The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government, Vol. II (Jefferson Davis, 1881)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1881 D. Appleton edition, Vol. II (https://archive.org/details/bwb_S0-ACB-874_2). Davis's apologia, Vol. II — the war years and defeat, from the Confederate White House.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Sete yy 


% 4 
ie Mi 
ae isn We SO rt 


Aus ie 
Paws 


+ 


mM 


[| ROBERT MANNING ff 
4 STROZIER LIBRARY |} 


ae ae : ei. — = 

os (Sale ee a : 

¥ 7 me 4 
7 ~~ i “y: a ' 


Tae ye be! Sa ee ay) ee oe) oe ee en ok er rs ees vm 


¥Y WILLIAM BDGAR. MARS FLA 


ATT 


Boon AND FAT. 


OF THE 


CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


BY 


JEFFERSON DAVIS. 
VOLUME II. 


NEW YORK: 
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, 
1, 8, anv 5 BOND STREET. 
1881. 


= LIBRARY 
FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY 
TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA 


AUG 3 1978 


COPYRIGHT BY 
JEFFERSON DAVIS, 
1881. 


CONTENTS. 


PART IV.—(Continvus=p). 
THE WAR. 
CHAPTER XV. 
PAGE 

Review of 1861.—Summary of Hostile Acts of United States Government.— 
Fuller Details of some of them.—Third Session of Provisional Congress,— 
Message.—Subjugation of the Southern States intended.—Obstinacy of 
the Enemy.—Insensibility of the North as to the Crisis——Vast Prepara- 
‘tion of the Enemy.—Embargo and Blockade.—Indiscriminate War waged. 
—<Action of Confederate Congress.—Confiscation Act of United States 
Congress.—Declared Object of the War.—Powers of United States Govern- 
ment.—Forfeitures inflicted—Due Process of Law, how interpreted.— 
“Who pleads the Constitution ?”,—Wanton Destruction of Private Prop- 
erty unlawful—Adams on Terms of the Treaty of Ghent.—Sectional 
Hatred.—Order of President Lincoln to Army Officers in Regard to Slaves. 
—‘“Hducating the People.”—Fremont’s Proclamation.—Proclamation of 
General T. W. Sherman.—Proclamation of General Halleck and others.— 
Letters of Marque.—Our Privateers.—Officers tried for Piracy.—Retali- 
atory Orders.—Discussion in the British House of Lords.—Recognition as 
a Belligerent of the Confederacy.—Exchange of Prisoners.—Theory of the 
United States—Views of McClellan.—Revolutionary Conduct of United 
States Government.—Extent of the War at the Close of 1861.—Victories 
of the Year.—New Branches of Manufactures.—Election of Confederate 
States President.—Posterity may ask the Cause of such Hostile Actions,— 


EST ERTOR yt A oe aan Te ge a ee 1 
rr CHAPTER XVI. 
- Military Arrangements of the Enemy.—Marshall and Garfield.—Fishing Creek.— 
a y Crittenden’s Report.—Fort Henry ; its Surrender.—Fort Donelson ; its Po- 
sition.—Assaults.—Surrender.—Losses_, : . ; f ( ats 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Results of the Surrender of Forts Henry and Donelson.—Retreat from Bowling 
Green.—Criticism on General A, 5. Johnston.—Change of Plan necessary. 


iv CONTENTS. 

PAGE 
—Evacuation of Nashville—Generals Floyd and Pillow.—My Letter to 
Genera! Johnston.—His Reply—My Answer.—Defense of General John- 
ston.—Battle of Elkhorn.—Topography of Shiloh. ; ; : . 36 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


General Buell’s March.—Object of General Johnston.—His Foree.—Advance 
from Corinth.—Line of Battle.—Telegram.—The Time of the Battle of 
Shiloh.—Results of the First Day’s Battle—One Encampment not taken.— 
Effects.—Reports on this Failure.—Death of General Johnston.—Remarks 54 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Retirement of the Army.—Remnants of Grant’s Army.—Its Reénforcements.— 
Strength of our Army.—Strength of Grant’s Army.—Reorganization.— 
Corinth.—Advance of General Halleck.—Siege of Corinth.—Evacuation.— 
Retreat to Tupelo.—General Beauregard retires.—General Bragg in Com- 
mand.—Positions on the Mississippi River occupied by the Enemy.—New 
Madrid.—Island No. 10.—Fort Pillow.—Memphis.—Attack at Hatteras 
Inlet.—Expedition of the Enemy to Port Royal.—Expeditions from Port 
Royal.—System of Coast Defenses adopted by us.—Fort Pulaski 5 ~ —70 


CHAPTER XX. 


Advance of General McClellan toward Centreville; his Report.—Our Forces 
ordered to the Peninsula.—Situation at Yorktown.—Siege by General Mc- 
Clellan.—General Johnston assigned to Command; his Recommendation. 
—Attack on General Magruder at Yorktown.—Movements of McClellan.— 

The Virginia.—General Johnston retires.—Delay at Norfolk.—Before Wil- 
liamsburg.—Remark of Hancock.—Retreat up the Peninsula.—Sub-terra 
Shells used.—Evacuation of Norfolk.—Its Occupation by the Enemy oO 


CHAPTER XXI. 


A New Phase to our Military Problem.—General Johnston’s Position.—Defenses 
of James River.—Attack on Fort Drury.—Johnston crosses the Chicka- 
hominy.—Position of McClellan.—Position of McDowell.—Strength of 
Opposing Forces.—Jackson’s Expedition down the Shenandoah Valley.— 
Panic at Washington and the North.—Movements to intercept Jackson.— 
His Rapid Movements,—Repulses Fremont,—Advance of Shields.—Fall of 
Ashby.—Port Republic, Battle of,—Results of this Campaign . 7 . 101 


CHAPTER XXII, 


Condition of Affairs.—Plan of General Johnston.—The Field of Battle at Seven 
Pines.—The Battle.—General Johnston wounded.—Advance of General 
Sumner.—Conflict on the Right.—Delay of General Huger.—Reports of the 
Enemy.—Losses.—Strength of Forces,—General Lee in Command. . 119 


CONTENTS. yee 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
PAGE 


The Enemy’s Position.—His Intention.—The Plan of Operations.—Movements 
of General Jackson.—Daring and Fortitude of Lee.—Offensive-Defensive 
Poliey.— General Stuart’s Movement.—Order of Attack.—Critical Position 
of McClellan—Order of Mr, Lincoln creating the Army of Virginia.—Ar- 
rival ef Jackson.—Position of the Enemy.—Diversion of General Long- 
street.—The Enemy forced back south of the Chickahominy.—Abandon- 
ment of the Railroad : Z : : é ‘ i a . . 130 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


Retreat of the Enemy.—Pursuit and Battle.—Night.—Further Retreat of the 
Enemy.—Progress of General Jackson.—The Enemy at Frazier’s Farm.— 
Position of General Holmes.—Advance of General Longstreet.—Remark- 
able Features of the Battle——Malvern Hill.—Our Position.—The Attack.— 
Expedition of General Stuart.—Destruction of the Enemy’s Stores.—As- 
saults on the Enemy.—Retreat to Westover on the James.—Siege of Rich- 
mond raised.—Number of Prisoners taken.—Strength of our Forces.— 
Strength of our Forces at Seven Pines and after.—Strength of the Enemy. 140 


CHAPTER XXV. 


Forced Emancipation.—Purposes of the United States Government at the Com- 
mencement of 1862.—Subjugation or Extermination.—The Willing Aid of 
United States Congress.— Attempt to legislate the Subversion of our Social 
Institutions,—Could adopt any Measure Self-Defense would justify.—Sla- 
very the Cause of all Troubles, therefore must be removed.—Statements 
of President Lincoln’s Inaugural.— Declaration of Sumner.—Abolition 
Legislation—The Power based on Necessity.—Its Formula.—The System 
of Legislation devised—Confiscation.—How permitted by the Law of Na- 
tions.—Views of Wheaton; of J. Q. Adams; of Secretary Marcy; of Chief- 
Justice Marshall_—Nature of Confiscation and Proceedings.—Compared 
with the Acts of the United States Congress.—Provisions of the Acts.— 
Five Thousand Millions of Property involyedi—Another Feature of the 
Act.—Confiscates Property within Reach.—Procedure against Persons.— 
Held us as Enemies and Traitors.—Attacked us with the Instruments of 
War and Penalties of Municipal Law.—Emancipation to be secured.—Re- 
marks of President Lincoln on signing the Bill—Remarks of Mr. Adams 
compared.—Another Alarming Usurpation of Congress.—Argument for 
it—No Limit to the War-Power of Congress; how maintained—The 
Act to emancipate Slaves in the District of Columbia.—Compensation 
promised.—Remarks of President Lincoln—The Right of Property vio- 
lated.— Words of the Constitution —The Act to prohibit Slavery in the 
Territories—The Act making an Additional Article of War.—All Officers 
forbidden to return Fugitives.—Words of the Constitution.—The Powers 
of the Constitution unchanged in Peace or War.—The Discharge of Fugi- 
tives commanded in the Confiscation Act.—Words of the Constitution . 158 


47 


Vill CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER XXXI. 
PAGE 
Naval Affairs (concluded) —Excitement in the Northern States on the Appear- 
ance of our Cruisers.—Failure of the Enemy to protect their Commerce.— 
Appeal to Europe not to help. the So-called “ Pirates.”—Seeks Iron-plated 
Vessels in England.—Statement of Lord Russell.—What is the Duty of 
Neutrals ?—Position taken by President Washington.—Letter of Mr. Jef- 
ferson.—Contracts sought by United States Government.—Our Cruisers 
went to Sea unarmed.—Mr. Adams asserts that British Neutrality was 
violated—Reply of Lord Russell.—Rejoinder of Mr. Seward.—Duty of 
Neutrals relative to Warlike Stores.—Views of Wheaton; of Kent.— 
Charge of the Lord Chief Baron in the Alexandra Case.—Action of the 
Confederate Government sustained.—Antecedents of the United States 
Government.—The Colonial Commissions.—Build and equip Ships in Eu- 
rope.—Captain Conyngham’s Captures.—Made Prisoner.—Retaliation.— 
Numbers of Captures.—Recognition of Greece.—Recognition of South 
American Cruisers.—Chief Act of Hostility charged on Great Britain by 
the United States Government.—The Queen’s Proclamation: its Effect.— 
Cause of the United States Charges.—Never called us Belligerents.—Why 
not ?—Adopts a Fiction—The Reason.—Why denounce our. Cruisers as 
“Pirates ” 2—Opinion of Justice Greer.—Burning of Prizes.—Laws of Mari- 
time War.—Cause of the Geneva Conference.—Statement of American 
Claims.—Allowance.—Indirect Damages of our Cruisers.—Ships trans- 
ferred to British Registers.—Decline of American Tonnage.—Decline of 
Coasting Tonnage.—Decline of Export of Breadstuffs——Advance of In- 
surance . : : i : ° 3 2 niga? 4 . 266 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


Attempts of the United States Government to overthrow States.—Military Goy- 
ernor of Tennessee appointed.—Object.—Arrests and Imprisonments.— | 
Measures attempted.—Oath required of Voters.—A Convention to amend 
the State Constitution.—Results.—Attempt in Louisiana.—Martial Law.— 
Barbarities inflicted.—Invasion of Plantations.—Order of General Butler, 
No. 28.—Execution of Mumford.—Judicial System set up.—Civil Affairs 
to be administered by Military Authority—Order of President Lincoln for 
a Provisional Court.—A Military Court sustained by the Army.—Words 
of the Constitution.—“ Necessity,” the reason given for the Power to create 
the Court.—This Doctrine fatal to the Constitution ; involves its Subver- 
sion.—Cause of our Withdrawal from the Union——Fundamental Prin- 
ciples unchanged by Force.—The Contest is not over; the Strife not ended. 
When the War closed, who were the Victors ?—Let the Verdict of Man- 
kind decide “ 5 5 ° : : . 285 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


Further Attempts of the United States Government to ovérthrow States.—Elec- 
tion of Members of Congress under the Military Governor of Louisiana.— 
The Voters required to take an Oath to support the United States Govern- 


CONTENTS. ix 


PAGE 
ment.—The State Law violated_—Proposition to hold a State Convention s 


postponed.—The President’s Plan for making a Union State out of a Frag- 
ment of a Confederate State—His Proclamation—The Oath required.— 
Message.—“ Phe War-Power our Main Reliance.”—Not a Feature of a 
Republican Government in the Plan—What are the True Principles ?— 
The Declaration of Independence asserts them.—Who had a Right to in- 
stitute a Government for Louisiana ?—Its People only.—Under what Prin- 
ciples could the Government of the United States do it ?—As an Invader to 
subjugate.—Effrontery and Wickedness of the Administration.—It enforces 
a Fiction.—Attempt to make Falsehood as good as Truth.—Proclamation 
for an Election of State Officers.—Proclamation for a State Convention.— 
The Monster Crime against the Liberties of Mankind.—Proceedings in 
Arkansas.—Novel Method adopted to amend the State Constitution.—Per- 
version of Republican Principles in Virginia.—Proceedings to create the 
State of West Virginia—A Falsehood by Act of Congress.—Proceedings 
considered under Fundamental Principles.—These Acts sustained by the 
United States Government.—Assertion of Thaddeus Stevens.—East Vir- 
ginia Government.—Removed to Richmond and upheld by. the United 
States Government.—Such Acts caused Entire Subversion of States.—Mere 
Fictions thus constituted . : : c 3 . . . ' . 295 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Address to the Army of Eastern Virginia by the President.—Army of General 
Pope.—Position of McClellan.—Advance of General Jackson.—Atrocious 
Orders of General Pope.—Letter of McClellan on the Conduct of the War. 
—Letter of the President to General Lee.—Battle of Cedar Run.—Results 
of the Engagement.—Reénforcements to the Enemy.—Second Battle of 
Manassas.—Capture of Manassas Junction .—Captured Stores.—The Old 
Battle-Field—Advance of General Longstreet. —Attack on him.—Attack 
on General Jackson.—Darkness of the Night.—Battle at Ox Hill.—Losses 
of the Enemy . : c : a - : 5 ¢ : . 311 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


Return of the Enemy to Washington.—War transferred to the Frontier.—Con- 
dition of Maryland.—Crossing the Potomac.—Evacuation of Martinsburg. 
—Advance into Maryland.—Large Force of the Enemy.—Resistance at 
Boonesboro.—Surrender of Harper’s Ferry.—Our Forces reach Sharps- 
burg.—Letter of the President to General Lee.—Address of General Lee 
to the People.—Position of our Forces at Sharpsburg.—Battle of Sharps- 
burg.—Our Strength.—Forces withdrawn,—Casualties —. . : . 828 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Efforts of the Enemy to obtain our Cotton —Demands of European Manufac- 
turers.—Thousands of Operatives resorting to the Poor-Rates.—Complaint 
of her Majesty’s Secretary of State——Letter of Mr. Seward.—Promise to 


The 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


open all the Channels of Commerce.—Series of Measures adopted by the 
United States.—Act of Congress.—Its Provisions.—Its Operation.— Uncon- 
stitutional Measures.—President Lincoln an Accomplice.—Not authorized 
by a State of War.—Case before Chief-Justice Taney —His Decision.—Ex- 
peditions sent by the United States Government to seize Localities.—An 
Act providing for the Appointment of Special Agents to seize Abandoned 
or Captured Property.—The Views of General Grant—Weakening his 
Strength One Third.—Our Country divided into Districts, and Federal 
Agents appointed.—Continued to the Close of the War . : a 


a 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


Enemy crosses the Potomac and concentrates at Warrenton.—Advances 
upon Fredericksburg.—Its Position.—Our Forces.—The Enemy crosses the 
Rappahannock.—Attack on General Jackson.—The Main Attack.— Re- 
pulse of the Enemy on the Right.—Assaults on the Left.—The Enemy’s 
Columns broke and fled.—Recross the River.—Casualties.—Position during 
the Winter.—The Enemy again crosses the Rappahannock.—Also crosses 
at Kelly’s Ford.—Converging toward Chancellorsville, to the Rear of our 
Position.—Inactivity on our Front.—Our Forces concentrate near Chancel- 
lorsville and encounter the Enemy.—Position of the Enemy.—Attempt to 
turn his Right.—The Enemy surprised and driven in the Darkness.— 
Jackson fired upon and wounded.—Stuart in Command.—Battle renewed. 
—Fredericksburg reoccupied.— Attack on the Heights——Repulse of the 
Enemy.—The Enemy withdraws in the Night.—Our Strength.—Losses,— 
Death of General Jackson.—Another Account . : 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


Relations with Foreign Nations.—The Public Questions.—Ministers abroad.— 


Usages of Intercourse between Nations.—Our <Action.—Mistake of Eu- 
ropean Nations; they follow the Example of England and France.—Dif- 
ferent Conditions of the Belligerents.—Injury to the Confederacy by the 
Policy of European Powers relative to the Blockade.—Explanation.—The 
Paris Conference.—Principles adopted.—Acceded to by the Confederacy 
with a Single Exception.—These Agreements remained inoperative-— 
Extent of the Pretended Blockade.—Remonstrances against its Recog- 
nition.—Sinking Vessels to block up Harbors.—Every Proscription of 
Maritime Law violated by the United States Government.—Protest.—Ad- 
dition made to the Law by Great Britain.—Policy pursued favorable to 
our Enemies.—Instances.—Mediation proposed by France to Great Britain, 
and Russian Letter of French Minister.—Reply of Great Britain.—Reply 
of Russia,—Letter to French Minister at Washington.—Various Offensive 
Actions of the British Government.—Encouraging to the United States.— 
Hollow Profession of Neutrality 


. 843 


. 851 


367 


CONTENTS. ne 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
PA 
Advance of General E. K. Smith.—Advance of General Bragg.—Retreat of Gen- be 


eral Buell to Louisville—Battle at Perryville, Kentucky.—General Morgan 
at Hartsville——Advance of General Rosecrans.—Battle of Murfreesboro.— 
General Van Dorn and General Price.—Battle at Iuka.—General Van Dorn. 
—Battle of Corinth_—General Little—Captures at Holly Springs—Re- 
treat of Grant to Memphis.—Operations against Vicksburg.—The Canal.— 
Concentration.—Raid of Grierson,—Attack near Port Gibson.—Orders of 
General Johnston.—Reply of General Pemberton.—Baker’s Creek.—Big 
Black Bridge.—Retreat to Vicksburg.—Siege.—Surrender.—Losses.—Sur- 
render of Port Hudson.—Some Movements for its Relief . : : . 882 


CHAPTER XL. 


Inactivity in Tennessee.—Capture of Colburn’s Expedition.—Capture of 
Streight’s Expedition.—Advance of Rosecrans to Bridgeport.—Burnside 
in East Tennessee.—Our Force at Chattanooga.—Movement against Burn- 
side.—The Enemy moves on our Rear near Ringgold.—Battle at Chicka- 
mauga.—Strength and Distribution of our Forces——The Enemy with- 
draws.—Captures.—Losses.—The Enemy evacuates Passes of Lookout 
Mountain.—His Trains captured.—Failure of General Bragg to pursue.— 
Reénforcements to the Enemy, and Grant to command.—His Description 
of the Situation,—Movements of the Enemy.—Conflict at Chattanooga . 426 


CHAPTER XLI. 


Movement to draw forth the Enemy.—Advance to Culpeper Court-House.— 
Cavalry Engagement at Beverly’s and Kelly’s Fords.—Movement against 
Winchester.—Milroy’s Force captured.—Prisoners.—The Enemy retires 
along the Potomac.—Maryland entered.— Advance into Pennsylvania.—The 
Enemy driven back toward Gettysburg.—Position of the Respective Forces. 
—Battle at Gettysburg.—The Army retires.—Prisoners.—The Potomac 
swollen.—No Interruption by the Enemy.—Strength of our Force.— 
Strength of the Enemy.—The Campaign closed.—Observations.—Kelly’s 
Ford.—Attempt to surprise our Army.—System of Breastworks.—Pris- 
oners SIT Ty en ees Sn siljees had URES is (yeaa LO 


CHAPTER XLII. 


Subjugation of the States of Tennessee, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Virginia.— 
Object of a State Government; its Powers are “Just Powers”; how 
exercised ; its Duty ; necessarily sovereign ; its Entire Order; how found- 
ed; how destroyed.—The Crime against Constitutional Liberty——What is 
the Government of the United States?—It partakes of the Nature of a 
Limited Partnership ; its Peaceful Objects.—Distinction between the Gov- 
ernments of the States and that of the United States.—Secession.—The 
Government of the United States invades the State; refuses to recognize 


xi CONTENTS. 

PAGE 
its Government; thus denies the Fundamental Principle of Popular Lib- 
erty.—Founded a New State Government based on the Sovereignty of the 
United States Government.—Annihilation of Unalienable Rights.—Quali- 
fication of Voters fixed by Military Power.—Condition of the Voter's Oath. 
—Who was the Sovereign in Tennessee?—Case of Louisiana.—Registra- 
tion of Voters.—None allowed to register who could not or would not 
take a Certain Oath; its Conditions.—Election of State Officers—Part of 
the State Constitution declared void—Al done under the Military Force 
of the United States Government . 2 : : : 2 s . 450 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


Subjugation of the Border States, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri—A Mili- 
tary Force invades Maryland and occupies Baltimore.—Martial Law de- 
clared.—A Military Order.—Banishment from the State.—Civil Government 
of the State suspended.—Unalienable Rights of the Citizens invaded.— 
Arrests of Citizens commenced.—Number.—Case of John Merryman.— 
Opinion of Chief-Justice Taney.—Newspapers seized.icHouses searched 
for Arms.—Order of Commanding General to Marshals to put Test to 
Voters.—The Governor appeals to the President.—His Reply.—Voters 
imprisoned.—Statement of the Governor.—Result of the Election.—State 
Constitutional Convention.— Emancipation hardly carried— First Open 
Measures in Kentucky.—Interference at the State Election by the United 
States Government.—Voters excluded.—Martial Law declared.—Soldiers 
keeping the Polls —The Vote.—Statement of the Governor.—Attempt to 
enroll Able-bodied Negroes.—The Governor visits Washington.—The Re- 
sult.—Arrests, Imprisonment, and Exile of Citizens.—Suspension of the 
Writ of Habeas Corpus by President Lincoln.—Interference with the State 
Election.—Order to the Sheriffs.—Proclamation of the Governor.—Enlist- 
ment of Slaves.—Emancipation by Constitutional Amendment.—Violent 
Measures in Missourii—The Governor calls out the Militia—His Words.— 
The Plea of the Invader.—* The Authority of the United States is Para- 
mount,” said President Lincoln.—Bravery of the Governor.—Words of 
the Commanding General.—Troops poured into the State.—Proceedings of 
the State Convention.—Numberless Usurpations.—Provisional Governor. 
—Emancipation Ordinance passed . ‘ ; . : A ‘ - 460 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


Subjugation of the Northern States,—Humiliating Spectacle of New York.— 
“ Ringing of a Little Bell.”—Seizure and Imprisonment of Citizens, —Num- 
ber seized.—Paper Safeguards of Liberty.—Other Safeguards.—Suspension 
of the Writ of Habeas Corpus absolutely forbidden with One Exception.— 
How done.—Not able to authorize another.—Abundant Protective Provi- 
sions in New York, but all failed,—Case of Pierce Butler.—Arrest of Sec- 
retary Cameron.—The President assumes the Responsibility of the Crime. 
—No Heed given to the Writ of Habeas Corpus issued by the Court.— 


CONTENTS. cet 


PAGE 
The Governor passive.—Words of Justice Nelson.—Prison overflowing.— 


How relieved.—Oath required of Applicants for Relief—Oath declined by 
some.—Reasons.—Order forbidding the Employment of Counsel by Pris- 
oners,—Victims in almost Every Northern State.—Defeat at the Elec- 
tions.—Result.—Suit for Damages commenced.—Coneress interferes tu 
protect the Guilty.—State Courts subjugated—How suspend Habeas Cor- 
pus.—Congress violates the Constitution—What was New York ?—Writ 
suspended throughout the United States.—What.is “ Loyalty ” 2—Military 
Domination.—Correspondence between General Dix and Goyernor Sey- 
mour.—Seizure of Newspapers.—Governor orders Arrest of Offenders.— 
Interference with the State Election.—Vote of the Soldiers.—State Agents 
arrested.—Provost-Marshals appointed in Every Northern State.—Their 
Duties.—Sustained by Force.—Trials by Military Commission.—Trials at 
Washington.—Assassination of the President.—Trial of Henry Wirz.— 
Efforts to implicate the Author.—Investigation of a Committee of Con- 
gress as to Complicity in the Assassination.—Arrest, Trial, and Banish- 
ment of Clement C. Vallandigham.—Assertions of Governor Seymour on 
the Case . : : : ; - ~ : - : : 477 


CHAPTER XLY. 


Inactivity of the Army of Northern Virginia.—Expeditions of Custer, Kilpatrick, 
and Dahlgren for the Destruction of Railroads, the Burning of Richmond, 
and Killing the Officers of the Government.—Repelled by Government 
Clerks,—Papers on Dahlgren’s Body.—Repulse of Butler’s Raid from Ber- 
muda Hundred,—Advance of Sheridan repulsed at Richmond.—Stuart re- 
sists Sheridan.—Stuart’s Death.—Remarks on Grant’s Plan of Campaign. 
—Movement of General Butler.—Drury’s Bluff.—Battle there.—Campaign 
of Grant in Virginia . 3 > ; ¢ : : : : . 504 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


General Grant assumes Command in Virginia.—Positions of the Armies.—Plans 
of Campaign open to Grant’s Choice.—The Rapidan crossed.—Battle of 
the Wilderness.—Danger of Lee.—The Enemy driven back.—Flank Attack. 
—Longstreet wounded.—Result of the Contest.—Rapid Flank Movement 
of Grant.—Another Contest.—Grant’s Reénforcements.—Hanover Junc- 
tion.—The Enemy moves in Direction of Bowling Green.—Crosses the Pa- 
munkey.—Battle at Cold Harbor.—Frightful Slaughter—The Enemy’s 
Soldiers decline to renew the Assault when ordered.—Loss.—Asks Truce 
to bury the Dead.—Strength of Respective Armies.—General Pember- 
ton.—The Enemy crosses the James.—Siege of Petersburg begun. . 515 


CHAPTER XLVI, 


Situation in the Shenandoah Valley.—March of General Harly.—The Object.— 
At Lynchburg.—Staunton.—His Force—Enters Maryland.—Attack at 
Monocacy.—Approach to Washington,—The Works.—Recrosses the Po- 


ae CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
tomac.—Battle at Kernstown.—Captures.—Outrages of the Enemy.—State- 
ment of General Harly.—Retaliation on Chambersburg, Pennsylvania.— 
Battle near Winchester.—Sheridan’s Force routed.—Attack subsequently 
renewed with New Forces.—Incapacity of our Opponent.—Karly falls 
back,—The Enemy retires.—Early advances.—Report. of a Committee of 
Citizens on Losses by Sheridan’s Orders.—Battle at Cedar Creek.—Losses, 
Subsequent Movements, and Captures.—The Red River Campaign.—Re- 
pulse and Retreat of General Banks.—Capture of Fort Pillow . “ . 527 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


Assignment of General J. E. Johnston to the Command of the Army of Ten- 
nessee,—Condition of his Army.—An Offensive Campaign suggested.— 
Proposed Objects to be accomplished.—General Johnston’s Plans.—Ad- 
vance of Sherman.—The Strength of the Confederate Position General 
Johnston expects General Sherman to give Battle at Dalton—The Enemy’s 
Flank Movement via Snake-Creeck Gap to Resaca.—Johnston falls back 
to Resaca,—Further Retreat to Adairsville-—-General Johnston’s Reasons. 
—Retreat to Cassville—Projected Engagement at Kingston frustrated. 
Retreat beyond the Etowah River—Strong Position at Alatoona aban- 
doned.—Nature of the Country between Marietta and Dallas.—Engage- 
ments at New Hope Church.—Army takes Position at Kenesaw.—Senator 
Hill’s Letter.—Death of Lieutenant-General Polk—Battle at Kenesaw 
Mountain.— Retreat beyond the Chattahoochee.— Results reviewed.— 
Popular Demand for Removal of General Johnston.—Reluctance to re- 
move him.—Reasons for Removal.—Assignment of General J. B. Hood to 
the Command.—He assumes the Offensive.—Battle of Peach-tree Creek.— 
Death of General W. H. T. Walker.—Sherman’s Movement to Jonesboro.— 
Defeat of Hardee.—Evacuation of Atlanta.—Sherman’s Inhuman Order.— 
Visit to Georgia.—Suggested Operations.—Want of Codperation by the 
Governor of Georgia.—Conference with Generals Beauregard, Hardee, and 
Cobb, at Augusta.—Departure from Original Plan.—General Hood’s Move- 
ment against the Enemy’s Communications.—Partial Successes.—With- 
drawal of the Army to Gadsden and Movement against Thomas.—Sher- 
man burns Atlanta and begins his March to the Sea,.—Vandalism.— 
Direction of his Advance.—General Wheeler’s Opposition.—His Valuable 
Service.—Sherman reaches Savannah.—General Hardee’s Command.—The 
Defenses of the City.—Assault and Capture of Fort McAlister.—The 
Results.—Hardee evacuates Savannah ; : , : d . 547 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


Exchange of Prisoners,—Signification of the Word “ loyal.”—Who is the Sover- 
eign ?—Words of President Lincoln.—The Issue for which we fought.—Posi- 
tion of the United States Government.—Letters of Marque granted by us.— 
Officers and Crew First Prisoners of the Enemy.—Convicted as “ Pirates.” — 
My Letter to President Lincoln.—How received.—Act of Congress relating 


CONTENTS. XV 


PAGE 
to Prisoners.—Exchanges, how made.—Answer of General Grant.—Request 


of United States Congress.—Result.—Commissioners sent.— Agreement.— 
Disputed Points.—Exchange arranged.—Order to pillage issued.—General 
Pope’s Order.—Proceedings.—Letter of General Lee relative to Barbari- 
ties.—Answer of General Halleck.—Case of Mumford.—Effect of Threat- 
ened Retaliation—Mission of Vice-President Stephens.—A Failure.—Ex- 
cess of Prisoners.—Paroled Men.—Proposition made. by us—No Answer. 
—Another Arrangement. —Stopped by General Grant.—His words, “ Put 
the Matter offensively.”—Exchange of Slaves.—Proposition of Lee to 
Grant.—Reply of Grant.—Further Reply.—His Dispatch to General Butler. 
—Another Proposition made by us.—No Answer.—Proposition relative to 
Sick and Wounded.—Some exchanged.—The Worst Cases asked for to 
be photographed.—Proposition as to Medicines.—No Answer.—A Final 
Effort.—Deputation of Prisoners sent to Washington.—A Failure.—Cor- 
respondence between Ould and Butler.—Order of Grant.—Report of Butler. 
—Responsibility of Grant for Andersonville.—Barbarities of the United 
States Government.—Treatment of our Men in Northern Prisons.—Deaths 
on Each Side . : A c ‘ : : ; . 5 ‘ . 580 


CHAPTER L. 


Subjugation the Object of the Government of the United States.—The only 
Terms of Peace offered to us.—Rejection of all Proposals.—Efforts of the 
Enemy.—Appearance of Jacques and Gilmore at Richmond.—Proposals.— 
Answer.—Commissioners sent to Canada.—The Object.—Proceedings.— 
Note of President Lincoln.—Permission to visit Richmond granted te 
Francis P. Blair.—Statement of my Interview with him.—My Letter to him. 
—Response of President Lincoln.—Three Persons sent by me to an In- 
formal Conference.—Their Report.—Remarks of Judge Campbell.—Oath 
of President Lincoln.—The Provision of the Constitution and his Procla- 
mation compared.—Reserved Powers spoken of in the Constitution — 
What are they, and where do they exist ?—Terms of Surrender offered-to 
our Soldiers . : : 2 f : é ; : 3 - 608 


CHAPTER LI. 


General Sherman leaves Savannah.—His March impeded.—Difficulty in collect- 
ing Troops to oppose him.—The Line of the Salkehatchie—Route of the 
Enemy’s Advance.—Evacuation of Columbia.—Its Surrender by the Mayor. 
—Burning the City.—Sherman responsible—Evacuation of Charleston.— 
The Confederate Forces in North Carolina.—General Johnston’s Estimate, 
—General Johnston assigned to the Command.—The Enemy’s Advance 
from Columbia to Fayetteville, North Carolina.— Foraging Parties.”— 
Sherman’s Threat and Hampton’s Reply.—Description of Federal ‘“ Treas- 
ure-Seekers”” by Sherman’s Aide-de-Camp.—Failure of Johnston’s Projected 
Attack at Fayetteville—Affair at Kinston.—Cavalry Exploits. —General 


XV! CONTENTS. 

PAGE 
Johnston withdraws to Smithfield—Encounter at Averysboro.—Battles of 
Bentonville.—Union of Sherman’s and Schofield’s Forces.—Johnston’s Re- 


treat to Raleigh 5 - : 5 : : : - : 5 . 625 


CHAPTER LII. 


Siege of Petersburg.—Violent Assault upon our Position—A Cavalry Expedi- 
tion —Contest near Ream’s Station.—The City invested with Earthworks. 
—Position of the Forces——The Mine exploded, and an Assault made.— 
Attacks on our Lines.—Object of the Enemy.—Our Strength.—Assault on 
Fort Fisher.—Evacuation of Wilmington.—Purpose of Grant’s Campaign. 
—I.ee’s Conference with the President.—Plans.—Sortie against Fort Stead- 
man.—Movements of Grant farther to Lee’s right.—Army retires from 
Petersburg.—The Capitulation.—Letters of Lee : : : : . 637 


CHAPTER LUI. 


General Lee advises the Evacuation of Richmond.—Withdrawal of the Troops. 
The Naval Force.—The Conflagration in Richmond.—Telegram of Lee to 
the President.—The Evacuation complete.—The Charge of the Removal 
of Supplies intended for Lee’s Army.—The Facts.—Arrangement with 
General Lee.—Proclamation.—Reports of Scouts . : : : . 661 


CHAPTER LIV. 


Invitation of General Johnston to a Conference.—Its Object.—Its Result.— 
Provisions on the Line of Retreat.—Notice of President Lincoln’s Assas- 
sination.—Correspondence between Johnston and Sherman.—Terms of the 
Convention.—Approved by the Confederate Government.—Rejected by the 
United States Government.—Instructions to General Johnston.—Disobeyed, 
—Statements of General Johnston.—His Surrender.—Movements of the 
President South—His Plans.—Order of General E. K. Smith to his Sol- 
diers.—Surrender.—Numbers paroled.—The President overtakes his Fam- 
ily.—His Capture.—Taken to Hampton Roads, and imprisoned in Fortress 
Monroe . : 2 A : : : : ; : : : . 678 


CHAPTER LY. 


Number of the Enemy’s Forces in the War.—Number of the Enemy’s Troops 
from Maryland, Kentucky, Missouri, and Tennessee.—Cruel Conduct of the 
War.—Statements in 1862,—Statements in 1863,—Emancipation Procla- 
mation,—Statements in 1864,—General Hunter’s Proceedings near Lynch- 
burg.—Cruelties in Sherman’s March through South Carolina . : - 705 


CHAPTER LVI. 


Final Subjugation of the Confederate States,—Result of the Contest.—A Simple 
Process of Restoration,—Rejected by the United States Government.—A 


CONTENTS. XVil 


PAGE 
Forced Union.—The President’s Proclamation examined.—The Guarantee, 
not to destroy.—Provisional Governors.—Their Duties.—Voters.—First 
Movement made in Virginia—Government set up.—Proceedings.—Action 
of So-called Legislature—Constitutional Amendment.—Case of Dr. Wat- 
son.—Civil Rights Bill—Storm brewing.—Congress refuses to admit Sen- 
ators and Representatives to Seats——Committee on “ Reconstruction.” — 
Freedmen’s Bureau.—Report of Committee.—Fourteenth Amendment to 
the Constitution—Extent of Ratification—Another Step taken by Con- 
gress.—Military Commanders appointed over Confederate States, with Un- 
limited Powers.—Reconstruction by the Bayonet.—Course of Proceedings 
required.—Two Governments for Hach State-—Major-Generals appointed. 
—Further Acts of Congress.—Proceedings commenced by the Major-Gen- 
eral at Richmond.—Civil Governor appointed.—Military Districts and Sub- 
districts—Registration.—So-called State Convention.—So-called Legisla- 
ture.—Its Action.—Measures required by Congress for the Enfranchisement 
of Negroes adopted by the So-called Legislature.—Assertion of Senator 

' Garret Davis.—State represented in Congress . A ; 5 Be acer! 


CHAPTER LVII. 


Final Subjugation of the Confederate States (continued).—Slaves declared free 
by Military Commanders in North Carolina.—Provisional Governor.—Con- 
vention.—Military Commander.—Governor-elect turned out.—His Protest. 
—Members of Congress admitted.—Proceedings in South Carolina.—Arrest 
of Judge Aldrich.—Military Reversal of Sentence of the Court.—Post Com- 
manders.—Jurors.—Proceedings in Georgia.—President’s Plan.—Plan of 
Congress enforeed.—Other Events.—Proceedings in Florida.—Rival Con- 
ventions.—Plan of Congress enforced.—Proceedings in Alabama.—Suspen- 
sion of Bishop Wilmer by the Military Commander.—Military Authority — 
Action of Congress.—Proceedings in Mississippii—Constitutionality of the 
Act of Congress before the Supreme Court.—Remarks of Chief-Justice 
Chase.—Military Arrests.-Removals.—The Chief-Justice of the State re- 
signs.—The So-called Constitution rejected.—Ames appointed Governor,— 
Proceedings in Louisiana.—Plan of Congress enforced.—Other Measures. 
—Arkansas.—Texas.—Opinion of the United States Attorney-General on 
Military Commanders.—Consequences that followed the Measures of Con- 
gress.—Increase in State Debts.—Increase in Frauds and Crimes.—Ex- 
amples.—Investigating Committees of Congress.—The Unalienable Rights 
of Man.—The Sovereignty of the People and the Supremacy of Law gone. 737 


y bs rt . 
ue rf i 
5 ¥ ” A 
. FA A eh : 
Sheed Oa] i ae 
we 4 r . yer erat i 
5 ; "hats : 
“9 ee er: J 
7 s 
. ¥ 
it ‘ 
) } ' 
a . 
\ 
ry si ¢ 
i ithe seks 
f é Te iMeas 
¥ 
, a 4s SN eee 
a hy oa. ) ‘en, 
aha Meg et Fo if 
' j Tamia he Pee ths 
ee ee as) ee 
~~ y aA 
’ 
uv 
, 
‘ 
i 
1 
r ; 
i ” 
; \ 
‘ 
4 N La Ee tg 
. 2 ed A - ! 
f ets L js a ek i 
’ matt 
, Jon. 
; Bp 
; i sé 


“aie Anes } 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


JEFFERSON Dayis . : - : 
General Braxton Braae a : 
Davis Housr, at RioumMonp , a 
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL T. J. JACKSON . 
MEMBERS OF THE CONFEDERATE CABINET . 
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL JAMES LONGSTREET 
GENERAL Wapz Hampron . R : 
GENERAL J. E. JOHNSTON é , 
GreneraL Joun B. Hoop . ; z 
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL WILLIAM J. HARDEE 


MAPS. 


Battie-Fietp oF Fort DoNneLson . ci 
Map UsED BY THE CONFEDERATE GENERALS 
Battie or SHILOH . 5 - * 
Port Hupson . 3 7 é 
YorKTOWN AND WILLIAMSBURG : : 
Oprrations IN NortTHEerRN VIRGINIA . 


OPERATIONS AROUND RIcHMOND AND PETERSBURG 


Barrie oF FREDERICKSBURG . ‘ 
OPERATIONS IN MIssISsIPrI . ; A 
OPERATIONS IN KenTUOKY AND TENNESSEE 
Barrrze-FietD oF CHICKAMAUGA . - 
Battle oF GETTYSBURG a ; 
OPERATIONS IN GEORGIA AND TENNESSEE . 
Fort FisHer : : é A 


PETERSBURG . s ; 4 é 
Retreat FROM RICHMOND AND PETERSBURG 


OPERATIONS IN GEORGIA AND SvutH CAROLINA 


AT SHILOH 


Frontispiece 


Face page 54 


102 
106 
374 
449, 
505 
558 
573 
627 


421 


At end of volume 


“cc 


66 


(74 


66 


66 


6c 


bs 


fags a at lala 8 ‘V —(Continvep). 


THE WAR. 


CHAP TER-XYV. 


Review of 1861.—Summary of Hostile Acts of United States Government.—Fuller 
Details of some of them.—Third Session of Provisional Congress.—Message.— 
Subjugation of the Southern States intended.—Obstinacy of the Enemy.—In- 
sensibility of the North as to the Crisis—Vast Preparation of the Enemy.— 
Embargo and Blockade.—Indiscriminate War waged.—Action of Confederate 
Congress.—Confiscation Act of United States Congress.—Declared Object of 
the War.—Powers of United States Government.—Forfeitures inflicted—Due 
Process of Law, how interpreted.—“ Who pleads the Constitution ?’””"—Wanton 
Destruction of Private Property unlawfulAdams on Terms of the Treaty 
of Ghent.—Sectional Hatred.—Order of President Lincoln to Army Officers in 
Regard to Slaves.—‘ Educating the People.”—Fremont’s Proclamation.—Proc- 
lamation of General T. W. Sherman.—Proclamation of General Halleck and 
others.—Letters of Marque.—Our Privateers.—Officers tried for Piracy.—Re- 
taliatory Orders.—Discussion in the British House of Lords.—Recognition 
as a Belligerent of the Confederacy.—Exchange of Prisoners,—Theory of the 
United States.—Views of McClellan.—Revolutionary Conduct of United States 
Government.—Extent of the War at the Close of 1861.—Victories of the Year, 
—New Branches of Manufactures.—Election of Confederate States President. 
—Posterity may ask the Cause of such Hostile Actions—Answer. 


Tue inauguration of the permanent government, amid the 
struggles of war, was welcomed by our people as a sign of the 
independence for which all their sacrifices had been made, and 
the increased efforts of the enemy for our subjugation were 
met by corresponding determination on our part to maintain 
the rights our fathers left us at whatever cost. We now enter 
upon those terrible scenes of wrong and blood in which the 
Government of the United States, driven to desperation by 

48 


) RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


al 


our successful resistance, broke through every restraint of 
the Constitution, of national law, of justice, and of humanity. 
But, before commencing this fearful narration, let us sum up 
the hostile acts and usurpations committed during the first 
year. 

Our people had been declared to be combinations of insur- 
rectionists, and more than one hundred and fifty thousand men 
had been called to arms to invade our territory ; our ports were 
blockaded for the destruction of our regular commerce, and 
we had been threatened with denunciation as pirates if we mo- 
lested a vessel of the United States, and some of our citizens 
had been confined in cells to await the punishment of piracy ; 
one of our States was rent asunder and a new State constructed 

out of the fragment; every proposition for a peaceful solution 
of pending issues had been spurned. An indiscriminate war- 
fare had been waged upon our peaceful citizens, their dwellings 
burned and their crops destroyed; a law had been passed im- 
posing a penalty of forfeiture on the owner of any faithful slave 
who gave military or naval service to the Confederacy, and for- 
bidding military commanders to interfere for the restoration of 
fugitives; the United States Government had refused to agree 
to an exchange of prisoners, and suffered those we had captured 
to languish in captivity; it had falsely represented us in every 
court of Europe, to defeat our efforts to obtain a recognition 
from foreign powers; it had seized a portion of the members of 
the Legislature of one State and confined them in a distant mili- 
tary prison, because they were thought merely to sympathize 
with us, though they had not committed an overt act; it had 
refused all the propositions of another State for a peaceful neu- 
trality, invaded her and seized important positions, where not 
even a disturbance of the peace had occurred, and perpetrated 
the most despotic outrages on her people; it rejected the most 
conciliatory terms offered for the sake of peace by the Governor 
of another State, claimed for itself an unrestricted right to move 
and station its troops whenever and wherever its officers might 
think it to be desirable, and persisted in its aggressions until 
the people were involved in conflicts, and a provisional govern- 
ment became necessary for their protection. Within the North- 


1862] THE ANTECEDENTS OF OPPRESSIVE MEASURES. 3 


ern States, which professed to be struggling to maintain the 
Union, the Constitution, its only bond, and the laws made in 
pursuance of it, were in peaceful, undisputed existence; yet 
even there the Government ruled with the tyrant’s hand, and 
the provisions for the freedom of speech, freedom of the press, 
and the personal liberty of the citizen, were daily violated, and 
these sacred rights of man suppressed by military force. 

But some of these hostile actions require here a more specific 
consideration. They were the antecedents of oppressive meas- 
ures which the enemy strove to enforce upon us during the 
entire war. 

The third session of the Provisional Congress commenced at 
Richmond on July 20, 1861, and ended on August 31st. At 
the previous session, a resolution had been passed authorizing 
the President to cause the several executive departments, with 
the archives thereof, to be removed to Richmond at such time 
as he might determine prior to July 20th. In my message to the 
Congress of that date, the cause of removal was stated to be, that 
the aggressive movements of the enemy required prompt, ener- 
getic action; that the accumulation of his forces on the Poto- 
mac sufficiently demonstrated that his first efforts were to be 
directed against Virginia, and from no point could necessary 
measures for her defense and protection be so effectively pro- 
vided as from her own capital. My remarks to Congress at this 
session were confined to such important facts as had occurred 
during the recess, and to the matters connected with the public 
defense. “The odious features of the policy and purposes of 
the Government of the United States stood revealed ; the recent 
grant of a half million of men and four hundred millions of dol- 
lars by their Congress, was a confession that their intention was 
a subjugation of the Southern States.” 

The fact thus briefly presented in the message was estab- 
lished by the course pursued since the first advent to power of 
those who had come into possession of the sword and the purse 
of the Union. Not only by the legislation cited was the intent 
to make war for the purpose of subjugating the Southern States 
revealed, but also, and yet more significantly, was the purpose 
manifested in the evasion and final rejection of every propost- 


4 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


tion of the Southern States for a peaceful solution of the issues 
arising from secession. 

Such extreme obstinacy was unnatural, unreasonable, and 
contrary to the general precedents of history, except those which 
resulted in civil war. This unfavorable indication was also ob- 
servable in the original party of abolition. Its intolerance had 
a violence which neither truth nor justice nor religion could re- 
strain, and it was transferred undiluted to their successors. The 
resistance to the demands of the States and persistence in ag- 
gressions upon them were the occasion of constant apprehensions 
and futile warnings of their suicidal tendency on the part of the 
statesmen of the period. For thirty years had patriotism and 
wisdom pointed to dissolution by this perverse uncharitableness. 
Had the North been contending for a principle only, there would 
have been a satisfactory settlement, not indeed by compromis- 
ing the principle, but by adjusting the manner of its operation 
so that only good results should ensue. But when the contest 
is for supremacy on one side and self-defense on the other— 
when the aim of the aggressor is “power, plunder, and extended 
rule ’—there will be no concessions by him, no compromises, no 
adjustment of results. The alternative is subjugation by the 
sword, or peace by absolute submission. The latter condition 
could not be accepted by us. The. former was, therefore, to be 
resisted as best we might. 

An amazing insensibility seemed to possess a portion of the 
Northern people as to the crisis before them. They would not 
realize that their purpose of supremacy would be so resolutely 
resisted ; that, if persisted in, it must be carried to the extent of 
bloodshed in sectional war. With them the Iust of dominion 
was stronger than the sense of justice or of the fraternity and 
the equal rights of the States, which the Union was formed to 
secure, and so they were blind to palpable results. Otherwise 
they must have seen, when the remnants of the old Whig party 
joined hands with abolitionism, that it was like a league with 
the spirit of evil, in which the conditions of the bond were be- 
stowal of power on one side, and the commission of deeds meet 
for disunion on the other. The honest masses should have re- 
membered that when scheming leaders abandon principle, and 


1862] . PURPOSE OF WAR REVEALED. 5 


adopt the ideas of dreamers and fanatics, the ladder on which 
they would mount to power is one on which they can not return, 
and up which it would be a fatal delusion to follow. 

The reality of armed resistance on our part the North was 
slow to comprehend. The division of sentiment at the South 
on the question of the expediency of immediate secession, was 
mistaken for the existence of a submission party, whereas the 
division was confined to expediency, and wholly disappeared 
when our territory was invaded. Then was revealed to them 
the necessity of defending their homes and liberties against the 
ruthless assault on both, and then extraordinary unanimity pre- 
vailed. Then,as Hamilton and Madison had stated, war against 
the States had effected the deprecated dissolution of the Union. 

Adjustment by negotiation the United States Government 
had rejected, and had chosen to attempt our subjugation. This 
course, adopted without provocation, was pursued with a feroci- 
ty that disregarded all the laws of civilized warfare, and must 
permanently remain a stain upon the escutcheon of a Government 
once bright among the nations. The vagt provision made by 
the United States in the material of war, the money appropriated, 
and the men enrolled, furnished a sufficient refutation to the 
pretense that they were only engaged in dispersing rioters, and 
suppressing unlawful combinations too strong for the usual 
course of judicial proceedings. 

Further, they virtually recognized the separate existence of 
the Confederate States by an interdictive embargo, and block- 
ade of all commerce between them and the United States, not 
only by sea but by land; not only with those who bore arms, 
but with the entire population of the Confederate States. They 
waged an indiscriminate war upon all: private houses in iso- 
lated retreats were bombarded and burned; grain-crops in the 
field were consumed by the torch; and, when the torch was 
not applied, careful labor was bestowed to render complete the 
destruction of every article of use or ornament remaining in 
private dwellings after their female inhabitants had fled from 
the insults of brutal soldiers; a petty war was made on the sick, 
including women and children, by carefully devised measures _ 
to prevent them from obtaining the necessary medicines. Were 


6 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


these the appropriate means by which to execute the laws, and 
in suppressing rioters to secure tranquillity and preserve a vol- 
untary union? Was this a government resting on the consent 
of the governed ? 

At this session of the Confederate Congress additional 
forces were provided to repel invasion, by authorizing the 
President to accept the services of any number of volunteers 
not exceeding four hundred thousand men. Authority was 
also given for suitable financial measures hereafter stated, and 
the levy of a tax. An act of sequestration was also adopted as 
a countervailing measure against the operations of the confis- 
cation law enacted by the Congress of the United States on 
August 6, 1861. 

This act of the United States Congress, with its complement 
passed in the ensuing year, will be considered further on in these 
pages. One of the most indicative of the sections, however, 
provided that, whenever any person, claimed to be held to labor 
or service under the laws of any State, shall be permitted, by the 
person to whom such labor or service is claimed to be due, to 
take up arms against the United States, or to work, or to be em- 
ployed in or upon any fort, intrenchment, etc., or in any military 
or naval service whatever spain the Goverment of the United 
States, the person to whom such labor is claimed to be due 
shall forfeit his claim, and, to any attempt to enforce it, a 
statement of the facts shall be a sufficient answer. The Presi- 
dent of the United States, in his message of December 3, 1861, 
stated that numbers of persons held to service had been liber- 
ated and were dependent on the United States, and must be 
provided for in some way. He recommended that steps be 
taken for colonizing them at some places in a climate congenial 
to them. 

As the President and the Congress of the United States had 
declared this to be a-war for the preservation of the Constitu- 
tion, it may not be out of place to see what course they now 
undertook to pursue under the pretext of preserving the Con- 
stitution of the United States. It had been conceded in all 
time that the Congress of the United States had no power to 
legislate on slavery in the States, and that this was a subject for 


1862] “DUE PROCESS OF LAW.” ie 


State legislation. It was one of the powers not granted in the 
Constitution, but “reserved to the States respectively.” * All 
the powers of the Federal Government were delegated to it 
by the States, and all which were reserved were withheld from 
the Federal Government, as well in time of war as in peace. 
The conditions of peace or war made no change in the powers 
granted in the Constitution. The attempt, therefore, by Con- 
gress, to exercise a power of confiscation, one not granted to 
it, was a mere usurpation. The argument of forfeiture for trea- 
son does not reach the case, because there could be no for- 
.feiture until after conviction, and the Constitution says, “No 
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood or forfeiture 
except during the life of the person attainted.”’ + The con- 
fiscation act of 1861 undertook to convict and sentence with- 
out a trial, and entirely to deprive the owner of slaves of his 
property by giving final freedom to the slaves. Still further 
to show how regardless the United States Government was 
of the limitations imposed upon it by the compact of Union, 
the reader is referred to the fifth article of the first amend- 
ment, being one of those cases in which the people of the sev- 
eral States, in an abundance of caution, threw additional pro- 
tection around rights which the framers of the Constitution 
thought already sufticiently guarded. The last two clauses of 
the article read thus: No person “shall be deprived of life, 
liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall pri- 
vate property be taken for public use, without just compensa- 
tion.” 

Here was a political indictment and conviction by the Con- 
gress and President, with total forfeitures inflicted in palpable 
violation of each and of all the cited clauses of the Constitu- 
tion. 

One can scarcely anticipate such effrontery as would argue 
that “due process of law” meant an act of Congress, that judi- 
cial power could thus be conferred upon the President, and 
private property be confiscated for party success, without vio- 
lating the Constitution which the actors had sworn to support. 

The unconstitutionality of the measure was so palpable that, 


* Constitution of the United States, Article X. + Ibid., Article III, section 3. 


8 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


when the bill was under consideration, Mr. Thaddeus Stevens, 
a member of Congress from Pennsylvania, said: “I thought 
the time had come when the laws of war were to govern our 
action; when constitutions, if they stood in the way of the laws 
of war in dealing with the enemy, had no right to intervene. 
Who pleads the Constitution against our proposed action?” * 
This subject is further considered in subsequent chapters on 
the measures of emancipation adopted by the United States 
Government. 

It is to be remembered in this connection that pillage and 
the wanton destruction of private property are not permitted 
by the laws of war among civilized nations. When prosecuting 
the war with Mexico, we respected private property of the ene- 
‘my; and when in 1781 Great Britain, attempting to reduce her 
revolted American colonies, took possession of the country 
round and about Point Comfort (Fortress Monroe), the homes 
quietly occupied by the rebellious people were spared by the 
armies of the self-asserting ruler of the land. At a later date, 
war existed between Great Britain and the independent States 
of the Union, during which Great Britain got possession of va- 
rious points within the States. At the Treaty of Ghent, 1815, 
by which peace was restored to the two countries, it was stipu- 
lated in the first article that all captured places should be re- 
stored “without causing any destruction, or carrying away any 
of the artillery or other public property originally captured in 
the said forts or places, and which shall remain therein upon 
the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty; or any slaves or 
other private property.” Persistent efforts were made to avoid 
the return of deported slaves, and it was attempted to put them 
in the category of artillery which had been removed before the 
exchange of ratification. Mr. John Quincy Adams, first as 
United States Minister to England, and subsequently as United 
States Secretary of State, conducted with great vigor and ear- 
nestness a long correspondence to maintain the true construe- 
tion of the treaty as recognizing and guarding the right of pri- 
vate property in slaves. In his letter to Viscount Castlereagh, 
the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, after explain- 


* Congress of the United States, July, 1861. 


1862] THE WRONG DONE IN DEPORTING SLAVES. 9 


“ing the distinction between “artillery or other public property ” 
and “slaves or other private property,” as used in the treaty, 
and why it might be impracticable, if they had been removed, 
to return the former, but that the reasons did not apply to the 
latter, for, he proceeds to say, “Private property, not having 
been subject to legitimate capture with the places, was not lia- 
ble to the reason of limitation.” In the same letter, Mr. Ad- 

ams writes: “ Merchant-vessels and effects captured on the 
high-seas are, by the laws of war between civilized nations, 
lawful prize, and by the capture become the property of the 
captors. . . . But, as by the same usages of civilized nations, 
private property is not the subject of lawful capture in war 
upon the land, it is perfectly clear that, in every stipulation, 
private property shall be respected ; or that, upon the restora- 
tion of places taken during the war, it shall not be carried 
away.” (See “American State Papers,” vol. iv, pp. 122, 123.) 
Sectional hostility and party zeal had not then so far under- 
mined the feeling of fraternity which generated the Union as 
to make a public officer construe the Constitution as it might 
favor or injure one section or another, and Great Britain 
was, from a sense of right, compelled to recognize the wrong 
done in deporting slaves, the private property of American 
citizens. 

On the 4th of December, 1861, the President of the United 
States issued an order to the commander-in-chief relative to 
slaves as above mentioned, in which he said, “Their arrest as 
fugitives from service or labor should be immediately followed 
by the military arrest of the parties making the seizure.” Had 
Congress and the President made new laws of war? 

Although the Government of the United States did not 
boldly proclaim the immediate emancipation of all slaves, the 
tendency of all its actions was directly to that end. To use a 
favorite expression of its leaders, the Northern people were not 
at that time “educated up to the point.” A revolt from too 
sudden a revelation of its entire policy was apprehended. Even 
as late as July 7, 1862, General McClellan wrote to the authori- 
ties at Washington from the vicinity of Richmond, “ A. decla- 
ration of radical views, especially upon slavery, will rapidly dis- 


10 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


integrate our armies.” Nevertheless, when policy indicated it, 
the declaration came, as will be seen hereafter. Meantime, 
General Fremont, in command in Missouri, issued a proclama- 
tion on August 31, 1861, declaring the property, real and per- 
sonal, of all persons in arms against the United States, or taking 
an active part with their enemies, to be confiscated, and their 
slaves to be free men. This was subsequently modified to con- 
form to the terms of the above-mentioned confiscation act. 
General Thomas W. Sherman, commanding at Port Royal, in 
South Carolina, was instructed, on October 14, 1861, to receive 
all persons, whether slaves or not, and give them employment, 
“ assuring all loyal masters that Congress will provide just com- 
pensation to them for the loss of the services of the persons so 
employed.” To others no relief was to be given. ‘This was, 
by confiscation, to punish a class of citizens, in the emancipa- 
tion of every slave whose owner rendered support to the Con- 
federate States. Finally, General Halleck, who succeeded Fre- 
mont, and General Dix, commanding near Fortress Monroe, 
issued orders not to permit slaves to come within their lines. 
They were speedily condemned for this action, because it put 
a stop to the current of emancipation, which will be hereafter 
narrated. 

Reference has been made to our want of a nayy, and the 
efforts made to supply the deficiency. The usual resort under 
such circumstances to privateers was, in our case, without the 
ordinary incentive of gain, as all foreign ports were closed 
against our prizes, and, our own ports being soon blockaded, our 
vessels, public or private, had but the alternative of burning or 
‘bonding their captures. To those who, nevertheless, desired 
them, letters of marque were granted by us, and there was soon a 
small fleet of vessels composed of those which had taken out these 
letters, and others which had been purchased and fitted out by the 
Navy Department. They hovered on the coasts of the North- 
ern States, capturing and destroying their vessels, and filling the 
enemy with consternation. The President of the United States 
had already declared in his proclamation of April 19th, as above 
stated, that “any person, who, under the pretended authority of 
the said (Confederate) States, should molest a vessel of the 


1862] THE LITTLE SCHOONER SAVANNAH. 11 


United States, or the persons or cargo on board,’ should be held 
amenable to the laws of the United States for the prevention 
of piracy. This was another violation of international law, 
another instance of arrogant disregard for universal opinion. 
The threat, if meant for intimidation, and to deprive the Con- 
federacy of one of the usual weapons of war, was unbecoming 
the head of a Government. To have executed it upon a help- 
less prisoner, would have been a crime intensified by its coward- 
ice. Happily for the United States, the threat was not executed, 
but the failure to carry out the declared purpose was coupled 
with humiliation, because it was the result of a notice to retaliate 
as fully as might need be to stop such a barbarous practice. 
To yield to the notice thus served, was a practical admission by 
the United States Government that the Confederacy had be- 
come a power among the nations. 

On June 3, 1861, the little schooner Savannah, previously a 
pilot-boat in Charleston Harbor and sailing under a commission 
issued by authority of the Confederate States, was captured by 
the United States brig Perry. The crew were placed in irons 
and sent to New York. It appeared, from statements made 
without contradiction, that they were not treated as prisoners of 
war, whereupon a letter was addressed by me to President Lin- 
coln, dated July 6th, stating explicitly that, “painful as will be 
the necessity, this Government will deal out to the prisoners 
held by it the same treatment and the same fate as shall be ex- 
perienced by those captured on the Savannah ; and, if driven to 
the terrible necessity of retaliation by your execution of any of 
the officers or crew of the Savannah, that retaliation will be 
extended so far as shall be requisite to secure the abandonment 
of a practice unknown to the warfare of civilized man, and so 
barbarous as to disgrace the nation which shall be guilty of in- 
augurating it.” A reply was promised to this letter, but none 
came. Still later in the year the privateer Jefferson Davis was ' 
captured, the captain and crew brought into Philadelphia, and 
the captain tried and found guilty of piracy and threatened 
with death. Immediately I instructed General Winder, at Rich- 
mond, to select one prisoner of the highest rank, to be confined 
in a cell appropriated to convicted felons, and treated in all re- 


12 RISE AND FALL OF TIE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


spects as if convicted, and to be held for execution in the same 
manner as might be adopted for the execution of the prisoner 
of war in Philadelphia. He was further instructed to select 
thirteen other prisoners of the highest rank, to be held in the 
same manner as hostages for the thirteen prisoners held in New 
York for trial as pirates. By this course the infamous attempt 
made by the United States Government to commit judicial mur- 
der on prisoners of war was arrested. 

The attention of the British House of Lords was also at- 
tracted to the proclamation of President Lincoln, threatening the 
officers and crew of privateers with the punishment of piracy. 
It led to a discussion in which the Earl of Derby said: “He 
apprehended that, if one thing was clearer than another, it was 
that privateering was not piracy; and that no law could make 
that piracy, as regarded the subjects of one nation which was 
not piracy by the law of nations. Consequently, the United 
States must not be allowed to entertain this doctrine, and to 
call upon her Majesty’s Government not to interfere.” The 
Lord Chancellor said: “There was no doubt that, if an English- 
man engaged in the service of the Southern States, he violated the 
laws of his country and rendered himself liable to punishment, 
and that he had no right to trust to the protection of his native 
country to shield him from the consequences of his act. But, 
though that individual would be guilty of a breach of the law 
of his own country, he could not be treated as a pirate, and those 
who treated him as a pirate would be guilty of murder.” 

The appearance of this little fleet on the ocean made it ne- 
cessary for the powers of Europe immediately to define their 
position relative to the contending powers. Great Britain, 
adopting a position of neutrality, and recognizing both as bel- 
ligerents, interdicted the armed ships and privateers of both from 
carrying prizes into the waters of the United Kingdom or its 
colonies, All the other powers recognized the Confederate 
States to be belligerents, but closed their ports against the ad- 
mission of prizes captured by either belligerent. 

It is worthy of notice that the United States Government 
(though it had previously declined) at this time notified the 
English and French Governments that it was now willing to 


ee 


1862] WHY WERE THEY NOT HUNG? 13 


adhere to all the conditions of the Paris Congress of 1856, pro- 
vided the clause abolishing privateers might apply to the Con- 
federate States. The offer, with the proviso, was honorably 
declined by both France and England. 

In the matter of the exchange of prisoners, which became 
important in consequence of these retaliatory measures, and the 
number taken by our troops at Manassas, the people of the 
Northern States were the victims of incessant mortification and 
distress through the vacillating and cruel conduct of their Goy- 
ernment. It based all its immense military movements on the 
theory that “the laws of the United States have been for some 
time past and now are opposed and the execution thereof ob- 
structed, . . . by combinations too powerful to be suppressed” 
by the ordinary methods. Under this theory the United States 
are assumed to be one nation, and the distinctions among them 
of States are as little recognized as if they did not exist. This 
theory was false, and thereby led its originators into constant 
blunders. When the leaders of a government aspire to the 
acquisition of absolute, unlimited power, and the sword is 
drawn to hew the way, it would be more logical and respectable 
to declare the laws silent than to attempt to justify unlawful 
acts by unwarranted legislation. If their theory had been true, 
then their prisoners of war were insurrectionists and rebels, and 
guilty of treason, and hanging would have been the legitimate 
punishment. Why were they not hung? Not through pity, 
but because the facts contradicted the theory. The “ combina- 
tions” spoken of were great and powerful States, and the danger 
was that the North would be the greater sufferer by our retali- 
ation. There was no humane course but to exchange prisoners 
according to the laws of war. With this the Government of 
the United States refused to comply, lest it might be construed 
into an acknowledgment of belligerent rights on our part, which 
would explode their theory of insurrectionary combinations, tend 
to restore more correct views of the rights and powers of the 
States, and expose in its true light their efforts to establish the 
supreme and unlimited sovereignty of the General Government. 
The reader may observe the tenacity with which the authorities 
at Washington, and, behind them, the Northern States, clung 


14 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


to this theory. Upon its strict maintenance depended the suc- 
cess of their bloody revolution to secure absolute supremacy 
over the States. Upon its failure, the dissolution of the Union 
would have been established ; constitutional liberty would have 
been vindicated; the hopes of mankind in the modern institu- 
tions of federation fulfilled ; and a new Union might have been 
formed and held together with a bond of fraternity and not by 
the sword, as under the above revolutionary theory. 

By the exchange of prisoners, nothing was conceded except 
what was evident to the world—that actual war existed, and 
that a Christian people should at least conduct it according to 
the usages of civilized nations. But sectional hate and the vain 
conceit of newly acquired power led to the idle prophecy of our 
speedy subjection, and hence the Government of the United 
States refused to act as required by humanity and the usages of 
civilized warfare. At length, moved by the clamors of the reia- 
tives and friends of the prisoners we held, and by fears of retali- 
ation, it covertly submitted to abandon its declared purpose, 
and to shut its eyes while the exchanges were made by various 
commanders under flags of truce. Thus some were exchanged 
in New York, Washington, Cairo, and Columbus, Kentucky, 
and by General McClellan in western Virginia and elsewhere. 
On the whole, the partial exchanges were inconsiderable and 
inconclusive as to the main question. The condition at the 
close of the year 1861, summarily stated, was that soldiers cap- 
tured in battle were not protected by the usage of “ exchange,” 
and citizens were arrested without due process of law, deported 
to distant States, and incarcerated without assigned cause. All 
this by persons acting under authority of the United States 
Government, but in disregard of the United States Constitution, 
which provides that “no person shall be held to answer for a 
capital or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or 
an indictment of a grand jury, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property without due process of law.”* “The right of the peo- 
ple to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, 
against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be vio- 
lated.” + These provisions were of no avail to protect the citi- 


* Constitution of the United States, Article V. + Ibid., Article IV. 


1862] WHAT CAUSE WAS THERE FOR SUCH ACTS? 15 


zens from the outrages, because those who derived their author- 
ity from the Constitution used that authority to violate its guar- 
antees. It has been stated that the rule upon which the United 
States Government was conducting affairs was entirely revolu- 
tionary. Its efforts to clothe the Government of the Union with 
absolute power involved the destruction of the rights of the 
States and the subversion of the Constitution. Hence on 
every occasion the provisions of the Constitution afforded no 
protection to the citizens: their rights were spurned; their 
persons were seized and imprisoned beyond the reach of 
friends; their houses sacked and burned. If they pleaded the 
Constitution, the Government of the Constitution was deaf to 
them, unsheathed its sword, and said the Union was at stake; 
and the Constitution, which was the compact of union, must 
stand aside. This was indeed a revolution. A constitutional 
government of limited powers derived from the people was 
transformed into a military despotism. The Northern people 
were docile as sheep under the change, reminding one of the 
words of the Psalmist: “ All we, like sheep, have gone astray.” 

Posterity may ask with amazement, What cause could there 
have been for such acts by a government that was ordained “ to 
form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic 
tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the gen- 
eral welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and 
our posterity”? Posterity may further ask, Where could a gov- 
ernment of limited powers, constructed only for certain general 
purposes—and on the principle that all power proceeds from the 
people, and that “the powers not delegated by the Constitution, 
nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States 
respectively, or to the people ”—find a grant of power, or an 
authority to perpetrate such injuries upon the States and the 
people? As to the first question, it may be said: There was 
no external cause for such acts. All foreign nations were at 
peace with the United States. No hostile fleets were hovering 
on-her coasts, nor immense foreign armies threatening to invade 
her territory. The cause, if any plausible one existed, was 
entirely internal. It lay between it and its citizens. If it had 
treated them with injustice and oppression, and threatened so 


16 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


to continue, it had departed from the objects of its creation, and 
they had the resulting right to dissolve it. : 

Who was to be the umpire in such a case? Not the United 
States Government, for it was the creature of the States; it pos- 
sessed no inherent, original sovereignty. The Constitution says, 
“The powers not delegated to the United States by the Consti- 
tution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the 
States respectively, or to the people.” * The umpireship is, there- 
fore, expressly on the side of the States, or the people. When 
the State of South Carolina, through a sovereign convention, 
withdrew from the Union, she exercised the umpireship which 
rightly belonged to her, and which no other could exercise for 
her. This involved Hie dissolution of the Union, and the ex- 
tinction of the Government of the United States so far as she 
was concerned; but the officers of that Government, instead of 
justly acquiescing in that which was constitutionally and legally 
inevitable, drew the sword, and resolved to maintain by might 
that which had no longer existence by right. A usurpation 
thus commenced in wrong was the mother of all the usurpations 
and wrongs which followed. The unhallowed attempt to estab- 
lish the absolute sovereignty of the Government of the United 
States, by the subjugation of States and their people, brought 
forth its natural fruit. Well might the victim of the guillo- 
tine exclaim, ““O Liberty, what crimes are committed in thy 
name |” 

As to the other question—Where could a government of 
limited powers find authority to perpetrate such injuries upon. 
its own constituents ?—an answer will be given in succeeding 
pages. 

Up to the close of the year the war enlarged its proportions 
so as to include new fields, until it then extended from the shores 
of the Chesapeake to the confines of Missouri and Arizona. 
Sudden calls from the remotest points for military aid were met 
with promptness enough not only to avert disaster in the face of 
superior numbers, but also to roll back the tide of invasion on 
the border. . 

At the commencement of the war the enemy were possessed 


* Constitution of the United States, Article X. 


1862] STRONGER AT THE END OF THE YEAR. 17 


of certain strategic points and strong places within the Confed- 
erate States. They greatly exceeded us in numbers, in available 
resources, and in the supplies necessary for war. Military es- 
tablishments had been long organized, and were complete; the 
navy and the army, once common to both, were in their posses- 
sion. To meet all this we had to create not only an army in the 
face of war itself, but also military establishments necessary to 
equip and place it in the field. The spirit of the volunteers and 
the patriotism of the people enabled us, under Providence, to 
grapple successfully with these difficulties. A succession of 
glorious victories at Bethel, Manassas, Springfield, Lexing- 
ton, Leesburg, and Belmont, checked the invasion of our soil. 
After seven months of war the enemy had not only failed to 
extend their occupancy of the soil, but new States and Terri- 
tories had been added to our confederacy. Instead of their 
threatened march of unchecked conquest, the enemy were driven 
at more than one point to assume the defensive ; and, upon a 
fair comparison between the two belligerents, as to men, mili- 
tary means, and financial condition, the Confederate States were 
relatively much stronger at the end of the year than when the 
struggle commenced. 

The necessities of the times called into existence new 
branches of manufactures, and gave a fresh impulse to the activ- 
ity of those previously in operation, and we were gradually 
becoming independent of the rest of the world for the supply 
of such military stores and munitions as were indispensable for 
war. 

At an election on November 6, 1861, the chief executive 
officers of the provisional Government were unanimously chosen 
to similar positions in the permanent Government, to be inaugu- 
rated on the ensuing 22d of February, 1862. 


49 


18 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Military Arrangements of the Enemy.—Marshall and Garfield.—Fishing Creek.—Crit- 
tenden’s Report.—Fort Henry ; its Surrender.—Fort Donelson ; its Position.— 
Assaults.—Surrender.—Losses. 


Important changes in the military arrangements of the 
enemy were made about this time. Major-General George B. 
McClellan was assigned to the chief command of his army, in 
place of Lieutenant-General Scott, retired. A Department of 
Ohio was constituted, embracing the States of Ohio, Michigan, 
Indiana, and Kentucky east of the Cumberland and Tennessee 
Rivers; and Brigadier-General D. C. Buell was assigned to its 
command. At the same time, General Henry W. Halleck su- 
perseded General John OC. Fremont in command of the United 
States Department of the West. General W. T. Sherman was 
removed from Kentucky and sent to report to General Halleck. 
General A. 8. Johnston was now confronted by General Hal- 
leck in the West and by General Buell in Kentucky. The 
former, with armies at Cairo and Paducah, under Generals 
Grant and O. F. Smith, threatened equally Columbus, the key 
of the lower Mississippi River, and the water-lines of the Cum- 
berland and the Tennessee, with their defenses at Forts Donel- 
son and Henry. The right wing of General Buell also men- 
aced Donelson and Henry, while his center was directed against 
Bowling Green, and his left was advancing against General 
Zollicoffer at Mill Spring, on the upper Cumberland. If the 
last-named position could be forced, the way seemed open to 
East Tennessee, by either the Jacksboro or the Jamestown 
routes, on the one hand, and to Nashville on the other. At the 
northeastern corner of Kentucky there was a force under Colo- 
nel Garfield, of Ohio, opposed to the Confederate force under 
General Eoehe Marshall. 

The strength of Marshall’s force in effective men was about 
sixteen hundred. Knowing that a body of the enemy under 
Colonel Garfield was advancing to meet him, and that a small 
force was moving to his rear, he fell back some fifteen miles, 


1862] MY LEFT WING NEVER FIRED A SHOT. 19 


and took position on Middle Creek, near Prestonburg. On Janu- 
ary 10, 1862, Garfield attacked him. The firing was kept up, 
with some intervals, about four hours, and was occasionally very 
sharp and spirited. Marshall says in his report: “The enemy 
did not move me from any one position I assumed, and at night- 
fall withdrew from the field, leaving me just where I was in 
the morning. . . . He came to attack, yet came so cautiously 
that my left wing never fired a shot, and he never came tip 
sufficiently to engage my center or left wing.” Garfield was 
said to have fallen back fifteen miles to Paintsville, and 
Marshall seven miles, where he remained two days, then 
slowly pursued his retreat. He stated his loss at ten killed 
and fourteen wounded, and that of the enemy to have been 
severe. 

The battle of Fishing Creek has been the subject of harsh 
criticism, and I think it will be seen by the report herein in- 
serted that great injustice has been done to General George B. 
Crittenden, who commanded on that occasion. 

In July, 1880, I wrote to him requesting a statement of the 
affair at Fishing Creek, and a short time before his decease he 
complied with my request by writing as follows: 


“In November, 1862, I assumed, by assignment, the command 
of a portion of East Tennessee and southeastern Kentucky, 
which embraced the troops stationed at Mill Springs, on the Cum- 
berland River, and under the command of General Zollicoffer, 
who, as I understood the matter, had been stationed there by 
General Johnston to prevent the enemy under Schépf, and con- 
fronting him on the opposite side of the river, from crossing and 
penetrating into Tennessee. Schépf’s camp was at Somerset, on 
Fishing Creek, a tributary of the Cumberland, emptying into it a 
mile above Mill Springs. He was several miles away from the 
bank of the Cumberland, so that both the river and creek inter- 
vened between him and General Zollicoffer. While I was detained 
in Knoxville, on business connected with my command, I received 
an official communication from General Zollicoffer, informing me 
that he had crossed the Cumberland by fording, and was fortify- ° 
ing a camp on the right bank, etc. By the messenger who bore 
me this communication I ordered him to recross the river and 


90 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


resume his original position on the left bank. Early in January, 
I reached Mill Springs, and found, to my surprise, General Zolli- 
coffer still on the right bank. He called on me immediately, and 
informed me that his messenger who bore back my order had lost 
several days in returning, and that when it was received he sup- 
posed that I would arrive almost immediately ; and, hoping to be 
able to convince me that it would be better to remain on the right 
bank, he had postponed crossing until, by a rise in the river, it 
had become impossible to do so ; that all his artillery and a large 
portion of his wagons were on the right bank, and his only means 
of transferring them to the other bank were a small ferry-boat and 
a very small stern-wheel steamer, entirely inadequate to the pur- 
pose. I was dissatisfied, but, as I knew that the General had been 
actuated by pure motives, I accepted his excuse. Details were 
promptly placed in the woods, to prepare timber for flat-boats to 
transport the artillery and wagons to the left bank of the river. 
The weather was execrable, and the men unskilled, so that the 
work progressed slowly. 

“Such was the posture of affairs, when, on the 18th of Janu- 
ary, I was informed that General Thomas was approaching with 
a large force of all arms, and would encamp that night within a 
few miles of us. Here was thrust upon me the very contingency 
which my order to General Zollicoffer was intended to obviate. 
It rained violently throughout this day until late in the afternoon. 
It occurred to me that Fishing Creek must so rise as to render it 
impossible for Schopf to connect with Thomas. Acting upon this 
idea, I summoned a council of superior officers, and, laying before 
them the circumstances of the case, asked their advice. There 
was not one of them who did not concur with me in the opinion 
that Thomas must be attacked immediately, and, if possible, by 
surprise ; that such attack, if successful merely in repulsing him, 
would probably give us time to cross the Cumberland with artil- 
lery and wagons, by means of our boats, then being built. 

“ Accordingly, at twelve o’clock in the night, we marched 
for the position of the enemy, ascertained to be some six miles 
away. We had scarcely taken up the line of march, when the 
rain began to fall, the darkness became intense, and the conse- 

quent confusion great, so that day dawned before we reached his 
position. The attack, as a surprise, failed ; nevertheless, it was 
promptly made. It rained violently throughout the action, ren- 


1862] THE BATTLE WAS A NECESSITY, 21 


dering all the flint-lock guns useless. The men bearing them were 
allowed to fall back on the reserve. 

“The action was progressing successfully, when the fall of 
General Zollicoffer was announced to me. Apprehending disas- 
trous consequences, I hastened to the front. My apprehensions 
were well founded. I found the line of battle in confusion and 
falling back, and, after a vain effort to restore the line, yielded to 
necessity, and, by the interposition of the reserve, covered the 
shattered line and effected my retreat to camp without loss. 

“T reached camp late in the afternoon. Not long afterward 
the enemy opened fire at long range ; night coming on, he ceased 
to fire. The few shot and shells that fell in the camp so plainly 
demonstrated the demoralization of the men, that I doubted, even 
if I had had rations, which I had not, whether the camp could 
have been successfully defended for twenty-four hours. There 
was not, and had not been for some time in the camp, rations be- 
yond the daily need. This state of affairs was due to the exhaus- 
tion of the neighboring country, and the impracticability of the 
roads. 

“Tt became now my sole object to transfer the men with their 
arms, the cavalry-horses, and teams to the left bank of the river. 
This was successfully accomplished by dawn of the next day. 

““T attributed the loss of the battle, in a great degree, to the 
inferiority of our arms and the untimely fall of General Zolli- 
coffer, who was known and highly esteemed by the men, who were 
almost all Tennesseeans. I think I have shown that the battle of 
Fishing Creek was a necessity, and that I ought not to be held 
responsible for that necessity. As to how I managed it, I have 
nothing further to say.” 


General Crittenden’s gallantry had been too often and too 
conspicuously shown in battle during the war with Mexico 
and on the Indian frontier to admit of question, and the 
criticism has been directed solely to the propriety of the attack 
at Fishing Creek. His explanation is conclusive against any 
arraignment of him for the presence of the troops on the right 
bank of the Cumberland, or for his not immediately with- 
drawing them to the left bank when his position was threat- 
ened. Under these circumstances, to attack one portion of the 
enemy, when a junction with the other part could not be ef- 


99, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


fected, was to act in accordance with one of the best-settled 
rules of war. ; 

The unforeseen accident of renewed rain, with intense dark- 
ness, delayed his march beyond reasonable expectation ; and, 
whereas the whole force should have reached the enemy’s 
encampment before dawn, the advance of two regiments only 
reached there after broad daylight. To hesitate, would have 
been to give the enemy time for preparation, and I think it 
was wisely decided to attack at once and rely upon the rear 
coming up to support the advance; but the rear, encumbered 
with their artillery, were so far behind that, though the advance 
were successful in their first encounter, they did not receive 
the hoped-for support until they had suffered severely, and then 
the long-known and trusted commander of the forces there, the 
gallant and most estimable Zollicoffer, fell; whence confusion 
resulted. General Crittenden had been but a few days with the 
troops, a disadvantage which will be readily appreciated. Had 
the whole force been in position at early dawn, so as to have sur- 
prised the enemy, the plan would have been executed, and vic- 
tory would have been the probable result; after which, Schépf’s 
force might have been readily disposed of. But, had the attack 
done no more than to check the advance of Thomas until the 
boats under construction could have been finished, so as to en- 
able Crittenden to save his artillery and equipments, it would 
have justified the attempt. I therefore think the strategy not 
only defensible but commendable, and the affair to be ranked 
with one of the many brilliant conceptions of the war. The 
reader will not fail to remark the evidence which General Crit- 
tenden’s report affords of the fallacy of representing the South 
as having been prepared by supplying herself with the matériel 
necessary for war. The heart of even a noble enemy must be 
moved at the spectacle of citizens defending their homes, with 
muskets of obsolete patterns and shot-guns, against an invader 
having all the modern improvements in arms. The two regi- 
ments constituting the advance were Battle’s Twentieth Tennes- 
see and the Fifteenth Mississippi, commanded by Lieutenant- 
Colonel E. C. Walthall. With dauntless courage they engaged 
the whole array of the enemy, and drove him from his first 


1862] LET PRAISE, NOT CENSURE, BE GIVEN. 23 


position. When at length our forces fell back to their in- 
trenched camp, it was with sullen determination, and the pur- 
suit was so cautious that whenever it ventured too near it was 
driven back by our rear guard. The valiant advance—the 
Fifteenth Mississippi and Twentieth Tennessee—bore the bur- 
den of the day. The Mississippians lost two hundred and 
twenty out of four hundred engaged, and the Tennesseeans lost 
half as many, this being about three fourths the casualties in 
our force. 

That night General Crittenden crossed his troops over the 
river, with the exception of those too badly wounded to travel. 
He was compelled to leave his artillery and wagons, not having 
the means of transporting them across, and moved with the 
remnant of his army toward Nashville. 

Both by General Crittenden and those who have criticised 
him for making the attack at Fishing Creek, it is assumed that 
General Zollicoffer made a mistake in crossing to the right bank 
of the Cumberland, and that thence it resulted as a consequence 
that General Johnston’s right flank of his line through Bowling 
Green was uncovered. I do not perceive the correctness of the 
conclusion, for it must be admitted that General Zollicoffer’s com- 
mand was not adequate to resist the combined forces of Thomas 
and Schépf, or that the Cumberland River was a sufficient ob- 
stacle to prevent them from crossing either above or below the 
position at Mill Springs. General Zollicoffer may well have 
believed that he could better resist the crossing of the Cumber- 
land by removing to the right bank rather than by remaining 
on the left. The only difference, it seems to me, would have 
been that he could have retreated without the discomfiture of 
his force or the loss of his artillery and equipments, but, in 
either case, Johnston’s right flank would have been alike un- 
covered. : 

To Zollicoffer and the other brave patriots who fell with 
him, let praise, not censure, be given; and to Crittenden, let 
tardy justice render the meed due to a gallant soldier of the 
highest professional attainments, and whose fault, if fault it 
be, was a willingness to dare much in his country’s service. 

When the State of Tennessee seceded, measures were im- 


94. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


mediately adopted to occupy and fortify all the strong points on 
the Mississippi, as Memphis, Randolph, Fort Pillow, and Island 
No. 10. As it was our purpose not to enter the State of Ken- 
tucky and construct defenses for the Cumberland and Ten- 
nessee Rivers on her territory, they were located within the 
borders of Tennessee, and as near to the Kentucky line as suit- 
able sites could be found. On these were commenced the con- 
struction of Fort Donelson on the west side of the Cumberland, 
and Fort Henry on the east side of the Tennessee, and about 
twelve miles apart. The latter stood on the low lands adjacent 
to the river about high-water mark, and, being just below a bend 
in the river and at the head of a straight stretch of two miles, it 
commanded the river for that distance. It was also commanded 
by high ground on the opposite bank of the river, which it was 
intended should be occupied by our troops in case of a land at- 
tack. The power of ironclad gunboats against land defenses 
had not yet been shown, and the low position of the fort brought 
the battery to the water-level, and secured the advantage of 
ricochet firing, the most effective against wooden ships. 

Fort Donelson was placed on high ground; and, with the 
plunging fire from its batteries, was thereby more effective 
against the ironclads brought to attack it on the water side. 
But on the land side it was not equally strong, and required 
extensive outworks and a considerable force to resist an attack 
in that quarter. 

In September, 1861, Lieutenant Dixon, of the Engineer 
Corps, was instructed to make an examination of the works at 
the two forts. He reported that Fort Henry was nearly com- 
pleted. It was built, not at the most favorable position, but it 
was a strong work, and, instead of abandoning it and building 
at another place, he advised that it should be completed, and 
other works constructed on the high lands just above the fort 
on the opposite side of the river. Measures for the accomplish- 
ment of this plan were adopted as rapidly as the means at dis- 
posal would allow. 

In relation to Donelson, it was his opinion that, although a 
better position might have been chosen for this fortification 
on the Cumberland, under the circumstances surrounding the 


1862] BEST TO CONCENTRATE THE RESOURCES, 95 


command, it would be better to retain and strengthen the posi- 
tion chosen. 

General Polk, in a report to General Johnston just previous 
to the battle of Shiloh, said: “The principal difficulty in the 
way of a successful defense of the rivers, was the want of an 
adequate force—a force of infantry and a force of experienced 
artillerists.” This was the unavoidable result of the circum- 
stances heretofore related, but tells only half of the story. To 
match the vessels of the enemy (floating forts) we required 
vessels like theirs, or the means of constructing them. We had 
neither. 

The efforts which were put forth to resist the operations on 
the Western rivers, for which the United States made such vast 
preparations, were therefore necessarily very limited. There 
was a lack of skilled labor, of ship-yards, and of materials for 
constructing ironclads, which could not be readily obtained or 
prepared in a beset and blockaded country. Proposals were con- 
sidered both for building gunboats and for converting the ordi- 
nary side-wheel, high-pressure steamboats into gunboats. But 
the engineer department, though anxious to avail itself of 
this means of defense, decided that it was not feasible. There 
was not plate-iron with which to armor a single vessel, and even 
railroad-iron could not be spared from its uses for transportation. 
Unless a fleet could have been built to match the enemy’s, 
we had to rely on land-batteries, torpedoes, and marching 
forces. It was thought best to concentrate the resources on 
what seemed practicable. One ironclad gunboat, however, the 
Eastport, was undertaken on the Tennessee River, but under 
so many difficulties that, after the surrender of Fort Henry, 
while still unfinished, it was destroyed, lest it should fall to the 
enemy.* 

The fleet of gunboats prepared by the United States for the 
Mississippi and its tributaries consisted of twelve, seven of which 
were iron-clad, and able to resist all except the heaviest solid shot. 
The boats were built very wide in proportion to their length, so 
that in the smooth river-waters they might have almost the 
steadiness of land-batteries when discharging their heavy guns. 


* “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” by his son. 


26 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


This flotilla carried one hundred and forty-three guns, some 
sixty-four pounders, some thirty-two pounders, and some seven- 
inch rifled guns carrying eighty-pound shells. 

On February 2d General Grant started from Cairo with sev- 
enteen thousand men on transports. Commodore Foote accom- 
panied him with seven gunboats. On the 4th the landing of the 
troops commenced three miles or more below Fort Henry. Gen- 
eral Grant took command on the east bank withthe main column, 
while General Charles F. Smith, with two brigades of some five 
to six thousand men, landed on the left bank, with orders to 
take the earthwork opposite Fort Henry, known as Fort Hind- 
man. On the 5th the landing was completed, and the attack 
was made on the next day. The force of General Tilghman, 
who was in command at Fort Henry, was about thirty-four 
hundred men. It is evident that on the 5th he intended to 
dispute Grant’s advance by land; but on the 6th, before the 
attack by the gunboats, he changed his purpose, abandoned 
all hope of a successful defense, and made arrangements for 
the escape of his main body to Fort Donelson, while the 
guns of Fort Henry should engage the gunboats. He or- 
dered Colonel Hindman to withdraw the command to Fort 
Donelson, while he himself would obtain the necessary delay 
for the movement by use of the battery, and standing a bom- 
bardment in Fort Henry. For this purpose he retained his 
heavy artillery company—seventy-five men—to work the guns, 
a number unequal to the strain and labor of the defense.* 

Noon was the time fixed for the attack; but Grant, impeded 
by the overflow of water, and unwilling to expose his men to the 
heavy guns of the fort, held them back to await the result of the 
gunboat attack. In the mean time the Confederate troops were 
in retreat. Four ironclads, mounting forty-eight heavy guns, ap- 
proached and took position within six hundred yards of the fort, 
firing as they advanced. About half a mile behind these came 
three unarmored gunboats, mounting twenty-seven heavy guns, 
which took a more distant position, and kept up a bombardment 
of shells that fell within the works. Some four hundred of the 
formidable missiles of the ironclad boats were also thrown into 


* “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” by his son. 


WERE 


NOT SLOW TO RESPOND. 


27 


SSS 


iW 


e ea 
o 
\ 
Rwy 
SSW 
SO 
Ws 


, 
Won 
S 


ay 


US 
AGS 


Hi SS 
JINN 


Map ofthe 
BATTLE FIELD 
OF 
FORT DONELSON 
February 12th. to 16 th. 18¢2. 
by W.-F.Foster 


Formerly Major and Chief Engineer, 


7, 
TES, ae, 
th WY 


a) SS 
SS 
Y 


Z 


. 


ZI 
refi 
~ (2) 


iY 
=) 


Ty 


T- 


Scale of Feet 


LAD DSS 


Uae 


the fort. 


The officers and men inside were not slow to respond, 


and as many as fifty-nine of their shots were counted as striking 


the gunboats. 
whole length; another shot, passi 


On the ironclad Essex a cannon-ball ranged her 


ng through the boiler, caused 


98 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


an explosion that scalded her commander, Porter, and many of ~ 
the seamen and soldiers on board. 

_ Five minutes after the fight began, the twenty-four pounder 
rifled gun, one of the most formidable in the fort, burst, disabling 
every man at the piece. Then a shell exploded at the muzzle 
of one of the thirty-two pounders, ruining the gun, and killing or 
wounding all the men who served it. About the same moment 
a premature discharge occurred at one of the forty-two pounder 
guns, killing three men and seriously injuring others. The ten- 
inch columbiad, the only gun able to match the artillery of the 
assailants, was next rendered useless by a priming-wire that was 
jammed and broken in the vent. An heroic blacksmith labored 
for a long time to remove it, under the full fire of the enemy, 
but in vain. The men became exhausted and lost confidence ; 
and Tilghman, seeing this, in person served a thirty-two pounder 
for some fifteen minutes. Though but four of his guns were 
disabled, six stood idle for want of artillerists, and but two were 
replying to the enemy. After an engagement of two hours and 
ten minutes, he ceased firing and lowered his flag. or this sol- 
dierly devotion and self-sacrifice the gallant commander and his 
brave band must be honored while patriotism has an advocate 
and self-sacrifice for others has a votary. Our casualties were 
five killed and sixteen wounded; those of the enemy were sixty- 
three of all kinds. Twelve officers and sixty-three non-com- 
missioned officers and privates were surrendered with the fort. 
The Tennessee River was thus open, and a base by short lines 
was established against Fort Donelson. 

The next movement was. a combined attack by land and 
water upon Fort Donelson. This fort was situated on the left 
bank of the Cumberland, as has been stated, near its great 
bend, and- about forty miles from the mouth of the river. It 
was about one mile north of the village of Dover, where the 
commissary and quartermaster’s supplies were in depot. The 
fort consisted of two water-batteries on the hillside, protected 
by a bastioned earthwork of irregular outline on the summit, 
inclosing about one hundred acres. The water-batteries were 
admirably placed to sweep the river approaches, with an arma- 
ment of thirteen guns; eight thirty-two pounders, three thirty- 


1862] CRASHED THROUGH ONE OF HER PORTS. 29 


two pound carronade, one ten-inch columbiad, and one rifled 
gun of thirty-two pound caliber. The field-work, which was 
intended for infantry supports, occupied a plateau about one 
hundred feet above the river, commanding and protecting the 
water-batteries at close musket range. These works afforded a 
fair defense against gunboats; but they were not designed or 
adapted for resistance to a land attack or investment by an 
enemy. 

Generals Pillow and Floyd were ordered with their sepa- 
rate commands to Fort Donelson. General Buckner also was 
sent with a division from Bowling Green; so that the Confed- 
erate effective force at the fort during the siege was between 
fourteen thousand five hundred and fifteen thousand men.* 
The force of General Grant was not less than thirty to thirty- 
five thousand men. On February 12th he commenced his 
movement across from Fort Henry, and the investment of Donel- 
son was made without any serious opposition. On the 13th 
General Buckner reports that “the fire of the enemy’s artillery 
and riflemen was incessant throughout the day; but was re- 
_ sponded to by a well-directed fire from the intrenchments, which 
inflicted upon the assailant a considerable loss, and almost si- 
lenced his fire late in the afternoon.” The object of the enemy 
undoubtedly was to discover the strength and position of our 
forces. The artillery-fire was continued at intervals during 
the night. Nearly every Confederate regiment reported a few 
casualties from the shot and shell which frequently fell inside 
of the works. Meanwhile, a gunboat of thirteen guns arrived 
in the morning, and, taking a position behind a headland, fired 
one hundred and thirty-eight shots, when our one hundred and 
twenty-eight pound shot crashed through one of her ports, in- 
juring her machinery and crippling her. The enemy’s fire did 
no damage to the fort itself, but a shot disabled a gun and 
killed Captain Dixon, a valuable engineer, whose loss was 
greatly deplored. 

The weather became cold during the night, and a driving 
snow-storm prevailed, so that some of the soldiers were frozen, 
and the wounded between the lines suffered extremely. The 


* “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” by his son. 


30 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


fleet of gunboats under Commodore Foote arrived, bringing re- 
enforcements to the enemy. These were landed during the 
night and the next day, which was occupied with placing them 
in position. Nevertheless, though no assault was made, a ram- 
bling and ineffective fire was kept up. About 3 p. m. the com- 
mander of the naval force, expecting an easy victory, like that 
at Fort Henry, brought his four ironclads, followed by two gun- 
boats, up to the attack. Each of the ironclads mounted thir- 
teen guns and the gunboats nine. Any one of them was more 


than a match for the guns of the fort. Their guns were eight,. 


nine, and ten inch, three in the bow of each. Our columbiad 
and the rifled gun were the only two pieces effective against the 
ironclads. The enemy moved directly toward the water-bat- 
teries, firing with great weight of metal. It was the intention 
of Commodore Foote to silence these batteries, pass by, and take 
a position where he could enfilade the fort with broadsides. 
The gunboats opened at a mile and a half distance, and advanced 
until within three or four hundred yards. The shot and shell 
of the fleet tore up the earthworks, but did no further injury. 
But the Confederate guns, aimed from an elevation of not less 
than thirty feet by cool and courageous hands, sent their shot 
with destructive power, and overcame all the enemy’s advan- 
tages in number and weight of guns. The bolts df our two 
heavy guns went crashing through iron and massive timbers 
with resistless force, scattering slaughter and destruction through 
the fleet.* Hoppin, in his “ Life of Commodore Foote,” says: 


“The Louisville was disabled by a shot, which cut away her 
rudder-chains, making her totally unmanageable, so that she 
drifted with the current out of action. Very soon the St. Louis 
was disabled by a shot through her pilot-house, rendering her 
steering impossible, so that she also floated down the river. The 
other two armored vessels were also terribly struck, and a rifled 
cannon on the Carondelet burst, so that these two could no longer 
sustain the action ; and, after fighting for more than an hour, the 
little fleet was forced to withdraw. The St. Louis was struck 
fifty-nine times, the Louisville thirty-six times, the Carondelet 


* “The Life of Gen, Albert Sidney Johnston,” by his son. 


ee 


1862] OPERATIONS FOR THE NEXT DAY. 81 


twenty-six, the Pittsburg twenty, the four vessels receiving no 
less than one hundred and forty-one wounds. The fleet, gathering 
itself together, and rendering mutual help to its disabled mem- 
bers, proceeded to Cairo to repair damages.” 


The loss of the enemy was fifty-four killed and wounded. 
The report of Major Gilmer, who laid out these works, says: 


“Our batteries were uninjured, and not a man in them killed. 
The repulse of the gunboats closed the operations of the day, ex- 
cept a few scattering shots along the land defenses.” 


In consequence of reénforcements to the enemy, the plan of 
operations for the next day was determined by the Confederate 
generals about midnight. The whole of the left wing of the 
army except eight regiments was to move out of the trenches, 
attack, turn, and drive the enemy’s right until the Wynn’s Ferry 
road, which led to Charlotte through a good country, was 
cleared, and an exit thus secured. 

The troops, moving in the small hours of the night over the 
icy and broken roads, which wound through the obstructed 
area of defense, made slow progress, and delayed the projected 
operations. At 4 A.m. on the 15th, Pillow’s troops were ready, 
except one brigade, which came late into action. By six 
o’clock, Baldwin’s brigade was engaged with the enemy, only 
two or three hundred yards from his lines, and the bloody con- 
test of the day had begun. At one o’clock the enemy’s right 
was doubled back. The Wynn’s Ferry road was cleared, and 
it only remained for the Confederates to do one of two things : 
The first was, to seize the golden moment and, adhering to the 
original purpose and plan of the sortie, move off rapidly by the 
route laid open by such ‘strenuous efforts and so much blood- 
shed; the other depended on the inspiration of a master-mind, 
equal to the effort of grasping every element of the combat, and 
which should complete the partial victory by the utter rout and 
destruction of the enemy. 

“While one or the other alternative seems to have been the 


only possible safe solution,” says the author of “The Life of Gen. 
Albert Sidney Johnston,” “the Confederate commander tried nei- 


39 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ther. A fatal middle policy was suddenly but dubiously adopted, 
and not carried out. The spirit of vacillation and divided coun- 
sels prevented that unity of action which is essential to success.‘ 
For seven hours the Confederate battalions had been pushing over 
rough ground and through thick timber, at each step meeting fresh 
troops massed, where the discomfited regiments rallied. Hence 
the vigor of assault slackened, though the wearied troops were 
still ready and competent to continue their onward movement. 
Ten fresh regiments, over three thousand men, had not fired a 
musket. But in the turmoil of battle no one knew the relations 
of any command to the next, or indeed whether his neighbor was 
friend or foe. 

“ General Buckner had halted, according to the preconcerted 
plan, to allow the army to pass out by the opened road and to 
cover their retreat. At this point of the fight, Pillow, finding 
himself at Hindman’s position, heard of (or saw) preparations by 
General C. F. Smith for an assault on the Confederate right ; but, 
whether he understood this to be the purpose or construed the 
movement as the signs of a flight, was left uncertain by his lan- 
guage at the time. ... He ordered the regiments which had 
been engaged to return to the trenches, and instructed Buckner to 
hasten to defend the imperiled point. Buckner, not recognizing 
him as a superior authorized to change the plan of battle, or the 
propriety of such change, refused to obey, and, after receiving 
reiterated orders, started to find Floyd, who at that moment joined 
him. He urged upon Floyd the necessity of carrying out the 
original plan of evacuation. Floyd assented to this view, and 
told Buckner to stand fast until he could see Pillow. He then 
rode back and saw Pillow, and, hearing his arguments, yielded to 
them. Floyd simply says that he found the movement so nearly 
executed that it was necessary to complete it. Accordingly, 
Buckner was recalled. In the mean time, Pillow’s right brigades 
were retiring to their places in the trenches, under orders from 
the commanders.” 


The conflict on the left soon ended. Three hundred pris- 
oners, five thousand stand of small-arms, six guns, and other 
spoils of victory, had been won by our forces. But the ene- 
my, cautiously advancing, gradually recovered most of his lost 
ground. It was about 4 p.m. when the assault on the right was 


1862] I TURN OVER THE COMMAND. 33 


made by General C. F. Smith. The enemy succeeded in carry- 
ing the advanced work, which General Buckner considered the 
key to his position. The loss of the enemy during the siege 
was four hundred killed, seventeen hundred and eighty-five 
wounded, and three hundred prisoners. Our losses were about 
three hundred and twenty-five killed and one thousand and 
ninety-seven wounded ; including missing, it was estimated at 
fifteen hundred. 

After nightfall a consultation of the commanding officers 
was held, and, after a consideration of the question in all its as- 
pects as to what should be done, it was decided that a surrender 
was inevitable, and, that to accomplish its objects, it must be 
made before the assault, which was expected at daylight. Gen- 
eral Buckner in his report, says : 


“TI regarded the position of the army as desperate, and that 
the attempt to extricate it by another battle, in the suffering and 
exhausted condition of the troops, was almost hopeless. The 
troops had been worn down with watching, with labor, with fight- 
ing. Many of them were frosted by the cold, all of them were 
suffering and exhausted by their incessant labors. There had 
been no regular issue of rations for several days, and scarcely any 
means of cooking. The ammunition was nearly expended. We 
were completely invested by a force fully four times the strength 
of our own.” 


The decision to surrender having been made, it remained to 
determine by whom it should be made. Generals Floyd and 
Pillow declared they would not surrender and become prison- 
ers; the duty was therefore allotted to General Buckner. Floyd 
said, “ General Buckner, if I place you in command, will you 
allow me to draw out my brigade?” General Buckner replied, 
“Yes, provided you do so before the enemy act upon my com- 
munication.” Floyd said, “General Pillow, I turn over the 
command.” General Pillow, regarding this as a mere technical 
form by which the command was to be conveyed to Buckner, 
then said, “I pass it.” Buckner assumed the command, sent 
for a bugler to sound the parley, for pen, ink, and paper, and 
opened the negotiations for surrender. 

50 


84 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


There were but two roads by which it was possible for the 
garrison to retire. If they went by the upper road, they would 
certainly have to cut through the main body of the enemy ; if 
by the lower road, they would have to wade through water three 
feet deep. This, the medical director stated, would be death 
to more than one half the command, on account of the severity 
of the weather and their physical prostration. 

To cut through the enemy, if effected, would, it was sup- 
posed, involve the loss of three fourths of the command, a sac- 
rifice which, it was conceded, would not be justifiable. 

The enemy had, in the conflict of the preceding day, gained 
possession of our rifle-pits on the right flank, and General 
Buckner, an experienced soldier, held that the fort would im- 
mediately fall when the enemy attacked in the morning. Gen- 
eral Pillow dissented from this conclusion, believing that the 
fort could be defended until boats could be obtained to convey 
the garrison across the river, and also advocated an attempt to 
cut through the investing lines of the enemy. Being overruled 
on both points, he announced his determination to leave the 
post by any means available, so as to escape a surrender, and he 
advised Colonel N. B. Forrest, who was present, to go out with 
his cavalry regiment, and any others he could take with him 
through the overflow. General Floyd’s brigade consisted of 
two Virginia regiments and one Mississippi regiment; these, as 
before mentioned, it was agreed that General Floyd might with- 
draw before the surrender. Two of the field-officers, Colonel 
Russell and Major Brown, of the Mississippi regiment, the twen- 
tieth, had been officers of the First Mississippi Riflemen in the 
war with Mexico; and the twentieth, their present regiment, was 
reputed to be well instructed and under good discipline. This 
regiment was left to be surrendered with the rest of the garri- 
son, under peculiar circumstances, of which Major Brown, then 
commanding, gives the following narrative : 


“About twelve o’clock of the night previous to the surrender, 
I received an order to report in person at headquarters. On ar- 
riving I met Colonel N. B. Forrest, who remarked : ‘I have been 
looking for you ; they are going to surrender this place, and I 


1862] SORROWFULLY I GAVE THE ORDERS. 85 


wanted you with your command to go out with me, but they have 
other orders for you.’ On entering the room, Generals Floyd and 
Pillow also informed me of the proposed proceedings. General 
Floyd ordered me to take possession of the steamboat-landing 
with my command ; that he had reserved the right to remove his 
brigade ; that, after having guarded the landing, my command 
should be taken aboard the boat; the Virginia regiments, first 
crossing to the other side of the river, could make their way to 
Clarksville. 

“T proceeded at once with my command to the landing ; there 
was no steamboat there, but I placed my regiment in a semicir- 
cular line so as to cover the landing-place. About daylight the 
steamer came down, landed, and was soon loaded with the two 
Virginia regiments, they passing through my ranks. At the same 
time the General and staff, or persons claiming to belong to the 
staff, passed aboard. The boat, being a small one, was consider- 
ably crowded. -While the staging of the boat was being drawn 
aboard, General Floyd hallooed to me, from the ‘hurricane-roof,’ 
that he would cross the river with the troops aboard and return 
for my regiment. But, about the time of the departure of the 
boat, General S. B. Buckner came and asserted that he had turned 
over the garrison and all the property at sunrise ; that, if the boat 
was not away immediately, he would be charged by the enemy 
_ with violating the terms of the surrender. I mention this inci- 
dent as furnishing, I suppose, the reason why my regiment was 
left on the bank of the river. 

“ Sorrowfully I gave the necessary orders to stack arms and 
surrender . . 

“Both morally and materially the disaster was a severe blow 
tous. Many, wise after the event, have shown their skill in tell- 
ing what all knew afterward, but nobody told before,” 


36 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Results of the Surrender of Forts Henry and Donelson.—Retreat from Bowling 
Green.—Criticism on General A. 8. Johnston—Change of Plan necessary.— 
Evacuation of Nashville——Generals Floyd and Pillow.—My Letter to General 
Johnston.—His Reply—My Answer.—Defense of General Johnston.—Battle 
of Elkhorn.—Topography of Shiloh. 


Tue loss of Forts Henry and Donelson opened the river 
routes to Nashville and north Alabama, and thus turned the 
positions both at Bowling Green and Columbus. These disas- 
ters subjected General Johnston to very severe criticism, of 
which we shall take notice further on in these pages. A con- 
ference was held on February 7th by Generals Johnston, Beau- 
regard (who had been previously ordered to report to Johnston), 
and Hardee, as to the future plan of campaign. It was deter- 
mined, as Fort Henry had fallen and Donelson was untenable, 
that preparations should at once be made for a removal of the 
army to Nashville, in rear of the Cumberland River, a strong 
point some miles below that city being fortified forthwith to 
defend the river from the passage of gunboats and transports. 
From Nashville, should any further retrograde movement be- 
come necessary, it would be made to Stevenson, and thence 
according to circumstances. 

As the possession of the Tennessee river by the enemy sepa- 
rated the army at Bowling Green from the one at Columbus, 
Kentucky, they must act independently of each other until they 
could be brought together: the first one having for its object 
the defense of the State of Tennessee along its line of opera- 
tion; and the other, of that part of the State lying between 
the Tennessee River and the Mississippi. But, as the possession 
of the former river by the enemy rendered the lines of com- 
munication of the army at Columbus liable to be cut at any 
time by a movement from the Tennessee River as a base, and 
an overpowering force of the enemy was rapidly concentrating 
from various points on the Ohio, it was necessary, to prevent 
such a calamity, that the main body of the army should fall 
back to Humboldt, and thence, if necessary, to Grand Junction, 


Wo WOT A POUND OF AMMUNITION LOST. 37 


#9 an Vo prod Memphis from either point and still have a line 
. & retreat to the latter place, or to Grenada, and, if needful, 
to Jackwn, Mississippi. 

Captain Holline’s fleet of improvised gunbosts and a suffi- 
Gent garrison wae to be left at Columbus for the defense of 
the river at that point, with transports near at hand for the 
removal of the garrison when the position became no longer 
tenable. 

Every preparation for the retreat was silently made. The 
dcienses of Bowling Green, originally slight, had been greatly 
enlarges by the addition of 4 cordon of detached forts, mounted 
with heavy ficld-gune; yet the garrison was only sufficiently 
strong to withstand an assault, and it was never proposed to sub- 
mit to 4 siege. The ordnance and army supplies were quietly 
moved southward, and measures were taken to remove from 
Nashville the immense stores accumulated there. Only five 
hundred men were in the hospital before the army commenced 
to retreat, but, when it reached Nashville, five thousand four 
hundred out of fourteen thousand required the care of the 
medical officers. On February 11th the troops began to move, 
and at nightfall on the 16th General Johnston, who had estab- 
lished his headquarters at Edgeville, on the northern bank of 
the Cumberland, saw the last of his wearied columns defile 
across and safely establish themselves beyond the river. The 
evacuation was secomplished by a force so small as to make the 
feat remarkable, not 4 pound of ammunition nor a gun being 
lost, and the provisions were hearly all secured. The first in- 
timation which the enemy had of the intended evacuation, so 
far a6 has been ascertained, was when Generals Hindman and 
Breckinridge, who were in advance near his camp, were. seen 
suddenly to retreat toward Bowling Green. The enemy pur- 
sued, and succeeded in shelling the town, while Hindman was 
still covering the rear. Not a man was lost.* At the same 
time Crittenden’s command was brought back within ten miles 
of Nashville, and thence to Murfreesboro. 

had the retreat to Nashville been accomplished, 
when the news of the fall of Donelson was received. The state 


* Colond B. W. Woolley, in “ New Orleans Picayune,” March, 1863. 


388 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of feeling which it produced is described by Colonel Munford, 
an aide-de-camp of General Johnston, in an address delivered in 
Memphis. “ Dissatisfaction was general. Its mutterings, already 
heard, began to break out in denunciations. The demagogues 
took up the ery, and hounded on one another and the people in 
hunting down a victim. The public press was loaded with 
abuse. The Government was denounced for intrusting the 
public safety to hands so feeble. The Lower House of Con- 
gress appointed a select committee to inquire into the conduct 
of the war in the Western Department. The Senators and 
Representatives from Tennessee, with the exception of Judge 
Swann, waited upon the President.” Their spokesman, Senator 
G. A. Henry, stated that they came for and in behalf of Ten- 
nessee to ask for the removal of General A. 8. Johnston, and 
the assignment of a competent officer to the defense of their 
homes and people. It was further stated that they did not 
come to recommend any one as the successor; that it was con- 
ceded that the President was better able than they were to select 
a proper officer, and they only asked that he would give them 
a general. 

Painfully impressed by this exhibition of distrust toward an 
officer whose place, if vacated, I was sure could not be filled by 
his equal, realizing how necessary public confidence was to suc- 
cess, and wounded by the injustice done to one I had known 
with close intimacy in peace and in war, and believed to be one 
of the noblest men with whom I had ever been associated, and 
one of the ablest soldiers I had ever seen in the field, I paused 
under conflicting emotions, and after a time merely answered, 
“Tf Sidney Johnston is not a general, the Confederacy has none 
to give you.” 

On February 17th the rear guard from Bowling Green 
reached Nashville, and on the 18th General Johnston wrote to 
the Secretary of War at Richmond, saying: 


“T have ordered the army to encamp to-night midway be- 
tween Nashville and Murfreesboro. My purpose is to place the 
force in such a position that the enemy can not concentrate his 
superior strength against the command, and to enable me to as- 
semble as rapidly as possible such other troops in addition as it 


1862] A SPEEDY CHANGE OF PLAN NECESSARY. 39 


may be in my, power to collect. The complete command which 
their gunboats and transports give them upon the Tennessee and 
Cumberland renders it necessary for me to retire my line between 
the rivers. I entertain the hope that this disposition will enable 
me to hold the enemy for the present in check, and, when my 
forces are sufficiently increased, to drive him back.” 


The fall of Fort Donelson made a speedy change of his 
plans necessary. General Johnston was now compelled to with- 
draw his forces from the north bank of the Cumberland, and to 
abandon the defense of Nashville; in a word, to evacuate Nash- 
ville or sacrifice the army. Not more than eleven thousand 
effective men were left to him with which to oppose General 
Buell with not less than forty thousand men, moving by Bowl- 
ing Green, while another superior force, under General Thomas, 
was on the eastern flank; and the armies from Fort Donelson, 
with the gunboats and transport, had it in their power to ascend 
the Cumberland, so as to interrupt all communication with the 
south. 

On February 17th and 18th the main body of the command 
was moved from Nashville to Murfreesboro, while a brigade 
remained under General Floyd to bring on the stores and prop- 
erty upon the approach of the enemy, all of which would have 
been saved except for the heavy and general rains. By the 
junction of the command of General Crittenden and the fugi- 
tives from Donelson, who were reorganized, the force of Gen- 
eral Johnston was increased to seventeen thousand men. The 
stores not required for immediate use were ordered to Chatta- 
nooga, and those which were necessary on the march were or- 
dered to Huntsville and Decatur. On February 28th the march 
was commenced for Decatur through Shelbyville and Fayétte- 
ville. Halting at those points for the purpose, he saved his 
provisions and stores, removed his depots and machine-shops, 
obtained new arms, and finally, at the close of March, joined 
Beauregard at Corinth with twenty thousand men, making their 
aggregate force fifty thousand. 

Considering the great advantage which the means of trans- 
portation upon the Tennessee and Cumberland afforded the 
enemy, and the peculiar topography of the State, General John- 


AO RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ston found that he could not with the force under his command 
successfully defend the whole line against the advance of the 
enemy. He was, therefore, compelled to elect whether the 
enemy should be permitted to occupy Middle Tennessee, or 
turn Columbus, take Memphis, and open the valley of the Mis- 
sissippi. Deciding that the defense of the valley was of para- 
mount importance, he therefore crossed the Tennessee and 
united with Beauregard. 

The evacuation of Nashville and the evident intention of 
General Johnston to retreat still further, created a panic in 
the public mind which spread over the whole State. Those 
who had refused to listen to his warning voice, when it called 
them to arms, were loudest in their passionate outcry at what 
they considered a base surrender of them to the mercies of the 
invader. He was accused of imbecility, cowardice, and treason. 
An appeal from every class was made to the President demand- 
ing his removal. Congress took the matter in hand, and, though 
the feeling there resulted merely in a committee of inquiry, it 
was evident that the case was prejudged. The Confederate 
House of Representatives created a special committee “to in- 
quire into the military disasters at Fort Henry and Fort Donel- 
son, and the surrender of Nashville to the enemy,” and as to the 
conduct, number, and disposition of the troops under General 
Johnston. Great feeling was shown in the debates. 

Generals Floyd and Pillow, the senior officers at Fort Don- 
elson, after it had been decided to surrender, withdrew, to avoid 
being made prisoners. The Secretary of War (Mr. Benjamin) 
wrote, March 11th, to General Johnston as follows: 


“The reports of Brigadier-Generals Floyd and Pillow are un- 
satisfactory, and the President directs that both these generals be 
relieved from command until further orders. In the mean time 
you will request them to add to their reports such statements as 
they may deem proper on the points submitted. You are further 
requested to make up a report, from all the sources of information 
accessible to you, of all the particulars connected with the unfor- 
tunate affair, which can contribute to enlighten the judgment of 
the Executive and. of Congress, and to fix the blame, if blame 
there be, on those who were delinquent in duty.” 


1862] YOUR FORCE HAS BEEN MAGNIFIED. 4l 


This state of affairs, under the command of General John- 
ston, was the occasion of the following correspondence: 


Letter from President Davis to General A. 8. Johnston. 


“Ricauonn, March 12, 1862. 

“My pear GeneraL: The departure of Captain Wickliffe 
offers an opportunity, of which I avail myself, to write you an 
unofficial letter. We have suffered great anxiety because of re- 
cent events in Kentucky and Tennessee, and I have been not a 
little disturbed by the repetitions of reflections upon yourself. I 
expected you to have made a full report of events precedent and 
consequent to the fall of Fort Donelson. In the mean time, I 
made for you such defense as friendship prompted, and many 
years of acquaintance justified ; but I needed facts to rebut the 
wholesale assertions made against you to cover others and to con- 
demn my administration. The public, as you are aware, have no 
correct measure for military operations, and the journals are very 
reckless in their statements. 

“Your force has been magnified, and the movements of an 
army have been measured by the capacity for locomotion of an 
individual. 

“The readiness of the people, among whom you are operating, 
to aid you in every method, has been constantly asserted ; the 
purpose of your army at Bowling Green wholly misunderstood ; 
and the absence of an effective force at Nashville ignored. You 
have been held responsible for the fall of Donelson and the cap- 
ture of Nashville. It is charged that no effort was made to save 
the stores at Nashville, and that the panic of the people was caused 
by the army. 

“Such representations, with the sad forebodings naturally be- 
longing to them, have been painful to me, and injurious to us 
both ; but, worse than this, they have undermined public confi- 
dence and damaged our cause. A full development of the truth 
is necessary for future success. 

“TI respect the generosity which has kept you silent, but would 
impress upon you that the question is not personal but public in 
its nature ; that you and I might be content to suffer, but neither 
of us can willingly permit detriment to the country. As soon as 
circumstances will permit, it is my purpose to visit the field of 
your present operations ; not that I shall expect to give you any 


49, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


aid in the discharge of your duties as a commander, but with the 
hope that my position would enable me to effect something in 
bringing men to your standard. With a sufficient force, the au- 
dacity which the enemy exhibits would no doubt give you the 
opportunity to cut some of his lines of communication, to break 
up his plan of campaign, and, defeating some of his columns, 
to drive him from the soil as well of Kentucky as of Ten- 
nessee. 

“We are deficient in arms, wanting in discipline, and inferior 
in numbers. Private arms must supply the first want ; time and 
the presence of an enemy, with diligence on the part of command- 
ers, will remove the second ; and public confidence will overcome 
the third. General Bragg brings you disciplined troops, and you 
will find in him the highest administrative capacity. General E. 
K. Smith will soon have in East Tennessee a sufficient force to 
create a strong diversion in your favor ; or, if his strength can 
not be made available in that way, you will best know how to 
employ it otherwise. I suppose the Tennessee or the Mississippi 
River will be the object of the enemy’s next campaign, and I 
trust you will be able to concentrate a force which will defeat 
either attempt. The fleet which you will soon have on the Mis- 
sissippi River, if the enemy’s gunboats ascend the Tennessee, may 
enable you to strike an effective blow at Cairo; but, to one so 
well informed and vigilant, I will not assume to offer suggestions 
as to when and how the ends you seek may be attained. With 
the confidence and regard of many years, I am very truly your 
friend, JEFFERSON Davis.” 


Letter of General Johnston in answer to the above. 


“Decatur, ALaBaMa, March 18, 1862. 

“My pear Genera: [ received the dispatches from Rich- 
mond, with your private letter by Captain Wickliffe, three days 
since ; but the pressure of affairs and the necessity of getting my 
command across the Tennessee prevented me from sending you 
an earlier reply. 

“T anticipated all that you have told me as to the censure 
which the fall of Fort Donelson drew upon me, and.the attacks to 
which you might be subjected; but it was impossible for me to 
gather the facts for a detailed report, or to spare time which was 
required to extricate the remainder of my troops and save the 


. 


ey 


1862] NECESSARY AS AN ACT OF SELF-DEFENSE. 43 


~ large accumulation of stores and provisions after that dishearten- 


ing disaster. 

“J transmitted the reports of Generals Floyd and Pillow with- 
out examining or analyzing the facts, and scarcely with time to 
read them. 

“When about to assume command of this department, the 
Government charged me with the duty of deciding the question 
of occupying Bowling Green, Kentucky, which involved not only 
military but political considerations. At the time of my arrival 
at Nashville, the action of the Legislature of Kentucky had put 
an end to the latter by sanctioning the formation of camps men- 
acing Tennessee, by assuming the cause of the Government at 
Washington, and by abandoning the neutrality it professed ; and, 
in consequence of their action, the occupation of Bowling Green 
became necessary as an act of self-defense, at least in the first 
step. 

“ About the middle of September General Buckner advanced 
with a small force of about four thousand men, which was in- 
creased by the 15th of October to twelve thousand ; and, though 
accessions of force were received, it continued at about the same 
strength until the end of November—measles and other diseases 
keeping down the effective force. The enemy’s force then whs 
reported to the War Department at fifty thousand, and an ad- 
vance was impossible. No enthusiasm, as we imagined and hoped, 
but hostility, was manifested in Kentucky. Believing it to be of 
the greatest moment to protract the campaign, as the dearth of 
cotton might bring strength from abroad and discourage the 
North, and to gain time to strengthen myself by new troops from 
Tennessee and other States, I magnified my forces to the enemy, 
but made known my true strength to the department and the 
Governors of States. The aid given was small. At length, when 
General Beauregard came out in February, he expressed his sur- 
prise at the smallness of my force, and was impressed with the 
danger of my position. I admitted what was so manifest, and 
laid before him my views for the future, in which he entirely con- 
curred, and sent me a memorandum of our conference, a copy of 
which I send.to you. I determined to fight for Nashville at Don- 
elson, and gave the best part of my army to do it, retaining only 
fourteen thousand men to cover my front, and giving sixteen 
thousand to defend Donelson. The force at Donelson is stated in 


44 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General Pillow’s report at much less, and I do not doubt the cor- 
rectness of his statement, for the force at Bowling Green, which 
I supposed to be fourteen thousand effective men (the medical 
report showing only a little over five hundred sick in the hospi- 
tal), was diminished more than five thousand by those who were 
unable to stand the fatigue of a march, and made my force on 
reaching Nashville less than ten thousand men. I inclose medical 
director’s report. Had I wholly uncovered my front to defend 
Donelson, Buell would have known it, and marched directly on 
Nashville. There were only ten small steamers in the Cumber- 
land, in imperfect condition, only three of which were available 
at Nashville, while the transportation of the enemy was great. 

“The evacuation of Bowling Green was imperatively neces- 
sary, and was ordered before, and executed while the battle was 
being fought at Donelson. I had made every disposition for 
the defense of the fort my means allowed, and the troops were 
among the best of my forces. The generals, Floyd, Pillow, and 
Buckner, were high in the opinion of officers and men for skill 
and courage, and among the best officers of my command. They 
were popular with the volunteers, and all had seen much service. 
No reénforcements were asked. I awaited the event opposite 
Nashville. The result of the conflict each day was favorable. 
At midnight on the 15th I received news of a glorious victory ; 
at dawn, of a defeat. 

“My column during the day and night was thrown over the 
river—a battery had been established below the city to secure the 
passage. Nashville was incapable of defense, from its position, 
and from the forces advancing from Bowling Green and up the 
Cumberland. A rear guard was left, under General Floyd, to se- 
cure the stores and provisions, but did not completely effect the 
object. The people were terrified, and some of the troops were 
disheartened. The discouragement was spreading, and I ordered 
the command to Murfreesboro, where I managed, by assembling 
Crittenden’s division and the fugitives from Donelson, to collect 
an army able to offer battle. The weather was inclement, the 
floods excessive, and the bridges were washed away, but most of 
the stores and provisions were saved and conveyed to new depots. 
This having been accomplished, though with serious loss, in con- 
formity with my original design, I marched southward and crossed 
the Tennessee at this point, so as to codperate or unite with Gen- 


we 


“ 


ee 


1862] LOOK AT EVENTS AS THEY APPEARED. 45 


eral Beauregard for the defense of the valley of the Mississippi. 
The passage is almost completed, and the head of my column is 
already with General Bragg at Corinth. The movement was 
deemed too hazardous by the most experienced members of my 
staff, but the object warranted the risk. . The difficulty of effect- 
ing a junction is not wholly overcome, but it approaches comple- 
tion. Day after to-morrow (the 22d), unless the enemy intercepts 
me, my force will be with Bragg, and my army nearly fifty thou- 
sand strong. This must be destroyed before the enemy can attain 
his object. 

“J have given this sketch, so that you may appreciate the em- 
barrassment which surrounded me in my attempts to avert or 
remedy the disaster of Fort Donelson, before alluding to the con- 
duct of the generals. 

“When the force was detached, I was in hopes that such dis- 
position would have been made as would have enabled the forces 
to defend the fort or withdraw without sacrificing the army. On 
the 14th I ordered General Floyd, by telegraph, ‘If he lost the 
fort, to get his troops to Nashville.’ It is possible that might 
- have been done, but justice requires us to look at events as they 
appeared at the time, and not alone by the light of subsequent 
information. All the facts in relation to the surrender will be 
transmitted to the Secretary of War as soon as they can be col- 
lected, in obedience to his order. It appears from the informa- 
tion received that General Buckner, being the junior officer, took 
the lead in advising the surrender, and that General Floyd acqui- 
esced, and that they all concurred in the belief that their force 
could not maintain the position. All concurred that it would in- 
volve a great sacrifice of life to extricate the command, Subse- 
quent events show that the investment was not so complete as 
their information from their scouts led them to believe. 

“The conference resulted in the surrender. The command 
was irregularly transferred, and devolved on the junior general ; 
but not apparently to avoid any just responsibility or from any 
want of personal or moral intrepidity. The blow was most disas- 
trous, and almost without a remedy. I therefore, in my first 
report, remained silent. This silence you were kind enough to 
attribute to my generosity. I will not lay claim to the motive to 
excuse my course. I observed silence, as it seemed to be the best 
way to serve the cause and the country. The facts were not fully 


46 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


known, discontent prevailed, and criticism and condemnation were 
more likely to augment than to cure the evil. I refrained, well 
knowing that heavy censures would fall upon me, but convinced 
that it was’ better to endure them for the present, and defer for a 
more propitious time an investigation of the conduct of the gen- 
erals ; for, in the mean time, their services were required and their 
influence was useful. For these reasons Generals Floyd and Pil- 
low were assigned to duty, for I still felt confidence in their gal- 
lantry, their energy, and their devotion to the Confederacy. 

“T have thus recurred to the motives by which I have been 
governed, from a deep personal sense of the friendship and confi- 
dence you have always shown me, and from the conviction that 
they have not been withdrawn from me in adversity. 

“ All the reports requisite for a full official investigation have 
been ordered. Generals Floyd and Pillow have been suspended 
from command. 

“You mention that you intend to visit the field of operations 
here. I hope soon to see you, for your presence would encourage 
my troops, inspire the people, and augment the army. To me 


personally it would give the greatest gratification. Merely a sol- . 


dier myself, and having no acquaintance with the statesmen or 
leaders of the South, I can not touch springs familiar to you. 
Were you to assume command, it would afford me the most un- 
feigned pleasure, and every energy would be exerted to help you 
to victory and the country to independence. Were you to de- 
cline, still your presence alone would be of inestimable advan- 
tage. ; 
“The enemy are now at Nashville, about fifty thousand strong, 
advancing in this direction by Columbia. THe has also forces, ac- 
cording to the report of General Bragg, landing at Pittsburg, 
from twenty-five to fifty thousand, and moving in the direction 
of Purdy. 

“This army corps, moving to join Bragg, is about twenty thou- 
sand strong. Two brigades, Hindman’s and W oods’s, are, I suppose, 
at Corinth. One regiment of Hardee’s division (Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Patton commanding) is moving by cars to-day (March 20th), 
and Statham’s brigade (Crittenden’s division). The brigade will 
halt at Iuka, the regiment at Burnsville; Cleburne’s brigade, 
Hardee’s division, except the regiment, at Burnsville ; and Car- 
roll’s brigade, Crittenden’s division, and Helm’s cavalry, at Tus- 


ae He heat hats 


1862] THE TEST OF MERIT IN MY PROFESSION. AT 


cumbia; Bowen’s brigade at Courtland; Breckinridge’s brigade 
here ; the regiments of cavalry of Adams and Wharton on the 
opposite bank of the river ; Scott’s Louisiana regiment at Pulaski, 
sending forward supplies; Morgan’s cavalry at Shelbyville, or- 
dered on. 

“To-morrow Breckinridge’s brigade will go to Corinth, then 
Bowen’s. When these pass Tuscumbia and Iuka, transportation 
will be ready there for the other troops to follow immediately 
from those points, and, if necessary, from Burnsville. The cav- 
alry will cross and move forward as soon as their trains can be 
passed over the railroad-bridge. Ihave troubled you with these 
details, as I can not properly communicate them by telegram. 

“The test of merit in my profession, with the people, is suc- 
cess. It is a hard rule, but I think it right. If I join this corps 
to the forces of Beauregard (I confess a hazardous experiment), 
then those who are now declaiming against me will be without an 


argument. 
“Your friend, A. §. JoHnstTon.” 


To this letter the following reply was made : 


“Ricumonp, Virernia, March 26, 1862. 


“My pear Genera: Yours of the 18th instant was this day 
delivered by your aide, Mr. Jack. I have read it with much satis- 
faction. So far as the past is concerned, it but confirms the con- 
clusions at which I had already arrived. My confidence in you 
has never wavered, and I hope the public will soon give me credit 
for judgment, rather than continue to arraign me for obstinacy. 

“You have done wonderfully well, and now I breathe easier 
in the assurance that you will be able to make a junction of your 
two armies. If you can meet the division of the enemy moving 
from the Tennessee before it can make a junction with that ad- 
vancing from Nashville, the future will be brighter. If this can 
not be done, our only hope is that the people of the Southwest 
will rally en masse with their private arms, and thus enable you 
to oppose the vast army which will threaten the destruction of 
our country. 

“JT have hoped to be able to leave here for a short time, and 
would be much gratified to confer with you, and share your re- 
sponsibilities. I might aid you in obtaining troops ; no one could 
hope to do more unless he underrated your military capacity. I 


48 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


write in great haste, and feel that it would be worse than useless 
to point out to you how much depends on you. 
“May God bless you, is the sincere prayer of your friend, 
“‘ JurrERSoN Davis.” 


Let us now review the events which had brought such 
unmeasured censure on General Johnston for some months pre- 
ceding this correspondence. We have seen him, with a force 
numerically much inferior to that of the enemy in his front, 
holding the position of Bowling Green, and, by active operations 
» of detached commands, keeping up to foe and friend the im- 
pression that he had a large army in position. With self-sacri- 
ficing fortitude he remained silent under reproaches for not 
advancing to attack the enemy. When Forts Donelson and 
Henry were more immediately threatened, he gave reénforce- 
ments from his small command until his own line became more 
like one of skirmishers than an intrenched line of battle; and 
when those forts were surrendered, and his position became both 
untenable and useless, he withdrew in such order and with such 
skill that his retreat was unmolested by the enemy. Though 
he continued to be the subject of unreasoning vituperation, he 
sought not to justify himself by blaming others, or telling what 
he would have done if his Government had sent him the arms 
and munitions he asked for, but which his Government he 
learned did not possess. 

There are yet those who, self-assured, demand why John- 
ston did not go himself to Donelson and Henry, and why his 
forces were not there concentrated. A slight inspection of the 
map would suffice to show that, Bowling Green abandoned, the 
direct road to Nashville would be open to the advance of Buell’s 
army. ‘Then the forts, if held, would cease to answer their 
purpose, and, being isolated, and also between hostile armies 
above and below, would be not only valueless but only tempo- 
rarily tenable; and of his critics it may be asked, Who else than 
himself could, with the small force retained at Bowling Green, 
have held the enemy in check so long, and at last have retired 
without disaster ? 


To collect the widely separated troops of his command so as ¢ er a 


a ee ee 


1862] WHY DID HE NOT WAIT? 49 


to form an army which might offer battle to the invading foe 
was a problem which must have been impossible, if the organ- 
ized armies by which he was threatened had been guided by a 
capacity equal to his own. It was done, and, with the genius 
of a great soldier, he seized the opportunity, by the rapid com- 
bination of new levies and of forces never before united, to at- 
tack the armies of the enemy in detail while they were endeav- 
oring to form a junction. 

The Southwestern States presented a field peculiarly favor- 
able for the application of a new power in war. Deep rivers, 
with banks frequently but little elevated above the water, trav- 
erse the country. On these rivers iron-plated steamboats with 
heavy guns may move with a rapidity incomparably greater 
than that of marching armies. It is as if forts, with armaments, 
garrison, and stores, were endowed with locomotion more swift 
and enduring than that of cavalry. 

The Ohio, Mississippi, Cumberland, and Tennessee Rivers 
all were in the field of General Johnston’s operations, and at 
the stage of water most suited to naval purposes. Apart from 
the heavy guns which could thus be brought to bear at interior 
places upon an army having only field-artillery, the advantage 
of rapid transportation for troops and supplies can hardly be 
over-estimated. It has been seen how these advantages were 
utilized by the enemy at Henry and Donelson, and not less did 
they avail him at Shiloh. 

As has been elsewhere explained, the condition of the South 
did not enable the Confederacy to meet the enemy on the water , 
except at great odds. 

If it be asked, “ Why did not General Johnston wait until the 
enemy marched from the river instead of attacking him at Shi- 
~ loh or Pittsburg Landing?” the answer is, “That would have 
been to delay until the junction of the enemy’s armies had been 
effected.” To fight them in detail, it was necessary to attack 
the first where it lay, backed by its gunboats. That sound judg- 
ment and soldierly daring went hand in hand in this attack the 

- sequel demonstrated. 
Meantime some active operations had taken place in that 
ey part of General Johnston’s command west of the Mississippi 
51 


 S, 


hee 


50 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


River. Detached conflicts with the enemy had been fought by 
the small forces under Generals Price and McCulloch, but no 
definite result had followed. General Earl Van Dorn had been 
subsequently assigned to the command, and assumed it on Jan- 
uary 29, 1862. General Curtis was then in command of the 
enemy’s forces, numbering about twelve thousand men. He had 
harassed General Price on his retreat to Fayetteville, Arkansas, 
and then had fallen back to Sugar Creek, where he proposed to 
make a stand. Van Dorn, immediately on his arrival at the 
Confederate camps on Boston Mountain, prepared to attack 
Curtis. His first movement, however, was to intercept General 
Sigel, then at Bentonville with sixteen thousand men. The © 
want of codperation in Van Dorn’s forces enabled Sigel to es- 
cape. Curtis thus concentrated his forces at Sugar Creek, and, 
instead of taking him in detail, Van Dorn was obliged to meet 
his entire army. By a circuitous route, he led Price’s army 
against the enemy’s rear, moving McCulloch against the right 
flank; but his progress was so slow and embarrassed, that the 
enemy heard of it in season to make his dispositions accord- 
ingly. 

The battle of Elkhorn, or Pea Ridge, was fought on the 
morning of March 5th. Van Dorn reported his force to be 
fourteen thousand men, and Curtis puts his force at about 
ten thousand. Van Dorn, with Price’s division, encountered 
Carr’s division which had already advanced, but was driven 
back steadily and with heavy loss. Meanwhile, MeCulloch’s 
command met a division under Osterhaus, and, after a sharp, 
quick struggle, swept it away. Pushing forward through the 
shrub-oak, his wide-extended line met Sigel’s, Asboth’s, and 
Davis’s divisions. Here on the rugged spurs of the hills ensued 
a fearful combat. In the crisis of the struggle, McCulloch, 
dashing forward to reconnoiter, fell a victim to a sharpshooter. 
Almost at the same moment, McIntosh, his second in command, 
fell while charging a battery of the enemy with a regiment of 
Texas cavalry. Without direction or leader, the shattered lines 
of our forces left the field to rally, after a wide circuit, on Price’s 
division. When Van Dorn heard of this misfortune, he urged 
his attack, pressing back the enemy until night closed the bloody 


1862] THE ENEMY WAS BADLY CRIPPLED. 51 


combat. Van Dorn’s headquarters were then at Elkhorn Tav- 
ern, where the enemy’s headquarters had been in the morning. 
Each army was now on its opponent’s line of communication. 
Van Dorn found his troops much disorganized and exhausted, 
short of ammunition, and without food, and made his arrange- 
ments to retreat. The wagon-trains and all the men not effec- 
tive for the coming battle were started by a circuitous route for 
Van Buren. The effectives remained to cover the retreat. The 
battle was renewed at 7 a.m, and raged until 10 a.m. The 
gallant General Henry Little had the covering line with his 
own and Rives’s Missouri brigades; this stout rear-guard hold- 
ing off the whole army of the enemy. The trains, artillery, and 
most of the army were by that time well on the road. The 
order was given to the Missourians to withdraw, and “the gal- 
lant fellows faced about with cheers” retired steadily, and en- 
camped ten miles from the battle-field at three o’clock. There 
was no real pursuit. The attack had failed. Van Dorn put his 
loss at six hundred killed and wounded, and two hundred pris- 
oners. Curtis reported his loss at two hundred and three killed, 
nine hundred and seventy-two wounded, and a hundred and 
seventy-six missing—total, thirteen hundred and fifty-one.* 

The object of Van Dorn had been to effect a diversion in 
behalf of General Johnston. This failed; but the enemy was 
badly crippled, and soon fell back to Missouri, of which he still 
retained posséssion. 

General Van Dorn was now ordered to join General John- 
ston by the quickest route. Yet only one of his regiments ar- 
rived in time to be present at the battle of Shiloh. As has been 
already stated, General Beauregard left Nashville on February 
14th to take charge in West Tennessee, and made his headquar- 
ters at Jackson, Tennessee, on February 17th. He was some- 
what prostrated by sickness, which partially disabled him through 
the campaign. The two grand divisions of his army were com- 
manded by the able Generals Bragg and Polk. On March 26th 
he permanently removed to Corinth. Under his orders the 
evacuation of Columbus by General Polk, and the establish- 
ment of a new line resting on New Madrid, Island No. 10, 


* “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” by his son. 


52 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and Humboldt, was completed. On March 2d Brigadier-Gen- 
eral J. P. McCown, an “old army” officer, was assigned to 
the command of Island No. 10, forty miles below Columbus, 
whither he removed his division. A. P. Stewart’s brigade was 
sent to New Madrid. At these points some seven thousand 
troops were assembled, and the remainder marched under Gen- 
eral Cheatham to Union City. General Polk says: 


“Tn five days we moved the accumulations of six months, tak- 
ing with us all our commissary and quartermaster’s stores—an 
amount sufficient to supply my whole command for eight months 
—all our powder and other ammunition and ordnance stores, ex- 
cepting a few shot, and gun-carriages, and every heavy gun in the 
fort, except two thirty-two pounders and three carronades in a 
remote outwork, which had been rendered useless.” 


The movement of the enemy up the Tennessee River com- 
menced on March 10th. General C. F. Smith led the advance, 
with a new division under General Sherman. On the 13th 
Smith assembled four divisions at Savannah, on the west bank 
of the Tennessee, at the Great Bend. The ultimate design was 
to mass the forces of Grant and Buell against our army at Cor- 
inth. Buell was still in the occupation of Nashville. On the 
16th Sherman disembarked at Pittsburg Landing, and made a 
reconnaissance to Monterey, nearly half-way to Corinth. On 
the next day General Grant tookcommand. Twomore divisions 
were added, and he assembled his army near Pittsburg Landing, 
which was the most advantageous base for a movement against 
Corinth. Here it lay inactive until the battle of Shiloh. 

The Tennessee flows northwest for some distance, until, a 
little west of Hamburg, it takes its final bend to the north. 
Here two small streams, Owl and Lick Creeks, flowing nearly 
parallel, somewhat north of east, from three to five miles apart, 
empty into the Tennessee. Owl Creek forms the northern limit 
of the ridge, which Lick Creek bounds on the south. These 
streams, rising some ten or twelve miles back, toward Corinth, 
were bordered near their mouths by swamps filled with back- 
water from the Tennessee, and impassable except where the 
roads crossed them. 


1862] WITH FEW AND DIFFICULT APPROACHES. 53 


MAP 
used by the 
\ CONFEDERATE GENERALS 
AT SHILOH: 
Scale of Miles 


i 
~ a: cuikh ‘\ 


et 
(good 
mn 


z 
° 
2. 
= 
nm 
P 
° 
ze 
ate: 
2 
= 


The inclosed space is a rolling table-land, about one hundred 
feet above the river-level, with its water-shed lying near Lick 
Creek, and either slope broken by deep and frequent ravines 
draining into the two streams. The acclivities were covered with 
forests, and often thick set with undergrowth. Pittsburg Land- 
ing, containing three or four log-cabins, was situated about mid- 
way between the mouths of the creeks, in the narrow morass 
that borders the Tennessee. It was three or four miles below 
Hamburg, six or seven above Savannah, the depot of the enemy 
on the right bank, and twenty-two miles from Corinth. Thus 
the position of the enemy was naturally strong. With few and 
difficult approaches, guarded on either flank by impassable 
‘streams and morasses, protected by a succession of ravines and 
acclivities, commanded by eminences to the rear, it seemed safe 
against attack, and easy to defend. No defensive works were 
constructed. 


54 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


CHAPTER <OYV-AIT: 


General Buell’s March.—Object of General Johnston.—Ilis Force.—Advance from 
Corinth.—Line of Battle.-—Telegram.—The Time of the Battle of Shiloh.—Re- 
sults of the First Day’s Battle-—One Encampment not taken.—Hffects.—Re- 
ports on this Failure——Death of General Johnston.—Remarks. 


GenerAL Buetx, who was to make a junction with General 
Grant, deemed it best that his army should march through by 
land, as it would facilitate the occupation of the Memphis and 
Charleston Railroad through north Alabama, where General 
Mitchell had been assigned. Accordingly, Buell commenced 
his march from Nashville on March 15th, with a rapid move- 
ment of cavalry, followed by a division of infantry, to seize 
the bridges. The bridge over Duck River being destroyed, it 
was the 31st before his army crossed. His advance arrived at 
Savannah on Saturday, April 5th, and our attack on Grant at 
Pittsburg Landing was made on the next day, the 6th of April. 
The advance of General Buell anticipated his orders by two 
days, and likewise the calculations of our commanders. 

It had been the object of General Johnston, since falling 
back from Nashville, to concentrate his army at Corinth, and 
fight the enemy in detail—Grant first, and Buell afterward. 
The army of General Polk had been drawn back from Colum- 
bus. The War Department ordered General Bragg from Pen- 
sacola, with his well-disciplined army, to the aid of Johnston. 
A brigade was sent by General Lovell from Louisiana, and 
Chalmers and Walker were already on the line of the Memphis 
and Charleston road with considerable commands. These forces 
collected at Corinth, and to them were added such new levies as 
the Governors had in rendezvous, and a few regiments raised in 
response to General Beauregard’s call. General Bragg, in a 
sketch of the battle of Shiloh, thus speaks of General John- 
ston’s army : 


“Tn a period of four weeks, fragments of commands from 
Bowling Green, Kentucky, under Hardee ; Columbus, Kentucky, 
under Polk; and Pensacola, Mobile, and New Orleans, under 


sal 


had he iy ne ie 


Eng@hy H.B-Hell. Ir 


GENERAL BRAXTON BRAGG 


New York, D, Appleton & Co ae 


Ris . 
a ‘ 
1862] _ THE ORDERS FOR MARCH AND BATTLE. 55 


~ Bragg, with such new levies as could be hastily raised, all badly 
armed and equipped, were united at and near Corinth, and, for the 
first time, organized as an army. It was a heterogeneous mass, 
in which there was more enthusiasm than discipline, more capacity 
than knowledge, and more valor than instruction. Rifles, rifled 
and smooth- -bore muskets—some of them originally percussion, 
others hastily altered from flint-locks by Yankee contractors, many 
with the.old flint and steel—and shot-guns of all sizes and patterns, 
held place in the same regiments. The task of organizing such a 
command in four weeks, and supplying it, especially with ammu- 
nition, suitable for action, was simply appalling. It was under- 
taken, however, with a cool, quiet self-control, calling to his aid 
the best knowledge and talent at his command, which not only 
inspired confidence, but soon yielded the natural fruits of system, 
order, and discipline.” 


This force, about forty thousand of all arms, was divided 
into four corps, commanded respectively by Major-Generals 
Polk, Bragg, and Hardee, and Brigadier-General Breckinridge. 
General Beauregard was second in command under General 
Johnston. General Beauregard says, “A want of general offi- 
cers needful for the proper organization of divisions and bri- 
gades of an army brought thus suddenly together, and other 


_~ difficulties in the way of effective i sean li delayed the 


movements until the night of April 2d.” 

About one o’clock on the morning of April 3d preliminary 
orders were issued to hold the troops in readiness to move at a 
moments notice, with five days’ provisions and a hundred rounds 
of ammunition. The orders for march and battle were issued 
in the afternoon. At that time General Hardee led the ad- 
vance, the Third Corps, from Corinth, by the northernmost 
route, known as the Ridge road. Bivouacking that night on 
the way, he arrived next morning at Mickey’s, a house about 
eighteen miles from Corinth and four or five miles from Pitts- 
burg. The Second Corps, under Bragg, marched by the direct 
road to Pittsburg through Monterey, which it reached about 11 
A.M. on the 4th, and bivouacked that night near Mickey’s in the 
rear of Hokies corps. The First Corps, under General Polk, 
consisted of two divisions, under Cheatham and Clark. The 


56 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


latter was ordered to follow Hardee on the Ridge road at an 
interval of half an hour, and to halt near Mickey’s, so as to 
allow Bragg’s corps to fall in behind Hardee, at a thousand 
yards’ interval, and form a second line of battle. Polk’s corps 
was to form the left wing of the third line of battle; and 
Breckinridge’s reserve the right wing. The other division of 
Polk, under Cheatham, was on outpost duty, at and near Bethel, 
on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad, about as far from Mickey’s 
as Corinth was. He was ordered to assemble his forces at 
Purdy, and pursue the route to Monterey. He effected his 
junction on the afternoon of the 5th, and took position on the 
_ left wing of Polk’s corps. Breckinridge’s reserve corps moved 
from Burnsville early on April 4th, by way of Farmington 
toward Monterey, distant fourteen miles. It did not effect its 
junction with the other corps until late on the afternoon of 
Saturday the 5th, being delayed by the rains on Friday and 
Saturday. At daylight on the 5th Hardee moved, and by 
seven o’clock was sufficiently out of the way to allow Bragg to 
advance. Before ten o’clock Hardee’s corps had reached the 
outposts and developed the lines of the enemy. The corps was 
immediately deployed into line of battle about a mile and a 
half west of Shiloh church, where Lick Creek and Owl Creek 
approach most nearly, and are about three miles apart. Glad- 
den’s brigade, of Bragg’s corps, was on the right of Hardee’s 
corps, which was not sufficiently strong to occupy the whole 
front. This line extended from creek to creek. Before seven 
o’clock Bragg’s column was in motion, and the right wing of 
his line of battle formed about eight hundred yards in the rear 
of Hardee’s line. But the division on the left was nowhere to 
be seen. Even as late as half-past twelve the missing column 
had not appeared, nor had any report from it been received. 
General Johnston, “looking first at his watch, then glancing at 
the position of the sun, exclaimed: ‘This is not war/ Let us 
have our horses!’ He rode to the rear until he found the 
missing column standing stock-still, with its head some distance 
out in an open field. General Polk’s reserves were ahead of it, 
with their wagons and artillery blocking up the road. General 
Johnston ordered them to clear the road, and the missing col- 


1862] THUS WAS THE ARMY ARRAYED, 57 


umn to move forward. There was much chaffering among 
those implicated as to who should bear the blame. . . . It was 
about four o’clock when the lines were completely formed—too 
late, of course, to begin the battle then.” * 

The road was not clear until 2 p.m. General Polk got 
Clark’s division of his corps into line of battle by four o’clock ; 
and Cheatham, who had come up on the left, promptly fol- 
lowed. Breckinridge’s line was then formed on Polk’s right. 
Thus was the army arrayed in three lines of battle late Saturday 
afternoon.t 

The purpose of General Johnston to attack promptly is 
evinced in the correspondence already introduced ; it is further 
shown in his telegram of April 3d, as follows: 


“To the PresipENnT, Richmond. 

“General Buell in motion, thirty thousand strong, rapidly from 
Columbia by Clifton to Savannah. Mitchell behind him, with ten 
thousand. Confederate forces forty thousand ; ordered forward 
to offer battle near Pittsburg. 

“ Division from Bethel, main body from Corinth, reserve from 
Burnsville, converging to-morrow, near Monterey, on Pittsburg. 

“Beauregard second in command, Polk the left, Bragg the 
center, Hardee the right wing, Breckinridge the reserve. 

“ Hope engagement before Buell can form junction.” f , 


On the 5th of April I sent a telegram as follows: 


“GuneraL A. S. Jonnsron: Your dispatch of yesterday re- 
ceived. I hope you will be able to close with the enemy before 
his two columns unite.” 


Though much inquiry has been made, I have not been able 
to recover that dispatch “of yesterday” the 4th. It was 
anxiously sought because, in cipher (private between us), he 
explained distinctly his plan of battle, as the previous one had 
his proposed order of march. It was in every respect impor- 
tant to attack at the earliest moment after the advance of Buell’s 


* Colonel Munford’s address at Memphis. 
+ “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” by his son. 
¢ Original in the possession of Colonel W. P. Johnston. 


58 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


BATTLE OF 2d. Position (Noon) 6th, April 


Federal 
SHIL oO H Confederate 
Part IL 


ss nt Phony 
y i My al, Len drys 
\ 
\ < 
Cottén Press & 
LN . ca 


Gass / os 


eS) 


> Upper-Landg: 


command became known. Every delay diminished the chances 
of surprising the enemy, and increased the probability of his 
being reénforced. Had the attack been made a day sooner, not 
only would Buell’s army have been absent, but there would have 
been no prospect of their timely arrival; and who can measure 
the moral effect this would have produced? It would be use- 
less to review the controversies as to who was responsible for 
the confusion and consequent detentions on the march, the evil 


—————— 


1862] . WAR CALLED A FICKLE GODDESS. 59 


of which might have been greater if the vigilance of the enemy 
had been equal to his self-sufficiency. 

War has been called a fickle goddess, and its results attrib- 
uted tochance. The great soldier of our century said, “ Fortune 
favors the heavy battalions” ; but is it not rather exact calcula- 
tion than chance which controls the events of war, and the just 
determination of the relation of time, space, and motion in the 
application of force, which decides the effective weight of bat- 
talions? Had the battle of Shiloh opened a day sooner, it 
would have been better; had it been postponed a day, to attack 
then would have been impracticable. Had the several columns 
moved on different roads, converging toward the field of battle, 
the movements of some could not have been obstructed by others, 
so that the troops would have been in position and the battle 
have been commenced on Saturday morning. The programme 
and purpose of General Johnston appear from his dispatch of 
the 3d, and from the disappointment evinced by him at the 
failure of a portion of the command to be present on the field 
on the morning of the 5th (Saturday), as he expected. 

General Bragg, in a monograph on the battle of Shiloh, says: 


“During the afternoon of the 5th, as the last of our troops 
were taking position, a casual and partly accidental meeting of 
general officers occurred just in rear of our second line, near the 
bivouac of General Bragg. The Commander-in-Chief, General 
Beauregard, General Polk, General Bragg, and General Breckin- 
ridge, are remembered as present. In a discussion of the causes 
of the delay and its incidents, it was mentioned that some of the 
troops, now in their third day only, were entirely out of food, 
though having marched with five days’ rations. General Beau- 
regard, confident our movement had been discovered by the ene- 
my, urged its abandonment, a return to our camps for supplies, 
and a general change of programme. In this opinion no other 
seemed fully to concur; and when it was suggested that ‘ the 
enemy’s supplies were much nearer, and could be had for the tak- 
ing,’ General Johnston quietly remarked, ‘Gentlemen, we shall 
attack at daylight to-morrow.’ The meeting then dispersed upon 
an invitation of the commanding general to meet at his tent that 
eyening, At that meeting a further discussion elicited the same 


60 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


views, and the same firm, decided determination. The next morn- 
ing, about dawn of day, the 6th, as the troops were being put in 
motion, several generals again met at the camp-tire of the general- 
in-chief. The discussion was renewed, General Beauregard again 
expressing his dissent ; when, rapid firing in the front indicating 
that the attack had commenced, General Johnston closed the dis- 
cussion by remarking: ‘The battle has opened, gentlemen ; it is 
too late to change our dispositions.’ He prepared to move to the 
front, and his subordinates promptly joined their respective com- 
mands, inspired by his coolness, confidence, and determination. 
Few men have equaled him in the possession and display, at the 
proper time, of these great qualities of the soldier.” 


The results of the first day of the famous battle thus begun 
are very summarily presented in the following brief report of 
General Beauregard : 


“ At 5 a.m., on the 6th instant, a reconnoitering party of the 
enemy having become engaged with our advanced pickets, the 
commander of the forces gave orders to begin the movement and 
attack as determined upon, except that Trabue’s brigade of Breck- 
inridge’s division was detached and advanced to support the left 
of Bragg’s corps and line of battle then menaced by the enemy ; 
and the other two brigades were directed to advance by the road 
to Hamburg to support Bragg’s right ; and at the same time Ma- 
ney’s regiment of Polk’s corps was advanced by the same road to 
reénforce the regiment, of cavalry and battery of four pieces, 
already thrown forward to watch and guard Grier’s, Tanner’s, and 
Borland’s Fords of Lick Creek. 

“Thirty minutes after 5 a.m., our lines and columns were in 
motion, all animated evidently by a promising spirit. The front 
line was engaged at once, but advanced steadily, followed in due 
order, with equal resolution and steadiness, by the other lines, 
which were brought successively into action with rare skill, judg- 
ment, and gallantry by the several corps commanders, as the ene- 
my made a stand with his masses rallied for the struggle for his 
encampments. Like an Alpine avalanche our troops moved for- 
ward, despite the determined resistance of the enemy, until after 
6 p. M., when we were in possession of all his encampments between 
Owl and Lick Creeks but one ; nearly all of his field-artillery, 
about thirty flags, colors, and standards, over three thousand _pris- 


1862] IT WAS THAT ONE ENCAMPMENT. 61 


oners, including a division commander (General Prentiss), and 
several brigade commanders, thousands of small-arms, an immense 
supply of subsistence, forage, and munitions of war, and a large 
amount of means of transportation, all the substantial fruits of a 
complete victory—such, indeed, as rarely have followed the most 
successful battles, for never was an army so well provided as that 
of our enemy. 

“The remnant of his army had been driven in utter disorder 
to the immediate vicinity of Pittsburg, under the shelter of the 
heavy guns of his iron-clad gunboats, and we remained undis- 
puted masters of his well-selected, admirably provided canton- 
ments, after our twelve hours of obstinate conflict with his forces, 
who had been beaten from them and the contiguous covert, but 
only by the sustained onset of all the men we could bring into 
action.” 


There are two words in this report which, if they could 
have been truthfully omitted, it would have been worth to us 
the surrender of all “the substantial fruits of a complete vic- 
tory.” It says: “Our troops moved forward, despite the deter- 
mined resistance of the enemy, until after 6 P.m., when we 
were in possession of all his encampments pa Owl and 
Lick Creeks but one.” It was that “one” encampment that 
furnished a foothold for all the subsequent reénforcements sent 
by Buell, and gave occasion for the final withdrawal of our 
forees; whereas, if that had been captured, and the “waters of 
the Tennessee” reached, as General Johnston designed, it was 
not too much to expect that Grant’s army would have surren- 
dered; that Buell’s forces would not have crossed the Tennes- 
see ; but with a skillful commander, like Johnston, to lead our 
troops, the enemy would have sought safety on the north bank 
of the Ohio; that Tennessee, Kentucky, and Missouri would 
have been recovered, the Northwest disaffected, and our armies 
filled with the men of the Southwest, and perhaps of the North- 
west also. 

Let us turn to reports and authorities. The author of “The 
Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston” says: 


“Of the two armies, one was now an advancing, triumphant 
host, with arm uplifted to give the mortal blow; the other, a 


62 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


broken, mangled, demoralized mob, paralyzed and waiting for the 
stroke. While the other Confederate brigades, which had shared 
most actively in Prentiss’s capture, were sending back the prison- 
ers and forming again for a final attack, two brigades, under 
Chalmers and Jackson, on the extreme right, had cleared away all 
in front of them, and, moving down the river-bank, now came 
upon the last point where even a show of resistance was made. 
Being two very bold and active brigadiers, they at once closed . 
with the enemy in their front, crossing a deep ravine and difficult 
ground to get at him. Here Colonel Webster, of Grant’s staff, 
had gathered all the guns he could find from batteries, whether 
abandoned or still coherent, and with stout-hearted men, picked 
up at random, had prepared a resistance. Some infantry, simi- 
larly constituted, had been got together ; and Ammen’s brigade, 
the van of Nelson’s division of Buell’s corps, had landed, and was 
pushing its way through the throng of pallid fugitives at the 
landing to take up the battle where it had fallen from the hands 
of Grant and Sherman. It got into position in time to do its 
part in checking the unsupported assaults of Chalmers and Jack- 
son.” 8 


General Chalmers, describing this final attack in his report, 
Says : 

“Tt was then about four o’clock in the evening, and, after dis- 
tributing ammunition, we received orders from General Bragg to 
drive the enemy into the river. My brigade, together with that 
of Brigadier-General Jackson, filed to the right and formed fac- 
ing the river, and endeavored to press forward to the water’s 
edge; but in attempting to mount the last ridge we were met 
by a fire from a whole line of Sigh agen pr pest by infantry and 
assisted by shells from the gunboats.” 


In a subsequent memorandum General Chalmers writes: 


“One more resolute movement forward would have captured 
Grant and his whole army, and fulfilled to the letter the battle- 
plan of the great Confederate general, who died in the belief that 
victory was ours. . . .”—(“The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney John- 
ston,” p. 637.) 


Brigadier-General Jackson, in his report, says: 


1862] THE DEMORALIZED REMNANT OF HIS FORCES. 68 


“My brigade was ordered to change direction again, face to- 
ward Pittsburg, where the enemy appeared to have made his last 
stand, and to advance upon him, General Chalmers’s brigade be- 
ing again on my right, and extending to the swamp of the Ten- 
nessee River. Without ammunition, and with only their bayo- 
nets to rely on, steadily my men advanced under a heavy fire 
from light batteries, siege-pieces, and gunboats. Passing through 
_ the ravine, they arrived near the crest of the opposite hill, upon 
which the enemy’s batteries were, but could not be urged farther 
without support. Sheltering themselves against the precipitous 
sides of the ravine, they remained under this fire for some time. 
Finding an advance without support impracticable, remaining 
there under fire useless, and believing that any further forward 
movement should have been made simultaneously along our whole 
line, I proceeded to obtain orders from General Withers, but, 
after seeing him, was ordered by a staff-officer to retire. This 
order was communicated to me as coming from General Beaure- 


gard.” 


General Hardee, who commanded the first line, says in his 
report : 


“Upon the death of General Johnston, the command having 
devolved upon General Beauregard, the conflict was continued 
until near sunset, and the advance divisions were within a few 
hundred yards of Pittsburg, where the enemy were huddled in 
confusion, when the order to withdraw was received. The troops 
were ordered to bivouac on the field of battle.” 


General Polk’s report says: 


“We had one hour or more of daylight still left, were within 
one hundred and fifty to four hundred yards of the enemy’s posi- 
tion, and nothing seemed wanting to complete the most brilliant 
victory of the war but to press forward and make a vigorous as- 
sault on the demoralized remnant of his forces.” 


General Gilmer, the chief engineer of the Confederate 
States Army, in a letter to Colonel William Preston Johnston, 
dated September 17, 1872, writes as follows: 

“Tt ig my well-considered opinion that if your father had sur- 
vived the day he would have crushed and captured General Grant’s 


64 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


army before the setting of the sun on the 6th. In fact, at the 
time your father received the mortal wound, advancing with Gen- 
eral Breckinridge’s command, the day was ours. The enemy hay- 
ing lost all the strong positions on that memorable field, his troops 
fell back in great disorder on the banks of the Tennessee. To 
cover the confusion, rapid fires were opened from the gunboats 
the enemy had placed in the river ; but the shots passed entirely 
over our devoted men, who were exultant and eager to be led for- 
ward to the final assault, which must have resulted in a complete 
victory, owing to the confusion and general disorganization of the 
Federal troops. I knew the condition of General Grant’s army at 
the moment, as I had reached a high, projecting point on the bank 
of the river, about a mile above Pittsburg Landing, and could see 
the hurried movements to get the disordered troops across to the 
right bank. Several thousand had already passed, and a confused 
mass of men crowded to the landing to get on the boats that were 
employed in crossing. I rode rapidly to General Bragg’s position 
to report what I had seen, and suggested that, if he would sus- 
pend the fire of his artillery and marshal his infantry for a general 
advance, the enemy must surrender. General Bragg decided to 
make the advance, and authorized me and other officers to direct 
the commanders of the batteries to cease firing. 

“In the midst of the preparations, orders reached General 
Bragg from General Beauregard directing the troops to be with- 
drawn and placed in camp for the night—the intention being to 
resume the contest in the morning. ‘This was fatal, as it enabled 
General Buell and General Wallace to arrive on the scene of ac- 
tion ; that is, they came up in the course of the night. Had Gen- 
eral Beauregard known the condition of the enemy as your father 
knew it when he received the fatal shot, the order for withdrawal 
would certainly not have been given, and, without such order, I 
know the enemy would have. been crushed.” * 


To General Gilmer’s opinion as a scientific engineer, a sol- 
dier of long experience, and a man of resolute will as well as 
calm judgment, the greatest respect will be accorded by those 
who knew him in the United States Army, as well as his asso- 
ciates in the Confederate Army. 


General Bragg, in his official report, says : 


* “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” pp. 635, 636, 


1862] CONDITION OF THE TWO ARMIES. 65 


‘As soon as our troops could be again put in motion, the 
order was given to move forward at all points and sweep the en- 
emy from the field. . . . Our troops, greatly exhausted by twelve 
hours’ incessant fighting without food, mostly responded to the 
order with alacrity, and the movement commenced with every 
prospect of success, though a heavy battery in our front and the 
gunboats on our right seemed determined to dispute every inch 
of ground. Just at this time an order was received from the 
- commanding General to withdraw the forces beyond the enemy’s 
fire.” 


In addition to the statements and opinions cited above, I 
will introduce from a recent publication by Thomas Worthing- 
ton, late colonel of the Forty-sixth Regiment of Ohio Volun- 
teers, two statements showing the relative condition of the two 
armies in the afternoon of the day of battle. It may be proper 
to say that Colonel Worthington was regularly educated as a 
soldier, and had seen service in Mexico. 

He quotes Colonel Geddes, of the Eighth Iowa Volunteers, 
as follows: 


“ About 3 p.M. all communications with the river (landing) 
ceased, and it became evident to me that the enemy was turning 
the right and left flanks of our army. . .. About 2 p. m. the 
whole Union right, comprising the Forty-sixth Ohio, which had 
held that flank two hours or more, was driven back in disorder, 
and the Confederate flanking force cut the center off from the 
_ landing, as stated by Colonel Geddes, soon after General John- 
ston’s fall.” 


General Beauregard reports as follows: 


“Tt was after 6 p.m. when the enemy’s last position was car- 
ried, and his force finally broke and sought refuge behind a com- 
manding eminence covering Pittsburg Landing, not more than 
half a mile distant, and under the guns of the gunboats, which 
opened on our eager columns a fierce and annoying fire with shot 
and shell of the heaviest description. Darkness was close at hand. 
Officers and men were exhausted by a combat of over twelve 
hours, without food, and jaded by the march of the preceding 
day through mud and water ; it was, therefore, impossible to col- 

52 


66 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


lect the rich and opportune spoils of war scattered broadcast on 
the field left in our possession, and impracticable to make any 
effective dispositions for their removal to the rear. 

“I accordingly established my headquarters at the church of 
Shiloh, in the enemy’s encampment, with Major-General Bragg, 
and directed our troops to sleep on their arms in such positions in 
advance and rear as corps commanders should determine, hoping, 
from news received by a special dispatch, that delays had been 
encountered by General Buell in his march from Columbia, and 
that his main forces, therefore, could not reach the field of battle 
in time to save General Grant’s shattered fugitives from capture 
or destruction on the following day. 


Such are the representations of those having the best means 
of information relative to the immediate causes of the failure to 
drive the enemy from his last foothold, and gain possession of 
it. Some of the more remote causes of this failure may be no- 
ticed. The first was the death of General Johnston, which is 
thus described by his son : 


‘General Johnston had passed through the ordeal (the charge 
upon the enemy) seemingly unhurt. His noble horse was shot in 
four places ; his clothes were pierced by missiles ; his boot-sole 
was cut and torn by a Minié ball; but, if he himself had received 
any severe wound, he did not know it. At this moment Governor 
Harris rode up from the right, elated with his own success, and 
with the vindication of his Tennesseeans. After a few words, Gen- 
eral Johnston sent him with an order to Colonel Statham, which, 
having delivered, he speedily returned. In the mean time knots 
and groups of Federal soldiers kept up an angry discharge of fire- 
arms as they retreated upon their supports, and their last line, now 
yielding, delivered volley after volley as they retreated. By the 
chance of war a Minié ball from one of these did its fatal work. 
As General Johnston, on horseback, sat there, knowing that he 
had crushed in the arch which had so long resisted the pressure of 
his forces, and waiting until they could collect sufficiently to give 
the final stroke, he received a mortal wound. It came in the mo- 
ment of victory and triumph from a flying foe. It smote him at 
the very instant when he felt the full conviction that the day was 
won.” 


1862] FELL IN SIGHT OF VICTORY. 67 


His wound consisted in the cutting of the artery that runs 
down through the "thigh and divides at the knee, and passes 
along the separate bones of the lower part of the leg. The 
wound was just above the division or branch of the artery. It 
was fatal only because the flow of blood was not stopped by a 
tourniquet. The narrative continues: 


___ “General Beauregard had told General Johnston that morning 

as he rode off, that if it should be necessary to communicate with 
him or for him to do anything, he would be found in his ambu- 
lance in bed. Governor Harris, knowing this, and how feeble Gen- 
eral Beauregard’s health was, went first to his headquarters—just 
in the rear of where the army had deployed into line the evening 
before. Beauregard and his staff were gone on horseback in the 
direction of Shiloh Church. He found them there. The Gov- 
ernor told General Beauregard that General Johnston had been 
killed. Beauregard expressed regret, and then remarked, ‘ Every- 
thing else seems to be going on well on the right.’ Governor 
Harris assented. ‘Then,’ said Beauregard, ‘the battle may as 
well go on.’ The Governor replied that he certainly thought it 
ought. He offered his services to Beauregard, and they were 
courteously accepted. General Beauregard then remained where 
he was, waiting the issue of events.” * 


Sidney Johnston fell in sight of victory; the hour he had 
waited for, the event he had planned for, had arrived. His 
fame was vindicated, but far dearer than this to his patriotic 
spirit was it with his dying eyes to behold his country’s flag, so 
lately drooping in disaster, triumphantly advancing. In his fall 
the great pillar of the Southern: Confederacy was crushed, and 
beneath its fragments the best hope of the Southwest lay buried. 
A highly educated and richly endowed soldier, his varied experi- 
ence embraced also civil affairs, and his intimate knowledge of 
the country and people of the Southwest so highly qualified him 
for that special command that it was not possible to fill the 
place made vacant by his death. Not for the first time did the 
fate of an army depend upon a single man, and the fortunes of 
a country hang, as in a balance, on the achievements of a single 


* “The Life of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston,” p. 616. 


68 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


army. To take an example far from us, in time and place, 
when Turenne had, after months of successful manceuyring, 
finally forced his enemy into a position which gave assurance 
of victory, and had marshaled his forces for a decisive battle, 
he was, when making a preliminary reconnaissance, killed by a 
chance shot; then his successor, instead of attacking, retreated, 
and all which the one had gained for France, the other lost. 

To take another example, not quite so conclusive, it was epi- 
grammatically said by Lieutenant Kingsbury, when writing of 
the battle of Buena Vista, that if the last shot, fired at the close 
of the second day’s conflict, had killed General Taylor, the next 
morning’s sun would have risen upon the strange spectacle of 
‘two armies in full retreat from each other, the field for which 
they had fought being in the possession of neither. What 
material consequences would have flowed from the supposed 
event—how the Mexican people would have been inspired by 
the retreat of our army, how far it would have brought out all 
their resources for war, and to what extent results might have 
been thereby affected—are speculative inquiries on a subject 
from which time and circumstance have taken the interest it 
once possessed. 

The extracts which have been given sufficiently prove that, 
when General Johnston fell, the Confederate army was so fully 
victorious that, had the attack been vigorously pressed, General 
Grant and his army would before the setting of the sun have 
been fugitives or prisoners. 

As our troops drew near to the river, the gunboats of the 
enemy became ineffective, because to fire over the bank required 
such elevation of the guns that the shot and shell passed high 
over the heads of our men, falling far away in the rear. 

General Polk described the troops in advance for that reason 
as quite safe from the fire of the gunboats, though it might seem 
terrible to those far in the rear, and expressed the surprise and 
regret he felt at the order to retire. 

Grant’s army being beaten, the next step of General John- 
ston’s programme should haye followed, the defeat of Bu- 
ell’s and Mitchell’s forces as they successively came up, and 
a return by our victorious army through Tennessee to Ken- 


1862] MUST BE MATTER OF CONJECTURE. 69 


tucky. The great embarrassment had been the want of good 
military weapons; these would have been largely supplied by . 
the conquest hoped for, and, in the light of what had occurred, 
not unreasonably anticipated. 

What great consequences would have ensued must be mat- 
ter of conjecture, but that the people of Kentucky and Mis- 
souri generously sympathized with the South was then com- 
monly admitted. Our known want of preparation for war and 
numerical inferiority may well have caused many to doubt 
the wisdom of our effort for independence, and to these a 
signal success would have been the makeweight deciding their 
course. 

I believe that again in the history of war the fate of an 
army depended on one man; and more, that the fortunes of a 
country hung by the single thread of the life that was yielded 
on the field of Shiloh. So great was my confidence in his ca- 
pacity for organization and administration, that I felt, when he 
was assigned to the Department of the West, that the undevel- 
oped power of that region would be made sufficient not only 
for its own safety, but to contribute support if need be to the 
more seriously threatened Kast. 

There have been various suppositions as to the neglect of 
the wound which caused General Johnston’s death. My own 
opinion, founded upon the statements of those who were near 
him, and upon my long acquaintance with him and close ob- 
servation of him under trying circumstances, is, that his iron 
nerve and extraordinary concentration of mind made him re- 
gardless of his wound, in the fixed purpose to dislodge the 
enemy from his last position, and, while thus struggling to com- 
plete the victory within his grasp, he unheedingly allowed his 
life-blood to flow away. 

It often happens that men do not properly value their rich- 
est gifts until taken away. Those who had erroneously and un- 
justly censured Johnston, convicted of their error by the gran- 
deur of his revealed character, joined in the general lamenta- 
tion over his loss, and malignity even was silenced by the 
devoted manner of his death. My estimation of him was based 
on long and intimate acquaintance; beginning in our youth, it 


70 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


had grown with our growth without check or variation, and, 
when he first arrived in Richmond, was expressed to some 
friends yet living, in the wish that I had the power, by resign- 
ing, to transfer to him the Presidency of the Confederate 
States. 


GH ART Boh x LX. 


Retirement of the Army.—Remnants of Grant’s Army.—Its Reénforcements.— 
Strength of our Army.—Strength of Grant’s Army.—Reorganization Corinth. 
—Advance of General Halleck.—Siege of Corinth.—Evacuation.—Retreat to 
Tupelo.—General Beauregard retires. —General Bragg in Command.—Positions 
on the Mississippi River occupied by the Hnemy.—New Madrid.—Island No. 
10.—Fort Pillow.—Memphis.—Attack at Ilatteras Inlet.—Expedition of the 
Enemy to Port Royal.—Expeditions from Port Royal.—System of Coast De- 
fenses adopted by us.—Fort Pulaski. 


Ar the ensuing nightfall our victorious army retired from 
the front and abandoned its vantage-ground on the bluffs, which 
had been won at such a cost of blood. The enemy thereby had 
room and opportunity to come out from their corner, reoceupy 
the strong positions from which they had been driven, and dis- 
pose their troops on much more favorable ground. Called off 
by staff-officers, who gave no specific instructions, our brigades, 
according to circumstances, bivouacked on the battle - field, 
marched to the rear, or made themselves comfortable on the pro- 
fuse spoils of the enemy’s encampments. General Buell says: 


“Of the army of not less than fifty thousand effective men, 
which Grant had on the west bank of the Tennessee River, not 
more than five thousand were in ranks and available on the battle- . 
field at nightfall on the 6th, exclusive of Lew Wallace’s division, 
say eight thousand five hundred men that only came up during 
the night. The rest were either killed, wounded, captured, or 
scattered in inextricable and hopeless confusion for miles along 
the banks of the river.” 


In addition to the arrival of Wallace’s division, the entire 
divisions of Nelson and Crittenden got across the river during 
the night, and by daylight that of McCook began to arrive; 


\ 
1862] A SERIES OF COMBATS. ENSUED. val 


all but the first named belonged to Buell’s army. The work of 
reorganization of fragments of Grant’s force also occupied the 
night. In the morning the arrival of reénforcements to the 
enemy continued. | 

On the morning of the 7th the enemy advanced about six 
o’clock, and opened a heavy fire of musketry and artillery, such 
as gave assurance that the reénforcements had arrived, to antici- 
pate which the battle of the 6th had been fought. A series of 
combats ensued, in which the Confederates showed their usual 
valor; but, after the junction had been effected between Grant 
and Buell, which Johnston’s movement was made to prevent, 
our force was unequal to resist the combined armies, and retreat 
was a necessity. 

The field return of the Army of Mississippi before and after 
the battle of Shiloh was as follows: infantry and artillery, effec- 
tive before the battle, 35,953; cavalry, 4,382; total, 40,335. 
Infantry and artillery, effective after the battle, 25,555; cav- 
alry, 4,081; total, 29,636. Difference, 10,699. Casualties in 
battle: killed, 1,728; wounded, 8,012; missing, 959. 

The effective force of General Grant’s army engaged in the 
battles of April 6th and 7th at Shiloh was 49,314; reénforce- 
ments of General Buell, 21,579; total, 70,893. The casualties 
in the battle of April 6th in Grant’s force were as follows : 
killed, 1,500; wounded, 6,634; missing, 3,086; total, 11,220 ; 
leaving, for duty on the “th, 59,673. 

On April 9th Major-General H. W. Halleck left St. Louis 
and proceeded to Pittsburg Landing to assume command of 
the enemy’s forces in the field. A reorganization was made, in 
which General Grant’s divisions formed the right wing, those 
of General Buell the center, and those of General Pope, brought 
from the west side of the Mississippi, the left wing; and an ad- 
vance on Corinth was commenced. 

Corinth, the position from which our forces had advanced to 
Shiloh or Pittsburg Landing, and to which they had now retired, 
was a small village in the northeast corner of the State of Missis- 
sippi. It was ninety miles east of Memphis and twenty or | 

twenty-two west of the Tennessee River. The Memphis and 
Charleston Railroad ran from west to east through it, and the 


"9 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Mobile and Ohio road from south to north. The country be- 
tween it and the Tennessee River was quite rugged, broken 
into ridges, and covered with a heavy forest. The position it- 
self was flat, the water poor. Being the point at which two 
principal railroads crossed, it served admirably for the concen- 
tration of our forces. 

Corinth was a strategic point of importance, and it was in- 
tended to be held as long as circumstances would permit; but 
it was untenable in the face of a largely superior force, owing 
to the ease with which the railroad communications in the rear 
could be cut by the enemy’s cavalry. The small streams and 
contiguous flats in its front formed some obstacles which were 
not passed by the enemy until after the retreat of our army. 
The defenses were slight, consisting of rifle-pits and earthworks 
of little elevation or strength. 

The movement of General Halleck against this position 
commenced from Pittsburg Landing on April 28th with a foree 
exceeding eighty-five thousand effectives. On May 3d he had 
reached within eight miles of Corinth, and on the 21st his bat- 
teries were within three miles. This slow progress was prob- 
ably the result of a conviction that our force was very large, 
rather than of the bad state of the roads. So great were his 
precautions, that every night his army lay in an intrenched 
camp, and by day it was assailed by skirmishers from our army 
in more or less force. 

General Sherman, in his report of May 30th, says: 


“ My division has constructed seven distinct intrenched camps 
since leaving Shiloh, the men working cheerfully and well all the 
time, night and day. Hardly had we finished one camp before we 
were called on to move forward and build another. But I have 
been delighted at this feature in the character of my division, and 
take this method of making it known. Our intrenchments near 
Corinth and at Russell’s, each built substantially in one night, are 
stronger works of art than the much-boasted forts of the enemy 
at Corinth.” 


The line of railroad on the north and east had been cut by 
the enemy, and an attempt made on the south. But so well 


1862] GENERAL ATTACK NOT TO BE HAZARDED. "3 


was his apprehension of our strength maintained, that he con- 
tinued his intrenched approaches until within one thousand 
yards of our main works. 

General Sherman says : 


“By 9 a.m. of the 29th our works were substantially done, 
and our artillery in position, and at 4 P.M. the siege-train was 
brought forward. . So near was the enemy that we could hear 
the sound of his ee and sometimes of voices in command ; ; and 
the railroad-cars arriving and departing at Corinth were easily dis- 
tinguished. For some days and nights cars have been arriving 
and departing very frequently, especially in the night ; but last 
night (the 29th) more so than usual, and my suspicions were 
aroused. Before daybreak I instructed the brigade commanders 
and the field-officer of the day to feel forward as far as possible ; 
but all reported the enemy’s pickets still in force in the dense 
woods to our front. But about 6 A.M. a curious explosion, sound- 
ing like a volley of large siege-pieces, followed by others, singly, 
and in twos and threes, arrested our attention, and soon after a 
large smoke arose from the direction of Corinth, when I tele- 
graphed to General Halleck to ascertain the cause. He answered 
that he could not explain it, but ordered me to advance my divi- 
sion and feel the enemy, if still in my front. I immediately put 
in motion two regiments of each brigade, by different roads, and 
soon after followed with the whole division—infantry, artillery, 
and cavalry. General M. L. Smith’s brigade moved rapidly down 
the main road, entering the first redoubt of the enemy at 7 a. M. 
It was completely evacuated, and by 8 a.m. all my een was 
at Corinth and beyond.” 


The force of General Beauregard was less than forty-five 
thousand effective men. He estimated that of the enemy to 
be between eighty-five and ninety thousand men. All the 
troops of the enemy in reserve in Arkansas, Missouri, Ken- 
tucky, and Illinois were brought forward, except the force of 
- Curtis, in Arkansas, and placed in, front of our position. No 
definite idea of their number was formed. In the opinion of 
Beauregard, a general attack was not to be hazarded; but on 
May 3d an advance was made to attack the corps of General 
Pope, when only one of his divisions was in position, and that 


T4 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


gave way so rapidly it could not be overtaken. Again, on May 
9th, an advance was made, hoping to surprise the enemy. But 
a division, which should have been in position at three o’clock 
in the morning, or early dawn, was detained until three in the 
afternoon by the mistakes of a guide. The enemy thus be- 
came informed of the movement, and no surprise could be 
effected. General Beauregard commenced the removal of his 
sick, preparatory to an evacuation, on May 26th; on the next 
day arrangements for falling back were made, and the work 
completed on the 29th. So complete was the evacuation, that 
not only was the army successfully withdrawn, but also every 
piece of ordnance, only a quantity of damaged ammunition 
being left behind. The retreat was continued to Tupelo, with- 
out any serious conflict with the enemy; but during the re- 
treat seven locomotives were reported to be lost by the burning 
of a bridge, and a number of cars, most of which were loaded 
with stores, were ordered to be burned. 

On June 14th orders were sent to General nee from 
Richmond, to proceed to Jackson, Mississippi, and temporarily 
to assume command of the department then under command of 
General Lovell. The order concluded as follows : 


“ After General Magruder joins, your further services there 
may be dispensed with. The necessity is urgent and absolute. 
“J. Davis.” 


On application to General Beauregard for the necessary 
order, he replied: 


“You can not possibly go. My health does not permit me to 
remain in charge alone here. This evening my two physicians 
were insisting that I should go away for one or two weeks, fur- 
nishing me with another certificate for that purpose, and I had 
concluded to go—intending to see you to-morrow on the subject, 
and leave you in command,” » 


The certificate of the physicians was as follows : 
“TIEADQUARTERS, WESTERN DEPARTMENT, 
“Turrto, June 14, 1862. 
“We certify that, after attendance on General Beauregard 
for the past four months, and treatment of his case, in our pro- 


1862] EVENTS IN THE WESTERN DEPARTMENT. 75 


fessional opinion he is incapacitated physically for the arduous 

duties of his present command, and we urgently recommend rest 

and recreation. “R. L. Bropin, Surgeon, P. A. C. 8. 
“Sam Cuoprin, Surgeon, P. A. 0. 8.” 


These facts were telegraphed to me at once by General 
Bragg. Soon after, I sent a second dispatch to him, renewing 
the order, and expressing my surprise that he should have hesi- 
- tated to obey, when the original order stated “the necessity is 
urgent and absolute.” Before this second dispatch was received 
by General Bragg, General Beauregard had transferred the 
command to him, and had departed for Bladen Springs. Gen- 
eral Brage thus describes the subsequent proceedings : 


“Prepared to move, I telegraphed back to the President that 
the altered conditions induced me to await his further orders. In 
reply to this, I was immediately notified by telegraph of my as- 
signment to the ‘permanent command of the army,’ and was 
directed to send General Van Dorn to execute my first instruc- 
tions.” 


From this statement it appears—1. That General Beaure- 
gard was not, as has been alleged, harshly deprived of his com- 
mand, but that he voluntarily surrendered it, after being fur- 
nished with medical certificates of his physical incapacity for 
its arduous duties. 2. That he did not even notify his Govern- 
ment, still less ask permission to retire. 3. That the order, as- 
signing another to the command he had abandoned, could not 
be sent through him, when he had departed and gone to a place 
where there was no telegraph, and rarely a mail. 4. That it is 
neither customary nor proper to send orders to the commander 
of an army through a general on sick-leave; and in this case 
it would have been very objectionable, as a similar order had 
just been sent and disobeyed. 

Meanwhile some other events had occurred in the Western 
Department which should be mentioned. The movement of 
the forces of the enemy up the Tennessee River, as has been 
stated, thus flanking some of our positions on the Mississippi 
River, was followed by his fitting out a naval fleet tomove down 
thatriver. This fleet, consisting of seven ironclads and one gun- 


"6 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


boat, ten mortar-boats, each carrying a thirteen-inch mortar, a 
coal- barge, two ordnance-steamers, and two transports with 
troops, left Cairo on March 14th, and arrived at Hickman that 
evening. A small force of our cavalry left upon its approach. 
Columbus, as has been stated, had previously been evacuated 
by our forces and occupied by the enemy. In the morning the 
fleet continued down toward Island No. 10. This island is situ- 
ated in that bend of the river which touches the border of Ten- 
nessee, a few miles further up the river than New Madrid, 
although nearly southeast of that point. . 

In the latter part of February a large force of the enemy under 
Major-General Pope left Commerce, Missouri, and moved south 
about fifty miles to New Madrid, with the object of capturing 
that place. Aided by the gunboats of Commander Hollins, our 
small force repulsed the assaults of the enemy three times, but 
such was the disparity of numbers that it soon became manifest 
that our forces could not successfully hold the position, and it 
was evacuated on the night of March 13th. Its defenses con- 
sisted of two earthworks, in which about twenty guns were 
mounted. These were spiked and rendered unfit for use. 

The bombardment of Island No. 10, above described, com- 
menced on March 15th, and was continued night and day. Up 
to April 1st the enemy fired several thousand thirteen-inch and 
rifle shells. On March 17th a general attack with five gunboats 
and four mortar-boats was made, and continued nine hours, 
without any serious result. Finally, the forces of the enemy 
were greatly increased, and began to occupy both banks of the 
river, and also the river above and below the island, when a 
portion of our force retired, and about April 7th the remainder 
surrendered. 

The fleet, on April 12th, proceeded next to Fort Pillow, 
about a hundred and eighty miles below Island No. 10, and a 
bombardment was commenced on the next day. This was con- 
tinued without effect until the night of June 4th, when both 
Forts Pillow and Randolph, the latter some twelve miles below 
the former, were evacuated — these positions having become 
untenable in consequence of. the withdrawal of our forces from 
Corinth and the adjacent portion of Tennessee. 


1862] THEY MANFULLY ENGAGED THE ENEMY. ug 


Nothing now remained to oppose the enemy’s fleet but our 
gunboats at Memphis, which were, say, seventy miles farther 
down the river. The gallantry and efficiency displayed by our 
improvised river navy at New Madrid and Island No. 10 gave rise 
to hopes scarcely justified by the number of our vessels or their 
armament. Our boats had fewer guns than those of the enemy, 
and they were less substantially constructed, but their officers 
and crews took counsel of their country’s need rather than of 
their own strength. They manfully engaged the enemy, and 
disabled one of his rams, but after an hour’s conflict were com- 
pelled to retire. 

The possession of Memphis being no longer disputed, its 
occupation by the enemy promptly followed. 

At an early period of the war the Government of the United 
States organized some naval and military expeditions, with a 
view to capture our harbors, to occupy an extensive tract of 
country in their vicinity, and especially to obtain possession of 
a portion of our cotton-crop. The first movement of this kind 
was by a fleet of naval vessels and transports which appeared 
off Hatteras Inlet on August 27,1861. This inlet is a gap in 
the sandy barrier that lines the coast of North Carolina about 
eighteen miles southwest of Cape Hatteras. It was the princi- 
pal entrance to Pamlico Sound, a large body of water lying be- 
tween the sandy beach and the mainland. The channel of the 
entrance had about seven feet of water, and was protected by 
two small forts constructed on the sand. Our forces were under 
the command of Captain Samuel Barron, an officer of distinction, 
formerly in the United States Navy. After a short bombard- 
ment, which developed the strength of the enemy and his own 
comparative weakness, he capitulated. 

A much larger fleet of naval vessels and transports, carrying 
fifteen thousand men, appeared off the harbor, of Port Royal, 
South Carolina, on November 4, 1861. This harbor is situated 
midway between the: cities of Charleston and Savannah. It is 
a broad estuary, into which flow some two or three streams, the 
interlacing of which with creeks forms a group of numerous 
islands. The parish, of which these are the greater part, con- 
stituted the richest agricultural district in the State ; its staples 


78 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


being sea-island cotton and rice. The principal defenses were 
Fort Walker, a strong earthwork on Hilton Head, and Fort 
Beauregard on Philip’s Island. The attack was made by the 
enemy on the 7th, by a fleet consisting of eight steamers and a 
sloop-of-war in tow. Some of the steamers were of the first 
class, as the Wabash and the Susquehanna. The conflict con- 
tinued for four hours, when the forts, because untenable, were 
abandoned. 

In the early part of 1862 several reconnaissances were sent 
out from Port Royal, and subsequently an expedition visited 
Darien and Brunswick in Georgia, and Fernandina, Jackson- 
ville, and St. Augustine in Florida. Its design was to take and 
keep under control this line of seacoast, especially in Georgia. 
Some smal] steamers and other vessels were captured, and some 
ports were occupied. 

The system of coast defenses which was adopted and the 
preparations which had been at that time made by the Govern- 
ment to resist these aggressions of the enemy should be stated. 
By reference to the topography of our coast, it will be seen that, 
in the State of North Carolina, are Albemarle and Pamlico 
Sounds, penetrating far into the interior; then the Cape Fear 
River, connecting with the ocean by two channels, the south- 
west channel being defended by a small inclosed fort and a 
water-battery. On the coast of South Carolina are George- 
town and Charleston Harbors. A succession of islands ex- 
tends along the coast of South Carolina and Georgia, sep- 
arated from the mainland by a channel which is navigable 
for vessels of moderate draft from Charleston to Fernandina, 
Florida. There are fewer assailable points on the Gulf than on 
the Atlantic. Pensacola, Mobile, and the mouth of the Missis- 
sippi were defended by works that had hitherto been regarded 
as sufficiently strong to repulse any naval attack that might be 
made upon them. Immediately after the bombardment of Fort 
Sumter, the work of improving the seacoast defense was begun 
and carried forward as rapidly as the limited means of the Gov- 
ernment would permit. 

The work that was now done has been so summarily and 
satisfactorily described by General A. L. Long, chief of artil- 


1862] DEFENSIVE WORKS ALONG THE COAST. 19 


lery, in a paper contributed to the Southern Historical Society, 
that I avail myself of a few extracts : * 


“ Roanoke Island and other points on Albemarle and Pamlico 
Sounds were fortified. Batteries were established on the south- 
east entrance of Cape Fear River, and the works on the south- 
west entrance strengthened. Defenses were constructed at George- 
town, and at all assailable points on the northeast coast of South 
Carolina. The works of Charleston Harbor were greatly strength- 
ened by earthworks and floating batteries. The defenses from 
Charleston down the coast of South Carolina and Georgia were 
confined chiefly to the islands and salient points bearing upon the 
channels leading inland. Defensive works were erected at all 
important points along the coast. Many of the defenses, being 
injudiciously located and hastily erected, offered but little resist- 
ance to the enemy when attacked. These defeats were not sur- 
prising, when we take into consideration the inexperience of the 
engineers, and the long line of seacoast to be defended. As soon 
as a sufficient naval force had been collected, an expedition under 
the command of General B. F. Butler was sent to the coast of 
North Carolina, and captured several important points. A second 
expedition, under Admiral Dupont and General Thomas W. Sher- 
man, was sent to make a descent on the coast of South Carolina. 
On the 7th of November Dupont attacked the batteries that were 
designed to defend Port Royal harbor, as stated above, and al- 
most without resistance carried them and gained possession of 
Port Royal. This is the best harbor in South Carolina, and is the 
strategic key to all the South Atlantic coast. Later, Burnside 
captured Roanoke Island, and established himself in eastern North 
Carolina without resistance. The rapid fall of Roanoke Island 
and Port Royal Harbor struck consternation into the hearts of the 
inhabitants along the entire coast. The capture of Port Royal 
gave to the Federals the entire possession of Beaufort Island, 
which afforded a secure place of rest for the army, while the har- 
bor gave a safe anchorage for the fleet. Beaufort Island almost 
fills a deep indenture in the main shore, being separated the 
greater part of its extent by a narrow channel, which is navigable 
its entire circuit. Its northern extremity extends to within a few 
miles of the Charleston and Savannah Railroad. The main road 


* “ Seacoast Defenses of the Carolinas and Georgia.” 


80 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


from Port Royal to Pocotaligo crosses the channel at this point. 
The evacuation of Hilton Head, on the southwestern extremity 
of Beaufort Island, followed the capture of Port Royal. This 
exposed Savannah, only about twenty-five miles distant, to an 
attack from that direction. At the same time, the Federals hay- 
ing command of Helena Bay, Charleston was liable to be assailed 
from North Edisto or Stono Inlet, and the railroad could have 
been reached without opposition by the route from Port Royal to 
Pocotaligo. ; 

“Such was the state of affairs when General Lee reached 
Charleston, about December 1, 1861, to assume the command of 
the Department of North Carolina, Georgia, and Florida. His 
vigorous mind at once comprehended the situation, and, with his 
accustomed energy, he met the difficulties that presented them- 
selves. Directing fortifications to be constructed on the Stgno 
and the Edisto and the Combahee, he fixed his headquarters at 
Coosawhatchee, the point most threatened, and directed defenses to 
be erected opposite Hilton Head, and on the Broad and Salte- 
hatchie, to cover Savannah. These were the points requiring im- 
mediate attention. He superintended in person the works over- 
looking the approach to the railroad from Port Royal, and soon 
infused into his troops a part of his own energy. The works he 
had planned rose with magical rapidity. A few days after his 
arrival at Coosawhatchee, Dupont and Sherman sent their first re- 
connaissance in that direction, which was met and repulsed by 
shots from the newly erected batteries ; and now, whether the 
Federals advanced toward the railroad or turned in the direction 
of Charleston or Savannah, they were arrested by our batteries. 
The people, seeing the Federals repulsed at every point, regained 
their confidence, and with it their energy. 

“The most important points being now secured against imme- 
diate attack, the General proceeded to organize a system of sea- 
coast defense different from that which had been previously 
adopted. He withdrew the troops and material from those works 
which had been established on the islands and salient points which 
he could not defend to a strong interior line, where the effect of 
the Federal naval force would be neutralized. After a careful 
reconnaissance of the coast, he designated such points as he ton- 
sidered it necessary to fortify. The most important positions on 
this extensive line were Georgetown, Charleston, Pocotaligo, Coo- 


1862] THE ENEMY WOULD SOON ADVANCE. 81 


sawhatchee, and Savannah. Coosawhatchee, being central, could 
communicate with either Charleston or Savannah in two or three 
hours by railroad, and in case of an attack they could support 
each other. The positions between Coosawhatchee and Savan- 
nah, and those between the former and Charleston, could be re- 
enforced from the positions contiguous to them ; there was thus a 
defensive relation throughout the entire line, extending from Win- 
yaw Bay to the mouth of St. Mary’s River, in Georgia, a distance 
of about two hundred miles. These detached and supporting 
works covered a most important agricultural country, and sufficed 
to defend it from the smaller expeditions made against that re- 
gion. 

“ About March 1st the gunboats of the enemy entered the Sa- 
vannah River by way of the channel leading from Hilton Head. 
Our naval force was too weak to dispute the possession with them, 
and they thus cut off the communication of Fort Pulaski with the 
city. Soon after, the enemy landed a force, under General Gill- 
more, on the opposite side of the fort. By April Ist they had 
powerful batteries in position, and on that day opened fire on the 
fort. Having no hope of succor, Fort Pulaski, after striking a 
blow for honor, surrendered with about five hundred men.” * 


CHAPTER XxX. 


Advance of General McClellan toward Centreville; his Report.—Our Forces or- 
dered to the Peninsula.—Situation at Yorktown.—Siege by General McClellan. 
—General Johnston assigned to Command; his Recommendation.—Attack on 
General Magruder at Yorktown.—Movements of McClellan.—The Virginia.— 
General Johnston retires.—Delay at Norfolk.—Before Williamsburg.—Remark 
of Hancock.—Retreat up the Peninsula,—Sub-terra Shells used.—Kvacuation 
of Norfolk.—Its Occupation by the Enemy. 


In a previous chapter the retreat of our army from Centre- 
ville has been described, and reference has been made to the 
anticipation of the commanding general, J. E. Johnston, that 
the enemy would soon advance to attack that position. Since 
the close of the war we have gained information not at that 


* General A. L. Long, in Historical Society Papers. 
53 


82 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


time to us attainable, which shows that, as early as the 31st of 
January, 1862, the commanding General of the enemy’s forces 
presented to his President an argument against that line of 
operations, setting forth the advantages of a movement by 
water-transports down the Chesapeake into the Rappahannock 5 
and that in the following February, by the direction of Presi- 
dent Lincoln, General McClellan held a council with twelve of 
the generals of that army, who decided in favor of the move- 
ment by way of Annapolis, and thence to the Rappahannock, to 
which their President gave his assent. When General McClel- 
lan, then in the city of Washington, heard that our army had 
retired, he ordered a general movement of his troops toward the 
position we had lately occupied. A detachment was sent to 
make reconnaissance as far as the line of the Rappahannock, by 
which it was ascertained that our troops had passed beyond that 
river. His account of this movement was given in the follow- 
ing report: 
“Parrrax Court-Houss, March 11, 1862, 8.30 P.M. 

“J have just returned from a ride of more than forty miles. 
Have examined Centreville, Union Mills, Blackburn’s Ford, etc. 
The rebels have left all their positions, and, from the information 
obtained during our ride to-day, I am satisfied that they have 
fallen behind the Rapidan, holding Fredericksburg and Gordons- 
ville. Their movement from here was very sudden. They left 
many wagons, some caissons, clothing, ammunition, personal bag- 
gage, etc. Their winter-quarters were admirably constructed, 
many not yet quite finished. The works at Centreville are for- 
midable ; more so than at Manassas. Except the turnpike, the 
roads are horrible. The country entirely stripped of forage and 
provisions. Having fully consulted with General McDowell, I pro- 
pose occupying Manassas with a portion of Banks’s command, and 
then at once throwing all forces I can concentrate upon the line 
agreed upon last week. The Monitor justifies this course. I tel- 
egraphed this morning to have the transports brought to Wash- 
ington, to start from there. I presume you will approve this 
course. Circumstances may keep me out here some little time 
longer.* G. B. McCieian, Major- General. 

“Hon. E, M. Sranton, Secretary of War.” 


* See “Report on the Conduct of the War,” Part I, pp. 10-12, 309-311. 


1862] THE ENEMY AT FORTRESS MONROE. 83 


The reference to the Monitor is to be explained by the 
condition previously made in connection with the proposition 
of going to Fortress Monroe, that the Merrimac, our Vir- 
ginia, should first be neutralized. The order to bring the 
“transports” to Washington was due to the fact that they 
had not dared to run by our batteries on the Potomac, and in- 
tended to avoid them by going to Annapolis for embarkation. 
The withdrawal of our batteries from the banks of the -Poto- 
mac had removed the objection to going down that river, and 
the withdrawal of our forces across the Rappahannock was 
fatal to the programme of landing on that river, and marching 
to Richmond before our forces could be in position to resist an 
attack on the capital. Notwithstanding the assurance given 
that the destruction of railroads and bridges proved that our 
army could not intend to advance, apprehension was still enter- 
tained of an attack upon Washington. 

As soon as we ascertained that the enemy was concentrating 
his forces at Fortress Monroe, to advance upon our capital by 
that line of approach, all our disposable force was ordered to 
the Peninsula, between the James and York Rivers, to the sup- 
port of General John B. Magruder, who, with a force of seven 
to eight thousand men, had, by availing himself of the Warwick 
River, a small stream which runs through a low, marshy coun- 
try, from near Yorktown to the James River, constructed an 
intrenched line across the Peninsula, and with equal skill and 
intrepidity had thus far successfully checked every attempt to 
break it, though the enemy was vastly superior in numbers to 
the troops under General Magruder’s command. Having a 
force entirely inadequate to occupy and defend thé whole line, 
over thirteen miles long, he built dams in the Warwick River, 
so as to form pools, across which the enemy, without bridges, 
could not pass, and posted detachments at each dam to prevent 
the use of them by attacking columns of the enemy. To de- 
fend the left of his line, where the stream became too small to 
present a serious obstacle to the passage of troops, redoubts were 
constructed, with curtains connecting them. 

Between Yorktown and Gloucester Point, on the opposite 
shore, the York River is contracted to less than a mile in 


84. RISE- AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


width, and General Magruder had constructed batteries at both 
places, which, by their cross fire, presented a formidable ob- 
stacle to the ascent of ordinary vessels. The fortifications at 
Norfolk and the navy-yard, together with batteries at Sewell’s 
Point and Craney Island, in conjunction with the navy, offered 
means of defense against any attempt to land troops on the 
south side of James River. After the first trial of strength 
with our Virginia, there had been-an evident disinclination on 
the part of the enemy’s vessels to encounter her, so that, as long 
as she floated, the deep water of the roads and mouth of James 
River was not likely to be invaded by ships of war. 

As a second line of defense, a system of detached works had 
been constructed by General Magruder near to Williamsburg, 
where the width of the Peninsula, available for the passage of 
troops, was only three or four miles. The advantage thus se- 
cured to his forces, if they should be compelled to retreat, will 
be readily appreciated. I am not aware that torpedoes had been 
placed in York River to prevent the entrance of the enemy’s 
vessels; indeed, at that time, but little progress had been made 
in the development of that means of harbor and river defense. 
General Rains, as will be seen hereafter, had matured his inven- 
tion of sensitive fuse-primers for sub-terra shells, and proposed 
their use for floating torpedoes. Subsequently he did much 
to advance knowledge in regard to making torpedoes efficient 
against the enemy’s vessels. 

Such was the condition of the Virginia Peninsula between 
the York and James Rivers when General McClellan embarked 
the mass of the army he commanded in northern Virginia and 
proceeded to Fortress Monroe; and when the greater part of 
our army, under the command of General J. E. Johnston, was 
directed to move for the purpose of counteracting this new 
plan. of the enemy. 

Early in April, General McClellan had landed about’ one 
hundred thousand. men at or near Fortress Monroe.* At this 
time General Magruder occupied the lower Peninsula with his 
force of seven or eight thousand men. Marshes, creeks, and 


* See “ Report on the Conduct of the War,” p. 319. Letter of President Lin- 
coln to General McClellan, April 6, 1862. 


1862] ADVANCE UP THE PENINSULA. . 85 


dense wood gave to that position such advantage that, in his - 
report, made at a subsequent period, he expressed the belief that 
with twenty or twenty-five thousand men he could have held 
it against any supposable attack. When McClellan advanced 
with his immense army, Magruder fell back to the line of War- 
wick River, which has been imperfectly described, and there 
checked the enemy; and the vast army of invasion, repulsed in 
several assaults by the most heroic conduct of our troops, com- 
menced a siege by regular approaches. After the first advance 
of the enemy, General Magruder was reénforced by some troops 
from the south side of James River and General Wilcox’s bri- 
gade, which had been previously detached from the army under 
General Johnston. On the 9th of April General Magruder’s 
command, thus reénforced, amounted to about twelve thousand. 
On that day General Early joined with his division from the 
Army of Northern Virginia. It had gone by rail to Richmond 
and thence down the York and James Rivers in vessels towed 
by tugs—except the trains and artillery, which moved by land. 
This division had about eight thousand officers and men for 
duty. General Magruder’s force was thus increased to about 
twenty thousand. This was the first detachment from the Army 
of Northern Virginia which arrived on the Peninsula. 

‘ General McClellan, in a cipher dispatch of the 7th of April, 
two days previous, informed Secretary Stanton that prisoners 
stated that General J. E. Wharton (no doubt, Johnston) had the 
day before arrived in Yorktown with strong reénforcements, 
and adds: “It seems clear that I shall have the whole force 
of the enemy on my hands, probably not less than one hun- 
dred thousand men, and possibly more. . . . When my pres- 
ent command all joins, I shall have about eighty-five thousand 
men for duty, from which a large force must be taken for 
guards, escort, etc.” After some remarks about the strength 
of our intrenchments, and his conviction that the great battle 
which would decide the existing contest would be fought there, 
he urges as necessary for his success that there should be an 
attack on the rear of Gloucester Point, and adds: “My pres- 
ent strength will not admit of a detachment for this purpose 
without materially impairing the efficiency of this column. 


86 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Commodore Goldsborough thinks the work too strong for his 
available vessels, unless I can turn Gloucester.” * 

In the cipher dispatch of the 7th of April to President Lin- 
coln, General McClellan acknowledges a telegram of the pre- 
vious day, and adds, “In reply, I have the honor to state that 
my entire force for duty only amounts to about eighty-five 
thousand men.” + He then mentions the fact that General 
Wool’s command is not under his orders, etc. 

Subsequent correspondence clearly shows that General Me- 
Clellan would not risk making a detachment from his army to 
turn the position at Gloucester Point, and that the navy would 
not attempt to operate against the battery at that place. He 
therefore urgently pressed for reénforcements to act on the 
north side of York River. 

General Magruder had, up to and after the time of receiving 
the reénforcements before mentioned, worked day and night in 
constructing and strengthening his defenses. His small force 
had been assisted in this-work by a considerable body of negro 
laborers, and an active participant and competent judge, General 
Early, thus wrote of his conduct : 


“The assuming and maintaining this line by Magruder, with 
his small force, in the face of such overwhelming odds, was one 
of the boldest exploits ever performed by a military commander ; 
and he had so maneuvred his troops, by displaying them rapidly 
at different points, as to produce the impression on his opponent 
that he had a large army.” 


As soon as it was definitely ascertained that’ General McClel- 
lan, with his main army, was on the Peninsula, General J. E. 
Johnston was assigned to the command of the Department of 
the Peninsula and Norfolk, and directed to proceed thither 
to examine the condition of affairs there. After spending 
a day on General Magruder’s defensive line, he returned to 
Richmond, and recommended the abandonment of the Penin- 
sula, and that we should take a defensive position nearer to 
Richmond. The question was postponed, and an appointment 
made for its discussion, to which I proposed to invite the Sec- 


* “Report on the Conduct of the War,” Part I, p. 320. + Ibid., p, 321. 


hm 


1862] THE PLAN ANNOUNCED AND DISCUSSED. 87 


retary of War, General Randolph, and General Lee, then sta- 
tioned in Richmond, and in general charge of army operations. 
General Johnston asked that he might invite General Long- 
street and General G. W. Smith to be present, to which I as- 
sented. 
At this meeting, General Johnston announced his plan to 
be, the withdrawal of General Magruder’s troops from the Pen- 
insula, and of General Huger’s from Norfolk, to be united with 
the main body of the Army of Northern Virginia, and the 
withdrawal of the troops from South Carolina and Georgia, his 
belief being that General Magruder’s line was indefensible with 
the forces we could concentrate there; that the batteries at 
Gloucester Point could not be maintained; that the enemy 
would turn the position at Yorktown by ascending the York 
River, if the defensive line there should possibly be main- 
tained. To this plan the Secretary of War objected, because 
the navy-yard at Norfolk offered our best if not our only op- 
portunity to construct in any short time gunboats for coastwise 
and harbor defense. General Lee, always bold in his views 
and unusually sagacious in penetrating the designs of the ene- 
my, insisted that the Peninsula offered great advantages to a 
smaller force in resisting a numerically superior assailant, and, 
in the comprehensive view which he usually took of the ne- 
cessities of other places thau the one where he chanced to be, 
objected to withdrawing the troops from South Carolina and 
Georgia, as involving the probable capture of Charleston and 
Savannah. By recent service in that section he was well in- 
formed as to the condition of those important ports. General 
G. W. Smith, as well as I remember, was in full accord with 
General Johnston, and General Longstreet partially so. 

After hearing fully the views of the several officers named, 
I decided to resist the enemy on the Peninsula, and, with the 
aid of the navy, to hold Norfolk and keep the command of the 
James River as long as possible. Arrangements were made, 
with such force as our means permitted, to occupy the country 
north of Richmond, and the Shenandoah Valley, and, with the 
rest of General Johnston’s command, to make a junction with 
General Magruder to resist the enemy’s forces on the Penin- 


88 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


sula. Though General J. E. Johnston did not agree with this 
decision, he did not ask to be relieved, and I had no wish to 
separate him from the troops with whom he was so intimately 
acquainted, and whose confidence I believed he deservedly pos- 
sessed. 

To recur to General Magruder: soon after the landing of the 
enemy, skirmishes commenced with our forces, and the first vig- 
orous attempt was made to break the line at Lee’s Mills, where 
there were some newly constructed defenses. The enemy was so 
signally repulsed that he described them as very strong works, 
and thereafter commenced the construction of parallels and regu- 
lar approaches, having an exaggerated idea as well of the number 
’ of our troops as of the strength of our works at that time. Gen- 
eral Magruder, in his report, notices a serious attempt to break 
his line of the Warwick at Dam No. 1, about the center of the 
line, and its weakest point. Opening with a heavy bombard- 
ment at nine in the morning, which continued until three Pp. ., 
heavy masses of infantry then commenced to deploy, and, with 
musketry-fire, were thrown forward to storm our six-pounder 
battery, which had been effectively used, and was the only artil- 
lery we had there in position. A portion of the column charged 
across the dam, but Brigadier-General Howell Cobb met the 
attack with great firmness, the enemy was driven with the 
bayonet from some of our rifle-pits of which he had gained 
possession, and the assaulting column recoiled with loss from 
the steady fire of our troops. 

The enemy’s skirmishers pressed closely in front of the re- 
doubts on the left of our line, and with their long-range rifles 
had a decided advantage over our men, armed with smooth-bore 
muskets. In addition to the rifle-pits they dug, they were cov- 
ered by a dwelling-house and a large peach-orchard which ex- 
tended to within a few hundred yards of our works. On the 
1ith of April General Magruder ordered sorties to be made 
from all the main points of his line. General Wilcox sent out 
a detachment from Wynne’s Mill which encountered the ad- 
vance of the enemy in his front and drove it back to the main 
line. Later in the day General Early sent out from Redoubt 
No. 5 Colonel Ward’s Florida regiment and the Second Mis- 


1862] THE ASSAULT ON YORKTOWN. 89 


sissippi Battalion, under Colonel Taylor. They drove the 
sharpshooters from their rifle-pits and pursued them to the 
main road from Warwick Court-House, encountered a battery 
posted at an earthwork, and compelled it precipitately to re- 
tire. On the approach of a large force of the enemy’s infantry, 
Colonel Ward returned to our works, after having set fire to 
the dwelling-house above mentioned. These affairs developed 
the fact that the enemy was in strong force, both in front of 
Wynne’s Mill and Redoubts Nos. 4 and 5. On the next night 
General Early sent out Colonel Terry’s Virginia regiment to 
eut down the peach-orchard and burn the rest of the houses 
which had afforded shelter to the assailants ; and on the succeed- 
ing night Colonel McRae, with his North Carolina regiment, 
went further to the front and felled the cedars along the main 
road which partially hid the enemy’s movements, and subse- 
quently our men were not annoyed by the sharpshooters. About 
the middle of April a further reénforcement of two divisions 
from the Army of Northern Virginia was added to our forces 
on the Peninsula, which amounted, when General Johnston as- 
sumed command, to something over fifty thousand. 

The work of strengthening the defenses was still continued. 
On the 16th of April an assault was made on our line, to the 
right of Yorktown, which was repulsed with heavy loss to the 
enemy, and such serious discomfiture that henceforward his 
plan seemed to be to rely upon bombardment, for which numer- 
ous batteries were prepared. 

The views of the enemy, as revealed by the testimony before 
the Committee on the Conduct of the War, were that he could 
gain possession of Gloucester Point only by reénforcements oper- 
ating on the north side of York River, or by the previous reduc- 
tion of Yorktown. In addition to the answer given by General 
McClellan, I quote from the testimony of General Keyes. He 
said, “The possession of Gloucester Point by the enemy re- 
tarded the taking of Yorktown, and it also enabled the enemy 
to close the river at that point,” and added, “Gloucester must 
have fallen upon our getting possession of Yorktown, and the 
York River would then have been open.” * 

* “Report on the Conduct of the War,” Part I, pp. 601, 602. 


90 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


With the knowledge possessed by us, General McClellan 
certainly might have sent a detachment from his army which, 
after crossing the York River, could have turned the position 
at Gloucester Point and have overcome our small garrison at 
that place ; but this is but one of the frequent examples of war 
in which the immunity of one army is derived from the mis- 
takes of the other. 

An opinion has existed among some of our best-informed 
officers that Franklin’s division was kept on transports for the 
purpose of landing on the north side of York River to capture 
our battery at Gloucester Point, and thus open the way to turn 
our position by ascending the York River. Upon the authority 
of Swinton, the fairest and most careful of the Northern writ- 
ers on the war, it appears that Franklin’s division had disem- 
barked before the evacuation of Yorktown; and, upon the 
authority of the Prince de Joinville, serving on the staff of 
General McClellan, it appears that his commanding general was 
not willing to intrust that service to a single division, and plain- 
tively describes the effect produced by the refusal of President 
Lincoln to send McDowell’s corps to reénforce McClellan. He © 
writes thus : 


“The news was received by the Federal army with dissatisfac- 
tion, although the majority could not then foresee the deplorable 
consequences of an act performed, it must be supposed, with no 
evil intention, but with inconceivable recklessness. ... It was 
the mainspring removed from a great work already begun. It 
deranged everything. Among the divisions of the corps of Mc- 
Dowell, there was one—that of Franklin—which was regretted 
more than all the rest. . . . He [the commander-in-chief] held it 
in great esteem, and earnestly demanded its restoration. It was 
sent back to him without any explanation, in the same manner as 
it had been withheld. This splendid division, eleven thousand 
strong, arrived, and for a moment the commander thought of in- 
trusting to it alone the storming of Gloucester, but the idea was 
abandoned.” 


On the 28th of April General J. E. Johnston wrote to Flag- 
Officer Tatnall, commanding the naval forces in the James Riv- 
er, requesting him, if practicable, to proceed with the Virginia 


1862] ANSWER TO AN UNGENEROUS COMPLAINT. O14 


to York River for the purpose of destroying the enemy’s trans- 
ports, to which Commodore Tatnall replied that it could only 
be done in daylight, when he would be exposed to the fire of 
the forts, and have to contend with the squadron of men-of-war 
stationed below them, and that, if this should be safely done, 
according to the information derived from the pilots, it would 
not be possible for the Virginia to reach the enemy’s transports 
at Poquosin, while the withdrawal of the Virginia would be to 
abandon the defense of Norfolk, and to remove the obstacles 
she opposed to “the enemy’s operations in the James River.’ * 

Meanwhile, the brilliant movements of the intrepid Jackson 
created such apprehension of an attack upon Washington City 
by the Army of the Shenandoah, that President Lincoln refused 
the repeated requests of General McClellan to send him Mc- 
Dowell’s corps to operate on the north side of the York River 
against our battery at Gloucester Point. 

On the 28th of the following June, Mr. Lincoln, noticing 
what he regarded as ungenerous complaint, wrote to General 
McClellan: “If you have had a drawn battle or a repulse, 
it is the price we pay for the enemy not being in Washington. 
We protected Washington, and the enemy concentrated on 
you.” + ; 

The month of April was cold and rainy, and our men poorly 
provided with shelter, and with only the plainest rations; yet, 
under all these discomforts, they steadily labored to perfect the 
defenses, and, when they were not on the front line, were con- 
stantly employed in making traverses and epaulments in the 
rear. Whether General McClellan, under the pressure from 
Washington, would have made an early assault, { or have ad- 
hered to the policy of regular approaches, and, relying on his 
superiority in artillery, have waited to batter our earthworks in 
breach, and whether all which had been done, or which it was 

* “Tife of Commodore Tatnall,” pp. 166, 167. 

+ “Report on the Conduct of the War,” p. 340. 

t On April 6, 1862, President Lincoln wrote to General McClellan as follows : 
“ You now have over one hundred thousand troops with you, independent of Gen- 
eral Wool’s command. I think you had better break the enemy’s line from York- 


town to Warwick River at once. They will probably use time as advantageously as 
you can.”—(“ Report on the Conduct of the War,” pp. 319, 820.) 


92 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


practicable under the circumstances to do, to strengthen the 
main line would have made it sufficiently strong to resist the 
threatened bombardment, is questionable; and how soon that 
bombardment would have commenced is now indeterminate. A 
telegram from President Lincoln to General McClellan is sug- 
gestive on this point. It reads thus: i 
“Wasnineron, May 1, 1862. 

“Your call for Parrott guns from Washington alarms me— 
chiefly because it argues indefinite procrastination. Is anything 
to be done?” * 


By the following telegram sent by me to General J. E. John- 
ston, commanding at Yorktown, the contents of that which I 
had received from him, and of which I am not now possessed, 
will be readily inferred : 

“ Ricamonp, Virainia, May 1, 1862. 
“ General J. EK. Jonnston, Yorktown, Virginia. 

“ Accepting your conclusion that you must soon retire, ar- 
rangements are commenced for the abandonment of the navy- 
yard and removal of public property both from Norfolk and Pen- 
insula. Your announcement to-day that you would withdraw 
to-morrow night takes us by surprise, and must involve enormous 
losses, including unfinished gunboats. Will the safety of your 
army allow more time? 

“ JEFFERSON Davis.” 


My next step was to request the Secretary of War, General 
Randolph, and the Secretary of the Navy, Mr. Mallory, to pro- 
ceed to Yorktown and Norfolk to see whether the evacuation 
could not be postponed, and to make all practicable arrange- 
ments to remove the machinery, material, ordnance, and sup- 
plies for future use. At the suggestion of the Secretary of War, 
T agreed that he should first go with the Secretary of the Navy 
to Norfolk and thence pass over to Yorktown. . 

On the next morning they left for Norfolk. General Ran- 
dolph, in his testimony before a joint special committee of the 
Confederate Congress, said: 


* “Report on the Conduct of the War,” p. 324. 


1862] REMOVAL OF STORES FROM NORFOLK. 93 


“A few hours after we arrived in Norfolk, an officer from 
General Johnston’s army made his appearance, with an order for 
General Huger to evacuate Norfolk immediately. . .. As that 
would have involved heavy losses in stores, munitions, and arms, 
I took the responsibility of giving General Huger a written order 
to delay the evacuation until he could remove such stores, muni- 
tions, and arms as could be carried off. . . . Mr. Mallory was with 
me and gave similar instructions to the commandant of the navy- 
yard. ... The evacuation was delayed for about a week... . 
When the council of war met [the conference with the President 
heretofore referred to], it was supposed that, if the enemy assaulted 
our army at the Warwick River line, we should defeat them ; but 
that, if instead of assaulting they made regular approaches to 
either flank of the line and took advantage of their great superior- 
ity of heavy artillery, the probability would be that one flank or 
both of the army would be uncovered, and thus the enemy, as- 
cending the York and James Rivers in transports, could turn the 
flank of the army and compel it to retreat. . . . They made 
regular approaches, mounted the largest-sized guns, such as we 
could not compete with, and made the position of Yorktown 
untenable. Nearly all of our heavy rifled guns burst during the 
siege. The remainder of the heavy guns were in the water-bat- 
teries,” etc. 


The permanent occupation of Norfolk after our army with- 
drew from the lower Peninsula and the enemy possessed it 
was so obviously impossible as not to require explanation ; 
but, while the enemy was engaged in the pursuit of our re- 
treating columns, it was deemed justifiable to delay the evac- 
uation of Norfolk for the purposes indicated in the above 
answer of the Secretary of War. The result justified the de- 
cision. 

The order for the withdrawal of the army from the line 
of the Warwick River on the night of the 2d of April was 
delayed until the next night, because, as I have been informed, 
some of the troops were not ready to move. Heavy cannonad- 
ing, both on the night of the 2d and 3d, concealed the fact of 
the purpose to withdraw, and the evacuation was made so suc- 
cessfully, as appears by the testimony before the United States 


94 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Congressional Committee on the Conduct of the War, that the 
enemy was surprised the next morning to find the lines unoc- 
cupied. 

The loss of publie property, as was anticipated, was great, 
the steamboats expected for its transportation not having ar- 
rived before the evacuation was made. From a narrative by 
General Early I make the following extract : 


“ A very valuable part of the property so lost, and which we 
stood much in need of, consisted of a very large number of picks 
and spades, many of them entirely new. All of our heavy guns, 
including some recently arrived and not mounted, together with 
a good deal of ammunition piled up on the wharf, had to be left 
behind.” 


The land transportation was quite deficient. General Ma- 
gruder’s troops had scarcely any, and others of the more recent 
organizations were in a like condition; as no supplies had been 
accumulated at Williamsburg, this want of transportation would 
necessarily involve want of rations in the event of delays on the 
retreat. 

At Williamsburg, about twelve miles from Yorktown, Gen- 
eral Magruder, as has been mentioned, had constructed a line of 
detached works. The largest of these, Fort Magruder, was con- 
structed at a point a short distance beyond where the Lee’s Mill 
and Yorktown roads united, and where the enemy in his pur- 
suit first encountered our retiring forces, and were promptly 
repulsed. General Magruder, whose arduous service and long 
exposure on the Peninsula has been noticed, was compelled by 
illness to leave his division. His absence at this moment was 
the more to be regretted, as it appears that the positions of the 
redoubts he had constructed were not all known to the: com- 
manding General, and some of them being unoccupied were 
seized by the enemy, and held subsequently to our disadvantage. 
General McClellan, in his official report from “bivouac in 
front of Williamsburg, May 5, 1862,” says, “General Hancock 
has taken two redoubts and repulsed Early’s rebel brigade by a 
real charge of the bayonet, taking one colonel and one hundred 
and fifty other prisoners,” ete. As this is selected for the bril- 


1862] A CHARGE UPON THE ENEMY. 95 


liant event in the affair before Williamsburg, I will extract 
fully from General Early’s report : 
“ Lyncupure, June 9, 1862. 

“Tn accordance with orders received the evening before, my 
brigade was in readiness to take up the line of march from its 
camp west of Williamsburg toward Richmond on the 5th of 
May. . . . I was directed by Major-General D. H. Hill not: to 
move my infantry, and in a short time I was ordered by him to 
march back, and report with my regiments to Major-General 
Longstreet at Williamsburg. . . . Between three and four o’clock, 
p. M., I was ordered by General Longstreet to move to the support 
of Brigadier-General Anderson of his division, at or near Fort 
Magruder. . . . Before my command had proceeded far toward 
its destination, I received an order from General Longstreet to 
send him two regiments. ... With the remainder of my com- 
mand, being my brigade proper, I proceeded, as near as practica- 
ble, to the position designated by General Longstreet on the left 
and rear of Fort Magruder. . . . In a short time Major-General 
Hill arrived, and, having ascertained that the enemy had a battery 
in front of us, he informed me that he wished me to attack and 
capture the battery with my brigade, but before doing so he must 
see General Longstreet on the subject. . . . General Hill being on 
the right and accompanying the brigade, I placed myself on the 
left with the Twenty-fourth Virginia Regiment for the purpose of 
directing its movements, as I was satisfied from the sound of the 
enemy’s guns that this regiment would come directly on the bat- 
tery. .. . In an open field, in view of Fort Magruder, at the end 
farthest from the fort, the enemy had taken position with a bat- 
tery of six pieces . . . supported by a brigade of infantry under 
the command of Brigadier-General Hancock. In this field were 
‘ two or three redoubts, previously built by our troops, of one, at 
least, of which the enemy had possession, his artillery being posted 
in front of it, near some farmhouses, and supported by a body of 
infantry, the balance of the infantry being in the redoubt, and in 
the edge of the woods close by. The Twenty-fourth Virginia Regi- 
ment, as I had anticipated, came directly upon the battery... . 
This regiment, without pausing or wavering, charged upon the 
enemy under a heavy fire, and drove back his guns and the infan- 
try supporting them to the cover of the redoubt. ...I sent 
orders to the other regiments to advance ; these orders were an- 


96 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ticipated by Colonel McRae of the Fifth North Carolina Regiment, 
who was on the extreme right of my brigade, and marched down 
to the support of the Twenty-fourth, traversing the whole front 
that should have been occupied by the other two regiments.” 


General Early, having received a severe wound, soon after 
the Twenty-fourth Virginia Regiment charged the battery, was 
compelled by exhaustion from loss of blood and intense pain to 
leave the field just as the Fifth North Carolina Regiment, led 
by its gallant colonel, charged on the enemy’s artillery and 
infantry. Of that charge General Early writes : 


“This North Carolina Regiment, in conjunction with the 
Twenty-fourth Virginia Regiment, made an attack upon the vastly 
superior forces of the enemy, which for its gallantry is unsur- 
passed in the annals of warfare: their conduct was such as to 
elicit from the enemy himself the highest praise.” 


This refers to the chivalric remark made by General Han- 
cock to Dr. Cullen, left in charge of our wounded, viz., “The 
Fifth North Carolina and Twenty-fourth Virginia deserve to 
have the word immortal inscribed on their banners.” Colonel 
McRae, who succeeded to the command after General Early 
retired, states in his report that he sent to General Hill for re- 
enforcements in order to advance, and in reply received an order 
to retire: that his men were holding the enemy to his shelter 
in such way that they were not at all suffering, but, when he 
commenced retiring, the enemy rose and fired upon his men, 
doing the greatest damage that was done. Some of them ob- 
liqued too far to the right in going back, and met a regiment of © 
the enemy concealed in the woods, and were thus captured. 
General Early writes: “The two regiments that united in the 
assault were not repulsed at all. They drove the enemy to the 
cover of the redoubt and the shelter of the woods near it, where 
he was held at bay by my two regiments, which had suffered 
comparatively little at that time.” He confidently expresses the 
opinion that, had his attack been supported promptly and vigor- 
ously, the enemy’s force there engaged must have been captured, 
as it had crossed over to that point on a narrow mill-dam, and 
had only that way to escape. 


1862] OUR FORCE AT WILLIAMSBURG. 97 


The claim of the enemy to have achieved a victory at Wil- 
liamsburg is refuted by the fact that our troops remained in 
possession of the field during the night, and retired the next 
morning to follow up the retreat, which was only interrupted 
by the necessity of checking the enemy until our trains could 
proceed far enough to be out of danger. The fact of our 
wounded being left at Williamsburg was only due to our want 
of ambulances in which to remove them. 

Though General McClellan at this time estimated our force 
as “probably greater a good deal” than his own, the fact is, it 
was numerically less than half the number he had for duty. 
Severe exposure and fatigue must, by sickness, have diminished 
our force more than it was increased by absentees returning to 
duty after the middle of April, so that at the end of the month 
the number was probably less than fifty thousand present for 
duty. General McClellan’s report on the 30th of April, 1862, © 
as shown by the certified statement, gives the aggregate present 
for duty at one hundred and twelve thousand three hundred 
and ninety-two.* 

When the Confederates evacuated Yorktown, General Frank- 
lin’s division had just been disembarked from the transports. 
It was reémbarked, and started on the morning of the 6th up 
the York River.t 

After the battle of Williamsburg our army continued its 
retreat up the Peninsula. Here, for the first time, sub-terra 
shells were employed to check a marching column. The event 
is thus described by General Rains, the inventor: 


“On the day we left Williamsburg, after the battle, we worked 
hard to get our artillery and some we had captured over the 
sloughs about four miles distant. On account of the tortuous 
course of the road, we could not bring asingle gun to bear upon 
the enemy who were pursuing us, and shelling the road as they 
advanced. Fortunately, we found in a mud-hole a broken-down 
ammunition-wagon containing five loaded shells. Four of these, 
armed with a sensitive fuse-primer, were planted in our rear, near 
some trees cut down as obstructions to the road. <A body of the 

* “ Report on the Conduct of the War,” pp. 323, 324. 
+ “ Army of the Potomac,” Swinton, p. 117. 
54 


98 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


enemy’s cavalry came upon these sub-terra shells, and they ex- 
ploded with terrific effect. 

“ The force behind halted for three days, and finally turned off 
from the road, doubtless under the apprehension that it was mined 
throughout.. Thus our rear was relieved of the enemy. No sol- 
dier will march over mined land, and a corps of sappers, each man 
having two ten-inch shells, two primers, and a mule to carry them, 
could stop any army.” ; 


Accounts, contemporaneously published at the North, repre- 
sent the terror inspired by these shells, extravagantly describe 
the number of them, and speak of the necessity of leaving the 
road to avoid them. 

The next morning after the battle of the 5th, at Williams- 
burg, Longstreet’s and D. H. Hill’s divisions, being those there 
engaged, followed in the line of retreat, Stuart’s cavalry moy- 
ing after them—they marched that day about twelve miles. In 
the mean time Franklin’s division had gone up the York River, 
and landed a short distance below West Point, on the south 
side of York River, and moved into a thick wood in the diree- 
tion of the New Kent road, thus threatening the flank of our 
line of march. Two brigades of General G. W. Smith’s divis- 
ion, Hampton’s and Hood’s, were detached under the command 
of General Whiting to dislodge the enemy, which they did 
after a short conflict, driving him through the wood to the 
protection of his gunboats in York River. 

On the next morning the rear divisions joined those in ad- 
vance at Barhamsville, and the retreat of the whole army was 
resumed —Smith’s and Magruder’s divisions moving by the 
New Kent Court-House to the Baltimore Cross Roads, and 
Longstreet’s and Hill’s to the Long Bridge, where the whole 
army remained in line facing to the east for five days. 

The retreat had been successfully conducted. In the prin- 
cipal action, that at Williamsburg, our forces, after General 
Hill’s division had been brought back to the support of Gen- 
eral Longstreet, did not exceed, probably was not equal to, one 
half that of the enemy. Yet, as has been seen, the position 
was held as long as was necessary for the removal of our trains, 
and our troops slept upon the field of battle. The loss of 


1862] GALLANT OFFICERS LOST BY US. 99 


the enemy greatly exceeded our own, which was about twelve 
hundred ; while General Hooker, commanding one division of 
the Federal army, in his testimony stated the loss in his division 
to have been seventeen hundred.* 

Among the gallant and much regretted of those lost by us, 
was Colonel Ward, of Florida, whose conduct at Yorktown 
has been previously noticed, and of whom General Early, in his 
report of the battle of Williamsburg, says : 


“On the list of the killed in the Second Florida Regiment is 
found the name of its colonel, George T. Ward, as true a gentle- 
man and as gallant a soldier as has drawn a sword in this war, and 
whose conduct under fire it was my fortune to witness on another 
occasion. His loss to his regiment, to his State, and to the Con- 
federacy can not be easily compensated.” 


Colonel Ward, with his regiment, had been detached from 
General Early’s command in the early part of the action. I 
regret that I have not access to the report of General Long- 
street, where, no doubt, may also be found due notice of Colo- 
nel Christopher Mott, whom I knew personally. In his youth 
he served in the regiment commanded by me during the war 
with Mexico. He was brave, cheerful, prompt, and equal to 
every trial to which he was subjected, giving early promise of 
high soldierly capacity. He afterward held various places of 
honor and trust in civil life, and there were many in Mississippi 
who, like myself, deeply lamented his death in the height of 
his usefulness. 

General Huger, commanding at Norfolk, and Captain Lee, 
commanding the navy-yard, by the authority of the Secretaries 
of War and Navy, delayed the evacuation of both, as stated 
by General Randolph, Secretary of War, for about a week after 
General Johnston sent orders to General Huger to leave imme- 
diately. While he was employed in removing the valuable 
stores and machinery, as we learn from the work of the Comte 
de Paris, President Lincoln and his Secretary of War arrived 
at Fortress Monroe, and on the 8th of May an expedition 


* “ Report on the Conduct of the War,” p. 579. 


100 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


against Norfolk by the troops under General, Wool was con- 
templated. He writes : 


“Being apprised by the columns of smoke which rose on the 
horizon that the propitious moment had arrived, Wool proposed | 
to the President to undertake an expedition against Norfolk. Max 
Weber’s brigade was speedily embarked, and, to protect his de- - 
scent, Commodore Goldsborough’s fleet was ordered to escort it. 
But the Confederate batteries, not yet having been abandoned, 
fired a few shots in reply, while the Virginia, which, since the 
wounding of the brave Buchanan, had been commanded by Com- 
modore Tatnall, showed her formidable shell, and the expedition 
was countermanded. Two more days were consumed in waiting. 
Finally, on the morning of the 10th, Weber disembarked east of 
Sewell’s Point. This time the enemy’s artillery was silent. There 
was found an intrenched camp mounting afew guns, but abso- 
lutely deserted. General Wool reached the city of Norfolk, 
which had been given up to its peaceful inhabitants the day pre- 
vious, and hastened to place a military governor there.” * 


Reposing on these cheaply won laurels, the expedition re- 
turned to Fortress. Monroe, leaving Brigadier-General Viele, 
with some troops brought from the north side of the river, to 
hold the place. The navy-yard and workshops had been set on 
fire before our troops withdrew, so as to leave little to the 
enemy save the glory of capturing an undefended town. The 
troops at Fortress Monroe were numerically superior to the 
command of General Huger, and could have been readily com- 
bined, with the forces at and about Roanoke Island, for a forward 
movement on the south side of the James River. In view of 
this probability, General Huger, with the main part of his 
force, was halted for a time at Petersburg, but, as soon as it was 
ascertained that no preparations were being made by the enemy 
for that campaign, so palpably advantageous to him, General 
Huger’s troops were moved to the north side of the James 
River to make a junction with the army of General Johnston. 

Previously, detachments had been sent from the force. with- 
drawn from Norfolk to strengthen the command of Brigadier- 


* “History of the Civil War in America,” Comte de Paris, vol. ii, p. 30. 


1862] . HIS PLANS AND EXPECTATIONS. 101 


General J. R. Anderson, who was placed in observation before 
General McDowell, then at Fredericksburg, threatening to ad- 
vance with a force four or five times as great as that under 
General Anderson, and another detachment had. been sent to 
the aid of Brigadier-General Branch, who, with his brigade, 
had recently been brought up from North Carolina and sent 
’ forward to Gordonsville, for the like purpose as that for which 
General Anderson was placed near Fredericksburg. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


A New Phase to our Military Problem.—General Johnston’s Position.—Defenses of 
James River.—Attack on Fort Drury.—Johnston crosses the Chickahominy.— 
Position of McClellan.—Position of McDowell.—Strength of Opposing Forces. 
—Jackson’s Expedition down the Shenandoah Valley.—Panic at Washington 
and the North.—Movements to intercept Jackson.—His Rapid Movements.—Re- 
pulses Fremont.—Advance of Shields.—Fall of Ashby.—Port Republic, Battle 
of.—Results of this Campaign. 


Tse withdrawal of our army to the Chickahominy, the 
abandonment of Norfolk, the destruction of the Virginia, and 
opening of the lower James River, together with the fact that 
McClellan’s army, by changing his base to the head of York 
River, was in a position to cover the approach to Washington, 
and thus to remove the objections which had been made to send- 
ing the large force, retained for the defense of that city, to 
make a junction with McClellan, all combined to give a new 
phase to our military problem. 

Soon after, General Johnston took position on the north side 
of the Chickahominy ; accompanied by General Lee, I rode out 
to his headquarters in the field, in order that by conversation 
with him we might better understand his plans and expecta- 
tions. He came in after we arrived, saying that he had been 
riding around his lines to see how his position could be im- 
proved. A long conversation followed, which was so incon- 
elusive that it lasted until late in the night, so late that we re- 
mained until the next morning. As we rode back to Richmond, 


102 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


. 


reference was hattrally. made to the conversation of the previous 
evening and night, when General Lee confessed himself, as I 
was, unable to draw from it any more definite purpose than that 
the policy was to improve his position as far as practicable, and 
wait for the enemy to leave his gunboats, so that an opportunity 
might be offered to meet him on the land. 
oie bl yea of the opening of the James River to the 
enemy’s fleet, the attempts to utilizeethis channel for transpor- 
tation, so as to approach. directly to Richmond, soon followed. 
We had then no defenses on the James River below Drury’s 
Bluff, about seven miles distant from Richmond. There an 
- earthwork had been constructed and provided with an armament 
of four guns. Rifle-pits had been made in front of the fort, 
and obstructions had been placed in the river by driving piles, 
and sinking some vessels. The crew of the Virginia, after her 
destruction, had been sent to this fort, which was then in charge 
of Commander Farrand, Confederate States Navy. 

On the 15th of April the enemy’s fleet of five ships of war, 
among the number, their much-vaunted Monitor, took position 
and opened fire upon the fort between seven and eight o’clock. 
Our small vessel, the Patrick Henry, was lying above the ob- 
struction, and codperated with the fort in its defense—the 
Monitor and ironclad Galena steamed up to about six hundred 
yards’ distance; the others, wooden vessels, were kept at long 
range. 

The armor of the flag-ship Galena was badly injured, and 
many of the crew killed or wounded. The Monitor was struck 
repeatedly, but the shot only bent her plates. At about eleven 
o'clock the fleet abandoned the attack, returning discomfited 
whence they came. The commander of the Monitor, Lieuten- 
ant Jeffers, in his report, says that “the action was most gal- 
lantly fought against great odds, and with the usual effect against 
earthworks.” . . . He adds, “It was impossible to reduce such 
works, except with the aid of a land force”’ The enemy in 
their reports recognized the efficiency of our fire by both artil- 
lery and ridemanyi the sincerity of which was made manifest in 
the failure to renew the attempt. 

The small garrison at Fort Drury, only adequate to the ser- 


iT 
HV hs 
Beal 


a7) 


fn 


Davis House, at Richmond. 


% 


7a 
es SS 


am) 


oe 
1862} AN UNEXPECTED MOVEMENT. 103 


vice it had performed, that of repelling an attempt by the 
fleet to pass up James River, was quite insufficient to prevent 
the enemy from landing below the fort, or to resist an attack by 
infantry. To guard against its sudden capture by such means, 
the garrison was increased by the addition of Bryan’s regiment 
of Georgia Rifles. 


After the repulse of the enemy’s gunboats at Drury’s Bluff, 


I wrote to General Johnston a letter to be handed to him by my 
aide, Colonel G. W. C. Lee, an officer of the highest intelligence 
and reputation—referring to him for full information in regard 
to the affair at Drury’s Bluff, as well as to the positions and 
strength of our forces on the south side of the James River. 
After some speculations on the probable course of the enemy, 
and expressions of confidence, I informed the General that my 
aide would communicate freely to him and bring back to me 
any information with which he might be intrusted. Not receiv- 
ing any definite reply, I soon thereafter rode out to visit Gen- 
eral Johnston at his headquarters, and was surprised in the sub- 
urbs of Richmond, viz., on the other side of Gillis’s Creek, to 
meet a portion of the light artillery, and to learn that the whole 
army had crossed the Chickahominy. 

General Johnston’s explanation of this (to me) unexpected 
movement was, that he thought the water of the Chickahominy 
unhealthy, and had directed the troops to cross and halt at the 
first good water on the southern side, which he supposed would 
be found near to the river. He also adverted to the advantage 
of having the river in front rather than in the rear of him—an 
advantage certainly obvious enough, if the line was to be near 
to it on either of its banks. 

The considerations which induced General McClellan to 
make his base on the York River had at least partly ceased to ex- 
ist. From the corps for which he had so persistently applied, he 
had received the division which he most valued, and the destruc- 
tion of the Virginia had left the James River open to his fleet 
and transports as far up as Drury’s Bluff, and the withdrawal of 
General Johnston across the Chickahominy made it quite prac- 
ticable for him to transfer his army to the James River, the 
south side of which had then but weak defenses, and thus by a 


tee 


104 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


short march to gain more than all the advantages which, at a 
later period of the war, General Grant obtained at the sacrifice 
of a hecatomb of soldiers. 

Referring, again, to the work of the Comte de Paris, who 
may be better authority in regard to what occurred in the army 
of the enemy than when he writes about Confederate affairs, it 
appears that this change of base was considered and not adopted 
because of General McClellan’s continued desire to have Me- 
Dowell’s corps with him. The Count states: 


“The James River, which had been closed until then by the 
presence of the Virginia, as York River had been by the cannon 
of Yorktown, was opened by the destruction of that ship, just as 
York River had been by the evacuation of the Confederate for- 
tress. But it was only open as far as Drury’s Bluff ; in order to 
overcome this last obstacle interposed between Richmond and the 
Federal gunboats, the support of the land forces was necessary. 
On the 19th of May Commodore Goldsborough had a conference 
with General McClellan regarding the means to be employed for 
removing that obstacle. . . . General McClellan, as we have stated 
above, might have continued to follow the railway line, and pre- 
served his depots at Whitehouse, on the Pamunkey, . . . but he 
could also now go to reéstablish his base of operations on James 
River, which the Virginia had hitherto prevented him from doing. 
By crossing the Chickahominy at Bottom’s Bridge, and some other 
fords situated lower down, . . . could have reached the borders of 
the James in two or three days. . . . This flank march effected 
at a sufficient distance from the enemy, and covered by a few dem- 
onstrations along the upper Chickahominy, offered him great ad- 
vantages without involving any risk. ... If McClellan could 
have foreseen how deceptive were the promises of reénforcement 
made to him at the time, he would undoubtedly have declined the 
uncertain support of McDowell, to carry out the plan of campaign 
which offered the best chances of success with the troops which 
were absolutely at his disposal.” * 


Without feeling under any obligations for kind intentions 
on the part of the Government of the North, it was fortunate 
for us that it did, as its friend the Comte de Paris represents, 


* “ History of the Civil War in America,” Comte de Paris, vol. ii, pp. 32-34. 


1862] GREAT ALARM IN WASHINGTON. oe LOR 


deceive General McClellan, and prevent him from moving to 
the south side of James River, so as not only to secure the co- 
operation of his gunboats in an attack upon Richmond, but to 
make his assault on the side least prepared for resistance, and 
where it would have been quite possible to ent our line of com- 
munication with the more Southern States on which we chiefly 
depended for supplies and for reénforcements. 

It is hardly just to treat the failure to fulfill the assurance 
given by President Lincoln about reénforcements as “ decep- 
tive promises,” for, as will be seen, the operations in the Valley 
by General Jackson, who there exhibited a rapidity of move- 
ment equal to the unyielding tenacity which had in the first 
great battle won for him the familiar name “ Stonewall,” had 
created such an alarm in Washington, as, if it had been better 
founded, would have justified the refusal to diminish the force 
held for the protection of their capital. Indeed, our cavalry, in 
observation near Fredericksburg, reported that on the 24th 
McDowell’s troops started southward, but General Stuart found 
that night that they were returning. This indicated that the 
anticipated junction was not to be made, and of this the Prince 
' de Joinville writes: 


“Tt needed only an effort of the will: the two armies were 
united, and the possession of Richmond certain! Alas ! this effort 
was not made. I can not recall those fatal moments without a 
real sinking of the heart.” * 


General McClellan, in his testimony December 10, 1862, 
before the court-martial in the case of General McDowell, 
said : 

“T have no doubt, for it has ever been my opinion, that the 
Army of the Potomac would have taken Richmond had not the 
corps of General McDowell been separated from it. It is also my 
opinion that, had the command of General McDowell joined the 
Army of the Potomac in the month of May, by the way of Hano- 
ver Court-House, from Fredericksburg, we would have had Rich- 
mond within a week after the junction.” t 


* “Campaign on the Peninsula,” Prince de Joinville, 1862. 
+ Court-martial of General McDowell, Washington, December 10, 1862. 


106 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Let us first inquire what was the size of this army so crippled 
for want of reénforcement, and then what the strength of that 
to which it was opposed. On the 30th of April, 1862, the 
official report of McClellan’s army gives the aggregate present 
for duty as 112,392; * that of the 20th of June—omitting the 
army corps of General Dix, then, as previously, stationed at 
Fortress Monroe, and including General McCall’s division, 
which had recently joined, the strength of which was reported 
to be 9,514—gives the aggregate present for duty as 105,825, 
and the total, present and absent, as 156,838.+ 

Two statements of the strength of our army under General 
J. E. Johnston during the month of May—in which General 
McClellan testified that he was greatly in need of McDowell’s 
corps—give the following results: First, the official return, 21st 
May, 1862, total effective of all arms, 53,688; subsequently, 
five brigades were added, and the effective strength of the army 
under General Johnston on May 31, 1862, was 62,696. ¢ 

I now proceed to inquire what caused the panic at Wash- 

ington. 
On May 23d, General Jackson, with whose force that of 
General Ewell had united, moved with such rapidity as to sur- 
prise the enemy, and Ewell, who was in advance, captured most 
of the troops at Front Royal, and pressed directly on to Win- 
chester, while Jackson, turning across to the road from Stras- 
burg, struck the main column of the enemy in flank and drove 
it routed back to Strasburg. The pursuit was continued to 
Winchester, and the enemy, under their commander-in-chief, 
General Banks, fled across the Potomac into Maryland. Two 
thousand prisoners were taken in the pursuit. General Banks 
in his report says, “There never were more grateful hearts in 
the same number of men, than when, at mid-day on the 26th, 
we stood on the opposite shore.” 

When the news of the attack on Front Royal, on May 23d, 
reached General Geary, charged with the protection of the 
Manassas Gap Railroad, he immediately moved to Manassas 
Junction. At the same time, his troops, hearing the most ex- 


* “ Report on the Conduct of the War,” Part I, p. 322. + Ibid., p. 887. 
} “Four Years with General Lee,” by Walter H. Taylor, p. 50. 


Ty Yon b rong 


Fram a Photograph taker yiat before 


death. 


New York, D. Appleton & Go. 


1862] THE CALLS FOR MORE TROOPS. 107 


--travagant stories, burned their tents and destroyed a quantity of 
arms. General Duryea, at Catlett’s Station, becoming alarmed 
on hearing of the withdrawal of Geary, took his three New 
York regiments, leaving a Pennsylvania one behind, hast- 
ened back to Centreville, and telegraphed to Washington for 
aid. He left behind a large quantity of army stores. The 
alarm spread to Washington, and the Secretary of War, Stan- 
ton, issued a call to the Governors of the “loyal” States for 
militia to defend that city. _ 

The following is the dispatch sent to the Governor of Mas- 
sachusetts : pee 

: : “Wasnineron, Sunday, May 25, 1862. 
“ To the Governor of Massachusetts. - 

“Intelligence from various quarters leaves no doubt that the 
enemy in great force are marching on Washington. You will 
please organize and forward immediately all the militia and vol- 
unteer force in your State. 

“Epwin M. Sranron, Secretary of War.” 


This alarm at Washington, and the call for more troops for 
its defense, produced a most indescribable panic in the cities of 
the Northern States on Sunday the 25th, and two or three days 
afterward. The Governor of New York on Sunday night tele- 
graphed to Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, and other cities, as fol- 
lows: 


“Orders from Washington render it necessary to send to that 
city all the available militia force. What can you do? 
“HK. D. Morean.” 


~ Governor Curtin, of Pennsylvania, issued the following 
order : 


“(GenzRaL Orper, No. 23.) 
“ HeADQUARTERS OF PENNSYLVANIA MiLir1a, 


“ Harrispure, May 26, 1862. 

“ On pressing requisition of the President of the United States 
in the present emergency, it is ordered that the several major-gen- 
erals, brigadier-generals, and colonels of regiments throughout the 
Commonwealth muster without delay all military organizations 


o 


108 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


within their respective divisions or under their control, together 
with all persons willing to join their commands; and proceed 
forthwith to the city of Washington, or such other points as may 
be designated by future orders. By order: 
“A, G. Curtin, 
“ Governor and Commander-in-Chief.” 


The Governor of Massachusetts issued the following proc- 
lamation : 


“ Men of Massachusetts / 

“The wily and barbarous horde of traitors to the people, to 
the Government, to our country, and to liberty, menace again the 
national capital. They have attacked and routed Major-General 
Banks, are advancing on Harper’s Ferry, and are marching on 
Washington. The President calls on Massachusetts to rise once 
more for its rescue and defense. 

“The whole active militia will be summoned by a general or- 
der, issued from the office of the adjutant-general, to report on 
Boston Common to-morrow. They will march to relieve and 
avenge their brethren and friends, and to oppose, with fierce zeal 
and courageous patriotism, the progress of the foe. May God 
encourage their hearts and strengthen their arms, and may he 
inspire the Government and all the people ! 

“ Given at headquarters, Boston, eleven o’clock, this (Sunday) 
evening, May 25, 1862. Joun A, ANDREW.” 


The Governor of Ohio issued the following proclamation : 


: “ CotumBus, Onto, May 26, 1862. 
“ To the gallant men of Ohio. 


“T have the astounding intelligence that the seat of our be- 
loved Government is threatened with invasion, and am called upon 
by the Secretary of War for troops to repel and overwhelm the 
ruthless invaders. Rally, then, men of Ohio, and respond to this 
call, as becomes those who appreciate our glorious Government ! 
. . « The number wanted from each county has been indicated by 
special dispatches to the several military committees. 

“Davin Top, Governor.” 


At the same time the Secretary of War at Washington 
caused the following order to be issued : 


1862] THE PANIC IN THE NORTHERN STATES. 109 


“Wasuineton, Sunday, May 25, 1862. 

“ Ordered: By virtue of the authority vested by an act of 
Congress, the President takes military possession of all the rail- 
roads in the United States from and after this date, and directs 
that the respective railroad companies, their officers and servants, 
shall hold themselves in readiness for the transportation of troops 
and munitions of war, as may be ordered by the military authori- 
ties, to the exclusion of all other business. 

“ By order of the Secretary of War: 

“M. C. Metas, 


“ Quartermaster- General.” 


At the first moment of the alarm, the President of the 
United States issued the following order: 


“Wasuinaton, May 24, 1862. 
‘Major-General McDowE Lt. 

“General Fremont has been ordered by telegraph to move to 
Franklin and Harrisonburg to relieve General Banks and capture or 
destroy Jackson’s and Ewell’s forces. You are instructed, laying 
aside for the present the movement on Richmond, to put twenty 
thousand men in motion at once for the Shenandoah, moving on 
the line or in advance of the line of the Manassas Gap Railroad. 
Your object will be to capture the forces of Jackson and Ewell, 
either in codperation with General Fremont, or, in case want of 
supplies or transportation has interfered with his movement, it is 
believed that the force which you move will be sufficient to ac- 
complish the object alone. The information thus far received 
here makes it probable that, if the enemy operates actively against 
General Banks, you will not be able to count upon much assist- 
ance from him, but may have even to release him. Reports re- 
ceived this morning are that Banks is fighting with Ewell, eight 


miles from Harper’s Ferry. #. 
“ ApRAHAM LINCOLN.” 


When the panic thus indicated in the headquarters of the 
enemy had disseminated itself through the military and social 
ramifications of Northern society, the excitement was tumultu- 
ous. Meanwhile, General Jackson, little conceiving the alarm 
his movements had caused in the departments at Washington 


110 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and in the offices of the Governors of States, in addition to the 
diversion of McDowell from codperation in the attack upon 
Richmond, after driving the enemy out of Winchester, pressed 
eagerly on, not pausing to accept the congratulations of the 
overjoyed people at the sight of their own friends again among 
them, for he learned that the enemy had garrisons at Charles- 
town and Harper’s Ferry, and he was resolved they should 
not rest on Virginia soil. General Winder’s brigade in the 
advance found the enemy drawn up in line of battle at Charles- 
town. Without waiting for reénforcements, he engaged them, 
and after a short conflict drove them in disorder toward the 
Potomac. The main column then moved on near to Harper’s 
Ferry, where General Jackson received information that Fre- 
mont was moving from the west, and the whole or a part of 
General McDowell’s corps from the east, to make a junction 
in his rear and thus cut off his retreat. At this time General 
Jackson’s effective force was about fifteen thousand men, much 
less than either of the two armies which were understood to be 
marching to form a junction against him. We now know that 
General McDowell had been ordered to send to the relief of 
General Banks in the Valley twenty to thirty thousand men. 
The estimated force of General Fremont when at Harrison- 
burg was twenty thousand. General Jackson had captured in 
his campaign down the Valley a very large amount of valu- 
able stores, over nine thousand small-arms, two pieces of ar- 
tillery, many horses, and, besides the wounded and sick, who 
had been released on parole, was said to have twenty-three 
hundred prisoners. To secure these, as well as to save his 
army, it was necessary to retreat beyond the point where his 
enemies could readily unite. The amount of captured stores 
and. other property which he was anxious to preserve were 
said to require a wagon-train twelve miles long. This, under 
the care of a regiment, was sent forward in advance of the 
army, which promptly retired up the Valley. 

On his retreat, General Jackson received information con- 
firmatory of the report of the movements of the enemy, and of 
the defeat of a small force he had left at Front Royal in charge 
of some prisoners and captured stores—the latter, however, the 


1862] NOT WASTE TIME CHASING FREMONT. 111 


garrison before “ retreating had destroyed. Strasburg being 
General Jackson’s Winans point, he had farther to march to 
reach that position than either of the columns operating against 
him. The rapidity of movement which marked General Jack- 
son’s 2 sean’ had given to his command the appellation of 
“foot cavalry” ; and never had they more need to show them- 
selves entitled to the name of Stonewall. 

On the night of the 31st of May, by a forced march, Gen- 
eral Jackson arrived with the head of his column at Stras- 
burg, and learned that General Fremont’s advance was in the 
immediate vicinity. To gain time for the rest of his army to 
arrive, General Jackson decided to check Fremont’s march 
by an attack in the morning. This movement was assigned to 
General Ewell, General Jackson personally giving his attention 
to preserving his immense trains filled with captured stores. 
The repulse of Fremont’s advance was so easy that General 
Taylor describes it as offering a temptation to go beyond Gen- 
eral Jackson’s orders and make a serious attack upon Fremont’s 
army, but recognizes the justice of the restraint imposed by the 
order, “as we could not waste time chasing Fremont,” for it 
was reported that General Shields was at Front Royal with 
troops of a different character from those of Fremont’s army, 
who had been encountered near Strasburg, 2d est, the corps 
“commanded by General O. O. Howard, and called by both 
_ sides ‘the flying Dutchmen.’” This more formidable com- 

mand of General Shields therefore required immediate atten- 
tion. 

Leaving Strasburg on the evening of June 1st, always intent 
to prevent a junction of the two armies of the enemy, Jackson 
continued his march up the Valley. Fremont followed in pur- 
suit, while Shields moved slowly up the Valley wa Luray, for 
the purpose of reaching New Market in advance of Jackson. 
On the morning of the 5th Jackson reached Harrisonburg, and, 
passing beyond that town, turned toward the east in the direc- 
tion of Port Republic. General Ashby had destroyed all the 
bridges between Front Royal and Port Republic, to prevent 
Shields from crossing the Shenandoah to join Fremont. The 
troops were now permitted to make shorter marches, and were 


119 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


allowed some halts to refresh them after their forced marches 
and frequent combats. Early on the 6th of June Fremont’s re- 
enforced cavalry attacked our cavalry rear-guard under General 
Ashby. A sharp conflict ensued, which resulted in the repulse 
of the enemy and the capture of Colonel Perey Wyndham, com- 
manding the brigade, and sixty-three others. General Ashby 
was in position between Harrisonburg and Port Republic, and, 
after the cavalry combat just described, there were indications of 
a more serious attack. Ashby sent a message to Ewell, inform- 
ing him that cavalry supported by infantry was advancing upon 
his position, The Fifty-eighth Virginia and the First Mary- 
land Regiments were sent to his support. Ashby led the Fifty- 
eighth Virginia to attack the enemy, who were under cover of 
a fence. General Ewell in the mean time had arrived, and, see- 
ing the advantage the enemy had of position, directed Colonel 
Johnson to move with his regiment so as to approach the flank | 
instead of the front of the enemy, and he was now driven from 
the field with heavy loss. Our loss was seventeen killed, fifty 
wounded, and three missing. Here fell the stainless, fearless 
cavalier, General Turner Ashby, of whom General Jackson in 
his report thus forcibly speaks : 


“ As a partisan officer I never knew his superior. His dar- 
ing was proverbial; his power of endurance almost incred- 
ible; his tone of character heroic; and his sagacity almost 
intuitive in divining the purposes and movements of the en- 
emy.” 


The main body of General Jackson’s command had now 
reached Port Republic, a village situated in the angle formed 
by the junction of the North and South Rivers, tributaries of 
the South Fork of the Shenandoah. Over the North River was 
a wooden bridge, connecting the town with Harrisonburg. Over 
the South River there was a ford. Jackson’s immediate com- 
mand was encamped on the high gr ound north of the village and 
about a mile from the river. Ewell ‘vas some four miles dis- 
tant, near the road leading from Harrisonburg to Port Republic. 
General Fremont had arrived with his forces in the vicinity 
of Harrisonburg, and General Shields was moving up the east 


1862] ADVANCE OF GENERAL SHIELDS ENCOUNTERED. 113 


side of the Shenandoah, and had reached Conrad’s Store. Each 
was about fifteen miles distant from Jackson’s position. To 
prevent a junction, the bridge over the river, near Shields’s 
position, had been destroyed. 

As the advance of General Shields approached on the 8th, 
the brigades of Taliaferro and Winder were ordered to occupy 
positions immediately north of the bridge. The enemy’s cav- 
alry, accompanied by artillery, then appeared, and, after direct- 
ing a few shots toward the bridge, crossed South River, and, 
dashing into the village, planted one of their pieces at the 
southern entrance of the bridge. Meantime our batteries were 
placed in position, and, Taliaferro’s brigade having approached 
the bridge, was ordered to dash across, capture the piece, and 
occupy the town. This was gallantly done, and the enemy’s 
eavalry dispersed and driven back, abandoning another gun. 
A considerable body of infantry was now seen advancing, when 
our batteries opened with marked effect, and in a short time the 
infantry followed the cavalry, falling back three miles. They 
were pursued about a mile by our batteries on the opposite — 
bank, when they disappeared in a wood. 

This attack of Shields had scarcely been repulsed when 
Ewell became seriously engaged with Fremont, moving on the 
opposite side of the river. The enemy pushed forward, driving 
in the pickets, which, by gallant resistance, checked their ad- 
vance until Ewell had time to select his position on a com- 
manding ridge, with a rivulet and open ground in front, woods 
on both flanks, and the road to Port Republic intersecting his 
line. Trimble’s brigade was posted on the right, the batteries 
of Courtney, Lusk, Brockenbrough, and Rains in the center, 
Stuart’s brigade on the left, and Elzey’s in rear of the center. 
Both wings were in the woods. About ten o’clock the enemy 
posted his artillery opposite our batteries, and a fire was kept 
up for several hours, with great spirit on both sides. Mean- 
time a brigade of the enemy advanced, under cover, upon 
General Trimble, who reserved his fire until they reached 
short range, when he poured forth a deadly volley, under which 
they fell back; Trimble, supported by two regiments of Elzey’s 
reserve, now advanced, with spirited skirmishing, more than a 

55 : 


114 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


mile from his original line, driving the opposing force back to 
its former position. Ewell, finding no attack on his left was 
designed by the enemy, advanced and drove in their skirmish- 
ers, and at night was in position on ground previously occu- 
pied by the foe. This engagement has generally been known 
as the battle of Cross Keys. 

As General Shields made no movement to renew the action 
of the 8th, General Jackson determined to attack him on the 
9th. Accordingly, Ewell’s forces were moved at an early hour 
toward. Port Republic, and General Trimble was left to hold 
Fremont in check, or, if hard pressed, to retire across the 
river and burn the bridge, which subsequently was done, under 
orders to concentrate against Shields. 

Meanwhile the enemy had taken position about two miles 
from Port Republic, their right on the river-bank, their left on 
the slope of the mountain which here threw out a spur, between 
which and the river was a smooth plain of about a thousand 
yards wide. On an elevated plateau of the mountain was 
' placed a battery of long-range guns to sweep the plain over 
which our forces must pass to attack. In front of that plateau 
was a deep gorge, through which flowed a small stream, trend- 
ing to the southern side of ‘the promontory, so as to leave its 
northern point in advance of the southern. The mountain-side 
was covered with dense wood. 

Such was the position which Jackson must assail, or lose the 
opportunity to fight his foe in detail—the object for which 
his forced marches had been made, and on which his best hopes 
depended. 

General Winder’s brigade moved down the river to attack, 
when the enemy’s battery upon the plateau opened, and it was 
found to rake the plain over which we must approach for a 
considerable distance in front of Shields’s position. Our guns 
were brought forward, and an attempt made to dislodge the 
battery of the enemy, but our fire proved unequal to theirs; 
whereupon General Winder, having been reénforced, at- 
tempted by a rapid charge to capture it, but encountered such 
a heavy fire of artillery and small-arms as to compel his com- 
mand, composed of his own and another brigade, with a light 


1862] JACKSON IN ADVANCE. 115 


battery, to fall back in disorder. The enemy advanced steadily, 
and in such numbers as to drive back our infantry supports 
and render it necessary to withdraw our guns. Ewell was 
hurrying his men over the bridge, and there was no fear, if 
human effort would avail, that he would come too late. But 
the condition was truly critical. General Taylor describes his 
chief at that moment thus: “Jackson was on the road, a little 
in advance of his line, where the fire was hottest, with reins on 
his horse’s neck, seemingly in prayer. Attracted by my ap- 
proach, he said, in his usual voice, ‘ Delightful excitement.’” 
He then briefly gave Taylor instructions to move against the 
battery on the plateau, and sent a young officer from his staff 
as a guide. The advance of the enemy was checked by an 
attack on his flank by two of our regiments, under Colonel 
Scott; but this was only a temporary relief, for this small com- 
mand was soon afterward driven back to the woods, with severe 
loss. Our batteries during the check were all safely withdrawn 
except one six-pounder gun. 

In this critical condition of Winder’s command, General 
Taylor made a successful attack on the left and rear of the ene- 
my, which diverted attention from the front, and led to a con- 
centration of his force upon him. Moving to the right along 
the mountain acclivity, he was unseen before he emerged from 
the wood, just as the loud cheers of the enemy proclaimed their 
success in front. Although opposed by a superior force in 
front and flank, and with their guns in position, with a rush 
and shout the gorge was passed, impetuously the charge was 
made, and the battery of six guns fell into our hands. Three 
times was this battery lost and won in the desperate and deter- 
mined efforts to capture and recover it, and the enemy finally 
succeeded in carrying off one of the guns, leaving both caisson 
and limber. * Thus occupied with Taylor, the enemy halted in 
his advance, and formed a line facing to the mountain. Win- 
der succeeded in rallying his command, and our batteries were 
replaced in their former positions. At the same time reénforce- 
ments were brought by General Ewell to Taylor, who pushed 

‘forward with them, assisted by the well-directed fire of our ar- 


tillery. 


116 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Of this period in the battle, than which there has seldom 
been one of greater peril, or where danger was more gallantly 
met, I copy a description from the work of General Taylor: 


“The fighting in and around the battery was hand-to-hand, 
and many fell from bayonet-wounds. Even the artillerymen used 
their rammers in a way not laid down in the manual, and died at 
their guns. I called for Hayes, but he, the promptest of men, and 
his splendid regiment could not be found. Something unexpected 
had occurred, but there was no time for speculation. With a 
desperate rally, in which I believe the drummer-boys shared, we 
carried the battery for the third time, and held it. Infantry and 
riflemen had been driven off, and we began to feel a little com- 
fortable, when the enemy, arrested in his advance by our attack, 
appeared. He had countermarched, and, with left near the river, 
came into full view of our situation. Wheeling to the right, with 
colors advanced, like a solid wall he marched straight upon us. 
There seemed nothing left but to set our back to the mountain 
and die hard. At the instant, crashing through the underwood, 
came Ewell, outriding staff and escort. He produced the effect of 
a reénforcement, and was welcomed with cheers. The line before 
us halted and threw forward skirmishers. A moment later a shell 
came shrieking along it, loud Confederate cheers reached our de- 
lighted ears, and Jackson, freed from his toils, rushed up like a 
whirlwind.” * 


The enemy, in his advance, had gone in front of the pla- 
teau where his battery was placed, the elevation being suffi- 
cient to enable the guns without hazard to be fired over the ad- 
vancing line ; so, when he commenced retreating, he had to pass 
by the position of this battery, and the captured guns were 
effectively used against him—that dashing old soldier, “Ewell, 
serving as a gunner.” Mention was made of the inability to 
find Hayes when his regiment was wanted. It is due to that 
true patriot, who has been gathered to his fathers, to add Tay- 
lor’s explanation: “Ere long my lost Seventh Regiment, sadly 
cut up, rejoined. This regiment was in rear of the column 
when we left Jackson to gain the path in the woods, and, before 
it filed out of the road, his thin line was so pressed that Jack- 


* “Destruction and Reconstruction,” pp. 75, 76. 


1862] EFFECT OF THESE MOVEMENTS. 117 


son ordered Hayes to stop the enemy’s rush. This was done, 
for the Seventh would have stopped a herd of elephants—but at 
a fearful cost.” 

The retreat of the enemy, though it was so precipitate as to 
cause him to leave his killed and wounded on the field, was 
never converted into a rout. ‘“Shields’s brave ‘boys’ preserved 
their organization to the last; and, had Shields himself, with 
his whole command, been on the field, we should have had 
tough work indeed.” 

The pursuit was continued some five miles beyond the bat- 
tle-field, during which we captured four hundred and fifty pris- 
oners, some wagons, one piece of abandoned artillery, and about 
eight hundred muskets. Some two hundred and seventy-five 
wounded were paroled in the hospitals near Port Republic. On 
the next day Fremont withdrew his forces, and retreated down 
the Valley. The rapid movements of Jackson, the eagle-like 
stoop with which he had descended upon each army of the 
enemy, and the terror which his name had come to inspire, cre- 
ated a great alarm at Washington, where it was believed he must 
have an immense army, and that he was about to come down 
like an avalanche upon the capital. Milroy, Banks, Fremont, 
and Shields were all moved in that direction, and peace again 
reigned in the patriotic and once happy Valley of the Shenan- 
doah. 

The material results of this very remarkable campaign are 
thus summarily stated by one who had special means of informa- 
tion : 

“Tn three months Jackson had marched six hundred miles, 
fought four pitched battles, seven minor engagements, and daily 
skirmishes ; had defeated four armies, captured seven pieces of 
artillery, ten thousand stand of arms, four thousand prisoners, and 
a very great amount of stores, inflicting upon his adversaries a 
known loss of two thousand men, with a loss upon his own part 
comparatively small.” * 


The general effect upon the affairs of the Confederacy was 
even more important, and the motives which influenced Jackson 


* “Stonewall Jackson,” military biography by John Esten Cooke, p. 194, 


118 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


present him in a grander light than any military success could 
have done. Thus, on the 20th of March, 1862, he learned that 
the large force of the enemy before which he had retired was re- 
turning down the Valley, and, divining the object to be to send 
forces to the east side of the mountain to codperate in the at- 
tack upon Richmond, General Jackson, with his small force of 
about three thousand infantry and two hundred and ninety cav- 
alry, moved with his usual celerity in pursuit. He overtook 
the rear of the column at Kernstown, attacked a very supe- 
rior force he found there, and fought with such desperation 
as to impress the enemy with the idea that he had a large 
army ; therefore, the detachments, which had already started for 
Manassas, were recalled, and additional forces were also sent into 
the Valley. Nor was this all. McDowell’s corps, under orders 
to join McClellan, was detained for the defense of the Federal 
capital. 

Jackson’s bold strategy had effected the object for which his 
movement was designed, and he slowly retreated to the south 
bank of the Shenandoah, where he remained undisturbed by 
the enemy, and had time to recruit his forces, which, by the 
28th of April, amounted to six or seven thousand men. General 
Banks had advanced and occupied Harrisonburg, about fifteen 
miles from Jackson’s position. Fremont, with a force estimated 
at fifteen thousand men, was reported to be preparing to join 
Banks’s command. 

The alarm at Washington had caused McDowell’s corps to 
be withdrawn from the upper Rappahannock to Fredericksburg. 
Jackson, anxious to take advantage of the then divided condi- 
tion of the enemy, sent to Richmond for reénforcements, but 
our condition there did not enable us to furnish any, except 
the division of Ewell, which had been left near Gordonsville in 
observation of McDowell, now by his withdrawal made dis- 
posable, and the brigade of Edward Johnson, which confronted 
Schenck and Milroy near to Staunton. Jackson, who, when he 
could not get what he wanted, did the best he could with what 
he had, called Ewell to his aid, left him to hold Banks in check, 
and marched to unite with Johnson; the combined forces at- 
tacked Milroy and Schenck, who, after a severe conflict, retreated 


1862] THE PLANS AND PURPOSES, 119 


in the night to join Fremont. Jackson then returned toward 
Harrisonburg, having ordered Ewell to join him for an attack 
on Banks, who in the mean time had retreated toward Winches- 
ter, where Jackson attacked and defeated him, inflicting great 
loss, drove him across the Potomac, and, as has been repre- 
sented, filled the authorities at Washington with such dread of 
its capture as to disturb the previously devised plans against 
Richmond, and led to the operations which have already been 
described, and brought into full play Jackson’s military genius. 

In all these operations there conspicuously appears the self- 
abnegation of a devoted patriot. He was not seeking by great 
victories to acquire fame for himself; but, always alive to the 
necessities and dangers elsewhere, he heroically strove to do 
what was possible for the general benefit of the cause he main- 
tained. His whole heart was his country’s, and his whole coun- 
try’s heart was his. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Condition of Affairs.—Plan of General Johnston.—The Field of Battle at Seven 
Pines.—The Battle.-—General Johnston wounded.—Advance of General Sum- 
ner.—Conflict on the Right.—Delay of General Huger.—Reports of the Enemy. 
—Losses.—Strength of Forces.—General Lee in Command. 


Ovr army having retreated from the Peninsula, and with- 
drawn from the north side of the Chickahominy to the imme- 
diate vicinity of Richmond, I rode out occasionally to the lines 
and visited the headquarters of the commanding General. There 
were no visible preparations for defense, and my brief conver- 
sations with the General afforded no satisfactory information as 
to his plans and purposes. We had, under the supervision of 
General Lee, perfected as far as we could the detached works 
before the city, but these were rather designed to protect it 
against a sudden attack than to resist approaches by a great 
army. They were, also, so near to the city that it might have 
been effectually bombarded by guns exterior to them. Anxious 
for the defense of the ancient capital of Virginia, now the capi- 


120 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tal of the Confederate States, and remembering a remark of 
General Johnston, that the Spaniards were the only people who 
now undertook to hold fortified towns, I had written to him 
that he knew the defense of Richmond must be made at a dis- 
tance fromit. Seeing no preparation to keep the enemy at a 
distance, and kept in ignorance of any plan for such purpose, I 
sent for General R. E. Lee, then at Richmond, in general charge 
of army operations, and told him why and how I was dissatisfied 
with the condition of affairs. 

He asked me what I thought it was proper to do. Reeur- 
ring to a conversation held about the time we had together 
visited General Johnston, I answered that McClellan should be 
attacked on the other side of the Chickahominy before he ma- 
tured his preparations for a siege of Richmond. To this he 
promptly assented, as I anticipated he would, for I knew it had 
been his own opinion. He then said: “General Johnston 
should of course advise you of what he expects or proposes to 
do. Let me go and see him, and defer this discussion until I 
return.” 

It may be proper here to say that I had not doubted that 
General Johnston was fully in accord with me as to the purpose 
of defending Richmond, but I was not content with his course 
for that end. It had not occurred to me that he meditated a 
retreat which would uncover the capital, nor was it ever sus- 
pected until, in reading General Hood’s book, published in 
1880, the evidence was found that General Johnston, when 
retreating from Yorktown, told his volunteer aide, Mr. McFar- 
land, that “he [Johnston] expected or intended to give up Rich- 
mond.” * 

When General Lee came back, he told me that General 
Johnston proposed, on the next Thursday, to move against the 
enemy as follows: General A. P. Hill was to move down on 
the right flank and rear of the enemy. General G. W. Smith, 
as soon as Hill’s guns opened, was to cross the Chickahominy at 
the Meadow Bridge, attack the enemy in flank, and by the con- 
junction of the two it was expected to double him up. Then 


* For recital and correspondence of 1874, see “Advance and Retreat,” by J. B. 
Hood, Lieutenant-General in the Confederate Army, pp. 153-155. 


1862] THE PLAN NOT ATTEMPTED. 121 


Longstreet was to cross on the Mechanicsville Bridge and attack 
him in front. From this plan the best results were hoped by 
both of us. 

On the morning of the day proposed, I hastily dispatched 
my office business, and rode out toward the Meadow Bridge to 
see the action commence. On the road I found Smith’s division 
halted, and the men dispersed in the woods. Looking for some 
one from whom I could get information, I finally saw General 
Hood, and asked him the meaning of what I saw. He told me 
he did not know anything more than that they had been halted. 
I asked him where General Smith was; he said he believed he 
had gone to a farmhouse in the rear, adding that he thought he 
was ill. Riding on to the bluff which overlooks the Meadow 
Bridge, I asked Colonel Anderson, posted there in observation, 
whether he had seen anything of the enemy in his front. He 
said that he had seen only two mounted men across the bridge, 
and a small party of infantry on the other side of the river, some 
distance below, both of whom, he said, he could show me if I 
would go with him into the garden back of the house. There, by 
the use of a powerful glass, were distinctly visible two cavalry 
videttes at the further end of the bridge, and a squad of infantry 
lower down theriver, who had covered themselves with a screen 
of green boughs. The Colonel informed me that he had not 

heard Hill’s guns; it was, therefore, supposed he had not ad- 
vanced. I then rode down the bank of the river, followed by a 
cavalcade of sight-seers, who, I supposed, had been attracted by 
the expectation of a battle. The little squad of infantry, about 
fifteen in number, as we approached, fled over the ridge, and were 
lost to sight. Near to the Mechanicsville Bridge I found General 
Howell Cobb, commanding the support of a battery of artillery. 
He pointed out to me on the opposite side of the river the only 
enemy he had seen, and which was evidently a light battery. 
Riding on to the main road which led to the Mechanicsville 
Bridge, I found General Longstreet, walking to and fro in an 
impatient, it might be said fretful, manner. Before speaking to 
him, he said his division had been under arms all day waiting for 
orders to advance, and that the day was now so far spent that he 
did not know what was the matter. I afterward learned from 


122 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General Smith that he had received information from a citizen 
that the Beaver-dam Creek presented an impassable barrier, 
and that he had thus fortunately been saved from a disaster. 
Thus ended the offensive-defensive programme from which Lee 
expected much, and of which I was hopeful. 

In the mean while the enemy moved up, and, finding the 
crossing at Bottom’s Bridge unobstructed, threw a brigade of the 
Fourth Corps across the Chickahominy as early as the 20th of 
May, and on the 23d sent over the rest of the Fourth Corps ; on 
the 25th he sent over another corps, and commenced fortifying 
a line near to Seven Pines. In the forenoon of the 31st of May, 
riding out on the New Bridge road, I heard firing in the direc- 
tion of Seven Pines. As I drew nearer, I saw General Whiting, 
with part of General Smith’s division, file into the road in front 
of me; at the same time I saw General Johnston ride across the 
field from a house before which General Lee’s horse was stand- 
ing. I turned down to the house, and asked General Lee what 
the musketry-firing meant. He replied by asking whether I had 
heard it, and was answered in the affirmative; he said he had 
been under that impression himself, but General Johnston had 
assured him that it could be nothing more than an artillery 
duel. It is scarcely necessary to add that neither of us had been 
advised of a design to attack the enemy that day. 

We then walked out to the rear of the house to listen, and 
were satisfied that an action, or at least a severe skirmish, must 
be going on. General Johnston states in his report that the 
condition of the air was peculiarly unfavorable to the transmis- 
sion of sound. 

General Lee and myself then rode to the field of battle, 
which may be briefly described as follows: 

The Chickahominy flowing in front is a deep, sluggish, and 
narrow river, bordered by marshes, and covered with tangled 
wood. The line of battle extended along the Nine-mile road, 
across the York River Railroad and Williamsburg stage-road. 
The enemy had constructed redoubts, with long lines of rifle-pits 
covered by abatis, from below Bottom’s Bridge to within less 
than two miles of New Bridge, and had constructed bridges to 
connect his forces on the north and south sides of the Chicka- 


1862] THE BATTLE AT SEVEN PINES. 123 


hominy. The left of his forces, on the south side, was thrown 
forward from the river; the right was on its bank, and covered 
by its slope. Our main force was on the right flank of our posi- 
tion, extending on both sides of the Williamsburg road, near to 
its intersection with the Nine-mile road. This wing consisted of 
Hills, Huger’s, and Longstreet’s divisions, with light batteries, 
and a small force of cavalry; the division of General G. W. 
Smith, less Hood’s brigade ordered to the right, formed the left 
Wing, and its position was on the Nine-mile road. There were 
small tracts of cleared land, but most of the ground was wooded, 
and much of it so covered with water as to seriously embarrass 
the movements of troops. 

When General Lee and I riding down the Nine-mile road 
reached the left of our line, we found the troops hotly engaged. 
Our men had driven the enemy from his advanced encampment, 
and he had fallen back behind an open field to the bank of the 
river, where, in a dense wood, was concealed an infantry line, 
with artillery in position. Soon after our arrival, General 
Johnston, who had gone farther to the right, where the conflict 
was expected, and whither reénforcement from the left was 
marching, was brought back severely wounded, and, as soon as 
an ambulance could be obtained, was removed from the field. 

Our troops on the left made vigorous assaults under most 
disadvantageous circumstances. They made several gallant 
attempts to carry the enemy’s position, but were each time 
repulsed with heavy loss. 

After a personal reconnaissance on the left of the open in 
our front, I sent one, then another, and another courier to Gen- 
eral Magruder, directing him to send a force down by the 
wooded path, just under the bluff, to attack the enemy in flank 
and reverse. Impatient of delay, I had started to see General 
Magruder, when I met the third courier, who said he had not 
found General Magruder, but had delivered the message to 
Brigadier-General Griffith, who was moving by the path desig- 
nated to make the attack. 

On returning to the field, I found that the attack in front 
had ceased ; it was, therefore, too late for a single brigade to 
effect anything against the large force of the enemy, and mes- 


“a 
rd 


194 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. © 


sengers were sent through the woods to direct General Griffith 
to go back. 

The heavy rain during the night of the 30th had swollen 
the Chickahominy ; it was rising when the battle of Seven Pines 
was fought, but had not reached such height as to prevent the 
enemy from using his bridges; consequently, General Sumner, 
during the engagement, brought over his corps as a reénforce- 
ment. He was on the north side of the river, had built two 
bridges to connect with the south side, and, though their cov- 
erings were loosened by the upward pressure of the rising water, 
they were not yet quite impassable. With the true instinct of 
the soldier to march upon fire, when the sound of the battle 
reached him, he formed his corps and stood under arms waiting 
for an order to advance. He came too soon for us, and, but for 
his forethought and promptitude, he would have arrived too 
late for his friends. It may be granted that his presence saved 
the left wing of the Federal army from defeat. 

As we had permitted the enemy to fortify before our attack, 
it would have been better to have waited another day, until the 
bridges should have been rendered impassable by the rise of the 
river. 

General Lee, at nightfall, gave instructions to General Smith, 
the senior officer on that part of the battle-field, and left with 
me to return to Richmond. 

Thus far I have only attempted to describe events on the 
extreme left of the battle-field, being that part of which I had 
personal observation; but the larger force and, consequently, the 
more serious conflict were upon the right of the line. To these 
I will now refer. Our force there consisted of the divisions of 
Major-Generals D. H. Hill, Huger, and Longstreet, the latter in 
chief command. In his report, first published in the “ Southern 
Historical Society Papers,” vol. iii, pp. 277, 278, he writes: 


“ Agreeably to verbal instructions from the commanding Gen- 
eral, the division of Major-General D. H. Hill was, on the morning 
of the 31st ultimo, formed at an early hour on the Williamsburg 
road, as the column of attack upon the enemy’s front on that 
road. . . . The division of Major-General Huger was intended to 
make a strong flank movement around the left of the enemy’s 


1862] THE SERIOUS CONFLICT ON THE RIGHT. 195 


position, and attack him in rear of that flank. . . . After waiting 
some six hours for these troops to get into position, I determined 
to move forward without regard to them, and gave orders to that 
effect to Major-General D. H. Hill. The forward movement began 
about two o’clock, and our skirmishers soon became engaged with 
those of the enemy. The entire division of General Hill became 
engaged about three o’clock, and drove the enemy steadily back, 
gaining possession of his abatis and part of his intrenched camp, 
General Rodes, by a2 movement to the right, driving in the ene- 
my’s left. The only reénforcements on the field in hand were my 
own brigades, of which Anderson’s, Wilcox’s, and Kemper’s were 
put in by the front on the Williamsburg road, and Colston’s and 
Pryor’s by my right flank. At the same time the decided and 
gallant attack made by the other brigades gained entire posses- 
sion of the enemy’s position, with his artillery, camp-equipage, etc. 
Anderson’s brigade, under Colonel Jenkins, pressing forward rap- 
idly, continued to drive the enemy till nightfall. . . . The conduct 
of the attack was left entirely to Major-General Hill. The entire 
success of the affair is sufficient evidence of his ability, courage, 
and skill.” 


This tribute to General Hill was no more than has been ac- 
corded to him by others who knew of his services on that day, 
and was in keeping with the determined courage, vigilance, and 
daring exhibited by him on other fields. 

The reference, made, without qualification, in General Long- 
street’s report, to the failure of General Huger to make the 
attack expected of him, and the freedom with which others 
have criticised him, renders it proper that some explanation 
_ should be given of an apparent dilatoriness on the part of that 
veteran soldier, who, after long and faithful service, now fills 
an honored grave. 

It will be remembered that General Huger was to move by 
the Charles City road, so as to turn the left of the enemy and 
attack him in flank. The extraordinary rain of the previous 
night had swollen every rivulet to the dimensions of a stream, 
and the route prescribed to General Huger was one especially 
affected by that heavy rain, as it led to the head of the White- 
Oak Swamp. The bridge over the stream flowing into that 


196 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


swamp had been carried away, and the alternatives presented to 
him was to rebuild the bridge or leave his artillery. He chose 
the former, which involved the delay that has subjected him to 
criticism. If any should think an excuse necessary to justify 
this decision, they are remanded to the accepted military maxim, 
that the march must never be so hurried as to arrive unfit for 
service; and, also, they may be reminded that Huger’s specialty 
was artillery, he being the officer who commanded the siege- 
guns with which General Scott marched from Vera Cruz to the 
city of Mexico. To show that the obstacles encountered were 
not of such slight character as energy would readily overcome, 
I refer to the report of an officer commanding a brigade on that 
occasion, Brigadier-General R. E. Rodes, whose great merit 
and dashing gallantry caused him to be admired throughout the 
army of the Confederacy. He said: 


“On the morning of the 31st the brigade was stationed on the 
Charles City road, three and a half miles from the point on the 
Williamsburg road from which it had been determined to start 
the columns of attack. . . . I received a verbal order from Gen- 
eral Hill to conduct my command at once to the point at which 
the attack was to be made. . . . The progress of the brigade was 
considerably delayed by the washing away of a bridge near the 
head of White-Oak Swamp, by reason of which the men had to 
wade in water waist-deep, and a large number were entirely sub- 
merged, At this point the character of the crossing was such 
that it was absolutely necessary to .proceed with great caution to 
prevent the loss of both ammunition and life. In consequence of 
this delay, and notwithstanding that the men were carried at dou- 
ble-quick time over very heavy ground for a considerable dis- 
tance to make up for it, when the signal for attack was given, 
only my line of skirmishers, the Sixth Alabama and the Twelfth 
Mississippi Regiments, was in position. . .. The ground over 
which we were to move being covered with thick undergrowth, 
and the soil being marshy—so marshy that it was with great 
difficulty that either horses or men could get over it—and being 
guided only by the fire in front, I emerged from the woods 
from the Williamsburg road under a heavy fire of both artil- 
lery and musketry, with only five companies of the Fifth Ala- 
bama.” 


1862] THE LACK OF COOPERATION. 127 


General Huger’s line of march was farther to the right, 
therefore nearer to White-Oak Swamp, and the impediments 
consequently greater than where General Rodes found the 
route so difficult as to be dangerous even to infantry. 

On the next day, the 1st of June, General Longstreet states 
that a serious attack was made on our position, and that it was 
repulsed. This refers to the works which Hill’s division had 
captured the day before, and which the enemy endeavored to 
retake. 

From the final report of General Longstreet, already cited, 
it appears that he was ordered to attack on the morning of the 
31st, and he explains why it was postponed for six hours; 
then he states that it was commenced by the division of Gen- 
eral D. H. Hill, which drove the enemy steadily back, press- 
ing forward until nightfall. The movement of Rodes’s bri- 
gade on the right flank is credited with having contributed 
much to the dislodgment of the enemy from their abatis 
and first intrenchments. As just stated, General Longstreet 
reports a delay of some six hours in making this attack, be- 
cause he was waiting for General Huger, and then made it 
successfully with Hill’s division and some brigades from his 
own. ‘These questions must naturally arise in the mind of the 
reader: Why did not our troops on the left, during this long 
delay, as well as during the period occupied by Hill’s assault, 
coéperate in the attack? and Why, the battle having been pre- 
conceived, were they so far removed as not to hear the first 
guns? The officers of the Federal army, when called before a 
committee appointed by their Congress to inquire into the 
conduct of the war, have by their testimony made it quite plain 
that the divided condition of their troops and the length of 
time required for their concentration after the battle com- 
menced, rendered it practicable for our forces, if united—as, 
taking the initiative, they well might have been—to have 
crushed or put to flight first Keyes’s and then Heintzelman’s 
corps before Sumner crossed the Chickahominy, between five 
and six o’clock in the evening. 

By the official reports our aggregate loss was, “killed, 
wounded, and missing,” 6,084, of which 4,851 were in Long- 


128 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


street’s command on the right, and 1,233 in Smith’s command 
on the left. 

The enemy reported his aggregate loss at 5,789. It may 
have been less than ours, for we stormed his successive defenses. 

Our success upon the right was proved by our possession of 
the enemy’s works, as well as by the capture of ten pieces of 
artillery, four flags, a large amount of camp-equipage, and more 
than one thousand prisoners. 

Our aggregate of both wings was about 40,500. The force 
of the enemy confronting us may be approximated by taking 
his returns for the 20th of June and adding thereto his casual- 
ties on the 31st of May and ist of June, because between the 
last-named date and the 20th of June no action had occurred 
to create any material change in the number present. From 
these data, viz., the strength of Heintzelman’s corps, 18,810, 
and of Keyes’s corps, 14,610, on June 20th, by adding their 
casualties of the 31st of May and 1st of June—4,516—we de- 
duce the strength of these two corps on the 31st of May to 
have been 37,936 as the aggregate present for duty. 

It thus appears that, at the commencement of the action on 
the 31st of May, we had a numerical superiority of about 2,500. 
Adopting the same method to calculate the strength of Sum- 
ner’s corps, we find it to have been 18,724, which would give 
the enemy in round numbers a force of 16,000 in excess of 
ours after-General Sumner crossed the Chickahominy. 

Both combatants claimed the victory. I have presented the 
evidence in support of our claim. The withdrawal of the Con- 
federate forces on the day after the battle from the ground on 
which it was fought certainly gives color to the claim of the 
enemy, though that was really the result of a policy much 
broader than the occupation of the field of Seven Pines. 

On the morning of June Ist I rode out toward the position 
where General Smith had been left on the previous night, and 
where I learned from General Lee that he would remain. Af- 
ter turning into the Nine-mile road, and before reaching that 
position, I was hailed by General Whiting, who saw me at a dis- 
tance, and ran toward the road to stop me. He told me I was 
riding into the position of the enemy, who had advanced on the 


1862] GENERAL LEE PLACED IN COMMAND. 129 


withdrawal of our troops, and there, pointing, he said, “is a 
battery which I am surprised has not fired on you.” I asked 
where our troops were. He said his was the advance, and the 
others behind him. He also told me that General Smith was 
at the house which had been his (Whiting’s) headquarters, and 
I rode there to see him. To relieve both him and General Lee 
from any embarrassment, I preferred to make the announce- 
ment of General Lee’s assignment to command previous to his 
arrival. 

After General Lee arrived, I took leave, and, being subse- 
quently joined by him, we rode together to the Williamsburg 
road, where we found General Longstreet, his command being 
in front, and then engaged with the enemy on the field of the 
previous day’s combat. The operations of that day were nei- 
ther extensive nor important, save in the collection of the arms 
acquired in the previous day’s battle. 

General R. E. Lee was now in immediate command, and 
thenceforward directed the movements of the army in front of 
Richmond. Laborious and exact in details, as he was vigilant 
and comprehensive in grand strategy, a power, with which the 
public had not credited him, soon became manifest in all that 
makes an army a rapid, accurate, compact machine, with respon- 
sive motion in all its parts. I extract the following sentence 
_ from a letter from the late Colonel R. H. Chilton, adjutant 
and inspector-general of the army of the Confederacy, because 
of his special knowledge of the subject : 


“T consider General Lee’s exhibition of grand administrative 
talents and indomitable energy, in bringing up that army in so 
short a time to that state of discipline which maintained aggre- 
gation through those terrible seven days’ fights around Richmond, 
as probably his grandest achievement.” 


56 


130 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CHAP PER axel: 


The Enemy’s Position.—His Intention.—The Plan of Operations.—Movements of 
General Jackson.—Daring and Fortitude of Lee.—Offensive-Defensive Policy.— 
General Stuart’s Movement.—Order of Attack.—Critical Position of McClellan.— 
Order of Mr. Lincoln creating the Army of Virginia.—Arrival of Jackson.—Po- 
sition of the Enemy.—Diversion of General Longstreet—The Enemy forced 
back south of the Chickahominy.—Abandonment of the Railroad. 


Wuen riding from the field of battle with General Robert 
E. Lee on the previous day, I informed him that he would be 
assigned to the command of the army, vice General Johnston, 
wounded, and that he could make his preparations as soon as he 
reached his quarters, as I should send the order to him as soon 
as I arrived at mine. On the next morning, as above stated, 
he proceeded to the field and took command of the troops. 
During the night our forces on the left had fallen back from 
their position at the close of the previous day’s battle, but those 
on the right remained in the one they had gained, and some 
combats occurred there between the opposing forces. The 
enemy proceeded further to fortify his position on the Chicka- 
hominy, covering his communication with his base of supplies 
on York River. His left was on the south side of the Chicka- 
hominy, between White-Oak Swamp and New Bridge, and was 
covered by a strong intrenchment, with heavy guns, and with 
abatis in front. His right wing was north of the Chicka- 
hominy, extending to Mechanicsville, and the approaches de- 
fended by strong works. 

Our army was in line in front of Richmond, but without 
intrenchments. General Lee immediately commenced the con- 
struction of an earthwork for a battery on our left flank, and a 
line of intrenchment to the right, necessarily feeble because of 
our deficiency in tools. It seemed to be the intention of the 
enemy to assail Richmond by regular approaches, which our 
numerical inferiority and want of engineer troops, as well as the 
deficiency of proper utensils, made it improbable that we should 
be able to resist. The day after General Lee assumed com- 
mand, I was riding out to the army, when I saw at a house on 


1862] WHAT WAS MOST ADVISABLE TO DO. 131 


my left a number of horses, and among them one I recognized 
as belonging to him. I dismounted and entered the house, where 
I found him in consultation with a number of his general offi- 
cers. The tone of the conversation was quite despondent, and ’ 
one, especially, pointed out the inevitable consequence of the 
enemy’s advance by throwing out boyaus, and constructing suc- 
cessive parallels. I expressed, in marked terms, my disappoint- 
ment at hearing such views, and General Lee remarked that he 
had, before I came in, said very much the same thing. I then 
withdrew and rode to the front, where, after a short time, Gen- 
eral Lee joined me, and entered into conversation as to what, 
under the circumstances, I thought it most advisable to do. I 
then said to him, substantially, that I knew of nothing better 
than the plan he had previously explained to me, which was to 
have been executed by General Johnston, but which was not 
carried out ; that the change of circumstances would make one 
modification necessary—that, instead, as then proposed, of bring- 
ing General A. P. Hill, with his division, on the rear flank of the 
enemy, it would, because of the preparation for defense made in 
the mean time, now be necessary to bring the stronger force of 
General T. J. Jackson from the Valley of the Shenandoah. So 
far as we were then informed, General Jackson was hotly en- 
gaged with a force superior to his own, and, before he could be 
withdrawn, it was necessary that the enemy should be driven 
out of fhe Valley. For this purpose, as well as to mask the de- 
sign of bringing Jackson’s forces to make a junction with those 
of Lee, a strong division under General Whiting was detached 
to go by rail to the Valley to join General Jackson, and, by a 
vigorous assault, to drive the enemy across the Potomac. As 
soon as he commenced a retreat which unmistakably showed 
that his flight would not stop within the limits of Virginia, 
General Jackson was instructed, with his whole force, to move 
rapidly on the right flank of the enemy north of the Chicka- 
hominy. The manner in which the division was detached to 
reénforce General Jackson was so open that it was not doubted 
General McClellan would soon be apprised of it, and would 
probably attribute it to any other than the real motive, and 
would confirm him in his exaggerated estimate of our strength. 


132 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


By the rapidity of movement and skill with which General 
Jackson handled his troops, he, after several severe engage- 
ments, finally routed the enemy before the reénforcement. of 
Whiting arrived ; and he then, on the 17th of June, proceeded, 
with that celerity which gave to his infantry its wonderful 
fame and efficiency, to execute the orders which General Lee 
had sent to him. 

As evidence of the daring and unfaltering fortitude of 
General Lee, I will here recite an impressive conversation which 
occurred between us in regard to this movement. His plan 
was to throw forward his left across the Meadow Bridge, drive 
back the enemy’s right flank, and then, crossing by the Mechan- 
icsville Bridge with another column, to attack in front, hoping 
by his combined forces to be victorious on the north side of 
the Chickahominy ; while the small force on the intrenched 
line south of the Chickahominy should hold the left of the 
enemy in check. I pointed out to him that our force and in- 
trenched line between that left flank and Richmond was too 
weak for.a protracted resistance, and, if McClellan was the man- 
I took him for when I nominated him for promotion in a new 
regiment of cavalry, and subsequently selected him for one of 
the military commission sent to Europe during the War of the 
Crimea, as soon as he found that the bulk of our army was on 
the north side of the Chickahominy, he would not stop to try 
conclusions with it there, but would immediately move upon 
his objective point, the city of Richmond. If, on the other 
hand, he should behave like an engineer officer, and deem it 
his first duty to protect his line of communication, I thought 
the plan proposed was not only the best, but would be a suc- 
cess. Something of his old esprit de corps manifested itself 
in General Lee’s first response, that he did not know engineer 
officers were more likely than others to make such mistakes, 
but, immediately passing to the main subject, he added, “If 
you will hold him as long as you can at the intrenchment, and 
then fall back on the detached works around the city, I will 
be upon the enemy’s heels before he gets there.” 

Thus was inaugurated the offensive-defensive campaign 
which resulted so gloriously to our arms, and turned from the 


1862] THE CAMPAIGN IN THE VALLEY COMMENCED. 1338 


capital of the Confederacy a danger so momentous that, looking 
at it retrospectively, it is not seen how a policy less daring or 
less firmly pursued could have saved the capital from capture. 

To resume the connected thread of our narrative. Prepara- 
tory to this campaign, a light intrenchment for infantry cover, 
with some works for field-guns, was constructed on the south 
side of the Chickahominy, and General Whiting, with two bri- 
gades, as before stated, was sent to reénforce General Jackson 
in the Valley, so as to hasten the expulsion of the enemy, after 
which Jackson was to move rapidly from the Valley so as to 
arrive in the vicinity of Ashland by the 24th of June, and, by 
striking the enemy on his right flank, to aid in the proposed 
attack. The better to insure the success of this movement, 
General Lawton, who was coming with a brigade from Georgia 
to join General Lee, was directed to change his line of march 
and unite with General Jackson in the Valley. 

As General Whiting went by railroad, it was expected that 
the enemy. would be cognizant of the fact, but not, probably, | 
assign to it the real motive; and that such was the case is 
shown by an unsuccessful attack of the 26th, made on the 
Williamsburg road, with the apparent intention of advancing 
by that route to Richmond. 

To observe the enemy, as well as to prevent him from learn- 
ing of the approach of General Jackson, General J. E. B. Stu- 
art was sent with a cavalry force on June 8th to cover the 
route by which the former was to march, and to ascertain 

whether the enemy had any defensive works or troops in posi- 

tion to interfere with the advance of those forces. He re- 
ported favorably on both these points, as well as to the natural 
features of the country. On the 26th of June General Stuart 
received confidential instructions from General Lee, the execu- 
tion of which is so interwoven with the seven days’ battles as 
to be more appropriately noticed in connection with them, of 
which it is proposed now to give a brief account. 

Our order of battle directed General Jackson to march from 
Ashland on the 25th toward Slash Church, encamping for the 
night west of the Central Railroad; to advance at 3 a. mM. on 
the 26th, and to turn Beaver-Dam Creek. General A. P. Hill 


~ 


134 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


was to cross the Chickahominy at Meadow Bridge when Jack- 
son advanced beyond that point, and to move directly upon 
Mechanicsville. As soon as the bridge there should be uncov- 
ered, Longstreet and D. H. Hill were to cross, the former to 
proceed to the support of A. P. Hill and the latter to that of 
Jackson. 

The four commands were directed to sweep down the north 
side of the Chickahominy toward the York River Railroad— 
Jackson on the left and in advance; Longstreet nearest the 
river and in the rear. Huger, McLaws, and Magruder, remain- 
ing on the south side of the Chickahominy, were ordered to 
hold their positions as long as possible against any assault of the 
enemy ; to observe his movements, and to follow him closely if 
he should retreat. General Stuart, with the cavalry, was thrown 
out on Jackson’s left to guard his flank and give notice of the 
enemy’s movements. Brigadier-General Pendleton was directed 
to employ the reserve artillery so as to resist any advance to- 
ward Richmond, to superintend that portion of it posted to aid 
in the operations on the north bank, and hold the remainder 
for use where needed. The whole of Jackson’s command did 
not arrive in time to reach the point designated on the 25th. 
He had, therefore, more distance to move on the 26th, and he 
was retarded by the enemy. 

Not until 3 p. m. did A. P. Hill begin to move. Then 
he crossed the river and advanced upon Mechaniesville. After 
a sharp conflict he drove the enemy from his intrenchments, 
and forced him to take refuge in his works, on the left bank of 
Beaver Dam, about a mile distant. This position was naturally 
strong, the banks of the creek in front being high and almost 
perpendicular, and the approach to it was over open fields com- 
manded by the fire of artillery and infantry under cover on the 
opposite side. The difficulty of crossing the stream had been 
increased by felling the fringe of woods on its banks and de- 
stroying the bridges. Jackson was expected to pass Beaver 
Dam above, and turn the enemy’s right, so General Hill made 
no direct attack. Longstreet and D. H. Hill crossed the Me- 
chanicsville Bridge as soon as it was uncovered and could be 
repaired, but it was late before they reached the north bank of 


ea . i 
¥ ‘ 
» 
1862) CRITICAL POSITION OF McCLELLAN. 135 


the Chickahominy. An effort was made by two brigades, one 
of A. P. Hill and the other Ripley’s of D. H. Hill, to turn the 
enemy's left, but the troops were unable in the growing dark- 
ness to overcome the obstructions, and were withdrawn. The 
engagement ceased about 9 vp. mu. Our troops retained the 
ground from which the foe had been driven. 

According to the published reports, General McClellan’s po- 
sition was regarded at this time as extremely critical. If he 
concentrated on the left bank of the Chickahominy, he aban- 
doned the attempt to capture Richmond, and risked a retreat 
upon the White House and Yorktown, where he had no re- 
serves, or reason to expect further support. If he moved to 
the right bank of the river, he risked the loss of his communi- 
cations with the White House, whence his supplies were drawn 
by railroad. He would then have to attempt the capture of 
Richmond by assault, or be forced to open new communications 
by the James River, and move at once in that direction. There 
he would receive the support of the enemy’s navy. This latter 
movement had, it appears, been thought of previously, and 
transports had been sent to the James River. During the 
night, after the close of the contest last mentioned, the whole 
of Porter's baggage was sent over to the right bank of the 
river, and united with the train that set out on the evening of 
the 27th for the James River. 

It would almost seem as if the Government of the United 
States anticipated, at this period, the failure of McClellan’s 
expedition. On June 27th President Lincoln issued an order 
creating the “ Army of Virginia,” to consist of the forces of 
Fremont, in their Mountain Department; of Banks, in their 
Shenandoah Department; and of McDowell, at Fredericksburg. 
The command of this army was assigned to Major-General 
John Pope. This cut off all reénforcements from McDowell to 
McClellan. 

In expectation of Jackson’s arrival on the enemy’s right, 
the battle was renewed at dawn, and continued with animation 
about two hours, during which the passage of the creek was 
attempted, and our troops forced their way to its banks, where 
their progress was arrested by the nature of the stream and the 


fe 


136 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


resistance encountered. They maintained their position while 
preparations were being made to cross at. another point nearer 
the Chickahominy. Before these were completed, Jackson 
crossed Beaver Dam above, and the enemy abandoned his in- 
trenchments, and retired rapidly down the river, destroying a 
great deal of property, but leaving much in his deserted camps, 
After repairing the bridges over Beaver Dam, the several 
columns resumed their advance, as nearly as possible, as pre- 
scribed in the order. Jackson, with whom D. H. Hill had 
united, bore to the left, in order to cut off reénforcements to 
the enemy or intercept his retreat in that direction, Long- 
street and A. P. Hill moved nearer the Chickahominy. Many 
prisoners were taken in their progress; and the conflagration of 
wagons and stores marked the course of the retreating army. 
Longstreet and Hill reached the vicinity of New Bridge about 
noon. It was ascertained that the enemy had taken a position 
behind Powhite Creek, prepared to dispute our progress. He 
occupied a range of hills, with his right resting in the vicinity 
of McGhee’s house, and his left near that of Dr. Gaines, on a 
wooded bluff, which rose abruptly from a deep ravine. The 
ravine was filled with sharpshooters, to whom its banks gave 
protection.- A second line of infantry was stationed on the side 
of the hill, overlooking the first, and protected by a breastwork 
of logs. A third occupied the crest, strengthened with rifle- 
trenches, and crowned with artillery. The approach to this 
position was over an open plain, about a quarter of a mile wide, 
commanded by a triple line of fire, and swept by the heavy bat- 
teries south of the Chickahominy. In front of his center and 
right the ground was generally open, bounded on the side of 
our approach by a wood, with dense and tangled undergrowth, 
and traversed by a sluggish stream, which converted the soil 
into a deep morass. The woods on the further side of the 
swamp were occupied by sharpshooters, and trees had been 
felled to increase the difficulty of its passage, and detain our 
advancing columns under the fire of infantry massed on the 
slopes of the opposite hills, and of the batteries on their crests. 
Pressing on toward the York River Railroad, A. P. Hill, 
who was in advance, reached the vicinity of New Cold Har- 


1862] BATTLE OF NEW COLD HARBOR. 1387 


bor about 2 P.m., where he encountered the foe. He immedi- 
ately formed his ite nearly parallel to the road leading from 
that place toward MecGhee’s house, and soon became hotly en- 
gaged. The arrival of Jackson on our left was momentarily 
expected, and it was supposed that his approach would cause 
the extension of the opposing line in that direction. Under 
this impression, Longstreet was held back until this movement 
should commence. The principal part of the enemy’s army was 
now on the north side of the Chickahominy. Hill’s single 
division met this large force with the impetuous courage for 
which that officer and his troops were distinguished. They 
drove it back, and assailed it in its strong position on the ridge. 
The battle raged fiercely, and with varying fortune, more than 
two hours. Three regiments pierced the enemy’s line, and 
forced their way to the crest of the hill on his left, but were 
compelled to fall back before overwhelming numbers. This 
superior force, assisted by the fire of the batteries south of 
the Chickahominy, which played incessantly on our columns 
as they pressed through the difficulties that obstructed their 
way, caused them to recoil. Though most of the men had never 
been under fire until the day before, they were rallied, and 
in turn repelled the advance of our assailant. Some brigades 
were broken, others stubbornly maintained their positions, but 
it became apparent that the enemy was gradually gaining ground. 
The attack on our left being delayed by the length of Jackson’s 
march and the obstacles he encountered, Longstreet was ordered 
to make a diversion in Hill’s favor by a feint on the enemy’s 
left. In making this demonstration, the great strength of the 
position already described was discovered, and General Long- 
street perceived that, to render the diversion effectual, the feint 
must be converted into an attack. He resolved, with his char- 
acteristic determination, to carry the heights by assault. His 
column was quickly formed near the open ground, and, as his 
preparations were completed, Jackson arrived, and his right 
division—that of Whiting—took position on the left of Long- 
street. At the same time, D. H. Hill formed on our extreme 
left, and, after a short but bloody conflict, forced his way 
through the morass and obstructions, and drove the foe from 


138 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the woods on the opposite side. Ewell advanced on Hill’s right, 
and became hotly engaged. The first and fourth brigades of 
Jackson’s own division filled the interval between Ewell and 
A. P. Hill. The second and third were sent to the right. The 
arrival of these fresh troops enabled A. P. Hill to withdraw 
some of his brigades, wearied and reduced by their long and 
arduous conflict. The lines being now complete, a general ad- 
vance from right to left was ordered. On the right, the troops 
moved forward with steadiness, unchecked by the terrible fire 
from the triple lines of infantry on the hill, and the cannon on 
both sides of the river, which burst upon them as they emerged 
upon the plain. The dead and wounded marked the line of 
their intrepid advance, the brave Texans leading, closely fol- 
lowed by their no less daring comrades. The enemy were 
driven from the ravine to the first line of breastworks, over 
which our impetuous column dashed up to the intrenchments 
on the crest. These were quickly stormed, fourteen pieces of 
artillery captured, and the foe driven into the field beyond. 
Fresh troops came to his support, and he endeavored repeatedly 
to rally, but in vain. He was forced back with great slaughter 
until he reached the woods on the banks of the Chickahominy, 
and night put an end to the pursuit. Long lines of dead and 
wounded marked each stand made by the enemy in his stubborn 
resistance, and the field over which he retreated was strewed 
with the slain. On the left, the attack was no less vigorous and 
successful. D.H. Hill charged across the open ground in front, 
one of his regiments having first bravely carried a battery whose 
fire enfiladed his advance. Gallantly supported by the troops 
on his right, who pressed forward with unfaltering resolution, 
he reached the crest of the ridge, and, after a sanguinary strug- 
gle, broke the enemy’s line, captured several of his batteries, 
and drove him in confusion toward the Chickahominy, until 
darkness rendered further pursuit impossible. Our troops re- 
mained in undisturbed possession of the field, covered with the 
dead and wounded of our opponent; and his broken forces fled 
to the river or wandered through the woods. Owing to the 
nature of the country, the cavalry was unable to participate in 
the general engagement. It, however, rendered valuable ser- 


ON ee 


i. 


1862] FURTHER RETREAT OF THE ENEMY. 139 


vice in guarding Jackson’s flank, and took a large number of 
prisoners. 

On the morning of the 28th it was ascertained that none of 
the enemy remained in our front north of the Chickahominy. 
As he might yet intend to give battle to preserve his communi- 
cations, the Ninth Cavalry, supported by Ewell’s division, was 
ordered to seize the York River Railroad, and General Stuart 
with his main body to codperate. When the cavalry reached 
Dispatch Station, the enemy retreated to the south bank of the 
Chickahominy, and burned the railroad-bridge. During the 
forenoon, columns of dust south of the river showed that he 
was in motion. The abandonment of the railroad and de- 
struction of the bridge proved that no further attempt would 
be made to hold that line. But, from the position the enemy 
occupied, the roads which led toward the James River would also 
enable him to reach the lower bridges over the Chickahominy, 
and retreat down the Peninsula. In the latter event, it was ne- 
cessary that our troops should continue on the north bank of the 
river, and, until the intention of General McClellan was discov- 
ered, it was deemed injudicious to change their disposition. 
Ewell was therefore ordered to proceed to Bottom’s Bridge, to 
guard that point, and the cavalry to watch the bridges below. 
No certain indications of a retreat to the James River were dis- 
covered by our forces on the south side of the Chickahominy, 
and late in the afternoon the enemy’s works were reported to be 
fully manned. The strength of these fortifications prevented 
Generals Huger and Magruder from discovering what was pass- 
ing in their front. Below the enemy’s works the country was 
densely wooded and intersected by swamps, concealing his move- 
ments and precluding reconnaissances except by the regular 
roads, all of which were strongly guarded. The bridges over the 
Chickahominy in rear of the enemy were destroyed, and their 
reconstruction by us was impracticable in the presence of his 
whole army and powerful batteries. "We were therefore com- 
pelled to wait until his purpose should be developed. Generals 
Huger and Magruder were again directed to use the utmost vigi- 
lance, and to pursue the foe vigorously should they discover that 
he was retreating. During the afternoon of the 28th the signs 


140 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


were suggestive of a general movement, and, no indications of 
his approach to the lower bridges of the Chickahominy having 
been discovered by the pickets in observation at those points, 
it became inferable that General McClellan was about to retreat 
to the James River. 


CHAPTER.XXTY. 


Retreat of the Enemy.—Pursuit and Battle.—Night.—Further Retreat of the Enemy. 
—Progress of General Jackson.—The Enemy at Frazier’s Farm.—Position of 
General Holmes.—Advance of General Longstreet.—Remarkable Features of the 
Battle—Malvern Hill—Our Position—The Attack.—Expedition of General 
Stuart.—Destruction of the Enemy’s Stores.—Assaults on the Enemy.—Retreat 
to Westover on the James.—Siege of Richmond raised.—Number of Prisoners 
taken.—Strength of our Forces.—Strength of our Forces at Seven Pines and 
after—Strength of the Enemy. 


Dorie the night I visited the several commands along the 
intrenchment on the south side of the Chickahominy. Gen- 
eral Huger’s was on the right, General McLaws’s in the center, 
and General Magruder’s on the left. The night was quite dark, 
especially so in the woods in front of our line, and, in expressing 
my opinion to the officers that the enemy would commence a 
retreat before morning, I gave special instructions as to the pre- 
cautions necessary in order certainly to hear when the movement 
commenced. In the confusion of such a movement, with nar- 
row roads and heavy trains, a favorable opportunity was offered 
for attack. It fell out, however, that the enemy did move be- 
fore morning, and that the fact of the works having been evacu- 
ated was first learned by an officer on the north side of the river, 
who, the next morning, the 29th, about sunrise, was examining 
their works by the aid of a field-glass. 

Generals Longstreet and A. P. Hill were promptly ordered 
to recross the Chickahominy at New Bridge, and move by the 
Darbytown and Long Bridge roads. General Lee, having sent 
his engineer, Captain Meade, to examine the condition of the 
abandoned works, came to the south side of the Chickahominy 
to unite his command and direct its movements. 

Magruder and Huger found the whole line of works deserted, 


1862] ; PURSUIT PREVENTED BY THE DARKNESS. 141 


and large quantities of military stores of every description aban- 
doned or destroyed. They were immediately ordered in pursuit, 
the former by the Charles City road, so as to take the enemy’s 
army in flank ; and the latter by the Williamsburg road, to at- 
tack his rear. Jackson was directed to cross the “Grapevine” 
Bridge, and move down the south side of the Chickahominy. 
Magruder reached the vicinity of Savage Station, where he came 
upon the rear-guard of the retreating army. Being informed 
that it was advancing, he halted and sent for reénforcements. 
Two brigades of Huger’s division were ordered to his support, 
but were subsequently withdrawn, it having been ascertained 
that the force in Magruder’s front was merely covering the re- 
treat of the main body. 

Jackson’s route led to the flank and rear of Savage Station, 
but he was delayed by the necessity of reconstructing the 
“Grapevine” Bridge. 

Late in the afternoon Magruder attacked the enemy with 
one of his divisions and two regiments of another. A severe 
action ensued, and continued about two hours, when night put 
an end to the conflict. The troops displayed great gallantry, 
and inflicted heavy loss; but, owing to the lateness of the hour 
and the small force engaged, the result was not decisive, and 
the enemy continued his retreat under cover of night, leaving 
several hundred prisoners, with his dead and wounded, in our 
hands. Our loss was small in numbers but great in value. 
Among others who could ill be spared, here fell the gallant sol- 
dier, the useful citizen, the true friend and Christian gentleman, 
Brigadier-General Richard Griffith. He had served with dis- 
tinction in foreign war, and, when the South was invaded, was 
among the first to take up arms in defense of our rights. 

At Savage Station were found about twenty-five hundred 
men in hospital, and a large amount of property. Stores of 
much value had been destroyed, including the necessary medi- 
eal supplies for the sick and wounded. The night was so dark 
that, before the battle ended, it was only by challenging that on 
several occasions it was determined whether the troops in front 
were friends or foes. It was therefore deemed unadvisable to 
attempt immediate pursuit. 


142 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Our troops slept upon their arms, and in the morning it was 
found that the enemy had retreated during the night, and, by 
the time thus gained, he was enabled to cross the White-Oak 
Creek, and destroy the bridge. 

Early on the 30th Jackson reached Savage Station. He was 
directed to pursue the enemy on the road he had taken, and 
Magruder to follow Longstreet by the Darbytown road. As 
Jackson advanced, he captured so many prisoners and collected 
so large a number of arms, that two regiments had to be de- 
tached for their security. His progress at White-Oak Swamp 
was checked by the enemy, who occupied the opposite side, and 
obstinately resisted the rebuilding of the bridge. 

Longstreet and A. P. Hill, continuing their advance, on the 
30th came upon the foe strongly posted near the intersection 
of the Long Bridge and Charles City roads, at the place known 
in the military reports as Frazier’s Farm. 

Huger’s route led to the right of this position, Jackson’s to 
* the rear, and the arrival of their commands was awaited, to be- 
gin the attack. . 

On the 29th General Holmes had crossed from the south 
side of the James River, and, on the 30th, was reénforced by a 
detachment of General Wise’s brigade. He moved down the 
River road, with a view to gain, near to Malvern Hill, a position 
which would command the supposed route of the retreating 
army. 

It is an extraordinary fact that, though the capital had been 
threatened by an attack from the seaboard on the right, though 
our army had retreated from Yorktown up to the Chickahom- 
iny, and, after encamping there for a time, had crossed the river 
and moved up to Richmond, yet, when at the close of the bat- 
tles around Richmond McClellan retreated and was pursued 
toward the James River, we had no maps of the country in 
which we were operating; our generals were ignorant of the 
roads, and their guides knew little more than the way from 
their homes to Richmond. It was this fatal defect in prepara- 
tion, and the erroneous answers of the guides, that caused Gen- 
eral Lee first to post Holmes and Wise, when they came down 
the River road, at New Market, where, he was told, was the 


1862] THE POSITION OF GENERAL HOLMES. 143 


route that McClellan must pursue in his retreat to the James. 
Subsequently learning that there was another road, by the Wil- 
lis church, which would better serve the purpose of the retreat- 
ing foe, Holmes’s command was moved up to a position on 
that road where, at the foot of a hill which concealed from view 
the enemy’s line, he remained under the fire of the enemy’s 
gunboats, the huge, shrieking shells from which dispersed a 
portion of his cavalry and artillery, though the faithful old sol- 
dier remained with the rest of his command, waiting, accord- 
ing to his orders, for the enemy with his trains to pass; but, 
taking neither of the roads pointed out to General Lee, he re- 
treated by the skorter and better route, which led by Dr. Poin- 
dexter’s house to Harrison’s Landing. It has been alleged that 
General Holmes was tardy in getting into position, and failed 
to use his artillery as he had been ordered. Both statements 
are incorrect. He first took position when and where he was di- 
rected, and, soon after, he moved to the last position to which 
he was assigned. The dust of his advancing column caused a - 
heavy fire from the gunboats to be opened upon him, and, in men 
who had never before seen the huge shells then fired, they 
inspired a degree of terror not justified by their effectiveness. 
The enemy, instead of being a straggling mass moving toward 
the James River, as had been reported, were found halted be- 
tween West’s house and Malvern Hill on ground commanding 
Holmes’s position, with an open field between them. 
General Holmes ordered his chief of artillery to commence 
firing upon the enemy’s infantry, which immediately gave way, 
but a heavy fire of twenty-five or thirty guns promptly replied 
to our battery, and formed, with the gunboats, a cross-fire upon 
General Holmes’s command. The numerical superiority of the 
opposing force, both in infantry and artillery, would have made 
it worse than useless to attempt an assault unless previously re- 
enforced, and, as no reénforcements arrived, Holmes, about an 
hour after nightfall, withdrew to a point somewhat in advance 
of the one he had held in the morning. Though the enemy 
continued their cannonade until after dark, and most of the 
troops were new levies, General Holmes reported that they be- 
haved well under the trying circumstances to which they were 


144 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


exposed, except a portion of his artillery and cavalry, which gave 
way in disorder, probably from the effect of the ten-inch shells, 
which were to them a novel implement of war; for when I met 
them, say half a mile from the point they had left, and suc- 
ceeded in stopping them, another shell fell and exploded near 
us in the top of a wide-spreading tree, giving a shower of metal 
and limbs, which soon after caused them to resume their flight 
in a manner that plainly showed no moral power could stop 
them within the range of those shells. It was after a personal 
and hazardous reconnaissance that General Lee assigned Gen- 
eral Holmes to his last position ; and when I remonstrated with 
General Lee, whom I met returning from his reconnaissance, 
on account of the exposure to which he had subjected himself, 
he said he could not get the required information otherwise, 
and therefore had gone himself. 

After the close of the battle of Malvern Hill, General 
Holmes found that a deep ravine led up to the rear of the left 
flank of the enemy’s line, and expressed his regret that it had 
not been known, and that he had not been ordered, when the 
attack was made in front, to move up that ravine and simulta- 
neously assail in flank and reverse. It was not until after he 
had explained with regret the lost, because unknown, oppor- 
tunity, that he was criticised as having failed to do his whole 
duty at the battle of Malvern Hill. 

He has passed beyond the reach of censure or of praise, after 
serving his country on many fields wisely and well. I, who 
knew him from our schoolboy days, who served with him in 
garrison and in the field, and with pride watched him as he gal- 
lantly led a storming party up a rocky height at Monterey, and 
was intimately acquainted with his whole career during our sec- 
tional war, bear willing testimony to the purity, self-abnega- 
tion, generosity, fidelity, and gallantry which characterized him 
as a man and a soldier. 

General Huger reported that his progress was delayed by trees 
which his opponent had felled across the Williamsburg road. In 
the afternoon, after passing the obstructions and driving off the 
men who were still cutting down trees, they came upon an open 
field (P. Williams’s), where they were assailed by a battery of 


1862] THE BATTLE OF FRAZIER’S FARM. 145 


rifled guns. The artillery was brought up, and replied to the 
fire. In the mean time a column of infantry was moved to the 
right, so as to turn the battery, and the combat was ended. The 
report of this firing was heard at Frazier’s Farm, and erro- 
neously supposed to indicate the near approach of Huger’s col- 
umn, and, it has been frequently stated, induced General Long- 
street to open fire with some of his batteries as notice to 
General Huger where our troops were, and that thus the en- 
gagement was brought on. General A. P. Hill, who was in 
front and had made the dispositions of our troops while hope- 
fully waiting for the arrival of Jackson and Huger, states that 
the fight commenced by fire from the enemy’s artillery, which 
swept down the road, ete. This not only concurs with my rec- 
ollection of the event, but is more in keeping with the design 
to wait for the expected reénforcements. 

The detention of Huger, as above stated, and the failure of 
Jackson to force a passage of the White-Oak Swamp, left Long- 
street and Hill, without the expected support, to maintain the 
unequal conflict as best they might. The superiority of num- 
bers and advantage of position were on the side of the enemy. 
The battle raged furiously until 9 p. m. By that time the 
enemy had been driven with great slaughter from every posi- 
tion but one, which he maintained until he was enabled to with- 
draw under cover of darkness. At the close of the struggle 
nearly the entire field remained in our possession, covered with 
the enemy’s dead and wounded. Many prisoners, including a 
general of division, were captured, and several batteries with 
some thousands of small-arms were taken. 

After this engagement, Magruder, who had been ordered to 
go to the support of Holmes, was recalled, to relieve the troops 
of Longstreet and Hill. He arrived during the night, with the 
troops of his command much fatigued by the long, hot march. 

In the battle of Frazier’s Farm the troops of Longstreet and 
Hill, though disappointed in the expectation of support, and 
contending against superior numbers advantageously posted, 
made their attack successful by the most heroic courage and 
unfaltering determination. . 

Nothing could surpass the bearing of General Hill on that 

57 


146 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


occasion, and I often recur with admiration to the manner in 
which Longstreet, when Hill’s command seemed about to be 
overborne, steadily led his reserve to the rescue, as he might 
have marched ona parade. The mutual confidence between 
himself and his men was manifested by the calm manner in 
which they went into the desperate struggle. The skill and 
courage which made that corps illustrious on former as well 
as future fields were never more needed or better exemplified 
than on this. 

The current of the battle which was then setting against us 
was reversed, and the results which have been stated were gained. 
That more important consequences would have followed had 
Huger and Jackson, or either of them, arrived in time to take 
part in the conflict, is unquestionable; and there is little hazard 
in saying that the army of McClellan would have been riven in 
twain, beaten in detail, and could never, as an organized body, © 
have reached the James River. 

Our troops slept on the battle-field they had that day won, 
and couriers were sent in the night with instructions to hasten 
the march of the troops who had been expected during the day. 

Valor less true or devotion to their cause less sincere than 
that which pervaded our army and sustained its commanders 
would, in this hour of thinned ranks and physical exhaustion, 
have thought of the expedient of retreat; but, so far as I re. 
member, no such resort was contemplated. To bring up reén- 
forcements and attack again was alike the expectation and the 
wish. 

During the night, humanity, the crowning grace of the 
knightly soldier, secured for the wounded such care as was pos- 
sible, not only to those of our own army, but also to those of 
the enemy who had been left upon the field. 

This battle was in many respects one of the most remarkable 
of the war. Here occurred on several occasions the capture of 
batteries by the impetuous charge of our infantry, defying the 
canister and grape which plowed through their ranks, and many 
hand-to-hand conflicts, where bayonet-wounds were freely given 
and received, and men fought with clubbed muskets in the life- 
and-death encounter. 


1862] THE POSITION AT MALVERN HILL. 147 


The estimated strength of the enemy was double our own, 

and he had the advantage of being in position. From both 
causes it necessarily resulted that our loss was very heavy. To 
the official reports and the minute accounts of others, the want 
of space compels me to refer the reader for a detailed statement 
of the deeds of those who in our day served their country so 
bravely and so well. 
_ During the night those who fought us at Frazier’s Farm 
fell back to the stronger position of Malvern Hill, and by a 
night-march the force which had detained Jackson at White- 
Oak Swamp effected a junction with the other portion of the 
enemy. Early on the 1st of July Jackson reached. the battle- 
field of the previous day, having forced the passage of White- 
Oak Swamp, where he captured some artillery and a number of 
prisoners. He was directed to follow the route of the ene- 
my’s retreat, but soon found him in position on a high ridge 
in front of Malvern Hill. Here, on a line of great natural 
strength, he had posted his powerful artillery, supported by 
his large force of infantry, covered by hastily constructed in- 
trenchments. His left rested near Crew’s house and his right 
near Binford’s. Immediately in his front the ground was open, 
varying in width from a quarter to half a mile, and, sloping 
gradually from the crest, was completely swept by the fire of his 
infantry and artillery. To reach this open ground our troops 
had to advance through a broken and thickly wooded country, 
traversed nearly throughout its whole extent by a swamp pass- 
able at only a few places and difficult at these. The whole was 
within range of the batteries on the heights and the gunboats 
in the river, under whose incessant fire our movements had to 
be executed. 

Jackson formed his line with Whiting’s division on his left 
and D. H. Hill’s on his right, one of Ewell’s brigades occupying 
the interval. The rest of Ewell’s and Jackson’s own division 
were held in reserve. Magruder was directed to take position 
on Jackson’s right, but before his arrival two of Huger’s bri- 
gades came up and were placed next to Hill. Magruder subse- 
quently formed on the right of these brigades, which, with a 
third of Huger’s, were placed under his command. Longstreet 


148 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and A. P. Hill were held in reserve, and took no part in the 
engagement. Owing to ignorance of the country, the dense 
forests impeding necessary communications, and the extreme 
difficulty of the ground, the whole line was not formed until a 
late hour in the afternoon. The obstacles presented by the 
woods and swamp made it impracticable to bring up a sufficient 
amount of artillery to oppose successfully the extraordinary force 
of that arm employed by the enemy, while the field itself afford- 
ed us few positions favorable for its use, and none for its proper 
concentration. 

General W. N. Pendleton, in whom were happily combined 
the highest characteristics of the soldier, the patriot, and the 
Christian, was in chief command of the artillery, and energeti- 
cally strove to bring his long-range guns and reserve artillery 
into a position where they might be effectively used against the 
enemy, but the difficulties before mentioned were found insu- 
perable. : 

Orders were issued for a general advance at a given signal, 
but the causes referred to prevented a proper concert of action 
among the troops. D. H. Hill pressed forward across the open 
field, and engaged the enemy gallantly, breaking and driving 
back his first line; but, a simultaneous advance of the other 
troops not taking place, he found himself unable to maintain 
the ground he had gained against the overwhelming numbers 
and numerous batteries opposed to him, Jackson sent to his 
support his own division and that part of Ewell’s which was in 
reserve ; but, owing to the increasing darkness and intricacy of 
the forest and swamp, they did not arrive in time to render 
the desired assistance. Hill was therefore compelled to aban- 
don part of the ground he had gained, after suffering severe loss 
and inflicting heavy damage. 

On the right the attack was gallantly made by Huger’s and 
Magruder’s commands. Two brigades of the former com- 
menced the action, the other two were subsequently sent to the 
support of Magruder and Hill. Several determined efforts were 
made to storm the hill at Crew’s house. The brigade advanced 
bravely across the open field, raked by the fire of a hundred 
cannon and the musketry of large bodies of infantry. Some 


1862] THE FOE HAD SILENTLY WITHDRAWN. 149 


were broken and gave way; others approached close to the 
guns, driving back the infantry, compelling the advance batter- 
ies to retire to escape capture, and mingling their dead with 
those of the enemy. For want of codperation by the attacking 
columns, their assaults were too weak to break the enemy’s line ; 
and, after struggling gallantly, sustaining and inflicting great 
loss, they were compelled successively to retire. Night was ap- 
proaching when the attack began, and it soon became difficult 
to distinguish friend from foe. The firing continued until after 
9 p.m., but no decided result was gained. 

Part of our troops were withdrawn to their original posi- 
tions; others remained in the open field; and some rested 
within a hundred yards of the batteries that had been so bravely 
but vainly assailed. The lateness of the hour at which the at- 
tack necessarily began gave the foe the full advantage of his supe- 
rior position, and augmented the natural difficulties of our own. 

At the cessation of firing, several fragments of different 
commands were lying down and holding their‘ground within a 
short distance of the enemy’s line, and, as soon as the fighting 
ceased, an informal truce was established by common consent. 
Numerous parties from both armies, with lanterns and litters, 
wandered over the field seeking for the wounded, whose groans 
and calls on all sides could not fail to move with pity the hearts 
of friend and foe. 

The morning dawned with heavy rain, and the enemy’s po- 
sition was seen to have been entirely deserted. The ground 
was covered with his dead and wounded, and his route exhib- 
ited evidence of a precipitate retreat. To the fatigue of hard 
marches and successive battles, enough to have disqualified our 
troops for rapid pursuit, was added the discomfort of being 
thoroughly wet and chilled by rain. I sent out to the neigh- 
boring houses to buy, if it could be had, at any price, enough 
whisky to give to each of the mena single gill, but it could 
not be found. 

The foe had silently withdrawn in the night by a route 
which had been unknown to us, but which was the most direct 
road to Harrison’s Landing, and he had so many hours the start, 
that, among the general officers who expressed to me their opin- 


150 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ion, there was but one who thought it was possible to pursue 
effectively. That was General T. J. Jackson, who quietly said, 
“ They have not all got away if we go immediately after them.” 

During the pursuit, which has just been described, the cav- 
alry of our army had been absent, having been detached on a 
service which was reported as follows: After seizing the York 
River Railroad, on June 28th, and driving the enemy across 
the Chickahominy, the force under General Stuart proceeded 
down the railroad to ascertain if there was any movement of the 
enemy in that direction. He encountered but little opposition, 
and reached the vicinity of the White House on the 29th. On 
his approach the enemy destroyed the greater part of the im- 
mense stores accumulated at that depot, and retreated toward 
Fortress Monroe.. With one gun and some dismounted men 
General Stuart drove off a gunboat, which lay near the White 
House, and rescued a large amount of property, including more 
than ten thousand stand of small-arms, partially burned. Gen- 
eral Stuart describes his march down the enemy’s line of com- 
munication with the York River as one in which he was but 
feebly resisted. He says: 


““We advanced until, coming in view of the White House (a 
former plantation residence of General George Washington), at a 
distance of a quarter of a mile, a large gunboat was discovered 
lying at the landing. . . . I was convinced that a few bold sharp- 
shooters could compel the gunboat to leave. I accordingly ordered 
down about seventy-five, partly of the First and Fourth Virginia 
Cavalry, and partly of the Jeff Davis Legion, armed with the 
rifled carbines. They advanced on this monster so terrible to our 
fancy, and a body of sharpshooters was sent ashore from the boat 
to meet them. . . . To save time I ordered up the howitzer, a few 
shells from which, fired with great accuracy, and bursting directly 
over her decks, caused an instantaneous withdrawal of the sharp- 
shooters, and a precipitous flight under headway of steam down the 
river, . . . An opportunity was here offered for observing the de- 
ceitfulness of the enemy’s pretended reverence for everything as- 
sociated with the name of Washington—for the dwelling-house 
was burned to the ground, not a vestige left except what told of 
desolation and vandalism. 

. “Nine large barges, laden with stores, were on fire as we ap- 


1862] ENEMY’S ESCAPE TO THE JAMES RIVER. 151 


proached ; immense numbers of tents, wagons, and cars in long 
trains, loaded, and five locomotives ; a number of forges; quanti- 
ties of every species of quartermaster’s stores and property, mak- 
aa a total of many millions of dollars—all more or less destroyed. 

. I replied (to a note from the commanding General) that there 
was no evidence of a retreat of the main body down the Williams- 
burg road, and I had no doubt that the enemy, since his defeat, 
was endeavoring to reach the James as a new base, being com- 
pelled to surrender his connection with the York. If the Federal 
people can be convinced that this was a part of McClellan’s plan, 
that it was in his original design for Jackson to turn his right 
flank, and our generals to force him from his strongholds, they 
certainly never can forgive him for the millions of public treasure 
that his superb strategy cost.” 


Leaving one squadron at the White House, he returned to 
guard the lower bridges of the Chickahominy. On the 30th 
he was directed to recross and codperate with Jackson. After 
a long march, he reached the rear of the enemy .at Malvern Hill, 
on the night of July Ist, at the close of the engagement. 

On the 2d of July the pursuit was commenced, the cavalry 
under General Stuart in advance. The knowledge acquired 
since the event renders it more than probable that, could our 
infantry, with a fair amount of artillery, during that day and the 
following night, have been in position on the ridge which over- 
looked the plain where the retreating enemy was encamped on 
the bank of the James River, a large part of his army must have 
dispersed, and the residue would have been captured. It appears, 
from the testimony taken before the United States Congressional 

Yommittee on the Conduct of the War, that it was not until 
July 3d that the heights which overlooked the encampment of 
the retreating army were occupied, and, from the manuscript 
notes on the war by General J. E. B. Stuart, we learn that he 
easily gained and took possession of the heights, and with his 
light howitzer opened fire upon the enemy’s camp, producing 
great commotion. This was described by the veteran soldier, 
General Casey, of the United States Army, thus: 


“The enemy had come down with some artillery upon our 
army massed together on the river, the heights commanding the 


152 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


position not being in our possession. Had the enemy come down 
and taken possession of those heights with a force of twenty or 
thirty thousand men, they would, in my opinion, have taken the 
whole of our army except that small-portion of it that might have 
got off on the transports.” 


General Lee was not a man of hesitation, and they have 
mistaken his character who suppose caution was his vice. He 
was prone to attack, and not slow to press an advantage when 
he gained it. Longstreet and Jackson were ordered to advance, 
but a violent storm which prevailed throughout the day greatly 
retarded their progress. The enemy, harassed and closely fol- 
lowed by the cavalry, succeeded in gaining Westover, on the 
James River, and the protection of his gunboats. His position 
was one of great natural and artificial strength, after the heights 
were occupied and intrenched. It was flanked on each side by 
a creek, and the approach in front was commanded by the heavy 
guns of his shipping, as well as by those mounted in his in- 
trenchments. Under these circumstances it was deemed inex- 
pedient to attack him; and, in view of the condition of our 
troops, who had been marching and fighting almost incessantly 
for seven days, under the most trying circumstances, it was de- 
termined to withdraw, in order to afford to them the repose of 
which they stood so much in need. 

Several days were spent in collecting arms and other prop- 
erty abandoned by the enemy, and, in the mean time, some 
artillery and cavalry were sent below Westover to annoy his 
transports. On July 8th our army returned to the vicinity of 
Richmond. 

Under ordinary circumstances the army of the enemy should 
have been destroyed. Its escape was due to the causes already 
stated. Prominent among these was the want of correct and 
timely information. This fact, together with the character of 
the country, enabled General McClellan skillfully to conceal his 
retreat, and to add much to the obstructions with which nature 
had beset the way of our pursuing columns. We had, however, 
effected our main purpose. The siege of Richmond was raised, 
and the object of a campaign which had been prosecuted after 


1862] THE NUMBER OF OUR TROOPS. 1538 


months of preparation, at an enormous expenditure of men 
and money, was completely frustrated.* 

More than ten thousand prisoners, including officers of rank, 
fifty-two pieces of artillery, and upward of thirty-five thousand 
stand of small-arms were captured. The stores and supplies of 
every description which fell into our hands were great in amount 
and value, but small in comparison with those destroyed by the 
enemy. His losses in battle exceeded our own, as attested by 
the thousands of dead and wounded left on every field, while 
his subsequent inaction shows in what condition the survivors 
reached the protection of the gunboats. 

In the archive office of the War Department in Washington 
there are on file some of the field and monthly returns of the 
strength of the Army of Northern Virginia. These are the 
original papers which were taken from Richmond. They fur- 
nish an accurate statement of the number of men in that army 
at the periods named. They were not made public at the time, 
as I did not think it to be judicious to inform the enemy of 
the numerical weakness of our forces. The following state- 
ments have been taken from those papers by Major Walter H. 
Taylor, of the staff of General Lee, who supervised for several 
years the preparation of the original returns. 

A statement of the strength of the troops under General 
Johnston shows that on May 21, 1862, he had present for duty 


as follows: 


Smith’s division, consisting of the brigades of Whiting, Hood, Hampton, Hat- 


REPO DULON OW 2 aie aiareldicis o.c0 sie, aie che coo vise ese bas ba 2% ele mimaveratate 10,592 
Longstreet’s division, consisting of the brigades of A. P. Hill, Pickett, R. H. 
Anderson, Wison, Colston, and Pryors os. cee cee os 600d were 018 ove aieve 13,816 
Magruder’s division, consisting of the brigades of McLaws, Kershaw, Griffith, 
Copp.boombs, and Di Ri SONS. sci. ec. eee cer ce ce ced matlens ais 15,680 
D. H. Hill’s division, consisting of the brigades of Early, Rodes, Raines, 
Featherston, and the commands of Colonels Ward and Crump........ 11,151 
PN AISVA OCIA aietise aol Wai’ sxsnaiG-epiuhweininin asa) oje)¢ 4 sane evsieln pishuetaasiala 1,289 
ONY G CAN UMLONY: edicts ohele! colelole fare 44 siclele vig esac cele ajo Se ietislewgnins 1,160 
BE CHeal Ne IN EOPAVIG LCT) apie 4) ceieis\'arbis)+1@ ielcic »: a le'sjfoin eres whe edlval el pugana, ole 58,688 


* Reports of Generals Robert E. Lee, Pendleton, A. P. Hill, Muger, Alexander, 
and Major W. H. Taylor, in his “ Four Years with Lee,” have been drawn upon for 


the foregoing. ‘ « 


154 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


STATEMENT OF THE STRENGTH OF THE ARMY COMMANDED BY GENERAL 
R. E. LEE ON JULY 20, 1862. 


PRESENT FOR DUTY: 
DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA AND NORTH CAROLINA. 
Officers, Enlisted men. 
Departmentsot North Carolina ..ces sets sine eeteiialetontencieterl -i-i= 722 11,509 
Longstreet’s division. ......6- 0+ scescces cee foocaeeoee ans 557 7,929 
DTI SCEVISLOM 5 coy yas crete) fnxalayarakeleinerefevale tere clatot Meislelite c 550 8,998 
MoTia wes division (ach, cris scsrci lele's siekeleicia aie cketaciel ates ae 514 7,188 
AC PHBL a IAIVASLOMe cov cyeiy ca03<\eisunle ecele asks erat eras aheeeeeee See 519 10,104 
Andersons) CiVisiON «vars cluuehe Mvere cients elsioleieateerooiens sates ate 357 5,760 
DRAW ones AVGiASTON 401. %e shorts w Hel Ne nevi ote elena oles steerer te 213 38,500 
Whiting Ss GIVISION(.)- fb axce,orelererssceietsioh oie cleele visfersioba)cpaletstelotte 252 8,600 
Stuart: dmcavaley crys rticctestoyeicte ots tote tauel clot a- anal ca rai eee 295 3,740 
Pendleton’ starbillleryiee’.tcsissscccote essere seks bitte eee steeya ret auetn eee 103 1,716 
UM EREN GUO noma gatanats Cito o mocOmoce cmc Comoe 78 1,855 
Total, including Department of North Carolina.......... 4,160 65,399 


ARMY OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA, SEPTEMBER 22, 1862. 


PRESENT FOR DUTY. 


Officers. Enlisted men. 

Longstreet’s command............-- Os eniitae dochind (Gant oo 1,410 19,001 
Jackson’s command ; 

DESH UU SGA STON 05:05 <5 <vere rare eislow cleveseiate eater here eee nein 310 4,739 

A, P. Hill's division. «55... < seen eee cece ee ee teens 318 4,435 

Fi Wolli ss GLVASIO stots catstelay o0is/a <teiial's aisiaisis slater eietes\eneer ore where arate 280 8,144 

FACKSON Ss GUVIBION: jai, store 'g e's Sug iolssrerapeacaeperel alee Ener achat 183 . 2,367 

Total. cccuwaterenorecaterets tolsip aloha eG ciniete's nicgy alata eiele eysaor see 2,501 33,686 


ARMY OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA, SEPTEMBER 80, 1862. 


PRESENT FOR DUTY. 


Officers. Enlisted men, 


LONE eirsetis COMMAND vere ne a clea tele s c's « e's sto eieren stare cte torte 1,927 26,489 
Tacksonisicommanid. <.. cers deals’ soil loksie seid eesete imate a venterer 1,629 21,728 
Reservevantillery os wclrenguerssneyels's laos suet tlereinlnuetels cakes anette 50 716 

AYO O paierdaeti 9 tic.ticia Qoneh a ecc DOMAINS Aeron: 8,606 48,933 


Major Taylor, in his work, states : 


“In addition to the troops above enumerated as the strength 
of General Johnston on May 21, 1862, there were two brigades 
subject to his orders then stationed in the vicinity of Hanover 
Junction, one under the command of General J. R. Anderson, and 
the other under the command of General Branch ; they were sub- 


* No report of cavalry + “Four Years with General Lee.” 


oe a 


1862] AN EXPOSITION OF ALL THE FACTS. 155 


sequently incorporated into the division of General A. P. Hill, 
and participated in the battles around Richmond.” 


He has no official data by which to determine their numbers, 
but, from careful estimates and conference with General Ander- 
son, he estimates the strength of the two at 4,000 effective. 

Subsequent to the date of the return of the army around 
Richmond, heretofore given, but previous to the battle of Seven 
Pines, General Johnston was reénforced by General Huger’s 
division of three brigades. The total strength of these three 
brigades, according to the “ Reports of the Operations of the 
Army of Northern Virginia,” was 5,008 effectives. Taylor says: 


“Tf the strength of these five be added to the return of May 
21st, we shall have sixty-two thousand six hundred and ninety-six 
(62,696) as the effective strength of the army under General John- 
ston on May 31, 1862. 

“Deduct the losses sustained in the battle of Seven Pines as 
shown by the official reports of casualties, say 6,084, and we have 
56,612 as the effective strength of the army when General Lee 
assumed command.” 


There have been various attempts made to point out the ad- 
vantage which might have been obtained if General Lee, in 
succeeding to the command, had renewed on the 1st of June 
the unfinished battle of the 31st of May; and the representation 
that he commenced his campaign, known as the “Seven Days’ 
Battles,” only after he had collected a great army, instead of 
moving with a force not greatly superior to that which his pred- 
ecessor had, has led to the full exposition of all the facts bear- 
ing upon the case. In the “Southern Historical Society Papers,” 
June, 1876, is published an extract from an address of Colonel 
Charles Marshall, secretary and aide-de-camp to General R. E. 
Lee, before the Virginia Division of the Army of Northern 
Virginia. In it Colonel Marshall quotes General J. E. John- 
ston as saying : 

“General Lee did not attack the enemy until the 26th of June, 
because he was employed from the Ist until then in forming a 
great army by bringing to that which I had commanded 15,000 
men from North Carolina under Major-General Holmes, 22,000 


156 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


men from South Carolina and Georgia, and above 16,000 men 
from the ‘ Valley,’ in the divisions of Jackson and Ewell,” ete. 


These numbers added together make 53,000. Colonel Mar- 
shall then proceeds, from oflicial reports, to show that all these 
numbers were exaggerated, and that one brigade, spoken of as 
seven thousand strong—that of General Drayton—was not 
known to be in the Army of Virginia until after the “seven 
days,” and that another brigade, of which General Johnston ad- 
mitted he did not know the strength, Colonel Marshall thought 
it safer to refer to as the “unknown brigade,” which, he sug- 
gests, may have been “a small command under General Evans, 
of South Carolina, who did not join the army until after it 
moved from Richmond.” 

General Holmes’s report, made July 15, 1862, states that 
on the 29th of June he brought his command to the north side 
of the James River, and was joined by General Wise’s brigade. 
With this addition, his force amounted to 6,000 infantry and 
six batteries of artillery. General Ransom’s brigade had been 
transferred from the division of General Holmes to that of Gen- 
eral Huger a short time before General Holmes was ordered to 
join General Lee. The brigade of General Branch had been 
detached at an earlier period; it was on duty near to Hanover 
Junction, and under the command of General J. E. Johnston 
before the battle of Seven Pines. These facts are mentioned to 
account for the small size of General Holmes’s division, which 
had been reduced to two brigades. Ripley’s brigade on the 
26th of June was reported to have an aggregate force of 2,366, 
including pioneers and the ambulance corps. General Law- 
ton’s brigade, when moving up from Georgia to Richmond, 
was ordered to change direction, and join General Jackson in 
the Valley. He subsequently came down with General Jack- 
son, and reports the force which he led into the battle of Cold 
Harbor, on the 27th of June, 1862, as 3,500 men. 

General Lee, after the battle of Seven Pines, had sent two 
large brigades under General Whiting to codperate with Gen- 
eral Jackson in the Valley, and to return with him, according 
to instructions furnished. These brigades were in the battle of 
Seven Pines, and were counted in the force of the army when 


1862] REENFORCEMENTS TO GENERAL LEE. 157 


General Lee took command of it. Lawton’s Georgia brigade, 
as has been stated, was diverted from its destination for a like 
temporary service, and is accounted for as reénforcements 
brought from the south. These three brigades, though coming 
with Jackson and Ewell, were not a part of their divisions, and, 
if their numbers are made to swell the force which Jackson 
brought, they should be elsewhere subtracted. 

General J. A. Early, in the same number of the “ Historical 
_ Society Papers,” in a letter addressed to General J. E. John- 
ston, February 4, 1875, makes an exhaustive examination from 
official reports, and applies various methods of computation to 
the question at issue. Among other facts, he states : 


“ Drayton’s brigade did not come to Virginia until after the 
battles around Richmond. It was composed of the Fifteenth 
South Carolina and the Fiftieth and Fifty-first Georgia Regi- 
ments and Third South Carolina Battalion. A part, if not all, of 
it was engaged in the fight at Secessionville, South Carolina, on 
the 16th of June, 1862. Its first engagement in Virginia was on 
the Rappahannock, 25th of August, 1862. After Sharpsburg, it 
was so small that it was distributed among some other brigades in 
Longstreet’s corps.” 


After minute inquiry, General Early concludes that “the 
whole command that came from the Valley, including the artil- 
lery, the regiment of cavalry, and the Maryland regiment and a 
battery, then known as ‘The Maryland Line,’ could not have 
exceeded 8,000 men.” In this, General Early does not include 
either Lawton’s brigade or the two brigades with Whiting, and 
reaches the conclusion that “the whole force received by General 
Lee was about 23,000—about 30,000 less than your estimate.” 

Taking the number given by General Karly as the entire re- 
enforcement received by General Lee after the battle of Seven 
Pines and before the commencement of the seven days’ battles 
—which those who know his extreme accuracy and minuteness 
of inquiry will be quite ready to do—and deducting from the 
23,000 the casualties in the battle of Seven Pines (6,084), we 
have 16,916; if to this be added whatever number of absentees 
may have joined the army in anticipation of active operations, 
a number which I have no means of ascertaining, the result 


158 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


will be the whole increment to the army with which Geueral 
Lee took the offensive against McClellan. 

It appears from the official returns of the Army of the Botox 
mac that on June 20th General McClellan had present for duty 
115,102 men. It is stated that McClellan reached the James 
River with “between 85,000 and 90,000 men,” and that his 
loss in the seven days’ battles was 15,249; this would make 
the army 105,000 strong at the commencement of the battles.* 
Probably General Dix’s corps of 9,277 men, stationed at For- 
tress Monroe, is not included in this last statement. 


CHAPTER XX Y; 


Forced Emancipation.—Purposes of the United States Government at the Com- 
 mencement of 1862.—Subjugation or Extermination.—The Willing Aid of 
United States Congress.—Attempt to legislate the Subversion of our Social 
Institutions.—Could adopt any Measure Self-Defense would justify.—Slavery 
the Cause of all Troubles, therefore must be removed.—Statements of Presi- 
dent Lincoln’s Inaugural.—Declaration of Sumner.—Abolition Legislation. — 
The Power based on Necessity.—Its Formula.—The System of Legislation 
devised.—Confiscation.—How permitted by the Law of Nations——Views of 
Wheaton; of J. Q. Adams; of Secretary Marcy; of Chief-Justice Marshall.— 
Nature of Confiscation and Proceedings.—Compared with the Acts of the United 
States Congress.—Provisions of the Acts.—Five Thousand Millions of Property 
involved.—Another Feature of the Act.—Confiseates Property within Reach._— 
Procedure against Persons.—Held us as Enemies and Traitors.—Attacked us 
with the Instruments of War and Penalties of Municipal Law.—Emancipation 
to be secured.—Remarks of President Lincoln on signing the Bill.—Remarks 
of Mr. Adams compared.—Another Alarming Usurpation of Congress.— Argu- 
ment for it—No Limit to the War-Power of Congress; how maintained. — 
The Act to emancipate Slaves in the District of Columbia.—Compensation 
promised.—Remarks of President Lincoln.—The Right of Property violated.— 
Words of the Constitution.—The Act to prohibit Slavery in the Territories,— 
The Act making an Additional Article of War.—All Officers forbidden to 
return Fugitives.—Words of the Constitution—The Powers of the Constitution 
unchanged in Peace or War,—The Discharge of Fugitives commanded in the 
Confiscation Act.—Words of the Constitution. 


Ar the commencement of the year 1862 it was the purpose 
of the United States Government to assail us in every manner 
and at every point and with every engine of destruction which 


* Swinton’s ‘“ History of the Army of the Potomac.” 


1862] THE CAUSE OF ALL THE TROUBLES. 159 


could be devised. The usual methods of civilized warfare con- 
sist in the destruction of an enemy’s military power and the 
capture of his capital. These, however, formed only a small 
portion of the purposes of owr enemy. If peace with frater- 
nity and equality in the Union, under the Constitution as inter- 
preted by its framers, had been his aim, this was attainable 
without war; but, seeking supremacy at the cost of a revolution 
in the entire political structure, involving a subversion of the 
Constitution, the subjection of the States, the submission of the 
people, and the establishment of a union under the sword, his 
efforts were all directed to subjugation or extermination. Thus, 
while the Executive was preparing immense armies, iron-clad 
fleets, and huge instruments of war, with which to invade our 
territory and destroy our citizens, the willing aid of an impa- 
tient, enraged Congress was invoked to usurp new powers, to 
legislate the subversion of our social institutions, and to give 
the form of legality to the plunder of a frenzied soldiery. 

That body had no sooner assembled than it brought forward 
the doctrine that the Government of the United States was en- 
gaged in a struggle for its existence, and could therefore resort 
to any measure which a case of self-defense would justify. It 
pretended not to know that the only self-defense authorized in 
the Constitution for the Government created by it, was by the 
peaceful method of the ballot-box; and that, so long as the 
Government fulfilled the objects of its creation (see preamble 
of the Constitution), and exercised its delegated powers within 
their prescribed limits, its surest and strongest defense was to 
be found in that ballot-box. 

The Congress next declared that our institution of slavery 
was the cause of all the troubles of the country, and therefore 
the whole power of the Government must be so directed as to 
remove it. If this had really been the cause of the troubles, 
how easily wise and patriotic statesmen might have furnished 
a relief. Nearly all the slaveholding States had withdrawn 
from the Union, therefore those who had been suffering vica- 
riously might have welcomed their departure, as the removal 
of the cause which disturbed the Union, and have tried the 
experiment of separation. Should the trial have brought more 


160 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


wisdom and a spirit of conciliation to either or both, there 
ight have arisen, as a result of the experiment, a reconstructed 
fraternal Union such as our fathers designed. 

The people of the seceded States had loved the aes 
Shoulder to shoulder with the people of the other States, they 
had bled for its liberties and its honor. Their sacrifices in 
peace had not been less than those in war, and their attachment 
had not diminished by what they had given, nor were they less 
ready to give in the future. The concessions they had made 
for many years and the propositions which followed secegsion 
proved their desire to preserve the peace. 

The authors of the aggressions which had disturbed the 
harmony of the Union had lately acquired power on a sectional 
basis, and were eager for the spoil of their sectional victory. To 
conceal their real motive, and artfully to appeal to the prejudice 
of foreigners, they declared that slavery was the cause of the 
troubles of the country, and of the “ rebellion ” which they were 
engaged in suppressing. In his inaugural address in March, 
1861, President Lincoln said: “I have no purpose, directly 
or indirectly, to interfere with the institution of slavery in the 
States where it exists. I believe I have no lawful right to do 
so, and I have no inclination to do so.” The leader (Sum- 
ner) of the Abolition party in Congress, on February 25, 1861, 
said in the Senate, “I take this occasion to declare most expli- 
citly that I do not think that Congress has any right to interfere 
with slavery in a State”’ The principle thus announced had 
regulated all the legislation of Congress from the beginning of 
its first session in 1789 down to the first session of the Thirty- 
seventh Congress, commencing July 4, 1861. 

A few months after the inaugural address above cited and 
the announcement of the fact above quoted were made, Con- 
gress commenced to legislate for the abolition of slavery. If 
it had the power now to do what it before had not, whence 
was it derived? ‘There had been no addition in the interval to 
the grants in the Constitution ; not a word or letter of that in- 
strument had been changed since the possession of the power 
was disclaimed; yet after July 4, 1861, it was asserted by the 
majority in Cotigeesa that the Cie had power to in 


1862] A “WARD” OF THE GOVERNMENT. 161 


terfere with slavery in the States. Whence came the change ? 
The answer is, It was wrought by the same process and on the 
same plea that tyranny has ever employed against liberty and 
justice—the time-worn excuse of usurpers—necessity ; an excuse 
which is ever assumed as valid, because the usurper claims to 
be the sole judge of his necessity. 

The formula under which it was asserted was as follows: 


“Whereas the laws of the United States have been for some 
time past and now are opposed, and the execution thereof ob- 
structed, etc., by combinations too powerful to be suppressed by 
the ordinary course of judicial proceedings,” ete. 


Therefore, says the plea of necessity, a new power is this 
day found under the Constitution of the United States. This 
means that certain circumstances had transpired in a distant 
portion of the Union, and the powers of the Constitution had 
thereby become enlarged. The inference follows with equal 
reason that, when the circumstances cease to exist, the powers 
of the Constitution will be contracted again to their normal 
state; that is, the powers of the Constitution of the United 
States are enlarged or contracted according to circumstances. 
Mankind can not be surprised at seeing a Government, admin- 
istered on such an interpretation of powers, blunder into a 
civil war, and approach the throes of dissolution. 

Nevertheless, these views were adopted by the Thirty-sey- 
enth Congress of the United States, and a system of legislation 
was devised which embraced the following usurpations: univer- 
sal emancipation in the Confederate States through confiscation 
of private property of all kinds; prohibition of the extension 
of slavery to the Territories; emancipation of slavery in all 
places under the exclusive control of the Government of the 
United States; emancipation with compensation in the border 
States and in the District of Columbia ; practical emancipation 
to follow the progress of the armies; all restraints to be re- 
moved from the slaves, so that they could go free wherever 
they pleased, and be fed and clothed, when destitute, at the ex- 
pense of the United States, literally to become a “ ward of the 


Government.” 
58 


162 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The emancipation of slaves through confiscation in States 
where the United States Government had, under the Constitu- 
tion, no authority to interfere with slavery, was a problem which 
the usurpers found it difficult legally or logically to solve, but 
these obstacles were less regarded than the practical difficulty 
in States where the Government had no physical power to en- 
force its edicts. The limited powers granted in the Constitu- 
tion to the Government of the United States were not at all 
applicable to such designs, or commensurate with their execu- 
tion. Now, let us see the little possibility there was for con- 
stitutional liberties and rights to survive, when intrusted to such 
unscrupulous hands. 

In Article I, section 8, the Constitution says: 


“The Congress shall have power to declare war, grant letters 
of marque and reprisal, and make rules concerning captures on 
land and water; to raise and support armies; to provide and 
maintain a navy; to make rules for the government and regula- 
tion of the land and naval forces,” etc. 


This is the grant of power under which the Government of the 
United States makes war upon a foreign nation. If it had not 
been given in the Constitution, there would not have been any 
power under which to conduct a foreign war, such as that of 
1812 against Great Britain or that of 1846 against Mexico. In 
such conflicts the nations engaged recognize each other as sepa- 
rate sovereignties and as public enemies, and use against each 
other all the powers granted by the law of nations. One of 
these powers is the confiscation of the property of the enemy. 
Under the law of nations of modern days this confiscation is 
limited in extent, made under a certain form, and for a defined 
object. 

For the modern laws of war one must look to the usages of 
civilized states and to the publicists who have explained and 
enforced them. These usages constitute themselves the laws of 
war. 

In relation to the capture and confiscation of private prop- 
erty on land, in addition to what has been said in previous 
pages, it may be added that the whole matter has never been 


1862] NATIONAL LAW RELATIVE TO PRIVATE PROPERTY. 163 


better stated than by our great American publicist, Mr. Whea- 
ton, in these words: 


“ By the modern usages of nations, which have now acquired 
the force of law, temples of religion, public edifices devoted to 
civil purposes only, monuments of art, and repositories of science, 
are exempted from the general operations of war. Private prop- 
erty on land is also exempt from confiscation, with the exception 
of such as may become booty in special cases, when taken from 
enemies in the field or in besieged towns, and of military contri- 
butions levied upon the inhabitants of the hostile territory. This 
exemption extends even to the case of an absolute and unqualified 
conquest of the enemy’s country.”—(“ Elements of International 
Law,” p. 421.) 


Mr. John Quincy Adams, in a letter to the Secretary of 
State, dated August 22, 1815, says: 


“Our object is the restoration of all the property, including 
slaves, which, by the usages of war among civilized nations, ought 
not to have been taken. “All private property on shore was of 
that description. It was entitled by the laws of war to exemp- 
tion from capture.” —(4 “ American State Papers,” 116, etc.) 


Again, Mr. William L. Marcy, Secretary of State, in a let- 
ter to the Count de Sartiges, dated July 28, 1856, says: 


“The prevalence of Christianity and the progress of civiliza- 
tion have greatly mitigated the severity of the ancient mode of 
prosecuting hostilities. . . . It is a generally received rule of mod- 
ern warfare, so far at least as operations upon land are concerned, 
that the persons and effects of non-combatants are to be respected. 
The wanton pillage or uncompensated appropriation of individual 
property by an army even in possession of an enemy’s country is 
against the usage of modern times. Such a proceeding at this day 
would be condemned by the enlightened judgment of the world, 
unless warranted by particular circumstances.” 


The words of the late Chief-Justice Marshall on the capture 
and confiscation of private property should not be omitted : 


-“Jt.may not be unworthy of remark that it is very unusual, 
even in cases of conquest, for the conqueror to do more than dis- 


164 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


place the sovereign, and assume dominion over the country. The 
modern usage of nations, which has become law, would be vio- 
lated ; that sense of justice and of right which is acknowledged 
and felt by the whole civilized world would be outraged, if pri- 
vate property should be generally confiscated and private rights 
annulled. The people change their allegiance ; their relation to 
their ancient sovereign is dissolved ; but their relations to each 
other and their rights of property remain undisturbed.”—(“ United 
States vs. Percheman,” 7 Peters, 51.) 


The Government of the United States recognized us as 
under the law of nations by attempting to use against us one of 
the powers of that law. Yet, if we were subject to this power, 
we were most certainly entitled to its protection. This was re- 
fused. That Government exercised against us all the severities 
of the law, and outraged that sense of justice and of right which 
is acknowledged and felt by the whole civilized world by re- 
jecting the observance of its ameliorations. The act of confis- 
cation is a power exercised under the laws of war for the pur- 
pose of indemnifying the captor for his expense and losses; 
and it is upon this basis that it is recognized. At the same 
time there is a mode of procedure attached to its exercise by 
which it is reserved from the domain of plunder and devasta- 
tion. As has been already shown, there are, under the law, ex- 
emptions of certain classes of property. It is further required 
that the property subject to confiscation shall be actually cap- 
tured and taken possession of. It shall then be adjudicated as 
prize by a proper authority, then sold, and the money received 
must be deposited in the public Treasury. Such are the condi- 
tions attached by the law of nations to legal confiscation. 

Now, compare these conditions with the act of Congress, 
that in its true light the usurpations of that body may be seen. 
The act of Congress allowed no exemptions of private prop- 
erty, but confiscated all the property of every kind belonging 
to persons residing in the Confederate States who were engaged 
in hostilities against the United States or who were aiding or 
abetting those engaged in hostilities. This includes slaves as 
well as other property. The act provided that the slaves should 
go free; that is, they were exempted from capture, from being 


1862] THE LAW OF CONFISCATION. 165 


adjudicated and sold, and no proceeds of sale were to be put 
into the public Treasury. The following sections are from the 
act of the United States Congress, passed on August 6, 1861: 


“Section 1. That if, during the present or any future insurrec- 
tion against the Government of the United States after the Presi- 
dent of the United States shall have declared by proclamation that 
the laws of the United States are oppos€d and the execution there- 
of obstructed by combinations too powerful to be suppressed by 
the ordinary course of judicial proceedings or by the power vested 
in the marshals by law, any person, or persons, his, her, or their 
agent, attorney, or employee shall purchase or acquire, sell or give, 
any property, of whatsoever kind or description, with intent to 
use or employ the sqme, or suffer the same to be used or employed 
in aiding, abetting, or promoting such insurrection or resistance 
to the laws, or any person or persons engaged therein, or if any 
person or persons, being the owner or owners of any such proper- 
ty, shall knowingly use or employ or consent to the use or employ- 
ment of the same as aforesaid, all such property is hereby declared 
to be lawful subject of prize and capture wherever found ; and it 
shall be the duty of the President of the United States to cause 
the same to be seized, confiscated, and condemned. 

“Sxrction 3. The proceedings in court shall be for the benefit 
of the United States and the informer equally. 

“Sxcrion 4, That whenever hereafter, during the present in- 
surrection against the Government of the United States, any per- 
son claimed to be held to labor or service under the law of any 
State shall be required or permitted by the person to whom such 
labor or service is claimed to be due, or by the lawful agent of 
such person, to take up arms against the United States, or shall be 
required or permitted by the person to whom such labor or service 
is claimed to be due, or his lawful agent, to work or to be em- 
ployed in or upon any fort, navy-yard, dock, armory, ship, intrench- 
ment, or in any military or naval service whatsoever against the 
Government and lawful authority of the United States, then, and 
in every such case, the person to whom such labor or service is 
claimed to be due shall forfeit his claim to such labor, any law of 
the State or of the United States to the contrary notwithstanding. 
And, whenever thereafter the person claiming such labor or service 
shall seek to enforce his claim, it shall be a full and sufficient an- 


166 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


swer to such claim that the person whose service or labor is claimed 
had been employed in hostile service against the Government of 
the United States contrary to the provisions of this act.” 


The following sections are from the act of Congress passed 
on July 17, 1862: 


“Sxcrion 6. That if any person, within any State or Territory 
of the United States other than those named aforesaid” (Confed- 
erate officers, etc.), “after the passage of this act, being engaged 
in armed rebellion against the Government of the United States, 
or aiding or abetting such rebellion, shall not within sixty days 
after public warning and proclamation duly given and made by 
the President of the United States, cease to aid, countenance, and 
abet such rebellion and return to his allegiance to the United 
States, all the estate and property, moneys, stocks, and credits of 
such person shall be liable to seizure as aforesaid, and it shall be 
the duty of the President to seize and use them as aforesaid, or 
the proceeds thereof. And all sales, transfers, or conveyances of 
any such property, after the expiration of the said sixty days from 
the date of such warning and proclamation, shall be null and void ; 
and it shall be a sufficient bar to any suit brought by such person 
for the possession or use of such property, or any of it, to allege 
and prove that he is one of the persons described in this section. 

“Sxotion 7, That to secure the condemnation and sale of any 
such property, after the same shall have been seized, so that it 
may be made available for the purpose aforesaid, proceedings in 
rem shall be instituted in the name of the United States in any 
district court thereof, or in any territorial court, or in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia, within which 
the property above described, or any part thereof, may be found, 
or into which the same, if movable, may first be brought, which 
proceedings shall conform as nearly as may be to proceedings in 
admiralty or revenue cases ; and if said property, whether real or 
personal, shall be found to have belonged to a person engaged in 
rebellion, or who has given aid or comfort thereto, the same shall 
be condemned as enemy’s property and become the property of 
the United States, and may be disposed of as the court shall de- 
cree, and the proceeds thereof paid into the Treasury of the United 
States for the purposes aforesaid. 

“Sxcrion 9. That all slaves of persons who shall hereafter be 


ry 


1862] EMANCIPATION BY CONFISCATION. 167 


engaged in rebellion against the Government of the United States, 
or who shall in any way give aid or comfort thereto, escaping from 
such persons and taking refuge within the lines of the army ; and 
all slaves captured from such persons or deserted by them and 
coming under the control of the Government of the United States ; 
and all slaves of such persons found or being within any place 
occupied by rebel forces and afterward occupied by the forces of 
the United States, shall be deemed captives of war, and shall be 
for ever free of their servitude, and not again held as slaves. 
“Section 10, That no slave escaping into any State, Terri- 
tory, or the District of Columbia from any other State, shall be 
delivered up, or in any way impeded or hindered of his liberty, 
except for crime or some offense against the laws, unless the per- 
son claiming said fygitive shall first make oath that the person, to 
whom the labor or service of such fugitive is alleged to be due, is 
his lawful owner, and has not borne arms against the United 
States in the present rebellion, nor in any way given aid and com- 
fort thereto ; and no person engaged in the military and naval 
service of the United States shall, under any pretense whatever, 
assume to decide on the validity of the claim of any person to the 
service or labor of any other person, or surrender up any such per- 
son to the claimant, on pain of being dismissed from the service.” 


These above-mentioned proceedings violated all the princi- 
ples of the law of nations, without a shadow of authority for it 
under the Constitution of the United States. The armies of 
the United States were literally authorized to invade the Con- 
federate States, to seize all property as plunder, and to let the 
negroes go free. Our posterity, reading that history, will blush 
that such facts are on record. It was estimated on the floor of 
the House of Representatives that the aggregate amount of prop- 
erty within our limits subject to be acted upon by the provi- 
sions of this act would affect upward of six million people, and 
would deprive them of property of the value of nearly five 
thousand million dollars. 

Said Mr. Garrett Davis, of Kentucky : 


“ Was there ever, in any country that God’s sun ever beamed 
upon, a legislative measure involving such an amount of property 
and such numbers of property-holders ? ” 


168 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


But this is only one feature of the confiscation act which 
was applied to persons who were within the Confederate States, 
in such a position that the ordinary process of the United States 
courts could not be served upon them. They could be reached 
only by the armies. There was another feature equally flagrant 
and criminal. It was extended to all that class of persons giv- 
ing aid and comfort, who could be found within the United 
States, or in such position that the ordinary process of law could 
be served on them. It was derived from Article III, section 3, 
of the Constitution, which says: 


“The Congress shall have the power to declare the punish- 
ment of treason, but no attainder of treason shall work corruption 
of blood, or forfeiture, except during the life of the person at- 
tainted.” 


The mode of procedure against persons under this power 
was determined by other clauses of the Constitution. Article 
III, section 2, declared that— 


“The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall 
be by jury ; and such trial shall be held in the State where the 
said crimes shall have been committed.” 


In section 38, of the same article, it was provided that— 


_ “No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testi- 
mony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on confession in 
open court.” 


This feature of the confiscation act, passed by the Congress 
of the United States, provided for the punishment of the owner 
of property, on the proof of the crime, but excluded the trial by 
jury, and made the forfeiture of the property absolute instead 
of a forfeiture for life. Heavy fines were imposed, and prop- 
erty was sold in fee. The property to which the act applied was 
not a prize under the law of nations, nor booty, nor contraband 
of war, nor enforced military contributions, nor used or em- 
ployed in the war or in resistance to the laws. It was private 
property, outside of the conflict of arms, and forfeited, not be- 
cause it was the instrument of offense, but as a penalty for the 


1862] EMANCIPATION THE FIRST OBJECT. 169 


assertion of his rights by the owner, which was imputed to him 
asacrime. Such proceeding was, in effect, punishment by the 
forfeiture of a man’s entire estate, real and personal, without 
trial by jury, and in utter disregard of the provisions of the 
Constitution. It was an attempt to get a man’s property, real 
and personal, “silver spoons” included, into a prize court, to 
- be tried by the laws of war. 

It will be seen that we were treated by the Congress of the 
United States as holding the twofold relation of enemies and 
traitors, and that they used against us all the instruments of 
war, and all the penalties of municipal law which made the pun- 
ishment of treason to be death. The practical operation, there- 
fore, of these laws was that, under a Constitution which defined 
treason to consist in levying war against the United States, 
which would not suffer the traitor to be condemned except by 
the judgment of his peers, and, when condemned, would not 
forfeit his estate except during his life, the Government of 
the United States did proceed against six million people, with- 
out indictment, without trial by jury, without the proof of two 
witnesses, did adjudge our six millions of people guilty of trea- 
son in levying war, and decree to deprive us of all our estate, 
real and personal, for life, and in fee, being nearly five thou- 
sand million dollars. And, after we had been thus punished, 
without trial by jury, and by the loss in fee of our whole estate, 
the Government of the United States assumed the power, on 
the same charge of levying war, to try us and to hang us. 

The first object to be secured by this act of confiscation was 
the emancipation of all our slaves. Upon his approval of the 
bill, President Lincoln sent a message to Congress, in which 
he said: 


“Tt is startling to say that Congress can free a slave within a 
State, and yet, if it were said the ownership of the slave had first 
been transferred to the nation, and Congress had then liberated 
him, the difficulty would at once vanish, And this is the real case. 
The traitor against the General Government forfeits his slave at 
least as justly as he does any other property ; and he forfeits both 
to the Government against which he offends. The Government, 
so far as there can be ownership, thus owns the forfeited slaves, 


170 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and the question for Congress in regard to them is, ‘Shall they 
be made free or sold to new masters ?’” 


It is amazing to see the utter forgetfulness of all constitu- 
tional obligations and the entire disregard of the conditions of 
the laws of nations manifested in these words of the President 
of the United States. Was he ignorant of their existence, or. 
did he seek to cover up his violation of them by a deceptive 
use of language. It may not be unseasonable to repeat here 
the words of John Quincy Adams, in his letter of August 22, 
1815, as above stated :: 


“Our object is the restoration of all the property, including 
slaves, which, by the usages of war among civilized nations, ought 
not to have been taken.” 


Let posterity answer the questions: Who were the revolu- 
tionists? Who were really destroying the Constitution of the 
United States ¢ 

The agitation of this subject brought out another still more 
alarming usurpation in Congress, and showed that the majority 
were ready to throw aside the last fragments of the Constitution 
in order to secure our subjugation. The argument for this 
usurpation was thus framed: Assuming that the state of the 
“nation” was one of general hostility, and that, being so in- 
volved, it possessed the power of self-defense, it was asserted 
that the supreme power of making and conducting war was ex- 
pressly placed in Congress by the Constitution. “The whole 
powers of war are vested in Congress.”—(“ United States Su- 
preme Court, Brown vs. United States,” 1 Cranch.) There is no 
such power in the judiciary, and the Executive is simply “com- 
mander-in-chief of the army and navy”; all other powers not 
necessarily implied in the command of the military and naval 
forces are expressly given to Congress. 

The theory was that the contingency of actual hostilities 
suspended the Constitution and gave to Congress the sovereign 
power of a nation creating new relations and conferring new” 
rights, imposing extraordinary obligations on the citizens, and 
subjecting them to extraordinary penalties. There is, under 
that view, therefore, no limit on the power of Congress ; it is 


1862] THE WAR POWER VERSUS THE CONSTITUTION. alt 


invested with the absolute powers of war—the civil functions 
of the Government are, for the time being, in abeyance when 
in conflict, and all State and “ national” authority subordinated 
to the extreme authority of Congress, as the supreme power, in 
the peril of external or internal hostilities. The ordinary pro- 
visions of the Constitution peculiar to a state of peace, and all 
laws and municipal regulations, were to yield to the force of 
martial law, as resolved by Congress. This was designated as 
the “‘ war power” of the United States Government. 

I should deem an apology to be due to my readers, in offer- 
ing for their perusal such insane extravagances, under a consti- 
tutional Government of limited powers, had not this doctrine 
been adopted by the United States Government, and subse- 
quently made the basis of some most revolutionary measures for 
the emancipation of the African slaves and the enslavement of 
the free citizens of the South. One must allow that the Cham- 
ber of Deputies of the French National Assembly of 1798 had 
some claims to a respectable degree of political virtue when 
compared with the Thirty-seventh Congress and the Executive 
of the United States. 

The specious argument for this tremendous and sweeping 
usurpation, designated as the “ war power,” as presented by its 
adherents, may be stated in a few words, thus: The Constitu- 
tion confers on Congress all the specific powers incident to war, 
and then further authorizes it “to make all laws which shall be 
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing 
powers.” The words are these: 


“ Congress shall have power to declare war ; to grant letters of 
marque and reprisal ; to make rules concerning captures on land 
and water ; to raise and support armies ; to provide and maintain 
a navy ; to make rules for the government and regulation of the 
land and naval forces ; to provide for calling forth the militia to 
execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel 
invasion ; and to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper 
“for carrying into execution the foregoing powers and all other 
powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the 
United States, or in any department or officer thereof.” * 


* Constitution of the United States, Article I, section 8. 


172 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


It will be seen that this unlimited, despotic power was 
claimed for Congress in the conduct of the war under the last 
clause above, viz., “to make all laws which,” etc. ; whereas no 
one familiar with the rules of legal interpretation will seriously 
contend that the powers of Congress are one atom greater by 
the insertion of this provision than they would have been if it 
had not appeared in the Constitution. The delegation of a 
power gives the incidental means necessary for its execution. 

Another step in the usurpations begun for the destruction 
of slavery was the passage by Congress of an act for the eman- 
cipation of slaves in the District of Columbia. The act eman- 
cipated all persons of African descent held to service within the 
District, immediately upon its passage. Those owners of slaves 
who had not sympathized with us were allowed ninety days to 
prepare and present to commissioners, appointed for that pur- 
pose, the names, ages, and personal description of their slaves, 
who were to be valued by commissioners. No single slave 
could be estimated to be worth more than three hundred dol- 
lars. One million dollars was appropriated to carry the act into 
effect. All claims were to be presented within ninety days after 
the passage of the act, and not thereafter; but there was no 
saving clause for minors, femmes covert, insane or absent per- 
sons. On his approval of the act, the Executive of the United 
States sent a message to Congress, in which he said : 


“T have never doubted the constitutional authority of Congress 
to abolish slavery in the District, and I have ever desired to see 
the national capital freed from the institution in some satisfactory 
way. Hence there never has been in my mind any questions upon 
the subject, except those of expediency, arising in view of all the 
circumstances.” 


For the previous twenty-five or thirty years the subject had 
again and again been presented in Congress, and was always 
rejected. One of the incidents that led to our withdrawal from 


the Union was the apprehension that it was the intention of the © 


United States Government to violate the constitutional right of 
each State to adopt and maintain, to reject or abolish slavery, as 
it pleased. This step showed the justness of our apprehensions. 


a 


1862] INVIOLABILITY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY. 173 


Among the rights guaranteed to every citizen of the United 
States, including the District of Columbia, was the right of 
property. No one could be deprived of his property by the 
Government, except in the manner prescribed and authorized 
by the Constitution. Its words are these: 


“No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property with- 
out due process of law ; nor shall private property be taken for 
public use without just compensation.” * 


Whenever it was necessary in the administration of affairs 
that the Government should take private property for public 
use, it had the right to take that private property on the condi- 
tion of making compensation for it, and on no other condition. 
Also, it could not be taken except for public use, even by mak- 
ing just compensation for it; nor could it be taken to be de- 
stroyed. The simple and sole condition on which the inviola- 
bility of private property could be broken by the Government 
itself was, that it was necessary for public use. Otherwise, there 
was no constitutional right on the part of the Government to 
take the property at all. 

Again, this property, thus necessary, must be taken by due 
process of law. The Government had not the right to declare 
the mode, and arbitrarily fix the limit of price which should be 
paid. The negro could be taken only as other property, even 
admitting that he could be taken for emancipation. The due 
process of law required that the citizen’s property should be 
appraised judicially. A court must proceed judicially in every 
case, summon a jury, appoint commissioners, and, under the 
supervision and sanction of the court, the valuation of the slave 
by them must proceed as it does in relation to any other prop- 
erty of the citizen that might be taken by the lawful exercise of 
the power of Congress or of the United States Government. 
Thus it will be seen that by this usurpation of power the Con- 
_ stitution was violated, not only by taking private property for 
other purposes than for public use, but in the neglect to observe 
the due process of law which the Constitution required. 

The next step in the usurpation of power for the destruc- 


* Constitution of the United States, Article V. 


174. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tion of the right of citizens to hold property in slaves was the 
passage by Congress of an act which declared that, after its | 
passage— ' 
“There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in 
any of the Territories of the United States now existing, or which . 
may at any time hereafter be formed or acquired by the United 
States, otherwise than in the punishment of crimes,” etc.. j . 


The subject had been brought forward at every session of 
Congress for a number of years, and was uniformly resisted by 
the advocates of equality among the States. We claimed an 
equal right with the other States to the occupation and settle- 
ment of the Territories which were the common property of 
the Union; and that any infringement of this right was not 
only a violation of the spirit of the Constitution, but destruc- 
tive of that equality of the States so necessary for the main- 
tenance of their Union. We further claimed our right under 
this express provision of the Constitution : 


“The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all 
needful rules and regulations respecting the Territory or other 
property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this 
Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of 
the United States or of any particular States.” * 


The obstinate resistance of the consolidation school to our 
views was an evidence of their aggressive purposes, and jus- 
tified still further our apprehensions of their intention to vio- 
late our constitutional rights. 

Another step taken to accomplish the emancipation of our 
slaves was the passage by Congress of an act making an addi- 
tional article of war for the government of the army of the 
‘United States. It was in these words: 


“* All officers or persons in the military or naval service of the 
United States are prohibited from employing any of the forces 
under their respective commands for the purpose of returning 
fugitives from service or labor, who may have escaped from any 
persons to whom such service or labor is claimed to be due ; and 


* Constitution of the United States, Article IV, section 3, clause 2. 


1862] THE SUPREME LAW OF THE LAND. 175 


any officer who shall be found guilty by a court-martial of violat- 
ing this article shall be dismissed from the service.” 


The Constitution of the United States expressly declares 
that all such persons 


“Shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such 
service or labor may be due.” * 


In this instance Congress passed an act declaring that they 
shall not be delivered up on such claim; and, as a penalty for 
disobedience, any officer of the army or navy should be dis- 
missed from the service. Thus an act of Congress directly for- 
bade that which the Constitution commanded. A more fla- 
grant outrage upon the constitutional obligation could not be 
committed. 

But, it may be said, a state of war existed. That does not 
diminish the crime of the Congress. The commands of the 
Constitution are positive, direct, unchanged, and unrelaxed by 
circumstances. They are equally in force in a state of war and 
in a state of peace. The powers are delegated, and can not be 
amended or changed by war or peace. Its words are these: 


“ This Constitution, and the laws of the United States, which 
shall be made in pursuance thereof, shall be the supreme law, and 
the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the 
Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding. 
The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the mem- 
bers of the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial 
officers, both of the United States and of the several States, shall 
be bound by oath or affirmation to support this Constitution.” + 


It declares itself to be, within its province, the supreme law 
of the United States, not merely during the condition of peace, 
but continuing through all times and events supreme through- 
out the Union, until it should be altered or amended in the 
manner prescribed. 

Another instance of the like flagrant violation of the Con- 
stitution is to be found in the ninth and tenth sections of the 


* Constitution of the United States, Article IV, section2. + Ibid., Article VI. 


176 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


confiscation act previously referred to. The Constitution of 
the United States in Article IV, section 3, says: 


“No person held to service or labor in one State, under the 
laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law 
or regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor.” 


It will be seen, by reference to the Constitution, that the 
first part of the clause here referred to forbids the discharge of 
the fugitive, and the second part commands his delivery to the 
claimant. It has just been stated in what manner Congress 
commanded the claim for delivery to be repudiated. The “ dis- 
charge from such service and labor,” in consequence of any 
State law or regulation, is forbidden. Thisis a part of the Con- 
stitution, and it is thereby made the duty of the executive, 
legislative, and judicial departments of the United States Gov- 
ernment to enforce the prohibition, to make sure that the fugi- 
tive is not discharged by any action of a State. 

Will the friends of constitutional liberty believe our assér- 
tion that these acts, the execution of which it was so expressly 
made the duty of the United States Government to prevent, 
that Government itself did do in the most explicit and effective 
manner? The Constitution forbids the discharge ; Congress and 
the Executive, each, not only commanded the discharge, but, to 
make it sure and thorough, forbade the incipiency of an appre- 
hension—not even permitting the shadow of an occasion for a 
discharge. Could human ingenuity devise a method for a more 
perfect subversion of a constitutional duty? The provisions of 
the act are in these words: 


“All slaves of persons who shall hereafter be engaged in re- 
bellion against the Government of the United States, or who shall 
in any way give aid or comfort thereto, escaping from such’ per- 
sons and taking refuge within the lines of the army ; and all slaves 
captured from such persons or deserted by them and coming 
under the control of the Government of the United States ; and 
all slaves of such persons found or being within any place occu- 
pied by rebel forces and afterward occupied by the forces of the 
United States, shall be deemed captives of war, and shall be for 
ever free of their servitude, and not again held as slaves.” 


1862] THE PROVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION. WRG 


Again, the next section of the same act says: 


“No slave escaping into any State, Territory, or the District 
of Columbia from any other State, shall be delivered up; or in any 
way impeded or hindered of his liberty, except for crime or some 
offense against the laws, unless the person claiming said fugitive 
shall first make oath that the person, to whom the labor or service 
of such fugitive is alleged to be due, is his lawful owner, and has 
not borne arms against the United States in the present rebellion, 
nor in any way given aid and comfort thereto.” * 


In this connection it is worth while to read again the words 
of the Constitution : 


“No person held to service or labor in one State, under the 
laws thereof, escaping into another, ‘shall, in consequence of any 
law or regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, 
but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such ser- 
vice or labor may be due.” 


’ Let it be observed that there is no limitation, no qualifica- 
tion, no condition whatever attached to this clause of the Con- 
stitution. The words “no person held to service” included 
every slave in the United States. In Article I, section 9, and 
in Article V, are exceptions suspending the operation of the 
general provision. But in this provision there are none, be- 
cause it was intended there should be none. The provision was 
designed to include every slave, and to be in force under all cir- 
cumstances. 

Perhaps it may be urged as an objection to this assertion, 
that the Confederate States were out of the Union and beyond 
the protection of the provisions of the Constitution. This ob- 
jection can not be admitted in extenuation of this crime of Con- 
gress and the Executive; for there was, thus far, no act of Con- 
gress, nor proclamation of the President in existence, showing 
that either of them regarded the Confederate States in any 
other position than as States within the Union, whose citizens 
were subject to all the penalties contained in ee Constitution, 
and therefore entitled to the benefit of all its provisions for 


* Laws of the United States, 1862. 
59 


178 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


their protection. Unhesitatingly it may be said, and as will be 
still more apparent further on in these pages, that all the conduet 
- of the Confederate States, pertaining to the war, consisted in 
just efforts to preserve to themselves and their posterity rights 
and protections guaranteed to them in the Constitution of the 
United States; and that the actions of the Federal Government 
consisted in efforts to subvert those rights, destroy those protec- 
tions, and subjugate us to compliance with its arbitrary will ; 
and that this conduct on their part involved the subversion of 
the Constitution and the destruction of the fundamental prin- 
ciples of liberty. Who is the criminal? Let posterity answer. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Forced Emancipation concluded.— Emancipation Acts of President Lincoln—Eman- 
cipation with Compensation proposed to Border States.—Reasons urged for it. 
—Its Unconstitutionality—Order of General Hunter.—Revoked by President 
Lincoln.—Reasons,—“ The Pressure ” on him.—One Cause of our Secession.— 
The Time to throw off the Mask at Hand.—The Necessity that justified the 
President and Congress also justified Secession—Men united in Defense of 
Liberty called Traitors.—Conference of President Lincoln with Senators and 
Representatives of Border States.—Remarks of Mr. Lincoln.—Reply of Sena- 
tors and Representatives.—Failure of the Proposition.—Three Hundred Thou- 
sand more Men called for.—Declarations of the Antislavery Press.—Truth of 
our Apprehensions.—Reply of President Lincoln.—Another Call for Men.— 
Further Declarations of the Antislavery Press—The Watchword adopted.— 
Memorial of So-called Christians to the President—Reply of President Lincoln. 
—Issue of the Preliminary Proclamation of Emancipation.—Issue of the Final 
Proclamation.—The Military Necessity: asserted.—The Consummation verbally 
reached.—Words of the Declaration of Independence.—Declarations by the 
United States Government of what it intended to do.—True Nature of the Party 
unveiled.— Declarations of President Lincoln.—Vindication of the Sagacity of 
the Southern People.—His Declarations to European Cabinets.—Object of these 
Declarations.—Trick of the Fugitive Thief.—The Boast of Mr. Lincoln calmly 
considered, 


Tue attention of the reader is now invited to a series of 
usurpations in which the President of the United States was 
the principal actor. On March 6, 1862, he began a direct and 
unconstitutional interference with slavery by sending a message 


1862] EXECUTIVE INTERFERING WITH SLAVERY. 179 


to Congress recommending the adoption of a resolution which 
should declare that the United States ought to codperate with 
any State which might adopt the gradual abolition of slavery, : 
giving to such State pecuniary aid, to be used by such State in 
its discretion, to compensate for the inconvenience, public and 
private, produced by such change of system. The reason given 
for the recommendation of the adoption of the resolution was 
that the United States Government would find its highest inter- 
est in such a measure as one of the most important means of 
self-preservation. He said, in explanation, that “ the leaders of 
the existing rebellion entertain the hope that this Government 
will ultimately be forced to acknowledge the independence of 
some part of the disaffected region, and that all the slave States 
north of such part will then say,‘ The Union for which we have 
struggled being already gone, we now choose to go with the 
Southern section.’ To deprive them of this hope substantially 
ends the rebellion, and the initiation of emancipation deprives 
them of it and of all the States initiating it.” 

When it was asked where the power was found in the Con- 
stitution to appropriate the money of the people to carry out 
the purposes of the resolution, it was replied that the legisla- 
tive department of the Government was competent, under these 
words in the preamble of the Constitution, “to provide for the 
general welfare,” to do anything and everything which could 
be considered as promoting the general welfare. It was further 
said that this measure was to be consummated under the war 
power; that whatever was necessary to carry on the war toa 
successful conclusion might be done without restraint under the 
authority, not of the Constitution, but as a military necessity. 
It was further said that the President of the United States had 
thus far failed to meet the just expectations of the party which 
elected him to the office he held; and that his friends were 
to be comforted by the resolution and the message, while the 
people of the border slave States could not fail to observe that 
with the comfort to the North there was mingled an awful 
warning to them. It was denied by the President that it was 
an interference with slavery in the States. It was an artful 
scheme to awaken a controversy in the slave States, and to com- 


180 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


mence the work of emancipation by holding out pecuniary aid 
as an inducement. In every previous declaration the President 
had said that he did not contemplate any interference with do- 
mestic slavery within the States. The resolution was passed by 
large majorities in each House. 

This proposition of President Lincoln was wholly unconsti- 
tutional, because it attempted to do what was expressly forbid- 
den by the Constitution. It proposed a contract between the 
State of Missouri and the Government of the United States 
which, in the language of the act, shall be “irrepealable with- 
out the consent of the United States.” The words of the Con- 
stitution are as follows : 


“No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation, 
grant letters of marque and reprisal, coin money, etc.” * 


This is a prohibition not only upon the power of one State 
to enter into a compact, alliance, confederation, or agreement 
with another State, but also with the Government of the United 
States. 

Again, if the State of Missouri could enter into an irrepeal- 
able agreement or compact with the United States, that sla- 
very should not therein exist after the acceptance on the part of 
Missouri of the act, then it would be an agreement on the part 
of that State to surrender its sovereignty and make the State 
unequal in its rights of sovereignty with the other States of the 
Union. The other States would have the complete right of soy- 
ereignty over their domestic institutions while the State of Mis- 
souri would cease to have such right. The whole system of the 
United States Government would be abrogated by such legisla- 
tion. Again, it is a cardinal principle of the system that the 
people in their sovereign capacity may, from time to time, change 
and alter their organic law; and a provision incorporated in 
the Constitution of Missouri that slavery should never there- 
after exist in that State could not prevent a future sovereign 
convention of its people from reéstablishing slavery within its 
limits. 

It will be observed, from what has been said in the preced- 


* Article I, section 10. 


1862] INTERFERENCE OF MILITARY COMMANDERS. 181 


ing pages, that the usurpations by the Government of the 
United States, both by the legislative and executive depart 
ments, had not only been tolerated but approved. Feeling 
itself, therefore, fortified in its unlimited power from “neces- 
sity,” the wheels of the revolution were now to move with 
accelerated velocity in their destructive work. Accordingly, 
a manifesto soon comes from the Executive on universal eman- 
cipation. On April 25, 1862, the United States Major-General 
Hunter, occupying a position at Hilton Head, South Carolina, 
issued an order declaring the States of Georgia, Florida, and 
South Carolina under martial law: On May 9th the same offi- 
cer issued another order, declaring “the persons held as slaves 
in those States to be for ever free.” The. Executive of the 
United States, on May 19th, issued a proclamation declaring the 
order to be void, and said : 


“I further make known that, whether it be competent for me 
as commander-in-chief of the army and navy to declare the slaves 
of any State or States free, and whether at any time or in any 
case it shall have become a necessity indispensable to the mainte- 
nance of the Government to examine such supposed power, are 
questions which, under my responsibility, I reserve to myself, and 
which I can not feel justified in leaving to the decision of com- 
manders in the field.” 


Speaking of this order of Major-General Hunter soon after- 
ward, President Lincoln, in remarks on July 12, 1862, to the 
border States Representatives, said : 


“In repudiating it, I gave dissatisfaction, if not offense, to 
many whose support the country can not afford to lose. And this 
is not the end of it. The pressure in this direction is still upon 
me, and is increasing.” 


This pressure consisted in the demand of his extreme par- 
tisans that the whole authority of the Government should be 
exerted for the immediate and universal emancipation of the 
slaves. 

By a reference to the statement of the causes of our with- 
drawal from the Union of the United States, it will be seen that 


182 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


one of them consisted in the conviction that the newly elected 
officers of the Government would wield its powers for the de- 
struction of the institutions of the Southern States. The facts 
already related in these pages furnish ample proofs of the jus- 
tice and accuracy of this conviction. 

The time was now close at hand when the mask was to be 
thrown off, and, at a single dash of the pen, four hundred mill- 
ions of our property was to be annihilated, the whole social 
fabric of the Southern States disrupted, all branches of indus- 
try to be disarranged, good order to be destroyed; and a flood 
of evils many times greater than the loss of property to be in- 
flicted upon the people of the South, thus consummating the 
series of aggressions which had been inflicted for more than 
thirty years. All constitutional protections were to be with- 
drawn, and. the powers of a common government, created for 
common and equal protection to the interests of all, were to be 
arrayed for the destruction of our institutions. The President 
of the United States says: “This is not the end. The pressure 
in this direction is still upon me, and is increasing.” How easy 
it would have been for the Northern people, by a simple, hon- 
est obedience to the provisions of the Constitution, to have 
avoided the commission of all these crimes and horrors! For 
the law which demands obedience to itself guarantees in return 
life and safety. It is not necessary to ask again where the 
President of the United States or the Congress found authority 
for their usurpations. But it should be remembered that, if the 
necessity which they pleaded was an argument to justify their 
violations of all the provisions of the Constitution, the existence 
of such a necessity on their part was a sufficient argument to 
justify our withdrawal from union with them. If necessity on 
their part justified a violation of the Constitution, necessity on 
our part justified secession from them. If the preservation of ' 
the existence of the Union by coercion of the States was an 
argument to justify these violent usurpations by the United 
States Government, it was still more forcibly an argument to 
justify our separation and resistance to invasion; for we were 
struggling for our natural rights, but the Government of the 
United States has no natural rights. 


1862] A PROPOSITION TO “SELL OUT AND BUY OUT.” 183 


How can a people who glory in a Declaration of Indepen- 
dence which broke the slumbers of a world declare that men 
united in defense of liberty, property, and the pursuit of happi- 
ness are “traitors”? Is it henceforth to be a dictum of human- 
ity that man may no more take up arms in defense of rights, 
liberty, and property? Shall it never again in the course of 
human events become lawful “for one people to dissolve the 
political bands which have connected them with another, and to 
assume among the powers of the earth the separate and equal 
station to which the laws of nature and of nature’s God entitle 
them”? Is the highwayman, henceforth, to be the lord of the 
highway, and the poor, plundered traveler to have no property 
which he may defend at the risk of the life of the highwayman ? 

On July 12, 1862, the President of the United States, per- 
sistent in his determination to destroy the institution of slavery, 
invited the Senators and Representatives of the border slave- 
holding States to the Executive Mansion, and addressed them 
on emancipation in their respective States. He said: 


“T intend no reproach or complaint when I assure you that, in 
my opinion, if you all had voted for the resolution in the gradual 
emancipation message of last March, the war would now be sub- 
stantially ended. And the plan therein proposed is yet one of the 
most potent and swift means of ending it. Let the States which 
are in rebellion see definitely and certainly that in no event will 
the States you represent ever join their proposed confederacy, and 
they can not much longer maintain the contest. But you can not 
divest them of their hope to ultimately have you with them so 
long as you show a determination to perpetuate the institution 
within your own States. Beat them at elections as you have over- 
whelmingly done, and, nothing daunted, they still claim you as 
their own. You and I know what the lever of their power is. 
Break that lever before their faces, and they can shake you no 
more for ever.” 


He further said that the incidents of the war might extin- 
guish the institution in their States, and added : 


“How much better for you as seller and the nation as buyer 
to sell out and buy out that without which the war could never 


184 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


have been, than to sink both the thing to be sold and the price of 
it in cutting one another’s throats ! ” 


The reply of the majority, consisting of twenty of the twenty- 
nine Senators and Representatives, subsequently made to the 
President, is worthy of notice. They said that they were not 
of the belief that funds would be provided for the object, or 
that their constituents would reap the fruits of the promise held 
out, and added: 


“The right to hold slaves is a right appertaining to all the 
States of the Union. They have the right to cherish or abolish the 
institution, as their tastes or their interests may prompt, and no 
one is authorized to question the right, or limit its enjoyment. 
And no one has more clearly affirmed that right than you have. 
Your inaugural address does you great honor in this respect, and 
inspired the country with confidence in your fairness and respect 
for law.” 


After asserting that a large portion of our people were fight- 
ing because they believed the Administration was hostile to 
their rights, and was making war on their domestic institutions, 
they further said : 


“Remove their apprehensions ; satisfy them. that no harm is 
intended to them and their institutions ; that this Government is 
not making war on their rights of property, but is simply defend- 
ing its legitimate authority, and they will gladly return to their 
allegiance.” 


This measure of emancipation with compensation soon proved 
a failure. A proposition to appropriate five hundred thousand 
dollars to the object was voted down in the United States Sen- 
ate with great unanimity. The Government was, step by step, 
“educating the people” up to a proclamation of emancipation, 
so as to make entire abolition one of the positive and declared 
issues of the contest. 

The so-called pressure upon the President was now organized 
for a final onset. The Governors of fifteen States united in a 
request that three hundred thousand more men should be called 
out to fill up the reduced ranks, and it was done. The anti- 


1862] HOW WELL FOUNDED OUR APPREHENSIONS. 185 


slavery press then entered the arena. Charges were made 
against the President, in the name of 


“Twenty millions of people, that a great proportion of those 
who triumphed in his election were sorely disappointed and deeply 
pained by the policy he seemed to be pursuing with regard to the 
slaves of the rebels.” 


This is a simple statement of the progress of events, and it 
shows to the world how well founded were our apprehensions, 
at the hour of its election, that the Administration intended 
the destruction of our property and community independence. 
They further said: 


“You are strangely and disastrously remiss in the discharge of 
your official and imperative duty with regard to the emancipation 
provisions of the new confiscation act.” 


They further boldly added : 


“We complain that the Union cause has suffered, and is now 
suffering, immensely from mistaken deference to rebel slavery. 
Had you, sir, in your inaugural address, unmistakably given notice 
that, in case the rebellion already commenced was persisted in, 
and your efforts to preserve the Union and enforce the laws should 
be resisted by armed force, you would recognize no loyal person as 
rightfully held in slavery by a traitor, we believe the rebellion 
would therein have received a staggering if not fatal blow.” 


The President replied at length, saying : 


“T shall do less whenever I shall believe what I am doing hurts 
the cause, and I shall do more whenever I shall believe doing more 
will help the cause. I shall try to correct errors when shown to 
be errors ; and I shall adopt new views so fast as they shall appear 
to be true views. I have here stated my purpose according to my 
view of official duty ; and I intend no modification of my oft- 
expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free.” 


The education of the conservative portion of the Northern 
people up to emancipation was becoming more complete every 
_ day, notwithstanding the professed reluctance of the President. 


id 


186 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Another call for three hundred thousand men was made, but 
enlistments were slow, so that threats of a draft and most liberal 
bounties were required. The champions of emancipation sought 
to derive an advantage from this circumstance. They asserted 
that the reluctance of the people to enter the army was caused 
by the policy of the Government in not adopting bold emanci- 
pation measures. If such were adopted, the streets and by-ways 
would be crowded with volunteers to fight for the freedom of 
the ‘loyal blacks,” and thrice three hundred thousand could be 
easily obtained. They said that slavery in the seceded States 
should be treated as a military question ; it contributed nearly 
all the subsistence which supported the Southern men in arms, 
dug their trenches, and built their fortifications. The watch- 
word which they now adopted was, “ The abolition of slavery by 
the force of arms for the sake of the Union.” 

Meantime, on September 13th, a delegation from the so- 
called “ Christians” in Chicago, Illinois, presented to President 
Lincoln a memorial, requesting him to issue a proclamation of 
emancipation, and urged in its favor such reasons as occurred to 
their minds. President Lincoln replied : 


“What good would a proclamation of emancipation from me 
do, especially as we are now situated? Ido not want to issue a 
document that the whole world would see must necessarily be in- 
operative, like the Pope’s bull against the comet. Would my 
word free the slaves, when I can not even enforce the Constitution 
in the rebel States? Is there a single court, or magistrate, or in- 
dividual that would be influenced by it there? And what reason 
is there to think it would have any greater effect upon the slaves 
than the late law of Congress which I approved, and which offers 
protection and freedom to the slaves of rebel masters who come 
within our lines? Yet I can not learn that that law has caused a 
single slave to come over to us. And suppose they could be in- 
duced by a proclamation of freedom from me to throw themselves 


. upon us, what should we do with them? How can we feed and 


care for such a multitude? .. . 

“Tf, now, the pressure of the war should call off our forces from 
New Orleans to defend some other point, what is to prevent the 
masters from reducing the blacks to slavery again?. . . Now, 


1862] THE MILITARY NECESSITY TESTED. 187 


then, tell me, if you please, what possible result of good would 
follow the issuing of such a proclamation as you desire? I have 
not decided against a proclamation of liberty to the slaves, but 
hold the matter under advisement.” 


Nine days after these remarks were made—on September 
22, 1862—the preliminary proclamation of emancipation was 
_ issued by the President of the United States. It declared that 

at the next session of Congress the proposition for emancipation 
in the border slaveholding States would be again recommend- 
ed, and that on January 1, 1863— 


“ All persons held as slaves within any State or designated part 
of a State, the people whereof shall then be in rebellion against 
the United States, shall be then, thenceforward, and for ever free ; 
and the Executive Government of the United States, incline 
the military and naval authority thereof, will recognize and main- 
tain the freedom of such persons, and will do no act or acts to 
repress such persons, or any of them, in any efforts thos may 
make for their actual freedom.” 


Also, all persons engaged in the military and naval service 
were ordered to obey and enforce the article of war and the sec- 
tions of the confiscation act before mentioned. On January 1, 
1863, another proclamation was issued by the President of the 
United States declaring the emancipation to be absolute within 
the Confederate States, with the exception of a few districts. 
The closing words of the proclamation were these : 


“ And upon this act, sincerely believed to be an act of justice, 
warranted by the Constitution upon military necessity, I invoke 
the considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of 
Almighty God.” 


Let us test the existence of the military necessity here 
spoken of by a few facts. The white male population of the 
Northern States was then 13,690,364. The white male popu- 
lation of the Confederate States was 5,449,463. The number 
of troops which the United States had called into the field ex- 
ceeded one million men. The number of troops which the 
Confederate Government had then in the field was less than 


188 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


four hundred thousand men. The United States Government 
had a navy which was only third in rank in the world. The 
Confederate Government had a navy which at that time con- 
sisted of a single small ship on the ocean. The people of the 
United States had a commerce afloat all over the world. The 
people of the Confederate States had not a single port open 
to commerce. The people of the United States were the rivals 
of the greatest nations in all kinds of manufactures. The people - 
of the Confederate States had few manufactures, and those were 
of articles of inferior importance. The Government of the 
United States possessed the Treasury of a Union of eighty years _ 
with its vast resources. The Confederate States had to create a 
Treasury by the development of financial resources. The am- 
bassadors and representatives of the former were welcomed at 
every court in the world. The representatives of the latter 
were not recognized anywhere. 

Thus the consummation of the original antislavery purposes 
was verbally reached; but even that achievement was attended 
with disunion, bloodshed, and war. In the words of the Dec- 
laration of Independence: 


“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that, whenever any 
form of government becomes destructive of these ends” (life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness), “it is the right of the people 
to alter or to abolish it, and to institute a new government, laying 
its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in 
such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety 
and happiness. . . . When a long train of abuses and usurpations, 
pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce 
them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to 
throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their 
future security.” 


It is thus seen what the United States Government did, and 
our view of this subject would not be complete if we should 
omit to present their solemn declarations of that which they 
intended todo. In his proclamation of April 15, 1861, calling 
for seventy-five thousand men, the President of the United 
States Government said : 


1862] _ TRUE NATURE OF THEIR DESIGNS. 189 


“In any event, the utmost care will be observed, consistently 
with the objects aforesaid, to avoid any devastation, any destruc- 
tion of or interference with property, or any disturbance of peace- 
ful citizens in any part of the country.” 


On the 22d of July, 1861, Congress passed a resolution rela- | 
tive to the war, from which the following is an extract: ° 


“That this war is not waged on our part in any spirit of 
oppression, or for any purpose of conquest or subjugation, or pur- 
pose of overthrowing or interfering with the rights or established 
‘institutions of those [Confederate] States; but to defend and 
maintain the supremacy of the Constitution, and to preserve the 
Union with all the dignity, equality, and rights of the several 
States unimpaired ; and that, as soon as these objects are accom- 
plished, the war ought to cease.” 


The vote in favor of the resolution was: in the Senate, 
yeas 30, nays 4; in the House of Representatives, yeas 117, 
nays 2. 

It may further be observed that these proclamations cited 
above afforded to our whole people the complete and crowning 
proof of the true nature of the designs of the party which 
elevated to power the person then occupying the Presidential 
chair at Washington, and which sought to conceal its purposes 
by every variety of artful device and by the perfidious use of 
the most solemn and repeated pledges on every possible occa- 
sion. A single example may be cited from the declaration 
made by President Lincoln, under the solemnity of his oath as 
Chief Magistrate of the United States, on March 4, 1861: 


“ Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the South- 
ern States that, by the accession of a Republican Administration, 
their property and their peace and personal security are to be 
endangered. There has never been any reasonable cause for such 
apprehensions. Indeed, the most ample evidence to the contrary 
has all the while existed and been open to their inspection. It is 
found in nearly all the public speeches of him who now addresses 
you. Ido but quote from one of those speeches when I declare 
that I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with 
the institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe 


190 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to do 
so. ‘Those who nominated and elected me did so with full knowl- 
edge that I had made this and many similar declarations, and had 
never recanted them. And more than this, they placed in the 
platform for my acceptance, and as a law to themselves and to 
me, the clear and emphatic resolution which I now read : 

“ Resolved, That the maintenance inviolate of the rights of the 
States, and especially the right of each State to order and control 
its own domestic institutions according to its own judgment exclu- 
sively, is essential to that balance of power on which the perfec- 
tion and endurance of our political fabric depend, and we denounce 
the lawless invasion by armed force of the soil of any State or 
Territory, no matter under what pretext, as among the gravest 
crimes.” 


Nor was this declaration of the want of power or disposition 
to interfere with our social system confined to a state of peace. 
Both before and after the actual commencement of hostilities, 
the Executive of the United States repeated in formal official 
communications to the Cabinets of Great Britain and France, 
that it was utterly without constitutional power to do the act 
which it subsequently committed, and that in no possible event, 
whether the secession of these States resulted in the establishment 
of aseparate Confederacy or in the restoration of the Union, 
was there any authority by virtue of which it could either 
restore a disaffected State to the Union by force of arms, or 
make any change in any of its institutions. I refer especially 
for the verification of this assertion to the dispatches addressed 
by the Secretary of State of the United States, under direc- 
tion of the President, to the Ministers of the United States 
at London and Paris, under date of the 10th and 22d of 
April, 1861. 

This proclamation was therefore received by the ane of 
the Confederate States as the fullest vindication of their own 
sagacity in foreseeing the uses to which the dominant party in 
the United States intended from the beginning to apply their 
power. 

For what honest purpose were these declarations made? 
They could deceive no one who was familiar with the powers 


1862] BY SLOW AND BARELY VISIBLE APPROACHES. 191 


and duties of the Federal Government; they were uttered in 
the season of invasion of the Southern States, to coerce them to 
obedience to the agent established by the compact between the 
States, for the purpose of securing domestic tranquillity and the 
blessings of liberty. The power to coerce States was not given, 
and the proposition to make that grant received no favor in the 
Convention which formed the Constitution ; and it isseen by the 
proceedings in the States, when the Constitution was submitted 
to each of them for their ratification or rejection as they might 
choose, that a proposition which would have enabled the Gen- 
eral Government, by force of arms, to control the will of a 
State, would have been fatal to any effort to make a more per- 
fect Union. Such declarations as those cited from the diplo- 
matic correspondence, though devoid of credibility at home, 
might avail in foreign countries to conceal from their govern- 
ments the real purpose of the action of the majority. Mean- 
while, the people of the Confederacy plainly saw that the ideas 
and interests of the Administration were to gain by war the 
empire that would enable it to trample on the Constitution 
which it professed to defend and maintain. 

It was by the slow and barely visible approaches of the ser- 
pent seeking its prey that the aggressions and usurpations of 
the United States Government moved on to the crimes against 
the law of the Union, the usages of war among civilized na- 
tions, the dictates of humanity and the requirements of justice, 
which have been recited. The performance of this task has 
been painful, but persistent and widespread misrepresentation 
of the cause and conduct of the South required the exposure of 
her slanderer.. To unmask the hypocrisy of claiming devotion 
to the Constitution, while violating its letter and spirit for a 
purpose palpably hostile to it, was needful for the defense of 
the South. In the future progress of this work: it will be seen 
how often we have been charged with the very offenses com- 
mitted by our enemy—offenses of which the South was entirely 
innocent, and of which a chivalrous people would be incapable. 
There was in this the old trick of the fugitive thief who cries 
“Stop thief!” as he runs. 

In his message to Congress one hg later, on December 8, 


193 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


1863, the President of the United States thus boasts of his proc- 
Jamation : 


“The preliminary emancipation proclamation, issued in Sep- 
tember, was running its assigned period to the beginning of the 
new year. A month later the final proclamation came, including 
the announcement that colored men of suitable condition would 
be received into the war service. The policy of emancipation and 
of employing black soldiers gave to the future a new aspect, about 
which hope and fear and doubt contended in uncertain conflict. 
According to our political system, as a matter of civil administra- 
tion, the General Government had no lawful power to effect eman- 
cipation in any State, and for a long time it had been hoped that 
the rebellion could be suppressed without resorting to it as a mili- 
tary measure. . . . Of those who were slaves at the beginning of 
the rebellion, full one hundred thousand are now in the United 
States military service, about one half of which number actually 
bear arms in the ranks, thus giving the double advantage of tak- 
ing so much labor from the insurgent cause, and supplying the 
places which otherwise must be filled with so many white men. 
So far as tested, it is difficult to say they are not as good soldiers 
as any.” 


Let the reader pause for a moment and look calmly at the ° 
facts presented in this statement. The forefathers of these 
negro soldiers were gathered from the torrid plains and malarial 
swamps of inhospitable Africa. Generally they were born the 
slaves of barbarian masters, untaught in all the useful arts and 
occupations, reared in heathen darkness, and, sold by heathen 
masters, they were transferred to shores enlightened by the rays 
of Christianity. There, put to servitude, they were trained in 
the gentle arts of peace and order and civilization; they in- 
creased from a few unprofitable savages to millions of efficient 
Christian laborers. Their servile instincts rendered them con- 
tented with their lot, and their patient toil blessed the land of 
their abode with unmeasured riches. Their strong local and 
‘personal attachment secured faithful service to those to whom 
their service or labor was due. A strong mutual affection was 
the natural result of this life-long relation, a feeling best if not 
only understood by those who have grown from childhood 


1862] THE TEMPTER CAME LIKE THE SERPENT. 193 


_ under its influence. Never was there happier dependence of 
labor and capital on each other. The tempter came, like the 
serpent in Eden, and decoyed them with the magic word of 
“freedom.” Too many were allured by the uncomprehended 
and unfulfilled promises, until the highways of these wander- 
ers were marked by corpses of infants and the aged. He put 
arms in their hands, and trained their humble but emotional 
natures to deeds of violence and bloodshed, and sent them out 
to devastate their benefactors. What does he boastingly an- 
nounce /—“ Tt is difficult to say they are not as good soldiers 
as any.” Ask the bereaved mother, the desolate widow, the 
sonless aged sire, to whom the bitter cup was presented by 
those once of their own household. With double anguish they 
speak of its bitterness. What does the President of the United 
States further say ?—“ According to our political system, as a 
matter of civil administration, the General Government had 
no lawful power to effect emancipation in any State.” And 
further on, as if with a triumphant gladness, he adds, “Thus 
giving the double advantage of taking so much labor from the 
insurgent cause, and supplying the places which otherwise must 
be filled with so many white men.” <A rare mixture of mal- 
feasance with traffic in human life! It is submitted to the 
judgment of a Christian people how well such a boast. befits 
the President of the United States, a federation of sovereigns 
under a voluntary compact for specific purposes. 


60 


194 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTERS XXNMIT. 


Naval Affairs.—Organization of the Navy Department.—Two Classes of Vessels.— 
Experiments for Floating Batteries and Rams.—The Norfolk Navy-Yard.— 
Abandonment by the Enemy.—The Merrimac Frigate made an Ironclad.—Officers. 
—Trial-Trip.—Fleet of the Enemy.—Captain Buchanan.—Resolves to attack 
the Enemy.—Sinks the Cumberland.—Burns the Congress.—W ounded.—Execu- 
tive Officer Jones takes Command.—Retires for the Night.—Appearance of the 
Monitor.—The Virginia attacks her.—She retires to Shoal Water.—Refuses 
to come out.—Cheers of English Man-of-war.—Importance of the Navy-Yard. 
—Order of General Johnston to evacuate.—Stores saved.—The Virginia burned. 
—Harbor Defenses at Wilmington.—Harbor Defenses at Charleston.—Fights 
in the Harbor.—Defenses of Savannah.—Mobile Harbor and Capture of its 
Defenses.—The System of Torpedoes adopted.—Statement of the Enemy.— 
Sub-terra Shells placed in James River.—How made.—Used in Charleston 
Harbor; in Roanoke River; in Mobile Harbor.—The Tecumseh, how de- 
stroyed. 


Tue organization of the Navy Department comprised under 
its general supervision a bureau of orders and details, one of 
ordnance and hydrography, one of provisions and clothing, and 
one of medicine and surgery. The grades of officers consisted 
of admirals, captains, commanders, surgeons, lieutenants, and 
midshipmen. Of the officers at the close of the first year there 
were one admiral, twelve captains, thirty commanders, and one 
hundred and twelve first and second lieutenants. All of the 
principal officers had belonged to the United States Navy. 
Owing to the limited number of vessels afloat, many of these 
officers were employed on shore-duties. 

The vessels of the navy may be reduced to two classes: those 
intended for river and harbor defense, as ironclads, rams, float- 
ing batteries, or river-steamboats transformed into gunboats ; 
and sea-going steamers of moderate size, some of them of great 
speed, but, not having been designed for war purposes, were all 
unsuited for a powerful armament, and could not be expected 
to contend successfully with ships of war. 

Karly in 1861 discussions and experiments were instituted 
by the Navy Department to determine how floating batteries 
and naval rams could be best constructed and protected by iron 


1861] ABOUT MIDNIGHT A FIRE WAS STARTED, 195 


plates. Many persons had submitted plans, according to which 
cotton-bales might be effectively used as a shield against shot. 
Our deficiency in iron, and also in rolling-mills to prepare it 
into plates, caused cotton to be sometimes so employed; though 
the experiments had satisfied the Navy Department that, instead 
of cotton being rendered impenetrable by compression, it was 
really less so than in looser condition, and that iron must needs 
be of great thickness to resist the direct impact of heavy shot at 
short ranges. An officer of the navy, as skillful in ordnance as 
he was in seamanship, and endowed with high capacity for the 
investigation of new problems—Lieutenant Catesby Ap R. 
Jones—had conducted many of these experiments, and, as will 
be seen hereafter, made efficient use of his knowledge both in 
construction and in battle. 

After Virginia had seceded from the United States, but be- 
fore she had acceded to the Confederate States—viz., on the 
19th of April, 1861—General Taliaferro, in command of Vir- 
ginia forces, arrived at Norfolk. Commodore McCauley, United 
States Navy, and commandant of the navy-yard, held a confer- 
ence with General Taliaferro, the result of which was “ that 
none of the vessels should be removed, nor a shot fired except 
in self-defense.” The excitement which had existed in the 
town was quieted by the announcement of this arrangement ; 
but it was soon ascertained that the Germantown and Merrimac, 
frigates in the port, had been scuttled, and the former otherwise 
injured. About midnight, as elsewhere stated, a fire was started 
‘in the navy-yard, which continued to increase, involving the 
destruction of the ship-houses, a ship of the line, and the un- 
finished frame of another; several frigates, in addition to those 
mentioned, had been scuttled and sunk; and other property de- 
stroyed, to an amount estimated at several million dollars. The 
Pawnee, which arrived on the 19th, had been kept under steam, 
and, taking ¢he Cumberland in tow, retired down the harbor, 
freighted with a great portion of valuable munitions and the 
commodore and other officers of the yard.* In the haste and 
secrecy of the conflagration, a large amount of material remained 
uninjured. The Merrimac, a beautiful frigate, in the yard for 


* See “ Annual Cyclopedia,” 1861, p. 586. 


J 


% 


196 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


repairs, was raised by the Virginians, and the work immediately 
commenced, on a plan devised by Lieutenant Brooke, Confeder- 
ate States Navy, to convert her hull, with such means as were 
available, into an iron-clad vessel. T'wo-inch plates were pre- 
pared, and she was covered with a double-inclined roof of four 
inches thickness. This armor, though not sufficiently thick to 
resist direct shot, sufficed to protect against a glancing ball, and 
was as heavy as was consistent with the handling of the ship. 
The shield was defective in not covering the sides sufficiently 
below the water-line, and the prow was unfortunately made of 
cast-iron ; but, when all the difficulties by which we were sur- 
rounded are remembered, and the service rendered by this float- 
ing battery considered, the only wonder must be that so much 
was so well done under the circumstances. 

Her armament consisted of ten guns, four single-banded 
Brooke rifles, and *six nine-inch Dahlgren shell-guns. Two of 
the rifles, bow and stern pivots, were seven inch; the other two 
were six and four tenths inch, one on each broadside. The nine- 
inch gun on each side, nearest the furnaces, was fitted for firing 
hot shot. The work of construction was prosecuted with all 
haste, the armament and crew were put on board, and the ves- 
sel started on her trial-trip as soon as the workmen were dis- 
charged. She was our first ironclad; her model was an experi- 
ment, and many doubted its success. Her commander, Captain 
(afterward Admiral) Franklin Buchanan, with the wisdom of 
age and the experience of sea-service from his boyhood, com- 
bined the daring and enterprise of youth, and with him was’ 
Lieutenant Catesby Ap R. Jones, who had been specially in 
charge of the battery, and otherwise thoroughly acquainted 
with the ship. His high qualifications as an ordnance officer 
were well known in the “old navy,” and he was soon to ex- 
hibit a like ability as a seaman in battle. 

Now the first Confederate ironclad was afloat, the Stars and 
Bars were given to the breeze, and she was new-christened “ The 
Virginia.” She was joined by the Patrick Henry, six guns, 
Commander John R. Tucker; the Jamestown, two guns, Lieu- 
tenant-commanding John N. Barney; the Beaufort, one gun, 
Lieutenant-commanding W. H. Parker; the Raleigh, one gun, 


* 
x 2 
18621 A DULL, HEAVY THUD WAS HEARD. 19% 


Lieutenant-commanding J. W. Alexander; the Teaser, one 
gun, Lieutenant-commanding W. A. Webb. 

The enemy’s fleet in Piacipton Roads consisted of the Cum- 
berland, twenty-four guns; Congress, fifty guns; St. Lawrence, 
fifty guns; steam-frigates Bi roe ce and Roanoke, forty guns 
each. ‘The relative force was as twenty-one guns to two hun- 
dred and four, not counting the small steamers of the enemy, 
though they had heavier armament than the small vessels of 
our fleet, which have been enumerated. The Cumberland and 
the Congress lay off Newport News; the other vessels were an- 
chored about nine miles eastward, near to Fortress Monroe. 
Strong shore-batteries and several small steamers, armed with 
heavy rifled guns, protected the frigates Cumberland and Con- 
gress. 

Buchanan no doubt felt the inspiration of a sailor when his 
vessel bears him from the land, and the excitement of a hero at 
the prospect of battle, and thus we may understand why the 
trial-trip was at once converted into a determined attack upon 
the enemy. After the plan of the Virginia had been decided 
upon, the work of her construction was pushed with all possible 
haste. Her armament was on board, and she was taken out of 
the dock while the workmen were still employed upon her—in- 
deed, the last of them were put ashore after she was started on 
her first experimental trip. Few men, conscious as Flag-ofticer 
Buchanan was of the defects of his vessel, would have dared 
such unequal conflict. Slowly—about five knots an hour—he 
steamed down to the roads. The Cumberland and Congress, 
seeing the Virginia approach, prepared for action, and, from 
the flag-ship Roanoke, signals were given to the Minnesota and 
St. Lawrence to advance. The Cumberland had swung:so as to 
give her full broadside to the Virginia, which silently and with- 
out any exhibition of her crew, moved steadily forward. ‘The 
shot from the Cumberland fell thick upon her plated roof, but . 
rebounded harmless as hailstones. At last the prow of the Vir- 
ginia struck the Cumberland just forward of her starboard fore- 
chains. A dull, heavy thud was heard, but so little force was 
given to the Virginia that the engineer hesitated about backing 
her. It was soon seen, however, that a gaping breach had been 


198 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


made in the Cumberland, and that the sea was rushing madly 
in. She reeled, and, while the waves ingulfed her, her crew 
gallantly stood to their guns and vainly continued their fire. 
She went down in nine fathoms of water, and with at least one 
hundred of her gallant crew, her pennant still flying from her 
mast-head. 

The Virginia then ran up stream a short distance, in order 
to turn and have sufficient space to get headway, and come 
down on the Congress. The enemy, supposing that she had 
retired at the sight of the vessels approaching to attack her, 
cheered loudly, both ashore and afloat. But, when she turned 
to descend upon the Congress, as she had on the Cumber- 
land, the Congress slipped her cables and ran ashore, bows on. 
The Virginia took position as near as the depth of water would 
permit, and opened upon her a raking fire. The Minnesota was 
fast aground about one mile and a half below. The Roanoke 
and St. Lawrence retired toward the fort. The shore-batteries 
kept up their fire on the Virginia, as did also the Minnesota 
at long range, and quite ineffectually. The Congress, being 
aground, could but feebly reply. Several of our small vessels 
came up and joined the Virginia, and the combined fire was 
fearfully destructive to the Congress. Her commander was 
killed, and soon her colors were struck, and the white flag ap- 
peared both at the main and spanker gaff. The Beaufort, Lieu- 
tenant-commanding W. H. Parker, and the Raleigh, Lieutenant- 
commanding J. W. Alexander, tugs which had accompanied 
the Virginia, were ordered to the Congress to receive the sur- 
render. The flag of the ship and the sword of its then com- 
mander were delivered to Lieutenant Parker, by whom they 
were subsequently sent to the Navy Department at Richmond. 
Other officers delivered their swords in token of surrender, and 
entreated that they might return to assist in getting their wound- 
ed out of the ship. The permission was granted to the officers, 
and they then took advantage of the clemency shown them 
to make their escape. In the mean time the shore-batteries fired 
upon the tugs, and compelled them to retire. By this fire five 
of their own men, our prisoners, were wounded. Flag-officer 
Buchanan had stopped the firing upon the Congress when she 


1862] THE VIRGINIA AND THE MONITOR. 199 


struck her flag, and ran up the white flag, as heretofore de- 
seribed. Lieutenant Jones in his official report, referring to 
the Congress, writes: “But she fired upon us with the white 
flag flying, wounding Lieutenant Minor and several of our men. 
We again opened fire upon her, and she is now in flames.” 
The crew of the Congress escaped, as did that of the Cumber- 
land, by boats, or by swimming, and generously our men ab- 
stained from firing on them while so exposed. Flag-officer 
Buchanan was wounded by a rifle-ball, and had to be carried 
below. His intrepid conduct won the admiration of all. The 
executive and ordnance officer, Lieutenant Catesby Ap R. 
Jones, succeeded to the command. It was now so near night 
and the change of the tide that nothing further could be at- 
tempted on that day. The Virginia, with the smaller vessels 
attending her, withdrew and anchored off Sewell’s Point. She 
had sunk the Cumberland, left the Congress on fire, had blown 
up a transport-steamer, sunk one schooner, and had captured 
another. Casualties, reported by Lieutenant Jones, were two 
killed and eight wounded. The prow of the Virginia was some- 
what damaged, her anchor and all her flag-staffs were shot away, 
and her smoke-stack and steam-pipe were riddled ; otherwise, 
the vessel was uninjured, and, as will be seen, was ready for 
action on the next morning. The prisoners and wounded were 
immediately sent up to the hospital at Norfolk. 

During the night the Monitor, an iron-clad turret-steamer, 
of an entirely new model, came in, and anchored near the Min- 
nesota. Like our Virginia she was an invention, and her merits 
and demerits were to be tested in the crucible of war. She was 
of light draught, and very little save the revolving turret was 
visible above the water, was readily handled, and had good 
speed ; but, also, like the Virginia, was not supposed by nautical 
men to be capable of braving rough weather at sea. 

The Virginia was the hull of a frigate, modified into an iron- 
clad vessel. She was only suited to smooth water, and it had 
not been practicable to obtain for her such engines as would have 
given her the requisite speed. Her draught, twenty-two feet, 
was too great for the shoal water in the roads, and the appre- 
hension which was excited lest she should go up to Washington 


900 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


might have been allayed by a knowledge of the deep water 
necessary to float her. Her great length, depth, and want of 
power, caused difficulty in handling to be anticipated. In many 
respects she was an experiment, and, had we possessed the means 
to build a new vessel, no doubt a better model could have been 
devised. Commander Brooke, who united much science to 
great ingenuity, was not entirely free in the exercise of either. 
Our means restricted us to making the best of that which chance 
had given us. 

In the morning the Virginia, with the Patrick Henry, 
the Jamestown, and the three little tugs, jestingly called the 
“mosquito fleet,” returned to the scene of the previous day’s 
combat, and to the completion of the work, the destruction of 
the Minnesota, which had, the evening before, been interrupted 
by the change of tide and the coming of night. The Monitor, 
which had come in during the previous night, and had been 
seen by the light of the burning Congress, opened fire on the 
Virginia when about the third of a mile distant. The Virginia 
sought to close with her, but the greater speed of the Monitor 
and the celerity with which she was handled made this imprac- 
ticable. The ships passed and repassed very near each other, 
and frequently the Virginia delivered her broadside at close 
quarters, but with no perceptible effect. The Monitor fired 
rapidly from her revolving turret, but not with such aim as to 
strike successively in the same place, and the armor of the Vir- 
ginia, therefore, remained unbroken. Lieutenant-commanding 
Catesby Jones, to whom Buchanan had intrusted the ship when 
he was removed to the hospital, soon discovered that the Monitor 
was invulnerable to his shells. He had a few solid shot, which 
were intended only to be fired from the nine-inch guns as hot 
shot, and therefore had necessarily so much windage that they 
would be ineffective against the shield of the Monitor. He, 
therefore, determined to run her down, and got all the headway 
he could obtain for that purpose, but the speed was so small 
that it merely pushed her out of her way. It was then decided 
to board her, and all hands were piped for that object. Then 
the Monitor slipped away on to shoal water where the Virginia 
could not approach her, and Commander Jones, after waiting a 


1862] ADMIRATION OF GENUINE GAME. 201 


due time, and giving the usual signals of invitation to com- 
bat, without receiving any manifestation on the part of the 
Manic of an intention to return to deep water, withdrew to 
the navy-yard. 

In the two days of conflict our only casualties were from the 
Cumberland as she went down valiantly fighting to the last, 
from the men on shore when the tugs went to the Congress to 
receive her surrender, or from the perfidious fire from the Con- 
gress while her white flags were flying. None were killed or 
wounded in the fight with the Monitor. 

As this was the first combat between two iron-clad vessels, it 
attracted great attention and provoked much speculation. Some 
assumed that wooden ships were henceforth to be of no use, and 
much has been done by the addition of armor to protect sea- 
going vessels; but certainly neither of the two which provoked 
the speculation could be regarded as seaworthy, or suited to 
other than harbor defense. 

A new prow was put on the Virginia, she was furnished 
with bolts and solid shot, and the slight repairs needed were 
promptly made. The distinguished veteran, Commodore Jo- 
siah Tatnall,- was assigned to the command of the Virginia, 
vice Admiral Buchanan, temporarily disabled. The Virginia, 
as far as possible, was prepared for battle and cruise in the 
Roads, and, on the 11th of April, Commodore Tatnall moved 
down to invite the Monitor to combat. But her officers kept 
the Monitor close to the shore, with her steam up, and under the 
guns of Fortress Monroe. To provoke her to come out, the 
little Jamestown was sent in and pluckily captured many prizes, 
but the Monitor lay safe in the shoal water under the guns of the 
formidable fortress. An English man-of-war, which was lying 
in the channel, witnessed this effort to draw the Monitor out 
into deep water in defense of her weaker countrymen, arf, as 
Barney on the Jamestown passed with his prizes, cut out in full 
view of the enemy’s fleet, the Englishmen, with their national 
admiration of genuine “ game,” as a spectator described it, ‘un- 
able to restrain their generous impulses, from the captain to the 
side-boy, cheered our gunboat to the very echo.” I quote fur- 
ther from the same witness: “Early in May, a magnificent 


902 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Federal fleet, the Virginia being concealed behind the land, had 
ventured across the channel, and some of them, expressly fitted 
to destroy our ship, were furiously bombarding our batteries at 
Sewell’s Point. Dashing down comes old Tatnall on the in- 
stant, as light stepping and blithe as a boy. . . . But the Vir- 
ginia no sooner draws into range than the whole fleet, like a 
flushed covey of birds, flutters off into shoal water and under 
the guns of the forts”—where they remained. After some 
delay, and there being no prospect of active service, the Com- 
modore ordered the executive officer to fire a gun to windward 
and take the ship back to her buoy. Here, ready for service, 
waiting for an enemy to engage her, but never having the op- 
portunity, she remained until the 10th of the ensuing month. 

The Norfolk Navy-Yard, notwithstanding the injury done 
to it by conflagration, was yet the most available and equipped 
yard in the Confederacy. A land-force under General Huger 
had been placed there for its protection, and defensive works 
had also been constructed with a view to hold it as well for 
naval construction and repair as for its strategic importance in 
connection with the defense of the capital, Richmond. On 
the opposite side of the lower James, on the Peninsula between 
the James and York Rivers, we occupied an intrenched posi- 
tion of much natural strength. The two positions, Norfolk and 
the Peninsula, were necessary to each other, and the command 
of the channel between them essential to both. As long as the 
Virginia closed the entrance to the James River, and the in- 
trenchment on the Peninsula was held, it was deemed possible 
to keep possession of Norfolk. 

On the 1st of May General Johnston, commanding on the 
Peninsula, having decided to retreat, sent an order to General 
Huger to evacuate Norfolk. The Secretary of War, General 
Randolph, having arrived just at that time in Norfolk, assumed 
the authority of postponing the execution of the order “ until 
he [General Huger] could remove such stores, munitions, and 
arms as could be carried off.” The Secretary of the Navy, Mr. 
Mallory, was there also, and gave like instructions to the com- 
mandant of the yard. To the system and energy with which 
General Huger conducted the removal of heavy guns, machin- 


1862] WE GAVE HER TO THE FLAMES. 2038 


ery, stores, and munitions, we were greatly indebted in our 
future operations, both of construction and defense. A week 
was thus employed in the removal of machinery, ete., and the 
enemy, occupied with the retreating army on the Peninsula, 
did not cross the James River above, either to interrupt the 
transportation or to obstruct the retreat of the garrisons of the 
forts at Norfolk and its surroundings. When our army had 
been withdrawn from the Peninsula, and Norfolk had been 
evacuated, and the James River did not furnish depth of chan- 
nel which would suffice for the Virginia to ascend it more 
than a few miles, her mission was ended. It is not surprising 
that her brilliant career created a great desire to preserve her, 
and that it was contemplated to lighten her and thus try to take 
her up the river, but the pilots declared this to be impracticable, 
and the court which subsequent¥y investigated the matter sus- 
_ tained their opinion that “the only-.alternative was then and there 
to abandon and burn the ship.” The statement of Commodore 
Tatnall shows that the Virginia could not have been taken sea- 
ward, and that such was the opinion of her first commander. 
He said: “I consulted Commodore Buchanan on the character 
and power of the ship. He expressed the distinct opinion that 
she was unseaworthy, that she was not sufficiently buoyant, and 
that ina common sea she would founder.” She could not, it 
therefore appears, ascend the river, was unseaworthy, and was 
uncovered by the retreat of the troops with whom she had co- 
operated. So, on the 10th of May, the Virginia was taken to 
Craney Island, one mile above, and there her crew were landed ; 
they fell in and formed on the beach, and, in the language of 
the eye-witness heretofore quoted, “then and there, on the 
very field of her fame, within sight of the Cumberland’s top- 
gallant-masts, all awash, within sight of that magnificent fleet 
still cowering on the shoal, with her laurels all fresh and green, 
we hauled down her drooping colors, and, with mingled pride 
and grief, we gave her to the flames.” * 

At Wilmington, North Carolina, the Southwest bar was de- 
fended by Fort Caswell, and New Inlet bar by Fort Fisher. 


* “The Story of the Confederate Ship Virginia,” by William Norris, Colonel 
Signal Corps, Confederate Army. 


904 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The naval defenses consisted of two ironclads, the North Caro- 
lina and the Raleigh. The former could not cross any of the 
bars in consequence of her draught of water. Her steam-power 
hardly gave propulsion. She sank during the war off Smith- 
ville. The Raleigh’s services were almost. valueless in conse- 
quence of her deep draught and her feeble steam-power. She 
made one futile trip out of New Inlet, and after a few hours 
attempted to return, but was wrecked upon the bar. 

The brave and invincible defense of Fort Sumter gave to 
the city of Charleston, South Carolina, additional luster. For 
four years that fort, located in its harbor, defied the army and 
navy of the United States. When the city was about to be 
abandoned to the army of General Sherman, the forts defend- 
ing the harbor were embraced in General Hardee’s plan of 
evacuation. The gallant cor’mander of Fort Sumter, Colonel 
Stephen Elliott, Jr., with unyielding fortitude, refused to be 
relieved, after being under incessant bombardment day and 
night for weeks. It was supposed he must be exhausted, and 
he was invited to withdraw for rest, but, on receiving the gen- 
eral order of retreat, he assembled his brave force on the rugged 
and shell-crushed parade-ground, read his instructions, and, in a 
voice that trembled with emotion, addressed his men in the 
glowing language of patriotism and unswerving devotion to the 
Confederate cause. The cheers, which responded to the utter- 
ances of their colonel, came from manly and chivalric throats. 
Yielding to the inevitable, they claimed for the Stars and Bars 
a salute of one hundred guns. As it was fired from Sumter, it 
was reéchoed by all the Confederate batteries, and startled the 
outside blockaders with the idea that a great victory had been 
won by the Confederacy. 

The naval force of the Confederacy in Charleston Harbor 
consisted of three ironclads. Their steam-power was totally 
inadequate for the effective use of the vessels. In fact, when 
the wind and tide were moving in the same direction, it was 
impossible for the vessels to advance against them, light though | 
the wind might be. Under such circumstances it was necessary 
to come to an anchor. On one occasion the ironclads Palmetto 
State and Chicora ran out of Charleston Harbor under favor- 


1862] HE BROKE HIS PLIGHTED WORD. 905 


able circumstances. The Palmetto State assaulted the Merci- 
deta, commanded by Captain Stellwagen, who unconditionally 
surrendered. But the ironclad a andes orders to follow 
her consort in chase of the enemy, and having no boats to which 
to transfer her prisoners, the parole of the officers and men was 
accepted, with their promise to observe the same until its return. 
The surrender was accepted, and an honest parole was the con- 
sideration for not being sunk on the spot. Captain Stellwagen 
abided but a short time, when, getting up steam, he broke his 
plighted word, and ran off with the captured vessel. The defi- 
ciency of speed on the part of the Confederate ironclads frus- 
trated their efforts to relieve the city of Charleston from con- 
tinued blockade. 

The harbor defenses of Savannah were intrusted to Commo- 
dore Tatnall, who defended the approach to the city with a 
small steamer of one gun, an inefficient floating battery and 
ironclad, which had been constructed from a blockade-runner. 
Several attempts were made to attack the enemy’s vessels with 
the ironclad, but these were frustrated by the delay in opening 
a passage through the obstructions in the river when tide and 
opportunity were offered. Her draught was too great for the 
depth of water, except at high tides, and these were at long inter- 
vals. The ironclad was armed with a battery of four guns, two 
seven-inch and two six-inch. Her force consisted of some twenty- 
one officers and twenty-four men, when she was fully furnished. 
Another vessel was under construction and nearly completed, 
and Commodore Tatnall, notwithstanding his well-known com- 
bative instincts, was understood to be unwilling to send the 
Atlanta alone against the enemy’s blockading vessels. Lieuten- 
ant Webb, who had been lately placed in command of the At- 
lanta, took her to Warsaw Sound to deliver battle singly to the 
two ironclads Weehawken and Nahant, which awaited her ap- 
proach. The Atlanta got twice aground—the second time, inex- 
tricably so. In this situation she was attacked, and, though 
hopelessly, was bravely defended, but was finally forced to sur- 
render. 

Mobile Harbor was thought to be adequately provided for, 
as torpedoes obstructed the approach, and Forts Morgan and 


206 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Gaines commanded the entrance, aided by the improvised fleet 
of Admiral Buchanan, which consisted of the wooden gunboats 
Morgan and Gaines, each carrying six guns, and Selma four 
guns, with the ram Tennessee of six guns—in all, twenty-two 
guns and four hundred and seventy men. On August 4, 1864, 
Fort Gaines was assaulted by the United States force from the 
sea-side of the beach. The resistance made was feeble, and the 
fort soon surrendered. On the next day Admiral Farragut 
stood into the bay with a force consisting of four monitors, or 
ironclads, and fourteen steamers, carrying one hundred and 
ninety-nine guns and twenty-seven hundred men. One iron- 
clad was sunk by a torpedo. Admiral Buchanan advanced to 
meet this force, and sought to run into the larger vessels with 
the Tennessee, but they avoided him by their superior speed. 
Meanwhile the gunboats became closely engaged with the ene- 
my, but were soon dispersed by his overwhelming force. The 
Tennessee again stood for the enemy and renewed the attack 
with the hope of sinking some of them with her prow, but she 
was again foiled by their superior speed in avoiding her. The 
engagement with the whole fleet soon became general, and lasted 
an hour. Frequently the Tennessee was surrounded by the ene- 
my, and all her guns were in action almost at the same moment. 
Four of their heaviest vessels ran into her under full steam with 
the view of sinking her. While surrounded by six of these 
heavy vessels which were suffering fearfully from her heavy 
battery, the steering-gear of the Tennessee was shot away, and 
her ability to manceuvre was completely destroyed, leaving the 
formidable Confederate entirely at the disposal of the enemy. 
This misfortune, it was believed, saved the greater part of Far- 
ragut’s fleet. Further resistance becoming unavailable, the 
wounded Admiral was under the painful necessity of ordering 
a surrender. His little fleet became a prey to the enemy, except 
the Morgan, which made good her escape to Mobile. 

This unequal contest was decidedly creditable to the Confed- 
eracy. The entire loss of the enemy, most of which is ascribed 
to the Tennessee, amounted to quite three hundred in killed and 
wounded, exclusive of one hundred lost on the sunken ironclad, 
making a number almost as large as the entire Confederate force. 


1862] THE SYSTEM OF TORPEDOES ADOPTED. 907 


On August 22d, Fort Morgan was bombarded from the land, 
also by ironclads at sea, and by the fleet inside. Thus Forts 
Powel, Morgan, and Gaines shared the fate of the Confederate 
fleet, and the enemy became masters of the bay. On this as on 
other occasions, the want of engines of sufficient power consti- 
tuted a main obstacle to the success which the gallantry and 
skill of the seamen so richly deserved. 

The system of torpedoes adopted by us was probably more 
effective than any other means of naval defense. The destruc- 
tiveness of these little weapons had long been known, but no 
successful modes for their application to the destruction of the 
most powerful vessels of war and ironclads had been devised. 
It remained for the skill and ingenuity of our officers to bring 
the use of this terrible instrument to perfection. The success 
of their efforts is very frankly stated by one of the most dis- 
tinguished of the enemy’s commanders—Admiral Porter.* He 
says: 

“Most of the Southern seaports fell into our possession with 
comparative facility ; and the difficulty of capturing Charleston, 
Savannah, Wilmington, and Mobile was in a measure owing to the 
fact that the approaches to these places were filled with various 
kinds of torpedoes, laid in groups, and fired by electricity. The 
introduction of this means of defense on the side of the Confeder- 
ates was for a time a severe check to our naval forces, for the com- 
manders of squadrons felt it their duty tobe careful when dealing 
with an element of warfare of which they knew s0 little, and the 
character and disposition of which it was so difficult to discover. 
In this system of defense, therefore, the enemy found their great- 
est security ; and, notwithstanding all the efforts of Du Pont and 
Dahlgren, Charleston, Wilmington, and Savannah remained closed 
to our forces until near the close of the war.” 


In 1862, while General McClellan was in command of the 
enemy’s forces below Richmond, it was observed that they had 
more than a hundred vessels in the James River, as if they were 
about to make an advance by that way upon the city. This led 
to an order placing General G. J. Rains in charge of the sub- 

*See “Torpedo Warfare,” “North American Review,” September-October, 
1878, 


908 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


marine defenses; and, on the James River opposite Drewry’s 
Bluff, the first submarine torpedo was made. The secret of all 
his future success consisted in the sensitive primer, which is. 
unrivaled by any other means to explode torpedoes or sub-terra 
shells. 

The torpedoes were made of the most ordinary material gen- 
erally, as, beer-barrels fixed with conical heads, coated within 
and without with rosin dissolved in coal-tar ; some were made 
of cast-iron, copper, or tin; and glass demijohns were used. 
There were three essentials to success, viz., the sensitive fuse- 
primer, a charge of sixty pounds of gunpowder, and actual con- 
tact between the torpedo and the bottom of the vessel. 

There were one hundred and twenty-three of these torpe- 
does placed in Charleston Harbor and Stono River. It was 
blockaded by thirteen large ships and ironclads, with six or 
seven storeships, and some twenty other vessels. The position 
of each one was known, and they could be approached within 
a half-mile, which made it easy to attack, destroy, or disperse 
them at night by floating torpedoes, connected together by twos 
by a rope one hundred and thirty yards long, buoyed up and 
stretched across the current by two boats, which were to be 
dropped in ebbing tide, to float down among the vessels. This 
plan, says General Rains, was opposed by General Gilmer, of 
the engineer corps, on the ground that “they might float back 
and destroy our own boat.” One was sent down to go in the 
midst of the fleet, and made its mark. An act of devoted dar- 
ing was here performed by Commander W. T. Glassell, Con- 
federate States Navy, which claims more than a passing notice. 
While the enemy was slowly contracting his lines around 
Charleston, his numerous ships of war kept watch-and-ward 
outside of the harbor. Our few vessels, almost helpless by 
their defective engines, could effect little against their powerful 
opponents. The New Ironsides, the pride of their fleet, lay 
off Morris’s Island. This Glassell resolved to attack with a 
steam-launch carrying a torpedo spar at the bow. With an 
engineer, pilot, and fireman, he steered for the Ironsides under 
cover of a hazy night. As he approached, he was hailed by 
the lookout, and the next moment struck the Ironsides, explod- 


1862] STRUCK TORPEDOES AND WENT TO THE BOTTOM. 909 


ing the torpedo about fifteen feet from the keel. An immense 
volume of water was thrown up, covering the little boat, and, 
pieces of timber falling in the engine, it was rendered entirely 
unmanageable, so as to deprive Commander Glassell of the 
means of escape on which he had relied. A rapid fire was 
concentrated upon him from the deck of the ship, and there re- 
mained no chance except to attempt an escape by swimming 
ashore. To secure liberty to his country, he risked and lost 
his own, and found, for the indignity to which he was subject- 
ed, compensation, inasmuch as the famous New Ironsides was 
long rendered useless to the enemy. 

One hundred and one torpedoes were planted in Roanoke 
River, North Carolina, after a flotilla of twelve vessels had 
started up to capture Fort Branch. The torpedoes destroyed 
six of the vessels and frustrated the attack. 

Every avenue to the outworks or to the city of Mobile was 
guarded by submarine torpedoes, so that it was impossible for 
any vessel drawing three feet of water to get within effective 
cannon-range of the defenses. Two ironclads attempted to get 
near enough to Spanish Fort to take part in the bombardment. 
They both struck torpedoes, and went to the bottom on Apa- 
lachie bar; thenceforward the fleet made no further attempt to 
encounter the almost certain destruction which they saw awaited 
any vessel which might attempt to enter the torpedo-guarded 
waters. But many were sunk when least expecting it. Some 
went down long after the Confederate forces had evacuated Mo- 
bile. The Tecumseh was probably sunk, says Major-General 
D. H. Maury,* on her own torpedo. While steaming in lead of 
Farragut’s fleet she carried a torpedo affixed to a spar, which 
projected some twenty feet from her bows; she proposed to 
use this torpedo against the Tennessee, our only formidable 
ship; but, while passing Fort Morgan, a shot from that fort ent 
away the stays by which the torpedo was secured; it then 
doubled under her, and, exploding fairly under the bottom of 
the ill-fated ship, she careened and sank instantly in ten fathoms 
of water. Only six or eight of her crew of a hundred or more 
were saved. The total number of vessels sunk by torpedoes in 


* Southern Historical Society Papers, January, 1877. 
61 


910 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Mobile Bay was twelve, viz., three ironclads, two tinclads, and 
seven transports. Fifty-eight vessels were destroyed in South- 
ern waters by torpedoes during the war; these included iron- 
clads and others of no mean celebrity. 


CHAP.TER <XX MLE, 


Naval Affairs (continued).—Importance of New Orleans.—Attack feared from up 
the River.—Preparations for Defense.—Strength of the Forts.—Other De- 
fenses.—The General Plan.—Ironclads.—Raft-Fleet of the Enemy.—Bombard- 
ment of the Forts commenced.—Advance of the Fleet.—Its Passage of the 
Forts.—Batteries below the City—Darkness of the Night.—Evacuation of the 
City by General Lovell on Appearance of the Enemy.—Address of General Dun- 
can to Soldiers in the Forts.—Refusal to surrender.—Meeting of the Garrison 
of Fort Jackson.—The Forts surrendered.—Ironclad Louisiana destroyed.—The 
Tugs and Steamers.—The Governor Moore.—The Enemy’s Ship Varuna sunk.— 
The McRae.—The State of the City and its Defenses considered.—Public In- 
dignation.—Its Victims.—Efforts made for its Defense by the Navy Depart- 
ment.—The Construction of the Mississippi. 


New Or.EAns was the most important commercial port in the 
Confederacy, being the natural outlet of the Mississippi Valley, 
as well to the ports of Europe as to those of Central and Southern 
America. It was the depot which, at an early period, had led 
to controversies with Spain, and its importance to the interior 
had been a main inducement to the purchase of Louisiana. It 
had become before 1861 the chief cotton-mart of the United 
States, and its defense attracted the early attention of the Con- 
federate Government. The approaches for an attacking party 
were numerous. They could through several channels enter 
Lake Pontchartrain, to approach the city in rear for land-attack, 
could ascend the Mississippi from the Gulf, or descend it from 
the Northwest, where it was known that the enemy was prepar- 
ing a formidable fleet of iron-clad gunboats. In the early part 
of 1862, so general an opinion prevailed that the greatest danger 
to New Orleans was by an attack from above, that General 
Lovell sent to General Beauregard a large part of the troops 
then in the city. 


1862] BUT NEITHER OF THEM WAS FINISHED. O11 


At the mouth of the Mississippi there is a bar, the greatest 

depth of water on which seldom exceeded eighteen feet, and it 
was supposed that heavy vessels of war, with their armament and 
supplies, would not be able to cross it. Such proved to be the 
fact, and the vessels of that class had to be lightened to enable 
them to enter the river. In that condition of affairs, an inferior 
fleet might have engaged them with a prospect of success. 
Captain Hollins, who was in command of the squadron at New 
Orleans, and who had on a former occasion shown his fitness for 
such service, had been sent with the greater part of his fleet up 
the river to join the defense there being made. Two powerful 
vessels were under construction, the Louisiana and the Mississip- 
pi, but neither of them was finished. A volunteer fleet of trans- 
port-vessels had been fitted up by some river-men, but it was in 
the unfortunate condition of not being placed under the orders 
of the naval commander. A number of fire-rafts had been also 
provided, which were to serve the double purpose of lighting 
up the river in the event of the hostile fleet attempting to pass 
the forts under cover of the night, and of setting fire to any 
vessel with which they might become entangled. 
_ After passing the bar, there was nothing to prevent the as- 
cent of the river until Forts Jackson and St. Philip were reached. 
These works, constructed many years before, were on opposite 
banks of the river. Their armament, as reported by General 
Lovell, December 5, 1861, consisted of—Fort Jackson: six 
forty-two-pounders, twenty-six twenty-four-pounders, two thirty- 
two-pounder rifles, sixteen thirty-two-pounders, three eight- 
inch columbiads, one ten-inch columbiad, two eight-inch mor- 
tars, one ten-inch mortar, two forty-pounder howitzers, and ten 
twenty-four-pounder howitzers. Fort St. Philip: six forty-two- 
pounders, nine thirty-two-pounders, twenty-two twenty-four- 
pounders, four eight-inch columbiads, one eight-inch mortar, one 
ten-inch mortar, and three field-guns. 

General Duncan reported that, on the 27th of March, he 
was informed by Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins, commanding 
Forts Jackson and St. Philip, of the coast-defenses, which were 
under his (General Duncan’s) command, that the enemy’s fleet 
was crossing the bars, and entering the Mississippi River in 


919 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


force ; whereupon he repaired to Fort Jackson. After describ- 
ing the condition of the forts from the excess of water and 
sinking of the entire site, as well as the deficiency of guns of 
heavy caliber in the forts, he proceeds: 


“It became necessary in their present condition to bring in 
and mount, and to build the platforms for, the three ten-inch and 
three eight-inch columbiads, the rifled forty-two-pounder, and the 
five ten-inch seacoast mortars recently obtained from Pensacola 
on the evacuation of that place, together with the two rifled seven- 
inch guns temporarily borrowed from the naval authorities in New 
Orleans. It was also found necessary to repair the old water- 
battery to the rear of and below Fort Jackson, which had never 
been completed, for the reception of a portion of these guns, as 
well as to construct mortar-proof magazines, and shell-rooms with- 
in the same.” 


One of the seven-inch rifled guns borrowed from the navy 
was subsequently returned, so that, when the forts were attacked, 
the armament was one hundred and twenty-eight guns and 
mortars. 

The garrisons of Forts Jackson and St. Philip were about 
one thousand men on December 5, 1861; afterward, so far as I~ 
know, the number was not materially changed. 

The prevailing belief that vessels of war, in a straight, smooth 
channel, could pass batteries, led to the construction of a raft 
between the two forts which, it was supposed, would detain the 
ships under fire of the forts long enough for the guns to sink 
them, or at least to compel them to retire. The power of the 
river when in flood, and the drift-wood it bore upon it, broke 
the raft; another was constructed, which, when the drift-wood 
accumulated upon it, met a like fate. Whether obstructions 
differently arranged—such as booms secured to the shores, with 
apparatus by which they could be swung across the channel 
when needful, or logs such as were used, except that, being 
unconnected together, but each separately secured by chain and 
anchor, they might severally yield to the pressure of the drift- 
wood, sinking, so as to allow it to pass over them, and, when 
relieved of the weight, rising again—or whether other expe- 


1862] A VERY STRONG LINE OF DEFENSE. — DAIS} 


dient could have been made permanent and efficient, is a prob- 
lem which need not be discussed, as the time for its applica- 
tion has passed from us. 

The general plan for the defense of New Orleans consisted 
of two lines of works: an exterior one, passing through the 
forts near the mouth of the river, and the positions taken to de- 
fend the various water approaches; nearer to the city was the 
interior line, embracing New Orleans and Algiers, which was 
intended principally to repel an attack by land, but also, by its 
batteries on the river-bank, to resist approach by water. The 
total length of the intrenchments on this interior line was more 
than eight miles. When completed, it formed, in connection 
with impassable swamps, a very strong line of defense. At the 
then high stage of the river, all the land between it and the 
swamps was so saturated with water, that regular approaches 
could not have been made. The city, therefore, was at the time 
supposed to be doubly secure from a land-attack. 

In the winter of 1861-62 I sent one of my aides-de-camp to 
New Orleans to make a general inspection, and hold free con- 
ference with the commanding General. Upon his return, he 
reported to me that General Lovell was quite satisfied with the 
condition of the land-defenses—so much so as to say that his 
only fear was that the enemy would not make a land-attack. 

Considered since the event, it may seem strange that, after 
the fall of Donelson and Henry, and the employment of the 
enemy’s gunboats in the Tennessee and Cumberland, it was still 
generally argued that the danger to New Orleans was that the 
_ gunboats would descend the Mississippi, and applications were 
made to have the ship Louisiana sent up the river as soon as she 
was completed. 

The interior lines of defense mounted more than sixty guns 
of various caliber, and were surrounded by wide and deep ditches. 
On the various water approaches, including bays and bayous on 
the west and east sides of the river, there were sixteen different 
forts, and these, together with those on the river and the bat- 
teries of the interior line, had in position about three hundred 
guns. 

One ironclad, the Louisiana, mounting sixteen guns of heavy 


914. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


caliber, though she was not quite completed, was sent down to 
codperate with the forts. Her defective steam-power and im- 
perfect steering apparatus prevented her from rendering active 
codperation. The steamship Mississippi, then under construc- 
tion at New Orleans, was in such an unfinished condition as to 
be wholly unavailable when the enemy arrived. In the opinion 
of naval officers she would have been, if completed, the most 
powerful ironclad then in the world, and could have driven the 
enemy’s fleet out of the river and raised the blockade at Mobile. 
There were also several small river-steamers which were lightly 
armed, and their bows were protected so that they could act as 
rams and otherwise aid in the defense of the river; but, from 
the reports received, they seem, with a few honorable excep- 
tions, to have rendered little valuable service. 

The means of defense, therefore, mainly relied on were the 
two heavy-armed forts, Jackson and St. Philip, with the ob-. 
struction placed between them: this was a raft consisting of 
cypress-trees, forty feet long, and averaging four or five feet-at 
the larger end. They were placed longitudinally in the river, 
about three feet apart, and held together by gunwales on top, 
and strung upon two two-and-a-half-inch chain cables fastened 
to their lower sides. This raft was anchored in the river, abreast 
of the forts. 

The fleet of the enemy below the forts consisted of seven 
steam sloops of war, twelve gunboats, and several armed steam- 
ers, under Commodore Farragut ; also, a mortar-fleet consisting 
of twenty sloops and some steam-vessels. The whole force was 
forty-odd vessels of different kinds, with an armament of three 
hundred guns of heavy caliber, of improved models. 

The bombardment of the forts by the mortar-fleet com- 
menced on April 18th, and, after six days of vigorous and’ con- 
stant shelling, the resisting power of the forts was not diminished 
in any perceptible degree. On the 23d there were manifest 
preparations by the enemy to attempt the passage of the forts. 
This, as subsequently developed, was to be done in the following 
manner. The sloops of war and the gunboats were each formed 
in two divisions, and, selecting the darkest hour of the night, 
between 3 and 4 a.m. of the 24th, moved up the river in two 


1862] THE COVER OF DARKNESS. 215 


_ columns. The commanders of the forts had vainly endeavored to 
have the river lighted up in anticipation of an attack by the fleet. 
In the mean time, while the fleet moved up the river, there 
was kept up from the mortars a steady bombardment on the 
forts, and these opened a fire on the columns of ships and gun- 
boats, which, from the failure to send down the fire-rafts to light 
up the river, was less effective than it otherwise would. have 
been. The straight, deep channel enabled the vessels to move 
at their greatest speed, and thus the forts were passed. 
Brigadier-General J. K. Duncan, commanding the coast de- 
fenses, says, in his report of the passing of Forts Jackson and 
St. Philip by the enemy’s fleet : 


“The enemy evidently anticipated a strong demonstration to 
be made against him with fire-barges. Finding, upon his approach, 
however, that no such demonstration was made, and that the only 
resistance offered to his passage was the anticipated fire of the 
forts—the broken and scattered raft being no obstacle—I am satis- 
fied that he was suddenly inspired, for the first time, to run the 
gantlet at all hazards, although not a part of his original design. 
Be that as it may, a rapid rush was made by him in columns of 
twos in echelon, so as not to interfere with each other’s broad- 
sides. The mortar-fire was furiously increased upon Fort Jackson, 
and, in dashing by, each of the vessels delivered broadside after 
broadside, of shot, shell, grape, canister, and spherical case, to 
drive the men from our guns. 

“ Both the officers and men stood up manfully under this gall- 
ing and fearful hail, and the batteries of both forts were promptly 
opened at their longest range, with shot, shell, hot shot, and a 
little grape, and most gallantly and rapidly fought, until the 
enemy succeeded in getting above and beyond our range. The 
absence of light on the river, together with the smoke of the guns, 
made the obscurity so dense that scarcely a vessel was visible, and, 
in consequence, the gunners were obliged to govern their firmg 
entirely by the flashes of the enemy’s guns. I am fully satisfied 
that the enemy’s dash was successful mainly owing to the cover 
of darkness, as a frigate and several gunboats were forced to retire 
as day was breaking. Similar results had attended every previous 
attempt made by the enemy to pass or to reconnoiter when we had 
sufficient light to fire with accuracy and effect.” 


916 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The vessels which passed the fort anchored at the quaran- 
tine station about six miles above, and in the forenoon pro- 
ceeded up the river. Batteries had been constructed where the 
interior line of defense touched both the right and the left bank 
of the river. The high stage of the river gave to its surface an 
elevation above that of the natural bank; but a continuous levee 
to protect the land from inundation existed on both sides of the 
river. When the ascending fleet approached these batteries, a 
cross-fire, which drove two of the vessels back, was opened upon 
it, and continued until all the ammunition was exhausted. The 
garrison was then withdrawn—casualties, one killed and one 
wounded. The regret which would naturally arise from the 
fact of these batteries not having a sufficient supply of ammuni- 
tion is modified, if not removed, by the statement of the highly 
accomplished and gallant officer, Major-General M. L. Smith, 
who was then in command of them. He reported: 


“Had the fall of New Orleans depended upon the enemy’s first 
taking Forts Jackson and Philip, I think the city would have been 
safe from an attack from the Gulf. The forts, in my judgment, 
were impregnable as long as they were in free and open commu- 
nication with the city. This communication was not endangered 
while the obstruction existed. The conclusion, then, is briefly this : 
While the obstruction existed, the city was safe; when it was 
swept away, as the defenses then existed, it was within the ene- 
my’s power.” 

On the other hand, General Duncan, whose protracted, skill- 
ful, and gallant defense of the forts is above all praise, closes his 
official report with the following sentence: “Except for the 
cover afforded by the obscurity of the darkness, I shall always 
remain satisfied that the enemy would never have succeeded in 
passing Forts Jackson and St. Philip.” The darkness to which 
he referred was not only that of night, but also the absence of 
the use of the means prepared to light up the river. As further 
proof of the intensity of the darkness, and the absence of that 
intelligent design and execution which had been claimed, I will 
quote a sentence from the report of Commodore Farragut: “ At 
length the fire slackened, the smoke cleared off, and we saw to 
our surprise that we were above the forts.” 


1862] DEMANDED ITS SURRENDER. 217 


On the 25th of April the enemy’s gunboats and ships of war 
anchored in front of the city and demanded its surrender. Ma- 
jor-General M. Lovell, then in command, refused to comply 
with the summons, but, believing himself unable to make a 
successful defense, and in order to avoid a bombardment, agreed 
to withdraw his forces, and turn it over to the civil authorities. 
Accordingly, the city was evacuated on the same day. The 
forts still continued defiantly to hold their position. By assidu- 
ous exertion the damage done to the works was repaired, and 
the garrisons valiantly responded to the resolute determination 
of General Duncan and Colonel Higgins to defend the forts 
against the fleet still below, as well as against that which had 
passed and was now above. On the 26th Commodore Porter, 
commanding the mortar-fleet below, sent a flag-of-truce boat to 
demand the surrender of the forts, saying that the city of New 
Orleans had surrendered. To this Colonel Higgins replied, 
April 27th, that he had no official information that New Or- 
leans had been evacuated, and until such notice was received he 
would not entertain fora moment a proposition to surrender 
the forts. On the same day General Duncan, commanding the 
coast-defenses, issued the following address : 


“Sotprers or Forts Jackson anp St. Pamir: You have 
nobly, gallantly, and heroically sustained with courage and forti- 
tude the terrible ordeals of fire, water, and a hail of shot and 
shell wholly unsurpassed during the present war. But more re- 
mains to be done. The safety of New Orleans and the cause of 
the Southern Confederacy—our homes, families, and everything 
dear to man—yet depend upon our exertions. We are just as 
capable of repelling the enemy to-day as we were before the bom- 
bardment. Twice has the enemy demanded your surrender, and 
twice has he been refused. 

“Your officers have every confidence in your courage and 
patriotism, and feel every assurance that you will cheerfully and 
with alacrity obey all orders, and do your whole duty as men and 
as becomes the well-tried garrisons of Forts Jackson and St. Philip. 
Be vigilant, therefore, stand by your guns, and all will yet be well. 

“J. K. Dunean, 


“ Brigadier- General, commanding coast-defenses.” 


918 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Not less lofty and devoted was the spirit evinced by Colo- 
nel. Higgins. His naval experience had been energetically ap- 
plied in the attempts to preserve and repair the raft. As im- 
mediate commander of Fort St. Philip, he had done all which 
skill and gallantry could achieve, and, though for forty-eight 
hours during the bombardment he never left the rampart, yet, 
with commendable care for his men, he kept them so under 
cover that, notwithstanding the long and furious assault to 
which the fort was subjected, the total of casualties in it was 
two killed and four wounded. Their conduct was such as was 
to be anticipated, for, had these officers been actuated by a 
lower motive than patriotism, had they been seeking the re- 
wards which power confers, they would not have taken service 
with the weaker party. Their meed was the consciousness of 
duty well done in a righteous cause, and the enduring admira- 
tion and esteem of a people who had only these to confer. 

During the 25th, 26th, and 27th, there had been an abate- 
ment of fire on the forts, and with it had subsided the excite- 
ment which imminent danger creates in the brave. A rumor 
became current that the city had surrendered, and no reply had 
been received to inquiries sent on the 24th and 25th. About 
midnight on the 27th the garrison of Fort Jackson revolted en 
masse, seized upon the guard, and commenced to spike the guns. 
Captain 8. O. Comay’s company, the Louisiana Cannoneers of 
St. Mary’s Parish, and a few others remained true to their cause 
and country. The mutiny was so general that the officers were 
powerless to control it, and therefore decided to let those go 
who wished to leave, and after daybreak to communicate with 
the fleet below and negotiate for the terms which had been 
previously offered and declined. 

Under the incessant fire to which the forts had been ex- 
posed, and the rise of the water in the casemates and lower part 
of the works, the men had been not only deprived of sleep, but 
of the opportunity to prepare their food. Heroically they had 
braved alike dangers and discomfort ; had labored constantly to 
repair damages ; to extinguish fires caused by exploding shells ; to 
preserve their ammunition by bailing out the water which threat- 
ened to submerge the magazine: yet, in a period of compara- 


1862] FLAGS WERE LEFT FLYING. 219 


tive repose, these men, who had been cheerful and obedient, as 
suddenly as unexpectedly, broke out into open mutiny. Under 
the circumstances which surrounded him, General Duncan had 
no alternative. It only remained for him to accept the propo- 
sition which had been made for a surrender of the forts. As 
this mutiny became known about midnight of the 27th, soon 
after daylight of the 28th a small boat was procured, and notice 
of the event was sent to Captain Mitchell, on the Louisiana, 
and also to Fort St. Philip. The officers of that fort concurred 
in the propriety of the surrender, though none of their men had 
openly revolted. 

A flag of truce was sent to Commodore Porter to notify 
him of a willingness to negotiate for the surrender of the forts. 
The gallantry with which the defense had been conducted was 
recognized by the enemy, and the terms were as liberal as had 
been offered on former occasions. 

The garrisons were paroled, the officers were to retain their 
side-arms, and the Confederate flags were left flying over the 
forts until after our forces had withdrawn. If this was done as 
a generous recognition of the gallantry with which the forts had 
been defended, it claims acknowledgment as an instance of 
martial courtesy—the flower that blooms fairest amid the deso- 
lations of war. 

Captain Mitchell, commanding the Confederate States naval 
forces, had been notified by General Duncan of the mutiny in 
the forts and of the fact that the enemy had passed through a 
channel in rear of Fort St. Philip and had landed a force at the 
quarantine, some six miles above, and that, under the circum- 
stances, it was deemed necessary to surrender the forts. As 
the nayal forces were not under the orders of the general com- 
manding the coast-defenses, it was optional with the naval com-' 
mander to do likewise or not as to his fleet. After consultation 
with his officers, Captain Mitchell decided to destroy his flag- 
ship, the Louisiana, the only formidable vessel he had, rather 
than allow her to fall into the hands of the enemy. The crew 
was accordingly withdrawn, and the vessel set on fire. 

Commodore Porter, commanding the fleet below, came up 
under a flag of truce to Fort Jackson, and, while negotiations 


- 


920 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


were progressing for the surrender, the Louisiana, in flames, 
drifted down the river, and, when close under Fort St. Philip, 
exploded and sank. 

The defenses afloat, except the Louisiana, conaten of tugs 
and river-steamers, which had been converted to war purposes 
by protecting their bows with iron so as to make them rams, 
and putting on them such armament as boats of that class would 
bear; and these were again divided into such as were subject to 
control as naval vessels, and others which, in compliance with 
the wish of the Governor of Louisiana and many influential 
citizens, were fitted out to a great extent by State and private 
sources, with the condition that they should be commanded by 
river-steamboat captains, and should not be under the control 
of the naval commander. This, of course, impaired the unity 
requisite in battle. For many other purposes they might have 
been used without experiencing the inconvenience felt when 
they were brought together to act as one force against the 
enemy. The courts of inquiry and the investigation by a com- 
mittee of Congress have brought out all the facts of the case, 
but with such conflicting opinions as render it very difficult, in 
reviewing the. matter, to reach a definite and satisfactory con- 
clusion. This much it may be proper to say, that expectations, 
founded upon the supposition that these improvised means could 
do all which might fairly be expected from war-vessels, were 
unreasonable, and a judgment based upon them is unjust to the 
parties involved. The machinery of the Louisiana was so incom- 
plete as to deprive her of locomotion, but she had been so well 
constructed as to possess very satisfactory resisting powers, as 
was shown by the fact that the broadsides of the enemy’s ves- 
sels, fired at very close quarters, had little or no effect upon her 
shield. Without power of locomotion, her usefulness was lim- 
ited to employment as a floating battery. The question as to 
whether she was in the right position, or whether, in her un- 
finished condition, she should have been sent from the city, is 
one, for an answer to which I must refer the inquirer to the 
testimony of naval men, who were certainly most competent to 
decide the issue. 

One of the little river-boats, the Governor Moore, com- 


1862] STOUTLY FOUGHT THE LARGE SHIPS. 9O1 


manded by Lieutenant Beverly Kennon, like the others, imper- 
fectly protected at the bow, struck and sunk the Varuna, in 
close proximity to other vessels of the enemy’s fleet. Such 
daring resulted in his losing, in killed and wounded, seventy- 
four out of a crew of ninety-three. Then finding that he must 
destroy his ship to prevent her from falling into the hands of 
the enemy, he set her on fire, and testified as follows: 


“T ordered the wounded to be placed in a boat, and all the 
men who could to save themselves by swimming to the shore and 
hiding themselves in the marshes. I remained to set the ship on 
fire. After doing so, I went on deck with the intention of leaving 
her, but found the wounded had been left with no one to take 
care of them. I remained and lowered them into a boat, and got 
through just in time to be made a prisoner. The wounded were 
afterward attended by the surgeons of the Oneida and Eureka.” 


This, he says, was the only foundation for the accusation of 
having burned his wounded with his ship. Another, the Ma- 
nassas, Lieutenant-commanding Warley, though merely an al- 

tered ‘“‘tug-boat,” stoutly fought the large ships; but, being 
wholly unprotected, except at her bow, was perforated in many 
places, as soon as the guns were brought to bear upon her sides, 
and floated down the river a burning wreck. Another of the 
same class is thus referred to by Colonel Higgins : i: 
“ At daylight, I observed the McRae, gallantly fighting at 
terrible odds, contending at close quarters with two of the ene- _ 
my’s powerful ships. Her gallant commander, Lieutenant Thomas 
B. Huger, fell during the conflict, severely, but I trust not mor- 
tally, wounded.” 


This little vessel, after her unequal conflict, was still afloat, 
and, with permission of the enemy, went up to New Orleans to 
convey the wounded as well from our forts as from the fleet. 

On the 23d of April, 1862, General Lovell, commanding the 
military department, had gone down to Fort Jackson, where 
General Duncan, commanding the coast-defenses, then made his 
headquarters. The presence of the department commander did 
not avail to secure the full codperation between the defenses 


992 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


afloat and the land-defenses, which was then of most pressing 
and immediate necessity. 

When the enemy’s fleet passed the forts, he hastened back to 
New Orleans, his headquarters. The confusion which prevailed 
in the city, when the news arrived that the forts had been passed 
by the enemy’s fleet, shows how little it was expected. There 
was nothing to obstruct the ascent of the river between Forts 
Jackson and St. Philip and the batteries on the river where 
‘the interior line of defense rested on its right and left banks, 
about four miles below the city. The guns were not sufficiently 
numerous in these batteries to inspire much confidence; they 
were nevertheless well served until the ammunition was ex- 
hausted, after which the garrisons withdrew, and made their 
way by different routes to join the forces withdrawn from New 
Orleans. 

Under the supposition entertained by the generals nearest 
to the operations, the greatest danger to New Orleans was from 
above, not from below, the city; therefore, most of the troops 
had been sent from the city to Tennessee, and Captain Hollins, 
with the greater part of the river-fleet, had gone up to check the 
descent of the enemy’s gunboats. 

Batteries like those immediately below the city had been 
constructed where the interior line touched the river above, 
and armed to resist an attack from that direction. Doubtful as 
to the direction from which, and the manner in which, an at- 
tempt might be made to capture the city, such preparations as 
circumstances suggested were made against many supposable 
dangers by the many possible routes of approach. To defend 
the city from the land, against a bombardment by a powerful 
fleet in the river before it, had not been contemplated. All the 
defensive preparations were properly, I think, directed to the 
prevention of a near approach by the enemy. To have sub- 
jected the city to bombardment by a direct or plunging fire, 
as the surface of the river was then higher than the land, 
would have been exceptionally destructive. Had the city been 
filled with soldiers whose families had been sent to a place of 
safety, instead of being filled with women and children whose 
natural protectors were generally in the army and far away, the 


1862] FAILED TO GET VOLUNTEERS. 993 


attempt might have been justified to line the levee with all the 
effective guns and open fire on the fleet, at the expense of what- 
ever property might be destroyed before the enemy should be 
driven away. The case was the reverse of the hypothesis, and 
nothing could have been more unjust than to censure the com- 
manding General for withdrawing a force large enough to in- 
duce a bombardment, but insufficient to repel it. His answer 
to the demand for the surrender showed clearly enough the 
motives by which he was influenced. His refusal enabled him 
to withdraw the troops and most of the public property, and to 
use them, with the ordnance and ordnance stores thus saved, in 
providing for the defense of Vicksburg, but especially it de- 
prived the enemy of any pretext for bombarding the town and 
sacrificing the lives of the women and children. It appears that 
General Lovell called for ten thousand volunteers from the citi- 
zens, but failed to get them. There were many river-steam- 
boats at the landing, and, if the volunteers called for were in- 
tended to man these boats and board the enemy’s fleet before 
their land-forces could arrive, it can not be regarded as utterly 
impracticable. The report of General Butler shows that he 
worked his way through one of the bayous in rear of Fort St. 
Philip to the Mississippi River above the forts so as to put 
himself in communication with the fleet at the city, and to fur- 
nish Commodore Farragut with ammunition. From this it is 
to be inferred that the fleet was deficient in ammunition, and 
the fact would have rendered boarding from river-boats the 
more likely to succeed. In this connection it may be remem- 
bered that, during the war, John Taylor Wood, Colonel and 
A.D. C. to the President, who had been an officer of high 
repute in the “old Navy,” did in open boats attack armed ves- 
sels, board and capture them, though found with nettings up, 
having been warned of the probability of such an attack.* 

* Captain Wood had a number of light row-boats built, holding each about 
twenty men. They were fitted with cradles to wagons, and could be quickly 
moved to any point by road or rail. He writes: ‘In August, 1863, I left Rich- 
mond with four boats and sixty men for the Rappahannock, to look after one or 
two gunboats that had been operating in that river. Finding always two cruising 


together, I determined to attempt the capture of both at once. About midnight, 
with muffled oars, we pulled for them at anchor near the mouth of the river. They 


994 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


_ Many causes have been assigned for the fall of New Orleans. 

Two of them are of undeniable force: First, the failure to light 
up the channel; second, the want of an obstruction which would 
detain the fleet under fire of the forts. General Duncan’s re- 
port and testimony justify. the conclusion that to the thick veil 
of darkness the enemy was indebted for his ability to run past 
the forts. 

The argument that the guns were not of sufficiently large 
caliber to stop the fleet is not convincing. If all the guns had 
been of the largest size, that would not have increased the accu- 
racy but would have diminished the rapidity of the fire, and 
therefore in the same degree would have lessened the chances 
of hitting objects in the dark. Further, it appears that the 
forts always crippled or repulsed any vessels which came up in 
daylight. 

The forts would have been better able to resist bombard- 
ment if they had been heavily plated with iron; but that would 
not have prevented the fleet from passing them as they did. 
Torpedoes might have been placed on the bar at. the mouth of 
the river before the enemy got possession of it, and subsequent- 
ly, if attached to buoys, they might have been used in the deep 
channel above. Many other things which were omitted might 
and probably would have been done had attention been earlier 
concentrated on the danger which at last proved fatal. If the 
volunteer river-defense fleet was ineffective, as alleged, because 
it was not subject to the orders of the naval commander, that 
was an evil without.a remedy. The Governor of Louisiana had 
arranged with the projectors that they should not be subject to 
the naval commander, and the alternative of not accepting them 
with that condition was that they would not agree to convert 
their steamers into war-vessels. Unless, therefore, it can be 
shown that they were worse than none, their presence can not 
be properly enumerated among the causes of the failure. 
discovered us two hundred yards off. We dashed alongside, cut our way through 
and over the boarder nettings with the old navy cutlass, gained the deck, and, 
after a sharp, short fight, drove the enemy below. The prizes proved to be the 
gunboats Satellite and Reliance, two guns each. Landing the prisoners, we cruised 


for two days in the Chesapeake Bay. A number of vessels were captured and de- 
stroyed.” 


1862] A GREAT DISASTER. 295 


The fall of New Orleans was a great disaster, over which . 


there was general lamentation, mingled with no little indigna- 
tion. The excited feeling demanded a victim, and conflicting 
testimony of many witnesses most nearly concerned made it 
convenient to select for censure those most removed and least 
active in their own justification. Thus the naval constructors 
of the Mississippi and the Secretary of the N. avy became the 
special objects of attack. The selection of these had little of 
justice in it, and could not serve to relieve others of their re- 
sponsibility, as did the old-time doom of the scapegoat. New 
Orleans had never been a ship-building port, and when the 
Messrs. Tift, the agents to build the iron-clad steamer Missis- 
‘sippi, arrived there, they had to prepare a ship-yard, procure 
lumber from a distance, have the foundries and rolling-mills 
adapted to such iron-work as could be done in the city, and 
contract elsewhere for the balance. They were ingenious, well 
informed in matters of ship-building, and were held in high 
esteem in Georgia and Florida, where they had long resided. 
They submitted a proposition to the Secretary of the Navy 
to build a vessel on a new model. The proposition was ac- 
cepted after full examination of the plan proposed, the novelty 
of which made it necessary that they should have full control 
of the work of construction. To the embarrassments above 
mentioned were added interruptions by calling off the workmen 
occasionally for exercise and instruction as militiamen, the city 
being threatened by the enemy. From these causes, unexpected 
delay in the completion of the ship resulted, regret for which 
increased as her most formidable character was realized. 

These constructors—the brothers Tift—hoped to gain much 
reputation by the ship which they designed, and, from this mo- 
tive, agreed to give their full service and unremitted attention 
in its construction without compensation or other allowance 
than their current expenses. It would, therefore, on the face 
of it, seem to have been a most absurd suspicion that they will- 
ingly delayed the completion of the vessel, and at last wantonly 
destroyed it. . 

Mr. E. O. Murray, who was the contractor for building the 
Louisiana, in his testimony before a committee of the Confeder- 


62 


¥ 
996 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ate Congress, testified that he had been a practical ship-builder 
for twenty years and a contractor for the preceding eighteen 
years, having built about a hundred and twenty boats, steamers, 
and sailing-vessels. There was only a fence between his ship- 
yard and that where the Mississippi was constructed. Of this 
latter vessel he said: 


“J think the vessel was built in less time than any vessel of 
her tonnage, character, and requiring the same amount of work 
and materials, on this continent. That vessel required no less 
than two million feet of lumber, and, I suppose, about one thou- 
sand tons of iron, including the false works, blockways, ete. I do 
not think that amount of materials was ever put together on this 
continent within the time occupied in her construction. I know 
many of our naval vessels, requiring much less materials than were 
employed in the Mississippi, that took about six or twelve months 
in their construction. She was built with rapidity, and had at all 
times as many men at work upon her as could work to advantage 
—she had, in fact, many times more men at work upon her than 
could conveniently work. They worked on nights and Sundays 
upon her, as I did upon the Louisiana, at least for a large portion 
of the time.” 


The Secretary of the Navy knew both of the Tifts, but had 
no near personal relations or family connection with either, as 
was recklessly alleged. 

He, in accepting their proposition, connected with it the 
detail of officers of the navy to supervise expenditures and 
aid in procuring materials. Assisted by the chief engineer 
and constructor of the navy, minute instructions were given 
as to the manner in which the work was to be conducted. As 
early as the 19th of September he sent twenty ship-carpen- 
~ ters from Richmond to New Orleans to aid in the construc- 
tion of the Mississippi. On the 7th of October authority 
was given to have guns of heaviest caliber made in New Or- 
leans for the ship. Frequent telegrams were sent in Novem- 
ber, December, and January, showing great earnestness about 
the work on the ship. In February and March notice was 
given of the forwarding from Richmond of capstan and main- 
shaft, which could not be made in New Orleans. On March 


® 
1862] SPARE NEITHER MEN NOR MONEY. 997 


22d the Secretary, by telegraph, directed the constructors to 
“strain every nerve to finish the ship,” and added, “ work day 
and night.” April 5th he again wrote: ‘Spare neither men 
nor money to complete her at the earliest moment. Can not 
you hire night-gangs for triple wages?” April 10th the Seere- 
tary again says: ‘“‘ Knemy’s boats have passed Island 10. Work 
day and night with all the force you can command to get the 
Mississippi ready. Spare neither men nor money.” April 11th 
he asks, “ When will you launch, and when will she be ready 
for action?” These inquiries indicate the prevalent opinion, at 
that time, that the danger to New Orleans was from the iron- 
clad fleet above, and not the vessels at the mouth of the river ; 
but the anxiety of the Secretary of the Navy and the efforts 
made by him were of a character applicable to either or both the 
sources of danger. Thus we find as early as the 24th of Febru- 
ary, 1862, that he instructed Commander Mitchell to make all 
proper exertions to have guns and carriages ready for both the 
iron-clad vessels the Mississippi and the Louisiana. Reports 
having reached him that the work on the latter vessel was not 
pushed with sufficient energy, on the 15th of March he author- 
ized Commander Mitchell to consult with General Lovell, and, 
if the contractors were not doing everything practicable to com- 
plete her at the earliest moment, that he should take her out of 
their hands, and, with the aid of General Lovell, go on to com- 
plete her himself. On the 5th of April, 1862, Secretary Mallory 
instructed Commander Sinclair, who had been assigned to the 
command of the Mississippi, to: urge on by night and day the 
completion of the ship. In March, 1861, the Navy Department 
sent from Montgomery officers to New Orleans, with instruc- 
tions to purchase steamers and fit them for war purposes. Offi- 
cers were also sent to the North to purchase vessels suited to 
such uses, and in the ensuing May an agent was dispatched to 
Canada and another to Europe for like objects; and in April, 
1861, contracts were made with foundries at Richmond and New 
Orleans to make guns for the defense of New Orleans. On the 
8th of May, 1861, the Secretary of the Navy communicated at 
some length to the Committee on Naval Affairs of the Confed- 
erate Congress his views in favor of iron-clad vessels, arguing as 


— 


998 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


well for their efficiency as the economy in building them, believ- 
ing that one such vessel could successfully engage a fleet of the 
wooden vessels which constituted the enemy’s navy. His fur- 
ther view was that we could not hope to build wooden fleets 
equal to those with which the enemy were supplied. The com- 
mittee, if it should be deemed expedient to construct an iron- 
clad ship, was urged to prompt action by the forcible declara- 
tion, “ Not a moment should be lost.” 

Commander George Minor, Confederate States Navy, Chief 
of the Bureau of Ordnance, reported the number of guns sent 
by the Navy Department to New Orleans, between July 1, 1861, 
and the fall of the city, to have been one hundred and ninety- 
seven, and that before July twenty-three guns had been sent 
there from. Norfolk, being a total of two hundred and twenty 
guns, of which forty-five were of large caliber, supplied by the 
Navy Department for the defense of New Orleans. 

Very soon after the Government was removed to Richmond, 
the Secretary of the Navy, with the aid of Commander Brooke, 
designed a plan for converting the sunken frigate Merrimac 
into an iron-clad vessel. She became the famous Virginia, the 
brilliant. career of which silenced all-the criticisms which had 
been made upon the plan adopted. On May 20, 1861, the Sec- 
retary of the Navy instructed Captain Ingraham, Confederate 
States Navy, to ascertain the practicability of obtaining wrought- 
iron plates suited for ships’ armor. . After some disappoint- 
ment and delay, the owners of the mills at Atlanta were in- 
duced to make the necessary changes in the machinery, and 
undertake the work. Efforts at other places in the West had 
been unsuccessful, and this was one of the difficulties which 
an inefficient department would not have overcome. The 
iron-clad gunboats Arkansas and Tennessee were commenced 
at Memphis, but the difficulty in obtaining mechanies so inter- 
fered with their construction, that the Secretary of the Navy 
was compelled, December 24, 1861, to write to General Polk, 
who was commanding at Columbus, Kentucky, asking that me- 
chanics might be detached from his forces, so as to insure the 
early completion of the vessels. So promptly had the iron- 
clad boats been put under contract, that the arrangements had 


1862] PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENSE. 999 


all been made in anticipation of the appropriation, and the con- 
tract was signed “on the very day the law was passed.” 

On December 25, 1861, Lieutenant Isaac N. Brown, Con- 
federate States Navy, a gallant and competent officer, well and 
favorably known in his subsequent service as commander of the 
ram Arkansas, was sent to Nashville. Information had been 
received that four river-boats were there, and for sale, which 
were suited for river defense. Lieutenant Brown was instructed . 
to purchase such as should be adaptable to the required service, 
“and to proceed forthwith with the necessary alteration and 
armament.” 

In the latter part of 1861, it having been found impossible 
with the means in Richmond and Norfolk to answer the requisi- 
tions for ordnance and ordnance stores required for the naval 
defenses of the Mississippi, a laboratory was established in New 
Orleans, and authority given for the casting of heavy cannon, 
construction of gun-carriages, and the manufacture of projectiles 
and ordnance equipments of all kinds. On December 12, 1861, 
the Secretary of the Navy submitted an estimate for an appro- 
priation to meet the expenses incurred “for ordnance and ord- 
nance stores for the defense of the Mississippi River.” 

Secretary Mallory, in answer to inquiries of a joint commit- 
tee of Congress, in 1863, replied that he had sent a telegram to 
Captain Whittle, April 17, 1862, as follows : 


“Ts the boom, or raft, below the forts in order to resist the 
enemy, or has any part of it given way? State condition.” 


On the next day the following answer was sent: 


“T hear the raft below the forts is not in best condition ; they 
are strengthening it by additional lines. I have furnished an- 
chors.” 


To further inquiry about the raft by the Committee, the 
Secretary answered : 

“The commanding General at New Orleans had exclusive 
charge of the construction of the raft, or obstruction, in question, 
and his correspondence with the War Department induced confi- 
dence in the security of New Orleans from the enemy. I was 


930 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


aware that this raft had been injured, but did not doubt that the 
commanding General would renew it, and place an effectual barrier 
across the river, and I was anxious that the navy should afford all 
possible aid, . . . A large number of anchors were sent to New 
Orleans from Norfolk for the raft.” 


Though much more might be added, it is hoped that what 
has been given above will sufficiently attest the zeal and capacity 
of the Secretary of the Navy, and his anxiety, in particular, to 
protect the city of New Orleans, whether assailed by fleets de- 
scending or ascending the river. 

Having thus reviewed at length the events, immediate and 
remote, which were connected with the great catastrophe, the 
fall of our chief commercial city, and the destruction of the 
naval vessels on which our hopes most rested for the protection 
of the lower Mississippi and the harbors of the Gulf, the narra- 
tive is resumed of affairs at the city of New Orleans. 


CHLPT ER: SEX 


Naval Affairs, continued.—Farragut demands the Surrender of New Orleans.—Reply 
of the Mayor.—United States Flag hoisted.—Advent of General Butler.—Bar- 
barities.—Antecedents of the People.—Galveston.—Its Surrender demanded.— 
The Reply.—Another Visit of the Enemy’s Fleet.—The Port occupied.—Ap- 
pointment of General Magruder.—Recapture of the Port.—Capture of the Har- 
riet Lane.—Report of General Magruder.—Position and Importance of Sabine 
Pass.—Fleet of the Enemy.—Repulse by Forty-four Irishmen,—Vessels cap- 
tured.—Naval Destitution of the Confederacy at first.—Terror of Gunboats on 
the Western Rivers.—Their Capture.—The most Illustrious Example.—The In- 
dianola.—Her Capture.—The Ram Arkansas.—Descent of the Yazoo River.— 
Report of her Commander.—Runs through the Enemy’s Fleet.—Description of 

_ the Vessel.—Attack on Baton Rouge.—Address of General Breckinridge.— 
Burning of the Arkansas. 


Sap though the memory of the fall of New Orleans must be, 
the heroism, the fortitude, and the patriotic self-sacrifice exhib-. 
ited in the eventful struggle at the forts must ever remain the 
source of pride and of such consolation as misfortune gathers 
from the remembrance of duties well performed. 


1862] WHO IS THE SOVEREIGN? 9381 


After the troops had been withdrawn and the city restored 
to the administration of the civil authorities, Commodore Farra- 
gut, on April 26, 1862, addressed the Mayor, repeating his de- 
mand for the surrender of the city. In his letter he said: “It 
is not within the province of a naval officer to assume the duties 
of a military commandant,” and added, “The rights of persons 
and property shall be secured.”’ He proceeded then to demand 
“that the emblem of sovereignty of the United States be hoist- 
ed over the City Hall, Mint, and Custom-House by meridian 
this day. All flags and other emblems of sovereignty other 
than those of the United States must be removed from all the 
public buildings by that hour.” ‘To this the Mayor replied, and 
the following extracts convey the general purport of his letter: 


“The city is without the means of defense, and is utterly des- 
titute of the force and material that might enable it to resist an 
overpowering armament displayed in sight of it... . To surrender 
such a place were an idle. and unmeaning ceremony. ... As to 
hoisting any flag other than the flag of our own adoption and alle- 
giance, let me say to you that the man lives not in our midst 
whose hand and heart would not be paralyzed at the mere thought 
of such an act; nor could I find in my entire constituency so_ 
wretched and desperate a renegade as would dare to profane with 
his hand the sacred emblem of our aspirations. . . . Peace and 
order may be preserved without resort to measures which I could 
not at this moment prevent. Your occupying the city does not 
transfer allegiance from the government of their choice to one 
which they have deliberately repudiated, and they yield the obedi- 
ence which the conqueror is entitled to extort from the conquered. 

“ Respectfully, 
“Joun T. Monron, Mayor.” 


On the 29th of April Admiral Farragut adopted the alterna- 
tive presented by the answer of the Mayor, and sent a detach- 
ment of marines to hoist the United States flag over the Custom- 
House, and to pull down the Confederate flag from the staff on 
the City Hall. An officer and some marines remained at the 
Custom-House to guard the United States flag hoisted over it 
until the land-forces under General Butler arrived. On the 
ist of May General Butler took possession of the defenseless 


939 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


city ; then followed the reign of terror, pillage, and a long train 
of infamies, too disgraceful to be remembered without a sense 
of shame by any one who is proud of the name American. 

Had the population of New Orleans been vagrant and riot- 
ous, the harsh measures adopted might have been excused, 
though nothing could have justified the barbarities which were 
practiced; but, notable as the city had always been for freedom 
from tumult, and occupied as it then was mainly by women 
and children, nothing can extenuate the wanton insults and 
outrages heaped upon them. That those not informed of the 
character of the citizens may the better comprehend it, a brief 
reference is made to its history. 

When Canada, then a French colony, was conquered by 
Great Britain, many of the inhabitants of greatest influence and 
highest cultivation, in a spirit of loyalty to their flag, migrated 
to the wilds of Louisiana. Some of them established them- 
selves in and about New Orleans, and their numerous descend- 
ants formed, down to a late period, the controlling element in 
the body-politic. Even after they had ceased, because of large 
immigration, to control in the commercial and political affairs 
of the city, their social standard was still the rule. No people 
were more characterized by refinement, courtesy, and chivalry. 
Of their keen susceptibility the Mayor informed Commodore 
Farragut in his correspondence with that officer. 

When the needy barbarians of the upper plains of Asia 
descended upon the classic fields of Italy, their atrocities were 
such as shocked the common-sense of humanity; but, if any one 
shall inquire minutely into the conduct of Butler and his fol- 
lowers at New Orleans, he will find there a history yet more 
revolting, 

Soon thereafter, on May 17, 1862, Captain Eagle, United 
States Navy, commanding the naval forces before Galveston, 
summoned it to surrender, “to prevent the effusion of blood 
and the destruction of property which would result from the 
bombardment of the town,” adding that the land and naval 
forces would appear in a few days. The reply was that, “when 
the land and naval forces made their appearance, the demand 
would be answered.” The harbor and town of Galveston were 


1862] THE CITIZENS REMAINED QUIET. 233 


3) 


not prepared to resist a bombardment, and, under the advice of 
- General Herbert, the citizens remained quiet, resolved, when 
the enemy should attempt to penetrate the interior, to resist 
his march at every point. This condition remained without 
any material change until the 8th of the following October, 
when Commander Renshaw with a fleet of gunboats, consisting 
of the Westfield, Harriet Lane, Owasco, Clifton, and some 
transports, approached so near the city as to command it with 
his guns. Upon a signal, the Mayor pro tem. came off to the 
flag-ship and informed Commander Renshaw that the military 
and civil authorities. had withdrawn from the town, and that 
he had been appointed by a meeting of citizens to act as mayor, 
and had come for the purpose of learning the intentions of the 
naval commander. In reply he was informed that there was 
no purpose to interfere with the municipal affairs of the city; 
that he did not intend to occupy it before the arrival of a mili- 
tary commander, but that he intended to hoist the United 
States flag upon the public buildings, and claim that it should 
be respected. The acting Mayor informed him that persons 
over whom he had no control might take down the flag, and he 
could not guarantee that it should-be respected. Commander 
Renshaw replied that, to avoid any difficulty like that which 
oceurred in New Orleans, he would send with the flag a suffi- 
cient force to protect it, and would not keep the flag flying for 
‘more than a quarter or half an hour. 

The vessels of the fleet were assigned to positions command- 
ing the town and the bridge which connected the island with 
the mainland, and a battalion of Massachusetts volunteers was 
posted on one of the wharves. 

Late in 1862 General John B. Magruder, a skillful and 
knightly soldier, who had at an earlier period of the year ren- 
dered distinguished service by his defense of the peninsula be- 
tween the James and York Rivers, Virginia, was assigned to the 
command of the Department of Texas. On his arrival, he found 
the enemy in possession of the principal port, Galveston, and 
other points upon the coast. He promptly collected the scat- 
tered arms and field artillery, had a couple of ordinary high- 
pressure steamboats used in the transportation of cotton on 


934 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Buffalo Bayou protected with cotton-bales piled from the main 
deck to and above the hurricane-roof, and these, under the 
command of Captain Leon Smith, of the Texas Navy, in co- 
operation with the volunteers, were relied upon to recapture 
the harbor and island of Galveston. Between night and 
morning on the 1st of January, 1863, the land-forces entered 
the town, and the steamboats came into the bay, manned by 
Texas cavalry and volunteer artillery. The field artillery was 
run down to the shore, and opened fire upon the boats. The 
battalion of the enemy having torn up the plank of the wharf, 
our infantry could only approach them by wading through the 
water, and climbing upon the wharf. The two steamboats at- 
tacked the Harriet Lane, the gunboat lying farthest up the bay. 
They were both so frail in their construction that their only 
chance was to close and board. One of them was soon disabled 
by collision with the strong vessel, and in a sinking condition 
ran into shoal water. The other closed with the Harriet Lane, 
boarded and captured the vessel. The flag-ship Westfield got 
aground and could not be got off, though assisted by one of the 
fleet for that purpose. General Magruder then sent a demand 
that the enemy’s vessels should surrender, except one, on which 
the crews of all should leave the harbor, giving until ten o’clock: 
for compliance with his demand, to enforce which he put a crew 
on the Harriet Lane, then the most efficient vessel afloat of the 
enemy’s fleet, and, while waiting for an answer, ceased firing. 
This demand was communicated by a boat from the Harriet 
Lane to the commander on the Clifton, who said that he was 
not the commander of the fleet, and would communicate the 
proposal to the flag-officer on the Westfield. Flags of truce 
were then flying on the enemy’s vessels, as well as on shore. 
Commander Renshaw refused to accede to the proposition, di- 
recting the commander of the Clifton to get all the vessels, 
including the Corypheus and Sachem, which had recently joined, 
out of port as soon as possible, and that he would blow up the 
Westfield, and leave on the transports lying near him with his 
officers and crew. In attempting to execute this purpose, Com- 
mander Renshaw and ten or fifteen others perished soon after 
leaving the ship, in consequence of the explosion being prema- 


1862] CAVALRY CHARGE ON A FLEET. 235 


ture. The General commanding made the following prelimi- 
nary report : 
“ HEADQUARTERS, GALVESTON, TEXAS. 

“This morning, the Ist January, at three o’clock, I attacked 
the enemy’s fleet and garrison at this place, captured the latter 
and the steamer Harriet Lane, two barges, and a schooner. The 
rest, some four or five, escaped ignominiously under cover of a 
flag of truce. I have about six hundred prisoners and a large 
quantity of valuable stores, arms, etc. The Harriet Lane is very 
little injured. She was carried by boarders from two high-press- 
ure cotton-steamers, manned by Texas cavalry and artillery. The 
line troops were gallantly commanded by Colonel Green, of Sib- 
ley’s brigade, and the ships and artillery by Major Leon Smith, to 
whose indomitable energy and heroic daring the country is indebted 
for the successful execution of a plan which I had considered for 
the destruction of the enemy’s fleet. Colonel Bagby, of Sibley’s 
brigade, also commanded the volunteers from his regiment for the 
naval expedition, in which every officer and every man won for 


himself imperishable renown. 
“J. BankueaD Macruper, 


“Major- General.” 


The conduct of Commander Renshaw toward the inhabitants 
of Galveston had been marked by moderation and propriety, 
and the closing act of his life was one of manly courage and 
fidelity to the flag he bore. 

Commander Wainright and Lieutenant-commanding Lea, 
who fell valiantly defending their ship, were buried in the cem- 
etery with the honors of war: thus was evinced that instinctive 
respect which true warriors always feel for their peers. The 
surviving officers were paroled. 

It would be a pleasing task, if space allowed, to notice the 
many instances of gallantry in this affair, as daring as they were 
novel, but want of space compels me to refer the reader to the 
full accounts which have been published of the “cavalry charge 
upon a naval fleet.” 

The capture of the enemy’s fleet in Galveston Harbor, by 
means so novel as to excite surprise as well as grateful admira- 
tion, was followed by another victory on the coast of Texas, 


936 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


under circumstances so remarkable as properly to be considered 
marvelous. To those familiar with the events of that time and 
section, it is hardly necessary to say that I refer to the battle of 
Sabine Pass. 

The strategic importance to the enemy of the possession of 
Sabine River caused the organization of a large expedition of 
land and naval forces to enter and ascend the river. If success- 
ful, it gave the enemy short lines for operation against the 
interior of Texas, and relieved them of the discomfiture resulting 
from their expulsion from Galveston Harbor. 

The fleet of the enemy numbered twenty-three vessels. The 
forces were estimated to be ten thousand men. No adequate 
provision had been made to resist such a force, and, under the 
circumstances, none might have been promptly made on which 
reliance could have been reasonably placed. A few miles above 
the entrance into the Sabine River, a small earthwork had been 
constructed, garrisoned at the time of the action by forty-two 
men and two lieutenants, with an armament of six guns. The 
officers and men were all Irishmen, and the company was called 
the “ Davis Guards.” The captain, F. H. Odlum, was tempora- 
rily absent, so that the command devolved upon Lieutenant R. 
W. Dowling. Wishing to perpetuate the history of an affair, 
in which I believe the brave garrison did more than an equal 
force had ever elsewhere performed, I asked General Magruder, 
when I met him after the war, to write out a full account of the 
event ; he agreed to do so, but died not long after I saw him, 
and before complying with my request. From the publications 
of the day I have obtained the main facts, as they were then 
printed in the Texas newspapers, and, being unwilling to sum- 
marize the reports, give them at length. 


Captain F. H, Odlum’s Official Report. 
“ Heapquarters, SaBINE Pass, 
“ September 9, 1868. 
“Captain A. N. Mitus, Assistant Adjutant- General. 
“Str: [have the honor to report that we had an engagement 
with the enemy yesterday and gained a handsome victory. We 
captured two. of their gunboats, crippled a third, and drove the 


1862] COOLLY HELD THEIR FIRE. Ey 


rest out of the Pass. We took eighteen fine guns, a quantity of 
smaller arms, ammunition and stores, killed about fifty, wounded 
several, and took one hundred and fifty prisoners, without the loss 
or injury of any one on our side or serious damage to the fort. 
“Your most obedient servant, 
“FF. H. Opium, Captain, commanding Sabine Pass.” 


Commodore Leon Smith’s Official Report. 


“Captain E. P. Turner, Assistant Adjutant- General. 

“Sir: After telegraphing the Major-General before leaving 
Beaumont, I took a horse and proceeded with all haste to Sabine 
Pass, from which direction I could distinctly hear a heavy firing. 
Arriving at the Pass at 3 p.m., I found the enemy off and inside 
the bar, with nineteen gunboats and steamships and other ships 
of war, carrying, as well as I could judge, fifteen thousand men. 
I proceeded with Captain Odlum to the fort, and found Lieuten- 
ant Dowling and Lieutenant N. H. Smith, of the engineer corps, 
with forty-two men, defending the fort. Until 3 Pp. m. our men 
did not open on the enemy, as the range was too distant. The 
officers of the fort coolly held their fire until the enemy had 
approached near enough to reach them. But, when the enemy ar- 
rived within good range, our batteries were opened, and gallantly 
replied to a galling and most terrific fire from the enemy. AsI 
entered the fort, the gunboats Clifton, Arizona, Sachem, and Gran- 
ite State, with several others, came boldly up to within one thou- 
sand yards, and opened their batteries, which were gallantly and 
effectively replied to by the Davis Guards. For one hour and 
thirty minutes a most terrific bombardment of grape, canister, and 
shell was directed against our heroic and devoted little band with- 
in the fort. The shot struck in every direction, but, thanks be to 
God! not one of the noble Davis Guards was hurt. Too much 
credit can not be awarded Lieutenant Dowling, who displayed the 
utmost heroism in the discharge of the duty assigned him and the 
defenders of the fort. God bless the Davis Guards, one and all ! 
The honor of the country was in their hands, and nobly they sus- 
tained it. Every man stood at his post, regardless of the murder- 
ous fire that was poured upon them from every direction. The 
result of the battle, which lasted from 3.30 to 5 Pp. M., was the cap- 
turing of the Clifton and Sachem, eighteen heavy guns, one hun- 
dred and fifty prisoners, and the killing and wounding of fifty 


938 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


men, and driving outside the bar the enemy’s fleet, comprising 
twenty-three vessels in all. I have the honor to be your obedient 
servant, Lzon Smiru, 

“ Commanding Marine Department of Texas.” 


“ Wespquarters District or Texas, New Mexico, AND 


Arizona, Houston, Texas, September 9, 1863. 
‘“(SpEorAL ORDER.) 


“ Another glorious victory has been won by the heroism of 
Texans. The enemy, confident of overpowering the little garri- 
son at Sabine Pass, boldly advanced to the work of capture. After 
a sharp contest he was entirely defeated, one gunboat hurrying 
off in a crippled condition, while two others, the Clifton and Sa- 
chem, with their armaments and crews, including the commander 
of the fleet, surrendered to the gallant defenders of the fort. The 
loss of the enemy has been heavy, while not a man on our side has 
been killed.or wounded. Though the enemy has been repulsed in 
his naval attacks, his land-forces, reported as ten thousand strong, 
are still off the coast waiting an opportunity to land. 

“The Major-General calls on every man able to bear arms to 
bring his guns or arms, no matter of what kind, and be prepared 
to make a sturdy resistance to the foe. 

“Major-General J. B. Macruper. 
“Epmonp P, Turner, Assistant Adjutant- General,” 


The “Daily Post,” Houston, Texas, of August 22, 1880, has 
the following : 


“A few days after the battle each man that participated in the 
fight was presented with a silver medal inscribed as follows: On 
one side ‘D. G.,’ for the Davis Guards, and on the reverse side, 
‘Sabine Pass, September 8, 1863.’ 

“Captain Odlum and Lieutenant R. W. Dowling have gone to 
that bourn whence no traveler returns, and but few members of 
the heroic band are in the land of the living, and those few reside 
in the city of Houston, and often meet together, and talk about 
the battle in which they participated on the memorable 8th of Sep- 
tember, 1863. 

“The following are the names of the company who manned the 
guns in Fort Grigsby, and to whom the credit is due for the glo- 
rious victory : 

“Lieutenants R. W. Dowling and N. H. Smith ; Privates Tim- 


1862] IT WAS MARVELOUS. 239 


othy McDonough, Thomas Dougherty, David Fitzgerald, Michael 
~ Monahan, John Hassett, John McKeefer, Jack W. White, Patrick 
McDonnell, William Gleason, Michael Carr, Thomas Hagerty, 
Timothy Huggins, Alexander McCabe, James Flemming, Patrick 
Fitzgerald, Thomas McKernon, Edward Pritchard, Charles Rheins, 
Timothy Hurley, John McGrath, Matthew Walshe, Patrick Sulli- 
van, Michael Sullivan, Thomas Sullivan, Patrick Clare, John Hen- 
nessey, Hugh Deagan, Maurice Powers, Abner Carter, Daniel Mc- 
Murray, Patrick Malone, James Corcoran, Patrick Abbott, John 
McNealis, Michael Egan, Daniel Donovan, John Wesley, John 
Anderson, John Flood, Peter O’Hare, Michael Delaney, Terence 
Mulhern.” 


The inquiry may naturally arise how this small number of 
men could take charge of so large a body of prisoners. This 
required that to their valor they should add stratagem. A few 
men were placed on the parapet as sentinels, the rest were 
_ marched out as a guard to receive the prisoners and their arms. 
Thus was concealed the fact that the fort was empty. The 
report of the guns bombarding the fort had been heard, and 
soon after the close of the battle reénforcements arrived, which 
relieved the little garrison from its embarrassment. 

Official reports of officers in the assaulting column, as pub- 
lished in the “ Rebellion Record,” vol. vii, page 425, e¢ seq., 
refer to another fort, and steamers in the river, codperating in 
the defense of Fort Grigsby. The success of the single com- 
pany which garrisoned the earthwork is without parallel in 
ancient or modern war. It was marvelous; but it is incredible 
—more than marvelous—-that another garrison in another fort, 
with cruising steamers, aided in checking the advance of the 
enemy, yet silently permitted the forty-two men and two officers 
of Fort Grigsby to receive all the credit for the victory which 
_was won. If this be supposable, how is it possible that Captain 
Odlum, Commander Smith, General Magruder, and Lieutenant 
Dowling, who had been advised to abandon the work, and had 
consulted their men as to their willingness to defend it, should 
nowhere have mentioned the putative fort and codperating | 
steamers ? 

The names of the forty-four must go down to posterity, 


940 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


unshorn of the honor which their contemporaries admiringly 
accorded. 

At the commencement of the war the Confederacy was not 
only without a navy, all the naval vessels possessed by the States 
having been, as explained elsewhere, left in the hands of our 
enemies; but worse than this was the fact that ship-building 
had been almost exclusively done in the Northern States, so 
that we had no means of acquiring equality in naval power. 
The numerous deep and wide rivers traversing the Southern 
States gave a favorable field for the operation of gunboats suited 
to such circumstances. The enemy rapidly increased their sup- 
ply of these by building on the Western waters, as well as else- 
.where, and converting existing vessels into iron-clad gunboats. 
The intrepidity and devotion of our people met the necessity 
by new expedients and extraordinary daring. This was espe- 
cially seen in the operations of western Louisiana, where numer- 
ous bayous and rivers, with difficult land-routes, gave an advan- 
tage to the enemy which might well have paralyzed anything 
less than the most resolute will. 

In the earlier period of the war, the gunboats had inspired a 
terror which their performances never justified. There was a 
prevailing opinion that they could not be stopped by land-bat- 
teries, or resisted on water by anything else than vessels of their 
own class. Against the first opinion General Richard Taylor, 
commanding in Louisiana, south of Red River, stoutly con- 
tended, and maintained his opinion by the repulse and capture of 
some of the enemy’s vessels by land-batteries having guns of 
rather light caliber. 

One by one successful conflicts between river-boats and gun- 
boats impaired the estimate which had been put upon. the lat- 


ter. The most illustrious example of this was the attack and” 


capture of the Indianola, a heavy ironclad, with two eleven-inch 
guns forward, and two nine-inch aft, all in iron casemates. She 
had passed the batteries at Vicksburg, and was in the section of 
the river between Vicksburg and Port Hudson, which, in Feb- 
ruary, 1863, was the only gate of communication which the 
Confederacy had between the east and west sides of the Missis- 
sippi. The importance of keeping open this communication, 


we 


1862] SHE WAS SINKING. 941 


always great, became vital from the necessity of drawing com- 
missary’s stores from the trans-Mississippi. 

Major Brent, of General Taylor’s staff, proposed, with the 
tow-boat Webb, which had been furnished as a ram, and the 
Queen of the West, which had been four or five days before 
captured by the land-battery at Fort De Russy, to go to the 
Mississippi and attack the Indianola. On the 19th of Febru- 
ary the expedition started, though mechanics were still working 
upon the needed repairs of the Queen of the West. The service 
was so hazardous that volunteers only formed the crews, but of 
these more offered than were wanted. On the 24th, while 
ascending the Mississippi, Major Brent learned, when about 
sixty miles below Vicksburg, that the Indianola was a short 
distance ahead, with a coal-barge lashed on either side. He 
determined to attack in the night, being assured that, if struck by 
a shell from one of the eleven- or nine-inch guns, either of his 
boats would be destroyed. At 10 p.m. the Queen, followed by 
the Webb, was driven at full speed directly upon the Indianola. 
The momentum of the Queen was so great as to cut through the 
coal-barge, and indent the iron plates of the Indianola. As the 
Queen backed out, the Webb dashed in at full speed, and tore 
away the remaining coal-barge. Both the forward guns fired 
at the Webb, but missed her. Again the Queen struck the 
Indianola, abaft the paddle-box, crushing her frame and loosen- 
ing some plates of armor, but received the fire of the guns from 
the rear casemates. One shot carried away a dozen bales of 
cotton on the right side ; the other, a shell, entered the forward 
port-hole and exploded, killing six men and disabling two field- 
pieces. Again the Webb followed the Queen, struck near the 
same spot, pushing aside the iron plates and crushing timbers. 
Voices from the Indianola announced the surrender, and that 
she was sinking. The river here sweeps the western shore, and 
there was deep water up to the bank. General Grant’s army 
was on the west side of the river, and, for either or both of 
these reasons, Major Brent towed the Indianola to the opposite 
side, where she sank on a bar, her gun-deck above water. Both 
boats were much shattered in the conflict, and Major Brent 
returned to the Red River to repair them. A tender accompa- 

63 


949 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


nied the Queen and the Webb, and a frail river-boat without 
protection for her boilers, which was met on the river, turned 
back and followed them, but, like the tender, could be of no 
service in the battle. For these particulars I am indebted to 
General Richard Taylor’s book, “Destruction and Reconstruc- 
tion,” pages 123-125. 

The ram Arkansas, which has been previously noticed as 
being under construction at Memphis, was removed before she 
was finished to the Yazoo River, events on the river above hay- 
ing rendered this necessary for her security. After she was 
supposed to be ready for service, Commander Brown, then as 
previously in charge of her, went down the Yazoo to enter the 
Mississippi and proceed to Vicksburg. The enemy’s fleet of 
some twelve or thirteen rams, gunboats, and sloops of war, were 
in the river above Vicksburg, and below the point where the 
Yazoo enters the Mississippi. Anticipating the descent of the 
Arkansas, a detachment had been made from this fleet to pre- 
vent her exit. The annexed letter of Commander Brown de- 
scribes what occurred in the Yazoo River : 


“STEAMER ARKANSAS, July 15, 1862. 

“GeneRAL: The Benton, or whatever ironclad we disabled, 
was left with colors down, evidently aground to prevent sinking, 
about one mile and a half above the mouth of the Yazoo (in Old 
River), on the right-hand bank, or bank across from Vicksburg. 

“T wish it to be remembered that we whipped this vessel, made 
it run out of the fight and haul down colors, with two less guns 
than they had; and at the same time fought two rams, which 
were firing at us with great guns and small-arms ; this, too, with 
our miscellaneous crew, who had never, for the most part, been on 
board a ship, or at big guns. 

“Tam, General, very respectfully, your obedient servant, 

“J. N. Brown, 


“ Lieutenant commanding. 
“To Brigadier-General M. L, Surru, commanding defenses at Vicksburg.” 


When entering the Mississippi the fleet of the enemy was 
found disposed as a phalanx, but the heroic commander of the 
Arkansas moved directly against it; and, though in passing 
through this formidable array he was exposed to the broadsides 


1862] PROVED UNDER FIRE. 243 


of the whole fleet, the vessel received no other injury than from 
one eleven-inch shot which entered the gun-room, and the per- 
foration in many places of her smoke-stack. The casualties to 
the crew were five killed, four wounded—among the latter was 
the gallant commander. General Van Dorn, commanding the 
department, in a dispatch from Vicksburg, July 15th, states the 
number of the enemy’s vessels above Vicksburg, pays a high 
compliment to the officers and men, and adds: 


“ All the enemy’s transports and all the vessels of war of the 
lower fleet (i. e., the fleet just below Vicksburg), except a sloop 
of war, have got up steam, and are off to escape from the Arkan- 
sas.” 


A vessel inspiring such dread is entitled to a special descrip- 
tion. She was an iron-clad steamer, one hundred feet in her 
length, her armament ten Parrott guns, and her crew one hun- 
dred men, who had volunteered from the land-forces for the 
desperate service proposed. Her commander had been from his 
youth in the navy of the United States, and his capacity was 
such as could well supplement whatever was wanted of naval 
knowledge in his crew. The care and skill with which the 
vessel had been constructed were tested and proved under fire. 
Had her engines been equal to the hull and armor of the vessel, 
it is difficult to estimate the value of the service she might have 
performed. At this period the enemy occupied Baton Rouge, 
with gunboats lying in front of it to codperate with the troops 
in the town. The importance of holding a section of the Mis- 
sissippi, so as to keep free communication between the eastern 
and western portions of the Confederacy, has been heretofore 
noticed. To this end it was deemed needful to recover the 
possession of Baton Rouge, and it was decided to make a land- 
attack in eA ai with the Arkansas, to pe sent down against 
the enemy’s fleet. 

Major-General J. C. Breckinridge was digital to the com- 
mand of the land-forces. This distinguished citizen and alike 
distinguished soldier, surmounting difficulties which would have 
discouraged a less resolute spirit, approached Baton Rouge, and 
moved to the attack at the time indicated for the arrival of 


944 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the Arkansas. In his address to the officers and soldiers of his 
command, after the battle, viz., on August 6, 1862, he compli- 
ments the troops on the fortes with which ‘they ae borne a 
severe march, on the manner in which they attacked the enemy, 
superior in numbers and admirably posted, drove him from his 
positions, taking his camps, and forcing him to seek protection 
under cover of the guns of his fleet. Major-General Breckin- 
ridge attributes his failure to achieve entire success to the ina- 
bility of the Arkansas to codperate with his forces, and adds : 


“You have given the enemy a severe and salutary lesson, and 
now those who so lately were ravaging and plundering this re- 
gion do not care to extend their pickets beyond the sight of their 
fleet.” 


The Arkansas in descending the river moved leisurely, hav- 
ing ample time to meet her appointment; but, when about fif- 
teen miles above Baton Rouge, her starboard engine broke down. 
Repairs were immediately commenced, and, by 8 a.m. on the 
5th of August, were partially completed. General Breckinridge 
had commenced the attack at four o’clock, and the Arkansas, 
though not in condition to engage the enemy, moved on, and, 
when in sight of Baton Rouge, her starboard engine again broke 
down, and the vessel was run ashore. The work of repair was re- 
sumed, and next morning the Federal fleet was seen coming up. 
The Arkansas was moored head down-stream and cleared for ac- 
tion. The Essex approached and opened fire; at that moment 
the engineers reported the engines able to work half a day. The 
lines were cut, and the Arkansas started for the Essex, when the 
other—the larboard—engine suddenly stopped, and the vessel 
was again secured to the shore stern-down. The Essex now 
valiantly approached, pouring a hot fire into her disabled an- 
tagonist. Lieutenant Stevens, then commanding the Arkansas, 
ordered the crew ashore, fired the vessel, and, with her flag 
flying, turned her adrift—a sacrificial offering to the cause she 
had served so valiantly in her brief but brilliant career. Lieu- 
tenant Reed, of the ram Arkansas, in his published account of 
the affair, states, “ After all hands were ashore, the Essex fired 
upon the disabled vessel most furiously.” 


1862] NECESSARY TO HAVE A NAVY. 945 


Or AP TE RX XX, 


Naval Affairs, continued.—Necessity of a Navy.—Raphael Semmes.—The Sumter. 
—Difficulties in creating a Navy.—The Sumter at Sea.—Alarm.—Her Captures. 
—James D. Bullock.—Laird’s Speech in the House of Commons.—The Alaba- 
ma.—Semmes takes Command.—The Vessel and Crew.—Goes to Sea.—Banks’s 
Expedition.—Magruder at Galveston.—The Steamer Hatteras sunk.—The Ala- 
bama not a Pirate —An Aspinwall Steamer ransomed.—Other Captures.—Prizes 
burned.—At Cherbourg.—Fight with the Kearsarge.—Rescue of the Men.—De- 
mand of the United States Government for the Surrender of the Drowning Men. 
—Reply of the British Government.—Sailing of the Oreto.—Detained at Nas- 
sau.—Captain Maffit—The Ship half equipped.—Arrives at Mobile—Runs the 
Blockade.—Her Cruise.—Capture and Cruise of the Clarence.—The Captures of 
the Florida.—Captain C. M. Morris.—The Florida at Bahia.—Seized by the 
Wachusett.—Brought to Virginia and sunk.—Correspondence.—The Georgia. 
—Cruises and Captures—The Shenandoah.—Cruises and Captures.—The At- 
lanta.—The Tallahassee.—The Edith. 


To maintain the position assumed by the Confederate States 
as a separate power among the nations, it was obviously neces- 
sary to have a navy, not only for the defense of their coast, but 
also for the protection of their commerce. These States, after 
their secession from the Union, were in that regard in a desti- 
tute condition, similar to that of the United States after their 
Declaration of Independence. 

It has been shown that among the first acts of the Confed- 
erate Administration was the effort to buy ships which could be 
used for naval purposes. The policy of the United States Gov- 
ernment being to shut up our commerce rather than protect 
their own, induced the wholesale purchase of the vessels found 
in the Northern ports—not only such as could be made fit for 
cruisers, but also any which would serve even for blockading 
purposes. There was little shipping of any kind in the South- 
ern ports, and to that scanty supply we were, for the time, 
restricted. 

A previous reference has been made to the Sumter, Com- 
mander Raphael Semmes, but a more extended notice is con- 
sidered due. . Educated in the naval service of the United 
States, Raphael Semmes had attained the rank of commander, 


946 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and was distinguished for his studious habits and varied acquire- 
ments. When Alabama passed her ordinance of secession, he 
was on duty at Washington as a member of the Lighthouse 
Board ; he promptly tendered his resignation, and, at the organi- 
zation of the Confederate Government, repaired to Montgomery 
and tendered his services to it. The efforts which had been 
made to obtain steamers suited to cruising against the enemy’s 
commerce had been quite unsuccessful, none being found which 
the naval officers charged with their selection regarded fit for the 
service. One of the reports described a small propeller-steamer 
of five hundred tons burden, sea-going, low-pressure engine, 
sound, and capable of being so strengthened as to carry an ordi- 
nary battery of four or five guns; speed between nine and ten 
knots, but the board condemned her because she could carry but 
five days’ fuel, and had no accommodations for the crew. 

The Secretary of the Navy showed this to Commander 
Semmes, who said: “Give me that ship; I think I can make her 
answer the purpose.” She was to be christened the Sumter, in 
commemoration of our first victory, and had the honor of being 
the first ship of war commissioned by the Confederate States, 
and the first to display the Stars and Bars of the Confederacy on 
the high-seas. The Sumter was at New Orleans, to which place 
Commander Semmes repaired ; and, as forcibly presenting the 
difficulties under which we labored in all attempts to create a 
navy, I will quote from his memoirs the account of his effort to 
get the Sumter ready for sea: 


“T now took my ship actively in hand and set gangs of mechan- 
ics at work to remove her upper cabins and other top hamper, pre- 
paratory to making the necessary alterations. These latter were 
considerable, and I soon found that I had a tedious job on my 
hands. It was no longer the case, as it had been in former years, 
when I had had occasion to fit out a ship, that I could go into a 
navy-yard, with well-provided workshops and skilled workmen, 
ready with all the requisite materials at hand to execute my 
orders. Everything had to be improvised, from the manufacture 
of a water-tank to the kids and cans of the berth-deck messes, 
and from a gun-carriage to a friction-primer. . . .- Two long, te- 
dious months were consumed in making alterations and additions. 


* 


1862] HAD GONE OFF IN CHASE. 247 


My battery was to consist of an eight-inch-shell gun, to be piv- 
oted amidships, and of four light thirty-two-pounders of thirteen 
hundred weight each, in broadside.” 


On the 8d of June, 1861, the Sumter was formally put in 
commission, and a muster-roll of the officers and men trans- 
mitted to the Navy Department. On the 18th of June she 
‘left New Orleans and steamed down and anchored near the 
mouth of the river. While lying at the head of the passes, 
the commander reported a blockading squadron outside, of 
three ships at Passe 4 Outre, and one at the Southwest Pass. 
The Brooklyn, at Passe 4 Outre, was not only a powerful 
vessel, but she had greater speed than the Sumter. The Pow- 
hatan’s heavy armament made it very hazardous to pass her in 
daylight, and the absence of buoys and lights made it next to 
impossible to keep the channel in darkness. The Sumter, there- 
fore, had been compelled to lie at the head of the passes and 
watch for some opportunity in the absence of either the Brook- 
lyn or the Powhatan to get to sea. Fortunately, neither of these 
vessels came up to the head of the passes, where, there being 
but a single channel, it would have been easy to prevent the 
exit of the Sumter. 

On the 30th of June, one bright morning, a boatman re- 
ported that the Brooklyn had gone off in chase of a sail. Im- 
mediately the Sumter was got under way, when it was soon 
discovered that the Brooklyn was returning, and that the two 
vessels were about equally distant from the bar. By steady 
courage and rare seamanship the Sumter escaped from her more 
swift pursuer, and entered on her career of cutting the enemy’s 
sinews of war by destroying his commerce. 

Numerous armed vessels of the enemy were hovering on 
our coast, yet this one little cruiser created a general alarm, and, 
though a regularly commissioned vessel of the Confederacy, was 
habitually denounced as a “ pirate,” and the many threats to 
destroy her served only to verify the adage that the threatened 
live long. ; 

During her cruise up to January 17, 1862, she captured 
three ships, five brigs, six barks, and three schooners, but the 


948 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


property destroyed formed a very small part of the damage done 
to the enemy’s commerce. Her appearance on the seas created 
such alarm that Northern ships were, to a large extent, put 
under foreign flags, and the carrying-trade, in which the United 
States stood second only to Great Britain, passed rapidly into 
other hands. The Sumter, while doing all this mischief, was 
nearly self-sustaining, her running expenses to the Confederate 
Government being but twenty-eight thousand dollars when, at 
the close of 1861, she arrived at Gibraltar. Not being able to 
obtain coal, she remained there until sold. 

Captain James D. Bullock, an officer of the old navy, of 
high ability as a seaman, and of an integrity which stood the 
test under which a less stern character might have given way, 
was our naval agent at Liverpool. In his office he disbursed 
millions, and, when there was no one to whom he could be re- 
quired to render an account, paid out the last shilling in his 
hands, and confronted poverty without prospect of other reward 
than that which he might find in a clear conscience. He con- 
tracted with the Messrs. Laird, of Birkenhead, to build a strong 
steam merchant-ship—the same which was afterward christened 
“The Alabama” when, in a foreign port, she had received her 
armament and crew. So much of puerile denunciation has been 
directed against the builder and the ship, which, in the virulent 
language of the day, our enemies denominated a “ pirate,” that 
the case claims at my hands a somewhat extended notice. 

The senior Mr. Laird was a member of the British Parlia- 
ment, and, because of the complaints made by the United States 
Government, and the abuse heaped upon him by the Northern 
newspapers, he made a speech in the House of Commons, in 
which he stated that, in 1861, he was applied to to build vessels 
for the Northern Government, first, by personal application, 
and subsequently by a letter from Washington, asking him, on 
the part of the United States Navy Department, to give the 
terms on which he would build an iron-plated ship, “to be 
finished complete, with guns and everything appertaining.” 
Mr. Laird continued: “On the 14th of August I received 
another letter from the same gentleman, from which the fol- 
lowing is an extract: ‘I have this morning a note from the 


1862] RIGHT TO STATE THESE FACTS. 949 


Assistant-Secretary of the Navy, in which he says, “I hope 
your friends will tender for the two iron-plated steamers.” ” 
Mr. Laird then said that, while he would not give the name of 
his correspondent, who was a gentleman of the highest respecta- 
bility, he was willing, in confidence, to submit the original let- 
ters to the Speaker of the House or the first Minister of the 
Crown ; that, as “ the American Government is making so much 
work about other parties whom they charge with violating or 
evading the law, when in reality they have not done so, I think 
it only right to state these facts.” 

Those who have listened with credulity to the abuse of the 
Confederate Government, as well as that of Great Britain, the 
one for contracting for the building of the Alabama and the 
other for permitting her to leave a British port, will thus see 
how little of sincerity there was in the complaints of the United 
States Government. For more than a generation the British 
people have been the great ship-builders of the world, and it is 
a matter of surprise that they should have given respectful con- 
sideration to charges of a breach of neutrality because they al- 
lowed a merchantman to be built in one of their ports and to 
leave it without any armament or crew, which could have ena- 
bled it, in that condition, to make war upon a country with 
which ee Britain was at peace. 

Referring to the Alabama, as she was when she left the 
Mersey, Mr. Laird said : 


“Tf a ship without guns and without arms is a dangerous 
article, surely rifled guns and ammunition of all sorts are equally 
and even more dangerous. I have referred to the bills of entry in 
the custom-houses of London and Liverpool, and I find that there 
have been vast shipments of implements of war to the Northern 
States through the celebrated houses of Baring & Co. ; Brown, 
Shipley & Co. ; and a variety of other names. . . . I have obtained 
from the official custom-house returns some details of the sundries 
exported from the United Kingdom to the Northern States of 
America from the Ist of May, 1861, to the 31st of December, 1862. 
There were—muskets, 41,500 ; rifles, 341,000; gun-flints, 26,500 ; 
percussion-caps, 49,982,000 ; and swords, 2,250. The best infor- 
mation I could obtain leads me to believe that. one third to a half 


4 


950 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


may be added to these numbers for items which have been shipped 
to the Northern States as hardware . . . so that, if the Southern 
States have got two ships unarmed, unfit for any purpose of 
warfare—for they procured their armament somewhere else—the 
Northern States have been well supplied from this country, 
through the agency of some most influential persons.” 


The speech of Mr. Laird, exposing the hypocrisy of the rep- 
resentations which had been made, as well by commercial bod- 
ies as by the highest officers of the United States, called forth 
repeated cheers from the Parliament. 

There had been no secrecy about the building of the Ala- 
bama. The same authority above quoted states that she was 
frequently visited while under construction, and it is known 
that the British Government was applied to to prevent her from 
leaving port. It was feared that she might be delayed ; but it 
was not considered possible that British authorities would pre- 
vent an unarmed merchant-ship from leaving her coast, lest she 
might elsewhere procure an armament, and, in the service of a 
recognized belligerent, revive the terror in the other belligerent 
ees the little eclist had recently inspired. 

When the Alabama was launched and ready for sea, Conta 
Bullock summoned Captain Semmes, lately commander of the 
Sumter, to Liverpool, where he spent a few days in financial ar- 
rangements, and in collecting the old officers of the Sumter. The 
Alabama, then known as the 290, had proceeded a few days 
before to her rendezvous, the Portuguese Island of Terceira, one 
of the group of the Azores. The story that the name 290 be- 
longed to the fact that she had been built by two hundred and 
ninety Englishmen, sympathizers in our struggle, was a mere 
fiction. She was built under a contract with the Confederate 
States, and paid for with Confederate money. She happened 
to be the two hundred and ninetieth ship built by the Lairds, 
and, not haying been christened, was called 290. Captain 
Semmes followed her, accompanied by Captain Bullock on the 
steamer Bahama, and found her at the place of rendezvous, also 
a sailing-ship which had been dispatched before the Alabama 
with her battery and stores. Captain Semmes, with a sailor’s 


1862] ONLY A MERCHANT SHIP. 951 


enthusiasm, describes his first impression on seeing the ship 
which was to be his future home. The defects of the Sumter 
had been avoided, so that he found his new ship “a perfect 
steamer and a perfect sailing-ship, at the same time neither of 
her two modes of locomotion being at: all dependent upon the 
other. . . . She was about nine hundred tons burden, two hun- 
dred and thirty feet in length, thirty-two feet in breadth, twen- 
ty feet in depth, and drew, when provisioned and coaled for a 
eruise, fifteen feet of water. Her model was of the most per- 
fect symmetry, and she sat upon the water with the lightness 
and grace of aswan.” She was yet only a merchant-ship, and 
the men on board of her, as well as those who came out with 
the Captain on the Bahama, were only under articles for the 
voyage. She therefore had no crew for future service. When 
her armament and stores had been put on board, she steamed 
from the harbor out to the open sea, where she was to be christ- 
ened and put in commission. Captain Bullock went out on her 
and stood sponsor at the ceremony. He had just cause to be 
proud of the ship, and we to be thankful to him for the skill 
and care with which he had designed her and supervised her 
construction. The scantling of the vessel was comparatively 
light, having been intended for a scourge to the enemy’s com- 
merce rather than for battle, and merely to defend herself if it 
became necessary. Her masts were proportioned so as to carry 
large canvas, and her engine was of three hundred horse-pow- 
er, with an apparatus for condensing vapor to supply the crew 
with all the fresh water requisite. The coal, stores, and arma- 
ment having been received from the supply-ships, she steamed 
out to sea on Sunday morning, August 24, 1862. “There, more 
than a marine league from the shore, on the blue water over 
which man holds no empire, Captain Semmes read the commis- 
sion of the President of the Confederacy appointing him a cap- 
tain, and the order of the Secretary of the Navy assigning him 
to the command of the Alabama. There, where no government 
held jurisdiction, where the commission of the Confederacy was as 
valid as that of any power, the Alabama was christened, and was 
henceforth a ship of war in the navy of the Confederate States. 
The men who had come thus far under articles no longer bind- 


959, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ing were left to their option whether to be paid off with a free 
passage to Liverpool, or to enlist in the crew of the Alabama. 
Eighty of the men who had come out in the several vessels en- 
rolled themselves in the usual manner. Captain Semmes had 
a full complement of officers, and with this, though less than the 
authorized crew, he commenced his long and brilliant cruise. 
The ship’s armament consisted of six thirty-two-pounders in 
broadsides and two pivot-guns amidships, one of them a smooth- 
bore eight-inch, the other a hundred-pounder rifled Blakely. 

Captain Semmes, from his varied knowledge of affairs both 
on sea and land, did not sail by chance in quest of adventure, 
but directed his course to places where the greatest number of 
the enemy’s merchantmen were likely to be found, and to this 
the large number of captures he made is in no small degree at- 
tributable. On board one of the ships captured they got New 
York papers, from which he learned that General Banks, with 
a large fleet of transports, was to sail on a certain day for Gal- 
veston. On this he decided to go to the rendezvous appointed 
for his coal-ship, and make all due preparation for a dash into 
the fleet when they should arrive at the harbor of Galveston, 
and therefore directed his course into the Gulf of Mexico. 

In the mean time General Magruder had recaptured Galves- 
ton, so that on his arrival the lookout informed him that, in- 
stead of a fleet, there were five ships of war blockading the 
harbor and throwing shells into the town, from which his keen 
perception drew the proper conclusion that we had possession 
of the town, and that he was confronted by ships of war, not 
transports laden with troops. As each of the five ships ob- 
served by the lookout were supposed to be larger than his own, 
he had of course no disposition to run into that fleet. It there- 
fore only remained to tempt one of the ships to follow him 
beyond supporting distance. The hope was soon realized, as a 
vessel was seen to come out from the fleet. The Alabama was 
under sail, and Captain Semmes says: “To carry out my design 
of decoying the enemy, I now wore ship as though I were flee- 
ing from his pursuit, and lowered the propeller into the water. 
When about twenty miles from the fleet, the Alabama was pre- 
pared for action, and wheeled to meet her pursuer. To the first 


* 


1862] NONE WERE DROWNED. 253 


hail made, the answer from the Alabama was, ‘This is her 
Britannic Majesty’s steamer Petrel,’ and the answer was, ‘ This 
is the United States ship » name not heard.” Captain 
Semmes then directed the first lieutenant to call out through 
his trumpet, “This is the Confederate States steamer Alabama.” 
A broadside was instantly returned by the enemy. Captain 
Semmes describes the state of the atmosphere as highly favor- 
able to the conduct of sound, and the wind blowing in the direc- 
tion of the enemy’s fleet. The Federal Admiral, as afterward 
learned, immediately got under way with the Brooklyn and two 
others of his steamers to go to the rescue. The crews of both 
ships must have been standing at their guns, as the broadsides 
so instantly followed each other. In thirteen minutes after 
firing the first gun the enemy hoisted a light and fired an off- 
gun as a signal that he had been beaten. Captain Semmes 
steamed quite close to the Hatteras and asked if he had sur- 
rendered ; then, if he was in want of assistance. An affirmative 
answer was given to both questions. The boats of the Alabama 
were lowered with such promptitude and handled with such 
care that, though the Hatteras was sunk at night, none of her 
crew were drowned. When her captain came on board, Cap- 
tain Semmes learned that he had been engaged with the United 
States steamer Hatteras, “a larger ship than the Alabama by 
one hundred tons,” with an equal number of guns, and a crew 
numbering two less than that of the Alabama. There was a 
“considerable disparity between the two ships in the weight of 
their pivot-guns, and the Alabama ought to have won the fight, 
which she did in thirteen minutes.” The Alabama had re- 
ceived no appreciable injury, and, continuing her cruise to the 
Island of Jamaica, entered the harbor of Port Royal, where, by 
- the permission of the authorities, Captain Semmes landed his 
prisoners, putting them on parole. 

As an answer to the stereotyped charges against Captain 
Semmes as a “pirate”? and robber, I will select from the many 
unarmed ships captured by him one case. He had gone to the 
track of the California steamers between Aspinwall and New 
York, in the hope of capturing a vessel homeward bound with 
Government treasure. On the morning before such a vessel 


bs 


954 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


was expected, a large steamer, the Ariel, was seen, but unfor- 
tunately not going in the right direction. An exciting chase 
occurred, when she was finally brought to, but, instead of the 
million of dollars in her safe, she was outward bound, with a 
large number of women and children on board. A boarding 
officer was sent on her, and returned, giving an account of great 
alarm, especially among the ladies. Captain Semmes sent a 
lieutenant on board to assure them that they had “fallen into 
the hands of Southern gentlemen, under whose protection they 
were entirely safe.” Among the passengers were a battalion 
of marines and some army and navy officers. These were all 
paroled, rank and file numbering one hundred and forty, and 
the vessel was released on ransom-bond. Captain Semmes states 
that there were five hundred passengers on board. It is fair to 
presume that each passenger had with him a purse of from 
three to five hundred dollars. Under the laws of war all this 
money would have been good prize, but not one dollar of it was 
touched, or indeed so much as a passenger’s baggage examined.’ 

The Alabama now proceeded to run down the Spanish Main, 
thence bore eastward into the Indian Ocean, and, after a cruise 
into every sea where a blow at American commerce could be 
struck, came around the Cape of Good Hope, and, sailing north, 
ran up to the thirtieth parallel, where so many captures had 
been made at a former time. Of the ship at this date Captain 
Semmes wrote: “The poor old Alabama was not now what she 
had been then. She was like the wearied fox-hound, limping 
back after a long chase, foot-sore, and longing for quiet repose.” 

She had, in her mission to cripple the enemy’s commerce 
and cut his sinews of war, captured sixty-three vessels, among 
them one of the enemy’s gunboats, the Hatteras, sunk in battle, 
had released nine under ransom-bond, and had paroled all pris- 
oners taken. 

All neutral ports being closed against her prizes, the rest of 
the vessels were, of necessity, burned at sea. Much complaint 
was made on account of the burning of these merchantmen, 
though very little reflection would have taught the complain- 
ants that the interests of the captor would have induced him to 
save the vessels, and send them into the nearest port for con- 


“9 


1862] REGARDED AS A CHALLENGE. 255 


demnation as prizes; and, therefore, whatever grievance existed 
was the result of the blockade and of the rule which prevented 
the captures from being sent into a neutral port to await the 
decision of a prize court. 

On the morning of the 11th of June, 1864, the Alabama 
entered the harbor of Cherbourg. “ An officer was sent to call 
on the port admiral, and ask leave to land the prisoners from 
the last two ships captured; this was readily granted.” The 
next day Captain Semmes went on shore to consult the port 
admiral “in relation to docking and repairing” the Alabama. 
As there were only government docks at Cherbourg, the appli- 
cation had to be referred to the Emperor. Before an answer 
was received, the Kearsarge steamed into the harbor, sent a boat 
ashore, and then ran out and took her station off the break- 
water. Captain Semmes learned that the boat from the Kear- 
sarge sent on shore had borne a request that the prisoners dis- 
charged from the Alabama might be delivered to the Kearsarge. 
It will be remembered that the Government of the United 
States, in many harsh and unjust phrases, had refused to recog- 
nize the Alabama as a ship of war, and held that the paroles 
given to her were void. This request was therefore regarded 
by Captain Semmes as an attempt to recruit for the Kearsarge 
from the prisoners lately landed by the Alabama, and he so pre- 
sented the facts to the port admiral, who rejected the appli- 
cation from the Kearsarge. 

Captain Semmes sent notice to Captain Winslow, of the 
Kearsarge, whose presence in the offing was regarded as a chal- 
lenge, that, if he would wait until the Alabama could receive 
some coal on board, she would come out and give him battle. 

As has been shown by extracts previously made, Captain 
Semmes knew that, after his long cruise, the Alabama needed 
to go into dock for repairs. It had not been possible for him, 
on account of the rigid enforcement of “neutrality,” to replen- 
ish his ammunition. Unless the niter is more thoroughly puri- 
fied than is usually, if ever, done by those who manufacture for 
an open market, it is sure to retain nitrate of soda, and the 
powder, of which it is the important ingredient, to deteriorate 
by long exposure to a moist atmosphere. The Kearsarge was 


e 


. 


- 


956 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


superior to the Alabama in size, and, having been built for war 
in stanchvess of construction, her armament was also greater, the 
latter being measured, not by the number of guns, but by the 
amount of metal she could throw at a broadside. The crew of the 
Kearsarge, all told, was one hundred and sixty-two; that of the 
Alabama, one hundred and forty-nine. Captain Semmes says: 
“Still the disparity was not so great but that I might hope to 
beat my enemy in a fair fight. But he did not show me a fair 
fight, for, as it afterward turned out, his ship was iron-clad.” 
This expression “iron-clad ” refers to the fact that the Kearsarge 
had chains on her sides, which Captain Semmes describes as 
concealed by planking, the forward and after ends of which so 
accorded with the lines of the ship as not to be detected by 
telescopic observation. Many of that class of critics whose 
wisdom is only revealed after the event have blamed Captain 
Semmes for going out under the circumstances. Like most other 
questions, there are two sides to this. If he had gone into 
dock for repairs, the time required would have resulted ‘in the 
dispersion of his crew, and, from the known improvidence of 
sailors, it would have been more than doubtful whether they 
could have been reassembled. It was, moreover, probable that 
other vessels would have been sent to aid the Kearsarge in effect- 
ually blockading the port, so that, if his crew had returned, the 
only chance would have been to escape through the guarding 
fleet. Proud of his ship, and justly confiding in his crew, surely 
something will be conceded to the Confederate spirit so often 
exhibited and so often triumphant over disparity of force. 

On the 19th of June, 1864, the Alabama left the harbor 
of Cherbourg to engage the Kearsarge, which had been lying off 
and on the port for several days previously. Captain Semmes 
in his report of the engagement writes: 


“ After the lapse of about one hour and ten minutes, our ship 
was ascertained to be in a sinking condition . . . to reach the 
French coast, I gave the ship all steam, and set such of the fore 
and aft sails as were available. The ship filled so rapidly, how- 
ever, that, before we had made much progress, the fires were ex- 
tinguished. I now hauled down my colors, and dispatched a boat 
to inform the enemy of our condition. Although we were now 


1864] THE DEFECT OF THE CAP. OY 


but four hundred yards from each other, the enemy fired upon me 
five times after my colors had been struck. It is charitable to 
suppose that a ship of war, of a Christian nation, could not have 
done this intentionally.” 


Captain Semmes states that, his waist-boats having been torn 
to pieces, he sent the wounded, and such of the boys of the ship 
as could not swim, in his quarter-boats, off to the enemy’s ship, 
and, as there was no appearance of any boat coming from the 
enemy, the crew, as previously instructed, jumped overboard, 
each to save himself if he could. Al the wounded—twenty-one 
—were saved. Ten of the crew were ascertained to have been 
drowned. Captain Semmes stood on the quarter-deck until his 
ship was settling to go down, then threw his sword into the sea, 
there to lie buried with the ship he loved so well, and leaped 
from the deck just in time to avoid being drawn down into the 
vortex created by her sinking. He and many of his crew were 
picked up by a humane English gentleman in the boats of his 
yacht, the Deerhound. Others were saved by two French pilot- 
boats which were near the scene. The remainder, it is hoped, 
were picked up by the enemy. Captain Semmes states in his 
official report, two days after the battle, that about the time of 
his rescue by the Deerhound the “ Kearsarge sent one and then 
tardily another boat.’ The reader is invited to compare this 
with the conduct of Captain Semmes when he sank the Hat- 
teras, and when, though it was in the night, by ranging up close 
to her, and promptly using all his boats, he saved her entire crew. 

Mention has been made of the defective ammunition of the 
Alabama, and in that connection I quote the following passage 
from Captain Semmes’s book, on which I have so frequently 
and largely drawn for facts in regard to the Sumter and the 
Alabama (pages 761, 762) : 


“T lodged a rifle percussion shell near to her [the Kearsarge’s] 
sternpost—where there were no chains—which failed to explode 
because of the defect of the cap. If the cap had performed its 
duty, and exploded the shell, I should have been called upon to 
save Captain Winslow’s crew from drowning, instead of his being 
called upon to save mine.” 

64 


988 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


As it appears by the same authority that the Kearsarge had 
greater speed than the Alabama, it followed that, though the 
Captain of the Kearsarge might have closed with and boarded 
the Alabama, the Captain of the Alabama could not board the 
Kearsarge, unless by consent. 

The Alabama, built like a merchant-ship, sailed in peaceful 
garb from British waters, on a far-distant sea received her crew 
and armament, fitted for operations against the enemy’s com- 
merce. On “blue-water’’ she was christened, and in the same 
she was buried. She lived the pride of her friends and the ter- 
ror of her enemies. She went out to fight a wooden vessel and 
was sunk by one clad in secret armor. Those rescued by the 
Deerhound from the water were landed at Southampton, Eng- 
land. 

The United States Government then, through its minister, 
Mr. Charles Francis Adams, made the absurd demand of the 
English Government that they should be delivered up to her as 
escaped prisoners. To this demand Lord John Russell replied 
as follows : 


“With regard to the demand made by you, by instructions 
from your Government, that those officers and men should now 
be delivered up to the Government of the United States, as being 
escaped prisoners of war, her Majesty’s Government would beg 
to observe that there is no obligation by international law which 
can bind the government of a neutral state to deliver up to a bel- 
ligerent prisoners of war who may have escaped from the power 
of such belligerent, and may have taken refuge within the terri- 
tory of such neutral. Therefore, even if her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment had any power, by law, to comply with the above-mentioned 
demand, her Majesty’s Government could not do so without being 
guilty of a violation of the duties of hospitality. In point of fact, 
however, her Majesty’s Government have no lawful power to ar- 
rest and deliver up the persons in question. They have been 
guilty of no offense against the laws of England, and they have 
committed no act which would bring them within the provisions 
of a treaty between Great Britain and the United States for the 
surrender of the offenders ; and her Majesty’s Government are, 
therefore, entirely without any legal means by which, even if 


1862] SHE WAS RELEASED. 259 


they wished to do so, they could comply with your above-men- 
tioned demand.” 


Tt will be observed that her Majesty’s Minister mercifully 
forbore to expose the pretensions that ‘the persons in question” 
had been prisoners, and confined his answer to the case as it 
would have been had that allegation been true. There are other 
points in this transaction which will be elsewhere presented. 

The Oreto, which sailed from Liverpool about the 23d of 
March, 1862, was, while under construction at Liverpool, the 
subject of diplomatic correspondence and close scrutiny by the 
customs officers. After her arrival off Nassau, upon representa- 
tions by the United States consul at that port, she was detained 
and again examined, and, it being found that she had none of 
the character of a vessel of war, she was released. Captain Maf- 
fitt, who had gone out with a cargo of cotton, here received a 
letter which authorized him to take charge of the Oreto and 
get her promptly to sea. She was a steamer of two hundred 
and fifty horse-power, tonnage five hundred and sixty, bark- 
rigged; speed, under steam, eight to nine knots; with sail, in a 
fresh breeze, fourteen knots; crew twenty-two, all told. The 
United States Minister, Mr. Adams, had made a report to the 
British Government, which, it was apprehended, would cause 
her seizure at once. This was soon done, and with great diffi- 
culty the vessel was saved to the Confederacy by her com- 
mander. She arrived at Nassau on the 28th of April, and was 
detained until the session of the Admiralty Court in August. 
As soon as discharged by the proceedings therein, she sailed for 
the uninhabited island “ Green Kay,” ninety miles to the south- 
ward of Providence Island, with a tender in tow having equip- 
ments provided by a Confederate merchant, where she anchored 
the next day, and proceeded to take on board her military arma- 
ment sent out on the tender. She now became a ship of the 
Confederate Navy, and was christened Florida. Her long de- 
tention in Nassau had caused the ship to be infected with yel- 
low fever, and, as she had no surgeon on board, the vessel was 
directed to the Island of Cuba, and ran into the harbor of Car- 
denas for aid. The crew was reduced to one fireman and two 


260 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


seamen, and eventually the Captain was prostrated by the fever. 
The Governor of Cardenas, under his view of the neutrality pro- 
claimed by his Government, refused to send a physician aboard, 
and. warned the steamer that she must leave in twenty-four 
hours. Lieutenant Stribling, executive officer of the ship, had 
been sent to Havana to report her condition to the Captain- 
General, Marshal Serrano. That chivalrous gentleman, soldier, 
and statesman, at once invited the ship to the hospitalities of 
the harbor of Havana, whither she repaired and received the 
kindness which her forlorn situation required. 

On the 1st of September, 1862, the vessel left Havana to 
obtain a crew; and, to complete her equipment, which was so 
imperfect that her guns could not all be used, the vessel was di- 
rected to the harbor of Mobile. On approaching that harbor she 
found several blockading vessels on the station, and boldly ran 
through them, escaping, with considerable injury to her masts 
and rigging, to the friendly shelter of Fort Morgan, where, 
while in quarantine, Lieutenant Stribling was attacked with 
fever and died. He was an officer of great merit, and his loss 
was much regretted, not only by his many personal friends, 
but by all who foresaw the useful service he could render to 
his country if his life were prolonged: Under the disadvan- 
tages of being an infected ship and remote from the work- 
shops, repairs were commenced, and the equipment of the ship 
completed. 

In the mean time the blockading squadron had been in- 
creased, with the boastful announcement that the cruiser should 
be “hermetically sealed” in the harbor of Mobile. Some im- 
patience was manifested after the vessel was ready for sea that 
she did not immediately go out, but Captain Maffitt, with sound 
judgment and nautical skill, decided to wait for a'winter storm 
and a dark night before attempting to pass through the close in- 
vestment. When the opportunity offered, he steamed out into a 
rough sea and a fierce north wind. As he passed the blockading 
squadron he was for the first time discovered, when a number 
of vessels gave chase, and continued the pursuit throughout the 
night and the next day. In the next evening all except the two 
fastest had hauled off, and, as night again closed in, the smoke 


1863} WE BADE THE ENEMY GOOD NIGHT. 261 


and canvas of the Florida furnished their only guide. Captain 
Maffitt thus describes the ruse by which he finally escaped : 
“The canvas was secured in long, neat bunts to the yards, and 
the engines were stopped. Between high, toppling seas, clear 
daylight was necessary to enable them to distinguish our low 
hull. In eager pursuit the Federals swiftly passed us, and we 
jubilantly bade the enemy good night, and steered to the north- 
ward.” She was now fairly on the high-seas, and after long 
and vexatious delays entered on her mission to cruise against 
the enemy’s commerce. She commenced her captures in the 
Gulf of Mexico, then progressed through the Gulf of Florida 
to the latitude of New York, and thence to the equator, contin- 
uing to 12° south, and returned again within thirty miles of 
New York. When near Cape St. Roque, Captain Maffitt cap- 
tured a Baltimore brig, the Clarence, and fitted her out as a 
tender. He placed on her Lieutenant C. W. Read, commander, 
fourteen men, armed with muskets, pistols, and a twelve-pound - 
howitzer. The instructions were to proceed to the coast of 
America, to cruise against the enemy’s commerce. Under these 
orders he destroyed many Federal vessels. Of him Captain 
Maffitt wrote: “Daring, even beyond the point of martial pru- 
dence, he entered the harbor of Portland at midnight, and 
captured the revenue cutter Caleb Cushing; but, instead of 
instantly burning her, ran her out of the harbor; being thus 
delayed, he was soon captured by a Federal expedition sent out 
against him.” While under the command of Captain Maffitt, 
the Florida, with her tenders, captured some fifty-five vessels, 
many of which were of great value. The Florida being built 
_of light timbers, her very active cruising had so deranged her 
machinery, that it was necessary to go into some friendly har- 
bor for repairs. Captain Maffitt says: “I selected Brest, and, 
the Government courteously consenting to the Florida having 
the facilities of the navy-yard, she was promptly docked.” The 
effects of the yellow fever from which he had suffered and the 
fatigue attending his subsequent service had so exhausted his 
strength that he asked to be relieved from command of the 
ship. In compliance with this request, Captain C. M. Morris 
was ordered to relieve him. 


962 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


After completing all needful repairs, Captain Morris pro- 
ceeded to sea and sighted the coast of Virginia, where he made 
a number of important captures. Turning from that locality 
he crossed the equator, destroying the commerce of the North- 
ern States on his route to Bahia. Here he obtained coal, and 
also had some repairs done to the engines, when the United 
States steamship Wachusett entered the harbor. Not know- 
ing what act of treachery might be attempted by her com- 
mander on the first night after his arrival, the Florida was kept 
in a watchful condition for battle. 

This belligerent demonstration in the peaceful harbor of a 
neutral power alarmed both the governor and the admiral, who 
demanded assurances that the sovereignty of Brazil and its 
neutrality should be strictly observed by both parties. The 
pledge was given. In the evening, with a chivalric belief in 
the honor of the United States commander, Captain Morris un- 
fortunately permitted a majority of his officers to accompany 
him to the opera, and also allowed two thirds of the crew to 
visit the shore on leave. About one o’clock in the morning the 
Wachusett was surreptitiously got under way, and her com- 
mander, with utter abnegation of his word of honor, ran into 
the Florida, discharging his battery and boarding her. The 
few officers on board and small number of men were unable to 
resist this unexpected attack, and the Florida fell an easy prey 
to this covert and dishonorable assault. She was towed to sea 
amid the execrations of the Brazilian forces, army and navy, 
who, completely taken by surprise, fired a few ineffectual shots 
at the infringer upon the neutrality of the hospitable port of 
Bahia. The Confederate was taken to Hampton Roads. 

Brazil instantly demanded her restoration intact to her late 
anchorage in Bahia. Mr. Lincoln was confronted by a protest 
from the different representatives of the courts of Europe, de- 
nouncing this extraordinary breach of national neutrality, which 
placed the Government of the United States in a most unenyi- 
able position. Mr. Seward, with his usual diplomatic insincer- 
ity and Machiavellianism, characteristically prevaricated, while 
he plotted with a distinguished admiral as to the most adroit 
method of disposing of the “elephant.” The result of these 


1863] THE FLORIDA MUST BE AT THE BOTTOM. 963 


plottings was that an engineer was placed in charge of the 
stolen steamer, with positive orders to “open her sea-cock at 
midnight, and not to leave the engine-room until the water was 
up to his chin, as at sunrise the /’lorida must be at the bottom.” 

The following note was sent to the Brazilian chargé d’ affaires 
by Mr. Seward : 


“ While awaiting the representations of the Brazilian Govern- 
ment, on the 28th of November she [the Florida] sank, owing to 
a leak, which could not be seasonably stopped. The leak was at 
first represented to have been caused, or at least increased, by col- 
lision with a war-transport. Orders were immediately given to 
ascertain the manner and circumstances of the occurrence. It 
seemed to affect the army and navy. A naval court of inquiry 
and also a military court of inquiry were charged with the inves- 
tigation. The naval court has submitted its report, and a copy 
thereof is herewith communicated. The military court is yet en- 
gaged. So soon as its labors shall have ended, the result will be 
made known to your Government. In the mean time it is assumed 
that the loss of the Florida was in consequence of some unfore- 
seen accident, which casts no responsibility on the Government of 
the United States.” 


The restitution of the ship having thus become impossible, 
the President expressed his regret that “the sovereignty of 
Brazil had been violated; dismissed the consul at Bahia, who 
had advised the offense ; and sent the commander of the Wa- 
chusett before a court-martial.” * 

The commander of the Wachusett experienced no annoy- 
ance, and was soon made an admiral. 

The Georgia was the next Confederate cruiser that Captain 
Bullock succeeded in sending forth. She was of five hundred 
and sixty tons, and fitted out on the coast of France. Her com- 
mander, W. L. Maury, Confederate States Navy, cruised in the 
North and South Atlantic with partial success. The capacity 
of the vessel in speed and other essentials was entirely inade- 
quate to the service for which she was designed. She proceed- 
ed as far as the Cape of Good Hope, and returned, after having 


* M, Bernard’s “ Neutrality of Great Britain during the American Civil War.” 


964 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


captured seven ships and two barks. Then she was laid up and 
sold. 

The Shenandoah, once the Sea King, was purchased by Cap- 
tain Bullock, and placed under the command of Lieutenant- 
commanding J. J. Waddell, who fitted her for service under 
many difficulties at the barren island of Porto Santo, near Ma- 
deira. After experiencing great annoyances, through the activ- 
ity of the American consul at Melbourne, Australia, Captain 
Waddell finally departed, and commenced an active and effec- 
tive cruise against American shipping in the Okhotsk Sea and 
Arctic Ocean. In August, 1865, hearing of the close of the 
war, he ceased his pursuit of United States commerce, sailed 
for Liverpool, England, and surrendered his ship to the English 
Government, which transferred it to the Government of the 
United States. The Shenandoah was a full-rigged ship of eight 
hundred tons, very fast under canvass. Her steam-power was 
merely auxiliary. 

This was the last but not the first appearance of the Confed- 
erate flag in Great Britain; the first vessel of the Confederate 
Government which unfurled it there was the swift, light steamer 
Nashville, R. B. Pegram, commander. Having been construct- 
ed as a passenger-vessel, and mainly with reference to speed 
and the light draught suited to the navigation of the Southern 
harbors, she was quite too frail for war purposes and too slightly 
armed for combat. 

On her passage to Europe and back, she, nevertheless, de- 
stroyed two merchantmen.- Nearing the harbor on her return 
voyage, she found it blockaded, and a heavy vessel lying close 
on her track: Her daring commander headed directly for the 
vessel, and ran so close under her guns that she was not sus- 
pected in her approach, and had passed so far before the guns 
could be depressed to bear upon her that none of the shots took 
effect. Being little more than a shell, a single shot would have 
sunk her; and she was indebted to the address of her commander 
and the speed of his vessel for her escape. Wholly unsuited 
for naval warfare, this voyage terminated her career. 

A different class of vessels than those adapted to the open 
sea was employed for coastwise cruising. In the month of 


1864] NEITHER HAILED NOR HALTED HER, 265 


July, 1864, a swift twin-screw propeller called the Atlanta, of 
six hundred tons: burden, was purchased by the Secretary of the 
Navy, and fitted out in the harbor of Wilmington, North Caro- 
lina, for a cruise against the commerce of the Northern States. 
Commander J. Taylor Wood, an officer of extraordinary ability 
and enterprise, was ordered to command her, and her name was 
changed to “The Tallahassee.” This extemporaneous man-of- 
war ran safely through the blockade, and soon lit up the New 
England coast with her captures, which consisted of two ships, 
four brigs, four barks, and twenty schooners. Great was the 
consternation among Northern merchants. The construction 
of the Tallahassee exclusively for steam made her dependent 
on coal; her cruise was of course brief, but brilliant while it 
lasted. 

About the same time another fast double-screw propeller of 
five hundred and eighty-five tons, called the Edith, ran into 
Wilmington, North Carolina, and the Navy Department re- 
quiring her services, bought her and gave to her the name of 
“ Chickamauga.” <A suitable battery was placed on board, with 
officers and crew, and Commander John Wilkinson, a gentle- 
man of consummate naval ability, was ordered to command her. 
When ready for sea, he ran the blockade under the bright rays 
of afullmoon. Strange to say, the usually alert sentinels neither 
hailed nor halted her. Like the Tallahassee, though partially 
rigged for sailing, she was exclusively dependent upon steam in 
the chase, escape, and in all important evolutions. She captured 
seven vessels, despite the above-noticed defects. 


966 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CHAP TE Rix X XT, 


Naval Affairs, concluded.—Excitement in the Northern States on the Appearance of 
our Cruisers.—Failure of the Enemy to protect their Commerce.—Appeal to 
Europe not to help the So-called ‘“ Pirates.’—Seeks Iron-plated Vessels in 
England.—Statement of Lord Russell.—What is the Duty of Neutrals ?—Posi- 
tion taken by President Washington.—Letter of Mr. Jefferson.—Contracts 
sought by United States Government.—Our Cruisers went to Sea unarmed.— 
Mr. Adams asserts that British Neutrality was violated—Reply of Lord Rus- 
sell.—Rejoinder of Mr. Seward.—Duty of Neutrals relative to Warlike Stores.— 
Views of Wheaton; of Kent.—Charge of the Lord Chief Baron in the Alexan- 
dra Case.—Action of the Confederate Government sustained.—Antecedents of 
the United States Government.—The Colonial Commissions.—Build and equip 
Ships in Europe.—Captain Conyngham’s Captures.—Made Prisoner.—Retalia- 
tion.—Numbers of Captures.—Recognition of Greece.—Recognition of South 
American Cruisers.—Chief Act of Hostility charged on Great Britain by the 
United States Government.—The Queen’s Proclamation: its Effect.—Cause of 
the United States Charges.—Never called us Belligerents—Why not ?—Adopts 
a Fiction—The Reason.—Why denounce our Cruisers as “ Pirates.”—Opinion 
of Justice Greer.—Burning of Prizes.—Laws of Maritime War.—Cause of the 
Geneva Conference.—Statement of American Claims.—Allowance.—Indirect 
Damages of our Cruisers.—Ships transferred to British Registers——Decline of 
American Tonnage.—Decline of Coasting Tonnage.—Decline of Export of 
Breadstuffs,—Advance of Insurance. 


Tux excitement produced in the Northern States by the 
effective operations of our cruisers upon their commerce was 
such as to receive the attention of the United States Govern- 
ment. Reasonably, it might have been expected that they 
would send their ships of war out on the high-seas to protect 
their commerce by capturing or driving off our light cruisers, 
but, instead of this, their fleets were employed in blockading the 
Confederate ports, or watching those in the West Indies, from 
which blockade-runners were expected to sail, and, by captur- 
ing which, either on the high-seas or at the entrance of a Con- 
federate port, a harvest of prizes might be secured. For this 
dereliction of duty, in the failure to protect commerce, no bet- 
ter reason offers itself than greed and malignity. There was, 
however, in this connection, a more humiliating feature in the 
conduct of the United States Government. 

While, from its State Department, the Confederacy was de- 


1864] : THE SO-CALLED PIRATES. 267 


nounced as an insurrection soon to be suppressed, and the eruis- 
ers, regularly commissioned by the Confederate States, were 
called “pirates,” diplomatic demands were made upon Great 
Britain to prevent the so-called “pirates” from violating in- 
ternational law, as if it applied to pirates. Appeals to that 
Government were also made to prevent the sale of the materials 
of war to the Confederacy, and thus indirectly to aid the United 
States in performing what, according to the representation, was 
a police duty, to suppress a combination of some evil-disposed 
persons—gallantly claiming that they, armed cap-a-pie, should 
meet their adversary in the list, he to be without helmet, shield, 
or lance. 

To one who from youth to age had seen, with exultant pride, 
the flag of his country as it unfolded, disclosing to view the 
stripes recordant of the original size of the family of States, and 
the Constellation, which told of that family’s growth, it could 
but be deeply mortifying to witness such paltry exhibition of 
deception and unmanliness in the representatives of a Govern- 
ment around which fond memories still lingered, despite the 
perversion of which it was the subject. 

If this attempt, on the part of the United States, to deny 
the existence of war after having, by proclamation of blockade, 
compelled all nations to.take notice that war did exist, and to 
claim that munitions should not be sold to a country because 
there were some disorderly people in it, had been all, the at- 
tempt would have been Iudicrously absurd, and the contradic- 
tion too bald to require refutation ; but this would have been 
but half of the story. Subsequently the United States Govern- 
ment claimed reclamation from Great Britain for damage in- 
flicted by vessels which had been built in her ports, and which 
had elsewhere been armed and equipped for purposes of war. 
International law recognizes the right of a neutral to sell an un- 
armed vessel, without reference to the use to which the pur- 
chaser might subsequently apply it. The United States Gov- 
ernment had certainly not practiced under a different rule, but 
had gone even further than this—so much further as to trans- 
gress the prohibition against armed vessels. 

It has already been stated that the Government of the 


. 


968 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


United States, at the commencement of the war, sought to 
contract for the construction of iron-plated vessels in the ports 
of England, which were to be delivered fully armed and 
equipped to her. To this it may be added that her armies 
were recruited from almost all the countries of Europe, down 
almost to the last month of the war; a portion of their arms 
were of foreign manufacture, as well as the munitions of war; 
a large number of the sailors of her fleets came from the sea- 
ports of Great Britain and Germany ; in a word, whatever could 
be of service to her in the conflict was unhesitatingly sought 
among neutrals, regardless of the law of nations. At the same 
time an effort was made on her part to make Great Britain 
responsible for the damage done by our cruisers, and for the 
warlike stores sold to our Government. 

Some statements of Lord Russell on this point, in a letter 
to Minister Adams, dated December 19, 1862, deserve notice. 
He says: 

“Tt is right, however, to observe that the party which has 
profited by far the most by these unjustifiable practices, has been 
the Government of the United States, because that Government, 
having a superiority of force by sea, and having blockaded most 
of the Confederate ports, has been able, on the one hand, safely to 
receive all the warlike supplies which it has induced British manu- 
facturers and merchants to send to the United States ports in vio- 
lation of the Queen’s proclamation ; and, on the other hand, to 
intercept and capture a great part of the supplies of the same 
kind which were destined from this country to the Confederate 
States. 

“Tf it be sought to make her Majesty’s Government respon- 
sible to that of the United States because arms and munitions of 
war have left this country on account of the Confederate Govern- 
ment, the Confederate Government, as the other belligerent, may 
very well maintain that it has a just cause of complaint against 
the British Government because the United States arsenals have 
been replenished from British sources. Nor would it be possible 
to deny that, in defiance of the Queen’s proclamation, many sub- 
jects of her Majesty, owing allegiance to her crown, have enlisted 
in the armies of the United States. Of this fact you can not be 
ignorant. Her Majesty’s Government, therefore, has just ground 


1793) ' THE DUTY OF NEUTRAL NATIONS, 269 


for complaint against both of the belligerent parties, but most 
especially against the Government of the United States, for having 
systematically, and in disregard of the comity of nations which it 
was their duty to observe, induced subjects of her Majesty to vio- 
late those orders which, in conformity with her neutral position, 
she has enjoined all her subjects to obey.” 


Perhaps it may be well to inquire what is, under interna- 
tional law, the duty of neutral nations with regard to the con- 
struction and equipment of cruisers for either belligerent, and 
the supply of warlike stores. Thus the groundlessness of the 
daims put forth by the Government of the United States for 
damages to be paid by Great Britain will be more manifest, and 
the lawfulness of the acts of the Confederate Government de- 
monstrated. 

After the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, the 
Government of France, owing to the temporary inferiority of 
her naval force, openly and deliberately equipped privateers in 
our ports. These privateers captured British vessels in United 
States waters, and brought them as prizes into United States 
porte. These facts formed the basis of demands made upon 
the United States by the British plenipotentiary. The demands 
had reference, not to the accidental evasion of a municipal law 
of the United States by a particular ship, but to a systematic 
disregard of international law upon some of the most important 
pointe of neutral obligation. 

To these demands Mr. Jefferson, then Secretary of State 
under President Washington, thus replied on September 3, 
1793: 


“We are bound by our treaties with three of the belligerent 
nations, by all the means in our power, to protect and defend their 
vessels and effects in our ports or waters, or on the seas near our 
- ghores, and to recover and restore the same to the right owners 
__ when taken from them. If all the means in our power are used, 
- and fail in this effort, we are not bound by our treaties with those 
nations to make compensation. Though we have no similar treaty 
with Great Britain, it was the opinion of the President that we 
should use toward that nation the same rule which, under this 


270 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


article, was to govern us with other nations, and even to extend it 
to the captures made on the high-seas and brought into our ports, 
if done by vessels which had been armed within them.” 


It will be observed that the justice of restitution, or compen- 
sation, for captures made on the high-seas and brought into our 
ports, is only admitted by President Washington upon one con- 
dition, which is expressed in these words: “If done by vessels 
which had been armed within them.” The terms of the con- 
tract, which the Government of the United States endeavored 
to make at the ship-yards of England, were for the delivery of 
the ship or ships of war “to be finished complete, with, guns and 
everything appertaining.” The contract was not taken, as too 
little time was allowed for its execution. But, if entered into 
and executed, it would have been a direct violation of interna- 
tional law. 

In the instance of our cruisers built in the ports of England, 
it will be observed that they went to sea without arms or warlike 
stores, and, at other ports than those of Great Britain, they were 
converted into ships of war and put into commission by the 
authority of the Confederate Government. The Government 
of the United States asserted that they were built in the ports 
of Great Britain, and thereby her duty of neutrality was violated, 
and the Government made responsible for the damages sustained 
by private citizens of the United States in consequence of her 
captures on the seas. To this declaration of Mr. Adams, Earl 
Russell (he had been made an earl) replied on September 14, 
1863, thus : 


“When the United States Government assumes to hold the 
Government of Great Britain responsible for the captures made 
by vessels which may be fitted out as vessels of war in a foreign 
port, because such vessels were originally built in a British port, I 
have to observe that such pretensions are entirely at variance with 
the principles of international law, and with the decisions of 
American courts of the highest authority ; and I have only, in 
conclusion, to express my hope that you may not be instructed 
again to put forward claims which her Majesty’s Government can 
not admit to be founded on any grounds of law or justice.” 


1863] THE SUPPLY OF WARLIKE STORES. pyal 


On October 6, 1863, Mr. Seward, the Secretary of State of 
the United States Government, replied to this declaration of 
Earl Russell, saying: 


“The United States do insist, and must continue to insist, that 
the British Government is justly responsible for the damages which 
the peaceful, law-abiding citizens of the United States [!] sustain 
by the depredations of the Alabama.” 


Earl Russell answered on October 26, 1863, thus: 


“T must request you to believe that the principle contended for 
by her Majesty’s Government is not that of commissioning, equip- 
ping, and. manning vessels in our ports to cruise against either of 
the belligerent parties—a principle which was so justly and une- 
quivocally condemned by the President of the United States in 
1793. . . . But the British Government must decline to be respon- 
sible for the acts of parties who fit out a seeming merchant-ship, 
send her to a port or to waters far from the jurisdiction of British 
courts, and there commission, equip, and man her as a vessel of 


war.” 


The duty of neutral nations relative to the supply of warlike 
stores is expressed in these words : 


“Tt is not the practice of nations to undertake to prohibit their 
own subjects by previous laws from trafficking in articles contra- 
band of war. Such trade is carried on at the risk of those engaged 
in it, under the liabilities and penalties prescribed by the law of 
nations or particular treaties.” * 


We now quote from the great American commentator on 
the Constitution of the United States and on the law of na- 
tions : 

“Tt is a general understanding that the powers at war may seize 
and confiscate all contraband goods, without any complaint on the 
part of the neutral merchant, and without any imputation of a 
breach of neutrality in the neutral sovereign himself. It was con- 
tended on the part of the French nation, in 1796, that neutral 
governments were bound to restrain their subjects from selling or 
exporting articles contraband of war to the belligerent powers. 


* Wheaton’s “ International Law,” sixth edition, p. 571, 1855. 


972 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


But it was successfully shown, on the part of the United States, 
that neutrals may lawfully sell at home to a belligerent power, or 
carry themselves to the belligerent powers, contraband articles, 
subject to the right of seizure in transitu, This right has been ex- 
plicitly declared by the judicial authorities of this country [United 
States]. The right of the neutral to transport, and of the hostile 
power to seize, are conflicting rights, and neither party can charge 
the other with a criminal act.” * 


In accordance with these principles, President Pierce’s mes- 
sage of December 31, 1855, contains the following passage : 


“In pursuance of this policy, the laws of the United States do 
not forbid their citizens to sell to either of the belligerent powers 
articles contraband of war, to take munitions of war or soldiers on 
board their private ships for transportation ; and, although in so 
doing the individual citizen exposes his property or person to some 
of the hazards of war, his acts do not involve any breach of inter- 
national neutrality, nor of themselves implicate the Government.” 


Perhaps it may not be out of place here to notice the charge 
of the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer to the jury in the 
case of the Alexandra, a vessel of one hundred and twenty tons, 
under construction at Liverpool for our Government. The case 
came on for trial on June 22, 1863, in the Court of Exchequer, 
sitting at nist prius, before the Lord Chief Baron and a special 
jury. After it had been summed up, the Lord Chief Baron 
said : 


“This is an information on the part of the Crown for the seiz- 
ure and confiscation of a vessel that was in the course of prepara- 
tion but had not been completed. It is admitted that it was not 
armed, and the question is, whether the preparation of the vessel 
in its then condition was a violation of the Foreign Enlistment 
Act. The main question you will have to decide is this : Whether, 
under the seventh section of the act of Parliament, the vessel, as 
then prepared at the time of seizure, was liable to seizure? The 
statute was passed in 1819, and upon it no question has ever arisen 
in our courts of justice ; but there have been expositions of a simi- 
lar statute which exists in the United States. I will now read to 


* Kent’s “ Commentaries,” vol. i, p. 145, 1854. 


1863] WHY SHOULD SHIPS BE AN EXCEPTION? 973 


you the opinions of some American lawyers who have contributed 
so greatly to make law a science. [His lordship then read a pas- 
sage from Story and others.] These gentlemen are authorities 
which show that, when two belligerents are carrying on a war, a 
neutral power may supply, without any breach of international 
law and without a breach of the Foreign Enlistment Act, muni- 
tions of war—gunpowder, every description of arms, in fact, that 
can be used for the destruction of human beings. 

_“ Why should ships be an exception? I am of opinion, in 
point of law, they are not. The Foreign Enlistment Act was an 
act to prevent the enlistment or engagement of his Majesty’s sub- 
jects to serve in foreign armies, and to prevent the fitting out and 
equipping in his Majesty’s dominions vessels for warlike purposes 
without his Majesty’s license. The title of an act is not at all 
times an exact indication or explanation of the act, because it is 
generally attached after the act is passed. But, in adverting to 
the preamble of the act, I find that provision is made against the 
equipping, fitting out, furnishing, and arming of vessels, because 
it may be prejudicial to the peace of his Majesty’s dominions. 

“The question I shall put to you is, Whether you think that 
vessel was merely in a course of building to be delivered in pursu- 
ance of a contract that was perfectly lawful, or whether there was 
any intention in the port of Liverpool, or any other English port, 
that the vessel should be fitted out, equipped, furnished, and armed 
for purposes of aggression. Now, surely, if Birmingham, or any 
other town, may supply any quantity of munitions of war of vari- 
ous kinds for the destruction of life, why object to ships? Why 
should ships alone be in themselves contraband? I asked the At- 
_ torney-General if a man could not make a vessel intending to 

sell it to either of the belligerent powers that required it, and 
which would give the largest price for it, would not that be law- 
ful? To my surprise, the learned Attorney-General declined to 
give an answer to the question, which I think a grave and perti- 
nent one. But you, gentlemen, I think, are lawyers enough to 
know that a man may make a vessel and offer it for sale. Ifa 
man may build a vessel for the purpose of offering it for sale 
to either belligerent party, may he not execute an order for it? 
That appears to be a matter of course. The statute is not made 
to provide means of protection for belligerent powers, otherwise 
it would have said, ‘You shall not sell powder or guns, and you 


65 


OVA RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


shall not sell arms’; and, if it had done so, all Birmingham would 
have been in arms against it. The object of the statute was this: 
that we should not have our ports in this country made the ground 
of hostile movements between the vessels of two belligerent pow- 
ers, which might be fitted out, furnished, and armed in these ports. 
The Alexandra was clearly nothing more than in the course of 
building. 

“Tt appears to me that, if true that the Alabama sailed from 
Liverpool without any arms at all, as a mere ship in ballast, and 
that her armament was put on board at Terceira, which is not in 
her Majesty’s dominions, then the Foreign Enlistment Act was 
not violated at all.” ; 


After reading some of the evidence, his lordship said : 


“Tf you think that the object was to furnish, fit out, equip, and 
arm that vessel at Liverpool, that is a different matter ; but if you 
think the object really was to build a ship in obedience to an or- 
der, in compliance with a contract, leaving those who bought’ it to 
make what use they thought fit of it, then it appears to me that 
the Foreign Enlistment Act has not been broken.” 


The jury immediately returned a verdict for the defendants. 
An appeal was made, but the full bench decided that there was 
no jurisdiction. Against this decision an appeal was taken to 
the House of Lords, and there dismissed on some technical 
ground. 

Sufficient has been said to show that the action of the Con- 
federate Government relative to these cruisers is sustained and 
justified by international law. The complaints made by the 
Government of the United States against the Government of 
Great Britain for acts involving a breach of neutrality find no 
support in the letter of the law or in its principles, and were 
conclusively answered by the interpretations of American ju- 
rists. At the same time they are condemned by the antecedent 
acts of the United States Government, Some of these will be 
presented. 

In the War of the American Revolution, Dr. Franklin and 
Silas Deane were sent to France as commissioners to look after 
the interests of the colonies. In the years 1776 and 1777 they 


1177] SWEEPING THE SBA. oon 


became extensively connected with naval movements. They 
built, and purchased, and equipped, and commissioned ships, all 
in neutral territory ; even filling up blank commissions sent out 
to them by the Congress for the purpose. Among expeditions 
fitted out by them was one under Captain Wickes to intercept 
a convoy of linen-ships from Ireland. He went first into the 
Bay of Biscay, and afterward entirely around Ireland, sweep- 
ing the sea before him of everything that was not of force to 
render the attack hopeless. Mr. Deane observes to Robert Mor- 
ris that it “effectually alarmed England, prevented the great 
fair at Chester, occasioned insurance to rise, and even deterred 
the English merchants from shipping in English bottoms at any 
rate, so that, in a few weeks, forty sail of French ships were 
loading in the Thames, on freight, an instance never before 
known.” 

In the spring of 1777 the Commissioners sent an agent to 
Dover, who purchased a fine, fast-sailing English-built cutter, 
which was taken across to Dunkirk. There she was privately 
equipped as a cruiser, and put in command of Captain Gustavus 
Conyngham, who was appointed by filling up a blank commis- 
sion from John Hancock, the President of Congress. This 
commission bore date March 1, 1777, and fully entitled Mr. 
Conyngham to the rank of captain in the navy. His vessel, 
although built in England, like. many of our cruisers, was not 
armed or equipped there, nor was his crew enlisted there, but 
in the port of a neutral. This vessel was finally seized under 
some treaty obligations between France and England. The 
Commissioners immediately fitted out another cruiser, and still 
another. It was also affirmed that the money advanced to Mr. 
John Adams for traveling expenses, when he arrived in Spain 
a year or two later, was derived from the prizes of these vessels, 
which had been sent into the ports of Spain. 

— Captain Conyngham was a very successful commander, but 
he was made a prisoner in 1779. The matter was brought 
before Congress in July of the same year, and a committee re- 
ported that this “late commander of an armed vessel in the 
service of the States, and taken on board of a private armed 
cutter, had been treated in a manner contrary to the dictates 


276 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of humanity, and the practice of Christian civilized nations.” 
Whereupon it was resolved to demand of the British Admiral in 
New York that good and sufficient reason be given for this con- 
duct, or that he be immediately released from his rigorous and 
ignominious confinement. If a satisfactory answer was not re- 
ceived by August 1st, so many persons as were deemed proper 
were ordered to be confined in safe and close custody, to abide 
the fate of the said Gustavus Conyngham. No answer having 
been received, one Christopher Hale was thus confined. In 
December he petitioned Congress for an exchange, and that he 
might procure a person in his room. Congress replied that his 
petition could not be granted until Captain Conyngham was re- 
leased, “as it had been determined that he must abide the fate 
of that officer.” Conyngham was subsequently released. 

The whole number of captures made by the United States 
in this contest is not known, but six hundred and fifty prizes 
are said to have been brought into port. Many others were 
ransomed, and some were burned at sea. 

Prescribed limits will not permit me to follow out in detail 
the past history of the United States as a neutral power. It 
must suffice to recall the memory of readers to a few significant 
facts in our more recent history : 

The recognition of the independence of Greece in her strug- 
gle with Turkey, and the voluntary contributions of money 
and men sent to her; the recognition of the independence of 
the Spanish provinces of South America, and the war-vessels 
equipped and sent from the ports of the United States to Bra- 
zil during the struggle with Spain for independence; the ships 
sold to Russia during her war with England, France, and Tur- 
key ; the arms and munitions of war manufactured at New Ha- 
ven, Connecticut, and Providence, Rhode Island, sold and shipped 
to Turkey to aid her in her late struggle with Russia. 

The reader will observe the promptitude with which the 
Government of the United States not only accorded belligerent 
rights, but, even more, recognized the independence of nations 
struggling for deliverance from oppressive rulers. The in- 
stances of Greece and the South American republics are well 
known, and that of Texas must be familiar to every one. One 


1867] HOW MUCH MORE RATIONAL. ° Oy 


could scarcely believe, therefore, that the chief act of hostil- 
ity, or, rather, the great crime of the Government of Great 
Britain in the eyes of the Government of the United States, 
was the recognition by the latter of the Confederate States as a 
belligerent power, and that a state of war existed between them 
and the United States. This was the constantly repeated charge 
against the British Government in the dispatches of the United 
States Government from the commencement of the war down 
hearly to the session of the Geneva Conference in 1872. In 
the correspondence of the Secretary, in 1867, he says: 


“ What is.alleged on the part of the United States is, that the 
Queen’s proclamation, which, by conceding belligerent rights to 
the insurgents, lifted them up for the purpose of insurrection to 
an equality with the nation which they were attempting to over- 
throw, was premature because it was unnecessary, and that it was, 
in its operation, unfriendly because it was premature.” 


Again he says, and, if sincerely, shows himself to be utterly 
ignorant of the real condition of our affairs : 


“Before the Queen’s proclamation of neutrality, the disturb- 
ance in the United States was merely a local insurrection. It 
wanted the name of war to enable it to be a civil war and to live, 
endowed as such, with maritime and other belligerent rights. 
Without the authorized name, it might die, and was expected not 
to live and be a flagrant civil war, but to perish a mere insur- 
rection.” 


The first extract in itself contains a fiction. If the Queen’s 
proclamation possessed such force as to raise the Confederate 
States to an equality with the United States as a belligerent, 
perhaps another proclamation of the Queen might have pos- 
sessed such force, if it had been issued, as to have lifted the 
Confederate States from the state of equality to one of inde- 
pendence. This is a novel virtue to be ascribed to a Queen’s 
proclamation. This idea must have been borrowed from our 
neighbors of Mexico, where a pronunciamiento dissolves one 
and establishes a rival administration. How much more rational 
it would have béen to say that the resources and the military 


978 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


power of the Confederate States placed them, at the outset, on 
the footing of a belligerent, and the Queen’s proclamation only 
declared a fact which the announcement of a blockade of the 
Southern ports by the Government of the United States had 
made manifest!—blockade being a means only applicanl as 
against a foreign foe. 

Nevertheless, the Government of the United States, although 
refusing to concede belligerent rights to the Confederate States, 
‘was very ready to take advantage of such concession by other 
nations, whenever an opportunity offered. The voluminous 
correspondence of the Secretary of State of the United States 
Government, relative to the Confederate cruisers and their so- 
called “ depredations,” was filled with charges of violations of 
international law, which could be committed only by a belliger- 
ent, and which, it was alleged, had been allowed to be done in 
the ports of Great Britain. On this foundation was based the 
subsequent claim for damages, advanced by the Government of 
the United States against that of Great Britain; and, for the 
pretended lack of “due diligence” in watching the actions of 
this Confederate belligerent in her ports, she was mulcted in a 
heavy sum by the Geneva Conference, and paid it to the Gov- 
ernment of the United States. 

It is a remarkable fact that the Government of the United 
States, in no one instance, from the opening to the close of the 
war, formally spoke of the Confederate Government or States 
as belligerents. Although on many occasions it acted with the 
latter as a belligerent, yet no official designations were ever 
given to them or their citizens but those of “insurgents,” 
“insurrectionists.” Perhaps there may be something in the 
signification of the words which, combined with existing cir- 
cumstances, would express a state of affairs that the authorities 
of the Government of the United States were in no degree will- 
ing to admit, and vainly sought to prevent from becoming mani- 
fest to the world. 

The party or individuality against which the Government of 
the United States was conducting hostilities consisted of the 
people within the limits of the Confederate States. Was it 
against them as individuals in an unorganized condition, or as 


1864]— NEVER FORGIVE NOR EVER FORGET. 979 


organized political communities? In the former condition they 
might be a mob; in the latter condition they formed a State. 
By the actions of unorganized masses may arise insurrections, 
and by the actions of organized people or states, arise wars. 

The Government of the United States adopted a fiction 
when it declared that the execution of the laws in certain States 
was impeded by “insurrection.” The persons whom it desig- 
nated as insurrectionists were the organized people of the States. 
The ballot-boxes used at the elections were State boxes. The 
judges who presided at the elections were State functionaries. 
The returns of the elections were made to the State officers. 
The oaths of office of those elected were administered by State 
authority. They assembled in the legislative chambers of the 
States. The results of their deliberations were directory to the © 
State, judicial, and executive officers, and by them put in opera- 
tion. Is it not evident that, only by a fiction of speech, such 
proceedings can be called an insurrection ? 

Why, then, did an intelligent and powerful Government, 
like that of the United States, so outrage the understanding of 
mankind as to adopt a fiction on which to base the authority and 
justification of its hostile action? The United States Govern- 
ment is the result of a compact between the States—a written 
Constitution. It owes its existence simply to a delegation of 
certain powers by the respective States, which it is authorized 
to exercise for their common welfare. One of these powers is 
to “suppress insurrections”; but there is no power delegated 
to subjugate States, the authors of its existence, or to make war 
on any of the States. If, then, without any delegated power or 
lawful authority for its proceedings, the Government of the 
United States commenced a war upon some of the States of the 
Union, how could it expect to be justified before the world? 
It became the aggressor—the Attila of the American Continent. 
Its action inflicted a wound on the principles of constitutional 
liberty, a crushing blow to the hopes that men had begun to 
repose in this latest effort for self-government, which its friends 
should never forgive nor ever forget. To palliate the enormity 
of such an offense, its authors resorted to a vehement denial 
that their hostile action was a war upon the States, and persist- 


980 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ently asserted the fiction that their immense armies and fleets 
were merely a police authority to put down insurrection. They 
hoped to conceal from the observation of the American people 
that the contest, on the part of the central Government, was 


for empire, for its absolute supremacy over the State govern- _ 


ments ; that the Constitution was rolled up and laid away among 
the old archives; and that the conditions of their liberty, in 
the future, were to be decided by the sword or by “ national” 
control of the ballot-box. 

With like disregard for truth, our cruisers were denounced 
as “pirates” by the Government of the United States. A pirate, 
or armed piratical vessel, is by the law of nations the enemy 
of mankind, and can be destroyed by the ships of any nation. 
The distinction between a lawful cruiser and a pirate is that 
the former has behind it a government which is recognized by 
civilized nations as entitled to the rights of war, and from which 
the commander of the cruiser receives his commission or author- 
ity, but the pirate recognizes no government, and is not recog- 
nized by any one. As the Attorney-General of Great Britain 
said in the Alexandra case: 


“ Although a recognition of the Confederates as an indepen- 
dent power was out of the question, yet it was right they should 
be admitted by other nations within the circle of lawful belliger- 
ents—that is to say, that their forces should not be treated as 
pirates, nor their flag as a piratical flag. Therefore, as far as the 
two belligerents were concerned, on the part of this and other 
governments, they were so far put on a level that each was to be 
considered as entitled to the right of belligerents—the Sta ea, 
States as much as the other.” 


The Government of the United States well knew that, after 
the issue of the Queen’s proclamation recognizing our Govern- 
ment, the application of the word pirate to our cruisers was 
simply an exhibition of vindictive passion on its part. A de 
Sacto Government by its commission legalizes among nations a 
cruiser. That there was such a Government even its own courts 
also decided. In a prize case (2 Black, 635), Justice Greer de- 
livered the opinion of the Supreme Court, saying: 


a 


1876] THE SOVEREIGN RIGHTS OF WAR. 981 


“Tt [the war] is not less a civil war, with belligerent parties 
in hostile array, because it may be called an ‘insurrection’ by one 
side, and the insurgents be considered as rebels and traitors. It 
is not necessary that the independence of the revolted province 
or State be acknowledged in order to constitute it a party bel- 
_ ligerent in a war, according to the laws of nations. Foreign na- 
tions acknowledge it a war by a declaration of neutrality. The 
condition of neutrality can not exist unless there be two belli- 
gerent parties.” 


In the case of the,Santissima Trinidad (7 Wheaton, 337), 
the United States Supreme Court says: 


“The Government of the United States has recognized the 
existence of a civil war between Spain and her colonies, and has 
avowed her determination to remain neutral between the parties. 
Each party is therefore deemed by us a belligerent, having, so far 
as concerns us, the sovereign rights of war.” 


The belligerent character of the Confederate States was thus 
fully acknowledged by the highest judicial tribunal of the United 
States. This involved an acknowledgment of the Confederate 
Government as a Government de facto having “the sovereign 
rights of war,” yet the Executive Department of the United 
States Government, with reckless malignity, denounced our 
cruisers as “pirates,” our citizens as “insurgents” and “trai- 
tors,” and the action of our Government as an “insurrection.” 

It has been stated that during the war of the colonies with 
Great Britain many of the prizes of the colonial cruisers were 
destroyed. This was done by Paul Jones and other command- 
ers, although during the entire period of the war some of the 
colonial ports were open, into which prizes could be taken. In 
that war Great Britain did not attempt to blockade all the ports 
of the colonies. Sailing-vessels only were then known, and with 
these a stringent blockade at all seasons could not have been 
maintained. But, at the later day of our war, the powerful 
steamship had appeared, and revolutionized the commerce and 
the navies of the world. During the first months of the war 
all the principal ports of the Confederacy were blockaded, and 
finally every inlet was either in possession of the enemy or 


989 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


had one or more vessels watching it. The steamers were inde- 
pendent of wind and weather, and could hold their positions 
before a port day and night. At the same time the ports of 
neutrals had been closed against. the prizes of our cruisers by 
proclamations and orders in council. Says Admiral Semmes: — 


“During my whole career upon the sea, I had not so much as 
a single port open to me, into which I could send a prize.” 


Our prizes had been sent into ports of Cuba and Venezuela 
under the hope that they might gain admittance, but they were 
either handed over to the enemy under some fraudulent pretext, 
or expelled. Thus, by the action of the different nations and 
by the blockade with steamers, no course was left to us but to 
destroy the prizes, as was done in many instances under the 
Government of the United States Confederation. 

The laws of maritime war are well known. The enemy’s 
vessel when captured becomes the property of the captor, which 
he may immediately destroy ; or he may take the vessel into 
port, have it adjudicated by an admiralty court as a lawful 
prize, and sold. That adjudication is the basis of title to the 
purchaser against all former owners. In these cases the captor 
sends his prizes to a port of his own country or to a friendly 
port for adjudication. But, if the ports of his own country are 
under blockade by his enemy, and the recapture of the prizes, 
if sent there, most probable, and if, at the same time, all friendly 
ports are closed against the entrance of his prizes, then there 
remains no alternative but to destroy the prizes by sinking or 
burning. Courts of admiralty are established for neutrals; not 
for the enemy, who has no right of appearance before them. 
If, therefore, any neutrals suffered during our war for want of 


adjudication, the fault is with their own Government, and not | 


with our cruisers. 

Many other objections were advanced by the United States 
Government as evidence that we committed a breach of inter- 
national law with our cruisers, but their principles are embraced 
in the preceding remarks, or they were too frivolous to deserve 
notice. Suffice it to say that, if the Confederate Government 
had been successful in taking to sea every vessel which it built, 


——_- 


ae 


1871] HAVE SWEPT FROM THE OCEANS. 283 


it would have swept from the oceans the commerce of the United 
States, would have raised the blockade of at least some of our 
ports, and, if by such aid our independence had been secured, 
there is little probability that such complaints as have been no- 
ticed would have received attention, if, indeed, they would have 
been uttered. 

In January, 1871, the British Government proposed to the 
Government of the United States that a joint commission should 
be convened to adjust certain differences between the two na- 
tions relative to the fisheries, the Canadian boundary, etc. To 
this proposition the latter acceded, on condition that the so-called 
Alabama claims should also be considered. To this condition 
Great Britain assented. In the Convention the American Com- 
missioners proposed an arbitration of these claims. The British 
Commissioners replied that her Majesty’s Government could 
- not admit that Great Britain had failed to discharge toward the 
United States the duties imposed on her by the rules of inter- 
national law, or that she was justly lable to make good to the 
United States the losses occasioned by the acts of the cruisers to 
which the American Commissioners referred. 

Without following the details, it may be summarily stated 
that the Geneva Conference ensued. That decided that “Eng- 
land should have fulfilled her duties as a neutral by the exercise 
of a diligence equal to the gravity of the danger,” and that 
“the eircumstances were of a nature to call for the exercise, on 
the part of her Britannic Majesty’s Government, of all possible 
solicitude for the observance of the rights and duties involved 
in the proclamation of neutrality issued by her Majesty on May 
13, 1861.” The Conference also added: “It can not be denied 
that there were moments when its watchfulness seemed to fail, 
and when feebleness in certain branches of the public service 
resulted in great detriment to the United States.” 

The claims presented to the Conference for damages done 
by our several cruisers were as follows: The Alabama, $7,050,- 
293.76; the Boston, $400; the Chickamauga, $183,070.73 ; the 
Florida, $4,057,934.69; the Clarence, tender of the Florida, 
$66,736.10; the Tacony, tender of the Florida, $169,198.81 ; 
the Georgia, $481,160.72; the Jefferson Davis, $7,752; the 


984 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Nashville, $108,433.95; the Retribution, $29,018.53; the Sal- 
lie, $5,540; the Shenandoah, $6,656,838.81; the Sumter, $179,- 
697.67; the Tallahassee, $836,841.83. Total, $19,782,917.60. 
Miscellaneous, $479,033; increased insurance, $6,146,219.71. 
Aggregate, $26,408,170.31. 

The Conference rejected the claims against the Boston, the 
Jefferson Davis, and the Sallie, and Piruaer to the United States 
Government $15,500,000 in gold. 

But the indirect damages upon the commerce of the United 
States produced by these cruisers were far beyond the amount 
of the claims presented to the Geneva Conference. The num- 
ber of ships owned in the United States at the commencement 
of the war, which were subsequently transferred to foreign 
owners by a British register, was 715, and the amount of their 
tonnage was 480,882 tons. Such are the laws of the United 
States that not one of them has been allowed to resume an 
American register. 

In the year 1860 nearly seventy per cent. of the foreign com- 
merce of the country was carried on in American ships. But, 
in consequence of the danger of capture by our cruisers to 
which these ships were exposed, the amount of this commerce 
carried by them had dwindled down in 1864 to forty-six per 
cent. It continued to decline after the war, and in 1872 it had 
fallen to twenty-eight and a half per cent. 

Before the war the amount of American tonnage was second 
only to that of Great Britain, and we were competing with her 
for the first place. At that time the tonnage of the coasting 
trade, which had grown from insignificance, was 1,735,863 tons. 
Three years later, in 1864, it had declined to about 867,931 
tons. 

The damage to the articles of export is illustrated by the 
decline in breadstuffs exported from the Northern States. In 
the last four months of each of the following years the value of 
this export was as follows: 1861, $42,500,000; 1862, $27,842,090; 
1863, $8,909,042; 1864, $1,850,819. Some of this decline re- 
sulted from good crops in England; but, in other respects, it 
Was a consequence of causes growing out of the war. 

The increase in the rates of marine insurance, in consequence 


1862} THE WILL AND PLEASURE OF THE GOVERNOR. 985 


of the danger of capture by the cruisers, was variable. But the 
gross amount so paid was presented asa claim to the Confer- 
ence, as given above. 


CO ne eB RX XX TT 


eeemnts of the United States Government to overthrow States.—Military Governor 
of Tennessee appointed.—Object.—Arrests and Imprisonments.—Measures at- 
tempted.—Oath required of Voters.—A Convention to amend the State Consti- 
tution.—Results.—A ttempt in Louisiana.—Martial Law.—Barbarities inflicted. — 
Invasion of Plantations.—Order of General Butler, No. 28,—Execution of Mum- 
ford.—Judicial System set up.—Civil Affairs to be administered by Military 
Authority.—Order of President Lincoln fora Provisional Court.—A Military 
Court sustained by the Army.—Words of the Constitution —“ Necessity,” the 
reason given for the Power to create the Court.—This Doctrine fatal to the 
Constitution; involves its Subversion.—Cause of our Withdrawal from the 
Union.—Fundamental Principles unchanged by Force-——The Contest is not 
over; the Strife not ended.—When the War closed, who were the Victors ?— 
Let the Verdict of Mankind decide. 


On the capture of Nashville, on February 25, 1862, Andrew 


Johnson was made military Governor of Tennessee, with the 
rank of brigadier-general, and immediately entered on the du- 
ties of his office. This step was taken by the President of the 
United States under the pretense of executing that provision of 
the Constitution which is in these words: 


“The United States shall guarantee to every State in this 
Union a republican form of government.” 


The administration was conducted according to the will and 
pleasure of the Governor, which was the supreme law. Public 
officers were required to take an oath of allegiance to the United 
States Government, and upon refusal were expelled from office. 
Newspaper-offices were closed, and their publication suppressed. 
Subsequently the offices were sold out under the provisions of 
the confiscation act. All persons using “treasonable and sedi- 
tious” language were arrested and required to take the oath 
of allegiance to the Government of the United States, and give 
bonds for the future, or to go into exile. Clergymen, upon 


986 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. _ 


their refusal to take the oath, were confined in the prisons 
until they could be sent away. School-teachers and editors 
and finally large numbers of private citizens were arrested and 
held until they took the oath. Conflicts became frequent in 
the adjacent country. Murders and the violent destruction of 
property ensued. 

On October 21, 1862, an order for an election of members of 
the United States Congress in the ninth and tenth State districts 
was issued. Every voter was required to give satisfactory evi- 
dence of “loyalty ” to the Northern Government. Two persons 
were chosen and admitted to seats in that body. 

' That portion of the State in the possession of the forces of 
the United States continued without change, under the authority 
of the military Governor, until the beginning of 1864. Meas- 
ures were then commenced by the Governor for an organiza- 
tion of a State government in sympathy with the Government 
of the United States. These measures were subsequently 
known as the “process for State reconstruction.” The Gov- 
ernor issued his proclamation for an election of county officers 
on March 5th, to be held in the various counties of the State 
whenever it was practicable. “It is not expected,” says the 
Governor, “that the enemies of the United States will propose 
to vote, nor is it intended that they be permitted to vote or hold 
office.” In addition to the possession of the usual qualifica- 
tions, the voter was required to take the following oath : 


“T solemnly swear that I will henceforth support the Consti- 
tution of the United States, and defend it against the assaults of 
all its enemies ; that I will hereafter be, and conduct myself as, a 
true and faithful citizen of the United States, freely and volun- 
tarily claiming to be subject to all the duties and obligations, and 
entitled to all the rights and privileges, of such citizenship ; that I 
ardently desire the suppression of the present insurrection and re- 
bellion against the Government of the United States, the success 
of its armies, and the defeat of all those who oppose them ; and 
that the Constitution of the United States, and all laws and proe- 
lamations made in pursuance thereof, may be speedily and per- 
manently established and enforced over all the people, States, 
and Territories thereof ; and, further, that I will hereafter aid 


1862] MARTIAL LAW WAS DECLARED. 987 


and assist all loyal people in the accomplishment of these re- 
sults.” 


Thus to invoke the Constitution was like Satan quoting 
Scripture. The election was a failure, and all further efforts at 
reconstruction were for a time suspended. An attempt was 
made at the end of 1864 to obtain a so-called convention to 
amend the State Constitution, and a body was assembled which, 
without any regular authority, adopted amendments. These 
were submitted to the voters on February 22, 1865, and de- 
clared to be ratified by a vote of twenty-five thousand, in a 
State where the vote, in 1860, was one hundred and forty-five 
thousand. Slavery was abolished, other changes made, so-called 
State officers elected, and this body of voters was proclaimed 
as the reconstructed State of Tennessee, and one of the United 
States. Such was the method adopted in Tennessee to execute 
the provision of the Constitution which says: 


“The United States shall guarantee to every State in this 
Union a republican form of government.” 


The next attempt to guarantee “a republican form of gov- 
ernment” to a State was commenced in Louisiana by the mili- 
tary occupation of New Orleans, on May 1, 1862. The United 
States forces were under the command of Major-General Ben- 
jamin F. Butler. Martial law was declared, and Brigadier- 
General George F. Shepley was appointed military Governor of 
the State. It is unnecessary to relate in detail the hostile ac- 
tions which were committed, as they had no resemblance to 
such warfare as is alone permissible by the rules of international 
law or the usages of civilization. Some examples, taken from 
contemporaneous publications of temperate tone, will suffice. 

Peaceful and aged citizens, unresisting captives, and non- 
combatants, were confined at hard labor with chains attached to 
their limbs, and held in dungeons and fortresses ; others were 
subjected to a like degrading punishment for selling medicine 
to the sick soldiers of the Confederacy. The soldiers of the in- 
vading force were incited and encouraged by general orders to 
insult and outrage the wives and mothers and sisters of the citi- 


988 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


zens ; and helpless women were torn from their homes and sub- 
jected to solitary confinement, some in fortresses and prisons— 
and one, especially, on an island of barren sand, under a tropical 


sun—and were fed with loathsome rations and exposed to vile ~ 


insults. Prisoners of war, who surrendered to the naval forces 
of the United States on the agreement that they should be re- 
leased on parole, were seized and kept in close confinement. 
Repeated pretexts were sought or invented for plundering the 
inhabitants of the captured city, by fines levied and collected 
under threat of imprisonment at hard labor with ball and chain. 
The entire population were forced to elect between starvation 
by the confiscation of all their property and taking an oath 
against their conscience to bear allegiance to the invader. Egress 
from the city was refused to those whose fortitude stood the 
test, and even to lone and aged women and to helpless children ; 
and, after being ejected from their houses and robbed of their 
property, they were left to starve in the streets or subsist on 
charity. The slaves were driven from the plantations in the 
neighborhood of New Orleans, until their owners consented to 
share their crops with the commanding General, his brother, and 
other officers. When such consent had been extorted, the slaves 
were restored to the plantations and compelled to work under 
the bayonets of a guard of United States soldiers. Where that 
partnership was refused, armed expeditions were sent to the 
plantations to rob-them of everything that could be removed ; 
and even slaves too aged and infirm for work were, in spite of 
their entreaties, forced from the homes provided by their own- 
ers, and driven to wander helpless on the highway. By an order 
(No. 91), the entire property in that part of Louisiana west of the 
Mississippi River was sequestrated for confiscation, and officers 
were assigned to the duty, with orders to gather up and collect 
the personal property, and turn over to the proper officers, upon 
their receipts, such of it as might be required for the use of the 
United States army; and to bring the remainder to New Or- 
leans, and cause it to be sold at public auction to the highest 
bidders. This was an order which, if it had been executed, 
would have condemned to punishment, by starvation, at least a 
quarter of a million of persons, of all ages, sexes, and condi- 


1862] AND AFTERWARD HANGED. 289 


tions, The African slaves, also, were not only incited to insur- 


- rection by every license and encouragement, but numbers of 


them were armed for a servile war, which in its nature, as ex- 
emplified in other lands, far exceeds the horrors and merciless 
atrocities of savages. In many instances the officers were active 
and zealous agents in the commission of these crimes, and no in- 
stance was known of the refusal of any one of them to partici- 
pate in the outrages. 
The order of Major-General Butler, to which reference is 


made above, was as follows: 


“ HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF THE GULF, New Or pans. 

“ As officers and soldiers of the United States have been sub- 
ject to repeated insults from women, calling themselves ladies, of 
New Orleans, in return for the most scrupulous non-interference 
and courtesy on our part, it is ordered hereafter, when any female 
shall, by mere gesture or movement, insult, or show contempt for 
any Officers or soldiers of the United States, she shall be regarded 
and held liable to be treated as a woman about town plying her 


vocation. 
“By command of Major-General BuriEr.” 


This order was issued on May 15, 1862, and known as Gen- 
eral Order No. 28. 

_ Another example was the cold-blooded execution of William 
B. Mumford on June 7th. He was an unresisting and non- 
combatant captive, and there was no offense ever alleged to 
have been committed by him subsequent to the date of the 
capture of the city. He was charged with aiding and abetting 
certain persons in hauling down a United States flag hoisted on 


the mint, which was left there by a boat’s crew on the morning 


of April 26th, and five days before the military occupation of 
the city. He was tried before a military commission, sentenced, 
and afterward hanged. 

On December 15, 1862, Major-General N. P. Banks took 
command of the military forces, and Major-General Butler re- 
tired. The military Governor, early in August, had attempted 


to set on foot a judicial system for the city and State. For 


this purpose he appointed judges to two of the district courts, 
66 : 


290 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of which the judges were absent, and authorized a third, who 
held a commission dated anterior to 1861, to resume the ses- 
sions. This was an establishment of three new courts, with 
the jurisdiction and powers pertaining to the courts that pre- 
viously bore their names, by a military officer representing the 
Executive of the United States. These were the only courts 
within the territory of the State held by the United States 
forces which claimed to have civil jurisdiction. But this juris- 
diction was limited to citizens of the parish of Orleans as 
against defendants residing in the State. As to other residents 
of the State, outside the parish of Orleans, there was no court 
in which they could be sued. In this condition several parishes 
.were held by the United States forces. 

It was therefore necessary to take another step in order to 
enable the military power to administer civil affairs. This 
involved, as every reader must perceive, a complete subversion 
of the fundamental principles of social organization. Accord- 
ing to this advanced step, the military power, instituted by an 
organization of its own, creates for itself a new nature, fixes 
at will its rules and modes of action, and determines the limits 
of its power. It absorbs by force the civil functions, with 
absolute disregard of the fundamental principle that the mili- 
tary shall be subject to the civil authority. 

This attempt to administer civil affairs on the basis of mili- 
tary authority involved, as has been said, the subversion of fun- 
damental principles. ‘The military power may remove obstacles 
to the exercise of the civil authority; but, when these are re- 
moved, it can not enter the forum, put on the toga, and sit in 
judgment upon civil affairs, any more than the hawk becomes: 
the dove by assuming her plumage. 

However, the next step was taken. It consisted in the pub- 
lication of the following order by the President of the United 
States : 

“Executive Mansion, Wasuineton, October 20, 1862. 

“The insurrection which has for some time prevailed in sev- 
eral of the States of this Union, including Louisiana, having tem- 
porarily subverted and swept away the civil institutions of that 
State, including the judiciary and the judicial authorities of the 


1862] THIS SO-CALLED. COURT. 291 


_ Union, so that it has become necessary to hold the State in mili- 
tary occupation ; and it being indispensably necessary that there 
shall be some judicial tribunal existing there capable of adminis- 
tering justice, I have therefore thought it proper to appoint, and 
I do hereby constitute a provisional court, which shall be a court 
of record for the State of Louisiana; and I do hereby appoint 
Charles A. Peabody, of New York, to be a provisional judge to 
hold said court, with authority to hear, try, and determine all causes 
civil and criminal, including causes in law, equity, revenue, and 
admiralty, and particularly with all such powers and jurisdiction 
as belong to the District and Circuit Courts of the United States, 
conforming his proceedings, so far as possible, to the course of 
proceedings and practice which has been customary in the courts 
of the United States and Louisiana—his judgment to be final and 
conclusive. And I do hereby authorize and empower the said 
judge to make and establish such rules and regulations as may be 
necessary for the exercise of his jurisdiction, and to appoint a 
prosecuting attorney, marshal, and clerk of the said court, who 
shall perform the functions of attorney, marshal, and clerk accord- 
ing to such proceedings and practice as before mentioned, and 
such rules and regulations as may be made and established by 
said judge. These appointments are to continue during the pleas- 
ure of the President, not extending beyond the military occupa- 
tion of the city of New Orleans, or the restoration of the civil 
authority in that city and in the State of Louisiana. These officers 
shall be paid out of the contingent fund of the War Department, 
and compensation shall be as follows. 
“ By the President : Aprauam Lincoxn. 
“W.H. Sewarp, Secretary of State.” 


This so-called court, as its judge said, “ was always governed 
_ by the rules and principles of law, adhering to all the rules and 
forms of civil tribunals, and avoiding everything like a military 
administration of justice. In criminal matters it summoned a 
grand jury, and submitted to it all charges for examination.” 
Yet, when its judgments and mandates were to be executed, 
that execution could come only from the same power by which 
the court was constituted, and that was the military power of 
the United States holding the country in military occupation. 
Therefore, to this end the military and naval forces were 


999 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


pledged. Hence it was the military power, as has been said, 
administering civil affairs. 
The Constitution of the United States says: 


“The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in 
one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress 
may from time to time ordain and establish.” * 


This provisional court was neither ordained nor established 
by Congress; it had not, therefore, vested in it any of the judi- 
cial power of the United States. Neither does the Constitution 
give to Congress any power by which it can constitute an inde- 
pendent State court within the limits of any State in the Union, 
as Louisiana was said to be. 

This provisional court, therefore, was a mere instrument 
of martial law, constituted by the Commander-in-Chief of the 
United States forces, not for the usual purposes which justify 
the establishment of such courts, but to enter the domain of 
civil affairs and administer justice between man and man in the 
ordinary transactions of peaceful life. The ministers of martial 
law are only the representatives of the conqueror, and they sit 
in his seat of authority to relieve him from the burden of exces- 
sive duties, and to administer justice to offenders against his 
authority and the social welfare, during his presence. On such 
grounds the existence of such courts is justified; but, for the 
establishment of a court like this provisional one, no legitimate 
authority is to be found either in the Constitution of the United 
States or outside of it. “Jnter arma silent leges” is a maxim 
nearly two thousand years old; it means that, under the exercise 
of military power, the civil administration ceases. 

When called upon to state any just grounds for such a meas- - 
ure, the invader has usually replied that he had, ex necessitate 
rev, the right to establish such a tribunal. Thus said the Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the United States, and Congress acquiesced 
—indeed, leading the way, it had urged the same plea to jus- 
tify the passage of its confiscation act. The judiciary has ob- 
served the silence of acquiescence. Thus the doctrine of neces- 
sity—the rule that, in the administration of affairs, both military 

* Constitution of the United States, Article III, section 1. 


1862] WHAT, THEN, IS THIS NECESSITY? 293 


_and civil, the necessity of the case may and does afford ample 
authority and power to subvert or to suspend the provisions 
of the Constitution, and to exercise powers and do acts unwar- 
ranted by the grants of that instrument—has apparently become 
incorporated as an unwritten clause of the Constitution of the 
United States. 

What, then, is this necessity? Its definition would require 
an explanation, from the persons who act under it, of the objects 
for which, in every instance, they act. Suffice it to say that the 
political wisdom of mankind has consecrated this truth as a fun- 
damental maxim, that no man can be trusted with the exercise 
of power and be, at the same time, the final judge of the limits 
within which that power may be exercised. It has fortified this 
with other maxims, such as, “ Necessity is the plea of despot- 
ism” ; “ Necessity knows no law.” The fathers of the Consti- 
tution of the United States sought to limit every grant of power 
so exactly that it should observe its bounds as invariably as a 
planetary body does its orbit. Yet within the first hundred’ 
years of its'existence all these limits have been disregarded, and 
the people have silently accepted the plea of necessity. 

It must be manifest to every one that there has been a fatal 
subversion of the Constitution of the United States. In esti- 
mating the results of the war, this is one of the most deplor- 
able; because it is self-evident that, when a constitutional Gov- 
ernment once oversteps the limits fixed for the exercise of its 
powers, there is nothing beyond to check its further aggres- 
sion, no place where it will voluntarily halt until it reaches 
the subjugation of all who resist the usurpation. This was 
the sole issue involved in the conflict of the United States 
Government with the Confederate States; and every other is- 
sue, whether pretended or real, partook of its nature, and was 
subordinate to this one. Let us repeat an illustration: In strict 
observance of their inalienable rights, in abundant caution re- 
served, when they formed the compact or Constitution—which- 
ever the reader pleases to call it—of the United States, the 
Confederate States sought to withdraw from the Union they 
had assisted to create, and to form a new and independent one 
among themselves. Then the Government of the United States 


994. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


broke through all the limits fixed for the exercise of the powers 


with which it had been endowed, and, to accomplish its own 


will, assumed, under the plea of necessity, powers unwritten 
and unknown in the Constitution, that it might thereby proceed 
to the extremity of subjugation. Thus it will be perceived 
that the question still lives. Although the Confederate armies 
may have left the field, although the citizen soldiers may have 
retired to the pursuits of peaceful life, although the Confeder- 
ate States may have renounced their new Union, they have 
proved their indestructibility by resuming their former places 
in the old one, where, by the organic law, they could only be 
admitted as republican, equal, and sovereign States of the 
Union. And, although the Confederacy as an organization may 
have ceased to exist as unquestionably as though it had never 
been formed, the fundamental principles, the eternal truths, 
uttered when our colonies in 1776 declared their independence, 
on which the Confederation of 1781 and the Union of 1788 
were formed, and which animated and guided in the organ- 
ization of the Confederacy of 1861, yet live, and will survive, 
however crushed they may be by despotic force, however deep 
they may be buried under the débris of crumbling States, how- 
ever they may be disavowed by the time-serving and the faint- 
hearted; yet I believe they have the eternity of truth, and that 
in God’s appointed time and place they will prevail. 

The contest is not over, the strife is not ended. It has only 
entered on a new and enlarged arena. The champions of con- 
stitutional liberty must spring to the struggle, like the armed 
men from the seminated dragon’s teeth, until the Government 
of the United States is brought back to its constitutional limits, 
and the tyrant’s plea of “necessity” is bound in chains strong 


as adamant: 
“For Freedom’s battle once begun, 


Bequeathed by bleeding sire to son, 
Though baffled oft, is ever won.” 


When the war closed, who were the victors? Perhaps it is 
too soon to answer that question. Nevertheless, every day, as 
time rolls on, we look with increasing pride upon the struggle 
our people made for constitutional liberty. The war was one in 


a ee ee 


1862] - ON WHICH SIDE WAS THE VICTORY ? 995 


which fundamental principles were involved ; and, as force de- 
cides no truth, hence the issue is still undetermined, as has 
been already shown. We have laid aside our swords; we have 
ceased our hostility; we have conceded the physical strength 
of the Northern States. But the question still lives, and all 
nations and peoples that adopt a confederated agent of govern- 
ment will become champions of our cause. While contemplat- 
ing the Northern States—with their Federal Constitution gone, 
ruthlessly destroyed under the tyrant’s plea of “ necessity,” 
their State sovereignty made a byword, and their people ab- 
sorbed in an aggregated mass, no longer, as their fathers left 
them, protected by reserved rights against usurpation —the 
question naturally arises: On which side was the victory? Let 
the verdict of mankind decide. 


CHAT LTE ne xX xX, 


Further Attempts of the United States Government to overthrow States.—Election 
of Members of Congress under the Military Governor of Louisiana.—The Voters 
required to take an Oath to support the United States Government.—The State 
Law violated.—Proposition to holda State Convention ; postponed.—The Presi- 
dent’s Plan for making Union States out of a Fragment of a Confederate State. 
—His Proclamation.—The Oath required.—Message.—“ The War-Power our 
Main Reliance.’—Not a Feature of a Republican Government in the Plan, 
—What are the True Principles ?—The Declaration of Independence asserts 
them.—Who had a Right to institute a Government for Louisiana ?—Its People 
only—Under what Principles could the Government of the United States do it ? 
—As an Invader to subjugate.—Effrontery and Wickedness of the Administra- 
tion.—It enforces a Fiction.—Attempt to make Falsehood as good as Truth.— 
Proclamation for an Election of State Officers.—Proclamation for a State Con- 
vention.—The Monster Crime against the Liberties of Mankind.—Proceedings in 
Arkansas.—Novel Method adopted to amend the State Constitution.—Perversion 
of Republican Principles in Virginia.—Proceedings to create the State of West 
Virginia—A Falsehood by Act of Congress.—Proceedings considered under 
Fundamental Principles.—These Acts sustained by the United States Govern- 
ment.—Assertion of Thaddeus Stevens.—East Virginia Government.—Removed 
to Richmond and upheld by the United States Government.—Such Acts caused 
Entire Subversion of States.—Mere Fictions thus constituted. 


Bor to resume our narration. On December 3d, in compli- 


ance with an order of the military Governor, Shepley, a so-called 
election was held for members of the United States Congress in 


‘ 


996 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the first and second State districts, each composed of about half 
the city of New Orleans and portions of the surrounding parishes. 
Those who had taken the oath of allegiance were allowed to 
vote. In the first district, Benjamin F. Flanders received 
2,370 votes, and all others 273. In the second district, Michael 
Hahn received 2,799 votes, and all others 2,318. These persons 
presented themselves at Washington, and resolutions to admit 
them to seats were reported by the Committee on Elections in 
the House of Representatives. It was urged that the military 
Governor had conformed in every particular to the Constitution 
and laws of Louisiana, so that the election had every essential 
of a regular election in a time of most profound peace, with the 
exception of the fact that the proclamation for the election was 
issued by the military instead of the civil Governor of the State. 
The law required the proclamation to be issued by the civil 
Governor ; so that, if these persons were admitted to seats after 
an election-called by a military Governor, Congress thereby rec- 
ognized as valid a military order of a so-called Executive that 
unceremoniously set aside a provision of the State civil law, and 
was anti-republican and a positive usurpation. Again, all the 
departments of the United States Government had acted on the 
theory that the Confederate States were in a state of insurrec- 
tion, and that the Union was unbroken ; under this theory, they 
could come back to the Union only with all the laws unimpaired 
which they themselves had made for their own government. 
Congress was as much bound to uphold the laws of Louisiana, in 
all their.extent and in all their parts, as it was to, uphold the 
laws of New York, or any other State, whose civil policy had 
not been disturbed. Both those persons, however, were ad- 
mitted to seats—yeas, 92; nays, 44. 

The work of constituting the State of Louisiana out of 
the small portion of her population and of her territory held 
by the forces of the United States still went on. The propo- 
sition now was to hold a so-called State Convention and frame 
a new Constitution, but its advocates were so few.that no- 
thing was accomplished during the year 1863. The object 
of the military power was to secure such civil authority as 
to enforce the abolition of slavery; and, until the way was 


1863] OUT OF A FRAGMENT. 297 


clear to that result, every method of organization was held in 
abeyance. 

Meanwhile, on December 8, 1863, the President of the 
United States issued a proclamation which contained his plan 
for making a Union State out of a fragment of a Confederate 
State, and also granting an amnesty to the general mass of the 
people on taking an oath of allegiance. His plan was in these 
words : 


“And I do further proclaim, declare, and make known that, 
whenever, in any of the States of Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana, Mis- 
sissippi, Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina, and 
North Carolina, a number of persons, not less than one tenth in 
number of the votes cast in such State at the Presidential election 
of 1860, each having taken the following oath and not having 
since violated it, and being a qualified voter by the election laws 
of the State existing immediately before the so-called act of 
secession, and excluding all others, shall reéstablish a State gov- 
ernment. which shall be republican, and in nowise contravening 
said oath, such shall be recognized as the true government of the 
State, and the State shall receive thereunder the benefits of the 
constitutional provision which declares that ‘the United States 
shall guarantee to every State in this Union a republican form of 
government, and shall protect each of them against invasion ; and, 
on application of the Legislature or the Executive (when the 
Legislature can not be convened), against domestic violence.’ ” 


The oath required to be taken was as follows : 


+82 , do solemnly swear, in presence of Almighty God, 
that I will henceforth support, protect, and defend the Constitu- 
tion of the United States and the Union of the States thereunder ; 
and that I will in like manner abide by and faithfully support all 
acts of Congress, passed during the existing rebellion, with refer- 
ence to slaves, so long and so far as not repealed, modified, or held 
void by Congress, or by decision of the Supreme Court, and that 
I will, in like manner, abide by and faithfully support all procla- 
mations of the President, made during the existing rebellion, hay- 
ing reference to slaves, so long and so far as not modified or 
declared void by decision of the Supreme Court. So help me 
God!” 


998 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


In a message to Congress, of the same date with the pre- 
ceding proclamation, the President of the United States, after 
explaining the objects of the proclamation, says : 


“Tn the midst of other cares, however important, we must not 
lose sight of the fact that the war-power is still our main reliance. 
To that power alone can we look, for a time, to give confidence to 
the people in the contested regions that the insurgent power will 
not again overrun them.” 


The intelligent reader will observe that this plan of the 
President of the United States to restore States to the Union, 
to occupy the places of those which he had been attempting to 
destroy, does not contain a single feature to secure a republican 
form of government, nor a single provision authorized by the 
Constitution of the United States. With his usurped war- 
power to sustain him in the work of destruction, he found it 
easy to destroy ; but he was powerless to create or to restore. 
In the former case, he had gone imperiously forward, tramp- 
ling under foot every American political principle, and break- 
ing through every constitutional limitation. In the latter case, 
he could not advance one step without recognizing sound po- 
litical principles and complying.with their dictates. On such 
foundation he must construct, or his work would be like the 
house founded on the sand. 

It will now be shown what the true principles are, and 
then that the President of the United States perverted them, 
misstated them, and sought to reach his ends by groundless 
fabrications—as if he would enforce a fiction or establish 
a fallacy to be as good as truth. It might be still further 
shown, if it had not already become self-evident, that this 
method was pursued with such a perversity and wickedness as 
to render it a characteristic feature of that war administration 
on whose skirts is the blood of more than a million of human 
beings. 

The whole science of a republican government is to be found 
in this sentence of the Declaration of Independence, made by the 
representatives of the United States of America, in Congress 
assembled, on July 4, 1776. It says: 


1862] THE POWER OF THE INVADER. 299 


“That, to secure these rights [certain unalienable rights], gov- 
ernments are instituted among men—deriving their just powers 
from the consent of the governed ; that, whenever any form of 
government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of 
the people to alter or abolish it, and to institute a new govern- 
ment, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its 
powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect 
their safety and happiness.” 


Thus it will be seen that civil and political sovereignty was 
held to be implanted by our Creator in the individual, and no 
human government has any original, inherent, just sovereignty 
whatever, and no acquired sovereignty either, beyond that which 
"may be granted to it by the individuals as “ most likely to effect 
their safety and happiness.” ‘ Deriving their just powers from 
the consent of the governed,” says the Declaration of Indepen- 
dence. All other powers than those thus derived are not “ just 
powers.” Any government exercising powers “not just” has 
no right to survive. “It is the right of the people to alter or 
abolish it,” says the Declaration of Independence, ‘“ and to insti- 
tute a new government.” 

Who, then, had a right to “institute” a republican govern- 
ment for Louisiana? No human beings whatever but the peo- 
ple of Louisiana; not the strangers, not the.slaves, but the man- 
hood that knew its rights and dared to maintain them. Under 
what principles, then, could a citizen of Massachusetts, whether 
clothed in regimentals or a civilian’s dress, come into Louisiana 
and attempt to set up a State government? Under no prin- 
ciples, but only by the power of the invader and the usurper. 
If the true principles of a republican government had prevailed 
and could have been enforced when Major-General Butler ap- 
peared at New Orleans, he would have been hanged on the 
first lamp-post, and his successor, Major-General Banks, would 
have been hanged on the second. 

Under what principles, then, could the Government of the 
United States appear in Louisiana and attempt to institute a 
State government? As has been said above, it was the act of 
an invader and a usurper. Yet it proposed to “institute” a 
republican State government. The absurdity of such intention 


300 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


is too manifest to need argument. How could an invader at- 
tempt to “institute” a republican State government? an act 
which can be done only by the free and unconstrained action 
of the people themselves. It has been charged that this and 
every similar act of the President of the United States was in 
violation of his duty to maintain and observe the requirements 
and restrictions of the Constitution, and to uphold in each State 
a republican form of government. To specify, the following 
is offered as an example. He did “ proclaim, declare, and make 
known— 


that, whenever any number of persons, not less than one tenth 
of the number of voters at the last Presidential election, shall 
reéstablish a State government, which shall be republican [!] and 
in no wise contravening said oath, such shall be recognized as the 
true government of the State.” 


One tenth of the voters can not establish a republican State 
government, which requires the consent of the people of the 
State to make its powers just, as has been shown above. There- 
fore, such a government had not one element of republicanism 
init. But what is astonishingly remarkable is the stultification 
of requiring the one tenth of the people to “reéstablish a State 
government, which shall be republican and in no wise contraven- 
ing said oath.” Either he did not know how a republican State 
government was “instituted,” or, if he knew, then he was a 
participant in that perversity and wickedness, which was above 
charged to be the characteristic of his war Administration. 

It will now be shown how he sought “to enforce a fiction 
or establish a fallacy to be as good as truth.” Of the govern- 
ment thus established by one tenth of the voters, he says: 


“Such shall be recognized as the true government of the State, 
and the State shall receive thereunder the benefits of the constitu- 
tional provision which declares that ‘ the United States shall guar- 
antee to every State in this Union a republican form of govern- 
ment,’ ” 


It is proper here to inquire who and what was the tenth to 
whom this power to rule the State was to be given. It will be 


1862] UNCONDITIONED CONSENT. 801 


seen, by reference to the proclamation, that each voter of the 
one tenth, in order to be qualified, is required to take an oath 
with certain promises in it, which are prescribed by an outside 
or foreign authority. This condition of itself is fatal to a repub- 
lican State government, that “ derives its just powers from the 
consent of the governed.” Free consent—not cheerful consent, 
but unconstrained and unconditioned consent—is required that 
“just powers” may be derived from it. In this instance, the 
invader prescribes the requisite qualifications of the voter, and 
makes it a condition that the government established shall “in 
no wise contravene” certain stipulations expressed in the oath 
taken to give the qualification. A State government thus formed 
derives its powers from the consent of the invader, and not 
“from the consent of the governed.” It has no “just powers” 
whatever. It is a groundless fabrication. Yet the President of 
the United States declared, “‘ The State shall receive thereunder 
the benefits of the constitutional provision which declares that 
‘the United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union 
a republican form of government.’” Is not this an attempt, 
while pretending to establish, to destroy true republicanism ? 

Now, let the reader bear in mind that these remarks relate to 
Louisiana alone, of which more remains to be told; and that 
there were eleven States that withdrew from the Union, whose 
restoration was to be effected on this rotten system, in addition 
to several constitutional amendments, the adoption of which 
was to be effected and secured by the votes of these groundless 
fabrications, in which a fiction was to be considered as good as 
the truth. Having attained all these facts which are yet to be 
stated, he may begin to form some estimate of the remnants of 
the Constitution, and of the probable existence of any true 
union of the States. 

To proceed with the narration. Under the above-mentioned 
proclamation of the President of the United States, Major-Gen- 
eral Banks issued at New Orleans, on January 11, 1864, a proc- 
lamation for an election of State officers, and for members of 
a State Constitutional Convention. The State officers, when 
elected, were to constitute, as the proclamation said, “ the civil 
government of the State under the Constitution and laws of 


302 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Louisiana, except so much of the said Constitution and laws 
as recognize, regulate, or relate to slavery, which, being incon- 
sistent with the present condition of public affairs, and plainly 
inapplicable to any class of persons now existing within its lim- 
its, must be suspended.” The number of votes given for State 
officers was 10,270. The population of the State in 1860 was 
708,902. The so-called Governor-elect was inaugurated on 
March 4th, and on March 11th he was invested with the powers 
hitherto exercised by the military Governor for the President of 
the United States. On the same day Major-General Banks is- 
sued an order. relative to the election of delegates to a so-called 
State Convention. The most important provisions of it defined 
the qualifications of voters. The delegates were elected entirely 
within the army lines of the forces of the United States. The 
so-called Convention assembled and adopted a so-called Consti- 
tution, declaring “instantaneous, universal, uncompensated, un- 
conditional emancipation of slaves.” The meager vote on the 
Coustitution was, for its adoption, 6,886 ; for its rejection, 1,566. 
The vote of New Orleans was, yeas 4,664, nays 789. This state 
of affairs continued after the close of the war. Violent dis- 
putes arose as to the validity of the so-called Constitution. The 
so-called Legislature elected under it adopted Article XIII as 
an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, pro- 
hibiting the existence of slavery in the United States. 

It will be seen from these facts that the State of Louisiana 
was not a republican State instituted by the consent of the gov- 
erned ; that its Legislature was an unconstitutional body, with- 
out any “just powers,” and that the vote which it gave for the 
amendment of the Constitution of the United States was no 
vote at all; for it was given by a body that had no authority to 
give it, because it had no “just powers” whatever. Yet this 
vote was counted among those necessary to secure the passage 
of the constitutional amendment. Was this an attempt to en- 
force a fiction or to establish the truth? Such are the deeds 
which go to make up the record of crime against the liberties 
of mankind. 

The proceedings in: Arkansas to “institute” a republican 
State government were inaugurated by an order from the Presi- 


99 


1862} THE NOVEL METHOD. 303 


dent of the United States to Major-General Steele, command- 
ing the United States forces in Arkansas. At this time the 
regular government of the State, established by the consent of 
the people, was in full operation outside the lines of the United 
States army. The military order of the President, dated Janu- 
ary 20, 1864, said : 


“Sundry citizens of the State of Arkansas petitioned me that 
an election may be held in that State, in which to elect a Gov- 
ernor ; that it be assumed at that election, and thenceforward, that 
the Constitution and laws of the State, as before the rebellion, are 
in full force, except that the Constitution is so modified as to 
declare that there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servi- 
tude,” ete. 


The order then directs the election to be held for State offi- 
cers, prescribes the qualifications of voters and the oath to be 
taken, and directs the General to administer to the officers thus 
chosen an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, 
and the “modified Constitution of the State of Arkansas,” 
_ when they shall be declared qualified and empowered imme- 
diately to enter upon the duties of their offices. 

The reader can scarcely fail to notice the novel method here 
adopted to modify or amend the State Constitution. It should 
be called the process by “assumption ”—that is, assume it to 
be modified, and it is so modified. Then the President orders 
the officers-elect to be required to swear, on their oath, to sup- 
port “the modified Constitution of the State of Arkansas.” 
Now, unless the Constitution was thus modified by assuming 
it to be modified, these State officers were required by oath to 
support that which did not exist. But it was not so modified. 
No Constitution or other instrument in the world containing a 
grant of powers can be modified by assumption, unless it be the 
Constitution of the United States, as shown by recent experi- 
ence. Yet the chief object for which these officers were elected 
and qualified was to carry out these so-called modifications of 
the State Constitution. This adds another to the deeds of 
darkness done in the name of republicanism. 

Meantime some persons in the northern part of Arkansas, 


304 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


acting under the proclamation of December 8, 1863, got to- 
gether a so-called State Convention on January 8, 1864, and 
adopted a revised Constitution, containing the slavery prohi- 
bition, etc. This was ordered to be submitted to a popular vote, 
and at the same time State officers were to be elected. Presi- 
dent Lincoln acceded to these proceedings after they had been 
placed under the direction of the military commander, General 
Steele. The election was held, the Constitution received twelve 
thousand votes, and the State officers were declared to be elected. 
Then Arkansas came forth a so-called republican State, “insti- 
tuted” by military authority, and, of course, received the benefit 
of the constitutional provision, which declares that “the United 
States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a republican 
form of government.” It should be added that Arkansas, thus 
“instituted” a State, was regarded by the Government of the 
United States as competent to give as valid a vote as New 
York, Massachusetts, or any other Northern State, for the rati- 
fication of Article XIII, as an amendment to the Constitution 
of the United States, prohibiting the existence of slavery in the 
United States. The vote was thus given; it was counted, and 
served to make up the exact number deemed by the managers 
to be necessary. Thus was fraud and falsehood triumphant 
over popular rights and fundamental law. 

The perversion of true republican principles was greater in 
Virginia than in any other State, through the codperation of 
the Government of the United States. In the winter of 1860- 
’61 a special session of the Legislature of the State convened at 
Richmond and passed an act directing the people to elect dele- 
gates toa State Convention to be held on February 14, 1861. 
The Convention assembled, and was occupied with the subject 
of Federal relations and the adjustment of difficulties until the 
call for troops by President Lincoln was made, when an ordi- 
nance of secession was passed. The contiguity of the north- 
western counties of the State to Ohio and Pennsylvania led to 
the manifestation of much opposition to the withdrawal of the 
State from the Union, and the determination to reorganize that 
portion into a separate State. This resulted in the assembling 
of a so-called convention of delegates at Wheeling on June 


1862] THE PROCESS OF ASSUMPTION. 3805 


11th. One of its first acts was to provide for a reorganization 
of the State government of Virginia by declaring its offices 
vacant, and the appointment of new officers throughout. This 
new organization assumed to be the true representative of the 
State of Virginia, and, after various fortunes, was recognized 
as such by President Lincoln, as will be presently seen. The 
next act of the Convention was “to provide for the formation 
of a new State out of a portion of the territory of this State.” 
Under this act delegates were elected to a so-called Constitu- 
tional Convention which framed a so-called Constitution for 
the new State of West Virginia, which was submitted to a vote 
of the people in April, 1862, and carried by a large majority 
of that section. Meantime the Governor of the reorganized 
government of Virginia, above mentioned, issued his proclama- 
tion calling for an election of members, and the assembling of 
an extra session of the so-called Legislature. This body assem- 
bled on May 6, 1862, and, adopting the new Federal process of 
assumption, it assumed to be the Legislature of the State of 
Virginia. This body, or Legislature, so called, immediately 
’ passed an act giving its consent to the formation of a new State 
out of the territory of Virginia. The formal act of consent 
and the draft of the new Constitution of West Virginia above 
mentioned were ordered by this so-called Legislature to be sent 
to the Congress of the United States, then in session, with the 
-request that “the said new State be admitted into the Union.” 
On December 31, 1862, the President of the United States ap- 
proved an act of Congress entitled ‘An act for the admission 
of the State of West Virginia into the Union,” ete. The act 
recited as follows: 

“ Whereas, The Legislature of Virginia, by an act passed May 
13, 1862, did give its consent to the formation of a new State 
within the jurisdiction of the said State of Virginia, to be known 
by the name of West Virginia,” etc. 


Again it recites: 

“And whereas both the Convention and the Legislature afore- 
said have requested that the new State should be admitted into 
the Union, and the Constitution aforesaid being republican in 


67 


306 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


form, Congress doth hereby consent that the said forty-eight coun- 
ties may be formed into a separate and independent State.” 


It were well to pause for a moment and consider these pro- 
ceedings in the light of fundamental republican principles. The 
State of Virginia was not a confederation, but a republic, or na- 
tion. Its government was instituted with the consent of the gov- 
erned, and its powers, therefore, were “ just powers.” When the 
State Convention at Richmond passed an ordinance of secession, 
which was subsequently ratified by sixty thousand majority, it was 
as valid an act for the people of Virginia as was ever passed by a 
representative body. ‘The legally expressed decision of the ma- 
jority was the true voice of the State. When, therefore, disor- 
derly persons in the northwestern counties of the State assem- 
bled and declared the ordinance of secession “to be null and 
void,” they rose up against the authority of the State. When 
they proceeded to elect delegates to a convention to resist the 
act of the State, and that Convention assembled and organized 
and proceeded to action, an insurrection against the govern- 


ment of Virginia was begun. When the Convention next de- ~ 


clared the State offices to be vacant, and proceeded to fill them 
by the choice of Francis H. Pierpont for Governor, and other 
State officers, assuming itself to be the true State Convention of 
Virginia, it not only declared what notoriously did not exist, 


but it committed an act of revolution. And, when the so-called. 


State officers elected by it entered upon their duties, they inau- 
gurated a revolution. The subsequent organization of the State 
of West Virginia and its separation from the State of Virginia 
were acts of secession. Thus we have, in these movements, 
insurrection, revolution, and secession. 

The reader, in his simplicity, may naturally expect to find 
the Government of the United States arrayed, with all its mili- 
tary forces, against these illegitimate proceedings. Oh, no! It 
made all the difference in the world, with the ministers of that 
Government, “ whose ox it was that was gored by the bull.” 
She was the nursing-mother to the whole thing, and to insure 
its vitality fed it, not, like the fabled bird, with her own blood, 
but by the butchery of the mother of States. The words of the 


a 


1862] TO PERPETUATE A MONSTROUS USURPATION. 307 


Constitution of the United States applicable to this case are 
these : 


“No new State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdic- 
tion of any other State ; nor any State be formed by the junc- 
tion of two or more States, or parts of States, without the consent 
of the Legislatures of the States concerned, as well as of the Con- 
gress.” * 


Will any intelligent person assert that the consent of the 
State of Virginia was given to the formation of this new State, 
or that the government of Francis H. Pierpont held the true 
and lawful jurisdiction of the State of Virginia? Yet the Con- 
gress of the United States asserted in the act above quoted that 
“the Legislature of Virginia did give its consent to the for- 
mation of a new State within the jurisdiction of the State of 
Virginia.” This was not true, but was an attempt, by an act of 
Congress, to aid a fraud and perpetuate a monstrous usurpation. 
For there is no grant of power to Congress in the Constitution 
nor in the American theory of government to justify it. If it 
is said that the government of Francis H. Pierpont was the only 
one recognized by Congress as the government of the State of 
Virginia, that does not alter the fact. The recognition of Con- 
gress can not make a State of an organization which is not a 
State. There is no grant of power to Congress in the Constitu- 
tion for that purpose. If it is said that the government of Fran- 
cis H. Pierpont was established by the only qualified voters in 
the State of Virginia, that is as equally unfounded as the other 
assertions. Neither the Congress of the United States nor the 
Government of the United States can determine the qualifica- 
tions of voters at an election for delegates to a State Constitu- 
tional Convention, or for the choice of State officers. There 
was no grant of power either to the President or to Congress 
for that purpose. All these efforts were usurpations, by which 
it was sought, through groundless fabrications, to reach certain 
ends, and they add to the multitude of deeds which constitute 
the crime committed against States and the liberties of the 
people. 

* Constitution of the United States, Article IV, section 3. 


308 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


When the question of the admission of West Virginia was 
before the House of Representatives of the United States Con- 
gress, Mr. Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania, declared, with 
expiatory frankness, that he would not stultify himself by claim- 
ing the act to be constitutional. He said, “ We know that it is 
not constitutional, but it is necessary.” 

It now became necessary for the government of Virginia, 
represented by Francis H. Pierpont, to emigrate ; for the new 
State of West Virginia embraced the territory in which he was 
located. He therefore departed, with his carpet-bag, and located 
at Alexandria, on the Potomac, which became the seat of gov- 
ernment of so-called East Virginia. On February 13, 1864, 
a convention, consisting of a representative from each of the 
ten counties in part or wholly under the control of the United 
States forces, assembled at Alexandria to amend the Constitu- 
tion of the State of Virginia. Some sections providing for the 
abolition of slavery were declared to be added to the Constitu- 
tion, and the so-called Convention adjourned. Nothing of im- 
portance occurred until after the occupation of Richmond by 
the United States forces. On May 9, 1865, President Johnson 
issued an “ Executive order to reéstablish the authority of the 
United States, and execute the laws within the geographical 
limits known as the State of Virginia.” The order closed in 
these words : 


“That, to carry into effect the guarantee of the Federal Con- 
stitution of a republican form of State government, and afford the 
advantage of the security of domestic laws, as well as to complete 
the reéstablishment of the authority of the laws of the United 
States and the full and complete restoration of peace within the 
limits aforesaid, Francis H. Pierpont, Governor of the State of 
Virginia, will be aided by the Federal Government, so far as may 
be necessary, in the lawful measures which he may take for the 
extension and administration of the State government throughout 
the geographical limits of said State.” 


This order recognized the factitious organization, which was 
begun in West Virginia and then transplanted to Alexandria, as 
the true government of the State of Virginia, and, by the aid of 


ne es 


1862] WAS NOT REPUBLICAN. 309 


the United States Government, was now removed to Richmond 
and set up there. No person was allowed to take any part in 
this government or to vote under it unless he had previously 
taken the purgatorial oath above mentioned, and had not held 
office under the Confederate or any State government. Thus, 
the taking of this oath, which was prescribed by the President 
of the United States, became the most important of the quali- 
fications of a voter. Here was a condition prescribed by a for- 
eign authority as necessary to be fulfilled before the first act 
could be done by a citizen relative to his State government. 
Such a government was not republican, for its powers were not 
derived from the consent of the governed. Its powers were 
derived from voters who had, under oath, said : 


“T will abide by and faithfully support all acts of Congress, 
passed during the existing rebellion with reference to slaves, so 
long and so far as not repealed, modified, or held void by Con- 
gress or by decision of the Supreme Court ; and that I will in like 
manner abide by and faithfully support all proclamations of the 
President, made during the existing rebellion having reference to 
slaves, so long and so far as not modified or declared void by de- 
cision of the Supreme Court.” 


Such a State government was not in the interest of the 
people, but in the interest of the United States Government. 
The true republican organization, which had been “instituted ” 
by the free “consent of the governed to effect their safety and 
happiness,” had been repudiated by the Government of the 
United States as in rebellion to it ; and this fiction had been set 
up, not by the free consent of the people, which alone could 
give to it any “just powers,” not “to effect their safety and 
happiness,” for which alone a republican State government can 
be instituted, but solely to secure the safety and supremacy of 
the Government of the United States. The qualification of the 
voter was prescribed by the United States Government, and the 
oath required him to recognize allegiance to the Union as su- 
preme over that to the State of which he was a citizen. Thus 
the voters under the State government of Virginia were re- 
quired first to protect the Government of the United States, 


310 . RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and then they were at liberty to look after their own interests 
through the State government. 

Now, it is charged that such acts on the part of the United 
States Government were not only entirely unconstitutional, but 
they caused the complete subversion of the States. The Con- 
stitution of the United States knows States in the Union only 
as they are republican States. The Government of the United 
States was conscious of this fact, and publicly recognized it when 
it promised to guarantee a republican form of government to 
each one that it sought to reconstruct. But it violated the Con- 
stitution when it sought to place in the Union mere fictions 
which had not the first element of a republic, which were 
groundless fabrications of its own minions that could not have 
existed a day without the military support which they received. 
Further, it is to be remembered that it does not come within 
the grants of the Constitution, consequently not within the pow- 
ers of the Government of the United States, to institute a re- 
publican form of government at any time or in any place. 
Such an act is neither contemplated nor known in the Consti- 
tution, as such a government can be instituted only by the free 
consent of those who are to be governed by it. Any interfer- 
ence on the part of the United States to limit, modify, or con- 
trol this consent goes directly to the nature and objects of the 
State government, and it ceases to be republican. To admit a 
State under such a government is entirely unauthorized, revo- 
lutionary, subversive of the Constitution, and destructive of the 
Union of States. 


1862] — DONE ENOUGH FOR GLORY. 811 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Address to the Army of Eastern Virginia by the President—Army of General Pope. 
—Position of McClellan— Advance of General Jackson.—Atrocious Orders of 
General Pope.—Letter of McClellan on the Conduct of the War.—Letter of the 
President to General Lee.—Battle of Cedar Run.—Results of the Engagement.— 
Reénforcements to the Enemy.—Second Battle of Manassas.—Capture of Ma- 
nassas Junction.—Captured Stores.—The Old Battle-Field—Advance of Gen- 
eral Longstreet.—Attack on him.—Attack on General Jackson.—Darkness of 
the Night.—Battle at Ox Hill—Losses of the Enemy. 


Tuts defeat of McClellan’s army led me to issue the follow- 
ing address : 

“Rricumonp, July 5, 1862. 
“To the Army of Eastern Virginia. 

* Sotprers: I congratulate you on the series of brilliant victo- 
ries which, under the favor of Divine Providence, you have lately 
won, and, as the President of the Confederate States, do heartily 
tender to you the thanks of the country, whose just cause you 
have so skillfully and heroically served. Ten days ago an invad- 
ing army, vastly superior to you in numbers and the materials of 
war, closely beleaguered your capital and vauntingly proclaimed 
its speedy conquest; you marched to attack the enemy in his 
intrenchments ; with well-directed movements and death-defying 
valor you charged upon him in his strong positions, drove him 
from field to field over a distance of more than thirty-five miles, 
and despite his reénforcements compelled him to seek safety under 
the cover of his gunboats, where he now lies cowering before the 
army so lately derided and threatened with entire subjugation. 
The fortitude with which you have borne toil and privation, the 
gallantry with which you have entered into each successive battle, 
must have been witnessed to be fully appreciated ; but a grateful 
people will not fail to recognize you, and to bear you in loved 
remembrance. Well may it be said of you that you have ‘done 
enough for glory’ ; but duty to a suffering country and to the cause 
of constitutional liberty claims from you yet further effort. Let it 
be your pride to relax in nothing which can promote your future 
efficiency ; your one great object being to drive the invader from 
your soil, and, carrying your standards beyond the outer bounda- 


312 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ries of the Confederacy, to wring from an unscrupulous foe the 
recognition of your birthright, community independence. 
“ JEFFERSON Davis.” 


After the retreat of General McClellan to Westover, his 
army remained inactive about a month. His front was closely 
watched by a brigade of cavalry, and preparations made to 
resist a renewal of his attempt upon Richmond from his new 
base. The main body of our army awaited the development of 
his intentions, and no important event took place. 

Meantime, another army of the enemy, under Major-General 
Pope, advanced southward from Washington, and crossed the 
Rappahannock as if to seize Gordonsville, and move thence 
upon Richmond. Contemporaneously the enemy appeared in 
force at Fredericksburg, and threatened the railroad from Gor- 
donsville to Richmond, apparently for the purpose of codp- 
erating with the movements of General Pope. To meet the 
advance of the latter, and restrain, as far as possible, the atroci- 
ties which he threatened to perpetrate upon our defenseless 
citizens, General Jackson, with his own and Ewell’s division, 
was ordered to proceed on July 18th toward Gordonsville. 

The nature of the atrocities here alluded to may be inferred 
from the orders of Major-General Pope, which were as follows: 


“ HapquartTers or THE ARMY OF VIRGINIA, WASHINGTON, July 18, 1862. 
“ (GmneRAL Orpers, No. 5.) 

“Hereafter, as far as practicable, the troops of this command 
will subsist upon the country in which their operations are carried 
on. In all cases supplies for this purpose will be taken by the 
officers to whose department they properly belong, under the or- 
ders of the commanding officer of the troops for whose use they 
are intended. Vouchers will be given to the owners, stating on 
their face that they will be payable at the close of the war upon 
sufficient testimony being furnished that such owners have been 
loyal citizens of the United States since the date of the vouch- 
ere Ss 4 

“By command of Major-General Pope : 

“Grorcr D. Ruecres, 
“Colonel, A. A.-General, and Chief of Staff.” 


1862] THE HOUSE SHALL BE RAZED. 313 


“ HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY oF VirGintA, July 18, 1862. 
“(GENERAL Orpers, No. 6.) 


“Hereafter, in any operations of the cavalry forces in this 
command, no supply or baggage trains of any description will be 
used, unless so stated especially in the order for the movement. 
Two days’ cooked rations will be carried on the persons of the 
men, and all villages and neighborhoods through which they pass 
will be laid under contribution in the manner specified by General 
Orders, No. 5, current series, from these headquarters, for the sub- 
sistence of men and horses. . . . ; 

“ By command of Major-General Pope: 

“GuroreEe D. Rueerzs, 
“Colonel, A. A.-General, and Chief of Staff?” 


“ArapquarTers ARMY OF VirGinia, WasuinerTon, July 18, 1862. 
“(GENERAL Orpers, No. 7.) 


“The people of the Valley of the Shenandoah and throughout 
the region of operations of this army, living along the lines of 
railroad and telegraph, and along routes of travel in the rear of 
United States forces, are notified that they will be held responsi- 
ble for any injury done the track, line, or road, or for any attacks 
upon the trains or straggling soldiers, by bands of guerrillas in 
their neighborhood. . . . Evil-disposed persons in the rear of our 
armies, who do not themselves engage directly in these lawless 
acts, encourage by refusing to interfere, or give any information 
by which such acts can be prevented or the perpetrators punished. 
Safety of the life and property of all persons living in the rear of 
our advancing army depends upon the maintenance of peace and 
quiet among themselves, and upon the unmolested movements 
through their midst of all pertaining to the military service. 
They are to understand distinctly that the security of travel is 
their only warrant of personal safety. ... If a soldier or legiti- 
mate follower of the army be fired upon from any house, the house 
shall be razed to the ground and the inhabitants sent prisoners to 
the headquarters of this army. If such an outrage occur at any 
place distant from settlements, the people within five miles around 
shall be held accountable, and made to pay an indemnity sufficient 
for the case; and any person detected in such outrages, either 


314 RISE. AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


during the act or at any time afterward, shall be shot, without 
waiting civil process... . 
“ By command of Major-General Pope : 
“GrorcEe D. Ruaetzs, Colonel.” 


“Hrapquarters Army or VirGinia, WasHincrTon, July 23, 1862. 
“ (GENERAL Orpers, No. 11.) 

“ Commanders of army corps, divisions, brigades, and detached 
commands will proceed immediately to arrest all disloyal male 
citizens within their lines, or within their reach in the rear of their 
respective stations. 

“Such as are willing to take the oath of allegiance to the 
United States, and will furnish sufficient security for its observ- 
ance, shall be permitted to remain at their homes, and pursue in 
good faith their accustomed avocations. ‘Those who refuse shall 
be conducted south beyond the extreme pickets of the army, and 
be notified that, if found again anywhere within our lines or at 
any point in the rear, they will be considered spies, and subjected 
to the extreme rigor of the military law. .. . 

“ By command of Major-General Pope : 

“GuorcEe D. RuGGEs, 
“Colonel, A. A.-General, and Chief of Staff.” 


Thus was announced a policy of pillage, outrage upon un- 
armed, peaceable people, arson, and ruthless insult to the de- 
fenseless. Had the vigor of the campaign been equal to the 
bombastic manifesto of this disgrace to the profession of arms, 
the injuries inflicted would have been more permanent; the 
conduct could scarcely have been more brutal. 

In recurring to the letter of General George B. McClellan, 
written at “Camp near Harrison’s Landing, Virginia, July 7, 
1862,” to the President of the United States, one must be struck 
with the strong contrast between the suggestions of General 
McClellan and the orders of General Pope. The inquiry natu- 
rally arises, Was it because of this difference that Pope had been 
assigned to the command of the Army of Virginia? McClellan 
wrote : 


“This rebellion has assumed the character of a war; as such 
it should be regarded, and it should be conducted upon the high- 


1862] THE MOST SHAMEFUL CHAPTERS. 815 


est principles known to Christian civilization. It should not be a 
war looking to the subjugation of the people of any State, in any 
event. It should not be at all a war upon population, but against 
armed forces and political organizations. Neither confiscation of 
property, political executions of persons, territorial organizations 
of States, or forcible abolition of slavery, should be contemplated 
for a moment. 

“Tn prosecuting the war, all private property and unarmed per- 
sons should be strictly protected, subject only to the necessity of 
military operations ; all private property taken for military use 
should be paid or receipted for; pillage and waste should be 
treated as high crimes; all unnecessary trespass sternly prohib- 
ited, and offensive demeanor by the military toward citizens 
promptly rebuked. Military arrests should not be tolerated, ex- 
cept in places where active hostilities exist ; and oaths, not re- 
quired by enactments constitutionally, should be neither demanded 
nor received.” 


Had these views been accepted, and the conduct of the 
Government of the United States been in accordance with 
them, the most shameful chapters in American history could 
not have been written, and some of the more respectable news- 
papers of the North would not have had the apprehensions 
they expressed of the evils which would befall the country 
when an army habituated to thieving should be disbanded. 

On the reception of copies of the orders issued by General 
Pope, inserted above, I addressed to General Lee, commanding 
our army in Virginia, the following letter: 


“Ricumonp, Vireinia, July 31, 1862. 

“Sir: On the 22d of this month a cartel for a general ex- 
change of prisoners of war was signed between Major-General D. 
H. Hill, in behalf of the Confederate States, and Major-General 
John A. Dix, in behalf of the United States. 

“By the terms of that cartel, it is stipulated that all prisoners of 
war hereafter taken shall be discharged on parole until exchanged. 

“Scarcely had that cartel been signed, when the military au- 
thorities of the United States commenced a practice changing the 
character of the war, from such as becomes civilized nations, into 
a campaign of indiscriminate robbery and murder. 


316 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“The general order issued by the Secretary of War of the 
United States, in the city of Washington, on the very day that the 
cartel was signed in Virginia, directs the military commanders of 
the United States to take the private property of our people for 
the convenience and use of their armies, without compensation. 

“The general order issued by Major-General Pope, on the 23d 
of July, the day after the signing of the cartel, directs the mur- 
der of our peaceful inhabitants as spies, if found quietly tilling 
their farms in his rear, even outside of his lines ; and one of his 
brigadier-generals, Steinwehr, has seized upon innocent and peace- 
ful inhabitants, to be held as hostages, to the end that they may 
be murdered in cold blood if any of his soldiers are killed by some 
unknown persons, whom he designates as ‘ bushwhackers.’ 

“Under this state of facts, this Government has issued the in- 
closed general order, recognizing General Pope and his commis- 
sioned officers to be in the position which they have chosen for 
themselves, that of robbers and murderers, and not that of pub- 
lic enemies, entitled, if captured, to be considered as prisoners of 
war. 

“We find ourselves driven by our enemies in their steady prog- 
ress toward a practice which we abhor, and which we are vainly 
struggling toavoid. Some of the military authorities of the United 
States seem to suppose that better success will attend a savage war 
in which no quarter is to be given and no sex to be spared than 
has hitherto been secured by such hostilities as are alone recog- 
nized to be lawful by civilized men in modern times. 

“For the present, we renounce our right of retaliation on the 
innocent, and shall continue to treat the private enlisted soldiers 
of General Pope’s army as prisoners of war; but if, after notice 
to the Government at Washington of our confining repressive 
measures to the punishment only of commissioned officers, who 
are willing participants in these crimes, these savage practices 
are continued, we shall reluctantly be forced to the last resort 
of accepting the war on the terms chosen by our foes, until the 
outraged voice of a common humanity forces a respect for the 
recognized rules of war. 

“While these facts would justify our refusal to execute the 
generous cartel, by which we have consented to liberate an excess 
of thousands of prisoners held by us beyond the number held by 
the enemy, a sacred regard to plighted faith, shrinking from the 


1862] SLAUGHTER MOUNTAIN CONFLICT. 317 


mere semblance of breaking a promise, prevents our resort to this 
extremity. Nor do we desire to extend to any other forces of the 
enemy the punishment merited alone by General Pope and such 
commissioned officers as choose to participate in the execution of 
his infamous orders. 

“You are therefore instructed to communicate to the com- 
mander-in-chief of the armies of the United States the contents of 
this letter and a copy of the inclosed general order, to the end 
that he may be notified of our intention not to consider any offi- 
cers hereafter captured from General Pope’s army as prisoners of 
war. Very respectfully, yours, etc., 

“JEFFERSON Davis.” 


When General Jackson arrived near Gordonsville on July 19, 
1862, he was at his request reénforced by Major-General A. P. 
Hill. Receiving information that only a part of General Pope’s 
army was at Culpeper Court-House, General Jackson, hoping 
to defeat it before reénforcements should arrive, moved in that 
direction the divisions of Ewell, Hill, and Jackson, on August 
7th, from their encampments near Gordonsville. As the ene- 
my’s cavalry displayed unusual activity and the train of Jack- 
son’s division was seriously endangered, Generak*Lawton with 
his brigade was ordered to guard it. On August 9th Jackson 
arrived within eight miles of Culpeper Court-House and found 
the foe in his front near Cedar Run and a short distance west 
and north of Slaughter Mountain. When first seen, the cav- 
alry in large force occupied a ridge to the right of the road. 
A battery opened upon it and soon forced it to retire. Our 
fire was responded to by some guns beyond the ridge from 
which the advance had just been driven. Soon after, the 
cavalry returned to the position where it was first seen, and 
General Early was ordered forward, keeping near the Cul- 
peper road, while General Ewell with his two remaining bri- 
gades diverged from the road to the right, advancing along 
the western slope of Slaughter Mountain. General Early, form- 
ing his brigade in line of battle, moved into the open field, and, 
passing a short distance to the right of the road but parallel to 
it, pushed forward, driving the opposing cavalry before him to 
the crest of a hill which overlooked the ground between his 


+ 


318 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


troops and the opposite hill, along which the enemy’s batteries — 
were posted, and opened upon him as soon as he reached the 
eminence. Early retired his troops under the protection of 
the hill, and a small battery of ours, in advance of his right, 
opened. Meantime General Winder with Jackson’s: brigade 
was placed on the left of the road, Campbell’s brigade, Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Garnett commanding, being on the left, Taliaferro’s 
parallel to the road, supporting the batteries, and Winder’s own 
brigade under Colonel Roland in reserve. The battle opened 
with a fierce fire of artillery, which continued about two hours, 
during which Brigadier-General Charles S. Winder, while di- 
recting the positions of his batteries, received a wound, from 
the effects of which he expired in a few hours. General Jack- 
son thus spoke of him in his report : 


“Tt is difficult, within the proper reserve of an official report, 
to do justice to the merits of this accomplished officer. Urged by 
the medical director to take no part in the movements of the day, 
because of the then enfeebled state of his health, his ardent patriot- 
ism and military pride could bear no restraint. Richly endowed 
with those qualities of mind and ‘person which fit an officer for 
command, and which attract the admiration and excite the enthu- 
siasm of troops, he was rapidly rising to the front rank of his pro- 
fession. His loss has been severely felt.” 


Charles Winder had attracted my special notice, when I was 
Secretary of War of the United States, by an act of heroism 
and devotion to duty which it gives me pleasure to record. A 
regiment of artillery, in which he was a second-lieutenant, being 
under orders for California, embarked on the steamer San Fran- 
cisco, and in a storm became disabled ; drifting helplessly at sea, 
_she was approached by a bark which, to give succor, hove to. 
Not being able to receive all the passengers, the commissioned 
officers left, as the Colonel naively reported, in the order of 
their rank. Winder alone remained with the troops; in great 
discomfort and by strenuous exertion the wreck was kept afloat 
until a vessel bound for Liverpool came to the relief of the suf- 
ferers. 

Arriving at Liverpool, Winder left the soldiers there, went 


, 
1862} CAME GALLANTLY INTO ACTION. 819 


' tothe American consul in London, got means to provide for 
their needs, and returned with them. Soon afterward, four regi- 
ments were added to the army, and, for his good conduct so full 
of promise, he was nominated to be a captain of infantry, and, 
notwithstanding his youth, was confirmed and commissioned 
accordingly. He died manifesting the same spirit as on the 
wreck—that which holds life light when weighed against honor. 

The enemy’s infantry advanced about 5 p. m., and attacked 
General Early in front, while another body, concealed by the 
inequality of the ground, moved upon his right. Thomas’s bri- 
gade, of A. P. Hill’s division, which had now arrived, was sent 
to his support, and the contest soon became animated. In the 
mean time the main body of the opposing army, under cover 
of a wood and the undulations of the field, gained the left of 
Jackson’s division, now commanded by Brigadier-General Tal- 
iaferro, and poured a destructive fire into its flank and rear. 
Campbell’s brigade fell back in confusion, exposing the flank of 
Taliaferro’s, which also gave way, as did the left of Harly’s. 
The rest of his brigade, however, firmly held its ground. 

Winder’s brigade, with Branch’s, of A. P. Hill’s division, on 
its right, advanced promptly to the support of Jackson’s divis- 
ion, and after a sanguinary struggle the assailants were repulsed 
with loss. Pender’s and Archer’s brigades, also of Hill’s divis- 
ion, came up on the left of Winder’s, and by a general charge 
the foe was driven back in confusion, leaving the ground coy- 
ered with his dead and wounded. General Ewell, with the two 
brigades on the extreme right, had been prevented from advanc- 
ing by the fire of our own artillery, which swept his approach to 
the enemy’s left. The obstacle being now removed, he pressed 
forward under a hot fire, and came gallantly into action. Re- 
pulsed and vigorously followed on our left and center, and now 
hotly pressed on our right, the whole line of the enemy gave 
way, and was soon in full retreat. Night had now set in, but 
General Jackson, desiring to enter Culpeper Court-House be- 
fore morning, determined to pursue. Hill’s division led the 
advance; but, owing to the darkness, it was compelled to move 
slowly and with caution. 

The enemy was found about a mile and a half in the rear of 


390 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the field of battle, and information was received that reénforce- 


ments had arrived. General Jackson thereupon halted for the 
night, and the next day, becoming satisfied that the enemy’s force 
had been so largely increased as to render a further advance on 
his part imprudent, he sent his wounded to the rear, and pro- 
ceeded to bury the dead and collect the arms from the battle- 
field. On the 11th the enemy asked and received permission 
to bury those of his dead not already interred. General Jack- 
son remained in position during the day, and at night returned 
to the vicinity of Gordonsville. In this engagement 400 pris- 
oners, including a brigadier-general were captured, and 5,800 
stand of small-arms, one piece of artillery, several caissons, 
and three colors, fell into our hands. Our killed were 229, 
wounded 1,047, total 1,276. The loss on the other side exceeded 
" 1,500, of whom nearly 300 were taken prisoners. 

The victory of Cedar Run effectually checked the invader 
for the time; but it soon became apparent that his army was 
receiving a large increase. The corps of Major-General Burn- 
side, from North Carolina, which had reached Fredericksburg, 
was reported to have moved up the Rappahannock, a few days 
after the battle, to unite with General Pope, and a part of 
General McClellan’s army had left Westover for the same pur- 
pose. It therefore seemed that active operations on the James 
were no longer contemplated, and that the most effectual way 
to relieve Richmond from any danger of an attack would be to 
reénforce General Jackson and advance upon General Pope. 

Accordingly, on August 13th, Longstreet, Anderson, and 
Stuart were ordered to proceed to Gordonsville. On the 16th 
the troops began to move from the vicinity of Gordonsville 
toward the Rapidan, on. the north side of which, extending 
along the Orange and Alexandria Railroad in the direction 
of Culpeper Court-House, the army of invasion lay in great 
force. It was determined, with the cavalry, to destroy the 
railroad-bridge over the Rappahannock in rear of the enemy, 
while Jackson and Longstreet crossed the Rapidan and at- 
tacked his left flank. But, the enemy becoming apprised of 
our design, hastily retreated beyond the Rappahannock. On 
the 21st our forces moved toward that river, and some sharp 


1862] DRIVEN OVER THE RIVER. 391 


skirmishing ensued with our cavalry that had crossed at Bey- 
erly’s Ford. As it had been determined in the mean time not 
to attempt the passage of the river at that point with the army, 
the cavalry withdrew to the south side. Soon afterward the 
enemy appeared in great strength on the opposite bank, and 

an active fire was kept up during the rest of the day between 
his artillery and the batteries attached to Jackson’s leading 
division, under Brigadier-General Taliaferro. 

- But, as our positions on the south bank of the Rappahannock 
were commanded by those on the north bank, and which served 
to guard all the fords, General Lee determined to seek a more 
favorable place to cross higher up the river, and thus gain his 
adversary’s right. Accordingly, General Longstreet was di- 
rected to leave Kelly’s Ford on the 21st, and take the position 
in the vicinity of Beverly’s Ford and the Orange and Alexan- 
dria Railroad bridge, then held by Jackson, in order to mask the 
movement of the latter, who was instructed to ascend the river. 
On the 22d Jackson proceeded up the Rappahannock, leaving 
Trimble’s brigade near Freeman’s Ford to protect his train. In 
the afternoon Longstreet sent General Hood with his own and 
Whiting’s brigade to relieve Trimble. Hood had just reached 
the position, when he and Trimble were attacked by a consider- 
able force which had crossed at Freeman’s Ford. After a short 
but spirited engagement, the enemy was driven precipitately 
over the river with heavy loss. General Jackson attempted to 
cross at Warrenton Springs Ford, but was interrupted by a 
heavy rain, which caused the river to rise so rapidly as to be 
impassable for infantry and artillery, and he withdrew the 

troops that had reached the opposite side. General Stuart, who 
had been directed to cut the railroad in rear of General Pope’s 
army, crossed the Rappahannock on the morning of the 22d, 
about six miles above the Springs, with parts of Lee’s and Rob- 
ertson’s brigades. He reached Catlet’s Station that night, but 
was prevented destroying the railroad-bridge there by the same 
storm that arrested Jackson’s movements. He captured more 
than three hundred prisoners, including a number of officers. 
Apprehensive of the effect of the rain upon the streams, he re- 
crossed the Rappahannock at Warrenton Springs. The rise of 

68 


399 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the river, rendering the lower fords impassable, enabled the 
enemy to concentrate his main body opposite General Jackson, 
and on the 24th Longstreet was ordered by General Lee to pro- 
ceed to his support. Although retarded by the swollen condi- 
tion of Hazel River and other tributaries of the Rappahannock, 
he reached Jeffersonton in the afternoon. General Jackson’s 
command lay between that place and the Spring’s Ford, and a 
warm cannonade was progressing between the batteries of Gen- 
eral A. P. Hill’s division and those in his front. The enemy 
was massed between Warrenton and the Springs, and guarded 
the fords of the Rappahannock as far above as Waterloo. ° 

The army of General McClellan had left Westover, and a 
part had marched to join General Pope. It was reported that 
the rest would soon follow. The greater part of the army of 
General Cox had also been withdrawn from the Kanawha Val- 
ley for the same purpose. Two brigades of D. H. Hill’s di- 
vision, under General Ripley, had already been ordered from 
Richmond, and the remainder were to follow; also, McLaws’s 
division, two brigades under General Walker, and Hampton’s 
cavalry brigade. In pursuance of the plan of operations now 
determined upon, Jackson was directed, on the 25th, to cross 
above Waterloo and move around the enemy’s right, so as to 
strike the Orange and Alexandria Railroad in his rear. Long- 
street, in the mean time, was to divert his attention by threat- 
ening him in front, and to follow Jackson as soon as the latter 
should be sufficiently advanced. 

General Jackson crossed the Rappahannock on the 25th, 
about four miles above Waterloo, and, after sunset on the 26th, 
reached the railroad at Bristoe Station. At Gainesville he was 
joined by General Stuart, with the brigades of Robertson and 
Fitzhugh Lee, who continued with him during his operations, 
and effectually guarded both his flanks. 

General Jackson was now between the large army of Gen- 
eral Pope and Washington City, without having encountered 
any considerable force. At Bristoe two trains of cars were cap- 
tured and a few prisoners taken. Determining, notwithstand- 
ing the darkness of the night and the long and arduous march 
of the day, to capture the depot of the enemy at Manassas 


1862] WERE BROKEN AND REPULSED. 323 


Junction, about seven miles distant, General Trimble volun- 
teered to proceed at once to that place with the Twenty-first 
North Carolina and the Twenty-first Georgia Regiments. The 
offer was accepted, and, to render success more certain, General 
Stuart was directed to accompany the expedition with part of 
his cavalry. About midnight the place was taken with little 
difficulty. Eight pieces of artillery, with their horses, ammu- 
nition, and equipments were captured ; more than three hundred 
prisoners, one hundred and seventy-five horses, besides those 
belonging to the artillery, two hundred new tents, and immense 
quantities of commissary and quartermaster’s stores, fell into 
our hands. 

Ewell’s division, with the Fifth Virginia Cavalry under Colo- 
nel Rosser, were left at Bristoe Station, and the rest of the 
command arrived at the Junction early on the 27th. Soona 
considerable force of the enemy, under Brigadier-General Tay- 
lor, of New Jersey, approached from the direction of Alexan- 
dria, and pushed forward boldly to recover the stores. After 
a sharp engagement he was routed and driven back, leaving 
his killed and wounded on the field. The troops remained 
at Manassas Junction during the day, and supplied themselves 
with everything they required. In the afternoon, two brigades 
advanced against General Ewell, at Bristoe, from the direction 
of Warrenton Junction, but were broken and repulsed. Their 
place was soon supplied with fresh troops, but it was apparent 
that the commander had now become aware of the situation of 
affairs, and had turned upon General Jackson with his whole 
force. General Ewell, perceiving the strength of the column, 
withdrew and rejoined General Jackson, having first destroyed 
the railroad-bridge over Broad Run. The enemy halted at 
Bristoe. General Jackson, having a much inferior force to 
General Pope, retired from Manassas Junction and took a posi- 
tion west of the turnpike-road from Warrenton to Alexandria, 
where he could more readily unite with the approaching column 
of Longstreet. Having supplied the wants of his troops, he was 
compelled, through lack of transportation, to destroy the rest of 
the captured property. Many thousand pounds of bacon, a 
thousand barrels of corned beef, two thousand barrels of salt 


394. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


pork, and two thousand barrels of flour, besides other property 
of great value, were burned. 

During the night of the 27th of August Taliaferro’s division 
crossed the turnpike near Groveton and halted on the west side, 
near the battle-field of July 21, 1861, where it was joined on 
the 28th by the divisions of Hill and Ewell. During the after- 
noon the enemy, approaching from the direction of Warrenton 
down the turnpike toward Alexandria, exposed his left flank, 
and General Jackson determined to attack him. A fierce and 
sanguinary conflict ensued which continued until about 9 P.m., 
when he slowly fell back and left us in possession of the field. 
The loss on both sides was heavy. On the next morning (the 
29th) the enemy had taken a position to interpose his army be- 
tween General Jackson and Alexandria, and about 10 a. m. 
opened with artillery upon the right of Jackson’s line. The 
troops of the latter were disposed in rear of Groveton, along 
the line of the unfinished branch of the Manassas Gap Rail- 
road, and extending from a point a short distance west of the 
turnpike toward Sudley Mill, Jackson’s division under Brigadier- 
General Starke being on the right, Ewell’s under General Law- 
ton in the center, and A. P. Hill on the left. The attacking col- 
umns were evidently concentrating on Jackson with the design 
of overwhelming him before the arrival of Longstreet. This 
latter officer left his position opposite Warrenton Springs on the 
26th and marched to join Jackson. On the 28th, arriving at 
‘Thoroughfare Gap, he found the enemy prepared to dispute his 
progress. Holding the eastern extremity of the pass with a large 
force, the enemy directed a heavy fire of artillery upon the road 
leading to it and upon the sides of the mountain. An attempt 
was made to turn his right, but, before our troops reached their 
destination, he advanced to the attack, and, being vigorously re- 
pulsed, withdrew to his position at the eastern end of the Gap, 
keeping up an active fire of artillery until dark. He then re- 
treated. On the morning of the 29th Longstreet’s command 
resumed its march, the sound of cannon at Manassas announc- 
ing that Jackson was already engaged. The head of the column 
came upon the field in rear of the enemy’s left, which had al- 
ready opened with artillery upon Jackson’s right, as above stated. 


1862] NO SERIOUS ATTACK WAS MADE. 325 


Longstreet immediately placed some of his batteries in posi- 
~ tion, but, before he could complete his dispositions to attack the 
force before him, it’ withdrew to another part of the field. He 
then took position on the right of Jackson, Hood’s two bri- 
gades, supported by Evans, being deployed across the turnpike 
and at right angles to it. These troops were supported on the 
left by three brigades under General Wilcox, and by a like 
force on the right under General Kemper. D. R. Jones’s divis- 
ion formed the extreme right of the line, resting on the Ma- 
nassas Gap Railroad. The cavalry guarded our right and left 
flanks, that on the right being under General Stuart in person. 
After the arrival of Longstreet the enemy changed his position 
and began to concentrate opposite Jackson’s left, opening a 
brisk artillery-fire, which was responded to by some of A. P. 
Hill’s batteries. 

Soon afterward General Stuart reported the approach of a 
large force from the direction of Bristoe Station, threatening 
Longstreet’s right. But no serious attack was made, and, after 
firing a few shots, that force withdrew. Meanwhile a large col- 
umn advanced to assail the left of Jackson’s: position, occupied 
by the division of General A. P. Hill. The attack was received 
by his troops with their accustomed steadiness, and the battle 
raged with great fury. The enemy was repeatedly repulsed, 
but again pressed on the attack with fresh troops. Once he 
succeeded in penetrating an interval between General Gregg’s 
brigade on the extreme left and that of General Thomas, but 
was quickly driven back with great slaughter by the Fourteenth 
South Carolina Regiment, then in reserve, and the Forty-ninth 
Georgia of Thomas’s brigade. The contest was close and ob- 
stinate; the combatants sometimes delivered their fire at a few 
paces. General Gregg, who was most exposed, was reénforced 
by Hays’s brigade under Colonel Forno. Gregg had successfully 
and most gallantly resisted the attack until the ammunition of 
his brigade was exhausted and all his field-officers but two killed 
or wounded. The reénforcement was of like high-tempered 
steel, and together in hand-to-hand fight they held their post 
until they were relieved, after several hours of severe fight- 
ing, by Early’s brigade and the Eighth Louisiana Regiment. 


396 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General Early drove the enemy back with heavy loss, and 
pursued about two hundred yards beyond the line of battle, 
when he was recalled to the position on the railroad, where 
Thomas, Pender, and Archer had firmly held their ground 
against every attack. While the battle was raging on Jackson’s 
left, Hood and Evans were ordered by Longstreet to advance, 
but, before the order could be obeyed, Hood was himself at- 
tacked, and his command became at once warmly engaged. The 
enemy was repulsed by Hood after a severe contest, and fell 
back, closely followed by our troops. 

The battle continued until 9 p.m, the foe retreating until 
he reached a strong position, which he held with a large force. 
Our troops remained in their advanced position until early next 
morning, when they were withdrawn to their first line. One 
piece of artillery, several stands of colors, and a number of pris- 
oners were captured. Our loss was severe. On the morning 
of the 80th the enemy again advanced, and skirmishing began 
along the line. The troops of Jackson and Longstreet main- 
tained their position of the previous day. At noon the firing 
of the batteries ceased, and all was quiet for some hours. 

About 8 p. m. the enemy, having massed his troops in front of 
General Jackson, advanced against his position in strong force. 
His front line pushed forward until it was engaged at close 
quarters by Jackson’s troops, when its progress was checked, 
and a fierce and bloody struggle ensued. A second and third 
line of great strength moved up to support the first, but in doing 
so came within easy range of a position a little in advance of 
Longstreet’s left. He immediately ordered up two batteries, 
and, two others being thrown forward about the same time by 
Colonel S. D. Lee, the supporting lines were broken, and fell 
back in confusion under their well-direeted and destructive fire. 
Their repeated efforts to rally were unavailing, and Jackson’s 
troops, being thus relieved from the pressure of overwhelming 
numbers, began to press steadily forward, driving everything 
before them. The enemy retreated in confusion, suffering se- 
verely from our artillery, which advanced as he retired. Gen-. 
eral Longstreet, anticipating the order for a general advance, 
now threw his whole command against the center and left. 


1862] THE LINE OF BATTLE. 397 


The whole line swept steadily on, driving the opponents with 
great carnage from each successive position, until 10 p. u., when 
darkness put an end to the battle and the pursuit. 

The obscurity of the night and the uncertainty of the fords 
of Bull Run rendered it necessary to suspend operations until 
morning, when the cavalry, being pushed forward, discovered 
that the retreat had continued to the strong position of Centre- 
ville, about four miles beyond Bull Run. The prevalence of a 
heavy rain, which began during the night, threatened to render 
Bull Run impassable, and to impede our movements. Long- 
street remained on the battle-field to engage attention and to pro- 
tect parties for the burial of the dead and the removal of the 
wounded, while Jackson proceeded by Sudley’s Ford to the Lit- 
tle River turnpike to turn the enemy’s right, and intercept his 
retreat to Washington. Jackson’s progress was retarded by the 
inclemency of the weather and the fatigue of his troops. He 
reached the turnpike in the evening, and the next day (Sep- 
tember 1st) advanced by that road toward Fairfax Court-House. 
The enemy in the mean time was falling back rapidly toward 
Washington, and had thrown a strong force to Germantown, 
on the Little River turnpike, to cover his line of retreat from 
Centreville. The advance of Jackson encountered him at Ox 
Hill, near Germantown, about 5 p.m. Line of battle was at 
once formed, and two brigades were thrown forward to attack 
and ascertain the strength of the position. A cold and drench- 
ing rain-storm drove in the faces of our troops as they ad- 
vanced and gallantly engaged. They were subsequently sup- 
ported, and the conflict was obstinately maintained until dark, 
when the enemy retreated, having lost two general officers, one 
of whom—Major-General Kearney—was left dead on the field. 
Longstreet’s command arrived after the action was over, and 
the next morning it was found that the retreat had been so rapid 
that the attempt to intercept was abandoned. The proximity * 
of the fortifications around Alexandria and Washington was 
enough to prevent further pursuit. Our army rested during the 
2d near Chantilly, the retreating foe being followed only by 
our cavalry, who continued to harass him until he reached the 
shelter of his intrenchments. 


398 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


| 

In the series of engagements on the plains of Manassas more 
than seven thousand prisoners were taken, in addition to about 
two thousand wounded left in our hands. Thirty pieces of ar- 
tillery, upward of twenty thousand stand of small-arms, numer- 
ous colors, and a large amount of stores, besides those taken by 
General Jackson at Manassas Junction, were captured. 

Major-General Pope in his report says: 


“The whole force that I had at Centreville, as reported to me 
by the corps commanders, on the morning of the 1st of September, 
was as follows: McDowell’s corps, 10,000 men ; Sigel’s corps, about 
7,000 ; Heintzelman’s corps, about 6,000 ; Reno’s, 6,000 ; Banks’s, 
5,000 ; Sumner’s, 11,000; Porter’s, 10,000 ; Franklin’s, 8,000—in 
all, 63,000 men. . . . The small fraction of 20,500 men was all of 
the 91,000 veteran troops from Harrison’s Landing which ever 
drew trigger under my command.” 


Our losses in the engagement at Manassas Plains were con- 
siderable. The number killed was 1,090; wounded, 6,154— 
total, 7,244. The loss of the enemy in killed, wounded, and 
missing was estimated between 15,000 and 20,000. The strength 
of our army in July and September is stated on a preceding 


page. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


Return of the Enemy to Washington.—War transferred to the Frontier.—Condition 
of Maryland.—Crossing the Potomac.—Evacuation of Martinsburg.—Advance 
into Maryland.—Large Force of the Enemy.—Resistance at Boonesboro.—Sur- 
render of Harper’s Ferry.—Our Forces reach Sharpsburg.—Letter of the Presi- 
dent to General Lee.—Address of General Lee to the People.—Position of our 
Forces at Sharpsburg.—Battle of Sharpsburg.—Our Strength.—Forces with- 
drawn,—Casualties, 


Tur énemy having retired to the protection of the fortifica- 
tions around Washington and Alexandria, Lee’s army marched, 
on September 3d, toward Leesburg. The armies of Generals 
McClellan and Pope had now been brought back to the point 
from which they set out on the campaign of the spring and sum- 
mer. The objects of those campaigns had been frustrated, and 


1862] THE ARMY WAS PUT IN MOTION. 829 


the hostile designs against the coast of North Carolina and in 
~ western Virginia, thwarted by the withdrawal of the main body 
of the forces from those regions. 

Northeastern Virginia was freed from the presence of the 
invader. His forces had withdrawn to the intrenchments of 
Washington. Soon after the arrival of our army at Leesburg, 
information was received that the hostile troops which had oc- 
cupied Winchester had retired to Harper’s Ferry. The war was 
thus transferred from the interior to the frontier, and the sup- 
plies of rich and productive districts were made accessible to our 
army. To prolong a state of affairs, in every way desirable, and 
not to permit the season for active operations to pass without en- 
deavoring to impose further check on our assailant, the best 
course appeared to be the transfer of our army into Maryland. 
Although not properly equipped for invasion, lacking much of 
the material of war, and deficient in transportation, the troops 
poorly provided with clothing, and thousands of them without 
shoes, it was yet believed to be strong enough to detain the op- 
posing army upon the northern frontier until the approach of 
winter should render its advance into Virginia difficult, if not 
impracticable. 

The condition of Maryland encouraged the belief that the 
presence of our army, though numerically inferior to that of the 
North, would induce the Washington Government to retain all 
its available force to provide against contingencies which its 
conduct toward the people of that State gave reason to appre- 
hend. At the same time it was hoped that military success 
might afford us an opportunity to aid the citizens of Maryland 
in any efforts they should be disposed to make to recover their 
liberty. The difficulties that surrounded them were fully ap- 
‘preciated, and we expected to derive more assistance in the 
attainment of our object from the just fears of the Washington 
Government than from any active demonstration on the part ° 

of the people of Maryland, unless success should enable us to 
give them assurance of continued protection. Influenced by 
these considerations, the army was put in motion. 

_ It was decided to cross the Potomac east of the Blue Ridge, 
in order, by threatening Washington and Baltimore, to cause the 


330 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


enemy to withdraw from the south bank, where his presence 
endangered our communications and the safety of those engaged 
in the removal of our wounded and the captured property from 
the late battle-field. Having accomplished this result, it was 
proposed to move the army into western Maryland, establish 
our communication with Richmond through the Valley of the 
Shenandoah, and, by threatening Pennsylvania, induce the enemy 
to withdraw from our territory for the protection of his own. 

General D. H. Hill’s division, being in advance, crossed the 
Potomac, between September 4th and 7th, at the ford near 
Leesburg, and encamped in the vicinity of Frederick. It had 
been supposed that this advance would lead to the evacuation 
of Martinsburg and Harper’s Ferry, thus opening the line of 
communication through the Shenandoah Valley. This not hay- 
ing occurred, it became necessary to dislodge the garrisons 
from those positions before concentrating the army west of the 
mountains. For this purpose General Jackson marched very 
rapidly, crossed the Potomac near Williamsport on the 11th, 
sent Hill’s division directly to Martinsburg, and disposed of the 
rest of the command so as to cut off retreat to the westward. 
The enemy evacuated Martinsburg and retired to Harper’s Ferry 
on the night of the 11th, and Jackson entered the former on 
the 12th. Meanwhile General McLaws had been ordered to 
seize Maryland Heights on the north side of the Potomac, 
opposite Harper’s Ferry, and General Walker took possession 
of Loudon Heights, on the east side of the Shenandoah, where 
it unites with the Potomac, and was in readiness to open fire 
upon Harper’s Ferry. But McLaws found the heights in pos- 
session of the foe, with infantry and artillery, protected by in- 
trenchments. On the 13th he assailed the works, and after a 
spirited contest they were carried; the troops made good their. 
retreat to Harper’s Ferry, and on the next day its investment 
was complete. 

At the same time that the march of these troops upon Har- 
per’s Ferry began, the remainder of General Longstreet’s com- 
mand and the division of D. H. Hill crossed the South Moun- 
tain and moved toward Boonsboro. General Stuart with the 
cavalry remained east of the mountains to observe the enemy and 


/ 


1862] TO PUSH FORWARD RAPIDLY. 331 


retard his advance. Longstreet continued his march to Hagers- 
town, and Hill halted near Boonsboro to support the cavalry 
and to prevent the force invested at Harper’s Ferry from escap- 
ing through Pleasant Valley. The advance of the hostile army 
was then so slow as to justify the belief that the reduction of 
Harper’s Ferry would be accomplished and our troops concen- 
trated before they would be called upon to meet the foe. In 
that event it had not been intended to oppose his passage 
through South Mountain, as it was desired to engage him as 
far as possible from his base. But a copy of Lee’s order, direct- 
ing the movement of the army from Frederick, happening to 
fall into the hands of McClellan, disclosed to him the dispo- 
sition of our forces. He immediately began to push forward 
rapidly, and on the afternoon of the 13th was reported as ap- 
proaching the pass in South Mountain on the Boonsboro and 
Frederick road. General Stuart’s cavalry impeded his progress, 
and time was thus gained for preparations to oppose his advance. 

In Taylor’s “Four Years with General Lee” some facts 
relative to this lost order are stated. An order of battle was 
issued, stating in detail the position and duty assigned to each 
command of the army: 


“It was the custom to send copies of such orders, marked 
‘ confidential,’ to the commanders of separate corps or divisions 
only, and to place the address of such separate commander in the 
bottom left-hand corner of the sheet containing the order. Gen- 
eral D. H. Hill was in command of a division which had not been 
attached to nor incorporated with either of the two wings of the 
Army of Northern Virginia. A copy of the order was, therefore, 
in the usual course, sent to him. After the evacuation of Fred- 
erick City by our forces, a copy of General Lee’s order was found 
in a deserted camp by a soldier, and was soon in the hands of 
General McClellan. The copy of the order, it was stated at the 
time, was addressed to ‘General D. H. Hill, commanding division.’ 
General Hill has assured me that it could not have been his copy, 
because he still has the original order received by him in his pos- 
session.” * 


* To these remarks Colonel W. H. Taylor adds the following note: “ Colonel 
Venable, one of my associates on the staff of General Lec, says in regard to this 


339, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General D. H. Hill guarded the Boonsboro Gap, and Long- 
street was ordered to support him, in order to prevent a force 
from penetrating the mountains at this point, in the rear of 
McLaws, so as to relieve the garrison at Harper’s Ferry. arly 
on the 14th a large body of the enemy attempted to force its 
way to the rear of the position held by Hill, by a road south of 
the Boonsboro and Frederick turnpike. The small command 
of Hill, with Garland’s brigade, repelled the repeated assaults 
of the army, and held it in check for five hours. Longstreet, 
leaving a brigade at Hagerstown, hurried to the assistance of 
Hill, and reached the scene of action between 3 and 4 Pp. mM. 
The battle continued with great animation until night. On 
the south of the turnpike the assailant was driven back some 
distance, and his attack on the center repulsed with loss. Dark- 
ness put an end to the contest. 

The effort to force the pass of the mountain had failed, but. 
it was manifest that without reénforcements Lee could not haz- 
ard a renewal of the engagement; for McClellan, by his great 
superiority of numbers, could easily turn either flank. Infor- 
mation was also received that another large body of his troops 
had, during the afternoon, forced its way through Crampton 
Gap, only five miles in rear of McLaws. Under these cireum- 
stances it was determined to retire to Sharpsburg, where we 
would be on the flank and rear of the enemy should he move 
against McLaws, and where we could more readily unite with 
the rest of our army. This movement, skillfully and efficiently 
covered by the cavalry brigade of General Fitzhugh Lee, was 
accomplished without interruption. The advance of McClel- 
lan’s.army did not appear on the west side of the pass at Boons- 
boro until about 8 A. m. on the following morning. 

The resistance that our troops had offered there secured suf- 
ficient time to enable General Jackson to complete the reduc- 
matter: ‘This is very easily explained. One copy was sent directly to Hill from 
headquarters. General Jackson sent him a copy, as he regarded Hill in his com- 
mand. It is Jackson’s copy, in his own handwriting, which General Hill has, The 
other was undoubtedly left carelessly by some one at Hill’s quarters.’ Says Gen- 
eral McClellan, “ Upon learning the contents of this order, I at once gave orders 


for a vigorous pursuit.”—(General McClellan’s testimony, “Report on the Conduct 
of the War,” Part I, p. 440.) 


1862] TO THE PEOPLE OF MARYLAND. 333 


tion of Harper’s Ferry. The attack on the garrison began at 
dawn on the 15th. A rapid and vigorous fire was opened by 
the batteries of General Jackson, in conjunction with those on 
Maryland and Loudon Heights. In about two hours, the gar- 
rison, consisting of more than eleven thousand men, surren- 
dered. Seventy-three pieces of artillery, about thirteen thou- 
sand small-arms, and a large quantity of military stores fell 
into our hands. General A. P. Hill remained formally to re- 
ceive the surrender of the troops and to secure the captured 
property. 

The commands of Longstreet and D. H. Hill reached Sharps- 
burg on the morning of the 15th. General Jackson arrived early 
on the 16th, and General J. G. Walker came up in the after- 
noon. The movements of General McLaws were embarrassed 
by the presence of the enemy in Crampton Gap. He retained 
‘his position until the 14th, when, finding that he was not to be 
attacked, he gradually withdrew his command toward the Po- 
tomac, then crossed at Harper’s Ferry, and marched by way of 
Shepardstown. His progress was slow, and he did not reach the 
battle-field at Sharpsburg until some time after the engagement 
of the 17th began. 

At this time the letter, from which the following extract is 
made, was addressed by me to General R. E. Lee, commanding 
our forces in Maryland : 


“Sir : It is deemed proper that you should, in accordance with 
established usage, announce, by proclamation, to the people of 
Maryland, the motives and purposes of your presence among them 
at the head of an invading army ; and you are instructed in such 
proclamation to make known,” etc. 


In obedience to instructions, General Lee issued the follow- 
ing address: 

“ Heapquarters, ArMy or NorTHERN VIRGINIA, NEAR FREDERICK, t 
September 8, 1862. 

“To tur Prorie or Marytanp: It is right that you should 
know the purpose that has brought the army under my command 
within the limits of your State, so far as that purpose concerns 
yourselves. 


834 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“The people of the Confederate States have long watched, with 
the deepest sympathy, the wrongs and outrages that have been 
inflicted upon the citizens of a Commonwealth allied to the States 
of the South by the strongest social, political, and commercial ties, 
and reduced to the condition of a conquered province. 

“Under the pretense of supporting the Constitution, but in 
violation of its most valuable provisions, your citizens have been 
arrested and imprisoned upon no charge, and contrary to the forms 
of law. 

“ A faithful and manly protest against this outrage, made by a 
venerable and illustrious Marylander, to whom in his better days 
no citizen appealed for right in vain, was treated with scorn and 
contempt. 

“The government of your chief city has been usurped by armed 
strangers ; your Legislature has been dissolved by the unlawful 
arrest of its members ; freedom of the press and of speech has 
been suppressed ; words have been declared offenses by an arbi- 
trary decree of the Federal Executive ; and citizens ordered to 
be tried by military commissions for what they may dare to 
speak, , 

“Believing that the people of Maryland possess a spirit too 
lofty to submit to such a Government, the people of the South have 
long wished to aid you in throwing off this foreign yoke, to enable 
you again to enjoy the inalienable rights of freemen, and restore 
the independence and sovereignty of your State. 

“In obedience to this wish, our army has come among you, and 
is prepared to assist you with the power of its arms in regaining 
the rights of which you have been so unjustly despoiled. 

“This, citizens of Maryland, is our mission, so far as you are 
concerned. No restraint upon your free-will is intended ; no in- 
timidation will be allowed within the limits of this army at least. 
Marylanders shall once more enjoy their ancient freedom of thought 
and speech. We know no enemies among you, and will protect 
all of you in every opinion. 

“Tt is for you to decide your destiny freely and without con- 
straint. This army will respect your choice, whatever it may be ; 
and while the Southern people will rejoice to welcome you to your 
natural position among them, they will only welcome you when 
you come of your own free will. 

“R. E. Len, General commanding.” 


1862] ADVANCED WITH GREAT SPIRIT. 335 


‘The commands of Longstreet and D. H. Hill, on their ar. 
rival at Sharpsburg, were placed in position along the range of 
hills between the town and the Antietam, nearly parallel to the 
course of that stream, Longstreet on the right of the road to 
Boonsboro and Hill on the left. The advance of the enemy 
was delayed by the determined opposition he encountered from 
Fitzhugh Lee’s cavalry, and he did not appear on the opposite 
side of the Antietam until about 2r.m. During the afternoon 
the batteries on each side were partially engaged. On the 16th 
the artillery-fire became warm, and continued throughout the 
day. A column crossed the Antietam beyond the reach of 
our batteries and menaced our left. In anticipation of this 
movement Hood’s two brigades had been transferred from the 
right and posted between D. H. Hill and the Hagerstown road. 
General Jackson was now directed to take position on Hood’s 
left, and formed his line with his right resting on the Hagers- 
town road and his left extending toward the Potomac, protected 
by General Stuart with the cavalry and horse-artillery. General 
Walker with his two brigades was stationed on Longstreet’s 
right. As evening approached, the enemy fired more vigorously 
with his artillery and bore down heavily with his infantry upon 
Hood, but the attack was gallantly repulsed. At 10 P.m. Hood’s 
troops were relieved by the brigades of Lawton and Trimble, of 
Ewell’s division, commanded by General Lawton. Jackson’s 
own division, under General J. K. Jones, was on Lawton’s left, 
supported by the remaining brigades of Ewell. 

At early dawn on the 17th his artillery opened vigorously 
from both sides of the Antietam, the heaviest fire being directed 
against our left. Under cover of this fire a large force of infan- 
try attacked General Jackson’s division. They were met by his 
troops with the utmost resolution, and for several hours the con- 
flict raged with intense fury and alternate success. Our troops 
advanced with great spirit; the enemy’s lines were repeatedly 
broken and forced to retire. Fresh troops, however, soon re- 
placed those that were beaten, and Jackson’s men were in turn 
compelled to fall back. Nearly all the field officers, with a large 
proportion of the men, were killed or wounded. Our troops 
slowly yielded to overwhelming numbers, and fell back, obsti- 


336. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


nately disputing every point. General Early, in command of 
Ewell’s division, was ordered with his brigade to take the place 
of Jackson’s division, most of which was withdrawn, its am- 
munition being nearly exhausted and its numbers much re- 
duced. The battle now raged with great violence, the small 
commands under Hood and Early holding their ground against 
many times their own infantry force and under a tremendous 
tire of artillery. Hood was reénforced ; then the enemy’s lines 
were broken and driven back, but fresh numbers advanced to 
their support, and they began to gain ground. The desperate 
resistance they encountered, however, delayed their progress 
until the troops of McLaws arrived, and those of General J. G. 
Walker could be brought from the right. Hood’s brigade, 
though it had suffered extraordinary loss, only withdrew to re- 
plenish their ammunition, their supply being entirely exhausted. 
They were relieved by Walker’s command, who immediately 
attacked vigorously, driving his combatant back with much 
slaughter. Upon the arrival of the reénforeements under Mc- 
Laws, General Early attacked resolutely the large force opposed 
to him. McLaws advanced at the same time, and the forces 
before them were driven back in confusion, closely followed by 
our troops beyond the position occupied at the beginning of the 
engagement. 

The attack on our left was speedily followed by one in 
heavy force on the center. This was met by part of Walker’s 
division and the brigades of G. B. Anderson and Rodes, of D. 
H. Hill’s command, assisted by a few pieces of artillery. Gen- 
eral R. H. Anderson’s division came to Hill’s support, and 
formed in rear of his line. At this time, by a mistake of orders, 
Rodes’s brigade was withdrawn from its position; during the 
absence of that command a column pressed through the gap 
thus created, and G. B. Anderson’s brigade was broken and re- — 
tired. The heavy masses moved forward, being opposed only 
by four pieces of artillery, supported by a few hundred of our 
men belonging to different brigades rallied by Hill and other 
officers, and parts of Walker’s and R. H. Anderson’s com- 
mands. Colonel Cooke, with the Twenty-seventh North Caro- 
lina Regiment, stood boldly in line without a cartridge. The 


1862] HIS LINE BEGAN TO WAVER. 337 


firm front presented by this small force and the well-directed 
fire of the artillery checked the progress of the enemy, and in 
about an hour and a half he retired. Another attack was made 
soon afterward a little farther to the right, but was repulsed by 
Miller’s guns, of the Washington Artillery, which continued to 
hold the ground until the close of the engagement, supported 
by a part of R. H. Anderson’s troops. The corps designated 
the Washington Artillery was composed of Louisiana batteries, 
organized at New Orleans in the beginning of the war, under 
Colonel I. B. Walton. It was distinguished by its services in 
the first great battle of Manassas, and in nearly every important 
conflict, as well of the army of Virginia as that of Tennessee, 
to the close of the war. In the official reports and in the tradi- 
tions of both armies the names of the batteries of the Washing- 
ton Artillery have frequent and honorable mention. 

While the attack on the center and left was in progress, 
repeated efforts were made to force the passage of the bridge 
over the Antietam, opposite the right wing of Longstreet, com- 
manded by Brigadier-General D. R. Jones. The bridge was 
defended by General Toombs with two regiments of his bri- 
gade and the batteries of General Jones. This small com- 
mand repulsed five different assaults, made by a greatly su- 
perior force. In the afternoon the enemy, in large numbers, 
having passed the’ stream, advanced against General Jones, who 
held the ridge with less than two thousand men. After a de- 
termined and brave resistance, he was forced to give way, and 
the summit was gained. General A. P. Hill, having arrived 
from Harper’s Ferry, was now ordered to reénforce General 
Jones. He moved to his support and attacked the force now 
flushed with success. Hill’s batteries were thrown forward 
and united their fire with those of Jones, and one of D. H. 
Hill’s also opened with good effect from the left of the Boons- 
boro road. The progress of the enemy was immediately arrest- 
ed, and his line began to waver. At this moment General 
Jones ordered Toombs to charge the flank, while Archer, sup- 
ported by Branch and Gregg, moved on the front of the 
enemy’s line. After a brief resistance, he broke and retreated 
in confusion toward the Antietam, pursued by the troops of Hill 

69 


333 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


and Jones, until he reached the protection of the batteries on 
the opposite side of the river. 

It was now nearly dark, and McClellan had massed a num- 
ber of batteries to sweep the approach to the Antietam, on the 
opposite side of which the corps of General Porter, which had 
not been engaged, now appeared to dispute our advance. Our 
troops were much exhausted, and greatly reduced in numbers 
by fatigue and the casualties of battle. Under these cireum- 
stances it was deemed injudicious to push our advantage further 
in the face of these fresh troops added to an army previously 
much exceeding the number of our own. Ours were accord- 
ingly recalled, and formed on the line originally held by Gen- 
eral Jones. The repulse on the right ended the engagement, 
a protracted and sanguinary conflict in which every effort to 
dislodge us from our position had been defeated with severe 
loss. 

This great battle was fought by less than forty thousand 
men on our side, all of whom had undergone the greatest labors 
and hardships in the field and on the march. Nothing could 
surpass the determined valor with which they met the large 
army of the enemy, fully supplied and equipped, and the result 
reflected the highest credit on the officers and men engaged.* 

On the 18th our forces occupied the position of the preced- 
ing day, except in the center, where our line was drawn in 
about two hundred yards. Our ranks were increased by the 
arrival of a number of troops, who had not been engaged the 
day before, and, though still too weak to assume the offensive, 
Lee waited without apprehension a renewal of the attack. The 
day passed without any hostile demonstration. During the 
night of the 18th our army was withdrawn to the south side 
of the Potomac, crossing near Shepardstown, without loss or 
molestation. 'The enemy advanced on the next morning, but 
was held in check by General Fitzhugh Lee with his cavalry. 
The condition of our troops now demanded repose, and the 
army marched to the Opequan, near Martinsburg, where it 
remained several days, and then moved to the vicinity of Bun- 
ker Hill and Winchester. General McClellan seemed to be 


* Report of General R. E. Lee. 


1862] WAS THE MOST VIOLENT. 339 


concentrating in and near Harper’s Ferry, but made no forward 
movement. 

The contest on our left in this battle was the most violent. 
This and the deprivation of our men are very forcibly shown 
in the following account of Major-General Hood : * 


“On the morning of the 15th my forces were again in motion. 
My troops at this period were sorely in need of shoes, clothing, 
and food. We had had issued to us no meat for several days, and 
little or no bread ; the men had been forced to subsist principally 
on green corn and green apples. Nevertheless, they were in high 
spirits and defiant as we contended with the advanced guard 
of McClellan on the 15th and forenoon of the 16th. During the 
afternoon of this day I was ordered, after great fatigue and hun- 
ger endured by my soldiers, to take position near the Hagerstown 
turnpike, in open field in front of the Dunkard church. General 
Hooker’s corps crossed the Antietam, swung round with its front 
on the pike, and about an hour before sunset encountered my 
division. I had stationed one or two batteries on a hillock in a 
meadow, near the edge of a corn-field, and just by the pike. The 
Texas Brigade had been disposed on the left, and that of Law on 
the right. We opened fire, and a spirited action ensued, which 
lasted till a late hour in the night. When the firing had in a 
great measure ceased, we were so close to the enemy that we could 
distinctly hear him massing his heavy bodies in our immediate front. 

“The extreme suffering of my troops for want of food induced 
me to ride back to General Lee, and request him to send two or 
more brigades to our relief, at least for the night, in order that 
the soldiers might have a chance to cook their. meager rations. 
He said that he would cheerfully do so, but he knew of no com- 
mand that could be spared for the purpose ; he, however, sug- 
gested that I should see General Jackson, and endeavor to obtain 
assistance from him. After riding a long time in search of the 
latter, I finally discovered him alone, lying upon the ground asleep 
by the root of a tree. I aroused him, and made known the half- 
starved condition of my troops; he immediately ordered Law- 
ton’s, Trimble’s, and Hays’s brigades to our relief. He exacted of 
me, however, a promise that I would come to the support of these 
forces the moment I was called upon. I quickly rode off in search 


* “ Advance and Retreat,” by J. B. Hood, p. 41. 


840 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of my wagons that the men might prepare and cook their flour, as 
we were still without meat ; unfortunately, the night was then far 
advanced, and, although every effort was made in the darkness to 
get the wagons forward, dawn of the morning of the 17th broke 
upon us before many of the men had time to do more than pre- 
pare the dough. Soon, thereafter, an officer of Lawton’s staff 
dashed up to me, saying, ‘General Lawton sends his compliments, 
with the request that you come at once to his support.’ ‘To 
arms!’ was instantly sounded, and quite a large number of my 
brave soldiers were again obliged to march to the front, leaving 
their uncooked rations in camp. 

“Not far distant in our front were drawn up, in close array; 
heavy columns of Federal infantry ; not less than two corps were 
in sight to oppose my small command, numbering approximately 
two thousand effectives. However, with the trusty Law on my 
right, in the edge of the wood, and the gallant Colonel Wafford 
in command of the Texas Brigade on the left, near the pike, we 
moved forward to the assault. Notwithstanding the overwhelming 
odds of over ten to one against us, we drove the enemy from the 
wood and corn-field back upon his reserves, and forced him to 
abandon his guns on our left. This most deadly combat raged 
till our last round of ammunition was expended. The First Texas 
Regiment had lost in the corn-field fully two thirds of its number ; 
and whole ranks of brave men, whose deeds were unrecorded save 
in the hearts of loved ones at home, were mowed down in heaps 
to the right and left. Never before was I so continually troubled 
with fear that my horse would further injure some wounded 
fellow-soldier lying helpless upon the ground. Our right flank, 
during this short but seemingly long space of time, was toward 
the main line of the Federals, and, after several ineffectual efforts 
to procure reénforcements and our last shot had been fired, I or- 
dered my troops back to Dunkard church for the same reason 
which had previously compelled Lawton, Hays, and Trimble to 
retire (a want of cartridges). Upon the arrival of McLaws’s di- 
vision we marched to the rear, renewed our supply of ammunition, 
and returned to our position in the wood near the church, which 
ground we held till a late hour in the afternoon, when we moved 
somewhat farther to the right and bivouacked for the night. 
With the close of this bloody day ceased the hardest-fought bat- 
tle of the war.” 


i 


£ 


1862] WE HAD NO RESERVE. 341 


The following account of Colonel Taylor, in his “Four 
Years with General Lee,” is more comprehensive, embracing 
the other forces besides Hood’s brigade : 


“On the afternoon of the 16th, General McClellan directed 
an attack by Hooker’s corps on the Confederate left—Hood’s two 
brigades—and during the whole of the 17th the battle was waged, 
with varying intensity, along the entire line. When the issue 
was first joined, on the afternoon of the 16th, General Lee had 
with him less than eighteen thousand men, consisting of the com- 
mands of Longstreet and D. H. Hill, the two divisions of Jack- 
son, and two brigades under Walker. Couriers were sent to 
the rear to hurry up the divisions of A. P. Hill, Anderson, and 
McLaws, hastening from Harper’s Ferry, and these several com- 
mands, as they reached the front at intervals during the day, on 
the 17th, were immediately deployed and put to work. Every 
man was engaged. We had no reserve. 

“The fighting was heaviest and most continuous on the Con- 
federate left. It is established by Federal evidence that the three 
corps of Hooker, Mansfield, and Sumner were completely shat- 
tered in the repeated but fruitless efforts to turn this flank, and 
two of these corps were rendered useless for further aggressive 
movements. The aggregate strength of the attacking column at 
this point reached forty thousand men, not counting the two 
divisions of Franklin’s corps, sent at a late hour in the day to 
rescue the Federal right from the impending danger of being 
itself destroyed ; while the Confederates, from first to last, had 
less than fourteen thousand men on this flank, consisting of Jack- 
son’s two divisions, McLaws’s division, and the two small divisions, 
of two brigades each, under Hood and Walker, with which to 
resist their fierce and oft-repeated assaults. The disproportion in 
the center and on our right was as great as, or even more decided 
than, on our left.” 


In the “ Report of Committee on the Conduct of the War,” 
Part I, p. 368, General Sumner testifies as follows: 


“General Hooker’s corps was dispersed ; there is no question 
about that. I sent one of my staff-officers to find where they 
were, and General Rickets, the only officer he could find, said that 
he could not raise three hundred men of the corps. There were 


849 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


troops lying down on the left, which I took to belong to Mans- 
field’s command. In the mean time General Mansfield had been 
killed, and a portion of his corps bad also been thrown into con- 
fusion.” 


The testimony of General McClellan, in the same report, 
Part I, p. 441, is to the same effect : 


“The next morning (the 18th) I found that our loss had been 
so great, and there was so much disorganization in some of the 
commands, that I did not consider it proper to renew the attack 
that day, especially as I was sure of the arrival that day of two 
fresh divisions, amounting to about fifteen thousand men. As an 
instance of the condition of some of the troops that morning, 
I happen to recollect the returns of the First Corps, General 
Hooker’s, made on the morning of the 18th, by which there were 
thirty-five hundred men reported present for duty. Four days 
after that, the returns of the same corps showed thirteen thousand 
five hundred.” 


On the night of the 19th our forces crossed the Potomae, 
and some brigades of the enemy followed. In the morning 
General A. P. Hill, who commanded the rear-guard, was or- 
dered to drive them back. Having disposed his forces, an 
attack was made, and, as the foe massed in front of General 
Pender’s brigade and endeavored to turn his flank, General 
Hill says, in his report: 


“A simultaneous daring charge was made, and the enemy 
driven pell-mell into the river. Then commenced the most ter- 
rible slaughter that this war has yet witnessed. The broad sur- 
face of the Potomac was blue with the floating bodies of our foe. 
But few escaped to tell the tale. By their own account, they lost 
three thousand men killed and drowned from one brigade alone. 
Some two hundred prisoners were taken.” 


General McClellan states, in his official report, that he had 
in this battle, in action, 87,164 men of all arms. 

The official reports of the commanding officers of our forces, 
made at the time, show our total effective infantry to have been 
27,255. The estimate made for the cavalry and artillery, which 


1862] OUR CROP OF COTTON. 343 


is rather excessive, is 8,000. This would make General Lee’s 
entire strength 35,255. 

The official return of the Army of Northern Virginia, on 
September 22, 1862, after its return to Virginia, and when the 
stragglers had rejoined their commands, shows present for duty, 
36,187 infantry and artillery ; the cavalry, of which there is no re- 
port, would perhaps increase these figures to 40,000 of all arms.* 

The return of the United States Army of the Potomac on 
September 20, 1862, shows present for duty, at that date, of 
the commands that participated in the battle of Sharpsburg, 
85,930 of all arms.t+ 

The loss of the enemy at Boonsboro and Sharpsburg was 
14,794.t 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Efforts of the Enemy to obtain our Cotton —Demands of European Manufacturers 
—Thousands of Operatives resorting to the Poor-Rates.—Complaint of her 
Majesty’s Secretary of State——Letter of Mr. Seward.—Promise to open all the 
Channels of Commerce.—Series of Measures adopted by the United States.— 
Act of Congress.—Its Provisions.—Its Operation.— Unconstitutional Measures, 
—President Lincoln an Accomplice.—Not authorized by a State of War.—Case 
before Chief-Justice Taney.—His Decision.—Expeditions sent by the United 
States Government to seize Localities.—An Act providing for the Appointment 
of Special Agents to seize Abandoned or Captured Property —The Views of 
General Grant.— Weakening his Strength One Third.—Our Country divided into 
Districts, and Federal Agents appointed.—Continued to the Close of the War. 


A crass of measures was adopted by the Government of the 
United States, the object of which was practically and effectually 
to plunder us of a large portion of our crop of cotton, and secure 
its transportation to the manufacturers of Europe. The foreign 
necessity for our cotton is represented in these words of her 
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, on May 6, 
1862, when speaking of the blockade of our ports: 


* Taylor’s “Four Years with General Lee.” 

+ Official return from Adjutant-General’s office, United States Army. “ Report 
of Committee on Conduct of the War,” Part I, p. 492. 

$ Ibid., p. 42. 


344 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“Thousands are now obliged to resort to the poor-rates for 
subsistence, owing to this blockade, yet her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment have not sought to take advantage of the obvions imperfec- 
tions of this blockade, in order to declare it ineffective. They 
have, to the loss and detriment of the British nation, scrupulously 
observed the duties of Great Britain to a friendly state.” 


The severity of the distress thus alluded to was such, both 
in Great Britain and France, as to produce an intervention of 
the Governments of those countries to alleviate it. Instead, 
however, of adopting those measures required in the exercise of 
justice to the Confederacy, and which would have been sus- 
tained by the law of nations, by declaring the blockade “ inef- 
fective,” as it really was, they sought, through informal appli- 
cations to Mr. Seward, the Secretary of State for the United 
States, to obtain opportunities for an increased exportation of 
cotton from the Confederacy. This is explained by Mr. Seward 
in a letter to Mr. Adams, the Minister at London, dated July 
28, 1862, in which he writes as follows: 


“The President has given respectful consideration to the 
desire informally expressed to me by the Governments of Great 
Britain and France for some further relaxation of the blockade in 
favor of that trade. They are not rejected, but are yet held under 
consideration, with a view to ascertain more satisfactorily whether 
they are really necessary, and whether they can be adopted with- 
out such serious detriment to our military operations as would 
render them injurious rather than beneficial to the interests of all 
concerned.” 


In the same letter Mr. Seward had previously said : 


“We shall speedily open all the channels of commerce, and 
free them from military embarrassments ; and cotton, so much 
desired by all nations, will flow forth as freely as heretofore. We 
have ascertained that there are three and a half millions of bales 
yet remaining in the region where it was produced, though large 
quantities of it are yet unginned and otherwise unprepared for 
market. We have instructed the military: authorities to favor, 
so far as they can consistently with the public safety, its prepara- 
tion for and dispatch to the markets where it is so much wanted.” 


1862] IT IS SCARCELY CREDIBLE. 345 


It has been stated elsewhere in these pages that “it became 
apparent that by some understanding, express or tacit, Europe 
had decided to leave the initiative in all actions touching the 
contest on this continent to the two powers just named (Great 
Britain and France), who were recognized to have the largest 
interest involved.” By the preceding extracts the demands 
of the Governments of Great Britain and France for increased 
facilities, by which to obtain a greater supply of cotton, are | 
evident ; at the same time the determination of the Govern- 
ment of the United States to fulfill those demands is apparent, 
although it placed itself under the necessity of fitting out some 
military expeditions against those portions of our territory 
where it was supposed the foraging for cotton would be likely 
to meet with the greatest success. 

By reference to the series of measures adopted by the Gov- 
ernment of the United States to secure possession of our cotton, 
it will be seen that it was inaugurated as early as July 13, 1861. 
This was within ten days after the commencement of the first 
and extra session of Congress, under the Administration of 
President Lincoln. It is scarcely credible that that Govern- 
ment, at so early a day, foresaw the pressing demand from 
Europe for cotton which would ensue a year later. Yet it 
would seem that we must suppose such to have been its fore- 
sight, or else conclude that the first of these measures was the 
inauguration of a grand scheme for the plunder of our cotton- 
crop, to enrich whomsoever it might concern. 

The act of the United States Congress of July 138, 1861, 
above mentioned, was entitled “ An act to provide for the col- 
lection of duties on imports, and for other purposes.” Under 
the “other purposes” the important features of the act arc con- 
tained. Section 5 provides that— 


“when said insurgents claim to act under the authority of any 
State or States, and such claim is not disclaimed or repudiated by 
the persons exercising the functions of government in such State 
or States, or in the part or parts thereof in which said combi- 
nation exists, or such insurrection suppressed by said State or 
States, then and in such case it may and shall be lawful for the 
_ President, by proclamation, to declare that the inhabitants of such 


346 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


State, or any section or part thereof, where such insurrection ex- 
ists, are in a state of insurrection against the United States, and 
thereupon all commercial intercourse by and between the same 
and the citizens thereof and the citizens of the rest of the United 
States shall cease, and be unlawful, so long as such condition of 
hostility shall continue; and all goods and chattels, wares and 
merchandise, coming from said State or section into the other 
parts of the United States, and all proceeding to such State or 
section, by land or water, shall, together with the vessel or vehicle 
conveying the same, or conveying persons to or from such State 
or section, be forfeited to the United States: Provided, however, 
That the President may, in his discretion, license and permit com- 
mercial intercourse with any such part of said State or section, 
the inhabitants of which are so declared in a state of insurrection, 
in such articles, and for such time, and by such persons, as he, in 
his discretion, may think most conducive to the public interest ; 
and such intercourse, so far as by him licensed, shall be conducted 
and carried on only in pursuance of rules and regulations pre- 
scribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. And the Secretary of 
the Treasury may appoint such officers at places where officers of 
the customs are not now authorized by law, as may be needed to 
carry into effect such licenses, rules, and regulations.” 


It was provided in section 9 as follows: 


“Proceedings on seizures for forfeitures, under this act, may 
be pursued in the courts of the United States in any district into 
which the property so seized may be taken, and proceedings insti- 
tuted.” 


It will be seen, by reference to the provisions of this section, 
that the President of the United States was authorized to issue 
his proclamation, declaring the inhabitants of any of our States, 
or of a portion of any one of them, to be in insurrection, and 
thereupon all commercial intercourse became unlawful, and was 
required to cease, and all goods and chattels, wares and mer- 
chandise, on the way to, or from, the State or part of a State, 
were forfeited to the United States, together with the vessel, or 
vehicle, in which they were conveyed. ‘Two effects follow this 
proclamation: first, the cessation of all commercial intercourse 


a 


1862] TO FIND ANY GRANT OF POWER. 847 


with the citizens of the United States; second, the forfeit- 
ure of all goods im transitu. When this condition has been 
reached, the act then authorizes the President, in his discretion, 
by license, to reopen the trade in such articles, and for such 
time, and by such persons, as he may think most conducive to 
the public interest. The articles of trade were to be chiefly cot- 
ton and tobacco; the time during which it might be continued 
was evidently so long as it could be used for the purpose in 
view; the persons were those who would most skillfully ad- 
vance the end to be accomplished; and the public interest was 
the collection and transportation of the cotton to the European 
manufacturers. 

One may search the Constitution of the United States in 
vain to find any grant of power to Congress, by which ‘t could 
be authorized to pass this act; much less to find any authority 
conferred upon the President to approve the act, or to justify 
him in a violation of the oath he had taken to support and main- 
tain the provisions of the Constitution. Congress was guilty of 
a most flagrant usurpation by the passage of the act, and the 
President, instead of being a check upon their unconstitutional 
measures, for which object the veto power was granted to him, 
became, by his approval, an accomplice in their usurpation. For 
nothing is more evident than that it is one of the powers re- 
served to the States to regulate the commercial intercourse be- 
tween their citizens, to the extent even of the establishment of 
inspection and quarantine regulations. The former of these is 
a benefit to commerce, and the latter, in some special cases, only 
retards it temporarily, to secure the health of a community. 

Neither did a state of war authorize the Government of the 
United States to interfere with the commercial intercourse be- 
tween the citizens of the States, although under the law of na- 
tions it might be so justified with regard to foreign enemies. 
But this relation it persistently refused to concede to the Con- 
federate States or to their citizens. It constantly asserted that 
they were its subjects, in a state of insurrection; and, if so, they 
were equally entitled to the provisions of the Constitution for 
their protection as well as to its penalties. Still less could the 
Government make an absolute forfeiture of the goods seized, 


348 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


as has already been shown when treating of the Confiscation 
Act. 

But that a state of war did not enlarge the powers of the 
Government, as was assumed by this act, was expressly decided 
by Chief-Justice Taney, in a case that arose under this act. The 
Secretary of the Treasury issued the regulations for trade, as the 
act assumed the power to authorize him to do, in the section 
presented on a previous page. One Carpenter neglected or re- 
fused to obtain the permit required, and his goods were seized. 
He contested the right of seizure, and the Chief-Justice gave a 
decision at Baltimore, in May, 1863. He said: 


“Tf these regulations had been made directly by Congress, they 
could not be sustained by a.court of justice, whose duty it is to 
administer the law according to the Constitution of the United 
States. For from the commencement of the Government to this 
day it has been admitted on all hands, and repeatedly decided by 
the Supreme Court, that the United States have no right to inter- 
fere with the internal and domestic trade of a State. They have 
no right to compel it to pass through their custom-houses, nor to 
tax it. This is so plainly set forth in the Constitution, that it has 
never been supposed to be open to controversy or question. Un- 
doubtedly, the United States authorities may take proper meas- 
ures to prevent trade or intercourse with the enemy.: But it does 
not by any means follow that they disregard the limits of all their 
own powers as prescribed by the Constitution, or the rights and 
powers reserved to the States and the people. 

“ A civil war, or any other, does not enlarge the powers of the 
Federal Government over the States or the people beyond what 
the compact has given to it in time of war. A state of war does 
not annul the tenth article of the amendment to the Constitution, 
which declares that ‘the powers not delegated to the United States 
by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are re- 
served to the States respectively, or to the people.’ Nor does a 
civil war, or any other war, absolve the judicial department from 
the duty of maintaining with an even and firm hand the rights 
and powers of the Federal Government, and of the States, and of 
the citizens, as they are written in the Constitution, which every 
judge is sworn to support. Upon the whole the Court is of opinion 
that the regulations in question are illegal and void, and that the 


1862] LICENSES WERE GRANTED. 349 


seizure of the goods of Carpenter, because he refused to comply 
with them, can not be sustained. The judgment of the District 
Court must, therefore, be reversed, and the goods delivered to the 
claimant, his agent, or proctor.” 


The proclamation of the President required by the act was 
issued on August 16, 1861, declaring certain States and parts of 
States to be in insurrection, ete. Under it some licenses were 
issued to places in Kentucky and Missouri where the United 
States forces were located, without any fruitful results. Some 
strong military and naval expeditions were fitted out to invade 
us and occupy the ports where cotton and other valuable prod- 
ucts were usually shipped. An advance was made up the Cum- 
berland and Tennessee Rivers and down the Mississippi, as has 
been stated elsewhere. The ports of Beaufort, North Carolina, 
Port Royal, South Carolina, and New Orleans, Louisiana, were 
declared by proclamation of the President of the United States to 
be open for trade under the new system. Licenses were granted 
to foreign vessels by United States consuls and to coasting ves- 
sels by the Treasury Department, and the blockade was relaxed 
so far as related to those ports, except as “ to persons, property, 
and information contraband of war.” Collectors were appointed 
at the above-mentioned ports, and a circular was addressed to 
the foreign Ministers at Washington announcing the reopening 
of communication with conquered Southern localities. 

Again, on March 3, 1863, an act was passed which author- 
ized the Secretary of the Treasury to appoint special agents to 
receive and collect all abandoned or captured property in any 
State or portion of a State designated as in insurrection. Un- 
der this act a paper division of the whole of our territory was 
made into five special districts, and to each a special agent was 
appointed with numerous assistants. Abandoned property was 
defined to be that which had been deserted by the owners, or 
that which had been voluntarily abandoned by them to the civil 
or military authorities of the United States. Property which 
had been seized or taken from hostile possession by the military 
or naval forces was also to be turned over to the special agents 
to be sold. All property not transported in accordance with 


350 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the Treasury regulations was forfeitable. AJl expenses incurred 
in relation to the property were charged upon it. 

The views of General Grant on the operation of this system 
of measures, as tending to retard the success of subjugation, 
which was the object of the war, were presented to the Secre- 
tary of the United States Treasury in a letter dated at Vicks- 
burg on July 21, 1863. He writes: 


“‘My experience in West Tennessee has convinced me that any 
trade whatever with the rebellious States is weakening to us at 
least thirty-three per cent. of our force. No matter what restric- 
tions are thrown around trade, if any whatever is allowed, it will 
be made the means of supplying to the enemy what they want. 
Restrictions, if lived up to, make trade unprofitable, and hence 
none but dishonest men go into it. I will venture to say that no 
honest man has made money in West Tennessee in the last year, 
while many fortunes have been made there during the time. The 
people in the Mississippi Valley are now nearly subjugated. Keep 
trade out for a few months, and I doubt not but that the work of 
subjugation will be so complete that trade can be opened freely 
with the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi.” 


On September 11, 1863, revised regulations were issued by 
the Secretary which divided the country into thirteen districts, 
from Wheeling, West Virginia, to Natchez, on the Mississippi, 
and a complete system of trade and transportation was organ- 
ized. In December, 1864, new regulations were issued, which 
authorized the purchase of our products at certain points from 
any person with bonds furnished by the Treasury. The prod- 
ucts were sold, transportation was allowed, and the proceeds 
were made to constitute a fund for further purchases. <A vig- 
orous traffic sprang up under these regulations, which were sus- 
pended by an order of General Grant, issued on March 10, 
1865, and revoked on April 11th by himself. On April 29, 
1865, all restrictions upon internal, domestic, and coastwise 
commercial intercourse with all the country east of the Missis- 
sippi River were discontinued. 


1862] SEIZING THE PASSES, 351 


OHAPTER XXXVII. 


The Enemy crosses the Potomac and concentrates at Warrenton.—Advances upon 
Fredericksburg.—Its Position.—Our Forces.—The Enemy crosses the Rappa- 
hannock.—Attack on General Jackson.—The Main Attack.—Repulse of the 
Enemy on the Right.—Assaults on the Left-—The Enemy’s Columns broke 
and fled—Recross the River.—Casualties.—Position during the Winter.— 
The Enemy again crosses the Rappahannock.—Also crosses at Kelly’s Ford— 
Converging toward Chancellorsville, to the Rear of our Position —Inactivity 
on our Front.—Our Forces Concentrate near Chancellorsville and encounter 
Enemy.—Position of the Enemy.—Attempt to turn his Right—The Enemy 
surprised and driven in the Darkness.—Jackson fired upon and wounded.— 
Stuart in command.—Battle renewed.—Fredericksburg reoccupied.— Attack on 
the Heights.—Repulse of the Enemy.—The Enemy withdraws in the Night.— 
Our Strength.—Losses.—Death of General Jackson.—Another Account. 


Axout the middle of October, 1862, General McClellan 
crossed the Potomac east of the Blue Ridge and advanced 
southward, seizing the passes of the mountains as he progressed. 
In the latter part of the month he began to incline eastwardly 
from the mountains, moving in the direction of Warrenton, 
about which he finally concentrated, his cavalry being thrown 
forward beyond the Rappahannock in the direction of Culpeper 
Court-House. 

On November 15th the enemy was in motion. The indi- 
cations were that Fredericksburg was again to be occupied. 
Sumner’s corps had marched in the direction of Falmouth, and 
gunboats and transports had entered Acquia Creek. 

McLaws’s and Ransom’s divisions were ordered to proceed 
to that city ; and on the 21st it became apparent that the whole 
army—under General Burnside, who had succeeded General 
McClellan—was concentrating on the north side of the Rap- 
pahannock. 

About November 26th Jackson was directed to advance 
toward Fredericksburg, and, as some of the enemy’s gunboats 
had appeared in the river at Port Royal, and it was possible 
that an attempt might be made to cross in that vicinity, D. H. 
Hill’s division was stationed near that place, and the rest of 
Jackson’s corps so disposed as to support Hill or Longstreet, as 


359, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


occasion might require. The fords of the Rappahannock above 
Fredericksburg were closely guarded by our cavalry, and the 
brigade of General W. H. F. Lee was stationed near Port Royal 
to watch the river above and below. The interval before the 
advance of the foe was employed in strengthening our lines, 
extending from the river about a mile and a half above Fred- 
ericksburg along the range of hills in the rear of the city to the 
Richmond Railroad. As these hills were commanded by the 
opposite heights, in possession of General Burnside’s force, 
earthworks were constructed on their crest at the most eligible 
positions for artillery. To prevent gunboats ascending the 
river, a battery, protected by epaulements, was placed on the 
bank four miles below the city. The plain of Fredericksburg 
is so completely commanded by the Stafford Heights, that no 
effectual opposition could be made to the passage of the river 
without exposing our troops to the destructive fire of the nu- 
merous batteries on the opposite heights. At the same time, 
the narrowness of the Rappahannock and its winding course 
presented opportunities for laying down pontoon-bridges at 
points secure from the fire of our artillery. Our position was 
therefore selected with a view to resist an advance after cross- 
ing, and the river was guarded by detachments of sharpshooters 
to impede the laying of pontoons until our army could be pre- 
pared for action. 

Before dawn, on December 11th, General Burnside was in 
motion. About 2 a.m. he commenced preparations to throw 
two bridges over the Rappahannock opposite Fredericksburg, 
and one about’ a mile and a quarter below, near the mouth of 
Deep Run. From daybreak until 4 p. m., the troops, sheltered 
behind the houses on the river-bank, repelled his repeated 
efforts to lay bridges opposite the town, driving back his work- 
ing parties and their supports with great slaughter. At the 
lower point, where there was no such protection, he was suc- 
cessfully resisted until nearly noon, when, being exposed to 
the severe fire of the batteries on the opposite heights and a 
superior force of infantry on the river-banks, our troops were 
withdrawn, and about 1 p. m. the bridge was completed. Soon 
afterward, one hundred and fifty pieces of artillery opened a 


1862] A CONTINUOUS AND HEAVY FIRE. 353 


furious fire upon the city, causing our troops to retire from the 
river-bank about 4 p.m. The enemy then crossed in boats, and 
proceeded rapidly to lay down the bridges. His advance into 
the town was bravely contested until dark, when our troops 
were recalled, the necessary time for concentration having been 
gained. 

Brigadier-General William Barksdale, who commanded the 
force placed in Fredericksburg to resist the crossing, performed 
that service with his well-known gallantry. The enemy was 
prevented from constructing bridges, and his attempts to cross 
in boats, under the cover of artillery and musketry fire, were 
repelled until late in the afternoon, when General Barksdale 
was ordered to retire; he had directed Lieutenant-Colonel Fizer, 
commanding the Seventeenth Mississippi Regiment, of Barks- 
dale’s brigade, to select some skillful marksmen, and proceed 
to check the operations of the pioneers, who had commenced 
to lay pontoons above the city. Colonel Fizer described to 
me the novel and bold expedient to which he successfully 
resorted. He said his sharpshooters were placed in rifle-pits, 
on the bank opposite to that from which the bridge was start- 
ed; that his men were instructed to aim only at the bridge- 
builders. At dawn the workmen came forward to lay the cover 
on the bridge ; fire was opened, some were killed, and the rest 
of the party driven ashore. Then the enemy’s batteries and 
riflemen opened a heavy fire on his position, when his men 
would sit down in the rifle-pits and remain quiet until the can- 
nonade ceased. Probably ander the supposition that our sharp- 
shooters had been driven off, the workmen would return; our 
sharpshooters would arise and repeat the lesson lately given. 
This, he said, with intervals of about an hour, during which 
a continuous and heavy fire of artillery was kept up, occurred 
nine times, with the same result—a repulse with severe loss ; and 
that, for twelve hours, every attempt to construct a bridge at 
that point was defeated. Then, under orders, they withdrew. 

During the night and the succeeding day the enemy crossed 
in large numbers at and below the town, secured from material 
interruption by a dense fog. Longstreet’s corps constituted our 
left, with Anderson’s division resting on the river, and those of 

70 


354 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


McLaws, Pickett, and Hood extending to the right. A. P. 
Hill, of Jackson’s corps, was posted between Hood’s right and 
Hamilton’s Crossing, on the railroad. His front line occupied 
the edge of a wood. Early and Taliaferro’s divisions consti- 
tuted Jackson’s second line, D. H. Hill’s division his reserve. 
His artillery was distributed along his line in the most eligible 
positions, so as to command the open ground in front. 

Shortly after 9 a. u., the partial rising of the mist disclosed 
a large force moving in line of battle against Jackson. Dense 
masses appeared in front of A. P. Hill, stret¢hing far up the 
river in the direction of Fredericksburg. As they advanced, Ma- 
jor Pellham, of Stuart’s horse-artillery, opened a rapid and well- 
directed enfilade fire, which arrested their progress. our bat- 
teries immediately turned upon him, and, upon his withdrawal, 
the enemy extended his left down the Port Royal road, and his 
numerous batteries opened with vigor upon Jackson’s line. 
Eliciting no response, his infantry moved forward to seize the 
position oceupied by Lieutenant-Colonel Walker. The latter, 
Yeserving the fire of his fourteen pieces until their line had ap- 
proached within less than eight hundred yards, opened upon it 
with such destructive effect as to cause it to waver and soon re- 
treat in confusion. 

About 1 p. m., the main attack on the right began by a furi- 
ous cannonade, under cover of which three compact lines of 
infantry advanced against Hill’s front. They were received 
as before and momentarily checked, but, soon recovering, they 
pressed forward, until, coming within range of our infantry, the 
contest became fierce and bloody. Archer and Lane, who occu- 
pied the edge of a wood, repulsed those portions of the line 
immediately in front of them; but, before the interval between 
these commands could be closed, the assailants pressed through 
in overwhelming numbers and turned the left of Archer and 
the right of Lane. Attacked in front and flank, two regiments 
of the former and a brigade of the latter, after a brave: resist- 
ance, gave way. Archer held his line until the arrival of reén- 
forcements. ‘Thomas came to the relief of Lane and repulsed 
the column that had broken his line, and drove it back to the 
railroad. In the mean time a large force had penetrated the 


1862] THE ENEMY WAS QUICKLY ROUTED. 355 


wood as far as Hill’s reserve, where it was met by a fire for 
which it was not unprepared. General Hill says:* “The ad- 
vancing columns of the enemy encountered an obstacle at the 
military road which they little expected. Gregg’s brigade of 
South Carolinians stood in the way.” The advancing Federals 
were allowed to approach quite near, when that brigade poured 
a withering fire into the faces of Meade’s men, and Early’s di- 
- vision from the second line swept forward, and the contest in 
the woods was short and decisive. The enemy was quickly 
routed and driven out with very heavy loss, and, though largely 
reénforced, was pressed back and pursued to the shelter of the 
railroad embankment. Here he was gallantly charged by the 
brigades of Hoke and Atkinson, and driven across the plain to 
his batteries. The attack on Hill’s left was repulsed by the 
artillery on that part of the line, against which a hot fire from 
twenty-four guns was directed. The repulse of the foe on our 
right was decisive and the attack was not renewed, but his bat- 
teries kept up an active fire at intervals, and sharpshooters skir- 
mished along the front during the afternoon. 

- While these events were transpiring on our right, the enemy, 
in formidable numbers, made repeated and desperate assaults 
upon the left of our line. About 11 a. m., having massed his 
troops under cover of the houses of Fredericksburg, he moved for- 
ward in strong columns to seize Marye’s and Willis’s Hills. All 
his batteries on the Stafford Heights directed their fire upon the 
positions occupied by our artillery, with a view to silence it, 
and cover the movement of the infantry. Without replying to 
this furious cannonade, our batteries poured a rapid and destruc- 
tive fire into the dense lines of the infantry as they advanced to 
the attack, frequently breaking their ranks, and forcing them to 
retreat to the shelter of the houses. Six times did he, not- 
withstanding the havoc inflicted by our batteries, press on with 
great determination to within one hundred yards of the foot of 
the hill; but here, encountering the deadly fire of our infantry, 
his columns were broken, and fled in confusion to the town. 
The last assault was made shortly before dark. This effort met: 
the fate of those that preceded it, and, when night closed in, 


* “Reports of the Army of Northern Virginia,” vol. ii, p. 463, 


356 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


his shattered masses had disappeared in the town, leaving the 
field covered with his dead and wounded. 

During the night our lines were strengthened by the con- 
struction of earthworks at exposed points, and preparations made 
- to receive the enemy on the next day. The 14th passed, however, 
without a renewal of the attack. The hostile batteries on both 
sides of the river played upon our lines at intervals, our own fir- 
ing but little. On the 15th General Burnside still retained his 
position, apparently ready for battle, but the day passed as the 
preceding. But, on the morning of the 16th, it was discovered 
that he had availed himself of the darkness of the night and 
the prevalence of a violent storm of wind and rain to recross 
the river. The town was immediately reoccupied, and our posi- 
tions on the river-bank resumed. 

In the engagement we captured more than 900 prisoners 
and 9,000 stand of arms. <A large quantity of ammunition was 
found in Fredericksburg. On our side 458 were killed and 
3,743 wounded ; total, 4,201. The loss of the enemy was 
1,152 killed, 9,101 wounded, and 3,234 missing ; total, 13,771. 

General Burnside testified before the Committee on the 
Conduct of the War that he “had about 100,000 men on the 
south side of the river, and every single man of them was under 
artillery-fire, and about half of them were at different times 
formed in columns of attack.” * 

Less than 20,000 Confederate troops were actively engaged. 
This number composed about one fourth of the army under 
General Lee. The returns of the Army of Northern Virginia 
show that on the 10th of December, 1862, General Lee had 
present for duty 78,228, and, on December 20th, 75,524 of all 
arms.t ; 

Upon being asked what causes he assigned for the failure of 
his attack, General Burnside replied to the Committee on the 
Conduct of the War: “It was found impossible to get the men 
up to the works. The enemy’s fire was too hot for them.” + 
After the battle of Fredericksburg the Army of Northern 


* “Report of Committee on the Conduct of the War,” Part T, p. 656. 
+ Taylor’s “ Four Years with General Lee.” 
{ “Report of Committee on the Conduct of the War,” Part I, p. 656. 


1862] TO RESIST A DIRECT ADVANCE. 857 


Virginia remained encamped on the south side of the Rappa- 
hannock until the latter part of April, 1863. The Federal 
army occupied the north side of the river opposite Fredericks- 
burg, extending to the Potomac. Two brigades of Ander- 
son’s division—those of Mahone and Posey—were stationed _ 
near United States Mine or Bank Mill Ford. The cavalry was 
distributed on both flanks—Fitzhugh Lee’s brigade picketing 
the Rappahannock above the mouth of the Rapidan and W. H. 
‘F. Lee’s near Port Royal. General Longstreet, with two di- 
visions of his corps, was detached for service south of James 
River in February, and did not rejoin the army until after the 
battle of Chancellorsville. Excepting a cavalry engagement 
near Kelly’s Ford, on March 17th, nothing of interest transpired 
during this period of inactivity. On April 14, 1863, the ene- 
my’s cavalry was concentrating on the upper Rappahannock, 
but his efforts to establish himself on the south side of the 
river were successfully resisted. About the 21st, small bodies 
of infantry appeared at Kelly’s Ford and the Rappahannock 
Bridge; at the same time a demonstration was made oppo- 
site Port Royal. These movements indicated that the army, 
now commanded by Major-General Hooker, was about to re- 
sume active operations. On the 28th, early in the morning, 
the enemy crossed the river in boats near Fredericksburg, laid 
a pontoon-bridge, and built another about a mile below. A 
considerable force crossed on these bridges during the day, and 
was massed under the high banks of the river, which afforded 
protection from our artillery, while the batteries on the opposite 
heights completely commanded the wide plain between our lines 
and the narrow river. As in the first battle at Fredericksburg, 
our dispositions were made with a view to resist a direct ad- 
vance against us. But the indications were that the principal 
effort would be made in some other quarter. On the 29th it 
was reported that he had crossed in force near Kelly’s Ford, 
and that a heavy column was moving from Kelly’s toward Ger- 
mania Ford on the Rapidan, and another toward Ely’s Ford. 
The routes they were pursuing, after crossing the Rapidan, con- 
verged near Chancellorsville, whence several roads led to the 
rear of our position at Fredericksburg. General Anderson pro- 


358 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ceeded to cover these roads on the 29th, but, learning that the 
enemy had crossed the Rapidan and was approaching in strong 
force, he retired early on the next morning to the intersection 
of the Mine and plank roads near Tabernacle Church, and began 
to intrench himself. His rear-guard, as he left Chancellors- 
ville, was attacked by cavalry, but, being vigorously repulsed, 
offered no further opposition to his march. 

The enemy on our front near Fredericksburg continued in- 
active, and it was now apparent that the main attack would be 
made upon our flank and rear. It was therefore determined to 
leave sufficient troops to hold our lines, and with the main body 
of the army to give battle to the approaching column. Larly’s 
division of Jackson’s corps and Barksdale’s brigade of McLaws’s 
division, with part of the reserve artillery under General Pen- 
dleton, were intrusted with the defense of our position at Fred- 
ericksburg, and at midnight on the 30th General McLaws 
marched with the rest of his command toward Chancellorsville. 
General Jackson followed at dawn next morning with the re- 
maining divisions of his corps. He reached’ the position oceu- 
pied by General Anderson at 8 A. m., and immediately began to 
make preparations to advance. At 11. M. the troops moved for- 
ward on the plank and old turnpike roads. The enemy was soon 
encountered on both roads, and heavy skirmishing with infantry 
and artillery ensued, our troops pressing steadily forward. A 
strong attack upon McLaws was repulsed with spirit by Semmes’s 
brigade; and General Wright, by direction of General Ander- 
son, diverging to the left of the plank-road, marched by way of 
the unfinished railroad from Fredericksburg to Gordonsville 
and turned the Federal right. His whole line thereupon retreat- 
ed rapidly, vigorously pursued by our troops until they arrived 
within about one mile of Chancellorsville. Here the enemy 
had assumed a position of great natural strength, surrounded on 
all sides by a dense forest filled with a tangled undergrowth, in 
the midst of which breastworks of logs had been constructed 
with trees felled in front so as to form an almost impenetrable 
abatis, His artillery swept the few narrow roads by which his 
position could be approached from the front, and commanded the 
adjacent woods. The left of his line extended from Chancellors- 


1862] | ‘THE EXECUTION OF THE PLAN, 359 


ville toward the Rappahannock, covering the Bank Mill Ford, 
where he communicated with the north bank of the river by a 
pontoon-bridge. His right stretched westward along the Ger- 
mania Ford road more than two miles. Darkness was approach- 
ing before the strength and extent of his line could be ascer- 
tained; and, as the nature of the country rendered it hazardous 
to attack by night, our troops were halted and formed in line of 
battle in front of Chancellorsville at right angles to the plank- 
road, extending on the right to the Mine road, and to the left 
in the direction of the “ Furnace.” 

It was evident that a direct attack by us would be attended 
with great difficulty and loss, in view of the strength of his po- 
sition and his superiority of numbers. It was therefore resolved 
to endeavor to turn his right flank and gain his rear, leaving 
a force in front to hold him in check and conceal the move- 
ment. The execution of this plan was intrusted to Lieuten- 
ant-General Jackson with his three divisions. The commands 
of Generals McLaws and Anderson, with the exception of Wil- 
cox’s brigade which during the night had been ordered back 
to Banks’s Ford, remained in front of the enemy. Early on 
the morning of the 2d General Jackson marched by the Fur- 
nace and Brock roads, his movement being effectually covered 
by Fitzhugh Lee’s cavalry under General Stuart in person. As 
the rear of his train was passing the furnace a large force of the 
enemy advanced from Chancellorsville and attempted its cap- 
ture, but this advance was arrested. After a long and fatiguing 
march General Jackson’s leading division under General Rodes 
reached the old turnpike about three miles in rear of Chancel- 
lorsville at 4 yp. mw. As the different divisions arrived, they 
were formed at right angles to the road—Rodes’s in front, 
Trimble’s, under Brigadier-General Colston, in the second, and 
A. P. Hill’s in the third line. At 6 p.m. the advance was or- 
dered. The enemy was taken by surprise, and fled after a brief 
resistance. General Rodes’s men pushed forward ‘with great 
vigor and enthusiasm, followed closely by the second and third 
lines. Position after position was carried, the guns captured, 
and every effort of the foe to rally defeated by the impetuous 
rush of our troops. In the ardor of pursuit through the thick 


360 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and tangled woods, the first and second lines at last became min- 
gled and moved on together as one. The fugitives made a stand 
at a line of breastworks across the road, but the troops of Rodes 
and Colston dashed over the intrenchments together, and the 
flight and pursuit were resumed and continued until our advance 
was arrested by the abatis in front of the line of works near the 
central position at Chancellorsville. It was now dark, and Gen- 
eral Jackson ordered the third line under General Hill to ad- 
vance to the front and relieve the troops of Rodes and Colston, 
who were completely blended and in such disorder from their 
advance through intricate woods and over broken ground that 
~ it was necessary to reform them. As Hill’s men moved for- 
ward, General Jackson, with his staff and escort, returning from 
the extreme front, met the skirmishers advancing, and in the 
obscurity of the night were mistaken for the enemy and fired 
upon. Captain Boswell, chief engineer of the corps, and sev- 
eral others, were killed and a number wounded, among whom 
was General Jackson, who was borne from the field. The 
command devolved upon Major-General Hill, whose division 
under General Heth was advanced to the line of intrenchments 
which had been reached by Rodes and Colston. A furious 
fire of artillery was opened upon them, under cover of which 
infantry advanced to the attack, but were handsomely re- 
pulsed. General Hill was soon afterward disabled, and the 
command was turned over to General Stuart. He immediately 
proceeded to reconnoiter the ground and make himself acquaint- 
ed with the disposition of the troops. The darkness of the 
night and the difficulty of moving through the woods and un- 
dergrowth rendered it advisable to defer further operations until 
morning, and the troops rested on their arms in line of battle. 
+ As soon as the sound of cannon gave notice of Jackson’s 
attack on the enemy’s right, the troops in front began to press 
strongly on the left to prevent reénforcements being sent to the 
point assailed. They advanced up to the intrenchments, while 
several batteries played with good effect until prevented by the 
increasing darkness. 

Early on the morning of May 8d General Stuart renewed 
the attack upon General Hooker, who had strengthened his right 


1862] THREE TIMES CARRIED. | 361 


wing during the night with additional breastworks, while a large 
number of guns, protected by intrenchments, were posted so as 
to sweep the woods through which our troops had to advance. 
Hill’s division was in front, with Colston in the second line, and 
Rodes in the third. The second and third lines soon advanced 
to the support of the first, and the whole became hotly engaged. 
The breastworks at which the attack was suspended on the pre- 
ceding evening were carried by assault, under a terrible fire of 
musketry and artillery. In rear of these breastworks was a bar- 
ricade, from which the enemy was quickly driven. The troops 
on the left of the plank-road, pressing through the woods, at- 
tacked and broke the next line, while those on the right bravely 
assailed the extensive earthworks behind which General Hook- 
er’s artillery was posted. Three times were these works car- 
ried, and as often were the brave assailants compelled to aban- 
don them—twice by the retirement of the troops on their left, 
who fell back after a gallant struggle with superior numbers, 
and once by a movement of the enemy on their right caused by 
the advance of General Anderson. The left, being reénforced, 
finally succeeded in driving back the enemy, and the artillery 
under Lieutenant-Colonels Carter and Jones, being thrown for- 
ward to occupy favorable positions secured by the advance of 
the infantry, began to play with great precision and effect. 
Anderson, in the mean time, pressed gallantly forward directly 
upon Chancellorsville, his right resting upon the plank-road and 
his left extending around the furnace, while McLaws made a 
strong demonstration to the right of the road. As the troops 
advancing upon the enemy’s front and right converged upon 
his central position, Anderson effected a junction with Jackson’s 
corps, and the whole line pressed irresistibly. General Hook- 
er’s army was driven from all its fortified positions with heavy 
loss in killed, wounded, and prisoners, and retreated toward the 
Rappahannock. By 10 a.m. we were in full possession of the 
field. The troops, having become somewhat scattered by the 
difficulties of the ground and the ardor of the contest, were im- 
mediately reformed, preparatory to renewing the attack. The 
enemy had withdrawn to a strong position nearer to the Rappa- 
hannock, which he had fortified. His superiority of numbers, 


862 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the unfavorable nature of the ground, which was densely wood- 
ed, and the condition of our troops, after the arduous and san- 
guinary conflict in which they had been engaged, rendered great 
caution necessary. Our operations were just completed, when 
further movements were arrested by intelligence received from’ 
Fredericksburg. 

Before dawn, on the morning of the 3d, it was known that 
the enemy had occupied Fredericksburg in large force, and 
laid down a bridge at the town. He made a demonstration 
against the extreme right of the force left to hold our lines, 
which was easily repulsed by General Early. Soon afterward a 
column moved from Fredericksburg along the river-banks, as if 
to gain the heights on the extreme left which commanded those 
immediately in rear of the town. This attempt was foiled. 
Very soon the enemy advanced in large force against Ma- 
rye’s, and the hills to the right and left of it. Two assaults 
were gallantly repulsed. After the second, a flag of truce was 
sent from the town to obtain permission to provide for the 
wounded. Three heavy lines advanced immediately upon the 
return of the flag and renewed the attack. They were bravely 
repulsed on the right and left, but the small force at the foot of 
Marye’s Hill, overpowered by more than ten times their num- 
bers, was captured after an heroic resistance and the hill carried. 
The success of the enemy enabled him to threaten our commu- 
nications by moving down the Telegraph road, or to come upon 
our rear at Chancellorsville by the plank-road. He began to 
advance on the plank-road, his progress being gallantly disputed 
by the brigade of General Wilcox, who fell back slowly until 
he reached Salem Church on the plank-road, about five miles 
from Fredericksburg. 

In this state of affairs in our rear, General Lee led General 
McLaws with his three brigades to reénforce General Wilcox. 
He arrived at Salem Church early in the afternoon, where he 
found General Wilcox in line of battle, with a large force of 
the enemy—consisting, as was reported, of one army corps and 
part of another—in his front. The enemy’s artillery played 
vigorously upon our position for some time, when his infantry 
advanced in three strong lines, the attack being directed mainly 


(9) 


1862] NO ATTEMPT TO FOLLOW. 363 


against General Wilcox, but partially involving the brigades on 
his left. The assault was met with the utmost firmness, and 
after a fierce struggle the first line was repulsed with great 
slaughter. The second then came forward, but immediately 
broke under the close and deadly fire which it encountered, and 
the whole mass fled in confusion to the rear. They were pur- 
sued by the brigades of Wilcox and Semmes, which advanced 
nearly a mile, when they were halted to reform in the presence 
of the hostile reserve, which now appeared in large force. It 
being quite dark, General Wilcox deemed it imprudent to push 
the attack with his small numbers, and retired to his original 
position, the enemy making no attempt to follow.. The next 
morning General Early advanced along the Telegraph road, and 
recaptured Marye’s and the adjacent hills without difficulty, thus 
gaining the rear of the enemy’s left. In the mean time General 
Hooker had so strengthened his position near Chancellorsville, 
that it was deemed inexpedient to assail it with less than our 
whole force, which had been reduced by the detachment led 
to Fredericksburg to relieve us from the danger that menaced 
our rear. 

It has been heretofore stated that General Longstreet had 
been sent with two divisions of Lee’s army to codperate with 
General French on the south side of the James River, in the 
capture of Suffolk, the occupation of which by the enemy inter- 
rupted our collection of supplies in the eastern counties of North 
Carolina and Virginia. When the advance of Hooker threat- 
ened General Lee’s front, instructions were sent to General 
Longstreet to hasten his return to the army with the large force 
detached with him. These instructions were repeated with ur- 
gent insistence, yet his movements were so delayed that, though 
the battle of Chancellorsville did not occur until many days 
after he was expected to join, his force was absent when it oc- 
curred. Had he rejoined his command in due time, Lee need 
not have diminished his force in front of Hooker, so as to delay 
the renewal of the attack and force him to a precipitate retreat, 
involving the loss of his artillery and trains. It was accord- 
ingly resolved still further to reénforce the troops in front, in 
order, if possible, to drive Hooker across the Rappahannock. 


364. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Some delay occurred in getting the troops into position, 
owing to the broken and irregular nature of the ground, and 
the difficulty of ascertaining the disposition of the opposing 
forces. The attack did not begin until 6 p. m., when the en- 
emy’s troops were rapidly driven across the plank-road in the 
direction of the Rappahannock. The speedy approach of dark- 
ness prevented General McLaws from perceiving the success 
of the attack, until the. foe began to recross the river a short 
distance below Banks’s Ford, where he had laid one of his pon- 
toon-bridges. His right brigades advanced through the woods 
in the direction of the firing, but the retreat was so rapid that 
they could only join in the pursuit. A dense fog settled over 
the field, increasing the obscurity and rendering great caution 
necessary to avoid collision between our own troops. Their 
movements were consequently slow. The next morning it was 
found that the enemy had made good his escape and removed 
his bridges. Fredericksburg was evacuated, and our rear no 
longer threatened. But, as General Hooker had it in his power 
to recross, it was deemed best to leave a force to hold our lines 
as before. McLaws and Anderson being directed to return to 
Chancellorsville, they reached their destination during the 
afternoon, in the midst of a violent storm, which continued 
throughout the night and most of the following day. Prepa- 
rations were made to assail the enemy’s works at daylight on 
the 6th, but, on advancing our skirmishers, it was found that, 
under cover of the storm and darkness of the night, he had 
retreated over the river. A detachment was left to guard the 
battle-field, while the wounded were removed and the captured 
property collected. The rest of the army returned to its former 
position. 

The loss of the enemy, according to his own statement, was 
1,512 killed and 9,518 wounded ; total, 11,030. His dead and a 
large number of wounded were left on the field. About 5,000 
prisoners, exclusive of the wounded, were taken, and 13 pieces 
of artillery, 19,500 stand of arms, 17 colors, and a large quan- 
tity of ammunition fell into our hands. 

Our loss was much less in killed and wounded than that 
of the enemy, but of the number was one, a host in himself, 


1862] HIS PLACE WAS NEVER FILLED. 865 


Lieutenant-General Jackson, who was wounded, and died on 
May 10th. Of this great captain, General Lee, in his anguish 
at his death, justly said, “I have lost my right arm.” As an 
executive officer he had no superior, and war has seldom shown 
an equal. Too devoted to the cause he served to have any 
personal motive, he shared the toils, privations, and dangers of 
his troops when in chief command ; and in subordinate position 
his aim was to understand the purpose of his commander and 
faithfully to promote its success. He was the complement of 
Lee; united, they had achieved such results that the public felt 
secure under their shield. To us his place was never filled. 

The official return of the Army of Northern Virginia, on 
March 31, 1863, shows as present for duty 57,112, of which 
6,509 were cavalry and 1,621 reserve artillery. On May 20th, 
_two weeks after the battle, and when Pickett’s and Hood’s 
divisions had rejoined the army, the total infantry force num- 
bered but 55,261 effective men, from which, if the strength of 
Hood’s and Pickett’s divisions is deducted, there would re- 
main 41,358 as the strength of the commands that participated 
in the battles of Chancellorsville.* 

The Army of the Potomac numbered 120,000 men, infan- 
try and artillery, with a body of 12,000 well-equipped cavalry, 
and an artillery force of four hundred guns.t 

A brief and forcible account of this battle is given by Tay- 
lor: ¢ 


“ A formidable force under General Sedgwick was thrown 
across the river below Fredericksburg, and made demonstrations 
of an intention to assail the Confederate front. Meanwhile, with 
great celerity and secrecy, General Hooker, with the bulk of his 
army, crossed at the upper fords, and, in an able manner and won- 
derfully short time, had concentrated four of his seven army corps, 
numbering fifty-six thousand men, at Chancellorsville, about ten 
miles west of Fredericksburg. His purpose was now fully devel- 
oped to General Lee, who, instead of awaiting its further prose- 
cution, immediately determined on the movement the least ex- 
pected by his opponent. He neither proceeded to make strong 


* Taylor’s “ Four Years with General Lee.” 
+ Swinton’s “ Army of the Potomac,” p. 269. } “ Four Years with General Lee.” 


366 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


his left against an attack from the direction of Chancellorsville 
nor did. he move southward so as to put his army between that of 
General Hooker and the Confederate capital, but, leaving General 
Early, with about nine thousand men, to take care of General Sedg- 
wick, he moved with the remainder of his army, numbering forty- 
eight thousand men, toward Chancellorsville. As soon as the ad- 
vance of the enemy was encountered, it was attacked with vigor, 
and very soon the Federal army was on the defensive in its appar- 
ently impregnable position. It was not the part of wisdom to at- 
tempt to storm this stronghold ; but Sedgwick would certainly soon 
be at work in the rear, and Early, with his inadequate force, could 
not do more than delay and harass him. It was, therefore, imper- 
atively necessary to strike—to strike boldly, effectively, and at 
once. There could be no delay. Meanwhile, two more army 
corps had joined General Hooker, who now had about Chancel- 
lorsville ninety-one thousand men—six corps except one division 
of the Second Corps (Couch’s), which had been left with Sedgwick 
at Fredericksburg. It was a critical position for the Confederate 
commander, but his confidence in his trusted lieutenant and brave 
men was such that he did not long hesitate. Encouraged by the 
counsel and confidence of General Jackson, he determined to still 
further divide his army ; and, while he, with the divisions of An- 
derson and McLaws, less than fourteen thousand men, should hold 
the enemy in his front, he would hurl Jackson upon his flank and 
rear, and crush and crumble him as between the upper and nether 
millstone. The very boldness of the movement contributed much 
to insure its success. 

“The flank movement of Jackson’s wing was attended with 
extraordinary success. On the afternoon of the 2d of May, he 
struck such a blow to the enemy on their extreme right as to 
cause dismay and demoralization to their entire army ; this ad- 
vantage was promptly and vigorously followed up the next day, 
when Generals Lee and Stuart (the latter then in command of 
Jackson’s wing) joined elbows; and, after most heroic and de- 
termined effort, their now united forces finally succeeded in storm- 
ing and capturing the works of the enemy. 

“Meantime Sedgwick had forced Early out of the heights at 
Fredericksburg, and had advanced toward Chancellorsville, thus 
threatening the Confederate rear. General Lee, having defeated 
the greater force and driven it from its stronghold, now gathered 


1862] BETWEEN THE HOSTILE HOSTS. 367 | 


up a few of the most available of his victorious brigades and turned 
upon the lesser. On May 3d Sedgwick’s force was encountered 
near Salem Church, and its further progress checked by General 
McLaws, with the five brigades detached by General Lee for this 
service, including Wilcox’s, which had been stationed at Banks’s 
Ford. On the next day, General Anderson was sent to reénforce 
McLaws with three additional brigades. Meanwhile, General 
Early had connected with these troops, and in the afternoon, so 
soon as dispositions could be made for attack, Sedgwick’s lines 
were promptly assailed and broken, the main assault being made 
on the enemy’s left by Early’s troops. The situation was now a 
critical one for the Federal lieutenant. Darkness came to his res- 
cue, and on the night of the 4th he crossed to the north side of 
the river. 

“On the 5th General Lee concentrated for another assault on 
the new line taken up by General Hooker ; but on the morning of 
the 6th it was ascertained that the enemy, in General Lee’s lan- 
guage, ‘had sought safety beyond the Rappahannock,’ and the 
river flowed again between the hostile hosts,” 


(TAP ob wih SX SOV I. 


Relations with Foreign Nations.—The Public Questions.—Ministers abroad.—Usages 
of Intercourse between Nations.—Our Action.—Mistake of European Nations ; 
they follow the Example of England and France.—Different Conditions of the Bel- 
ligerents.—Injury to the Confederacy by the Policy of European Powers relative 
to the Blockade.—Explanation.—The Paris Conference.—Principles adopted.— 
Acceded to by the Confederacy with a Single ExceptionThese Agreements 
remained inoperative.—Extent of the Pretended Blockade.—Remonstrances 
against its Recognition Sinking Vessels to Block up Harbors.—Every Pro- 
scription of Maritime Law violated by the United States Government.—Pro- 
test.—Addition made to the Law by Great Britain.—Policy pursued favorable 
to our Enemies.—Instances.—Mediation proposed by France to Great Britain, 
and Russian Letter of French Minister.—Reply of Great Britain—Reply of 
Russia.—Letter to French Minister at Washington.—Various Offensive Ac- 
tions of the British Government.—Encouraging to the United States.—Hollow 
Profession of Neutrality. 


Tue public questions arising out of our foreign relations 
were too important to be overlooked. At the end of the first 
year of the war the Confederate States had been recognized 


368 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


by the leading governments of Europe as a belligerent power. 
This continued unchanged to the close. Mr. Mason became our 
representative in London, Mr. Slidell in Paris, Mr. Rost in 
Spain, and Mr. Mann in Belgium. They performed with en- 
ergy and skill the positions, but were unsuccessful in obtaining 
our recognition as an independent power. 

The usages of intercourse between nations require that offi- 
cial communication be made to friendly powers of all organic 
changes in the constitution of states. To those who are fa- 
miliar with the principles upon which the States known as the 
United States were originally constituted, as well as those upon 
which the Union was formed, the organic changes made by the 
secession and confederation of the Southern States are very ap- 
parent. But to others an explanation may be necessary. Each 
of the States was originally declared to be sovereign and inde- 
pendent. In this condition, at a former period, all of those then 
existing were severally recognized by name by the only one of 
the powers which had denied their right to independence. This’ 
gave to each a recognized national sovereignty. Subsequently 
they formed a compact of voluntary union, whereby a new or- 
ganization was constituted, which was made the representative 
of the individual States in all general intercourse with other 
nations. So long as the compact continued in force, this agent 
represented merely the sovereignty of the States. But, when a 
portion of the States withdrew from the compact and formed a 
new one under the name of the Confederate States, they had 
made such organic changes in their Constitution as to require 
official notice in compliance with the usages of nations. 

For this purpose the Provisional Government took early 
measures for sending to Europe Commissioners charged with 
the duty of visiting the capitals of the different powers and 
making arrangements for the opening of more formal diplo- 
matic intercourse. Prior, however, to the arrival abroad of 
these Commissioners, the Government of the United States had 
addressed communications to the different Cabinets of Europe, 
in which it assumed the attitude of being sovereign over the 
Confederate States, and alleged that these independent States 
were in rebellion against the remaining States of the Union, and 


1862] SAME COURSE OF POLICY. 369 


threatened Europe with manifestations of its displeasure if it 
should treat the Confederate States as having an independent 
existence. It soon became known that these pretensions were 
not considered abroad to be as absurd as they were known to be 
at home; nor had Europe yet learned what reliance was to be 
placed in the official statements of the Cabinet at Washington. 
The delegation of power granted by the States to the General 
Government to represent them in foreign intercourse had led 
European nations into the grave error of supposing that their 
separate sovereignty and independence had been merged into one 
common sovereignty, and had ceased to have a distinct existence. 
Under the influence of this error, which all appeals to reason 
and historical fact were vainly used to dispel, our Commissioners 
were met by the declaration that foreign Governments could not 
assume to judge between the conflicting representations of the 
two parties as to the true nature of their previous relations. The 
Governments of Great Britain and France accordingly signified 
their determination to confine themselves to recognizing the 
self-evident fact of the existence of a war, and to maintain a 
strict neutrality during its progress. Some of the other powers 
of Europe pursued the same course of policy, and it became ap- 
parent that by some understanding, express or tacit, Europe had 
decided to leave the initiative in all action touching the contest 
on this continent to the two powers just named, who were rec- 
ognized to have the largest interests involved, both by reason of 
proximity to and of the extent of intimacy of their commercial 
relations with the States engaged in war. 

It was manifest that the course of action adopted by Europe, 
while based on an apparent refusal to determine the question or 
to side with either party, was, in point of fact, an actual deci- 
sion against our rights and in favor of the groundless preten- 
sions of the United States. It was a refusal to treat us as an 
independent government. If we were independent States, the 
refusal to entertain with us the same international intercourse 
which was maintained with our enemy was unjust, and was inju- 
rious in its effects, whatever might have been the motive which 
prompted it. Neither was it in accordance with the high moral 
obligations of that international code, whose chief sanction is 

i 


870 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the conscience of sovereigns and the public opinion of mankind, 
that those eminent powers should have declined the perform- 
ance of a duty peculiarly incumbent on them, from any appre- 
hension of the consequences to themselves. One immediate 
and necessary result of their declining the responsibility of a 
decision, which must have been adverse to the extravagant pre- 
tensions of the United States, was the prolongation of hostilities 
to which our enemies were thereby encouraged, and which re- 
sulted in scenes of carnage and devastation on this continent 
and of misery and suffering on the other such as have scarcely 
a parallel in history. Had those powers promptly admitted 
our right to be treated as all other independent nations, none 
can doubt that the moral effect of such action would have been 
to dispel the pretension under which the United States per- 
sisted in their efforts to accomplish our subjugation. 

There were other matters in which less than justice was ren- 
dered to the Confederacy by “neutral” Europe, and undue ad- 
vantage conferred on the aggressors in a wicked war. At the 
inception of hostilities, the inhabitants of the Confederate States 
were almost exclusively agriculturists; those of the United 
States were also toa large extent mechanics, merchants, and 
navigators. We had no commercial marine, while their mer- 
chant-vessels covered the ocean. We were without a navy, 
while they had powerful fleets built by the money we had in 
full share contributed. The power which they possessed for 
inflicting injury on our coasts and harbors was thus counter- 
balanced in some measure by the exposure of their commerce 
to attack by private armed vessels. It was known to Enu- 
rope that within a very few years past the United States had 
peremptorily refused to accede to proposals for the abolition 
of privateering, on the ground, as alleged by them, that nations 
owning powerful fleets would thereby obtain undue advantage 
over those possessing inferior naval force. Yet no sooner was 
war flagrant between the Confederacy and the United States 
than the maritime powers of Europe issued orders prohibit- 
ing either party from bringing prizes into their ports. This 
prohibition, directed with apparent impartiality against both 
belligerents, was in reality effective against the Confederate 


1856] POLICY OF EUROPEAN POWERS. 371 


States only, for they alone could find a hostile commerce on 
the ocean. Merely nominal against the United States, the pro- 
hibition operated with intense severity on the Confederacy by 
depriving it of the only means of maintaining its struggle on 
the ocean against the crushing superiority of naval force pos- 
sessed by its enemies. The value and efficiency of the weapon 
which was thus wrested from our grasp by the combined ac- 
tion of ‘neutral ” European powers, in favor of a power which 
professes openly its intention of ravaging their commerce by 
privateers in any future war, is strikingly illustrated by the 
terror inspired among commercial classes of the United States 
by a single cruiser of the Confederacy. One small steamer, 
commanded by officers and manned by a crew who were de- 
barred by the closure of neutral ports from the opportunity 
of causing captured vessels to be condemned in their favor as 
prizes, sufficed to double the rates of marine insurance in Northern 
ports, and consign to forced inaction numbers of Northern ves- 
sels, in addition to the direct damage inflicted by captures at sea. 

But it was especially in relation to the so-called blockade 
that the policy of European powers was so shaped as to cause 
the greatest injury to the Confederacy, and to confer signal ad- 
vantages on the United States. A few words in explanation may 
here be necessary. 

Prior to the year 1856 the principles regulating this subject 
were to be gathered from the writings of eminent publicists, 
the decisions of admiralty courts, international treaties, and the 
usages of nations. The uncertainty and doubt which prevailed 
in reference to the true rules of maritime law, in time of war, 
resulting from the discordant and often conflicting principles 
announced from such varied and independent sources, had be- 
come a grievous evil to mankind. Whether a blockade was 
allowable against a port not invested by land ‘as well as by sea, 
whether a blockade was valid by sea if the investing fleet was 
merely sufficient to render ingress to the blockaded port evi- 
dently dangerous, or whether it was further required for its 
legality that it should be sufficient “really to prevent access,” 
and numerous other similar questions, had remained doubtful 


and undecided. 


372 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Animated by the highly honorable desire to put an end “to 
differences of opinion between neutrals and belligerents, which 
may occasion serious difficulties and even conflicts” (such was 
the official language), the five great powers of Europe, together 
with Sardinia and Turkey, adopted in 1856 the following dec- 
laration of principles : 

“1, Privateering is and remains abolished. 

“9. The neutral flag covers enemy’s goods, with the excep- 
tion of contraband of war. 

“3. Neutral goods, with the exception of contraband of war, 
are not liable to capture under enemy’s flag. 

“4, Blockades, in order to be binding must be effective, that 
is to say, maintained by a force sufficient really to prevent ac- 
cess to the coast of the enemy.” 

Not only did this solemn declaration announce to the world 
the principles to which the signing powers agreed to conform in 
future wars, but it contained a clause to which these powers 
gave immediate effect, and which provided that the states, not 
parties to the Congress of Paris, should be invited to accede to 
the declaration. Under this invitation every independent state 
in Europe yielded its assent—at least, no instance is known to 
me of a refusal ; and the United States, while declining to assent 
to the proposition which prohibited privateering, declared that 
the three remaining principles were in entire accordance with 
their own views of international law. 

No instance is known in history of the adoption of rules 
of public law under cireumstances of like solemnity, with like 
unanimity, and pledging the faith of nations with a sanctity so 
peculiar. 

When, therefore, this Confederacy was formed, and when 
neutral powers, while deferring action on its demand for ad- 
mission into the family of nations, recognized it as a belliger- 
ent power, Great Britain and France made informal proposals, 
about the same time, that their own rights as neutrals should be 
guaranteed by our acceding, as belligerents, to the declaration 
of principles made by the Congress of Paris. The request was 
addressed to our sense of justice, and therefore met immediate 
and favorable response in the resolutions of the Provisional 


1861] THIS MONSTROUS PRETENSION. 873 


Congress of the 13th of August, 1861, by which all the princi- 
ples announced by the Congress of Paris were adopted as the 
guide of our conduct during the war, with the sole exception of 
that relative to privateering. As the right to make use of pri- 
vateers was one in which neutral nations had, as to the then 
existing war, no interest ; as it was a right which the United 
States had refused to abandon, and which they remained at lib- 
erty to employ against us; as it was a right of which we were 
already in actual enjoyment, and which we could not be expected 
to renounce flagrante bello against an adversary possessing an 
overwhelming superiority of naval forces—it was reserved with 
entire confidence that neutral nations could not fail to perceive 
that just reason existed for the reservation. Nor was this con- 
fidence misplaced ; for the official documents published by the 
British Government contained the expression of the satisfaction 
of that Government with the conduct of officials who conducted 
successfully the delicate transaction confided to their charge. 
These solemn declarations of principle, this implied agreement 
between the Confederacy and the two powers just named, were 
suffered to remain inoperative against the menaces and outrages 
on neutral rights committed by the United States with unceas- 
ing and progressing arrogance during the whole period of the 
war. Neutral Europe remained passive when the United States, 
with a naval force insufficient to blockade effectively the coast 
of a single State, proclaimed a paper blockade of thousands of 
miles of coast, extending from the Capes of the Chesapeake to 
those of Florida, and encircling the Gulf of Mexico from Key 
West to the mouth of the Rio Grande. Compared with this 
monstrous pretension of the United States, the blockades known 
in history under the names of the Berlin and Milan Decrees, and 
the British Orders in Council, in the years 1806 and 1807, sink 
into insignificance. Those blockades were justified by the pow- 
ers that declared them, on the sole ground that they were retali- 
atory ; yet they have since been condemned by the publicists of 
those very powers as violations of international law. It will be 
remembered that those blockades evoked angry remonstrances 
from neutral powers, among which the United States were the 
most conspicuous, and were in their consequences the chief cause 


874 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of the war between Great Britain and the United States in 1812; 
also, that they formed one of the principal motives that led to 
the declaration of the Congress of Paris in 1856, in the fond 
hope of imposing an enduring check on the very abuse of mari- 
time power which was renewed by the United States in 1861 
and 1862, under circumstances and with features of aggravated 
wrong without precedent in history. 

Repeated and formal remonstrances were made by the Con- 
federate Government to neutral powers against the recognition 
of that blockade. It was shown by evidence not capable of con- 
tradiction, and which was furnished in part by the officials of 
neutral nations, that the few ports of the Confederacy, before 
which any naval forces at all were stationed, were invested so 
inefficiently that hundreds of entries were effected into them 
after the declaration of the blockade; that our enemies admitted 
the inefficiency of their blockade in the most forcible manner, 
by repeated official complaints of the sale to us of goods contra- 
band of war—a sale which could not possibly have affected their 
interests if their pretended blockade had been sufficient “really 
to prevent access to our coasts”; that they alleged their inabil- 
ity to render their paper blockade effective as the excuse for 
the odious barbarity of destroying the entrance to one of the 
harbors by sinking vessels loaded with stone in the channel; 
that our commerce with foreign nations was interrupted, not by 
the effective investment of our ports, but by watching the ports 
of the West Indies; not only by the seizure of ships in the at- 
tempt to enter the Confederate ports, but by the capture on the 
high-seas of neutral vessels by the cruisers of our enemies, when- 
ever supposed to be bound to any point on our extensive coast, 
without inquiry whether a single blockading vessel was to be 
found at such point; that blockading vessels had left the ports 
at which they were stationed for distant expeditions, were ab- 
sent for many days, and returned without notice either of the 
_ cessation or renewal of the blockade ; in a word, that every pre- 
scription of maritime law and every right of neutral nations to 
trade with a’ belligerent under the sanction of principles here- 
tofore universally respected were systematically and persistently 
violated by the United States. Neutral Europe received our 


1862] THE EVIDENT DANGER. 375 


* 
¢ 


_Yremonstrances, and submitted in almost unbroken silence to all 
the wrongs that the United States chose to inflict on its com- 
merce. The Cabinet of Great Britain, however, did not confine 
itself to such implied acquiescence in these breaches of interna- 
tional law which resulted from simple inaction, but, in a pub- 
lished dispatch of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, assumed to 


make a change in the principle enunciated by the Congress of. 
Paris, to which the faith of the British Government was consid- 


ered to be pledged. The change was so important and so preju- — 


dicial to the interests of the Confederacy that, after a vain 
attempt to obtain satisfactory explanations from that Goyern- | 


ment, I directed a solemn protest to be made. 

In a published dispatch from her Majesty’s Foreign Office 
to her Minister at Washington, under date of February 11th, 
1862, occurred the following passage : 


“ Her Majesty’s Government, however, are of opinion that, as- 
suming that the blockade was duly notified, and also that a num- 
ber of ships is stationed and remains at the entrance of a port 
sufficient really to prevent access to it, or to create an evident dan- 
ger of entering it or leaving it, and that these ships do not volun- 
tarily permit ingress or egress, the fact that various ships may 
have successfully escaped through it (as in the particular instance 
here referred to), will not of itself prevent the blockade from be- 
ing an effectual one by international law.” 

The words which I have italicized were an addition made by 
the British Government of its own authority to a principle, the 
exact terms of which were settled with deliberation by the com- 
mon consent of civilized nations, and by implied convention 
with our Government, as already explained, and their effect was 
clearly to reopen to the prejudice of the Confederacy one of the 
very disputed questions on the law of blockade which the Con- 
_ gress of Paris proposed to settle. The importance of this change 
was readily illustrated by taking one of our ports as an example. 
There was “evident danger,” in entering the port of Wilming- 
ton, from the presence of a blockading force, and by this test 
the blockade was effective. ‘Access is not really prevented” 
by the blockading fleet to the same port; for steamers were con- 


£ 


4h 
bi 


e 


376 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tinually arriving and departing, so that, tried by this test, the 
blockade was ineffective and invalid. Thus, while every energy 
of our country was evoked in the struggle for maintaining its 
existence, the neutral nations of Europe pursued a policy which, 
nominally impartial, was practically most favorable to our ene- 
mies and most detrimental to us. 

The exercise of the neutral right of refusing entry into their 
ports to prizes taken by both belligerents was especially hurtful 
to the Confederacy. It was sternly adhered to and enforced. 

The assertion of the neutral right of commerce with a bel- 
ligerent, whose ports are not blockaded by fleets sufficient really 
to prevent access to them, would have. been eminently bene- 
ficial to the Confederate States, and only thus hurtful to the 
United States. It was complaisantly abandoned. 

The duty of neutral states to receive with cordiality and 
recognize with respect any new confederation that independent 
states may think proper to form, was too clear to admit of de- 
nial, but its postponement was equally beneficial to the United 
States and detrimental to the Confederacy. It was postponed. 

In this statement of our relations with the nations of Eu- 
rope, it has been my purpose to point out distinctly that the 
Confederacy had no complaint to make that those nations de- 
clared their neutrality. It could neither expect nor desire more. 
The complaint was, that the declared neutrality was delusive, not 
real; that recognized neutral rights were alternately asserted and 
waived in such manner as to bear with great severity on us, while 
conferring signal advantages on our enemy. 

Perhaps it may not be out of place here to notice a corre- 
spondence between the Cabinets of France, Great Britain, and 
Russia, relative to a mediation between the Confederacy and the 
United States. On October 80, 1862, the French Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, Drouyn de l’Huys, addressed a note to the am- 
bassadors of France at London and St. Petersburg. In this 
dispatch he stated that the Emperor had followed with painful 
interest the struggle which had then been going on for more 
than a year on this continent. He observed that the proofs of 
energy, perseverance, and courage, on both sides, had been given 
at the expense of innumerable calamities and immense blood- 


1862] TO HAVE NO ISSUE. 377 


shed ; to the accompaniments of civil conflict was to be added 
the apprehension of servile war, which would be the climax of 
so many irreparable misfortunes. 

If these calamities affected America only, these sufferings of 
a friendly nation would be enough to excite the anxiety and 
sympathy of the Emperor; but Europe also had suffered in one 
of the principal branches of her industry, and her artisans had 
been subjected to most cruel trials. France and the maritime 
powers had, during the struggle, maintained .the strictest neu- 
trality, but the sentiments by which they were animated, far 
from imposing on them anything like indifference, seem, on the 
contrary, to require that they should assist the two belligerent 
parties in an endeavor to escape from a position which appeared 
to have no issue. The forces of the two sides had hitherto 
fought with balanced success, and the latest accounts did not 
show any prospect of a speedy termination of the war. 

These circumstances, taken together, seemed to favor the 
adoption of measures which might bring about a truce. The 
Emperor of the French, therefore, was of the opinion that there 
was now an opportunity of offering to the belligerents the good 
offices of the maritime powers. He, therefore, proposed to 
her Majesty, as well as to the Emperor of Russia, that the 
three courts should endeavor, both at Washington and in com- 
munication with the Confederate States, to bring about a sus- 
pension of arms for six months, during which time every act of 
hostility, direct or indirect, should cease, at sea as well as on 
land. This armistice might, if necessary, be renewed for a 
further period. y 

This proposal, he proceeded to say, would not imply, on the 
part of the three powers, any judgment on the origin of the 
war, or any pressure on the negotiations for peace, which it 
was hoped would take place during the armistice. The three 
powers would only interfere to smooth the obstacles, and only 
within the limits which the two interested parties would pre- 
scribe. The French Government was of the opinion that, even 
in the event of a failure of immediate success, those overtures 
might have proved useful in leading the minds of men heated 
by passion to consider the advantages of conciliation and peace. 


378 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The reply of Great Britain, through Lord John Russell, on 
November 13, 1862, is really contained in this extract: 


“ After weighing all the information which has been received 
from America, her Majesty’s Government are led to the conclu- 
sion that there is no ground at the present moment to hope that 
the Federal Government would accept the proposal suggested, 
and a refusal from Washington at the present time would prevent 
any speedy renewal of the offer.” 


The Russian Government, in reply, said: 


“ According to the information we have hitherto received, we 
are inclined to believe that a combined step between France, 
England, and Russia, no matter how conciliatory, and how cau- 
tiously made, if it were taken with an official and collective char- 
acter, would run the risk of causing precisely the very opposite of 
the object of pacification, which is the aim of the wishes of the 
three courts.” 


The unfavorable reception of the proposal was communi- 
cated by the French Minister of Foreign Affairs to the repre- 
sentative of France at Washington. In this communication he 
said : 

“Convinced as we were that an understanding between the 
three powers in the sense presented by us would answer as much 
the interests of the American people as our own; that even that 
understanding was, in the existing circumstances, a duty of hu- 
manity, you will easily form an idea of our regret at seeing the 
initiative we have taken after mature reflection remain without 
results. Being also desirous of informing Mr. Dayton, the United 
States Minister, of our project, I confidently communicated it to 
him, and even read in his presence the dispatch sent. to London 
and St. Petersburg. I could not but be surprised that the Minis- 
ter of the United States should oppose his objections to the pro- 
ject I communicated to him, and to hear him express personally 
some doubts as to the reception which would be given by the Cabi- 
net at Washington to the joint offers of the good offices of France, 
Russia, and Great Britain.” 


It has already been stated that, by common understanding, 
the initiative in all action touching the contest on this continent 


1861] TRUE NATURE OF THE NEUTRALITY. 3879 


had been left by foreign powers to the two great maritime na- 
tions of Western Europe, and that the Governments of these 
two nations had agreed to take no measures without previous 
concert. ‘The result of these arrangements, therefore, placed it 
in the power of either France or England to obstruct at pleas- 
ure the recognition to which the Confederacy was justly enti- 
tled, or even to prolong the continuance of hostilities on this 
side of the Atlantic, if the policy of either could be promoted 
by the postponement of peace. Each, too, thus became pos- 
sessed of great influence in so shaping the general exercise of 
neutral rights in Europe as to render them subservient to the 
purpose of aiding one of the belligerents, to the detriment of the 
other. Perhaps it may not be out of place to present a few 
examples by which to show the true nature of the neutrality 
professed in this war. 

In May, 1861, the Government of her Britannic Majesty 
assured our enemies that “ the sympathies of this country [Great 
Britain] were rather with the North than with the South.” 

On June 1, 1861, the British Government interdicted the 
use of its ports ‘‘to armed ships and privateers, both of the 
United States and the so-called Confederate States,” with their 
prizes. The Secretary of State of the United States fully ap- 
preciated the character and motive of this interdiction, when he 
observed to Lord Lyons, who communicated it, that “this meas- 
ure and that of the same character which had been adopted by 
France would probably prove a death-blow to Southern priva- 
teering””—a means, it will be remembered, which the United 
States had refused to abandon for themselves. 

On the 12th of June, 1861, the United States Minister in 
London informed her Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs 
that the fact of his having held interviews with the Commission- 
ers of our Government had given “great dissatisfaction, and 
that a protraction of this would be viewed by the United States 
as hostile in spirit, and to require some corresponding action ac- 
cordingly.” In response to this intimation her Majesty’s Min- 
ister gave assurance that “he had no expectation of seeing them 
any more.” 

Further extracts will show the marked encouragement to 


38) RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the United States to persevere in its paper blockade, and unmis- 
takable intimations that her Majesty’s Government would not 
contest its validity. 

On May 21, 1861, Earl Russell pointed out to the United 
States Minister in London that “the blockade might, no doubt, 
be made effective, considering the small number of harbors on 
the Southern coast, even though the extent of three thousand 
miles were comprehended in the terms of that blockade.” 

On January 14, 1862, her Majesty’s Minister in Washing- 
ton communicated to his Government that, in extenuation of 
the barbarous attempt to destroy the port of Charleston by sink- 
ing a stone fleet in the harbor, Mr. Seward had explained that 
“the Government of the United States had, last spring, with a 
navy very little prepared for so extensive an operation, under- 
taken to blockade upward of three thousand miles of coast. 
The Secretary of the Navy had reported that he could stop up 
the ‘large holes’ by means of his ships, but that he could not 
stop up the ‘small ones.’ It has been found necessary, there- 
fore, to close some of the numerous small inlets by sinking ves- 
sels in the channel.” 

On May 6, 1862, so far from claiming the right of British 
subjects as neutrals to trade with us as belligerents, and to dis- 
regard the blockade on the ground of this explicit confession by 
our enemy of his inability to render it effective, her Majesty’s 
Minister for Foreign Affairs claimed credit with the United 
States for friendly action in respecting it. His lordship stated 
that— 


“The United States Government, on the allegation of a rebel- 
lion pervading from nine to eleven States of the Union, have now, 
for more than twelve months, endeavored to maintain a blockade 
of three thousand miles of coast. This blockade, kept up irregu- 
larly, but, when enforced, enforced severely, has seriously injured 
the trade and manufactures of the United Kingdom. 

“Thousands are now obliged to resort to the poor-rates for 
subsistence owing to this blockade. Yet her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment have never sought to take advantage of the obvious im- 
perfections of this blockade, in order to declare it ineffective. 
They have, to the loss and detriment of the British nation, seru- 


1862] TO SEIZE ONE VESSEL. 3881 


pulously observed the duties of Great Britain toward a friendly 
state.” 


It is not necessary to pursue this subject further. Suffice it 
to say that the British Government, when called upon to redeem 
its pledge made at Paris in 1856, and renewed to the Confederacy 
in 1861, replied that it could not regard the blockade of South- 
ern ports as having been otherwise than “ practically effective in 
February, 1862,” and that “the manner in which it has since 
been enforced gives to neutral governments no excuse for as- 
serting that the blockade had not been effectively maintained.” 

The partiality of her Majesty’s Government in favor of our 
enemies was further evinced in the marked difference of its con- 
duct on the subject of the purchase of supplies by the two bel- 
ligerents. This difference was conspicuous from the very com- 
mencement of the war. As early as May 1, 1861, the British 
Minister in Washington was informed by the Secretary of State 
of the United States that he had sent agents to England, and 
that others would go to France, to purchase arms; and this fact 
was communicated to the British Foreign Office, which inter- 
posed no objection. Yet, in October of the same year, Earl 
Russell entertained the complaint of the United States Minister 
in London, that the Confederate States were importing contra- 
band of war from the Island of Nassau, directed inquiry into 
the matter, and obtained a report from the authorities of the 
island denying the allegations, which report was inclosed to Mr. 
Adams, and received by him as satisfactory evidence to dissi- 
pate “the suspicion thrown upon the authorities by that unwar- 
rantable act.” So, too, when the Confederate Government 
purchased in Great Britain, as a neutral country (with strict 
observance both of the law of nations and the municipal law of 
Great Britain), vessels which were subsequently armed and com- 
missioned as vessels of war after they had been far removed 


from English waters, the British Government, in violation of its . 


own laws, and in deference to the importunate demands of the 
United States, made an ineffectual attempt to seize one vessel, 
and did actually seize and detain another which touched at the 
Island of Nassau, on her way to a Confederate port, and sub- 


389 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


jected her to an unfounded prosecution, at the very time when 
cargoes of munitions of war were openly shipped from British 
ports to New York, to be used in warfare against us. Further 
instances need not be adduced to show how detrimental to us, 
and advantageous to our enemy, was the manner in which the 
leading European power observed its hollow profession of neu- 
trality toward the belligerents. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


Advance of General E. K. Smith.—Advance of General Bragg.—Retreat of General 
Buell to Louisville. — Battle at Perryville, Kentucky. — General Morgan at 
Hartsville.—Advance of General Rosecrans.—Battle of Murfreesboro.—General 
Van Dorn and General Price.—Battle at Iuka.—General Van Dorn.—Battle of 
Corinth.—General Little—Captures at Holly Springs.—Retreat of Grant to 
Memphis.—Operations against Vicksburg.—The Canal.—Concentration.—Raid 
of Grierson.—Attack near Port Gibson.—Orders of General Johnston.—Reply 
of General Pemberton.—Baker’s Creek.—Big Black Bridge.—Retreat to Vicks- 
burg.—Siege.—Surrender.—Losses.—Surrender of Port Hudson.—Some Move- 
ments for its Relief. 


Orrrations in the West now claim attention. General 
Bragg, soon after taking command, as has been previously stated, 
advanced from Tupelo and occupied Chattanooga. Meantime 
General E. K. Smith with his force held Knoxville, in East 
Tennessee. Subsequently, in August, he moved toward Ken- 
tucky, and entered that State through Big Creek Gap, some 
twenty miles south of Cumberland Gap. After several small 
and successful affairs, he reached Richmond in the afternoon of 
August 30th. Here a force of the enemy had been collected to 
check his progress, but it was speedily routed, with the loss of 
some hundred killed and several thousand made prisoners, and a 
large number of small-arms, artillery, and wagons were captured. 
Lexington was next occupied ; thence he advanced to Frankfort ; 
and, moving forward toward the Ohio River, a great alarm was 
created in Cincinnati, then so little prepared for defense that, 
had his campaign been an independent one, he probably could 
and would have crossed the Ohio and captured that city. His 


1362] THERE TO GIVE BATTLE. 383 


division was but the advance of General Bragg’s, and his duty 
to codperate with it was a suflicient reason for not attempting 
so important a movement. 

General Bragg marched from Chattanooga on September 
5th, and, without serious opposition, entered Kentucky by the 
eastern route, thus passing to the rear of General Buell in Mid- 
dle Tennessee, who, becoming concerned for his line of com- 
munication with Nashville and Louisville, and especially for the 
safety of the latter city, collected all his force and retreated 
rapidly to Louisville. This was a brilliant piece of strategy on 
the part of General Bragg, by which he manceuvered the foe 
out of a large and to us important territory. By it north 
Alabama and Middle Tennessee were relieved from the presence 
of the enemy, without necessitating a single engagement. 

General Buell in his retreat followed the line of the railroad 
from Nashville to Louisville. General Bragg moved more to 
the eastward, so as to unite with the forces under General E. K. 
Smith, which was subsequently effected when the army was 
withdrawing from Kentucky. 

On September 18th General Bragg issued an address to the 
citizens of Kentucky. Some recruits joined him, and an im- 
mense amount of supplies was obtained, which he continued to 
send to the rear until he withdrew from the State. The enemy, 
having received reénforcements, as soon as our army began to 
retire, moved out and pressed so heavily on its rear, under 
Major-General Hardee, that he halted and checked them near 
Perryville. General Bragg then determined there to give 
battle. 

Concentrating three of the divisions of his old command, 
then under Major-General Polk, he directed him to attack on 
the morning of October 8th. The two armies were formed 
on opposite sides of the town. The action opened at 12.30 
p. M., between the skirmishers and artillery on both: sides. 
Finding the enemy indisposed to advance, General Bragg or- 
dered him to be assailed vigorously. The engagement became 
general soon after, and was continued furiously until dark. 
Although greatly outnumbered, our troops did not hesitate to 
engage at any odds, and, though the battle raged with varying 


884 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


fortune, our men eventually carried every position, and drove 
the Federals about two miles. The intervention of night termi- 
nated the action. Our force captured fifteen pieces of artillery, 
killed one and wounded two brigadier-generals and a very large 
number of inferior officers and men, estimated at no less than 
four thousand, and captured four hundred prisoners. Our loss 
was twenty-five hundred killed, wounded, and missing. 

Ascertaining that the enemy was heavily reénforeced during 
the night, General Bragg on the next morning withdrew his 
troops to Harrodsburg. General Smith arrived the next day . 
with most of his forces, and the whole were then withdrawn to 
Bryantsville, the foe following slowly but not closely. _Gen- 
eral Bragg finally took position at Murfreesboro, and the hos- 
tile forces concentrated at Nashville, General Buell having been 
superseded by General Rosecrans. 

Meantime, on November 30th, General Morgan with thir- 
teen hundred men made an attack on a brigade of the enemy at 
Hartsville. It was found strongly posted on a hill in line of 
battle. Our line was formed under fire, and the advance was 
made with great steadiness. The enemy was driven from his 
position, through his camps, losing a battery of Parrott guns, 
and finally hemmed in on the river-bank, where he surrendered. 
The contest was severe, and lasted an hour and ahalf. The 
prisoners numbered twenty-one hundred. 

Late in the month of December General Rosecrans com- 
menced his advance from Nashville upon the position of Gen- 
eral Brage at Murfreesboro. His movement began on Decem- 
ber 26th by various routes, but such was the activity of our 
cavalry as to delay him four days in reaching the battle-field, a 
distance of twenty-six miles. On the 29th General Wheeler 
with his cavalry brigade gained the rear of Rosecrans’s army, 
and destroyed several hundreds of wagons loaded with sup- 
plies and baggage. After clearing the road, he made the cir- 
cuit of the enemy and joined our left. Their strength, as we 
have ascertained, was 65,000 men. The number of fighting 
men we had on the field on December 31st was 35,000, of 
which 30,000 were infantry and artillery. 

Our line was formed about two miles from Murfreesboro, 


1862] TOO FORMIDABLE FOR ASSAULT. 885 


and stretched transversely across Stone River, which was ford- 
able from the Lebanon pike on the right to the Franklin road 
on the left. As General Rosecrans made no demonstration on 
the 30th, General Bragg determined to begin the conflict early 
on the morning of the 31st by the advance of his left. The ene- 
my was taken completely by surprise, and his right was stead- 
ily driven until his line was thrown entirely back at a right 
angle to his first position and near to the railroad, along which 
he had massed reserves. Their resistance after the first surprise 
was most gallant and obstinate. At night he had been forced 
from every position except the one on his extreme left, which 
rested on Stone River, and was strengthened by a concentra- 
tion of artillery, and now seemed too formidable for assault. 

On the next day (January 1st) the cannonading opened on 
the right center about 8 A.m., and after a short time subsided. 
The enemy had withdrawn from the advanced position occu- 
pied by his left flank; one or two short contests occurred on 
the 3d, but his line was unchanged. Our forces had now 
been in line of battle five days and nights, with little rest, as 
there were no reserves. Their tents had been packed in the 
wagons, which were four miles to the rear. The rain was con- 
tinuous, and the cold severe. Intelligence was received that 
heavy reénforcements were coming to Rosecrans by a rapid 
transfer of all the troops from Kentucky, and for this and the 
reasons before stated General Bragg decided to fall back to Tul- 
lahoma, and the army was withdrawn in good order. 

In the series of engagements near Murfreesboro we captured 
over 6,000 prisoners, 30 pieces of artillery, 6,000 small-arms, a 
number of ambulances, horses, and mules, and a large amount 
of other property. Our losses exceeded 10,000, and that of the 
enemy was estimated at over 25,000. 

After the battle of Shiloh, West Tennessee and north Mis- 
sissippi were occupied by a force under General Grant. Subse- 
quently this force was increased, and General Rosecrans assigned 
to its command. Many positions were held in West Tennessee 
and north Mississippi, extending from Memphis to the north- 
eastern part of the State of Mississippi, with garrisons aggre- 
gating about 42,000 men. The most important of these posi- 

72 


386 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tions was that of the fortified town of Corinth. As part of the 
plan to subjugate the Southwestern States, extensive prepara- 
tions were made for an advance through Mississippi and an at- 
tack on Vicksburg by combined land and naval forces. A large 
number of troops occupied Middle Tennessee and north Ala- 
bama. ‘To defeat their general plan, and to relieve the last- 
mentioned places of the presence of the enemy, General Bragg 
moved his army into Kentucky, which, by this time, the Federal 
Government thought it needless to overawe by the presence of 
garrisons. General Van Dorn and General Price commanded 
the Confederate troops then in north Mississippi. General 
Bragg, when he advanced into Kentucky, had left them with 
instructions to operate against the Federals in that region, and 
especially to guard against their junction with Buell in Middle 
Tennessee. Though Van Dorn was superior in rank, he had no 
power to command General Price, unless they should happen to 
join in the field and do duty together. General Price on this 
as on other occasions manifested his entire willingness to make 
a junction with his superior officer, and about the last of August 
proposed to General Van Dorn to join him, but at that time 
Van Dorn’s available force for the field had been sent with Gen- 
eral Breckinridge in his campaign against Baton Rouge. After 
that force had rejoined General Van Dorn, he wrote to Price, 
inviting him to unite with him, that, with their two divisions, 
they might make an attack upon Corinth, by the capture of 
which main position of the enemy in that section of the country 
he hoped to be subsequently able to drive him from north Mis- 
sissippi and West Tennessee. Price felt constrained by his 
instructions to observe and if possible to prevent Rosecrans’s 
forces in Mississippi from effecting a junction with Buell’s in 
Tennessee; therefore the invitation was unfortunately post- 
poned to a future time. 

Subsequently General Price learned that Rosecrans was moy- 
ing to cross the Tennessee and join Buell; he therefore marched 
from Tupelo and reached Iuka on the 19th of September. His 
cavalry advance found the place occupied by a force,’ which 
retreated toward Corinth, abandoning a considerable amount 
of stores. On the 24th Van Dorn renewed in urgent terms 


1862] AND NOT SOONER. 387 


his request for Price to come with all his forces to unite with 
him and make an attack upon Corinth. On the same day 
Price received a letter from General Ord, informing him that 
“ Lee’s army had been destroyed at Antietam; that, therefore, 
the rebellion must soon terminate, and that, in order to spare 
the further effusion of blood, he gave him this opportunity 
to lay down his arms.” Price replied, correcting the rumor 
about Lee’s army, thanked Ord for his kind feeling, and prom- 
ised to “lay down his arms whenever Mr. Lincoln should ac- 
knowledge the independence of the Southern Confederacy, and 
not sooner.” On that night General Price held a council of 
war, at which it was agreed on the next morning to fall back 
and make a junction with Van Dorn, it being now satisfactorily 
shown that the enemy was holding the line on our left instead 
of moving to reénforce Buell. The cavalry pickets had re- 
ported that a heavy force was moving from the south toward 
Iuka on the Jacinto road, to meet which General Little had ad- 
vanced with his Missouri brigade, an Arkansas battalion, the 
Third Louisiana Infantry, and the Texas Legion. It proved to 
be a force commanded by General Rosecrans in person. A 
bloody contest ensued, and the latter was driven back, with the 
loss of nine guns. Our own loss was very serious. General 
Maury states that the Third Louisiana regiment lost half its 
men, that Whitfield’s legion suffered heavily, and adds that 
these two regiments and the Arkansas battalion of about a hun- 
dred men had charged and captured the enemy’s guns. In this 
action General Henry Little fell, an officer of extraordinary 
merit, distinguished on many fields, and than whom there was 
none whose loss could have been more deeply felt by his Mis- 
souri brigade, as well as by the whole army, whose admiration 
he had so often attracted by gallantry and good conduct. It 
was afterward ascertained that this movement of Rosecrans 
was intended to be made in concert with one by Grant mov- 
ing from the west, but the former had been beaten before the 
latter arrived. Before dawn Price moved to make the proposed 
junction with Van Dorn, which was effected at Ripley on the 
28th of September, at which time Van Dorn in his report 
says: “Field returns showed my strength to be about 22,000. 


388 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


Rosecrans at Corinth had about 15,000, with about 8,000 addi- 
tional men at outposts from twelve to fifteen miles distant.” In 
addition to this force, the enemy had at Memphis, under Sher- 
man, about 6,000 men; at Bolivar, under Ord, about 8,000; at 
Jackson, Tennessee, under Grant, about 3,000; at bridges and 
less important points, 2,000 or 3,000—making an aggregate of 
42,000 in West Tennessee and north Mississippi. 

Corinth, though the strongest, was from its salient position 
the point it was most feasible to attack, and, under the cireum- 
stances, the most important to gain. Van Dorn, therefore, 
decided to move so rapidly upon it as to take it by surprise, and 
endeavor to capture it before reénforcements could arrive. In 
a previous chapter notice has been taken of the character and 
conduct of General Price; here it is proposed in like manner to 
say something of General Van Dorn, rendered the more appro- 
priate because of the criticism to which his attack upon Corinth 
has been subjected. He was an educated soldier, had served 
with marked distinction in the war with Mexico; indeed, had 
been quite as often noticed in official reports for gallantry and 
good conduct as any officer who served in that war. After its 
close he had served on the Western frontier, and in Indian 
warfare exhibited a like activity and daring as that shown in 
the greater battles with Mexico. Immediately on the seces- 
sion of his native State, Mississippi, he resigned from the United 
States Army, and, together with his veteran commander in 
Texas, General Twiggs, commenced recruiting men for the 
anticipated war. He was among the first to leave the service 
of the United States, and came to offer his sword to Missis- 
sippi. In the military organization there authorized, he was 
appointed a brigadier-general, and, when the State troops were 
transferred to the Confederacy, he entered its service. Gen- 
tle as he was brave, and generous, freely sharing all the dan- 
gers and privations to which his troops were subjected, he 
possessed, like his associate Price, both the confidence and affec- 
tion of his men. Without entering into details of the disposi- 
tion of his troops in the attack on the works at Corinth, the 
result shows that they were skillfully made, and, though final 
success did not crown the effort, the failure was due to other 


1862] | ONE HOUR MORE OF DAYLIGHT. 389 


causes than the defect of plan or want of energy and personal 
effort on the part of Van Dorn. His opponent, Rosecrans, was an 
engineer of high ability, and proved himself one of the best 
generals in the United States Army. He had materially strength- 
ened the works around Corinth, and had interposed every pos- 
sible obstacle to an assault. Our army had moved rapidly from 
Ripley, its point of junction, had cut the railroad between Corinth 
and Jackson, Tennessee, and at daybreak on the 3d of March 
was deployed for attack. By ten o’clock our force confronted 
the enemy inside his intrenchments. In half an hour the whole 
line of outer works was carried, the obstructions passed, and 
the battle opened in earnest; the foe, obstinately disputing 
every point, was finally driven from his second line of detached 
works, and at sunset had retreated to the innermost lines. 

The battle had been mainly fought by Price’s division on 
our left. The troops had made a quick march of ten miles over 
dusty roads without water; the line of battle had been formed 
in forests with undergrowth ; the combats of the day had been 
so severe that General Price thought his troops unequal to fur- 
ther exertion on that day, and it was decided to wait until 
morning. Of this, General Van Dorn says: 


“T saw with regret the sun sink behind the horizon as the last 
shot of our sharpshooters followed the retreating foe into their in- 
nermost lines. One hour more of daylight, and victory would have 
soothed our grief for the loss of the gallant dead who sleep on that 
lost but not dishonored field.” 


During the night batteries were put in position to open 
on the town at4 a.m. At daybreak the action was to begin 
on the left, to be immediately followed by an advance on the 
extreme right. The order was not executed, the commander 
of the wing which was to make the attack failed to do so, and 
another officer was sent to take his place. In the mean time 
the center became engaged, and the action extended to the left. 
The plan had been disarranged; nevertheless, the center and 
left pushed forward and planted their colors on the last strong- 
hold of the enemy; his “heavy guns were silenced, and all 
seemed about to be ended, when a heavy fire from fresh troops 


390 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


that had succeeded in reaching Corinth was poured into our 
thin ranks,” and, with this combined assault on Price’s exhausted 
corps, which had sustained the whole conflict, those gallant 
troops were driven back. The day was lost. The enemy, re- 
enforced, was concentrated against our left, and Lovell’s divis- 
ion, which was at this time advancing, pursuant to orders, and 
was on the point of assaulting the works, was ordered to move 
to the left to prevent a sortie, and cover their retreat. Our 
army retired during the day to Chewalla without pursuit, and 
rested for the night free from molestation. 

Our loss was very heavy of gallant men and officers. In the 
fierce conflicts the officers displayed not only daring, but high 
military skill, their impetuous charges being marked by judi- 
cious selection of time and place. Colonel William 8. Barry, 
who, as commander of the burial party, visited General Rose- 
crans, was courteously received by that officer, who, while de- 
clining to admit the command within his lines, sent assurance 
to General Van Dorn that “every becoming respect should be 
shown to his dead and wounded. ... He had the grave of 
Colonel Rodgers, who led the Second Texas sharpshooters, in- 
closed and marked with a slab, in respect to the gallantry of his 
charge. Rodgers fell before Gates called on me to reénforce 
him on the edge of the ditch of Battery Robbinet.”* This 
officer, W. P. Rodgers, was a captain in the First Regiment 
of Mississippi Rifles in the war with Mexico, and the gallantry 
which attracted the admiration of the enemy at Corinth was in 
keeping with the character he acquired in the former service re- 
ferred to. Of this retreat, that able soldier and military critic, 
General Dabney H. Maury, in a contribution to the “ Annals 
of the War,” wrote: 


“Few commanders have ever been so beset as Van Dorn was 
in the forks of the Hatchie, and very few would have extricated 
a beaten army as he did then. One, with a force stated at ten 
thousand men, headed him at the Hatchie Bridge ; while Rose- 
crans, with twenty thousand men, was attacking his rear at the 
Tuscumbia Bridge, only five miles off. The whole road between 
was occupied by a train of nearly four hundred wagons, and a de- 


* General D. H. Maury. 


1862] RETREAT HASTILY FROM THE STATE. 3891 


feated army of about eleven thousand muskets. But Van Dorn 
was never for a moment dismayed. He repulsed Ord, and pun- 
ished him severely ; while he checked Rosecrans at the Tuscum- 
bia, until he could turn his train and army short to the left, and 
cross the Hatchie by the Boneyard road, without the loss of a 
wagon.” 


He then moved near Holly Springs, Mississippi, to await 
further developments. In the mean time General Grant massed 
a heavy force, estimated at eighty thousand men, at various 
points on the Memphis and Charleston Railroad. Thence he 
moved south, through the interior of Mississippi, until he en- 
camped near Water Valley. The country was teeming with 
great quantities of breadstuffs and forage, and he accumulated 
an immense depot of supplies at Holly Springs, and hastened 
every preparation necessary to continue his advance southward. 
Unless his progress was arrested, the interior of the State, its 
capital, Jackson, Vicksburg, and its railroads, would fall into his 
possession. As we had no force in front sufficient to offer.battle, 
our only alternative was to attack his communications. For this 
purpose, General Van Dorn, on the night of December 15th, 
quietly withdrew our cavalry, amounting to less than twenty- 
five hundred men, from the enemy’s front, and marched for 
Holly Springs. That place was occupied by a brigade of in- 
fantry and a portion of the Seventh Illinois Cavalry. The 
movement of Van Dorn was so rapid that early on the morn- 
ing of the 19th he surprised and captured the garrison, and 
before eight o’clock was in quiet possession of the town. The 
captured property, amounting to millions of dollars, was burned 
before sunset, with the exception of the small quantity used in 
arming and equipping his command. General Grant was thus 
forced to abandon his campaign and to retreat hastily from the 
State. 

After the battle of Murfreesboro, which closed in the first 
days of 1863, there was a cessation of active operations in that 
portion of Tennessee, and attention was concentrated upon the 
extensive preparations which were in progress for a campaign 
into Mississippi, with Vicksburg as the objective point. The 


399 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


plan, as it was developed, was for a combined movement by 
land and river, the former passing through the interior of 
Mississippi to approach Vicksburg in rear, the latter to descend 
the Mississippi River and attack the city in front. General 
Pemberton, with the main body of his command, held the po- 
sition on the Tallahatchie and Yazoo Rivers, and among the 
various devices to turn that position was one more ingenious 
than ingenuous. It was an offer to furnish, at prices lower 
than ruled in our markets, provisions of. which we stood in 
need, to be sent through the Yazoo Pass and transported in 
boats through to the Yazoo River if we should desire. I had, 
some time before, directed that cypress rafts, as far as practi- 
cable, of sinking timber, should be thrown into the main chan- 
nel leading down from the Yazoo Pass; and saw that, if it was 
not the purpose of the proposer, the effect of accepting the 
proposition would be to open a water line of approach from the 
Mississippi, below Memphis, then in the hands of the enemy, 
to the interior in rear of Vicksburg: for that reason, I re- 
sisted much importunity in favor of allowing the supplies to 
be brought in that manner. 

In the latter part of December General Sherman, haying 
descended the Mississippi River, entered the Yazoo with four 
divisions of land troops and five gunboats, the object being to 
reduce our work at Haines’s Bluff and turn Vicksburg so as to 
attack it in rear. The first point at which the range of hills 
extending from Vicksburg up the Yazoo approaches near to the 
river is at Haines’s Bluff, some twenty miles by the course of 
the Yazoo from the Mississippi River. Here the troops were 
landed the 26th of December to attack the redoubts which had 
been built upon the bluff. 

On the 27th little progress was made. On the 28th the at- 
tempt, by one division, to approach the causeway north of the 
Chickasaw Bayou, was repulsed with heavy loss. The troops 
were withdrawn and moved down the river to a point below 
the bayou, there to unite with the rest of the command. At 
daylight on the 29th the attack was resumed and continued 
throughout the most of the day; the enemy were again repulsed 
with heavy loss. On the next day there was firing on both sides 


1863] A NEW PLAN OF OPERATIONS. 393 


without conclusive results. On the 31st General Sherman sent 
in a flag of truce to bury the dead. 

Thereafter nothing important occurred until the latter part 
of January, when the troops under General Grant embarked at 
Memphis and moved down the Mississippi River to Young’s 
Point, on the Louisiana shore, a few miles above Vicksburg. 
The expected codperation by his forces with those of Sherman 
had been prevented by the brilliant cavalry expedition under 
Van Dorn, which captured and destroyed the vast supplies col- 
lected at Holly Springs for the use of Grant’s forces in the land 
movement referred to. This compelled Grant to retreat to 


NU 


sh 
Co 


i> 
yw 
ly 


\ 


= 
44% 
Y Lym ~ 
i wee 
y %=8 GB 4 
S RENN pes 
\ Wis GN eA 
S Ze oP 
GS Se 


Ks 


CIA 
———— < 


NN 2 


% 
A 


| aie <aco0n f # \ 9 > \ 
is = Aen ee 


Memphis, and frustrated the combined movement which had 
been projected, in connection with the river campaign, by Sher- 
man, and a new plan of operations resulted therefrom, in which, 
however, still prominently appears the purpose of turning Vicks- 
burg on the north. After General Grant, descending the Mis- 
sissippi from Memphis, arrived (2d of February, 1863) in the 
neighborhood of Vicksburg and assumed command of the ene- 
my’s forces, an attempt was made, by removing obstructions to 
the navigation of the Yazoo Pass and Cold Water, small streams 
which flow from the Mississippi into the Tallahatchie River, to 


394 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


pass to the rear of Fort Pemberton at the mouth of the latter. 


The never-to-be-realized hope was to reduce that work, and thus 
open the way down the Yazoo River to the right flank of the 
defenses of Vicksburg. 


At the same time another attempt was made, by means of 


fi} 
fii 


MOON LAKE 
Sip? F8 
DAN 
INT = 


a 


g 
ry 
oh 
¢ 
N 
& {P CARROL TON, 
Se Ay 
it Se 
is Y~_ LEXINGTON 
ii ( 2 
3 \ 
2° re 
5 -\ 
y \ \ Z 
oa Y 


A SYAZOO CITY 
OR MANCHESTER 


JX HAINES 
BLUFF 


Mss pVER 


SCALE OF MILES 
WATERS ~ SON 8c. 


ER aa || 


ous on the north side of the Ya- 
around and enter the Yazoo above Haines’ Bluff ; 


sharpshooters, availing themselves of every advantageous 


the network of creeks and bay 
200, to pass 
but our 


1863] UTTERLY DISCOMFITED. 395 


position, picked off the men upon the boats, and Colonel (after- 
ward General) Ferguson, with a few men and a section of field- 
pieces, so harassed and beset them that they were driven back 
utterly discomfited. 

Admiral Porter had, with his fleet, gone some distance up 
Deer Creek, and, but for the land-forces sent to sustain him, 
would probably never have returned, an adventurous party 
having passed in below him with axes to fell trees so as to pre- 
vent his egress. He is described as follows: * 


“Tsoon found Admiral Porter, who was on the deck of one of 
his ironclads, with a shield made of the section of a smoke-stack, 
and I doubt if he was ever more glad to meet a friend than he was 
to see me. He explained that he had almost reached the Rolling 
Fork, when the woods became full of sharpshooters, who, taking 
advantage of trees, stumps, and the levee, would shoot down every 
man that poked his nose outside the protection of their armor. 
. .. He informed me at one time things looked so critical that 
he had made up his mind to blow up the gunboats, and to escape 
with his men through the swamp to the Mississippi River.” 


This attempt to get through to Yazoo, above Haines’s Bluff, 
had so signally failed, that the expedition was ordered back to 
the Louisiana shore above Vicksburg, where they arrived on 
_ the 27th of March, 1863. General Grant was now in command 
of a large army, holding various positions on the Mississippi 
River opposite to Vicksburg, extending from Milliken’s Bend 
above to New Carthage below, with a fleet of gunboats in 
the river above Vicksburg, and another some eight miles be- 
low. Lieutenant-General Pemberton’s military district in- 
eluded Vicksburg, and Major-General Gardner: was in com- 
mand at Port Hudson. These posts, as long as they could be 
maintained, gave us some control over the intermediate space 
of the river, about two hundred and sixty miles in length, and 
to that extent secured our communication with the trans-Mis- 
_sissippi. The enemy, after his repeated and disastrous attempts 
to turn the right flank of Vicksburg, applied his attention to 
the opposite direction. General Grant first endeavored to di- 


* “ Memoirs of General W. T. Sherman,” vol. i, pp. 310, 311. 


896 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


vert the Mississippi from its channel, by cutting a canal across 
the peninsula opposite to Vicksburg, so as to make a practicable 
passage for transport-vessels from a point above to one below 
the city. His attempt was quite unsuccessful, and, whatever 
credit may be awarded to his enterprise, none can be given to 
his engineering skill, as the direction given to his ditch was 


v & 
° & 
Stew of 
y re Sy yy 
oY ae 
x No }; aa Q 
RON At UD o 
0 i Salo) C ae 
v fr Se No 
ee VEX 
ie SN 
& We = V7 
¢ 72 We 4 
iy 
() [7Ze Sy, 
¢ Nat 
Vaas a 
. } 
g ah es 
, yh 
22, CS h a ‘( 
> ne) SG SY 
3 fi. False 7 
a ane al 
f fo} hy \ <4 
i= Nd gj 


G 
CASE 


Cots 


‘ SS <iiGh ROLLING 
Aw 
a HIN SON. 
ARM 


a) 
PN VW vKLeste AVO 
ff x to #C00E0 LAND 
Wz. > Ry —— 
Ww WSC S 
< I Sree 
meyer 


X 
z= WS 


Z—\ (IIS 
younes Poin?” \V Vp on "2 WALT HILLS 


i ff) WE 
vf SZ ‘ICKSBURG 


such that, instead of being washed out by the current of the 
river, it was filled up by its sediment. 

Another attempt to get into the Mississippi, without passing 
the batteries at Vicksburg, was by digging a canal to connect 
the river with the bayou in rear of Milliken’s Bend, so ag to 


1863] A FURIOUS CANNONADE. 397 


have water communication by way of Richmond to New Car- 
thage. These indications of a purpose to get below Vicksburg 
caused General Pemberton, early in February, 1863, to detach 
Brigadier-General John S. Bowen, with his Missouri Brigade, 
to Grand Gulf, near the mouth of the Big Black, and establish 
batteries there to command the mouth of that small river, 
which might be used to pass to the rear of Vicksburg, and also 
by their fire to obstruct the navigation of the Mississippi. 

On the 19th of March the flag-ship of Admiral Farragut, 
with one gunboat from the fleet at New Orleans, passed up the. 
river in defiance of our batteries; but, on the 25th, four gun- 
boats from the upper fleet attempted to pass down and were 
repulsed, two of them completely disabled. 

On the 16th of April a fleet of ironclads with barges in tow, 
Admiral Porter commanding, under cover of the night ran the 
Vicksburg batteries. One of the vessels was destroyed, and an- 
other one crippled, but towed out of range. Subsequently, on the 
night of the 26th, a fleet of transports with loaded barges was 
floated past Vicksburg. One or more of them was sunk, but 
enough escaped to give the enemy abundant supplies below 
Vicksburg and boats enough for ferriage uses. On the 20th of 
April the movement of the enemy commenced through the 
country on the west side of the river to their selected point of 
crossing below Grand Gulf. 

On the 29th the enemy’s gunboats came down and took their 
stations in front of our batteries and rifle-pits at Grand Gulf. 
A furious cannonade was continued for many hours, and the 
fleet withdrew, having one gunboat disabled, and otherwise re- 
ceiving and inflicting but little damage. Among the casualties 
on our side was that of Colonel William Wade, the chief of 
artillery, an officer of great merit, alike respected and beloved, 
whose death was universally regretted. 

In a short time the fleet reappeared from behind a point 
which had concealed them from view. The gunboats now had 
transports lashed to their farther side, and, protected by their 
iron shields, ran by our batteries at full speed, losing but one 
transport on the way. 

On the evening of the 29th of April the enemy commenced 


398 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ferrying over troops from the Louisiana to the Mississippi shore 
to a landing just below the mouth of Bayou Pierre. General 
Green with his brigade moved thither, and, when the enemy 
on the night of the 30th commenced his advance, General 
Green attacked him with such impressive vigor as to render 
their march both cautious and slow. As additional forces came 
up, Green retired, skirmishing. In the mean time Generals 
Tracy and Baldwin, with their brigades, had by forced marches 
joined General Green, and about daylight a more serious con- 
flict occurred, lasting some two hours and a half, during which 
General Tracy, a distinguished citizen of Alabama, of whom 
patriotism made a soldier, fell while gallantly leading his bri- 
gade in the unequal combat in which it was engaged. Step 
by step, disputing the ground, Green retired to the range of 
hills three miles southwest of Port Gibson, where General 
Bowen joined him and arranged a new line of battle. The 
enemy’s forces were steadily augmented by the arrival of reén- 
forcements from the rear. Our troops continued most valiantly 
to resist until, between nine and ten o’clock, outflanked both — 
on our right and left, their condition seemed almost hope- 
less, when, by a movement to which desperation gave a power 
quite disproportionate to the numbers, the right wing of the 
enemy was driven back, and our forces made good their re- 
treat across the bridge over Bayou Pierre. General Cocker- . 
ell, commanding our left wing, led this forlorn hope in person, 
and to the fortune which favors the brave must be attrib- 
uted the few casualties which occurred in a service so haz- 
ardous. General Bowen promptly intrenched his camp on the 
east side of Bayou Pierre and waited for future developments. 
The relative forces engaged in the battle of the Ist of May were, 
as nearly as I have been able to learn, fifty-five hundred Con- 
federates and twenty thousand Federals. Fresh troops were 
reported to be joining Grant’s army, and one of his corps had 
been sent to cross by a ford above so as to get in rear of our 
position. The reénforcements which were en route to Bowen 
had not yet approached so near as to give him assurance of co- 
operation. 

To divert notice from this movement to get in the rear of 


1863] MARCHING INTO THE INTERIOR. 899 


_ Bowen, on the morning of the 2d, Grant ordered artillery-fire 

to be opened on our intrenchments across Bayou Pierre. It 
was quite ineffectual, and probably was not expected to do more 
than occupy attention. During the forenoon Bowen sent a flag 
of truce to ask suspension of hostilities for the purpose of bury- 
ing the dead. This was refused, and a demand made for gsurren- 
der. That was as promptly as decidedly rejected, and, as the 
day wore away without the arrival of reénforcement, Bowen, 
under cover of night, commenced a retreat, his march being 
directed toward Grand Gulf. General Loring with his divi- 
sion soon joined him. Directions were sent to the garrison at 
Grand Gulf to dismantle the fortifications and evacuate the 
place. On the morning of the 3d General Grant commenced a 
pursuit of the retreating force, which, however, was attended 
with only unimportant skirmishes; Bowen, with the reénforce- 
ments which were marching to his support, recrossed the Big 
Black at Hankinson’s Ferry, and all, under the orders of Gen- 
eral Pemberton, were assigned to their respective positions in 
the army he commanded. 

While the events which have just been narrated were tran- 
spiring, Colonel Grierson with three regiments of cavalry made 
a raid from the northern border of Mississippi through the in- 
terior of the State, and joined General Banks at Baton Rouge 
in Louisiana. Among the expeditions for pillage and arson this 
stands prominent for savage outrages against defenseless women 
and children, constituting a record alike unworthy a soldier and 
a gentleman. 

Grant with his large army was now marching into the in- 
terior of Mississippi, his route being such as might either be 
intended to strike the capital (Jackson) or Vicksburg. The coun- 
try through which he had to pass was for some distance com- 
posed of abrupt hills, and all of it poorly provided with roads. 
There was reasonable ground to hope that, with such difficult 
communications with his base of supplies, ad the physical obsta- 
cles to his progress, he might be advantageously encountered at 
many points and be finally defeated. In such warfare as was 
possible, that portion of the population who were exempt or in- 
capable of full service in the army could be very effective as 


400 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


an auxiliary force. I therefore wrote to the Governor, Pettus, 
a man worthy of all confidence, as well for his patriotism as his 
manhood, requesting him to use all practicable means to get every 
man and boy, capable of aiding their country in its need, to turn 
out, mounted or on foot, with whatever weapons they had, to aid 
the soldiers in driving the invader from our soil. The facilities 
the enemy possessed in river transportation and the aid which 
their iron-clad gunboats gave to all operations where land and 
naval forces could be combined were lost to Grant in this in- 
terior march which he was making. Success gives credit to 
military enterprises; had this failed, as I think it should, it 
surely would have been pronounced an egregious blunder. 
Other efforts made to repel the invader will be noticed in the 
course of the narrative. 

After the retreat of Bowen which has been described, Gen- 
eral Pemberton, anticipating an attack on Vicksburg from the 
rear, concentrated all the troops of his command for its defense. 
All previous demonstrations indicated the special purpose of 
the enemy to be its capture. Its strategic importance justified 
the belief that he would concentrate his efforts upon that ob- 
ject, and this opinion was enforced by the difficulty of supply- 
ing his army in the region into which he was marching, and the 

‘special advantages of Vicksburg as his base. The better mode 
of counteracting his views, whatever they might be, it would be 
more easy now to determine than it was when General Pem- 
berton had to decide that question. The superior force of the 
enemy enabled him at the same time, while moving the main 
body of his troops through Louisiana to a point below Vicks- 
burg, to send a corps to renew the demonstration against Haines’s 
Bluff. Finding due preparation made to resist an attack there, 
this demonstration was merely a feint, but, had Pemberton with- 
drawn his troops, that feint could have been converted into a 
real attack, and the effort so often foiled to gain the heights. 
above Vicksburg would have become a success. When that 
corps retired, and proceeded to join the rest of Grant’s army 
which had gone toward Grand Gulf, Pemberton commenced 
energetically to prepare for what was now the manifest object 
of the enemy. From his headquarters at Jackson, Mississippi, 


1863] TO HARASS THE ENEMY. 401 


he, on the 23d of April, directed Major-General Stevenson, com- 
manding at Vicksburg, “that communications, at least for in- 
fantry, should be made by the shortest practicable route to 
Grand Gulf. The indications now are that the attack will not 
be made on your front or right, and all troops not absolutely 
necessary to hold the works at Vicksburg should be held as a 
movable force for either Warrenton or Grand Gulf.” On the 
28th Brigadier-General Bowen, commanding at Grand Gulf, 
reported that “transports and barges loaded down with troops 
are landing at Hard-Times on the west bank.” Pemberton re- 
plied by asking: ‘‘ Have you force enough to hold your posi- 
tion? If not, give me the smallest additional number with 
which you can.” At this time the small cavalry force remain- 
ing in Pemberton’s command compelled him to keep infantry 
detachments at many points liable to be attacked by raiding 
parties of the enemy’s mounted troops, a circumstance seriously 
interfering with the concentration of the forces of his command. 
Instructions were sent to all the commanders of his cavalry de- 
tachments to move toward Grand Gulf, to harass the enemy in 
flank and rear, obstructing, as far as might be, communications 
with his base. A dispatch was sent to Major-General Buckner, 
commanding at Mobile, asking him to protect the Mobile and 
Ohio Railroad, as Pemberton required all the troops he could 
spare to strengthen General Bowen. A dispatch was also sent 
to General J. E. Johnston, at Tullahoma, saying that the Army 
of Tennessee must be relied on to guard the approaches through 
north Mississippi. To Major-General Stevenson, at Vicksburg, 
he sent a dispatch: “Hold five thousand men in readiness to 
move to Grand Gulf, and, on the requisition of Brigadier- 
General Bowen, move them; with your batteries and rifle-pits 
manned, the city front is impregnable.” At the same time the 
following was sent to General Bowen: “I have directed Gen- 
eral Stevenson to have five thousand men ready to move on 
your requisition, but do not make requisition unless absolutely 
necessary for your position. I am also making arrangements 
for sending you two or three thousand men from this direction 
in case of necessity.” 

The policy was here manifested of meeting the enemy in 

73 


403 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the hills east of the point of his debarkation, yet all unfriendly 
criticism has treated General Pemberton’s course on that occa- 
sion as having been voluntarily to withdraw his troops to with- 
in the intrenchments of Vicksburg. His published reports 
show what early and consistent efforts he made to avoid that 
result. 

After General J. E. Johnston had recovered from the wound 
received at Seven Pines, he was on the 24th of November, 1862, 
by special order No. 275, assigned to the command of a geo- 
graphical department including the States of Tennessee, Mis- 
sissippi, Alabama, and parts of Louisiana, Georgia, and North 
Carolina. The order gives authority to establish his headquar- 
ters wherever, in his judgment, will best secure facilities for 
ready communication with the troops of his command; and 
provides that he “will repair to any part of said command 
whenever his presence may for the time be necessary or desir- 
able.” While the events which have been described were oc- 
curring in Pemberton’s command, he felt seriously the want of 
cavalry, and was much embarrassed by the necessity for substi- 
tuting portions of his infantry to supply the deficiency of cay- 
alry. 

These embarrassments and the injurious consequences at- 
tendant upon them were frequently represented. In his re- 
port he states, after several other applications for cavalry, that 
on March 25th he wrote to General Johnston, commanding 
department, “urgently requesting that the division of cavalry 
under Major-General Van Dorn, which had been sent to the 
Army of Tennessee for special and temporary purposes, might 
be returned.” He gives the following extract from General 
Johnston’s reply of April 8d to his request: 


“Tn the present aspect of affairs, General Van Dorn’s cavalry 
is much more needed in this department than in that of Missis- 
sippi and Kast Louisiana, and can not be sent back as long as this 
state of things exists. You have now in your department five 
brigades of the troops you most require, viz., infantry, belonging 
to the Army of Tennessee. This is more than a compensation for 
the absence of General Van Dorn’s cavalry command.” 


1863] THE STAKE IS A GREAT ONE. 403 


To this Pemberton rejoined that cavalry was indispensable, 
stating the positions where the enemy was operating on his 
communications, and the impossibility of defending the rail- 
roads by infantry. Referring to the advance of the enemy 
from Bruinsburg, Pemberton, in his report, makes the follow- 
ing statement : 


“With a moderate cavalry force at my disposal, I am firmly 
convinced that the Federal army under General Grant would have 
been unable to maintain its communication with the Mississippi 
River, and that the attempt to reach Jackson and Vicksburg 
would have been as signally defeated in May, 1863, as a like at- 
tempt from another base had, by the employment of cavalry, been 
defeated in December, 1862,” 


Pemberton commenced, after the retreat of Bowen, to con- 
centrate all his forces for the great effort of checking the invad- 
ing army, and on the 6th of May telegraphed to the Secretary 
of War that the reénforcements sent to him were very insuffi- 

cient, adding: “The stake is a great one; I can see nothing so 
important.” On the 12th of May he sent a telegram to General 
J. E. Johnston, and a duplicate to the President, announcing 
his purpose to meet the enemy then moving with heavy force 
toward Edwards’s Depot, and indicated that as the battle-field ; 
he urgently asked for more reénforcements: “ Also, that three 
thousand cavalry be at once sent to operate on this line. I urge 
this as a positive necessity. The enemy largely outnumbers me, 
and I am obliged to hold back a large force at the ferries on 
Big Black.” This was done to prevent the foe passing to his 
rear. 

Large bodies of troops continued to descend the river, land 
above Vicksburg, and, to avoid our batteries at that place, to move 
on the west side of the river to reénforce General Grant. This 
seemed to justify the conclusion that the main effort in the West 
was to be made by that army, and, supposing that General John-* 
ston would be convinced of the fact if he repaired to that field 
in person, as well as to avail ourselves of the public confidence 
felt in his military capacity, he was ordered, on the 9th of May, 
1863, to “proceed at once to Mississippi and take chief com- 


404. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


mand of the forces, giving to those in the field, as far as prac- 
ticable, the encouragement and benefit of your personal direc- 
tion. Arrange to take, for temporary service, with you, or to 
be followed without delay, three thousand good troops,” ete. 

On the 12th, the same day General Pemberton had applied 
for reénforcements, he instructed Major-General Stevenson as 
follows : 


“From information received, it is evident that the enemy is 
advancing in force on Edwards’s Depot and Big Black Bridge ; 
hot skirmishing has been going on all the morning, and the 
enemy are at Fourteen-Mile Creek.’ You must move with your 
whole division to the support of Loring and Bowen at the bridge, 
leaving Baldwin’s and Moore’s brigades to protect your right.” 


In consequence of that information, Brigadier-General 
Gregg, who was near Raymond, received cautionary instruc- 
tion; notwithstanding which, he was attacked by a large body 
of the enemy’s forces, and his single brigade, with great gal- 
lantry and steadiness, held them in check for several hours, and 
then retired in such good order as to attract general admiration. 
Meantime, bodies of the enemy’s troops were sent into the in- 
terior villages, and much damage was done in them, and to the 
defenseless, isolated homes in the country. 

General Johnston arrived at Jackson on the 13th of May, 
1863, and telegraphed to J. A. Seddon, Secretary of War, as 
Pilowes 


“T arrived this evening, finding the enemy in force between 
this place and General Pemberton, cutting off the communication. 
I am too late.” 


In the order assigning General Johnston to the geographi- 
cal Department of the West, he was directed to repair in person 
to any part of his command, whenever his presence might be 
for the time necessary or desirable. On the 9th of May, 1863, 
he was ordered to proceed at once to Mississippi and take chief 
command of the forces in the field. 

When he reached Jackson, learning that the enemy was be- 
tween that place and the position occupied by General Pember- 


1863] ; TIME IS ALL-IMPORTANT, ; - 405 


ton’s forces, about thirty miles distant, he halted there and 
opened correspondence with Pemberton, from which a confu- 
sion with consequent disaster resulted, which might have been 
avoided had he, with or without his reénforcements, proceeded 
to Pemberton’s headquarters in the field. What that confusion 
or want of co-intelligence was, will best appear from citing the 
important part of the dispatches which passed between them. 
On May 18th General Johnston, then at Jackson, sent the fol- 
lowing dispatch to General Pemberton, which was received on 
the 14th: 


“T have lately arrived, and learn that Major-General Sherman 
is between us, with four divisions at Clinton. It is important to 
reéstablish communications, that you may be reénforced. If prac- 
ticable, come up in his rear at once—to beat such a detachment 
would be of immense value. Troops here could codperate. Ali 
the troops you can quickly assemble should be brought. Time is 
all-important.” 


On the same day, the 14th, General Pemberton, then at Bo- 
vina, replied : 

“JT have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your communi- 
cation. I moved at once with whole available force, about six- 
teen thousand, leaving Vaughan’s brigade, about fifteen hundred, 
at Big Black Bridge; Tilghman’s brigade, fifteen hundred, now 
at Baldwin’s Ferry, I have ordered to bring up the rear of my 
column ; he will be, however, from fifteen to twenty miles behind 
it. Baldwin’s Ferry will be left, necessarily, unprotected. To 
hold Vicksburg are Smith’s and Forney’s divisions, extending 
from Snyder’s Mills to Warrenton, numbering effectives seven 
thousand eight hundred men. . . . I do not think that you fully 
comprehend the position that Vicksburg will be left in; but I 
comply at once with your order.” 


On the same day, General Pemberton, after his arrival at 
Edwards’s Depot, called a council of war of all the general offi- 
cers present. He placed General Johnston’s dispatch before 
them, and stated his own views against the propriety of an ad- 
vance, but expressed the opinion that the only possibility of 
success would be by a movement on the enemy’s communica- 


406 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tions. .A majority of the officers present expressed themselves 
favorable to the plan indicated by General Johnston. The 
others, including Major-Generals Loring and Stevenson, “pre- 
ferred a movement by which the army might attempt to cut off 
the enemy’s supplies from the Mississippi River.” General 
Pemberton then sent the following dispatch to General John- 


ston ; 
“Epwarps’s Depot, May 14, 1868. 


“T shall move as early to-morrow morning as practicable, with 
a column of seventeen thousand men, to Dillon’s, situated on the 
main road leading from Raymond to Port Gibson, seven and a 
half miles below Raymond,.and nine and a half miles from Ed- 
wards’s Depot. The object is to cut the enemy’s communication 
and to force him to attack me, as I do not consider my force suf- 
ficient to justify an attack on the enemy in position, or to attempt 
to cut my way to Jackson. At this point your nearest communi- 
cation would be through Raymond.” 


The movement commenced about 1 p.m. on the 15th. Gen- 
eral Pemberton states that the force at Clinton was an army 
corps, numerically greater than his whole available force in the 
field; that— 


“The enemy had at least an equal force to the south, on my right 
flank, which would be nearer Vicksburg than myself, in case I 
should make the movement proposed. I had, moreover, positive 
information that he was daily increasing his strength. I also 
learned, on reaching Edwards’s Depot, that one division of the 
enemy (A. J. Smith’s) was at or near Dillon’s.” 


On the morning of the 16th, about 6.30 o’clock, Colonel 
Wirt Adams, commanding the cavalry, reported to General 
Pemberton that his pickets were skirmishing with the enemy 
on the Raymond road in our front. At the same moment a 
courier arrived and delivered the following dispatch from Gen- 
eral Johnston : 

“Canton Roap, TEN Mires rrom Jackson, 
“ May 15, 1868, 8.30 o'clock A. M. 

“Our being compelled to leave Jackson makes your plan im- 

practicable. The only mode by which we can unite is by your 


1863] AS RAPIDLY AS POSSIBLE. 407 


moving directly to Clinton and informing me, that we may move 
to that point with about six thousand.” 


Pemberton reversed his column to return to Edwards’s De- 
pot and take the Brownsville road, so as to proceed toward 
Clinton on the north side of the railroad, and sent a reply to 
General Johnston to notify him of the retrograde movement 
and the route to be followed. Just as the reverse movement 
commenced, the enemy drove in the cavalry pickets and opened 
fire with artillery. 

The continuance of the movement was ordered, when, the 
demonstrations of the enemy becoming more serious, orders were 
issued to form a line of battle, with Loring on the right, Bowen 
in the center, and Stevenson on the left. Major-General Ste- 
venson was ordered to make the necessary dispositions for pro- 
tecting the trains on the Clinton road and the crossing of Ba- 
ker’s Creek. The line of battle was quickly formed in a position 
naturally strong, and the approaches from the front well cov- 
ered. The enemy made his first demonstration on the right, 
but, after a lively artillery duel for an hour or more, this attack 
was relinquished, and a large force was thrown against the left, 
where skirmishing became heavy. About ten o’clock the battle 
began in earnest along Stevenson’s entire front. About noon 
Loring was ordered to move forward and crush the enemy in 
his front, and Bowen to codperate. No movement was made 
by Loring; he said the force was too strongly posted to be at- 
tacked, but that he would seize the first opportunity to assault 
if one should offer. Stevenson soon found that unless reén- 
forced he would be unable to resist the heavy and repeated at- 
tacks along his line. Aid was sent to him from Bowen, and for 
a time the tide of battle turned in our favor. The enemy still 
continued to move troops from his left to his right, thus increas- 
ing on that flank his vastly superior forces. General Pember- 
ton, feeling assured that there was no important force in front of 
Loring, again ordered him to move to the left as rapidly as pos- 
sible. To this order, the answer was given that the enemy was 
in strong force and endeavoring to turn his flank. As there was 
no firing on the right, the order was repeated. Much time was 


408 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


lost in exchanging these messages. At4 p.m. a part of Steven- 
son’s division broke badly and fell back. Some assistance finally 
came from Loring, but it was too late to save the day, and the 
retreat was ordered. Had the left been promptly supported 
when it was first so ordered, it is not improbable that the posi- 
tion might have been maintained and the enemy possibly driven 
back, although his increasing numbers would have rendered it 
necessary to withdraw during the night to save our communi- 
cations with Vicksburg unless promptly reénforced. The dis- 
patch of the 15th from General Johnston, in obedience to which 
Pemberton reversed his order of march, gave him the first in- 
telligence that Johnston had left Jackson ; but, while making the 
retrograde movement, a previous dispatch from Johnston, dated 
“May 14, 1863, camp seven miles from Jackson,” informed 
Pemberton that the body of Federal troops, mentioned in his 
dispatch of the 13th, had compelled the evacuation of Jackson, 
and that he was moving by the Canton road; he refers to the 
troops east of Jackson as perhaps able to prevent the enemy 
there from drawing provisions from that direction, and that his 
command might effect the same thing in regard to the country 
toward Panola, and then asks these significant questions: . 


“Can he supply himself from the Mississippi? Can you not 
cut him off from it? Above all, should he be compelled to fall 
back for want of supplies, beat him? As soon as the reénforce- 
ments are all up, they must be united to the rest of the army. .. . 
If prisoners tell the truth, the force at Jackson must be half of 
Grant’s army. It would decide the campaign to beat it, which 
can only be done by concentrating, especially when the remainder 
of the eastern troops arrive. They are to be twelve or thirteen 
thousand.” Be rs 


From Pemberton’s communication it is seen that he did not 
feel his army strong enough to attack the corps in position at 
Clinton, and that he hoped by the course adopted to compel 
the enemy to attack our force in position. Whether the move- 
ment toward Dillon’s was well or ill advised, it was certainly a 
misfortune to reverse the order of march in the presence of the 
enemy, as it involved the disadvantage of being attacked in 


1863] THEY WERE NOT ROUTED. 409 


rear. As has been described, the dispositions for battle were 
promptly made, and many of the troops fought with a gal- 
lantry worthy of all praise. Though defeated, they were not 
routed. 

Stevenson’s single division for a long time resisted a force 
estimated by him at “more than four times” his own. In the 
afternoon he was reénforced by the unfaltering troops of Bowen’s 
division. Cockerell, commanding the First Missouri Brigade, 
fought with like fortitude under like disadvantage. When 
Pemberton saw that the masses assailing his left and left cen- 
ter by their immense numbers were pressing our forces back 
into old fields, where the advantages of position would be in 
his adversary’s favor, he directed his troops to retire, and sent 
to Brigadier-General Lloyd Tilghman instructions to hold the 
Raymond road to protect the retreat. General Pemberton says 
of him: 


“Tt was in the execution of this important duty, which could 
not have been confided to a fitter man, that the lamented General 
bravely lost his life.” 


He was the officer whose devoted gallantry and self-sacrific- 
ing generosity were noticed in connection with the fall of Fort 
Henry. This severe battle was signalized by so many feats of 
individual intrepidity that its roll of honor is too long for the 
limits of these pages. 

Though some gave way in confusion, and others failed to 
respond when called on, the heroism of the rest shed luster on 
‘the field, and “the main body of the troops retired in good 
order.” The gallant brigades of Green and Cockerell covered 
the rear. 

The topographical features of the position at the railroad- 
bridge across the Big Black were such as, with the artificial 
strength given to it, made it quite feasible to defend it against 
a direct approach even of an army as much superior in numbers 
to that of Pemberton as was that of Grant ; but the attack need 
not be made by a direct approach. The position could be 
turned by moving either above or below by fords and ferries, and 
thus advancing upon Vicksburg by other and equally eligible 


410 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


routes. From what has already been quoted, it will be under- 
stood that General Pemberton considered the occupation of 
Vicksburg vitally important in connection with the command of 
the Mississippi River, and the maintenance of communication 
with the country beyond it. It was therefore that he had been 
so reluctant to endanger his connection with that point as his 
base. Pressed as he was by the enemy, whose object, it had been 
unmistakably shown, was to get possession of Vicksburg and its 
defenses, the: circumstances made it imperative that he should 
abandon a position, the holding of which would not effect his 
object, and that he should withdraw his forces from the field to 
unite them with those within the defenses of Vicksburg, and 
endeavor, as speedily as possible, to reorganize the depressed 
and discomfited troops. 

One of the immediate results of the retreat from Big Black 
was the necessity of abandoning our defenses on the Yazoo, at 
Snyder’s Mills; this position and the line of Chickasaw Bayou 
were no longer tenable. All stores that could be transported 
were ordered to be sent into Vicksburg as rapidly as possible, 
the rest, including heavy guns, to be destroyed. During the 
night of the 17th nothing of importance occurred. On the 
morning of the 18th the troops were disposed from right to 
left on the defenses. On the entire line, one hundred and two 
pieces of artillery of different caliber, principally field-guns, were 
placed in position at such ‘points as were deemed most suitable 
to the character of the gun. Instructions had been given from 
Bovina that all the cattle, sheep, and hogs, belonging to pri- 
vate parties, and likely to fall into the hands of the enemy, 
should be driven within our lines. Grant’s army appeared on 
the 18th. | 

The development of the intrenched line from our extreme 
right was about eight miles, the shortest defensible line of 
which the topography of the country admitted. It consisted of 
a system of detached works, redans, lunettes, and redoubts, on 
the prominent and commanding points, with the usual profile of 
raised field-works, connected in most cases by rifle pits. To 
hold the entire line there were about eighteen thousand five hun- 
dred infantry, but these could not all be put in the trenches, 


1863] HAD LOST THE OPPORTUNITY. 411 


as it was necessary to keep a reserve always ready to reénforce 
any point heavily threatened. — 

The campaign against Vicksburg had commenced as early as 
November, 1862, and reference has been made to the various 
attempts to capture the position both before and after General 
Grant arrived and took command in person. He had now by a 
circuitous march reached the rear of the city, established a base 
on the Mississippi River a few miles below, had a fleet of gun- 
boats in the river, and controlled the navigation of the Yazoo 
up to Haines’s Bluff, and was relieved from all danger in regard 
to supplying his army. We had lost the opportunity to cut his 
communications while he was making his long march over the 
rugged country between Bruinsburg and the vicinity of Vicks- 
burg. Pemberton had by wise prevision endeavored to secure 
supplies sufficient for the duration of an ordinary siege, and, on 
the importance which he knew the Administration attached to 
the holding of Vicksburg, he relied for the codperation of a re- 
lieving army to break any investment which might be made. 
Disappointed in the hope which I had entertained that the 
invading army would be unable to draw its supplies from 
Bruinsburg or Grand Gulf, and be driven back before crossing 
the Big Black, it now only remained to increase as far as possi- 
ble the relieving army, and depend upen it to break the invest- 
ment. The ability of the Federals to send reénforcements was 
so much greater than ours, that the necessity for prompt action 
was fully realized ; therefore, when General Johnston on May 9th 
was ordered to proceed to Mississippi, he was directed to take 
from the Army of Tennessee three thousand good troops, and 
informed that he would find reénforcements from General Beau- 
regard. On May 12th a dispatch was sent to him at Jackson, 
stating, “In addition to the five thousand men originally ordered 
from Charleston [Beauregard], about four thousand more will 
follow. I fear more can not be spared to you.” On May 22d 
I sent the following dispatch to General Bragg, at Tullahoma, 
Tennessee : 


“The vital issue of holding the Mississippi at Vicksburg is de- 
pendent on the success of General Johnston in an attack on the 


412 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


investing force. The intelligence from there is discouraging. 
Can you aid him?” 


To this he replied on the 23d of May, 1863: 


“Sent thirty-five hundred with the General, three batteries of 
artillery and two thousand cavalry since ; will dispatch six thou- 
sand more immediately.” 


In my telegram to General Bragg, after stating the neces- 
sity, I submitted the whole question to his judgment, having 
full reliance in the large-hearted and comprehensive view which 
his self-denying nature would take of the case, and I responded 
to him: 


“ Your answer is in the spirit of patriotism heretofore mani- 
fested by you. The need is sore, but you must not forget your 
own necessities.” 


On the Ist of June General Johnston telegraphed to me 
that the troops at his disposal available against Grant amounted 
to twenty-four thousand one hundred, not including Jackson’s 
cavalry command and a few hundred irregular cavalry. Mr. 
Seddon, Secretary of War, replied to him stating the force to be 
thirty-two thousand. In another dispatch, of June 5th, the Sec- 
retary says his statement rested on official reports of numbers 
sent, regrets his inability to promise more, as we had drained 
our resources even to the danger of several points, and urged 
speedy action. ‘ With the facilities and resources of the enemy 
time works against us.” Again, on the 16th, Secretary Seddon 
says: 


“Tf better resources do not offer, you must hazard attack.” 


On the 18th, while Pemberton was inspecting the intrench- 
ments along which his command had been placed, he received 
by courier a communication from General Johnston, dated 
“May 17, 1863, camp between Livingston and Brownsville,” 
in answer to Pemberton’s report of the result of the battles of — 
Baker’s Creek and Big Black, and the consequent evacuation of 
Snyder’s Mills. General Johnston wrote : 


1863] EVERY EFFORT SHOULD BE MADE. 413 


“Tf Haines’s Bluff is untenable, Vicksburg is of no value and 
can not be held. If, therefore, you are invested in Vicksburg, you 
must ultimately surrender. Under such circumstances, instead of 
losing both troops and place, we must, if possible, save the troops. 
If it is not too late, evacuate Vicksburg and its dependencies, and 
march to the northeast.” 


Pemberton, in his report, remarks : 


“This meant the fall of Port Hudson, the surrender of the 
Mississippi River, and the severance of the Confederacy.” 


He recurs to a former correspondence with myself in which 
he had suggested the possibility of the investment of Vicks- 
burg by land and water, and the necessity for ample supplies to 
stand a siege, and says his application met my favorable con- 
sideration, and that additional ammunition was ordered. Con- 
fident in his ability, with the preparations which had been made, 
to stand a siege, and firmly relying on the desire of the Presi- 
dent and of General Johnston to raise it, he “felt that every 
effort would be made, and believed it would be successful.” He, 
however, summoned a council of war, composed of all his gen- 
eral officers, laid before them General Johnston’s communication, 
and desired their opinion on “the question of practicability,” 
and on the 18th replied to General Johnston that he had placed 
his instructions before the general officers of the command, and 
that “the opinion was unanimously expressed that it was im- 
possible to withdraw the army from this position with such 
morale and material as to be of further service to the Confeder- 
acy.” He then announces his decision to hold Vicksburg as 
long as possible, and expresses the hope that he may be assisted 
in keeping this obstruction to the enemy’s free navigation of 
the Mississippi River. He closes his letter thus: 


“T still conceive it to be the most important point in the Con- 
federacy.” 

While the council of war was assembled, the guns of the 
enemy opened on the works, and the siege proper commenced. 

Making meager allowance for a reserve, it required the 
whole force to be constantly in the trenches, and, when they 


, 


414 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


were all on duty, it did not furnish one man to the yard of the 
developed line. On the 19th two assaults were made at the 
center and left. Both were repulsed and heavy loss inflicted ; 
our loss was small. At the same time the mortar-fleet of Ad- 
miral Porter from the west side of the peninsula kept up a bom- 
bardment of the city. 

Vicksburg is built upon hills rising successively from the 
river. The intrenchments were upon ridges beyond the town, 
only approaching the river on the right and left flanks, so that 
the fire of Porter’s mortar-fleet was mainly effective upon the 
private dwellings, and the women, the children, and other non- 
combatants. 

The hills on which the city is built are of a tenacious calcare- 
ous clay, and caves were dug in these to shelter the women and 
children, many of whom resided in them during the entire siege. 
From these places of refuge, heroically facing the danger of 
shells incessantly bursting over the streets, gentlewomen hourly 
went forth on the mission of humanity to nurse the sick, the 
wounded, and to soothe the dying of their defenders who were 
collected in numerous hospitals. Without departing from the 
softer character of their sex, it was often remarked that, in 
the discharge of the pious duties assumed, they seemed as 
indifferent to danger as any of the soldiers who lined the 
trenches. 

During the 20th, 21st, and the forenoon of the 22d, a heavy 
fire of artillery and musketry was kept up by the besiegers, as 
well as by the mortar- and gun-boats in the river. On the after- 
noon of the 22d preparation was made fora general assault. The 
attacking columns were allowed to approach to within good 
musket-range, when every available gun was opened with grape 
and canister, and our infantry, “rising in the trenches, poured 
into their ranks volley after volley with so deadly an effect that, 
leaving the ground literally covered in some places with their 
dead and wounded, they [the enemy] precipitately retreated.” 
One of our redoubts had been breached by their artillery pre- 
vious to the assault, and a lodgment made in the ditch at the 
foot of the redoubt, on which two colors were planted. Gen- 
eral Stevenson says in his report: 


1863] THE FLAGS WERE IN OUR POSSESSION. A15 


“The work was constructed in such a manner that the ditch 
was commanded by no part of the line, and the only means by 
which they could be dislodged was to retake the angle by a des- 
perate charge, and either kill or compel the surrender of the whole 
party by the use of hand-grenades. A call for volunteers for this 
purpose was made, and promptly responded to by Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel E. W. Pettus, Twentieth Alabama Regiment, and about forty 
men of Waul’s Texas Legion. A more gallant feat than this 
charge has not illustrated our arms during the ‘war. The prepa- 
rations were quietly and quickly made, but the enemy seemed at 
once to divine our intentions, and opened upon the angle a ter- 
rible fire of shot, shell, and musketry. Undaunted, this little 
band, its chivalrous commander at its head, rushed upon the work, 
and, in less time than it required to describe it, the flags were 
in our possession. Preparations were then quickly made for the 
use of hand-grenades, when the enemy in the ditch, being in- 
formed of our purpose, immediately surrendered. 

“From this time forward, although on several occasions their 
demonstrations seemed to indicate other intentions, the enemy 
relinquished all idea of assaulting us, and confined himself to 
the more cautious policy of a system of gradual approaches and 
mining.” 


His force was not less than sixty thousand men. Thus af- 
fairs continued until July 1st, when General Pemberton thus 
describes the causes which made capitulation necessary : 


“Tt must be remembered that, for forty-seven days and nights, 
those heroic men had been exposed to burning suns, drenching 
rains, damp fogs, and heavy dews, and that during all this period 
they never had, by day or by night, the slightest relief. The ex- 
tent of our works required every available man in the trenches, 
and even then they were in many places insufficiently manned. 
It was not in my power.to relieve any portion of the line fora - 
single hour. Confined to the narrow limits of trench, with their 
limbs cramped and swollen, without exercise, constantly exposed 
to a murderous storm of shot and shell. . . . Is it strange that the 
men grew weak and attenuated? ... They had held the place 
against an enemy five times their number, admirably clothed and 
fed, and abundantly supplied with all the appliances of war. 


416 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Whenever the foe attempted an assault, they drove him back 
discomfited, covering the ground with his killed and wounded, 
and already had they torn from his grasp five stands of colors as 
trophies of their prowess, none of which were allowed to fall again 
into his hands.” 


Under these circumstances, he says, he became satisfied that 
the time had arrived when it was necessary either to evacuate 
the city by cutting his way out or to capitulate. Inquiries 
were made of the division commanders respecting the ability 
of the troops to make the marches and undergo the fatigues 
necessary to accomplish a successful sortie and force their way 
through the enemy; all of whom reported their several com- 
mands quite unequal to the performance of such an effort. 
Therefore, it was resolved to seek terms of capitulation. These 
were obtained, and the city was surrendered on July 4th. 

The report of General Pemberton contains this statement : 


“Knowing the anxious desire of the Government to relieve 
Vicksburg, I felt assured that, if within the compass of its power, 
the siege would be raised ; but, when forty-seven days and nights 
had passed, with the knowledge I then possessed that no ade- 
quate relief was to be expected, I felt that I ought not longer to 
place in jeopardy the brave men whose lives had been intrusted 
to my care. Hence, after the suggestion of the alternative of 
cutting my way out, I determined to make terms, not because my 
men were starved out, not because I could not hold out yet a 
little longer, but because they were overpowered by numbers, 
worn down with fatigue, and each day saw our defenses crum- 
bling beneath their feet... . With an unlimited supply of pro- 
visions, the garrison could, for the reasons already given, have held 
out much longer.” 


At the close of General Pemberton’s report he notices two 
officers, whose gallant services have been repeatedly mentioned 
in the foregoing pages, as follows: 


“T can not close this report without brief tribute to the mem- 
ory of two of the best soldiers in the Confederate service. I refer 
to Major-General John S. Bowen and Brigadier-General Martin 
E. Green, Always faithful, zealous, and brave, they fell, as became 


1863] EFFORTS TO RELIEVE VICKSBURG. A417 


them, in the discharge of their duty. General Green died upon 
the lines he had so long and so gallantly defended. General 
Bowen, having passed scathless through the bloody scenes of 
Shiloh, Iuka, Corinth, Grand Gulf, Port Gibson, Baker’s Creek, 
and Vicksburg, perished by disease after the capitulation.” 


With an unlimited supply of provisions the garrison could 
not, for the reasons already given, have held out much longer. 
Our loss in killed, wounded, and missing, from the landing of 
the enemy on the east to the capitulation, was 5,632; that of 
the enemy, according to his own statement, was 8,875. The 
number of prisoners surrendered, as near as I can tell, did not 
exceed 28,000. . 

In addition to the efforts made to relieve Vicksburg by an 

attack on Grant’s army in the rear, instructions were sent to 
General Kirby Smith, commanding on the west side of the river, 
to employ a part of his forces in codperation with our troops on 
the east side. From General Richard Taylor’s work, “ Destruc- 
tion and Reconstruction,” I learn that— 
“the Federal army withdrew from Alexandria [a town on Red 
River, Louisiana] on the 13th of May, and on the 23d crossed 
the Mississippi and proceeded to invest Port Hudson... . A com- 
munication from General Kirby Smith informed me that Major- 
General Walker, with a division of infantry and three batteries, 
four thousand strong, was on the march from Arkansas, and would 
reach me within the next few days ; and I was directed to employ 
Walker’s force to relieve Vicksburg, now invested by General 
Grant, who had crossed the Mississippi on the 1st of May.” 


General Taylor states that his view was that this force might 
be best employed for the relief of Vicksburg by a movement to 
raise the siege of Port Hudson, which he regarded as feasible, 
while a direct movement toward Vicksburg he considered would 
- be unavailing, because the peninsula opposite to that city was 
partially occupied by the enemy and commanded by the gun- 
boats in the river; he states, however, that he was overruled, 
and proceeded with Walker’s division to cross the Tensas and 
attack two Federal camps on the bank of the Mississippi, the 
one ten and the other fourteen miles above Vicksburg, but that, 
after driving the troops over the levee, the gunboats in the river 

74 


418 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


protected them from any further assault. Then, being convinced 
that nothing useful could be effected in that quarter, he, in con- 
formity with his original idea, ordered General Walker to retire 
to Alexandria, intending to go thence to the Téche. He says 
this order was countermanded and the division kept in the 
region between the Tensas and the Mississippi until the fall of 
Vicksburg. Taylor had left Mouton’s and Green’s brigades in 

the country west of the Téche, and thither he went in person. 

At Alexandria he found three regiments of Texan mounted men, 

about six hundred and fifty aggregate, under the command of 

Colonel (afterward Brigadier-General) Major, and these were 

ordered to Morgan’s Ferry on the Atchafalaya. Taylor then 

proceeded to the camps of Mouton and Green, on the lower 

Téche. After giving instructions preparatory to an attack on 

a work which the Federals had constructed at Berwick’s Bay, 

Taylor returned to join Colonel Major’s command on the Atcha- 

falaya, and with it moved down the Fardoche and Grossetéte 

to Fausse Riviere, opposite to Port Hudson. Here the noise 

of the bombardment then in progress could be distinctly heard, . 
and here he learned that the Federal force left in New Orleans 

did not exceed one thousand men. 

It was now the 19th of June. He was about one hundred 
miles from the Federal force at Berwick’s Bay.. He furnished 
Colonel Major with guides, informed him that he must be at 
Berwick’s Bay on the morning of the 23d, as Mouton and Green 
would attack at dawn on that day. Taylor then hastened to the 
camp of Moutonand Green. The country through which Major 
was to march was in possession of the enemy, therefore secrecy and 
celerity were alike required for success. The men carried their 
rations, and the wagons were sent back across the Atchafalaya. 
In his rapid march, Major captured seventy prisoners and 
burned two steamers, and the combined movements of Mou- 
ton, Green, and Major, all reached their goal at the appointed 
time, of which General Taylor says: “ Although every precau- 
tion had been taken to exclude mistakes and insure coperation, 
such complete success is not often attained in combined military 
movement; and I felt that sacrifices were due to fortune.” 

At Berwick’s Bay the Federals had constructed works to 


1863] A NUMBER OF SUGAR-COOLERS WERE COLLECTED. 419 


strengthen a position occupied as a depot of supplies. The 
effective garrison was small, the principal number of those © 
present being sick and convalescents. The works mounted 
twelve guns, thirty-twos and twenty-fours, and a gunboat was 
anchored in the bay. Our object was to capture Berwick’s 
Bay, and thence proceed to the execution of the plan above in- 
dicated. or this purpose, having arrived on the Téche, a short 
distance above Berwick’s Bay, some small boats (skiffs) and a 
number of sugar-coolers were collected, in which the men were 
embarked. Major Hunter, of the Texas regiment, and Major 
Blair, of the Second Louisiana, were placed in command, and 
detachments were drawn from the forces. They embarked at 
night, and paddled down the Téche to the Atchafalaya and 
Grand Lake. They had about twelve miles to go, and were 
expected to reach the northeast end of the island, a mile from 
Berwick’s, before daylight, where they were to remain until 
they heard the guns of our force on the west side of the bay. 
At dawn on June 23d our guns opened on the gunboat and 
speedily drove it away. Fire was then directed on the earth- 
works, and the enemy attempted to reply, when a shout was 
heard in the rear, and Hunter with his party came rushing on. 
Resistance ceased at once. The spoils of Berwick’s were of 
vast importance. Twelve thirty-two- and twenty-four-pounder 
guns, many small arms and accouterments, great quantities of 
quartermaster’s and commissary’s, ordnance, and medical stores, 
_and seventeen hundred prisoners were taken. Then, as promptly 
as circumstances would permit, Taylor, with three thousand men 
of all arms, proceeded, with the guns and munitions he had ac- 
quired, to the execution of the object of his campaign—to raise 
the siege of Port Hudson, by cutting Banks’s communication 
with New Orleans and making a demonstration which would 
arouse that city. “Its population of two hundred thousand was 
bitterly hostile to Federal rule, and the appearance of a Con- 
federate force on the opposite bank of the river would raise 
such a storm as to bring Banks from Port Hudson, the garrison 
of which could then unite with General Joseph Johnston in the 
rear of General Grant.” . 

In the first week in July, twelve guns were placed on the 


490 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


river below Donaldsonville. Fire was opened and one trans- 
port destroyed and several turned back. Gunboats attempted 
to dislodge our batteries, but were driven away by dismounted 
men, protected by the levee. For three days the river was 
closed to transports, and mounted scouts were pushed down to 
a point opposite Kenner, sixteen miles above New Orleans. A 
few hours more, and there would have been great excitement in 
the city. But, by the surrender of Port Hudson on July 9th, 
the enemy were in sufficient force, not only to arrest Taylor’s 
movements, but to require a withdrawal from the exposed posi- 
tion which this little command had assumed for the great object 
of relieving that place, and thus giving of its garrison, per- 
haps about five thousand men, as a reénforcement to break 
the investment of Vicksburg. 

Port Hudson, which thus capitulated, was situated on a 
bend of the Mississippi, about twenty-two miles above Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana, and one hundred and forty-seven above New 
Orleans: The defenses in front, or on the water-side, consisted 
of three series of batteries situated on a bluff and extending 
along the river above the place. Farther up was an impassable 
marsh forming a natural defense, and in the rear the works 
were strong, consisting of several lines of intrenchments and rifle- 
pits, with heavy trees felled in every direction. General Banks 
with a large force landed on May 21,1863, and on the 27th an 
assault was made on the works, and repulsed. A bombardment 
from the river was then kept up for several days, and on June 
14th another unsuccessful assault was made. This was their last 
assault, but the enemy, resorting to mines and regular ap- 
proaches, was slowly progressing with these when the news of 
the surrender of Vicksburg was received. Major-General Gard- 
ner, who was in command, then made a proposal to General 
Banks to capitulate, which was accepted by the latter, and the 
position was yielded to him on the next day. The surrender 
included about six thousand persons all told, fifty-one pieces of 
artillery, and a quantity of ordnance stores. Our loss in killed 
and wounded in the assaults was small compared to that of the 
enemy, and by the fall of Vicksburg the position of Port Hud- 
son had ceased to have much importance. 


1863] THE GALLANTRY OF THE DEFENSE. 421 


Z 


4 
= 
& 
> 


GEN WE/7-ZELS CAMP 
¥ 
yy % 
R U, \ 


“Aor CREEK _ 


mA 


M4 
i 


yf 


Wy 


JN) 
aN 
TAGON 
BOWENS CAMP 
AAAAAAAANRKA 


> 
EN 


CLINTON. PLHUDSON RE. 


«PORT HUDSON 


4y 
AS 
2 4 
2, fy P 
eae) 
oa 
Ni 
le 
a 
IN 
Ke 


\a 
ve. SS << 
4 a 


yy 
Tee a 


More than six weeks the garrison, which had resisted a vastly 
superior force attacking by both land and water, had cheerfully 
encountered danger and fatigue without a murmur, had borne 
famine and had repulsed every assault, and yielded Port Hud- 
son only when the fall of Vicksburg had deprived the position 
of its importance. A chivalric foe would have recognized the 
gallantry of the defense in the terms usually given under like 
circumstances; such, for instance, as were granted to Major 


WATERS-SON, SC. 


499, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Anderson at Fort Sumter, or, at the least, have paroled the 
garrison. 

I had regarded it of vast importance to hold the two posi- 
tions of Vicksburg and Port Hudson. Though gunboats had 
passed the batteries of both, they had found it hazardous, and 
transport-vessels could not prudently risk it. The garrisons 
of both places had maintained them with extraordinary gal- 
lantry, inspired no doubt as well by consciousness of the im- 
portance of their posts as by the soldierly character common to 
Confederate troops. Taylor on the 10th received intelligence 
of the fall of Port Hudson, and some hours later learned that 
Vicksburg had surrendered. His batteries and outposts were 
ordered in to the Lafourche, and Mouton was sent to Berwick’s 
to cross the stores to the west side of the bay. On the 13th a 
force of six thousand men followed his retreat down the La- 
fourche; but Green, with fourteen hundred dismounted men 
and a battery, attacked the Federals so vigorously as to drive 
them into Donaldsonville, capturing two hundred prisoners, 
many small-arms, and two guns. Undisturbed thereafter, Taylor 
continued his march, removed all the stores from the fortifica- 
tion at Berwick’s, and on the 21st of July moved up the Téche. 
The pickets left at Berwick’s reported that the enemy’s scouts 
only reached. the bay twenty-four hours after Taylor’s troops 
had withdrawn. 

In the recital of those events connected with the sieges of 
Port Hudson and Vicksburg, enough has been given to show 
the great anxiety of the Administration to retain those two po- 
sitions as necessary to continued communication between the 
Confederate States on the east and west sides of the Mississippi 
River. The reader will not have failed to observe that General 
Johnston, commanding the department, and General Pemberton, 
the district commander, entertained quite different views. The 
former considered the safety of the garrisons of such paramount 
importance, that the position should be evacuated rather than the 
loss of the troops hazarded; the latter regarded the holding of 
Vicksburg as of such vital consequence that an army should be 
hazarded to maintain its possession. When General Pemberton 
and his forees were besieged in Vicksburg, every effort was 


1863] TO CUT HIS WAY OUT. 493 


made to supply General Johnston with an army which might 
raise the siege. While General Johnston was at Jackson, pre- 
paring to advance against the army investing Vicksburg, the 
knowledge that the enemy was receiving large reénforcements 
made it evident that the most prompt action was necessary for 
success; of this General Johnston manifested a clear percep- 
tion, for on the 25th of May he sent Pemberton the following 
message : 


“ Bragg is sending a division ; when it comes, I will move to 
you.” 


After all the troops which could be drawn from other points 
had been sent to him, it was suggested that he might defeat the 
force investing Port Hudson, and unite the garrison with his 
troops at Jackson, but he replied : 


“We can not relieve Port Hudson without giving up Jackson, 
by which we should lose Mississippi.” 


~ On June 29th General Johnston reports that— 


“ Field transportation and other supplies having been obtained, 
the army marched toward the Big Black, and on the evening of 
July 1st encamped between Brownsville and the river.” 


The 2d and 3d of July were spent in reconnaissance, from 
which the conclusion was reached that an attack on the north 
side of the railroad was impracticable, and examinations were 
commenced on the south side of: the railroad. On the 3d a 
messenger was sent to General Pemberton that an attempt 
would be made about the 7th, by an attack on the enemy, to 
ereate a diversion which might enable Pemberton to cut his 
way out. The message was not received, and Pemberton, de- 
spairing of aid from the exterior, capitulated on the 4th. 

General Grant, in expectation that an attack in his rear would 
be made by General J. E. Johnston, formed a provisional corps 
by taking brigades from several corps, and assigned General 
Sherman to command it. He was sent in the direction of Big 
Black. Colonel Wilson, then commanding the Fifteenth Illi- 
nois Cavalry, was sent to the Big Black River to watch for the 


494 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


expected advance of Johnston, when Sherman was to be noti- 
fied, so that he might meet and hold Johnston in check until 
additional reénforcements should arrive. Wilson never sent 
the notice. An officer of Grant’s army, whose rank and posi- 
tion gave opportunity for accurate information, writes: 


“Tt was always a matter of surprise to Grant and his com- 
manders that Johnston failed to make the attempt to break up the 
siege of Vicksburg, of which from the long line and consequent 
weakness of the army of the North there seemed a fair chance of 
accomplishment.” 


General Johnston, being informed on the 5th of the surren- 
der of Vicksburg, fell back to Jackson, where his army arrived 
on the 7th. 


“On the morning of the 9th the enemy appeared in heavy 
force in front of the works thrown up for the defense of the place ; 
these, consisting of a line of rifle-pits prepared at intervals for 
artillery, . . . were badly located and constructed, presenting but 
a slight obstacle to a vigorous assault.” * 


The weather was hot, deep dust covered the country roads, 
and for about ten miles there was no water to supply the troops 
who were advancing in heavy order of battle from Clinton; and 
the circumstances above mentioned caused General Johnston, as 
he states, to expect that the enemy “ would be compelled to make 
an immediate assault.” Sherman, in command of the attacking 
column, did not, however, elect to assault the intrenchments, 
but moved the left of his line around so as to rest upon Pearl 
River above, and then, extending his right so as to reach the 
river below, commenced intrenching a line of investment. As 
early as May 27th Brigadier-General J. G. Rains had been 
directed to report to General Johnston in connection with tor- 
pedoes and sub-terra shells, and a request had been made for 
“all reasonable facilities and aid in the supply of men or 
material for the fair trial of his torpedoes and shells.” There 
could scarcely have been presented a better opportunity for 


* General Johnston’s “ Report of Operations in Mississippi and East Louisiana,” 
pp. 12, 13. , 


1863] BEEN TAKEN AT GREAT DISADVANTAGE. 495 


_ their use than that offered by the heavy column marching 
against Jackson, and the enemy would have been taken at great 
disadvantage if our troops had met them midway between Jack- 
son and Clinton. As the defenses of Jackson had not been so 
corrected in location and increased in strength as to avail against 
anything other than a mere assault, it is greatly to be regretted 
that the railroad-bridge across Pearl River was not so repaired 
that the large equipments of the Central road might have been 
removed for use elsewhere and at other times. One of the 
serious embarrassments suffered in the last two years of the war 
was from the want of rolling-stock, with which to operate our 
railroads, as required for the transportation of troops and sup- 
plies. On the 12th of July a heavy cannonade was opened, and 
the missiles reached all parts of the town. An assault was also 
made on Major-General Breckinridge’s position on our extreme 
left. His division, with the aid of Cobb’s and Slocum’s bat- 
teries, repulsed it, inflicting severe loss, and capturing two hun- 
dred prisoners, besides the wounded, and taking three regi- 
mental colors. On the 15th General Johnston was assured 
that the remainder of Grant’s army was moving from Vicks- 
burg to Jackson, and on the night of the 16th he, having .pre- 
viously sent forward his sick and wounded, successfully with- 
drew his army across the Pearl River, and moved toward 
Brandon, and continued the march as far as Morton, about 
thirty-five miles from Jackson. The enemy followed no farther 
than Brandon, which was reached on the 19th, and manifested 
no higher purpose than that of arson, which was exhibited on 
a still larger scale at Jackson. 

Thus, within the first half of July, our disasters had fol- 
lowed close upon the heels of one another. Though not defeated 
at Gettysburg, we had suffered a check, and an army, to which 
nothing was considered impossible, had been compelled to re- 
tire, leaving its opponent in possession of the field of battle. 
The loss of Vicksburg and Port Hudson was the surrender of 
the Mississippi to the enemy. It was true that gunboats had 
run by our batteries, but not with impunity, and some of them 
had been sunk in the attempt. Transports for troops, supplies, 
and merchandise could not, except at great risk, use the river 


+ 
496 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


while our batteries at those two points remained effective, and 
gunboats cruising between them would have but a barren field. 
Moreover, they needed to be very numerous to prevent inter- 
course between the two sides of the river, which, thus far, they 
had never been able to effect. 


CUBASE er 


Inactivity in Tennessee.—Capture of Colburn’s Expedition—Capture of Streight’s 
Expedition.—Advance of Rosecrans to Bridgeport.—Burnside in East Tennes- 
see.—Our Force at Chattanooga*-Movement against Burnside.—The Enemy 
moves on our Rear near Ringgold.—Battle at Chickamauga.—Strength and Dis- 
tribution of our Forces.—The Enemy withdraws.—Captures.—Losses.—The 
Enemy evacuates Passes of Lookout Mountain.—His Trains captured.—Failure 
of General Bragg to pursue.—Reénforcements to the Enemy, and Grant to com- 
mand.—His Description of the Situation.—Movements of the Enemy.—Conflict 
at Chattanooga. 


Arter the battle at Murfreesboro, in Tennessee, a period of 
inactivity ensued between the large armed forces, which was 
disturbed only by occasional expeditions by small bodies on 
each side. On March 5, 1863, an expedition of the enemy, under 
Colonel Colburn, was captured at Spring Hill, ten miles south of 
‘Franklin, by Generals Van Dorn and Forrest. Thirteen hun- 
dred prisoners were taken. In April another expedition, under 
Colonel Streight, into northern Georgia, was captured near 
Rome by our vigilant, daring cavalry leader, Forrest. This was 
one of the most remarkable, and, to the enemy, disastrous raids 
of the war. Seventeen hundred prisoners were taken. In 
June some movements were made by General Rosecrans, which 
were followed by the withdrawal of our forces from Middle 
Tennessee, and a return to the occupation of Chattanooga. At 
this time General Buckner held Knoxville and commanded the 
district of Kast Tennessee; General Samuel Jones commanded 
the district of southwest Virginia, his headquarters at Abingdon, 
Virginia. Between the two was Cumberland Gap, the well- 
known pass by which the first pioneer, Daniel Boone, went into 
Kentucky, and the only one in that region through which it was 


1863] THE FUTILITY OF RESISTANCE. 497 


supposed an army, with the usual artillery and wagon-train, 
could march from the north into East Tennessee or southwest 
Virginia. It was, therefore, occupied and partially fortified, 
which, with the precipitous heights flanking it on the right and 
left, would, it was hoped, suffice against an attack in front, and 
prove an adequate barrier to an advance on our important line 
of communication in its rear, which Buckner and Jones were 
relied on to defend. 

On the 20th of August Brigadier-General I. W. Frazier, an 
educated soldier in whom I had much confidence, assumed, by 
assignment, the command of this position, and energetically 
commenced to perfect the defenses, and ingeniously though un- 
successfully endeavored to bring a supply of water into the 
fortifications. He reported his force to amount to seventeen 
hundred effective infantry and artillery, and about six hundred 
cavalry ; the supply of ammunition was deficient, and some of 
it damaged by a badly constructed magazine. 

About August 20th it was ascertained that the army under 
General Rosecrans had crossed the mountains to Stevenson and 
Bridgeport. His force of infantry and artillery amounted to 
seventy thousand men, divided into four corps. About the 
same time General Burnside advanced from Kentucky, crossed, 
by using pack-mules, the rugged mountains west of Cumber- 
land Gap, and, about the 1st of September, approached Knox- . 
ville, East Tennessee, with a force estimated at over twenty- 
five thousand men. General Buckner, therefore, evacuated 
Knoxville, and took position at Loudon, with a force of about 
five thousand infantry, artillery, and cavalry; this rendered 
the occupation of Cumberland Gap hazardous to the garrison, 
and comparatively of little value to us, but, when its surrender 
was demanded by a force which might be resisted, General Fra- 
zier promptly refused to comply with the demand. Subse- 
quently, General Burnside advanced with a large body of 
troops, and, approaching from the south, renewed the demand, 
when General Frazier, recognizing the inutility as well as fu- 
tility of resistance, surrendered on the 9th of September, 1863.* 


* Some of the garrison of Cumberland Gap escaped, and stated to General Jones 
that the surrender had been made without resistance, on the demands of the smaller 


498 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The main body of our army was encamped near Chattanooga, 
while the cavalry force was recruiting from fatigue and ex- 
haustion near Rome, Georgia. The enemy first attempted to 
strike Buckner in the rear, but failing, commenced a move- 
ment against our left and rear. On the last of August he 
had crossed his main force over the Tennessee River at Car- 
penter’s Ferry, near Stevenson. Our effective force of in- 
fantry and artillery was about thirty-five thousand. By active 
reconnaissance of our cavalry, which had been brought for- 
ward, it was ascertained that Rosecrans’s general movement 
was toward our left and rear, in the direction of Dalton and 
Rome, keeping Lookout Mountain between us. The want of 
supplies in the country and the force under Burnside on our 
right rendered hazardous a movement on the rear of the for- 
mer with our force. General Lee, with commendable zeal for 
the public welfare and characteristic self-denial, had consented 
to remain for a time on the defensive for the purpose of reén- 
forcing Bragg’s army, and General Longstreet had been de- 
tached with his corps for that purpose. These troops were to 
come by rail from Atlanta, and might soon be expected to 
arrive. It was, therefore, determined to retire toward our ex- 


detachments which had preceded General Burnside, and I was not advised of the 
fact that Buckner had previously retreated toward Chattanooga, and that Burn- 
side was in possession of Knoxville. In my message of December 12, 1863, I re- 
ferred to the event, as reported to the War Department, as follows: 

“The country was painfully surprised by the intelligence that the officer in com- 
mand of Cumberland Gap had surrendered that important and easily defensible pass, 
without firing a shot, upon the summons of a force still believed to have been inade- 
quate to its reduction, and when reénforcements were in supporting distance and 
had been ordered to his aid. The entire garrison, including its commander, being 
still held prisoners by the enemy, I am unable to suggest any explanation of this 
disaster which laid open Eastern Tennessee and southwestern Virginia to hostile 
operations.” 

So far as censure of General Frazier was implied in these remarks, I am now 
fully satisfied it was unjust, and I can only regret that the authentic information 
recently furnished to me had not been received at an earlier date, so that I might . 
have relieved General Frazier from the reflection while I held executive authority. 
It gives me pleasure now to say that full and exact information justifies the high 
estimate I placed upon him when he was assigned to the separate command of that 

_ important post. Full justice can be done to General Frazier only when his report 
and those of his subordinate officers shall have been published. 


1863] PUT IN A SAFE POSITION. 499 


pected reénforcements, as well as to meet the foe in front when 
he should emerge from the mountain-gorges. 

As we could not thus hold Chattanooga, our army, on Sep- 
tember 7th and 8th, took position from Lee and Gordon’s Mill 
to Lafayette, on the road leading south from Chattanooga and 
fronting the east slope of Lookout Mountain. The forces on 
the Hiawassee and at Chickamauga Station took the route by 
Ringgold. A small cavalry force was left in observation at 
Chattanooga, and a brigade of infantry at Ringgold to cover the 
railroad. 

The enemy immediately moved the corps that threatened 
Buckner into Chattanooga, and, shortly after, it commenced to 
move on our rear by the is to Lafayette and Ringgold. 
Another corps was nearly opposite the head of McLemore Cove, 
in Will’s Valley, and one at Colonel Winston’s opposite Alpine. 
During the 9th it was ascertained that a column, between four 
and five thousand, had crossed Lookout Mountain by Stevens’s 
and Cooper’s Gaps into McLemore’s Cove. An effort was made 
by General Bragg to capture this column, with intent then to 
turn upon the others, and beat each in succession. But, some 
delay having occurred in the advance of our forces through the 
gaps, the enemy took advantage of it and retreated to the 
mountain-passes. He then withdrew his corps from the route 
toward Alpine to unite with the one near McLemore’s Cove, 
which was gradually extended toward Lee and Gordon’s Mills. 
It was now determined to turn upon the Third Corps of the 
enemy, approaching us from the direction of Chattanooga. The 
forces sent toward the Cove were accordingly withdrawn to 
Lafayette, and Polk’s and Walker’s corps were moved imme- 
diately in the direction of Lee and Gordon’s Mills, Lieutenant- 
General Polk commanding. He was ordered to attack early 
the next morning, as the enemy’s corps was known to be di- 
vided, and it was hoped by successive attacks to crush his army 
in detail; but the expectation was not realized, as his forces 
withdrew and formed a junction. Our trains and supplies were 
then put in a safe position, and all our forces were concen- 
trated along the Chickamauga, threatening the opposing force 
in front. Major-General Wheeler, with two divisions of cavalry, 


430 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


occupied the extreme left, vacated by Hill’s corps, and was 
directed to press the enemy in McLemore’s Cove ; to divert his 
attention from the real movement, General Forrest covered the 
movement on our front and right; General B. R. Johnson was 
moved from Ringgold to the extreme right of the line; Walk- 
er’s corps formed on his left opposite Alexander’s Bridge, Buck- 
ner’s next, near Tedford Ford, Polk opposite Lee and Gordon’s: 
Mills, and Hill on the extreme left.. Orders were issued to cross 
the Chickamauga at 6 a. M., commencing by the extreme right. 
The movements were unexpectedly delayed by the difficulty 

of the roads and the resistance of the enemy’s cavalry. The 
right column did not effect its crossing until late in the after- 
noon of the 18th; at this time, Major-General Hood, from the 
Army of Northern Virginia, arrived and assumed command of 
the column. General W. H. T. Walker had a severe skirmish 
at Alexander’s Bridge, from which he finally drove the enemy, 
but not before he had destroyed it; General Walker, however, 
found a ford, crossed, and Hood united with him after night. 
The advance was resumed at daylight on the 19th, when Buck- 
ner’s corps with Cheatham’s division of Polk’s corps crossed the 
Chickamauga, and our line of battle was thus formed: Buck- 
ner’s left rested on the bank of the stream about one mile 
below Lee and Gordon’s Mills; on his right came Hood with 
his own and Johnson’s divisions, and Walker’s formed the 
extreme right; Forrest with his cavalry was in advance to the 
right. He soon became engaged with such a large force that 
two brigades were sent from Walker’s division to his support. 
Forrest, here fighting with his usual tenacity, desperately held 
in check the comparatively immense force which he was re- 
sisting. General Walker, being ordered to commence the 
attack on the right, boldly advanced, and soon developed op- 
posing forces greatly superior to his own; he, however, drove 
them handsomely, capturing several batteriés of artillery, by 
dashing charges. As he pressed back the force in his front, 
it rested upon such heavy masses in the rear, that he was in 
turn repulsed. Cheatham’s division was ordered to his sup- 
port ; it came too late. Before it could reach him, assailed on 
both flanks, he had been forced back to his first position, but 


1863] SLEPT UPON THE FIELD. 431 


the two commands united, though yet greatly outnumbered, 
and, by a spirited attack, recovered our advantage. These 
movements on our right were in such direction as to create 
an opening between the left of Cheatham’s division and the 
right of Hood’s. To fill this, Stewart’s division, the reserve 
of Buckner’s corps, was ordered up, and soon became engaged, 
as now did Hood’s whole front. The enemy had transferred 
forces from his extreme right so as to concentrate his main body 
on his left, acutely perceiving the probability of an effort on 
our part to gain his rear, and cut off his communication with 
his base at Chattanooga. The main part of the battle, there- 
fore, was fought on the opposite flank from that where both 
armies had probably expected it. Lieutenant-General Polk was _ 
now directed to move the remainder of his corps across the 
stre€m, and to assume command in person; Hill’s corps was 

also directed to move to ourright. Stewart, bya gallant assault, 

broke the enemy’s center, and pushed forward until he became _ 
exposed to an enfilading fire. Hood steadily advanced, driving 
the force in his front ia night. Cleburne, of Hill’s corps, im- 
mediately on reaching the right, closed so impetuously with the 
enemy as to create surprise, and drove him in great disorder. 
From prisoners and otherwise, the commanding General became 
satisfied that his antagonist had by marching night and day suc- 
ceeded in concentrating his whole force, and that it had that 
day been fought on the field of Chickamauga. A part of the 
forces on our extreme left had not reached the field of actual 
conflict in time to participate in the engagement of that day ; 
they, together with the remainder of Longstreet’s corps, were 
brought up and put in position to renew the battle in the morn- 
ing. Our troops slept upon the field they had so bravely con- 
tested. The Confederate troops engaged on the right were as 
follows: 


General W. H. T; Walker’s division... .......se0esseesees 5,500 
Chegttam’ SidivisiOn. vavec sc cscs cecces scee ds conse 7,000 
Uma e SLOW ANY SCQIVISION: ¢ nigeis chesie © ses ude ele cee siee so sine 4,040 
GlSi IEG SNULVISL OW sete aco acidic « isis, cselels #°s/lorale,« TateYa daalec clestaietec eke 6,115 
Hood’s, B. R. Johnson’s, and Trigg’s troops....:..+....+665 8,428 
Forrest’s and Pegram’s cavalry........e+sseeeeeeeeeeeeses 8,500 - 


439 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General Wheeler with his cavalry had been in observation 
on the left, and for a fortnight, daily skirmishing with the 
enemy. On the 17th he was ordered to move into McLemore’s 
Cove to make a demonstration in that direction, where, after a 
severe engagement, he developed a force too large to be dis- 
lodged. On the 18th he was directed to hold the gap in Pig- 
eon Mountain, so as to prevent the enemy from moving on 
our left. As appeared subsequently, General Rosecrans, by 
forced marches, had made a détour, and formed a junction of. 
his forces in front of ours, so that it was no longer needful to 
hold the passes of the Pigeon Mountain, and Wheeler with his 
cavalry was called to take position on the left of our line. 

On the night of the 19th, the whole force having been assem- 
bled, including the five thousand effective infantry sent for 
temporary service from Virginia, the command was orgartized 
as two corps, the one on the right to be commanded by Lien- 
tenant-General Polk ; the other, on the left, to be commanded by 
Lieutenant-General Longstreet. These corps consisted respec- 
tively as follows: Polk’s right wing, of Breckinridge’s, Cle- 
burne’s, Cheatham’s, and Walker’s divisions, and Forrest’s cay- 
alry—ageregate, 22,471; Longstreet’s left wing, of Preston’s, 
Hindman’s, Johnson’s (Hood’s), Law’s, Kershaw’s, Stewart’s di- 
visions, and Wheeler’s cavalry—aggregate, 24,850: grand aggre- 
gate of both wings, 47,321. The forces under Rosecrans, as has 
been subsequently learned, consisted of McCook’s corps, 14,345 ; 
Thomas’s, 24,072 ; Crittenden’s, 18,975 ; Granger’s, about 5,000; 
cavalry, 7,000: whole number, 64,392. On the night of the 
19th General Bragg gave his instructions orally, to the general 
officers whom he had summoned to his camp-fire, as to the 
position of the different commands; and the order of battle was 
that the attack should commence on the right at daybreak, and 
be taken up successively to the left. From a combination of 
mishaps, it resulted that the attack was not commenced until 
nine or ten o’clock in the day, and, what was much more impor- 
tant, the troops from right to left did not in rapid succession 
engage, so as to have that effectiveness which would have re- 
sulted from concert of action. Prodigies of valor were per- 
formed, many partial successes were gained in the beginning of 


1863] YIELDED ALONG THE WHOLE LINE. 433 


the battle, but in the first operations the troops so frequently 
moved to the assault without the necessary cohesion in a charg- 
ing line, that nearly all early assaults by our right wing were 
successively repulsed with loss. Though at first invariably suc- 
cessful, our troops were subsequently compelled to retire before 
the heavy reénforcements constantly brought. 

Wheeler with his cavalry struck boldly at the enemy’s ex- 
treme right and center, and with such effect that, in the Federal 
battle reports, it appears the attack was mistaken for a flank 
movement by General Longstreet. 

Rosecrans having transferred his main strength to our right, 
the attack of the left met with less resistance, and was success- 
fully and vigorously followed up. About 4 p.m. a general 
assault was made by the right, and the attack was pressed 
from right to left until the enemy gave way at different points, 
and, finally, about dark, yielded along the whole line. Our 
army bivouacked on the ground it had so gallantly won. The 
foe, though driven from his lines, continued to confront us 
when the action closed. But it was found the next morning 
that he had availed himself of the night to withdraw from our 
front, and that his main body was soon in position within his 
lines at Chattanooga. Wecaptured over eight thousand prison- 
ers, fifty-one pieces of artillery, fifteen thousand stand of small 
arms, and quantities of ammunition, with wagons, ambulances, 
teams, and medicines with hospital stores in large quantities. . 
From the appearance of the field the enemy’s losses must have 
largely exceeded ours, and the victory was complete; but these 
results could not console us for the lives they cost. Pride in the 
gallantry of our heroes, rejoicing at the repulse of the invader, 
was subdued by the memory of our fallen brave. 

After General Rosecrans’s retreat to Chattanooga, he with- 
drew his forces from the passes of Lookout Mountain, which 
covered his line of supplies from Bridgeport. These command- 
ing positions were immediately occupied by our troops, and a 
cavalry force was sent across the Tennessee, which destroyed a 
large wagon-train in the Sequatchie Valley, captured McMinns- 
ville and other points on the railroad, and thus temporarily cut 
off the source of supplies for the army at Chattanooga. 

75 


434 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The reasons why General Bragg did not promptly pursue 
are stated in his report thus : 


“Our supplies of all kinds were greatly reduced, the railroad 
having been constantly occupied in transporting troops, prisoners, 
and our wounded, and the bridges having been destroyed to a 
point two miles south of Ringgold. These supplies were ordered 
to be replenished, and, as soon as it was seen that we could be sub- 
sisted, the army was moved forward to seize and hold the only 
communication the enemy had with his supplies in the rear. His 
important road, and the shortest by half to his depot at Bridge- 
port, lay along the south bank of the Tennessee. The holding of 
this all-important route was confided to Lieutenant-General Long- 
street’s command, and its possession forced the enemy to a road 
double the length, over two ranges of mountains, by wagon trans- 
portation. At the same time, our cavalry, in large force, was 
thrown across the river to operate on this long and difficult route. 
These dispositions, faithfully sustained, insured the enemy’s speedy 
evacuation of Chattanooga for want of food and forage.” 


These reverses caused the enemy to send forward reén- 
forcements from the army at Vicksburg, and also to assign 
General Grant to the command in Tennessee. As early as 
September 23d the Eleventh and Twelfth Corps of the Army 
of the Potomac were detached, and sent under General Hooker 
_to Tennessee, and assigned to protect Rosecrans’s line of com- 

munication from Bridgeport to Nashville. It was on October 

23d that General Grant arrived at Chattanooga, and only in 
time to save their army from starvation or evacuation. The 
investment by General Brage had been so close and their 
communications had been so destroyed that Bragg was on the 
point of realizing the evacuation of Chattanooga, which he had 
anticipated. The report of Grant thus describes the situation 
on his arrival : 


“Up to this period our forces in Chattanooga were practically 
invested, the enemy’s lines extending from the Tennessee River, 
above Chattanooga, to the river at and below the point of Look- 
out Mountain, below Chattanooga, with the south bank of the 
river picketed nearly to Bridgeport, his main force being fortified 


1863 | ALMOST CERTAIN ANNIHILATION. 435 


in Chattanooga Valley, at the foot of. and on Missionary Ridge 
and Lookout Mountain, and a brigade in Lookout Valley. True, 
we held possession of the country north of the river, but it was 
from sixty to seventy miles over the most impracticable roads to 
army supplies. 

“The artillery horses and mules had become go reduced by 
starvation that they could not have been relied upon for moving 
anything. An attempt at retreat must have been with men alone, 
and with only such supplies as they could carry. <A retreat would 
have been almost certain annihilation, for the enemy, occupying 
positions within gunshot of and overlooking our very fortifica- 
tions, would unquestionably have pursued retreating forces. Al- 
‘ready more than ten thousand animals had perished in supplying 
half rations to the troops by the long and tedious route from Ste- 
venson and Bridgeport to Chattanooga over Waldron’s Ridge. 
They could not have been supplied another week.” 


The first movement under Grant was, therefore, to estab- 
_lish a new and shorter line of supplies. For this purpose a 
night expedition was sent down the river from Chattanooga, 
which seized the range of hills at the mouth of Lookout Val- 
ley, and covered the Brown’s Ferry road. By 10 a. ma 
bridge was laid across the river at the ferry, which secured 
the end of the road nearest to our forces and the shorter line 
over which the enemy could move troops. General Hooker 
also entered Lookout Valley at Wauhatchie, and took up posi- 
tions for the defense of the road from Whiteside’s, over which 
he had marched, and also the road leading from Brown’s Ferry 
to Kelly’s Ferry. General Palmer crossed from the north side 
of the river opposite Whiteside’s, and held the road passed over 
by Hooker. An unsuccessful attack was made on a portion of 
Hooker’s troops the first night after he entered the valley. Sub- 
sequently, we lost the remaining heights held by us west of 
Lookout Creek. 

Further operations of the enemy were delayed until the 
arrival of Sherman’s force from Memphis After his arrival, 
on November 23d, an attempt was made to feel our lines. 
This was done with so much force as to obtain possession of 
Indian Hill and the low range of hills south of it. That night 


436 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Sherman began to move to obtain a position just below the 
mouth of the South Chickamauga, and by daylight on the 24th 
he had eight thousand men on the south side of the Tennes- 
see, and fortified in rifle-trenches. By noon pontoon-bridges 
were laid across the Tennessee and the Chickamauga, and the 
remainder of his forces crossed. During the afternoon he took 
possession of the whole northern extremity of Missionary Ridge 
nearly to the railroad-tunnel, and fortified the position equally 
with that held by us. A raid was also made on our line of com- 
munication, cutting the railroad at Cleveland. On the same day 
Hooker scaled the western slope of Lookout Mountain. On the 
25th he took possession of the mountain-top with a part of his 
force, and with the remainder crossed Chattanooga Valley to 
Rossville. Our most northern point was assailed by Sherman, 
and the attack kept up all day. He was reénforced by a part 
of Howard’s corps. In the afternoon the whole force of the 
enemy’s center, consisting of four divisions, was moved to the 
attack. They got possession of the rifle-pits at the foot of Mis- 
sionary Ridge, and commenced the ascent of the mountain from 
right to left, and continued it until the summit was reached, 
notwithstanding the volleys of grape and canister discharged at 
them. Our forces retreated from the ridge as the multitudinous 
assailants neared the thin line on the crest, and during the night 
withdrew from the positions on the plain below. General 
Grant, after advancing a short distance from Chattanooga, dis- 
patched a portion of his forces to the relief of Burnside in East 
Tennessee, where he was closely besieged by General Longstreet 
in Knoxville. Longstreet moved east into Virginia, and ulti- 
mately joined General Lee. He had left the army of General 
Lee, and moved to the West with his force, on the condition that 
he should return when summoned. This summons had been 
sent to him. The loss of the enemy in the conflicts at Chat- 
tanooga was 757 killed, 4,529 wounded, and 337 missing ; total, 
5,616. Our loss in killed and wounded was much less than 
theirs. 


1863] THE OBJECTIVE POINT OF THE WAR. A37 


Crea ie TE R* X Li. 


Movement to draw forth the Enemy.—Advance to Culpeper Court-House.—Cay- 
alry Engagement at Beverly’s and Kelly’s Fords.—Movement against Winches- 
ter.—Milroy’s Force captured.—Prisoners.—The Enemy retires along the Poto- 
mac.—Maryland entered.— Advance into Pennsylvania.—The Enemy driven back 
toward Gettysburg.—Position of the Respective Forces.—Battle at Gettysburg. 
—The Army retires.—Prisoners.—The Potomac swollen.—No Interruption by 
the Enemy.—Strength of our Force.—Strength of the Enemy.—The Campaign 
closed.—Observations.—Kelly’s Ford.—Attempt to surprise our Army.—Sys- 
tem of Breastworks.—Prisoners. 


Ixy the spring of 1863 the enemy occupied his former posi- 
tion before Fredericksburg. He was in great strength, and, so 
far as we could learn, was preparing on the grandest scale for 
another advance against Richmond, which in political if not 
military circles was regarded as the objective point of the war. 
The consolidated report of the Army of the Potomac, then 
under the command of Major-General Hooker, states the force 
present on May 10, 1863, to be 136,704. 

General Lee’s forces had been reorganized into three army 
corps, designated the First, Second, and Third Corps. In the 
order named, they were commanded by Lieutenant-Generals 
Longstreet, Ewell, and A. P. Hill. 

The zeal of our people in the defense of their country’s cause 
had brought nearly all of the population fit for military service 
to the various armies then in the field, so that but little increase 
could be hoped for by the Army of Northern Virginia. Under 
these circumstances, to wait until the enemy should choose to 
advance was to take the desperate hazard of the great inequal- 
ity of numbers, as well as ability to reénforce, which he pos- 
sessed. In addition to the army under General Hooker, a 
considerable force occupied the lower part of the Valley of the 
Shenandoah. 

It was decided by a bold movement to attempt to transfer 
hostilities to the north side of the Potomac, by crossing the 
river and marching into Maryland and Pennsylvania, simultane- 
ously driving the foe out of the Shenandoah Valley. Thus, 


438 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


it was hoped, General Hooker’s army would be called from 
Virginia to meet our advance toward the heart of the enemy’s 
country. In that event, the vast preparations which had been 
made for an advance upon Richmond would be foiled, the plan 
for his summer’s campaign deranged, and much of the season 
for active operations be consumed in the new combinations 
and dispositions which would be required. If, beyond the Po- 
tomac, some opportunity should be offered so as to enable us 
to defeat the army on which our foe most relied, the measure 
of our success would be full; but, if the movement only re- 
sulted in freeing Virginia from the presence of the hostile 
army, it was more than could fairly be expected from awaiting 
the attack which was clearly indicated. 

Actuated by these and other considerations, the campaign 
was commenced on June 3, 1863. Our forces advanced to Cul- 
peper Court-House, leaving A. P. Hill to occupy the lines in 
front of Fredericksburg. On the 5th Hooker, having discov- 
ered our movement, crossed an army corps to the south side of 
the Rappahannock, but, as this was apparently for observation, 
it was not thought necessary to oppose it. 

On the 9th a large force of the enemy’s cavalry crossed at 
Beverly’s and Kelly’s Fords and attacked General Stuart. <A 
severe engagement ensued, continuing from early in the morn- 
ing until late in the afternoon, when Stuart forced his assailant 
to recross the river with heavy loss, leaving four hundred pris- 
oners, three pieces of artillery, and several stands of colors in 
our hands. 

Meantime, General Jenkins with a cavalry brigade had been 
ordered to advance toward Winchester, to codperate with an in- 
fantry expedition into the lower Valley, and General Imboden 
made a demonstration toward Romney to cover the movement 
against Winchester, and prevent reénforcements from the line 
of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. Both these officers were 
in position when Ewell left Culpeper Court-House on the 6th. 
Crossing the Shenandoah near Front Royal, Rodes’s division 
went to Berryville to dislodge the force stationed there, and 
cut off the communication between Winchester and the Po- 
tomac. General Ewell, on the 13th of June, advanced directly 


1863] BEHIND THE HILLS OF STAFFORD. 439 


upon Winchester, driving the enemy into his works around the 
town. On the next day he stormed the works, and the whole 
army of General Milroy was captured or put to flight. Most 
of. those who attempted to escape were intercepted and made 
prisoners. Unfortunately, among the exceptions, was their com- 
mander, who had been guilty of most unpardonable outrages 
upon defenseless non-combatants. 

General Rodes marched from Berryville to Martinsburg, 
entering the latter place on the 14th, and capturing seven hun- 
dred prisoners, five pieces of artillery, and a considerable quan- 
tity of stores. These operations cleared the Valley of the 
enemy. More than four thousand prisoners, twenty-nine pieces 
of artillery, two hundred and seventy wagons and ambulances, 
with four hundred horses, were captured, besides a large 
amount of military stores. Our loss was small. On the night 
that Ewell appeared at Winchester, the enemy at Fredericks- 
burg recrossed the Rappahannock, and on the next day disap- 
peared behind the hills of Stafford. 

The whole army of General Hooker, in retiring, pursued the 
roads near the Potomac, offering no favorable opportunity for 
attack. His purpose seemed to be to take a position which 
would enable him to cover the approaches to Washington City. 
To draw him farther from his base, and to cover the march of 
A. P. Hill, who had left for the Valley, Longstreet moved from 
Culpeper Court-House on the 15th, and occupied Ashby’s and 
Snicker’s Gaps. The cavalry under General Stuart was in front 
of Longstreet to watch the enemy, and encountered his cavalry 
on the 17th near Aldie, and drove it back. The engagement 
was renewed on the next day, but the cavalry of the latter being 
now strongly supported by infantry, Stuart was compelled to 
retire. He had, however, taken in these engagements about 
four hundred prisoners and a considerable number of horses and 
arms. 

Meantime, General Ewell, with the advance of his corps, 
had entered Maryland. Jenkins, with his cavalry, penetrated 
as far as Chambersburg, Pennsylvania. As these demonstra- 
tions did not cause the hostile army to leave Virginia, nor 
did it seem disposed to advance upon Longstreet’s position, he 


440 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


was withdrawn to the west side of the Shenandoah. General 
Hill had already reached the Valley. General Stuart was left 
to guard the passes of the mountains and observe the move- 
ments of the enemy, whom he was instructed to harass and im- 
pede as much as possible should he attempt to cross the Poto- 
mac. In that event General Stuart was directed to move into 
Maryland, crossing the Potomac east or west of the Blue Ridge, 
as in his judgment should seem best, and take position on the 
right of our column as it advanced. General Longstreet says: 


“General Stuart held the gap for a while, and then hurried 
around beyond Hooker’s army, and we saw nothing more of him 
until the evening of July 2d, when he came down from York and 
joined us, having made a complete circuit of the Federal army.” 


Longstreet and Hill crossed the Potomac, to be within sup- 
porting distance of Ewell, and advanced into Pennsylvania, 
encamping near Chambersburg on the 27th of June. The 
cavalry, under Colonel White, advanced to the Susquehanna. 

On the night of the 27th information was received that Gen- 
eral Hooker had crossed the Potomac, and was advancing north- 
ward, and that the head of the column had reached South Moun- 
tain. This menaced our communications, and it was resolved to 
prevent his further progress by concentrating our army on the 
east side of the mountain. Accordingly, the different com- 
mands were ordered to proceed to Gettysburg. This march 
was conducted more slowly than it would have been had the 
movements of Hooker been known. Heth’s, the leading divis- 
ion of Hill’s corps, met the enemy in front of Gettysburg on 
the morning of July 1st, driving him back to within a short 
distance of the town; the advance there encountered a larger 
force, with which two of Hill’s divisions became engaged. 
Ewell, coming up with two of his divisions, joined in the en- 
_gagement ; and the opposing force was driven through Gettys- 

burg with heavy loss, including about five thousand prisoners 
and several pieces of artillery. 

Under the instructions given to them not to bring on a gen- 
eral engagement, these corps bivouacked on the ground they 
had won. 


1863] THERE WAS UNACCOUNTABLE DELAY. 44] 


: In an address delivered at Lexington, Virginia, on January 
17, 1873, General W. N. Pendleton, chit of artillery, makes 
the felliewcinas statement : 


“The ground southwest of the town was carefully examined 
by me after the engagement on July Ist. Being found much less 
difficult than the steep ascent fronting the troops already up, its 
practicable character was reported to our commanding General. 
He informed me that he had ordered Longstreet to attack on that 
front at sunrise the next morning. And he added to myself, ‘I 
want you to be out long before sunrise so as to reéxamine and 
save time.’ He also desired me to communicate with General 
Longstreet as well as with himself. The reconnaissance was 
accordingly made, as soon as it was light enough on the 2d, and 
made through a long distance—in fact, very close to what there 
was of the enemy’s line. No insuperable difficulty appearing, 
and the marching up—far off, the enemy’s reénforcing columns 
being seen—the extreme desirableness of immediate attack there, 
was at once reported to the commanding General ; and, according 
to his wish, message was also sent to the intrepid but deliberate 
corps commander whose sunrise attack there had been ordered. 
There was, however, unaccountable delay. My own messages — 
went repeatedly to General Lee, and his, I know, was urgently 
pressed on General Longstreet, until, as I afterward learned from 
officers who saw General Lee, as I could not at the time, he mani- 
fested extreme displeasure with the tardy corps commander. That 
hard-fighting soldier, to whom it had been committed there to 
attack early in the day, did not, in person, reach the commanding 
General, and with him ride toa position whence to view the ground 
and see the enemy’s arriving masses, until twelve o’clock ; and 
his column was not up and ready for the assault until 4 p.m. All 
this, as it occurred under my personal observation, it is nothing 
short of imperative duty that I should thus fairly state.” 


For the reasons set forth by General Pendleton, whose _ 
statement, in regard to a fact coming under his personal obser- 
vation, none who know him will question, preparations for a_ 
general engagement were unfortunately delayed until the after- 
noon, instead of being made at sunrise ; then troops had been 
concentrated, and “ RandsTop,” the conataeieant position, un- 


449 RISE AND FALL OF TIE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


occupied in the morning, had received the force which inflicted 
such disaster on our assaulting columns. The question as to the 
responsibility for this delay has been so fully discussed in the 
Southern Historical Society papers as to relieve me from the ne- 
cessity of entering into it. “ 

The position at Gettysburg was not the choice of either side. 
South from the town an irregular, interrupted line of hills runs, 
which is sometimes called the “ Gettysburg Ridge.” This ridge, 
at the town, turns eastward and then southward. At the turn 
eastward is Cemetery Hill and at the turn southward Culps’s 
Hill. From Cemetery Hill the line runs southward about three 
miles in a well-defined ridge, since the battle called Cemetery 
Ridge, and terminates in a high, rocky, and wooded peak named 
Round-Top, which was the key of the enemy’s position, as it 
flanked their line. The less elevated portion, near where the 
crest rises into Round-Top, is termed “Little Round-Top,” a 
rough and bold spur of the former. Thus, while Cemetery and 
Culps’s Hills require the formation of a line of battle to face 
northward, the direction of Cemetery Ridge requires the line to 
face westward. The crest has a good slope to the rear, while 
to the west it falls off in a cultivated and undulating valley, 
which it commands. About a mile distant isa parallel crest, 
known as Seminary Ridge, and which our forces occupied dur- 
ing the battle. Longstreet, with the divisions of Hood and 
McLaws, faced Round-Top and a good part of Cemetery Ridge ; 
Hill’s three divisions continued the line from the left of Long- 
street, fronting the remainder of Cemetery Ridge; while Ewell, 
with his three divisions, held a line through the town, and, 
sweeping round the base of Cemetery Hill, terminated the left 
in front of Culps’s Hill. 

These were the positions of the three corps after the arrival 
of General Longstreet’s troops. 

The main purpose of the movement across the Potomac was 
to free Virginia from the presence of the enemy. If this could 
be done by manceuvering merely, a most important result would 
be cheaply obtained. The contingency of a battle was of course 
deemed probable, and, with any fair opportunity, the Army of 
Northern Virginia was considered sure to win a victory. 


(Lo 


En¢é? by H.B.Hall Jr 


EuT.GEN.JAM 


ES LONGSTRE 


New York, D. Appleton & Co, 


ET. 


1863] THE BATTLE CEASED AT DARK. 443 


_ It had not been intended to fight a general battle at such a 
distance as Gettysburg from our base, unless attacked; but, 
being unexpectedly confronted by the opposing army, it became 
a matter of difficulty to withdraw through the mountains with 
our large trains. At the same time the country was unfavorable 
for collecting supplies while in the presence of the main army 
of the enemy, as he was enabled to restrain our foraging par- 
ties by occupying the passes of the mountains with both regular 
and local troops. Encouraged by the successful issue of the 
engagement of the first day, and in view of the valuable re- 
sults that would ensue from the defeat of the army of Gen- 
eral Meade (who had sueceeded General Hooker), General Lee 
thought it preferable to renew the attack. 

General Meade held the high ridge above described, along 
which he had massed a large amount of artillery. General 
Ewell occupied the left of our line, General Hill the center, 
and General Longstreet the right. In front of General Long- 
street the enemy held a position, from which, if he could be 
driven, it was thought that our army could gain the more ele- 
vated ground (Round-Top) beyond, and thus enable our guns 
to rake the crest of the ridge. That officer was directed to 
endeavor to carry this position, while General Ewell attacked 
directly the high ground on the enemy’s right, which had al- 
ready been partially fortified. General Hill was instructed to 
threaten the center of the line, in order to prevent reénforce- 
ments to either wing, and to avail himself of any opportunity 
that might present itself to attack. After a severe struggle 
Longstreet succeeded in getting possession of and holding the 
ground in his immediate front. Ewell also carried some of the 
strong positions which he assailed, and the result was such as to 
lead to the belief that he would ultimately be able to dislodge 


‘the force in his front. The battle ceased at dark. These par- 


tial successes determined Lee to continue the assault on the next 
day. Pickett, with three of his brigades, joined Longstreet on 
the following morning, and our batteries were moved forward 
to the position gained by him on the day before. The general 
plan of attack was unchanged, except that one division and two 
brigades of Hill’s corps were ordered to support Longstreet. 


ae 
+ 


444 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General Meade, in the mean time, had strengthened his line 
with earthworks. The morning was occupied in necessary prep- 
arations, and the battle recommenced in the afternoon of the 

"3d, and raged with great violence until sunset. Our troops 
succeeded in entering the advanced works of the enemy, and 
getting possession of some of his batteries; but, our artillery . 
having nearly expended its ammunition, the attacking columns 
became exposed to the heavy fire of the numerous batteries near 
the summit of the ridge, and, after a most determined and gal- 
lant struggle, were compelled to relinquish their advantage and 
fall back to their original positions with severe loss. 

Owing to the strength of the enemy’s position and the 
exhaustion of our ammunition, a renewal of the engagement 
could not be hazarded, and the difficulty of procuring supplies 
rendered it impossible to continue longer where we were. 
Such of the wounded as could be removed and a part of the 
arms collected on the field were ordered to Williamsport. 
The army remained at Gettysburg during the 4th, and at 
night began to retire by the road to Fairfield, carrying with 
it about four thousand prisoners. Nearly two thousand had 
been previously paroled ; but the numerous wounded that had 
fallen into our hands after the first and second day’s engage- 
ments were left behind. Little progress was made that night, 
owing to a severe storm, which greatly embarrassed our move- 
ments. The rear of the column did not leave its position near 
Gettysburg until after daylight on the 5th. The march was 
continued during that day without interruption by the enemy, 
except an unimportant demonstration upon our rear in the 
afternoon, when near Fairfield, which was easily checked. The 
army, after a tedious march, rendered more difficult by the 
rains, reached Hagerstown on the afternoon of the 6th and 
morning of the 7th of July. 

The Potomac was so much swollen by the rains, that had 
fallen almost incessantly since our army entered Maryland, as 
to be unfordable. A pontoon-train had been sent from Rich- 
mond, but the rise in the river gave to it a width greater than 
was expected, so that additional boats had to be made by the 
army on its retreat. Our communication with the south side 


1863] WOULD HAVE RESULTED DISASTROUSLY. 445 


_was thus interrupted, and it was found difficult to procure 
either ammunition or subsistence, the latter difficulty being en- 
hanced by the high water impeding the working of the mills. 
The trains with the wounded and prisoners were compelled to 
wait at Williamsport for the subsiding of the river or the con- 
struction of additional pontoon-boats. The enemy had not yet 
made his appearance, but, as he was in a condition to obtain 
large reénforcements and our want of supplies was daily be- 
coming more embarrassing, it was deemed advisable to recross 
the river. By the 13th a good bridge was thrown over at 
Falling Waters. On the 12th Meade’s army approached. A 
position had been previously selected to cover the Potomac 
from Williamsport to Falling Waters, and an attack was 
awaited during that and the succeeding day. This did not 
take place, though the two armies were in close proximity, the 
enemy being occupied in fortifying his own lines. 

General Meade, in his testimony before the Committee on 
the Conduct of the War, said that he ordered an attack on 
our forces on the morning of the 14th, and, if it had been made, 
it was his opinion that “it would have resulted disastrously.” 
When asked the reasons for that opinion, he replied : 


“Tf I had attacked the enemy in the position which he then 
occupied—he having the advantage of position, and being on the 
defensive, his artillery in position, and his infantry behind para- 
pets and rifle-pits—the very same reasons and causes which pro- 
duced my success at Gettysburg would have operated in his favor 
there, and be likely to produce success on his part.” 


Our preparations being completed, and the Potomac, though 
still deep, being pronounced fordable, the army commenced to 
withdraw to the south side on the night of the 138th. Evwell’s 
corps forded the river at Williamsport, those of Longstreet and 
Hill crossed upon the bridge. Owing to the condition of the 
roads the troops did not reach the bridge until after daylight on 
the 14th, and the crossing was not completed until 1 p. m., when 
the bridge was removed. General Lee said that the enemy 
offered no serious interruption, and the movement was attended 
with no loss of material except a few disabled wagons and two 


446 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


pieces of artillery, which the horses were unable to move 
through the deep mud. During the slow and tedious march 
to the bridge, in the midst of a violent storm of rain, some of 
the men lay down by the way to rest. Officers sent back for 
them failed to find many in the obscurity of the night, and 
these, with some stragglers, a few of Heth’s division most re- 
mote from the bridge, were captured. On the following day the 
army marched to Bunker Hill, in the vicinity of which it en- 
camped for several days. Owing to the swollen condition of 
the Shenandoah River, the campaign which was contemplated 
when the Potomac was recrossed, could not be immediately 
commenced. Before the waters had subsided, the movements of 
the enemy required us to cross the Blue Ridge and take position 
south of the Rappahannock. 

The strength of our army at Gettysburg is stated at 62,000 
of all arms.* The report of the Army of the Potomac under 
General Meade, on June 30, 1863, states the force present at 
112,988 men. Before the Committee on the Conduct of the 
War, General Meade, in reference to his force at Gettysburg, 
said, “Including all arms of the service, my strength was a lit- 
tle under 100,000 men—about 95,000.” 

If the strength of General Lee’s forces, according to the 
last accessible report before the movement northward, be com- 
pared with that made after his return into Virginia, there is 
a decrease of nineteen thousand of the brave men who had set 
the seal of invincibility upon the Army of Northern Virginia. 

General Lee, in his report, noticing the large loss of men 
and officers, says : 


“T can not speak of these brave men as their merits and ex- 
ploits deserve. Some of them are appropriately mentioned in the 
accompanying reports, and the memory of all will be gratefully and 
affectionately cherished by the people in whose defense they fell. 

“The loss of Major-General Pender is severely felt by the 
army and the country. . . . Brigadier-Generals Armistead, Barks- 
dale, Garnet, and Semmes, died as they had lived, discharging the 
highest duty of patriots with devotion that never faltered, and 
courage that shrank from no danger.” 


* “Four Years with General Lec.” 


1863] THUS CLOSED THE CAMPAIGN. 44 


The testimony of General Meade, above mentioned, con- 
tains this statement respecting his losses : 


“On the evening of the 2d of July, after the battle of that day 
had ceased, and darkness had set in, being aware of the very 
heavy losses of the First and Eleventh Corps on the Ist of July, 
and knowing how severely the Third Corps, the Fifth Corps, and 
other portions of the army, had suffered in the battle of the 2d of 
July—in fact, as subsequently ascertained, out of the twenty-four 
thousand men killed, wounded, and missing, which was the amount 
of my losses and casualties at Gettysburg—over twenty thousand 
of them had been put hors de combat before the night of the 2d 
of July.” 


Thus closed the campaign in Pennsylvania. The wisdom 
of the strategy was justified by the result. The battle of Get- 
tysburg was unfortunate. Though the loss sustained by the 
enemy was greater than our own, theirs could be repaired, ours 
could not. 

Had General Lee been able to compel the enemy to attack 
him in position, I think we should have had a complete victory, 
and the testimony of General Meade quoted above shows that 
he was not at all inclined to make the experiment. If General 
Lee, by moving to the right, would only have led General 
Meade to fall back on his preferred position of Pipe Creek, his 
ability to wait and the impossibility under such circumstances 
for General Lee to supply his army for any length of time 
seem to me an answer to that point in the criticism to which 
our great Captain has been subjected. To compel Meade to 
retire would have availed but little to us, unless his army had 
first been routed. To beat that army was probably to secure our 
independence. The position of Gettysburg would have been 
worth nothing to us if our army had found it unoccupied. The 
fierce battle that Lee fought there must not be considered as for 
the position ; to beat the great army of the North was the ob- 
ject, and that it was of possible attainment is to be inferred 
from the various successes of our arms. Had there been a con- 
centrated attack at sunrise on the second day, with the same gal- 
lantry and skill which were exhibited in the partial assaults, it 


448 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


may reasonably be assumed that the enemy would have been 
routed. This, from the best evidence we have, was the plan and 
the expectation of General Lee. These having failed, from what- 
ever cause, and Meade having occupied in force the commanding 
position of Round-Top, it must be conceded that it would have 
been better to withdraw than to renew the attack on the third 
day. The high morale and discipline of our army, together with 
the unqualified confidence of the men in their commanding Gen- 
eral, excluded the supposition that they would be demoralized by 
retreat. Subsequent events proved how little cause there was 
to fear it. It is not admitted that our army was defeated, 
and the enemy’s claim to a victory is refuted by the fact that, 
when Lee halted on the banks of the Potomac, Meade, instead 
of attacking as a pursuing general would a defeated foe, halted 
also, and Eeencon intrenching. 

The battle of Gettysburg had been the subject of an un- 
usual amount of discussion, and the enemy has made it a mat- 
ter of extraordinary exultation. As an affair of arms it was 
marked by mighty feats of valor to which both combatants 
may point with military pride. It was a graceful thing in 
President Lincoln if, as reported, when he was shown the steeps 
which the Northern men persistently held, he answered, “I am 
proud to be the countryman of the men who assailed those 
heights.” 

The consequences of the battle have justified the amount of 
attention it has received. It may be regarded as the most 
eventful struggle of the war. By it the drooping spirit of the 
North was revived. Had their army been there defeated, those 
having better opportunities to judge than I or any one who was 
not among them, have believed it would have ended the war. 
On the other hand, a drawn battle, where the Army of Northern 
Virginia made an attack, impaired the confidence of the South- 
ern people so far as to give the malcontents a power to repre- 
sent the Government as neglecting for Virginia the safety of 
the more southern States, 

In all free governments, the ability of its executive branch 
to prosecute a war must largely depend upon public opinion; in 
an infant republic, this, for every reason, is peculiarly the case. 


1863] ROSE LIKE THE SON OF TERRA. 449 


The volume given to the voice of disaffection was therefore most 
seriously felt by us. 

Shattered, it is true, but not disheartened, the Army of 
Northern Virginia after recrossing the Potomac rose like the 
son of Terra, with renewed vigor, and entered on the brilliant 
campaign hereafter to be generally described. 

Early in October General Lee, with two corps (Ewell’s and 
Hill’s), the First Corps of his army having been temporarily de- 
tached for service in Tennessee, crossed the Rapidan to attack 
the flank of the enemy, or to compel him to retreat. It resulted 
in the capture of fifteen hundred prisoners, and forced Meade’s 
army back to Alexandria and Cenireville. The campaign was 
an unbroken success, with the exception of a rash and ill-con- 
ducted affair at Bristoe Station, where our advance engaged a 
corps, and was repulsed, losing a number of men and five guns. 
Thus, without a general battle, a large portion of the State 
was for the time liberated. 

On November 7th the enemy advanced upon our force at 
Kelly’s Ford, of the Rappahannock River, effected a crossing, 
and, rushing upon two brigades who were at Rappahannock Sta- 
tion defending the bridges, overwhelmed and captured most 
of them, taking between twelve and fifteen hundred men, and 
four pieces of artillery. The movements of the enemy were 
concealed by the darkness, and his attack was a surprise. 

On November 26th the army under General Meade crossed 
the Rapidan, with the intention of interposing between the 
widely separated wings of his adversary. Instead of being 
successful, this movement resulted in an entire failure. Gen- 
eral Meade found Lee’s army posted behind Mine Run, and 
ready to receive an attack whenever he was disposed to make 
it. “Meade declared, it is related, that he could carry the 
position with a loss of thirty thousand men; but, as that idea 
was frightful, there seemed nothing to do but retreat.”* Lee 
had inaugurated that system of breastworks which did him good 
service in his long campaign with General Grant. When the 
troops were halted in a wood, the men felled the large trees, 
heavy logs were dragged without loss of time to the prescribed 

* “Life of General R. E. Lee,” by J. E. Cooke. 
76 


450 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


line, where they were piled upon one another in double walls, 
which were filled in rapidly with earth ; so that, in a short space 
of time, defenses which would turn a cannon-shot were often 
constructed. In front, for some distance, the felled timber 
made a kind of abatis. As General Meade did not attack, Gen- 
eral Lee, on the night of December 1st, determined to assail his 
adversary on the next morning; but, when the dawn broke 
over the hills, his camps were seen to be deserted. General 
Meade had abandoned the campaign, and was in full retreat 
toward the Rapidan. Pursuit was immediately made, but he 
had too much the start, and reachéd the north side of the 
Rapidan before he could be overtaken. Both armies then re- 
tired to their original positions. We captured about seven hun- 
dred prisoners, four hundred mules and horses, and destroyed 
or secured one hundred and twenty wagons. 


CHAPTERRaY Err. 


Subjugation of the States of Tennessee, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Virginia.—Object 
of a State Government; its Powers are “Just Powers”; how exercised ;. its 
Duty; necessarily sovereign; its Entire Order; how founded ; how destroyed. 
—The Crime against Constitutional Liberty —What is the Government of the 
United States?—It partakes of the Nature of a Limited Partnership; its 
Peaceful Objects.—Distinction between the Governments of the States and 
that of the United States——Secession.—The Government of the United States 
invades the State; refuses to recognize its Government; thus denies the 
Fundamental Principle of Popular Liberty.—Founded a New State Govern- 
ment based on the Sovereignty of the United States Government.—Annihila- 
tion of Unalienable Rights.—Qualification of Voters fixed by Military Power.— 
Condition of the Voter’s Oath—Who was the Sovereign in Tennessee ?—Case 
of Louisiana.—Registration of Voters,—None allowed to register who could 
not or would not take a Certain Oath; its Conditions.—Election of State Offi- 
cers.—Part of the State Constitution declared void.—All done under the Mili- 
tary Force of the United States Government. 


Tue most painful pages of this work are those which now 
present the subjugation of the State governments by the Goy- 
ernment of the United States. The patriot, the lover of his 
country and of the liberties of mankind, can not contemplate 


1863] A REVOLUTION UNLIKE ANY OTHER ABI 


these facts without a feeling of grief which will not be com- 
forted. That the work of the fathers of the republic, that the 
most magnificent system of constitutional government which 
the wisdom of man has devised, should be turned from its ob- 
ject, changed from its order, rendered powerless to protect the 
unalienable rights and sovereignty of the people, and made the 
instrument by which to establish and maintain imperialism, is a 
revolution unlike any other that may be found in the history of 
mankind. The result established the truthfulness of the assertion, 
so often made during the progress of the war, that the Northern 
people, by their unconstitutional warfare to gain the freedom 
of certain negro slaves, would lose their own liberties. 

It has been shown that the governments of the States were 
instituted to secure certain unalienable rights of the citizens 
with which they were endowed by their Creator, and that 
among these rights were life, liberty, and the pursuit of happi- 
ness; that they derived their just powers from the consent of 
the governed; and that these powers were organized by the 
citizens in such form as seemed to them most likely to effect 
their safety and happiness. Where must the American citizen 
look for the security of the rights with which he has been en- 
dowed by his Creator? To his State government. Where shall 
he look to find security and protection for his life, security 
and protection for his personal liberty, security and protection 
for his property, security and. protection for his safety and hap- 
piness? Only to his State government. 

The powers which the State government. possesses for the 
security of his life, his liberty, his property, his safety, and 
his happiness, are “just powers.” They have been derived 
from the unconstrained consent of the governed, and they have 
been organized in such form as seems most likely to effect these 
objects. 

Is the citizen’s life in danger from violence? The State 
guarantees his protection, and it is its duty to rescue him from 
danger and obtain redress from the offender, whether an indi- 
vidual or a foreign nation. Are the freedom and personal liberty 
of the citizen in danger from unlawful arrest and imprisonment 
The State guarantees both, and it is its duty to secure and pre- 


459, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


serve his freedom. Is the property of the citizen in danger of 
a violent and unjust seizure and unlawful detention or destruc- 
tion? The State government guarantees his title, restores the 
property, or obtains damages. Is the personal property of the 
citizen in danger of robbery or abduction? ‘The State govern 
ment throws over it the shield of its protection, and regards 
the burglar and the robber as the enemies of society. It is un- 
necessary to proceed further with this enumeration. 

The duty of the State government is to give to its citi- 
zens perfect and complete security. It is necessarily sovereign 
within its own domain, for it is the representative and the con- 
stituted agent of the inherent sovereignty of the individuals. 
For the performance of its duty of protection it may unite with 
other sovereignties ; and also, for better safety and security to 
its citizens, it may withdraw or secede from such Union. 

It will be seen that the entire order of the State government 
is founded on the free consent of the governed. From this it 
springs; from this it receives its force and life. It is this con- 
sent alone from which “just powers” are derived. They can 
come from no other source, and their exercise secures a true 
republican government. All else are usurpations, their exer- 
cise is a tyranny, and their end is the safety and security of the 
usurper, to obtain which the unalienable rights of the people are 
sacrificed. The “just powers,” thus derived, are organized in 
such form as shall seem to the governed to be most likely to 
secure their safety and happiness. It is the governed who de- 
termine the form of the government, and not the ruler nor his 
military force, unless he comes as a conqueror to make the sub- 
jugated do his will. The object, or end, for which these “ just 
powers” are derived from the consent of the governed and or- 
ganized in such form as seems most likely to effect that object, 
is solely to secure the unalienable rights of men—such as life, 
liberty, property, justice, peace and order, and the pursuit of 
happiness. 

It will now be seen by the reader that, whenever any one of 
the features of this order is perverted in its origin or progress, or 
thwarted, or caused to deviate from its natural operation by any 
internal or external interference, the order is destroyed, and the 


So a 


1863] TO STRENGTHEN THE HANDS OF DESPOTISM. 453 


State government, which represents it, is subverted, turned from 
its object, changed from its natural purpose, rendered powerless 
to protect the unalienable rights of its citizens, and made an 
instrument to strengthen the hands of despotism. The commis- 
sion of such a subversion of the peaceful and fraternal States of 
this once happy republic is fearlessly charged upon the Govern- 
ment of the United States, as in itself constituting a monstrous 
crime against constitutional liberty ; and it is asserted that, when 
the circumstances attending the deed are considered—the rage 
against a whole people, the pillage, the arson, the inciting of 
servile war, the slaughter of defenseless non-combatants, the 
devastation of whole peaceful regions, the indiscriminate destrue- 
tion of property—no parallel can be found in the annals of man- 
kind. 

What, then, is the Government of the United States? It is 
an organization of a few years’ duration. It might cease to 
exist, and yet the States and the people continue prosperous, 
peaceful, and happy. Unlike the governments of the States, 
which find their origin deep in the nature of man, it sprang 
from certain circumstances which existed in the course of hu- 
man affairs. Unlike the governments of the States and of 
separate nations, which have a divine sanction, it has no war- 
rant for its authority but the ratification of the sovereign States. 
Unlike the governments of the States, which were instituted to 
secure generally the unalienable rights of man, it has only the 
enumerated objects, and is restrained from passing beyond them 
by the express reservation of all undelegated functions. It keeps 
no records of property, and guarantees to no one the possession 
of his estate. Marriage, from which springs the family and the 
State, it can neither confirm nor annul. It partakes of the na- 
ture of an incorporation for certain purposes, beyond which it 
has neither influence nor authority. It is an anomaly among 
governments, and arose out of the articles of agreement made 
by certain friendly States, which proposed to form a society of 
States and invest a common agent with specified functions of 
sovereignty. Its duration was intended to be permanent, as it 
was hoped thus to. promote the peaceful ends for which it was 
established ; but, to have declared it perpetual, would have been 


456 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


the United States was not there by the consent of those who 
were to be governed. It had not, therefore, any “ just powers ” 
of government within the State of Tennessee. For, says the 
Declaration of Independence of our fathers, governments “ de- 
rive their ‘ just powers’ from the consent of the governed.” It 
is further evident that, by this action, the Government of the 
United States denied the fundamental principle of popular lib- 
erty—that the people are the source of all political power. In 
this instance, it not only subverted the State government, but 
carried that subversion to the extent of annihilation. It, there- 
fore, proceeded to establish a new order of affairs, founded, not 
on the principle of the sovereignty of the people, which was 
wholly rejected, but on the assumption of sovereignty in the 
United States Government. It appointed its military Governor 
to be the head of the new order, and recognized no civil or po- 
litical existence in any man, except some of its notorious adhe- 
rents, until, betraying the State, he had taken an oath of alle- 
giance to the sovereignty of the Government of the United 
States. Now commenced a system of denial of unalienable 
rights, for the methods of the usurper are the same everywhere. 
Freedom of speech was suppressed by the imposition of fines 
on those using “seditious” language, and the demand of secu- 
rity for their future humility. The freedom of the press was 
suppressed by suspension of publications and the confiscation of 
the offices. Personal liberty was destroyed by arrests, impris- 
onment, and exile. 

In process of time, an effort was made to erect a form of 
State government which should be subservient and subject to 
the United States Government. For this purpose, no one could 
be a voter until he had bound himself by an oath to support and 
defend the Government of the United States. Under the State » 
governments, manhood, which came by nature, and residence, 
which came by one’s own will, were sufficient qualifications for 
the voter. 

It will be apparent from this statement that the voter’s 
right to cast his ballot came not to him as an unalienable right, 
but rested upon the permission of the Government of the 
United States, as his sovereign, to whom his allegiance was due, 


1863] AS THE LORD PARAMOUNT. AY 


and to whom he was required, in the first instance, to bind him- 
self by an oath of allegiance without any mention whatever of 
a State government. Indeed, a little later, the same oath was 
required with additional conditions before a man was permitted 
to vote for a State constitutional convention, or for delegates 
to such a convention. These conditions were, that he would 
faithfully support all acts of Congress and all proclamations of 
the President of the United States, passed or made during the 
rebellion, having reference to slaves. Thus, the voter’s right 
was made to rest, not only upon his binding himself in allegiance 
to the United States as his sovereign, but in the binding by 
oath his consent to certain unconstitutional acts and proclama- 
tions expressly designed to destroy one of the most important 
institutions of the State. This, sustained by a military force, was 
exacted by the United States Government as the lord para- 
mount—the sovereign within the State. At the same time, the 
action of the voter, which should be perfectly free and uncon- 
strained (for, under American political principles, he is the sov- 
ereign over all), is limited and bound down by an oath faithfully 
to support certain acts to which it was presumable he had ever 
been conscientiously opposed. ; 
Under these circumstances, who was the sovereign in Ten- 
nessee? The Government of the United States. Where was 
the government of the State of Tennessee and the sovereign 
people? The former was subverted and overthrown, and the 
latter subjugated. ‘The approval by Tennessee, under such cir- 
cumstances, of Article XIII, as an amendment to the Constitu- 
tion of the United States prohibiting the existence of slavery, 
was of no force; for consent given by a party under constraint 
has neither legal nor moral validity. The State Constitution 
was so amended as to contain certain new provisions prescribed 
by the Government of the United States by a so-called conven- 
tion of delegates elected by the voters above specified, and then 
submitted to these voters, and said to be ratified by them. They 
were little more in numbers than a handful of the people of 
Tennessee. Was this a Constitution amended and approved 
by the consent of the people of Tennessee, the only sovereigns 
known under our institutions, or was it a Constitution amended 


456 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the United States was not there by the consent of those who 
were to be governed. It had not, therefore, any “ just powers ” 
of government within the State of Tennessee. For, says the 
Declaration of Independence of our fathers, governments “ de- 
rive their ‘ just powers’ from the consent of the governed.” It 
is further evident that, by this action, the Government of the 
United States denied the fundamental principle of popular lib- 
erty—that the people are the source of all political power. In 
this instance, it not only subverted the State government, but 
carried that subversion to the extent of annihilation. It, there- 
fore, proceeded to establish a new order of affairs, founded, not 
on the principle of the sovereignty of the people, which was 
wholly rejected, but on the assumption of sovereignty in the 
United States Government. It appointed its military Governor 
to be the head of the new order, and recognized no civil or po- 
litical existence in any man, except some of its notorious adhe- 
rents, until, betraying the State, he had taken an oath of alle- 
giance to the sovereignty of the Government of the United 
States. Now commenced a system of denial of unalienable 
rights, for the methods of the usurper are the same everywhere. 
Freedom of speech was suppressed by the imposition of fines 
on those using “seditious” language, and the demand of secu- 
rity for their future humility. The freedom of the press was 
suppressed by suspension of publications and the confiscation of 
the offices. Personal liberty was destroyed by arrests, impris- 
onment, and exile. 

In process of time, an effort was made to erect a form of 
State government which should be subservient and subject to 
the United States Government. For this purpose, no one could 
be a voter until he had bound himself by an oath to support and 
defend the Government of the United States. Under the State 
governments, manhood, which came by nature, and residence, 
which came by one’s own will, were sufficient qualifications for 
the voter. 

It will be apparent from this statement that the voter’s 
right to cast his ballot came not to him as an unalienable right, 
but rested upon the permission of the Government of the 
United States, as his sovereign, to whom his allegiance was due, 


1863] AS THE LORD PARAMOUNT. ABY 


and to whom he was required, in the first instance, to bind him- 
self by an oath of allegiance without any mention whatever of 
a State government. Indeed, a little later, the same oath was 
required with additional conditions before a man was permitted 
to vote for a State constitutional convention, or for delegates 
to such a convention. These conditions were, that he would 
faithfully support all acts of Congress and all proclamations of 
the President of the United States, passed or made during the 
rebellion, having reference to slaves. Thus, the voter’s right 
was made to rest, not only upon his binding himself in allegiance 
to the United States as his sovereign, but in the binding by 
oath his consent to certain unconstitutional acts and proclama- 
tions expressly designed to destroy one of the most important 
institutions of the State. This, sustained by a military force, was 
exacted by the United States Government as the lord para- 
mount—the sovereign within the State. At the same time, the 
action of the voter, which should be perfectly free and uncon- 
strained (for, under American political principles, he is the soy- 
ereign over all), is limited and bound down by an oath faithfully 
to support certain acts to which it was presumable he had ever 
been conscientiously opposed. i 
Under these circumstances, who was the sovereign in Ten- 
nessee? The Government of the United States. "Where was 
the government of the State of Tennessee and the sovereign 
people? The former was subverted and overthrown, and the 
latter subjugated. The approval by Tennessee, under such cir- 
cumstances, of Article XIII, as an amendment to the Constitu- 
tion of the United States prohibiting the existence of slavery, 
was of no force; for consent given by a party under constraint 
has neither legal nor moral validity. The State Constitution 
was so amended as to contain certain new provisions prescribed 
by the Government of the United States by a so-called conven- 
tion of delegates elected by the voters above specified, and then 
submitted to these voters, and said to be ratified by them. They 
were little more in numbers than a handful of the people of 
Tennessee. Was this a Constitution amended and approved 
by the consent of the people of Tennessee, the only sovereigns 
known under our institutions, or was it a Constitution amended 


458 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and voted for by a small fraction of its population acting 
under the authority of the Government of the United States, 
as the only sovereign in the State? Admitting, even, that 
those who voted for the amended Constitution were the only 
legal voters in the State, the Government of the United States 
was no less an unlawful intruder and usurper when it pre- 
scribed the amendments of the Constitution and designated the 
voters. Nevertheless, this work was recognized by it, as con- 
stituting a republican State government under the Constitution. 

Let us next notice some points in the subversion of the 
State government of Louisiana. One of the earliest steps taken 
for a civil organization, after the occupation of New Orleans, 
was to make a registration of voters. The United States Goy- 
ernment was in possession by military force, and the object was 
to secure its permanent supremacy. Therefore, the oath which 
was administered to the person applying for registration con- 
tained this condition : 


“T now register myself as a voter, freely and voluntarily, for 
the purpose of organizing a State government in Louisiana, loyal 
to the Government of the United States.” 


It was also announced, with the approval of the military 
Governor, that. any person swearing falsely to any material part 
of the oath would be deemed to be guilty of perjury, and be 
liable to prosecution and punishment. The effect of this meas- 
ure was to secure a registration only of persons who would 
maintain the supremacy of the Government of the United States. 
A proclamation was next issued by the commander of the United 
States forces for an election of State officers under the laws 
and Constitution of the State. It was declared that these offi- 
cers, when thus elected, would constitute the so-called civil gov- 
ernment of the State, under the Constitution and laws of Louis- 
iana, “except so much of the said Constitution and laws as rec- 
ognize, regulate, or relate to slavery,” which were also declared 
to be inoperative and void. It was further provided, in the 
same proclamation, as follows: 


“Tn order that the organic law of the State may be made to 
conform to the will of the people and harmonize with the spirit of 


1863] IT WAS NOT SO DONE. 459 


the age, as well as to maintain and preserve the ancient landmarks 
of civil and religious liberty, an election of delegates to a conven- 
tion for the revision of the Constitution will be held,” etc. 


The effect of these acts was to establish a number of per- 
sons, pledged to support the Government of the United States, 
as the only qualified voters in the State, and to elect so-called 
State officers and delegates toa so-called Constitutional Conven- 
tion by their ballots. But this was a work that could be done 
only by the sovereign people acting through their lawful State 
government. It was not so done, because the Government of 
the United States, with a powerful military force, had taken 
possession of New Orleans, refused to recognize the officers of 
the State government, and sought to capture and imprison 
them, although it recognized the validity of the State Constitu- 
tion in part, and commanded these things to be done as if it was 
the ultimate sovereign over all. 

Thus the government of the State was subverted, the Con- 
stitution of the State in part set aside, and the sovereignty 
of the people trampled down by a power that had no rightful 
authority for such acts. Subsequently, a so-called convention 
was held, a so-called new Constitution adopted, complying with 
the views of the Government of the United States, the amend- 
ment to the Constitution of the United States as above men- 
tioned was adopted, the State Representatives were admitted to 
seats in Congress, and the people acquiesced in the fraud which 
they had not the power to correct. 

The proceedings in the States of Arkansas and Virginia, 
which resulted in an entire subversion of the State Govern- 
ments, the destruction of the sovereignty of the people, and the 
establishment of the supremacy of the Government of the 
United States, have been stated on a preceding page. 


460 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CABVAXP Paes Xi hae 


Subjugation of the Border States, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri—aA Military 
Force invades Maryland and occupies Baltimore.—Martial Law declared—aA 
Military Order.—Banishment from the State-—Civil Government of the State 
suspended.—Unalienable Rights of the Citizens invaded.—Arrests of Citizens 
commenced.—Number.—Case of John Merryman.—Opinion of Chief-Justice 
Taney.—Newspapers seized.—Houses searched for Arms.—Order of Command- 
ing General to Marshals to put Test to Voters.—The Governor appeals to the 
President.—His Reply.—Voters imprisoned.—Statement of the Governor,—Re- 
sult of the Election—State Constitutional Convention.—Emancipation hardly 
carried.—First Open Measures in Kentucky.—Interference at the State Election 
by the United States Government.—Voters excluded.—Martial Law declared.— 
Soldiers keeping the Polls —The Vote.—Statement of the Governor.—Attempt 
to enroll Able-bodied Negroes.—The Governor visits Washington.—The Result.— 
Arrests, Imprisonment, and Exile of Citizens.—Suspension of the Writ of Habeas 
Corpus by President Lincoln.—Interference with the State Election.—Order to 
the Sheriffs. —Proclamation of the Governor.—Enlistment of Slaves.—Emanci- 
pation by Constitutional Amendment.—Violent Measures in Missouri.—The Goy- 
ernor calls out the Militia—His Words.—The Plea of the Invader. The 
Authority of the United States is Paramount,” said President Lincoln.—Bravery 
of the Governor.—Words of the Commanding General.—Troops poured into 
the State.—Proceedings of the State Convention.—Numberless Usurpations,— 
Provisional Governor.—Emancipation Ordinance passed. 


Ir the State government is instituted with certain powers 
which become “ just powers ” by the formal consent of the gov- 
erned, for the purpose of enforcing security to the unalienable 
rights of man, it must be evident that any interference with 
those rights by which their enjoyment is diminished, endangered, 
or destroyed, is not only an obstruction to the operation of the 
“just powers” of the State government, but is subversive of 
the purpose which it was instituted to effect. 

In this manner the State government of Maryland was sub- 
jugated. A military force, under the authority of the Govern- 
ment of the United States, occupied the city of Baltimore at a 
time when no invasion of the State was threatened, and when 
there had been no application of the Legislature, or of the Ex-_ 
ecutive, for protection against domestic violence, which circum- 
stances alone could give a constitutional authority for this or- 
ganized military force to occupy the State. The commanding 


1863] HAD NO CONSTITUTIONAL PERMISSION. 461 


General, Schenck, soon issued an order, of which the following 
is an extract: 


“Martial law is declared and hereby established in the city 
and county of Baltimore, and in all the counties of the Western 
Shore of Maryland. The commanding General gives assurance 
that this suspension of civil government within the limits defined 
shall not extend beyond the necessities of the occasion. All the 
civil courts, tribunals, and political functionaries of State, county, 
or city authority, are to continue in the discharge of their duties 
as in times of peace, only in no way interfering with the exercise 
of the predominant power assumed and asserted by the military 
authority.” 


It will be noticed that this military force of the Government 
of the United States had no constitutional permission to come 
into Maryland and exercise authority; that the commanding 
General says that the civil government of the State is suspended 
within certain limits; that this suspension will be continued 
according to the necessities of the occasion; that the courts 
and political functionaries may discharge their duties, only in 
no way interfering with the exercise of the predominant mili- 
tary power. Now, where were the “just powers” of the State 
government at this time? They were suspended in a part of 
the State, says the commanding General, and for so long a time 
as the military authority may judge the necessities of the occa- 
sion to require, and that the courts and political functionaries 
may discharge their duties while recognizing the supremacy of 
the military power. Thus was the State government subju- 
gated. 

A further subversion of the State government was now com- 
menced by an invasion and. denial of some of the unalienable 
rights of the citizens, for the security of which that govern- 
ment was instituted. The Constitution of the United States 
says: 
“No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property, with- 


out due process of law.” * 
“The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 


* Article V, amendment. 


462 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, 
shall not be violated.” * 

“Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines im- 
posed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.” t 

“ Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech, 
or of the press.” f 


The Declaration of Independence says: 


“That they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalien- 
able rights ; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of 
happiness ; that, to secure these rights, governments are instituted 
among men.” 


Immediately upon the issue of the order of the commanding 
General, the arrests of citizens commenced by provost-marshals. 
The family residence of a lady was forced open ; she was seized, 
put on board of a steamer, and sent to the Confederate States. 
A man was arrested for being “disloyal” to the United States 
Government, and held for examination. Another was charged 
with interfering with the enrollment; he was held for further 
examination. Another, charged with being “disloyal” to the 
United States Government, took the oath of allegiance, and was 
released. A woman charged with the attempt to resist the 
enrollment was arrested, and subsequently released. A man, 
on a charge of “disloyalty,” took the oath, and was released. 
Another, charged with having given improper information to 
enrolling officers, was released on furnishing the information. 
Another, charged with having powder in his possession, was 
released on taking the oath of allegiance. ‘Two others, charged 
with abuse of the negroes laboring on the fortifications, were 
held for examination. Another, charged with rendering assist- 
ance to wounded Confederate soldiers, and expressing treason- 
able sentiments, took the oath of allegiance and was released. 
Another, charged with being a soldier in the Confederate army 
and paroled, was ordered to be sent across the lines. A man, 
charged with treasonable language, was ordered to be sent across 


* Article IV, amendment. + Article VII, amendment. 
¢ Article I, amendment. 


1863] SEIZED IN HIS BED, 463 


the lines. Two others, charged with aiding Confederate sol- 
diers, took the oath of allegiance and were discharged. Another, 
charged with receiving letters from Confederates for the pur- 
pose of delivery, took the oath of allegiance, and was dis- 
charged. Another, charged with expressing treasonable senti- 
ments, was held for examination. Two, charged with cheering 
for Jefferson Davis, took the oath and were released. 

One case more must be stated. On May 25, 1861, John 
Merryman, a most respectable citizen of the State, residing in 
Baltimore County, was seized in his bed by an armed force, and 
imprisoned in Fort McHenry. He petitioned the Chief-Justice 
of the United States that a writ of habeas corpus might be 
issued, which was granted. The officer upon whom it was 
served declined to obey the writ. An attachment was issued 
against the officer. The marshal was refused admittance to the 
fort to serve it. Upon such return being made, the Chief-Jus- 
tice said : 


*T ordered the attachment yesterday, because upon the face of 
the return the detention of the prisoner was unlawful upon two 
grounds : 

“1. The President, under the Constitution and laws of the 
United States, can not suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus, nor authorize any military officer to do so. 

“2, A military officer has no right to arrest and detain a per- 
son not subject to the rules and articles of war for an offense 
against the laws of the United States, except in aid of the judicial 
authority and subject to its control; and, if the party is arrested 
by the military, it is the duty of the officer to deliver him over 
immediately to the civil authority, to be dealt with according to 
law. 

“Under the Constitution of the United States, these principles 
are the fundamental law of the Union. In relation to the present 
return, I propose to say that the marshal has legally the power to 
summon out the posse comitatus to seize and bring into court the 
party named in the attachment; but it is apparent he will be 
resisted in the discharge of that duty by a force notoriously supe- 
rior to the posse comitatus, and, such being the case, the Court has 
no power under the law to order the necessary force to compel 
the appearance of the party. 


464 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“T shall reduce to writing the reasons under which I have acted, 
and which have led me to the conclusions expressed in my opinion, 
and shall report them, with these proceedings, to the President of 
the United States, and call upon him to perform his constitutional 
duty to enforce the laws ; in other words, to enforce the process 
of this court.” 


During the month of July arrests were made of 361 persons, 
on charges like the above mentioned, by the military authority. 
Of this number, 317 took the oath of allegiance to the Govern- 
ment of the United States, and were released; 5 were sent to 
Fort McHenry, 3 to Washington for the action of the authori- 
ties there, 11 to the North, 6 across the lines, and 19 were held 
for further examination. 

On September 11, 1863, one of the city newspapers pub- 
lished the poem entitled “The Southern Cross.” The publish- 
ers and editor were immediately arrested, not allowed commu- 
nication with any person whatever, and on the same day sent 
across the lines, with the understanding that they should not 
return during the war. On July 2d an order was issued which 
forbade the citizens of Baltimore City and County to keep arms 
unless they were enrolled as volunteer companies. The Fifty- 
first Regiment of Massachusetts Volunteers was placed at the 
disposal of General E. B. Tyler, assisted by the provost-marshal 
and the chief of police. The soldiers, in concert with the police, 
formed into parties of three or four, and were soon diligently 
engaged in searching houses. Large wagons were provided, and 
muskets, carbines, rifles, revolvers of all kinds, sabers, bayonets, 
swords, and bird and ducking guns in considerable quantities 
were gathered. The Constitution of the United States says: 


“The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be 
infringed.” * 


A further subversion of the State government of Maryland 
was next made by a direct interference with the elections. An 
election was to be held in the State for members of the Legisla- 
ture and members of Congress on November 3, 1863. The com- 


* Article II, amendment. 


1863] THE MOST UNDENIABLE STATEMENT. 465 


manding General, on October 27th, issued an order to all mar- 
shals and military officers to cause their direct interference with 
the voters. The Governor (Bradford) applied to the President 
of the United States to have the order revoked, and protested 
against any person who offered to vote being put to any test not 
found in the laws of Maryland. President Lincoln declined to 
interfere with the order, except in one less important point. 
The Governor issued a proclamation on the day preceding the 
election, which the military commander endeavored to suppress, 
and issued an order charging that the tendency of the procla- 
mation was to invite and suggest disturbance. One or more 
regiments of soldiers were sent out and distributed among sev- 
eral of the counties to attend the places of election, in defiance 
of the known laws of the State prohibiting their presence. 
Military officers and provost-marshals were ordered to arrest 
voters, guilty, in their opinion, of certain offenses, and to men- 
ace judges of election with the power of the army in case this 
order was not respected. 

But, perhaps, the forcible language of the Governor to the 
Legislature will furnish the most undeniable statement of the 
facts. He says: 


“On Monday evening preceding the election I issued a proc- 
lamation giving the judges of election the assurance of the pro- 
tection of the State to the extent of its ability. Before the fol- 
lowing morning, orders were sent to the Eastern Shore, directing 
its circulation to be suppressed ; the public papers were forbidden 
to publish it, and an embargo laid on all steamers in port trading 
with that part of the State, lest they might carry it. 

“The abuses commenced even before the opening of the polls. 
On the day preceding the election, the officer in command of the 
regiment which had been distributed among the counties of the 
Eastern Shore, and who had himself landed in Kent County, com- | 
menced his operations by arresting and sending across the bay 
some ten or more of the most estimable and distinguished of its 
citizens, including several of the most steadfast and most uncom- 
promising loyalists of the Shore. The jail of the county was 
entered, the jailer seized, imprisoned, and afterward sent to Balti- 
more, and prisoners confined therein under indictment set at lib- 


17 


466 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


erty. The commanding officer gave the first clew to the kind of 
disloyalty against which he considered himself as particularly 
commissioned, by printing and publishing a proclamation in which, 
referring to the election to take place on the next day, he invited 
all the truly loyal to avail themselves of that opportunity and 
establish their loyalty, ‘by giving a full and ardent support to 
the whole Government ticket, upon the platform adopted by the 
Union League Convention,’ declaring that ‘none other is recog- 
nized by the Federal authorities as loyal or worthy of the sup- 
port of any one who desires the peace and restoration of the 
Union.’ 

“This Government ticket was in several, if not all, of those 
counties designated by its color. It was a yellow ticket, and, 
armed with that, a voter could safely run the gantlet of the sa- 
bers and carbines that guarded the entrance to the polls, and 
known sympathizers with the rebellion were allowed to vote un- 
questioned if they would vote that ticket, while loyal and respected 
citizens, ready to take the oath, were turned back by the officer in 
charge without even allowing them to approach the polls. In one 
district the military officer took his stand at the polls before they 
were opened, declaring that none but the ‘ yellow ticket should 
be voted,’ and excluded all others throughout the day. In another 
district a similar officer caused every ballot offered to be ex- 
amined, and, unless it was the favored one, the voter was re- 
quired to take the oath, and not otherwise. In another district, 
after one vote only had been given, the polls were closed, the 
judges were all arrested and sent out of the county, and mili- 
tary occupation taken of the town. Other statements might be 
made. 

“These abuses present a humiliating record, such as I had 
never supposed we should be called upon to read in any State, 
still less in a loyal one like this. Unless it be, indeed, a fallacy to 
suppose that any rights whatever remain to such a State, or that. 
_any line whatever marks the limit of Federal power, a bolder 
stride across that line that power never made, even in a rebel 
State, than it did in Maryland on the 3d of last November. A 
part of the army, which a generous people had supplied for a very 
different purpose, was on that day engaged in stifling the freedom 
of election in a faithful State, intimidating its sworn officers, vio- 
lating the constitutional rights of its loyal citizens, and obstruct- 


1863] VIOLATION OF THE RIGHTS OF VOTERS, 467 


ing the usual channels of communication between them and their 
Executive.” 


The result was the election of a majority of members of the 
Legislature in favor of a State Constitutional Convention. The 
acts necessary for this object were passed. At the election of 
delegates, the military authority again interfered in order to 
secure a majority in favor of immediate and unconditional 
emancipation. The so-called Convention assembled and drafted 
a so-called Constitution, in which the twenty-third article of the 
Bill of Rights prohibited the existence of slavery in the State, 
and said, “ All persons held to service or labor as slaves are 
hereby declared free.” 

It was urged, in objection to the adoption of the so-called 
Constitution by the Convention, that “the election by which 
the Convention was called and its members elected was not free 
for the legal voters of the State, but was held and conducted in 
clear violation of the rights of voters, in consequence of which 
a majority of the legal voters of the State were excluded from 
the polls.” A rigid article on the qualifications of voters at the 
State elections was embodied in the Constitution, with the 
- shameless provision that it should be in force at the election 
for ratification or rejection of the so-called Constitution which 
was to create the disabilities. The instrument also authorized 
a poll to be opened in each company of every Maryland regi- 
ment in the service of the United States at the quarters of the 
commanding officer, and that the commissioned officers of such 
company should act as the judges of election. The aid of 
the President of the United States was also obtained to help 
on the ratification of the new Constitution, and he concludes a 
letter on the subject by saying, “I shall be gratified exceed- 
ingly if the good people of the State shall, by their votes, rat- 
ify the new Constitution.” 

Notwithstanding the aid of the President, of the soldiers’ 
votes, and a most stringent oath, and the exclusion of every per- 
son who had in any manner, by word or act, aided the cause of 
the Confederacy, the majority for the so-called Constitution was 
only 375. The total vote was 59,973. In 1860 the vote of the 
State was 92,502. Thus was the State government subjugated 


468 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and made an instrument of destruction to the people; thus were 
their rights ruthlessly violated, and property millions of dollars 
in value annihilated. : 

The reader must have noticed, in all these proceedings 
which resulted in the subjugation of the State governments, 
the cautious and stealthy manner in which the Govern- 
ment of the United States proceeded at the outset in each 
instance until it got a strong foothold, that then the mask 
was thrown off, and both Governor and people were made’ 
the unresisting victims of its unscrupulous and lawless out- 
rages. 

In the State of Kentucky, the first open and direct meas- 
ures taken by the Government of the United States for the 
subjugation of the State government and people, thereby to effect 
the emancipation of the slaves, consisted in an interference with 
the voters at the State election in August, 1863. This interfer- 
ence was by means of a military force stationed at the polls to 
sustain and enforce the action of some of the servants of the 
Government. of the United States, the object being to overawe 
the judges of election, secure the administration of a rigid oath 
of allegiance, and thereby the rejection of as many antago- 
nistic votes as possible. Indeed, it was intended that none 
but so-called “Union” men should vote—that is, men who 
were willing to approve of every measure which the Govern- 
ment of the United States might adopt to carry on the war 
and revolutionize the State. At the same time, no man was 
allowed to be a candidate or to receive any votes unless he 
was a well-known advocate of the Government of the United 
States. It will be seen that these measures excluded the 
largest portion of the former Democratic party, although 
they might be practically “Union” men, and placed every- 
thing in the hands of the Administration party, where, by 
the use of similar machinery, it remained a great many years 
after the war closed. 

Meantime, on July 31, 1863, the commanding General of 
the Department of the Ohio issued an order declaring the State 
under martial law, and said, “It is for the purpose, only, of 
protecting, if necessary, the rights of loyal citizens and the free- 


1863] TEN SOLDIERS AT EACH VOTING PLACE. 469 


dom of elections.” He would have more correctly said, “It is 
for the purpose of enforcing and securing a majority for the 
candidates of my views.” The General in command in the 
western part of the State issued an order to regulate the elec- 
tion in that quarter, and the colonels at every post did likewise. 
In Louisville, on the day of election, there were ten soldiers 
with muskets at each voting-place who, with crossed bayonets, 
stood in the doors, preventing all access of voters to the polls 
‘but by their permission, and who arrested and carried to the mil- 
itary prison all whom they were told to arrest. Out of some 
eight thousand voters in the city, less than five thousand votes 
were taken. How many of the missing three thousand were 
deterred from attempting to vote could not be ascertained, nor 
was it necessary, for the intimidation of three thousand voters 
is no greater outrage than the intimidation of only three hun- | 
dred. ‘The interpretation generally put on the order of the 
commanding officer by the opposition party was, that no man 
was to have the privilege of having his right to vote tested 
by the judges of election if he was pointed out to the guard 
by any one of the detectives as a proper person to be arrested. 
As the commanding officer had not the semblance of legal or 
rightful power to interfere with the election, the most sinister 
suspicions were naturally aroused, and very many were said 
to have been deterred from going to the polls through fear 
that they would be made the victims to personal or party 
malice. Similar intimidation was practiced in other parts of 
the State. The result was, that there was not only direct 
military interference with the election, but it was conducted 
in most of the State under the intimidation of the bayonets 
of the Government of the United States. The total vote 
was 85,695. In 1860 the vote of the State was 146,216. The 
Governor-elect in his message spoke, of such an unjust election, 
as follows : 


“The recent elections clearly and unmistakably define the pop- 
ular will and public judgment of Kentucky. It is settled that 
Kentucky will, with unwavering faith and unswerving purpose, 
stand by and support the Government in every effort to suppress 
the rebellion and maintain the Union.” 


470 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The true sense of this language is, that the Government of 
the United States had so far subverted the State government 
and destroyed the sovereignty of the people that they could 
not withstand its further aggressions. 

The Government of the United States was now ready to 
move forward in its design to destroy one of the most valuable 
institutions of the State. Steps were taken by its officers to 
enroll all able-bodied male negroes in the State between the 
ages of twenty and forty-five years, that they might form a 
part of its forces. The effect of this measure was to break up 
the labor system of the State, and meanwhile the pseudo- 
philanthropists furnished food for powder, and indulged 
their ideas of freedom at their neighbors’ expense. The ex- 
citement produced caused the Governor to visit Washing- 
ton and effect agreements by which all recruiting should cease 
when a county’s quota was full, all recruits should be re- 
moved from the State, and other similar provisions. A year 
later, he said to the Legislature: “Had these agreements. 
been carried out, a very different state of feeling would have 
existed in Kentucky. But, instead of carrying them out, 
the most offensive and injurious modes were adopted to vio- 
late them.” 

The next step taken by the Government of the United 
States in the subversion of the government of Kentucky was 
the destruction of the unalienable right of personal liberty of 
the citizens, which the State was in duty bound to protect. 
The Union Governor of the State, whose election was aided by 
the United States military officers, as above stated, is the witness 
for the facts. In his message to the Legislature of January, 
1865, he says: 


“The gravest matter of military outrage has been, and yet is, 
the arrest, imprisonment, and banishment of loyal citizens without 
a hearing, and without even a knowledge of the charges against 
them. There have been a number of this class of arrests, merely 
for partisan political vengeance, and to force them to pay heavy 
sums to purchase their liberation. How the spoils so infamously 
extorted are divided, has not transpired to the public information. 


1863] THE PROGRESS OF SUBJUGATION. AT1 


For partisan political ends, General John B. Huston was arrested 
at midnight preceding the election, and hurried off under circum- 
stances of shameful aggravation. He was, however, released in a 
few days ; but that does not atone for the criminality of his mali- 
cious arrest and false imprisonment. The battle-scarred veteran, 
Colonel Frank Wolford, whose name and loyal fame are part of 
his country’s proudest memories, and whose arrest for political 
vengeance should put a nation’s cheek to blush, is yet held in 
durance vile, without a hearing and without an accusation, so far 
as he or his friends can ascertain. 

“ Lieutenant-Governor Jacobs, whose yet unclosed wounds were 
received in battle for his country, was made a victim to partisan 
and personal enmity, and hurried without a hearing and without 
any known accusation through the rebel lines into Virginia. The 
action in this case is in defiance of Federal and State Constitutions 
and laws, in defiance of the laws of humanity and liberty, dishon- 
ors the cause of our country, and degrades the military rank to the 
infamous uses of partisan and personal vengeance. Other cases 
might be mentioned, but these are selected because they are known 
to the whole country ; the acts of these men are part of the glori- 
ous history of loyal heroism.” 


The next step in the progress of the subjugation of the State 
government was taken by President Lincoln on July 5, 1864, 
when he issued a proclamation establishing martial law through- 
out the State, and the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. 
Civil proceedings were allowed to be continued, “which did 
not affect the military operations or the constituted author- 
ities of the Government of the United States.” Arrests of in- 
dividuals by military force soon commenced, and a large num- 
ber of eminent Kentuckians of all professions and pursuits 
were imprisoned. A group of persons, consisting of judges, 
magistrates, wealthy merchants, and young women, without 
having been allowed a hearing, or trial, or any opportunity 
to vindicate themselves, were banished from the State. In 
this destruction of the unalienable right of personal liberty, 
the State government was passive; indeed, it was powerless 
to resist. 

A State election was to be held on the first Monday of Au- 


479, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


gust for local officers and a Judge of the High Court of Appeals 
from one district. Chief-Justice Duvall was one of the two 
candidates. On July 29th an order was issued by the Major- 
General, commanding, to the sheriffs of the counties concerned, 
as follows: 


“You will not allow the name of Alvin Duvall to appear 
upon the poll-books as a candidate for office at the coming elec- 
tion.” 


Another name was substituted. The election of a Presi- 
dent of the United States was to be held in November, but 
the Government of the United States seems to have regarded 
the vote of the State as unnecessary to secure the reélec- 
tion of its officials, and refrained from interference. Under 
these circumstances, the Governor of the State took courage 
and issued a proclamation to the election officers. It is of 
no importance except as showing their powers and duties, 
and how grossly they had neglected them at previous elections. 
He said: 


“ As no officer of any rank, from the President down, has any 
right or authority to interfere with elections, no order to do so 
can legalize the act. If there be sufficient power in the citizens 
present, at any place where such interference may be attempted, 
to arrest the offenders, and hold them over to answer to the vio- 
lated laws, it will be the duty of the sheriff to make the arrest in 
such case. He has authority to require the aid of every citizen, 
and it should be readily and promptly given, in defense of a com- 
mon right—of a blood-bought franchise. If the force employed 
to interfere with the election be too great, at any place of voting, 
to be arrested, the officers of election, in such case, should adjourn 
and not proceed with the election. If you are unable to hold a 
free election, your duty is to hold none at all.” 


By enlistment, over twenty-two thousand of the most valu- 
able slaves in the State had gone into the service of the United 
States, and on March 8, 1865, its Congress passed an act declar- 
ing that the wives and children of all such soldiers should be 


1863] SENSIBLE OF HIS DUTY. 473 


free. But the final moment was near at hand when the anni- 
hilation of more than one hundred millions of property and the 
destruction of one of the most important institutions of the State 
was to take place by one of those fictions so peculiar to this ad- 
ministration of the Government of the United States. That was 
the pretended adoption of a constitutional amendment, prohib- 
iting the existence of slavery in the United States. When a 
whole people suffers itself to be cajoled in this unaccountable 
manner by its unscrupulous rulers, it argues as little regard for 
the fundamental law of the Union as for the rights of the 
States. 

The subversion of the State government of Missouri by the 
Government of the United States was more rapid and more 
desperate than in the case of Kentucky. As previously stated, 
the Governor of the State, at the commencement of the diffi- 
culties, proposed the most conciliatory terms to the Government 
of the United States, which were rejected. He then, like a Gov- 
ernor, sensible of his duty to protect the rights of his people 
and of the sacred obligations of his official oath, issued his 
proclamation calling into active service fifty thousand of the 
State militia, “for the purpose of repelling invasion, and for 
the protection of the lives, liberty, and property of the citizens.” 
He said: 


“A series of unprovoked and unparalleled outrages have been 
inflicted upon the peace and dignity of this Commonwealth and 
upon the rights and liberties of its people, by wicked and unprin- 
cipled men, professing to act under the authority of the Govern- 
ment of the United States; solemn enactments of your Legisla- 
ture have been nullified ; your volunteer soldiers have been taken 
prisoners ; your commerce with your sister States has been sus- 
pended ; your trade with your own fellow-citizens has been and is 
subjected, to the harassing control of an armed soldiery ; peaceful 
citizens have been imprisoned without warrant of law ; unoffend- 
ing and defenseless men, women, and children have been ruthlessly 
shot down and murdered ; and other unbearable indignities have 
been heaped upon your State and yourselves.” 


The plea of the invader was contained in an order is- 


474. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


sued from Washington to the commanding General in these 
words : 


“The President observes with concern that, notwithstanding 
the pledge of the State authorities to codperate in preserving the 
peace of Missouri, loyal citizens in great numbers continue to be 
driven from their homes. It is immaterial whether the outrages 
continue from inactivity or indisposition on the part of the State 
authorities to prevent them. It is enough that they continue, 
and it will devolve on you the duty of putting a stop to them 
summarily by the force under your command, to be aided by 
such troops as you may require from Kansas, Iowa, and Illinois. 
... The authority of the United States is paramount, and, 
whenever it is apparent that a movement, whether by order of 
State authority or not, is hostile, you will not hesitate to put it 
down.” 


In this order the only pretext put forward is that of domes- 
tie violence. But in that case the Constitution of the United 
States gives no authority to the United States Government to 
interfere except on the express conditions of an “application 
of the Legislature, or of the Executive, when the Legislature 
can not be convened.’”’ There had been no application of the 
Legislature or of the Executive. On the contrary, the Govern- 
or of the State, like a brave man, told the Executive of the 
United States to keep his hands off, and to keep his military 
forces without the State, and he pledged himself to preserve its 
peace and neutrality. But arguments or pledges on the part of 
the victim have never yet stopped the progress of the remorse- 
less usurper. The subjugation of the State government of 
Missouri to the will and designs of the Government at Wash- 
ington had been determined upon, and the sovereignty of the 
people was to be crushed by troops from the sister States of 
Kansas, Iowa, and linois. 

But the bravery of the Governor and the determination of 
the Legislature caused the Government of the United States 
to depart from its usually stealthy progress in the invasion of 
the State government and the sovereignty of the people, and 
to adopt bolder measures. The Governor was charged with 


1863] THE SATRAP OF A USURPER. i SS ATS 


purposes of treason and secession, for his attempt faithfully to 
discharge the duties of a conscientious Governor to the citizens. 
Says the commander of the United States forces, in his procla- 
mation : 


“The recent proclamation of Governor Jackson, by which he 
has set at defiance the authorities of the United States and urged 
you to make war upon them, is but a consummation of his trea- 
sonable purposes, long indicated by his acts and expressed opin- 
ions, and now made manifest.” 


These are fine words to come from the satrap of a usurper 
who invades a State of the Union without lawful permission or 
authority, with the design to subvert its government and over- 
throw the sovereignty of its people, and to be applied by him to 
the only Governor in the Northern States who strove defiantly 
to protect the unalienable rights and sovereignty of his con- 
stituents ! 

Troops were now poured into the State by the Government 
of the United States so rapidly as to render the successful op- 
position of the lawful authorities impossible, and the control of 
a large portion of the State was soon held by the military forces. 
The Governor, unable to resist, retired to the southern part of 
the State. Meantime, the State Convention, which had been 
called to consider the relations between the Government of the 
United States and the State of Missouri, and to adopt such 
measures for vindicating the sovereignty of the State as were 
necessary, reassembled on the call of its committee. [Entirely 
forgetful of the objects for which the people had called it to- 
gether, it proceeded to declare the State offices vacant, and 
to elect a provisional Governor and other officers entirely sub- 
servient to the will and behests of the Administration at Wash- 
ington. The commanding General now declared martial law 
in the State, and the emancipation of all slaves belonging to 
persons who had taken an active part with us. This eman- 
cipation clause was soon modified by the President as in ad- 
vance of the times. 

The attention of the reader is called to the numerous usurpa- 


476 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tions and violations of constitutional principles and of laws, by 
the Government of the United States and its champions, con- 
tained in the few lines of the preceding paragraph, viz.: the 
invasion with military force, the expulsion of the lawful State 
authorities, the assumption by the State Convention of unlaw- 
ful powers, the election and introduction of persons to offices 
not vacant, the abandonment of all protection of the unalienable 
rights of the people, the declaration of martial law without any 
authority for it, and the attempt to emancipate the slaves in vio- 
lation of every law and constitutional principle. 

The severity of the Executive of the United States now 
began to be felt by the citizens of the State. All disaffected 
persons were silenced or arrested, prisoners of war were treated 
as criminals, and every obstacle to complete subjugation to the 
will of the conqueror sought to be removed. The State gov- 
ernment was represented by a provisional Governor ; and a State 
Convention, that adjourned its sessions from year to year, after 
dallying periodically with the subject of the emancipation of 
the slaves, finally passed an ordinance for that purpose, to take 
effect in 1870. This was not immediate emancipation, so the 
disturbances were kept up in the State until, at a session of the 
Legislature in February, 1864, a bill was passed for a so-called 
State Convention to revise the State Constitution, and the elec- 
tion of delegates in November. It is remarkable how much 
the orders of the commanding General now contained relative 
to disorderly persons. This was preparatory to the occupation 
of the polls by the military force, and the exclusion of all op- 
position voters. The delegates were elected, and the so-called 
Convention assembled on January 6, 1865. An immediate 
emancipation ordinance was passed, and the State organization 
was subjugated to do the will of the usurper and to disregard 
the will of the sovereign people. 


1863] THE HAND OF THE USURPER. ANT 


Cara XLV. 


Subjugation of the Northern States——Humiliating Spectacle of New York.—“ Ring- 
ing of a Little Bell.”—Seizure and Imprisonment of Citizens.—Number seized. 
—Paper Safeguards of Liberty.—Other Safeguards.—Suspension of the Writ of 
Habeas Corpus absolutely forbidden with One Exception—How done.—Not 
able to authorize another.—Abundant Protective Provisions in New York, but 
all failed.—Case of Pierce Butler.—Arrest of Secretary Cameron.—The Presi- 
dent assumes the Responsibility of the Crime.—No Heed given to the Writ of 
Habeas Corpus issued by the Court.—The Governor passive-—Words of Jus- 
tice Nelson.—Prison overflowing.—How relieved.—Oath required of Applicants 
for Relief.—Oath declined by some.—Reasons.—Order forbidding the Employ- 
ment of Counsel by Prisoners.—Victims in almost Every Northern State.—De- 
feat at the Elections.—Result.—Suit for Damages commenced.—Congress inter- 
feres to protect the Guilty—State Courts subjugated—How suspend Habeas 
Corpus.—Congress violates the Constitution. What was New York ?—Writ 
suspended throughout the United States—What is “ Loyalty ” ?—Military 
Domination.—Correspondence between General Dix and Governor Seymour.— 
Seizure of Newspapers.—Governor orders Arrest of Offenders.—Interference 
with the State Election—Vote of the Soldiers.—State Agents arrested.—Pro- 
vost-Marshals appointed in Every Northern State-—Their Duties.—Sustained by 
Force.—Trials by Military Commission.—Trials at Washington.—Assassination 
of the President.—Trial of Henry Wirz.—Efforts to implicate the Author.—In- 
vestigation of a Committee of Congress as to Complicity in the Assassination. 
—Arrest, Trial, and Banishment of Clement C. Vallandigham.—Assertions of 
Governor Seymour on the Case. 


Now follows the humiliating spectacle of the subjugation 
of the State government of New York—the “Empire” State, 
as she calls herself—where, with all her men and treasures, 
it might have been supposed that some stanch defenders of 
constitutional liberty would have sprung up. On the contrary, 
under the pretext of “preserving the Union,” her deluded chil- 
dren aided to destroy the Constitution on which the Union was 
founded, and put forth all their strength to exalt the Govern- 
ment of the United States to supremacy. Thus the States were 
brought to a condition of subjugation, and their governments 
subverted from the protection of the rights for which they were 
instituted. These unalienable rights of the people were left 
without a protector or a shield before the crushing hand of the 
usurper; the sovereignty of the people was set aside, and in its 
place arose the sovereignty of the Government of the United 


478 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


States. With the foundation undermined, the superstructure 
subverted, the ends for which the Great Republic was organ- 
ized entirely lost to sight, and the true balance of the system 
destroyed, unless the dormant virtue and love for their inher- 
ited rights shall arouse the citizens to a vigorous effort to restore 
the republican institutions and powers of the States, the em- 
perors and kings of the earth have only to await calmly the 
lapse of time to behold a fulfillment of their evil prophecies 
in regard to the “ Great Republic” of the world. 

To show how the laws were disregarded, and how despoti- 
cally the personal liberty of the citizen was invaded, let this 
example bear witness: The Secretary of State at Washington, 
William H. Seward, a favored son of the State of New York, 
would “ring a little bell,” which brought to him a messenger, 
to whom was given a secret order to arrest and confine in Fort 
Lafayette a person designated. This order was sent by tele- 
graph to the United States Marshal of the district in which 
would be found the person who was to be arrested. The arrest 
being forcibly made by the marshal with armed attendants with- 
out even the form of a warrant, the prisoner without the knowl- 
edge of any charge against him was conveyed to Fort Hamilton 
and turned over to the commandant. An aid with a guard of 
soldiers then conveyed him in a boat to Fort Lafayette and 
delivered him to the keeper in charge, who gave a receipt for 
the prisoner. He was then divested of any weapons, money, 
valuables, or papers in his possession. His baggage was opened 
and searched. A soldier then took him in charge to the desig- 
nated quarter, which was a portion of one of the casemates for 
guns, lighted only from the port-hole, and occupied by seven or 
eight other prisoners. All were subjected to prison fare. Some 
were citizens of New York, and the others of different States. 
This manner of imprisonment was subsequently put under the 
direction of the Secretary of War, and continued at intervals 
until the close of the war. 

In the brief period between July 1 and October 19, 1861, 
the Secretary of State, William H. Seward, made such diligent 
use of his “little bell,” that one hundred and seventy-five of the 
most respectable citizens of the country were consigned to im- 


1861] HONORED NAME OF LAFAYETTE. 479 


prisonment in this Fort Lafayette, a strong fortress in the lower 
_ part of the harbor of New York. A decent regard for the 
memory of the friend of Washington, and for the services ren- 
dered to the colonies in their struggle for independence, might 
have led Mr. Seward to select for such base uses some other 
place than that which bore the honored name of Lafayette. 

The American citizen has always, like the ancient Roman, 
felt that his personal liberty was secure. He supposed himself 
to be surrounded with numerous paper safeguards, which, to- 
gether with the love of justice and respect for law, common to 
his fellow-citizens, would be sufficient for his protection against 
any usurper. These now proved to be as weak as the paper 
upon which they were written. What were these supposed 
safeguards? There was the Constitution of the State of New 
York, an instrument for the protection and government of the 
people. It had received the consent of the people of the State 
who were governed by it, and therefore its powers were “ just 
powers.” Its first object was to protect the unalienable rights 
of its citizens, relative to which it contains various provisions in 
its Bill of Rights: its declarations respecting personal liberty ; 
its regulations to secure and enforce the great writ of freemen, 
the habeas corpus ; the powers granted to the courts which it 
created ; the Legislature; the Executive, in whose hands was 
placed the richest purse and the strongest sword of the sover- 
eign States to protect the rights of its citizens. 

Further safeguards were placed in the Constitution of the 
United States. These were designed to restrain that Govern- 
ment from any invasion of the citizen’s personal liberty. They 
are as follows: 

“The right of the people to be secure in their persons... 
shall not be violated, and no warrant shall issue but upon probable 
cause, pie by oath, or affirmation, and particularly describ- 
ing... the persons to be seized.” * 


Again : 

“No person shall . . . be deprived of life, liberty, or prop- 
erty, without due process of law.” f 

* Article TV, amendment. + Article V, amendment. 


480 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Again: 

“No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise 
infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand 
jarye 

Again : 

“In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right 
to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and 
district wherein the crime shall have been committed, and to be 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation ; to be con- 
fronted with the witnesses against him ; to have compulsory pro- 
cess for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance 
of counsel for his defense.” + 


Among the enumerated powers of Congress is the following 
clause: 


“The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be sus- 
pended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public 
safety may require.” { 


This clause first forbids the suspension of the writ abso- 
lutely. A single exception is then made by the words “ unless 
the public safety may require.” A condition is attached to this 
exception which still further limits it, by the words “in eases 
of rebellion or invasion.” There is still another and far more 
sweeping limitation attached to this clause. The writ must be 
suspended by an act of Congress, which can be passed only 
when Congress is in session. This suspension must be positive 
and absolute by Congress, not indefinite and dependent on any 
future contingency. Yor the acts of Congress are not absolute 
powers, if between enactment and enforcement they can be 
set. aside by a contingency, unless such contingency was attached 
in the clause of the grant creating the power. But in these 
words of the Constitution there is no contingency expressed. 
Congress alone by positive enactment can suspend the writ of 
habeas corpus. It can not authorize the President to suspend 
its force, nor has he any authority under the Constitution to do 
it. Neither can Congress make an intermittent suspension of 


* Article V, amendment, +} Article VI, amendment. + Article I, section 9. 


i 
a 


é ¥ 
a 


1863] ILLUSTRATION OF THE FACTS. A8] 


the force of the writ ; but it must be absolute under the specific 
condition. 

It is evident that the citizen of New York was abundantly 
provided with the safeguards of personal liberty; yet they all 
proved to be of no avail to secure and enforce his right in the 
hour of trial. A few instances will afford an illustration of the 
facts. Mr. Pierce Butler was suspected of corresponding with 
persons in the Confederate States. He was arrested in Phila- 
delphia on August 19, 1861, by order of Simon Cameron, then 
Secretary of War, without process of law and without, any as- 
signed cause. His trunks and drawers, wardrobe, and entire 
apartments were searched, and his private papers taken by the 
marshal and his four assistants. His office was also examined, 
and his books and papers taken, and within an hour he was on 
his way to Fort Lafayette with an armed guard. After five 
weeks of detention he was liberated. No reason was given 
for his discharge any more than for his arrest. As Mr. Cam- 
eron was about to sail as Minister to Russia, in January ensuing, 
he was arrested for assault and battery and false imprisonment, 
at the suit of Mr. Butler. The case was brought to the knowl- 
edge of the President of the United States, and on April 18, 
1862, the Secretary of State, Seward, replied as follows: 


“The communication has been submitted to the President, 
and I am directed by him to say in reply that he avows the 
proceeding of Mr. Cameron referred to as one taken by him 
when Secretary of War, under the President’s directions, and 
deemed necessary for the prompt suppression of the existing 
rebellion.” 


The writ of habeas corpus was issued by some of the State 
courts, directing the officer in command at the fort to bring 
some one or other of the prisoners into court for an investiga- 
tion of the canse and authority for his detention. But no atten- 
tion was given to these writs by the officer. Neither did the 
Governor of the State make any effort to enforce the processes of 
the courts. He, perhaps, expected that his efforts might be 
resisted by an overpowering force. But expectations, of what- 
soever nature, do not justify or excuse the neglect of a positive 

78 


482 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


duty. It is through such weaknesses that the liberties of man- 
kind have been too often lost. 

Thus the Constitution, the laws, the courts, the Executive of 
the State of New York, were subverted, turned aside from the 
end for which they were instituted, and all the specific arrange- 
ments were of no avail to secure this guaranteed right of its 
citizens. Probably every one of the prisoners was entirely in- 
nocent of any act whatever that was criminal under the laws, 
either of the State or of the United States. 

In opinion they were opposed to the military proceedings of 
the Government of the United States; and these opinions they 
had expressed, which liberty is a part of the birthright of free- 
men. Indeed, Judge Nelson, of the Supreme Court of the 
United States, in the Cireuit of New York, in an opinion de- 
livered about this time, thus expressed himself : 


“Words, oral, written, or printed, however treasonable, seditious, 
or criminal of themselves, do not constitute an overt act of trea- 
son within the definition of the crime. When spoken, written, or 
printed, in relation to an act or acts which, if committed with a 
treasonable design, might constitute such overt act, they are ad- 
missible as evidence, tending to characterize it and show the intent 
with which the act was committed.” 


Finally, the prison in New York Harbor became so full that 
many prisoners were sent to Fort Warren in the harbor of Bos- 
ton. At this time the Government of the United States used 
the Old Capitol at Washington, Fort McHenry of Baltimore, 
Fort Lafayette at New York, and Fort Warren at Boston, 
for the confinement of those whom the usurper designated as 
“state prisoners.” Still further to relieve the fullness of the 
prisons, two men, John A. Dix, of the army, and Edwards Pierre- 
pont, of civil life, were sent to investigate the cases of the pris- 
oners, and release some who were willing to take an “oath of 
allegiance.” Next it was made a condition precedent to an 
investigation that the said oath should be taken by the prisoner. 
As an instance, this proposal was made to two persons named 
Flanders, citizens of the interior of New York. The oath was 
as follows: 


1863] WE HAVE BEEN GUILTY OF NO OFFENSE. A838 


“T do solemnly swear that I will support, protect, and defend 
the Constitution and Government of the United States against all 
enemies, whether domestic or foreign, and that I will bear true 
faith, allegiance, and loyalty to the same, any ordinance, resolution, 
or law of any State Convention, or Legislature, to the contrary 
notwithstanding ; and, further, that I do this with a full determi- 
nation, pledge, and purpose, without any mental reservation or 
evasion whatsoever ; and, further, that I will well and faithfully 
perform all the duties which may be required of me by law.” 


These persons declined to take the prescribed oath. The 
reasons which they gave for this refusal furnish painful evi- 
dence of the extreme subjugation of the government of the 
State of New York, and its silent submission to the arbitrary 
and unconstitutional acts of the Government of the United 
States, even at the sacrifice of the most sacred rights of free- 
men. They said: 


“We have been guilty of no offense against the laws of our 
country, but have simply exercised our constitutional rights as 
free citizens in the open and manly expression of our opinions 
upon public affairs. We have been placed here without legal 
charges, or, indeed, any charges whatsoever being made against us, 
and upon no legal process, but upon an arbitrary and illegal order 
of the Hon. William H. Seward, Secretary of State of the United 
States. Every moment of our detention here is a denial of our 
most sacred rights. We are entitled to and hereby demand an 
unconditional discharge ; and, while we could cheerfully take the 
oath prescribed by the Constitution of the United States, because 
"we are, always have been, and ever intend to be loyal to that 
instrument (though at the same time protesting against the right 
of the Government to impose even such oath upon us as the con- 
dition of our discharge), we can not consent to take the oath now 
required of us, because we hold no office of any kind under the 
Government of the United States, and it is an oath unknown to 
and unauthorized by the Constitution, and commits us to the sup- 
port of the Government though it may be acting in direct conflict 
with the Constitution, and deprives us of the right of freely dis- 
cussing, and by peaceful and constitutional methods opposing its 
measures—a right which is sacred to freedom, and which no 

he 


484 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


American citizen should voluntarily surrender. That such is the 
interpretation put upon this oath by the Government, and such its 
intended effect is plainly demonstrated by the fact that it is dic- 
tated to us as a condition of our release from an imprisonment 
inflicted-upon us for no other cause than that we have exercised 
the above-specified constitutional rights.” 


One important fact which illustrates the flagrant outrage 
committed on all these prisoners should not be omitted. The 
Constitution of the United States declares as follows: 


“Tn all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right 
.. . to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.” 


On December 3, 1861, the commanding officer at Fort La- 
fayette came to the prisoners’ quarters, and read a document, of 
which the following is a copy: 


“ To the political prisoners in Fort Lafayette: 
_ “Tam instructed by the Secretary of State to inform you that 
the Department of State of the United States will not recognize 
any one as an attorney for political prisoners, and will look with 
distrust upon all applications for release through such channels ; 
and that such applications will be regarded as additional reasons 
for declining to release the prisoners. 

“ And, further, that if such prisoners wish to make any com- 
munication to the Government, they are at liberty to make it 
directly to the State Department. Seto C, Hawzey.” 


Space will not permit me further to notice the instances of 
this immense class of cases. In almost every Northern State 
the victims of this violence were to be found. That there was 
no just cause for these invasions of the rights of the States, and 
of the citizens, was demonstrated in the most decisive manner. 
At this time (November 4, 1862) the friends of the Administra- 
tion of the United States Government were decisively defeated 
at the elections. On November 22d ensuing, the War Depart- 
ment issued an order releasing all except prisoners of war. The 
order was muffled up in a phraseology suited to hide from the 
observation of the people that the result of the elections had 
stricken home to the sensibilities of the usurpers. It said: 


¢ 


1863] THEN VIGOROUSLY RENEWED. 485 


“ Ordered—1. That all persons now in military custody, who 
have been arrested for discouraging volunteer enlistments, oppos- 
ing the draft,* or for otherwise giving aid and comfort to the 
enemy, in States where the draft has been made or the quota of 
volunteers and militia has been furnished, shall be discharged 
from further military restraint.” 


Thus these arrests were for a short period suspended, and 
then vigorously renewed. 

Many of these persons who had been illegally seized and im- 
prisoned now commenced suits for damages. This led to an- 
_ other step on the part of the Government of the United States, 
by which the judiciary of the State was entirely subverted and 
deprived of all jurisdiction in these cases. Congress passed an 
act on March 3, 1863, which provided that any order of the 
President of the United States, or arrest made under his au- 
thority, when pleaded, should be a defense, in all courts, to any 
action or prosecution for any search, seizure, arrest, or imprison- 
ment made, done, or committed, or any acts omitted to be done, 
under or by virtue of such order, or under color of any law of 
Congress. The act further provided that all actions against offi- 
cers and others for torts in arrests might be removed for trial to 
the next Cireuit Court of the United States held in the district, 
and said : 


“Tt shall then be the duty of the State court to accept the 
surety and proceed no further in the cause or prosecution, and the 
bail that shall have been originally taken shall be discharged.” 


It will be noticed that by the terms of this act the case could 
be removed to the Circuit Court when the defendant “filed a 
petition stating the facts verified by affidavit.” Thus the juris- 
diction of all the courts of the State of New York was made to 
terminate and cease upon the simple word of the defendant ac- 
companied by an affidavit. But these courts were instituted by 
the consent of the governed, for the protection of the personal 
freedom of the citizen; yet in the cases brought before them 


* The first act of Congress providing for an enrollment and draft was passed on 


March 8, 1868, three and a half months later than this order, 
i * 


486 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. | 


they ordered the removal on the ground that they involved 
the question of the constitutionality of an act of Congress, over 
which the courts of the United States had a jurisdiction. The 
absurdity of this plea is manifest; for it is founded on the 
presumption that the question, whether, under authority from 
the President of the United States, any one, without interven- 
tion of the judicial tribunals, can incarcerate a citizen, is a ques- 
tion which can be treated as constituting a case arising under 
the Constitution of the United States. Any statute authorizing 
such acts is palpably void, and not entitled to be a ground for 
a hearing under an appeal. 

The subjugation of the government of the State of New 
York was made in another section of the same act of Congress 
of March 3, 1863. It declares: 


“That, during the present rebellion, the President of the United 
States, whenever in his judgment the public safety may require it, 
is authorized to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
in any case throughout the United States, or any part thereof.” 


Let us turn to the words of the Constitution of the United 
States which are contained in the grant of powers to Congress: 


“The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be sus- 
pended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public 
safety may require it.” 


It will be seen that two facts are required to exist before the 
Congress of the United States can suspend the privilege of this 
writ. Congress must, therefore, determine the existence of these 
facts before it has power constitutionally to act. If it finds 
either fact to exist and not the other, it has no power to suspend 
the privilege of the writ. There must be rebellion, and the 
public safety must require the suspension. When Congress 
finds these facts to exist, it can enact the suspension. It is the 
judgment of Congress alone that can determine that the public 
safety requires the suspension. This can not be delegated to 
the judgment of any other department of the Government. 
Therefore, when Congress tells the President, in the above- 
mentioned act, that he is authorized to suspend the privilege 


1863] IT HAS NO AUTHORITY. 487 


of this writ whenever, in his judgment, the public safety may 
require it, then that body undertakes to do that for which it 
has no authority in the Constitution. The States delegated the 
power solely to Congress; an act to transfer the trust to any 
other depository could rightfully have no force whatever. 

Now, the State of New York, in which this writ was thus. 
suspended by the Government of the United States, was one of 
the Northern States and a most ardent advocate of the Union. 
It had contributed more men and money to support the Gov- 
ernment of the United States than any other State, and than 
some whole sections of States. Peace reigned throughout all 
its borders. Yet, in this quiet and “loyal” State, whose people 
had given so freely to aid the Government of the United States, 
a claim was now set up to the right to nullify the rights and 
immunities of every citizen, by that Government which had 
already nullified the powers of every court in the State. This 
was done by the declaration of the President that “the pub- 
lic safety ” required the suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus. 

The act of Congress was passed on March 38, 1863, and on 
September 15th the President issued his proclamation, and, re- 
ferring to the authority claimed to have been granted by the 
act, he proceeded to say : 


“ Whereas, In the judgment of the President, the public safe- 
ty does require that the privilege of said writ shall now be sus- 
pended throughout the United States, in cases where, by the 
authority of the President of the United States, military, naval, 
and civil officers of the United States, or either of them, hold per- 
sons under their custody, either as prisoners of war, spies, or aid- 
ers or abettors of the enemy, or officers, soldiers, or seamen, en- 
rolled, drafted, or mustered, or enlisted in, or belonging to, the 
land or naval forces of the United States, or as deserters there- 
from, or otherwise amenable to military law, or to the rules or 
articles of war, or the rules and regulations prescribed for mili- 
tary and naval service by the authority of the President of the 
United States, or for resisting a draft, or for any other offense 
against the military or naval service: Therefore I do hereby pro- 
claim and make known that the privilege of the writ of habeas 


488 RISE AND FALL OF 


corpus is suspended theoNee hout 
cases before mentioned throughout the duration of said rebellion.” 


No autocrat ever issued an edict more destructive of the 
natural right to personal liberty. Not only was the State goy- 
ernment of New York deprived of the power to fulfill its obli- 
gations to protect and preserve this right of its citizens, but 
every State government of the Northern States was in like 
manner subverted. The only distinction known among the citi- 
zens was that established by the Government of the United 
States in answer to the question applied to each one, “Is he 
loyal or disloyal?” The only test of loyalty was based on sub- 
mission, and, as usual in such cases, the most abject in spirit 
were the most loyal to the usurper. All those liberties of 
conduct and action which stamp the true freeman everywhere 
throughout the world disappeared; and the suppressed voice, 
the apprehensive look, and the cautious movements were substi- 
tuted for the free speech, the open brow, and fearless tread 
which had characterized the American. 

Another step in the subjugation of the government of the 
State of New York was made by the domination over it of 
the military power of the Government of the United States, 
This took place in a time of peace in the State, when the courts 
were all open and the civil administration of affairs was unob- 
structed. On July 30, 1863, the United States commanding 
General of that department addressed a letter to Governor Sey- 
mour, saying: 


“ As the draft under the act of Congress of March 3, 1863, for 
enrolling and calling out the national forces, will probably be re- 
sumed in this city (New York) at an early day, I am desirous of 
knowing whether the military power of the State may be relied 
on to enforce the execution of the law, in case of forcible resist- 
ance to it. I am very anxious there should be perfect harmony 
of action between the Federal Government and that of the State 
of New York ; and if, under your authority to see the laws faith- 
fully executed, I can feel assured that the act referred to will be 
enforced, I need not ask the War Department to put at my dis- 
posal, for the purpose, troops in the service of the United States.” 


1868] THE PAINFUL QUESTIONS. | 489 


Ba 
rs 


don August 3d: 

**T have this day sent to the President of the United States a 
communication in relation to the draft in this State. I believe his 
answer will relieve you and me from the painful questions grow- 
ing out of an armed enforcement of the conscription law in this 
patriotic State, which has contributed so largely and freely to the 
support of the national cause during the existing war.” 


Governor Seymour repli 


On August 8th General Dix writes again: 


“Tt is my duty, as commanding officer of the troops in the ser- 
vice of the United States in this department, if called on by the 
enrolling officers, to aid them in resisting forcible opposition to 
the execution of the law ; and it is from an earnest desire to avoid 
the necessity of employing for the purpose any of my forces, 
which have been placed here to garrison the forts and protect the 
public property, that I wished to see the draft enforced by the 
military power of the State, in case of armed or organized resist- 
ance to it. . . . I designed, if your codperation could not be relied 
on, to ask the General Government for a force which should be 
adequate to insure the execution of the law and to meet any 
emergency growing out of it.” 


Meantime Governor Seymour received no answer to his 
letter to the President. He had asked for a suspension of the 
draft, on the ground that the enrollments in the city were ex- 
cessive as compared with other portions of the State, and that 
due credit was not given for the past. He therefore replied to 
General Dix, saying: 


“As you state in your letter that it is your duty to enforce the 
act of Congress, and, as you apprehend its provisions may excite 
popular resistance, it is proposed you should know the position 
which will be held by the State authorities. Of course, under no 
circumstances, can they perform duties expressly confided to 
others, nor can they undertake to relieve others from their proper 
responsibilities. But there can be no violations of good order, or 
riotous proceedings, no disturbances of the public peace, which are 
not infractions of the laws of the State ; and those laws will be 
enforced under all circumstances. I shall take care that all the 
executive officers of this State perform their duties vigorously and 


490 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


thoroughly, and, if need be, the military power will be called into 
requisition. As you are an officer of the General Government, and 
not of the State, it does not become me to make suggestions to 
you with regard to your action under a law of Congress. You 
will, of course, be governed by your instructions and your own 
views of duty.” 


On August 18th General Dix thus wrote to the Govy- 
ernor : 


“‘ Not having received an answer from you, I applied to the Sec- 
retary of War on the 14th inst. for a force adequate to the object. 
The call was promptly responded to, and I shall be ready to meet 
all opposition to the draft.” 


The force sent by the Secretary of War, to keep the peace 
and subjugate the sovereignty of the people, amounted to forty- 
two regiments and two batteries. There was no occasion for 
the exertion of their powers, but the wrong to the State of New 
York was none the less gross. 

Again, the subjugation of the government of the State of 
New York by the domination of the military power was made 
still more manifest by another act on the part of the Govern- 
ment of the United States. A spurious proclamation, seeming 
to have been issued by the President, calling for four hundred 
thousand men, by a fraudulent imposition appeared in two 
papers of New York City (the “ Journal of Commerce” and the 
“World ”) on the morning of May 18, 1864. It was immedi- 
ately contradicted by the authorities at Washington, and orders 
were issued, under which the offices of these papers were en- 
tered by armed men, the property of the owners seized, the 
premises held by force for several days, and the publications sus- 
pended. At the same time the office of the independent tele- 
graph line was occupied by a military force in the name of the 
Government of the United States. The operators were taken 
into custody, and the proprietors of the newspapers were ordered 
to be arrested and imprisoned. But these orders were sus- 
pended. 

Governor Seymour immediately instructed the District At- 
torney to proceed against the offenders, saying : 


1863] INVESTIGATION WAS MADRE. : 491 


“In the month of July last, when New York was a scene of 
violence, I gave warning that ‘the laws of the State must be en- 
forced, its peace and order maintained, and the property of its 
citizens protected at every hazard.’ The laws were enforced at a 
fearful cost of blood and life. The declaration I then made was 
not intended merely for that occasion, or against any class of men. 
It is one of an enduring character, to be asserted at all times, and 
against all conditions of citizens without favor or distinction. 
Unless all are made to bow to the law, it will be respected by 
none. Unless all are made secure in their rights of person and 
property, none can be protected.” 


An investigation was made by one of the city judges, and 
warrants were issued for the arrest of Major-General Dix and 
several of his officers. They voluntarily appeared by counsel 
on July 6th, and the argument was set down for the 9th. On 
that day the counsel for the defense said : 


“Since this warrant was issued, the President of the United 
States has issued another order to General Dix, which directs him 
that, while this civil war lasts, he ‘must not relieve himself from 
his command, or be deprived of his liberty to obey any order of a 
military nature which the President of the United States directs 
him to execute.’” 


The result of the arguments was that the officers were held 
to await the action of the grand jury, who, however, took no 
action on the charges. The guilty person was arrested in two 
or three days after the appearance of the proclamation, and im- 
prisoned in Fort Lafayette; the newspaper and telegraph offices 
were restored to the owners, and the publications resumed. But 
the government of New York never obtained any indemmifica- 
tion of these losses by its citizens. 

Another subversion of the State government was brought 
about by the military interference on the part of the Govern- 
ment of the United States with the State election. This was in 
1864, when President Lincoln and General McClellan were the 
candidates for the Presidency of the United States. As usual, 
in all these cases, proceedings to work up a pretended necessity 
for interference on the part of the United States Government 


492 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


were commenced. by the appearance of a grandiloquent procla- 
mation from the commanding General, Dix, telling what hor- 
rible designs, there was reason to believe, the agents of the 
Confederate States in Canada had prepared to be executed on 
election-day, by an invasion of voters from Canada to colonize 
different points. Therefore, to avert these dreadful dangers 
and arrest the guilty parties, it was necessary that provost-mar- 
shals, sustained by a military force, should be present with an- 
thority at the polls. At the same time the State Department 
issued a dispatch, saying: 

“Information has been received from the British provinces 
to the effect that there is a conspiracy on foot to set fire to the 
principal cities in the Northern States on the day of the Presiden- 
tial election.” 


Thus was created an apparent necessity for the military force | 
to be very active on the day of election. Governor Seymour 
issued a proclamation, saying : 


‘¢ There is no reason to doubt that the coming election will be 
conducted with the usual quiet and order.” 


Major-General Butler was sent to take command in the city, 
and seven thousand additional men were placed in the forts of 
the harbor, and proclamations were issued, threatening, by the 
United States Government, the severest punishment upon every 
person who might attempt improperly to vote at the election in 
the State of New York. 

The State Legislature, at its previous session, had passed an 
act to provide for the vote of the soldiers in the field, to be 
taken previous to the day of election. Agents were appointed 
by the State government, to the localities where the soldiers were 
stationed, to receive the votes. The informers of the United 
States Government immediately brought charges of fraud against 
some of these agents, and they were seized by the military au- 
thorities, sent to Washington, cast into prison, and held to be 
tried by a military commission. The Governor of New York 
immediately appointed Amasa J. Parker and two other most 
respectable citizens as commissioners, to proceed to Washing- 


1863] HOW UTTER WAS THE SUBVERSION. _ 493 
ton in behalf of the State and investigate the difficulties. They 
~ informed the Governor that several hundred ballots, which had 
been seized, were given up, and that they visited the principal 
agent of the State of New York in his prison, through the per- 
mission of Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary of War. They re- 
ported thus: 


“The undersigned availed themselves of the permit granted 
them to visit Colonel North, M. M. Jones, and Levi Cohn. They 
found them in the ‘Carroll Prison,’ in close confinement. They 
then learned that Messrs. North and Cohn had been confined to- 
gether in one room, and had not been permitted to leave it for 
a moment during the four days they had been prisoners, even for 
the purposes of answering the calls of nature. They had been ~ 
supplied with meager and coarse prison-rations, to be eaten in 
their room, where they constantly breathed the foul atmosphere 
- arising from the standing odor. They had no vessel out of which 
to drink water, except the one furnished them for the purpose of 
urination. They had but one chair, and had slept three of the 
nights of their confinement upon a sack of straw upon the floor. 
They had not been permitted to see a newspaper, and were ignorant 
of the cause of their arrest. All communication between them 
and the outer world had been denied them, and no friend had been 
allowed to see them. The undersigned complained to the acting 
superintendent, who seemed humanely disposed, but justified his 
course by the prison rules and the instructions of his superiors.” 


The commissioners further say : 


“ From the best investigation the undersigned have been able 
to make, though there may have been irregularities, they have 
found no evidence that any frauds, either against any elector or 
the elective franchise, have been committed by any person con- 
nected with the New York agency.” 


The commissioners then addressed a communication to the 
Secretary of War. A few extracts from this communication 
will show how utter was the subversion of the authority of the 
government of the State of New York. They say: 


“They, North, Cohn, and Jones, were not in the military or 
naval service of the United States, and by no law of which we 


494. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


are aware were they subject to the martial and military laws of 
the United States, or to the orders of the War Department... . 
The charges, so far as we can learn, are not for the violation of 
any law of the United States, but relate to acts purporting to 
have been done under the law of the State of New York concern- 
ing elections, and making provisions for soldiers voting in that 
State ; it being claimed that certain irregularities have intervened 
which give reason to suspect that frauds and forgeries are intend- 
ed, and may be consummated. These suspected and anticipated 
frauds have respect solely to the election laws of the State of 
New York, and the action of the-Government in making the 
arrest is claimed to be justified upon the ground that, unless thus 
prevented, frauds will be perpetrated against the ballot-box at the 
approaching election in the State of New York. We beg leave, 
in behalf of the State, respectfully to protest against this jurisdic- 
tion, assumed as well over the alleged offense as over the persons 
of the accused, who are citizens of the State, in its employ, and 
entitled to its protection. The proper business of the State 
agency is greatly interfered with by the arrest and detention of 
the agents, and the State is deprived of its proper jurisdiction 
over its agents and citizens, over offenses against its laws, and 
over its own ballot-box and the exercise of the elective franchise 
within its limits.” 


The demands made by the State of New York through 
these commissioners were refused. The persons arrested were 
finally tried before a military commission, clearly without juris- 
diction, in violation of their personal rights, and in usurpation 
of the just powers of the State. They were, however, acquit- 
ted and discharged, glad to get off no worse. 

The proposed limits will not permit me further to present 
the details relative to the subjugation of the State govern- 
ment of New York by the Government of the United States. 
Neither can space be spared to relate the details of the sub- 
jugation of the government of each Northern State. In many 
the events were similar to those in New York; in others they 
arose under dissimilar circumstances; but, in all, the sover- 
eignty of the people was entirely disregarded, and the opera- 
tion of the institutions which had been established for the pro- 


1863] HOW COMPLETE WAS THE WORK, 495 


tection of their rights was suspended, or nullified, by a military 
force of the Government of the United States. Only such 
events, therefore, can be stated as serve to show how universal 
and how complete was the work done by the United States 
Government to secure a recognition of its supremacy, over not 
only acts but even words, from every citizen. All were its sub- 
jects; the “loyal,” as some were called, were its friends, and 
could be trusted ; the “disloyal” were its disaffected subjects, 
and must be watched by spies and informers, and, if tiecessary, 
put in prison to secure their passive submission. 

A military domination was established in all of the Northern 
States, under the pretext of securing the arrest of deserters from 
the army. This was accomplished on September 24, 1862, by 
the appointment of a Provost-Marshal-General of the War De- 
partment at Washington, and in each State one or more special 
provost-marshals, who were required to report to and receive 
instructions from the Provost-Marshal-General. It was made 
the duty of the special marshals— 


“To arrest all deserters, whether regulars, volunteers, or mi- 
litia, and send them to the nearest military commander or military 
post, where they can be cared for and sent to their respective regi- 
ments ; to arrest, upon the warrant of the Judge Advocate, all 
disloyal persons subject to arrest under the orders of the War 
Department ; to inquire into and report treasonable practices, 
seize stolen or embezzled property of the Government, detect spies 
of the enemy, and perform such other duties as may be enjoined 
on them by the War Department.” 


To enable these marshals to perform their duties efficiently, © 
they were authorized to call on any available military force 
within their respective districts, or else to employ the assistance 
of citizens, constables, sheriffs, or police officers, so far as might 
be necessary. No trial was allowed to any person thus arrested 
except before a military commission consisting of military offi- 
cers designated for the purpose; the prosecutor was the Judge 
Advocate, and the punishments were exemplary, unusual, and 
too often such as were unknown to the laws. The State gov- 
ernments within whose domains the courts were open, the civil 


49@ RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


institutions in quiet operation, and the transactions of peaceful 
life uniform and constant, were powerless to protect their citi- 
zens in their unalienable rights of freedom of speech and per- 
sonal liberty, and the mandates of their courts were treated with 
contempt. In utter disregard of the principles of civil liberty, a 
military control was established in every Northern State, the 
declarations of rights in their Constitutions were violated, their 
laws nullified, and the authority of their governments subverted 
by an absolute and direct usurpation on the part of the Govern- 
ment of the United States. 

The country was filled with horror during 1865 by two trials 
held before a military commission in the city of Washington. 
The first commenced on May 13th, and ended on June 29th. 
The specification was— 


“That David E. Harold, Edward Spangler, Lewis Payne, John 
H. Surratt, Michael O’Loughlin, Samuel Arnold, George A. Atze- 
rott, Samuel A. Mudd, and Mary E. Surratt, did on April 15, 
1865, combine, confederate, and conspire together to murder Presi- 
dent Abraham Lincoln, Vice-President Andrew Johnson, Lieuten- 
ant-General U. 8. Grant, and Secretary of State William H. Sew- 
ard.” 


President Lincoln had been shot, and Secretary Seward was 
badly wounded with a knife. The others were uninjured. 

The sentence of the commission was that David E. Harold, 
G. A. Atzerott, Lewis Payne, and Mary E, Surratt, be hanged 
by the proper military authority, under the direction of the Sec- 
retary of War, on July 7, 1865. The others were sentenced to 
imprisonment at hard labor for a term of years or for life. 
With only one day’s delay, the sentences were carried into exe- 
cution. John H. Surratt escaped before trial. He was sought 
for by the spies of the War Department half round the world, 
and after a long time was found serving as a soldier in the corps 
of Papal Zouaves at Rome. He was brought back to Washing- 
ton, tried, and acquitted. 

The insertion of my name with those of others, honorable 
gentlemen, as “inciting and encouraging ” these acts, served as 
an exhibition of the malignant spirit with which justice was ad- 


1865] COMMITTED SUICIDE. 497 


ministered -by the authorities in Washington at that time. The 
case of Mrs. Surratt, at whose house some of these persons had 
boarded, awakened much sympathy. She was spoken of by her 
counsel, Reverdy Johnson, of Maryland, as “a devout Christian, 
ever kind, affectionate, and charitable,” which was confirmed by 
evidence and uncontradicted. On the day of the execution, her 
daughter, who was quite a devoted and affectionate person, 
sought to obtain an audience with President Johnson to implore 
at least a brief suspension of the sentence of her mother. She 
was obstructed and prevented from seeing the President by ex- 
Senator Preston King, of New York, and Senator James H. 
Lane, of Kansas, who were reported to have been at the Execu- 
tive Mansion to keep guard over President Johnson. Each of 
these Senators at a later period committed suicide. 

The trial of Major Henry Wirz was the next in importance 
which came before a military commission. In April, 1865, 
President Johnson issued a proclamation, stating that, from 
evidence in possession of the “ Bureau of Military Justice,” it 
appeared that I, Jefferson Davis, was implicated in the assassi- 
nation of President Lincoln, and for that reason he offered a 
reward of one hundred thousand dollars for my capture. That 
testimony was subsequently found to be entirely false, having 
been a mere fabrication. The manner in which this was done 
will be presently stated. Meantime, certain persons of influence 
and public position at that time, either aware of the fabricated 
character of this testimony or convinced of its insufficiency to 
secure my conviction on a trial, sought to find ample material to 
supply this deficiency, in the great mortality of the soldiers we 
had captured during the war and imprisoned at Andersonvillé.* 

Orders were therefore issued by the authorities of the United 
States Government to arrest a subaltern officer, Captain Henry 
Wirz, a foreigner by birth, poor, friendless, and wounded, and 
held as a prisoner of war. He had been included in the sur- 
render of General J. E. Johnston. On May 7th he was placed 
in the “Old Capitol” Prison at Washington. The poor man 
was doomed before he was heard, and the permission to be 
heard: according to law was denied him. Captain Wirz had 


* See chapter on exchange of prisoners, 


79 


498 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


been in command at the Confederate prison at Andersonville. 
The first charge alleged against him was that of conspiring with 
myself, Secretary Seddon, General Howell Cobb, General Win- 
der, and others, to cause the death of thousands of the prisoners 
through cruelty, ete. The second charge was alleged against 
himself for murder in violation of the laws and customs of war. 

The military commission before which he was tried was con- 
vened by an order of President Johnson, of August 19th, direct- 
ing the officers detailed for that purpose to meet as a special 
military commission on August 20th, for the trial of such pris- 
oners as might be brought before it. The commission convened, 
and Wirz was arraigned on the charges above mentioned, and 
pleaded not guilty. At the suggestion of the Judge Advocate, 
Joseph Holt, he was remanded to prison and the court adjourned. 
The so-called trial afterward came on, and lasted for three months, 
but no evidence whatsoever was produced showing the existence 
of such a conspiracy as had been charged. Wirz was, however, 
pronounced guilty, and, in accordance with the sentence of the 
commission, he was executed on November 10, 1865. 

On April 4, 1867, Mr. Louis Schade, of Washington, and the 
attorney for Wirz on the trial, in compliance with the request 
of Wirz so to do, as soon as the times should be propitious, pub- 
lished a vindication of his character. The following is an extract 
from this publication : 


“On the night previous to the execution of the prisoner, some 
parties came to the confessor of Wirz (Rev. Father Boyle) and 
also to me. One of them informed me that a high Cabinet officer 
wished to assure Wirz that, if he would implicate Jefferson Davis 
with the atrocities committed at Andersonville, his sentence should 
be commuted. He (the messenger, whoever he was) requested me 
to inform Wirz of this. In presence of Father Boyle, I told him 
next morning what had happened. The Captain simply and quietly 
replied : ‘Mr. Schade, you know that I have always told you that 
I do not know anything about Jefferson Davis. He had no con- 
nection with me as to what was done at Andersonville. If I knew 
anything of him, I would not become a traitor against him or any- 
body else to save my life.” Thus ended the attempt to suborn 
Captain Wirz against Jefferson Dayis.” 


1865] SPURNED THESE PROPOSITIONS. 499 


The following is an extract from a letter of Captain C. B. 
Winder to Mrs. Davis, dated Eastern Shore of Virginia, January 
9, 1867; 


“The door of the room which I occupied while in confinement 
at the Old Capitol Prison, Washington, was immediately opposite 
Captain Wirz’s door—both of which were occasionally open. 
About two days before Captain Wirz’s execution, I saw three or 
four men pass into his room, and, upon their coming out, Captain 
Wirz told me that they had given him assurances that his life 
would be spared and his liberty given to him if he (Wirz) could 
give any testimony that would reflect upon Mr. Davis or implicate 
him directly or indirectly with the condition and treatment of 
prisoners of war, as charged by the United States authorities ; 
that he indignantly spurned these propositions, and assured them 
that, never having been acquainted with Mr. Davis, either offi- 
cially, personally, or socially, it was utterly impossible that he 
should know anything against him, and that the offer of his life, 
dear as the boon might be, could not purchase him to treason and 
treachery to the South and his friend.” 


The following letter is from the Rey. Father F. E. Boyle, 


of Washington : 
“Wasuineton, D.C., October 10, 1880. 


“Hon. JEFFERSON Davis. 

“DxraR Siz: ... I know that, on the evening before the day 
of the execution of Major Wirz, a man visited me, on the part of a 
Cabinet officer, to inform me that Major Wirz would be pardoned 
if he would implicate Jefferson Davis in the cruelties of Ander- 
sonville. No names were given by this messenger, and, upon my 
refusal to take any action in the matter, he went to Mr. Louis 
Schade, counsel for Major Wirz, with the same purpose and with 
a like result. 

“ When I visited Major Wirz the next morning, he told me 
that the same proposal had been made to him, and had been rejected 
with scorn. The Major was very indignant, and said that, while 
he was innocent of the cruel charges for which he was about to 
suffer death, he would not purchase his liberty by perjury and a 
crime, such as was made the condition of his freedom. I attended 
the Major to the scaffold, and he died in the peace of God, and 
praying for his enemies. I know he was indeed innocent of all 


500 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the cruel charges on which his life was sworn away, and I was 
edified by the Christian spirit in which he submitted to his perse- 


cuters. Yours very truly, 
“FF, E. Boye.” 


In the other case of the fabrication of evidence by some of 
the authoritics in Washington relative to myself, it will be suffi- 
cient here to present what others have said and done. The 
subject is noticed in these pages only to show the desperate ex- 
tremities to which the agents of the Government of the United 
States proceeded in order to compass my ignominious death. 
Three principal measures were resorted to for the accomplish- 
ment of this object: the charge in the case of Wirz, above 
mentioned ; the fabrications in the case now under considera- 
tion; and the cruel and inhuman treatment inflicted upon me 
while a prisoner in Fortress Monroe. 

At the session of Congress of 1865-66, a committee was 
appointed in the House of Representatives “to inquire into and 
report upon the alleged complicity of Jefferson Davis with the 
assassination of the late President Lincoln,” or words to that 
effect. George 8. Boutwell was chairman of the committee, 
and the majority of the members were extreme advocates of the 
war. The charge emanated from the “Bureau of Military 
Justice,” as it was designated—a similar institution to the “ Se- 
eret Committee.’ of the French Revolution. Of this institu- 
tion Judge-Advocate Joseph Holt was the chief. After an 
investigation continuing through several months, a majority of 
the committee made their report to Congress. 


“That report not only failed to establish the charge, but the 
committee were forced to confess in it that the witnesses, on 
whose testimony Holt had affected to rely, were wholly untrust- 
worthy. Shortly after this report was presented to the House, 
Mr. A. J. Rogers, of the committee, a very respectable member 
from New Jersey, made a minority report. He asserted that 
much of the evidence was altogether suppressed, and that the wit- 
nesses, who had received large sums of money from Holt for tes- 
tifying to the criminality of Mr. Davis, recanted their evidence 
before the committee, and acknowledged that they had perjured 
themselves by testifying to a mass of falsehoods; that they had 


i i ain 2 


1865] MORE MIGHT BE ADDED. 501 


been tutored to do so by one S. Conover ; and that, from him down 
through all the miserable Hist, the very names under which these 
hired informers were known to the public were as false as the nar- 
ratives to which they had sworn.” * 


Much more might be added to show the evil purpose of 
these men, together with the correspondence of Holt and his 
associates, but it would be out of place if it was put in these 
pages. 

Another case of this kind occurred in the State of Ohio, in 
April, 1863, in the arrest, trial, and banishment of Clement L. 
Vallandigham. On April 13th Major-General Ambrose E. 
Burnside, commanding the Department, issued an order, declar- 
ing— 

“That, hereafter, all persons found within our lines who com- 
mit acts for the benefit of the enemies of our country will be tried 
as spies or traitors, and, if convicted, will suffer death.” (The dif- 
ferent classes of persons were then named in the order.) “The 
habit of declaring sympathies for the enemy will no longer be tol- 
erated in this department. Persons committing such offenses will 
be at once arrested, with a view to being tried as above stated, or 
sent beyond our lines into the lines of their friends. It must be 
distinctly understood that treason, expressed or implied, will not 
be tolerated in this department.” 


Mr. Vallandigham commented upon this order, on May Ist, 
at a public meeting of citizens. Three days afterward a body 
of soldiers was sent by railroad from Cincinnati to Dayton, who, 
with violence, broke into his residence at three o’clock in the 
morning, seized, and hurried him to the cars before a rescue 
could be made, and departed for Cincinnati, where he was con- 
fined in a military prison. He was brought to trial before a 
military commission on May 6th. The specification made against 
him in the charge was that “he addressed a large meeting of 
citizens at Mount Vernon, and did utter sentiments in words, 
or in effect, as follows: declaring the present war ‘a wicked, 
cruel, and unnecessary war’; ‘a war not being waged for the 


* Baltimore “ Gazette,” September 25, 1866. 


502 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


preservation of the Union’; ‘a war for the purpose of crush- 
ing out liberty and creating a despotism’; ‘a war for the free- 
dom of the blacks and the enslavement of the whites’; stating 
that, ‘if the Administration had so wished, the war could have 
been honorably terminated months ago’; characterizing the 
military order ‘as a base usurpation of arbitrary authority’; 
declaring ‘that he was at all times and upon all occasions re- 
solved to do what he could to defeat the attempts now made to 
build up a monarchy upon the ruins of our free government.’ ” 

He was adjudged as guilty, and sentenced to confinement 
in Fort Warren, Boston Harbor, during the war. This sen- 
tence was changed by President Lincoln to banishment to the 
Confederate States. This military usurpation was spoken of 
by Governor Seymour, of New York, in a letter written at the 
time, in these words: 


“The transaction involved a series of offenses against our most 
sacred rights. It interfered with the freedom of speech ; it vio- 
lated our rights to be secure in our homes against unreasonable 
searches and seizures ; it pronounced sentence without a trial, save 
one which was a mockery, which insulted as well as wronged. The 
‘perpetrators now seek to impose punishment, not for an offense 
against law, but for a disregard of an invalid order, put forth in 
utter violation of the principles of civil liberty. If this proceed- 
ing is approved by the Government and sanctioned by the people, 
it is not merely a step toward revolution, it is revolution ; it will 
not only lead to military despotism, it establishes military despot- 
ism. If it is upheld, our liberties are overthrown. The safety of 
our persons, the security of our property, will hereafter depend 
upon the arbitrary wills of such military rulers as may be placed 
over us, while our constitutional guarantees will be broken down. 
Even now the Governors and the courts of some of the great 
Western States have sunk into insignificance before the despotic 
powers claimed and exercised by military men who have been sent 
into their borders.” 


A large number of such arrests were made in Ohio, news- 
papers were suspended, and editors imprisoned. Like scenes 
were very numerous in Indiana and Illinois. In Pennsylvania 
arrests were made, newspapers suspended, editors imprisoned, 


eas rk 


1863] WHERE WAS THE SOVEREIGNTY ? 503 


and offices destroyed. In New Hampshire, Vermont, and Wis- 
consin many similar scenes occurred. The provost-marshal sys- 
tem was used as a weapon of vindictiveness against influential 
citizens of opposite political views throughout all the Northern 
States. No one of such persons knew when he was safe. A 
complaint of his neighbors, supported by affidavit of “ disloyal ” 
words spoken or “disloyal” acts approved, received prompt at- 
tention from all marshals. Everything was brought into sub- 
jection to the will of the Government of the United States and 
its military officers. 

In view of all the facts here presented relative to the North- 
ern States, let the reader answer where the sovereignty de facto 
resided. Most clearly in the Government of the United States. 
That presided over the ballot-box, held the keys of the prisons, 
arrested all citizens at its pleasure, suspended or suppressed 
newspapers, and did whatever it pleased under the declaration 
that the public welfare required it. But, under the principles 
of American liberty, the sovereignty is inherent in the people as 
an unalienable right ; and, for the preservation and protection of 
this and other rights, the State governments were instituted. 
If, therefore, the people have lost this inherent sovereignty, it 
is evident that the State governments have failed to afford that 
protection for which they were instituted. If they have thus 
failed, it has been in consequence of their subversion and loss 
of power to fulfill the object for which they were established. 
This subversion was achieved when the General Government, 


' under the pretext of preserving the Union, made war on its 


creators the States, thus changing the nature of the Federal 
Union, which could rightfully be done only by the sovereign, 
the people of the States, in like manner as it was originally 
formed. If they should permit their sovereignty to be usurped 
and themselves to be subjugated, individuals might remain, 
States could not. Of their wreck a nation might be built, but 
there could not be a Union, for that implies entities united, and 
of a State which has lost its sovereignty there may only be writ- 


. ten, “ Jt was.” 


504 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


Inactivity of the Army of Northern Virginia.—Expeditions of Custer, Kilpatrick, and 
Dahlgren for the Destruction of Railroads, the Burning of Richmond, and Kill- 
ing the Officers of the Government.—Repelled by Government Clerks.—Papers 
on Dahlgren’s Body.—Repulse of Butler’s Raid from Bermuda Hundred.—Ad- 
vance of Sheridan repulsed at Richmond.—Stuart resists Sheridan—Stuart’s 
Death.—Remarks on Grant’s Plan of Campaign—Movement of General Butler. 
—Drury’s Bluff.—Battle there—Campaign of Grant in Virginia. 


Born the Army of Northern Virginia and the army under 
General Meade remained in a state of comparative inaction dur- 
ing the months of January and February, 1864. 

On February 26, 1864, while General Lee’s headquarters 
were at Orange Court-House, two corps of the army of the 
enemy left their camp for Madison Court-House. The object 
was, by a formidable feint, to engage the attention of General 
Lee, and conceal from him their plans for a surprise and, if 
possible, capture of the city of Richmond. This was to be a con- 
eerted movement, in which General Butler, in command of the 
forces on the Peninsula, was to move up and make a demon- 
stration upon Richmond on the east, while Generals Custer and 
Kilpatrick and Colonel Dahlgren were to attack it and enter 
on the west and north. 

Two days later another army corps left for Madison Court- 
House, and other forces subsequently followed. At the same — 
time General Custer, with two ten-inch Parrott guns and fif- 
teen hundred picked men, marched for Charlottesville by the 
James City road. His purpose was to destroy the Orange and 
Alexandria Railroad, running by Charlottesville to Gordonsville, 
where the junction was made of the railroad running north from 
Lynchburg, with the Central running to Richmond. The eap- 
ture of the army stores there, the destruction of the tracks run- 
ning south, west, and east, and cutting the telegraph, would 
have severed the communication between Lee’s army and Rich- - 
mond by that route. This movement, with the destruction of 
railroads by General Kilpatrick, and of the Central Railroad and 


hy H.B Hall Jr, 


GENERAL WADE HAMPTON 


o 


New York, D. Appleton & Co, 


1864] FLED AT A GALLOP. 505 


the James River and Kanawha Canal by Colonel Dahlgren, 
- would have isolated that army from its base of supplies. 

Three hours later, on the same day on which General Custer 
started, General Kilpatrick with five thousand picked cavalry 
and a light battery of six guns, left Stevensburg, near Culpep- 
er Court-House, for the lower fords of the Rapidan. His ob- 
ject was to make a dash upon Richmond for the purpose of 
releasing the United States prisoners, and doing whatever injury 
might be possible. He moved rapidly, destroying railroads and 
depots, and plundering the country, but found no obstacle except 
in being closely harassed in his rear by Colonel Bradley T. 
Johnson with his sixty Marylanders, who, with extraordinary 
daring, activity, and skill, followed him until he reached the line 
of the defenses of Richmond. There, while attacked in the 
rear by Colonel Johnson and his pickets driven in, he was at 
the same time opposed in front by Colonel W. H. Stevens, who, 
with a detachment of engineer troops, manned a few sections of 
light artillery. After an engagement of thirty minutes, Kilpat- 
rick’s entire force began to retreat in the direction of the Meadow 
Bridge on the Central Railroad. At night his camp-fires were 
discovered by General Wade Hampton, who dismounted one 
hundred men to act as infantry, and, supported by the cavalry, 
opened his two-gun battery upon the enemy at short range. He 
then attacked the camp of Davies’s and of a part of two other 

brigades. The camp was taken, and the whole force of Kilpat- 
rick fled at a gallop, leaving one hundred and five prisoners 
and more than one hundred horses. 

Colonel Dahlgren started with General Kilpatrick, but at 
Spottsylvania Court-House was dispatched with five hundred 
men to Frederickhall, a depot of the Central Railroad, where 
some eighty pieces of our reserve artillery had been parked. — 
His orders were to destroy the artillery, the railroads, and tele- 
graph-lines. Finding the artillery too well guarded, he pro- 
ceeded to destroy the line of railroad as far as Hanover Junc- 
tion. Thence he moved toward the James River and Kanawha 
Canal, which he reached twenty-two miles west of Richmond. 
Thence his command moved toward the city, pillaging and 
destroying dwelling-houses, out-buildings, mills, canal-boats, 


506 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


grain, and cattle, and cutting one lock on the canal. The first 

resistance met was by a battalion of General G. W. C. Lee's 
force, consisting of about two hundred and twenty of the armory- 
men, under command of their major, Ford. This small body 
was ues back until it joined a battalion of the Treasury De- 
partment clerks, who, in the absence of their major, Henly, 
were led by Captain McIlhenney. The officers and men were all 
clerks of the Treasury Department, and, like those of other 
departments and many citizens of Richmond, who were either 
too old or too young to be in the army, were enrolled and organ- 
ized to defend the capital in the absence of troops. Captain 
MclIlhenney, as soon as he saw the enemy, promptly arranged to 
attack. This was done with such impetuosity that Dahlgren 
and his men were routed, leaving some eighteen killed, twenty 
to thirty wounded, and as many more prisoners. About a hun- 
dred horses, with equipments, a number of small-arms, and one 
three-inch Napoleon gun were captured. Our loss was one cap- 
tain and two lieutenants killed, three lieutenants and seven 
privates wounded—one of the latter mortally. This feat of 
the Clerks’ Battalion commanded the grateful admiration of 
the people, and the large concourse that attended the funeral 
of the fallen expressed the public lamentation. 

Dahlgren now commenced his retreat. To increase the 
chances of escape, the force was divided, he leading one party 
in the direction of King and Queen County. The home guard 
of the country turned out against the raiders, and, being joined 
by a detachment from the Forty-second Battalion of Virginia 
Cavalry and some furloughed cavalrymen of Lee’s army, sur- 
prised and attacked the retreating column of Dahlgren, killed 
the leader, and captured nearly one hundred prisoners, with ne- 
groes, horses, ete. 

On the body of Dahlgren was found an address to his offi- 
cers and men, another paper giving special orders and instruc- 
tions, and one giving his itinerary, the whole disclosing the un- 
soldierly means and purposes of the raid, such as disguising the 
men in our uniform, carrying supplies of oakum and turpen- 
tine to burn Richmond, and, after releasing their prisoners on 
Belle Isle, to exhort them to destroy the hateful city, while on 


1864] THAT RASCALLY VIRTUE. 507 


all was impressed the special injunction that the city must be 
burned, and “ Jeff Davis and Cabinet killed.” 

The prisoners, having been captured in disguise, were, under 
the usages of war, liable to be hanged as spies, but their protes- 
tations that their service was not voluntary, and the fact that as 
enlisted men they were subject to orders, and could not be held 
responsible for the infamous instructions under which they were 
acting, saved them from the death-penalty they had fully in- 
curred. Photographic copies of the papers found on Dahlgren’s 
body were taken and sent to General Lee, with instructions to 
communicate them to General Meade, commanding the enemy’s 
forces in his front, with an inquiry as to whether such practices 
were authorized by his Government, and also to say that, if any’ 
question was raised as to the copies, the original paper would 
be submitted. No such question was then made, and, the denial 
that Dahlgren’s conduct had been authorized was accepted. 

Many sensational stories, having not even a basis of truth, 
were put in circulation to exhibit the Confederate authorities as 
having acted with unwarrantable malignity toward the deceased 
Colonel Dahlgren. The fact was, that his body was sent to 
Richmond and decently interred in the Oakwood Cemetery, 
where other Federal soldiers were buried. .The enormity of 
his offenses was not forgotten, but resentment against him ended 
with his life. It was also admitted that, however bad his pre- 
ceding conduct had been, he met his fate gallantly, charging at 
the head of his men when he found himself inextricably en- 
compassed by his foe. 

Custer and Kilpatrick, who were to codperate with him in 
the expedition, especially the first-named, manifested a saving 
degree of “that rascally virtue,’ as Charles Lee, of Revolu- 
tionary memory, called it. After the feeble demonstration upon 
some parked artillery which has been described, he fancied that 
he heard the roaring of cars coming with reénforcements, and 
retreated, burning the bridges behind him—a precaution quite 
in vain, as there were none there to pursue him. 

Kilpatrick, followed as above stated by Colonel Bradley T. 
Johnson, who hung close upon his rear, finally reached the de- 
fenses of Richmond. There, out of respect to the field artillery 


508 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


he encountered, he turned off to cross the Chickahominy, and 
that night he was routed by the cavalry command of our gal- 
lant cavalier General Wade Hampton. Thus ended the com- 
bined movement with which Northern papers had regaled their 
readers by announcing as made “with instructions to sack the 
rebel capital.” 

During the first week in May, Major-General B. F. Butler 
landed at Bermuda Hundred with a considerable force, and 
moved up so as to cut the telegraph line and reach by a raiding 
party the railroad at Chester, between Richmond and Peters- 
burg. General Ransom, then in command of the defenses at 
Richmond and those of Drury’s Bluff, with a small force, at- 
tacked the advance of General Butler, and after a sharp skir- 
mish compelled him to withdraw. 

Meantime, because of the warning which Stuart had sent, 
General Ransom was summoned to Richmond to resist an im- 
pending assault by General Sheridan on the outer works north 
of the city. Taking the two disposable brigades of Gracie and 
Fry and a light battery, he hastened forward, arriving at the for- 
tifications on the Mechanicsville Turnpike just in time to see a 
battery of artillery, then entirely unsupported, repulse the ad- 
vance of Sheridan. During the night the clerks and citizens, 
under General G. W. Custis Lee, had formed a thin line along 
part of the fortifications on the west side of the city. As the 
day advanced, Gracie’s brigade was thrown in front of the works 
and pressed forward to feel Sheridan; but it was regarded as 
worse than useless with two small brigades to engage in an open 
country many times their number of well-appointed cavalry. 
Sheridan showed no purpose to attack, but withdrew from be- 
fore our defenses, and the two brigades returned to the vicinity 
of Drury’s Bluff—the approach on the south side of James River, 
by forces under General Butler, being then considered the most 
imminent danger to Richmond. 

After the battle of the Wilderness, on May 4th and 5th, as 
hereafter narrated, General Grant moved his army toward 
Spottsylvania Court-House, and General Lee made a correspond- 
ing movement. At this time Sheridan, with a large force of 
United States cavalry, passed around and to the rear of our 


1864] SHOT BY A FUGITIVE. . 509 


army, so as to place himself on the road to Richmond, which, in 
the absence of a garrison to defend it, he may have not unrea- 
sonably thought might be surprised and captured. 

- Stuart, our most distinguished cavalry commander—fearless, 
faithful Stuart—soon knew of Sheridan’s movement, perceived 
its purpose, and, with his usual devotion to his country’s wel- 
fare, hastily collected such of his troops as were near, and 
pursued Sheridan. He fell upon Sheridan’s rear and flank at 
Beaver Dam Station, where a pause had been made to destroy 
the railroad, some cars, and commissary’s stores, and drove it 
before him. The route of the enemy being unmistakably to- 
ward Richmond, Stuart, to protect the. capital, or at least to 
delay attack, so as to give time to make preparation for de- 
fense, made a détowr around Sheridan, and: by a forced march 
got in front of him, taking position at a place called Yellow 
Tavern, about seven or eight miles from Richmond. Here, 
with the daring and singleness of purpose which characterized 
his whole career, he decided, notwithstanding the great ine- 
quality between his force and that of his foe, to make a stand, 
and offer persistent resistance to his advance. The respective 
strength of the two commands, as given by Colonel Heros von 
Borke, chief of General Stuart’s staff, was, Stuart, eleven hun- 
dred; Sheridan, eight thousand. While engaged in this des- 
perate service, General Stuart sent couriers to Richmond to 
give notice of the approach of the enemy, so that the defenses 
might be manned. 

Notwithstanding the great disparity of force, the contest was 
obstinate and protracted, and fickle Fortune cheered our men 
with several! brilliant successes. Stuart, who in many traits re- 
sembled the renowned Murat, like him was always a leader 
when his cavalry charged. On this occasion he is represented 
when he was wounded to have been quite in advance, to have 
fired the last load in his pistol, and to have been shot by a fugi- 
tive whom he found cowering under a fence, and ordered to sur- 
render. The “heavy battalions” at last prevailed, our line was 
broken, and our chieftain, though mortally wounded, still kept 
in his saddle, invoking his men to continue the fight.* Our 


* Address of Major H. B. McClellan before Army of Northern Virginia Association, 


510 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, | 


gallant chieftain was brought wounded into Richmond, a noble 
sacrifice on the altar of duty. 

Long accustomed to connect him only with daring exploits 
and brilliant successes, there was much.surprise and deeper sor- 
row when the news spread through the city. Admired as a 
soldier, loved as a man, honored as a Christian patriot, to whom 
duty to his God and his country was a supreme law, the intense 
anxiety for his safety made us all shrink from realizing his im- 
minent danger. When I saw him in his very last hours, he 
was so calm, and physically so strong, that I could not believe 
that he was dying, until the surgeon, after I had left his bed- 
side, told me he was bleeding inwardly, and that the end was 
near. 

Grant’s plan of campaign, as now revealed to us, was to con- 
tinue his movement against Lee’s army, and, if, as experience 
had taught him, he should be unable to defeat it and move 
directly to his objective point, Richmond, he was to continue 
his efforts so as to reach the James River below Richmond, and 
thus to connect with the army under General Butler, moving 
up on the south side of the James. The topography of the 
country favored that design. The streams in the country in 
which he was operating all trended toward the southeast, and 
his change of position was frequently made under cover of 
them. Butler, in the mean time, was ordered with the force of 
his department, about twenty thousand, reénforced by Gilmer’s 
division of ten thousand, to move up to City Point, there in- 
trench, and concentrate all his troops as rapidly as possible. 
From this base he was expected to operate so as to destroy the 
railroad connections between Richmond and the South. On 
the 7th of May he telegraphed that he had “destroyed many 
miles of railroad, and got a position which, with proper sup- 
plies, we can hold out against the whole of Lee’s army.” 

At this time Major- Caneel Robert Ransom, as before men- 
tioned, was in command at Richmond, including Drury’s Bluff. 
His aa consisted, for the defense of both places, of the men 
serving the stationary or heavy artillery, and three brigades of 
infantry—Hunton’ s at Chapin’s Bluff, and Barton’s and Gracie’s 
for field service. To these, in cases of emergency, the clerks 


1864] DROVE HIM FROM THE RAILROAD, 511 


and artisans in the departments and manufactories, were organ- 
ized, to be called out as an auxiliary force when needed for the 
defense of the capital. It was with this field force that Ran- 
som, as has been related, moved upon Butler, and drove him 
from the railroad, the destruction of which he had so vaunt- 
ingly announced. 

A few days thereafter he again emerged from his cover, but 
this time changed his objective point, and, diverging from the 
south bank of the James River, moved toward Petersburg, and 
reached the railroad at Port Walthal Junction, where he encoun- 
tered some of General Beauregard’s command, which had been 
ordered from Charleston, and was driven from the railroad and 
turnpike. The troops ordered from Charleston with General 
Beauregard had, by May 14th, reached the vicinity of Drury’s 
Bluff. In connection with the works and rifle-pits on the bluff, 
which were to command the river and prevent the ascent of 
gunboats, an intrenched line had been constructed on a ridge 
about a mile south of the bluff, running across the road from 
Richmond to Petersburg. This ridge was higher than the 
ground on which the fort was built, and was designed to check 
an approach of the enemy from the south, as well as to cover 
the rear of the fort. In the afternoon of the 14th I rode 
down to visit General Beauregard at his headquarters in the 
field. Supposing his troops to be on the line of intrenchment, 
I passed Major Drury’s house to go thither, when some one by 
the roadside called to me and told me that the troops were.not 
on the line of intrenchment, and that General Beauregard was 
at the house behind me. 

My first question on meeting him was to learn why the in- 
trenchments were abandoned. He answered that he thought it 
better to concentrate his troops. Upon my stating to him that 
there was nothing then to prevent Butler from turning his po- 
sition, he said he would desire nothing more, as he would then 
fall upon him, cut him off from his base, ete. 

According to my uniform practice never to do more than to 
make a suggestion to a general commanding in the field, the sub- 
ject was pressed no further. We then passed to the considera- 
tion of the operations to be undertaken against Butler, who had 


512 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


already advanced from his base at Bermuda Hundred. [I offered, 
for the purpose of attacking Butler, to send Major-General Ran- 
som with the field force he had for the protection of Richmond. 
In addition to his high military capacity, his minute knowledge 
of the country in which they were to operate made him specially 
valuable. He reported to General Beauregard at noon on the 
15th, received: his orders for the battle which was to occur the 
next day, and about 10 p. m. was, with a division of four bri- 
gades and a battery of light artillery, in position in front of the 
breastworks. Colonel Dunovant, with a regiment of cavalry 
not under Ransom’s orders, was to guard the space between his 
left and the river, so as to give him information of any move- 
ment in that quarter. General Whiting, with some force, was 
holding a defensive position at Petersburg. General Beaure- 
gard proposed that the main part of it should advance and unite 
with him in an attack upon Butler wherever he should be found 
between Drury’s and Petersburg. To this I offered distinct ob- 
jection, because of the hazard during a battle of attempting to 
make a junction of troops moving from opposite sides of the 
enemy ; and proposed that Whiting’s command should move at 
night by the Chesterfield road, where they would not probably 
be observed by Butler’s advance. This march I supposed they 
could make so as to arrive at Drury’s by or soon after daylight. 
The next day being Sunday, they could rest, and, all the troops 
being assigned to their positions, could move to make a concerted 
attack at daylight on Monday. - He spoke of some difficulty in 
getting a courier who knew the route and could certainly de- 
liver the order to General Whiting. Opportunely, a courier ar- 
rived from General Whiting, who had come up the Chesterfield 
road. He then said the order would have to be drawn with a 
great deal of care, and that he would prepare it as soon as he 
could. I arose to take leave, and he courteously walked down 
the stairs with me, remarking as we went that he was embar- 
rassed for the want of a good cavalry commander. I saw in the 
yard Colonel Chilton, assistant adjutant and inspector-general, 
and said, “There is an old cavalry officer who was trained in 
my old regiment, the First Dragoons, and who I think will an- 
swer your requirements.” Upon his expressing the pleasure 


1864] WE DROVE HIM BACK. 513 


it would give him to have Colonel Chilton, I told him of Gen- 
eral Beauregard’s want, and asked him if the service would be 
agreeable to him. He readily accepted it, and I left, suppos- 
ing all the preliminaries settled. In the next forenoon Colonel 
Samuel Melton, of the adjutant and inspector-general’s depart- 
ment, called at my residence and delivered a message from 
General Beauregard to the effect that he had decided to order 
Whiting to move by the direct road from Petersburg, instead 
of by the Chesterfield route, and, when I replied that I had stated 
my objections to General Beauregard to a movement which gave 
the enemy the advantage of being between our forces, he said 
General Beauregard had directed him to explain to me that 
upon a further examination he found his force sufficient; that 
his operations, therefore, did not depend upon making a junc- 
tion with Whiting. 

On Monday morning I rode down to Drury’s, where I found 
that the enemy had seized our line of intrenchments, it being 
unoccupied, and that a severe action had occurred, with serious 
loss to us before he could be dislodged. He had crossed the 
main road to the west, entering a dense wood, and our troops 
on the right had moved out and were closely engaged with him. 
We drove him back, frustrating the attempt to turn the ex- 
treme right of our line. The day was wearing away, a part of 
the force had been withdrawn to the intrenchment, and there 
was uno sign of purpose to make any immediate movement. 
General Beauregard said he was waiting to hear Whiting’s 
guns, and had been expecting him for some time to approach 
on the Petersburg road. Soon after this, the foe in a strag- 
gling, disorganized manner, commenced crossing the road, mov- 
ing to the east, which indicated a retreat, or perhaps a pur- 
pose to turn our left and attack Fort. Drury in rear. He 
placed a battery in the main road and threw some shells at our 
intrenchment, probably to cover his retiring troops. General 
Ransom, in an unpublished report, says that, at the time he 
received the order of battle, General Beauregard told him, “ As 
you know the region, I have given you the moving part of the 
army, and you will take the initiative.” He further states that 
at dawn of day he moved to the south of Kingsland Creek, 

80 


514 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


formed two lines with a short interval, and at once advanced 
to the attack. A dense fog suddenly enveloped him, so as to 
obscure all distant objects. Moving forward, the skirmishers 
were quickly engaged, and the fighting was pressed so vigor- 
ously that by sunrise he had captured a brigade of infantry, a 
battery of artillery, and occupied about three quarters of a mile 
of the enemy’s temporary breastworks, which were strengthened 
by wire interwoven among the trees in their front; this was 
not effected, however, without considerable loss in killed and 
wounded, and much confusion, owing to the denseness of the 
fog. General Ransom’s report continues: 


“Having no ammunition-wagons and requiring replenishment 
of infantry cartridges, and knowing that delay would mar the ef- 
fect of the success gained, I sent instantly to Beauregard, report- 
ing what had happened, and asked that Ransom’s brigade might 
come to me at once, so that I might continue the pressure and 
make good the advantage already gained.” 


He then describes the further delay in getting ammunition, 
and his renewal of the request for Ransom’s brigade, which he 
had organized and formerly commanded, but, instead of which, 
two small regiments were sent to him, the timely arrival of 
which, it is to be gratefully remembered, enabled him to repulse 
an advance of the enemy. It would be neither pleasant nor 
profitable to dwell on the lost opportunity for a complete vic- 
tory, or to recount the possible consequences which might have 
flowed from it. On the next morning, our troops moved down 
the river road as far as Howlett’s, about three or four miles, 
but saw no enemy. The “back door” of Richmond was closed, 
and Butler “bottled up.” 

Soon after the affair at Drury’s Bluff, General Beauregard 
addressed to me a communication, proposing that he should be 
heavily reénforced from General Lee’s army, so as to enable 
him to crush Butler in his intrenchments, and then, with the 
main body of his own force, together with a detachment from 
General Lee’s army, that he should join General Lee, over- 
whelm Grant, and march to Washington. I knew that General 
‘Lee was then confronting an army vastly superior to his in num- 

ees 


wo 4 
% 
un 


1864] ASSUMED PERSONAL COMMAND. : 515 


bers, fully equipped, with inexhaustible supplies, and a persist- 
ence in attacking of which sufficient evidence had been given. 
I could not therefore expect that General Lee would consent to 
the proposition of General Beauregard; but, as a matter of 
courteous consideration, his letter was forwarded with the usual 
formal endorsement. General Lee’s opinion on the case was 
shown by the instructions he gave directing. General Beaure- 
gard to straighten his line so as to reduce the requisite number 
of men to hold it, and send the balance to join the army north 
of the James. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


General Grant assumes Command in Virginia.—Positions of the Armies.—Plans of 
Campaign open to Grant’s Choice.—The Rapidan crossed.—Battle of the Wil- 
derness.—Danger of Lee.—The Enemy driven back.—Flank Attack.—Longstreet 
wounded.—Result of the Contest.—Rapid Flank Movement of Grant.—Another 
Contest.—Grant’s Reénforcements.—Hanover Junction.—The Enemy moves 
in Direction of Bowling Green.—Crosses Pamunkey.—Battle at Cold Harbor. 
—Frightful Slaughter.—The Enemy’s Soldiers decline to renew the Assault when 
ordered.—Loss.—Asks Truce to bury the Dead.—Strength of Respective Ar- 
mies.—General Pemberton.—The Enemy crosses the James.—Siege of Peters- 
burg begun. 


Ir was in March, 1864, that Major-General Ulysses S. Grant, 
having been appointed lieutenant-general, assumed command 
of the armies of the United States. He subsequently proceeded 
to Culpeper and assumed personal command of the Army of 
the Potomac, although nominally that army remained under 
the command of General Meade. Reénforcements were gath- 
ered from every military department of the United States and 
sent to that army. 

On May 3d General Lee held the south bank of the Rapidan 
River, with his right resting near the mouth of Mine Run and 
his left extending to Liberty Mills, on the road from Gordons- 
ville to the Shenandoah Valley. Ewell’s corps was on the right, 
Hill’s on the left, and two divisions of Longstreet’s corps, having 
returned from East Tennessee, were encamped in the rear near 
Gordonsville. The army of General Grant had occupied the 


ri 
git eee 8 


oe 


cighigh,: 2 


516 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


north bank of the Rapidan, with the main body encamped in 
Culpeper County and on the Rappahannock River. 

While Grant with his immense and increasing army was 
thus posted, Lee, with a comparatively small force, and to 
which few reénforcements could be furnished, confronted him 
on a line stretching from near Somerville Ford to Gordons- 
ville. To Grant was left the choice to move directly on Lee 
and attempt to defeat his army, the only obstacle to the cap- 
ture of Richmond, and which his vast means rendered sup- 
posable, or to cross the Rapidan above or below Lee’s posi- 
tion. The second would fulfill the condition, so imperatively 
imposed on McClellan, of covering the United States capital ; 
the third would be in the more direct line toward Richmond. 
Of the three he chose the last, and so felicitated himself on his 
unopposed passage of the river as to suppose that he had, un- 
observed, turned the flank of Lee’s army, got between it and 
Richmond, and necessitated the retreat of the Confederates to 
some point where they might resist his further advance. So 
little could he comprehend the genius of Lee, that he expected 
him to be surprised, as appears from his arrangements contem- 
plating only combats with the rear-guard covering the retreat. 
Lee, dauntless as he was sagacious, seized the opportunity, which 
the movement of his foe offered, to meet him where his artil- 
lery would be least available, where his massive columns would 
be most embarrassed in their movements, and where South- 
ern individuality and self-reliance would be specially effective. 
Grant’s object was to pass through “the Wilderness” to the 
roads between Lee and Richmond. Lee resolved to fight him 
in those pathless woods, where mind might best compete with 
matter. 

Providence held its shield over the just cause, and heroic 
bands hurled back the heavy battalions shattered and discom- 
fited, as will be now briefly described. 

In order to cross the Rapidan, Grant’s army moved on May 
3d toward Germania Ford, which was ten or twelve miles from 
our right. He succeeded in seizing the ford and crossing. 
The direct road from this ford to Richmond passed by Spott- 
sylvania Court-House, and, when Grant had crossed the river, 


1864] REPULSED WITH SEVERE LOSS. 517 


he was nearer than General Lee to Richmond. From Orange 
Court-House there are two nearly parallel roads running east- 
wardly to Fredericksburg. The one nearest the river is called 
the “Stone Turnpike,” and the other the “Plank-road.” The 
road from the ford to Spottsylvania Court-House crosses the 
Old Stone Turnpike at the ‘“ Old Wilderness Tavern,” and, 
two or three miles farther on, it crosses the plank-road. 

As soon as Grant’s movement was known, Lee’s troops were 
put in motion. LEwell’s corps moved on the Stone Turnpike, 
and Hill’s corps on the plank-road, into which Longstreet’s 
force also came from his camp near Gordonsville. Ewell’s 
corps crossed Mine Run, and encamped at Locust Grove, four 
miles beyond, on the afternoon of the 4th. On the morning of 
the 5th it was again in motion, and encountered Grant’s troops 
in heavy force at a short distance from the Old Wilderness Tav- 
ern, and Jones’s and Battle’s brigades were driven back in some 
confusion. LEarly’s division was ordered up, formed across the 
pike, and moved forward. It advanced through a dense pine- 
thicket, and, with other brigades of Rodes’s division, drove 
the enemy back with heavy loss, capturing several hundred 
prisoners and gaining a commanding position on the right. 
Meantime, Johnson’s division, on the left of the pike, and ex- 
tending across the road to Germania Ford, was heavily engaged 
in front, and Hays’s brigade was sent to his left to participate 
in a forward movement. It advanced, encountered a large 
force, and, not meeting with the expected codperation, was 
drawn back. Subsequently, Pegram’s brigade took position on 
Hays’s left, and just before night an attack was made on their 
front, which was repulsed with severe loss to the enemy. Dur- 
ing the afternoon there was hot skirmishing along the whole 
line, and several attempts were made by the foe to regain the 
position from which he had been driven. At the close of the 
day, Ewell’s corps had captured over a thousand prisoners, be- 
sides inflicting on the enemy very severe losses in killed and 
wounded. Two pieces of artillery had been abandoned and 
were secured by our troops. 

A. P. Hill,-on the 4th, with Heth’s and Wilcox’s divisions 
of his corps, moved eastwardly along the plank-road. They 


518 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


bivouacked at night near Verdiersville, and resumed their march 
on the 5th with Heth in advance. About 1 p.m. musketry | 
firing was heard in front; the sound indicated the presence 
of a large body of infantry. Kirkland’s brigade deployed 
on both sides of the plank-road, and the column proceeded 
to form in line of battle on its flanks. Hill’s advance had 
followed the plank-road, while Ewell’s pursued the Stone 
turnpike. These parallel movements were at this time from 
three to four miles apart. The country intervening and round 
about for several miles is known as the “ Wilderness,” and, 
having very little open ground, consists almost wholly of a 
forest of dense undergrowth of shrubs and small trees. In 
order to open communication with Ewell, Wilcox’s division 
moved to the left, and effected a junction with Gordon’s bri- 
gade on Ewell’s extreme right. The line of battle thus com- 
pleted extended from the right of the plank-road through a sue- 
cession of open fields and dense forest to the left of the Stone 
turnpike. It presented a line of six miles, and the thicket 
that lay along the whole front of our army was so impenetrable 
as to exclude the use of artillery save only at the roads. Heth’s 
skirmishers were driven in about 3 p.m. by a massive column 
that advanced, firing rapidly. The struggle thus commenced in 
Hill’s front continued for two or three hours unabated. Heth’s 
ranks were greatly reduced, when Wilcox was ordered to his 
support, but the bloody contest continued until night closed 
over our force in the position it had originally taken. This 
stubborn and heroic resistance was made by the divisions of 
Heth and Wilcox, of Hill’s corps, fifteen thousand strong, 
against the repeated and desperate assaults of five divisions— 
four divisions of Hancock’s and one of Sedgwick’s corps, num- 
bering about forty-five thousand men. Our forces completely 
foiled their adversaries, and inflicted upon them most seri- 
ous loss.* During the day the Ninth Corps of the enemy 
under General Burnside, had come on the field. The third 
division of Hill’s corps, under General Anderson, and the two 
divisions of Longstreet’s corps, did not reach the scene of con- 
flict until dawn of day on the morning of the 6th. Simutlta- 


* “ Four Years with General Lee.” 


1864] SOON HAVE MATTERS RECTIFIED. 519 


neously the attack on Hill was renewed with great vigor. In 
addition to the force he had so successfully resisted on the pre- 
vious day, a fresh division of the enemy’s Fifth Corps had 
secured position on Hill’s flank, and codperated with the column 
assaulting in front. After a severe contest, the left of Heth’s 
division and the right of Wilcox’s were overpowered before 
the advance of Longstreet’s column reached the ground, and 
were compelled to retire. The repulsed portions of the divi- 
sions were in considerable disorder. General Lee now came 
up, and, fully appreciating the impending crisis, dashed amid 
the fugitives, calling on the men to rally and follow him. 


“The soldiers, seeing General Lee’s manifest purpose to ad- 
vance with them, and realizing the great danger in which he then 
was, begged him to go to the rear, promising that they would soon 
have matters rectified. The General waved them on with some 
words of cheer.” * 


The assault was checked. 

Longstreet, having come up with two divisions, deployed 
them in line of battle, and gallantly advanced to recover the 
lost ground. The enemy was driven back over the ground he 
had gained by his assault on Hill’s line, but reformed in the 
position previously held by him. About mid-day an attack on 
his left flank and rear was ordered by Longstreet. For this 
purpose three brigades were detached, and, moving forward, 
were joined by General J. R. Davis’s brigade, which had been 
the extreme right of Hill’s line. Making a sufficient détour to 
avoid observation, and, rushing precipitately to attack the foe 
in flank and reverse while he was preparing to resist the move- 
ment in his front, he was taken completely by surprise. The 
assault resulted in his utter rout, with heavy loss on that part 
of his line. 

Preparations were now made to follow up the advantages 
gained by a forward movement of the whole line under General 
Longstreet’s personal direction. When advancing at the head 
of Jenkins’s brigade, with that officer and others, a body of 
Confederates in the wood on the roadside, supposing the col- 


* “Four Years with General Lee.” 


590 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


umn to be a hostile force, fired into it, killing General Jenkins, 
distinguished alike for civil and military virtues, and severely 
wounding General Longstreet. The valuable services of Gen- 
eral Longstreet were thus lost to the army at a critical moment, 
and this caused the suspension of a movement which promised 
the most important results; and time was thus afforded to the 
enemy to rally, reénforce, and find shelter behind his intrench- 
ments. Under these circumstances the commanding General 
deemed it unadvisable to attack. 

On the morning of the 6th the contest was renewed on the 
left, and a very heavy attack was made on the front, occupied 
by Pegram’s brigade, but it was handsomely repulsed, as were 
several subsequent attacks at the same point. Inthe afternoon 
an attack was made on the enemy’s right flank, resting in the 
woods, when Gordon’s brigade, with Johnson’s in the rear and 
followed by Pegram’s, succeeded in throwing it into great con- 
fusion, doubline it up and forcing it back some distance, cap- 
turing two brigadier-generals and several hundred prisoners. 
Darkness closed the contest. On the 7th an advance was made 
which disclosed the fact that Grant had given up his line of 
works on his right. During the day there was some skirmish- 
ing, but no serious fighting. The result of these battles was 
the infliction of severe loss upon the foe, the gain of ground, 
and the capture of prisoners, artillery, and other trophies. The 
cost to us, however, was so serious as to enforce, by additional 
considerations, the policy of Lee to spare his men as much as 
was possible. 

A rapid flank movement was next made by Grant to secure 
possession of Spottsylvania Court-House. General Lee compre- 
hended his purpose, and on the night of the 7th a division of 
Longstreet’s corps was sent as the advance to that point. Stuart, 
then in observation on the flank, and ever ready to work or to 
fight as the one or the other should best serve the cause of his 
country, dismounted his troopers, and, by felling trees, ob- 
structed the roads so as materially to delay the march of the 
enemy. The head of the opposing forces arrived almost at the 
same moment on the 8th; theirs, being a little in advance, 
drove back our cavalry, but in turn was quickly driven from 


1864] DO ITS DUTY MORE NOBLY. 521 


the strategic point by the arrival of our infantry. On the 9th 
the two armies, each forming on its advance as a nucleus, swung . 
round and confronted each other in line of battle. 

The 10th and 11th passed in comparative quiet. On the 
morning of the 12th the enemy made a very heavy attack on 
Ewell’s front, and broke the line where it was occupied by 
Johnson’s division. At this time and place the scene occurred 
of which Mississippians are justly proud. Colonel Venable, of 
General Lee’s staff, states that, on the receipt of one of the mes- 
sages from General Rodes for more troops, he was sent by Gen- 
eral Lee to bring Harris’s Mississippi brigade from the extreme 
right ; that General Lee met the brigade and rode at its head 
until under fire, when a round shot passed so near to him that 
the soldiers invoked him to go back; and when he said, “If 
you will promise me to drive those people from our works, I 
will go back,” the brigade shouted the promise, and Colonel 
Venable says: 


“ As the column of Mississippians came up at a double quick 
an aide-de-camp came up to General Rodes with a message from, 
Ramseur that he could hold out only a few minutes longer unless 
assistance was at hand. Your brigade was thrown instantly into 
the fight, the column being formed into line under a tremendous 
fire and on very difficult ground. Never did a brigade go into 
fiercer battle under greater trials ; never did a brigade do its duty 
more nobly.” * 


A portion of the attacking force swept along Johnson’s 
line to Wilcox’s left, and was checked by a prompt movement 
on that flank. Several brigades sent to Ewell’s assistance were 
carried into action under his orders, and they all suffered se- 
_yerely. Subsequently, on the same day, some brigades were 
thrown to the front, for the purpose of moving to the left and 
attacking the flank of the column which broke Ewell’s line, to 
relieve the pressure on him, and recover the part of the line 
which had been lost. These, as they moved, soon encountered 
the Ninth Corps, under Burnside, advancing to the attack. 


* Letter from Colonel C. S Venable, ‘‘ Southern Historical Society Papers,” vol. 
viii, p. 106, March, 1880. 


599 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


They captured over three hundred prisoners and three battle- 
flags, and their attack on the enemy’s flank, taking him by 
surprise, contributed materially to his repulse. 

Taylor, in his “Four Years with General Lee,” says that 
Lee, having detected the weakness of “the salient” occupied by 
the division of General Edward Johnson, of Ewell’s corps, di- 
rected a second line to be constructed across its base, to which 
he proposed to move the troops occupying the angle. Suspect- 
_ ing another flank movement by Grant, before these arrange- 
ments were quite completed, he ordered most of the artillery at 
this portion of the lines to be withdrawn so as to be available. 
‘Toward dawn on the 12th, Johnson, discovering indications of 
an impending assault, ordered the immediate return of the ar- 
tillery, and made other preparations for defense. But the un- 
fortunate withdrawal was so partially and tardily restored, that 
a spirited assault at daybreak overran that portion of the lines 
before the artillery was put in position, and captured most of 
the division, including its brave commander. 

The above-mentioned attacking column advanced, under 
cover of a pine-thicket, to within a very short distance of a 
salient defended by Walker’s brigade. A heavy fire of mus- 
ketry and artillery, from a considerable number of guns on 
Heth’s line, opened with tremendous effect upon the column, 
and it was driven back with severe loss, leaving its dead in 
front of our works.* 

Several days of comparative quict ensued. During this time 
the army of General Grant was heavily reénforced from Wash- 
ington. 

“Tn numerical strength his army so much exceeded that under 
General Lee that, after covering the entire Confederate front 
with double lines of battle, he had in reserve a large force with 
which to extend his flank and compel a corresponding movement 
on the part of his adversary, in order to keep between him and 
his coveted prize—the capital of the Confederacy.” + 


On the 18th another assault was made upon our lines, but 
it produced no impression. On the 20th of May, after twelve 


* “Memoir of the Last Year,” ete., by General Harly. 
{ “Four Years with General Lee,” 


1864] HIS MOVEMENT WAS A BLUNDER. 528 


days of skirmish and battle at Spottsylvania against a superior 
force, General Lee’s information led him to believe that the 
enemy was about to attempt another flanking movement, and 
interpose his army between the Confederate capital and its de- 
fenders. To defeat this purpose Longstreet was ordered to 
move at midnight in the direction of Hanover Junction, and on 
the following day and night Ewell’s and Hill’s corps marched 
for the same point. 

The Confederate commander, divining that Grant’s objective 


point was the intersection of the two railroads leading to Rich-. 
mond at a point two miles south of the North Anna River, 
crossed his army over that stream and took up a line of battle 


which frustrated the movement. 

Grant began his flanking movement on the night of the 
20th, marching in two columns, the right, under General War- 
ren, crossing the North Anna at Jericho Ford without opposi- 
tion. On the 23d the left, under General Hancock, crossing 
four miles lower down, at the Chesterfield or County Bridge, 
was obstinately resisted by a small force, and the passage of the 


river was not made until the 24th. After crossing the North © 


Anna, Grant discovered that his movement was a blunder, and 
that his army was in a position of much peril. 

The Confederate commander established his line of battle 
on the south side of the river, both wings refused so as to form 


an obtuse angle, with the apex resting on the river between. 


the two points of the enemy’s crossing, Longstreet’s and Hill’s 
corps forming the two sides, and Little River and the Hanover 
marshes the base. Evwell’s corps held the apex or center. 

The hazard of Grant’s position appears not to have been 
known to him until he attempted to unite his two columns, 
which were four miles apart, by establishing a connecting line 
along the river. Foiled in the attempt, he discovered that the 
Confederate army was interposed between his two wings, which 
were also separated by the North Anna, and that the one could 
give no support to the other except by a double crossing of the 
river. That the Confederate commander did not seize the op- 
portunity to strike his embarrassed foe and avail himself of the 
advantage which his superior generalship had gained, may have 


594 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


been that, concluding from past observation of Grants tactics, 
he felt assured that the “continuous hammering” process was 
to be repeated without reference to circumstances or position. 
If Lee acted on this supposition, he was mistaken, as the Federal 
commander, profiting by the severe lessons of Spottsylvania 
and the Wilderness, with cautious, noiseless movement, with- 
drew under cover of the night of the 26th to the north side of 
the North Anna, and moved eastward down to the Pamunkey 
River. 

At Hanover Junction General Lee was joined by Pickett’s 
division of Longstreet’s corps, which had been on detached 
service in North Carolina, and by a small force under Gen- 
eral Breckinridge from southwestern Virginia, twenty-two hun- 
dred strong. Hoke’s brigade, of Early’s division, twelve hun- 
dred strong, which had been on detached duty at the Junction, 
here also. rejoined its division. On the 29th the whole of 
Grant’s army was across the Pamunkey, while General Lee’s 
army on the next day was in line of battle with his left at 
Atlee’s Station. By another movement eastward the two ar- 
mies were brought face to face at Cold Harbor on June 3d. 
Here fruitless efforts were made by General Grant to pierce 
or drive back the forces of General Lee. Our troops were 
protected by temporary earthworks, and while under cover of 
these were assailed by the enemy: 


“But in vain. The assault was repulsed along the whole line, 
and the carnage on the Federal side was fearful. I * well recall 
having received a report, after the assault, from General Hoke— 
whose division reached the army just previous to this battle—to 
the effect that the ground in his entire front, over which the 
enemy had charged, was. literally covered with their dead and 
wounded ; and that up to that time he had not had a single man 
killed. No wonder that, when the command was given to renew 
the assault, the Federal soldiers sullenly and silently declined. 
‘The order + was issued through the officers to their subordinate 
commanders, and from them descended through the wonted chan- 
nels ; but no man stirred, and the immobile lines pronounced a 


* Taylor, “Four years with General Lee.” 
+ Swinton, “ Army of the Potomac,” p. 487, 


1864] PRESENTED AN IMPREGNABLE FRONT. 595 


verdict, silent yet emphatic, against further slaughter. The loss 
on the Union side in this sanguinary action was over thirteen 
thousand, while on the part of the Confederates it is doubtful 
whether it reached that many hundreds.’ After some disingenu- 
ous proposals, General Grant finally asked a truce to enable him 
to bury his dead. Soon after this he abandoned his chosen line of 
operations, and moved his army so as to secure a crossing to the 
south side of James River. The struggle from the Wilderness to 
this point covered a period of over one month, during which time 
there had been an almost daily encounter of arms, and the Army 
of Northern Virginia had placed hors de combat, of the army 
under General Grant, a number exceeding the entire numerical 
strength, at the commencement of the campaign, of Lee’s army, 
which, notwithstanding its own heavy losses and the reénforce- 
ments received by the enemy, still presented an impregnable front 

to its opponent.” . 


By the report of the United States Secretary of War (Stan- 
ton), Grant had, on the 1st of May, 1864, two days before he 
crossed the Rapidan, 120,880 men, and in the Ninth Army 
Corps 20,780, or an aggregate with which he marched against 
Lee of 141,160. To meet this vast force, Lee had on the Rapi- 
dan less than 50,000 men. By the same authority it appears 
that Grant had a reserve upon which he could draw of 137,672. 
Lee had practically no reserve, for he was compelled to make 
detachments from his army for the protection of West Virginia 
and other points, about equal to all the reénforeements which 


he received. Inthe “Southern Historical Papers,” vol. vi, page = 


144, upon the very reliable authority of the editor, there appears 
the following statement : 


“ Grant says he lost, in the campaign from the Wilderness to 
Cold Harbor, 39,000 men ; but Swinton puts his loss at over 60,000, 
and a careful examination of the figures will’ show that his real” 
loss was nearer 100,000.: In other words, he lost about twice as 
many men as Lee had, in order to take a position which he could 
have taken at first without firing a gun or losing a man.” 


On June 12th the movement was commenced by Grant 
for crossing the James River. Pontoon-bridges were laid near 


596 RISE AND FALL OF THE CON FEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Wilcox’s Wharf for the passage of his army. J.C. Pemberton, 
who, after the fall of Vicksburg, was left without a command 
corresponding to his rank of lieutenant-general in the provi- 
sional army, in order that he might not stand idle, nobly re- 
signed that commission, and asked to be assigned to duty ac- 
cording to his rank in the regular army, which was that of 
lieutenant-colonel. He was accordingly directed to report to 
General Lee for service with the Army of Northern Virginia. 
Being a skillful artillerist, he was directed to find a position 
where he could place a mortar so as to throw shells on the 
enemy’s bridge when it should be put into use. By a daring 
reconnaissance and exact calculation, he determined a point from 
which the desired effect might be produced by vertical fire, 
over a wood. At the proper moment he opened upon the 
bridge, and his expectations were verified by the shells falling 
on the troops harassingly. This, his first service with the 
Army of Northern Virginia, was interrupted by the failure 
to send promptly a covering force to protect the mortar, the 
position of which was disclosed by its fire. The injury it 
inflicted caused the Federal commander to send a detach- 
ment which. drove away the gunners and captured the 
mortar. 

On the 14th and 15th of June the crossing of Grant’s army 
was completed. It will be remembered that he had crossed 
the Rapidan on the 38d of May. It had therefore taken him 
more than a month to reach the south side of the James. In 
his campaign he had sacrificed a hecatomb of men, a vast amount 
of artillery, small-arms, munitions of war, and supplies, to reach 
a position to which McClellan had already demonstrated there 
was an easy and inexpensive route. It is true that the Confed- 
erate army had suffered severely, and, though the loss was com- 
paratively small to that of its opponents, it could not be repaired, 
as his might be, from the larger population and his facility for 
recruiting in Europe. To those who can approve the policy of 
attrition without reference to the number of lives it might cost, 
this may seem justifiable, but it can hardly be regarded as gen- 
eralship, or be offered to military students as an example worthy 
of imitation. After an unsuccessful attempt, by a surprise, to 


1864] VOLUNTARILY JOINED HIM. 5O7 


capture Petersburg, General Grant concentrated his army south 
of the Appomattox River and commenced the operations to be 
related hereafter. 


CHAR LER X LY. LL. 


Situation in the Shenandoah Valley.—March of General Early.—The Object.—At 
Lynchburg.—Staunton,—His Force.—Enters Maryland.—Attack at Monocacy.— 
Approach to Washington.—The Works.—Recrosses the Potomac.—Batile at 
Kernstown.—Captures.—Outrages of the Enemy.—Statement of General Early. 
—Retaliation on Chambersburg, Pennsylvania.—Battle near Winchester.— 
Sheridan’s Force routed.—Attack subsequently renewed with New Forces.— 
Incapacity of our Opponent.—Harly falls back.—The Enemy retires.—Early ad- 
vances.—Report of a Committee of Citizens on Losses by Sheridan’s Orders.— 
Battle at Cedar Creek.—Losses, Subsequent Movements, and Captures.—The 
Red River Campaign.—Repulse and Retreat of General Banks,—Capture of Fort 
Pillow. 


Berore the opening of the campaign of 1864, the lower 
Shenandoah Valley was held by a force under General Sigel, - 
with which General Grant decided to renew the attempt which 
had been made by Crook and Averill to destroy the Virginia 
and Tennessee Railroad west of Lynchburg as a means to his’ 
general purpose of isolating Richmond ; and a prompt move- 
ment of General Morgan had defeated those attempts and driven 
off the invaders. Sigel, with about fifteen thousand men, com- 
menced his movement up the Valley of the Shenandoah. Ma- 
jor-General Breckinridge, commanding in southwestern Vir- 
ginia, was notified, on the 4th of May, of the movement of 
Sigel, and started immediately with two brigades of infantry to 
Staunton, at which place he arrived on the 9th. The reserves 
of Augusta County, under Colonel Harmon, were called out, 
numbering several hundred men, and the cadets of the Military 
Institute at Lexington, numbering two hundred, voluntarily 
joined him. With this force Breckinridge decided to march 
to meet Sigel. General Imboden, with a cavalry force of sev- 
eral hundred, had been holding, as best he might, the upper 
Valley, and joined Breckinridge in the neighborhood of New 
Market, informing him that Sigel then occupied that place. 


B98 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Breckinridge having marched so rapidly from Staunton 
that it was probable that his advance was unknown to the 
enemy, he determined to make an immediate attack. His 
troops were put in motion at one o’clock, and by daylight was 
in line of battle two miles south of New Market. Sigel seems 
to have been unconscious of any other obstruction to the cap- 
ture of Staunton than the small cavalry force under Imboden. 
At this time Lee was engaged with the vastly superior force of 
Grant, which had crossed the Rapidan, and Sigel’s was a move- 
ment to get upon our flank, and thus codperate with Grant in 
his attempt to capture Richmond. Breckinridge had an in- 
fantry force not much exceeding three thousand. The hazard 
of an attack was great, but the necessity of the case justified it. 
Breckinridge’s force was only enough to form one line of bat- 
tle in two ranks, the cadets holding the center between the two 
brigades. There were no reserves, and Colonel Harmon’s com- 
mand formed the guard for the trains. Skirmish lines were 
promptly engaged, and soon thereafter the enemy fell back be- 
yond New Market, where Sigel, assuming the defensive, took a 
strong position, in which to wait for an attack. Our artillery 
was moved forward, and opened with effect upon the enemy’s 
position; then our infantry advanced, “with the steadiness of 
troops on dress parade, the precision of the cadets serving well 
as a color-guide for the brigades on either side to dress by. .. . 
The Federal line had the advantage of a stone wall which served 
as a breastwork.’’?* Sigel’s cavalry attempted to turn our right 
flank, but was repulsed disastrously, and in a few moments the 
enemy was in full retreat, crossing the Shenandoah and burning 
the bridge behind him. 

Breckinridge captured five pieces of artillery and over tive 
hundred prisoners, exclusive of the wounded left on the field. 
Our loss was several hundred killed and wounded. General 
Lee, after receiving notice of this, ordered Breckinridge to 
transfer his command as rapidly as possible to Hanover Junc- 
tion. The battle was fought on the 15th, and the command 
reached Hanover Junction on the 20th of May. . 


* J. Stoddard Johnston, ‘Southern Historical Society Papers,” June, 18479, p. 
258, et seq. 


1864] WITH THE STEADINESS OF VETERANS. - 599 


Before General Breckinridge left the Valley, he issued an 
order. thanking his troops, “ particularly the cadets, who, though 
mere youths, had fought with the steadiness of veterans.” 

Brigadier-General W. E. Jones had, with a small cavalry 
force, come from southwestern Virginia to the Valley after 
Breckinridge’s departure, and this, with the command of Im- 
boden, only sufficient for observation, was all that remained in 
the Valley when the Federal General David Hunter, with a 
larger force than Sigel’s, succeeded the latter. Jones, with his 
cavalry and a few infantry, encountered this force at Piedmont, 
was defeated and killed. Upon the receipt of this information, 
Breckinridge with his command was sent back to the Valley. 

On June 13th Major-General Early, with the Second Corps 
of Lee’s army, numbering a little over eight thousand mus- 
kets and two battalions of artillery, commenced a march to 
strike Hunter’s force in the rear, and, if possible, destroy it; 
then to move down the Valley, cross the Potomac, and threaten 
Washington. On the 17th he reached Lynchburg, and Hunter 
arrived at the same time. Preparations were made for the 
attack of Hunter on the 19th, when he began to retreat, and 
was pursued with much loss, until he was disposed of by 
taking the route to the Kanawha River. On the 27th Early’s 
force reached Staunton on its march down the Valley. It 
now amounted to ten thousand infant#y and about two thou- 
sand cavalry, having been joined by Breckinridge, and Colo- 
nel Bradley T. Johnson, with a battalion of Maryland cavalry. 
The advance was rapid. Railroad bridges were burned, the 
track destroyed, and stores captured. The Potomac was crossed 
on the 5th and 6th of June, and the move was made through 
the gaps of South Mountain to the north of Maryland Heights, 
which were occupied by a hostile force. A brigade of cavalry 
was sent north of Frederick to strike the railroads from Balti- 
more to Harrisburg and Philadelphia, burn the bridges over 
the Gunpowder, and to eut the railroad between Washington 
and Baltimore, and threaten the latter'place. The other troops 
moved forward toward Monocacy Junction, where a consider- 
able body of Federal troops under General Wallace was found 
posted on the eastern bank of the Monocacy, with ‘an earth- 


81 


530 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


work and two block-houses commanding both bridges. The 
position was attacked in front and on the flank, and it was 
carried and the garrison put to flight. Between six and seven 
hundred unwounded prisoners fell into our hands, and the ene- 
my’s loss in killed and wounded was far greater than ours, which 
was about seven hundred. 

An advance was made on the 10th nearly to Rockville, on 
the Georgetown Pike. On the next day it was continued to ~ 
Washington, with the hope of getting into the fortifications 
before they could be manned. But the heat and the dust im- 
peded the progress greatly. ort Stevens was approached soon 
after noon, and appeared to be lightly manned, but; before our 
force could get into the works, a column of the enemy from 
Washington filed into them on the right and left, skirmishers 
were thrown out in front, and an artillery-fire was opened on us 
from a number of batteries. An examination was now made to 
determine if it were practicable to carry the defenses by assault. 
“ They were found to be exceedingly strong, and consisted of 
what appeared to be inclosed forts for heavy artillery, with a 
tier of lower works in front of each, pierced for an immense 
number of guus, the whole being connected by curtains with 
ditches in front, and strengthened by palisades and abatis. The 
timber had been felled within cannon-range all around and left 
on the ground, making aformidable obstacle, and every possible 
approach was raked by artillery.” As far as the eye could reach, 
the works appeared to be of the same impregnable character. 
The exhaustion of our force, the lightness of its artillery, and 
the information that two corps of the enemy’s forces had just 
arrived in Washington, in addition to the veteran reserves and 
hundred-days-men, and the parapets lined with troops, led us to’ 
refrain from making an assault, and to retire during the night of 
the 12th. On the morning of the 14th General Early recrossed 
the Potomac, bringing off the prisoners captured at Monocacy 
and everything else in safety, including a large number of beef- 
cattle and horses. There was some skirmishing in the rear 
between our cavalry and that which was following us, and on 
the afternoon of the 14th there was artillery-firing across the 
river at our cavalry watching the fords. 


1864] HIS FAVORITE MODE OF WARFARE. 5381 


Meantime General Hunter had arrived at Harper’s Ferry 
and united with Sigel, and some skirmishing took place; but 
General Early determined to concentrate near Strasburg, so as 
to enable him to put the trains in safety, and mobilize his com- 
mand to make an attack. On the 22d he moved across Cedar 
Creek toward Strasburg, and so posted his force as to cover all 
the roads from the direction of Winchester. Learning on the 
next day that a large portion of the column sent after him from 
Washington was returning, and that the Army of West Virginia, 
under Crook, including Hunter’s and Sigel’s forces, with Av- 
erill’s cavalry, was at Kernstown, he determined to attack at 
once. 

After the enemy’s skirmishers had been driven in, it was 
discovered that his left flank was exposed, and General Breckin- 
ridge was ordered to move Echols’s division under cover of some 
ravines on our right and attack that flank. The attacking 
division struck the enemy’s left flank in open ground, dou- 
bling it up and throwing his whole line into great confusion. 
The other divisions then advanced, and his rout became com- © 
plete. He was pursued by the infantry and artillery beyond 
Winchester. Our loss was very light; his loss in killed and 
wounded was severe. The whole defeated force crossed the 
Potomac, and took refuge at Maryland Heights and Harper’s 
Ferry. The road was strewed with débris of the rapid retreat 
—twelve caissons and seventy-two wagons having been aban- 
doned, and most of them burned. 

On the 26th the Confederate force moved to Martinsburg : 


“While at Martinsburg,” says General Early in his memoir, 
‘it was ascertained beyond all doubt that Hunter had been again 
indulging in his favorite mode of warfare, and that, after his re- 
turn to the Valley, while we were near Washington, among other 
outrages, the private residences of Mr. Andrew Hunter, a member 
of the Virginia Senate, Mr. Alexander R. Boteler, an ex-member 
of the Confederate Congress, as well as of the United States Con- 
gress, and Edmund I. Lee, a distant relative of General Lee, all 
in Jefferson County, with their contents, had been burned by his 
orders, only time enough being given for the ladies to get out of 
the houses. A number of towns in the South, as well as private 


539 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


country-houses, had been burned by Federal troops, and the ac- 
counts had been heralded forth in some of the Northern papers 
in terms of exultation, and ,gloated over by their readers, while 
they were received with apathy by others. I now came to the 
conclusion that we had stood this mode of warfare long enough, 
and that it was time to open the eyes of the people of the North 
to its enormity by an example in the way of retaliation. I did 
not select the cases mentioned as having more merit or greater 
claims for retaliation than others, but because they had occurred 
within the limits of the country covered by my command, and 
were brought more immediately to my attention.* 

“The town of Chambersburg was selected as the one on which 
retaliation should be made, and McCausland was ordered to pro- 
ceed with his brigade and that of Johnson’s and a battery of artil- 
lery to that place, and demand of the municipal authorities the 
sum of one hundred thousand dollars in gold, or five hundred 
thousand dollars in United States currency, as a compensation 
for the destruction of the houses named and their contents ; and 
in default of payment to lay the town in ashes, in retaliation 
for the burning of those houses and others in Virginia, as well 
as for the towns which had been burned in other Southern States. 
A written demand to that effect was also sent to the municipal 
authorities, and they were informed what would be the result 
of a failure or a refusal to comply with it. I desired to give 
the people of Chambersburg an opportunity of saving their 
town, by making compensation for part of the injury done, and 
hoped that the payment of such a sum would have the desired 


* “YT had often seen delicate ladies who had been plundered, insulted, and rendered 
desolate by the acts of our most atrocious enemies, and, while they did not call for 
it, yet in the anguished expressions of their features while narrating their misfor- 
tunes, there was a mute appeal to every manly sentiment of my bosom for retribu- 
tion, which I could no longer withstand. On my passage through the lower Valley 
into Maryland, a lady had said to me, with tears in her eyes: ‘Our lot is a hard one, 
and we see no peace; but there are a few green spots in our lives, and they are 
when the Confederate soldiers come along and we can do something for them.’ 
May God defend and bless these noble women of the Valley, who so often minis- 
tered to the wounded, sick, and dying Confederate soldiers, and gave their last mor- 
sel of bread tothe hungry! They bore with heroic courage the privations, sufferings, 
persecutions, and dangers to which the war, which was constantly waged in their 
midst, exposed them, and upon no portion of the Southern people did the disasters, 


which finally befell our army and country, fall with more crushing effect than on 
them,” 


1864] THAT GREATLY OUTNUMBERED OURS. 533 


effect, and open the eyes of people of other towns at the North 
to the necessity of urging upon their Government the adoption of 
a different policy. 

“On July 30th McCausland reached Chambersburg, and made 
the demand as directed, reading to such of the authorities as pre- 
sented themselves the paper sent by me. The demand was not 
complied with, the people stating that they were not afraid of 
having their town burned, and that a Federal force was approach- 
ing. The policy pursued by our army on former occasions had 
been so lenient that they did not suppose the threat was in ear- 
nest at this time, and they hoped for speedy relief. McCausland, 
however, proceeded to carry out his orders, and the greater part 
of the town was laid in ashes. He then moved in the direction of 
Cumberland, but found it defended by a strong force. He then 
withdrew and crossed the Potomac, near the mouth of the South 
Branch, capturing the garrison and partly destroying the railroad- 
bridge. Averill pursued from Chambersburg, and surprised and 
routed, Johnson’s brigade, and caused a loss of four pieces of artil- 
lery and about three hundred prisoners from the whole command.” 


Meantime a large force, consisting of the Sixth, Nineteenth, 
and Crook’s corps, of the Federal army, had concentrated at 
Harper’s Ferry under Major- General Sheridan. After various 

manceuvers, both armies occupied positions in the neighbor- 
hood of Winchester. Early had about eight thousand five hun- 
dred infantry fit for duty, nearly three. thousand mounted men, 
three battalions of artillery, and a few pieces of horse-artil- 
lery. Sheridan’s force, according to the best information, con- 
sisted of ten thousand cavalry, thirty-five thousand infantry, 
and artillery that greatly outnumbered ours both in men and 
guns. 

On the morning of September 19th, the enemy began to ad- 
vance in heavy force on Ramseur’s position, on an elevated 
plateau between Abraham’s Creek and Red Bud Run, about 
a mile and a half from Winchester, on the Berryville road. 
Nelson’s artillery was posted on Ramseur’s line, covering the 
approaches as far as practicable; and Lomax, with Jackson’s 
cavalry and a part of Johnson’s, was on the right, watching the 
valley of Abraham’s Oreek and the Front Royal road Rerene, 


534 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT, 


while Fitzhugh Lee was on the left, across the Red Bud, with 
cavalry, watching the interval between Ramseur’s left and the 
Red Bud. These troops held the enemy’s main force in check 
until Gordon’s and Rodes’s divisions arrived, a little after 10 
A.M. Gordon was placed under cover in rear of a piece of 
woods, behind the interval between Ramseur’s line and the 
Red Bud. Rodes was directed to form on Gordon’s right, in 
rear of another piece of woods. Meanwhile, we discovered 
very heavy columns, that had been massed under cover between 
the Red Bud and the Berryville road, moving to attack Ram- 
seur on his left flank, while another force pressed him in front. 
Rodes and Gordon were immediately hurled upon the flank 
of the advancing columns. But Evans’s brigade, of Gordon’s 
division, on the extreme left of our infantry, was forced back 
through the woods from behind which it had advanced bya | 
column, which followed to the rear of the woods and within - 
musket-range of seven pieces of Braxton’s artillery. Brax- 
ton’s guns stood their ground and opened with canister. The 
fire was so well directed that the column staggered, halted, and 
commenced falling back. Just then Battle’s brigade moved 
forward and swept through the woods, driving the enemy be- 
fore it, while Evans’s brigade was rallied and codperated. Our 
advance was resumed, and the enemy’s attacking columns, the 
Sixth and Nineteenth Corps, were thrown into great confusion 
and fled from the field.. General Early exclaims, “It was a 
grand sight to see this immense body hurled back in utter dis- 
order before my two divisions, numbering very little over five 
thousand muskets!” This affair occurred about 11 a. m., and a 
splendid victory had been gained. But the enemy still had a 
fresh corps which had not been engaged, and there remained 
his heavy force of cavalry. Our lines were now formed across 
from Abraham’s Creek to Red Bud, and were very attenuated. 
There was still seen in front a formidable force, and away to 
the right a division of cavalry massed, with some artillery over- 
lapping us at least a mile. Late in the afternoon, two divi- 
sions of the enemy’s cavalry drove in the small force that had 
been watching it on the Martinsburg road, and Crook’s corps, 
which had not been engaged, advanced at the same time on 


1864] THE INCAPACITY OF MY OPPONENT. 535 


the north side of Red Bud and forced back our brigade of 
infantry and cavalry. A considerable force of cavalry then 
swept along the Martinsburg road to the skirts of Winchester, 
thus getting in the rear of our left flank. This was soon driven 
back by two of Wharton’s brigades, and subsequently another 
charge of cavalry was also repulsed. But many of the men in 
the front line, hearing the fire in the rear, and thinking they 
were flanked and about to be cut off, commenced to fall back. 
At the same time Crook’s corps advanced against our left, and 
Evans’s brigade was thrown into line to meet it, but, after an 
obstinate resistance, that brigade also retired. The whole front 
line had now given way, but was rallied and formed behind 
some old breastworks, and with the aid of artillery the progress 
of the enemy’s infantry was arrested. Their cavalry afterward 
succeeded in getting around on our left, producing great confu- 
sion, for which there was no remedy. -We now retired through 
Winchester, a new line was formed, and the hostile advance 
checked until nightfall. We then retired to Newton without 
serious molestation. Our trains, stores, sick, and wounded that 
could be removed had been sent to Fisher’s Hill. This battle, 
beginning with the skirmishing in Ramseur’s front, had lasted 
from daylight until dark, and, at the close of it, we had been 
forced back two miles, after having repulsed the first attack 
with great slaughter, and subsequently contested every inch of 
ground with unsurpassed obstinacy. We deserved the victory, 
and would have gained it but for the enemy’s immense superi- 
ority in cavalry. In his memoir General Early says: 


«When I look back to this battle, I can but attribute my es- 
cape from utter annihilation to the incapacity of my opponent.” 


Our loss was severe for the size of our force, but only a 
fraction of that ascribed to us by the foe, while his was very 
heavy, and some prisoners fell into our hands. 

On the 22d, after two days spent in reconnoitering, the ene- 
my prepared to make an attack upon our position at Fisher’s 
Hill; but, as our force was not strong enough to resist a deter- 
_ mined assault, orders were given to retire after dark. Before 
sunset, however, an advance was made against Ramseur’s left by 


53G RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


‘Crook’s corps. The movement to put Pegram’s brigades into 
line successively to the left produced some confusion, when the 
enemy advanced along his entire line, and, after a brief contest, 
our force retired in disorder. We fell back to a place called 
Narrow Passage, all the trains being removed in safety. Some 
skirmishing ensued as we withdrew up the Valley, but without 
important result. 

On October 1st our force was in position between Mount 
Sidney and North River, and the enemy’s had been concen- 
trated around Harrisonburg and on the north bank of the 
river. On the 5th we were reénforced by General Rosser with 
six hundred mounted men, and Kershaw’s division, numbering 
twenty-seven hundred muskets, with a battalion of artillery. On 
the morning of the 6th it was discovered that the foe had re- 
tired down the Valley. General Early then moved forward 
and arrived at New Market with his infantry on the 7th. Ros- 
ser pushed forward on the back and middle roads in pursuit of 
the cavalry, which was engaged in burning houses, mills, barns, 
and stacks of wheat and hay, and had several skirmishes with it. 

A committee, consisting of thirty-six citizens and the same 
number of magistrates, appointed by the County Court of Rock- 
ingham County, for the purpose of making an estimate of the 
losses of that county by the execution of General Sheridan’s 
orders, made an investigation, and reported as follows: 


“ Dwelling-houses burned, 30 ; barns burned, 450 ; mills burned, 
31; fences destroyed (miles), 100; bushels of wheat destroyed, 
100,000 ; bushels of corn destroyed, 50,000 ; tons of hay destroyed, 
6,283 ; cattle carried off, 1,750; horses carried off, 1,750; sheep 
carried off, 4,200 ; hogs carried off, 3,350 ; factories burned, three ; 
furnaces burned, one. In addition there was an immense amount 
of farming utensils of every description destroyed, many of them of 
great value, such as reapers and thrashing-machines ; also, house- 
hold and kitchen furniture, and money, bonds, plate, etc., pillaged.” 


General Early, having learned that Sheridan was preparing - 
to send a part of his troops to Grant, moved down the Valley 
again on the 12th, and reached Fisher’s Hill. The enemy was 
found on the north bank of Cedar Creek in strong force. He 


1864] IN SIGHT OF EACH OTHER, 537 


gave no indication of an intention to move, nor did he evince 
any purpose of attacking us, though the two positions were in 
sight of each other. At the same time it became necessary for 
us to move back for want of provisions and forage, or to attack 
him in his position with the hope of driving him from it. 
An attack was determined upon by General Early, and, as he 
was not strong enough to assault the fortified position in front, 
he resolved to get around one of the enemy’s flanks and attack 
him by surprise. His plan of attack is thus stated by him: 


“T determined to send the three divisions of the Second Corps, 
to wit, Gordon’s, Ramseur’s, and Pegram’s, under General Gordon, 
to the enemy’s rear, to make the attack at 5 a. m., which would bea 
little before daybreak on the 19th ; to move myself with Kershaw’s 
and Wharton’s divisions and all the artillery along the pike through 
Strasburg, and attack the enemy on the front and left flank as 
soon as Gordon should become engaged, and for Rosser to move 
with his own and Wickham’s brigade on the back road across 
Cedar Creck, and attack the enemy’s cavalry simultaneously with 
Gordon’s attack, while Lomax should move by Front Royal, cross 
the river, and come to the Valley pike, so as to strike the enemy 
wherever he might be, of which he was to judge by the sound of 
the firing.” 


Gordon moved at the appointed time. At 1a. m. Kershaw 
and Wharton, accompanied by General Early, advanced. At 
Strasburg, Kershaw moved to the right on the road to Bow- 
man’s “Mill, and Wharton moved along the pike to Hupp’s 
Hill, with instructions not to display his forces, but to avoid 
notice until the attack began, when he was to move forward, 
support the artillery when it came up, and send a force to 
get possession of the bridge on the pike over the creek. Ker- 
shaw’s division got in sight of the enemy at half-past three 
o’clock. He was directed to cross his division at the proper 
time over the creek as quietly as possible, and to form it into . 
column of brigades as he did so, and advance in that manner 
against the left breastwork, extending to the right or left as 
might be necessary. At half-past four he was ordered forward, 
and, a very short time after he started, the firing from Rosser on 


538 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


our left and the picket-firing at the ford at which Gordon was 
crossing wére heard. Kershaw crossed the creek without mo- 
lestation and formed his division as directed, and precisely at 
five o’clock his leading brigade, with little opposition, swept 
over the left work, capturing seven guns, which were at once 
turned on the enemy. At the same time Wharton and the 
artillery were just arriving at Hupp’s Hill, and a very heavy 
fire of musketry was heard in the rear from Gordon’s column. 
Wharton had advanced his skirmishers to the creek, captur. 
ing some prisoners, but the foe still held the works on our . 
left of the pike, commanding that road and the bridge, and 
opened with his artillery on us. Our artillery was at once 
brought into action, and opened on the enemy, but he soon 
evacuated his works, and our men from the other columns 
rushed into them. Wharton was immediately ordered for- 
ward. Kershaw’s division had swept along the enemy’s works 
on the right of the pike, which were occupied by Crook’s corps, 
and he and Gordon had united at the pike, and their divisions 
had pushed across it in pursuit. A delay of an hour at the 
river had occurred in Gordon’s movement, which enabled 
Sheridan partially to form his lines after the alarm produced 
by Kershaw’s attack; and Gordon’s, which was after daylight, 
was therefore met with greater obstinacy by the enemy than 
it would otherwise have encountered, and the fighting had 
been severe. Gordon, however, pushed his advance with such 
energy, that the Nineteenth and Crook’s corps were in complete 
rout, and their camps, with a number of pieces of artillery and. 
a considerable quantity of small-arms, abandoned. The Sixth 
Corps, which was on the right, and some distance from the 
point attacked, had had time to get under arms and take posi- 
tion so as to arrest our progress. A fog which had prevailed 
soon rose sufficiently for us to see the Sixth Corps’ position on a 
ridge to the west of Middletown, and it was discovered to be a: 
strong one. The enemy had not advanced, but opened on us 
with artillery, and orders were given to concentrate all our guns 
on him. In the mean time a force of cavalry was moving along 
the pike, through the fields to the right of Middletown, thus 
placing our right and rear in great danger. Wharton was or- 


1864] AN ATTACK WAS NOT MADE. 589 


dered to form his division at once, and take position to hold 
that cavalry in check. Discovering that the Sixth Corps could 
not be attacked with advantage on its left flank, because the 
approach in that direction was through an open flat and across 
a boggy stream with high banks, Gordon in conjunction with 
Kershaw was ordered to assail the right flank, while a heavy 
fire of artillery was opened from our right. Ina short time 
eighteen or twenty guns were concentrated on the enemy, 
and he was soon in retreat. Ramseur and Pegram advanced | 
_ at once to the position from which he was driven, and just 
then his cavalry commenced pressing heavily on the right, and 
Pegram’s division was ordered to move to the north of Mid- 
dletown and -take position across the pike against the cavalry. 
As soon as Pegram moved, Kershaw was ordered from the 
left to supply his place. Rosser had attacked the enemy 
promptly at the appointed time, but had not been able to sur- 
prise him, as he was found on the alert on that flank. There 
was now one division of cavalry threatening our right flank, and 
two were on the left near the Back road, held in check by Ros- 
ser. His force was so weak he could only watch. 

After he had been driven from his second position, the ene- 
my had taken a new one about two miles north of Middletown. 
An advance by Gordon and Kershaw and Ramseur was or- 
dered,-but, after it had been made for some distance, Gordon’s 
skirmishers came back, reporting a line of battle in front, be- 
hind breastworks, and an attack was not made. 


“Tt was now apparent that it would not do,” says General 
Early, “to press my troops farther. They had been up all night 
and were much jaded. In passing over rough ground to attack 
the enemy at dawn their own ranks had been much disordered and 
the men scattered, and it had required time to reform them. Their 
ranks were much thinned by the absence of the men engaged in 
plundering the enemy’s camps.” 


It was determined, therefore, to try to hold what had been 
gained, and orders were given to carry off the captured and 
abandoned artillery, small-arms, and wagons. A number of 
bold attempts were made, during the subsequent part of the 


540 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


day, by the enemy’s cavalry, to break our line on the right, 


but they were invariably repulsed. Late in the afternoon, 


his infantry advanced against Ramseur’s, Kershaw’s, and Gor- 
don’s lines, and the attack on Ramseur’s and Kershaw’s fronts 
was handsomely repulsed; but a portion of the assailants had 
penetrated an interval which was between Evans’s brigade 
on the extreme left and the rest of the line, when that bri- 
gade gave way, and Gordon’s other brigades soon followed. 
General Gordon made every possible effort to rally his men 
and lead them back, but without avail. This affair was soon 
known. with exaggerations along Kershaw’s and Ramseur’s 
lines, and their men, fearing to be flanked, began to fall back in 
disorder, though no force was pressing them. At the same 
time the enemy’s cavalry, observing the disorder in our ranks, 
made another charge on our right, but was again repulsed. 
Every effort was made to rally the men, but the mass of them 
continued to resist all appeals. Ramseur succeeded in retaining 
with him two or three hundred men of his division, and about 
the same number was retained by Major Goggin from Conner’s 
brigade; these, aided by several pieces of artillery, held the 
whole force on our left in check for one hour and a half until 
Ramseur was shot down, and the ammunition of the artillery 
was exhausted. While the latter was being replaced by other 
guns, the force that had continued steady gave way also. Pe- 
gram’s and Wharton’s divisions and Wofford’s brigade had 
remained steadfast on the right, and resisted every effort of 
the cavalry, but no portion of this force could be moved to 
the left without leaving the pike open to the cavalry, which 
would have destroyed all hope at once. Every effort to rally 
the men in the rear having failed, these troops were ordered to 
retire. The disorder soon extended to them. The greater part 
of the infantry was halted at Fisher’s Hill, and Rosser, whose 
command had retired in good order on the Back road, was 
ordered to that point with his cavalry to cover the retreat, and 
hold that position until the troops were beyond pursuit. He 
fell back on the forenoon of the 20th, when the enemy had not 
advanced to that place. The troops were halted at Newmarket, 
seven miles from Mount Jackson. Our loss in the battle of 


Ra Me 


1864] PRECISELY THE SAME POSITION. BAL 


Cedar Creek was twenty-three pieces of artillery, some ord- 
nance, and medical wagons and ambulances, about 1,860 killed 
and wounded, and something over a thousand prisoners; 1,500 
prisoners were captured from the enemy and brought off, and 
his loss in killed and wounded was very heavy. We had in 
this battle about 8,500 muskets and a little over forty pieces of 
artillery. Sheridan’s cavalry numbered 8,700, and his infantry 
force was fully as large as at Winchester. 

Subsequently General Early confronted Sheridan’s whole 
force north of Cedar Creek for two days, November 11th and 
12th, without an attack being made upon him. On November 
27th the fortified post at New Creek on the Baltimore and Ohio 
Railroad was surprised and captured by General Rosser. Two 
regiments of Federal cavalry with their arms and colors were 
taken, and eight pieces of artillery and a very large amount 
of ordnance, quartermaster, and commissary stores fell into our 
hands. Eight hundred prisoners, four -pieces of artillery, and 
some wagons and horses were brought off. When the campaign 
closed, the invader held precisely the same position in the Val- 
ley which he held before the opening of the campaign in the 
spring. 

In the Red River country of Louisiana, it became certain in 
February, 1864, that the enemy was about to make an expedi- 
tion against our forces under General Richard Taylor, not so 
much to get possesgion of the country as to obtain the cotton 
‘in that region. Their forces. were to be commanded by Major- 
General Banks, and to consist of his command, augmented by a 
part of Major-General Sherman’s army from Vicksburg, and ac- 
companied by a fleet of gunboats under Admiral Porter. With 
these the force under General Steele, in Arkansas, was to co- 
operate. ‘Taylor’s forces at this time consisted of Harrison’s 
mounted regiment with a four-gun battery, in the north toward 
Monroe; Mouton’s brigade, near Alexandria; Polignac’s, at 
Trinity, on the Washita, fifty-five miles distant ; Walker’s divi- 
sion, at Marksville and toward Simmsport, with two hundred 
men detached to assist the gunners at Fort De Russy, which, 
though still unfinished, contained eight heavy guns and two 
field-pieces. Three companies of mounted men were watch- 


549 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ing the Mississippi, and the remainder of a regiment was on the 
Téche. 

On March 12th Admiral Porter, with nineteen gunboats and 
ten thousand men of Sherman’s army, entered the Red River. 
A detachment on the 14th marched to De Russy and took pos- 
session of it. On the 15th the advance of Porter reached Alex- 
andria, and on the 19th General Franklin left the lower Téche 
with eighteen thousand men to meet him. General Steele, in 
Arkansas, reported his force at seven thousand men. The force 
of General Taylor at this time had increased to five thousand 
and three hundred infantry, five hundred cavalry, and three 
hundred artillerymen; and Liddel on the north had about the 
same number of cavalry and a four-gun battery. Some reén- 
forcements were soon received. On March 31st~Banks’s ad- 
vance reached Natchitoches, and Taylor moved toward Pleas- 
ant Hill, arriving on the next day. On April 4th and 5th, he 
moved to Manstield, concentrating his force in that vicinity. 
There two brigades of Missouri infantry and two of Arkansas, 
numbering four thousand and four hundred muskets, joined 
him: is April 7th the enemy were reported from Pleasant 
Hill to be advancing in force, but their progress was arrested by 
a body of our tavaliy: 

General Taylor then selected his position in which to wait 
for an attack expected on the next day. It was in the edge of 
a wood, fronting an open field eight hundred yards in width 
and twelve hundred in length, through the center of which the 
road to Pleasant Hill passed. On the opposite side of the field 
was a fence separating it from the pine-forest, which, open on 
the higher ground and filled with underwood on the lower, 
spread over the country... The position was three miles in front 
of Mansfield, and covered a cross-road leading to the Sabine. 
On each side of the mait? Mansfield-Pleasant Hill road at two 
miles’ distance, was a road parallel to it, and these were con- 
nected by this Sabine cross-road. 

On the 8th General Taylor disposed, on the right of the road 
to Pleasant Hill, Walker’s infantry division of three brigades 
with two batteries; on the left, Mouton’s two brigades and two 
batteries. As the horsemen came in from the front, they took 


1864] SWEPT EVERYTHING BEFORE US. 543 


position, dismounted, on Mouton’s left. A regiment of horse- 
men was posted on each of the parallel roads, and cavalry with 
a battery held in reserve on the main road. Taylor’s force 
amounted to 5,300 infantry, 3,000 mounted men, and 500 artil- 
lerymen ; total, 8,800. Banks left Grand Ecore with an esti- 
mated force of 25,000. 

As the enemy showed no disposition to advance, a forward 
movement of the whole line was made. On the left our forces 
crossed the field under a heavy fire and entered the wood, where 
a bloody contest ensued, which resulted in gradually turning 
their right, which was forced back with loss of prisoners and 
guns. On the right little resistance was encountered until the 
wood was entered. Finding that our force outflanked the op- 
ponent’s left, the right brigade was kept advanced, and we swept 
everything before us. 

His first line, consisting of all the mounted force and one 
division of the Thirteenth Corps, was in full flight, leaving pris- 
oners, guns, and wagons in our hands. Two miles to the rear 
of the first position, the Second Division of the Federal Thir- 
teenth Corps was brought up, but was speedily routed, losing 
guns and prisoners. The advance was continued. Four miles 
from the original position, his Nineteenth Army Corps was 
found drawn up on a ridge overlooking a small stream. Sharp 
work followed, but, as our force persisted, his fell back at night- 
fall. Twenty-five hundred prisoners, twenty pieces of artil- 
lery, several stands of colors, many thousands of small-arms, and 
two hundred and fifty wagons, were taken. 

On the next morning the enemy was found about a mile in 
front of Pleasant Hill, which occupies a plateau a mile wide 
from west to east along the Mansfield road. His lines extended 
across the plateau from the highest ground on the west, his 
left, to a wooded height on the right of the Mansfield road. 
Winding along in front of this position was a dry gully cut 
by winter rains, bordered by a thick growth of young pines. 
This was held by his advanced infantry, his main line and guns 
being on the plateau. The force of General Taylor—Church- 
il’s brigade having joined him now—amounted to twelve thou- 
sand five hundred men against eighteen thousand of General 


544 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Banks, among them the fresh corps of General A. J. Smith. 
The action commenced about 4.30 p. m. It was the plan of 
General Taylor, as flo offensive movement on the part of the 
enemy was anticipated, to turn both his flanks and subject him 
to a concentric fire and overwhelm him. The right was suc- 
cessfully turned, but our force on his left did not proceed far 
enough to outflank him. An obstinate contest ensued, with 
much confusion, and failure to execute the plan of battle. Night 
ended the conflict on our right, and both sides occupied their 
original positions. General Banks made no attempt to recover 
the ground from which his right and center had been driven. 
During the night he retreated, leaving four hundred wounded, 
and his dead unburied. On the-next morning he was pursued 
twenty miles before his rear was overtaken, and on the road 
were found stragglers, and burning wagons and stores. Our loss 
in the two actions of Mansfield and Pleasant Hill was twenty- 
two hundred. At Pleasant Hill the loss was threé. guns and 
four hundred and twenty-six prisoners. The loss of the enemy 
in killed and wounded was larger than ours. We captured 


twenty guns and twenty-eight hundred prisoners, not includi®g— 
stragglers. Their campaign was defeated. In the second vols, 


ume of the “Report of the Committee on the Conduct of the 
War,” page 239, a report of Admiral Porter, dated Grand 
Ecore, April 14, 1864, says: 


“The army here has met with a great defeat, no matter what 
the generals try to make of it,” ete. 


On April 21st General Banks retreated from Grand Ecore 
to Alexandria, harassed by a small cavalry force. A large part 
of our forces had been taken by General E. K. Smith to follow 
General Steele. On April 28th Porter’s fleet was lying above 
the falls, then impassable, and Banks’s army was in and around 
Alexandria behind earthworks. On May 13th both escaped 
from Alexandria, and on May 19th Banks crossed the Atcha- 
falaya, and the campaign closed at the place where it began. 
Porter was able to extricate his eight ironclads and two wooden 
gunboats by building a dam with transports, as shown in the 
adjoining cut. General Banks boasted that the army obtained 


ee ot — 


1864] PICK OFF THE GARRISON. 545 


ten thousand bales of cotton, to which Admiral Porter added 
five thousand more as collected by the navy. This was the 
compensation reported for the loss of many,lives, much public 
property, and a total defeat. Even for the booty as well as 
for the escape of their fleet, they were probably indebted to the 
unfortunate withdrawal of a large part of Taylor’s force, as 
mentioned above.* 

On April 12, 1864, an attack was made by two brigades of 
General N. B. Forrest’s force, under Brigadier-General J. R. 
Chalmers, upon Fort Pillow. This was an earthwork on a bluff 
on the east side of the Mississippi, at the mouth of Coal Creek. 
It was garrisoned by four hundred men and six pieces of artil- 
lery. General Chalmers promptly gained possession of the 
outer works and drove the garrison to their main fortifications. 
The fort was crescent-shaped, the patapet eight feet in height 
and four feet across the top, surrounded by a ditch six feet 
deep and twelve feet in width. About this time General For- 
rest arrived and soon ordered his forces to move up. The bri- 
gade of Bell, on the northeast, advanced until it gained a posi- 
tion in which the men were sheltered by the conformation of 
the ground, which was intersected by aravine. The other bri- 
gade, under McCulloch, carried the intrenchments on the high- 
est part of the ridge, immediately in front of the southeastern 
face of the fort, and occupied a cluster of cabins on its south- 
ern face and about sixty yards from it. The line of investment 
was now short and complete, within an average distance of one 
hundred yards. It extended from Coal Creek on the north, 
which was impassable, to the river-bank south of the fort. In 
the rear were numerous sharpshooters, well posted on command- 
ing ridges, to pick off the garrison whenever they exposed 
themselves. At the same time, our forces were so placed that 
the artillery could not be brought to bear upon them with much 
effect except by a fatal exposure of the gunners. During all 
this time a gunboat in the river kept up a continuous fire in all 
directions, but without effect. General Forrest, confident of 
his ability to take the fort by assault, which it seemed must be 
perfectly apparent to the garrison, and desiring to prevent fur- 

* © Destruction and Reconstruction,” Taylor, p. 162, et seq. 


82 


546 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ther loss of life, sent a demand for an unconditional surrender, 
with the assurance that they should be treated as prisoners of 
war. The answer was written with a pencil on a slip of pa- 
per, “ Negotiations will not attain the desired object.” Mean- 
time, three boats were seen to approach, the foremost of which 
was apparently loaded with troops, and, as an hour’s time had 
been asked for to communicate with the officers of the gun- 
boat, it seemed to be a pretext to gain time for reénforcements. 
General Forrest, understanding also that the enemy doubted 
his presence and had pronounced the demand to be a trick, 
declared himself, and demanded an answer within twenty min- 
utes whether the commander would fight or surrender. Mean- 
while, the foremost boat indicated an intention to land, but a 
few shots caused her to withdraw to the other side of the river, 
along which they all passed up. The answer from the fort was 
a positive refusal to surrender. Three companies on the left 
were now placed in an old rifle-pit and almost in the rear of the 
fort, and on the right a portion of Barton’s regiment of Bell’s 
brigade was also under the bluff and in the rear of the fort. 

On the signal, the works were carried without a halt. As 
the troops poured into the fortification the enemy retreated to- 
ward the river, arms in hand and firing back, and their colors 
flying, doubtless expecting the gunboats to shell us away from 
the bluff and protect them until they could be taken off or re- 
enforced. As they descended the bank an enfilading and deadly 
fire was poured in upon them from right and left by the forces 
in rear of the fort, of whose presence they were ignorant. To 
this was now added the destructive fire of the regiments that 
had stormed the fort. Fortunately some of our men cut down 
the flag, and the firing ceased. Our loss was twenty killed and 
sixty wounded. Of the enemy two hundred and twenty-eight 
were buried that evening and quite a number next day. We 
captured six pieces of artillery and about three hundred and 
fifty stand of small-arms. The gunboat escaped up the river. 


1864] IN ALL THAT CONSTITUTES EFFICIENCY. 547 


CHAaArTER XLYITI: 


Assignment of General J. E. Johnston to the Command of the Army of Ten- 
nessee.—Condition of his Army.—An Offensive Campaign suggested.—Pro- 
posed Objects to be accomplished.—General Johnston’s Plans.—Advance of 
Sherman.—The Strength of the Confederate Position.—General Johnston ex- 
pects General Sherman to give Battle at Dalton—The Enemy’s Flank Move- 
ment via Snake-Creek Gap to Resaca.—Johnston falls back to Resaca.—Fur- 
ther Retreat to Adairsville—General Johnston’s Reasons.—Retreat to Cass- 
ville—Projected Engagement at Kingston frustrated—Retreat beyond the 
Etowah River.—Strong Position at Alatoona abandoned.—Nature of the Coun- 
try between Marietta and Dallas.—Engagements at New Hope Church.—Army 
takes Position at Kenesaw.—Senator: Hill’s Letter.—Death of Lieutenant-Gen- 
eral Polk.—Battle at Kenesaw Mountain.—Retreat beyond the Chattahoochee. 
—Results reviewed.—Popular Demand for Removal of General Johnston.— 
Reluctance to remove him.—Reasons for Removal.—Assignment of General 
J. B. Hood to the Command.—He assumes the Offensive.-—Battle of Peach-tree 
Creek.—Death of General W. H. T. Walker.—Sherman’s Movement to Jones- 
boro.—Defeat of Hardee.—Evacuation of Atlanta.—Sherman’s Inhuman Order. 
—Visit to Georgia.—Suggested Operations.—Want of Codperation by the 
Governor of Georgia.—Conference with Generals Beauregard, Hardee, and 
Cobb, at Augusta.—Departure from Original Plan.—General Hood’s Movement 
against the Enemy’s Communications.—Partial Successes.—Withdrawal of the 
Army to Gadsden and Movement against Thomas.—Sherman burns Atlanta and 
begins his March to the Sea.—Vandalism.—Direction of his Advance.—General 
Wheeler’s Opposition.—His Valuable Service—Sherman reaches Savannah.— 
General Hardee’s Command.—The Defenses of the City.—Assault and Capture 
of Fort McAlister—The Results.—Hardee evacuates Savannah. 


On December 16, 1863, I directed General J. E. Johnston 
to transfer the command of the Department of Mississippi and 
East Louisiana to Lieutenant-General Polk, and repair to Dal- 
ton, Georgia, to assume command of the Army of Tennessee, 
representing at that date an effective total of 43,094. My in- 
formation led me to believe that the condition of that army, in all 
that constitutes efficiency, was satisfactory, and that the men 
were anxious for an opportunity to retrieve the loss of prestige 
sustained in the disastrous battle of Missionary Ridge. I was 
also informed that the enemy’s forces, then occupying Chatta- 
nooga, Bridgeport, and Stevenson, with a detached force at Knox- 


548 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ville, were weaker in numbers than at any time since the battle 
of Missionary Ridge, and that they were especially deficient in 
cavalry and in artillery and train-horses. I desired, therefore, 
that prompt and vigorous measures be taken to enable our troops 
to commence active operations against the enemy as early as 
practicable. It was important to guard against the injurious 
results to the morale of the troops, which always attend a pro- 
longed season of inactivity ; but the recovery of the territory in 
Tennessee and Kentucky, which we had been compelled to 
abandon, and on the supplies of which the proper subsistence 
of our armies mainly depended, imperatively demanded an on- 
ward movement. I believed that, by a rapid concentration of 
our troops between the scattered forces of the enemy, without 
attempting to capture his intrenched positions, we could compel 
him to accept battle in the open field, and that, should we fail 
to draw him out of his intrenchments, we could move upon his 
line of communications. The Federal force at Knoxville de- . 
pended mainly for support on its connection with that at Chatta- 
nooga, and both were wholly dependent on uninterrupted com- 
munication with Nashville. Could we, then, by interposing 
our force, separate these two bodies of the enemy, and cut off 
his communication from Nashville to Chattanooga by destroying 
the railroad, both conditions were fulfilled. Of the practica- 
bility of this movement I had little doubt; of its expediency, 
if practicable, there could be none. I impressed repeatedly 
upon General Johnston by letter, and by officers of my staff 
and others, sent to him by me for the purpose of putting him 
in possession of these views, the importance of a prompt aggres- 
sive movement by the Army of Tennessee. The following 
were among the considerations presented to General Johnston, 
at my request, by Brigadier-General W. N. Pendleton, chief 
of artillery of the Army of Northern Virginia, on April 16, 
1864; 

1. To take the enemy at disadvantage while weakened, it is 
believed, by sending troops to Virginia, and having others still 
absent on furlough. 

2. To break up his plans by anticipating and frustrating 
his combinations. 


1864] CORDIALLY APPROVED OF, 5A 


3. So to press him in his present position as to prevent his 
heavier massing in Virginia. 

4. To defeat him in battle, and gain great consequent strength 
in supplies, men, and productive territory. 

5. To prevent the waste of the army incident to inac- 
tivity. 

6. To inspirit the troops and the country by success, and to 
discourage the enemy. 

7. To obviate the necessity of falling back, which might 
probably occur if our antagonist be allowed to consummate his 
plans without molestation. 

General Johnston cordially approved of an aggressive move- 
ment, and informed me of his purpose to make it as soon as re- 
enforcements and supplies, then on the way, should reach him. 
He did not approve the proposed advance into Tennessee. He 
believed that the Federal forces in Tennessee were not weaker, 
- but if anything stronger, than at Missionary Ridge; that defeat 
beyond the Tennessee would probably prove ruinous to us, re- 
sulting in the loss of his army, the occupation of Georgia by the 
enemy, the “ piercing of the Confederacy in its vitals,” and the 
loss of all the southwestern territory. He proposed, therefore, 
to stand on the defensive until strengthened, “ to watch, prepare, 
and strike” as soon as possible. As soon as reénforced, he de- 
clared his purpose to advance to Ringgold, attack there, and, 
if successful, as he expected to be, to strike at Cleveland, cut 
the railroad, control the river, and thus isolate East Tennessee, 
and, as a consequence, force his antagonist to give battle on this 
side of the Tennessee River. Simultaneously with, and in aid 
of, this movement, General Johnston proposed that a large cav- 
alry force should be sent to Middle Tennessee, in the rear of 
the enemy. These operations, he thought, would result in 
forcing the Federal army to evacuate the Tennessee Valley, 
and make an advance into the heart of the State safely prac- 
ticable. 

The irreparable loss. of time in making any forward move- 
ment as desired having sufficed for the combinations which 
rendered an advance across the Tennessee River no longer prac- 
ticable, I took prompt measures to enable General Johnston 


550 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


to carry out immediately his own proposition to strike. first 
at Ringgold and then at Cleveland, proposing that General 
Buckner should threaten Knoxville, General Forrest advance 
into or threaten Middle Tennessee, and General Roddy hold the 
enemy in northern Alabama, and thus prevent his concentra- 
tion in our front. This movement, although it held out no such 
promise as did the plan of advance before the enemy had had 
time to make his combinations, might have been attended with 
good results had it been promptly executed. But no such move- 
ment was made or even attempted. General Johnston’s belief 
that General Grant would be ready to assume the offensive be- 
fore he could be prepared to do so, proved too well founded, 
while his purpose, if the Federal army did not attack, that we 
should prepare and take the initiative ourselves, was never car- 
ried out.* 

On the morning of May 2, 1864, General Johnston discov- 
ered that the enemy, under the command of General Sherman, - 
was advancing against him, and two days subsequently it was 
reported that he had reached Ringgold (about fifteen miles north 
of Dalton) in considerable force. 

At this date the official returns show that the effective 
strength of the Army of Tennessee, counting the troops actu- 
ally in position at Dalton and those in the immediate rear of 
that place, was about fifty thousand. When to these is added 
General Polk’s command (then en route), and the advance of 
which joined him at Resaca, the effective strength of General 
Johnston’s army was not less than 68,620 men of all arms, ex- 
cluding from the estimate the thousands of men employed on 
extra duty, amounting, as General Hood states, to ten thou- 


5) 
sand when he assumed command of the army. 


* Tt was during this time, i. e., in March and April, 1864, that Forrest made his 
extraordinary expedition from north Mississippi across Tennessee to Paducah, Ken- 
tucky, and continued his operations against depots of supplies, lines of communica- 
tion, and troops moving to reénforce Sherman—having, on June 11th, a severe ac- 
tion in Tishemingo with a force estimated at eight or nine thousand, supposed to be 
on their way to join Sherman. The energy, strategy, and high purposes of Forrest, 
during all this period, certainly entitle him to higher military rank than that of a 
partisan, and enroll him in the list of great cavalry commanders. Some of his other 
expeditions are elsewhere mentioned in these pages. 


1864] PLACED AT HIS DISPOSAL. 551 


Army at Dalton, May 1, 1864, according to General John- 
SLOMISOS UAL Cee aircon cess vee 's scersiss cain oleiainicen 37,652 infantry. 
2,812 artillery. 
2,392 cavalry. 


Mereer’s brigade, joined May 2d............. 000 cccees 2,000 infantry. 
Thirty-seventh Mississippi Regiment, en rowte........... 400 “ 
Dibrell’s and Harrison’s brigades in rear, recruiting their 

OCR CNet tet prot, Taleo) sisi ere ie/s'e » tue evuaeld eloes.c eo 2,336 cavalry, 
Martin’s division’at Cartersville. . oi... 3.0.00. ce sees L000 e “4 

49,292 

EAP SICOMMBIAIA Sear te geen ewe ARTA ee he ee 19,330 

Maralue tec tive terete Ceke etic te trac 6c crs: chss o'aosaie een 68,620 


To enable General Johnston to repulse the hostile advance 
and assume the offensive, no effort was spared on the part of 
the Government. Almost all the available military strength of 
the south and west, in men and supplies, was pressed forward 
and placed at his disposal. The supplies of the commissary, 
' quartermaster, and ordnance departments of his army were rep- 
resented as ample and suitably located. The troops, encouraged 
by the large accessions of strength which they saw arriving daily, 
and which they knew were marching rapidly to their support, 
were eager to advance, and confident in their power to achieve 
victory and recover the territory which they had lost. Their 
position was such as to warrant the confident expectation of suc- 
cessful resistance at least. Long mountain-ranges, penetrated 
by few and difficult roads and paths, and deep and wide rivers, 
seemed to render our position one from which we could not be 
dislodged or turned, while that of the enemy, dependent for 
his supplies upon a single line of railroad from Nashville to the 
point where he was operating, was manifestly perilous. The 
whole country shared the hope which the Government enter- 
tained, that a decisive victory would soon be won in the moun- 
tains of Georgia, which would free the south and west from 
invasion, would open to our occupation and the support of our 
armies the productive territory of Tennessee and Kentucky, 
and so recruit our army in the West as to render it impracti- 
cable for the enemy to accumulate additional forces in Virginia. 


* “ Narrative,” p. 302, 


BBQ RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


On May 6th the Confederate forces were in position in and 
near Dalton, which point General Johnston believed that Gen- 
eral Sherman would attack with his whole force. This belief 
seems to have been held by General Johnston until the evening 
of May 12th, when, having previously learned the proximity of 
the advance of Lieutenant-General Polk’s command, and that 
the rest of his troops were hurrying forward to reénforce him, 
but discovering that the main body of Sherman’s army was 
moving round his left flank, x7a Snake-Creek Gap to Resaca, 
under cover of Rocky-Face Mountain, he withdrew his troops 
from Dalton and fell back on Resaca, situated on the Western 
and Atlantic Railroad, eighteen miles south of Dalton on a 
peninsula formed by the junction of the Oostenaula and Cona- 
sauga Rivers. The Confederate position at this place was 
strengthened by continuous rifle-pits and strong field-works, by 
which it was protected on the flanks on the above-named rivers, 
and a line of retreat across the Oostenaula secured. Informa- 
tion, on May 15th, that the right of the Federal army was cross- 
ing the Oostenaula near Calhoun (four miles south of Resaca), 
thus threatening his line of communications, induced General 
Johnston to fall back from Resaca toward Adairsville, thirteen 
miles south on the railroad. General Johnston, in accounting 
for his abandonment of his strong position at Dalton, and of his 
subsequent position at Resaca, states that he was dislodged from 
the first position—that in front of Dalton—by General Sher- 
man’s movement to his right through Snake-Creek Gap, threat- 
ening our line of communication at Resaca; and from the posi- 
tion taken at Resaca to meet that movement, by a similar one 
on the part of the Federal General toward Calhoun—the second 
being covered by the river, as the first had been by the moun- 
tains. 

After abandoning Resaca, General Johnston hoped to find a 
good position near Calhoun ; but, finding none, he fell back toa 
position about a mile north of Adairsville, where the valley of the 
Oothcaloga was supposed from the map to be so narrow that his 
army, formed in line of battle across it, could hold the heights 
on both flanks. On reaching this point, however, it was found 
that the valley was so much broader than was supposed, that the 


1864] THE BEST HE SAW DURING THE WAR. BES 


army, in line of battle, could not obtain the anticipated advantage 
of ground. Hence a further retreat to Cassville was ordered, 
seventeen miles farther south, and a few miles to the east of the 
railroad. Here, supposing that the Federal army would divide, 
one column following the railroad through Kingston and the 
other the direct road to the Etowah Railroad Bridge through 
Cassville, General Johnston hoped that the opportunity would 
be offered him to engage and defeat one of the enemy’s columns 
before it could receive aid from the other, and, as the distance 
between them would be greatest at Kingston, he determined to 
attack at this point. The coming battle was announced in or- 
ders to each regiment of the army. 

The battle, for causes which were the subject of dispute, did 
not take place as General Johnston had originally announced, 
and, instead of his attacking the divided columns of the enemy, 
the united Federal army was preparing to attack him. Here 
our army occupied a position which General Johnston describes 
as “the best that he saw during the war,” but owing, as he rep- 
resents, to an expressed want of confidence on the part of Lieu- 
tenant-Generals Hood and Polk in their ability to resist the 
enemy, the army was again (May 19, 1864) ordered to retreat 
beyond the Etowah. 

General Hood, in his official report, and in a book written by 
him since the war, takes a very different view of the position in 
rear of Cassville, and states that he and General Polk explained 
that their corps were on ground commanded and enfiladed by 
the batteries of the enemy, therefore wholly unsuited for de- 
fense, and, unless it was proposed to attack, that the position 
should be abandoned. General Shoup, a scientific and gallant 
soldier, confirms this opinion of the defects of the position, as 
does Captain Morris, chief-engineer of the Army of Mississippi, 
and others then on duty there.* 

The next stand of our army was at Alatoona, in the Etowah 
Mountains, and south of the river of that name; but the re- 
ported extension of the Federal army toward Dallas, threaten- 
ing Marietta, was deemed to necessitate the evacuation of that 
strong position. The country between Dallas and Marietta, 


* “ Advance and Retreat,” by J. B. Hood, pp. 98-116. 


554 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


eighteen miles wide, and lying in a due westerly direction from 
the latter place, constitutes a natural fortress of exceptional 
strength. Densely wooded, traversed by ranges of steep hills, 
seamed at intervals by ravines both deep and rugged, with very 
few roads, and those ill constructed and almost impassable to 
wheels, it is difficult to imagine a country better adapted for 
defense, where the advantages of numerical superiority in an 
invading army were more thoroughly neutralized, or where, 
necessarily ignorant of the topography, it was compelled to 
advance with greater caution. 

The engagements at New Hope Church, June 27th and 
28th, though severe and marked by many acts of gallantry, did 
not result in any advantage to our army. Falling back slowly 
as the enemy advanced to Acworth (June 8th), General John- 
ston made his next stand in that mountainous country that lies 
between Acworth and Marietta, remarkable for the three clearly 
defined eminences : Kenesaw Mountain, to the west of the rail- 
road, and overlooking Marietta; Lost Mountain, half-way be- 
tween Kenesaw and Dallas, and west of Marietta; and Pine 
Mountain, about half a mile farther to the north, forming, as it 
were, the apex of a triangle, of which Kenesaw and Lost Moun- 
tains form the base. These heights are connected by ranges of 
lower heights, intersected by numerous ravines, and thickly 
wooded. The right of our army rested on the railroad, the line 
extending four or five miles in a westerly direction, protected 
by strong earthworks, with abatis on every avenue of approach. 
While the enemy, feeling his way slowly, was skirmishing on 
the right of our position, our army, our country, and mankind 
at large, sustained an irreparable loss on June 13th in the 
death of that noble Christian and soldier, Lieutenant-General 
Polk. Having accompanied Generals Johnston and Hardee to 
the Confederate outpost on Pine Mountain, in order to acquaint 
himself more thoroughly with the nature of the ground in 
front of the position held by his corps, he was killed by a 
shot from a Federal battery six or seven hundred yards dis- 
tant, which struck him in the chest, passing from left to right. 
Since the ealamitous fall of General Albert Sidney Johnston 
at Shiloh and of General T. J. Jackson at Chancellorsyille, the 


1864] RETREAT FOLLOWED RETREAT. 555 


country sustained no heavier blow than in the death of General 
Polk. 

On June 18th, heavy rains having swollen Nose’s Creek on 
the left of our position so that it became impassable, the Fed- 
eral army, under cover of this stream, extended its lines several 
miles beyond Johnston’s left flank toward the Chattahoochee, 
causing a further retrograde movement by a portion of his force. 
For several days brisk fighting occurred at various points of our 
line. 

The cavalry attack on Wheeler’s force on the 20th, the at- 
tack upon Hardee’s position on the 24th, and the general assault 
upon the Confederate position on the 27th were firmly met and 
handsomely repulsed. On the 4th of July, it having been re- 
ported by General G. W. Smith, in command of about a thou- 
sand militia, and occupying the extreme left of our army, that 
the enemy’s “cavalry was pressing him in such force that he 
would be compelled to abandon the ground he had been hold- 
ing and retire before morning to General Shoup’s line of re- 
doubts,” * constructed on the high ground near the Chattahoochee 
and covering the approaches to the railroad-bridge and Turner’s 
Ferry, General Johnston deemed it necessary to abandon his 
position at Kenesaw on July 5th and fall back to the line con- 
structed by General Shoup, as the enemy’s position covered one 
of the main roads to Atlanta, and was nearer to that city than 
the main body of General Johnston’s-force. On the 9th, Sher- 
man having crossed the Chattahoochee with two corps on the 
day previous, the Confederate army crossed that river and estab- 
lished itself two miles in its rear. 

Thus, from Dalton to Resaca, from Resaca to Adairsville, 
from Adairsville to Alatoona (involving by the evacuation of 
Kingston the loss of Rome, with its valuable mills, foundries, 
and large quantities of military stores), from Alatoona to Kene- 
saw, from Kenesaw to the Chattahoochee, and then to Atlanta ; 
retreat followed retreat, during seventy-four days of anxious 
hope and bitter disappointment, until at last the Army of Ten- 
nessee fell back within the fortifications of Atlanta. The Federal 
army soon occupied the arc of a circle extending from the rail- 


* Johnston’s “ Narrative,” p. 346. 


556 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


road between Atlanta and the Chattahoochee River to some miles 
south of the Georgia Railroad (from Atlanta to Augusta) in a 
direction north and northeast of Atlanta. We had suffered a 
disastrous loss of territory. 

Whether the superior numerical strength of the enemy, by 
enabling him to extend his force beyond the flank of ours, did 
thereby necessitate the abandonment of every position taken by 
our army, and whether the enemy, declining to assault any of 
our intrenched camps, would have ventured to leave it in rear, 
upon his only line of communication and supply, or whether 
we might have obtained more advantageous results by a vigor- 
ous and determined effort to attack him in detail during some 
of his many flank movements—are questions upon which there 
has been a decided conflict of opinion, and upon which it would 
be for me now neither useful nor pleasant to enter. When it be- 
came known that the Army of Tennessee had been successively 
driven from one strong position to another, until finally it had 
reached the earthworks constructed for the exterior defense of 
Atlanta, the popular disappointment was extreme. The possible 
fall of the “Gate City,” with its important railroad communica- 
tion, vast stores, factories for the manufacture of all sorts of 
military supplies, rolling-mill and foundries, was now contem- 
plated for the first time at its full value, and produced intense 
anxiety far and wide. From many quarters, including such as 
had most urged his assignment, came delegations, petitions, and 
letters, urging me to remove General Johnston from the com- 
mand of the army, and assign that important trust to some 
officer who would resolutely hold and defend Atlanta. While 
sharing in the keen sense of disappointment at the failure of the 
campaign which pervaded the whole country, I was perhaps 
more apprehensive than others of the disasters likely to result 
from it, because I was in a position to estimate more accurately 
their probable extent. On the railroads threatened with de- 
struction, the armies then fighting the main battles of the war 
in Virginia had for some time to a great degree depended for 
indispensable supplies, yet I did not respond to the wishes of 
those who came in hottest haste for the removal of General 
Johnston ; for here again, more fully than many others, I realized 


1864] ‘DANGER OF CHANGING COMMANDERS. 5DdT 


how serious it was to change commanders in the presence of the 
enemy. This clamor for his removal commenced immediately 
after it became known that the army had fallen back from Dal- 
ton, and it gathered volume with each remove toward Atlanta. 
Still I resisted the steadily increasing pressure which was 
brought to bear to induce me to revoke his assignment, and only 
issued the order relieving him from command when I became 
satisfied that his declared purpose to occupy the works at At- 
lanta with militia levies and withdraw his army into the open 
country for freer operations, would inevitably result in the loss. 
of that important point, and where the retreat would cease could 
not be foretold. If the Army of Tennessee was found to be 
unable to hold positions of great strength like those at Dalton, 
Resaca, Etowah, Kenesaw, and on the Chattahoochee, I could 
not reasonably hope that it would be more successful in the 
plains below Atlanta, where it would find neither natural nor 
artificial advantages of position. As soon as the Secretary of 
War showed me the answer which he had just received in reply 
to his telegram to General Johnston, requesting positive infor- 
mation as to the General’s plans and purposes, I gave my per- 
mission to issue the order relieving General Johnston and 
directing him to turn over to General Hood the command of 
the Army of Tennessee. I was so fully aware of the danger of 
changing commanders of an army while actively engaged with 
the enemy, that I only overcame the objection in view of an 
emergency, and in the hope that the impending danger of the 
loss of Atlanta might be averted. 

The following extracts are made from a letter of the Hon. 
Benjamin H. Hill, of Georgia, written at Atlanta, October 
12, 1878, and handed to me by the friend to whom it was ad- 
dressed : 


“On Wednesday or Thursday, I think the 28th or 29th of June, 
1864, a messenger came to my house, sent, as he said, by General 
Johnston, Senator Wigfall, of Texas, and Governor Brown, of 
Georgia. 

“The purpose of his mission, as he explained, was to persuade 
me to write a letter to President Davis urging him to order either 


BQ RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Morgan or Forrest with five thousand men into Sherman’s rear, 
CECa~ es ; ! 
“The result of this interview was a determination on my part 
to go at once to see General Johnston, and place myself at his 
service. I reached his headquarters near Marietta, on the line 
of the Kenesaw, on Friday morning, which was the last day of 
June or the first day of July. We had a full and free interview, 
and I placed myself unreservedly at his disposal. 

“He explained at length that he could not attack General Sher- 
man’s army in their intrenchments, nor could he prevent Sherman 
from ditching round his (Johnston’s) flank and compelling his 
retreat. 

“The only method of arresting Sherman’s advance was to send 
a force into his rear, cut off his supplies, and thus compel Sherman 
either to give battle on his (Johnston’s) terms or retreat. In 
either case, he thought, he could defeat Sherman, and probably 
destroy his army. 

“T said to him, ‘As you do not propose to attack General Sher- 
man in his intrenchments, could you not spare a sufficient number 
of your present army, under Wheeler or some other, to accomplish 
this work ?’ 

“He said he could not—that he needed all the force he had in 
front. 

“He then said that General Morgan was at Abingdon, Vir- 
ginia, with five thousand cavalry, and, if the President would so 
order, this force could be sent into Sherman’s rear at once. 

“He also said that Stephen D. Lee had sixteen thousand men 
under him in Mississippi, including the troops under Forrest and 
Roddy, and that, if Morgan could not be sent, five thousand of 
those under Forrest could do the work. Either Morgan or For- 
rest, with five thousand men, could compel Sherman to fight at a 
disadvantage or retreat, and there was no reason why either should 
not be sent if the President should give the order. He explained 
that he (General Johnston) had had a consultation with Senator 
Wigfall and Governor Brown, the result of which was the messen- 
ger to me to secure my codperation to influence President Davis 
to make the order. I repelled the idea that any influence with the 
President was needed, and stated that, if the facts were as Gen- 


eral Johnston reported them, the reénforcement would be sent on 
his request. 


LL LA 


1864] THE PURPOSE OF MY MISSION. 559 


“ But the situation was so critical, involving, as I believed and 
explained at length to General Johnston, the fate of the Confed- 
eracy, that I said I would go in person to Richmond and lay all 
the facts before the President, and I did not doubt he would act 
promptly. we 

“T then said to General Johnston : ‘How long can you hold 
Sherman north of the Chattahoochee River? This is important, 
because I must go to Richmond, and Morgan must go from Vir- 
ginia or Forrest from Mississippi, and this will take some time, 
and all must be done before Sherman drives you to Atlanta.’ 
General Johnston did not answer this question with directness, 
but gave me data which authorized me to conclude that he could 
hold Sherman north of the Chattahoochee River at least fifty-four 
days, and perhaps sixty days. I made this calculation with Gen- 
eral Johnston’s data in his presence, and told him the result, and 
he assented to it. When this result was stated, General Hood, 
who was present, said, ‘Mr. Hill, when we leave our present line, 
we will, in my judgment, cross the Chattahoochee River very rap- 
idly. ‘Why, what makes you think that ?’ said General John- 
ston, with some interest. ‘Because,’ answered General Hood, 

‘this line of the Kenesaw is the strongest line we can get in this 
country. If we surrender this to Sherman, he can reconnoiter 
from its summit the whole country between here and Atlanta, and 
there is no such line of defense in the distance.’ 

“<] differ with your conclusion,’ said General Johnston. ‘I 

admit this is a strong line of defense, but I have two more strong 
lines between this and the river, from which I can hold Sherman 
a long time.’ 
_ “Twas delayed en route somewhat, and reached Richmond on 
Sunday morning week, which I think was the 9th day of July. I 
went to the hotel, and in a few moments was at the Executive 
‘mansion. 

“This interview with Mr. Davis I can never forget. 

“J laid before him carefully, and in detail, all the facts elicited 
in the conversation with General Johnston, and explained fully 
the purpose of my mission. When I had gone through, the 
President took up the facts, one by one, and fully explained the 
situation. I remember very distinctly many of the facts, for the 
manner as well as matter stated by Mr. Davis was impressive. 
‘Long ago,’ said the President, ‘I ordered Morgan to make this 


860 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


movement upon Sherman’s rear, and suggested that his best plan 
was to go directly from Abingdon through East Tennessee. But 
Morgan insisted that, if he were permitted to go through Ken- 
tucky and around Nashville, he could greatly recruit his horses 
and his men by volunteers. I yielded, and allowed him to have 
his own way. He undertook it, but was defeated, and has re- 
treated back, and is now at Abingdon with only eighteen hun- 
dred men, very much demoralized, and badly provided with 
horses.’ He next read a dispatch from General Stephen D. Lee, to 
the effect that A. J. Smith had left Memphis with fifteen thousand 
men, intended either as a reénforcement for Sherman or for an 
attack on Mobile; that, to meet this force, he (Lee) had only 
seven thousand men, including the commands of Forrest and 
Roddy. He would like to have reénforcements, but anyhow, with 
or without reénforcements, ‘he should meet Smith, and whip him, 
too.” ‘Ah! there is a man for you,’ said Mr. Davis. And he 
did meet Smith with his inferior force, and whipped him, too. He 
next read a dispatch from a commander at Mobile (who, I think, 
was General Maury), to the effect that Canby was marching from 
New Orleans with twenty thousand men, and A. J. Smith from 
Memphis with fifteen thousand, intending to make a combined 
attack on Mobile. To meet this force of thirty-five thousand men 
he had four thousand, and Lee, with Forrest and Roddy, seven 
thousand, making eleven thousand in all. He asked for reén- 
forcements. 

“ After going fully through this matter, and showing how utter- 
ly General Johnston was at fault, as to the numbers of troops in 
the different commands, the President said, ‘How long did you 
understand General Johnston to say he could hold Sherman north 
of the Chattahoochee River?’ From fifty-four to sixty days 
I said, and repeated the facts on that subject as above stated. 
Thereupon the President read me a dispatch from General John- 
ston, announcing that he had crossed or was crossing the Chatta- 
hoochee River.” 

“The next day (Monday), Mr. Seddon, the Secretary of War, 
called to see me. He asked me to reduce my interview with 
General Johnston to writing, for the use of the Cabinet, and I did 
so, and gave it to him. Mr. Seddon said he was anxious for Gen- 
eral Johnston’s removal, and he was especially anxious because, he 


1864] DECLINED TO GIVE ANY POSITIVE ADVICE. 561 


said, he was one of those who was responsible for his appoint- 
ment. He had urged his appointment very earnestly, but it was 
a great mistake, and he desired to do all he could, even at this 
late day, to atone for it. The President, he said, was averse to the 
removal. He made the appointment against his own convictions, 
but thought it a very hazardous thing to remove him now, and he 
would not do it, if he could have any assurance that General 
Johnston would not surrender Atlanta without a battle. 

“ Other members of the Cabinet, I know, had views similar to 
those expressed by Mr. Seddon. The question, or rather the situ- 
ation, was referred to General Lee, but he declined to give any 
positive advice, and expressed regret that so grave a movement as 
the removal of General Johnston, under the circumstances exist- 
ing, should be found to be necessary.” * 

“During all the time, a telegraphic correspondence was kept 
up with General Johnston—the object being to ascertain if he 
would. make a determined fight to save Atlanta. His answers 
were thought to be evasive. Finally, the question was put to 
General Johnston categorically to this effect : ‘ Will you surrender 
Atlanta without a fight?’ To this the answer was regarded as 
not only evasive, but as indicating the contemplated contingency 
of surrendering Atlanta, on the ground that the Governor of the 
State had not furnished, as expected, sufficient State troops to 
man the city while the army was giving battle outside. ‘This 
evasive answer to a positive inquiry,’ said one of the Cabinet to 
me, ‘brought the President over. He yielded very reluctantly.’ 
I was informed of the result at once, and was also informed that 
Mr. Davis was the last man in the Cabinet to agree to the order of 


removal.”. .. 


General Hood assumed command on the 18th of July. In 
his report of the operations of the army while under his com- 
mand, he states that the effective strength of his force on that 


‘* Mr, Seddon, ex-Secretary of War, in a letter written to me on the 10th of Feb- 
ruary, 1879, states, in regard to his interview with General Lee, that it was held after 
the determination had been made “ to remove General Johnston from his command 
at Atlanta,” and says of the purpose of the interview with General Lee: “It was de- 
signed merely to secure General Lee’s estimate of qualifications in the selection of a 
successor for the command.” 


83 


562 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


day was forty-eight thousand seven hundred and fifty men of all 
arms. 

Feeling that the only chance of holding Atlanta consisted in 
assuming the offensive by forcing the enemy to accept battle, Gen- 
eral Hood determined, on the 20th of July, to attack the corps 
of Generals Thomas and Schofield, who were in the act of cross- 
ing Peachtree Creek, hoping to defeat Thomas before he could 
fortify himself, then to fall on Schofield, and finally to attack 
McPherson’s corps, which had reached Decatur, on the Georgia 
Railroad, driving the enemy back to the creek and into the nar- 
row space included between that stream and the Chattahoochee 
River. Owing to an unfortunate misapprehension of the order 
of battle and the consequent delay in making the attack, the 
movement failed. On the 21st, finding that McPherson’s corps 
was threatening his communications, General Hood resolved to 
attack him at or near Decatur, in front and on flank, turn his 
left, and then, following up the movement from the right to 
the left with his whole army, force the enemy down Peachtree 
Creek. This engagement was the hottest of the campaign, but 
it failed to accomplish any other favorable result than to check 
General McPherson’s movement upon the communications of 
our army, while it cost heavily in the loss of many officers 
and men, foremost among whom was that preuw chevalier and 
accomplished soldier, Major-General W. H. T. Walker, of 
Georgia. 

Beyond expeditions by the enemy, for the most part by 
cavalry, to destroy the lines of railroad by which supplies and 
reénforcements could reach Atlanta, and successful efforts on 
our part to frustrate their movements, resulting in the defeat 
and capture of General Stoneman and his command near Ma- 
con, the utter destruction of the enemy’s cavalry force engaged 
by General Wheeler at Newnan, and the defeat of Sherman’s 
design to unite his cavalry at the Macon and Western Railroad, 
and effectually destroy that essential avenue for the conveyance 
of stores and ammunition for our army, no movement of special 
importance took place between July 22d and August 26th, at 
which latter date it was discovered that Sherman had aban- 
doned his works upon our right, and, leaving a considerable 


1864] PRIVATE PROPERTY SHOULD BE RESPECTED. 563 


force to hold his intrenched position at the railroad-bridge over 
the Chattahoochee, was marching his main body to the south 
and southwest of Atlanta, to use it, as he himself has expressed 
it, “against the communications of Atlanta, instead of against 
its intrenchments.” On the 30th, it being known that he was 
moving on Jonesboro, the county town of Clayton County, 
about twenty miles south of Atlanta, General Hood sent two 
corps under General Hardee to confront him at that point, in 
the hope that he could drive him across Flint River, oblige him 
to abandon his works on the left, and then be able to attack him 
successfully in flank. The attack at Jonesboro was unsuccessful. 
General Hardee was obliged, on September 1st, to fall back to 
Lovejoy’s, seven miles south of Jonesboro, on the Macon and 
Western Railroad. Thus, the main body of the Federal army was 
between Hardee and Atlanta, and the immediate evacuation of 
that city became a necessity. There was an additional and co- 
gent reason for that movement. Owing to the obstinately cruel 
policy which the United States Government had pursued for 
some time, of refusing on any terms to exchange prisoners of 
war, upward of thirty thousand prisoners were at Andersonville 
in southwestern Georgia at this time. To guard against the 
release and arming of these prisoners, General Hood thought 
it necessary to place our army between them and the enemy, 
and abandon the project, which he thought feasible, of moving 
on Sherman’s communications and destroying his depots of sup- 
plies at Marietta. 

Upon abandoning Atlanta, Hood marched his army in a 
westerly direction, and formed a junction with the two corps 
which had been operating at Jonesboro and Lovejoy’s under 
General Hardee. 

General Sherman, desisting from any further aggressive 
movement in the field, returned to Atlanta, which had been 
formally surrendered by the Mayor on September 2d, with 
the promise, as reported, on the part of the Federal com- 
mander, that non-combatants and private property should be 
respected. Shortly after his arrival, the commanding Gen- 
eral of the Federal forces, forgetful of this promise, and on 
the pretense that the exigencies of the service required that 


564 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the place should be used exclusively for military purposes, is- 
sued an order directing all civilians living in Atlanta, male and 
female, to leave the city within five days from the date of the 
order (September 5th). Since Alva’s atrocious eruelties to 
the non-combatant population of the Low Countries in the six- 
teenth century, the history of war records no instance of such 
barbarous cruelty as that which this order designed to perpe- 
trate. It involved the immediate expulsion from their homes 
and only means of subsistence of thousands of unoffending wo- 
men and children, whose husbands and fathers were either in 
the army, in Northern prisons, or had died in battle. In vain 
did the Mayor and corporate authorities of Atlanta appeal to 
Sherman to revoke or modify this inhuman order, represent 
ing in piteous language “the woe, the horror, and the suffer- 
ing, not to be described by words,” * which its execution would 
inflict on helpless women and infant children. His only reply 
was: 


“T give full credit to your statements of the distress that will 
be occasioned by it, and yet shall not revoke my order, because 
my orders are not designed to meet the humanities of the case.” 


At the time appointed, the women and children were ex- 
pelled from their houses, and, before they were passed within 
our lines, complaint was generally made that the Federal offi- 
cers and men who were sent to guard them had robbed them of 
the few articles of value they had been permitted to take from 
their homes. The cowardly dishonesty of its executioners was 
in perfect harmony with the temper and spirit of the order. 

During the month of September the Federal army in and 
around Atlanta made no movement beyond strengthening its 
defenses and collecting within it large quantities of military 
supplies. General Hood, meantime, held his troops in the vi- 
cinity of Jonesboro. His reports to the War Department rep- 
resented the morale of his army as “greatly impaired by the 
recurrence of retreat,” decreasing in numbers day by day, and 
the surrounding country devoid of natural strength or any ad- 
vantageous position upon which he could retire. With a view 


* Mayor Calhoun’s Petition to General Sherman, September 11, 1864. 


1864] MY FIRST OBJECT WAS. 565 


to judge better the situation, and then determine after personal 
inspection the course which should seem best to pursue, I visited 
General Hood’s headquarters at Palmetto. The crisis was grave. 
It was not to be expected that General Sherman would remain 
long inactive. The rapidity with which he was collecting re- 
cruits and supplies at Atlanta indicated that he contemplated a 
movement farther south, making Atlanta a secondary base. To 
rescue Georgia, save the Gulf States, and retain possession of 
the lines of communication upon which we depended for the 
supplies of our armies in the field, an effort to arrest the fur- 
ther progress of the enemy was necessary ; and to this end the 
railroads in his rear must be effectually torn up, the great rail- 
road-bridge over the Tennessee River at Bridgeport destroyed, 
and the communication between Atlanta, Chattanooga, and 
Nashville completely cut off. Could this be accomplished, all 
the fruits of Sherman’s successful campaign in Georgia would 
be blighted, his capture of Atlanta would become a barren vic- 
tory, and he would probably be compelled to make a retreat to- 
ward Tennessee, at every mile of which he might be harassed 
by our army. Or, should he, relying on Atlanta as a base, push 
forward through Georgia to the Atlantic coast, our army, hay- 
ing eut his communications north of Atlanta, could fall upon 
his rear, and, with the advantages of a better knowledge of the 
country, of the surrounding devoted population, of the auxiliary 
force to be expected under the circumstances, and our superi- 
ority in cavalry, it was not unreasonable to hope that retribu- 
tive justice might overtake the ruthless invader. 

My first object was to fill up the depleted ranks of the army, 
to bring the absentees and deserters back to the ranks, and in- 
duce the Governor and State officials to codperate heartily and 
earnestly with the Confederate Government in all measures that 
might be found necessary to give the proposed movement a 
reasonable prospect of success. 

The avowed objection of the Governor of Georgia to the 
acts of Congress providing for raising troops by conscription, 
and his persistent opposition to the authority of the Conféderate 
Executive to appoint the generals and staff officers of the volun- 
teer organizations received from the States to form the provi- 


566 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


sional army of the Confederacy, caused him frequently to ob- 
struct the Government officials in the discharge of their duty, 
to withhold the assistance which he might be justly expected to 
render, and, in the contemplation of his own views of the duties 
and obligations of the Executive and legislative departments 
of the General Government, to lose sight of those important 
objects, the attainment of which an exalted patriotism might 
have told him depended on the codperation of the State and 
Confederate governments. The inordinate exemption from 
military service as State officials of men between the ages of 
eighteen and forty-five (it was estimated that the number of 
exempts in November, 1864, amounted to fifteen thousand) was 
an abuse which I endeavored in vain to correct. Were the 
majority of the men thus exempted, and who remained at home 
“that the army might be fed,” really engaged in that important 
service, the end might be said to justify the means; but, for any 
less exigent demand, patriotism and humane consideration for 
the brave men at the front required that the number of these 
exempts should be reduced to the minimum, if, indeed, the num- 
ber of those unfit for military duty was not sufficient to per- 
form this service. After a thorough inspection of the Army of 
Tennessee at Palmetto, after conference with several prominent 
Georgians, and notably with that pure patriot and distinguished 
statesman and soldier, General Howell Cobb, whose brain and 
heart and means and energies were all at the service of his coun- 
try, I proceeded to Augusta during the first week of October, 
in order, with Generals Hardee and Cobb and other officers of 
prominence, to meet and confer with General Beauregard, whom 
I had just assigned to the command of the Military Division 
of the West, and to impart to him my views as to the exigen- 
cies of the occasion, and how I thought that they might be most 
advantageously met. | 

Before this time General Hood~had already crossed the 
Chattahoochee with his entire force, moving against the ene- 
my’s line of communication. General Forrest, with a strong 
force of cavalry, had been ordered to Tennessee to strike the 
railroad from Nashville to Chattanooga. During my visit to 
Hood’s army, I learned that the morale of it had been partially 


1864] MUST SURRENDER OR DISPERSE. BOT 


restored, many absentees had returned to duty, and the waning 
hope of the people was beginning to revive. 

The plan of operations which I had discussed with General 
Hood while at his headquarters was fully explained to General 
Beauregard at Augusta, and by him cordially approved. It 
comprised the occupation of a strong position on the enemy’s 
line of communication by the railroad between Atlanta and 
Chattanooga, the capture of his depots of supplies and the small 
garrisons left to guard them. If this, as was probable, should 
cause Sherman to move to attack us in position, in that case, 
if the tone of the troops justified it, a battle should be joined ; 
otherwise, he should retreat toward Gadsden, where supplies 
would be collected, and, should Sherman follow him so far, then 
there, on the dividing line of the States of Georgia and Ala- 
bama, the largest practicable number of militia and home-guards 
of both States would be assembled as an auxiliary force, and 
there a final stand should be made for a decisive battle. If vic- 
torious, as under the circumstances it was hoped we should be, 
the enemy could not retreat through the wasted country behind 
him, and must surrender or disperse. If Sherman should not 
pursue our retiring army to Gadsden, but return to Atlanta to 
march toward the seacoast, he was to be pursued, and, by our 
superiority in cavalry, to be prevented from foraging on the 
country, which, according to our information as to his supplies 
on hand at Atlanta, and as to his inadequate means of trans- 
portation, would be indispensable for the support of his troops. 
Should Sherman, contrary to that information, have supplies 
and transportation sufficient to enable him to march across the 
country, and he should start toward the seacoast, the militia, 
the local troops, and others who could be employed, should ob- 
struct the roads and fords in his front by felling trees, and, by 
burning bridges and other available means, delay his progress 
until his provisions should be consumed and absolute want 
should deplete if not disintegrate his army. It was supposed 
that Augusta, on account of our principal powder-manufactory 
and some important workshops being located there, would be 
the first objective point. of Sherman, should he march toward 
the east. General Hood’s calculation was that, taking a route 


568 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


north of Sherman’s, where he would have smaller streams to 
cross, he could reach Augusta as soon as Sherman. 

General Cobb, the local commander in Georgia, in addition 
to obstructing roads, etc., was, in the last supposed contin- 
gency, to assemble at Augusta the invalid soldiers, the militia, 
and others to defend the place.. General George W. Rains, an 
accomplished soldier and military engineer, was instructed to 
enlarge and strengthen the defenses of the place, and General 
G. R. Rains, the author of the system of defense by sub-terra 
shells, was, on the coming of the enemy, to apply his invention 
to the threatened approaches of the town. There was another 
contemplated contingency, viz., that Sherman, emboldened by 
his recent successes, would move against Hood with such over- 
weening confidence as might offer to the latter the opportunity 
to strike in detail. 

After the full conversation with General Beauregard above 
noticed, General Hardee was called in and asked to give his 
opinion on the plan, which I regarded as entitled to great con- 
sideration, not only because of his high capacity as a soldier, but 
also because of his long connection with the Army of Tennessee, 
and minute knowledge of the country in which it was proposed 
to operate. He had previously been made fully aware of the 
plans and purposes discussed between General Hood and my- 
self, and stated to General Beauregard substantially that, while 
he could not say the plan would succeed, he was confident it 
was the best which we could adopt, and that, if it failed, none 
other with our means would succeed. General Beauregard left 
for General Hood’s headquarters, as I supposed, to aid in the 
execution of the proposed plan, to the success of which the 
larger command with which he was invested, it was hoped, 
would contribute. | 

General Hood moved as was expected upon the enemy’s line 
of communication, and his successes at Big Shanty and Acworth, 
in capturing those stations and thoroughly destroying the rail- 
road between them, and his partial success at Allatoona, caused 
Sherman, leaving one corps to garrison Atlanta, to move out 
with his main body to restore his communications. Hood fur- 
ther succeeded in destroying the railroad from Resaca to Tun- 


1864] HANGING ON HIS REAR. 569 


nel Hill, capturing the enemy’s posts at Tilton, Dalton, and 
Mill-Creek Gap ; but, not deeming his army in condition to risk 
a general engagement, withdrew his forces in a southwesterly 
direction toward Gadsden, which place he reached October 20th, 
finding there supplies adequate for the wants of his troops. 
Sherman had turned back toward Atlanta, and Hood, instead of 
hanging on his rear, not allowing him to repair the damage to 
the railroad, and otherwise harassing him in his march as much 
as possible, after conference with General Beauregard, decided 
to continue his march into Tennessee.* His reasons for this 
change of plan are elaborately and forcibly presented in his book, 
“ Advance and Retreat,” published since the war, and in which 
he emphatically contradicts the attempt which has been made to 
represent that campaign into Tennessee as one projected by me. 
The correspondence of General Sherman, published in the same 
work, shows that Hood was not far wrong in the supposition 
that Sherman would follow the movement made on his line of 
communication; the only error being that he could thus draw 
him beyond the limits of Georgia. After my return to Rich- 
mond, a telegram from General Beauregard informed me of the 
change of programme. My objection to that movement re- 
mained, and, though it was too late to regain the space and time 
which had been lost, I replied promptly on November 30, 1864, 
as follows: 


“General BEAUREGARD, care of Colonel W. M. Browne, Augusta, 
Georgia. 

“Yours of 24th received. It is probable that the enemy, if 
short of supplies, may move directly for the coast. When that 
is made manifest, you will be able to concentrate your forces upon 
the one object, and I hope, if you can not defeat his attempt, that 
you may reduce his army to such condition as to be inefficient for 
further operations. 

“ Until Hood reaches the country proper of the enemy, he can 
searcely change the plans for Sherman’s or Grant’s campaigns. 
_ They would, I think, regard the occupation of Tennessee and 

Kentucky as of minor importance. JEFFERSON Davis.” 


* “ Advance and Retreat,” by General J. B. Hood ; letter of General Beauregard 
to President Davis, p. 278, et seq. 


570 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


To the arguments offered to show that our army could not, 
after it had reached the Tennessee River, have effectually pur- 
sued Sherman in his march through southern Georgia, it is 
only needful to reply that the physical difficulties set forth 
would not have existed, had our army commenced the pursuit 
from Gadsden. 

To make the movement into Tennessee a success, even so 
far as to recover that country, it was necessary that it should 
be executed so promptly as to anticipate the concentration of 
the enemy’s forces, but unforeseen and unavoidable delays oc- 
curred, which gave full time for preparation. After having 
overcome many vexatious detentions, Hood on the 20th of 
November completed his crossing of the Tennessee River at 
Gunter’s Landing, and moved forward into Tennessee on the 
route to Nashville, whither Sherman had sent General Thomas 
for the protection of his depots and communications against an 
apprehended attack by cavalry under General Forrest. 

Most unwilling to criticise the conduct of that very gallant 
and faithful soldier who, battle-scarred and mutilated, survived 
the war, and whose recent death our country has so much de- 
plored, I must say after the event, as I did before it, that I con- 
sider this movement into Tennessee ill-advised. 

Thomas having been sufficiently reénforced in Tennessee to 
enable him to hold Hood in check, and Sherman relieved from 
the necessity of defending himself against an active army, and 
of protecting a long line of railroad communication with a for- 
tified base in his rear, resolved upon his march to the sea, aban- 
doning Atlanta, after having first utterly destroyed that city 
by fire. Not a single house was spared, not even a church, 
Similar acts of vandalism. marked the progress of the Federal 
army at Rome, Kingston, Acworth, Marietta, and every town 
or village along its route, thus carrying out General Sherman’s 
order “to enforce a devastation more or less relentless” along 
the line of his march, where he only encountered helpless women 
and children. The arson of the dwelling-houses of non-com- 
batants and the robbery of their property, extending even to 
the trinkets worn by women, made the devastation as relentless 
as savage instincts could suggest. 


- 1864] MILLIONS WORTH OF PROPERTY. 571 


On November 16th Sherman left his intrenchments around 
Atlanta, and, dividing his army into two bodies, each from 
twenty-five to thirty thousand strong, the one followed the 
Georgia Railroad in the direction of Augusta, and the other 
took the line of the Macon and Western Railroad to Jonesboro. 
Avoiding Macon and Augusta, they passed through central 
Georgia, taking Milledgeville on the way, marching in compact 
column, and advancing with extreme caution, although only op- 
posed by detachments of Wheeler’s cavalry and a few hastily 
formed regiments of raw militia. Partial efforts were made to 
obstruct and destroy the roads in the front and on the flanks of 
the invading army, and patriotic appeals by prominent citizens 
were made to the people, to remove all provisions from its path, 
but no formidable opposition was made, except at the railroad- 
bridge over the Oconee, where Wheeler, with a portion of his 
command and a few militia, held the enemy in check for two 
or three days. With his small force, General Wheeler dar- 
ingly and persistently harassed, and, when practicable, delayed 
the enemy’s advance, attacking and defeating exposed detach- 
ments, deterring his foragers from venturing far from the main 
body, defending all cities and towns along the railroad lines, 
and affording protection to depots of supplies, arsenals, and 
other important Government works. The report of his opera- 
tions from November 14th to December 20th displays a dash, 
activity, vigilance, and consummate skill, which justly entitle 
him to a prominent place on the roll of great cavalry leaders. 
By his indomitable energy, operating on all sides of Sherman’s 
columns, he was enabled to keep the Government and com- 
manders of our troops advised of the enemy’s movements, and, 
by preventing foraging parties from leaving the main body, 
he saved from spoliation all but a narrow tract of country, and 
from the torch millions worth of property which would other- 
wise have been certainly consumed. 

It soon became manifest that Savannah was General Sher- 
man’s objective point. That city was occupied by General W. 
J. Hardee with about eighteen thousand men, a considerable 
portion of which was composed of militia, local troops, reserves, 
and hastily organized regiments and battalions made up of con- 


572 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


valescents from the hospitals and artisans from the Govern- 
ment shops. On the 10th of December the enemy’s columns 
reached the immediate vicinity of Savannah, and on the 12th 
they occupied a semicircular line extending from the Savannah 
River to the Savannah and Gulf Railroad. The defenses of the 
city were strong, the earthworks and other fortifications were 
flanked by inundated rice-swamps extending across the peninsula 
formed by the Savannah and Ogeechee Rivers, and the cause- 
ways leading through them were well fortified by works mount- 
ing heavy guns. With a sufficient force to occupy his long lines 
of defense, General Hardee could have sustained a protracted 
siege. The city was amply supplied, and its lines of communi- 
cation were still open. Although Sherman had reached Savan- 
nah, he had not yet opened communication with the Federal 
fleet. Fort McAllister, situated on the right bank of the Ogee- — 
chee, about six miles from Ossabaw Sound, was a serious obstacle 
in his way, as it was a work of considerable strength, mounting 
twenty-one heavy guns, a deep and wide ditch extending along 
its front, with every avenue of approach swept by the guns 
mounted upon its bastions. The fort was held by a garrison of 
two hundred and fifty men under the command of experienced 
officers. The work was attacked on the evening of the 18th, 
and carried by assault after a short and feeble resistance. In 
consequence of the loss of this fort, Sherman speedily opened 
communication with the fleet, and became perfectly secure against 
any future want of supplies. This also enabled him to obtain 
heavy ordnance for use against the city. He proceeded imme- 
diately to take measures to invest Savannah, and in a few days 
had succeeded in doing so on every side of the city except that 
fronting the river. While Hardee’s troops had not yielded a sin- 
gle position or lost a foot of ground, with the exception of Fort 
McAllister, when, on December 20th, he discovered that Sher- 
man had put heavy siege-guns in position near enough to bom- 
bard the city, and that the enemy was threatening Union Cause- 
way, which extends across the large swamps that lie between 
Savannah and Charleston, and offered the only practicable line 
of retreat, he determined to evacuate the place rather than ex- 
pose the city and its inhabitants to bombardment. He also’ 


vr 


‘4 


4 
Vv 
— 
~ 


1864] THE FIDELITY AND GALLANTRY OF THAT OFFICER. 578 


thought holding it had ceased to be of any special importance, 
and that his troops could do more valuable service in the field. 
Accordingly, on the night of December 20th, having destroyed 
the navy-yard, the Grenelads, and other Gareranie? property, 
and razed the fortifications below the city, he withdrew his 
army and reached Hardeeville on the evening of the 22d, with- 
out hindrance or molestation on the part of the enemy. 

Having heretofore stated my objections to the plan of send- 

_ing Hood’s army into Tennessee after the fall of Atlanta, I will 
now follow it in that campaign, relying for the facts on the 
official report of General Hood of the 15th of February, 1865. 
The fidelity and gallantry of that officer and.the well-known 
magnanimity of his character are a sufficient guarantee of the 
impartiality of his narration. 

He reported the arrival of his army at Gadsden on the 20th 
of October, 1864, where he was joined by General P. G. T. Beau- 
regard, ESE the military department. He writes that, 
after withdrawing from Atlanta, his hope had been that Sherman 
in following might offer an opportunity to strike him in detail, 
but in this he was disappointed. Hood reported that the morale 
of his army, though improved, was not such as, in the opinion 
of his corps commanders, would justify a general engagement 
while the enemy remained united. At Gadsden he found a 
thorough supply of shoes and other stores, but, after a full and 
free conference with General Beauregard at Tuscumbia, he de- 
cided to cross the Tennessee and move against Thomas, who 
with his corps had been detached by Sherman and sent into 
Middle Tennessee. General Beauregard had sent orders to 
General Forrest to move with his cavalry into Tennessee; the 
main body of Hood’s cavalry had been sent to follow Sher- 
man. As the orders to Forrest were accidentally delayed, and 
Hood had not cavalry enough to protect his trains, he was 

compelled to wait for the coming of Forrest, and, to hasten 

‘the meeting, moved down the river as far as Florence, where 
he arrived on the 31st of October. This unfortunate delay 
gave the enemy time to repair the railroad to Chattanooga, 
and accumulate supplies at Atlanta for a march thence toward 
the Atlantic coast. Forrest’s cavalry joined on the 21st of 


sd 


574 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


November, and the movement began. The enemy’s forces at 
that time were concentrated at Pulaski and at Lawrenceburg. 
Hood endeavored to place his army between these forces and 
Nashville, but our cavalry, having driven off the enemy at Law- 
renceburg, gave notice of our advance, and on the 23d he evacu- 
ated Pulaski and moved rapidly by the turnpike and railroad 
to Columbia. On the evening of the 27th of November our 
army took position in front of the works at that place. During 
the night the town was evacuated, and a strong position was 
taken on the opposite side of the river, about a mile and a half 
distant. On the evening of the 28th General Forrest crossed 
Duck River a few miles above Columbia, and in the morning 
of the 29th Stewart’s and Cheatham’s corps followed the cavalry, 
leaving Lieutenant-General Stephen D. Lee’s corps confronting 
the enemy at Columbia. The cavalry and the two infantry corps 
moved in light marching order, the object being, by advancing 
rapidly on roads parallel to the Columbia and Franklin turnpike 
at or near Spring Hill, to cut off that portion of the foe at Co- 
lumbia. The movement having been discovered after Hood’s 
forces had got well on the flank of the enemy, he began to retreat 
along the turnpike toward Spring Hill. About noon of that 
day the cavalry attacked his trains, but found them too strong- 
ly guarded to be captured. The retreat was rapidly conducted 
along’ the turnpike, with flankers thrown out to protect the 
main column. Near Spring Hill Major-General Cheatham, 
being in the advance, commenced to come in contact with the 
retreating column about two miles from Spring Hill. He was 
ordered to attack vigorously, and get possession of the turnpike. 
This was so feebly executed that he failed to attain the object, 
and the enemy passed on toward Spring Hill. Though the 
golden opportunity had passed with daylight, Hood did not aban- 
don the hope of effecting by a night movement the end he sought. 
Accordingly, Lieutenant-General Stewart was furnished with a 
guide, and ordered to move his corps beyond Cheatham’s, and | 
place it across the road beyond Spring Hill. In the dark and 
confusion, he did not succeed in getting the position desired. 
About midnight, ascertaining that the enemy was moving in 
disorder, with artillery, wagons, and troops intermixed, Hood 


1864] ONE OF THE BLOODIEST BATTLES. 575 


sent instructions to General Cheatham to advance a heavy line of 
skirmishers, still further to impede the retreat. “ This was not 
accomplished. The enemy continued to move along the road 
in hurry and confusion nearly all the night. Thus was lost a 
great opportunity for striking him for which we had labored 
so long—the greatest this campaign had offered, and one of 
the greatest during the war. Lieutenant-General S. D. Lee, 
left in front of the enemy at Columbia, was instructed to press 
him the moment he abandoned his position at that point. He 
did not abandon his works until dark, showing that his trains 
obstructed the road for fifteen miles during the day and a great 
part of the night.” At daylight Hood pursued the enemy so 
rapidly as to compel him to burn a number of his wagons. On 
the hills about four miles south of Franklin, he made demon- 
stration as if to give battle, but, when our forces deployed for 
the attack, he retired to Franklin. 

From dispatches captured at Spring Hill, Hood learned that 
Schofield was instructed by Thomas to hold that position. until 
Franklin could be made secure, and thus knew that it was im- 
portant to attack Schofield promptly, and concluded that, if he 
should escape at Franklin, he would gain the fortifications about 
Nashville. Hood reports that “the nature of the position was 
such as to render it inexpedient to attempt any other flank 
movement, and I therefore determined to attack him in front 
and without delay.” 

As this was one of the bloodiest battles of the war, and its 
results materially affected the future, before entering on an 
account of it, I pause for some general reflections. It is 
not quite easy to determine what my gallant friend Hood 
meant by the expression, “the nature of the position.” It may 
have referred to the probability that the enemy, if he at- 
tempted a flank movement, would retreat rapidly, as he had 
done from Columbia, and it is now known that a part of his 
troops and a large part of his train had already been sent across 
the Harpeth River. Thomas’s dispatch indicated a purpose to 
hold Franklin ; and its relation to Murfreesboro, where a garrison 
was maintained, would seem to render this a probable part of a 
plan to maintain communication with Chattanooga. Franklin 


576 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


had to us, as a mere mélitary question, no other value than that 
the road to Nashville led through it. Whether it would have 
been possible to turn the position so promptly as to strike the 
enemy’s line of retreat is a question which no doubt General 
Hood considered and decided in the negative, otherwise he 
would surely have preferred to attack the enemy on the march 
rather than in his intrenchments, especially as these were so near 
to the town that Hood was restrained from using his artillery on 
account of the women and children resident in it. The position 
itself was favorable for defense; the Harpeth River by a short 
bend flows on two sides of the town, and the works in front had 
the center so boldly salient, their flanks resting on the river, as 
to inclose the town in something like a square, two sides being 
river and two sides intrenchment. The exterior line of defense 
had been recently and hastily constructed ; the interior line was 
much stronger. Behind the town there were two bridges, one 
on the main road leading through it, and the other a pontoon- 
bridge a short distance above it. Hood had served with dis- 
tinction under Lee and Jackson, and his tactics were of that 
school. If he had, by an impetuous attack, crushed Schofield’s 
army, without too great a loss to his own, and Forrest could 
have executed his orders to capture the trains when Schofield’s 
army was crushed, we should never have heard complaint 
because Hood attacked at Franklin, and these were the hopes 
with which he made his assault. 

On the 30th of November he formed his line of battle. At 4 
p. M. he gave the order to advance; his troops moved gallantly 
forward, carried the first line, and advanced against the interior 
works ; here the engagement was close and fierce; the combatants 
occupied the opposite sides of the intrenchments, our men ear- 
rying them in some places, many being killed entirely inside 
the enemy’s works. Some of the Tennesseeans, after years of 
absence, saw again their homes, and strove with desperation to 
expel the invader from them ; the contest continued till near mid- 
night, when the enemy abandoned his works and crossed the 
river, leaving his dead and wounded behind him. We had won 
a victory, but it was purchased at fearful cost. General Hood, 
in his letter of December 11, 1864, written near Nashville, 


1864] THICKLY LAY THE GALLANT MEN. BIT 


reported his entire loss at about four thousand five hundred, and 
among them was Major-General Cleburne, Brigadier-Generals 
Gist, John Adams, Strahl, and Granberry, all well known to 
fame, and whose loss we could ill afford to bear. Around Cle- 
burne thickly lay the gallant men who, in his desperate assault, 
followed him with the implicit confidence that in another army 
was given to Stonewall Jackson; and in the one ease, as in the 
other, a vacancy was created which could never be filled. 
Hood reported that the number of dead left on the field by the 
enemy indicated that his loss was equal to or near our own ; that 
those of our men who were captured were inside the enemy’s 
_ works. 

The next morning at daylight, the wounded being cared for 
and the dead buried, Hood moved forward toward Nashville, 
about eighteen miles distant, and Forrest with his cavalry 
closely pursued the enemy. On the 2d of December our 
army took position in front of Nashville about two miles from 
the city, Lieutenant-General Lee’s corps in the center resting 
on the Franklin turnpike, Cheatham’s on the right, Stewart’s on 
the left, and the cavalry on each flank. Hood then commenced 
to construct detached works to cover the flanks, should offensive 
movements be attempted against our flank and rear. The 
enemy still held Murfreesboro with a garrison of about six thou- 
sand, strongly fortified; he also had small forces at Chattanooga 
and Knoxville. It was supposed that he would soon have to 
take the offensive to relieve his garrisons at those points, or 
cause them to be evacuated, in which latter case Hood hoped 
to capture the forces at Murfreesboro, and thus open communi- 
cation with Georgia and Virginia; and he thought, if attacked 
in position, that he could defeat Thomas, gain possession of 
Nashville with its abundant supplies, and thus get the control 
of Tennessee. The people of the country, in the mean time, 
were able and willing to furnish our army with supplies, and 
we had captured rolling-stock to put the railroad to Pulaski in 
successful operation. 

Hood sent Major-General Forrest with the greater part of 
his cavalry and a division of infantry against Murfreesboro. 
The infantry did not fulfill expectation, and it was withdrawn. 


84 


578 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Mercer’s and Palmer’s brigades of infantry were sent to replace 
the division. Nothing of importance occurred until the morn- 
ing of the 15th, and the enemy, having been reénforced by about 
fifteen thousand men from the trans-Mississippi, attacked simul- 
taneously both flanks of our line. On our right he was re- 
pulsed with heavy loss; but on our left, toward evening, he car- 
ried some of the partially completed redoubts. During the 
night of the 15th our line was shortened and strengthened, the 
left being thrown back and dispositions made to meet any re- 
newed attack. The corps of Major-General Cheatham was trans- 
ferred from our right to the left. Early on the 16th of Decem- 
ber the enemy made a general attack on our lines, accompanied 
by a heavy fire of artillery. All his assaults were repulsed with 
heavy loss until 3.30 p. u., when a portion of our line to the left 
of the center suddenly gave way. Up to this time no battle 
ever progressed more favorably—the troops in excellent spirits, 
waving their colors and bidding defiance to the enemy; but the 
position he then gained being such as to enfilade us, caused our 
entire line to give way in a few moments and our troops to re- 
treat in the direction of Franklin, most of them in great con- 
fusion. Confidence in the ability to hold the line had caused 
the artillery-horses to be sent to the rear for safety, and the 
abandonment of the position was so unexpected and sudden 
that it was not possible to bring forward the horses to remove 
the guns which had been placed in position, and fifty-four of 
them were consequently lost. Our loss in killed and wounded 
was small. At Brentwood, about four miles from the field of 
battle, the troops were partially rallied, and Lieutenant-General 
S. D. Lee took command of the rear-guard and encamped for 
the night. On leaving the field, Hood sent one of his staff-offi- 
cers to inform General Forrest of our defeat, and to direct him 
to rejoin the army with as little delay as possible, but heavy 
rains had so swollen the creeks that he was unable to effect the 
junction with his main force until it reached Columbia. During 
the 17th the enemy’s cavalry pressed boldly on the retreating 
column, the open character of the country being favorable to 
cavalry operations. Lieutenant-General Lee, commanding the 
covering force, was severely wounded, but not until after he 


e 


1864] THE CONDITION OF HIS ARMY. 579 


and the corps he commanded had rendered such service as to 
receive the special commendation of the General commanding 
the army. 

Hood reports that when he left the field before Nashville 
he had hoped to be able to remain in Tennessee, on the line of 
Duck River; but, after arriving at Columbia, he became con- 
vinced that the condition of the army made it necessary to 
recross the Tennessee without delay. On the 2lst he re- 
sumed his march for Pulaski, leaving Major-General Walthall, 
with five infantry brigades, and General Forrest, with the main 
body of his cavalry, at Columbia, to cover the movements of the 
army. The retreat continued, and on the 25th, 26th, and 27th, 
the army, including the rear-guard, crossed the Tennessee River 
at Bainbridge. The enemy had followed the rear-guard with 
all his cavalry and three corps of infantry to Pulaski, and 
thence the cavalry continued the pursuit to the Tennessee 
River. After crossing the river, the army moved by easy 
marches to Tupelo, Mississippi. General Hood reported his 
losses in the Tennessee campaign to have been about ten thou- 
sand men, including prisoners, and that when he arrived at 
Tupelo he had 18,500 infantry and artillery, and 2,306 cavalry. 
I again quote from General Hood’s report : 


“Here, finding so much dissatisfaction throughout the country, 
as, in my judgment, greatly to impair, if not destroy, my useful- 
ness, and counteract my exertions, and with no desire but to serve 
my country, I asked to be relieved, with the hope that another 
might be assigned to the command who might do more than I 
could hope to accomplish. Accordingly, I was so relieved on the 
23d of January, by authority of the President.” 


Though, as General Hood states in his book, page 273, I 
was “averse to his going into Tennessee,” he might well assume 
that I “was not, as General Beauregard and himself, acquainted 
with the true condition of the army” when they decided on the 
Tennessee campaign. Of the manner in which he conducted it, 
Isham G. Harris, the Governor of Tennessee, a man of whose 
judgment, integrity, and manhood I had the highest opinion, 
wrote to me, on the 25th of December, 1864: 


580 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


« ||, I have been with General Hood from the beginning of 
this campaign, and beg to say, disastrous as it has ended, I am 
not able to see anything that General Hood has done that he 
should not, or neglected any thing that he should, have done, .. . 
and regret to say that, if all had performed their parts as well as 
he, the results would have been very different.” 


To this I will only add that General Hood was relieved at 
his reiterated request, made from such creditable motives as are 
expressed in the extract above, taken from his official report, 
and that it was in no wise due to a want of confidence in him 
on my part. 


OHAPTERNX LTX:. 


Exchange of Prisoners.—Signification of the Word “‘ loyal.’—Who is the Sovereign ? 
—Words of President Lincoln.—The Issue for which we fought.—Position of 
the United States Government.—Letters of Marque granted by us.—Officers and 
Crew First Prisoners of the Enemy.—Convicted as ‘‘ Pirates.”—My Letter to 
President Lincoln.—How received.—Act of Congress relating to Prisoners,— 
Exchanges, how made.—Answer of General Grant.—Request of United States 
Congress.— Result.— Commissioners sent.—Agreement.— Disputed Points.— 
Exchange arranged.—Order to pillage issued.—General Pope’s Order.—Pro- 
ceedings.—Letter of General Lee relative to Barbarities—Answer of General 
Halleck.—Case of Mumford.—Effect of Threatened Retaliation—Mission of 
Vice-President Stephens. —A Failure.—Excess of Prisoners.—Paroled Men,— 
Proposition made by us.—No Answer.—Another Arrangement.—Stopped by 
General Grant.—His words, “ Put the Matter offensively.”—Exchange of Slaves, 
—Proposition of Lee to Grant.—Reply of Grant.—-Further Reply.—His Dis- © 
patch to General Butler.—Another Proposition made by us.—No Answer.—Prop- 
osition relative to Sick and Wounded.—Some exchanged.—The Worst Cases 
asked for to be photographed.—Proposition as to Medicines.—No Answer,— 
A Final Effort.—Deputation of Prisoners sent to Washington.—A Failure.— 
Correspondence between Ould and Butler.—Order of Grant.—Report of But- 
ler.—Responsibility of Grant for Andersonyille——Barbarities of the United 
States Government.—Treatment of our Men in Northern Prisons.—Deaths on 
Each Side. 


Prrnars there was no question in the treatment of which 
the true character and intentions of the Government of the 
United States was so clearly exposed as in the exchange of 
prisoners. That we should dare to resort to arms for the pres 


1861] THIS PEOPLE ARE THE SOVEREIGN. 581 


ervation of our rights, and “to secure the blessings of liberty 
to ourselves and our posterity,” was regarded by our enemies as 
most improbable. Their aspirations for dominion and _ gover- 
eignty, through the Government of the Union, had become so 
deep-seated and apparently real as to cause that Government, at 
its first step, to assume the haughtiness and imperiousness of an 
absolute sovereign. “I appeal to all loyal citizens to favor, 
facilitate, and aid this effort,” said President Lincoln, in the 
first proclamation, calling for seventy-five thousand men. The 
term “loyal” has no signification except as applied to the sover- 
eign of an empire or kingdom. Ina republic the people are 
the sovereign, and the term “loyal” or its opposite can have no 
signification except in relation to the true sovereign. To say, 
therefore, that the agent of the sovereign people, the represent- 
ative of the system they have organized to conduct their com- 
mon affairs, composed the real sovereign, and that loyalty or 
disloyalty is of signification in relation to this sovereign alone, 
is not only a perversion of language, but an error, that leads 
straight to the subversion of all popular government and the 
establishment of the monarchical or consolidated form. The 
Government of the United States is now the sovereign here, 
says President Lincoln in this proclamation, and loyalty consists 
in the maintenance of that sovereignty against all its foes. The 
sovereignty of the people and of the several and distinct States, 
in his mind, was only a weakness and enthusiasm of the fathers. 
The States and the people thereof had become consolidated into 
a national Union. “I appeal,” says President Lincoln, “to all 
loyal citizens to favor, facilitate, and aid this effort to maintain 
the honor, the integrity, and the existence of our national 
Union.” 

The Confederate States refused thus “to favor, facilitate, 
and aid this effort to maintain the honor, the integrity, and the 
existence of a national Union.” They not only refused to aid, 
but they took up arms to defeat the consummation of such a 
monstrous usurpation of popular rights and popular sovereignty. 
It was evident that, if no efforts for a rescue were made, the 
time would soon’ come when the rights of all the States might 
be denied, and the hope of mankind in constitutional freedom 


589 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


be for ever lost. This was the usurpation. This lay at the 
foundation of the war. Every subsequent act of the Govern- 
ment was another step in the same direction, all tending pal- 
pably to supremacy for the Government of the United States, 
the subjugation of the States, and the submission of the 
people. 

This was the adversary with whom we had to struggle, and 
this was the issue for which we fought. That we dared to draw 
our swords to vindicate the rights and the sovereignty of the 
people, that we dared to resist and deny all sovereignty as in- 
herently existing in the Government of the United States, was 
adjudged an infamous crime, and we were denounced as “ reb- 
els.” It was asserted that those of us “who were captured 
should be hung as rebels taken in the act.” Crushing the 
corner-stone of the Union, the independence of the States, the 
Federal Government assumed toward us a position of haughty 
arrogance, refused to recognize us otherwise than as insurrec- 
tionists and “rebels,” who resisted and denied its usurped soy- 
ereignty, and who were entitled to no amelioration from the 
punishment of death, except such as might proceed only from 
the promptings of mercy. 

On April 17, 1861, I issued a proclamation in which I offered 
to grant letters of marque and reprisal to seamen. On April 
19th President Lincoln issued a counter-proclamation, declar- 
ing that, “if any person, under the pretended authority of said 
States, or under any other pretense, shall molest a vessel of the 
United States, or the persons or cargo on board of her, such 
person shall be held amenable to the laws of the United States 
for the prevention and punishment of piracy,” which was 
death. 

Some small vessels obtained these letters of marque and were 
captured. Their officers and crew constituted the first prisoners 
that fell into the hands of the enemy. They were immediately 
imprisoned, and held for trial as pirates. The trial came on 
later in the year. A report of it states that “the views.of all 
the judges seemed to center upon the one point, that these men 
were taken in arms against the Government of the United 
States, and that, inasmuch as the laws of that Government did 


1861] SENT BY A SPECIAL MESSENGER. 583 


not recognize the authority under which the men acted, there 
was no course but to condemn them.” 

As soon as the treatment of these prisoners was known in 
Richmond, before their trial and as early as July 6, 1861, I sent 
by a special messenger a communication to President Lincoln, 
in substance as follows: 


“Having learned that the schooner Savannah, a private armed 
vessel in the service and sailing under a commission issued by the 
authority of the Confederate States of America, had been captured 
by one of the vessels forming the blockading squadron off Charles- 
ton Harbor, I directed a proposition to be made to the command- 
ing officer of the squadron for an exchange of officers and crew of 
the Savannah for prisoners of war held by this Government, ‘ac- 
cording to number and rank.’ To this proposition, made on the 
19th ultimo, Captain Mercer, the officer in command of the block- 
ading squadron, made answer, on the same day, that ‘the prison- 
ers’ (referred to) ‘are not on board any of the vessels under my 
command.’ 

“Tt now appears, by statements made without contradiction in 
newspapers published in New York, that the prisoners above men- 
tioned were conveyed to that city, and have been treated not as 
prisoners of war, but as criminals; that they have been put in 
irons, confined in jail, brought before courts of justice on charges 
of piracy and treason ; and it is even rumored that they have been 
convicted of the offenses charged, for no other reason than that 
they bore arms in defense of the rights of this Government and 
under the authority of its commission. 

“T could not, without grave discourtesy, have made the news- 
paper statements above referred to the subject of this communi- 
cation, if the threat of treating as pirates the citizens of this Con- 
federacy, armed for its service on the high-seas, had not been 
contained in your proclamation of the 19th of April last. ‘That 
proclamation, however, seems to afford a sufficient justification 
for considering these published statements as not devoid of proba- 
bility. 

“Tt is the desire of this Government so to conduct the war 
now existing as to mitigate its horrors as far as may be possible, 
and, with this intent, its treatment of the prisoners captured by 
its forces has been marked by the greatest humanity and leniency 


584 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


consistent with public obligation. Some have been permitted to 
return home on parole, others to remain at large, under similar 
conditions, within this Confederacy, and all have been furnished 
with rations for their subsistence, such as are allowed to our own 
troops. It is only since the news has been received of the treat- 
ment of the prisoners taken on the Savannah, that I have been 
compelled to withdraw these indulgences, and to hold the prison- 
ers taken by us in strict confinement. 

“A just regard to humanity and to the honor of this Govern- 
ment now requires me to state explicitly that, painful as will be the 
necessity, this Government will deal out to the prisoners held by 
it the same treatment and the same fate as shall be experienced 
by those captured on the Savannah ; and, if driven to the terrible 
necessity of retaliation by your execution of any of the officers or 
crew of the Savannah, that retaliation will be extended so far as 
shall be requisite to secure the abandonment of a practice un- 
known to the warfare of civilized man, and so barbarous as to 
disgrace the nation which shall be guilty of inaugurating it. 

“With this view, and because it may not have reached you, I 
now renew the proposition made to the commander of the block- 
ading squadron, to exchange for the prisoners taken on the Savan-- 
nah an equal number of those now held by us according to rank,” 


This communication was taken by Colonel Thomas Taylor, 
who was permitted to visit Washington, but was refused an audi- 
ence with President Lincoln. He was obliged to content himself 
with a verbal reply from General Winfield Scott that the com- 
munication had been delivered to President Lincoln, and that he 
would reply in writing as soon as possible. No answer ever 
came. We were compelled to select by lot from among the pris- 
oners in our hands a number to whom we proposed to mete 
out the same fate which might await the crew of the Savannah. 
These measures of retaliation arrested the cruel and illegal pur- 
poses of the enemy. 

Meantime, as early as May 21, 1861, the Confederate Con- 
gress passed an act which provided that— 


“ All prisoners of war taken, whether on land or sea, during the 
pending hostilities with the United States, shall be transferred by 
the captors from time to time, and as often as convenient, to the 


1861] THE PALTRY PRETENSE OF NOT KNOWING IT. 585 


Department of War ; and it shall be the duty of the Secretary of 
War, with the approval of the President, to issue such instructions 
to the quartermaster-general and his subordinates as shall provide 
for the safe custody and sustenance of prisoners of war, and the 
rations furnished prisoners of war shall be the same in quantity 
and quality as those furnished to enlisted men in the army of the 
Confederacy.” 


This law of Congress was embodied in the orders issued from 
the War Department and from the headquarters in the field, 
and no order was ever issued in conflict with its humane pro- 
visions. 

Nevertheless, the Government of the United States, forget- 
ful of the conduct of Great Britain toward her revolted colo- 
nies, apparently refused all consideration of the question of 
exchange of prisoners, as if impressed with the idea that it 
would derogate from the dignity of its position to accept any 
interchange of courtesy. An exchange was therefore occasion- 
ally made by the various commanders of troops under flags of 
truce, while the Federal Government made the paltry pretense 
of not knowing it. We released numbers at different points 
on parole, and.the matter was compromised in various ways. 
Fifty-seven wounded soldiers were unconditionally released at 
Richmond and sent home. In response, twenty of our soldiers, 
mostly North Carolinians, were released from Bedloe’s Island, 
New York, and sent to Fortress Monroe, to be discharged on 
condition of taking the oath, so called, of loyalty to the United 
States Government. Thirty-seven confined in the military pris- 
on at Washington were released on taking the oath. On Sep- 
tember 3d an exchange was made between General Pillow and 
Colonel Wallace, of the United States Army. Whereupon 
General Polk proposed an exchange to General Grant, who 
replied, on October 14th: 

“JT can, of my own accordance, make none. I recognize no 
‘Southern Confederacy’ myself, but will communicate with higher 
authorities for their views.” 


An exchange was made on October 23d between General 
McClernand and General Polk. Subsequently, on November 


586 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Sth, General Grant offered to surrender to General Polk cer- 
tain wounded men and invalids unconditionally. To this prop- 
osition General Polk replied : 


“My own feelings would prompt me to waive again the un- 
important affectation of declining to recognize these States as 
belligerents in the interest of humanity ; but my Government 
requires all prisoners to be placed at the disposal of the Secretary 
of War.” 


On November 1st General Fremont made an agreement 
with General Price, in Missouri, by which certain persons named 
were authorized to negotiate for the exchange of any persons 
who might be taken prisoners of war, upon a plan previously 
arranged. General Hunter, who succeeded General Fremont, 
on November 7th, repudiated this agreement. A proposition 
made in the Confederate Congress to return the prisoners cap- 
tured by us at first Manassas, without any formality whatever, 
would doubtless have poe but for the aii in ree 
ence to the crew of the Savannah. 

But this determination of the United States Garona 
not to meet us on the equal footing consistent with the mod- 
ern usages of war and exchange prisoners, thus far prevented 
any general arrangement for that object. In consequence, how- 
ever, of the clamors of the Northern people for the restoration 
of their friends, both Houses of Congress united in a request to 
President Lincoln to take immediate steps for a general exchange. 
Instead of complying with this request, two respectable commis- 
sioners were, however, appointed to visit the prisoners we held, 
relieve their necessities, and provide for their comfort at the ex- 
pense of the United States. It is impossible to conceive any 
reason for such conduct, unless it was to exasperate and “fire 
up the Northern heart,” as it was expressed, and thus cause the 
people to make greater efforts for our devastation. This action 
on the part of the Government was at a later day known by the 
expression ‘‘ waving the bloody shirt.” 

The commissioners arrived at Norfolk, Virginia, but were 
not allowed to proceed any farther. A readiness on our part 
to negotiate for a general exchange was manifested, and agreed 


1862] HAD CHANGED HIS INSTRUCTIONS. 587 


to by them. This was subsequently approved at Washington. 
Shortly afterward, on February 14, 1862, an arrangement was 
made between General Howell Cobb on our part and General 
Wool, the commander at Fortress Monroe, by the terms of which 
the prisoners of war in the hands of each Government were to 
be exchanged man for man, the officers being assimilated as to 
rank; our privateersmen were to be exchanged on the footing 
of prisoners of war; any surplus remaining on either side was 
to be released ; and during the continuance of hostilities prison- 
ers taken on either side should be paroled. The exchange pro- 
ceeded, and about three hundred in excess had been delivered, 
when it was discovered that not one of our privateersmen had 
been released, and that our men taken prisoners at Fort Donel- 
son, instead of being paroled, had been sent into the interior. 
Some of the hostages we held for our privateersmen had gone 
forward, but the remainder were retained. Being informed of 
this state of affairs, I recommended to Congress that all of our 
men who had been paroled by the United States Government 
should be released from the obligations of their parole so as to 
bear arms in our defense, in consequence of this breach of good 
faith on the part of that Government. It was subsequently said, 
on behalf of the United States Government, that the detention 
of our privateersmen had been intended to be only temporary, 
to make it certain that the hostages were coming forward. 

It is further stated that the only unadjusted point between 
Generals Cobb and Wool was, that the latter was unwilling that 
each party should agree to pay the expenses of transporting their 
prisoners to the frontier, and this he promised to refer to his 
Government. At a second interview, on March 1, 1862, Gen- 
eral Wool informed General Cobb that his Government would 
not consent to pay these expenses, and thereupon General Cobb 
promptly receded from his demand, and agreed to the terms 
proposed by the other side. But General Wool, who had said 
at the beginning of the negotiation, “I am clothed with full 
power for the purpose of arranging for the exchange of prison- 
ers,” was now under the necessity of stating that “his Govern- 
ment had changed his instructions.” And thus the negotiations 
were abruptly broken off, and the matter left where it was be- 


588 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


fore.* After these negotiations had begun, the capture of 
Forts Henry and Donelson had given to the United States a 
considerable preponderance in the number of prisoners held by 
them, and they at once returned to their original purpose of un- 
equal treatment. 

A suspension of exchange for some months ensued. Finally, 
a storm of indignation beginning to arise among the Northern 
people at the conduct of their Government, it was forced to 
yield its absurd pretensions, and, on July 22, 1862, a cartel for 
the exchange of prisoners was executed, based on the cartel of 
1812 between the United States and Great Britain. In accord- 
ance with these terms an exchange commenced, and by the 
middle of August-most of the officers of rank on either side, 
who had been for any long period in captivity, were released. 

On the same day on which the cartel was signed, an order’ 
was issued by the Secretary of War, in Washington, under in- 
structions from President Lincoln, empowering the military 
commanders in Virginia and elsewhere “to seize and use any 
property, real or personal, which may be necessary or conven- 
ient for their several commands for supplies or for other mili- 
tary purposes,” and “to keep accounts sufficiently accurate and 
in detail to show quantities and amounts and from whom it 
shall come, as a basis upon which compensation can be made 
in proper cases.” This was simply a system of plunder, for no 
compensation would be made to any person unless he could prove 
his fidelity to the Government of the United States. 

On the next day, Major-General Pope, in command of the 
United States forces near Washington, issued a general order 
directing the murder of our peaceful inhabitants as spies, if 
found quietly tilling the farms in his rear, even outside of his 
lines; and one of his brigadier-generals seized upon innocent 
and peaceful inhabitants to be held as hostages, to the end that 
they might be murdered in cold blood if any of his soldiers 
were killed by some unknown persons, whom he designated as 
“bushwhackers.” Under this state of facts, I issued a general 
order, recognizing General Pope and his commissioned officers 
to be in the position which they had chosen for themselves— 


* “Southern Historical Society Papers,” March, 1876. + See chapter xxxiy, 


1862] WORSE THAN THAT OF THE SAVAGE. 589 


that of robbers and murderers, and not that of public enemies, 
entitled, if captured, to be considered as prisoners of war. Some 
of the military authorities of the United States seemed to sup- 
pose that better success would attend a savage war, in which no 

- quarter was to be given and no age or sex to be spared, than had 
hitherto been secured by such hostilities as were alone recog- 
nized to be lawful by civilized men. We renounced our right 
of retaliation on the innocent, and continued to treat the soldiers 
of General Pope’s army as prisoners of war, confining our re- 
pressive measures to the punishment only of commissioned offi- 
cers as were willing participants in such crimes. General Pope 
was soon afterward removed from command. 

In August a letter involving similar principles was addressed 
by General R. E. Lee to the commanding General at Washing- 
ton, General Halleck, making inquiries as to the truth of the 
ease of William B. Mumford, reported to have been murdered 
at New Orleans by Major-General Benjamin F. Butler, and of 
Colonel John Owens, reported to have been murdered in Mis- 
souri by order of Major-General Pope. I had also been credi- 
bly informed that numerous other officers of the army of the 
United States within the Confederacy had been guilty of felonies 
and capital offenses, which are punishable by all laws human 
and divine. Inquiries were made by letter relative to a few of 
the best-authenticated cases. It was announced that Major- 
General Hunter had armed slaves for the murder of their mas- 
ters, and had thus done all in his power to inaugurate a servile 
war, which is worse than that of the savage, inasmuch as it super- 
adds other horrors to the indiscriminate slaughter of all ages, 
sexes, and conditions. 

In a letter, dated Port Royal, South Carolina, June 23, 1862, 
Genera] Hunter said : 


“Tt is my hope to have organized by the end of next fall, and 
to be able to present to the Government, from forty-eight to fifty 
thousand of these hardy and devoted soldiers.” 


Brigadier-General Phelps was reported to have initiated at 
New Orleans the example set by General Hunter in South Caro- 
lina. Brigadier-General G. N. Fitch was stated in the public 


590 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


journals to have murdered in cold blood two peaceful citizens, 
because one of his men, when invading our country, was killed 
by some unknown person while defending his home. General 
Lee was further directed by me to say that, if a reply was not 
received in fifteen days, it would be assumed that the alleged 
facts were true, and were sanctioned by the Government of the 
United States, and on that Government would rest the responsi- 
bility of retaliatory measures. The reply of the commanding 
General (Halleck) at Washington was in these words: 


“As these papers are couched in language insulting to the 
Government of the United States, I most respectfully decline to 
receive them.” 


On August 20, 1862, I issued an order threatening retalia- 
tion for the lives of peaceable citizens reported to have been 
executed by Brigadier-General Fitch. That report was after- 
ward ascertained to be untrue. On the next day I issued an- 
other order, which, after reciting the principal facts, directed 
that Major-General Hunter and Brigadier-General Phelps should 
be no longer held and treated as public enemies of the Confed- 
erate States, but as outlaws; and that in the event of the cap- 
ture of either of them, or that of any other commissioned officer 
employed in drilling, organizing, or instructing slaves, with a 
view to their armed service in this war, he should not be re- 
garded as a prisoner of war, but held in close confinement for 
execution as a felon, at such time and. place as may be ordered. 

In the case of William B. Mumford, a letter was received 
from General Halleck, dated August 7, 1862, stating sufficient 
causes for a failure to make an earlier reply to the letter of July 
6th; asserting that “no authentic information had been re- 
ceived in relation to the execution of Mumford, but measures 
will be immediately taken to ascertain the facts f the alleged 
execution,” and promising that General Lee should be duly 
informed thereof. Subsequently, on November 25, 1862, our 
agent for the exchange of prisoners, Mr. Robert Ould, under 
my instructions, addressed the agent of the United States, in- 
forming him that the explanation promised on August 7th had 
not been received ; and that, if no answer was sent within fifteen 


1863] WITH THE USAGES OF WAR. 591 


days, it would be considered that an answer was declined. On 
December 3d our agent, Mr. Ould, was apprised by the agent of 
the United States that his letter had been forwarded to the Sec- 
retary of War at Washington, and no answer was returned, which 
was regarded as a tacit admission of the charge. Besides, I had 
received evidence fully establishing the fact that the said Mum- 
ford, a citizen of the Confederacy, was actually and publicly 
executed in cold blood by hanging after the occupation of New 
Orleans by the forces under General Benjamin F. Butler, when 
said Mumford was an unresisting and non-combatant captive, 
and for no offenses even alleged to have been committed by 
him subsequent to the date of the occupation of the city. It ap- 
peared that the silence of the Government of the United States 
and its maintenance of Butler in high office, under its author- 
ity, afforded evidence too conclusive that it sanctioned his con- 
duct, and was determined that he should remain unpunished for 
these crimes. I therefore pronounced and declared the said 
Butler a felon,.deserving capital punishment, and ordered that 
he be no longer considered and treated as a public enemy of the 
Confederate States, but as an outlaw and common enemy of 
mankind; and that, in the event of his capture, the officer in 
command should. cause him to be immediately executed by 
hanging. 

These measures of retaliation were in conformity with the 
usages of war, and were adapted to check and punish the cruel- 
ties of our adversary. 

At length, so many difficulties were raised and so many com- 
plaints made in the execution of the cartel, that, for the sake of 
the unfortunate prisoners, I resolved to seek an adjustment 
through the authorities at Washington. For this purpose Vice- 
President Stephens offered his services as acommissioner. The 
following papers will show the proposition we were prepared to 
make, and illustrate the disposition with which our humane de- 
signs were regarded by the enemy : 

“Ricumonp, July 2, 1868. 
“Hon. ALEXANDER H. SteruEns, Richmond, Virginia. 

“Sir: Having accepted your patriotic offer to proceed as a 

military commissioner under flag of truce to Washington, you will 


599 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


receive herewith your letter of authority to the Commander-in- 
Chief of the Army and. Navy of the United States. The letter is 
signed by me, as Commander-in-Chief of the Confederate land 
and naval forces. 

“You will perceive from the terms of the letter that it is so 
worded as to avoid any political difficulties in its reception. In- 
tended exclusively as one of those communications between bel- 
ligerents which public law recognizes as necessary and proper 
between hostile forces, care has been taken to give no pretext for 
refusing to receive it on the ground that it would involve a tacit 
recognition of the independence of the Confederacy. Your mis- 
sion is simply one of humanity, and has no political aspect. 

“Tf objection is made to receiving your letter on the ground 
that it is not addressed to Abraham Lincoln as President, instead 
of Commander-in-Chief, etc., then you will present the duplicate 
letter which is addressed to him as President and signed by me as 
President. To this latter, objection may be made on the ground 
that I am not recognized to be President of the Confederacy. In 
this event you will decline any further attempt to confer on the 
subject of your mission, as such conference is admissible only on 
the footing of perfect equality. 

“My recent interviews with you have put you so fully in pos- 
session of my views, that it is scarcely necessary to give you any 
detailed instructions, even were I at this moment well enough to 
attempt it. My whole purpose is in one word to place this war 
on the footing of such as are waged by civilized people in modern 
times, and to divest it of the savage character which has been im- 
pressed on it by our enemies, in spite of all our efforts and pro- 
tests. Waris full enough of unavoidable horrors under all its 
aspects, to justify and even to demand of any Christian rulers who 
may be unhappily engaged in carrying it on, to seek to restrict its 
calamities and to divest it of all unnecessary severities. You will 
endeavor to establish the cartel for the exchange of prisoners on 
such a basis as to avoid the constant difficulties and complaints 
which arise, and to prevent for the future what we deem the un- 
fair conduct of our enemies in evading the delivery of the prison- 
ers who fall into their hands ; in retarding it by sending them on 
circuitous routes, and by detaining them sometimes for months in 
sail ey prisons ; and in persisting in taking captives non-com- 


1863] JUST GROUNDS OF COMPLAINT. 593 


“Your attention is also called to the unheard-of conduct ‘of 
Federal officers in driving from their homes entire communities of 
women and children, as well as of men, whom they find in districts 
occupied by their troops, for no other reason than because these 
unfortunates are faithful to the allegiance due to their States, and 
refuse to take an oath of fidelity to their enemies. 

“The putting to death of unarmed prisoners has been a ground 
of just complaint in more than one instance ; and the recent exe- 
cution of officers of our army in Kentucky, for the sole cause that 
they were engaged in recruiting service in a State which is claimed 
as still one of the United States, but is also claimed by us as one 
of the Confederate States, must be repressed by retaliation if not 
unconditionally abandoned, because it would justify the like exe- 
cution in every other State of the Confederacy ; and the practice 
is barbarous, uselessly cruel, and can only lead to the slaughter of 
prisoners on both sides—a result too horrible to be contemplated 
without making every effort to avoid it. 

“On these and all kindred subjects you will consider your au- 
thority full and ample to make such arrangements as will temper the 
present cruel character of the contest, and full confidence is placed 
in your judgment, patriotism, and discretion that, while carrying 
out the objects of your mission, you will take care that the equal 
rights of the Confederacy be always preserved.” 


“ Heapquarters, Ricumonn, July 2, 1868. 


“Sir: As Commander-in-Chief of the land and naval forces 
now waging war against the United States, I have the honor to 
address this communication to you, as Commander-in-Chief of 
their land and naval forces. 

“Numerous difficulties and disputes have arisen in relation to 
the execution of the cartel of exchange heretofore agreed on by 
the belligerents, and the commissioners for the exchange of pris- 
oners have been unable to adjust their differences. Their action 
on the subject of these differences is delayed and embarrassed by 
the necessity of referring each subject as it arises to superior au- 
thority for decision. I believe that I have just grounds of com- 
plaint against the officers and forces under your command for 
breach of the terms of the cartel, and, being myself ready to exe- 
cute it at all times in good faith, I am not justified in doubting 
the existence of the same disposition on your part. 

85 


594 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“Jn addition to this matter, I have to complain of the conduct 
of your officers and troops in many parts of the country, who vio- 
late all the rules of war, by carrying on hostilities, not only 
against armed foes, but against non-combatants, aged men, women, 
and children ; while others not only seize such property as is re- 
quired for the use of your forces, but destroy all private property 
within their reach, even agricultural implements; and openly 
avow the purpose of seeking to subdue the population of the dis- 
tricts where they are operating, by the starvation that must result 
from the destruction of standing crops and agricultural tools. 

“Still, again, others of your officers in different districts have 
recently taken the lives of prisoners who fell into their power, and 
justify their act by asserting a right to treat as spies the military 
officers and enlisted men under my. command, who may penetrate 
for hostile purposes into States claimed by me to be engaged in 
the warfare now waged against the United States, and claimed by 
the latter as having refused to engage in such warfare. 

“J have heretofore, on different occasions, been forced to make 
complaint of these outrages, and to ask from you that you should 
either avow or disclaim having authorized them, and have failed 
to obtain such answer as the usages of civilized warfare require to 
be given in such cases. 

“These usages justify, and indeed require, redress by retalia- 
tion, as the proper means of repressing such cruelties as are not 
permitted in warfare between Christian peoples. I have, notwith- 
standing, refrained from the exercise of such retaliation, because 
of its obvious tendency to lead to a war of indiscriminate mas- 
sacre on both sides, which would be a spectacle so shocking to 
humanity and so disgraceful to the age in which we live and the 
religion we profess, that I can not contemplate it without a feeling 
of horror that I am disinclined to doubt you would share. 

“With the view, then, of making one last solemn attempt to 
avert such calamities, and to attest my earnest desire to prevent 
them, if it be possible, I have selected the bearer of this letter, 
the Hon, Alexander H. Stephens, as a military commissioner to 
proceed to your headquarters under flag of truce, there to confer 
and agree on the subjects above mentioned ; and I do hereby au- 
thorize the said Alexander H. Stephens to arrange and settle all 
differences and disputes which may have arisen or may arise in 
the execution of the cartel for exchange of prisoners of war, here- 


—e SY 
: 


1863] THE REQUEST IS INADMISSIBLE, 595 


tofore agreed on between our respective land and naval forces ; also 
to agree to any just modification that may be found necessary to 
prevent further misunderstandings as to the terms of said cartel ; 
and finally to enter into such arrangement or understanding about 
the mode of carrying on hostilities between the belligerents as shall 
confine the severities of the war within such limits as are right- 
fully imposed, not only by modern civilization, but by our common 
Christianity. JI am, very respectfully, your obedient servant, 
“ JEFFERSON Davis, 
“Commander-in- Chief of the land and naval 
Sorces of the Confederate States. 


“To Apranam LINCOLN, 
“ Commander-in- Chief of the land and naval forces of the United States,” 


On July 3, 1863, Mr. Stephens proceeded down the James 
River under a flag of truce, and when near Newport News his 
further progress was arrested by the orders of the Admiral of 
the enemy’s fleet. The object of his mission, with a request for 
permission to go to Washington, was made known to that officer, 
who, by telegraph, communicated with the Government at 
Washington. The reply of that Government was: 


“The request is inadmissible. The customary agents and chan- 
nels are adequate for all needful military communications and con- 
ference between the United States forces and the insurgents.” 


This was all the notice ever taken of our humane proposi- 
tions. We were stigmatized as insurgents, and the door was 
shut in our faces. Does not this demonstrate an intent to sub- 
jugate our States ? . 

From the correspondence of our exchange commissioner, 
Judge Ould, it appears that, from the date of the cartel on July 
22, 1862, until the summer of 1863, we had an excess of -pris- 
oners. During the interval deliveries were made as fast as the 
enemy furnished transportation. Indeed, upon more than one 
occasion they were urged to send increased means of transporta- 
tion. It was never alleged that we failed or neglected to make 
prompt deliveries of prisoners who were not held under charges 
when they had the excess. On the other hand, the cartel was 
openly and notoriously violated by the Washington authorities. 


596 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Officers and men were kept in confinement, sometimes in irons 
or doomed to cells, without charge or trial. Many officers were 
kept in confinement even after the notices published by the 
enemy had declared them to be exchanged. 

In the summer of 1863 the authorities at Washington in- 
sisted upon exchanges limited to such as were held in confine- 
ment on either side. This was resisted as in violation of the car- 
tel. Such a construction not only kept in confinement the excess 
on either side, but ignored all paroles which were held by the 
Confederate Government. These were very many, being the 
paroles of officers and men who had been released on capture. 
The authorities at Washington at that time held few or no pa- 
roles. They had all, or nearly all, been surrendered. We gave 
prisoners as an equivalent for them. As long as we had the 
excess of prisoners, matters went on smoothly enough; but, as 
soon as the posture of affairs in that respect was changed, the 
cartel could no longer be observed. So long as the United 
States Government held the paroles of Confederate officers and 
men, they were respected and made the basis of exchange; but 
when equivalents were obtained for them, and no more were in 
hand, they would not recognize the paroles which were held ~ 
by us. In consequence of the position thus assumed by the 
Government of the United States, the requirement of the cartel 
that all prisoners should be delivered within ten days was prac- 
tically nullified. The deliveries which were afterward made 
were the results of special agreements. 

The wish of the Confederate Government, which it was 
hoped had been accomplished by the cartel, was the prompt 
release of all prisoners on both sides, either by exchange or 
parole. When, in 1864, the cartel was so disregarded by the 
enemy as to indicate that prisoners would be held long in con- 
finement, Andersonville, in Georgia, was selected for the loca- 
tion of a principal prison. The site was chosen because of its 
supposed security from raids, together with its salubrity, the 
abundance of water and timber, and the productive farming 
country around it. General Howell Cobb, then commanding in 
Georgia, employed a large number of negro laborers in the con- 
struction of a stockade and temporary shelter for the number 


~ 1864] TOO BRAVE TO BE CRUEL. 597 


of prisoners it was expected would be assembled there. The 
number, however, rapidly increased, and, by the middle. of 
May, gangrene and scurvy made their appearance. General 
John H. Winder, who had been stationed in Richmond in 
charge of the police and local guards, as well as the general 
control of prisoners, went to Andersonville in June, and found 
disease prevailing to such an extent that, to abate the pestilence, 
he immediately advised the removal of prisoners to other points. 
As soon as arrangements could be made, he was instructed to 
disperse them to Millen and elsewhere, as in his judgment 
might be best for their health, comfort, and safety. In July 
he made arrangements to procure vegetables, recommended 
details of men to cultivate gardens, and that hospital acecommo- 
dations should be constructed outside of the prison; all of which 
recommendations were approved, and as far as practicable exe- 
cuted. In September General Winder, with the main body of 
the prisoners, removed first to Millen, Georgia, and then to 
Florence, South Carolina. 

Major Wirz thereafter remained in command at Anderson- 
ville, and the testimony of Chief-Surgeon Stevenson, of the 
hospital at Andersonville, bears testimony to the success with 
which Wirz improved the post, and the good effect produced 
upon the health of the prisoners. This unfortunate man—who, 
under the severe temptation to which he was exposed before 
his execution, exhibited honor and fidelity strongly in contrast 
with his tempters and persecutors—it now appears, was the vic- 
tim of men whom, in his kindness, he paroled to take care of 
their sick comrades, and who, after having violated their parole, 
appeared to testify against him. 

Tn like manner has calumny pursued the memory of General 
John H. Winder, a man too brave to be cruel to anything 
within his power, too well bred and well born to be influ- 
enced by low and sordid motives. I have referred only toa 
few of the facts illustrative of his kindness to the prisoners 
after he went to Georgia, and they were in keeping with his 
conduct toward the prisoners at Richmond. This latter fact, 
together with his sterling integrity and soldierly character, had 
caused his selection for the chief control of Confederate prisons. 


598 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The Adjutant-General, Samuel Cooper, a man as pure in 
heart as he was sound in judgment, was the classmate of Win- 
der; their lives had been passed in the army in frequent inter- 
course ; and General Cooper, in a letter of July 9, 1871, wrote 
that “ General Winder, who had the control of the Northern 
prisoners, was an honest, upright, and humane gentleman, and 
as such J had known him for many years. He had the reputa- 
tion, in the Confederacy, of treating the prisoners confided to 
his general supervision with great kindness and consideration.” 

In January, 1864, and even earlier, it became manifest that, 
in consequence of the complication in relation to exchanges, the 
large mass of prisoners on both sides would remain in captivity 
for many long and weary months, if not for the duration of the 
war. In order to alleviate the hardships of confinement on 
both sides, our commissioner, on January 24, 1863, addressed a 
communication to General E. A. Hitchcock, United States com- 
missioner of exchange, in which he proposed that all prisoners 
on each side should be attended by a proper number of their 
own surgeons, who, under rules to be established, should be per- 
mitted to take charge of their health and comfort. 

It was also proposed that these surgeons should act as com- 
missaries, with power to receive and distribute such contribu- 
tions of money, food, clothing, and medicines as might be for- 
warded for the relief of the prisoners. It was further proposed 
that these surgeons should be selected by their own Government, 
and that they should have full liberty at any and all times, 
through the agents of exchange, to make reports, not only of 
their own acts, but of any matters relating to the welfare of the 
prisoners. 

To this communication no reply of any kind was ever made. 

Again, Commissioner Ould, in a communication published 
in August, 1868, further says: 


*“ About the last of March, 1864, I had several conferences 
with General B. F. Butler, then agent of exchange at Fortress 
Monroe, in relation to the difficulties attending the exchange of 
prisoners, and we reached what we both thought a tolerably satis- 
factory basis, The day that I left there General Grant arrived. 
General Butler says he communicated to him the state of the ne- 


1864] PUT THE MATTER OFFENSIVELY. 599 


gotiations, and ‘most emphatic verbal directions were received 
from the Lieutenant-General not to take any step by which an- 
other able-bodied man should be exchanged until further orders 
from him’; and that on April 30, 1864, he received a telegram 
from General Grant ‘to receive all the sick and wounded the Con- 
federate authorities may send you, but send no more in exchange.’ 
Unless my recollection fails me, General Butler also, in an address 
to his constituents, substantially declared that he was directed, in 
his management of the question of exchange with the Confeder- 
ate authorities, to put the matter offensively, for the purpose of” 
preventing an exchange.” 


The signification of the word “ offensively,” in the preceding 
line, relates to the exchange of negro soldiers. The Govern- 
ment of the United States contended that the slaves in their 
ranks were such no longer; that it was bound to accord to them, 
when made prisoners, the same protection that it gave all other 
soldiers. We asserted the slaves to be property, under the Con- 
stitution of the United States and that of the Confederate 
States, and that property recaptured from the enemy in war re- 
verts to its owner, if he can be found, or it may be disposed of 
by its captor. 

On October 1st, when the number of prisoners was large on 
either side, General Lee addressed a note to General Grant, 
saying : 

“With a view of alleviating the sufferings of our soldiers, I 
have the honor to propose an exchange of the prisoners of war 
belonging to the armies operating in Virginia, man for man, or 
upon the basis established by the cartel.” 


On the next day General Grant replied : 


“TI could not of a right accept your proposition further than 
to exchange those prisoners captured within the last three days, 
and who have not yet been delivered to the commanding General 
of prisoners. Among those lost by the armies operating against 
Richmond were a number of colored troops. Before further ne- 
gotiations are had upon the subject, I would ask if you propose 
delivering these men the same as white soldiers.” 


On the next day General Lee said, in rejoinder : 


600 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“In my proposition of the Ist inst., to exchange the prisoners 
of war belonging to the armies operating in Virginia, I intended 
to include all captured soldiers of the United States, of whatever 
nation and color, under my control. Deserters from our service 
and negroes belonging to our citizens are not considered subjects 
of exchange, and were not included in my proposition. If there 
are any such among those stated by you to have been captured 
around Richmond, they can not be returned.” 


On October 20th General Grant finally answered, saying: 


“T shall always regret the necessity of retaliating for wrong 
done our soldiers, but regard it my duty to protect all persons re- 
ceived into the army of the United States, regardless of color or 
nationality; when acknowledged soldiers of the Government are 
captured, they must be treated as prisoners of war, or such treat- 
ment as they receive inflicted upon an equal number of prisoners 
held by us.” 


This was “ putting the matter offensively, for the purpose of 
preventing an exchange,” as recommended by General Grant 
for the adoption of General Butler. 

But let us return to the progress of negotiations. In a dis- 
patch from General Grant to General Butler, dated City Point, 
August 18, 1864, the former says : 


“On the subject of exchange, however, I differ from General 
Hitchcock. It is hard on our men held in Southern prisons not to 
exchange them, but it is humanity to those left in the ranks to 
fight our battles. Every man released on parole, or otherwise, be- 
comes an active soldier against us at once, either directly or indi- 
rectly. If we commence a system of exchange, which liberates all 
prisoners taken, we will have to fight on until the whole South is 
exterminated. If we hold those caught, they amount to no more 
than dead men. At this particular time to release all rebel pris- 
oners North would insure Sherman’s defeat, and would compro- 
mise our safety here.” 


We now proposed to the Government of the United States 
to exchange the prisoners respectively held, officer for officer 
and man for man. We had previously declined this proposal, 
and insisted on the terms of the cartel, which required the de- 


1864] NO ANSWER WAS RECEIVED. 601 


livery of the excess on either side on parole. At the same time 
we sent a statement of the mortality prevailing among the pris- 
oners at Andersonville. 

As no answer had been received relative to this proposal, a 
communication was sent, on August 22, 1864, to Major-General 
E. A. Hitcheock, United States commissioner of exchange, con- 
taining the same proposal which had been before delivered to 
the assistant commissioner, and a request was made for its ac- 
ceptance. 

No answer was received to either of these letters, and on 
August 31st the assistant commissioner stated that he had no 
communication on the subject from the United States Govern- 
ment, and that he was not authorized to make an answer. 

This offer, which would have released every soldier of the - 
United States confined in our prisons, was not even noticed. 
Indeed, the United States Government had, at that time, a 
large excess of prisoners, and the effect of ‘the proposal, if car- 
ried out, would have been to release all the prisoners belonging 
to it, while a large number of ours would have remained in 
prison awaiting the chances of the capture of their equiv- 
alents. 

Thus, having ascertained that exchanges could not be made, 
either on the basis of the cartel, or officer for officer and man for 
man, we offered to the United States Government their sick and 
wounded without requiring any equivalents. On these terms, 
- we agreed to deliver from ten to fifteen thousand at the mouth 
of the Savannah River; and we further added that, if the num- 
ber for which transportation might be sent could not be readily 
made up from sick and wounded, the difference should be sup- 
plied with well men. Although the offer was made in the sum- 
mer, the transportation did not arrive until November. And 
as the sick and wounded were at points distant from Georgia, 
and could not be brought to Savannah within a reasonable time, 
five thousand well men were substituted. In return, some three 
thousand sick and wounded were delivered to us at the same — 
place. The original rolls showed that some thirty-five hundred 
had started from Northern prisons, and that death had reduced 
the number during the passage to about three thousand. 


602 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


On two oceasions we were specially asked to send the very 
sick and desperately wounded prisoners, and a particular request 
was made for men who were so seriously sick that it was doubt- 
ful whether they would survive a removal a few miles down 
James River. Accordingly, some of the worst cases, contrary 
to the judgment of our surgeons, but in compliance with the 
piteous appeals of the sick prisoners, were sent away, and after 
being delivered they were taken to Annapolis, Maryland, and 
there photographed as specimen prisoners. The photographs 
at Annapolis were terrible indeed, but the misery they por- 
trayed was surpassed by some of those we received in exchange 
at Savannah. Why was there this delay between the summer 
and November in sending vessels for the transportation of sick 
and wounded, for whom no equivalents were asked? Were 
Federal prisoners left to suffer, and afterward photographed 
“to aid in firing the popular heart of the North” ? 

In the summer of 1864, in consequence of certain informa- 
tion communicated to our commissioner, Mr. Ould, by the Sur- 
geon-General of the Confederate States, as to the deficiency of 
medicines, Mr. Ould offered to make purchases of medicines 
from the United States authorities, to be used exclusively for 
the relief of the Union prisoners. He offered to pay gold, cot- 
ton, or tobacco for them, and even two or three prices if re- 
quired. At the same time he gave assurances that the medi- 
cines would be used exclusively for the treatment of Union 
prisoners; and moreover agreed, on behalf of the Confederate 
States, if it were insisted on, that such medicines might be 
brought into the Confederate lines by the United States sur- 
geons, and dispensed by them. Incredible as it may appear, it 
is, nevertheless, strictly true that no reply was ever received to 
this offer. 

One final effort was now made to obtain an exchange. This 
consisted in my sending a delegation from the prisoners at 
Andersonville to plead their cause before the authorities at 
Washington. It was of no avail. President Lincoln refused 
to see them. They were made to understand that the interests 
of the Government of the United States required that they 
should return to prison and remain there. They carried back 


1864] REFUSED TO MAKE A FAIR EXCHANGE. 603 


the sad tidings that their Government held out no hope of their 
release. 


“We have a letter from the wife of the chairman of that del- 
egation (now dead) in which she says that her husband always 
said that he was more contemptuously treated by Secretary of 
War Stanton than he ever was at Andersonville.” * 


Another prisoner, Henry M. Rrennan, writes: 


“T was at Andersonville when the delegation of prisoners 
spoken of by Jefferson Davis left there to plead our cause with 
the authorities at Washington ; and nobody can tell, unless it be 
a shipwrecked and famished mariner, who sees a vessel approach- 
ing and then passing on without rendering the required aid, what 
fond hopes were raised, and how hope sickened into despair, wait- 
ing for the answer that never came. In my opinion, and that of 
a good many others, a good part of the responsibility for the hor- 
rors of Andersonville rests with General U.S. Grant, who refused 
to make a fair exchange of prisoners.” 


The following extracts are from the official report of Major- 
General Butler to “‘ the Committee on the Conduct of the War,” 
which was appointed by a joint resolution of Congress, during 
the war: 


“Mr. Ould left on the 31st of March, 1864, with the under- 
standing that I would get authority and information from my 
Government, by which all disputed points could be adjusted, and 
would then confer with him further, either meeting him at City 
Point or elsewhere for that purpose. In the mean time exchanges 
of sick and wounded, and special exchanges, should go on. 

“ General Grant visited Fortress Monroe on April 1st, being the 
first time I had ever met him. To him the state of the negotia- 
tions as to exchange ¢ was verbally communicated ; and most em- 
phatic directions were received from the .Lieutenant-General not 


* Editor of Southern Historical Society Papers. 

+ The negotiations as to exchange, to which General Butler refers, were the 
points of agreement between General Butler and myself, under which exchanges of 
all white and free black soldiers, man for man and officer for officer, were to go on, 
leaving the question as to slaves to be disposed of by subsequent arrangement,”— 
(Letter of Mr, Ould, June, 1879.) 


604 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


to take any step by which another able-bodied man should be ex-_ 
changed, until further orders from him.” 


General Butler next gives the following from General Mul- 
ford, United States assistant agent of exchange, addressed to 
him : 


“ GenERAL: The Confederate authorities will exchange pris- 
oners on the basis heretofore proposed by our Government—that 
is, man for man. This proposition was proposed formally to me 
after I saw you.” 


General Butler’s report continues as follows: 


“ Accident prevented my meeting the rebel commissioner, so 
that nothing was done ; but after conversation with General Grant, 
in reply to the proposition of Mr. Ould to exchange all prisoners 
of war on either side held, man for man, officer for officer, I wrote 
an argument showing our right to our colored soldiers. This ar- 
gument set forth our claims in the most offensive form possible, 
consistently with ordinary courtesy of language, for the purpose 
of carrying out the wishes of the Lieutenant-General that no 
prisoners of war should be exchanged. This paper was published 
so as to bring a public pressure by the owners of slaves upon the 
rebel Government, in order to forbid their exchange.” 


The report continues : 


“In case the Confederate authorities took the same view as 
General Grant, believing that an exchange ‘ would defeat Sherman 
and imperil the safety of the Armies of the Potomac and the 
James,’ and therefore should yield to the argument, and formally 
notify me that their former slaves captured in our uniform would 
be exchanged as other soldiers were, and that they were ready to 
return us all our prisoners at Andersonville and elsewhere in ex- 
change for theirs, then I had determined, with the consent of the 
Lieutenant-General, as a last resort to prevent exchange, to de- 
mand that the outlawry against me should formally be reversed 
and apologized for, before I would further negotiate the exchange 
of prisoners. But the argument was enough, and the Confederates 
never offered to me afterward to exchange the colored soldiers 
who had been slaves, held in prison by them.” 


1864] WOULD HONESTLY MEET US. 605 


_ Further on in the report General Butler gives the history 
of some naval exchanges, in the course of which colored prison- 
ers were delivered, and concludes his observations on that head 
as follows : 


“Tt will be observed that the rebels had exchanged all the 
naval colored prisoners, so that the negro question no longer im- 
peded the exchange of prisoners; in fact, if we had demanded the 
exchange of all, man for man, officer for officer, they would have 
done it.” 


The conclusion of the report is as follows : 


“T have felt it my duty to give an account with this particular 
carefulness of my participation in the business of exchange of 
prisoners, the orders under which I acted, and the negotiations 
attempted, which comprises a faithful narration of all that was 
done, so that all may become a matter of history. The great im- 
portance of the questions ; the fearful responsibility for the many 
thousands of lives which, by the refusal to exchange, were sacri- 
ficed by the most cruel forms of death, from cold, starvation, and 
pestilence of the prison-pens of Raleigh and Andersonville, being 
more than all the British soldiers killed in the wars of Napoleon ; 
the anxiety of fathers, brothers, sisters, mothers, wives, to know 
the exigency which caused this terrible, and perhaps, as it may 
have seemed to them, useless and unnecessary, destruction of those 
dear to them, by horrible deaths, each and all have compelled me 
to this exposition, so that it may be seen that those lives were 
spent as a part of the system of attack upon the rebellion, devised 
by the wisdom of the General-in-Chief of the armies, to destroy it 
by depletion, depending upon our superior numbers to win the 
victory at last. The loyal mourners will doubtless derive solace 
from this fact, and appreciate all the more highly the genius which 
conceived the plan, and the success won at so great a cost.” 


Sufficient facts have been presented to satisfy every intelli- 
gent and candid mind of our entire readiness to surrender, for 
exchange, all the prisoners in our possession, whenever the 
Government of the United States would honestly meet us for 
that purpose. At any hour perfect arrangements could have 
been made with us for the restoration to it of all its soldiers 
held as prisoners by us, if its authorities at Washington had 


606 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


consented so to do. On them rests the criminality for the 
sufferings of these prisoners. 

Further, the Government of the United States, in order to 
effect our subjugation, devastated our fields, destroyed our 
crops, broke up our railroads, and thus interrupted our means of 
transportation, and reduced our people, our armies, and conse- 
quently their soldiers, who were our prisoners, all alike, to the 
most straitened condition for food. Our medicines for the sick 
were exhausted, and, contrary to the usage of civilized nations, 
they were made, by our enemy, contraband of war. After 
causing these and other distressing events—of which Atlanta, 
where the women and children were driven into the fields and 
their houses burned, and Columbia, with its smoking and plun- 
dered ruins, were prominent examples—after every effort to 
excite our slaves to servile war—this Government of the United 
States turned to the Northern people, and, charging us with 
atrocious cruelties to their sons, who were our prisoners, ap- 
pealed to them again and again to recruit the armies and take 
vengeance upon us by our abject subjugation or entire extermi- 
nation. It was the last effort of the usurper to save himself. 

But there is another scene to be added to these cruelties. 
During all this time, Northern prisons were full of our brave 
and heroic soldiers, of whom there were about sixty thousand. 
The privations which they suffered, the cruelties inspired by 
the malignant spirit of the Government, which were inflicted 
upon them, surpass any records of modern history: yet we have 
had no occasion to seek out a Wirz for public trial before an 
illegal court, that we might conceal behind him our own 
neglect and cruel sacrifice of them. That we might clothe 
our brave men in the prisons of the United States Govern- 
ment, I made an application for permission to send cotton 
to Liverpool, and therewith purchase the supplies which were 
necessary. The request was granted, but only on condition 
that the cotton should be sent to New York and the supplies 
bought there. This was done by our agent, General Beale. 
The suffering of our men in Northern prisons caused the appli- 
cation ; that it was granted, refutes the statement that our men 
were comfortably maintained. 


1865] TO OFFER TWO FACTS. 607 


Finally, to the bold allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners 
on our side, and humane treatment and adequate supplies on 
that of our opponents, it is only necessary to offer two facts: 
First, the report of the Secretary of War, E. M. Stanton, made 
on July 19, 1866, shows that, of all the prisoners in our hands 
during the war, aay 22,576 dina. while, of the prisoners in 
our opponents’ hands, 26,246 died. Second, the official report 
of Surgeon-General Barnes, an officer of the United States Gov- 
ernment, states that, in round numbers, the number of Confed- 
erate States prisoners in their hands amounted to 220,000, the 
number of United States prisoners in our hands amounted to 
270,000. Thus, out of the 270,000 in our hands, 22,000 died; 
while of the 220,000 of our soldiers in their hands, 26,000 died. 
Thus, more than twelve per cent. of the prisoners in our oppo- 
nents’ hands died, and less than nine per cent. of the prisoners 
in our hands died. 

When, in this connection, it is remembered how much our 
resources were reduced, that our supply of medicines required 
in summer diseases was exhausted, and that Northern men 
when first residing at the South must undergo acclimation, and 
that these conditions in the Northern States were the reverse in 
each particular—the fact that greater mortality existed in 

‘Northern than-in Southern prisons can only be accounted for 
by the kinder treatment received in the latter. To present the 
case in a sentence—we did the best we could for those whom 
the fortune of war had placed at our mercy; and the enemy, in 
the midst of plenty, inflicted cruel, wanton deprivation on our 
soldiers who fell within his power. 

In regard to the failure in the exchange of prisoners, Gen- 
eral B. F. Butler has irrefutably fixed the responsibility on the 
Government at Washington and on General Grant. The ob- 
stacles thus thrown in the way were not only persistently inter- 
posed, but artfully designed to be insurmountable. 

On the other hand, the Confederate Government, through 
Colonel Ould, its commissioner of exchanges, sought by all 
practicable means to execute the obligations of the cartel, and 
otherwise to relieve the suffering of prisoners kept in ote 
ment; through a delegation of the Federal prisoners at Ander- 


608 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


sonville, it sought to attract the notice of their Government to 
their sufferings; and, finally, confiding in the chivalry charac- 
teristic of soldiers, onlin through General Lee, to make an 
arrangement with General Grant for the exchange of all the 
prisoners held in their respective commands, and as many more 
as General Grant could add in response to all held by the Con- 
federate Government.* 


CHAPTER i. 


Subjugation the Object of the Government of the United States—The only Terms 
of Peace offered to us.—Rejection of all Proposals.—Efforts of the Enemy.— 
Appearance of Jacques and Gilmore at Richmond.—Proposals.— Answer.—Com- 
missioners sent to Canada.—The Object.—Proceedings.—Note of President Lin- 
coln.—Permission to visit Richmond granted to Francis P. Blair.—Statement 
of my Interview with him.—My Letter to him.—Response of President Lincoln. 
—Three Persons sent by me to an Informal Conference.—Their Report.—Re- 
marks of Judge Campbell.—Oath of President Lincoln.—The Provision of the 
Constitution and his Proclamation compared.—Reserved Powers spoken of in 
the Constitution—What are they, and where do they exist ?—Terms of Sur- 
render offered to our Soldiers. 


Tuar it was the purpose of the Government of the United 
States to subjugate the Southern States and the Southern 
people, under the pretext of a restoration of the Union, is estab- 
lished by the terms and conditions offered to us in all the con- 
ferences relative to a settlement of differences. All were com- 
prehended in one word, and that was subjugation. If the pur- 
pose had been an honorable and fraternal restoration of the 
Union as was avowed, methods for the adjustment of difficul- 
ties would have been presented and discussed ; propositions for 
reconciliation with concessions and modifications for grievances 
would have been kindly offered and treated; and a way would 
have been opened for a mutual and friendly intercourse. How 
unlike this were all the propositions offered to us, will be seen 
in the proceedings which took place in the conferences, and in 

* For full and exact information, compiled from official records and other docu- 
ments, the reader is referred to “Treatment of Prisoners,” by J. William Jones, 


D. D., and to “‘The Southern Side: or Andersonville Prison, compiled from Official 
Documents,” by R. Randolph Stevenson, M. D. 


1861] “DISPERSE, YE REBELS!” 609 


the terms of surrender offered to our soldiers. It. should be re- 
membered that mankind compose one uniform order of beings, 
and thus the language of arbitrary power has the same signifi- 
cation in all ages. When Major Pitcairn marched the British 
soldiers upon the common, at Lexington, in Massachusetts, on 
April 19, 1775, and, drawing his sword, rushed upon the little line 
of Continentals, exclaiming: “ Disperse, ye rebels! throw down 
your arms and disperse!” he expressed the same conditions 
which were offered to us in all our negotiations with the Presi- 
dent of the United States and his generals. Does any one 
doubt that Major Pitcairn meant subjugation, or that Great 
Britain meant subjugation? Let them as dispassionately con- 
strue the Government of the United States in its declarations 
to us. 

Several efforts were made by us to communicate with the 
authorities at Washington without success. Commissioners 
were sent before hostilities were begun, and the Government of 
the United States refused to receive them, or hear what they 
had to say. A second time I sent a military officer with a com- 
munication addressed by myself to President Lincoln. The 
letter was received by General Scott, who did not permit the 
officer to see Mr. Lincoln, but promised that an answer would 
be sent. No» answer was ever received. The third time a 
gentleman was sent whose position, character, and reputation 
were such as to insure his reception, if the enemy had not been 
determined to receive no proposals whatever from our Govern- 
ment. Vice-President Stephens made a patriotic tender of his 
services, in the hope of being able to promote the cause of hu- 
manity ; and, although little belief was entertained of his suc- 
cess, I cheerfully yielded to his suggestions, that the experiment 
should be tried. The enemy refused to let him pass through 
their lines or to hold any conference with him. He was stopped 
before he reached Fortress Monroe. 

If we would break up our Government, dissolve the Con- 
federacy, disband our armies, emancipate our slaves, take an 
oath of allegiance, binding ourselves to obedience to it and to 
disloyalty to our own States, the Government of the United 
States proposed to pardon us, and not to deprive us of anything 

86 


610 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


more than the property already robbed from us, and such slaves 
as still remained. In order to render the proposals so insulting 
as to secure their rejection, the President of the United States 
joined to them a promise to support with his army one tenth of 
the people of any State who would attempt to set up a govern- 
ment over the other nine tenths; thus seeking to sow discord 
among the people of the several States, and to excite them to 
civil war in furtherance of his ends. 

The next movement relating to the accommodation of dif- 
ferences occurred in July, 1864, and consisted in the appearance 
at Richmond of Colonel James F. Jacques, of the Seventy-eighth 
Illinois Infantry, and James R. Gilmore, of Massachusetts, solicit- 
ing an interview with me. They stated that they had no official 
character or authority, “but were fully possessed of the views of 
the United States Government, relative to an adjustment of the 
differences existing between the North and the South,” and did 
not doubt that a free interchange of views would open the way 
to official negotiations, ete. They had crossed our lines through 
a letter of General Grant to Colonel Ould, commissioner for the 
exchange of prisoners. The Secretary of State, Mr. Benjamin, 
to whom they were conducted, accompanied them to my office. 
Colonel Jacques expressed the ardent desire he felt, in common 
with the men of their army, for a restoration of peace, using 
such emphatic terms as that the men would go home in double- 
quick time if they could only see peace restored. Mr. Gilmore 
addressed me, and in a few minutes conveyed the information 
that the two gentlemen had come to Richmond impressed with 
the idea that the Confederate Government would accept a peace 
on the basis of a reconstruction of the Union, the abolition of 
slavery, and the grant of an amnesty to the people of the States 
as repentant criminals. In order to accomplish the abolition of 
slavery, it was proposed that there should be a general vote of 
all the people of both federations, in mass, and the majority of 
the vote thus taken was to determine that as well as all other 
disputed questions. These were stated to be Mr. Lincoln’s 
views. The impudence of the remarks could only be extenu- 
ated because of the ignorance displayed and the profuse avowal 
of the kindest motives and intentions. 


1864] THE VOTE OF A FOREIGN PEOPLE. 611 


I answered that, as these proposals had been prefaced by the 
remark that the people of the North were a majority, and that 
a majority ought to govern, the offer was, in effect, a proposal 
that the Confederate States should surrender at discretion, ad- 
mit that they had been wrong from the beginning of the con- 
test, submit to the mercy of their enemies, and avow themselves 
to be in need of pardon for their crimes; that extermination 
was preferable to dishonor. I stated that, if they were them- 
selves so unacquainted with the form of their own government 
as to make such propositions, Mr. Lincoln ought to have known, 
when giving them his views, that it was out of the power of | 
the Confederate Government to act on the subject of the domes- 
tic institutions of the several States, each State having exclu- 
sive jurisdiction on that point, still less to commit the decision 
of such a question to the vote of a foreign people. Having no 
disposition to discuss questions of state with such persons, espe- 
cially as they bore no credentials, I terminated the interview, 
and they withdrew with Mr. Benjamin. 

The opening of the spring campaign of 1864 was deemed a 
favorable conjuncture for the employment of the resources of 
diplomacy. To approach the Government of the United States 
directly would have been in vain. Hepeated efforts had already 
demonstrated its inflexible purpose—not to negotiate with the 
Confederate authorities. Political developments at the North, 
however, favored the adoption of some action that might influ- 
ence popular sentiment in the hostile section. The aspect of 
the peace party was quite encouraging, and it seemed that the 
real issue to be decided in the Presidential election of that year, 
was the continuance or cessation of the war. A commission of 
three persons, eminent in position and intelligence, was accord- 
ingly appointed to visit Canada, with a view to negotiation with 
such persons in the North as might be relied upon to aid the attain- 
ment of peace. The commission was designed to facilitate such 
preliminary conditions as might lead to formal negotiations be- 
tween the two Governments, and they were expected to make 
judicious use of any political opportunity that might be pre- 


sented. 
The commissioners— Messrs. Olay, of Alabama; Holcombe, of 


612 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Virginia; and Thompson, of Mississippi—established themselves 
at Niagara Falls in July, and on the 12th commenced a corre- 
spondence with Horace Greeley, of New York. Through him 
they sought a safe-conduct to Washington. Mr. Lincoln at first 
appeared to favor an interview, but finally refused on the ground 
that the commissioners were not authorized to treat for peace. 
His final announcement to them was the following : 


“Exrcutive Mansion, Wasuivnatoy, D. C., July 18, 1864. 
“ To whom it may concern: 

“ Any proposition which embraces the restoration of peace, the 
integrity of the whole union, and the abandonment of slavery, 
and which comes by and with an authority that can control the 
armies now at war against the United States, will be received and 
considered by the Executive Government of the United States, 
and will be met by liberal terms on other substantial and collateral 
points, and the bearer or bearers thereof shall have safe conduct 
both ways. Aprauam LINcoLN.” 


This movement, like all others which had preceded it, was a 
failure. 

On December 30, 1864, I received a request from Mr. Fran- 
cis P. Blair, a distinguished citizen of Montgomery County, 
Maryland, for permission to visit Richmond for certain personal 
objects, which was conceded to him. On January 12, 1865, 
he visited me, and the following statement of our interview was 
immediately afterward prepared : 


“Ricumonp, Vireinta, January 12, 1865. 
“ Memorandum of a confidential conversation held this day with 
F. P. Buiarr, of Montgomery County, Maryland. 

“Mr. Blair stated that, not receiving an answer to his applica- 
tion for permission to visit Richmond, which had been sent from 
the headquarters of General Grant’s army, he returned to Wash- 
ington and there received the reply which had been made to his 
application, but by some means had been withheld from him and 
been forwarded after having been opened ; that he had originally 
obtained permission to visit Richmond from Mr. Lincoln, after stat- 
ing to him that he (Mr. Blair) had for many years held friendly 
relations with myself. Mr. Lincoln stopped him, though he after- 


1864] THE DREAMS OF AN OLD MAN. 613 


ward gave him permission to visit me. He stated, in explana- 
tion of his position, that he, being a man of Southern blood, felt 
very desirous to see the war between the States terminated, and 
hoped by an interview with me to be able to effect something to 
that end ; that, after receiving the pass which had been sent to 
him by my direction, he sought before returning to have a con- 
versation with Mr. Lincoln ; had two appointments for that pur- 
pose, but on each occasion was disappointed, and, from the cir- 
cumstances, concluded that Mr. Lincoln avoided the interview, 
and therefore came not only without credentials but without such 
instructions from Mr. Lincoln as enabled him to speak for him. 
His views, therefore, were to be regarded merely as his own, and 
said they were perhaps merely the dreams of an old man, ete. 
He said, despairing of being able to see me, he had determined to 
write to me, and had the rough draft. of a letter which he had 
prepared, and asked permission to read it. Soon after commenc- 
ing to do so, he said (pleasantly) that he found his style was 
marked by his old pursuit, and that the paper:appeared too much 
like an editorial. He omitted, therefore, portions of it, reading 
what he considered the main points of his proposition. He had 
recognized the difference of our positions as not entitling him to 
a response from me to the arguments and suggestions which he 
desired to offer. I therefore allowed him to read without com- 
ment on my part. When he had finished, I inquired as to his main 
proposition, the cessation of hostilities and the union of the mili- 
tary forces for the common purpose of maintaining the ‘Monroe 
doctrine ’—how that object was to be reached. He said that both 
the political parties of the United States asserted the Monroe 
doctrine as a cardinal point of their creed ; that there was a gen- 
eral desire to apply it to the case of Mexico. For that purpose a 
secret treaty might be made, etc. I called his attention to my 
past efforts for negotiation, and my inability to see—unless Mr. 
Lincoln’s course in that regard should be changed—how we were 
to take the first step. He expressed the belief that Mr. Lincoln 
would now receive commissioners, but subsequently said he could 
not give any assurance on that point, and proposed to return to 
Washington to explain his project to Mr. Lincoln, and notify me, 
if his hope proved well founded, that Mr. Lincoln would now agree 
to a conference for the purpose of entering into negotiations. He 
affirmed that Mr. Lincoln did not sympathize with the radical men 


614 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


who desired the devastation and subjugation of the Southern 
States, but that he was unable to control the extreme party, which 
now had great power in the Congress, and would at the next ses- 
sion have still more ; referred to the existence of two parties in 
the Cabinet, to the reluctant nomination of Mr. Chase to be Chief- 
Justice, etc. For himself, he avowed an earnest desire to stop the 
further effusion of blood, as one every drop of whose blood was 
Southern. He expressed the hope that the pride, the power, and 
the honor of the Southern States should suffer no shock ; looked 
to the extension of Southern territory even to the Isthmus of Da- 
rien, and hoped, if his views found favor, that his wishes would 
be realized ; reiterated the idea of State sovereignty, with illus- 
trations, and accepted the reference I made to explanation given 
in the ‘Globe,’ when he edited it, of the proclamation of General 
Jackson. 

When his attention was called to the brutal atrocities of their 
armies, especially the fiendish cruelty shown to helpless women 
and children, as the cause of a deep-seated hostility on the part of 
our people, and an insurmountable obstacle to an early restoration 
of fraternal relations, he admitted the necessity for providing a 
new channel for the bitter waters, and another bond than that of 
former memories and interests. This was supposed to be con- 
tained in the proposed common effort to maintain the “ Monroe 
doctrine” on the American Continent. It was evident that he 
counted on the disintegration of the Confederate States if the war 
. continued, and that in any event he regarded the institution of 
slavery as doomed to extinction. I thought any remark by me on 
the first proposition would lead to intimations in connection with 
public men which I preferred not more distinctly to hear than as 
manifested in his general remarks ; on the latter point, for the rea- 
son stated, the inequality of his responsibility and mine, I pre- 
ferred to have no discussion. The only difficulty which he spoke 
of as insurmountable was that of existing engagements between 
European powers and the Confederate States. This point, when 
referred to a second time as the dreaded obstacle to a secret treaty 
which would terminate the war, was met by me with a statement 
that we had now no such complication, were free to act as to us 
should seem best, and desired to keep state policy and institutions 
free from foreign control. Throughout the conference Mr. Blair 
appeared to be animated by a sincere desire to promote a pacific 


1864] THE SUBSTITUTION OF REASON FOR PASSION. 615 


solution of the existing difficulty, but claimed no other power 
than that of serving as a medium of communication between those 
who had thus far had no intercourse, and were therefore with- 
out the co-intelligence which might secure an adjustment of their 
controversy. To his hopeful anticipation in regard to the restora- 
tion of fraternal relations between the sections, by the means in- 
dicated, I replied that a cessation of hostilities was the first step 
toward the substitution of reason for passion, of sense of justice 
for a desire to injure, and that, if the people were subsequently 
engaged together to maintain a principle recognized by both, if 
together they should bear sacrifices, share dangers, and gather 
common renown, that new memories would take the place of 
those now planted by the events of this war, and might, in the 
course of time, restore the feelings which preéxisted. But it was 
for us to deal with the problems before us, and leave to posterity 
questions which they might solve, though we could not ; that, in 
the struggle for independence by our colonial fathers, had failure 
instead of success attended their effort, Great Britain, instead of 
a commerce which has largely contributed to her prosperity, would 
have had the heavy expense of numerous garrisons, to hold in sub- 
jection a people who deserved to be free and had resolved not to 
be subject. Our conference ended with no other result than an 
agreement that he would learn whether Mr. Lincoln would adopt 
his (Mr. Blair’s) project, and send or receive commissioners to 
negotiate for a peaceful solution of the questions at issue ; that he 
would report to him my readiness to enter upon negotiations, and 
that I knew of no insurmountable obstacle to such a treaty of — 
peace as would secure greater advantage to both parties than any 


result which arms could achieve. 
“ January 14, 1866. 


“The foregoing memorandum of conversation was this day 
read to Mr. Blair, and altered in so far as he desired, in any re- 


spect, to change the expressions employed. 
“ JurrerRson Davis.” 


The following letter was given by me to Mr. Blair: 
“Rronmonp, Virani, January 12, 1865. 
“FF, P. Brarr, Esq. 
“Sr: I have deemed it proper and probably desirable to you 
to give you in this form the substance of remarks made by me to 
be repeated by you to President Lincoln, etc., ete. 


616 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“T have no disposition to find obstacles in forms, and am will- 
ing now, as heretofore, to enter into negotiations for the restora- 
tion of peace, am ready to send a commission whenever I have 
reason to suppose it will be received, or to receive a commission 
if the United States Government shall choose to send one. That, 
notwithstanding the rejection of our former offers, I would, if you 
could promise that a commissioner, minister, or other agent would 
be received, appoint one immediately, and renew the effort to enter 
into conference with a view to secure peace to the two countries. 

“ Yours, etc., JEFFERSON Davis.” 


“Wasuineton, January 18, 1865. 
“FR, P. Brarr, Esq. 


“Sire: You having shown me Mr. Davis’s letter to you of the 
12th instant, you may say to him that I have constantly been, am 
now, and shall continue ready to receive any agent whom he or any 
other influential person now resisting the national authority may 
informally send to me with the view of securing peace to the peo- 
ple of our one common country. 

“Yours, ete., A, Lincorn.” 


When Mr. Blair returned and gave me this letter of Mr. 
Lincoln of January 18th, it being a response to my note to 
Mr. Blair of the 12th, he said it had been a fortunate thing 
that I gave him that note, as it had created greater confidence 
in Mr. Lincoln regarding his efforts at Richmond. Further re- 
flection, he said, had modified the views he formerly presented 
to me, and that he wanted to have my attention for a different 
mode of procedure. 

He had, as he told Mr. Lincoln, held friendly relations with 
me for many years; they began as far back as when I was a 
schoolboy at Lexington, Kentucky, and he a resident of that 
place. In later years we had belonged to the same political 
party, and our views had generally coincided. There was 
much, therefore, to facilitate our conference. He then un- 
folded to me the embarrassment of Mr. Lincoln on account 
of the extreme men in Congress and elsewhere, who wished 
to drive him into harsher measures than he was inclined to 
adopt; whence it would not be feasible for him to enter into 
any arrangement with us by the use of political agencies; that, 


1865] HOSTILITIES WOULD BE SUSPENDED. 617 


if anything beneficial could be effected, it must be done with- 
out the intervention of the politicians. He, therefore, suggested 
that Generals Lee and Grant might enter into an arrangement 
by which hostilities would be suspended, and a way paved for 
the restoration of peace. I responded that I would willingly 
intrust to General Lee such negotiation as was indicated. 

The conference then ended, and, to report to Mr. Lincoln 
the result of his visit, Mr. Blair returned to Washington. He 
subsequently informed me that the idea of a military conven- 
tion was not favorably received at Washington, so it only re- 
mained for me to act upon the letter of Mr. Lincoln. 

I determined to send, as commissioners or agents for the 
informal conference, Messrs. Alexander H. Stephens, R. M. T. 
Hunter, and John A. Campbell. 

A letter of commission or certificate of appointment for each 
was prepared by the Secretary of State in the following form: 


“In compliance with the letter of Mr. Lincoln, of which the 
foregoing is a copy, you are hereby requested to proceed to Wash- 
ington City for conference with him upon the subject to which it 
relates,” ete. 


This draft of a commission was, upon perusal, modified by 


me so as to read as follows: 
“Ricumonp, January 28, 1865. 


“Tn conformity with the letter of Mr. Lincoln, of which the 
foregoing is a copy, you are requested to proceed to Washington 
City for an informal conference with him upon the issues involved 
in the existing war, and for the purpose of securing peace to the 
two countries.” 


Some objections were made to this commission by the United, 
States officials, because it authorized the commissioners to con- 
fer for the purpose “of securing peace to the two countries” ; 
whereas the letter of Mr. Lincoln, which was their passport, 
spoke of “securing peace to the people of our one common 
country.” But these objections were finally waived. 

The letter of Mr. Lincoln expressing a willingness to receive 
any agent I might send to Washington City, a commission was 
appointed to go there; but it was not allowed to proceed far- 


618 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ther than Hampton Roads, where Mr. Lincoln, accompanied ky 
Mr. Seward, met the commissioners. Seward eraftily proposed 
that the conference should be confidential, and the commission- 
ers regarded this so binding on them as to prevent them from 
including in their report the discussion which occurred. This 
enabled Mr. Seward to give his own version of it in a dispatch 
to the United States Minister to the French Government, which 
was calculated to create distrust of, if not hostility to, the Con- 
federacy on the part of the power in Europe most effectively 
favoring our recognition. 

Why Mr. Lincoln changed his purpose, and, instead of re- 
ceiving the commissioners at Washington, met them at Hamp- 
ton Roads, I can not, of course, explain. Several causes may be 
conjecturally assigned. The commissioners were well known 
in Washington, had there held high positions, and, so far as 
there was any peace party there, might have been expected to 
have influence with its members; but a more important inquiry 
is: If Mr. Lincoln previously had determined to hear no propo- 
sition for negotiation, and to accept nothing less than an uncon- 
ditional surrender, why did he propose to receive informally our 
agent? If there was nothing to discuss, the agent would have 
been without functions. 

I think the views of Mr. Lincoln had changed after he wrote 
the letter to Mr. Blair of June 18th, and that the change was 
mainly produced by the report which he made of what he saw 
and heard at Richmond on the night he staid there. Mr. Blair 
had many acquaintances among the members of the Confederate 
Congress ; and all those of the class who, of old, fled to the eave 
of Adullam, “gathered themselves unto him.” 

Mr. Hunter, in a published article on the peace commission, 
referring to Mr. Blair’s visit to Richmond, says: “He saw many 
old friends and party associates. Here his representations were 
not without effect upon his old confederates, who for so long 
had been in the habit of taking counsel with him on public af- 
fairs.” He then goes on to describe Mr. Blair as revealing dan- 
gers of such overwhelming disaster as turned the thoughts of 
many Confederates toward peace more seriously than ever before. 
That Mr, Blair saw and noted this serious inclining of many to 


1865] CONTINUED FOR SEVERAL HOURS. 619 


thoughts of peace, scarcely admits of a doubt; and, if he be- 
lieved the Congress to be infected by a cabal undermining the 
Executive in his efforts successfully to prosecute the war, Mr. 
Lincoln may be naturally supposed thence to have reached the 
conclusion that he should accept nothing but an unconditional 
surrender, and that he should not allow a commission from the 
Confederacy to visit the United States capital. 

The report of the Sl eh gage dated February 5, 1865, 
was as follows: 


“ To the President of the Confederate States : 

“Sir: Under your letter of appointment of the 28th ult. we 
proceeded to seek ‘an informal conference’ with Abraham Lin- 
coln, President of the United States, upon the subject mentioned 
in the letter. The conference was granted and took place on the 
30th ult., on board of a steamer anchored in Hampton Roads, 
where we met President Lincoln and the Hon. Mr. Seward, Secre- 
tary of State of the United States. It continued for several hours, 
and was both full and explicit. We learned from them that the 
message of President Lincoln to the Congress of the United States, 
in December last, explains clearly and distinctly his sentiments as 
to the terms, conditions, and method of proceeding by which peace 
can be secured to the people, and we were not informed that they 
would be modified or altered to obtain that end. We understood 
from him that no terms or proposals of any treaty, or agree- 
ment looking to an ultimate settlement, would be entertained or 
_made by him with the authorities of the Confederate States, be- 
cause that would be a recognition of their existence as a separate 
power, which under no circumstances would be done ; and, for a 
like reason, that no such terms would be entertained by him for 
the States separately ; that no extended truce or armistice (as at 
present advised) would be granted or allowed without a satisfac- 
tory assurance in advance of the complete restoration of the au- 
thority of the Constitution and laws of the United States over all 
places within the States of the Confederacy ; that whatever con- 
sequences may follow from the reéstablishment of that authority 
must be accepted ; but that individuals subject to pains and pen- 
alties under the laws of the United States might rely upon a very 
liberal use of the power confided to him to remit those pains and 
penalties if peace be restored. 


620 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“ During the conference, the proposed amendment to the Con- 
stitution of the United States adopted by Congress on the 31st 
ultimo was brought to our notice. 

“This amendment provides that neither slavery nor involun- 
tary servitude, except for crime, should exist within the United 
States, or any place within their jurisdiction, and that Congress 
should have power to enforce this amendment by appropriate 
legislation. Very respectfully, etc., 

“ ALEXANDER H, STEPHENS, 
R, MOT. Lunt Ee, 
“ Joun A. CAMPBELL.” 


Thus closed the conference, and all negotiations with the 
Government of the United States for the establishment of 
peace. Says Judge Campbell, in his memoranda: 


“Tn conclusion, Mr. Hunter summed up what seemed to be the 
result of the interview : that.there could be no arrangements by 
treaty between the Confederate States and the United States, or 
any agreements between them; that there was nothing left for 
them but unconditional submission.” 


By reference to the message of President Lincoln of Decem- 
ber 6, 1864, which is mentioned in the report, it appears that 
the terms of peace therein stated were as follows: 


“In presenting the abandonment of armed resistance to the 
national authority on the part of the insurgents, as the only in- 
dispensable condition to ending the war on the part of the Goy- 
ernment, I retract nothing heretofore said as to slavery. I repeat 
the declaration made a year ago, that ‘while I remain in my pres- 
ent position I shall not attempt to retract or modify the emanci- 
pation proclamation, nor shall I return to slavery any person who 
is free by the terms of that proclamation, or by any act of Con- 
gress.’ 

“If the people should, by whatever mode or means, make it 
an executive duty to reénslave such persons, another, and not I, 
must be their instrument to perform it.” 


On the 4th of March, 1861, President Lincoln appeared on 
the western portico of the Capitol at Washington, and in the pres- 
ence of a great multitude of witnesses took the following oath ; 


1864} WHICH IS SOVEREIGN ? 621 


“T do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office 
of President of the United States, and will, to the best of my 
ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the 
United States.” . 


The first section of the fourth article of the Constitution of 
the United States is in these words: 


“No person held to service or labor in one State, under the 
laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any 
law or regulation therein, be discharged from such service or la- 
bor, but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such 
service or labor may be due.” 


The intelligent reader will observe that the words of this 
section, “in consequence of any law or regulation therein,” 
embrace a President’s emancipation proclamation, as well as any 
other regulation therein. Thus the Constitution itself nullified 
Mr. Lincoln’s proclamation, and made it of no force whatever. 
Yet he assumed and maintained, with all the military force he 
could command, that it set every slave free. Which is the 
higher authority, Mr. Lincoln and his emancipation proclama- 
tion or the Constitution? If the former, then what are con- 
stitutions worth for the protection of rights ? 

Again he says: 

‘Nor shall I return to slavery any person who is free by the 
terms of that proclamation or by an act of Congress.” 


But the Constitution says he shall return them— 


“but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such 
service is due.” 


Who shall decide? Which is sovereign, Mr. Lincoln and 
his proclamation or the Constitution? The Constitution says: 

“This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which 
shall be made in pursuance thereof, shall be the supreme law of 
the land.” 


Was it thus obeyed by Mr. Lincoln as the supreme law of 
the land? It was not obeyed, but set aside, subverted, over- 
turned by him. But he said in his oath: 


622 RISE AND FALL OF TIE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“TJ do solemnly swear that I will, to the best of my ability, pre- 
serve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States.” 


Did he do it? Is such treatment of the Constitution the 
manner to preserve, protect, and defend it? Of what value, 
then, are paper constitutions and oaths binding officers to their 
preservation, if there is not intelligence enough in the people to 
discern the violations, and virtue enough to resist the violators 4 

Again the report says: 


“We understood from him that no terms or proposals of-any 
treaty or agreement looking to an ultimate settlement would be 
entertained or made by him with the authorities of the Confeder- 
ate States, because that would be a recognition of their existence 
as a separate power, which under no circumstances would be 
done ; and, for a like reason, that no such terms would be enter- 
tained by him for the States separately.” 


Now the Constitution of the United States says, in Article X: 


“The powers not delegated to the United States by the Con- 
stitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the 
States respectively, or to the people.” 


Within the purview of this article of the Constitution the 
States are independent, distinct, and sovereign bodies—that is, 
in their reserved powers they are as sovereign, separate, and su- 
preme as the Government of the United States in its delegated 
powers. One of these reserved powers is the right of the people 
to alter or abolish any form of government, and to institute a 
new one such as to them shall seem most likely to effect their 
safety and happiness ; that power is neither “delegated to the 
United States by the Constitution nor prohibited by it to the 
States.” On the contrary, it is guaranteed to the States by the 
Constitution itself in these words: 


“The powers not delegated to the United States by the Con- 
stitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the 
States respectively, or to the people.” 


Mark the words, “are reserved to the States respectively, or 
to the people.” No one will venture to say that a sovereign 


1788] REMAINS TO THE PEOPLE. 623 


State, by the mere act of accession to the Constitution, delegated 
the power of secession. The assertion would be of no validity 
if it were made; for the question is one of fact as to the powers 
delegated or not delegated to the United States by the Con- 
stitution. It is absurd to ask if the power of secession in a 
State is delegated to the United States by the Constitution, or 
prohibited by it to the States. No trace of the delegation or 
prohibition of this power is to be found in the Constitution. 
It is, therefore, as the Constitution says, “reserved to the 
States respectively, or to the people.” 


The Convention of the State of New York, which ratified 
the Constitution of the United States on July 26, 1788, in its 
resolution of ratification said : 


“We do declare and make known... that the powers of 
Government may be reassumed by the people, whensoever it shall 
become necessary to their happiness; that every power, jurisdic- 
tion, and right, which is not by the said Constitution clearly dele- 
gated to the Congress of the United States, or to the departments 
of the Government thereof, remains to the people of the several 
States, or to their respective State governments, to whom they 
may have granted the same. . . . Under these impressions, and 
declaring that the rights aforesaid can not be abridged or violated,” 
etc., etc., “ we, the said delegates, in the name and in behalf of the 
people of the State of New York, do, by these presents, assent to 
and ratify the said Constitution.” 


With this and other conditions stated in the resolution of 
ratification, it was accepted and approved by the other States, 
and New York became a member of the Union. The resolu- 
tion of Rhode Island asserts the same reservation in regard to 
the reassumption of powers. 

It is unnecessary to examine here whether this reserved power 
exists in the States respectively or in the people; for, when the 
Confederate States seceded, it was done by the people, acting 
through, or in conjunction with, the State, and by that power 
which is expressly reserved to them in the Constitution of the 
United States. When Mr. Lincoln, therefore, issued his procla- 
mation calling for seventy-five thousand men to subjugate cer- 


624 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tain “combinations too powerful to be suppressed by the ordi- 
nary course of judicial proceedings,” he not only thereby denied 
the validity of the Constitution, but sought to resist, by military 
force, the exercise of a power clearly reserved in the Constitu- 
tion, and reaffirmed in its tenth amendment, to the States re- 
spectively or to the people for their exercise. But, in order to 
justify his flagrant disregard of the Constitution, he contrived 
the fiction of “combinations,” and upon this basis commenced 
the bloody war of subjugation with all its consequences. Thus, 
any recognition of the Confederate States, or of either of them, 
in his negotiations, would have exposed the groundlessness of his 
fiction. But the Constitution required him to recognize each 
of them, for they had simply exercised a power which it ex- 
pressly reserved for their exercise. Thus it is seen who violated 
the Constitution, and upon whom rests the responsibility of the 
war. 

It has been stated above that the conditions offered to our 
soldiers whenever they proposed to capitulate, were only those 
of subjugation. When General Buckner, on February 16, 1862, 
asked of General Grant to appoint commissioners to agree upon 
terms of capitulation, he replied: 


“No terms, except unconditional and immediate surrender, 
can be accepted.” 


When General Lee asked the same question, on April 9, 
1865, General Grant replied : 


“The terms upon which peace can be had are well understood. 
By the South laying down their arms, they will hasten that most 
desirable event, save thousands of human lives and hundreds of 
millions of property not yet destroyed.” 


When General Sherman made an agreement with General 
Johnston for formal disbandment of the army of the latter, it 
was at once disapproved by the Government of the United 
States, and Sherman therefore wrote to Johnston : 


“T demand the surrender of your army on the same terms as 


were given to General Lee at Appomattox, on April 9th, purely 
and simply.” 


1865] AND FOR NO OTHERS. 625 


It remains to be stated that the Government which spurned 
all these proposals for peace, and gave no terms but uncondi- 
tional and immediate surrender, was instituted and organized 
for the purposes and objects expressed in the following extract, 
and for no others: 

“ We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more 
perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, pro- 
vide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and 
secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do 
ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of 
America.” 


Cn ASP tie a 1. 


General Sherman leaves Savannah.—His March impeded.—Difficulty in collecting 
Troops to oppose him.—The Line of the Salkehatchie—Route of the Enemy’s 
Adyance.—Evacuation of Columbia.—Its Surrender by the Mayor.—Burning 
the City.—Sherman responsible.—Evacuation of Charleston.—The Confederate 
Forees in North Carolina.—General Johnston’s Estimate.—General Johnston 
assigned to the Command.—The Enemy’s Advance from Columbia, to Fayetteville, 
North Carolina.—“ Foraging Parties.” —Sherman’s Threat and Hampton’s Reply. 
—Description of Federal “‘ Treasure-Seekers” by Sherman’s Aide-de-Camp.— 
Failure of Johnston’s Projected Attack at Fayetteville—Affair at Kinston.— 
Cavalry Exploits——General Johnston withdraws to Smithfield—Encounter at 
Averysboro,—Battles of Bentonville——Union of Sherman’s and Schofield’s 
Forces,—Johnston’s Retreat to Raleigh. 


Arrer the evacuation of Savannah by General Hardee, it 
soon became known that General Sherman was making prepara- 
tions to march northward through the Carolinas with the sup- 
posed purpose of uniting his forces with those of General Grant 
before Richmond. General Hardee, having left detachments 
at proper points to defend the approaches to Charleston and 
Augusta, Georgia, withdrew the rest of his command to the 
first-mamed city. General Wheeler’s cavalry held all the roads 
northward, and, by felling trees and burning bridges, obstructed 
considerably the enemy’s advance, which in the early part of 
January was still further impeded by the heavy rains which had 
swollen the rivers and creeks far beyond their usual width and 


depth. 
aah BT 


626 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The seriously impaired condition of our railroad communi- 
eations in Georgia and Alabama, the effect of the winter rains 
on the already poor and ill-constructed country roads, the diffi- . 
culty in collecting and transporting supplies, so impeded the 
concentration of our available forces, that Generals Beauregard 
and Hardee—the former at Columbia, South Carolina, and the’ 
latter at Charleston—could.only retard, not prevent, the onward 
march of the enemy. At the outset of his movement the Sal- 
kehatchie River presented a very strong line of defense. Its 
swollen condition at that time, and the wide, deeply inundated 
swamps on both sides, rendered it almost impossible to force or 
outflank the position if adequately defended. It might have 
been better if we had then abandoned the attempt to hold cities 
of no strategic importance, and concentrated their garrisons at 
this point, where the chances of successful resistance were 
greater than at any subsequent period of the campaign. For, 
even if our expectation had been disappointed, and had the su- 
_perior numerical force of the enemy compelled us to withdraw 
from this line, the choice of several good positions was open to 
“us, any one of which, by moving upon converging lines, we could 
reach sooner than was possible to Sherman, whose passage of 
the river must have been much encumbered and delayed by 
his trains. Of these defensive positions, Branchville and Or- 
angeburg may be regarded as eligible: had Sherman headed 
his columns toward Charleston, our forces would have been in 
position to attack him in front and on the flank. Had his 
objective point been Augusta, he would have had our army in 
his rear; and had, as proved to be the case, Columbia been the 
place at which he aimed, our army would have been able to 
reach there sooner than he could. 

General Sherman left Savannah January 22, 1865, and reached 
Pocotaligo on the 24th. On February 3d he crossed the Salke- 
hatchie with slight resistance at River’s and Beaufort. bridges, 
and thence pushed forward to the South Carolina Railroad at 
Midway, Bamberg, and Graham’s. After thorcughly destroy- 
ing the railroad between these places, which occupied three or 
four days, he advanced slowly along the line of the railroad, 
threatening Branchville, the junction of the railroads from Au- 


Eng? by @5, Hall, Jr 


LikuT. G 


v.WM. J.WARDE 


ry 


New York, D, Appleton & Go, 


1865] THE TRIBUTE VICE PAYS TO VIRTUE. 627 


gusta to Columbia and Charleston. For a short time it was 
doubtful whether he proposed to attack Augusta, Georgia, where 
it was well known we had our principal powder-mill, many im- 
portant factories and shops, and large stores of army supplies ; 
but on the 11th it was found that he was moving north to 
Orangeburg, on the road from Branchville to Columbia, the 
latter city being the objective point of his march. Early on the 
morning of the 16th the head of his columns reached the Con- 
garee opposite Columbia. The bridge over that stream had 
been burned by our retreating troops, but a pontoon bridge, 
built by the enemy under cover of strong detachments who had 
crossed higher up at Saluda Factory, enabled the main body to 
pass the river and enter the city on the morning of the 17th, 
the Confederate troops having previously evacuated it. On the 
same day the Mayor formally surrendered the city to Colonel 
Stone, commanding a brigade of the Fifteenth Corps, and 
claimed for its citizens the protection which the laws of civil- 
ized war always accord to non-combatants. In infamous disre- 
gard not only of the established rules of war, but of the com- 
mon dictates of humanity, the defenseless city was burned to 
the ground, after the dwelling-houses had been robbed of every- 
thing of value, and their helpless inmates subjected to outrage 
and insult of a character too base to be described. 

* Hypocrisy is the tribute which vice pays to virtue; therefore 
General Sherman has endeavored to escape the reproaches for 
the burning of Columbia by attributing it to General Hamp- 
ton’s order to burn the cotton in the city, that it might not fall 
into the hands of the enemy. General Hampton has proved 
circumstantially that General Sherman’s statement is untrue, 
and, though in any controversy to which General Hampton 
may be a party, no corroborative evidence is necessary to sub- 
stantiate his assertion of a fact coming within his personal ob- 
servation, hundreds of unimpeachable witnesses have testified 
that the burning of Columbia was the deliberate act of the 
Federal soldiery, and that it was certainly permitted, if not 
ordered, by the commanding General. The following letter 
of General Hampton will to those who know him be con- 
clusive : 


628 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


‘‘Witp Woops, Mississirpi, April 21, 1866. 


“To Hon, Reverpy Jounson, United States Senate. 

“Sir: A few days ago I saw in the published proceedings of 
Congress that a petition from Benjamin Kawles, of Columbia, 
South Carolina, asking for compensation for the destruction of his 
house by the Federal army, in February, 1865, had been presented 
to the Senate, accompanied by a letter from Major-General Sher- 
man. In this letter General Sherman uses the following language : 
‘The citizens of Columbia set fire to thousands of bales of cotton 
rolled out into the streets, and which were burning before we 
entered Columbia; I, myself, was in the city as early as nine 
o’clock, and I saw these fires, and knew that efforts were made to 
extinguish them, but a high and strong wind prevented. I gave 
no orders for the burning of your city, but, on the contrary, the 
conflagration resulted from the great imprudence of cutting the 
cotton bales, whereby the contents were spread to the wind, so 
that it became an impossibility to arrest the fire. I saw in your 
Columbia newspaper the printed order of General Wade Hampton, 
that on the approach of the Yankee army all the cotton should 
thus be burned, and, from what I saw myself, I have no hesitation 
in saying that he was the cause of the destruction of your city.’ 

“This charge, made against me by General Sherman, having 
been brought before the Senate of the United States, I am natu- 
rally most solicitous to vindicate myself before the same tribunal. 
But my State has no representative in that body. Those who 
should be her constitutional representatives there are debarred 
the right of entrance into those halls. There are none who have 
the right to speak for the South ; none to participate in the legis- 
lation which governs her ; none to impose the taxes she is called 
upon to pay, and none to vindicate her sons from misrepresenta- 
tion, injustice, or slander. Under these circumstances, I appeal to 
you, in the confident hope you will use every effort to see that 
justice is done in this matter. 

“JT deny, emphatically, that any cotton was fired in Columbia 
by my order. I deny that the citizens ‘set fire to thousands of 
bales rolled out into the streets.’ I deny that any cotton was on 
fire when the Federal troops entered the city. I most respectfully 
ask of Congress to appoint a committee, charged with the duty of. 
ascertaining and reporting all the facts connected with the de- 
struction of Columbia, and thus fixing upon the proper author of 


1865] SMOKE ROSE WHEREVER THE ARMY WENT. 629 


that enormous crime the infamy he richly deserves. I am willing 
to submit the case to any honest tribunal. Before any such I 
pledge myself to prove that I gave a positive order, by direction 
of General Beauregard, that no cotton should be fired ; that not 
one bale was on fire when General Sherman’s troops took posses- 
sion of the city ; that he promised protection to the city, and that, 
in spite of his solemn promise, he burned the city to the ground, 
deliberately, systematically, and atrociously. I, therefore, most 
earnestly request that Congress may take prompt and efficient 
measures to investigate this matter fully. Not only is this due to 
themselves and to the reputation of the United States army, but 
also to justice and to truth. Trusting that you will pardon me 
for troubling you, I am, very respectfully, your obedient servant, 
“'WapEe Hampton.” 


Were this the only instance of such barbarity perpetrated 
by General Sherman’s army, his effort to escape the responsi- 
bility might be more successful, because more plausible; but 
when the eulogists of his exploits note exultingly that “wide- 
spreading columns of smoke rose wherever the army went,” 
when it is incontrovertibly true that the line of his march could 
be traced by the burning dwelling-houses and by the wail of 
women and children pitilessly left to die from starvation and 
exposure in the depth of winter, his plea of “not guilty ” in 
the case of the city of Columbia can not free him from the 
reprobation which outraged humanity must attach to an act of 
eruelty which only finds a parallel in the barbarous excesses of 
Wallenstein’s army in the Thirty Years’ War, and which, even 
at that period of the world’s civilization, sullied the fame of 
that otherwise great soldier. 

In consequence of General Sherman’s movements, it was 
considered: advisable to eyacuate Charleston (February 17th), 
that General Hardee’s command might become available for 
service in the field ; and thus that noble city and its fortresses, 
which the combined military and naval forces of the United 
States, during an eighteen months’ siege, had failed to reduce, 
and which will stand for ever as imperishable monuments of the 
skill and fortitude of their defenders, were, on February 21st, 


630 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


without resistance, occupied by the Federal forces under General 
Q. A. Gillmore. 

Fort Sumter, though it now presented the appearance of a 
ruin, was really better proof against bombardment than when 
first subjected to fire. The upper tier of masonry, from severe 
battering, had fallen on the outer wall, and shot and shell 
served only to solidify and add harder material to the mass. 
Over its rampart the Confederate flag defiantly floated until the 
city of Charleston was evacuated. 

Every effort that our circumstances permitted was imme- 
diately and thenceforward made to collect troops for the de- 
fense of North Carolina. General Hood’s army, the troops 
under command of General D. H. Hill at Augusta, General 
Hardee’s force, a few thousand men under General Bragg, and 
the cavalry commands of Generals Hampton and Wheeler, con- 
stituted our entire available strength to oppose Sherman’s ad- 
vance. These were collected as rapidly as our broken com- 
munications and the difficulty of gathering and transporting 
supplies would permit. 

After the fall of Columbia, General Beauregard, command- 
ing the military department, retreated toward North Carolina. 
The Army of Tennessee (Hood’s) was moving from the west 
to make a junction with the troops retiring from South Caro- 
lina. The two forces, if united with Hardee’s command, then 
moving in the same direction, would, it was hoped, be able to 
make effective resistance to Sherman’s advance. In any event 
it was needful that they should be kept in such relation to Lee’s 
army as to make a junction with it practicable. In this state of 
affairs I was informed that General Beauregard, after his troops 
had entered North Carolina, had decided to march to the eastern 
part of that State. This would leave the road to Charlotte open . 
to Sherman’s pursuing column, which, interposing, would pre- 
vent the troops coming from the west from joining Beauregard, 
enable him to destroy our force in detail by the joint action of 
his own army and that of Schofield, commanding the district of 
Wilmington. The anxiety created by this condition of affairs 
caused me, after full correspondence with General Lee, to sug- 
gest to him to give his views to General Beauregard, and I sent 


1865] AFTER HE TOOK COMMAND. 631 


to General Beauregard’s headquarters the chief-engineer, Gen- 
eral J. F. Gilmer, he being possessed fully of my opinions 
and wishes. General Beauregard modified his proposed move- 
ments so as to keep his forces on the left of the enemy’s line of 
march until the troops coming from Hood’s army could make 
a junction. These were the veteran commands of Stevenson, 
Cheatham, and Stewart. Lieutenant-General S. D. Lee, though 
he had not entirely recovered from a wound received in the 
Tennessee campaign, was at Augusta, Georgia, collecting the 
fragments of Hood’s army to follow the troops previously men- 
tioned. They had not moved together, and the first-named di- 
vision had reached Beauregard’s army in South Carolina. 

Though it contained an implied compliment, General Lee 
was not a little disturbed by occasional applications made to 
have troops detached from his army to reénforce others. The 
last instance had been a call from General Beauregard for re- 
enforcements from the Army of Virginia. He had always been 
attentive, and ready as far as he could,to meet the wants of 
other commands of our army, but at this time those who knew 
his condition could not suppose he had any men to spare; yet 
the fact of thinking so was a compliment to his success in re- 
sisting the large army which was assailing his small one. There 
had always been entire co-intelligence and accord between Gen- 
eral Lee and myself, but the Congress about this time thought 
his power would be increased by giving him the nominal dig- 
nity of general-in-chief, under which he resumed, as far as he 
could, the general charge of armies from which, at his urgent 
solicitation, I had relieved him after he took command, in the 
field, of the Army of Northern Virginia. 

A few days subsequent to the events in North Carolina to 
which reference has been made, General Lee proposed to me 
that General J. E. Johnston should be put in command of the ° 
troops in North Carolina. He still had the confidence in that 
officer which I had once felt, but which his campaigns in Mis- 
sissippi and Georgia had impaired. With the understanding 
that General Lee was himself to supervise and control the 
operations, I assented to the assignment. General Johnston, 
on the 23d of February, at Charlotte, North Carolina, relieved 


632 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


General Beauregard and assumed command. General Lee’s 
first instructions to General Johnston were to “concentrate all 
available forces and drive back Sherman.” The first part of 
the instructions was well executed ; the last part of it was more 
desirable than practicable, though the brief recital made herein 
of the events of the campaign claimed the credit due to a vig- 
orous effort. 

General Johnston’s force, according to his estimate, when he 
took command, amounted to about sixteen thousand infantry 
and artillery, and four thousand cavalry; if to this be added 
the portion of the Army of Tennessee, about twenty-five hun- 
dred men, under command of General Stephen D. Lee, which 
afterward joined the army at Smithfield, North Carolina, and 
that of General Bragg’s command at Goldsboro, which amounted 
to about eight thousand, the aggregate would be about thirty 
thousand five hundred men of all arms. 

After leaving Columbia, the course of the Federal army 
through Winnsboro, across the Catawba at Rocky Mount, Hang- 
ing Rock, and Peay’s Ferry, and in the direction of Cheraw on 
the Great Pedee, indicated that it would attempt to cross the 
Cape Fear River at Fayetteville, North Carolina—a town sixty 
miles south of Raleigh, and of special importance, as containing 
an arsenal, several Government shops, and a large portion of the 
machinery which had been removed from Harper’s Ferry—and 
effect a junction at that point with General Schofield’s com- 
mand, then known to be at Wilmington. Up to this time, 
while no encounter of any magnitude had taken place, the 
enemy’s progress had been much impeded by the Confederate 
cavalry, and the robbery of private citizens by gangs of armed 
banditti, called “foraging parties,’ was in a large measure 
prevented. The right of an army to forage as it advances . 
through an enemy’s country is not questioned. But the right 
to forage, to collect food for men and horses, does not mean the 
right to rob household furniture, plate, trinkets, and every con- 
ceivable species of private property, and to burn whatever could 
not be carried away, together with the dwellings. General 
Sherman complained that some of these “foragers,” who were 
caught in the commission of the above-named offenses, and 


1865] IF THEY STRUCK A VEIN. 633 


had added thereto the greater crime of assaulting women, had 
been summarily dealt with by some of those whose wives and 
daughters they had outraged, and whose homes they had made 
desolate ; and he informed General Hampton that in retaliation 
he had ordered a number of Confederate prisoners of war to 
be put to death. To arrest this brutality General Hampton 
promptly informed him that, “for every soldier of mine mur- 
dered by you, I shall have executed at once two of yours, — 
giving in all cases preference to any officers who may be in 
our hands,” and adding, with a view to check the inhuman 
system of burning the houses of those citizens whom they had 
robbed, that he had ordered his men “to shoot down all of 
your men who are caught burning houses.” * This notice and 
the knowledge that General Hampton would keep his word, 
produced, it is believed, a very salutary effect, and thereafter 
the fear of punishment wrought a reform which the dictates of 
honor and humanity had been powerless to effect. 

The historian of Sherman’s “Great March,” in his illus- 
trated narrative of that expedition, describes both with pen and 
pencil the manner in which “with untiring zeal the soldiers 
hunted for concealed treasures. . . . Wherever thearmy halted,” 
he writes, “almost every inch of ground in the vicinity of the 
dwellings was poked by ramrods, pierced with sabers, or up- 
turned with spades,” searching for “valuable personal effects, 
plate, jewelry, and other rich goods, as well as articles of food, 
such as hams, sugar, flour, etc. . . . It was comical,” adds the 
chronicler, “to see a group of these red-bearded, barefooted, 
ragged veterans punching the unoffending earth in an appar- 
ently idiotic but certainly most energetic way. If they ‘struck 
a vein,’ a spade was instantly put into requisition, and the 
coveted wealth was speedily unearthed. Nothing escaped the 
observation of these sharp-witted soldiers. A woman standing 
upon the porch of a house, apparently watching their proceed- 
ings, instantly became an object of suspicion, and she was 
watched until some movement betrayed a place of concealment. 
The fresh earth recently thrown up, a bed of flowers just set 
out, the slightest indication of a change in appearance or posi- 


* General Hampton’s letter to General Sherman, February 27, 1865, 


634 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tion, all attracted the gaze of these military agriculturists. It 
wag all fair spoil of war, and the search made one of the excite- 
ments of the march.”* The author of the work from which 
the foregoing is an extract was an aide-de-camp on the staff of 
General Sherman. The playful manner in which he describes 
these habitual acts of plunder of “ plate, jewelry, and other rich 
goods” from private and undefended dwellings, shows that 
not only was such conduct not forbidden by the military au- 
thorities, but that it was permitted and applauded, that it was 
practiced “wherever the army halted” under the eye of the 
staff-ofticers of the General commanding, and was looked upon 
as one of the pleasurable “ excitements of the march.” Indeed, 
so agreeable was the impression made by these scenes of rob- 
bery of women’s “rich goods” that he has adorned his narra- 
tive with a full-page illustration, exhibiting a plantation home 
surrounded by soldiers engaged, as this staff-officer humorously 
terms it, in “ treasure-seeking,” while the lady of the house—its 
only apparent occupant—stands upon the veranda, with hands 
uplifted, beseeching them not to steal the watch and chain which 
they are taking out of a vessel which they have just dug up. 
That the foreign mercenaries, of which the Federal army was 
largely composed, should have been guilty of such disgraceful 
conduct, when free from the observation of their officers, is 
conceivable; but it is difficult to imagine that, in the nineteenth 
century, such acts as are described above could be committed 
habitually, in view of the officer of highest rank in the army of 
a civilized country, and not merely pass unpunished or unre- 
buked, but be recorded with sesh ile approval in the pages 
of a Se y history. 

The advance of the enemay? s columns across the Catawba, 
Lynch’s Creek, and the Pedee, at Cheraw, though retarded as 
much as possible by the vigilant skill of our cavalry under Gen- 
erals Hampton, Butler, and Wheeler, was steady and continuous. 
General Johnston’s hope that, from the enemy’s order of moy- 
ing by wings, sometimes a day’s march from each other, he 

* “The Story of the Great March, from the Diary of a Staff Officer.” By Brevet 


Major George Ward Nichols, Aide-de-Camp to General Sherman. New York: 
Harper & Brothers, 1865, pp. 112, et seq. 


1865] THEIR WONTED ENERGY AND DASH. 635 


could find an opportunity to strike one of their columns in the 
passage of the Cape Fear River, when the other was not in 
supporting distance, was unhappily disappointed. 

On March 6th, near Kinston, General Bragg with a reén- 
forcement of less than two thousand men attacked and routed 
three divisions of the enemy under Major-General Cox, captur- 
ing fifteen hundred prisoners and three field-pieces, and inflict- 
ing heavy loss in killed and wounded. This success, though 
inspiring, was on too small a scale to produce important results. 
During the march from the Catawba to the Cape Fear several 
brilliant cavalry affairs took place, in which our troops displayed 
their wonted energy and dash. Among these the most conspic- 
uous were General Butler’s at Mount Elon, where he defeated 
a detachment sent to tear up the railroad at Florence; General 
Wheeler’s attack and repulse of the left flank of the enemy at 
Hornesboro, March 4th; a similar exploit by the same officer 
at Rockingham on the 7th; the attack and defeat by General 
Hampton of a detachment on the 8th; the surprise and capture 
of General Kilpatrick’s camp by General Hampton on the 
morning of the 10th, driving the enemy into an adjoining 
swamp, and taking possession of his artillery and wagon-train, 
and the complete rout of a large Federal party by General 
Hampton with an inferior force at Fayetteville on the 11th. 

As it was doubtful whether General Sherman’s advance 
from Fayetteville would be directed to Goldsboro or Raleigh, 
General Johnston took position with a portion of his command 
at Smithfield, which is nearly equidistant from each of those 
places, leaving General Hardee to follow the road from Fayette- 
ville to Raleigh, which for several miles is also the direct road 
from Fayetteville to Smithfield, and posted one division of his 
cavalry on the Raleigh road, and another on that to Goldsboro. 
On the 16th of March General Hardee was attacked by two 
corps of the enemy, a few miles south of Averysboro, a place 
nearly half-way between Fayetteville and Raleigh. Falling 
back a few hundred yards to a stronger position, he easily re- 
pelled the repeated attacks of these two corps during the day, 
and, learning in the evening that the enemy’s corps were moving 
to turn his left, he withdrew in the night toward Smithfield. 


636 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Early in the morning of the 18th General Johnston obtained 
definite information that General Sherman was marching on 
Goldsboro, the right wing of his army being about a day’s 
march distant from the left. General Johnston took immedi- 
ate steps to attack the head of the left wing on the morning of 
the 19th, and ordered the troops at Smithfield and General Har- 
dee’s command to march at once to Bentonville and take posi- 
tion between that village and the road on which the enemy was 
advancing. An error as to the relative distance which our 
troops and those of the enemy would have to move, exaggerat- 
ing the distance between the roads on which the enemy was 
advancing and diminishing the distance that our troops would 
have to march, caused the failure to concentrate our troops 
in time to attack the enemy’s left wing while in column; 
but, when General Hardee’s troops reached Bentonville in the 
morning, the attack was commenced. The battle lasted through 
the greater part of the day, resulting in the enemy’s being 
driven from two lines of intrenchments, and his taking shelter 
in a dense wood, where it was impracticable for our troops to 
preserve their line of battle or to employ the combined strength 
of the three arms. On the 20th the two wings of the Federal 
army, numbering, as estimated by General Johnston, upward 
of seventy thousand, came together and repeatedly attacked a 
division of our force (Hoke’s) which occupied an intrenched 
position parallel to the road to Averysboro; but every attack 
was handsomely repulsed. On the next day (21st) an attempt 
by the enemy to reach Bentonville in the rear of our center, and 
thus cut off our only route of retreat, was gallantly defeated by 
an impetuous and skillful attack, led by Generals Hardee and 
Hampton, on the front and both flanks of the enemy’s column, 
by which he was compelled to retreat as rapidly as he had ad- 
vanced. In this attack, General Hardee’s only son, a noble boy, 
charging gallantly with the Eighth Texas Cavalry, fell mortally 
wounded. On the night of the 21st our troops were withdrawn 
across Mill Oreek, and in the evening of the 22d bivouacked 
near Smithfield. On the 23d the forces of General Sherman 
and those of General Schofield were united at Goldsboro, where 
they remained inactive for upward of two weeks. 


1865] DECIDED TO SEEK A NEW BASE. 637 


_ On the 9th of April the Confederate forces took up the 
line of march te Raleigh, and reached that city early in the 
afternoon of the same day closely followed by the Federal 
army. 


GOWAPRTLER -LI1. 


Siege of Petersburg.—Violent Assault upon our Position.—A Cavalry Expedition.— 
Contest near Ream’s Station.—The City invested with Earthworks.—Position 
of the Forces.—The Mine exploded, and an Assault made,—aAttacks on our 
Lines.—Object of the Enemy.—Our Strength.—Assault on Fort Fisher.— 
Evacuation of Wilmington.—Purpose of Grant’s Campaign.—Lee’s Conference 
with the President.—Plans.—Sortie against Fort Steadman.—Movements of 
Grant farther to Lee’s right.—Army retires from Petersburg.—The Capitula- 
tion.—Letters of Lee. 


Arter the battle of Cold Harbor, the geography of the 
country no longer enabled General Grant, by a flank movement 
to his left, to keep himself covered by a stream, and yet draw 
nearer to his objective point, Richmond. He had now reached 
the Chickahominy, and to move down the east bank of that 
stream would be to depart further from the prize he sought, the 
capital of the Confederacy. His overland march had cost him 
the loss of more men than Lee’s army contained at the beginning 
of the campaign. He now, from considerations which may 
fairly be assumed to have been the result of his many unsuccess- 
ful assaults on Lee’s army, or from other considerations which I 
am not in a position to suggest, decided to seek a new base on 
the James River, and to attempt the capture of our capital by 
a movement from the south. With this view, on the night of 
June 12th he commenced a movement by the lower crossings 
of the Chickahominy toward the James River. General Lee 
learned of the withdrawal on the next morning, and moved to 
our pontoon-bridge above Drury’s Bluff. While Grant’s army 
was making this march to James River, General Smith, with 
his division, which had arrived at Bermuda Hundred, was, on 
the night of the 14th, directed to move against Petersburg, with 
an additional force of two divisions, it being supposed that this 


638 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


column would be sufficient to effect what General Butler’s pre- 

vious attempts had utterly failed to accomplish, the capture of 

Petersburg and the destruction of the Southern Railroad. On 

the morning of the 15th the attack was made, the exterior re- 

doubts and rifle-pits were carried, and the column advanced to- 

ward the inner works, but the artillery was used so effectively 

as to impress the commander of the assailants with the idea that 

there must be a large supporting force of infantry, and the 

attack was suspended so as to allow the columns in rear to’ 
come up. 

Hancock’s corps was on the south side of the James River, 
before the attack on Petersburg commenced, and was ordered 
to move forward, but not informed that an attack was to be 
made, nor directed to march to Petersburg until late in the 
afternoon, when he received orders to move to the aid of Gen- 
eral Smith. It being night when the junction was made, it was 
deemed prudent to wait until morning. Had they known how 
feeble was the garrison, it is probable that Petersburg would 
have been captured that night; but with the morning came an- 
other change, as marked as that from darkness to light. Lee 
crossed the James River on the 15th, and by a night march his 
advance was in the entrenchments of Petersburg before the 
morning for which the enemy was waiting. The artillery now 
had other support than the old men and boys of the town. 

The Confederates promptly seized the commanding points 
and rapidly strengthened their lines, so that the morning’s re- 
connaissance indicated to the enemy the propriety of postpon- 
ing an attack until all his force should arrive. 

On the 17th an assault was made with such spirit and force 
as to gain a part of our line, in which, however, the assailants 
suffered severely. Lee had now constructed a line in rear of 
the one first occupied, having such advantages as gave to our 
army much greater power to resist. On the morning of the 
18th Grant ordered a general assault, but finding that the for- 
mer line had been evacuated, and a new one on more command- 
ing ground had been constructed, the assault was postponed un- 
til the afternoon; then attacks were made by heavy columns on 
various parts of our line, with some partial success, but the final 


1865] RETREATED IN CONFUSION. 639 


result was failure everywhere, and with extraordinary sacrifice 
of life. 

With his usual persistence, he had made attack after attack, 
and for the resulting carnage had no gain to compensate. The 
eagerness manifested leads to the supposition that it was ex- 
pected to capture the place while Lee with part of his force 
was guarding against an advance on Richmond by the river 
road. The four days’ experience seems to have convinced 
Grant of the impolicy of assault, for thereafter he commenced 
to lay siege to the place. On the 2lst a heavy force of the 
enemy was advanced more to our right, in the vicinity of the 
Weldon Railroad, which runs southward from Petersburg. But 
General Lee, observing an interval between the left of the Sec- 
ond and right of the Sixth of the enemy’s corps, sent forward 
a column under General A. P. Hill, which, entering the interval, 
poured a fire into the flank of one corps on the right and the 
other on the left, doubling their flank divisions up on their cen- 
ter, and driving them with disorder and with heavy loss. Sey- 
eral entire regiments, a battery, and many standards were cap- 
tured, when Hill, having checked the advance which was direct- 
ed against the Weldon Railroad, withdrew with his captures 
to his former position, bringing with him the guns and nearly 
three thousand prisoners. 

On the same night, a cavalry expedition, consisting of the 
divisions of Generals Wilson and Kautz, numbering about six 
thousand men, was sent west to cut the Weldon, Southside, and 
Danville Railroads, which connected our army with the south 
and west. This raid resulted in important injury to our com- 
munications. The enemy’s cavalry tore up large distances of 
the tracks of all three of the railroads, burning the wood-work 
and laying waste the country around. But they were pursued 
and harassed by a small body of cavalry under General W. H. 
F. Lee, and, on their return near Ream’s Station, were met, near 
Sapponey Church, by a force of fifteen hundred cavalry under 
General Hampton. ‘That officer at once attacked. The fight- 
ing continued fiercely throughout the night, and at dawn the 
enemy’s cavalry retreated in confusion. Near Ream’s Station, 
at which point they attempted to cross the Weldon Railroad, they 


640 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


were met by General Fitzhugh Lee’s horsemen and a body of 
infantry under General Mahone, and this force completed their 
discomfiture. After a brief attempt to force their way, they 
broke in disorder, leaving behind them twelve pieces of artil- 
lery, and more than a thousand prisoners, and many wagons and 
ambulances. The railroads were soon repaired, and the enemy’s 
cavalry was for the time rendered unfit for service. 

Every attempt made to force General Lee’s lines having 
proved unsuccessful, General Grant determined upon the method 
of slow approaches, and proceeded to confront the city with a 
line of earthworks, and, by gradually extending the line to his 
left, he hoped to reach out toward the Weldon and Southside 
Railroads. ° To obtain possession of these roads now became the 
special objeet with him, and all his movements had regard to 
that end. Petersburg is twenty-two miles south of Richmond, 
and is connected with the south and west by the Weldon .and 
Southside Railroads, the latter of which crosses the Danville 
Railroad, the main line of communication between Richmond 
and the Gulf States. With the enemy once holding these 
roads and those north of the city, Richmond would be isolated, 
and it would have been necessary for the Confederate army to 
evacuate eastern Virginia. 

It will be seen from what has been written that, though the 
operations against Petersburg have been ordinarily called a 
siege, it could not in strictness of language be so denominated, 
as the communications in the rear, as well as to the north and 
south, were still open. It was really a conflict between oppos- 
ing intrenchments. 

General Grant had crossed a force into Charles City, on the 
north bank of the James, and thus menaced Richmond with an 
assault from that quarter. His line extended thence across the 
neck of the peninsula of Bermuda Hundred, and east and south 
of Petersburg, where it gradually stretched westward, approach- 
ing nearer and nearer to the railroads bringing the supplies for 
our army and for Richmond. The line of General Lee con- 
formed to that of General Grant. In addition to the works 
east and southeast of Richmond, an exterior line of defense 
had been constructed against the hostile forces at Deep Bottom, 


1865] UNIFORM FAILURE OF THE ASSAULTS. 641 


and, in addition to a fortification of some strength at Drury’s 
Bluff, obstructions were placed in the river to prevent the 
ascent of the Federal gunboats. The lines thence continued 
facing those of the enemy north of the Appomattox, and, ecross- 
‘ing that stream, extended around the city of Petersburg, gradu- 
ally moving westward with the works of the enemy. The 
struggle that ensued consisted chiefly of attempts to break 
through our lines. These it is not my purpose to notice seri- 
atum ; some of them, however, it is thought necessary to men- 
tion. While at Petersburg, the assaults of the enemy were met 
by a resistance sufficient to repel his most vigorous attacks ; our 
force confronting Deep Bottom was known to be so small as to 
suggest an attempt to capture Richmond by a movement on the 
north side of the James. On the 26th of July a corps of in- 
fantry was sent over to Deep Bottom to move against our pon- 
toon-bridges near to Drury’s Bluff, so as to prevent Lee from 
sending reénforcements to the north side of the James, while 
Sheridan with his cavalry moved to the north side of Rich- 
mond to attack the works which, being poorly garrisoned, it 
was thought might be taken by assault. Lee, discovering the 
movement after the enemy had gained some partial success, 
sent over reénforcements, which drove him back and defeated 
the expedition. On the night of the 28th the infantry corps 
(Hancock’s) was secretly withdrawn from the north side of the 
river, to codperate in the grand assault which Grant was pre- 
paring to make upon Lee’s intrenchments. The uniform fail- 
ure, as has been stated, of the assaults upon our lines had caused 
the conclusion that they could only succeed after a breach had 
been made in the works. For that purpose a subterranean 
gallery for a niine was run under one of our forts. General 
Burnside, who conducted the operation, thus describes the 
work : 


‘“‘The main gallery of the mine is five hundred and twenty-two 
feet in length, the side-galleries about forty feet each. My sug- 
gestion is that eight magazines be placed in the lateral galleries, 
two at each end, say a few feet apart, at right angles to the side- 
gallery, and two more in each of the side-gallerics, similarly 


88 


642 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


placed by pairs, situated equidistant from each other, and the end 
of the galleries, thus : 


MAIN GALLERY 


“T proposed to put in each of the eight magazines from twelve 
to fourteen hundred pounds of powder, the magazines to be con- 
nected by a trough of powder instead of a fuse.” 


It appears that it was decided that the charge should be 
eight thousand pounds instead of the larger amount proposed.* 
Between four and five o’clock on the morning of the 30th of 
July the mine was exploded, and simultaneously the enemy’s 
batteries commenced firing, when, as previously arranged, the 
column of attack moved forward to the breach, with instruc- 
tions to rush through it and seize the crest of a #idge in rear of 
our fort, so as to interpose a force between our troops and in 
rear of our batteries. A question had arisen as to whether the 
assaulting column should consist of white or negro troops; of 
each, there were brigades in General Burnside’s division, which 
occupied that part of the line nearest to the mine, and there- 
fore seems to have been considered as the command from which 


* Testimony of General Burnside, “ Report of Committee on the Conduct of the 
War,” vol, i, pp. 16, 17, 1865. 


* 


1865] THUS DESCRIBES WHAT ENSUED. 643 


(3) 


the troops to constitute the storming column must be selected. 
The explosion was destructive to our artillery and its small sup- 
porting force immediately above the mine. 

An opening, one hundred and fifty feet long, sixty feet 
‘wide, and thirty feet deep, suddenly appeared in the place of 
the earthworks, and the division of the enemy selected for the 
charge rushed forward to pierce the opening. A Southern 
writer * thus describes what ensued : 


“The white division charged, reached the crater, stumbled 
over the débris, were suddenly met by a merciless fire of artillery 
enfilading them right and left and of infantry fusillading them in 
front ; faltered, hesitated, were badly led, lost heart, gave up the 
plan of seizing the crest in rear, huddled into the crater man on 
top of man, company mingled with company ; and upon this dis- 
ordered, unstrung, quivering mass of human beings, white and 
black—for the black troops had followed—was poured a hurricane 
of shot, shell, canister, musketry, which made the hideous crater a 
slaughter-pen, horrible and frightful, beyond the power of words. 
All order was lost; all idea of charging the crest abandoned. 
Lee’s infantry was seen concentrating for the carnival of death ; 
his artillery was massing to destroy the remnants of the charging 
divisions ; those who deserted the crater, to scramble over the dé- 
bris and run back, were shot down; then all that was left to the 
shuddering mass of blacks and whites in the pit was to shrink 
lower, evade the horrible mitraille, and wait for a charge of their 
friends to rescue them or surrender.” 


The forces of the enemy finally succeeded in making their 
way back, with a loss of about four thousand prisoners, and 
General Lee, whose casualties were small, reéstablished his line 
without interruption. This affair was subsequently investigated 
by a committee of the Congress of the United States, and their 
report declared that “the first and great cause of the disaster 
was the ee ysens of white instead of black troops to make 
the charge.” 

Attacks continued to be made on our lines aati the 
months of August and September, but, as in former instances, 


* John Esten Cooke, “ Life of General R. EH. Lee.” 


a 
644 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


they were promptly repulsed. On August 18th the enemy 
seized on a portion of the Weldon Railroad near Petersburg, 
and on the 25th this success was followed up by an attempt, 
under General Hancock, to take possession of Reams’s Station 
on the same road, farther south. He was defeated by Heth’s 
division and a portion of Wilcox’s, under the direction of 
General A. P. Hill, and, having lost heavily, was compelled to 
retreat. These events did not, however, materially affect the 
general result. The enemy’s left gradually reached farther and 
farther westward, until it had passed the Vaughan, Squirrel 
Level, and other roads running southwestward from Peters- 
burg, and in October was established on the left bank of 
Hatcher’s Run. The movement was designed to reach the 
Southside Railroad. A heavy column crossed Hatcher’s Run, 
and made an obstinate attack on our lines, in order to break 
through to the railroad. This column was met in front and 
flank by Generals Hampton and W. H. F. Lee, with dismounted 
sharpshooters. Infantry was hastened forward by General Lee, 
and the enemy was driven back. This closed for the winter 
active operations against our lines at Petersburg. 

When the campaign opened on the Rapidan, General Lee’s 
effective strength was in round numbers sixty thousand of all 
arms; that of General Grant at the same time one hundred and 
forty thousand. In the many battles fought before the close of 
the campaign, Grant’s loss had been a multiple of that sustained 
by Lee; but the large reénforcements he had received, both be- 
fore and after he crossed the James River, repaired his losses, 
and must have increased the numerical disparity between the 
two armies; yet, notwithstanding the great superiority in the 
number of his force, the long-projected movement for the 
reduction of Fort Fisher and the capture of Wilmington was 
delayed, because of Grant’s unwillingness to detach any of his 
troops for that purpose until after active operations had been 
suspended before Petersburg. 

It.was proposed to make a combined land and naval attack— 
Major-General B. F. Butler to command the land-forces, and 
Admiral D, D. Porter the fleet. The enemy seems about this 
time to have conceived a new means of destroying forts; it was, 


“ 


1865] AND VASTLY MORE EFFECTIVE. 645 


to place a large amount of powder in a ship, and, having an- 
chored off the fort, to explode the powder and so destroy the 
works and incapacitate the garrison as to enable a storming party 
to capture them. How near to Fort Fisher it was expected to 
anchor the ship I do not know, nor have I learned how far it 
was supposed the open atmosphere could be made to act as a 
projectile. General Whiting, the brave and highly accomplished 
soldier, who was in command of the defenses of Wilmington, 
stated that the powder-ship did not come nearer to Fort Fisher 
than twelve or fifteen hundred yards. He further stated that 
he heard the report of the explosion at Wilmington, and sent a 
telegram to Colonel Lamb, the commanding officer at the fort, 
to inquire what it meant, and was answered, “ Enemy’s gunboat 
blown up.” No effect, as might have been anticipated, was pro- 
duced on the fort.* From the same source it is learned that the 
combined force of this expedition was about six thousand five 
hundred land-troops and fifty vessels of war of various sizes and 
classes, several ironclads, and the ship charged with two hun- 
dred and thirty-five tons of powder. Some of the troops landed, 
but after a reconnaissance of the fort, which then had a garrison 
of about six thousand five hundred men, the troops were reém- 
barked, and thus the expedition ended. 

On January 15, 1865, the attempt was renewed with a larger 
number of troops, amounting, after the arrival of General Scho- 
field, to twenty-odd thousand. Porter’s fleet also received addi- 
tional vessels, making the whole number fifty-eight engaged in 
the attack. The garrison of Fort Fisher had been increased to 
about double the number of men there on the 24th of Decem- 
ber. The iron-clad vessels of the enemy approached nearer the 
fort than on a former occasion, and the fire of the fleet was 
more concentrated and vastly more effective. Many of the guns 
in the fort were dismounted, and the parapets seriously injured, 
by the fire. The garrison stood bravely to their guns, and, when 
the assault was made, fought with such determined courage as 
to repulse the first column, and obstinately contended with an- 
other approaching from the land-side, continuing the fight long 


* “Report of Committee on the Conduct of the War,” 1865, vol. ii, pp. 
106, 107. 


646 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


after they had got into the fort. Finally, overwhelmed by num- 
bers, and after the fort and its armament had been mainly de- 
stroyed by a bombardment—I believe greater than ever before 
concentrated upon a fort—the remnant of the garrison surren- 
dered. The heroic and highly gifted General Whiting was 
mortally, and the gallant commander of the fort, Colonel 
Lamb, was seriously, wounded. They both fell into the hands 
of the enemy. General Hoke, distinguished by brilliant ser- 
vice on other fields, had been ordered down to support the 
garrison, and under the directions of General Bragg, command- 
ing the department, had advanced to attack the investing force, 
but a reconnaissance convinced them both that his command 
was too weak to effect the object. The other forts, of necessity, 
fell with the main work, Fisher, and were abandoned. Hoke 
with his small force retiring through Wilmington, after destroy- 
ing the public vessels and property, to prevent them from fall- 
ing into the hands of the enemy,.slowly fell back, fighting at 
several points, and seeking to find in the separation of the vastly 
superior army which was following him an opportunity to at- 
tack a force the number of which should not greatly exceed his 
own, and finally made a junction with General Johnston, then 
opposing Sherman’s advance through North Carolina. 

The fixed purpose of General Grant’s campaign of 1864 
was the capture of Richmond, the Confederate capital. For 
this he had assembled the large army with which he crossed the 
Rapidan and fought the numerous battles between there and 
the James River. For this he had moved against Petersburg, 
the capture of which in itself was not an object so important as 
to have justified the effort made to that end. It was only val- 
uable because it was on the line of communication with the 
more southern States, and offered another approach to Richmond. 
In his attack upon Petersburg it will be seen from the events 
uready described that he adopted neither of the two plans which 
were open to him: the one, the concentration of all his efforts 
to break the line covering Petersburg; the other, to move his 
army round it and seize the Weldon and Southside Railroads, 
So as to cut off the supplies of Lee’s army and compel the evac- 
uation of both Petersburg and Richmond. Had there been 


1865] WITH A WELL-DESERVED CONFIDENCE. 647 


approximate equality between his army and that of Lee, he 
could not wisely have ventured upon the latter movement 
against a soldier so able as his antagonist; but the vast numer- 
ical superiority of Grant’s army might well have induced him 
to invite Lee to meet him in the open field. He did, however, 
neither the one nor the other, but something of both. 

In the opening of the campaign of 1865, he continued, as he 
had done in 1864, to extend his line to the left, seeking, after. 
having gained the Weldon Railroad, to reach still farther to 
that connecting Petersburg with the Richmond and Danville 
Railroad. Lee, with a well-deserved confidence in his troops 
and his usual intrepidity, drew from his lines of defense men 
enough to enable him for a long time to defeat the enemy in 
these efforts, by extension to turn his right flank. After Grant’s 
demonstration on the north side of the James by sending over 
Hancock’s corps had been virtually abandoned by its with- 
drawal, Longstreet’s corps, which had been sent to oppose it, 
remained for a long time on the north side of the James. Fi- 
nally, General Ewell with a few troops, the Richmond reserves, 
and a division of the navy under Admiral Semmes, held the 
river and land defenses on the east side of Richmond. 

General A. R. Lawton, who had become the quartermaster- 
general of the Confederate army, ably supported by Lewis E. 
Harvie, President of the Richmond and Danville Railroad, in- 
creased the carrying capacity of that line so as to compensate 
for our loss of the use of the Weldon Railroad. At the same 
_ time, General St. John, chief of the commissariat, by energetic 
efforts and the use of the Virginia Canal, kept up the supplies 
of General Lee’s army, so as to secure from him the complimen- 
tary acknowledgment, made about a month before the evacuation 
of Petersburg, that the army there had not been so well supplied 
for many months. 

During the months of February and March, Lee’s army was 
materially reduced by the casualties of battle and the frequency 
of absence without leave. I will not call these absentees desert- 
ers, because they did not leave to join the enemy, and again, 
because in some instances where the facts were fully developed, 
they had gone to their necessitous families with intent to return 


648 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and resume their places in the line of battle. His cavalry force 
had been also diminished by the absence of General Hampton’s 
division, to which permission had been given to go to their 
home, South Carolina, to get fresh horses, and also to fill up 
their ranks. Long, arduous, and distant service had rendered 
both necessary. 

In the early part of March, as well as my memory can fix 
the date, General Lee held with me a long and free conference. 
He stated that the circumstances had forced on him the conclu- 
sion that the evacuation of Petersburg was but a question of 
time. He had early and fully appreciated the embarrassment 
which would result from losing the workshops and foundry at 
Richmond, which had been our main reliance for the manufac- 
ture and repair of arms as well as the preparation of ammuni- 
tion. The importance of Richmond in this regard was, how- 
ever, then less than it had been by the facilities which had 
been created for these purposes at Augusta, Selma, Fayetteville, 
and some smaller establishments; also by the progress which 
was being made for a large armory at Macon, Georgia. To 
my inquiry whether it would not be better to anticipate the 
necessity by withdrawing at once, he said that his artillery and 
draught horses were too weak for the roads in their then condi- 
tion, and that he would have to wait until they became firmer. 
There naturally followed the consideration of the line of retreat. 
A considerable time before this General Hood had sent me a 
paper, presenting his views and conclusion that, if it became 
necessary for the Army of Northern Virginia to retreat, it should ° 
move toward Middle Tennessee. The paper was forwarded to 
General Lee and returned by him with an unfavorable criti- 
cism, and the conclusion that, if we had to retreat, it should be 
in a southwardly direction toward the country from which we 
were drawing supplies, and from which a large portion of our 
forces had been derived. In this conversation the same general 
view was more specifically stated, and made to apply to the then 
condition of affairs. The programme was to retire to Danville, 
at which place supplies should be collected and a junction made 
with the troops under General J. E. Johnston, the combined 
force to be hurled upon Sherman in North Carolina, with the 


1865} IT THUS FELL OUT. 649 


hope of defeating him before Grant could come to his relief. 
Then the more southern States, freed from pressure’ and en- 
couraged by this success, it was expected, would send large re- 
enforcements to the army, and Grant, drawn far- from his base 
of supplies into the midst of a hostile population, it was hoped, 
. might yet be defeated, and Virginia be delivered from the in- 
vader. Efforts were energetically continued. to collect supplies 
in depots where they would be available, and, in furtherance of 
the suggestion of General Lee as to the necessary improvement 
in the condition of his horses, the quartermaster-general was 
instructed to furnish larger rations of corn to the quartermaster 
at Petersburg. 

Though of unusually calm and well-balanced fides Gen- 
eral Lee was instinctively averse to retiring from his enemy, 
and had so often beaten superior numbers that his thoughts 
were no doubt directed to every possible expedient which might 
enable him to avoid retreat. It thus fell out that, in a week 
or two after the conference above noticed, he presented to me 
the idea of a sortie against the enemy near to the right of his 
line. This was rendered the more feasible, from the constant 
extension of Grant’s line to the left, and the heavy bodies of 
troops he was employing to turn our right. The sortie, if en- 
tirely successful, so as to capture and hold the works on Grant’s 
right, as well as three forts on the commanding ridge in his rear, 
would threaten his line of communication with his base, City 
Point, and might compel him to move his forces around ours 
- to protect it; if. only so far successful as to cause the transfer of 
his troops from his left to his right, it would relieve our right, 
and delay the impending disaster for the more convenient sea- 
son for retreat. 

Fort Steadman was the point against which the sortie was 
directed ; its distance from our lines was less than two hundred 
yards, but an abatis covered its front. For this service, requir- 
ing equal daring and steadiness, General John B, Gordon, well 
proved on many battle-fields, was selected. His command was 
the remnant of Ewell’s corps, troops often tried in the fiery 
ordeal of battle, and always found true as tempered steel. Be- 
fore daylight, on the morning of the 25th of March, Gordon 


650 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


moved his command silently forward. His pioneers were sent 
in advance to make openings through the obstructions, and the 
troops rushed forward, surprised and captured the garrison, then 
turned the guns upon the adjacent works and soon drove the 
enemy from them. A detachment was now sent to seize the 
commanding ground and works in the rear, the batteries of 
which, firing into the gorges of the forts on the right and left, 
would soon make a wide opening in Grant’s line. The guides 
to this detachment misled it in the darkness of a foggy dawn 
far from the point to which it was directed. In the mean time 
the enemy, recovering from his surprise and the confusion into 
which he had been extensively thrown, rallied and with over- 
whelming power concentrated both artillery and infantry upon 
Gordon’s command. The supporting force which was to have 
followed him, notwithstanding the notice which was given by 
the victorious cheer of his men when they took Fort Steadman, 
failed to come forward, and Gordon’s brilliant success, like the 
Dead Sea fruit, was turned to ashes at the moment of possession. 
It was hopeless, with his small force unsupported, to retain the 
position he had gained. It only remained as far as practicable 
to withdraw his command to our line, and this the valiant 
soldier promptly proceeded to do; some of his men were killed 
on the retreat, many became prisoners—l believe all, or nearly 
all, of those who had been detached to seize other works, and 
had not rejoined the main body. 

The following letter from General Gordon furnishes some 
important details of the attack : 


“ ATLANTA, GEORGIA, October 16, 1880. 

“My pear Mr. Present: The attack upon Fort Steadman 
was made on the night of the 25th March, or rather before light 
on the morning of the 26th March, 1865. A conference had been 
held between General Lee and myself at his headquarters the 10th 
of March, which resulted in General Lee’s decision to transfer my 
corps from the extreme right of our army to the trenches in and 
around Petersburg, with the purpose of enabling me to carefully 
examine the enemy’s lines, and report to him my belief as to the 
practicability of breaking them at any point. Within a week 
after being transferred to this new position, I decided that Fort 


1865]. A LINE OF SHARPENED FENCE-RAILS. 651 


Steadman could be taken by a night assault, and that it might be 
possible to throw into the breach thus made in Grant’s lines a suffi- 
cient force to disorganize and destroy the left wing of his army 
before he could recover and concentrate his forces, then lying be- 
yond the James and Appomattox Rivers. Fort Steadman was the 
point at which the earthworks of General Grant most nearly ap- 
proached our own. This fort was located upon what was known 
as Hare’s Hill, and was in front of the city of Petersburg, and of 
the point on our lines known as Colquitt’s Salient. The two 
hostile lines could not have been more than two hundred to two 
hundred and fifty yards apart at this point ; and the pickets were 
so close together that it was difficult to prevent constant conversa- 
tion between those of the Confederate and Federal armies. Fort 
Steadman was upon the main line of General Grant’s works, and 
flanked on either side by a line of earthworks and other forts, 
which completely commanded every foot of the intervening space 
between the hostile lines. In rear of Fort Steadman were three 
other forts, two of which, and perhaps all three, could command 
Fort Steadman, in case of its capture by our forces. These forts 
in rear of Steadman were protected by an almost impenetrable 
abatis, while, in front of Fort Steadman itself, and of the main 
line of which it was a part, was a line of sharpened fence-rails, 
with the lower ends buried deeply in the ground, their middle 
resting upon horizontal poles and wrapped with telegraph-wires, 
and their upper ends sharpened and elevated to the height of four 
and a half or five feet. These rails, which formed the obstruction 
in front of General Grant’s lines at Fort Steadman and along the 
flanking works, were, as I said, wrapped with telegraph-wire where 
they rested on the horizontal poles, so as to prevent an attacking 
force from pressing them apart, and buried in the ground too 
deeply to be pulled up, and, sharpened at the upper end, were too 
high to be mounted by my men. This obstruction, therefore, had 
to be cut away with axes before the attacking force could enter 
the fort or lines. 

“General Lee, after considering the plan of assault and batile 
which I submitted to him, and which I shall presently describe, 
gave me orders to prepare for the movement, which was regarded 
by both of us as a desperate one, but which seemed. to give more 
promise of good results than any other hitherto suggested. Gen- 
eral Lee placed at my disposal, in addition to my own corps, a 


633 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


portion of A. P. Hill’s and a portion of Longstreet’s, and a detach- 
ment of cavalry—in all, about one half of the army. 

“The general plan of the assault and battle was this: To take 
the fort by a rush across the narrow space that lay between it and 
Colquitt’s Salient, and then surprise and capture, by a stratagem, 
the commanding forts in the rear, thus opening a way for our 
troops to pass to the rear, and upon the flank of the left wing of 
Grant’s army, which was to be broken to pieces by a concentration 
of all the forces at my command moving upon that flank. During 
the night of the 25th my preparations were made for the move- 
ment before daylight. I placed three officers in charge of three 
separate bodies of men, and directed them, as soon as the lines of 
Fort Steadman should be carried by the assaulting column, to rush 
through the gap thus produced to the three rear forts—one of 
these officers and bodies of men to go to each fort, and to approach 
them from their rear by the only avenue left open and seize those 
forts. A guide was placed with each of these officers, who was to 
conduct him and his troops to the rear of the front, which he was 
to surprise. A body of the most stalwart of my men was organ- 
ized to move in advance of all the troops, armed with axes, with 
which they were to cut down the obstruction of sharpened and 
wire-fastened rails in front of the enemy’s lines. 

“ Next to these were to come three hundred men, armed with 
bayonets fixed and empty muskets, who were to mount and enter 
the fort as the axemen cut away the obstruction of sharpened rails, 
bayoneting the pickets in front and gunners in the fort if they 
resisted, or sending them to our rear if they surrendered. Next 
were to cross the three officers and their detachments, who were 
to capture the three rear forts. Next, a division of infantry was 
to cross, moving by the left flank, so as to be in position when 
halted, and fronted to move without any confusion or delay im- 
mediately down General Grant’s lines, toward his left, capturing 
his troops, or forcing them to abandon their works and form.un- 
der our advancing fire at right angles to his line of works. 

“‘ Next was to cross the cavalry, who were to ride to the rear, 
cut the enemy’s telegraph-lines, capture his pontoons, and prevent 
or delay the crossing of reénforcements from beyond the Ap- 
pomattox. Next, my whole force was to swell the column of 
attack, Then, as the front of our lines were cleared of the en- 
emy’s troops, our divisions were to change front and join in press- 


1355] EVERYTHING WAS MOVING. 653 


ing upon the enemy and driving him farther from the other wing 
of General Grant’s army, and widening the breach. Strips of white 
cloth were tied around the shoulders of our men, so as to designate 
them in the darkness. 

“Just before daylight, when all was ready, I gave the signal, 
and the axemen rushed across, followed by the bodies armed with 
bayonets and empty muskets, who captured and sent to the rear the 
enemy’s pickets. The axemen cut away the sharpened rails so 
rapidly as scarcely to cause a halt of the troops following, who 
mounted the enemy’s works and seized his guns and gunners in 
the fort, clearing the way and giving safe passage to detachments 
. and larger bodies which were to follow and which did follow. 

The fort and most of the lines between the fort and the river were 
captured with the loss of but one man, so far as I could learn. 
We captured eleven heavy guns, nine mortars, about seven hun- 
dred prisoners, as I now recollect, among whom was the brigadier 
commanding that portion of the line, General McLaughlin. 
“Everything was moving as well as I could have desired, when, 
one after another, all three of the officers, sent to the rear to cap- 
ture by stratagem the rear forts, sent messengers to inform me 
that they had passed successfully through the lines of the enemy’s 
reserves in rear of Fort Steadman, and were certainly beyond the 
rear forts, but that their guides had been lost or had deserted, and 
that they could not find the forts. 
“ Although I heard nothing afterward of these guides, yet I 
did learn of the fate of the three officers and their commands. 
‘Some were shot down after daylight, some were captured, and a 
few, very few, made their way back to our lines. The failure of 
that portion of the programme left, of course, these three forts 
manned by the enemy, and his heavy guns made it impossible to 
carry out literally the details of the plan. Then a large body of 
the troops sent by General Lee from General Longstreet’s corps 
were delayed by the breaking down of trains, or by some other 
cause, and did not arrive at the appointed hour, which caused so 
great a delay that we did not get in the fort and upon the enemy’s 
fiank at as early an hour as was expécted, and daylight found us 
with the plan only half executed. At daylight, all the commanding 
forts in the rear, which we had failed to capture, opened upon 
Fort Steadman and that portion of the enemy’s lines held by our 
troops. Reénforcements were rapidly brought up, so that it be- 


654 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


came too hazardous, as General Lee thought, to go forward or 
attempt it. So he ordered me back (I may say here that I entirely 
approved of this decision of General Lee). Up to this hour we 
had lost but few men, and these had been killed or wounded 
mainly by artillery. But now the enemy’s infantry came up and 
made several assaults. They were repulsed by our troops in Fort 
Steadman and in the enemy’s works on its flanks. It was in the 
effort to withdraw the troops that our principal loss occurred. A 
raking fire was kept up across the intervening space over which 
we had moved in capturing the fort. I was wounded in recrossing 
to Colquitt’s Salient, and many of our men were killed and wound- 
ed in making the same passage back to our works. 

“ As I said at the outset, this attack was regarded by both Gen- 
eral Lee and myself as very hazardous ; but it seemed necessary to 
do more than sit quietly waiting for General Grant to move upon 
our right, while each day was diminishing our strength by disease 
and death. 

“Let me also add that the movement made at Hare’s Hill must 
have proved a great success but for the unforeseen and unavoidable 
miscarriages to which I have referred. 

“T am, very respectfully, your obedient servant, 


“J. B. Gorpon. 
“Hon. Jerrerson Davis, Jfssissippi.” 


Immediately following, and perhaps in consequence of this 
sortie, an extensive attack was made upon our lines to the left 
of Fort Steadman, but without any decisive results. On the 
27th of March the main part of Grant’s forces confronting 
Richmond were moved over to the lines before Petersburg, 
and his left was on the same day joined by Sheridan’s di- 
vision of cavalry. It will be remembered that Lee had sent 
Longstreet to the north side of the James as soon as he dis- 
covered that Grant had sent a corps across with the supposed 
purpose of attacking Richmond from that side. It was intended 
that Longstreet should return whenever the enemy withdrew 
his main force from the north side of the James; but it appears 
that this was so secretly done as to conceal the fact from Gen- 
eral Longstreet, and that both Hancock and Ord had joined 
Grant, to swell his forces by two corps before our troops 


1865] A PRESENT NECESSITY. GBs 


_ returned to join Lee. Grant, thus strengthened, made a more 
determined movement to gain the right of Lee’s position; be- 
fore, however, he was ready to make his assault, Lee marched 
with a comparatively very small force, took the initiative, and 
on the 31st struck the enemy’s advance, and repulsed him in 
great confusion, following until confronted by the heavy masses 
formed in open ground in the rear, when Lee withdrew his men 
back to their intrenchments. 

A strategic position of recognized importance was that 
known as Five Forks. Lee had stationed there Major-General 
Pickett with his division, and some additional force. On the 
next day, the 1st of April, this position was assaulted, and our 
troops were driven from it in confusion. The unsettled ques- 
tion of time was now solved. 

Grant’s massive columns, advancing on right, left, and cen- 
ter, compelled our forces to retire to the inner line of de- 
fense, so that, on the morning of the 2d, the enemy was ina 
condition to besiege Petersburg in the true sense of that term. 
Battery Gregg made an obstinate defense, and, with a garri- 
son of about two hundred and fifty men, held a corps in check 
for a large part of the day. The arrival of Longstreet’s troops, 
and the strength of the shorter line now held by Lee, enabled 
him to make several attempts to dislodge his assailant from posi- 
tions he had gained. In one of these, the distinguished soldier 
whose gallantry and good conduct it has frequently been my 
pleasure to notice, Lieutenant-General A. P. Hill, who had so 
often passed unscathed through storms of shot and shell, yielded 
up the life he had, in the beginning of the war, consecrated to 
the Confederate cause; and his comrades, while mourning his 
loss, have drawn consolation from the fact that he died before 
our flag was furled in defeat. 

Retreat was now a present necessity. All that could be done 
was to hold the inner lines during the day, and make needful 
preparations to withdraw at night. In the forenoon of Sunday, 
the 2d, I received, when in church, a telegram announcing that 
the army would retire from Petersburg at night, and I went to 
my office to give needful directions for the evacuation of Rich- 
mond, the greatest difficulty of which was the withdrawal of the 


656 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


troops who were on the defenses east of the city, and along the 
James River. 

The event had come before Lee had expected it, and the 
announcement was received by us in Richmond with sorrow 
and surprise; for, though it had been foreseen as a coming 
event which might possibly, though not probably, be averted, 
and such preparation as was practicable had been made to meet 
the contingency when it should occur, it was not believed to be 
so near at hand. 

At nightfall our army commenced crossing the Appomat- 
tox, and, before dawn, was far on its way toward Amelia Court- 
House, Lee’s purpose being, as previously agreed on in conference 
with me, to march to Danville, Virginia. By a reference to the 
map, it will be seen that General Grant, starting from the south 
side of the Appomattox, had a shorter line to Danville than 
that which General Lee must necessarily follow, and, if Grant 
directed his march so as to put his forces between Danville and 
those of Lee, it was quite possible for him to effect it. This 
was done, and thus Lee was prevented from carrying out his 
original purpose, and directed his march toward Lynchburg. 
The enemy, having first placed himself across the route to 
Danville, at Jetersville, subsequently took up the line of Lee’s 
retreat. His large force of cavalry, and the exhausted condition 
of the horses of our small number of that arm, gave the pur- 
suing foe a very great advantage; but, worn and reduced in 
numbers as Lee’s army was, the spirit it had always shown 
flashed out whenever it was pressed. A division would turn 
upon a corps and drive it; and General Fitzhugh Lee, the . 
worthy successor of the immortal Stuart, with a brigade of our 
emaciated cayalry, would drive a division of their pursuers. 
These scenes were repeatedly enacted during the long march 
from Petersburg to Appomattox Court-House, and have been 
so vividly and fully described by others that I will pass to the 
closing event. 

Lee had never contemplated surrender. He had, long be- 
fore, in language similar to that employed by Washington dur- 
ing the Revolution, expressed to me the belief that in the 
mountains of Virginia he could carry on the war for twenty 


1865] THERE IS NOTHING LEFT ME. : 657 


years, and, in directing his march toward Lynchburg, it may 
well be that as an alternative he hoped to reach those moun- 
tains, and, with the advantage which the topography would : 
give, yet to baffle the hosts which were following him. On the 
evening of the 8th General Lee decided, after conference 
with his corps commanders, that he would advance the next 
morning beyond Appomattox Court-House, and, if the force 
reported to be there should prove to be only Sheridan’s cavalry, 
to disperse it and continue the march toward Lynchburg ; but, 
if infantry should be found in large force, the attempt to break 
through it was not to be made, and the correspondence which 
General Grant had initiated on the previous day should be re- 
opened by a flag, with propositions for an interview to arrange 
the terms of capitulation. Gordon, whose corps formed the 
rear-guard from Petersburg, and who had fought daily for the 
protection of the trains, had now been transferred to the front. 
On the next morning, before daylight, Lee sent Colonel Ven- 
able, one of his staff, to Gordon, commanding the advance, to 
learn his opinion as to the chances of a successful attack, to 
which Gordon replied, “ My old corps is reduced to a frazzle, 
and, unless I am supported by Longstreet heavily, I do not think 
we can do anything more.” When Colonel Venable returned 
with this answer to General Lee, he said, “ Then there is nothing 
left me but to go and see General Grant.” 

At that time Longstreet, covering the rear, was threatened 
by Meade, so that there was no ability to reénforce Gordon, 
and thus to explain why General Lee then realized that the 
emergency had arisen for the surrender of his army which, in 
his note to General Grant of the previous day, he had said 
he did not believe to exist. Colonel Venable, at early dawn, 
had left Gordon with about five thousand infantry, and Fitz- 
hugh Lee with about fifteen hundred cavalry, and Colonel 
Carter’s battalion of artillery, forming his line of battle to 
attack the enemy, which, so far as then known, consisted of 
Sheridan’s cavalry, which had got in front of our retreating 
column. ‘The assault was made with such vigor and determina- 
tion as to drive Sheridan for a considerable distance; and, if 
this had been the only obstacle, the road would have been opened 

89 


658 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


for Lee to resume his march toward Lynchburg. After Gordon 
had advanced nearly a mile, he was confronted by a large body 
of infantry, subsequently ascertained to be about eighty thou- 
sand. To attack that force was, of course, hopeless, and Gor- 
don commenced falling back, and simultaneously the enemy 
advanced, but suddenly came toa halt. Lee had sent a flag to 
Grant, who had consequently ordered a suspension of hostilities. 

A leader less resolute, an army less heroically resisting fatigue, 
constant watching, and starvation, would long since have reached 
the conclusion that surrender was a necessity. Lee had left 
Petersburg with not more than twenty thousand infantry, five 
thousand cavalry, and four thousand artillery. Men and horses 
all reduced below the standard of efficiency by exposure and in- 
sufficient supplies of clothing, food,* and forage, only the mutual 
confidence between the men and their commander could have 
sustained either under the trials to which they were subjected. 
It is not a matter of surprise that the army had wasted away to 
a mere remnant, but rather that it had continued to exist as an 
organized body still willing to do battle. All the evidence we 
have proves that the proud, cheerful spirit both of the army and 
its leader had resisted the extremes of privation and danger, and 
never sunk until confronted by surrender. 

General Grant, in response to a communication under a 
white flag made by General Lee, as stated above, came to Ap- 
pomattox, where a suitable room was procured for their confer- 
ence, and, the two Generals being seated at a small table, Gen- 
eral Lee opened the interview thus: 


“General, I deem it due to proper candor and frankness to 
say at the very beginning of this interview that I am not willing 
even to discuss any terms of surrender inconsistent with the honor 
of my army, which I am determined to maintain to the last.” 


General Grant replied: 


* Falsehood and malignity have combined to invent and circulate a baseless story 
to the effect that food ordered to Amelia Court-House for Lee’s troops, was by the 
Administration at Richmond diverted from its destination, and the soldiers thus left 
to needless suffering. A further notice will be taken of this slander in a subsequent 


chapter, and that it had not one atom of truth in it will be shown by conclusive - 
testimony, 


1865] BRIEFLY STATED THE TERMS. 659 


“J have no idea of proposing dishonorable terms, General, but 
I would be glad if you would state what you consider honorable 
terms.” 


General Lee then briefly stated the terms upon which he 
would be willing to surrender. Grant expressed himself as sat- 
isfied with them, and Lee requested that he would formally re- 
duce the propositions to writing. 

' To present a full and satisfactory account of the cireum- 
stances and terms of the surrender, as well as the events imme- 
diately preceding the evacuation of Petersburg, and the retreat 
thence to Appomattox Court-House, I annex the subjoined let- 
ters : 

“ Appomattox Court-Hovusr, April 9, 1865. 
be Signet R. E. Lux, commanding Confederate States Army: 

“In accordance with the substance of my letter to you of the 
8th inst., I propose to receive the surrender of the Army of North- 
ern Virginia on the following terms, to wit : 

“Rolls of all the officers and men to be made in duplicate, one 
copy to be given to an officer designated by me, the other to be 
retained by such officers as you may designate. 

“The officers to give their individual parole not to take arms 
against the Government of the United States until properly ex- 
changed, and each company or regimental commander to sign a 
like parole for the men of their commands. 

“The arms, artillery, and public property to be parked and 
stacked and turned over to the officers appointed by me to receive 
them. 

“This will not embrace the side-arms of the officers, nor their 
private horses or baggage. 

“This done, each officer and man will be allowed to return to 
their homes, not to be disturbed by the United States authority 
so long as they observe their parole and the laws in force where 
they may reside. 

“ Very respectfully, 
“U.S. Grant, Lieutenant- General.” 


“ Heapquarters Army or Norruern Vireinta, April 9, 1865. 


“ Gznerat: IJ have received your letter of this date contain- 
ing the terms of surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia, as 


660 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


proposed by you. As they are substantially the same as those 
expressed in your letter of the 8th inst., they are accepted. I will 
proceed to designate the proper officers to carry the stipulations 
into effect. 
“Very respectfully, your obedient servant, 
“RED Lan” 


“ PETERSBURG, VIRGINIA, 3 P.M., April 2, 1865. 

“ His Excellency Jurrerson Davis, Richmond, Virginia. 
“Mr. Presipent: Your letter of the lst is just received. I ~ 
have been willing to detach officers to recruit negro troops, and 
sent in the names of many who are desirous of recruiting compa- 
nies, battalions, or regiments, to the War Department. After re- 
ceiving the general orders on that subject establishing recruiting 
depots in the several States, I supposed that this mode of raising 
the troops was preferred. I will continue to submit the names of 
those who offer for the service, and whom I deem competent, to 
the War Department; but, among the numerous applications 
which are presented, it is difficult for me to decide who are suit- 
able for the duty. I am glad your Excellency has made an appeal 
to the Governors of the States, and hope it will have a good effect. 
I have a great desire to confer with you upon our condition, and 
would have been to Richmond before this, but, anticipating move- 
ments of the enemy which have occurred, I felt unwilling to be 
absent. I have considered our position very critical; but have 
hoped that the enemy might expose himself in some way that we 
might take advantage of, and cripple him. Knowing when Sheri- 
dan moved on our right that our cavalry would be unable to resist 
successfully his advance upon our communications, I detached 
Pickett’s division to support it. At first Pickett succeeded in 
driving the enemy, who fought stubbornly ; and, after being re- 
enforced by the Fifth Corps (United States Army), obliged Pick- 
ett to recede to the Five Forks on the Dinwiddie Court-House and 
Ford’s road, where, unfortunately, he was yesterday defeated. 
To relieve him, I had to again draw out three brigades under 
General Anderson, which so weakened our front line that the 
enemy last night and this morning succeeded in penetrating it 
near the Cox road, separating our troops around. the town from 
those on Hatcher’s Run, This has enabled him to extend to the 
Appomattox, thus inclosing and obliging us to contract our lines 


1865] LITTLE TIME FOR PREPARATION. 661 


to the city. I have directed the troops from the lines on Hatch- 
er’s Run, thus severed from us, to fall back toward Amelia Court- 
House, and I do not see how I can possibly help withdrawing 
from the city to the north side of the Appomattox to-night. 
There is no bridge over the Appomattox above this point nearer 
than Goode’s and Bevil’s over which the troops above mentioned 
could cross to the north side, and be made available to us; other- 
wise I might hold this position for a day or two longer, but would 
have to evacuate it eventually ; and I think it better for us to 
abandon the whole line on James River to-night, if practicable. 
I have sent preparatory orders to all the officers, and will *be 
able to tell by night whether or not we can remain here another 
day ; but I think every hour now adds to our difficulties. I regret 
to be obliged to write such a hurried letter to your Excellency, 
but I am in the presence of the enemy, endeavoring to resist his 
advance. 
“JT am most respectfully and truly yours, 
“R. E, Lex, General.” 


CHAPTER, LILI, 


General Lee advises the Evacuation of Richmond.—Withdrawal of the Troops.— 
The Naval Force.—The Conflagration in Richmond.—Telegram of Lee to the 
President.—The Evacuation complete.—The Charge of the Removal of Sup- 
plies intended for Lee’s Army.—The Facts.—Arrangement with General Lee. — 
Proclamation.—Reports of Scouts. 


Wuey, on the morning of the 2d of April, the main line of 
the defenses of Petersburg was broken, and our forces driven 
back to the inner and last line, General Lee sent the telegram, 
to which reference has been already made, and advised that 
Richmond should be evacuated simultaneously with the with- 
drawal of his troops that night. This left little time for prepa- 
ration, especially in the matter of providing transportation for 
the troops holding the eastern defenses of Richmond. To sup- 
ply the cavalry, artillery, and army-wagons with horses, had so 
exhausted the stock of Virginia as to leave the quartermaster’s 
department little ability to supplement the small transportation 


662 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


possessed, or required by troops regarded as a stationary defense. 
The consequence was, that their withdrawal had to be made un- 
der circumstances which involved unusual embarrassments upon 
the march; but soldiers, sailors, and citizens, constituting the 
“eserves,” vied with each other in the performance of the 
hard duty to which they were called—a night march over un- 
known roads, to join a retreating army, pursued by a powerful 
enemy having large bodies of cavalry. The opposing lines of 
intrenchment north of the James were so near to each other, 
that our forces could only withdraw when it was too dark for 
observation ; this required that the movement should be post- 
poned until the moon went down, which was at a late hour of 
the night. 

The circumstances attending the withdrawal of Ewell’s corps 
were such as to make its safety the subject of special solicitude. 
It was small in comparison to that retiring from Petersburg, had 
a greater distance to march before a junction could be made 
with the main body, and most of the men were unused to 
marching. From reports received long after the event, I am 
able to give the principal occurrences of their campaign. 

General G. W. C. Lee moved his division from Chapin’s Bluff 
across the James River, on the Wilton Bridge; the wagons hay- 
ing been loaded under the preparatory order, were sent up in 
the afternoon to cross at Richmond, and the division moved on 
to a short distance beyond Tomahawk Church, where it en- 
camped on the night of the 8d. General Kershaw’s division, 
with dismounted men of Gary’s cavalry brigade, crossed at Rich- 
mond and moved on to the same encampment. Having ascer- 
tained that the Appomattox could not be crossed on the route 
they were pursuing, the column was turned up to the railroad- 
bridge at the Mattoax Station, which was prepared for the pas- 
sage of artillery and troops, and the two divisions, with their 
trains, crossed on the night of the 4th and encamped on the 
hills beyond the river. On the next day the column moved on 
to Amelia Court-House ; it was now joined by the Naval Bat- 
talion, under Commodore Tucker, and the artillery battalion of 
Major Frank Smith, which had been withdrawn from Howlett’s 
Bluff; both of these were added to G. W. ©. Lee’s division. 


1865] SOON REPELLED THE ATTACK, 663 


The supply-train not being able to cross the Appomattox River 
near Meadville, went Sacther up, and, having effected a crossing, 
proceeded with safety until ee four miles from Amelia 
Court-House, where it was destroyed by a detachment of the 
enemy’s cavalry on the morning of the 5th, with the baggage 
of G. W. C. Lee’s division and about twenty thousand good 
rations. 

' At Amelia Court-House Ewell’s corps made a junction with 
Lee’s army, but forced marches with men most of whom were 
untrained by previous campaign had greatly reduced the num- 
ber of Ewell’s command, and the want of rations now was 
impairing their efficiency. From that place his corps moved 
in rear of Anderson’s, followed by the train of Lee’s army, 
which was covered in rear by Gordon’s corps. The march was 
much impeded by the wagon-trains, consequently slow, and, 
from frequent halts, fatigning. About noon of the 6th, after 
crossing a small stream within several miles of Sailor’s Creek, 
the enemy’s cavalry made an attack at the point where the 
wagon-train turned off to the right. Skirmishers from Lee’s 
division were thrown out, and soon repelled the attack; but it 
was thought necessary to retain these troops in that position 
until the trains had passed. General Gordon, who protected 
the rear, had frequent combats. with the pursuers. As soon as 
the trains were out of the way, Ewell’s troops moved on after 
Anderson’s corps. On crossing Sailor’s Creek, General Ewell 
reports that he met General Fitzhugh Lee, from whom he 
learned that a large force of cavalry held the road in front of 
Anderson, and was so strongly posted that he had halted. Lee’s 
and Kershaw’s divisions moved on to close upon Anderson ; but 
Gordon having followed the wagon and artillery train, the ene- 
my’s cavalry and also infantry appeared in the rear, and com- 
menced an attack upon Kershaw’s division. Anderson had 
proposed to Ewell that, if he would hold the enemy in check 
who was coming up on the rear, he would attack the cavalry in 
front, to open our line of march in that direction. Lee’s and 
Kershaw’s divisions were therefore formed in line of battle 
faced to the rear. Anderson made the attack, but failed. Mean- 
time an artillery-fire was opened on Kershaw’s and Lee’s divi- 


664 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


sions; they, having no artillery to reply, were subjected to the 
severe trial of standing under a fire which they could not re- , 
turn. In their praise, it was said they unflinchingly bore the 
test. Supposing probably that their artillery-fire had demoral- 
ized our troops, the enemy’s infantry advanced. They were 
repulsed, and that portion which attacked G. W. O. Lee’s artil- 
lery brigade was charged by it, and driven back across Sailor’s 
Oreek. The enemy had now turned the flank of Kershaw’s 
division and obliged it to retire. Ewell, while seeking some 
route by which his command might be extricated, was captured, 
and the enemy closed in on Lee’s division, surrounding it on 
every side. Firing ceased, and the division was captured. A 
like fate befell the division of Kershaw. A. portion of Ander- 
son’s corps escaped, but Ewell’s was all captured. This corps, 
when it left Richmond, numbered about six thousand men. At 
the battle of Sailor’s Creek there remained about three thou- 
sand. The fatigue of constant marching for days and nights to 
men unaccustomed to such service might sufficiently explain 
the diminution; but to this must be added the want of rations 
for the last two days of their campaign. Twenty-eight hun- 
dred were taken prisoners, and about a hundred and fifty killed 
and wounded. From General Ewell’s report, I learn that the 
force of the enemy engaged at Sailor’s Creek amounted to 
thirty thousand men. In closing his report he says : 


“The discipline preserved by General G. W. C. Lee in camp 
and on the march, and the manner in which he handled his troops 
in action, fully justified the request I had made for his promotion. 
General Kershaw, who had only been a few days under my com- 
mand, behaved with his usual coolness and judgment.” 


Lest any should suppose, from the remark of General Ewell, 
that I had been unwilling or reluctant to promote my aide-de- 
camp, Colonel G. W. C. Lee, it is proper to state that the only 
obstacle to be overcome was Lee’s objection to receiving promo- 
tion, With refined delicacy he shrank from the idea of super- 
seding men who had been actively serving in the field, and in 
one case where the objection did not seem to me to have any 
application, he so decidedly preferred to remain with me, that I 


1865] WITH ALL YOUR FORCES. 665 


yielded to his wishes; but gave him additional rank to com- 
mand the local troops for the defense of Richmond. His valu- 
able services in that capacity, on various occasions, sustained my 
high opinion of him as a soldier, and his conduct on that re- 
treat, and in the battle of “ Sailor’s Creek,” for which he is 
commended, was only what I anticipated. 

Of the forces constituting the defense of Richmond on the 
2d of April, it only remains to account for the naval force in 
the James. After General Ewell had withdrawn his command, 
Admiral Semmes embarked the crews of his gunboats on some 
small steamers, set fire to his war-vessels, and proceeded up the 
river to the landing opposite Richmond. Here he found no 
land transportation awaiting him, and the last railroad train had 
left at early dawn. He, however, with the energy and capacity 
so often elsewhere displayed by him, on finding the railroad 
station deserted, commenced a search for material which, with 
his steam engineers, he could make available. He states that a 
few straggling passenger-cars lay uncoupled along the track, and 
that there was also a small engine, but no fire, and no fuel to 
make one. They coupled the cars together, his marine sappers 
and miners cut up a fence for steam-fuel, and thus he got under 
way, but the engine proved insufficient to draw the train, and at 
an up-grade he was brought to a halt immediately after starting. 
One of his engineers, however, found in the workshops another 
engine; with the two he was able to proceed, and thus to trans- 
port his sailors to Danville, the best mode known to him to 
execute the order sent to him by the Secretary of the Navy, 
“ You will join General Lee in the field with all your forces.” * 
When General Longstreet was withdrawn from the north side 
of the James, Colonel Shipp, Commandant of the Virginia In- 
stitute, with the Battalion of Cadets, youths whose gallantry at 
the battle of New Market has been heretofore noticed, and such 
conyalescents in Richmond as were able to march, moved down 
to supply the vacancy created by the transfer of Longstreet’s 
force to Petersburg. General Ewell, in command at Richmond, 
had for its defense the naval force at Drury’s Bluff under Com- 
_mander Tucker, which was organized as a regiment and armed 


* “Memoirs of Service Afloat,” Admiral Semmes, pp. 811-815, 


666 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


with muskets. On the north side of the James were General 
Kershaw’s division of Confederate troops and General G. W. C. 
Lee’s division, composed mostly of artillery-men armed as in- 
fantry, and the “reserves,” or “local troops.” Codperating 
with these was Admiral Semmes’s naval force on the James. 
On the night of the 2d of April these forces were withdrawn, 
and took up their line of march to join General Lee’s army on 
its retreat. 

In obedience to a law of the Congress, General Ewell had 
made arrangements to burn the tobacco at Richmond whenever 
the evacuation of the city should render the burning necessary, 
to prevent the tobacco from falling into the hands of the enemy. 
Orders were also given to destroy certain property of the Con- 
federate States, exceptions being made as in the case of the ar- 
senal, the burning of which would endanger the city. To pre- 
vent the possibility of a general conflagration he had advised 
with the Mayor and City Council, and the necessary precautions 
were believed to have been taken. General Ewell’s report, De- 
cember 20, 1865, published in the “ Historical Society Papers ” 
(vol. i, p. 101), satisfactorily establishes the fact that the con- 
flagration in Richmond of April 8, 1865, did not result from 
any act of the public authorities. The burning of the tobacco 
was only resorted to when the alternative was to burn or allow 
it to fall into the hands of the enemy, who, there was no doubt, 
would take it without making compensation to the owners. It 
was a disagreeable necessity, and therefore every opportunity 
was allowed to the owners of that and other articles of export 
to place them, if possible, beyond the danger of being applied 
to the use of the hostile Government. There is no similitude 
between the destruction of public property made by us and the 
like act of the invader in our country. The property we de- 
stroyed belonged to the Confederate States only. Armories and 
ship-yards destroyed by them—those, for instance, at Harper’s 
Ferry and Norfolk—were the property of the States in common, 
which the Federal Government had emphatically declared it 
was its bounden duty to preserve, and which was its first plea 
in justification of the act of sending an armed force against the 
Southern States. 


1865] RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT CALAMITY, 667 


The conflagration at Richmond occurred on the morning of 
the 3d of April, after I had left the city, and I therefore have 
only such knowledge in regard to it as was subsequently ac- 
quired from others. Those who would learn specifically the 
facts and speculations in regard to it are referred to the report 
of General Ewell, which has been above cited. Suffice it to say, 
the troops of neither army were considered responsible for that 
calamity. 

On Sunday, the 2d of April, while I was in St. Paul’s 
church, General Lee’s telegram, announcing his speedy with- 
drawal from Petersburg, and the consequent necessity for evac- 
uating Richmond, was handed to me. I quietly rose and left 
the church. The occurrence probably attracted attention, but 
the people of Richmond had been too long beleaguered, had 
known me too often to receive notice of threatened attacks, and 
the congregation of St. Paul’s was too refined, to make a scene 
at anticipated danger. For all these reasons, the reader will be 
prepared for the announcement that the sensational stories 
which have been published about the agitation caused by my 
leaving the church during service were the creations of fertile 
imaginations. I went to my office and assembled the heads of 
departments and bureaus, as far as they could be found on a day 
when all the offices were closed, and gave the needful instruc- 
tions for our removal that night, simultaneously with General 
Lee’s withdrawal from Petersburg. The event was not unfore- 
seen, and some preparation had been made for it, though, as it 
came sooner than was expected, there was yet much to be done. 
My own papers were disposed as usual for convenient reference 
in the transaction of current affairs, and as soon as the principal 
officers had left me the executive papers were arranged for re- 
moval. This occupied myself and staff until late in the after- 
noon. By this time the report that Richmond was to be evac- 
uated had spread through the town, and many who saw me 
walking toward my residence left their houses to inquire wheth- 
er the report was true. Upon my admission of the painful fact, 
qualified, however, by the expression of my hope that we would 
under better auspices again return, the ladies especially, with 
generous sympathy and patriotic impulse, responded, “If the 


668 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


success of the cause requires you to give up Richmond, we are 
content.” 

The affection and confidence of this noble people in the hour 
of disaster were more distressing to me than complaint and un- 
just censure would have been. . 

In view of the diminishing resources of the country on which 
the Army of Northern Virginia relied for supplies, I had urged 
the policy of sending families as far as practicable to the south 
and west, and had set the example by requiring my own to go. 
If it was practicable and desirable to hold the south side of the 
James, then, even for merely material considerations, it was im- 
portant to hold Richmond, and this could best have been done 
if there had been none there save those who could aid in its de- 
fense. If it was not practicable and desirable to hold the south 
side of the James, then Richmond would be isolated, and if it 
could have been defended, its depots, foundries, workshops, 
and mills could have contributed nothing to the armies outside, 
and its possession would no longer have been to us of military 
importance. Ours being astruggle for existence, the indulgence 
of sentiment would have been misplaced. 

Being alone in Richmond, the few arrangements needful for 
my personal wants were soon made after reaching home. Then, 
leaving all else in care of the housekeeper, I waited until noti- 
fied of the time when the train would depart; then, going to 
the station, started for Danville, whither I supposed General 
Lee would proceed with his army. 

In a previous chapter I promised to expose the fiction which 
imputed to me the removal of supplies intended for Lee’s army 
at Amelia Court-House. Though manufactured without one 
fiber of truth, it has been copied into so many books, formed 
the staple of so many jeremiads, and pointed so many malignant 
reflections, that I deem it proper for myself and others con- 
cerned now to present the evidence which will overthrow this 
baseless fabric. 

General I. M. St. John, Commissary-General of the Confed- 
erate Army, was requested by me, after the close of the war, to 
prepare a report in reply to the widely circulated story that Lee’s 
army had been compelled to evacuate Petersburg, and subse- 


1865] TO MEET REQUISITIONS. 669 


quently to surrender because the Administration had failed to 
provide food for their support. On the 14th of July, 1878, 
General St. John addressed to me a report of the operations and 
condition of the commissariat immediately preceding the sur- 
render of Lee’s and Johnston’s armies. That report, togéther 
with confirmatory statements, will be found in the ‘Southern 
Historical Society Papers” for March, 1877. From it and the 
accompanying documents I propose to make brief extracts. 

General St. John says that in February, 1865, when he took 
charge of the commissary bureau, on account of the military 
status he 


“found that the Army of Northern Virginia was with difficulty 
supplied day by day with reduced rations. . . . I at once pro- 
ceeded to organize a system of appeal and of private contribution 
as auxiliary to the regular operations of the commissary service. 
With the earnest and very active aid of leading citizens of Vir- 
ginia and North Carolina, this effort was attended with results ex- 
ceeding expectation. . . . On or before March 15, 1865, the Com- 
missary-General was able to report to the Secretary of War that, 
in addition to the daily issue of rations to the Army of Northern 
Virginia, there lay in depot along the railroad between Greens- 
boro, North Carolina, Lynchburg, Staunton, and Richmond, at 
least ten days’ rations of bread and meat, collected especially for 
that army, and subject to the requisition of its chief commissary 
officer ; also that considerably over 300,000 rations were held in 
Richmond as a special reserve. . . . There was collected by April 
1, 1865, in depot, subsistence stated in detail as follows : 

“ At Richmond, Virginia, 300,000 rations bread and meat ; at 
Danville, 500,000*rations bread; at Danville, 1,500,000 rations 
meat ; at Lynchburg, 180,000 rations bread and meat ; at Greens- 
boro, North Carolina, and vicinity, 1,500,000 rations bread and 
meat. 

“Tn addition, there were considerable supplies of tea, coffee, 
and sugar carefully reserved for hospital issues chiefly. These re- 
turns did not include the subsistence collections by the field-trains 
of the Army of Northern Virginia, under orders from its own head- 
quarters, nor the depot collections at Charlottesville, Staunton, and 
other points upon the Virginia Central Railroad, to meet requisi-’ 
tions from the Confederates operating in the Valley and western 


670 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Virginia. South and west of Greensboro, North Carolina, the 
depot accumulations were reserved first to meet requisitions for 
the forces operating in the Carolinas, and the surplus for Virginia 
requisitions, . . .” 

The report then refers to a conference between the Secretary 
of War (Breckinridge) and the General commanding (Lee) with 
the Quartermaster-General (Lawton) and the Commissary-Gen- 
eral (St. John). After a general discussion of the wants of the 
army in clothing, forage, and subsistence, to an inquiry by Gen- 
eral Lee, General St. John replied: 


“That a daily delivery by cars and canal-boats, at or near 
Richmond, of about five hundred tons of commissaries’ stores was 
essential to provide for the Richmond siege reserve and other 
accumulations desired by the General commanding; that the 
depot collections were already sufficient to assure the meeting of 
these requisitions, and, if the then existing military lines could be 
held, the Commissary-General felt encouraged as to the future of 
his own immediate department.” 


The procuring of supplies was only one of the difficulties by 
which we were beset. The deteriorated condition of the rail- 
roads and the deficiency of rolling-stock embarrassed transporta- 
tion, and there was yet another: the cavalry raids of the enemy 
frequently broke the railroads and destroyed trains. General 
Lawton, with great energy and good judgment, under the 
heavy pressure of the circumstances, improved the railroad 
transportation. I quote again from the report of General St. 
John: , 


“Upon the earliest information of the approaching evacuation, 
instructions were asked from the War Department and the Gen- 
eral commanding for the final disposition of the subsistence reserve 
in Richmond, then reported by Major Claiborne, post commissary, 
to exceed in quantity 350,000 rations. The- reply, ‘Send up the 
Danville Railroad if Richmond is not safe,’ was received from the 
army headquarters, April 2, 1865, and too late for action, as all 
railroad transportation had then been taken up, by superior orders, 
for the archives, bullion, and other Government service, then 
deemed of prior importance. All that remained to be done was 


1865] ON TRAINS FOR IMMEDIATE USE. 671 


to fill every accessible army-wagon ; and this was done, and the 
trains were hurried southward.” 


It will be seen from this statement that the reply was only 
directed to the removal of the subsistence reserve if Richmond 
was not safe. It can not be supposed that such a reply emanated 
from General Lee, as he surely never contemplated an attempt 
to hold Richmond after Petersburg was evacuated. General St. 
John then adds: 


“On March 31st, or possibly the morning of April Ist, a telegram 
was received at the bureau in Richmond, from the commissary offi- 
cer of the Army of Northern Virginia, requesting breadstuffs to be 
sent to Petersburg. Shipment was commenced at once, and was 
pressed to the extreme limit of transportation permitted by the 
movement of General Longstreet’s corps (then progressing south- 
ward). No calls, by letter or requisition, from the General com- 
manding, or from any other source, official or unofficial, had been 
received either by the Commissary-General or the Assistant Com- 
missary-General ; nor (as will be seen by the appended letter of 
the Secretary of War) was any communication transmitted through 
the department channels to the bureau of subsistence, for the col- 
lection of supplies at Amelia Court-House. Had any such requisi- 
tion or communication been received at the bureau as late as the 
morning of April Ist, it could have been met from the Richmond 
reserve with transportation on south-bound trains, and most assur- 
edly so previous to General Longstreet’s movement.” 


On the morning of the 3d the Commissary-General left Rich- 
mond and joined. General R. E. Lee at Amelia Springs. There 
were at that time about eighty thousand rations at Farmville, 
“there held on trains for immediate use.” On the morning of 
the 6th the Commissary-General asked General Lee whether he 
should send those rations down the railroad or hold them at 
Farmville. Not receiving instructions, the rations remained at 
Farmville, and on the 7th the army passing there took a portion 
of them. On the morning of the 8th the subsistence trains on 
the railroad at Pamphlin’s Station, twenty miles west of Farm- 
ville, were attacked by the enemy’s cavalry and captured, or 
burned to avoid capture. The surrender followed on the sub- 


672 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


sequent day. The foregoing extracts, I think, prove unques- 
tionably that no orders were received to place supplies for Lee’s 
army at Amelia Court-House; that sufficient supplies were in 
depot to answer the immediate wants of the army, and that the 
failure to distribute them to the troops on their retreat was due 
to the active operations of the enemy on all our lines of com- 
munication; hence, when the Commissary-General applied to 
General Lee for instructions as to where supplies should be 
placed, he says, “General Lee replied in substance that the 
military situation did not permit an answer.” Lest, however, 
what has been given should not seem conclusive to others, I 
add confirmatory testimony. General John C. Breckinridge, 
in a letter to General I. M. St. John, of date May 16, 1871, 
wrote : 


“A few days before the evacuation of Richmond you reported 
to me that besides supplies accumulated at different distant points 
in Virginia and North Carolina, you had ten days’ rations acces- 
sible by rail to [General Lee] and subject to the orders of his chief 
commissary. I have no recollection of any communication from 
General Lee in regard to the accumulation of rations at Amelia 
Court-House. . . . The second or third day after the evacuation, 
I recollect you said to General Lee in my presence that you had a 
large number of rations (I think eighty thousand) at a convenient 
point on the railroad, and desired to know where you should place 
them. The General replied that the military situation made it im- 
possible to answer.” 


In a letter of the date of September, 1865, Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Thomas G. Williams, assistant commissary-general, wrote 
to General St. John, and from his letter I make the following 
extract : 


“On the morning of April 2, 1865, the chief commissary of 
General Lee’s army was asked by telegram what should be done 
with the stores in Richmond. No reply was received until night ; 
he then suggested that, if Richmond was not safe, they might be 
sent up on the Richmond and Danville Railroad. As the evacua- 
tion of Richmond was then actively progressing, it was impracti- 
cable to move those supplies. . . . In reply to your question with 


1865] IT WAS ENTIRELY CORRECT. 673 


_ Tegard to the establishment of a depot of supplies at Amelia 
Court-House, I have to say that I had no information of any such 
requisition or demand upon the bureau.” 


Major J. H. Claiborne, assistant commissary-general, in a 
letter to General J. M. St. John, from Richmond, June 3, 
1873, wrote: 


“No order was received by me, and (with full opportunities 

of information if it had been given) I had no knowledge of any 

plan to send supplies to Amelia Court-House. Under such cir- 

cumstances, with transportation afforded, there could readily have 

been sent about three hundred thousand rations, with due regard 
to the demand upon this post.” 


During the retreat, supplies were found at Pamphlin’s De- 
pot, Farmville, Danville, Saulsbury, and Charlotte. Major B. 
P. Noland, chief commissary for Virginia, wrote to General 
St. John, April 16, 1874. After saying that he had read with 
care the report of General St. John, and expressing the opinion 
that it was entirely correct, of which no one in the Confederacy 
had better opportunities to judge, he writes: 


“JT think the plan adopted by your predecessor, Colonel. Nor- 
throp (which was corftinued by you), for obtaining for the use of 
the army the products of the country, was as perfect and worked 
as effectively as any that could have been devised. ... I left 
Richmond at one o’clock of the night Richmond was evacuated, 
with orders from you to make Lynchburg my headquarters, and 
be ready to forward supplies from that point to the army. I 
never heard of any order for the accumulation of supplies at Ame- 
lia Springs.” 


Lewis E. Harvie, a distinguished citizen of Virginia, and - 
who at the close of the war was President of the Richmond 
and Danville and Piedmont Railroads, wrote to General St. 
John on January 1, 1876. From his letter I make the follow- 
ing extracts, referring to the condition of affairs in 1865. He 
writes : 

“The difficulties of obtaining supplies were very great, particu- 
larly when the roads under my charge were cut, and transporta- 

90 


674 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


tion suspended on them, which was the case on one or two occasions _ 
for several weeks. Engines and cars, and machinery generally, 
on these roads were insufficient and inadequate from wear and tear 
to accomplish the amount of transportation required for the Gov- 
ernment. . . . The Richmond and Danville and Piedmont Rail- 
roads were kept open, and about that time we added largely to its 
rolling-stock by procuring engines and cars from the different 
roads on the route of the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad west. 
Starvation had stared the Army of Northern Virginia in the face ; 
and the commissary department organized an appeal to the people 
on the line of the Richmond and Danville Railroad for voluntary 
contributions of supplies, and a number of gentlemen of influence, 
character, and position, including the most eminent clergymen of 
the State, addressed them in several counties, urging them to fur- 
nish the supply wanted. 

“No one who witnessed can ever forget the results. Contri- 
bution was universal, and supplies of food sufficient to meet the 
wants of the army at the time were at once sent to the depots on 
the road until they were packed and groaned under their weight ; 
and I affirm that at the time of the evacuation of Richmond, the 
difficulty of delivering supplies sufficient for the support of the 
Army of Northern Virginia under General Lee was solved and 
surmounted, for I know that abundant supplies were in reach 
of transportation on the Richmond and Danville Railroad, being 
massed in Danville, Charlotte, and at other points ; and, from the 
increased motive power above referred to, they could have been 
delivered as fast as they were required. . . , At the time of the 
evacuation of the city, there were ample supplies in it, as well as 
on the railroad west of Amelia Court-House, to have been delivered 
at the latter place for the retreating army, if its numbers had been 
double what they were. No orders were ever given to any officers 
or employee of the Richmond and Danville Railroad to transport 
any supplies to Amelia Court-House for General Lee’s army, nor 
did I ever hear that any such orders were sent to the commissary 
department on the occasion of the evacuation of Richmond, until 
after the surrender of the army.” 


Mr. Harvie then recites his interview, held on Saturday, the 
day before evacuation, with the Quartermaster-General, the Secre- 
tary of War, and myself, from whom he learned that he might go 


1865] NO KNOWLEDGE OF THE MATTER. 675 


home for a fortnight, there being no expectation that Richmond 
would be evacuated in the mean time. He adds that the next 
day he was informed by telegraph of the proposed evacuation, 
and returned to Richmond, at which place he conferred with 
myself and the Secretary of War about the route to be taken 
by the wagon supply-train, and that he had a long conversa- 
tion with me on the cars, during our night-ride to Danville. 

In regard to sending supplies to Amelia Court-House, he 
writes: 


“T have never believed that any orders to place supplies of 
food at Amelia Court-Hoyse were received by the commissary 
department at the time of the evacuation of the city, because 
from Richmond, cr from the upper portions of the railroad, if 
required, they could at once have been transported without any 
delay or difficulty. Neither the road nor the telegraph was cut 
or disturbed until the day after the evacuation of the city.” 


It may perhaps be thought that the amount of evidence 
adduced is greater than necessary to disprove the very improb- 
able assertion that, instead of burden-cars, a passenger train had 
been loaded with provisions for Lee’s army at Amelia Court- 
House, and that these passenger-cars, without being permitted 
to unload the freight, had, in reckless disregard of the wants of 
our worn and hard-pressed defenders, been ordered to proceed 
immediately to Richmond, thus leaving them to starvation, and 
the necessity to surrender, in order to enable the executive 
department to escape; but, as I had no personal knowledge of 
the matter, it was necessary to quote those whose functions 
brought them into closer communication with the subject to 
which the calumny related. 

In the night of the 2d, the same on which General Ewell 
evacuated the defenses of the capital and General Lee withdrew 
from Petersburg, I left Richmond and reached Danville on the 
next morning. 

Neither the president of the railroad, who was traveling 
with me, nor I knew that there was anything which required 
attention at Amelia Court-House or other station on the route. 
Had General Lee’s letter to me, written on the afternoon of 


676 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the 2d, been received at Richmond, which I think it was not, 
the fact that he proposed to march to Amelia Court-House 
would have been known; but it would have been unjust to the 
officers of the commissary department to doubt that any requisi- 
tion made or to be made for supplies had received or would 
receive the most prompt and efficient attention. If, however, I 
had known that General Lee wanted supplies placed at Amelia 
Court-House, I would certainly have inquired as to the time of 
reaching that station, and have asked to have the train stopped 
so as to enable me to learn whether the supplies were in depot 
or not. The unfounded calumny, after perhaps having given it 
more consideration than it was worth} is now dismissed. 

Though the occupation of Danville was not expected to be 
permanent, immediately after arriving there rooms were ob- 
tained, and the different departments resumed their routine 
labors. Nothing could have exceeded the kindness and hospi- 
tality of the patriotic citizens. They cordially gave us an “Old 
Virginia welcome,” and with one heart contributed in every 
practicable manner to cheer and aid us in the work in which we 
were engaged. 

The town was surrounded by an intrenchment as faulty in 
location as construction. I promptly proceeded to correct the 
one and improve the other, while energetic efforts were being 
made to collect supplies of various kinds for General Lee’s 
army. 

The design, as previously arranged with General Lee, was 
that, if he should be compelled to evacuate Petersburg, he would 
proceed to Danville, make a new defensive line of the Dan and 
Roanoke Rivers, unite his army with the troops in North Caro- 
lina, and make a combined attack upon Sherman; if successful, 
it was expected that reviving hope would bring reénforcements 
to the army, and Grant, being then far removed from his base 
of supplies, and in the midst of a hostile population, it was 
thought we might return, drive him’ from the soil of Virginia, 
and restore to the people a government deriving its authority 
from their consent. With these hopes and wishes, neither seek- 
ing to diminish the magnitude of our disaster nor to excite il- 
lusory expectations, I issued, on the 5th, the following procla- 


1865] A NEW PHASE OF THE STRUGGLE. | 677 


mation, of which, viewed by the light of subsequent events, it 
may fairly be said it was over-sanguine: 


“The General-in-Chief found it necessary to make such move- 
ments of his troops as to uncover the capital. It would be unwise 
to conceal the moral and material injury to our cause resulting 
from its occupation by the enemy. It is equally unwise and un- 
worthy of us to allow our energies to falter and our efforts to be- 
come relaxed under reverses, however calamitous they may be. 
For many months the largest and finest army of the Confederacy, 
under a leader whose presence inspires equal confidence in the 
troops and the people, has been greatly trammeled by the neces- 
sity of keeping constant watch over the approaches to the capital, 
and has thus been forced to forego more than one opportunity for 
promising enterprise. It is for us, my countrymen, to show by 
our bearing under reverses, how wretched has been the self-de- 
ception of those who have believed us less able to endure misfor- 
tune with fortitude than to encounter danger with courage. 

“We have now entered upon a new phase of the struggle. 
Relieved from the necessity of guarding particular points, our 
army will be free to move from point to point, to strike the enemy 
in detail far from his base. Let us but will it, and we are free. 

“ Animated by that confidence in your spirit and fortitude 
which never yet failed me, I announce to you, fellow-countrymen, 
that it is my purpose to maintain your cause with my whole heart 
and soul; that I will never consent to abandon to the enemy one 
foot of the soil of any of the States of the Confederacy ; that 
Virginia—noble State, whose ancient renown has been eclipsed by 
her stili more glorious recent history; whose bosom has been. 
bared to receive the main shock of this war; whose sons and 
daughters have exhibited heroism so sublime as to render her 
illustrious in all time to come—that Virginia, with the help of the 
people and by the blessing of Providence, shall be held and de- 
fended, and no peace ever be made with the infamous invaders of 
her territory. 

“If, by the stress of numbers, we should be compelled to a 
temporary withdrawal from her limits or those of any other bor- 
der State, we will return until the baffled and exhausted enemy 
shall abandon in despair his endless and impossible task of making 


slaves of a people resolved to be free. 


678 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“Let us, then, not despond, my countrymen, but, relying on 
God, meet the foe with fresh defiance and with unconquered and 
unconquerable hearts. JEFFERSON Davis.” 


While thus employed, little if any reliable information in 
regard to the Army of Northern Virginia was received, until a 
gallant youth, the son of General Henry A. Wise, came to Dan- 
ville, and told me that, learning Lee’s army was to be surren- 
dered, he had during the night mounted his fleet horse, and, 
escaping through and from the enemy’s cavalry, some of whom 
pursued him, had come quite alone to warn me of the approach- 
ing event. Other unofficial information soon followed, and of 
such circumstantial character as to prove that Lieutenant Wise’s 
anticipation had been realized. 

Our scouts now reported a cavalry force to be moving toward 
the south around the west side of Danville, and we removed 
thence to Greensboro, passing a railroad-bridge, as was subse- 
quently learned, a very short time before the enemy’s cavalry 
reached and burned it. I had telegraphed to General John- 
ston from Danville the report that Lee had surrendered, and, 
on arriving at Greensboro, conditionally requested him to meet 
me there, where General Beauregard at the time had his head- 
quarters, my object being to confer with both of them in re- 
gard to our present condition and future operations. 


OD A.B PE Bt ve 


Invitation of General Johnston to a Conference.—Its Object.—Its Result.—Provi- _ 
sions on the Line of Retreat.—Notice of President Lincoln’s Assassination.— 
Correspondence between Johnston and Sherman:—Terms of the Convention.— 
Approved by the Confederate Government.—Rejected by the United States 
Government.—Instructions to General Johnston.—Disobeyed.—Statements of 
General Johnston.—His Surrender.—Movements of the President South.—His 
Plans.—Order of General E. K. Smith to his Soldiers.—Surrender.—Numbers 
paroled.—The President overtakes his Family,—His Capture.—Taken to Hamp- 
ton Roads, and imprisoned in Fortress Monroe. 


Tux invitation to General Johnston for a conference, no- 
ticed in a previous chapter, was as follows : 


1865] WE STILL HAD EFFECTIVE ARMIES. 679 


“GREENSBORO, NortH Carona, April 11, 1865—12 
“General J. E. Jounston, headquarters, via Raleigh: 

“The Secretary of War did not join me at Danville. Is ex- 
pected here this afternoon. 

“ As your situation may render best, I will go to your head- 
quarters immediately after the arrival of the Secretary of War, 
or you can come here ; in the former case our conference must be 
without the presence of General Beauregard. I have no official 
report from General Lee. The Secretary of War may be able to 
add to information heretofore communicated. 

“The important question first to be solved is, At what point 
shall concentration be made, in view of the present position of 
the two columns of the enemy, and the routes which they may 
adopt to engage your forces before a proposed junction with 
General Walker and others. Your more intimate knowledge of 
the data for the solution of the problem deters me from making 
a specific suggestion on that point. JreFFErson Davis.” 


In compliance with this request, General J. E. Johnston 
came up from Raleigh to Greensboro, and with General Beau- 
regard met me and most of my Cabinet at my quarters in a 
house occupied by Colonel J. Taylor Wood’s family. Though 
I was fully sensible of the gravity of our position, seriously 
affected as it was by the evacuation of the capital, the surrender 
of the Army of Northern Virginia, and the consequent discour- 
agement which these events would produce, I did not think we 
should despair. We still had effective armies in the field, and 
a vast extent of rich and productive territory both east and 
west of the Mississippi, whose citizens had evinced no disposi- 
tion to surrender. Ample supplies had been collected in the 
railroad depots, and much still remained to be placed at our 
disposal when needed by the army in North Carolina. 

The failure of several attempts to open negotiations with 
the Federal Government, and notably the last by commis- 
sioners who met President Lincoln at Hampton Roads, con- 
vinced me of the hopelessness under existing cireumstances to 
obtain better terms than were then offered, i. e., a surrender at 
discretion. My motive, therefore, in holding an interview with 
the senior generals of the army in North Carolina was not to 


680 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. » 


learn their opinion as to what might be done by negotiation 
with the United States Government, but to derive from them 
information in regard to the army under their command, and 
what it was feasible and advisable to do as a military problem. 
The members of my Cabinet were already advised as to the 
object of the meeting, and, when the subject was introduced to 
the generals in that form, General Johnston was very reserved, 
and seemed far less than sanguine. His first significant expres- 
sion was that of a desire to open correspondence with General 
Sherman, to see if he would agree to a suspension of hostilities, 
the object being to permit the civil authorities to enter into the 
needful arrangements to terminate the existing war. Confident 
that the United States Government would not accept a proposi- 
tion for such negotiations, I distinctly expressed my conviction 
on that point, and presented as an objection to such an effort 
that, so far as it should excite delusive hopes and expectations, 
its failure would have a demoralizing effect both on the troops 
and the people. Neither of them had shown any disposition 
to surrender, or had any reason to suppose that their Govern- 
ment contemplated abandoning its trust—the maintenance of 
the Constitution, freedom, and independence of the Confederate 
States. From the inception of the war, the people had gener- 
ally and at all times expressed their determination to accept no 
terms of peace that did not recognize their independence; and 
the indignation manifested when it became known that Mr. 
Lincoln had offered to our commissioners at Hampton Roads a 
surrender at discretion as the only alternative to a continuance 
of the war assured me that no true Confederate was prepared to 
accept peace on such terms. During the last years of the war 
the main part of the infantry in the Army of Northern Vir- 
ginia was composed of men from the farther South. Many of 
these, before the evacuation of Petersburg and especially about 
the time of Lee’s surrender, had absented themselves to go 
homeward, and, it was reported, made avowal of their purpose 
to continue the struggle. I had reason to believe that the spirit 
of the army in North Carolina was unbroken, for, though sur- 
rounded by circumstances well calculated to depress and dis- 
courage them, I had learned that they earnestly protested to 


1865] DARE TO THE LAST EXTREMITY. 681 


their officers against the surrender which rumor informed them 
was then in contemplation. If any shall deem it a weak credu- 
lity to confide in such reports, something may be allowed to an 
intense love for the Confederacy to a thorough conviction that 
its fall would involve ruin, both material and moral, and to a 
confidence in the righteousness of our cause, which, if equally 
felt by my compatriots, would make them do and dare to the 
last extremity. 

But if, taking the gloomiest view, the circumstances were 
such as to 1k no hope of maintaining the independence of 
the Confederate States—if negotiations for peace must be on 
the basis of reunion and the acceptance of the war legislation— 
it seemed to me that certainly better terms for our country 
could be secured by keeping organized armies in the field than 
by laying down our arms and trusting to the magnanimity of 
the victor. 

For all these considerations I was not at all hopeful of any . 
success in the attempt to provide for negotiations between the 
civil authorities of the United States and those of the Confed- 
eracy, believing that, even if Sherman should agree to such a 
proposition, his Government would not ratify it; but, after hav- 
ing distinctly announced my opinion, I yielded to the judgment 
of my constitutional advisers, of whom only one held my views, 
and consented to permit General Johnston, as he desired, to 
hold a conference with General Sherman for the purpose above 
recited. 

Then, turning to what I supposed would soon follow, I in- 
' yited General Johnston to an expression of his choice of a line 
of retreat toward the southwest. He declared a preference for 
a different route from that suggested by me, and, yielding the 
point, I informed him that I would have depots of supplies for 
his army placed on the route he had selected. The commissary- 
general, St. John, executed the order, as shown in his report 
published in the “Southern Historical Society Papers,” vol. 
vili, pp. 103-107. 

Referring to the period which followed the surrender of the 
Army of Northern Virginia, General I. M. St. John, Commis- 
sary-Genéral Confederate States Army, writes : 


689 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


“The bureau headquarters were continued in North Carolina 
until the surrender of that military department. During the 
interval preparations were made for the westward movement of 
forces as then contemplated. In these arrangements the local de- 
pots were generally found so full and supplied so well in hand, 
from Charlotte southwest, that the commissary-general was able 
to report to the Secretary of War that the requisitions for which 
he was notified to prepare could all be met. The details of this 
service were executed, and very ably, by Major J. H. Claiborne, 
then, and until the end, assistant commissary-general.” 


Major Claiborne, in his report, writes: 


“Being placed under orders as assistant commissary-general, 
I forwarded supplies from South Carolina to General J. E. John- 
ston’s army, and also collected supplies at six or seven named 
points in that State for the supposed retreat of General Johnston’s 
army through the State. This duty, with a full determination at 
the evacuation of this city [Richmond] to follow the fortunes of 
our cause, gave me opportunity of ascertaining the resources of 
the country for my department. The great want was that of 
transportation, and specially was it felt by all collecting commis- 
saries for a few months before the surrender.” 


It will thus be seen that my expectations, referred to above, 
caused adequate provision to be made for the retreat of our 
army, if that result should become necessary by the failure of 
the attempt to open negotiations for an honorable peace. I had 
never contemplated a surrender, except upon such terms as a 
belligerent might claim, as long as we were able to keep the 
field, and never expected a Confederate army to surrender while 
it was able either to fight or to retreat. Lee had only surren- 
dered his army when it was impossible for him to do either one 
or the other, and had proudly rejected Grant’s demand, in the 
face of overwhelming numbers, until he found himself sur- 
rounded and his line of retreat blocked by a force much larger 
than his own. 

After it had been decided that General Johnston should at- 
tempt negotiation with General Sherman, he left for his army 
headquarters ; and I, expecting that he would soon take up his 


1865] A GREAT MISFORTUNE TO THE SOUTH. 683 


line of retreat, which his superiority in cavalry would protect 
from harassing pursuit, proceeded with my Cabinet and staff 
toward Charlotte, North Carolina. While on the way, a dis- 
patch was received from General Johnston announcing that 
General Sherman had agreed to a conference, and adie that 
the Secretary of War, General J. C. Breckinridge, should return 
to codperate in it. The application was complied with, and the 
Postmaster-General, John H. Reagan, also went at my request. 
He, however, was not admitted to the conference. 

We arrived at Charlotte on April 18, 1865, and I there re- 
ceived, at the moment of dismounting, a telegram from General 
Breckinridge announcing, on information received from Gen- 
eral Sherman, that President Lincoln had been assassinated. 
An influential citizen of the town, who had. come to welcome 
me, was standing near me, and, after remarking to him in a low 
voice that I had received sad intelligence, I handed the telegram 
to him. Some troopers encamped in the vicinity had collected 
to see me; they called to the gentleman who had the dispatch 
in his hand to read it, no doubt supposing it to be army news. 
He complied with their request, and a few, only taking in the 
fact, but not appreciating the evil it portended, cheered, as was 
natural at news of the fall of one they considered their most 
powerful foe. The man, who invented the story of my having 
read the dispatch with exultation, had free scope for his imagina- 
tion, as he was not present, and bad no chance to know whereof 
he pore witness, even if there had been any foundation of truth 
for his fiction. 

For an enemy so relentless in the war for our subjugation, 
we could not be expected to mourn ; yet, in view of its political 
consequences, it could not be regarded otherwise than as a great 
misfortune to the South. He had power over the Northern 
people, and was without personal malignity toward the people 
of the South; his successor was without power in the North, 
and the embodiment of malignity toward the Southern people, 
perhaps the more so because he had betrayed and deserted them 
in the hour of their need. The war had now shrunk into nar- 
row proportions, but the important consideration remained to so 
conduct it that, if failing to secure our independence, we might 


684 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


obtain a treaty or guasi-treaty of peace which would secure to 
the Southern States their political rights, and to the people 
thereof immunity from the plunder of their private property. 

I found some cavalry at Charlotte, and soon had the satisfac- 
tion to increase them to five brigades. They had been on de- 
tached service, and were much reduced in numbers. Among 
the troopers who assembled there was the remnant of the com- 
mand which had spread terror north of the Ohio, under the 
command of their dauntless leader, General John Hunt Morgan. 
Their present chief, worthy to be the successor of that hero, was 
General Basil Duke. Among the atrocious, cowardly acts of 
vindictive malice which marked the conduct of the enemy, none 
did or could surpass the brutality with which the dying and 
dead body of Morgan was treated. Hate, the offspring of fear, 
they might feel for the valorous soldier while he lived, but even 
the ignoble passion, vengeance, might have been expected to 
stop when life was extinct. 

On April 18, 1865, General Johnston wrote to General Sher- 
man as follows: 

“The results of the recent campaign in Virginia have changed 
the relative military condition of the belligerents. I am therefore 
induced to address you, in this form, the inquiry whether, to stop 
the further effusion of blood and the devastation of property, 
you are willing to make a temporary suspension of active opera- 
tions; . . . the object being to permit the civil authorities to enter 
into the needful arrangements to terminate the existing war.” 


General Sherman replied, on the 14th: 


“T am fully empowered to arrange with you any terms for the 
suspension of hostilities between the armies commanded by you 
and those commanded by myself, and will be willing to confer 
with you to that end,” etc., etc.* 


In thesame volume, at page 327, General Sherman describes 
an interview with Mr. Lincoln, held at City Point on the 27th 
and 28th of March preceding, in which he says : 

“Mr. Lincoln distinctly authorized me to assure Governor 
Vance and the people of North Carolina that, as soon as the rebel 

* “Memoirs of General W. T. Sherman,” vol. ii, pp. 346, 347. 


1865] TO STOP THE FURTHER SHEDDING OF BLOOD. 685 


armies laid down their arms, and resumed their civil pursuits, 
they would at once be guaranteed all their rights as citizens of a 
common country ; and that, to avoid anarchy, the State govern- 
ments then in existence, with their civil functionaries, would be 
recognized by him as the government de fucto till Congress could 
provide others.” 


In a letter of D. D. Porter, vice-admiral, written in 1866, 
giving his recollections of that interview, in the same volume, 
page 330, is found the following paragraph : 


“The conversation between the President and General Sher- 
man, about the terms of surrender to be allowed Joe Johnston, 
continued. Sherman energetically insisted that he could command 
his own terms, and that Johnston would have to yield to his 
demands ; but the President was very decided about the matter, 
and insisted that the surrender of Johnston’s army must be ob- 
tained on any terms.” 


Hence it appears that Sherman was authorized to say that 
he was fully empowered to arrange for the suspension of hos- 
tilities ; and, moreover, that he was instructed by Mr. Lincoln 
to give “any terms” to obtain the surrender of Johnston’s army. 

In regard to the memorandum or basis of agreement, Sher- 
man states, in the same volume, page 353, that, while in consul- 
tation with General Johnston, a messenger brought him a parcel 
of papers from Mr. Reagan, Postmaster-General ; that Johnston 
and Breckinridge looked over them, and handed one of them to 
him, which he found inadmissible, and proceeds : 


“Then, recalling the conversation with Mr. Lincoln at City 
Point, I sat down at the table and wrote off the terms which I 
thought concisely expressed his views and wishes.” 


But, while these matters were progressing, Mr. Lincoln had 
been assassinated, and a vindictive policy had been substituted 
for his, which avowedly was, to procure a speedy surrender of 
the army upon any terms. His evident wish was to stop the fur- 
ther shedding of blood; that of his successors, like Sherman’s, to 
extract all which it was possible to obtain. From the memo- 
randa of the interview between Mr. Lincoln and Sherman it is 


686 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


clearly to be inferred that, but for the untimely death of Mr. 
Lincoln, the agreement between Generals Sherman and John- 
ston would have been ratified; and the wounds inflicted on civil 
liberty by the “reconstruction” measures might not have left 
their shameful scars on the United States. 

General Sherman, in his ‘‘ Memoirs,” vol. ii, page 349, re- 
ferring to a conversation between himself and General John- 
ston at their first meeting, writes : 


“T told him I could not believe that he or General Lee, or the 
officers of the Confederate army, could possibly be privy to acts 
of assassination, but I would not say as much for Jeff Davis, 
George Saunders, and men of that stripe.” 


On this I have but two remarks to make: First, that I think 
there were few officers in the Confederate army who would 
have permitted such a slanderous imputation to be made by a 
public enemy against the chief executive of their Government ; 
second, that I could not value the good opinion of the man 
who, in regard to the burning of Columbia, made a false charge 
against General Wade Hampton, and, having left it to circulate 
freely for ten years, then in his published memoirs makes this 
disgraceful admission : 


“In my official report of this conflagration, I distinctly charged 
it to General Wade Hampton, and confess I did so pointedly, to 
shake the faith of his people in him,” ete. 


“Memorandum, or basis of agreement, made this 18th day of April, 
A. D, 1865, near Durham Station, and in the State of North 
Carolina, by and between General Joseph E. Johnston, com- 
manding the Confederate army, and Major-General W. T. 
Sherman, commanding the army of the United States in North 
Carolina, both present : 


“1, The contending armies now in the field to maintain their 
status quo, until notice is given by the commanding General of 
either one to its opponents, and reasonable time, say forty-eight 
hours, allowed. 

“2. The Confederate armies now in existence to be disbanded 
and conducted to the several State capitals, there to deposit their 
arms and public property in the State Arsenal, and each officer and 


1865] A MILITARY CONVENTION. 687 


man to execute and file an agreement to cease from acts of war, 
and abide the action of both Federal and State authorities. The 
number of arms and munitions of war to be reported to the chief 
of ordnance at Washington City, subject to future action of the 
Congress of the United States, and in the mean time to be used 
solely to maintain peace and order within the borders of the States 
respectively. 

“3. The recognition by the Executive of the United States of 
the several State governments, on their officers and Legislatures 
taking the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the United 
States ; and, where conflicting State governments have resulted 
from the war, the legitimacy of all shall be submitted to the Su- 
preme Court of the United States. 

“4, The reéstablishment of all Federal courts in the several 
States, with powers as defined by the Constitution and laws of 
Congress. 

“5, The people and inhabitants of all States to be guaranteed, 
so far as the Executive can, their political rights and franchises, 
as well as their rights of person and property, as defined by the 
Constitution of the United States and of the States respectively. 

“6. The Executive authority of the Government of the United 
States not to disturb any of the people by reason of the late war, 
so long as they live in peace and quiet, abstain from acts of armed 
hostility, and obey laws in existence at any place of their residence. 

“7, In general terms, war to cease, a general amnesty, so far as 
the Executive power of the United States can command, or on 
condition of the disbandment of the Confederate armies, the dis- 
tribution of arms, and resumption of peaceful pursuits by officers 
and men, as hitherto composing said armies. Not being fully 
empowered by our respective principals to fulfill these terms, we 
individually and officially pledge ourselves to promptly obtain 
necessary authority, and to carry out-the above programme. 

“W. T. Suerman, Major- General, etc., ete. 
“J. E. Jounston, General, etc., etc.” 


The reader will not fail to observe that the proposition for a 
suspension of hostilities to allow the civil authorities to nego- 
tiate, was not even entertained; that the agreement was, in fact, 
a military convention, in which all reference to the civil authori- 
ties was excluded, except by the adntission that the negotiators 


688 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


respectively had principals from whom they must obtain author- 
ity, i. e., ratification of the agreement into which they had en- 
tered. There seemed to be a special dread on the part of the 
United States officials lest they should do something which 
would be construed as the recognition of the existence of a gov- | 
ernment. which for four years they had been vainly trying to 
subdue. Now, as on previous occasions, I cared little for the 
form, and therefore only gave my consideration to the substance 
of the agreement. In consideration of the disbandment of our 
armies it provided for the recognition of the several State gov- 
ernments, guaranteed to the people of the States their political 
rights and franchises, as well as their rights of person and prop- 
erty as defined by the Constitution of the United States and 
other States respectively ; promised not to disturb any of the 
people by reason of the late war, and generally indicated that 
the United States Government was to be restricted to the exer- 
cise of the powers delegated in the Constitution. 

Though this convention, if ratified, would not have all the 
binding force of a treaty, it secured to our people the political 
rights and safety from pillage, to obtain which I proposed to 
continue the war. I, therefore, with the concurrence of my 
constitutional advisers, addressed General Johnston as follows: 


“Cuartorte, Norra Caroxina, April 24, 1868. 
“General J. E. Jounston, Greensboro, North Carolina, 

“The’ Secretary of War has delivered to me the copy you 
handed to him of the basis of an agreement between yourself and 
General Sherman. Your action is approved. You will so inform 
General Sherman ; and, if the like authority be given by the Goy- 
ernment of the United States to complete the arrangement, you 
will proceed on the basis adopted. 

“Further instructions will be given after the details of the 
negotiation and the methods of executing the terms of agreement 
when notified by you of the readiness on the part of the General 
commanding United States forces to proceed with the arrange- 
ment. JEFFERSON Davis.” 


From the terms of this letter it will be seen that I doubted 
whether the agreement would be ratified by the United States 


1865] THIS ORDER WAS DISOBEYED. 689 


Government. The opinon I entertained in regard to President 
Johnson and his venomous Secretary of War, Stanton, did not 
permit me to expect that they would be less vindictive after a 
surrender of our army had been proposed than when it was re- 
garded as a formidable body defiantly holding its position in the 
field. Whatever hope others entertained that the existing war 
was about to be peacefully terminated, was soon dispelled by 
the rejection of the basis of agreement on the part of the Goy- 
ernment of the United States, and a notice from General Sher- 
man of termination of the armistice in forty-eight hours after 
noon of the 24th of April, 1865. 

General Johnston communicated to me the substance of the 
above information received by him from General Sherman, and 
asked for instructions. I have neither his telegram nor my re- 
ply, but can give it substantially from memory. It was that he 
should retire with his cavalry, and as many infantry as could be 
mounted upon draught-horses, and some light artillery, the rest of 
the infantry to be disbanded, and a place of rendezvous appointed. 
It was unnecessary to say anything of the route, as that had been 
previously agreed on, and supplies placed on it for his retreating 
army. This order was disobeyed, and he sought another inter- 
view with Sherman, to renew his attempt to reach an agreement 
for a termination of hostilities. Meantime, General Hampton, 
commanding the cavalry of Johnston’s army, came to me at 
Charlotte, told me that he feared the army was to be. surren- 
dered, and wished permission to withdraw his part of it and 
report to me. I gave the permission, extending it to all the 
cavalry, which was in accordance with the instructions I had 
sent to General Johnston. He returned immediately, but I 
have since learned from him that the cavalry had been included 
in a proposition to surrender, before he reached them. 

After the expiration of the armistice, I rode out of Charlotte, 
attended by the members of my Cabinet (except Attorney-Gen- 
eral Davis, who had gone to see his family, residing in that sec- 
tion, and the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Tren halan; who was 
too ill to accompany me), my personal staff, and the cavalry 
which had been concentrated from different, and some of them 
distant, fields of detached service. The number was about 

91 


690 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


two thousand, and they represented six brigade organizations , 
though so much reduced in numbers, they were in a good state 
of efficiency, and among their officers were some of the best in 
our service. To the troops of this command, whose gallantry 
had been displayed on many fields, there is due from me a 
special acknowledgment for the kind consideration shown to 
me on the marches from Charlotte, when the dark shadows 
which gathered round us foretold the coming night. General 
Hampton, finding his troops had been included in the surren- 
der, endeavored to join me to offer his individual service, and 
to share my fate whatever it might be. He accidentally failed 
to meet me. 

I must now recur to two extraordinary statements made by 
General J. E. Johnston in regard to myself while at Charlotte, 
North Carolina, on pages 408 and 409, Johnston’s “ Narrative.” 
The first is that at Greensboro, on the 19th of April— 


“Colonel Archer Anderson, adjutant-general of the army, gave 
me two papers, addressed to me by the President. The first 
directed me to obtain from Mr. J. N. Hendren, Treasury Agent, 
thirty-nine thousand dollars in silver, which was in his hands, sub- 
ject to my order, and to use it as the military chest of the army. 
The second, received subsequently by Colonel Anderson, directed 
me to send this money to the President at Charlotte. This order 
was not obeyed, however. As only the military part of our Gov- 
ernment had then any existence, I thought that a fair share of 
the fund still left should be appropriated to the benefit of the 
army.” 


And so, as revealed in his “ Narrative,” he took the money, 
and divided it among the troops. 

When my attention was called to this statement by one who 
had read the “ Narrative,” I wrote to Colonel Anderson, referred 
to book and page, and inquired what letters from me as there dis- 
scribed he had received. He responded : 


“T do not remember anything connected with the subject, ex- 
cept that there was a payment of silver coin to the army at 


Greensboro, and I have no papers which would afford informa- 
tion.” 


1865] NO CONTROL OVER THE PUBLIC TREASURY, 691 


My letter-book contains no such correspondence, but has a 
letter which renders more than doubtful the assertion that I 
wrote others such as described. The only letter found in my 
letter-book on the subject of the funds in charge of Hendren is 
the following: 


““Greensporo, Nortu Carouina, April 15, 1865. 

“Mr. Henpren, C. S. Treasurer, Greensboro, North Carolina. 

“Sir: You will report to General Beauregard with the treas- 
ure in your possession, that he may give to it due protection as a 
military chest to be moved with his army train. For further in- 
structions you will report to the Secretary of the Treasury. 

“ JEFFERSON Davis. 
“Official: F. R. Lussock, Colonel and A. D. 0.” 


From the above it will be seen that, while I exercised author- 
ity to assign officers to their posts or places of duty, I assumed 
no control over the public Treasury ; but in that connection 
referred the subordinate to his chief, the Secretary of the 
Treasury, by whom alone could warrants be drawn against the 
public funds. How very improbable, then, it is, that I wrote to 
have the money in the hands of a treasurer sent to me per- 
sonally! Yet this is what General Johnston claims to have re- 
sisted, when without any lawful authority he distributed the 
money himself. The second statement is: 


“ As there was reason to suppose that the Confederate Execu- 
tive had a large sum in specie in its possession, I urged it ear- 
nestly, in writing, to apply a part of it to the payment of the army. 
This letter was intrusted to Lieutenant-Colonel Mason, who was 
instructed to wait for an answer. Its receipt was acknowledged 
by telegraph, and an answer promised. After waiting several 
days to no purpose, Colonel Mason returned without one.” 


Not recollecting to have met Colonel Mason at Charlotte, I 
wrote to him, calling his attention to the statement, and asking 
what was the fact. Not receiving a reply, I renewed the in- 
quiry, but, though considerable time has elapsed, he has not 
answered. It is quite possible that I might have met the gen- 
tleman without recollecting it, but not at all probable that I 
should have received such a letter and have forgotten it. Such 


692 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


intrusion of advice as to what should be done with the money 
in the Treasury, and the speculative opinion as to the amount 
there, I must suppose would have been very promptly rejected 
if it had been presented to me. For years there had been 
irregularity and delay in the payment of the troops, and surely 
no one regretted it more than myself, or had for years tried 
more sedulously to correct it; but, expecting the army to con- 
tinue in the field, it was indispensable to have the means of 
obtaining the necessary supplies for it. 

The Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Trenholm, was ill before 
we reached Charlotte, and quite so during our stay there, but he 
knew there was not a large sum of specie in the Treasury, and 
with patriotic desire had been using it to supply the troops after 
Confederate money became unavailable for purchases. He did 
not contemplate the abandonment of our cause, and it would not 
have taken him a minute to answer that more than all the 
money he had would be needed in future military operations. 

On the 26th, the day on which the armistice terminated, 
General Johnston again met General Sherman, who offered the 
same terms which had been made with General Lee, and he 
says, ‘‘ General Johnston, without hesitation, agreed to, and we 
executed the following,” which was the surrender of General 
Johnston’s troops, with the condition of their being paroled 
and the officers being permitted to retain their side-arms, pri- 
vate horses, and baggage. 

It is true that these were the terms accepted by Lee, but the 
condition of the two armies was very different. Lee’s supplies 
had been cut off, his men were exhausted by fatigue and hun- 
ger; he had no reénforcements in view; notwithstanding the 
immense superiority in numbers and equipments of the enemy 
pursuing, he had from point to point fought them in rear and 
on both flanks, and had, the day before his line of retreat: was 
closed, rejected the demand for surrender, and only yielded to 
it after his starving little army had been surrounded by masses 
through which he tried to, but could not, cut his way. 

Johnston’s line of retreat was open, and supplies had been 
placed upon it. His cavalry was superior to that of the enemy, 
as had been proved. in every conflict between them. Maury 


1865] CONTINUED WAR WAS NOT THE GREATEST OF EVILS. 693 


and Forrest and Taylor still had armies in the field—not large, 
but strong enough to have collected around them the men who 
had left Johnston’s army and gone to their homes to escape a 
surrender, as well as those who under similar circumstances 
had left Lee. The show of continued resistance, I then believed, 
as I still do, would have overcome the depression which was 
spreading like a starless night over the country, and that the 
exhibition of a determination not to leave our political future 
at the mercy of an enemy which had for four years been striv- 
ing to subjugate the States would have led the United States 
authorities to do, as Mr. Lincoln had indicated—give any terms 
which might be found necessary speedily to terminate the exist- 
ing war. ; 

Those who look back upon the period when the States were 
treated as subject provinces, and the Congress left to legislate 
at its will—when a war professedly waged to bring the seceding 
States back to the Union, with all the rights and privileges guar- 
anteed by the Constitution, was followed by the utter disregard 
of those rights, and the miscalled peace was a state of vindictive 
hostility—will probably think continued war was not the great- 
est of evils. 

I quote again from the “Memoirs” of Sherman, vol. ii, p. 
349. [eferring to the first interview, he writes: 


“JT then told Johnston that he must be convinced that he 
could not oppose my army, and that, since Lee had surrendered, 
he could do the same with honor and propriety. He plainly and 
repeatedly admitted this, and added that any further fighting 
would be ‘murder’ ; but he thought that, instead of surrendering 
piecemeal, we might arrange terms that would embrace all the 
the Confederate armies.” 


Sherman further writes that he told Johnston that the terms 
given to General Lee’s army were most generous and liberal, 
which he states Johnston “admitted, but always recurred to 
the idea of a universal surrender, embracing his own army, that 
of Dick Taylor, in Louisiana and Texas, and of Maury, For- 
rest, and others, in Alabama and Georgia.” Considering the 
character of the authority cited, and the extraordinary propo- 
sition to provide for a universal surrender by a district com- 


.694 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


mander, it may be well supposed to require confirmation. I 
therefore quote from General Richard Taylor, “ Destruction 
and Reconstruction,” page 224: 


“Intelligence of the Johnston-Sherman convention reached 
us, and Canby and I were requested by the officers making it to 
conform to its terms until the civil authorities acted.” 


The advice may have been well enough, but, as there was an 
established channel of communication, and an order of respon- 
sibility necessary for effective codperation in the public service, 
something more than courtesy required that the Executive should | 
have been advised if not consulted. I had left Charlotte with 
no other sure reliance against any cavalry movement of the 
enemy than the force which was with me; that, however, I be- 
lieved to be sufficient for any probable exigency, if the reénforce- 
ments hoped for should not join us on the way. We proceeded 
at easy stages; some of the command thought we went too slow. 
After making two halts of about half a day each, we reached the 
Savannah River. I crossed early in the morning of the 4th of 
May, with a company, which had been detailed as my escort, 
and rode some miles to a farmhouse, where I halted to get 
breakfast and have our horses fed. Here I learned that a regi- 
ment of the enemy were moving upon Washington, Georgia, 
which was one of our depots of supplies, and I sent back a 
courier with a pencil-note addressed to General Vaughn, or the 
officer commanding the advance, requesting him to come on 
and join me immediately. After waiting a considerable time, 
I determined to move on with my escort, trusting that the others 
would overtake us, and that, if not, we should arrive in Wash- 
ington in time to rally the citizens to its defense. When I 
reached there, scouts were’ sent out on the different roads, and 
my conclusion was that we had had a false alarm. The Secre- 
tary of State, Mr. Benjamin, being unaccustomed to traveling 
on horseback, parted from me, at the house where we stopped to 
breakfast, to take another mode of conveyance and a different 
route from that which I was pursuing, with intent to rejoin me 
in the trans-Mississippi Department. At Washington, the Sec- 
retary of the Navy, Mr. Mallory, left me temporarily to attend 


1865] THE TRANSFER OF THE TREASURE. 695 


to the needs of his family. The Secretary of War, Mr. Breckin- 
ridge, had remained with the cavalry at the crossing of the Sa- 
vannah River. During the night after my arrival in Washing- 
ton, he sent in an application for authority to draw from the 
treasure, under the protection of the troops, enough to make to 
them a partial payment. I authorized the acting Secretary of 
the Treasury to meet the requisition by the use of the silver 
coin in the train. When the next day passed without the 
troops coming forward, I sent a note to the Secretary of War, 
showing the impolicy of my longer delay, having there heard 
that General Upton had passed within a few miles of the town 
on his way to Augusta to receive the surrender of the garrison 
and military material at that place, in conformity with orders 
issued by General Johnston. This was my first positive infor- 
mation of his surrender. Not receiving an immediate reply 
to the note addressed to the Secretary of War, General Breck- 
inridge, I spoke to Captain Campbell, of Kentucky, command- 
ing my escort, explained to him the condition of affairs, and 
telling him that his company was not strong enough to fight, 
and too large to pass without observation, asked him to inquire 
if there were ten men who would volunteer to go with me 
without question wherever I should choose. He brought back 
for answer that the whole company volunteered on the terms 
proposed. Gratifying as this manifestation was, I felt it would 
expose them to unnecessary hazard to accept the offer, and told 
him, in any manner he might think best, to form a party of ten 
men. With these, Captain Campbell, Lieutenant Barnwell, of 
South Carolina, Colonels F. R. Lubbock, John Taylor Wood, 
and William Preston Johnston, of my personal staff, I left 
Washington. Secretary Reagan remained for a short time to 
transfer the treasure in his hands, except a few thousand dol- 
lars, and then rejoined me on the road. This transfer of the 
treasure was made to Mr. Semple, a bonded officer of the navy, 
and his assistant, Mr. Tidball, with instructions, as soon as it 
could be safely done, to transport it abroad and deliver it to the 
commercial house which had acted as the financial agent of the 
Confederate Government, and was reported to have incurred 
liabilities on its account. 


696 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


Mr. Reagan overtook me in a few hours, but I saw no more 
of General Breckinridge, and learned subsequently that he was 
following our route, with a view to overtake me, when he heard 
of my capture, and, turning to the east, reached the Florida 
coast unmolested. On the way he met J. Taylor Wood, and, in 
an open boat, they crossed the straits to the West Indies. No 
report reached me at that time, or until long afterward, in re- 
gard to the cavalry command left at the Savannah River; then 
it was to the effect that paroled men from Johnston’s army 
brought news of its surrender, and that the condition of re- 
turning home and remaining unmolested embraced all the men 
of the department who would give their parole, and that this 
had exercised a great influence over the troops, inclining them 
to accept those terms. Had General Johnston obeyed the 
order sent to him from Charlotte, and moved on the route se- 
lected by himself, with all his cavalry, so much of the infantry 
as could be mounted, and the light artillery, he could not have 
been successfully pursued by General Sherman. His force, 
united to that I had assembled at Charlotte, would, it was be- 
lieved, have been sufficient to vanquish any troops which the 
enemy had between us and the Mississippi River. 

Had the cavalry with which I left Charlotte been associated 
with a force large enough to inspire hope for the future, instead 
of being discouraged by the surrender in their rear, it would 
probably have gone on, and, when united with the forces of Mau- 
ry, Forrest, and Taylor, in Alabama and Mississippi, have consti- 
tuted an army large enough to attract stragglers, and revive the 
drooping spirits of the country. In the worst view of the case 
it should have been able to cross the trans-Mississippi Depart- 
ment, and there uniting with the armies of E. K. Smith and 
Magruder to form an army, which in the portion of that coun- 
try abounding in supplies, and deficient in rivers and railroads, 
could have continued the war until our enemy, foiled in the pur- 
pose of subjugation, should, in accordance with his repeated 
declaration, have agreed, on the basis of a return ta the Union, 
to acknowledge the Constitutional rights of the States, and by a 
convention, or guwasi-treaty, to guarantee security of person and 
property. To this hope I persistently clung, and, if our inde- 


1865] TO SUCH LIMITED MEASURE OF SUCCESS. 697 


pendence could not be achieved, so much, at least, I trusted 
might be gained. 

Those who have endured the horrors of “reconstruction,” 
who have, under “carpet-bag rule,” borne insult, robbery, and 
imprisonment without legal warrant, can appreciate the value 
which would have attached to such limited measure of success. 

When I left Washington, Georgia, with the small party 
which has been enumerated, my object was to go to the south 
far enough to pass below the points reported to be occupied by 
Federal troops, and then turn to the west, cross the Chattahoo- 
chie, and then go on to meet the forces still supposed to be in 
the field in Alabama. If, as now seemed probable, there should 
be no prospect of a successful resistance east of the Mississippi, 
I intended then to cross to the trans-Mississippi Department, 
where I believed Generals E. K. Smith and Magruder would 
continue to uphold our cause. That I was not mistaken in the 
character of these men, I extract from the order issued by Gen- 
eral EK. K. Smith to the soldiers of the trans-Mississippi Army 
on the 21st of April, 1865: 


“ Great disasters have overtaken us. The Army of Northern 
Virginia and our General-in-Chief are prisoners of war. With 
you rest the hopes of our nation, and upon you depends the fate 
of our people. . . . Prove to the world that your hearts have not 
failed in the hour of disaster. . . . Stand by your colors—main- 
tain your discipline. The great resources of this department, its 
vast extent, the numbers, the discipline, and the efficiency of the 
army, will secure to our country terms that a proud people can 
with honor accept.” 


General Magruder, with like heroic determination, invoked 
the troops and people of Texas not to despond, and pointed out 
their ability in the interior of that vast State to carry on the 
war indefinitely. 

General D. H. Maury, after his memorable defense of 
Mobile, withdrew his forces on the 12th of April, at the last 
moment, and moved toward Meridian. Commodore Farrand, 
commanding our navy at Mobile Bay, withdrew his armed 
vessels and steamers up the Tombigbee River, and planted tor- 


698 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


pedoes in the Alabama below. Forrest and Maury had about 
eiaht thousand men, but these were veterans, tried in many 
hard engagements, and trained to the highest state of efficiency. 
Before Maury withdrew from Mobile, news had been received 
of Lee’ssurrender. Taylor says the news was soon disseminated 
through his army, but that the men remained steadfast, and 
manifested a determination to maintain the honor of ,our arms 
_to the last. On pages 224 and 225 of his book, he gives an 
account of the intelligence received of the Johnston-Sherman 
convention of the 18th of April, and of the meeting between 
Canby and himself to arrange terms for his army, and an 
agreement that there should be an armistice; but he says, two 
days after that meeting, news was received of Johnston’s sur- 
render, and the capture of President Davis. The latter was 
untrue, and he does not say who communicated it, but that he 
was at the same time notified that the Johnston-Sherman con- 
vention had been disavowed by the United States Government, 
and notice given for the termination of the armistice. Under 
these circumstances he asked General Canby to meet him again, 
and on the 8th of May, two days before I was actually captured, 
but which he supposed had already occurred, he agreed with 
Canby on terms for the surrender of the land and naval forces 
in Mississippi and Alabama. These terms were similar to those 
made between Johnston and Sherman ; the mounted men were 
to retain their horses, being their private property. 

On the 26th of May, the chief of staff of General E. Kirby 
Smith, and the chief of staff of General Canby, at Baton Rouge, 
arranged similar terms for the surrender of the troops in the 
trans-Mississippi Department. On May 11th, after the last army 
east of the Mississippi had surrendered, but before Kirby Smith 
had entered into terms, the enemy sent an expedition from the 
Brazos Santiago against a little Confederate encampment some 
fifteen miles above. The camp was captured and burned, but, 
in the zeal to secure the fruits of victory, they remained so long 
collecting the plunder, that General J. E. Slaughter heard of 
the expedition, moved against it, and drove it back with consid- 
erable loss, sustaining very little injury to his command. This 
was, I believe, the last armed conflict of the war, and, though 


1865] WITH A CONFEDERATE VICTORY. 699 


very small in comparison to its great battles, it deserves notice 
as having closed the long struggle—as it opened—with a Con- 
federate victory. 

The total number of prisoners paroled at Greensboro, North 
Carolina, as reported by General Schofield, was 36,817; in 
Georgia and Florida, as reported by General Wilson, 52,548 ; 
ageregate surrender under the capitulation of Gere i E. 
Johnston, 89,270.* How many of this last number were men 
who left Garerak Johnston’s army to avoid the surrender, or 
were on detached service from the armies of Virginia and 
North Carolina, I have no means of ascertaining. 

The total number in the Department of Alabama and Mis- 
sissippi paroled by General Canby, under agreement with 
General Richard Taylor, of the 8th of May, 1865, as reported, 
was 42,293,+ to which may be added of the navy a small foree— 
less than 150. The number surrendered by General E. Kirby 
Smith, commanding the trans-Mississippi Department, as re- 
ported, was 17,686.¢ To this small dimension had General 
Smith’s army been reduced when he accepted the terms to 
which a reference has already been made. This reduction re- 
sulted from various causes, but it is believed was mainly due to 
the reluctance of a large part of his army to accept a parole, 
preferring to take whatever hazard belonged to absenting them- 
selves without leave and continuing their character of belliger- 
ents. A few, but so far as I know very few, even went to the 
extent of expatriating themselves, and joined Maximilian in 
Mexico. Against no one as much as myself did the hostility 
of our victorious enemy manifest itself, but I was never willing 
to seek the remedy of exile, and always advised those who con- 
sulted me against that resort. The mass of our people could 
not go; the few who were able to do so were most needed to 
sustain the others in the hour of a common adversity. The ex- 
ample of Ireland after the Treaty of Limerick, and of Canada 
after its conquest by Great Britain, were instructive as to the 
duty of the influential men to remain and share the burden of a 
common disaster. 


* “Memoirs of General W. T. Sherman,” vol. ii, p. 370, 
+ “ Annual Cyclopedia,” 1865, p. 77. t¢ Ibid. 


“00 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


With General E. K. Smith’s surrender the Confederate flag no 
longer floated on the land; but one gallant sailor still unfurled 
it on the Pacific. Captain Waddell, commanding the Con- 
federate cruiser Shenandoah, swept the ocean from Austra- 
lia nearly to Behring’s Straits, making many captures in the 
Okhobak Sea and Arctic Ocean. In August, 1865, he learned 
from the captain of a British ship that the Confederacy, as 
an independent Government, had ceased to exist. With the 
fall of his Government his right to cruise was of course ter- 
minated; he therefore sailed for the coast of England, en- 
tered the Mersey, and on November 6, 1865, and in due 
form, surrendered his vessel to the British Government. She 
was accepted and subsequently transferred to the United 
States. 

After leaving Washington in the manner and for the pur- 
pose heretofore described, I overtook a commissary and quarter- 
master’s train, having public papers of value in charge, and, 
finding that they had no experienced woodsman with it, I gave 
them four of the men of my small party, and went on with 
the rest. On the second or third day after leaving Washing- 
ton, I heard that a band of marauders, supposed to be strag- 
glers and deserters from both armies, were in pursuit of my 
family, whom I had not seen since they left Richmond, but of 
whom I heard, at Washington, that they had gone with my pri- 
vate secretary and seven paroled men, who generously offered 
their services as an escort, to the Florida coast. Their route 
was to the east of that I was pursuing, but I immediately 
changed direction and rode rapidly across the country to over- 
take them. About nightfall the horses of my escort gave out, 
but I pressed on with Secretary Reagan and my personal staff. 
It was a bright moonlight night, and just before day, as the 
moon was sinking below the tree-tops, I met a party of men in 
the road, who answered my questions by saying they belonged 
to an Alabama regiment ; that they were coming from a village 
not far off, on their way homeward. Upon inquiry being made, 
they told me they had passed an encampment of wagons, with 
women and children, and asked me if we belonged to that party. 
Upon being answered in the affirmative, they took their leave. 


1865] MY HORSE REMAINED SADDLED. “01 


After a short time I was hailed by a voice which I recognized 
as that of my private secretary, who informed me that the ma- 
rauders had been hanging around the camp, and that he and 
others were on post around it, and were expecting an assault as 
soon as the moon went down. A silly story had got abroad 
that it was a treasure-train, and the auri sacra fames had prob- 
ably instigated these marauders, as it subsequently stimulated 
General J. H. Wilson, to send out a large cavalry force to cap- 
ture the same train. For the protection of my family I traveled 
with them two or three days, when, believing that they had passed 
out of the region of marauders, I determined to leave their en- 
campment at nightfall, to execute my original purpose. My 
horse and those of my party proper were saddled preparatory 
to a start, when one of my staff, who had ridden into the neigh- 
boring village, returned and told me that he had heard that 
a marauding party intended to attack the camp that night. 
This decided me to wait long enough to see whether there was 
any truth in the rumor, which I supposed would be ascertained in 
a few hours. My horse remained saddled and my pistols in the: 
holsters, and I lay down, fully dressed, to rest. Nothing occurred 
to rouse me until just before dawn, when my coachman, a free 
colored man, who faithfully clung to our fortunes, came and told 
me there was firing over the branch, just behind our encampment. 
I stepped out of my wife’s tent and saw some horsemen, whom 
I immediately recognized as cavalry, deploying around the en- 
campment. I turned back and told my wife these were not 
the expected marauders, but regular troopers. She implored 
me to leave her at once. I hesitated, from unwillingness to do 
so, and lost a few precious moments before yielding to her im- 
portunity. My horse and arms were near the road on which I 
expected to leave, and down which the cavalry approached ; it 
was therefore impracticable to reach them. I was compelled to 
start in the opposite direction. As it was quite dark in the 
tent, I picked up what was supposed to be my “raglan,” a 
water-proof, light overcoat, without sleeves ; it was subsequently 
found to be my wife’s, so very like my own as to be mistaken 
‘for it; as I started, my wife thoughtfully threw over my head 
and shoulders a shawl. I had gone perhaps fifteen or twenty 


402 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


yards when a trooper galloped up and ordered me to halt and 
surrender, to which I gave a defiant answer, and, dropping the 
shawl and raglan from my shoulders, advanced toward him; he 
leveled his carbine at me, but I expected, if he fired, he would 
miss me, and my intention was in that event to put my hand 
under his foot, tumble him off on the other side, spring into 
his saddle, and attempt to escape. My wife, who had been 
watching, when she saw the soldier aim his carbine at me, ran 
forward and threw her arms around me. Success depended on 
instantaneous action, and, recognizing that the opportunity had 
been lost, I turned back, and, the morning being damp and chilly, 
passed on to a fire beyond the tent. Our pursuers had taken dif- 
ferent roads, and approached our camp from opposite directions ; 
they encountered each other and commenced firing, both sup- 
posing they had met our armed escort, and some casualties re- 
sulted from their conflict with an imaginary body of Confederate 
troops. During the confusion, while attention was concentrated 
upon myself, except by those who were engaged in pillage, one 
of my aides, Colonel J. Taylor Wood, with Lieutenant Barn- 
well, qpariced off unobserved. His daring exploits on the sea 
had thatle him, on the part of the Federal Government, an ob- 
ject of special hostility, and rendered it quite proper that he 
should avail himself of every possible means of escape. Colo- 
nel Pritchard went over to their battle-field, and I did not see 
him for a long time, surely more than an hour after my cap- 
ture. He subsequently claimed credit, in a conversation with 
me, for the forbearance shown by his men in not shooting me 
when I refused to surrender. 

Wilson and others have uttered many falsehoods in regard 
to my capture, which have been exposed in publications by 
persons there present—by Secretary Reagan, by the members 
of my personal staff, and by the colored coachman, Jim Jones, 
which must have been convincing to all who were not given 
over to believe a lie. For this reason I will postpone, to some 
other time and more appropriate place, any further notice of 
the story and its variations, all the spawn of a malignity that 
shames the civilization of the age. We were, when prisoners, 
subjected to petty pillage, as described in the publications re- 


‘ 


1865] PRESENTED ARMS. 7038 


ferred to, and in others; and to annoyances such as military 
gentlemen never commit or permit. 

On our way to Macon we received the proclamation of 
President Andrew Johnson offering a reward for my apprehen- 
sion as an accomplice in the assassination of the late President 
A. Lincoln. Some troops by the wayside had the proclama- 
tion, which was displayed with vociferous demonstrations of ex- 
ultation over my capture. When we arrived at Macon I was 
conducted to the hotel where General Wilson had his quarters. 
A strong guard was in front of the entrance, and, when I got 
down to pass in, it opened ranks, facing inward, and presented 
arms. 

A commodious room was assigned to myself and family. 
After awhile the steward of the hotel called and inquired 
whether I would dine with General Wilson or have dinner 
served with myself and family in my room. I chose the 
latter. After dinner I received a message from General Wil- 
son, asking whether he should wait upon me, or whether I would 
call upon him. J rose and accompanied the messenger to Gen- 
eral Wilson’s presence. We had met at West Point when he 
was a cadet, and I a commissioner sent by the Congress to in- 
quire into the affairs of the Academy. After some conversation 
in regard to former times and our common acquaintance, he 
referred to the proclamation offering a reward for my capture. 
Taking it for granted that any significant remark of mine would 
be reported to his Government, and fearing that I might never 
have another opportunity to give my opinion to A. Johnson, I 
told him there was one man in the United States who knew that 
proclamation to befalse. He remarked that my expression indi- 
cated a particular person. I answered that I did, and the person 
was the one who signed it, for he at least knew that I preferred 
Lincoln to himself. Some other conversation then occurred in 
regard to the route on which we were to be carried. Having 
several small children, one of them an infant, I expressed a 
preference for the easier route by water, supposing then, as he 
seemed to do, that I was to go to Washington City. He mani- 
fested a courteous, obliging temper, and, either by the authority 
with which he was invested or by obtaining it from a higher 


"04 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


power, my preference as to the route was accorded. I told him 
that some of the men with me were on parole, and that they all 
were riding their own horses—private property—that I would 
be glad they should be permitted to retain them, and I have a 
distinct recollection that he promised me it should be done ; 
but I have since learned that they were all deprived of their 
horses, and some who were on parole, viz., Major Moran, Cap- 
tain Moody, Lieutenant Hathaway, Midshipman Howell, and 
Private Messee, who had not violated their obligations of parole, 
but had been captured because they were found voluntarily 
traveling with my family to protect them from marauders, 
were sent with me as prisoners of war, and all incarcerated, in 
disregard of the protection promised when they surrendered. 
At Augusta we were put on a steamer, and there met Vice- 
President Stephens; Hon. C. C. Clay, who had voluntarily sur- 
rendered himself upon learning that he was included in the 
proclamation for the arrest of certain persons charged with 
complicity in the assassination of Mr. Lincoln; General Wheel- 
er, the distinguished cavalry officer, and his adjutant, General 
Ralls. My private secretary, Burton N. Harrison, had refused 
to be left behind, and, though they would not allow him to go 
in the carriage with me, he was resolved to follow my for- 
tunes, as well from sentiment as the hope of being useful. 
His fidelity was rewarded by a long and rigorous imprison- 
ment. At Port Royal we were transferred to a sea-going 
vessel, which, instead of being sent to Washington City, was 
brought to anchor at Hampton Roads. One by one all my com- 
panions in misfortune were sent away, we knew not whither, 
leaving on the vessel only Mr. Clay and his wife and myself 
and family. After some days’ detention, Clay and myself were 
removed to Fortress Monroe, and there incarcerated in separate 
cells. Not knowing that the Government was at war with 
women and children, I asked that my family might be permitted 
to leave the ship aoe go to Richmond or Wiasteteton City, or 
to some place where they had acquaintances, but this was refused. 
I then requested that they might be permitted to go abroad on 
one of the vessels lying at the Roads. This was also denied ; 
finally, I was informed that they must return to Savannah on 


1865] THIS ALSO WAS REFUSED. 405 


the vessel by which we came. This was an old transport-ship, 
hardly seaworthy. My last attempt was to get for them the 
privilege of stopping at Charleston, where they had many per- 
sonal friends. This also was refused—why, I did not then know, 
have not learned since, and am unwilling to make a supposition, 
as none could satisfactorily account for such an act of inhuman- 
ity. My daily experience as a prisoner shed no softer light on 
the transaction, but only served to intensify my extreme solici- 
tude. Bitter tears have been shed by the gentle, and stern 
reproaches have been made by the magnanimous, on account of 
the needless torture to which I was subjected, and the heavy 
fetters riveted upon me, while in a stone casemate and sur- 
rounded by a strong guard ; but all these were less excruciating 
than the mental agony my captors were able to inflict. It was 
long before I was permitted to hear from my wife and children, 
and this, and things like this, was the power which education 
added to savage cruelty ; but I do not propose now and here to 
enter upon the story of my imprisonment, or more than merely 
to refer to other matters which concerns me personally, as dis- 
tinct from my connection with the Confederacy. 


CHAPTER LV. 


Number of the Enemy’s Forces in the War.—Number of the Enemy’s Troops from 
Maryland, Kentucky, Missouri, and Tennessee.—Cruel Conduct of the War. 
—Statements in 1862.—Statements in 1863.—Emancipation Proclamation.— 
Statements in 1864,—General Hunter’s Proceedings near Lynchburg.—Cruel- 
ties in Sherman’s March through South Carolina. 


On April 25th, at Raleigh, North Carolina, General J. E. 
Johnston capitulated to General Sherman, as has been stated, 
and his army was disbanded. On May 4th General R. Taylor 
capitulated with the last of our forces east. 

The number of men brought into the field by the Govern- 
ment of the United States during the war, according to the 
official returns in the Adjutant-General’s office, Washington, 
was 2,678,967. In addition to these, 86,724 paid a commutation. 

92 


706 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The rapidity with which calls for men were made by that 
Government during the last eighteen months of the war, and 


the number brought into the field, were as follows: 
Men furnished. 
Calls of October 17, 1863, and February 1, 1864, for 500,000 


men for three years....... SOAP So MAIO re HOE 317,092 
Call of March 14, 1864, for 200,000 men for three years ..... 259,515 
Militia for one hundred days, April to July, 1864............ 83,612 
Call of July 18, 1864, for 500,000 men........... 20000. eee 885,163* 
Call of December 19, 1864, for 300,000 men..............26. 211,752 

Total men furnished in eighteen months............ 1,257,184 


The number of men furnished on call of the United States 
Government, previous to October 17, 1863, was as follows: 
Men furnished. 


Call of April 15, 1861, for 75,000 men for.three months...... 91,816 
Call of May 3, 1861, for 500,000 men......... paren rec tcnth & 700,680 
Men furnished in May and June, 1862, for three Saonehe Litas @ 15,007 
Call of July 2, 1862, for 300,000 men for three years........ 421,465 
Call of August 4, 1862, for 300,000 militia for nine months... 87,588 
Proclamation of June 15, 1863, for militia for six months.... 16,361 

Volunteers and militia at various times, of sixty days to one : 
POAT 1 bd )a:st wee ee eee soles Secede Ata eee see ah able erate eine te 13,760 
Volunteers and militia at various times for three years....... 75,156 
Potalilee her ss .. eee ee 1,421,833 


The number of men furnished to the armies of the United 
States by the States of Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, and Ten- 
nessee, was as follows: 


States. Men furnished. 
Reentucl vit. cine iactratera ete aves 75,760 equal to 70,832 three years’ men. 
Maryland... a: gusta como 46,638 3 41,275 “ = 2 
MISSOUTT cue erence oer ss 86,5380 “ : ee 
Tennessee s, eienre dec ve mink 31,092 « 26,3894 “ me st: 
Total. sores ne 262,601 225,031 


The public debt of the Government of the United States on 
July 1, 1861, and on July 1, 1865 was as follows: 


Debt, July ty IS6kla ts wrdd.acteal dtedGetaeeee $90,867,828 68 
6 Sul, TRGB. aris ough a eae ee 2,682,598,026 53 
Therease in fourvyears.iy. diss) b ie elele «01g alc $2,591,725,197 85 


* Reduced by excess on previous calls. 


1865] A MORE CORRECT REPRESEN‘ATION. 407 


Of the manner in which our adversaries conducted the war 
I had frequent occasion to remark. Those observations made 
at the time present a more correct representation of facts than 
could be given in more recent statements. In a message to 
Congress on August 15, 1862, I said: 


“The perfidy which disregarded rights secured by compact, 
the madness which trampled on obligations made sacred. by. every 
consideration of honor, have been intensified by the malignancy 
engendered by defeat. These passions have changed the charac- 
ter of the hostilities waged by our enemies, who are becoming 
daily less regardful of the usages of civilized war and the dictates 
of humanity. Rapine and wanton destruction of private property, 
war upon non-combatants, murder of captives, bloody threats to 
avenge the death of an invading soldiery by the slaughter of un- 
armed citizens, orders of banishment against peaceful farmers 
engaged in the cultivation of the soil, are some of the means used 
by our ruthless invaders to enforce the submission of a free 
people to a foreign sway. Confiscation bills, of a character so 
atrocious as to insure, if executed, the utter ruin of the entire 
population of these States, are passed by their Congress and ap- 
proved by their Executive. The moneyed obligations of the Con- 
federate Government are counterfeited by citizens of the United 
States, and publicly advertised for sale in their cities, with a 
notoriety that sufficiently attests the knowledge of their Govern- 
ment ; and the soldiers of the invading armies are found supplied 
with large quantities of these forged notes as a means of despoiling 
the country people by fraud out of such portions of their property 
as armed violence may fail to reach. ‘Two at least of the generals 
of the United States are engaged, unchecked by their Government, 
in exciting servile insurrection, and in arming and training slaves 
for warfare against their masters, citizens of the Confederacy.” 


Again, in January, 1863, I said, with regard to the conduct 
of the war by our adversaries : 


“Tt is my painful duty again to inform you of the renewed 
examples of every conceivable atrocity committed by the armed 
forces of the United States at different points within the Confeder- 
acy, and which must stamp indelible infamy, not only on the per- 
petrators, but on their superiors, who, having the power to check 


408 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


these outrages on humanity, numerous and well authenticated as 
they have been, have not yet ina single instance, of which I am 
aware, inflicted punishment on the wrong-doers. Since my last 
communication to you, one General McNeil murdered seven pris- 
oners of war in cold blood, and the demand for his punishment 
has remained unsatisfied. The Government of the United States, 
after promising examination and explanation in relation to the 
charges made against General B. F, Butler, has, by its subsequent 
silence, after repeated efforts on my part to obtain some answer 
on the subject, not only admitted his guilt, but sanctioned it by 
acquiescence. . . . Recently I have received apparently authentic 
intelligence of another general by the name of Milroy, who has 
issued orders in West Virginia for the payment of money to him 
by the inhabitants, accompanied by the most savage threats of 
shooting every recusant, besides burning his house, and threaten- 
ing similar atrocities against any of our citizens who shall fail to 
betray their country by giving him prompt notice of the approach 
of any of our forces. And this subject has also been submitted 
to the superior military authorities of the United States, with but 
faint hope that they will evince any disapprobation of the act. 

“ A proclamation, dated on January 1, 1863, signed and issued 
by the President of the United States, orders and declares all 
slaves within ten of the States of the Confederacy to be free, except 
such as are found in certain districts now occupied in part by the 
armed forces of the enemy. We may well leave it to the instinct 
of that common humanity, which a beneficent Creator has implant- 
ed in the breasts of our fellow-men of all countries, to pass judg- 
ment on a measure by which several millions of human beings of 
an inferior race—peaceful, contented laborers in their sphere—are 
doomed to extermination, while at the same time they are encour- 
aged to a general assassination of their masters by the insidious 
recommendation ‘to abstain from violence, unless in necessary self- 
defense,’ ” 


The war, which in its inception was waged for forcing us 
back into the Union, having failed to accomplish that purpose, 
passed into a second stage, in which it was attempted to con- 
quer and rule our States as dependent provinces. Defeated in 
this design, our enemies entered upon another, which could 
have no other purpose than revenge and plunder of private 


1865] THE CONSTANTLY RECURRING ATROCITIES. 709 


property. In May, 1864, it was still characterized by the bar- 
barism with which it had been previously conducted. Aged 
men, helpless women and children appealed in vain to the hu- 
manity which should be inspired by their condition, for immu- 
nity from arrest, incarceration, or banishment from their homes. 
Plunder and devastation of the property of non-combatants, de- 
struction of private dwellings, and even of edifices devoted to 
the worship of God, expeditions organized for the sole purpose 
of sacking cities, consigning them to the flames, killing the un- 
armed inhabitants, and inflicting horrible outrages on women 
and children, were some of the constantly recurring atrocities 
of the invader. 

On June 19, 1864, Major-General Hunter began his retreat 
from before Lynchburg down the Shenandoah Valley. Lieu- 
tenant-General Early, who followed in pursuit, thus describes 
the destruction he witnessed along the route: 


‘Houses had been burned, and helpless women and children 
left without shelter. The country had been stripped of provisions, 
and many families left without a morsel to eat. Furniture and 
bedding had been cut to pieces, and old men and women and chil- 
dren robbed of all the clothing they had, except that on their 
backs. Ladies’ trunks had been rifled, and their dresses torn to 
pieces in mere wantonness. Even the negro girls had lost their 
little finery. At Lexington he had burned the Military Institute 
with all its contents, including its library and scientific apparatus. 
Washington College had been plundered, and the statue of Wash- 
ington stolen. The residence of ex-Governor Letcher at that place 
had been burned by orders, and but a few minutes given Mrs. Letch- 
er and her family to leave the house. In the county a most ex- 
cellent Christian gentleman, a Mr. Creigh, had been hung, because, 
on a former occasion, he had killed a straggling and marauding 
Federal soldier while in the act of insulting and outraging the 
ladies of his family.” * 

A letter dated Charleston, September 14, 1865, written by 
Rey. Dr. John Bachman, then pastor of the Lutheran Church 
in that city, presents many facts respecting the devastation and 
robberies by the enemy in South Carolina. So much as relates 


* “Memoir of the Last Year of the War,” by Lieutenant-General Harly. 


710 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


to the march of Sherman’s army through parts of the State is 
here presented : 


“When Sherman’s army came sweeping through Carolina, leav- 
ing a broad track of desolation for hundreds of miles, whose steps 
were accompanied with fire, and sword, and blood, reminding us 
of the tender mercies of the Duke of Alva, I happened to be at 
Cash’s Depot, six miles from Cheraw. The owner was a widow, 
Mrs. Ellerbe, seventy-one years of age. Her son, Colonel Cash, 
was absent. I witnessed the barbarities inflicted on the aged, the 
widow, and young and delicate females. Officers, high in com- 
mand, were engaged tearing from the ladies their watches, their 
ear and wedding rings, the daguerreotypes of those they loved and 
cherished. A lady of delicacy and refinement, a personal friend, 
was compelled to strip before them, that they might find concealed 
watches and other valuables under her dress. A system of torture 
was practiced toward the weak, unarmed, and defenseless, which, 
as far as I know and believe, was universal throughout the whole 
course of that invading army. Before they arrived at a plan- 
tation, they inquired the names of the most faithful and trust- 
worthy family servants; these were immediately seized, pistols 
were presented at their heads ; with the most terrific curses, they 
were threatened to be shot if they did not assist them in finding 
buried treasures. If this did not succeed, they were tied up and 
cruelly beaten. Several poor creatures died under the infliction. 
The last resort was that of hanging, and the officers and men of 
the triumphant army of General Sherman were engaged in erect- 
ing gallows and hanging up these faithful and devoted servants. 
They were strung up until life was nearly extinct, when they were 
let down, suffered to rest awhile, then threatened and hung up 
again. It is not surprising that some should have been left hang- 
ing so long that they were taken down dead. Coolly and deliber- 
ately these hardened men proceeded on their way, as if they had 
perpetrated no crime, and as if the God of heaven would not pur- 
sue them with his vengeance. But it was not alone the poor 
blacks (to whom they professed to come as liberators) that were 
thus subjected to torture and death. Gentlemen of high charac- 
ter, pure and honorable and gray-headed, unconnected with the 
military, were dragged from their fields or their beds, and sub- 
jected to this process of threats, beating, and hanging. Along the 


1865] CAME THE SECOND PARTY. "11 


whole track of Sherman’s army, traces remain of the cruelty and 
inhumanity practiced on the aged and the defenseless. Some of 
those who were hung up died under the rope, while their cruel 
murderers have not only been left unreproached and unhung, but 
have been hailed as heroes and patriots. The list of those martyrs 
whom the cupidity of the officers and men of Sherman’s army sacri- 
ficed to their thirst for gold and silver, is large and most revolting. 
If the editors of this paper will give their consent to publish it, I 
will give it in full, attested by the names of the purest and best 
men and women of our Southern land. 

“TI, who have been a witness to these acts of barbarity that are 
revolting to every feeling of humanity and mercy, was doomed to 
feel in my own person the effects of the avarice, cruelty, and des- 
potism which characterized the men of that army. I was the only 
male guardian of the refined and delicate females who had fled 
there for shelter and protection. I soon ascertained the plan that 
was adopted in this wholesale system of plunder, insult, blasphemy, 
and brutality. The first party that came was headed by officers, 
from a colonel to a lieutenant, who acted with seeming politeness, 
and told me that they only came to secure our firearms, and when 
these were delivered up nothing in the house should be touched. 
Out of the house, they said, they were authorized to press forage 
for their large army. I told them that along the whole line of the 
march of Sherman’s army, from Columbia to Cheraw, it had been 
ascertained that ladies had been robbed-and personally insulted. 
I asked for a guard to protect the females. They said that there 
was no necessity for this, as the men dare not act contrary to or- 
ders. If any did not treat the ladies with proper respect, I might 
blow their brains out. ‘But,’ said I, ‘you have taken away our 
arms, and we are defenseless.’ They did not blush much, and 
made no reply. Shortly after this came the second party, before 
the first had left. They demanded the keys of the ladies’ drawers, 
took away such articles as they wanted, then locked the drawers 
and put the keys in their pockets. In the mean time, they gathered 
up the spoons, knives, forks, towels, table-cloths, etc. As they 
were carrying them off, I appealed to the officers of the first party ; 
they ordered the men to put back the things; the officer of the 
second party said he would see them d d first ; and, without 
further ado, packed them up, and they glanced at each other and 
smiled. The elegant carriage and all the vehicles on the premises 


412 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


were seized and filled with bacon and other plunder. The smoke- 
houses were emptied of their contents and carried off. Every 
head of poultry was seized and flung over their mules, and they 
presented the hideous picture in some of the scenes in ‘Forty 
Thieves.’ Every article of harness they did not wish was cut in 
pieces. 

“By this time the first and second parties had left, and a third 
appeared on the field. They demanded the keys of the drawers, 
and, on being informed that they had been carried off, coolly and 
deliberately proceeded to break open the locks, took what they 
wanted, and when we uttered words of complaint were cursed. 
Every horse, mule, and carriage, even to the carts, was taken 
away, and, for hundreds of miles, the last animal that cultivated 
the widow’s corn-field, and the vehicles that once bore them to the 
house of worship, were carried off or broken into pieces and 
burned. 

“The first party that came promised to leave ten days’ provi- 
sions, the rest they carried off. An hour afterward, other hordes 
of marauders from the same army came and demanded the last 
pound of bacon and the last quart of meal. On Sunday, the ne- 
groes were dressed in their best suits. They were kicked, and 
knocked down and robbed of all their clothing, and they came to 
us in their shirt-sleeves, having lost their hats, clothes, and shoes. 
Most of our own clothes had been hid in the woods. The negroes 
who had assisted in removing them were beaten and threatened 
with death, and compelled to show them where they were con- 
cealed. They cut open the trunks, threw my manuscripts and 
devotional books into a mud-hole, stole the ladies’ jewelry, hair 
ornaments, ete., tore many garments into tatters, or gave the rest to 
the negro women to bribe them into criminal intercourse, These 
women afterward returned to us those articles that, after the mu- 
tilations, were scarcely worth preserving. The plantation, of one 
hundred and sixty negroes, was some distance from the house, and 
to this place successive parties of fifty at a time resorted for three 
long days and nights, the husbands and fathers being fired at and 
compelled to fly to the woods. 

‘““Now commenced scenes of licentiousness, brutality, and ray- 
ishment that have scarcely had an equal in the ages of heathen 
barbarity. I conversed with aged men and women, who were 
witnesses of these infamous acts of Sherman’s unbridled soldiery, 


1865] WERE BURNED TO THE GROUND. 413 


and several of them, from the cruel treatment they had received, 
were confined to their beds for weeks afterward. The time will 
come when the judgment of Heaven will await these libidinous, 
beastly barbarians. During this time, the fourth party, whom, I 
was informed by others, we had the most reason to dread, had 
made their appearance. They came, as they said, in the name of 
the great General Sherman, who was next to God Almighty. They 
came to burn and lay in ashes all that was left. They had burned 
bridges and depots, cotton-gins, mills, barns, and stables. They 
swore they would make the d d rebel women pound their corn 
with rocks, and eat their raw meal without cooking. They suc- 
ceeded in thousands of instances. I walked out at night, and the 
innumerable fires that were burning as far as the eye could reach, 
in hundreds of places, illuminated the whole heavens, and testified 
to the vindictive barbarity of the foe. I presume they had orders 
not to burn occupied houses, but they strove all in their power to 
compel families to fly from their houses that they might after- 
ward burn them. The neighborhood was filled with refugees who 
had been compelled to fly from their plantations on the seaboard. 
As soon as they had fled, the torch was applied, and, for hundreds 
of miles, those elegant mansions, once the ornament and pride of 
our inland country, were burned to the ground. 

“ All manner of expedients were now adopted to make the resi- 
dents leave their homes for the second time. I heard them say- 
ing, ‘ This is too large a house to be left standing, we must con- 
trive to burn it.’ Canisters of powder were placed all around the 
house, and an expedient resorted to that promised almost certain 
success. The house was to be burned down by firing the out- 
buildings. These were so near each other that the firing of the 
one would lead to the destruction of all. I had already succeeded 
in having a few bales of cotton rolled out of the building, and 
hoped, if they had to be burned, the rest would also be rolled out, 
which could have been done in ten minutes by several hundred 
men who were looking on, gloating over the prospect of another 
elegant mansion in South Carolina being left in ashes. The torch 
was applied, and soon the large storehouse was on fire, This com- 
municated to several other buildings in the vicinity, which, one 
by one, were burned to the ground. At length the fire reached 
the smoke-house, where they had already carried off the bacon of 
two hundred and fifty hogs. This was burned, and the fire was 


"14 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


now rapidly approaching the kitchen, which was so near the 
dwelling-house that, should the former burn, the destruction of 
the large and noble edifice would be inevitable. 

«A captain of the United States service, a native of England, 
whose name I would like to mention here, if I did not fear to 
bring down upon him the censure of the abolitionists as a friend to 
the rebels, mounted the roof, and the wet blankets we sent up to 
him prevented the now smoking roof from bursting into flames. 
I called for help to assist us in procuring water from a deep well ; 
a young lieutenant stepped up, condemned the infamous conduct 
of the burners, and called on his company for aid ; a portion of 
them came cheerfully to our assistance ; the wind seemed almost 
by a miracle to subside ; the house was saved, and the trembling 
females thanked God for their deliverance. All this time, about 
one hundred mounted men were looking on, refusing to raise a 
hand to help us ; laughing at the idea that no efforts of ours could 
save the house from the flames. 

“My trials, however, were not yet over. I had already suf- 
fered much in a pecuniary point of. view. I had been collecting a 
library on natural history during a long life. The most valuable 
of these books had been presented by various societies in England, 
France, Germany, Russia, etc., who had honored me with mem- 
bership, and they or the authors presented me with these works, 
which had never been for sale, and could not be purchased. My 
herbarium, the labor of myself and the ladies of my house for 
many years, was also among these books. I had left them asa 
legacy to the library of the Newbury College, and concluded to 
send them at once. They were detained in Columbia, and there 
the torch was applied, and all were burned. The stealing and 
burning of books appear to be one of the programmes on which 
the army acted. I had assisted in laying the foundation and dedi- 
cating the Lutheran Church at Columbia, and. there, near its walls, 
had recently been laid the remains of one who was dearer to me 
than life itself. To set that brick church on fire from below was 
impossible. The building stood by itself on a square but little 
built up. One of Sherman’s burners was sent up to the roof. 
He was seen applying the torch to the cupola. The church was 
burned to the ground, and the grave of my loved one desecrated. 
The story circulated, that the citizens had set their own city on 
fire, is utterly untrue, and only reflects dishonor on those who 


1865] ASKED ME WHERE THE SILVER WAS. 415 


vilely perpetrated it. General Sherman had his army under con- 
trol. The burning was by his orders, and ceased when he gave 
the command. 

“T was now doomed to experience in person the effects of ava- 
rice and barbarous cruelty. The robbers had been informed in 
the neighborhood that the family which I was protecting had 
buried one hundred thousand dollars in gold and silver. They 
first demanded my watch, which I had effectually secured from 
their grasp. They then asked me where the money had been hid. 
I told them I knew nothing about it, and did not believe there 
was a thousand dollars worth in all, and what there was had been 
carried off by the owner, Colonel Cash. All this was literally 
true. They then concluded to try an experiment on me which 
had proved so successful in hundreds of other instances. Coolly 
and deliberately they prepared to inflict torture on a defenseless, 
gray-headed old man. They carried me behind a stable, and once 
again demanded where the money was buried, or ‘I should be sent 
to hell in five minutes.’ They cocked their pistols and held them 
to my head. I told them to fire away. One of them, a square- 
built, broad-faced, large-mouthed, clumsy lieutenant, who had the 
face of a demon, and who did not utter five words without an 
awful blasphemy, now kicked me in the stomach until I fell 
breathless and prostrate. As soon as I was able, I rose again. 
He once more asked me where the silver was. I answered as be- 
fore, ‘I do not know.’ With his heavy, elephant foot he now 
kicked me on my back until I fell again. Once more I arose, and 
he put the same question to me. I was nearly breathless, but an- 
swered as before. Thus was I either kicked or knocked down 
seven or eight times. I then told him it was perfectly useless for 
him to continue his threats or his blows. He might shoot me if 
he chose. I was ready and would not budge an inch, but re- 
quested him not to bruise and batter an unarmed, defenseless old 
man. ‘Now,’ said he, ‘I'll try anew plan. How would you like 
to have both your arms cut off?’ He did not wait for an answer, 
but, with his heavy sheathed sword, struck me on my left arm, 
near the shoulder. I heard it crack; it hung powerless by my 
side, and I supposed it was broken. He then repeated the blow 
on the other arm. The pain was most excruciating, and it was 
several days before I could carve my food or take my arm out of 
a sling, and it was black and blue for weeks. (I refer to Dr. Kol- 


716 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


lock, of Cheraw.) .At that moment the ladies, headed by my 
daughter, who had only then been made aware of the brutality 
practiced upon me, rushed from the house, and came flying to my 
rescue. ‘You dare not murder my father,’ said my child; ‘he 
has been a minister in the same church for fifty years, and God 
has always protected, and will protect him.’ ‘Do you believe in 
a God, miss?’ said one of the brutal wretches ; ‘I don’t believe 
in a God, a heaven, nor a hell.’ ‘Carry me,’ said I, ‘to your Gen- 
eral.’ I did not intend to go to General Sherman, who was at 
Cheraw, from whom, I was informed, no redress could be obtained, 
but to a general in the neighborhood, said to be a religious man. 
Our horses and carriages had all been taken away, and I was too 
much bruised to be able to walk, The other young officers came 
crowding around me very officiously, telling me that they would 
represent the case to the General, and that they would have him 
shot by ten o’clock the next morning. I saw the winks and glances 
that were interchanged between them. Every one gave a differ- 
ent name to the officers. The brute remained unpunished, as I 
saw him on the following morning, as insolent and as profane as 
he had been on the preceding day. 

“ As yet, no punishment had fallen on the brutal hyena, and I 
strove to nurse my bruised body and heal my wounds, and forget 
the insults and injuries of the past. A few weeks after this I was 
sent for to perform a parochial duty at Mars Bluff, some twenty 
miles distant. Arriving at Florence in the vicinity, I was met by 
a crowd of young men connected with the militia. They were 
excited to the highest pitch of rage, and thirsted for revenge, 
They believed that among the prisoners that had just arrived on 
the railroad-car, on their way to Sumter, were the very men who 
committed such horrible outrages in the neighborhood. Many of 
their houses had been laid in ashes. They had been robbed of 
every means of support. Their horses had been seized ; their cat- 
tle and hogs bayoneted ; their mothers and sisters had been in- 
sulted, and robbed of their watches, ear and wedding rings. Some 
of their parents had been murdered in cold blood, The aged pas- 
tor, to whose voice they had so often listened, had been kicked 
and knocked down by repeated blows, and his hoary head had 
been dragged about in the sand. They entreated me to examine 
the prisoners and see whether I could identify the men that had 
inflicted such barbarities on me. I told them I would do so, pro- 


1865] SHOW US THE MEN. lee 


vided they would remain where they were and not follow me, 
The prisoners saw me at a distance, held down their guilty heads, 
and trembled like aspen-leaves. All cruel men are cowards. One 
of my arms was stillinasling. With the other I raised some of 
their hats. They all begged for mercy. I said to them, ‘The 
other day you were tigers—you are sheep now.’ But a hideous 
object soon arrested my attention. There sat my brutal enemy— 
the vulgar, swaggering lieutenant, who had ridden up to the steps 
of the house, insulted the ladies, and beaten me most unmercifully. 
I approached him slowly, and, in a whisper asked him: ‘Do you 
know me, sir? —the old man whose pockets you first searched, to 
see whether he might not have a penknife to defend himself, and 
then kicked and knocked him down with your fist and heavy scab- 
bard?” He presented the picture of an arrant coward, and in a 
trembling voice implored me to have mercy: ‘Don’t let me be 
shot ; have pity! Old man, beg forme! I won’t do it again! 
For God’s sake, save me! O God, help me!’ ‘Did you not 
tell my daughter there was no God? Why call on him now?’ 
©Oh, I have changed my mind ; I believe in a God now.’ I turned 
and saw the impatient, flushed, and indignant crowd approaching. 
‘What are they going to do with me?’ said he. ‘Do you hear 
that sound—click, click?’ ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘they are cocking their 
pistols.’ ‘True, said I; ‘and if I raise a finger you will have a 
dozen bullets through your brain.’ “Then I will go to hell; don’t 
let them kill me. O Lord, have merey!’ ‘Speak low,’ said I, 
‘and don’t open your lips.’ The men advanced. Already one 
had pulled me by the coat. ‘Show us the men.’ I gave no clew 
by which the guilty could be identified. I walked slowly through 
the car, sprang into the waiting carriage, and drove off,” 


718 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CH Ab treet Vek. 


Final Subjugation of the Confederate States.—Result of the Contest.—A Simple 
Process of Restoration.—Rejected by the United States Government.—A Forced 
Union.—The President’s Proclamation examined.—The guarantee, not to destroy. 
—Provisional Governors.—Their Duties.—Voters.—First Movement made in 
Virginia.—Government sct up.—Proceedings.—Action of So-called Legislature. 
—Constitutional Amendment.—Case of Dr. Watson.—Civil Rights Bill—Storm 
brewing.—Congress refuses to admit Senators and Representatives to Seats.— 
Committee on “ Reconstruction.”—Freedmen’s Bureau.—Report of Committee. 
—Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution.—Extent of Ratification —An- 
other Step taken by Congress,—Military Commanders appointed over Confed- 
erate States, with Unlimited Powers.—Reconstruction by the Bayonet.—Course 
of Proceedings required.—Two Governments for each State-—Major-Generals 
appointed.—Further Acts of Congress.—Proceedings commenced by the Major- 
General at Richmond.—Civil Governor appointed.—Military Districts and Sub- 
districts.—Registration.—So-called State Convention.—So-called Legislature.— 
Its Action.—Measures required by Congress for the Enfranchisement of Negroes 
adopted by the So-called Legislature.—Assertion of Senator Garrett Davis.— 
State represented in Congress. 


Wuewn the Confederate soldiers laid down their arms and 
went home, all hostilities against the power of the Government 
of the United States ceased. The powers delegated in the com- 
pact of 1787 by these States, i. e., by the people thereof, to a 
central organization to promote their general welfare, had been 
used for their devastation and subjugation. It was conceded, as 
the result of the contest, that the United States Government 
was stronger in resources than the Confederate Government, 
and that the Confederate States had not achieved their indepen- 
dence. 

Nothing remained to be done but for the sovereigns, the 
people of each State, to assert their authority and restore order. 
If the principle of the sovereignty of the people, the corner- 
stone of all our institutions, had survived and was still in force, 
it was necessary only that the people of each State should re- 
consider their ordinances of secession, and again recognize the 
Constitution of the United States as the supreme law of the 
land. This simple process would have placed the Union on its 
original basis, and have restored that which had ceased to exist, 
the Union by consent. Unfortunately, such was not the inten- 


1865] THE FIRST STEP. "19 


tion of the conqueror. The Union of free-wills and brotherly 
hearts, under a compact ordained by the people, was not his 
object. Henceforth there was to be established a Union of 
force. Sovereignty was to pass from the people to the Govern- 
ment of the United States, and to be upheld by those who had 
furnished the money and the soldiers for the war. 

The first step required, therefore, in the process for the re- 
construction of the new and forced Union, was to prepare those 
_who had been the late champions of the sovereignty of the 
people to become suitable subjects under the new sovereign. 
Standing defenseless, stripped of their property, and exposed, 
as it was asserted, to the penalties of insurrection on the one 
hand, and that of treason on the other, the President of the 
United States, Mr. Andrew Johnson, who, as Vice-President, 
became President after the death of Mr. Lincoln, on May 29, 
1865, thus addressed them: 


“To the end, therefore, that the authority of the Government 
of the United States may be restored, and that peace, order, and 
freedom may be reéstablished, I, Andrew Johnson, President of 
the United States, do proclaim and declare that I hereby grant to 
all persons who have directly or indirectly participated in the ex- 
isting rebellion, except as hereinafter excepted, amnesty and par- 
don, with restoration of all rights of property, except as to slaves, 
and except in cases where legal proceedings under the laws of the 
United States providing for the confiscation of property of per- 
sons engaged in the rebellion have been instituted ; but on the 
condition, nevertheless, that every such person shall take and sub- 
scribe the following oath or affirmation, and thenceforward keep 
and maintain said oath inviolate ; and which oath shall be regis- 
tered for permanent preservation, and shall be of the tenor and 
effect following, to wit : 

a , do solemnly swear, or affirm, in presence of Al- 
mighty God, that I will henceforth faithfully support and defend 
the Constitution of the United States and the Union thereunder, 
and that I will, in like manner, abide by and faithfully support 
all laws and proclamations which have been made during the 
existing rebellion with reference to the emancipation of slaves, so 
‘help me God.” 


490) RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


The permission to take this oath was withheld from large 
classes of citizens. It will be seen that there are two stipula- 
tions in this oath, the first faithfully to support the Constitution 
of the United States and the Union thereunder. This com- 
prises obedience to the laws made in conformity to the Consti- 
tution, and is all that is requisite in the simple oath of alle- 
giance of an American citizen. The second stipulation is : 


“To abide by and faithfully support all laws and proclama- 
tions which have been made during the existing rebellion with 
reference to the emancipation of slaves.” 


What need was there of this second stipulation? Because 
the laws were not enacted, nor the proclamation issued under 
any grant of power in the Constitution or under its authority. 
Now, the exercise of a power by Government, for which it has 
no constitutional authority, is not only a usurpation, but it de- 
stroys the sanction of all written instruments of government. 
Also, what has become of the unalienable right of property, 
which all the State governments were created to protect and 
preserve? Where was the sovereignty of the people under these 
proceedings? Yet the Confederate citizen was required to bind 
himself by an oath to abide by and faithfully support all these 
usurpations; the alternative being to resist the Government, or 
to aid and abet a violation of the Constitution. 

Meanwhile, each of the late Confederate States was occupied 
by a military foree of the Government of the United States, 
and military orders were the supreme law; and that Govern- 
ment thereby proceeded to establish a State organization based 
on the principle of its own sovereignty. In the first place, the 
President of the United States issued a proclamation in such 
terms as to be applicable to each of the Confederate States 
wherever its affairs were in such process of subjugation as to 
permit the commencement of the proposed organization. This 
proclamation begins by setting forth four propositions as the 
basis of his authority: First, the Constitution declares that the 
United States shall guarantee to every State in the Union a re- 
publican form of government, and protect each against invasion 
and domestic violence. Second, the President is Commander- 


1865] OF ALL CIVIL GOVERNMENT. n91 


in-Chief of the Army and Navy, as well as chief civil executive 
officer, and bound to take care that the laws be faithfully exe- 
cuted. Third, the rebellion, in its revolutionary progress, de- 
prived the people of all civil government. Fourth, it becomes 
necessary and proper to enforce and carry out the obligations of 
the United States to the people of the State in securing it in 
the enjoyment of a republican form of government. There- 
fore, ete. 

These propositions call for a notice as well because of their 
fallacy as their enormity. The third declares that the so- 
ealled rebellion, in its progress, deprived the people of each 
Confederate State of all civil government. There was a gov- 
ernment over each Confederate State, then existing and in 
full operation. It was, in all its internal relations, the same 
government which existed when the State was a member of 
the Union, whereby it was recognized by the Government of 
the United States and by the other States as a lawful and re- 
publican State government. It had been created by the free 
consent of the people of the State, and they had defended it 
with their lives and their fortunes. It had been denied by the 
Government of the United States that any one of the Confeder- 
ate States was a foreign state or outside the Union by its seces- 
sion, There was, therefore, neither in law nor in fact, any 
foundation for the assertion that the so-called rebellion had de- 
prived the people of each Confederate State of all civil govern- 
ment. 

Having thus stripped each Confederate State of all civil 
government, it was asserted that the Constitution declares that 
the United States shall guarantee to each State a republican 
form of government. But to guarantee is not to create, to or- 
ganize, or to bring into existence. This can be done for a State 
government only by the free and unconstrained action of the 
whole people of a State. The creation of such a government 
is beyond the powers of the Government of the United States, 
as has already been shown. After a republican government has 
‘been instituted by the people, the Constitution requires the 
United States to guarantee its existence, and thereby forbids 
them or their Government to overthrow it and set up a creature 

93 


799, RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of its own. The duty to guarantee commands the preservation 
of that which already exists. Such were the governments of 
the Confederate States before the war and after the war. Thus 
the power granted in the Constitution to preserve and guarantee 
State governments was perverted to overthrow and destroy 
republican governments, and to erect in their places military 
Governors, Legislatures, and judicial tribunals. 

The third proposition is that the President is Commander- 
in-Chief of the Army and Navy and the chief civil executive. 
His troops already occupied each of these States, and held the 
people in subjection. His proclamation was therefore merely a 
military order from the hand of the conqueror. Everything 
which he can do under such a character partakes of the nature, 
simply and solely, of martial law. Therefore he proceeds under 
the fourth proposition, wherein it “ becomes necessary and proper 
to carry out the obligations of the United States to the people” 
of each Confederate State, “in securing them in the enjoyment 
of a republican form of government.” The American people 
were now about to witness, on an extensive scale, the tyrannical 
experiment of instituting republican governments by the pro- 
cesses of martial law. They had declared it to be a self-evident 
truth that it was “the right of the people to alter or to abolish 
it [their government], and to institute a new government, lay- 
ing its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers 
in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their 
safety and happiness.” * This principle of the sovereignty of 
the people was now rejected, and the sovereignty of fleets and 
armies was substituted. 

“ Now, therefore,” says the Commander-in-Chief of the Army 
and Navy, and the chief civil executive officer of the United 
States, “in obedience to the high and solemn duties imposed 
upon me by the Constitution of the United States, and for the 
purpose of enabling the loyal people of said State (or States) to 
organize a State government, whereby justice may be estab- 
lished, domestic tranquillity restored, and loyal citizens protected 
in all their rights of life, liberty, and property, I do hereby 
appoint —— provisional Governor of the State.” It 


* Declaration of Independence. 


1865] UNKNOWN IN THIS CASE. "93 


will be here noticed that all the proceedings are undertaken for 
the sake of the “loyal” persons in the State. Whois to decide 
what persons are “loyal”? He who issues the military order— 
the President and his agent the provisional Governor; and 
they naturally will decide those to be loyal who support and 
obey their orders. The free assent and dissent which are the 
basis of the validity of every political action under our system, 
are unknown in this case. 

The duty of the provisional Governor is declared in the 
proclamation to be, “to prescribe such rules and regulations as 
may be necessary and proper for convening a convention com- 
posed of delegates to be chosen by that portion of the people 
of the State who are ‘loyal’ to the United States, and no 
others, for the purpose of altering and amending the Constitu- 
tion thereof.” In the third of the four propositions laid down 
as the basis of authority for the President’s proceedings, above 
mentioned, it is declared that the so-called rebellion, “ deprived 
the people of the State of all civil government ” ; but here it is 
made the first duty of the provisional Governor to procure a 
convention of “loyal” persons “to alter and amend the Con- 
stitution” of the State. Thus it seems that there was a State 
in existence, and a Constitution in full vigor, notwithstanding 
the above declaration of the President to the contrary. This 
was that Constitution of the State which was in force during 
that long and peaceful period through which the Constitution 
of the United States was observed, and constitutional laws en- 
acted. Now it was to be altered and amended from what the 
sovereign people of those days had ordained it to be, at the 
command, and to conform to the views, of another sovereign. 
The nature of those alterations and amendments will be stated 
hereafter. 

This convention was to possess the authority to exercise all 
the powers necessary “ to restore the State to its constitutional 
relations with the Federal Government.” It was further pro- 
vided that no person should vote unless he had taken the amnesty 
oath mentioned on a previous page, and was a qualified voter 
previous to the secession of the State. The convention or the 
subsequent Legislature was to prescribe the qualification of all 


794 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


voters afterward— a power,” says the President, “the people of 
the several States composing the Federal Union have rightfully 
exercised from the origin of the Government to the present 
time.’ The proclamation then continued: “And I do hereby 
direct: first, that the military commander of the department 
and all officers and persons in the military and naval service 
aid and assist the said provisional government in carrying into 
effect this proclamation ; and they are enjoined to abstain from 
in any way hindering, impeding, or discouraging ‘loyal’ people 
from the organization of a State government as herein author- 
ized.” The proclamation closed with instructions to the Secre- 
tary of each department of the Government to proceed to put 
in operation his department within the limits of the State. 

The first movement for the restoration of the Confederate 
States to the Union under subjugation was commenced in Vir- 
ginia. Richmond was occupied by the forces of the United 
States Government, and the authority of all State officers elected 
during the war was annulled. -Affairs remained in this position 
until May 9, 1865, when the President of the United States is- 
sued an order declaring all the acts and proceedings of the polit- 
ical, military, and civil organizations in the State which had 
been in insurrection against the United States to be null and 
void; and that all persons who should attempt to exercise any 
authority as under the late State or Confederate officers, should 
be deemed and taken as in rebellion, ete. At this time Francis 
H. Pierpont, who had assumed to exercise the oftice of Governor 
of Virginia over ten counties around Alexandria, was recognized 
by the President as the true Governor of the State. He was 
aided to remove the seat of his government from Alexandria 
to Richmond, and there maintained by the military force. No 
hostile opposition, however, was anywhere manifested, while at 
Alexandria delegates from the ten counties had assembled in 
convention and assumed to amend the State Constitution, and 
the little so-called legislative body had undertaken to pass vari- 
ous acts of importance. The so-called Governor, in presenting 
asummary of them, concluded by saying, “Thus, State sover- 
eignty—the status of the African race—the armed resistance to 
the Government of the United States—are disposed of.” An 


1835] NOT ALLOWED TO QUALIFY. NOB 


election for a new Legislature and State officers was held on 
October 12th. All were allowed to vote who had not held office 
under the State government or the Confederacy during the 
war, after they had taken the amnesty oath. The so-called Legis- 
lature assembled and entered upon the regulation of all the 
affairs of the State. A general act of vagrancy was passed, 
whereupon the major-general in command issued an order 
“that no magistrate, civil officer, or other person shall, in any 
way or manner, apply, or attempt to apply, the provisions of 
the said statute to any colored person in this department.” At 
the municipal election in Richmond, the Mayor, Attorney, and 
_ Superintendent of the Poor, elected, were persons who had held 
office under the Confederate States. They were not allowed by 
the military authority to qualify, and subsequently declined. 

In 1865 the Congress of the United States passed an act 
which provided that the following amendment to the Consti- 
tution should be submitted to the Legislatures of the several 
States for ratification or rejection : 


“Sxrcrion 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except 
as a punishment for crime, whereof the party shall have been duly 
convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place sub- 
ject to its jurisdiction. 

“Srction 2. Congress shall have full power to enforce this 
article by appropriate legislation.” 


One Dr. James L. Watson was tried for killing a negro in 
Rockbridge County, and acquitted. Major-General Schofield, 
in command of the military forces of the department, imme- 
diately ordered his arrest and trial by a military commission. 
On the assembling of the commission a writ of habeas corpus 
was sued out of the Cireuit Court of Richmond in behalf of 
Watson, and served on the General. In his answer, he declined 
compliance with the writ, saying : 


“Dr, Watson is held for trial by military commission, under 
the authority of the act of Congress of July 16, 1866, which act 
directs and requires the President, through the commissioner 
and officers of the Freedmen’s Bureau, to exercise military juris- 
diction over all cases and questions concerning the free enjoy- 


"96 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ment of the right to have full and equal benefit of all laws and 
proceedings concerning personal liberty, personal security, etc., by 
all citizens, without respect to race or color, or previous cowie 
of slavery, of the States whose constitutional relations to the 
Government of the United States have been discontinued by the 
rebellion, and have not been restored.” 


In the mean time, the United States Attorney-General hav- 
ing examined the case, and reported that, in his opinion, the 
military commission had not competent jurisdiction, the Presi- 
dent thereupon directed that the commission be dissolved and 
the prisoner discharged without delay. 

Meantime Congress had passed an act, known as the Civil 
Rights Bill, and a case came before the Circuit Court, at Alex- 
andria, in which one of the parties offered to produce negro 
evidence. The Judge (Thomas) ruled that, inasmuch as the 
State laws of Virginia forbade the introduction of negro testi- 
mony in civil suits to which white men alone were parties, the 
evidence of the negro was inadmissible; and that Congressional 
legislation could not impair the right of the States to decide 
what classes of persons were competent to testify in her courts. 

A storm was now brewing which was soon to involve the 
President and Congress in open conflict. The reader will re- 
member that, during the period in which these proceedings 
took place in Virginia, similar ones occurred in all the remain- 
ing Confederate States. Not only in Virginia, but in several 
of the other States, some persons had been voted for as mem- 
bers of Congress, but in no case had they been admitted to 
seats. This was one of the measures taken by Congress to in- 
dicate its disapproval of the President’s plan for the treatment 
of the late Confederate States. 

The difficulties that now arose between the President and 
Congress had reference entirely to the affairs of the Confeder- 
ate States. The plan of the President left the negroes to the 
care of the States alone after the establishment of their emanci- 
pation. Congress desired them to be made American citizens, 
secure in all the rights of freemen and voters. The refusal to 
admit Senators and Representatives to Congress from the Con- 


1866} NO COMPROMISE BETWEEN THE TWO. 7927 


federate States served to arrest the operation of the President’s 
plans to hold these States in abeyance. 

No compromise could be made between the two. Each 
appealed to the Constitution, forgetful that each had sustained 
all its ruthless violations during the last four years. Congress, 
therefore, commenced an independent action, and in its reck- 
less course sought, unsuccessfully, to rid itself of the President 
by impeachment. Its first act, at the commencement of the 
session, in December, 1865, was the appointment, by a large 
majority in each House, of a joint Committee of Fifteen, to 
which was referred all questions relating to the conditions and 
manner in which Congress would recognize the late Confeder- 
ate States as members of the Union. Meantime the creden- 
tials of all persons sent as Representatives and Senators from 
them were laid upon the table in each House, there to remain 
until the final action of the Committee of Fifteen. This was 
followed by the passage, in February, 1866, of “an act to estab- 
lish a bureau for the relief of freedmen, refugees, and aban- 
doned lands.” It proposed to establish military jurisdiction 
over all parts of the United States containing refugees and 
freedmen. This bill was vetoed by the President, and passed 
over his veto. 

In March an act was passed “to protect all persons in the 
United States in their civil rights, and furnish the means of their 
vindication.” The first section declared all persons born in the 
United States, and not subject to any foreign power, excluding 
Indians not taxed, to be citizens of the United States, and enu- 
merates the rights to be enjoyed by those so declared to be 
citizens. The second section affords discriminating protection 
to colored persons in the full enjoyment of all the rights secured 
to them by the preceding section. This bill was vetoed by the 
President, and passed over his veto. 

On June 8, 1866, a majority and a minority report were 
made by the Committee of Fifteen. Meanwhile, a report had 
been made from the same committee, at a previous date, in the 
form of an amendment to the Constitution, which was debated 
and amended in each House, and finally passed by the requisite 
majority in each. Thus was to be secured the political support 


498 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


and votes of the negroes, who were expected to be the control- 
ling citizens of the late Confederate States. 

The amendment to the Constitution was now submitted to 
the Legislatures of all the States, to be valid as a part of the 
Constitution, when ratified by three fourths, in the following 
form: 


“ ArTicLE—, Sxction 1. All persons born or naturalized in the 
United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens 
of the United States, and of the State wherein they reside. No 
State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privi- 
leges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall 
any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without 
due process of law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction 
the equal protection of the laws. 

“SEction 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the 
several States according to their respective numbers, counting the 
whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not 
taxed. But, when the right to vote at any election for the choice 
of electors for President and Vice-President of the United States, 
Representatives in Congress, the executive and judicial officers of 
a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to 
any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years 
of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, 
except for participation in rebellion or other crime, the basis of 
representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which 
the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number 
of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State. 

“Section 3. No person shall be a Senator or Representative in 
Congress, or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any 
office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any 
State, who, having previously taken an oath as a member of Con- 
gress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any 
State Legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, 
to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have en- 
gaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid 
or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may by a vote 
of two thirds of each House remove such disability. 

“Srction 4. The validity of the public debt of the United 
States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment 


1866] THE BALLOT OF THE NEGROES. 799 


of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection 
or rebellion, shall not be questioned. But the United States shall 
neither assume nor pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of 
insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim 
for the loss or emancipation of any.slave ; but all such debts, ob- 
ligations, and claims shall be held illegal and void. 

“Section 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by 
appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.” 


It may here be stated that the restoration of the late Con- 
federate States to all the rights and privileges of States as co- 
equal members of the Union, under the plan of President John- 
son, received the approval of the executive and judicial branches 
of the Government soon after the cessation of hostilities. Con- 
gress, however, not only withheld its assent, but, during its ses- 
sion in 1866, required as a condition precedent to a recognition 
of any one of these States, and the admission of its Representa- 
tives and Senators to seats, the adoption by its Legislature of 
the above-mentioned amendment. The question really involved 
in this amendment was the admission to citizenship and the 
ballot of the negroes in these States. It was the acknowledged 
fact that the authority to determine this question resided in the 
States severally and nowhere else. The amendment itself, in 
its second section, recognized the authority to grant or withhold 
the elective franchise as existing in the State governments. 

-This amendment was submitted to the Legislatures of the 
States immediately after its adoption by Congress in June, 1866, 
and by March 30, 1867, it had been ratified by twenty States, | 
including West Virginia, Maryland, Missouri, and Tennessee, 
and rejected by thirteen, including Delaware and Kentucky, 
and eleven of the late Confederate States. There were thirty- 
four States at that time, and thirty had voted. A ratification 
by three fourths was required to make it valid. 

When this amendment was presented for ratification to the 
Legislature of Virginia at its session commencing December, 
1866, it was rejected in the Senate by a unanimous vote, and in 
the House by a vote of seventy-four to one. Meantime the 
Freedmen’s Bureau was organized and put in operation in the 
State, but the military occupation continued, and the condition 


~ 


730) RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of affairs remained unchanged during the proceedings of Con- 
gress to construct its plan for subjugation. 

After the vote of the States up to March, 1867, it was mani- 
fest that no real advance had been made in the extension of the 
franchise to the negro population of the States. In this position 
of affairs Congress, on March 2d, adopted an entirely new sys- 
tem of measures relative to the late Confederate States. The 
fiction upon which these measures were based.is thus expressed 
in the preamble of the first act: 


“ Whereas, No legal State, governments, or adequate protec- 
tion for life or property, now exists in the rebel States of Virginia, 
North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, 
Louisiana, Florida, Texas, and Arkansas ; and, whereas, it is neces- 
sary that peace and good order should: be enforced in said States, 
until loyal and republican State governments can be legally estab- 
lished ; therefore, be zt enacted,” etc. 


These States were then divided into five military districts, 
and it was further provided : 


“Until the people of the said rebel States shall by law be ad- 
mitted to representation to the Congress of the United States, all 
civil governments that may exist therein shall be deemed provi- 
sional only, and shall be in all respects subject to the paramount 
authority of the United States, at any time to abolish, modify, con- 
trol, and supersede the same, and in all elections to any office under 
such provisional governments, all persons shall be entitled to vote 
under the provisions of the fifth section of this act.” 


Thus these States, when held by military force as conquered 
territory, with the sovereignty of the people extinct, were not 
allowed to claim to possess any rights under the Federal Con- 
stitution, or any other than such as might be granted by the 
will of the conqueror. It was asserted that the right to regulate 
the elective franchise, recognized as belonging to the States in 
the Union, could not attach to those out of the Union, and hay- 
ing only provisional political institutions. Congress then pro- 
ceeded to declare, in the fifth section of the bill, the terms upon 


which a late Confederate State could become a member of the 
Union: 


1866] THE BILL BECAME A LAW. "31 


“Section 5. That, when the people of any one of said rebel 
States shall have formed a Constitution of government in con- 
formity with the Constitution of the United States in all respects, 
framed by a convention of delegates elected by the male citizens 
of said State, twenty-one years old and upward, of whatever race, 
color, or previous condition, who have been resident in said State 
for one year previous to the day of such election, except such as 
may be disfranchised for participation in the rebellion or for fel- 
ony at common law, and when such Constitution shall provide that 
the elective franchise shall be enjoyed by all such persons as have 
the qualifications herein stated for electors of delegates, and when 
such Constitution shall be ratified by a majority of the persons 
voting on the question of ratification who are qualified as electors 
for delegates, and when such Constitution shall have been sub- 
mitted to Congress for examination and approval, and Congress 
shall have approved the same, and when said State, by a vote of 
its Legislature elected under said Constitution, shall have adopted 
the amendment to the Constitution of the United States, proposed 
by the Thirty-ninth Congress, and known as Article XIV, and 
when said article shall have become a part of the Constitution of 
the United States, said State shall be declared entitled to repre- 
sentation in Congress, and Senators and Representatives shall be 
admitted therefrom on their taking the oath prescribed by law, 
and then and thereafter the preceding sections of this act shall 
be inoperative in said State,” etc. 


The bill became a law, notwithstanding the veto of the 
President. 

On March 4th a new Congress commenced its session, and 
on March 23d a supplement to the preceding act was passed. 
It ordered a registration to be made of the qualified voters in 
each military sub-district of the State, an election to be held for 
the State Convention to draft a Constitution for the State, and 
for delegates to such convention; and that such Constitution 
should be submitted to the voters for adoption or rejection, and 
upon its adoption a State government should be organized, ete. 
The registration was required to be made of all citizens as de- 
fined by the “act to protect all persons in the United States in 
their civil rights,” ete. Many disqualifications of voters, arising 
from participation in the war, were also expressed. This act 


439 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


also became a law, notwithstanding the objections of the Presi- 
dent. 

It will be seen that this act contemplated two distinet gov- 
ernments in each of the ten States—the one military and the 
other civil. Both were provisional, and both were to continue 
until the new State Constitution was framed, and the State was 
admitted to representation in Congress. The two were to be car- 
ried on together, and the people were made subject to both and 
obliged to obey both. The law was next put in operation by 
constituting the districts, as follows: 1. Virginia, commander, 
Major-General Schofield; 2. North Carolina and South Caro- 
lina, commander, Major-General Sickles; 3. Georgia, Florida, 
and Alabama, commander, Major-General John Pope; 4. Mis- 
sissippi and Arkansas, commander, Major-General Ord; 5. ~ 
Louisiana and Texas, commander, Major-General Sheridan. 

Previous to adjournment, on July 19, 1867, Congress passed 
an additional supplement to the act of March 2d and the sup- 
plement of March 23d. It declared the intent and meaning of 
the previous acts to have been: that the civil governments of 
the ten States were not legal governments, and, if continued, 
were to be subject in all respects to the military commanders 
and the paramount authority of Congress. It made the acts of 
the military commanders subject only to the disapproval of the 
General of the Army, U. 8. Grant, and authorized them to re- 
move any person from office under the State government. It 
further defined the classes disfranchised, and directed that no 
district commander should be bound in his action by any opin- 
ion of any civil officer of the United States. 

The President vetoed the bill, and in his message said: 


“Thus, over all these ten States, this military government is 
now declared to have unlimited authority. It is no longer con- 
fined to the preservation of the public peace, the administration 
of criminal law, the registration of voters, and the superintend- 
ence of elections ; but, ‘in all respects,’ is asserted to be para- 
mount to the existing civil governments. It is impossible to con- 
ceive any state of society more intolerable than this, and yet it is 
to this condition that. twelve millions of American citizens are re- 
duced by the Congress of the United States. Over every foot of 


1867] — A WARNING WAS GIVEN. ° 733 


the immense territory occupied by these American citizens, the 
Constitution of the United States is theoretically in full operation. 
It binds all the people there, and should protect them; yet they 
are denied every one of its sacred guarantees. Of what avail will 
it be to any one of these Southern people, when seized by a file of 
soldiers, to ask for the cause of arrest, or for the production of the 
warrant? Of what avail to ask for the privilege of bail when in 
military custody, which knows no such thing as bail? Of what 
avail to demand a trial by jury, process for witnesses, a copy of 
the indictment, the privilege of counsel, or that greater privilege, 
the writ of habeas corpus?” 


Congress having thus completed its plan of operations, the 
crushing wheels of subjugation began to move forward. Let 
us proceed with the narration of affairs in Virginia. 

On the appearance of Major-General Schofield at Richmond, 
all the proceedings*of the so-called civil government, for the 
organization and restoration of the State to the Union, at once 
ceased, and he assumed command. A board of army officers 
was named by the commanding General for the purpose of se- 
lecting suitable persons for appointment as registering officers 
throughout the State. In making the selections, the preference 
was given, first, to officers of the army and of the Freedmen’s 
Bureau, on duty in the State; second, to persons who had been 
discharged from the Federal army, after “meritorious ” services 
during the war; third, to “loyal” citizens of the county or city 
where they were to serve. On April 2d an order appeared 
from the major-general, suspending all elections, whether 
State, county, or municipal, “under the provisional govern- 
ment,” until after the registration was completed. A lecture 
on the “ Chivalry of the South,” advertised to be delivered in 
Lynchburg, was suppressed by the order of the post commander 
at that place. A warning was given by the major-general to 

the editor of the Richmond “Times,” which said, “The ef- 
forts of your paper to foster enmity, create disorder, and lead to 
violence, can no longer be tolerated.” On the refusal of five 
magistrates of the Corporation Council of Norfolk to receive 
the testimony of a negro, they were arrested on a process issued 
under the Civil Rights Bill, and held to bail to appear before 


“34 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


the District Court. All armed organizations in the State were 
disbanded. Inflammatory meetings of freedmen and those who 
sought their political alliance were held in different parts of the 
State. 

Military commissioners were appointed over sub-districts 
for the suppression of disorder and violence, for the protection 
of all persons in their so-called rights of person and property, 
and clothed with all the powers of justices of a county or police 
magistrates of a city. The State was also divided into sub-dis- 
tricts, and commanders appointed over the same. These officers 
were empowered to exercise a general supervision over the mili- 
tary commissioners, and to furnish them, when necessary, with 
sufficient military force to enable them to discharge their duties. 
Further orders relative to the qualification of voters were issued 
by the major-general, in which it was declared that “all per- 
sons who voluntarily joined the rebel army, and all persons in 
that army, whether volunteers or conscripts, who committed 
voluntarily any hostile act, were thereby engaged in insurrec- 
tion or rebellion ; and all who voted for the ordinance of seces- 
sion, gave aid and comfort to the enemy. Also all who volun- 
tarily furnished supplies of food, or clothing, arms, ammunition, 
horses, or mules, or any other material of war, participated in 
the rebellion,’ and were disfranchised. The whole number 
registered was 116,982 whites and 104,772 blacks. The vote 
for the Convention was 14,835 whites and 92,507 blacks ; against 
the Convention, 61,249 whites and 638 blacks. 

The Convention assembled on December 3d and adjourned 
on April 17, 1868. The Bill of Rights adopted declared that— 


“The State shall ever remain a member of the United States 
of America, and the people thereof a part of the American nation, 
and all attempts, from whatever source, and upon whatever pretext, 
to dissolve said Union, or to sever said Union, are unauthorized, 
and ought to be resisted with the whole power of the State. 

“'The Constitution of the United States, and the laws of Con- 
gress passed in pursuance thereof, constitute the supreme law of 
the land, to which paramount allegiance and obedience are due 
from every citizen, anything in the Constitution, ordinances, or 
laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.” 


1866] UPON THAT BASIS. 485 


Suffrage was granted to every male citizen twenty-one years 
of age. All officers of the State were required to take the fol- 
lowing oath: 


"1; , do solemnly swear that I will support and main- 
tain the Constitution and laws of the: United States and the Con- 
stitution and laws of the State of Virginia ; and that I recognize 
and accept the civil and political equality of all men before the 
law,” etc. 


In addition, all State, city, and county officers were required 
to take the test-oath prescribed by Congress on July 2, 1862, as 
follows : 


“T do solemnly swear that I have never borne ‘arms against 
the United States since I have been a citizen thereof ; that I have 
voluntarily given no aid, countenance, counsel, or encouragement 
to persons engaged in armed hostility thereto ; that I have never 
sought or accepted, nor attempted to exercise the functions of any 
office whatever, under any authority, or pretended authority, in 
hostility to the United States ; that I have not yielded a volun- 
tary support to any pretended government, authority, power, or 
Constitution within the United States, hostile or inimical thereto ; 
and I do further swear that, to the best of my knowledge and 
ability, I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States against all enemies, foreign and domestic ; that I will bear 
true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will take this obli- 
gation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of eva- 
sion ; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of 
the office on which I am about to enter.” 


Major-General Schofield, in an address to the Convention 
in opposition to these stringent provisions, said : 


“You can not find in some of the counties a sufficient num- - 
ber of men who are capable of filling the offices, and who can take 
the oath you have prescribed here, I have no hesitation in saying 
that I believe it impossible’'to inaugurate a government upon that 
basis.” 


-Meantime the so-called Constitution was adopted by the 
Convention, and June 2d fixed for the popular vote upon it. 


736 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


But no appropriation was made for the expenses of the elec- 
tion, and it was not held. Major-General Stoneman now suc- 
ceeded Major-General Schofield. 

The utter subjugation of the sovereign people of Virginia 
was now manifest. Not a public act of the least importance 
could they do without the consent of the military chief who 
ruled over them, and who was a stranger in their State. Find- 
ing the provisions of this Constitution were so restrictive as 
to exclude from the elective franchise nearly all of the most 
intelligent and best-educated citizens, on account of their par- 
ticipation in the late war, a movement was commenced for a 
modification of these clauses or their entire omission. The sov- 
ereignty of the people was extinct, so no relief could be secured 
except through the action of the sovereign sitting in Washing- 
ton. Congress, therefore, passed an act. authorizing the Presi- 
dent (Grant), at such time as he might deem best, to submit 
the Constitution to the registered voters of Virginia, and also 
submit to a separate vote such provisions of the Constitution as 
he thought proper. The act also required the Legislature that 
should be elected to ratify the fourteenth and fifteenth amend- 
ments to the Constitution of the United States, as a condition 
precedent “to the readmission of the State into the Union.” 

The fifteenth article of amendment to the Constitution was 
passed by Congress in February, 1869, and submitted to the 
Legislatures of the States. It was as follows: 


“Sxrction 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote 
shall not be denied or abridged by the United States, or by any 
State, on account of race, color, or previous condition of ser- 
vitude. 

“Sxrction 2, The Congress shall have power to enforce this 
article by appropriate legislation.” 


On the passage of the amendment by the United States Sen- 
ate, Senator Garrett Davis, of Kentucky, said: 


“Sir, your amendments to the Constitution are all void; they 
are of no effect. They were proposed by a mutilated Congress ; 
they were proposed by a mutilated House of Representatives and 
Senate,” ; 


1869] IN THE HANDS OF CARPET-BAGGERS. 137 


_ The election in Virginia took place on July 6, 1869. The 
vote on the Constitution was, for it, 206,233 ; against it, 9,189. 
For the disfranchising clause, 84,4045; against it, 124,361. In 
favor of the test-oath clause, the votes were, 83,114 ; against it, 
124,106. State officers and a Legislature were chosen. 

Meantime the civil or provisional Governor had been re- 
moved by the military commander, Major-General Stoneman, 
and the commander of the first district put in the vacancy. At 
the same time the President-Judge of the Supreme Court of 
Appeals was a staff-officer of the General commanding, and as- 
signed to that duty; and another one of the judges of that 
court was an officer of the Federal army, receiving his appoint- 
ment from the same source. 

On October 5th the Legislature assembled, the State officers- 
elect having already entered upon their duties. The fourteenth 
and fifteenth amendments to the United States Constitution 
were adopted, and Senators elected to Congress. On January 
26, 1870, a bill for the admission of the State into the Union, 
“without further condition,” was passed. Her subjugation was 
now completed. The military commanders were withdrawn, 
and she was left in the hands of “ carpet-baggers.” 


aur 6 Eh oceey IT, 


Final Subjugation of the Confederate States continued.—Slaves declared free by Mili- 
tary Commanders in North Carolina.—Provisional Governor.—Convention.— 
Military Commander.—Governor-elect turned out.—Ilis Protest—Members of 
Congress admitted.—Proceedings in South Carolina.—Arrest of Judge Aldrich, 
—Military Reversal of Sentence of the Court.—Post Commanders.—Jurors.— 
Proceedings in Georgia.—President’s Plan.—Plan of Congress enforced.—Other 
Events.—Proceedings in Florida.—Rival Conventions.—Plan of Congress en- 
forced.—Proceedings in Alabama.—Suspension of Bishop Wilmer by the Mili: 
tary Commander.—Military Authority—Action of Congress.—Proceedings in 
Mississippi.—Constitutionality of the Act of Congress before the Supreme Court. 
—Remarks of Chief-Justice Chase.—Military Arrests.—Removals.—The Chief- 
Justice of the State resigns.—The So-called Constitution rejected—Ames ap- 
pointed Governor.—Proceedings in Louisiana.—Plan of Congress enforced.— 
Other Measures,—Arkansas.—Texas.—Opinion of the United States Attorney- 
General on Military Commanders.—Consequences that followed the Measures 


94 


738 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


of Congress.—Increase in State Debts.—Increase in Frauds and Crimes.—Ex- 
amples.—Investigating Committees of Congress.—The Unalienable Rights of 
Man.—The Sovereignty of the People and the Supremacy of Law gone. 


In the preceding chapter the reader will find a narration 
of the series of measures, adopted by the Government of the 
United States, to complete the final subjugation of the State of 
Virginia. The same series was applied, in the same order, to 
each of the Confederate States. It is, therefore, unnecessary 
to repeat the narration of these details in their application to 
the other States. But there were some concurrent incidents and 
some flagrant outrages in each one which should be stated, in 
order to afford a full and comprehensive view of the universal 
denial of unalienable personal rights, the destruction of civil in- 
stitutions, the disregard of laws, and the cruel and ignominious 
treatment, inflicted by the authority of the Government of the 
United States upon individuals in every part of the Southern 
country. 

In North Carolina, immediately on the cessation of hostili- 
ties, the Federal General issued an order, declaring that “all 
persons heretofore held in the State as slaves are now free, and 
that it is the duty of the army to maintain the freedom of such 
persons.” Another order was then issued, defining and regu- 
lating the relations of the freedmen and whites. President 
Johnson issued his proclamation on May 29th, appointing a 
provisional Governor, W. W. Holden, as in the case of Vir- 
ginia. On August 8th the Governor issued his proclamation 
for an election of delegates to a State Constitutional Convention 
on September 12th, and stated who would be permitted to vote, 
and the manner of election. The election was held, and the so- 
ealled Convention assembled on October 2, 1865. Its first act 
declared the uninterrupted existence of the State in the Union, 
and that the ordinance of secession was null and void. The 
next prohibited slavery. The payment of the debt contracted 
during the war, by any future Legislature, was forbidden. The 
repeal of the secession ordinance and the prohibition of slavery 
were ratified by the people. An election for State officers and 
members of Congress was held in November, and those who had 
taken the amnesty oath were the voters. The so-called Legis- 


See 


1867] MADE A SPIRITED PROTEST. 139 


lature-elect held a session and ratified the amendment to the 
United States Constitution prohibiting slavery. On December 
23d the Governor-elect (Worth) was inaugurated, and the pro- 
visional Governor retired, acknowledging Worth to be the legal 
and “loyal” Governor. Thus the State was subjugated on the 
plan of President Johnson. 

The affairs of the State were thus conducted until the mili- 
tary acts of Congress went into operation, and on March 923, 
1867, Major-General Sickles issued his order assuming com- 
mand. On April 11th he issued an order for the relief of 
debtors, by prohibiting imprisonment for debt, and ordering 
the stay of all proceedings for the collection of debts for twelve 
months. Writs of execution issuing out of the United States 
Cireuit Court were not allowed to be served by the military 
commander at Wilmington. The question was taken to the 
Attorney-General at Washington, and General Sickles appeared 
in his own defense. It was decided by the acting Attorney- 
General to be “simply a case of a high misdemeanor, legally 
contemplated.” General Sickles was removed, and Major-Gen- 
eral Canby succeeded. The State registration was completed 
in October, and contained the names of 103,060 whites and 
71,657 blacks. The so-called election for a Convention was 
held in November, and the Convention assembled on February 
14, 1868. The Bill of Rights adopted contained similar clauses 
to the one adopted by the Virginia Convention. The Consti- 
tution was ratified, and State officers, members of the Legisla- 
ture, and representatives to Congress were elected on April 23d. 
The vote for the Constitution was 93,118; against it, 74,109. 
The so-called Republicans had a majority of seventy on joint 
ballot in the Legislature. 

The State officers elected under the plan of President John- 
son had continued in the peaceful administration of their duties. 
Therefore, on the day of the inauguration of the newly-elected 
Governor (Holden) the existing Goyernor (Worth) made a spir- 
ited protest, saying : 

“I do not recognize the validity of the late election, under 
which you and those codperating with you claim to be invested 
with the civil government of the State. You have no evidence of 


440 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


your election, save the certificate of a major-general of the United 
States Army. I regard all of you as, in effect, appointees of the 
military power of the United States, and not as deriving your 
powers from the consent of those you claim to govern. Know- 
ing, however, that you are backed by military force here, which 
I could not resist if I would, I do not deem it necessary to offer a 
futile opposition, but vacate the office without the ceremony of 
actual eviction, offering no further opposition than this, my pro- 
test. I would submit to actual expulsion in order to bring before 
the Supreme Court of the United States the question as to the 
constitutionality of the legislation under which you claim to be 
the rightful Governor of the State, if the past action of that tri- 
bunal furnished any hope of a speedy trial. I surrender the office 
to you under what I deem military duress, without stopping, as 
the occasion would well justify, to comment on the singular coin- 
cidence that the present State government is surrendered, as with- 
out legality, to him whose own official sanction, but three years 
ago, declared it valid. 
“T am, very respectfully, 
“ JonaTHan WortH, 
“ Governor of North Carolina.” 


The so-called Legislature assembled on the appointed day, 
and the fourteenth amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States was at once ratified, and on July 11, 1868, the President 
announced by proclamation that “ North Carolina had complied 
with the conditions prescribed by Congress for her restoration 
to an equal place in the Union of States.” 

In South Carolina, proceedings were commenced on June 
20, 1865, when President Johnson issued a proclamation simi- 
lar to the one in the case of Virginia, and appointed Benjamin 
I’. Perry as provisional Governor of the State. He continued 
all. persons in office on taking the amnesty oath, and all laws in 
force prior to the secession of the State were maintained except 
those conflicting with the proclamation ; delegates to a so-called 
State Convention were elected on the first Monday of Septem- 
ber, and the Convention assembled on the 13th to amend the 
State Constitution. The ordinance of secession was repealed and 
slavery abolished. Blacks were made witnesses in all cases 


1865] OR IGNORANCE SUGGESTED. "AY 


. where the rights or property of persons of that class were in- 
volved. An election of State officers and a so-called Legisla- 
ture were held. The latter convened on October 25th. The 
thirteenth amendment to the Constitution of the United States 
prohibiting slavery was ratified. On November 29th the pro- 
visional Governor retired, and the so-called Governor-elect (Orr) 
was inaugurated. The work of the Legislature was very com- 
plete. The courts were open to all persons, with equal civil 
rights, withont distinction of color, and Major-General Sickles, 
commander of the Military Department of North Carolina and 
South Carolina, ordered all civil and criminal cases to be tried 
before them in which the parties were civilians. Previous to 
this order, and after the cessation of hostilities, provost-marshals 
and military courts were detailed for duty all over the State. 
These officers knew only the law martial, and generally very 
little of that ; and took jurisdiction of all cases both civil and 
criminal, occasioning great annoyance, expense, and vexation, 
deciding as their prejudice, caprice, or ignorance suggested. 
After the completion of the so-called State government, how- 
ever, the vacancies on the bench were filled, and the courts 
opened throughout the State. 

Still the people were made to feel that the military hand 
was overall. A case occurred in the court in Charleston, before 
Judge A, P. Aldrich, in which a white man was indicted for 
petit larceny, tried, and found guilty. The punishment pre- 
scribed by the law of the State for this offense was whipping. 
To this punishment the offender was sentenced. On the next 
day an armed soldier came to the court-house inquiring for the 
Judge, who was absent. To an inquiry of the sheriff as to his 
business, he replied that he was ordered to require the Judge 
to report at General Bennet’s headquarters, who was the mili- 
tary commander of the district. On the next day another sol- 
dier in full uniform came to the lodgings of the Judge with a 
note from the General requesting the former to report at head- 
quarters. 

The reply of the Judge was: “As I have no business with 
you, I decline to report. If you have business with me, it will 
give me great pleasure to receive you.” 


749 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


On the next day an adjutant appeared saying: “The Gen- 
eral is very much engaged, and asks you to come to his office. 
I will wait your convenience.” 

“JT see I am under arrest,” replied the Judge. “I will go 
now.” 

The adjutant, in full uniform, escorted him through the 
most public parts of the city to headquarters, and, entering the 
office, announced him. The General was sitting, with his cap 
on, and writing. After some time, having finished, he looked 
up and said, “Sit down,” adding, “That was a curt note you 
sent to me yesterday.” 

“No, sir,” answered the Judge, “I intended it to be re- 
spectful, but, as I had no business with you, I did not see why 
I should be required to come to your office.” 

“Do you dispute the authority of the United States Gov- 
ernment?” asked the General, tartly. 

“No, sir; I am here in obedience to that authority, but I 
have always supposed that, as a mere matter of courtesy, when 
one gentleman has business with another, he calls on him. As 
a matter of etiquette, I believe a Judge of the Superior Court 
of a State is equal in rank to a brevet brigadier-general.” 

“We will not discuss the question of rank,” replied the 
General, “but General Sickles requests you to revoke your sen- 
tence of the other day and impose some other penalty.” 

The Judge replied: “I do not impose the penalty; it is 
the law, and I have no discretion.” 

He then explained the law, and said there was no relief ex- 
cept by a pardon of the Governor, or by taking the prisoner out 
of the custody of the sheriff. A few days after, the prisoner 
was taken from the custody of the Sheriff and discharged. The 
proceeding was brought to the knowledge of the so-called Gov- 
ernor, who applied to General Sickles to suspend his order, but 
the latter declined; whereupon the Judge, then at Columbia, 
to hold the court of the cireuit, declared that he would adjourn 
the court and not proceed on his circuit; that he would not go 
through the farce of holding a court when judgments and sen- 
tences could be arrested and prevented by military order. He 
then adjourned the court, and passed an order refusing to hold 


1867} TRIAL BY MILITARY COMMISSION. 448 


courts while the military order was in force. General Sickles 
also issued an order reversing a judgment of the Supreme Court. 
The President about the same time countermanded a like order 
of the General in North Carolina, and the Judge resumed his 
duties. 

Under the act of Congress of March 2, 1867, the State was 
divided into ten military districts, and a post commander ap- 
pointed for each. All local officers, who were regularly elected 
by the people, were to be appointed by these commanders. 
Military orders were issued from time to time containing social 
regulations, etc. One on the subject of criminal arrests and 
trials required all sheriffs, marshals, and police officers to report 
to the Provost-Marshal-General of the district, their names, resi- 
dence, official station, salary, and the authority by which they 
were appointed ; also to investigate and report all particulars of 
any crime committed, to the Provost-Marshal-General, setting 
forth name, residence, and description of the offender with the 
nature of the offense, and steps taken to secure punishment. 
Sheriffs were directed to make a full report of the condition of 
all jails and prisons within their jurisdiction. All civil officers 
in charge of any jail, prison, or workhouse, were required to 
make full monthly reports of each inmate under their care. All 
sheriffs, constables, and police officers were required “to obey 
and execute the lawful orders of the Provost-Marshal-General, 
to the same effect as they are required by law to obey and exe- 
cute writs, warrants, or other process issued by civil magistrates,” 
and any resistance or refusal to execute the same subjected the 
offender to trial by military commission. 

Details of the plan to be followed in making the registra- 
tion were fully laid down, and the order then contained the 
following instructions: 


“Boards will take notice that, according to section 10 of the 
act of July 19, 1867, they are not to be bound in their action by 
any opinion of any civil officer of the United States. 

“Boards are instructed that all the provisions of the;several 
acts of Congress cited are to be liberally construed, to the end that 
all the intents thereof be fully and perfectly carried out. 

Jt is made the duty of the commanding General to remove 


“44. RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


from office all persons who are disloyal to the Government of the 
United States, or who use their official influence in any manner to 
hinder, delay, prevent, or obstruct the due and perfect administra- 
tion of the reconstruction acts.” 


On September 5, 1867, Major-General Canby took com- 
mand. General Sickles, on announcing his retirement, said : 


“The undersigned avails himself of the occasion to acknowl- 
edge the fidelity and zeal with which the officers and troops under 
his command have discharged their duties.” 


The question of the qualification of jurors now became 
important. General Canby issued an order on September 13th, 
which required the jurors to be drawn from the “ qualified 
voters,” which included the newly emancipated slaves. The 
Judges met, and sent a respectful request to the General to 
change the order to conform to the law of the State. By the 
jury law, as it then stood, no person was qualified to serve as a 
juror unless he was a free white man, twenty-one years of age. 
The Judges were sworn to enforce this law and the Constitution 
of the State. No notice was taken of the application. At the 
next court in Edgefield, Judge Aldrich, charging the grand 
jury, brought to their notice the order, the law and the Consti- 
tution, and the oath of office, and then declared “ he could not 
and would not obey the order.” On going to open the court a 
few days after, the adjutant of the post delivered to him a mili- 
tary order suspending him from office. He proceeded and 
opened the court, read the order and stated the circumstances, 
and, laying aside his gown, directed the sheriff “to let the court 
stand adjourned while justice is stifled.”* The major-general 
appointed another Judge to the vacancy. 

* This incident in the conduct of the Judge recalls a like exhibition of judicial 
purity and independence which occurred in the colonial history of South Carolina, and 
which I present by extracts from the charge of Judge William Henry Drayton, deliy- 
ered November, 1774, Referring to the nature of the civil liberties of the Carolina 
colonists, he said: ‘‘ This is the distinguishing character: English people can not be 
taxed, nay, they can not be bound by any law unless by their consent, expressed by 
themselves or their representatives of their own election. This colony was settled 


by English subjects; by a people from England herself—a people who brought over 
with them, who planted in this colony, and who transmitted to posterity the in- 


1867] I CHARGE YOU TO DO YOUR DUTY. T45 


The registration of voters was completed in the middle of 
October, and amounted to 46,346 whites and 78,982 blacks. 
The vote on a State Convention was taken on November 19th 
and 20th, and resulted, for the Convention, 130 whites and 68,- 
876 blacks; against the Convention, 2,801 whites. The dele- 
gates were 34 whites and 63 blacks. The Convention assembled 
on January 14,1868. The Bill of Rights contained provisions 
similar to that of Virginia, and the Constitution was made to 
conform to the will of Congress. The ratification of the Consti- 
tution, and the election of State officers and a Legislature, took 
place on April 14, 15, and 16, 1868. The vote for the Consti- 
tution was 70,758 ; against it, 27,288; not voting, but registered, 
85,551. The Legislature, with a majority of forty-eight blacks, 
assembled on July 6th. The fourteenth constitutional amend- 
ment was adopted, and the construction of the State by Con- 
gress was completed practically on July 13, 1868. 

In Georgia, on the cessation of hostilities, the Governor 
issued a proclamation calling a session of the Legislature. But 
the commanding General issued an order declaring the procla- 
mation to be null and void. Another military officer, in a letter 


valuable rights of Lnglishmen—rights which no time, no contract, no climate can 
diminish. . . . By all the ties which mankind hold most dear and sacred; your 
reverence to ‘your ancestors; your love to your own interests ; your tenderness to 
your posterity ; by the lawful obligations of your oath, I charge you to do your duty ; 
to maintain the laws, the rights, the Constitution of your country, even at the 
hazard of your lives and fortunes. 

“Some county judges style themselves the King’s servants, a style which sounds 
harshly in my ears, inasmuch as the being a servant implies obedience to the orders 
of the master, and such judges might possibly think that, in the present situation 
of American affairs, my charge is inconsistent with my duty to the King. But for 
my part, in my judicial character, I know no master but the law; I am a servant, 
not to the King, but to the Constitution.” . .. In the course of his charge, he 
quotes a “learned judge” as saying: “ Every new tribunal erected for the decision 
of facts, without the intervention of a jury, is a step toward aristocracy, the most 
oppressive of absolute governments; and it is therefore a duty which every man owes 
to his country, his friends, his posterity, and himself, to maintain to the utmost of 
his power this valuable Constitution in all its rights, to restore it to its ancient 
dignity, if at all impaired; to amend it wherever it is defective, and, above all, to 
guard with the most jealous circumspection against the introduction of new and 
arbitrary methods of trial, which, under a variety of plausible pretenses, may in 
time perceptibly undermine this best preservative of English liberty.” —(“ American 
Archives,” Fourth Series, vol. i, pp. 959, 960.) 


“4G RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


to the Governor, stated that he was instructed by the President 
to say to him, that “the persons who incited the war and car- 
ried it on will not be allowed to assemble at the call of their ac- 
complice to act again as the Legislature of the State, and again 
usurp the authority and franchises. In calling the Legislature 
together again, without the permission of the President, you 
have perpetrated a fresh crime; and, if any person presumes to 
answer or acknowledge your call, he will be immediately ar- 
rested.” The military authorities of the United States then 
took the control of affairs until the appointment of James John- 
son, on June 17th, by the President, as provisional Governor of 
the State, by a proclamation similar to the one issued in the case 
of Virginia. On July 13th he issued a proclamation preserib- 
ing the-regulations for a State Convention. Provost-marshals 
had been stationed all over the State to regulate local affairs, 
and the laws in force previous to 1861 were ordered to be en- 
forced. Delegates were elected on October 4th, and the so- 
called State Convention assembled on October 25th. The 
ordinance of secession was repealed. The payment of the war 
debt was prohibited. The emancipation of the slaves was ex- 
pressly recognized, and a so-called election for State officers, 
members of the Legislature and of Congress, was appointed to 
be held on November 15th. The Legislature assembled on 
December 4th, and unanimously adopted the thirteenth amend- 
ment to the Federal Constitution, prohibiting the existence of 
slavery. Charles J. Jenkins, Governor-elect, was inaugurated, 
and on December 19, 1865, the provisional Governor relin- 
quished the conduct of the State affairs to the constituted au- 
thorities. The Freedmen’s Bureau Act and the Civil Rights Act ~ 
of Congress were enforced by the military authorities. 

The State Legislature again assembled on November 1, 
1866. The ratification of the fourteenth amendment to the 
Constitution of the United States was repassed to a joint com- 
mittee of each House, which reported a resolution to refuse to 
ratify the same. In the Senate it was adopted unanimously, 
and in the House by a vote of 132 to 2. On April 1, 1866, © 
Major-General John Pope assumed command in the third mili- 
tary district, containing Georgia, Florida, and Alabama. An 


1866] NOT CONFORM TO THE ORDER. MAT 


unsuccessful effort was made by the State at this time to bring 
the question of the constitutionality of the “reconstruction ” 
acts of Congress before the Supreme Court. Governor Jenkins 
took part in the application to the Supreme Court, and, while at 
Washington, issued an address to the people of the State, urging 
them to take no action under the laws. He was called upon to 
make an explanation on his return by General Pope, as parts of 
the address were declared in violation of the military order of 
the latter. But as the so-called Governor had not seen the 
order, his offense was excused. A mayor and aldermen for Au- 
gusta were appointed by General Pope; also the sheriff and 
deputy for Bartow County, and other officers. 

An order was issued that jurors should be selected from the 
list of qualified voters. Judge Reese, of Ocmulgee District, 
wrote to General Pope, declaring that, under his oath to sustain 
the laws, he could not conform to the order. General Pope 
replied with an attempt to show him that he owed allegiance, 

‘first of all, to the authority of the United States, as rep- 
resented by the military power in the State. The argument 
“was of no avail, and the Judge was prohibited from holding 
court. 

The registration of votes was completed early in September. 
The number registered was 188,647, and the whites had a ma- 
jority of about 2,000. The election of delegates to the State 
Convention took place from October 29th to November 3d. 
Of the delegates, 133 were whites and 33 blacks. The Con- 
vention assembled on December 13th, and soon adjourned to 
January 8, 1868. Meantime, Major-General Meade had re- 
lieved General Pope as military commander. The Convention, 
before this adjournment, ordered the Comptroller to levy a tax 
to pay its expenses, and directed the State Treasurer to advance 
forty thousand dollars for its pay and mileage. The ordinance 
was sent to the Treasurer, endorsed with instructions from 
General Pope to pay. The Treasurer refused to advance the 
money, as he was prohibited by the Constitution to do so, except 
on the warrant of the Governor. General Meade requested the 
Governor to issue the warrant. Je replied that the Consti- 
tution forbade any money to be drawn from the Treasury except 


"48 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


on an appropriation, whereupon General Meade removed both 
officers, and appointed others. 

The provisions required by the acts of Congress were adopt- 
ed in the so-called new Constitution. At the same time, certain 
provisions were inserted, which were intended to afford relief 
to the people. The Convention, therefore, by resolution, re- 
quested General Meade to require the courts to enforce them 
“until the State was restored to its regular relations with the 
United States, and the State organization was in full force.” 
An order was, therefore, issued by the General requiring the 
courts and officers of the State government to enforce the pro- 
visions, in all respects, the same as if they had regularly taken 
effect. One of the Judges, having refused to comply with this 
order, was removed by General Meade. 

The so-called election on the Constitution, and for State offi- 
cers, and Legislature, and members of Congress, was held on 
April 20th and following days. The State Constitution was 
declared to be ratified; Rufus W. Bullock, the so-called Repub- 
lican candidate, was declared to be elected Governor by a ma- 
jority of seven thousand votes. The Legislature assembled on 
July 4, 1868, with three Senators and twenty-five Representa- 
tives who were negroes. The fourteenth amendment to the 
Federal Constitution was adopted, and all the conditions of 
Congress were fulfilled; and on July 28, 1868, she was de- 
clared to be restored to the Union. Subsequently it appeared 
that the State Convention had made no provision which could 
be construed as expressly giving the black man a right to hold 
office, and all these members were expelled from the Legislature. 
The matter was taken up by Congress, and the State was not 
fully recognized as in the Union until 1870. 

The proceedings in Florida commenced with the usual proc- 
lamation of President Johnson. It was issued on July 138, 
1865, and appointed William Marvin provisional Governor of 
the State. On August 3d he issued a proclamation prescribing 
such rules and regulations as were deemed necessary for the 
choice of members of a so-called State Constitutional Conven- 
tion, and appointed October 10th for the day of election, and 
October 25th as the day on which the delegates should meet. 


1867} A DISGRACEFUL QUARREL. "49 


They “annulled” the secession ordinance, passed an ordinance 
prohibiting slavery, with a preamble in these words: ‘ Whereas, 
slavery has been destroyed in this State by the Government of 
the United States; therefore,” etc. Another ordinance declared 
void the liabilities contracted for the war. Freedmen were 
made competent witnesses in any matter wherein a colored per- 
son was concerned. An election of State officers, of the mem- 
bers of the Legislature, and of Representatives in Congress, was 
ordered to be held on November 29th, and the Legislature were 
required to meet on December 18th. Governor David S. Walker 
was inaugurated on December 21st, and on January 18, 1866, 
the provisional Governor surrendered the conduct of the State 
to the so-called constitutional authorities. At this session of the 
Legislature, the Lower House unanimously refused to ratify 
the fourteenth amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States. The military rule which had prevailed in local affairs 
was relaxed on April 27, 1866, and all civilians under military 
arrest were turned over to the civil authorities for trial. 

On April 1, 1867, Major-General Pope assumed command 
under the act of Congress of March 2d. On June 18th asu- 
perintendent of registration was appointed, and the conditions 
for the registration of voters were prescribed. The result of 
the registration was 11,148 whites and 15,434 blacks. The 
election of delegates to the so-called State Constitutional Con- 
vention was held on November 14th, 15th and 16th, and on 
January 20, 1868, the Convention assembled, and contained sey- 
enteen blacks as members. A disgraceful quarrel arose in the 
Convention, and twenty members absented themselves. The 
twenty-one remaining claimed to be a quorum, and formed a 
Constitution, and adjourned. The absentees then returned, and, 
with three or four from the other side, organized and proceeded 
to form a Constitution. The others appeared and claimed their 
seats. Great disorder prevailed, but by the intervention of 
Major-General Meade, and by putting in the chair his sub-com- 
mander, some degree of order was restored, and such an arrange- 
ment effected that the second Constitution was completed. All 
the requisite measures under it were adopted, and on June 29th, 
the surrender of the so-called government of the State by the 


"50 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


military power of the United States to the civil authority was 
made. ‘The political quarrel continued long afterward. 

In Alabama the proclamation of President Johnson was 
issued on June 21, 1865, by which Lewis C. Parsons was ap- 
pointed provisional Governor and the usual proceedings pre- 
scribed. On July 20th the Governor issued a proclamation, 
which renewed the powers of the persons holding the township 
offices in the State; called a State Constitutional Convention to 
assemble on September 10th, and reordained the civil and crimi- — 
nal laws, except those relating to slaves, as they existed previous 
to 1861, and prescribed other regulations. A peaceful election 
was held, and the delegates to the so-called Convention assem- 
bled and took an oath to support the Constitution of the United 
States and the Union thereof, and all proclamations relative to 
the emancipation of slaves. Slavery was prohibited, the war 
debt declared void, and the secession ordinance repealed. An 
election for State officers, members of the Legislature, and Rep- 
resentatives in Congress, was ordered on the first Monday of 
November. The new Constitution was not submitted to a vote 
of the people on account of the delay it would occasion. Robert 
M. Patton was elected Governor, and the Legislature assem- 
bled on November 20th. The amendment to the Constitu- 
tion of the United States prohibiting the existence of slavery 
was ratified, and on December 18, 1865, the provisional Govern- 
or surrendered the conduct of the affairs of the State to the 
Governor-elect. 

During the existence of the Confederate Government, the 
Protestant Episcopal Church South was established, and the 
prayer for the President of the United States and all in civil 
authority, in the “ Book of Common Prayer,” was changed to 
one for the Confederate authorities. Upon the restoration of 
the authority of the United States, the prayer for the President 
was omitted altogether, by the recommendation of Bishop Wil- 
mer; whereupon Major-General Woods issued an order by 
which the Bishop and all his clergy in the diocese of Alabama 
“were suspended from their functions and forbidden to preach 
or perform divine service.” The order was subsequently set 
aside by President Johnson. 


1867] OTHERS APPOINTED BY THE COMMANDER. T51 


At the session of the Legislature in November, 1866, the 
fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution was 
rejected by an overwhelming majority. 

On assuming command of the Third Military Division under 
the act of Congress of March 2, 1867, Major-General Pope 
assigned Major-General Swayne to the “administration of the 
military reconstruction bill” in Alabama. On April 8th the 
order directing the proceedings in the registration of voters 
was issued. Special instructions were issued, as in all the other 
States, to boards of registers which declared that clerks and re- 
porters of the Supreme Court and inferior courts, and clerks to 
ordinary county courts, treasurers, county surveyors, receivers 
of tax-returns, tax-collectors, tax-receivers, sheriffs, justices of 
the peace, coroners, mayors, recorders, aldermen, councilmen of 
any incorporated city or town, who were ex-officers of the Con- 
federacy, and who, previous to the war, occupied these offices 
and afterward participated in the war, were all disqualified and 
not entitled to registration. Meantime the municipal officers 
were removed in several places, and in the city of Mobile the 
police administration was suspended and the maintenance of 
public order assumed by the commander of the military force. 
Finally, the qhief officers and councilmen of the city were re- 
moved, and others appointed by the district commander. 

The registration was completed in August, and amounted to 
72,748 whites and 88,243 blacks. The vote on the Convention 
and for delegates was given on the first three days of October. 
A hundred delegates were chosen, of whom ninety-six were 
“radicals ””—seventeen of them were blacks. On November 5th 
the so-called Convention assembled and adopted all the amend- 
ments required by the act of Congress. The election for the 
ratification of the Constitution, for State officers, members of 
the Legislature, and Representatives in Congress, was held on 
February 4, 1868. A majority of all the registered vote was 
required to ratify the Constitution, which was 85,000. The 
vote cast was 75,000. 

On June 20, 1868, Congress passed an act which declared 
that each of the States of North Carolina, South Carolina, Geor- 
gia, Florida, Alabama, and Louisiana, should be admitted to 


459 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


representation when its Legislature had ratified the fourteenth 
amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and 
further, “upon the fundamental condition that the Constitution 
of neither of said States shall ever be so amended or changed 
as to deprive any citizen, or class of citizens, of the United 
States of the right to vote in said State, who are entitled to vote 
by the Constitution thereof, herein recognized, except as a pun- 
ishment for crime,” ete. 

The so-called State Legislature assembled on July 13th, and 
Articles XIII and XIV as amendments to the Constitution 
of the United States were ratified. The conduct of the affairs 
of the State was now transferred by General Meade to the new 
civil authorities. 

Mississippi, immediately after the cessation of hostilities, 
was occupied by a military force of the United States. Mean- 
time the: Governor called an extra session of the Legislature, 
and made provision for a Constitutional Convention ; but these 
measures were set aside by the proclamation of President John- 
son, on June 138th, appointing William L. Sharkey provisional 
Governor. The system of measures embraced in the plan of 
the President for the restoration of the Confederate States to 
the Union was immediately commenced and completed in the 
election of Benjamin G. Humphreys for Governor, with the 
other State officers, members of the Legislature, and Represent- 
atives in Congress. 

The fourteenth amendment of the Constitution was unani- 
mously rejected by the Legislature in January, 1867. 

Under the act of Congress of March 2, 1867, Major-General 
Ord assumed command of the Fourth Military Division, consist- 
ing of Mississippi and Arkansas. Governor Humphreys sought 
immediately to bring the question of the constitutionality of 
this act before the United States Supreme Court. Arguments 
were heard upon it by the Court. The motion was to enjoin 
and restrain President Johnson and Major-General Ord from 
executing the act and supplements. It was denied, and Chief- 
Justice Chase, on delivering the opinion, said : 


“Tf the President refuses obedience, it is needless to observe 
that the Court is without power to enforce its process. If, on the 


1867] THE HANDS OF THE NEGROES. 153 


other hand, the President complies with the order of the Court, 
and refuses to execute the act of Congress, is it not clear that a 
collision may occur between the executive and the legislative 
departments of the Government? May not the House of Repre- 
sentatives impeach the President for such refusal ?” 


Major-General Ord, immediately after assuming command, 
proceeded to organize boards for the registration of voters and 
prescribe their qualifications and disqualifications. The latter 
were so numerous as to embrace, in all these States, every white 
who had voluntarily done the most simple act to aid or favor 
any person engaged in the Confederate service, or had incited, 
by words, others to render such aid, while the entire class of 
blacks were not disqualified by such acts, as it was assumed 
that they were done by compulsion. Thus the aim and end 
of registration, after this manner, in a State, were to throw the 
entire political power into the hands of the negroes. 

Orders were now issued directing the military to codperate 
with the civil officers to break up the crime of horse-stealing, to 
secure to labor its share of the crops, and to protect debtor and 
creditor from sacrifices by forced sales; to suspend for a time cer- 
tain sales under execution ; to prohibit interference with the legal 
tenant; to ascertain if distillers had paid their taxes; to investi- 
gate complaints made by citizens of persecution by civil author- 
ities; to notify State and municipal officers of the laws of Con- 
gress for the organization of their governments on the basis of 
suffrage without regard to color; to subordinates of the Freed- 
men’s Bureau to investigate all charges against landholders; to 
require supervisors, inspectors, and boards of registration to 
obtain the names of suitable persons, white or black, to act as 
clerks and judges of elections; to close strictly all bar-rooms 
and saloons for the day when political meetings were held; to 
remove the city marshal, three justices of the peace, and four 
members of the City Council of Vicksburg; to appoint other 
persons to fill the vacancies, who were required to take the test 
oath of Congress ; to forbid the assembling of bodies of citizens 
under any pretense ; to transfer the papers to a military commis- 
sion whenever a person who had been in the Federal service 

95 


454 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


was indicted and apprehended an unfair trial; to notify over- 
seers of the poor that any neglect to provide for colored paupers 
would be regarded as a neglect of duty, ete. 

The registered names amounted to 46,636 whites and 60,167 
blacks. The military appointment for delegates to the Conven- 
tion was such as to give to thirty-two counties, having small col- 
ored majorities, seventy of the representatives, and to twenty- 
nine counties, having small white majorities, thirty representa- 
tives. On November 5th the election was held, and the so- 
called Convention assembled on January 8,1868. The ordinance 
of secession was declared null and void; the existence of slavery 
prohibited ; payment of the war debt forbidden; universal suf- 
frage established, excepting only criminals; an election to ratify 
the Constitution and for the election of State officers, a Legisla- 
ture, and Representatives in Congress, was ordered to be held on 
June 22d, and a large number of radical amendments adopted. 
At the election the Constitution was rejected by a majority of 
7,629. The opposition candidate was also elected Governor. 

On October 1, 1867, the Chief-Justice of the State, A. H. 
Handy, sent his resignation to the Governor. He said: 


“Tt is apparent that the character and dignity of the Court can 
not be maintained, and that its powers must be held and exercised 
in subordination to the behests of a military commander.” 


On December 28, 1867, Major-General Ord was succeeded 
by Major-General McDowell. On June 15th the latter issued 
an order removing Governor Humphreys and appointing Major- 
General A. Ames to the vacancy. Governor Humphreys de- 
clined to vacate the office, saying that the attempt toremove him 
was a “usurpation of the civil government of Mississippi, un- 
warranted by and in violation of the Constitution of the United 
States.” A squadron of soldiers was sent by the military com- 
mander of the post, which marched in and took possession of 
the office. The house of the Governor was then demanded for 
the new incumbent of the office. As Governor Humphreys re- 
fused to vacate it, a file of soldiers came and ejected him. 

After the rejection of the so-called new Constitution, its 
friends applied to Congress, as the sovereign, to throw out the 


1867] AID OF THIS WEAPON, rat 


vote of several counties and declare the Constitution to be 
adopted. This action was recommended on the ground, as 
they said, that the election had not been fairly conducted, and 
that violence and intimidation had, in many parts of the State, 
prevented a full and just vote. The Constitution was defeated, 
not, as thus alleged, by fraud and intimidation, but distinctly 
for the reason that it was more vindictive in its spirit than the 
people, white or black, would tolerate, and more proscriptive in 
its provisions than the acts of Congress required. 

In March, 1869, the provisional Governor of the State, 
Major-General A. Ames, was made the military commander of 
the Fourth Military District. At the same time a joint resolu- 
tion was passed by Congress, which ordered that all persons 
holding office in Mississippi, who.could not take the test-oath 
prescribed in 1862, should be removed from office. By the aid 
of this weapon it was expected that General Ames would make 
the State organization so-called Republican. Meanwhile Con- 
gress passed an act which authorized the President to submit 
the Constitution of the State to another election by the people, 
with a separate vote on its objectionable section. Preparations 
for this election were commenced by the issue of an order of 
the military commander prescribing stringent regulations rela- 
tive to the requisites of voters for registration. The election 
was held on November 30 and December 1, 1869, and the 
Constitution was ratified. The vote against disfranchising 
citizens for serving under the Confederacy during the war was 
almost unanimous. ‘The so-called Legislature assembled on 
January 11, 1870. The fourteenth and fifteenth amendments 
of the United States Constitution were adopted, and on Feb- 
ruary 12th an act of Congress was passed by which the State 
‘ was permitted to be represented in that body. 

At the beginning of 1865 Louisiana was under the State 
government constructed by General Banks, as has been stated 
in previous pages. It occupied New Orleans, and extended its 
control to the extremity of the military lines. Within this 
limit it was treated practically as a restored portion of the 
Union. The United States military draft was enforced. Much 
disorder in civil affairs prevailed, and some serious disturbances 


"56 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


occurred up to the time when Congress undertook its plan of 
restoration. There was, in fact, a military rule during all that 
period. On March 19, 1867, Major-General Sheridan was as- 
signed to the command of the Fifth Military District, embrac- 
ing Louisiana and Texas, in accordance with the act of Con- 
gress of March 2d. By this act the existing State government 
was “declared to be only provisional, and subject. to be abol- 
ished, modified, controlled, or superseded.” Major-General 
Sheridan began his proceedings with the removal of certain 
obnoxious officials who were, in his opinion, dangerous to the 
peace of the community. The registration of voters was ordered 
to commence on May 1st. To an application to General Grant, 
the commander-in-chief, for more definite instructions, by Major- 
General Sheridan, the former replied on June 28th: 


“Enforce your own construction of the military bill, until or- 
dered to do otherwise.” 


The Legislature having appropriated four million dollars for 
the repairs of levees, and appointed a board to discharge the 
duties, Governor Wells became dissatisfied with their action, 
and appointed another board. Disputes arising between the 
two boards, Major-General Sheridan removed both, and ap- 
pointed a third, and enforced its authority. In April, Major- 
General Sheridan, writing to General Grant, said : 


“T fear I shall be obliged to remove Governor Wells, of this 
State, who is impeding me as much as he can.” 


General Grant replied : 


“TY would advise that no removals of Governors of States be 
made at present. It is a question now under consideration whether 
the power exists, under the law, to remove, except by special act 
of Congress, or by trial under the sixth section of the act promul- 
gated in Orders 33 (act of March 2d).” 


On June 3d Major-General Sheridan issued an order, re- 
moving the so-called Governor, saying that, “having made 
himaelf an impediment to the faithful execution of the act of 
Congress of March 2d, by directly and indirectly im peding the 


1867] REMOVE THE FORMER INCUMBENTS. "BT 


General in command in the faithful execution of the law,” ete., 
Benjamin F. Flanders was appointed to fill the vacancy. 

The registration ceased on July 31st, with the names of 
44,732 whites and 82,907 blacks. Extensive removals from 
office were now made—among others, twenty-two members of 
the City Council of New Orleans, also the city treasurer and 
city surveyor, a justice of peace, sheriff, etc. On August 17th 
Major-General Sheridan was relieved, and Major-General Han- 
cock succeeded. “ Impediments to reconstruction under the 
laws of Congress” continued to be removed, and other persons 
assigned to their places. 

The election for delegates to the so-called Convention was 
held on September 27th and 28th, and that body assembled on 
November 23d. The measures required by the act of Congress 
were adopted, and an election for its ratification and for State 
officers, and a Legislature, was held on April 17th and 18th. 
The Constitution was ratified, and the State officers and mem- 
bers of the Legislature were elected. Meantime Major-General 
Hancock was relieved, and succeeded by Major-General Bu- 
chanan. “ 

After the election, the registrars of the State proposed to 
install the newly elected officers under the provisions of an 
ordinance of the Convention. But they were notified by Major- 
General Buchanan that it could not be done without permission. 
To avoid any question as to the persons who should hold the 
offices of so-called Governor and Lieutenant-Governor after the 
meeting of the Legislature, the district commander was directed 
by General Grant to remove the former incumbents by military 
order and set up the individuals lately elected as their succes- 
sors. This was done on June 27th, and on the 29th the so-called 
Legislature assembled in pursuance of a notice from the com- 
manding General. The fourteenth amendment to the United 
States Constitution was adopted ; and, as by the act of Congress 
of June 25th, Louisiana had been restored to representation in 
that body, the commanding General on July 138, 1868, trans- 
ferred the administration of civil affairs to the State officers. 

I will not pursue these odious details further. Suffice it to 
say that Texas and Arkansas, having passed through the same 


758 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


military process as their sister Confederate States, were ad- 
mitted to representation in Congress, the former in 1870 and 
the latter in 1868. 

It will be seen that the power usurped by Congress was 
without a limitation, and extended to all the political, civil, and 
social relations. Many of the military commanders seem to 
have regarded their authority as equally comprehensive. The 
Attorney-General of the United States, in his official opinion on 
these acts of Congress, addressed to the President on June 12, 
1867, says: 


“It appears that some of the military commanders have under- 
stood this grant of power as all-comprehensive, conferring on them 
the power to remove the executive and judicial officers of the 
State, and to appoint other officers in their places ; to suspend the 
legislative power of the State; to take under their control, by offi- 
cers appointed by themselves, the collection and disbursement of 
the revenues of the State ; to prohibit the execution of the laws of 
the State by the agency of its appointed officers and agents ; to 
change the existing laws in matters affecting purely civil and pri- 
vate rights ; to suspend or enjoin the execution of the judgments 
and decrees of the established State courts ; to interfere in the or- 
dinary administration of justice in the State courts, by prescrib- 
ing new qualifications for jurors ; and to change, upon the ground 
of expediency, the existing relations of the parties to contracts, 
giving protection to one party by violating the rights of the other 
party.” 


Many instances are then related by the Attorney-General to 
confirm his statements. Some of these are worthy of the at- 
tention of the reader, although they may have been mentioned 
on a preceding page. In one district the so-called Governor of 
a State was deposed under a threat of military force, and an- 
other person, called a Governor, appointed by the military com- 
mander to fill the place—thus presenting the strange spectacle 
of an official intrusted with chief power to execute the laws of 
a State, whose authority was not recognized by the laws he was 
called on to execute. 

In the same district a Judge was, by military order, ejected 
from his office, and a private citizen was appointed Judge in his 


1867] SO, TOO, DID THE JUDGE. 159 


place by military authority, and exercised criminal jurisdiction 
“over all crimes, misdemeanors, and offenses ” committed within 
the territorial jurisdiction of the court. This military appointee 
was certainly not authorized, as a member of a military tribunal, 
to try any one for an offense; and he had just as little author- 
ity, as a Judge of a criminal court of the State, to try and pun- 
ish any offender. This person was sole judge in a criminal 
court whose jurisdiction extended to the life of the accused. 
In capital cases he might well change places with the criminal, 
for, if the latter had unlawfully taken life, so too did the Judge. 

In another district, a military order commanded the nominal 
Governor of the State to forbid the assembling of the Legisla- 
ture, and thus suspended the proper legislative power of the 
State. In the same district an order was issued “to relieve the 
Treasurer of the State from the duties, bond, books, papers, etc., 
appertaining to his office, and to put an “assistant quartermas- 
ter of the United States Volunteers” in place of the removed 
Treasurer. The duties of this quartermaster-treasurer were thus 
summed up: He was to make to the headquarters of the dis- 
trict “the same reports and returns required from the Treas- 
urer, and a monthly statement of the receipts and expenditures ; 
he will pay all warrants for salaries which may be or become 
due, and legitimate expenditures for the support of the Peniten- 
tiary, State Asylum, and the support of the provisional State 
government; but no scrip or warrants for outstanding debts, 
of other kind than those specified, will be paid without special 
authority from these headquarters. He will deposit funds in 
the same manner as though they were those of the United 
States.” These instances will suffice, although many more 
might be related. 

Illegal, unjust, and vindictive as were these gross usurpa- 
tions of the Congress of the United States in their immediate 
results, the consequences which followed were still more disas- 
trous. When the late Confederate States were restored to rep- 
resentation in Congress, a large portion of their white citizens 
remained disfranchised, and the political power of each was in 
the hands of the blacks and the remnant of the whites. Nor 
was the military force withdrawn, but it was placed in conven- 


760 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


ient localities, under the pretext of maintaining order, but in 
reality to sustain the new rulers. It must be manifest that the 
sovereignty of the people was now extinct, and those ruled who 
had the bayonets on their side. With the disfranchised were the 
intelligence, the virtue, and the political experience; with the 
voters were the ignorance, the lawless passions, and soon a body 
of political adventurers from the Northern States, greedy for 
power and plunder. These quickly won for themselves the dis- 
tinctive epithet of “carpet-baggers.” The governments under 
the control of such popular sovereigns demonstrated the vin- 
dictiveness rather than wisdom of Congress, and soon brought 
forth their natural fruits of anarchy, fraud, and crime. One or 
two examples must suffice in which to exhibit these results. 

The debt of the ten Confederate States in 1874 was as fol- 
lows : 


Wirginia, tundedvand wntimded crys... -..:.1c eetetecetecs terete $45,718,119 73 
NorthtCarolina 35) .\./9ticiate ase toate eke @ cone 38,921,848 05 
South Carolina ssp seeraeyappet otareh= gers Re Steelers eRe 9,866,627 385 
WOM a of ois ioe ln cdepe ete geen ree Asks mie anette 1,620,809 27 
GEOTSIA <:arsiara lero nisenoreaeretens Vera ese $8,105,500 funded 
8,000,000 fraudulent 16,105,500 00 
Alabama,.....% $10,452,593 380 
15,051,000 00 railroad endorsement 15,503,593 80 
MISSISSID PL stein ysjepeteveralelsn=/-(+1s! ojala iors guraraot ON ene area tiene 3,558,629 24 
TiOwisianay<« -.aiioe qnrhatoatl.rnrese.b'a ok end caweheieba renee wees 23,933,407 90 
IROXBS 7, a3 1a nloveneteleretalcretagar saith o shee cle ace tig erates tenetenete eeerene 4,012,421 00 
INDE ANSASH daracls iaaie Sloss stars’ <iare ciete ac en eenceeee eI lene 9,561,000 00 


$148,801,955 80 


It is not claimed that all this amount of indebtedness had 
been accumulated since the close of the war. Some of the 
States had debts previous to the war, but a large proportion of 
the amount had been contracted by the spendthrift governments 
instituted by Congress, and very little could be found to offset 
the expenditure. 

Again, in Arkansas, on April 16th, Governor Brooks seized 
and occupied the State-House with a body of armed men and 
two cannon. On the same day, Governor Baxter proclaimed 
martial law, and marched with a body of armed men from St. 
John’s College to the Anthony House, and established his head- 


1875] I AM BUT A SOLDIER. "61 


quarters there. Guards were placed along the principal streets, 
and the State-House was completely surrounded by a cordon of 
sentinels. Subsequently, he marched to attack the State-House, 
but a body of troops belonging to the Government of the United 
States appeared before it. Two so-called Republican Governors 
of the State, with their troops, were about to fight for the ex- 
ecutive office. 

In Louisiana, on January 4, 1875, a body of troops of the 
Government of the United States, on the order of Governor 
W. P. Kellogg, marched into the hall of the House of Repre- 
sentatives of the State Legislature, while that body was in ses- 
sion, and forcibly seized and took out five members as not en- 
titled to seats. The General in command (De Trobriand) then 
proceeded to eject the Clerk, and arrested the proceedings of the 
House. When expostulated with by the Speaker, he replied: 
“T am but a soldier. These are my orders.” The members 
then retired. 

In Mississippi, on December 7, 1874, a serious conflict oc- 
eurred in Vicksburg between whites and blacks, which resulted 
in great loss of life and caused a widely-spread alarm. It grew 
out of frauds committed by public officers. 

Again, during the exciting contest in Arkansas, the Con- 
gress of the United States appointed a committee to investigate 
the affairs in that State, and “whether said State had now a 
government republican in form, the officers of which are duly 
elected, and, as now organized, ought to be recognized by the 
Government of the United States.” 

On December 24, 1874, the Congress of the United States 
appointed a committee to proceed to New Orleans, and inves- 
tigate the state of affairs in Louisiana. This committee re- 
ported on January 14, 1875, that “they could not agree upon 
any recommendation; but, upon the situation in Louisiana, as it 
appeared before us, we are all agreed.” 

The same Congress, before its adjournment, appointed a 
committee to proceed to Mississippi and make an investigation 
of the state of affairs there. Thus committees were kept quite 
busy in traveling back and forth to these States, and much of 
the time of Congress was occupied in discussing their affairs, 


762 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOV ERNMENT, 


and in efforts to reconcile the quarreling factions of so-called’ 
Republicans in them, to the great detriment of the public inter- 
ests. 

Where now were the unalienable rights of man, and the 
sovereignty of the people, with their safeguards ; a Constitution 
with limited powers, the reserved rights of the States, and the 
supremacy of law equally over both rulers and ruled? All were 
gone. — 

It will be seen that, through all these proceedings, the Gov- 
ernment of the United States controlled as the sovereign, and the 
sovereignty of the people was extinct. The measures adopted 
were those prescribed by the Government of the United States ; 
and, subordinate to these and subject to the conditions of these, 
such others were permitted as the necessities of the people re- 
quired. Affairs were not in such disorder when the Constitu- 
tion of the United States was adopted. The uppermost then 
had come to be the undermost now, and that which was nothing 
then had grown to be over all now. Will it always be thus? 
Was the inherent sovereignty of the people destroyed by shot 
and shell ? 

The intelligent reader must perceive that this invasion of 
the natural and unalienable rights of man, the subjugation of 
the sovereignty of the people, the monstrous usurpations of 
powers not granted in the Constitution, the trampling under 
foot of the reserved rights of the States, the disregard of the 
supremacy of law, and the assumption of the sovereignty of the 
Government of the United States as the corner-stone of our 
future political edifice, is a revolution in our system of Govern- 
ment, deep-seated, reaching to the foundations, and sending the 
poisonous waters of despotism throughout all the branches fed 
from this fountain. The Confederate States resisted it from 
the beginning. They drew their swords for the sovereignty of 
the people, and they fought for the maintenance of their State 
governments in all their reserved rights and powers, as the only 
true and natural guardians of the unalienable rights of their 
citizens, among which the most sacred is, that only the consent 
of the governed can give vitality and existence to any civil or 
political institution. 


1881] WILL IT STAND? 768 


This overthrow of the rights of freemen and the establish- 
ment of such new relations required a complete revolution in 
the principle of the government of the United States, the sub- 
version of the State governments, the subjugation of the people, 
and the destruction of the fraternal Union. The work has been 
done. Will it stand? Have the eternal principles of the Dec- 
laration of Independence been hid from our sight for ever? 
Or, will they again come forth, “redeemed, disenthralled, re- 
generated,” and rally the reunited people to shout in thunder- 
tones for sovereignty of the people and the unalienable rights 
of man ? 

It has been shown in previous pages that the State govern- 
ments were instituted to be the*special guardians of these 
unalienable rights of man; but henceforth they must be the 
sworn defenders of the Government of the United States, not of 
the Constitution and laws enacted in pursuance thereof, but of 
such interpolations and perversions of them as, in cases of 
necessity, that Government should find it convenient to make. 
Whenever it pleases, it can set them aside; and, whenever 
it wills, it can destroy them. Unalienable rights are unknown 
to this war-begotten theory of the Constitution. The day has 
come in which mankind behold this Government founding its 
highest claims to greatness and glory upon deeds done in utter 
violation of those rights which belonged to its own citizens 
in every State, North and South. The palladium of the free- 
man, the Bills of Rights, the limitations of power, the written 
Constitutions, have all lost their sacred authority, and not a man 
or a State dare, single-handed, gainsay the will of the agency 
which, feeling power, has forgotten right. It has put its hand 
on the ballot-box, and the declaration is made that it is not safe 
to trust the people to vote, except under the inspection of 
its authority, after the example set by the Roman emperors. 
When the cause was lost, what cause was it? Not that of the 
South only, but the cause of constitutional government, of the 
supremacy of law, of the natural rights of man. 


“64 RISE AND FALL OF THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT. 


CONCLUSION. 


My first object in this work was to prove, by historical 
authority, that each of the States, as sovereign parties. to the 
compact of Union, had the reserved power to secede from it 
whenever it should be found not to answer the ends for which 
it was established. If this has been done, it follows that the 
war was, on the part of the United States Government, one of 
ageression and usurpation, and, on the part of the South, was 
for the defense of an inherent, iuaeeeeble right. 

My next purpose was to show, by the gallantry and devotion 
of the Southern people, in their unequal struggle, how thorough 
was their conviction of the justice of their cause; that, by then: 
humanity to the wounded and captives, they poet themselves 
the worthy descendants of chivalric sires, and fit to be free; and 
that, in every case, as when our army invaded Deans by 
ae respect for private rights, their morality and observance 
of the laws of civilized war, they are entitled to the confidence 
and regard of mankind. 

The want of space has compelled me to omit a notice of 
many noble deeds, both of heroic men and women. The roll 
of honor, merely, would fill more than the pages allotted to this 
work. To others, who can say cuncta quorum vidi, I must leave 
the pleasant task of paying the tribute due to their. associate 
patriots. 

In asserting the right of secession, it has not been my wish 
to incite to its exercise: I recognize the fact that the war showed 
it to be impracticable, but this did not prove it to be wrong ; and, 
now that it may not be again attempted, and that the Union may 
promote the general welfare, it is needful that the truth, the 
whole truth, should be known, so that crimination and. recrimi- 
nation may for ever cease, and then, on the basis of fraternity 
and faithful regard for the rights of the States, there may be 
written on the arch of the Union, Zsto perpetua. 


Norr.—The publishers are responsible for the orthography of 
these volumes, 


” 


END EX TO VOL It. 


Abandonment of the Peninsula, recom- 
mended by General J. E. Johnston, 86; 
a defensive position nearer to Rich- 
mond proposed, 86; the question dis- 
cussed in a conference of officers, 87 ; 
plan of General Johnston, 87 ; concen- 
tration of all troops, 87; objections, 
87; not adopted, 87; measures deter- 
mined on, 87. 

Apams, Joun Quincy, Secretary of State, 
correspondence with the British Sec- 
retary of State relative to the depor- 
tation of slaves in war, 8,9; on the 
restoration of slaves captured in war, 
163; says private property, including 
slaves, can not be taken by the usages 
of war, 170. 

Agents of the State of New York to take 
the vote of her soldiers at the Presi- 
dential election, 492; seized with the 
votes and locked up in prison by the 
orders of the Government of the United 
States, 492; the description of the im- 
prisonment, 493. 

Aggressions, the authors of, having ac- 
quired power, were eager for the spoils 
of victory, 160; the series of, about to 
be consummated, 182. 

Alabama, the cruiser, her condition when 
leaving Liverpool, 250. 

Alarm at Washington, created by the 
operations of Jackson in the Shenan- 
doah Valley, 105. 

Axupricn, Judge A. P., arrested, 741; 
removed by a military officer, 744. 

ANDERSON, General G. B., in command at 
Sharpsburg, 336. 

ANDERSON, General J. R., placed in ob- 
servation before General McDowell be- 
fore Fredericksburg, 101. 

AnpERSON, General R. H., in command at 
Sharpsburg, 336. 

Andersonville, occasion for its selection 
for the confinement of prisoners of 
war, 596; its location, 596; prepara- 
tions, 596; treatment, 597, 


96 


Anomaly among Governments, the Gov- 
ernment of the United States, 453. 

Arkansas, proceedings to institute a State 
Government inaugurated by order of 
President Lincoln, 302; his order, 308 ; 
the State Constitution amended by as- 
sumption, or by assuming it to be 
amended, 303; movements in the 
northern part of the State, 304; fur- 
ther proceedings, 304; vote for Article 
XIII of the United States Constitution, 
304; fraud triumphant, 304. 

Arkansas, The ram, fight at the mouth 
of the Yazoo, 242; enters‘the Missis- 
sippi and runs through the enemy’s 
fleet, 242; description of the vessel, 
243; destined for attack on Baton 
Rouge, 248; failure of her engines, 
244, 

Arms and munitions of war manufac- 
tured in the United States for Turkey 
in her late war with Russia, 276. 

Army of Northern Virginia, changes of 
position before Richmond, 101; re- 
turns to the vicinity of Richmond after 
McClellan reached Westover, 152. 

Army of Tennessee under General A. 8. 
Johnston, its strength after fall of Don- 
elson, 89; moves to Murfreesboro, 39 ; 
its concentration, 39; joins Beauregard 
at Corinth, 39. 

Army of the United States, new generals 
assigned to command, and new depart- 
ments created, 18; under General 
McClellan—its size when reported to 
be crippled for want of reénforcements, 
106; size of our army, 106, 

Army of Virginia, order of President 
Lincoln creating, 135 ; the commander, 
and the forces, 135. 

Asupy, General Turner, commands rear- 
guard, 112; attacked by Fremont’s 
cavalry, 112; killed, 112; remarks of 
General Jackson, 112, 

Assertion, An, often made during the 
war, 451. 


766 


Allanta, The, a cruiser’s name changed 
to Tallahassee, 265; commanded by 
Commander John Taylor Wood, 265 ; 
her cruise along the New England coast, 
265. 

Atlanta evacuated by General Hood, 563; 


surrendered by the Mayor to General 


Sherman, with the promise that non- 
combatants and private property should 
be respected, 563; order of Sherman 
directing all civilians, male and female, 
living in Atlanta to leave the city within 
five days from September 5th, 564; 
vain appeals of the Mayor and corpo- 
rate authorities for a modification of 
the order, 564; reply of Sherman, 564. 

Atrocities of the war : letter of the Presi- 
dent to General Lee, 315; in the Shen- 
andoah Valley, 531; retaliation of 
General Early, 531; Butler’s proceed- 
ings in New Orleans, 232; Pope’s mili- 
tary orders in Virginia, 313 ; Sherman’s 
expulsion of the inhabitants of Atlan- 
ta, 564; march to Savannah, 570; 
Sherman’s burning of Columbia, 627 ; 
the order of President Lincoln to mili- 
tary commanders, 588; order of Gen- 
eral Pope, 588; letter of General Lee 
to General Halleck, 589; efforts of 
General Hunter to inaugurate a servile 
war, 589; proceedings of Brigadier- 
General Phelps, 589; do. of General 
Butler, 589 ; extracts from the official 
report of Major-General Butler to the 
Committee on the Conduct of the War 
relative to the exchange of prisoners, 
603 ; extract from the message to the 
Confederate Congress, in August, 1862, 
707; do. in January, 1868, 707; varied 
stages of the war, 708; atrocities of 
Major-General Hunter in the Shenan- 
doah Valley, 709; statement of Rev. 
John Bachman of the devastations of 
the enemy in South Carolina, 710-715. 

Attrition, The policy of, can hardly be 
regarded as generalship, or be offered 
to military students as an example 
worthy of imitation, 526. 


Bacuman, Rev. Dr, Jonn, statement of 
the devastations of the enemy in South 
Carolina, 710-715. 

Banks, Major-General N. P., exclamation 
of relief on his escape from Jackson 
across the Potomac, 106; succeeds 
General Butler at New Orleans, 289 ; 
expedition into the Red River country, 
541; his force, 548; battles at Mans- 
field and Pleasant Hill, 548, 544; ob- 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


tains cotton in the Red River country, 
545. 

BarkspaLe, Brigadier-General WiLtiaM, 
commands the force placed at Freder- 
icksburg to resist the enemy’s crossing, 
353. 

Barron, Captain SaMvEL, commands at 
Hatteras Inlet, 77; is bombarded by 
the enemy’s fleet, and capitulates, 77. 

Barry, Colonel Wirt1am §., commander 
of the burial-party at Corinth, 390; his 
reception by General Rosecrans, 390. 

Baton Rouge, its importance, 2438 ; occu- 
pied by the enemy, 243 ; attacked, 244; 
failure of entire success by the break- 
down of the ram Arkansas, 244. 

Battalion of cadets, their services at Rich- 
mond, 665. 

BEAUREGARD, General P. G. T., takes 
command in West Tennessee, 51; 
moves to Corinth, 51; states cause of 
delay of movements toward Shiloh, 55 ; 
report of result of first day’s battle of 

« Shiloh, 60 ; his force at Corinth, 73 ; his 

“estimate of the enemy, 73; retreats to 
Tupelo, 74; declines to let Bragg go to 
Mississippi, 74; his health, 74; certifi- 
cates of his physicians, 74; transfers 
the command to General Bragg and re- 
tires to Bladen Springs, 75; statement 
of the case,75; in command near 
Drury’s Bluff, 511; interview with the 
President, 511; position ef the forces, 
512; movements of the enemy, 513: 
the affair at Drury’s Bluff, 513; his 
proposal fora campaign, 514; assigned 
to the military division of the West, 
566; retreats toward North Carolina, 
630; decides to march to the eastern 
part of the State, 630; effect of this 
move, 630; modifies his proposed 
movement, 631. 

Beaver Dam, its naturally strong position 
near Mechanicsville, 184; engagement 
near, 134. 

Belligerents—in no instance from the 
opening to the close of the war did the 
United States Government speak of us 
as belligerents, 278 ; why was it ? 278 ; 
the signification of the word, combined 
with existing circumstances, expressed 
something it was in no degree willing 
to admit before the world, 278; its 
war was against the people within the 
limits of the Confederate States, and 
were they a mob or organized political 
communities ? 279; then it was a war 
against the States which the world 
could not justify, 279; opinion of Jus- 


INDEX TO VOL. IL . 167, 


tice Green, of the United States Su: 
preme Court, 281; case of the Santis- 
sima Trinidad, 281. 

Bexgamin, Jupag P., Secretary, letter to 
General A. 8. Johnston, 40; report on 
the proceedings of Generals Floyd and 
Pillow requested, 40. 

Berwick Bay, capture of the works of the 
enemy at, 419; the spoils taken, 419. 
Big Black River railroad-bridge, topo- 
graphical features of the position, 409 ; 
results of the retreat of Pemberton 

from, 410. 

Brarr, Francis P., visits Richmond, 612; 
conversation with the President, 612 ; 
letter given to him, 615 ; answer of Mr. 
Lincoln, 615 ; return of Mr. Blair, 616; 
his statements, 616; further move- 
ments, 617; his visit, 618. 

Blockade, The, its effect upon English 
manufactures, 344 ; intervention of the 
Governments of France and England 
to alleviate the distress, 344; the pas- 
siveness of neutral Kurope relative to, 
373; other blockades compared, 373 ; 
facts shown relative to our ports, 374; 
Great Britain assumes to make a change 
in the principles announced at Paris, 
875; dispatch of the British Minister, 
375; illustration of the importance of 
this change, 375; other matters inju- 
rious to us, 376; letters of the British 
Government to United States, 379, 380 ; 
marked encouragement given to per- 
severe in the blockade, 380; statement 
of the British Government as to the 
blockade of the Southern ports, 381; 
further facts, 381. 

Bowen, General Joun §., detached from 
Vicksburg to Grand Gulf, 397 ; retreats 
toward Grand Gulf, 399; one of the 
best soldiers of the Confederate ser- 
vice, 416. 

Bowling Green, position of General A. S. 
Johnston’s center turned, 36; the con- 
sequences, 36, 37; its evacuation, 37. 

Brace, General Braxton, commands a 
division of Beauregard’s forces in West 
Tennessee, 51; sent from Pensacola, 54; 
account of Johnston’s efforts, 54; com- 
mands a corps at battle of Shiloh, 55; 
statement of affairs at battle of Shi- 
loh, 59; ordered to command the de- 
partment under General Lovell, 74 ; 
Beauregard declines to permit his 
departure owing to ill health, 74; 
receives the command from Beaure- 
gard, 75; report of subsequent pro- 
ceedings, 75; advances from Tupelo and 


occupies Chattanooga, 382; marches 
from Chattanooga and enters Kentucky, 
883; passes to the rear of General 
Buell in Middle Tennessee, 383; thus 
relieves north Alabama and Middle 
Tennessee from the presence of the 
enemy, 383; issues an address to the 
people of Kentucky, 383; gives battle 
to the enemy at Perryville, 8838 ; losses, 
384; falls back before reénforcements 
to the enemy, 384; takes position at 
Murfreesboro, 384; begins the con- 
flict at Murfreesboro, 385; its result, 
885; falls back to Tullahoma, 885; 
takes a position south of Chattanooga, 
429; his movements, 429; concen- 
trates at Chickamauga, 429 ; forms his 
line of battle, 430; the conflict, 481- 
433. 

Brazil, Government of, demands the res- 
toration of the cruiser Florida, 262; 
letter of Mr. Seward, 262. 

Breckinripce, Brigadier-General Joun 
C., commands a corps at battle of Shi- 
loh, 55; commands the attack at Ba- 
ton Rouge, 244; commands in south- 
western Virginia, 527; his movements 
and skirmishes, 528; ordered to Han- 
over Junction, 528; returns, 529. 

Brent, Major, attacks and captures the 
gunboat Indianola, 241. 

Brown, Commander, commands the ram 
Arkansas, 242. 

Brown, Major, report of the surrender 
of Fort Donelson, 34. 

BucHANan, Captain FRANKLIN, commands 
the Virginia, 196; fight at Hampton 
Roads, 197; commands the ironclad 
Tennessee in the conflict in Mobile 
Bay, 206. 

Buckner, General Sron, commands a 
division at Fort Donelson, 29; in com- 
mand at Knoxville, 426, 

Burtt, General D. C., assigned to com- 
mand in Kentucky, 18; his threaten- 
ing position, 38; his force after fall of 
Donelson, 89; moves his army to join 
Grant at Pittsburg Landing, 54; pro- 
gress of his advance, 64; statement of 
the condition of Grant’s army after the 
battle of Shiloh, 70; retreats from 
Nashville to Louisville, fearing for the 
safety of the latter city, 383. 

Buttock, Captain Jamus D., his integrity 
and efficiency as naval agent at Liver- 
pool, 248, 

Burglary, the State government throws 
its shield over the citizen for his pro- 
tection against, 452. 


: 


768 


Bournsivz, General Amprosr, commands 
expedition against the coast of North 
Carolina, 79; succeeds McClellan in 
command of the army, 351; attempts 
to throw bridges across the river be- 
fore Fredericksburg, 352 ; finally cross- 
es and lays his bridges, 353; attacks 
our army, 354; is repulsed, 355 ; with- 
draws, 356; losses, 356; the causes he 
assigned for his failure, 856; subse- 
quent inactivity of his army, 357; re- 
moved from command, 357, 

Burier, General B. F., commands expe- 
dition against the coast of North Caro- 
lina, 79; advances to New Orleans, 
223; a reign of terror follows, 232; 
lands at Bermuda Hundred, 507; makes 
a raid to Chester, 508; compelled to 
withdraw, 508; moves out again to 
Port Walthal Junction, 511; repulsed 
by troops of General Beauregard from 
Charleston, 511; commissioner for the 
exchange of prisoners, 598. 


Captures on the high seas, the position 
taken by Washington and Jefferson in 
1798, 2770. 

CampsrLL, Joun A., appointed to confer 
with Mr, Lincoln, 617. 
Cause, The, that was lost. 

was it? 763. 

Cedar Creck, Harly’s battle with the ene- 
my at, 538-540. 

Cedar Run, its location, 3117; the battle at, 
317, 319; the forces, 817; losses, 319. 

Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, retaliatory 
measures inflicted on, 531, 532. 

Chancellorsville, forces of the enemy con- 
verge near, from the fords of the Rapi- 
dan, 357; Anderson’s rear-guard at- 
tacked by cavalry, 857; Lee moves 
toward, 358; turns the enemy’s right, 
858; a position of great natural 
strength assumed by the enemy, 358; 
his lines, 858, 859; effort to turn his 
right flank and gain his rear, 859; to 
be done by Jackson with three divi- 
sions, 859; success of the movement, 
859, 360; the attack in front, 860; 
Jackson wounded, 360; battle renewed 
next day, 361; the enemy retreats 
toward the Rappahannock, 3861 ; 
Strengthens his position, 861; attack 
from Fredericksburg on Lee’s rear, 362, 
363; battle near Salem Church, 368; 
attack renewed on Hooker, 364; enemy 
recross the river, 364; losses, 364; 
Strength, 365; a brief and forcible ac- 
count of the battle, 365, 366. 


What cause 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


Change of plans, necessary after the fall 
of Fort Donelson, 39. : 


“ Ohange of base,” by McClellan, expla- 


nation of, by the Comte de Paris, 104. 

Charge, against the Government of the 
United States, 454. 

Charleston Harbor, the Confederate naval 
force in, 204; its strength and effi- 
ciency, 204; exploit of the ironclads 
Palmetto State and Chicora, 205 ; 
number of torpedoes in the harbor, 
208; evacuated by General Hardee, 
629; occupied by the enemy’s forces, 
630; condition of Fort Sumter, 630. 


Chatianooga, Grant arrives after the bat- 


tle of Chickamauga and assumes com- 
mand, 484; his description of the situ- 
ation, 4384 ; his operations, 435 ; move- 
ments of General Hooker, 435; arrival 
of Sherman, 435; attack made by the 
whole force of the enemy’s ccnter, 436 ; 
get possession of rifle-pits at the foot 
of Missionary Ridge, and commence 
the ascent of the mountain, 4386; our 
forces withdraw, 486; losses, 486; oc- 
cupied by the enemy, 429. 
Chickahominy River, its character and 
course, 122; rising from heavy rains, 
124; position of General Sumner, 124, 


Chickamauga, Bragg concentrates at, 


429; forms his line of battle, 430; 
commencement of the contest, 430; 
movements of the forces, 431; Con- 
federate troops engaged, 431; Bragg 
reorganizes his command, 432; strength 
of the opposing forces, 432; Bragg’s 
order of battle, 482; movement of 
troops, 483; enemy yields along the 
whole line, 433; withdraws at night, 
433; his losses, 438. 


Curxroy, Colonel R. H., remarks on the 


talents of General Lee, displayed in 
the preparation and command of his 
army, 129. 

Cincinnati, alarm at the approach of 
General EB, K. Smith, 382. 

Citizens, Southern, confined in cells to 
await the punishment of piracy, 2; 
peaceful, an indiscriminate warfare 
waged upon, 2. 

Citizen’s life, is it in danger? the State 
guarantees protection, 451; his per- 
sonal liberty is guaranteed by the 
State, 451; his property guaranteed 
from unlawful seizure and destruction 
by the State, 452. 

Citizenship and the ballot is wholly within 
the control of each State, 729; efforts 
of Congress to wrest it from each 


INDEX TO VOL. IL 


Confederate State to confer on the ne- | 
groes, 729, 

Civil government in Maryland, over- 
thrown by the military force of the 
United States, 461. ; 

Clarence, The, fitted out as a tender to 
the Florida, 261. 

CLEBURNE, Major-General, killed at the 
battle of Franklin, 577. 

Coast defenses, the system adopted, 78; 
topography of the coast, 78; descrip- 
tion of the fortifications constructed, 
79; several points captured by the 
enemy, 79; state of affairs when Gen- 
eral Lee assumed command of the De- 
partment of the Carolinas and Florida, 
80; his plans for coast defenses, 80; 
the system he organized, 80; its suc- 
cess, 81. 

Coss, General Howet1, arranges a cartel 
for the exchange of prisoners with 
General Wool, 587. 

Cotzurn, Colonel, captured at Spring Hill 
by Generals Van Dorn and Forrest, 
426. 

Cold Harbor, fearful carnage of Grant’s 
soldiers, 524; they sullenly and silent- 
ly decline to renew the assault, 524. 

Columbia, South Carolina, approach of 
General Sherman’s army, 627; the 
Mayor surrenders the city, 627; infa- 
mous disregard of the established rules 
of war, 627; the city burned, 627; at- 
tributed by Sherman to an order of 
General Hampton to burn the cotton, 
627; denied by General Hampton, 627 ; 
his letter, 628; other atrocities of Sher- 
man’s army, 629. 

Oolumbus, Kentucky., threatened by the 
enemy, 18. 

Combinations of insurrectionists, the 
Southern people declared to be, by the 
United States Government, 2. 

Conciliatory terms offered by the Goy- 
ernor of a State for the sake of peace, 
rejected by the United States Govern- 
ment, 2. — 

Confederate Government, carly efforts to 
buy ships, 245; the lawfulness of its 
maritime acts demonstrated, 269; its 
acts relative to cruisers sustained and 
justified by international law, 274; by 
the interpretations of American jurists, 
244; by antecedent acts of the United 
States Government, 274; instances, 
275, 276. 

Confederate States regarded by United 
States Government as in the Union, 
177; yet deprived of all the protec- 


769 


tions of the Constitution, 177; all 
their conduct pertaining to the war 
consisted in just efforts to preserve to 
themselves and their posterity richts 
and protections guaranteed in the Con- 
stitution, 178 ; their sagacity vindicated 
by President Lincoln’s emancipation 
proclamation, 190. 

Confederate States, The final subjugation 
of : when the Confederate soldiers laid 
down their arms and went home, all 
hostilities against the power of the 
United States Government ceased, 718; 
the result of the contest, 718; a simple 
process of restoration, 718 ; rejected by 
the United States Government, 718; a 
forced union, 719; the amnesty proc- 
lamation of President Johnson, 719; 
the oath required to be taken, 719; 
large classes of citizens excluded, 720 ; 
its stipulations, 720; the reason for 
them, 720 ; the Government of the Unit- 
ed States proceeds to establish State 
organizations based on the principle of 
its own sovereignty, 720; terms of the 
next proclamation, 720; the argument 
it contained examined, 721; the four 
propositions, 721; a provisional Gov- 
ernor appointed for each Confederate 
State,723; his duties, 723; to secure a 
convention to alter the State Constitu- 
tion according to the views of the Gov- 
ernment of the United States, 723 ; in- 
structions to the military authorities, 
4724; the first movement in Virginia, 
424- the so-called Governor, Francis 
H. Pierpont, brought from Alexandria 
and established at Richmond, 724; new 
Legislature elected, 725; acts passed, 
725; the amendment to the United 
States Constitution, prohibiting the ex- 
istence of slavery, 725; interference of 
the military officers of the United States 
Government with the administration of 
civil affairs, 725; a case under the Civil 
Rights Bill, 726; a storm brewing be- 
tween the President and Congress, rel- 
ative to affairs of Confederate States, 
9726; the plan of the President left 
the negroes to the care of the States, 
Congress desired them to be Ameri- 
can citizens and voters, 726; Congress 
refused to admit Senators and Repre- 
sentatives elect from the Confederate 
States to arrest the operation of the 
President’s plan and hold these States 
in abeyance, 727; proceedings of Con- 
gress, 727; a Committee of Fifteen ap- 
pointed, 727; the Freedmen’s Bureau 


m0) INDEX TO VOL. II. 


Act, 727; the Civil Rights Act, 727 ; 
the fourteenth amendment to the 
United States Constitution, 728 ; 
the adoption of this amendment by a 
State Legislature required before its 
Senators and Representatives could 
take seats in Congress, 729; the ques- 
tion really involved in this amendment, 
429; to force from the State citizen- 
ship and the ballot for the negroes, 
729; failure of the amendment to be 
adopted, 729; rejected by Virginia, 
429; a new system of measures now 
adopted by Congress, 730; the fiction 
upon which they were based, 730; 
Confederate States divided into five 
military districts, 730; the States held 
as conquered territory, 780; possess- 
ing no rights unless granted by the 
will of the conqueror, 730; terms upon 
which they could become members of 
the Union, 731; supplement to this 
act requiring registration of voters, 
etc., 7381; two distinct governments 
in each State, one military, the other 
civil, 732; the military commanders, 
432; asecond supplement, 732; words 
of President Johnson on vetoing the 
bill, 732; Major-General Schofield as- 
sumes command in Richmond, 733; 
a board of army officers appointed to 
designate officers for the registration 
of voters, 733; interference of the 
military with civil and social affairs, 
483; military officers appointed over 
sub-districts, 734; military regulations 
adopted, 734; the vote taken, 734 ; the 
so-called Convention assembles, 734 ; 
Bill of Rights adopted, 734; amend- 
ments, 785; test-oath of Congress 
adopted, 735; so stringent that in 
some counties.men could not be found 
capable of filling the offices, 735 ; words 
of General Schofield, 735; utter sub- 
jugation of the people of Virginia 
manifest, 736; President Grant au- 
thorized to submit the stringent 
amendments to a vote of the people 
of the State, by Congress, 736; all 
the amendments to the United States 
Constitution passed by the so-called 
Legislature, 786;. the Senators and 
Representatives allowed to take seats 
in Congress, 737. 

The same series of measures applied 
in the same order to each Confederate 
State, 738; in North Carolina the mil- 
itary commander issues an order de- 
claring all slaves to be free, 738; oth- 


er orders, 738; Constitutional Conven- 
tion, 738; secession ordinance declared 
void, 738; payment of the war debt 
prohibited, 738; Governor elected and 
inaugurated, 739; the military com- 
mander orders the stay of all proceed- 
ings for the collection of debts, 739 ; 
proceedings under the measures of 
Congress, 739; so-called Constitution- 
al Convention and election, 739; the 
Governor surrenders his office because 
he has not power strong enough to 
keep it, 739; his protest, 740; Con- 
stitutional amendments adopted, 740; 
Senators and Representatives take 
seats in Congress, 740. 

Proceedings in South Carolina, 740 ; 
provost-marshals and military courts 
detailed for duty all over the State, 
741; the officers knew only martial 
law, 741; interference of the military 
commander with the judges of the 
State courts, 741; the arrest of Judge 
A. P, Aldrich, 741; a criminal rescued 
from the sentence of the law by mili- 


‘tary force, 741; the Judge refuses to 


hold his court, 742; the State divided 
into ten military districts, 748; a post- 
commander appointed to each, 743; 
all local officers appointed by the com- 
manders, 743; military orders issued, 
743; details of registration, 743; qual- 
ifications of jurors such as to include 
newly emancipated slaves, 744; in 
conflict with the jury law of the State, 
744; proceedings of Judge Aldrich, 
744; is suspended from office, 744 ; 
opens his court, states the circum- 
stances, and declares it adjourned so 
long as justice was stifled, 744; a 
similar instance in the colonial history 
of South Carolina, 744; proceedings 
under the acts of Congress, and the 
results, 745. 

In Georgia, the Governor, on the ces- 
sation of hostilities, called a session of 
the Legislature, 745; the commanding 
General declares the proclamation null 
and void, 745; message to the Gov- 
ernor from the President of the United 
States, 746 ; charged with committing 
a fresh crime by his act, 7463 pro- 
ceedings under the provisional Gov- 
ernor, 746; these set aside by the mil- 
itary commander of Congress, 747; an 
unsuccessful effort to test the consti- 
tutionality of the acts of Congress, 
747; the Governor took part in the 
effort, ‘747; called to an account by 


INDEX TO VOL. Il. V71 


the military commander as violating 
an order of the latter, 747; the matter 
of jurors, 747; Judge Reese prohibited 
from holding court, 747; proceedings 
under the acts of Congress, 747; con- 
flict of the Treasurer and Governor 
with the military commander, 747; 
both removed from office by the latter 
and others appointed, 748; the so- 
called Convention requests the com- 
manding General to require the courts 
to enforce, certain of its regulations, 
748 ; oneof the Judges of the Supreme 
Court refuses, and is removed, 748 ; 
other proceedings completed, and the 
State declared to be restored to the 
Union, 748; it appeared some of the 
measures were defective as to giving 
the ballot to the negro, 748; members 
of the Legislature expelled, 748; the 
State held in abeyance by Congress, 
748, 

In Florida, the proceedings com- 
menced and completed under President 
Johnson’s proclamation, 748, 749; all 
setaside by the military commander un- 
der the actsof Congress, 749; a so-called 
Constitutional Convention assembles, 
4749; a disgraceful quarrel and split 
ensue, 749; the majority form a Con- 
stitution, 749 ; the minority, with some 
members of the majority, form anoth- 
er, 749; the commanding General puts 
his sub-commander in the chair, and 
the latter Constitution is adopted, 749; 
all requisite measures adopted, 749; 
the State restored to the Union, 750. 

In Alabama, the proceedings under 
President Johnson’s proclamation were 
completed, and State officers elected, 
9760; the commanding General sus- 
pends the Protestant Episcopal bishop 
and his clergy from their functions, 
and forbids to preach or perform 
divine service, 750; the fourteenth 
amendment to the United States Con- 
stitution rejected by an overwhelming 
majority, 751; proceedings commenced 
under the acts of Congress, 751; mili- 
tary orders issued, 751 ; all civil officers 
whatever, who were ex-officers of the 
Confederacy, removed and disqualified 
from registration, 751; municipal of- 
ficers removed, 751; police adminis- 
tration suspended in Mobile, 751; 
registration completed, 751; Congress 
_ declares the condition upon which 
North Carolina, South Carolina, Geor- 
gia, Florida, Alabama, and Louisiana 


shall be admitted to the Union, 752; 
amendments to the United States Con- 
stitution adopted, 752; conduct of af- 
fairs transferred to the civil authori- 
ties, 752. 

In Mississippi, the Governor calls an 
extra session of the Legislature, 752; 
set aside by a proclamationof President 
Johnson, 752; the system of measures 
under President Johnson’s plan com- 
pleted, 752; the military commander 
assumes command, under the acts of 
Congress, 752; the question of the 
constitutionality of the acts brought 
before the United States Supreme 
Court, 752; the opinion of Chief-Jus- 
tice Chase, 753 ; boards of registration 
organized, 753; disqualifications of 
voters most sweeping, 753; object to 
throw the entire political power into 
the hands of the negroes, 753; vast 
number of military orders issued, 758 ; 
public local officers removed, and oth- 
ers appointed in their places, 753; the 
Constitution rejected by a large ma- 
jority, 754; the Chief-Justice resigns, 
754; his reasons, 754; the Governor 


‘removed, and another appointed by 


the military commander, 754; the for- 
mer refuses to retire, 754; a squad of 
soldiers sent to dispossess him, 754; 
ejected from his house by a file of sol- 
diers, 754; cause of the rejection of 
the Constitution, 755; Congress au- 
thorizes the President of the United 
States to submit the Constitution to 
another election by the people, 755; 
sweeping disqualifications of voters or- 
dered, 755; Constitution ratified, 755; 
the constitutional amendments adopted, 
755; the State permitted to be repre- 
sented in Congress, 755. 

Louisiana continues under the goy- 
ernment set up by General Banks, 755 ; 
the military commander under the acts 
of Congress assumes command, 756 ; 
the existing government declared to 
be “only provisional and subject to be 
abolished, modified, controlled, or su- 
perseded,” 756; officers removed, 756 ; 
registration ordered, 756; the military 
commander “‘ fears he shall be obliged 
to remove Governor Wells,” 756; cor- 
respondence with General Grant, 756 ; 
the Governor removed and another ap- 
pointed, 756; twenty-two members of 
the City Councils of New Orleans re- 
moved, 757; Sheriff, City Treasurer, 
Surveyor, justice of peace removed, 


rae) INDEX TO VOL. IL 


454; declared to be “‘impediments to 
reconstruction,” 757; newly elected 
officers not allowed to be installed 
without permission of the commanding 
General, 757; the Governor and Lieu- 
tenant-Governor by military order, now 
removed, those newly elected set up by 
the military commander, 757; all re- 
quisitions complied with, 757. 

Texas and Arkansas passed through 
the same military process as their sister 
Confederate States, 757. 

Usurpations of the military com- 
manders, 758; regarded their author- 
ity as comprehensive as the usurpations 
of Congress, 758; declaration of United 
States Attorney-General, 758; instances 
related, 758, 759; the disastrous con- 
sequences that followed, 959; increase 
of the debts of these States, 760; in 
Arkansas two so-called Republican Goy- 
ernors of the State with their troops 
about to fight for the Executive office, 
461; in Louisiana a body of troops 
enter the Legislature in session and 
take out five members, 761; in Missis- 
sippi a bloody conflict between whites 
and blacks, 761; a committee of Con- 
gress sent to ‘Arkansas to “inquire if 
the State had a government repub- 
lican in form,” 761; a committee of 
Congress sent to New Orleans to in- 
vestigate the state of affairs, 761; a 
like committee sent to Mississippi, 761 ; 
where were the unalienable rights of 
men and the sovereignty of the people 
with their safeguards? 762; when the 
cause was lost, what cause was it? 763. 

Conference of Generals A. 8. Johnston 
and Beauregard after the loss of Forts 
Henry and Donelson, 36; conclusions, 
36. 

Confiscation Act of the United States Con- 
gress, provisions of one of its most in- 
dicative sections, 6 ; a forfeiture of all 
claim to persons held to service, 6; 

conceded that Congress had no power 

over slavery, 6; one of the reserved 
powers of the States, 7; a reservation 

equally in time of war and in peace, 7; 

forfeiture for treason does not touch 

the case, 7; a conviction by trial must 
precede forfeiture, 7; the forfeiture 
ean be only during life, 7; final free- 
dom to slaves can not be thus obtained, 

7; other limitations, 7; “due process 

of law” not an act of Congress, 7; 

words of Thaddeus Stevens, 8; who 

pleads the Constitution against our ac- 


tion ? 8; the object of, 164; adjudica- 
tion, sale, etc., required for confisca- 
tion by national law, 164; compared 
with the act of Congress, 164; sections 
of the act of August 6, 1861, 165; 
do. of the act of July 17, 1862, 166; 
amount of property subject to the pro- 
visions of the act, 167; number of 
persons liable to be affected by it, 167 ; 
another feature of the confiscation act, 
168; equally flagrant and criminal, 
168; trial by jury excluded and for- 
feiture of property made absolute, 168 ; 
heavy fines imposed and the property 
sold in fee, 168; treated as traitors and 
enemies, 169; first object to be se- 
cured by confiscation was emancipa- 
tion, 169, fi 

Conflict, the last armed, of the war, like 
the first, a Confederate victory, 698. 

Congress, Provisional, its third session, 
8; removal of departments of the Govy- 
ernment to Richmond authorized, 3; 
cause of removal stated in the Presi- 
dent’s message, 3; first efforts of the 
enemy to be directed against Virginia, 
3; acts at its third session, 6; pro- 
ceedings relative to the removal of 
General A. 8. Johnston, 38. 

Congress, The United States, conceded 
that it had no power over slavery, 6; 
a power reserved to the States, 7; this 
reservation continued in time of war as 
in peace, 7; the attempt to exercise a 
power of confiscation was a mere usur- 
pation, 7; forfeiture for treason does 
not reach the case, ‘7; words of the 
Constitution, 7; no forfeiture with con- 
viction, and only during life, 7; fifth 
article of first amendment to the Con- 
stitution, 7; “due process of law” 
not an act of Congress, 7; who pleads 
the Constitution against our action ? 
8; in 1862, declares that the struggle 
is for existence, and the Government 
may resort to any measure that self- 
defense would justify, 159 ; the self-de- 
fense of the Government, how author- 
ized by the Constitution, 159; slavery 
declared to be the cause of all the trou- 
bles, 159; inaugural of President Lin- 
coln, 160; commences to legislate for, 
the abolition of slavery, 160; asserts 
that it had the power to interfere with 
the institution, 160; the plea of ne- 
cessity, the source of the power, 161 ; 
usurpations embraced in its system of 
legislation, 161; the powers granted 
in the Constitution, 162; to make 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


foreign war, 162; confiscation, 162; 
international law on the capture of 
private property, 163; its conditions 
compared with the act of Congress, 
164; another alarming usurpation of, 
170; the argument advanced for its 
support, 170; the theory on which it 
was based, 170; another step in the 
usurpations for the destruction of 
slavery, 172; emancipation in the Dis- 
trict of Columbia, 172; prohibits that 
which the Constitution commands—a 
most flagrant usurpation, 175. 
Constitutional liberty, vindicated by the 
triumph of the Confederate States, 14; 
the wound to the principles of, com- 
mitted by the Government of the United 
States, 279; the crashing blow to the 
hopes that mankind had begun to re- 
pose in this latest effort for self-gov- 
ernment, 279; sought to palliate the 
offense by asserting a fiction that its 
immense fleets and armies were only a 
police authority to put down insurrec- 
tion, 280. 

Constitution, The, every restraint of, bro- 
ken through by the Government of the 
United States, 2; this was declared by 
the United States Government to be 
for the preservation of, 6; the course 
attempted to be pursued by it under 
this pretext of preserving the Consti- 
tution, 6; violations of, under the con- 
fiscation act of Congress relative to 
private property, 7; violations of, in 
the treatment of seized and imprisoned 
citizens, 14; its provisions afforded no 
protection to the citizens, 15; the Unit- 
ed States Government transformed in- 
toa military despotism, 15; what cause 
for such acts, 15; answer to the ques- 
tion, 15; powers of, not changed by 
circumstances, 161; or by peace or war, 
161; do. of the United States, who 
were really destroying? 170; theory 
that it was suspended by actual hostil- 
ities, 170 ; these gave to Congress sov- 
ereign power, 170; new relations of 
citizens and subject to extraordinary 
penalties, 170; power of Congress thus 
unlimited, 170. 

Constitution of the United States, a fatal 
subversion of, 293. 

Constitutions, Paper, of what value are 
they ? 622. 

Constitution of Tennessee, was it amended 
by the consent of the people of Ten- 
nessee, the only sovereigns known un- 
der our institutions, or by consent of 


773 


the Government of the United States, 
the usurping sovereign ? 457, 

Contest, The, is not over; it has only en- 
tered on a new and enlarged arena, 
294, 

Conyneuam, Captain Gustavus, com- 
mands a cruiser fitted out in France by 
United States Government, 275; ap- 
pointed by filling up a blank commis- 
sion from John Hancock, 275; cap- 
tured and ignominiously confined, 276 ; 
retaliatory measures of United States 
Congress, 276. 

Cook, Colonel, stands, with Twenty-sev- 
enth North Carolina regiment, boldly 
in line at Sharpsburg without a car- 
tridge, 336. 

Coormr, Adjutant-General Samuet, testi- 
mony relative to General Winder’s hu- 
mane treatment of prisoners of war, 
598. 

Corinth, our force concentrated at, before 
the battle of Shiloh, 55; its position, 
41; a strategic point of importance, 
72; Hallock advances against it, 72; 
his precautions, 72; report of Sher- 
man, 72; intrenched approaches, 78 ; 
further report of Sherman, 73 ; its po- 
sition and importance, 387; attempt to 
capture it by Generals Van Dorn and 
Price, 389; battle mainly fought by 
Price’s division, 389; delay in the at- 
tack, 389; course of the battle, 390; 
fresh troops arrive to the enemy, 390; 
our army retires to Chewalla, 390; 
losses, 390. 

Cotton, measures of the United States 
Government to obtain our cotton, 343; 
the necessity for it, 344; words of the 
British Secretary of State, 344; efforts 
of foreign governments to obtain in- 
creased exportation, 344; letter of Min- 
ister Adams, 344 ; letter of Mr. Seward, 
344; military expeditions fitted out by 
the United States Government to ob- 
tain it, 845; act of the United States 
Congress to “provide tor the collec- 
tion of duties, and for other purposes,” 
345; sections of the act, 345; the 
President authorized by proclamation 
to forbid all commercial intercourse 
with any of our States, 346 ; forfeiture 
of all goods in transitu, and the ves- 
sel, 846; authorized then to reopen the 
trade for cotton and tobacco by licenses 
to the most suitable persons for the 
end in view, 347; no grant of power 
in the Constitution to Congress to pass 
such an act, or to the President to ap- 


{74 INDEX TO VOL. IL. 


prove, in violation of his oath, 347; a 
power reserved to the States to regu- 
late commercial intercourse between 
their citizens, 847; a state of war did 
not give the United States Government 
such power, 847; the case of Carpen- 
ter, who refused to obtain the required 
permit, 848; decision of Chief-Justice 
Taney, 848; a civil war or any other 
war does not enlarge the powers of the 
Federal Government over the States or 
people beyond what the compact has 
given to it, 348; issue of the Presi- 
dent’s proclamation, 349; military ex- 
peditions fitted out to occupy our ports 
where cotton and other valuable prod- 
ucts were usually shipped, 349; col- 
lectors appointed and licenses granted, 
849; special agents appointed to re- 
ceive and collect all abandoned or cap- 
tured property, 849; views of General 
Grant on the operation of this system, 
850; our country divided into thirteen 
districts from Wheeling to Natchez, 
850; new regulations, 350; a vigorous 
traffic, 350. 

Crime of the Government of Great Britain, 
in the eyes of the Government of the 
United States, was the recognition of 
the Confederate States as a belligerent, 
272; letter of Secretary Seward, 277; 
the unparalleled virtue of a Queen’s 
proclamation, 277; the effect of one 
more, 277; a Mexican pronunciamiento, 
247 ; irrationality of United States Gov- 
ernment, 278. 

Crimes and horrors, how easy for the 
Northern people, by a simple obedience 
to the provisions of the Constitution, 


to have avoided the commission of all | 


these ! 181. 

Crirrenpen, General Grorer B., state- 
ment of battle of Fishing Creek, 19; 
takes command, 19; position. of his 
force, 19; advances to attack General 
Thomas, 20; destitution of his men, 
21; unsuccessful attack, 21; move- 
ments afterward, 21, 22. 


Cruisers, Confederate: the Sumter, her | 


career, 247; no seerecy in building the 
Alabama, 250; she sails from Liver- 
pool as a merchant-ship, 250; her 
name, 250; description of her, 251; 
changed to a man-of-war, 251; her ar- 
mament, 252; her fight with the Hat- 
teras, 253; capture of an Aspinwall 
Steamer, 253; her cruise, 254; arrival 
at Cherbourg, 255; the Kearsarge, her 
size and strength, 256; description of 


Cumberland Gap, its 


the fight of the Alabama with the 
Kearsarge, 256, 257 ; comparison of the 
vessels, 258; the United States Gov- 
ernment absurdly demands from the 
English Government the rescued sail- 
ors, 256; reply of Lord John Russell, 
256; the Georgia, 262; her career, 
262; the Shenandoah, 263 ; her career, 
262; the Nashville, 263; her cruise, 
863; the Tallahassee, 364; the Chick- 
amauga, 364; the cruiser Florida, orig- 
inal name Oreto, 259; difficulty at Nas- 
sau, 259; her commander, Maffitt, 259 ;° 
her size, 259; arrives at Green Kay, 
259; changed to a cruiser, 259; sick- 
ness and loss of crew, 259; arrives at 
Havana, 260; arrives at Mobile, 260; 
repaired and equipped, 260; runs the 
blockade, 261; her cruise, 261; seized 
in the port of Bahia, 262; taken to 
Hampton Roads, 262; sunk by artifice, 
263; demand of Brazil, 262; letter of , 
Mr. Seward, 263; the circumstances 
of their construction, 270; Minister 
Adams’s claim for damages, 270; reply 
of Earl Russell, 270; answer of Mr. 
Seward to the declaration, 271; re- 
sponse of Earl Russell, 271; the pro- 
ceedings of the Confederate Govern- 
ment relating to, justified by interna- 
tional law, 274; the complaints of the 
United States Government condemned 
by the interpretations of American 
jurists, 274; and by its own antéce- 
dent acts, 274; fitting out cruisers in 
France during the Revolutionary War, 
274; action of Dr. Franklin and Silas 
Deane, 275; cruise of Captain Wickes, 
275; do, Captain Conyngham, 275 ; ap- 
pointed by filling up a blank commis- 
sion from John Hancock, 275; retalia- 
tory action of U. 8. Congress, 276, 
position and 
strength, 427; commanded by Briga- 
dier-General Frazier, 427; his force, 
427; position of General Rosecrans, 
427; General Burnside advances from 
Kentucky, 427; General Buckner re- 
tires, 427; Frazier, seeing the futility 
of resistance, surrenders, 427; note in 
explanation, 427; further movements 
of the enemy, 428. 


Custer, General, marches on a raid, 504; 


his object, 504; codperation of Gen- 
eral Kilpatrick and Colonel Dahlgren, 
504; after a feeble demonstration on 
some parked artillery, retreats, burn- 
ing bridges where there was no one to 
pursue, 507, 


INDEX TO VOL. IL. 175 


Dau eren, Colonel Jonny, starts with Gen- 
eral Kilpatrick, 505 ; proceeds to Han- 
over Junction, thence to the canal West 
of Richmond, 505; pillages, destroys 
dwellings, out-buildings, mills, canal- 
boats, grain and cattle, 505; encoun- 
ters a body of armory men, citizens 
and clerks of Richmond, and is routed, 
506; retreats, 506; attacked by the 
Home Guard of King’s and Queen’s 
Counties and is killed and his force 
put to flight, 506; papers found on his 
body, showing his purposes, 506; his 
burial, 507; a denial that his conduct 
was authorized, 507. 

Damages for personal injuries, obtained 
from the offender by the State gov- 
ernment, 452; claimed by the United 
States Government against our cruisers, 
283 ; transfer of ships to foreign owners, 
284; increase in the foreign commerce 
of the country, 284; decline in Ameri- 
can tonnage, 284; in articles of export, 
284; increase in rates of insurance, 284. 

Danville, arrival of the President and 
Cabinet, 676; routine work of the de- 


partments resumed, 676; proclamation | 


of the President, 676, 677. 

Davis, Brigadier-General J. R., move- 
ments of his brigade at the Wilderness 
struggle, 519. 

Davis, Senator Garrett, remarks on the 
confiscation act of the United States 
Congress, 167. 

Davis, JurFERSON, message at the third 
session of the Provisional Congress, 3 ; 
the schooner, treatment of her crew 
by the United States Government, 11 ; 
letter to President Lincoln relative to 
the crew of the Savannah, 11; instruc- 
tions relative to retaliatory measures, 
11; answer to members of Congress 
that requested the removal of General 
A. 8. Johnston, 38; letter to General 
A. S. Johnston on state of affairs, 41 ; 
reply to A. S. Johnston’s letter, 47; 
orders Bragg to command in Mississip- 
pi, 74; detained by Beauregard, 74; 
command transferred to him. by Beau- 
regard, 74; statement of the case, ‘75 ; 
letter to General J. E. Johnston on the 
announcement of his intention to evac- 
uate the Peninsula and Norfolk, 92 ; 
sends General Randolph, Secretary of 
War, and Mr. Mallory, Secretary of the 

' Navy, to arrange for the removal of 
stores and machinery from Norfolk, 
92; conversation with General J. H. 
Johnston relative to his plans before 


Richmond, 101; letter to General J. 
E. Johnston, 108; goes to meet him, 
and finds the whole army had fallen 
back across the Chickahominy, 103; 
the explanation given, 103; remarks 
relative to the situation, 103; dissatis- 
faction with military affairs around 
Richmond, 120; conyersation with 
Lee, 120; had no doubts that John- 
ston was fully in accord in the purpose 
to defend Richmond until recently, 
120; his remark to his volunteer aide, 
120; plan of Johnston, 120; goes to 
the expected battle-field, 121; proceed- 
ings, 122; in danger of going into the 
enemy’s camp, 128; meets General G. 
W. Smith, 129; announces the assign- 
ment of Lee to the command, 129; 
conversations with Lee, 181; plan for 
the future, 131; conversation with Lee 
relative to the movements of Mc(Clel- 
lan, 132; do. with regard to that of 
Jackson, 132; offensive-defensive pol- 
icy inaugurated, 132; his address on 
the defeat of McClellan’s army, 311; 
letter to General Lee on the action of 
the military authorities of the United 
States changing the character of the 
war into a campaign of indiscrimi- 
nate robbery and murder, 315, 316; 
letter to General Lee in Maryland, 
333 ; letter to Governor Pettus to get 
every man into the field, 400; sends a 
dispatch to General Bragg for aid for 
Vicksburg, 411; reply, 412; response, 
412; importance of Vicksburg and 
Port Hudson, 422; anxiety of the Ad- 
ministration to hold them, 422; visits 
Hood’s headquarters, 565; his views, 
565; conference at Augusta with 
Beauregard and others, 566; reply to 
Hood’s change of programme, 569; 
letter to President Lincoln, relative 
to prisoners captured in our privateers, 
583; order relative to General Pope, 
588; issues retaliatory orders relative 
to Generals Hunter and Phelps, 590; 
efforts to seek an adjustment of diffi- 
culties relative to the exchange of 
prisoners through the authorities at 
Washington, 591; appoints Vice-Presi- 
dent Stephens as a commissioner, 591 ; 
letter of instructions, 591; letter to 
President Lincoln, 593; the result, 
595; conference with General Lee on 
the state of affairs, 648; the pro- 
gramme adopted, 648 ; receives a tele- 
gram from General Lee, advising the 
evacuation of Richmond, 661; unpre- 


776 INDEX TO VOL. Il. 


pared state of transportation, 661; 
receives notice of General Lee’s with- 
drawal, 667; arrangements, 667 ; 
starts for Danville, 667; arrival, and 
resumption of routine labors, 676 ; 
issues a proclamation, 676, 677; pro- 
poses a conference with General J. 
i. Johnston, in North Carolina, 678 ; 
his letter, 678; they meet at Greens- 
boro, 679; state of affairs, 679; object 
of the conference, 680 ; proceedings at 
the conference, 680; conference be- 
tween Johnston and Sherman assented 
to, 681; the route of retreat, 681; sup- 
plies placed on the route, 682; letter 
of General St. John, 682; do. of Ma- 
jor Claiborne, 682; proceeds to Char- 
lotte with his Cabinet, 683; news of 
the assassination of President Lincoln, 
683; remarks, 683; obtains an in- 
creased cavalry force, 684; corre- 
spondence between Generals Johnston 
and Sherman, 684 ; Sherman’s interview 
with President Lincoln, 684; result of 
the conference with Sherman, 685; 
memorandum of agreement, 686; the 
agreement, a military convention, 687 ; 
approved, 687 ; letter to General John- 
ston, 688; the basis of agreement 
rejected by the United States Govern- 
ment, 689; instruction to General 
Johnston, 689; disobeyed, 689; pro- 
ceeds from Charlotte, 690; statements 
of General Johnston, 690; explana- 
tion, 691; Johnston surrenders to 
Sherman, 692; difference in the con- 
dition of his army from Lee’s, 692; 
the former’s line of retreat open, and 
supplies on it, 692; importance of con- 
tinued resistance, 698; statement of 
General Taylor, 694; the Executive 
should have been advised, 694; fur- 
ther movements of the President, 694 ; 
his companions, 694; first information 
of Johnston’s surrender, 695; a small 
escort selected, 695 ; Secretary Reagan 
transfers the money in the Confederate 
Treasury to the financial agent who 
had incurred liabilities, 695 ; Johnston 
could not have been successfully pur- 
sued by Sherman, 696; considerations, 
696; thus foiled the enemy’s purpose 
of subjugation, 696; purpose of the 
President, 697; forces in the trans- 
Mississippi Department, 697; General 
EK. K. Smith’s address to his soldiers, 
697; the other forces of the Confed- 
eracy, 698; surrenders east of the Mis- 
sissippi, 698; the last armed conflict 


of the war, 698; surrender of General 
E. K. Smith, 698; the total number of 
prisoners paroled at the close of the 
war, 699; the Shenandoah the last to 
float the Confederate flag, 700; fur- 
ther movements of the President, 700 ; 
turns aside to find his family, 700; 
apprehensions of an attack of maraud- 
ers, 701; preparations to leave, 701 ; 
awaiting nightfall, 701; approach of 
the enemy, 7013; surprise and capture, 
701; some of the escort escape, 702 ; 
pillage and annoyances, 703; taken to 
Macon, 703; proceed to Port Royal, 
404; transferred to a steamer and 
taken to Hampton Roads, 704; im- 
prisoned in Fortress Monroe, 704. 

Delegation from the prisoners sent from 
Andersonville to plead their cause be- 
fore the authorities at Washington, 
602; President Lincoln refuses to see 
them, 602; the answer that the inter- 
ests of the Government of the United 
States required that they should return 
to prison and remain there, 602; let- 
ter from the wife of the chairman 
of the delegation, 603 ; letter from a 
prisoner, 603. 

“ Delightful excitement,’ exclamation of 
Jackson in the hottest of the battle at 
Port Republic, 115. 

De Russy, Fort, taken possession of, by 
the enemy, 542. 

Destruction of our institutions, the pow- 
ers of a common government, created 
for the common and equal protection 
to the interests of all, were to be ar- 
rayed for, 182. 

Distinction in its nature and objects be- 
tween the Government of the United 
States and the State governments, 454, 
455. 

District of Columbia, act of Congress of 
United States to emancipate slaves in, 
172; right of private property guar- 
anteed in, by the Constitution, 178 ; its 
words, 173; conditions on which such 
property might be taken under the 
Constitution, 173. 

Disunion, bloodshed, and war, the con- 
summation verbally of the original an- 
tislavery purposes attended with, 188. 

Dixon, Lieutenant, as an engineer exam- 
ines and reports on the sites and con- 
dition of Forts Henry and Donelson, 24. 

Donaldsonville, a battery erected at, which 
interrupts river navigation by the en- 
emy, 420. 

Donelson, Fort, reason for the selection 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


of the site, 24; its position, 24; re- 
port relative to the fort, 24; details of 
the fort and its situation, 28 ; officers 
in command, 29; strength of force, 
29; the attack,.29; fire of a gunboat, 
29; boat disabled, 29; attack of the 
-ironclads—all their advantages over- 
come by our heavy guns, 30; scatter 
destruction through fleet, 80; it retires 
to Cairo for repairs, 30; their loss, 
31; effect of their fire on our bat- 
teries, 31; reénforcements to the en- 
emy, 31; plan of the Confederate gen- 
erals, 31; condition of things, 31; va- 
cillation of our commanders, 32; the 
first success and subsequent loss, 82 ; 
consultation of the commands, 33 ; 
condition of the troops, 33; the com- 
mand transferred to General Buckner, 
33; Generals Pillow and Floyd retire, 
84; part of General Floyd’s force left 
behind, 34; advantages gained by the 
enemy, 34; surrender, 34; effects, 36. 
Donelson and Henry, the consequences 
of their loss, 36; change of plans, 39. 
Drury’s Bluff, a defensive position on 
the James River, 102; enemy’s fleet 
open fire on the fort, 102; injuries to 
the fleet, 102; report of Lieutenant 
Jeffers, 102; its position and works, 
511; General Beauregard in command, 
511; the battle with Butler’s force, 
512-514. 
“ Due diligence” ; on this foundation was 
based the claim for damages by the 
United States Government at the Ge- 
neva Conference, 278. 
“ Due process of law” assumed by the 
United States Government to mean an 
act of Congress, 7. 
Duncan, General, had command of the 
coast defenses at New Orleans, 212; 
his report of the passage of the forts 
below New Orleans by the enemy’s 
fleet, 215; do. on their skillful and 
gallant defense, 216; address to the 
garrisons, 217. 
Duration of the Government of the United 
States, to have declared it perpetual 
would have destroyed the sovereignty 
of the people, which possesses the in- 
herent right to alter or abolish their 
Government when it ceases to answer 
the ends for which it was instituted, 
45. 


Earty, General Jusat E., remarks on the 
line of defense constructed by General 
Magruder at Warwick River, 86; re- 


UR. 


sists the enemy at Yorktown, 89; re- 
port of his conflict before Williams- 
burg with a force under General Han- 
cock, 95; further statements, 96; bad- 
ly wounded and obliged to retire, 96; 
engaged at the battle of Cedar Run, 
317; commands Ewell’s division at 
Sharpsburg, 336; resists the attacks of 
the enemy on Fredericksburg, 362; re- 
gains his former position, 3863; with a 
force drives Hunter out of the Valley, 
and advances to the Potomac and 
crosses, 529; sends a force to strike 
the railroads from Baltimore to Har- 
risburg, 529; puts. to flight a body of 
troops under Wallace, 529; approaches 
Fort Stevens, near Washington, 530; 
too strong to assault, 530; recrosses 
the Potomac, 530; attacks the enemy 
at Kernstown, 531; moves to Martins- 
burg, 5381; appearance of Sheridan 
with a large force, 533; Harly attacks 
his force near Winchester, 533, 584; 
retires to Newton, 535; escapes an- 
nihilation by the incapacity of his ene- 
my, 535 ; withdraws up the Valley, 536; 
subsequently moves down the Valley 
again, 536; the destruction caused by 
Sheridan’s orders, 5386; Early reaches 
Fisher’s Hill, 536; attacks the enemy 
at Cedar Creek, 537; his plan, 537; 
the battle, 538; his success and sub- 
sequent disaster, 540; his losses, 541; 
subsequently confronts Sheridan’s 
force north of Cedar Creek, 541; other 
attacks, 541. 

Edith, The, a cruiser, name changed to 
Chickamauga, 265; runs the blockade 
under a full moon, 265; her cruise, 
265. 

Election, The, in 1861, officers of the 
Provisional Government chosen for 
the permanent Government, 17. 

Elections in Maryland, interfered with 
by an armed force of the United States 
Government, 464, 465. 

Eikhorn, or Pea Ridge, battle of, 50; its 
object, 51; losses, 51. 

Exxiort, Colonel Stzrnen, Jr., refused to 
be relieved at Fort Sumter, 204; sa- 
lutes his flag on evacuation, 204. 

Elon, Mount, General Butler defeats a 
detachment of Sherman’s force sent to 
tear up the railroad at Florence, 635, 

Emancipation, efforts of United States 
Congress to effect emancipation of 
slaves by confiscation, 7; violation of 
the Constitution, 7; efforts to effect 
by pillage and deportation, 8; by 


778 INDEX TO VOL. II. 


President Lincoln’s order to military 
commanders, 9; by Generals Fremont 
and T. W. Sherman, 10; the first ob- 
ject to be secured by the confiscation 
act, 169 ; the codperation of the United 
States, recommended by President 
Lincoln, 179 ; his reasons, 179; to be 
consummated under the war-power, 
179; an artful scheme to awaken con- 
troversy in the Southern States, 179 ; 
measure approved by Congress, 180; 
the terms proposed, 180; expressly 
forbidden by the Constitution, 180; 
order of General Hunter counter- 
manded as too soon, 181; the Presi- 
dent claims the right to issue such a 
one, 181; the proposition of emanci- 
pation with compensation, 183; its 
failure in Congress, 184; the prelim- 
inary proclamation, 187; its terms, 
186; the necessity for it examined, 
187. 

Enemies and traitors, the twofold relation 
in which the United States Govern- 
ment sought to place us, 169; its prac- 
tical operation, 169. 

Englishmen cheer the Virginia in Hamp- 
ton Roads, 201. 

Events, Review of, that brought such un- 
merited censure on General A. S§. 
Johnston, 48. 

Evidence, Fabrication of, attempted by 
some of the authorities of Washing- 
ton in order to compass the death of 
the President of the Confederate States, 
498, 499; the investigation and report 
before the United States Congress, 500. 

Ewett, General, engaged at the battle of 
Cedar Run, 317; unites with General 
Jackson for operations in the Shenan- 
doah Valley, 106 ; conflict with Fremont 
near Harrisonburg, 113; serving as a 
gunner, 116; repulses the enemy at 
Bristoe Station, 828; commands the 
Second Corps of Lee’s army, 487; 
storms Winchester, and captures or 
puts Milroy’s army to flight, 489; en- 
ters Maryland, 489; encamps near 
Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, 440; oc- 
cupies the left at Gettysburg, 443, 


Facts on record, such as will make our 
posterity blush, 167. 

Farragut, Commodore, commands the 
enemy’s fleet at New Orleans, 214; its 
strength and numbers, 214; report of 
his passage of the forts, 216; sends a 
aetachment to hoist the United States 
flag on New Orleans Custom-House, 281. 


Farranp, Commander, commands at 
Drury’s Bluff, 102. 

Fayetteville, North Carolina, Sherman’s 
army approaches, 632; brutality of 
his forces, 632, 633; description of 
Sherman’s march by his historian, 633 ; 
“the pleasurable excitements of the 
march,” 634. ; 

Frreuson, General, drives off the enemy 
that seek to get to the Yazoo, 395. 

“ Fire up the Northern heart,” what was 
signified by the expression, 586. 

Fisher, Fort, a movement by aforce from 
Grant’s army with the fleet to attack 
below Wilmington, 645; an attempt 
to destroy it by the explosion of a 
powder-ship, 645; its failure, 645; 
subsequently a renewed attempt, 645 ; 
the attack, 645 ; surrender of the fort, 
646. 

Fishing Creek, the battle of, 19; state- 
ment of General Crittenden, 19; the 
battle a necessity, 21; the case con- 
sidered, 22; causes of the ill success, 
22; retreat of our force, 23; the ques- 
tion of crossing to the right bank of 
the Cumberland considered, 28. 

Five Forks, a strong position on Lee’s 
line assaulted and carried by the en- 
emy, 655. 

Five thousand million dollars, amount of 
property subject to be acted on by the 
provisions of the confiscation act of 
the United States Congress, 167. 

Fizer, Lieutenant-Colonel, his bold ex- 
pedient to resist the crossing of the 
enemy at Fredericksburg, 353. 

Flag, The Confederate, the Shenandoah 
the last to float it, 700. 

Flagrant violation of the Constitution, 
Another, the discharge of a fugitive 
under the confiscation act, 176 ; words 
of the act, 176. 

FLanpers, Messrs., citizens of New York, 
482; incarcerated by the Government 
of the United States in Fort Lafayette, 
482; required to take an oath of alle- 
giance before the Government permit- 
ted their case to be investigated, 482 ; 
the oath, 483 ; their refusal, 483 ; their 
reasons, 483. 

Hlect of the enemy, prepared for moving 
down the Mississippi River, 75; its 
progress, 76. 

Froyp, General, commands at Fort Don- 
elson, 29; retires from Fort Donelson, 
84; correspondence relative to his con- 
duct at Donelson, 40, 41. 

Forces, The United States, number of 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


men brought into the field by the Gov- 
ernment of the United States during 
the war, 706. 

Foreign powers, our States falsely repre- 
sented in every court of Europe, 2; 
adopt a position of neutrality, 12. 

Foreign relations, recognized by leading 
European Governments as a belliger- 
ent, 368; principles upon which the 
States were originally constituted and 
upon which the Union was formed ex- 
plained, 368 ; commissioners early sent 
abroad by us, 368; previous commu- 
nications of the Government of the 
United States assuming the attitude 
of a sovereign over the Confederate 
States, and threatening Europe if it 
acknowledged it as having an inde- 
pendent existence, 369; error of Eu- 
ropean nations, 369 ; answer of foreign 
Governments in consequence, 369; re- 
fuse to side with either party, 369; 
the consequence—a prolongation of 
hostilities, 370; other matters in which 
less than justice was rendered to us by 
“neutral” Europe, and undue advan- 
tage given to the aggressors, 370; both 
parties prohibited from bringing prizes 
into their ports, 370; the value of the 
weapon thus wrested from our grasp, 
871; their policy in reference to the 
blockade was so shaped as to cause 
the greatest injury to the Confederacy, 
371. declaration of principles of the 
Paris Congress, 372; proposals that 
the Confederacy should accede to it, 
872; acceded to, with the exception of | 
privateering, 373; reasons for the ex- 
ception, 373; the passiveness of “‘neu- 
tral’ Europe relative to its declaration, 
373; the pretension of blockading 
thousands of miles, 373; other block- | 
ades, 373; facts shown, 374; the me- 
diation proposed by France to Great 
Britain and Russia, 376; dispatch of 
the French Minister, 376; reply of 

. Great Britain, 378; reply of Russia, 
378; communication to the French : 
Minister at Washington by his Gov- 
ernment, 878; the initiative of all 
measures left by foreign powers to 
the governments of France and Great 
Britain, 379. 

Forrest, Colonel N. B., at Fort Donel- 
son, 84; interview with Major Brown, 
34; his expedition from North Missis- 
sippi to Paducah, Kentucky, 550; or- 
dered to strike the railroad from Nash- 
ville to Chattanooga, 566; his move- 


779 


ments with General Hood’s army, 574; 
sent to Murfreesboro, 577. 

Forty-two regiments and two batteries sent 
by the Government of the United States 
into the State of New York to maintain 
the subjugation of its sovereign people, 
490. 

France, her proposed mediation between 
the belligerents, 376. 

Franxkiin, General, his division disem- 
barked before the evacuation of York- 
town, 90; his force reémbarks after 
the evacuation of Yorktown, 97; lands 
near West Point and threatens the 
flank of our line of march, 98. 

Frazier, Brigadier-General I. W., com- 
mands at Cumberland Gap, 427; ap- 
proach and strength of the enemy, 427; 
seeing the inutility of resistance, sur- 
renders on demand of General Burn- 
side, 427; a note in explanation by the 
author, 427. 

Frazier’s Farm, the battle at, one of the 
most remarkable of the war, 146; 
strength of forces, and losses, 147. 


| Fredericksburg, its situation, 352; the 


enemy attempt to lay bridges and cross 
the Rappahannock, 352 ; repulsed, 352 ; 
our troops withdrawn and bridges laid, 
352; attack and repulse of Burnside’s 
army, 354, 355; withdraws at night, 
356; losses, 356; strength of opposing 
forces, 356. 

Free consent of the governed, the only 
source of all “just powers” of govern- 
ment, 452. 

Fremont, General Joun C., issues a proc- 
lamation confiscating real and person- 
al property in Missouri, 10; repulsed 
at Strasburg with ease, 111; follows 
and attacks General Ashby, 112. 

Fugitives, their forfeiture ordered, 2; 
military commanders forbidden to in- 
terfere in their restoration, 2. 

Galveston, summoned to surrender, 232 ; 
the reply, 232; the state of affairs, 
233; subsequent approach of the ene- 
my, and occupation of the city, 233; 
arrival of General Magruder, 233; 
gathers a force to attack the enemy, 
238; protects his steamboats with cot- 
ton-bales, 234; attacks the fleet, 284 ; 
captures the Harriet Lane, 234; de- 
mands a surrender of the enemy’s 
flect, 284; it escapes under cover of a 

‘flag of truce, 235. 

Garpner, Major-General, in command at 
Port Hudson, 395; yields Port Hudson 
to General Banks after the capitula- 


"80 INDEX TO 


tion of Vicksburg, 420; his gallant 
defense, 421. 

GarrieLp, Jamus A., commands in north- 
eastern Kentucky, 18. 

Geneva Conference, adjustment proposed 
by Great Britain, 283; results in the 
Geneva Conference, 283; the ground 
of its action, 2838. 

Georgia, the campaign of 1864; General 
J. E. Johnston ordered to the com- 
mand of the Army of Tennessee at 
Daiton, 547; total effective strength 
of the army, 547; positions of the 
enemy, 547; an onward movement de- 
manded, 548; considerations relative 
thereto, 548; do. presented to Gen- 
eral Johnston, 548, 549; his approval 
of an aggressive movement, 548; his 
proposition, 549; prompt measures 
taken to enable him to carry out his 
proposition, 549; no movement at- 
tempted, 550; Sherman advances 
against him, 550; official returns of 
the strength of the army, 550; efforts 
of the Government to strengthen John- 
ston, 551; his position, 551; hopes 
of the country, 551; he withdraws 
from Dalton and falls back to Resaca, 
552; the position, 552; falls back 
from Resaca to Adairsville, 552; his 
reasons, 552; a further retreat to 
Cassville, 553; a coming battle an- 
nounced, 553; it did not take place, 
553 ; another retreat beyond Etowah, 
553; the position in rear of Cassville 
held by Generals Polk’ and Hood, 553 ; 
the next stand at Alatoona, 553; Ma- 
rietta evacuated, 553 ; the state of the 
country between Dallas and Marietta, 
553; engagements at New Hope 
Church, 554; the next stand made by 
General Johnston between Acworth 
and Marietta, 554; character of the 
country, 554; death of Lieutenant- 
General Polk, 554; brisk fighting for 
some days, 555; the pressure on Gen- 
eral G. W. Smith, 555; falling back 
to the Chattahoochee, 555; losses of 
mills, foundries, and military stores in 
these retreats, 555; position of the 
enemy, 555; questions upon which 
there has been a decided conflict of 
opinion, 556; the extreme popular 
disappointment, 556; the possible 
fall of the “Gate City” produced in- 
tense anxiety, 556; the removal of 
General Johnston demanded, 556; ap- 
prehensive of disasters that might 


result from it, 556; the clamors for 


VOL. IL. 


his removal, 557; Johnston relieved 
and Hood appointed, 557; letter of 
Hon. B. H. Hill, 557; Hood assumes 
command, 561; his effective strength, 
562; resolved to attack the enemy, 
562; the movement fails, 562; attacks 
McPherson’s corps, 562; various suc- 
cessful expeditions, 562; Sherman 
moves to the south and southwest of 
Atlanta, 562, 563; evacuation of At- 
lanta a necessity, 563; Hood marches 
westerly, 563; Atlanta surrendered to 
Sherman, 563; inhabitants expelled by 
Sherman and robbed by his-soldiers, 
564; the enemy inactive, 564; Hood’s 
report of the state of his army, 564 ; 
visit of the President to his head- 
quarters, 565; view of the situation, 
565; efforts to fill up the army, 565; 
action of the Governor of Georgia, 565 ; 
exemption of citizens from military 
service, 566; Hood moves against the 
enemy’s communications, 566 ; Forrest 
ordered to strike the Nashville road, 
566; improvement in the condition of 
Hood’s army, 567; the plan of opera- 
tions discussed, 567; opinion of Gen- 
eral Hardee, 568; proceeding of Beau- 
regard, 568 ; movements of Hood, 568 ; 
withdraws toward Gadsden, 569; con- 
ference with Beauregard, 569 ; decides 
to march into Tennessee, 569; tele- 
gram of General Beauregard, 569; 
change of programme, 569; reply, 569; 
Hood crosses the Tennessee, 570; the 
movement ill advised, 570; Sherman’s 
destructive march, 570; moves from 
Atlanta, 571; harassed by Wheeler’s 
cavalry, 571; Hardee at Savannah, 
572; Sherman reaches Savannah, 572; 
Fort McAllister taken, 572; prepara- 
tions of the enemy to bombard Savan- 
nah, 572; Hardee evacuates, 573. (See 
Hoop, General J. B.) 


Gettysburg, the enemy met in front of 


Gettysburg and driven through the 
town, 440; instructions given not’ to 
bring on a general engagement, 440 ; 
statement of General Pendleton, chief 
of artillery, 441; preparations for a 
general engagement delayed, 442; the 
position at Gettysburg, 442 ; main pur- 
pose of the movement across the Po- 
tomac, 442; Lee decides to renew the 
attack, 443; the position of our line, 
443; the conflict of the second day, 
443; Lee determines to continue the 
assault, 443; general plan unchanged, 
448; the continued conflict, 444; its 


INDEX TO VOL. II. . 781 


results, 444; army retires, 444; pris- 
oners and loss, 444 ; strength of forces, 
446; the wisdom of the strategy justi- 
fied the result, 447; the battle was un- 
fortunate, 447; considerations, 447 ; 


most eventful struggle of the war, 448. |. 


GuassELt, Com. W. T., attacks the New 
Tronsides frigate with torpedoes, 208. 

Gloucester Point, its position, 83; Me- 
Clellan urges an attack in rear, 85; a 
detachment could have turned it, 90. 

Gorpon, General Joun B., selected to 
command the sortie against Fort Stead- 
man, in Grant’s lines before Peters- 
burg, 649; its result, 649; his letter 
furnishing details, 650-654. 

Government permanent, The, its inaugu- 
ration welcomed, 1. 

Government of the United States, rejected 
adjustment by negotiation, and chose 
to attempt subjugation, 5; the course 
how pursued, 5; recognized the sepa- 
rate existence of the Confederate States 
by an interdictive embargo and block- 
ade of all their commerce with United 
States, 5; manner in which the war 
was conducted, 5; not a government 
resting on the consent of the governed, 
6; tendency of its actions directly to 
the emancipation of slaves,9; caution 
of General McClellan, 9; instructions 
to General T. W. Sherman, in South 
Carolina, to receive all persons, whether 
slaves or not, 10; other orders, 10; 
willing to accede to the terms of the 
Treaty of Paris, 12; its offer declined 
by foreign powers, 13; the terms upon 
which the offer was made, 13; its ob- 
ject, in 1862, to assail us with every 
instrument of destruction that could 
be devised, 158; all its efforts directed 
to our subjugation or extermination, 
159; the aid of Congress called in, 
159; did acts which it was expressly 
made in the Constitution its duty to 
prevent, 176; words of the Constitu- 
tion, 177; what all its acts consisted 
in, 178; has no natural rights, 181; 
insincerity of her complaints to Great 
Britain for the construction of our 
ships, 249; statement of Mr. Laird, 
249; employed its war-vessels to catch 
blockade-runners instead of capturing 
our light cruisers on the ocean, 266; 
action. of its State Department, 266 ; 
appeals to Great Britain to prevent the 
so-called “pirates” from violating in- 
ternational law, 267; a mortifying ex- 
hibition of deception and unmanliness, 


97 


267; reclamation sought for, 267; 
what international law recognizes, 267 ; 
effort of the United States Govern- 
ment to contract in England for the 
construction of iron-plated vessels, 
268; other proceedings, 268; state- 
ment of Lord Russell, 268; United 
States Government profited most 
by unjustifiable war practices, 268; 
upon its interference, a State govern- 
ment immediately ceases to be repub- 
lican, 310; its acts of reconstruction 
entirely unconstitutional, revolutionary, 
subversive of the Constitution, and de- 
structive of the Union, 310; what is 
it? 453; an organization of a few 
years’ duration, 453 ; it might cease to 
exist, and the States and people con- 
tinue prosperous, peaceful, and happy, 
453; it sprang from certain circum- 
stances in the course of human affairs, 
453; has no warrant or authority but 
the ratification of the sovereign States, 
453; unlike the governments of the 
States instituted for the protection of 
the unalienable rights of man, it has 
only its enumerated objects, 453; it 
keeps no records of property, and guar- 
antees no possession of an estate, 453; 
marriage it can neither confirm nor 
annul, 453; partakes of the nature 
of an incorporation, 453; right of the 
people to alter or abolish it, 453; its 
duration, 454; objects, 454; distinct in 
its nature and objects from the State 
governments, 454; its true character 
and intentions toward us exposed, 580:; 
aspirations for dominion and sovereign- 
ty, 581; the term “loyal,” its signifi- 
cation, 581; meaning of President Lin- 
coln’s words, 581; hope of mankind in 
constitutional freedom be for ever lost, 
582; the foundation of the war, 582; 
the issue for which we fought, 582; 
why we-were called rebels, 582. 
Grant, General U. §., starts from Cairo 
with a force to attack Fort Henry, 26; 
strength of his force, 26; his move- 
ments, 26; moves to invest Fort Don- 
elson, 29; strength of his force, 29; 
takes command at Pittsburg Landing, 
52; condition of his army after the 
battle of Shiloh, 70; masses a heavy 
force along the Memphis and Charles- 
ton Railroad, 391; moves south and 
camps near Water Valley, 391; coun- 
try teeming with forage, 391; his ob- 
ject, 391; moves down the Mississippi 
to Young’s Point, 393 ; retreat to Mem- 


782 


phis compelled by Van Dorn’s de- 
struction of supplies at Holly Springs, 
393; attempt to pass to the rear of 
Fort Pemberton, 394; do. to enter the 
Yazoo above Haines’s Bluff, 395 ; 
Grant’s army, 395 ; attempts to cut a ca- 
nal, 396; unsuccessful, 396 ; another at- 
tempt to cut one near Milliken’s Bend, 
896; lands below Vicksburg, 398 ; ad- 
vances into Mississippi to strike either 
Jackson or Vicksburg, 899; his ex- 
pectation of an attack in his rear by 
General Johnston, 423; preparations 
to resist it, 423 ; statement of an officer 
of his army, 424; arrives at Chatta- 
nooga and assumes command, 434 ; his 
description of the situation, 434; his 
first movement, 435 ; other operations, 
436; his plan of campaign revealed, 
510; to connect with the army of But- 
ler on the south side of the James, 510; 
appointed: lieutenant-general, 515; as- 
sumes command of armies of United 
States, 515; his reénforcements, 515; 
position of Lee’s and Grant’s forces, 
515; movements open to the choice of 
General Grant, 516; the movement 
which was made, 516; Grant encoun- 
tered in the Wilderness, 516; move- 
ments of Grant to cross the Rapidan, 
516; his contest in the Wilderness, 
517-520 ; moves to Spottsylvania Court- 
House, 520; the battle there, 520, 521; 
heavily reénforced, 522; his blunder at 
Hanover Junction, 523; crosses the 
Pamunkey, 524; moves to Cold Harbor, 
524; attempts to picrce or drive back 
Lee’s forces, 524; fearful carnage of 
his soldiers, 524; his soldiers sullenly 
and silently decline to renew the as- 
sault, 524; his force before he crossed 
the Rapidan, 525; his losses from the 
Wilderness to Cold Harbor, 525; state- 
ment of Swinton, 525 ; crosses the James 
and concentrates at Petersburg, 525, 
526; makes a campaign of a month 
and sacrifices a hecatomb of men, 526 ; 
his instructions to General Butler rela- 
tive to the exchange of prisoners, 599 ; 
replies to General Lee’s letters, 599, 
600; dispatch to General Butler, 600; 
seeks a new base on the’ James River, 
637; advances to Petersburg, 637; the 
purpose of his campaign, 646; two 
plans open for him in the attack on 
Petersburg, 646; the campaign of 
1865, 647, (See Petersburg.) 

Great Britain, her treatment of private 
property in wars with us, 8. 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


Greece, recognition of her independence 
by the United States Government in 
the war with Turkey, 276. 

Green, Brigadier-General Martin, at- 
tacks the enemy landing below Vicks- 
burg, 898; one of the best soldiers in 
the Confederate service, 416; died at 
Vicksburg, 417. 

Grea, Brigadier-General, attacked by a 
large body of the enemy near Vicks- 
burg, 404. 

Gregg, Battery, makes an obstinate de- 
fense with a small force, 655. 

Grierson, Colonel, his raid through Mis- 
sissippi, 399. 

GrirritH, Brigadier-General_ RicHaRrD, 
killed near Savage Station, 141. 

Gunboats, efforts to construct, on the Ten- 
nessee River, 25; the fleet prepared by 
the United States Government, 25; of 
the enemy disabled and defeated at 
Fort Donelson, 30; the terror inspired 
by them in the early period of the war, 
240; successful contests with them by 
river-boats impaired the estimate put 
upon them, 240; the appearance of 
the Indianola, 240; fight with the 
Webb and Queen of the West, 241; 
captured, 241; the ram Arkansas, 
242; fight in the Yazoo, 242; on the 
Mississippi, 242. 


Haines’s Bluff, attempt of General Sher- 
man to reduce our work at, and gain 
the rear of Vicksburg, 892; unsue- 
cessful, 393. 

Haueck, Major-General H. W., assumes 
command of the enemy’s forces at Shi- 
loh, 71; advances on Corinth, 71; as- 
signed to command by enemy in the 
West, 18; his threatening position, 18. 

Hamitron, ALEXANDER, statement. re- 
garding war between the States, 5. 

Hameron, General Wank, attacks Kilpat- 
rick at night, and routs his force, 505; 
letter relative to burning cotton, 628 ; 
successes against the enemy at and 
near Fayetteville, North Carolina, 635 ; 
endeavors to obtain his cavalry, 689 ; 
finds it surrendered with Johnston’s 
army, 689. 

Hancock, General, commands an assault 
at Williamsburg, 94; chivalric remark 
respecting the Fifth North Carolina 
and Twenty-fourth Virginia Regiments, 
$6. 

Hanover Junetion, the peril of Grant's 
army near, 523. : 

Harper, General W. G., commands a 


INDEX TO VOL. IL. 783 


corps at the battle of Shiloh, 55; holds 
Savannah, 571; conflict with the en- 
emy at Bentonville, North Carolina, 
636. 

Harris, Governor Isoam G., on the skill 
of General Hood in his campaign, 580. 

Harviz, Lewis £., efforts to increase the 
capacity of the Danville Railroad after 
the loss of the Weldon, 673. 

Hatteras Inlet, its position and strength, 
77; attacked by military and naval 
expedition of the enemy, 77; it capit- 
ulates, 77. 

_ Hayes, General, “his regiment sadly cut 
up,” 116; explanation, 116. 

Hecatomb of men sacrificed by General 
Grant to reach a position to which Mc- 
Clellan had already demonstrated there 
was an easy and inexpensive route, 
526. 

Henry, Fort, its position, 24; report rela- 
tive to, 24; its condition, 24; strength 
of our force at, 26; attacked by the 
enemy, 26; defended by seventy-five 
men while our main body retire to Fort 
Donelson, 26; cannonade of the iron- 
clads, 26; response of the fort, 27; 
damage to the enemy’s fleet, 27; our 
losses, 28 ; surrender of the fort, 28. 

Haru, General, stubborn resistance made 
by his division, 518. 

Hieerns, Colonel, in command at the 
forts below New Orleans, 211; his 
skill and gallantry in the defense, 218. 

Highwayman, The, is he henceforth to be 
the lord of the highway ? 183. 

Hitt, General A. P., advances upon Me- 
chaniesville, 134; forces the enemy to 
take refuge on the left bank of Beaver 
Dam, 134; reaches New Cold Harbor, 
136; becomes hotly engaged, 137; 
continues the pursuit to Frazier’s Farm, 
142; his gallant bearing at Frazier’s 
Farm, 146; engaged with his division 
at the battle of Beaver Run, 319; 
reaches Sharpsburg and reénforzes 
General Jones in the battle there, 337; 
commands the rear-guard as the army 
retires from Sharpsburg, 342; drives 
the enemy into the Potomac, 342; his 
report, 342; commands the Third 
Corps of Lee’s army, 437; occupies 
the line in front of Fredericksburg, 
438 ; leaves for the Valley, 439 ; crosses 
the Potomac, 440; occupies the center 
at Gettysburg, 443; penetrates an in- 
terval of Grant’s force at Petersburg 
and inflicts great loss, 639; killed in 
action, 655, 


Hit, Hon. Bengamin H., his letter rela- 
tive to interviews with General John- 
ston and President Davis, 557-561. 

Hitt, General D. H., his services at Seven 
Pines, 125; forms on the extreme left 
of the line, 137; drives the enemy in 
confusion toward the Chickahominy, 
188; gallantly engages the enemy at 
Malvern Hill, 168; crosses the Poto- 
mac and encamps near Frederick, 380; 
crosses South Mountain and moves to- 
ward Boonesboro, 330; his position at 
the battle of Sharpsburg, 335; sia- 
tioned near Fredericksburg, 351. 

Hox, General, moves against the enemy 
attacking Fort Fisher, 646; retires 
with his small force, 646. ? 

Hoxiins, Commander, aids with gunboats 
to repulse Major-General Pope at New 
Madrid, 76; commands our squadron 
at New Orleans, 211; commands the 
river fleet at New Orleans, 222. 

Holly Springs, an immense depot of sup- 
plies accumulated by General Grant 
for his march on Vicksburg, 391 ; sur- 
prised and captured by General Van 
Dorn, 391; supplies destroyed, 391. 

Houmas, General, his movement, 142; a 
mistake, 142; ordered by General Lee, 
142; remains under fire of enemy’s 
gunboats, 143; incorrect statements 
made, 143; their correction, 143; the 
fire upon his position, 143 ; withdraws, 
144; importance of his position devel- 
oped too late, 144; his character, 144. 


Hoop, General J. B., at Sharpsburg battle, 


835; account of the contest on the left at 
Sharpsburg, 3839; appointed to com- 
mand the Army of Tennessee, 557; ar- 
rives at Gadsden, 578; condition of his 
army, 578; decides to cross the Ten- 
nessee and move against Thomas, 573 ; 
an unfortunate delay, 573; his move- 
ments, 574; position of the enemy, 
574; pursues him to Franklin, 575; 
position at Franklin, 576; considera- 
tions, 576; line of battle formed, 
576; the battle, 576; moves toward 
Franklin, 577; position of the enemy, 
577; enemy reénforced, 578; Hood’s 
line retreats in confusion, 578; re- 
tires pressed by the enemy, 578; 
crosses the Tennessee, 579; losses, 
579; relieved, 579; moves his forces 
from the west to aid in the defense of 
North Carolina, 630, 

Hooxer, Major-General Josrru, succeeds 
General Burnside in the command of 
the Federal army, 357 ; resumes active 


184. INDEX TO VOL. Il. 


operations, 857; a feint before Fred- 
ericksburg, 358; a considerable force 
crosses the fords of the Rapidan, 357 ; 
converged near Chancellorsville, 357 ; 
attacked and repulsed by Lee, 359, 
360; recrosses the Rappahannock, 
864; arrival near Chattanooga, 4385 ; 
his movements, 485; scales the western 
slope of Lookout Mountain, 436; po- 
sition of his army at Fredericksburg in 
the spring of 1868, 487; retires from 
Fredericksburg along the Potomac 
toward Washington, 439; crosses the 
Potomac, 440; this menaces Lee’s 
communications, 440. 

Hornesboro, left flank of the enemy under 
Sherman repulsed by General Wheeler, 
635. 

Houses searched for arms by an armed 
force of the United States Government 
in Baltimore, 464. 

Hueerr, General, delays the evacuation 
of Norfolk, 99; halted at Petersburg, 
100; moves to the north side of the 
James River and joins General John- 
ston, 100; his movements affected by 
the rain, 125; statement of General 
Rodes, 126; his line of march, 127; 
the impediments, 127; expected by 
Longstreet, 127; ordered to pursue the 
enemy, 141; his route, 142; his prog- 
ress, how delayed, 144; encounters a 
battery of rifled guns, 144; it is driven 
off, 145; probable effect of his non- 
arrival in time, 146; gallant attack at 
Malvern Hill, 148; placed at the Nor- 
folk Navy-Yard for its protection, 202; 
ordered to evacuate by General John- 
ston, 202; order delayed by Secretary 
of War, 202; the fruits of Huger’s 
system and energy, 202, 203. 

Houerr, Lieutenant Tomas B., commands 
the McRae at New Orleans, 221. 

Hunrer, Major-General, issues an order 
declaring the slaves in his department 
for ever free, 181; countermanded as 
too soon, 181. 

Hunrrr, R. M. T., appointed to confer 
with Mr, Lincoln, 617. 


“ Thave no lawful right to do so,” words of 
President Lincoln relative to his inter- 
ference with slavery, 160. 

ImsopEN, General, makes a demonstra- 
tion toward Romney, 488 ; joins Breck- 
inridge in the upper Valley, 527. 

Indianola, The, 1 gunboat on the Missis- 
Sippi, 240; her size and force, 240; 
captured by our river-boats, 241, 


Insane extravagances, an apology for 
presenting such, to readers under a 
constitutional Government of limited 
powers, 171. 

Intention, The, to violate our constitutional 
right shown, 174. 

Interference with “ the just powers” of a 
State causes a subversion and subjuga- 
tion of them, 460. 

International law, every restraint of, 
broken through by the Government of 
the United States, 2; violations of, by 
the Government of the United States 
in the pillage and deportation of pri- 
vate property, 8. 

Tronelads, the first conflict between, 201. 

Island No. 10, its situation, 76 ; its bom- 
bardment, 76; a portion of our force 
retires and the remainder surrender, 
76. : 

Issue, the sole, involved in the conflict of 
the United States Government with the 
Confederate States, 293; an illustra- 
tion, 298; the question still lives, 294 ; 
the strife not over until the tyrant’s 
plea is bound in chains strong as 
adamant, 294; for which we fought, 
582; the rights and sovereignty of the 
people, 582. 

Iuka, a force of the enemy encountered 
by General Little, 8387; a bloody con- 
test, 887; enemy driven back with a 
loss of nine guns, 387; Grant arrives 
too late, 387. 


Jackson, General T. J., rapid movements 
in the Shenandoah Valley, 106 ; attacks 
Port Royal, 106; arrives at Strasburg, 
111; repulses Fremont, 111; marches 
up theValley, 111; reaches Harrisonburg 
and turns toward Port Republic, 111; 
reaches Port Republic, 112; battle 
with General Shields near Port Re- 
public, 114; description of him by 
General Taylor, 115; material results 
of this campaign in the Valley, 117; 
motives which influenced Jackson, 118; 
his object effected, 118; recruits his 
forces, 118; reattacks the enemy, 118; 
drives him across the Potomac, 119; 
plan to bring his force from the Valley 
to Richmond, 131; the design masked, 
131; instructions to Jackson, 131; be- 
fore reénforced, he routs the enemy 
and then follows Lee’s instructions, 
132; directions to, under the order of 
battle by Lee, 133; ordered to pursue 
the enemy, 141; his route, 142; prob- 
able effect of his non-arrival in time, 


INDEX TO VOL, II. 


146; arrives on the battle-field, 147; 
forms his line, 147; his remark on 
the retreating foe, 150; ordered with 
his division to Gordonsville to resist 
the advance of General Pope, 312; 
fights the enemy at Cedar Run, 317; 
reénforcements sent to, 320; his move- 
ment round the right of General Pope, 
322; attacks left flank of the enemy, 
324; battle ensued, 324; enemy re- 
tires, 324; subsequent battle of Ma- 
nassas, 324; defeat of the enemy, 326, 
327; advances to intercept the retreat, 
327; battle at Ox Hill, 327; enemy 
escapes, 327; moves to attack Harper’s 
Ferry, 330; reduces Harper’s Ferry, 
332; extent of the surrender, 333; 
position at Sharpsburg battle, 335 ; 
directed to advance toward Fredericks- 
burg, 351; position of his corps at 
Fredericksburg, 354; turns the enemy’s 
right at Chancellorsville, 360; wound- 
ed by mistake in the darkness, 360. 
Jackson, Mississippi, held by General J. 
E. Johnston, 425; assaulted by Sher- 
man, 425; Johnston withdraws across 
Pearl River, 425. 

JENKINS, General, advances toward Win- 
chester, 438; penetrates to Chambers- 
burg, Pennsylvania, 439. 

Jounston, General A. §., confronted by 
new commanders, 18; his position 
altered by the loss of Forts Henry and 
Donelson, 36; his preparations for re- 
treat, 87; his successful retreat, 37; 
the enemy unaware, 37 ; reaches Nash- 
ville, 38; public excitement, 38; pro- 
- ceedings in Congress, 38; his removal 
asked, 38; answer of the President, 
88; Johnston’s letter to the Secretary 
of War, 38; his plans and further 
movements, 39; movements after the 
fall of Donelson, 39; letter from the 
Secretary of War, 40; do. from the 
President, 41; his reply relative to 
affairs, 42-47; review of the events 
that brought such censure upon him, 
48; his object to concentrate at Cor- 
inth and fight the enemy in detail, 
54; Grant first and Buell afterward, 
54; forces sent to him, 54; Bragg’s 
account of Johnston’s efforts, 54; or- 
ders of battle at Shiloh, 55 ; the march, 
55; its progress, 56; exclamation, 
“This is not war,” 56; delay and its 
cause, 56; his purpose, 57; his tele- 
gram to the President, 57; the answer, 
57 ; importance of an early attack, 57 ; 
conference with generals, 60; progress 


785 


of the battle, 58, 59; death of John- 
ston, 66; circumstances, 66; case of 
Turenne, 68 ; incident at Buena Vista, 
68. 

Jounson, ANDREW. Lincoln, President, 
appoints Andrew Johnson military Goy- 
ernor of Tennessee, 285; his object, 
285. 

Jounson, Colonel Brapizy T., harasses 
the rear of General Judson Kilpatrick, 
505. 

Jounston, General Joseph E., ordered to 
the Peninsula of Virginia, 84; directed 
to proceed and examine the condition 
of affairs, 86; recommends the aban- 
donment of the Peninsula, 86; the 
recommendation discussed, 87; antici- 
pates that McClellan will soon advance 
and attack Centreville, 87; his plan of 
operation in the Peninsula, 87; writes 
to Commander Tatnall to proceed with 
the Virginia to York River, 90; an- 
nounces his intention to evacuate York- 
town, 92; policy before Richmond, 
101; remark that he expected to give 
up Richmond, 120; his plan for at- 
tacking McClellan, 120; unexpected 
firing, 122; assigned to the Southern 
Department, 402; reply to General 
Pemberton’s request for cavalry, 402 ; 
orders to General Johnston, 403; tele- 
gram to the Secretary of War, 404; 
stops at Jackson and corresponds with 
Pemberton, 405; dispatch to General 
Pemberton, 405; reply, 405; further 
dispatches, 408; telegrams to the 
President and Secretary of War, 412; 
communication to Pemberton, 413 ; 
entertained quite different views from 
General Pemberton, 422; efforts to 
supply the army of the former, 428 ; 
his message to General Pemberton, 
423 ; reply to the suggestion of reliev- 
ing Port Hudson, 423; another report, 
423; falls back to Jackson after the 
surrender, 424 ; appearance of the en- 
emy, 424; extract from his report,. 
424; movements of Sherman, 424 ;> 
withdraws from Jackson, 425; direct- 
ed to assume the command of the Army 
of Tennessee, 547; total effective of 
the army, 547; position of the enemy’s 
forces, 547; an onward movement de- 
manded, 548 ; considerations presented 
to General Johnston, 548; his ap- 
proval of an aggressive movement, 
548; his proposition, 549; his subse- 
quent movements, 550-557; clamors 
for his removal, 557; relieved, and 


786 


Hood appointed, 557; putin command | 
of the troops in North Carolina, ‘631 ; 
relieves General Beauregard, 631; in- 
structions from General Lee, 632; 
Johnston’s force, 632 ; his movements, 
632; his purposes, 634; takes posi- 
tion at Smithfield, 635 ; failure to con- 
centrate against the enemy’s left wing, 
636; moves to Raleigh, 637; confer- 
ence with the President, 679-681 ; cor- 
respondence with General Sherman, 
684; the idea of a universal surren- 
der, 699. 

JomnviLLE, Prince de, describes the ef- 
fect produced by the refusal of Presi- 
dent Lincoln to send McDowell’s corps 
to reénforce General McClellan, 90; 
extract from his letter, 90. 

Jones, Lieutenant Catesby Ap R., com- 
mands the Virginia in the combat with 
the Monitor, 200; signals the Monitor 
to renew the combat without success, 
201. 

Jones, General J. K., at Sharpsburg bat- 
tle, 335. 

Jones, General SamurL, commanded in 
southwest Virginia, 426. 

Jones, General W. E., encounters Hunter 
in the Valley, and is killed, 529. 

Just powers of government, only those 
which are derived from the free and 
unconstrained consent of the governed, 
25253 object and end for which they 
are derived, 452. 


Kearney, Major-General, left dead on 
the field, 327. 

(elly’s Ford, attack and surprise of the 
enemy at, 449, 

Kennon, Lieutenant Brverrty, sinks the 
Varuna at New Orleans, 221; his re- 
port, 221. é 

Kent, Chancellor, on the rights of bel- 
ligerents, 271. 

Kentucky, the first step taken for the 
subjugation of the State government 
and the people consisted in an inter- 
ference, by an armed force, of the 
Government of the United States with 
the voters at the State election, 468 ; 
object to secure the rejection of as 
many votes as possible antagonistic to 
the emancipation measures of the Goy- 
ernment of the United States, 468 ; 
none allowed to be candidates but its 
friends, 468 ; martial law declared by 
General Burnside, commander of the 
Department of Ohio, 468; orders regu- 
lating the election issued by military 


INDEX TO VOL. II. . 


commanders in the State, 469; armed 
soldiers stationed at the polls, 469; 
the result, 469; statement of the Goy- 
ernor, 469; its meaning, 470; negroes 
enrolled as soldiers by the United 
States Government, 470; verbal ar- 
rangement effected at Washington by 
the Governor, 470; his complaint of 
its offensive violations, 470; arrest of 
peaceful citizens by soldiers of the 
United States Government, 470; out- 
rages described by the Governor, 470 ; 
declaration of martial law throughout 
the State by President Lincoln, and the 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, 
471; a large number of eminent citi- 
zens arrested by the military force of 
the Government of the United States, 
471; judges, merchants, and young 
women banished from the State with- 
out a trial or hearing, 471; at a State 
election for Judge of the High Court 
of Appeals, the commanding General 
of the United States Government or- 
ders that the name of the Chief-Justice 
shall not be allowed to appear on the 
poll-books as a candidate, 472; the 
duties of the Governor relating to elec- 
tions, 472 ; twenty thousand slaves en- 
listed in the armies of the Government 
of the United States, 472; United States 
Congress passes an act declaring that 
the wives and children of these soldiers 
shall be free, 473; everything swept 
away by the emancipation proclama- 
tion, 473. 

Kernstown, the enemy at, attacked by 
Early, 531; routs him, 581. 

Kerrsuaw, General, moves his division 
toward Amelia Court-House, 662. 

Kitpatrick, General, marches to: make 
a dash on Richmond, 505; harassed 
in his rear by Colonel Bradley T. 
Johnson and sixty Marylanders, 505 ; 
reaches the defenses of Richmond, 505 ; 
an engagement, 505; retreats and is 
attacked at night by General Wade 
Hampton, 505; enemy fled on a gal- 
lop, 505. 

Kinespury, Lieutenant, remark relative 
to the battle of Buena Vista, 68. 

Kinston, North «Carolina, a body of Sher- 
man’s force attacked and routed by 
General Bragg, 635. 


Lairp, Mr., senior, applied to, to build 
vessels for the Northern Government, 
248; his statement in the British 
Ilouse of Commons, 248; extracts 


INDEX TO VOL, IL. 787 


from letters, 248; statement of the 
condition of the Alabama when she 
sailed, 249; presents records of the 
Custom-House on exports to Northern 
States, 249. 

Lamp, Colonel, seriously wounded in the 
defense of Fort Fisher, 646, 

Language of the Governor of Maryland, 
on the interference by the United States 
Government with the State elections, 
465, 466. 

Last fragments of the Constitution to be 
thrown aside to secure our subjuga- 
tion, 170. 

Law, International, on the capture and 
confiscation of private property in war, 
163. 

Lawton, Gencral A. R., ordered to unite 
with Jackson in the Valley, 133; at 
Sharpsburg battle, 335; quartermaster 
of the Confederate army, 647. 

Len, General Rozert E., assumes com- 
mand of the Carolinas and Florida, 80; 
his plans for coast defense, 80; the 
system he organized, 80; its success, 
81; takes command of the army around 
Richmond, 130; commences the con- 
struction of earthworks, 130; plans for 
the future, 131; answer to the President, 
132; his order of battle in the attack 
on General McClellan, 134; advances 
against General Pope, 312; battle of 
Cedar Run, 317; its success, 320; 
enemy falls back, 320; moves up the 
Rappahannock, 321; skirmishes along 
the fords, 321; Jackson crosses the 
river, but falls back owing to a storm, 
821; Longstreet ordered to his sup- 
port, 322; position of Jackson, 322 ; 
position of the enemy, 322; forces 
ordered from Richmond, 322; plan of 
operations now determined on, 322; 
movement of Jackson round the right 
of Pope’s army, 322; Manassas Junc- 
tion depot captured at night, 323; 
Ewell repulses the enemy at Bristoe 
Station and joins Jackson, 323; posi- 
tion of General Pope, 323; Taliaferro 
halts at the Manassas battle-field, 324 ; 
joined by Hill and Ewell, 324; attack 
of Jackson on enemy’s left flank, 324 ; 
enemy retire, 324; battle of Manassas, 
824; retreat of the enemy, 326; night 
puts an end to the pursuit, 827; enemy 
retreats to Washington, 327; strength 
of forces, 828; losses, 328; marches 
toward Leesburg, 328 ; decided to cross 
the Potomac, 329; reasons for the de- 
cision, 329; the plan, 330 ; movements 


of the divisions, 330; slow advance of 
the enemy, 331; order of General Lee 
found by the enemy, 331; facts rela- 
tive to the lost order, 331; action at 
Boonsboro Gap, 332; retires to Sharps- 
burg, 832; Harper’s Ferry reduced by 
General Jackson, 332; forces concen- 
trated at Sharpsburg, 333; letter from 
the President, 333; address to the 
people of Marryland by General Lee, 
3833; concentrates at Sharpsburg, 334; 
fights the battle at Sharpsburg, 335, 
836; strength of Lee’s army, 338; 
position of his forces on the next day, 
338; withdraws his army south of the 
Potomac, 338; moves to Martinsburg 
and then to the vicinity of Bunker Hill, 
838; the contest on the left, 339; 
strength of armies and losses, 342; 
advances to Fredericksburg, 351 ; takes 
a position to resist an advance of the 
enemy after crossing the river, 352; 
advance of Burnside to lay bridges, 
352; repelled with great slaughter, 
852, 8538; Lee’s forces in order and 
position, 354 ; the attack by Burnside’s 
army, 354, 355 ; its repulse, 355; with- 
drawn in the night, 356; a period of 
inactivity ensues, 357; distribution of 
his army, 857; some unimportant en- 
gagements, 357; movements of the 
enemy indicate the resumption of ac- 
tive operations, 357; our dispositions 
made with a view to resist a direct ad- 
vance, 857; leaves sufficient to hold 
the lines and moves the rest of his 
force toward Chancellorsville, 358 ; his 
successful attack upon Hooker, 359, 
860; in full possession of the field, 
861; enemy’s successful attack before 
Fredericksburg, 862; threatens our 
communications, 362; reénforcements 
sent to Salem Church, 362; enemy re- 
pulsed and broke, 363 ; attack renewed 
on Hooker, 364; enemy recrosses the 
river and retires from Fredericksburg, 
864; reorganizes his forces in the 
spring of 1863, 437; decides by a bold 
movement to attempt to transfer hos- 
tilities to the north side of the Poto- 
mac, 487; movement of his forces, 
438; further movements, 439, 440; 
concentrates at Gettysburg, 440; de- 
cides to renew the attack of the first 
day, 448 ; the conflict, 443 ; determines 
to continue the conflict, 443; retires 
toward the Potomac, 444 ; crosses, 445 ; 
strength of his army at Gettysburg, 
446; do. of Meade, 446; losses, 


788 INDEX TO VOL. IL. 


446; his report, 446; testimony of 
General Meade, 447; moves to attack 
the flank of the enemy, 449; result, 
449; affair at Kelly Ford, 449; 
puts his troops in motion soon as 
Grant’s movement was known, 517; 
his troops encountered near Old Wil- 
derness tavern, 517; the engagement, 
517; further movements, 518; the 
line of battle, 518; the struggle, 518; 
the adversary completely foiled, 518; 
the attack renewed, 519; Lee comes 
on the field, 519; the assault checked, 
519; attack on the left, 519; the foe 
surprised and routed, 519; Longstreet 
wounded by mistake, 520; on the next 
day an attack on the right and left 
flank, 529; Grant makes a rapid flank 
movement to Spottsylvania Court- 
House, 520; Lee’s movement in ad- 
vance, 520; on the next day the armies 
swung round on their advance and con- 
fronted each other in line of battle, 
521; a proud scene for Mississippians, 
521; the contest of the day, 521; cap- 
ture of General E. Johnson and most 
of his division, 522; divines Grant’s 
objective point and frustrates him, 523 ; 
the peril of Grant’s army, 523; reén- 
forcements to Lee, 524; Grant’s move- 
ments to Cold Harbor, 524; fruitless 
efforts of Grant to drive back Lee’s 
forces, 524; fearful carnage of the 
enemy, 524; his force on the Rapidan 
with which to meet Grant, 525; his 
letter to General Halleck relative to 
the execution of William B. Mumford, 
590; letters to General Grant relative 
to the exchange of prisoners, 599, 600 ; 
crosses the James at Drury’s’ Bluff, 
637; occupies the intrenchments at 
Petersburg, 638 ; his defense of, 640; 
conference with the President on the 
state of affairs, 648; the programme 
adopted, 648 ; presents the idea of a 
sortie, 649; adopted, 649; its failure, 
650; his letter to the President stat- 
ing final movements, 660. 

Lyx, General G. W. C., moves his division 
from Chapin’s Bluff to retreat from 
Richmond, 662; his promotion, 664. 

Lyx, General W. H. F., watches the fords 
of the Rappahannock with his cavalry, 
352; repulses a cavalry expedition near 
Ream’s Station, 639. 

Legislature of a State, some of its mem- 
bers seized and confined in a distant 
prison, 2, 

Liberty, its fundamental principles de- 


nied by the action of the Government 
of the United States in Tennessee, 
456; the people the source of all 
power, 456. 


Life, personal liberty, and property, their 


protection to be found only in the State 
governments, 451. 


Lincotn, President, his message} 6; rec- 


ommends the colonization of the ne- 
groes at some places in a climate con- 
genial to them, 6; refuses the repeated 
requests of General McClellan for Mc- 
Dowell’s corps, 91; writes to MeClel- 
lan, 91; do. on the strength of his 
forces, 91; relative to request for Par- 
rott guns, 92; words of his inaugural 
relative to the institution of slavery, 
160; the principle thus announced, 
160; message to Congress saying, “It 
is startling to think that Congress can 
free a slave within a State,” 169; how 
the deed should be attempted, 169; a 
deceptive use of language, 170; mes- 
sage to Congress approving the act to 
emancipate slaves in the District of 
Columbia, 172; extract, 172; previous 
action of Congress, 172; a series 
of usurpations by, 178; recommends 
the adoption of a resolution that the 
United States ought to codperate 
with any State which might adopt 
the gradual abolition of slavery, 179; 
his reasons for the measure, 179; ob- 
jections, 179; his proclamation declar- 
ing the emancipation proclamation of 
General Hunter void, 181; extract, 
181; his subsequent remarks, 181; re- 
marks to border States Representa- 
tives, 183; charges of remissness of 
his abolition supporters, 185 ; demands 
of Chicago Christians of, 186; answer 
of Mr. Lincoln, 186 ; declaration of his 
intentions in the proclamation of April 
15, 1861, 189; his declaration under 
oath, 189; his declarations to the Cabi- 
nets of Great Britain and France, 190 ; 
object of snch declarations, 190; his 
boast of the effect of his emancipation 
proclamation, 192 ; the facts presented, 
192; his proclamation for making a 
Union State out of a fragment of a 
Confederate State, 2977; his reliance on 
the “war power” declared, 298; de- 
clines to prevent the interference with 
the elections in Maryland by an armed 
force of the United States Government, 
465; announcement of his terms of 
peace, 612; meets our commissioners 
at Hampton Roads, 618; results, 619; 


INDEX TO VOL. Il. 789 


statement in his message to Congress 
on December 6, 1864, 620; the words 
of his inauguration oath, 620; words 
of the Constitution, 621; his words, 
621; the Constitution the supreme law, 
621; his oath, 621. 

Lirtte, General Henry, services at the 
battle‘of Pea Ridge, 51; attacks Rose- 
crans near Iuka, 387; a bloody contest, 
387; he is killed, 387; remarks, 387. 

Lone, General A. L., description of our 
coast defenses, 79. 

Lonestreet, General James, report on 
battle at Seven Pines, 124; ordered to 
attack, 127; explains the delay, 127; 
made the attack successfully by aid of 
Hill, 127; ordered to make a diversion 
in favor of Hill, 137; the feint con- 
verted into an attack, 137; continues 
the pursuit to Frazier’s Farm, 145; 
manner in which he led his reserve to 
the rescue at Frazier’s Farm, 146 ; joins 
“Jackson at Manassas, 324; crosses 
South Mountain and moves toward 
Boonsboro, 330 ; his position at Sharps- 
burg, 335; occupies the left at Fred- 
ericksburg, 353; recalled from the 
James River to Chancellorsville, 363 ; 
commands the left wing at Chickamau- 
ga, 432; besieges Burnside in Knox- 
ville, 436; moves to Virginia and joins 
Lee, 436; commands the First Corps 
of Lee’s army in the spring of 1863, 
437; movement to draw Hooker far- 
ther from his base, 439; crosses. the 
Potomac, 440; occupies the right at 
Gettysburg, 443 ; drives the enemy back 
at the Wilderness struggle, 519; se- 
verely wounded by mistake, 519; fur- 
ther movements, 519. 

Lorp Carer Baron of the Exchequet, his 
charge in England in the case of our 
ship the Alexandra, 272; the rights of 
belligerents, 272, 273. 

Lorine, General, joins General. Bowen 
near Grand Gulf, 402. 

Louisiana, proceedings of General Butler 
after the occupation of New Orleans, 
287; martial law declared and a mili- 
tary Governor appointed, 287; atroci- 
ties committed upon the citizens, 287, 
288 ; Order No. 28, 289; cold-blooded 
execution of William B. Mumford, 
289 ; local courts set up, 290 ; military 
power attempts to administer civil af- 
fairs, 290; order of President Lincoln 
creating a State court, 290; words of 
the Constitution, 292 ; the court a mere 
instrument of martial law, 292; assert- 


ed his right to do so on the ground of 
necessity, 292; the doctrine of neces- 
sity considered, 293-295; election of 
members of Congress on proclamation 
of the military Governor, 296; what 
the law required, 296; its violation 
sustained by Congress, 296 ; proclama- 
tion of President Lincoln to make a 
State out of a fragment of a State, 297; 
a so-called election for State officers 
and members of a State Constitutional 
Convention held, 801; so-called State 
Convention, 302; attempts to amend 
the State Constitution, 802; Louisiana 
not a republican State, 802; not insti- 
tuted by the consent of the governed, 
802; attempt by the United States 
Government to enforce a fiction, 302 ; 
subversion of the State government, 
458; registration of voters required by 
the United States Government, 458; 
the oath, 458 ; punishment of perjury 
threatened, 458; proclamation order- 
ing an election of State officers, 458 ; 
further conditions, 458 ; effect of these 
proceedings, 459; effect of these pro- 
ceedings was to establish a number of 
persons pledged to support the United 
States Government as voters and State 
government, 459; this work could be 
done only by the sovereign people, 459. 

Louisiana, an iron-clad, her capacity, 
219; destroyed, 219; her incomplete 
condition at the defense of New Or- 
leans, 220. 

Lovett, General, sent with a brigade to 
Corinth, 54; expresses satisfaction 
with the land defenses at New Orleans, 
213; evacuates the city, 217; at New 
Orleans after the fleet passed the forts, 
222; withdraws his force, and public 
property, 228. 

“ Loyal,” the word, its signification, 581. 

“ Loyalty or disloyalty,” the only dis- 
tinction among citizens of the Northern 
States, in their relation to the Govern- 
ment of the United States, 488. 


Manson, James, statement regarding war 
between the States, 5. 

Marrirt, Captain Joun N., takes com- 
mand of the cruiser Florida, 259; de- 
tained in Nassau by yellow fever, 259; 
sails for Havana, 260; goes to Mobile 
for equipment of his vessel, 260; ene- 
my’s fleet gather off the harbor to pre- 
vent his escape, 260; runs the block- 
ade and skillfully evades the enemy, 
260; his eruises, 261; fits out the ten- 


790 


der Clarence, 261; captures of the 
Florida, 261; Maffit, through sickness, 
relieved of the command, 261. 

Magruper, General Joun B., in command 
on the Virginia Peninsula, 83; con- 
structs an intrenched line across the 
Peninsula at Warwick River, 83; his 
force, 83; the form and construction 
of the line to resist McClellan’s ad- 
vance, 83; other means of defense, 
84; a second line constructed near 
Williamsburg, 84; his position on the 
arrival of General McClellan, 84; its 
advantages, 85; falls back to the line 
of Warwick River, 85; his labor in 
constructing and strengthening his de- 
fenses, 86; statement of General Ear- 
ly, 86; attempts to break his line, 88 ; 
he orders sorties, 88; the enemy in 
strong force, 89; compelled by illness 
to leave his division, 94; deficiency of 
land transportation on the withdrawal 
from Yorktown, 94; constructed de- 
fenses at Williamsburg, 94 ; ordered 
to pursue the enemy, 141; attacks, 
141; gallant attack at Malvern Hill, 
148; assigned command of the De- 
partment of Texas, 233; his conflict 
in Galveston Harbor with the enemy’s 
fleet, 234; his success, 234; his re- 
port, 235. 

Magruder, Fort, the largest work at Wil- 
liamsburg, 94. 

Malvern Hill, its situation, 147 ; occupied 
by McClellan’s army, 147; its posi- 
tion, 147; arrangement of our army, 
147; use of artillery impracticable, 
148 ; a general advance ordered, 148 ; 
not simultaneous, 148; the attack on 
the right, 148; approach of darkness, 
149; nearness of the combatants after 
the conflict closed, 149; an informal 
truce established, 149; rain in the morn- 

. ing, and the enemy’s position entirely 
deserted, 149; evidence of precipitate 
retreat, 149; the foe at Harrison’s 
Landing, 150, 

Matuory, Secretary S. R., his efforts to 
complete the construction of vessels 
for the defense of New Orleans, 226, 
227; inquiries relative to the raft be- 
low New Orleans, 229. 

Manassas, the second battle at, 824 ; re- 
treat of the enemy, 326; night put an 
end to the pursuit, 327. 

Mann, Duptry, our representative in Bel- 
gium, 368, 

Mansfield, battle at, between the forces of 
General Taylor and General Banks, 542. 


INDEX TO VOL. IL. 


Maritime war, the losses of, briefly stated, 
282, 

Marcy, Witu1am E., on the capture of 
private property in war, 163. 

Marque, letters of, issued by the Presi- 
dent of the Confederate States, 582; 
vessels captured, 582; treatment of 
the prisoners, 582; opinion of United 
States Court, 582. 

MarsHatt, General Humpurey, opposed 
to Colonel Garfield in Kentucky, 18; 
strength of his force, 18; falls back 
as Garfield advances, 18; takes posi- 
tion at Middle Creek, 19; attacked by 
Garfield, 19 ; report of Marshall, 19; 
result, 19. 

MarsHatt, Chief-Justice Joun, on the 
capture and confiscation of private 
property, 163. 

Marshals, Provost-General and special, 
appointed by the Government of the 
United States in all the Northern States, 
495; their duties, 495; civil officers 
and soldiers made subject -to their 
orders, 495; a military control estab- 
lished in every Northern State by the 
Government of the United States, 
496. 

Maryland, a military force of United 
States Government occupies Baltimore, 
460 ; order of the commander declaring 
martial law, 461; this force had no 
constitutional permission to come into 
Maryland, 461; the civil government 
suspended, 461; where were the “just 
powers ” of the State government at 
this time, 461; suspended by the com- 
manding General, 461; invasion of 
some of the unalienable rights of the 
citizens, 461 ; provisions of the United 
States Constitution, 462; instances of 
the violations of personal liberty, 462; 
case of John Merryman, 463; number 
of personal arrests in one month, 464 ; 
seizure of newspapers, 464; houses 
searched for arms, 464; interference 
with the State elections by armed force 
of the United States Government, 464, 
465; President declines to prevent it, 
465; proclamation of the Governor, 
465, 466; result, 466; Constitutional 
Convention assembled, 467 ; objections 
to the Constitution, 467; voters re- 
quired to take an oath previous to 
voting at an election where the adop- 
tion or rejection of the oath was one 
of the issues, 467; the so-called Con- 
stitution declared adopted and the 
slaves emancipated, 467 ; cautious and 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


stealthy proceedings of the United 
States Government, 468. 

Mason, Joun M., our representative in 
London, 368. 

Mavry, Captain W. L., commands the 
cruiser Georgia, 263. 

McAllister, Fort, taken by Sherman’s 
foree, 572. 

McCrzxiay, General Groner B., cautions 
the authorities at Washington against 
their emancipation measures, 9; as- 
signed to the chief command of army 
of the United States, 18; presents an 
argument to President Lincoln against 
an advance by Centreville and Manas- 
sas, but in favor of a movement down 
the Chesapeake Bay into the Rappahan- 
nock River, 82; his reconnaissance, 82 ; 
its results stated by him in a letter, 
82 ; the latter movement approved, 82; 
reason for ordering his transports to 
Washington, 83; concentrates at For- 
tress Monroe, 83, 84; advances up the 
Peninsula, 85; repulsed in several as- 
saults at Yorktown, commences a siege 
by regular approaches, 85; letter to 
Secretary Stanton on the strength of 
our forces, 85 ; reports the strength of 
his own force, 86; his views at York- 
town, 89; testimony before the Com- 
mittee on the Conduct of the War, 89; 
report on the affair between Hancock 
and Early at Williamsburg, 94; state- 
ment of General Early, 94; testimony 
at the court-martial of McDowell, 105 ; 
his position regarded as critical, 135; 
reasons, 135; his failure apparently 
anticipated by the United States Gov- 
ernment, 135; reénforcements to, cut 
off, 185; position behind Powhite 
Creek, 136; retreats from Frazier’s 
Farm to Malvern Hill, 147; its situa- 
tion, 147; his position, 147; his letter 
on the manner of conducting the war, 
814; part of his forces leave West- 
over, 320; report of his strength at 
Sharpsburg, 842; moves his army 
southward from Sharpsburg, 351; ap- 
proaches Fredericksburg, 851;  re- 
moved from command, 351. 

McCown, Brigadier-General J. P., as- 
signed to command of Island No. 10, 
52. 

McCuttoon, General Ben, killed in the 
battle of Pea Ridge, 50. 

McLaws, General, ordered to seize Mary- 
land Heights, 830; embarrassed by the 
presence of the enemy, 333; marches 
to Sharpsburg, 333. 


791 


McRar, Colonel, succeeds to the com- 
mand after General Early retires 
wounded at Williamsburg, 96; report 
of subsequent events, 96. 

Mzapr, General Grorce G., succeeds 
General Hooker, 443; his position at 
Gettysburg, 443 ; continues to strength- 
en his line, 444; his opinion that an 
attack on Lee would have resulted dis- 
astrously, 445; his testimony, 447; 
moves a force to Madison Court-House, 
504; a feint to engage the attention 
of Lee, 504; other plans for the sur- 
prise and capture of Richmond, 504, 

Medicines, proposal by our commissioner 
to purchase medicines of the United 
States authorities, to be used exclu- 
sively for the relief of the Union pris- 
oners, 602; no reply ever received, 
602. 

Memphis, advance of the enemy’s ficet 
toward, 77; encounters our fleet and 
has one ram disabled, 77; our fleet 
retires, 77; occupation of the town by 
the enemy no longer disputed, 77. 

Mrrryman, Jon, seized in his bed by an 
armed force of the United States Goy- 
ernment, 463; writ of habeas corpus 
granted, 463; disobeyed, 463; deci- 
sion of Chief-Justice Taney, 463. 

Military commissions, two trials before, 
filled the country with horror, 496 ; 
specification in the first, 496; for the 
assassination of the President, 496 ; 
the sentence, 496; insertion of the 
name of the President of the Confed- 
erate States among those of the con- 
spirators, an exhibition of the malig- 
nancy of the Government of the United 
States, 496; the case of Mrs. Surratt 
awakened much sympathy, 497; efforts 
to obtain a respite, 497; the trial of 
Major Wirz, 497; proclamation of 
President Johnson against the Presi-. 
dent of the Confederate States, 497 ; 
the condemnation of Wirz, 498 ; efforts 
to prevail upon him to implicate the 
President of the Confederate States in 
the great mortality of Northern soldiers 
as prisoners, 498; declaration of Mr, 
Louis Schade, of Washington, 498 ; 
letter of Captain C. B. Winder, 499 ; 
do. of Rev. F. E. Boyle, 499; order of 
General Burnside in Ohio, 501; com- 
ments of C. L. Vallandigham on the 
order, 501, 502; his arrest, trial, and 
sentence to imprisonment in Boston 
Harbor, 502; letter of Governor Sey- 
mour on the military usurpation, 502 ; 


792 


similar proceedings in Indiana, Illinois, 
Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and 
Vermont, 502, 503. 

Military power, its attempt to administer 
civil affairs, 290; a subversion of fun- 
damental principles, 290, 

Mine Run, unsuccessful movement of 
General Meade, 449; his loss, 450. 

Mississippi, west of, active operations in 
the beginning of 1862, 49. 

Mississippi River surrendered by the 
loss of Vicksburg and Port Hudson, 
425. 

Missouri, proposal of President Lincoln 
to make an irrepealable compact with, 
180; forbidden by the Constitution, 
180; its words, 180; a proposal to the 
State to surrender its sovereignty, 180 ; 
most conciliatory propositions of the 
Governor rejected by the Government 
of the United States, 473; he calls 
fifty thousand State militia into active 
service for the purpose of repelling in- 
vasion and for the protection of the 
lives, liberty, and property of the 
citizens, 473; his words, 473; order 
from Washington to the commanding 
General, 474; this order a pretext for 
domestic violence, 474; terms of the 
Constitution on which the Government 
of the United States may interfere in 
a State, 474; the bravery of the Gov- 
ernor, 474; charged by the Govern- 
ment of the United States with pur- 
poses of treason, 474, 475; words of 
the military commander, 475; troops 
of United States Government poured 
into the State, 475; proceedings of the 
State Convention, 475; violations of 
constitutional principles committed, 
475; final proceedings, 476. 

Mexico, our treatment of private prop- 
erty in the war with, 8, 

Mobile Harbor, its defenses, 205 ; torpe- 
does also used, 205; combat with Ad- 
miral Farragut’s fleet, 206; quite cred- 
itable to the Confederacy, 206; bom- 
bardment of the forts, 207; torpedoes, 
209, 

Money in the Confederate Treasury, trans- 
ferred to the financial agent of the 
Government by Secretary Reagan, 695. 

Monro, Joun T., the Mayor of New Or- 
leans, 231 ; reply to the demands of 
Commodore Farragut, 231. 

Monstrous crime, A, fearlessly charged 
as committed by the Government of 
the United States against Constitu- 
tional liberty in the subversion and 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


subjugation of the State governments, 
453. 

Morgan, General, attacks a brigade of 
the enemy at Hartsville, 384 ; the bri- 
gade surrenders, 884; defeats the ef- 
forts of the enemy in the Shenandoah 
Valley, 527. 

Morris, Captain OC. M., commands the 
cruiser Florida, 261; enters the har- 
bor of Bahia, 262; ship seized by the 
enemy, 262. 

Morr, Colonel Curistorner, killed at 
Williamsburg, 99; a brave soldier in 
the war with Mexico, 99. 

Moumrorp, Wit11aM B., his cold-blooded 
execution by Major-General Butler at 
New Orleans, 289; letter of General 
Lee to General Halleck, relative to the 
execution of, 590. 

Murfreesboro, position of General Bragg 
at, 884; his strength, 384; Rosecrans 
advances to attack him, 384; Rose- 
erans’s strength, 384; position of our 
line, 884; conflict begun by General 
Bragg, 385 ; result of the series of en- 
gagements, 385. 

Murray, E. C., contracts for building the 
Louisiana at New Orleans, 225; his 
testimony, 225. 

Muskets of obsolete patterns and shot- 
guns used by our soldiers at Fishing 
Creek, 22. 


Nashville, effect of its evacuation by Gen- 
eral A. S. Johnston, 40; demands for 
his removal, 40; Congress takes the 
matter in hand, 40. 

Navy Department, The, its organization, 
194; two classes of vessels, 1943 dis- 
cussions and experiments relative to 
floating batteries, 194; agreement rel- 
ative to Norfolk Navy-Yard, 195; dis- 
regarded, 195; destruction of prop- 
erty, 196; the Merrimac transformed 
into the ironclad Virginia, 196; her 
trial-trip, 196; her consorts, 196; fleet 
of the enemy, 197 ; the Virginia makes 
an attack, 197; destruction of the frig- 
ate Cumberland, 197; destruction of 
the frigate Congress, 198; Buchanan 
wounded, 199; appearance of the Mon- 
itor, 199; Virginia attacks and drives 
her into shoal water, 200. 

“* Necessity,” pleaded by Congress to jus- 
tify its usurpations of power, 161; ex- 
tent of this power from necessity, 179; 
the existence of the necessity tested, 
187; the doctrine of, incorporated as 
an unwritten clause of the Constitu- 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


tion of the United States, 293; what 
is this necessity? 298; a fundamental 
maxim, 293; no man ean be trusted 
with the exercise of power and be the 
judge of its limits, 293; the grants 
of power in the Constitution limited, 
293; limits all disregarded, and the 
people accepted the plea of necessity, 
293; a fatal subversion of the United 
States Constitution, 293; the sole issue 
of the war, 293; the question still 
lives, 294; all nations and peoples 
that adopt a confederated agent of 
government will become champions of 
our cause, 295. 

Neutrality, Peaceful, of a State, all prop- 
ositions for, refused by the Govern- 
ment of the United States, 2. 

Neutral nations, what is their duty under 
international law with regard to the 
construction and equipment of cruisers 
for either belligerent, and the supply 
of warlike stores, 269; proceedings 
of the United States after the Revolu- 
tionary War, 269; demands of the 
British plenipotentiary, 269; reply of 
Mr. Jefferson, 269; the admission of 
Washington, 270; attempt of United 
States Government to contract, if suc- 
cessful, would have been a direct viola- 
tion of international law, 270; circum- 
stances of the construction of our 
cruisers, 270; Minister Adams’s claim 
for damages, 270; Earl Russell’s re- 
ply, 270; Mr. Seward’s answer to Earl 
Russell, 271; the response of the lat- 
ter, 271; views of Chancellor Kent, 
271; views of President Pierce in a 
message to Congress, 272; charge of 
the Lord Chief Baron of the Exche- 
quer, 272, 273. 

New TIronsides, attack on her with tor- 
pedoes, 208. 

New Madrid, assaulted by Major-General 
Pope, 76; assault repulsed three 
times, 76; the place evacuated, 76. 
New Orleans, its importance, 210; nu- 
merous approaches for an attacking 
party, 210; an attack apprehended to 
come from up the river, 210; the bar 
at the mouth of the river, 211; means 
of defense in preparation, 211; the 
forts, 211; their armament, 211; their 
condition stated by General Duncan, 
212; the garrisons, 212; the construc- 
tion of a raft, 212; repeated failures, 
212; general plan of defense for the 
city, 218; two lines of works, 213; 
course of the exterior one, 213; course 


793 


of the interior one, and its location, 
213; opinion of General Lovell, 213 ; 
guns on the interior line of defense, 
213; the ironclads, 214; the main re- 
liance for defense on the forts, with 
the ,obstructions, 214; force of the 
enemy’s fleet, 214; bombardment of 
the forts, 214; preparations to pass 
the forts, 214; movements of the fleet, 
215; Duncan’s report of its passage 
of the forts, 215; further movements 
of the fleet, 216 ; statement of General 
Smith respecting the forts on the river, 
216; do. of General Duncan, 216; the 
effect of the darkness of the night, 
216; surrender of the city demanded, 
217; evacuated by General Lovell, 
217; surrender of the forts demanded, 
217; refused, 217; address of Gen- 
eral Duncan to the garrisons, 217; 
skill and gallantry of Colonel Higgins, 
218; revolt of the garrison of Fort 
Jackson, 218; forts surrendered, 219 ; 
destruction of the Louisiana, 219; 
state of the other defenses afloat, 220 ; 
damage to the enemy’s fleet, 221; loss 
of the Varuna, 221; action of other 
vessels, 221; confusion in the city 
when the fleet arrived, 222; batteries 
below the city, 222; the city saved 
from bombardment, 223; General Lov- 
ell retires with his force, 223; causes 
assigned for the fall of, 224; their 
consideration, 224; its fall a great dis- 
aster, 225; attack on the naval con- 
structors and Secretary of the Navy, 
225; testimony, 226; efforts of the 
Secretary, 226 ; number of guns sent to, 
228; iron plates not to be procured, 
228; laboratory at, 228; Commodore 
Farragut demands the surrender of 
the city, 231; request that the United 
States flag shall be hoisted on public 
buildings, 231; reply of the Mayor, 
231; Farragut sends a detachment to 
hoist and guard the flag, 231; arrival 
of General Butler, 222 ; a reign of ter- 
ror, pillage, and a long train of infa- 
mies, 232; brief reference to the his- 
tory of the city, 231. 

New York, its subjugation, 477 ; unalien- 
able right of the people left without 
a protector, 477; ringing of a little 
bell, 478; proceedings at the arrest 
and imprisonment of an individual, 
478 ; number arrested and imprisoned, 
478; safeguards of the citizen for the 
protection of his unalienable rights, 
479; what they were in New York, 


794 


479; worthless as the paper on which 
they were printed, 479 ; further safe- 
guards in the Constitution of the Unit- 
ed States, 479; the writ of habcas 
corpus and the only conditions on which 
it can be suspended, 480; instances of 
the violations of the safeguards of the 
citizens in New York by the Govern- 
ment of the United States, 481; Presi- 
dent Lincoln adopts them as his act, 
481; utter disregard of the writ of ha- 
beas corpus in’ New York, 481; the 
Constitution, the laws, the courts, the 
Executive authority of the State, sub- 
verted and turned from the end for 
which they were instituted, 482 ; opin- 
ion of Mr. Justice Nelson on the mili- 
tary proceedings of the Government of 
the United States, 482; prison of New 
York Harbor overflows, 482; surplus 
sent to Boston Harbor, or Washington, 
or Baltimore prisons, 482; attempt to 
relieve them by sending persons to 
investigate the cases of those willing 
to take an oath of allegiance to the 
Government of the United States, 482 ; 
made a condition precedent that the 
prisoner should take the oath, 482; 
the oath, 483; case of Messrs. Flan- 
ders who refuse the oath, 483; words 
of the Constitution declaring that the 
accused shall have the right of coun- 
sel, 484; Government of the United 
States refuses to recognize the coun- 
sel of prisoners, and looks with dis- 
trust on all such applications, 484 ; 
victims of this violence found in al- 
most every Northern State, 484 ; result 
of the elections causes an order for 
the release of prisoners to be issued 
by the Government of the United States, 
484; the order, 485; another step for 
the subjugation of the judiciary of the 
State, 485; an act of Congress author- 
izes the removal of all actions against 
officers of the Government for tests in 
arrests, for trial to the Circuit Court 
of the Government itself, 485; its 
command to the State courts, 485 ; the 
obedience of the New York courts to 
the command, 486; subjugation of 
New York and the Northern States by 
the suspension of the writ of habeas 
corpus in their limits, 486; two facts 
required to exist before Congress could 
pass such an act, 486; Congress vio- 
lates the Constitution, 487; what was 
New York? 488; the proclamation of 
the President suspending the writ of ha- 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


beas corpus throughout all the Northern 
States, 488; no autocrat ever issued 
an edict more destructive of the nat- 
ural right to personal liberty, 488 ; 
the subversion of the governments of 
the Northern States, 488; all those 
liberties of conduct and action which 
stamp the true freeman were gone, 
488; another step in the subjugation 
of the State of New York, 488; letter 
of the commanding General of the 
United States forces in New York to 
the Governor of the State, 488; reply 
of the Governor, 489; response of the 
commanding General, 489; rejoinder 
of the Governor, 489; the command- 
ing General now states to the Governor 
that the Government of the United 
States has sent to him “a force ade- 
quate to the object,” 490; forty-two 
regiments and two batteries sent to 
New York, 490; another act manifest- 
ing the subjugation of the government 
of the State by the military power of 
the Government of the United States, 
490; seizure of newspaper offices in 
New York by soldiers under the orders 
of the Government of the United 
States, 490; the Governor of the State 
causes the commanding General to be 
taken into custody, 491; the instruc- 
tions sent by the Government of the 
United States to the commanding Gen- 
eral that “he must not be deprived of 
his liberty to obey any order of a mili- 
tary nature which the President directs 
him to execute,” 491; the authority of 
NewYork was subjugated, 491 ; another 
act of subjugation was the interference 
of the Government of the United States 
with the Presidential election in the 
State, 491; a pretended necessity 
worked up,491; details of the prepa- 
rations, 492; military force increased, 
492; vote of the soldiers in the field 
to be taken, 492; agents sent by the 
State to take the vote seized by sol- 
diers of the Government of the United 
States and imprisoned, 492; the de- 
scription of the imprisonment, 493; 
demands of the State in behalf of their 
agents, 493; refused by the Govern- 
ment of the United States, 494; tried 
before a military commission, 494; 
terms upon which the State acceded to 
the Union, 623. 


Norfolk, its evacuation delayed for the 


removal of property, 93; an expedi- 
tion by the enemy against, contem- 


INDEX TO VOL. IL. } 795 


plated, 100; account of the Comte de 
Paris, 100; its evacuation and occupa- 
tion by the enemy, 100; detachments 
previously sent to General Anderson, 
near Fredericksburg and elsewhere, 
101. 

Norfolk Navy- Yard, destruction at,195. 

North Carolina, efforts to concentrate 
our troops to resist the army of Gen- 
eral Sherman, 630. 

Northern people, amazing insensibility to 
the crisis before them, 4; would not 
realize the resistance that would be 
made, 4; blind to palpable results, 4; 
a league with the spirit of evil, 4; its 
condition, 4; slow to comprehend the 
reality of armed resistance, 5. 

Northern States, provisions for the free- 
dom of speech, of the press, and the 
personal liberty of the citizen daily 
violated in, 3; the events in them 
similar to those in New York, 494; 
sovereignty of the people entirely dis- 
regarded by the Government of the 
United States, 494; the operation of 
the institutions established for the 
protection of the rights of the people, 
nullified by the military force of the 
Government of the United States, 495 ; 
a military domination established, 495 ; 
general and special provost-marshals 
appointed in every State, 495; their 
duties, 495; the forces granted to aid 
them, 495 ; military control established 
in every Northern State, by the usur- 
pation of the Government of the United 
States, 496. 


Oath, the voters in Maryland required to 
take an oath previous to voting at an 
election where one of the questions 
was the adoption or rejection of the 
oath, 467. 

Object of the war, the declaration of Con- 
gress, 189. 

Objects for which the Government of the 
United States was instituted, stated in 
the preamble of the Constitution, 454. 

Oastinacy, extreme, observable in the ori- 
ginal party of abolition, 4. 

Offensive-defensive policy, how inaugurated 
at Richmond, 132; its successful result, 
132. 


“ Offensively,” signification of the word | 


as used by General Grant relative to 
the exchange of prisoners, 599. 

Open brow and fearless tread of the 
American citizen, all were gone in the 
Northern States, 488. 


Organization of “just powers,” the ob- 
ject for which it is done, 452. 

Origin of the United States Government, 
sprang from certain circumstances, 
which existed in the course of human 
affairs, 453; the articles of agreement. 
made by certain friendly States pro- 
posing to form a society of States, 453, 

“ Other purposes,” the signification of the 
words explained in an act of the United 
States Congress, 345. 

OvLp, Roserr C., our commissioner for 
the exchange of prisoners, 595; his 
proposals to the United States com- 
missioner, 598; no reply ever made, 
598; his communication relative to 
conferences with General Butler, the 
United States commissioner of ex- 
change, 598. 

Outrages in Kentucky, by the soldiers of 
the Government of the United States, 
described by the Governor, 470. 


Panie at Washington, its cause, 106; 
movements of Jackson in the Shenan- 
doah Valley, 106; pursues General 
Banks across the Potomac, 106; ex- 
citement with General Geary, 106; 
alarm of the enemy at Catlett’s Station, 
107; retreat of Duryea to Centreville . 
and telegram to Washington for help, 
107; telegrams of Secretary Stanton 
to Northern Governors for militia to 
defend Washington, 107; call of the 
Governor of New York, 107; call of 
the Governor of Pennsylvania, 107; 
call of the Governor of Massachusetts, 
108; call of the Governor of Ohio, 108; 
order of Secretary Stanton taking mili- 
tary possession of, all the Northern rail- 
roads, 109; order of President Lincoln 
to General McDowell, 109. 

Paris Congress, The, its declaration of 
principles, 372, : 

Pau Jones, destroyed many of his prizes 
281; all ports closed to us, 370. 

Peace negotiations, our subjugation was 
the purpose of the Government of the 
United States, 608; established by the 
terms and conditions offered to us, 608 ; 
Major Pitcairn’s words, 609; commis- 
sioners sent before hostilities, 609; 
next a letter sent, 609; the third time 
a commissioner sent, 609; not allowed 
to pass, 609; the next movement was 
the appearance of two persons from 
Washington, 610; their propositions, 
610; Mr. Lincoln’s views, 610; they 
depart, 611; three commissioners ap- 


796 


pointed to visit Canada, 611; announce- 
ment of Mr. Lincoln, 612; visit of Mr. 
Francis P. Blair, 612; confidential con- 
versation with the President, 612, 615; 
letter given to Mr. Blair, 615; answer 
of Mr. Lincoln, 616; return of Mr, 
Blair, 616; his statements, 616; mili- 
tary convention suggested, 617; com- 
missioners appointed, 617; their com- 
mission, 617; objections, 617; meet- 
ing at Hampton Roads, 618; Mr. Sew- 
ard’s version, 618; change of Mr. Lin- 
coln’s views as to the place of meet- 
ing, 618; Mr. Blair’s visit, 618; state- 
ment of Mr. Hunter, 618; remarks, 
619; report of the commissioners, 619 ; 
closing of negotiations, 620; statement 
of Judge Campbell, 620; terms of peace 
stated in Mr. Lincoln’s message to Con- 
gress on December 6, 1864, 620; his 
actions compared with the Constitution, 
621; reserved rights of the States, 622; 
terms on which New York ratified the 
Constitution, 623; who violated the 
Constitution ? 624; who is responsible 
for the war? 624; terms of surrender 
offered to our soldiers, 624. 

Preram, Commander R. B., sails the 
Nashville, 264. 

. Pemperron, General J. C., holds a posi- 
tion on the Tallahatchie and Yazoo 
Rivers, 892; ingenious device to turn 
it, 8392; in command at Vicksburg, 
895; sends General Bowen to Grand 
Gulf, 897; assigns troops to respec- 
tive positions after crossing the Big 
Black River, 899; concentrates all 
troops for the defense of Vicksburg, 
in rear, 400; instructions to his offi- 
cers, 401; dispatches to other com- 
manders, 401; the policy manifested 
of meeting the enemy in the hills east 
of the point of debarkation, 402; his 
want of cavalry, 402; letter to General 
Johnston, 402; reply, 402; report on 
the advance of the enemy from Bruins- 
burg, 408 ; concentrates his forces to 
check the invading army, 408; tele- 
gram to General Johnston, 403; in- 
structions to General Stevenson, 404 ; 
dispatch from General Johnston, 405 ; 
answer, 405 ; calls a council of officers, 
405; dispatch to General Johnston, 
406; moves his foree, 406; appear- 
ance of the enemy, 406 ; dispatch from 
General Johnston, 406; reply and a 
retrograde movement, 407 ; encounters 
the enemy, 407; orders to General 
Loring, 407 ; not obeyed, 407; the day 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


lost, 408; dispatches from General 
Johnston, 408; considerations, 408 ; 
concentrates at Vicksburg, 410; re- 
marks on a communication from Gen- 
eral Johnston, 413; a former corre- 
spondence with the President, 418 ; his 
confidence that the siege would be 
raised, 413 ; his decision to hold Vicks- 
burg, 418; progress of the siege, 413; 
states the causes that led to the capit- 
ulation, 415; resigns his rank, 526; 
shells Grant’s army as it crosses a 
bridge of the James River, 526. 

Prenpiteron, General W. N., strives to 
bring long-range guns to bear on Mal- 
vern Hill, 148; his statement of the 
appearance at Gettysburg, 441; pre- 
sents considerations to General J. E. 
Johnston, 548, : 

Peninsula, The Virginia, all our dis- 
posable forces ordered there, 88; its 
topography and means of defense, 83, 
84; moyements, 85, 88; strengthen- 
ing the défenses continued, 88; new 
defenses constructed, 88; attempts to 
break Magruder’s line at Dam No. 1, 
88; the enemy in strong force, 89; 
our forces continue the retreat toward 
Richmond, 98; flank of our line of 
march threatened by General Franklin, 
98; driven to the protection of his 
gunboats, 98; army retreat to the Bal- 
timore Cross-Roads and Long Bridge, 
98. 

Perryville, its location, 888; the battle 
at, 383; its result, 384. 

Persons seized in Baltimore by an armed 
force of ‘the United States Govern- 
ment, 464, 

Personal liberty, proclamation of Presi- 
dent Lincoln suspending the writ of 
habeas corpus in the Northern States, 
488 ; no autocrat ever issued an edict 
more destructive of the natural right 
to personal liberty, 488; every North- 
ern State government subverted, 488. 

Petersburg, an assault by the advance of 
Grant’s army, 688; repulsed, 638; an- 
other assault with a large force, 638; 
a failure everywhere, with an extraor- 
dinary sacrifice of life, 689; repeated 
attacks, with increased carnage, 639 ; a 
heavy force advanced to our right, 639; 
an interval of the enemy’s force pen- 
etrated by General A. P. Hill, and his 
flanks doubled up with great loss, 639 ; 
a cavalry expedition to the Weldon and 
other railroads, 6389; a fight near 
Ream’s station, 639; enemy retreat in 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


confusion, 639; a methéd of slow ap- 
proaches adopted by Grant, 640; his ob- 
ject to obtain possession of the Weldon 
and Southside Railroads, 640; Grant 
menaces Richmond, 640 ; his line, 640; 
General Lee’s line, 640; movement to 
attack the works at Richmond, 641; 
defeated, 641 ; a mine run under one 
of our forts, 641; a description, 642 ; 
a question relative to negro troops, 
642; results of the explosion, 648 ; re- 
peated attacks on our lines made and 
repulsed, 644 ; force of General Lee at 
the opening. of the campaign, 644; do. 
of General Grant, 644; a movement 
against Fort Fisher, 644; opening of 
the campaign of 1865, 647; Grant ex- 
tends his line to the left and gains the 
Weldon Railroad, 647; the troops in 
Richmond, 647; capacity of the Rich- 
mond and Danville Railroad increased, 
647; diminution of General Lee’s 
forces, 647; his conference with the 
President, 648; general view of the 
state of affairs, 648; a sortie against 
Grant’s lines determined on by General 
Lee, 648; commanded by General John 
B. Gordon, 649 ; its failure, 650; letter 
of General Gordon, 650-654; an ex- 
tensive attack by the enemy follows, 


654; secret concentration of the ene- | 


my’s forces, 654; more determined 
effort to gain the right of Lee, 655; 
the advance repulsed by General Lee, 
655 ; our strong position at Five Forks 
assaulted and carried by the enemy, 
655; Battery Gregg makes an obsti- 
nate defense, 655; Lieutenant-General 
A. P. Hill killed, retreat became a ne- 
cessity, 655; inner lines held during 
the day, 655; army retires at night 
toward Amelia Court-House, 656; 
Grant’s advantages of position, 656; 
his movements, 656; Lee’s subse- 
quent conference with his officers, 
657; their plan, 657; frustrated, 
657; position of Lee’s forces, 657 ; 
movements of his advance and rear, 
657, 658; condition of General Lee’s 
army and its weakness, 658; sends 
a communication to General Grant, 
658 ; a conference, 658; terms of sur- 
render agreed upon, 659; the terms, 
659; Lee’s letter to the President, 
660. 

Pertus, Lieutenant-Colonel E. W., leads 
volunteers to recover a redoubt at 
Vicksburg, 415. 

Preece, President, remarks in his annual 


98 


797 


sii on the rights of belligerents, 

2. 

Pillow, Fort, its situation, 76 ; bombard- 
ment by the enemy’s fleet commenced, 
76; it becomes untenable and is evac- 
uated, 76 ; captured by General N, B. 
Forrest, 545. 

Pitiow, General Gipron J., commands at 
Fort Donelson, 29; retires from Fort 
Donelson, 84; correspondence rela- 
tive to his course at Donelson, 40, 
41. 

Pirate, A, who is one? 280; statement 
of the Attorney-General of Great Brit- 
ain, 280. 

Pirates, some of the Southern people de- 
nounced as, 2. 

Pittsburg Landing, topographical descrip- 
tion, 52, 53. 

Plan, The, of President Lincoln to make 
a Union State out of a fragment of a 
Confederate State, 297; the war-power 
his main reliance, 298; does not con- 
tain a single feature to secure a repub- 
lican form of government, nor a single 
provision authorized by the Constitu- 
tion of the United States, 298. 

Pleasant Hill, General Banks routed by 
the force of General Taylor, 544. 

Plunder, A system of, the order of Presi- 
dent Lincoln to military commanders, 
588. 

Policy and purposes of the United States 
Government, their odious features. re- 
vealed, 3. 

Potk, Major-General Lronipas, evacuates 
Columbus, 51; his account of his move- 
ment, 52; commands a corps at battle 
of Shiloh, 55; commands the attack on 
the enemy at Perryville, 383; com- 
mands the right wing at Chickamauga, 
432; command of the Department of 
Mississippi and Hast Louisiana trans- 
ferred to him, 547; killed at an out- 
post on Pine Mountain, 554; the great- 
ness of his loss, 554. 

Porr, Major-General Jon, assaults New 
Madrid and is repulsed, 76; oceupies 
the place after evacuation, 76 ; assigned 
to the command of the Army of Vir- 
ginia, 135; commands the Army of 
Virginia, 312; advances south from 
Washington, 312; order to his army 
to subsist on the country, 312; order 
to dispense with supply or baggage 
trains, 313; order to hold the inhabi- 
tants responsible for all assaults, etc., 
313; order “to arrest all disloyal citi- 
zens,” ete, 314; thus announces a 


798 INDEX TO VOL. II. 


policy of pillage, outrage on unarmed 
citizens, and arson, 314; letter of Gen- 
eral McClellan, 314; his forces near 
Culpeper Court-House, 817; defeated 


at Cedar Run, 320; losses, 320; his 


forces increased by Burnside’s corps, 
320; Jackson advances against him, 
320; reénforcements sent to, 322; his 
subsequent movements, 323, 327. 

Port Hudson, its situation, 420; de- 
fenses, 420; assaulted by General 
Banks, 420; resort to regular ap- 
proaches, 420; after the capitulation 
of Vicksburg, its importance ceased, 
420; surrendered by Major-General 
Gardner, 420; losses, 420; the gal- 
lantry of its defense, 421. 

Port Republic, its position, 112; battle 
near, 212; defeat of the enemy, 117; 
prisoners, 117; pursuit, 117. 

Port Royal, a harbor of South Carolina, 
77; its situation, 77; its defenses, 78 ; 
strength of the enemy’s fleet, 78 ; their 
attack, 78; the forts: abandoned, 78. 

Porrrr, Admiral, statement of the effi- 
ciency of torpedoes used by us for 
naval defense, 207; relieves his fleet 
by a dam above Alexandria on the 
Red River, 544, 

Ports, Southern, blockaded for the de- 
struction of their commerce, 2. 

Power, where found, for the United 
States to codperate with a State in 
emancipation ? 179. 

Powhite Oreek, the position of McClellan 
behind, 136. 

Price, Major-General SrrRLinG, com- 
mands in Missouri, 50; his move- 
ments, 50; battle at Pea Ridge, 50; 
commands in West Tennessee, 386; 
moves to Iuka, 386; enemy abandons 
stores and retires, 886; letter from 
General Ord, 887; reply, 887; unites 
with General Van Dorn, 387; the com- 
bined force, 888; moves upon Corinth, 
388; the battle fought at first mainly 
by his division, 889; the enemy reén- 
forced, 389; army retires, 390. 

Princ pE JomNvILLE on the junction of 
McDowell with McClellan, 105. 

Prisoners, Hachange of, increase in their 
numbers in 1861, 18; vacillating and 
cruel conduct of the United States 
Government, 18; their false theory of 
combinations, 13; its obstacle, 13; if 
the theory was true, hanging was the 
legitimate punishment, 18; why were 
not their prisoners hung? 13 ; tenacity 
with which the enemy clung to the 


theory, 13; the issues involved, 14; 
further obstacles to exchange, 14; 
moved by clamors of the people, Unit- 
ed States Government shut its eyes, 
14; some exchanged by military com- 
manders, 14; condition of captured 
soldiers at the close of 1861, 14; citi- 
zens arrested and held as prisoners, 
14; violations of the Constitution, 14; 
object to clothe the Government with 
absolute power, 15; efforts of the Gov- 
ernment of the United States to impli- 
cate the President of the Confederate 
States in the mortality of Northern 
prisoners, 497; declarations of Ma- 
jor-General Grant, 497; captures of, in 
our privateers, 582; treatment, 582; 
opinion of United States court, 582, 
583; communication sent-to President 
Lincoln by special messenger, 583 ; the 
communication, 583 ; no answer made, 
584; act of Confederate Congress, 584 ; 
United States Government refuses to 
consider the question of exchange, 
585; some exchanges made by offi- 
cers, 585; exchange proposed to Gen- 
eral Grant in 1861, 585; subsequent- 
ly offers to surrender some, 586; re- 
ply of General Polk, 586; agreement 
of Fremont with General Price, 586 ; 
repudiated by General Hunter, 586 ; 
“fire up the Northern heart,” 586; 
commissioners sent from Washington 
to Norfolk, 586; the result, 586; dif- 
ficulties, 587 ; arrangement of Generals . 
Cobb and Wool, 587; abruptly broken 
off, 587; suspension ensued, 588; in- 
dignation at the North, 588; a cartel 
executed, based on that of 1812, 588; 
order of President Lincoln to military” 
commanders, issued on the same day, 
to seize and use our property, 588; a 
system of plunder, 588 ; order of Gen- 
eral Pope to murder peaceful inhabi- 
tants as spies, 588; letter of General 
Lee to General Halleck, 589; answer, 
590; proceedings of General Hunter, 
589; of Brigadier-General Phelps, 
589; retaliatory orders, 590; letter 
of General Lee to General Halleck 
relative to the execution of William 
B. Mumford, 590; result, 590; efforts 
to seek an adjustment of difficulties 
through the authorities at Washing- 
ton, 591; Vice-President Stephens 
sent as a commissioner, 591; instruc- 
tions, 591; letter to President Lincoln, 
593; Stephens not allowed to pro- 
ceed beyond Newport News, 695; cor- 


INDEX TO VOL, II. 


respondence of our exchange com- 
missioners, 595; demands of the au- 
thorities at Washington, 596; the 
wish of the Confederate Government, 


596; Andersonville, the occasion of. 


its selection, 596; advantages of its 
location, 596; its preparation, 597; 
diseases, 597; successful efforts of 
Major Wirz for the benefit of the pris- 
oners, 597; humane and kind treat- 
ment by General Winder, 597; state- 
ment of Adjutant-General Cooper, 598; 
a proposal made to the United States 
commissioner that all prisoners on each 
side should be attended' by a proper 
number of their own surgeons, 598; 
further proposals, 598; no reply ever 
made, 598 ; statements of General But- 
ler, 598; letters between Generals Lee 
and Grant, 600; dispatch of General 
Grant to General Butler, 600; another 
proposal to the United States Govern- 
ment, 600; no answer received, 601; 
the offer would have released every 
soldier of the United States in our 
prisons, 601; other offers, 601; re- 
quested to send the worst cases, 602; 
photographs taken at Annapolis and 
circulated, 602; worse cases received 
by us, 602; proposal to purchase medi- 
cines from the United States authori- 
ties to be used exclusively for the relief 
of the Union prisoners, 602; no reply 
ever received, 602 ; a delegation of the 
prisoners at Andersonville sent to 
Washington to plead their cause, 602 ; 
President Lincoln refuses to see them, 
602; their return and report, 602; 
letter from the wife of the chairman, 
6038; letter from another prisoner, 
603; extracts from the official report 
of Major-General Butler to the Com- 
mittee on the Conduct of the War, 
603-605 ; our readiness to surrender 
for exchange all the prisoners in our 
possession, 605; Northern prisons full 
of our soldiers, 606; cotton sent by us 
to New York, and sold to purchase 
clothing for our soldiers, 606; report 
of Secretary Stanton, 607; number of 
prisoners that died in our hands, 607 ; 
number that died in the hands of the 
United States Government, 607; re- 
port of Surgeon-General Barnes, 607 ; 
number of Confederate prisoners, 607; 
number of United States prisoners, 
607; further considerations, 607, 608 ; 
the number paroled at the close of the 
war, 699, 


799 


Private property, its pillage and destruc- 
tion not permitted by the laws of war, 
8; our war with Mexico, how con- 
ducted, 8; action of Great Britain 
around Point Comfort in 1781, 8; res- 
toration stipulated in the Treaty of 
Ghent in 1815, 8; correspondence of 
John Quincy Adams with the British 
Secretary of State, on the deportation 
of, 8, 9; order of President Lincoln to 
arrest all persons who arrested slaves 
as fugitives, 9; language of General 
McClellan, 9; action of Fremont in 
Missouri, 10; of General T. W. Sher- 
man in South Carolina, 10; do. of 
others, 10; how made subject to con- 
fiscation by United States Congress, 
168; conditions’ upon which its invio- 
lability might be broken under the 
Constitution of the United States, 173. 

Privateering not piracy, remarks of Earl 
Derby, 12; do. of the Lord Chancellor 
of England, 12. 

Privateers, resorted to not for purposes 
of gain, 10; a small fleet soon fitted 
out, 10; their cruises, 10; proclama- 
tion of President Lincoln, 10; another 
violation of international law, 11; 
its threat not executed, 11; the case 
of the schooner Savannah, 11; retalia- 
tion threatened, 11; the case of the 
schooner Jefferson Davis, 11; remarks 
of Earl Derby, 12; do. of the Lord 
Chancellor of England, 12. 

Prize court, the attempt to get our private 
property into, to be tried by the laws 
of war, 169. 

Prizes, captured by foreign-built cruisers 
of the United States during the Revolu- 
tionary War, 276; more than six hun- 
dred, 276; both belligerents forbidden 
by European nations to bring prizes 
into their ports, 370. 


Queen’s proclamation, The, the force as- 
cribed to it by the United States Goy- 
ernment, 277. 


Rarns, General G. R., inventor of sub- 
terra shells, 97; describes their use in 
the retreat from Williamsburg and its 
effect, 97, 98; placed in charge of our 
submarine defenses, 208. 

Rais, Brigadier-General J. G., ordered 
to report to General Johnston at Jack- 
son, in connection with torpedoes and 
sub-terra shells, 424. 

Ranvorpn, General, Secretary of War, his 
testimony relative to affairs at Nor- 
folk and the posilion of Yorktown, 93. 


800 INDEX TO VOL. IL. 


Ransom, Major-General, summoned to 
Richmond from Drury’s Bluff to resist 

~ an impending assault of General Sheri- 
dan, 508; his movements and success, 
508; his position and force, 510; re- 
ports to General Beauregard at Drury’s 
Bluff, 512; his part in the action with 
Butler’s force, 514. 

Reap, Lieutenant C. W., commands the 
tender Clarence, 261. 

Reacan, Secretary Joun H., transfers 
the money in the Confederate Treas- 
ury, 695. 

Reconnaissances, made by the enemy with 
the design to take and keep control of 
the seacoast of Georgia, 78. 

Records of property, kept under the au- 
thority of the State government, 452, 
Republican government, the whole sci- 
ence of, where found, 298; words of 
the Declaration of Independence, 298 ; 
civil and political sovereignty is in 
the individual, 299 ; no human govern- 
ment has any inherent, original sov- 
ereignty, 299; derives its just powers 
from the consent of the governed, 299 ; 
all other powers than those thus de- 
rived are not just powers, 299; a goy- 
ernment exercising powers not just has 
no right to survive, 299; who, then, 
had a right to institute a government 


for a State ? 299; only the people of | 


the State, 299; how could the Govern- 
ment of the United States appear in a 
State and attempt to institute a State 
government ? 299; only as an invader 
and a usurper, 299; how could an 
invader ‘institute a republican State 
government, which can be done only 
by the free consent of the people them- 
selves ? 300; the absurdity of the pre- 
tension, 8300; President Lincoln’s plan 
of one tenth, 300; one tenth of the 
voters can not establish a republican 
State government, 800; an effort to 
enforce a fiction, 800; who were the 
voters ? 301; those whose consent had 
been bound by the oath given by the 
usurper, 801; such a Government de- 
rives it powers from the consent of the 
usurper, 801; an attempt to destroy 
true republicanism, 801; a true, its 
source, 452 ; how secured, 452. 
Reserved powers of the Constitution, sov- 
ereignty of the States therein, 622. 
Revolutionists, who were the ? 170. 
Richmond, removal of the Government 
to, authorized, 3; detached works 
around it perfected by Lee, 119; in- 


trenched line commenced by Lee, 130; 
position of hostile forces, 180; con- 
versations relative to its defense and 
the defeat of the enemy, 131; offen- 
sive-defensive policy adopted, 132; 
preparations for the campaign after 
Seven Pines battle, 133; reénforce- 
ment sent to Jackson in the Valley, 
183; noticed by the enemy, 133; his 
unsuccessful attack on Williamsburg 
road, 183; route of Jackson covered 
by Stuart, 133; directions to Jackson 
under the order of battle, 183; the 
order of battle, 183; position of the 
respective troops, 134; Hill forces the 
enemy to take refuge on the left bank 
of Beaver Dam, 134; a strong posi- 
tion, 184; movement of other forces, 
134; engagement closes at dark, 134; 
critical position of McClellan, 1385 ; 
action of the United States Govern- 
ment, 135; renewal of the battle at 
dawn, 135; arrival of Jackson, 136; 
enemy abandons his works, 136; ad- 
vance of our forces resumed according 
to the order, 136; destruction of muni- 
tions by the retreating enemy, 136; 
takes a position behind Powhite Creek, 
136; A. P. Hill hotly engages, 137; 
enemy north of the Chickahominy, 137 ; 
fierce battle, 187; Longstreet ordered 
to make a diversion, 137; strength of 
the enemy’s position, 187; Jackson’s 
right division forms on Longstreet’s 
left, 187; position of D. H. Hill, 187; 
completion of the lines, 138; a gen- 
eral advance, 138; enemy back to the 
woods on the bank of the Chickahom- 
iny, 138; night put an end to pursuit, 
188; inthe morning none of the enemy 
north of the Chickahominy, 189; York 
River Railroad, 139; enemy in motion 
south of the river, 189; the line aban- 
doned, 139; position of the enemy, 
139; topography of the country, 139; 
on the next morning enemy’s works 
found to be evacuated, 140 ; movement 
of our forces, 140; condition of the 
enemy’s works, 140; enemy’s pesition, 
141; Savage Station, 141; darkness, 
141; enemy crosses White-Oak Swamp, 
142; resist the rebuilding the bridge, 
142; enemy at Frazier’s Farm, 142; 
we had no maps of the country in 
which we were operating, 142; conse- 
quent mistakes, 142; battle at Fra- 
zier’s Farm, 145; nearly the entire 
field in our possession at its close, 
145; the siege of, raised, 152; McClel- 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


lan at Westover, and his expedition 
frustrated, 153; prisoners captured in 
the battles around Richmond, 153; 
losses, 153; statement of the strength 
of our army at different periods, 153, 
154; suggestions on the delay of Lee, 
155; other details relative to the 
strength of our army, 156, 157; effec- 
tive force of General McClellan, 158; 
the most effective way to relieve was 
to reénforce Jackson and advance on 
General Pope, 320; its evacuation ad- 
vised by General Lee, 661; lack of 
transportation, 661; movement of the 
troops, 666; Ewell’s corps, 662; G. 
W. C. Lee’s and Kershaw’s, 662; 
other forces, 662; the rear followed 
by the enemy, 663; frequent combats, 
663; Ewell captured, 664; G. W. C. 
Lee’s division captured, 664; engage- 
ment at Sailor’s Creek, 664; the naval 
force, 665; their retreat to Danville, 
665; troops in and around Richmond, 
665; orders given to destroy certain 
property of the Confederate States, 
666; the conflagration did not result 
from any act of the public authorities, 
666; distinction from the case of Har- 
per’s Ferry, 666; the troops of neither 
army considered responsible, 667; no- 
tice of General Lee’s withdrawal sent 
to the President at church, 667; his 
proceedings, 667; removal of families, 
668; the President starts for Danville, 
668; the supplies prepared for Lee’s 
army, 669; report of General St. John, 
in charge of the commissary bureau, 
669; extracts, 669; the daily delivery 
by cars and canal-boats, 670; further 
evidence to expose unfounded state- 
ments, 671; rations on the line of re- 
treat, 671; letter of General Breck- 
inridge, 672; letter of the assistant 
commissary-general, 672; other letters, 
673, 674. 

Richmond, Kentucky, enemy routed by 
General E. K. Smith, 382. 

Rights, unalienable, shall man no more 
take up arms in defense of ? 182. 

Rights of belligerents, \etter of Earl Rus- 
sell, 271; views of Chancellor Kent, 
271; of President Pierce, 272; charge 
of the Lord Chief Baron of the Exche- 
quer, 272, 273. 

Rivers, the principal difficulty in the way 
of a successful defense of, by us, 25 ; 
preparations made for resistance, 25. 

Roanoke River, torpedoes planted there, 
209; effect on the enemy, 209. 


801 


Ropes, General, statement of the obsta- 
cles to General Huger’s movement at 
Seven Pines, 126; in command at 
Sharpsburg, 836; captures Martins- 
burg, with stores, artillery, and a body 
of the enemy, 439. 

Ropcers, Colonel W. P., killed at Cor- 
inth, 890; his character, 390. 

Rosrcrans, General, succeeds General 
Buell, 384; advances upon the position 
of General Bragg at Murfreesboro, 
384; a battle ensues, 385; subsequent- 
ly assigned to the command of the 
force under General Grant in West 
Tennessee, 385; his character, 389; 
treatment of the dead and wounded 
at Corinth, 390; occupies Chattanooga, 
429; moves on the rear of General 
Bragg, 429 ; concentrates before Gen- 
eral Bragg, 432; concentrates in Chat- 
tanooga, 433; reénforcements sent to 
him, and Grant assigned to the com- 
mand, 434, 

Russet, Lord Jonny, answer to the de- 
mand of the Government of the United 
States for the sailors rescued from the 
sinking Alabama, 258; his letter stat- 
ing that the United States Government 
profited most by unjustifiable mari- 
time practices, 268; on the principle 
contended for by her Majesty’s Gov- 

rnment, 271. 


Sabine Pass, its importance, 236; ap- 
pearance of the enemy’s fleet, 236; 
only means of defense, 286; a report 
of the engagement, 237; two gunboats 
surrendered to forty-two men, 238; 
the flect retires, 238; names of the 
defenders, 239; success in holding 
their prisoners, 239; an unparalleled 
feat, 289; mistaken reports of the en- 
emy, 239. 

Safeguards, for the protection of the 
personal liberty of the citizen in New 
York, 479; worthless as the paper on 
which they were printed, 479. 

Savage Station, numbers found in the 
hospital, 141. 

Savannah, The, schooner, treatment of 
her crew by the United States Govern- 
ment, 11; its harbor defenses, 205; 
their condition, 205. 

Scuépr, General, commands a force of 
‘the enemy at Fishing Creek, 28. 

Sceurity, perfect and complete, duty of 
the State government to give to all its 
citizens, 452. 

Seppon, James A., Secretary of War, re- 


802 


plies to General Johnston as to the num- 
bers of his army near Vicksburg, 412. 

Self-defense of the Government, how au- 
thorized by the Constitution, 159. 

Semmes, Commander Rarwakt, resigns at 
Washington, 246; enters Confederate 
service, 240; obtains the Sumter for 
a cruiser, 246; description of her and 
her preparation, 246 ; runs the block- 
ade, 247; career on the sea, 247; her 
captures, 247; takes command of the 
Alabama, 250; collects the old officers 
of the Sumter, 250; sails for Ter- 
ceira, 250; his first impressions on see- 
ing his ship, 251; proceeds to sea and 
reads his commission and enrolls his 
men, 251; sails for Galveston, 252; 
decoys out one of the blockading ships, 
252; fights and sinks the Hatteras, 
253; captures and bonds the steamer 
Ariel, 254; a cruise in every sea, 254; 
arrives at Cherbourg to repair his ship, 
255 ; appearance of the Kearsarge, 255 ; 
anotice to her captain, 255 ; defective 
powder of the Alabama, 255; ques- 
tions considered, 256 ; his report of the 
engagement with the Kearsarge, 256 ; 
Alabama sinks and crew rescued by an 
English vessel, 257; narrow escape of 
the Kearsarge, 257; clad in secret 
armor, 258; the Government of the 
United States demands the rescued 
sailors, 258; answer of Lord John 
Russell, 258; his statement of closed 
ports, 282; commands the naval force 
at Richmond, 665; order to him from 
the Secretary of the Navy, 665. 

Seven Pines, position of the respective 
forces, 121; movements of the enemy, 
122; unexpected firing heard, 122; 
the line of battle, 122, 123; General 
Johnston wounded and removed, 128; 
events on the left, 124; most serious 
conflict on, the right, 124; report of 
Longstreet, 124; Huger’s delay, 127; 
Longstreet waits, 127; why did not 
the left codperate? 127; no way ap- 
pears to have been practicable to put 
the enemy to flight, 127; our losses, 
127; that of the enemy, 128; evi- 
dence of our success, 128; our agere- 
gate force, 128; that of the enemy, 
128; cause of the withdrawal of our 
forces on the day after the battle, 128 ; 
position of the forces, 180. 

Sewarp, Secretary, letter on the export 
of cotton, 844, 

Sharpsburg, General Hood’s account of 
the contest on the left, 339; an ac- 


INDEX TO VOL. IL. 


count by Colonel Taylor, 241; testi- 
mony of General Sumner, 341; do. of 
General McClellan, 342; strength of 
the armies, 348; Lee concentrates his 
forces at, 333 ; address to the people of 
Maryland, 333; the battle at, 335-338. 

Shenandoah Valley, operations by which 
it was cleared of the enemy’s forces, 
439; enemy’s losses, 439; movements 
of the enemy to destroy the Virginia 
and Tennessee Railroad, 527, 

Superman, General, moves with a large 
foree around and to the rear of General 
Lee’s army, 508; pursued by Stuart, 
509; strength of the respective forces, 
509; Stuart places himself in front and 
resists the advance of Sheridan, 509 ; 
he retires, 509; appears in the Valley 
with a large force, 535. 

Surerman, General W. T., leads a divi- 
sion up the Tennessee, 52; disem- 
barks at Pittsburg Landing, 52 ; report 
of advance on Corinth, 72; its evacua- 
tion, 73; enters the Yazoo River to re- 
duce Haines’s Bluff and attack Vicks- 
burg in the rear, 892; repulsed with 
heavy loss, 892; reaches Chattanooga 
with his force, 485; his movements, 
436; prepares to march northward 
through the Carolinas, 625; position 
of our forces, 625, 626; leaves Savan- 
nah, 626; his movements, 626 ; arrives 
at Columbia, 627; the Mayor surren- 
ders the city, 627; unites with General 
Schofield at Goldsboro, 686. 

Suretps, General, advances toward Jack- 
son’s position at Port Republic, 113 ; 
conflict. at the bridge, 113; his posi- 
tion, 114; attacked by Jackson, 114. ~ 

“ Shields’s brave boys”? preserve their or- 
ganization to the last, 117; tough 
work, if Shields had been on the field, 
SiS 

Shiloh, description of the battle-field, 52, 
53; the battle of — advance of our 
forces, 56; delay, 56; cause, 56; im- 
portance of attack at the earliest mo- 

“ment, 57; Buell’s advance, 58; result 
of an earlier or later attack, 59; pur- 
pose of General Johnston, 59; his or- 
der of attack, 59; monograph of Gen- 
eral Bragg, 59; result of the first day, 
60; one encampment of the enemy 
not taken, 61; the disastrous conse- 
quences, 61; causes of the failure, 
61; statement of the author of the 
“Life of General Johnston,” 61; re- 
port of General Chalmers on the fail- 
ure, 62; report of Brigadicr-General 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


Jackson, 62; report of General Har- 
dee, 63; report of Major-General Polk, 
63; report of General Gilmer, chief 
engineer, 63; statement of General 
Bragg, 64; statement of Colonel Ged- 
des, of the Eighth Iowa Volunteers, 
65; report of General Beauregard, 66 ; 
some remote causes of this failure, 
66; death of General Johnston, 66; 
its circumstances, 66; consequences to 
be expected from Grant’s defeat, 68; 
instance of Marshal Turenne, 68; Bue- 
na Vista, 68; fate of an army and 
fortunes of a country hung on one 
man, 69; confidence in his capacity, 
69; at nightfall our vantage-ground 
abandoned, 70; the enemy reoccupy, 
70; statement of Buell as to the con- 
dition of Grant’s army,.70 ; reénforce- 
ments of the enemy cross the river, 
70; advance of the enemy in the morn- 
ing, 71; our retreat was a necessity, 
71; strength of our army, 71; casual- 
ties, 71; effective force of General 
Grant, 71; his casualties, 71; his ar- 
my reorganized under General Halleck, 
41; advance on Corinth, 71. 

Ships of war, equipped and sent from 
ports of the United States to Brazil in 
her struggle with Spain for indepen- 
dence, 276; do. sold to Russia in her 
war with England and France, 276. 
Six million people, the number of persons 
subject to be acted upon by the con- 
fiscation act of the United States Con- 
gress, 167. 

Slavery, declared by Congress to be the 
cause of all the troubles, 159; wise 
and patriotic statesmen might easily 
have furnished relief, 159. 

Slaves, unconstitutional measures taken 
by Congress to effect the emancipation 
of, 159; grounds upon which its pro- 
ceedings were based, 159; their power 
found in the plea of necessity, 161; 
emancipation by confiscation, 162; 
emancipation in the District of Colum- 
bia, 172; prohibition of the extension 
of slavery to the Territories, 174; pro- 
hibiting the return of fugitives by mili- 
tary or naval officers, 174; another in- 
stance of the flagrant violation of the 
Constitution, 175; declaration by Con- 
gress of the objects for which the war 
was waged, 189; unconstitutional meas- 
ures taken by President Lincoln to ef- 
fect the emancpation of, 179 ; message 
recommending the codperation of the 
United States for the emancipation of, 


803 


in any State, 179; countermands the 
order of General Hunter, and claims for 
himself to issue one for emancipation, 
181; conference with Senators and 
Representatives of the border States 
to effect emancipation, 183 ; an attempt 
to effect emancipation by compen- 
sation, 184; issues a preliminary proc- 
lamation for emancipation, 187; the 
final proclamation emancipation, 192; 
his declaration in the proclamation call- 
ing for seventy-five thousand men, 189. 

SLIDELL, JoHN, our representative in 
Paris, 368. 

Suits, General E. K., occupies Knox- 
ville, Hast Tennessee, 382; advances 
into Kentucky, 382; conflict at Rich- 
mond, 882; advances to Frankfort, 
3883; great alarm in Cincinnati, 382; 
unites his forces with those of General 
Bragg, 383; orders to, for the relief 
of Vicksburg, 417 ; his movement, 417 ; 
his address to his soldiers, 697. 

South, The, nature of the division of sen- 
timent in, 5; a question of expedien- 
cy, 5. 

Ration people, their love and sacrifices 
for the Union, 160. 

Southern States, one of the causes of 
their withdrawal from the Union, 181. 

Sovereignty of the State government, the 
representative and the constituted 
agent of the inherent sovereignty of 
the individual, 452. 

Spanish provinces of South America, 
their independence recognized by the 
United States, 276. 

“ Spare neither men nor money,” orders 
of the Secretary of the Navy to com- 
plete ironclads at New Orleans, 227, 

Spottsyluania Court-House, twelve days 
of skirmish and battle at, between Lee 
and Grant, 523. 

State, A, rent asunder and a new one 
formed of the fragment, 2. 

State governments, the subjugation of, 
450; a revolution unlike any other 
that may be found in the history of 
mankind, 451; an assertion often 
made during the war, 451; objects for 
which the State governments were in- 
stituted, 451; where must the Ameri- 
can citizen look for the security of the 
rights with which he has been endowed 
by his Creator ? 451; to the State gov- 
ernment, 451; the powers of the State 
government are just powers, 451; is 
the citizen’s life in danger? the State 
guarantees his protection, 451; is the 


804 INDEX TO VOL. II. 


citizen’s personal liberty in danger ? 
the State guarantees it, 451; duty of 
the State government to give its citi- 
zens perfect and complete security, 
452; necessarily sovereign within its 
own domain, 452; its entire order 
founded on the free consent of the 
governed, 452; this consent gives just 
powers, 452; all else are usurpations, 
452; how these powers are organized, 
452; its object, 452; subversion and 
subjugation of a State government, 
how accomplished, 452; the commis- 
sion of such a subversion and subjuga- 
tion fearlessly charged upon the Gov- 
ernment of the United States as a mon- 
strous crime against constitutional lib- 
erty, 453; distinction in nature and ob- 
jects between the Government of the 
United States and the State govern- 
ments, 4538. 

States, The, the principles upon which 
they were originally constituted and 
upon which the Union was formed ex- 
plained, 368. 

SrepHens, A. H., sent as commissioner 
relative to the exchange of prisoners 
to Washington, 591; not allowed to 
come to Washington, 595; appointed 
to confer with Mr, Lincoln, 617. 

Stevens, Tuapprus, his remark, “‘ Who 
pleads the Constitution against our 
proposed action ” of confiscation ? 8; 
declaration in Congress on the admis- 
sion of West Virginia, 308. 

Stevens, Licutenant, commands the Ar- 
kansas at Baton Rouge, 244. 

STEVENSON, Major-General, resists the 
force of the enemy near Vicksburg, 
407; report of the conflict at the re- 
doubt before Vicksburg, 415, 

“ Stop thief!” the old trick exemplified, 
191. 

Srreieut, Colonel, captured by General 
Forrest, 426. 

Sruart, General J. B. B., sent with cav- 
alry to cover the approach of Jackson 
from the enemy, 133; subsequent con- 
fidential instructions from Lee, 138 ; 
engaged with cavalry on detached ser- 
vice, 150; his march down the enemy’s 
line of communication described, 150; 
opens fire on the enemy with a light 
howitzer, 151; effect on the enemy, 
described by General Casey, 151; re- 
mains east of the mountains to ob- 
Serve the enemy, 830; at Sharpsburg 
battle, 835; attacked by the enemy at 
Kelly’s Ford, 488; encounters the 


enemy’s cavalry, 4389; left to guard 
the passes of the mountains, 440; 
makes a circuit of the Federal army, 
440; pursues Sheridan in a dash upon 
Richmond, 509; places himself in 
front of Sheridan and resists his ad- 
vance, 509; is mortally wounded, 510; 
his death and character, 510. 

Subjugation of the Southern States, the 
intention of the Government of the 
United States, 8; established by the 
course pursued by it, 3; evasion and 
final rejection of every proposition for 
a peaceful settlement, 3; its extreme 
obstinacy, 4; observable in the origi- 
nal party of abolition, 4; futile warn- 
ings of its suicidal tendency, 4; not 
contending for a principle, but su- 
premacy, 4; no compromise, 4; of the 
States by the Government of the 
United States, 450; object of the State 
governments, 451; how accomplished, 
452; of the government of the State 
of New York, by the domination over 
it of the military power of the Govern- 
ment of the United States, 488. 

Sub-terra shells, effect produced on the 
enemy by their use on the retreat from 
Williamsburg, 97. 

Subversion of a State government, how 
accomplished, 454. 

Sumter, Fort, its brave and invincible 
defense, 204; the manner of its evacu- 
ation, 204; salute and cheers, 204. 

Sumter, The cruiser, her preparation and 
career, 246, 247. 

Supplies for Lee’s army at Petersburg, 
a statement of facts, 668-670 ; letter 
of General Breckinridge, 672; do. of 
the assistant commissary-general, 672; 
another letter, 673; supplies on the 
retreat, 673 ; letter of President Harvie, 
of the Richmond and Danville Railroad, 
678, 674; do. relative to sending sup- 
plies to Amelia Court-House, 675. 

Supremacy, when the contest is for, there 
will be no concessions, 4. 

Surratt, Mrs., her case awakening much 
sympathy, 497; efforts to obtain a res- 
pite, 497. 


TALIAFERRO, General, commands Virginia 
forces at Norfolk, 195; commands 
Jackson’s division at Cedar Run, 319. 

Taney, Chief-Justice, decision in the 
Carpenter case, 348; a civil war, or 
any other war, does not enlarge the 
powers of the Federal Government over 
the States or the people beyond what 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


the compact has given to it, 348; grants 
the writ of habeas corpus in the case of 
John Merryman, 463 ; disobeyed, 463 ; 
decision of the Court, 463. 

TarTnwatt, Commander Jostan, objections 
to proceeding to York River with the 
Virginia, 91; takes command of the 
Virginia, 202; his statement respect- 
ing the Virginia, 203; has charge of 
the harbor defense of Savannah, 201. 

Taytor, General RicHarp, his descrip- 
tion of the dangerous moment of the 
battle at Port Republic, 116; move- 
ments against the enemy west of the 
Mississippi, 418; proceeds to raise the 
siege of Port Hudson by cutting the 
communications of General Banks, 
419; his movements after the capitu- 
lation of Port Hudson, 422; commands 
in the Red River country, 541; his 
force and movements, 542; encounters 
General Banks, 542; battle at Mans- 
field, 542; defeat of Banks at Pleasant 
Hill, 543, 544. 

Taytor, Colonel THomas, takes a letter 
to President Lincoln relative to prison- 
ers, 584. 

Taytor, Brigadier-General, of New Jer- 
sey, advanees to recover the stores 
captured at Manassas Junction, 323; 
routed, 323. 

Tennessce, measures adopted to occupy 
and fortify strong positions after her 
secession, 24; Forts Henry and Donel- 
son, 24; our forces in, 51; their con- 
centration, 52; a military Governor 
appointed, 285; public officers driven 
from office, 285; newspaper offices 
closed, 285.;-citizens arrested and im- 
prisoned, 285; election of members of 
Congress ordered, 286; a State organ- 
ization attempted, 286; qualifications 
of voters determined and fixed by the 
military officer of the Government of 
the United States, 286; the oath, 286; 
amendments to the regular State Con- 
stitution attempted, 287; declared to 
be adopted by a vote of twenty-five 
thousand out of a hundred and forty- 
five thousand citizens, 287; called 
“ouaranteeing a republican form of 
government,” as required by the 
United States Constitution, 287; many 
positions held by the enemy in, 285 ; 
the aggregate foree, 885; Rosecrans 
assigned to command, 385; most im- 
portant position at Corinth, 386; plan 
of the enemy, 386; Vicksburg, the 
‘point of attack, 386; Generals Price 


805 


and Van Dorn in command of our 
forces, 386; the former moves from 
Tupelo to Iuka, 386; the enemy re- 
treats, abandoning stores, 386; unites 
with General Van Dorn for an attack 
on Corinth, 387; battle at Iuka, 387 ; 
strength of Van Dorn, 387; do. of the 
enemy, 388; attempt to surprise Cor- 
inth before reénforcements were re- 
ceived, 388; its secession proceedings 
founded on true republican principles, 
455; the proceedings of the Govern- 
ment of the United States, 455; it 
denies the fundamental principles of 
liberty, 456; its proceedings founded 
on the assumption of the sovereignty 
of the Government of the United 
States, not on the principle of the 
sovereignty of the people, 456; in- 
vasion of the rights of popular liberty, 
456; efforts to erect a State govern- 
ment subject to the United States Gov- 
ernment, 456; limitation of the will 
of the voter, 456; voter’s right to cast 
his ballot dependent on the permission 
of the United States Government, 456 ; 
further conditions required of the 
voter, 457; who was the sovereign in 
Tennessee? 457; the Government of 
the United States, 457; where was the 
government of the State of Tennessee 
and the sovereign people? 457; the 
former was subverted and overthrown, 
and the latter subjugated, 457 ; amend- 
ments to the Constitution, 457; guar- 
antecd to be a republican State, 458; 
Hood's campaign in, 573. 

Tennessee, an iron clad, 206; her combat 
with the enemy’s fleet in Mobile Har- 
bor, 206. 

Texas, recognition of her independence 
by United States Government in the 
war of the former with Mexico, 276. 

Theory of combinations, ot President 
Lincoln, the issues involved, 14. 

“The pressure is still upon me,” words 
of President Lincoli relative to forci- 
ble emancipation, 181. 

Tuomas, General, commands the enemy’s 
forces at Fishing Creek, 20. 

TrnGHMaNn, General Liuoyp, commands at 
Fort Henry, 26; his bravery, 28; 
loses his life in battle near Vicksburg, 
409. 

Toomss, General Rowert, defends the 
bridge over the Antietam, 337. 

Torpedoes, probably more effective than 
any other means of naval defense, 
207; statement of Admiral Porter as 


806 


to their successful use by us, 207; 
secret of our success was the sensitive 
primer, 208; how the torpedoes were 
made, 208; three essentials to success, 
208; exploits with them in Charleston 
Harbor, 208 ; their use at Roanoke Riv- 
er, 209; successful use at Mobile, 209, 

TrimBie, General, volunteers to capture 
the enemy’s depot at Manassas Junc- 
tion, 323. 

Torenne, Marshal, of France, an exam- 
ple, 68. 


Umpire, Who is the, on the question of 
secession, 16; not the United States 
Government, as it has no inherent, 
original sovereignty, 16; but the States 
and their people, 16; the case of South 
Carolina, 16. 

United States, number of men furnished 
during the war, 706; do. to the United 
States Government by Maryland, Ken- 
tucky, Tennessee, and Missouri, 706; 
debt contracted by the United States 
Government, 706. 

Usurpations of the Government of the 
United States during the year 1861, 
2; the mother of all the, the unhal- 
lowed attempt to establish the absolute 
sovereignty of the Government of the 
United States by the subjugation of the 
States and their people, 16; embraced 
in the system of legislation devised by 
the United States Congress, 161; of 
United States Congress, another alarm- 
ing one brought out, 170; the argu- 
ment by which it was supported, 170 ; 
the war-power, 171; another step for 
the destruction of slavery, 172 ; eman- 
cipation in the District of Columbia, 
172. 

Usurpations of Congress, the next step in 
usurpation, the passage of an act pro- 
hibiting slavery in the Territories, 174 ; 
words of the act, 174; an act making 
an additional article of war passed, 
174; all military and naval officers 
prohibited from efforts to réturn fugi- 
tives from labor, 174; the words of 
the Constitution, 175; Congress di- 
rectly forbids that which the Consti- 
tution commands, 175; excuse of a 
state of war groundless, 175; a series 
of, committed by President Lincoln, 
178 ; all exercises of power not derived 
from the free consent of the governed, 
452 in what it consisted, 582. 

Usurper, The, the last effort to save him- 
self, 606, 


INDEX TO VOL. II. 


Van Dorn, General Eart, assigned to 
command west of the Mississippi, 50; 
his movements, 50; battle of Elkhorn, 
or Pea Ridge, 50; his strength, 50; 
his object, 51; losses, 51; moves to 
join A. S. Johnston, 51; in command 
in north Mississippi, 386; unites with 
General Price, 387; his strength, 387 5 
the strength of the enemy, 388; char- 
acter and conduct of, 388; moves to 
surprise Corinth, 388; its result, 389 ; 
his hazardous retreat, 390; surprises 
and eaptures Holly Springs and de- 
stroys its depot of supplies, 391. 

VENABLE, Colonel C. S., statement of the 
attack of Mississippians under a prom- 
ise to General Lee, 521. 

Vessels destroyed by torpedoes in South- 
ern waters, 210. 

Vicksburg, a combined movement 
against, by land and by the Mississippi 
River, planned by the enemy, 392; the 
position of General Pemberton, 392; 
an ingenious device to turn that posi- 
tion, 892; attempt of Sherman to re- 
duce Haines’s Bluff, 392; Grant lands 
his army at Young’s Point, 393 ; at- 
tempt to pass to the rear of Fort 
Pemberton, 394; also to enter the 
Yazoo above Haines’s Bluff, 394; posi- 
tion of Admiral Porter and his fleet in 
Deer Creek, 894; position of Grant’s 
force, 395 ; Pemberton in command at, 
895; unsuccessful attempt to cut a 
canal across the peninsula, 396; do. 
to connect the river with the bayou 
at Milliken’s Bend, 396; gunboats at- 
tempt to run the batteries, 397; the 
enemy commence ferrying troops from 
the Louisiana to the Mississippi shore, 
898; resistance by our troops, 898; 
battle near Port Gibson, 398, attempt 
of Grant to get in rear of General 
Bowen, 398; he retreats toward Grand 
Gulf, 899; joined by General Loring, 
399; Grant advances into Mississippi, 
899; concentration of General Pem- 
berton at, 410; strength of the posi- 
tion, 410; length of fortified line, 
410; Pemberton’s force, 410; efforts 
to strengthen the relieving army, 411; 
dispatches for aid to the relieving 
army, 412; siege commenced, 418; 
assault, 414; bombardment from the 
mortar fleet, 414; position of, 414; 
progress of the siege, 414; another 
assault, 414; report of General Ste- 
venson, 415; causes that led to the 
capitulation, 415; the losses, 4147; 


INDEX TO VOL. JIL. 


other efforts to relieve, 417; movement 
of General E. K. Smith, Ary, 

Victors, Who were the, ‘when the war 
closed? 294; let the verdict of man- 
kind decide, 295. 

Virginia, first efforts of the enemy di- 
rected against her, 3; greater perver- 
sion of republican ‘principles i in, by the 
Government of the United States, than 
in any other State, 304; its seces- 
sion, 304; opposition in northwestern 
counties, 304; they hold a conven- 
tion to reorganize the government 
of Virginia, 305; assume to be the 
State of Virginia, 305; consent to the 
formation of a new State, 305; ac- 
tion of United States Congress, 305; 
these proceedings viewed in the light 
of fundamental principles, 306; in- 
volved insurrection, revolution, and se- 
cession, 306; the United States Gov- 
ernment the nursing-mother to the 
whole thing, 306; words of the United 
States Constitution, 307; the fraud 
examined, 307; words of Thaddeus 
Stevens, 308; so-called government 
of Virginia migrates from Wheeling 
to Alexandria, 308; subsequent order 
of President Johnson, 308; proceed- 
ings under the order, 309’; such a 
State government not in the interest 
of the people, but of the Government 
of the United States, 309; voters re- 
quired first to protect the Government 
of the United States, 309. 

Virginia, former frigate Merrimac, 196 ; 
transformed into an ironclad, 196; her 
armament, 196; and the Mouitor, the 
combat between, 200; the latter seeks 
safety in shoal water, 200; refitted af- 
ter her conflict, 201; invites the Mon- 
itor to a new contest, 201; declined, 
201; dashes upon the enemy’s fleet, 
202; abandoned and burned, 203; the 
reasons, 208. 

Voter in Tennessee, The, the limitation 
of his will, 456; his right to cast his 
ballot vested in "the permission of the 
Government of the United States as his 
sovereign, 456. 


Waonpeit, Lieutenant J. J., commands 
the cruiser Shenandoah, 264. 

Warxrr, General J. G., movement of his 
troops at Sharpsburg, 336. 

Watker, General W. H. T., commences 
the attack at Chickamauga, 430; killed 
in the attack on McPherson’s corps, 
562, 


807 


War, The, manner in which it was con- 
ducted by the Government of the 
United States, 5; how inappropriate 
to preserve a ‘voluntary Union, 6; en- 
larged its proportions during the ‘year 
1861, 16; points possessed “by the en- 
emy, 17: his supply of men and re- 
sources of war, 17; asuccession of glo- 
rious victories to us, 17; the founda- 
tion of the, 582. 

Warp, Colonel, his conduct at Yorktown, 
88, 89; killed at Williamsburg, 99; 
report of General Early on his gallant. 
Tyo. 

Wan ey, Lieutenant, attacks the enemy’s 
vessels at New Orleans, 221. 

“ War-power, The, of the United States 
Government,” the theory on which it 
was based, 171; its unlimited extent, 
171; the specious argument for, 171; 
words of the Constitution, 171; Presi- 
dent Lincoln declares his main reliance 
on it, 298. 

Washington Artillery, organized in New 
Orleans, 337 ; its frequent and honor- 
able mention in the reports of battles, 
337. 

Washington threatened by General Early, 
530. 

Watchword, The, ‘The abolition of sla- 
very by the force of arms for the sake 
of the Union,” 186, 

Westover reached by McClellan’s army, 
152; protection of the gunboats, 152 ; 
his position, 152; inexpedient to at- 
tack him, 152. 

Wueaton, on the capture and confisca- 
tion of private property, 163. 

Wueeter, General, destroys supplies and 
baggage in the rear of Rosecrans’s army 
advancing to Murfreesboro, 384 ; move- 
ments with his cavalry at Chickamau- 
ga, 432. 

Which is the higher diutlior ity, Mr. Lin- 
coln’s emancipation proclamation, or 
the Constitution ? 621. 

Wuire, Colonel, advances to the Susque- 
hanna, 440. 

Wuirrnc, General, sent to reénforce 
Jackson in the Valley, 133; he is 
killed in the defense of Fort Fisher, 
646, 

Who is the criminal? Let pontouty, an- 
swer, 178. 

Why were they not hung? our soldiers 
taken prisoners, as “rebels and trai- 
tors,” 13. 

Wicxxs, Captain, commands a cruiser 
fitted out in France by United States 


Historical and Biographical Works. 


The Life of the Prince Consort. 


By Turoporr Martin. With Portraits. Complete in 5 volumes. 12mo. 
Cloth, $2.00 each volume. 


The English Reformation : 


« How it came about, and why we should uphold it. By Cunnineuam GEIKIE, 
D.D., author of “The Life and Words of Christ.” With a Preface by the 
author for the American edition, 1 vol.,12mo. Cloth. Price, $2.00. 


A History of England in the Eighteenth Century. 


By Witu1am E. H. Lecxy. 2 vols., 8vo. Cloth, $5.00. 


Prehistorie Times, 


As illustrated by Ancient Remains and the Manners and Customs of Modern 
Savages. Illustrated. By Sir Joun Lussock, Bart., author of “Origin of 
Civilization, and the Primitive Condition of Man.”. Entirely new edition. 
8vo. Cloth. Price, $5.00. 


The French Revolutionary Epoch. 


Being a History of France from the Beginning of the First French Revolution 
to the End of the Second Empire. By Henri Van Lavn, author of “ History 
of French Literature,” ete. 2 vols., 12mo. Cloth, $3.50. 


The Historical Poetry of the Ancient Hebrews. 


Translated and critically examined by Micnarn Hernprin. Vol. 1. Crown 
8vo. Cloth. Price, $2.00, 


History of New York 


During the Revolutionary War, and of the Leading Events in the other Colo- 
nies at that Period. By Tuomas Jonxs, Justice of the Supreme Court of the 
Province. Edited by Epwarp Froyp pr Lancey. With Notes, Contemporary 
Documents, Maps, and Portraits. In two yols., 8v0, 748 pp., 718 pp. Cloth, 
gilt top, price, $15.00. Printed for the New York Historical Society, in 
“The John D. Jones Fund Series of Histories and Memoirs.” 


The Last Years of Daniel Webster. 


A Monograph. By Gzoreu TicKNoR Curtis. 8vo. Paper, 50 cents. 


® 


For sale by all booksellers. Any work mailed, post-paid, to any address in 
the United States, on receipt of price. 


D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers, 
1, 8, & 5 Bonn Srreer, New. Your. 


MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS. 


New Volumes of “The International Scientific Series,’ 


Sight : 


An Exposition of the Principles of Monocular and Binocular Vision. By Josrru 
Le Conrsz, LL.D., author of “Elements of Geology,” “Religion and 
Science,” and Professor of Geology and Natural History in the University 
of California. With numerous Illustrations, 12mo, cloth, $1.50. 


“Tt is pleasant to find an American book which can rank with the very best of foreign 
works on this subject. Professor Le Conte has long been known as an original investiga- 
tor in this department ; all that he gives us is treated with a master-hand.’’— Zhe Nation. 


Animal Life, 

As affected by the Natural Conditions of Existence. By Kart Semper, Professor © 

of the University of Wiirzburg. With 2 Maps and 106 Woodcuts, and 
Index. 12mo, cloth, $2.00. 


‘Tt appears to me that, of all the properties of the animal organism, Variability is that 
which may first and most easily be traced by exact investigation to its efficient causes ; 
and as it is beyond a doubt the subject around which, at the present moment, the strife of 
opinions is most violent, it is that which will be most likely to repay the trovble of closer 
research. I have endeavored to facilitate this task so far as inme lies.”—Prom the Preface. 

“This is in many respects one of the most interesting contributions to zodlogical 
literature which has appeared for some time.’’—Wature. 


The Atomic Theory. 


By Av. Wurtz, Membre de l'Institut; Doyen Honoraire de la Faculté de Médecine ; 
Professeur 4 la Faculté des Sciences de Paris. Translated by E. Cremrn- 
sHaw, M.A., F.C.S., F. 1 C., Assistant Master at Sherborne School. 12mo, 
cloth, $1.50. 


‘« There was need for a book like this, which discusses the atomic theory both in its his- 
toric evolution and in its present form, And perhaps no man of this age could have been 
selected so able to perform the task in a masterly way as the illustrious French chemist, 
Adolph Wurtz. It is impossible to convey to the reader, in a notice like this, any adequate 
idea of the scope, lucid instructiveness, and scientific interest of Professor Wurtz’s book. 
The modern problems of chemistry, which are commonly so obscure from imperfect ex- 
position, are here made wonderfully clear and attractive.’’"— Zhe Popular Science Monthly. 


The Power of Movement in Plants. 


By Cuartzs Darwin, LL. D., F. R.S., assisted by Francis Darwin. With Illustra. 
tions. 12mo, cloth, $2.00, 


‘Mr. Darwin’s latest study of plant-life shows no abatement of his power of work or 
his habits of fresh and original observation. We have learned to expect from him at inter- 
vals, never much prolonged, the results of special research in some by-path or other stb- 
ordinated to the main course of the biological syetem associated with his name ; and it has 
been an unfailing source of interest to see the central ideas of the evolution and the con- 
tinuity of life developed in detail through a series of special treatises, each wellnigh ex- 
haustive of the materials available for its subject.”"—Saturday Review. 


D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers, 


1, 3, & 5 Bond Street, New York. 


IMPORTANT WORKS. 


a 
L 
The Life and Words of Christ. By Comenam Gun, 


D. D. New cheap edition, From the same stereotype plates as the two- 
volume illustrated edition. 8vo. Cloth. Price, $1.50. 
This edition of Geikie’s Life of Christ is the only cheap edition that contains the copious 
notes of the author, the marginal references, and an index. 4 ; ; 
“A work of the highest rank, breathing the spit of true faith in Christ."—Dr. Delitasch, the 


Commentator. mrt y 
“A most valuable addition to sacred literature."—A. WV. Litilejohn, D. D., Bishop of Long 


Island. 
a 


Mind in the Lower Animals, in Health and Dis- 


ease. By W. Lauper Linpsay, M.D., F.R.8. 2, ete. In two volumes, 
8vo, cloth. Price, $4.00. 


+ 
“T have studied the subject of mind in other animals, as compared. mit that of man, tor a se- 
ries of years, simply as a physician-naturalist. . . . Regarding the whole subject of mind in 
animals from a medical and natural-history point of view, I have studied it from first to last 
without any preconceived ideas, with no theory to defend, support, or illustrate. . . . All that I 
attempt is to outline the subject of mind in the lower animals, to illustrate their possession of the 
higher mental faculties as they occur in man.”—Zwtract from Introduction. 


Ii. 
Memoirs of Madame de Remusat. complete in one 


vol., with an Index, 12mo, 740 pages, cloth, price, $2.00. In three vols., 
octavo, paper covers, price, $1.50; or, 50 cents each. 


“Madame de Rémusat’s Memoirs’ will remain as the most finished picture of the Napoleonic 
Court in its outward glory and its inner pettiness."—London Atheneum. 

“Notwithstanding the enormous library of works relating to Napoleon, we know of none 
which cover precisely the ground of these Memoirs. Madame de Rémusat was not only lady-in- 
waiting to Josephine during the eventful years 1802-1808, but was her intimate friend and trusted 
confidant. Thus we get a view of the daily life of porate and his wife and the terms on which 
they lived not elsewhere to be found.”—Vew York Mai aay 

» Rd ° : x Cp 
yee 


aie LY. 
Memoirs of Napoleon, his Court and Family. 


By the Duchess p’ABranres (Madame Junot). New edition. In two vols., 
12mo. Cloth. Price, $3.00. 


The interest in the first Napoleon and his Court, which has recently been so stimulated by 
the ‘‘ Memoirs of Madame de Rémusat,” has induced the publishers to reissue the famous ‘ Me- 
moirs of the Duchess d’Abrantes.” These memoirs, which hitherto have appeared in costly 8vo 
volumes, are now published at a much lower price, to correspond with the De Rémusat 12mo 
volume, The work at the present juncture will be read with attention, especially as it presents a 
much more favorable portrait of the great Corsican than that limned by Madame de Rémusat. 


We 
The Life of David Glasgow Farragut, First Aamiral 
of the United States Navy, embodying his Journal and Letters. By his 
Son, Loyart Farracur. With Portraits, Maps, and Illustrations. 8vo, 
Cloth, Price, $4.00. ‘ 


“The book is a stirring one, of course; the story of Farragut’s life is a tale of adventure of 
the most ravishing sort, so that, aside from the value of this work as an authentic biography of 
the greatest of American naval commanders, the book is one of surpassing interest, considered 


merely as a narrative of difficult and dangerous enterprises and heroic achievements.”—WNew 
York Hvening Post. 


For sale by all booksellers; or any yolume sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of price, 


D. APPLETON & 0O., Publishers, 1,3, & 5 Bond Street, New York. 


a ON ee a a a “ot Ag 
: y a 


LY 


" = 


| 


eer ee pe 


ec Seen Ss nena Snot io | 
— 
| 
Ss ean A ee ee eee ae | 
! 


j 
| 
i 
{ 
{ 
i 
7 
\ 
| 


— mia Nee Me Ae ten sempre ees 


NT 


3 1254 00431 4171 


| 


a vaicee 
Nite Pgh Pay Mat 
SMT ce iPad srs 


ve 


lye Gee 
er aa 


a 


Sites 


WF 


Peet 


< 
oy 
q