The Present Age and Inner Life (Andrew Jackson Davis, 1853)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1853 Partridge & Brittan, New York first edition (https://archive.org/details/presentageinnerl00davi). A sequel to Spiritual Intercourse — the Poughkeepsie Seer's harmonial-philosophy survey of the movement's first five years.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PRESENT  AGE  AND  INNER  LIEE;


A SEQUEL


SPIRITUAL  INTERCOURSE


MODERN  MYSTERIES


CLASSIFIED  AND  EXPLAINED.


BY

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS,

AOTHOR  OF  "NATURE'S  DIVINE REVELATIONS,"  "HARMONIA,"  ETC., ETC.


'COME  NOW,  AND  LET  US  REASON  TOGETHER."— Bible.


ILLUSTRATED WITH E  N  G  E,  A  V  1 H  G  8  .


NEW YORK:
PARTRIDGE & BRITTAN,

300  BROADWAY.
1853.


ENTERED,  ACCORDING  TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS,  IN  THE  YEAR  1653,  BY

•ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS,

IN  THE  CLERK'S  OFFICE  OF  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  CONNECTICUT.


BFI25I
853D


FOUNDRY  OF  S.  ANDRUS AND SON,

HAKJFORD.

W.  C.  Armstrong,  Typographer.


PREFACE.


The  author  has  obeyed  his  impressions  in  present-
ing' to  the  world  this  book.  Its  contents  are  designed
to  meet  the  psychological  demands  of  the  time.  The
heart  and  the  head,  the  soul  and  the  understanding,
are  particularly  and  familiarly  addressed.

To  the  down-trodden  and  wearied,  to  the  tram-
melled and  enslaved,  to  the  depressed  and  sorrowful,
to  the  seeker  after  light  and  liberty,  this  book  is  most
cordially  dedicated  by  the  author.  He  can  think  of
no  better  offering — no  legacy  more  adapted  to  the
development  and  tranquillization  of  man's  nature —
than  the  one  now  laid  upon  the  altar  of  the  reader's
Reason.

"  Let  there  be  Light  /"  was  the  first  and  most  om-
nipotent mandate  of  Heaven;  it  reverberated  through-
out the  length  and  breadth  of  the  arching  skies;  it
has  rolled  down  from  generation  to  generation  with
ever-increasing  power;  and  now,  it  seeks  an  expres-
sion from  every  heart  that  beats  in  unison  with  the
sovereign  laws  of  universal  justice  and  equal  liberty.


r  it  e  r  a  c  e  .


That  there  may  "  be  Light "  on  the  important  ques-
tions now  agitating  the  people,  and  that  "  mental  lib-
erty "  may  come  with  it,  is  the  deepest  and  foremost
prayer  of  the  author;  and  he  earnestly  hopes,  and
even  ventures  to  believe,  that  the  following  pages
will  serve  to  conduct  the  reader  to  the  attainment
and  enjoyment  of  these  inestimable  blessings.


A.  J.  D.

Hartford,  Conn.,  May  22,  1853.


CONTENTS


PAGE.

A  SURVEY  OF  HUMAN  NEEDS, 7

DEFINITION  OF  PHILOSOPHY  AND  SPIRITUALISM, 29

THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT, 47

THE  SPl RITUAL  CONG RESS, 82

VISION  AT  HIGH-ROCK  COTTAGE, 84

THE  DELEG  ATIONS  AND  EXORDI A, 97

THE  TABLE  OF  EXPLANATION, 128

THE  CLASSIFICATION  OF  MEDIA, 130

THE  CLASSIFICATION  OF  CAUSES, 197

SUMMARY  EXPLANATIONS, 200

REVELATIONS  FROM  PANDEMONIUM, 207

ASSERTION  VERSUS  FACTS, 215

A  VOICE  TO  THE  INSANE, 244

BENEFITS  OF  EXPERIENCE, 259

PHENOMENA  OF  THE  SPIRITUA  ^  SPHERES, 263

1*


ILLUSTRATIONS,


PAGE.

SCENE  IN  A  FAMILY  CIRCLE, 67

CIRCLE  FOR  PHYSICAL  EVIDENCES 70

VISION  AT  HIGH-ROCK  COTTAGE, 86

OHIROGRAPHY  OF  THE  NEUROLOGIC  MEDIUM, 146

ALMONDUS  PENMANSHIP, 147

ENGRAVING  OF  FARMS  AND  GARDENS, 171

ILLUSTRATION  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE  AND  IMPRESSION, 173


A  SURVEY  OF  HUMAN  NEEDS.


In  the  Old  wilderness  of  Superstition  now  blooms  the
immortal  flower  of  Keason.  The  great  and  powerful  genii
of  the  Eastern  hemisphere  have  given  themselves  up  to  ob-
livion ;  and  the  great  and  powerful  Ideas  of  the  Western
hemisphere  now  occupy  their  places.  The  whole  world  is
rapidly  approaching  a  Transition  State — is  passing  from
death  unto  life- — is  merging  from  a  long  night  of  ignorance
and  superstition.  But  to  realize  the  marvelous  changes
that  are  constantly  going  on  everywhere,  and  in  order  to
contemplate  this  glorious  transition  of  the  Old  into  the
New,  we  must  take  a  stand-point  high  upon  the  summit  of
the  ages.  From  this  position  the  mind's  eye  may  not  only
take  a  comprehensive  survey  "of  the  inferior  Past  as  the
vast  back-ground  of  the  superior  Present,  but  also,  now
and  then,  obtain  a  satisfying  glimpse  of  the  undeveloped
Future.  By  scanning  the  fables  of  the  past,  and.  comparing
them  with  the  realities  of  the  present,  we  can  see  that  what
was  considered  miraculous  and  supernatural  is  now  recog-
nized as  the  "  matter-of-course"  triumphs  of  progressive
science — as  things  ordinary  and  natural  to  the  constitution
of  matter  and  principles.  Consequently,  though  every
new  development  is  exceeding  wonderful,  it  is  not  super-
natural. In  the  Empire  of  Matter  there  can  come  no
miracle ;  the  world  of  Mind  is  equally  impregnable,  be-
cause the  former  is  its  foundation.  The  thinking  mind
knows  too  much  of  the  laws  of  matter  to  believe  in  miracles.
The  more  we  know  the  less  we  believe  !  Faith  has  extem-
porized so  often  and  improvised  so  much  which  Knowledge


5  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

repudiates  as  godless  and  wrong,  that  the  intelligent  por-
tion of  the  world  has  deserted  the  continent  of  belief
for  the  far  safer  and  firmer  hemisphere  of  positive  Knowl-
edge, which  in  the  mind  is  balanced  by  the  hemisphere
of  passion  or  impulse.

Skepticism  is,  I  think,  the  handmaid  of  Truth.  Doubt  is
the  beginning  of  Wisdom.  Doubt  is  the  precursor  of  inqui-
ry ;  inquiry  leads  to  Evidence ;  Evidence  is  the  foundation
of  Knowledge  ;  and  Knowledge  is  the  parent  of  Liberty  and
Power.  Concerning  skeptics  a  philosophical  writer  once
remarked,  "  That  they  are  men  who  pick  holes  in  the  fabric
of  Knowledge  wherever  it  is  weak  and  faulty ;  and  when
these  places  are  properly  mended,  the  whole  of  the  build-
ing becomes  more  firm  and  solid  than  it  was  before."  In
the  ages  of  ignorance,  it  was  a  crime  to  doubt ;  now  it  is
the  sign  of  intelligence.  Skepticism  is  the  Chief  of  all
policemen  who  maintain  order  among  the  clergy.  Science
is  an  excellent  and  indomitable  watchman ;  but  an  intel-
ligent, honest,  philosophical  Doubt,  is  the  most  formidable
of  all  foes  with  which  the  Dogmatists  have  to  contend.
Then  fear  not,  ye  skeptics — Doubt  on !  Do  for  the  world
what  an  unreasoning  faith  can  never  accomplish.  Help
on  the  work  of  Eeform !  If  there  be  any  nigh  to  the  king-
dom of  heaven,  they  are  those  who  conscientiously  Doubt
until  adequate  Evidence  is  obtained ;  then  faith  is  not  pos-
sible ;  for  Knowledge  occupies  its  place  in  the  mind ;  and
a  force  equal  to  the  "moving  of  mountains"  is  therein
forthwith  generated.

The  object  of  this  chapter  is  to  show,  that  the  world,  es-
pecially in  this  century,  needs  a  "Philosophy"  higher  than
the  schools  can  furnish,  and  a  "  Spiritualism"  more  demon-
strative than  the  churches  possess — needs  these,  in  order  to
destroy  the  hatreds  of  the  churches ;  to  cas  tthis  creed  and
that  religion  into  the  world's  treasury  of  experience  ;  to  en-
rich our  minds  with  a  unitary  understanding  of  all  natural
and  spiritual  things ;  and  finally,  to  render  all  things,  which
pertain  to  our  physical  and  mental  being,  universal  and
harmonious !

There  are  three  unmistakable  indications  that  the  world


A SURVEY OF IIUMAN NEEDS.  9

really  "needs"  the  Harmonial  Philosophy,  or  something
analogous,  as  follows :

First.  The  materialistic  influence  which  nearly  all  the
Sciences  exert  upon  the  civilized  races — limiting  knowledge
and  faith  to  the  scope  of  the  physical  perceptions  :  showing
the  need  of  some  philosophical  interpretation  or  spiritual
manifestation  of  things,  which  will  harmonize  at  once  with
the  known  facts  of  science  and  the  immutable  laws  of  Na-
ture.

Second.  The  incapacity  or  inadequacy  of  any  and  every
form  of  Theology,  which  is  evolved  from  the  Testaments,
to  answer  the  great  variety  of  questions  which  involuntarily
rise  in  intelligent  minds.

Third.  The  failure  on  the  part  of  popular  Theology  to
bring  "  Peace  on  Earth" — its  failure  to  save  the  people  from
poverty,  ignorance,  crime,  discord,  disease !

The  argument  in  support  of  these  three  propositions  will,
on  this  occasion,  be  drawn — 1st,  from  the  Doings  of  Geolo-
gists; 2d,  from  the  Doings  of  Chemists;  3d,  from  the
present  social  state  ;  and  4th,  from  the  antagonisms  of  exist-
ing religions.

In  this  little  volume,  the  sequel  to  my  "Philosophy  of
Spiritual  Intercourse,"  the  reader  will  find  a  continuation
of  certain  thoughts  therein  broached,  with  much  which  is
entirely  new  and  very  important.  The  initial  considera-
tions now  submitted,  are  those  which  enter  into  the  forma-
tion of  this  chapter.

When  contemplated  from  a  certain  position,  it  is  very
natural  to  exclaim  that,  "  all  the  world's  a  stage" — a  pyra-
mid of  excellence — a  gorgeous  Temple — vested  with  super-
nal beauty;  built  upon  the  granite  foundations  of  inde-
structible material ;  and  upheld  by  the  golden  columns  of
Eternal  Truth.  How  beautiful  the  scenery  which  falls,  and
rises,  and  glides  away  before  »the  ever-changing  drama  of
existence !

First,  let  us  glance  at  the  play  of  geologists  among  the
rocks  and  hills.  Now,  as  the  curtain  rolls  up,  let  us  look
upon  the  geologic  drama. Behold !  the  earth,  the  seas,  the


10  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

flowing  tides,  the  groves  of  solemn  grandeur;  and  diverse
vegetation,  unfolding  with  a  wild  luxuriance  over  the  roll-
ing lands.  What  can  all  this  mean  ?  Whence  the  origin
of  these  things? Who  owns  and  manages  this  theater?

We  are  the  audience.  We  know  by  all  these  properties
and  decorations — by  all  this  form,  and  order,  and  arrange-
ment— that  there  must  be  a  "  green-room"  somewhere  with-
in, behind  the  exhibition ;  and  we  desire  to  behold  it.  Yea,
we  must!  For  we  possess  investigating,  exploring  facul-
ties ;  and  these  demand  an  exercise  !

See!  A  silent  splendor  floats  down  from  the  noon-day
sun,  and  illuminates  the  hills.  Star-beams  come  down  from
on  high,  and  play  amid  the  lilies  of  the  valley !  There  is
a  glow  and  a  loveliness — a  poem  and  a  song — upon,  and
flowing  from,  every  thing  that  lives  !

Again  and  again  we  ask:  "Who  made  all  these  won-
ders?"

In  vain  the  cast-iron  conservative,  "with  eyes  severe  and
beard  of  formal  cut" — replete  with  heavenly  ire — admon-
ishes you  to  leave  untouched  the  secrets  of  Nature :  to
search  not  into  the  mysteries  of  godliness.  The  clergyman,
too,  shrinks  from  the  results  of  investigation.  He  fears
that,  in  case  you  should  behold  the  "  green-room"  of  the
World's  theater,  there  may  be  found  no  traces  of  the  "rock"
he  stands  upon ;  only  the  heterogeneous  materials  from
which  it  was  originated.  He,  therefore,  cries  out  from  his
desk  against  you,  and  exclaims — "Beware  ! Beware  !"

But  the  ways  of  mind  are  imperious  ;  man  must  investi-
gate ;  and,  first  of  all,  the  land  of  his  birth.  And  so,  with
hammer  in  hand,  he  knocks  at  the  magnificent  door  of  geo-
logical science,  and  begins  to  enumerate  the  various  strata
which  constitute  the  Earth.

When  man  first  entered  the  subterranean  departments
of  Nature,  he  could  read  but  imperfectly  the  hieroglyphic
characters  traced  thereon — upon  the  inner  chambers — by
the  laws  of  progress  and  the  methods  of  growth.  But  soon
he  learned  to  count  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  centuries
which  were  consumed  in  advancing  the  earth  from  its  pri-
meval condition  to  its  present  state. And  forthwith  his


A SURVEY OF HUMAX NEEDS.  11

mind,  like  a  freed  bird,  overleaped  the  existing  boundaries
set  to  biblical  chronology  ;  and  the  geologic  man  dated  the
hirth  of  the  world  far  away  in  the  remote,  unremembered
past — long,  very  long  prior  to  the  origin  of  life  or  anima-
tion.

Here  began  a  new  act  on  the  stage — a  battle  between  in-
flexible science  and  popular  dogmas ;  which  resulted,  as
you  probably  know,  in  numerous  theological  concessions
and  acknowledgments,  viz. :  that  the  Fathers  of  the
Church,  and  Students  of  divinity,  had  uniformly  ac-
cepted the  "Mosaic  account  of  Creation"  in  a  too  literal
and  restricted  sense.  They  discovered  and  determined
that,  in  order  to  avoid  any  public  clashing  between
the  teachings  of  Mature  and  the  dogmas  of  Revelation,  they
could  construe  the  expression  "  the  evening  and  the  morn-
ing," to  mean  the  "  ending  and  beginning  of  an  indefinite
era;"  and  thus,  also,  they  stretched  out  the  "six  days"  of
Genesis  into  "  ages,"  long  and  spacious  enough  to  accom-
modate the  most  extravagant  discoveries  of  geological  sci-
ence. This,  for  modern  times,  was  an  interesting  act.  The
sparks  of  geologic  truth,  which  were  from  time  to  time
elicited  from  the  granite  sides  of  Nature,  indicated  the  final
dawning  forth  of  a  basilar  knowledge  of  the  constitution  of
things,  almost  too  vast  for  the  human  mind.

When  the  dark  dungeons  of  the  earth  were  fairly  thrown
open  to  the  rays  of  wisdom,  and  when  men  discovered  that
they  could  walk  therein  unharmed,  and  find  philosophic
truths  in  clusters  everywhere  ;  then  it  was,  as  it  now  is,  in-
teresting to  see  men  of  intellectual  power,  summoned  from
other  studies,  go  forth  to  grapple  with  the  unfolding  truths  of
Mature,  and  sound  their  melody  on  harps  of  praise.  These
minds,  each  acting  for  himself,  have  arranged,  systema-
tized, and  propagated  the  greatest  lights  of  terrestrial  dis-
covery ;  and,  moved  forward  by  the  love  of  research  and
positive  knowledge,  they  have  advanced  all  geological
acquisitions,  regardless  of  time-honored  prejudices  and
popular  intolerance,  into  a  form  and  character  of  one  of
the  noblest  of  the  sciences.

"  Of  all  the  sciences  in  the  material  universe,"  says  a


12  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

writer,  "none  comes  more  immediately  into  sympathy
with  our  physical  wants  and  sensuous  enjoyments  than
this  science  of  geology."  It  acquaints  us  with  the  rudi-
ments of  life,  with  the  laws  of  formation,  with  the  incip-
ient manifestations  of  the  Soul  of  Nature.  Geology  is  a
beautiful  country,  which  all  should  visit.  At  every  step
we  tread  upon  the  interesting  facts  which  it  embraces.  The
earth  is  paved  with  wonders.  Could  we  but  intelligently
interrogate  the  rounded  pebble  at  our  feet,  it  would  reveal
to  us  events  or  acts  in  the  elemental  drama  of  this  world,
more  wonderful  and  sublime  than  all  the  myths  of  ancient
days !  Yea,  the  little  speechless,  time-worn,  pale-faced
crystal,  could  it  speak  its  experience  truly,  might  read  us
a  history  of  its  travels  from  primeval  times  to  its  present
humble  bed,  enough  replete  with  "hair-breadth  escapes
and  thrilling  incidents,"  to  shake  the  strongest  mind  with
grotesque  and  sublime  emotion.

I  have  introduced  this  matter,  simply,  to  interest  the
reader  in  the  science  of  geology ;  to  interest  you  in  the
beginning  principles  of  life,  which  geology  discovers  to  us.
As  a  young  science,  with  its  colossal  proportions  and
strength,  it  has  already  performed  a  mighty  part  on  the
world's  stage !

Aside  from  all  the  psychological  blessings  which  it  brings
to  us,  it  reveals  to  man  its  immense  storehouses  of  mineral
wealth ;  tells  where  we  may  find  coal  to  keep  us  warm,  to
"make  the  pot  boil,"  and  drive  the  engine.  It  tells  us
where  we  may  find  zinc  and  iron,  and  tables  of  building
stone,  wherewith  to  construct  palaces  and  prisons,  and
every  thing  else.  It  tells  us  where  to  find  copper,  silver,
gold,  that  august  "Trinity,"  which  even  a  Unitarian  can
understand,  and  reconcile  to  the  laws  of  calculation.

Besides  all  this,  geology  instructs  us  in  the  mysteries  of
the  material  creation,  develops  the  motive  principles  of
embryology,  exhibits  the  vast  pyramid  of  all  animal  ex-
istences ;  and  so,  perpetually  enriches  our  stock  of  sensu-
ous knowledge.

But,  more  than  all,  Geology  is  the  inexorable  judge  of
Tueology. And  it  will  be  an  exciting  day  when  the  ac-


A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.  13

complislied  champions  of  each  system  are  compelled  to  ap-
pear, side  by  side,  or  face  to  face,  on  the  stage  of  the  world
there  and  then,  before  an  intelligent  audience,  to  test  and
determine  the  merits  and  demerits  of  their  respective  reve-
lations. When  this  trial  comes  on  between  the  teachings
of  nature  and  the  dogmas  of  antiquity,  we  may  be  called
upon  to  take  our  positions  in  the  juror's  box !  Let  us,
therefore,  speedily  learn  the  divine  art  of  seeing  all  sides
of  a  question,  and  of  "judging,  not  from  appearances,
but  with  a  righteous  judgment,"  all  the  evidences  which
may  be  presented.

But  the  scene  is  changed !  New  characters  appear,  new
"  stars"  come  forth,  and  a  new  audience  is  summoned !

Behold  now,  the  chemical  laboratory,  the  furnace,  the
blow-pipes,  and  retorts.  See  the  bottles  of  ether,  the  speci-
mens of  mineral  compounds,  and  the  results,  the  triumph-
ant results,  of  demonstrative  analyses  in  every  direction !
See,  too,  the  intrepid  chemist,  digging  and  burning  his
way  into  the  things  which  God  has  made.  With  what  im-
perturbable zeal,  with  what  studied  gravity,  he  dissolves
elements  and  gases  !  "  I  can  not  help  admiring,"  says  the
classic  Wilkinson,  "  the  thoroughness  of  the  Liebigs,  who,  af-
ter having  analyzed  the  rest  of  things,  put  men  and  women
into  the  retorts,  and  with  pen  and  ink  ready,  write  down
so  much  dirty  water  and  fetid  oil,  and  so  many  ounces  of
scientific  dust ;"  and  who,  therefore,  convince  their  audi-
ence, by  plain  and  unequivocal  demonstration,  that  "peo-
ple are  no  better  than  they  should  be,"  and  have  much
affinity  for  the  dust,  from  which  they  originally  came.

"  Physiologists  and  soap-chandlers  look  on  with  amaze-
ment," and  begin  to  calculate  how  much  can  be  made  out
of  the  novel  discovery  !  But  clergymen  and  lukewarm  be-
lievers in  man's  immortal  destiny,  on  the  contrary,  having
no  principles  of  truth  underlying  their  theory,  are  inex-
pressibly terror-stricken  to  see  dissolving,  in  the  retorts,
before  the  eyes  of  the  world,  the  mystic  evidences  to  which
they  have  so  long  referred,  in  addition  to  Bible  testimony,
in  behalf  of  man's  immortality. And  so  chemistry,  which


14  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

is  all  right  in  its  proper  sphere  of  action,  is  really  depriv-
ing the  world  of  its  faith  in  Spiritualism ;  and  is  breeding
troublesome  questions  and  skepticism  in  every  intelligent
mind. Old  faith  is  disturbed.

Well:  what,  then,  is  to  be  done?  What  can  the  church
do,  in  order  to  restore  to  the  people,  and  to  materialistic
chemists  also,  the  virgin  primitive  faith  in  man's  immortal
destiny  ?  Shall  the  noble  science  of  chemistry  be  hooted
down  and  driven  out  of  civilized  society,  and  be  treated
hereafter  as  an  Atheistic  or  demoniac  deception ;  or,  must
Old  Theology  bestir  himself,  shake  his  whitened  locks,
make  another  respectful  acknowledgment  to  Young  Sci-
ence, and  very  complacently  fold  the  youth  within  his
garments?  Shall  this  be  done?  Do  you  think  that  "  Old
Theology"  can  adopt,  and  provide  for,  all  the  children  of
Science  and  Philosophy,  which  come  forth  from  the  ever-
pregnant  womb  of  Truth  ? We  shall  hereafter  see.

But,  again,  the  scene  is  changed !  Behold  the  Human
Family,  in  the  aggregate,  which,  like  the  "Tower  of  Ba-
bel," is  the  platform  of  innumerable  discords  and  misun-
derstandings. Want,  ignorance,  war,  slavery,  starvation,
crime;  these  form  the  basis  of  all  the  dramas;  and  "all
the  men  and  women  are  merely  actors."  There  is  too
much  tragedy  visible  ;  the  lights  and  shades  are  too  sharply
drawn.  More  equality  is  needed.  The  heavens  are  too
dark ;  the  thunders  roar  in  too  high  a  key  !  This  question
can  not  be  suppressed — does  an  All-good,  an  All-wise,
an  All-powerful  Divine  Being  control  and  manage  the  vast
Theater  of  this  human  world  ?  Or,  has  he  cursed  it,  and
abandoned  it  to  the  capricious  and  terrible  management  of
an  Adversary?  Do  the  Manichees  and  the  Christians  tell
us  truly  ?  Oh,  there  are  dramas  and  tragedies  performed
on  this  stage  of  being — performed  by  men  and  women  bad
enough  to  shipwrech  all  human  faith  in  the  existence  of
an  All-good,  an  All-wise,  an  Almighty  Mind !

Behold  the  strong  oppress  the  weak !  Oh,  where  is  the
arm  of  God  ;  the  God  of  prayer  and  of  special  provi-
dence ?


A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.  15

Behold  yon  poor,  dejected  Slave  ;  Lis  spirit  black  with
compelled  ignorance  ;  his  body  deformed  by  over-work  ;  his
back  streaming  with  blood !  Behold  his  master,  too,  clothed
in  purple  and  fine  linen  ;  surrounded  with  luxuries  and  com-
forts ;  the  bosom  companion  of  legislators  and  divines ;  a
popular  candidate  for  Congress !  Oh,  where,  where  is  the
Christian's  God,  the  God  of  miracle  and  of  special  provi-
dence ;  why  doth  He  not  appear  ?  Throughout  the  whole
domain  of  popular  theology  no  answer  is  returned,  except
the  soulless  echo,  "Where  :''

Do  you  wonder,  ye  churchmen,  that  there  are  "Infidels"
and  "  Atheists"  who  look,  and  look  to  the  heavens  in  vain,
for  the  manifestation  of  some  special  favor  ?  The  Chris-
tians tell  them  to  "pray  for  it,"  "to  have  faith  ;"  but,  alas  !
faith  in  a  God  of  special  providence  "  without  works,"  is
as  a  starving  man  in  the  desert.

Turn  thine  eyes  toward  the  lands  of  despotism.  Behold
there  what  a  prevalence  of  wretchedness  and  crime  !  The
sons  and  daughters  of  Emerald  Isle  ;  where  are  they  ?  There
are  plenty  of  Priests  and  Bishops  on  the  soil,  plenty  o±
Roman  and  Episcopal  churches  there,  innumerable  prayers
spoken,  and  heavy  salaries  paid  ;  but  where  are  the  children
of  "  our  Father  who  art  in  heaven?"  Exhausted  and  wea-
ried out  with  the  hardships  of  oppression ;  dying,  dying
with  starvation  and  disease,  in  order  that  the  lordly  drones
of  opulence  may  live.  Surely  the  world  has  great  need  of
something.  Experience  is  good,  I  grant  you ;  but  not  such
experience.  The  granite  boulder,  when  wrenched  from  its
parent  rock,  is  adequate  to  the  fierce  trials  of  the  earth ;
but  not  so  with  the  ever-sensitive  soul  of  an  immortal
flower.

I  plead  now  the  "  cause"  of  the  world,  of  humanity.
Yiewed  in  the  light  of  theologic/a^A,  merely,  something
must  he  done  to  save  the  generous-hearted  and  humanitary
mind  from  utter  skepticism.  For  these  dreadful  crimes
performed  year  after  year  and  day  after  day,  before  High
Heaven,  bad  enough  to  make  the  angels  weep,  wrongs  and
evils  that  go  unremoved  and  unredressed,  are  sufficient  to
impair  all  hvman faith  in  God,  sufficient  to  cast  a  mantle


16  A S  UK  VET OF HUMAN NEEDS.

of  doitbt  and  gloom  over  the  mind  of  every  intelligent  being.
Of  course  the  narrow-minded  and  selfish  sectarian  can  not
feel  these  remarks,  nor  realize  the  needs  of  the  world  of
which  I  now  speak ;  for  such  a  mind  is  interested,  mainly,
in  a  future  selfish  salvation  from  an  imaginary  hell ;  but  the
expanded,  philanthropic  soul,  who  desires  practically  to  love
his  neighbor  as  himself,  he  needs  a  "  new  philosophy"  and  a
new  theology  to  keep  his  faith  alive  and  his  mind  free.  The
sectarian  dogmatically  submits  his  explanation  of  all  these
evils,  and  offers  you  "  the  means  of  salvation."  But  the
world  has  found  out  the  fallacy  of  his  explanation  ;  the  im-
potency  of  the  old  remedies.

Eighteen  hundred  years  is  quite  long  enough  to  test  the
efficacy  of  a  moral  medicine.

Christianity  has  been  assiduously  administered,  with  pro-
fessional skill,  to  the  world  for  nearly  twenty  centuries.  Yet
these  horrid  dramas  and  bloody  tragedies  are  still  being  per-
formed, almost  beneath  the  "  droppings  of  the  sanctuary."
But  you  say,  "  Christianity  has  civilized  the  world."  I  tell
you  the  exact  truth  when  I  say,  in  reply,  that  excepting  the
civilizing  or  moralizing  influence  which  Commerce  and  Art,
and  Science,  and  Poetry,  and  Music,  and  which  Philosophy
have  progressively  exerted  upon  the  world,  the  people,  as
far  as  the  church  is  concerned  in  their  civilization,  are  no
more  righteous  to-day  than  they  were  in  the  days  of  Char-
lemagne.

But  again  the  question,  "What  shall  be  done?"  What
shall  the  people  have  in  exchange  for  their  old  faiths?
Kind  reader,  you  should  not  attempt  to  barter  them  away ;
when  you  get  through  with  them,  let  them  die.  Do  not
poison  the  rising  generations.  But  be  generous,  and  make
the  future  a  "gift,"  which  all  shall  worship  as  the  Truth.
One  fact  is  clear,  theology  must  make  still  farther  conces-
sions to  science.  Por  science  has  invented  steam-carriages.
And  Christianity,  before  helpless  as  an  infant,  being  con-
veyed in  the  arms  of  its  sponsors  from  city  to  city,  now
takes  a  seat  in  the  cars,  and  flies  speedily  from  state  to  state,
or  a  berth  in  the  ocean  steamer,  pays  morning  calls  to  the
heathen  and  the  oppressed ;  and  thus,  by  the  agencies  and


A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.  17

potencies  of  science,  theology  spreads  rapidly  over  a  con-
tinent or  a  hemisphere.

Now,  be  it  remembered,  the  world  is  looking  on ;  it  sees
all  this ;  and  sees,  too,  what  agencies  are  really  at  work
civilizing  and  moralizing  mankind.  The  people  see  how
old  theology  lias  labored  to  keep  up  with  the  times.  Again,
in  view  of  all  this,  I  ask,  "  What  shall  be  done  in  regard  to
human  faith  ?"  Shall  we  renounce  our  old  faith  and  old
notions,  and  become  materialists — believers  only  in  the  facts
of  science  and  in  the  world  of  physical  phenomena — have
faith  only  in  what  we  see,  and  hear,  and  feel ;  or,  shall  we
strive  to  obtain  a  "new  philosophy,"  which  subjects  all  the
Past  to  itself,  explains  the  Present,  and  throws  open  the
golden  portals  of  the  all-radiant  Future  ?

"All  the  world's  a  stage."  And  the  scene  which  I  shall
now  show  you,  concludes  the  present  exhibition  of  thought.

The  world  has  many  needs  /  the  greatest  of  all  is,  a  Phi-
losophy, which  unfolds,  in  a  systematic  and  orderly  form,
the  stupendous  truths  of  Nature  ;  which  points  the  soul  of
man,  through  Nature,  to  the  Eternal  Mind  ;  which  converts
the  rudimental  facts  of  immortality  into  household  gods,
divulges  the  great  laws  of  human  existence,  and  leads  to
the  harmonious  organization  of  present  social  discords,  on
the  ground  that  existing  evils  arise  from  the  perverted  action
of  naturally  good  performers.

The  history  of  the  world  has  recorded  the  fact,  that  every
new  discovery  has  had  to  encounter  old  theology  to  begin
with,  and  then  do  battle  with  its  learned  adherents.  And
yet,  by  dint  of  nearly  starving  its  pioneers  to  death,  or  else,
by  subjecting  them  to  the  scoffs  and  derision  of  the  world,
the  new  discovery  has  invariably  came  off  at  last  victorious,
amid  the  forced  concessions  of  the  church.  Now  the  most
intelligent  among  civilized  nations  have  seen  all  this,  and
have  accepted  the  moral.  And  so  this  Age  especially  de-
mands instruction  or  "  revelations"  particularly  addressed
to  the  Reason  Principle.  Spiritual  authority,  based  on
mere  testimony  and  tradition,  is  now  questioned,  and  criti-
cised everywhere,  by  almost  every  body. Never  before,


18  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

since  the  days  of  the  Reformation,  did  the  world  so  abound
with  a  deep-seated  and  inflexible  skepticism  in  regard  to
the  asserted  supernatural  or  miraculous.  And  especially  is
this  true  where  intellectual  science  and  popular  theology
are  most  cultivated,  as  in  Europe  and  America.

The  high  Truths  of  God,  of  Mature,  of  Immortality,  of
Social  re-organization  and  progress,  are  sought  and  inquir-
ed after  by  the  people !  These  vast  problems,  which  come
closest  to  our  business  and  bosoms,  still  appear  to  remain
unsolved.  Though,  it  is  true,  that  the  Mormons,  the  So-
cialists, the  Shakers,  Free  Masons,  and  Odd  Fellows  have
struck  out  into  new  paths ;  and  each  system,  by  its  own
especial  ordinations  and  wisdom,  has  tried  to  solve  the
problem  of  human  protection  and  social  happiness.  But
the  free-born  mind  will  still  ask,  and  seek,  and  find — in
spite  of  all  the  barriers  set  up  by  creeds  and  dogmas !

Inow  the  Church — I  mean  the  entire  religious  system  of
Christendom — points  us  to  the  Primitive  History  of  "in-
spirations," the  Bible,  and  bids  us  to  find  there  all  the
knowledge  and  spiritual  nutriment  which  we  seek.  But
when  we  drink  at  the  old  fountain,  there  is  too  much  of
that  which  healeth  not ;  too  much  of  the  old  myths  and
notions  floating  near  the  surface ;  which  we  of  necessity
imbibe  with  the  pure  waters  of  truth.  Hence,  many  per-
sons look  to  the  Testament  in  vain ;  though  this  depends
much  on  mental  organization  and  early  associations.  Ev-
ery discriminating  mind,  however,  can  easily  see  that  many
passages  in  that  old  book — the  leaves  upon  the  tree  of  a
former  age — bear  the  clearest  impress  of  Honesty  and  In-
tuition, of  Spiritual  Blumination  and  manifestation,  also,
in  certain  places  ;  but  the  cause  and  the  effect,  the  wh,
and  the  wherefore  of  things,  with  their  natural  relation-
ships, doth  not  appear  on  the  sacred  pages.  This  is  the
trouble  to-day.

It  is  related  by  the  Aposiles  of  Jesus,  that  he  "brought
life  and  immortality  to  light."

But  this,  says  the  critic,  is  all  a  matter  of  assertion,  and
of  local  testimony  ;  furnished  by  persons  of  whom  we  know
absolutely  nothing,  except  through  the  medium  of  fallible


A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.  19

history.  Surely  there  is  nothing  in  the  world's  past  multi-
farious experiences  to  corroborate,  or  even  analogically  to
justify,  such  a  circumstance  as  the  physical  resurrection;
the  going  iqj  into  the  air  of  a  body  of  flesh  and  blood,  con-
trary to  all  the  laws  of  attraction,  gravitation,  and  order !
No  man,  or  woman,  or  child,  says  the  materialist,  has  ever
been  seen  to  rise  thus  physically  and  spiritually,  as  related
of  Jesus.  Hence  the  world,  having  neither  the  sensuous
nor  the  philosophical  evidence  that  such  an  event  is  possi-
ble in  the  nature  of  things,  can  not  be  expected  to  believe.
For  faith  is  uncontrollable.  Man  is  not  the  master,  but
the  subject,  of  evidence.  Hence,  the  proof  of  this  physical
resurrection  being  so  frail  and  unsatisfactory,  the  thinking
mind  finds  itself  disbelieving  the  whole  account,  frequently
against  all  educational  desires  and  will.

Utter  skepticism  upon  this  subject  is  inevitable.  To
wage  a  clerical  warfare  against  the  carnality  or  inadequacy
of  Reason,  to  denounce  and  forbid  all  attempts  at  reason-
ing on  sacred  themes,  is  to  forbid  the  effulgent  sun  to  shine,
or  the  imperious  tides  to  flow.  Because,  just  as  the  heart
beats,  spontaneously  and  unsolicited,  so  the  mind  thinks !
For  all  organs  have  consigned  to  them,  from  birth,  their
proper  functions.  Now,  here  is  a  difficulty  which  old  the-
ology can  not  remove ;  the  masters  in  the  churches  have
expended  their  skill  upon  it  in  vain  ;  the  mind  will  investi-
gate, and  young  science  carries  the  day  !

Again :  the  human  family,  when  considered  in  the  ag-
gregate, is  literally  destitute  of  a  belief  in  an  intelligent
Supreme  Being,  "without  God  and  hope  in  the  world."
There  is  no  disguising  this  fact ;  although  it  still  lurks  and
shirks  from  public  gaze  underneath  a  vast  multitude  of
creeds  and  formulas.  If  you  will  but  examine  "  the  map
of  the  world,"  and  point  out  to  your  own  mind  the  exact
proportion  of  it  which  is  now  occupied  by  Christianity,
you  will  be  surprised  at  the  smcdlness  of  the  "spot;"  and
yet,  without  the  Christian  system,  without  the  revelations
which  it  bears  to  us,  the  world,  so  say  the  clergy,  would
knov)  nothing  of  the  absolutely  spiritual  and  supreme  ;  all
would  be  conjectural. But  is  not  the  Christian  world  full


20  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

of  conjecture  and  antagonism  ?  Christendom,  as  the  reader
probably  knows,  is  divided  and  subdivided  into  about  fifty
different  distinct  "  systems  of  salvation."  Eacli  sect  living
out  the  life  of  its  founder,  and  developing  a  different  idea
of  the  nature,  attributes,  and  moral  government  of  God.
In  other  words,  each  sect  makes  for  itself  a  new  idea  of
God ;  repudiating  the  old  one  as  partial  and  incomplete.
And  yet,  all  the  sects  profess  to  be  Bible-believers.  "Well,
so  they  are  !  But  they  believe  from  different  stand-points
of  observation.  If  you  read  the  Testament  through  Rom-
ish, or  Presbyterian,  or  Methodist,  or  any  other  sectarian
spectacles,  you  will  receive  corresponding  notions  of  Man
and  God. Thoughts  and  symbols  are  inseparable..

Let  us  view  the  world  in  this  respect.  The  Jewish  God
is  the  creation  of  the  nether  portions  of  the  brain.  He  is
an  embodiment  of  the  idea  of  "  power;"  a  personification
of  "  energy,"  an  omniarch.  He  is  neither  pre-eminent  in
affection  or  intellect ;  is  the  deification  of  Mars ;  encour-
ages war,  and  the  art  of  making  saints  by  swords.  The
Jewish  God  is  an  All-mighty ',  holding,  as  the  totality  of
his  character  demonstrates,  the  gentler  attributes  of  Love,
Mercy,  Reason,  Justice,  and  Truth,  in  strict  subordination
to  the  sovereignty  of  Force !  He  does  every  thing  by
special  legislation ;  is  full  of  expediencies ;  and  his  devo-
tees must,  therefore,  seek  his  will  in  the  "  decalogue."

The  Homish  God  is,  also,  a  creation  of  the  cerebellum !
He  is  a  sublime  Potentate,  an  ecclesiastical  and  a  political
tyrant ;  ruling  among  the  armies  of  heaven  and  the  inhab-
itants of  earth  ;  the  patron  of  kings  and  emperors  ;  a  cross
between  a  despot  and  a  Father,  devoting  the  attributes  of
the  latter  to  the  purposes  of  special  miracle,  local  provi-
dence, and  imperial  rule.  His  devotees  must,  therefore,
seek  his  presence  through  the  "Pope,"  the  "Priest,"  and
"  Confessional."

The  Episcopalian  God  is  a  supernal  sovereign,  with  a  dig-
nified touch  of  philoprogenitiveness.  JS  s  t1^  e  moral  King  of
the  world,  he  sits  on  his  eternal  thro1  roned  by  a  rich

profusion  of  regal  splendor,  adm  nighty  phalanx

of  genteel  and  accomplished  saints,  whose  genealogy  can


A  SURVEY  OF  HUMAN  NEEDS. 21

be  traced  down  through  a  long  line  of  Bishops  and  Eccle-
siastics, to  the  primitive  aristocracy  itself;  forming  the  so-
called  "Apostolic  succession."  lie  looks  with  special  fa-
vor upon  a  well-ordained  ecclesiasticism  ;  and  his  devotees
must,  therefore,  seek  him  in  "The  Church."

The  Presbyterian  God  is  supremely  aristocratic ;  is  a
magnificent  Lawyer ;  is  logical,  also,  to  the  last  degree.
Like  a  true  eclectic  mind,  he  selected  the  eternal  inhab-
itants of  heaven  from  the  foundations  of  the  world ;  the  re-
jected multitudes  he  consigned,  ex-officio,  to  the  depths  of
Gehenna.  He  has  written  his  unalterable  decrees  in  a
book,  and  those  gentlemen  who  hear  the  "high  calling,"
become  its  expounders.  Hence,  the  Calvinist  always  re-
fers to  "  Our  Minister."

The  Metiiodistic  God  is  a  production  of  the  higher  por-
tions of  the  brain.  He  comes  forth  from  the  iron  rigidity
and  fixedness  of  character ;  is  inspired  with  Benevolence,
and  is  gloriously  democratic.  He  magnanimously  lifts
the  shackles  of  "predestination''  from  every  soul,  and
gives  every  descendant  of  Adam  an  equal  chance  to  win
the  prize  of  eternal  value.  In  the  plenitude  of  his  hospi-
tality, he  throws  open  the  celestial  gates  to  all.  His  terms
are  fixed,  but  moderate.  You  must  be  "willing  to  be
damned,"  whilst  you  must  also  "strive  to  be  saved,  and
come  into  the  knowledge  of  the  Truth."  Methodism  is
Calvanism  inverted  ;  a  pyramid  standing  on  its  apex ;  the
broadest  part  toward  the  skies.  The  Methodist  God  gives
his  devotees  this  world  as  a  kind  of  moral  gymnasium,  in
order  to  discipline  their  moral  muscles ;  and  so,  therefore,
his  followers  always  refer  to  their  "Probation."

The  Quaker  God  is  a  God  of  temperance,  patience,  per-
severance, brotherly-kindness,  and  charity.  He  is  a  crea-
tion not  of  a  whole  harmonious  brain,  but,  exclusively,  of
the  upper  and  frontal  portions.  An  embodiment  of  Pater-
nity and  Humility,  dressed  in  drab,  and  violently  opposed
to  music !  He  turns  our  eyes  inwardly,  into  the  innermost
silence  of  the  soul's  sanctuary,  and  gently  bids  us  always
to  "move  with  the  Spirit."  The  true  Quaker,  therefore,
leaves  all  forms  of  inspiration,  and  seeks  his  God  in  "Faith."


22  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

Tiie  ITniyeksalist  God — like  the  generous  conceptions  of
Origin,  and  Plato,  of  Jesus,  John,  and  Paul — is  a  verifica-
tion of  Love;  a  crystallization  of  mercy,  goodness,  and
benevolence.  His  attributes  are  more  democratic  than  those
which  characterize  the  other  Gods.  Intellectually  con-
sidered, he  has  far  more  breadth  than  height — a  mild,  lov-
ing, indulgent  "Father  of  Spirits."  In  many  respects,  his
character,  and  the  relations  subsisting  between  himself  and
his  creatures,  bear  a  marked  resemblance  to  the  gods  of  the
Judean  Poets — the  writers  of  the  Yedas.  Universalism  is
Calvinism  gone  to  seed — the  unphilosophical  counterpart
to  a  magnificent  absurdity.  It  cracks  the  Presbyterian  nut
and  spreads  the  contents  before  the  whole  family  of  Man.
Predestination  is  a  Sound  Doctrine  with  the  Universalist
God,  but  his  preordinations  secure  the  "salvation  of  all
men."  There  are  "no  high,  no  low,  no  great,  no  small"  in
the  scales  with  which  the  Universalist  God  metes  out  the  prob-
lems of  eternity ;  but,  with  the  cold,  dignified,  aristocratic
Justice  of  the  Presbyterian  God,  all  this  is  totally  reversed.

The  Unitarian  God,  on  the  contrary — in  opposition  to
the  Romish,  Episcopalian,  Calvinistic,  and  Methodistic
Gods — is  not  divided  up  into  three  incomprehensibilities,
but  stands  out  intellectually,  boldly,  and  alone  in  owning
and  governing  the  universe.  He  is  more  a  creation  of  a
well-balanced  brain,  whose  central  thought  was  "univer-
sal unity."  This  monotheistic  conception  harmonizes  more
easily  with  the  mind's  unitary  instincts  of  Truth,  and  so,
therefore,  although  Unitarianism  has  as  yet  only  attained  a
transition  footing  among  the  sects,  still  it  has  accomplished
a  good  thing,  i.e.,  a  new  reading  of  an  old  book.

The  truth  is  this :  some  theological  hero  or  Xapoleon  in
religious  reform — a  Luther,  a  Calvin,  a  >Yesley,  a  Sweden*
borg — strikes  the  plow  deep  into  the  luxurious  soil  of  spir-
ituality, turns  up  a  new  stratum  of  thought,  capable  of
yielding  a  still  richer  harvest,  with  a  new  conception  of
God,  and,  as  a  matter  of  logical  necessity,  a  new  and  dif-
ferent reading  of  the  Testaments.  Several  beautiful  songs
may  be  elicited  from  the  same  instrument.  But  these  dif-
ference* among  Bible-believers  are  the  fertile  soinv


A SURVEY OP HUMAN NEEDS.  23

much  modern  Infidelity.  I  ask,  therefore,  is  the  world  not
in  "need?1  of  something — even  of  a  philosophical  concep-
tion of  a  Supreme  Being  ?  For  without  a  true  idea  of  a
Deity  to  begin  with,  we  can  not  proceed  a  single  step  to-
ward a  better  state  of  society,  nor  see  the  way  to  its  ulti-
mate perfection.

"The  doctors  of  divinity"  disagree  in  their  conceptions
of  God  ;  hence,  in  all  their  reasonings  on  nature,  on  morals,
on  religion!  The  sects  are  supported  by  eminent  men!
Talent,  and  genius,  and  all  the  moral  qualities  which  go
to  form  good  men,  are  to  be  found  within  the  circle  ol
every  creed.  Xow,  it  is  not  "  the  creed,"  but  the  talent,  and
integrity,  and  fidelity  of  minds  that  sustain  the  creed,  which
preserve  the  inclosure  from  instantaneous  decay.  But  this
antagonism  among  Bible-believers  generates  the  Atheistic
God  in  the  reasoning  classes.

The  Atheistic  God — in  opposition  to  the  Jewish  Power,
with  no  spiritual  attributes  or  personality — is  a  kind  of
hype  r-gal  canto  Principle,  manifesting  itself  in  metals,
plants,  worlds,  etc. — compelling  us  to  live  exclusively  in
the  realms  of  sensation,  of  passion,  and  intellect ;  making  .
mankind  philosophical  magnetic  batteries  of  the  hour,  and
the  creatures  of  an  inexorable  "Fate."  This  god  is  a  legit-
imate offspring  of  the  antagonisms  of  Christians ;  there  is  no
denying  its  paternity,  and  so,  the  question  is  :  "  What  shall
be  done?"

The  Carpenter's  Son  of  the  earlier  time,  according  to
testamental  relation,  although  richly  endowed  with  powers
of  interior  discernment,  and  with  a  holy  love  for  man,  did
not  attempt  to  philosophize  on  the  nature  of  God,  on  the
law  of  Immortality,  on  the  structure  of  the  Universe,  or
upon  social  Organization ;  and,  consequently,  not  having
received  this  kind  of  information,  "the  world  needs,"  calls
for  light  upon  the  eternal  science  of  Cause  and  Effect ;
more  light  upon  the  ever-pressing  problems  of  our  j>resent
ana  prospective  existence !

The  Harmonial  Philosophy  is  the  Harbinger  of  these
additional  revelations.


24  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

I  know  I  shall  be  told,  as  I  frequently  have  been,  that
Jesus  manifested  his  exalted  dignity,  that  he  gave  evidence
of  his  supernal  nature  and  inspiration,  in  the  fact,  that  he
never  descended  to  reason  and  debate  upon  these  great  ques-
tions. It  is  affirmed  that  he  hnew  the  truth  in  the  inner-
most, foresaw  its  ultimate  triumph,  and,  differing  from  all
other  teachers  before  or  since,  he  simply  and  majestically
announced  it,  trusting  in  its  own  inherent  power  to  work
its  own  way  into  and  through  the  world.  And  in  addition
to  this,  it  is  also  said,  that  the  Testaments  contain  all  the
wisdom,  all  the  light,  necessary  for  man.  But  Time,  time,
bringing  with  it  the  combined  and  conspiring  testimony  of
departed  and  retiring  generations,  has  demonstrated  this
assertion  to  be  a  fallacy.  For  while  mankind  have  intui-
tive and  moral  perceptions  to  which  Jesus  directed  his
teachings,  they  possess  reflective  faculties,  also,  and  rea-
soning powers,  which  "need,"  yea,  require  for  their  devel-
opment, to  be  judiciously  addressed.  This,  be  it  remem-
bered, the  Man  of  Love  dial  not  do ;  it  is  this  which  the
Harmonial  Philosophy  is  designed  to  do.  Jesus  introduced
the  era  of  Love  ;  but  an  era  of  Wisdom  is  also  required.
An  age  of  impulse  demands  an  age  of  Reason.

The  soft,  silvery  sunbeams  of  heaven  do  not  more  natur-
ally flow  over  the  fields,  than  did  the  loving,  intuitive  soul
of  Jesus  spread  its  elixer  over  his  solemn  utterances  !  Ev-
ery Bible  student  feels  its  mysterious  beauty ;  realizes  its
spiritual  presence,  as  he  reads  those  sacred  evangels  of  the
testaments.  Every  civilized  mind  feels  the  goodness  of  his
teachings,  and  admires  the  expurgated  history  of  the  man,
bequeathed  to  us  by  the  early  fathers  of  "  the  Church  ;"
nevertheless,  the  world  needs  to-day  a  "Philosophy"
which  Jesus  did  not  furnish,  needs  a  "revelation"  to  the
faculty  of  reason,  which  the  Bible  does  not  contain.

Concerning  scientific  professors.  The  world,  as  I  feel
impressed  to  affirm,  needs  a  system  of  some  description,  dif-
fering essentially  from  all  prevailing  theologies,  which
can  lead  the  people  forth  intellectually  into  the  fields  of
universal  nature,  shed  a  resplendent  light  over  all  the
chapters  of  human  experience,  separate  the  wheat  from  the


A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.  25

chaff,  theology  from  mythology,  Deity  from  dogmas,
"prove  all  things,"  developing  only  the  things  that  are
good.  The  reader  may  doubt  the  statement,  yet  it  is
very  true,  as  I  see  the  world,  that  Iloyal  Societies  and  In-
stitutions of  learning  require  educating!  They  possess
much  of  certain  branches  and  fragments  of  wisdom !  Each
professor  engages  himself,  from  personal  motives,  in  per-
fecting his  particular  chair,  or  department  of  education.
Wilkinson  says,  that  "  while  the  Professors,  pursuing  their
own  way,  warmed  in  their  exclusive  sensates,  gather  useful
facts,  enlarge  their  formulas,  appeal  to  nobler  faculties  in
their  students,  and,  finally,  if  not  too  imprisoned  by  cus-
tom, sail  away  into  supersensuous  abstractions ;  yet  do
they  remain  invisible  and  insensible  to  the  eyes  and  needs
of  the  world  at  large."  For  these  reasons,  the  Profes-
sors themselves  require  to  be  educated;  and  thereby  ele-
vated out  of  the  circumscribed  sphere  of  individuality
into  an  expansive  universality  of  sentiment  and  purpose —
living  in  the  life  of  the  whole !

That  system  of  ethics  is  good  for  nothing,  which  comes
not  home  to  our  business  and  bosoms ;  the  congenial  com-
panion at  once  of  our  Instincts  and  our  Reason ;  the  guard-
ian angel  of  our  being  !

That  book-divinity  which  is  now  being  taught  in  our  Col-
leges and  Universities,  bears  the  same  relation  to  Real
Truths  it  seems  to  me,  that  a  dream  sustains  to  the  sub-
stantial events  of  wakeful  experience.

The  formulas  of  prayer  may  be  consigned  to  the  mem-
ory, as  gold  to  the  purse ;  a  capital  to  do  business  with ;
but  when  the  hour  of  real  prayer  comes  over  the  throbbing
soul,  then  formal  prayers,  like  riches,  "  take  unto  them-
selves wings  and  fly  away."  Then  inexorable  experience
steps  in,  prescribes  its  own  remedies,  its  own  penalties ;
and  becomes,  at  last,  the  only  "divinity  school"  from
which  the  mind  can  draw  its  imperishable  education.

The  Professors  will  be  truly  learned  and  humanitary,
when  they  leave  sectarian  forms  of  instruction,  go  up  into
the  temple  of  the  world's  theater  /  take  their  position  be-
fore the  audience ;  throw  open  the  "  green-room"  to  the

2


26  A SURVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

public ;  and  perform  in  the  grand  Drama  of  a  progressive
Spiritual  experience!

There  is  in  Katdee  no  such  a  thing  as  "  my  truth,''  "  my
church,"  "my  creed,"  "my  religion."  For  Nature  and
Humanity  are  the  everlasting  proprietors  ;  they  own  all  the
property  of  individuals.  Men  may  beg,  borrow,  or  steal
from  the  Treasury  of  the  world.  But  Time  and  Truth,  the
ever-vigilant  policemen  and  magistrates,  finally  capture
the  drone  or  thief  ;  then  all  his  personal  wealth,  principal
and  interest,  is  restored  to  the  common  exchequer  of
Universal  Principles  !  I  respectfully  submit,  whether  the
world  does  not  need  a  Comprehensive  Philosophy  and  Spirit-
ualism, to  teach  the  teachers  this  fact ;  that  the  people  can
never  be  benefited  by  sectarian  antagonism  and  fragments  of
scholastic  wisdom.

The  question  is  sometimes  asked,  "What  shall  we  do
with  the  different  religions?"  The  different  religions,  as  I
see  them,  while  they  are  no  passports  to  future  bliss,  nei-
ther important  enough  to  quarrel  about ;  yet  they  are  no
useless  groicth  •  they  belong  to  the  world,  should  be  placed
in  the  world's  library,  being,  as  they  are,  so  many  sacred
volumes  of  human  experience,  so  many  different  human
reports  of  the  Divine  Being !

Do  you  think,  you  who  have  taken  the  best  of  the  world
to  your  churches  and  chambers,  that  Music  and  Poetry,
horses  and  coaches,  were  made  with  special  reference  to
your  accommodation  and  pleasure?  Do  you  think  that
riches  and  poverty  are  the  dispensations  of  God ;  or,  are
they  the  accidents  of  a  disordered  social  arrangement?
Must  your  sons  and  your  daughters  be  educated  to  use
clowns  as  slaves,  and  clodhoppers  as  the  feet  of  the  world?

Far  from  it.  The  world  is  the  indisputable  Home  and
the  property  of  all !  He  who  tills  the  soil,  or  produces
something  which  the  world  can  beneficially  use,  has  an
imperial,  yea,  the  best  right  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  inter-
ests thus  and  thereby  accruing.  And  wo,  wo  be  to  the
sect  or  party,  to  the  Aristocrat  or  Ruler,  who  deprives  the
workingiuan  of  his  reward, or  the  clown  of  his  proper


A SHE  VET OF HUMAN NEEDS.  27

freedom!  For  Humanity  would  surely  sit  in  judgment
against  a  wrong  thus  committed  !  And  the  condemnation
of  earth  is  more  terrible  than  the  fabled  curses  of  Jehovah  !
Because,  after  death,  when  the  Interior  Man  emigrates  to
another  country,  and  takes  up  his  residence  among  the
Eternal  and  the  Free,  he  can  not  altogether/br^  the  "home
of  his  childhood,"  nor  be  insensible  to  the  throb  of  bleeding
hearts,  or  to  the  discords  arising  from  wrongs  unremoved,
visible  on  the  bosom  of  his  own,  his  native  Land !  The
Spirit  must  return  to  Earth.

All  Truth  is  old ;  being  co-eternal  and  co-extensive  with
Deity.  And  yet,  year  after  year  New  Truths  are  being
discovered.  Rather,  let  us  say,  the  discovery  is  "new;"
not  "the  thing"  discovered.  These  discoveries  occur  as
man's  nature  is  unfolded.  And  I  think  it  is  time  that
"2sTew  Truth"  should  be  estimated  as  the  most  valuable,
and  practically  important.  That  truth  which  has  just  de-
veloped itself  to  the  world  is,  of  all  others,  the  truth  most
needed  by  the  world.  The  revealments  of  former  ages,  the
old  truths  of  early  days,  have  done  their  work,  and  are  no
longer  applicable  to  the  needs  of  man.  As  the  world  goes
on,  new  ideas,  new  thoughts,  new  inventions,  new  truths,
new  revelations,  and  fresher  inspirations  are  required,  and
therefore  they  are  developed.  But  there  are  persons  who
cling  to  the  past,  who  believe  all  the  avenues  of  inspira-
tion were  forever  closed  up  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,
that  the  world  needs  nothing  "new;"  and  yet,  those  per-
sons avail  themselves  of  the  new  ideas  of  science,  the  grand
principles  of  civilization,  which  have  gained  a  footing  in
the  world  in  defiance  of  popular  prejudices,  and  the  un-
yielding resistance  of  a  proud  and  powerful  priesthood.
The  Mosaic  dispensation  is  an  improvement  upon  the  pre-
vious systems ;  so  the  Christian  dispensation  is  an  improve-
ment on  Moses.  And  so,  the  law  of  progress  being  eter-
nally operative,  are  we  not  fully  authorized  in  holding  our
minds  open  to  the  belief  that  a  still  higher,  grander  Dis-
pensation is  dawning  upon  the  world  s

If  the  Christian  Dispensation  is  an  endorsement  and  ful-
filling of  the  Mosaic  Law,  why  may  not  a  third  Dispensa-


28  A SUEVEY OF HUMAN NEEDS.

tion  come  as  a  coronation  of  the  Christian  Law ;  to  insure
the  practice  of  the  eleventh  commandment  ?

Man's  course  is  onward !  And  the  new  dispensation  is
coming!  It  comes  like  a  rolling  flood,  bearing  on  its
muscular  waves  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  error.  Old
creeds,  old  systems,  old  despotisms,  old  doctrines  of  man
and  conceptions  of  God,  are  crumbling  one  after  the  other
into  chaos.  Men  and  nations  may  remain  dumb  and  blind
to  their  own  interests,  and  temporarily  false  to  the  rights
of  Humanity ;  but  the  sun  of  wisdom  is  rising,  and  even
blinded  eyes  shall  soon  see  that  all  ideas,  all  institutions,
and  all  theories  are  valuable  only  just  so  far  as  they  sub-
serve the  common  welfare  and  progressive  destiny  of  the
whole  family  of  man.


PHILOSOPHY  AND  SPIRITUALISM


On  the  very  threshold  of  the  Dispensation  of  Love,  (which
began  with  Jesus)  there  were,  according  to  testamental  his-
tory, many  communications  made  by  departed  spirits  to  the
earth's  inhabitants.  The  one  I  propose  to  quote,  is  to  be  found
in  the  second  chapter  of  Luke,  between  the  eighth  and  tenth
verses,  and  was  made  to  several  shepherds.  "The  glory  of
the  Lord" — or,  as  a  German  philosopher  recently  termed  it,
the  Odic  Light — "shone  about  them,"  and  the  honest  rustics
heard  the  voice.  This  spiritual  communication,  be  it  remem-
bered, is  read  and  preached  from,  and  professedly  believed
in,  by  all  the  clergy  of  Christendom:  "Fear  not,  for  behold,
I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  unto
all  people."

The  world  has  had  so  many  revelations  made  to  the  faculty
of  Faith — so  many  marvellous  developments  addressed  to
the  organ  of  Wonder — that  even  the  shepherds  of  the  land,
priests,  and  theologians,  who  have  so  long  denounced  the
world  for  its  materiality  and  skepticism,  are  notwithstanding
the  most  prominent  and  inveterate  opposers  of  any  new
Revelation  professing  to  be  addressed  to  the  reason-principle.
They  object  to  it,  because,  forsooth,  it  comes  in  a  shape  so
questionable — because,  in  other  words,  it  does  not  flow
through  the  orthodox  channels.  But  is  it  not  strange  that
they  do  not  see  that  the  whole  Jewish  nation  is  not  Chris-
tianized, precisely  for  the  same  reason? — because  Jesus  was
not  born  as  they  had  determined  he  should  have  been — because
he  did  not  teach  the  doctrines  which  they  had  resolved  could  only
be  orthodox  f  The  clergy  of  Christendom  occupy  the  same
position  to-day  that  the  Jewish  priests  occupied  two  thou-
sand years  ago ;  and  it  would  seem,  with  such  an  example
3*


30  PHILOSOPHY A  X  D SPIRITUALISM.

before  them,  engraved  on  the  very  history  of  the  progress
of  Christianity,  that  the  priests  of  the  nineteenth  century
might  bestow  more  respectful  attention  on  the  Spiritual
Developments  of  the  Day.  The  priests  array  themselves
in  opposition  to,  and  defame,  those  things  of  which  they
have  no  absolute  knowledge.  But  the  tides  will  flow — the
sun  will  shine — Truth  will  prevail;  these  truisms  begin  to
be  believed ;  and  the  keepers  of  the  Old  Dogmas  begin  there-
fore to  tremble  for  the  safety  of  their  prisoners !

All  the  religions  of  the  world,  Pagan  and  Christian,  assert
the  existence  of  a  future  state  for  man — after  the  death  of
his  physical  body.  Seers,  prophets,  poets,  leaders,  and  apos-
tles, have  declared  the.  fact  of  a  World  of  Spirits.  But  we
have  believed  these  assertions  on  external  testimony — on  the
mere  authority  of  individuals,  long  enough.  Now,  therefore,
comes  the  age  of  criticism;  the  day  of  Judgment;  the  analy-
zation  and  disposition  of  old  psychological  revealments ;  the
ERA  of  demonstration.  Every  man  must  make  the  pil-
grimage to  the  regions  of  Philosopy  for  himself.  Man  may
point  out  the  paths,  and  accompany  the  people  on  the  jour-
ney thither;  but  he  cannot  any  longer  lead  them;  for  every
man  begins  to  find  out  the  existence  of  a  head  upon  his  own
shoulders — and  a  brain,  capable  of  the  loftiest  exercises !

Like  Columbus,  before  his  voyage,  the  people  have  read
of  a  New  Continent,  and  feel  a  desire  to  discover  it:  and
yet,  unlike  him,  the  people  fear  to  hazard  the  enterprize  of
demonstration.  All  the  learning,  ambition,  and  wisdom  of
Europe  shrank  at  the  Thought  of  finding,  through  the
medium  of  actual  experiment,  that  New  World  in  which  we
at  present  live.  A  similar  crisis  has  now  arrived  in  the
world  of  Theology !  A  "new  world "  of  knowledge  exists —
a  Spirit  Land,  beyond  the  ken  of  physical  eyes — but  theolo-
gians shrink  from  the  results  of  the  discovery,  deplore  the
attempt,  and  denounce  the  pioneers!

Intelligent  minds,  when  summoned  to  the  examination  of
any  new  subject,  often  find  themselves  in  a  strait  betwixt
two — between  a  Microscopic  world,  peopled  with  an  infini-
tude of  littlenesses,  and  a  Telescopic  world  of  stupendous
greatness  and  wondrous  grandeur — lost  between  simplicity


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  31

and  complexity — between  materialism  and  spirituality ;  and
so  max,  though  being,  as  he  is,  the  instrument  of  diversified
uses — the  sovereign  of  the  physical  universe — a  connecting
link  between  earth  and  heaven — is  also  a  kind  of  mediator
between  the  ideal  and  the  actual,  and,  hence,  necessarily
subjected  to  the  alternate  states  of  faith  and  skepticism;
as  the  sky  to  sun-shine  and  storms,  or  the  body  to  health
and  disease.

But  man,  by  virtue  of  the  spiritual  exaltations  consequent
upon  his  ever-unfolding  attributes,  is  not  destined  to  exist
in  the  regions  of  perplexities  for  ever !  He  is  not  organized
for  standing  still — physically,  intellectually,  or  spiritually.
To  resist  the  law  of  eternal  growth,  is  to  resist  the  plainest
law  of  the  universe.  Nay,  man  was  not  made  for  a  station-
ary residence  an 3^  where  nor  in  any  thing;  for  the  God  of
the  universe  has  written  "Progression"  all  over  his  constitu-
tion. If  you  consign  man  to  the  realms  of  torment,  he
would,  by  the  virtue  of  his  intrinsic  nature,  sooner  or  later,
institute  a  series  of  psychological  experiments  upon  the  imps
of  darkness  for  their  improvement,  and  some  Sir  John
Franklin  would  soon  commence  the  discovery  of  a  North-
west Passage  leading  away  to  the  world  of  light.  Or,  on
the  other  hand,  if  you  give  man,  simply  for  doing  his  duty
on  earth,  a  fixed  home  in  an  orthodox  heaven,  then,  too,
sooner  or  later,  his  overflowing  humanity  would  lead  him,
far  beyond  his  narrow  confines,  into  reformatory  schemes —
into  the  formation  of  anti-slavery  and  colonization  societies
— for  the  ultimate  salvation  of  hell  itself.

The  Law  of  Progress  is  imperious.  Place  iron  in  the
earth,  and  disintegration  forthwith  commences;  place  it
above  ground,  and  oxydation  is  the  certain  phenomenon.
Motion  is  the  parent  of  progress ;  and  progress  is  the  parent
of  development.  The  germs  of  vegetation  first  move  with
life;  then  they  grow  upward;  then  they  outwardly  unfold.
So  is  the  whole  nature  of  man!  Like  the  angular  crystal,
which  may  be  classed  among  the  lowest  forms  of  matter,
man,  at  first,  is  replete  with  sharp  and  severe  points;  then
he  advances  toward  the  degrees  of  refinement,  becoming
rounded  and  smoothed  off  by  experience;  and  finally  the


32  PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.

Law  of  Development  being  active  at  tins  crisis,  he  "unfolds
like  an  immortal  flower  destined  to  bloom  amid  innumerable
gardens  on  high.

If  we  would  learn  of  the  dignity  and  power  of  humanity,
we  must  study  "The  Individual."  Although  no  one  person
can  possibly  approximate  to  the  perfect  Type  of  Humanity ;
yet,  individual  man  is  the  organic  impersonation  of  the  race
— a  prophecy \  so  to  speak,  of  what  the  Eace  is  destined  to  be !
The  world-knowing,  and  world-conquering  faculties  of  man
are  authorized  to  put  all  enemies  to  his  happiness  and  pro-
gress beneath  his  feet.  "The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise
the  serpent's  head."

That  mind  which  loves  truth  more  than  any  other  thing,
is  clothed  in  the  armor  of  Heaven ;  and  that  mind  which
comprehends  truth,  is  intimately  allied  to  God,  being  well
nigh  omnipotent.  The  love  of  truth  is  a  phenomenon  of  the
affections ;  a  feeling  of  truth  is  the  spontaneous  miracle  of
intuition ;  an  understanding  of  truth  is  a  normal  manifesta-
tion of  the  reason-principle.  We  love  the  earth,  we  feel  it;
butEeason  bids  us  go  forth — explore,  measure,  comprehend,
and  harmonize  it !  The  most  tyrannical  slaveholder  is  Igno
ean"ce  ;  the  most  glorious  freeman  is  Wisdom  !  Knowledge
leads  us  progressively  to  the  summits  of  immensity — to  the
mounts  of  truth;  ignorance  leads  into  the  vales  of  supersti-
tion— into  the  deepest  pandemonium  of  doubt  and  gloom !
Choose  you  this  day  whom  you  will  serve  !  Will  you  shut  your
eyes,  and  be  wilfully  blind  when  the  firmament  is  radiant
with  light — turn  your  thoughts  backward  towards  the  sys-
tems of  former  ages,  and  be  changed,  like  Lot's  wife,  into  a
conservative  pillar  of  stone?  Or,  will  you  let  the  scales
drop  off,  open  your  eyes,  and  look,  like  the  good  Paul,  with
appreciative  reflection,  into  the  causes  of  things?  The  ques-
tion is  plain.  Your  reply  will  be  manifested  in  your  actions ;
a  lip  response  is  not  required.

It  is  now  time  to  roll  up  the  curtain  which  has  so  long
hung  between  the  Origin  and  the  Destiny  of  Man.  When
\vp  e  upon  the  scenes  which  lie  behind,  and  comprehend
the  principles- which  uphold  the  entire  superstructure  of
man's  immortal  spirit,  we  will  surely  conceive  a  new  Love


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  33

for  life,  and  a  new  Religion  whereby  to  honor  Deity — a  fear-
less love,  a  creedless  religion !

Let  us  fear  not,  I  repeat,  to  enter  upon  a  voyage  so  new;
upon  a  sea  so  boundless !  Na}r,  I  propose  not  to  show  you
that  which  no  eye  hath  seen ;  nor  to  say  any  thing  absolutely
"new,"  because  all  the  truth  I  may  write  is  very  old — ven-
erable as  the  Universe!  But  I  am  impressed  to  unfold  sim-
ply the  Principles  of  the  Harmonial  Philosophy — making
the  rough  places  smooth,  the  crooked  straight — bringing  the
Ends  of  the  Earth  into  the  fraternal  relationship  of  Harmony,
Peace,  and  Brotherhood.  You  will  remember  the  assertion
made  in  the  previous  chapter,  that  the  greatest  and  most
imperative  need  of  the  world  to-day,  is — a  New  Philosophy —
a  harmonizing  Principle  of  Human  Improvement — which
shall  destroy  the  hatreds  of  the  churches,  systematize  the
sciences,  and  render  the  Truths  of  Eevelation  as  reasonable
and  beneficial  as  the  growth  of  vegetation !

You  have  heard  of  "The  New  Philosophy ;"  also,  of  "  The
Spiritual  Manifestations."  In  most  minds,  these  six  words
represent  one  and  the  same  movement.  This  is  not  correct;
and  we  cannot  proceed  intelligently  without  a  definition  of
the  difference.

First:  the  Harmonial  Philosophy  has  a  plain  signification
and  humanitary  tendency.  It  purports  to  be  a  "Eevelation"
of  the  Structures,  and  Laws,  and  orders,  and  uses,  of  the  mate-
rial and  spiritual  Universe.  It  is  a  progressive  exposition
of  the  boundless  system  of  Nature,  addressed  to  the  human
instincts  and  understanding.  So  far  as  the  great  general
Truths  of  Nature  are  concerned,  it  may  be  said :  They  have
declared  themselves  through  the  English  language.  The
Harmonial  Philosophy  repudiates  all  human  infallibility,  and
claims  Natuke,  Eeason,  and  Intuition  as  the  only  reliable
authorities  on  all  subjects.  Nature  is  the  Universal  exponent
of  God.  God  can  be  known,  studied,  and  approached  only
through  the  laws  and  developments  of  Nature.  Nature  has
a  boundless  signification.  It  does  not  mean  the  fields  and
flowers,  the  animals  and  birds,  the  stones  and  trees  of  earth,
merely ;  neither  the  ten  thousand  constellated  systems  which


34  PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.

unfold  themselves  in  the  encircling  heavens;  nor  any  extents
or  magnitudes,  however  vast ;  neither  the  innumerable  worlds
of  inconceivable  beauty  and  perfection ;  but  Nature,  as  the
term  is  employed  by  the  Philosophy,  signifies  the  Entire
System  of  All  Existences — the  centre  and  the  circum-
ference— the  Eterna'  Cause  and  the  Eternal  Effect  of  the
stupendous  universe.

This  "Nature"  is  the  great  Fountain  of  Truth.  Its  Laws
are  the  rivers  which  ripple  unto  everlasting  life!  He  who
searches  Nature,  searches  the  gospel  of  God;  while  he
who  wanders  from  the  laws  and  harmonies  of  Nature,  wan-
ders from  the  paths  and  joys  of  the  Infinite.  In  a  brief
definition,  it  must  not  be  expected  that  I  shall  present  the
arguments  whereby  these  positions  are  arrived  at  and  suc-
cessfully maintained.  In  this  place  let  it  be  distinctly  under-
stood, that  Nature  is  the  Natural  Revelation  of  God,  and  is  the
foundation  of  all  authority  in  science,  morals,  and  religion.

As  Nature  is  the  exponent  of  God;  so  Reason  is  an
exponent  of  Nature.  The  office  of  the  mind  is  to  investi-
gate, to  search,  and  explore  the  principles  of  Nature,  and
trace  the  world  of  effects  back  to  the  sphere  of  causes:  the
oak  to  the  acorn — the  child  to  its  parent — the  pulses  of  the
Universe  inwardly  to  the  Central  Heart — the  Love  and  Wis-
dom displayed  in  this  world  to  the  Fount  of  every  good  and
perfect  gift,  in  the  world  of  Light.  The  mind  cannot  be
chained!  It  will  leave  its  resting-place,  and  explore  the
fields  of  science ;  and,  not  satisfied  with  the  investigation  of
terrestrial  things,  it  soars  to  the  heavens  and  counts  the  stars.
It  familiarizes  itself  with  the  motions  of  the  planets,  names
the  laws  which  control  these  phenomena,  and  reduces  every
thing  to  a  mathematical  order  and  self-evident  demonstration.

Reason  is  the  mirror  which,  when  untarnished  by  igno-
rance or  undeformed  by  error,  reflects  the  form  and  likeness
of  truth,  naturally,  as  the  placid  lake  images  forth  the  firma-
ment. The  reason-principle  is  progressive,  and  learns  by
experience;  it  is  the  prime-minister  of  Truth,  and  the  only
power  in  man  to  which  a  revelation  could  be  vouchsafed ;
and,  therefore,  every  human  being  is  organized  and  endowed
expressly  for  the unrestrained exercise  of  this  sovereign


PHILOSOPHY AND S  P  IJR  I  T  LT  A  L  I  S  M  .  35

faculty!  With  the  Harmonial  Philosophy,  Reason,  next  to
Nature,  is  the  recognised  Authority.  Churches  and
Creeds  are  powerless  before  Reason's  administrations.  No
religion  on  earth  can  possibly  benefit  man,  unless  it  will
bear  the  rigid  analysis  of  reason,  and  the  test  of  scientific
principles.

Intuition  is  high  authority,  also,  and  claims  a  prominent
position,  as  the  power  of  the  soul  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion
of  pure  Reason,  without  the  process  01  reasoning.  Intuition
is  the  Soul's  telegraph — transmitting  truths  from  the  depths  of
Genius  to  the  summits  of  Wisdom — informing,  as  by  a  single
flash,  the  internal  man  of  that  which  he  might  otherwise
be  long  years  in  learning,  by  the  external  methods  of  inves-
tigation.

Woman  is  more  endowed  with  "  Intuition  "  than  man.  She
often  sees  at  a  glance,  as  it  were,  the  legitimate  conclusion  of
an  argument — sees  the  soul  of  Poetry,  and  the  character  of  an
Idea ! — while  man  depends  more  on  the  process  of  deliberate
reasoning.  A  pure-minded  woman,  w^hose  faculties  are  in
the  beauty  of  integrity,  is  the  best  medium  for  the  instinct-
ive perception  of  Truth.  Jesus,  in  all  the  organic  essentials
of  his  spiritual  nature,  was  a  woman;  a  good,  simple-minded,
truth-feeling,  truth-loving  soul !  He  spoke  upon  the  author-
ity of  his  intuition.  Like  a  prophet,  he  felt  the  Truth ;  he
offered  no  argument;  and,  like  a  woman,  he  breathed  out
the  emotions  of  his  inward  nature.  "I  and  my  father  are
one,"  said  he;  because  he  felt  himself  to  be  in  harmony  with
the  principles  of  nature,  and  hence  also  with  the  Soul  of
Nature,  which  is  Deity.

In  the  Harmonial  Philosophy,  Intuition  is  regarded  as  the
soul's  authority  in  all  religious  development.

Nature,  Reason,  and  Intuition,  therefore,  are  accepted
as  the  only  infallible  mediums  of  revelation — the  only
Church,  Creed,  and  Religion  natural  to  the  mind  of  man.
Consequently,  the  New  Philosophy  unqualifiedly  rejects  all
the  dogmas  and  sectarianisms  of  Christendom,  as  so  many
barriers  set  up  by  ignorance  and  cupidity  against  the  spon-
taneous development  of  Nature's  own  Religion.

Let  us  try  this  method. I  have  already  asserted  that  the


36  PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.

world  needs  a  Deity.  This  is  true,  because  the  antagon-
istic notions  of  the  existence  and  attributes  of  such  a  Being,
are  to-day  numerous  enough  and  sufficiently  heterogeneous  to
neutralize  all  consistent  faith  on  this  important  source  of  all
reasonable  theology.  It  cannot  be  disguised,  that  the  Reason-
principle  openly  rebels  against  all  sectarian  conceptions  of  God.
The  Universalists  and  Unitarians  stand  in  open  rebellion  and
protestation  against  the  venerable  dogmas  of  Trinitarianism.
The  pioneers  have  had  to  encounter  old  theology  face  to  face,
and  do  battle  with  its  learned  adherents,  who  had  the  advan-
tage of  being  strongly  entrenched  in  the  ignorance  and  pre-
judices of  the  majority.  And  now,  the  liberalisms  and
rationalisms  of  the  successful  parties  begin  to  appear,  like
the  sun  shining  through  banks  of  fog,  in  the  gradual  modi-
fication of  popular  orthodoxy.

1.  Orthodoxy  once  believed  in  the  "damnation  of
infants "  ;  now,  this  faith  is  repudiated  as  unworthy  the
Heavenly  Father.

2.  Orthodoxy  once  believed  in  the  lake  of  literal  "fire
and  brimstone";  now,  it  is  vulgar  to  believe  in  anything
more  gross  than  an  eternal  compunction  of  conscience.

3.  Orthodoxy  once  believed  in  the  "six  literal  days  of
creation";  now,  it  is  absurd  to  believe  in  anything  more
bigoted  than  six  indefinite  eras  of  creative  development.

All  this  compels  us  to  the  inevitable  concession  of  the
authority  of  Reason — the  triumph  of  Nature  over  super-
stition !  Still  do  we  hear  much  preaching  about  the  carnal-
ity of  reason ;  and,  among  the  inland  towns,  where  only  the
"New  York  Observer"  or  some  similar  production,  is  taken
and  read,  you  may  yet  see  many  sturdy  representatives  of
old  notions  in  Theology.  The  cold  charge  of  "Pantheism,"
"Materialism,"  and  "Infidelity,"  is  made  against  those  who
strive,  independent,  or  with  the  assistance  of  the  testaments,
to  study  out  and  comprehend  the  nature  of  God.  The
Bible  teaches  us  to  conceive  of  a  Divine  Being,  existing
somewhere  separate  from,  and  strictly  independent  of,  phys-
ical nature.  But  all  such  speculations  yi  ae  reason-
principle,  and  so  they  come  to  naught.  Now,  therefore,  in
order  to  escape  atheism  or  confusion  in  thinking  of  God,


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  37

men  must  let  their  Reason  do  its  perfect  work  in  the  fields
of  inductive  philosophy.

The  testaments  teach  that  God  created  Matter  out  of
Nothing;  and  imply  the  miraculous  creation  of  worlds,
vegetation,  animals,  and  man.  But  here,  again,  Eeason
rebels !  The  unphilosophical  aspect  of  the  affirmation  ren-
ders it  repulsive;  and  the  absurdity  drives  intelligent,
inquiring  minds  into  the  darkest  Skepticism.  And  what,
let  me  ask,  can  the  unphilosophical,  the  unscientific  church
do  to  prevent  such  a  mental  disaster? Nothing!

Again,  on  another  question,  Nature  and  Eeason  unitedly
stand  in  fatal  opposition  to  orthodoxy — that  is,  in  regard  to
the  miraculous  creation  of  things!  Eeason,  on  its  throne,
in  its  own  kingly  character,  proclaims,  that  the  theological
definition  of  miracles  must  for  ever  be  abandoned.  The
expanded  mind  cannot  endure  it.  Nature  and  Eeason,  as  the
soul's  authority,  affirm  that  an  unchangeable  God  cannot  work
a  miracle  in  the  theological  definition;  that  is  to  say,  He  can-
not produce  an  effect  without  an  adequate  cause,  or  an  event
above  the  eternal  order  and  method  of  Law.  Here  orthodoxy
interposes  its  objections,  and  says:  "all  things  are  possible
with  God."  Nay,  far  from  it;  God  is  omnipotent  only  in  the
right  direction;  not  in  the  wrong!  The  Bible  affirms  that
"it  is  impossible  for  God  to  tell  a  lie."*  So,  therefore,  is  it
impossible  for  God  to  contradict  himself  in  any  one  particular.
Take,  for  example,  the  Law  of  Eternal  Truth.  What  would
be  a  miracle  in  regard  to  this  law?  Nothing  less  than  a
falsehood  on  the  part  of  the  law-maker,  Avho  is  supposed  to
be  unchangeable!  Or,  take  the  Law  of  Gravitation — per-
vading, alike,  all  bodies  and  space — what  would  be  a
miracle  in  regard  to  this  Law?  Manifestly  a  suspension  of
its  action — or,  in  more  appropriate  words,  a  positive  violation
of  its  normal  tendencies — resulting  in  universal  derangement
and  confusion!  Hence  the  accounts  of  Jonah  and  the
Whale;  the  standing  still  of  the  Sun  to  accommodate
Joshua  in  his  sanguinary  battles;  the  miraculous  concep-
tion: the  physical  resurrection;  all  these  become  insur-
mountable difficulties  in  the  well-balanced  and  reasoning

*  Titus  1:2;  Hebrew  6:18.
4


38  PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.

mind.  All  faith  is  disturbed;  because  these  transactions,
understood  literally,  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  known,
umvavering  laws  of  Nature,  nor  with  the  concurrent  laws
of  human  experience.  These  examples  I  adduce  to  demon-
strate the  constrained  concession  even  of  old  Theology:  that
Reason  is  the  Master.  Consequently,  without  some  Harmo-
nial  explanation  of  Nature  and  I^eity,  the  world's  unreason-
ing faith,  in  the  reliability  of  ancient  inspiration,  "will  die
amid  her  worshippers"!

Second:  The  Philosophy  unfolds  the  grand  scheme  of
the  material  creation.  The  beginning  principles  of  life  are
traced,  progressively,  frcfrn  their  Fountain  Source,  throughout
all  the  diversified  avenues  and  interminable  labyrinths  of
simple  and  organic  existence.  The  entire  scale  of  Mineral,
Vegetable,  and  Animal  Organization  is  exhibited,  and  class-
ified in  their  natural  orders  and  spheres  of  adaptation.
This  pyramid  of  organic  formation  is  essential,  according  to
the  Philosophy,  to  the  existence,  spiritualization,  and  eter-
nalization  of  man!  He  who  interrogates  Nature  aright,
receives  the  information,  that  Man  is,  organically  and  nat-
urally, the  Key-stone  to  the  bending  architecture  of  the
material  creation.  In  all  the  foliaceous  expansions  visible
on  the  surface  of  primeval  rocks;  in  all  the  zoophitic  devel-
opments and  incipient  points  of  organic  life ;  in  all  the  struc-
tural and  physiological  plans  of  formation — so  many  and
various — discovered  in  the  animal  kingdom — in  all,  do  we
behold  the  unmistakable  prophecies  of  the  material  and
spiritual  organization  of  Man.  Every  stone  in  the  arcli
is  wrought  out  with  the  most  consummate  skill — designed
expressly,  in  its  every  minutest  particular,  for  the  human
climax.  Man  is  the  dome  of  the  material  creation — the
window,  through  which  heaven  illuminates  the  earth!

The  term  "Creation"  is  not  here  used  with  the  significa-
tion which  is  popularly  attached  to  it.  The  church  theory
of  creation  has  worked  its  way  deep  into  the  vitals  of
modern  science.  Hence,  even  science  itself  is  very  mytho-
logic  in  its  fundamental  assumptions.  It  is  reasonable  in  its
details — useful  in  its  secondary  and  tertiary  discoveries —
but,  at  the  primary  point,  modern  science  is  as  offensive  to


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  39

the  Truth-seeing  genius  of  the  Soul  as  the  cardinal  prin-
ciples of  popular  theolog}^.  Wherefore?  Because  Science
begins  with  the  theologic-myth  that  the  facts  and  things  of
external  Nature  had  a  supernatural  origin!  The  monu-
mental NEWTON,  who  saw  but  a  few  pebbles  on  the  margin
of  that  Ocean  of  Truth  yet  unexplored,  described  the  gravi-
tational phenomena  of  the  sidereal  world  as  the  methods  of
omnipotence;  or,  in  other  words,  affirmed  that  the  harmonious
motions  of  the  celestial  bodies  were  maintained  by  the  per-
petual volition  of  the  Divine  Mind — teaching,  consequently,
the  incomprehensible  doctrine  that  every  thing  subsists  and
moves  only  as  instigated  and  potentialized  by  the  miraculous
impulsion  and  exercise  of  the  Divine  Will.  And  all  the
principles  of  modern  science,  which  relate  to  the  physical
world  about  us,  commence  with  the  theologic  assumption
that  God  "created"  the  germs  in  the  first  place;  and  that
lie  then  prescribed  the  legal  code  whereby  those  germs
should  progressively  ascend  the  scale  of  organic  develop-
ment— thus  rationalizing,  in  a  very  crude  and  unnatural
"Wtty,  the  supernatural  cosmologic  theories  of  Zolena  and
Zoroaster,  which  are,  however,  generally  attributed  to  the
Scripture  of  Moses.  The  geologists  of  Europe,  with  two  or
three  exceptions,  are  mortgaged  to  the  early  doctrines  of
Egypt  and  Persia,  regarding  the  origin  of  the  physical
universe.  Brewster,  Burke,  Murchinson,  Hugh  Miller — the
talented  master-builders  of  the  terrestrial  science — begin
with  the  popular  dogma  of  original  special  "creation";  and
so,  although  they  are  compelled  to  differ  from  supernatural-
ism  in  their  secondary  conclusions,  yet,  primarily,  modern
science  and  popular  theology  are  wholly  at  peace — being
equally  mythological.

The  Harmonial  Philosophy,  on  the  contrary,  in  opposition
to  the  primary  teachings  of  modern  theology  and  science,
affirms  the  eternity  of  matter ;  that  there  is  no  creation,  but
FORMATION ;  that  the  "  Laws  of  Nature  "  are  not  the  voluntary
institutions  of  Dehvy,  but  the  unchangeable  attributes  of  his
constitution,  acting  perpetually,  without  the  miraculous  exer-
cise of  the  Divine  Will,  as  exhibited  in  the  analogue  of  the
blood  flowing  through  the  human  body,  unaided  by  volun-


40  PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRIT JALISM.

tarj  mental  volition.  Creation,  you  will  observe,  implies
the  certainty  of  termination.  If  man  is  the  issue  of  a  miracle,
then  is  he  in  danger  of  utter  extinction ;  because  the  age  of
miracles  is  said  to  have  passed  away!  If  man  was  created
originally  by  the  Divine  Will,  then  that  Will  can  never  for
one  moment  be  relaxed  without  resulting  in  man's  annihila-
tion; for  even  old  unphilosophical  theology  concedes  the
point,  that  an  effect  cannot  continue  to  exist  without  an  ade-
quate perpetuating  cause.  The  laws  of  nature  are  the  eternal
methods  of  Deity.  The  organizations  and  phenomena  of  the
external  world  are  the  ever-changing  processes  of  formation— ■
the  particles  of  matter  changing  places — refining,  expanding,
and  flowing  into  higher  channels  and  forms  of  being — each
and  all  tending  to  the  development  of  man  ;  the  grand  con-
summation of  the  Material  Structure.

God  is  the  cause — Nature  is  the  effect — Man  is  the  ulti-
mate! As  a  seed,  planted  in  the  earth,  reproduces  its  kind;
so  does  Deity,  as  the  spiritual  germ,  unfold,  through  the  ten
thousand  processes  of  Nature,  its  own  image  and  likeness  in
the  moral  characteristics  of  the  human  type!

There  is  nothing  any  more  supernatural  in  the  formation
and  perpetuation  of  man  than  there  is  in  the  growth  of  trees.
Man  is  a  phenomenon  of  existence — a  thought  of  God,
clothed  in  a  material  vesture — as  the  bird  is  a  song  with
wings,  or  as  the  rose  is  a  throne  of  fragrance.

All  the  positions  assumed,  or  conclusions  arrived  at,  by  the
"Harmonial  Philosophy,"  are  mathematically  demonstrable
to  every  enlightened  Reason.  But  I  cannot  stop  to  do  this
in  the  present  volume.  I  am  impressed  to  roll  up  the  cur-
tain which  has  long  hung  between  the  human  mind  and  the
real  theatre  of  existence,  and  let  the  reader  see  that  there  is
much  "in  heaven  and  earth,"  which  cannot  be  found  in  the
world's  philosophy  or  religion.

Among  the  highest  truths  developed  by  the  Harmonial
System  to  the  reason-principle,  is  that  of  the  soul's  immor-
tality. The  Christian  world  can  furnish  no  invulnerable
argument — can  present  no  unmythologic  and  altogether
reasonable  evidence — that  the  human  spirit  will  triumphantly
survive  the  ordeal  of  physical  dissolution. All  church  proofs


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  41

of  man's  immortality  are  as  the  merest  fables  to  the  man  of
science;  the  physiologist  regards  the  faith  as  logically  unten-
able; the  German  chemist  pronounces  it  a  superstition  of
the  alchemic  age,  unsupported  by  the  results  of  analysis;
while  the  Christian,  having  nothing  certain  to  rest  his  reason
upon,  resolves  to  resign  the  use  of  that  faculty  on  this  subject,
and  composes  himself,  as  best  he  can,  in  a  comfortable  hope
that  this  mortal  shall,  by  virtue  of  some  incomprehensible
law,  put  on  immortality.

The  Harmonial  Philosophy,  on  the  other  hand,  brings  evi-
dences of  man's  eternal  individuality  out  of  the  very  rocks
and  mountains  of  Nature — digs  them  out  of  the  laws,  forces,
and  characterizations  of  vegetables  and  animals — and  renders
the  problems  of  the  future  as  certain  as  the  results  of  mathe-
matical calculation.  All  miracle,  therefore,  is  henceforth
abrogated;  and  man  is  immortal  upon  principles  as  plain  and
natural  as  the  common  laws  of  organism  and  growth.  The
human  spirit  is  the  focal  organism  of  Nature — it  cannot  be
dissolved — because  all  atoms,  and  laws,  and  essences,  expend
th^nselves  in  man's  formation ;  and  so  it  is  that  the  interior
form  is  rendered  eternal,  as  it  were,  by  a  spiritual  Jaw  of
chemical  affinity.  But  the  church  theory  of  spirit  is  equiva-
lent to  nonentity.  Nature  affirms  that  the  spiritual  body  of
man  is  still  material — coming,  measurably,  under  the  action
of  the  physical  laws  of  rarity,  density,  elasticity,  &c. — but
always  upon  a  vastly  higher  plane  of  activity  and  influence.
The  spiritual  body,  I  repeat,  is  a  substance;  and  yet  it  is  not
what  we  term  "matter."  "Spirit,"  says  Galen,  "bears  the
same  relation  to  earthly  matter  that  Light  sustains  to  the
element  of  Water;  the  same  as  the  flower  to  the  ground
which  enlivens  it.  The  spiritual  body  is  '  matter '  spiritual-
ized; as  the  flower  is  the  earth  refined."

According  to  the  natural  laws  of  Progress  and  Develop-
ment, the  Spirit  Land  is  revealed  to  our  intellectual  percep-
tion, and  harmonized  with  the  oracles  and  authorities  of
Intuition.  Poetry  and  prophecy  begin  to  possess  a  new  sig-
nificance. Paul,  he  who  "died  daily,"  and  was  often  "in
the  spirit,"  glided  past  the  subordinate  spheres,  and  was
"caught  up  into  the  third  heaven,"  and  saw  things  not  pos-
~4*


42  PHILOSOPHY AND SPTIs. TUALTSM.

sible  for  man  to  utter.  The  Harmonial  Philosophy  unfolds
the  magnificent  order  of  the  Spiritual  Worlds  with  the
same  precision  that  it  treats  of  the  physical  kingdoms  of
Nature.  And  so  natural  is  this  revealment,  that  the  skeptical
mind  finds  itself  believing  it  as  easily  as  it  concedes  "the
existence  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  or  the  cities  of  London  and
Stockholm,  which  it  may  never  have  physically  seen,  but
readily  believes,  on  the  ground  of  incontrovertible  probability
and  instinctive  prophecy.

Let  me  remind  the  reader  that  the  present  chapter  is
devoted  to  the  discussion  of  no  thought  or  theory;  but  is
simply  designed  to  define,  in  general  terms,  the  difference
between  the  "Harmonial  Philosophy"  and  the  "Spiritual
Manifestations."  Many  explanations,  therefore,  are  deferred
to  subsequent  pages.  The  question,  however,  may  be  asked :
"What  is  the  ulterior  object  of  the  Philosophy — what  does
it  propose  to  accomplish  for  Man?"  The  object  is  this:  to
unfold  the  "kingdom  of  Heaven  on  earth,"  to  apply  the  laws
of  planets  to  individuals ;  to  establish,  in  a  word,  in  human
society  the  same  harmonious  relations  that  are  found  Jbo
obtain  in  the  planetary  world.  Consequently,  as  already
affirmed,  the  object  is  wholly  humanitary  and  religious — not
only  telling  man  to  "love  the  neighbor,"  but  practically
showing  him  how  to  do  so — thus  crowning  Divine  love  with
Divine  wisdom.

I  come  now  to  define  the  so-called  Spiritual  Manifestations.

There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  realm  of  psychology,  as  I
see  it,  so  demonstrative  of  the-  hidden  laws  and  slumbering
forces  of  the  human  mind,  as  these  so-called  modern  mys-
teries. Man's  nature  is  just  beginning  to  declare  its  manifold
resources  and  psychological  powers.  The  clown  is  now
enabled  to  confound  the  wise.  "The  foolish  things  of  this
world"  are,  so  to  speak,  becoming  transcendentalized — in
spite  of  abounding  anathemas  and  skepticisms;  and  there  is
no  closing  nor  bolting  of  these  open  doors  which  lead  to  the
interior  nature  of  man,  and  thence  to  a  new  theology.

The  manifestations  should  be  considered  as  a  "living
demonstration"  of  rifany  truths  unfolded  by  the  Philosophy;


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  43

for  even  so  the  miracles  recorded  in  the  New  Testament  were
illustrative  of  the  doctrines  and  principles  developed  by  that
important  Dispensation.

But  these  modern  manifestations  are  no  miracles.  Ana-
logically considered,  like  all  other  events  called  miracles,
they  are  the  incipient  workings  of  new  laws  belonging  to
man  in  his  present  and  future  state  of  being.

Man  stands  on  the  apex  of  the  magnificent  pyramid  of
the  visible  organic  creation — "a  little  lower  than  the  angels"
— and  when  properly  viewed,  as  a  physical  and  spiritual
being,  he  will  be  found  to  be  a  medium  or  mediator  between
the  Idea*l  and  the  Actual,  between  Heaven  and  Earth.  He
is  the  pneumatic  bridge  over  which  every  thing  spiritual
travels  into  this  world.  But  how  often  are  the  ps}7chological
travelers  almost  assassinated  on  the  road,  and  maimed  for
life,  by  the  discordant  characters  journeying  the  other  way!
That  is  to  say,  man's  undeveloped  thoughts  and  educational
prepossessions  are  prone  to  come  into  fierce  collisions  with
thoughts  proceeding  from  higher  sources,  and  hence,  as  will
hereafter  be  shown,  while  man  continues  to  remain  ignorant
of  his  own  nature,  so  long  will  there  be  contradictions  in  his
deeds  and  revealments.

The  spiritual  manifestations,  however,  will  teach  the  theo-
logic  world  a  valuable  lesson,  viz:  that  the  divine  cannot  flow
into  human  structures,  without  the  former  participating  in  the
imperfections  of  the  latter.  This  universal  psychologic  law,
when  logically  understood,  will  give  the  death-blow  to
church  and  Bible  infallibility;  and  you,  kind  reader,  may
expect  this  grand  result  from  the  manifestations.  The
experience  and  testimony  of  the  world  are  conclusive  to
this  point:  that  all  revelations,  though  professing  to  de-
scend, expressly  directed,  from  on  high,  freighted  with  the
immaculate  thoughts  of  the  Supernal  Spirit,  yet  bear  the
plainest  evidence  of  having  flowed  from  heaven  to  earth —
from  the  world  of  the  Ideal  to  the  region  of  the  Actual —
through  imperfect  and  fallible  channels!

It  is  a  historical  fact,  of  the  most  momentous  import,  that
from  the  earliest  periods  of  the  world,  certain  persons  of  un-
impeachable character  have  assumed  to  have  actual  intercourse


44  PHILOSOPHY A  X  D SPIRITUALISM.

with  the  spiritual  sphere  of  being.  This  fact  alone  is  presump-
tive evidence,  to  say  the  least,  that  the  human  mind  is,  nat-
urally, progressing  toward  an  identical  state  of  existence.

But  now  approaches  the  skeptic,  with  his  explanation —
"Imposture"!

And  then  the  scientific  man,  with  his  explanation —
"Imagination!"

And  then  the  Christian,  with  his  explanation — "The
Devil!"

Still  the  work  goes  steadily  onward.  And  the  other
world  flows  silently  into  this — "turning  the  tables"  on  the
opposers — and  "knocking"  off  numerous  shackles  of  big-
otry. Indeed,  I  think  you  will  acknowledge  that  there
seems  to  be  much  "shaking  of  hands"  between  the  two
worlds  just  now;  that  the  eyes  of  hundreds  are  being  daily
opened  to  the  laws  and  beauties  of  that  Land  which  lies
beyond  the  tomb.

From  the  first  investigation  of  these  modern  developments,
the  skeptic  returns  with  the  persuasion  that  the  manifest-
ations are  closely  allied  to  the  doings  of  Jugglery.  The
second  visit  convinces  him  of  the  truths  of  Mesmerism.
The  third,  satisfies  him  that  Psychology  explains  it  all.
The  fourth,  assures  him  that  it  is  all  referable  to  Clair-
voyance. But  the  fifth  investigation  opens  his  blinded
heart,  dissipates  his  materialism,  and  persuades  him  of  the
'possibility  of  Spiritual  Intercourse.

But  he  is  unfortunate  who  meets  with  only  the  mounte-
bank side  of  this  question;  sees  only  the  Moon,  which  bor-
rows its  light,  while  the  Real  Source  of  illumination  is
visible  in  the  opposite  direction.  We  do  not  undertake  to
disguise  the  self-evident  proposition  that  there  are  two  sides
to  this  question,  as  well  as  to  every  other  now  before  the
world.  It  requires,  like  bank  bills,  a  "  Counterfeit  Detecter."
God,  therefore,  has  put  into  every  man's  hand  a  "pair  of
scales" — a  reason-principle,  which  should  be  well-balanced
— the  sovereign  standard  whereby  to  measure  and  experi-
mentally determine  every  thing.  Some  persons  can  only
weigh  six  ounces  of  evidence;  others  ten  pounds;  others,
still  more  developed,  an  hundred. But  this  is  a  free  country


PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM.  45

at  least  in  one  respect: — no  man  is  neither  politically  nor
ecclesiastically  obliged  to  exercise  common  sense  if  lie  has
not  got  it.  This  liberty  is  extended  to  all  parties,  without
regard  to  birth  or  station.  Church  and  State  enjoy  this
freedom  exceedingly.

Either  the  so-called  Spiritual  Manifestations  arc  Human,
or  else  they  are  Divine.  They  are  just  what  they  claim  for
themselves  to  be,  or  they  are  the  most  extraordinary  Fraud.
When  the  eye  scans  the  whole  ground  already  occupied  by
these  phenomena,  it  is  found,  and  by  the  best  minds  it  is  con-
ceded, that  none  but  a  spiritual  solution  can  cover  and  explain
them,  even  in  the  crude  shape  of  sounds,  vibrations,  and
movings.  To  affirm  that  the  human  brain  can  project  an
"odic  force"  or  electric  power  sufficient  to  move  heavy  tables
and  other  articles,  in  such  a  manner  as  intelligently  to  respond
to  questions  put  by  the  medium  or  others,  is  to  state  a  pro-
position which  far  more  taxes  human  credulity  than  the
spiritual  solution  of  the  whole  matter.  The  simplest  expla-
nation of  any  thing  is  most  likely  to  be  true.

Now,  the  spiritual  phenomena  have  already  become  historic
facts.  And  the  human  side  of  the  question  has  been  thor-
oughly tested.  The  human  explanation  has  the  best  and  the
worst  minds  in  the  country  in  its  favor — advocates  in  high
places — weapons  taken  from  the  magnificent  armory  of  the
Pulpit  and  the  Press.  Still  the  people  are  not  satisfied  with
any  but  the  spiritual  explanation,  and  even  this  they  dread
to  accept — fearing,  as  they  habitually  do,  the  disapprobation
of  the  Rt.  Rev.  Dr.  All  Right;  or  else,  the  muriatic  acid  of
the  indignant  Pastor  of  the  village  church,  who  takes  it  upon
himself  to  denounce,  ex  officio,  all  modern  Spiritualism  as  the
providential  manifestation  of  devilty — -a  "strong  delusion'*
to  try  men's  belief  in  the  miracles  of  antiquity !

The  spiritual  explanation  involves,  as  a  matter  of  course,
the  accredited  intelligence  of  certain  dogmatic  theologians
and  supercilious  scientific  men.  It  is  saying  substantially:
"Gentlemen,  you  cannot  explain  everything;  you  are  not
infallible."  Surely,  it  is  hard  for  the  scholastic  pride  of  such,
when  the  foolish  things  of  this  world — the  unlearned  heads
-—begin  to  amaze  and  confound  the  wise.


46  PHILOSOPHY A  X D SPIRITUALIS M  .

"But  the  manifestations  are  too  low,  too  trivial,  too  absurd,
too  undignified! "

Indeed!  Whence  comes  this  exclamation?  It  proceeds
from  persons,  both  in  church  and  state,  who  profess  to  believe
in  Moses,  who  was  found  in  a  basket  among  the  weeds —
believe  in  Jesus,  too,  who  was  cradled  in  a  manner,  born  in
the  presence  of  cows  and  horses!  Is  a  matter  trivial  or
undignified  because  it  may  have  an  inferior  or  humble
beginning?  Nay,  I  tell  you  truly  when  I  affirm,  that  the
other  world  will  he  icedded  to  this  earth — the  nuptial  ceremo-
nies will  be  performed;  and  there  will  be  "rappings"  heard
• — much  "moving  of  tables  and  chairs'' — and  "sinsmifr  and
rejoicing"  at  this  wedding,  whether  you -will  consent  to  be
present  at  the  ceremony  or  not.

The  New  Dispensation  is  upon  us,  even  at  the  door.  It
has  been  long  and  very  gradually  coming — coming!

"A  divinity  hath  oFten-times  descended
Upon  our  slumbers;  raid  the  blessed  troupes
Have,  in  the  calm  and  quiet  of  the  soul,
Conversed  with  us ! "

Or  with  some  spiritual-minded  man  belonging  to  genera-
tions past;  as  the  next  chapter,  devoted  to  the  sketch  of  an
external  argument,  will  demonstrate.

If  men  loved  Truth  more  than  the  honey-comb  of  Pop-
ularity— worshipped  Principle,  more  than  the  gold  which
devotion  to  fashionable  "vital  Piety"  brings  them — then,
indeed,  would  already  have  come  the  good  time — the  Pla-
tonic Era — when  Truth  and  Peace,  Law  and  Liberty,  shall

KEIGN SUPREME!


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.


In  the  present  chapter  I  am  impressed  to  represent,  with
as  much  plainness  of  speech  as  the  subject  will  permit,  the
Possibility,  the  Probability,  and  the  Certainty  of  Spiritual
Intercourse.

First:  By  Possibility,  is  meant,  the  power  of  any  thing  to
appear,  to  exist,  to  happen,  in  the  affairs  of  men,  or  in  the
constitution  of  things.

Second:  By  Probability,  is  meant,  the  intrinsic  reasona-
bleness of  any  thing;  the  appearance  of  truth;  a  matter
which,  is  esteemed  not  only  as  possible  in  the  nature  of
things,  but,  also,  a  matter  which  is  more  likely  to  be  true
than  false.

Third:  By  Certainty,  is  meant,  that  which  has  transcended
all  the  doubtfulness  which  inevitably  lingers  about  things
merely  possible  or  probable — a  matter  proved  to  a  demon-
stration; being  wholly  above  the  region  of  mistake  or  argu-
mentation.

In  this  brief  definition,  you  see  the  three  departments  of
the  question  which  I  propose  to  state  in  this  chapter,  ad-
dressed to  the  faculties  of  Keason  with  which  the  reader  is
endowed.  You  are  now,  therefore,  respectfully  solicited  to
let  those  faculties  perform  their  appropriate  functions  in  per-
ceiving, in  weighing,  and  in  attaining  to,  the  legitimate
conclusion  of  Evidence  which  may  be  presented  in  the  ensu-
ing pages.

It  may  appear  somewhat  strange,  that  I  she  aid  commence
the  discussion  of  this  question,  with  the  apparent  presumption
of  skepticism  on  the  part  of  the  reader — begin  the  subject
as  if  you  were  a  disbeliever  in  the  future  existence  of  the
human  soul,  and  required  evidence  of  this  fact,  before  you
can  take  a  single  firm  step  on  the  ground  opened  by  the


48  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.

New  Dispensation.  You  say,  you  "have  never  doubted  the
existence  of  the  soul  after  death!"  True,  as  a  believer  in
Christianity,  you  may  never  have  called  this  mysterious
doctrine  in  question — you  always  believed  that  this  '''mortal
would  put  on  immortality"  in  some  future  age,  by  virtue  of
some  incomprehensible  miracles  wrought  by  the  Lord  of
lords;  yet,  your  mental  state,  after  all,  is  the  state  of  neu-
trality, based  upon  a  universally-conceded  ignorance  of  the
whole  question,  encouraged  by  a  faith  as  universal,  amount-
ing, in  the  end,  to  a  lukewarmness  of  conviction,  which  is
alike  fatal  to- interior  happiness  and  mental  development.

The  Christian  should  be  able  to  give  "a  Eeason  for  this
hope,"  else,  he  is  living  on  a  foundation  of  sand,  and  his
house  of  Zion  cannot  withstand  the  deep,  mighty  torrents  of
rationalistic  criticism  which  are  now  rushing,  with  the  strength
of  the  cataract,  upon  the  entire  theologic  superstructure.
The  geologist,  the  astronomer,  the  artist,  the  philosopher,
cannot  pursue  his  investigations  a  single  step  without  encoun-
tering one  or  more  of  the  sacred  notions  of  modern  theology.
This  fact  is  well  knoAvn  to  the  scholars  of  divinity,  but  the
people,  as  a  mass,  know  very  little  about  this  conflict;  and
so  the  Doctors  of  science  have  a  private  understanding  with
the  Doctors  of  divinit}',  to  the  end  that  the  people  may  be
taught  scientific  truths,  if  they  do  not  tread  on  the  toes  of
Dogmatic  Theolog}r.  For  instance:  the  astronomer  may
teach  the  laws  and  harmonies  of  the  planets — may  explain
their  order,  and  use,  and  immutability — may  even  lecture  in
the  pulpit,  during  the  secular  portions  of  the  week;  and  he
may  be  certain  of  getting  a  respectable  audience ;  but,  remem-
ber, he  must  make  a  very  lor>g  apology  for  presuming  to
speak  on  a  matter  so  unscriptural,  especially  for  saying  the
least  word,  or  implying  in  the  remotest  degree,  that  Joshua's
miracle  of  the  standing  still  of  the  sun  Avas  contrary  to  the
immutable  principles  of  planetary  harmony!  And  so  the
man  of  science,  in  order  to  obtain  an  audience  and  live,  must
meekly  lay  his  Knowledge  upon  the  altar  of 'superstition —
a  sacrifi  popular  Theology ■ — "take  a  pew"  in  the  most

fashion  -anctuary,  and  make  an  effort  to  become  a  tal-

ented and  respectable  citizen ! By  these  means  the  false  and


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  49

superficial  soon  attain  the  ascendency  in  the  world;  and  all
faith  in  the  higher  truths  of  our  being,  gradually  dies  away
into  empty  forms  and  godless  ceremonies.  These  constitute
a  few  of  the  reasons  why  I  commence  the  question  of  Spir-
itual Intercourse,  on  the  ground  of  its  intrinsic  possibility.
Let  us  now  proceed.

Nature  is  a  stupendous  mystery,  until  she^  declares  herself
to  the  human  mind.  To  the  undeveloped  mind,  every  thing  is
mysterious ;  and  the  Sun,  being  the  most  resplendent  wonder,
is  worshipped  as  the  Grod  of  Power  and  the  Source  of  every
blessing !  The  idolatry  of  the  Hindoo  is  a  spontaneous  de-
velopment in  the  crudest  form  of  that  Religious  Sentiment
which  nothing  can  extinguish  in  the  Soul  of  Man.  We  may
grow  for  ever  in  wisdom,  and  obtain  the  profoundest  knowl-
edge of  existence:  still,  as  a  well  of  never-failing  water,  the
internal  sentiment  of  religion  flows  up  and  over  all  the  facul-
ties of  thought,  encouraging  us  to  transcend  the  trials  of
Earth,  and  to  emulate  the  Alps  of  life,  even  as  the  eagle
soars  above  the  highest  clouds !

Inasmuch  as  this  aspiring  progressive  tendency  is  found  to
be  a  universal  attribute  of  man,  may  we  not  reasonably  con-
clude that  the  soul,  thus  emulous,  will  ultimately  reach  the
summit  of  an  immortal  being?  Man  will  sacrifice  his  com-
fort, his  character,  and  his  wealth,  to  attain  to  some  eminence
of  worldly  power,  or  mental  distinction' — a  position  which,
even  when  attained,  can  only  gratify  the  internal  attribute
which  thus  aspires !  Even  in  his  lowest  condition,  Man  has
desires  which  point  and  center  far  above  his  body,  in  some
higher  and  better  individuality.  The  animals  progress  also!
The  brute  seeks  to  gratify  the  needs  and  relationships  of  the
body.  The  parental  and  maternal  desires  the  animal  seeks
to  gratify,  often  in  a  manner  so  touching  and  beautiful,  that
Man  would  do  well  to  learn  the  lessons  of  protection  and
kindness  which  the  lower  creation  teaches:  yet,  unlike  the
animal,  the  human  Soul  elevates  its  eyes  towards  the  skies,
implying  that  its  Real  Home  is  in  the  heavens !  The  desire
of  the  private  soldier  to  become  a  General;  the  child  to
emulate  its  Father;  the  ruler  to  become  King;  the  patriarch
to  become  Emperor — yea,  and  the  desire  of  Man  even  to
5


50  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.

exceed  himself—  does  not  all  this  prove  the  workings  of  that
Interior  Principle  of  Progress  which  may  confer  immortality
on  the  human  soul?

Nature  is  prophetic.  Her  Scriptures  cannot  be  voted
canonical,  or  otherwise,  to  suit  the  caprices  of  undeveloped
minds.  Truth  is  stamped  upon  every  sentence,  and  love
glows  from  the  temple  of  every  Thought.

In  the  human  organism,  be  it  remembered,  are  concen-
trated all  the  elements  and  essences  of  surrounding  Mature.
Man  feels  a  friendship,  more  or  less  remote,  for  every  thing;
because  every  thing  has,  in  one  shape  or  another,  entered
into  his  being.  Solids  and  fluids,  elements  and  gases,  pow-
ers and  essences,  have  climbed  up  the  granite  hills  of  crea-
tion, flowed  through  vegetables  and  animals,  and  taken  up
their  residence  in  the  human  constitution.  It  seems  that  the
first  part  of  the  Volume  of  Nature  is  divided  into  four  grand
chapters,  viz:  1st,  The  formation  of  Minerals;  2d,  the  for-
mation of  Vegetables;  3d,  the  formation  of  Animals;  and,
lastly,  (which  concludes  the  fourth  chapter,)  the  formation
of  Man.

All  the  principles  of  the  preceding  ages  bloom  out  in  the
human  type!  Creation  is  a  beautiful  sermon;  terminating
with  a  grand,  glowing,  glorious  conclusion- — the  human
Soul.  No  novel  ever  terminated  so  harmoniously  with  our
best  desires ;  no  drama,  so  worthy  the  Divine  Author.  Now,
let  me  ask,  do  you  think  creation  will  prove  a  failure?  Do
you  think  another  chapter,  more  beautiful  than  the  fourth,
will  never  be  added  to  the  Volume  of  Nature?

Do  you  think  that  man  is  a  temporary  being,  the  mortal
insect  of  a  season  merely,  the  highest  animal  in  creation,
with  a  soul,  like  a  breath,  destined  to  be  diffused  in  the  vast
ocean  of  life,  or,  as  a  dew-drop,  lost  in  the  sea.  To  suppose
that  man  stands  on  the  summit  of  the  lower  kingdom  of
creation,  with  mental  powers,  exalted  and  progressive  in
their  nature,  with  no  objects  beyond  to  which  those  powers
might  eternally  rise,  is  to  suppose  a  defect  in  the  scheme  of
existence,  unworthy  the  character  of  a  wise  and  perfect
Deity.  Indeed,  to  believe  that  Man  blooms  on  the  moun-
tains, like  the  vigorous  oak,  ultimately  to  die  an  eternal


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  51

death,  is  to  believe  contrary  to  all  the  prophecies  of  God,  as
written  upon  the  living  faculties  of  the  human  type,  and
upon  every  thing  that  lives.  Nature  is  not  man's  invention ;
is  not  capable  of  uttering  a  falsehood.

Now  be  it  duly  impressed,  that  creation  is  brought  to  a
focus  in  Man.  The  voice  of  Truth  is  heard,  whispering  its
first  melodies  in  the  soul's  intuitions !  At  first,  her  words
are  soft  and  low;  so  low  and  soft,  indeed,  that  superstition
is  often  allowed  to  make  man  doubt  the  voice  of  Truth
within,  causing  him  to  lose  sight  of  his  immortal  inheritance.
But  in  the  properly  unfolded  and  virgin  soul,  the  forces  of
nature  are  summoned  to  one  point,  and  the  prophecy  comes
forth — "THAT  THE  SPIKIT  OF  MAN  is  eternal."  He  is  an
unfortunate  being  who  hears  not  the  proclamations  of  his
inward  being,  "that  its  nature  is  divine  and  its  form  unalter-
able." Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart;  for  they  shall  see  God.
Blessed  are  the  truly  wise,  for  they  can  every  where  read
the  gospel  of  Deity.

The  possibility  of  spiritual  intercourse  is  necessarily  predi-
cated upon  the  continued  existence  of  the  soul,  with  all  its
senses  and  faculties,  after  the  material  body  is  placed  in  that
tomb.  If  you  believe  that  the  soul  continues  to  exist  after
death,  then  you  must,  to  be  consistent,  also  believe  that  that
soul  may  return,  ladened  with  affection,  back  to  its  own
native  land ;  return  to  the  home  of  its  childhood,  and  bring
good  tidings  of  great  joy  to  those  who  have  ears  to  hear.
If  you  believe  in  the  soul's  immortality,  then,  the  possibility
of  that  soul's  revisiting  the  earth  is  established.  Before
birth,  how  many  powers  are  reposing  dormant,  wMch,  after
birth,  come  out  in  full  and  perfect  action ;  evet^  so,  on  the
ground  of  this  analogy,  how  many  powers  lie  hidden  unsus-
pected in  the  soul  before  death,  which,  after  death,  may
appear  in  the  full  force  of  their  harmony  and  beauty  ?

The  question  of  possibility,  therefore,  is  naturally  disposed
of  at  this  point.  The  spirit  of  man  may  certainly  converse
when  out  of  the  natural  body,  as  it  does  while  in  it ;  that  is
to  say,  if  the  spirit  is  believed  to  be  clothed  with  another
body,  and  still  in  the  full  possession  of  its  present  voluntary
attributes. As  I  see  the  constitution  of  things,  the  inter-


52  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

course  between  minds  in  this  world  and  minds  in  the  other,
is  just  as  possible  as  the  oceanic  commerce  between  Europe
and  America,  or,  as  the  more  common  interchange  of  social
sympathies,  between  man  and  man,  in  every-day  life.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  examine  the  Probability  of  Spirit-
ual Intercourse.  If  I  appeared  before  you,  in  this  volume,
as  the  avowed  advocate  of  a  sect  or  party,  then  it  would  be
reasonable  to  expect  that  I  should  consider,  only,  the  most
favorable  points  of  evidence,  at  the  expense  of  a  candid
weighing  and  impartial  statement  of  the  objections  which
might  be  logically  urged  against  my  positions.  But  the
true  philosopher,  the  honest  lover  of  wisdom,  cannot  be  one-
sided and  partial  in  the  investigation  of  a  question  which
involved  pro's  and  corfs  which  may  be  supposed  to  embrace
both  Truth  and  Error.  If  all  the  objections  are  not  consid-
ered in  this  chapter,  nor  all  the  evidence  summoned  to
appear,  the  omission  should  be  referred  to  a  deficiency  of
space  allotted  to  this  external  argument.

Man's  internal  affinities,  his  attractions,  which  are  born
with  him,  inwrought  in  the  nerves  and  tissues  of  his  inward
nature,  yearn  for  corresponding  ties  of  communion.  The
soul  seems  to  ask  for  nourishment  from  an  interior  source.
Hence,  man  is  naturally  a  religious  or  spiritually-inclined
being,  demanding,  by  virtue  of  a  strict  moral  necessity,  the
assistance  of  mind  superior  to  his  own.  Every  man,  in  his
best  moments,  has  an  Ideal  self  to  which  he  aspires — a  spirit-
ual magnet,  so  to  speak,  drawing  him  onward  and  upward
above  the  crudities  of  his  animal  nature.  Now,  therefore,  is
it  not  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  this  interior  desire  of
the  soul  has  its  appropriate  gratification?

The  term  '  inspiration '  is,  surely,  not  void  of  meaning.  It
signifies  the  inflowing  of  thought — the  breathing  in  of  senti-
ments. It  is  certain  that  just  in  proportion  as  the  sensibilities
of  our  minds  become  unfolded,  so  will  the  love  and  wisdom
of  the  Higher  Spheres  flow  in  to  elevate  the  affections  and
intellect.  Every  mind  possesses  the  same  attributes.  Na-
ture's Author  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  His  Spirit  is
general  and  universal ;  embracing  the  low  and  the  high,  the


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  53

animal  and  the  human,  the  falling  sparrow  and  the  ascend-
ing seraph!  And  so,  also,  is  his  inspiration  universal;
illuminating  every  thing  according  to  its  condition  and
capacity.  His  Laws  are  unchangeable — operating  the  same
every  where  and  at  all  times — consequently,  as  a  law  of
mind,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  harmonious
and  virgin  brain  may  be  the  medium  of  spiritual  illumination!

The  Prophets  of  the  east,  the  early  bards,  the  great
masters  of  music:  did  they  not  speak  and  write  as  by  inspi-
ration? The  principles  and  paintings  of  invisible  artists
were  impressed  upon  the  interiors  of  those  eminent  men.
Their  productions  glow  with  a  divine  radiance.  True,  they
had  imperfections;  but  such  serve  to  prove  to  us  the  impos-
sibility of  obtaining  infallible  truth  through  human  mediums;
they  serve,  moreover,  the  next  high  purpose,  viz:  that  of
teaching  us  invariably  to  use  the  reason-principle  in  perceiv-
ing and  obtaining  Truth.  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Socrates,  Je-
sus, Swedenborg — those  minds,  together  with  hundreds  of
others  known  to  history,  gave  evidence  of  inspiration  in
matters  of  Philosophy  and  Eeligion,  far  transcending  the
wisdom  of  the  generations  in  which  they  lived.

Here  let  me  inquire:  what  is  the  probability  in  the  case
of  these  minds?  Is  there  any  thing  intrinsically  unreason-
able in  the  hypothesis,  that  they  received  thoughts  from
some  interior  source — from  spirits  who  once  resided  on  the
earth?  Else  how  could  these  human  beings  have  accom-
plished so  much  superior  to  their  brethren?

Bible  History  is  replete  with  testimony  bearing  directly
on  the  subject  of  intercourse  between  men  and  angels.  The
term  'angels,'  in  the  original,  signifies  'messengers,'  or  'dele-
gates,' 'bearers  of  dispatches,'  &c,  and  does  not  necessarily
always  mean  celestial  personages,  as  most  readers  suppose.
Nevertheless,  the  Bible  is  indomitable  in  its  affirmation  and
advocacy  of  spiritual  communications.

Daniel,  the  author  of  one  of  the  Jewish  books,  says:  "I,
Daniel,  was  mourning  three  full  weeks.  I  ate  no  pleasant
bread,  neither  came  flesh  nor  wine  in  my  mouth,  till  three
whole  weeks  were  fulfilled."  You  perceive '  and  learn  by
this  language,  that  Daniel  was  religiously  observing,  for  three
5*


54  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

weeks,  Grahamite  and  temperance  principles.  (This  method
I  have  found  by  experience  to  be  the  only  way  to  promote
physical  harmony  and  mental  susceptibility  to  spiritual
impressions.  At  the  end  of  three  weeks'  fasting,  Daniel
says:  "Then  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold
a  certain  man,  * whose  face  was  as  the  appear-

ance of  lightning,  * and  the  voice  of  his  words

was  like  the  voice  of  a  multitude!"  And  forthwith  Daniel
passed,  he  affirms,  into  'a  deep  sleep,'  with  his  'face  toward
the  ground.'  While  in  this  interior  magnetic  condition,
according  to  the  account,  the  angel  spoke  into  the  spiritual
ear  of  Daniel,  when  the  following  interesting  communication
was  accordingly  made:

"Fear  not,  Daniel;  for  from  the  day  that  thou  didst  set
thine  heart  to  understand,  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  thy
God,  thy  ivords  iverc  heard,  and  I  came  for  thy  words,"  &c. —
That  is  to  say,  in  plain  English,  that  when  Daniel  had  become
temperate  in  his  eating  and  drinking,  and  began,  in  a  proper
state  of  simple-mindedness,  to  pray  to  a  spiritual  source  for
aid  and  wisdom,  then  his  guardian  spirit  came  nigh  and
imparted  instructions.  This  same  principle  of  internal  puri-
fication and  prayer  is  acted  upon  elsewhere,  and,  in  our
own  day,  hundreds  of  spiritual  instructions  are  accordingly
received  by  minds  thus  prepared.

Among  other  spiritual  communications  recorded  in  the
first  books  of  the  New  Testament,  is  one  relating  to  the  phys-
ical preservation  of  the  infant  Jesus,  from  the  destroying
hand  of  the  executioner.  "And  the  angel  of  the  Lord
appeared  unto  Joseph  in  a  dream,  and  said :  Arise,  take  the
young  child  and  his  mother,  and  flee  into  Egypt."  Now,  the
sequel  of  the  history  proves  that  the  spiritual  instruction
resulted  in  good  to  all  the  parties  interested.  I  could  adduce
still  farther  from  the  experience  of  living  persons  among  us,
instances  of  salvation  from  frightful  accidents,  illness,  and
misfortunes,  by  means  of  instructions  received  in  a  manner
precisely  identical  with  the  foregoing.

The  second  chapter  of  Luke  contains  a  very  consoling
and  prophetic  communication  dispatched  from  the  other
world to  the  earth's  inhabitants. And,  as  heretofore  re-


THE EXTERNAL AEG  U  M  E  NT.  55

marked,  clergymen  and  congregations  who  reject  every  thing
like  the  probability  of  modern  manifestations,  nevertheless
read,  and  preach  from,  and  profess  openly  to  accept,  this  com-
munication as  the  word  of  God  to  Man — thus  exposing
themselves  to  the  severe  criticism  of  consistent  and  intelli-
gent minds.

It  appears  from  the  above  account,  that  the  shepherds  who
were  keeping  watch  over  their  flocks  in  the  fields,  were,  to
some  extent,  mediums  for  the  odic  manifestations — also,  for
clairvoyance  or  seeing  with  the  spiritual  perceptions.  The
language,  however,  in  which  the  relation  is  clothed,  is  quite
unscientific  and  eminently  oriental.  It  is  very  beautiful,
and  should  be  quoted  entire.  Here  it  is:  "And  there  were
in  the  same  country,  where  Jesus  was  born,  shepherds  abid-
ing, keeping  watch  over  their  flocks  by  night!"  [It  is  a
curious  feet,  often  remarked,  and  which  I  will  try  to  explain
hereafter,  that  almost  all  spiritual  manifestations  occur  at
'night,'  frequently  without  artificial  light.  The  Bible  ac-
counts are  uniform  in  their  testimony  to  this  peculiarity.]
"And,  lo,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them,  and  the
glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them,  and  they  were
sore  afraid.  And  the  angel  said  unto  them,  'Fear  not:  for,
behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be
unto  all  people.  For  unto  you  is  born  this  day  in  the  city
of  David,  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  Lord.'  *  *
And  suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel,  a  multitude  of
the  heavenly  hosts,  praising  God,  and  saying:  Glory  to  God
in  the  highest,  peace  on  earth,  good  will  toward  men."

Now,  what  can  be  more  reasonable  than  that  this  spiritual
communication  was  really  made  to  those  simple-hearted  shep-
herds? Is  it  not  more  likely  to  be  true  than  false?  In  a
word,  to  meet  our  argument,  is  it  not  probable  that  this
testamental  account  is  grounded  at  least  in  a  substratum  of
truth?  If  you  grant  this  point,  then  you  are  ready  in  mind
to  believe  that  spirits  can  hold  open  intercourse  with  mortals —
even  with  the  keepers  of  cows  and  horses — whenever  there
is  some  good  thing  to  be  accomplished  by  it.  Let  us  have
the  truth;  it  will  render  us  free  as  birds;  as  democratic
as  the  universal  spirit  of  Deity  itself. I  desire  to  impress


56  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.

upon  you,  the  probability  of  a  correspondence  between
spirits  both  in  and  out  of  the  material  body.

Testamental  history,  I  well  know,  is  considered  to  be
exceedingly  apochryphal  by  many  investigating  minds;  and
the  intelligent  external  critic  begins  to  associate  Bible  texts
with  the  fabrications  of  Monks  and  Priests;  still,  there
remains,  in  the  straight-forward  simplicity  of  the  narratives,
a  certain  sphere  of  truthfulness  which  strengthens  the  'Proba-
bility '  designed  to  be  presented.

I  am  fully  impressed  with  the  historic  fact,  well  known  to
the  ecclesiastical  antiquary,  that  the  present  books  of  the
Bible  were  brought  together  under  very  suspicious  circum-
stances. I  know  that  the  'original,'  to  which  doctors  of
divinity  so  often  refer,  teas  destroyed  soon  after  copies  were
taken ;  and  that  all  we  now  have  is  referable  to  the  work
and  compilation  of  the  early  scholars.  The  various  gospels
and  epistles  were  bound  together  at  the  close  of  the  third
century,  and  which  then  formed  the  New  Testament;  but
this  collection  did  not  contain  either  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  or  the  Revelations.  The  Acts  were  added  to  the
collection  as  soon  as  they  were  found,  in  the  year  408.  The
Revelations  were  added  in  the  year  565.  And  subsequently
several  other  changes  and  discoveries  were  made.  Now,  all
this,  as  I  am  free  to  confess,  throws  a  mantle  of  doubt  over  the
alledged  verity  of  the  supernatural  accounts  of  the  Bible ;  but
still,  as  I  now  appeal  only  to  the  probahil it y  of  the  case,  I  again
ask:  do  not  certain  instances  of  spiritual  intercourse,  detailed
by  Daniel,  Matthew,  and  Luke,  seem  to  be  intrinsically
reasonable — especially,  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  numer-
ous modern  analogies?  If  they  do  seem  reasonable,  then
the  point  of  'probability'  is  established;  and  we  are  pre-
pared to  take  another  step  forward  in  the  present  inquiry.

We  come  now  to  the  third  external  consideration,  viz :  to
weigh  the  facts  with  strict  reference  to  the  certainty  of  spir-
itual agency  in  the  production  of  modern  manifestations.
The  principal  object  is  to  determine  the  external  facts  in  the
premises;  not  to  consider  the  doctrines  inculcated,  nor  to
tarry  with  the  logical  conclusions  to  which  we  are  conducted


THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.  57

by  their  significance.  The  doctrines  and  significations,  there-
fore, are  deferred  to  subsequent  pages.  And  the  reader's
attention  is  particularly  solicited  to  the  facts,  as  developed
in  America  within  the  past  two  years.

It  has  already  become  a  matter  of  undisputed  history,
that  the  'mysterious  noises,' so  called,  broke  out  originally
in  Western  New  York.  They  came  forth  frequently,  wholly
unsolicited,  and  under  a  great  variety  of  circumstances;
which  precluded  the  supposition  of  the  possibility  of  physical
or  mechanical  causes.  Every  description  of  hypotheses  has
been  resorted  to,  and  charges  of  imposture  have  been  pre-
ferred against  the  parties  connected  with  the  noises;  but  the
true  'explanation'  still  lies  concealed  within  the  veil — and
so,  to  the  reputed  wise  and  the  bigoted,  alike,  the  develop-
ment remains  folded  in  impenetrable  mystery.

Now,  if  the  whole  mystery  was  strictly  confined  to  West-
ern New  York,  there  would  be  more  ground  for  the  presumption
of  human  contrivance  and  fraud.  The  world  has  a  right  to
be  suspicious — to  call  in  question  every  extraordinary  state-
ment or  profession:  first,  because  many  'pious  frauds'  have
been  passed  in  the  world  for  verities;  second,  because  doubt
and  skepticism  best  try  and  develope  the  intrinsic  strength
and  truth  of  any  question.

But  what  are  the  historic  facts?  They  are  briefly  these:
The  'noises'  soon  began  to  answer  questions,  sometimes  like
the  tickings  of  the  telegraph  when  thoughts  are  transmitted
from  one  end  of  the  wire  to  the  other.  Intelligence  was
openly  demonstrated  as  producing  and  conducting  the  sounds.
Answers  were  as  readily  received  to  questions  put  in  the
silence  of  the  mind  as  when  pronounced  audibly.  All  this
is  so  well  attested  by  competent  witnesses  that,  to  doubt  the
facts,  is  to  violate  the  plainest  principles  of  human  testimony.

But  again,  even  if  the  honesty  of  the  parties  be  not  ques-
tioned, there  still  remains  a  troublesome  doubt  respecting  the
causes  of  the  manifested  intelligence.  There  may  be  prin-
ciples of  physical  or  mental  economy,  or  of  both  combined,
of  which  we  have  been  hitherto  ignorant,  capable  of  pro-
ducing manr  of  these  developments.  "There  may  be,"  says
the  thinker, (;for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  certain


58  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT

unconscious  involuntary  emanations  of  our  being — certain
hidden  dynamics  and  projectile  forces — which  may  act  with
all  the  semblance  of  the  conscious  volition  of  an  intelligent
spirit."  This  is  reasonable  enough,  and  may  hereafter  come
into  an  explanation  of  many  things  which  have  so  mysteri-
ously occurred;  nevertheless,  are  we  not  absolutely  driven
back  into  the  mystic  region  of  uncertainty,  when  we  call  to
mind  a  matter,  (which  is  too  much  overlooked,)  that  the
'mysterious  noises'  in  Western  New  York  spelled  out  that
these  same  'sounds'  would  be  made  in  other  states  of  the
Union;  and  let  it  be  remembered  it  was  not  long  before  this
strange  prophesy  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter/  With  this  fact  be-
fore us,  what  can  we  say?  Shall  we  still  appeal  to  fraud  and
collusion  to  help  us  out  with  an  explanation  ?  Shall  Ave  say
that  the  'trick'  was  divulged  to  certain  persons  for  purposes
of  obtaining  money?  This  presumption  falls  to  earth  by  the
weight  of  its  own  inconsistency.  The  superficial  motive  of
pecuniary  gain  could  not  have  caused  the  extensive  diffusion
of  these  mysterious  things;  because,  even  the  commonest
mind  knows  that  such  wide-spread  competition  is  fatal  to
monopoly  or  emolument  in  any  pursuit.

Since  the  appearance  of  the  'noises'  in  New  York  state,  the
manifestations  have  unexpectedly  come  out  in  nearly  all  the
northern  states — on  hills  and  dales,  in  villages  and  cities.
What  does  it  all  mean?  As  the  forms  of  these  manifestations
exhibit  a  vast  variety,  it  is  very  possible  that  some  of  them,
at  least,  are  explainable  on  purely  natural  scientific  principles.
Media  for  tipping,  for  speaking,  for  writing,  for  impersonation,
for  manipulating  the  sick,  &c,  have  increased  in  numbers,
and  come  out  like  the  flowers  of  June.  But  as  an  incontro-
vertible evidence,  to  the  sensuous  mind,  of  phenomena  which
can  only  be  explained  on  spiritual  principles,  I  refer  exclusively
to  the  recorded  manifestations  of  physical  force.

Instances  are  on  record  where  the  table,  situated  within  a
circle  of  twelve  or  fifteen  persons,  has  been  seized  by  an  in-
visible power,  and  raised  neatly  to  the  lofty  ceiling  of  the
apartment.  Externally  I  have  seen  the  table  shaken  by  this
power  like  a  leaf  in  the  wind.  A  thrill  of  pleasure,  as  it
were,  sometimes  darts  through  the  solid  board — compelling


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  59

the  atoms,  composing  it,  to  dance  and  vibrate  with  the  emo-
tions of  conscious  joy,  springing  from  the  cause.

Instances  are  also  established,  as  historic  facts,  where  the
heavy  dining-table  has  been  gently  drawn  up  from  the  floor,
with  a  load  of  human  beings  upon  it,  weighing,  in  the  aggre-
gate, not  less  than  one  hundred  pounds.  The  time,  place,
and  witnesses  will  be  furnished  in  the  sequel.  The  rolling
away  of  the  huge  stone  from  the  mouth  of  the  sephulcre,  by
alledged  angelic  instrumentality,  begins  to  appear,  in  the  light
of  these  developments,  a  far  more  reasonable  or  probable  oc-
currence. The  soldiers  who  were  thrown  into  a  deep  sleep,
when  the  body  of  Jesus  was  taken  from  the  tomb,  corresponds
almost  entirely  with  the  magnetic  slumber  which  spirits  are
supposed  to  induce  on  certain  persons  when  something  is  to
be  accomplished  in  their  presence.

Instances  have  come  under  my  own  outward  observation,
where  the  'sounds'  occurred  on  the  table,  under  it,  on  the
floor,  and  on  the  walls  of  the  apartment,  in  broad  day  light,
with  the  room  nearly  full  of  skeptics :  and  so  loud  were  these
vibrations,  that  they  could  have  been  heard  at  a  distance  of
ten  rods,  or  more,  answering  questions,  both  mental  and
verbal,  in  a  manner  strictly  convincing  and  perfectly  demon-
strative of  spiritual  agency.

These  are  facts.  Similar  instances  are  of  daily  occur-
rence in  various  portions  of  America.  They  are  becoming
familiar  as  household  words;  and  no  reasonable  mind  pre-
sumes to  douut  them  now,  any  more  than  the  actual  existence
of  Washington  City.  Upon  these  facts,  therefore,  is  grounded
the  certainty  of  Spiritual  Intercourse.  This  certainty  is  made
doubly  certain  by  the  fact  that  no  solution,  except  a  spiritual
one,  can  possibly  cover  all  the  phenomena  which  come  under
the  denomination  of  sounds  and  movings — exclusive  of  a
world  of  other  manifestations  of  a  vastly  different  order  and
higher  import,  hereafter  to  be  delineated.

To  affirm  that  the  human  brain  can  project  an  electric  or
odic  force  sufficient  to  move  heavy  tables,  and  to  move  them,
too,  in  such  a  way  as  to  respond  to  questions  put  mentally
by  the  medium  or  by  others,  is  to  say  a  thing  which  far  more
taxes  human  credulity  than  the  spiritual  solution  of  the  matter.


60  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

'•The  hypothesis  that  these  phenomena  have  their  origin
in  some  hitherto  latent  action  of  Electricity,  Magnetism,  or
any  other  natural  and  physical  force,  creates  many  more  dif-
ficulties than  it  overcomes,  and  is  also  inconsistent  with  some
of  the  best-attested  facts.

"In  like  manner,  the  idea  that  these  phenomena  are
caused  by  some  unconscious,  involuntary  mental  action  of
some  person  or  persons  still  in  the  body,  is  equally  unphilo-
sophical,  equally  at  odds  with  the  attested  facts,  and  equally
open  to  the  objection  that  it  magnifies  the  marvel  it  professes
to  explain.  To  say  that  a  table  which  sustains  itself  on  two
legs,  or  one,  or  none,  at  the  request  of  some  persons  near  it,
and  responds  intelligently  to  a  dozen  various  questions  as
they  are  asked,  is  impelled  so  to  act  by  Electricity,  or  Mag-
netism, or  some  mental  impulse  of  an  individual  wholly
unconscious  of  such  influence,  is  to  assume  as  true  what  is
incredible,  because  contrary  to  the  world's  uniform  experi-
ence and  to  all  the  known  laws  of  causation."*

The  spiritual  explanation  teaches,  that  the  external  effects
are  always  produced  through  the  intermediation  of  certain
latent  powers  within  the  folds  of  the  brain  and  constitution
of  man.  The  facts  prove  this  solution  to  be  certain  to  a
demonstration.  This  I  affirm  to,  solely  on  the  ground  of
intrinsic  evidence;  not  from  any  additional  knowledge  which
I  may  be  supposed  to  have  obtained  in  the  superior  condition.
I  have  learned  very  many  things  of  late  about  this  subject
— such  as  the  causes  of  contradiction,  the  ultimate  design  of
the  spirits,  &c. — which  I  shall  hereafter  detail  and  present.
But  now  I  appeal  only  to  your  reason-principle.  Are  not
the  facts  clothed  in  the  profounclest  mystery,  unless  Ave  adopt
the  spiritual  hypothesis?  The  certainty  of  spiritual  inter-
course is  as  perfectly  demonstrated  by  the  rappings  and
movings,  (which  have  occurred  in  various  American  towns
and  cities  within  the  last  two  years,)  as  any  thing  which  facts
can  possibly  substantiate  or  verify.  If  nothing  more  con-
vincing should  ever  again  occur;  still  we  can  refer  to  those

*  Extract  from  the  Report  of  Rev.  Charles  Beecher  on  the  causes  which
have  produced  the  "effects  'in  the  sphere  of  facts'1  for  which  Spiritualism  is
now  so  widely  and  favorably  known.


THE EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  Gl

plain  historic  facts  as  unmistakable  evidences  of  the  visitation
of  immortal  spirits  to  the  homes  of  the  children  of  Men.


Iisr  the  entire  history  of  mankind  no  moral  or  social  ad-
vancement has  ever  so  powerfully  marched  a-head  of,  or
soared  so  entirely  above  all  derision  and  futile  attempts  at
refutation,  as  the  mysterious  phenomena  of  our  era.  The
pomp,  glory,  and  circumstance  of  the  great  men  of  the
world,  their  combined  influence  and  reputation  for  skill  and
wisdom  adequate  to  any  problem,  have  had  scarcely  no  pre-
judicial effect  upon  the  progressive  development  of  the  New
Dispensation.  Like  the  onward  flow  of  the  mountain  tor-
rent has  been  the  march  of  the  super-mundane  manifestations.
The  Dead  Sea  of  superstition  will  soon  roll  its  gloomy  waves
away  from  the  vital  currents  of  living  men.  The  popular
Gomorrah  of  creeds  and  dogmas — the  existing  forms  of  the-
ology and  religion,  with  their  lofty  towers  of  superstition  and
ascending  spires  of  dogmatism — will  surely  sink  beneath  the
sullen  surge  of  oblivious  death.  And  we  rejoice!  Why  do
we  rejoice?  Are  we  elated  with  the  prospect  of  victory?
Do  we  rejoice  because  success  will  crown  our  struggles  and
efforts  to  be  free?  Not  to  this  end;  we  have  vastly  more
noble  reasons  for  rejoicing  with  joy  exceeding  all  speech.

In  the  first  place,  the  manifestations  open  to  our  contem-
plation the  immensity  of  human  capability.  The  opinion
that  man  is  'fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,'  is  gaining  in-
fluence each  succeeding  day.  That  man  has  'some  new  law
of  mind,'  not  made  manifest  in  former  times — 'that  he  is  more
diversified  and  subtle  in  his  attributes  than  the  school-men
or  metaphysicians  have  been  led  to  imagine — is  the  convic-
tion now  of  thousands  who  a  few  years  ago  entertained  the
most  degraded  opinions  of  their  fellow-men.  A  writer  in
the  Investigator  says:  "Not  long  since  you  (the  editor)  pub-
lished for  me  an  article  on  '  Spiritual  Eappings.'  I  then
regarded  it  as  being  all  villany  and  folly,  or  deception  and
delusion.  But  since  I  wrote  that  article,  my  mind  has
undergone  a  great  revolution  on  that  subject,  at  which  I  am
myself  very  much  astonished.  Six  weeks  ago  I  should  have
6


02  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.

thought  it  impossible  for  mo  ever  to  believe  what  I  now  believe
in  regard  to  this  subject."  This  confession  emanates  from  an
investigating  intelligence.  He  has  persisted  in  searching,
and  concludes  in  the  following  words:

"I  do  not  make  up  my  mind  hastily;  yet  what  I  have  seen
removes  many  of  my  objections  to  the  Bible;  for  I  now  have
evidence  that  sorcery  and  magic  and  witchcraft  and  soothsay-
ing and  incantations  and  enchantments  may  not  be,  as  I  have
long  thought  they  were,  mere  phantoms  of  the  brain,  but
sober  realities.  The  Bible  and  all  ancient  writings  are  full
of  these  things.  What  I  have  seen,  also,  gives  me  a  letter
ojnnion  of  the  human  race;  for  it  shows  me  that  there  has  not
been  so  much  villany  and  deception  and  delusion  in  the
world  as  I  have  long  supposed.  I  have  been  frequently
astonished  at  the  revolution  in  my  opinion."

The  beneficial  tendency  of  the  manifestations,  therefore,
to  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the  attributes  of  human  nature,
cannot  be  questioned.  Hundreds  who  disbelieve  the  exist-
ence of  the  spiritual  world,  and  repudiate  the  entire  spiritual
explanation  of  the  phenomena,  still  admit  the  existence  of
the  manifestations,  but  trace  their  causes,  as  they  assert,  to
laws  and  principles  within  and  about  the  human  mind.  The
intelligence  manifested  compels  the  materialist  to  this  conclu-
sion. Hence  he  is  forced  to  place  a  higher  estimate  upon  the
organic  qualifications  of  the  brain,  and  to  accept  the  doctrine
of  progressive  development  in  reference  to  the  growth  and
unfolding  of  the  human  mind.  The  old  towers  of  metaphys-
ical speculation,  therefore,  crumble  and  fall  in  hopeless  ruins
at  the  slightest  touch,  The  mind  of  man  is  really  a  new  dis-
covery. It  seems  to  live  a  new  life — being  as  it  is  a  won-
drous vital  battery — with  every  particle  a  magnet.  Wise
men  look  at  the  spirit  of  man  with  ever-increasing  surprise.
A  short-sighted  priesthood  may  brand  the  soul  as  degraded
and  hideous  before  the  Supreme  Intelligence,  unless  converted
to  the  authority  of  some  creed,  and  a  worshipper  at  the  shrine
of  Orthodoxy;  yet  dimmer  and  dimmer,  as  the  days  pass  by,
is  the  force  of  Terror  presented  to  the  mind,  and  a  'Love
which  casteth  out  all  Fear'  is  being  rapidly  developed  for
individual  man. All  nations  and  distinctions  are  embraced


THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.  G3

in  the  thought  of  "Brotherhood."  And  this  Thought  is  laid
upon  the  altar  of  every  heart  by  the  manifestations.  Here,
then,  is  one  reason  why  we  rejoice,  and  pray  evermore  for
the  advancement  of  natural  spiritualism,  or  for  the  eternal
triumph  of  a  rational  supernaturalism — without  witchcraft,
without  superstition,  without  miracle.  For  the  first  effect
manifestly  is  to  open  new  fields  to  the  human  mind,  and
exalt  man's  knowledge  of  his  kind.

In  the  second  place,  the  manifestations  furnish  us  with
insurmountable  arguments  against  the  assumptions  of  the
priesthood.  The  orthodox  doctrine,  that  the  portals  of
heaven  were  for  ever  closed  at  the  moment  when  the  last
sentence  of  the  Apocalypse  was  written,  is  put  into  an  end-
less sleep  by  the  unfolding  Light  of  the  nineteenth  century.
The  doctrine  proclaimed  every  succeeding  Sabbath,  that  all
necessary  Revelation  is  behind  us,  that  we  must  repose,  like
unreasonable  but  confiding  babes,  upon  the  bosom  of  patri-
archal and  biblical  authority,  is  overthrown  for  evermore  by
the  thousands  of  equally-good  revelations  daily  made  to
us.  The  Religion  of  the  priesthood  is  founded  on  mem-
ory— a  remembrance  of  the  sayings  of  Moses  and  the  pro-
phets— a  sacred  recollection,  well-trained  to  the  purpose,
of  what  the  Evangelists  have  written  and  what  accepta-
ble Commentators  have  said  of  them.  As  well  might  a
tree  grow  on  the  iceberg.  Memory  is  not  the  basis  of  true
religion.  If  man  cannot  be  religious  as  easily  as  he  breathes
or  walks  or  sleeps,  by  the  daily  exercise  of  the  powers  and
attributes  of  his  nature,  then  there  is  some  defect  in  the
divine  order  of  the  Universe.  Religion  is  Happiness,  aris-
ing from  individual  harmony  and  the  consciousness  of
having  done  some  good,  and  no  harm,  to  mankind.

The  yoke  of  theological  despotism  is  hard  to  bear.  Millions
of  professing  Christians  have  bowed  down,  terror-stricken,
to  the  Superstitions  which  priests  have  preached  as  divine
truths.  The  .realm  of  Rhadamanthus  is  not  more  full  of
imaginary  sufferings  of  the  Eternally  Lost  than  is  existing
theology  of  tremendous  absurdities.  Men,  no  better  than
other  members  of  humanity,  are  educated  to  be  dogmatic.

A  certain  class  of  ideas  ore  put  into  the  student's  mind  as


64  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

gospel  essentials.  lie  learns  them  by  heart,  and  soon  ties
the  white  cravat  about  his  neck  as  the  credential  of  office  and
qualification.  He  then  exercises  before  the  mirror  to  learn
the  art  of  graceful  gesture,  prays  aloud  his  memory-prayers
to  cultivate  the  intonations  of  his  voice,  preaches  a  few  sopho-
mic  sermons  in  country  churches  to  acquire  the  requisite
amount  of  self-assurance  and  pompous  egotism:  and  now  the
young  clergyman  has  graduated  fairly  into  the  kingdom  of
dogmatism.  He  advocates  the  dignity  of  the  priesthood  and
its  essentiality  to  the  existence  of  morals  and  civilization.
His  congregation  soon  begin  to  believe  every  thing  he  says,
"because  he  's  been  to  college!"  He  has  studied  Greek  and
Latin;  has  read  "Horn's  Introduction  to  the  Sacred  Scrip-
tures;" has  translated  pages  from  Horace;  has  written  an
1  elegant  essa}^ '  on  the  sermon  on  the  mount ;  has  sown  all
his  'wild  oats'  before  other  young  men  knew  they  had  any
to  sow;  has  produced  a  'beautiful  poem'  on  Belthazzer's
Feast;  has  explained  the  exact  mode  of  Elisha's  or  Enoch's
physical  translation;  has  acknowledged  himself  to  be  eter-
nally pledged  to  think  precisely  as  the  schoolmen  have
taught;  has  sworn  everlasting  fidelity  to  the  creed  of  his
sect;  and  so  the  authority  of  the  Priest  is  manufactured.
And  so  are  made  our  task-masters:  men  who,  generation
after  generation,  are  permitted  to  denounce  all  pleasure  as
Satanic — all  cheerful  singing  and  dancing  as  sins — converting
the  beautiful  world,  so  adorned  and  fitted  for  the  entertain-
ment and  happiness  of  all,  into  a  gloomy  probationary  state,
a  miserable  prison-house,  full  of  sufferings  and  useless  terror !

In  view  of  this,  we  rejoice  at  the  manifestations.  With
one  all-crushing  blow  they  strike  all  priestly  dogmatism  into
silence!  Past  revelations  are  borne  on  the  bosom  of  the
rolling  flood  to  the  table  of  every  spirit-circle.  The  Present
reveals  the  Past.  The  key,  of  all  miracle  and  soothsaying
and  strange  occurrences,  is  placed  in  our  hands.  We  may
go  forward,  without  a  priest,  and  unlock  the  mysteries  of
former  ages.  Here  is  another  reason  why  we  welcome  the
manifestations.

In  the  third  place,  the  manifestations  constitute  a  3st
powerful  innovation. They  form  a  positive  opposition  to


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  65

the  successful  spread  of  ignorance  and  bigotry.  Because
they  go  to  the  altar  of  the  family  group.  "Come,  let's  have
some  fun,"  ssljs  one.  "How?"  inquires  the  other.  "Let's
form  a  spiritual  circle,"  suggests  the  third.  "Agreed,"
responds  the  fourth.  Flushed  with  mirth  and  excitement,
the  family  members  seat  themselves  around  the  well-known
dining-table,  which,  its  character  for  honesty  being  long
established,  is  at  once  beyond  the  possibility  of  mechanical
deception  and  the  suspicion  of  being  party  to  any  modern
fraud.

The  family  remain  seated  a  few  minutes ;  then  says  one,
"Let's  call  up  the  spirit  of  our  old  dog."

"Table!  will  you  tip  if  we  ask  questions?"

To  the  consternation  of  the  party,  the  table  tips  a  short
angle  and  returns  to  the  floor,  as  significant  of  consent,
"What  can  it  be?"  asks  one.  "Nothing,  but  electricity!"
says  the  other.  "How  do  you  know  it's  electricity  ?" — "  Why.
don't  the  papers  say  so?  And  don't  you  know,  I  had  a  long
talk  with  c  our  good  minister '  the  other  day,  who  told  me
that  it  is  electricity,  and  nothing  else!"  "Well,"  responds
the  first,  "let's  have  some  fun.  Let's  call  up  the  spirit  of  our
old  dead  dog."

"Boss!  are  you  here?"

All  is  silence!  The  effect  of  the  previous  surprise  has  not
departed.  The  evening  lamps  are  lighted,  but  there  is  some-
thing strange  in  the  thought  of  seeing  a  table  move  without
assistance  from  tangible  hands.  Slowly  and  noiselessly  at
one  end  it  raises  from  the  floor,  and,  by  returning,  pro-
duces three  sounds,  meaning/y-e-s.'

"Boss!  give  us  a  communication.  I'll  call  the  alphabet,
and  write  it  down."

Slowly,  the  table  begins  its  mysterious  work.  The  spell-
ing goes  on,  and  the  following  is  received:

"DEAR  FRIENDS,  I  AM  HAPPY  TO  MEET  YOU  ALL:  TELL  MOTHER
TO WEEP NO MORE WHEN SHE THINKS OF ME."

The  work  is  accomplished !  The  family  is  silent!  A  mys-
terious quiet  pervades  the  apartment,  which  nothing  disturbs,
except  the  low  sobs  of  joy  awakened  in  the  mother's  breast.


66  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

The  good  minister's  electrical  explanation  lias  'departed
this  life,'  and  the  truth — plain,  simple,  natural,  philosoph-
ical, without  miracle — stands  before  them  incarnated,  so  to
speak,  in  the  old  well-known  dining-table.  And  all  the
newspaper  articles  in  the  world  can  have  no  disturbing  influ-
ence upon  the  new  faith  of  that  family.  The  mother  now
can  say,  in  the  impressive  language  of  Longfellow :

"  Then  the  forms  of  the  departed
Enter  at  the  open  door;
The  beloved  ones,  the  true-hearted.
Come  to  visit  me  once  more.

With  a  slow  and  noiseless  footstep

Comes  the  messenger  divine,
Takes  the  vacant  chair  beside  me,

Lays  her  gentle  hand  in  mine.

And  she  sits  and  gazes  at  me

With  those  deep  and  tender  eyes,
Like  the  stars,  so  still  and  saint-like,

Looking  downward  from  the  skies."

On  page  twenty-seven  of  my  former  volume,  may  be  found
the  philosophy  of  the  causes  of  such  a  communication  as
above  detailed.  We  are  negative  to  our  guardian  spirits ;  they
are  positive  to  us ;  and  the  whole  mystery  is  illustrated  by  the
workings  of  the  common  magnetic  telegraph.  The  principles
involved  are  identical.  The  spirits  (improperly  so  called)
sustaining  a  positive  relation  to  us,  are  enabled  through  me-
diums, as  electric  conductors,  to  attract  and  move  articles  of
furniture,  vibrate  the  wires  of  a  musical  instrument,  and,  by
discharging,  through  the  potencies  of  their  wills,  currents  of
magnetism,  they  can  and  do  produce  rappings,  on  principles
strictly  analogous  to  the  magnetic  telegraph,  and  may  move
tables,  or  tip  them,  to  signify  certain  letters  of  the  alphabet.
The  exact  process  by  which  these  spiritual  currents  of  mag-
netism enter  solid  substances,  will  be  hereafter  explained.

There  is  always  a  super-mundane  circle  corresponding  to  the
structure  and  conditions  of  the  circle  on  earth.  And  each
guardian  mind  in  the  spiritual  group  contributes  its  proportion
of  magnetic  emanation,  to  form  a  line  of  communication,  just
as  each  perso  a  in  the  terrisyial  group  lends  his  or  her  mental


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.


67


and  physical  influence  to  mediumize  the  table.  Thus  there
is  an  earthly  terminus  and  there  is  a  spiritual  terminus  to  the
fine  thread  of  magnetism,  which,  perforating  and  passing
through  all  intervening  substances,  accomplishes  the  wonders
herein  described.*


-#>:


This  is  no  fancy  sketch;  it  is  parallelled  by  many  instances
on  record.  But  it  is  not  always  that  a  circle  formed  "for
fun,"  or  composed  of  persons  disposed  to  trifle  with  and  rid-
icule a  blessing,  can  get  good  and  convincing  exhibitions  of

*  The  above  engraving  is  designed  expressly  to  illustrate  the  process  of
table-moving,  as  accomplished  on  principles  already  explained.  Elevated
above  the  cloud-region,  is  seen  the  spirit-circle  in  telegraphic  correspondence
with  the  mundane  party  in  the  lower  story  of  the  dwelling. The  influence


68  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

spiritual  power.  The  evidence  once  received  is  stronger  than
any  clerical  opposition.  Xow  the  door  is  open  to  further
inquiry.  The  convinced  mother  will  begin  to  read  the  spir-
itual literature,  which,  although  composed  of  as  many  and
various  books  as  the  apochryphal  chapters  of  the  first  Bible,
is  nevertheless  liberalizing  in  its  tendency,  and  helps  on  the
work  of  moral  reform.  Here,  therefore,  is  another  reason
why  we  rejoice  at  the  spread  of  the  manifestations.

In  the  fourth  place,  the  manifestations  serve  the  important
purpose  of  diverting  man's  attention  from  the  money-getting
avocations  of  every-day  life.  From  the  world  of  effects  he
turns  to  the  world  of  causes.  This  world  is  a  kind  of  magic-
lantern.  Its  phantasms  and  spectral  projections,  its  laws,
objects,  and  scenery,  are  simply  representations  of  corres-
ponding phenomena  in  the  spiritual  world.  This  life  is  but
the  A,  B,  C,  of  an  endless  being.  The  great  Temple  of
mystery  is  composed  of  innumerable  planets,  or  globes,  like
the  one  we  now  inhabit.  Our  earth  is  but  a  small  stone  in
the  everlasting  structure  of  the  Universe;  it  is  but  a  base-
ment vjindoto  in  "the  house  not  made  with  hands."  The
manifestations  have  the  effect  to  change  man's  estimate  of
existence.  From  the  miserable  theory  of  a  Godless  universe,
from  the  idea  that  life  and  time  are  mere  money-making  con-
veniences, from  the  belief  that  the  doctrine  of  Immortality
is  but  the  wild  delusion  of  the  Poet  or  the  extravagant  dream
of  the  enthusiast,  the  mind  is  suddenly' — sometimes  too
suddenly — awakened  into  a  conception  of  the  universe  as  a
living  whole,  and  this  every-day  life  as  the  commencement
of  an  endless  existence!  It  is  deplorable  that  a  sudden
inbursting  of  light  should  so  dazzle  the  perceptions,  and  in-

from  the  upper  circle  is  seen  passing  down  through  the  roof  and  floors  to
the  surface  of  the  table,  where  it  imperceptibly  radiates  and  emits  invisible
rays  in  every  direction,  and  fills  the  substance  of  the  table  as  water  saturates
a  sponge.  This  is  a  true  copy  from  nature.  The  descending  line,  it  may
be  remarked,  proceeds  in  an  oblique  direction,  in  order  to  exert  a  leverage
influence  on  the  substance  to  be  moved.  But  when  the  '  sounds '  are  desired
to  be  produced,  this  line  descends  almost  perpendicularly,  as  will  be  here-
after shown.  The  diameter  of  this  magnetic  current,  which  is  fine  and  very
strong,  as  I  have  frequently  seen,  3  in  size  from  that  of  a  knitting-

needle  to  a  child's  little  finder.


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  69

tensity  the  emotions  of  the  soul,  as  to  cause  a  temporary-
aberration  of  the  intellect.  But  so  it  is.  I  cannot  even  wish
it  were  otherwise ;  for  I  behold  this  law  of  martyrdom  through-
out nature.  Earthquakes  improve  the  physical  aspect  of  the
globe,  and,  by  eliminating  new  principles,  purify  the  air  we
breathe ;  yet  countless  hosts  of  human  beings  have  sunk  to
one  common  grave  by  the  operation.  But  of  this  I  will  again
speak.  The  sudden  awakening  of  the  grief-stricken  and  lonely
mind  to  the  consoling  belief  that  the  broad  meadows  visible
are  but  symbols  of  spiritual  and  invisible  realities — that  hills,
valleys,  rivers,  seas,  music,  birds,  love,  friendship,  organic
life,  are  but  hieroglyphic  representations  of  eternal  actualities
in  the  world  of  Causes — can  have  but  one  substantial  general
effect — viz :  to  make  man  a  lighter,  better,  and  happier  being.
Here,  therefore,  is  still  another  reason  why  we  rejoice  at  the
spread  of  the  manifestations.

In  the  fifth  place,  the  manifestations  have  a  powerful
influence,  as  yet  quite  unsuspected,  toward  the  equalization
or  equilibrium  of  mankind.  There  is  a  supercilious,  weak-
minded  Aristocracy  gaining  ground  in  America,  both  in
church  and  state,  whose  chief  ambition  manifestly  is,  to  create
and  fix  an  everlasting  distinction  between  the  rich  and  the
poor — between  a  graduate  of  the  college  and  the  student  at
the  common  school — between  the  high-born  and  low-born  in
society.  This  error  of  misdirected  minds  has  fastened  itself
upon  the  priest  and  the  sanctuary.  It  has  contaminated
those  who  worship  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  They  realize  an
unpleasant  repugnance  at  the  thought  of  being  associated  in
heaven  with  the  converted  libertine  or  the  repentant  mur-
derer. They  rather  pray  to  be  numbered  among  the  jewels
— to  fellowship  with  the  "just  made  perfect" — to  be  consid-
ered as  the  aristocracy  of  paradise.  ISTow  this  desire  to  be
beautiful,  exalted,  and  refined,  is  a  prayer  which  all  should
cherish  as  the  words  of  inward  prophesy.  But  when  this
holy  desire  is  degraded,  by  the  undeveloped  possessors  of
money,  fine  dwellings,  and  worldly  advantages,  into  an
odious  distinction  between  the  rich  man  and  the  poor  man,
between  the  ragged  workman  and  the  tailorized  consumer,
then  surely  it  is  quite  time  that  a  New  Dispensation  should


70  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.

dawn  over  the  land — rolling  up  the  curtain  hanging  between
truth  and  error.

The  manifestations  occur  in  humble  places.  The  carpenter's
son,  the  cordwainer's  son,  the  tailor's  son,  the  son  of  doubt-
ful parentage,  and  the  working-maids,  are  the  torch-bearers
to  the  Newness!  The  glorious  sun  pours  down  his  golden
light  not  more  cheerfully  upon  the  rich  man's  palace  than
upon  the  poor  man's  cabin.  Heaven  spans  the  brotherhood
of  kingdoms.  The  poor  man's  child  has  a  mind  which,  as
well  as  the  mind  of  the  rich  man's  child,  is  a  portion  of  the
Infinite  Essence.  And  so  far  as  this  Divine  essence  is
concerned  in  the  production  of  the  human  type,  "it  is  no
respecter  of  persons" — impartiality  and  equalization  stand
conspicuously  forth.  And  even  so,  among  the  new  develop-
ments of  the  age,  stand  side  by  side  the  plebeian  and  patrician
— the  reputed  saint  and  the  reputed  sinner — involved  in  the
same  great  work  of  social  and  moral  reform.  The  illiterate
and  humble  working-man,  sequestered  from  public  knowl-
edge, no  sooner  becomes  a  medium,  and  passes  through  the
indefinite  phases  of  primary  experience,  than  we  hear  of  some

"Kev.  Dr. ,"  favorably  known  as  a  scholar  and  truthful

man,  going  through  the  same  identical  experience — declaring
the  cause  to  be  the  "Adversary  of  souls,"  and  unsafe  for
human  investigation.

It  would  seem  to  be  a  universal  law,  that  the  sweetest
flowers  grow  in  the  vales  of  humility.  The  'manger'  is
ever  the  cradle  of  a  Savior.  The  friends  of  humanity  are
never  born  under  the  palatial  roof.  "The  poor  tallow-chan-
dler's son,"  says  Bishop  Doane,  "that  sits  up  all  night  to  read
the  book  which  an  apprentice  lends  him,  lest  his  master's
eye  should  miss  it  in  the  morning,  shall  stand  and  treat  with
kings:  shall  bind  the  lightning  with  a  hempen  cord,  and
bring  it  harmless  from  the  skies."  The  imperious  and  super-
cilious merchant  is  startled  with  intelligence  that  his  '  clerk '
is  a  medium.  The  college-bred  priest — full  of  shadowy  no-
tions of  the  other  world,  and  yet  as  dogmatic  about  it  as  a
Calvin — is  awe-stricken  to  learn  that  mediums  have  come  out
from  his  own  congregation.  The  proud  wife  of  the  respect-
able banker  is  humbled  by  the  news,  that  her  absent  daughter


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  71

is  a  "very  interesting  medium  for  the  sounds,"  and  the  family
are  of  necessity  forced  to  concede  something  favorable  to  the
New  Dispensation.

Thus  again  do  we  rejoice  at  the  spread  of  the  manifestations.
Call  them  what  you  will — ' unpleasant,'  'ridiculous,'  'absurd,'
'nonsensical,'  'magnetism,'  'a  new  law  of  mind,'  a  'demon-
ological  delusion,'  or  any  other  name  whatever;  nevertheless
we  welcome  them  as  the  premonitory  signs  of  a  mental  and
social  Revolution,  which  shall  exalt  man,  open  his  under-
standing, blend  the  nations,  annihilate  superstition,  and
render  this  world  a  lighter,  better,  happier  habitation  for  the
children  of  men.  We  do  not  look  for  infinite  and  perfect
wisdom  through  the  manifestations.  The  communications
are  occasionally  replete  with  extravagant  promises.  Many
of  them  are  not  superior  to  the  mental  capacity,  nor  much
different  from  the  structure  of  the  mind,  of  the  medium.
The  ideas  are  few;  the  words  innumerable.  The  orthography
is  sometimes  defective ;  the  grammar  is  frequently  unfinished ;
the  thoughts  without  breadth  or  point.  But  these  are  excep-
tions. The  rule  is  the  reverse  of  this.  The  question,  how-
ever, turns  upon  another  centre — i.  e.  the  influence  exerted
by  these  new  developments  upon  the  institutions  of  society.
I  think  I  have  sketched  the  good  already  appearing  and
likely  to  be  done.

"We  welcome  them  as  the  glimmerings  of  another  sphere.
We  welcome  them  as  a  beautiful  mystery,  without  miracle,
as  a  bursting  of  light  through  the  thin  crust  of  ordinary
existence,  without  superstition,  opening  new  passages  in  the
universe.  We  welcome  them,  with  all  their  sudden  transi-
tions from  the  grave  to  the  gay,  from  the  horrible  to  the
grotesque  and  absurd,  as  a  demonstration  in  favor  of  Freedom.
We  welcome  them  as  a  banner  of  promise  unrclled  across
the  horizon,  bearing  this  glorious  device:  Emancipation  from
all  Fear  and  Superstition.


The  doctrine  of  the  progressive  development  of  man's
organic  and  mental  nature — the  legitimate  doctrine  that  the
next  state  of  existence  is  a  perpetuation  of  and  improvement


72  THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.

upon,  this,  the  rudimental — furnishes  the  mind  with  all
adequate  explanations  of  contradictory  and  boisterous  mani-
festations. It  may  be  laid  down  as  an  immutable  law,  that
the  less  developed  &  spirit  is,  the  more  adequate  is  its  power
to  move  and  act  upon  inorganic  and  terrestrial  substances.
A  physical  spirit,  so  to  express  it,  is  one  who  can  readily
cast  its  will-power,  and  personal  influence,  upon  certain
media — causing  them  to  gesture,  impersonate,  speak,  &c. —
while  a  more  fully-developed  and  perfected  spirit  cannot  do
any  thing  of  this  character,  except  through  intermediate
powers,  or  by  proxy.

And  furthermore,  the  law  may  be  accepted,  that  every
person  has  a  particular  guardian  spirit,  which — whenever
that  person  is  in  a  situation  to  receive  any  special  influence
or  instruction — is  ever  ready  to  communicate;  and  this
guardian,  let  it  be  recollected,  is  constitutionally  and  phren-
ologically  congenial  to  the  earthly  charge — that  is,  the  two
are  similar  in  organization,  inclination,  and  desires,  with  this
exception,  that  the  guardian  is  always  better,  wiser,  and
more  advanced,  enough  so  in  truth  to  be  positive  to  the  ter-
restrial mind.  This  fact  is  illustrated  in  the  likeness  visible
between  many  thoughts  and  words  employed  and  communi-
cated by  Galen,  and  those  common  to  myself — our  mental
conformations  being  considerably  analogous.  Hence  there
is  discoverable,  in  all  media,  a  general  sameness  of  ideas — or,
as  it  were,  a  similitude  between  thoughts  spiritually  derived
and  those  drawn  from  the  medium's  own  brain — giving  the
external  investigator  the  impression  of  self-deception  in  the
subject's  mind.

It  is,  therefore,  an  unwarrantable  thing  to  look  for  perfect
wisdom,  or  for  instruction  much  superior  to  the  mental  devel-
opment of  the  medium ;  because,  when  the  whole  field  is  care-
fully examined,  it  will  be  found  that  persons  in  this  world  do
not,  as  they  suppose,  communicate  promiscuously  with  Swed-
enborg,  Washington,  and  other  illustrious  minds,  but  always
immediately  with  their  own  particular  and  congenial  guardian
spirit.  If  the  higher  spirits  desire  to  impart  thoughts,  they
do  so  by  attorney.  A  long  chain  of  "mediums"  is  at  times
formed  between  some  exalted  mind  in  the  next  sphere  and  a


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  73

person  on  the  footstool — but  the  spirit  in  closest  sympathy
with  the  earthly  mind,  is  its  own  congenial  protector.  For
an  illustration,  and  I  may  add,  a  fulfilment,  of  this  law,  the
reader  is  referred  to  the  preceding-  volume,  page  fifty-seven,
where  may  be  found  this  sentence :  u  A  high  society  of  angels
desire,  through  the  agency  of  another  and  a  more  inferior  society,
to  communicate  in  various  ways  to  the  earth's  inhabitants."
Here,  you  perceive,  spiritual  media  are  acknowledged  to
exist,  as  well  as  terrestrial  channels — the  immediate  spirit
being,  in  almost  every  instance,  the  guardian  of  the  person
communicating.  If  these  laws  of  interpretation  be  accepted,
together  with  much  to  be  hereafter  said,  the  reader  will  find
no  difficulty  in  extricating  his  mind  from  doubts,  arising
from  contradictions.


HOW  TO  OBTAIN PHYSICAL EVIDENCES.

Physical  evidences  are  useful  as  incentives  to  investiga-
tion. These  evidences  may  be  either  compound  or  simple.
The  demonstrations  may  occur  in  all  parts  of  the  room,  or
be  confined  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  table,  the  circle,
and  mediums.  All  this  is  determined  by  the  success  of  the
circle  in  the  act  of  mediumizing  the  table,  the  room,  or  the
subjects  of  the  demonstrations.  The  substratum  of  vital
electricity  necessary  for  successful  physical  evidences  of  spirit
power,  is  the  chief  reason  why  many  persons  accept  only  the
electrical  explanation  of  the  consequent  phenomena.  There
are  very  few  who  understand  how  wonderful  a  galvanic  bat-
tery is  the  physical  constitution  of  man.  In  my  various
works  may  be  found  references  to  this  remarkable  fact.  The
modus  operandi  of  the  generation  of  this  organic  electricity
is  thus  correctly  set  forth  by  the  distinguished  Dr.  Gregory
in  his  work  on  chemistry:

"The  remarkable  fact  of  the  existence,  in  all  parts  of  the
body,  of  an  alkaline  liquid,  the  blood,  and  an  acid  liquid,
the  juice  of  the  flesh,  separated  by  a  very  thin  membrane,
and  in  contact  with  muscle  and  nerve,  seems  to  have  some
relation  to  the  fact  now  established  of  the  existence  of
electric  currents  in  the  body,  and  particularly  to  those  which
7


74  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

occur  when  the  muscles  contract.  The  animal  body  may  be
regarded  as  a  galvanic  engine  for  the  production  of  mechan-
ical force.  This  force  is  derived  from  the  food,  and,  with
food,  is  derived  from  the  solar  rays.  A  working-man,  it  has
been  calculated,  produces,  in  twenty-four  hours,  an  amount
of  heating  or  thermal  effect  equal  to  raising  14,000,000  lbs.
to  the  height  of  one  foot — heat  being  one  form  of  mechan-
ical effect.  But,  from  causes  connected  with  the  range
of  temperature,  he  can  only  produce,  in  the  form  of  actual
work  done,  about  as  much  mechanical  effect  as  would  raise
3,500,000  lbs.  to  the  height  of  one  foot,  and  that  in  twenty-
four  hours.  Even  this  is  a  prodigious  amount  of  force ;  and
whether  we  regard  it  as  derived  from  heat,  electricity,  or
chemical  action,  it  is  ultimately  derived  from  the  luminous
solar  rays,  on  which  vegetation  depends."

The  spiritual  thecry  is  forcing  materialistic  minds  into
intimate  fellowship  with  the  electrical  attributes  of  the  bod}r.
"We  hail  the  dawning  of  this  better  knowledge  of  man's
nature,  because  on  this  alone  can  securely  rest  a  philosophical
understanding  of  the  prerequisite  conditions  of  spiritual
intercourse.  The  phenomenon  of  lighting  gas  with  the  tip  of
the  finger  is  a  beautiful  experiment,  illustrating,  in  a  most
convincing  manner,  the  electrical  atmosphere  (owra)  surround-
ing the  body  whereby  spirits  approach  and  act  upon  the
media. The  Tribune  says:

"This  is  a  feat  any  body  may  perform.  Let  a  person  in
their  shoes  or  slippers  walk  briskly  over  a  woolen  carpet,
scuffing  his  feet  thereon,  or  stand  upon  a  chair  with  its  legs
in  four  tumblers,  to  insulate  it,  and  be  there  rubbed  up  and
down  on  the  body  a  few  times  with  a  muff,  by  another  per-
son, and  he  will  light  his  gas  by  simply  touching  his  finger
to  the  tube.  It  is  only  necessary  to  take  the  precaution  not
to  touch  any  thing  or  be  touched  by  any  body  during  the
trial  of  the  experiment.  The  stock  of  electricity  acquired
b}^  the  process  we  have  described  is  discharged  by  contact
with  another  object.  A  second  person  must  turn  on  the  gas
while  the  other  fires  it.  The  writer  has  lighted  it  in  this  way,
and  seen  it  done  by  children  not  half  a  dozen  }^ears  old.
We  are  all  peripatetic  lucifer  matches,  if  we  did  but  know  it."


THE EXTERN  A  L \  R  G  U  M  E  XT.  75

The  full  and  unequivocal  discovery  of  the  electrical  attri-
butes of  man  is  equivalent  to  a  scientific  acknowledgment
of  the  primary  conditions  on  which  we  repose  our  philosophy
of  spiritual  intercourse — especially,  the  physical  demonstra-
tions. There  is  a  remarkable  difference  in  persons  with
regard  to  electrical  susceptibility.  "Persons,"'  says  Kerner,
"highly  susceptible  of  electrical  influences,  are  often  cured
of  their  maladies  by  a  change  of  residence ;  whilst  others  of
the  same  description,  frequently  from  a  like  cause,  fall  into
sickness  which  the  physician  cannot  account  for.  Papponi,
a  man  spoken  of  by  Amoretti,  who  was  very  susceptible  to
electrical  influences,  and  who  suffered  from  convulsions,  was
cured  merely  by  a  change  of  residence.  Pennet,  a  man  of
the  same  susceptibility,  could  not  go  to  rest,  in  a  certain  inn
in  Calabria,  till  he  had  wrapt  himself  in  an  isolating  cloak
of  waxed  cloth."

The  condition  of  man's  constitution  remains  wrapt  in  mys-
tery. Incomprehensible  and  undefmable,  man  emerged  from
the  unfathomable  vortex  of  divine  vitality — a  projected
embodiment  of  an  all-animating  Spirit — the  greatest  living
wonder.  How  fearfully — how  wonderfully  made!  He  is
inwardly  a  spirit:  externally,  a  spiritual  manifestation.  If
the  demonstrations  of  invisible  intelligence  are  marvellous,
man  is  the  origin  of  those  marvels.  Is  man  a  chimera?  Is
man's  existence  a  fiction?  Lo!  he  is  a  spirit;  a  manifest-
ation of  an  infinite  reality.  The  mystery  of  innumera-
ble worlds  lies  imbedded  in  man;  there  are,  therefore,
worlds  innumerable,  of  endless  progression,  in  which  this
mystery  shall  be  unrolled  and  comprehended.  Yet  he  is
wonderfully  simple,  organically  and  spiritually;  it  is  our
ignorance,  not  his  nature,  that  makes  the  attributes  of  his
constitution  marvellous.

Circles  for  spiritual  evidences,  when  formed  in  a  becoming
spirit  of  inquiry,  will  quicken  the  intellect  and  unchain  the
heart.  The  general  system,  as  explained  in  the  former  vol-
ume, is  still  applicable.  All  the  laws  therein  given  should
be  observed  when  circles  for  mental  development  are  instituted,
and,  therefore,  it  is  deemed  unnecessary  to  recapitulate  those
directions  in  this  connection.


76


THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT


But  I  now  propose,  by  impression,  the  following  plan,  as
the  best  method  to  accumulate,  refine,  and  concentrate  the
vital  electricity  of  a  circle :


Here  is  seen  a  new  arrangement.  The  males  and  females
(the  positive  and  negative  principles)  are  placed  alternately;
as  so  many  zinc  and  copper  plates  in  the  construction  of
magnetic  batteries.  The  medium  or  media  have  places
assigned  them  on  either  side  of  the  junction  whereat  the
rope  is  crossed,  the  ends  terminating  each  in  a  pail  or  jar  of
cold  water.  This  rope  may  be  formed  as  already  described.*
But  these  new  things  should  be  added.  The  copper  wire
should  terminate  in,  or  be  clasped  to,  a  zinc  plate;  the  steel
wire  should,  in  the  same  manner,  be  attached  to  a  copper
plate.  These  plates  should  be  dodecahedral,  or  cut  with
twelve  angles  or  sides,  because,  by  means  of  the  points,  the
volume  of  terrestrial  electricity  is  greatly  augmented,  and
its  accumulation  is  also,  by  the  same  means,  .  accelerated,
which  the  circle  requires  for  a  rudimental  aura  (or  atmos-
phere) through  which  spirits  can  approach  and  act  upon
material  bodies.  The  plates  should  be  from  six  to  ten  inches
in  diameter;  though  this  may  be  conformable  to  the  size  of
the  pails  or  jars.

Underneath,  and  brazed  to  the  copper  plates  in  four  or
five  places,  leaving  one  plate  slightly  raised  above  the  other,
so  that  the  water  can  flow  between  them,  should  be  corres-
ponding plates  of  opposite  denominations;  that  is  to  say,
the  copper  plate  should  be  brazed  to  a  zinc  plate,  and  vice

*  See  'Philosophy  of  Spiritual  Intercourse,''  page  98,  for  particular  direc-
tions concerning  the  magnetic  rope.


THE  EXTERNAL  ARGUMENT.  77

versa.  Then  a  copper  wire  (which  the  engraving  does  not
indicate)  should  pass  from  one  vessel  to  the  other,  simply
to  be  immersed  in  the  water  at  each  end.  The  vessels  con-
taining the  plates  and  water,  may  be  not  more  than  four  feet
asunder.  The  plates  should  be  kept  clean  and  bright.  The
magnetic  cord,  arising  from  these  surfaces,  should  pass  (as
seen  in  the  illustration,)  around  the  circle  of  individuals,
rest  on  the  knees  of  each,  and  be  gently  grasped  by  all  hands.
The  result  will  soon  be — on  the  supposition  that  the  external
atmosphere  is  favorable,  and  the  members  physically  healthy
— a  repletion  of  organic  or  vital  electricity.  This  element
will  soon  saturate  the  table,  penetrate  its  fibres  and  atoms,
forming  thus  the  menstruum  for  the  physical  manifestations
— as  exhibited  in  the  action  of  Mind  upon  the  muscles
through  the  agency  of  the  magnetism  which  continually  per-
vades and  penetrates  them.  By  the  foregoing  method,  a
circle  can  accomplish  and  establish  the  prerequisites  in  one-
fifth  of  the  time  now  consumed  by  heterogeneous  plans  so
generally  adopted.  And  in  order  that  the  reader  may  intel-
ligently know  how  the  'raps'  are  produced,  and  'tables
moved,'  I  will  introduce  an  impressive  instance,  in  which  I
was  myself  the  medium.  But  first  let  me  remark,  that  the
'tipping  of  tables'  by  resting  of  the  hands  on  the  outer
edges  of  them,  is  doubtless  the  best  way  to  be  self-deceived,
for  in  such  cases,  with  few  exceptions,  the  mere  muscular
and  involuntary  nervous  pressure  determines  the  external
and  visible  motions.

AN  ILITJSTRATIVE  VISION.

The  circumstances  under  which  the  following  vision  was
received  were  these:  I  had  been  writing  upon  the  benefits
and  penalties  of  human  experience.  My  mind  was  .much
but  pleasantly  exercised  upon  the  subject.  In  the  progress
of  my  writing,  I  had  come  to  this  conclusion :  that  those  who
prematurely  pass  away  to  the  spirit  land — that  is,  before  the
period  of  utter  organic  ripeness  or  maturity — are  deprived  of
that  wholesome  foundation  of  experience  which  is  essential  to
normal  mental  development.  And  when  engaged  in  inditing
7*


78  THE E  XTEENAL A  R  G  D  MBNT,

these  words,  being  meanwhile  in  the  superior  state,  I  feit  a
warm  breathing  over  the  side  of  my  face  and  head,  pene-
trating to  the  fibres  of  my  brain,  and  causing  me  to  look  to
the  right,  whence  the  warm  current  emanated.

Immediately  I  saw  that  the  breathing  proceeded  from  the
will  of  a  finely-moulded  Man,"  leading  by  the  hand  a  charm-
ing little  boy,  apparently  about  five  years  of  age.  They  were
clothed  with  the  immortal  body,  and  I  knew  they  came  from
the  spirit-home.  They  were  strangers  to  me,  in  the  sense
that  I  had  never  seen  them  before;  and  yet  they  were  friends
to  the  doctrines  of  this  philosophy.  The  man.  who  was  of  the
Italian  style  of  beauty — for  every  race,  like  every  star,  hath
"a  glory  of  its  own" — signified  his  desire  to  enter  the  room
where  I  was  writing.  Accordingly  I  opened  the  doors;  and
he  glided  gracefully  into  the  apartment,  with  the  smiling  little
boy  by  his  side.  He  had  no  sooner  entered,  when  he,  in
plain,  audible  English,  said:

"I  come  to  speak  of  Life  with  thee; the  beginning  of
things — the  origin  of  Man — is  my  present  study."
"Why  do  you  come  to  earth?"  I  inquired.
"First,  because  I  was  horn  on  the  earth;  second,  because
the  real  student  must  go  to  the  source  of  external  things."
"Will  you  tell  me  your  name?"

"My  name,"  he  replied,  "is  known  only  to  my  family  in
Italy.  I  belong  to  the  family  whence  the  Eeformer  issued,
whose  principal  name  I  bear.  My  family's  name  is  '  Giobertti ; '
and  I  was  christened,  '  Archilli-Batista,'  Thou  sayest,"  he
continued,  "that  Man  is  designed  to  live  out  the  full  number
of  his  days — that  all  early  deaths  are  contrary  to  the  ordina-
tions of  Deity.  To  the  verit}r  of  this  saying,  I  now  come  to
testify.  And  this  little  embassador  (pointing  to  the  child)
will  also  add  his  testimony,  if  thou  wilt  question  him,  even
while  his  mind  taketh  no  knowledge  of  the  purport  of  my
communication  with  thee."

I  now  thanked  the  Italian  for  his  unexpected  assistance  in
solving  this  problem  of  experience;  and  I  expressed  my  plea-

*  The  reader  will  pardon  any  apparently  unwarrantable  use  of  this  term,
as  applicable  to  a  spiritual  personage;  but  I  am  quite  sure  that,  to  an  ap-
preciative and  rational  mind,  the  word  is  here  "employed  with  no  impropriety.


THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.  ?9

sure,  in  my  thoughts,  which  lie  instantly  perceived.  Since
the  privilege  of  catechizing  the  little  boy  was  granted  me,  I
asked:  "Will  you  reply  to  my  questions  by  the  vibrations  or
'raps,'  as  they  are  called,  for  I  wish  to  see  how  the  spirits
produce  them  on  hard  surfaces  "

The  Italian  replied:  "If  he  cannot  fully  cause  them  on
your  table,  I  will  lend  him  strength."

"  What  questions  shall  I  ask?"  I  inquired.

"Ask  him  the  usual  questions  put  to  children  who  are
known  to  have  passed  from  the  earth  in  infancy."

I  followed  the  direction,  and  asked  the  little  boy  if  he
could  and  would  'rap'  for  me?

Immediately  he  drew  near  the  table,  and  raised  himself
about  two  feet  above  its  level.  Still  the  gentleman  held  his
left  hand.  His  right  hand  being  at  liberty,  he  moved  it  rap-
idly in  several  directions  for  a  few  minutes;  then  brought
it  in  a  calm,  firm  manner,  at  a  right  angle  with  the  surface  of
the  table.  The  beautiful  spontaneous  grace  accompanying
these  gestures  made  the  exhibition  exceedingly  entertaining.
His  hand  had  not  been  in  this  posture  more  than  three  min-
utes, remaining  fixed  as  by  the  strongest  effort  of  Will,  when  1
saw  a  current  of amber  softness  pass  down  from  the  middle  finger
to  the  table,  on  which  slight  concussions  were  instantly  produced.
This  phenomenon  was  very  beautiful.  But  I  saw  how  dim-
cult  it  was  to  make  them  loud,  or  rapidly,  as  he  and  I  desired.
The  concussions  were  caused  by  the  fine  current,  proceeding
from  the  hand  of  the  spirit,  directed  by  the  will-power,  coming
in  sudden  contact  with  the  electricity  which  reposed,  like  latent
heat,  in  the  interstices  of  the  board — in  the  spaces  between  the
particles  composing  the  top  and  standard  of  the  table.

Now,  as  it  was  clearly  manifested  that  he  could  make  the
sounds,  I  asked  him  if  he  would  "spell  out  to  me  his  name?"

He  hesitated.  He  looked  at  his  companion,  who  did  not
return  his  gaze;  then,  he  locked  at  me.  I  saw  he  was  con-
fused; and  this  surprised  me.  I  thought  he  was  old  enough
to  tell  me  his  earthly  name,  given  to  him  by  his  parents,  be-
fore he  left  them.  Now  it  occurred  to  me  that  he  resembled
very  much  a  little  boy  I  once  saw,  who  died  in  Poughkeepsie,
by  the  name  of  'Edward.' And  I  can  assure  you  that  my


80  THE EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.

surprise  was  not  lessened,  when  /  saw  him  lrap  ouV the
name  I  had  in  my  mind.

But  I  resolved  to  put  another  question:  "Can  you  tell  me
how  old  you  were  when  }^ou  left  the  earth?"

Again  he  hesitated' — again  he  looked  at  the  Italian,  who
told  him  to  answer  if  he  could;  then  he  looked  at  me.  Im-
mediately the  quick  current  passed  into  the  table,  the  sounds
were  made,  and  he  spelled  out — "five  years  old."  "This
cannot  be,"  thought  I,  unless  he  died  yesterday,  for  this  seems
to  be  his  present  age."  This  idea  had  no  sooner  taken  a  form
in  my  mind,  than  he  spelled  out — 'No.'  This  'No'  was  pre-
cisely the  conclusion  of  my  own -private  thinking.  I  turned  to
the  Italian  for  an  explanation;  he  replied:  "It  is  well.  Pro-
ceed with  thy  questionings."

Again  I  asked:  "Can  you  tell  me  where  you  were  born;
in  what  country,  village,  or  city?"

Before  I  put  this  question,  I  had  resolved  to  think  of  no
earthly  locality;  for  I  began  to  suspect  that  my  thoughts  had
influenced  him  in  his  replies.  I  waited  patiently  for  the
response,  and  he  rapped  out — "I  belong  to  the  third  circle."

"Were  you  born  in  the  third  circle?"  I  inquired.

"ISTo,"  he  responded.

"Where,  then,  were  you  born?"

" I never  teas  bom"  said  he.

"Have  you,  then,  always  lived  in  the  spirit  world?"

"Yes,"  he  replied,  "and  this  (pointing  to  the  Italian) —
this  is  my  father/"

The  little  boy — that  charming  being  who  never  (he  said)
was  born  on  earth — had  just  completed  the  last  sentence;
when  the  gentleman  indicated  to  me  the  propriety  of  asking
no  more  questions.  He  gently  drew  the  child  nearer  him,
and  then  addressed  me  in  the  following  terms:

"Life  is  a  chain  of  discipline.  It  hath  been  well  said,  that
there  is  not  a  chord  in  man's  nature  which  some  event  does
not  strike  at  some  time.  The  riches  of  experience  are  strewn
all  over  the  highway  of  human  progress.  And  he  who  has
not  gathered  a  full  discipline  on  earth,  has  lost  for  consider-
able time  the  foundation  on  which  his  higher  education  stands.

"Great  trials  and  heroisms,"  he  continued,  "make  man-


THE  EXTERNAL ARGUMENT.  81

kind's  history  interesting  and  instructive.  The  alternations  of
joy  and  sorrow  have  their  positive  benefits;  all  penalties  are
negative,  and  serve  to  "make  rough  places  smooth,"  although
the  process  is  frequently  imperious  and  exceedingly  severe !
"When  the  sky  pours  out  its  tears,  when  the  tempest  strikes
the  sea,  when  nature  portends  her  elemental  strifes,  and  the
thunders  leap  down  the  wild  mountains,  rushing  with  all
the  wildness  and  power  of  the  cataract ;  then — then  be  calm
and  believing ;  for  when  the  shower  is  past,  when  the  clouds
pass  away,  when  the  sun  shines  out  again  over  the  green
fields,  over  the  green  lawns  and  variegated  meadows,  then  the
good  of  the  whole  is  revealed,  and  a  million  birds  will  join  num-
berless flowers  in  a  hymn  of  gratitude  for  all  that's  passed.

"I  come  to  earth  to  learn  this  lesson.  This  young  mind
(referring  to  the  little  boy)  left  the  earth  three  hours  after
his  birth.  He  has  therefore  no  knowledge  of  the  uses  of  the
physical  senses;  no  memories  of  his  parentage;  he  believes
his  origin  to  be  unnatural ;  and  all  this  is  a  serious  disad-
vantage ;  for  unless  the  mind  receives  a  knowledge  of  things
through  the  physical  senses,  and  unless  those  senses  are  used
properly,  and  as  long,  too,  as  they  will  serve  the  soul,  the  con-
dition and  culture  of  the  spirit  is  impaired,  and  it  must  return
to  earth,  to  see,  to  learn,  to  feel,  and  to  reason.  Thou  hast  had,
during  this  interview,  an  illustration  of  the  cause  of  many
spiritual  contradictions,  viz:  spirits  coming  near  the  earth
to  learn  of  things,  reading  the  mind  of  the  medium  or  ques-
tioner, and  responding  in  accordance  therewith ;  not  knowing,
oftentimes,  any  thing  to  the  contrary — believing  it  to  be  the
truth — thus  leading  men  to  confusion  and  to  doubt.  This
is  all  traceable  to  the  absence  of  the  right  kind  and  right
quantity  of  true  experience  in  the  communicating  mind."

From  the  foregoing,  we  may  infer  that  an  education  through
the  bodily  senses — through  the  eyes  and  ears  and  physical
nervous  system — is  essential  to  an  accurate  comprehension  of
many  things  in  the  spiritual  world.  We  may  also  infer,  that
the  intelligent  inhabitants  of  the  other  world  desire  that  we
should  become  educated,  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  while  on  the
earth,  even  though,  as  with  children  at  school,  we  shed  bitter
tears  in  learning  our  various  lessons.


THE  SPIRITUAL  CONGRESS


FIRST SESSION.


It  is  now  presumed  that  the  reader  is  in  a  sufficiently  ad-
vanced stage  of  mental  preparedness  to  be  interested  in  the
relation  of  the  following  celestial  wonder.  Serene  and  high,
distributed  into  harmonious  groups,  surrounded  with  a  glory
altogether  inexpressible,  I  saw  an  innumerable  host  of  happy
beings,  engaged  in  examining  mighty  secrets  and  propound-
ing deep  thoughts,  and  canvassing  earth's  remotest  bounds
for  beacon-lights  to  guide  our  erring  race  towards  higher
destinations.  When  I  think  of  this  celestial  scene,  my  pulse
beats  higher  and  my  brain  rapidly  grows  unfit  for  calm  per-
ception. Yet  will  I  press  down  the  gladsome  emotions,  and,
with  the  surging  tides  of  enthusiasm  flowing  in  harmony  with
the  causes  of  mental  deliberation,  will  I  proceed  to  give  the
reader  a  relation  of  what  I  beheld.

For  purposes  of  health  and  recreation,  we  spent  the  most
of  last  summer  near  the  ocean.  We  were  pleased  to  find  a
quiet  retreat  at  the  Cottage  owned  by  Jesse  Hutchinson — one
of  the  "Band  of  Brothers  from  the  Old  Granite  State,"  who
is  now  in  California.

This  cottage  is  situated  almost  in  the  middle  of  Lynn,
Mass.,  but  is  very  retired,  from  the  fact,  that  it  is  built  upon
a  high  rocky  eminence,  and  is  somewhat  difficult  of  access,
either  on  foot  or  with  horses.  From  its  lofty  situation,  this
romantic  residence  has  received  the  name  of  "High  Rock
Cottage,"  a  locality  well  calculated  to  awaken  the  powers  of
song,  and  enlarge  one's  conceptions  of  the  world  we  live  in.
This  is  true  for  several  reasons,  a  portion  of  which  I  will
detail  to  the  reader,  to  the  end  that  we  may  together  realize


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  83

all  the  more  perfectly  the  external  realities  connected  with
my  vision.

When  standing  on  the  piazza  of  this  cottage,  the  eye  may
describe  a  vast  tract  of  country  in  every  direction.  The  city
of  Lynn,  spreading  its  numerous  white-painted  habitations
over  several  large  farms,  is  situated  immediately  beneath  the
brow  of  the  mount,  and  is  visible  in  all  directions.  East-
wardly,  whence  the  sun  comes  dancing  up  the  crimsoned  sky,
rolls  the  mighty  ocean,  with  its  unceasing  motion ;  yet  whose
bosom  is  as  quiet  and  musical  at  times  as  the  song-bird's
gladsome  harmonies  when  accompanied  with  the  modulating
breathings  of  lonely  pines.  The  cottage  windows,  during
an  August  night,  when  the  inhabitants  of  cities  are  miserable
with  excessive  heat,  unmitigated  by  a  single  refreshing  breeze,
are  entered  by  the  ocean  air,  fragrant  writh  saline  odors,  and
ample  in  its  properties  to  bless  the  constitution  of  man.

In  the  distance  another  favorite  retreat,  known  as  JNahant,
breaks  pleasingly  upon  the  eye.  To  the  left,  about  eight
miles  away,  is  seen  the  city  of  Boston.  (It  was  apparently
thirty  miles  in  the  atmosphere,  a  little  east  of  this  city,  where
the  Spiritual  Congress  was  located  which  I  had  the  unutter-
able happiness  to  behold.)  But  the  piazza  of  "High  Rock
Cottage,"'  is  not  by  far  the  most  attractive  portion  of  this
property.  For  j ust  behind  the  house,  but  much  more  elevated,
is  a  kind  of  tower  or  observatory.  JSext  to  the  ocean  side,
this  elevated  'look-out'  is  the  favorite  resort  for  travelers  and
the  inhabitants  of  Lynn.  From  the  street  below  the  brow
of  the  mount,  if  I  remember  right,  there  are  no  less  than
seven  long  flights  of  steps  to  the  tower.  The .  prospect  from
the  upper  windows  of  this  plainly-constructed  Observatory,
is  very  beautiful. But  I  will  not  stop  to  describe.

Having  introduced  the  reader  to  the  Observatory,  situated
on  the  lofty  eminence,  I  have  but  to  say  that  there  it  was  in
the  topmost  apartment  of  that  quiet  retreat,  I  was  impressed
to  retire  for  purposes  soon  to  be  made  manifest.  It  was  just
half-past  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  of  August,
1852,  when  I  received  the  first  intimation  that  a  vision  was
about  to  be  shown  me.  I  knew  how  difficult  it  is  for  the
external-minded  to  realize  the  psychologic  state  necessary


84  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

for  sucli  an  experience.  Christians  are  surely  prepared  to
believe  in  'visions'  and  communion  between  mortals  and
immortals.  In  the  "thus  saith  the  Lord"  of  the  oriental
seers  and  prophets — in  the  visions  of  Ezekiel  and  Daniel —
the  instance  of  the  angel  appearing  unto  Joseph  and  Mary — •
the  rolling  away  of  the  stone  from  the  mouth  of  the  Holy
sepulchre — Peter's  miraculous  liberation  from  prison — Paul's
testimony  of  seeing  great  glory  and  unutterable  things — the
solemn  declarations  of  Swedenborg — the  attestations  of  Rev.
William  Tennent,  who  declared,  long  after  having  a  vision,
that  "for  three  years  the  sense  of  divine  things  continued
so  great,  and  every  thing  else  appeared  so  completely  vain
when  compared  to  heaven,  that  could  I  have  had  the  world
for  stooping  down  for  it,  I  believe  I  should  not  have  thought
of  doing  it" — by  these,  with  the  intelligent  Bible  receiver,
the  probability  of  the  following  is  sufficiently  well  established.

An  impression  comes  to  my  mind,  tells  me  to  get  paper
and  pencil,  retire  to  a  quiet  room,  and  write  down  every
thing  I  may  see  and  hear.  I  forthwith  obey.  I  sit  tran-
quilly— waiting  patiently,  for  any  thing  which  may  occur.
*  *  *  An  influence,  sweet  and  heavenly,  over-
spreads my  soul,  and  bids  me  'Look  Up.'  I  do  so  But
my  bodily  eyes  see  nothing,  except  the  bending  firmament
— obscured  here  and  there  by  fleecy,  floating  clouds.  Now
my  spiritual  eyes  are  opened,  and  the  vision  is  gloriously
beautiful — a  company  or  assemblage  of  men  from  the  Spirit
Land.  They  seem  to  be  standing  thirty  miles  above  the
earth's  surface,,  where  the  sun  sheds  its  rays  abroad  calmly,
where  the  air  is  wholly  serene.  But  I  do  not  understand
this  exhibition.  What  does  it  mean?  Ah!  now  I  behold
them  conversing  together — can  see  them  gesture  and  move
their  lips — but  I  hear  no  word  pronounced.

A  thin  mellow  atmosphere,  full  of  glory  and  beauty,  ema-
nates from  and  surrounds  them — extending  apparently  in
every  direction  about  twenty  feet.  The  upper  edge  is  tinted
prismatically,  as  if  the  sun  is  about  to  paint  a  rainbow  on
the  spiritual  sky

These  men,  as  I  feel  inwardly  prompted  to  term  them.


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  85

seem  very  natural ;  although  I  well  know  that  they  are  spir-
itual. They  move,  and  talk,  and  smile,  and  gesticulate,  just
as  men  ordinarily  do;  yet  with  far  more  ease,  more  grace,
more  spontaneousness,  as  if  unfettered  and  free  alike  in  body
and  mind.  Their  features  emit  a  sudden  radiance — a  some-
what intense  but  variegated  illumination — as  it  were,  from
minds  highly  endowed  with  wisdom;  yet  skilled  in  the
divine  art  of  self-government  and  individual  culture.  Ah!
I  see  now:  those  are  illustrious  men — men  of  superior
natural  endowments;  great  men,  because  good;  strong,
because  righteous;  loving,  because  wise  and  deeply  versed
in  knowledge.

Still,  I  do  not  comprehend  this  vision ;  yet  I  could  not  but
'look  up'  and  see  it  all.

Far  beyond  this  company  in  the  extreme  distance — appar-
ently several  thousand  miles  away — I  distinctly  behold  some-
thing approaching!*  I  wonder  what  it  can  be?  It  looks
like  a  large  white  cloud,  shining  and  sparkling  with  many
colors;  and  yet  it  is  not  transparent.  Now  it  appears  like
an  immense  mount  of  snow — wholly  overspread  with  the

*  Unassisted  by  any  outward  references,  but  strictly  from  memory,  I
have  sketched  out  and  have  had  engraved  expressly  for  this  volume,  tho
external  situation  and  appearance,  from  a  short  distance,  of  the  locality  of
my  extraordinary  vision.  A  circumstance  so  wonderful  and  impressive
could  not  fail,  as  the  reader  may  well  imagine,  to  fill  my  mind  with  plea-
surable recollections  of  the  'local  habitation,'  where  those  celestial  scenes
were  first  presented.  From  the  descriptions  already  given  of  the  situation
of  Lynn,  of  High  Rock  Cottage,  and  its  environments,  the  reader  will
recognize  the  prospective  points  of  the  engraving.

The  Spiritual  Congress,  as  beheld  by  me  in  session,  is  necessarily,  from
the  nature  of  the  subject,  imperfectly  indicated  in  the  aerial  distance,  a  little
left  of  Boston  city.  The  four  spirits  who  I  beheld  leave  the  assembly,  who
drew  nigh  unto  me,  and  immersed  their  thoughts  in  mine,  are  also  repre-
sented in  closer  proximity  to  the  tower  where  I  was  then  writing  the  com-
munications, as  I  will  hereafter  relate.

The  engraving  may  not  be,  in  every  particular,  an  accurate  portraiture  of
the  cottage  and  surroundings;  but  whatever  of  imperfection  is  discoverable
in  it,  should  be  attributed  to  the  defects  of  my  external  memory  of  the
localities,  and  not  to  any  mal-cxecution  on  the  part  of  the  artist;  for  we
are  not  without  grateful  recollections  of  the  engraver,  W.  H.  Dodd,  of  this
city,  for  his  artistic  execution  of  the  various  pictorial  designs  which  accom-
pany and  illustrate  this  volume.
8


I


^IffiftJ-iss


^


HHN
MS


1)11


1


;.  p4#,'


'


88  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

leaves  of  mammotli  flowers.  But  as  I  continue  to  look,  all
these  appearances  gradually  fade  away.  As  the  mass  ap-
proaches, I  see  a  great  multitude  of  spirits  and  angels,  both
male  and  female,  coming  rapidly  toward  the  assemblage  I
first  saw.  But  they  do  neither  fly  nor  walk;  but  they  ride
upon  a  magnificent  Shining  Kiver  of  what  appears  to  be
electricity ;  and  yet  it  is  different  from  this  element.  It  looks
far  more  like  the  principle  of  Light  in  a  state  of  condensa-
tion or  liquifaction !  This  celestial  river,  like  terrestrial
waters,  has  tides  which  ebb  and  flow  through  space  from  one
pole  of  the  Universe  to  the  other,  for  I  can  see  no  beginning
nor  ending  to  it !

But  I  do  see  that  this  Biver  of  Light  has  innumerable
branches,  flowing,  one  toward  the  earth,  another  toward  the
planet  Mars,  another  toward  Jupiter,  another  toward  Saturn;
and  so,  also,  onward  to  the  planets  and  orbs  beyond.  And
now,  as  I  look  at  them  minutely,  I  see  that  the  tides  of  all
these  rivers  seem  to  set  strongly,  and  with  inconceivable
rapidity,  this  way — from  the  hidden  fountain  in  infinitude
toward  all  the  planets  and  constellations  in  our  department
of  the  material  universe !  And  I  remember  now  to  have  seen
this  river  before,  on  the  flowing  bosom  of  which  spirits  and
angels  often  glide  from  place  to  place;  but  I  never  saw  it
before  so  intelligently — with  so  much  internal  satisfaction
and  insight  into  its  use  and  quality.  And  it  comes  to  me
now  that  I  shall  examine  this  celestial  wonder  with  far  more
minuteness  at  some  future  time,  and  learn  then  and  thereby
the  exact  philosophy  of  the  means  of  travelling  adopted  by
the  beings  of  the  other  world.  I  await  this  disclosure  with
gratitude  and  patience.

The  multitude  has  now  joined  the  first  party;  and  they
number  many,  many  thousands.

Now  they  arrange  themselves  into  harmonious  groups  and
circles,  as  if  to  systematize  their  numbers;  some  with  their
faces  toward  the  North ;  others  toward  the  South ;  and  others
still  face  the  East;  and  others  the  West.

"What  can  this  all  mean  ?  Ah !  now  I  see  them,  as  they
quietly  and  benignantly  gaze  upon  the  different  Towns,  Vil-
lages, and  Cities  on  this  side  of  the  earth's  surface. They


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  89

seem  to  he  looking  into  the  mind  and  reading  the  heart  of  every
human  being/  0!  that  the  human  world  could  realize  this
inspection;  and  comprehend  the  righteous  judgment  now
being  exercised  upon  it!  Every  thing  is  visible!  Ignorance
and  Crime — Poverty  and  Wretchedness,  together  with  their
innumerable  hideous  Causes — are  seen  to-day  by  the  noble
beings  who,  one  daj^,  we  shall  meet  face  to  face!

Now  I  behold  four  spirits  leave  the  Western  group,  and
approach  me.  They  come  very  moderately;  conversing
together.  Now  they  halt  in  the  air — apparently,  about  two
miles  from  the  place  I  now  occupy  in  writing.

Not  only  my  internal  eyes,  but  my  spiritual  ears  are  also
opened;  and  I  am  both  Clairvoyant  and  Glairaudiant — can
see  and  hear  the  Things  which  are  spiritual  as  easily  as  if  they
were  on  the  earth.  And  now,  with  speechless  joy,  I  recog-
nize the  four  individual  spirits  as  my  most  dear  friends  in
the  Spirit  Land!  Be  still,  be  calm,  0,  my  soul!  and  listen
to  the  illustrious  Galen,  who  is  now  about  to  address  me.
He  speaks:

"We,  your  guardians  in  the  spirit,  will  now  give  you  the
ground-plan  and  frame-work  of  a  Discourse  which  you  may
hold  your  spirit  in  ample  readiness  to  deliver  when  requested,
during  your  sojourn,  trusting  in  that  Faith  which  moveth
mountains,  that  we  will  strengthen  and  inspire  your  mind,
by  direct  intercourse  and  illustration,  to  enforce  your  thoughts
and  complete  the  superstructure."

After  the  spirit  of  Galen  had  pronounced  these  words  of
encouragement  with  an  indescribable  richness  of  intonation,
I  waited  quietly  for  something  more ;  but  he  uttered  not  a
word.  And  yet  upon  his  countenance  something  fraternal
seemed  to  say :  "You  may  ask  me  questions."  This  I  accord-
ingly did,  and  inquired :

"Will  you  tell  me  what  means  the  vast  assemblage  which
you  just  left  behind?"

"That  Consociation,"  he  replied,  "is  a  detachment  of  the
Koyal  Circle  of  the  Foli:  being  a  convocation  of  many  spirits
that  were  born  on  the  earth;  who,  in  their  present  estate,
belong  to  that  Wisdom  Circle  which  is  conjoined,  in  the
bonds  of  divine  congeniality,  to  the  circle  of  Fraternal  Love."
8* .


90  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

Being  deeply  gratified  by  this  reply,  I  asked:  "Will  yon
tell  me  who  some  of  them  are?"

"Their  earthly  names,"  said  he,  "are  known  by  the  char-
acters they  themselves  inscribed  on  the  history  of  their  race ;
by  the  gardens  of  affection  they  established  in  the  memories
of  thousands  through  the  force  of  their  genius  and  culture."

At  this  he  stopt  speaking,  and  I  suppose  he  designed  not  to
tell  me  the  names  of  some  of  the  spirits  assembled ;  and  so,
recurring  to  the  'Discourse'  which  he  had  promised  me,  I
asked:  "  Will  you  now  give  me  the  ' ground-plan, ?  &c.,  of  the
lecture  which  I  must  deliver?"

And  immediately  he  replied:  "We  will  impress  you  to-
night. Soon  you  shall  know  more  of  this  vision."  And
forthwith  he  departed  with  his  companions  as  he  came,  and
I  saw  nothing  further.  But  this  impression  flowed  distinctly
into  my  mind:  that  the  commission  which  I  had  just  received
to  go  forth  and  lecture  was  "per  order  of  supermundane  Wis-
dom— the  Natural,  Spiritual,  and  Celestial  degrees  or  phases
of  which,  (so  far  as  the  other  world  is  related  to  this  life,)  the
four  spirits  whom  I  had  seen  individually -and  collectively
represented." Their  names  on  earth  were:

Claudius  Galen,  Representative  of  Natural  Wisdom.

James  Victor  Wilson,  " "  Transitional "

The  Athenian  Solon,  " "  Spiritual "

The  Beloved  John,  " "  Celestial

'Natural  Wisdom,'  as  I  have  been  led  to  apprehend,  means
the  mental  ability  to  comprehend  the  teachings  of  science —
to  understand  the  nature,  relationship,  and  application  of
facts  from  which  science  is  derived.  And  I  may  here  add
that,  for  years,  Galen  has  ever  been  the  mind  to  suggest  cer-
tain scientific  facts — medical,  geologic,  historical — with  which
I  have,  from  time  to  time,  illustrated  the  Philosophy.

'Transition  Wisdom'  signifies  the  mental  state  in  which
the  individual  realizes  much  fondness  for  the  facts  of  Love,
Friendship,  examples  of  Devotion,  pertaining  to  the  affec-
tions and  emotions;  such  as  poetry,  music,  painting,  sculp-
ture, &c;  and  the  reader,  by  referring  to  Friend  Wilson's
previous  communications  in  the  former  volume  on  this  sub-
ject, will  doubtless  observe  this  peculiarity  in  his  mind.


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  91

'Spiritual  Wisdom'  is  devoted  to  the  comprehension  of
principles  of  exalted  association  in  the  other  life — a  knowl-
edge of  progressions,  back  and  forth,  through  multitudinous,
experience  and  developments.

'Celestial  Wisdom'  I  cannot  define,  for  I  have  never
entered  into  its  significations.  The  former  phases  have
been  experienced  to  some  degree  by  many  minds  on  earth.
From  what  I  have  seen,  however,  I  infer  celestial  wisdom  to
be  the  mental  power  to  realize  the  Divine  Being  in  many
departments  of  his  sublime  relation  to  the  Spirit  Universe.

SECOND SE  S  S  I  0  N.

Ox  this  ocasion  I  was  situated  alone  in  a  bed-chamber  at
High  Eock  Cottage.  It  was  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day ;
the  time  was  twenty  minutes  past  seven  o'clock.  The  mut-
tering voices  of  the  angry  waters,  and  the  gloomy  clouds,
burdened  with  wind  and  rain,  gave  me,  as  I  remember,  a
singular  feeling,  before  entering  the  Superior  Condition,  as
if  the  night  was  too  severe  for  spirits  to  be  near  the  earth !

The  sky  is  overshadowed  by  heavy  clouds,  and  the  rain
steadily  falls  to  earth.  The  physical  indications  are  that  the
night  will  be  dark  and  gloomy.  The  winds  sob  and  sigh
with  a  shrill  voice  over  the  adjoining  promontories;  and  the
distant  ocean  moans  heavily,  as  if  anticipating  a  stormy  visit
ation.  Nevertheless,  punctual  to  my  engagement,  here  I  am
at  my  table — with  paper  and  pencil  ready — waiting,  with  as
much  passivity  of  soul  as  my  will  can  command,  for  the
communication  which  was  promised  me  this  morning  by  the
good  Galen. I  have  been  waiting  fifteen  minutes  already.

But  now  it  comes!  After  the  manner  of  gentle  music,  the
sweet  influence  flows  upon  and  overspreads  my  whole  being.
The  effect  is  indescribable.  Vital  action  is  partially  suspended.
In  the  appropriately  descriptive  phraseology  of  Daniel,  ch.
x.  v.  8:  "And  there  remained  no  strength  in  me:  for  my
comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into  corruption,  and  I  retained
no  strength."  A  profound  sleep  gradually  takes  my  mem-
bers into  custody. Yet  I  am  not  slumbering;  but  more


92  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

completely  awake  than  before.  My  brain  is  peculiarly  calm.
Still  I  feel  a  beautiful  waltz  going  on  in  its  chambers,  amid
the  nerves  and  tissues  there,  as  if  music,  like  an  element  of
self-consciousness  and  voluntary  fluidity,  had  overflowed  my
faculties  of  thought — attuning  them  to  the  ways  of  harmony.
Yea,  I  now  comprehend  it. — This  is  the  sovereign  Law  of
Nature  asserting,  temporarily,  its  supremacy  over  my  mind.
This  is  the  grand  cause  of  all  mental  exaltation !  0,  that  all
children  could  be  born  thus — all  men  live  thus — how  glori-
ous then  would  be  the  sons  of  God !  I  have  enjoyed  this
mental  harmony  many  hundreds  of  times;  but  never  stopt
before  to  realize  progressively  the  delightful  processes  in  the
economy  which  bring  it  about.  How  I  wish  for  words  to
describe  them !

But  now  my  spiritual  senses  are  unlocked.  My  eyes  are
uplifted,  and  again  I  behold  the  vision.  Again  I  see  the  vast
Congress  of  spirits  and  angels — apparently,  still  thirty  miles
above  the  earth's  surface — a  little  south  of  the  city  of  Boston
in  the  State  of  Massachusetts.  The  atmosphere  which  I  saw
this  morning,  as  enveloping  the  assemblage,  has  become  more
brilliant,  and  is  inexpressibly  beautiful;  it  is  broader  and
higher;  and  the  prismatic  distribution  of  colors  is  more
exquisite,  and  produces  an  effect  upon  me  which  I  cannot
describe.

Other  alterations  are  also  visible.  The  groups  are  far
more  numerous.  So  abundant  are  they,  I  cannot  count  them.
Ah !  now  I  see  that  many  thousands  of  the  good  and  true
immortals  have  arrived  since  my  morning's  observation.
The  reading  and  judging  of  the  world — that  sublime  looking
into  the  conditions  and  the  hearts  of  the  motives  of  men — is
now  almost  completed,  and  the  various  groups  now  constitute
a  grand  Consilium — being,  to  all  appearance  absorbed  in
conversation  and  in  calm  debate!

All  this  still  remains  incomprehensible — wholly  wrapt  in
impenetrable  mystery.  For  the  vision  is  new  to  me;  and
not  having  an  interpretation  given  me,  I  strive  in  vain  to
understand  it. Still  I  must  continue  my  observations.

I  now  behold  some  changes  taking  place  in  the  western
wing  of  the  body. A  group  on  the  right  is  now  disbanded.


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  93

Its  members  seem  to  be  seeking  new  places  among  other  cir-
cles. Yet  I  see  nothing  of  the  four  spirits  who  so  kindly
visited  me  this  morning.  Where  are  they?  Ah!  now  I
behold  them.  I  see  them  just  emerging  from  the  extreme
left  of  the  multitude.  Now  they  approach  deliberately ;  they
halt  precisely  as  before;  and  turning  their  beaming  coun-
tenances toward  me,  they  seem  more  than  ever  disposed  to
communicate  the  noble  thoughts  with  which  they  overflow.

What  a  scene  is  this !  The  night  is  dark,  the  rain  descends,
the  winds  shriek  among  the  rocks  and  cliffs,  yet  they — that
beautiful  company — stand  unharmed  above  the  lower  sphere
of  storm-clouds  and  tempestuous  rain,  which  hover  over  the
earth.  From  where  they  stand,  all  below  is  dark  and  misty,
while  all  above  is  bright,  starlit,  and  beautifully  serene.  The
earth  is  beneath  their  feet.  They  have  triumphed  over  the
wreck  of  matter  visible  at  the  hour  of  death;  they  have,  indeed,
escaped  from  bondage;  they  are  no  longer  involved  in  the
material  trials  of  our  rudimental  state;  and  yet  how  touching
is  the  cheerfulness  with  which  they  come  back  to  earth!
How  willingly  do  they  gaze  into  the  mangers  and  humble
places  wherein  Truth  is  born!  How  compassionately  do
they  examine  the  mental  cemeteries  wherein  Error,  conse-
crated by  scholastic  Ignorance,  lies  entombed  in  sacred  garb !
*  Time  passes  rapidly. I  am  surprised  that

friend  Wilson  does  not  come  to  speak  with  me,  nor  John
nor  Solon — friends  from  whom  I  have  derived  the  highest
thoughts,  with  whom  I  have  exchanged  the  finest  sympa-
thies— why  do  they  not  come  nearer?  Ah!  now  the  good
Galen  is  approaching.  He  draws  very  nigh !  The  distance
between  us  is  not  more,  it  seems  to  me,  than  one-quarter  of
an  English  mile. He  is  now  about  to  speak.

(Here  he  gave  me  many  private  instructions  and  directions
about  what  lectures  I  should  deliver;  how  I  should  obtain
impressions  of  my  discourses;  how  to  examine  the  mental
condition  of  my  audience,  &c,  &c,  all  of  which  I  feel  not  at
liberty  to  disclose  in  detail.)

During  the  speaking  of  these  directions,  I  was  again  forcibly
reminded  of  the  language  of  Daniel:  that  "1  alone  saw  the
vision"  of  the  angel,  and  while  "there  remained  no  strength


94  THE SPIEITUAl CONGRESS.

in  me,"  yet  "heard  I  the  voice  of  his  words;  and  when  I
heard  the  voice  of  his  words,  then  was  I  in  a  deep  sleep,"
yet  was  I  more  awake  than  ever!  When  he  had  finished
his  private  remarks,  he  spoke  more  openly,  and  said:

"You  may  now  ask  questions,  on  condition  that  you
report  them  entire  to  all  persons  who  have  ears  to  hear!"

I  answered,  that  I  would  do  so.  And  these  words  I  spoke
audibly  with  my  physical  tongue ;  for  thus  he  addressed  me ;
and  I  heard,  with  great  joy,  the  marvellous  music  of  his  voice.*

I  now  asked:  "Will  you  tell  me  why  friend  Wilson,  and
John,  and  Solon  do  not  come  nearer."

" Because,' '  replied  he,  "I  am  delegated  with  the  power
especially  to  speak  to  you  of  things  which  they  cannot  so
easily  impart.  Be  patient,  and  they  will  each  converse  with
you,  and  ivill  give  you  thouglits  and  strength  while  you  are
teaching  orally  !"f

I  tried  to  feel  truly  grateful  for  this  blessing,  and  again
ventured  to  ask  concerning  the  consociation  of  spirits.
'•What,"  I  inquired,  "is  the  object  of  yon  vast  multitude  of
spirits  who  have  been  in  session  so  many  hours?"

"They  are  spirits,  as  you  incorrectly  term  them,  originally
from  the  earth,"  he  replied.  "They  have  convoked  for  the
purpose  of  weighing  kings,  emperors,  tyrants,  teachers,  and
theologians  in  the  balance  of  Justice  and  Truth.  And  rnene,
mene,  tekel,  apharsiyi,  is  written  all  over  their  institutions.
Men,"  he  continued,  "have  commented  on  the  contents  of
the  Bible  with  a  gaudy  show  of  skillful  erudition.  But  the
true  commentary  is  now  being  written.  When  completed,
it  will  be  found  to  be  'A  New  Dispensation' — an  era  of  ipsy-
chological  revealments  and  spiritual  progressions — the  ripen-
ing up  and  culmination  of  all  the  Experiences  of  Humanity —
revealing  a  unitary  combination  of  Truths  ^  unspeakably
brighter  than  the  noon-day  sun!"

At  this  speaking,  I  was  deeply  moved.  "Can  you  tell  me,"
I  asked,  "when  this  investigation  will  terminate?"

*  This  phenomenon  is  almost  entirely  new  with  me;  because  in  all  my
converse  with  spirits  hitherto,  with  a  very  few  exceptions,  the  process  has
been  carried  on  by  and  confined  to  a  silent  mental  communion.

f  The  truth  of  this  promise  I  have  frequently  realized.


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  95

He  answered :  "  When  they  shall  have  discovered  from  out
of  all  the  races  of  men,  Twelve  Teachers  of  Philosophy,  and
enough  media  to  awaken  the  advocates  of  sacred  superstitions
from  the  delusive  sleep  which  has  befallen  them."

"Can  I  assist  you  in  this  work?"  I  asked.

"Yes."

"How?"

"By  teaching,"  he  replied,  "when  and  as  you  are  most
interiorily  impressed."

(He  now  seemed  disposed  to  terminate  his  communication.
He  gently  withdrew  a  little,  and  turned  away  his  face  lov-
ingly toward  his  companions.  Yet  he  evidently  lingered  to
say  something  more;  and  so  I  interrogated  again:)

"What  do  you  mean  by  'Teachers  of  Philosophy?'"

"We  mean,"  he  replied,  "those  minds  who  can  discern
truthfully,  so  far  as  capacity  extends,  the  Love  and  Wisdom
which  are  bodied  forth  in  things  seen  and  unseen — minds,
living  on  the  earth,  who  can  utter  both  love  and  wisdom  by
mouth  and  by  life  before  the  world."

"Is  it  easy  to  find  such  characters?"  I  asked.

"No!"  he  exclaimed;  "although  many  are  called,  few  are
chosen."

Here  I  thought  of  the  many  talented  men  engaged  in
teaching  theology  and  science,  and  others  managing  the
affairs  of  nations,  and  so  I  ventured  to  ask:

"  Can  you  not  find  the  proper  minds  in  some  of  the  de-
partments of  Church  and  State?"

He  answered:  "Nay — Nay;  it  is  not  easy  to  find  them
there.  The  most  of  them  are  externally  too  superficial,  and
internally  too  unsound."  Here  he  manifested  some  emotion,
and  then  impressively  said:  "The  Church  and  /State  are  two
thieves  between  whom  Truth  is  daily  crucified/"

A  few  moments  of  utter  quietness  now  passed  away,
and  then  I  asked:  "Can  you  explain  to  me  why  the  spirits
impart  to  mankind  contradictory  communications?"

"The  explanation  has  already  been  given  you,"  he  replied,
"in  what  you  were  impressed  to  write  on  the  23d  of  July*

*  This  explanation  may  be  found  in  the  Summary  of  Explanations  at  the
conclusion  of  the  chapter  on  the  different  media.


96  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

Experience  will  graciously  add  the  rest.  Let  all  be  patient
and  calm!"

"Can  I  tell  any  men  or  women  how  to  prepare  themselves
for  Teachers  and  mediums?"

"Nay;  for  we  must  prepare  them  ourselves  by  our  own
especial  influence  and  instigation."

"Can  you  inform  me  by  what  names  some  of  those  spirits
in  yon  innumerable  host  are  known  on  the  earth?"

"Their  names,"  he  replied,  "are  engraved  on  the  monu-
ments of  Humanity — but,  remember,  they  were  their  own
engravers.  I  will  transfer  to  you  for  the  present  a  few  names
of  the  spirit-brothers  who  are  now,  this  very  moment,  urging
forward  the  essential  principles  of  Justice,  and  Wisdom,  and
Truth — interior  philanthropists,  the  lovers  of  their  terres-
trial brethren :  Zoroaster,  Moses,  Solomon,  Paul,  Lycurgus,
Plato,  Christ,  Hippocrates,  Socrates,  Galileo,  Fenelon,  Mo-
zart, Kaphael,  Fourier,  Spinosa,  Byron,  Goethe,  Spurzheim,
Washington,  Franklin,  Channing — these,  together  with  many
thousands  of  no  less  advanced  minds,  though  less  known  to
the  world's  superficial  history,  have  places  assigned  to  them
in  yon  Legislature.

"You  mention  only  the  names  of  celebrated  men,"  I  re-
plied, "are  there  no  women  there?

He  answered:  "Yea,  verily.  You  would  see  no  beauty
in  the  margin  of  yon  atmosphere,  if  there  were  no  women
there.  The  sexes  are  balanced  in  the  Spirit  Land.  Positives
and  negatives  are  conjugally  conjoined.  Because  the  Law
of  Justice  is  the  cause  of  equilibrium;  as  I  have  frequently
told  you.  Consequently,  all  nuptials  among  the  sexes  are
consecrated  by  divine  Truth;  the  wedlock  of  divine  Love
with  divine  Wisdom ;  which  no  man  can  put  asunder."

Immediately,  upon  completing  the  last  sentence,  Galen

turned  away,  and  rapidly  passed  onward  with  the  others,  till

I  saw  them  enter  the  Spiritual  Congress  at  the  precise  point

from  which  they  first  emerged,  and  forthwith  my  vision  ended.

#  ■*  *  *  *  ■*  ->:-

It  is  now  eight  months  since  the  foregoing  was  written.
But  to-day,  being  the  seventh  of  March,  1853,  I  am  partic-
ularly impressed  to  hold  myself  in  readiness,  in  body  and


THE SPIRITUAL C  O  N  C.  It  E  S  S  .  97

mind,  to  record  things  further  concerning  the  Spiritual  Con-
gress. Accordingly,  I  take  plenty  of  out-door  exercise,  very
small  quantities  of  food,  and  am  particular  to  be  passive  in
mind.  *  *  *  To-day,  being  the  eighth,  I  go
into  my  room,  prepare  my  writing  materials,  and  wait  further
impressions.  Now  I  feel  the  overshadowing  presence  of  a
sweet  influence.  It  pervades  my  entire  system.  It  pene-
trates to  my  interior  sensibilities.  It  first  surrounds  me  like
a  warm  fluid- vapor;  then  it  settles  down  through  the  pores
of  the  cuticle ;  now  it  flows  through  my  blood — cooling  and
soothing  it  most  pleasingly;  and  now  I  feel  a  general  slum-
ber stealing  over  my  being.  I  yield  to  it.  And  now,  several
minutes  having  passed,  I  am  quite  ready  for  the  additional
information  promised.

Galen  is  again  approaching!  He  tells  me  to  "write  what-
soever word  is  given."  I  obey.  And  the  following  pages
are,  therefore,  parenthetically  introduced,  between  the  con-
clusion of  the  second  and  the  commencement  of  the  third
vision,  being  esteemed  as  new  and  important  information.


THE JEWISH

"Publius  Abraham,  the  commissioner  ;  Flaccus  Mordaci,  the  architect ;  Jesusi
Josh,  the  warrior ;  Tisah  Ahasiah,  the  ruler  ;  Zeriah  Jehoram,  the  prince  ;  Sol-
omon Ezra,  the  king ;  Helvius  Zolena,  the  satirist ;  Tullius  Cicero,  the  orator ;
Quintus  Cincinnatus,  the  statesman;  Tiberius,  the  emperor;  Paul,  the  writer;
Benedictus  Spinosa,  the  thinker ;  Mordecai  Noah,  the  publisher."

The  Exokd^i. — "Ancient  People  of  the  desert!  Like
rippling  mountain  rills,  sparkling  in  their  limpid  course,  hast
thou  flowed  into  the  ebbless  tides  of  human  history.  From
wildernesses  emerged !  On  the  arid  plain  ye  have  raised  the
monuments  of  skill — gorgeous  towers,  palaces  of  magnifi-
cence, and  domes  gilded  and  starred  with  gold  and  the  azure
amethyst — with  which  ye  think  all  Jewish  fame  and  unity
are  inseparable.  We  come  to  turn  thine  eyes  to  a  New
Jerusalem! Darkness  now  shrouds  each  favorite  spot ;  time

*  The  beautiful  and  wonderful  import  of  these  Delegations  and  Exordia,
will  receive  an  ample  explanation  after  the  record  of  them  is  completed.

9


98  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

hath,  brought  desolations  in  its  wings;  ambitious  hopes  and
great  cities  lay  in  endless  ruins  upon  thy  history's  page;
noble  men,  endowed  with  gifts  of  soul  which  gods  might
claim,  are  remembered  only  as  'having  lived'  and  directed
thy  footsteps ;  but  a  grander  destiny  awaits  thee !  Time  is  thy
changeless  Friend;  we  pray  thee  believe.  Thy  wandering
sons  shall  rest.  The  patriarchs  still  live.  Moses  and  the
Prophets  still  speak  to  thee:  'Onward,  to  the  Mountain  of
the  Lord  thy  God! We  bid  thee  follow  us!'


V


Conversation. — After  writing,  word  by  word,  nearly  as  pos-
sible as  dictated,  the  names  of  the  Jewish  Delegation  and  the
Exordium  to  that  people,  I  felt  moved  to  ask  a  few  questions
concerning  them  as  a  race.  All  supposed  miracles  and
providential  interpositions,  as  Christian's  sacred  writings
inform  the  world,  began  with  the  Jews.  Their  history  is
fraught  with  supernatural  wonders — prophecies,  command-
ments, holy  wars,  preservations  from  vanquishment  and
starvation,  and  miracles  of  every  shade — at  least  so  says  the
record.  About  this  I  ventured  to  ask:  "  Whether  the  Jews
now  live  as  scattered  outcasts  over  the  earth  in  consequence
of  any  special  and  supernatural  transgressions  against  the
Lord's  will?  If  so,  was  their  dispersion  accomplished  by
a  decree  of  the  Supreme  Being?"  To  which  the  communi-
cating mind  replied  as  follows:

"The  law  of  God  groweth  spontaneously  in  the  human
mind ;  by  prayer  and  by  cultivation  of  the  mind,  this  law
is  strengthened  and  vivified ;  then  and  thereby  the  Supreme
speaks  to  man;  whence  proceeds  all  prophetic  knowledge,
all  perception  of  Eight  and  Wrong,  and  all  the  Brotherhood
possible  to  humankind.  The  Israelites  or  Hebrews,  known
as  Jews,  never  completely  obe3^ed  this  law  among  themselves.
A  house  divided  against  itself  must  fall ;  even  so  with  the
Jews  as  a  nation.  They  separated,  as  every  nation  must,
when  the  Law  of  Internal  Unity  is  violated  or  disregarded.
This  is  the  cause  of  the  miracle  of  the  scattering  of  the
tribes.  The  New  Jerusalem  to  which  we  point  this  people
is  the  Union  of  Nations  with  the  Law  of  Universal  Justice."


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  99


THE CHINESE DELEGATION.

"  Hong-alles-si,  the  brave;  Fohi,  the  book-maker ;  Confuicus,  the  axiomist  ;
Copli-ching,  the  ship-builder ;  Sirach,  the  iconoclast;  Tipho-ching,  the  benevo-
lent; Attalus,  the  king;  Nisa,  the  hospitable;  Hiao-Poli,  the  silk-weaver;
Eohi-chinun,  the  kind  emperor;  Hoang-ti,  the  inventor  of  garments ;  See-ma-
kuang,  the  traveler;  Si-ling-chi,  the  cultivator  of  silk;  and  three  score  and
one  others."

The  Exordium. — "China!  Queen  of  the  nations,  Land  of
our  existence,  Home  of  our  beginning,  Child  of  our  remem-
brance, we,  recorded  in  the  Wai-Jci,  unchanged,  unwearied,
having  sprung  into  corresponding  life  and  being  from  the
organic  ruins  of  our  forms;  we,  the  ancestors  and  descend-
ants of  the  dynasty  of  Techin,  companions  of  the  beloved
Hiao-wenti,  of  Yao-  Youenti,  and  of  Ming-ti,  the  writer  of  Ben-
Peking- Saonti,  the  royal  history  now  entombed  beneath  the
Temple  of  Jeddo;  we,  surviving  the  devastations  of  Time,
and  the  wreck  of  national  splendor,  and  the  decay  of  mem-
ories, and  the  endless  growths  of  the  silken  fleece  which
bedeck  the  distant  nations,  and  empurple  now  the  Imperial
Palace  of  Pekin ;  being  thus  thy  kindred,  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  China !  we  come  to  thee  endowed  to  lift  the  curtain
hanging  over  the  archway  of  thy  spiritual  destiny!  With
our  breath  we  will  inspire  the  wise-hearted  to  see  with  under-
standing. Ad-orab- Hi-ling -chi  will  be  a  goddess  to  thee ;  the
earth  shall  learn  by  thy  light;  justice  shall  be  done  to  thy
people,  0  China,  the  Queen  of  Nations."


THE PERSIAN DELEGATION.

"Zoroaster,  the  ruler;  Zoioallah,  the  historian;  Almodhi,  the  prince;  Al-
mamdun,  the  musician;  Abdallah,  the  wanderer;  Gancm,  the  beloved;  Alras-
chid,  the  caliph;  Abdas,  the  priest;  Mahomet,  the  vizier ;  Mohammed,  the
satirist;  Abdallateph,  the  historian,  Genaallah,  the  charitable ;  and  one  score
and  seven  from  other  countries."

The  Exordium. — "Persia!  Through  the  endless  labyrinth
of  prominent  fables  and  obscured  facts,  we  contemplate  your
history.  We  are  thy  children.  Country  of  enchantment!
Where  pleasure-crowned  Princes,  and  imperious  Caliphs  of
the  house  of  Abbas,  have  drawn  the  peri  of  passion  from


100  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

countless  attractions — palaces,  gardens,  vineyards,  beautiful
female  slaves,  pageantries  of  flowers,  galleries  of  fountains,
singing-birds,  gilded  roofs,  embroidered  garments,  and  music
on  every  scale — all  this  we  now  ignore  as  unworthy  thee.
But  what  we  most  delight  to  read  on  thy  page,  is,  the  excel-
lence of  thy  genius  and  learning,  the  refinement  of  thy  man-
ners, the  beneficence  of  thy  science,  art,  and  literature,  even
when  Augustan  Eome  was  buried  in  the  injustices  of  Feud-
alism and  ignorance.  It  is  to  this  end  we  come !  Arise,  O
ye  Magi,  teach  the  rulers  and  slaves  that  we  seek  their  eleva-
tion. We  are  not  the  fabulous  Peris,  the  genii  of  the  fallen
Eblis;  neither  the  descendants  of  the  Azzalis.  Allah!  the
Compassionate,  the  Sustainer  eternal  of  the  orbid  infinitude,
remains  thy  unchanging  Friend !  Hear  us,  0  Persia,  and  fol-
low thy  inspirations!"

THE JAPANESE DELEGATION.

"  Firouz-gal,  the  boat-man;  Dinargah,  the  architect;  King-Ling-hi,  the  con-
queror; Montucci,  the  encyclopedist ;  Royer  Collard,  the  French  statesman;
Nour  Balsora-ti,  the  teacher  and  musician;  Gia-sheki-fai,  the  avenger;  Abra-
hini-Manson-effendi,  the  adventurer;  Lycurgus,  the  law  -maker ;  Xerxes,  the
warrior ;  Camaralza  Amgiad,  the  constructor  of  the  gods  and  cabalistic  sym-
bols of  the  dynasties ;  Zoroaster,  the  fourth  king  of  Persia ;  and  two  score  and
six  from  neighboring  tribes."

The  Exokdium. — "Japan!  From  the  elder  nation,  the
Queen,  you  were  born.  Her  sympathies  are  thine.  Wealth
and  intelligence,  and  a  love  of  Peace,  are  thine.  And  we
are  thine !  The  western  nations  think  you  abandoned  to  the
right  of  Ignorance' — buried  in  the  depths  of  Idolatry — nay,
Japan,  we  behold  thee  as  thou  art.  The  Admirer  of  the
beauties  of  the  Mind;  the  Patron  of  elegant  manners;  the
Friend  of  education ;  hence  come  we  to  thee.  Let  the  western
nations  enter  thy  gates !  Let  the  stranger  enter  the  Mosque ;
for  the  day  of  sudden  destruction  is  entombed  amid  the  piles
of  bedarkened  eras.  In  thy  Temples  are  records  of  thy
science  and  art.  'The  symbols  of  thy  religion  unroll  from
lamps  of  purest  brilliancy.  Suspended  from  the  shining
walls  in  the  Jeddo,  on  silk  with  golden  embroidery,  is  written
a  song  of  God. No  nation  can  super-conceive  it. Unite,  0


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  101

Japan,  in  the  cry  of  the  world — "Love  Universal  and  Just-
ice," 0  our  country!  Let  this  be  proclaimed,  0  Emperor,
from  thy  lofty  places!

THE TURKISH DELEGATION.

"  Gengis  Khan,  the  warrior ;  Baber,  the  conqueror ;  Aurungzebe,  the  emperor ,
Mahomet,  the  revelator ;  Khadijah,  the  wife;  Abubeker,  the  warrior ;  Al-ebn-
zoar,  the  physician;  Abu-Obida-Azrilola,  the  beloved;  Suragah  Dowlah,  the
misdirected;  Jacob  and  Rachel;  Rajohah,  the  ruler;  Balkis  Shedim,  the  hos-
pitable woman;  and  threescore  more  of  the  same  people."

The  Exordium. — "Mohamedans,  Arise!  For  there  is  no
God  but  God;  lo!  God  is  great,  and  all  true  persons  are  his
prophets.  Mussulmen,  Arise !  Break  thou  the  sensual  reign;
and  when  ye  pray,  turn  your  eyes  no  more  toward  the  Tem-
ple of  Mecca.  The  Koreish  is  not  the  most  celestial  of  lan-
guages. Islamism  is  not  the  highest  miracle.  As  ye  have
been  ravished  and  amazed  by  the  reading  of  the  Koran —
as  ye  have  the  Abyssinians  for  thy  attendants,  the  Circassian
females  for  thy  slaves,  whose  loveliness  elicits  the  impassioned
expressions  of  thy  Koreish  eloquence — so  art  thou  chained
to  earth.  So  art  thou  sinking,  in  the  magnificent  empire  so
beloved,  beneath  thy  over-wrought  indulgences.  We  come
to  open  thy  dreamy  eyes ;  to  break  the  galling  chain  about
to  crush  our  beloved ;  to  bid  thee  welcome  the  oppressed  of
every  land;  to  open  to  thy  impassioned  gaze  the  boundless
pathway  trod  already  by  thy  children.  We  come  to  thee,  0
ye  the  faithful,  from  the  Mecca  of  a  more  holy  Paradise."

THE GREEK DELEGATION.

"  Simonides,  the  lyrist ;  Patrocles,  the  sandal-maker ;  Parrhasius,  the  artist ;
Pheniciaos,  the  huntsman;  Thales,  the  meditator  ;  Anaxiomander,  the  aerialist;
Diogenes,  the  critic ;  Pythagoras,  the  wise ;  Plato,  the  republican;  Soloniue,  the
teacher ;  Epicurus,  the  philosopher ;  Des  Cartes,  the  French  theogonist ;  and
fifteen  less  known  to  history."

The  Exordium. — "Boiling  through  all  the  nations  are
thy  thoughts,  0  country  of  Bepublics !  Thy  Thoughts  have
power  to  change  whole  eras  of  noisy  conjecture  into  moments
of  sublimest  contemplation.  High  up  o'er  the  Isles,  bathing
the  archipelago  with  interfusing  rays  of  beauty,  bath  arisen
9*


102  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

the  Sun  of  independent  Thought.  It  is  essentially  immortal.
It  can  never  set  in  infinite  forgetfulness.  In  all  Egyptian
germs  do  we  behold  thy  Wisdom,  0  sons  of  Greece!  All
spirit  and  matter,  all  objects  of  thought,  all  thinking  things,
are  partakers  of  each  other's  worth  and  nature.  The  tran-
scendent empires  of  Truth  are  so  constructed  that  the  sons
of  all  nations  shall  see  the  work  of  their  existence.  But  a
mountainous  cloud  hovers  o'er  thee,  between  thee  and  thine
eternal  sun,  leaving  thee  half-hidden  and  powerless,  while  the
distant  nations  enjoy  thy  light  of  former  days,  believing  thy
sons  of  Thought  lost  in  eternal  solicitude.  We  bid  thee,
Grecians,  welcome  industry  to  thy  shores."

THE ROMAN DELEGATION.

"Lucius  Catiline,  the  talented;  Cato,  the  censor;  Romulus,  the  founder;
Celsus,  the  physician;  Olvasus  Chalcidius,  the  non-conformist ;  Ignatius,  the
religio-exarch;  Dominic,  the  writer;  Ganganelli,  the  pope;  Flavius  Clemens,  the
religious  writer;  Gelasius,  the  pope;  John  Adams,  the  legislator;  John  Han-
cock, the  independent ;  Malebranche,  the  meditative  monk"

The  Exordium. — "  Imperial  City  of  the  world !  We  know
of  and  remember  thee  as  the  unrivalled  mistress  of  a  thousand
powers.  The  eyes  of  the  world  have  seen  thee  in  thy  glory ;
in  thy  despotic  and  republic  states;  when  Goth  and  Hun
humbled  thy  pride ;  when  Brutus  lived  and  Cesar  died ;  when
might  and  wealth  ripened  into  idleness,  and  fanned  the  fires
of  sensualism  and  religious  desolation.  Now  thou  art  a  mon-
ument, marking  the  place  where  once  the  brave,  the  good,
the  great,  the  wise,  moved  amid  the  hills  of  grandeur  and
temples  of  matchless  architecture.  Misfortune  hath  stamped
his  seal  deep  upon  thy  brow.  Wretchedness  still  moans  from
thy  dungeons.  Strange  whisperings  of  distress  issue  from  thy
shattered  habitations.  The  deeds  of  Caligula,  the  crimes  of
Nero,  the  unholy  doings  of  Pio  Nono — these  walk  like  ghosts
amid  thy  royal  palaces !  Hark !  the  long-expected  earthquake
grumbles  beneath  thy  throne!  Italy,  like  a  mountainous  vol-
cano is  every  moment  swelling !  Wherefore  we  seek  thee  for
Italy's  sake,  for  humanity's  sake,  for  the  sake  of  France.  Pray,
O  ye  lovers  of  the  Supreme,  for  more  strength  and  better
inspiration."


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  103


THE GERMANIC DELEGATION.

" CEcolampadius,  the  reformer;  Julius  Lafontaine,  the  writer;  Lagerstroem,
the  historian;  Caspar  Fa  gel,  the  resolute;  Von  Klinger,  the  officer;  Emanuel
Kant,  the  critic;  Heraclitus,  the  sorrowful;  Frederic  Von  Schiller,  the  student;
Johanna  Schopenhauer,  the  authoress;  Wolfgang  Von  Goethe",  the  intellectual-
ist;  Aristides,  the  just;  Ptolemy  Philomater,  the  thinker;  and  a  multitude  of
others.'"

The  Exordium. — "As  the  architectural  and  sculptural
grandeur  of  Greece  were  originated  or  suggested  by  the
ancient  people  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  so  came  the  germs
of  thy  soul-feeling,  the  foundation  of  the  intellectual-self-sub-
ordinating-methods  of  thy  scholars,  from  the  Druids  and
neighboring  tribes.  But  how  skeptical  art  thou  in  the  midst
of  infinite  belief!  We  speak  from  our  soul-experience.  All
history  is  subjected  to  criticism;  words  are  traced  to  ground-
less fragments ;  thoughts  are  sundered  till  phantom-like  they
flit  away  amid  the  ruins  of  useless  speculation ;  a  sweeping
and  overwhelming  incredulity  rolls  out  from  the  disciples  of
Niebuhr  ;  yet  art  thou  the  mistress  of  a  thousand  circles  of
Eeform  Thought !  But  now  is  the  time  to  improve  thy  legis-
lation. When  Hungary  asks  for  admission  to  thy  Bepublic,
do  not  refuse!  Thou  may  est  be  the  triumphal  archway  to  a
to  a  great  national  deliverance."


THE POLISH DELEGATION.

"Thaddeus  Kosciusko,  the  freeman;  Ama  Kaunsinoff,  the  artist;  Grammati-
cus  Saxo,  the  historian;  Wilhelmina  Louisa,  the  Prussian  queen;  Ignatius
Krasicki,  the  critic;  Romanzoff,  the  warrior;  Suwarrow,  the  prince;  Wilhelm
Von  Schegel,  the  poet-historian;  KutusofF,  the  gallant  warrior;  Jalenbowsky,
the  peaceful  prince;  Augustin  Ivanhoff,  the  architect;  Johanna  Sergiervitsch,
the  beloved  of  children ;  Malackowski,  the  Polish  petitioner ;  and  many  others."

The  Exordium.' — "Inhabitants  of  Poland!  We  come  not
to  recount  thy  trials,  thy  wrongs,  thy  failings ;  but,  as  loving
Brothers,  we  mingle  our  sympathies  with  thee,  and  breathe
upon  thy  rulers  the  breath  of  Peace  and  Justice.  Each
broken  column  of  Warsaw,  each  remembrance  sacred  of  thy
heroes  and  suffering,  do  we  regard  as  naught,  compared  to
the  apathy  now  stealing  through  the  arteries  of  thy  govern-
ment. An  apathy  to  the  voice  of  the  oppressed! Knowest


104  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

thou  not  how  remotest  parts  of  earth  are  tending  to  one
centre?  Let  thine  heart  beat,  beloved  Poland;  victory  is  of
Truth,  not  of  abundant  armory  or  dauntless  warriors.
Change  thy  weapons!  Aim  for  Peace  and  Justice;  think
of  a  better  world  that  changes  not."

THE RUSSIAN DELEGATION.

"  Joshua,  the  leader;  Falieri,  the  warrior;  Clerfayt,  the  commander ;  Ochlen-
schloder,  the  dramatist;  Derzhavine,  the  officer;  Luther,  the  reformer;  Walven-
steiner,  the  informer;  Bennowasky,  the  magnate;  Beirbaur,  the  serf;  August
Harndenberg,  the  plenipotentiary;  Fezzan  Heirrhstein,  the  composer;  Michael-
ovitsch,  the  czar  and  fraternizer  among  neighboring  kingdoms."

The  Exordium. — "We  listen,  Kussia!  we  listen  for  one
note  of  Harmony  from  thy  palaces,  but  we  hear  the  loud
roaring  of  the  practicing  warrior.  The  rugged  earth  echoes
back  these  songs  of  death.  Thy  imperial  strength  is  con-
trasted with  plebeian  weakness.  The  first  has  wealth  and
artillery;  the  latter,  poverty  and  love  of  Liberty.  To  the
former  we  may  add  nothing,  but  we  can  diminish ;  to  the  last
we  can  diminish  nothing,  but  we  may  add  a  torrent  of  poAver.

Thy  soldiers  will  fail  thee  in  battle ;  their  hearts  shall  beat
for  the  down-trodden.  Thy  officers  shall  fall  in  death  before
thine  eyes ;  and  thy  cunning  shall  depart.  Eussians !  noble-
men of  the  north!  spurn  thy  glittering  swords,  and  commence
the  education  of  thy  youth.  Ignorance  lowers  heavily  o'er
thy  habitations.  Crime  hath  sealed  thy  despotisms;  hath
consigned  them  to  decay."

THE AUSTRIAN DELEGATION.

"  Michael  Bruto,  the  historian;  Christina,  the  queen;  Copernicus,  the  astron-
omer;  Johanna  Dousa,  the  soldier;  Gibbon,  the  logical  chronicler;  John  Huss,
the  reformer;  Laurence  Mosheim,  the  theologian;  Alberstein,  the  traveler;
Ethan  Allen,  the  strong;  Pickler,  the  writer;  Pulaski,  the  freeman;  Zimmer-
man, the  physician;  and  fourscore  of  others."

The  Exordium. — "Austria!  Subjected  to  the  soul-com-
pelling power  of  political  circumstances,  how  indistinct  are
thy  conceptions  of  the  pure  regions  environing  thee — how
materialized !  What  greater,  grander  Thought  hast  thou  than
that of  military  victory? To  thee remonstrance against


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  105

wrong  and  rebellion  against  country  are  identical.  Liberty
and  Crime  are  synonymous  to  thee.  Justice  and  thy  gov-
ernments are  twin-born!  Upon  thy  head,  Austria,  hovers
now  the  Spirit  of  Night.  The  worshippers  of  Truth  have
forsaken  thy  magnificent  temples.  Cathedrals  are  loud-
sounding  with  cries  of  neglected  children.  Keligion  warms
not  the  chambers  of  thy  Governments;  it  has  gone  out  to  its
primeval  sanctuary,  and  sits  upon  the  eternal  hills.  The
unmeasured  universe  surrounds  thee,  0  our  Brothers,  and
thousands  of  souls,  impassioned  with  republican  Love,  have
their  eyes,  and  their  poniards,  aimed  at  thy  hearts.  Would'st
thou  live  and  prosper,  Austria  ?  Then  withdraw  thy  armed
hosts,  and  relax  the  reins  of  despotism."

THE SWEDISH DELEGATION.

"Celsius,  the  botanist;  Adolphus,  the  ling;  Louisa  Ulrica,  the  queen;  Pol-
heim,  the  councillor;  Berzelius,  the  chemist;  Swedberg,  the  revelator;  Ceol-
wulf,  the  neighbor-king ;  Reni  Guelph,  the  ruler;  Albert  Krantz,  the  historian;
Charles  Von  Linnseus,  the  original  botanist ;  Augustus  Barnardi,  the  philologist ;
Bcerhaave,  the  physician;  and  nine  more."

The  Exordium. — "Let  the  world  boast  of  thee,  beloved
Sweden !  Noble  chieftains  have  led  thy  sons  to  victorious
battle.  Stienbock  led  Sweden  to  the  shores  of  courage ;  his
name  is  enshrined  in  the  monuments  of  history.  Swedish  hero-
ism kindles  afresh  at  the  mentioning  of  Charles,  the  hero-king,
and  at  Stienbock,  the  victorious  defenders  of  thy  liberties.
It  hath  been  said  that  '  the  proper  immortality  of  man  is  to
live  in  the  grateful  remembrance  of  posterity,  by  an  exten-
sion of  his  wise  and  noble  designs ;  by  transferring  to  the
bosom  of  his  descendants  the  just  and  noble  sentiments  that
once  actuated  his  own.'  Nay,  illustrious  Sweden,  the  glitter-
ing genius  of  thy  scholars,  and  the  triumphal  laurel  upon
thy  chieftain's  brow,  were  wasted  on  an  arid,  trackless,  ob-
livious Desert,  did  we  not  possess  a  personal  immortality,
inseparably  linked  to  thee,  as  stars  in  the  upper  sky  with  the
growth  of  vegetation.  Let  thy  sons  be  Peaceful  and  Justice-
loving;  teach  them  to  obtain  a  victory  over  Wrong!"


106  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.


THE HUNGARIAN DELEGATION.

"Frederick  Trenck,  the  incarcerated;  Bern,  the  defender;  Potemkin,  the
officer;  Wallenstein,  the  general;  Wilberforce,  the  earnest  freeman;  Robert
Pollok,  the  ideal  describcr ;  Poniatowski,  the  officer  ;  Dzialynski,  the  ambassador ;
Bernardine,  the  earnest ;  Mary,  the  queen  ;  Darnley ,  the  companion  ;  Berlichin-
gen,  the  friend  of  the  peasantry  ;  Tivoglio  Archidamas,  the  Spartan  leader.

The  Exordium. — "  Wandering  in  glooms  of  midnight
sadness,  O  Children  of  Hungary!  and  bewailing  thy  lost
armaments  and  exiled  chieftains,  day  and  night,  how  canst
thou  unitedly  espouse  the  Cause  of  God  and  become  invin-
cible to  thy  foes?  The  Kings  of  Europe  tremble  because  of
thy  hatred  to  their  power.  Treacherous  bands  are  forming
to  obtain  thy  Chief.  The  far-resounding  melodies  of  'Lib-
erty' have  poured  in  overwhelming  streams  from  this  hero
of  Hungary.  This  is  his  crime!  He  has  felt  our  sustaining
power.  His  tongue  hath  discoursed  to  the  oppressed  of
Europe  in  ever-thrilling  words;  because  we  touched  the
immortal  chords  of  his  being,  telling  him  neither  to  weary
nor  despair.  We  are  thy  guardians,  0  Beloved  Country !
Thy  people  need  Education  much  more  than  swords.  Despot-
ism is  based  on  Ignorance ;  and  War  is  its  darling  Offspring.
But  thy  inspired  Chief  is  still  working  for  thy  deliverance.
Thy  Land  shall  bring  forth  the  flowers  of  Peace.  The  Ger-
manic Power  will  unite  in  thy  well-doing.

THE ITALIAN DELEGATION.

"  Trajan  Boccalini,  the  satirist-politico ;  Antonio  Canova,  the  sculptor;  Cor-
reggio,  the  graceful  colorist ;  John  D'Avila,  the  journeyman  of  Andalusia;
Leopold  Berchtoldt,  the  humane;  Sophonia  Angusciola,  the  blind  artist;  Col-
chester, the  reformer;  Artemesia,  the  governess  of  Cairo;  Margaret  D'Ossoli
and  Companion,  the  liberators;  Margaret  Blessington,  the  countess  and  author-
ess; Paul  Von  Rembrandt,  the  writer  of  pictures."

The  Exordium. — "Pictorial  beauty,  and  deep  wisdom,
and  chequered  improvisations  of  love,  friendship,  and  hero-
ism, and  conquests  of  blood,  mixed  with  good  and  evil,
these  form  the  records  of  thy  Past.  As  missionaries  to  the
Present  we  come !  The  voice  of  discontent  is  heard  from  all
thy  habitations. For  slight  and  fancied  injustice,  the  people


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  KJT

groan  to  be  avenged.  The  world  remembers  tnee  as  the
Queen  of  Song  and  the  kingdom  of  Art.  Thy  beauteous
gardens  and  flowering  terraces  are  not  worth  the  regrets  fos-
tered for  them.  0,  where  is  thy  magnanimity?  Mazzini
and  Gavazzi,  speak  to  thy  people !  O'er  every  continent  and
isle  of  the  sea  is  spreading  the  tidings  of  thy  great  oppres-
sions! Italians!  where  resides  thy  power  to  overcome  a
great  injustice?  Not  in  impatience  and  self-destructive
haste;  but  in  the  united  Love  of  Eight — stronger  than  all
Fear,  and  bolder  than  the  accustomed  warrior.  Italians!
arise  to  the  grandeur  of  Liberty."

THE SWISS DELEGATION.

"John  George  Aldman,  the  curate  of  Inns;  William  Tell,  the  freeman,
Baron  Von  Redin,  the  defender  of  his  countrymen ;  Simon  Tissot,  the  physician;
Sismondi,  the  politico-historian;  William  Cassillon,  the  type-maker;  Cadmus,
the  founder ;  Charlemagne,  the  frugal  king ;  Phidias,  the  sculptor ;  Althame-
rus,  the  religio-reformer  ;  Constantine,  the  emperor  ;  Joan,  the  maid  of  Orleans
and  of  justice  ;  Paracelsus,  the  alchemist  and  discoverer,  and  nine  ?nore."

The  Exordium. — There  is  a  proud  magnificence  in  thy
mountains,  Beloved  Country !  In  them  we  behold,  symbol-
ized, the  lofty  crest  of  Truth  reared  in  everlasting  defiance
to  the  inglorious  march  of  Ignorance.  The  distant  nations
have  seen  ye,  the  dwellers  of  hight  and  dell,  and  have  been
awe-struck  by  the  valor  of  thy  sons.  Among  thy  lofty  mounts,
where  inundating  fountains  have  flowed,  are  vaulted  cellars
and  treasures  of  the  finest  gold.  For  this  the  earth's  inhabit-
ants will  come  to  thee.  But  worship  thou  not  at  the  shrine
of  the  golden  Idol ;  for  he  hath  steeped  the  earth  with  blood.
Towns,  cities,  empires,  have  fallen  before  his  tramping
devotees;  and  Liberty  is  not  the  issue  of  his  loins.  Maria
Theresa,  the  Bohemian  Queen,  is  still  the  empress  of  com-
passion. Her  public  libraries,  universities,  colleges,  and
observatories,  are  better  than  mounts  of  Gold.  We  will
pour  Inspiration  into  thy  scholars ;  and  Love  into  the  hearts
of  those  who  shall  visit  thee."


1 03  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.


THE SPANISH DELEGATION.

"  Pizarro,  the  warrior ;  Isabella,  the  queen;  Avarado,  the  conqueror;  Altami-
rano,  the  mother  of  Cortez ;  Gautemozin,  the  stoic;  Guevara,  the  wit  of  the
Spanish  court;  Caraneadez,  the  architect;  Charles  Bucquoi,  the  intrepid  gen-
eral; Artaxerxes,  the  Persian  king;  Torquemada,  the  inquisitor-general  of
Spain  ;  Seneca,  the  philosopher  ;  Philip  Sidney,  the  advocate  and  republican."

The  JdjjJJL.  raff. — "Upon  thy  crumbling  tombs,  0  Spain!
we  read  the  records  of  thy  mis-direction.  Cruelty  hath  been
thy  companion.  Thy  passion  for  Power — barbaric,  tran-
sient, national  strength — hath  consumed  the  fires  of  purifica-
tion. Martyrdoms  and  inquisitions  are  written  but  too
plainly  on  thy  brow.  The  nations  read  and  shun.  Thou
worshippers  at  the  shrine  of  Moloch,  why  persist  still  in
wearing  upon  thy  bosoms  the  weapons  of  defence.  We  are
thy  friends !  The  blood  of  victims  cries  against  thee.  Con-
cealed in  thy  minds  are  feelings  of  revengeful  hate  to  nations
about  thee;  hence  in  thy  garments  we  behold  the  knife  and
the  poniard.  The  blood  of  thy  children  flows  in  blackened
piles  through  their  veins ;  for  excessive  passion  hath  left  its
curse  upon  them.  Hear  us,  Spaniards,  most  beloved!  let
thy  blood  flow  warm  and  free.  Thought  is  thine  Empire.
Peace  is  thy  Harbinger.  Universal  Love  is  thine  only
passport  to  the  eternal  joys  of  the  Infinite."


THE MEXICAN DELEGATION.

'•  Hernando  Cortez,  the  conqueror  ;  Diego  Velasquez,  the  chieftain ;  Nuno  de
Guzman,  the  valiant  ;  Columbus,  the  voyager  ;  Montezuma,  the  prodigal  ;  Don
Luis  de  Valesco,  the  emancipator  of  Indians ;  Bornal  de  Castillo,  the  writer;
Herreira  Cerda,  the  poetess  and  reformer;  Gaul-de-Priorta,  the  historian;
Iturbide,  the  emperor  ;  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,  the  traveler  ;  Nicolas  de  Ovando,
the  discoverer."

The  Exordium. — "People  of  Mexico!  Thy  country  is
marching  onward  to  sudden  ruin;  for  the  wealth  of  thy
mountains  is  not  in  thy  coffers.  As  a  nation,  thou  art  has-
tening to  a  place  whence  thou  may  cast  no  shadow;  the  sub-
stance having  departed.  Schools  and  seminaries  are  needed.
Think  less  of  war;  more  of  intelligence.  Thy  limbs  are
paralyzed,  0  Mexico ;  the  demon  of  war  hatli  plunged  thee


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  109

deep  in  the  vortex  of  pecuniary  ruin.  Having  learned,
through  boundless  space,  that  War  is  a  universal  Wrong,
we  come  to  thee  with  our  message.  But  it  is  not  of  thy
impending  destruction  that  we  now  discourse.  Nay,  we
now  admonish  thee  to  mingle  thy  possessions  with  the
United  States — peacefully,  nobly,  fearing  no  injustice,  ask-
ing no  returns — and  we  will  secure  to  thee  thy  Liberty.
Columbus  will  show  thee  a  'new  voyage' — a  gradual  pro-
gress from  natural  science  up  to  spiritual  light.  Montezuma
will  show  thee  '  New  Halls  of  Pleasure ' — the  Cathedral  of
the  Universe ;  resounding  with  eternal  songs ;  decorated  with
suns  and  systems  innumerable."


THE FRENCH DELEGATION.

"  Barbazan,  the  irreproachable ;  Augustine,  the  talented  bishop ;  Gratien
Phlipon,  the  sufferer ;  Danton,  the  courageous;  Pelisson,  the  writer ;  Poussin,
the  artist ;  Rousseau,  the  author ;  Lafayette,  the  freeman ;  Daubenten,  the
physician;  Napoleon,  the  strong;  Josephine,  the  faithful ;  Almanzor-Aven-
Rosch,  the  republican  and  investigator."

The  Exordium. — "Suddenly  plunged  from  the  dizzy
hights  of  honored  power  to  the  dismal  depths  of  dungeon
woe,  thy  sons,  0  France,  have  learned  the  penalties  of
passion  and  the  misfortunes  of  impatience.  Ever  glorious
in  history ;  ever  struggling  for  freedom ;  ever  unfaithful  to
the  laws  of  Justice;  ever  bound  in  chains  of  triumphant
Tyranny;  ever  hopeful  for  the  hour  when  Eternal  Liberty
shall  wide  unfurl  her  celestial  banner  to  the  sky ;  ever  vexed
with  disappointments;  yet  how  nobly  unchanged  thou  art
in  all  the  known  principles  of  Eternal  Truth.  We  come
to  rule  thee  neither  on  throne,  in  song,  nor  in  philosophic
thought;  for  experimental  wisdom  hath  manifested  to  us
how  quick  thou  art  to  vibrate  between  impassioned  Eeason
and  Papal  supremacy.  Of  the  latter  thou  art  now  in  danger!
The  sovereignties  of  Europe  have  an  eye  to  thy  destruction
through  the  confluence  of  thy  present  unconsolidated  monar-
chy and  the  powerfully-organized  papal  power.  0  People  of
France !  a  new  trial  of  thy  courage  dawns  even  now  in  the
stillness  and  intricacies  of  the  northern  powers.  Open  thy
10


110  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

dungeons;  let  the  oppressed  go  free !  Open  thy  government,
let  the  light  shine  within!  And  when  again  thy  hands  are
uplifted  against  injustice,  be  firm  to  the  last,  and  think  of  us
as  thy  brothers  eternal."


THE SCOTTISH DELEGATION.

"James,  the  king;  Gaurden,  the  botanist;  Cunningham,  the  novelist;  Henry
Melville,  the  councillor  ;  Macnish,  the  writer  ;  John  Douglass,  the  friend  of  Dr
Johnson;  Walter  Scott,  the  writer  ;  John  Abercrombie,  the  physician  ;  Robert
Burns,  the  freeman;  Dugald  Stewart,  the  philosopher;  William  Wallace,  the
reformer  ; Robert  Bruce,  the  deliverer  and  freeman."

The  Exordium. — "In  the  grave  are  entombed  every
error,  regret,  defect,  resentment,  or  unkind  remembrance.
The  look,  the  smile,  the  bearing,  the  good  deed,  the  noble
saying,  is  preserved  in  the  palace  of  memory  as  the  living
remains  of  thy  dead.  The  grave  is  the  sweetest  sorrow — it
is  wreathed  in  a  mystic  solitude ;  with  enchantments  for  the
heart.  The  kindest  thought  is  the  parent  of  the  epitaph.
The  gentlest  flowers  adorn  the  silent  mound;  the  evergreen
sends  up  its  tendrils  here  and  there  as  emblems  of  existence.
What  a  threshold  is  the  grave!  Ye  seek  the  tomb  as  the
gate  of  sorrow;  and  sorrow  as  the  gate  of  heaven.  How
unwilling  thou  art  to  be  deprived  of  pensive  sadness!  Med-
itation near  the  tomb  is  the  sacred  joy — the  most  pleasing
romance  of  sorrow — known  to  thee.*  And  so  our  birth-
place is  fraught  with  superstitions;  or  with  cold,  ungenial
skepticisms.  From  Scottish  night  and  dell  arise  the  song  of
romance,  the  enchanter's  verse,  or  the  severe  logic  of  the
preacher.  Edinburgh  shines  bright  with  Thought;  the  feet
of  geologists  tread  the  Orkney  hills;  the  principle  of  Peace
is  working  through  the  people;  the  doctrines  of  Education
issue  from  the  writers  on  thy  soil;  we  see  minds  stand  ready
to  accept  our  message;  and  we  shall  soon  be  prepared  to
utter  it."

*It  may  be  considered  *  an  act  of  supererogation' to  assert,  that  the
author  is  totally  unacquainted  with  the  majority  of  names  recorded  in
these  Exordia,  and  that  the  historical  references,  as  well  as  the  national
peculiarities  frequently  alluded  to,  are  entirely  new  to  him.


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  Ill


THE ENGLISH DELEGATION.

"  John  Dryden,  the  poet;  Anne  Boleyn,  the  ambitious;  Holbach,  the  intel-
lectualist ;  Thomas  Hood,  the  writer ;  William  Shakspeare,  the  descrier  of
passion ;  George  Herbert,  the  pious  poet ;  Julius,  the  pope  ;  James,  the  king  ;
Henry,  the  king ;  Roger  Sherman,  the  freeman;  John  Spencer,  the  writer-
religio ;  Chalmers,  the  writer ;  Charles  James  Fox,  the  independent ;  John
Hampden,  the  enemy  of  injustice  ;  Mary  Sidney,  countess  of  Pembroke  ;  Felicia
Hemans,  the  poetess-idealist;  Thomas  Leicester,  the  agricultural  reformer;
Wellington,  the  military  director."

The  Exordium. — "With  the  Lion  watching  by  thy  side,
with  thy  Marine  power  so  capable  of  locomotion  and  trans-
foration, with  thy  ships  in  every  sea,  thy  banner  floating
freely  on  every  breeze,  well  mayst  thou,  most  beauteous
England,  be  proud,  and  arrogant,  and  austere!  Monarchs
may  scan  thy  boundless  influence  on  every  shore.  Thy
missionaries  have  gone  to  distant  lands;  at  home  the  gor-
geous temples  of  Keligion  rear  their  proud  domes  and  turrets
on  high ;  and  thy  Eoyal  Institutions  are  brilliant  with  classic
lore — deep  wisdom,  drawn  from  the  wells  of  ancient  days.
Yea,  Beloved  England,  well  mayst  thou  indulge  the  passion
of  Pride — and  feel  imperial  joy,  when  thinking  of  thy  Sons
of  Thought.  Yet  hear  us,  hear  us!  for  hatred  to  human
Liberty  is  still  enthroned  upon  thy  Government,  and  danger
stands  now  at  thy  palace- door.  Thy  lands  are  tilled  by  the
faithful  Sons  of  Liberty !  The  working-men  and  working-
children  in  thy  Factories  will  sit  in  judgment  against  thee!
The  times  are  full  of  signs !  The  faithful  inhabitants  of  Erin,
loaded  with  labor  and  taxation,  and  threatened  by  poverty
and  distress  every  hour,  will  bring  thee  to  judgment.  0,
England,  change  thy  Pride  for  Humility !  The  wealth  of  thy
coffers  is  owned  by  a  few;  hence  thy  Government  cannot
fall  by  poverty.  But  wouldst  thou  see  thy  fate?  Behold,
then,  the  mountain  of  Ice  melting  into  liquid  shape  and  flow-
ing away  into  freedom !  So  shall  England,  as  a  Monarchy,
decompose  and  disappear.  The  catalogue  of  crimes  that
chequers  history  is  poisoning  the  vitals  of  England's  exist-
ence. 0,  our  countrymen!  let  a  Lamb  repose  by  thy  Lion;
let  Justice  be  done  to  thine  oppressed ;  for  thus  even  in  death
thou  may  est  be  glorious  and  beloved."


112  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.


THE IRISH DELEGATION.

"  Darey,  t he  mathematician  ;  Caulfield  Charlemont,  the  commander ;  Robert
Mossem,  the  prelate;  Philpot  Curran,  the  Irish  orator ;  Robert  Emmett,  the
friend  of  the  oppressed;  Melancthon ,  the  theologico-rej ormer ;  Daniel  O'Con-
nell,  the  advocate  for  justice ;  Edward  O'Meara,  the  physician ;  Archibald
Maclaine,  the  writer-religio  ;  William  Magree,  the  talented  dean;  Robert  Peel,
the  statesman  and  reformer  ;  and  nineteen  more."

The  Exordium. — "Ireland!  Through  the  vast  world  of
heart,  beloved,  flows  the  blood  of  thy  people.  The  end  of
thy  vassalage  draweth  nigh.  But  thou  art  not  ready  for
Freedom;  else,  long  ago,  this  blessing  would  have  been
thine.  Wouldst  thou  have  earth  a  paradise,  and  every  heart
a  heaven  ?  then  begin  with  Union  in  the  soul,  crowned  with
the  thought  of  eternal  perseverance !  How  patiently  dost  thou
delve  the  earth,  ditch  the  meadows,  clean  the  soil,  and  make
the  vegetations  unfold !  Meanwhile,  how  art  thou  agitated
with  Political  cogitations — thinking  how  things  might  have
been — how  they  should  be — watching  night  and  day  for  the
death  of  Usurpation,  or  praying  for  a  milder  kind  of  tyranny!
Then,  again,  thou  art  resolved  to  borrow  no  trouble  from
'to-morrow' — and  so,  forgetting  in  a  few  hours  all  thy  sor-
rows and  oppressions,  the  heavy  hand  of  despotism  is  placed
upon  thee  again  and  again — and  so  thou  art  vulnerable,  and
easily  trained  to  submission.  Behold  thy  weakness,  0  sons
of  Ireland!  Forsake  it,  ye  down-trodden!  We  speak  to
thee  from  the  Home  of  thy  departed  saints ;  from  the  Land
of  the  Free!  Unite,  unite! — not  for  war  and  bloodshed,
and  useless  rioting  in  moments  of  reckless  discontent  or  enthu-
siasm— but  unite  for  National,  Complete  Suffrage,  to  secure
annual  Parliaments  and  emancipation  from  Aristocratic  legis-
lation! England  is  vulnerable  in  every  joint  of  its  anatomy.
Her  commercial  Prosperity  is  temporary.  Every  nerve  in
the  oligarchic  organism  is  exposed  to  the  slightest  touch  of
Freedom!  0,  sons  of  Ireland!  unless  ye  unite  in  the
strength  of  Mind  against  the  legislations  which  now  keep  ye
in  poverty  and  distress,  thy  Cause,  though  it  be  tght  and  of
God,  will  fail  thee  a  thousand  times !  If  ye  allow  the  Advo-
cates for  Liberty  to  be  captured  before  thine  ej  es  and  exiled
by  Despotism  or  destroyed  by  the  ruling  powers,  then  ye  are


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  113

unfit  for  that  Freedom  ye  yearn  to  enjoy! Again,  hear  us,
brothers,  for  we  are  united;  we  seek  thy  salvation  for  ever."


THE INDIAN DELEGATION.

"  Pocahontas,  the  freewoman ;  William  Penn,  the  legislator;  Tallien,  the  revo-
lutionist; Tecumseh,  the  chieftain;  Osceola,  the  resolute;  Metacom,  the  over-
earnest;  Canonicus,  the  Narragansett  chief;  Walter  Raleigh,  the  historical
writer;  Roger  Williams,  the' lover  of  free  doctrine;  Samosett,  the  devoted;
John  Pound,  the  teacher ;  Simon  Bradstreet,  the  governor;  Sassacus,  the  chief ;
Mononotto,  the  huntsman;  and  one  score  and  ten  others,  belonging  to  other
tribes  and  countries."

The  Exordium. — ""We,  of  your  race,  well  remember  the
wigwam,  often  carried  on  our  backs,  which  we  left  standing
near  the  flowing  stream ;  and  the  ever-green  shelter,  beneath
the  tall  trees,  whereon  the  many-colored  bird  poured  forth
its  melodious  song ;  and  the  hunter's  seat  by  the  river  side,
hallowed  by  the  tears  of  the  poor  Indian,  and  by  the  bless-
ings of  the  Great  Spirit,  after  the  going  down  of  the  sun  in
the  West.  We  remember  these  birth-places,  endeared  by  a
thousand  charms — enlivened  by  the  fox,  the  beaver,  and  the
bear — with  more  delight  than  language  can  define.  Ye  are
children  of  a  lower  or  carnal  heaven — sons  of  the  fields  and
animals  in  Nature!  The  white  man  perceives  not  the  grand-
eur of  tlrr  bosom ;  he  sees  not,  he  knows  not,  the  spontaneous
worship  of  thy  being !  The  red  man's  bosom,  like  the  wave
on  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  swells  and  falls  alternately  with
reverential  thoughts  toward,  Tuh-wah-wash-nee-mun-ee-doo,
the  Great  Spirit  who  walketh  above  the  tops  of  trees,  and
spreadeth  his,  Kah-ga-nah-che-noo-bingo-pang,  wings  wide
over  the  ground — fanning  the  breast  of  the  good  hunter,  the
soul  of  the  successful  warrior,  the  brow  of  the  wise  medi-
cine-man.

Of  thine  ancestors,  the  white  man  taketh  no  knowledge;
the  source  of  the  red  man,  remains,  with  all  men,  a  mystery.
The  well-remembered  pines  and  evergreens,  the  ascending
oaks,  in  whose  giant  arms  the  sun-soaring  eagle  builds  her
nest,  and  reposes  there  beyond  the  prick  of  thy  straight-
thrown  arrow ;  the  water-fall,  and  flowing  river,  the  cataract
which  for  thousands  of  years  performs  its  labor  without
10*


114  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

fatigue  or  decay,  and  many  hills  in  Nature's  wide  domain :
these  might  better  yield  a  history  of  thy  origin  and  wrongs
than  the  white  man's  pen  or  the  words  we  now  impart.

Inhabitants  of  the  swamp,  travelers  in  the  wilderness,  lords
of  the  island,  sons  of  the  forest!  we  come  to  tell  ye  that  the
war-cry,  the  knife,  and  battle-axe,  have  ever  been  thine  ene-
mies! The  Chief  hath  urged  to  war,  and  hath  died  like  the
blasted  oak  by  it.  The  warrior's  bosom,  0  brothers,  is  self-
consuming  ;  for  so  the  rude  cliff,  capping  the  volcanic  mount,
is  finally  sundered  in  the  destructive  storm  of  fire  coming
from  within !  The  white  man,  with  that  intelligence  which
ye  require,  hath  occupied  your  lands.  Hark!  place  your
ear  to  the  ground !  Hark  !  the  voice  of  the  advancing  mul-
titudes is  resounding  on  the  distant  hills.  Alas !  the  canoe
is  buried;  the  fire- vessels  plough  the  river,  the  lake,  and  the
sea!  The  reverberations  of  the  white  man's  axe  are  heard
in  the  forests;  thy  favorite  hunting-grounds  are  now  fields
of  vegetation ;  thy  desert-lands  are  covered  with  cities.  We
might  murmur  o'er  thy  burning  wrongs.  We  might  start
again  the  founts  of  hot  tears,  and  sound  the  trumpet  of  war !
Nay,  ye  sons  of  the  wilderness,  we  tell  ye  nay!  but  dig  the
grave  for  thine  enemies!  Place,  side  by  side,  the  barbed
arrow,  the  spear,  the  sword,  the  knife,  and  battle-axe;  and
over  these,  thine  enemies,  write  this  epitaph — 'Death  is  an
eternal  sleep.'  Then  uplift  thine  eyes  with  friendship  in
them  toward  the  white  man,  for  the  Great  Spirit  liveth;  and
the  Spirit  Land  is  nigh ;  and  Justice  shall  be  done !  Brothers,
learn  ye  the  art  of  Peace;  forget  ye  the  art  of  war."

THE AFRICAN DELEGATION.

" Toussaint,  the  intrepid;  Petion,  the  St.  Domingo  father;  Abouaboula,  the
king  of  Granada;  Fabius  Gallius,  the  emperor;  Arabbelshah,  the  historian;
Africaner,  the  chieftain;  Jobn  Q.  Adams,  the  religio-statesman ;  George  Fox,  the
revelator-spiritus ;  Isaac  T.  Hopper,  the  practical  freeman;  Daniel  Webster,
the  strong  statesman;  Addison,  the  classic-writer ;  John  Randolph,  the  critic
pro  publico ;  Michael  Servetus,  the  lover  of  liberty."

The  Exordium. — "We  speak,  0  ye  suffering  Sons  of
Africa,  from  the  clear  sky ;  and  our  voices  shall  be  heard.
Mammon  is  the  god  who  first  led  thee  to  bondage;  so  shall  it


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  115

be  the  god  of  thy  deliverance.  "We  will  open  the  catalogue
of  national  crimes  to  the  world.  The  nation  that  perpetuates
slavery  shall  become  a  bye-word ;  and  its  people  be  counted
odious  as  Appius  Claudius  the  tyrant  of  ancient  Rome,  who
condemned  Virginia  as  a  slave!  The  people  who  enslave
thee  shall  prove  thy  eternal  benefactors.  There  is  a  Law  of
Justice  which  evermore  overcomes  evil  with  good.  We  will
inspire  thy  masters  to  worship  at  the  shrine  of  Justice.  This
is  the  Great  God  before  whom  Mammon  shall  bow  in  eternal
subserviency!  The  honest  man  shall  rise  in  over-awing
majesty  before  the  doer  of  wrong  deeds.  The  soil  now  tilled
by  enslaved  hands,  the  plants  now  moistened  by  the  tears  of
suffering  exiles,  shall  yet  be  thine,  0  sons  of  Africa,  to  work
in  the  sunshine  of  gladness,  to  barter  with  consumers  as  thine
own.  Thou  shalt  become  an  independent  Nation !  This  shall
come  of  thy  free-will  and  choice !  We  will  bring  an  over-
powering light  to  all  Oppressors:  and  the  every- where  Op-
pressed shall  go  free."

Conversation. — Upon  concluding  the  Exordium  to  Africa,
my  thoughts  reverted  to  the  time  when  I  first  beheld  the
Spiritual  Convention,  and  I  thought — "Why,  how  is  this?
Here  is  the  name  of  Daniel  Webster,  who,  if  I  remember
right,  had  not  left  the  earth  at  the  date  of  my  first  vision —
how  can  this  be  explained?"  This  thought  had  no  sooner
become  defined  in  my  brain,  than  I  received  the  follow-
ing reply:

"The  Royal  Circle  is  enlarged  every  hour  as  persons
arrive  from  the  planets.  Since  you  beheld  the  assemblage,
multitudes  have  joined  the  Delegations,  and  become  special
actors  in  the  Reformation  assigned.  Others  again  have  gone
away  into  different  consociations — having  dispositions  toward
things  in  other  directions."

"But  Daniel  Webster  was  understood  on  earth  as  not  being
the  friend  of  the  enslaved  African,"  said  I;  "and  now  he
goes  to  them:  what  does  this  mean?"

"Because,"  he  replied,  "there  is  a  Law  of  Justice  which
evermore  overcomes  evil  with  good.  He  selects  his  own
field  of  labor. He  comprehends  the  extent  of  the  ground — ■


116  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

is  in  harmony  with  the  workmen  already  engaged — and
sees  where  the  institution  is  vulnerable,  and  its  advocates
accessible."

"Will  the  African  race,"  I  inquired,  "be  nationalized  in
America?"

"This  is  not  yet  known,"  he  answered,  "but  we  perceive
that  their  development  depends  upon  this  destiny."

I  then  asked:  "Is  it  right  to  send  slaves  out  of  this
country?"

"No!  it  is  right  to  give  them  Justice — their  Freedom —
and  leave  the  issue  to  their  own  subsequent  genius  and  indi-
vidual attractions.  Then,  should  they  desire  to  depart,  give
your  money  freely  to  augment  the  work  of  colonization."


THE AMERICAN DELEGATION.

"Patrick  Henry,  the  orator;  John  Howard,  the  sympathizer  and  doer ;  George
Washington,  the  careful  statesman;  Samuel  Thompson,  the  physician;  Hopkins,
the  writer  theologico  ;  Byron,  the  capacious  poet ;  Fulton,  the  inventor  ;  Thomas
Hobbes,  the  philosopher;  Cooper,  the  historical  novelist;  Benjamin  Franklin,
the  analytic  thinker;  Thomas  Jefferson,  the  statesman;  Paine,  the  critic;  James
Hutton,  the  agriculturist  and  writer;  Downing,  the  botanist  architect;  Alex-
ander Everett,  the  charge  d'affaires;  Jonathan  Edwards,  the  religio-intellectual-
ist;  John  Wesley,  the  earnest  teacher;  Mary,  the  beloved  Nazarene ;  James
Munroe,  the  president;  Mary  Montague,  the  talented;  Francis  Wright,  the
suffering  thinker ;  Wolfgang  Mozart,  the  composer  ;  Reynolds,  the  objective-critic;
Francis  Bacon,  the  philosophic  reformer ;  Charles  Fourier,  the  social  architect;
and  twenty  and  four  score  and  ten  more."

The  Exokdium. — "We  come  to  thee,  Beloved  Inhabitants
of  America !  we  come  to  thee  to  testify  that  there  are  change-
less ties  in  the  soul  of  man;  that  there  are  ever-kindred
sympathies  which  prejudice  and  transient  wrong  cannot  warp ,
that  there  are  loves  for  homes  and  friends — for  country  and
its  liberties — which  death  cannot  break  or  the  revolution  of
generations  disturb.  The  Spirit  Home  is  more  attractive
than  America ;  but  Love  is  the  attraction  that  no  will-power
can  resist.  From  all  the  nations  do  we  behold  dwellers
among  the  states.  The  kings  of  the  eastern  hemisphere  pray
for  thy  dissolution.  The  success  of  thy  Governments  and
the  comparative  Happiness  of  thy  people  form  topics  for  the
thinking  of  the  world. The  sympathies  of  the  world  are


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  117

thine.  Thou  art  a  bright  light  shining  on  the  mountain — a
star  whereby  the  approaching  mariner  may  direct  his  vessel
into  an  harbor  of  safety.

But  we  behold  ye  wanting  in  vital  Integrity.  Thy  laws
of  Liberty  are  localized  in  their  operation ;  thy  principles  of
Justice  are  partial  in  their  application.  To  the  Church  ye
look  for  all  spiritual  progression ;  to  the  Government  ye  look
for  all  temporal  improvement.  This  is  thine  error!  The
wealth  of  thy  lands  and  the  resources  of  thy  territories  have
been  developed  by  the  discovery  of  Eobert  Fulton.  Yet  the
Hall  of  the  national  Capitol  was  refused  to  him,  "because,"
said  the  wise  men,  "the  subject  of  his  discourse  is  visionary."
But  the  country  has  been  more  benefited  by  the  suggestions
of  Eobert  Fulton  than  by  any  legislative  act  or  controversy
since  the  day  the  Hall  was  refused  to  him.  The  Church  and
the  Government  are  but  developments  of  the  people;  how
can  they  advance  and  improve  the  causes  of  their  existence?
Be  watchful,  0  Americans,  lest  ye  become  worshippers  at  the
shrine  of  St.  Custom !  This  Saint  is  the  foe  of  all  true  man-
hood and  nationality.  When  ye  think  that  thy  Government
is  complete;  then  art  thou  on  the  way  to  death.  When  ye
think  that  thy  Church  can  enlighten  thee;  then  art  thou  on
the  road  to  papal  supremacy.  Let  thy  people  proclaim —
'Peace,  Justice,  Love,  Law,  Light,  Liberty.'"

Conversation. — "Why  do  these  dwellers  of  the  Inner  Life,
come  so  close  to  the  earth?"  I  inquired.  "Why  do  they  not
hold  their  Convention  in  the  Home  of  the  Free?"

"Because,"  said  he,  "like  reapers  who  go  forth  to  reap,  the
laborers  should  always  draw  nigh  unto  the  field  wherein  they
are  to  labor."

Again  I  asked:  "Is  it  absolutely  necessary  that  spirits,
who  we  suppose  to  be  at  all  times  clairvoyant,  and  able  to  see
almost  any  distance  through  space,  should  come  so  near  the
earth,  as  the  location  of  the  Convention  appeared  to  me,  in
order  to  comprehend  their  work?"

"It  is  not  necessary  for  perception  nor  comprehension,"  he
answered;  "but  for  the  more  perfect  flow  of  the  elements  of
sympathy."


118  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

"Does  distance  impair  the  strength  or  flow  of  so  subtle  a
principle  as  sympathy?''  I  inquired.

"In  thy  mind,"  replied  he,  "sympathy  and  sentiment  are
the  same:  this  is  not  true  of  what  we  mean  by  'sympathy'
— it  is  like  the  sun's  influence  on  vegetation,  or  as  the  action
of  the  brain  upon  the  members  of  the  body."

Again  I  asked:  "Does  distance  prevent  the  flow  of  this
actual  element?"

"Distance,"  he  replied,  "is  composed  of  spaces,  which,  being
marked  by  objects,  often  break  the  chain  or  lines  of  connec-
tion between  mind  and  mind — more  positively  is  this  true,
where  the  intervening  objects  serve  to  constitute  and  establish
prominently  defined  spaces;  causing  thus  a  given  distance  to
be  objectively-paved  and  phenomenally-girted,  whether  it  be
a  few  hundred  miles  or  as  many  thousand."

"I  cannot  quite  understand,"  I  responded ;  "  will  you  illus-
trate this  idea  to  me?"

"Thou  knowest,"  he  replied,  "that  water  cannot  flow
steadily  and  powerfully  if  in  its  channel  there  be  stationed
many  prominent  obstructions. This  is  plain  to  thee,  is  it  not  ?"

"Yes,  this  is  plain;  but  I  do  not  see  the  application."

He  replied,  "The  application  is  as  follows:  Between  the
Spirit  Home  and  the  earth  there  are,  strewn  along  and
throughout  the  intervening  Distance,  like  mile-stones  mark-
ing the  length  of  thy  public  roads — thus  making  space  an
actual  and  realizable  fact  in  infinity — more  than  four  hundred
thousand  planets  and  fifteen  thousand  solar  bodies  of  lesser
magnitude.  These  objective  realities,  peopling  the  distance
intervening  between  the  Spirit  Home  and  the  earth,  frequently
obstruct  the  flow  of  our  influence,  or  the  circulations  of  our
'mental  sj^mpathies,'  as  thou  would'st  term  them;  but  these
intercepting  bodies  never  arrest  the  penetrations  of  the  fully
unfolded  mental  vision,  which,  by  virtue  of  our  improved
estate,  we  can  evermore  exercise."

"Do  you  come  then,"  I  asked,  "so  near  to  the  earth  in
order  to  get  into  complete  sympathy  with  its  inhabitants?"

"Yes,"  he  replied,  "yet  more  positively  do  we  draw  nigh
to  scan  the  territories  of  human  Experience;  to  examine  the
stratifications  of  human  Thought;  to  weigh  the  world  in  the


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  119

scales  of  Justice;  to  establish  a  sustaining  sympathy  with
the  Pure,  the  True,  the  Heroic — with  the  oppressed  of  every
color — with  the  tyrannized  of  every  clime ;  and  though  it  is
true  that  even  Spirits  may  sometimes  look  with  pleasure  upon
the  spectacle  of  a  great  man  struggling  ivith  misfortune,  yet  is  it
our  purpose,  exarchically,  to  do  whatsoever  good  thing  we
find  to  do,  With  One  Accord,  for  so  shall  at  last  Eternal
Justice  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  Heaven!"

"Will  you  tell  me,"  I  asked,  "why  individuals  from  one
nation  belong  to  delegations  designed  for  another?"

"Every  one,"  he  replied,  "goes  to  labor  in  that  field  for
which  he  has  conceived  an  attraction."

I  now  asked:  "Why  are  persons  from  all  the  Nations,
ancient  and  modern,  interested  in  the  deliberations  of  the
Convention?"

"Every  thing  material,"  he  answered,  "originated  in  or
rushes  out  from  the  spiritual,  as  trees  roll  their  magnificent
proportions  from  the  spiritual  potentialities  first  in  their  germs
embosomed."

"  I  do  not  understand,"  I  said,  "  the  application  of  this  truth."

"The  application,"  said  he,  "is  this:  that  all  atomic  har-
mony in  the  body  of  a  man  depends  upon  a  preexisting  har-
mony among  the  particles  of  the  mind.  Unity  of  spirit
begets  and  propagates  the  unity  of  the  form.  A  Congress  of
Nations  on  earth  is  possible  only  after  such  a  Congress  is
established  in  the  Spirit  Home."

"Will  you  explain  this  more  clearly?"  I  asked.

"The  explanation  is,"  said  he,  "that  when  a  spiritual  sym-
pathy is  perfected  among  those  nations  which  have,  as  indi-
vidual representations,  left  the  earth,  and  when  that  unity
is  made  to  exert  its  energizing,  its  silent  influence  upon  the
corresponding  nations  still  remaining  on  earth,  (which  all  has
been  accomplished  within  the  past  five  years,)  then,  conse*
quently,  the  same  most  excellent  consummation  will  be  possible
among  all  the  nations,  kindreds,  and  tongues  that  are  now
every  where  disunited  and  inharmoniously  diversifying  the
globe  which  thou  art  inhabiting."

"Sometimes  I  observe  you  speak  as  I  would — using  the
terms  'You'  and  'They;'  at  other  times,  'Thee,'  'Thou,' and


120  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

'Thine,'  as  in  the  exordiums;  will  yon  tell  me  why  the  style
is  thus  changed?"

"I  speak,"  said  he,  "for  the  Convention,  as  they  would
speak — except  that  I  employ  my  own  words  to  convey  their
thoughts :  when  I  speak  to  you,  I  change  to  meet  your  men-
tal methods — neither,  however,  is  essential  to  the  verification
of  the  thoughts  imparted."

Here  the  communicating  mind  impressed  me  to  consider
the  interview  as  terminated.  At  this  I  resigned  myself  to
the  external,  and  soon  came  out  of  the  internal  state.  The
names  and  addresses  I  read  over  and  over  again,  with  never-
lessening  curiosity,  for  both  are  totally  new,  and,  I  think,
the  reader  will  add  "interesting,"  to  say  the  least  of  them.
But  my  third  vision  of  the  same  assemblage  remains  to  be
related.  As  before  remarked,  the  foregoing  pages,  from  the
termination  of  the  second  vision,  are  added  parenthetically;
because  they  contain  material  information  subsequently
received,  designed  for  publication  in  this  work.  I  now  refer
the  reader  to  the  third  vision  which  follows.


THIRD SESSION.

The  following  day,  the  Sabbath,  was  passed  without
bringing  me  any  new  vision.  Indeed,  I  do  not  know  that  I
had  any  reason  to  expect  further  light.  The  reaction  of  feel-
ing was  so  intense,  in  consequence  of  the  extraordinary  men-
tal excitement  of  the  previous  day,  that  I  was  unfit  for  any
thing  but  slumber  and  repose.  I  found  that  I  could  not  even
reflect  upon  what  I  had  witnessed;  and  so  I  yielded  myself
wholly  up  to  the  acquisition  of  physical  vigor.

But  now — half-past  six  o'clock,  Monday  morning,  August
9th,  1852,  having  just  returned  from  a  walk — I  find  myself
reflecting  in  a  peculiar  doubtful  mood,  as  it  were  for  the  or-
dinary materialist,  who  must  always  stand  on  terra  firma,  and
have  a  cause  for  every  effect,  else  he  is  disturbed  and  unsat-
isfied. I  am  reflecting,  as  such  a  mind  naturally  would  under
the  circumstances,  upon  what  appears  to  be  the  physical  im-
possibility of  my  vision  of  Saturday  morning  and  evening.
What  will  astronomers  and  meteorologists — those  who  have


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  121

investigated  the  extreme  rarity  of  the  atmosphere — think  of
my  assertion:  that  I  saw  innumerable  men  and  women  stand-
ing upon  and  walking  to  and  fro  in  the  thin  air,  as  men  walk
on  the  ground,  and  yet  thirty  miles  above  the  earth's  surface  ?
These  beings  were  real ;  not  imaginary.  They  were  firm  and
substantial  bodies,  adapted  to  the  other  world ;  not  gossamer
and  vaporish,  as  many  might  suppose.  "How  then,"  philos-
ophers will  ask,  "can  such  a  multitude  of  substantial  bodies
be  sustained  by  the  unsubstantial  air?"  How  many  hundred
pounds  must  such  a  multitude  weigh  in  the  aggregate?  Is
not  this  phenomenon  contrary  to  all  the  known  laws  of
gravitation  ?

While  reflecting  thus,  my  spiritual  eyes  were  suddenly
opened;  and  I  beheld  the  beautiful  person  and  beaming
countenance  of  Galen!  He  stood  about  the  usual  distance
from  me;  but  in  a  somewhat  more  easterly  direction.  While
looking  toward  him,  my  internal  ears  were  also  opened ;  and,
as  before,  I  heard  the  "voice  of  his  words."

"Our  detachment  of  the  Eoyal  Circle  of  the  Foli  departs
this  morning,"  said  he;  "the  members  depart  to  the  Moun-
tains of 'the  Beautiful — to  their  habitations  in  the  Spirit  Land,
beyond  the  ken  of  mortal  vision."

"Indeed,"  I  exclaimed,  "have  they,  then,  found  the  twelve
Teachers  of  Philosophy,  and  all  the  mediums  required,  for
the  glorious  work?"

"Yes,"  he  replied:  "the  future  for  the  present  is  generally
determined."

"What  do  you  mean  by  being  'generally'  determined?
Can  you  not  foretell  the  future  in  detail?"

"No — the  minutia  are  not  presented."

"Why,  how  is  this?"

"Because,  there  are  things  which  occur  incidentally  to  the
great  general  principles  of  human  progression — things  which
we  cannot  provide  for  or  anticipate  with  the  absolute  certainty
of  Truth."

"May  I  know  whc  the  twelve  teachers  are?"

"No — it  remains  for  us  to  reveal  them  to  the  world  as
rapidly  as  possible."
11


122  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

"Can  I  tell  any  persons  how  to  prepare  themselves  for  this
exalted  mission?"

"Y%s,  this  you  can  do:  admonish  all  public  teachers  to
resist  not  the  will  of  our  Heavenly  Father ;  urge  them  to
open  their  affections  to  the  breathing  of  Universal  Love,
their  judgments  to  the  light  of  Divine  Wisdom!"

"Can  I  do  any  thing  else?"

"Yes."

"What?"

"Go,  teach  your  Impressions  to  all  who  have  ears  to  hear,
saying,  'Repent  ye,  for  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  at  hand.'"

The  peculiarity  of  this  charge  very  powerfully  reminded
me  of  the  Dispensation  which  began  with  the  Teaching  of
the  Doctrines  of  Jesus ;  and  so,  desiring  to  know  more  con-
cerning his  counsel  and  its  import,  I  asked :  "  Shall  any  signs
follow  them  that  believe  ?"

"Yes,"  he  impressively  responded.

"How  shall  I  know  them?

"The  believers,"  said  he,  "will  show  signs  or  deeds  of
Goodness,  Truth,  Temperance,  Integrity;  they  will  teach
and  heal  the  sick;  they  will  Love  and  liberate  their  fellow-
men;  they  will  condemn  nor  despise  no  man  in  anger;
neither  will  they  retard  any  more  the  union  of  love  with
wisdom;  nor  procrastinate  the  development  of  Nature's  Own
Eeligion  in  the  Earth!"

When  he  had  said  this,  with  much  emotion  and  thrilling
power,  which  I  cannot  attempt  to  describe,  he  made  a  grace-
ful gesture  with  his  hand  outwardly,  which  I  understood  to
mean  that  he  would  say  nothing  further  on  this  subject.

And  immediately,  fearing  he  might  depart,  I  asked  him
about  the  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  immortal
beings  whom  I  had  seen  walking  and  standing  upon  the  thin
air!  I  inquired:  "How  can  the  suspension  of  a  weight  so
immense  be  reconciled  with  the  laws  of  gravitation?"

"You  fear,"  he  answered,  "the  opposition  of  what  are
termed  'Natural'  Philosophers?  This  class  of  men  know  as
yet  very  little  of  the  physical  constitution  of  the  atmosphere;
still  less,  of  the  so-called  'Law  of  gravitation.'  "


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  123

"Can  you  tell  me,"  I  asked,  "how  such  an  immense  weight
could  be  supported  by  the  air?"

"Look  yonder,"  said  he,  pointing  obliquely  through  the
heavens  toward  the  south; "do  you  see  that?"

I  looked,  and  beheld,  greatly  to  my  surprise,  an  immense
body  of  hail-stones,  suspended,  motionless,  in  the  air,  and
weighing,  as  I  should  suppose,  many  thousands  of  tons.

He  now  pointed  in  an  easterly  direction,  and  again  said:
"Behold!"

I  looked.  And,  lo!  I  saw  a  great  Lake  of  ponderous
masses  of  what  appeared  to  be  Iron  and  Coal,  elastic,  like
partially  molten  pewter.  I  inquired,  "what  this  all  was
designed  to  signify?"

And  he  answered,  "Look  again!"

I  did  so.  And  with  a  graceful  sweep  of  his  shining  hand,
he  pointed  me  to  the  various  planets,  and,  beyond  these  still,
to  the  different  satellites,  and  likewise  to  the  Sun !

"What,"  exclaimed  he,  in  a  style  which  an  orator  of  the
skies  could  only  possess,  the  precise  words  I  cannot  attempt
to  record,  "what  supports  these  weighty  and  substantial
bodies  in  the  thin  air?  Do  they  stand  or  rest  upon  the
bosom  of  any  visible  thing?  Do  they  need  the  material
Earth  for  their  foundation?  Yon  mass  of  congealed  water
cannot  fall  to  earth;  those  Aerolites,  known  as  meteoric
stones,  cannot  fall,  though  they  weigh  more  than  twenty  of
the  largest  stone  habitations  on  the  earth;  those  stupendous
Oris  cannot  fall,  though  they  stand  upon  nothing  visible,  and
weigh  more  than  any  man  can  comprehend.  All  this,  re-
member, is  consistent  with  the  laws  of  gravitation!  And
when  natural  philosophers  shall  have  fully  explained  how
these  weighty  bodies  remain  in  the  air,  without  disturbance
or  accident,  then  will  they  also  explain  the  '  physical  possibil-
ity' of  the  vision  of  the  multitude  which  thou  hast  beheld."

Here  I  inquired:  "Why  do  we  not  see,  with  our  bodily
eyes,  those  material  masses  in  the  air?"

"Because,"  said  he,  "the  accumulation  of  hail-stones  and
Aerolites  are  too  small  and  too  for  off,  ranging  variously,  from
twelve  to  thirty-five  miles  from  the  earth's  surface ;  while  the
Orbs  are  larger,  and  these,  therefore,  you  do  behold."


124  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

"Am  I  to  understand,  by  these  remarks,  that  the  spiritual
body  is  still  material ;  coming  under  the  action  of  physical
laws;  subject  to  the  laws  of  rarity,  density,  and  elasticity,  as
we  generally  speak  of  the  properties  of  matter?"

"  Yes,  measurably  so,"  said  he.  "The  spiritual  body  is  a
substance:  and  yet  it  is  not  what  you  term  'Matter.'  Spirit
bears  the  same  relation  to  earthy  matter  that  light  sustains
to  the  element  of  water;  the  same  as  the  flower  to  the  ground
which  enlivens  it.  The  spiritual  body  is  'matter'  spiritual-
ized ;  as  the  flower  is  the  earth  refined."

I  here  inquired,  "will  not  the  spiritual  body  die  also  in
future  ages,  and  its  elements  pass  away  into  higher  forms,  aa
analogy  would  teach  us?"

"The  elements,"  he  replied,  "change  perpetually;  but  the
form,  the  body,  which  contains  those  elements,  is  eternal!"

"By  what  law  is  the  spiritual  body  eternal?"

"By  the  Law  of  Harmony!"

"Why  may  we  not  obtain  an  immortal  body  on  earth?"  I
inquired,  "the  law  being  Harmony?"

"Because,  owing  to  the  lowness  and  inferiority  of  the
state,  it  will  for  ever  remain  impossible  to  attain  that  degree
of  organic  Harmony  and  refinement  which  is  essential."

"You  say  the  'elements  change  perpetually;'  that  the
'body  is  eternal.' What  am  I  to  understand  by  this?"

"I  will  speak  still  more  plain,"  he  replied,  "and  will
inform  thee  of  the  distinctive  difference  between  the  changing
elements  and  the  unchanging  Form.  The  spiritual  body  is
unalterable;  because  the  elements  of  which  it  is  composed
never  become  deranged  by  disease  or  accident,  nor  from
atmospheric  causes,  but  flow  through  the  body  and  circulate
freely  in  all  ramifications  for  ever,  making  age  and  decay
alike  impossible  in  the  Spirit  World."

"Will  you  tell  me,"  I  asked,  "why  all  men  are  born  with
the  earthy  body,  which  dies?"

"Because,"  he  replied,  "the  earthy  body  is  essential  to  the
organization  of  the  inward  spirit;  which,  when  organized,  has
no  more  need  of  the  same  body  than  the  apple,  after  being
unfolded  into  ripeness,  needs  the  tree  which  produced  it."

Here  I  made  a  statement and  request  in  these  words:


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  125

"The  people  find  great  difficulty  in  conceiving  of  'spirit!7
They  think  it  is  a  mass  of  Sentiments;  a  conglomeration  of
Ideas;  something  like  an  unsubstantial  Vapor,  palpitating
with  drowsy  life,  tinted  with  different  hues,  yet  '  nothing,'
after  all,  except  a  sentimental  consciousness  of  being  or  con-
tinuing to  exist.  This,  as  nearly  as  I  can  ascertain  and  define
it,  is  the  Christian's  conception  of  'spirit'  after  death.  Now
almost  all  Americans  have  been  indoctrinated  in  this  unphi-
losophical  idea  of  a  future  life ;  and  hence  we  find  it  exceed-
ingly hard  to  get  a  clear  conception  of  'spirit'  into  this
world.  Can  you  help  me  to  a  better  definition  than  that
presented  in  the  books  I  have  written?"

He  answered:  "There  are,  in  yon  Legislature,  many  minds
so  well  educated  and  versed  in  this  question,  that  an  expla-
nation from  them  would  be  as  plain  as  words  can  make  it.
But  the  'words'  they  employ  are  fixed  in  meaning,  like
axioms,  preventing  all  confusion.  The  language  of  earth  is
too  imperfect  for  this  question.  Words  are  used  inconsider-
ately with  meanings  arbitrary  and  variable;  wherefore  it  is
difficult  to  make  new  ideas  understood.  The  truth  is,"  he
continued,  "that  Man,  on  this  Planet,  is  yet  but  partially
developed.  His  language  is  imperfect  for  the  same  cause
that  his  mind  is  so ;  and  many  words  are  used,  originating
in  the  confusion  and  imperfection  of  the  understanding,  to
convey  a  confused  idea  of  something  which  his  mind  could
not  in  reality  explain;  yet  these  words  have  passed  into
general  employment,  and  certain  vague  meanings  are  asso-
ciated with  them."

Here  I  asked,  "Will  you  give  me  an  instance  of  the  mis-
use of  language ;  an  instance  of  words  which  have  originated
in  man's  ignorance?"

He  hesitated  a  few  moments,  as  if  communing  with  the
Legislature,  and  then  said :

"The  word  'spirit,'  as  used  by  man,  has  no  actual  meaning;
for  spirit  does  not  exist  in  the  infinite  order  and  plenitude  of
things.  Every  thing  in  the  universe  is  a  substance,  a  materi-
ality; and  the  cr  ence  between  the  Eudimental  and  the
Superior  worlds  consists  simply  in  this:  here,  in  the  rudi-
mental,  matter  is  progressing ;  there,  in  the  superior  world,
11*


126  THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.

matter  is  progressed.  Here,  matter  is  idtimating  ;  there,  it  is
ulUmated — and  is,  consequently,  much  more  real  than  where
the  external  conditions  are  constantly  changing.  Thus,  man
is  employing  words  that  have  no  real  meaning,  but  lead  the
mind  into  error,  and  that  continually."

I  inquired:  "Would  you  like  to  substitute  some  other
word  for  '  Spirit,'  now  frequently  used  by  myself  and  others !"

He  replied:  "I  did  not  come  to  do  this  now;  I  feel  more
at  liberty  to  speak  of  Principles.  Man  knows  too  little  of
principles.  Man  sees  the  motions  of  the  planetary  bodies;
sees  life  on  earth;  sees  wonders  every  where;  and  asks:
'  Where  does  the  Power  come  from  which  pervades  all  and
moves  in  all?'  If  man  would  examine  the  laws  of  realities,
lie  would  soon  find  that  'Matter'  contains  all  Power  as  well
as  all  Forms.  He  would  soon  find,  that  Matter,  when  central-
ized or  organized,  contains  form ;  and  when  attenuated,  con-
tains force.  All  matter  has  two  conditions :  one,  when  it  is
reduced  to  form;  the  other,  when  attenuated  to  the  evolution
offeree.  It  is  these  two  conditions  which  perfect  and  advance
matter  to  its  ultimate  point  of  atomic  refinement;  at  which
consummation  the  atoms  perfectly  coalesce,  become  indivisible,
and  can  no  longer  expand.  On  this  law  of  Harmony  between
Form  and  Force,  the  spiritual  body  will  for  ever  retain  its
form  and  shape!  Having  progressed,  in  itself,  all  of  its
original  properties,  qualities,  and  attributes,  the  spirit  will
continue  young,  harmonious,  and  happy,  throughout  the
countless  cycles  of  eternity,  without  the  sensations  of  age,
decrepitude,  or  knowledge  of  decay."

Here  he  gave  me  to  understand,  by  a  motion  of  his  hand,
that  he  would  say  no  more  on  this  subject  just  now.  And
so,  fearing  he  might  depart  at  once,  I  asked:  "Could  we  not
see  the  spirits  thus  assembled,  with  our  physical  natural  eyes,
if  they  were  not  too  far  off?"

"No,"  he  replied;  "but  you  would  behold  a  grayish  mass
of  nebula  in  the  sky,  in  appearance  like  a  fleecy  cloud,  though
the  whole  canopy  besides  might  be  as  cloudless  as  a  Thought
of  Truth."

On  saying  this,  he  waved  his  hand,  as  if  to  bid  me  adieu,
a  departing  salutation  glowed  forth  from  his  countenance,


THE SPIRITUAL CONGRESS.  127

and  so  was  terminated  one  of  the  most  impressive  visions
ever  made  manifest  to  my  perceptions !

When  I  meditate  upon  the  foregoing,  and  particularly
when  I  recall  the  incidents  attending  the  reception  of  the
exordia,  I  have  but  one  conscious  regret — that  is,  the  imper-
fection of  my  rendering  of  Galen's  language.  True,  as  nearly
as  possible,  I  have  translated  into  English  the  precise  words
(often  in  different  languages)  employed  by  this  gifted  intelli-
gence; but  unavoidably,  owing  to  the  fact  that  I  wrote  almost
all  his  communications  from  the  sound  of  his  voice,  as  addressed
through  the  spiritual  organ  of  hearing,  some  words  may  not
be  exactly  as  he  pronounced  them.  The  ideas,  however,  are
strictly  in  accordance  with  his  impartations.  He  termed  the
addresses  ' exordia,'  because,  he  said,  they  were  merely  intro-
ductory to  something  else  which  remains  to  be  imparted.
Whether  or  not  Galen  will  transmit  the  additional  informa-
tion to  me,  or  whether  he  or  the  Congress  or  the  Delegates  to
each  nation,  will  communicate  direct  with  the  various  nations
designated,  I  am  wholly  unable  to  say.  But  this  I  know :
something  for  the  general  welfare  of  our  common  race  will
grow  out  of  this  Spiritual  Congress;  for  those  beautiful  and
gifted  minds,  the  noblest  of  our  kind,  have  not  come  together
for  an  insignificant  purpose.  Beneficent,  as  the  sun  in  the
heavens,  was  the  object  of  that  Convention — so  inexpressibly
beautiful,  and  so  impressive


THE  TABLE  OF  EXPLANATION


Having  accompanied  me  thus  far  on  the  path  of  psycho-
logic  investigation,  the  reader  will  not,  I  think,  deprive  me
of  his  companionship  at  this  junction  of  the  subject.  The
Table  of  explanation  is  about  to  be  spread.  Many  descrip-
tions of  food,  with  their  wonderful  and  mysterious  condi-
ments, will  be  placed  on  the  festive  board.  Upon  this  table
shall  in  due  order  be  arranged  before  all  the  people  "a  feast
of  fat  things,"  of  which  the  brotherhood  of  man  is  invited  to
partake,  "a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of
marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined."  Every  individual
will  find  a  flavor  suited  to  his  taste,  and  every  one  that
'hungers  and  thirsts'  for  more  light  on  the  topic  under  discus-
sion, will,  I  venture  to  promise,  find  something  which  shall
delight  and  nourish  him.  Let  us,  therefore,  sit  down  like
brethren  to  the  Table,  and  partake  only  of  those  things  to
which  our  constitutions  most  distinctly  incline.

There  are  at  present  peculiar  existing  circumstances  in
the  condition  of  the  religious  world,  Avhich  make  it  almost
imperative  that  a  classification  of  the  alledged  spiritual  phe-
nomena should  be  attempted.  There  is  an  unaccountable
repugnance  to  the  supermundane  theory  of  the  manifesta-
tions. The  poet  opposes  it  upon  poetical  grounds :  that  the
spiritual  occurrences  are  too  offensive  to  the  long-cherished
pictures  of  the  imagination.  The  religious  man — the  receiver
of  popular  theology — is  opposed  to  the  spiritual  theory,  be-
cause the  phenomena  are  calculated  to  render  familiar  and
common-place  those  sacred  necrologic  mysteries  which  have
been  so  long  supposed  to  be  known  only  to  the  Supreme
Being.  The  scientific  man  is  too  fearful  of  his  reputation
either  to  venture  an  acceptance,  or  a  positive  denial  of  the


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  129

theory,  but  apprehensive!}'  suggests,  that  "when  the  facts
have  become  firmly  lodged  in  the  public  mind,  then,  doubt-
less, they  can  and  will  be  scientifically  accounted  for  by  refer-
ence to  a  class  of  analogous  phenomena  already  known.1'
Herschel's  method  of  investigation  is  still  referred  to,  that
"  we  are  not  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  cause  in  favor  of
which  we  have  a  unanimous  agreement  of  strong  analogies,
though  it  may  not  appear  how  such  a  cause  can  produce  the
effect,  or  even  though  it  may  be  difficult  to  conceive  its
existence  under  the  circumstances  of  the  case."

It  is  my  impression  that  an  attempt,  just  at  this  stage  of  the
subject,  to  arrange,  tabularize,  classify,  and  dogmatize  upon
the  spiritual  phenomena — any  effort  to  obtain  an  explanation
of  these  phenomena,  by  referring  them  to  analogous  facts,
traceable  to  natural  physical  laws — would  meet  with  an  unmi-
tigated rejection  at  the  hands  of  every  man  who  has  properly
contemplated  the  new  field;  for  the  wonders  are  not  yet  half
unfolded!  The  facts  are  to  he  developed.  But  facts  already
lodged  in  the  mind  of  the  multitude  do  point  us  most  distinctly
and  incontrovertibly  to  a  stupendous  mass  of  "strong  anal-
ogies"— to  a  volume  of  corresponding  "phenomena  already
known" — namely,  to  the  prophecies,  miracles,  apparitions,
and  spiritual  manifestations  written  down  in  the  Old  and  New
Testaments — and  so,  if  the  facts  are  to  be  carefully  analyzed,
and  compared,  and  classified,  and  arranged  in  accordance  with
their  natural  relations,  and  then  all  explained  by  reference  to
the  operation  of  some  physical  principle,  known  or  unknown,
why  so  be  it!  But,  ye  Bible-believers,  ye  receivers  of  the
"strong  analogies "  whose  origin  is  attributed  to  supernatural
causes,  take  heed ;  for  the  key  which  will  unlock  modern  mys-
teries will  also  lay  bare  the  causes  of  every  analogous  phe-
nomenon recorded  on  the  page  of  sacred  history.  "vYe  are
prepared  for  the  issue ;  be  ye  also  ready.

It  is  now  given  me  to  present  a  generalization  of  the  facts,
with  their  causes,  which  are  already  before  the  world.  To
this  work  we  will  now  proceed.

In  taking  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  field  occupied  by
the  torch-bearers  of  the  new  dispensation,  there  f  srs  into
my  mind  a  new  and  explanatory  classification. In  the  midst


130


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.


of  apparent  chaos,  a  beautiful  harmony  reigns.  I  think  no
one  has  before  conceived  of  the  order  in  which  the  media
exist.  The  following  scale  shows  the  relative  positions  of
the  many  and  various  offices  of  the  spiritual  army  :


TABLE OF MEDIA


OUTWARD.


ONWAKD.


1,  Vibratory  Medium.

2,  Motive  "

3,  Gesticulating *«

4,  Tipping  "

5,  Pantomimic "

6,  Impersonating  "

"  13,  Symbolic  Medium.

14,  Psychologic "

15,  Psychometric "

16,  Pictorial  "

17,  Duodynamic "
I  18,  Developing "


INWARD <


UPWARD. <


7,  Pulsatory  Medium.

8,  Manipulating "

9,  Neurological "

10,  Sympathetic "

11,  Clairlative «

12,  Homo-motor "

19,  Therapeutic  Medium.

20,  Missionary "

21,  Telegraphic "

22,  Speaking  "

23,  Clairvoyant «
124,  Impressional "


From  the  foregoing  table  the  reader  will  learn,  that  there
is  a  systematic  stratification  of  individual  workers — repre-
sented by  the  four  successive  strata — Outward,  Inward,
Onward,  Upward.  That  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  or  for-
tuitous in  this  progressive  and  harmonious  arrangement,  the
reader  will  be  satisfied,  I  think,  as  we  proceed  with  our
delineations.


I. THE VIBRATORY MEDIUM.

Properly  speaking,  the  Vibratory  medium  is  first  in  the
outward  stratum.  It  signifies  a  person  whose  body,  not
mind,  is  under  the  partial  control  of  invisible  powers.  The
world  is  replete  with  examples.  In  all  Egyptian,  Persian,  and
Oriental  Bibles  are  to  be  found  records  of  these  things: — ■
"And  I  Daniel  alone  saw  the  vision:  for  the  men  that  were
with  me  saw  not  the  vision ;  but  a  great  quaking  fell  upon  them,
so  that  they  fled  to  hide  themselves."  "And,

behold,  a  hand  touched  me,  which  sat  me  upon  my  knees,
and  upon  the  palms  of  my  hands."  See  Daniel  x.  7.  10.
This  'quaking1  is  the  influence  and  effect  exhibited  by  vibra-
tory mediums.  Daniel,  it  seems,  was  also  clairvoyant.  There
are,  however,  a  limited  number  of  modern  media  who  only
manifest  the  vibratory  facts. The  following  case,  though


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  131

somewhat  mixed  with  neurologic  symptoms,  is  deemed  a
good  one:

"  That  the  agitations  proceed  from  a  supernatural  cause,
and  of  an  agent  separate  and  distinct  from  me,  I  cannot  be
ignorant,  after  a  full  year's  experience.*  When  my  arm,
leg  or  head  is  shaken,  I  must  be  allowed  to  know  whether
it  be  voluntarily,  from  myself  or  not.  And  I  do  affirm  it  is
not  from  myself,  nor  at  my  own  will  or  pleasure ;  but  on  the
contrary  when  that  agent  does  so,  if  I  think  to  suppress  the
same,  he  does  continue  so  to  start  aud  twitch  my  limbs,  and  by
more  interior  uneasiness  over  my  whole  body,  to  solicit  my  obe-
dience, that  I  can  have  no  rest  till  I  suffer  the  same  to  take
place.  Under  this  foreign  influence,  I  felt  my  fingers  forcibly
contracted  and  moved  to  write  those  words  in  page  ninety,  of
the  first  book  of  warnings ;  under  this  influence  my  body  was
removed  ten  or  eleven  feet,  as  in  page  sixty -five  of  the  second
part,  without  any  concurrent  mixture  of  my  agency;  under
this  influence  the  respiration  of  my  breath  hath,  for  sundry  days,
beat  various  tunes  of  the  drum,  sometimes  six  hours  in  a  day,
without  my  voluntary  operation,  or  thinking  of  it — nay,  sometimes
without  being  able  to  stifle  it.  Under  this  influence  I  have
experienced,  sometimes  a  voice  so  strong  and  clear,  sometimes
so  harmonious,  as  my  natural  one  never  did  or  could  furnish.
Under  this  influence  I  have  been  carried  on  my  knees,  several
times  round  a  room  swifter  than  I  could  have  gone  on  my
feet.  Some  other  particularities,  many  have  been  also  wit-
nesses of;  but  these  may  suffice  to  show  that  I  am  at  times
under  the  agency  of  another  distinct  being,  in  which  times  the
tongue  also  is  at  the  direction  of  that  foreign  agent,  and  no  more
under  mine  than  the  motion  of  the  other  parts  of  my  body.  This
is  the  true  state  of  the  case  with  me,  and  evidently  paralleled
with  some  variations  in  two  hundred  or  three  hundred  other
persons  in  London."

The  next  in  order  is  the  motive  medium,  another  phase  of
spiritual  manifestation,  which  we  will  proceed  to  illustrate.

*  This  account  is  extracted  from  a  Tract  published  in  London,  in  the
year  1708,  entitled  "A  Relation  of  the  Dealings  of  God  to  his  Unworthy
Servant,  John  Lacy,  since  the  time  of  believing  and  professing  himself  inspired."


132  TABLE OF EXPLANATION


II. THE MOTIVE MEDIUM.

The  following  is  an  authentic  report  of  the  members  of  a
circle  organized  for  the  acquisition  of  physical  evidence.
The  medium  was  D.  D.  Hume,  at  the  house  of  Eufus  Elmer,
in  Springfield,  on  the  evening  of  the  fifth  of  April,  1852.

"First,  The  table  was  moved  in  every  possible  direction,
and  with  great  force,  when  we  could  not  perceive  any  cause
of  motion.

"Second,  It  (the  table)  was  forced  against  each  one  of  us
so  powerfully  as  to  move  us  from  our  positions,  together
with  the  chairs  we  occupied — in  all,  several  feet.

"  Third,  Mr.  Wells  and  Mr.  Edwards  took  hold  of  the  table
in  such  a  manner  as  to  exert  their  strength  to  the  best  advan-
tage, but  found  the  invisible  power,  exercised  in  the  opposite
direction,  to  be  quite  equal  to  their  utmost  efforts.

"Fourth,  In  two  instances,  at  least,  while  the  hands  of  all
the  members  of  the  circle  were  placed  on  the  top  of  the  table,
— and  while  no  visible  power  was  employed  to  raise  the  table
or  otherwise  move  it  from  its  position — it  ivas  seen  to  rise  clear
of  the  floor,  and  to  float  in  the  atmosphere  for  several  seconds,  as
if  sustained  by  a  denser  medium  than  the  air. *■#*■*

"Seventh,  Occasionally  we  were  made  conscious  of  the  oc-
currence of  a  powerful  shock  which  produced  a  vibratory
motion  of  the  floor  of  the  apartment.  It  seemed  like  the
motion  occasioned  by  distant  thunder,  or  the  firing  of  ord-
nance far  away — causing  the  tables,  chairs,  and  other  inani-
mate objects,  and  all  of  us  to  tremble  in  such  a  manner  that
the  effect  was  both  seen  and  felt."

The  above  facts,  quoted  from  the  experience  of  Mr.  Hume,
are  here  given  as  illustrative  of  the  developments  of  the
motive  type  of  media.  These  phenomena  perhaps  more  than
almost  any  other  class,  are  calculated  to  amuse  and  confound
the  investigator ;  and  if  the  examiner  abandons  his  inquiries
with  this  type  of  spiritual  unfoldings,  his  mind  may  be  re-
garded as  neither  substantially  convinced  nor  beneficially
enlightened.  Mr.  Hume,  the  medium  through  whom  the
foregoing  facts  were  ted,  has  experienced  still  further

advancements. The  motive  medium  is  simple. But  when,


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  133

as  with  this  individual,  the  impersonating,  the  sympathetic,
the  clairvoyant,  and  the  impressional  attributes  of  medium-
ship  are  added,  as  they  arc  under  the  most  favorable  circum-
stances, then,  the  facts  being  well-authenticated,  such  a  person
may  be  called  a  compound  medium.  And  yet,  with  this  com-
bination, unless  the  strictest  care  be  preserved  during  the
sessions,  the  medium  will  be  confused  and  perplexed  by
wrong  sounds,  visions,  and  communications,  which,  because
the  medium  is  not  in  the  Superior  Condition  (which  brings
wisdom  to  the  mind,)  he  may  charge  in  full  confidence  to
extraneous  causes — -usually,  to  the  undeveloped,  evil,  or
inconsiderate  condition  of  the  spirits.  This  notorious  fact
will  receive  special  consideration  as  we  proceed.

The  simple  motive  medium,  let  it  be  remembered,  is  second
in  the  outward  stratum ;  whose  mission,  so  to  speak,  is  con-
fined to  the  " sphere  of  facts;"  than  which  there  is  none  more
pregnant  with  puerilities  and  incongruities;  yea,  and  with
startling,  inexplicable  phenomena  also!  The  wise-looking
and  sneering  denouncers  of  spiritual  intercourse — the  Saddu-
cees  who,  without  knowing,  question  and  den}^ — are  some-
times unexpectedly  overwhelmed  with  evidence  of  super-
mundane power  by  means  of  a  motive  medium.  To  this
class  the  motive  medium  is  always  serviceable.  And  though
it  is  true,  that,  as  materialists  say,  the  members  of  the  circle
play  some  electrical  part  in  the  production  of  the  phenomena,
yet  the  primary  power  or  cause  will  be  found  to  be  spiritually
derived. The  next  development  is  gesticulation.


. T 1 1  . THE GESTICULATING MEDIUM.

This  medium  differs  from  the  pantomimic  in  one  respect,
viz :  in  the  number  of  muscular  motions.  Athletic  men  are
sometimes  influenced  in  this  way.  At  first,  these  various
motions  and  gesticulations  seem  absolutely  absurd.  When
the  medium  is  impelled  exclusively  to  gesture,  the  move-
ments and  intelligence  manifested  are  next  to  imbecility.
But  should  the  person  be  a  compound  medium  for  clairlative-
ness,  tdrgraphing,  or  for  impressions  at  the  same  time,  then  the
manifestations  become  at  once  far  more  beautiful  and  signifl-
12


134  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

cant.  The  Shakers  and  the  French.  Prophets  began  wrtk
gesticulations.  The  same  was  true  of  the  votaries  of  St.
Vitus.  This  phenomenon  is  the  first  remove  from  the  mo-
tive medium,  and  is  very  external.  There  is  nothing  in
simple  gesturing  manifestations  adapted  to  the  public  mind;
nor  suitable  for  the  skeptical  eye.  They  are  unpleasant,
because  initiator}^.  The  medium  should  remain  in  quiet
circles,  and  allow  himself  to  be  further  developed,  before
appearing  among  skeptical  minds.  In  fact,  any  Outward
phenomena  are  no  more  adapted  to  human  entertainment
and  development,  when  in  embryo  exegesis,  than  the  first
lessons  on  the  accordeon  or  piano — "  A  thought  worthy  of
remembrance!"  The  spiritual  manifestations  will  come  to  a
crisis  very  soon,  and  be  rejected  in  toto  for  their  worthless-
ness  and  transcendent  absurdity,  unless  media  and  spiritual-
ists generally  consent  to  conduct  themselves  more  in  har-
mony with,  a  comprehensive  reason  and  the  principles  of  a
universally  applicable  Philosophy.  As  another  step  in  spir-
ituality, the  Tipping  phenomena  appear  next  in  order.


IV. THE TIPPING MEDIUM.

This  medium  is  intimately  related  to  the  motive;  and  many
of  the  effects  are  identical.  As  a  criterion  to  investigation,  I
will  remark,  that  the  so-called  "Tipping  phenomena"  are
often  totally  unassociated  with  any  spiritual  cause;  }7et,  if
persisted  in,  the  supermundane  powers  are  attracted,  and
forthwith  perpetuate  the  effects  which  might  have,  in  the
first  instance,  originated  in  physiodynamic  causes.  Read  the
following  illustration :

"In  Woodbridge,  1ST.  J.,  some  few  years  since,  a  young
lady  was  affected  witli  a  disease  which  gave  rise  to  the  Tip-
ping phenomena.  Mysterious  sounds  were  heard  in  her
presence  —  window-panes  were  frequently  broken  in  her
vicinity — and,  in  like  manner,  door-panels  were  burst  out,
sometimes  falling  toward  her,  sometimes  from  her,  and,  espe-
cially, were  quick,  concussive,  and  very  loud  sounds  heard
under  her  feet  as  she  ascended  a  flight  of  stairs.  Ultimately,
however,  the  mysterious  phenomena  frightened  her  into  an


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  135

illness  which  cured  the  so-called  malady.  Here  we  are
reminded  that,  though  not  necessarily  a  diseased  state,  certain
conditions  of  the  body  and  mind  are  essential  to  produce  the
sounds  through  which  the  spirits  now  at  times  communicate
— taking  advantage,  as  they  do,  of  the  electrical  and  magnet-
ical  atmosphere  thus  emitted,  to  move  articles  and  even  to
converse;  and  this  explains  why  these  mysterious  manifesta-
tions are  confined  to  particular  persons  and  localities."

Another  example  was  communicated  by  a  Pittsburg  gentle-
man to  the  Telegraph:

"There  is  one  case  of  mediumship  which  I  cannot  forbear
mentioning:  it  is  a  young  lady  of  intelligence,  who  has
recently  become  developed  as  a  medium  for  the  tippings,
but  the  family  in  which  she  resides  have  applied  the  veto —
and  not  only  that,  but  she  is  cruelly  annoyed,  on  this  very
account.  A  few  evenings  since  she  was  sitting,  with  another
lady  and  two  gentlemen,  around  a  common  light-stand,  when,
after  sitting  a  short  time,  the  stand  began  to  move — poised
upon  two  legs,  then  on  one — and  it  required  the  united
strength  of  two  strong  persons  to  force  it  back  to  the  floor."

The  foregoing  description  of  manifestations  are  rapidly
entering  into  the  category  of  fashionable  amusements.  The
card-table  is  devoted  to  a  circle  for  the  " Tippings" — the
waltz  and  the  opera,  with  some  families  of  fashion,  are  consid-
ered secondary  to  the  new  manifestation  of  electricity !  This
is  well.  Mental  convictions  can  have  no  prejudicial  effect
upon  the  tippings,  but  the  latter  may  have  some  influence
upon  certain  institutions  which  need  the  tipping  phenomena
exceedingly.  We  recommend  and  encourage  the  employ-
ment of  tippings  as  amusements.  Let  us  now  consider  the
next  development.


V. THE PANTOMIMIC MEDIUM.

Perhaps  among  the  phenomenal  demonstrations  of  the
day,  none  stand  more  prominently  recorded  on  the  page  of
experience  than  pantomimic  representations  of  the  character
and  thoughts  of  different  persons  who  once  lived  on  earth.
Of  all  others  it  is  the  leasf,  convincing  to  the  skeptical. The


136  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

impersonating  medium,  which  is  another  phase,  will  here-
after he  described.  The  pantomimic  medium  is  a  different
modification  of  outward  phenomena,  and  I  may  add,  not  so
high  in  the  scale  as  the  impersonating ;  yet  in  spiritual  phi-
losophy, these  qualities  will  generally  be  found  embodied  in
one  medium  and  scarcely  distinguishable.  Discrimination,
however,  is  necessary ;  else  contradictory  manifestations  will
appear  associated  with  much  confusion  and  error.

As  every  Journal  devoted  to  Spiritualism,  publishes  almost
weekly  certain  instances  of  pantomime,  it  is  not  necessary  for
me  to  introduce  an  illustration  of  this  type.  For  purposes
of  distinction,  however,  I  will  remark,  that  the  pantomimic
medium  {per  se)  is  one  who,  without  sounds,  visions,  or  im-
pressions, is  partially  taken  into  possession  by  some  guardian
spirit,  who  desires  to  represent  certain  thoughts  by  means  of
moving  the  medium's  hand.  The  medium  is  enveloped,
meamvhile,  in  the  magnetic  atmosphere  of  the  guardian.
By  this  magnetism,  his  sensibilities  are  quickened,  and,  per-
ceiving thus,  the  medium  sympathetically  performs  what  the
spirit  would  otherwise  himself  do,  in  case  the  person  was
exclusively  a  Motive  medium.  Sometimes  the  pantomimic
individual  is  partially  clairvoyant,  in  which  case  the  imita-
tion or  pantomime  is  more  perfect.'"*  The  next  stratum  in  this
system  of  development  is  the  impersonating  phenomenon.

VI. THE IMPERSONATING MEDIUM.

This  class  of  media  presents  numerous  modifications.  The
number  of  persons  susceptible  to  the  psychologizing  action
of  spirits,  is  now  very  great.  The  term  is  from  the  Latin
impersonalis,  to  represent  or  embody.  It  is  here  employed
as  a  generic  word,  naming  the  family  to  which  a  vast  variety
of  prominent  and  imperspicuous  manifestations  belong.  On
record  may  be  found  hundreds  of  fine  illustrations,  but  I  am
impressed  to  present  the  following:

"  About  four  weeks  from  the  commencement  of  our  Spir-
itual intercourse,  the  spirits  began  to  put  the  medium  to

*  See  "Spiritual  Intercourse"  page  102,  el  seq.;  a  good  illustration,
accompanied  with  admonitions.


TABLE OF EXP  7*  ANATION.  137

sleep,  and  lie  became  clairvoyant  at  their  first  attempt/-  No
human  being  bad  ever  tried  to  mesmerize  or  psychologize
him  before  or  since.  At  these  times  he  would  shake  hands
with  the  invisibles,  describe  their  appearance,  etc.  This
done  a  few  times,  they  then  sunk  him,  as  they  informed  us,
far  below  the  clairvoyant  condition,  and  then  used  his  organs
of  speeeh  without  his  consciousness  even  at  the  time.  They
would  sing  most  beautifully  in  male  and  female  voices,  as  the
spirit  using  his  vocal  organs  might  be;  they  would  whistle  and
converse  with  fluency  and  freedom,  and  in  almost  the  identical
sounds  and  voices  they  ivere  known  to  possess  on  earth.  /So
perfect  teas  the  imitation,  that  frequently  some  of  the  company
iclco  were  skeptical  when  they  came,  would  melt  like  vmx,  and
become  tearful  at  the  first  salutation  of  some  departed  friend,  of
whom  the  medium  could  not  possibly  know  any  thing,  as
they  were  fully  aware."

The  impersonation  of  the  death-bed  exhibitions  of  the
departed,  is  very  interesting  to  those  who  desire  to  be
reminded  of  this  fact  in  their  friend's  progressive  life.  But
there  is  a  strong  probability  always  that  the  representation
may  be  shaded  and  biased  by  the  mind  of  the  medium;
wherefore  it  is  seldom  reliable.  But  let  us  now  advance  to
the  second  stratum — the  inward.


VII. THE PULSATORY MEDIUM.

Since  the  publication  of  the  volume  to  which  this  is  a
Sequel,  this  class  of  media  has  increased  fifty-fold — yea,  "an
hundred-fold" — and  the  prospect  is  still  radiant  with  promise.
The  pulsatory  medium  is  the  first  remove  from  the  outward
or  physical  strata  of  manifestation.  The  word  is  derived
from  the  Latin  pulso,  to  beat  or  throb.

It  is  well  known  that  many  media  receive  private  commu-
nications by  sensations  on  the  shoulder,  on  the  knee  or  face
and  head;  unaccompanied  with  scunds  or  any  movement
visible  to  a  third  person. This  beating  or  throbbing  is

*  This  fact  is  taken  from  Dr.  J.  A.  Gridley's  second  letter  to  the  "New
Era? — a  paper  devoted  to  the  defence  of  the  doctrines  and  facts  of  tho
New  Dispensation — S.  Crosby  Hewitt,  Editor  Boston.
12*


138  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

unlike  the  pulsatile  action  of  the  heart;  very  different  from
the  elastic  pulses  of  the  vital  forces,  compounded  of  the  nervo
and  cerebro  fluids,  which  the  ganglionic  centres  accumulate
and  distribute;  unlike  any  oscillating  or  vibrator,  process
of  the  galvanic  current ;  for  those  who  obtain  the  real  spirit-
ual pulsatory  responses  in  their  persons,  know  that  there  is
nothing  external  to,  or  incorporated  with,  the  human  organic
economy,  to  Which  such  experiences  can  justly  be  compared.

A  gentleman  writes  me:  "Whenever  my  mind  is  unoccu-
pied with  business  cares,  and  I  desire  the  departed  friend,

J P ,  to  inspire  my  soul  with  high  things,  directly

I  feel  him  touch  me,  as  it  were,  with  electrical  fingers  on  my
shoulder,  face,  and  on  the  upper  portions  of  my  head.  "When
I  ask  questions,  the  responses  are  beat  out,  upon  my  person,
sometimes  with  a  distinctness  and  power  absolutely  alarming!"

From  another  letter:  "When  I  read  the  different  news-
paper accounts,  and  compare  the  reported  experiences  of
others  with  my  own  for  nearly  two  years,  I  am  satisfied  that
none  get  more  convincing  or  incontestible  evidences  of  spir-
itual presence.  There  are  many  efforts  made  by  certain  self-
stjded  philosophers  to  prove  all  the  manifestations  material
in  origin;  that  man  and  mundane  causes  are  the  prolific
fountain  of  all  these  mysteries.  I  have  waded,  in  honest
search  of  explanatory  truth,  through  the  opposition  writings:
"  The  Philosophy  of  Mysterious  Agents,  human  and  mundane,
&c."  by  E.  C.  Rogers;  through  Reichenbach's  demonstra-
tions of  the  "Od"  principle,  and  some  three  hundred  other
pages  of  analogous  matter  of  different  authors; — but,  though
somewhat  analogous  facts  and  similar  illustrations  of  experi-
ences to  my  own  are  presented  in  a  comprehensive  manner,
nevertheless  I  personally  know  of  evidences  of  spiritual
intercourse  which  no  explanation  but  the  super-mundane
theory  can  possibly  cover.  *  *  *  responses  to  questions,
when  I  am  entirely  alone,  are  unmistakable.  It  was  three
months  before  I  learned  to  converse  with  the  invisible
beings,  during  which  time  pulsatory  sensations  were  frequent
on  my  knee  and  forehead — never,  however,  in  both  places
at  once.  The  first  thing  that  attracted  my  notice  was  the
intelligence  manifested. * * I  frequently  got  responses  to


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  139

thoughts  or  questions  contrary  to  my  previosuly  conceived
notions,  and,  in  several  temporalities,  I  had  the  most  con-
vincing evidence  of  the  forecast  and  wisdom  of  tiie  contigu-
ous but  invisible  intelligence.  *  *  The  responses  seem
to  be  made  by  rays  of  thought!  pulsations  of  a  very  gentle
yet  emphatic  kind  are  made  from  the  outside  of  my  clothing
■ — still  it  penetrates  to  the  cuticle  as  easily  as  if  my  garments
were  made  of  gauze,  through  which  a  person's  breath  could
pass.  And  sometimes  I  have  fully  realized  the  truth  of
your  description,  on  page  103  '  Spiritual  Intercourse,1  pub-
lished about  three  months  before  any  evidence  came  to  me.
1  Vibrating  or  waving  breathings'  have  occasionally  passed
1  through  the  nervous  system  up  to  the  brain,  and  awakened
there  thoughts  by  impression.'  In  private  conversation  with
these  invisible  intelligences,  I  have  learned  things,  scientific
and  otherwise,  of  which  hitherto  I  had  formed  not  the  least
notion.  These  things  occur  only  when  I  am  alone,  and  not
occupied  with  professional  duties."

The  reader  would  .surely  regard  this  Sequel  as  defective  if
I  neglected  to  record  the  progress  of  the  lady-medium  who,
though  before  incognito  and  still  very  quiet  with  her  personal
experiences,  was  particularly  quoted  and  remarked  upon  in
my  former  volume.*  Since  the  publication  of  that  account,
she  has  passed  steadily,  without  the  least  interruption  or
molestation,  from  the  Outward  to  the  Internal  stratum  of
mental  development.  At  first  I  regarded  her  experience  as
typical  of  a  class  of  spiritual  phenomena  which,  as  I  then
expressed  it,  "many  persons  will  ere  long  develop  and  pre-
sent to  the  world."  Whether  this  prophecy  has  been  ful-
filled, or  not,  the  reader  is  left  to  decide.

Her  natural  disposition  being  gentle,  conscientious,  and
rather  inclined  to  the  serious,  with  a  fall  share  of  hope  and
patience,  she  has  encountered,  in  the  process  of  her  spiritual
exodus,  but  few,  if  any,  of  those  internal  impediments  or
obstructions  which  customarily  arise  from  impetuous,  ambi-

*  The  initial  experiences  of  this  medium,  Miss ,  of  this  city,  may

be  found  detailed  in  "Philosophy  of  Spiritual  Intercourse?  commencing  on
page  109,  including  several  pages  succeeding  it,  recording  examples  of  her
communications.


110


TABLE OF EXPLANATION


tious,  and  skeptical  temperaments.  Rapidly  passing  the
gesturing  phase  and  the  intermediate  stages  to  the  pulsatory
state,  she  has  received  much  on  the  journey  which  is  entirely
new  and  far  more  convincing.  I  think  that  now,  in  addition
to  the  pulsatory  characteristics,  her  mind  shows  a  tendency
toward  pictorial  mediumship,  combined  with  slight,  and,  as
yet,  irregular  alternations  between  the  telegraphic  and  impres-
sional  stages;  but  the  indications  are  that  the  latter,  with
clairvoyance,  will  gradually  be  added  to  her  present  experi-
ences, of  which  she  has  kindly  offered  the  following  details:

"Hartford,  March  24th,  1853.

"Mr.  Davis. — Dear  Sir:  My  education  in  the  school  of  experience,  as  a
medium  for  spiritual  communications,  is  somewhat  limited.  I  made  use  of
the  alphabet  about  six  weeks,  and  as  I  found  that  impressions  would  flow
into  my  mind  at  the  same  time  that  my  hand  moved  to  the  letters,  I  relin-
quished the  alphabet.  Since  the  alphabetical  method  was  abandoned  by
me,  I  have  derived  additional  pleasure  in  receiving  impressions.  This
experience  seems  like  approaching  nearer  to  those  who  impart  thoughts  to
my  mind.  T  have  also  in  a  number  of  instances  had  impressions  of  sound,
representing  the  tone  of  voice,  or  the  manner  of  laughing,  or  the  emphasis
of  certain  words;  and  the  impression  would  be  so  cleai;  that  I  could  for
the  time  imitate  those  sounds,  and  so  accurately  that  the  friends  for  whom
they  were  designed  have  at  once  recognized  them.

"I  shall  never  forget  the  first  message  I  received  without  the  use  of  the
alphabet.  It  seemed  like  a  voice  '  wafted  on  a  heavenly  breeze.'  I  have  the
manuscripts  of  nine  hundred  and  ticenlij-lliree  communications  which  have
been  given  through  me.  Most  of  them  are  from  spirits  who  were  strangers
to  me,  and  many  of  them  are  addressed  to  persons  whom  I  have  never  met,
yet  from  whom  I  have  subsequently  received  testimony  as  to  the  applica-
bility and  genuineness  of  the  messages.  I  will  quote  a  few  words  from
a  lady  in  Ohio:  'The  communications  that  we  have  received  through  you
from  our  friends  are  such  as  we  should  expect  from  the  individuals  who
speak.'  And  in  reference  to  a  brother,  she  says:  'I  could  hardly  ask  for
stronger  assurances  of  his  identity,  than  the  thought  and  expression  con-
tained in  those  messages  from  him.'  She  adds:  'Oh!  what  a  joy  to  feel
that  the  dear  relations  that  exist  between  us  and  our  friends  in  life,  are  not
changed  by  death!  that  their  afrinities  for  the  good,  and  pure,  and  beautiful,
are  not  weakened  or  severed  by  the  change!'  Another  writes, 'I  read  to
my  sister,  who  is  with  me,  the  communication  of  her  brother  to  his  wife,
which  affected  her  deeply.  She  recognized  in  it  expressions  peculiar  to  him,
and  to  her  there  appeared  every  evidence  of  its  genuineness.'  I  could
quote  others,  but  I  wish  to  be  brief.

ik  There  seems  to  be  a  variety  in  the  style  of  communications. Sometimes


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  141

I  will  have  peculiar  expressions  given  me,  which  I  have  invariably  found  to
be  characteristic  of  the  person  when  residing  on  earth.  Since  last  August,
I  have  beon  favored  with  an  impression  of  personal  appearance,  which  is
received  by  the  friends  as  an  additional  evidence  of  identity.  These  unseen
visitants  (yet  -seen)  will  present  to  me  some  peculiarity  in  the  dress  they
used  to  wear,  or  some  habit  or  gesture  they  may  have  had,  by  means  of
which  they  are  at  once  recognized  by  their  delighted  friends.  Also,  they
will  impress  me  with  leading  traits  of  character.  I  have  observed  with
deep  interest  the  pleasure  they  manifest  in  being  able  to  converse  with
their  friends  on  earth;  and  in  no  instance  have  I  been  led  to  fear  that  'Satan
had  transformed  himself  into  an  angel  of  light.'

"I  cannot  forbear  quoting  a  communication  imparted  to  me  Jan.  24th,  1852:
'Communications  are  sometimes  given  to  ameliorate  circumstances,  and  to
relieve  tin.  mind,  rather  than  to  present  new  truths.  The  depressed  need
elevating;  the  sick  need  comforting;  the  despairing,  hope;  and  then  the
erring  need  reclaiming;  the  bigot,  wisdom;  and  the  self-sufficient,  humility.'

"Indication  of  spiritual  presence  frequently  comes  to  me  when  I  am
engaged  in  reading,  writing,  or  during  common  conversation.  The  person
addressed  may,  or  may  not,  be  present;  and  the  relationship  they  sustain
to  each  other  is  also  given  me,  though  but  seldom  the  name.  I  will
relate  a  circumstance  that  occurred  March  13th,  which,  to  me,  was  quite
interesting. A  number  of  friends  were  present,  and  as  they  were  about  to

leave,  Mary said  to  me, 'I  wish  you  could  get  impressions  from

some  of  the  scholars  who  were  victims  to  the  accident  at  the  Ward  School,
New  York.'  At  the  moment  she  commenced  speaking,  a  form  was  presented
to  me  as  standing  by  her  side,  and  when  I  described  her,  Mary ex-
claimed, 'It  is  Anna  Slate!'  And  on  the  15th  of  March,  I  received  the
following  message  from  her  for  her  friend:  'We  separated  in  a  terrible
manner,  Mary!  Oh,  how  hard  it  was  to  go  so;  it  made  the  dear  friends
feel  so  badly !  If  they  could  only  have  known,  when  the  dreadful  shock
was  over,  that  all  we  scholars  were  dwelling  together,  and  reading  each
other's  thoughts,  and  loving  each  other,  it  would  have  made  them  happy.
I  love  you,  my  dear  school-mate !  I  made  you  think  of  us — for  I  wanted
to  speak  to  you.  It  is  beautiful  to  be  able  to  speak  in  this  way.  I  never
thought  I  could  do  so;  and  I  never  knew  any  thing  about  Heaven  before.
I  love  all  my  dear  school-mates,  and  I  never  shall  make  them  unhappy
You  know  that  scholars  sometimes  feel  wrong  toward  each  other,  and  for
trifling  things,  too.  But  now  I  feel  that  I  can  go  to  them,  and  give  them
pleasant  thoughts,  and  do  them  good.  Oh,  Mary!  I  love  you.  I  will  walk
by  your  side,  and  you  will  think  of  me,  and  it  will  make  you  very  happy.
Good  Bye!'

"  When  this  young  girl  gave  the  above  communication,  she  was  accom-
panied by  another,  smaller  than  herself,  and  with  sparkling  eyes  and  ani-
mated countenance.  She  said  tome:  'Tell  Mary.'  Accordingly,  when  I
met  Mary  again,  I  did  tell  her,  and  she  instantly  recognized  her  as  a  little
girl  by  the  name  of  Eleanor  Down. I  also  saw  another  by  the  name  of


142  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

Amelia  Browncll. These  two  have  not  communicated,  but  expressed  their
intention  to  do  so.

"It  is  a  source  of  heart-felt  pleasure  to  me  to  be  able  to  present  any  small
degree  of  evidence  that  the  departed  can  and  do  in  reality  communicate
to  their  friends  on  earth. With  patience  I  wait  for  further  developments.
"Very  respectfully,  yours,  "Eliza  Brown."

The  best  and  most  unequivocal  demonstrations  of  spiritual
communication  are  private,  and  of  too  delicate  a  character
to  admit  of  publication.  They  cannot  be  made  to  appear
in  words  as  truly  as  in  deeds.  Hundreds  believe  in  the  near-
ness of  the  spirit-land  to  the  earth-land  from  evidences  and
reasons  which  are  not  susceptible  of  being  represented  or
transmitted  to  the  brain  of  a  third  person.  Hence  the  ques-
tion has  taken  a  deeper,  firmer,  more  immovable  root  in  the
minds  of  those  who  have  been  enough  fortunate  to  perceive
the  real  facts  as  they  are,  than  any  external  mind,  unfamiliar
with  these  innermost  reasons,  can  by  any  possibility  imagine.
We  will  now  pass  on  to  consider  another  development.

VIII. THE MANIPULATING MEDIUM.

Media  of  this  general  class  will  increase  rapidly — for  curing
the  sick  by  "laying  on  of  hands" — as  an  illustration  of  which,
the  following  is  given,  as  written  by  Elmer  Woodruff,  and
communicated  to  the  St.  Louis  Journal,  entitled,  u  Li g  J  it  from
the  Spirit  World"

"Mr.  Lucien  Gardener  and  family,  occupying  one  of  my
dwellings,  has  a  little  son,  two  years  of  age,  who  has  from  his
birth  been  struggling  with  disease,  which  has  caused  a  gen-
eral debility  throughout  the  system.  He  has  never  been  able
to  walk  a  step.  His  head  is  uncommonly  large,  and  the  sight
of  his  eyes  extremely  so.  The  little  sufferer,  though  weak
and  puny,  was  almost  constantly  moaning  and  crying,  and
at  times  seemed  to  be  suffering  from  acute  pain,  which  called
into  exercise  feelings  of  pity  for  the  little  sufferer.

"The  continual  crying  was  somewhat  annoying,  not  only
to  the  parents,  but  to  myself,  being  obliged  to  spend  a  con-
siderable portion  of  my  time,  in  my  furniture  ware-room,
directly  above.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  143

"  While  pondering  upon  the  suffering  condition  of  the  child,
I  became  controlled  by  spirit  influence;  upon  which,  I
inquired  if  any  thing  could  be  done  for  the  little  sufferer.
Immediately  the  answer  was,  'Yes.  You  must  lay  your
hand  upon  him,  and  he  will  be  healed.'  Instantly  I  per-
ceived altogether  a  different  influence  passing  over  me,  which
caused  me  to  inquire  if  this  was  the  healing  power.  The
answer  was,  'Yes;  and  you  must  apply  your  hand  as  you
have  been  instructed.'  This,  thought  I,  was  rather  a  deli-
cate business,  and  I  hesitated  some  time,  asking  many  ques-
tions, and  receiving  as  many  answers,  before  I  could  be
persuaded  to  make  the  trial.  The  influence  being  quite
strong  upon  me,  I  went  down  into  their  room ;  and  on  ap-
proaching the  child  my  hand  and  arm  became  powerfully
effected,  and  was  made  to  pass  over  the  child,  (as  if  to  exam-
ine it)  and  soon  rested  upon  the  small  of  the  back,  remaining
in  that  position  for  live  to  ten  minutes,  the  sweat  streaming
in  the  most  profuse  manner  from  the  child ;  especially,-  about
the  back  and  hips.  My  hand  was  then  made  to  pass  over
the  child,  in  a  variety  of  ways,  for  at  least  five  minutes.  At
this  juncture  the  influence  left,  and  I  was  again  at  liberty.
The  consequence  was  that  the  child  rested  quietly  the  re-
mainder of  the  day,  and  through  the  night.  The  next
morning  it  run  alone,  for  the  first;  and  has  continued  to  im-
prove in  health  and  strength  ever  since!  The  parents  feel
greatly  rejoiced  at  the  change;  yet  astonished  at  the  myste-
rious means  of  producing  it.  I  have  since  been  influenced
to  lay  my  hands  upon  my  daughter,  in  a  similar  manner,  she
being  severely  afflicted  with  the  Bronchitis — which  has  com-
pletely checked  the  ravages  of  the  disease,  and  she  is  now
fast  recovering.

"I  am  sorry  to  say,  that  I  am  blessed  with  this  influence
but  a  small  portion  of  the  time."

Great  things  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  result  from
manipulating  mediums.  All  ancient  records  are  explicit  on
the  utter  practicability  of  working  so  called  'miracles,'  in  this
manner.  Laying  hands  on  the  sick  and  healing  them,  is  a
grander  manifestation  than  any  other.  Interrogate  Egyptian
monuments,  read  the  inscriptions  on  the  most  ancient  temples,


144  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

study  the  religious  ordinances  and  ceremonies  of  the  early
nations  of  Greece,  and  you  will  see  proof  of  the  possibility
of  curing  the  sick  by  the  manipulating  method.  Circles,  for
developing  such  media,  should  be  formed  in  every  family;
this  is  the  best  and  purest  remedy  for  disease.

Although  disease  is  being  brought  more  and  more  within
the  control  of  medical  science  and  skill,  and  many  organic
and  functional  disturbances  are  manageable  by  clairvoyant
and  manipulatory  processes,  nevertheless,  as  my  mind  is  im-
pressed, there  is  no  sovereign  ever-certain,  always  infallible
remedy  for  human  transgressions.  The  whole  plan  of  medical
science  is  negative — waiting  for  a  foe  to  light — an  evil,  sys-
tematized and  popularized,  dressed  up  in  pompous  Greek
and  Latin  terms,  designed  merely  to  neutralize  another  evil
— the  ignorant  transgressions  of  man !  The  young  physician
crowds  his  memory  with  words  and  facts,  regardless  of  a  grand
principle  of  interpretation,  and  escapes,  in  triumph,  the  mo-
mentous ordeal  of  the  last  examination !  Encouraged  by  his
diploma,  he  thinks  himself  ready  for  a  fight  with  human  sins,
and  procures  an  office  and  a  variety  of  mineral  preparations;
thus  "armed  and  equipped  as  the  Law  directs"' — he  throws
himself  complacently  in  the  office-chair,  reads  the  daily  pa-
pers, and  waits  for  people  to  get  sick!  0,  when  shall  all  this
superficiality  cease  to  exist?  0,  man  of  medicine!  knowest
thou  not  how  impotent  all  remedies  are  when  the  imperial
Laws  of  Nature  have  been  outraged  by  human  violation?
Yea!  the  eternal  Mind  hath  well-ordained  the  illimitable  and
immutable  fact,  that  every  effect  shall  be  succeeded  by  its
equal  and  just  consequence.  Man  should  do  right  in  all
things — from  the  legitimate  consequences  of  transgression,
no  man,  angel,  or  seraph  can  save  him — for  the  law  of  recom-
pense or  compensation  is  eternal.

IX. THE NEUROLOGICAL MEDIUM.

A  work  of  considerable  merit  has  been  recently  written
by  E.  C.  Rogers,  on  the  philosophy  of  mysterious  agents,
tracing  all  spiritual  manifestations  to  physical,  electric,  and
mental  laws,  who  relates  the  following  excellent  illustration :


TABLE OF EXPLANATION'.  145

"We  refer  to  that  where,  in  both  the  phenomena  of  the
raps,  movement  of  the  table,  &c,  and  the  involuntary  writing,
the  grammatic  characteristics  of  the  medium  have  been  exhibited,
Ellen  Galaga,  an  Irish  servant-girl,  a  medium  for  'raps,'  and
the  movement  of  the  table — quite  intelligent.  Her  habitual
orthography  in  certain  words  is  false.  For  instance,  she
always  spells  possible,  'posebel?  belief,  'beleaff  lose,  llu$e;'
honest,  lonest;'  preach,  ' prechf  centre,  'senter;1  home,  'hom?
doubt  (a  word  which  has  frequently  occurred  in  the  commu-
nications, as  in  the  expression,  "You  must  not  doubt,"  is
spelled  '  dout.1  The  phenomena  of  the  rappings  in  this  case,
would  occur  on  the  table,  the  backs  of  chairs,  and  sometimes
on  the  walls  of  the  room,  without  her  contact.  But  in  the
movement  of  the  table  or  a  chair,  which,  however,  seldom
took  place,  she  would  have  to  touch  the  article,  and  at  the
time  of  the  movement  she  would  experience  a  tremor  over
her  system  that  sometimes  seemed  to  commence  in  the  hands,
and  at  others  in  the  feet.  On  touching  the  article,  the  table
for  instance,  it  would  soon  commence  to  jerk  away  from  her;
moving  in  this  jerking  manner  some  foot  and  a  half,  or  two
feet,  after  it  had  left  her  hands.  The  communications  were
generally  spelled  by  sounds  upon  the  table,  without  contact.
But  whether  the  communications  purport  to  come  from
Channing,  or  Jonathan  Edwards,  or  Noah  Webster,  Paul  or
'Jemmy  Cullen,'  'you  must  not  dontj  is  always  given  with
the  same  orthography  on  the  last  word."

The  neurologic  medium,  like  the  sympathetic,  is  on  the
transition  line  of  development.  The  mind,  though  influenced
to  some  extent  by  the  spirit  present,  is  nevertheless  left  to
reflect,  meditate,  and  indite  thoughts  through  its  accustomed
methods.  The  mind  is  set  in  motion  by  a  spiritual  power;
but  the  habitual  symbols  of  thought  will  shade  and  charac-
terize every  idea;  also,  the  orthography  of  terms,  in  which  the
thoughts  are  conveyed.  This  is  the  cause  of  much  skepticism.
In  fact,  a  medium  of  this  description  is  not  at  all  reliable  for
any  inwakd  phenomena,  and  should  be  further  advanced
before  reported  as  a  real  medium.

Transitional  media  encounter  many  trials. Doubt  and  faith,
alternate,  like  ague  and  fever,  in  the  mind ;  and  investigating
13


146


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.


skeptics,  when  so  unfortunate  as  to  begin  an  examination
of  this  question  with  a  medium  thus  conditioned,  are  apt  to
be  repelled  still  farther  from  faith  in  spiritual  intercourse.  The
hesitation  and  timidity  and  apparent  skepticism  characterizing
the  transitional  medium  is  painful  to  all  interested.  Media
of  this  general  class,  being  at  best  but  partially  under  spirit-
control,  have  been  made  to  write  over  whole  reams  of  paper,
sometimes  merely  for  purposes  of  discipline,  characters  and
words,  freighted  with  no  real  signification.  During  the  three
years  just  rolled  by,  I  have  seen,  with  my  physical  eyes,  no
less  than  three  thousand  pages  closely  written,  oftentimes
with  a  most  beautiful  chirographical  execution  and  order;
and  yet,  what  is  very  remarkable,  leaving  the  medium  in
utter  skepticism  as  to  its  real  use  and  internal  meaning.  The
mail  has  brought  me  packages  of  this  neurological  writing,
so  numerous  indeed,  that  I  have  been  compelled  to  leave  a
large  proportion  entirely  unacknowledged.  Let  me  present
the  reader  with  afac  simile  of  one  style  of  neurologic  or  tran-
sitional-media penmanship,  of  which  an  incredible  quantity
has  been  written  in  different  parts  of  our  country:


Here  is  an  example,  typical  of  a  large  class,  showing  the
protracted  effort  made  by  a  guardian  spirit  to  obtain  complete
control  over  the  medium's  mind  and  muscles,  and  that  with-
out success !  If  the  spirit  should  succeed,  then  the  manifest-
ation would  doubtless  be  a  bold  attempt  at  authorship  on  the
part  of  the  guardian — a  local,  personal,  circumscribed  revela-
tion of  opinions — as  with  all  psychological  media.

Not  long  since  a  package  of  mysterious  characters  (quite
suspicious  looking)  was  forwarded  to  me  from  Illinois  for
special  translation. The  names  of  the  media  were  given,  and


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  147

the  whole  was  recommended  by  an  ample  array  of  unim-
peachable endorsers.  At  first,  I  could  make  nothing  out  of
these  remarkable  figures.  They  were  spread,  regardless  of
order,  over  four  very  large  sheets,  and  appeared,  to  my  outer
vision,  not  unlike  the  incoherent  scribblings  of  a  ^o/ymaniac :
for  the  variety  was  too  extensive  to  predicate  mo?2omania  or
any  other  species  of  mental  affection.  At  length,  however,
when  the  impression  came  to  write  this  Sequel,  I  again
attempted  to  obtain  some  interpretation  of  the  mysterious
documents.  The  result  was  satisfactory.  Upon  examination
I  found  the  atmosphere  of  two  neurologic  media — that  is,
persons  partially  under  spirit-instigation  and  government —
and  discovered  that  the  sheets,  with  one  exception,  were
worth  no  more,  and  possessed  no  more  meaning,  than  the
child's  first  lessons  in  chirography.  The  'one  exception'  was
found,  written  in  large  characters,  interspersed  with  scribbling,
below  the  centre  of  one  of  the  sheets — showing  that  the  me-
dium, for  a  few  moments,  was  under  the  perfect  psychological
control*  of  a  spirit,  who,  when  on  earth,  was,  according  to
my  impressions,  an  oriental  prince.


The  medium  knows  nothing  of  any  language  except  the
English,  yet,  under  spirit-instigation,  wrote  the  above  well-
formed  and  significant  Arabic  characters.

*  See,  for  explanation,  in  subsequent  pages,  my  impressions  respecting
the  psychological  medium.


148  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

I  pronounce  these  characters*  to  have  been  written  when  the
medium  was  in  a  neurologic  state,  in  which  the  mental  facul-
ties and  physical  consciousness  remain  undisturbed  and  unin-
yolved,  yet  while  the  nerve-spirit,  so  to  speak,  living  in  the
nervous  fibres  and  tissues  of  the  medium's  hand,  was  for  the
time  being  wholly  under  control  of  the  Arabian  personage.
Upon  subjecting  these  characters  to  impression,  the  following
flowed  into  my  mind  as  its  translation:

"A  refined,  calm  Chamber  is  the  upper  Heaven;
Upraised  without  pillars:  to  be  sought  free  from  distrust,
With  doubts  cut  off:  where  congregate  the  smooth,  the  passing,
The  spotless  tribes  of  Allah. — Extolled  be  the  perfections
Of  the  All-Beneficent."

According  to  my  understanding,  the  name  of  the  spirit-
writer — which  he  apparently  attempted  to  spell  out  in  Eng-
lish some  fifteen  times  on  the  same  sheet,  but  uniformly  with-
out succeeding — is  "Almondi,"  a  Persian  prince,  and  also,
while  on  earth,  a  talented  biographer  and  poet.  It  would
please  me  to  obtain  a  communication  from  him.

Of  the  nature  and  functions  of  the  nerve-spirit,  which  in
all  my  works  is  denominated  and  described  as  being  com-
posed of  vital  electricity  and  vital  magnetism,  (two  degrees  of
the  same  element  in  the  nervous  system,)  much  might  be
written.  This  nerve  element  is  visible  to  the  clear  seer.  In
common  life,  this  portion  of  man's  individuality  acts  through
and  connects  the  senses  with  the  objective  world.  It  is  the
connecting  link  between  the  most  external  and  the  inner-
most. In  the  'superior  condition,'  this  nerve-power,  as  will
hereafter  be  shown,  is  concentrated  and  energetically  con-
densed upon  the  inner  consciousness.  The  sensorium  is  the
magnetic  battery  whereby  the  nerve  element  is  obtained  from
water,  air,  light,  food,  and  the  so  called  imponderables,  and
is  therein  so  refined  as  to  be  capable  of  subserving  the  high-
est willing  powers  of  mind — pervading  the  entire  conscious
individualism — and  of  acting  as  an  intermediate  protecting

*  I  have  had  transcribed,  and  herewith  present,  these  writt<  Tires,
accurately  as  possible,  for  the  benefit  of  the  reader  an t  r. In

the  original,  some  six  or  eight  words  are  defectively  formed,  and  this,  if  any
thing,  may  render  the  writing  obscure.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  149

agent  to  the  most  inward  consciousness  in  its  connections
with  the  external  body  and  world.  This  nerve-spirit  (or
element  pervading  the  mind,)  is  also  the  digestive  medium
whereby  imponderables  are  made  to  augment,  strengthen,
reinforce,  and  build  up  continually,  the  structure  and  the
almost  imparticled  organism  of  man's  immortal  mind.

The  psycho-physiology  of  the  human  soul  is  beautiful  only
to  the  spiritualistic  nature.  All  clear  seers  readily  perceive
that  this  nervous  element  is  the  element  on  which  sjrirm  cast
doicn  their  influence  upon  mediums;  and  a  person  thus  affected
is  properly  termed  a  neurological  medium ;  because  the  nerve-
spirit,  and  not  the  mind  of  the  individual,  is  the  field  of  the
phenomena. The  Seeress  of  Provorst  adds  her  testimony:

""With  respect  to  the  nerve-spirit,  or  nervous  principle  of
vitality,  she  said,  that  through  it  the  soul  was  united  to  the
body,  and  the  body  with  the  world.  The  facility  with  which
the  spirit  freed  itself  in  her  case,  was  the  cause  of  her  abnor-
mal condition.  The  nerve-spirit  is  immortal,  and  accom-
panies the  soul  after  death,  unless  where  the  soul  is  perfectly
pure,  and  enters  at  once  amongst  the  blessed.  By  its  means
the  soul  constructs  an  airy  form  around  the  spirit  It  is  capa-
ble of  increase  or  growth,  after  death ;  and  by  its  means  the
spirits,  who  are  yet  in  the  mid-region,  are  brought  into  con-
nection with  a  material  in  the  atmosphere,  which  enables
them  to  make  themselves  felt  and  heard  by  man,  and  also  to
suspend  the  property  of  gravity,  and  move  heavy  articles."

This  medium  makes  a  distinction  between  the  soul  and  the
spirit,  which  is  at  once  self-evident;  one  being  the  encase-
ment or  envelopment  of  the  other.  A  careful  comparison
of  all  the  facts  and  revelations  of  this  remarkable  Seeress —
a  method  of  inquiries  to  which  most  minds,  in  this  loco-mo-
tive and  lightning  age,  feel  an  unequivocal  aversion — would
demonstrate  her  to  have  been  a  compound  medium,  Pulsatory,
Neurologic,  Sympathetic,  Symbolic,  Psychologic,  Pictorial,
and  Clairvoyant.  Not  that  she  at  all  times  sustained  and
gave  out  the  manifestations  legitimately  growing  from  each-
separate  germ  or  condition;  but  that  she  alternated,  from
state  to  state,  on  the  Inward  and  Onward  scales,  enjoying
meanwhile,  and  without  much  intermission,  the  Upward
13*


150  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

faculty  of  Clairvoyance,  which  will  receive  attention  in  sub-
sequent pages.

Since  the  reception  of  the  mysterious  characters  from
Illinois,  I  have  received  several  packages  from  the  States;
one  of  which  contained-  three  large  sheets  of  writing  and
painting,  analogous  to  much  incipient  penmanship  seen  in
school-houses,  yet  curious  and  very  remarkable  when  the
attendant  circumstances  are  duly  considered.  The  limits  of
this  Sequel  will  not  admit  full  explanations,  but  I  quote  from
the  letter  accompanying  the  package:

"  Enclosed  you  will  please  find  three  sheets  of  characters
written  by  different  spiritual  mediums,  each  writing  a  sepa-
rate work,  with  special  instruction  to  be  forwarded  to  you
for  interpretation.  A  large  number  of  mediums  in  our  com-
munity are  writing  similarly,  or  are  instructed  to  do  so  by
spirits.  * It  appears  that  the  enclosed  sheets  are

a  preface  or  index  to  the  different  works  *  *  the
instructions  are  that  these  sheets  must  be  sent  to  you  for
interpretation  and  publication."

Upon  submitting  these  documents  to  impression,  I  obtain,
as  in  the  other  instance,  the  atmosphere  of  neurologic  media.
The  nerve-spirit  of  the  media  is  the  field  of  these  chiro-
graphic manifestations.  Some  spirit  or  spirits  desire  to
write  out  the  minutia  of  personal  experience.  They  have
found  media  organically  congenial,  and,  from  willingness  of
mind,  approachable ;  hence  the  spirits  commence  the  task  of
authorship,  but  fail  to  get  perfect  possession  of  the  nerve-
spirit  residing  in  the  medium's  hand.  Consequently,  they
make,  or  impress,  psychologically,  the  medium  to  write  out
a  variety  of  semi-Chinese,  semi- Arabic  (but  mostly  meaning-
less) characters,  as  exercises,  and  then  send  them  for  interpret-
ation. Accordingly  I  follow  my  impressions  when  I  affirm,
that  these  instances,  while  they  accomplish  nothing  of  mo-
ment, in  the  direction  first  supposed,  yet  do  subserve  the
great  cause  of  spiritual  intercourse — more  especially  the  work
of  human  reformation — by  illustrating  incontrovertibly  the
nearness  of  the  other  life  to  this  life,  and  by  disclosing  the
details  of  certain  great  fundamental  and  psychologic  laws.

"With  the  present  accumulation  of  facts  before  us,  with


TABLE OF EXPLANATION,  151

such  undeniable  external  and  self-evident  internal  evidences
as  attach  to  these  developments,  the  whole  world  is  forced
to  concede  the  grand  truth  that  spirits  do  communicate.


X. THE SYMPATHETIC MEDIUM.

In  a  candid  work,  written  and  compiled  by  Eev.  Adin
Ballou,  the  following  good  illustration  is  presented.  He  is
alluding  to  instances  "in  which  the  bias,  prejudice,  predilec-
tion, or  will  of  the  medium  evidently  governed  and  charac-
terized the  demonstrations.  In  these  cases,  the  answers  given
to  questions,  the  doctrines  taught,  and  the  peculiar  leanings
of  communications  spelled  out,  were  so  Obviously  fashioned
by  the  medium's  own  mind,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  fact.
In  absolute  confirmation  of  this,  questions  have  been  written
out  and  presented  to  the  medium,  with  a  request  that  the
answers  should,  if  possible,  be  given  thus  and  so.  And  they
were  given  by  rap>s,  accordingly.  I  myself  gave  questions
in  this  way  to  a  certain  medium,  and  found  that  answers
could  be  obtained  in  the  affirmative  or  negative,  or  in  flat
contradiction  to  previous  answers,  if  the  medium  would  but
agree  to  will  it.  At  the  same  time,  I  made  myself  certain
that  this  medium  could  not  procure  the  rapping  agency  at
will.  It  came,  staid,  and  went,  as  it  would,  and,  in  that  re-
spect, was  uncontrollable.  But  when  it  chanced  to  be  pres-
ent, it  could  be  overruled,  biased,  and  perverted,  more  or
less,  by  the  medium."

Media  of  this  general  class  are  still  too  numerous.  More
development  is  required.  The  sympathetic  mind  is  open  to
every  modification  of  contradiction.  Hysteria,  catalepsy,
trance,  fitful  somnambulism,  various  muscular  and  nervous
exhibitions  passing  rapidly  back  and  forth  through  the
phases  already  described — such  are  the  manifestations  of
this  stage  of  development.  When  impulse  predominates,  the
answers  to  questions  will  correspond ;  when  the  will  is  active,
as  above  related,  the  responses  will  be  overruled  by  the
medium.  Now,  why  is  this  ?  Because  the  medium  is  not
developed,  and  because  the  spirit  in  attendance  may  not  be
skilled  in  the  new  mode  of  communicating  his  thoughts  to


152  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

the  earth's  inhabitants. Neurologic  and  sympathetic  media
are  transitional,  and  require  careful  development.


XI. THE CLAIRLATIVE MEDIUM.

Concerning  the  interior  experience  of  this  peculiar  me-
dium, much  remains  to  be  written.  The  mind  is  made  to
live  over  again  the  years  by  gone,  all  in  a  few  brief  minutes,
with  all  the  freshness  and  joyousness,  yea,  and  enthusiasm
of  youth  and  unfolding  manhood.  This  experience,  so  pe-
culiar to  old  age,  is  generally  considered  to  be  nothing  more
than  the  mind's  voluntary  recurrence  to  the  scenes  of  child-
hood ;  an  attribute  and  capability  of  the  soul  to  recall  the
thousand  pleasant  memories  of  the  so-called  sunny  past,  and
live  afresh  in  the  fragrance  and  innocence  of  former  days.
But  while  we  grant  this  capacity  to  the  mind,  we  should  not
fail  to  attribute  certain  pictures,  painted  on  the  interior  can-
vas of  memory  and  consciousness,  to  the  pencillings  of
invisible  artists.  (For  delineations  of  this  thought,  as  illus-
trated in  certain  dreams,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  author's
third  volume  of  Harmonia,  entitled  the  "Seer.")  The  soul!s
bereavements  are  severe  trials.  Disease  overtakes  the  child,
the  wife,  the  mother,  the  father,  the  sister,  or  some  beloved
one,  ever  dear  and  precious  to  affection,  and  thus  the  loved
and  beautiful  ones  decay — fade  away  like  rosy  light  at  the
sunset  hour — and  so  the  poet  sighs :

"Thou  art  not  here,  but  gone  to  dwell

Where  stars  light  up  the  hallowed  dome; ,

Where  angels  holy  anthems  swell,
To  guide  their  sister-spirits  home;

And  thou  art  gone,  and  in  mine  ear
A  spirit  sighs,  thou  art  not  here."

But  the  clairlative  medium,  whose  experiences  are  usually
confined  to  meditative  moments  during  "the  twilight  hour,"
or  at  night,  in  bed,  before  the  deepest  slumber  takes  the
body  and  mind  captive,  can  testify  that  the  loved  one  is  still
near,  still  loving,  still  painting  pictures  on  the  prepared  fac-
ulties of  thought. The  following  is  a  bold  example  :

"Carsten  Niebuhr,  the  great  German  scholar  and  Oriental


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  153

traveller,  when  old  and  blind,  recalled  with  such  power  the
memory  of  his  early  adventures,  that  the  scenes  painted
themselves  on  his  sightless  eyeballs.  When  on  his  bed,  pic-
tures of  the  gorgeous  orient  flashed  on  his  mental  sight,  as
vivid  as  though  he  had  just  closed  his  eyes  to  shut  them  out
for  a  moment.  The  cloudless  blue,  bending  over  the  broad
desert,  and  studded  by  night  with  Southern  constellations,  as
bright  and  beautiful  as  when  he  saw  them  half  a  century
before."  *

The  clairlative  medium,  per  se,  is  one  whose  faculties  are
played  upon  by  some  guardian  spirit.  There  are  many
dreams  thus  originated.  The  word  clairlative  is  derived
from  the  French,  clair,  clear,  and  latif,  to  have  production
— meaning,  a  thing  which  is  clearly  produced.  Volumes
of  instances  might  be  adduced,  and  will  be  during  the
psychological  campaign  just  approaching,  but  for  the  pur-
poses of  this  Sequel,  the  above  is  deemed  sufficient.  We
will  now  pass  on  to  the  next  development.


XII. THE HOMO- MO  TOR MEDIUM.

This  description  of  media  remains  to  be  developed.  A
year  hence,  I  think,  the  journals  will  contain  definite  ac-
counts of  them.  The  following  case  is  translated  from  the
German  of  Werner,  by  A.  E.  Ford.  See  page  97,  "  Guar-
dian Spirits:"

"R.  had  announced  another  crisis  for  this  evening  at  six
o'clock.  To  satisfy  myself  whether  the  occurrence  of  the
cramps  took  place  punctually  at  the  time  indicated,  and  with
no  agency  on  her  part,  I  begged  the  members  of  my  family,
in  answer  to  her  question  what  time  she  had  fixed  for
another  sleep,  to  say  five  o'clock.  This  was  done;  and
thinking  it  would  be  no  otherwise,  she  so  arranged  her
affairs  as  that  she  should  have  them  off  her  hands  at  that

*  This  fact  is  taken  from  the  Telegraph.  Dr.  Richmond,  in  replying  to
Prof.  Briitan  on  the  question  of  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  agency  in  the
production  of  modern  mysteries,  occasionally  quotes  fine  illustrations  of
neurology  and  clairlativeness,  denominating  the  latter  a  result  of  the  rapport
of  mind  with  mind.


154  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

hour.  As  no  attack  occurred  at  five,  and  there  were  no
signs  of  it  so  late  as  a  quarter  after,  she  thought  she  had
made  a  mistake.  I  now  asked  her  to  go  with  us  into  the
garden  lying  near  the  house,  as  it  was  warm  and  pleasant
in  the  open  air.  She  followed  us,  and  was  in  a  cheerful
mood.  I  must  also  observe,  that  I  had  put  the  mantel-
clock  forward  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  in  the  morning,  so  that
it  struck  five  and  six  sooner  than  it  should  by  the  sun.  I
had,  also,  without  her  knowledge,  had  all  the  watches  in  the
house  set,  in  the  morning,  with  the  mantel-clock.  Thus  it
struck  six,  and  R.  still  continued  in  lively  spirits  in  the  gar-
den. Under  some  pretence  we  now  brought  her  back  into
the  chamber  just  as  it  struck  a  quarter  to  seven  in  the  sit-
ting-room. This  clock  had  been  exactly  a  quarter  too  fast
by  my  watch,  an  excellent  time-piece,  which  alone  I  had  not
altered.  The  watch,  therefore,  pointed  precisely  to  six —
and  scarcely  had  the  first  quarter  struck,  when  the  usual
cramps,  the  short,  dry,  hacking  cough,  and  the  trembling  of
the  limbs  came  on.  R.  was  now  quickly  laid  on  the  bed.
In  a  few  minutes,  after  the  accustomed  general  agitation  of
the  body  was  past,  she  said,  cheerfulty :  l  How  much  trouble
jou.  have  given  yourself  to  cheat  me!  It  was  well  that  I
left  the  garden  and  reached  the  chamber  in  time.  You  may
set  it  clown  for  the  future,  that  I  can  neither  add  nor  dimin-
ish in  this  matter.  My  malady  takes  its  own  course ;  only
my  Albert  can  change  the  time  of  the  crisis,  and  he  does  it
only  in  case  of  necessity ;  but  I  always  see  it  in  him  forth-
with, without  being  obliged  to  examine  my  own  nerves  and
blood-vessels.*  But  I  must  administer  you  a  reproof,  my
dear  doctor.'  For  what  cause?  'You  have  not  regarded,
this  time,  my  warning  to  keep  at  a  little  distance  from  me
during  my  cramps;  you  might  easily  have  been  affected  by
some  of  the  consequences.'"

The  Homo-motor  medium  is  one  who  is  exclusively  and
perfectly  under  systematic  and  regular  control.  The  word
signifies,  the  same  power;  one  who  is  moved  by  the  same
influence,  power,  or  mind.  The  above  case  is  related  by
Mr.  Ford,  with  great  particularity,  and  is  a  fine  example  of
this  description  of  media,  which  will  be  more numerous


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  155

hereafter. Let  every  one  pray  for  such  perfect  individuality
combined  with  true  spirit  communion.


XIII. THE SYMBOLIC MEDIUM.

Still  ascending  the  psychologic  scale,  and  going  from  the
inward  to  the  onward  stratification,  we  encounter  the  sym-
bolic medium.  A  lady,  not  long  since,  related  to  me  the
following  circumstance:

"Her  mother,  who  was  at  the  time  residing  in  Edin-
burgh, in  a  house,  one  side  of  which  looked  into  a  wynd,
whilst  the  door  was  in  the  High-street,  dreamed  that,  it
being  Sunday  morning,  she  had  heard  a  sound  which  had
attracted  her  to  the  window;  and  whilst  looking  out,  had
dropt  a  ring  from  her  finger  into  the  wynd  below.  That
she  had  thereupon  gone  down  in  her  night-clothes  to  seek
it;  but  when  she  reached  the  spot  it  was  not  to  be  found.
Eeturning,  extremely  vexed  at  her  loss,  as  she  reentered
her  own  door  she  met  a  respectable-looking  young  man,
carrying  some  loaves  of  bread.  On  expressing  her  aston-
ishment at  rinding  a  stranger  there  at  so  unseasonable  an
hour,  he  answered  by  expressing  his  at  seeing  her  in  such  a
situation.  She  said  she  had  dropt  her  ring,  and  had  been
round  the  corner  to  seek  it;  whereupon,  to  her  delightful
surprise,  he-  presented  her  with  her  lost  treasure.  Some
months  afterwards,  being  at  a  party,  she  recognized  the
young  man  seen  in  her  dream,  and  learnt  that  he  was  a
baker.  He  took  no  particular  notice  of  her  on  that  occasion ;
and,  I  think,  two  years  elapsed  before  she  met  him  again
This  second  meeting,  however,  led  to  an  acquaintance,  which
terminated  in  marriage."*

From  the  great  similarity  between  the  experiences  of  the
symbolic  and  the  pictorial  medium,  the  reader  may  be  dis-
posed to  conclude  that  they  necessarily  belong  to  the  same
plane;  but  this  is  far  from  being  correct.  Ezekiel,  Daniel,
and  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse,  including  Swedenborg
and  very  many  others,  were  Pictorial  media. But  Symbol-

*  The  above  is  related  by  Catherine  Crowe,  in  her  ncord  of  facts,
entitled,  "  The  Night  Side  of  Nature."


156  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

ical  media  are  persons  who  see  in  their  vision,  opened  by
spiritual  aid,  the  almost  exact  prefigurations  of  things  which
will  occur,  or  which  do  in  reality  exist.


XIV. THE PSYCHOLOGIC MEDIUM.

This  class  is  composed  of  multitudinous  persons  and  tem,-
peraments.  It  is  particularly  known  to  history  as  embracing
the  troupe  of  mystics  and  revelators — individuals,  seemingly
under  the  direct  inspiration  of  the  Most  High.  A  fine
example  may  be  seen  in  the  following:*

"Early  on  the  morning  of  March  first,  eighteen  hundred
and  forty-two,  I  was  awakened  by  a  loud  singing ;  I  carefully
listened  to  it,  for  it  was  very  heavenly  and  harmonious.  I
soon  saw  a  band  of  Angels  passing  through  the  place ;  they
marched  in  regular  order,  two  abreast,  about  four  feet  from
the  ground;  I  could  hear  the  words  which  they  sung,  but
did  not  understand  any,  save  the  following:  'Zion  is  the
habitation  of  the  living  God,  and  here  is  the  Holy  Mount
of  his  glor}^;  and  from  this  place  shall  his  righteous  word
be  sent  forth;  and  we,  his  holy  Angels,  will  proclaim  the
same  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.'

"They  soon  divided  into  four  companies,  and  went  each
way  out  of  sight.  Instantly,  I  heard  a  mighty  roaring,  like
unto  heavy  thunder ;  I  was  sensible  that  it  was  the  coming
of  the  mighty  Angel ;  it  came  nearer  and  grew  louder,  and
soon  changed  into  a  voice,  and  the  words  were  these :

'"This  day  thou  hast  seen  and  will  see  and  hear,  0  thou
mortal  that  now  listeneth  to  my  word,  that  which  will  be
pleasing  to  thee,  and  also,  that  which  will  cause  thee  sorrow
of  soul;  for  thou  shalt  not,  as  yet,  fully  understand  nor  have
permission  to  make  mention  of  my  word  unto  the  people.

" '  So  go  your  way  and  fear  not,  but  remember  I  now  tell
you,  that  ere  this  day  shall  come  again  you  shall  see  my
work  in  a  measure  performed,  and  many  of  my  words  fast
fulfilling.'

"I  now  went  about  my  hand  labor;  but  the  sound  of  the

*  See  "Sacred  Roll  and  Book"  published  by  the  United  Society  of
Shakers,  Canterbury,  N.  H.,  pages  274,  et  seq.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  157

mighty  voice  was  so  loud  in  my  ears,  for  the  most  part  of
the  day,  that  it  seemed  I  could  hear  nothing  else.  I  saw  the
mighty  Angel  four  different  times  in  the  course  of  the  day,
and  received  many  words  from  him,  similar  to  what  I  had
before  received.

"At  the  last  time,  which  was  about  the  hour  of  four  in
the  afternoon,  the  word  to  me  was  as  follows:  'Know,  and
even  remember  from  this  day,  that  God  your  Heavenly
Father,  never  has,  and  never  will  permit,  or  cause  a  promise
to  be  made  to  his  chosen  people,  nay,  nor  even  to  the  nations
of  the  earth,  but  what  he  has  fulfilled,  will  fulfill,  or  cause
to  be  fulfilled  in  his  own  time,  and  according  to  his  divine
will.'

"This  was  the  end  of  the  word  at  this  time,  and  I  retired
to  my  room,  feeling  very  sorrowful  that  I  could  not,  as  yet,
feel  at  liberty  to  speak  freely  of  all  that  I  had  seen  and  wit-
nessed. In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  soon  after  I  had
retired  to  rest,  I  again  heard  the  voice  of  the  holy  Angel,
and  the  word  was  swift  and  powerful,  as  follows:

" '  Hearken,  hearken,  0  thou  mortal  of  my  choice,  while  I
declare  boldly  unto  the  people  of  the  earth,  that  the  days  of
preparation  for  the  God  of  Heaven  and  earth  to  commence
his  own  work  in  full,  are  fast  passing  by;  and  his  time  to
work,  throughout  the  whole  earth,  is  near  at  hand;  and  the
time  for  his  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  men,  to  be  more  fully
known,  as  he  now  stands,  the  head  of  the  ISTew  Creation,  in
his  second  manifestation,  is  not  far  off.'

7v  vv  7v  vv  vv  w

"On  March  twelfth,  eighteen  hundred  and  forty-two,  while
I  was  busily  engaged  in  my  dut}^,  and  in  conversation  with
those  around  me  upon  various  subjects,  the  holy  and  mighty
Angel  entered  the  room  and  stood  before  me,  and  showed
forth  many  signs  in  my  view;  they  were  singular  and
strange,  even  so  much  so  that  I  cannot  well  describe  them
on  paper.

"This  scene  was  short,  but  was  repeated  three  times;  and

now  was  my  time  of  trial ;  for  those  present  perceived  that

something  singular  was  transacting  to  my  view,  and  not  to

theirs.  *  *  * Soon  after  this,  the  Holy

14


158  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

Angel  entered  again,  and  said  to  me:  'This  is  my  fifth  and
last  coming  in  this  manner;  but,  as  I  said,  so  have  I  done;
I  have,  indeed,  suffered  you  to  be  tempted  and  tried,  and  I
have  proved  you  to  my  satisfaction  at  this  time.  You  may
now  speak  of  my  presence,  and  make  known  my  word;  but
when  this  you  do,  let  it  be  boldly,  yet  wisely ;  for  I  am  to  be
feared  in  very  deed.' "

"Equally  remarkable,"  says  the  author  of  ^Supernatural-
■ishi  in  New  England"  "is  the  case  of  Dr.  Abel,  of  Lempster,
N.  H.,  as  given  by  himself,  in  the  Boston  Medical  Journal.
While  totally  blind  he  saw  persons  enter  his  apartment,  and
especially  was  he  troubled  with  a  gray  horse,  which  stood,
saddled  and  bridled,  champing  his  bit,  by  his  bed-side.  On
one  occasion,  he  sa}^s:  'I  seemed  placed  on  the  southern
border  of  a  plain,  from  which  I  could  see  a.  whole  regiment
of  soldiers,  coming  from  the  north.  As  they  approached,
their  number  increased  to  thousands.  Their  dress  was  so
splendid  as  to  dazzle  my  sight.  Their  movements  were
generally  quick,  often  halting  and  forming  into  two  columns,
facing  each  other  and  extending  in  line  as  far  as  the  eye
could  reach.  They  would  then  break  up  and  march  in  dif-
ferent directions,  often  driving  each  other  in  large  compa-
nies. I  felt  peculiarly  gratified  in  seeing  large  groups  of
little  boys  running  and  jumping  before  and  after  the  troops
— many  of  them  dressed  in  a  light  blue  frock  with  a  scarlet
sash.  These  movements  continued  through  the  day  till  near
sunset,  when  the  field  was  cleared  until  after  ten  o'clock,
when  I  saw  them  returning,  but  they  took  a  westward
movement,  and  soon  disappeared.  Among  the  great  variety
of  moving  objects  which  I  have  seen,  their  motion  has  been
from  right  to  left,  with  very  few  exceptions,  as  that  of  the
marches  and  counter-marches  of  the  soldiers.  It  was  com-
mon to  see  two  objects  moving  in  the  same  direction,  while
one  would  move  much  faster  than  the  other,  and  pass  by."*

Among  all  nations,  Pagan  as  well  as  Christian,  instances

*  See  page  18  of  the  above-named  work.  The  author  has  written  a
very  interesting  record  of  the  ancient  and  modern  superstitions  of  New
England.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  159

of  psychologic  mediumship  are  numerous  and  well  authen-
ticated. And  the  most  remarkable  feature  of  such  reveal-
ments,  is,  the  unqualified  reliance  reposed  in  them,  as  literal
occurrences,  by  the  nation  or  country,  generally,  where  they
are  received.  In  the  "  Philosophy  of  Dreaming,"  given  in
the  third  volume  of  " Harmonia"  the  reader  will  find  the
principles  of  psychological  revelations  fully  and  truthfully
explained.  Long  before  any  thing  was  developed,  resemb-
ling modern  manifestations,  the  various  nations  have  had  what
they  consider  divine  revealments.  An  hundred  pages  might
be  filled  with  examples  so  wonderful  and  well  established
that  no  hypothesis  but  our  own — the  spiritual — can  possibly
describe  their  origination.  Preferring  the  testimony  of
unsophisticated  nature  to  the  probable  "frauds"  of  priests
and  cunning  miracle-workers,  we  quote  the  affirmation  of
Kah-ge-ga-gah-bowh,  or  George  Cop  way,  the  Ojibway  Chief,
who,  after  speaking  of  the  influence  of  omens  among  Indians,
reports  the  following  psychologic  instance:

"  Dreams,  too,  were  much  relied  on  by  our  nation.  They
thought  the  spirits  revealed  to  them  what  they  were  to  do,
and  what  they  should  be,  viz:  good  hunters,  warriors,  and
medicine  men.  I  would  fast  sometimes  two,  and  sometimes
even  four  clays.  When  fasting,  we  were  to  leave  the  wig-
wam early  in  the  morning,  and  travel  all  day  from  one  place
to  another,  in  search  of  the  favor  of  the  gods.  I  was  taught
to  believe  that  the  gods  would  communicate  with  me.  *  *
"When  I  fell  asleep  in  the  woods,  and  dreamed  some  strange
dream,  I  felt  confident  that  it  was  from  the  spirits.  I  will
now  relate  what  I  dreamed  when  I  was  but  twelve  years  old,
and  also  my  father's  interpretation  of  my  dream.

"Myself  and  others  were  sleeping  far  from  the  wigwam,
near  a  large  pine.  I  saw,  in  my  dream,  a  person  coming
from  the  east ;  he  approached,  walking  on  the  air ;  he  looked
down  upon  me,  and  said:  'Is  this  where  you  are?'  I  said
'yes.'  'Do  you  see  this  pine?'  'Yes,  I  see  it.'  'It  is  a
great  and  high  tree.'  I  observed  that  the  tree  was  lofty,
reaching  towards  the  heavens.  Its  branches  extended  over
land  and  water,  and  its  roots"  were  very  deep.  '  Look  on  it
while  I  sing;  yes,  gaze  upon  the  tree.' lie  sang,  and  pointed


100  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

to  the  tree;  it  commenced  waving  its  top;  the  earth  about
its  roots  was  heaved  up,  and  the  waters  roared  and  tossed
from  one  side  of  their  beds  to  the  other.  As  soon  as  he
stopped  singing,  and  let  fall  his  hands,  every  thing  became
perfectly  still  and  quiet.  'Now,'  said  he,  'Sing  the  words
which  I  have  sung.' I  commenced  as  follows :

" '  It  is  I  who  travel  in  the  winds,
It  is  I  who  whisper  in  the  breeze,

I  shake  the  trees,

I  shake  the  earth,
I  trouble  the  waters  on  every  land.'

"While  singing,  I  heard  the  winds  whistle,  saw  the  tree
waving  its  top,  the  earth  heaving,  heard  the  waters  roaring,
because  they  were  all  troubled  and  agitated.  Then  said  he:
'I  am  from  the  rising  of  the  sun;  I  will  come  and  see  you
again.  You  will  not  see  me  often ;  but  you  will  hear  me
speak.'  Thus  spoke  the  spirit,  and  then  turned  away  towards
the  road  from  which  he  had  come.  I  told  my  father  of  my
dream,  and  after  hearing  all,  he  said:  'My  son,  the  god  of  the
winds  is  kind  to  you;  the  aged  tree,  I  hope,  may  indicate
long  life;  the  wind  may  indicate  that  you  will  travel  much;
the  water  which  you  saw,  and  the  winds,  will  carry  your  canoe
safely  through  the  waves.'

"I  relied  much  on  my  dream,  for  then  I  knew  no  better.
But,  however,  little  reliance  can  be  placed  in  dreams,  yet
may  not  the  Great  Spirit  take  this  method,  sometimes,  to
bring  about  some  good  result?"

In  the  scale  of  media,  the  reader  may  observe  the  different
degrees  of  mental  development  and  mediumship  which  it  is
our  present  purpose  to  illustrate  with  facts,  furnished  by
ancient  and  modern  history.  In  the  employment  of  these
facts,  much  care  is  taken  not  to  confound  one  with  another,
although  it  is  exceedingly  difficult,  in  the  present  limited
state  of  scientific  knowledge  on  this  subject,  to  avoid  occa-
sional ambiguities  in  the  phraseology  of  description.

In  subsequent  pages  will  be  found  a  "Table  of  Explana-
tion," giving  a  tematic  synopsis  of  the  "causes  of  the
phenomena,"  &c,  which  will  show  that,  owing  to  the  extra-


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  161

ordinary  attributes  of  man's  mind,  many  experiences  are  by
some  individuals  regarded  as  spiritually  originated;  which,
in  truth,  are  only  caused  by  the  natural  laws  of  our  being —
by  a  community  of  invisible  physico-psycho-dynamic  prin-
ciples— a  transferation  and  intercommunication  of  the  mind's
own  voluntary  and  involuntary  potencies — which,  as  I  have
already  distinctly  acknowledged,  must  necessarily  come  into
the  correct  exposition  of  certain  inferior  divisions  of  this
grand  demonstration  of  spiritual  existence.  And  persons
who  are  not  capable  of  grasping  a  question  in  all  its  multi-
tudinous bearings — minds,  not  able  to  embrace  the  immense
latitudes,  meridians,  archipelagoes,  and  interminable  long-
itudes of  a  theme  with  so  much  of  the  eternal  and  infinite
in  it  as  this — should,  at  least,  be  humble  in  spirit,  having
no  disposition  to  conceal  ignorance  or  pretend  knowledge
respecting  it,  because  human  progress  and  individual  experi-
ence only  can  effectually  give  any  problem  its  just  solution.
Every  thing  ceases  to  be  mysterious  when  man  ceases  to  be
ignorant.

The  reader  is  especially  requested  to  remember,  that  all
the  typical  media,  numbering  twenty-four,  the  causes  of  whose
mental  experiences  I  am  now  individually  delineating,  by
means  of  facts  and  observations,  are  all  embraced  under  the
denomination  of  "spirit-media"  (being  veritable  instances  of
spiritual  intercourse,)  and  are  not,  therefore,  subjected  to  the
suspicion  of  being  under  any  hallucination  whatever;  or,  as
merely  victims  to  abnormalization  and  psycho-dynamic  con-
ditions. With  this  understanding,  I  am  impressed  to  proceed
still  further  in  describing  the  extra-mundane  experiences  of
the  Psychologic  Medium.

This  type  is  extensively  multiplied,  and  requires,  in  this
category  of  expositions,  a  full  and  indisputable  diagnostica-
tion.  It  is  only  the  limited  number  of  pages  assigned  to  this
volume,  which  prevents  an  ample  presentation  of  the  multi-
farious modifications  and  "freaks,"  as  it  were,  of  this  type
of  mediatorial  development.  It  is  characterized  by  lights
and  shades,  illuminations  and  uncertainties,  promises,  proph-
ecies, visions,  ambiguities,  and  contradictions;  because,  sim-
ply, the  mediatorial  mind  is  on  the  level  plain  of  spiritual
14*


162  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

intercourse;  the  state  is  transitional,  as  all  the  conditions  on
the  third  or  "  Onward"  scale  are,  and  is,  therefore,  attended
with  equinoctial  storms;  and  is,  moreover,  occasionally  suc-
ceeded by  temporary  derangement;  but  the  latter  result  is
wholly  attributable  to  individual  disobedience  of  the  princi-
ples, ever  divine  and  pregnant  with  blessings,  which  control
this  phase  of  experience.

The  psychologic  state,  by  itself  considered,  is  fraught  with
a  peculiar  mystic  interest.  The  troupes  of  revelators,  who
once  trod  the  Oriental  lands,  their  minds  in  sweet  communi-
cation with  sanctum  personaz,  were  in  the  free  enjoyment  of
this  blessing.  This  condition,  however,  is  no  security  against
misapprehension  or  error.  The  "  Upward"  states  are  far
more  reliable,  and  should  be  aimed  for  by  the  mediatorial
mind.  Numerous  opportunities  have  presented  themselves,
giving  me  well-attested  and  incontrovertible  evidences  of
all  I  feel  impressed  to  affirm  respecting  this  mystic  state.
As  embracing  and  illustrating  the  most  modern  and  familiar
instances,  with  a  peculiar  and  pleasing  fidelity,  it  is  deemed
proper  to  introduce  the  experience  of  a  conscientious  and
investigating  mind.  I  wrote  to  the  author  of  the  subjoined
letter,  requesting  from  him  an  account  of  his  recent  trials
and  conclusions.  As  to  the  uprightness  and  candor  of  this
gentleman,  so  well  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Quaker
City,  nothing  need  be  said :

"Philadelphia,  March  25th,  1853.

"A.  J.  Davis  Esq. — Dtu,  Sir:  To  fulfil  my  promise,  made  to  you  a  few
days  since,  I  will  now  endeavor  to  give  a  general  outline  of  my  experience
in  the  spiritual  manifestations  of  the  day.  One  remarkable  feature  of  it,
however,  is,  that  my  memory  does  not  retain  the  particulars  as  it  does  of
other  things;  and,  as  I  keep  no  regular  diary,  I  shall  not  perhaps  be  able  to
give  you  all  the  facts  in  the  order  in  which  they  transpired;  as  many  inter-
esting circumstances  have  almost  entirely  escaped  my  recollection  *

*  The  incapacity  to  remember  certain  interior  occurrences  grows  from  this
fact :  that  the  mind  has  two  hemispheres  in  every  particular ;  more  especially  is
this  true  of  Memory.  There  is  an  external  and  corporeal  memory ;  and  a  memo-
ry, also,  which  is  wholly  internal  and  spiritual.  The  former  is  a  tablet  whereon
the  world  of  matter  and  sensuous  ohjects  write  the  evanescent  impressions  of
their  panoramic  existence ;  the  latter  is  the  soul's  sanctum  sanctorum,  wherein
are  deposited,  as  imperishable  jewels  in  a  casket  which  none  but  the  possessor


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  163

"In  the  month  of  August,  1851,1  first  became  sensibly  influenced  by
some  invisible  power  moving  my  hand  to  write,  without  the  aid  of  my  will,
and,  in  a  short  time,  very  rapidly.*  During  two  or  three  months,  I  was  con-
stantly influenced  whenever  alone,  and,  in  a  most  unmistakable  manner.
If  I  walked  the  streets,  I  was  continually  reminded  of  some  unseen  intelli-
gence impressing  my  mind,  in  so  powerful  a  manner,  that  it  was  impossible
for  me  to  refuse  paying  attention  to  it.  In  the  mornings  particularly,  before
my  mind  became  excited  with  the  cares  of  business,  were  the  impressions
most  interesting  and  elevating,  and  frequently  so  touching  that,  in  spite  of
myself,  tears  would  fill  my  eyes,  and  at  times  I  felt  I  would  gladly  do  any
thing  in  my  power  to  render  a  service  to  the  spirits,  (for  such  they  purported
to  be,)  that  were  continually  attending  my  steps  wherever  I  went.f

"One  morning,  after  I  had  left  my  home  to  attend  to  my  business,  thoughts
the  most  elevating  and  earnest  came  suddenly  into  my  mind,  and  with  such
distinctness  and  power,  word  after  word,  sentence  after  sentence,  that  I  was
greatly  astonished,  and  could  not  avoid  listening  to  them.  The  spirit  assumed
to  be  one  who  had  occupied  a  high  position  while  on  earth,  and  the  theme
was  the  unhappy  condition  of  Mexico.  The  object  was  to  have  that  country
annexed  to  the  United  States,  as  the  only  hope  for  the  peace  and  prosperity
of  her  people.  So  strongly  was  my  mind  impressed  during  this  time,  that
I  could  feel,  as  it  were,  every  word  upon  my  brain  as  distinctly  as  I  could  the
beating  of  my  pulse;  and  I  felt  the  presence  of  some  intelligence  as  really
as  I  ever  did  that  of  any  friend  I  could  see  with  my  physical  eyes.  So  sin-
gular and  extraordinary  were  these  manifestations,  that  at  times,  when  writ-
can  open,  the  spirit  of  things,  of  all  impressions,  of  all  useful  experiences  !  The
most  delicate  perfume  of  Thought  is  thus  treasured  up  !  while  the  body  of  that
thought  is  impressed  upon  the  external  memory,  a  lifeless  mass  of  material,  to
be  laid  aside  with  its  tablet  in  the  tomb.  But  on  the  internal  memory,  the  faintest
lines  of  a  spiritual  reality  produce  the  most  permanent  impressions.  And  yet,
in  this  life,  the  corporeal  faculty  is  so  constantly  called  into  requisition  and
exercise,  that,  with  but  rare  exceptions,  the  mind's  most  interior  experiences
are  seldom  remembered.  It  would  give  me  pleasure  to  dwell  on  the  mysteries  of
the  internal  man  ;  but  this  would  be  to  abstract  attention  from  my  friend's  letter.
*  This  stage  of  my  friend's  development  may  be  properly  classed  under  the
Duodynamic  type ;  because  he  could  have  been  readily  developed  in  either  direc-
tion, as  all  individuals  so  situated  always  can,  by  means  of  the  Circle;  he  might
have  added  the  "Motive"  on  the  Outward,  or,  passing  the  other  way,  attained
the  "  Telegraphic"  on  the  Upward,  and  either  would  have  produced  an  equili-
brium. With  the  first  combination,  his  mediatorial  usefulness  would  have  been
serviceable  to  others,  on  the  material  plane  of  skepticism  ;  the  latter  compound
would  have  elevated  his  own  mind  above  uncertainty,  and  his  true  mission  in
the  field  would  have  undoubtedly  appeared.  It  is  quite  necessary  that  Duody-
namic media,  whose  mental  ambition  soars  higher,  should  study  the  pathway  to
further  development,  and  not  abandon  themselves  to  mere  haphazard  growth,
t  Here  is  evidence  that  the  gentleman's  mind,  resting  on  a  partial  duody-
namic basis,  experienced  something  of  the  blissful  realities  which  pertain  to  the
"  Pulsatory"  condition;  the  explanation  of  which  has  already  been  submitted.


164  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

ing,  I  would  feel  a  power  controlling  my  mind  on  my  right  and  sometimes
on  my  left,  and  always  a  little  elevated  above  me!  To  me  this  was  the
most  interesting  and  delightful.  I  have  been  twice  so  powerfully  impressed
in  this  way  as  to  expectorate  a  little  blood,  which  I  believed  came  from  my
brain.*  During  this  stage  of  my  experience,  I  wrote  many  communications
purporting  to  come  from  celebrated  characters.

"  To  give  you  an  idea  of  the  doctrines  I  learned  from  one  that  professed
to  be  a  guardian  spirit,  I  will  quote  a  little  from  what  purports  to  be  instruc-
tions to  me  as  an  amanuensis:  'You  must  write  for  man,  for  humanity;
you  must  write  for  human  nature  in  rags;  for  human  nature  in  ruffles;  for
human  nature  in  prisons,  in  dungeons,  in  fetters.  In  no  place,  where  man
is  found,  must  you  leave  him  alone.  He  is  your  brother  by  birth  of  spirit;
your  brother  by  ties  of  humanity;  your  brother  by  more  than  you  now  can
imagine,'  &c.  This  was  written  in  a  very  rapid  off-hand  manner,  and  with-
out any  premeditation  on  my  part.  Whatever  of  fault  there  may  be  in  the
language,  the  spirit  of  the  communication  seems  to  be  the  truest  Christian-
ity. That  which  seemed  most  to  interest  the  spirits  attending  me,  was  the
condition  of  Mexico.  When  I  wrote  in  this  remarkable  manner,  there  had
not  transpired  any  thing,  that  I  knew  of,  to  cause  so  much  solicitude  in  her
behalf.  At  times,  the  condition  of  the  mothers  and  daughters,  the  fathers
and  sons,  the  selfishness  of  the  rulers  of  that  unhappy  country,  were  so
powerfully  impressed  on  my  mind,  that,  in  spite  of  myself,  I  would  weep
in  sympathy.!

"If  I  attempted  to  read  a  book,  I  would  become  quite  drowsy,  and,  if  I
closed  my  eyes,  I  would  immediately  see  symbolical  representations  in  great
variety. If  I  should  chance  to  lose  my  consciousness  in  sleep,  I  was  sure

*  Doubtless  my  friend  was  turned  inwardly  to  an  extent  so  unusual,  that  the
brain  did  emit  through  the  capillary  vessels  a  little  blood.  The  same  thing  has
happened  to  myself  on  several  occasions.  When  I  interiorly  examined  the
"  causes  and  cure  of  cholera,"  detailed  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Harmonia,  I  had
quite  a  profuse  discharge  of  blood. There  is  never  any  danger  to  arise  from  it.

t  This  is  an  important  fact.  This  gentleman's  mind  entertained  not  the  leas.*
prepossession  in  favor  of  Mexico.  Yet  this  was  the  theme  of  his  most  remarka-
ble communications.  How  can  the  believer  in  mental  hallucination  explain
this  fact,  on  the  ground  that  the  mind  manufactures  its  own  impressions.  In  a
letter  to  me,  dated  June  6th,  1852,  my  friend  says  :  "  Certain  I  am  that  the  sub-
jects which  I  have  been  inclined  to  believe  I  should  have  written  upon,  had  I  my
own  way,  were  the  last  of  all  subjects  the  spirits  have  chosen  for  me.  Mexico
has  had  no  charms  for  my  mind.  Personally  I  felt  rather  opposed  to  having
her  become  a  portion  of  my  beloved  country.  Yet  I  have  learned  much  charity
from  my  spiritual  investigations  ;  and,  to-day,  I  have  not  an  affection  or  preju-
dice which  I  would  not  rejoice  to  sacrifice  in  order  to  do  good."  It  seems,
therefore,  conclusive  that  the  communicating  spirits  did  not  consult  my  friend's
predilections.  They  wished  to  send  him  on  a  mission  of  love  and  national
reform  to  Mexico,  to  annex  that  country  to  this,  againat  all  of  which  the  medi-
um's mind  was  primarily  opposed  The  good  intentions  of  the  spirits  will  bo
illustrated  in  the  sequel.


TA3LE OF EXPLANATION.  165

of  receiving  a  tremendous  shock,  as  it  were,  from  some  galvanic  battery,
which  would  make  me  very  glad  to  keep  awake.  I  have  seen  and  felt  in
this  stage  of  my  experience,  an  endless  variety  of  such  things;  and  I  have
also  often  heard  whisperings  as  distinctly  as  if  some  one  was  at  my  side  in
conversation  with  me.  My  sense  of  smell,  too,  was  remarkably  affected.
In  my  waking  state,  no  matter  where  I  might  have  been,  I  could  smell  a
rose,  a  pink,  new-mown  hay,  tar,  brimstone,  &c,  as  plainly  as  ever  I  recog-
nized these  scents  in  my  life.*

"At  present  when  I  go  to  sleep  I  am  occasionally  awakened,  and,  in  a
measure,  paralyzed.  In  this  condition  I  hear  the  most  delightful  strains  of
music,  the  singing  of  birds,  and  thrilling  bursts  of  eloquence,  such  as  I  never
listened  to  in  my  waking  state,  all  denoting  much  intelligence  and  feeling.

"Of  late  I  do  not  write  much,  but  sit  and  receive  the  inflowings  of
thoughts  and  sentiments,  which  often  fill  me  with  gratitude  and  joy.f
During  these  sittings,  I  receive  views  and  feelings  which  I  would  not
exchange  for  any  enjoyment  I  ever  knew.  At  times  I  have  been  made  to
speak  when  alone;  often  I  get  so  completely  lost  in  the  subject,  that  I
entirely  furget  all  things  else.  You  may  think  me  at  such  moments  a  little
beside  myself,  yet,  when  the  influence  is  gone,  I  am  as  rational  as  ever,  and
never  feel  wearied  in  the  least.  In  these  scenes  I  have  received  such  inex-
pressible views  of  the  Infinite  Love  and  Wisdom  of  God  as  to  melt  me  to
tears ;  and  I  think  I  would  freely  give  all  I  possess  to  be  able  to  give  my
impressions  fully  to  the  world.

"It  is  no  exaggeration  when  I  tell  you,  that  not  an  hour  passes  (when  my
mind  is  drawn  from  earthly  cares)  without  bringing  me  the  most  soul-satis-
fying evidence  of  the  existence  and  presence  of  spirits.  But  what  troubles
me  most  is,  that  I  do  not  do  good  to  others  in  this  way.

"  The  spirits  tell  me  many  things  which  I  find  are  not  realized.  This  is
a  drawback  to  me,  and  I  have  queried  often, '  May  I  not  be  deceived  either
by  them  or  my  own  mind  V  If  one-half  is  ever  realized  that  has  been  prom-
ised me,  I  shall  not  be  an  idle  laborer  in  God's  great  vineyard.}: I  would

*  Here  the  mind,  resting-  on  its  primary  starting-point,  the  psychologic  state,
was  exercised  for  purposes  of  discipline,  by  some  well-meaning'  spirits  who  had
his  usefulness  and  health  under  special  consideration.  The  case  of  Dr.  Abel  is
an  illustration.  These  peculiar  diversions  of  the  senses  were  psychologically
stamped  upon  the  interior  principles  of  the  mind,  for  beneficent  and  sanitary
purposes,  which,  however,  are  not  always  apparent.

t  From  the  psychologic  and  duodynamic  states,  my  friend  here  passes,  retro-
gressionally,  to  the  "  Pulsatory"  condition,  which  alternates,  impermanently,
with  the  "  Impressional"  state,  and  gives  him  more  interior  and  quiet  communion.
These  latter  states,  in  permanent  union,  would  be  of  great  service  to  the  mind.

^  It  seems  that  much  doubt  arises  from  the  fact,  that  my  friend's  mind,  in
vibrating  back  and  forth  from  the  psychologic  to  the  pulsatory  state,  occasion-
ally stops  at  the  "Pictorial"  stratum,  and  obtains  prefigurations  of  certain
psychical  truths,  which  (because  he  accepts  them  as  symbolic  or  literal,)  act
upon  his  convictions  in  the  capacity  of  "  mistakes"  and  falsehoods. — See  de-
scriptions of  pictorial  medium.


166  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

not  go  back  to  the  bondage  of  mind  I  once  was  in,  for  all  that  eartli  can
give;  and  if  I  am  deluded  (as  my  dear  mother  tells  me  I  am,)  it  is  indeed  a
delusion  which  I  icish  never  to  be  rid  of,  unless  I  can  get  a  better  one!

"I  wish  much,  too,  to  know  the  result;  for  with  me  it  is  a  cardinal  doc-
trine, that  no  man  fills  his  destiny  unless  he  is  a  benefit  to  the  whole  race
of  man.  At  present  I  am  influenced,  in  my  ears,  by  a  singular  sensation,
which  I  know  results  from  the  operations  of  the  spirits.  I  can  request
them  to  influence  one  or  both  ears,  and  if  I  remain  calm,  I  can  now  feel
them  in  this  way  most  sensibly.  That  this  is  not  an  hallucination  I  am
convinced,  from  the  fact,  that  my  sense  of  hearing  while  thus  influenced,
is  much  more  acute  than  ordinary.  A  new  phase  of  late  with  me  is  this:
I  sit  and  request  the  spirits  to  answer  me  a  question.  I  ask  not  out  of  idle
curiosity,  but  as  an  honest  seeker.  In  a  short  time  I  am  fully  in  the  drowsy
condition,  and  then  I  either  see  something  as  an  answer  to  my  questions,  or
else  hear  whisperings  in  reply,  but  seldom,  if  ever,  is  the  answer  correct.
For  example:  I  ask,  'When  will  my  friend  write  me  an  answer  to  my  let-
ter?' I  hear  whispered,  as  distinctly  as  I  ever  hear  any  thing,  'four  days;'
but  it  may  be  that  eight  days  elapse  before  I  get  a  reply.  In  tests  like
these  of  the  intelligence  and  truthfulness  of  spirits,  do  I  seldom,  if  ever,
get  correct  answers.  Here  then  is  my  reason  for  insisting  upon  the
untruthfulness  of  certain  spirits,  either  from  mischief  or  some  other  cause.
However,  I  will  not  censure  them  too  much,  as  I  know  not  the  principles
which  control  these  mysterious  matters .*

*  Mistakes,  occuring  in  this  manner,  are  unavoidable.  A  spirit  can  no  more
foretell  an  event,  so  evanescent  and  incidental,  with  positive  certainty,  than  the
questioner  himself.  The  friend  may  have  been  that  moment  contemplating"  an
answer  to  the  letter,  which  spiritual  fact  the  guardian  spirit  saw,  and  from  the
probabilities  of  the  case,  as  judgingly  any  person  might  infer  a  result,  reply
"  four  days ;"  while  nothing  is  more  easy  than  being  mistaken,  because  the  letter,
physically  considered  as  an  objective  fact,  may  be  postponed  for  an  indefinite
period.  Spirits,  according  to  my  experience,  can  only  foretell  spiritual  facts —
things  which  have  or  have  not  been  bodied  forth  in  a  physical  vesture — and  can
prophecy  correctly  only  when  the  thing  foretold  lies  in  the  channel  of  some
plain,  immutable  law  of  causation.

My  friend  says  that,  on  one  occasion,  he  inquired  of  the  spirits  whether  a
person,  then  absent  and  very  ill,  would  recover,  and  be  restored  to  health.  The
spirits  immediately  represented  to  his  vision — his  state  being  "  pictorial"  and
not  clairvoyant— the  impressive  and  saddening  scene  of  the  death  and  burial  of
that  particular  person.  But  progress  of  time  proved  the  exhibition  an  untruth,
for  the  diseased  friend  recovered  ;  and  the  spiritual  representation  is  termed
"  a  falsehood"  or  mistake.  Now,  I  will  not  undertake  to  indicate  the  precise
signification  of  his  vision  ;  but  most  certain  am  I  that  my  friend  will  yet  see  a
spiritual  good  and  a  spiritual  truth'ux  it,  as  he  surely  will  in  every  other  experi-
ence impressed  upon  his  inward  memory.

The  gentleman  furthermore  submitted  for  examination  several  strange  com-
munications ;  some  overflowing  with  sublime  and  humane  thoughts;  other3
surcharged  with  meaningless  and  incoherent  ideas  and  "  Lingo,"  as  he  termed


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  167

I  send  you  this  statement,  as  being  but  a  general  idea  of  what  has  hap-
pened to  me,  during  my  investigations,  and  hope  you  may  be  able  to  dis
cover  the  philosophy  which  it  involves.  One  thing  more  I  will  state  as
worthy  of  note:  my  health  is  now  much  better  than  it  has  been  for  years,
before  I  was  influenced  by  the  spirits.  I  have  written  four,  five,  and  some-
times as  many  as  six  hours  in  succession,  without  intermission  of  any  account,
and  I  am  never  wearied  in  the  least:  a  proof  conclusive,  to  my  mind,  that
there  is  health,  if  not  wisdom,  in  such  spiritual  exercises.

"Very  truly  and  fraternally  yours,  J.  L*****."

[Numerous  examples  of  psychologic  mediumship  have  come
under  my  own  immediate  observation — externally  and  inte-
riorly— calculated  to  deintellectualize  and  unspiritualize  both
the  subjects  and  receivers  of  them.*  I  will  here  relate  an
interesting  instance.

About  nine  months  ago  a  female  called  at  my  home,  in
Hartford,  and  told  the  waiting-maid  that  she  must  have  a
conversation  with  me  immediately.  Accordingly  I  entered
the  front  parlor,  and  signified  my  willingness  to  hear  her
requests. She  was  about  thirty  years  of  age,  I  think,  and

it,  which  nothing-  could  have  persuaded  him  voluntarily  to  record  on  paper.
Among-  the  superior  class  of  his  communications,  however,  may  be  discovered
many  noble  and  comprehensive  principles  and  axioms  for  the  guidance  of  hu-
man life.  Several  months  since  he  transmitted  to  me,  in  a  postscript  to  one  of
his  letters,  the  following-  brief,  and,  in  its  phraseology,  original  rendering  of  the
spirit,  of  the  immortal  Golden  Rule  :

"  LET NO MAN CALL GOD HIS FATHER,
WHO CALLS NOT MAN HIS BROTHER."

But  I  cannot  now  stop  to  investig-ate  the  exact  spirits  from  whom  these
thoughts  were  manifested.  Neither  is  it  necessary  that  the  medium  should
himself  know;  for  he  may  rest  assured  there  "  is  a  law  of  justice  which  ever-
more overcomes  evil  with  good."  What  I  have  written  respecting-  mediums,
and  concerning-  the  power  of  certain  guardian  spirits  to  penetrate  the  uses  of
things  far  beyond  our  conceptions  of  right  and  wrong,  will  cast  a  sufficient
explanation  over  my  friend's  pneumatologic  experience.  The  main  point,  in
all  cases,  to  be  aimed  for,  is  the  development  of  the  mind  into  a  state  of  medi-
atorial equilibrium.  By  securing-  first  this  harmonious  condition,  as  already
delineated,  all  the  requisite  knowledg-e,  respecting-  one's  field  of  labor  in  the
g-ardens  of  Humanity,  will  be  most  amply  added.  There  is  nothing-  which  can
prevent  the  Cause  from  steadily  advancing-  to  a  giorious  consummation.

*  See  illustration  of  pulpit  psychology,  and  the  deplorable  effects  of  this
method  upon  the  congregation,  in  "  Philosophy  of  Spiritual  Intercourse.''*
pages  93,  94,  95.


168  TABLE L ' EXPLANATION.

gave  evidence  in  her  deportment  and  habiliments  of  belong-
ing to  that  might}^  multitude  of  Nature's  children  who
receive  but  few  gifts  and  advantages  from  Fortune's  hand.
Her  features,  which  I  particularly  remarked,  indicated  care
and  disappointment ;  yet  they  were  mainly  calm,  and
her  expression  entirely  rational.  I  could  see  not  -the  least
trace  of  that  treacherous  fanaticism  which  so  surely  plunges
its  victim  into  insane  despair.  When  I  inquired  of  her  the
purpose  of  her  urgent  visit,  she  arose,  and  took  from  the  sofa
a  large  roll,  which  I  had  not  before  noticed,  and  placed  it,
without  speaking,  upon  my  knees.  I  asked  her  what  it  con-
tained ?  She  said :  "  I  wish  you  to  examine  it."  And  added :
"  I  have  left  my  work  and  family,  and  with  what  little  money

I  had,  have  travelled  all  the  way  from ,  in  the  state  of

,  to  bring  this  roll  to  you." I  replied  that  my  time  was

then  too  much  engaged  to  examine  its  contents ;  but  prom-
ised to  investigate  it  at  some  future  time,  and  report  to  her
the  result.  After  a  little  farther  conversation  she  departed.
A  few  days  subsequently  I  turned  my  attention  particularly
to  this  carefully  arranged  roll.  The  envelope  was  of  thick
white  paper,  neatly  sealed  at  each  end,  and  painted  in  water
colors,  but  very  minutely,  with  fine  lines  crossing  each  other
transversely,  making  small  squares,  the  centres  of  which  were
uniformly  dotted,  altogether  presenting  a  very  odd  and  orderly
arrangement.  Upon  breaking  the  seals,  there  rolled  out  some
fifteen  pieces  of  paper,  eaeh  wide  and  long  enough  to  form  a
petition  to  Congress,  and  tied  carefully  together  with  white
sewing-thread.  Previous  to  opening  these  packages,  I  found
a  letter  addressed  to  me,  which,  literally  transcribed,  began  as
follows :

"THE  PROCEEDINGS  OF  FORMING  HARTFORD  COMMUNITY.

"First.  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  must  open  the  scroll  in  the
presence  of  the  people  who  wishes  to  see  it  opened.

"  Second.  The  writings  must  be  read  by  some  one  who  loves
Andrew  Jackson  Davis."

Then  follow  directions  to  be  pursued  by  me,  to  the  effect
that  I  must  procure  a  Book,  in  which  to  record  the  names  of
those "  who  wish  to  join  the  Hartford  Community;"  and


TABLE GF EXPLANATION.  169

that  I  must  prepare  the  "  papers  for  each  one  to  s.gn  when
they  are  baptized,"  which  documents  should,  each  read. — "  I
believe  that  Gods  Love  will  have  the  Hartford  Community
to  be  God's  heaven  on  earth.  In  love  for  God's  holy  Hart-
ford Community  I  will  do  as  God's  holy  angels  direct  me."
So  reads  the  baptismal  creed  !  The  letter  then  directs  that
"  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  must  preach  on  the  Sabbath  when
the  people  are  baptized."  Then  follow  repetitious  directions
and  exhortations  to  all  the  baptized,  alike  to  men  and  women,
and  concludes  with —

"  These  communications  were  written  by  C .*

These  communications  were  communicated  by  Emanuel  Swedenborg.
God's  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.
God  will  bless  the  Hartford  Community."

Concerning  the  baptismal  ceremony,  the  programme  is
ample.  In  one  place  the  document  reads,  "The  people  must
kneel  while  being  baptized,"  and  adds  that  I  (for  the  respon-
sibility of  the  whole  Community  and  the  ceremonies  is
bestowed  upon  me,)  "must  lay  the  water  on  the  organ  of
veneration,"  and  while  performing  thus,  in  a  very  solemn,
impressive  voice,  must  pronounce  these  words :  "I  do
baptize  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the
Holy  Ghost."  After  which,  the  people,  still  kneeling,  must
sign  their  names  to  the  Covenant,  when  the  whole  congre-
gation must  forthwith  repair  to  the  vestry  of  the  Temple,
and  partake  of  the  Lord's  supper."

In  addition  to  this  letter  there  are  twenty  closely  written
pages  of  plans  and  specifications  for  the  upbuilding  of  a
Community  of  dwellings,  workshops,  offices,  stores,  factories,
and  a  Temple  for  purposes  of  spiritual  communication  and
communal  worship.  The  various  departments  of  labor,  the
mechanics,  the  tradesmen,  the  professional  men,  with the

*  The  medium's  name  I  purposely  withhold.  She  remarked  to  me  how
lonely  she  was  in  her  house  and  neighborhood  in  consequence  of  the  ab-
sence of  all  sympathy ;  that  the  opposition  to  her  pencillings  and  writing
was  severe  and  wounding  to  her  feelings ;  but,  conceiving  it  to  be  her  duty
to  obey  the  spirits,  she  persevered  in  the  arduous  labor  of  preparing  these
papers,  even  in  the  midst  of  poverty  and  discomfort.

15


170  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

utmost  particularity,  receive  orders  as  to  modes  of  laboring
and  living  in  "  the  Hartford  Community."

There  is  method  in  it.  It  is  free  from  vagaries  or  extravagant
dreams  of  paradise  on  earth — and  bears  the  stamp  of  practi-
cability and  matter-of-fact  apprehension  of  men  and  things.
The  spirit  breathed  throughout  is  humanitary,  and  yet  the  plan
is  but  another  modification,  in  several  particulars,  of  popular
sectarianism,  and  would  lead  to  localization  of  thought  and
bigotry  in  worship.  The  welfare  of  mind  is  considered,
however,  and  provision  is  instituted  to  u  defend  unfortunate
hereditary  inclinations."  Good  advice  is  communicated  as  by
"  one  having  authority,"  and  addressed  to  the  different  arti-
zans  and  professions.  For  instance:  the  people  are  required
to  put  all  their  worldly  possessions  into  the  property  of  the
Community,  and  live,  as  did  the  Essenes  and  Christian  apos-
tles, with  "  all  things  in  common" — are  admonished  to  love
each  other,  divide  their  work  among  themselves,  and  then
equalize  all  the  interests  accruing  from  such  productive
labor.  The  "  powder-makers"  are  directed  to  "  sell  powder
to  blast  rocks  with,"  but  "  not  to  kill  people  whom  God  has
made."  Ministers  are  directed  to  "  preach  every  Sabbath-
day,  to  visit  the  sick,  visit  the  people,  work  in  the  rose-beds
around  the  Temple,  and  must  labor  within,"  and  live  "just
like  other  people"  in  the  Hartford  Community.  Physicians
must  "love  to  study  the  works  of  Nature,  her  laws,  and  God's
laws  of  health."  This  strange  manuscript  of  twenty  pages
concludes  with  "  Proceedings  for  every  week-day,"  which,
in  substance,  read  thus :  "  The  time  to  rise  is  six  the  year
round ;  breakfast  at  seven  the  year  round ;  prayer  at  eight ;
begin  work  at  nine ;  the  people  must  work  three  hours,  then
rest  two  hours,  then  work  three  hours  more ;  dinner  at  one ;
supper  at  six ;  the  time  for  women  to  walk  out  with  their
husbands  is  seven ;  the  time  to  return  is  eight ;  the  time  to
go  to  bed  is  nine."

Here  the  communications  terminate.  And  I  think  the
reader  will  agree  with  me  that  they  furnish  an  impressive
illustration  of  psychologic  mediumship.  But  what  does  this
mean  ?  I  will  presently  explain  my  impressions.  Let  us  for
a  moment  return  to  the  fifteen  pieces  of  paper. On  opening


TABLE OF EXPLANATION


171


these  I  obtained  a  clearer  realization  of  the  extent  of  the
medium's  labor.  It  was  deplorable,  in  remembrance  of  her
external  necessitous  circumstances,  to  witness  the  quantity  of
toil  bestowed  upon  these  rolls  of  paper.  They  were  painted
with  the  utmost  care,  forming  innumerable  minute  squares,
signifying  miles,  rods,  feet,  inches,  and  plans  of  farms  and
gardens,  for  the  formation  of  the  Hartford  Community.  The
medium's  hand  was  moved  over  seventy-five  square  feet,  or
four  hundred  and  thirty-four  square  inches  of  paper.  She
asserted  that  she  obeyed  the  spirit  implicitly  in  every  parti-
cular ;  procured  the  materials,  which  were  expensive ;  and
devoted  much  of  her  time  and  strength  to  the  work.  To
give  the  reader  a  distinct  idea  of  the  singular  and  simple  plan
of  arranging  the  farms  and  various  gardens,  I  here  will  intro-
duce an  engraved  example  of  her  pencillings  or  drawings,
each  square  representing  a  square  rood  or  square  foot  of
earth,  as  the  case  might  be :


. . .|.[. -H-M' .j.|T-T-7-7-.|.j. .j.|.l. .J, .p


Within  the  last  two  years  many  instances  of  this  general
description  have  been  submitted  to  me  for  clairvoyant  exam-
ination, but,  having  little  time  for  the  investigation  of  indivi-
dual cases  of  psychologic  mediumship,  I  am  impressed  to
remark  on  this  present  example,  in  order  to  cover  the  whole
ground  of  psj^chological  development.

To  most  persons  this  case  would  appear  explainable  on  the
obscure  hypothesis  of  insanity  or  self-deception.  But  when
the  case  is  fairly  viewed,  it  cannot  fail  to  impress  the  mind
with  a  doctrine  of  spiritual  intercourse.  Such  an  instance  is
very  demonstrative  of  the  truth  of  assertions  made  respecting
it,  viz :  that  the  medium  was  spiritually  impressed  to  believe
herself  an  amanuensis  for  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  and  that  she
was  controlled  in  reality  to  write  and  paint  as  she  did.  But  as
to  the  identity  of  the  spiritual  personage  who  professed  to
form  through  her  hand  a  "Hartford  Community,"  and  as  to


172  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

tlie  asserted  valuable ness  of  his  communications  to  the  world,
another  conclusion  is  rationally  unavoidable.  The  whole
matter,  I  think,  was  dictated  by  a  person  (or  spirit)  who  was
once  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  doctrines  of  Ann  Lee,  but
has  experienced  a  change  of  sentiments  on  several  divisions
of  the  social  question — is  intent  upon  the  propagation  of  his
new  system  in  the  world — and  took  possession  of  this  medi-
um, without  any  necessary  evil  intention,  but  simply  with
the  one  idea,  like  many  terrestrial  minds,  of  presenting  his  own
peculiar  plan  of  social  harmony  to  mankind.  To  my  mind
the  case  is  folded  in  no  mystery,  but  is  instructive  to  all  psy-
chologic media.  It  is  no  difficult  thing  for  certain  spirits  to
impersonate  others,  to  talk  and  dress  up  their  thoughts  like
others,  which  they  will  do  if  such  resemblance  adds  any  thing
important  to  their  communications.  Or,  sometimes,  indeed
most  always,  they  foresee  an  ultimate  good  to  proceed  from
such  impersonation,  and  regulate  their  deportment  with  the
medium  in  accordance  with  the  ulterior  use  which,  in  these
instances,  governs  the  means.  In  this  case,  it  is  my  impres-
sion, the  entire  object  foreseen  by  the  guardians  of  the
communicating  spirit*  who  controlled  the  medium — the
reason  why  they  did  not  remonstrate  with  him  and  keep  him
from  occupying  so  much  of  the  lady's  time — was  the  use  to
which  her  labors  are  now  appropriated,  viz :  as  an  illustra-
tion of  psychologic  mediumship — to  show  the  imperfections
inseparably  connected  with  this  stage  of  development — to
demonstrate  a  case  of  spiritual  intercourse ;  and  to  admonish
mankind  concerning  the  effects  of  a  too  strong  conviction
that  the  world  is  to  be  reformed  and  regenerated  hj  and
through  supernatural  instrumentalities.  The  case  already
introduced,  of  Dr.  Abel,  of  Lempster,  N.  Hv  who  saw,  though
totally  blind,  a  gray  horse  by  his  bedside,  a  whole  regiment
of  soldiers,  troupes  of  little  boys,  &c,  is  another  case  of  psy-
chologic mediumship.  Xo  metaphysical  or  cerebro-djmamic
principle  can  possibly  explain  it.  It  was  simply  the  psycho-
logical action  of  some  attendant  spirit  upon  Dr.  Abel's  mind —

*  It  may  be  well  to  remark,  that  every  dweller  in  the  spiritual  world  has
guardian  spirits,  superior  in  wisdom  to  himself,  juat  as  spirit  guardians
belong  to  every  earthly  beiiig.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  173

painting  there,  with  the  subtle  pencils  of  invisible  Thought,
as  an  orator  paint%aipon  his  audience,  distant  scenes,  and
seemingly  objective  realities.  The  use  of  all  this  might  have
been  to  divert  his  thoughts  from  reflection  upon  unpleasant
subjects,  or  to  delight  him  with  approximate  substitutions  for
the  objects  which  his  own  retina,  if  perfectly  healthy,  would
have  pleasurably  embraced.  With  these  remarks,  we  pass  on
to  consider  another  phase  of  mental  manifestation.


XV. THE PSYCHOMETRIC MEDIUM.

The  psychologic  subject  is  almost  always  a  victim  of  men-
tal misapprehension,  but  the  psychometric  media  are  far
more  certain:

"A  few  days  since,  I  carried  to  Mrs.  Mettler  an  envelope
of  a  letter,  the  direction  of  which  was  written  by  Lord
Brougham  of  England,  so  conspicuous  for  his  oratory  and
high  order  of  talents.  Mrs.  M.  had  not  the  remotest  idea  as
to  the  name  or  position  of  the  individual  she  was  about  to
describe,  as  the  writing  was  sealed  closely  in  an  envelope,
and  she  was  merely  requested  to  read  the  character.  She
remarked  as  follows,  all  the  time  holding  the  envelope  upon
her  forehead:*

" '  This  is  a  person  of  strong  and  powerful  intellect,  and  is
marked  for  his  positive  character.  He  perceives  quickly,  and
expresses  his  ideas  freely,  indeed  copiously.  He  possesses
much  refinement  of  thought;  is  not  confined  to  self,  but  has
much  universal  feeling  and  benevolence  of  heart.  He  can-
not be  a  sectarian.  He  reasons  much,  and  reason  is  a  guid-
ing principle  with  him.  He  entertains  no  principle,  save  that
which  appeals  to  his  idea  of  right.  He  receives  nothing
without  a  reason.  He  has  much  firmness  and  self-command.
But  an  appeal  to  his  sympathies  would  affect  him.  He  pos-
sesses manly  deportment,  is  pleasing  in  his  conversation,  is
often  inclined  to  deep  meditation. He  would  enjoy  domestic


*  This  testimony  is  one  among  hundreds  which  might  be  produced.  It
first  appeared  in  the  Hartford  Times,  and  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  psy-
chometrical  power.  This  faculty  of  mind,  T  think,  was  first  discovered  and
fully  demonstrated  by  the  systematic  Dr.  J.  R.  Buchanan,  of  CincinnattL

15*


174  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

comforts,  though  I  should  think  circumstances  have  deprived
him  of  this.  He  sighs  at  times  for  retirement,  where  he  may
enjoy  every  thing  in  a  simple  manner,  acting  out  his  true
nature.  Children  are  very  pleasing  to  him ;  he  likes  them
for  their  innocence.  He  is  pleased  with  an  intelligent  lady,
likes  her  for  her  goodness,  is  ardent  in  his  friendships,  and
cannot  be  easily  turned  against  one  whom  he  considers  his
friend.  Order  and  punctuality  are  large  with  him.  Music
hath  many  charms  for  him,  and  a  plaintive  kind  would  affect
him  to  tears.  He  has  a  good  idea  of  color,  is  a  good  judge
of  a  picture,  has  a  good  memory  of  past  events.  He  enjoys
a  good  joke  or  pun.  He  can  be  or  is  an  orater,  and  a  marked
character.  He  has  verjr,  very  great  gifts  of  orator}^ — very
great. His  intellectual  and  moral  faculties  predominate.'

"Here  the  leading  characteristics  are  truly  told,  and  the
gentleman  from  whom  I  obtained  Lord  Brougham's  writing
informs  me  that  he  knows  the  allusion  to  his  extreme  love  of
music  to  be  true;  and  we  should  judge  that  he  sighs  for
retirement  sometimes,  for  he  has  a  country  residence  in
France,  where  he  goes  evidently  to  get  away  from  the  cares
of  public  life.

"I  gave  her  three  more  autographs,  closely  sealed,  but  did
not  intimate  in  the  least  as  to  the  character  of  either  of  the
writers.  The  first  was  by  Lord  Ashburton,  the  second  by
D'Israeli,  both  prominent  men  in  England  and  in  the  world.
I  would  give  you  the  complete  description  she  made  of  each,
but  have  already  made  this  too  lengthy.  I  will  remark,
however,  that  so  accurate  was  the  description,  that  the  gen-
tleman who  favored  me  with  the  autographs  at  once  recog-
nized each  character  by  reading  the  three — 'this  is  Lord
Brougham,'  'this  is  Ashburton,'  'and  this  D'Israeli,'  said  he,
'and  there  are  remarkable  points  in  each.'

"The  other  letter  was  written  by  a  convict  in  our  State
Prison,  on  Thanksgiving-day,  and  was  directed  to  his  mother
At  once  she  remarked,  '  The  sphere  of  this  writer  is  unpleas-
ant ;  he  has  a  double  character ;  that  is,  he  has  much  secret-
iveness  and  is  not  just  what  he  appears  to  be;  he  has  con-
scientiousness, but  cannot  control  it;  he  loves  to  read  poetry,
can  write  poetry  tolerably  well,  and  dwells  a  great  deal  upon


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  175

home  and  scenes  of  his  childhood — indeed,  more  than  upon
any  other  subject;  he  has  a  great  love  for  order,  is  odd  in
his  expressions,  but  his  general  character  is  not  pleasant.'

"I  had  not  read  the  letter,  but  had  liberty  to  do  so.  In  it
was  a  request  that  his  mother  would  send  him  a  volume  of
poems,  and  some  worsted  shirts  of  a  certain  color;  then  fol-
lowed four  well- written  stanzas  on  the  'home  of  his  child-
hood.' The  letter  was  written  with  an  extraordinary  regard
for  order:  every  comma,  period,  semicolon,  dash,  apostrophe,
and  hyphen,  was  in  its  place,  and  some  of  his  ideas  were
oddly  enough  expressed.  He  is  in  imprisonment  for  the
crime  of  burglary  and  attempt  to  kill.

"The  wrappers,  enclosing  the  writings  of  the  three  Eng-
lishmen, were  all  precisely  alike,  and  as  they  had  got  mixed,
I  did  not  myself  know  one  from  the  other  as  she  was  read-
ing them,  but  marked  them  when  she  had  concluded  the
reading  of  each.  She  is  not  in  the  Clairvoyant  state  when
she  reads  pscycometrically,  and  this  renders  the  whole  thing
more  astonishing.  Let  those  who  take  any  interest  in  this
matter,  test  it  to  their  own  satisfaction."


XVI. THE PICTORIAL MEDIUM.

Differing  from  the  Symbolic  medium,  as  already  explained,
the  pictorial  media  see  and  describe  things  which  do  not  in
reality  exist  as  material  facts,  but  only  representations,  prefig-
uring or  bodying  forth  a  spiritual  or  psychical  truth.  The
symlolic  media  see  and  describe  things,  on  the  contrary,  which
have,  in  reality,  a  material  basis — things  which,  germinally,
do  already  exist  some  where  in  the  world — and  are  destined
to  be  developed  precisely  in  accordance  with  the  vision.  Of
this  class,  the  lady  who  saw  the  baker,  in  her  vision,  and  was
afterwards  married  to  the  same  gentleman,  of  that  profession,
whose  appearance  and  calling  accorded  with  her  symbolical
perception,  is  a  good  illustration.  His  guardian  spirit  united
with  her  guardian  spirit  to  impress  the  symbols  upon  her
prepared  mind.  But  of  the  Pictorial  class,  belonging  also
to  the  Onward  stratum  yet  higher  in  the  scale,  the  world  is
replete  with  examples. I  quote  for  the  reader  a  single  mod-


176  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

ern  instance.  It  is  taken  from  the  personal  experience  of
John  Worth  Edmonds,  Judge  of  the  New  York  Supreme
Court,  as  communicated  by  him  to  the  "jSkskinah"  for  July,
1852:

"What  I  first  saw,  on  this  occasion,  was  the  naked  hand
and  arm  of  a  female,  amid  an  atmosphere  of  intense  black-
ness.  It  was  round,  healthy,  and  very  distinctly  depicted;
was  extended  toward  me,  and  held  in  its  hand  something
shaped  like  a  ferule,  and  dark  in  color,  though  not  of  the
intense  blackness  that  enveloped  the  arm.

"The  next  I  saw  was  the  partially  naked  breast  of  a
female.  I  was  not  allowed  to  see  the  face  nor  the  body  of
the  one  to  whom  it  belonged.  The  breast  was  partly  con-
cealed by  an  oil-silk  shirt,  which  enveloped  the  body,  and
was  somewhat  open  in  front.  It  was  not  round,  and  full,
and  healthy,  as  the  arm  was  in  the  previous  picture,  but
shrunk  up  and  withered,  as  of  a  female  in  infirm  health  and
of  advanced  years.

"I  did  not  distinctly  understand,  at  the  time,  what  these
two  pictures  meant  to  teach.  The  next  day,  however,  it  was
disclosed  to  me,  and  it  was  said  that  it  was  perceived  I  did
not  understand  the  allegories,  and  that  was  because  my  inte-
rior perceptions  were  not  sufficiently  opened;  that  these  were
the  beginning  of  a  series  of  pictures  that  would  be  given  me,
and  as  I  advanced  I  would  become  more  capable  of  under-
standing them.

"It  was  then  said  that  the  first  picture  represented  the
arm  of  Truth  thrust  through  the  blackness  of  Error,  and
seen  distinctly  amidst  it ;  no  shade  from  the  error,  even  col-
oring or  obscuring  the  clear  brightness  of  the  trutl^  It  held
in  its  hand  a  Mystery,  dark-colored,  to  be  sure,  but  differing
in  hue  from  the  blackness  of  error.  That  Mystery  was  yet
to  be  explained  to  me ;  and  when  it  should  be,  I  must  cher-
ish and  preserve  it  until  the  world  was  ready  to  receive  it,
and  then  give  it  to  the  world.

"The  arm  alone  appearing,  without  the  bo^.v  to  which  it
was  attached,  was  intended  to  signify  that  t  dy  a  small

portion  of  Truth — one,  only,  of  its  mem,  lad  as  yet

penetrated  the  blackness  of  error  which  surrounds  mankind


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  , 177

in  their  present  condition.  At  both  ends  of  the  arm  there
was  yet  room  for  investigation;  at  one  end  to  solve  the
mystery  contained  in  the  hand,  and  at  the  other  to  develop
to  view  the  whole  form  and  body  of  Truth,  in  its  beauty
and  its  brightness.

"The  second  picture  was intended  to represent  Truth
deformed  and  obscured  by  sectarianism."


XVII. THE DUODYNAMIC MEDIUM.

This  word,  derived  from  the  Greek,  signifies  two  powers,
or  a  medium  who,  though  not  clairlative,  clairvoyant,  or
psychologic,  is  capable  of  being  the  fulcrum  or  centre  upon
which  two  things  can,  at  the  same  time,  be  accomplished.
I  am  impressed  to  introduce  the  following  case  as  an  exam-
ple. The  reader  will  perceive  that  the  boy  was  a  medium,
not  only  for  the  writing  phenomena,  but  also  for  motive
power — "the  table  moved  in  all  directions  with  so  much
violence,  that  I  thought  it  would  be  broken  to  pieces."
These  compound  media  are  very  rare,  but  useful.  I  extract
this  account  from  the  " Boston  Investigator-"

"Two  persons,  living  about  three  miles  from  me,  wrere
pointed  out  as  mediums,  by  a  certain  individual,  on  his  way
to  California,  and  were  informed  that,  previous  to  being  able
to  write,  their  hand,  by  being  laid  upon  the  table,  would
move  and  jerk  of  its  own  accord.  They  are  very  ignorant
and  illiterate  persons,  and  had  never  seen  any  operations*  of
this  nature.  They  commenced,  without  any  instruction,  to
write;  and  received  directions,  by  what  their  hand  wrote,
how  to  proceed  in  other  cases.  This  I  learn  by  report.
Three  days  ago,  I  saw  them  perform  at  their  home.  On
request,  they  were  at  my  house  yesterday,  and  performed
from  six  till  twelve,  in  the  presence  of  a  large  company  of
invited  spectators.  The  visible  facts  in  the  case  are  as  fol-
lows: Before  beginning  to  operate,  the  right  hand  of  the
medium,  and  sometimes  both  hands,  become  violently  agi-
tated, trembling  and  flying  in  every  direction.  Questions
are  then  asked,  either  orally  or  mentally,  and  the  hand  of
the  medium  takes  a  pencil,  and  writes  the  answers  on  a  slate.


178  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

In  doing  this,  the  medium  does  not  look  at  the  slate  or  in
that  direction.  When  the  writing  is  finished,  the  hand
moves  over  it  as  many  times  as  there  are  lines,  apparently
reading  what  is  written,  as  it  frequently  alters  a  letter,  or
adds  something,  or  rubs  it  all  out,  and  writes  again.  After
trying  to  rub  out  what  is  written,  the  hand  passes  over  the
slate  again,  apparently  to  see  if  the  writing  is  effectually  rub-
bed out;  for,  if  it  is  not,  the  rubbing  is  repeated  until  it  is
done  effectually.  This  is  a  difficult  job  for  the  medium  to
accomplish,  as  the  hand  is  always  dry.  Hence,  some  person
near  by,  with  a  damp  cloth  or  sponge,  generally  performs
this  work  for  the  medium.  As  soon  as  the  writing  is  com->
pleted,  the  pencil  falls,  and  the  hand  becomes  again  spas-
modic. Though  the  medium  does  not  look  on  the  slate,  and
is  generally  looking  in  another  direction,  yet  the  hand  goes
directly  to  the  pencil,  wherever  it  may  happen  to  lie.  There
is  no  feeling  after  it,  but  it  is  taken  up  at  once.

"The  answers  frequently  indicate  what  appears  like  super-
human intelligence;  e.  y.,  if  a  book  is  opened,  so  that  no
one  knows  where  it  is  opened,  the  medium  will  write  off  the
first  word  or  line  at  the  place  opened.  Having  his  eyes
blinded,  he  will  point  with  his  fingers  to  such  persons  in  the
room  as  are  mediums,  and  they  can  be  ascertained  in  various
ways.  As  many  individuals  as  could,  formed  a  circle  around
a  large  dining-table,  by  taking  hold  of  each  others'  hands,  and
as  soon  as  the  medium  became  agitated,  the  table  moved  in
all  directions  with  so  much  violence  that  I  thought  it  would
be  all  broken  to  pieces,  yet  it  was  not  touched  by  any  one.
Among  other  things,  the  table  beat  a  martial  tune  on  the
floor  with  its  legs,  and  the  blows  were  heitvy.  A  boy,  twelve
years  old,  was  then  put  upon  the  table,  the  leaves  being
spread  out,  but  this  did  not  diminish  its  motions  at  all.  The
boy  could  with  difficulty  stand  up  on  it.  Finally,  the  table
turned  up  sideways,  and  threw  off  the  boy,  and  it  was  left
in  this  position.  All  present  were  entirely  satisfied  that
there  was  no  deception  in  this  business,  and  that  it  would  be
impossible  for  men  to  move  the  table  in  this  manner,  had
they  attempted  to  do  it.  Mediums  frequently  strike  hard
bodies  with  their  hands,  in  such  a  way  as  would  give  them


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  179

much  pain  at  other  times.  One  of  them,  apparently  through
heedlessness,  held  his  hand,  for  some  time,  in  the  blaze  of  a
lamp,  and  it  did  not  hurt  him."

Let  us  now  pass  on  to  the  state  which  is,  unfortunately,
altogether  too  rare.


XVIII. THE DEVELOPING MEDIUM.

This  medium  is  compounded.  I  cannot  find  illustrations  of
my  impression  concerning  this  description  of  media.  The
books  and  papers  contain,  as  yet,  no  real  examples.  They
will  come  forth,  probably,  during  the  ensuing  year.  The
circles  for  "physical  evidences"  will  develop  them.  They
are  much  needed,  just  now,  in  order  to  harmonize  and  perfect
the  many  thousands  of  partial  media,  who  are  more  or  less
distressed  in  mind.  For  the  development  of  this  class  of
media,  I  look  with  no  little  interest.  The  duodynamic
medium  is  almost  the  type,  but  not  sufficiently  so,  to  act  in
that  particular  sphere  of  use.  The  therapeutic  medium  is
more  advanced.  A  type  of  media  is  needed  between  these,
for  the  purpose  of  equalizing  and  tranquillizing  the  mind
and  nerves  of  certain  parti  ally -unfolded  persons,  not  organ-
ically passive  enough  to  become  illuminated.  For  this  type
we  patiently,  but  earnestly,  wait.  We  will  now  pass  on  to
consider  the  "Therapeutic"  phenomena.


XIX. THE THERAPEUTIC MEDIUM.

The  therapeutic  medium  resembles  indistinctly  the  mani-
pulatory medium;  but  to  the  discriminating  mind,  to  the
scientific  eye,  the  former  is  in  reality  quite  a  different  mani-
festation. Let  me  illustrate  my  meaning  by  the  following:

"Bear  Sir:  In  this  age  of  ridicule  and  unbelief,  it  would
seem  to  be  necessary  that  a  great  Truth,  if  it  be  newly  pre-
sented to  the  world,  must  be  heralded  by  some  supernatural
event,  accompanied  by  a  miracle  in  fact,  in  order  to  be  re-
ceived by  the  people.  A  large  class  of  community  require
evidence  of  this  extraordinary  character  before  they  will
believe  a  newly-developed  Truth,  albeit  such  truth  may  be


180  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

intrinsically  far  more  consistent  and  easier  to  believe  than
much  tliat  they  have  been  accustomed  to  receive  and  accept
with  the  most  implicit  confidence.

"The  following  certificate  is  intended  for  this  class  of  soci-
ety. It  relates  to  the  remarkable  healing  powers  of  Mrs.
Mettler,  whose  clairvoyant  examinations  in  numerous  cases
of  disease  have  been  attended  with  unvarying  success  for  the
past  two  years,  both  in  Bridgeport  and  this  city.  Deacon
Mosman,  a  well-known  citizen  of  Cabotville,  certifies  that
his  daughter  was  restored  to  the  enjoyment  of  her  speech,
sight,  and  powers  of  loco-motion,  after  having  been  long  and
vainly  attended  by  more  than  a  dozen  different  physicians.
This  was  done  by  Mrs.  M.  merely  making  a  few  magnetic
passes,  or  manipulations,  over  the  patient.  If  the  fact  of
causing  the  blind  to  see,  the  dumb  to  speak,  and  the  lame  to
walk,  does  not  sufficiently  attest  her  healing  power,  a  host  of
similar  and  different  cases,  equally  striking,  can  be  seen  at
any  time  on  application.  These  things  are  being  accom-
plished every  day  among  our  own  citizens,  and  they  indicate
with  unerring  certainty  that  there  is  a  great  natural  law  by
which  they  are  effected.  The  following  is  Deacon  Mosman's
certificate :

"'Cabotville,  January  9th,  1850.
"'  To  all  whom  it  may  concern. — Be  it  known  that  my  daughter  Mary,  now
twenty-two  years  old,  has  for  about  three  years  past,  been  mostly  confined
to  her  bed,  and  unable  to  walk  alone.  About  the  middle  of  July  last,  she
lost  all  power  of  the  organs  of  speech,  and  a  few  days  after  was  deprived
of  her  eye-sight — becoming  entirely  blind,  with  no  power  to  even  open  her
eye-lids.  She  has  remained  in  that  deplorable  condition  until  the  present
time.  All  possible  means  have  been  used  for  her  relief — she  has  been
attended  by  twelve  or  thirteen  different  physicians — some  of  them  being
of  the  highest  order  and  skill.  She  continued  in  about  the  same  condition,
changing  only  for  the  worse,  and  was  finally  told  that  she  could  never  be
any  better.  By  this  time  we  had  almost  despaired  of  ever  obtaining  any
relief.  But  through  a  kind  Providence  we  noticed  a  letter  in  one  of  the
Springfield  papers  respecting  the  claims  and  powers  of  Mrs.  Mettler,  the
clairvoyant,  in  healing  and  restoring  the  sick.  We  immediately  applied  to
her,  and  after  several  attempts,  succeeded  in  getting  her  to  make  us  a  visit.
On  the  evening  of  the  above  date  she  called,  and  made  a  clairvoyant  exam-
ination of  Mary's  ease,  and  prescribed  for  her.  The  next  day  Mrs.  31.
tailed,  and  by  manipulation  quieted  her  a  good  deal,  and  on  the  next  Vvred-


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  181

nesday,  she  called  again  to  see  her,  and  in  about  half  an  hour — with  nothing
but  her  own  hands — she  succeeded,  to  the  joy  of  all,  in  opening  her  eyes,
anJ  restoring  her  sight,  and  speech.  The  next  day  Mrs.  Mettler  called
again,  and  to  our  astonishment  she  succeeded  in  making  my  daughter  walk,
entirely  alone,  which  she  had  not  done  for  three  years.  Such  are  the  facts
in  this  most  remarkable  case.  She  continues  to  see,  talk  and  walk,  and  for
all  we  know,  she  must  soon  be  restored  to  her  former  good  health.  The
above  facts  have  shaken  my  unbelief  in  magnetism,  and  revived  my  hopes
in  my  daughter's  case.

"'Silas  Mosman,  per  D.  F.  Mosman."'*

The  word  therapeutic  is  derived  from  the  Greek,  and  sig-
nifies to  nurse,  serve,  or  cure;  pertaining  to  the  discovering
and  applying  of  remedial  agents  to  various  diseases.  The
case  above  described  is  an  illustration  of  this  principle :  the
lady  being  a  compound  medium — impersonating,  psychometric,
therapeutic,  and  clairvoyant,  Such  a  combination  is  rare ;  but
a  little  systematic  and  philosophic  attention  to  any  so-called
partial  medium — possessed  of  a  good,  calm,  firm  tempera-
ment— would  soon  develop  similar  results.  Let  the  friends
of  scientific  discovery  be  true  to  the  investigation  of  the
therapeutic  media.  An  institution,  where  medical  clairvoy-
ance, in  combination  with  the  simple  curative  agents  now
beneath  the  earth's  crust,  can  be  systematically  applied  to
the  sick,  is  imperatively  demanded.


XX. THE MISSIONARY MEDIUM.

This  class  of  media  is  just  coming  upon  the  world's  stage.
There  are  already  many  incipient  illustrations  and  indefinite
glimmerings  of  the  approach  of  them.  Personally,  I  have
had  much  experience  of  this  general  description ;  one  instance
of  which  I  here  record :

Four  years  rolled  by,  and  my  mind  had  accumulated
more  than  thrice  that  measure  of  experience.  I  was  about
to  commence  a  course  of  lectures  in  the  city  of  New  York,
on  a  wide  range  of  subjects,  and  the  various  preparations

*  This  therapeutic  case  was  originally  published  in  the  Hartford  Times,
bearing  date,  Sept.  28,  1852.  Mr.  Mosman  concluded  by  cordially  recom-
mending every  sick  person  to  consult  this  lady  who  wrought  the  miracle.

16


182  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

were  being  made,  such  as  the  procuring  of  Scribe,  Witnesses,
&c,  which  were  necessary  to  record  and  testify  to  the  fact  of
their  delivery.  It  was  about  the  middle  of  the  month  of
November.  I  was  returning  from  a  place  of  amusement,
known  then  as  the  Alhambra,  to  my  boarding-house,  in  Green-
street — was  walking  homeward,  in  Prince-street,  between
Broadway  and  Green,  when  I  experienced  the  overshadow-
ing presence  of  an  invisible  influence.  It  pervaded  my
entire  system,  and  divested  me  of  the  will  and  ability  to
advance.  It  drew  me  powerfully  backward,  in  the  direction
in  which  I  had  come,  and,  as  is  my  habit,  I  turned  to  obey
it.  I  was  not  surprised,  for  I  had  experienced  similar  things
frequently,  and  had  learned  to  follow  those  spiritual  influ-
ences, which  so  manifestly  addressed  my  interior  sensi-
bilities. I  walked  to  Broadway,  and  down  this  street  nearly
half  a  block,  when  I  no  longer  felt  this  influence !  I  dis-
tinctly recollect  that  I  was  pleased  at  this,  for  it  was  then
past  ten  o'clock  at  night — my  usual  hour  for  retiring — and
I  quickly  turned,  and  hastened  with  all  speed  toward  the
boarding-house.  I  had  proceeded  up  Broadway  not  further,
I  think,  than  Prince-street,  when,  like  a  flash  of  lightning
from  the  sky,  the  invisible  influence  took  possession  of  my
powers  and  of  'every  desire,  impressing  me  with  an  over-
whelming and  irresistible  power,  to  retrace  my  steps.  I  was
now  guided  down  Broadway  to  Houston-street,  and  through
this  street  to  the  Bowery.  Here,  again,  I  ceased  to  feel  the
guiding  and  controlling  presence  of  my  invisible  companion,
and  again  I  felt  strongly  disposed  to  return  home.  Directly,
however,  the  influence  repossessed  me ;  my  guide  drew  me
across  the  Bowery,  and  on,  through  Houston-street,  toward
the  East  Eiver.  I  walked  with  extraordinary  facility  and
speed,  and  soon  beheld  the  Williamsburg  ferry  in  the  dis-
tance. I  had  never  crossed  the  East  Eiver  in  my  life,  but  I
began  to  believe  that  my  guide  was  conducting  me  thither.
Now,  the  Influence  seemed  to  settle  into  the  very  pores  of
my  skin;  it  bounded  through  my  blood;  my  head  grew
instantly  heavy,  and  I  was  suddenly  deprived  of  all  external
mejoagry  and  consciousness. * * *

Consciousness  and  memory  and  sight  were  restored,  how-


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  183

ever,  just  as  I  was  entering  a  small,  dense  wood!  It  was
situated  upon  a  gentle  eminence;  and  the  night  being  ex-
ceedingly dark,  I  could  see  no  dwellings  in  its  vicinity,  nor
other  distant  objects — nothing  but  the  trees  and  numerous
ston}-  projections,  situated  near  me,  upon  the  ground.  My
guide  led  me  quite  into  the  interior  of  this  miniature  forest,
so  to  speak,  and  suddenly  halted.  During  all  this  time  I
felt  unmoved — knowing  and  believing,  as  I  did,  that  I  was
then  and  would  continue  to  be  led  and  supported  by  a  power
superior  to  myself.  Therefore,  I  was  confidingly  waiting,
and  ready  to  obey  any  orders  with  which  my  mind  might
be  impressed.

Now,  a  strong  and  thorough  impression — which,  from  its
interior  nature,  I  know  to  be  philanthropic,  authoritative,
and  irresistible — bade  me  remove  the  great  quantity  of
decomposed  stumps,  stones,  decaying  leaves,  and  brambles
which  seemed  to  have  lain  on  the  spot,  where  I  was  then
standing,  for  the  last  twenty  j-ears.  This  labor  appeared,  at
first,  quite  formidable ;  but,  without  a  moment's  hesitation,
I  proceeded  to  accomplish  my  appointed  mission.  I  labored
with  unusual  success  and  ease,  because,  at  every  breath  I
drew,  the  powerful  influence  of  my  invisible  guide  inspired
me  with,  increasing  confidence  and  strength.

It  is  proverbial,  I  believe,  that  "  where  there 's  a  will,  there's
a  way " — thus,  at  least,  it  was  with  me.  I  labored,  almost
without  cessation,  for  about,  what  seemed  to  be,  one  hour,
when  I  came  to  a  smooth  surface,  like  the  upper  portion  of
a  concealed  rock.  Now,  the  guiding  Influence  impressed
me  to  remove  or  elevate  the  stone  which  I  saw.  I  forthwith
obeyed.  By  the  assistance  of  a  piece  of  timber,  which
served  the  purposes  of  a  lever,  I  succeeded,  finally,  in  push-
ing the  stone  on  one  side.  Great,  indeed,  was  my  astonish-
ment when  I  beheld,  before  me,*an  opening  sufficient  to
admit  my  person.  This  unexpected  apperture  had  every
appearance  of  leading  into  a  deep  vault  or  sepulchre  beneath !
This  was  the  first  time,  since  my  attempt  to  return  home
while  in  Broadway,  when  my  mind  disapproved  of,  or
dreaded  to  progress  with,  the  adventure.  I  involuntarily
shrunk  back  with  fear,  and  almost  positively  determined  not


184  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

to  enter  that  dark,  that  strange,  that  unwholesome  den.  So
I  resolved,  even  if  my  then  quiet,  but  powerful  guide,
demanded  the  contrary.

Several  things  conspired  to  develop  this  dread  and  resolu-
tion within  me:  first,  I  remembered  and  realized  fully,  for
the  first  time  since  losing  my  consciousness,  that  the  night
was  thoroughly  black  with  darkness — that  I  was  away  from
home — that  I  was  where  before  I  had  never  been :  secondly,
that  on  opening  the  mouth  of  the  cave  or  sepulchre,  I
smelled  a  very  offensive  and  suffocating  vapor,  like  the  dis-
agreeable effluvia  arising  from  the  remains  of  decomposed
human  bodies :  and  thirdly,  that  after  the  stone  was  removed
from  off  the  mouth  of  the  mysterious  cave,  I  forthwith
ceased,  to  experience  the  sweet  and  supporting  presence  of
my  invisible  Guide.

Presently,  however,  my  feelings  of  devotion  and  resolu-
tion of  perseverance  were  more  than  restored  to  me,  because
I  experienced  an  inwrought  strength  and  courage,  not  equal-
led by  any  previous  thing  of  the  kind,  except  upon  one
occasiou.  Now,  the  Influence  drew  me  downwards  into  the
cave!  Without  feeling  or  manifesting  the  least  symptom  of
reluctance,  I  fell  upon  my  knees,  and  with  my  hands  began
feeling  for  steps,  or  something  else,  by  which  to  descend.
After  a  brief  search,  I  ascertained  there  was  a  heavy  stone-
wall on  one  side  of  the  entrance,  with  projecting  stones,
which  might  serve  the  purpose  of  steps  or  stairs.  But  0,
how  cold  and  slippery  they  were!  It  seemed  that  human
feet  had  never  touched  them — they  were  so  literally  covered
with  wet  moss,  and  so  deathly  cold!  With  the  greatest
precision,  however,  I  placed  my  foot  upon  the  topmost
stone,  and,  with  the  same  sensitive  cautiousness,  continued
my  perilous  descent.  There  were  eight  steps  leading  to  the
surface  of  the  cold,  damp,  earthy  floor  beneath. It  seemed

like  a  cellar.  *****

.  #  *  *  *  *  *

I  was  finally  led  out  of  the  woods,  in  a  different  direction,
and  was  guided,  with  the  utmost  care,  for  two  or  three  miles,
when  again  the  Influence  completely  overshadowed  my
physical  and  spiritual  being. It  settled  into  every  possible


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  185

avenue  of  my  soul ;  the  curtains  of  night  were  folded  close
around  me ;  and  I  was  again  rendered  unconscious  of  any
mode  of  existence.

What  distance  I  was  made  to  travel  I  have  not  the  slight-
est recollection  ;  nor  have  I  ever  been  able  to  gather  a  perfect
idea  as  to  the  actual  locality  I  visited,  but  I  have  always
given  it  "a  local  habitation  and  a  name,"  on  Long  Island.
Indeed,  I  have  thought  of  it  as  being  in  a  little  wood,  about
four  miles  east  of  New  York  City ;  because  a  combination
of  circumstances  conspire  to  give  and  strengthen  in  me  this
impression  ; but  as  yet  I  am  not  certain.

When  I  returned  to  consciousness,  I  was  just  turning  from
Prince  into  Greene-street,  and  this  was  but  a  few  steps  from
my  boarding-house.  The  Influence  was  now  no  where  near;
I  felt  perfectly  free  of  its  power  and  direction — so  entirely
was  I  myself  again  !  I  hastened  into  my  room,  and  directly
retired.  That  night  I  slept  profoundly,  and  my  slumbers
were  dreamless.  In  a  few  days  the  entire  adventure  seemed
to  cease  its  residence  in  my  memory,  and  all  separate  em-
ployments of  mind  went  on  as  they  did  previous  to  its
occurrence.

******

Nearly  four  years  more  passed  away,  which  bring  me  to
the  present  time.*  I  was  seated  by  my  desk,  reflecting  upon
the  numerous  causes  and  temptations  Jo  evil  or  sin,  in  the
world,  and  became  unusually  absorbed  and  abstracted  in  the
meditation  of  the  subject.  This  meditation  was  induced  by
writing  an  article  entitled  "The  Spirit,  and  its  Culture,7'
in  which  I  stated  that  there  are  three  general  causes  of  evil,
viz :  a  Defective  Organization,  a  Defective  Situation,  and  a
Defective  Education.  But  for  the  fear  of  rendering  that
article  too  long  and  heavy  for  the  pages  of  a  periodical —
the  Uniuercodum — I  purposely  avoided  the  introduction  of
examples  and  illustrations  of  what  appeared  to  me  an
incontrovertible  truism  or  theorem.  But  I  know  that  but
few  are  capable  of  reasoning  correctly  from  the  mere  abstract
statement  of  principles  or  truths;  and  this  knowledge  induced

*  That  is,  to  the  time  when  this  narrative  was  written.

16*


186  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

the  desire  to  present  to  the  world  a  complete  illustration  of
the  plain  proposition  to  which  I  have  alladed.

Actuated  by  his  desire,  I  continued  my  mental  research
into  the  vast  field  of  human  existence,  seeking  the  most
familiar  and  forcible  illustrations  of  the  causes  of  crime.  At
this  point  of  inquiry,  there  was  revived  in  my  memory  the
scenes  of  the  cave  which  I  visited  on  Long  Island,  and  with
it  came  also  an  interesting  history.  This  history  poured  with
great  profusion  into  my  mind,  and  was  recorded  meanwhile
upon  my  memor}r.  And  I  was  delighted  and  astonished  to
find  that  this  matter  was  the  very  thing  for  which  I  was  then
seeking,  and  I  forthwith  resolved  to  commit  it  to  paper ;  and
this  is  all  I  shall,  in  this  work,  give  by  way  of  an  Introduc-
tion to  my  narrative  of  "  The  Mysterious  Association  or  the
Causes  and  Cure  of  Crime."

The  reader  is  provided  with  the  above,  in  order  to  illus-
trate the  actual  experience  of  a  Missionary  Medium.  The
approach,  operation,  and  departure  of  the  spiritual  Influence
are  truthfully  related.  I  may  here  add  that,  when  the  im-
pression comes  to  me  to  write  out  in  full,  and  present  to  the
world,  the  foregoing  very  strange  but  truthful  and  philo-
sophic narrative,  I  will  hasten  to  do  so.

Instances  to  the  repletion  of  many  volumes  could  be  cited
to  illustrate  the  nature  and  experience  of  "  the  missionary
medium,"  but  sufficient  has  been  related  on  this  class  to
subserve  the  object  of  this  volume.  Among  modern  instan-
ces, John  M.  Spear  stands  quite  prominently  before  the
world.  Eecommended,  as  he  is,  to  public  credulity,  by
virtue  of  his  well-known  truthfulness,  simplicity,  and  uni-
form conscientious  philanthropy  of  character,  his  spiritual
experience  is  particularly  and  generally  interesting  and  as
acceptable.  According  to  my  perceptions  of  his  state,  he  is
a  compound  medium — symbolic,  pulsatory,  missionary,  and
speaking.  The  most  prominent  manifestation,  it  seems  to
me,  and  the  most  reliable  in  his  case,  is  the  missionary
development,  to  which,  acting  as  a  confederating  or  auxili-
ary influence,  is  most  beautifully  added  the  manipulatory
and  speaking  qualifications,  or  unfolding  of  spiritual  inter-


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  187

course and  assistance. We  will  now  pass  on  to  consider
another  step  in  progression.

XXI. TELEGRAPHIC MEDIUM.

Media  of  this  general  class,  although  not  clairvoyant,  are
capable  of  speaking  or  writing  thoughts  communicated  at  a
distance,  whether  the  intelligence  be  living  in  or  out  of
the  body.  The  word  is  a  family  name  for  some  twenty  kinds
or  modifications  of  spiritualty  originated  phenomena.  It  is
derived  from  two  Greek  words  -r^Xs,  at  a  distance,  and  /^apw,
to  write  ;  but  it  is  here  used  to  embrace  every  description  of
manifestations  which  resemble  the  following  illustrations :

"  It  was  in  the  same  year,  (1761,)  that  Louisa  Ulrica,  a
sister  of  Frederick  the  Great  of  Prussia,  and  married  to  Adol-
phus  Frederick,  King  of  Sweden,  received  a  letter  from  the
Duchess  of  Brunswick,  in  which  she  mentioned  that  she  had
read,  in  the  Gottingen  Gazette,  an  account  of  a  man  at
Stockholm,  who  pretended  to  speak  with  the  dead,  and  she
wondered  that  the  Queen,  in  her  correspondence,  had  not
alluded  to  the  subject.  The  Queen  had  no  doubt  heard  of
the  Marteville  affair,  and  this,  coupled  with  her  sister's  de-
sires, made  her  wish  to  satisfy  herself  by  an  interview  with
Swedenborg.  Captain  de  Stahlhammer,  out  of  many  author-
ities, is  the  one  whose  narrative  we  select,  of  what  passed  at
that  in#rview.

"  '  A  short  time,'  says  Stahlhammer,  'after  the  death  of
the  Prince  of  Prussia,  Swedenborg  came  to  court,  (being
summoned  thither  by  the  Senator,  Count  Scheffer.)  As  soon
as  he  was  perceived  by  the  Queen,  she  said  to  him.  '  Well,
Mr.  Assessor,  have  you  seen  my  brother?'  Swedenborg
answered,  '  No  ;'  whereupon  she  replied,  'If  you  should  see
him,  remember  me  to  him.'  In  saying  this,  she  did  but  jest,
and  had  no  thought  of  asking  him  any  information  about
her  brother.  Eight  days  afterward,  and  not  four-and-twenty
hours,  nor  yet  at  a  particular  audience,  Swedenborg  came
again  to  court,  but  so  early  that  the  Queen  had  not  left  her
apartment,  called  the  white-room,  where  she  was  conversing
with her  maids of  honor and  other  ladies  of  the  court,


188  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

.  Swedenborg  did  not  wait  for  the  Qtfeen's  coming  out,  but
entered  directly  into  her  apartment,  and  whispered  in  her
ear.  The  Queen,  struck  with  astonishment,  was  taken  ill,
and  did  not  recover  herself  for  some  time.  After  she  was
come  to  herself,  she  said  to  those  about  her,  "  There  is  only
God  and  my  brother  who  can  know  what  he  has  just  told  me."
She  owned  that  he  had  spoken  of  her  last  correspondence
with  the  prince,  the  subject  of  which  was  known  to
themselves  alone.'  "*

Telegraphic  communications  from  the  spiritual  world
most  always  pass  in  history  for  remarkable  "  coinciden-
ces" or  "presentiments."  %  To  show  the  reader  the  absurdity
of  such  a  solution,  the  following  cases  are  added :

"  A  circumstance  is  related  by  Stilling,  of  Professor  Bohm,
teacher  of  mathematics,  at  Marburg;  who,  being  one  evening
in  company,  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  conviction  that  he
ought  to  go  home.  As,  however,  he  was  very  comfortably
taking  tea,  and  had  nothing  to  do  at  home,  he  resisted  the
admonition  ;  but  it  returned  with  such  force  that  at  length
he  was  obliged  to  yield.  On  reaching  his  house,  he  found
every  thing  as  he  had  left  it ;  but  he  now  felt  himself  urged
to  remove  his  bed  from  the  corner  in  which  it  stood  to
another ;  but,  as  it  had  always  stood  there,  he  resisted  this
impulsion  also.  However,  the  resistance  was  vain ;  absurd
as  it  seemed,  he  felt  he  must  do  it ;  so  he  summoned  the
maid,  and,  with  her  aid,  drew  the  bed  to  the  othei*side  of
the  room ;  after  which  he  felt  quite  at  ease,  and  returned  to
spend  the  rest  of  the  evening  with  his  friends.  At  ten
o'clock  the  party  broke  up,  and  he  retired  home,  and  went
to  bed  and  to  sleep.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  he  was
awakened  by  a  loud  crash,  and  on  looking  out  he  saw  that
a  large  beam  had  fallen,  bringing  part  of  the  ceiling  with
it,  and  was  lying  exactly  on  the  spot  his  bed  had  occupied.

u  One  of  the  most  remarkable  cases  of  presentiment  I
know,  is  that  which  occurred,  not  very  long  since,  on  board
one  of  her  Majesty's  ships,  when  lying  off  Portsmouth. The

*  This  instance  of  telegraphic  mediuraship  is  one  of  many,  similar,
related  of  Svvedenborg.  See  Wilkinson's  Candid  Biography  of  the  Swe-
dish Seer  and  the  Self- subordinating  Philosoplier.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  189

officers  being  one  day  at  the  mess-table,  a  young  Lieutenant
P.  suddenly  laid  down  his  knife  and  fork,  pushed  away  his
plate,  and  turned  extremely  pale.  He  then  rose  from  the
table,  covering  his  face  with  his  hands,  and  retired  from  the
room.  The  president  of  the  mess,  supposing  him  to  be  ill,
sent  one  of  the  young  men  to  inquire  what  was  the  matter.
At  first  Mr.  P.  was  unwilling  to  speak;  but  on  being
pressed,  he  confessed  that  he  had  been  seized  by  a  sudden
and  irresistible  impression  that  a  brother  he  had,  then  in
India,  was  dead.  '  He  died,'  said  he,  '  on  the  12th  of  Au-
gust, at  six  o'clock;  I  am  perfectly  certain  of  it.'  No
arguments  could  overthrow  this  conviction,  which,  in  due
course  of  post,  was  verified  to  the  letter.  The  young  man
had  died  at  Cawnpore,  at  the  precise  period  mentioned."

This  class  of  media  may  be  employed,  by  judicious  per-
sons, for  terrestrial  purposes,  and  without  doing  any  injury
to  the  mind ;  but  the  object  must,  in  every  instance  be  to
do  mankind  some  substantial  good.


XXII. THE SPEAKING MEDIUM.

Concerning  this  medium  much  might  be  written.  The
instances,  however,  of  perfect  declamatory  manifestation,  are
still  too  rare  to  admit  of  a  specific  classification.  Several
individuals  have  been  developed  to  this  plane  of  usefulness,
but  the  most  of  them  have  passed  through  the  pulsatory,  sym-
pathetic, and  duodynamic  phases.  This  angular  journey  is  to
be  studiously  avoided,  because,  when  the  medium  ascends  to
the  speaking  $)lane  of  spiritualization,  he  is  too  likely  to  con-
vey with  him  the  puerilities  and  impure  characterizations  of
the  preceding  conditions.  If  so,  he  is  more  than  usually
disposed,  without  designing  to  do  so,  to  modify,  and  com-
mingle his  own  individual  impressions  or  cogitations  with  liis
spiritually-instigated  utterances.  The  true  object  of  spiritual
intercourse  is  the  progressive  spiritualization  and  religious
harmonization  of  the  different  Nations  composing  the  terres-
trial family  of  Man.  The  Manifestations  are  not  the  end  of
reform ;  they  simply  point  to  the  great  and  glorious  destinies
in  store  for  mankind— socially,  intellectually,  spiritually! If


190  TABLE :  F EXPLANATION.

an  audience  is  thrilled  and  charmed  with  the  eloquence  of
'speaking  media,'  the  manifestation  should  not  be  regarded
as  a,  finality,  but  as  the  promise  of  a  perpetual  fact.  Modern
inspiration  is  adapted  to  modern  necessities  and  to  existing
religious  circumstances;  it  is  not  designed  to  amuse  the  idle,
neither  to  gratify  the  lovers  of  the  marvellous  and  supernat-
ural. Speaking  media  should  be  welcomed  as  the  evangelists
of  a  good  and  glorious  dispensation !

In  the  development  of  speaking  media,  the  circle,  in
which  the  process  is  going  on,  should  not  divert  the  prom-
ising person  from  the  straight  line  of  spirit-culture.  The  best
speaking  medium  is  one  who  has  glided,  with  his  entire
character  and  aspirations,  without  any  deviation  from  the
rudimental  state  of  the  rectilinear  plane  of  growth,  to  the
complete  individualization  of  his  faculties;  thus  becoming
an  orator  and  advocate  of  Eeformatory  Principles.  It  is  not,
however,  an  unfavorable  passage  for  a  person  to  pass  from
the  normal  condition  to  a  medium  for  the  motive  develop-
ments, then  to  the  gesturing  phenomena,  then  rapidly  to
the  impersonating  manifestations,  thence  to  the  missionary,
through  the  telegraphic  phase,  to  the  full  development  of  the
orator.  This  transition  is  a  correct  development.  But  should
the  individual  manifest  an  organic  disposition  toward  other
ultimates  or  points  of  development,  then  let  him  make
straight  to  that  result,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  perfect  his
individuality  in  it.  Let  no  one  suppose  himself  capable  of
being  correctly  and  profitably  more  than  one  type  of  medium.
Some  persons  can  make  only  a  good  outward  medium,  others,
an  inward,  others,  an  onward,  others,  an  upwmrd;  but  let
every  one  become  what  he  is  constitutionally  capable  of
being — a  medium,  at  least  on  one  of  the  strata  already  de-
scribed. The  age  demands  inspired  men  and  women !
Speaking  media,  taught  only  by  the  Spirit  of  Truth ;  such
are  every  where  needed.  Let  every  one,  who  can,  become  a
teacher  of  the  world — strive  for  development  and  inspiration.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  191


XXIII. THE CLAIRVOYANT MEDIUM.

The  tyrannical  despotism  of  public  opinion,  like  all  mon-
archical governments,  is  fast  fading  into  weakness  and  decay.
The  hundreds,  yea  thousands,  of  such  illustrations  as  the  fol-
lowing can  have  no  other  effect  than  that  of  conveying  the
true  idea  of  Spiritual  Intercourse:

"  Scottish  legends  abound  with  instances  of  second  sight,
often-times  supported  by  a  formidable  array  of  evidence.
But  I  have  met  with  only  one  person  who  was  the  subject
of  such  a  story.  She  was  a  woman  of  plain  practical  sense,
very  unimaginative,  intelligent,  extremely  well  informed,  and
as  truthful  as  the  sun.  I  tell  the  story  as  she  told  it  to  me.
One  of  her  relatives  was  seized  with  a  rapid  consumption.
He  had  for  some  weeks  been  perfectly  resigned  to  die ;  but
one  morning  when  she  called  on  him,  she  found  his  eyes
brilliant,  his  cheeks  flushed  with  an  unnatural  bloom,  and
his  mind  fall  of  belief  that  he  should  recover  health.  He
talked  eagerly  of  voyages  he  would  take,  and  of  the  reno-
vating influence  of  warmer  climes.  She  listened  to  him  with
sadness;  for  she  was  well  acquainted  with  his  treacherous  dis-
ease, and  in  all  these  things,  she  saw  symptoms  of  approach-
ing death.  She  said  this  to  her  mother  and  sisters  when  she
returned  home.  It  was  at  that  home,  away  from  her  invalid
relative,  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  as  she  sat  sewing
in  the  usual  family  circle,  that  she  accidentally  looked  up —
and  gave  a  sudden  start,  which  immediately  attracted  atten-
tion and  inquiry.  She  replied — 'Don't  you  see  cousin?'
They  thought  she  had  been  dreaming;  but  she  said,  'I  am
not  certainly  asleep.  It  is  strange  you  do  not  see  him ;  he
is  there !  The  next  thought  was,  that  she  was  seized  with
sudden  insanity ;  but  she  assured  them  she  was  never  more
rational  in  her  life — that  she  could  not  account  for  the  circum-
stance any  more  than  they  could ;  but  her  cousin  was  certainly
there,  and  looking  at  her  with  a  very  pleasant  countenance.
Her  mother  tried  to  turn  it  off  as  a  delusion ;  but,  neverthe-
less, she  was  so  much  impressed  by  it,  that  she  looked  at  her
watch,  and  immediately  sent  to  inquire  how  the  invalid  did.


192  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

The  messenger  returned  with  the  news  that  he  was  dead,  and
had  died  at  that  moment!

"My  friend  told  me  (continues  the  narrator,)  that  at  first
she  only  saw  the  bust;  but  gradually  the  whole  form  became
visible,  as  if  some  imperceptible  cloud  or  veil,  had  slowly
rolled  away.  The  invisible  veil  again  arose,  and  then  that
vanished.  She  said  the  vision  did  not  terrify  her  at  the
time;  it  simply  perplexed  her,  as  a  thing  incomprehensible,
"Why  she  saw  it,  she  could  explain  no  better  than  why  her
mother  and  sisters  did  not  see  it.  She  simply  told  it  to  me
just  as  it  appeared  to  her,  as  distinct  and  real  as  any  other
individual  in  the  room."*

The  clairvoyant  medium  is  one  who,  differing  from  the
natural,  organic,  clear  seer,  obtains  distinct  perceptions  of
spiritual  things  and  personages,  but  not  always  associated
with  wisdom  or  comprehension.  The  spiritual  clairvoyant,
as  in  the  instance  above  related,  has  occasional  lucid  mo-
ments when  the  mind  is  capable  of  seeing  far  away  and
clearly.  While  the  natural  clear  seer  depends  primarily  for
his  lucidity  upon  the  magnetic  process  of  some  terrestrial
person.f  Individualized  vision  and  special  lucidity  of  mind
are,  as  I  think,  without  a  single  exception,  produced  directly
or  indirectly  by  super-mundane  influences.  There  is  nothing
in  cerebro-dynamics  or  natural  Laws  capable  of  achieving  such
a  development.  The  "superior  condition,"  as  I  am  invariably
impressed  to  term  it,  in  contra-distinction  to  one's  common  or
ordinary  condition,  is  quite  a  different  state — being  more
permanent,  and  not  altogether  dependent,  as  the  other  state
is,  upon  the  Spirit-Land  for  revelations  of  truths  or  percep-
tions of  great  thoughts.  Individuality  of  character  is  not  a
condition  of  that  clairvoyance  which  is  spiritually  induced
The  clairvoyant  medium  may  be  hallucinated  and  completely
deceived,  by  the  insinuating  presence  of  some  psychological
influence,  and  he  will  fail  utterly  either  to  perceive' or  under-
stand the  nature  and  signification  of  the  vision  presented
by  a  spirit-power.  Yet  the  "circle  for  spirit  culture"  can
advance  such  a  medium  rapidly  toward  a  'superior  condition'

*  An  extract,  taken  from  Mrs.  L.  M.  Child's  " Letters  from  New  York"
f  See  Great  Harmoma,  vol.  III.,  pages  290,  291,  292,  et  seq.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  193

of  mind,  at  which  point  the  manifestations  will  be  not  only
very  convincing,  but  of  the  highest  service  to  beclarkened
intellects.

Without  personal  experience,  how  can  a  person  form  a
definite  conception  of  clairvoyance  or  impression?  It  is  the
sheerest  folly  for  a  man,  destitute  of  interior  psychical  infor-
mation, to  attempt  to  explain  every  thing  spiritual  by  laws
purely  mundane!  The  Pope,  without  astronomical  knowl-
edge in  his  mind,  was  just  the  man  to  pronounce  that  science
a  deception.  And  lesser  popes — the  Protestant  clergy — with-
out any  spiritual  illumination,  are  just  the  men  to  denounce
the  new  developments.  Perhaps  the  reader,  being  also  with-
out experience,  but  willing  to  learn,  may  obtain  a  distinct
idea  from  the  following  illustration:


4r"


The  above  engraving  gives,  as  well  as  an  external  symbol
can  be  made  to  do,  a  perfect  representation  of  the  philosoph y
of  spiritual  intercourse  through  clairvoyance,  and  also  by
impression.  The  cities  may  be  considered  thousands  of
miles  apart — say  one,  the  city  of  London,  across  the  Atlantic,
the  other,  New  York  city.  Suppose  a  clairvoyant  in  New
York  desires  to  see  a  person  in  London.  In  this  case,  the
spiritually-awakened  perception  darts  in  a  straight  line
through  all  intervening  substances  to  the  specified  localitj7 —
17


194  T  A  B  L  U OF E  X  P  L  J.  NATION,

as  indicated  by  the  horizontal  line  passing  from  one  city  to
the  other  through  the  various  hills  and  mountains — no  mag-
netic current  can  possibly  be  more  rectilinear  or  penetrative.
It  should  be  remarked  that  the  fine,  all-pervading  mag-
netism or  electric  aroma,  in  which  Nature  is  eternally  bathed,
is  the  medium  of  sight  to  the  clairvoyant  vision — as  sunlight
is  to  the  eye  of  flesh.  But  the  horizontal  line  is  designed  to
represent  simply  the  direct  penetrations  of  the  vision  of  the
clear  seer.

Again,  suppose  a  mother,  residing  in  New  York,  prays  for
news  from  her  son,  living  in  the  city  of  London.  He  is  very
sick.  She  is  anxious  to  learn  of  his  actual  situation.  It
will  take  ten  or  twenty  days  to  get  a  letter.  She  must  know
now.  But  how?  She  is  no  clairvoyant,  but  she  is  a  medium
for  impression.  What  is  to  be  done?  The  clairvoyant  vision
proceeds  from  the  base  of  the  forehead  toward  the  object
at  which  it  is  directed,  making  the  scene  as  plain  as  any
thing  can  be,  to  the  physical  eye;  but  she  is  only  a  medium
for  impression.  "What  does  this  mean?  That  is,  the  organs,
situated  on  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  are  only  accessible  to
spiritual  influence.  Very  well.  The  mother  has  guardian
spirits  in  the  Spirit-Land — so,  also,  has  her  son.  They  per-
ceive and  understand  the  mother's  anxiety,  and  the  son's
condition.  Therefore,  they  dra;v  nigh  to  the  atmosphere
surrounding  our  globe.  Like  the  earth's  inhabitants,  her
and  his  guardians  form  a  circle  of  sympathy.  He  is  lying
prostrate  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  in  London,  on  the  right.
She  is  trying  to  obtain  some  sleep,  in  New  York,  on  the  left,
of  the  picture.  It  is  night.  Now,  the  super-mundane  circle
establish  lines  of  sympathy  between  the  mother  and  the  son,
as  indicated  by  the  pyramidal  currents  connecting  the  two
cities.  Thus,  the  actual  condition  of  the  son  is  daguerre-
otyped  upon  the  mother's  brain — telegraphed,  so  to  speak,
or  impressed,  as  perfectly  as  any  object  can  be  painted  on  the
physical  organ  of  sight.  This  case  I  relate  from  life.  But
fliis  law  of  spiritual  communication,  above  illustrated,  is
applicable  to  thousands  of  dissimilar  instances,  and  truth-
fully explains  the  principle  of  Spiritual  Intercourse.


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  195


XXIV. THE IMPRESSIONAL MEDIUM.

The  medium  for  spiritual  impressions,  differs,  essentially,
from  that  mind  which  gets  its  interior  impressments  from  the
pressure  of  the  laws  of  Nature  upon  the  awakened  sensibili-
ties. Media,  for  impressions  flowing  from  some  particular
terrestrial  person,  or  proceeding  from  a  guardian  spirit  in  the
spiritual  world,  are  not  necessarily  clairvoyant,  or  tele-
graphic ;  though  the  capacity  for  clear  and  definite  spiritual
impressions  is,  usually,  developed  through  the  ascending
phases  of  neurology,  sympathy,  clairlativeness,  and  psychol-
ogy. The  word  is  from  the  Latin,  impressio,  to  stamp  a
figure,  or  to  make  an  indentation.  When  a  spirit  obtains  a
neurological,  a  sympathetic,  a  clairlative,  an4  a  psychological
possession  of  a  human  mind,  all  in  combination,  that  spirit
may  then  write  out  his  own  personal  and  localized  thoughts,
through  the  medium,  just  as  easily  and  certain  as  a  School
Teacher  can  stand  behind  the  pupil  and  dictate,  word  after
word,  and  frame  a  letter  for  the  home-sick  juvenile  to  send
to  his  distant  parents — telling  them  "  what  a  delightful  place
it  is,  what  a  kind  Teacher,"  &c. — while,  if  the  little  fellow
was  only  in  possession  of  perfect  liberty,  he  would  give  a
vastly  different  coloring  to  the  picture.  As  an  example  of
perfect  control,  read  the  following:

"John  Wilbraham,  the  Spirit  who  has  dictated  this  work,*
wishes  to  inform  the  reader,  that  the  medium  through  which
it  has  come  is  perfectly  reliable,  and  that  her  mind  is  per-
fectly under  our  control,  and  that  we  can  give  the  truth,  with-
out any  mixture.  '  Therefore,  we  would  advise  you  to  dives
your  mind  of  all  prejudice,  and  peruse  its  contents  carefully,
and  pray  earnestly  to  God  for  the  enlightening  influence  of
His  Spirit,  to  enable  you  to  discern  the  truth,  and  that  the
truth  may  make  you  free.  The  medium  we  have  employed,
has  been,  for  some  time,  constantly  receiving  visions  when
in  the  interior  state,  and  her  spirit  has  in  some  degree  beheld

*  From  a  recent  work,  entitled  the  "  Creation  of  the  World — A  Short
Essaij  on  the  Life  of  Christ.'1''  "  Dictated,"  it  is  said,  K  from  the  Seventh
Sphere."


1 96'  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

the  glories  that  are  in  the  heavenly  world.  She  has  seen
the  glory  of  God  in  snch  a  degree  as  not  many  mortals
before  have  been  privileged  with;  she  has  beheld  bright
visions  from  the  angel  world,  when  in  her  waking  moments,
and  her  spirit  has  conversed  freely  with  the  bright  beings
who  have  surrounded  her.

"She  has  borne  the  scorn  and  reproach  of  those  who
style  themselves  Christians,  with  patience;  and  though
unlearned,  retired,  and  poor,  and  almost  unknown  in  the
earth,  her  name  is  registered  in  the  mansions  of  glory.  We
have  watched  around  her,  with  intense  interest,  ever  since
she  first  began  to  investigate  the  truth,  and  have  seen  the
development  and  progress  of  her  mind,  through  all  its  wind-
ings, and  we  have  ever  seen  one  steady  aim  to  persevere  in
the  truth.  We  have  stood  beside  her,  in  the  silence  of  the
closet,  and  have  seen  the  tears  of  heartfelt  sorrow,  which
have  flowed  freely,  because  other  hearts  were  cold  in  the
cause  of  God.  \Ve  have  seen  her  resolutions,  and  the  sym-
pathy for  others'  woes,  that  have  had  a  place  in  her  bosom,
and  Gocl  has  heard  the  earnest  prayer  that  has  ascended  to
his  throne  from  her  sorrowful  heart,  to  him,  and  has  an-
swered it  in  such  a  way  as  will  best  promote  his  glory  and
the  good  of  mankind.  Therefore,  in  conclusion,  we  would
advise  you  not  to  look  on  these  pages  as  the  evolutions  of
the  medium's  mind,  but  as  truth,  which  has  descended  direct
from  heaven  to  earth,  by  spirits."

Impressional  media  are  multiplying.  The  temperament
of  the  medium  has  much  to  do  in  determining  the  strength
of  his  communications.  When  the  control  is  perfect,  the
medium  is-  annihilated,  so  to  speak,  so  far  as  individualism
of  character  is  concerned,  and  the  impressions  truly  are  just
what  the  controlling  power  desires.  From  this  source,  there
is  now  flowing  into  the  world  a  mass  of  literature — a  strange
combination  of  prose  and  so-called  poetic  verbiage — which,
it  seems  to  me,  the  world  might  easily  progress  without
receiving.  In  another  part  of  this  volume,  the  reader  will
see  examples  of  undeveloped  spirits,  still  sectarian  and  in
bondage  to  earth-life  doctrines,  taking  advantage  of  the  pas-
sivity of  certain  correspondingly  organized  and  conditionized


TABLE OF EXPLANATION


197


media;  thus  becoming  authors,  and  publishing  to  the  world,
with  an  authoritative  emphasis,  predicated  wholly  upon
human  ignorance  of  the  condition  of  those  who  live  in  the
other  world — upon  the  supposed  great  wisdom  and  intelli-
gence of  spirits — publishing,  thus,  a  species  of  literature
absolutely  no  better  than  the  majority  of  sermons  and  reli-
gious tracts  which  are  constantly  showered  upon  North
American  communities.  And  yet  we  welcome  it!  It  is  all
liberalizing,  generalizing,  universalizing  in  effect;  hence,  let
us  not  fail  to  devote  " impressional  media"  to  the  great  ends
of  reform.

When  the  reader  conceives  of  the  almost  endless  contra-
riety of  media,  and  realizes  the  multitudinous  phenomena  of
various  degree  and  import,  which  so  many  different  channels
are  constantly  engaged  in  unfolding  to  the  world,  he  will
have  but  little  difficulty  in  reconciling  to  his  mind  the  causes
of  the  numerous  contradictions.  Now,  there  flows  into  my
mind  a  classification  of  the  various  causes  of  the  alledged
spiritual  incongruities;  also,  the  number  of  believers  in  each
theory  or  cause;  and,  the  mental  experience  of  each  believer,
in  consequence  of  his  conviction.  The  scale  is  arranged  on
the  common  financial  rule  of  one  hundred — this,  for  the
purpose  of  simplification.

TABLE OF EXPLANATION.


CAUSES OF

PROPORTION

NUMBER

EFFECT UPON THE

THE PHENOMENA.

OR PER  CENTAGE.

OK BELIEVERS.

BELIEVING MIND.

1.

Voluntary  Deception,

6

100,000

Impatience.

2.

Neurological,

5

5  0,000

Sadness.

3.

Vital  Electricity,

10

80,000

Presumption.

4.

Nervo-psycholgy,

15

50,000

Skepticism.

5.

Cerebro-sympathy,

in

86,000

Confusion.

6:

Clairvoyance,

8

20,000

Investigation.

7.

Departed  Spirits,

40

260,000

Elevation.

Moved  by  the  above  unpremeditated,  and,  therefore,  unex-
pected classification,  I  affirm  that,  when  the  unprejudiced  eye
scans  the  whole  field,  occupied  by  these  wonderful  •  develop-
ments, the  mind  cannot  resist  the  conclusion  that  full  forty
per  cent,  of  all  and  every  description  of  the  manifestations
17*


198  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

are  truly  spiritually  originated;  that  about  thirty  per  cent,
is  epidemical  psychology;  about  twenty-five  percent,  sym-
pathy and  misapprehension;  and  the  remainder  six  percent,
is  simple  deception  or  voluntary  imitation,  by  persons  fond
of  attention  and  approbation.

From  the  foregoing  scale  we  learn  the  relative  position  and
proportion  of  the  causes  of  modern  mysteries.  But  I  am
interiorly  assured  that  this  per  centage  will  be,  ere  long,
reversed;  that  is,  sixty  spiritual  causes  to  forty  'material
causes  of  the  manifestations.  The  Table  indicates  the  num-
ber of  minds,  in  this  world,  interested  in  the  new  develop-
ments, to  be,  in  the  aggregate  calculation,  six  hundred  and
forty-six  thousand — two  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  of  which
immense  multitude  already  accept  the  spiritual  side  of  the
question;  these  receive  the  truth  of  intercourse  between  ter-
restrial and  celestial  spheres.

Here,  too,  we  have  the  curious  explanation  of  the  diversity
of  feelings  and  prejudices  which  the  same  phenomena,  or
the  public  reports  of  them,  create  in  different  mental  organ-
izations. It  seems  that  about  one  hundred  thousand  persons
have  concluded  that  all  psychological  wonders,  ancient  and
modern,  are  simply  "Voluntary  Deception,"  on  the  part  of
certain  individuals,  and,  when  they  think  of  these,  that
number  of  minds  is  moved  with  impatience ;  the  disciples  of
the  theory  of  "Neurologic"  or  hysteric  causes,  being  fifty
thousand,  are  saddened:  the  receivers  of  the  "Vital  Elec-
tricity" doctrine,  eighty  thousand,  are  presumptuous  and
egotistic ;  the  " Nervo-psychologic "  party,  or  imaginationists,
fifty  thousand,  are  distressed  with  vagaries  and  skepticism;  the
disciples  of  "Cerebro-sympathy,"  or  epidemic  diseases  of  the
mind,  possessing  the  power  to  propagate  themselves,  eighty-
six  thousand,  are  troubled  with  beclouded  ideas  of  man's
mental  nature — are  in  confusion;  the  receivers  of  the  "Clair-
voyant" theory  of  the  wonders,  twenty  thousand,  are  moved
toward  investigation ;  and  the  true  believers  in  the  doctrine
of  "Departed  Spirits"  communicating,  two  hundred  and
sixty  thousand,  are  advanced  toward  mental  elevation.

Let  the  reader  now  imagine  himself  seated,  with  others,
in  a  "circle"  for  physical  evidences. He  has  investigated


TABLE OF EXPLANATION'.  1 99

neither  the  laws  of  matter  nor  the  ways  of  mind,  to  any
extent.  Electricity  and  the  mechanical  sciences  have  occu-
pied but  little  space  in  the  chambers  of  his  intellect.  He
may  be  a  merchant,  or  a  professional  character,  with  seldom
opportunities  to  tread  the  path  of  science,  and  yet  he  is
now  professedly  examining,  and  endeavoring  to  satisfy  his
thoughts  upon,  one  of  the  profoundest  subjects  that  ever
engaged  the  attention  of  the  human  mind.

The  circle  has  been  in  session,  already,  nearly  an  hour,
and  several  manifestations  occur — such  as  moving,  vibra-
tions, rapping  with  the  medium's  hand,  irregular  and  con-
vulsive starts,  &c. — with  satisfying  indications  of  spiritual
presence.  This  time,  all  is  marvellously  astounding  and
convincing.  Again  and  again  you  meet  with  the  "circle,"
and  it  would  seem  impossible  to  acid  any  thing  to,  or  take
any  thing  from,  your  faith  in  spiritual  intercourse.  But  as
tUe  members  are  changing  places,  as  new  individuals  are
admitted  and  former  members  are  yielding  their  seats  to  them,
you  begin  to  feel  particularly  critical  and  very  desirous  of
obtaining  "evidences,"  to  report  publicly,  for  the  satisfaction
of  others.  You  seek  for  a  "test;"  on  the  morrow  it  is  a
mistake!  You  obtain  another  and  another,  but  the  "con-
tradictions" are  very  numerous!  You  wonder  "what  can
be  the  cause  of  them?"  Some  one  suggests,  "evil  spirits."
Nay;  first  be  rational.  Upon  no  other  foundation  can  spir-
ituality for  one  moment  stand  the  test  of  scientific  investi-
gation. Consequently,  reader,  dispassionately  run  your  eye
over  the  foregoing  Table  of  Explanation,  and  then,  just  as  a
truly  scientific  mind  must  of  necessity  do,  calculate  the  pos-
sibilities, the  probabilities,  and  the  certainties  of  the  simple
or  combined  operation  of  the  various  causes  of  the  manifest-
ations. Do  this  without  a  prior  theory  of  interpretation ;
else,  your  inferences  will  te  prejudiced,  and  your  conclusions
warped  by  your  prepossessions.  If  I  can  tabul arize  the
causes  or  theories,  so  as  to  furnish  your  mind  with  data,  then
I  am  not  giving  you  a  theory  of  explanation,  but,  simply,
certain  starting  points  from  which  your  own  thoughts  may
irradiate  and  arrive  at  conclusions,  independently.

ISTow,  on  the  above  suppositions,  how  does  the  case  really


200  T  A  ii  L  E OF E  X  1>  L  A  X  A  T  I  0  X  .

stand?  You  perceive  that  there  stand  inflexibly  before  you,
in  the  scale,  sixtv  material^  against  forty  spiritual  causes  of
the  phenomena!  If  the  members  or  media  are  but  partial! y
developed,  then  the  probabilities  are,  that  one  or  more  of  the
material,  in  unfavorable  combination  with  the  spiritual,
causes,  enter  into  the  explanation  of  the  effects  and  contra-
dictions. If  the  reputed  media  of  your  circle  are  not  spirit-
ual channels  at  all,  being  only  subjects  for  the  manifestation
of  clairvoyance,  or  vital  electricity,  or  nervo-psychology,
or  cerebro-sympathy — as  a  limited  number  of  the  supposed
media  are — then  the  phenomena  of  your  "circle"  may  have
nothing  of  the  seventh  cause  in  it.  And  your  "mistakes"
and  "contradictions"  receive,  therefore,  a  rational  explana-
tion. One  or  all  of  the  six  causes  may  be  exclusively  ope-
rative; or  the  reverse  may  be  true  in  other  circles,  i.  e.,
the  seventh  cause  only  !  So,  reader,  you  are  compelled
to  be  thorough  in  your  investigation.


Two  extremes,  in  the  interrogatories  of  individuals,  every
where  appear:  First,  "Do  spirits  really  exist?"  Second,
"How  can  the}7  communicate  with  mankind?"

"When  an  explanation  of  these  questions  presents  itself  to
my  mind,  I  realize,  at  the  same  time,  how  extremely  difficult
it  is  to  explain  a  phenomena  to  persons  whose  knowledge  of
the  laws  of  Nature  and  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind
is  diffusive,  limited,  unsystematized,  or  mythologic.  But
the  historical  fact,  as  already  urged,  that,  from  the  earliest
periods  of  the  human  world,  certain  personages  have  assumed
to  have  actual  knowledge  of,  and  personal  intercourse  with,
the  spiritual  sphere  of  existence,  is  presumptive  evidence
that  the  human  mind  is,  naturally,  progressing  toward  pre-
cisely such  a  state  of  being;  that  such  an  existence  is,
really,  embosomed  in  the  endless  folds  of  eternity — a  magnet,
whose  positive  attractions  the  spirit  of  man  may  not  resist.

There  is  an  abundance  of  proof  that  the  dwellers  of  the
other  life  are  in  daily  communication  with  minds  of  persons
who  vet  inhabit  the  temple  of  clay ;  a  kind  of  commerce  of
thoughts — a  mingling  of  affections,  which  were  conceived


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  201

and  kindled  on  the  earth,  in  cottages  and  in  the  fields — a
"shaking  of  hands"  between  spirits  in  and  out  of  clay — a
coming  together  of  dear  friends,  brothers  and  sisters,  chil-
dren  and  parents,  those  who  live  on  earth  and  those  who  live
in  the  eternal  spheres,  where  the  impulses  of  life  and  the
melocty  of  thought  mingle  with  the  voice  of  blossoms  and
the  breath  of  leaves!  I  say,  there  is  evidence  of  such,  inter-
course between  the  present  ana  the  adjoining  world.  But
we  are  offended  at  the  "gate"  with  contradictions — a  strange,
apparently  unwholesome,  repulsive  confusion  of  "sounds"
and  "voices,"  as  between  good  and  evil  beings — and  we  start
back,  shrinking  from  the  contact  as  from  that  which  insults
and  injures.  But  it  comes  to  me,  that  we  can  separate  the
"wheat  from  the  chaff" — the  good  from  the  discordant — and
enjoy  the  converse  of  spirits,  by  harmonizing  our  own  minds
with  the  laws  and  considerations  which  follow:

First.  As  to  the  First  cause  of  contradictions.

There  is  no  certainty  nor  security  in  asking  questions  of  a
kind  which  come  within  the  jurisdiction  or  administration  of
the  judgment  or  inclinations  of  either  the  medium  or  ques-
tioner. First,  because  the  primary  and  essential  conditions,
upon  which  Truth  is  alone  receivable  by  the  human  mind,
are  not  complied  with,  viz:  mental  passivity  to  the  ways  and
demands  of  Truth — or,  as  Christians  express  it,  "submission
to  the  will  of  God;"  and  because,  secondly,  as  already  as-
serted, the  truly  intelligent  and  illustrious  inhabitants  of  the
spiritual  fraternity  and  world,  desire  that  we  should,  while
on  the  earth,  be  educated,  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  even  though,
as  with  young  children  at  school,  we  shed  bitter  tears  in
learning  our  varied  lessons.

Second.  The  Second  cause  of  contradictions,  is  referable  to
a  contradiction  in  the  mental  condition  of  the  medium,  medi-
ator, seer,  or  impressionist — viz :  a  simultaneous  passivity  to
both  spheres  of  existence — thus  exposing  the  medium,  and
causing  him  to  receive  thoughts  and  influences  from  both
worlds,  at  the  same  moment.  No  mind  can  truthfully  serve
two  masters.  The  condition  is,  in  itself,  immoral  and  pro-
ductive of  psychological  contradictions  and  errors.  To  illus-
trate: That  mind  which  is  careless,  and  simultaneously  pas-


202  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

sive}  alike  to  error  and  to  truth — "don't  care  what  comes " —
is  in  a  state  to  certainly  vitiate  the  inflowing  impressions —
just  as  a  person  would  be  unfaithful  and  disloyal  to  parties
antagonistic  and  at  enmity,  if  he  carelessly  or  intentionally
coincided  with  the  views,  feelings,  and  asseverations  of  each,
whenever  in  contact  with  them.  In  the  boundless  dominion
of  Truth,  there  cannot  be — "a  good  Lord  and  a  good  devil !"

Thikd.  The  chief  cause  of  contradictions  is,  therefore,  the
simultaneous  reception  of  impressions  from  both  spheres  of
existence — that  is  to  say:  from  minds  in  human  society,  and
from  those  which  dwell  in  the  Spirit-Land.  It  requires,  on
the  part  of  the  medium,  the  seer,  the  prophet,  the  mediator,
&c,  a  liberal  amount  of  psychological  education  and  experi-
ence, in  order  to  be  able,  with  any  degree  of  truthful  dis-
crimination, to  detect  the  difference  between  impressions
received  from  minds  in  this  world  and  those  which  emanate
from  the  higher  sphere.  Let  me  illustrate :  A  medium  may
obtain  thoughts  from  a  person  sitting  in  the  circle,  or  from
a  mind  even  in  some  distant  portion  of  this  globe,  (as  illus-
trated in  the  engraving,  by  the  horizontal  line,)  and  still
be  wholly  deceived  as  to  the  source  of  them.  Because,  so  far
as  all  the  primary,  interior  sensations  and  personal  evidences
are  concerned,  such  impressions  do  appear  and  feel,  to  the
receptive  vessels  of  the  medium,  precisely  identical  with
those  which  emanate  from  a  mind  beyond  the  dominion  of
the  tomb!  This  is  true,  because  the  laws  of  mental  sympa-
thy are  the  same  on  earth,  identical  between  mind  and  mind
here,  as  in  the  Spirit-Land.  Hence  it  is,  that  some  media
and  clairvoyants,  and  minds  also' in  prayerful  or  supplicatory
moods,  quite  frequently  receive  responses  to  their  thoughts
and  prayers,  from  terrestrial  sources  and  minds;  even  while
the  interior  conviction  may  be  sanguine  to  the  contrary,  that
the  answer  really  descended  from  some  super-sensuous  intel-
ligence and  invisible  power!

Fourth.  The  Fourth  cause  of  contradictions  is  referable  to
the  fact,  that  affectionate  or  unwise  spirits  mainly  coincide
with  us  in  our  desires  and  beliefs,  just,  for  illustration,  as  the
very  loving  mother  (not  having  the  intellectual  strength  to
be  firm,  or  the  moral  courage  to  be  just,)  indulges  her  dar-


TABLE O  F EXI'LAN  A  T  ION.  203

ling  offspring,  often-times  much  to  the  child's  ultimate
injury  and  disappointment.

Fifth.  The  Fifth  cause  of  contradictions  is  referable  to
this  fact,  that  the  spiritual  cannot,  as  a  general  principle,
enter  into  human  or  terrestrial  media  or  receptacles  without
partaking,  like  water,  of  the  shape  of  the  vessel  into  which
it  is  poured.  The  mind  which  has  been,  through  the  form-
ative influence  of  prevailing  education  and  custom,  moulded
into  a  receptacle  for  the  entertainment  of  any  particular
notion,  theory,  or  creed  extant,  is  almost  certain  to  uncon-
sciously alter,  modify,  and  arrange  all  impressions,  from
whatever  source  received,  invariably  in  accordance  with
the  state  and  style  of  its  own  growth  and  individual  culture.
And  furthermore,  it  may  be  accepted  as  a  principle,  fully
demonstrated  in  the  world's  history,  that  the  Divine  cannot
flow  into  Human  structures — the  celestial  cannot  blend,  inti-
mately, with  the  terrestrial,  without  the  former  (the  Divine)
'participating  to  a  degree  more  or  less  obvious,  in  the  imper-
fections which  are  infinitely  and  eternally  consequent  upon,
and  inseparably  connected  with,  a  physical  or  material  state
of  existence.  Discord  and  contradiction,  therefore,  growing
out  of  the  intimate  association  or  conjunction  of  the  spiritual
with  the  material,  must  invariably  and  every  where  be  more
or  less  apparent.  This  fact  will  certainly  appear,  notwith-
standing the  honesty  or  good  intentions  of  the  media,  or
that  entire  passivity  of  mind  which  Truth  requires.  On
the  same  principle,  the  accomplished  artist  fails  to  impart
his  "  conception "  to  canvas.  The  coloring  process  re-
minds him  of  his  body,  and  of  the  world  ;  therefore  he  feels
a  vexatious  "  contradiction  "  between  his  pure  Ideal  and  the
external  Image — an  incorrigible  incongruity  between  the
spiritual  cause  within,  and  the  material  revelation  or  effect
without.  So  difficult  is  it  for  the  spiritual  world  to  disclose
itself  to  the  earth's  inhabitants  through  imperfect  means
and  media.

Sixth.  Inasmuch  as  most  media  are,  as  yet,  nearly  des-
titute of  that  indispensable  sub-stratum  of  spirit  culture  and
interior  experience  which  are  essential  to  the  formation  of  a
correct,  discriminating  judgment  vs  to  the  precise  source  from


204  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

which  their  impressions  emanate ;  so,  therefore,  for  this
reason,  it  is  not  safe  to  rely,  without  the  entire  approbation
of  their  own  judgments  and  powers  of  understanding,  upon
what  may  be  thus  communicated.  Nothing,  be  it  remem-
bered, is  altogether  infallible  and  perfect,  except  the  Eternal
Father  of  Spirits.  The  concurrent  experience  and  testimony
of  the  world  are  conclusive  on  this  fact,  that  all  "  Revela-
tions," though  professing  to  descend,  expressly  directed,
from  on  high,  and  freighted  with  the  immaculate  thoughts
of  the  Supernal  Spirit,  yet  bear  the  plainest  evidence  of
having  flowed  from  heaven  to  earth — from  the  realm  of  the
Ideal  to  the  world  of  the  actual — through  imperfect  and
fallible  channels.  It  is  for  this  cause  that  Reason  is  given
to  man.  Reason,  the  immortal  flower  of  the  mind,  the
mirror  which,  when  altogether  untarnished  and  properly
adjusted,  is  beautifully  calculated  to  polarize  and  reflect  the
golden  rays  emanating  from  the  Central  Sun  of  Truth ;  this
adjudicatory  power  is  man's  exclusive  inheritance.  And  this
principle,  above  divulged,  admonishes  men  to  exercise  their
best  reason  on  all  subjects,  and  especially  upon  all  revela-
tions which  profess  to  be  infallible.  When  Reason  does  not
see  clearly,  then  experience,  of  a  severe  but  salutary  kind,
will  surely  open  its  blinded  eyes!  When  educated  thus,
and  enfranchised  from  the  thraldom  of  ignorance,  Reason
becomes  the  Prime-minister  of  the  soul — the  High-priest  of
Truth.  Every  man  thus  endowed  and  thus  disciplined,
grows  rapidly  and  progressively  into  a  diviner  state,  with
a  more  deific  "Image"  stamped  upon  his  constitution.

Seventh.  In  all  real  or  spiritual  writing  media,  with  but
few  exceptions,  the  hand  and  the  brain,  as  secondary  instru-
mentalities, operate  in  conjunction  with  the  external  process,
as  is  the  case  with  persons  ordinarily  when  they  write.
Hence  it  is  that  the  mind,  quite  unconsciously  to  itself,  is
very  likely  to  mingle  much  of  its  own  involuntary  powers
and  unremembered  thoughts  and  previous  knowledge  with
the  impressions  which,  in  such  real  media,  primarily  eman-
ate unquestionably  from  a  spiritual  origin.  Consequently,
although  the  person,  while  absorbed  in  the  act  of  writing,  may
not  be  conscious  of  lending  any  such  involuntary  assistance


TABLE OF EXPLANATION.  205

to  the  process,  nevertheless  there  stands,  inflexibly,  the  ever-
lasting possibility  of  a  fusion  and  confusion,  or  admixture
of  the  thoughts  of  the  writer  with  the  spiritual  dictations.
This  eternal  possibility,  not  to  say  probability,  suggests  to  us
the  ever-present  necessity  of  always  employing  aright  our
reason  :  a  high  admonition  eternally  to  advance  ourselves
in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  by  dint  of  personal  exertion
and  interior  experience,  to  become  perfect  in  goodness  and
Truth,  even  as  our  Father  in  Heaven  is  perfect,  differing
only  in  degree.

Eighth.  By  virtue  of  the  considerations  and  the  "  possi-
bility" already  specified,  we  may  rest  assured  that  the
"contradictions,"  which  many  believers  suppose  emanate
from  the  instigations  of  "  wicked  and  mischievous  spirits,"
residing  above  the  earth,  are  invariably,  and  in  all  cases,
referable  to  mundane  causes,  and  to  the  interposition  of  hu-
man agency.  For  the  Lord  does  not  "deceive"  the  prophet.
The  prophet,  if  he  develops  contradictions  and  error,  is
either  self-deceived  or  else  deceiving.  So  the  medium,
should  he  disclose  mistakes,  is  either  consciously  or  uncon-
sciously the  disturbing  cause,  on  the  earth  ;  as  explained  in
my  former  volume  on  Intercourse.

Furthermore,  the  mind  is  so  wonderfully  endowed,  and
hath  of  itself  so  many  and  various  modes  of  exercise  and
manifestation,  that  a  man  may  be  allowing  his  organic  pow-
ers and  cerebro-dyn amies  to  act  upon  and  within  him,  without
being  conscious  of  so  doing.  In  certain  moods,  the  volun-
tary powers,  which  are  deposited  in  the  cerebrum  or  interior
brain,  become  involuntary,  and  proceed  to  act  without  the
least  instigation  or  support  from  the  source  of  will.  This
condition  is  illustrated  in  cases  of  hypochondrium  and  hys-
teria ;  in  St.  Vitus's  dance,  catalepsy,  and  mental  aberration.
In  the  scale  we  find  sixteen  per  cent,  of  modern  manifesta-
tions attributable  to  this  cause.  On  this  condition  alone
some  persons  suppose  themselves  to  be  media  for  the  phys-
ical, gesticulatory,  or  pantomimic  manifestations  of  illustri-
ous spirits  who  have  long  since  gained  the  white  shores  of
the  Eternal  and  the  Free !  While  we  neither  reject  nor
hesitate  to  examine  the  professions  of  such  media,  scientific
18


206  TABLE OF EXPLANATION.

men  and  the  clergy  are  all  the  more  distinctly  and  emphat-
ically admonished  to  'judge  not  from  appearances,  but  with
a  righteous  judgment,"  the  real  condition  of  such  media,  both
for  their  sakes  and  our  own;  for  the  sake  of  Truth,  and  the

enlightenment  of  the  classes  concerning  a  subject  winch
they  have  neither  the  leisure  nor  the  facilities  to  investigate.

Finally.  In  cases  wherein  the  medium  is  not  mistaken
as  to  the  cause  of  his  action  and  experience — such  as  the
moving  of  his  hand  by  spiritual  instigation  to  write — in
these  cases  it  will  be  found  that  the  mind  of  the  medium  is
exceedingly  passive  as  to  what  comes,  or  may  proceed,  from  the
Spiritual  Eealm  ;  and  very  positive,  on  the  other  hand,  and
proof  against  the  intrusion  of  thoughts  or  inclinations  com
mon  to  the  material  world.  But  a  person,  though  honest  in
conviction  and  design,  who  is  not  a  real  medium  for  the
open  display  of  spiritual  power  and  intelligence,  will  be
either  much  excited  concerning  his  supposed  communica-
tions, and  be  led  thus  into  extravagance  of  thought  and
impetuosity  of  action,  or  else  he  will  be  very  easily  and
morbidly  disturbed  by  the  speech  of  people  and  the  current
opinions  of  the  world.  None  of  this,  be  assured,  can  be  for
one  moment  reconciled  with  the  reception  and  enjoyment  of
real  spiritual  communication,  which,  irrespective  of  physical
health,  a  temperament,  or  situation,  or  organism,  can  only
'produce  permanent  joy,  a  tendency  to  personal  harmonv,
to  purity  of  life,  and  a  wise  semi-devotional  tranquillity  of
soul,  undisturbed  by  neither  questions  nor  skepticisms.

These  additional  conclusions  complete  the  brief  chapters
on  "evil  and  sympathetic  spirits/'  in  my  previous  volume  on
this  subject.  Although  I  have  impartially  examined  all  so
called  demonstrations  of  evil  spirits,  and  have  been  careful
to  be  led  in  willingness  of  mind  to  any  legitimate  conclu-
sions, nevertheless  I  have  been  utterly  unable,  from  the
evidences,  to  arrive  at  any  results  antagonistic  to  those  ex-
pressed in  the  foregoing  chapter.  But  the  doctrine  of  evil
spirits  will  be  reconsidered  in  succeeding  pages.


REVELATIONS  FROM  PANDEMONIUM,


I  am  persuaded  that  the  reader,  who  has  accompanied  me
through  the  "  Table  of  Explanation,"  will  not  be  terrified
by  the  demonological  disclosures  to  which  the  present  Chap-
ter is  devoted.  These  are  a  class  of  nocturnal,  mysterious,
and  exceptional  phenomena  quite  worthy  the  consideration
of  thinking  men.  Swedenborg  and  his  followers — "the  Re-
ceivers of  the  Doctrines  of  the  New  Church" — unreservedly
advocate  the  theory  that  corrupt  and  evil  spirits,  of  both
sexes,  utterly  dissolute  and  abandoned,  enter  in  at  the  open
door  of  every  correspondingly-inclined  mind,  and  tempt  it
to  the  commission  of  crime — deeds  dark  and  destructive  to
all  the  divine  interests  of  the  soul.  And  a  doctrine  no  less
hideous,  though  not  so  manifestly  involved  amid  ps3rcholo-
gical  complications,  imagination,  and  pandemoniacal  wind-
ings, is  indefatigably  taught  by  nearly  every  catholic  and
protestant  clergyman.

These  doctrines,  I  think,  are  not  wholly  imaginary.  There
is,  unquestionably,  some  hidden  psychological  source  whence
they  spring.  And  as  the  media  through  whom  these  revela-
tions are  professedly  made,  are  usually  firmly  convinced,  as
already  shown,  that  the  communicators  are  malignant  spir-
its— real  demons  from  a  veritable  pandemonium — therefore,
kind  reader,  it  becomes  us,  as  Candid  examiners  of  all  facts
in  the  wide  field  of  spiritual  intercourse,  now  thrown  open,
to  let  no  prominent  demoniac  cases  pass  without  a  careful
and  impartial  inquiry.  With  this  motive  prompting  us,  we
will  hesitate  no  longer,  but  proceed  directly  to  cite  and
examine  several  strange  revelations.

In  the  "New  Em?  dated  Boston,  March  9,  1853,  I  ob-
served an  article  containing  graphic  descriptions  of  several
"  Astounding Facts,"  arranged  for  publication  bv "  J.  A.


208  REVELATIONS FROM P  A  X  DEMONIUM.

Gridlcv,  M.  D.,"  which  should  not  remain  unnoticed.  The
circle  in  which  the  facts  are  reported  to  have  occurred,  was
composed  of  strong-nerved  men,  with  their  wives  and  fami-
lies, who  "could  not  be  induced  to1'  continue  in  the  circle
while  several  of  the  astounding  facts  were  in  process  of
development.  It  seems  the  proceedings  were  terrific.  "  We
have  seen  the  medium  evidently  possessed  by  Irishmen  and
Dutchmen  of  the  lowest  grade."  The  medium  was  seen  to
"  snap  and  grate  his  teeth  most  furiously,  strike  and  swear,
while  his  eyes  flashed  like  the  fires  of  an  orthodox  perdi-
tion." These  are  strange  freaks  of  nature!  Few  facts  come
to  us  so  freighted  with  discords  and  indications  of  pandemo-
nium. "  We  have  heard  him  (the  medium)  hiss,  and  seen  him
writhe  his  body  like  the  serpent  when  crawling,  and  dart  out
his  tongue  and  play  it  exactly  like  that  reptile.  These  exhi-
bitions were  intermingled  with  the  most  wrangling  and
horrible  convulsions."

The  preceding  and  subsequent  facts  are  related  with  par-
ticularity, and  the  writer  is  manifestly  a  full  believer.  "If
we  had  ever  been  skeptical  before,"  he  remarks,  "  after  what
we  have  witnessed,  we  shall  never  doubt  again  the  Bible
statement,  that  an  obsessed  man,  in  olden  time,  who  was  well
acquainted  with  Christ  and  Paul,  but  who  possessed  but
little  respect  for  the  seven  sons  of  one  Sceva,  a  Jew,  so
he  leaped  upon  them,  and  before  they  could  make  their
escape  from  the  house,  he  overcame  the  whole  of  them,
stripped  them  of  their  entire  clothing,  and  tore  their  flesh,
so  that  "they  left  the  house  naked  and  wounded."  "  We
have  heard  these  evil  spirits  lie  a  score  of  times,  as  fast  as
they  could  speak."  One  of  the  spiritual  friends  of  the
writer,  Bryant,  "  has  often  told  us  that  if  he  and  his  associ-
ates in  goodness  should  deliver  !N".  over  to  his  tormentors,
during  his  worst  seasons  of  obsession,  these  demons  would,
in  all  probability,  permanently  possess  him,  like  the  man
'who  dwelt  among  the  tombs.'  "  Such  facts  are  truly  start-
ling, especially  to  persons  who  cannot  penetrate  the  thin
gauze  which  separates  effects  from  causes.  If  it  were  con-
sistent with  the  limited  number  of  pages  to  which  this
volume  is  restricted,  a  full  philosophical  digest  of  all  facts


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  200

of  the  foregoing  description  and  genera,  would  tend  still
further  to  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  human  kind.  But  I
am  impressed  to  utter  but  a  few  thoughts  in  this  connection.

What  shall  the  reasonable  mind  conclude  from  the
"astounding  facts"  above  related?  In  one  place  the  writer
says  of  the  medium  :  "It  was  plain  that  he  was  very  much
exhausted  by  the  '  Legion '  that  were  in  him  ;  and  though,
for  a  time,  he  fought  like  a  tiger,  he  was  finally  overcome,
and  carried  forcibly  back  to  the  sofa  *
Now  came  the  most  forbidding  sceue  of  all,  a  scene  that
none  would  be  desirous  of  witnessing  a  second  time.  The
devils,  stung  to  madness  were  now  bent  on

taking  his  life !  We  had  seen  them  strangle  him  before
*  *  but  at  this  time  they  literally  crushed  in  his
chest,  as  though  a  mighty  mill-stone  had  fallen  upon  him.
The  lungs,  for  once,  endeavored  to  expand,  and  the  chest  to
heave  ;  but  this  was  quickly  over,  and  all  motion  ceased.
His  eye-balls  rolled  up  in  their  sockets,  lost  all  earthly
lustre,  and  became  fixed  as  in  death."

The  narrator  is  unhesitating,  and  peculiarly  emphatic,  in
the  employment  of  epithets  and  unbrotherly  terms  of  descrip-
tion :  The  "demons,"  the  "devils,"  the  "Legion,"  and  "dev-
ils damned."  Now  it  is  a  law  of  the  universe,  that  good
thoughts  procure  corresponding  deeds.  Let  a  community
unite  in  denouncing  a  certain  individual  "  as  crazy,"  and,
although,  at  first,  popular  judgment  and  utterance  may
wholly  err  in  respect  to  his  mental  state,  the  strong  pro-
bability is  that  he  will  fulfil  their  unbrotherly  suppositions.
This  law  of  psychology  is  becoming  better  known.  On  one
occasion  a  dogmatic  interpreter  of  the  Prophecies  sought  a
"spirit- circle,"  not  for  purposes  of  information,  but  to  get
his  own  views  confirmed  or  endorsed  by  the  communicating
minds.  He  put  the  questijn,  but  no  reply  was  made.  "It
was  suggested,"  says  the  relator  of  the  incident,  "  that  he
(the  querist)  might  be  wrong,  and  no  answer  given,  because
the  spirits  might  see  that  he  was  mentally  unprepared  to
receive  a  contradiction  to  his  theory.  "  I  know  I  am  right,11
said  he,  "  and  if  they  answer  otherwise,  I  shall  KNOW  they
are  evil,  lying  spirits."
18*


210  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

"What  says  the  reader  ?  Is  the  above  sound  logic  ?  Did
the  questioner  know  that  his  thoughts  of  the  Prophecies  were
perfectly  truthful?  Far  from  it.  Nevertheless,  as  all  so
called  "  strong-minded"  men  habitually  do,  he  would  know
that  only  error  could  differ  from  his  perceptions!  Let  these
considerations  be  now  applied  to  the  preceding  statements.

Not  to  call  in  question  the  assumptions  of  the  relator,  let
us  inquire,  on  the  supposition  that  the  spirits  were  low  and
undeveloped  in  character  and  motive,  "  did  the  wrriter  feel
kindly  toward  them  ?  "  Did  he  feel  commisseration  for  them
in  their  supposed  degraded  state  ?  Did  he  experience  com-
bativeness,  and  throw  out  from  his  individuality  a  positive
sphere  of  repugnance  and  hatred  toward  the  opposing  pow-
ers ?  Or  did  he  experience  sad  regrets  for  their  unfortunate
condition,  and  exercise  the  faculty  of  Benevolence  toward
them?  Nay!  He  unqualifiedly  termed  them  "demons,"
"devils,"  "Legion,"  &c. — thus  developing  sentiments  of
opposition  in  the  spirits  present ;  a  result,  under  the  circum-
stances, scarcely  avoidable,  even  on  the  hypothesis  that  the
contending  powers  were  intrinsically  righteous.  Words-
worth hath  uttered  an  eternal  truth:  "'Tis  Nature's  law,
that  none,  the  meanest  of  created  things,  of  forms  created  the
most  vile  and  brute,  the  dullest  or  most  noxious,  should  exist
divorced  from  good"  Facts  must  be  not  merely  "astound-
ing," but  endorsed  by  a  philosophic  spirit  of  charity  and
accuracy,  before  sound  theological  conclusions  can  be  safely
predicated  upon  them.  "  We  have  heard  these  evil  spirits
lie  a  score  of  times."  This  is  assumed.  He  may  have  heard
the  medium  utter  a  great  many  contradictory  things.  But
how  does  he  know  that  spirits  provoked  the  utterance  ?
"  The  devils  stung  to  madness  !  "  How  does  he  know  this  ?
The  medium  may  have  been  frenzied  by  a  contention  be-
tween the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum — a  severe  struggle
between  the  vital  magnetism  and  vital  electricity  in  the
nervous  system — implying  the  imperfection  of  his  psycholo-
gical state — implying,  moreover,  that  spirits,  or  the  terres-
trial circle,  had  partially  got  him  under  magnetic  influence.
The  horrible  convulsions  are  frequently  not  actual,  but
seeming. Persons  just  entering  upon  the confines of  the


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  211

magnetic  condition,  (especially  when  first  operated  upon,)
will  not  only  exhibit  "  wrangling  and  horrible  contortions,"
which  have  no  pain  in  them  whatever,  but  will  actually  im-
agine themselves  undergoing  the  most  indescribable  tortures.
This  distress  is  altogether  imaginary,  being  self-induced  psy-
chologically, in  consequence  of  the  mind's  unacquaintance
with  the  condition.  Yet  an  observer  is  wrought  up  to  a
high  point  of  sympathetic  suffering,  solely  from  the  apparent
agony  of  the  subject  or  medium.  The  same  is  true  of
persons  in  the  act  of  dying.  Death-agonies  are  only  ap-
parent, not  real.  The  suffering,  when  disease  does  not
exist,  is  from  fear  or  imagination — a  dread  of  undergoing
a  process  with  which  the  mind  has  had  no  previous  experi-
ence. These  things  I  record  from  personal  knowledge  and
interior  observation.

Inasmuch  as  the  writer  is  not  exact  in  his  facts  and  simil-
itudes, the  reader  is  at  liberty  to  question  the  conclusions
sought  to  be  conveyed.  We  need  a  truthful  record  ;  let  the
issue  be  what  it  ma}'.  And  I  am  impressed  to  remark  upon
these  "  astounding  facts,"  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the
world  against  any  further  inaccuracies.

"  His  e}7es  flashed  like  the  fires  of  an  authodox  perdi-
tion!" This  will  do  for  poetry;  but  facts  require  exact
boundaries,  even  in  comparison  and  figures.  Nothing  so
supernatural  and  extravagant  can  ever  be  truthfully  uttered
of  human  nature  in  this  or  any  other  sphere.

"  They  literally  crushed  in  his  chest,  as  though  a  mighty
millstone  had  fallen  upon  him."  Instead  of  this  hyperbolic
expression,  how  much  better  to  have  said,  'as  though  a  cramp
had  occurred  in  the  pulmonary  structure!'  The  medium
would  in  all  probability  have  had  a  more  severe  affliction
than  a  stricture  in  the  chest,  if  a  mighty  millstone  had  really
fallen  upon  him,  or  any  weight  commensurate  or  equal  to  it.
Such  descriptions  are  simply  disgusting  to  rational  minds.
The  Scriptures  would  be  more  honored  and  revered  to-day
if  it  were  not  for  corresponding  extravagant  methods -of  nar-
ration. Scientific  minds — the  truly  scientific,  I  mean — will
be  stronger  attracted  by  facts  less  'astounding,'  and  more  in
accordance  with  the  immutable  principles  of  cause  and  effect.


212  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

Permanently  established  in  numerous  minds  is  the  oriental
philosophy  of  good  angels  and  evil  demons.  The  Chaldean
myth  of  the  "sheep"  and  the  "goats"  has  become,  like  eon-
sumption  or  scrofula,  the  constitutional  chronic  disease  of
nearly  all  the  inhabitants  of  Christendom.  The  Egyptians,
Persians,  Jews,  Mahometans,  and  Christians,  advocated  and
entertained  the  same  hypothesis.  It  is  a  thoughtless,  unin-
tellectual,  barbaric  method  to  explain  the  discords  of  human-
kind— the  good  and  evil  apparent — the  human  and  the
bestial  characterizations  of  our  species.  This  myth  is  now
a  great  barrier,  obstructing  the  pathway  toward  a  better
analysis  of  man's  nature — a  truer  knowledge  of  his  char-
acter, relations,  attractions — leading  the  human  family  to  the
grandeur  of  unity  and  Brotherhood.

The  narrator  of  '  astounding  facts '  seems  to  construe  every
thing  into  a  confirmatory  demonstration  of  this  oriental  myth.
And  I  again  urge,  that  all  such  prepossessions  of  mind  are
positively  prejudicial  to  the  mental  state  of  the  medium.  As
already  defined,  the  human  mind  is  so  constituted,  whether
in  this  or  in  another  sphere,  that  unfavorable  prepossessions
concerning  it  can  have  but  one  effect,  viz :  to  rouse  or  invert
good  attributes  of  the  mind  to  a  manifestation  corresponding
to  the  cause  acting  upon  it.

"  To  raise  the  devil,  were  an  infant's  task
To  that  of  raising  man. Why,  every  one
Conjures  the  fiend  of  hell  into  himself
When  passion  choakes  or  blinds  him."

Inasmuch  as  this  law  of  Nature  is  universally  operative,
mankind  cannot  be  too  cautious  or  compassionate  with  man.
The  ideas  of  the  brain,  'uttered  or  unexpressed,'  descend  into
every  department  of  the  dependent  organism.  From  hence
a  'sphere'  issues  which  tinges  and  affects,  favorably  or  unfa-
vorably as  the  ideas  are,  every  thing  as  well  as  every  person
with  which  the  individual  comes  in  contact.  Thus  it  is  that
every  person  lends  his  character  to  the  garments  on  his  body,
to  the  furniture  in  his  room,  to  the  companions  of  his  ram-
bles; and  so,  if  his  ideas  be  false  in  their  relation  to  each
other,  all  beneath,  in  consequence  of  the  established  princi-
ple, must  also  be  characterized  in  a  similar  manner. The


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  213

subtile  essences  of  the  thinking  principle  in  man,  with  all
their  inconceivably-minute  attenuations,  flow  beneath  and
ascend  above  every  thing  pertaining  to  the  Individual  and
to  the  orbit  in  which  he  moves.  As  this  is  true  of  every
person,  so  it  is  that  minds  assimilate  into  each  other's
structure  and  inclinations.  Two,  agreeably  united  in  the
conjugal  sympathies,  finally  grow  into  analogous  manners
and  habits  of  life.  This  law  makes  it  certain  that  human
interests  are  not  intrinsically  conflicting,  but  one,  and  only
one!  All  members  must  suffer  when  one  suffers.  The  hap-
piness of  one  is  the  happiness  of  all !  The  solidarity  of  the
race  is  immovably  predicated  upon  this  mental  law  of  inter-
penetration!  Hence  theologically  or  mythologically  to  sepa-
rate the  world  of  mind,  in  this  sphere  or  in  the  other,  into
opposite  parties  and  factions,  or  even  to  have  the  mental
tendency  to  do  a  thing  so  prejudicial  to  human  happiness  and
universal  Brotherhood,  is  simply  adding  fresh  fuel  to  an  old
altar-fire,  whereon  Reason  has  from  the  first  been  sacrificed;
it  is  bowing  the  knee  to  an  Egyptian  myth ;  paying  rever-
ential homage  at  the  shrine  of  the  sheep  and  goats.  I  must
lose  all  power  to  penetrate  the  nature  of  man — I  must  die
to  the  sublime  and  unchangeable  philosophy  of  a  Universe
replete  with  endless  concatenations  of  cause  and  effect — and
become  "confirmed  in  error"  or  sectarianism — before  I  can
consent  to  poison  my  affections  and  stultify  my  judgment  with
the  doctrine,  that  the  earth,  or  any  lower  or  higher  plane  of
the  divine  creation,  contains  positive  antagonisms  in  any
intrinsic  sense  whatever.  And  yet  I  am  interiorily  prepared
to  weigh  any  'astounding  facts'  which  may  be  presented  in
demonstration  of  such  a  doctrine.  All  I  solicit  in  behalf  of
mankind,  is  this:  that  every  investigator  and  narrator  of  the
New  Developments  will  act  upon  the  mental  law  above
explained,  and  give  the  world  a  plain,  unvarnished,  unexag-
gerated  relation  of  every  thing  which  may,  from  the  world
of  causes,  be  unfolded  to  us,  the  inhabitants  of  the  objective
world  of  effects.

When  the  medium  of  these  horrible  convulsions  and
experiences  had  passed  apparently  into  death,  the  scene  de-
scribed is  awful. "He  remained  so  long  in  this  position


2 1  t  REVELATIONS F  R  O  M PANDEMONIUM.

that  all  in  the  room,  except  E.  and  myself,  thought  he  was
'done  for  this  world.'  A  number  left  the  room,  while  the
breath  of  those  who  remained,  seemed  wholly  suspended.
It  was  truly  an  awful  sight  to  witness  the  victim  of  contend-
ing angels,  knowing,  as  we  did,  that  his  very  vitals  were
nothing  less  than  the  Battle-field  for  Heaven's  protecting
Hosts,  on  the  one  hand,  seeking  his  and  our  good,  and
Devils  damned,  on  the*  other,  thirsting  for  the  blood  of  us
all."  Here,  then, 'is  an  account  of  another  'war  in  Heaven'
— or  rather  of  fighting  angels !  "Knowing  as  we  did !"  Nay
no  such  knowledge  existed.  From  the  exhibition,  the  inter-
prestation  was  derived;  nothing  more.  "Devils  damned,
thirsting  for  the  blood  of  us  all !"  Again,  I  am  impressed
to  remark,  that  for  poetry,  and  a  Miltonian  conception  of
celestial  and  degraded  beings,  this  relation  is  altogether
admissible.  But  as  a  plain  fact,  for  the  world  to  reason
upon,  and  from  which  to  deduce  spiritual  conclusions,  it  will
not  serve.  And  besides,  the  language  is  not  brotherly  toward
those  beings  who  thirsted  'for  blood ;'  it  is  calculated  to  excite,
even  in  good  minds,  corresponding  sensations.  An  author
hath  well  said:  "Men  might  be  better,  if  we  better  deemed  of
them.  The  worst  way  to  improve  the  world  is  to  condemn
it.  Man  may  over-get  delusion — not  despair."  0,  pray  that
this  important  principle  may  obtain  more  advocates!

"  Speak  not  bitterly  of  mankind ;
Oh!  unsay  what  thou  hast  said  of  man  :
Mind  cannot  mind  despise — it  is  itself.
Mind  must  love  mind:  the  great  and  good  are  friends;
And  he  is  but  half  great  who  is  not  good."

As  typical  of  a  numerous  class  of  Christian  persons,  I
have  been  impressed  to  remark  thus  much  upon  the  forego-
ing case.  It  illustrates  but  too  manifestly  the  mental  prepos-
sessions, which,  by  descending  into  and  pervading  the  cerebral
faculties  of  clairvoyants  and  mediums,  acts  more  prejudicially
upon  the  harmonious  advancement  of  the  New  Developments
than  any  other  one  cause  which  they  are  daily  obliged  to
encounter.  Moreover,  in  this  connection,  I  am  impressed  to
correct  a  few  misrepresentations  respecting  my  perceptions
of  the  realities  of  the  other  world,  which  also  are  used  pre-


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  215

judicially  by  certain  incautious  friends  of  progress.  Allu-
sion is  here  made  to  the  misapprehension  of  some,  and  the
seemingly  intentional  misrepresentation  of  others,  that,  in  my
spiritual  contemplation  of  the  societies  and  spheres  pertain-
ing to  the  other  Life,  I  have  either  neglected  or  been  unable
to  see,  and  give  an  account  of  the  existence  of,  any  low  or
undeveloped  inhabitants.  Thus  the  author  of  'astounding
facts,1  as  an  example,  makes  several  assertions,  more  or  less
direct,  upon  this  very  point,  which  are  no  more  reliable  than
many  other  things  contained  in  the  articles  under  considera-
tion. Yet  I  do  not  call  in  question  his  motives,  neither  his
disposition  to  report  what  he  believes  to  be  the  exact  truth  in
the  premises. But  let  us  look  on  both  sides  of  the  picture:

ASSERTION.  FACTS.

"  IVe  are  gravely  told  by  many  spir-  "I  continued  in  that  illuminated
i.'s,  with  3Ir.  Davis  at  their  head,  that  condition  nearly  an  hour,  *  *  *  when
there  is  no  discord  among  spirits."  my  perceptions  enlarged,  and  it was

•See  "Astounding  Facts,"  number  given  me  to  follow  his  spirit.  (A  crim-
three.  inal  who  was executed.)  And  in  the

First  Society  of  the  Second  Sphere  of
human  existence — where  the  inferior  types  of  the  Race  are — I  mean  the  Negroes,

INDIANS,  THE  WEAK,  IDIOTIC,  AND  THE  MISDIRECTED  INDIVIDUALS  OF  EVERY  COMMU-
NITY and  nation — there,  I  saio  that  dark  spirit.  He  was  S7nall,  and  weak,  and
ungrown;  lie  was  clothed  xcith  all  possible  conflicting  colors,  and  was  disagree-
able to  behold." See  second  volume"  Great  Harmonia,"  page  162.

The  word  "misdirected,"  stands  before  my  mind  as  a  truer
epithet,  and  adjective,  better  describing  the  actual  condition
of  those  minds  which  are  unbrotherly,  denounced  as  "devils
damned,"  or  the  "evil  spirits  '*  of  earth  and  the  other  sphere.
Popular  ideas  of  evil  begin  with  the  oriental  myth  of  intrin-
sic, inwrought,  unmitigated  corruption — sinfulness  of  the
inmost  heart,  in  the  sight  of  the  All-Seeing!  But,  most
grateful  am  I  for  the  blessing  of  interior  perception.  To
penetrate  the  superficial  veil  of  superstition — to  appreciate
the  "total  depravity"  of  all  arguments  and  theologic  sys-
tems predicated  upon  it — were  an  easy  thing.  I  find  no
intrinsic  corruption  in  the  soul  of  Man.  All  "evil,"  so
called,  and  "sin"  are  external.  How  can  God  be  inwardly
depraved? If  the  spirit


216  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

fountain  of  goodness,  and  love,  and  wisdom,  and  perfection,
whence,  then,  is  his  life  derived?  The  idea  of  "evil  spirits"
in  the  other  world  is  necessarily  grounded  upon  the  primary
notion  of  intrinsic  evil  in  this  world.  But  v\l  human  evil,
so  called,  can  be  incontestably  and  mathematically  demon-
strated to  proceed,  not  out  of  the  essences  of  the  soul,  but
from  the  following  external  and  superficial  sources:

First.  Progenitive  or  hereditary  misdirection;
Second.  Educational  or  sympathetic  misdirection;
Third. Circumstantial  or  social  misdirection.

It  is  most  beautifully  clear,  to  my  perception,  that  the
indwelling  forces  of  the  mind  are  pure,  and,  in  germ,  as  per-
fect as  THE  fountain  from  which  the  myriad  streams  of
spirit-life  flow !  And,  when  properly  directed  and  properly
developed,  from  birth,  the  mind  unfolds  corresponding  finite
perfections  and  attributes.  But  I  cannot  present  the  philos-
ophy in  this  connection.*  As  a  synopsis  of  the  exegetical
method  pursued  in  the  argument,  I  will  state  that  the  pri-
mary source  of  "evil,"  so  termed,  is  hereditary  organiza-
tion. Who  is  responsible  for  the  hosts  of  deformed  and
diseased  organisms  that  exist?  Men  and  women,  ignorant
of  the  laws  of  God,  written  on  the  body  and  soul,  enter  the
most  holy  state  of  marriage,  and,  regardless  of  consequences,
propagate  their  combined  imperfections.  Who  is  responsible
for  those  defective  organizations,  the  hereditary  foes  to  the
interests  of  society,  who  develop  war,  slavery,  prostitution,
drunkenness,  and  death?  All  men  and  women  were  once
infants;  who  shall  we  blame  for  the  existence  of  unwhole-
some children?  Man  is  just  what  his  organization  compels
him  to  be;  and,  as  every  one  is  differently  constituted,  so,
according  to  a  simple  law  of  cause  and  effect,  the  same  edu-
cation, an  identical  social  situation,  will  beget  different
developments  and  different  consequences.  Thus,  for  illustra-
tion, in  one  set  of  circumstances,  one  child  may  advance
rapidly  toward  genius,  glory,  honor,  and  emolument ;  while  his
brother,  with  a  different  shaped  head,  and  a  different  combi-

*  The  reader  is  referred,  for  the  argument,  to  the  second  volume  of
the  "  Harmonia  '  the  chapter  on  Moral  Cultivation.


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM


217


nation  of  temperaments,  may,  under  the  same  circumstances,
become  a  dejected  misanthrope,  or  an  accomplished  villain.
In  either  instance,  the  inmost  nature  or  essence  is  not  cor-
rupted— it  is  still  pure  and  immaculate — tending,  like  the
fragrance  of  flowers,  toward  heaven;  but  the  external,  the
symbols  of  life,  the  outward  character  is  changed,  and  this
only!  And  it  is  the  essence,  not  the  shape  of  it,  which  indi-
cates and  insures  destiny.

Notwithstanding  the  repeated  exposition  of  this  philoso-
phy of  "evil"  in  every  work  I  ever  issued,  and  the  frequent
allusion  to  the  continuation  of  the  unrighteousness  of  this
rudimental  existence  into  the  subordinate  societies  of  the
second  sphere,  nevertheless,  certain  misdirected  minds,  pro-
fessedly the  friends  of  eternal  progkession,  continue  to
urge  the  idea  that  the  Harmonial  Philosophy  teaches  a
uniform  and  all-glorious  heaven  for  every  person,  indiscrim-
inately !


ASSERTION.

"A.  J.  Davis. — Dear  Sir:  Having
been  very  much  interested  in  the  phe-
nomena of  ecstasy  or  magnetism,  long
before  your  experiences  were  published,
I  was,  of  course,  measurably  prepared
to  read  and  believe  your  productions.
The  descriptions  of  a  person  who
seemed  to  be  so  raised  toward  truth  by
the  divine  magnetic  attraction,  as  in
your  case,  are  intensely  interesting,  to
say  the  least.

"I  have  read  two  thousand  four  hun-
dred and  ninety-three  pages  of  astound-
ing thoughts,  from  your  pen.  But  I
think  you  make  the  spheres  too  heav-
enly. Your  utterances  about  the  spirit-
ual world,  reecho  the  opinions  of  Uni-
vcrsalists — no  discord,  no  envy,  no
jealousy,  no  untruth,  no  dispute.

"Now,  pardon  me  for  plain  speak-
ing, but  it  does  seem  to  me  that  you
have  recorded  the  sectarian  views  of
Universalism,  about  man's  future
state;  and  in  so  doing,  that  you  have
taught  the  truth  and  purity  of  all  spirits,
which doctrine,  the modern spiritual

19


FACTS.

Esteemed  Inquirer:  I  am  not  a  lit-
tle surprised  that  you  have  come  to  the
conclusion,  that  the  Philosophy  of  "the
spiritual  world  is  a  reecho  of  the  views
of  Univer>alists."  How  hastily  and
incautiously  you  must  have  read!

I  will  not  undertake  any  compari-
son between  the  writings  of  Universal-
ists  and  the  doctrines  of  the  New  Phi-
losophy. You  probably  know  that,  with
logical  Bible  Universalists,  the  doctrine
is,  that  Hell  is  confined  to  earthly  suf-
fering and  the  grave,  and  there  is  no
future  record,  of  this  life,  in  the  state
after  death — that  every  body  will  live
in  happinesson  the  same  plane  of  being.

In  refutation  of  this,  please  see  page
647,  "Nature's  Divine  Revelations!"
I  quote:  "  And  spirits  know  and  asso-
ciate with  each  other,  according  to  the
quality  of  the  sphere  which  is  exhaled
from  their  interiors."  By  "quality"  is
here  meant,  the  degree  or  stage  of
refinement.  "So  it  is  with  mankind
on  earth" — implying  a  correspondence
between  terrestrial  and  celestial  society.


218


EVELATION


FROM PANDEMONIUM.


manifestations  disprove,  in  toto.  *  *
Please  let  me  hear  from  you  by  mail,
at  your  convenience,  and  oblige  a  sincere
inquirer  after  truth."  *  *  *

Extract  from  a  letter.


And  on  the  succeeding  page  it  reads:
"  In  the  first  society  are  an  immense
number  of  infants  and  uncultivated
spirits,  in  various  degrees  of  advance-
ment and  cultivation,  according  as
each  have  proceeded  from  the  earth."
Again,  see  third  volume  "  Harmonic"  page  343,  where,  speaking  of  the  man
who  violates  his  moral  sense,  it  reads:  "He  takes  the  record  of  his  violation
with  him — on  his  moral  constitution — and  in  the  Spirit-Land  feels  the  legitimate
consequences  of  his  deeds,  whether  good  or  evil."  From  the  foregoing,  I  think,
you  will  see  that  you  have  misread  the  books  you  so  admire.


A  mighty  stumbling-block  to  accurate  individual  progress,
is  placed  in  the  pathway  of  the  tramping  millions,  by  the
misapprehensions  and  consequent  misstatements  of  those  who
read  without  understanding  the  grand  principles  of  the
Harmonial  Philosophy.  The  philosophy  of  human  society,
of  the  social  destiny  of  man,  of  the  constitution  and  ever-
lasting peregrinations  of  'the  Soul,  of  the  physical  Universe,
of  the  spiritual  Universe,  of  every  science  and  every  ramifi-
cation of  mythology  and  history,  cannot  be  stated  and
detailed  in  an  hundred  volumes.  In  fact,  it  is  beyond  and
greater  than  all  the  thoughts  of  man;  hence,  above  the
possibility  of  being  reduced  to  writing.  Still,  a  grand
generalization  is  practicable;  and  this,  therefore,  has  been
attempted.  Hence,  as  minute  details  are  necessarily  excluded,
even  from  subsequent  volumes,  it  is  no  more  than  reasonable
to  anticipate  that  portions  will  meet  the  fate  of  prejudicial,
yet  honest  misinterpretation.


ASSERTION.

"A.J.  Davis. — Dear  Brother :  Al-
though an  utter  stranger,  I  take  the
liberty  of  addressing  you.  Your  pro-
ductions have  been  a  solace  to  my
mind — for  they  teach  the  immortal
truths  of  God.  But  I  am  now  in  trouble
about  the  "rappings"  and  "manifesta-
tions," so  called.  Can  you  explain  to
me  the  cause  of  the  contradictions?

"According  to  all  accounts,  it  seems
as  if  Bedlam  is  located  in  the  other
world.  Are  the  accounts  correct?  In
your  interesting  volume  on  'Spiritual


FACTS.

Dear  Friend:  You  are  not  alone  in
your  trouble.  *  *  *  But  I  am  sure  you
have  quite  failed  to  comprehend  the
explanation  of  "contradictions,"  in  the
volume  referred  to — more  especially,
have  you  not  appreciated  the  scope  of
my  friend  Wilson's  communication.
Please  read  it  again.

Friend  Wilson  tells  what  is  true  of
the  Society  of  which  he  is  a  member;
his  remarks  do  not  apply  to  the  uni-
versal spheres — particularly  not  to  the
Societies  beneath  the  on s  he  inhabits.


REVELATIU  X  3 V  It  U  M P  A  N  D  £  M  O  X  I  U  M  .


219


Intercourse'  James  Victor  Wilson  says:  He  speaks  from,  his  local,  personal  en-

'  Misdirected individuals cannot bring  thusiastic  experiences  and  observation.

hypocrisy,  envy,  discord,  prejudice,  dis-  When  he  speaks  in  general  terms,  he

pute,  from  earth  to  the  Spirit-Land.'  says,  on  page  155:  "I  will  disclose  to

"  Yet, according  to  various  pamphlets,  thee  an  arcanum: — Those  spirits  who

it  seems  the  other  world  is  full  of  sec-  emanate  from the earth,  or  from  any

tarianism,  and  jargon,  and  discord. Is  other  planet  in  the  Universe,  are  intro-

it  so? Do  give  me  some  new  light  on  duced  into  that  society  for  xehich  they


these  contradictions."
Extract  from  a  letter.


entertain  the  most  congenial  sympa-
thies." Then,  after  enumerating  the
different  circles, he  says:  "Undeveloped
individuals,  who  are  more  interested  in  personal  gratification  than  in  causing
happiness  to  others,  are,  after  death,  introduced  into  the  first  circle,  which  is
termed,  Self  Love."  Here,  my  friend,  you  have  an  explanation!  Many  of  the
"contradictions"  emanate  from  the  circle  of  "  Self  Love,"  which  you  supposed
friend  Wilson  had  utterly  overlooked.


Still  further,  in  illustration  of  the  ease  with  which  certain
mental  organizations  misapprehend  what  they  professedly
believe  and  admire,  I  introduce  the  following:


ASSERTION.

"Communications,  purporting  to  em-
anate from  'devils,'  are  said  to  be  mul-
tiplying. The  disclosures  of  Sweden-
borg  inform  us,  that  the  demons  in  the
hells  '  are  continually  assaulting  heaven,
and  endeavoring  to  destroy  it.'  In
'Heaven  and  Hell,'  page  595,  it  is
asserted :  that  '  as  far  as  is  possible,
outrages  in  the  hells  are  subdued,  and
cruelties  are  restrained,  to  prevent  their
breaking  out  beyond  measure,  one
against  another;  this  is  effected  by
innumerable  means  of  divine  power.'
So,  it  seems,  we  are  safe !  Yet  there
are  certain  sectarian  sapient  seers,  with
Mr.  Davis,  as  their  professed  leader,
who  know  every  thing,  yet  know  no-
thing of  Svvedenborg's  disclosures. —
They  all  report  and  claim  the  other
world  to  be  a  flowery  place  for  pic-nicks
— a  kind  of  Mahommcdan  paradise."
— Journal  of  Record.


In  regard  to  being  a  "professed  lead-
er," in  any  sense,  I  emphatically  remon-
strate. On  the  375th  page  of  the  third
volume  of  " Harmonia"  it  reads:  "I
am  regarded  by  some  minds  as  th
founder  of  the  Harmonial  Philosophy ;
and  this  idea  is  what  I  now  desire  to
correct."  Then  follow  the  reasons  why
I  am  not  a  leader.

In  regard  to  not  knowing  any  thing
of  Swedenborg's  description  of  the  hells,
I  offer  the  harmonizing  statement  on
page  674  of  "Nature's  Divine  Revela-
tions" :  "A  mind  was  sufficiently  illu-
minated to  have  an  actual  knowledge
of  the  relation  and  affinity  existing  be-
tween the  natural  and  spiritual  spheres,
and  of  the  spheres  to  one  another,  and
th^  was  Emanuel  Swedenborg.  He,
however,  employed  terms  to  express  the
same  things  that  I  have  endeavored  to
impress,  by  terms  of  a  different  and
more  congenial  character.  He  put  forth
the  truth  that  there  were  different  degrees  of  goodness,  and  that  the  lowest  was
so  imperfect,  when  compared  with  the  highest,  that  the  one  seemed  evil  and  the


220  REVELATIONS FROM P  A  N  D  E  M  ON1UM.

other  good;  the  one  pei feet  and  the  other  imperfect.  Hence,  he  describes  the
first  three  spheres  as  three  hells,  inhabited  by  lower  spirits  and  angels;  while  the
three  higher  spheres  were  the  three  heavens  in  which  the  higher  spirits  and  angels
dwelt.  Ami  he  also  related  the  truth  that  the  inhabitants  of  these  spheres  could
not  approach  each  other — because  of  the  dissimilitude  in  their  positions  and  degrees
of  refinement — any  more  than  evil  can  approach  goodness,  or  darkness  can
approach  light.  All  this,  I  can  affirm,  is  true,  not  in  the  absolute,  but  rather  in
the  comparative  sense.  There  is  a  seeming  difference  between  the  lower  and  the
higher  in  all  things ;  yet,  the  highest,  as  has  been  proved,  is  an  unfolded  represent-
ative of  what  the  lowest  has  in  substance,  undeveloped."

Upon  reexamination  of  the  above,  I  am  internally  assured
that  the  abyss  between  Swedenborg's  Disclosures  and  Nature's
Revelations,  is  well-nigh  impassable.  It  would,  in  truth,
require  a  vaster  outlay  of  theolgical  gladiatorship,  to  produce
an  acceptable  reconciliation  of  sentiment  between  the  twain,
than  the  ease  demands.  If  Swedenborg  had  not  had  before
his  mind,  planted  thereon  by  education,  the  orthodox  sym-
bols of  theology,  and  the  symbols  of  biblical  authority — a
finality,  as  firmly  fixed  upon  his  exterior  intellect  as  pebbles
in  conglomerate  rock — or,  in  other  terms,  if  the  sponge  of
utter  passivity  had  been  drawn  over  his  mind,  washing  out
and  obliterating  every  vestige  of  early  theologic  preposses-
sions, prior  to  his  psychologic  illumination — then,  kind
reader,  instead  of  the  resurrection  of  popular  theology  in
the  Swedenborgian  modification  and  nomenclature,  we  would
behold  the  imposing  spectacle  of  a  fountain  of  talent  and
character,  sending  its  silvery  spray  high  up,  naturally,
spontaneously,  and  spiritually,  without  such  a  mixture  of
truth  and  error  as  his  books  contain.  Taking  the  then
existing  notions  of  hell,  as  magnetic  primary  suggestions,
the  untrammelled  mind  can  most  easily  understand  the  origin
of  the  additional  or  supplemental  matter  which  such  hints
awakened  in  the  idealistic  cerebrum  of  the  Swedish  seer.
Read,  for  illustration,  the  following  descriptions  of  the  Swed-
enborgian pandemonium.  According  to  the  English  trans-
lation, he  says:

"All  who  are  in  the  hells  are  in  evils  and  the  falses  thence,
and  no  one  there  is  in  evils  and  at  the  same  time  in  truths."
*—H.  and  II.  n.  551.

"All  spirits  in  the  hells,  when  inspected  in  any  light  of


R  E  V  E  I ft  T  I  0  N  g F  II  0  M P  A  N  D  E  M  0  X  I  U  M  .  22 1

heaven,  appear  in  tlie  form  of  their  own  evil;  for  every  one
is  an  effigy  of  his  own  evil.  In  general,  they  are  forms  of
contempt  of  others,  and  of  menaces  against  those  who  do
not  pay  them  respect;  they  are  forms  of  hatreds  of  various
kinds,  also  of  various  kinds  of  revenge;  fierceness  and
cruelty  from  their  interiors  are  transparent  through  those
forms.  Their  faces  are  direful  and  void  of  life,  like  corpses.
Their  bodies,  also,  are  monstrous;  and  their  speech  is  as  the
speech  of  anger,  or  of  hatred,  or  of  revenge ;  for  every  one
speaks  from  his  own  falsity,  and  the  tone  of  his  voice  is  from
his  own  evil;  in  a  word,  they  are  all  images  of  their  own
hell.  It  is  to  be  known,  however,  that  such  is  the  appear-
ance of  the  infernal  spirits  in  the  light  of  heaven,  whereas,
among  themselves  they  appear  as  men ;  this  is  of  the  Lord's
mercy,  lest  they  should  seem  as  filthy,  one  to  another,  as  they
appear  before  the  angels ;  but  that  appearance  is  a  fallacy,
for  as  soon  as  any  ray  of  light  from  heaven  is  let  in,  their
human  forms  are  turned  into  monstrous  forms,  such  as  they
are  in  themselves,  as  described  above;  for,  in  the  light  of
heaven  everything  appears  as  it  is  in  itself." — H.  and  II.  n.  553.
"This  I  can  testify,  that  their  wickedness  is  so  great  that
it  is  hardly  possible  to  describe  even  a  thousandth  part  of  it;
and,  likewise,  that  unless  the  Lord  protected  man,  it  would
not  be  possible  for  him  ever  to  be  rescued  from  hell ;  for
with  every  man  there  are  both  spirits  from  hell  and  angels
from  heaven.  And  the  Lord  cannot  protect  man,  unless  man
acknowledges  a  Divine,  and  unless  he  lives  a  life  of  faith
and  charity,  for  otherwise  he  averts  himself  from  the  Lord,
and  turns  himself  to  infernal  spirits." — II.  and  II.  n.  577.
Concerning  the  appearances  of  the  hells,  Swedenborg  says:
"Some  hells  appeared  to  the  view,  like  caves  and  dens,
such  as  wild  beasts  inhabit  in  forests ;  some,  like  to  arched
caverns  and  holes,  such  as  are  seen  in  mines.  In  some  hells
there  is  an  appearance  as  of  the  ruins  of  houses  and  cities
after  fires,  in  which  ruins  the  infernal  spirits  dwell  and  con-
ceal themselves.  In  the  milder  hells,  there  is  an  appearance
as  of  rude  cottages,  in  some  cases  contiguous,  having  the
aspect  of  a  city  with  lanes  and  streets ;  within,  in  the  houses,
are  infernal  spirits,  engaged  in  continual  quarrels,  enmities,
19*


222  It  E  V  E  L  A  T  IONS F  R  t>  M P  A  X  i)  E  M  0  X  I  C  M  .

blows,  and  fightinors;  in  the  streets  and  lanes,  robberies  and
depredations  are  committed.  There  are,  likewise,  deserts,
Where  is  nothing  but  what  is  barren  and  sandy,  and  in  some
places  ragged  rocks,  in  which  are  caverns;  in  some  places
arc  also  huts.'' — II.  and  If.  n.  5S6.

"The  odors,  which  are  from  the  perception  of  evil,  are
most  ungrateful,  being  foetid  as  those  which  arise  from  putrid
waters,  from  excrements,  and  from  dead  bodies.  They  who
are  in  hell,  are  in  the  spheres  of  such  stenches;  and,  what  is
wonderful,  they  who  are  in  them  are  not  sensible  of  the
horrid  smell,  yea,  those  stenches  are  delightful  to  them,  and
when  they  are  in  them,  they  are  in  the  sphere  of  their  de-
lights and  dainties."' — Arcana  Ocdestia\  n.  4628.

Now,  a  deeper  and  more  ample  insight  into  these  tartarean
revealments,  would  certainly  have  preserved  me  from  sug-
gesting, even  in  the  remotest  contingency,  a  possible  adjust-
ment between  the  Disclosures  of  Swedenborg  and  the
Revelations  of  Nature.  (For  a  solution  of  his  psychologic
state,  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  third  volume  of  the  "  llarmo-
nia")  But,  while  we  are  considering  this  class  of  excep-
tional phenomena,  the  whole  field  should  be  contemplated.
And,  according  to  my  impressions,  the  truest  process  to  get
at  all  the  facts  is,  to  take  down  the  evidence  of  different
witnesses.  The  validity  of  their  testimony  is  an  after-con-
sideration, not  to  be  omitted  in  arriving  at  a  rational  verdict.
A  most  thrilling  narrative  has  recently  come  into  my  posses-
sion, and,  as  the  witness  or  writer  has  experienced  many
wonderful  things,  bearing  on  the  question  of  evil  spirits,  we
proceed  to  place  him,  with  his  "astounding  facts"  (?)  before
the  bar  of  judgment.  As  a  reliable  witness,  his  character  is
thus  amply  sustained  by  the  editor  of  "  Church's  Bizarre."*

"  The  following  is  a  part  of  a  letter  we  received}  not  long  ago,  from  a  per
son  with  whom  we  are  acquainted,  and  on  whose  word  we  place  the  com
pit-test  reliance.  He  assures  us  that  the  occurrences  recorded  below  actualH
happened  to  himself. He  had  given  us  a  viva  voce  account  of  them,  with

*  This  narrative  is  extracted  from  the  above-named  paper,  published  in
Philadelphia,  numbers  9  and  10,  of  August,  1852.  and  is  as  well  authen-
ticated as  such  occurrences  can  possibly  be.


REVELATIONS F  ROM P  A  N  D  E  MONI  IJ  M  .  223

which  we  were  so  much  struck,  that  we  requested  him  to  write  them  down.
He  complied;  and  we  now  submit  the  relation  to  the  reader  without  com-
ment. Ata  time  when  so  many  tales  of  "spiritual  communications"  through
various  mediums  are  afloat,  possibly  some  one  versed  in  that  lore,  may  he
aLle  to  explain  the  why  and  wherefore  of  these  phenomena.  We  omit
some  preliminaries  and  commence  "cum  mediis  rebus.'''' — Ed.

"For  several  clays  I  bad  not  been  in  my  usual  health.  I
was  nervous  and  somewhat  languid,  though  not  to  a  degree
that  entirely  precluded  my  attending  to  my  wonted  avoca-
tions. I  did  not,  however,  on  finishing  these  employments
for  the  day,  feel  like  doing  any  thing  else,  bat  sat  listlessly
in  the  public  room  of  my  hotel,  till  again  summoned  away
by  indispensable  duties.  Sitting  thus,  in  the  latter  part  of
one  Saturday  afternoon,  my  attention  was  roused  from  the
paper  I  was  trying  to  read,  by  hearing  my  name  distinctly
pronounced.  I  looked  about  on  the  numbers  of  persons,
who  Avere  seated  in  the  room  or  were  entering  or  leaving  it,
but  could  discover  no  one,  who  appeared  to  have  addressed
me,  or,  so  far  as  I  could  judge,  to  have  been  speaking  about
me.  The  thing  was  repeated  so  often,  without  my  being
able  to  find  any  clue  to  its  meaning,  that  I  became  seriously
annoyed,  as  well  as  astonished,  and  gave  my  whole  powers
of  hearing  and  sight  to  the  attempt  at  detecting  the  cause  of
this  phenomenon.  I  was  sitting  by  a  window,  and,  after
listening  intently  for  a  few  minutes,  I  was  forced  upon  the
conclusion,  that,  if  my  senses  were  to  be  trusted,  the  pro-
nouncers  of  my  name  were  close  behind  and  on  either  side
of  me.  For,  not  only  did  I  hear  more  than  one  person  utter
my  name,  but  I  distinctly  heard  a  considerable  company  of
persons  talking  with  each  other,  calling  each  other  by  name,
and  at  intervals  speaking  about  myself.  I  looked  through
the  window  behind  me,  but  no  one  was  within  possible
hearing  distance.  I  looked  to  my  right  hand  and  left,  but  no
one  was  near;  no  one  was  in  sight,  who  cduld  have  been
concerned  in  this  matter.  And  yet  this  talk  continued  to
go  on.  and  was  heard  by  me  as  distinctly  as  I  ever  heard
any  thing  in  my  life.  And,  still  more,  T  heard  two  or  three
names  called,  in  the  addresses  of  one  to  another,  which  be-
longed to  persons  I  had  formerly  known,  and  who  had  been


224  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

for  many  years  dead!  You  may  laugh  at  the  conclusion  I
now  felt  compelled  to  adopt,  but  that  conclusion  was,  that  I
was  surrounded  by  spirits,  whose  voices,  from  some  abnormal
state  of  my  system,  I  was  able  to  hear.  Perhaps  I  should
not  so  readily  have  adopted  this  opinion,  but  for  several
strange  former  experiences  of  my  life.

"But,  what  was  their  object  in  besetting  me  thus?  I
listened  carefully  for  some  time,  and  from  numerous  re-
marks and  indirect  hints  passing  between  them,  I  learned
that  they  were  members  of  a  band  of  malignant  spirits,
whose  office  and  whose  delight  it  was  to  tempt  men  into
wrong  courses,  by  acting  on  their  constitutional  weaknesses
and  besetting  appetites;  that  this  was  not  the  first  time  they
had  assailed  me  with  mischievous  intents,  but  that  to  their
instigations  were  owing  many  severe  trials  of  my  self-control,
to  which,  in  past  time,  I  had  been  subjected;  and  which  my
strength,  in  too  many  instances,  had  proved  inadequate  to
resist;  and,  finally,  that  they  were,  at  this  moment,  deputed
by  the  superior  fiend,  who,  it  appeared,  had  the  command
of  them,  to  take  advantage  of  my  present  nervous,  languid,
debilitated  state,  and  incite  me  to  use  brandy,  as  a  cordial
and  remedy  for  it.  As  I  listened  to  this  talk,  interchanged
among  them,  a  flood  of  light  was  poured  over  many  past
events;  for  it  was  vividly  brought  to  my  mind  how  instinct-
ively and  by  what  a  strong  impulse  I  had  been,  for  some
years,  accustomed  to  resort  to  brandy  for  any  casual  ailments
— which  were  mostly  those  of  languor  and  nervous  debility
— though  experience  had  taught  me,  that  I  did  so  at  my
great  peril.  And  now,  if  I  could  credit  these  ghostly  whis-
perings, a  troop  of  demons  had  been  long  hovering  about
me,  prompt  to  seize  the  occasion  of  my  peculiar  physical
state,  io  urge  me  to  that  which,  they  trusted,  would  be  my
destruction.

"At  first,  it  seemed,  they  felt  so  confident  I  would  take
brandy  as  a  relief  for  my  present  sensations,  that  they  deemed
it  unnecessary  to  employ  any  other  incentives  to  this  act  than
what  flowed  from  their  own  presence,  with  the  burning  at-
mosphere surrounding  them,  naturally  creating  inflammation
and  inordinate  thirst. This  I  gathered  from  many  intima-


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONI  U  M  .  225

tions,  and  especially  from  the  fact,  that  every  time  I  stepped
into  the  adjacent  bar-room,  which  I  very  frequently  did,  for
a  glass  of  iced  water  to  quench  the  raging  thirst  that  tor-
mented me,  I  heard  them  exclaim  eagerly,  'Now  he's  going
for  brandy!'  And  each  time,  as  they  perceived  me  take
water  alone,  they  cursed  and  blasphemed  in  their  disap-
pointment.

"This  state  of  things  continued  for  some  time;  it  being
evident,  meanwhile,  that  they  were  not  aware  I  could  hear
their  voices,  but  supposed  they  were  inaudible,  as  well  as
invisible  to  me,  as  they  actually  are  to  most  men  always,  and
to  all  men  except  on  special  occasions.  Better  for  me  that
I  had  let  them  remain  in  this  ignorance,  as  thus  I  should
have  escaped  most  terrible  sufferings.  But,  imprudently,  I
accosted  them ;  manifested  my  knowledge  of  their  present
purpose,  and  recklessly  bade  them  defiance.  I  thus  stood
before  them  in  the  light  of  a  spy  in  their  camp;  for,  if  I
had  the  gift  of  knowing  when  the  demon  tempters  were
present,  and  of  overhearing  their  conferences,  it  was  plain
the  rod  of  their  malignant  power  was  broken,  so  far  as  con-
cerned myself,  and  perhaps  others,  also.  ISTo  sooner  had  I
addressed  them  than  they  evidently  became  greatly  excited,
and  one  of  them  was  sent  to  summon  their  superior.  He
soon  arrived,  as  I  could  judge  from  several  sounds,  and
brought  an  additional  throng  of  demons  with  him.  After
some  conversation  with  him — he,  meanwhile,  seeming  like
the  rest,  to  know  my  name  and  my  antecedent  history — I
asked  his  name.  He  told  it,  and  I  remembered  it  as  that  of
a  deceased  member  of  a  respectable  Boston  family.  I  shall
call  it,  by  way  of  disguise,  George  Howard.  The  arrival  of
these  fresh  numbers,  with  their  sultry  encircling  sphere,
augmented  the  feverishness  and  thirst  which  was  consuming
me,  and  I  was  obliged,  every  few  minutes,  to  go  for  a  glass
of  iced-water.  Besides  this  indirect  action  upon  me,  How-
ard tried  many  direct  means  to  prevail  on  me  to  take  brandy.
They  were  of  that  subtle  nature,  of  which  it  is  impossible
to  give  any  adequate  description  by  words.  One,  however,
of  his  devices,  was,  to  assume,  not  in  terms  but  in  reality,
that  it  was  a  settled  fact,  an  inexorable  fate,  in  no  way  to  be


226  R  E  V  E  L  A  T  I  O  X  3 FROM PANDEMONIUM.

evaded,  that  I  was  to  drink  and  to  terminate  my  life  by
intemperance;  and  that,  therefore,  it  was  worse  than  idle  to
resist  and  delay,  as  I  was  now  doing,  since  I  was  subjecting
myself  to  needless  suffering,  which  could,  by  no  possibility,
render  me  any  service.  To  their  diabolic  ranks  I  was  to
belong;  this  was  my  doom,  and  the  wiser  way  was  to  submit
at  once.

"As  I  still  resisted  his  multiform  provocatives,  I  heard
him  say,  angrily,  'Well,  we  must  call  William!'  A  mo-
ment's thought  recalled  to  my  mind  a  brother  of  the  speaker,
William  Howard,  a  college  cotemporary  of  mine,  who  had,
many  years  before,  died  young,  after  a  life  made  infamous
by  dissolute  excesses.  He  soon  arrived,  and  I  found  it  was
the  veritable  person,  now  raised  to  a  '  bad  eminence '  over
his  demon  associates,  by  superiority  of  intellect  and  wicked-
ness. I  felt  the  influence  of  his  burning  sphere  in  the
increased  inflammation  of  my  system,  with  its  accompanying
thirst.  He  also  entered  into  conversation  with  me,  and  tried
means,  direct  and  indirect,  akin  to  those  employed  by  his
brother,  though  enhanced  in  subtlet}^  and  force,  to  induce
me  to  resort  to  brandy.  Worried  and  tormented  by  these
protracted  assaults,  I  saw  not  where  they  were  to  end  or
how  I  was  to  get  rid  of  my  assailants.

"  As  their  efforts  for  my  subjection  had  as  yet  proved
futile,  I  heard  the  leaders,  after  holding  a  consultation,  say,
'  Well,  we  must  call  such  and  such  a  one,'  (naming  sundry
deceased  persons,  of  whom  I  had  heard)  c  and  we'll  over-
come him  yet ! '

"  All  this  while,  I  may  mention,  this  diabolic  troop  had
cursed  and  blasphemed  more  wickedly  even  than  men  are
wont  to  do,  if  this  be  possible;  their  oaths  being  mingled
with  the  most  outrageous  and  violent  abuse  of  my  poor  self,
qualified,  however,  with  not  a  few  expressions  of  unwilling
admiration  of  the  firmness  with  which  I  had  resisted,  and
the  penetration  which  had  seen  through  their  wiles.  '  We
must  have  him'  (they  exclaimed)  'or  he'll  do  us  infinite
mischief;  he'll  betray  us  to  the  world,  and  we  shall  lose  all
our  power  over  men,'  &c.,  &c.  Another  remark  I  would
make  is,  that,  by  some  sort  of  faculty,  they  evidently  saw


REVELATIONS  FROM l'ANDEMOXI  U  M  . 227

every  thought  and  feeling,  how  slight  or  shadowy  soever,  as
it  rose  in  my  mind,  and  at  once  uttered  it  aloud.  This  was
terribly  annoying ;  for  it  was  the  case  of  a  deadly  foe  over-
looking all  the  preparations  one  was  making  for  his  defence,
and  even  his  meditations  on  what  preparations  it  was  best
to  attempt  making !

"  Every  moment  new  spirits  arrived,  and,  as  before,  their
torrid  atmosphere  enhanced  the  violence  of  the  fever-flames
that  preyed  upon  me.  Like  those  who  preceded  them,  every
new-comer  seemed  to  take  for  granted  the  impossibilit}-  that,
in  my  then  corporeal  state,  I  should  long  persist  in  abstain-
ing from  the  brandy  so  easily  accessible  in  the  adjoining
room,  and  thus  looked,  from  moment  to  moment,  to  see  me
yield.  Every  time,  therefore,  they  saw  me  (which  was  very
often)  go  for  water,  they  felt  confident  of  my  fall ;  and  when
they  found  me  taking  water  merely,  their  execrations  of  me
were  absolutely  frightful.  Instead,  however,  of  desisting,
they  were  stimulated  to  new  efforts  against  me.  Thus,  at
one  time,  as  I  sat  by  the  open  window,  they  planted  them-
selves, in  a  mass,  just  outside  of  it,  and  breathed  unitedly
and  forcefully  upon  me,  in  the  hope  that  this  fiendish,  inflam-
ing breath  might  so  exhaust  me,  as  to  make  a  stimulating
cordial  indispensable.  And  I  did  in  fact  become  so  debil-
itated, so  tremblingly  weak,  that  I  felt  well-nigh  desperate.
But  resolved,  as  I  was,  that  I  would  not  touch  brandy — least
of  all  at  the  suggestion  of  such  counsellors — I  told  my  tor-
mentors I  would  not,  though  death  should  be  the  result.  It
was  curious  to  hear  their  utterances  of  admiration,  mixed
with  hate  and  wrath,  at  my  stubborn  refusal,  in  the  height
of  the  agony  which  they  evidently  saw  I  was  enduring,  to
taste  what  would  so  quickly  have  brought  relief;  to  be  had,
as  this  was,  by  the  mere  extending  of  my  hand.

"  But  I  suffered  in  mind,  too,  as  well  as  body,  placed  in
this  anomalous  condition;  feeling  myself  growing  continual-
ly worse;  knowing  no  method  of  escaping  the  presence  of
these  demons  or  of  counteracting  their  devices;  the  horrible
thought  came  over  me,  that  the  Divine  being  had  forsaken
me  !  From  the  depths  of  my  soul  went  up  again  and  again
unspoken  entreaties  to  Him  for  deliverance  from  the  assaults


228  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

of  this  diabolic  crew.  But  no  sign  appeared  of  a  favorable
response,  while  my  unuttered  petitions  were  repeated  aloud
with  mockery  and  laughter  by  my  malign  tormentors !

"  Finding  I  was  growing  more  and  more  exhausted,  and
determined  to  change  my  sensations,  if  possible,  even  though
I  could  do  no  more,  I  sallied  forth  for  a  walk,  knowing  air,
as  well  as  water,  to  be  one  of  God's  remedies  for  bodily  dis-
turbance. But  the  spirits  accompanied  me.  Incessantly
Were  their  odious  voices  heard  before,  behind,  and  on  either
side  of  me,  conferring  among  themselves ;  execrating,  vitu-
perating, and  sneering  at  myself;  and  alluding  to  theatres
and  other  places  on  the  way,  as  scenes  of  their  former  suc-
cesses in  snaring  men  by  their  evil  arts.  '  Let's  keep  with
him,'  I  heard  them  say,  'for  he's  going  to  indulge  at  some
drinking  saloon — we'll  have  him  yet!'  Onward  I  walked,
square  after  square,  companioned  by  this  '  hideous  rout,'
striving  to  urge  me  into  every  saloon  I  passed;  breaking  out
into  shocking  execrations  as  I  passed  each  without  stopping;
and  attempting  to  apply  the  torch  in  turn  to  each  and  every
forbidden  appetite.  Several  times  portions  of  the  band  pro-
posed relinquishing  the  attempt  upon  me  as  impracticable ;
but  two  or  three  insisted  on  its  further  prosecution,  and  still
halloed  forward  the  deathful  chase.

"  After  walking  a  mile,  I  turned  back,  still  beset  by  the
same  unwelcome  company.  Before  proceeding  far,  the  quere
chanced  to  arise  in  my  mind,  who  a  certain  member  of  the
band  was,  whose  baptismal  name  I  had  several  times  heard
pronounced  among  them  ;  when  instantly  occurred  the
thought,  that  it  must  be  a  young  man  I  had  formerly
known,  who  had  died  early  of  desperate  inebriety.  The
moment  this  thought  flashed  across  my  mind,  a  blast  of  blas-
phemous wrath  from  this  very  person,  proved  me  correct.
There  seemed  no  bounds  to  his  fury  at  my  detection  of  his
identity  and  present  condition.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if,  for-
getting his  want  of  a  material  frame,  he  had  tried  to  dash
himself  upon  me  and  rend  me.  Certainly  he  hissed,  serpent-
like, in  my  ear,,  and  put  in  action  a  new  engine  of  diabolism.
He  made  a  sound,  as  if  spitting  at  me ;  and  he  no  sooner  did
so,  than  I  heard  the  others  exclaim,  '  That's  right — that  will


R  E  V  E  L  A  T  I  O  N  S F  ROM P  A  N  DEMON]  O  M  .  229

weaken  him!" — from  which  exclamation  I  inferred  that,
until  now,  they  had  forgotten  to  employ  this  device  against
me.  He  repeated  the  act  again  and  again,  and  I  fancied  it  did
have  the  effect  to  increase  my  debility,  so  that  I  was  glad  to
get  back  to  my  hotel.  But  his  malignity,  super-fiendish  as
it  was,  pursued  me  thither:  and  I  no  sooner  sat  down,  than
he  apparently  stationed  himself  behind  me,  and  began  blow-
ing a  stream  of  hot  breath  continuously  on  my  head.  I
could  distinctly  feel  the  deadly  simoom  go  through  and
through  my  brain,  burning  and  stinging,  while  before  my
eyes  there  was  a  wavering  and  shimmering,  as  of  heated
air-currents.  How  dreadful  was  the  complication  of  my
sufferings !  The  rest  of  the  very  demons  themselves  remon-
strated with  McCune  (this  is  a  feigned  and  not  a  real  name)
for  his  worse  than  diabolic  cruelty  to  one  who,  at  least,  had
never  injured  him.  But  in  vain.  He  still  breathed  upon
me  this  fatal  breath.  Again  and  again  I  implored  relief
from  on  high,  but  as  yet  no  relief  was  given.

"  At  last,  from  inability  to  sit  up  longer,  I  went  up  to  my
bed-room,  with  how  much  of  awful  foreboding  you  may  pos-
sibly conjecture.  'Now  we'll  finish  him,'  was  the  exulting
cry  I  heard  from  my  tormentors,  while  ascending  the  stairs.
I  anticipated  a  night  of  horrors,  though  unable  to  guess  what
shape  they  would  assume,  nor  was  I  disappointed.  I  ex-
pected to  be  assailed  at  every  point  of  body  and  soul ;  and
especially  to  be  urged  by  every  species  of  device  to  suicide
by  the  razor,  for  I  heard  this  suggestion  whispered  among
them.  However,  I  left  my  razor  in  its  usual  drawer,  and  made
such  preparations  for  the  night,  as  were  in  my  power,  of  a
conservative  kind.  Thus,  my  windows  being  opened,  and  a
complete  draught  through  the  room  established,  I  placed  a
table  near  my  bed-head,  furnished  with  lights  and  books.
First  bathing  from  crown  to  sole  in  cold  water,  I  then  dip-
ped a  long  night-dress  in  the  same,  and  put  it  on  dripping.
Finally,  I  dipped  a  large  towel  in  water;  put  it  round  my
head;  and  then  stretched  myself,  book  in  hand,  on  the
outside  of  my  bed.

"  Sounds  from  various  quarters  of  my  room;  from  outside
the  windows,  and  from,  the  entry  passing  nry  door,  soon
20


230  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

showed  the  mastering  of  the  demon  hosts  to  their  work.
First  were  heard  all  sorts  of  lascivious  sounds  and  words,
apparently  in  the  opposite  and  contiguous  chambers ;  de-
signed (as  I  learned  from  the  conversation  of  the  actors)  to
make  a  breach  in  the  firmness  of  my  resistance  to  the  evil
they  would  fain  involve  me  in,  by  arousing  other  propensi-
ties also  forbidden  and  destructive.  This  first  attempt,  how-
ever, was  soon  abandoned,  for  they  perceived  at  once  I  told
them  truly,  when  I  said  it  was  futile.  Next  they  essayed  to
break  me  down  by  terror,  that,  being  thus  thrown  off  my
poise,  I  might  lie  open  to  their  machinations.  Thus,  they
kept  uttering  my  name  aloud,  as  that  of  a  person  guilty  of
every  species  of  baseness  and  crime ;  and  soon,  therefore,  I
heard  the  hotel-keeper  threatening  to  turn,  at  once,  into  the
street,  the  man  thus  charged,  as  being,  to  say  the  least,  a
very  suspicious  case.  Again,  I  heard  a  crowd  of  people
thronging  the  entry,  talking  loudl}7  of  the  police  being  in
pursuit  of  an  atrocious  murderer,  who  had  been  traced  to
this  house,  and  even  to  this  very  entry !  A  thousand  such
devices  succeeded  each  other,  all  contrived  and  carried  out
with  more  than  mortal  subtlety.  At  times  I  was  agitated
not  a  little,  but  on  the  whole,  I  was  able,  I  cannot  tell  how,
to  hold  nryself  tolerably  firm  and  fearless.

"But,  ere  long,  they  relinquished  these  alternating  at-
tempts, and  applied  themselves  to  the  grand  demonstration,
which,  they  seemed  to  think,  could  not  fail — the  ordeal  by
fire.  I  felt  that  a  considerable  number  of  them — I  judged
full  a  dozen  or  more — ranged  themselves  on  each  side  of
me,  from  head  to  foot,  and  each,  selecting  some  single  point
of  my  body,  began  breathing  on  that  point  a  continuous
stream  of  flame !  The  first  breath  struck  on  each  spot  pre-
cisely like  the  touch  of  a  live  coal,  and  I  started  from  it
exactly  as  one  starts  from  the  casual  contact  of  such  a  coal.
I  could  hear  them  respire,  each  and  all  of  them,  as  distinct-
ly and  loudly  as  a  tired  sleeping  laborer,  and  every  one  of
these  full  respirations  was  like  a  gush  of  flame  cast  upon
me.  It  seemed  to  me  that  it  was  utterly  impossible  I  could
endure  through  the  long,  lingering  night,  these  these  dia-
bolic breathings,  which,  at  the  very  outset,  stung  and  burned


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  231

me  almost  bej'ond  bearing.  "Wrung  witli  anguish  and  well
nigh  despairing,  I  again  implored  Divine  aid.  But  no  such,
aid  came,  nor  the  slightest  tempering  of  this  fiery  bath.
Still  the  thought  of  yielding  to  my  tempters  and  seeking
the  relief  they  had  been  so  long  urging,  was  rejected  more
indignantly  than  ever.

"  I  strove  to  fix  my  attention  on  a  volume,  in  which  I  had
lately  got  much  interested,  (it  was,  I  think,  the  life  of  Mad-
ame (iuyon,)  but  a  jet  of  fire,  darting  incessantly  into  either
eye,  made  seeing  well-nigh  impossible,  even  had  I  been  less
distracted  by  the  fierce  tortures  I  was  enduring.  On — on —
monotonously,  sonorously  on — went  these  fiery  respirations,
till  without  and  within,  from  the  head  to  the  feet,  my  whole
frame  felt  as  if,  like  that  of  Kehama  in  Pandalon,  it  were
transmuted  into  one  living  coal!  My  dripping  envelopments
ere  long  became  so  heated,  as  to  feel  like  cloths  dipped  in
boiling  water,  and  again  and  again  was  I  obliged  to  get  up
and  redip  them  in  water  directly  from  the  hydrant.

"A  strange  accompaniment  of  all  this  was,  that,  outside
my  window,  there  seemed  to  be  a  vast  world,  which  was  not
this  our  material  world  or  at  all  analogous  to  it;  but,  in
which,  as  in  that  famed  whispering  gallery  of  old,  the  faint-
est sound,  uttered  in  one  extremity,  ran  reverberating  round
a  vast  concave,  till  it  passed  off  in  thunder-tones  at  the  oppo-
site. In  that  world  I  heard  the  noise  of  a  countless  multi-
tude of  demons,  once  men,  who  were  awaiting  the  result  of
the  present  attempt  to  make  me  such  a  one  as  themselves,
and  were,  meanwhile,  doing  what  they  might  to  aid  in  this
destroying  work.  Had  I  a  Shakspearian  describing  faculty,
together  with  a  power  of  mimicry  that  could  copy  infallibly
every  sound  under  heaven,  I  might  perhaps  impart  some  idea
of  what  I  then  and  there  heard.  It  was  hell  in  very  truth;
the  home  of  all  jarrings  and  clashes  and  blasphemies  and
mad  mirth,  all  having  a  pungency  such  as  nought  can  create
but  the  sharp  ministries  of  pain  alone.  I  never  listened  else
where  to  such  wit  and  fun ;  I  never  heard  before  such  peals
of  laughter,  now  rising  into  screams,  now  exploding  in  stun-
ning uproar.  Voltaire  never  mocked  with  such  razor-edged
keenness  at  religion,  its  offices  or  its  historic  claims;  nor


232  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

Paine  uttered  ribaldry  so  brutally  coarse.  Ever  and  anon  the
fiendish  crew  boasted  of  the  evil  and  misery  which,  unknown,
they  had  wrought  on  earth,  while  the  wise  and  the  scientific
had  imputed  it  to  agencies  quite  different.  'Miss  Purbeck,
of  Salem,'  said  they,  'owed  to  our  ministration  those  incon-
ceivable agonies  of  long  lingering  years.'  'Miss  Mavtineau
we  can  pardon  for  recovering  health  in  consideration  of  the
years  of  suffering  she  owed  to  our  kind  offices.'  '  We  were
the  authors  of  Dr.  Channing's  life-long  disease  and  debility.'
'We  impelled  Dr.  Webster  to  the  assassination,  that  carried
him  to  the  scaffold.'

"Thus  they  went  on  a  long  while,  vaunting  themselves  the
hidden  springs  of  numberless  crimes  and  disasters  in  all
quarters  of  the  globe;  and  ever  and  anon,  as  they  completed
some  relation  of  wretchedness  and  ruin  wrought  by  them,  a
peal  of  blood-curdling  laughter  ran  roaring  and  shrieking
all  round  the  echoing  concave,  that  overhung  them. — AVhile
they  were  thus  talking,  my  memory  chanced  to  turn  to  some
foregone  seasons  of  my  own  life  marked  by  those  great  ca-
lamities that  lay  one  prostrate  and  those  rending  anguishes
that  strike  dumb.  Instantly  they  read  my  thoughts,  (as  is
the  nature  of  spirits)  and  burst  out  into  the  loudest  and  most
discordant  mirth  I  had  yet  heard.  'Are  you,  then,  the  one
we  dealt  with  then  and  there?'  (It  seemed  that,  until  that
moment,  they  had  failed  to  identify  me,  as  the  person  they
had,  on  certain  former  occasions,  most  cruelly  tormented.)
'Well,'  said  they  among  themselves,  'if  he  lived  through
those  assaults,  there's  not  much  chance  of  breaking  him  down
now!'  (They  here  alluded  to  a  dangerous  illness  I  bad  ex-
perienced several  years  before,  which  just  missed  of  proving
fatal.)  My  mind  also  happened  to  turn  to  some  acquaintances,
who  had  been  extraordinary  sufferers,  and  forth  broke  an-
other roar  of  laughter,  intimating  that  here  also  they  had
been  active.  In  the  course  of  these  conferences  with  each
other,  I  heard  pronounced  the  names  of  many  and  many  a
one,  whom  I  had  known  or  known  of,  but  who  had  deceased
a  longer  or  shorter  time  before;  all  of  whom  seemed  to  take
a  special  interest  in  the  present  endeavor  to  bring  me  into
their  own  ranks.


REVELATIONS  FRO  M  P  A  NDEMONIUM. 233

"In  the  intervals  of  these  assaults,  direct  or  indirect  upon
me,  the  demons  made  exceeding  merry  among  themselves
with  very  much  that  noisy,  painful-sounding  mirth,  which
may  often  enough  be  witnessed  among  the  habitual  and  rap-
idly deteriorating  haunters  of  a  drinking  saloon.  There  was
the  frequent  loud  laugh,  whose  loudness  seemed  partly  de-
signed to  drown  the  clamors  of  torturing  thought;  there  was
the  keen,  pungent  jest,  whose  keenness  could  come  only  from
a  mind,  whose  faculties  were  edged  by  habitual  suffering;
there  was  the  sarcasm  cast  upon  religion  and  its  requirements,
and  upon  virtue  in  all  its  manifestations,  evidently  prompted
by  despairing  remorse  at  having  proved  recreant  to  religion
and  virtue;  there  was  occasionally  a  snatch  of  singing,  and
once  a  song  of  several  stanzas  chanted  by  several  accordant
voices.  And,  oh,  what  a  song  was  that!  The  voices  were
exceeding  fine,  and  it  seemed  as  if,  for  a  moment,  the  very
soul  of  early  innocent  days  had  come  back  to  breathe  through
them,  and  mingling  with  the  sadness  of  the  hopeless  present,
gave  a  pathos  to  the  tones,  as  they  swelled  and  sank,  that
made  the  chant  inexpressibly  touching.

"I  could  not  restrain  my  tears,  even  on  that  couch  of  fire.
Neither,  indeed,  had  I  been  able  to  refrain  from  frequent
laughter  at  the  wit  and  drollery  tossed  to  and  fro  among
those  who  were  watching  my  torments.

"These  torments,  I  may  remark,  had  received  no  other
alleviation,  than  what  came  from  my  getting  somewhat  used
to  them. — This,  for  a  space,  was  a  partial  alleviation ;  but  no
sooner  did  my  tormentors  perceive  it,  than  they  augmented
the  rapidity  of  their  respirations.  I  could  hear  them  pant
and  breathe  fast  and  hard,  as  one  does  after  violent  running
or  other  exertion,  and  then  I  could  feel  the  heat  increase
where  their  breaths  fell.

"A  remark  made  by  one  of  them  I  record  for  its  strange-
ness and  its  unintelligibility.  By  the  others  he  was  called
by  the  name  of  a  somewhat  noted  physician  now  deceased,
and  the  point  of  his  assault  was  over  one  of  the  important
vital  organs.  Said  he,  'I  perceive  this  person,  by  the  quality
of  his  blood,  to  be  capable  of  evolving  more  heat  than  any
one  I  ever  knew;  and  his  constitution  is  such,  that  in  any
20*


234  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

enterprise  which  interests  him  he  is  competent  to  the  most
incredible  efforts  and  achievements.'  The  reader  must  be  a
better  physiologist  than  myself  to  extract  much  meaning
from  this.

"  Occasionally  the  whole  matter  I  wras  involved  in  struck
me  as  excessively  ludicrous.  The  idea  of  some  dozen  of
beings,  who  had  once  been  judges,  physicians,  &c,  gravely
putting  me  to  the  torture  by  breathing  upon  me  for  several
successive  hours,  with  their  whole  force,  was  so  droll,  that  I
would  burst  out  laughing,  and  taunt  them  with  the  bitterest
words  I  could  coin.  I  soon  found,  however,  that  this  was
no  wise  policy,  for  my  torturers  raged  with  redoubled  fury
at  my  taunts,  and  breathed  the  more  fiercely  and  fast,  so  that
at  times  they  actually  hissed  like  so  many  serpents.

"  It  was  now  approaching  morning,  when  feeling  an  unu-
sual intenseness  of  heat  over  one  vital  organ,  I  heard  one  of
the  party  exclaim,  l  Now  you're  going  to  hell — now  I'll
repay  you  for  charging  me  w7ith  low  dissipation' — and  the
burning  grew  more  and  more  insupportable  under  the  quick,
loud  breathing  of  the  speaker.  I  asked  him  who  he  was.
He  replied,  '  William  Howard,' — a  person  I  have  before
mentioned — adding  that,  in  old  college  days,  I  had  spoken
abusively  of  him,  as  a  dissolute,  worthless  fellow ;  '  but  now,'
continued  he,  '  I'll  repay  }rou,  for  you  shall  burn  into  hell
before  morning!'  And  then  he  renewed  his  furious  attack.
'God  forgive  you!'  I  exclaimed,  in  the  start  produced  by  this
redoubled  torture ;  when,  strange  to  say,  the  heat  partially
abated  on  the  instant.  Strange,  too,  that  his  companions
remonstrated  against  his  ferocity,  and  insisted  on  his  moder-
ating it.  He  actually  complied ;  and  at  the  same  moment
they  all  respired  so  much  more  moderately,  that  my  suffer-
ings became  palpably  less  severe.  I  then  explained  to
Howard,  that  he  was  in  error  about  my  having  abused  him,
for  that  having  personally  known  nothing  of  him,  I  had
said  nothing  that  I  could  recall.

"  From  this,  strangely  enough,  I  got  to  questioning  my
agreeable  companions  about  the  place  of  their  abode,  its
appearance,  usages  and  conditions.  Two  or  three  of  them
made  some  few  replies,  though  it  seemed,  (I  know  not  why,)


R  E  V  E  L  A  T  I  0  N  S F  R  0  >1 P  A  N  D  E  M  O  X  I  U  M  .  235

difficult  for  them  to  speak  on  the  subjects  of  my  inquiries  so
that  I  could  understand  them.

"I  asked  them  if  hell  resembled  earth  in  outward  appear-
ance? They  said  yes;  that  there  were  land,  water,  trees,
grass,  &c,  there  as  here.

"I  asked  if  they  dwelt  in  houses?  They  replied  in  the
affirmative,  but  did  not  give  me  a  clear  idea  of  the  architect-
ure used  among  them.  They  said,  too,  that  they  had  certain
species  of  grains,  on  which  they  subsisted,  but  they  had  no
horses  or  other  loco-motive  animals.

"  They  told  me  they  all  dressed  in  garments  made  of  a
yellowish-brown  material,  and  shaped  in  the  mode  prevail-
ing among  our  oriental  people.  They  bore,  they  said,  much
the  same  shape  and  appearance  as  when  living  on  earth;
that  they  "used  an  oral  language,  as  we  do  here,  and  also
communicated  by  glances  of  the  eyes,  inflections  of  the
mouth  and  movements  of  the  facial  muscles.  They  had
among  them  something  like  the  marriage  relation,  but  it  was
dissoluble  at  the  will  of  the  parties.

"  I  put  sundry  other  questions,  some  of  them  relating  to
their  beliefs  on  various  topics,  but  the  information  I  obtain-
ed was  not  very  satisfactory.  In  fact,  these  responses  taken
together  are  so  meagre  and  uninteresting,  not  to  say  silly,
that,  were  I  penning  a  fiction,  I  should  certainly  either  omit
them,  or  invent,  if  I  could,  something  better  in  their  stead.
But,  as  I  am  recording  actual  occurrences,  I  have  set  these
down  just  as  I  heard  them.

"In  this  sort  of  communication  both  parties  seemed  to
have  nearly  lost  sight  of  their  condition  and  the  objects  that
had  consumed  so  much  of  the  night.  I  had,  in  a  consider-
able degree,  ceased  to  suffer,  and  my  antagonists  had  nearly
ceased  to  torture.  Indeed,  some  of  them  appeared  absolutely
to  have  dropped  asleep,  while  the  first  faint  morning  twilight
began  to  glimmer  through  my  window.  Outside,  too,  the
immense  noisy  multitude  had  grown  almost  totally  still,  and
I  began  strongly  to  hope  that  the  ordeal  was  over ;  that  by
some  merciful  intervention  I  was  plucked  from  the  gripe  of
the  demon  host.

"  IIow  then  was  I  startled,  when  suddenly  I  heard  a  stun-


236  REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.

ning  outburst  of  noises  without,  which  showed  plainly  the
whole  fiendish  throng  to  be  awake  and  waiting !  At  the
same  moment  a  loud,  commanding  voice  called  out,  '  Have
you  finished  him  ? — Is  the  work  done  V  One  of  the  party
within  my  room  replied,  '  Finished  him  ! — no,  he's  unhurt
and  sound  as  ever,  and  they  are  asleep !'

"  The  voice  outside,  with  a  blasphemous  execration,  then
exclaimed,  '  I  must  kill  him  myself  then,  and  have  done
with  it,  for  we  must  and  will  have  him!'

"  An  instant  after,  some  being  flew  or  bounded  into  my
window,  (I  could  just  perceive  a  shadowy  something  inter-
cept the  light  partially  for  a  moment,)  and  took  his  station
upon  my  bed,  at  the  back  of  my  head.  I  could  not  see  him,
but  I  could  dimly  discern  something  like  a  stick  or  branch
held,  as  I  supposed,  in  his  hand.  This  branch  he  kept
waving  to  and  fro  above  my  head.  It  made  a  sort  of  crack-
ling, electric  noise  as  it  moved,  and  I  either  grew,  or  imagined
I  grew,  faint  under  the  process.

"  It  was  impossible  now  to  help  feeling  pretty  thoroughly
alarmed  and  disheartened  at  this  fresh  proof  of  the  inveter-
ate hostility  which  was  pursuing  me,  especially  as  I  could
form  no  conception  of  what  was  to  result  from  this  mysteri-
ous movement  going  on  above  me.  Fancies  began  to  come
thick  and  fast  of  some  new  and  strange  anguish,  suddenly  to
seize  upon  the  very  springs  of  life,  as  a  consequence  of  the
work,  which  this  malignant  being  was  performing  in  omin-
ous silence.  The  thought,  too,  fell  blightingly  upon  me,
that  I  must  have  been  absolutely  surrendered  by  Heaven  to
the  power  of  the  demons  to  wreak  their  whole  will  upon  me,
else  I  could  not  have  been  left  helpless  so  long  in  their  ruth-
less gripe.  I  even  remonstrated  earnestly  with  my  would-be
destroyer,  against  his  thus  persisting  in  his  attempts  to  enroll
me  in  his  band,  alledging  that  I  must  be  more  a  hindrance
than  a  helper  to  demoniac  aims  and  enterprises.  To  all  my
urging,  he  answered  not  a  word,  but  continued  to  wave  the
mystic  wand.

"  I  then  relapsed  into  a  silence,  in  which  I  still  held  my
will,  braced  as  firmly  as  I  could,  against  any  consenting  sur-
render to  his  efforts. He  continued  to  wave,  I  should  judge,


REVELATIONS FROM PA  N  D  E  M  0  N  IUM.  237

a  full  half  hour,  when,  as  I  still  remained  unsubdued,  he
dashed  the  wand  against  my  side,  where,  with  a  hissing
noise,  it  seemed  to  become  extinct,  and  with  a  wrathful  exe-
cration he  became  still.

"  For  a  considerable  time  I  lay  expecting  either  some  new
assault,  or  else  some  destructive  consequence,  I  could  not
conjecture  what,  from  the  one  just  terminated.

"  At  length,  as  I  was  on  the  point  of  yielding  to  despair,
at  the  thought  of  my  present  state,  and  the  recollection  of
what  I  had  gone  through  for  the  last  few  hours,  the  'bene-
diction of  the  covering  heavens,'  the  merciful  deliverance  I
had  so  many  times  implored  in  vain,  descended  upon  me  in
the  form  of  a  dewy,  profound,  dreamless  sleep,  from  which,
after  several  hours,  I  awoke,  completely  free  from  the  recent
disturbance  and  affected  solely  with  a  slight  un-paining  lan-
guor. But  the  impression  of  the  last  night's  events  remained ;
and  I  thought  then,  as  now,  after  the  lapse  of  years,  I  think,
that  there  was  more  in  those  events  than  can  be  explained
by,  or  than  is  'dreamed  of  in  our  philosophjV  shallow,  skep-
tical and  material  as  it  is.  I  leave  to  the  reader  to  frame  his
own  exposition.  Many  will,  perhaps,  be  able  to  define  the
nature  of  my  condition  ;  at  any  rate  to  their  own  satisfaction."

We  surely  cannot  reasonably  expect  to  obtain  stronger
testimony  than  the  foregoing.  And  now,  kind  reader,  what
do  you  think?  Yerily,  no  one  can  desire  more  thrilling  reve-
lations from  Pandemonium.  Now,  the  explanation  of  all  this
is  necessarily  metaphysical ;  but  I  will  proceed  to  give  it.
For,  having  myself  experienced  much  of  a  spiritual  charac-
ter, I  feel  qualified,  to  some  extent,  to  indite  a  few  sentences
of  practical  advice  to  spiritual  mediums  already  developed,
and  to  those  persons  who  are  likely  to  become  such.

In  the  first  place,  let  it  be  lodged  in  the  mind,  as  a  uni-
versal principle,  that  every  man  is  a  duality — a  double  being
— a  One-ness,  growing  out  of  the  interpenetration  of  two  na-
tures. Every  man  has  two  different  spheres  of  consciousness
— an  external,  material,  or  sensuous  sphere,  and  an  interior,
spiritual,  or  super-sensuous  sphere !  The  external  sphere  in
man,  is  the  medium  of  communication  with  the  objects,  sen-


238  REVELATIONS FROM 1>  A  N  DEMONIUM,

sensations,  and  phenomena  of  the  external  world,  in  which
we  now  reside;  and  the  internal  sphere,  is  the  medium  of
communication  with  the  objects,  sensations,  and  phenomena
of  the  spiritual  world,  in  which  we  are  destined  to  reside,
alter  the  external  sphere,  with  the  external  body,  is  cast  off,
like  a  worn-out  garment,  and  put  for  ever  away  in  that  ward-
robe, called  "the  grave-yard."  But  we  live,  for  the  present,
in  an  external  world,  full  of  material  magnetism,  drawing
the  spirit  outwardly,  causing  us,  too  frequently,  to  become
unconscious  and  unmindful  of  that  brighter  and  more  interior
sphere  to  which,  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  we  are  related.

The  more  we  are  absorbed  or  involved  in  the  material
sphere,  the  more  are  we  unconscious  and  skeptical  as  to
existence  of  the  interior  and  spiritual.  The  great  majority
of  mankind  are  under  the  magnetism  of  the  external  world,
and  to  such— who  are  in  "outer  darkness"  and  discord-
where,  in  the  midst  of  temporary  pleasures,  of  every  variety,
there  are  "weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth" —
to  such,  there  is  no  immortal  hope!  no  Spirit-Land!  no
God!  Such  persons,  however,  are  frequently  strong  and
energetic.  They  work  like  beavers.  They  believe  in  this
world,  and  in  the  happiness  which  may  be  drawn  from  the
fields  and  vineyards.  They  believe  in  what  they  see— in
steam-boats,  in  loco-motives,  rail-roads,  and  telegraphs — and
so,  these  instrumentalities  of  civilization  and  happiness  are
constructed.  I  do  not  say  that  this  world  is  blessed  and
civilized,  exclusively,  by  materialists— by  persons  uncon-
scious of  the  spiritual  sphere— but,  that  the  majority  of  the
world  are  in  this  external  state  of  being,  of  feeling,  and
belief.  The  disadvantage  of  this  condition  is,  that  such
persons  are  more  or  less  insane,  ignorant,  or  unreasonable
concerning  things  of  an  interior  and  spiritual  character.

On  the  other  hand,  the  more  we  are  absorbed  or  involved
in  the  spiritual  sphere,  the  more  are  we  necessarily  uncon-
scious and  unmindful  of  our  multiform  relations  to  the
world  in  which  we  now  live.  We  may  be  rational  and
moral,  when  measured  by  the  interior  and  spiritual  stand-
ard; but  irrational  and  insane,  when  estimated  by  the  opin-
ions of  the  steam-boat  captain,  or  the  experiences  of (he


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  239

rail-road  conductor.  In  the  light  of  the  spiritual  sphere,  all
material  existences  seem  insignificant  and  worthless.  Before
the  kindling  luxuriance  and  breathing  beauty  of  a  spiritual
scene,  the  earth,  with  all  its  gold  and  grandeur,  fades  away
into  disgusting  worthlessness,  and  rolls  into  comparative
nonentity!  Persons,  whose  interior  sphere  is  open,  in  this
way,  to  the  spiritual  world,  are  extremely  sensitive  and
impressible.  They  work  like  bees,  and  must  have  flowers.
'They  believe  in  the  other  world;  this  is  peremptorily
ignored;  and  the  disadvantage  of  this  condition  is,  that
such  persons  are  more  or  less  disqualified  for  the  material
sphere  of  the  sensuous  world.  They  become  ignorant,
unreasonable,  and,  to  some  extent,  insane  in  the  conflict
between  their  sensuous  and  super-sensuous  experiences.
Hence,  dreamers,  somnambulists,  psychological  subjects,
clairvoyants,  poets,  prophets,  seers,  and  what  are  now  termed
spiritual  mediums,  become  occasionally  unfit  for  external
contact  and  material  activities.  They  are  sensitive  and
nervous,  because  the  controlling  power  of  the  body  has
changed  its  plane  of  activity — has  gone  inwardly  toward
the  region  of  the  innermost,  and  left  the  external  surfaces  of
the  nerves  destitute  of  their  tranquillizing  medium — hence,
the  world  becomes  almost  unbearable,  and  is  often-times
improperly  repelled  and  abandoned.  Such  persons  are
surely  on  "the  broad  road"  to  fanaticism,  although  they
began  their  pilgrimage  by  entering  in  at  "the  strait  gate"
of  personal  discipline.

From  these  positions,  I  have  a  few  practical  deductions
to  present,  for  the  consideration  alike  of  materialists  and
spiritualists.

First  Both  extremes  of  existence  are  but  different  de-
grees of  insanity ;  more  properly,  of  ignorance  and  discord.

SecoJid.  Both  conditions  are  wrong;  because,  when  one
is  indulged  in,  at  the  expense  of  the  benefits  of  the  other,
it  is  a  partial  resignation  of  the  greatest  blessing  of  our
being;  i.  e.,  an  individuality  of  consciousness,  will,  and  reason}

The  man  who  lives  and  believes  in  this  material  objective
world,  exclusively,  is  but  half  a.  man!  lie  is  a  materialist;
his  world  is  lighted  by  the  Moon,  and  he  believes  in  no  spir-


240  RBVELATIO  X  S F  R  0  M r  A  X  D  E  M  0  X  I  U  M  .

itual  Sun.  While,  on  the  other  hand,  lie  who  is  wrapt  in
psychological  wonders,  and  yearns  only  for  the  spiritual  side
of  life,  is,  also,  but  half  a  man,  and  grows  rapidly  abnormal
and  unsound.  Let  it  be  distinctly  understood,  therefore,  that,
to  resign  our  consciousness  of  individuality — to  give  ourselves
wholly  to  the  exclusive  magnetism  of  either  one  of  the
worlds  or  sides  of  our  common  nature — is  to  violate  the
Law  of  Justice,  (organic  equilibrium  or  harmony,)  and  the
effects  could  only  prove  abnormal  and  absurd.

Third.  To  be  wholly  material,  is  to  be  deprived  of  the
blessings  which  flow  from  the  spiritual;  and  to  be  wholly
spiritual,  in  this  sphere  of  existence,  is  to  be  an  unphilo-
sophical  or  discordant  nature.

Fourth.  The  best  way  to  graduate  the  impressions  which
roll  upon  our  consciousness  from  the  two  hemispheres  of  our
being,  is  to  be  passive  or  willing  in  spirit,  and  read}^  for  any
thing,  but  always  firm  in  our  prayer  for  truth,  and  deter-
minedly opposed  to  whatever  sensation  disturbs  the  harmony
of  our  material  or  spiritual  being.

Fifth.  It  will  be  found  that  all  the  "devils"  of  the  uni-
verse are  living  in  the  symbols  of  the  mind — on  the  middle
ground  between  our  material  and  spiritual  organizations.
What  are  called  uevil  spirits,"  originate  in  the  conflict  of
the  nervous  system,  when  one  state  of  mentality  is  indulged
at  the  expense  of  the  blessings  which  the  other  may  con-
tribute or  confer.

Sixth.  It  will  also  be  found  that  the  charge  of  insanity
is,  in  reality,  no  more  applicable  to  the  excited  spiritualist
than  to  the  cold  materialist;  because,  on  the  ground  that
extremes  of  every  description  are  unhealthy,  it  follows  that
the  human  mind,  in  either  condition,  is  out  of  the  true  equi-
librium, and  hence  abnmmal.  And,  as  the  majority  of  man-
kind are  in  exclusive  bondage  to  the  magnetism  of  the
material  side  of  human  nature,  so  the  minority,  who  incline
to  the  spiritual  side  of  existence,  must  expect  to  be  voted
abnormal,  by  the  majority,  and  hence,  also,  fit  candidates  for
the  lunatic  asylum!  Now,  be  assured,  here  is  a  large  field
thrown  open  for  the  exercise  of  the  principles  of  toleration ;
and  the  ability  to  dispassionately  consider  the  claims  and


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  24 1

tendencies  of  our  common  nature,  may  now  have  a  freer
manifestation.  To  consider  one  another  insane  is  an  easy
matter;  but  to  ascertain  the  exact  standard  of  judgment  in
the  premises,  is  a  branch  of  wisdom  not  so  easily  acquired.
Nevertheless,  I  have  no  hesitation  to  state  the  philosophical
law,  whereby  we  may  adjudicate  for  ourselves,  or  by  which
others  may  judge  for  us,  as  to  the  actual  condition  of  our
Individuality.  And  this  law,  as  my  perception  and  experi-
ence go  conclusively  to  establish,  is  the  lav:  of  harmony  be-
tween the  material  and  spiritual  natures,  from  which  duality
we  are  individually  derived  and  eternally  perpetuated.

If  the  spiritual  sphere  draws  us  out  of  organic  and  sensu-
ous harmony  with  the  laws  and  circumstances  of  the  external
world,  then  we  have,  in  spirit,  taken  an  abnormal  position —
one  side  of  Truth ;  and  the  same  is  equally  true,  if  the  ma-
terial sphere  is  suffered  to  becloud  our  spiritual  or  super-
sensuous  nature,  or  allowed  to  conceal,  in  us,  the  interior
evidences  of  our  immortal  inheritance  and  blessed  destiny.
Either  state  is  unsound  and  unhealthy ;  hence,  of  necessity,
proportionably  insane  and  dangerous.  In  either  extreme,
the  mind  is  beset  with  imaginary  devils,  imaginary  hells,
and  imaginary  evil  spirits.  You  will  not  be  surprised  to
hear  me  so  acknowledge  myself  believing ;  for  so  am  I  at
length  constrained  to  say  :  and  you,  who,  from  spiritual  ex-
periences, have  been  forced  to  a  similar  position,  can  follow,
with  me,  this  acknowledgment  to  its  ultimate  analysis.

Seventh.  All  are,  or  may  be,  mediums.  All  men  are  seers.
The  spirit  of  God  is  infinite  !  and  the  drayman,  the  tollman,
the  merchant,  and  rail-road  contractor,  as  well  as  the  poet
and  philosopher,  are,  to  some  extent,  seers  of  spirits,  or,  more
properly,  of  the  forces  of  nature,  which  are  the  life -currents  of
the  universal  spirit!  Now,  be  it  remembered,  these  forces'
or  laics  appear  discordant  to  the  discordant  man;  and  harmoni-
ous to  the  man  of  harmony.  If  a  musical  instrument  be  out
of  tune,  not  even  the  most  skillful  performer  can  elicit  music
from  its  cords.  If  a  human  brain  be  unbalanced  in  its  forces,
or  disproportionate  in  any  department  of  its  combinations,  not
even  the  angel  Gabriel  could  impart  to  it  an  impression
which  shall  be  altogether  consistent  and  reliable
21


242  REVELATIONS FRC.M PANDEMONIUM.

Eighth.  Let  no  medium,  therefore,  believe  in  evil  spirits
upon  evidence  personally  received ;  because  the  imperfections
of  human  brains  arc  yet  a  disqualification — the  symbols  of
wrong  conditions  are  there — standing  in  the  gates  of  mind,
preventing  the  development  of  good  judgment  upon  a  ques-
tion so  momentous.

Ninth.  If  we  desire  reliable  illumination,  let  us  go  upon
the  Alps  of  personal  harmony.  If  we  would  hear  the
"voices  of  angels "  understandingly,  let  us  go  upon  the
Mounts  of  purification,  temperance,  and  simplicity.

Tenth.  If  we  would  comprehend  the  external  world,  and
subjugate  it  to  our  wiU^  we  must  look  at  and  work  upon  it
from  the  spiritual  sphere;  because  all  Outward  phenomena —
seeds,  plants,  trees,  great  mountains,  vast  oceans,  the  bending
sky,  birds,  the  inhabitants  of  forests  and  floods,  and  the  suc-
cessive development  of  human  societies — these  all  flow  from
spiritual  or  invisible  sources  of  causation !  And  if  we  are  so
truly  in  bondage  to  the  external,  and  to  the  innumerable
symbols  and  superstitions  which  grow  like  fungi  upon  its
varied  surface,  then  are  we  most  truly  "mediums"  for  the
fantastic  impressions  of  existence — seeing  the  basis  even  of
that  old  "impression"  upon  which  the  doctrine  of  good  and
evil  deities  was  predicated  and  erected  by  Zoroaster!

Eleventh.  Experience  prompts  me  to  affirm,  that  good  com-
munications depend  upon  good  states  of  mind.  If  you  would
have  true  impressions,  live  true  lives.  Your  drinking,  sleep-
ing, eating,  occupation,  &c,  must  be  free  from  extremes,  and
consistent  always  with  the  reciprocal  laws  and  developments
of  your  dual  nature.

A  fever  is  one  state  of  the  body — a  chill  is  the  opposite ;
both  are  wrong,  being  out  of  harmony-  with  nature  ;  and
both,  therefore,  develop  "  devils,"  in  the  shape  of  internal
disorders;  and  "evil  spirits,"  also,  in  the  familiar  shape  of
pains,  aches  and  mental  disturbances.  But  this  is  a  merely
physical  illustration! Let  us  apply  this  thought  to  the  mind.

Now,  the  mind,  be  it  remembered,  is  the  greatest  and  most
fertile  source  of  perplexities.  How  can  mind  investigate
itself?  Can  mind  solve  mind?  As  well  might  a  man  try
to  lift himocif  by  his  own  ears! Still, we must  onward


REVELATIONS FROM PANDEMONIUM.  243

press!  and  analyze  as  much  of  mind  as  the  self-investigating
power  will  allow.

Considered  as  a  dualism,  with  two  sides  to  his  individual-
ity— one  outwardly,  facing  *he  natural  sphere,  the  other
inwardly,  facing  the  spiritual  sphere — let  us  never  fail  to
remember  man  when  under  the  dominion  of  his  outward
attractions.  Outward  attractions  are  determined  by  the
symbols  or  the  organs  of  his  mind.  The  inward  activity  is
determined  by  these  external  forms.  As  to  the  origin  of
these  forms,  we  will  not  stop  to  inquire.  In  demoniac  visita-
tions to  the  brains  of  an  inebriate — during  the  psychological
paroxysms  of  delirium  tremens — the  effect  of  these  symbols
is  particularly  visible.  If  a  most  beautiful  angel  should
stand  by  the  bed-side,  the  inflamed  symbols  would  convert
the  object  into  terrible  and  frightful  proportions.  The  gen-
tlest breathings  are  supposed  to  be  the  living  fires  of  Ge-
henna. The  room  is  imagined  to  be  on  fire,  and  the  seer
will  spring  to  save  his  life,  while  there  is  nothing  of  the
kind  existing  exterior  to  his  mind.  But  I  have  clear  im-
pressions that  spirits  do  sometimes  work  (upon  the  minds
of  certain  unfortunate  individuals)  thrilling  symbolic  repre-
sentations or  dramas  solely  for  the  sake  of  securing  a  reform-
ation. But  enough!  This  law  explains  all:  that  mental
discord,  and  the  s\'mbols  of  such  discord,  develope  all  the
conceptions  of  hells  and  of  demons  that  ever  obtained  a  foot-
ing in  this  rudimental  existence.


A  VOICE  TO  THE  INSANE.


Since  the  dissemination  of  the  thrilling  idea  of  a  possible
intercourse  between  the  two  worlds,  our  eyes  and  ears  are
constantly  assaulted  with  newspaper  and  verbal  reports  con-
cerning the  frightful  increase  of  insanity.  "Behold  the
effects  of  the  New  Philosophy!"  exclaims  a  petrified  imper-
sonation of  conservatism :  "  What  do  you  think  now  ?  Don't
3rou  see  that  every  body  interested  in  the  manifestations  is
going  crazy?  A  tree  shall  be  known  by  its  fruits."  The
secular  journals  record  almost  every  week  two  or  three  new
cases  of  intellectual  aberration ;  thus  swelling  the  list  of  vic-
tims to  modern  developments  and  hallucinations.

The  retreats  and  asylums  in  the  western  and  northern
states,  if  the  public  prints  be  correct,  are  filling  with  mentally
diseased  individuals.  The  increase  in  the  number  of  insane
is  said  to  be  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of  historic  record.
If  these  reports  be  true,  as  certain  persons  think  they  have
considerable  reason  to  believe  the}^  are,  then  indeed  have  we
a  new  theme  for  deliberate  contemplation.  We  should  not
disguise  any  fact,  however  unfavorable  or  prejudicial  to  our
cause;  but  instead,  should  examine  the  fact  or  reported  event,
with  all  the  candor  and  impartiality  possible  for  honest,  fear-
less, philosophic  minds  to  command.  Self-culture  requires  the
cultivation  of  this  mental  habit;  self-strength  is  impossible
without  it.  Men  must  be  self-honest,  self-inspecting,  self-
impartial,  before  these  causes  of  communal  happiness  can  be
rendered  efficiently  active  among  the  earth's  inhabitants.

It  is  no  plan  of  mine  to  establish  a  new  form  of  sectarian-
ism. A  desire  so  low  and  so  unworthy  a  Man  has  never  for
a  single  moment  occupied  my  brain.  Sectarianism  has  been
the  curse  of  the  Christian  world.  The  good,  and  truth,  and
beauty  of  the  doctrines  of  Jesus  have  been  deformed  and


A VOICE TO THE INSANE.  245

placed  in  unnatural  juxtapositions  by  the  sectarian  schemes
of  certain  famous  men.  If  I  "know  any  thing,  I  know  this.
Consequently,  should  I  become  fired  with  sectarianism,  and
set  myself  to  the  work  of  constructing  a  new  Party — merely
a  new  form  of  an  existing  Evil — then  manifestly  I  would  be
sinning  against  the  Holy  Ghost:  transgressing  against  the
Sovereign  Law  of  Eight  within  me,  upon  which  alone  are
established  the  equilibrium  of  character  and  that  interior  hap-
piness which  every  one  is  organized  to  possess.

Insanity  is  a  deplorable  disaster  to  the  mind.  The  uni-
verse is  an  opaque  absurdity  to  the  unreasonable  being.
Eeason  is  the  king  whose  dominion  comprehends  the  vast
territories  of  objective  and  conscious  existence.  Without  the
king,  the  kingdom  becomes  a  blank  scene  of  desolation.  On
one  occasion,  a  lunatic  was  asked  "what  he  thought  of  the
world?"  In  reply,  he  immediately  chalked  a  large  circle  on
his  prison-wall.  As  he  put  within  the  ring  no  lines  for
rivers,  no  ridges  for  mountains,  no  indications  of  continents,
the  visitor  inquired  of  the  diseased  mind  "why  he  omitted
these  things?"  "To  me,"  replied  the  lunatic,  "the  world  is
like  that — all  blank,  all  blank,  all  blank !

If  the  spiritual  manifestations  produce  insanity,  it  is  time
that  the  world  had  the  benefit  of  the  fact.  Those  who  have
not  investigated,  should  possess  such  information  as  a  criterion
to  their  judgment  in  the  prosecution  of  an  inquiry;  while
those  who  have  made  themselves  acquainted  with  the  subject,
should  also  know  all  the  facts,  and  the  conclusions  logically
deducible  from  them,  in  order  to  meet  opposers  truthfully
and  his  own  objections  without  connection  of  thought.

In  the  first  place,  I  openly  acknowledge  that  the  new  de-
velopments have  acted  as  secondary  causes  in  the  production
of  insanity.  The  mail  brings  me  occasional  evidence.  No
longer  ago  than  last  January,  I  received  a  letter  strongly
appealing  to  my  "principles  of  humanity  and  benevolence."
The  writer  wrote  "in  behalf  of  an  idolized  brother.  *  *  *
About  four  years  since  he  became  interested  in  the  rappings
by  being  told  that  a  deceased  sister  was  present  at  the  circle.
From  that  time  he  has  believed  this  beloved  sister  to  be  what
lie  was  told  at  the  time  she  was — "his  guardian  angeL" — A
21*


24G  A VOICE TO THE INSANE.

year  ago  last  September  he  became  what  is  termed  a  'writing
medium,'  got  entangled  with  what  he  supposed  to  be,  and
called  at  the  time,  'evil  spirits.'  * * * They

kept  him  writing  when  he  should  have  been  working  or
sleeping,  and  in  a  short  time  he  began  to  slww  signs  of  mental
derangement.'1''  Taken  altogether  I  have  probably  received
not  more  than  six  letters  of  this  description.  Bat,  as  before
said,  the  Press  is  every  week  promulgating  what  it  terms  the
''deplorable  effects  of  spiritualism  and  the  new  philosophy.".

In  the  second  place,  I  foresee  no  prejudicial  influence  to
grow  out  of  such  an  acknowledgment.  But  I  do  perceive  a
good  in  it ;  which  may  appear  as  I  proceed.  This  charge  of
insanity  is  the  most  influential  obstacle  just  now  to  the  more
rapid  advancement  of  the  manifestations.  Hundreds,  by  an
impulsion  of  will,  shut  their  minds  against  the  unfolding  evi-
dences of  spiritual  intercourse;  solely  on  the  ground,  that  all
spiritualists  are  reported  to  be  more  or  less  insane,  and  some
of  them  already  under  medical  treatment.  Instead,  therefore,
of  furnishing  weapons  for  our  opposers  by  a  candid  acknowl-
edgment of  the  facts,  we  are  rather  doing  something  to
enlighten  ourselves  and  the  community  generally  upon  the
laws  of  the  human  mind.  If  the  facts  will  conduct  us  to
sane  conclusions,  perhaps  we  shall  be  almost  willing  to  toler-
ate the  effects  already  developed,  and  with  our  increased
knowledge  prevent  all  like  occurrences  hereafter.  It  is  to
this  end  that  I  am  impressed  respectful^  to  submit  the  fol-
lowing thoughts:

The  logic  of  conservative  editors  and  of  their  masters,  the
clerg}^,  is  this:  "the  spiritual  manifestations  make  people
insane;  hence  the  manifestations  are  evil,  and  should  be
shunned  as  an  injurious  delusion."  "If  reports  are  to  be
relied  on,"  says  the  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  "this  ex-
traordinary disease,  the  spiritual  rapping  mania,  is  rapidly
spreading.  It  takes  admirably  with  a  certain  class  of  minds.
Gentlemen  who  were  esteemed  for  their  sound  discretion,
heretofore,  discover  at  once  to  their  friends  that  a  screw  is
loose  in  the  mental  machinery.  With  a  profound  expression
of  thou ghtfuln ess,  when  the  rappings  are  mentioned,  some
of  them  timidly  venture  to  suggest  that  'there  maj'  be  some-


A VOICE TO THE INSANE.  247

tiling  in  it.'  "  In  this  connection  let  me  inquire:  Is  it  sound
logic,  is  it  a  good  doctrine  to  advocate,  that  a  matter  is  evil
and  dangerous  simply  because  certain  disagreeable  effects
grow  out  of  it?  Suppose,  to  use  a  strong  comparison,  I  eat
a  poisonous  herb,  and  thereby  cease  to  live  on  earth:  tell  me,
■what  is  wrong  or  evil?  Is  the  plant  evil?  Kay :  the  wrong
consists  in  the  inadaptedness  of  the  qualities  of  that  herb  to
the  welfare  of  my  physical  economy.  Suppose  I  walk  im-
petuously across  the  floor,  and,  in  consequence  of  inattention
to  my  footsteps,  stumble  over  a  chair,  and  injure  myself  ex-
ceedingly. What  shall  I  do?  If  I  adopt  the  logic  of  the
conservative,  I  must  denounce  the  chair  as  being  a  dangerous
evil,  and  destroy  it,  if  possible.  But  if  I  adopt  the  logic  of
truth,  I  shall  walk  next  time  with  more  deliberateness  and
rationality.  The  world  is  full  of  poverty,  and  disease,  and
suffering.  Is  life,  therefore,  a  dangerous  evil?  Is  existence,
thereiore,  an  ignis  fatuus,  delusive  infatuation,  meriting  the
scorn  and  condemnation  of  philosophic  minds?  Or,  is  not
existence  the  greatest  blessing?  and  the  effects  growing  out  of
it,  are  they  not  the  fruits  of  a  disordered  social  arrangement?
Do  they  not  also  issue  from  unfortunately  organized  members
of  society?  Come!  let  us  be  candid,  reader:  let  us  never
shrink  from  the  responsibility  of  rational  conclusions!

The  doctrine  that  the  manifestations  are  evil,  because  some
fifty  persons  have  been  over-excited  by  their  own  extremes
of  habit  and  over-wrought  indulgences,  or  mental  predispo-
sition, is  an  idea  as  weak  as  the  institutions  from  which  it
emanates.  There  is  no  truth  in  it.  It  is  a  cheap  logic,  em-
ployed in  the  pulpit  to  frighten  the  people  from  the  new
developments.  And  certain  fungi  indigenous  to  the  conserv-
ative soil,  in  the  shape  of  editors  and  tract-writers,  reiterate
the  fallacious  reasoning  whenever  exists  the  slightest  pretext,
no  matter  how  superficial,  for  writing  a  verbose  denunciation.

Some  persons  are  too  indolent  to  investigate;  others  are
too  deeply  immersed  in  the  waters  of  oriental  thought;  but
the  majority  of  society  are  too  proud.  This  pride  and  super-
ficial high-mindedness  constitute  a  powerful  reason  why  there
are  so  few  who  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  There  are
very  few  persons  who  "repent  and  become  as  little  children."


248  A VOICE TO TIE INSANE.

The j  belong  to  the  wealthiest  families,  go  to  the  richest
sanctuary,  and  walk  proudly  in  the  highest  paths  of  social
existence.  How  can  they  bend  the  knee  to  a  development
which  the  minister  denounces,  or  which  fashionable  scientific
men  pronounce  unsound?  As  an  example  of  this  I  quote
the  following:

"Whether  the  assumption  of  the  believers  in  spiritual
manifestations  be  true  or  false,  we  do  not  now  propose  to
inquire.  It  is  of  their  sad  effects  we  have  a  word  to  say.
There  are  minds,  possibly,  which  can  enter  upon  an  investi-
gation of  the  claims  of  the  spiritualists,  can  observe  their
operations  and  their  singular  developments,  without  being
injured.  They  can  hear  what  purport  to  be  communications
from  the  spirit- world:  they  can  hold  converse  with  departed
spirits,  as  carried  on  by  spiritualists:  they  can  see  material
substances  perform  strange  evolutions,  and  not  be  affected,
perhaps,  immediately,  in  any  injurious  manner.  But  it  is
not  this  class  of  mind  that  is  so  much  exposed  to  harm  to
any  great  extent,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  so  easily  brought
to  the  task  of  deep  investigation.  Men  of  strong  thinking
powers,  constantly  engaged  in  philosophical  and  scientific
research,  have  not,  as  }-et,  to  any  great  degree,  been  occupied
with  the  spiritual  developments  referred  to.

"It  is  hard  work  to  get  such  mind  to  grapple  with  what
appears  tinged  with  so  great  ridiculousness  and  absurdity.
If,  however,  it  is  at  any  time  brought  to  bear  upon  such
material  for  examination,  it  approaches  it  with  that  delib-
erateness  and  rationality  that  ever  characterizes  inquiries
after  truth.  Its  efforts  are  not  marked  by  that  fervid  excita-
bility, which  impairs  reason  and  prevents  faithful  research.
It  enters  upon  the  work  of  investigation,  with  impartiality,
and  a  willingness  to  expose  error  the  moment  it  is  detected.
It  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  sustain  or  encourage  delusion.
It  leaves  the  field  of  exploration,  the  moment  it  finds  itself
guided  solely  by  an  ignis  fatuus.  It  prefers  to  Avalk  in  sun-
light, rather  than  grope  after  the  changing  brilliancy  of  the
glow-worm.  There  may  be  exceptions  to  the  remark;  but
we  unhesitatingly  say,  that  the  great  mass  of  the  scientific,
the  cultivated  mind  of  the  age,  cannot  be  brought  into  the


A VOICE TO THE INSANE.  249

support  of  spiritualism,  so  called,  or  any  kindred  delusion.
Such  mind  is  secure  from  the  influences  of  all  such  infatuation."

The  foregoing  paragraph  is  an  editorial  attempt  to  stimulate
the  scholastic  superciliousness  of  so-called  scientific  mem
"It  is  hard  to  get  such  mind  to  grapple  with  what  appears
tinged  with  so  great  ridiculousness  and  absurdity!"  This
is,  when  viewed  correctly,  the  keenest  irony.  These  same
scientific  men  will  pay  their  dollars  to  see  an  Egyptian  mummy
unrolled  from  its  century-worn  shroud,  or  spend  much  time
in  examining  the  organic  remains  of  some  defunct  fish  or
quadruped,  whose  fossil  vestiges  the  Irishman's  spade  has
unexpectedly  exhumed.  These  men  are  all  too  subterranean !
The  earth  and  its  contents — the  granite  state,  the  mineral
kingdom,  plants,  animals,  and  the  human  economy,  with
now  and  then  a  generalizing  glimpse  at  the  stars — form  the
field  for  scientific  research.  But  when  a  more  interior  and
spiritual  theme  appears,  then  comes  the  cry  of  "ridiculous-
ness and  absurdity" — thus  fighting  against  a  principle  which
they  unquestionably  neither  comprehend  nor  appreciate.

And  what  is  the  result?  The  field  is  open  to  the  exclusive
re  veilings  of  impulsive  organizations.  The  new  marvels
have  the  effect  to  fan  into  a  blaze  the  slumbering  embers  of
some  old  religious  enthusiasm  or  excitement  through  which
certain  individuals  have  passed,  plunging  them  into  unprofit-
able fanaticism,  and  the  question  also  into  unmeaning  jargon
and  unphilosophical  relations  to  the  wants  of  the  world.
Such,  to  some  extent,  has  been  the  fate  of  the  manifestations.
And  mental  alienation  has  followed,  in  a  few  instances  of
over-excitement;  but  the  candid  mind  will  discriminate
between  the  abuse  of  a  blessing,  and  its  right  application  to
the  needs  of  man.

The  external  and  fallacious  argument,  that  a  thing  is  evil
because,  when  abused,  it  'bestows  an  injury  instead  of  a
blessing,  is  perhaps  the  strongest  weapon  which  churchmen
and  grand-jununen  can  wield  against  a  movement  to  which
they  feel  a  prejudice.  This  was  a  popular  objection  to  the
doctrines  of  the  Second  Advent.  "Consider  well,"  says  a
writer  on  the  love  of  the  supernatural  in  man,  "the  Tem-
ple of  the  Second  Advent — its  thronging  thousands,  with


250  A VOICE TO THE INSANE.

wild,  awe-stricken  faces  turned  towards  the  East,  like  Mus-
selmen  to  their  Kebla,  in  hourly  expectation  of  the  down-
rushing  of  the  fiery  mystery  of  the  Apocalypse;  waiting
with  trembling  eagerness  and  'not  unpleasant  horror'  to
behold,  with  the  eye  of  flesh,  the  tremendous  pageant  before
which  the  elements  shall  melt  and  the  heavens  flee  away —
the  Baptism  of  a  World  in  Fire."  An  excitement  so  pro-
tracted and  terrific  as  this  had  the  inevitable  effect,  in  certain
minds,  of  producing  insanity.  And  thus  the  churchmen,
who  could  not  begin  to  overthrow,  from  Scripture,  the  care-
ful lv -systematized  arguments  of  Adventists,  had  recourse  to
the  logic  of  insanit}^,  as  implying  the  evil  and  error  of  Mil-
ler's theory.

But  I  cheerfully  acknowledge  that,  if  I  could  see  no  other
argument  against  the  Advent  doctrine  or  the  religion  of  the
churches  than  this  weak  logic  of  making  certain  organized
minds  deranged,  I  should  accept  them  at  once  as  being  sound
and  invulnerable.  All  religions  have  accomplished  some-
thing toward  distressing  and  diseasing  the  human  mind ;  and
the  logic  when  applied  to  them  is  as  potent  as  when  employed
against  the  manifestations.

Let  us  reflect  upon  the  causes  of  insanity.  This  mental
state  is  produced  either  by  a  susjiension  of  the  functions  of
some  portions  of  the  brain,  or  else,  by  an  over-action  of  all
the  organs  composing  it.

But  these  are  the  immediate  causes.  The  question  is:
'What  originates  these  immediate  causes?'  The  primar}^
causes  of  insanity  arise  from  the  violation  of  some  physio-
logical or  psychological  law.  The  idea  that  spirits  produce
insanity,  as  the  s}\stem  of  Nature  stands  represented  to  my
mind,  is  a  foolish  and  unphilosophical  thought.  The  idea  of
"demoniacal  possession"  is  equally  absurd.  The  obsession
of  certain  persons  by  'devils  or  evil  beings'  is  an  Egyptian
mythology.  It  is  a  portion  of  the  Mahometan  religion,  that
every  person  is  momentarily  attended  by  two  opposite  classes
of  supernatural  beings — angels  and  demons.  These  attend-
ants constantly  tempt  the  mind  with  good  and  evil  inclina-
tions. And  it  sometimes  happens,  that  both  influences  meet
in  the  mind  at  the  same  moment;  when,  according  to  Ma-


A VOICE TO THE INSANE.  251

hornet,  a  most  terrific  struggle  or  battle  ensues  between  the
invisible  angels  and  demons^  which  combat  continues  for
several  days  in  order  to  settle  the  question  of  supremacy;
and  if  the  good  beings  gain  the  ascendency,  aided  by  the
person's  will,  then  the  mind  becomes  very  happy;  but  should
the  demons  capture  the  individual,  then  he  is  forthwith  'pos-
sessed of  the  devil,'  and  exhibits  the  most  frightful  signs  of
madness  and  passion.  Mussel  men  acknowledge  that  this
doctrine  originated  with  the  Jews;  the  latter  trace  it  to  the
Persian  Magi,  who  learned  it  from  the  Egyptians.

The  plain  truth  is  this:  insanity  is  a  hereditary  disease,
which,  like  the  symptoms  of  consumption  and  cancer,  may  be
roused  to  full  development  by  the  disobedience  of  organic  or
mental  laws.  Or,  if  not  hereditary,  and  no  predisposition  ex-
ists in  the  mental  fabric,  then  insanity  ma}'  be  superinduced —

1.  By  incessant  mental  care,  as  in  business.

2.  By  over-physical  exertion.  [child-birth.

3.  By  the  rushing  of  blood  to  the  brain,  as  in  apoplexy,  in  fevers  or

4.  By  protracted  dyspepsia.

5.  By  excessive  eating,  and  drinking  of  stimulating  beverages.

6.  By  protracted  sensual  indulgences.

7.  By  fright  and  fear.  [affection.

8.  By  disappointments  in  business  or  in  the  placement  of  the  conjugal

9.  By  anxiety  about  religious  considerations.

10.  By  the  sudden  death  of  a  beloved  friend  or  conjugal  companion.

11.  By  protracted  enthusiasm  or  joy.

12.  By  an  excessive  glow  of  any  love  or  of  any  emotion.

13.  By  continued  suspense  of  mind  on  any  matter.

14.  By  over-study,  or  anxiety  to  understand  incomprehensible  themes

of  thought — such,  for  instance,  as  "sinning  away  the  day  of
grace" — or  the  theological  idea  of  the  unpardonable  sin.

Insanity  is  the  absence  of  health.  Health  is  a  state  aris-
ing from  the  full,  free,  unrestricted,  harmonious  play  of  all
the  laws,  fluids,  feelings,  and  faculties  of  the  body  and  mind.
Any  thing  which  tends  to  disturb  this  state  in  the  individual
may  not  be  denounced  as  evil,  per  se,  but  is  simply  to  be
avoided  as  unadapted  to  the  wants  of  that  individual  con-
stitution. Because  others  may  employ  the  same  thing  with
benefit  and  permanent  pleasure.

Fatigued  and  exhausted  with  religious  excitement,  some


252  A VOICE TO THE INSANE.

persons  experience  a  mental  reaction,  and  pass  into  the  oppo-
site extreme  of  cerebral  lethargy  and  lukewarmness.  After
remaining  in  this  condition  a  sufficient  period  to  give  all  the
feelings  and  faculties  a  perfect  repose,  the  same  persons  may
be  aroused  by  the  new  developments  with  all  the  strength
which  rest  from  previous  religious  cerebral  agitation  would
furnish.  Now,  if  such  individuals  should  become  insane,  the
disease  is  not  traceable  to  the  manifestations,  but  to  a  religious
trouble  through  which  in  former  days  they  have  passed.  It
is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  the  principal  causes  of  insanity,
even  where  the  manifestations  are  most  abundant,  are  Intem-
perance, Sensualism,  Love,  Money,  and  Religious  excitements.
Public  report,  which  is  never  wholly  truthful,  in  consequence
of  the  difficulties  attending  the  acquisition  of  facts,  gives  us
to  understand  that  about  fifty  persons  have  been  mentally
deranged  by  the  manifestations.  But,  even  granting  this
report  to  be  true,  (which  it  is  not,)  does  it  prove  that  the
ISTew  Developments  have  a  bad  tendency?  Quite  the  con-
traiy.  For  there  are  now  in  the  United  States,  nearly  five
hundred  thousand  persons  more  or  less  interested  and  believ-
ing in  the  doctrine  of  spiritual  intercourse.  Fifty  of  this
large  multitude  are  supposed  to  be  injured!  Can  the  pro-
prietors of  steam-boats  and  rail-roads  give  as  favorable  a
report?  Can  the  lightning  in  the  heavens  be  praised  for
doing  less  injury?  But  we  are  spending  time:  this  matter
is  too  plain  to  require  further  elucidation.

To  the  excitable  Ave  have  a  few  words  to  utter.  In  pur-
suing the  investigation  of  this  subject,  or  any  other,  you  are
admonished  never  to  become  irritable,  or  impatient,  or  impul-
sive. If  you  are  mediums  or  inquirers,  the  same  admonition
is  applicable.  If  you  become  enthusiasts,  then  you  are  too
irrational  to  furnish  philosophical  explanations  of  the  mani-
festations, if  }<ou  believe  them,  and  too  irritable  "to  try  the
spirits"  whenever  honest  or  designing  skeptics  make  appli-
cation. If  you  feel  very  sensitive  whenever  your  views  are
opposed,  and  disposed  to  get  angry  with  skeptical  minds,
then  be  ioarned,Jor  your  own  mental  condition  is  not  sound.
If  your  interest  is  becoming  daily  more  and  more  trouble-
some and  uncontrollable,  then  take  heed,  for  there  is  danger


A VOICE TO THE 1XS  A  X  E  .  253

of  too  much  mental  excitement.  If  you  cannot  sleep  well,
abstain  from  food  and  warm  drink  subsequent  to  four  o'clock
in  the  afternoon.  If  you  feel  restless  and  nervous  in  your
body,  and  mentally  disturbed  and  dissatisfied,  then  abstain
from  visiting  circles  and  from  all  reading  on  the  subject,
until  this  condition  ceases.  The  same  counsel  is  equally
applicable  to  persons  interested  in  any  religious  system,  or
habit,  or  amusement,  whenever  the  effect  of  the  same  upon
the  body  and  mind  is  not  quieting  and  harmonious.  But
from  this,  no  person  should  infer  that  it  will  injure  to  perse-
vere in  searching  out  truth,  or  impair  health,  philosophically
to  investigate  any  question  that  ever  arose  before  the  human
intelligence.  Nay,  it  is  only  "temperance  in  all  things"
which  is  here  inculcated — the  strictest  obedience  to  the  im-
mutable laws  of  physiology  and  mentality,  and  nothing  more.

America  is  a  free  land,  however,  and  each  human  being
has  an  indisputable  right  to  do  with  his  mind  just  what
seemeth  best  to  his  own  opinion.  If  he  desires  to  be  impul-
sive and  fanatical,  he  may  do  so  without  interference,  unless
he  invades  the  rights  of  others.  But  in  a  question  so  import-
ant and  world-wide  interesting  as  that  of  an  'Open  Inter-
course of  Thought  and  Affection  between  the  Inhabitants  of
the  Inferior  and  Superior  Worlds,'  it  is  unutterably  neces-
sary that  the  investigator  be  calm,  rational,  philosophical,
free  from  anxiety  and  fanaticism;  else  the  question  will  not
do  for  him  at  present  to  examine.  If  the  mind  is  in  the
least  inclined  to  over-excitement  and  despondency,  caution
and  deliberation  are  essential — no  matter  what  the  theme
presented  for  contemplation.

Almost  all  instances  of  insanity  by  the  manifestations  are
traceable  to  an  undue  trifling  with  the  subject  to  begin  with;
then  a  sudden  conviction  of  its  truth;  then  excessive  elation  or
anxiety  in  consequence  of  some  extravagant  promises  made
to  them  by  professedly  guardian  spirits;  then  getting  involved
in  what  are  termed  "evil  spirits"  and  troubled  by  contradic-
tions; then  mentally  exhausted  by  rapid  vibrations  between
doubts  and  faith;  then  filled  to  overflowing  with  the  idea  of
being  an  important  personage  in  the  eternal  designs  of
Providence,  having  some  ponderous  mission  to  accomplish;
22


~54  A voice r  O THE


A  N  E


then  over.-anocious  to  undertake  it;  then  angry  with  the  remon-
strance of  friends;  and  finally,  becoming  a  sad  candidate  for
the  lunatic  asylum !

I  have  said  that  I  acknowledge  the  manifestations  to  have
acted,  in  a  few  instances,  as  the  secondary  causes  of  insanity.
But  never  as  the  first  cause  !  There  must  necessarily  first
exist  some  predisposition  in  the  mind,  or  the  dregs  of  reli-
gious excitement,  or  a  diseased  constitution  in  consequence
of  repeated  violations  of  the  organic  and  mental  laws;  with
such  a  foundation  to  begin  with,  it  is  easy  for  the  person  to
tread  the  path  of  experience  above  described.

In  this  connection  I  am  impressed  to  add  another  admo-
nit  ion  to  the  excitable:  that  should  you  get  where  you  believe
yourself  to  be  a  ehosen  instrument,  in  the  hands  of  Providence,
to  do  some  extraordinary  work,  then  look  to  thy  health  of  body
and  mind,  for  there  is  no  philosophy  in  the  conviction.  It  is
true  that  every  son  and  daughter  of  Man  has  a  mission  to
perform.  The  unchangeable  laws  of  nature  provide  for  this
issue  of  human  existence;  and  if  you  live  righteously,  doing
no  harm  and  some  good  wherever  you  can,  then  you  are  per-
forming your  mission.  There  is  nothing  supernatural  in  it.
Be  patient  and  joyful  in  your  existence,  but  never" ianatical
and  irrational.  Spiritualism  teaches  temperance  in  all  things.
The  Ilarmonial  Philosophy  teaches  Reason  in  all  things.  If
you  are  not  temperate,  if  you  are  not  reasonable,  you  are  nc
true  spiritualist — no  advocate  of  true  Philosophy.  These
things  must  be  remembered.  Insanitj^  is  no  legitimate.
offspring  of  a  Philosophy  founded  solely  upon  Nature
and  Reason  !

It  is  very  proper  that  every  individual  should  desire  to
comprehend  the  object  of  his  existence.  The  "chief  end  of
man"  is  still  an  open  question.  That  every  one  has  an
"end"  to  accomplish,  or  missions  innumerable  to  fulfil  in
all  the  mighty  cycles  of  being,  must  be  self-evident  from  the
plan  and  perfection  of  the  human  constitution.  And  the
same  is  true  of  every  plant,  every  beast,  every  bird,  and
object,  in  the  domain  of  organic  life.  The  mission  of  every
tiling  is  stamped  upon  its  constitution;  written  in  the  "book
of  life,"  which  signifies  the  living  structure.


A V  01  C  E TO T  II  E I  X  S  A  N  E  .  :i~)5

If,  therefore,  the  mission  of  every  human  being  is  j  lainly
carved  on  the  various  departments  of  his  temple,  it  hence-
forth becomes  an  unphilosophical  thought  to  suppose,  that

Supreme  Being  will  make  another  revelation  of  the  same
instruction."-  The  entire  world,  heathen  and  Christian,  has
been  exceedingly  injured  by  confiding  in  this  absurdity.
Veneration  for  great  men  and  great  names;  deferential  regard
for  those  who  claim  to  be  chosen  vessels  of  the  Most  High —
has  constituted  a,  foundation  upon  which  inconceivable  labyr-
inths of  superstitious  despotism  have  been  erected.  This
error  has  actuated  certain  spiritualists.  The  firm  conviction
that  the  Almighty — the  Great  Positive  Mind  Himself — has
marked  out  a  special  mission  for  some  individuals  to  perform,
has  influenced  several  who  incline  toward  the  new  Phi-
losophy. Than  this,  I  know  of  nothing  more  absolutely
unsound  and  erroneous.

This  idea  of  a  supernaturally  prepared  mission,  begins
with  a  prepossession  of  the  affections  in  favor  of  superficial
authority,  i.  e.  great  men  and  great  names.  But  when  this
conviction  is  firmly  established  in  the  mind,  the  individual
ceases  to  be  "meek  and  lowly,"  and  rapidly  grows  despotic-
ally dogmatic.  He  begins  to  look  upon  mankind  as  so  many
subjects  of  his  exclusive  authority.  Every  religious  founder
known  to  history  has  left  a  record  of  this  fact  upon  his
devotees.  They  cease  to  be  self-sustaining,  self-developing,
self-illuminated  ;  but,  when  the  leader  is  gone,  they  gaze
longingly  after  him,  not  rationally  and  lovingly,  on  the
ground  of  friendship  and  admiration,  but  superstitiously  and
ignorantly,  on  the  supposition  that  he  was  a  special  vessel  of
Supreme  choice,  an  angel  direct  from  the  throne  of  grace  !
It  is  my  impression  that  I  should  be  unfaithful  to  the  Prin-
ciples of  the  Universe,  if  I  did  not  write  against  this
absurdity.  It  still  lives  in  the  minds  of  men.  Several
spiritualists  have  adopted  it  as  truth.  And  insanity,  in  such
instances,  is  more  than  possible.

*  The  reader  will  remember,  as  an  example,  the  Reply  of  Galen  to  my
question,  "  Why  persons  of  one  nation  went  as  delegates  to  another."  The
mission  is  governed  by  the  individual  attraction.


25G  A VOICE TO THE INSANE.

By  this  conviction,  an  amiable  disposition  is  converted
into  a  repulsive  vanity ;  and  vanity  is  the  enemy  of  truth,
freedom,  and  wisdom.  Such  persons  can  consent  to  converse
only  with  illustrious  minds — Jesus,  John,  Paul,  Swedenboro-
Franklin  ;  now  and  then  obtaining  a  message  from  the  top-
most summit  of  Omnipotence!  In  all  this  we  behold  nothing
of  "the  little  child"  who  enters  the  kingdom  of  heaven!

We  have  said  thus  much  to  the  excitable  and  impulsive.
But  much  remains  to  be  said  to  those  who,  while  they  sup-
port the  churches  and  the  priesthood,  being  therefore  under
the  same  condemnation  of  fostering  external  authority  and
supernaturalism,  still  ridicule  and  deride  the  manifestations.
Your  estimate  of  insanity  is  sadly  defective  !  You  have  voted
yourselves  as  perfectly  sane :  beware  of  the  inference !  You
pronounce,  as  crazy,  and  mentally  unsound,  all  who  leave  the
"old  paths"  and  tread  new  fields  of  thought!  The  feet  of
Error  rest  upon  theological  ground.  But  should  a  mind
discover  this  by  dint  of  much  reading  and  laborious  research,
and,  compelled  by  knowledge,  proclaim  his  discovery,  and
tread  publicly  a  new  field  of  faith,  the  cry  of  "insanity"  is
raised  against  him,  and  the  community  begin  to  mock  at
and  deplore  his  fate!  You  imagine,  because  a  man  changes
his  views  on  a  given  subject,  that  he  is  weak-minded  and
partially  insane.  Must  a  man  always  think  the  same
thoughts  concerning  the  same  thing?  Is  it  an  indication
of  mental  debilhrv  that  a  man — especially  one  who  invest-
igates for  himself— should  revolve,  like  the  comet,  eccen-
trically, around  some  great  central  subject,  until  he  finds  his
proper  orbit?

"  0,  consistency !  thou  art  a  jewel."  This  is  the  pride  of
common  minds.  In  most  heads  the  proposition  stands  thus:
First  and  foremost,  u  Popularity  ;"  Second,  and  next  in  im-
portance, "  Consistency ;"  Third,  and  least,  "Truth."

Truth  must  conserve  consistency  and  popularity  in  order  to
receive  attention  at  the  bar  of  public  opinion !  Men  get  wed-
ded to  theories,  and  then  oppose  the  law  of  divorce.  Every
thing,  to  the  conservative,  must  be  consistent  with  Iris  own
apprehensions  of  consistency,  else  it  is  error ;  and  the
believer in the new  thing  is, of  course, in his opinion,


A VOICE TO THE INSANE.  257

weak-minded  and  partially  deranged.  But  Mature  begets,
unfolds  out  of,  and  develops  from  her  interior  recesses,
many  apparent  paradoxes — breaks  up  continuous  plains  by
mountains,  turns  rivers  in  diverse  directions,  and  performs
certain  ':  freaks,"  as  if  to  confound  the  undeveloped  lovers
of  this  phantom — "  Consistency."  Why  not  get  out  a  bill
of  indictment  against  the  good  old  dame,  (Xalure,)  and  com-
mit her  to  the  lunatic  asylum  ?  For,  at  times,  her  departure
from  a  certain  orthodox  conservative  "  consistency,"  cannot
be  doubted.

On  this  point,  a  free-minded,  independent  writer  once
remarked:  "A  foolish  consistency  is  the  hobgoblin  of  little
minds,  adored  by  little  statesmen,  and  philosophers,  and
divines.  With  consistency  a  great  soul  has  simply  nothing
to  do.  He  may  as  well  concern  himself  with  his  shadow  on
the  wall.  Speak  what  you  think  now,  in  hard  words,  and
to-morrow  speak  what  to-morrow  thinks,  in  hard  words
again,  though  it  contradict  every  thing  you  said  to-day.  Ah!
so  you  shall  be  sure  to  be  misunderstood.  Is  it  so  bad,  then,
to  be  misunderstood?  Pythagoras  was  misunderstood,  and
Socrates,  and  Jesus,  and  Luther,  and  Copernicus,  and  Galileo,
and  Kewton,  and  Fulton,  and  every  pure  and  wise  spirit
that  ever  took  flesh.  To  be  great,  is  to  be  misunderstood."
The  application  of  this  is  plain.  We  should  make  Truth
the  supreme  consideration.  When  you  get  a  sjTstem  of  truth,
you  will  get  consistency ;  but,  be  this  as  it  may,  you  should
think  of  consistency  always  as  being  secondary  to  principle.
And  you  who  condemn  this  or  that  mind  as  insane,  because
a  love  of  truth,  more  than  affection  for  popularity,  consist-
ency, or  sectarianism  actuates  it,  should  be  very  careful  to
judge  not  the  person,  but  to  calmly  investigate  the  new
thing  presented.

Skeptics  may  do  much  injury  by  an  injudicious  and  un-
charitable denunciation  of  mediums.  A  superficial  and
pompous  disciple  of  Lord  Bacon  may  approach  a  sensitive
medium  or  clairvoyant,  and  vehemently  vociferate :  "  You
are  a  deceiver,  a  cheat,  a  humbug !  Your  conduct  is  shame-
ful! The  community  ought  to  indict  you  for  procuring
money  under  false  pretences!  You  are  an  impostor!"  ISTow.
22*


258  A VOICE TO THE INSANE.

I  do  not  exaggerate  when  I  say,  that  much  mental  distress
has  been  unnecessarily  caused  in  this  way.  Partial  bewild-
erment and  insanity  has  succeeded  such  unwarrantable  and
inhuman  treatment.  The  common  law  regards  "every  body
innocent  till  proved  to  be  guilty."  All  skeptics  and  disbe-
lievers should  be  at  least  as  charitable  as  the  civil  law ;  much
mischief  to  sensitive  minds  may  thus  be  utterly  prevented.

In  conclusion,  let  it  be  impressively  understood,  that  in-
sanity is  no  legitimate  offspring  of  either  Spiritualism  or  the
Harmonial  Philosophy.  Spiritualism  may  be  full  of  contra-
dictions and  troublesome  experiences;  it  may  be  replete  with
apparently  evil  and  unwholesome  manifestations  of  thought
and  physical  evidence;  it  may  offend  the  existing  notions  of
propriet}r,  and  develop  several  seemingly  unmeaning  things;
yet  when  rightly  apprehended,  it  is  simply  a  rational  demon-
stration of  the  nearness  of  the  two  worlds  to  each  other ;  it  is
a  plain,  undeniable  proof  that  "there  is  no  more  death" — ■
that  earth-born  minds,  our  relations  and  friends,  come  back
to  us,  clothed  with  bodies  both  substantial  and  immortal.
How  rational  is  this!  Can  a  truth  develope  insanity?  If  it
be  insanity  to  believe  in  this  glorious  demonstration  of  eternal
life,  let  us  pray  never  to  have  our  reason  restored  !

The  Harmonial  Philosophy  is  a  system  of  universal  na-
ture— material  and  spiritual,  terrestrial  and  celestial — whose
only  expounder  and  interpreter  is  immortal  Reason.  It
teaches  that  all  are  parts  of  one  perfect  whole.  In  this
Divine  Oneness  of  the  constitution  of  things,  there  is  no
absolute  antagonism,  no  discord,  no  unsoundness,  no  imbe-
cility. First  the  natural,  then  the  spiritual.  First  ignorance,
then  wisdom.  First  the  terrestrial  body,  then  the  body  cel-
estial. Uncreated  mind  and  uncreated  matter  are  eternally
married.  The  moving  Power  and  the  Substance  moved  are
indissolubly  united.  We  behold  the  Temple  of  the  Infinite
as  one  great  system  of  unity  and  truth.  And  reason,  not
insanit}7-,  is  the  medium  whereby  we  first  comprehend,  and
then  adore.


BENEFITS  OF EXPERIENCE


From  the  foregoing  chapter  on  insanity,  the  reader  may
fail  to  apprehend  the  true  nature  and  use  of  experience.
Its  penalties  and  benefits  are  little  understood.  But  I  am
impressed  that  experience,  like  friction,  when  applied  to  the
surface  of  gold,  brings  out  the  true  lustre  of  the  metal.  So
steel  is  polished.  In  a  universe,  where  the  law  of  Motion  is
omnipresent  and  eternal,  and  where  the  law  of  Progress
reigns  supreme,  this  frictionizing  or  purifying  process  must
follow  as  an  inevitable  concomitant;  as  the  agent  of  high
results.  By  this  friction,  the  cylinder  of  glass  becomes  illu-
minated with  electric  fire !  By  it,  the  bar  of  cold  steel  is
animated  with  magnetism,  and,  fraternally,  draws  atoms  to
its  bosom!  So,  too,  this  frictionizing  principle — this  phe-
nomenon of  contact  and  motion — this  law  of  experience,  is
the  chief  agent  engaged  in  strengthening  and  unfolding  the
human  mind.  Experience  is  the  book  of  life.  And  he  is  a
good  student  who  knows  how  to  read  its  doctrines;  and  he
who  practically  acts  upon  them,  is  educated  in  the  school  of
God!  The  creation  is  just  beginning  to  be  unfolded  to  man.
The  forms  and  colors  of  flowers,  and  the  vapors  of  heated
Water — has  not  the  world's  experience  educated  us  to  clothe
these  things  with  new  meanings?  To  the  short-sighted
ancients,  this  world  wras  the  centre  of  the  universe.  Every
thing  in  the  creation  was  believed  to  be  under  the  arbitrary
arrangements  of  Jehovah — and  fear  oppressed  every  mind.
But  now,  we  forget  the  earth,  and  all  its  vast  possessions,
when  we  contemplate  the  unutterable  immensities  that  swarm
along  the  white  shores  of  infinity!  And  all  we  now  fear
is,  ignorance!

The  true  scholar  can  read  from  the  leaves  of  trees.  The
true  preacher  can  see  "sermons  in  stones." The  good  man


260  BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE.

sees  "good  in  every  thing."  That  is  a  good  vision  which
sees  into  the  soul  of  things.  Man  sees  better  and  further
into  the  meanings  of  truth,  when  his  bodily  eyes  are  closed.
The  bottom  of  the  deepest  well  is  invisible.  The  purest
water  flows  from  springs  which  lie  beyond  the  sweep  of
mortal  vision.  Every  faculty  in  the  mind  has  eyes — looking
backwards  and  forwards,  clown  and  up!  In  animals,  these
eyes  are  termed  "instincts."  But,  unlike  the  brute,  man  adds
to  his  vision  the  spectacles  of  experience,  and  learns  to  probe
the  events  of  life.

With  undeviating  regularity,  a  beautiful  order  is  perpetu-
ally maintained  in  every  department  of  the  various  physical
systems  which  environ  the  external  senses  of  the  soul.  Is  it
not  so?  Behold,  the  hills  which  form  luxuriant  vallies ;  the
mountains,  which  make  the  beds  for  the  repose  of  mighty
oceans;  the  planets,  which  display  the  magnificent  harmonies
of  positive  and  negative  forces.  What  uniform  beauties  of
order  do  these  stupendous  varieties  manifest!  Surely,  there
is  nothing  inscrutable  in  these  departments  of  the  divine
method — invisible  in  the  external  world.  Here,  we  feel  at
home — we  see  and  know!  But  why  may  we  not  cultivate
some  acquaintance,  also,  with  the  internal  world?  Does  not
the  same  God  govern  all?  Why,  therefore,  should  the
divine  administration  remain  obscure  in  the  various  degrees
of  the  spiritual  universe?  There  is  no  reason  why  it  should
or  why  it  has,  except  man's  short-sightedness  and  inexperi-
ence! All  we  require,  in  the  first  place,  is,  the  appropriate
power  of  vision ;  in  the  second  place,  time,  (or  progress,)
sweeping  outward  into  the  opening  realms  of  eternity — in
order  to  confirm  our  observations  by  actual  experience!  A
good  vision,  therefore,  is  almost  every  thing!  But  a  good
experience  is  the  "one  thing  needful"  in  all  true  culture!

The  value  or  benefits  of  a  progressive  earthly  experience
— commencing,  as  it  does,  with  the  first  memories  of  child-
hood, and  terminating  with  the  last  beat  of  the  heart — can
be  determined,  or  measurably  comprehended,  only  by  a  full
realization  of  the  definite  relations  which  actually  subsist
between  this  world  and  the  Spirit-Land.  This  world  is  the
first  sphere  of  human  existence. Here  the  essences  and  ele-


BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE.  261

ments  of  all  nature  arrive,  for  the  first  time,  at  that  point  of
organic  growth  and  essential  refinement,  which  endows  them
with  an  eternal  form — the  human  soul.  The  shape  or  form
of  this  sotd  is  unalterable;  being,  as  it  is,  the  final  produc-
tion of  the  powers  and  essences  of  the  soul  of  Nature.  This
world  is  the  manufactory  of  spirits;  the  store-house  is  the
Spirit-Land.  This  world  is  the  soil  of  that  beautiful  harvest
which  is  gathered,  in  the  autumn  of  life,  and  stored  away  in
the  "House  not  made  with  hands!"  This  world  is  the  pri-
mary school ;  the  mind  learns  here,  or  may  learn,  the  rudi-
ments of  all  truths  and  principles;  but  the  human  spirit,
though  highly  educated  in  this  world,  still  finds  the  true
academy j  the  true  college,  in  the  Spirit-Land!  The  second
sphere  of  human  existence  is  worth  more,  is  enjoyed  more
by  contrasting  a  full,  matured,  sensuous,  rudimental  experi-
ence with  it;  just  as  sunshine  is  more  beautiful  after  a  ter-
rible storm;  or,  as  our  estimation  of  the  joys  of  health  are
augmented  when  compared  with  the  sorrows  of  disease.

What  the  mind  does  not  learn  correctly  on  earth,  it  must
learn  to  perfection  in  the  spiritual  world.  How  relieved
will  thousands  of  minds  feel,  wrhen  they  have  unlearned  their
earthly  notions  of  God  and  the  universe?  When  they  ex-
change their  scientific  and  theologic  errors  for  harmonious
and  progressive  truths  ?  It  is  not  necessary  that  man  should
be  wicked  first  in  order  to  enjoy  goodness ;  be  diseased  in
order  to  enjoy  health;  nor  to  imbibe  errors  in  order  to
appreciate  truth.  Quite  the  contrary  of  this  is  necessary.
All  true  experience  relates  to  quantity,  not  to  kind.  The
contrast  between  the  bud  and  the  full-blown  rose ;  between
the  child  and  the  well-developed  man ;  between  night  and
day ;  between  a  human  being  in  the  mortal  tenement  and
the  same  being  in  an  immortal  body;  such  are  the  degrees
of  true  experience,  evolved  not  from  antagonistic  sources,
but  from  the  distinct  phases  of  homogeneous  principles!

Children,  as  I  am  impressed,  experience  a  sad  loss,  when,
from  the  ignorance  of  their  parents  or  others,  they  are  com-
pelled to  leave  the  earth,  and  be  "born  again,"  without  a
proper  sensuous  education.  This  circumstance  often  occurs
with  the  young,  and  so  soon,  too,  after  entering  upon  their


262  BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE.

terrestrial  career,  that  tliey  carry  with  them  no  instructive
memories  of  either  their  home  or  parentage.  The  general
diffusion  of  a  knowledge  of  plrysical  education  among  the
people  will  greatly  obviate  this  wrong.

The  law  of  development  causes  summers  and  winters  in
nature ;  so,  also,  it  does  in  man.  Alternations  are  necessary.
Even  beauty  and  poetry  ask  for  the  variations  of  life.  The
calm  of  the  sea  is  not  its  highest  beauty.  A  rough  experi-
ence works  out  much  good ;  for  all  evil,  in  the  end,  is
over-ruled  by  right.  Some  severe  experience  in  human  life,
some  friction  applied  to  the  inward  sensibilities,  frequently
awakens  a  sublime  vigor  of  passion  and  thought,  developing
deeds  and  utterances  which  are  inspired,  and  can  never  be
forgotten.  I  have  thrown  myself  into  psycho-sympathy  with
the  facts  of  external  nature,  and  have  interrogated  the
rounded  pebble,  as  it  lay,  amid  its  countless  brethren,  upon
the  sandy  beach.  It  related  to  me  passages,  in  its  unwritten
history,  so  grand  and  so  analogous  to  much  of  human  expe-
rience, that  I  wondered  the  great  Shakspeare  had  not  been
its  amanuensis.

At  first,  it  was  neither  small  nor  smooth ;  but  was  rough  and
big  with  physical  strength — a  huge  mass  of  solidified  stone.

It  related  how,  b}T  indescribable  convulsions  in  the  earth,  it
was  wrenched  from  its  parent-rock ;  and  driven,  by  resistless
floods,  far  from  home,  amid  innumerable  strangers — how  it
was  transported,  rolling  and  tumbling  continually,  from
place  to  place,  like  the  troubled  spirit  of  a  miser.

It  related  how  it  was  forced,  by  the  early  tides,  to  visit  the
picturesque  and  the  beautiful  in  nature.  Then,  how  it  as-
cended the  rough  "precipices  which  protect  our  sea-girt
shores — or  traversed  the  mountains  which  flank  our  glens
and  low-land  vallies."

And  then,  thrown,  by  the  potencies  of  the  earthquake,  far
above  high  mountains — only  to  fall,  as  a  useless  body,  to
earth  again,  among  the  shapeless  fragments  which  lay  upon
its  bosom.  Or,  uplifted  and  plunged  violently  far  down  into
ocean  depths— there,  "provided  with  a  grave  of  clay  or  a
lair  of  sand."

Then  raised  again,  by  torrents  of  mud  and  fbods  of  water,


BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE.  2G3

firmly  locked  in  the  strong  embrace  of  bergs  of  floating  ice,
and  conveyed  away  to  alpine  summits:  not  to  rest  there,
however;  but  again  to  be  upheaved  and  thrown,  by  the  ter-
rific earthquake,  with  its  nostrils  of  volcanic  fire,  amid  the
"  crash  of  falling  forests  and  the  death-shrieks  of  the  brutes
they  sheltered."

Then  again  uplifted,  and  cast  upon  a  sea  of  floating  vege-
tation ;  bound  on  a  voyage  round  the  world  ;  rolled  and
tumbled  perpetually,  from  the  first,  and  deprived  thus,  and
by  such  causes,  of  its  originally  cumbrous  size  and  angular
characteristics.

During  all  this  period  of  convulsions,  and  floods,  and
catastrophes,  there  were  no  indications  of  the  human  type
visible  on  the  earth.

Finally,  the  floating  sea  of  vegetation,  on  which  our  peb-
ble, with  countless  strangers,  moved  along,  rested  on  the
topmost  summit  of  a  mountain,  which  was  then  just  rising
from  the  ocean's  bed ;  and,  after  the  lapse  of  many  centuries,
when  this  mountain  was  high  elevated  above  the  ocean's
level,  and  a  beach  was  formed  at  its  base,  then  the  pebble
was  rolled  down  by  a  hurricane  into  its  present  humble  bed !
And  there  it  is,  (where  first  I  saw  it,)  growing  smaller  and
progressively  finer  every  hour — preparing  to  unfold  a  marine
flower  from  its  moss-covered  surface !  And  methought
how  manj-  human  beings  there  are,  whose  unrecorded  expe-
riences, from  birth  to  their  resting-place,  amid  the  variable
vicissitudes  of  this  life,  may  well  be  compared  to  the  history
of  this  speechless  stone.

Now,  this  simple  pebble  teaches  that  all  things,  and  all
men,  have  had  a  crude  beginning.  The  garden  of  Eden  is
before  us  ;  not  behind !  A  progressive  experience  harmon-
izes man,  just  as  pebbles  are  smoothed  and  rounded  by  the
irrisistible  tides  which  wash  the  margin  of  flowing  seas !
This  law  of  experience  is  not  the  code  fixed  to  a  probation-
ary state  of  being.  Nay :  it  is  the  law  of  Nature — of
progress  and  growth.  Babes  first;  then  come  the  higher
steps  ;  then  the  Man.  Experience  strengthens  the  soul ;  it
makes  man  subdue  the  earth  he  walks  upon  !

Ignorance,  the  greatest  foe  of  man,  hath  filled  the  world


264  BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE

with  martyrs.  Thousands  have  "died  on  the  cross"  in  every
department  of  human  experience;  because  the  people  have
not  known  how  to  read  the  laws  of  God  inscribed  in  nature
■ — on  her  tables  of  stone.  The  human  frame,  when  its  func-
tions are  not  violated,  obeys  the  laws  of  its  constitution ;  it
comes  into  being ;  advances  through  the  youthful  stages  of
development;  blooms  into  manhood;  retires  into  the  folds
of  age;  and  then,  like  a  flower  in  autumn,  it  decays  and  dies.
This  is  accomplished  by  no  inscrutable  law.  It  is  all  simple.
It  is  easy  to  see  that  man  is  provided  with  a  system  of  organs
of  respiration;  with  a  heart  and  blood-vessels;  with  a  stom-
ach and  other  organs  of  nutrition;  that  each  of  these  organs
is  endowed  with  a  definite  constitution ;  that  there  are  defin-
ite relations  subsisting  between  each  of  them  and  all  the
others,  and  between  each  and  all  of  them  and  the  objects  of
external  Nature.  It  is  easy  to  see,  also,  that  life  and  health
accompany  the  harmonious  action  of  the  whole;  and  that,
when  this  action  becomes  deranged  and  disproportionate,
the  consequences  are — pain,  disease,  and  premature  death!
Every  premature  death  is  manslaughter.  Children  should
never  die.  The  plea  set  up  by  old  theology,  that  God  sees
fit  to  take  the  }7oung  babe  from  its  mother,  is  a  plea  in  behalf
of  ignorance — a  miserable  excuse  for  a  palpable  violation  of
Nature's  laws!

In  almost  every  family,  I  see  an  altar  of  ignorance,  sanc-
tified by  some  ordained  teacher  of  popular  theology.  On
each  altar,  almost  every  mother  has  placed  her  babe,  and
allowed  it  to  be  sacrificed  by  the  hand  of  disease.  The
clergyman  comes;  sees  the  infant,  the  child,  cold  and  spirit-
less; sees  the  parents  weeping,  lamenting,  yearning  for  the
balm  of  consolation;  and  so,  the  preacher  commences  his
plea  of  justification.  He  speaks  of  "the  inscrutable  ways  of
Providence" — "the  Lord  giveth  and  taketh  away" — and
advocates  a  system  of  mysterious  fatalism  in  striving  to  just-
ify the  ways  of  God  to  man,  which  offends  Reason,  and  per-
petuates the  universal  practice  of  crucifying  little  children
on  the  cross  of  ignorance !

You  do  not  know,  kind  reader,  how  much  every  human
soul  needs  to  be  ushered  into  life  naturally ;  to  grow  natur-


BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE.  2G5

ally;  to  have  a  natural  experience;  and  to  die  naturally;
and  naturally  to  glide  away  into  the  spiritual  Universe!

God  arbitrarily  takes  no  children  from  earth:  He  never
causes  premature  deaths — never  plucks  flowers  half  unfolded
— never  violates  the  immutable  laws  of  progressive  develop-
ment. For  the  harvest  is  good,  only  when  the  grain  is  fully
matured.  Natural  deaths  are  sweet  as  the  breathings  of
Truth;  but  unnatural  deaths  are  embittered  with  the  noxious
vapors  of  ignorance  and  error!

The  doctrine  that  "this  life  is  a  vale  of  tears" — "a  fleeting
show" — "a  place  originally  designed  to  try  men's  souls" —
is,  as  I  see  it,  the  doctrine  of  ignorance;  having  no  endorser,
except  the  dark  and  mythologic  spirit  of  antiquity.  In  obe-
dience to  this  doctrine,  (but  in  disobedience  to  every  law
which  God  has  written  on  the  physical  constitution  of  man)
— the  mother  consigns  perhaps  her  first-born  to  the  grave;
just  at  a  time  when  the  mental  powers  and  physical  attrac-
tions are  expanding  to  the  view;  when  the  maternal  and
filial  affinities  begin  to  cluster  about  each  other' — then  all
are  disturbed — and  the  Christian  parent,  like  the  Hindoo
mother,  throws  her  infant  into  the  murky  waters  of  the
"Ganges"  of  ignorance;  and  the  priest,  with  a  species  of
conscientious  sympathy  for  the  bereft,  throws  his  religious
opinions  over  the  stricken  soul,  and  begets  the  wicked  faith
that  God  Killed  the  child  for  some  beneficent  purpose.  I  say
"wicked  faith;"  because  it  reconciles  man  to  his  ignorance
of  Nature;  and  justifies,  also,  the  constant  violation  of  repro-
ductive and  physiologic  principles.  There  are  no  scriptures
more  plain,  more  sacred,  more  infallible,  than  the  laws  of
life,  of  health,  and  of  a  progressive  experience!  The  lungs
and  organs  of  respiration;  the  heart  and  organs  of  circula-
tion; the  stomach  and  organs  of  nutrition;  the  brain  and
the  nervous  system;  the  organs  of  Sensation,  of  Thought,
of  Will,  of  Accomplishment — all  of  which  have  definite  con-
stitutions, definite  relations,  definite  functions,  and,  therefore,
definite  principles  of  being  and  doing — are  these,  think  you,
beautiful  and  harmonious  arrangements — designed  to  confer
only  a  few  days,  or  weeks,  or  years  of  existence  and  experi-
ence? Does  God  build  a  beautiful  temple  for  the  human
23


266  BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE.

spirit,  and  then,  like  a  child  with  a  house  of  cobs,  capri-
ciously demolish  it?  Kay — nay!  There  are  no  such  nervous
displays  of  Providence!  "The  early  dead" — those  who  die
martyrs  to  ignorance  and  disease — although  they  go  to  the
fairer  Land,  where  better  circumstances  surround  them — yet,
are  they  deprived  of  those  elementary  lessons  and  ex  peri*
ences  which  lie  at  the  base  of  all  true  spirit  culture!

The  sacred  scriptures  of  Physiology,  (which  we  know  that
priests  did  never  write — and  which,  therefore,  require  no
legislative  act  to  render  them  canonical,)  declare,  that  the
organism  of  man  is  designed  to  convey  the  soul  through
"Three-score  and  ten  years" — with  their  summers  and  win-
ters of  experience — and  as  many  more  years  as  the  right-
eousness of  the  person  will  produce!  Hills  of  granite  are
not  more  immovable,  than  the  Truth  of  these  organic  evan-
gels. How  long — O  how  long!  must  the  Human  Race  still
wait  for  the  advent  of  Nature's  own  Religion?

By  a  due  application  of  the  teachings  of  the  Harmonial
Philosophy,  this  world  may  be  attuned  to  the  laws  of  music.
The  brotherhood  of  man  is  capable,  through  the  laws  of  ex-
perience, of  becoming  a  sanctuary  of  joy.  The  history  of
music  is  the  history  of  the  soul  and  of  the  Race.  The  unde-
•  veloped  mind  has  a  life  of  discord  within  itself;  which  is,
(after  all,)  but  the  prelude  to  its  future  harmony!  The  un-
cultivated music. of  the  Indian  causes  him  to  make  a  frame
of  dry  pine  sticks;  across  these  he  tightens  a  thin  fox-skin;
and,  upon  this  rude  discordant  instrument,  he  beats  out  the
music  of  his  mind. So,  man's  life  begins !

Man's  life  begins  in  discord;  but  Harmony  is  his  destiny!
God  has  written  this  glorious  Truth  on.  every  thing !  Behold !
Nature  is  full  of  music!  This  is  the  Positive  Principle  I
Discord  is  negative!  Every  thing  which  moves,  and  feels,
and  thinks  in  the  Omnipresent  spirit  of  God,  is  impregnated
with  music!  What  a  gospel  is  this!  The  Alpine  cottage
on  the  mountain's  side,  is  a  sounding-board  for  the  encircling
winds  to  play  upon!  and  the  majestic  oak,  whose  stalwart
frame  hath  stood  the  blasts  of  an  hundred  winters,  spreads
forth  its  boughs,  and  becomes  the  harp  of  the  hurricane!
And  man,  too,  hath  his  history  of  wildness  and  imperfection!


BENEFITS 0  F EXPERIENCE.  267

The  shrill  Avail  of  the  distant  forest,  and  the  heavy  peals
of  thunder,  which  roll  forth  from  convolving  clouds,  combine
their  rude  measures  with  the  deep  moan  of  the  tempestuous
ocean;  and,  lo!  with  a  wondrous  power,  there  comes  up  a
music  which  causes  oven  the  monsters  of  the  great  deep  to
gambol  to  and  fro  like  the  playful  neulah!  In  all  this  ap-
parent discord,  there  lives  a  sublimity  which  no  language
can  describe!  There  is  music  in  it  all.  Yet,  it  is  very  low
in  the  scale  of  Harmony;  but  man  (in  his  earth  experiences)
is  likewise  low  and  ver}r  imperfect.

A  joyful  song  flows  forth  from  the  shepherd's  lute — the
beasts  of  the  fields  gather  together — the  robin  sails  through
the  soft  air  with  a  glee  on  its  tongue — the  melody  of  nature
is  poured  forth  from  the  mouths  of  ten  thousand  songsters —
the  vallies  and  mountains  reciprocate  the  low  echoes  of  har-
monic sounds — and  the  placid  lakes  convey  the  joyful  music
far  away  to  distant  summits!

All  these  effects  flow  from  a  Principle  in  Nature.  This
Principle  is  God,  manifested  in  the  world.

Our  mouths  and  lives  will  discourse  sweet  music,  if  we  will
but  correctly  apply  'experience'  to  them.

Life  is  but  a  rippling  rivulet — pursuing  various  paths —
winding  in  and  out  of  dark  ravines;  now  flowing  between
thorns,  murmuring  as  it  goes;  there  conveying  a  flower  upon
its  bosom;  now  leaping  to  and  fro  against  some  angular  im-
pediment or  circumstance  which  impedes  its  course;  then
flowing  round  a  mountain  which  it  could  not  ascend;  now
dividing  its  energies  in  the  effort  to  dislodge  some  fungus
substance  thrown  across  its  path — and  so  is  Individual  Life
in  this  ruclimental  state  of  being!  But  still  the  rippling  riv-
ulet flows  onward,  and  onward  still:  and  after  having  filled
many  a  spring,  slaked  the  thirst  of  many  travelers,  refreshed
many  a  fainting  plant,  perchance  (by  inattention  or  wrong)
caused  something  to  wither — still  it  onward  flows!  And
finally,  when  it  comes  to  the  verge  of  being,  it  leaps  the
brow  of  the  hill,  spreads  cascades  of  tears  on  either  side,  and
continues  its  course  far  more  musically  in  the  spheres  above!


PHENOMENA  OF THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES.


We  will  terminate  this  sequel  with  certain  cogent  reflec-
tions upon  the  evidences  and  law  of  individual  immortality.

Inferential  evidences  are  never  quite  satisfactory.  The
sensuous  mind  needs  something  more  conclusive — 'Something
positive.  So,  therefore,  as  I  have  presented  the  chief  infer-
ences of  our  personal  immortality,  I  now  proceed  to  a  brief
statement  of  the  more  certain  proof.

First  Nature  is  designed  to  develop  the  body.
Second.  The  body  is  designed  to  develop  the  mind.
Third.  Each  mind  is  designed  to  be  developed  enough
different in structure from every other, to establish its

individuality  and  eternal  duration.

Now,  here  are  three  propositions,  upon  which  all  our  pos-
itive evidences  depend.  Let  us  see  whether  they  will  bear
analysis.

That  Nature  is  designed  to  unfold  the  physical  organism
of  man,  is  proved  from  the  fact,  that  all  vegetable  and  animal
forms  point  toward  it,  both  in  plan  and  principles.  They
stand  as  so  many  distinct  yet  consecutive  chapters  in  a  vol-
ume whose  conclusion  and  climax  is — Man!  Science  lends
her  eyes  to  help  us  see  this  truth.  Intuition  tells  us,  that
Man  is  greater  than  a  world — than  systems  of  worlds.  The
mystery  is  greater;  the  simplicity,  grander.  Even  David
saw  this  truth,  and  sung  it  for  the  Lord,  on  his  harp.  "1
will  make  a  man  more  precious  than  fine  gold — than  the
golden  wedge  of  Ophir."  The  Spirit- World  declares  this
truth  in  every  way;  pours  its  sentiments  into  open  hearts;
directs  all  its  thoughts  to  Man!

That  the  body  is  designed  to  develop  the  spirit,  is  proved
from  the  fact  that  the  mind  takes  the  form  of  the  body. The


PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL BPfiEBES. 2G9

animal  brain  develops  the  animal  mind;  the  pure  brain,  the
pure  mind;  the  coarse  and  spongy  brain,  (though  it  be  very
large,)  develops  a  corresponding  mind;  which  absorbs  every
thing  liquid  within  its  reach,  and  disgorges  the  same  when-
ever pressed — a  fact  which  phrenology  does  not  easily
discover.  The  body  is  the  mold,  into  which  the  "  elixer
of  immortality"  is  run.  And  I  cannot  but  feel  grateful  that
the  manufacturing  of  molds  is  monopolized  entirely  by  the
God  of  Nature.  For  I  shudder  when  I  think  what  a  ster-
eotyped pattern  a  Calvinist,  a  Methodist,  a  Quaker,  or  any
other  sectarian  man  would  surely  turn  upon  the  world.
Let  us  be  duly  thankful  for  the  endless  variety  of  human
molds.  Let  us  praise  the  Liberty  of  that  Divine  Religion
— or  the  spirit  of  that  great  God — which  unfolds  human
types,  so  very  capable  of  looking  and  reading  in  all  direc-
tions! Every  mind  is  a  lens,  so  to  speak,  on  which  the  sun
and  earth  paint  new  pictures.

In  further  proof  of  this  proposition,  let  me  refer  }^ou  to
the  plain  fact,  that  Man  is  the  only  creature  in  which  the
front  brain  preponderates.  The  cerebrum  crowns  the  cere-
bellum. All  animals  have  a  preponderance  of  the  back
brain — the  spine  has  folded  up  and  formed  a  skull;  and  the
marrow  has  ascended  the  summit  of  the  tree,  folded  up  into
layers,  and  formed  a  brain.  Now,  in  Man,  this  back  brain
is  promoted.  It  has  mounted  the  pinnacle,  unrolled  the  ban-
ner of  Eeason,  and  invites  the  universe  to  dinner!

Now,  be  it  remembered,  the  Positive  and  Negative  prin-
ciples which  we  saw  operating  in  the  first  forms,*  have  now
accomplished  a  marriage  between  the  front  and  back  divi-
sions of  the  brain.  The  cerebral  nuptials  are,  (of  all  others,)
the  most  perfect  and  beautiful.  The  female  principle  occu-
pies the  back  brain ;  the  male  the  front.  Occasionally,  there
is  a  quarrel  as  to  who  shall  rule  the  house!

*  The  reader  is  here  referred  to  the  author's  several  works,  in  which
these  positive  and  negative  principles  are  particularly  traced — especially  to
the  three  volumes  of  the  "  Great  Harmonia"  already  published.  Also,
please  read  the  author's  recent  pamphlet,  entitled,  "  The  Harmonial  Man,
or  Thoughts f 07'  Age"  in  which  you  will  find  several  illustrations  of  thesa
dual  laws.

23*


270 i'  II  E  N  ()  M  E  N  A 0  P S  T  I  II  {  T  U  A  L SPHERES.

The  back  brain — the  female  principle — declares  her  right
to  the  enjoyment  of  every  liberty,  because  she  feeds  the
whole  family — sends  the  elements  of  recuperation  to  every
member — and  not  only  does  all  the  spurring,  but  holds  all
the  golden  reins  of  affection  in  her  own  hands.

The  front  brain- — the  male  principle — on  the  other  hand,
claims  the  rules  of  government,  because  he  stands  in  the;
gate  of  the  temple — sees  all  that's  passing — compares  fact
with  fact — reasons  on  the  comparison,  and  goes  forward  with
the  battle  of  life.

The  female  feels  most;  the  male  thinks  most.  And  so  it
happens,  that  family  quarrels  occur  in  every  human  skull.
There  is  no  supremacy  between  the  principles;  they  are
equals,  endowed  with  different  attributes  and  functions.

In  the  human  mind,  I  repeat,  these  anti-Shaking  Quaker
principles  enter  into  the  perfect  matrimonial  union.  And
the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  prepare  the  feast  and  dance  at  the
wedding.

Now  what,  think  you,  is  the  issue  of  this  marriage?  I
will  tell  you:  The  organic  "image" — the  spiritual  "like-
ness "  of  Deitjr.  In  other  words,  the  anatomical  and  physi-
ological constructions  of  man's  phrenological  part,  form  the
cause  of  his  immortality — the  latter  is  a  sequence  of  the
former.

In  the  present  volume,  it  will  not  serve  you  to  detail  the
scientific  facts  which  sustain  this  proposition.  We  will  let
them  pass,  knowing  that  the  plain  statement  itself  possesses
the  weight  of  demonstration.

The  question  may  be  asked;  "  How  do  we  knoiv  that  Alan
is  the  Ji?ial  issue  of  Nature,  that  his  mind  is  the  highest  pro-
duct of  organism."

I  reply:  Because  we  cannot  conceive  of  any  higher.
Suppose  you  paint  an  angel;  what  form  will  you  give  it?
The  sacred  artists  paint  a  light,  vaporish  human  form,  with.
a  touch  of  the  animal  kingdom,  in  the  shape  of  wings!
The  wings  are  signs  on  the  canvas,  saying:  "We  do  not
yet  know  how  spirits  travel."  They  do  not  improve  the
image.  I  say,  therefore,  the  human  form,  without  the  wings,
is  the  most  perfect  combination  of  parts — of  chemistry,  meek-


PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 27 1

anism,  symmetry,  and  spirituality — possible  to  conceive.
There  is  nothing  improvable  in  him — so  far  as  shape  and  form
are  concerned — that  is,  in  the  best  type.

"Probe  the  profound  of  thine  own  nature — Man!
And  thou  may'st  see  reflected,  e'en  in  life,
The  worlds,  the  heavens,  the  ages;  by  and  by
The  coming  time."

If  it  could  be  shown,  that  animals  possessed  the  perfect
cerebrum  and  cerebellum — the  perfect  double  mental  struc-
ture, as  seen  in  man — then  would  the  immortality  of  every
creature  be  certain  and  sure.  The  male  and  female  laws
meet  in  the  human  head  for  the  first  time,  since  flowing  forth
from  the  Supernal  Source.  Their  marriage  makes  the  sou]
an  immutable  unit — a  ONE-ness;  consequently,  the  soul
lives  when  the  body  dies  away.

Eemember,  it  is  not  the  possess  ion  of  the  human  form,  but
the  accomplishment  of  the  perfect  marriage  between  the  cere-
brum and  cerebellum,  which  settles  the  question  of  the  soul's
immortality !

There  are  children  or  persons  born  among  all  races  of
men,  who,  in  consequence  of  being  defective  in  their  cerebral
structure,  never  reach  the  important  crisis,  never  pass  that
equinoctial  line  which  separates  the  animal  from  the  human!
Such,  feeling  no  immortalit}',  are  without  it.  The  Bushmen
of  New  Holland,  the  inhabitants  of  the  interior  of  Africa,  the
Cannibals,  to  some  extent,  and  Children  whose  brains  are  so
structurally  unbalanced  as  to  make  them  idiots  from  birth —
such,  belong  wholly  to  the  outer  world  and  have  no  immortality.

The  spiritual  side  of  man's  nature  needs  cultivation,  in
order  to  make  his  future  existence  a  certainty.  If  the  child
should  be  born  on  the  animal  side,  still  the  perfect  human,
with  its  immortal  consequences,  may  be  developed  and  con-
firmed, by  cultivation,  into  the  spiritual  or  intellectual  direc-
tion. Man  may  reach  and  confirm  Ids  'immortality  by  a  good
life,  even  if  In  was  born  below  the  proper  human  point.  But
the  reverse  is  not  possible.  If  a  man  be  born  on  the  human
side,  then  the  fact  or  certainty  of  his  immortality  is  settled,
although  he  may  never  be  internally  conscious  of  the  pros-


272 P  II  E  N  0  MENA OF SPIRIT  D  A  L SPHERES.

pectivc  reality.  This  truth,  in  its  fullness,  is  illustrated  by
clairvoyance:  This  power  resides  in  every  mind;  but  very
few  minds  become  conscious  of  the  fact.

The  analogies  of  nature  are  complete  in  their  indications.
I  have  said,  some  few  of  every  race  are  not  bom  on  the
human  side  of  organization;  that  such,  unless  cultivated  on
the  spiritual  side  of  their  nature,  will  notbe  immortal.  Now,
how  perfectly,  for  instance,  is  this  truth  illustrated  in  the
apple- tree,  which  invariably  fails  (from  some  cause)  to
bring  every  blossom  to  maturity.  While  the  great  propor-
tion of  its  buds  are  ripened  up  into  fruit,  there  are  some
which  never  mature;  and  so  the  tree  casts  them  to  the  earth.

The  third  proposition — that  the  difference  in  the  constitution
of  every  mind  keeps  the  mind  always  together — is  supported
by  the  immutable  law  of  attraction.  A  chemical  compound
holds  together,  until  some  intrusive  substance  produces  a
separation,  by  attracting  some  of  its  elements  stronger  than
the  inherent  attraction.  But  this  is  not  possible  with  Man,
because  his  nature  yearns  for  personality.  Its  strongest
attraction  is  towards  its  own  central  selfhood.

Deity  (the  strongest  attraction  in  the  universe)  cannot
absorb  the  soul,  because  the  soul  does  not  love  God  object-
ively, but  subjectively,  i.  e.  the  soul  loves  God  through  the
centre  of  its  own  individuality,  and  not  outside  of  itself!
Self  is  the  eternal  standard  of  consciousness — the  portal
through  which  the  soul  looks  into  the  far-off!  "  Love  thy
neighbor  as  thyself."  Self  is  the  immutable  rule — the  pivot
on  which  immortality  revolves,  as  a  world  upon  its  axis —
and  without  it  there  is  no  existence.

The  body  is  disorganized  and  reabsorbed,  when  the  spirit
is  done  with  it ;  because  oxygen,  hydrogen,  carbon,  &c,  have
affinities  for  things  in  the  earth.  But  the  soul ! — Where,  let
me  ask,  is  the  power  superior  in  attraction  to  the  affinities
which  cluster  round  its  own  centrality?  Do  you  ask —
"  what  evidence  I  have  that  the  soul  will  not  be  disorgan-
ized?— that  it  will  not  be  immersed  in  the  great  Fountain  of
Life?"  I  reply — Yourself  !  Your  central  attraction — the
ambition  you  feel  to  be  a  Selfhood — this  is  the  demon-
stration of  your  immortality  !


PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 273

The  soul  knows  no  retrogression  ;  neither  maturity  !  It  is
destined  for  eternal  progression — for  the  unbroken  enjoy-
ment of  an  immortal  youth  !

I  have  seen  the  old  man,  as  the  sun  shone  brilliantly  ovei
the  earth,  draw  his  old  ann-clrair  close  to  the  cottage-door,
and  try  to  view  the  distant  landscape,  with,  its  waving
foliage,  its  undulating  surface,  and  glittering  granite.  But,
viewing  him  external^,  Shakspeare  says,  mournfully:  "The
last  stage  of  all  is  old  age — second  childishness,  and  mere
oblivion ;  icithout  teeth,  without  taste,  without  eyes,  without —
every  thing."  But  is  it  so?  "Second  childishness  and  mere
oblivion!"  ISTay:  it  is  not  so!  This  is  the  error  of  the
world  ;  reasoning  from  the  external.

True,  the  physical  is  worn  out  in  consequence  of  a  long
contact  and  struggle  with  the  gross  world  of  matter.  It  is
threadbare  ;  the  superficial  gloss  is  gone!  It  is  tattered,  and
covered  with  patches  !  It  cannot  conceal  the  form  beneath !
The  spiritual  eye  can  no  longer  use  the  material  eye;  the
spiritual  ear,  the  material  ear ;  the  spiritual  powers  of  loco-
motion, the  old  worn-out  limbs ;  and  the  brain  can  no  longer
render  the  spirit  assistance  in  preserving  external  memories.
What  then  ?  Why,  the  spirit  of  that  decrepid  old  man  is
young  as  a  bird !

It  soars  gracefully  over  the  fields  ;  hears  the  waters  mur-
mur their  plaintive  music;  sees  the  variegated  landscape;
and  enjoys  all  the  scenes  of  life  anew.  For  many  years,
perhaps,  the  tattered  garment  confines  the  youthful  soul.
But  at  a  time  when  ye  think  not — when  all  is  tranquil  in
the  midnight  hour,  or  when  you  would  summon  the  old
man  to  his  accustomed  meal,  and  go  to  his  room  to  arouse
him  from  his  slumber — the  glossless  garment  is  left  motionless
on  the  bed,  whilst  the  immortal  youth  of  the  interior,  is  gliding
joyfully  away  to  the  Spirit- Land.


"The  Spirit-Land!"  What  do  you  mean  by  these
terms?  Something  figurative,  or  something  literal?  I  mean
a  substantial  world ;  a  sphere,  similar  in  constitution  to  this


\
274 PHENOMENA OF ST-  RITUAL SPHERES.

world,  only,  in  every  conceivable  respect,  one  degree  superior
to  the  best  planet  in  our  solar  system.

The  highest  planet  in  our  system  is  Saturn,  being  nearly
eleven  times  larger  than  the  earth ;  its  surface  is  equal  to  an
hundred  worlds,  and  surrounded  by  a  magnificent  girdle  ;  or
rather  it  is  set,  like  a  jewel,  in  the  midst  of  several  concentric
circles,  presenting  the  grandest  spectacle  possible  to  conceive.
Being  as  substantial — but  one  degree  superior  in  point  of
beauty  and  refinement — the  Spirit-Land  presents  itself  to
our  vision.  We,  therefore,  mean  a  literal  world,  having
latitudes,  longitudes,  poles,  revolutions,  atmospheres  ;  with
all  the  higher  phenomena  which  pertain  to  the  present  world.
How  was  the  Spirit-Land  formed  $
This  question  may  be  answered  by  asking:
What  law  was  it  which  formed  the  sparkling  girdles  of
Saturn?  What  becomes  of  the  fine,  invisible  particles  of
matter  which  emanate  from  vegetation — from  minerals,  from
all  animal  bodies — and  from  the  entire  globe  ?  This  earth,
alone,  gives  off  eight  hundred  millions  of  tons  of  invisible
emanations  every  year.  Where  do  these  atoms  go  ?  The
earth  perspires  like  the  human  body.  The  fine  particles
arise,  like  bubbles,  to  the  surface.  Where  do  they  grav-
itate ?  Fluids  may  be  reduced  to  solids,  just  as  chaos  pre-
cedes harmony.  All  the  other  planets — Mercury,  Venus,
the  vast  group  of  Asteroids,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  the  three
orbs  beyond,  together  with  all  their  moons — give  off  fine
emanations  just  like  the  earth.  Where  do  these  emana-
tions go?  These  questions  are  left  with  you,  as  replies  to
quere  as  to  the  formation  of  the  Spirit-Land.  Just  think
for  one  moment  of  the  vast  quantity  of  evaporation
of  refined  particles  into  space.  If  our  earth  eliminates  eight
hundred  millions  of  tons  every  year,  what  must  the  mass
amount  to  when  all  the  planets  do  the  same  work,  not  to
say  vastly  more?

Where  is  the  Spirit-Land  located?

Seest  thou  that  beautiful  zone  of  worlds,  at  night,  called
the  "  Milky  Way?"  Seest  thou  how  it  encircles  immensity,
so  to  speak — a  wreath  of  suns  and  planets  "round  infinity?"
And,  besides,  seest  thou  the  countless  stars  and  constellations


PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 2ii>

of  stars  in  every  other  direction?  Thinkest  thou  that  this
visible  panoroma  of  stars,  in  the  heavens,  constitutes  the
universe  ?  As  well  might  one  say,  that  four  thousand  dew-
drops,  sparkling  in  the  sun,  constitute  the  ocean !

Again,  it  is  asked :  "  Seest  thou  that  magnificent  girdle,
spanning  the  heavenly  arch  ?"

Listen,  therefore,  to  the  answer!  Yon  "milky  way"  is
composed  of  myriads  of  suns  and  planets — each  system
resembling  our  sun  with  its  planets — having  specific  posi-
tions, orbits,  revolutions,  seasons,  and  inhabitants,  just  as  we
have  on  this  globe.  Our  sun,  our  earth,  and  all  the  neigh-
boring planets,  constitute  but  one  group  in  the  circle.

On  these  planets  the  human  spirit  first  begins  to  be  ;  in
the  state  (I  mean)  from  which  it  may  date  its  existence  as
an  immortal  being  !  Hence  this  circle  of  planets  (taken  alto-
gether) may  be  termed — "the  first  sphere  of  human  exist-
ence." But,  as  has  been  shown,  the  spirit  of  Man,  at  death,
passes  away  to  another  world ;  which  is  termed,  very  naturally,
"the  second  sphere."

"  But  iv here  is  this  sphere  located?"

Look  again  at  those  beautiful  rings  surrounding  the  planet
Saturn.  See  how  gently  they  embrace  the  planet,  and  each
other!  Yet  the  distance  between  them  is  fixed,  and  there
are  no  perturbations!  As  the  changing  caterpillar  is  a
symbol  of  death,  from  which  the  beauteous  butterfly,
phcenix-like,  arises  into  freedom ;  so  the  planet  Saturn,  with
its  rings,  is  a  perfect  symbol  of  the  first  and  second  spheres.

The  second  sphere  girdles  the  first  sphere,  "the  milky
way" — just  as  the  rings  girdle  the  planet  Saturn.  The
representation  is  perfect.  This  universe,  in  fact,  is  all  of  a
piece — a  harmonious  system  of  perfection — and  so,  as  a  mat-
ter of  logical  necessity,  the  Law  of  universal  analogy  must
be  true.  A  foot  rule  will  measure  the  universe,  as  well  as
twelve  yards,  and  the  doctrine  of  correspondence  must  be
equally  applicable  to  all  spheres  of  Icing.

Whenever  my  mind  is  opened  to  a  full  view  of  the  heav-
ens, I  realize,  to  a  painful  degree,  the  poverty  of  language ;
and,  still  more,  the  limited  capacity  of  intellect  to  which  th3
gorgeous  grandeur  is  presented


276 PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES.

At  such  times,  how  I  desire  the  ability  to  conceive,  and  the
power  to  execute,  the  picture  of  the  universe,  and  present  it
to  my  brother  man !

But  it  cannot  be — nor  will  it  ever  be — possible  for  one
mind  to  grasp,  entirely,  the  idea  of  a  universe  which  is  worthy
of  a  God;  a  God  worthy  of  a  universe.  Progression  would
cease,  were  it  otherwise,  and  the  immortal  mind  would  have
nothing  more  to  do.  But  I  have  done  my  best  to  give  you
an  impression  of  the  universe,  in  its  present  structure,  and
of  the  relations  subsisting  between  the  circles  of  planets  and
the  spiritual  spheres.

I  may  here  add,  that  could  our  orthodox  clergy  once  enjoy
a  clear  vision  of  the  magnitude  and  unutterable  beauty  of
this  universe,  both  natural  and  spiritual,  I  know  in  my  very
soul  that  they  would  soon  discover  a  way  to  make  their  books
and  sermons  give  the  world  "more  light"  than  they  yet  have
— viz :  by  voluntarily  making  a  bonfire  of  them  all !

What  is  the  external  appearance  of  the  Spirit  Land?

It  appears  like  a  beautiful  morning !  The  surface  is  diver-
sified endlessly,  with  vallies,  rivers,  hills,  mountains,  and
innumerable  parks.  These  parks  are  particularly  attractive.
The  trees  and  shrubbery  resemble  nothing  on  earth;  more
the  vegetation  of  Saturn.  The  ten  thousand  varieties  of
flowers  lend  a  peculiar  prismatic  charm  to  the  far-extending
territories,  and  the  soft  divine  ether  in  which  the  entire
world  is  bathed,  surpasses  all  conception.  You  feel  in  the
presence  of  Holiness — every  tree  speaks  to  your  Heart' —
every  flower  pronounces  a  perpetual  Benediction.

Canst  thou  form  an  idea  of  me  magnitude  of  the  "Second
Sphere?"

Multiply  our  earth  by  twenty-seven  million  times  its  pres-
ent size,  and  it  will  give  you  the  exact  extent  of  one  of  the
countless  parks  of  the  second  sphere!  Did  you  ever  think
of  "Infinity?"  Let  imagination  do  its  utmost!  unchain
your  thoughts!  Let  them  fly  outwardly — into  the  far,  far
off!  Let  them  stand  upon  the  topmost  zone  of  Immensity,
and  contemplate  the  vast  spectacle  of  the  universe!

What  do  you  see? Do  you  behold  infinity? Nay,  thou


PHENOMENA 0  P rf  I'  1  11  1  T  U  A  L SPHERES. 277

beholdest,  merely,  the  surface  of  an  apple  compared  with
that  which  your  imagination  cannot  grasp !  And  this  unper-
ceived,  this  unsuspected  immensity,  is  girdled  by  the  second
sphere!  It  is  a  magnificent  belt,  all  bespangled  with  count-
less jewels,  buckled  around  the  waist  of  the  Infinite  Man!
This,  and  all  the  spheres  besides,  is  the  attire  of  God.  'Let
expressive  silence  muse  his  praise!'

How  do  the  spirits  live  in  the  second  sphere?

The  second  sphere  is  divided  into  two  grand  hemispheres:
one  is  "  Love  ;"  the  other  is  "  Wisdom."  These  are  separated,
or  rather  connected  together,  by  an  Isthmus  or  strait,  called
"Will."  The  Spirit-Land,  therefore,  has  three  divisions —
Love — Will — Wisdom;  steps  in  the  ladder  of  angelic  pro-
gression. These  territories  appear  different,  both  as  regards
the  geographical  aspect  of  the  country  and  its  inhabitants.
The  people  in  the  "Love  sphere,"  taken  as  a  whole,  are  not
as  far  advanced  as  those  in  the  "Wisdom  sphere."  The  for-
mer hold  more  affinity  with  their  birth-place — have  unwise
or  troublesome  attachments  for  persons  or  things  which  they
left  behind.  The  latter,  on  the  contrary,  look  the  other  way!
Not  that  they  are  affectionally.dead  to  their  birth-place  rem-
iniscences, to  the  dear  ones  yet  living  on  some  planet;  but
they  know  how  to  love,  in  what  proportion,  and  to  ivhat  bene-
ficent purpose.  The  "Will-sphere"  is  not  particularly  inhab-
ited by  either  people — it  is  a  kind  of  briclge  leading  from
one  hemisphere  to  the  other.  It  comes  to  me,  that  no  spirit
from  our  earth  has  as  yet  progressed  beyond  the  second
sphere.  But  the  spirits  from  Jupiter  and  Saturn  sometimes
go  directly  into  the  third  sphere.

Why  do  spirits  profess  to  come  from  the  more  advanced  spheres?

The  contradiction  is  wholly  in  terms.  The  explanation  is
this:  Each  hemisphere  is  divided  into  six  different  societies;
each  being  characterized  by  a  different  race  of  spirits,  ruled
by  its  own  affinities,  with  different  habits,  in  different  stages
of  moral  culture;  differing  as  one  star  differs  from  another,
or  as  the  different  notes  in  music.  Then,  these  six  societies
are  sub-divided  over  and  over  again.  And  when  spirits
communicate,  individually,  to  man,  they  often  seem  to  give
contradictory  accounts,  and  frequently  confound  the  terms —
2±


278 PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES.

'societies'  and  'spheres' — together,  because  words  are  but
arbitrary  signs  of  thought.

i If  the  Spirit-Land  is  so  attractive,  why  may  we  not  commit
suicide,  and  go  there?  where  is  the punishmentt

Do  you  believe  that  there  is  bliss  in  selfishness?

Go,  ask  the  mizer!  Think  you  that  he  is  happy  in  the
midst  of  gold?  The  circle  of  self-love  is  ruled  by  a  rigid  law.
If  you  were  the  only  person  in  the  universe,  then  you  might
in  safety,  with  impunity,  go  where  and  as  you  please.  You
could  not  be  punished  for  wrong,  because  there  would  exist
no  relations;  consequently,  no  law.  But  you  live  in  a  world
of  relations;  hence,  in  a  world  of  Laws.  No  one  of  these
laws  can  be  violated  with  impunity.  I  will  not  undertake
to  describe  the  penalties  which  would  follow  the  suicide.
But  this  I  will  say:  the  man  who  goes  into  the  second  sphere,
before  his  body  naturally  dies,  feels  very  much  like  a  person
whose  presence  in  society  is  not  agreeable.  A  bird  in  a  wrong
latitude  would  not  feel  more  restless  than  the  spirit  of  man,  if
it  goes  from  earth  before  it  is  called.  The  process  of  accli-
mation is  not  pleasant;  unless  the  spirit  is  prepared  for  it,  by
a  full  terrestrial  maturity,  as  shown  in  the  previous  chapter.

What  is  the  use  of  such  a  Revelation?

To  make  you  Noble,  Just,  Good,  Free !  To  make  you  feel
your  nature;  to  exalt  yoa  as  immortals;  to  humble  you,  also,
as  earthly  creatures.  To  unfold  a  world  of  meaning  from
every  thing — to  kindle  the  Eternal  flame  of  Love  on  every
heart's  altar;  whose  incense  shall  arise  from  the  individual
to  the  whole — from  the  whole  to  Deity.  Be  ye  perfect,  even
as  your  God  is  perfect!  A  cruel,  revengeful,  calvinistic  God
makes  a  cruel,  combative  people.  Unfold  to  your  own  minds
the  universe  all-glorious  and  perfect,  as  it  is,  and  3'ou  must
conceive  of  a  God  worthy  to  be  its  proprietor.  A  good  Uni-
verse and  a  good  Deity  will  make  good  men  and  women.
The  "new  birth" — the  passing  away  of  the  old  dispensation
into  the  new,  bringing  to  us  a  new  Heaven,  a  new  Earth,  and
a  new  Deity — this  "new  birth"  will  surely  come  upon  our
world.

"Remember — the  Earth,  with  its  scarred  face,  is  the  sym-
bol of  the  Past;  the  Air  and  Heaven,  of  Futurity!"


PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 279

Man  is  a  fixed  fact  in  the  Universe!  when  once  he  is  born
into  being,  there  is  thenceforth  no  way  to  escape — no  door
to  annihilation!  This  is  a  startling  statement— a  most  over-
whelming fact!  Deaths  and  births— nights  and  mornings—
what  are  they?  Do  they  not  indicate  the  depots  of  life,  at
which  passengers  exchange  seats  in  different  trains  for  dif-
ferent destinations?

Human  theories  may  cast  gloom  and  dread  over  these
changes — and  fill  the  soul  with  sad  imaginings — but  Nature
speaks  a  universal  language  that  never  fails  to  reach  the  heart.
Nature  gives  us  genuine  births  and  deaths — genuine  sunrises
and  sunsets,  with  beauty  piled  on  beaut}r,  with  truth  on  truth,
joy  on  joy — and  Man  is  the  being  to  experience  and  appre-
ciate it  all.  Man  is  a  portion  of  Nature,  and  Nature  is  ever-
enduring,  because  its  soul  is  Deity.  All  creation  is  a  vast
cathedral;  its  various  life-principles  play  as  an  orchestra;
and  the  vast  spirit-realm  is  vocal  with  shouts  of  joy.  And
why  should  Man — the  most  favored  of  all — be  found  at  the
altar  of  Discontent?  Some  temporary  cloud  obscures  the
firmament.  But  the  Almighty  Sun  never  ceases  to  shine.
Its  kindling  beams  wake  millions  on  millions  of  beings  to
expressions  of  joy  and  praise.  Why  should  man  not  join
the  universal  anthem?

Ye  framers  of  laws — ye  advocates  of  a  dismal  religion —
answer:  Why  should  man  jar  the  sweet  vibrations  of  Na-
ture's melodies?  Why  should  he  mar  the  symmetry  and
beauty  of  his  own  soul?  Ye  advocates  of  learned  Ignorance
and  Superstition,  in  the  name  of  human  sorrow,  answer!
Do  you  say,  "inherent  evil?"  Do  you  say  that  "Man  is
under  the  dominion  of  evil  propensities;  that  his  soul  is
inclined  to  wickedness  since  the  original  sin?"  Nay;  say
not  this,  but  rather,  that  Man  is  a  progressive  being!  Na-
ture is  noiseless  in  all  her  grandest  movements.  The  deep
river  moves  with  a  noiseless  but  irresistible  power.  The
planets  move  noiselessly,  majestically,  sublimely,  in  their
orbits.  The  gates  of  the  morning  swing  silently  back  on
golden  hinges.  The  eternal  King  of  Day  marches  forth,
noiselessly,  into  the  bending  sky — clad  in  auroral  beauty,
composed  of  healing  elem?nts — filling  the  earth  with  life


280 PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL SPHERES

and  animation.  But  man  is  not  thus  silent  in  his  march.  He
moves,  in  the  path  of  progress,  with,  noise  and  agitation!
Wherefore?  Because  he  is  the  middle  organism — the  transi-
tion type — between  animals  and  angels,  bearing  the  image  and
living  the  life  of  both,  at  once!  But,  be  ye  patient  with  each
other,  and  very  lenient;  for  what  we  shall  be,  cloth  not  yet
appear!  If  man  was  a  temporary  being — if  his  soul,  at  the
close  of  this  brief  life,  should  drop  into  the  vast  Spirit  of
God  as  the  shallow  brook,  which  a  straw  may  turn,  that
goes  stumbling  and  muttering  among  rocks,  babbling  at
every  thing  it  touches,  and  is  only  silenced,  at  last,  by  drop-
ping into  the  shoreless  sea — if  man  had  this  destiny  before
him,  ultimate  annihilation,  then  I  would  recommend  to  all
who  move  in  the  current  of  injustice  and  misery,  to  pur-
chase no  more  bread  to  prolong  the  tortures  of  life — buy  no
more  cloth  to  shield  the  body  from  the  blasts  of  Winter.
But,  hasten  the  work  of  utter  destruction!  Or,  if  there
existed  the  least  possibility  that  any  member  of  the  human
family  will  be  miserable  hereafter — that  children  would,  in
any  possible  event,  go  into  everlasting  punishment — then
would  I  recommend  the  Shaker  system  to  all,  at  least  in  one
respect,  viz:  abolish  all  marriages — love  no  more — bring  no
more  beings  into  existence — smile  no  more — hang  the  heav-
ens in  mourning— blot  out  the  twinkling  stars — and  be  ye
miserable,  even  as  your  fathers  and  mothers,  your  sons  and
daughters,  may  be  miserable  in  the  world  to  come!  You,
who  feel  this  doctrine  as  truth,  should  be  consistent  for  ever
with  it,  and  when  Nature,  God's  Eevelation  and  Dominion,
shows  her  circling  gems  of  beauty;  shows  her  mountains
piled  on  mountains;  her  imperial  rivers;  her  landscapes  of
wild  and  wondrous  beauty — wrought  out  by  an  enchanting
union  of  land,  water,  and  sky;  and,  not  to  speak  of  the
heavens,  when  Nature  lets  you  hear  her  vocal  vallies — her
songsters — the  music  of  the  curling  wave  which  breaks
against  the  shore — then,  if  ycu  believe  in  either  annihila-
tion or  future  misery,  close  your  eyes  and  deafen  your  ears,
because  these  joyous  truths — these  evangels  of  existence —
these  beautiful  sights  and  sounds — must  only  tend  to  agitate
your  soul,  excite  useless  hopes,  suggest  useless  desires,  and


PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL 5  P  II  E  E  E  S. 28]

enhance  the  misery  of  life!  Before  all,  Death — real  Death
—would  thrust  up  his  hideous  front!  Or,  eternal  Misery
would  clank  his  chains  perpetually  before  the  inhabitants  of
heaven ;  and  the  deadening  discord  of  his  sighs  would  make
the  angels  weep,  and  drive  all  music,  all  joy,  all  heaven  from
this  beautiful  universe!

But,  no! Away  with these dismal fables  of  Oriental
religion! Bring  forward  the  gospel  of  Nature;  let  us  live
.joyously  in  the  Creator's  mansion,  and  read  the  great  volume
before  us.

What  we  shall  be  doth  not  yet  appear !  We  are  all  animal,
all  human,  all  angel  by  turns;  because  every  tiling  meets  and
centres  in  man.

No  man  can  say:  "I  am  holier  than  thou."  No  man  can
say:  "I  am  more  beloved  of  God  than  thou" — for  every  one
is,  in  his  own  way  and  state,  filling  some  proper  niche  in
the  great  scale  of  being.  If  man  be  misdirected  and  uncon-
trollable in  his  present  social  state,  and  the  author  of  many
wrongs,  then  we  must  set  ourselves  to  the  work  of  social
improvement,  and  convert  the  world  to  nature's  laws.  But
if  thou  art  bowed  down  in  sorrow,  and  troubles  surround
thee,  still  rejoice — still  live  on;  take  no  poison — for  thou  art
immortal!  Death  is  but  a  door  leading  to  another  room  "in
the  house  not  made  with  hands."  It  is  the  important  transi-
tion, good  for  man  only,  when  he  has  lived  out  the  full  term
of  life  allotted  to  the  natural  body.  In  view  of  ichat  ive-
shall  hereafter  he,  let  us  rejoice  exceedingly  with  songs  of
praise  in  our  mouths;  let  us  attune  our  lives  to  the  key-note
of  our  spiritual  convictions,
