Death and the After-Life (Andrew Jackson Davis, 1866)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1866 A. J. Davis & Co., New York first edition (https://archive.org/details/deathafterlife00davi). Three discourses on death and the Summer Land — Davis's core statement of the spiritualist afterlife.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DEATH  AND  THE  AFTER-LIFE.


"Death  is  but  a  kind  and  welcome  servant,  who  unlocks  with  noiseless
hand  life's  flower-encircled  door,  to  show  us  those  we  love."

I  find  myself  somewhat  embarrassed  in  speaking  on
a  subject  which,  though  it  is  not  a  stranger  to  human
hopes  and  aspirations,  is  nevertheless  quite  foreign  to
most  people's  habits  of  thinking,  opposed  to  their  edu-
cational bias,  and  which  conflicts  with  popular  methods
of  reasoning  on  the  resurrection.

I  find  three  classes  of  persons  who  have  read,  and
studied,  and  investigated  the  truths  of  this  discourse.
One  class  of  minds  are  prepared  for  many  spiritual
things  that  I  do  not  feel  impressed  to  utter  on  this
occasion.  I  am  to  address  more  especially  a  second
class  who  have  heard  a  large  variety  of  opinions
expressed  concerning  this  subject,  and  are  favorably
inclined  towards  it,  yet  who  have  no  practical  know-
ledge so  far  as  the  general  question  of  immortality  is
concerned,  and  who  are,  therefore,  in  the  rudiments  of
spiritual  education  respecting  the  processes  of  Death,
and  scenes  in  the  After-life.

Then  I  find  that  there  is  in  society  a  supercilious
class  —I  might  say  a  super-silly  class,  (if  this  is  not  a
dictionary  word,  it  ought  to  be.)  who  fancy  and  profess
that  they  know  all — a  band  of  intellectual  finishers —
persons  who  have  an  unhappy  conceit  in  the  perceptive
powers — that  they  are  thoroughly  "posted." These


4  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

last  named  persons  are  accustomed  to  the  newspapers,
to  the  genteel  Weeklies  and  orthodox  Monthlies,  and
to  the  trans-Atlantic  Quarterlies,  but  are  not  at  ail
accustomed  to  think  upon  the  spiritual,  practical,  and
progressive  questions  discussed  from  the  Harmonial
platform.  And  yet  these  same  persons  have  a. conceit
that  they  cannot  be  further  informed.  Every  such  mind
has  a  social  center,  and  will  exert  his  or  her  magnetic
influence  upon  others.

Now  finding  the  public  divided  into  these  mental
conditions,  it  becomes  necessary  that  I  should  express
something  which  would  at  least  seem  measurably
familiar  to  the  intuitions  and  religious  education  of  the
people.  To  speak  upon  a  strange  subject,  and  to
describe  scenes  that  are  wholly  transmunclane,  and  to
link  such  subjects  and  descriptions  with  nothing  analo-
gous or  known,  would,  to  many  minds,  be  building  a
temple  without  any  basis  in  either  Nature  or  Reason,
and  hence,  utterly  imaginative  and  unprofitable.  For
this  reason  I  shall  speak  to  the  world  from  the  position
of  religious  conviction  and  general  experience,  going
on  the  supposition  that  all  rational  men  are  interested
in  questions  pertaining  to  the  life  after  death.

I  begin  by  asking  your  attention  to  the  Spiritual-
ism of  Paul — the  most  learned  of  the  Apostles,  who,  in
giving  descriptions  of  death,  said :  "There  is  a  natural
body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body ;"  not  that  there
would  be,  but  there  is  "  a  spiritual  body."  Now  there
are  individuals  who  think  thus:  "Paul  says  so;  he  is
our  authority  ;  we  do  not  question  his  testimony :  but
it  is  all  a  great  mystery."  But  the  spiritual  philoso-
pher cheerfully  and  unprejudicially  takes  the  testimony


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  5

of  Paul,  stands  it  by  the  side  of  the  organized  human
being,  and  asks,  "  Is  there  a  spiritual  body  V  Paul
did  not  refer  to  something  outside  of  human  nature,  but
pointed  to  facts  in  the  organization  of  persons  in  the
world  before  him.  The  question  is  not  whether  Paul
said  it,  but  does  Nature  sustain  the  assertion  ?  All
truth  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  perfect  system  of
Nature.

There  are  persons  everywhere  who  accept  Paul's
affirmation  as  final  authority.  There  need  be  no  con-
troversy between  Orthodoxites  and  Spiritualists  on
this  question.  We  can  shake  hands  over  the  subject;
we  can  lock  arms  and  walk  together.  If,  with  Paul,
you  believe  that  there  positively  is  in  each  man's
organism,  not  only  a  natural  body,  but  also  "  a  spiritual
body,"  then  you  are  as  much  committed  to  the  funda-
mental teachings  of  Spiritualism  as  I  am,  and  I  am  on
this  point  no  more  of  a  Spiritualist  than  you  Christians
are,  and  henceforth  we  can  happily  "  walk  together/'
because  we  are  "  agreed"  on  the  basis  of  a  true  spiritual
philosophy. So  far,  then,  we  are  friends.

But  may  I  now  ask  your  attention  to  some  correla-
tive questions  which  we  inevitably  encounter  on  the
accepted  basis  of  this  spiritual  reasoning?  If,  with
Paul,  we  believe  that  there  is  a  spiritual  body,  must  we
not  also  believe  that  there  is  something  inside  of  that
body  ?  To  believe  differently,  would  be  like  saying
that  a  jug  is  designed  merely  to.  have  an  outside  and  an
inside,  the  inward  space  being  filled  with  nothing.
Most  persons  would  ask  "Is  that  all?  Is  the  vessel
not  designed  to  contain  something  ?  Was  it  not  made
to  hold,  against  all  parts  of  its  inward  surfaces,  some-


6  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

thing  besides  tTie  interior  of  a  jug?  The  thought  of
inventing  and  owning  a  jug  merely  for  the  purpose
of  holding  a  jug,  is  an  imbecility.  And  it  would  not  be
less  absurd  to  believe  that  the  "  spiritual  body"  is
destitute  of  a  more  interior  substance.  A  body  is  de-
signed to  hold  something  called  "  spirit."

If  Paul  wras  right,  then  he  stood  at  least  in  the  ves-
tibule of  that  spiritual  temple  which  we  have  entered
and  searched  through  and  through.  We  have  investi-
gated and  mapped  down  the  "experience"  with  as
much  gratitude  and  truthfulness  as  can  be  found  in  any
ancient  Testaments.  I  make  this  affirmation  with  per-
fect calmness  of  pulse,  and  with  no  heat  on  my  brain;
and  I  know  that  I  shall  be  ready  at  any  time  to  re-
consider reasons,  uttered  by  persons  who  feel  themselves
not  yet  satisfied,  why  positions  here  taken  may  not  be
sound  in  science  and  philosophy.

Your  attention  is  asked  to  the  logical  conclusion  that,
if  there  be  a  spiritual  body  in  every  man,  as  Paul  said,
there  must  be  a  fine  invisible  something  treasured  up
within  it.  Let  us  see,  now,  if  we  can  ascertain  what
that  treasured  "  something"  is.

Man  is  a  triple  organization.  This  fact  is  established
in  two  ways — (1)  by  the  concurrent  observations  of  all
seers,  sensitives,  and  mediums,  and  (2)  by  the  phenome-
nal developments  of  individual  men  and  women.  Man's
external  body  is  a  casing,  composed  of  the  aggregate
refinements  of  the  grossest  substances.  We  will  name
the  physical  body  "  iron,"  merely  to  give  it  a  just
classification  and  position  in  relation  to  mind  and
spirit.  Next,  we  find  that  there  is  an  intermediate  or-
ganization— which  Paul  called  the  "spiritual  body' —


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  7

composed  of  still  finer  substances,  the  ultimatum  of  the
coarser  elements  which  make  up  the  corporeal  or  "  iron
organization."  The  combination  of  the  finer  substances
composing  the  intermediate  or  spiritual  body,  being  so
white  and  shining,  may  be  called  the  "  silver  organiza-
tion/5 The  inmost,  or  inside  of  this  silvery  bodv.  (which
interior  Paul  definitely  said  nothing  about,;  is  the
immortal  "  golden  image."  I  use  the  term  "  golden
image,"  because  that  metal  is  just  now  exceedingly  valu-
able in  commerce,  and  goes  directly  to  men's  uppermost
feelings  and  interests.  Yes,  a  golden  image  !  You  can-
not obtain  it  from  stock-jobbers  in  Wail  street.  And
yet  it  is  there  when  you  find  yourself  there ;  you  may
also  see  it  deep  down  in  the  spiritual  vault  of  a  brother
speculator ;  for  whomsoever  you  meet,  and  wherever
you  meet,  that  person,  like  yourself,  contains,  against
the  lining  surfaces  of  his  spiritual  body,  the  "  golden
image,"  which,  let  us  thank  the  Eternal,  cannot  be  bar-
tered  away  on  'Change  !

Paul  did  not  directly  speak  of  what  we  have  been
philosophically  taught  to  call  "the  spirit."  Fully  per-
suaded am  I  that  you  cannot  escape  the  conclusion  that
there  must  be  something  within  the  "spiritual  body;75
and,  if  so,  you  Christians  might  as  well  "agree"  with
our  classification  of  the  different  parts  of  man,  as  to
take  any  other.  We  call  the  inmost  "  spirit" — signi-
fying the  finest,  the  super-essential  portion  of  man's
nature,  composed  of  "  all  imperaona]  principles,"  which
flow  from  the  Deific  center  of  this  glorious  universe,
taking  a  permanent  residence  within  the  spiritual  body
which  they  fill  and  exalt,  just  as  the  elements  of  the
spiritual body live within this corporeal or "iroo


8  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

organization."  which  is  composed  of  mineral,  vegetable,
and  animal  atoms  and  vitalities.

Now  you  may  be  prepared  to  take  some  other  steps
in  the  path  of  spiritual  discovery.  What  are  they  ?
Take  care  now  where  you  step — because,  if  you  are  in
reality  a  believer  in  Paul's  authority,  then  you  are  on
the  high  road  to  what  is  termed  "  Spiritualism."  If
you  are  not  a  Bible-receiver,  then  other  reasonings  and
evidences  will  be  necessary  to  promote  your  progress.
Now,  mark !  If  you  be  truly  a  receiver  of  Paul's
beautiful  spiritual  statements  (which  we  accept,  not  as
revelations,  but  because  they  agree  with  the  facts  of
the  spiritual  body,)  then  you  stand  upon  so  much  of  our
platform  as  regards  the  philosophy  that  a  body  is  a
substance.  No  substance  is  no  body.  Nothing  cannot
exist.  Existence  and  substance  are  convertible  terms-
one  means  and  necessitates  the  other.  Something — i.  e.
substance — always  exists.  If  Paul  was  right,  then  the
spiritual  body  is  a  fact  not  only,  but  it  is  a  substantial
fact  !  That  is,  the  spiritual  body  is  a  substance — the
under-fact,  the  "  silver  lining"  of  this  physical  and
cloudy  organism.  If  it  be  an  under-fact — a  real  and
substantial  body — it  is  no  fiction.

Now,  let  us  take  another  step  in  this  logical  path.
You  accept  that  the  spiritual  body  is  a  substance.  But
do  you  not  know  that  substance,  on  the  simple  rules  of
science  and  philosophy,  implies  the  associate  properties
of  both  weight  and  force.  Substance  cannot  exist  with-
out weight,  however  inappreciable  ;  and  weight  involves
force,  however  fine  and  unimaginable  to  man's  physical
thought  or  touch.  All  this  follows  if  Paul  told  the
truth.


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  9

Now,  take  one  more  step.  If  the  spiritual  body  be
a  substance,  and  if  a  substance  possess  the  property  of
v:eight>  it  follows  that  such  weight  can  never  be  moved
without  force.  The  finest  substance,  with  the  least
weight,  requires  the  highest  force.  This  principle  is
plain  and  simple  as  the  common  school-boy's  logic,  and
yet  it  supports  the  granite  basis  of  the  whole  Harmonial
Philosophy  concerning  "  spirit/'  which  the  churches
everywhere  are  stealthily  accepting  and  promulgating
as  their  own  long-entertained  doctrine  of  immor-
tality !

If  chere  be  a  spiritual  body,  which  is  a  very  attenu-
ated substance,  and  if  this  imperceptibly  fine  substance
have  a  delicate  weight,  and  if  force  be  required  to  move
the  aerial  weight,  then  I  ask  "  What  will  be  your  next
and  most  important  conclusion  V  This  is  your  next  step :
That  a  body  so  organized,  so  essentially  substantial,
and  so  inseparably  linked  with  a  fine  force,  must  exist
somewhere  and  occupy  space  !  If  any  lawyer  among
you  can  escape  this  last  conclusion,  if  any  materialist
can  go  through  another  orifice  in  logic,  why,  I  am  ready
to  "skedaddle"  through  the  same  remarkable  opening.
I  want  the  "  whole  truth"  as  much  as  any  one  else  can
want  it.  Therefore,  if  you  can  make  a  philosophical
retreat  from  this  military  line  of  logic,  I  will  promise
to  throw  down  my  arms  and  run  with  you.

Do  not  let  the  simplicity  of  the  philosophy  grow
weak  in  your  thoughts.  If  the  spiritual  body  be  any-
thing, it  is  something;  if  something,  it  is  substantial ;
if  substantial,  it  occupies  space  ;  if  it  occupy  space,
then  all  of  our  revealments  with  reference  to  a  "  Sum-
mer-Land" in  the  bosom  of  Space,  will  be  inseparable


10  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

from  your  convictions  of  probability.  Thus  while  we
are  crushing  and  "pulverizing  creeds"  in  God's  mill  of
Progressive  Truth,  we  do  vastly  more  labor  to  secure
the  "fraternization  of  the  spiritual  affections  of  man-
kind."

Again  let  us  look  into  the  Apostle's  logic.  Paul
says  of  the  spiritual  body,  "  Sown  in  dishonor" — in
imperfection,  in  corporeal  impurity — but  "  raised  in  glo-
ry." The  familiar  word  "glory"  means  "brightness."
Raised  in  brightness  !  Christians!  Do  you  believe  it?
I  believe  it  in  my  heart.  Do  you  ?  Let  us  know  who
is  the  "  infidel."  I  have  an  extensive  reputation  for
being  an  infidel  in  the  bad  sense  of  the  word.  To  me
this  reputation  is  very  amusing;  because  I  believe  so
much  I  Why,  I  am  utterly  discarded  and  clisfellow-
shipped  by  the  infidels  of  the  old  school.  The  foxes  have
more,  holes  than  I  have  pillows  among  the  skeptics.
But  do  not  misapprehend  my  meaning.  My  whole  soul
shrinks  from  contact  with  sectarian  Christians  or  with
so-called  Christian  Spiritualists.  Christians,  so  styled
in  the  newspapers,  are  the  most  stupid  in  spiritual
principles,  and  the  most  unmistakable  materialists  I
have  yet  met  with  in  society.  Infidels,  on  the  contrary,
are  accessible  and  decently  fraternal.  They  can
and  will  think,  although  they  sometimes  look  very  sul-
len and  seem  over-much  disappointed,  because  they  have
been  too  long  reasoning  wrong  end  foremost — have
logically  consigned  themselves  to  a  total  death  when
they  lie  down  to  die — and,  of  course,  they  unani-
mously consider  that  their  long-cherished  views  are
tenable  and  incontrovertible.  Hence  they  reject
Spiritualism. I  have  a  friend-,  however,  who,  although


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  11

a  confessed  skeptic,  said  that,  on  the  whole,  he  "  guessed
"he  would  rather  not  be  annihilated  at  death."  "  Why
not?"  I  asked.  With  spontaneous  simplicity  he  re-
plied, that  lie  was  afraid  he  would  "  regret  it  after-
wards /"

In  that  response  I  saw  the  inborn  remonstrance,  the
intuitive  protest,  which  the  Divine  source  puts  up
through  the  human  consciousness.  Miserable,  limping,
materialistic  logic  can  do  nothing  against  Intuition.  It
does  not  want  to  be  annihilated,  because  there  is  for  it
no  such  destiny.  It  conceives  of  it  as  possible  only  to
what  is  ponderable  and  perishable.  Converse  with
a  sensualist  to-morrow,  or  talk  with  persons  who
live  a  materialistic  life,  who  are  immersed  in  quadruped
habits — ask  them,  and  they  seem  to  know  nothing  con-
cerning «  spirit"  and  the  "  After-Life/'  simply  because
they  have  not  been  awakened  to  the  subject.  But  a
true  soul-born  conversation  invariably  touches  their
organs  of  hope.  1  have  never  met  men  or  women,
though  buried  in  the  mud  and  mire  of  circumstances,
but  would,  when  spiritually  and  affectionately  ap-
proached, respond  like  the  strings  of  an  iEolian-harp,
to  the  doctrine  that  the  "  Summer-Land"  belongs  to
them  as  much  as  to  the  finest,  most  respected,  and  most
beautiful  person  on  the  globe.

The  spiritual  doctrine  teaches  that  the  inmost  man
is  "  a  spirit,"  which  flows  through  these  nerve-sensa-
tions;  which  easily  contracts  and  expands  these  sturdy,
muscles  ;  which  causes  the  blood  to  throb  throughout  the
frame;  which  thinks  and  reasons;  which  feels  better,  no-
bler, and  purer  than  the  forms,  forces,  and  things  about
it;  which  teaches  the  intellect  and  the  heart  to  recog-


12  DEATH AND THE AFTER  LIFE.

nize  something  higher  than  the  fleeting  circumstances  to
which  it  is  harnessed,  and  by  which  it  is  constrained
to  assist  in  drawing  the  burdens  of  society.  That  is
"  spirit."  It  is  the  invisible  presence  of  the  Divine  in
the  visible  human.  It  is  the  only  and  all-sufficient
Incarnation.  Degradations  and  depravities  never  reach
that  which  lives  within  the  "  spiritual  body."  Dis-
cords and  great  evils  are  arrested  at  the  surface ;  they
cling  and  adhere ;  they  unhappily  besmear,  cover  up,
disfigure,  and  sometimes  almost  break  down  the  cita-
del ;  but  they  never  get  inward  far  enough  to  kill  the
proprietor !

Let  us  not  forget  our  major-proposition.  If  this
human  inmost  be  "  spirit,"  (comparable  to  a  golden
image);  if  on  the  outside  of  this  spirit  there  be  a
"body;"  if  this  impalpable  body  be  a  " substance  ;"  if
this  inter-affinitized  substance  require  "  force"  to
move  it ;  if  space  be  necessary  for  such  a  personality  to
exist  in — then,  I  ask,  why  may  there  not  be  something
beautiful  in  the  idea  of  Death?  Not  dreadful  and
appalling,  but  really  beautiful  ?  Not  heart-chilling,
but  truly  genial  and  warming?  Not  annihilating,  but
uplifting  and  encouraging  to  every  organ  and  function
of  the  soul  ?  If  this  spiritual  doctrine  be  a  fiction,  then
you  are  shut  up  to  atheistical  extinguishment  when  you
lie  down  to  die.  But  the  opposite  road  is  open  before
!  you.  On  this  highway  you  meet  your  personal  apotheo-
sis ;  you  rise  up  and  expand ;  you  go  onward  and  God-
ward  through  the  illimitable  space ;  and  you  seek  a
Summer-Land — a  place,  in  which  to  be  !  I  have  no
ambition  to  make  proselytes.  *It  would  not  increase
my private  joys to have you believe  my  cherished


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  13

thoughts.  Better  be  converted  and  guided  by  your  own
Eeason  and  Intuitions.

The  Apostle  says  there  is  a  "  terrestrial"  and  a
"celestial."  Do  you  believe  it?  I  do;  not,  however,
because  Paul  said  it;  but  because  I  find  it  in  the  Book
of  Nature.  "We  are  sown  in  corruption/5  Every-
body's spirit  knows  that  to  be  true.  But  at  last  the
chemistry  of  death  approaches  and  begins  its  work —
then  oxygen,  and  nitrogen,  and  hydrogen,  and  magnet-
ism, and  electricity,  and  the  resultant  heat,  and  all
ponderables  that  make  up  our  corporeal  existence,  bid
"good-by'v  to  each  other — then  the  eyes  sink  back,  and
the  outside  senses  are  closed,  and  all  the  elements
which  formed  the  body  bid  "an  eternal  farewell."
This  is  real  experience*.  If  we  exclude  the  air,  by
placing  the  body  in  a  hermetically-sealed  encasement,
you  can  bend  over  and  look  upon  the  yet  undecomposed
figure.  That  is  all ;  nothing  more.  The  confined
atoms  and  elements  have  no  further  interest  for  each
other.  The  pulseless  hand  is  no  longer  extended  to
grasp  yours  ;  the  once  beaming  eyes  do  not  open ;  the
ear  will  not  again  vibrate  to  your  heart-stricken  ap-
peals or  loving  accents  ;  the  stiffened  nose  can  no  more
feel  the  touch  and  enjoy  the  perfume  of  the  favorite
plant.  Appalling  silence !  All  is  closed  forever.
What  a  spiritualizing  and  holy  solemnity  is  that  which
pervades  the  chamber  of  Death  !  What  a  dark,  fearful,
haunted  room  is  that  where  Death  is — to  those  who
know  not  this  glorious  Gospel  of  the  After-Life  !

But  what  a  blessed  roseate  atmosphere  fills  all  the
heavenly  spaces — from  the  death-room  onward  to
Summer  realms  beyond  the  stars — to  those  who  know


14  DEATH  AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

that  this  basis  is  established  in  God's  truth !  Such
mediums  and  fortunate  reasoners  have  joy  and  peace
within.  Their  inmost  hearts  are  filled  with  emotions
of  thanksgiving;  and  why?  Because  to  the  seer  of
spiritual  truth,  "  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory."
The  Spiritualist  has  nothing .  whatever  to  do  with
Death.  He  is  emphatically  alive — alive  and  happy
throughout.  Women  and  men  past  the  "  meridian
of  life/5  who  receive  these  new  spiritual  teachings,  are
kindling  and  blooming  up  into  youth  again  !  They  see
that  this  pathway  of  truth  is  paved  with  perfectly  beau-
tiful scientific  facts  and  doctrines — Progress,  leading
from  man's  inmost  "  spirit"  to  the  Summer-Land.

And  now,  having  disposed  of  these  general  consid-
erations, I  will  tell  you  what  I  have  seen.  I  will  not
give  descriptions  of  phenomena  from  my  supposition  or
imagination.  I  suppose  that  I  need  not  repeat  that  I
have  had  the  peri-scopic  and  clairvoyant  ability  to  see
through  man's  iron  coating  for  the  past  fifteen  years ;
neither  need  I  again  remark  that,  within  the  last
twelve  years,  the  result  of  the  exercise  of  this  faculty
has  come  to  be  to  me  an  "education."  I  have  stood  by
the  side  of  many  death-beds;  but  a  description  of
manifestations  in  one  case  will  suffice  for  the  whole.

I  found  that  the  physical  body  grew  negative  and
cold  vi  proportion  as  the  elements  of  the  spiritual  body
grew  warm  and  positive.  Suppose  a  human  being  lying
in  the  death-bed  before  you.  Persons  present  not  see-
ing anything  of  the  beautiful  processes  of  the  interior,
are  grief-stricken  and  weeping.  This  departing  one  is
a  beloved  member  of  the  family.  But  there,  in  the
corner of  the  room  of  sorrow,  stands  one  who  sees


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  15

through  the  outward  phenomena  presented  by  the  dying
one,  and  what  do  you  suppose  is  visible  ?  To  the  outward
senses  the  feet  are  there ;  the  head  on  the  pillow ;
and  the  hands  clasped,  out-stretched,  or  crossed  over*
the  breast.  If  the  person  is  dying  under  or  upon
cotton,  there  are  signs  of  agony,  the  head  and  body
changing  from  side  to  side.  Never  allow  any  soul  to
pass  out  of  the  physical  body  through  the  agony  of
cotton  or  feathers  either  beneath  or  in  folds  about  the
sufferer.

Suppose  the  person  is  now  dying.  It  is  to  be  a
rapid  death.  The  feet  first  grow  cold.  The  clairvoy-
ant sees  right  over  the  head  what  may  be  called  a
magnetic  halo — an  ethereal  emanation,  in  appearance
golden,  and  throbbing  as  though  conscious.  The  body
is  now  cold  up  to  the  knees  and  elbows,  and  the  ema-
nation has  ascended  higher  in  the  air.  The  legs  are
cold  to  the  hips,  and  the  arms  to  the  shoulders,  and
the  emanation,  although  it  has  not  arisen  higher  in  the
room,  is  more  expanded.  The  death-coldness  steals
over  the  breast,  and  around  on  either  side,  and  the
emanation  has  attained  a  higher  position  nearer  the
ceiling.  The  person  has  ceased  to  breathe,  the  pulse  is
still,  and  the  emanation  is  elongated  and  fashioned  in
the  outline  of  the  human  form  !  Beneath,  it  is  con-
nected the  brain.  The  head  of  the  person  is  internally
throbbing — a  slow,  deep  throb — not  painful,  but  like
the  beat  of  the  sea.  Hence  the  thinking  faculties  are
rational  while  nearly  every  part  of  the  person  is  dead!
Owing  to  the  brain's  momentum,  I  have  seen  a  dying
person,  even  at  the  last  feeble  pulse-beat,  rouse  impul-
sively and  rise  up  in  bed  to  converse  with  a  friend,  but


16  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

the  next  instant  he  was  gone — his  brain  being  the  last
to  yield  up  tberlife-principles.

The  golden  emanation,  which  extends  up  midway  to
the  ceiling,  is  connected  with  the  brain  by  a  very  fine
life-thread.  Now  the  body  of  the  emanation  ascends.
Then  appears  something  white  and  shining,  like  a  hu-
man head;  next,  in  a  very  few  moments,  a  faint  outline
of  the  face  divine ;  then  the  fair  neck  and  beautiful
shoulders;  then,  in  rapid  succession,  come  all  parts  of
the  new  body  down  to  the  feet — a  bright,  shining
image,  a  little  smaller  than  this  physical  body,  but  a
perfect  prototype  or  reproduction,  in  all  except  its  dis-
figurements. The  fine  life-thread  continues  attached  to
the  old  brain.  The  next  thing  is  the  withdrawal  of  the
elective  principle.  When  this  thread  snaps,  the  spiritual
body  is  free!  and  prepared  to  accompany  its  guardians
to  the  Summer-Land.  Yes,  there  is  a  spiritual  body  ;  it
is  sown  in  dishonor  and  raised  in  brightness.

There  are  persons  in  the  room  of  mourning ;  they
gather  around ;  they  close  the  sightless  eyes,  and
friendly  hands  commence  those  final  preparations  with
which  the  living  consecrate  the  dead.  The  clairvoyant
sees  the  newly-arisen  spiritual  body  move  off  toward  a
thread  of  magnetic  light  which  has  penetrated  the
room  !  There  is  a  golden  shaft  of  celestial  light  touch-
ing this  spiritual  body  near  its  head.  That  delicate
chain  of  love-light  is  sent  from  above  as  a  guiding
power.  The  spiritual  being  is  asleep — like  a  just-born,
happy  babe ;  the  eyes  are  closed;  and  there  seems  to
be  no  consciousness  of  existence.  It  is  an  unconscious
slumber.  In  many  cases  this  sleep  is  long  ;  in  others,
not  at all. The  love-thread  now  draws  the  new-born


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  17

body  to  the  outside  door.  A  thought-shaft  descends
upon  one  who  is  busy  about  the  body.  This  person  is
all  at  once  "impressed"  to  open  the  door  of  the  dwell-
ing and  to  leave  it  open  for  a  few  moments.  Or,  some
other  door  of  egress  is  opened;  and  the  spiritual  body
is  silently  removed  from  the  house.  The  thread  of  ce-
lestial attraction  gathers  about  and  xlraws  it  obliquely
through  the  forty-live  miles  of  air.  It  is  surrounded
by  a  beautiful  assemblage  of  guardian  friends.  They
throw  their  loving  .arms  about  the  sleeping  one,  and  on
they  all  speed  to  the  world  of  Light !  Clairvoyants
and  mediums  see  this ;  and  they  know  it  is  true.  Many-
are  the  witnesses  to  these  celestial  facts.

Again,  I  remind  you  that  if  there  is  a  spiritual
body,  it  must  be  something  ;  if  something,  it  must  have
an  existence  and  a  position  somewhere  in  space  ;  if  in
space,  it  must  follow  the  laws  of  space,  including  time,
and  have  a  relative  as  well  as  an  absolute  conscious-
ness.

At  the  battle  of  Fort  Donelson  I  saw  a  soldier
instantly  killed  by  a  cannon-ball.  One  arm  was
thrown  over  the  high  trees;  a  part  of  his  brain  went
a  great  distance ;  other  fragments  were  scattered  about
in  the  open  field ;  his  limbs  and  fingers  flew  among  the
dead  and  dying.  Now  what  of  this  man's  spiritual
body  ?  I  have  seen  similar  things  many  times — not
deaths  by  cannon-balls,  but  analogous  deaths  by  sud-
den accidents  or  explosions.  Of  this  person  whose  body
was  so  utterly  annihilated  at  Fort  Donelson,  I  saw  that
all  the  particles  streamed  up  and  met  together  in  the
air.  The  atmosphere  was  filled  with  those  golden  par-
ticles— emanations  from  the  dead — over  the  whole  bat-


18  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

tie-field.  About  three-quarters  of  a  mile  above  the
smoke  of  the  battle-field — above  all  the  "clouds  that
lowered''  upon  the  hills  and  forests  of  black  discord,
there  was  visible  the  beautiful  accumulation  from  the
fingers  and  toes  and  heart  and  brain  of  that  suddenly-
killed  soldier.  There  stood  the  new  spiritual  body
three-quarters  of  a  mile  above  all  the  discord  and  din
and  havoc  of  the  furious  battle !  And  the  bodies  of
many  others  were  coming  up  from  other  directions  at
the  same  time;  so  that  from  half  a  mile  to  three  and
five  miles  in  the  clear,  tranquil  air,  I  could  see  spiritual
organisms  forming  and  departing  thence  in  all  direc-
tions. First  the  face,  then  the  head,  then  the  neck,
then  the  shoulders  and  arms — the  whole  smaller  than
the  natural  body,  but  almost  exactly  like  it — so  that
you  could  instantly  recognize  the  form  and  features  of
your  old  friend,  only  you  would  say,  "  Why,  James,
how  improved  you  are !  You  look  brighter  and  more
beautiful,  don't  you  ?  Your  countenance  has  more  quiet
and  love  in  it."  So  entirely  natural  is  "  the  spiritual
body"  which  the  good  God  has  wisely  planned  and
caused  to  rise  out  of  this  terrestrial  filth  and  corporeal
corruption!

The  man  so  killed — what  was  his  sensation  ?  It
was  for, the  time  suspended.  To  him,  existence  was
nothing.  Just  think  of  the  case.  He  was  a  healthy,
stout,  strong  Illinois  mechanic,  who  had  bravely  gone
out  with  his  loaded  musket  to  do  battle  for  the  "  Stars
and  Stripes"  which  shall  never  go  down !  His  sudden
death  was  to  his  consciousness  what  the  hammer  is  to
a  piece  of  flint.  If  a  hard  flint  is  struck  quick  enough,
it  will  fly  into  impalpable  powder. If  struck  with  less


DEATH A"XD THE AFTER-LIFE.  19

speed,  it  would  not  be  crushed  nor  destroyed.  It  is  the
suddenness  of  the  stroke  that  surprises  "  cohesion"  in  the
flint,  as  the  cannon-ball  for  the  moment  annihilated  the
"  sensation"  of  individuality  in  the  man.  Individuality
usually  returns,  in  cases  of  sudden  death,  after  a  few
days  in  the  homes  of  the  Summer-Land.  They  are
usually  guided  to  some  Brotherhood,  to  some  Hos-
pitalia,  or  to  some  open-armed  Pavilion,  and  there  they
are  watched  and  tenderly  cared  for,  as  are  all  who-  ar-
rive from  lower  worlds.  When  the  time  approaches  for
the  spirit's  awakening,  then  celestial  music,  or  some
gentle  manipulation,  or  the  murmuring  melody  of  dis-
tant streams,  or  something  like  breathing  passes  made
over  the  sleeping  one,  causes  "  sensation"  to  return,
and  thus  the  new  comer  is  introduced  to  the  Summer-
Land.

So  Professor  Webster  was  eight  days  and  a  half
unconscious.  You  know  that,  in  Leverett  street  jail-
yard,  in  Boston,  he  was  hung  according  to  law  and
gospel.  As  soon  as  he  was  pronounced  good  enough  to
live,  they  legally  and  religiously  killed  him.  The  sud-
den concussion  struck  to  the  soul  of  the  strong,  healthy
man,  and  he  was  instantly  jerked  out  of  his  individual
consciousness.  For  days  he  was  spiritually  watched.  I
was  at  the  time  stopping  at  the  Brattle  House,  in  Cam-
bridge. Mount  Auburn  was  my  daily  walk ;  the  only
academy,  the  only  college  I  sought  in  which  to  learn
these  lessons.  I  went  thither  every  day.  I  witnessed
the  execution  of  Professor  Webster ;  yet  I  was  not  per-
sonally present.  I  saw  the  organization  of  his  spiritual
body  in  the  air,  and  watched  its  ascension.  I  saw  his  sit-
uation every  day  between  the  hours  of  ten  and  twelve.


20  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

I  wish  now  to  call  your  attention  to  the  arrival  and
appearance  of  different  persons  in  the  Summer-Land.
We  find  on  investigation  that  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
immortal  Spheres  were  born  on  Earth,  Mars,  Jupiter,
Saturn,  and  upon  the  other  planets  which  have  gone
through  the  process  of  geologic  growth.

Spirits  themselves  nearly  all  refer  to  terrestrial
beginnings.  But  spirit  itself  is  only  manifested ;  it
never  came  out  of  terrestrial  sources.  Spirit,  per  se,  is
the  universal,  ever-present  truth.  The  organization  of
the  spiritual  body  is  another  question,  which  may  come
up  for  consideration  on  another  occasion.

It  is  a  well-ascertained  fact  that  persons  always
take  places  in  the  Summer-Land  in  accordance  with
their  jnoral  status,  and  not  in  accordance  with  their
intellectual  tastes,  inclinations,  or  social  condition.
Place  there  is  always  a  question  of  morals — that
is  whether  the  person  has  been,  or  is,  spiritually  loyal
to  Truth,  Justice,  and  Liberty,  and  the  divine  laws  that
regulate  social  relations  on  the  higher  planes  of  being ;
or  whether  the  person  has,  by  circumstances,  or  by  the
impulse  of  organization,  been  unfaithful  to  principles,
and  particeps  criminis  J  or  whether  he  is  really  inno-
cent, having  been  the  victim  of  a  combination  of  unpro-
pitious  circumstances,  or  a  sufferer  from  the  fortuitous
concourse  of  physical  and  spiritual  accidents.  In  either
case,  the  moral  status  determines  the  position  and
gravitation  of  the  person  in  the  Summer-Land.  It  is
found  that  persons  who  go  there  with  memories  of  con-
scious wrong-doing,  carry  with  them  just  so  much
gravitation — so  much  personal  density  and  moral  dark-
ness, and persons who have committed involuntary


DEATH AX1) THE AFTER-LIFE.  21

wrong,  although  partly  as  the  victims  of  others,  yet
have  the  same  density ;  but  they  do  not  suffer  from  the
internal  oppression  which  the  other  feels  as  a  part  of  his
own  conduct.

The  accusing  angel,  is  Memory.  The  theory  that
all  people  will  sometime  go  before  the  bar  of  God,  and
that  there  is  a  systematic  heavenly  tribunal,  is  the
sheerest  fancy  of  a  materialistic  theology.  Both  God
and  Nature  are  with  you  at  all  times.  The  interior
principle  of  Justice,  whether  you  know  it  or  not,  is  the
ever-present  "  bar  of  God"  at  which  you  are  arraigned
and  tried,  and  deathless  Memory  is  "the  accusing
angel."  It  gives  you  the  document  setting  forth  your
exculpation;  or  else  it  explains  to  you,  beyond  contro-
versy, the  all-sufficient  grounds  for  your  condemna-
tion.

The  Summer-Land  is  vastly  more  beautiful  than  the
most  beautiful  landscape  of  earth.  Celestial  waters  are
more  limpid,  the  atmosphere  more  soft  and  genial,  the
streams  are  always  musical,  and  the  fertile  islands  there
are  ever  full  of  meanings.  The  trees  are  not  exotics.
The  birds  are  literally  a  part  of  the  celestial  clime,
every  one  having  its  lesson  of  divine  significance.  That
which  is  nothing  to  an  idiot  is  a  great  deal  to  an  intel-
ligent man.  That  is  true  in  common  things  on  earth,
and  it  is  true  to  a  wondrous  degree  in  heaven.

When  a  person  enters  there  by  suicide  or  by  mur-
der, whether  legal  or  illegal,  or  however  else  he  may
be  introduced,  the  question  is  not,  how  he  came  there,
but  what  brought  him  ?  A  man  who  was  not  strong
enough  to  keep  another  from  doing  him  a  wrong — (to
say  nothing  of  one  who  was  not  strong  enough  tokeep


•h  to  kec


22  DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.

from  doing  a  deliberate  wrong  to  others)  is  a  subject
of  philanthropic  care-takings  and  discipline.  According
to  the  heavenly  code  I  ought  to  have  something  more
than  the  power  to  be  loyal  to  Justice  and  Right.  I
must  be  strong  enough  to  keep  any  brother  from  injur-
ing me,  and  that  without  ever  lifting  a  physical  weapon
before  him.  My  spirit  should  keep  from  harm  the
soul  of  my  brother  who  may  be  yet  encased- in  bad
circumstances,  and  moved  by  a  propulsive  organization.

In  the  Summer-Land  these  delicate  ideas  and  finely-
shaded  moral  distinctions  are  recognized.  And  you  will
find  yourself  under  a  new  Government — a  God-code,
instead  of  the  laws  of  earthly  Judges  and  Legislators.
You  will  be  surprised,  and  yet,  most  likely,  you  will
say,  "  It  is  about  as  I  had  supposed."

Religionists  are  highly  astonished  because  they  are
not  taken  immediately  into  the  presence  of  the  great
Jehovah,  or  cast  down  in  the  low  places  where  they
fry  souls  in  cheap  brimstone.  Some  people  who  have
been  in  the  Summer-Land  for  years  are  still  prayer-
fully expecting  that  the  "great  day  of  judgment"  will
come,  and  that  they  will  either  be  "  caught  up"  to  a
higher  glory,  or  "  snatched  down"  to  some  lower  depth.
When  these  persons  communicate  to  mediums,  they
teach  the  notions  of  orthodoxy,  even  in  the  old  Calvin-
istic  and  perpendicular  style,  and  you  would  be  con-
strained to  exclaim — "  What  contradictions !  Am  I
to  believe  in  Spiritualism  when  the  mediums  tell  all
sorts  of  contradictory  things  ?"  And  popular  newspa-
per men  say  :  "These  Spiritual  things  should  have  no
conflict  in  them."  "Spirits  should  understand  their
own  world  as  accurately  as  earthly  minds  understand


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  23

common  affairs."  So  says  my  political  friend  Horace
Greeley,  and  so  say  others  who  reason  in  that  superfi-
cial way.  Now,  look  at  earthly  reports  about  the
details  of  this  war! Behold  what  contradictions  !

Is  it  reasonable  to  demand  universal  sameness  ?
Is  it  natural  to  suppose  that  the  man  who  went  up  from
Africa,  and  the  native  of  Turkey  should  each  report
from  the  next  Sphere  exactly  what  an  American  would
who  died  the  day  before  yesterday,  with  all  the  twists
and  advantages  of  education  in  his  memory?  Same-
ness is  what  men  demand  who  call  themselves  "  rea-
sonable !"

The  point  now  is,  the  evils  of  general  society  and
the  evils  of  individual  passion,  the  unclean  spirits  and  hu-
man demons,  originate  in  the  mud  and  mire  of  outward
circumstances  and  hereditary  organization.  These
mold  and  fashion  mankind  according  to  their  own
image  and  likeness.  Sweet  and  good  circumstances,
however  thickly  they  may  cluster  about,  amount  to
almost  nothing  to  a  bad  mental  organization.  I  have
heard  worldly  men  say  that  they  would  be  happy  if
they  could  have  this  and  that — carpets,  flowers,  pic-
tures, fast  horses,  and  a  great  house  in  the  city.  Such
men  have  something  wrong  in  the  head.  They  were
born  in  bankruptcy  and  social  discord.  Society,  to
such  persons,  is  merely  a  fleeting  rush  and  a  momentary
flutter.  "  Circumstances"  do  not  much  control  such  cha-
racters, because  their  fathers  and  mothers  gave  them
propulsive  mental  organizations,  which  no  combination
of  circumstance  has  yet  been  able  to  fashion  into  bet-
ter shapes.  But  this  discord  in  character  simply
adheres ;  it  does not  inhere ;  hence  on  this pouiLwe


PQiflkw


24:  DEATH  AND THE AFTEtt-LIFE.

differ  with  the  whole  religious  world.  Modern  liberal
clergymen  are  almost  with  us.  Total  depravity  has
gone  down  in  the  market,  notwithstanding  all  the  city
evils  and  the  tremendous  civil  war.  There  is  scarcely
a  minister  who  will  reaffirm  the  old  doctrine  of  Baxter,
Calvin,  and  John  Knox.  They  get  quietly  over  it.
They  somehow  feel  ashamed  of  having  accused  "  the
golden  image !"  It  looks  like  an  unprovoked  slander
against  the  finest  piece  of  work  that  ever  came  from
the  heavens  to  mankind.  I  do  not  wonder  that  clergy-
men are  "  ashamed"  of  total  depravity.  They  will
presently  be  ashamed  of  many  other  things.

We  hold  that  these  evils,  these  errors,  these  sins
which  arise  out  of  the  abdomen,  from  the  region  of
physical  phrenology,  from  the  region  of  conditions,  and
out  of  social  circumstances,  will  increase  the  spirit's
gravitation  beyond  the  grave.  By  your  status  you
elect  yourself  at  death  to  the  place  where  you  will  be
at  home — be  it  good,  bad,  or  indifferent— you  will  be
in  your  own  proper  and  congenial  "place,"  as  are  the
fishes  in  the  water  and  the  birds  in  the  air.  If  you  feel
mentally  satisfied,  like  the  sightless  fish  in  the  Ken-
tucky cave,  to  dwell  amid  truths  without  eyes,  the  good
Father  and  Mother  will  have  no  objection.  So  in  the
Summer-Land,  where  there  are  infinitely  more  truthful-
ness and  freedom.  If  a  spirit  choose  to  be  foolish,
there  is  no  arbitrary  law  against  his  choice.  But,  ever
and  anon,  he  comes  under  the  genial  influences  of
celestial  teachers,  and  thus,  slowly,  he  is  brought  out
from  his  interior  hiding-places,  and  his  mind  is  at  last
fully  awakened. Randall's  Island,  near  this  cit  ,  gives


■


DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE.  25

off  youthful  candidates  who  receive  the  attentions  of
very  sweet  and  beautiful  celestial  missionaries.

Happiness  very  slowly  comes  to  one  who  persists  in
the  states  of  discord.  Beautiful  music,  the  fragrance
of  flowers,  the  luxurious  melody  of  singing  birds,  and
the  musical  voices  of  many  waters,  come  only  when  you
internally  deserve  them.  Ten  thousand  years  may  pass
before  one's  internals  are  sufficiently  pure  and  bright.
Some  will  find  on  their  spirit-surfaces  a  shadow,  a
feeling  of  unrest,  and  an  appearance  of  nebulous  black-
ness. And  there  are  persons  in  the  Summer-Land  who
have  an  atmosphere  surrounding  their  spiritual  bodies
that  similar  characters  would  be  ashamed  to  wear  in
this  world.  It  is  all  the  logical  consequence  of  wrong
and  evil  conditions  in  which  the  persons  lived  and  died.
But  there  is  no  despair  among  the  leaders  and  members
of  the  celestial  Brotherhoods.

Of  these,  and  concerning  domestic  scenes  in  the
After-life,  I  shall  hereafter  speak.


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.


"  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions ;  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would
have  told  yon."

It  does  not  as  yet  seem  to  be  a  part  of  human
belief  that  the  race  should  make  progress  as  rapidly,  as
broadly,  as  completely  in  spiritual  realities  as  in  science
and  the  common  concerns  of  a  very  common  world.
The  idea  generally  prevails  that  the  race  must  repose
on  "  faith/'  and  stand  eternally  still  in  all  matters  per-
taining to  the  mysteries  of  God,  while  it  is  esteemed
right  to  grow  and  improve  in  all  things  else  and  in  all
other  directions.  This  subtile  absurdity  has  crawled
all  the  way  through  every  creed  in  the  religious  world.

All  progress  in  science  and  general  education  within
the  last  century  points  toward  the  discovery  and  dis-
closures of  the  Summer-Land.  All  the  important  and
refining  sciences,  which  verge  on  the  spiritual,  have
come  up  within  the  last  quarter  of  a  century.  Our
navigators  have  within  the  last  hundred  years  plowed
through  all  the  seas  of  the  globe,  have  sought  know-
ledge of  the  obscure,  sequestered  rivers,  in  remotest
countries,  and  many  of  them  have  returned  to  tell  us
faithfully  of  their  scenes  and  experiences.  Only  now
and  then  a  man  has  fallen  upon  the  altar  of  discovery.
Every  such  spirit  has  been  carried  through  the  North-
West  passage  to  a  world  of  grander  dimensions.  The
interiors  of  the  earth  have  been  evoked. In  answer  to


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  27

practical  prayers  they  Lave  divulged  their  arcana,  and
their  inmost  secrets  have  become  our  every-day  facts,
"  familiar  as  household  words."  Great  mountains  have
been  scaled,  and  distant  heavenly  planets  have  been
measured ;  the  expansiveness  and  perfections  of  the
universe,  above  us  and  around,  have  been  searched  and
mapped  by  our  astronomers;  and  the  familiar  "  sun"
has  been  induced  to  become  party  to  the  finest  pencil-
ings,  so  that  when  we  ^tand  before  the  photographic
magician,  coming  within  the  field  of  his  camera  and  at
the  focus  of  his  mystic  glass,  we  seem  to  be  facing  a
supernatural  realm.  The  light  instantly  projects  a  sha-
dow, paints  your  picture,  and  perchance  also  that  of  a
departed  friend,  on  the  susceptible  surface  of  an  insen-
sate plate.  Thus  all  human  progress  in  the  imitative,
in  the  speculative,  and  in  the  absolute,  demonstrate  the
practicability  of  further  discoveries  with  reference  to
the  great  future  home  of  the  spirit.  We  find,  in  search-
ing history,  that  human  nature  has  been  blessed,  ever
and  anon,  with  inspirations  that  convey  the  elements
and  rudiments  of  truths  that  bloom  in  higher  degrees
of  life.  Instead,  therefore,  of  rejecting  the  germs  of
mythology  or  the  teachings  of  poetry,  we  are  learning
rapidly  to  receive  them  as  essentially  significant.  In-
stead of  impoverishing  ourselves  by  a  ruthless  rejection
of  the  multitudinous  productions  in  the  art,  and  science,
and  poetry,  and  music  of  the  past,  we  secure  to  our-
selves great  opulence  by  learning  that  human  genius,  in
every  age,  when  at  the  moment  of  its  incubation,  pro-
jects the  germs  and  foregleams  of  great  truths  which
live  beyond  the  tomb;  so  that  poetry  and  music  more
especially,  and  the  singing  of  beautiful  birds,  and  the


28  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

breathings  of  flowers,  and  the  loving  songs  of  laughing
rivulets — and  the  great  thoughts  that  come  pouring  into
your  ideality  from  these  sturdy  and  grave  mountains —
all  enter  into  the  rudiments  of  that  higher  education
which  is  designed  to  be  completed  beyond  the  stars.

I  affirm,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  absolute  imagi-
nation— that  a  total  falsehood  is  an  impossibility  ;  that
the  finest  imagination  is,  in  its  spiritual  essence,  the
nearest  approach  to  an  actual  truth.  However  gro-
tesque, however  absurd,  yet  divest  the  inspiration  ol
absurdity  and  grotesqueness,  and  lo!  you  find  tht.
sweetest  whispering  of  the  eternal  God.

If  you  will  permit  me  to  speak  with  reference  to
myself,  I  will  say  that  I  have  never  read  a  poet  in  my
life  v  not,  I  think,  more  than  three  pages  of  any  such
writings.  (I  have  had  an  object  in  this.)  But  I  do  not
expect  that  this  will  be  true  of  me  eight  or  ten  years
hence ;  for  I  now  intend  to  cultivate  some  acquaintance
with  the  externals  of  these  inspirations.  For,  as  I
grow,  I  desire  more  and  more  to  know,  in  the  external,
what  the  great  writers  and  thinkers  of  the  world  have
done;  and  already  I  feel  grateful  for  what  I  have
interiorly  seen  and  clairvoyantly  learned  in  the  great
human  sphere  about  me.  I  have  not  read  "  The  Epic
of  the  Starry  Heavens,"  by  the  imaginative  and  inspired
Harris,  fearing  that,  should  I  read  his  production,  it
might  enter  into  my  memory,  and  thus  become  a  portion
of  some  subjective  apprehensions  or  objective  visions  of
the  future.

As  many  of  you  know,  I  have  had  a  peculiar  expe-
rience ;  and  it  is  well  for  a  moment,  in  justice  to  what
I  shall  hereafter  say,  to  allude  to  it. There  is  positively


SCENES  IN  THE  SLUMER-  LAND.  29

no  imagination  in  what  I  shall  disclose,  but  I  leave  the
philosophy  and  the  science  of  the  experience  to  some
future  occasion.  My  reason  for  affirming  that  it  is  not
imagination  is,  that  I  started  with  the  conviction  thai
the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  a  beautifully  walled-up
city,  paved  with  gold,  with  a  vast  throne  in  it  some-
where ;  on  the  topmost  throne  the  great  "  Father''  and
Creator  of  men,  to  the  right  the  "  Son/'  and  on  the
opposite  side  the  "  Holy  Ghost ;"  while  in  the  front,
and  all  around,  extending  as  far  back  as  the  limited  popu-
lation of  the  "saved"  could  extend — an  amphitheater
with  no  galleries,  but  all  part  of  one  immensely  great
proscenium;  and  that  the  enjoyments  and  occupations  of
the  saints  and  saintesses  consisted  in  an  everlasting
Methodist  protracted  meeting !  No  eating,  no  sleeping,  no
drinking,  no  amusements;  but  praying  and  singing;  next
singing  and  praying  again;  and  lastly,  just  for  a  change
of  the  programme,  praying  and  singing  !  While  over
the  parapets,  near  the  resplendent  embattlements  of  the
golden  wall,  one  could  see  rolling  and  curling  up,  not
the  torment  of  the  condemned  segar-smokers  merely,
but  the  accumulated  black  clouds  of  unmitigated  misery
from  the  over-populated  regions  of  the  "  Devil  and  his
angels" !

I  think  this  orthodox  picture,  or  something  akin,
has  been  in  your  thoughts  many  times.  This  notion
was  started  early  with  me.  But  when  the  time  came
to  pass  into  the  "interior"  by  the  inductions  of  the
magnetic  process,  my  thoughts  soon  changed.  Very
rapidly  I  lost  all  interest  in  everything  that  I  had
heard  on  the  subject  of  religion ;  and  thus  I  remained,
not  desiring  to  acquire  further  external  knowledge.


30  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

This  condition  lasted  for  some  four  years.  At  length
the  time  came  to  divulge,  in  book  form,  what  had  been
accumulated  by  the  visions  of  clairvoyance.  Clairvoy-
ance is  the  mind's  telescopic- power  of  bringing  distant
objects  close  to  the  mind — a  positive  and  perfectly
certain  faculty — a  natural  power  of  bringing  the  details
of  a  distant  scene  as  near  as  the  flowers  in  the  garden
just  beyond  the  window.  However  distant  it  seemed
at  first,  the  object  or  scene  could  be,  by  cultivation  of
the  faculty,  brought  so  near  as  to  invite  your  footsteps.
At  length  I  became  proprietor,  so  to  say,  of  this  cerebro-
telescopic  faculty,  which  before  had  only  been  loaned
to  me  for  occasional  use,  as  by  an  artificial  process.
When  I  came  into  full  and  intelligent  possession  of
this  mental  instrument,  then  began  a  series  of  private
visional  experiments,  which  I  have  continued  from  1847
to  the  present  time.

And  now  a  word  concerning  my  habits  with  refer-
ence to  these  things — for  my  physical  methods,  I  think,
have  a  direct  and  important  bearing  upon  the  question.
Whenever  I  wish  to  obtain  these  visional  results  by
voluntary  telescopic  clairvoyance,  I  do  not  seek  opium
or  hasheesh  ;  neither  Arabian,  Hebrew,  Bohemian,  or
Gipsy  incantations ;  nor  do  I  clog  my  digestive  organs,
nor  highly  stimulate  my  nerves;  but  there  comes  (as
Daniel  expresses  it,)  a  period  of  "  fasting,"  and  of  con-
stant, though  not  over-urgent  desire.  Sometimes  I
have  been  obliged  to  continue  this  from  four  to  six
weeks  before  my  nerve-system  was  perfectly  still,  my
blood  cool,  my  senses  indifferent  to  the  outer  world.
Then  I  could  concentrate  the  perceptive  faculties  and
bring  into  action  all  the  requisite  organs,  and,  under


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  31

the  control  of  intuition,  direct  them  upon  remote  earthly
objects  or  scenes  super-terrestrial.  If  I  had  taken  for
food  what  is  called  a  "generous  diet/5  or  habitually
engaged  in  these  mental  exercises  at  night,  I  should  in
either  case  have  distrusted  my  discoveries.  But  I
almost  never  have  such  an  experience  as  a  dream.

I  never  attempt  to  get  visions  in  the  night,  "  when
deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men/'  My  exercises,  on  the
contrary,  are  between  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  and
twelve  o'clock  of  the  same  day.  If  I  do  not  obtain  my
clairvoyant  or  other  experiences  during  those  hours,
they  do  not  come  that  day;  for  I  do  not  then  seek
them.  But  if  the  spirit-way  is  widely  opened,  and  I
am  warmed  and  made  enthusiastic  by  what  I  have  seen
during  those  hours,  and  feel,  in  my  enthusiasm,  that  the
after  part  of  the  day  would  be  a  luxurious  gratification
if  it  were  similarly  appropriated,  I  always  say  to  my-
self, as  a  law,  "  Thus  far,  and  no  farther ;  never  infringe
upon  the  afternoon  or  night."  Consequently  I  clo  not
write  anything,  or  dream  anything,  or  think  anything
of  great  consequence,  during  the  after  portions  of  the
day ;  but  live  in  a  common  social  way  from  twelve
o'clock,  M.,  to  six  o'clock  on  the  following  morning.
This  has  been  my  mental  and  clairvoyant  habit  for  years.
I  have  found  it  to  be  an  orderly,  cool,  philosophical,
successful  way  of  getting  the  best  results,  the  largest
amount  of  spiritual  happiness,  and  the  true  secret  of
keeping  free  and  healthy  and  young  in  heart  and
body  and  head.  I  can  truthfully  say  that  it  has  re-
quired more  self-control  to  repress  the  waves  of
heavenly  joy  and  enthusiastic  happiness  that  have  rolled
through  my  mind,  and  the  effort  has  more  taxed  my


32  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

mental  powers,  than  have  all  the  disappointments  and
inevitable  trials  which  have  come  to  me  in  the  course
of  my  history.  Sometimes  I  have  been  powerfully
tempted  to  indulge  the  state  of  clairvoyance  a  little  too
long ;  but  never  have  been  able  to  sustain,  with  profit
and  happiness,  more  than  three  hours  of  such  occult
investigations  and  exalted  contemplations.  During
those  mysterious  hours,  however,  I  have  acquired  facts
and  knowledge  of  things  that  would  make  an  extensive
volume,  even  if  written  out  in  the  fewest  and  poorest
words;  and  yet,  when  attempting  to  record  the  scenes
and  facts  from  memory,  the  expression  would  be  the
coarsest  shell — the  mere  physical  precipitation — of  the
spiritual  realities  that  were  thus  born  in  the  mind —
beautiful  scenes  and  great  principles  struggling  through
the  incarcerations  of  language  to  come  in  contact  with
the  memories  and  to  become  part  of  the  judgment  of
my  fellow-men  yet  in  the  ordinary  condition.  I  men-
tion these  things  simply  because  they  are  psychological
facts,  and  should  have  important  bearings  upon  the
general  question  of  bodily  and  mental  habits  in  con-
nection with  the  exercises  of  the  mind.

I  have  met  persons  who  said  to  me,  "  Why,  Mr.
Davis,  are  you  not  all  the  time  conscious  of  the  presence
of  the  spiritual  world  VJ  And  my  answer  has  been,
"  No ;  I  could  not  be  and  live."  Others  have  asked,
"  Are  you  not  personally  and  frequently  in  contact  with
spiritual  beings  V9  And  I  have  replied,  "  No.  I  could
not  be  frequently  in  contact,  and  yet  keep  physically
healthy  and  be  mentally  able  to  attend  to  the  ordinary
duties  of  my  life."  And  again  some  ask :  "  Are  you
not  constantly  and  consciously  associated  with  ideas,


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  33

and  thinking  of  great  principles?"  And  others  seem
to  think  that  I  should  appear  uniformly  abstract,  and
look  ghostly,  like  the  last  remains  of  an  evangelical
minister.  Far  from  all  these  opinions  are  the  facts  ;
for  I  very  substantially  feel  my  feet  within  my  boots,  and
my  bodily  sensations  are  strictly  normal — are  as  solid
and  natural  as  those  of  any  person  in  this  assem-
blage, and  I  am  generally  free  from  disease  and
abnormal  conditions.

And  yet  my  cerebro-telescopic  experiences  of  the
super-mundane  world  have  been  an  unbroken  epic — the
grandest  spiritual  poem !  Indeed,  it  may  not  be  safe
to  contemplate  the  celestial  picture  in  its  boundless
affluence.  For  now,  while  reverting  in  memory  to
these  things,  I  feel  a  heat  gathering  on  the  brain  and
quickening  the  thoughts,  like  one  who  has  realized  the
local  concentration  of  the  rays  of  immortal  light,  and
felt  their  sublime  breathings  upon  and  within  every
fiber  and  faculty  of  his  spirit.

I  will  speak  to  you,  therefore,  as  an  observer  to-
night, and  not  as  a  "  Seer."  I  will  give  you,  in  my
own  way,  an  account  of  things  and  places  seen  beyond
the  stars.  Bayard  Taylor  would  in  like  manner  testify
(though  I  shall  not,  perhaps,  be  able  to  use  as  good
language  as  he)  concerning  his  travels  and  discoveries
in  foreign  climes.  I  shall  discourse  to  you  somewhat
as  does  Von  Humboldt  in  his  Cosmos,  giving  you  ac-
counts of  great  mountains  and  valley  scenes,  of  streams
traced  to  their  sources,  of  distant  lands  and  tempera-
tures, of  different  peoples,  climates,  and  soils.  And
what  I  shall  relate  is  as  strictly  in  harmony  with  the

facts  of  science,  with  the  laws  of  philosophy,  and  the

2*


34  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

developments  of  astronomy;  and  I  hold  myself  ready
to  reconcile  what  I  may  utter  to-night  with  all  scienti-
fic and  philosophical  discoveries  in  astronomy,  or
in  chemistry,  or  in  the  laws  of  light  or  color,  or  in  the
nature  of  substances,  or  in  the  secrets  of  growth,  or  in
the  properties  of  material  organization ;  for  I  do  not
think  that  spiritual  truth  is  irreconcilable,  incompati-
ble, or  out  of  harmony  with  the  real  laws  and  dis-
coveries of  science.  I  will  leave  all  this,  however,  for
another  time  and  more  fitting  occasion.

The  Summer-Land  is  a  world  every  way  as  actual
as  this.  If  you  had  clairvoyance  enough  to  see  into  a
person  when  very  sick,  and  observe  when  the  process
of  recuperation  begins,  and  if  you  could  also  understand
what  is  really  meant  by  "  recuperation,''  then  you  would
instantly  obtain  a  philosophical  conception  of  how  the
Summer-Land  could  be  developed.  I  believe  all  edu-
cated physicians  know  (at  least  all  spiritual  physicians
receive  the  incontrovertible  doctrine)  that  what  we
term  the  "  physical  substances"  which  make  up  the
physical  avoirdupois  of  the  body,  are  exuded,  so  to  ex-
press it — fabricated  and  emitted  from  the  innermost  of
the  nervous  system — put  out  from  within,  and  not  laid
on  from  without :  that  when  a  person  is  recuperating
from  disease  (all  day-exercises  and  bodily  wastings
result  in  disease,  or  in  broken-down  blood  and  tissue
which  sleep  removes,)  there  is  always  a  thoughtlessness
of  the  brain  and  also  a  perfect  stillness  in  the  voluntary
organs.  Only  in  such  moments  is  the  nervous  system
under  the  recuperating  and  up-building  action  of  the
innermost.  In  such  moments  of  physical  repose,  the
spirit,  working  through the  life  of  the  nerves,  makes


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  35

and  multiplies  the  tissues,  out  of  which  the  strong  and
heavy  parts  come.  The  tissues  are  built  up  out  of  the
invisible  life  of  the  nervous  system.  But  what  makes
the  nervous  system  ?  These  physical  physicians  can
trace  the  nerves.  But  there  is  some  hidden  principle
within  the  nerves,  within  the  electricity  and  dynamic
life  of  the  nerves,  within  the  mellow  magnetism  which
covers  the  fine  electricity — something  within  everything
in  you  that  is  human  and  interior — a  principle  of  recu-
peration known  only  by  the  'power  you  feel,  and  by  the
occasional  sense  of  immensity  in  your  personal  exist-
ence !  This  hidden  principle  lies  sequestered  in  your
least  nerves,  in  your  finest  points  of  life  and  sensation.
It  gives  you  all  your  prodigious  power  of  will.  From
it  flow  all  your  moral  feelings.  It  throbs  through  all
parts  of  your  being ;  it  cleaves  through  its  magnetic
and  electrical  vestures,  acts  on  the  nerves,  out-breathes
and  condenses  the  tissues,  and  ultimately  and  suc-
cessively elaborates  all  the  physical  organs  which  make
up  the  corporeal  system.

Now,  the  principle  of  growth  is  identical  with  the
unfoldinent  of  the  Summer-Land.  I  do  not  wish  to
detain  you  upon  this  point,  but  merely  desire  to  fix
your  thoughts  on  the  terrestrial  dynamics  of  the  planets.
Terrestrial  magnetisms,  terrestrial  electricities,  and
whatever  else  men  call  "  imponderables,"  constitute  the
nervous  system  of  this  physical  universe.  The  universal
nervous  system  holds  the  same  relation  to  matter  as  the
nervous  system  of  the  spirit  to  the  physical  parts  of  the
body.  Every  physician  knows  that  the  first  beginning
of  a  human  being  is  a  point  of  nerve  wrapped  up  in
matter. This  point  of  nerve  is  the  starting-point  of


36  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

life.  Next  come  the  tissues,  the  fine  thickness  on  the
outside,  then  the  blood  begins  to  flow,  and  so  on,  more
and  more  concrete,  until  the  full  equipped  outer  body
itself  is  formed  and  ready  for  parturition.

The  spiritual  world  is  made  from  life-points  sent
out  from  the  chemical  coalitions  of  the  planets.  Thus
the  Summer-Land  becomes  a  literal  truth  in  harmony
with  the  nervo-astronomy  of  the  universal  system.

It  may  seem  to  your  imaginations  that  this  spiritual
world  is  afar  off — that  it  must  be  a  vast  and  remote
existence,  because  astronomers  have  not  peered  into  it.
But  it  is  my  belief  that  astronomers,  with  their  physical
instruments,  will,  one  of  these  fortunate  future  days,
recognize  the  Summer-Land,  and  I  believe,  furthermore,
that  astronomers  will  see  landscapes  and  physical  scenes
there  more  clearly  than  those  vague  images  which  are
now  revealed  through  telescopes,  as  existing  upon  the
moon  and  different  rolling  stars.

No,  the  spirit-world  is  not  remote.  We  move  every
moment  in  its  presence.  This  earthly  planet  itself  rolls
in  its  orbit  under  the  observation  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  Spirit-Land.  The  vast  includes  the  little.  The
Summer-Land  is  the  comprehensive  sphere.  Astro-
nomically speaking,  the  earth  is  on  one  side  of  that  vast
galaxy  of  suns  and  planets  termed  "  the  milky-way,"
and  directly  across  this  great  physical  belt  of  stars,  we
find  the  sublime  repose  of  the  Summer-Land  ;  and  this
is  but  the  receptacle  of  the  immortal  inhabitants  who
ascend  from  the  different  planets  that  belong  to  our  so-
lar system.  These  planets  all  have  celestial  rivers
which  lead  from  them  toward  the  heavenly  shores.  As
each  organ  in  the  human  body  holds  its  physical  rela-


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  37

tion  to  the  brain  by  means  of  nerves  and  blood-rivers,
so  these  different  planets  in  the  physical  universe  hold
a  currental,  magnetic,  and  electrical  relation  to  the
Summer-Land,  which  corresponds  to  the  brain.  How
is  it  that  strength  rises  to  the  brain  of  a  man  from  what
he  eats?  It  is  by  means  of  circulation.  And  this  cir-
culation is  regulated  by  the  law  of  attraction  and
repulsion  ?  How  do  spirits  travel  from  these  physical
globes  to  their  homes  in  the  Summer-Land,  and  re-
versely, from  the  Summer-Land  to  persons  and  places
on  the  planets  ?

Answer  :  By  circulation.  And  here,  too,  magnetic
river-circulation  is  regulated  by  attraction  and  repul-
sion !  Thus  the  analogy  may  be  extended  ad  in-
finitum.

I  did  not  particularly  notice  until  1853,  that  differ-
ent seasons  of  the  year,  and  different  positions  of  our
planet  in  its  orbit  around  the  sun,  yield  a  different
clairvoyant  vision  of  the  Summer-Land.  I  found  that
an  observation  made  in  mid-winter  afforded  a  very  dif-
ferent aspect  of  the  Spirit-World  from  that  which  would
be  obtained  in  May,  July,  or  November ;  and  further-
more, in  the  same  year,  I  first  noticed  that  the  condition
of  the  observer  made  a  difference  in  what  was  visible ;
therefore  it  became  necessary  to  adopt  methods  and
conditions  which  would  enable  the  clairvoyant  to  mark
the  particular  sections  of  the  Summer-Land  that  came
within  the  range  of  vision  in  accordance  with  the  dif-
ferent months  of  the  year.  From  that  time  to  this,  I
have  been  regulated  by  the  discovery  that  the  rolling
of  this  terrestrial  planet,  in  its  orbit  around  the  sun,
affects  the  sweep  of  the  clairvoyant  sight  in  many  in-


38  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

stances,  furnishing  unexpectedly  a  new  conception  of  a
familiar  scene,  and  bringing  to  light  other  territories
in  the  heavens  before  unknown.  The  Spirit-Land  has
a  firmament.  It  is  circular,  and  its  vast  firmament  is
filled  with  stars,  suns,  and  satellites.  It  rolls  in  the
blue  immensity.  The  sky  there  is  not  without  its  clouds.
They  change  very  much  like  the  clouds  of  our  tropics;
yet  they  do  not  much  resemble  them.  The  changes  are
like  those  in  southern  skies  ;  but  the  clouds  themselves
are  very  different.

Among  my  first  observations  in  the  direction  of  the
Spirit-Land,  I  discerned  a  river  which  seemed  to  flow
across  the  open  aerial  space  and  pour  into  the  far  dis-
tant bosom  of  that  heavenly  world.  It  was  a  river
made  of  various  streams  that  flowed  out  from  planets,
which  blended  and  widened  and  expanded  into  a  great
sea,  and  thus  became  the  flowing  element  of  perfect
beauty  in  the  land  of  spirits.  That  celestial  river  is  as
visible  to  the  clairvoyant  perception  as  the  Hudson,  the
East  River,  or  any  other  water  that  can  be  seen  by  the
natural  eye  on  the  globe.  It  flows  away  far  beyond
any  distance  that  I  have  power  to  trace.  It  seemed
like  a  celestial  Gulf  Stream,  "  but  whither  it  goeth  I
know  not."  I  only  know  that  it  is  one  of  the  sources
of  unutterable  melody.  It  seems  to  give  out  music  from
all  its  variegated  margins,  and  to  yield  lessons  also,
because  on  several  occasions,  vast  congregations  were
visible  on  the  shores,  learning  something  beautiful  con-
cerning its  harmonious  sounds.  What  they  learned  I
cannot  tell.  I  only  saw  that  after  listening  and  con-
versing and  reposing  for  an  hour  ('or  what  seemed  to
me  to be  that  length of  time,)  they  rose  all  at  once;


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  39

they  seemed  to  be  many  thousands — a  vast  assemblage
— and  then  also  arose  their  songs,  and  those  songs,
blending  with  the  music  of  that  wonderful  water,
seemed  to  me  to  fill  the  whole  universe  with  melody  !
So  full  of  joy  was  my  heart  that  I  lost  all  spiritual
power  either  to  see  or  hear ;  and  so  suddenly  did  I  re-
turn to  the  common  state  that  I  could  not  but  ask  the
person  who  just  then  entered  the  room,  whether  he  had
heard  that  music!  "No,"  he  replied.  "Indeed!"
said  I.  "Didn't  you  hear  anything?"  "No."  So  real
and  so  distinct  was  the  sound  I  could  scarcely  believe
my  friend's  denial.

In  1854  1  had  an  opportunity,  for  the  first  time,  to
contemplate  a  celestial  garden.  It  was  unlike  any-
thing I  had  ever  seen  in  this  world.  The  Garden  of
the  Hesperides,  of  which  we  dream,  only  vulgarly  rep-
resents the  beautiful  fact.  When  I  saw  the  immense
landscape  and  the  innumerable  beauties  that  come  up
from  the  soil,  and  the  labyrinth  of  leafage  which
gathered  upon  the  vision  to  the  right  of  the  scene,  I
could  not  but  ask,  "  Will  some  one  tell  me  the  extent  Vs
After  a  few  moments  a  cerebro-telegraphic  dispatch
came  into  the  mind,  whispering  distinctly,  "It  would
reach  from  here  to  Scotland — near  four  thousand  miles
in  length — five  hundred  miles  in  width."  It  seemed  to
be  a  far-extending  avenue  of  flowers  and  beautiful
trees,  and  there  seemed  no  limit  to  the  number  of
persons  that  were  walking  leisurely,  lovingly,  arm-in-
arm;  and  oh  !  the  thousands  of  beautiful  children  that
were  at  play  through  the  devious  labyrinths  of  that
vast  heavenly  park  !

Now  let  us reason  for  a  moment. Christians  be-


4)  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

lieve,  or  profess  to  believe,  that,  "  In  our  Father's
house  are  many  mansions."  This  faith  is  based  in
reality j  or  else  it  is  false,  and  there  is,  or  there  is  not  a
mansion  or  a  house  "  eternal  in  the  heavens."  Is  that
Scriptural  language  figurative,  or  is  it  literal  ?  Does
it  mean  anything  ?  You,  who  so  strenuously  believe
the  Bible,  say  that  I  am  an  infidel.  But  I  now  ask  you
who  is  the  infidel  ? Your  Christian  poetry  says:

"  There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight,
Where  saints  immortal  reign ;
Eternal  day  excludes  the  night,
And  pleasures  banish  pain."

Now  I  ask  every  professed  Christian,  Do  you  stand
prepared  to  repudiate  the  fact  affirmed  in  your  poetry?
Who  is  infidel  to-night?  Your  highest  authority  in  the
Church  and  in  the  Bible  said,  "  In  my  Father's  house
are  many  mansions/5  He  said  also  that  that  house  was
built  without  hands.  Do  you  believe  it  ?  Do  you  be-
lieve anything  on  the  subject  ?  If  you  do,  then  you
have  at  least  the  rudiments  of  an  education  which  you
ought  to  have  perfected  by  this  time  into  some  reasona-
ble comprehension  of  what  the  Father  has,  "  without
hands,"  spanned  out  for  you  beneath  the  unfolded
heavens.

But  to  return.  In  the  trees  of  that  vast  celestial
Park  I  heard  the  songs  of  birds,  such  as  I  had  not
heard  from  any  species  of  birds  in  this  world.  In  1855
the  songs  of  these  birds  first  caught  the  clairaudient  ear.
This  power  of  hearing,  superadded  to  the  telescopic,
gave  all  the  more  perfection  and  actualness  to  the  ob-
servation. These  birds  resemble,  to  some  extent,  the
birds  of  this  planet  under  the  equator. In  plumage,


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  41

however,  they  were  unlike.  I  saw  celestial  birds  that
excluded  all  rays  except  the  yellow.  They  were  singu-
larly, wonderfully  yellow — quite  different  from  the  hue
of  the  canary.  It  seemed  as  though  composed  of  yellow
crystalline  air.  I  could  see  the  nervous  systems  of
these  birds — their  whole  physical  interior — they  were
so  transparent.  They  were,  I  observed,  swift  in  their
flight.  I  also  saw  a  bird  which  excludes  all  rays  save
that  of  blue,  and  that  looked  like  a  diamond  cut  out  of
pure,  ethereal  immensity.  I  never  could  have  imagined
anything  so  marvelously  expressive  of  pure,  immense,
heavenly  love  !  This  particular  bird  was  a  representa-
tive, I  saw,  of  universal  private  affection.  The  yellow
bird  was  also  a  representative.  It  had  a  great  mean-
ing— the  mellower  affection  which  comes  from  wisdom.
The  songs  of  these  birds  echoed  from  the  Concilium — a
place  where  minds  who  had  gathered  from  the  past,
occasionally  meet  as  in  a  Brotherhood  for  delibera-
tions.

1  inquired  concerning  the  flowers,  of  which  there
were  innumerable  varieties,  different  from  any  that  I
had  seen  on  earth,  except  one,  which  somewhat  resem-
bled the  violet.  All  others  were  newr  and  wonderful.
There  were  also  curious  vines  that  grew  all  over  very
lofty  trees  ;  instead  of  leaves,  the  vines  gave  out  count-
less throbbing  flowers.  Each  corolla  pulsated  like  a
harp,  and  when  I  looked  more  intimately  and  carefully,
I  saw  that  every  flower  seemed  to  be  conscious  that  it
was  part  of  a  Divine  life  and  plan.

Along  the  River,  of  which  I  first  spoke,  I  saw  wiiat
appeared  to  be  grasses,  but  they  were  not  such  as  I  have
seen  on  f  arth,  and  yet  they  were  emanations  from  the


42  SCENES  m  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

heavenly  soil.  They  were  what  might  be  termed  mossy-
grasses,  but  the  fibers  were  silken,  and  reflected  the
rainbow-colors  of  the  diamond.  The  exquisitely  fine
fibers,  composing  the  mossy  grasses  along  the  margin
of  the  aerial  Gulf  Stream,  gave  off  a  purple  brilliancy
which  was  mellowed  softly  down,  until  it  seemed  to  lose
itself  in  a  sort  of  atmospheric  immensity  of  its  own  !  As
I  gazed,  it  seemed  to  blend  and  lose  itself  within  innu-
merable seas  of  color  !  I  have  tried  to  get  some  repeti-
tion of  the  effect  of  that  color  by  visiting  our  Galleries
of  Painting ;  but  I  have  seen  nothing  like  it  on  canvas
in  the  pictures  of  any  earthly  artist.  Church's  "  Heart
of  the  Andes" — the  deep,  rich,  immense  colors  of  the
Cordilleras,  and  the  infinite  repose  expressed  in  the
marvelous  depths  of  that  picture — seem  to  be  the  merest
physicalism  compared  with  that  which,  in  1855,  was
first  reflected  upon  the  cerebro-telescopic  eye !  And
then,  to  make  sure,  twice  in  that  year  it  was  sought  and
seen  again,  and  also  several  times  since :  and  in  every
instance  it  only  became  more  perfect,  different  only  in
additions — no  disappearing,  no  transformations,  no
"shifting  scenes."

Sometimes  I  have  visited  the  scenic  transformations,
as  exhibited  in  the  New  York  theaters.  I  once  went
to  Laura  Keene's,  to  see  if  I  could,  by  witnessing  the
representation  of  fairy  lands,  &c,  get  something  like  a
hint  of  that  better  country.  The  display  was  unsatis-
factory, though  brilliant  and  successful.  In  those  dra-
matic representations  of  spirits,  and  in  attempted
supernatural  exhibitions  on  the  stage,  I  have  never  seen
anything  at  all  to  be  compared  with  what  is  positive
reality  in  the  other  world. The  dissolving  views,  which


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  43

are  exhibited  on  the  stage  as  best  illustrations  of  the
spiritual,  I  have  never  seen  in  the  Spirit-Land.  The
magical  opening  and  closing  of  flowers,  for  example,
and  spirits  coming  out  of  unfolding  plants,  and  the  elves
and  little  sprites  which  are  dramatically  represented,
as  in  the  myths  and  superstitions  of  Ireland  and  of  the
ancient  Britons,  are  nothing  like  the  permanent  repre-
sentations of  the  Spirit-World.  Flowers  never  magic-
ally open  there,  and  plants  do  not  give  off  little  human
beings.  I  never  saw  trees  changing  their  location  or
leafage ;  never  saw  anything  that  looked  like  transmu-
tation or  enchantment ;  but  instead,  solid,  sturdy  life
and  progressive  growth  in  the  "  house  not  made  with
hands."

There  is  an  Island,  which  I  first  saw  distinctly  in
1857.  I  was  in  Buffalo  at  the  time.  I  found  by  con-
versing with  a  Brother  who  had  gone  there — James
Victor  Wilson — that  they  called  it  the  Island  of  Akro-
panamede.  It  takes  its  name  from  the  purposes  to
which  it  is  devoted.  It  is  situated  in  a  very  vast  body
of  what  would  be  called  "water"  in  the  earth-land.
There  is  a  spring  on  that  island  which  they  call  "  Poril-
leum,"  and  there  is  a  beautiful  cluster  of  springs  some
distance  to  the  west  which  they  name  "  The  Porilla ;"
and  every  one  of  these  springs  gives  off  exceedingly
sweet  musical  sounds,  which  are  full  of  unutterable  sig-
nificance. Those  harmonious  notes  blend  with  the
streamlets  which  lose  themselves  in  a  beautiful  river
that  flows  along  by  the  flowery  paths  of  the  Hospitalia.
This  name  is  given  to  one  of  the  temples  where  persons
who  had  become  attached  to  some  particular  thing  in
this  world,  so  that  it  had  become  an  infatuation  with


44:  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

them,  are  taken  to  be  cured.  It  is  one  of  the  many  at-
tractive sanitary  temples  of  reform  on  that  beautiful
Island.  The  infatuation  of  a  person  is  named  "  Toleka."
When  a  person  from  earth  has  an  infatuation  so  strong
as  to  preclude  his  taking  interest  in  anything  else,  he
is  invited  to  these  springs  and  to  the  temples.  The
teacher-physicians  who  are  appointed  on  that  Island
are  called  "  Apozea."  I  never  heard  or  saw  such  words
before,  and  do  not  know  whether  they  correspond  with
any  earthly  language.  I  obtained  the  orthography  of
the  words  from  Brother  Wilson,  who  pronounced  them
over  and  over  again  in  my  listening  ear.  [See  end
of  this  pamphlet.]  There  are  many  spirit-physicians  on
the  Isle  of  Akropanamede.

In  a  very  different  portion  of  the  Spirit-Land,  seen
in  the.  year  1856,  I  saw  an  island  called  "Rosalia,"
which  is  a  region  of  great  splendor  in  the  midst  of
islands  of  less  attractiveness.  On  that  island  dwelt
persons  who  had  never  lived  upon  the  planet  Earth.  It
was  said  that  there  were  on  that  attractive  spot  per-
sons who  were  from  the  just  maturing  planets  of  Mer-
cury and  Venus.  The  description  of  that  island,  which
I  cannot  now  give  in  detail,  would  interest  you,  since  it
was  so  different  from  everything  else  that  was  then
visible.

One  of  the  attractive  islands  near  Rosalia  is  called
"Batellos,"  because  some  educated  Greeks  sought  its
retirements,  soon  after  their  arrival  in  the  Spirit-Land,
as  a  suitable  place  to  celebrate  the  advent  on  earth
of  Plato's  doctrine  of  the  Deity,  including  his  theory  of
«  Ideas."

"  Poleski"  is  an  island,  seen  for  the  first  time  in


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMEil-I^ND.  45

1857,  situated  in  another  part  of  the  Spirit-Land.  It
is  frequently  visited  by  former  inhabitants  of  this  earth,
especially  those  who  are  still  searching  for  U  ancient
wisdom,*'  and  who  believe  not  at  all  in  the  theories  and
education  of  the  moderns.  They  think  that  God's  truth
must  be  learned  from  those  who  lived  in  the  remote
past.  To  such  that  island  is  a  favorite  haunt — not  the
"  haunt  of  Poets/"  but  of  those  who  still  seek  for  wis-
dom through  ancient  views  and  old  opinions.

There  is  another  island  called  "AHum,"  intimately
related  to  the  one  just  mentioned,  where  certain  ancients
went  to  form  themselves  into  a  Brotherhood,  composed
of  persons  who  were  born  long  prior  to  the  origin  of
the  Old  Testament.

"  Lonalia"  is  the  name  of  an  island,  seen  for  the
first  time  by  me  in  1859,  which  is  inhabited  by  young
persons  from  the  earth  who  died  as  Orphans.  On  this
heavenly  spot  they  are  introduced  to  those  who  are
their  parents  in  spirit,  but  of  whom  they  were  not  al-
ways physiologically  born  on  earth.  In  this  behold  a
mystery.

In  the  Spirit-Land  countless  families  are  visible.  It
seems  that  certain  spirits  are  even  more  gregarious  than
are  people  in  this  world.  Many  have  strong  attach-
ments of  consanguinity  at  first,  and  then,  forgetting  or
losing  such  earthly  attachments,  they  seem  to  dwell,
like  old  persons,  in  memories,  and  particularly  enjoy
revelations  from  and  conversations  with  those  who  have
lived  in  the  Spirit-Land  for  many  centuries.

If  you  should  get  a  communication  from  any  one  of
these  spirits,  telling  you  that  he  lived  in  a  particular
house,  in  a  certain  street,  you  might  be  considerably


46  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

misled,  because,  although  they  live  in  the  Spirit- World,
and  in  plain  sight  of  this  earth,  yet  they  believe  in
memory  only,  and  do  not  take  interest  in  present  actual
things  and  circumstances.

The  royal  circle  of  the  Foli  is  a  Brotherhood  very
much  resembling  our  American  Shakers.  On  one  occa-
sion it  was  observed  that  the  members  of  this  Brother-
hood corresponded  in  spirit  and  faith  with  the  Shaker
communities,  and  that  these  were  really  baptized  thus
with  the  presence  of  what  men  call  the  Holy  Ghost,
making  them  feel  more  deeply  assured  that  they  were
right  in  religious  and  communal  matters.  From  this
circumstance  you  see  that  people  after  death  do  not
become  instantly  endowed  with  wisdom  and  freedom.
The  Spirit- World,  in  short,  is  just  like  this  world,  on  a
higher  plane.

There  is  a  temple  called  the  "  Concilium,"  which,  I
believe,  means  the  temple  of  affectionate  thought  and
practical  wisdom.  In  this  Concilium  are  frequently
and  mostly  heard  the  voices  of  women.  They  believe
and  teach  principles  different  from  those  peculiar  Greeks
who  gathered  upon  the  distant  islands.  In  this  temple
very  cultured  spirits  assemble  for  the  purpose  of  ac-
quiring information  concerning  what  is  best  to  accom-
plish upon  the  planet  Earth,  or  upon  Mars,  or  Jupiter,
or  Saturn — for  all  these  planetary  populations  need  to
be  frequently  visited — and  there,  in  that  beautiful  tem-
ple, are  gathered  the  wisdom,  intuition,  affection,  hopes,
love,  poetry,  and  music,  of  multitudes  of  the  sweetest,
happiest,  truest,  most  earnest  and  philanthropic  women
that  have  lived  on  the  planet  Earth. These  women.


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  47

with  their  companions,  gather  there  occasionally  for
information  and  deliberation.

There  is  a  class  of  persons  in  the  Spirit-World  who
are  great  travelers.  They  are  almost  like  our  gipsies.
They  form  themselves  into  affinitive  groups,  and,  har-
monizing with  the  circulating  rivers  between  the  dif-
ferent planets,  go  on  protracted  journeys  through  innu-
merable scenes,  and  do  not  return  to  their  pavilions
for  many  years.  Katie,  my  former  companion,  came
to  me,  (as  reported  in  the  "  Penetralia/5)  and
said  that  she  was  then  to  start  upon  a  journey  ;  she
knew  not  whither,  nor  when  she  would  return,  and  she
immediately  began  the  journey,  and  has  not  yet
returned,  or  I  should  have  heard  from  her.  She  had
joined  the  group  of  excursionists,  without  knowing
whither  they  were  going.

Mothers  have  inquired  to  know  concerning  their
little  ones;  whether  children  born  before  perfect  matu-
rity become  persons  in  the  Summer-Land.  It  is  found
that  infants  born  from  six  to  eight  weeks  before  Na-
ture's time,  continue  on  in  the  Spirit- World,  slowly  and
surely  acquiring  the  personal  growth  they  would  have
attained  had  they  lived  in  the  body  the  full  number  of
years.  Mothers,  therefore,  who  go  to  the  Spirit- World
to  meet  their  little  darlings,  must  be  somewhat  intuitive
to  know  and  recognize  the  child  that  was  spirit-born
without  a  moment's  earthly  life.  Again,  there  are  wo-
men who  have  had  many  children,  who  have,  neverthe-
less, never  been  mothers  !  I  was  amazed  when  first  I
learned  this,  and  I  looked  into  the  subject  day  after
day,  and  persistently  inquired  with  the  greatest  par-
ticularity in  order  to  ascertain  the  exact  truth. In


48  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

1858  I  found,  co  my  astonishment,  that  there  were  on
earth  certain  women  and  men  with  families  who  have
never  yet  known  maternity  or  paternity.  I  found  that
real  mothers  conceive  with  the  whole  life  and  love  of
the  heart,  and  that  real  fathers  produce  from  the  vitalic
energies  and  magnetisms  of  the  whole  brain ;  and  that
no  blood-and-passion  relations  amount  to  anything  to
the  progenitors  beyond  the  tomb.  So,  as  a  consequence,
it  is  seen  that  all  the  offspring  of  your  legalized  de-
baucheries, your  blood-and-passion,  are  likely  to  be
strangers  to  you,  and  the  real  children  of  others.  And
the  legalized  marriage,  unless  it  coronate  the  spiritual
fact,  melts,  like  all  temporary  error,  at  the  door  of  the
tomb.  Your  offspring,  unless  they  be  of  and  from  your
spirit,  and  therefore  from  God,  are  only  physiological
productions,  so  far  as  you  are  concerned — for  they  find
their  true  parents  in  other  homes  in  the  eternal  heavens.
Thus  those  who  were  unmarried  in  this  world,  after
death  meet  both  their  true  mates  and  their  spirit-
families.

I  wish  to  speak  a  few  moments  more  with  reference
to  social  life  in  the  Summer-Land.  I  found,  on  inquiry,
that  certain  kinds  of  idiots  die  like  blossoms  on  trees
that  produce  no  fruit ;  children  who  are  hybrids  in
their  phrenological  organizations — having  not  even  the
germs  of  a  mind,  but  only  the  sanguine  propulsions  of
the  blood  which  give  them  the  instinct  of  the  animal,
causing  them  to  open  their  mouths  to  eat,  and  to  drivel
in  sign  of  a  desire  for  drink  ;  such  are  but  the  vestiges
of  a  worn  out,  miserable,  passionate,  but  legalized
marriage.

These  useless  offspring  come  from  those  who  are
permitted  to  be  debauched  by  the  ruin-holes,  cesspools


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  49

of  intemperance  on  earth,  with  no  law  or  civil  regula-
tion positively  to  prevent  the  evil.  Much  of  this  agony
of  child-bearing  results  in  nothing;  only  so  much  or-
ganized clay  that  must  go  through  the  chemical  hopper
again,  and  be  wrought  up  in  the  combinations  of  the
physical  world.  Such  is  the  fate  of  certain  kinds  of
idiots  who  come  from  passion  and  intemperance.  But
in  the  Spirit-Land  I  have  seen  hosts  and  groups  of
beautiful  children  that  were  gathered  to  learn  lessons
from  birds,  and  trees,  and  rivulets,  and  flowing  streams.
These  happy  children  wrere  each  gathered  according  to
a  name  which  represented  the  group,  and  over  each
assemblage  was  appointed  an  "Apozea."  That  is  just
what,  in  a  very  crude  way,  we  shall  endeavor  to  rep-
resent in  our  newly-organized  Children's  Lyceums.
If  possible,  we  will  have  a  little  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven  on  the  earth.  Let  us  try  in  our  "  Lyceum"  to
make  some  human  progress  like  that  which  is  rolling
in  beautiful  groups  beyond  the  stars.

In  the  Spirit- World  I  noticed  a  vast  congregation
of  persons  who  were  in  this  world  known  for  their  phi-
lanthropy. Age  is  not  represented  in  the  physical
aspect  of  a  person  in  the  other  life,  but  wholly  by  the
expression  of  the  eye  and  the  temper  of  the  mind.
"  Age,"  as  we  call  it,  is  not  seen  or  known  there.
Those  philanthropic  persons  receive  delegates  from  the
battle-fields  of  America.  For  ages  those  celestial  Sa-
maritans have  gathered  the  soldiers  as  they  came,  in
large  parties  at  a  time,  direct  from  the  cannon's  mouth
or  the  bayonet's  point.  The  new-comers  are  slowly
introduced  to  a  new  and  a  different  life;  and  this  is
done  with  such  gentleness,  with  such  beautiful  and
'graceful  methods !
3


50  SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

But  those  of  both  sexes,  who  are  engaged  in  these
philanthropic  labors,  wear  clothing  of  various  appear-
ance and  of  wondrous  fashions,  different  from  anything
you  would  or  could  imagine.  I  have  never  yet  seen  any
silken  gauze  or  gossamer  fabrics  to  compare  with  the
garments  there  used.  Many  wear  a  peculiar  flowing
dress,  which,  in  a  moment,  can  be  either  wound  about
the  person  in  graceful  folds  or  taken  off.  This  gar-
ment, for  either  man  or  woman,  is  appropriate  and
beautiful  beyond  all  imitation.

And  then  the  feasting  which  is  sometimes  visible  in
the  Summer-Land,  would  give  you  a  great  joy  to  be-
hold. I  verily  believe  that  never  a  man  or  woman
would  partake  of  what  is  called  the  "  Lord's  Supper" —
never  partake  of  the  crude  elderberry  wine  and  the
very  carefully  prepared  unleavened  bread — if  they
could  see  the  feasting  of  hundreds  of  thousands  at  the
Lord's  Supper  spread  out  on  those  islands,  and  along
the  fringed  margins  of  those  beautiful  and  musical
rivers !  I  never  before  so  well  knew  what  was  meant
when  your  authority  and  our  Brother,  the  great  Spiritual
Reformer,  said,  "  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how
they  grow ;  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin ;  and
yet  I  say  unto  you,  that  even  Solomon,  in  all  his  glory,
was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these."  The  beautiful
truth  contained  in  that  passage  was  exemplified  to  my
mind  in  my  first  vision  of  the  scene  of  a  great  feast  in
the  Spirit-Land.  Verily,  no  man,  or  woman,  or  child,
in  the  higher  life,  careth  for  the  immediate  source —
that  is,  they  do  not  give  themselves  thought  and  great
care  for  the  food  they  receive  and  enjoy  at  appropriate
seasons.  What  was  called  "  manna"  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment is  there  a  literal  manifestation,  dropping  like  snow


SCENES  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  51

from  the  bosom  of  the  heavenly  realm ;  and  as  it  falls
it  covers  those  beautiful  and  mossy  fibers,  and  slowly
becomes  like  the  purest  honey  distilled  from  the  depths
of  the  upper  air.  The  beautiful  substances  made  from
this  manna  are  in  all  possible  forms  and  shapes,  and
each  form  and  shape  possesses  a  flavor  and  an  odor  of
its  own ;  out  of  the  one  substance  all  forms  and  varie-
ties of  food  are  made — an  art  in  chemistry  which  men
will  discover  in  this  world  one  of  these  future  golden
days.  For  be  it  remembered  that  the  immense  riches
of  an  apple  are  not  yet  known,  much  less  those  of  a
peach  or  a  berry.  Mankind  are  but  just  learning  to
preserve  their  fruits  and  common  berries.  When  we
get  where  aerial  emanations  are  granted  for  food,  and
when  we  know  how  to  gather  and  "  bottle  up"  the
spiritual  particles  that  float  in  the  invisible  ether  amid
the  heavens,  then  we  shall  live  the  life  of  the  "lilies."

The  Spirit- World  is  thus  brought  into  our  actual
experience,  and  the  very  life  of  it  is  seen  and  realized.
Many  of  these  visions  of  things  would  require  most
delicate  descriptions  to  make  them  acceptable  to  the
common  sense  of  the  world.  But  I  tell  you  that  the
existence  of  the  Summer-Land  is  not  more  mysterious
than  the  formation  and  existence  of  a  man's  body  out
of  the  invisible  life  of  his  nerves.  You  may  not  see  the
philosophy  of  what  I  have  here  uttered,  but  it  is  as
positive  a  science  and  is  as  literally  true  as  that  twice
five  make  ten.  And  I  fully  believe  that  the  existence
and  actualities  of  the  next  sphere  will  become  a  part
of  science,  and  that  its  philosophy  will  be  as  plain  as
the  existence  of  such  planets  as  Mars,  Jupiter,  and
Saturn.


SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND-


"  That  was  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  the  natural ;  afterward  the

spiritual."

If  you  will  permit  a  little  autobiography,  I  will
again  refer  to  my  own  past.  There  are  persons  who,
I  think,  know  nothing  of  my  personal  investigations
with  respect  to  the  existence,  circumstances,  and  scenes,
of  mankind's  future  life.  They  have  only  heard.  Those
who  do  know,  will,  I  trust,  excuse  me  for  speaking  to
those  who  do  not  know  concerning  my  personal  rela-
tions to  this  subject.

It  is  known  and  it  can  be  demonstrated  (the  wit-
nesses are  nearly  all  living  in  this  world,)  that  this
subject  of  the  future  life  came  upon  me  years  ago.  I
stand  before  you  educated,  to  some  extent,  by  that
advent.  It  has  made  me  acquainted  with  questions
which  are  not  common  to  merchants,  and  men  who
work,  and  think,  and  have  their  whole  being  parallel
with  society,  and  with  the  laws  of  ordinary  business
enterprises.  The  realities  and  scenes  of  the  future
came  to  me  more  silently  and  gradually  than  the  flower
unfolds  from  its  earliest  germinal  beginnings.  There
was  no  shock  in  the  advent.  I  was  very  much  of  a
child  in  mind  and  body,  and  in  years  also,  when  the
Spirit- World  was  first  opened  to  my  vision.  So  far  as
I  myself  was  conscious,  it  came  without  any  preparation,
without  any  expectation,  without  any  theory  whatever,


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  53

and  without  any  imagination  with  reference  to  what
man's  future  state  was,  and  would  be.  And  not  only
so,  but  I  was  for  years  shut  out  from  any  external
memory  or  other  acquaintance*  with  the  wondrous  facts
that  were  delighting  and  intellectually  enchanting  the
witnesses  who  were  present  when  these  things  were
delivered  at  252  Spring  street,  New  York,  in  the
winter  and  spring  of  1847.  (See  "Introduction  to
Nature's  Divine  Revelations/')

Now,  if  I  stood  before  you  as  an  intellectual  specu-
lator, a  theorist — as  a  person  who  hadpre-deterrnined  to
wrest  historical  facts,  to  twist  them,  to  mold  them,  to
fashion  them  by  the  legerdemain  of  an  anti-conscientious
intellect,  and  by  the  force  of  imagination  shape  my  facts
to  suit  a  foregone  conclusion — then  indeed  I  should  not
be  for  one  moment  worthy  your  respectful  attention.
Because,  in  such  case,  I  should  be  an  imaginationist  and
a  perjured  witness,  self-condemned,  and  I  could  not
longer  speak  ;  the  words  of  my  native  tongue  would
cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth,  and  I  should  be  inter-
nally forced  to  breathe  in  the  midst  of  self-consterna-
tions, and  I  know  no  power  that  could  extricate  me  from
the  terrible  embarrassment  that  would  overwhelm  my
whole  soul.

But  I  do  not  stand  before  you  in  any  such  capacity.
I  am  not  a  theorist;  not  an  imaginationist;  not  a  law-
yer. My  position  is  that  of  a  person,  who,  without
forethought  or  intellectual  preparation,  became  slowly
acquainted  with  realities  and  scenes  that  were  trans-
mitted, or  "impressed/'  day  by  day,  from  a  higher
sphere,  until  two  whole  years  had  transpired  ;  and
tiicn,  at  the  end  of  those  two  years,  by  a  blessed  mental


54:  SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.

unfolding,  which  only  the  spiritual  metaphysicians  can
truly  explain  to  your  understanding,  the  beautiful
memories  which  had  been  thus  gradually  deposited
within  me  came  out  and  stood  in  the  foreground,  and
said,  "  Rememberest  thou  these  things  V — instantly
my  external  life,  with  its  memories,  was  blended  and
married  sweetly  at  the  altar  of  the  "  superior  condi-
tion!'5 So  well  do  I  remember  it!  In  the  city  of
beautiful  Poughkeepsie,  vividly,  indeed*  like  a  conscious
flower,  pulsated  the  clear  facts  of  that  new  birth.  And
I  stand  before  you  as  one  who  has  continued  these  sub-
lime investigations  every  forenoon,  whenever  my  physical
and  external  conditions  were  favorable  for  an  entire
cerebral  abstraction — by  which  the  physical  world  is  shut
out,  and  the  spiritual  senses  opened — and  then  pictures
and  scenes  of  immortal  beauty  have  been  painted  on  the
spirit's  retina,  such  limpid  realities  as  no  pencil  can
possibly  imitate  on  canvas,  nor  poetry  transfer  in  lan-
guage, to  the  mind  of  man.

I  appear  before  you,  not  as  testifying  in  support
of  a  theory,  but  to  relate  what  I  have  seen  as  literal
celestial  verities.  No  theory  can  long  exist  which  does
not  walk  in  the  track  of  these  indubitable  facts.  Nor
can  any  philosophy  long  stand  unless  it  comes  to  you
just  as  these  celestial  facts  came  to  me,  in  a  logical
sequence,  following  like  flowing  water  along  the  un-
changeable channels  of  Cause  and  Effect.  Pardoning
so  much  self-history,  you  will,  I  think,  allow  me  now
to  ask  your  attention  briefly  to  a  philosophical  basis  for
what  I  shall  relate.

In  the  year  1850  I  began  a  chapter  by  asking  the
question : "  Is  human  nature immortal  ?" The same


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  55

question  is  before  me  now.  Who  is  the  infidel  among
you  ?  Christians  !  you  who  profess  to  believe  so  much
better  audi  finer  and  truer  things  than  I  do,  you  who  pass
current  in  the  outward  world  for  being  "  orthodox"  in
your  persuasion,  I  ask  you  :  "  Is  immortality  a  part  of
your  conviction  ?"  If  it  is  not,  then  some  other  method,
and  some  stouter  proof,  will  be  necessary  to  implant  it
in  your  judgment.  But  if  it  is,  then  I  ask  you  :  "  Is
immortality  possible  except  on  the  supposition  that  you
are  to  continue  forever  to  be  yourself?"  Is  human  nature,
the  individuality,  to  be  changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an
eye  ?  Can  your  personal  nature  be  supernaturally
changed  and  converted  into  something  different  ten
minutes  after  death,  or  at  the  moment  of  the  Resurrec-
tion ? — can  such  a  metempsychosis  take  place  and  you
still  continue  to  be  yourself  ?  What  kind  of  an  immor-
tality is  that?  For  you.  James  and  Mary,  to  be  immor-
tal, it  is  immutably  necessary  that  you  should  continue
to  be  James  and  Mary,  and  not  others.  When  your
neighbors,  relatives,  and  intimate  acquaintances  arrive
beyond  the  grave,  they  must  be  to  you,  and  to  them-
selves, the  continuation  of  the  individual  life-chapters
here  commenced  to  be  written,  otherwise  they  are  utter
strangers  to  each  other — in  all  logical  effects  they
would  be  new  persons — and  thus  the  doctrine  of  im-
mortality would  be  nothing,  although  individuals  might
forever  dwell  in  the  higher  realms.

If  immortality  be  a  truth,  then  Christians  cannot
with  reason  say  to  me  that  I  am  uttering  one  word  con-
trary to  the  divine  system  of  the  celestial,  spiritual,  and
physical  universe.  If  they  repudiate  immortality,  then
[  am  the  Christian — that  is,  the  believer. I  do  not  wTish


56  SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

to  arrogate  the  former  term  ;  for,  as  the  so-styled
Christian  world  now  goes,  I  do  not  think  the  name  is
either  much  of  a  compliment  or  recommendation.  The
doctrine  of  immortality  is  in  the  world's  religious  faith.
If  it  be  accepted  by  the  intellect,  it  must  be  on  the
principle  that  mankind  continue  the  life  begun  in  this
world.  How  can  a  man  be  after  death  what  he  was  on
earth,  unless  he  be  distinguished  by  the  same  structure,
unless  the  same  general  mental  conformation  continues,
unless  he  remains  possessed  of  the  same  general  phy-
sique, and  the  sam,e  general  arrangement  of  faculties  and
dispositions  of  temperament,  which  give  him  individu-
ality and  a  marked  personal  position  with  reference  to
others  in  this  world  ?

This  reasoning  I  take  as  the  first  layer  of  basis,
which  may  render  the  idea  of  immortality  somewhat
philosophical.

Again  I  ask  you  who  are  openly  avowed  "  Deists" —
I  mean  those  Unitarian  Christians  who  believe  in  God —
whether,  if  there  be  a  God,  who,  as  they  say,  is  "  with-
out variableness  or  shadow  of  turning" — is  He  to  be,
or  appear  to  be,  an  entirely  different  Person  or  Power
in  another  state  of  being  ?  Can  an  omnipotent,  un-
changeable, deathless  Deity,  be  something  entirely  dif-
ferent when  mankind  ascend  beyond  the  present,
"  nearer  to  God  "  ?  You  know  that  Deity,  in  the
world's  theologic  conception,  is  a  perfect,  single  man-
large,  vast,  beyond  all  measurement,  yet  a  man !  and
that  the  emanation  from  his  holy  spirit  goes  out  to  fill,
and  thrill,  and  vivify  the  illimitable  spaces  of  the
universe.  This  last  diffusion  of  the  holy  spirit  is  what
some  Christians  call  "  th  >  Divine  proceeding/'*  the  om-


SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  57

nipresence  of  the  spirit  of  God,  taking  the  name  of  the
«  Holy  Ghost."

Now  I  ask  you  whether,  in  your  honest  opinion,  it
be  possible  for  an  unchangeable  God  to  change  his  na-
ture and  his  balance?  If  he  does  not,  it  being  intrin-
sically impossible,  then  would  it  not  be  natural  and
reasonable  to  suppose  that  another  existence  adapted  to
mankind  would  be  simply  another  section,  or  a  higher
degree,  of  the  existence  begun  here  ?  Is  it  not  logical
to  believe  that  what  is  primary  here  would  correspond
to  something  primary  there — that  what  is  here  meant
by  "justice,"  and  "truth,"  and  "liberty,"  would  there
be  represented  by  something  exactly  the  same,  perfectly
identical  ?  If  things  begin  here  with  roots  and  grow
to  summits,  then,  God  not  changing,  and  the  vegetative
laws  and  systems  being  the  same,  would  you  not  sup-
pose that  all  future  growths  occur  in 'harmony  with  the
inspiring  principle  ?  Otherwise,  with  a  different  philo-
sophy, you  are  all  afloat !  You  can  have  no  common
sense  in  matters  of  religion,  unless  you  take  the  basis
which  is  here  given:  it  gives  solid,  fertile  soil,  and
strong,  firm  roots,  to  all  your  ultimate  reasonings  and
contemplations.

You  send  your  children  to  the  primary  schools.
What  for  ?  So  that  when  they  are  old  enough  to  take
a  higher  position  in  the  scale  of  learning  they  may  be
prepared  to  take  all  their  rudiments  of  thought  up  into
a  more  practical  mental  development.  For  this  end
the  primary  schools  are  established,  and  that  is  why
you  consent  to  send  your  children  to  them.  Now,  what
is  this  earth?  It  is  a  primary  school.  It  is  primary
in  the  physical  as  in  the  spiritual ;  just  as  much  in  the
3*


58  SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

social  as  in  the  intellectual.  The  universe  changes  not;
because  God  is  unchangeable ;  therefore  what  you  begin
to  learn  here  in  the  rudiment,  you  will  be  certain  to
ascertain  there  in  the  ultimate  life ;  what  is  germ  here
is  flower  there  ;  and  so  you  can  trace  upward  all  the
consecutive  and  unbroken  links  by  which  germs  reach
onward  to  fruition,  and  thus  bloom  out  naturally  on
the  summits  of  the  great  trees  of  Truth.  Otherwise —
that  is,  with  a  different  notion — you  have  no  philosophy
and  no  science  in  your  religion — only  a  dumb,  shallow,
idiotic  heathenism,  blundering  and  stumbling  headfore-
most into  the  absurdities  of  Supernaturalism.  Mystery
and  fear  are  what  the  olden  ministers  consider  the  best
stock-material  in  their  stupendous  trade.  The  high
calling  of  every  Reformer  is  to  make  Truth  a  simple
Unity  and  a  sublime  Reality !  We  have  science  and
philosophy  beneath  our  feet,  truth  in  our  principles,  and
reason  in  our  propositions ;  and  nothing  is  true  to  our
minds  because  any  particular  individual  has  "said  it"
— no  authority  to  us  in  a  "  thus  saith  the  Lord."

I  appear  before  you  to  testify  to  celestial  facts  that
came  to  me  without  a  theory  or  a  philosophy,  without
foregone  conclusions,  without  any  logical  points  to
make  out,  or  any  favorite  positions  to  affirm  and  main-
tain. If  you  can  demonstrate  my  personal  history  in
these  particulars  not  to  be  real,  publish  it  in  your
papers,  and  I  will  agree  to  pay  you  one  hundred  dol-
lars for  every  line  of  such  demonstration.  The  wit-
nesses can  nearly  all  be  reached,  and  probably  with  the
expense  of  from  two  to  live  dollars.  These  external
remarks  are  for  the  lawyer  and  for  the  man  who  can't
believe  except  he  steps  on  solid  ground. Therefore  I


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  59

say  to  such  minds,  try,  and  see  for  yourselves  whether
these  things  be  not  as  I  have  told  you  from  the  first.
Prove  these  declarations  to  be  utterly  unfounded,  and
you  shall  be  forever  thanked  by  the  sectarians  of
Christendom.

After  ten  years'  acquaintance  with  the  Summer-
Land,  I  made  the  inquiry,  on  one  occasion,  why  it  was
that  so  many  names  of  places  there  had  Latin  roots  and
Greek  terminations.  I  had  learned,  on  frequent  inte-
rior occasions,  to  know  what  a  Latin  or  Greek  word
meant,  and  how  it  was  originated  by  scholars.  By
writing  from  the  interior,  I  found  that  there  is  a  kind
of  immortality  in  the  Greek  and  Latin  Languages —
more  than  there  is  in  the  Hebrew,  the  Arabic,  and  some
other  tongues  more  oriental  and  ancient.  There  is  a
great  root- vitality  in  some  of  what  are  called  the  "  dead
languages/'  It  seemed  very  curious  to  me  that  the
Asiatic  and  Chaldaic  languages  were  most  represented
in  some  of  the  spiritual  brotherhoods ;  also  the  lan-
guage spoken  first  on  the  American  continent  by  the
earliest  inhabitants,  by  the  Aborigines,  and  those  more
singular  people  who  preceded  them — that  there  are
communities  in  the  Summer-Land  which  really  do  con-
tinue to  hold  the  words  and  memories  of  that  language
as  precious.  And  hence  it  may  be  remarked  that  the
Shakers,  when  under  their  peculiar  inspirations — the
celestial  afflatus  which  pervades  a  congregation  of  wor-
shiping Shakers — speak  fluently  in  what  are  called  "un-
known tongues."  (Of  course  on  this  point  I  need  not
stop  to  argue  with  and  persuade  Christians,  because
they  have  all  read  Paul,  and  know  from  such  authority
that such  singular thing's  used to  be  done— that  all


60  SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

kinds  of  persons,  in  Pentecostal  times,  were  uplifted
and  made  to  speak  in  ''unknown  tongues.")  And  it
seems  that  the  spiritual  language  of  the  Shakers  is  cha-
racteristic of  the  speeck  of  certain  brotherhoods  in  the
Summer-Land,  composed  of  minds  who  yet  retain  their
"  first  love"  for  the  words  which  characterized  their
nationality — in  which  all  their  national  history  and  re-
ligious developments  were  written.  They  affectionately
linger  in  it,  and  dwell  in  it,  as  bees  in  hives  by  the
roadside.  Why  ?  Because  human  nature  is  human
still :  death  not  radically  changing  either  the  heart  or
head.

There  is,  as  I  have  before  said,  a  beautiful  mount
called  "  Starnos."  A  brotherhood  of  affiliated  souls  is
seen  upon  the  west  of  it,  situated  near  a  celestial  pa-
vilion called  by  the  beautiful  word,  "  Connilium."
This  wondrously  beautiful  pavilion  is  not  to  shelter
persons  from  the  tempests  and  storms,  as  we  design  and
use  buildings  on  earth.

There  is  there  no  occasion  to  prepare  for  winter
nor  for  great  heat  of  summer.  Different  portions  of
the  Summer-Land  have  different  temperatures,  but  no
such  climate  as  we  have  in  any  part  of  the  earth,  be-
cause that  Land  is  made  by  the  fine  material  contribu-
tions and  gravitation  of  atoms  of  all  planets  in  the  solar
system.  Hence  it  is  the  product  of  many,  and  not  of
one :  the  earth  being  but  one  atomic  contributor  to  the
material  formation  of  that  existence.  Only  portions  of
that  Land,  therefore,  can  retain  the  peculiarities  of  the
earth,  of  which  such  portions  are  naturally  more  perfect
representatives.

This  Consilium  is  a  structure  of  exceeding  beauty.


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER- LAND.  61

It  seems,  to  look  at  it,  like  a  building  made  of  trees,
flowering  shrubs,  and  countless  vines.  To  the  clair-
voyant eye  it  is  full  of  undescribable,  beautiful  colors.
It  seems  to  be  composed  of  flowers  that  cast  rays  of
lights  and  shadows  like  precious  stones.  And  I  won-
der not  that  John,  when  standing  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos
and  gazing  into  the  upper  sphere,  seeing  this  marvelous
Pavilion,  called  it  "  the  New  Jerusalem/5  Such  gorge-
ous beauty,  resplendent  with  what  seems  to  be  precious
stones,  is  not  often  painted  upon  the  upturned  eyes  of
the  clairvoyant.

Plowing  along  this  side  of  that  beautiful  Pavilion  is
a  river  (I  obtained  the  pronunciation  of  this  word  with
great  care)  called  "  Apotravella."  They  sing  to  its
tides.  There  is  in  that  Brotherhood  a  piece  of  music
written  to  the  life  of  the  Apotravella.  And  there  are
times  when  the  vast  multi-arched  Connilium  throbs  like
a  harp,  responsive  to  the  historical  musical  revelation
of  that  beautiful  celestial  stream.

"  Ali-Nineka"  is  the  name  of  the  Turk  who  is  chief
in  that  temple — still  a  follower  and  a  believer  in  Ma-
homet. One  would  suppose  that  by  this  time  he  had
outgrown  his  creed,  but  he  has  not.  He  often  sees  and
adores  the  gifted  man  who  represented  Mecca.  The
dwellers  in  this  temple  still  believe  that  the  populations
of  other  portions  of  the  Summer-Land  will  yet  take
great  interest  in  Mahomet,  the  prophet  of  God.

Thus,  heathenism,  (as  men  call  it,)  continues  after
death,  and  missionary  workers,  and  even  Spiritualistic
meetings,  will  be  necessary  in  the  Upper-Land  ;  because
human  nature  is  not  supernatural,  but  continues  to  be
human — outgrowing  it*  errors  either  slowly  or  rapidly,


62  SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.

in  keeping  with  motives  and  temperaments.  Some  im-
mediately improving  and  progressing  in  free  truth ;
others  remaining  unimpressible  and  conservative  for
very  long  ages.

"  Martillos"  is  the  young,  bright  wife  of  Ali-Nineka.
Martillos,  who  has  lived  centuries  in  that  world,  is
"Morning  Devotion,"  which  is  the  significance  of  her
name.  She  is  filled  with  the  spirit  of  the*master-mind
from  whom  they  get  their  musical  education.  The  doc-
trine of  polygamy,  which  was  so  popular  in  Turkey  and
throughout  all  Mahommedan  countries,  is  not  practiced
in  this  Brotherhood.  This  beautiful  girl  seems  to  have
been  the  savior  of  Ali-Nineka.  They  constitute  the
central  objects  of  talent  and  beauty,  and  are  the  host
and  hostess  of  that  vast  pavilion.

In  1855,  when  I  was  writing  something  concerning
that  Christian  sect  which  flourished  in  the  second  cen-
tury, called  the  "  Gnostics/'  I  realized  a  warmth  and
observed  a  little  purple  ray  that  was  spread  and  trem-
bling over  the  paper  on  which  I  was  writing.  It  sig-
nified that  there  was  some  person  present  in  spirit  who
would  testify  ;  and  so,  casting  down  my  pen  and  yielding
to  that  invitation,  I  received  testimony  from  a  man  who
called  himself  "  Ephelitus."  He  said  that  he  was  a
scholar  and  a  propagandist  in  that  early  sect.  He
remarked  that  the  race  of  Gnostics  is  almost  extinct,
but  that  there  are  a  few  of  them  remaining,  who  still
believe  that  they  had  "  the  truth/'  and  they  accordingly
continue  to  advocate  it.  Ephelitus  himself  lived  in  a
very  different  section  of  the  Summer-Land.  "  Ori/5  he
said,  gives  the  sound  of  a  word  which  signifies  the
name  of  his  lovely  valley — tlie  Ephelitus  region—  where


SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.  63

still  a  few  Gnostics,  like  the  Quakers  of  earth,  meet  to
exchange  civilities  and  to  hold  social  conferences  or
religious  conversations.

Is  it  strange  that  persons  who  go  across  the  ocean
into  Europe  should  meet  and  talk  over  American  affairs  ?
Is  it  strange  that  when  the  old  man  walks  down
into  the  twilight  of  his  personal  history,  he  loves  to  sit
and  tell  over  to  younger  persons  what  happened  to  him
three-score  years  before?  Always  keep  in  remembrance
that  human  nature  is  human,  both  in  this  world  and  in
the  Summer-Land.

In  the  valley  of  Ori,  the  oldest  Gnostic,  Ephelitus,
holds  his  levees,  and  gathers  about  him  those  who  wish
to  hear  him  tell  of  scenes  and  toils  in  Rome  seventeen
centuries  ago.  They  listen  to  the  "tales  of  a  grand-
father," and  learn  of  the  eventful  century  when  Gnosti-
cism first  gathered  its  followers,  when  it  grew,  and
became,  for  the  time,  a  religious  and  local  power.

"  Zellabingen"  is  a  vast  Gernjan  Association,  which
was  also  seen  in  August,  1855.  This  Association  in  the
Summer-Land  was  located,  when  I  first  observed  the
assemblage,  parallel  with  the  rings  of  Saturn  with
reference  to  the  path  of  the  sun.  That  is,  if  you  were
at  that  moment  a  member  of  the  Zellabingen  Associa-
tion, and  stood  in  its  location,  pointing  northward  at
the  time  I  mention,  this  way  from  the  Summer-Land,
you  would  have  indicated  a  point  in  space  directly
parallel  to  the  situation  and  plane  of  the  rings  of  the
planet  Saturn.  To  have  pointed  earthward  would  have
nearly  reversed  the  direction  of  your  vision.

This  vast  Association  is  musical  throughout.  It  is
composed  wholly  of  persons  who  had  not,  before  death,


64  SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.

acquired  the  power  of  song,  but  who  yet  possessed  en-
thusiastic and  ardent  love  for  music — souls  whose  desires
for  song  had  not  been  gratified  in  the  earth.  The  Zel-
labingen Association  is  to  them  the  glorious  actualiza-
tion of  what  here  was  ideal  and  perpetual  disappoint-
ment. They  each  one  said,  "  I  have  now  no  voice  for
song,  but  I  will  yet  sing ;  it  is  in  me ;  I  can  silently
sing;  my  spirit  sings;  and  time  will  bring  me  song."
How  many  German  maidens,  and  how  many  German
young  men,  have  become  members  of  the  Zellabingen
Society!  There  they  are,  in  the  Upper-World,  some
of  them  centuries  old,  as  our  almanac  would  make  it,
yet  younger  than  any  grown  person  on  earth.  To  them
every  morning  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  day.  By
which  I  mean  that  every  change  in  the  cycle  of  their
lives  is  to  them  the  beginning  of  a  new  age  through
which  they  have  never  passed.  They  are  fresh  and
new,  spontaneous  and  beautiful.

It  was  this  Zellabingen  Society  that  first  adopted
the  beautiful  movement  called  "  The  Children's  Pro-
gressive Lyceum."  They  began,  as  we  have,  by  the
distribution  of  twelve  Groups.  The  Groups  were  de-
signated and  regulated  according  to  the  ages  of  their
members ;  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  ages  of  those
who  love  music  and  song,  and  not  according  to  ages
kept  by  the  almanac.  For  if  you  were  measured  and
classified  according  to  your  spiritual  age,  you  would,
perhaps,  be  not  more  than  two  or  three  months  in  some
things;  others  among  you,  though  past  life's  meridian,
are  just  born  to  a  sight  of  spiritual  things ;  and  some
of  you,  although  voters  on  election  days,  are  not  yet
born  in  wisdom  and  true  faith  ;  while  others,  years  old


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER- LAND.  65

in  spiritual  faith,  are  not  a  month  old  in  matters  per-
taining to  true  knowledge.  No — the  soul  is  not  to  be
measured  by  the  almanac,  but  by  its  development  from
a  state  of  darkness  to  a  state  of  knowledge.  In  the
Summer-Land  there  is  no  other  account  of  time.  A
young  man  may,  perhaps,  know  nothing  of  chemistry,
but  the  same  mind  may  be  more  than  a  century  old  in
music.  Youth  is  so  perfect  a  principle  in  spirit  that
decay  cannot  come  upon  it.  Every  spirit,  in  the  Upper
life,  becomes  a  spontaneous  spring  of  ever-recurring
youthfulness.

The  Zellabingen  Society,  I  again  observe,  origin-
ally adopted  the  Children's  Lyceum  Groups  in  the
Summer-Land.  The  Groups  first  represented  notes  of
music.  Then  each  Group  was  an  octave.  At  length
the  Groups  multiplied  and  numbered  up  higher  and
higher,  until  they  constituted  an  orchestra  with  a  thou-
sand octaves  !  The  master-spirits,  standing  among  the
musical  Groups,  so  that  every  one  could  be  reached,
evoked  such  magnetic  inspiration,  that  when  a  splendid
piece  of  historical  music  rolled  out  from  those  accord-
ant voices,  the  heavens  seemed  for  the  moment  to  be
only  music  !  It  seemed  to  me,  when  I  first  heard  this
celestial  concert,  that  the  people  of  Brooklyn,  where  I
then  resided,  could  not  shut  their  ears  against  it.  At
the  time  I  was  in  clairvoyance  on  the  corner  of  Fulton
and  Franklin  Avenues,  in  a  room  on  the  third  floor,
and  it  seemed  that  the  busy  inhabitants  of  New  York,
and  all  the  cities  round  about,  did  certainly  hear  every
note  that  was  sounded.  The  lowest,  the  highest,  and
grandest  notes  were  heard,  and  then  the  deep,  deep  bass,
which  seemed  to  come  up  from  the  profoundest  starry


66  SOCIETY  JN  TITO  SUMMER-LAND.

depths;  so  that  it  seemed  as  though  the  harp  of  old
ocean  was. attuned  to  perform  a  part  of  the  melody.  It
seemed  as  though,  had  I  had  paper  and  pencil  by  me  at
the  moment,  1  might  have  traced  many  parts  of  this
wonderful  historical  music  of  the  Zellabingen  Society.

But  let  us  now  speak  of  others.  Lindenstein  and
Moraneski  are  Russian  and  Austrian  Associations.  The
Lindenstein  Association  is  more  remote  from  the  Zella-
bingen Brotherhood  than  is  England  from  America.  It
is  situated  very  far  away  to  the  right.  The  Russian
Association  seemed  to  be  immersed  almost  wholly  in
matters  of  history  with  reference  to  races  of  planets,
no  matter  whether  of  this  earth  or  others  in  space.
They  have  lost  a  great  deal  of  their  attachment  to  their
native  globe.  They  are  peculiarly  truthful,  unselfish,
and  disinterested.  They  are  almost  Teutonic  in  their
studious  methods.  They  often  associate  themselves  in
large  assemblies.  And  when  I  first  saw  them,  on  a
p&rticular  occasion,  it  seemed  to  be  their  time  of  meet-
ing. They  were  interested  in,  and  debating  upon,
historical  questions.  The  uses  and  lessons  of  such
celestial  conventions  and  deliberations  will  be  seen  at
some  future  time.

"Moraneski,"  the  Austrian  Assembly,  or  Society,
is  a  very  different  Brotherhood.  They  were,  at  that
time,  concerning  themselves  almost  entirely  with  the
formation  of  the  best  governments  for  the  different
tribes  and  peoples  of  the  earth.  They  are  politicians
in  their  methods,  but  do  not  seek  to  exert  political
influence  over  kings  and  emperors.

Monazolappa  is  the  only  exclusively  African  realm
that  I  have  ever  seen  in  the  Spirit- World. And  here,


SOCIETY  IN THE SUMMER-LAND.  67

for  the  first  time,  I  saw  that  progeny  of  parents,  of
whatever  race,  not  born  perfectly  organized  in  the
formation  of  the  inner  brain,  do  not  obtain  an  indi-
vidualized representation  after  death.  It  seems  that
there  was  a  very  large  percentage  of  the  progeny  of
the  early  inhabitants  who  never  attained  to  immortality.
According  to  the  testimony  of  jthe  Monazolappa  Asso-
ciation, myriads  of  the  progeny  of  the  semi-humans,  who
prevailed  in  the  early  ages  of  the  globe,  went  down  out
of  sight  into  the  vortices  and  laboratories  of  matter.
There  was  there  no  voice  of  lamentation.  They  said
that  their  true  children  were  not  lost ;  for  every  human
child  naturally  born  is  there;  only  those,  who,  taking
on  the  shape  of  man,  but  not  yet  internally  organ-
ized up  to  the  human,  were  excluded  from  the  upper
spheres.

Two  years  previous,  in  1853,  I  was  led  (by  a  very
beautiful  incident  which  I  may  not  now  relate,)  to  see  for
the  first  time  a  Brotherhood  on  the  north  of  what  I
first  called  Mount  Starnos — a  beautiful  Spanish  Asso-
ciation, more  numerous  than  the  population  of  America,
called  "Aeadelaco,"  or  "  Eco  del  Eco" — the  name  as
near  as  I  can  remember  to  pronounce.  And  there  was
round  about  that  beautiful  Starnos  a  lake  that  seemed
to  be  of  pure  limpid  amber !  It  was  flowing,  yet  not
heavily  liquid  as  is  our  earthly  water.  It  seemed  to  be
more  like  flowing  liquid  atmosphere  than  like  water,
and  it  had  the  peculiar  property  of  giving  off  a  refresh-
ing fragrance  instead  of  a  suffocating  fog.  And  once.
soon  after  this  vision,  in  crossing  the  East  River  to
New  York  on  the  Brooklyn  ferry-boat,  I  saw  a  painful
contrast; for there we wandered, and  floated, and


68  SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.

steamed  about  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  in  a/og
that  had. a  remarkably  bad  smell.  And  I  had  just
arisen  from  the  studio  in  which  that  entire  spiritual
truth  had  been  developed,  with  the  recollection  of  the
emanations  from  the  amber-like  river  to  the  north  of
Staraos  !  What  a  contrast  between  the  two  worlds  !
Hovering  over  the  bosom  of  the  heavenly  river  was  a
fragrance  from  countless  flowers.

A  gentleman  who  is  an  expert  in  science  says  that
he  can  demonstrate  that  the  photographic  instrument
can  photograph  invisible  substances.  Thus  mankind
are  getting  ready  to  take  the  spirit  form,  to  establish  the
beautiful  fact,  by  photographic  developments.  Art  has
made  the  nearest  approach  to  painting  unsubstantial
shadows,  so  that  the  human  eye  can,  with  admiring
satisfaction,  look  upon  them.  Perhaps,  in  this  manner,
one  of  these  days,  Art  will  catch  the  fragrance  of  a
flower,  so  that  you  can  take  the  likeness  of  an  odor  to
your  friends  !  Men  will  then  say,  "  Is  it  possible  that
for  centuries  and  centuries  immemorial  we  have  been
only  able  to  smell  without  seeing,  while  now  we  can  see
what  we  have  known  only  by  the  olfactory  nerves  V9
Now,  I  will  again  say  that  the  odoriferous  emanations
from  that  beautiful  amber-river  were  visible,  and  that
they  constituted,  above  the  stream,  what  Fourier,  in
speaking  of  the  ultimate  of  this  planet,  called  a  "  Boreal
Crown."  It  aromally  rose  up  and  swept  over  for
thousands  of  miles  both  east  and  west.  What  a  mag-
nificent rainbow  was  that,  with  colors  to  which  no  hu-
man eye  is  accustomed !  Here  there  were,  in  colors,
new  developments,  rich,  splendid  !  And  do  you  suppose
that a  Brother  of  the  Acadelaco  Society  could look


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  69

upon  that  scene  and  not  worship  the  Infinite  Mind?
Every  human  mind  would  in  one  moment  be  moved  to
feelings  of  purest  devotion  and  highest  adoration.  The
rainbow  here  is  a  philosophical  fact,  unless  the  system
of  Nature  be  a  fraud;  and  the  spiritual  counterpart  is  a
continuation  of  this  on  a  grander  principle.  The  fact
exists  in  science,  and  you  cannot  dodge  the  conclusion,
that,  in  other  spheres,  similar  phenomena  may  occur.

M  Miantovesta"  is  an  Italian  Brotherhood,  in  a  very
different  section  of  the  Summer-Land.  This  Brother-
hood is  distinguished  by  some'  of  the  most  beautiful
women  that  ever  lived  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  It  is
one  of  the  most  celestial  and  attractive.  And  behold
what  hospitalities  the  Miantovestaians  receive  when
they  visit  the  Zellabingens!  They  journey  to  the  latter
Brotherhood  from  time  to  time;  and  there  the  sweet
singers  of  the  Miantovesta  join  the  anthems  of  the
Groups,  and  their  voices  rise  up  and  blend  like  drops
of  dew  in  the  air.

I  wonder  not — having  heard  the  music  of  this  great
Association — that  many  Christians  conceive  the  king-
dom of  heaven  to  be  a  perpetual  singing-school — a  pro-
tracted Methodist  meeting — continuing  years  and  centu-
ries, while  they  adore  God,  with  hymns  of  praise,  grati-
tude, and  thanksgiving,  in  this  manner  occupying  their
time  throughout  the  infinite  periods !  And  this  is  the
orthodox  Christian's  conception  of  heaven!  Human
nature  must  be  entirely  changed  at  death  to  make  it

ible  to  realize  such  a  conception.  Nay,  nay.  It  is
a  philosophic,  scientific,  phrenological,  affectional,  logi-
cal, spiritual,  religious  absurdity.  Yet,  remembering
the  effect  produced  when  the  Zellabingen  Socioty  joins


70  SOCIETY  IN THE SUMMER-LAND.

its  wondrous,  magnificent  melody  with  the  Mianto-
vesta — then  I  sometimes  think  that,  from  this  celestial
fact,  the  early  Christians  may  have  obtained  their  con-
ception that  the  eternity  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is
devoted  to  the  cheerful  works  of  music  and  praying.

"  Pialoleski"  is  another  Russian  Association.  It  is
peculiar,  and  distinguished  for  its  musical  properties.
Having  heard  the  songs  of  these  musical  gatherings,  I
feel  the  impulse  to  urge  our  Brothers  and  Sisters  to
open  their  mouths  and  bring  forth  the  joyful  hymns  of
progress  and  praise.  No  wonder  that  I  would  have
song  poured  from  everybody's  mouth!  It  has  almost
lifted  me  up  to  the  thought  of  having  nothing  cultivated
in  this  world  save  music.  When  I  first  heard  the  Anvil
Chorus,  it  seemed  after  all  as  though  the  multifarious
sounds  of  noisy  cities  would  one  of  these  days  be  "  set
to  music."  I  had  no  appreciation  of  such  a  combina-
tion of  sounds  and  parts  as  constituted  an  "opera"
until  these  celestial  sounds  came  through  the  clairaudi-
ence  of  my  own  spirit,  thus  educating  the  mind  to
breathe  in  the  significance  of  music,  as  well  as  to  com-
prehend somewhat  of  its  physical  vesture.

Senelocius  and  Helvetius  are  celebrated  even  in  the
Summer-Land  for  their  logical  peculiarities  and  intel-
lectual endowments.  Baron  D'Holbach,  too,  and  those
who  believe  in  his  doctrines,  seem  to  think  the  time  will
come  when  men's  minds  will  wholly  outgrow  any  idea
of  God — that  there  is  no  necessity  and  no  philosophy
for  such  an  impossible  Being.  They  believe  and  teach
many  about  them  that  God  is  a  supernatural  absurdity;
that  there  is  no  supernaturalism.  They  sometimes  think
the  absurdity  itself  is  absurd,  and  they  advocate  among


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  71

themselves,  and  fearlessly  in  the  presence  of  those  about
them,  the  same  fundamental  thoughts  that  ruled  the
affections  of  the  earthly  society  which  they  formed
before  they  left  the  earth.

Professor  Webster,  of  the  Dr.  Parkman  history,
went  among  such  minds,  not  by  invitation,  but  in  asso-
ciation with  others  who  were  going  to  see  and  to  listen.
And  when  he  first  appeared  to  a  circle  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  he  there  reported  a  peculiar  doctrine  which  the
medium  was  afraid  to  write  or  have  reported.  It  was
really  the  doctrine  of  the  Helvetian  School,  much  modi-
fied, but  essentially  the  same.

Swedenborg  truly  says  that,  in  the  Spirit- World,
the  different  associations,  nationalities,  tribes,  and  reli-
gious sects  continue.  The  philosophers  of  the  Atheistic-
al school — especially  Senelocius — make  these  notions
a  matter  of  society,  so  that  the  children  of  parents  who
think  as  they  do,  and  the  wives  of  those  men  who  so
think,  and  persons  in  other  Brotherhoods,  have  large
sentimental  gatherings,  where  they  enjoy  festivities  and
conversation.  Human  nature  here  is  human  nature
there.  We  have  here  a  New  England  Society,  the
Western  Association,  or  the  Knickerbocker  Associa-
tion, &c,  and  the  different  Clubs.  It  is  the  same  thing
there,  only  on  a  grander  and  more  harmonious  scale.

"  Archilarium"  is  the  name  of  an  open  pavilion
where  these  teachers  gather  the  multitudes  who  want
to  listen.  When  this  assemblage  was  witnessed  by  me
in  1858,  it  seemed  like  avast  convention  :  not,  however,
characterized  by  the  turbulency  of  earthly  gatherings.
They  all  seemed  to  take  a  great  deal  of  interest  in
everything  said  and  done. It  was  a  celestial  Conven-


72  SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

tion  held  out  in  the  open  fields  of  heaven — beautiful,
fair,  mossy,  and  bedecked  with  every  variety  of  flower-
ing plants.

"  Vivodario"  is  the  name  of  that  Oratorio — of  that
beautiful  section  of  river — to  which  I  referred  in  the
early  part  of  this  discourse.  And  the  beautiful  Octo-
lonia  is  the  angel-writer  and  poetess — a  gifted  lady  in
the  Summer-Land — who  developed  and  arranged  the
sublimest  piece  of  music  in  the  whole  Brotherhood  of
Zellabingen.  It  was  written  long  after  death  by  this
beautiful  German  lady-spirit.  Octolonia  is  the  name
given  to  her  in  consequence  of  her  great  attainments
and  accomplishments.  Her  name  is  her  coronation;  it
shines  from  her  brow  ;  it  sparkles  and  shimmers  through
her  beautiful  locks.  She  seems  to  be  radiant  with  the
music  of  which  she  was  the  authoress.

"  Ulcemira"  is  the  name  of  a  traveler  who  had  ar-
rived just  at  the  time  when  this  clairvoyant  observation
was  made.  Ulcemira,  too,  is  a  most  beautiful  woman,
who,  in  this  world,  had  desires  for  journeying  which
had  never  had  any  gratification.  But  when  she  felt  her
feet  free  upon  the  green  fields  of  Paradise,  she  openly
declared  and  made  an  oath  that  "  she  would  have  her
soul  gratified  with  excursions."  And  verily,  this  beau-
tiful woman,  Ulcemira,  has  traveled  twenty  times
farther  than  from  here  to  the  sun.  She  had  just  arrived
from  one  excursion,  and,  with  the  poetess,  stood  where
the  music  was  just  about  beginning :  and  that  was  the
glorious  scene,  and  the  time,  when  I  heard  the  grandest
music  possible  to  imagine.

The  social  scenes  in  the  Summer-Land,  which  I  was
enabled  to  see  two  days  after  what  is  above  mentioned,


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  73

and  which  included  the  enchanting  festivities,  were  be-
yond all  verbal  description.  I  will  not  detain  you  by  a
single  word  upon  them  ;  they  may  come  up,  perhaps,  in
a  future  reference.

11  La  Samosata"  is  the  name  of  a  Convent,  or  what
would  here  be  called  a  Monastery.  There  are  persons
who  still  verily  believe  that  the  Roman  Catholic  faith
is  God's  exclusive  religion.  Such  spirits  hover  over
their  congenial  earthly  congregations.  Therefore  the
Roman  Catholics  do  experience  real  inspirations — not
revelations,  remember,  because  revelations  open  and  en-
lighten the  judgment,  whilst  inspirations  excite,  vivify,
and  warm  our  spirits  to  action.  Many  persons  are
truly  inspired  who  have  not  common  sense.  In  fact,
they  may  be  very  highly  inspired,  and  still  be  very  un-
wise in  their  externals.  On  the  other  hand,  when  a  man
has  a  real  revelation — which  gently  expands  and  opens
the  faculties  of  thought,  and  which  also  brings  propor-
tion, and  depth,  and  solidity — then  inspiration  becomes
to  that  man's  faculties  what  sun-heat  is  to  the  flowers,
and  grains,  and  grasses.  It  is  a  cause  of  growth  and
of  steady  fertilization.

Now  these  Catholics  of  our  earth  really  feel  the
hovering  indorsement  and  benedictions  of  the  La  Samo-
sata— the  tenants  of  a  vast  Convent.  It  is  a  place  shut
in  by  mountains  that  fill  the  distance  away  off,  like
Alps  upon  Alps  (only  not  with  those  abrupt  and  pointed
summits,)  but  like  innumerable  oceans  they  seem  to  roll
down  to  the  garden  of  the  Convent.

If  the  earthly  astronomer  could  but  gaze  upon  this
scene  with  his  telescope,  it  would  seem  to  him  as  though
he  was  contemplating  new  star-fields  in  the  heavens,  in
4


74  SOCIETY  IN  THE  SUMMER-LAND.

beauty  and  magnitude  far  beyond  his  ability  to  transmit
in  language,  or  to  map  down  for  the  longing  eyes  of  his
waiting  fellow-men.  The  La  Samosata,  instead  of  being
a  place  where  a  few  thousand  can  gather,  may  con-
tain all  the  Roman  Catholics  who  have  gone  into
the  Spirit- World  for  many  past  centuries,  and  hence  it
is  vastly  larger  than  the  States  of  both  Illinois  and
Wisconsin.  You  ask,  "  Do  they  all  live  there  V*  I
answer  by  asking,  "Do  you  suppose  that  there  is  coer-
cion ?  Is  the  internal  government  of  the  Spirit-Land
more  arbitrary,  more  despotic  than  this?  Will  you  not
there  be  more,  instead  of  less,  generous  and  kind  to  all
forms  of  faith  ?  Will  the  good  Father  and  Mother
send  policemen  or  .missionaries  armed  with  rods  and
whips  to  drive  men  who  do  not  believe  the  exact  let-
ter V\  No,  no.  Human  nature  continues  the  same.
Therefore  Roman  Catholic  Associations  in  the  next
sphere  are  just  as  inevitable  and  natural  as  anywhere
on  the  face  of  the  earth.

I  will  speak  of  other  things.  A  great  white  flower
was  seen  in  the  same  month.  It  is  called  the  "  Archi-
bulum" — a  beautiful  word,  meaning  the  white  temple  of
the  children.  And  there,  near  the  garden  containing
these  flowers,  are  persons  we  read  of  in  the  Bible.
There  I  observed  those  who  would  not  be  comforted —
Rachel,  and  also  very  many  beautiful  Jewesses,  and  the
Israelitish  women  who  were  called  heroines  in  the  old
Hebrew  Scriptures.  The  Archibulum  is  a  vast  white
flower,  so  constituted  as  to  represent  the  image  of  beau-
tiful children  grouped  directly  at  its  center.  It  seems  to
grow  full  one  hundred  feet  from  the  earth.  Many  admir-
ing spirits  seem  to  think  they  see  in  the  flower's  center  a


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  75

beautiful  representation  of  the  son  of  Mary  and  Joseph,
when  he  said,  "  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me/'
It  is  the  divinest  flower  of  all  that  section  of  the  Sum-
mer-Land. And  the  early  Hebrew  women  look  with
great  delight  upon  the  Archibulum,  with  the  picture
of  an  assembly  of  children  at  its  center — one  of  the
most  marvelous  floral  developments  in  the  garden  of
God.

Do  not  forget,  friends,  that  I  am  speaking  to  you  of
scenes  in  the  Summer-Land — the  next-door  neighbor  to
all  this  circle  of  planets,  of  which  the  earth  is  a  member.
What  would  you  say  if  you  should  hear  somewhat  con-
cerning the  third  Sphere,  of  the  one  beyond  that,  or  of
another  and  still  higher  ?  I  have  seen  mediums  who
think  they  receive  communications  from  the  innumera-
ble upper  places  !  No.  Many  of  them  have  not  heard
from  the  gifted  in  these  Brotherhoods.  Now  and  then
some  one  of  them  says,  "  Oh,  that  is  nothing,  the  next
spirit- world  is  nothing!  i*  get  communications  from
the  seventh  heaven — away  up  out  of  sight  I"  That  is
all  ecstatic  inspiration,  without  any  analyzing  judg-
ment— no  revelation  to  balance  the  mind  in  truth.  Men
and  women  get  more  humility  when  they  get  more  wis-
dom. Pomposity  of  intellect  is  the  best  proof  of  its
shallowness.  When  a  truly  sublime  idea  comes  to  you,
then,  "  expressive  silence"  is  alone  natural  and  worthy.
Words  are  an  impertinence.

"  Aurealia"  is  the  general  name  for  a  class  of  pulsat-
ing lilies.  These  golden  and  graceful  plants  grow  by  the
peaceful  homes  of  those  pure  souls  who  wish  them.  Au-
realia  represents  u  new  hopes,"  or  freshened  hopes.  It
grows  by  the  heavenly  homes  of  many  good,  high-born


76  SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.

souls,  in  the  spirit-world.  Some  persons  who  have  lived
in  New  York,  and  some  who  have  departed  from  among
our  households,  have  been  seen  where  these  beautiful
pulsating  indications  of  "freshened  hopes"  vibrate  in
the  soft,  beautiful  zephyrs  of  the  immortal  sphere.

«  Oahulah"  is  the  name  of  a  brotherhood  of  Sand-
wich Islanders,  which  I  saw  almost  by  an  accident,
when  I  was  looking  for  something  very  different.  The
circumstance  may  interest  you.  1  took  up  a  newspaper
and  saw  the  name  of  Aaron  Burr.  I  had  never  read
anything  concerning  him.  I  had  heard  that  he  was  a
peculiar  man,  a  politician,  &c.  I  had  also  heard  some
conversation  about  him.  I  said,  "I  wonder  if  I  cannot
get  some  information  with  reference  to  him."  This  was
early  in  the  iirst  year  of  the  Herald  of  Progress —
about  three  years  ago.  The  question  occupied  my
thoughts  for  three  different  mornings,  and,  on  the  third
session,  clairvoyance  was  complete,  and  the  vision
opened,  but  I  did  not  see  Aaron  Burr  as  I  expected  to,
but  I  saw  a  much  smaller  man,  with  a  brow  that  was
not  yet  clear  of  a  singular  shadow,  which  immediately
drew  my  attention,  and  I  said,  "  I  wish  I  could  know
what  it  is  that  so  shades  that  man's  brow"  I  saw  nothing
above  him  that  could  cast  a  shadow,  nor  had  he  any-
thing upon  his  head.  He  was  surrounded  and  conversing
with  a  great  many  others.  They  were  seemingly  inter-
ested in  something  pertaining  to  the  war  then  approach-
ing on  earth,  and  with  reference  to  some  persons  who
were  their  earthly  relatives,  whom  they  knew  would
soon  be  among  them  from  the  battle-fields.  But  above
all,  this  man's  shaded  brow  drew  my  clairvoyant  atten-
tion. I  wished  to  know  who  he  was,  and  to  learn  what


SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.  77

the  shadow  meant.  At  length  I  saw  that  he  was  Alex-
ander Hamilton.  In  his  company  I  saw  none  of  the  early
American  statesmen  ;  but  there  were  many  intelligent
persons  with  him,  and  of  different  races.  Soon  Mr.
Hamilton  unvailed  his  memory  and  began  to  think,
and  I  could  see  the  thoughts  roll  out  at  the  front  part
of  his  mind,  and  each  was  as  clear  to  my  inward  vision
as  is  any  object  to  the  physical  eye.

I  saw  in  his  memory  a  place  that  I  had  seen  on
earth.  At  first  I  could  not  recognize  it  sufficiently  to
locate  it.  But  presently  it  grew  more  familiar.  I  had
seen  the  trees,  and  the  walks,  and  the  grass,  and  the
mountain,  and  the  Hudson  River!  I  looked  again,  and
thought  for  a  while,  and  then  I  remembered  that  it  was
Hoboken!  In  a  few  minutes  some  eight  men  appeared,
and  he  among  the  rest.  And  now  I  saw  in  his  thought
a  regret  that  he  had  been  weak  enough,  low  enough  in
the  moral  scale,  so  actuated  by  pride  and  a  false  code
of  honor,  as  ever  to  have  permitted  Aaron  Burr  to  send
him,  "before  his  time/'  into  the  Summer-Land.  And
I  could  see  distinctly  the  figures  1804 — the  year  in
which  Burr  shot  him:  twenty-four  hours  alterward  he
passed,  a  duelist,  to  the  After-Life.  For  days  he  was
in  a  deep,  dreamy  slumber.  When  he  awoke,  he  found
upon  his  brow  this  shadow  !  The  cause  of  his  regret
dates  back  half  a  century;  still  there  is  a  shadow  just
over  his  brow  and  upon  his  head.

The  lesson  is  impressive  and  easily  learned.  It  is  best
for  all  to  be  right  and  to  do  right.  No  man  or  woman
is  wholly  innocent;  no  one  perfect.  If  you  are  not
good  and  strong  enough  to  save  and  prevent  another
from  doing  you  a  wrong,  the  weakness  goes  with  you,


78  SOCIETY  IN  THE SUMMER-LAND.

and  its  effects  will  shade  you  somewhere,  either  in  person
or  in  spirit,  and  you  cannot  conceal  a  weakness  so  per-
fectly as  you  can  in  this  world.

The  Oahulah  is  the  association  of  Sandwich  Island-
ers where  Alexander  Hamilton  was  temporarily
sojourning,  which  I  saw  by  an  accident,  so  to  say,  when
trying  to  find  Aaron  Burr.  Oahulah  was  constituted
of  persons  who  had  passed  on  from  those  earth-islands
into  the  spirit-world.

"  Wallavesta"  and  "  Passaeta"  both  are  realms  of
various  peaceful  and  affiliated  tribes  of  Indians.  The
hatchet  is  really  buried,  and  the  pipe  of  peace  is
smoked.  At  last  the  red  man  has  found  his  hunting-
grounds.  The  sachems  and  the  wigwams,  the  great
forests  and  the  regions  of  beauty  to  traverse,  and  the
shining  lakes  for  bathing  and  fishing — these  ideal  dreams
of  the  old  Indians  are  more  than  actualized  in  the
Summer-Land. The  immortal  Indian,

"  whose  untutored  mind
Sees  God  in  clouds  and  hears  him- in  the  wind/'

is  just  as  good  a  Christian  as  they  who  sat  at  the  feet
of  Jesus,  because  the  Eternal  breathed  infallible  in-
stinctive truths  into  his  unfettered  mind.  In  the  depths
of  intuition  he  obtained  foreglimpses  of  the  beautiful
immortal  realm,  not  like  these  barren  wastes  and  rude
territories  granted  by  government,  but  a  land  given  by
the  Great  Spirit  to  the  "red  man,"  who  is  as  much  a
child  of  God  as  is  any  member  of  the  Zellabingen,  as
much  as  the  highest  archangel  who  dwells  in  yet  higher
spheres  in  the  spiritual  universe.


A  VOICE  FROM  THE  SPIRIT-LAND.

On  the  twenty-first  day  of  August,  1859,  while
making  clairvoyant  examinations  and  writing  upon  the
Second  Part  of  this  volume,  in  the  Fraternal  mansion
of  C.  O.  Pool,  Esq.,  at  Buffalo,  New  York,  I  realized
a  gush  of  thoughts,  surcharged  with  inexpressible  long-
ings, regarding  the  pure  nature  and  visitation  of  James
Victor  Wilson.  The  wave  soon  subsided,  however,
and  I  was,  as  before,  only  Occupied  with  the  subject  of
my  writing.  The  next  day  the  same  beautiful  thoughts
of  him,  and  the  same  fraternal  yearnings  for  his  per-
sonal presence,  pervaded  my  whole  mind.  But  these
meditations  and  longings,  as  before,  passed  gently  and
utterly  away.  This  experience  was  repeated  from  day
to  day  until  the  twenty-fifth,  the  early  morn  of  which
dawned  with  the  person  of  my  Brother  hovering  in  its
wings.  He  came  with  his  accustomed  gentleness,  stood
close  by  the  open  wTindow  at  which  I  was  writing,  and
we  conversed  as  naturally  as  any  two  spirits  ever  did.
Of  this  I  need  not  speak,  having,  as  I  think,  amply  ex-
plained the  method  thereof  in  several  preceding  works.

But  regarding  the  personal  appearance  of  this  un-
earthed Brother,  who  lias  resided  some  ten  years  in  the
spirit-hind,  I  may  remark  briefly.  His  form  is  more
round  than  when  last  I  beheld  him,  and  his  motions
and  gestures  are  characterized  with  more  uprightness


80  A VOICE FKOM THE SPIRIT-LAND.

and  dignity.  His  bodily  presence  ennobled  me  at  once,
and  I  felt  like  one  standing  in  the  midst  of  royalty.
Plis  habiliments  were  artificial,  evidently  the  work  of
more  delicate  hands  than  those  of  the  finest  terrestrial
maiden,  and  he  wore  them  as  though  he  lived  in  a  Land
of  summer  warmth  and  glory.  The  outlines  of  his  finG
form  were  visible  through  his  garments.

Of  the  following  imperfect  report  of  his  conversation
a  few  explanatory  words  are  necessary.  After  luxu-
riating some  twenty  minutes  or  more  in  social  com-
merce, during  which  lie  introduced  the  object  of  his
visit,  I  then  took  time  to  write  clown  all  my  memory  of
his  communication.  While  engaged  thus,  my  Friend
would  depart  from  the  window.  Whither  I  knew  not.
But  he  invariably  returned  in  time  to  correct  any  mis-
take in  conception  or  spelling,  and  to  proceed  with  the
narration.  In  every  instance  where  strange  words  were
used,  to  designate  places,  persons,  or  things,  my  habit
Was,  as  it  always  is,  to  request  the  repetition  of  them,
in  order  to  make  certain  of  the  pronunciation  and  ortho-
graphy. Many  words  of  this  class  occur  in  the  follow-
ing  report.  And  here  let  the  reader  bear  in  mind,  that
these  new  words  are  written  just  as  Brother  Wilson  pro-
nounced them  repeatedly  in  my  hearing.  Each  syllable
is  to  be  spoken  as  written,  which  will  then  yield  the
correct  pronunciation  ;  and  the  sound  of  each  word,  as
heard  from  the  tongue  of  the  gentle  Spirit,  conveys  the
sweetest  music  and  the  highest  impression.  Regarding
the  contents  of  this  communication,  I  have  nothing  to
say  by  way  of  explanation  ;  but  cheerfully  commit
them  to  the  reader's  reason  as  a  Voice  fkom  the  Spirit-
Land.


A  VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  81

"  Throughout  my  last  discourse  there  flowed  a  tur-
bulent river.*  My  joy  was  unutterable,  my  delight
ineffable,  my  perception  of  truth  ecstatic.  Much  have
I  wondered  what  my  friends  would  think  of  that  im-
perfect* report.  Long  have  I  wished  to  make  a  closer
and  a  nicer  revelation  of  the  angel's  home.  The  spirit-
land  is  indeed  a  country  of  undying  charms  and  posi-
tive attractions.  Among  the  millions  of  conceptions
which  within  ten  years  I  have  unlearned,  there  remains
one  which  is  more  sublime  and  growingly-permanent
than  any  truth  I  at  first  discerned,  and  that  I  gave  you  :
the  Universe  is  a  musical  instrument,  on  which  the
Divinity  is  perpetually  expressing  the  infinitely-diversi-
fied harmonies  of  his  nature,  which  is  immeasurably
deep  and  altogether  unchangeable."

u  Are  you  less  joyous  ?"  I  inquired.  "  Have  you  less
delight  and  less  truth  than  when  you  last  visited  me  ¥'

"  All  things  are  new,"  he  replied.  "  I  am  less  ecsta-
tic now,  because  I  am  more  happy.  My  joy  is  calmer
because  profounder.  Tn  the  early  months  of  my  exist-
ence here,  I  was  as  a  child  over-excited  with  the  worlds
of  immeasurable  magnitude  which  rolled  musically  in
every  quarter  of  the  firmament.  I  was  wild  with  the
ocean  of  attractions  that  throbbed  round  about  my  im-
mortal self.  iSTo  youth  ever  felt  one-half  of  my  enthu-
siasm. Every  excursion-troupe  sent  me  an  invitation.
I  visited  world  upon  world ;  walked  upon  planets
twenty  times  larger  and  greatly  more  populous  than
Earth  ;  meditated  as  I  thought,  studied  assiduously  as
I  believed,  tested  facts  by  analysis  as  I  fancied,  and
made nice philosophic measurements of much con-

*  See  his  communication  in  "  Philosophy  of  Spiritual  Intercourse."
4*


82  A  VOICE FROM  THE SPIRIT-LAKD.

secrated  truth :  yet  I  have  inhaled,  as  I  now  know,  but
the  fragrance  of  a  few  of  those  flowers  which  grow  on
the  margin  of  the  infinite  ocean !"

"  If  the  task  be  not  unpleasant,  my  angel-brother,"
said  I ;  rt  if  this  self-criticism  be  not  ungracious  and  un-
worthy of  your  wisdom,  will  you  contribute  to  earthly
minds  the  occupations  and  studies  of  your  past  few
years  ?"

A  heavenly  light  beamed  from  his  white  brow,  and  a
rich  flood  of  love  poured  out  of  his  large,  earnest  blue
eyes,  when  he  opened  his  rosy  lips  to  reply :  "  As  the
sun  unrolls  the  flower,  so  have  I  had  my  being  unrolled
by  the  spontaneous  working  of  eternal  principles.  But
while  travelling  and  flitting,  so  to  speak,  from  star  to
star,  dividing  my  thoughts  by  a  countless  variety  of
new  sights,  I  made  no  happy  progress  in  heavenly
knowledge.  Socially,  intuitionally,  and  perceptively,  I
had  obtained  and  absorbed  much ;  but  when  at  length
I  wanted  more  than  this,  my  reflective  reason  informed
me  that  I  was  ignorant.  Hundreds,  yea  thousands,
have  lived  here  thousands  of  years  without  visiting  the
surrounding  worlds  of  space.  Such  are  consecrated  to
the  Father's  service  in  healthful  ways  that  are  pleasant.
Among  these  are  Prodicus  the  eloquent  Greek,  Euripi-
des the  tragic  poet,  Socrates  the  ethical  teacher,  Her-
mogenes,  Plato,  Xenophon,  Moschus,  Anaxagoras,
Crito,  and  unnumbered  other  old  men  on  earth  of  vast
superiority  of  mind,  who,  though  brilliant  with  youth-
fulness  now,  and  illustrious  with  a  torrent  of  holy  acts
throbbing  through  their  harmonious  hearts,  are  fixed  in
their  self-made  orbits  here,  like  the  immutable  stars  of
destiny  in  your  stellar  scenery."


A VOICE FROM  THE SPIRIT- LAUD.  83

"  Do  not  these  persons  travel  in  the  spirit-land  ?*'  I
isked,  with  unrestrained  surprise.

My  angel-brother  smiled  with  an  awakened  fervor
spreading  over  his  face,  and  replied  :  "  They  bring  the
whole  universe  down  to  their  feet,  and  comprehend  in
truth  every  world  and'  all  the  planets  I  have  visited
with  infinitely  more  potent  thought  and  spiritual  accu-
racy than  I  can  understand  even  now."

"  You  make  a  curious  statement,"  said  I.  "  Perhaps
you  can  explain  it  so  that  I  may  get  the  image  of  your
thought."

"  Happy  word !"  he  exclaimed.  "Images  and  like-
nesses are  but  forms  of  ideas  within  the  great  minds  of
this  existence.  The  realm  of  objects  and  forms  is  the
educt  of  the  world  of  ideas.  The  sensational  sphere
they  regard  as  the  sphere  of  effects ;  the  causes  being
inherent  to  mind,  or  Vaseiel,  which  is  what  you  term
spirit.  On\j  he  travels  who  knows  not  the  contents  of
his  own  spirit.  That  every  sun  and  fixed  star,  every
world  or  heaven  of  worlds,  that  latitudes  and  distances,
objects,  forms,  time,  are  contained  in  man,  passeth  as
yet  my  highest  understanding.  Yet  there  is  a  symmetri-
cal dawning  of  this  truth  over  the  horizon  of  my  faith-
ful reason.  I  never  doubt  it,  whenever  inspired  by  the
discourse  of  those  chief  stars  of  immeasurable  self-pos-
session, whose  intellectual  powers  sweep  the  unmapped
empires  of  immensity."

11  Friend  Victor,"  I  interposed,  "  can  you  explain
how  it  was  that  your  great  thirst  for  journeying  was
satisfied  ?"

rt  That  thirst  is  not  quenched,"  he  replied  ;  "  another
attraction  prevails  with  me  now,  and  has  governed  my


84:  A VOICE FROM TH3 SPIRIT  LAND.

thoughts  for  several  years:  I  mean  the  study  of
Antiquity."

"Of  Antiquity!"  I  exclaimed.  "It  seems  to  me
that  you  are  the  last  mind  to  be  so  employed."

"  Let  me  relate  an  incident,"  he  replied.  "  I  was
admiring  the  geometrical  figures  made  upon  the  smooth
soil  by  the  shadows  of  a  certain  flower,  when  a  member
of  the  Plana  de  Alphos  (a  holy  brotherhood)  approached
me,  and  asked  :  '  Which  influence  exalts  you  most,  the
sounds  of  the  Porilleum  (a  musical  spring),  or  the
incense  of  the  Voralia  (a  beautiful  and  fragrant  rose),
that  blooms  on  the  slopes  of  the  Pantrello  V*  No
answer  came  to  his  simple  question.  He  had  many
times  witnessed  the  outbreaks  of  my  boyish  enthusiasm.
A  serene  beauty  and  a  brotherly  compassion  character-
ized his  face  and  speech,  for  he  had  let  me  into  the
depth  of  my  own  ignorance  regarding  the  most  familiar
objects  in  the  spirit-land.  My  mind  mounted  to  a
higher  level  of  emotion  and  labor,  and  tenderly  did  I
pray  in  silence  to  know  which  of  the  two  influences  was
most  exalting  to  my  feelings.  Although  I  had  much
intuitive  knowledge  of  the  spiritual  laws,  had  contem-
plated from  the  purple  mountains  of  the  Omniscient
Spirit,  had  walked  reverently  beneath  the  stooping  sky
of  many  worlds  in  space,  had  studied  as  I  thought  the
sculpture  of  Omnipotence  in  all  the  towers  of  the  stellar
universe,  yet  there  I  stood  confounded,  by  the  noble
Greek's  simple  question  ! — yea,  rebuked  a  thousand
times  every  moment  by  the  unfolded  voralia  at  my  feet,

*  This  name  is  given  to  a  group  of  graceful  hills  in  the  distance.


A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT- LAND.  85

and  equally  by  the  divine  melody  of  the  ever-flowing
porilleum.

"'Can  you  not  reply?'  asked  the  Greek,  who  was
even  more  gentle  and  compassionate  than  before.

u  I  replied  in  candor  that  I  could  not,  and  added:
'Allow  me  the  informing  advantages  of  your  Brother-
hood ;  attach  me  to  your  tender-spirited  wisdom  for  a
season,  and  I  will  promise  to  find  the  knowledge  of  God
as  he  originally  hid  it  in  the  least  of  things.'  The
good  man  extended  his  hand  as  a  token  of  agreement.
The  tidal  forces  of  his  love  beat  through  my  heart.
Like  the  tenth  billow  of  a  majestic-flowing  sea  was  the
uplifting  influence  of  his  wisdom  beneath  me.  In
silence  I  accompanied  him  to  the  Brotherhood  of  the
Plana  de  Alphos."

Here  I  asked  my  friend  Wilson  if  he  would  give  me
a  description  of  that  celestial  Association.

He  replied  :  "  You  remember  the  arcanum  which  I
before  disclosed,  that  those  spirits  which  emanate  from
the  earth,  or  from  any  other  planet  in  the  universe,  are
introduced  into  that  society  for  which  they  entertain
the  most  congenial  sympathies  and  affections?  This,
like  every  other  society  or  brotherhood,  is  thus  organ-
ized. It  is  situated  on  one  of  an  unnumbered  host  of
islands,  which  mark  and  diversify  the  geography  of  the
Spirit-Land.  The  name  of  this  beautiful  isle  is  Akro-
panamede,  meaning  i  All-Sided  Perfection.'  It  is  of
immense  proportions,  but  slopes  on  every  side,  wave-
like, to  the  water's  edge,  where  the  endless  rows  of
flowering  Gandulea  (or  fragrant  trees)  add  their  sym-
metrical glory  to  the  scene.  These  gandulea  grow  in
the glorious  gardens. They  cover  with  their  shade  a


86  A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.

musical  porilleum  here  and  there,  and  blend  their  per-
fume with  the  odor  of  the  immortal  voralia  blooming
in  the  courts  ;  or  with  the  incense  which  stealthily  floats
down  from  the  dreamy  pantrello  ;  where  millions  of
those  fairy  flowers  perpetually  breathe  their  holy
prayers.

"The  Isle  of  Akropanamede  is  shaped  something  like
an  earthly  pear.  It  is  more  beautiful  and  heavenly
than  any  terrestrial  landscape  can  ever  be.  A  brilliant
river  of  vivid  charms,  called  Appilobeda,  flowTs  like
God's  grace  and  love  around  the  head  of  the  isle.  The
smaller  river,  Atodyle,  glides  down  from  the  opposite
direction,  against  the  narrow  point  of  the  Isle  ;  whither
it  separates  into  two  equal  streams,  and  flows  thence
musically  into  the  embrace  of  the  ever-glorious  Appilo-
beda.  Birds  of  the  most  celestial  song,  and  with  plu-
mage of  the  simplest  beauty  conceivable,  till  the  fragrant
air. with  a  mournful  melody.  The  saddest  singing-bird
is  called  Quarreau,  a  native  of  the  planet  Mars,  but
brought  here  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  Isle,  who  fre-
quently visit  the  living  population  there,  even  as  spirits
now  begin  to  hold  commerce  with  the  earth's  inhabi-
tants. Ineffably  sweeter  to  me  is  the  varied  and  rich
notes,  yet  ever-sad  songs,  of  the  Baskatella  /  a  forest-
bird  of  the  ivy-mantled  trees  of  golden  Saturn.  These
feathery  songsters  live  and  multiply  here  as  they  did
upon  their  native  orbs.

"The  Brotherhood  of  Plana  de  Alphos  are  serenely
active  in  the  greatest  wonders  of  benevolence  and  art.
There  is  upon  this  beautiful  Isle  the  grandest  temple  of
treasured  antiquities.  The  Brothers  call  it  the  Agga-
mede  ;  meaning  £  the  Cabinet  of  Antiquity.' Nothing


A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  87

upon  earth  can  similitude  this  wondrous  combination  of
ancient  architecture.  There  is,  apparently,  something
of  every  absolute  form  of  edifice  in  its  mighty  propor-
tions. In  extent,  finish,  and  richness,  it  is  overwhelm-
ing; it  seems  that  ten  years  of  ceaseless  walking  would
not  pass  me  through  all  its  parts.  My  noble  guide  and
beloved  teacher,  whom  the  fraternity  name  Apozea,  in
answer  to  my  first  question  concerning  the  dimensions
of  the  Aggamede,  said  :  '  Compose  a  circle  of  twenty-one
sevens.  This  will  reveal  the  number  of  wings  to  the
temple  ;  also,  the  number  of  mansions  contained  in  each
wing.  Multiply  each  seven  by  the  whole  number,  and
the  total  of  the  added  amounts  reveals  the  number  of
both  the  inter-linking  avenues,  and  the  surmounting
domes.  Place  this  number  in  the  centre  of  the  circle  of
sevens,  multiply  the  central  figures  by  each  seven  com-
posing the  band,  and  the  total  amount  shows  the  number
of  square  furlongs  of  spirit-land  covered  by  the  Agga-
mede. Multiply  the  last  amount  by  the  central  figures,
and  the  product  will  reveal  the  number  of  square
English  miles  of  the  Isle  of  Akropanamede.  Difide
this  number  by  seven,  and  the  amount  obtained  is  the
number  of  Brothers  who  compose  the  Fraternity  of
Plana  de  Alphos.'  Seeing  many  beautiful  women —
younger  and  older — walking  in  the  temple  and  gardens,
I  asked  my  Apozea  for  information  regarding  their  con-
nection with  the  Brotherhood.  He  gently  instructed
me  at  some  length  concerning  the  balance  and  equal
happiness  of  the  sexes  in  the  benevolent  arts  and  labors
of  the  temple.  Many  of  the  women,  and  as  many
men,  were  there  under  the  Divine  vasciel  (or  influence)


88  A VOICE FROM'  THE SPIRIT-LAND.

of  the  fraternity.  Such  are  called  OjpeatJialeta,  meaning
the  patients  and  students  within  the  temple.

"  My  Apozea's  lifted  intellect  seemed  to  shed  sunlight,
mingled  with  mystery,  upon  everything  he  alluded  to
or  touched.  Field,  form,  flower,  bird,  spring,  tree,
temple,  even  my  fellow-beings,  were  both  brilliant  with
uses  and  blurred  with  a  sad-like  shadow  of  undefinable
mystery.  He  comprehended  my  condition,  as  I  stood
without  the  wing  of  the  temple,  and  said  cheeringly  :
'  Advance,  my  baskatella  (bird),  for  thou  art  our
beloved  Oj)eathalos  (student),  and  the  time  future  is
thine  to  become  whatso  thou  wilt ;  for  thou  art  even
now  fit  to  stir  within  others  the  power  of  thought,  and
to  meditate  with  the  happy  Paralorella*  The  distant
pantrello  will  invite  and  teach  thee  to  comprehend  thy
God,  hid  within  the  fragrant  voralia  and  the  musical
pori  Ileum.

u  '  Who  are  these  patients  V  I  asked.  And  my  Apozea
answered  :  '  Seek  to  know  them,  and  thou  shalt  under-
stand ;  feel  to  do  them  divine  service,  and  they  will  tell
thee  all  their  secrets.  The  day  is  long,  and  the  field  is
vast  down  to  the  waves  of  the  Appilobeda.  Within
the  temple  is  the  fountain  of  Andomont  /  beneath  the
Isle  is  the  source  of  the  sweet-flowing  Atodyle ;  within
thee  is  the  all-wise,  ever-loving  Arabula,  (meaning  a
divine  guest);  therefore,  my  baskatella,  thou  art  with
us  at  home,  and  thy  feet  will  press  the  path  that  is
pleasant;  see  to  it,  I  tell  thee,  that  thou  becomest
worthy  to  know  all  things  heavenly  and  eternal.'

"  So  saying, he  turned  from  me,  and disappeared

*  The  name  given  to  half-cured  patients.


A VOICE FJROM THE SPI1UT-LAXD.  89

beneath  the  flowering  gandulea,  the  beauty  and  fra-
grance of  whose  foliage  surpass  ail  tints  and  odors  upon
earth.

"My  Apozea  is  a  teacher  of  exceeding  grace  and
power.  There  is  an  immaculate  clearness  in  his  beauti-
ful eye;  his  loveful  voice  is  both  deep  and  round  with
power;  impressive  eloquence  and  modesty  characterize
his  face  and  speech  ;  his  form  is  rounded  and  is  as  per-
fect as  imagination  can  picture  harmony  of  proportion  ;
and  when  he  walks,  the  celestial  colors  sprinkle  his
wavy  hair  with  golden  light,  while  his  soft  beard  glit-
ters  with  the  highest  ray  of  beauty.  Demetrius,  Tasso,
Camoens,  Theodorus,  could  not  together  form  a  person
more  physically  beautiful.  O  my  brother,  the  Greek  is
great  and  beautiful  !  His  disposition  is  gentle  as  a
mother's  love,  yet  there  is  the  flow  and  fire  of  thought
in  his  discourse;  an  effectiveness  of  imagery  and  lofti-
ness of  style  which  thrills  every  opeathelos  who  attaches
himself  to  the  class.  The  separate  stages  of  individual
experience,  with  their  causes  and  significance,  are  the
textual  pivots  of  his  powerful  discourses.  He  is  a  met-
aphysician, yet  feels  with  the  opeathaleta  who  hear
him.  Hundreds  love  him,  although  they  know  not  the
import  of  his  speeches.  The  multitude  catch  his  geni-
ality and  power,  but  not  his  thought.

"  The  wondrous  Aggamede  now  attracted  me.  I
walked  very  near  to  the  formation,  put  my  hand  npon
its  smooth  sides,  and  began  like  an  architect  to  examine
the  material  and  construction.  The  building  substance
used  is  called  Aureola,  but  where  obtained  and  how
formed  into  a  transparent  wTall  eighty  times  finer  than
the finest earthly glass,  I as y^et know not. It is


90  A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.

wondrously  strong,  and  can  photograph  itself  upon  any
suitable  substance  in  three  hundred  and  twenty-four  of
your  seconds."  Here  friend  Wilson  unrolled  a  light,
gauzy  substance,  and  showed  me  a  curious  painting  of
the  temple,  taken  from  where  he  stood  when  first  he
saw  it.  In  grandeur,  magnitude,  and  newness  of  struc-
ture, it  exceeds  everything  I  ever  imagined.  The  like-
ness of  the  temple  was  limited  almost  entirely  to  a
single  section  or  wing.  Yet  from  the  uniformity  of  the
sections,  as  indicated  by  his  verbal  descriptions  of  the
palace,  I  could  gather  from  this  picture  an  image  of  the
entire  structure.  The  domes  appeared  like  a  sea  of  ter-
raced mountains  of  something  finer  than,  but  as  real  as,
glass  ;  and  like  the  Alps,  they  extended  away  toward
the  horizon,  until,  to  my  eyes,  the  temple  was  blended
with  and  lost  in  the  air.  In  my  haste  to  take  the  gauzy
picture  in  my  own  hand,  in  order  to  examine  it  more
critically,  he  said :  "  Not  yet,  brother  !"  (and  instantly
withdrew  it).  But  of  the  temple  he  continued:  "  It
cannot  be  compared,  either  in  material  or  construction,
to  any  earthly  edifice.  The  foundations  and  uprising
walls  appear  to  grow  like  trees  from  the  Spirit-Land.
Its  many  mountainous  domes  shed  a  mellow  light  upon
the  distant  hills  and  countless  streams.  The  palace  of
the  Living  God,  to  my  earthly  fancy,  could  not  be  more
perfect  and  beautiful.  It  is  surrounded  by  a  reflecting
atmosphere,  with  a  power  superior  to  that  of  the  sun.

"  Afar  from  the  kingdom  of  earth  I  stood,  my  brother  ;
and  the  palace-doors,  like  flowers  in  bloom,  welcomed
me.  My  joy  was  full  of  light  like  sunbeams,  yet
entered  I  there a  sorrowful  guest. '  The  Zona*  has

*  This  name  is  given  to  a  visitor.


A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  91

come V  '  The  Zona  is  here !'  was  shouted  and  echoed
through  the  vast  mansion.  Words  grew  unfrequent
and  low  in  every  direction.  The  wing  of  the  temple  in
which  I  stood  was  immense,  and  subdivided  into  tented
apartments  like  a  fair-ground  or  festival,  and  in  each
alcove  and  grotto,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  there  was  some-
thing artificial.  Yet  a  mystic  shade,  like  the  shadow  of
autumn  upon  the  brilliant  bloom  of  summer,  covered
every  person  and  place.  The  mansion  was  filled  with
people  of  every  country  on  earth,  young  and  old,  who
seemed  to  be  examining  and  adoring  the  beautiful  and
strange  articles  on  exhibition.  In  silence  I  walked
among  the  thronging  visitors.  Many  faces  smiled
sweetly  as  I  approached,  yet  a  mute  wail  of  grief
seemed  to  succeed.  Many  looked  happy  for  a  moment,
but  a  shadow  of  unrest  swept  over  their  faces.

"  My  astonishment  and  perplexity  increased  every
instant.  The  plaintive  song  of  the  baskatella  floated
through  the  temple,  and  the  flowers,  like  myrtles  in
bloom,  shed  a  fragrance  of  sorrow  upon  all.  '  What
can  this  mean  V  I  exclaimed.  '  Is  this  in  the  Spirit-
Land  V  As  I  spoke,  a  hand  touched  me  upon  the
shoulder  ;  I  turned,  and  beheld  my  Apozea,  the  teacher,
who  said  :  '  These  are  opeathaleta  ;  can  you  not  do  them
much  good  V  I  besought  the  Greek  to  instruct  me  in
the  causes  of  their  condition.  He  answered :  4  Speak
to  that  young  man  [pointing  to  a  person  near  us],  and
get  from  him  his  story.'  Obeying  the  suggestion,  I
asked  the  youth  to  confide  to  me  his  secret  grief.  '  That
I  will  do,  my  darling,'  he  tenderly  replied,  '  if  you
will  promise  to  aid  me  to  enjoy  this  beautiful  world.'


92  A  VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT- LAND.

Crossing  my  hands  upon  his  bosom,  I  promised  to  do  all
in  my  power. for  his  happiness.

"  '  Thanks,  my  zona  baskatella !'  lie  enthusiastically
exclaimed,  ■  you  will  make  me  free  as  the  flowing  Ap-
pilobeda,  and  my  happiness  will  be  like  that  of  the
arabula  !'  He  grasped  my  hand  lovingly,  and  said  :
'  Follow  me  to  my  Toleha*  The  good  Atolie  made  it
to  instruct  me  for  ever.'

"  Without  hesitation  I  went  with  him  through  many
avenues  of  the  wing,  and  halted  before  a  great  circle  of
happy  spirits,  who  were,  like  Chinese,  busily  construct-
ing toys,  as  I  thought.  The  young  man  called  upon
'  Atolie,'  and  "a  benevolent  woman  made  her  appear-
ance.  '  This  is  my  Apozea  !'  said  the  youth,  pointing
to  me  as  his  teacher,  and  added  :  '  Allow  him  to  behold
the  Tolelca  /'

"The  fond-bosomed  woman  held  up  what  resembled
a  common  leather  purse,  filled  with  gold  and  diamonds
and  other  jewelry.  I  wanted  the  good  Atolie  to  in-
struct me  as  to  its  significance.  She  waved  her  hand
negatively,  but  the  youth  said  :  '  I  will  show  you  all.'

"  Unqnestioningly  I  followed  him  beyond  the  temple,
over  the  flowing  Atodyle,  away  from  the  Isle,  and
presently  I  observed  that  he  was  guiding  me  earthward.
The  beautiful  sphere  was  afar,  and  as  we  approached
the  earth,  he  said  :  *  I  am  an  Italian  boy  of  much  wick-
edness, and  I  must  remain  on  the  Isle  of  Akropana-
mede,  must  live  and  labor  for  the  fraternity  of  Plana
de  Alphos,  must  visit  the  good  Atolie  once  every  day,
and  look  at  that  purse  of  gold  and  diamonds,  until  1

*  The  name  given  to  a  thing  of  memory.


A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  93

can  overcome  the  effect  of  the  evil  I  did  before  the  day
of  my  death.'  Upon  inquiring  of  his  earthly  home,  he
replied  :  '  Here  we  are  just  over  the  river  Eria,  in  Italy,
where  my  earthly  body  was  lost  in  the  effort  to  escape
the  officers  of  justice.'  Immediately  he  drew  my  atten-
tion to  a  small  Italian  house,  in  a  place  called  Venes-
trella,  wherein  I  beheld  a  sorrowful  and  impoverished
woman,  looking  at  the  likeness  of  her  lost  boy.  'That
is  my  mother,'  said  the  youth,  sadly  :  '  she  is  very  poor
and  wretched,  for  the  king  took  all  her  property  to
redress  the  wrong  I  did  an  officer's  lady,  whose  money
and  jewelry  I  one  night  stole  from  her  casket.'

tt  Remembering  the  purse  I  saw  in  the  spirit-land,  in
the  hand  of  the  good  Atolie,  on  the  Isle  of  Akropana-
mede,  I  suggested  the  return  of  the  property  by  drop-
ping it  upon  his  mother's  lap.  The  Italian  youth  smiled
with  pallor,  and  replied  :  '  Ah  !  my  darling  Apozea,
that  leather  purse  in  the  spirit-land  is  nothing  to  me
but  an  artificial  image,  bearing  admonition  and  educa-
tion. It  is  substantial  and  significant  there  ;  but  here,
on  earth,  it  is  the  same  as  an  imitation,  without  weight
and  without  value.'

*  As  he  spoke  thus,  a  new  light  dawned  upon  my  yet
more  teachable  and  reflective  reason.  The  Aggamede,
then,  is  a  Temple  of  Antiquities,  a  palace  where  past
deeds  or  tilings  are  made  to  be  present,  until  the  right
comes  right  upon  earth,  and  until  justice  is  fulfilled  by
the  evil-doer.  'Yes!'  interposed  the  youth,  'such  is
the  temple.  It  is  memory's  crystal  palace.  Every  arti-
ficial toleka  is  an  image  of  some  thing,  or  of  some  par-
ticular deed,  accomplished  or  sought  by  the  individual
before  death.'


94  A  VOICE FROM THE  SPIRIT-LAND.

"  While  he  was  yet  speaking,  I  beheld  the  officer  on
the  earth  whose  lady  the  boy  had  robbed,  and  by  whose
instigation  the  mother  was  reduced  to  wretchedness  and
beggary.  '  What  would  give  you  perfect  happiness  V
I  asked  the  youth.  '  To  behold  my  mother's  property
restored,  and  the  officer's  lady  forgetful  of  my  theft,'  he
quickly  responded."

Brother  Wilson  in  conversation  assured  me  that  this
particular  journey  to  earth  happened  nearly  seven  years
ago ;  and  that,  although  several  spirits  had  attempted
to  aid  the  mother,  and  to  remove  the  trouble  from  her
heart,  yet  the  Italian  youth  is  still  a  patient  on  the  Isle
of  Akropanamede  ;  and  every  day  he  is  growing  wiser
and  more  beautiful,  but  the  purse  will  hang  in  the  tem-
ple until  his  mother  leaves  the  earth  for  ever.  The
youth  will  not  leave  the  Isle.  Like  the  others  there,
his  spirit  is  taking  lessons  of  the  least  plants  of  truth
that  grow  in  the  infinite  summer  of  God,  and  preparing
to  reflect  rays  of  light  into  dark  minds  in  either  sphere.

"  Returning  to  the  Aggamede,"  continued  friend
Wilson,  "with  the  youth,  I  was  wiser  and  more  help-
ful. One  antiquity  that  next  fixed  my  attention  was  a
singular  mechanism.  A  Hollander  seemed  rapturously
fond  of  it,  and  besought  to  explain  to  me  his  '  perpetual
motion.'  His  mind  was  dead,  as  it  were,  to  every  great
truth.  Nothing  else  impressed  him  as  useful  for  his
remaining  fellow-men.  One  day  I  accompanied  him
earthward,  and  we  looked  down  upon  his  brother  living
at  Hoevelaken,  in  the  Netherlands,  upon  another  at
Kmmpen,  and,  lastly,  upon  the  old  homestead,  and  into
the  very  tool-basket  under  the  hovel,  where  the  enthu-
siast had  spent  his  days  and  dollars,  at  JVider  Kersclicn,


A  VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  95

making  his  '  perpetual  motion.'  He  urged  upon  me
the  feelings  of  his  judgment  with  respect  to  the  utility
of  his  invention  to  mankind.  Many  times  in  the  tem-
ple he  would  rejoice  over  the  news  that  a  '  medium '  for
machine-building  had  been  found  somewhere  on  earth.
He  said  that  he  had  influenced  many  such,  but  as  yet  to
no  purpose.  My  Apozea,  the  learned  and  beautiful  Greek,
calls  him  an  opeathelos,  or  patient  within  the  temple.

"  On  "other  journeys  to  earth  in  company  with  these
spirits,  I  have  visited  and  examined  items  of  individual
interest  in  Prussia,  at  Hohenstein,  Vausburg,  Frische
Nehrung ;  in  the  land  of  Germany,  the  places  called
Aichstadt,  Bheda,  Kohlberg,  and  Bingen ;  in  the  em-
pire of  Austria,  the  places  known  as  Aclberg,  Folded,
Leypa,  and  Brzezany  /  in  the  country  of  Scotland,  the
places  named  Freswick,  Kintyre,  Lanark,  and  Lammer-
muir ;  in  England,  the  places  called  London,  Llan-
gower,  and  Frodsham ;  in  the  country  of  Ireland,  the
places  known  as  Ganagh,  Dublin,  Eildare,  and  Eva-
nagh  /  in  France,  we  hav^  visited  to  effect  the  places
called  Feurs,  Paris,  Bellevue,  and  JSTapoule  /  in  Russia,
the  places  styled  Evanovsk,  Navolok,  and  lanisia  /  in  the
United  States,  the  places  named  Peru,  Boston,  Waukee-
gan,  Norwich,  Hartford,  Washington,  New  Orleans,  and
Portland.  Understand,  my  brother,  that  certain  persons
in  these  places  have  been  effectually  visited  by  the  spirits
of  the  Isle  of  Akropanamede.  Good  thus  accomplished
has  made  many  Paralorella,  or  half-cured  patients,  who
in  due  time  will  leave  their  love  for  '  by-gones,?  and
will  then  press  forward  to  the  things  which  grow  about
them  in  divine  beauty. The  devotees of  antiquities,


96  A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.

either  of  evil  or  good  import,  are  the  most  unteaehable
spirits  in  this  existence.

"  Students  of  the  past,  those  who  love  images,  and
cling  to  the  pictures  of  what  has  concerned  them  indi-
vidually anterior  to  their  departure  from  earth,  are  clas-
sified here  as  the  Miogarella.  Many  of  them  are  great
in  learning.  The  artists  who  construct  the  keepsakes,
the  tolekas,  are  of  both  sexes,  and  of  spirits  from  nearly
all  races,  and  are  named  Atoli.  Zangorilla  is  the  term
used  to  signify  '  lovers  of  the  Isle.'  Of  this  beautiful
class  of  spirits  there  is  an  innumerable  host.  The  cured
become  at  first  most  devout  and  grateful  inhabitants.
Then  they  become  gleeful,  and  the  merriest  singers  and
dancers  that  can  be  imagined.  And  such  would  not
leave  the  Isle  permanently  if  they  could  (as  they  can)
find  more  attractions  in  other  parts  of  the  Spirit-Home.
The  merry  dancers  are  called  Opiati,  and  the  singers,
because  of  the  beauty  and  sweetness  of  their  songs,  are
named  Ibleammah.  If  spirits  are  scholarly  and  learned,
with  a  recollection  of  earthly  honors  and  reputation  for
abilities  which  they  have  misused,  and  refuse  to  learn  of
the  wisdom  of  the  Apozea,  and  feel  high-minded,  they
are  called  La  Prida.  But  when  such  conceive  a  love
for  God  as  he  is  hid  in  the  bird  and  the  lilies  of  the
fields,  they  are  then  classified  as  the  Uldia,  or  the  '  no
longer  impenitent.'  Goethe  and  Stilling  are  here,  and
each  claimed  the  origination  of  the  beautiful  image
1  Lady  Lily  Siona.5  My  Apozea  took  these  good  and
wise  scholars  to  the  musical  porilleum.  He  next  invited
them  to  visit  the  voralia  as  they  bloomed  beneath  the
gandulea.  Afterward  they  journeyed  over  the  Appilo-
beda, and meditated  among the fragrant  pantrello.


A VOICE FEOM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  97

And  when  they  returned  to  the  temple,  they  believed
that  the  term  'Lily  Siona '  was  of  no  value  in  the
philosophy  of  eternity.

"About  two  years  ago,  as  I  was  walking  in  another
wing  of  this  wondrous  Palace  of  Antiquities,  my  Apo-
aea  illustrated  a  lesson  by  some  (artificial)  stone  ham-
mers and  flint  knives,  which  lie  said  had  been  long
cherished  as  sacred  relics  by  the  Shoshonecs,  a  tribe
of  earthly  Indians.  The  imitations  were  fading  away
like  mountain  mist  in  the  morning,  and  I  inquired  if
such  would  be  the  fate  of  everything  within  the  temple.
He  answered:  'The  useful  is  eternal.  But  things  are
temporary.5  To  my  further  inquiries,  he  said :  '  Mem-
ory is  frequently  loaded  wTith  love  for  many  things
which  do  not  exalt  the  spirit.  Yet  those  things  or
images  remain  until  the  spirit  hath  outgrown  the  temple
'of  the  Antiquities.  When  morning  dawns,  the  night
and  its  shadows  depart ;  so  the  evil  is  no  longer  evil  to
the  good.'  We  stood  near  the  central  fountain  of  An-
dromont.  Many-tinted  flowers  grew  lovingly  on  the
rounded  margin.  I  touched  one,  and  lo!  it  shrivelled
and  seemed  to  die  in  a  moment !  '  Behold,  my  baska-
tella!'  said  my  teacher,  affectionately;  'your  touch  is
poison  to  the  mimosa  sensitiva  of  the  spirit-land.  The
damp  shade  of  the  fountain  is  life  to  the  plant  compared
with  thy  deadly  touch.  On  earth  the  asphodels  grow
upon  graves  to  feed  the  manes  of  the  departed.  Here
the  rose  blooms  to  instruct  and  exalt  the  living.  The
Arabula  [divine  Guest  or  Godj  is  within  thee.  Live
true  to  that,  every  moment  of  thy  progress,  and  no  flower
-brink  from  thy  approach.'
-  With  much  sadness,  I  inquired  to  know  a


98  A VOICE FROM THE SPISIT-LAND.

in  me  that  had  poisoned  the  mimosa,  and  he  replied :
'You  are  yet  impatient  to  mount  higher  than  you
can  see,  and  hasty  to  hold  more  wisdom  than  your  spirit
can  comprehend.  This  aspiration  is  poisoned  with
ambition,  and  this  ambition  is  the  tempter  which
prompts  thee  to  appear  to  be  more  than  you  are,  and  to
seem  to  lenow  what  yon  do  not.  Rid  thee  of  all  this,  else
the  flowers  of  Akropanamede  will  shrink  from  thy  touch,
and  the  arabula  will  steal  the  sunshine  from  thy  heart.'
"  All  this  happened  some  two  years  since ;  and,  at
lengthened  intervals,  my  apozea  has  repeated  his  lesson.
During  all  this  time,  I  have  labored  with  the  opeatha-
leta  of  the  Isle.  Among  them  are  some  of  the  mighty-
minded  of  the  earth ;  nobles  in  government ;  preachers
in  religion;  authors  of  self-aggrandizing  books;  adhe-
rents to  antiquated  forms  of  thoughts;  but  the  merry
dancers  and  the  sweet  singers  are  multiplying,  and  sun-
beams from  the  eternal  sun  shine  through  many  hearts.
At  first,  it  seemed  that  the  universe  had  been  narrowed
down  to  an  Isle  of  sad  and  gloomy  experience.  Birds,
trees,  rivers,  hills,  sky,  my  fellow-beings,  seemed  wretched
and  nnpoetie.  The  Aggamede,  with  its  multitudinous
thickets  of  resplendent  beauties,  appeared  unspiritual.
Now,  my  brother,  I  come  to  tell  that  all  is  changed
The  Isle  of  Akropanamede  is  heaven.  Every  object  is
consecrated  to  good.  Birds  no  longer  sing  sadly  on  the
gandulea ;  trees  no  more  shed  a  melancholy  light  upon
the  flowing  appilobeda ;  the  temple  is  no  longer  a
palace  of  sorrow  ;  for  hope  and  faith  and  truth  and
wisdom  shine  out  from  every  door  and  dome.  All  who
dwell  here  are  divine  lovers,  friends,  sisters,  brothers:
'Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will


A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  99

dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God
himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.'  Here,
the  mother's  calm  bosom  veils  the  young  child ;  the
flying  hours  bring  progress  to  its  mind ;  and  the  warm
wisdom  of  the  apozea  improves  the  restless  spirit.  Igno-
rance and  discord  are  no  more  to  those  who  crave  for
and  partake  of  the  granted  blessings.  God  is  hid  in
the  flower  and  in  the  fountain ;  and  I  now  know,  my
brother,  which  exalts  my  feelings  most — H7ie  voralia  or
the  porilleum?  The  fountain  is  my  greatest  teacher.
God  is  in  it,  and  it  ever  floweth,  giving  waters  of  life
which  all  may  drink  if  they  have  sufficient  thirst  and
wisdom."

Friend  Wilson  appeared  beautifully  luminous,  like
an  angel  of  the  highest  degree,  when  he  spoke  these
last  words.  He  wTas  evidently  very  happy,  and,  as  he
turned  to  depart,  I  asked  :  "  Can  you  give  me  some
information  respecting  the  Spiritual  Congress  which  I
beheld  at  High-Rock  Tower?"

"  You  can  mark  me  in  the  group  of  i  spiritual  wis-
dom,' "  he  replied,  with  a  beautiful  smile ;  "  for  I  am
now  counted  in  the  class  of  Solon,  the  Athenian,  who,
with  hosts,  is  a  lover  of  the  Isle,  a  zangorilla.  The  del-
egations have  discharged  sublime  duties  since  the  Ses-
sions you  witnessed.  They  have  exerted  influence  upon
almost  every  kingdom.  Russia  is  opening  like  a  blighted
empire,  revived  by  the  principles  of  justice.  The  stars
of  the  night  and  the  morning  of  her  people  are  brighter
now.  Her  slaves  are  less  in  bondage.  But  still  greater
changes  are  breaking  over  the  hills  of  her  destiny.
Austria  is  growing  less  cold  at  her  heart ;  her  weary
sons  will  weep  less  in  her  fields  ;  and  the  shadow  of  pit-


100  A VOICE FROM THE SPIBIT-LAKB.

iless  pride  will  lift  from  the  tlirone  of  tlie  empire.  Japan
pillows  her  head  no  longer  on  the  bosom  of  her  pale
kingdom.  She  has  felt  our  forewarning.  Ignorance
was  her  terrible  foe,  and  she  bore  the  cross  without  a
crown.  Her  gates  are  open  to  the  stranger.  Angels
have  crowned  the  emperor,  and  the  star  of  a  better
career  is  twinkling  in  her  sky.  And  the  other  nations
and  powers,  which  have  not  yielded  to  justice,  we  are
yet  laboring  to  affect."

"  Can  you  tell  me  whether  the  twelve  teachers  men-
tioned by  Galen  have  been  found  ?"  (I  asked  this  ques-
tion because  it  has  many  times  been  put  to  me,  and
I  have  wondered  much  upon  that  point.)  And  he
replied  :  "  Part  of  that  number  are  this  day  at  work  in
the  vineyard  of  spiritual  truth  and  progress."

"May  I  know  who  they  are?"  I  inquired.  And  he
responded :

"  Wisdom  denies  even  that  they  themselves  should
know  the  cause  and  extent  of  their  individual  efforts.
Such  vain  knowledge  possessed  by  any  one  of  them
would  be  a  serious  disqualification.  The  spiritual
mimosa  sensitiva  would  shrink  from  them,  and  the  pure
truth  would  pale  and  depart  before  them,  if  they  pri-
vately knew  wdiat  and  who  they  are."  He  now  appeared
once  more  disposed  to  bid  me  an  adieu,  and  said :
"Arabula,  my  brother!"  I  asked  whether  he  had  not
something  more  for  me  or  the  world,  and  his  valedictory
words,  as  he  was  passing  outward,  were:  "Tell  man-
kind, my  brother,  that  the  Universe  is  a  volume  of  holy
writing,  the  title-page  whereof  not  even  the  highest
seraph  has  altogether  read. Tell  them  that  the  Centre


A VOICE FROM THE SPIRIT-LAND.  101

I

of  all  formation  is  a  holy-hearted  Porilleum,  a  Fountain
of  eternal  love  and  Wisdom  ;  that  it  floweth  impartially
throughout  the  encircling  existences  ;  and  that  we  drink
fropi  it  as  from  an  ocean  of  pure  water."
