Researches, Chemical and Philosophical (Humphry Davy, 1800)
==========================================================
Davy's 1800 researches on nitrous oxide; the young chemist's laughing-gas experiments. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/researcheschemic00davy).

/  ij


Boston

Medical  Library

8  The  Fenway


Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A. Countway
Library  of  Medicine  --Boston


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2011  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


http://www.archive.org/details/researcheschemicOOdavy


■■^r^-iT


^


^J!^^^^


RESEARCHES,
CHEMICAL  AND  PHILOSOPHICAL ;


CHIEFLY  COXCERSING


NITROUS  OXIDE,


OR


DEPHLOGISTICATED    NITROUS    AIR,


AND    1X3


RESPIRATION.


By  HUMPHRY  DAVT,

SUPERJNTEXDEXT    OF    THE    MEDICAL    PNEUMATIC
IXSTITUnON.


LONDON:

FUITTED  FOR  J.  JCfHKSOX,   ST.  PAUL's  CHUECH-YARP.

»Y  BIGGS  AND  COTTLE,    BRISTOU

i9oa.


y<r/z


xi.


CONTENTS,


Introduction,

RESEARCH  I.

I^lo  the  analyfis  of  x\t,tric  Acid  and  Nitrous  Gas,
and  the  produdiion  o/-Nitkous  Oxide.
DIVISION  I.
ExPERmENTs  and  Observations    on    the  compofuion
of    Nitric     Acid,     and  on  its   combinations  nvith
Avater  dfW  Nitrous  Gas.

1.  Preliminaries  -  _  _

2.  Produdion  of  aeriform  Nitrous  Acid      -  \  \

3.  Specific  gravity  of  Gafes             "             -  -  6

4.  Experiment  on  the  formation  of  Nitrous  Acid  "^  1 1

5.  Conclufions         -  ^  _

6.  Experiments  on  the  combinatfon  of  >fitrous  Gas  with  ^^

Nitric  Acid  .  _

7.  Additional  Experiments  -  .  "         ^^

8.  Conclufions  .  _


£>:  Mr  Thomson's  The6ty  of  the  difference  between  ^^
JNitnc  and  Nitrous  Acid

10.  Compofition  of  the  different  Nitrous  Acids      -        sg

1 1 .  Combination  of  Nitric  Acid  with  Water  .        «
J2.  Of  Nitrous  Vapor        -            .  ^^

'3.  Comparifonoftherefults^withthofe  of  Cavendiih  ^^

and  Lavoifier

4^


(  iV.   )

DIVISION    XL

Experiments  and  Observations  on  the  compofition
of  Ammoniac  and  on  its  combinations  with  Water
and  Nitric  Acid.

1 .  Analyfis  of  Ammoniac  -  -  _  5^

2.  Specific  gravity  of  Ammoniac  -  -  62

3.  Of  the  quantities  of  true  Ammoniac  in  Ammoniacal

Solutions  -  -  -  -  65

4-.  Compofition  of  Nitrate  of  Ammoniac  -  7^

5.  Decompofitionof  Carbonate  of  Ammoniac,  by  Nitrous

Acid  _  -         _  -  -  75

5.  Decompofition  of  Sulphate  of  Ammoniac  by  Nitre       77

6.  Non-exiflence  of  Ammoniacal  Nitrites  -  79

7.  Sources  of  error  in  Analyfis  -  -  8Q
8-  Lofs   in  Solutions  of  Nitrate  of  Ammoniac   daring-
evaporation              -             -             -             -             83

DIVISION    III.

Decomposition  of  Nitrate  of  Ammoniac — Prepara-
ration  of  respirable  Nitrous  Oxide,

1.  Of  the  heat  required  for  the  decompofition  of  Nitrate

of  Ammoniac         -  -  -  -  84

2.  Decompofition  of  Nitrate  of  Ammoniac — Produdion

of  refpirable  Niti'ous  Oxide- — its  properties     -         86

3.  Of  the  Gas  remaining  after  the  abforption  of  Nitrous

Oxide  by  Water  -  -  -         -  89

4.  Specific  Gravity  of  Nitrous  Oxide  -         -  94

5.  Analyfis  of  Nitrous  Oxide        .      -  -         -  95

6.  Minute  examination  of  the  decompofition  of  Nitrate

of  Ammoniac  -  -  -  -         101

7.  Of  the  heat  produced  during  the  decompofition  of

Nitrate  of  Ainmoniac  -  -  -        lOS


(      V.      )

58.  Dccompofition  of  Nitrate  of  Ammonfac  at  high  tem-
peratures -  -  -  .  log
^.  Speculations   on    the  deccvnpolitions   of  Nitrate  of

Ammoniac  -  -  -  ~  113

JO.  Of  the  preparation  of  Nitrous  Oxide  for  experiments

on  refpiration       -  »-  -  -  II7

DIVISION    IV.

Experiments  and  Observations  on   th,e  conopolition  of
Nitrous  Gas^  and  on  its  abforption  by  different  bodies.

1.  PreHminaries  -  _  _  -  122

2.  Analylis  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  Charcoal  -  126

3.  Analylis  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  Pyrophorus  -  132

4.  Additional  obfervatioiis  on  the  compolitipn  of  Nitrous

Gas         -  -  -  -  -  134

5.  Abforption  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  Water  -  14,0
jd.  Abforption  of  Nitrotis  Gas  by  Water  of  different  kinds  14/

7.  Abforption  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  iflution  of  pale  gfeen

Sulphate  of  Iron  -  _  _  152

8.  Abforption  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  folution  of  green  mti-

riate  of  Iron  -  -  -  -  179

9.  By  Solution  of  Nitrate  of  Iron  -  -  1.87

10.  By  other  metallic  .Solutions

1 1  Action  of  fulphurated  Hydrogene  on  folution  of  green

fulphate  of  iron  impregnated  with  Nitrous  Gas.       19I
12.  Additional  Obfervations  -  -  -       193

DIVISION    V.

JlxrERiMENTs  and  Observations  on  the  produ6tion  of
Nitrous  Oxide  from  Nitrous  Gas  and  Nitric
Acid  in  different  modes.

1.  Preliminaries  -  -  -  -  1^7

2.  Converlion  of  Nitrous  Gas  into  Nitrous   Oxide   by

alkaline  fulphitee  -  ,  ^  *  I99


<    vi.    )

3.  By  Muriate  of  Tin  -  -  -  -  202

4.  By  Sulphurated  Hydrogene  -  -  .  203

5.  Decompolition  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  Nafc^it   Hydro-

gene  -  -  -  -  -      -  206

6.  Mifcellaneous  Obfervations     -  -  -      -  209

7.  Recapitulation  -  -  -  --211

8.  Piodu^tion  of  Nitrous  Oxide  from  Metallic  Solutions  213
g.  Additional  Obfervations  relating  to  the  produtlion  of

Nitrous  Oxide  -  -  -  ^       2K)

K)  Decompofition  of  Aqua  regia  by  platina,  and  evolu-
tion of  a  gas  analogous  to  oxygenated  muriatic  acid,
and  nitrogene  .  _  _  _       223

11.  Adion  of  the  eledric  fpark  on  a  mixture  of  Nitro-

gerpe  and  Nitrous  gas  .  .  _       22(j^

12.  General  remarks  on  the  production  of  Nitrous  Oxide  23 1

RESEARCH  II.

Into  the  comhlnations  o/'NiTROUS  Oxide,  and  its  deci,ni-
^ojition.

DIVISION    I.

Experiments  and  Observations  on  tfie  combinations
of  Nitrous  Oxide.

1.  Combination  of  Water  witli  Nitrous  Oxide       -       235

2.     of  Nitrous  Oxide  M^ith  fluid  inflamma-
ble bodies.  _  _  .  »  240

3.  A6tion  of  fluid  Acids  on  Nitrous  Oxide         -  244

4.  '  of  Saline  Solutions  -  -  245

5.     of  Gales  -  -  .  .  248

6.  A6tion  of  aeriform  Nitrous  Oxide  on  the  alkalies —
Hiftory  of  the  difcovery  of  the  combinations  of
Nitrous  Oxide,  with  the  alkalies  -  254

7.  Combination  of  Nitrous  Oxide  with  Potafh       -        262


(   vii.   )

3.  Combination  of  Nitrous  Oxide  with  Soda         -        268

9.  ■    — ■■ with  Ammoniac        269

10.  Probability  of  forming  compounds  of  Nitrous  Oxide

and  the  alkaline  earths  -  -  273

11  Additional  Obfervations  -  -  274

12  The  properties  of  Nitrous  oxide  refemblethofeof  Acids27<5

DIVISION  II.

Pecompolition    of  Nitrous   Oxide    by   combuftible
Bodies.  I

1  Preliminaries  -  -  -  -  278

2  Converlion  of  Nitrous  Oxide  into  Nitrous  Acid  and

a  gas  analogous  to  Atmofpheric  Air  by  ignition      279

3  Decompoiition  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by  Hydrogene  286

4  '  "    by  Phofphorus  293

5     •  by  Phofphorated  Hydrogene  300

6  by  Sulphur  -  303

7  by  Sulphurated  Hydrogene  8O6

8 by  Charcoal  -  311

9  by  Hydrocarbon  ate        -  313

10  Combuftion  of  Iron  in  Nitrous  Oxide  -  3l6

11 of  Pyrophorus  -  -  318

12       , —     of  the  Taper  -  -  319

13 of  different  Compound  Bodies  -  321

14  General  Conclufions  relating  to   the  decompoiition

of  Nitrous  Oxide,  and  to  its  analyfis  -  322

15  Obfervations  on  the  combinations  of  Oxygene  and

Nitrogene  -  -  -  ^  -  325

RESEARCH  III.

Meluihig  io  the  KfiSPiBATioN  0/ Nitrous  Oxide  and
OTHER  Gases.


f    viii.    )

DIVISION    I.

Experiments  and  Observations  on  the  efFe(9:s  pro-
duced upon  Arjimals  by  the  refpiration  of  Nitrous
Oxide.

1  Prehminaries  -     >        -  -  -  333

2  On  the  refp nation  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by  warm-blooded

Animals  -         -  -  -  -  830

3.  EfFe6ls  of  the   refpiration   of  Nitrous  Oxide    upon

Animals,  as  compared  with  thole  produced  by  their
immerfion  in  Hydrogene  and  Water  -  343

4.  Of  the  changes  efFeded  in  the  organifation  of  warm

blooded  Animals,  by  the   reijpiration  Of  Nitrous-
Oxide  -  -  -  -  347

5s  Of  the  refpiration  of  mixtures  of  Nitrous  Oxide  and

other  Gafes,  by  warm-blooded  Animals      -  358

6.  Recapitulation  of  fa6ts  relating  to  the  refpiration    of

Nitrous  Oiiide,  by  warm-blooded  Animals     -      360

7.  Of  the  refpiration  of  Nitrous  Oxide,   by   amphibious

Animals  -  -  -  -  362

8.  Effeds  of  Solution  of  Nitrous  Oxide  on  Filhes     -     366

9.  Effects  of  Nitrotis  Oxide  on  Infeds  -         -         3/0

DIVISION     II.

Of  the  changes  efFefted  in  Nitrous  Oxide  and  other

Gafes,  by  the  Refpiration  of  Animals.
1.  Preliminaries  _  _  _  _  373

2-  Abforption  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by  Venous  Blood  374

3.  Of  the  changes  effcded  in  Nitrous  Oxide  by    Refpi-

ration ....  388

4.  Refpiration  of  Hydrogene  -  -  400

5.  Additional   Obfervations    and   Experiment?  on   t|ie

Refpiration  of  Nitrous  Oxide      -  -  /J|4


(    i^^.    )

6.  Of  the  Refpiration  of  Atmofpheric  Air  -  42p

7 .  Refpiration  of  Oxygene       -  -  -  439

8.  Obfervations  on  the  changes  effected  in  the  blood  by

Atmofpheric  Air  and  Oxygene  -  -       445

g.  Obfervations  on  the  Refpiration  of  Nitrous  Oxi,de     440

RESEARCH  IV.

Belating  to  the  Effects  produced  by  the  Respiration  of
Nitrous  Oxide  upon  different  Individuals.

DIVISION     I.

History  of  tJie  Difcovery. — Effects  produced  by  the
Refpiration  of  different  Gases.

1.  Refpirability  of  Nitrous  Oxide  -  -  A5Q

2.  Effeas  of  Nitrous  Oxide         -  -  -  453

3.  General  Elfe6ts  of  Nitrous  Oxide  on  the  Health  464

4.  Refpiration  of  Hydrogene       -  -  -  4^0

5.        ofNitrogene        m  ^  -  467

6.  EfFefts  of  Hydrocarbonate  -  -  463

7.  —     of  Carbonic  Acid                       -  -           4/2

8.  —     of  Oxygene  '                -             -  _           4^3

9.  —     of  Nitrous  Gas              -         .     -  -            4/5
iO.  Mofl  exteniive  action   of  Nitrous  Oxide  produces

no  debility  -  _  _  _  4c^5

DIVISION    If.

Details  of  the  Eife6ts  produced  by  the  Refpiration  of
Nitrous  Oxide  upon  ditferent  Individuals,  furnifhcd
'by  Themfelves.

1  Detail  of  Mr.  J.  W.  Tobiu  -  -  4(}7

2  —     of  Mr.  W.  Clayfitld  >  -         '     5Q;2

3  Letter  from  Dr.  Kinglake  -  -  503

4  Detail  of  Mr.  Southey  -  -  -  jO;


(      X.      )

S  Letter  from  Dr.  Roget         -  -  -  50g

fi  Letter  from  Mr,  James  Thomfon     -  -  512

7  Detail  of  Mr.  Coleridge       -  -  >  5l6

8  —     of  Mr.  Wedgwood     -  -  -  518

9  —     of  Mr.  G.  Burnet       -  -  -  520
ao   —     of  I>Ir.  T.  Pople         .             -             -              521

11  —  ofMr.Hammiek       -  -  .  522

12  —  of  Dr.  Blake     -        -  -  -  524

13  —  of  Mr.  Wanfey  .  -  -  525

14  —  of  Mr.  Rickman         -  -  -  526

15  —  of  Mr.  Lovell  Edgworth  -  -  527
16—  ofMr.  G.Bedford      -  -  -  528

17  —     of  Mifs  Rylaiid  .  ,  -  530

18  Letter  ffom  Mr.  M.  M.  Coates      -  -  530

DIVISION     III.

Abftrads  from  additional  Details — Obfervatlonson  the  cfFe6ts
of  Nitrous  Oxide,  by  Dr.  Beddoes — Conclufion,

1  Abllra^ls  from  additional  details  -  -         533

2  Of  the  effects  of  Nitrous  Oxide  on  delicate  females    5:^7
^  Obfervations  on  the  effe6ts  of  Nitrous  Oxide   by  Dr.

Beddoes.       -----        541
4  Conclufio|i         -----         54^

APPENDIX.

No.  I.  Of  the  effeds  of  Nitrous  Oxide  on  Vegetables    56l
No.  II.  Tabic  of  the  Weight  and  Compolition  of  the

combinations  of  Nitrogene  _  -  -    50(5

No.  III.  Additional  Obfei-vations       -  -  -    56/

No.  IV.   Dcfcription    of  a   Mercurial   Airholder,  and

Breathing  Machine,  by  Mr.  W.  Clayfield.
No.  V.    Propofals  for  the    Prefervation    of  Accidental

Obfervations  in  Medicine.     By  Dr.  Beddoes.


INTRODUCTION.


Xn  confequence  of  the  difcovery  of  the  ret'-
pirabiiity  and  extraordinary  effe61s  of  nitrous
pxide,  or  the  dephlogifticated  nitrous  gas  of
'Dr.  Prieftley,  made  in  April  1799,  in  a  manner
to  be  particularly  defcribed  hereafter,  *  I  was
induced  to  carry  on  the  following  inveftjgation
concerning  its  compofition,  properties,  combi-
nations, and  mode  of  operation  on  living  beings.

In  thecourfe  of  this  inveitigation,  I  have  met
with  many  difficulties  ;  fome  arifing  from  the
novel  and  obfcure  nature    of  the   fabjed,  and


*  A  (liort  accQunt  of  this  difcovery  has  been  given  ia  Dr.
Eeddoes's  Notice  of  fome  Obfervations  made  at  the  Pneu-
matic Inftitution,  and  in  Mr.  Nicholfon's  Phil.  Journal  for
May  and  December  17 9Q,


(  xii.  )

others  from  a  want  of  coincidence  in  the  obfer-
vations  of  different  experimentalifts  on  the
properties  and  mode  of  produdion  of  the  gas.
By  extending  my  refearches  to  the  different
fiibftancesconnedled  with  nitrous  oxide;  nitroiisj
acid,  nitrous  gas  and  ammoniac  ;  and  by  mul-
tiplying the  companions  of  facfls,  I  have  fuc-
Geeded  in  removing  the  greater  number  of
thofe  difficulties,  and  have  been  enabled  to  give
a  tolerably  clear  hiftory  of  the  combinations  of
oxygen c  and  nitrogen e.

By  employing  both  analyfis  and  fynthefis
whenever  thefe  methods  were  equally  applica-
ble, and  comparing  expcrin;ents  made  under
different  circumftances,  I  have  endeavoured  to
guard  again  ft  fources  of  error;  but  I  cannot
fla'tter  my felf  that  I  have  altogether  avoided
them.  The  phyfical  fcienccs  are  alnjoft
wholly  dependant  on  the  minute  obfervatiori
and  comparifon  of  properties  of  things  not  im-
mediately obvious  to  the  fenfes :  and  from  the
rlifficulty  of  difcovCrrng  every  poflible  mode  of
examination,  and  from  the  modification  of  p§r-


(    xiu.    )

ceptlons  by  the  ilate  of  feeling,  it  appears  nearly
jmpoffible  that  all  the  relations  of  a  feries  of
phaenomena/can  be  difcovered  by  a  fingleinvefti-
gation,  particularly  when  thefe  relations  are
complicated,  and  many  of  the  agents  unknown.
Fortunately  for  the  aflive  and  progreffive  na-
ture of  the  human  mind,  even  experimental
refearch  is  only  a  method  of  approximation  to
truth.

In  the  arrangement  of  fa6ls,  I  hava  been
guided  as  much  as  poffible  by  obvious  and
fimple  analogies  only.  Henc€  I  have  feldom
entered  into  theoretical  difcuffions,  particularly
concerning  light,  heat,  and  other  agents,  which
are  known  only  by  ifolated  efFedls.

Early  experience  has  taught  me  the  folly
of  hafty  generalifation.  We  are  ignorant  of  the
laws  of  corpufcular  motion  ;  and  an  immenfe
rnafs  of  minute  obfervafions  concerning  themore
complicated  chemical  changes  mufl  be  cdl^edied,
probably  before  we  fhall  be  able  to  afcertain
even  whether  we  are  capable  of  difcoveringthem.
Chemiftry  in  its  prefent  ftate,  is  fimply  a  partial


(  xiv.  7

hiftory  of  phasRomena,  confifting  of  many
feries  more  or  lefs  extenfive  of  accurately  con-
nc<^ed  (siiSis.

With  the  moft  important  of  thefe  feries,  the
arrangement  of  the  combinations  of  oxygene  or
the  antiphlogiftic  tlieory  difcovered  by  Lavoi-
lier,  the  chemical  details  in  this  work  are
capable  of  being  conne6\ed.

In  the  prefent  ftate  of  fcience,  it  will  be
unnccefTary  to  enter  into  difcuffions  concern-
ing the  importance  of  inyeftigations  relating
to  the  properties  of  phyfiological  agents,  and
the  changes  effedled  in  them  during  their  ope-
ration. By  means  of  fuch  inveftigations,  vvc
arrive  nearer  towards  that  point  frojn  which  we
fhall  be  able  to  view  what  is  within  the  reach
of  difcovery,  and  what  mud  for  ever  remain
unknown  to  us,  in  the  phaenomena  of  organic
life.  They  are  of  immediate  utility,  by  enabling
us  to  extend  our  analogies  fo  as  to  inveftigate
the  properties  o(  untried  fubftances,  with  greater
acciiracy  and  probability  of  fuccefs.


(     XV.     )

The  firft  Refearch  in  this  work  chiefly  relates
to  the  produdlion  of  nitrous  oxide  and  the  ana-
lyfis  of  nitrons  gas  and  nitrous  acid.  In  this
there  is  little  that  can  be  properly  called  mine  j
and  if  by  repeating  the  experiments  of  other
chemiftsj  I  have  fometimes  been  able  to  make
more  minute  obfervations  concerning  phaend-
mena,  and  to  draw  different  conclulions,  it  is
wholly  owing  to  the  life  I  have  made  of  the
inftruments  of  invefligation  difcovered  by  the
illuftrious  fathers  of  chemieal  philofophy,*  and
fo  fuccefsfully  applied  by  them  to  the  difcovery
of  truth.

In  the  fecond  Refearch  the  combinations  and
compofition  of  nitrous  oxide  are  inveftigated,
and  an  account  given  of  its  decompofition  by
moft  of  the  combuftible  bodies.

The  third  Refearch  contains  obfervations  on
the  a<3ion  of  nitrous  oxide  upon    animals,  and


*  Cavendifli,  Prieftley,  Black,  Lavoifier,  Schecle,  Kir-
wan,  GuytoDj  Berthollet,.  &c\


(    xvi.   )

an  inveftigation  of  the  changes  efFefled   in   it
by  refpiration.

In  the  fourth  Refearch  the  hiftory  of  the
refpirability  and  extraordinary  effects  of  nitrous
oxide  is  given,  with  details  of  experiments
on  its  powers  made  by  different  individuals.

I  cannot  clofe  this  introdu6iion,  without
acknowledging  my  obligations  to  Dr.  Beddoes.
In  the  conception  of  many  of  the  following
experiments-,  I  have  been  aided  by  his  conver-
fation  and  advice.  They  were  executed  in  an
Inftitutipn  which  owes  its  exiftence  to  his
benevolent  and  philofophic  exertions.

Voivry-Square,  HotiveUsy  Brtjiol.
June  25  th,  1800.


RESEARCH    I.

CONCERNING    THE    ANALYSIS

OF

NITRIC    ACID    AND    NITROUS    GAS.

AND
THE    PRODUCTION    OF

NITROUS   OXIDE.


^N  M..


1^^   JAN  6     ,^77    ^


RESEARCH   I.   '"'^^^i^l^AR


INTO  THE  PRODUCTION  AND  ANALYSIS

OP

NITROUS  OXIDE,

AND

THE  AERIFORM  FLUIDS  RELATED  TO  IT.


DIVISION  I.

EXPERIMENTS  and  OBSERf'ATIONS  on  the  com-
position  o/" NITRIC  ACID,  and  on  its  combinations
with  Water  and  Nitrous  Gas.


I.  1  HOUGH  fince  the  commencement
of  Pneumatic  Chcmiftry,  no  fubftance  has  been
more  the  fiibjed  of  experiment  than  Nitrous
Acid  ;  yet  ft  ill  the  greateft  uncertainty  exifts
with  regard  to  the  quantities  of  the  principles
entering  into  its  compofition.

In  comparing  the  experiments  of  the  illus-
trious Cavendifh  on  the  fynthefis  of  nitrous
acid,  with  thofe  of  Lavoifier  on  the  decompo-
pofttion  of  nitre  by  charcoal,  we  find  a  much
greater  difference  in  the  refults  than  can  be


(      2     )

accounted  for  by  iuppofing  the  acid  formed,
and  that  decompofed,  of  different  degrees  of
oxygenation.

In  the  moft  accurate  experiment  of  Cavendifb,
when  the  nitrous  acid  appeared  to  be  in  a  ftate
of  deoxygcnation,  1  of  nitrogene  combined  with
about  2,346  of  oxygene.*  In  an  earlier  experi-
ment, when  the  acid  was  probably  fully
oxygenated,  the  nitrogene  employed  was  to
the  oxygene  nearly  as  1  to  2yg2.'jf

Lavoilier,  from  his  experiments  on  the  de-
compofition  of  nitre,  and  combination  of  ni-
trous gas  and  oxygene,  concludes,  that  the
pcrfedlly  oxygenated,  or  what  he  calls  nitric
acid,  is  compofed  of  nearly  1  nitrogene,  with
3,9  of  oxygene  ;  and  the  acid  in  the  laft  ftatc
of  deoxygenation,  or  nitrous  acid,  of  about  3
oxygene  with  1  nitrogene.;};


*  Phil.  Tranf.  v.  78.  p.  270.      f  Phil.  Tranf.  v.  75,  p.  381.

X  Elem.  Kerr's  Tranf.  page  76,  and  2l6,  and  Mem.  dci
Sav.  Etrang.  torn.  7,  page  629.


(     3     )

Great  as  the  difference  is  between  the  efti-
rnations  of  thefe  philofophers,  we  find  differ-
ences flill  greater  in  the  accounts  of  the  quantities
of  nitrous  gas  neceflary  to  faturate  a  given  quan-
tity of  oxygeijc,  as  laid  down  by  very  accurate
experimentalifls.  On  the  one  hand^  Prieflley
found  1  of  oxygene  condenfed  by  2  of  nitrous
gas,  and  Lavoifier  by  1  |.  On  the  other,
Ingenhouz,  Scherer,  and  De  la  Metherie,
Hate  the  quantity  tieceflary  to  be  from  3  to  5.^^
Humbolt,  who  has  lately  invefligated  Eudi-
ometry  with  great  ingenuity,  confiders  the  mean
quantity  of  nitrous  gas  neceflary  to  faturate  1
of  oxygene,  as  about  2,55.-^

II.  To  reconcile  thefe  different  refults  is
impolfiblc,  and  the  immediate  connedlion  of
the  fubjefl  with  the  produdlion  of  nitrous
oxide,  as  well  as  its  general  importance,  obliged
me  to  fearch  for  means  of  accurately  deter-


*  Ingenhouz  fur  les  Vegetaux,  pag.  205.     De  la  Metheri«i
Eflai  fur  differens  Airs,   pag.  252.

t  Annales  de  Chimic,  tome  28,  p,  l68.


(     4      )

mining  the  compofitlon  of  nitrous  acid  in  its
different  degrees  of  oxygenation.

The  firft  defideratiim  was  to  afcertain  the
nature  and  compofition  of  a  fluid  acid,  which
by  being  deprived  of,  or  combined  with  nitrous
gas,  might  become  a  ftandard  of  comparifon
for  all  other  acids.

To  obtain  this  acid  I  fhould  have  preferred
the  immediate  combination  of  oxygene  and
nitrogene  over  water  by  the  eledlric  fpark,  had
it  been  pofFible  to  obtain  in  this  way  by  a  com-
mon apparatus  fufficient  for  extenfive  examina-
tion ;  but  on  carefully  perufing  the  laborious
experiments  of  Cavendifh,  I  gave  up  all  thoughts
of  attempting  it.

My  firft  experiments  were  made  on  the
decompofition  of  nitre,  formed  from  a  known
quantity  of  pale  nitrous  acid  of  known  fpccific
gravity,  by  phofphorus,  tin,  and  charcoal  :  but
in  thofe  procefTes,  unafcertainable  quantities  of
nitrous  acid,  with  cxcefs  of  nitrous  gas,  always
efcaped  undecompounded,  and  from  the  non-
coincidence  of  refults,  where  different  quanti-


(     5     )

ties  ofcombuftible  fubftances  were  employed,
I  had  reafons  for  believing  that  water  was
generally  decompofed.

Before  thefe  experiments  were  attempted,  I  had
analized  nitrous  gas  and  nitrous  oxide^  in  a  man-
ner to  be  particularly  defcribed  hereafter ;  fo
that  a  knowledge  of  the  quantities  of  nitrous
gas  and  oxygene  entering  into  the  compofition
of  any  acid,  enabled  me  to  determine  the  pro-
portions of  nitrogene  and  oxygene  it  contained.
In  confequence  of  which  I  attempted  to  com-
bine together  oxygene  and  nitrous  gas,  in  fuch
a  manner  as  to  abforb  the  nitrous  acid  formed
by  water,  in  an  apparatus  by  which  the  quanti-
ties of  the  gafes  employed,  and  the  increafe  of
weight  of  the  water,  might  be  afcertained  ;  but
this  procefs  likewife  failed.  It  was  impoffible
to  procure  the  gafes  perfectly  free  from  nitro-
gene, and  during  their  combination,  this  nitro-
gene made  to  pafs  into  a  pneumatic  apparatus
communicating  with  a  vcflel  containing  the
)vater  carried  over  with  it,  much  nitrous  acid
vapor,  of  different  compofition  from  the  acid
abforbed.


(    6    )

After  many  unfucccfsful  trials.  Dr.  Prieft ley's
experiments  on  nitrous  vapor  *  induced  me
to  fuppofe  that  oxygene  and  nitrous  gas,  made
to  combine  out  of  the  contad  of  bodies  having
affinity  for  oxygtne,  would  remain  perma-
nently aeriform,  and  on  throwing  them  fepa-
rately  into  an  exhaufted  glafs  balloon,  I  found
that  this  was  a(^ually  the  cafe  ;  increafe  of  tem-
perature was  produced,  and  orange  colored
nitrous  acid  cas  formed,  which  after  re-
maining  for  many  days  in  the  globe,  at  a  tem-
perature below  56",  did  not  in  the  flightcft
degree  condenfe.

This  fa6l  afforded  me  the  means  not  only  of
forming  a  ftandard  acid,  but  likcwife  of  afcer-
taining  the  fpecific  gravity  of  nitrous  acid  in
its  aeriform  ftate.

III.  Previous  to  the  experiment,  for  the  pur-
pofe  of  corre61ing  incidental  errors,  I  was  in-
duced to  afcertain    the    fpecific   gravity  of  the


*  Experiments  and  Obfervations,  Vol.  iii.  lad  edition^
page  105,  &c.


(  9  )

into  an  exhaufted  balloon,  increafed  it  in  weight
25,5  grains  ;  thermometer  being  56^  and
barometer  30,9.  And  allowing  for  the  fmall
quantity  of  nitrogene  in  the  gas,  100  cubic
inches  of  it  will  weigh  34.3  grains.

One  hundred  and  thirty  cubic  inches  of
oxygene  were  procured  from  oxide  of  raangan-
efe  and  fulphuric  acid,  by  heat,  and  received  in
another  mercurial  airholder.

10  meafures  of  it,  mingled  with  26  of  the
nitrous  gas,  gave,  after  the  refiduum  was  ex-
pofed  to  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron,  rather
more  than  one  meafure.  Hence  we  may  con-
clude that  it  contained  about  0,1  nitrogene.

6o  cubic  inches  of  it  weighed  20,75  grains  ;
and  accounting  for  the  nitrogene  contained  in
thefe,  100  grains  of  pure  oxygene  will  weigh
35,09  grains.

Atmofpherical  air  was  decern pofed  by  nitrous
gas  in  excefs;  and  the  refiduum  waflied  with
folution  of  fulphate  of  iron  till  the  Nitrogene
remained  pure ;  8/  cubic  inches  of  it  weighed
26,5  grains,  thermometer  being  48%  barometer
30,1 ;   100  will  confequently  weigh  30,45.


(    10    )

Qd  cubic  inches  of  the  air  of  the  laboratory
hot  deprived  of  its  carbonic  acid,  weighed
28,75  grains  ;  thermometer  53,  barometer  30  ;
100  cubic  inches  will  confequently  weigh  3 1,9.*
16  meafures  of  this  air,  with  ]6  nitrous  gas,
of  known  compofition,  diminifhed  to  19.
Hence  it  contained  about  ,26  oxygene.^

In  comparing  my  refults  with  thofe  of  Lavoifief
and  Kirwan,  the  eftimation  of  the  weights  of  ni-
trogene  and  oxygene  is  very  little  different,  the
corrections  for  temperature  and  prefTure  being
fiiade,  from  that  of  thofe  celebrated  philofophers.
The  firfl  makes  oxygene  to  weigh  -f-  34,21,  and
nitrogene  30,o64  per  cent ;  and  the  laft,  oxy-
gene 34, :}:  and  nitrogene  30,5.


*  A  tab4e  of  the  fpecific  gravities  of  theie  gafes,  and
other  gafes,  hereafter  to  be  mentioned,  reduced  to  a
barometrical  and  thermometrical  ftandard,  will  be  given
in  the  appendix.

I  40  meafures,  expofed  to  folution  of  potafh,  gave  an
abforption  of  not  quite  a  quarter  of  a  meafure  :  hence  it
contained  an  inconfiderable  quantity  of  carbonic  acid.

f  Traite  Elementaire.
+  Effai  fur  le  phlogiftique,  page  30.


(     7     )

gafes  employed,  particularly  as  I  was  unac-
quainted with  any  procefs  by  which  the
weight  of  nitrous  gas  had  been  accurately
determined.  Mr.  Kirwan's  eftimation,  which
is  generally  adopted,  being  founded  upon  the
comparifon  of  the  lofs  of  weight  of  a  Iblutioii
of  copper  in  dilute  .nitrous  acid,  with  the  quan-
tity of  gas  produced.*

The  inftruments  that  I  made  ufe  of  for  con-
taining and  meafuring  my  gafes,  were  two  mer-
curial airholders  graduated  to  the  cubic  inch  of
Everard,  and  furnifhed  with  flop  cocks.^


*  When  copper  is  diflblved  in  dilute  nitrous  acid,  certain
quantities  of  nitrogene  are  generally  produced,  likewife  the
nitrous  gas  carries  off  in  folution  fome  nitrous  acid.

f  This  airholdcr,  cohlidered  as  a  pneumatic  i'nftrumcnt,
is  of  greater  importance,  and  capable  of  a  more  extenfivc
application  than  any  other.  It  was  invented  by  Mr.  W.
Clatfibld,  and  in  its  form  is  analogous  to  Mr.  Watt's
hydraulic  bellows,  confifting  of  a  glafs  bell  playing  under
the  prelTure  of  the  atmofphere,  in  a  fpace  between  two  cy-
linders filled  with  mercury.  A  particular  account  of  it  will^
b6  given  in  the  appendix.


(     8     )

They  were  weighed  in  a  glafs  globe,  of  the
capacity  of  1Q8  cubic  inches,  which  with  the
fmall  glafs  ftop-cock  affixed  to  it,  was  equal,
when  filled  with  a^mofpheric  air,  to  1755
grains.  The  balance  that  I  employed,  when
loaded  with  a  pound,  turned  with  lefs  than  one
eighth  of  a  gi;ain.

Into  a  mercurial  airholder,  of  the  capacity
of  200  cubic  inches,  l6o  cubic  inches  of  ni-
trous gas  w^ere  thrown  from  a  folution  of  mer-
cury in  nitrous  acid.

70  meafures  of  this  were  agitated  for  fome
minutes  in  a  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron,*  till
the  diminution  was  complete.  The  nitrogene
remaining  hardly  filled  a  meafure ;  and  if  we
fuppofe  with  Humbolt  -j-  that  a  very  fmall  por-
tion of  it  was  abforbed  with  the  nitrous  gas,  the
whole  quantity  it  contained  may  be  eftimated
at  0,0142,  or^^.

75  cubic  inches  received  from  the  airholder

*  This  abforption  will  be  hereafter  particularly  treated  of.
t  Annales  dc  Chimic.    Tome  xviii.  page  139.


(  11 )

The  fpecific  gravity  of  nitrous  gas,  according
to  Kirwan^  is  to  that  of  common  air  as  1 194  to
1000.  Hence  itfhould  weigh  about  37  grains  per
cent.  This  difference  from  my  eflimation  is  not
nearly  fo  great  as  I  expedted  to  have  found  it.§

IV  #  xhe  thermometer  in  the  laboratory
ftanding  at  55°,  and  the  barometer  at  30, 1, 1  now
proceeded  to  my  experiment.  The  oxygene  that
I  employed  was  of  the  fame  compofition  as  that
which  I  had  previoufly  weighed.  The  nitrous
gas  contained  ,0166  nitrogene.

For  the  purpofe  of  combining  the  gafes,  a
glafs  balloon  was  procured,  of  the  capacity  of
148  cubic  inches,  with  a  glafs  (lop-cock
adapted  to  it,  having  its  upper  orifice  tubulated
and  graduated  for  the  purpofe  of  containing
and  meafuring  a  fluid.  The  whole  weight  of
this  globe  and  its  appendages,  when  filled  with
common  air,  was  2066,5  grains.

§  The  diminution  of  the  fpeci^c  gravity  of  the  gas  from
the  quantity  of  nitrogene  evolved  in  his  experiment,  proba-
bly deftroyed,  in  fome  meafure,  the  fource  of  error  frora
the  nitrous  acid  carried  oven.

*  Experiment    I.


(  12 )

It  was  partially  exhaufted  by  the  air-pump,
and  loft  in  weight  juft  32  grains.  From  whence
we  may  conclude  that  about  15  grains  of  air
remained  in  it.

In  this  ftate  of  exhauftion  it  was  immediately
cemented  to  the  ftop-cock  of  the  mercurial
airholder,  and  the  communication  being  made
with  great  caution,  82  cubic  inches  of  nitrous
gas  rufhed  into  the  globe,  on  the  outfide  of
which  a  flight  increale  of  temperature  was  per-
ceived, while  the  gafes  on  the  infide  appeared
of  a  deep  orange.

Before  the  common  temperature  was  reftored,
the  communication  was  flopped,  and  the  globe
removed.  The  increafe  of  weight  was  20,25
grains;  whence  it  appeared  that  1,14  grains  of
common  air,  part  of  which  had  been  contained
in  theftop-cocks,  had  entered  with  the  nitrous  gas.

Whilfl  it  vvas  cooling,  from  the  accidental
loofening  of  the  flopper  of  the  cock,  3  grains
more  of  common  air  entered.*

*  That  no  greater  contradion  took  place  depended  on
the  folution  of  the  nitrous  acid  formed  in  the  nitrous  gas ;
a  phaenonoenon  to  be  explained  hereafter.


(    13    )

The  communication  was  now  made  between
the  globe  and  the  mercurial  airholder  con-
taining oxygene.  64  cubic  inches  were  flowly
prefled  in,  when  the  outfide  of  the  globe
became  warmer,  and  the  color  on  the  infide
changed  to  a  very  dark  orange.  As  it
cooled,  6  cubic  inches  more  flowly  entered  ;
but  no  new  increafe  of  temperature,  or  change
of  color  took  place.

The  globe  being  now  completely  cold,  was
{lopped,  removed,  and  weighed  ;  it  had  gained
24,5  grains,  from  whence  it  appears  that  0,4
grains  of  common  air  contained  in  the  ftop-
cocks,  had  entered  with  the  oxygene.*

To  abforb  the  nitrous  acid  gas,  4 1  grains  of
water  were  introduced  by  the  tube  of  the  flop-
cock,  which  though  clofed  as  rapidly  as  pofTi-
ble,  muft  have  fufFered  nearly  ,5  grains  of  air  to


*  I  judged  it  expedient  always  to  afcertain  the  quantity
of  air  in  the  ftop-cocks  by  weight,  as  it  was  impoffible  to
join  them  fo  as  to  have  always  an  equal  capacity.  The
upper  tubes  of  the  two  ftop-cocks  not  joined,  contained
nearly  an  inch  and  half.


(    14    )

enter  at  the  fame  time,  as  the  increafe  of  weight
was  4], 5  grains.  The  dark  orange  of
the  globe  diminifhed  rapidly  ;  it  became  warm
at  the  bottom,  and  moifl  on  the  fides.  After  a
few  minutes  the  color  had  almoft  wholly  difap-
peared.

To  afcertain  the  quantity  of  aeriform  fluid
abforbed,  the  globe  was  again  attached  to  the
mercurial  air  apparatus,  containing  140  cubic
inches  of  common  air.  When  the  communi-
cation was  made,  51  cubic  inches  rufhed  in,
and  it  gained  in  weight  l6,5  grains.

A  quantity  of  fluid  equal  to  54  grains  was
now  taken  out  of  the  globe.  On  examination
it  proved  to  be  flightly  tinged  with  green,  and
occupied  a  fpace  equal  to  that  filled  by  41,5
grains  of  water.  Its  fpecific  gravity  was  con-
fequently  1,301.

To  afcertain  if  any  unabforbed  aeriform  ni-
trous acid  remained  in  the  globe,  13  grains  of
folution  of  ammonia  were  introduced  in  the
fame  manner  as  the  water,  and  after  fome  mi-
nutes, when  the  white  vapor  had  condenfed,


(    15    )

(he  communication  was  again  made  with  the
mercurial  airholder  containing  common  air.
A  minute  quantity  entered,  which  could  not
be  eftimated  at  more  than  three  fourths  of  an
inch,  and  the  globe  was  increafed  in  weight
about    33,25  grains.*

Common  air  was  now  thrown  into  the  globe
till  the  refidual  gafes  of  the  experiment  were
judged  to  be  difplaced ;  it  weighed  2106,5
grains,  that  is,  40  grains  more  than  it  had
weighed  when  filled  with  common  air  before
the  experiment.'f'

*  That  is,  by  the  folution  of  ammonia,  and  air,

•f  Tlie  following  is  an  account  of  the  increafe  and  dimi-
nution of  v/eight  of  the  globe,  as  it  was  noted  in  the  jour-
nal.

Globe  filled  with  common  air      -     gr.  2066,5
After  exhanftion  _  _  .         2034.5

After  introdu6tion  of  nitrous  gas,    82

cubic  inches  -  -  2G64,25

After  the  accidental  admiffion  of  com-
mon air  -  -  -         20^7,25
After  the  admiffion  of  oxy gene  *      2091,75

—       41  grains  of  water         2133,25

— •        •      51  cubic  inches  of  air  2149,7*5

Taken  out  54  grains  of  folution       -       2095,75
Introduced    13    grains   of  ammoniacal

folution  -  -  -  2109,2*

After  introdudlion  of  common  air      -      2106,5


(    16   )

And  if  from  thofe  40  grains  we  take  13  for
the  folution  of  ammonia  introduced,  the  re-
mainder, 27,  will  be  the  quantity  of  folution
of  nitrous  acid  in  water  remaining  in  the  globe,
which  added  to  54,  equals  81  grains,  the  whole
quantity  formed  ;  but  if  from  this  be  taken  41
grains,  the  quantity  of  water,  the  remainder
40  grains,  will  be  the  quantity  of  nitrous  acid
gas  abforbed  in  the  folution.

To  find  the  abfolute  quantity  of  nitrous  acid
formed,  we  muft  find  the  fpecific  gravity  of
that  abforbed  ;  but  as  during,  and  after  its
abforption,  17  grains  of  air,  equal  to  53,2  cubic
inches  entered,  it  evidently  filled  .fuch  a
fpace.  53,2  cubic  inches  of  it  confe-
quently  weigh  40  grains,  and  100  cubic
inches  75,17  grains.  Then  ^']b  cubic  inches
weigh  ,56  grains,  and  this  added  to  40,  makes
40,56  grains,  equal  to  57,0  cubic  inches,  the
whole  quantity  of  aeriform  nitrous  acid  pro-
duced. ^

But  the  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  entering  into
this,  allowing  for  the  nitrogene  it  contained,  is


(   17  )    •

27,6  grains,  equal  to  about  80,5  cubic  inches  ^
and  the  oxygepe  is  40,56  —  27,6  =  to  12,96
grains,  or  36,9  cubic  inches.

V.  There  could  ex.ift  in  this  experiment
no  circumftance  conne61ed  with  inaccu-
racy, except  the  impoffibility  of  very  mi-
nutely determining  the  quantities  of  com-
mon air  which  entered  with  the  gafes  from
the  (top-cocks.  But  if  errors  have  arifen  from
this  fource,  they  mud  be  very  inconfiderable  ;
as  will  appear  from  a  calculation  of  the  fpecific
gravity  of  the  nitrous  acid  gas,  founded  on
the  volume  of  the  gafes  that  entered  the
globe.
The  air  that   remained  in  the  globa

after  exhauftion  was  15  grains  =  47*  cub.  in.
The  nitrous  gas  introduced  was      82
Common  air  •         -         -  13

Oxygene         -         -         -        -       70
Common  air         -         -  -  1


*  Decimals  are  omitted,  becaufe  the  excefs  of  the  two
firft  numbers  is  exadly  corrected  by  the  deficiency  of  the
iaft.

B


(    18    )

Whole  quantity  of  air  thrown  into

the  globe  2\3

From  which  fubtradl  its  capacity      148

The  remainder  is  65

And  this  remainder  taken   from    80^5    nitrous
gas  -|-  36,9  oxygene,  leaves  52,4  cubic  inches,
which  is  the  fpace  occupied  by  the  nitrous  acid  ^
gas^  and  which  differs  from  53,95  only  by  1,55
cubic  inches.

I  ought  to  have  obferved,  that  before  this
conclufive  experiment,  two  fimilar  ones  had
been  made.  In  comparing  the  refultsofone
of  them,  performed  with  the  afli fiance  of  my
friend,  Mr.  Joseph  Priestley,  Dr.  Priest-
ley's eldefl  fon,  and  chiefly  detailed  by  him
in  the  journal,  I  find  a  coincidence  greater  than
could  be  even  well  expected,  where  the  pro-
cefles  are  {o  complex.  According  to  that
experiment,  41,5  grains  of  nitrous  acid  gas
fill  a  fpace  equal  to  53  cubic  inches,  and
are  compofed  of  nearly  29  nitrous  gas,  and
12,5  oxygene.


(    19  )

We  may  then  conclude,  Firft,  tliat  100
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  acid^  fuch  as  exifts  in
the  ^^  aeriform  ftate  faturated  with  oxygene,  at
temperature  55%  and  atmofpheric  preffure  30,1
weigh  75,17  grains.

Secondly,  that  100  grains  of  it  are  compofed
of  68,06  nitrous  gas,  and  31,94  oxygene.  Or
alTuming  what  will  be  hereafter  proved,  that
100  parts  of  nitrous  gas  confift  of  55,95  oxy-
gene, and  44,05  nitrogene,  of  29,9  nitrogene,
and  70,1  oxygene;  or  taking  away  decimals,
of  30  of  the  one  to  70  of  the  other.

Thirdly,  that  100  grains  of  pale  green
folution  of  nitrous  acid  in  water,  of  fpecific
gravity  1,301,  is  compofed  of  50,62  water,
and  49,38  acid  of  the  above  compofition.

VI.  Having  thus  afcertained  the  compofition
of  a  flandard  acid,  my  next  objedl  was  to  ob-
tain it  in  a  more  condenfed  ftate,  as  it  was
otherwife  impoffible   to  faturate  it  to  its  full


*  As  is  evident  from  the  Jfuperabundant  quantity  of
©xygene  thrown  into  the  giobe.


.^il


(    20    )

extent  with  nitrous  c-as.  But  this  I  could  efFe6l
in  no  other  way  than  by  comparing  mixtures
of  known  quantities  of  water^  and  acids  of  dif-
ferent rpecific  gravities  and  colors,  with  the
acid  of  1,301.

For  the  purpofe  of  combining  my  acids  with
water,  I  made  ufe  of  a  cylinder  about  8  inches
long,  and  ,3  inches  in  diameter,  accurately
graduated  to  grain  meafures^  and  furniflied  with
a  very  tight  ftopper.

The  concentrated  acid  was  firft  flowly  poured
into  it,  and  the  water  gradually  added  till  the
required  fpecific  gravity  was  produced  ;*  the
cylinder  being  clofed  and  agitated  after  each
addition,  To  as  to  produce  combination  without
any  liberation  of  elaftic  fluid.

After  making  a  number  of  experiments  with


*  The  weight  of  the  acid  poured  into  the  cylinder  being
known,  its  fpecific  gravity  was  known  from  the  fpace  it
occupied  in  the  phial.  The  weight  of  water  being  likewifc
known,  the  fpecific  gravity  of  the  folution,  when  the  com-
mon temperature  was  produced^  was  given  by  the  con-
denfation.


\


(  21  )

acids  of  different  colors  in  this  advantageous
way,  I  at  length  found  that  QO  grains  of  a  deep
yellow  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity  1,5,  became,
when  mingled  at  40"  with  77>5  grains  of  water,
of  fpecific  gravity  1,302,  and  of  a  light  green
tinge,  as  nearly  as  poffible  refembling  that  of
the  ftandard  acid.

Suppofing,  then,  that  thefe  acids  contain
nearly  the  fame  relative  proportions  of  oxygene
and  nitrogene,  100  grains  of  the  deep  yellow
acid  of  1,5,  are  compofed  of  91,9  grains  true
nitrous  acid,-{^  and  8,1  grains  of  water.

To  ^fcertain  the  difference  between  the  com-
poiition  of  this  acid,  and  that  of  the  pale,  or  nitric
acid,  of  the  fame  fpecific  gravity,  I  inferted  150
grains  of  it  into  a  fmail  cylindrical  mattrafs  of  the
capacity  of  ,5  cubic  inches,  accurately  graduated
to  grain  meafures,   and  connc61cd  by  a  curved


-{-  That  is,  fach  as  it  exlfts  in  tlie  aeriform  ftate  at  55o.
Ffoiii  the  ftrong  affinity  of  nitrous  acid  for  water,  we  may
fuppofe  that  this  acid  gas  contains  a  larger  proportion  of  it
than  the  other  eafes.


(    22    )

tube  with  the  water  apparatus.  After  heat  had
been  applied  to  the  bottom  of  the  niattrafs  tbr
a  few  minutes,  the  color  of  the  fluid  gradually
changed  to  a  deep  red,  whilft  the  globules  of  gas
formed  at  the  bottom  of  the  acid,  were  al molt
wholly  abforbed  in  palling  through  it.  In  a
fhort  time  deep  red  vapour  began  to  fill  the
tube,  and  being  condenfed  by  the  water  in  the
apparatus,  was  converted  into  a  bright  green
fluid,  at  the  fame  time  that  minute  globules  of
gas  were  given  out.  As  the  heat  applied  be-
came more  intenfe,  a  very  Angular  phaenomenon
prefented  itfelf ;  the  condenfed  vapor,  increafed
in  quantity,  at  length  filled  the  curvature  of  the
tube,  and  when  expelled,  formed  itfelf  into
dark  green  fpherules,  which  funk  to  the  bottom
of  the  water,  refted  for  a  moment,  and  then
refolved  themfelvcs  into  nitrous  gas.*

When  the  acid  was  become  completely  pale,
it  was  fufFered  to  cool,  and  weighed.  It  had
loft  near  15  grains,  and  was  of  fpecific  gravity

*  This  appearance  will  be  explained  hereafter.


(    23    )

1,491.     2  cubic  inches  and  quarter  of  nitrous
gas  only  were  colleded.

From  this  experiment  evidently  no  conclu-
fions  could  be  drawn,  as  the  nitrous  gas  had
carried  over  with  it  much  nitrous  acid  (in  the
form  of  what  Dr.  Prieflley  calls  nitrous  vapor)
and  was  partially  diflblved  with  it  in  the  water.-l^
To  afcertain,  then,  the  difference  between
the  pale  and  yellow  acids,  I  was  obliged  to
make  ufe  of  fynthefis,  compared  with  analylis,
carried  on  in  a  different  mode,  by  means  of  the
following  apparatus,

VII.  To  the  flop-cock  of  the  upper  cylinder  of
the  mercurial  airholder,  a  capillary  tube  was
adapted,  bent  fo  as  to  be  capable  of  introdudlion
into  an  orifice  in  the  ftopper  of  a  graduated  phial
fimilar  to  that  employed  for  mingling  acids
with  water,  and  fufficiently  long  to  reach  the
bottom.  With  another  orifice  in  the  ftopper
of  the^ phial  was  connected  a  (imilar  tube  cur-


t  This  phasncnaenoD  will   be   particularly   explained
hereafter.


(    24    )

ved,  for  the  purpofe  of  containing  a  fluid,  and
of  increafed  diameter  at  the  extremity.*

50  cubic  inches  of  pure  nitrous  gas  ^  were
thrown  into  the  mercurial  apparatus.  The
graduated  phial^  containing  00  grains  of
nitric  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity  1,5,  was
placed  on  the  top  of  the  airholding  cylinder,
and  made  to  communicate  with  it  by  means  of
the  ftop-cock  and  firit  tube.  Into  the  fecond
tube  a  fmall  quantity  of  folution  of  potafh  was
placed.  When  all  the  junctures  were  carefully
cemented,  by  prefling  on  the  air-holder,  the  ni-
trous gas  was  llowly  pafTed  into  the  phial,  and
abforbed  by  the  nitrous  acid  it  contained;  whilft
the  fmall  quantities  of  nitrogene  evolved,  flowly
drove  forward  the  folution  in  the  curved  tube  ;
from  the  height  of  which,  as  compared  with  that
of  the  mercury  in  the  condudiing  tube,  the
preflure  on  the  air  in  the  cylinder  was  known.

•*  The  outline  only  of  this  npparatus  is  given  here,  as  far
as  \va^  neceffary  to  make  the  experixnent  intelligible  ;  a
detailed  account  of  it,  and  of  its  general  application,  will
be  given  in  the  appendix.

^      fThat  is,  from  nitrous  acid  and  mercury.


(    25    )

In  proportion  as  the  nitrous  gas  was  ablbrbcd,
the  phial  became  warm,  and  the  acid  changed
color;  it  firft  became  ftravv-colored,  then
pale  yellow,  and  when  about  7^  cubic  inches
had  been  combined  with  it,  bright  yellow.  It
had  gained  in  weight  nearly  3  grains,  and  was
become  of  fpecific  gravity  1,496.

This  experiment  afforded  me  an  approxima-
tion to  the  real  difference  between  nitric  and
yellow  nitrous  acid  ;  and  learning  from  it  that
nitric  acid  was  diminifhed  in  fpecific  gravity
by  combination  with  nitrous  gas,  I  procured  a
pale  acid  of  fpecific  gravity  1,504.*'  After  this
acid  had  been  combined  in  the  fame  manner
as  before,  with  about  8  cubic  inches  of  nitrous
gas,§  it  became  nearly  of  fpecific  gravity  1,5,
and  had  gained  in  weight  about  3  grains.

*  A  pale  acid  of  1.52,  by  being  converted  into  yellow
acid,  became  nearly  of  fpecific  gravity  15,1.

§  It  is  impoflible  to  afcertain  the  quantity  of  gas  abforbcd
to  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  cubic  inch,  as  the  firfi:  portions
of  nitrous  gas  thrown  into  the  graduated  cylinder  are  com-
bined with  the  oxygene  of  the  common  air  in  it,  to  forui
uitrous  acid^  and  hence  the  flight  excefs  of  weight.


(    20    )

AfTuming  the  accuracy  of  this  Qxperiment  as
a  foundation  tor  calculation,  I  endeavoured  in
the  fame  manner  to  afcertaio  the  difFej-fences  in
the  compofition  of  the  orange-colored  acids,
and  the  acids  containing  (lill  larger  proportions
of  nitrous  gas.

93  grains  of  the  bright  yellow  acid  of  1,5
became,  when  6  cubic  inches  of  gas  had  been
pafTed  through  it,  orange  colored  and  fuming,
whilft  the  undifiblved  gas  increafed  in  quantity
fo  much  as  to  render  it  impoflible  to  confine  it
by  the  folution  of  potafh.  When  9  cubic
inches  had  pafTed  through,  it  became  dark
orange.  It  had  gained  in  weight  2,75  grains,
and  was  become  of  fpecific  gravity  1,48  nearly.
Hence  it  was  evident  that  much  nitrous  gas  had
pafTed  through  it  undiflblved.  25  cubic  inches
more  of  nitrous  gas  were  nowflowly  fcnt  through
it:  it  firft  became  of  a  light  olive,  then  of  a
dark  olive,  then  of  a  muddy  green,  then  of  a
bright  green,  and  laflly  of  a  blue  green.  After
its  afT-unption  of  this  color,  the  gas  appeared  to
pafs  through   it  unaltered,  and  large  globules


(    27    )

of  fluid,  of  a  darker  green  than  the  reft,
remained  at  the  bottom  of  the  cylinder,  and
when  agitated,  did  not  combine  with  it.  The
increafe  of  weight  was  only  l  grain,  and  the
acid  was  of  fpecific  gravity  J, 474  nearly.

In  this  experiment  it  was  evident  that  the
unabforbed  nitrous  gas  had  carried  over  with  it
a  confiderable  quantity  of  nitrous  acid.  I  en-
deavoured to  corre6l  the  errors  refulting  from
this  circumftance,  by  conne6i:ing  the  curved
tube  firfl  with  a  fmall  water  apparatus,  and
afterwards  with  a  mercurial  apparatus  ;  but
when  the  water  apparatus  was  ufed,  the  greater
part  of  the  unabforbed  gas  was  diflblved  with
the  nitrous  acid  it  held  in  folution,  by  the  water;
and  when  mercury  was  employed,  the  nitrous
acid  that  came  over  was  decompofed,  and  the
quantity  of  nitrous  gas  evolved,  in  confcquence
increafed.

As  it  was  pofiible  that  a  fmall  deficiency  of
weight  might  arife  from  the  red  vapor  given
out  during  the  procelies  of  weighing  and
examining   the  acid    in    the  lad    experiment,


(    2S    )

35  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas  were  very
flowly  pafled  through  90  grains  of  pale  nitrous
acidj  of  rpecific  gravity  1,5  :  it  became  of  fimi-
lar  appearance  tothat  juft  defcribed,  had  gained
in  weight  6,75  grains_,  and  was  become  of  fpe-
cific  gravity  1,475.

Thefe  experiments  did  not  afford  approxima-
tions fufiiciently  accurate  towards  the  compod-
tion  of  deoxygenated  acids,  containing  more
nitrous  gas  than  the  dark  orange  colored.  To
obtain  them,  a  folution  confifiing  of  94,25
grains  of  blue  green,  or  perfectly  nitrated  acid,
(if  we  may  be  allowed  to  employ  the  term),  of
fpceific  gravity  3,475,  was  inferred  into  a
graduated  phial,  and  connedled  by  a  curved
tube,  with  the  mercurial  airholder  ;  in  the
condudor  of  which  a  fmall  quantity  of
water  was  infcrtcd  to  abforb  the  nitrous  acid
which  might  be  carried  over  by  the  gas.  Heat
v.'as  flowly  a{)plicd  to  the  phial,  and  nitrous
gas  given  out  with  great  rapidity.  When  4
cubic  inches  were  colledlcd,  the  acid  became
dark  olive,  v/ hen  g  dark  red,  when    13  bright


(   ^9   )

orange,  and  when  18  pale.  It  had  lott  31
grains,  and  when  completely  cool,  was  of  foeci-
fic  gravity  1,502  nearly.  The  water  in  the
apparatus  was  tinged  of  a  light  blue  ;  from
whence  we  may  conclude  that  Ibme  of  the
nitrous  gas  was  abforbed  by  it  with  the  nitrous
acid  :  but  it  will  be  hereafter  proved  that  the
orange  colored  acid  is  the  moii  nitrated
acid  capable  of  combining  undecompounded
with  water,  and  that  the  color  it  commu-
nicates to  a  large  quantity  of  water,  is  light
blue.  If  then  we  take  6,1  grains,  the  quantity
of  gas  collci^ed,  from  31  the  lofs,  the  remainder
is  24,9,  which  reafoningfrom  the  fynthctical  ex-
periment, may  be  fuppofed  to  contain  nearly
3  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas.  Confeque.ntly,
94,25  grains  of  dark  green  acid,  of  fpecific
gravity  1,475,  are  compofed  of  nearly  21  cubic
inches,  or  7,2  grains  of  nitrous  gas,  and  87,05
grains  of  pale  nitrous  acid,  of  1,504.

VIII.  Comparing  the  different  fynthctical  and
analytical  experiments,  we  may  conclude  with
tolerable  accuracy,  that  92,75  grains  of  bright


(    30    )

yellow,  or  fiandard  acid  of  1,5,  are  compofed
0(2,75  grains  of  nitrous  gas,  and  90  grains  of
nitric  acid  of  1,504;  but  92,75  grains  of  ftandard
acid  contain  85,23  grains  of  nitrous  acld^  com-
pofed  of  about  27,23  of  oxygene^  and  58,
nitrous  gas  :  now  from  58,  take  2,75,  and  the
remainder  55,25,  is  the  quantity  of  nitrous  gas
contained  in  QO  grains  of  nitric  acid  of
1,504 ;  confequently,  100  grains  of  it  are
compofed  of  8,45  water,  and  91,55  true  acid,
containing  61,32  nitrous  gas,  and  30,23  oxy-
gene ;  or  27,01  nitrogene,  and  64,54  oxygene  :
and  the  nitrogene  in  nitric  acid,  is  to  the  oxy-
gene as  1  to  2,389.

IX.  My  ingenious  friend,  Mr.  James
Thomson,  has  communicated  to  me  fome
obfervations  relating  to  the  compofition  of
nitrous  acid  (that  is,  the  orange- colored  acid),
from  which  he  draws  a  conclulion  which  is,  in
my  opinion,  countenanced  by  all  the  fafls  we
are  in  pofleffion  of,  namely,  "  that  it  ought
"  not  to  be  confidcred   as  a  diftindl  and  lefs


(    31    )

^'  oxygenated  flate  of  acid,  but  fimply  as  nitric
"^  or  pale  acid,  holding  in  folution,  that  is,
''  loofely  combined  with,  nitrous  gas."*
It  is  impoffibleto  call  any  fubftance  a  fimpleacid
that  is  incapable  of  entering  undecompounded
into  combination  with  the  alkalies,  &c  ;  but  it
will  appear  hereafter  that  the  falts  called  in  the

•*  In  a  letter  to  me,  dated  061.  28,  1799,  after  giving  an
account  of  fome  experiments  on  the  phlogiftication  of
nitric  acid  by  heat  and  light,  he  fays,  "  It  was  from  an
"  attentive  examination  of  the  manner  in  which  the  nitric
"  acid  was  phlogifticated  in  thefe  experiments,  that  I  was
''  confirmed  in  the  fufpicion  T  had  long  before  entertained,
'^  of  the  real  difference  between  the  nitrous  and  nitric  acids,
"  It  is  not  enough  to  ihew  that  in  the  nitrous  acid,  (that  is,
"  the  nitric  holding  nitrous  gas  in  folution),  the  proportion
"  of  oxygene  in  the  whole  compound  is  lefs  than  that  enter-
'^ing  into  the  compofition  of  the  nitric  acid,  and  that  it  is
"  therefore  lefs  oxygenated.  By  the  fame  mode  of  reafoning
''  we  might  prove  that  water,  by  abforbing  carbonic  acid
"  gas,  became  lefs  oxygenated,  which  is  abfurd.  Should
''  any  one  attempt  to  prove  (which  will  be  nccelfary  to  fub-
"  f^antiate  the  generally  received  dodrlne)  that  the  oxygene
"  of  the  nitrous  gas  combines  with  the  oxygene  of  the  acid,
*'  and  thenitrogene,  in  like  manner,  fo  that  the  reful  ting  acid,
'*  when  nitrous  gas  is  abforbed  by  nitric  acid,  is  a  binary
*' combination  of  oxygene  and  nitrogene,  he  would  find  it
*'  fomewhat  more  difficult  than  he  at  firfl  imagined ;.  it  ap-
*'  pears  to  me  impo0ible.     it  is  mucli  more  confonant  with


(     32    )

iiew  nomenclature  nitrites^  cannot  be  direflly
formed.  If^  indeed,  it  could  be  proved,
that  the  heat  produced  by  the  combina-
tion of  nitrous  acid  with  falifiable  bafcs,  was
the  only  caufe  of  the  partial  decompofition  of
it,  and  that  when  this  procefs  was  efFedled  in
Aich  away  as  to  prevent  increafe  of  temperature,
no  nitrous    gas    was    liberated,    the  common


"  experiment  to  fuppofe  that  nitrous  acid  is  nothing  more
*'  than  nitric  acid  holding  nitrous  gas  in  folution,  which
"  might  in  conformity  to  the  principles  of  the  French
^'nomenclature,  becalled  nitrate  of  nitrogene.  The  difficulty,
"  and  in  fome  cafes  the  impoflibility,  of  forming  nitrites,
"  arifes  from  the  weak  affinity  which  nitrous  gas  has  for
f*  nitric  acid,  compared  with  that  of  other  fubftances ;  and
'^  the  decompofition  of  nitrous  acid)  that  is,  nitrate  of
^'  nitrogene)  by  an  alkaline  or  metallic  fubftance,  is  perfectly
'^  analogous  to  the  decompofition  of  any  other  nitrate,  the
*'  nitrous  gas  being  difplaced  by  the  fuperior  affinity  of  the
*'  alkali  for  the  acid.

"  Agreeable  to  this  theory,  the  falts  denominated
♦■'  nitrites  are  in  fadt  triple  falts,  or  ternary  combinations  of
**  nitric  acid,  nitrous  gas,  and  falifiable  bafes."

This  theory  is  perfe6tly  new  to  me.  Other  Chemifts
to  whom  I  have  mentioned  it,  have  likewife  confidered  it
as  new.  Yet  in  a  fubfequent  letter  Mr.  Thomfon  mentions
that  he  had  been  told  of  the  belief  of  a  fimilar  opinion
among  the  French  Qhpmilis.


(    33    )

theory  might  have  fomc  foundation  ;  but  though
dilute  phlogiflicated  nitrous  acid  combines
*  with  alkaline  folutions  without  decompoiition,
yet  no  excefs  of  nitrous  gas  is  found  in  the
folid  fait :  it  is  either  difengaged  in  proportion
as  the  water  is  evaporated,  or  it  abforbs  oxy-
gene  from  the  atmofpbere,  and  becomes  nitric
acid.

In  proportion  as  the  nitrous  acids  con-
tain more  nitrous  gas,  fo  in  proportion  do  they
more  readily  give  it  out.  From  the  blue
green  acid  it  is  liberated  flowly  at  the  tempera-
ture of  30°,  and  from  the  green  likewife  on
agitation.  The  orange- coloured  and  yellow
acids  do  not  require  a  heat  above  200®  to  free
them    of    their     nitrous  gas ;     and    all    the

*  In  fome  experiments  made  on  the  nitrites  of  potalli.
and  of  ammoniac,  before  I  was  well  acquainted  with
Ijhe  cpmppfition  ,of  nUric  acid,  I  fovin^  that  a  li,gh^  <>Hvie-
colored  acid  of  1,28;  was  capable  of  being  faturated  by
weak  folutions  of  potalh  and  ammoniac,  without  lofing
any  ixitirotis  gas  3  ,bi;it  after  tl^eeyaporation  of  the  neutrajifcd
folution,  at  very  low  temperatures,  the  falts  in  all  tlji^ir
properties  rcfembled  nitrates.


(    34    )

colored  acids^  when  expofed  to  the  atmofphere
abforb  oxygene,  and  become  by  degrees  pale.
If  the  nitrous  vapour,  i.  e.  fuch  as  Is
difengaged  during  the  denitration  of  the
colored  acids,  was  capable  of  combining  with
the  alkalies,  it  might  be  fuppofed  a  diftindl
acid,  and  called  nitrous  acid  ;  and  the  acids
of  different  colors  might  be  confidered  fimply
as  compounds  of  this  acid  with  nitric  acid  ;
but  it  appears  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  folu-
tion  of  nitric  acid  in  nitrous  gas,  incapable  of
condenfation,  undecompounded,  and  when
decompounded  and  condenfed,  conftituting
the  dark  green  acid,  which  is  immifcible  with
water,-^  and  uncombinable  with  the  alkalies.;}:
It  feems  therefore  reafonable,  till  we  are  in
pofTeflion  of  new  lights  on  the  fubjedl,  to  con-
fider,  with  Mr.  Thomfon,  the  deoxygenated  or
nitrous  acids  fimply  as  folutious  of  nitrous  gas

t  As  IS  evident  from  the  curious  appearance  of  the  dark
green  fpherules,  rcpulfive  both  to  water,  and  light  green
acid.

X  That  iSj  undecompounded.


(    35    )

in  nitric  acid,  and  as  analogous  to  the  folutions
of  nitrous  gas  in  the  fulphuric  and  marine
acids,  &;c.  and  the  (lilts  called  nitrites,  ternary
combinations,  fimilar  to  the  triple  compounds
compofed  of  fulphuric  acid,  metallic  oxides,
and  nitrous  gas.*

Suppofing  the  truth  of  thefe  principles  ac-
cording to  the  logic  of  the  French  nomencla-
ture, there  is  no  acid  to  which  the  term  nitrous
acid  ought  to  be  applied  ;  but  as  it  has  been
ufed  to  fignify  the  acids  holding  in  folution
nitrous  gas,  it  is  perhaps  better  ftill  to  apply  it
to  thofe  fubftances,  than  to  invent  for  them
new  names.  A  nomenclature,  accurately  ex-
prefling  their  conftituent  parts,  would  be  too
complex,  and  like  all  other  nomenclatures
founded  upon  theory,  liable  to  perpetual  alter-
ations. Their  compofition  is  known  from  their
fpecific  gravity  and  their  colors  ;  hence  it  is
better  to  denote  it  by  thofe  phyfical  proper-
ties :  thus  orange  nitrous  acid,  of  fpecific
gravity  1,480,  will  fignify  a  folution  of  nitrous

^  The  exiftence  of  tliefe  bodies  will  be  hereafter  proved.


(  36  )

gas  in  nitric  acid,  in  which  the  nitric  acid  is  td
the  nitrous  gas,  nearly  as  87  to  5,  and  to  the
water  as  1 1  to  I,

X.  The  eftimation  of  the  compofition  of  the
ydlow  and  orange  colored  nitrous  acids  given
in  the  following  table,  may  be  confidered  as
tolerably  accurate,  being  deduced  from  the
lynthetical  experiments  in  the  fixth  fef^ion,
compared  with  the  analytical  ones.  But  as  in
the  fynthetical  experiment,  when  the  acid  be-
came green,  it  was  impoffible  to  afcertain  the
quantity  of  nitrous  gas  that  pafTed  through  it
unabforbed,  and  as  in  the  analyfis  the  quantity
of  nitrous  gas  diflblvedby  the  water  at  different
periods  of  the  experiment  could  not  be  afcer-
tained,  the  accounts  of  the  compofition  of  the
green  acids  mnft  be  confidered  only  as  very
imperfeft  approximations  to  truth.


(    3?    )


TABLE  I.

Containing  Approximations  to  the  quantities  ofNITRiC
ACID,  NITROUS  GAS,  and  HEATER  in  NITROUS
ACIDS,  of  different  colors  and  specific  gravities.


100  Parts


Sol.  Nitric  Acid
YellowNitroueiJ:
Bright  Yellow-
Dark  Orange
Light  Olive  X
Dark  Olive  +
Blight  Green  %
Blue  Green*


of


Specific  gra.

NitricAcid

Water

1,504

91,55

8,45

1,502

90,5

8,3

lj500
1,4  80

iii

i

88,94
86,84

8,10
7,6

1,479

86,00

7,55

1,478

85,4

7,5

1,470

84,8

7,44

1,473

84,6

7,4

Nitrous  gas.


1,2
2,96
5,56

6,4  5

7,1
7,76

8,00


*  The  blue  green  acid  is  not  homogeneal  in  its  compofition,  it  is
compofed  of  the  blue  green  fpherules  and  the  bright  green  acid.
The  blue  green  fpherules  are  of  greater  fpecific  gravity  than  the  dark
green  acid,  probably  becaufe  they  contain  little  or  no  water.

X  The  compofition  of  the  acids  thus  marked,  is  given  from  cal-
.calaiions.


(    38    )


TABLfe    II.

Binary  Proportions  of  OXrGENE  and  NITROGEN E
in  NITRIC  and  KITROCS  ACIDS."


100  Parts.

Oxy-

Nitro-

k^

Nitro-

Oxv-

'5

gene

gene

5

d

c

1

gene

1

gene
■2,3S9

Nitric  Acid

70,50

20,50

Bright  yell  owNitrous

"

70,10

29,90

Z

1

2,344  j

1

Orange  coloured

6g,63

30,37

0

0

1

2,292!

Dark  Green

6g,os

30,92

0

1

2,230  j

XL  I  have  before  mentioned  that  dilute  nitric
acids  are  incapable  of  diffolving  fo  much  nitrous
gas  in  proportion  to  their  quantities  of  true
acid,  as  concentrated  ones.  During  their
abforption  of  it,  they  go  through  limilar  changes
of  color;  330  grains  of  nitric  acid,  of  fpecific
gravity  1,36,  after  50  cubic  inches  of  gas  had
been  pafTcd  through  it,  became  blue  green,  and


*  Nitrous   gas   contains   44,05    Nitrogene,   and  55,05
Oxygcne,  as  has  been  faid  before.


(   39   )

pffpecific  gravity  1^351.  It  had  gained  in
weight  but  3  grains  ;  and  when  the  nitrous  gas
was  driven  from  it  by  heat  into  a  water  appa-
ratus^ but  7  cubic  inches  were  colledled.*

From  the  diminution  of  fpecific  gravity  of
nitric  acid  by  combination  with  nitrous  gas,
and  from  the  fmaller  attradiion  of  nitric
acid  for  nitrous  gas,  in  proportion  as  it  is
diluted,  it  is  probable  that  the  nitrated  acids^  in
their  combinations  with  water,  do  not  contradl
fo  much  as  ^  nitric  acids  of  the  fame  fpecific
gravities.  The  al^nities  refulting  from  the
fmall  attrafl ion  of  nitrous  gas  for  water,  and
its  greater  attraction  for  nitric  acid,  muft  be
fuch  as  to  leflen  the  affinity  of  nitric  acid  and
water  for  each  other.

Hence  it  would  require  an  infinite  number
of  experiments  to  afcertain  the  real  quantities  of
acid,  nitrous  gas,  and  water,   contained  in  the


*  A  great  portion  of  it,  of  conrfe,   diflblved  in  the  water
with  the  nitrous  acid  carried  over.

t  Their  changes  of  volume,  correfponding   to  changes
of  temperature,  muft  probably,  are  likewife  different.


(    40    )

different  diluted  nitrous  acids ;  and  after  thele
quantities  were  determined^  they  would  proba-
bly have  no  important  connexion  with  the
chemical  arrangement.  As  yet,  our  inftru-
ments  of  experiment  are  not  fufficiently  exadl
to  afford  us  the  means  of  afcertaining  the
ratio  in  which  the  attradlion  of  nitric  acid*
for  water  diminifhes  in  its  progrefs  towards
faturation.

The  eflimations  in  the  following  table,  of  the
real  quantities  of  nitric  acid  in  folutions  of  dif-
ferent fpecific  gravities,  were  deduced  from
experiments  made  in  the  manner  defcribed  in
fedlion  VI,  except  that  the  phial  employed  was
longer,  narrower,  and  graduated  to  half  grains.
The  temperature,  at  the  time  of  combination,
was  from  40°  to  46°.


*  Probably  in  the  ratio  of  the   fquare  of  the  quantity  of
water  united  to  it.


(    41     )


TABLE  III.


Of  the  Quantities  of  True  NITRIC  ACID  in  solutions
of  different  SPECIFIC  GRAVITIES.


100  Parts  Nitric

Acid  of  fpecfic

True  Acid*

Water

gravity

^

1,5040

91.55

8,45          j

1,4475

80,39

19.61

1,4285

.3

71.65

28,35

1,3900

§

0

62,96

37.04

1,3551

56,88

43,12

1,3186

52,03

47.97

1,3042

49.04

50,96

1,2831

46,03

53,97

1,2090

45,27

54,73

*  The  quantities  of  Oxygene  and  Nitrogene  in  any  folur

tion,    may   be    thus   found Let  A  =  the  true  acid,

X  the  oxygene,  and  Y  the  nitrogene,


Then


238  A


23,9


andY  =


239


(    42    )

XII.  The  blue  green  fpherules  mentioned  in
fccSlion  V.  produced  by  the  condenfation  of
nitrous  vapor,  and  by  the  combination  of  nitric
acid  with  nitrous  gas,  may  be  confidered  as
faturated  folutions  of  nitrous  gas  in  nitric  acid.
The  combinations  of  nitric  acid  and  nitrous
gas  containing  a  larger  proportion  of  nitrous
gas,  are  incapable  of  exifting  in  the  fluid  ftate
at  common  temperatures  ;  and,  as  appears
from  the  firfl;  experiment,  an  increafe  of  volume
take  place  during  their  formation.  They  confe-
quently  ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  folutions
of  nitric  acid  in  nitrous  gas,  identical  with  the
nitrous  vapor  of  Prieftley.

From  the  refearches  of  this  great  difcoverer,
we  learn  that  nitrous  vapor  is  decompofablc,  both
by  water  and  mercury.  Hence  it  is  almoft  im-
poflible  accurately  to  afcertain  its  compofition.
In  one  of  his  experiments,^  when  more  than
130  grains  of  ftrong  nitrous  acid  were  expofed


%  ExperimenU  and  Obfervations  j   lall  edition;   vol.  1,
jiBge  384.


(    'IS    )

for  two  days  to  nearly  247  cubic  Inches  of
nitrous  gas,  over  water  :  about  half  of  the
acid  was  diflblved,  and  depofited  with  the  gas
in  the  water.^

XIII.  In  comparing  the  refults  of  my  fun-
damentar  experiment  on  the  compolition  of
nitrous  acid,  with  thofe  of  Cavendifh,  the  great
coincidence  between  them  gave  me  very  high
fatisfadlion,  as  affording  additional  proofs  of
accuracy.  If  the  acid  formed  in  the  laft  expe.
riment  of  this  ilkil^rious  philofopher  be  fuppofed
analogous  to  the  light  green  acid  formed  in  my
firft  experiment,  our  cftimations  will  be  almofl
identical.

Lavoifier's  account  of  the  compolition  of  the
nitric  and  nitrous  acids,  has  been  generally
adopted.  According  to  his  eftimation,  thefe
fubflances  contain  a  much  larger  quantity  of
oxygene  than  I  have  affigned  to  them.


§  Nitrous  gas,  holding  in  folution  nltrou^J  acid,  is  more
readily  abforbed  by  water  than  when  in  its  pure  form,
from  being  prefented  to  it  in  a  more  condenfed  (late  in  tho
green  acid,  formed  by  the  contact  of  water  and  nitrous
vapor.


(    44    )

The  fundamental  experiments  of  this  great  phi-
lofopher  were  made  at  an  early  period  of  pneu-
matic chemiftry^*  on  the  decompofition  of  nitre
by  charcoal ;  and  he  confidered  the  nitrogcne
evolved,  and  the  oxygene  of  the  carbonic  acid
produced  in  this  procefs,  as  the  component
parts  of  the  nitric  acid  contained  in  the  nitre.

I  have  before  mentioned  the  liberation  of
nitrous  acid,  in  the  decompofition  of  nitre  by
combuflible  bodies ;  and  I  had  reafons  for  fuf-
pedling  that  this  circumftance  was  not  the  only
fource  of  inaccuracy.

That  my  fufpicions  were  well  founded,  will
appear  from  the  following  experiments  ;

EXPERIMENT  a.  I  introduced  into  a
ftrong  glafs  tube,  3  inches  long,  and  nearly  ,3
wide,  a  mixture  of  10  grains  of  pulverifed,
well  burnt  charcoal,  and  6o  grains  of  nitre.  It
was  fired  by  means  of  touch-paper,  and  the
tube  infi:antly  plunged  under  ajar  filled  with


*  Mem.  des  Savans  Etrangers,  v.  xi.  226.     Vide  KirwaQ
fur  le  phlogiftique  pag.  110.


(    4S    )

dry  mercury.  A  quantity  of  gas,  clouded  with
denfe  white  vapor  was  colledled.  When  this
vapor  was  precipitated^  Co  that  the  furface  of
the  mercury  could  be  feen^  it  appeared  white,
as  if  adled  on  by  nitrous  acid.  On  introducing
a  little  oxygene  into  the  jar,  copious  red  fumes
appeared.

EXP.  h.  A  fimilar  mixture  was  fired*
under  the  jar,  the  lop  of  the  mercury  being
covered  with  a  fmall  quantity  of  red  cabbage
juice,  rendered  green  by  an  alkali.  This  juice,
examined  when  the  vapor  was  precipitated,  was
become  red,  and  on  introducing  to  it  a  little
carbonate  of  potafh,  a  flight  eftervefcence  took
place.

EXP.  c.  Five  grains  of  charcoal,  and  20
of  nitre,  were  now  fired  in  the  fame  manner  as
before,  the  mercury  being  covered  with  a  flratum
of  water.     After  the  precipitation  of  the  vapor


*  In  this  experiment,  as  well  as  in  the  laft,   fome  of  the
mixture  was  thrown  into  the  jar  undecompounded.


(    4G    )

on  the  introduction  ofoxygene,  no  red  fumes
were  perceived.

EXP.  d,  30  grains  of  nitre,  5  of  charcoal^
and  five  of  (ilicious  earth,*  were  now  mingled
and  fired.  The  gas  received  under  mercury
was  compofed  of  18  carbonic  acid,  and  nearly
12  nitrogene.-j-  A  little  muriatic  acid  was
poured  on  the  refiduum  in  the  tube;  a  flight
efFervefcence  took  place.

EXP.  <?.  The  top  of  the  mercury  in  the  jar
was  now  covered  v/ith  a  little  diluted  muriatic
acid,  and  a  fmall  glafs  tube  filled  with  a  mixture
of  3  grains  of  charcoal,  and  20  nitre.  After
the  deflagration,  the  tube  itfelf  with  the  refi-
duum it  contained,  were  thrown  into  the  jar.
The  carbonic  acid  was  quickly  detached  from
them  by  the  muriatic  acid,  and  the  whole  quan-

*  To  detach  the  potafli  from  the  carbonic  acid.

f  This  nitrogcne  contained  a  little  nitrous  gas,  as  it  gave
red  fumes  when  expofed  to  the  air.  The  free  nitrous  acid
was  decompofed  by  the  mcrcurV;  as  it  was  not  covered
with  water.


(    47    )

tity  of  gas  generated  in  the  procefs,  obtained  ;
it  meafured  15  cubic  inches.

4  cubic  inches  of  it  expofed  to  folution  of
potafh,  diminifhed  to  1  7^;  7  of  the  remainder,
with  8  of  oxygene,  gave  only  12.

EXP.  /.  60  grains  of  nitre,  and  q  of  char-
coal were  fired,  the  top  of  the  mercury  in  the
jar  being  covered  with  water.  After  the  defla-
gration, the  tube  that  had  contained  them  was
introduced,  and  the  carbonic  acid  contained  by
the  carbonate  of  potafh,  difengaged  by  muriatic
acid.  30  meafures  of  the  gafes  evolved  were
expofed  to  cauftic  potafli  ;  20  exaflly  v/cre
abforbed,  the  10  remaining,  with  ]0  of  oxy-
gene,  diminifhed  to  17.

EXP.  g.  A  mixture  of  nitre  and  charcoal
were  deflagrated  over  a  little  water  in  the  mer-
curial jar  :  after  the  precipitation  of  the  vapor,
the  water  was  abforbed  by  fih rating  paper.
This  filtrating  paper,  heated  in  a  folution  of
potafli,  gave  a  faint  fmell  of  ammoniac.

EXP.  /j.  Water  impregnated  with  the
vapor  produced  in  the  deflagration,   was  heated


(    48    )

with  quicklime,  and  prefeiited  feparately  i(3
three  perfons  accuftomed  to  chemical  odors*
Two  of  them  inftantly  recognifcd  the  ammo-
niacal  fmcll,  the  other  could  not  afcertain  it.
Paper  reddened  with  cabbage  juice  was  quickly
turned  green  by  the  vapor.

Thefe  experiments  are  fufficient  to  fliew  that  the
decompoiition  of  nitre  by  charcoal  is  a  very  com-
plex procefs,  and  that  the  intenfc  degree  of  heat
produced  may  efre6l  changes  in  the  fubftances
employed,  which  we  are  unable  to  eflimate.

The  produ6i:s,  inflead  of  being  fimply  car-
bonic acid,  and  nitrogene,  are  carbonic  acid,
nitrogene,  nitrous  acid,  probably  ammonia,
and  fometimes  nitrous  gas.  The  nitrous  acid
is  difengaged  from  the  bafe  by  the  intenfe  heat.
Concerning  the  formation  of  the  ammonia,  it
is  ufelcfs  to  reafon  till  we  have  obtained  un-
equivocal teftimonics  of  its  exiftence  ;  it  may
be  produced  either  by  the  decompoiition  of
the  water  contained  in  the  nitre,  by  the  com-
bination of  its  oxygcne  with  the  charcoal,  and
of  its  nafcent  hydrogene  with  the  nitrogene  of


( 49  )

the  nitric  acid  ;  or  from  fome  unknown  deconl-
pofition  of  the  potafh.

As  neither  Lavoifier  nor  Berthollet  found
nitrous  gas  produced  in  the  decompofition  of
nitre  by  charcoal,  when  a  water  apparatus  was
employed  ;  and  as  it  was  hot  uniformly  evolved
in  my  experiments,  the  mod  probable  fuppo-
fition  is,  that  it  arifes  from  the  decompofition
of  a  portion  of  the  free  nitrous  acid  intenfely
heated,  by  the  mercury.

In  none  of  my  experiments  was  the  whole  of
the  nitre  and  charcoal  decompofed,  fome  of  it
was  uniformly  thrown  with  the  gafes  into  the
mercurial  apparatus.  The  nitrogene  evolved,
as  far  as  I  could  afcertain  by  the  common  tefts,
was  mingled  with  no  inflammable  gas.

If  we  confider  experiment /as  accurate,  with
regard  to  the  relative  quantities  of  carbonic  acid
and  nitrogene  produced,  they  are  to  each  other
nearly  as  20  to  8  ;  that  is,  allowing  2  for  the
nitrous  gas,  and  confequently,  reafoning  in  the
fame  manner  as  Lavoifier,  concerning  the  com-
pofition  of  nitric  acid,  it  fhould  be  compofed


(    50    )

df  I  nitrogene  to  3,33  oxygerle.  But  thougli
the  quantity  of  oxygene  in  this  eftimation  is
far  fhort  of  that  given  in  his,  yet  ftill  it  is  too
much.  From  whatever  fource  the  errors  arife,
whether  from  the  evolution  of  phlogifticated
nitrous  acid,  or  the  decompofition  of  water,  or
the  produdion  of  nitrous  gas,  they  all  tend  to
increafe  the  proportion  of  the  carbonic  acid  to
the  nitrogene.

I  am  unacquainted  with  any  experiment  from
which  accurate  opinions  concerning  the  drfFer-
ent  relative  proportions  of  oxygene  and  nitrogene
in  the  nitric  and  nitrous  acids  could  be  deduced.
Lavoifier's  calculation  is  founded  on  his  fundi-
tnental  experiment,  and  on  the  combination  of
nitrous  gas  and  oxygene.

Dr.  Frieftley's  experiment  mentioned  in
fedion  1*2,  on  the  abforption  of  nitrous  gas  by
nitrous  acid,  from  which  Kirwan*  deduces  the
XJompofition  of  the  differently  colored  nitrous
acids,  was  made  over  water,   by  which,   as  is


*  Eflajr  00  phlogiftoi*,-


(    51    >

evident  from  a  minute  examinatiati  of  thefa<3s|j
the  greater  portion  of  the  nitrous  gas  employed
was  abforbed.

XIV.  The  opinions  heretofore  adopted
l*efpe6ling  the  quantities  of  real  or  true  acid
in  folutions  of  nitrous  acid  of  different  fpecific
gravities,  have  been  founded  on  experiments
made  on  the  nitro-neutral  falts,  the  moft  accu-


f  Dr.  Prieftley  fays,  *'  Maving  filled  a  phial  containing
<f  exa6tly  the  quantity  of  four  pennyweights  of  water,  witir
**  ftrong,  pale,  yellow  fpirit  of  nitre,  with  its  mouth  quite
"  clofc  to  the  top  of  a  large  receiver  flandiug  in  water,  1
^  carefully  drew  out  almoft  all  the  common  aii',  and  then
*'  filled  it  with  nitrous  air  j  and  as  this  was  abforbed,  I  kept
**  putting  in  more  and  more,  till  in  lefs  than  two  days  it
"  had  completely  abforbed  130  ounce  meafures.  Prefently
*'  after  this  procefs  began,  the  furface  of  the  acid  affiimed
*'  a  deep  orange  color,  and  when  20  or  30  ounce  meafures
"  of  air  were  abforbed,  it  became  green  at  the  top  :  this
"  green  dcfcended  lower  and  lower,  till  it  reached  the
"  bottom  of  the  phial.  Towards  the  end  of  the  procefs,
'*  the  evaporation  was  perceived  to  be  very  great,  and  when
**  I  took  it  out,  the  quantity  was  found  to  have  diminifhed
*'  to  one  half.  Alfo  it  had  become,  by  means  of  this  pro-
^*  cefs,  and  the  evaporation  together,  exceeding  weak,  and
"  was  rather  blue  than  green."

Exj^eriments  and  OhfervattonSy  vol.  1,  p.  364.   Laft  edition^.


(    62    )

rat^,  of  which  .are  thofe  of  Kirwan,  Bergman,
and  Wenzel.  The  great  difference  in  the
refults  of  thefe  celebrated  men,  proves  the
difficulty  of  the  inveftigation,  and  the  exiftence
of  fources  of  error.*  Kirwan  deduces  the
compofition  of  the  folutions  of  nitrous  acid  in
water,  from  an  experiment  on  the  formation  of
nitrated  foda.  In  this  experiment,  36,05  grains
of  foda  were  faturated  by  145  grains  of  nitrous
acid,  of  fpecific  gravity  1,2754.  By  a  tefl
experiment,  he  found  the  quantity  of  fait  formed
tp  be  85,142  grains.-j^  Hence  he  concludes
that  100  parts  of  nitrous  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity
1,5543,  contain  73,54  of  the  (Irongeft,  or
mofl  concentrated  acid.

Suppofing  his  eftimation  perfectly  true,  100
parts  of  the  aeriform  acid  of  55°  would  be  com-
pofed  of  74,54  of  his  real  acid,  and  25,46
water.   In  examining,  however,  one  of  his  later


*  See  Mr.  Keir  s  excellent  obfervations  on  this  fubjedt,
Chcm.  Dia.  Art.  Acid.

f  Irifti  Tranfaaions,  vol.  4,  p.  34,


(    53    )

experiments,*  we  fliall  frad  reafons  for  conclu-
ding, thai  the  acid  in  nitrated  foda  cannot  con^
tain  much  lefs  water  than  the  aeriform  acid.  A
folution  of  carbonated  foda,  containing  125
grains  of  real  alkali^  was  faturated  by  306,2
grains  of  nitrous  acid,  of  fpeeific  gravity  1,4 16,
The  evaporation  was  carried  on  in  a  temperature
not  exceeding  120%  and  the  refiduum  expofed
to  a  heat  of  400^  for  fix  hoars,  at  the  end  of
which  time  it  weighed  308  grains.  Now  ac-
cording to  my  eflimation,  306  grains  of  nitric
acid,  of  1,4]6,  fhould  contain  215  true  acid  ;
and  we  can  hai-dly  fuppofe,  but  that  during  the
^evaporation  and  confequent  long  expofure  to"
heat,  fomeofthe  nitrated  foda  was  loft  with
the  vvater.

Bergman  eftimates  the  quantity  of  water  in
this  fait  at  25,  and  the  acid  at  43  per  cent ;  but
his  real  acid  was  not  fo  concentrated  as  Kir-
\Van%  confequently  the  nitric  acid  in  nitra-
ted foda  fhould  contain  more  vvater  than  my
true  acid.

*  Addit.  ObC  pag.  ;4.


t    54    )

Wenzel,  from  an  experiment  on  the  compor^
fition  of  nitrated  (bda,  concludes  that  it  con-
tains 37,48  of  alkali,  and  62,52  of  nitrous  acid  ;
and  1000  of  this  acid,  from  Kirwan's  calcula-
tion, contain  812,6  of  his  real  acid;  confer
quently,  100  parts  of  my  aeriform  acid  fhould
contain  93,28  of  Wenzers  acid,  and  6,72  of
water.

I  faturated  with  potafh  54  grains  of  folutlon
of  nitric  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity  l  ,30 1 .  Evapo-
rated at  about  212°,  it  produced  66  grains  of
nitre.  This  nitre  expofed  to  a  higher  tempera-
ture, and  kept  in  fufion  for  fome  time,  was
reduced  to  60  grains.

Now  from  the  table,  54  of  1,301,  (hould
contain  26,5  of  true  acid.  But  according  to
Kirwan's  eftimation,  100  parts  of  dry  nitre
contain  44*  of  his  real  acid,  with  4  water ;
confcquently  60  fhould  contain  26,4.

Again,  90  grains  of  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity
1,504,  faturated  with  potafh^  and  treated   ia

*  Additional  pbfervation«,  page  7Q>


(    55    )

the  fame  manner,  gave  173  grains  of  dry  nitre.
Confequently,  100  parts  of  it  fhould  contain
47^3  grains  of  true  acid.

Now  Lavoifier-J-  allows  about  51  of  dry
acid  to  100  grains  of  nitre,  and  Wenzel  52.

From  Berthollet's:}:  experiments,  100  grains
of  nitre,  in  their  decompofition  by  heat,  give
out  nearly  49  grains  of  gas. ^

Hence  it  appears  that  the  aeriform  acid,  that
is,  the  true  acid  of  my  table,  contains  rather
lefs  water  than  the  acid  fuppofed  to  exift  in
nitre^


t  Elements,  pag.  103,  Kerrs  Tranflatiou.
X  Mem,  Acad.     178/,

§  As  well  as  oxygene  and  nitrogene/  Mr.  Watt's  experi-
ments prove  that  much  phlogifticated  nitrous  acid  is  pro-
duced.


DIVISION  II.

EXPERIMENTS  and  OBSERVATIONS  on  the  com--
position  of  AMMONIAC  and  on  its  combinations  with
WATER  and  NITRIC  ACID.


J.  Analysis  of  AMMONIAC  or  VOLATILE  ALKALL

X  HE  formation  and  decompofition  of  volatile
alkali  in  many  procefles,  was  obferved  by  Prieft-
ley,  Scheele,  Bergman,  Kirwan,  and  Higgins  ;
but  to  Berthollet  we  owe  the  difcovery  of  its
conftituent  parts,  and  their  proportions  to  each
other.  Thefe  proportions  this  excellent  philo-
fopher  deduced  from  an  experiment  on  the
decompofition  of  aeriform  ammoniac  by  the
eledric  fpark  :*  a  procefs  in  which  no  apparent
fource  of  error  exifls.

*  Jcurnal  de  Phyfique.     \7Q6,    Tom,  2,  pag.  I'^Gt.


(    57    )

Since,  hoWever,  his  eftimations  have  bee^
made,  the  proportions  of  oxygene  and  hydro-
gene  in  water  have  been  more  accurately  de-
termined. This  circumftance,  as  well  as  the
convi6^Ion  of  the  impollibility  of  too  minutely
fcrutinizing  fads,  fundamental  to  a  great  mafs
of  reafoning,  induced  me  to  make  the  follow-
ing experiments.

A  porcelain  tube  was  provided,  open  at  both
ends,  and  well  glazdd  inMe  and  outfide,  its
diameter  being  about  ,5  inches.  To  one  end
of  this,  a  glafs  tube  was  affixed,  curved  for  the
purpofe  of  communicating  with  the  water  appa-
ratus. With  the  other  end  a  glafs  retort  was
accurately  connedled,  containing  a  mixture  of
perfedly  cauftic  flacked  lime,  and  muriate  of
ammoniac.

The  water  in  the  apparatus  for  receiving  the
gafes  had  been  previoufly  boiled,  to  expel  the
air  it  might  contain,  and  during  the  experiment    >b
was  yet  warm.

When  the  tube  had  been  reddened  in  a  fur-
nace adapted  to  the  purpofe,  the  flame  of  a


(    58    >

Spirit  lamp  was  applied  to  the  bottom  of  the
retort.  A  great  quantity  of  gas  was  collefled
in  the  water  apparatus  j  of  this  the  firft  portions
were  rejedled,  and  the  laft  transferred  to  the
mercurial  trough.

A  fmall  quantity  examined,  did  not  at  all
diminifh  with  nitrous  gas,  and  burnt  with  a
lambent  white  flame,   in  contaiSl  with  common


0,^  of  this  gas,  equal  to  1 10  grain  meafures,
were  fired  with  2,  equal  to  80,  of  oxygene,  in
a  detonating  tube,  by  the  eledlric  fpark.  They
were  reduced  to  2^,  or  go.  On  introducing
to  the  remainder  a  folution  of  ftrontian,  it  be-
came flighlly  clouded  on  the  top,  and  an
abforption  of  Tome  grain  meafures  took  place.

It  was  evident,  then,  that  in  this  experiment,
charcoal  *  had  been  fomehow   prefeqt   in  the


*  Though  the  tube  had  never  been  ufcd,  and  was  appa-
rently clean  and  dry  on  the  iniide,  it  muft  have  contained
foraething  in  the  form  of  duft,  capable  of  furnilhing  cUhw
bydro-carbonate,  or  charcoal.


MV


(    59   )

tube ;  which  being  diflblved  by  the  nafcent
hydrogene,  had  rendered  it  flightly  carbonated,
and  in  confequence  made  the  refults  incon-
clnlive.  ^

A  tube  of  thick  green  glafs  carefully  made
clean,  was  now  employed,  inclofed  in  the  por-
celain tube.  Every  other  precaution  was  taken
to  prevent  the  exiftence  of  fources  of  error,  and
the  experiment  condu61ed  as  before.

140  grain  meafures  of  the  gas  produced,
fired  with  120  of  oxygene,  left,  in  two  experi-
ments, nearly  110.  Solution  of  ilrontian  placed
in  contadl  with  the  refiduum,  did  not  become
clouded,  and  no  abforption  was  perceived.

Now  ]  5o  meafures  of  gas  were  deflroyed,
and  if  we  take  Lavoifier's  and  Meufnier's  efli-
mation  of  the  compofition  of  water,  and  fuppofe
the  weight  of  oxygene  to  be  35  grains,  and  that
of  hydrogene  2,6  the  hundred  cubic  inches;  the
oxygene  employed  will  be  to  the  hydrogene  as
243  to  576.  Put  X  for  the  oxygene,  and  j'  for
the  hydrogene.


(  6q  )

Then         x+y  =  160

X   ;  y  ::  243  :  576
243  y


9C       =


576
839^=  86400

yz=z  105       Xz=45

And   140  —  105  z=z  35

Confequently,  the  nitrogene  in  ammoniac  is
to  the  hydrogene  as  35  :  105  in  volume  :  and
13,3  grains  of  ammoniac  are  compofed  of  10,6
nitrogene,  (fuppofing  that  100  cubic  inches
weigh  30,45  grains)  and  2,7  hydrogene.

According  to  Berthollet,  the  weight  of  the
BJtrogene  in  ammoniac  is  to  that  of  the  hydro-
gene as  121  to  29.^  The  difference  between
this  eftimation  and  mine  is  fo  fmall  as  to  be
almoft  unworthy  of  notice,  and  arifes  moft  pro-
bably from  the  flight  difference  between  the
accounts  of  Lavoifier  apd  Monge,  of  the  com-
pofition  of  water,  and  the  different  weights
afligned  to  the  gafes  employed.

*  Journal  de  Phyfique,  1786,  t.  2,  177.


(   61    )

We  may  then  conclude,  that  100  grains  of
ammoniac  are  compofed  of  about  80  nitrogene,
and  20  hydrogene.

The  decompofition  of  ammoniac  by  heat,  a5
well  as  by  the  ele<?lric  fpark,  was  firfl:  difcovered
by  Prieftley.  In  an  experiment-l-when  aeriform
ammoniac  was  fent  through  a  heated  tube  from
a  cauftic  folution  of  amnioniac  in  water,  this
great  difcoverer  obferved  that  an  inflammable
gas  was  produced,  though  in  no  great  quan-
tity, and  that  a  fluid  blackened  by  matter,  pro-
bably carbonaceous,  likewifc  canne  over.

In  my  experiments  the  whole  of  the  ammo-
niac appeared  to  be  decompofed  ;  the  quantity
of  gas  generated  was  immenfe,  and  not  clouded,
as  is  ufually  the  cafe  with  gafes  generated  at
high  temperatures.  It  is  poffible,  that  the  larger
quantity  of  water  carried  over  in  his  experir
ment,  by  its  flrong  attradlon  for  ammoniac  in
the  aeriform  flate,  might  have,  in  fome  mea-
fure,  retarded  the  decompofition.     It  is  how-

*  Phil.  Tranf.  vol.  T9>  page  2g4,


(   62   )

ever^  more  probable  to  fuppofe,  that  a  fiffure
cxifled  ill  the  earthen  tube  he  employed;,
through  which  a  certain  quantity  of  gas  efcaped,
and  coaly  matter  entered.

PrJeftley  found  that  the  metallic  oxides
when  ftrongly  heated,  decompofed  ammoniac^
the  metal  being  revivified  and  water  and  nitro-
gene  produced.*  The  eftimations  of  the  com-
pofition  of  ammoniac  that  may  be  deduced  from
his  experiments  on  the  oxide  of  lead,  differ  very
little  from  thofe  already  detailed.

II.     Specific  gravity  of  Ammoiiac.

From  the  great  folubility  of  ammoniac  in
water,  it  is  difficult  to  afcertain  its  fpecific
gravity  in  ihe  fame  manner  as  that  of  a  gas
combinable  to  no  great  extent  with  that  fluid.
It  is  impoffible  to  prevent  the  exiftence  of  a


•Vol.  2,  page  398.


(    04    )

to  communicate  with  the  airholder,  the  curved
tube  containing  a  fmall  quantity  of  water.
The  gas  was  flowly  pafled  into  the  fluid,  and
the  globules  wholly  abforbed  before  they
reached  the  top  ;  much  increafe  of  temperature
being  confequent.  When  the  abforption  was
compleat,  the  phial  was  increafed  in  weight
exadly  9  grains.  "

This  experiment  was  repeated  three  times.
The  difference  of  weight,  which  was  probably
connedf  ed  with  alterations  of  temperature  and
prefTure,  never  amounted  to  more  than  one
fixth  of  a  grain.

We  may  then  conclude,  that  at  temperature
58°,  and  atmofpheric  prefTure  29,6,  100  cubic
inches  of  ammoniac  weigh  18  grains.

According  to  KirwaU;,  100  cubic  inches  of
alkaline  air  =^  weigh  18,1 6  grains;  barometer
3Qo,  thermometer  61.  The  difference  between
thefe  eflimations,  the  corredions  for  tempera-
ture and  prefTure  being  made,  is  trifling.

'      *  Additional  01»fervations,  page  107.


(  6s  )

fmall  quantity  of  folution  of  amnroniac  in  the
mercurial  airholder,-}-  or  apparatus  containing
the  gas ;  and  during  the  diminution  of  the
preifure  of  the  atmofpherc  on  this  folution,^  a
certain  quantity  of  gas  is  hberated  from  it,  and
hence  a  fource  of  error.

Xo  afccrtain,  then,  the  weight  of  ammoniac,
I  employed  an  apparatus  fimilar  to  that  ufed
for  the  abforption  of  nitrous  gas  by  nitric
^cid.

50  cubic  inches  of  gas  were  collei5led  in  the
mercurial  airholder,  from  the  decompofition  of
muriate  of  ammoniac  by  lime  ;  thermometer
being  58°,  and  barometer  29,6.

100  grains  of  diluted  fulphuric  acid  wefe
introduced  into  the  fmall  graduated  cylinder,
which  after  being  carefully  weighed,  was  made


t  Ammoniac  generated  at  a  temperature  above  that  of
the  ^tmofphere,  always  depolits  ammoniacal  folution  during
its  rcdudlon  to  the  common  temperature.

X  By  the  introdu6lion  of  arriform  ammoniac  into  tlie
c;ihaufted  globe.


(   65   )

III.  Of  the  quantities  of  true  Ammoniac  in
Aqueous  Ammoniacal  Solutions^  of  different  fpe-
cific  gravities.

To  afcertain  the  quantities  of  ammoniac,  luch
as  exifts  in  the  aeriform  flate,  faturated  with
moifture,  in  foUitions  of  different  fpecific  gra-
vities, I  employed  the  apparatus  for  abforption
fo  often  mentioned.  Thermometer  being  52**,
the  mercurial  airholder  was  filled  with  ammo-
niacal gas,  and  the  graduated  phial,  containing
50  grains  of  pure  water,  conned^ed  with  it.
During  the  abforption  of  the  gas,  the  phial
became  warm.  When  about  30  cubic  inches
had  been  paffed  through,  it  was  fuffered  to
cool,  and  weighed  :  it  had  gained  5,25  grains,
and  the  fluid  filled  a  fpace  equal  to  that  occupied
by  57*  grains  of  water.

*  It  is  neceflary  in  thefe  experiments,  that  the  greateft
care  be  obfervcd  in  the  introdu6tion  and  extradion  of  the
capillary  tube.  If  it  is  introduced  dry,  there  will  be  a
fource  of  error  from  the  moifture  adhering  to  it  when
taken  out.  1  therefore  always  wetted  it  before  its  intro-
dudtion,  and  took  care  tliat  no  more  fluid  adhered  to  it
after  the  experiment,  than  before.


{    <56   )

Confequently,  100  grains  of  folution  of  am-
moniac in  water  of  fpecific  gravity  ,9684  con-
tain 9,502  grains  of  annmoniac.

The  apparatus  being  adjufted  as  before,  50
grains  of  pure  water  were  now  perfe6tly  fatu-
rated  with  ammoniac.  They  gained  in  weight
17  grains,  and  when  perfectly  cool,  filled  a
ipace  equal  to  74  of  water  Confequently  ]00
grains  of  aqueous  ammonia!  folution  of  fpecific
gravity  ,9054  contain  25,37  grains  of  ammo-
niac.

The  two  folutions  were  mingled  together ;
but  no  alteration  of  temperature  took  place.
Confequently  the  refulting  fpecific  gravity
might  have  been  found  by  calculation.

On  mingling  a  large  quantity  of  cauftic  folu-
tion of  ammoniac  with  ^  of  its  weight  of  water,  of
cxadly  the  fame  temperature,  no  alteration  of  it
was  perceptible  by  a  fcnfible  thermometer. —
Hence  the  two  experiments*  being  afTumed  as

*  Previous  to  thofe  experiments,  I  had  made  a  number
of  others  on  the  combination  of  ammoniac  with  water. —
My  defign  was,    to  afccrtain  the  diminution  of  fpecific


(   67   )

data,  the  intermediate  eftimations  in  the  fol-
lowing table,  were  found  by  calculation.


gravity  for  every  three  grains  of  ammoniac  abforbed  j  but
this  I  found  impoffible.  The  capillary  tube,  when  takeri
out  of  the  phial,  always  carried  with  it  a  ncinute  portion
of  the  folution,  which  partially  evaporated  before  it  could
be  again  introduced  3  and  thus  the  fources  of  error  increafed
in  proportion  to  the  number  Of  examinations.


(    68    )
TABLE  IV.

Of  approximations  to  the  quantities  of  AMMONIAC^
such  as  exists  in  the  aeriform  statcy  saturated  with
■water  at  ^20,  in  AQUEOUS  AMMONIAC  AL  SOLU-
TIONS of  different  specific  gravities.


100

Specific  gra.

Ammoniac

Water.

9054

25,37

74,63

9166

22,07

77.93

9255

19,54

80,46

9326

17>52

82,48

9385

5,88  ^

84,12

9435

c

14,53

85,47

9476

C

13,46

86,54

9513

u

12,40

87,60

9545

11,56

88,44

9573

10,82

89,18

9m

10,17

89,83

9619

9,60

90,40

9684

9,50

90,5

9639

9,09

90,91

9713

^     7,17

92,83

*  As  yet  no  mode  has  been  difcovered  for  obtaining  gafes
in  a  date  of  abfolute  drynefs ;  confequently  we  are  igno-
rant of  the  different  quantities  of  water  they  hold  in  folu-
tion  at  different  temperatures.  As  far  as  we  are  acquainted
with  the  combinations  of  ammoniac,  there  is  no  flate  in
which  it  exifts  fo  free  from  moifturc,  as  when  aeriform,
at  low  temperatures.


.( 60 )

That  no  confiderable  fource  of  error  exiftcd
in  the  two  experiments,  is  evident  from  the
trifling  difference  between  the  eftimations  of
the  quantities  of  real  ammoniac,  in  the  folu-
tion  o(  ,q684,  as  found  in  the  firft  experiment,
and  as  given  by  calculation  from  the  laft.

The  quantity  of  ammoniac  in  a  folution  of

fpecific  gravity  not  in  the  table,  may  be   thus

determined — Find   the  difference  between  the

two  fpecific  gravities  neareft  to  it  in  the  table ;

d,  and  the  difference  between  their  quantities

of  alkali,  i? ;  likewife   the   difference  between

the  given  fpecific  gravity  and  that  neareft  to  it,  c,

h  c

then     d  \  1?    \\    c    \   x     and  x  =

d

Which,  added    to   the   quantity  of  the  lower

fpecific  gravity,  is  the  alkali  fought.

The  differences   in    fpecific  gravity   of  the

folutions  of  ammoniac  at  temperatures  between

40°  and  Qb^  *   are  fo    trifling   as  to  be  hardly

*  The  expanfion  from  increafe  of  temperature  is  proba-
bly great  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  ammoniac  io
the  folution.


(    70    )

afcertainable,  by  our  imperfc6l  inflruinerits,  and
confequently  are  unworthy  of  notice.

It  is  poffible  at  very  low  temperatures  to  ob-
tain ammoniacal  folutions  oflefs  ipecific  gravity
than  ,9,  but  they  are  incapable  of  being  kept  for
any  length  of  time  under  the  common  preflTure
of  the  atmofphere.

IV.  Combinations  of  Ammoniac  with  Kitric
Acid.     Compojition  of  Nitrate  of  Ammoniac y  &c.

200  grains  of  ammoniacal  folution,  of  fpeci-
fie  gravity  ^Q05d,  were  faturated  by  385,5
'grains  of  nitric  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity  1,306.
The  combination  was  effected  in  a  long  phial,
the  nitrous  acid  added  very  ilowly,  and  the
phial  clofed  after  every  addition,  to  prevent  any
evaporation  in  confequence  of  the  great  increafe
of  tempcrature.-l-  The  fpecific  gravity  of  the
Jolution,  when  reduced  to  the  common  tem-
perature, was  1,15.       Evaporated  at  a  heat  of

I  From  ^he  ccmbiaation,


(  ?i  )

:212^4  it  gave  254  grains  of  fait  of  fibrous
cryftalization.  This  fait  was  diflblved  in  331
grains  of  water  ;  the  fpecific  gravity  of  the
foliition  was  1,148  nearly.

Hence  it  was  evident  that  fomc  of  the  fait
had  been  loft  during  the  evaporation.

To  find  the  quantity  loft,  fibrous  nitrate  of
ammoniac  was  difiblved  in  fmall  quantities  in
the  folutioUj  the  fpecific  gravity  of  which  was
examined  after  every  addition  of  3  grains.
When  Ingrains  had  been  added  to  it,  it  became
of  1,15.

Confequently,  the  folution  compofed  of  200
grains  of  ammoniacal,  and  of  385,5  of  nitric
acid  folution,  contained  262  grains  of  fait  of
fibrous  cryftalization,  and  of  this  fait  8  grains
were  loft  during  the  evaporation.

But  the  alkali  in  200  grains  of  ammoniacal
folution  of  ,9056  ==::  50,5  grains.  And  the
true  nitric  acid  in  385,5  grains  of  folution  of
1,306  =  IQO  grains.

t  I  had  before  proved  that  at  this  temperature  the  fait
neither  decompofed  nor  fublimed.


(    72    )

Then  262  —  240,5  =  21,5,  the  quantity  of
water.

And  262  grains  of  fibrous  cryftalized  nitrate
of  ammoniac,  contain  19O  grains  true  acid,
50,5  ammoniac,  and  21,5  water.  And  100
parts  contain  72,5  acid,  19,3  ammoniac,  and
8,2  water.

In  proportion  as  the  temperature  employed
for  the  evaporation  of  nitro-ammoniacal  folu-
tions,  is  above  or  below  212°,  fo  in  proportion
does  the  fait  produced  contain  more  or  lefs
water  than  the  fibrous  nitrate.  But  whatever
may  have  been  the  temperature  of  evaporation,
the  acid  and  alkali  appear  always  to  be  in  the
fame  proportions  to  each  other.

Of  the  falts  containing  different  quantities  of
water,  two  varieties  muft  be  particularly  noticed.
The  prifmatic  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  produced  at
the  common  femperaturesof  the  atmofphere,  and
containing  its  full  quantity  of  water  of  cryftali-
fation  ;  and  the  compa6l  nitrate  of  ammoniac,
either  amorphous,  or  compofcd  of  delicately
needled  cryflals,  formed  at  300°,  and  containing


(    78    )

but  little  more  water  than  exifts  in  nitric  acid
and  ammoniac.

To  difcover  the  cottipolition  of  the  prifmatic
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  200  grains  of  fibrous  fait
were  diflblved  in  the  fmalleft  poffible  quantity
of  water,  and  evaporated  in  a  temperature  not
exceeding  70°.  The  greater  part  of  the  fait
was  compofed  of  perfectly  formed  tetrahaedral
prifms,  terminated  by  tetrahsdral  pyramids.
It  had  gained  in  weight  about  8,5  grains.

Confcquently  100  grains  of  prifmatic  nitrate
of  ammoniac  may  be  fuppofed  to  contain  69,5
acid,   18,4  ammoniac,  and  12,1  water.

To  afcertain  the  compofition  of  the  compadl
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  I  expofed  in  a  deep  por-
celain cup,  400  grains  of  the  fibrous  fait,  in  a
temperature  below  300°.  It  quickly  became
fluid,  and  flowly  gave  out  its  water  without  any
ebullition,  or  liberation  of  gas.  When  it  was
become  perfedly  dry,  it  had  loft  33  grains.
I  fufpeded,  that  in  this  experiment  fome  of  the
fait  had  been  carried  off  with  the  water  ;  to
xletermine  this,  I  introduced  into  a  fmall  glafs


(    74    )

retort,  46o  grains  of  fibrous  fait ;  it  was  kept
at  a  heat  below  320^,  in  communication  with
a  mercurial  apparatus,  in  a  regulated  air-fur-
nace, till  it  was  perfeclly  dry  :  it  had  loft
23  grains.  No  gas,  except  the  common  air  of
the  retort  came  over,  and  the  fluid  coUedlcd
bad  but  a  faint  tafte  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac.

Though  in  this  experiment  I  had  removed
all  the  fluid  retained  in  the  neck  of  the
retort,  flill  a  few  drops  remained  in  the  head,
and  on  the  fides,  which  I  could  not  obtain.  It
was  of  importance  to  me  to  be  accurately  ac-
quainted with  the  compofition  of  the  compacSl
fait,  and  for  that  reafon  I  compared  thefe  ana-
lytical experiments  with  a  fynthetical  one.

I  faturated  200  grains  of  folution  of  ammo-
niac, of  ,9056  with  acid,  afcertained  the  fpe-
cific  gravity  of  the  folution,  evaporated  it  at
212°,  and  fufed  and  dried  it  at  about  300^—
260^  It  gave  246  grains  of  fait,  and  a  folu-
tion made  of  the  fame  fpecific  gravity  as  that
evaporated,  indicated  a  lofs  of  9  grains.  Con-
fequently,    255  grains  of  this  Hilt  contain  50.5


0

(    75    )

grains  alkali,   igo  grains  acid^  and  14^5  grains
water.

We  may  then  conclude,  that  100  parts  of
compad  nitrate  of  ammoniac  contain  74,5  acid,
19,8  alkali,  and  5,7  water.

V.  Decompofuion  of  Carbonate  of  Ammoniac
hy  Nitric  Acid.

In  my  firft  experiments  on  the  produflion  of
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  I  endeavoured  to  afcertain
its  compofition  by  decompounding  carbon-
ate of  ammoniac  by  nitric  acid  ;  and  in  making
for  this  purpofe,  the  analyfis  of  carbonate  of
ammoniac,  I  difcovered  that  there  exiiled  many
varieties  of  this  falt^  containing  very  different
proportions  of  carbonic  acid,  alkali^  and  water ;
the  carbonic  acid  and  water  being  fuperabnn-
dant  in  it,  in  proportion  as  the  temperature  of
its  formation  was  low,  and  the  alkali  in  pro-
portion as  it  Vv^as  high  :  and  not  only  that  a
different  fait  was  formed  at  every  different  tem-
perature,   but  likewife    that    the  difference  in


(   76  )

(hem  was  fo  great,  that  the  carbonate  of  ammo*
niac  formed  at  300^  contained  more  than  50
per  cent  alkali,  vvhilft  that  produced  at  6o°  con-
tained only  20.*

I  found  210  grains  of  carbonate  of  ammo-
niac, which  from  com  pari  fon  with  other  falts
previoufly  analifed,  I  fufpeiled  to  contain  about
20  or  21  per  cent  alkali,  faturated  by  200
grains  of  nitric  acid  of  1,504.  But  though
the  carbonate  was  diflblved  in  much  water,
llill,  from  the  fmell  of  the  carbonic  acid  gene-
rated, I  fufpe6l  that  a  fmall  portion  of  the
nitric  acid  was  diilblved,  and  carried  off  by
it.  The  folution,  evaporated  at  about  200%
and  afterwards  expofed  to  a  temperature  below
300°,  gave  232  grains  of  compa6l  fait.  But
reafoning  from  the  quantity  of  acid  in  200
grains  of  nitric  acid  of  1,504,  it  ought  to  have
given    245.      Confequently    13  were   loft   by


*  A  particular  account  of  the  experiments  from  which
thefe  fa6ts  were  deduced,  was  printed  in  September,  aod
will  appear  in  the  firft  volume  of  the  Bejcarchcs.


(  n  )

evaporation  ;  and  this  lofs  agrees  with  that  in
the  other  experiments.

V.  Decompojition  of  Sulphate  of  Ammoniac  hy
Nitre»

As  a  cheap  mode  of  obtaining  nitrate  of  am-
moniac, Dr.  Bed  DOES  propofed  to  decompofe
nitre  by  fulphate  of  ammoniac,  which  is  a  well
known  article  of  commerce.  From  fynthefis
of  fulphate  of  ammoniac,  compared  w^ith  analy-
iis  made  in  Auguft  1799?*  I  concluded  that
100  grains  of  prifmatic  fait  were  compofed  of
about  18  grains  ammoniac,  44  acid,  and  38
water  ;  and  fuppoling  100  grains  of  nitre  to
contain  50  acid,  100  grains  of  fulphate  of
ammoniac  will  require  for  their  decompolition
134  grains  of  nitre,  and  form  90;9  grains  of
compadl  nitrate  of  ammoniac.


*  And  which  will  be  publiihed,  with  an  account  of  its
perfed  decompofitioa  at  a  high  temperature,  in  the
Befearches.


(  7S   )

To  afcertain  if  the  fulphate  of  potaili  and
nitrate  of  ammoniac  could  be  eafily  feparated,  I
added  to  a  heated  faturated  folution  of  fulphate
of  ammoniac,  pulverifed  nitre,  till  the  decom-
pofition  was  complete.  After  this  decompoli-
lion,  the  folution  contained  a  flight  excefs  of
fulphuric  acid,  which  was  combined  with  lime,
and  the  whole  fet  to  evaporate  at  a  temperature
below  250°.  As  foon  as  the  fulphate  of  potafh
began  to  cryllalife,  the  folution  was  fufFered  to
cool,  and  then  poured  off  from  the  cryftalifed
fait,  which  appeared  to  contain  no  nitrate  of
ammoniac.  After  a  feconJ  evaporation  and
cryftalifation,  almofi:  the  whole  of  the  fulphate
appeared  to  be  depofited,  and  the  folution  of
nitrate  of  ammoniac  was  obtained  nearly  pure  :
it  was  evaporated  at  212%  and  gave  fibrous
cryftals.

VI.     Non-exiflence  of  Ammonia cal  Nitrites.

I  attempted  in  different  modes  to  combine
nitrous  acids  with  ammoniac,  fo  as  to  form  the
falts  which  have  been  fuppofed  to  exift,   and


(    79   )

called   nitrites  of  ammoniac  ;  but  without  fuc-
ccfs.

T  firft  decGmpofed  a  folution  of  carbonate  of
ammoniac  by  dilute  olive  colored  acid  ;  bat  in
this  procefs,  though  no  heat  was  generated,
yet  all  the  nitrous  gas  appeared  to  be  liberated
with  the  carbonic  acid.=^  I  then  combined  a
fmall  quantity  of  ni-trous  gas,  with  a  folution
of  nitrate  of  ammoniac.  But  after  evaporating
Ibis  folution  at  70° — 80°^  I  could  not  detecb
the  exiftence  of  nitrous  gas  in  the  fol id  fait;
it  was  given  out  during  the  evaporation  and
cryftalifation,  and  formed  into  nitrous  acid  by
the  oxygene  of  the  atmofpHere.  I  likewife
heated  nitrate  of  ammoniac  to  different  degrees,
and  partially  decompofed  it,  to  afcertain  if  in
any  cafe  the  acid  was  phlogifticated  by  heat :
but  in  no  experiment  could  I  detefl  the  exifience


*  When  nitrous  gas  exifts  in  neutro-faline  folutionsj
they  are  always  colored  more  orlefs  inlenfely,  from  yellow
to  olive,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  combined  with
them.


(    80    )

o(  nitrous  acid  in  the  heated  fait,  when  it  had
been  previoufly  perfedlly  neutralifed.

When  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  indeed,  with
excefs  of  nitric  acid,  is  expofed  to  heat,  the
fuperabundant  nitric  acid  becomes  phlogifti-
cated,  and  is  then  liberated  from  the  fait,  which
remains  neutral.*

We  may  therefore  conclude  that  nitrous  gas
has  little  or  no  affinity  for  folid  nitrate  of  am-
moniac, and  that  no  fubftance  exifts  to  which
the  name  nitrite  of  ammoniac  can  with  propriety
be  applied.

VII.     Of  the  four  ces  of  error  in  Analyfis,

To  compare  my  fynthelis  of  nitrate  of  ammo-
niac with  analylis,  I  endeavoured  to  feparate
the  ammoniac  and  nitric  acid  from  each  other,
without  decompofition.  But  in  going  through
the  analytical  procefs,  I  foon  difcovered  that

•  Hence  a  nitrate  of  ammoniac  with  excefs  of  acid,
when  expofed  to  heat,  firft  becomes  yellow,  and  then
white.


(    81     )

it  was  impoffible  to  make  it  accurate,  without
niany  collateral  laborious  experiments  on  the
quantities  of  ammoniac  folubic  in  water  at
different   temperatures.

At  a  temperature  above  212°,  I  decompofed^
by  cauftic  flacked  lirhe,  56  grains  of  compact  ni-
trate of  ammoniac  in  a  retort  communicating
with  the  mercurial  airholder,  the  moifture  ia
which  had  been  previoufly  faturated  with  ammo-
niac. 22  cubic  inches  of  gas  were  colle6led  at
38°,  and  from  the  lofs  of  weight  of  the  retort,  it
appeared  that  13  grains  of  folution  of  ammo-
niac in  water,  had  been  depofited  by  the  gas.

Now  evidently,  this  folution  muft  have  con-
tained much  more  alkali  in  proportion  to  its
water  than  that  of  55%  otherwife  the  quantity
of  ammoniac  in  50  grains  of  fait  would  hardly
equal  8  grains.*


*  The  accounts  given  by  different  chemifts  of  the  com-
pofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  are  extremely  difcordant^
they  have  been  chiefly  deduced  from  decompofiti9ns  of  car-
bonate of  ammoniac  (the  varieties  of  which  have  been


(    S2    )

VIII.  Of  the  lofs  of  Solutions  of  titrate  of
Ammoniac  during  evaporation.

The  mod  concentrated  folution  of  nitrate  of
ammoniac  capable  of  exi fling  at  60^,  is  of  fpeci-
fie  gravity  1,304,  and  contains  33  water,  and
5"J  fibrous  fait,  per  cent.  When  this  folution
is  evaporated  at  temperatures  betw^een  60°  and
100,  the  fait  is  increafed  in  weight  by  the
addition  of  water  of  cryftalifation,  and  no  por-
tion of  it  is  loft.

During  the  evaporation  of  folutions  of  fpccific
gravity  1,146  and  1,15,  at  temperatures  below
120'',  I  have  never  dcteded  any  lofs  of  fait.
When  the  temperature  of  evaporation  is  212^,
the  lofs  is  generally  from  3  to  4  grains  per
cent ;  and  when  from  230^  to  the  ftandard  of
their  ebullition,  from  4  to  6  grains.


heretofore  unknown)  by  nitrous  acids  of  unknown  degrees
of  nitration.  Hence  they  are  particularly  erroneous  with
regard  to  the  alkaline  part.  Wenzel  fuppofes  it  to  be  32
per  cent,  and  Kirwan  24. '    Adilit.  Ohferv,  pag.  120.


i


(    83    )

In  proportion  as  folutions  are  more  diluted,
their  lofs  in  evaporation  at  equal  temperatures
is  greater.


DIVISION  III.

Decomposition  of  NITRATE  of  AMMONIAC  :  prepa-
ration of  RESPIRABLE  NITROUS  OXIDE;  it&
ANALYSIS,


Of  the    heat    required  for   the   decomposition  of
NITRATE  of  AMMONIAC.


JL  HE  decompofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac
has  been  fuppofed  by  Cornette'*  to  take  place
at  temperatures  below  212^,  and  its  fublimation
at  234^

Kirwan,  from  the  non-coincidence  in  the
accounts  of  its  compofition,  has  imagined  that
it  is  partially  decompofable,   even  by  a  heat  of

To  afcerlain  the  changes  efFedled  by  increafe
of  temperature  in  this  fait,  a  glafs  retort  was  pro-
vided, tubulated  for  the  purpofe  of  introducing

•  Mem.  Par.  1783.     See  Irifli  Tranf.  vol.  4,
t  Addit.  Obf.  png.  ISiO


(    85    )

the  bulb  of  a  thermometer.  After  it  had  been
made  to  communicate  with  the  mercurial  air-
holder,  and  placed  in  a  furnace,  the  heat  of
which  could  be  eafily  regulated,  the  thermo-
meter was  introduced,  and  the  retort  filled  with
the  fait,  and  carefully  luted;  fo  that  the  ap-
pearances produced  by  different  temperatures
could  be  accurately  obferved,  and  the  produdls
evolved  obtained.

i

From  a  number  of  experiments  made  in  this
manner  on  different  falts,  the  following  con-
clufions  were  drawn.

lil.  Compadi,  or  dry  nitrate  of  ammoniac^^
undergoes  little  or  no  change  at  temperatures
below  260^.

2dly.  At  temperatures  between  2/5^  and
300°,  it  flowly  fublimes,  without  decompofition,
or  without  becoming  fluid.

3dly.  2\t  320^  it  becomes  fluid,  decom-
pofes,  and  flill  flowly  fublimes ;  it  neither
affuming,  or  continuing  in,  the  fluid  ftate,  witb-
Qiit  decompofition.


(   S6   )

4thly.  At  temperatures  between  340^  and
480'',  it  decompofes  rapidly.

5thly.  The  prifmatic  and  fibrous  nitrates  of
ammoniac  become  fluid  at  temperatures  below
300",  and  undergo  ebullition  at  temperatures
between  36o^  and  400^,  without  decompofition.

6thly.  They  are  capable  of  being  heated  to
430°  without  decompofition,  or  fublimation,
till  a  certain  quantity  of  their  water  is  evapo-
rated.

7thly.  At  temperatures  above  450°  they
undergo  decompofition,  without  previoufly
lofing  their  water  of  cryflalifation.

II.  Decompofition  of  Kitrate  of  Ammoniac  ;
produBmi  of  refprahle  Nitrous  Oxide ;  its  pro^
perties.

200  grains  of  compacl  nitrate  of  ammoniac
were  introduced  into  a  glafs  retort,  and  dccom*
pofcd  flowly  by  the  heat  of  a  fpirit  lamp.  The
firft  portions  of  the  gas  that  came  over  were
rcjedled,  and  the  laft  received  in  jars  containing


(    B7    )

mercury.  No  luminous  appearance  was  per-
ceived in  the  retort  during  the  procefs,  and
almoft  the  whole  of  the  fait  was  refolved  into
fluid  and  gas.  The  fluid  had  a  faint  acid  tafte^
and  contained  fome  undecompounded  nitrate.
The  gas  collected  exhibited  the  following  pro-
perties.—

a,  A  candle  burnt  in  it  with  a  brilliant
flame,  and  crackling  noife.  Before  its  extinc-
tion, the  white  inner  flame  became  furrounded
with  an  exterior  blue  one.

h.  Phofphorus  introduced  into  it  in  a  flate
of  inflammation,  burnt  with  infinitely  greater
vividnefs  than  before.

c.  Sulphur  introduced  into  it  when  burning
with  a  feeble  blue  flame,  was  inftantly  extin-
guiflied  ;  but  when  in  a  fl:ate  of  adtive  inflam-
mation (that  is,  forming  fulphuric  acid)  it
burnt  with  a  beautiful  and  vivid  rofe-colored
flame.

d.  Inflamed  charcoal,  deprived  of  hydro-
gene,  introduced  into  it,  burnt  with  much
greater  vividnefs  than  in  the  atmofphc^re.


(    S8    )

e.  To  fome  fine  twifted  iron  wire  a  fmall
piece  of  cork  was  affixed  :  this  was  inflamed,
and  the  whole  introduced  into  ajar  of  the  air.
The  iron  burned  with  great  vividncfs.  and  threw,
out  bright  fparks  as  in  oxygen e.

yi  30  meafures  of  it  expofed  to  water  pre-
vioufly  boiled,  was  rapidly  abforbcd  ;  when  the
diminution  was  complete,  rather  more  than  a
meafure  remained.

g.  Pure  water  faturated  with  it,  gave  it  out
again  on  ebullition,  and  the  gas  thus  produced
retained  all  its  former  properties.

h^  It  was  abforbed  by  red  cabbage  juice  ;
but  no  alteration  of  color  took  place.

/.  Its  tafte  was  diftindly  fweet,  and  its  odor
flight,  but  agreeable.

j, '  It  underwent  no  diminution  when  ipin-r
gled  with  oxygene  or  nitrous  gas.

Such  were  the  obvious  properties  of  thp
Nitrous  Oxide,  or  the  gas  produced  by  the
decompofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac  in  a  tem-
perature not  exceeding  440^.      Other  proper-


(    89   )

ties  of  It  will  be  hereafter  demonftrated,  and  its
affinities  fully  inveftigated.

III.  Of  the  gas  remaining  after  the  abforption  of
Mtrous  Oxide  hy  Water,

In  expofing  nitrous  oxide  at  different  times
to  rain  or  fpring  water,  and  water  that  had
been  lately  boiled,  I  found  that  the  gas  re-
maining after  the  abforption  was  always  leaft
when  boiled  water  was  employed,  though  from
the  mode  of  produ6lion  of  the  nitrous  oxide,  I
had  reafon  to  believe  that  its  compofition  was
generally  the  fame.

This  circumftance  induced  me  to  fuppofe
that  fome  of  the  refiduum  might  be  gas  prd-
vioufly  contained  in  the  water,  and  liberated
from  it  in  confequence  of  the  (Wronger  affinity
of  that  fluid  for  nitrous  oxide.  But  the  greater
part  of  it,  I  conjectured  to  confift  of  nitrogcne
produced  in  confequence  of  a  complete  decom-
pofition  of  part  of  the  acid,  by  the  hydrogene.
It  was  in  endeavoring  to  afcertain  the  relative


(  90   )

I

purity  of  nitrous  oxide  produced  at  different
periods  of  the  procefs  of  the  decompofition  of
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  that  I  difcovered  the  true
reafon  of  the  appearance  of  refidual  gas.

I  decompofed  fome  pure  nitrate  of  ammoniac
in  a  fmall  glafs  retort ;  and  after  fufFering  the
firfl  portions  to  efcapc  with  the  common  air,  I
caught  the  remainder  in  three  feparatc  vefiels
ftanding  in  the  fame  trough,  filled  with  water
that  had  been  long  boiled,  and  which  at  the
time  of  the  experiment  was  fo  warm  that  I  could
fcarcely  bear  my  hands  in  it.  The  different
quantities  collefled  gave  the  fame  intenfe  bril-
liancy to  the  flame  of  a  taper.

26  meafurcs  of  each  of  them  were  feparately
inferted  into  3  graduated  cylinders,  of  nearly
the  fame  capacity,  over  the  fame  boiled  water.
As  the  water  cooled,  the  gas  was  abforbed  by
agitation.  When  the  diminution  was  com-
plete,  the  refiduum  in  each  cylinder  filled,
as  nearly  as  poflible,  the  fame,  fpace  ;  about
two  thirds  of  a  meafure.

To  each  of  the  refiduums  I  added  two  mea-


('qi   )

iurcs  of  nitrous  gas  ;  they  gave  copious  red
vapor,  and  after  the  condenfation  filled  a  fpace
rather  lefs  than  two  meafures.

Hence  the  refidual  gas  contained  more
oxygcne  than  common  air.

I  now  introduced  26  meafures  of  gas  from
one  of  the  veflels  into  a  cylinder  filled  vi'ith
unboiled  fpring  water  of  the  fame  kind.*  After
the  abforption  w^as  complete,  near  two  meafures
remained.  Thefe  added  to  two  meafures  of
nitrous  air,  diminifhed  to  1,5  nearly.

Thefe  experiments  induced  me  to  believe
that  the  rciidual  gas  was  not  produced  in  the
decompofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  but  that
it  was  wholly  liberated  from  the  water.

To  afcertain  this  point  with  precifion,  I
diftilled  a  fmall  quantity  of  the  farne  kind  of
water,  which  had  been  near  an  hour  in  ebul-
lition, into  a  graduated  cylinder  containing
mercury.     To  this  I  introduced  about  one  third

*  Two  meafures  of  air  dii'pelled  from  this  water  by
boiling,  mingled  with  2  of  nitrous  gas^  diminiflicd  to  3,4
nearly.


(  92   )

of  its  bulk,  i.e.  12  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide,
which  had  been  carefully  generated  in  the  mer-
curial apparatus.  After  the  abforption,  a  fmall
globule  of  gas  only  remained,  which  could
hardly  have  equalled  one  fourth  of  a  meafure.
On  admitting  to  this  globule  a  minute  quantity
of  nitrous  gas,  an  evident  diminution  took  place.

Though  this  experiment  proved  that  in  pro-
portion as  the  water  was  free  from  air,  the  reii-
duum  was  lefs,  and  though  there  was  no  reafon
to  fuppofe  that  the  ebullition  and  diftillation
had  freed  the  water  from  the  whole  of  the  air
it  had  held  in  folution,  ftill  I  confidered  a
decifive  experiment  wanting  to  determine  whe-
ther nitrous  oxide  was  the  only  gas  produced  in
the  flow  decompofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,
or  whether  a  minute  quantity  of  oxygene  wa^
not  likewife  evolved.

I  received  the  middle  part  of  the  product  of
a  decompofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  under
a  cylinder  filled  with  dry  mercury,  and  intro-
duced to  it  Ibme  ftrong  folution  of  ammoniac.
After  the  white  cloud  produced  by  the  combi-


(   93   )

nation  of  the  ammoniacal  vapor  with  the  nitric
acid  fiifpended  in  the  nitrous  oxide^  had  been
completely  precipitated,  I  introduced  a  fmall
quantity  of  nitrous  gas.  No  white  vapor  was
produced.

Now  if  any  gas  combinable  with  nitrous  gas
had  exifted  in  the  cylinder^  the  qnantiry  of
nitrous  acid  produced,  however  fmall,  would
have  been  rendered  perceptible  by  the  ammo-
tiiacal  fumes ;  for  when  a  minute  globule  of
common  air  was  admitted  into  the  cylinder^
white  clouds  were  inftantly  perceptible.

It  feems  therefore  reafonable  to  conclude^       »

1.  That  the  refidual  gas  of  nitrous  oxide,  is
air  previoufly  contained  in  the  water,  (which
in  no  cafe  can  be  perfectly  freed  from  it  by
ebullition),  and  liberated  by  the  llronger  attrac-
tion of  that  fluid  for  nitrous  oxide.

2.  That  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  at  temperatures
below  440%  is  decompounded  into  pure  nitrous
oxide,  and  fluid.

3.  That  in  afcertainlng  the  purity  of  nitrous
oxide  from  its  abforption  by  water,  correflions
ought  to  be  made  for  the    quantity  of  gas  dif-


(    S4    )

pelled  from  the  water.  This  quantify  in  com-
mon water  diililled  under  mercury  being  about
-  ;  in  water  limply  boiled,  and  ufcd  when  hot,
about  ^  ;  and  in  contmon  fpring  water,  l^*

IV.    Specific  gravity  of  Nitrons  Oxide,

To  underfland  accurately  the  changes  taking
place  during  the  decompofition  of  nitrate  of
ammoniac,  we  muft  be  acquainted  with  the
fpecific  gravity  and  compofition  of  nitrous
oxide.

90  cubic  inches  of  it,  containing  about  —
common  air,  introduced  from  the  mercurial
airholder  into  an  exhaufled  globe,  increafed  it
in  weight  44.75  grains  ;  thermometer  being
51°,  and  atmofpheric  prefTure  30,7-

106  cubic  inches,  of  fimilar  compofition,
weighed  in  like  maimer,  gave  at  the  fame  tem-
perature and  prefTure  nearly  52,25  grains  ;  and
in  another  experiment,  when  the  thermometer
was  41»,   53  grains.

So  that  accounting  for  the  fmall  quantity  of


(   95   )

common  air  contained  in  the  gafes  weighed,  we
may  conclude,  that  100  cubic  inches  of  pure
nitrous  oxide  weigh  50,1  grains  at  temperature
50^,  and  atmofphcric  preffure  37.

I  was  a  little  furprifed  at  this  great  fpecific
gravity,  particularly  as  I  had  expelled,  from
Dr.  Prieftley's  obfervations,  to  find  it  lefs  heavy
than  atmofpherical  air.  This  philofopher  fup-
pofed,  from  fome  appearances  produced  by  the
mixture  of  it  with  aeriform  ammoniac,  that  it
was  even  of  Icfs  fpecific  gravity  than  that  gas.*

V.     Analyfts  of  Nitrons  Oxide,

The  nitrous  oxide  may  be  analifed,  either  by
charcoal  or  hydrogene  ;  during  the  combuflion
of  other  bodies  in  it,  fmall  portions  of  nitrous
acid  are  generally  formed,  as  will  be  fully  ex-
plained hereafter.

The  gas  that  I  employed  \vas  generated  from


*  Experiments  and  Obfervations,  vol.  2,  pag,  89.     LnJR;
Edition,


(   96  )

compact  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  and  was  in  lis
higheft  (late  of  purity,  as  it  left  a  refiduum  of
38  only,  when  abforbed  by  boiled  water.

30  cubic  inches  of  it  were  inferted  into  ajar
graduated  to  ,1  cubic  inches,  containing  dry
mercury.  Through  this  mercury  a  piece  of
charcoal  which  had  been  deprived  of  its  hydro-
gene  by  long  expofure  to  heat,  weighing  about
a  grain,  was  introduced,  while  yet  warm:  No
perceptible  abforption  of  the  gas  took  place.*

Thermometer  being  46°,  the  focus  of  a  Isns
was  thrown  on  the  charcoal,  which  inftantly
took  fire,  and  burnt  vividly  for  about  a  minute,
the  gas  being  incrcafed  in  volume.  After  the
vivid  combuftion  had  ceafed,  the  focus  was
again  thrown  on  the  charcoal ;  it  continued  to
burn  for  near  ten  minutes,  when  the  procefs
{lopped.

The  gas^  when  the  original  prefTure  and  tem-
perature were  reftorcd,  filled  a  fpace  equal  to
12,5  cubic  inches.

"  A  minute  quantity,  however,  muft  have  been  abforbed,
and  given  out  again  when  the  charcoal  was  heated.


(    97    )

On  introducing  to  it  a  fmall  quantity  of
ilrong  folution  of  ammoniac*',  white  vapor
was  inftantly  perceived,  and  after  a  fhort  time
the  redu6\ion  was  to  about  10,1  cubic  inches;  Co
that  apparently,  2,4  cubic  inches  of  carbonic
acid  had  been  formed.  The  10,1  cubic  inches
of  gas  remtlining  vvere  expofed  to  water  which
had  been  long  in  ebullition,  and  which  was
introduced  whilft  boiling,  under  mercury.
After  the  abforption  of  the  nitrous  oxide
by  the  water,  the  gas  remaining  was  equal  to
5,3.

But  on  combining  a  cubic  inch  of  pure  nitrous
oxide  with  fome  of  the  fame  water,  which  had
been  received  under  mercury  in  a  feparate  veffel,
nearly  -  remained.  Cpnfequently  we  luay
conclude,  that  5,1  of  a  gas  unabforbable  by
water,  was  produced  in  the  combullion.

This  gas  extinguifhed  flame,  gave  no  dimi-
nution with  oxygene,  and  the  flightefl:  poffible


*  Strong  foliUion  of  ammoniac  has  no  attia6tion   for
nitrous  oxide.


(   98   )

with  nitrous  gas.  When, an  eledlrlc  fpark  was
paflecl  through  it,  mingled  with  oxygene  ;  no
inflammation,  or  percepiible  diminution  took
place. 'J^  We  may  confequently  conclude  that
it  was  nitrogene,  mingled  with  a  minute  por-
tion of  common  air,  expelled  from  the  water.

The  charcoal  was  diminifhed  in  bulk  to  one
half  nearly,  but  the  lofs  of  weight  could  not
be  afcertained,  as  its  pores  were  filled  with
mercury.

Now  5  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide  were
ablbrbed  by  the  water,  confequently  5  were
decompounded  by  the  charcoal ;  and  thefe  pro-
duced 5,1  cubic  inches  of  nitrogene;  and  by
giving  their  oxygene  to  the  charcoal,  apparently
2,4  of  carbonic  acid.

But  5  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide  weigh  2,5
grains,  and  5,1  cubic  inches  of  nitrogene  1,55  ;
then  2,5  —  1,55  =  ,95.

So  that  reafoning   from  the  relative  fpecific


I  The  gas  was  examined  by  thofe  tells  in  order  to  prove
that  no  water  had  been  decompofed.


(   &9   )

gravities  of  nitrogene  and  nitrous  otide,  2,5
grains  of  the  laft  are  compofed  of  1,55  nitro-
gene, and  ,95  oxygene.

But  from  many  experiments  made  on  the
fpecific  gravity  of  carbonic  acid,  in  Augutl,
179P,  I  concluded  that  100  cubic  inches  of  it
weighed  47,5  grains,  thermometer  being  6o,l°a
and  barometer  29,5.  Confequently,  making
the  neceflary  correflions,  2,4  cubic  inches  of
it  weigh  IjM  grains;  and  on  Lavoifier's  and
Guyton's  *  eftimation  of  its  compofition,  thefe
1,13  grains  contain  8,2  of  oxygene.

So  that,  drawing  conclulions  from  the  quan-
tity of  carbonic  acid  formed  in  this  experiment,
2,5  grains  of  nitrous  oxide  will  be  compofed  of
,82  oxygene,  and  1,68  nitrogene.

The  difference  between  ihefe  eftimations  is
confidcrable,  and  yet  not  more  than  might
have  been  expelled,  if  vveconfider  the  probable
fog rces  of  error  in  the  experiment.

*  See  the  curious  paper  of  this  excellent  philofopber,  on
the  combuftion  of  the  diamond,  in  which  he  proves  that
charcoal  is,  in  fa«5^,  o:udp  of  diamond.    Anijaks  de  Gbicnie,


(    100  )

1.  It  is  likely  that  variable  minute  quan-
tities of  h}  drogcne  remain  combined  with  char-
coal, even  after  it  has  been  long  expofed  to  a
red  heat.

2.  It  is  probable  that  the  nitrogene  and  car-
bonic acid  produced  were  capable  of  diflblving
more  water  than  that  held  in  folution  by  the  ni-
trous oxide ;  and  if  fo,  they  were  more  condenfed
than  if  faturated  with  moiflure,  and  hence  the
quantity  of  carbonic  acid  under-rated.

We  may  conlequently  fuppofe  the  eflimation
founded  on  the  quantity  of  nitrogene  evolved,
moft  corredl ;  and  making  a  fmall  allowance
for  the  difference,  conclude,  that  100  grains
of  nitrous  oxide  are  compofed  of  about  37
oxygene,  and  63  nitrogene  ;  exifting  in  a  much
more  condenfed  ftate  than  when  in  their  fimplc
forms.

The  tolerable  accuracy  of  this  ftatement  will
be  hereafter  demonflrated  by  a  number  of  expe-
riments on  the  combuftion  of  different  bodies
in  nitrous  oxide,  detailed  in  Refearch  II.


(101)

VI.    Minute  examination  of  the  decompofttion  of
Nitrate  of  Ammoniac.

Into  a  retort  weighing  413,75  grains,  and
of  the  capacity  of  7,5  cubic  inches,  100  grains
of  pulverifed  compa6l  nitrate  of  ammoniac  were
introduced.  To  the  neck  of  this  retort  was
adapted  a  recipient,  weighing  7 1 1  grains,  tubu-
lated for  the  purpofe  of  communicating  with
the  mercurial  airholdcr,  and  of  the  capacity  of
8,3  cubic  inches.

Temperature  being  50^,  and  atmofpheric
preflTure  30,6,  the  recipient  was  inferted  into  a
vefTel  of  cold  water,  and  made  to  communicate
with  the  airholder.  The  heat  of  a  fpirit  lamp
was  then  flowly  applied  to  the  retort  :  the  fait
quickly  began  to  decompofe,  and  to  liquify.
Tl^e  temperature  was  fo  regulated,  as  to  keep
up  an  equable  and  flow  decompofition.

During  this  decompofition,  no  luminous
appearance  was  perceived  in  the  retort;  the
gas  that  came  into  the  airholder  was  very  little


(   102  )

clouded,  and   much  water  condenfed   in  the
receiver.

After  the  procefs  was  finifhed,  the  commu-
nication between  the  mercurial  airholder  and
the  recipient  was  preferved  till  the  common
temperature  was  reftored  to  the  retort.

The  volume  of  the  gas  in  the  cylinder  was
85,5  cubic  inches.  The  abfclute  quantity  of
nitrous  oxide  in  thofe  85,5  cubic  inches,  it  was
difficult  to  afcertain  with  great  nicety,  on  ac-
count of  the  common  air  previoufly  contained
in  the  vefTels.

45  meafures  of  it,  expofed  to  well  boiled
water,  diminifhed  by  agitation  to  8  mea-
fures. So  that  reafoning  from  the  quan-
tity of  air,  which  fhould  have  been  expelled
from  the  water  by  the  nitrous  oxide,  we  may
conclude  that  the  85,5  cubic  inches  were  nearly
pure.

The  retort  now  weighed  419,25  grains,  con-
fcqucntly  5,5  grains  of  fait  remained  in  it.
This  fait  was  chiefly  colledled  about  the  lower
part  of  the  neck,  and   contained  rather  more


(   103   )

water  than   the   compadl   nitrate,  as  in  fome
places  it  was  cryftalifed.

The  recipient  with  the  fluid  it  contained,
Vveighed  75g  grains.  '  It  had  confeqiiently
gained  in  weight  48  grains.

Now  the  85,5  cubic  inches  of  nitrons  oxide
produced,  weigh  about  42,5  grains;  and  this  ad-
ded to  48  and  5,5,  =  96  grains  ;  fo  that  about  4
grains  of  fait  and  fluid  were  loft,  probably  by
being  carried  over  and  depofited  by  the  gas.*

As  much  of  the  fluid  as  could  betaken  out  of
the  recipient,  weighed  46  grains,  and  held  in  fo-
lution  much  nitrate  of  ammoniac  with  fuper-
abundance  of  acid.  This  acid  required  for  its
faturation,  3  -  of  carbonate  of  ammoniac  (con-
taining,  as  well  as  I  could  guefs),  about  20  per
cent  alkali.

The  whole  folution  evaporated,  gave  18
grains  of  compadl  nitrate  of  ammoniac.     But


*This  was  adually  the  cafe;  for  on  examining  the  con-
ducing tube  the  day  after  the  CKperiment,  fome  minute
cryftals  of  prifiuatic  nitrate  of  ammoniac  were  perceived
in  it.


(   104  )

rcafoning  from  the  quantity  of  carbonate  of
ammoniac  employed,  the  free  nitric  acid  was
equal  to  2,^5  grains,  and  this  muft  have  formed
3,56  grains  of  fait.  Confequently  the  fait  pre--
exifting  in  the  folution  was  about  14,44  grains.
Bat  befides  the  fluid  takeri  out  of  the  recipient,
2  grains  remained  in  it :  let  us  fuppofe  this^
and  the  4  grains  loft,  to  contain  2  of  fait,  and
.6  of  free  acid.
Then  the  undecompounded

fait  is  5,5  +  14.4  +  2         =     21,9
The  free  acid  2,75  +  ,6  =       3,35

Gas  -  .  -  42,5

Water  ^  -  ^  32,25


]00

Now  about  76,1  grains  of  fait  were  decom-
pounded, and  formed  into  42.5  grains  of  gas,
3,35  grains  acid,  and  32,25  grains  water.

But  there  is  every  reafon  to  fuppofe,  tli^it  iq
this  procefs,  when  the  hydrogene  of  the  ammo-
niac combines  with  a  portion  of  the  oxygene  of
the  nitric  acid  to  form  water,  and  the  nitrogenc


(   105  )

enters  into  union  with  the  nitrogene  and  re-
maining oxygene  of  the  nitric  acid,  to  form
nitrous  oxide ;  that  water  pre-exifting  in  nitric
acid  and  ammoniac,  fuch  as  they  exifted  in
the  aeriform  ftate,  is  depolited  with  the  water
produced  by  the  new  arrangement,  and  not
wholly  combined  with  the  nitrous  oxide  formed.
Hence  it  is  impoffible  to  determine  with  great
exactitude,  the  quantity  of  water  which  was
abfolutely  formed  in  this  experiment.

78,1    grains  of  fait   are   compofed   of  15,4
alkali,  58  acid,  and  4,7  water.

And  reafoning  from  the  different  affinities  of
water  for  nitric  acid,  ammoniac,  and  nitrous
oxide,  it  is  probable  that  ammoniac,  in  its  de-
compofition,  divides  its  water  in  fuch  a  ratio,
between  the  nitrogene  furniflied  to  the  nitrous
oxide,  and  the  hydrogene  entering  into  union
with  the  oxygene  of  the  nitric  acid,  as  to  enable
us  to  affume,  that  the  hydrogene  requires  for
its  faturation  nearly  the  fame  quantity  of  oxy-
gene as  when  in  the  aeriform  tlate  ;  or  that  it
certainly  cannot  require  lefs.


(  loS  )

But  15,4  alkali  contain  3^08  hydrogene,  and
12,32  nitrogene  ;*  and  3,08  hydrogene  require
17,4  of  oxygene  to  form  20,48  of  water.

Now  32,5  grains  of  water  exifted  before  the
experiment ;  4,7  grains  of  water  were  con-
tained by  the  fait  decompofed,  and  32,5  —  4,7
=z  27,8  :  and  27,8  —  20,48,  the  quantity  gene-
rated, =  7^52,  the  quantity  cxifting  in  the  nitric
acid.

But  the  nitric  acid  decompofed  is  58^  —  3,35
=  to  54,7  ;  and  54,7  —  7-5  =  47,2,  which
entered  into  new  combinations.  Thefe  47,2
confift  of  33,2  oxygene,  and  14,  nitrogene.
And  33,2 — 17,4,  the  quantity  employed  to
form  the  water,  =  15,8,  which  combined  with
14„  nitrogene  of  the  nitric  acid,  and  12,32
of  that  of  the  ammoniac,  to  form  42,12  of
nitrous  oxide.  And  on  this  eflimation,  100  parts
of  nitrous  oxide  would  contain  37,6  oxygene,
and  62,4  nitrogene  ;  a  computation  much
nearer  the   refults  of  the  analyfis  than  could

*  Owing  part  of  their  weight  to  an  unknown  quantity
of  water.


(  107  )

have  been  expected,  particularly  as  fo  many
unavoidable  fources  of  error  exifted  in  the
procefs.

The  experiment  that  I  have  detailed  is  the
mod  accurate  of  four,  made  on  the  fame  quan-
tity of  fait.  The  others  were  carried  on  at
rather  higher  temperatures,  in  confequence  of
which,  more  water  and  fait  were  fublimed  with
the  gas.

To  Berthollet^  we  owe  the  diTcovery  of  the  pro*
dudts  evolved  during  the  flow  decompofition  of
nitrate  of  ammoniac;    but  as  this  philofopher
in  his  examination  of  this  procefs,  chiefly  de-
figned  to  prove  the  exiftence  of  hydrogene  in
ammoniac,  he  did  not  afcertain  the  quantity  of
gas  produced,  or  minutely  examine  its  proper-
ties ;  from  two  of  them,  its  abforption  by  water
and  its  capability  of  fupporting  the  vivid  com-
buftion  of  a  taper,  he  inferred  its  identity  with
the  dephlogifticated  nitrous  gas  of  Prieftley,  and
concluded  that  it  was  nitrous  gas  with   excefs
of  pure  air.*

*Mem.  de  Paris.  1785;,  and  Journal  de  Phyfique,  1/80,
page  175.


(   108  )

VIL     Of  the  heat  produced  during  the  decom*
fofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac.

To  afccrtain  whether  the  temperature  of
nitrate  of  ammoniac  was  increafed  or  diminifhed
after  it  had  been  raifed  to  the  point  elTential  to
its  decompofition,  during  the  evolution  of  ni-
trous oxide  and  water  ;  that  is,  in  common  lan-
guage, whether  heat  was  generated  or  abforbed
in  the  procefs  ;  I  introduced  a  thermometer  into
about  1500  grains  of  fibrous  nitrate  of  ammo-
niac, rendered  liquid  in  a  deep  porcelain  cup.
During  the  whole  of  the  evaporation,  the  tem-
perature was  about  380*",  the  fire  being  care-
fully regulated.

As  foon  as  the  decompofition  took  place,  the
thermometer  began  to  rife ;  in  lefs  than  a  quar-
ter of  a  minute  it  was  410^,  in  two  minutes  it
was  460°,

The  cup  was  removed  from  the  fire ;  the  de-
compofition flill  went  on  rapidly,  and  for  about
a  minute  the  thermometer  was   flationary.     It


(  i09  )

then  gradually  and  flowly  fell ;  in  three  minutes
it  was  440*',  in  five  minutes  420^,  in  feven
minutes  405°,  in  nine  minutes  36o°,  and  in
thirteen  minutes  307°,  when  the  decompofition
had  nearly  ceafed,  and  the  fait  began  to  folidify.
From  this  experiment,  it  is  evident  that  an
increafe  of  temperature  is  produced  by  the
decompofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac  :  though
the  capacity  of  water  and  nitrous  oxide  for
heat,  fuppofing  the  truth  of  the  common  doc-
trine, and  reafoning  from  analogy,  mull  be
confiderably  greater  than  that  of  the  fait.

VIII.  Of  the  decompofition  of  Nitrate  of  Am-
moniac at  high  temperatures^  and  produBion  of
Nitrous  gas ^  Nitrogene^  Nitrous  Acid,  and  Water.

At  an  early  period  of  my  inveftigation  relating
to  the  nitrous  oxide,  I  difcovered  that  when  a
heat  above  600°  was  applied  to  nitrate  of  ammo-
niac, fo  that  a  vivid  luminous  appearance  was  pro-
duced in  the  retort,  certain  portions  of  nitrous
gas,    and    nitrogene,    were  evolved   with  the


(110)

nitrous  oxide.  But  I  was  for  fome  time  igna-
rant  of  the  precife  nature  of  this  decompofition^
and  doubtful  with  regard  to  the  poflibility  of
effedting  it  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  prevent  the
produ61ion  of  nitrous  oxide  altogether.

I  firfi:  attempted  to  decompofc  nitrate  of
ammoniac  at  high  temperatures,  by  introducing
it  into  a  well  coated  green  glafs  retort,  having
a  wide  neck,  communicating  with  the  pneu-
matic apparatus,  and  ftrongly  heated  in  an  air-
furnace.  But  though  in  this  procefs  a  detona-
tion always  took  place,  and  much  light  was  pro-
duced, yet  fiill  the  greater  portion  of  the  gas
generated  was  nitrous  oxide  ;  the  nitrous  gas
and  nitrogene  never  amounting  to  more  than
one  third  of  the  whole.

After  breaking  many  retorts  by  explotions,
without  gaining  any  accurate  refults,  I  em-
ployed a  porcelain  tube,  curved  fo  as  to  be
capable  of  introduction  into  the  pneumatic
apparatus,  and  clofed  at  one  rnd.

The  clofed  end  was  heated  red,  nitrate  of
ammoniac  introduced  into  it,  and  all  the  latter


( 111 )

portions  of  gas  produced  in  the  explofion,  re-
ceived in  the  pneumatic  apparatus,  filled  with
warm  water.

Three  cxplofions  were  required  to  fill  a  jar
of  the  capacity  of  20  cubic  inches.  The  gas
produced  in  the  firft,  when  it  came  over,  was
tranfparent  and  dark  orange,  fimilar  in  its
appearance  to  the  nitrous  acid  gas  produced  in
the  firfl  experiment ;  but  it  fpeedily  became
white  and  clouded,  whilft  a  flight  diminution
of  volume  took  place.

When  the  fecond  portion  was  generated  and
mingled  with  the  clouded  gas,  it  again  became
tranfparent  and  yellow  for  a  fliort  time,  and  then
affumed  the  fame  appearance  as  before.

The  water  in  the  trough,  after  this  experi-
ment, had  an  acid  tafte,  and  quickly  red-
dened cabbage  juice  rendered  green  by  an
alkali

6  cubic  inches  of  the  gas  produced  were
expofed  to  boiled  water,  but  little  or  no  abforp-
tion  took  place.  Hence,  evidently,  it  con-
tained no  nitrous  oxide.


(  112 )

They  were  tlien  expofed  to  folution  of  ful-
phate  of  iron :  the  folution  quickly  became  dark
colored,  and  an  abforption  of  1,6  took  place
on  agitation.*

The  gas  remaining  inftantly  extinguifhed  the
taper,  and  was  confequently  nitrogene.
^  This  experiment  was  repeated,    with    nearly
the  fame  refults.

We  may  then  conclude,  that  at  high  tem-
peratures, nitrate  of  ammoniac  is  wholly  re-
folved  into  water,  nitrous  acid,  nitrous  gas,
and  nitrogene  ;  whilft  a  vivid  luminous  appear-
ance is  produced.
/  The  tranfparency  and  orange  color  produced

in  the  gas  that  had  been  clouded,   by  new  por-
tions of  it,  doubtlefs  arofe  from  the  folution  of
the  nitric  acid  and  water  forming  the  cloud,  in
%  the  heated  nitrous  vapor  produced,  fo  as  to  con-

ftitute  an  aeriform  triple  compound  ;  whilft  the
cloudinefs  and  abforption  fubfcquent  were  pro-


^'  The  abforption  of  nitrous  gas  by  fulphate  of  iron^  kc
will  be  treated  of  in  the  next  cUvifion.


{   113  )

duced  by  the  diminiftied  temperature,  which
deflroyed  the  ternary  combination,  and  feparated
the  nitrous  acid  and  water  from  the  nitrous
gas.

From  the  rapidity  with  which  the  deflagra-
tion of  nitrate  of  ammoniac  proceeds,  and  from
the  immenfe  quantity  of  light  produced,  it  is
reafonable  to  fuppofe  that  a  very  great  in creafe
of  temperature  takes  place.  The  tube  in  which
the  decompofition  has  been  efFeded,  is  always
ignited  after  the  procefs.

IX.  Speculations  on  the  decompojitions  of
Nitrate  of  Ammoniac,

All  ■  the  phsenomena  of  chemillry  concur  in
proving,  that  the  affinity  of  one  body,  A,  for
another,  B,  is  not  deftroyed  by  its  eombinatioa
with  a  third,  C,  but  only  modified  ;  either  by
condenfation,  or  expanfion,  or  by  the  attra6lion
of  C  for  B.

On  this  principle,  the  attraction  of  compound
bodies  for  each  other  mufl  be  revolved  into  the

H


(  114.  )

reciprocal  atlraflions  of  their  cotiftituents,  and
conlequeotly  the  changes  produced  in  them  by
variations  of  tem|>erature  eipblned,  from  the
alteratioas  prodoced  in  the  attradions  of  thofc
coniiit!icnts.

Thus  in  nitrate  of  ammoniac^  four  affioltics
may  be  fappofed  to  exill :

1*  That  of  hydrogeoe  for  nitrogenCj  produ-
clng  ammoniac.

2.  That  of  oxygeoe  for  nitrous  gas,  prodocing
nitric  acid.

3*  That  of  the  hydrogeoe  of  ammoniac  for  the
oxygeae  of  nitric  acid.

A.  That  of  the  oitrogcnc  of  ammoniac  for
the  nitrous  gas  of  nitric  acid.

At  temperatures  bdow  300%  the  felt,  from
the  eqoilibriam  between  thefe  affioilies,  prc-
ferves  its  exifencc.

Now  when  its  temperature  is  raifcd  io  400%
tlieattradiions  of  hydmgene  for  nilTOgene,*aiid


*  As  ifi  evident  from  the  decompolition  of  ammoniac  bv

keat.


( ^1^ )

of  nitrous  gas  for  oxygen c,:|:  are  climini(hed  s;
whilfl  the  atlradlion  of  hydrogene  for  oxygencf"
is  increafed;  and  perhaps  that  of  nitrogene  for
iiitrous  gas.

Hence  the  foi'mer  equilibrium  of  affinity  is
deftroyed,  and  a  new  one  produced.

The  hydrogene  of  the  ammoniac  combines
with  the  oxygefie  of  the  nitric  acid  to  generate
water  ;  and  the  nitrogene  of  the  ammoniac
enters  into  combination  with  the  nitrous  gas
to  form  nitrous  oxide  :  and  the  water  and  ni-
trous oxide  produced^  mod  probably  exifl;  in
binary  combination  in  the  aeriform  flatc,  at  the
temperature  of  the  dccompofition.

But  when  a  heat  above  800°  is  applied  to
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  the  attradtions  of  nitro-
gene  and    hydrogene  for   each   other,  and  of


•  :;:  Nitric  acid  is  phlogifticated  by  heat,  as  appears  from
Dr.  Prieftlcy's  experiments.     Vol.  3,  p.  26.

t  As  is  evident  from  the  increafe  of  temperattire  fe<|uiT^"
for  the  formation  of  water.


(li6)

oxygene  for  nitrous  gas,*  are  ftill  more  dimi-
nifhed  ;  whillt  that  of  nitrogene  for  nitrous  gas
is  deflroyed,  and  that  of  hydrogene  for  oxy-
gene increafed  to  a  great  extent  :  likevvife
a  new  attraiiion  takes  place;  that  of  nitrous
gas  for  nitric  acid,  to  form  nitrous  vapor.-^
Hence  a  new  arrangenient  of  principles  is
rapidly  produced;  the  nitrogene  of  ammoniac

*^-  For  ammoniac  and  nitrous  oxide  arc  both  decompofcd  at
the  red  heat,  and  oxygene  given  out  from  nitric  acid  when
it  is  paffed  through  a  heated  tube.

f  Whenever  iiitrous  acid  is  produced  at  high  tempera-
tures, it  is  always  highly  phlogifticated,  provided  it  has  not
been  long  in  conta6t  with  oxygene.  When  Dr.  Prieftley
pafled  nitric  acid  through  a  tube  heated  red,  he  procured
much  oxygene,  and  phlogifticated  acid  j  and  the  water
in  the  apparatus  employed  was  fully  impregnated  with
nitrous  air.  Hence  it  would  appear,  that  heat  diminilhes
the  attra6tion  between  oxygene  and  nitrous  gas,  and  in-
creafes  the  affinity  of  nitrous  gas  for  nitrous  acid.  Mr.
James  Thomson,  whofe  theory  of  the  Nitrous  Acid  1  have
already  mentioned,  from  fome  experiments  on  the  phlo-
giftication  of  Nitric  Acid  by  heat,  which  he  has  commu-
nicated to  me,  concludes  with  great  juftnefs,  that  a  portion
of  the  acid  is  always  completely  decompofed  in  this  procefs:
^he  oxygene  liberated,  and  the  nitrous  gas  combined  with
the  remaining  acid.


(  li7  )

having  no  affinity  for  any  of  the  fingle  principles
at  this  temperature,  enters  into  no  binary  com-r
pound  :  the  oxygene  of  the  nitric  acid  forms
water  with  the  hydrogene,  and  the  nitrous  gas
combines  with  the  nitric  acid  to  form  nitrous
vapor.  All  thefe  fubftances  moft  probably
exift  in  combination  at  the  temperature  of  their
production  ;  and  at  a  lower  temperature,  affume
the  forms  of  nitrous  acid,  nitrous  gas,  nitrogene,
and  water.

I  have  avoided  entering  into  any  difcuffions
concerning  the  light  and  heat  produced  in  this
procefs ;  becaufe  thefe  phsenomena  cannot  be
rcafoned  upon  as  ifolated  fafls,  and  their  relation
to  general  theory  will  be  treated  of  hereafter.

X.  On  the  preparation  of  Nlirous  Oxide  for
experiments  on  Refpiration,

When  compac-l  nitrate  of  ammoniac  is  ilowly
decompofed,  the  nitrous  oxide  produced  is
almoft  immediately  fit  for  refpiration  ;  but  as
Qne  part  of  the  fait  begins  to  decompofe  befor?;


\


/


(   118  )

the  other  is  rendered  fluid,  a  confiderable  lofs  is
produced  by  fublimation.

For  the  produflion  of  large  quantities  of
nitrous  oxide,  fibrous  nitrate  of  ammoniac  (hould
be  employed.  This  fait  undergoes  no  decom-
pofitioh  till  the  greater  part  of  its  water  is  evapo-
rated, and  in  confequence  at  the  commencement
of  that  procefs,  is  uniformly  heated.

The  gas  produced  from  fibrous  nitrate,  muft
be  fufFered  to  reft  at  leaft  for  an  hour  after  it$
generation.  At-  the  end  of  this  time  it  is  gene-
rally fit  for  refpiration.  If  examined  before,  it
will  be  found  to  contain  more  or  lefs  of  a  white
yapor,  which  has  a  difagreeable  acidulous  tafte,
and  ftrongly  irritates  the  fauces  and  lungs.  This
yapor,  mod  probably^  confifts  of  acid  nitrate
of  ammoniac  and  water,  which  were  diflblvcd
by  the  gas  at  the  temperature  of  its  production,
and  afterwards  flowly  precipitated.

It  is  found  in  lefs  quantity  when  compact
nitrate  is  employed,  becaufe  more  fait  is  fub-
limed  in  this  procefs,  which  being  rapidly  pre-
cipitated, carries  with  it  the  acid  and  water.


(  1^9)

Whatever  fait  ss  employed;,  the  laft  portions
of  gas  produced,  generally  contain  leis  vapor,
jjnd  may  in  confequence  be  refpired  icK>ner  tbad
the  firll.

The  nitrate  of  ammoniac  fhould  never  be
decompofed  in  a  metallic  veflel,*  nor  the  gas
produced  fuffcred  to  come  in  conta<5i  with
any  metallic  furface ;  for  in  this  caie  the  free
nitric  acid  will  be  decompofed,  and  in  conse-
quence, a  certain  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  pro-
duced. ^

The  apparatus  that  has  been  generally  em-
ployed in  the  medical  pneumatic  infiitution,  for
the   produ6iion    of  nitrous  oxide,   confifts

3 .  Of  a  glafs  retort,  of  the  capacity  of  two  or
three  quarts,  orificed  at  the  top,  and  furnifhed
with  a  ground  ftopper.

2.  Of  a  glafs  tube,  conical  for  the  purpole
of  receiving  the  neck  of  the  retort ;  about  ,4
inches  wide  in  the  narrowed  part,  4  fett  long,
curved  at  the  extremity,  fo  as  to  be  capable  of

"*•  Except  it  be  gold  or  piatina.


(   120  )

Introdudlion  into  an  airholder,  and  inclofed  by
tin  plate  to  preferve  it  from  injury.

3J  Ofairholders  of  Mr.  Watt's  invention^,
filled  with  water  faturated  with  nitrous  oxide.

4.  Of  a  common  air-furnace,  provided  with
dampers  for  the  regulation  of  the  heat.

The  retort,  after  the  infertion  of  the  fait,  i^
connected  with  the  tube,  carefully  luted,  and
expofed  to  the  heat  of  the  furnace,  on  a  con-
venient (land.  The  temperature  is  never  fuf-
fered  to  be  above  500°.  After  the  decompofi-
tion  has  proceeded  for  about  a  minute,  fo  that
the  gas  evolved  from  the  tube  enlarges  the
flame  of  a  taper,  the  curved  end  is  inferred
into  the  airholder,  and  the  nitrous  oxide  pre-
ferved.

The  water  thrown  out  of  the  airholders  in
confequence  of  the  introduction  of  the  gas,
is  prcfervcd  in  a  veiicl  adapted  for  the  pur-
pofe,  and  employed  to  fill  them  again  ;  for  if
common  water  was  to  be  employed  in  every  es^-^
periment,  a  great  lofs  of  gas  would  be  produced
from  abforption.


(   121   )

A  pound  of  fibrous  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  do-
compofed  at  a  heat  not  above  500^,  produces
nearly  5  cubic  feet  of  gas  ;  whilft  from  a  pound
pf  compadl  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  rarely  more
than  4,25  cubic  feet  can  be  collccled.

For  the  production  of  nitrous  oxide  in  quan-
tities not  exceeding  20  quarts,  a  mode  ftill
more  fimple  than  that  I  have  juft  defcribed  may
be  employed.  The  fait  ipay  be  decompofed  by
the  heat  of  an  argands  lamp,  or  a  common  fire,
in  a  tubulated  glafs  retort,  of  20  or  30  cubic
inches  in  capacity,  furnifhed  with  a  long  neck,
curved  at  the  extremity  ;  and  the  gas  received
in  fmall  airholders.

Thus,  if  the  pleafurable  efFeds,  or  medical
properties  of  the  nitrous  oxide,  (liould  ever
make  it  an  article  of  general  requefl:,  it  may  be
procured  with  much  lefs  time,,  labor,  and
expence,*  than  mofl  of  the  luxuries,  or  even
necefTaries,  of  life.

*  A  pound  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac  cofts  about  5s.  lOd.
This  pound,  properly  decompofed,  produces  rather  more
than  34  moderate  dofes  of  air  j  fo  that  the  expence  of  a
dofe  is  about  2d.  What  f.uid  ftimulus  can  be  procured  at
fo  cheap  a  rate  ?


IJMMUmlUl  — -    .J.t.H—W»iPBI—MH   I    ll^m


ravisioN  IV,

EXPERIMENTS  and  OBSERVATIONS  en  ibe
COMPOSITION  (?/  NITROUS  GAS,  and  on  iis
ABSORPTION  hy  drffcrcst  hodm.


I.      Prelimmarks,

In  my  account  of  the  compofition  of  nitric
scid,  in  Diviiion  I.  I  gave  an  eftimation  o{  the
qnanlities  of  oxygene  and  nitrogene  combined
2^1  nitrons  gas  :  I  fhall  now  detail  the  experi-
ments on  which  that  eitimation  is  founded.

At  an  early  period  of  my  refearches  relating
to  nitrous  oxide,  from  the  obfcrvation  of  the
pha^nomena  taking  place  during  the  produ^iion
of  this  fubftance,  I  had  concluded,  that  the
common  opinion  with  regard  to  the  compofition
of  nitrous  gas,  was  very  diftant  from  the
troth.  I  had  indeed  analyfed  nitrous  gas^  by
converting  it  into  nitrous  oxide,  before  I  at-


(  1^3  )

tempted  to  afcertain  its  compofition  by  imme-
diately feparating  the  conftitucnt  principles  from
each  other  :  and  my  firft  hopes  of  the  poffi-
bility  of  efFetSling  this,  were  derived  from  Dr.
Prieftley*s  experiments  on  the  combufllon  of
pyrophorus  in  nitrous  gas,  and  On  the  changes
cfFedled  in  it,   by  heated  iron  and  charcoal.

This  great  philofopher  found,  that  pyropho-
rus placed  in  contadl  with  nitrous  gas,  burnt
with  great  vividnefs,  whilfl  the  gas  was  dimin-
iflied  in  volume  to  about  one  half,  which  gene-
rally confifted  of  nitrogene  and  nitrous  oxide.*
He  likewife  found,  iron  heated  by  a  lens  in
nitrous  gas,  increafed  in  weight,  whilft  the
gas  was  diminfhed  about  -|,  and  converted  into
nitrogene.*

He  heated   common  charcoal,  and  charcoal
of  copper,^    in   nitrous  gas  by  a  lens.     When


*  Experiments  and  Obfervations,  vol.  ii.  pag.  50.     Laft
Edition.

X  That  is,  charcoal  produced  by  the  deconfipofition  of
Cpirits  of  wine.     Vol.  11.  pag.  3p.


(   124  )

common  charcoal  was  employed,  the  gas  was
neither  increafed  or  diminifhed  in  bulk,  but
wholly  converted  into  nitrogene  ;  when  char-
coal of  copper  was  ufed,  the  volume  was  a  little
increafed,  and  the  gas  remaining  confifted
of-  nitrogene,  and  -  carbonic  acid.

In  his  experiments  on  the  iron  and  pyrophy-
rus,  the  nitrous  gas  was  evidently  decompofed.
From  the  great  quantity  of  nitrogene  produced
in  thofe  on  the  charcoal,  it  feems  likely  that  both
the  common  charcoal,*  and  the  charcoal  of
copper  employed  contained  atmofpherical  air,
which  being  difpelled  by  the  heat  of  the  lens.


*  Dr.  Prieftley  fays,  "  having  heated  iron  in  nitrous  air^,
"  I  proceeded  to  heat  in  the  fame  air,  a  piece  of  charcoal
"  not  long  after  it  had  been  fubjedcd  to  a  ftrong  heat  covered
"  with  fand.  The  fan  not  (hlning  immediately,  after  th«
"'  charcoal  \yas  introduced  into  the  veflel  of  air,  through  the
"  mercury  by  which  it  was  confined,  part  of  the  air  was
••'  abforbed  j'but  on  heating  the  charcoal,  the  quantity  was
''  increafed.  Having  continued  the  progrefs  as  long  as  I
''  thought  neceflary,  I  examined  the  air  and  found  it  to  be
'^  about  as  much  as  the  original  quantity  of  nitrous  airj
"  but  it  was  all  phlogiilicatcd  air  extingnifhing  a  candle
"  and  having  no  mixture  of  fixed  ^ir  in  it."- — Experiments
snd  Obfervations,  Vol.  II,  page  Sp.


(    125  )

was  decompofed  by  the  nitrous  gas  :  indeed,
till  I  made  the  following  experiment,  I  fufped^cd
that  the  carbonic  acid  produced,  when  the  char-
coal of  copper  was  employed,  a  role  from  a  dc-
compofition  of  the  nitrous  acid,  formed  in  this
way,

I  introduced  a  piece  of  well-burnt  charcoal,
which  could  hardly  have  weighed  the  eighth  of
a  grain,  whilft  red  hot,  under  a  cylinder  filled
with  mercury,  and  admitted  to  it  half  a  cubic
inch  of  nitrous  gas.  A  flight  abforption  took
place.

The  fun  being  very  bright,  I  kept  the  char-
coal in  the  focus  of  a  fmall  lens  for  near  a  quar-
ter of  an  hour.  At  the  end  of  this  time  the  gas
occupied  a  fpace  nearly  as  before  the  experi-
ment, and  a  very  minute  portion  of  the  charcoal
had  been  confumed.  On  introducing  into
the  cylinder  a  fmall  quantity  of  iblution
of  ftrontian,  a  white  precipitation  was  per-
ceived, and  the  gas  ilovvly  diminifhed  to
about  three  tenths  of  a  cubic   inch.     To  thefc


(  126  )

three  tenths  a  little  commoa  air  was  adinittect
when  very  flight  red  fumes  were  perceived.

This  experiment  convinced  me,  that  the  at-
tradlion   of  charcoal  for   the   oxygene  of  nl^'
trous   gas,     at  high  temperatures,    was    fuffi-
ciently  ftrong  to  efFedt  a  flow  decompofition  of
it.

To  be  more  accurately  acquainted  with  this
decompofition,  and  to  learn  the  quantities  of
carbonic  acid  and  riitrogene  produced  from  a
known  quantity  of  nitrous  gas,  I  proceeded  in
the  following  manner.

11.     Analyfis  of  Nitrons  Gas  hy  Charcoal,

A  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  was  procured  in  a
water  apparatus,  from  the  decompofition  of
nitrous  acid  hy  mercury.  A  portion  of  it  was
transferred  to  the  mercurial  trough.  After  the
mercury  and  the  jar  had  been  dried  by  bibulous
paper,  40  meafures  of  this  portion  were  agitated
in  a  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron.  The  gas  re-
maining  after   the  abforption   was  complete.


i  m )

filled  aboat  a  meafure  asid  half;    fo  that  tlie
mtroas  gas  contained  nearly  ^  iiitrogene.

•Tl3crmo25icter  being  53®5  a  fi«ail  piece  of
ii'ell  borot  charcoal,  the  weight  of  which  coiiiA
I'iardly  have  equalled  a  <|uarler  of  a  graio,  was
Introdaccd  Ignited^  into  a  fmall  cyiiader  filled
with  mercury^  graduated  to  ^  iO  gmia  meiifurcto;
to  this,  l5  meafarfiSj  equal  to  i6D  grain  m.  af
introjLss  gas,  were  admitted-  An  abforption  of
Siboiit  OQC  aieafure  aad  half  took  place.  When
the  ^ciis  of  a  lens  was  thrown  on  the  charco^l^
a  flight  increafe  of  the  gas  was  prcdiiccd^  from.
the  emiffioe  of  that  which  had  been  shforhod.

Aftcr.the  proccls  had  bcca  carried  ois  for^hmit
3L  half  aa  hour^  the  charcoal  evidcotlj  bcgaai
to  famCf  and  to  canfame  ¥erv  fiawh^j  ihoiigh
HO  alteration  in  the  volisme  of  the  gas  was  ob~
feri^ed-

Tfce  fun  i3ot  conflanlly  fliinlng,  ihc  progrcH
of  the  experiment  was  now  aiad  iheij  ft0p|jed  .:
but  taking  the  ^hole  timc^  the  focMS  could  n^t
hare  hecn  applied  to  it  for  lefn  than  foiir  Lonm.
Whca  the   procels  was  firiillicd,  the  gas  wm


(    1^8   )

increafed    in   bulk  nearly    three   quarters  bf  d
ineafure.

A  drop  of  water  was  introduced  into
the  cylinder,  by  means  of  a  fmall  glafs
tube,  on  the  fuppofition  that  the  carbonic  acid,
and  nitrogene,  might  be  capable  of  holding
in  folution,  more  water  than  that  contained
in  the  nitrous  gas  decompofed  ;  but  no
alteration  of  volume  took  place.

When  20  graiti  meafures  of  folution  of  pale
green*  fulphatc  of  iron  were  introduced  into  the
cylinder^  they  became  ratherycllovver  than  before,
but  not  dark  at  the  edges,  as  is  always  the  cafe
when  nitrous  gas  is  prefent.  On  agitation,  a
diminution  of  nearly  half  a  meafure  was  pro-
duced, doubtlefs  from  the  abforption  of  fomc
of  the  carbonic  acid  by  the  folution.

A  fmall  quantity  of  cauftic  potafh,  much
more  than  was  fufficient  to  decompofe  the  fiil-
phate  of  iron,  was  now  introduced.  A  rapid
diminution  took  place,  and  the  gas  remaining

*  That  is,  fulphate  of  iron  containing  oxide  of  iron,  in  the
lirft  degree  of  oxygenation.


(  lig)

filled  about  8  meafiires.  This  gas  was  agitated
for  fome  time  over  water,  but  no  abforption
took  place.  Two  itieafures  of  it  were  then
transferred  into  a  detonating  cylinder  with  two
meafures  of  oxygene.  The  electric  fpark  was
pafTed  through  them, but  no  diminution  was  pro-
duced. Hence  it  vvas  nitrogene,  mingled  with
no  afcertainable  quantity  of  hydrogene :  con-
fequently  little  or  no  water  could  have  been
decompofed  in  the  procefs.

Now  fuppofing,  for  the  greater  eafe  of  calcu-
lation, each  of  the  meafures  employed,  cubic
inches.

16  of  nitrous  gas  —  ^q  ====  ^^A  were  decom-
pofed, and  thefe  weigh,  making  the  neceflary
corrections,  5,2 ;  but  7,4  nitrogene  were  pro-
duced, and  thefe  weigh  about  2,2.  So  that
reafoning  from  the  relative  fpecific  gravities  of
nitrous  gas  and  nitrogene,  5,2  grains  of  nitrous
gas  will  be  compofed  of  3  oxygene,  and  2,2
nitrogene.

But  8,7  of  carbonic  acid  were  produced,
which  weigh  41  grains,  and  confift  of  2,9  oxy-

I


(   130  )

g;enje,  and  1,2  charcoal. *  Conrecjuently,
drawing  conclulions  from  the  quantity  of  car-
bonic acid  formed,  5,2  grains  of  nitrous  gas
will  confift  of  2,9  oxygene,  and  2,3  nitrogene.

The  difference  in  thefe  edimations  is  ranch
Jefs  than  could  have  been  expe61ed  ;  and  taking
the  mean  proportions,  it  would  be  inferred
from  them,  that  100  grains  of  nitrous  gas,  con-
tain 56,5  oxygene,  and  43.5  nitrogene.

I  repeated  this  experiment  with  refults  not
very  different,  except  that  the  increafe  of
volume  was  rather  greater,  and  that  more
unabforbable  gas  remained  ;  which  probably
depended  on  the  decompofition  of  a  minute
quantity  of  water,  that  had  adhered  to  the
charcoal  in  pafling  through  the  mercury.

As  nitrous  gas  is  decompofable  into  nitrous
acid,  and  nitrogene,  by  the  eledlric  fpark  ;  it
occurred  to  me,  that  a  certain  quantity  of
nitrous  acid  might  have  been  pofRbly  produced,
in  the  experiments  on  the  decompofition  of
nitrous  gas,  by  the  intcnfely   ignited  charcoal.

•*  That  iS;   carbori;  or  oxide  of  diamond.


(    131    )

To  afcertain  this  circumftance,  I  introduced
into  VI  meafures  of  nitrous  gas,  a  fmall  piece
of  charcoal  which  had  been  jutt  reddened.
The  fun  being  very  bright,  the  focus  of  the
lens  was  kept  on  it  for  rather  more  than  an
hour  and  quarter.  In  the  middle  of  the  procefs
it  began  to  fume  and  to  fparkle,  as  if  in  com-
buftion.  In  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  the
gas  was  increafed  rather  more  than  half  a
mcafure;  bnt  no  alteration  of  volume  took
place  afterwards.

The  mercury  was  not  white  on  the  top  as  is
ufually  the  cafe  when  nitrous  acid  is  produced.
On  introducing  into  the  cylinder  a  little  pale
green  fulphate  of  iron,  and  then  adding  prufiate
of  potafh,  a  white  precipitate  only  was  produ-
ced. Now,  if  the  minuteft  quantity  of
nitric  acid  had  been  formed,  it  would  have
been  decompofed  by  the  pale  green  oxide  of
iron,  and  hence,  a  vifible  quantity  of  pruffian
blue*  produced^  as  will  be  fully  explained  here-
after.

*  That  is,  blue  prufTiate  of  iron.


( 15^^ )

III.     Analyfis  of  Nitrous  Gas  by  PyrophoTtis*

I  placed  fome  newly  made  pyrophorus,  about
as  much  as  would  fill  a  quarter  of  a  cubic
inch,  into  a  jar  filled  with  dry  mercury,  and
introduced  to  it,  four  cubic  inches  of  nitrous
gas,  procured  from  mercury  and  nitric   acid.

It  inftantly  took  fire  and  burnt  with  great
vividnefs  for  fome  moments.

After  the  combuftion  had  ceafed,  the  gas
was  diminifhed  about  three  quarters  of  a  cubic
inch.  The  remainder  was  not  examined  ;  for
the  diminution  appeared  to  go  on  for  fome
time,  after ;  in  an  half  hour,  when  it  was  com-
pleat,  it  was  to  2  cubic  inches.  A  taper,
introduced  into  thefe,  burnt  with  an  enlarged
flame,  blue  at  the  edges ;  from  whence  it
appeared,  that  they  were  compofed  of  nitrogene
and  nitrous  oxide.

I  now  introduced  about  half  a  cubic  inch  of
pyrophorus  to  two  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas ;
the  combuftion  took  place,  and  the  gas  was


(  133  )

rapidly  diminiflied  to  one  half;  and  on  fufFering
it  to  remain  five  minutes  to  one-third  nearly  ;
which  extinguifhed  flame.

Sufpedling  that  this  great  diminution  was
owing  to  the  abforption  of  fome  of  the  nitro-
gene  formed,  by  the  charcoal  of  the  pyrophorus,
I  carefully  made  a  quantity  of  pyrophorus;
employing  more  than  two-thirds  of  alumn,  to
one-rthird  of  fugar.

To  rather  more  than  half  of  a  cubic  inch  of
this,  two  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas,  which
contained  about  ~  nitrogene^  were  admitted.
After  the  combuftion,  the  gas  remaining,  aj}pa'
rently  filled  a  fpace  equal  to  1,2  cubic  inches;
but,  as  on  account  of  the  burnt  pyrophyrus  in
the  jar,  it  was  impoilible  to  afcertain  the  volume
with  nicety,  it  was  carefully  and  wholly  trans-
ferred into  another  jar.  It  filled  a  fpace  equal
to  1,15  cubic  inches  nearly.

When  water  was  admitted  to  this  gas  no
abforption  took  place.  It  underwent  no  dimi-
nution with  nitrous  gas,  and  a  taper  plunged
into  it  was  iniiantly  extinguifhed.  We  may
confequcntly  conclude  that  it  was  nitrogene.


(   134  )

Now  2  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas  weigh
^686  grains,  and  1,1  of  nitrogene  —  ,05^
the  quantity  previoufly  contained  in  the  gas
=  to  1,05,  3,19.  Hence  ,686  of  nitrous  gas
would  be  compofed  of  ,367  oxygene,  and  ,319
nitrogene  ;  and  100  grains  would  contain  53,4
oxygene,  and  46^6  nitrogene.

IV.  Additional  obfervations  on  the  comhiftion
of  bodies  in  Nitrous  GaSy  and  on  its  Compoji-
iion.

Though  phofphorus  may  be  fufed,  and  even
fublimcd,  in  nitrous  gas,  without  producing
the  ilightelt  luminous  appearance,*  yet  when

*  No  luminous  appearance  is  produced  w  hen  phofphorus
is  introduced  into  pure  nitrous  gas.  It  has  been  often  ob-
ferved,  that  phofphorus  is  luminous  in  nitrous  gas,  that  has
not  been  long  in  conta<!it  with  water  after  its  produftion.
This  phaenomeaon,  I  fufpcd,  depends  either  on  the  decom-
petition  of  the  nitric  acid  held  in  folution  by  the  nitrous
gas  i  or  on  the  combination  of  the  phofphorus  with  oxygene
loofely  adhering  to  the  binary  aeriform  compound  of  nitric
acid  and  nitrous  gas.  1  have  not  yet  examined  if  nitrous
gas  can  be  converted  into  nitrous  oxide  by  long  expofure
to  heated  phofphorus :  it  appears,  however,  very  probable.


(    135  )

it  is  introduced  into  it  in  a  ftate  of  adive  in-
flammation, it  burns  with  almoft  as  much
vividnefs  as  in  oxygene.^  Hence  it  is  evident,
that  at  the  heat  of  ignition,  phofphorus  is
capable  of  attradling  the  oxygene  from  the
nitrogene  of  nitrous  gas.

I  attempted  to  analife  nitrous  gas,  by  intro-
ducing into  a  known  quantity  of  it,  confined
by  mercury,  phofphorus,  in  a  veffel  containing
a  minute  quantity  of  oxygene.'}-  The  phofpho-
rus was  inflamed  with  an  ignited  iron  wire,  by
which,  at  the  moment  of  the  combuftion,  the
vefl^l  containing  it  was  raifed  from  the  mercury
into  the  nitrous  gas.  But  after  making  in  this
way,  five  of  fix  unfuccefsful  experiments,  I
defifted.  When  the  communication  between
the  veflels  was  made  before  the  oxygene  was
nearly  combined  with  the  phofphorus,    nitrous


■*  Perhaps  this  fad  has  been  noticed  before  3  I  have  not,
however,  met  with  it  in  any  chemical  work.

t  This  mode  of  inflaming  bodies  in  gafes,  not  capable  of
Tupporting  combuftion  at  low  temperatures^  will  be  par-
ticularly defcribed  hereafter.


(  136)

acid  was  formed,  which  inftantly  deftroyed  the
combuftion  ;  when^  on  the  contrary,  the  phof-
phorus  was  fufFered  to  confume  almoll  the
whole  of  the  oxygene,  it  was  not  fufficiently
ignited  when  introduced,  to  decompofe  the
nitrous  gas.

In  one  experiment,  indeed,  the  phofphorus
burnt  for  a  moment  in  the  nitrous  gas ;  the
diminution  however  was  flight,  and  not  more
than  ^of  it  was  decompofed.

Sulphur,  introduced  in  a  (late  of  vivid  in-
flammation, into  nitrous  gas,  was  inftantly
extinguiflied.

I  pafled  a  ftrong  eleflric  (hock  through  equal
parts  of  hydrogene  and  nitrous  gas,  confined  by
mercury  in  a  detonating  tube  ;  but  no  inflani-
mation,  or  perceptible  diminution,  was  pro-
duced.

1 9,2  grain  meafures  of  hydrogene  were  fired
by  the  eledric  Ihock,  with  10  of  nitrous  oxide,
and  6  of  nitrous  gas  ;  the  diminution  was  to  1 7  ;
and  pale  green  fulphate  of  iron  admitted  to  the
refiduvim,  was  not  difcolored,  Confequently  the


(  137  )

nitrous  gas  was  decompofed  by  the  hydrogene,
and  as  will  be  hereafter  more  clearly  underftood,
nearly  as  much  nitrogene  furnifhed  by  it,  as
would  have  been  produced  from  half  the  quan-
tity of  nitrous  oxide.

Sufpeding  that  phofphorated  hydrogene
might  inflame  with  nitrous  gaSj  I  paffed  the
eledlric  fpark  through  1  meafure  of  phofphorated
hydrogene,  and  4  of  nitrous  gas  ;  but  no  dimi-
nution was  perceptible.  I  likewife  pafled  the
eledlric  fpark  through  1  of  nitrous  gas,  with  2
of  phofphorated  hydrogene,  without  inflamma-
tion.

Perhaps  if  I  had  tried  many  other  difFererlt
proportions  of  the  gafes,  I  fhould  have  at  laft
difcovered  one,  in  which  they  would  have  in-
flamed ;  for,  as  will  be  feen  hereafter,  nitrous
oxide  cannot  be  decompofed  by  the  compound
combuftible  gafes,  except  definite  quantities  arc
employed.

From  Dr.  Prieftley's  experiments  on  iron  and,
pyrophorus,  and  from  the  experiments  I  have
detailed,  on  charcoal,  phofphorus,  and  hydro-


%


(   138  )

gene,  it  appears  that  at  certain  temperatures,
nitrous  gas  is  decompofable  by  mofl:  of  thex:om-
buflible  bodies  :  even  the  extinflion  of  fulphur,
when  introduced  into  it  in  a  flate  of  inflamma-
tion, depends  perhaps,  on  the  fmaller  quantity
of  heat  produced  by  the  combuflion  of  this  body,
than  that  of  moil  others.

The  analyfis  of  nitrous  gas  by  charcoal,  as
0  affording  data  for  determining  immediately  the

quantities  of  oxygene  and  nitrogcne,  ought  to
beconfidered  as  moll  accurate ;  and  correcting
it  by  mean  calculations  derived  from  the  decom-
pofition  of  nitrous  gas  by  pyrophorus  and  hydro-
gene,  and  its  converlion  into  nitrous  oxide,  a
procefs  to  be  defcribed  hereafter,  we  may  con-
clude, that  lOOgrains  of  nitrous  gas  are  compofed
of  55,95  oxygene,  and  44,05  nitrogene;  or
taking  away  decimals,  of  56  oxygene,  and  44
nitrogene.

This  eflimation  will  agree  very  well  with  the
mean  proportions  that  would  be  given  from  Dr.
Priefiley's  experiments  on  the  decompofition
i>f  nitrous  gas  by  iron  ;  but  as  he  never   afcer-


(   139  )

tained  the  purity  of  his  nitrous  gas/*  and  proba-^
bly  employed  different  kinds  in  different  expe-
riments, it  is  impoffible  to  fix  on  any  one,  from
which  accurate  conclusions  can  be  drawn.

Lavoifier's  eflimation  of  the  quantities  of  oxy-
geneand  nitrogene  entering  into  the  compofition
of  nitrous  gas,  has  been  generally  adopted.
He  fuppofes  64  parts  of  nitrous  gas  to  be  com-
pofed  of  43^  of  oxygene,  and  20^ofnitro-
gene.-f-

The  difference  between  this  account  and
mine  is  very  great  indeed  ;  but  I  have  already,
in  Divifion  ifl,  pointed  out  fources  of  error  in
the  experiments  of  this  great  man,  on  the  de-
compofition  of  nitre  by  charcoal ;  which  expe-
riments were  fundamental,  both  to  his  accounts
of  the  conftitution  of  nitrous  acid,  and  nitrous
gas.


*  Elements  EngliOi  Tranf.  edit.  i.  pag.  2 16.
t  Experiments  and  Obfervations,  Vol.  II.  pag.  40,  2a.  £d.


(  J-to  )

»      V.      Of  the   abjorftion    of  Nit  reus    Gas   ly
Water.

Amongft  the  properties  of  nitrous  gas  noticed
by  its  great  difcoverer,  is  that  of  abforbability
by  water.

In  expofing  nitrous  air  to  diitilled  water.  Dr.
Prieftley  found  a  diminution  of  the  volume  of
gas,  nearly  equal  to  one  tenth  of  the  bulk  of
the  water  ;  and  by  boiling  the  water  thus  im-^
pregnated,  he  procured  again  a  certain  portion
of  the  nitrous  gas.

Humbolt,  in  his  paper  on  eudiometry,  men-
tions the  diminution  of  nitrous  gas  by  water.  This
diminution,  he  fuppofes  to  arife  from  the  decom-
pofition  of  a  portion  of  the  nitrous  gas^  by  the
water,  and  the  confcquent  formation  of  nitrate
of  ammoniac*

^  He  lays,  ''  On  a  obferve,  (depuis  quon  travaille  fur  le
^*  purete  de  I'air)  que  le  gaz  nitreux,  fecoue  avec  I'eau,  en
•'  foufFre  une  diminution  de  volume.  Quelques  phyficicns
"  attribuent  ce  changeraent  a  une  vraie  abforption,  a  une
'*  diflblution  du  gaz  nitreux  dans  I'cau  j  d'autres  a  J'air  con-
''  tenu  dans  les  interftices  de  tous  les  fluides.  Le  cit.
*'  Vanbreda,  a  Delft,  a  fait  des  recherches  tres-exades  fur
"  I'influence  des  eaux  de  pluie  et  de  puit,  fur  les  nombres
•*  eudiometriqucsj  et  les  belles  experiences  du  cit.  Haflcn-


(   141  )

I  confefs;  that  even  before  the  following  ex-
periments were  made,  1  was  but  little  inclined
to  adopt  this  opinion  :  the  fmall  diminution
of  nitrous  gas  by  water,  and  the  uniform  limits
of  this  diminution,  rendered  it  extremely  im-
probable*

a.     To  afcertain  the  quantity  of  nitrous  gas

'*■  fratz,  fur  Pabondance  d'oxygene,  contenue  dans  les  caux
'^  de  neige  et  de  pluie,  font  fuppofer  que  I'air  des  interftices
"  de  Teau  joue  uu  role  irnportant  dans  Tabforption  du  gaz
*'  nitreux.  En  comparant  ces  efFets  avec  les  phenomenes
^'  obferve  dans  la  decompofition  du  fulfate  de  fer,  nous  fup-
*'  posames,  le  cit.  Taffaert  et  moi,  que  le  limple  contaft  du
"  gaz  nitreux  avec  I'eau  diftillee  pourroit  bien  caufer  une
*^  decompofition  de  ce  dernier.  Nous  examinames  foign-
"  eufement  une  petite  quantite  d'eau  dillillee,  fecouee  avec
*'  beaucoup  de  gas  nitreux  trc;s-pur,  et  nous  trouvames,
"  au  moyen  de  la  terre  calcaire,  et  I'acide  m^iiatique,  qu'il
*'  s'y  forme  du  nitrate  (Tammoniaque.  L'eau  fe  docompofe
*'  en  cette  operation,  par  un  double  affinitc  de  I'oxygene
^'  pour  le  gaz  nitreux^  et  de  Thydrogene  pour  I'azote ;  il  fe
"  forme  de  Tacide  nitrique  et  de  \ ammoniaqiic -,  et,  quoique
*'  la  quantite  du  dernier  paroiffe  trop  petite  pour  en  evaluer
"  cxa6traent  la  quantite,  fon  exiftence  cependant  fe  mani-
"  fefte,  (a  ne  pas  fans  douter)  par  le  degagement  des  va-
"  peurs,  qui  blanchiffent  dans  la  proximite  de  I'acide  mu-
*^  riatique.  Voila  un  fait  bicn  frappant  que  la  corapofitioii
"  d'une  fubftance  alcaline  par  le  conta6t  d'une  acide,  et  de
*•'  I'cau.

Annales  de  Chlmie.  t.  xxviii.  pag.  1.03.


(   14'2  )

abtorbable  by  pure  water,  and  the  limits  of  ab-
Ibrption^  I  introduced  into  a  glafs  retort  about
5  ounces  of  water,  which  bad  been  previoufly
boiled  for  fome  hours.  The  neck  of  the  retort
was  inverted  in  mercury,  and  the  water  made
to  boil.  After  a  third  of  it  had  been  diililled,
fo  that  no  air  could  poffibly  remain  in  the  re-
tort, the  remfiinder  was  driven  over,  and  con-
denfed  in  an  inverted  jar  filled  with  mercury.
To  three  cubic  inches  of  this  water,^  confined
in  a  cylinder  graduated  to  ,o5  cubic  inches,  5
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas,  containing  nearly  one
thirtieth  nitrogene,  were  introduced.

After  agitation  for  near  an  hour,  rather  more
thrin  ^-^  of  ii  cubic  inch  appeared  to  be  abforbed;
but  though  the  procefs  was  continued  for  near
two  hours  longer,  no  further  diminution  took
place.

The  remaining  gas  was  introduced  into  a
ttibe  graduated  to  ,02  cubic  inches.  It  mca-
fured  "  >  hence  -^  had  been  abforbed.


*  Which  was  certainly  as  free  from  air  as  it  ever  can  bc
obtaincd.


(   143  )

Confequently,  100  cubic  inches  of  pure  wa-
ter are  capable  of  abforbing  1 1,8  of  nitrous  gas.
In  the  water  thus  impregnated  with  nitrous
gas  I  could  diftinguifh  no  peculiar  tafle  ;*  it
did  not  at  all  alter  the  color  of  blue  cabbage
juice.

h.  To  determine  if  the  abforption  of  nitrous
gas  was  owing  to  a  decompofition  of  it  by  the
water,  as  Humbolt  has  fnppofed,  or  to  a  fimple
folution  ;  I  procured  fome  nitrous  gas  from
nitrous  acid  and  mercury,  containing  about
one  feventieth  nitrogene.  ^5  cubic  inches  of
it,  mingled  with  25^  of  oxygene,  from  ful-
phuric  acid  and  manganefe  left  a  refiduum  of
^03.  5  cubic  inches  more  were  introduced
to  3  of  water,  procured  in  the  lame  manner  as
in  the  laft  experimeut,   in  the   fame  cylinder.

*  Dr.  Prieftley  found  diflilled  v/atcr,  faturated  with
nitrous  air,  to  acquire  an  aftringent  tafte  and  pungent
imell.  In  fome  unbailed  impregnated  pump  water,  I  once
thought  that  I  perceived  a  fubacid  tads }  but  it  was  ex-
tremely flight,  and  probably  owing  to  nitrous  acid  formed
by  the  union  of  the  oxygene  of  the  common  air  in  the  wa-
ter, with  fome  of  the  nitrous  gas.


(  34«>


J^


ir»  leatcd.  faaB^riniei


vCEas  te  wcAy  vtc


X^toAic


«atfer^tf0i^t0#


(  145  )

3,  That  at  the  temperature  of  212%  nitrous
gas  is  incapable  of  remaining  in  combination
with  water.

Humbolt's  opinion  relating  to  the  decompo-
fition  of  nitrous  gas  by  water,  is  founded  upon
the  difengagement  of  vapor  from  diflilled  water
impregnated  with  nitrous  gas,  by  means  of  lime,
which  became  white  in  the  proximity  of  the  mu-
riatic acid.  But  this  is  a  very  imperfecS,  and
fallacious  ted,  of  the  prefence  of  ammoniac.  I
have  this  day,  April  2,  1800,  heated  4  cubic
inches  of  diftillcd  water,  impregnated  with
nitrous  gas,  with  caufliclime;  the  vapor  cer-
tainly became  a  little  whiter  when  held  over  a
vetfcl  containing  muriatic  acid ;  but  the  vapor
of  diflilled  water  produced  precifely  the  fame
appearance,  =*  which  was  owing,  moil  likely,  to


*  As  carbonic  acid  and  ammoniac  arc  both  produ6ts  of
aoimaliiation,  is  it  not  probable  that  our  common  waters
particularly  thofe  in,  and  near  towns  and  cities,  contain  car-
bonate of  ammoniac  ?  Iffo,  this  fait  will  always  exift  in
them  after  diflillation.  In  the  experiments  on  carbonate  of
ammoniac,  to  which  I  have  often  alluded,  I  found,  in
diftilling  a  folution  of  this  fait  in  water,  that  before  half  of
K


(    140   )

the  combination  of  the  acid  with  the  aquooas
vapor.  Indeed^  when  I  added  a  particle  of
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  which  might  have  equalled
one  twentieth  of  a  grain,  to  the  lime  and  im-
pregnated water,  the  increafed  whitenefs  of  the
vapor  was  but  barely  perceptible,  though  this
quantity  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac  is  much  more
confiderable  than  that  which  could  have  been
formed,  even  fuppofing  the  nitrous  gas  decom-
pofed.

VI.  Of  the  ahforpion  of  Niirous  Gas  hy
Water  of  different  kinds.

In  agitating  nitrous  gas  over  fpring  water,
the  diminution  rarely  amounts  to  more  than
one  thirtieth,  the  volume  of  water  being  taken
as  unity.    I  at  firft  fufpedted  that  this  great  dif-


thc  water  had  pafled  into  the  recipient,  the  carbonate
of  ammoniac  had  fublimed  j  fo  that  the  diftilled  folulion
was  much  ftrcnge^:  than  before,  whilftthe  water  remaining
in  the  retort  was  taftelefs.  Will  this  fuppofition  at  all  ex-
plain Humbolt's  miftake  ?


(  147  )

ference  in  the  quantity  of  gas  abforbedby  fpring
water,  and  pure  water,  depended  on  carbonic
acid  contained  in  the  lad,  diminifhing  the  at-
tradlion  of  it  for  nitrous  gas  :  but  by  long  boil-
ing a  quantity  of  fpring  water  confined  by  mer-
cury, I  obtained  from  it  about  one  twentieth  of
its  bulk  of  air,  which  gave  nearly  the  fame
diminution  with  nitrous  gas,  as  atmofpheric
air.

This  facSl  induced  me  to  refer  the  difference
ofdiminutioa  to  the  decompofition  of  the  at-
mofpheric air  held  in  folution  by  the  water,
the  oxygene  of  which  I  fuppofed  to  be  con-
verted into  nitric  acid,  by  the  nitrous  gas,
whilft  the  nitrogene  was  liberated  ;  and  hence
the  increafed  refiduum.

a,  I  expofed  to  pure  water,  that  is,  water
procured  by  diftillation  under  mercury,  nitrous
gas,  containing  a  known  quantity  of  nitrogene.
After  the  abforption  was  complete,  I  found  the
fame  quantity  of  nitrogene  in  the  refiduum,  as
was  contained  in  a  volume  of  gas  equal  to  the
whole  quantity  employed.


(    148  )

h.  Spring  water  boiled  for  fomc  hours,  and
fiifFered  to  cool  under  mercury,  abforbeda  quan-
tity of  nitrous  gas  equal  to  one  thirteenth  of  its
bulk ;  which  is  not  much  lefs  than  that
abforbed  by  pure  water.

c.  I  expofed  to  fpring  water^  10  meafures  of
nitrous  gas  ;  the  compofition  of  which  had
beeii  accurately  afcertained  ;  the  diminution
was  one  twenty-eighth,  the  volume  of  water
being  taken  as  unity.  On  placing  the  refiduum
in  contadl  with  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron,  the
nitrogene  remaining  w^as  nearly  one-twentieth
more  than  had  been  contained  by  the  gas
before  its  expofure  to  water.

d.  Diftilled  water  was  faturated  with  com-
mon air,  by  being  agitated  for  fome  time  in  the
atmofphere.  Nitrous  gas  placed  in  conta6l  with
this  water,  underwent  a  diminution  of  -  ;
the  volume  of  water  being  unity.  The  gas  re-
maining after  the  abforption  contained  about
one  twenty  -  feventh  nitrogene  more  than
before.

e.  Nitrous  gas  expofed  to  water  combined


(  149  )

with  about  one  fourth  of  its  volume  of  carbonic
acidj  diminifhed  to  -  *  nearly.  The  remainder
contained  little  or  no  fuperabundant  nitro-
gene.

From  thefe  obfervations  it  appears,  that  the
different  degrees  of  diminution  of  nitrous  gas
by  different  kinds  of  Nvater,  may  depend  upon
various  caufes.

1.  Lefs  nitrous  gas  will  be  abforbed  by
water  holding  in  folution  earthy  falts,  than  by
pure  water  ;  and  in  this  cafe  the  diminution  of
the  attraflion  of  water  for  pitrous  gas  will  pro-
bably be  in  the  ratio  of  the  quantities  of  fait
combined  with  it.     a.  h.

2.  The  apparent  diminution  of  nitrous
gas  in  water,  holding  in  folution  atmofphe-
ric  air,  will  be  lefs  than  in  pure  water,
though  the  abfolute  diminution  will  be
greater  ;  for  the  fame  portion  will  be  abforbed,
whilft  another  portion  is  combined  with  the
oxygene  of  the  atmofpheric  air  contained  in  the
water;    and   from   the  difengagement  of  the

"  The  water  ftill  bein^  unity.


(   150  )

nitrogene  of  this  air,  arifesian  increafed  refi-
duum.     c,  d.

3.  Probably  in  waters  containing  nitrogene,
hydrogene,  and  other  gafes,  abforbable  only  to
a  flight  extent,  the  apparent  diminution  will  be
lefs,  on  account  of  the  difengagement  of  thofe
gafes  from  the  water,  by  the  (Irongcr  affinity  of
nitrous  gas  for  that  fluid.

4.  In  water  containing  carbonic  acid,  and
probably  fome  other  acid  gafes,  the  diniinution
will  be  fmall  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of
gas  contained  in  the  water  :  the  affinity  of
this  fluid  for  nitrous  gas  being  diminifhed  by  its
greater  affinity  for  the  fubftance  combined
with  it.     e,

ThedifFerent  diminution  of  nitrous  gas  Vvhen
agitated  in  different  kinds  of  water,  has  been
long  obferved  by  experimenters  on  the  conflitu-
ent  parts  of  the  atmofphere,  and  various  folutions
have  been  given  of  the  phaenomenon  ;  the  mod
fingular  is  that  of  Hurabolt.^      He   fuppofes

♦  He  fays  '^  100  parties  de  gaz  nitrcux,  (a  o.l4  d'azote)  fe-
^*  couees  avec  I'eau  diftill^C;  recemment  cuite,  diminuent  en


»


(  "51  )

that  the  apparent  diminution  of  nitrous  gas  is
lefs  in  fpring  water  than  diftilled  water,  on  ac-
count of  the  decompofition  of  the  carbonate  of
lime  contained  in  the  fpring  water,  by  the  nitrous
acid  formed  from  the  contad  of  nitrous  gas
with  the  water  ;  the  carbonic  acid  difengaged
from  this  decompofition  increafing  the  refi-
duum.

This  opinion  may  be  confuted  without  even
reference  to  my    obfervations.     It  is,  indeed,  ,  #


"  volume  de  0.1 1,  ou  0.12.  Ce  meme  gaz,  en  contact  avec
''  I'eau  de  puits,  iie  perd  que  0.02.  La  caufe  de  cette  dif-
*'  ference  de  0.9,  ou  0.10,  ne  doit  pas  etre  attribuee  ni  a
"  rimpurite  de  I'air  atmofpherique,  contenu  dans  les  inter-
'^  fiices  de  I'eau,  ni  a  la  decompolition  de  cette  eau  meme.
'^  Elle  n'eft  qu'apparente  ;  car  I'acide  nitrique,  qui  fe  forme
"^  par  le  contat3:  du  gaz  nitreux  avec  I'eau  de  puits,  en  do-
'^  compofe  le  carbonate  de  chaux.  II  fe  degage  de  I'acidc
**  carbonique,  qui,  en  augmentant  le  volume  du  refiJu,  rend
''  I'abforption  du  gaz  nitreux  moins  fenfible.  Pour  deter-
^'  miner  la  quantitc  de  cet  acide  carbonique,  je  lavai  Ic
*'  refidu  avec  de  I'eau  de  chaux.  Dans  un  grand  nombre
**  d'experiences,  le  volume  diminna  de  O.OC),  ou  0,07.  II
''  faul  en  concluire  que  I'eau  de  puits  abibrbe  reellement
''  9  -|-  2,  ou  7  -[-  2  parties  de  gas  nitreux,  c'eft-a-dire,  :\
"  peu-pr^s  la  meme  quantite  que  I'eau  diltiJlee,"

Aunales  deCbiri^ic,  xxviii.  pag.  151.


'j^^


(    152   )

altogether  unworthy  of  a  philofopher,  generally
^  acute   and  ingenious.     He  feems  to  have  for-

^  gotten    that  carbonic   acid    is    abforbable    by

water.

VII.      Of  the  ahforpHon  of  Nitrous   Gas,   hy
folution  of  pale  green  Sulphate  of  Iron,

f  a.   The  difcovery  of  the  exadl  difference  be-

tween the  fulphates  of  iron,  is  owing  to  Prouft.*
According  to  the  ingenious  refearches  of  this
chemift,  there  exifl  two  varieties  of  fulphate  of
iron,  the  green  and  the  red.  The  oxide  in  the
green  fulphate  contains  —  oxygene.  This  fait,
when  pure,  is  infoluble  in  fpirit  of  wine ;  its
folution  in  water  is  of  a  pale  green  color;  it  is
not  altered  by  the  gallic  acid,  and  affords  a
white  precipitate  with  alkaline  priiffiates.

The  red  fulphate  of  iron  is  foluble  in  alcohol
and  lincryflalizable;  its  oxide  contains  —  oxy-
gene. It  forms  a  black  precipitate  with  the
gallic  acid,  and  with  the  alkaline  pruHiates,  a
blue  one.

>^  Nicholfon's  Phil.  Jour.  No.  1,  p.  453.


s


(   153  )

The  common  fulphatesofiron  generally  con-
lift  of  combinations  of  thefe  two  varieties  in
different  proportions.

The  green  fulphate  may    be  converted   into  4

the  red  by  oxygenated  muriatic  acid  or    nitric  i

acid.  The  common  lulphate  may  be  converted
into  green  fulphate,  by  agitation  in  contadl
with  fulpburated  hydrogene.

The  green  fulphate  has  a  ftrong  afiinity  for
oxygene,  it  attracts  it  from  the  atmofphere,  from
oxygenated  marine  acid,  and  nitric  acid.  The
alkalies  precipitate  from  it  a  pale  green  oxide,
which  if  expofed  to  the  atmofphere,  rapidly  be-
comes yellow  red.

The  red  fulphate  of  iron  has  no  affinity
for  oxygene,  and  when  decompofed  by  the
alkalies,  gives  a  red  precipitate,  which  under-
goes no  alteration  when  expofed  to  the  atmof-
phere.*

b.  The  abforption  of  nitrous  gas  by  a  folution
of  fulphate  of  iron,   was  long  ago  difcovered  by

*  I  have  been  able  to  make  thefe  obfervations  on  tlie
fulphates  of  iron,  moft  of  them  after  Prouft.


I


I


(   154  )

Prieftley.     During  this  abforption,  he  remarketl
a  change  of  color  in  the  folution,  analogous  to

4^  that  produced  by  the  mixture  of  it  with  nitric

1  acid.

This  chemical  fa<S  has  been  lately  applied
by  Humbolt,  to  the  difcovery  of  the  nitrogene
generally  mingled  with  nitrous  gas.

Vauquelin  and  Humbolt  have  publifhed
a  memoir,  on  the  cauics  of  the  abforp-
tion*  of  nitrous  gas  by  folution  of  fulphate
of  iron.  They  faturated  an  ounce  and  half  of
fulphate  of  iron  in  folution,  with  .180  cubic
inches  of  nitrous  gas.

Thus  impregnated  it  ftrongly  reddened  tinc-
ture of  turnfoyle  ;  when  mingled  with  fulphuric
acid,  gave  nitric  acid  vapor  ;  and  faturated  with
potafh,  ammoniacal  vapor.

By  analyfis,  it  produced  as  much  ammoniac
as  that  contained  in  4  grains  of  ammoniacal
muriate,  and  a  quantity  of  nitric  acid  equal  to
that  exitling  in  17  grains  of  nitre.    Hence  they

'^•'  Annales  de  chimie,  vol.  xxviii.  pag.  182,


(   155   )

concluded,  that  the  nitrous  gas  and  a  portion  of
the  Vvater  of  the  folution,  had  mutually  deconi-
pofed  each  other;  the  oxygene  of  the  water  com-
bining with  the  oxygene  and  a  portion  of  the
nitrogene  of  nitrous  gas  to  form  nitric  acid  ;
and  its  hydrogene  uniting  with  the  remaining
nitrogene,  to  generate  ammoniac.

They  have  taken  no  notice  of  the  nature  of
the  fulphate  of  iron  employed,  which  was  mod
probably  the  common  or  mixed  fulphate  ;  nor
of  the  attradllon  of  the  oxide  of  iron  in  this  fub-
fiance  for  oxygene.

c.  Before  I  was  acquainted  with  the  obferv^ations
of  Proud,  the  common  fa6is  relating  to  the
oxygenation  of  vitriol  of  iron  induced  me  to
fuppofe,  that  the  attradlion  of  this  fubftancc  for
oxygene  was  in  fome  way  connedled  with  the
procefs  of  abforption.  The  comparifon  of  the
experiments  of  Humbolt  and  Vauquelin,  with
the  obfervations  of  Prouft,  enabled  me  to  dif-
cover  the  true  nature  of  the  procefs.

I  procured  a  folution  of  red  fulphate  of
iron,    by    palling    oxygenated     muriatic    acid


I


«>■


(  156  )

through  a  folution  of  common  fulphate  of  iron,
till  it  gave  only  a  red  precipitate,  when  mingled
with  cauftic  potafh.  To  nitrous  gas  confined
by  mercury,  a  fmall  quantity  of  this  folution
was  introduced.  On  agitation,  its  color  altered
to  muddy  green  ;  but  the  abforption  that  took
place  was  extremely  trifling  :  in  half  an  hour
it  did  not  amount  to  ,2,  the  volume  of  the
folution  being  unity,  w^hcn  it  had  nearly  re-
gained the  yellow  color.

I  now  obtained  a  folution  of  green  ful-
phate of  iron,  by  diflx)lving  iron  filings  in  diluted
fulphuric  acid.  The  folution  was  agitated  in
contact  with  fulphurated  hydrogen e,  and  after-
wards boiled  ;  when  it  gave  a  white  precipitate
with  pruffiate  of  potaOi.

A  fmall  quantity  of  this  folution  agitated  in
nitrous  gas,  quickly  became  of  an  olive  brown,
and  the  gas  was  diminifhed  with  great  rapidity;
in  two  minutes,  a  quantity  equal  to  four  times
the  volume  of  the  folution,  had  been  abforbed.

Thefe  fadls  convinced  me  that  the  folubility
of  nitrous   gas  in  common   fulphate  of  iron,


(  157  )

chiefly  depended  upon  the  pale  green  fiilphale
contained  by  it ;  and  that  the  attra6\ion  of  one
of  the  conftituents  of  this  fubftance,  the  green
oxide  of  iron,  for  oxygene,  was  one  of  the
caufcs  of  the  phaenonnenon.

d.  Green  fulphate  of  iron  rapidly  decompofes
nitric  acid.  li  was  confeqnently  difficult  to
conceive  how  any  affinities  exifting  between  ni-
trous gas,  water,  and  green  fulphate  of  iron,
could  produce  the  nitric  acid  found  in  the  ex-
periments of  Vauquelin  and  Hunnbolt.

To  afcertain  if  the  prefencc  of  a  great  quan-
tity of  water  deilroyed  the  power  of  green  ful-
phate of  iron  to  decompofe  nitric  acid,  I  intro-
duced into  a  cubic  inch  of  folution  of  green
fulphate  of  iron,  two  drops  of  concentrated
nitric  acid.

The  folution  affiimed  a  very  light  olive  color  ;
pruffiate  of  potafh  mingled  with  a  little  of  it,
gave  a  dark  green  precipitate.  Hence  the
nitric  acid  had  been  evidently  decompofed.  As
no  nitrous  gas  was  given  out,  which  is
always  the  cafe  when  nitric  acid  is  poured  on


(   158  )

cr}{lalired  fulphate  of  iron,  1  fufpecSled  that  a
compleat  decompofition  of  the  acid  had  taken
place ;  but  when  the  folution  was  heated,  a  few
minute  globules  of  gas  were  liberated,  and  it
gradually  became  flightly  clouded.

Having  often  remarked  that  no  precipitation
is  ever  produced  during  the  converfion  of  green
fulphate  of  iron  into  red,  by  oxygenated  muri-
atic acid,  or  concentrated  nitric  acid,  I  could
refer  the  cloudinefs  to  no  other  caufe  than  to
the  formation  of  ammoniac.

To  afcertain  if  this  fubftance  had  been  pro-
duced, a  quantity  of  flacked  cauftic  lime  was
thrown  into  the  folution.  On  the  application
of  heat,  the  ammoniacal  fmell  was  diftintSlly
perceptible,  and  the  vapor  held  over  orange
nitrous  acid,  gave  denfe  white  fumes.

e.  When  I  confidered  this  fadt  of  the  decom-
pofition of  nitric  acid  and  water  by  the  folution
of  green  fulphate  of  iron,  and  the  change  of
color  effcdted  in  it  by  the  abforption  of  nitrous
gas,  exa611y  analogous  to  that  produced  by  the
decompofition  of  nitric  acid;  I  was  induced  to


(  159  )

believe  that  the  nitric  acid  found  in  the  analjfis
ofVauquelin  and  Humbolt,  had  been  formed
by  the  combination  of  feme  of  the  nitrous  gas
thrown  into  the  folution   with  the  oxygenc  of
the   atmofpherCc:  and  that  the  abforbability  of
nitrous  gas^  by  folution  of  green  fulphate  of
iron,,  was  owing   to  a  decompodtion   produced
by  the   combination  of  its  oxygenc    with   the
green  oxide  of  iron,  and  of  its  nitrogcne  with
the  hydrogene  difengaged  irom  w^ater,  decom-
pounded at  the  fame  time.

To  afcertain  this,  I  procured  a  quantity  of
nitrous  gas:  it  was  fuitered  to  remain  in  con-
ta6l  with  water  for  ibme  hours  after  its  pro-
duflion.  Transferred  to  the  mercurial  appa-
ratus, it  gave  no  white  vapor  when  placed
in  contact  with  folution  of  ammoniac  ;  and  con-
fequently  held  no  nitric  acid  in  folution.

Into  a  graduated  jar  filled  with  mercury,  a
cubic  inch  of  concentrated  folution  of  pure
green  fulphate  of  iron  was  introduced,  and  7
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas  admitted  to  it.
The  folution  immediatelv  became  dark  olive  at


nmtk


(  160)

the  edges,  and  on  agitation  this  color  was  dif-
fuTed  through  it.  In  3  minutes,  when  near  5^
cubic  nichets  h:.d  been  abforbed,  the  diminution
ceafcd  The  folutioii  w:is  now  of  a  bright  olive
brown,  and  tranrparcnt  at  the  edges.  After  it  had
reded  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  no  farther  ab-
forption  was  obferved  ;  the  color  was  the
fame,  and  no  precipitation  could  be  perceived.
A  little  of  it  was  thrown  into  a  fmall  glafs  tube,
under  the  mercury,  and  examined  in  the  at-
mofphere.  Its  tafte  was  rather  more  aftringent
than  that  of  folution  of  green  fulphate ;  it
did  not  at  all  alter  the  color  of  red  cabbage
juice.  When  a  little  of  it  was  poured  on  the
mercury,  it  foon  lofl:  its  color,  its  tafte  became
acid,  and  it  quickly  reddened  cabbage  juice,
even  rendered  green  by  an  alkali.

To  the  folution  remaining  in  the  mercurial
jar,  a  fmall  quantity  of  pruffiate  of  potafh  was
introduced,  to  afcertain  if  any  red  fulphate  of
iron  had  been  formed;  but  in  (lead  of  the  pro-
dudlion  of  either  a  blue,  or  a  white  precipitate,
the  whole  of  the  Iblution  became  opaque^  and
chocolate  colored.


( Ifll  >

Surprifed  at  this  appearance,  I  was  at  firft
induced  to  fuppofe,  that  the  ammoniac  formed
by  the  ilitrogene  of  the  nitrous  gas  and  the
hydrogene  of  the  water,,  had  been  fufficient  to
precipitate  from  the  fulphuric  acid,  the  red
oxide  of  iron  produced,  and  that  the  color  of
the  mixture  was  owing  to  this  precipitation.
To  diflcjivc  any  uncombined  oxide  that  might
ex  ill  in  the  folution,  I  added  a  very  minute
quantity  of  diluted  fulphuric  acid  ;  but  little
alteration  of  color  was  produced.  Hence,  evi-
dently, no  red  oxide  had  been  formed.

This  unexpedled  refult  obliged  me  to  theorife
a  fecond  time,  by  fuppofing  that  nitrate  of  am-
moniac had  been  produced,  which  by  combining
with  the  white  prufRate  of  iron,  generated  a
new  combination.  But  on  mingling  together
green  fulphate  of  iron,  pruiliate  of  potafli,  and
nitrate  of  ammoniac  in  the  atmofphere,  the
mixture  remained  perfectly  white.

To  afcertain  if  any  nitric  acid  exified,  com-
bined with  any  of  the  bafes,  in  the  impregnated
folution,  I  introduced    into   it   an   equal  bulk


(  i62  J

bf  diluted    fulphuric   acid  :    it  became  rather
paler  ;  but  no  green  or  blue  tinge  was  produced.

Thatthepruflic  acid  had  not  been  decompofed,
was  evident  from  the  bright  green  produced,
when  lefs  than  a  grain  of  dilute  nitric  acid  was
admitted  into  the  folution.

/.  From  thefc  experiments  it  was  evident,  that
no  red  fulphate  of  iron,  or  nitric  acid,  and  confe-
quently  no  ammoniac,  had  been  produced  after
the  abforption  of  nitrous  gas  by  green  fulphate
of  iron.  And  when  I  compared  them  with  the
obfervatibns  of  Prieftley,  who  had  expelled  by
heat  a  minute  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  from  an
impregnated  folution  of  common  fulphate  of
iron,  and  who  found  common  air  phlogifticated
by  flanding  in  contact  with  it,  I  began  to  fuf-
pe6l  that  nitrous  gas  was  fimply  diflblved  in
the  folution,  without  undergoing  decompofi-
tion.

g.  To  determine  more  accurately  the  nature  of
the  procefs,  I  introduced  into  a  mercurial
cylinder  410  grains  of  folution  of  green  fulphate
of  iron,  occupying  a  fpace  nearly  equal   to  a


(  163  )

cubic  incli  ami  quarter  ;  it  was  faturated  with
nitrons  gas,  by  abforbing  8  cubic  inches.  This
faturated  folution  exhibited  the  fame  appearance
!is  the  lafi: ;  and  after  remaining  near  an  hour
untouched,  had  evidently  depofited  no  oxide
of  iron,   nor  gained  any  acid  properties.

Into  a  fmall  mattrafs  filled  with  mercury,
naving  a  tight  ll:opper  with  '  a  curved  tube
adapted  to  it,  the  greater  part  of  this  folution
was  introduced  ;  judging  from  the  capacity  of
the  mattrafs,  about  50  grains  of  it  might  have
been  loft.  To  prevent  conrimon  air  from  coming
in  contadl  with  the  folution,  the  ftopper  was
introduced  into  the  mattrafs  under  the  mercury;
the  curved  tube  conneded  with  a  graduated
cylinder  filled  with  that  fubftance  ;  and  the
mattrafs  brought  over  the  fide  of  the  mercurial
trough.  But  in  fpitc  of  thefe  precautions  a
large  globule  of  common  air  got  into  the  top  of
the  mattrafs,  from  the  curvature  of  the  tube.
When  the  heat  of  a  fpirit  lamp  was  applied  to
the  folution,  it  gave  out  gas  with  great  rapidity^
and   gradually  loft  its  color.       When  5  cubic


(    164  )

inches  were  collc61cd  it  became  perfeeily  pale
green,  whilft  a  yellow  reel  precipitate  was  depo-
fited  on  the  bottom  of  the  mattrafs.

On  pouring  a  little  of  the  clear  folution  into
prnfiiatc  of  potafh,  it  gave  only  white  prufliate
of  iron.

But  on  introducing  a  particio  of  fulphuric
acid  into  the  folution,  fufficient  to  diffolve  fome
of  the  red  precipitate,  and  then  pouring  a
little  of  it  into  a  folution  of  prufliate  of  potafh,
)t  gave  a  fine  blue  prufliate  of  iron.

Hence  the  red  precipitate  was  evidently  red
yellow  oxide  of  iron.

I  now  examined  the  gas,  fufpeding  that  it
was  nitrous  oxide.  On  mingling  a  little  of  it
with  atmofpheric  air,  it  gave  red  vapor,  and
diminifhed.  Solution  of  fulphate  of  iron  intro-
duced to  the  remainder,  almoft  wholly  abforbed
it :  the  fmall  reiidual  globule  of  nitrogene  could
not  equal  one  thirtieth  of  a  cubic  inch.

Confequcntly  it  was  nitrous  gas,  nearly  pure.

Cauftic  potafli  was  now  introduced  into  the
folution,  till  all  the  oxide  of  iron  was  precipi-
tated.    The   folution,    when    heated,   gave  a


(  165  )

flrong  fmell  of  ammoniac,  and  dcnfe  white
fumes  when  held  over  muriatic  acid.  It  was
kept  at  the  heat  of  ebullition  till  the  evapora-
tion had  been  nearly  compleated.  Sulphuric
acid  poured  upon  the  refiduum  gave  no  yellow
fumes,  or  nitric  acid  vapor  in  any  way  per-
ceptible ;  even  when  .heated  and  made  to  boil,
there  was  no  indication  of  the  production  of
any  vapor,  except  that  of  the  fulphuric  acid,

h.  This  experiment,  compared  with  the  others,
feemed  almoft  to  prove,  that  nitrous  gas
combined  with  folution  of  pale  green  fulphate
of  iron,  at  the  common  temperature,  without
decompofition ;  and  that  when  the  impregnated
folution  was  heated,  the  greater  portion  of  gas
was  difengaged,  whilQ  the  remainder  was  de-
compounded by  the  green  oxide  of  iron  ;  which
attracted  at  the  fame  time  oxygene  from  the
water  and  the  nitrous  gas  ;  whilft  their  other
conftituent  principles,  hydrogCLe  and  nitrogene,
entered  into  union  as  ammoniac.

Whilfi,  however,  I  was  reafoning  upon  this
fmgular  chemical    change,     as  affording  pre-


-  mi


(  166  )

Jutnpiive  proofs  in  favor  of  the  exertion  of  iim-
ple  affinities  by  the  coni^ituent  parts  of  com-
pound fubftances,  a  doubt  concerning  the
decompofition  of  the  nitrous  gas  occurred  to
me.  As  near  as  I  could  guefs  at  the  quantity
of  nitrous  gas  contained  by  the  impregnated
folution,  at  Icaft  j^  of  it  muft  have  been  expelled
undecompounded.

More  than  a'  quarter  of  a  cubic  inch  of  com-
mon air  had  been  prefent  in  the  mattrafs :  the
oxygene  of  this  common  air  mufl  have  com-
bined with  the  nitrous  gas,  to  form  nitric  acid.
Might  not  this  nitric  acid  have  been  decom-
pofed,  and  furnifhed  oxygene  to  the  red  oxide
of  iron,  and  nitrogene  to  the  fmall  quantity  of
ammoniac  found  in  the  folution,  as  in  dP

i.  I  now  introduced  to  a  folution  of  green  ful~
phate  confined  by  mercury,  nitrous  gas,  per-
fectly free  from  nitric  acid.  "When  the  folution
was  faturatedj  a  portion  of  it  was  introduced
into  a  fmall  mattrafs  filled  with  dry  mercury,  in
the  mercurial  trough.  The  curved  tube  was
clofed   by  a  fitiall   cork  at  the  top,    and  filled


(  167  )

with  nitrous  gas  ;  it  was  then  adapted  to  th^
mattrafs,  which  was  raifed  from  the  trough,  and
the  folution  thus  efFedlually  preferved  from  the
contadl  of  the  atmofphere.

When  the  heat  of  a  fpirit  lamp  was  applied
to  the  mattrafs,  it  began  to  give  out  gas  with
great  rapidity.  After  fome  time  the  folution
loll  its  dark  color,  and  became  turbid.  When
the  produdlion  of  nitrous  gas  had  ceafed,  it  was
fufFered  to  cool.  A  copious  red  precipitate
had  fallen  down  ;  which,  examined  by  the  fame
tefts  as  in  the  lad  experiment,  proved  to  be
red  oxide  of  iron.

The  folution  treated  with  lime,  as  before,
gave  ammoniac  ;  but  with  fulphuric  acid,  not
the  llighteft  indications  of  nitric  acid.

k.  Having  thus  procured  full  evidence  of  the
decompofition  of  nitrous  gas  in  the  heated  folu-
tion, in  order  to  gain  a  more  accurate  ac-
quaintance with  the  affinities  exerted,  I  endea-
voured to  afcertain  the  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  ,
decompofed  by  a  given  folution,  under  known
ci^cumftances.


(  i6s  )

Into  a  cylinder  of  the  capacity  of  20  cubic
inches,  inverted  in  mercury,  11 50  grains  of
foiution  of  green  fulphate  of  iron,  of  fpecific
gravity  1.4,  were  introduced.  Nitrous  gas  was
admitted  to  it,  and  after  feme  time  21  cubic
inches  were  abforbed.

The  impregnated  foiution  was  thrown  into  a
mattrafs,  in  the  fame  rn^nner  as  in  the  laft  ex-
periment, and  the  fame  precautions  taken  to
preferve  it  from  the  contadl  of  atmofpheric  air.
A  quantity  was  loft  during  the  procefs  of  tranf-
ferring,  which,  reafoning  from  the  fpace  occu-
pied in  the  mattrafs  by  the  remaining  portion,
as  determined  by  experiment  afterwards,  muft
have  amounted  nearly  to  240  grains.

The  curved  tube  from  the  mattrais  was  now
made  to  communicate  with  the  mercurial  air-
holder.  By  the  application  of  heat  12^5  cubic
inches  of  nitrous  gas  were  colled^ed,  after  the
common  temperature  had  been  reftored  to  the
mattrafs  ;  which  wasfufTcred  to  remain  in  com-
munication with  the  condudling  tube.

The  foiution  was  now  pale  grccnj  that  is,  of  its


(  169)

natural    color,  and  a  confiderable    quantity  of
red  oxide  of  iron  had  been  depofitcd.

Solid  cauftic  potafli  was  introduced  into  it,
till  all  the  green  oxide  of  iron  had  been  precipi-
tated^ and  till  the  folution  rendered  green,  red
cabbage  juice.

A  tube  was  now  accurately  connefled  with
the  mattrafsj  bent,  and  introduced  into  a  frnall
quantity  of  diluted  fulphuric  acid.  Nearly  half
of  the  fluid  in  it  was  ilowly  diftilled  into  the
fulphuric  acid,  by  the  heat  of  a  fpirit  lamp.
The  impregnated  acid  evaporated  at  a  heat
above  212®,  and  gave  a  fmall  quantity  of  cryf-
talifed  fait,  which  barely  amounted  to  two  grains
and  quarter  :  it  had  every  property  of  fulphatc
of  ammoniac.  Sulphuric  acid  in  cxcefs  was
poured  on  therefiduum,  and  the  whole  difiilled
by  a  heat  not  exceeding  300®,  into  a  fmall  quan-
tity of  water.  This  water,  after  the  proccf?,
tafted  (Irongly  of  fulphuric  acid;  it  had  no
peculiar  odor.  Tin  thrown  into  it  when  heated,
was  not  perceptibly  oxydated  ;  mingled  with
flrontitic   lime    W4lcr,  it  gave  a  copious    white


(  170  )

precipitate,  and  after  the  precipitation  became
almoft  taftelefs.  Hence  it  evidently  contained
no  nitric  acid.

The  12,5  cubic  inches  of  undecompounded
gas  that  came  over  were  examined ;  and  ac-
counting for  the  fmall  quantity  of  common  air
previoufly  contained  in  the  airholder,  muft  have
been  almoft  pure.

/.  Now  fuppofing927  grains  of  the  impregnated
folution  (including  the   weight  of  the  nitrous
gas),  to  have   been  operated   upon,    this  muft
have  contained  about  l6,7  cubic  inches  of  ni-
J  trousgas.     But  12,5   cubic  inches  efcaped  un>-

decompoundod  :  hence  4,2  were  decompofed  ;
and  thefe  weigh  1,44  grains,  and  are  compofed
of  ,8  oxygene,  and  ,64  nitrogene.*

Confequently,  the  nitrous  gas  muft  have  fur-
nifhed  ,8  of  oxygene  to  the  green  oxide  of
iron.

But  ,64  of  nitrogene  require  ,15  of  hydrogene
to  form  .79  of  ammoniac  t-f-  confequently  1  of

^-  Dlvifion  IV.  Seaion  5.
.•  t  Divifion  II.  Seaio|i  l.


(in  )

water  was  decompounded,  and  this  furuiflied
^S5  of  oxygene  to  the  green  oxide  of  Iron.

The  green  oxide  of  iron  contains  —^  oxygene ;
the  red  — .  But  the  whole  quantity  of  oxygene
fupplied  from  the  water  and  nitrous  gas  is
8+  85  =  1,65  ;  and  calcuhiting  on  the  dif-
ference of  the  compofition  of  the  red  and  green
pxide  of  iron,  5,7  grains  of  red  oxide  mud  h.ave
been  depofited,  and  confequently  thefe  would
faturate  as  much  acid  as  ,79  grains  of  ammoniac,
or  4,1  grains  of  green  oxide  of  iron.*

And  fuppofing  the  ammoniac  in  fulphate  of
ammoniac  to  be  to  the  acid  as  1  is  to  3,^5^  3.2
grains  of  fulphate  of  ammoniac  mult  have  been
formed,  containing  about  2,4  grains  acid  ;  and
then  6,5  grains  of  green  fulphnte  of  iron  mud
have  been  decompofed.

Hence    we   gain  the   following    equation  :


*  No  precipltntlon  takes  place  during  the  couvf^rfion  of
iblution  of  gieen  fulphate  into  red  j  and  tiie  acid  v^ppears
faturated.

t  Divifion  II,  Seaion  6


'•^mmaamatm


(  172  )

6,5  green  f.  =  2,41  ful.  acid  +  4,1  gr.ox.  iron.

1,44  nit.  gas  =  ,64  nitrogene  +  ,8  oxygene.

1    water        rzz  ,85  oxygene -f- ,15  bydrogene.

equal
3,2  ful.  am.  =  2,41  f.  acid  + ,64  nit. +,15  hyd.

5,7  r.  ox.  iron  =  4,1  gr.  ox.  iron  +  1,6  oxyg.

Though  the  eftimation  of  the  quantities  in
this  equation  muft  not  be  confidered  as  ftridlly
accurate,  on  account  of  the  degree  of  uncer-
tainty that  remains  concerning  the  exadl  nu-
merical expreffion  of  the  quantities  of  the  con-
ftituents  of  water,  ammoniac,  and  the  other
compound  bodies  employed  ;  yet  as  founded
on  a  fimple  quantity,  that  is,  the  nitrous
gas  decompofed,  it  cannot  be  very  diftant
from  the  truth.

The  fulphate  of  ammoniac  given  by  experi-
ment, is  confiderably  lefs  than  that  which  was
really  produced  ;  much  of  it  was  probably  carried
off  during  the  evaporation  of  the  fuperabundant
acid.


(   173   )

The  conclufions  that  may  be  drawn  from  this
experiment,  afford  a  flriking  inftanceofthe  im-
portance of  the  application  of  the  fcience  of
quantity  to  the  chemical  changes  :  for  the  data
being  one  chemical  fadi,  the  decompolition  of
a  given  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  by  known  agents  ;
the  compofition  of  nitrous  gas,  of  water,  am-
moniac, the  oxides  of  iron,  and  fulphate  of
ammoniac  ;  we  are  able  not  only  to  determine
the  quantities  of  the  limple  conftituents  that
have  entered  into  new  arrangements,  but  like-
wife  the  compofition  of  two  compound  bodies,
the  green  and  red  fulphates  of  iron. '^

m.  Though  from  the  experiments  in  e  it
appeared  that  no  decompofition  of  nitrous  gas
had  been  produced  during  or  even  after  its
abforption  by  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron  at
the  common  temperature  ;  yet  a  fufpicion
that  it    might     take    place    flowly,  and   that


.  *  According  to  the  eftimation  in  the  equation,  6.5  of
dry  green  fulphate  of  iron  contain  4.1  green  oxide  of  iron,
and  2,4  of  Kirwan's  real  fnlphuric  acid  :  and  8.1  red  ful-
phate of  iron,  contain  2  4  acid,  and  5.7  red  oxide  of  iron,


^L^^h^ -... — —  -  ■■    ^    ■      ^-^


(   i74  )

indications  of  it  might  be  given  by  depofi-
tion,  induced  me  to  examine  minutely  two
impregnated  folutions,  one  of  which  had  been
at  reft,  confined  by  mercury,  for  19  hours,  and
the  other  for  11 .  '  In  neither  of  them  c>ould  I
difcov^r  any  depoiition,  or  alteration  of  color,
which  might  denote  a  change.

Two  cubic  inches  of  oxygene  were  admitted
to  half  a  cubic  inch  of  one  of  thefe  folutions.
The  oxygene  was  flowly  abforbed,  and  the  folu-
tion  gradually  loft  its  color.

To  afcertain  if  during  the  converfiun  o{  the
nitrous  gas  held  in  folution  by  fulphate  of
iron,  into  nitric  acid,  by  the  oxygene  of  the
atmofphere  at  the  con)mon  temperature,  any
water  was  decompofed  ;  I  fufFered  an  impreg-
nated folution,  weighing  nearly  two  ounces,  to
remain  in  conta6l  with  the  atmofphere  at  57° —
62°,  till  it  was  become  perfe<5ily  pale.  It  then
had  a  ftrong  acid  tafte,  cfFervefced  with  car-
bonate of  potath,  and  gave  a  blue  precipitate
with  pruffiatc  of  potafh. — It  was  faturated
with  quicklime,  and  heated  ;  flight  indications


(  i75  )

of  the  prefence  of  ammoniac  were  perceived.

As  in  this  experiment  the  nitric  acid  had  beeu
mod  probably  decompofed  by  the  green  oxide
of  iron,  as  in/,  I  fent  oxygenated  muriatic  acid
through  an  impregnated  folution,  till  all  the
green  oxide  of  iron  was  converted  into  red,  and
all.  the  nitrous  gas  into  nitric  acid.
This  folution  faturated  with  potafh,  and  heated,
gave  no  ammoniacal  fmell.

From  thefe  experiments  we    may   conclude,

ift.  That  folution  of  red  fulphate  of  iron
has  little  or  no  affinity  for  nitrous  gas^;  and
that  folution  of  common  fulphate  ablbrbs  nitrous
gas  only  in  proportion  as  it  contains  green
fulphate.

2dly.  That  folutions  of  green  fulphate  of
iron  difTolvc  nitrous  gas  in  quantities  propor-
tionable to  their  concentration,  without  effcclinrt-


*  The  muddy  green  color  produced  in  a  roliiiion  cf  red
fulphate  of  iron  agitated  in  nitrons  gas,  depended  npon
impurities  in  the  mercury.  I  have  iince  found,  that  when
the  folution  is  completely  oxygenated,  the  diminution  is
barely  perceptible.


(  176  )

any  decompofition  of  it  at  common  temperatures.
And  the  foliibility  o^  nitrous  gas  in  folution
of  green  fulphate,  may  be  fuppofcd  to  depend
on  an  equilibrium  of  affinity,  produced  by  the
following  fimple  attra6lions  :

1.  That  of  green  oxide  of  iron  for  the  oxy-
gene  of  nitrous  gas  and  water.

2.  That  of  the  hydrogene  of  the  water
for  the  nitrogene  of  the  nitrous  gas.

3.  That  of  the  principles  of  the  fulphu-
ric  acid,  for  nitrogene  and  hydrogene.

3dly.  That  at  high  temperatures,  that  is,
from  200°  to  300^^,  the  equilibrium  of  affinity
producing  the  bmary  combination  between
nitrous  gas  and  folution  of  green  fulphate  of
iron  is  dcftroyed  ;  the  attra6iion  of  the  green
oxide  of  iron  for  oxygenebeingincreafed  ;  whilft
probably  that  of  nitrogene  for  hydrogene  is
diminifhed.

Hence  the  nitrous  gas  is  either  liberated,*  in


*  Perhaps  the  liberation  of  nitrous  gas  from  the  folution


(  177  )

cohreqaence  of  the  affinity  between  oxygeind
and  hydrogene,  and  oxygene  and  nitrogene  not
following  the  fame  ratio  of  alteration  on  in-
creafed  temperature;  or  decompofed,  becaufe
at  a  certain  temperature  the  green  oxide  exerts
fuch  affinities  upon  water  and  nitrous  gas,  as  to
attra(fl  oxygene  from  both  of  them  to  form  red
oxide ;  whilft  the  ftill  exiftitig  affinity  between
the  hydrogene  of  the  one,  and  the  nitrogene  of
the  other,  difpofes  them  to  combine  to  form
ammoniac.

4thly.  That  the  change  of  color  produced  by
introducing  nitric  acid  to  folution  of  commonL
fulphate  of  iron,  exactly  analogous  to  that  o'c-
cafioned  in  it  by  impregnation  with  nitrous  gas,
is  owing  to  the  decompofition  of  the  acid^  by
the  combination  of  its  oxygene  with  the  greea


takes  place  at  a  lower  temperature  than  its  dccompolition.
I  have  always  obferved  that  the  quantity  of  yellow  pre-;
cipitate  is  greater  when  the  folution  is  rapidly  made  to
boil.  Were  it  poliible  to  heat  it  to  a  certain  tem-
perature at  once,  probably  a  compleat  decompolitioii
would  taUft  place.


(  178  >

oxide  of  iron,  and  of  its   nitrous  gas  with  the
folution.

5thly.    That  nitrous  gas  in  combination  with-
folution  of  green  fulphate  of  iron,  is  capable  of
exerting  a  ftrong  affinity  upon  free  or  loofely
combined   oxygene,  and  of  uniting  with  it   to
form  nitric  acid.

n.  The  produces  obtained  from  a  folution
of  fulphate  of  iron  faturated  with  nitrous  gas,
by  Vauquclin  and  Humbolt,  and  their  confe-
quent  miftake  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
procefs  of  ablbrption,*  muft  have  arifen  from
expofure  of  their  impregnated  folution  to  the
atmofphere.

Indeed,  from  the  acidity  of  it,  on  examina-
tion, from  the  fmall  portion  of  ammoniac,  and
the  large  quantity  of  nitric  acid  obtained,  it
appears  mod  probable  that  the  whole  of  the
nitrous  gas  employed  was  converted  into  nitric
acid,  by  combining  with  atmolplieric  oxygene;
for  no  nitric  acid  could  have  been  obtained  in

*  A-nnales  de  Chimic.  T.  38,  pag.  IS;.


the  mode  in  which  they  operated,  unlefs  the
green  oxide  of  iron  in  the  fblution  had  been
previoufly  converted  into  red.

Vlir.  On  the  dhforplon  of  Nitrous  Gas  by
folution  of  green  Mzirtaie  of  Iron^

a.  The  analogy  between  the  affinities  of  the
bonftititents  of  the  muriate  and  fulphate  of  iron,
induced  me  to  conjcdurc  that  they  poffefled
fimilar  powers  oAabforbing  nitrous  gas  ;  and  I
foon  found  that  this  was  a(5tually  the  cafe  ;  for
on  agitating  half  a  cubic  inch  of  folution  of
muriated  iron,  procured  by  diflolving  iron
fdings  in  muriatic  acid,  in  nitrous  gas,  the  gas
was  abforbed  with  great  rapidity,  whilft  the
folution  aflumed  a  deep  and  bright  browii
tinge.

h.  Prduft,'''*  who  as  I  have  before  mentioned^,
fuppofes  theexiftence  of  two  oxides  of  iron  only.


*  Annales  de   Chimie,   xxiii.    pag.  85}   or  Nicholfoni
Phil.  Journal  vol.  i,  pag.  45,


^^


(    180)


one  containing  ^J-oxygene,  the  other ---,  has
afTamed,  that  the  muriatic  acid,  and  inoit  other
acids  as  well  as  the  fulphnric^  are  capable  of
combining  with  thefe  oxides,  and  of  forming
ivith  each  of  them  a  diftindl  fait.  He  has,
however,  detailed  no  experiments  on  the  mu-
riates of  iron.

As  thefe  falts  are  ftill  more  diftindl  from  each
other  in  their  properties  than  the  fulphates,  arid
as  thefe  properties  ai-e  connedled  with  the
phsenomenon  of  the  ablbfption  and  decompb-
fition  of  nitrous  gas,  I  dial  I  detail  the  obfer-
vations  I  have  been  able  to  make    upon    them.

c.  When  iron  filings  have  been  diflblved  iil
pure  muriatic  acid,  and  the  folution  prefcfved
from  the  contadl  of  air,  it  is  of  a  pale  greeii
color,  and  gives  a  white  precipitate  with  alkaline
pruffiates.  The  alkalies  throw  down  from  it  d
light  green  oxide  of  iron.

When  evaporated,  it  gives  cryftals  almoft
white,  which  are  extremely  foluble  in  water  ;
but  infoluble  in  alcohol.

The  folution  of  green  muriate  of  iron  has  a


(   181   )

great  affinity  for  oxygene,  and  attracts  it  from
the  atmofphere,  from  nitric  acid,  and  probably
from  oxygenated  muriatic  acid.

When  red  oxide  of  iron  is  diffolved  in  muri-
atic acid,  or  when  nitric  acid  is  decompofed  by
folution  of  green  muriate  of  Iron  ;  the  red
muriate  of  iron  is  produced.  The  folution  of
this  fait  is  of  a  deep  brown  red,  its  odor  is  pe-
culiar, and  its  tafte,  even  in  a  very  diluted  ilatCj
highly  aftringent.  It  a6\s  upon  animal  and
vegetable  matters  in  a  manner  fomewhat  analo-
gous to  the  oxygenated  muriatic  acid,  rendering
them  yellowidi  white,  or  yellow.*

Sulphuric  acid  poured  upon  it,  produces  a
fmell  refembling  that  of  oxygenated  muriatic
acid.  Evaporated  at  a  low  temperature,  it
gives  an  uncryftalifable  dark  orange  colored
fait,  which  is  foluble  in  alcohol,  and  when  de-
compofed by  the  alkalies,  gives  a  red  precipitate.
With  prufliate  of  potafli  it  gives  prntTian    blue.


*  Probably  by  giving  them  oxygene  ;  whereas  th(».
green  muriate  and  fulphate  blacken  animal  lubflances^  molj:
likely  by  abflrading  from  them  OKygene.


(   182  )

The  common  muriate  of  iron  confifts  of  dlf-:
ferent  proportions  of  thcfe  two  falts.  It  may
be  converted  into  red  muriate  by  concentrated
nitric  acid^  or  into  green  by  fulphur^ted  hydro-
gene.

d.  To  afcertain  if  folutioq  of  red  muriate
of  iron  was  capable  of  abforbing  nitrous  gas,  I
introduced  intoa  jar  filled  with  mercury,  a  cubic
inch  of  nitrous  gas,  and  admitted  to  it  nearly
half  a  cubic  inch  of  folution  of  red  muriate  of
iron.  No  difcoloration  took  place.  By  rnucb
agitation,  however,  an  abforption  of  nearly  ,2
was  produced,  and  the  folution  became  of  a
muddy  green.  But  this  change  of  color,  and
probably  the  abforption,  was  in  confequence  of
the  oxydation  of  either  the  mercury,  or  fome
imperfedl  metals  combined  with  it,  by  the
oxygene  of  the  red  muriate.  For  I  after-
wards found,  that  prccifely  the  fame  change
of  color  was  produced  when  a  folution  was
agitated  over  mercury.

e  I  introduced  to  a  cubic  inch  of  concen-
trated folution  of  green  muriate  of  iron,  7  cubiq


(   183  )

incfies  of  nitrous  gas,  free  from  nitric  acid  ;  the
folution  indantly  became  colored  at  the  edges,
and  on  agitation  abforbed  the  gas  with  much
greate;*  rapidity  than  even  fulphate  of  iron  ;  in
a  minute,  only  a  q darter  of  a  cqbic  inch  re-
inained.

The  folution  appeared  of  a  very  dark  brown,
but  evidently  no  precipitation  had  taken  place
in  it,  and  the  edges,  when  viewed  againft  the
light,  were  tranfparent  and  puce  colored^

Five  cubic  inches  more  gf  nitrous  gas  were
now  diffblved  in  the  folution.  The  intenfity
of  the  color  increafed,  and  after  an  hour  no
depofition  had  takeft  place.  A  little  of  it  was
then  examined  in  the  atmofphere ;  ft  had  a
much  more  afiringent  tafte  than  the  unimpreg-
nated  folution,  and  effected  no  change  in  red
cabbage  juice.  When  pru^ate  of  potafh  was
introduced  into  it,  its  color  changed  to  olive
brown.  A  few  drops  of  the  folution,  that  had
accidentally  fallen  on  the  mercury,  foon  became
cplorlefs,  and  then  effervefced  with  carbonate
of  potafh,  and  tailed  ftrongly  acid.


(   184  )

The  remainder  of  the  impregnated  folution,
which  muft  have  nearly  equalled  ,75  cubic
inches,  was  introduced  into  a  mattrafs,  having
a  ftopper  and  curved  tube,  as  in  the  experi-
ments on  the  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron;  great
care  being  taken  to  preferve  it  from  the  contadl
of  air.

The  mattrats  was  heated  by  a  fpiritlamp,  the
curved  tube  being  in  communication  with  a
mercurial  cylinder-  Near  8  cubic  inches  of
nitrous  gas  'were  colledled,  when  the  folution
became  of  a  muddy  yellow.  It  was  fufFered  to
cool,  and  examined.  A  fmall  quantity  of
yellow  precipitate  covered  the  bottom  of  the
mattrafs ;  the  fluid  was  pellucid,  and  light
green.  A  little  of  it  thrown  on  prufliate  of
potafh,  gave  a  white  precipitate,  colored  by
Hreaks  of  light  blue.  When  the  yellqw  pre-
cipitate was  partly  diflblved  by  fulphuric  acid,
a  drop  of  the  folution,  mingled  with  prufliate  of
potafh,  gave  a  deep  blue  green.

Hence,  evidently,  the  precipitate  was  red
oxide  of  iron.


(   185  )

Cauftic  potafh  in  excefs  was  infroduced  into
the  remainder  of  thq  folution,  and  it  was  heated.
It  gave  an  evident  fmell  of  ammoniac,  and
denfe  white  fumes,  when  held  over  flrong  phlo-
gifticated  nitrous  acid.

When  half  of  it  was  evaporated,  fulphuric
^cid  in  excefs  was  poured  on  the  remainder  ;
n)uriatic  acid  was  liberated,  not  perceptibly
combined  with  any  nitric  acid.

f.  In  an  experiment  that  I  made  to  afcertaia
the  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  capable  of  combining
with  folution  of  green  muriate  of  iron  ;  I  found
that  ^*]b  cubic  inches  of  fatnrated  folution  ab-
forbed  about  18  of  nitrous  gas,  which  is  nearly
double  the  quantity  combinable  with  an  equal
portion  of  the  flrongeft  folution  of  fulphate  of
iron.  A  part  of  this  impregnated  folution,
heated  flowly,  gave  out  more  gas  in  proportion
to  the  quantity  it  contained,  than  the  lafi,  and
confeqiiently  produced  lefs  precipitate  ;  fo  that
I  am  inclined  to  fup{X)fc  it  probable,  that  at  a
certain  temperature,  all  the  diilblved  nitrous
gas  may  be  difpelled    from  a  folution.


-M


(  J86  )

From  thefe  experiments  we  may  conclude,

1(1.  That  the  folution  of  green  muriate  of
iron  abforbs  nitrous  gas  in  confequence  of  nearly
the  fame  affinities  as  folution  of  green  fulphatc
of  iron  ;  its  capability  of  abforbing  larger  quan-
tities depending  moft  probably  on  its  greater
concentration  (that  is,  on  the  greater  folubility
pf  the  muriate  of  iron),  and  perhaps,  in  fome
ineafure,  on  a  nevy  combining  affinity,  that  of
muriatic  acid  for  oxygene.

!2dly.  That  at  certain  temperatures  nitrous
gas  is  either  liberated  from  folution  of  green
muriate^  or  decompofed,  by  the  combination
of  its  oxygene  v;lth  green  oxide  of  iron,  and  of
its  nitrogene  with  hydrogene,  produced  by
water  decompounded  by  the  oxide  at  the  fame
time.

IX.  Ahforption  of  Nilrous  Gas  hy  SoJutio7t  of
Niirate  of  Iron.

a.  As  well  as  two  fulphates  and  two  muriates


i  m  )

of  iron,  there  exift  two  nitrates.*  When  cqn-
centrated  nitric  acid  is  made  to  a<Si  upon  iron,,
nitrous  gas  is  difengaged  with  great  rapidity,
and  with  great  increafe  of  temperature  :  the
folution  affumes  a  yellovvifh  tinge,  and  as  the
procefs  goes  on,  a  yellow  red  oxide  is  pre-
cipitated.

Nitrate  of  iron  made  in  this  way,  gives  d>
bright  blue  mingled  with  pruffiate  of  potafh,
and  decompofed  by  the  alkalies,  a  red  precipi-
tate. Its  folution  has  little  or  no  affinity  for
nitrous  gas.

L  When  very  dilute  nitric  acid,  that  is,
fuch  as  of  fpecific  gravity  1,1 6,  is  made  to
pxydate  iron,  vyithout  the  affiftance  of  heat,
the  folution  gives  out  no  gas  for  fome  time,  and
becomes  dark  olive  brown  :  when  neutralifed
it  gives,  decompofed  by  the  alkalies,  a  light  green
precipitate  ;  and  mingled  with  pruffiate  of  pot-
afh,  pale  green  pruffiate  of  iron.


*  The  cxiftence  of  green  nitrate  was   not   fufpcded  by


mi^Om


(  iss  )

It  owes  its  color  to  the  nitrous  gas  it  holds  iii
fblution.  By  expofure  to  the  atmofphere  it
becomes  pale,  the  nitrous  gas  combined  with  it
being  converted  into  nitric  acid.

It  is  then  capable  of  abforbing  nitrous  gias,
and  confifts  of  pale  nitrate  of  irOn^  mingled  with
red  nitrate.

I  have  not  yet  obtained  a  nitrate  of  iron  giving
only  a  white  precipitate  with  pruffiate  of  pot-
afh,  that  is,  fuch  as  contains  only  oxide  of  iron
at  its  minimum  of  oxydation  ;  for  when  pure
green  oxide  of  iron  is  diflblved  by  very  dilute
nitric  acid,  a  fmall  quantity  of  the  acid  is
generally  decompofcd,  which  is  likewife  the  cafe
in  the  decompofition  of  nitre  by  green  fulphate
of  iron.  The  folutions  of  nitrate  of  iron,  bow-
ever,  procured  in  both  of  thefe  modes,  abforb
nitrous  gas  with  rapidity,  and  by  fulphurated
hydrogenc  might  probably  be  converted  into
pale  nitrate.

As  it  is  impoflible  to  obtain  concentrated
folutions  of  pale  nitrate  of  iron,  chiefly
containing  green  oxide,  its  powers  of  abforbing


(  189  )

nitrous  gas  cannot  be  compared  with  the  inn-
riatic  and  fulphitric  folutions,  unlefs  they  are
made  of  nearly  the  fame  fpecific  gravity.

Nitrous  gas  is  difengagcd  by  heat  from  the  im^^
pregnated  folution  of  nitrate  of  iron,  at  the  fame
time  that  much  red  oxide  of  iron  is  precipitated.
Whether  any  nitrous  gas  is  decompofed^
I  have  not  yet  afcertained ;  for  vrhen  un-
impregnated  pale  nitrate  of  iron  is  heated,  a
part  of  the  acid,  and  of  the  Vv^ater  of  the  folu-
tion, is  decompofed  by  the  green  oxide  of  iron  ;'^
and  in  confequence  ammoniac,  and  red  nitrate
of  iron  formed,  whilil  red  oxide  is  precipi-
tated.

X.  Abforpion  of  Nitrous  Gas  hy  other  MetaU
lie  Solutions,

a.    White    pruffiate  of  iron  in  conta61    with
vvater  abforbs  nitrous  gas  to  a  great  extent,  and


*  In  this  proccfs  nitrous  oxide  is  fometimes  given  out;
as  will  be  fcen  hereafter.


becomes  dark  chocolate.*

h.  Concentrated  folution  of  fulphate  of  tiri^
^rohahly  at  its  minimum  of  oxydation,  abforbs
one  eighth  of  itsbulk  of  nitrous  gas,  and  becomes
brown,  without  depofition.

c.  Solution  of  fulphate  of  zinc;}:  abforbs  about
one  tenth  of  its  volume  of  nitrous  gas,  and  be-
comes green.

d.  Solution  of  muriate  of  zinc:};  abforbs  nearly
the  fame  quantity,  and  becomes  orange  brown.

e.  Thefe  are  all  the  metallic  fubftances  on
which  I  have  experimented.  It  is  more  thart
probable  that  there  exifl;  others  pofTeiling  iimilar
powers  of  abforbing  nitrous  gas.

Whenever  the  metals  capable  of  decompofing
water  exift  in  folutions  at  their  minimum  of
oxydation,    the  affinities  exerted  by  them  on


*  Hence  we  learn  why  no  nitrous  gas  Is  difengaged  when
Impregnated  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron  is  decompofed  by
prufliate  of  potafli,  as  in  Div.  IV.  Sec.  vii.

+  In  both  of  thefe  folutions  the  metal  is  at  its  minimum
of  oxydation.  The  abforption  of  a  fmall  quantity  of  ni-
trous gas  by  wlnte  vitriol  was  obferyed  by  Piicliley.


(  m  )

nitrous  gas  and  water,  will  be  ftich  as  fo  pro-
duce combination.  The  powers  of  metallic
folutions  to  combine  with  nitrous  gas  at  com-
mon temperatures,  as  well  as  to  decompofe  it
at  higher  temperatures,  will  probably  be  in  the
ratio  of  the  affinity  of  the  metallic  oxides  they
contain,   for  oxygene.

XI.     Tbe  adlon  of  Sulphurated  Hydrogene  ori
folution  of  Green  Sulphate   of  Iron,  impregnated
with  Nitrous  Gas,

a.  In  an  experiment  on  the  abforption  of
nitrous  gas  by  folution  of  green  fulphate  o^  iron,
I  introduced  an  unboiled  folution  of  common
fulphate,  deprived  of  red  oxide  of  iron  by  ful-
phurated  hydrogene,  into  a  jar  filled  with  ni-
trous gas  ;  the  abforption  took  place  as  ufual.
and  nearly  (ix  of  gas  entered  into  combinationy
the  volume  of  the  folution  being  unity.  On
applying  heat  to  a  part  of  this  impregnated
folution,  the  whole  of  the  nitrous  gas  it  con-
tained (as  nearly  as  I  could  guefs),  was  expelled


(  192  )

undecompounded,  and  no  yellow  precipitate
produced.  Prafliate  of  potafli  poured  into  it
gave  only  white  prufRate  of  iron  ;  and  when  it
was  heated  with  lime,  no  ammoniacal  fmell  was
perceptible.

I  could  refer  this  phasnomenon  to  no  other
caufe  than  to  the  exigence  of  a  fmall  quantity
ofAilphurated  hydrogene  in  the  folution.  That
this  was  the  real  caufe  I  found  from  the  follow-
ing experiment.

Ik  One  part  of  a  folution  of  green  fulpbate
of  iron,  formed  by  the  agitation  of  commort
fulphate  of  iron  in  contadl  with  fulphuratcd
hydrogene,  was  boiled  for  fome  minutes  to
expel  the  fmall  quantity  of  gas  retained  by  it
imdecompoundcd.  It  had  then  no  peculiar
fmell,  and  gave  a  white  prufliate  of  iron  With
prufliate  of  potafh  ;  the  other  part  had  a  faint
odor  of  fulphurated  hydrogene,  and  gave  a
dirty  white  precipitate  with  prufliate  of  potafh.
Nearly  equal  quantities  of  each  were  faturated
with  nitrous  gas,  and  heated.  The  unboiled
impregnated  folution  gave   out  all  its  nitrous


(  m )

gas  undecompounded  ;  whilft  in  the  boiled
folution  it  was  partly  decompofed,  yellow  pre-
cipitate and  ammoniac  being  formed.

c.  This  fingular  phaenortienon  of  the  power  of
a  minute  quantity  of  fulphurated  hydrogene,  in
preventing  the  decompoiition  of  nitrous  gas  and
water,  by  green  oxide  of  iron,  will  mofl  proba-
bly take  place  in  other  impregnated  folutions.
It  feems  to  depend  on  the  ftrong  affinity  of  the
hydrogene  of  fulphurated  hydrogene  for  oxy-
gene.

XII.     jidditional  Ohfervations*

a.  For  feparating  nitrous  gas  from  gafes  ab-
forbable  to  no  great  extent  by  water ;  a  well
boiled  folution  of  green  muriate  of  iron  Ihould
be  employed.  Nitrous  gas  agitated  in  this  is
rapidly  abforbed,  and  it  has  no  affinity  for^  or
adlion  on,  nitrogene,  hydrogene,  or  hydro-
carbonate.

h.  Nitrous  gas  carefully  obtained  from  mer-
cury and  nitric  acid,  when  received  under  mer-
N


(    104  )

Gury,  or  boiled  water,  and  abforbed  by  folution
of  green  muriate,  or  fulphate  of  iron,  rarely
leaves  a  refiduum  of —  of  its  volume  :  pre-
ferved  over  common  water,  and  abforbed,  the
remainder  is  generally  from  j^  to  ^,  from  the
nitrogene  difengaged  by  the  decompofition  of
the  common  air  contained  in  the  water.

c.  The  nitrous  gas  carefully  obtained  from
the  decompofition  of  nitric  acid  of  ]  .26,  by
copper,  I  have  hardly  ever  found  to  contain
more  than  from  ^  to  ~  nitrogene,  when  received
through  common  water  :  when  boiled  water  is
employed,  the  refiduum  is  nearly  the  fame  as
that  of  nitrous  gas  obtained  from  mercury,

d,  Confequently  the  gas  from  thofc  two
folutions  may  be  ufed  in  common.  It  is  more
than  probable,  that  the  fmall  quantities  of
nitrogene  generally  mingled  with  nitrous  gas
from  copper  and  mercury,  arife  either  fit)m  the
common  air  of  the  vefTels  in  which  it  was  pro-
duced, or  that  of  the  water  over  which  it  was
received.  There  is  no  reafon  for  fuppofing  that
it  is  generated  by  a  complete  decompofition  of


}


(  m )

a  portion  of  the  acid.*

e.  Whenever  nitrous  oxide  is  mingled  with
nitrous  gas  and  nitrogene,  it  muft  be  feparated
by  well  boiled  water  ;  and  after  the  correflions
are  made  for  the  quantity  of  air  difengaged
from  the  water,  the  nitrous  gas  abforbed  by  the
muriatic  folution*


•*  Humbolt,  who  is  the  firft  philofopher  that  has  applied
the  folution  of  fulphate  of  iron  to  afcertain  the  purity  of
nitrous  gas,  aflerts  that  he  uniformly  found  nitrous
gas  obtained  from  folution  of  copper  in  nitrous  acid,  to
contain  from  fix  tenths  to  one  tenth  nitrogene.

Annales  de  Chimie,  vol.  xxviii.  pag.  14/.


DlVISIOI^f  V.

EXPERTMENTS  and  6BSERVAT10NS  on  the
produdiion  of  NITROUS  OXIDE  from  NITROUS
GAS  and  NITRIC  ACID,  in  different  modes.


I.      Preliminaries,

a.  X  he  opinions  of  Prieftley*  and  Kirwan,t
relating  to  the  caufes  of  the  converfion  of  nitrous
gas  into  nitrous  oxide,  were  founded  on  the
theory  of  phlogifton.  The  firft  of  thefe  philo-
fophers  obtained  nitrous  oxide  by  placing  nitrous
gas  in  conta6l  with  moiftened  iron  filings,  or
the  alkaline  fulphures.  The  lad  by  expofing  it
to  fulphurated  hydrogene.

The  Dutch   chemifts, :}:    the   lateft   experi-

*  Vol.  ii.  pag.  5b,    f  P^i^-  Tranf.  vol.  Ixxvi.  pag.  133.
t  Journal  de  Phyfique,  torn,  xliii,  323.


(  197  )

mentalifts  on  nitrous  oxide,  have  fuppofed  that
the  produ(5iion  of  this  fubftance  depends  upon
the  fimple  abftradlion  of  a  portion  of  the  oxy-
gene  of  nitrous  gas.  They  obtained  nitrous
oxide  by  expofing  nitrous  gas  to  muriate  of
tin,  to  copper  in  folution  of  ammoniac,  and
like  wife  by  paiEng  it  over  heated  fulphur.

The  diminution  of  volume  fuftained  by
nitrous  gas  during  its  converfion  into  nitrous
oxide,  has  never  been  accurately  afcertained  ;
it  has  generally  been  fuppofed  to  be  from  two
thirds  to  eight  tenths.

h.  Nitrous  gas  may  be  converted  into  nitrous
oxide  in  two  modes.

Firft,  by  the  fiipple  abftradlion  of  a  portion
of  its  oxygene,  by  bodies  pofleffing  a  ftrong
affinity  for  that  principle,  fuch  as  alkaline
fulphites,    muriate  of  tin,   and  dry  fulphures.

Second,  by  the  combination  of  a  body
with  a  portion  both  of  its  oxygene  and
nitrogene,  fuch  as  hydrogene,  when  either  in  a
nafcent  form,  or  a  peculiar  ftate  of  combir
nation.


(  m  )

c.  Each  of  thefe  modes  will  be  diftindlly
treated  of;  and  to  prevent  unneceflary  repe-
titions, I  fhall  give  an  account  of  the  general
manner  in  which  the  following  experiments  on
the  converfion  of  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  oxide,
have  been  conduced.

Nitrous  gas,  the  purity  of  which  has  been
accurately  afcertained  by  folution  of  muriate  of
iron,  is  introduced  into  a  graduated  jar  filled  with
dry  mercury.  If  a  fluid  fubftance  is  defigned
for  the  converfion  of  the  gas  into  nitrous  oxide,
it  is  heated,  to  expel  any  loofely  combined  air
which  might  be  liberated  during  the  procefs  ;
and  then  carefully  introduced  into  the  jar,  by
means  of  a  fmall  phial.  After  the  procefs  is
finifhed,  and  the  diminution  accurately  noted,
the  nitrous  oxide  formed  is  abforbed  by  pure
water.  If  any  nitrous  gas  remains,  it  is  con-
denfed  by  folution  of  muriate  of  iron  ;  other
refidual  gafes  are  examined  by  the  common
lefts.  The  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide  diflblved
by  the  fluid  is  determined  by  a  comparative
experiment ;  and  the  corrcflions  for  tempera-


(  199  )

ture  and  preflure   being   guefled  at,  the  con-
clufions  drawn.

If  a  folid  fubftance  is  ufed,  rather  niore  nitrous
gas  than  that  defigned  for  the  converfion,  is
introduced  into  the  jar.  The  fubftance  is
brought  in  contadl  with  the  gas,  by  being
carried  under  the  mercury  ;  and  as  a  little  com-
mon air  generally  adheres  to  it,  a  fmall  portion
of  the  nitrous  gas  is  transferred  into  a  graduated
tube,  after  the  infertion,  and  its  purity  afcer-
tained.  In  other  refpedts  the  procefs  is  con-
duiSed  as  mentioned  above.

II.  Of  the  converfion  of  Nitrous  gas  into  JVi-
trous  Oxide ^  hy  Alkaline  Sulj^hites,

The  alkaline  fulphites,  particularly  the  ful-
phite  of  potafh,  convert  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous
oxide,  with  much  greater  rapidity  than  any
other  bodies.

At  temperature  46^  l6  cubic  inches,  of
nitrous  gas  were  converted,  in  lefs  than  an
hour,  into  7,8  of  nitrous  oxide,    by  about  100


(  '200  )

grains  of  pulverifed  fulphite  of  potafli,  contain*-
ing  its  water  of  cryftalifation.  No  fenfible  in-
creale  of  temperature  was  produced  during  the
procefs,  no  water  was  decompofed,  and  the
quantity  of  nitrogene  remaining  aftpr  the  ex-
periment, was  exadlly  equal  to  that  previoufly
contained  in  the  nitrous  gas.

The  nitrous  oxide  produced  from  nitrous  gas
by  fulphite  of  potafh,  has  all  the  properties  of
that  generated  from  the  decompofition  of  ni«
trate  of  ammoniac.  It  gives,  as  will  be  feen
hereafter,  the  fame  produdls  by  analyfis.  Phof-
phorus,  the  taper,  fulphur,  and  charcoal,  burn
in  it  with  vivid  light.  It  is  abforbable  by  water,
and  capable  of  expulfion  from  it  unaltered,  by
heat.

Nitrous  gas  is  converted  into  nitrous  oxide
by  the  alkaline  fulphites  with  the  fame  readinefs,
whether  expofed  to  the  light,  or  deprived  of  its
influence.

The  folid  fulphites  a6l  upon  nitrous  gas  much
more  readily  than  their  concentrated  folutions;
they   fliould   however  always   be   fuffered   to


(  201    )

retain  their  water  of  cryilalifation,  or  otherwife
they  attradl  moifture  from  the  gas,  and  render
it  drier,  and  in  confequence  more  condenfed
than  it  would  otherwife  be.  In  cafe  per-
fe611y  dry  fulphites  are  employed,  the  gas
fhould  be  always  faturated  with  moifture  after
the  experiment,  by  introducing  into  the  cylin-
der a  drop  of  water.

The  fulphites,  after  expofure  to  nitrous  gas,
are  either  found  wholly,  or  partially,  converted
into  fulphates.  Confequently  the  converfion  of
nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  oxide  by  thefe  bodies,
limply  depends  on  the  abftradlion  of  a  portion
of  its  oxygene ;  the  nitrogene  and  remaining
oxygene  afluming  a  more  condenfed  ilate  of
exiftence.

If  we  reafon  from  the  different  fpecific  gra-
vities of  nitrous  oxide  and  nitrous  gas,  as  com-
pared with  the  diminution  of  volume  of  nitrous
gas,  during  its  converfion  into  nitrous  oxide,
100  parts  of  nitrous  gas,  fuppcfing  the  former
eftimation  of  the  compofition  of  nitrous  oxide
given  in  Divifion  III,  accurate,  would  confift


(  202   )

of  54  oxygene,  and  46  nitrogene  ;  which  is  not
far  from  the  true  eftimation.  Or  afTuming  the
compofition  of  nitrous  gas,  as  given  in  Divifion
IV,  it  would  appear  from  the  diminution,  that
100  parts  of  nitrous  oxide  confifted  of  38  oxjr
gene,  and  62  nitrogene,

III.  Coyrcerfion  of  NitroKS  Gas  into  Nitrous
Oxidey  by  Muriate  of  Tin,  and  dry   Sulphur es.

a.  Nitrous  gas  expofed  to  dry  muriate  of
tin,  is  flowly  converted  into  nitrous  oxide  :
during  this  procefs  the  apparent  diminution  is
to  about  one  half;  but  if  the  produ6ls  are  nicely
examined,  and  the  neceflary  corredions  made,
the  real  diminution  of  nitrous  gas  by  muriate  of
tin,  will  be  the  fame  as  by  the  fulphites  ;  that
is,  100  parts  of  it  will  be  converted  into  48  of
nitrous  oxide.

During  this  converfion,  no  water  is  decom-
poled,  and  no  nitrogene  evolved.  Solution  of
muriate  of  tin  converts  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous
oxide  ;  but  with  much  lefs  rapidity  than  the
folid  fait.


(   203   )

h.  Nitrons  gas  expofed  to  dry  and  perfedlly
well  made  fulphures,  particularly  fuch  as  arc
produced  from  cryftalifed  alumn*  and  charcoal
not  fufficiently  inflammable  to  burn  in  the
atmofphere,  is  converted  into  nitrous  oxide  by
the  fimple  abftradion  of  a  portion  of  its  oxygene,
and     confequently    undergoes    a    diminution

It  is  probable,  that  all  the  bodies  having
ftrong  affinity  for  oxygene  will,  at  certain
temperatures,  convert  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous
oxide.  Prieftley,  and  the  Dutch  chemifts,
effe^ed  the  change  by  heated  lulphur.  Per-
haps nitrous  gas  fent  through  a  tube  heated,
but  not  ignited,  with  phofphorus,  would  be
converted  into  nitrous  oxide.

IV.  Decompofit'ion  of  Nitrous  Gas,  by  Sid-
pburafed  Hydrogenc.

a.     When   nitrous  gas  and  fulphurated  hy-
*  That  is,   aliirnn  containing  fulphate  of  potidi.


(  204   )

drogene  are  mingled  together,  a  decompoiition
of  tbem  flowly  takes  place.  The  gafes  are
diminiflied,  fulphur  depofited,  nitrous  oxide
formed,  and  figns  of  the  produ6lion  of  ammo-
niac* and  water  perceived.

In  this  procels  no  fulphuric,  or  fulphureous
acid  is  produced  ;  confequently  none  of  the
fulphur  is  oxydated,  and  of  courfe  the  changes
depend  upon  the  combination  of  the  hydrogene
of  the  fulphurated  hydrogene,  with  different
portions  of  the  oxygene  and  nitrogene  of  the
nitrous  gas,  to  form  water  and  ammoniac,  the
remaining  oxygene  and  nitrogene  afTuming  the
form  of  nitrous  oxide.

This  iingular  exertion  of  attradlions  by  a
fimple  body,  appears  highly  improbable  a  priori,
nor  did  I  admit  it,  till  the  formation  of  ammo-
niac, and  the  non -oxygenation  of  the  fulphur,
were  made  evident  by  many  experiments.

In  thofe  experiments,  the  diminution  of  the
nitrous   gas   was  not   uniformly  the  fame.      It

*  The  produ6lion  of  ammoniac  in  this  proccfs  was  ob^
ferved  by  Kirwan  aud  Auftin.


(  205  )

Varied  from  ^^  to  ^.  In  the  moft  accurate  of
them,  5  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas  were  con-
verted into  2.2  of  nitrous  oxide.  Confequently
the  quantity  of  ammoniac  formed  was  ,04/
grains.

In  experiments  on  the  converfion  of  nitrous
gas  into  nitrous  oxide,  by  fulphurated  hydro-
gene,  the  gafes  fhould  be  rendered  as  dry  as
poffible.  The  prefence  of  water  confiderably
retards  the  decompofition.

b.  The  fulphurcs*  diflblved  in  water  convert
nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  oxide.  This  decom-
pofition is  not;  however,  produced  by  the  iimplc
abftradlion  of  oxygene  from  the  nitrous  gas  to
form  fulphuric  acid.  It  depends  as  well  on  the  de-


•*  Solution  of  fulphure  of  ftrontian,  or  barytes,  iliould
be  ufed.  During  the  converlion  of  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous
oxide  by  thofe  bodies,  a  thin  film  is  depoiited  on  the  furface
of  the  folution.  This  film  examined,  is  found  to  con  lilt
of  fulphur  and  fulphate.  Poffibly  the  nitrous  gas  is  wholly
decompofed  by  thehydrogene  of  the  fulphurated  hydrogene
in  the  folution,  whilft  the  fulphate  is  produced  from  water
decompounded  by  the  fulphur  to  form  more  gas  for  tho
faturation  of  the  hydro-fulphure.


(  206  )

compofition  of  the  fulphurated  hydrogene  dif-
folved  in  the  folution^  or  liberated  from  it.  In  this
procefs  fulphur  is  depofited  on  the  furface  of  the
fluid,  fulphuric  acid  is  formed,  and  the  diminu-
tion, making  the  neceflary  corredlions,  is  nearly
the  fame  as  when  free  fulphurated  hydrogene
is  employed.

It  is  extremely  probable  that  fulphurated  hy-
drogene, in  combination  with  the  alkalies,  as
well  as  with  water,  is  capable  of  being  flowly
decompofed  by  nitrous  gas.

V.  Decompoption  of  Nitrous  Gas  hy  Nafcenf
Hydrogene.

a.  When  nitrous  gas,  is  expofed  to  wetted
iron  filings,  a  diminution  of  its  volume  flowly
takes  place  ;  and  after  a  certain  time,  it  is  found
converted  into  nitrous  oxide.

In  this  procefs  ammoniac*  is  formed,  and  the
iron  partially  oxydated.

*  As  was  firft  obferved  by  Piieftley  and  Auftiii,  and  as  I
have  proved  by  many  experiments.


(  207  )

The  water  in  contadl  with  the  iron  is  decom-
pofed  by  the  combination  of  its  oxygene  with
that  fubftance,  and  of  its  hydrogene  with  a  por-
tion of  the  oxygene  and  nitrogene  of  the  nitrous
gas,  to  form  water  and  ammoniac.

That  the  iron  is  not  oxydated  at  the  expencc
of  the  oxygene  of  the  nitrous  gas,  appears  very
probable  from  the  analogy  between  this  procefs,
and  the  mutual  decompofition  of  nitrous  gas
and  fulphurated  hydrogene.  Befides,  dry  iron
filings  effedl  no  change  whatever  in  nitrous
gas,  at  common  temperatures.

I  have  generally  found  about  12  of  nitrous
gas  converted  into  5  of  nitrous  oxide  in  this
procefs  ;  which  is  not  very  different  from  the
diminution  by  fulphurated  hydrogene.  It  takes
place  equally  well  in  light  and  darknefs ;  but
more  rapidly  in  warm  weather  than  in  cold.

h.  Nitrous  gas  expofed  to  a  large  furface  of
zinc,  in  contact  with  water,  is  flowly  converted
into  nitrous  oxide  ;  at  the  fame  time  that  am--
moniac  is  generated,  and  white  oxide  of  zinc
formed.     This  procefs  appears  to  depend,    like


^a.^^


(  10^   )

the  laftj  upon  the  decompolition  of  water  by
the  affinities  of  part  of  the  oxygene  and  nitre-
gene  of  nitrous  gas,  for  its  hydrogene,  to  form
ammoniac  and  water;  and  by  that  of  zinc  for
its  oxygene.  Zinc  placed  in  contaft  with
water,  and  confined  by  mercury,*  decompofes
it  at  the  common  temperature.  Zinc,  when
perfectly  dry,  does  not  in  the  flighteft  degree
a6l  upon  nitrous  gas.

I  have  not  been  able  to  determine  exadlly
the  diminution  of  volume  of  nitrous  gas,  during
its  converdon  into  nitrous  oxide  by  zinc.  In
one  experiment  20  meafures  of  nitrous  gas,  con-
taining about  ,03  nitrogene,  were  diminithed  to
g,  after  an  expofure  of  eight  days  to  wetted
zinc ;  but  from  an  accident,  I  was  not  able  to
afcertain  the  exa6l  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide
formed.

c.  It  is  probable  that  moft  of  the  imperfedl
metals  will  be  found  capable  of  oxydation,  by
the  decompofltion  of  water,  when  its  hydrogene
is  abftradled  by  the  oxygene  and   nitrogene  of

*  As  I  have  found  by  experiment.


(  209  )

nitrous  gas.  I  have  this  day  (April  14,  J  800),
examined  two  portions  of  nitrous  gas,  one  of
which  had  been  expofed  to  copper  filings,  and
the  other  to  powder  of  tin,  for  twenty-three
days.

The  gas  that  had  been  expofed  to  copper  was
diminifhed  nearly  two  fifths.  The  taper  burnt
in  it  with  an  enlarged  flame,  blue  at  the  edges.
Hence  it  evidently  contained  nitrous  oxide.

The  nitrous  gas  in  contadl:  with  tin  had
undergone  a  diminution  of  one  fourth  only,
and  did  not  fupport  flame.

VI.  Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations  on  the  converjion
of  Nitrous  Gas  into  Nitrous  Oxide,

a.  Dr.  Priefl:ley  found  nitrous  gas  expofed  to  a
mixture  of  iron  filings  and  fulphur,  with  water,
converted  after  a  certain  time,  into  nitrous
oxide.  Sulphurated  hydrogene  is  always  pro-
duced during  the  combination  of  iron  and  ful-
phur, when  they  are  in  contadt  with  water ;
and  by  the  hydrogene  of  this  in  the  nafcent
o


( ^10)

ftate,  fhe  nitrous  gas  is  moft  probably  decom-
pofed.

h.  Green  oxide  of  iron  moiftened  vvith  water,
expofed  to  nitrous  gas,  flowly  gains  an  orange
tinge,  whilfl  the  gas  is  diminifhed.  Moft
likely  it  is  converted  into  nitrous  oxide  ;  but
this  I  have  not  afcertained.

c  I  expofed  nitrous  gas,  to  the  following  bodies
over  mercury  for  many  days,  without  any
diminution,  or  apparent  change  in  its  properties.
Alcohol,  faccharine  matter,  hydro-carbonate,
fulphureous  acid,  and  phofphorus.

d,  Cryftalifed  fulphate,  and  muriate  of  iron,
abforb  a  fmall  quantity  of  nitrous  gas,  and
become  dark  colored  on  the  outfide ;  but  after
this  abforption,  (which  probably  depends  on
their  water  of  cryftalifation,)  has  taketl  place,
no   change  is  efFedled  in  the  gas  remaining,

e  The  power  of  iron  to  decompofe  water  being
much  increafed  by  increafe  of  temperature,  ni-
trous gas  is  converted  into  nitrous  oxide  much
more  rapidly  when  placed  in  contaft  with  a  fur-
face  of  heated  iron,  than  when  expofed  to  it  at


(211)

common  temperatures.  During  the  decompo-
lition  of  nitrous  gas  in  this  way,  ammoniac  ^
is  formed.

/.  The  curious  experiments  of  Rouppe,"f*
on  the  abforption  of  gafes  by  charcoal,  com-
pared with  the  phaenomena  noticed  in  this
Divifion,  render  it  probable  that  hydrogene  in
a  Hate  of  loofe  combination  with  charcoal,  will
be  found  to  convert  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous
oxide.

VII.  Recapitulation  of  conclujions  concerning
the  converfion  of  Nitrous  Gas  into  Nitrous  Oxide.

a.  Certain  bodies  having  a  ftrong  affinity
for  oxygene,  as  the  fulphites,  dry  fulphures,
muriate  of  tin,  &c.  convert  nitrous  gas  into
nitrous  oxide,  by  (imply  attradling  a  portion  of
its  oxygene ;    whilft   the  remaining  oxygene


*  As  was  obferved  by  Milner.  Nitrous  gas  pafled  over
heated  zinc,  or  tin,  I  doubt  not  will  be  found  converted
into  nitrous  oxide.

t  Annates  de  Chimie.  xxxii.  p.  3.


:^E.M^J


(  212  )   ^

enters  into  combination  with  the  nitrogene,  and'
they  afTume  a  more  condenfed  flate  of  exig-
ence.

h.  Nitrous  gas  is  converted  into  nitrous
oxide  by  hydrogene,  in  a  peculiar  ftate  of  ex-
iftence,  as  in  fulphurated  hydrogene  ;  and  that
by  a  feries  of  very  complex  affinities.  Both
oxygene  and  nitrogene  are  attradled  from  the
nitrous  gas  by  the  hydrogene,  in  fuch  propor-
tions as  to  form  water  and  ammoniac,  whilft
the  remaining  oxygene  and  nitrogene  *  aflume
the  form  of  nitrous  oxide.

c.  Nitrous  gas  placed  in  contacSl  with  bodies,
fuch  as  iron  and  zinc  decompofing  water,  is
converted  into  nitrous  oxide,  at  the  fame  time
that  ammoniac  is  formed.  It  is  difficult  to
afcertain  the  exad  rationale  of  this  procefs.  For
either  the  nafccnt  hydrogene  produced  by  the
decompofition  of  the  water  by  the  metallic  fub-
flance  may  combine  with  portions  of  both  the

'^  The  decompoiition  and  recompolition  of  water,  in  this
procefs,  ate  analogous  to  fome  of  the  phaenomena  obferved
by  the  i^igcnioa*  Mrs.  Fulhame.


(  213  )

Qxygene  and  nitrogene  of  the  nitrous  gas  ;  and
thus  by  forming  water  and  ammoniac,  convert
it  into  nitrous  oxide.  Or  the  metallic  fubftance
may  attradl  at  the  fame  time  oxygene  from  the
water  and  nitrous  gas,  whilft  the  nafcent  hydro-
gene  of  the  water  feizes  upon  a  portion  of  the
nitrogene  of  the  nitrous  gas  to  form  ammo-
niac.

The  degree  of  diminution,  and  the  analogy
between  this  procefs  and  the  decompofition  of
nitrous  gas  by  fulphurated  hydrogene,  render
the  firft  opinion  mofi:  probable.

VIII.  The  froduBion  of  Nitrous  Oxide  during
the  oxydation  of  Tin,  Zinc,  and  Iron^  in  Nitric
Acid,

a.  Dr.  Prieftley  difcovered,  that  during  the  fo-
lution  of  tin,  zinc,  and  iron,  in  nitric  acid,  cer-
tain portions  of  nitrous  oxide  were  produced,
mingled  with  quantities  of  nitrous  gas,  and
nitrogene,  varying  in  proportion  as  the  acid
employed  was  more  or  lefs  concentrated.


(  ai4  )

It  has  long  been  known  that  ammoniac  is
formed  during  the  folution  of  tin,  zinc,  and
iron,  in  diluted  nitric  acid.  Confequently,  in
thefe  proceiTes  water  is  decompofed.

I  had  defigned  to  inveftigate  minutely  thefe
phaenomena,  fo  as  to  afcertain  the  quantities
of  water  and  acid  decompounded,  and  of  the
new  produdls  generated.  But  after  going
through  fome  experiments  on  the  oxydation  of
tin  without  gaining  conclufive  refults,  the  labor,
and  facrifice  of  time  they  demanded,  obliged
me  to  defift  from  purfuing  the  fubjedl,  till  I
had  completed  more  important  inveftigations.

I  {ball  detail  the  few  obfervations  which  have
occurred  to  me,  relating  to  the  produdion  of
nitrous  oxide  from  metallic  folutions.

h.  When  tin  is  diflblved  in  concentrated
nitric  acid,  fuch  as  of  1.4,  nitrous  oxide  is  pro-
duced, mingled  with  generally  more  than  twice
its  bulk  of  nitrous  gas.  In  this  procefs  but  little
free  nitrogenc  is  evolved,  and  the  tin  is  chiefly
precipitated  in  the  form  of  a  white  powder.  If
the  folution,  after  the  generation  of  thefe  pro-


(  ^15  )

du<3s,  is  faturated  with  lime,  and  heated,  the
ammoniacal  fmeli  is  diftindl.

When  nitric  acid  of  fpecific  gravity  1.24,  is
made  to  ail  upon  tin ;  in  the  beginning
of  the  procefs,  nearly  equal  parts  of  nitrous  gas
and  nitrous  oxide  are  produced  ;  as  it  advances,
the  proportion  of  nitrous  oxide  to  the  nitrous
gas  increafes :  the  largefl:  quantity  of  nitrous
oxide  that  I  have  found  in  the  gas  procured
from  tin  is  ^,  the  remainder  being  nitrous  gas
and  nitrogene.

When  tin  is  oxydated  in  an  acid  of  lefs  fpe-
cific gravity  than  I.09,  the  quantities  of  gas
difen gaged  are  very  fmall,  and  confift  of  nitro-
gene, mingled  with  minute  portions  of  nitrous
oxide,  and  nitrous  gas.

Whenever  I  have  faturated  folutions  of  tin
in  nitric  acid  of  different  fpecific  gravities,  with
lime,  and  afterwards  heated  them,  the  ammo-
niacal fmell  has  been  uniformly  perceptible,
and  generally  mofl  diflinfl  when  diluted  acids
have  been  employed.

c.     When  zinc  is  difTolved  in  nitric  acid,


(216)

whatever  is  its  fpecific  gravity,    certain  quanti^
ties  of  nitrous  oxide  are  produced.

Nitric  acids  of  greater  fpecific  gravity  than
1.2,  adl  upon  zinc  with  great  rapidity,  and
great  increafe  of  temperature.  The  gafes  dif-
engaged  from  thefe  folutions  conlift  of  nitrous
gas,  nitrous  oxide,  and  nitrogene  ;  the  nitrous
oxide  rarely  equals  one  third  of  the  whole.

When  nitric  acid  of  1,104  is  made  to  diflblve
zinc,  the  gas  obtained  in  the  middle  of  the  pro-
cefs  confifts  chiefly  of  nitrous  oxide.  From
fuch  a  folution  I  obtained  gas  which  gave  a
refiduum  of  one  fixth  only  when  abforbed  by
water.  The  taper  burnt  in  it  with  a  brilliant
flame,  and  fulphur  with  a  vivid  rofe-colored
light.

100  grains  of  granulated  zinc,  during
their  folution  in  300  grains  of  nitric  acid,  of
1,43,  diluted  with  14  times  its  weight  of  water,
produced  26  cubic  inches  of  gas.  Of  this
gas  gg  were  nitrous,  -  nitrous  oxide,  and  the
remainder  nitrogene.  The  folution  faturated
with  lime  and  beated,  gave  a  diftind  fmell  of
ammoniac,  '


(  ^17  )

d.  During  the  folution  of  Iron  in  concen-
trated nitric  acid,  the  gas  given  out  is  chiefly
nitrous;  it  is  however  generally  mingled  vi/ith
minute  quantities  of  nitrous  oxide.  When
very  dilute  nitric  acids  are  made  to  adl  upon
iron,  by  the  affiftance  of  heat,  .  nitrous  oxide  is
produced  in  confiderable  quantities,  mingled
with  nitrous  gas  and  nitrogene  ;  the  proportions
of  which  are  fmaller  as  the  procefs  advances.*
The  fluid  remaining  after  the  oxydation  and
folution  of  iron  in  nitric  acid,  always  contains
ammoniac.

e.  As  during  the  folution  of  tin,  zinc,  and  iron,
in  nitric  acid,  the  quantity  of  acid  is  diminifhed
in  proportion  as  the  procefs  advances,  it  is  rea-
fonable  to  fuppofe  that  the  relative  quantities  of
the  gafes  evolved  are  perpetually  varying.  In
the  beginning  of  a  diflblution,   the  nitrous  gas


*  From  one  of  Dr.  Prleftley's  experiments,  it  appears
that  hydrogene  gas  is  fometimes  difengaged  during  the
folution  of  iron  in  very  dilute  nitric  acid  bv  heat.  Tljis
phsenomenon  has  never  occurred  to  mc.


(  218  )

generally  predominates,  in  the  middle  nitrous
oxide,  and  at  the  end  nitrogene.

f.  During  the  generation  of  nitrous  gas,
nitrous  oxide,  and  ammoniac,  from  the  decom-
pofition  of  folution  of  nitric  acid  in  water,  by
tin,  zinc,  and  iron,  very  complex  attractions
muft  exift  between  the  conftituents  of  the  fub-
ftances  employed.  The  acid  and  the  water  are
decompofed  at  the  fame  time,  and  in  propor-
tions different  as  the  folution  is  more  con-
centrated, by  the  combination  of  thqir  oxygenc
with  the  metallic  body.

The  nitrous  gas  is  produced  by  the  combina-
tion of  the  metal  with  -^  of  the  oxygcne  of  the
acid.  The  nitrous  oxide  is  moft  probably
generated  by  the  decompofition  of  a  portion  of
the  nitrous  gas  difengaged,  by  the  nafcent  hy-
drogene  of  the  water  decompounded;  fome  of
it  may  be  poffibly  formed  from  a  more  com-
plete decompofition  of  the  acid.

The  produdlion  of  ammoniac  may  arife,
probably  from  two  caufes  ;  from  the  de-
compofition of  the  nitrous  gas  by  the  combi-


(  ^19  )

nation  of  the  nafcent  hydrogen e  of  the  water,
with  portions  of  its  oxygene  and  nitrogene  at
the  fame  time  ;  and  from  the  union  of  hy-
drogene  with  nafcent  nitrogene  liberated  in
confequence  of  a  complete  decompofition  of
part  of  the  acid.

IX.     Additional    Ohfervations    on    the  pro-
du6lion  of  Nitrous  Oxide.

a.  When  nitric  acid  is  combined  with  mu-
riatic acid,  or  fulphuric  acid,*  the  quantities  of
nitrous  oxide  produced  from  its  decompofition
by  tin,  zinc,  and  iron,  are  rather  increafed  than
<limini(hed.  The  nitrous  oxide  obtained  from
thefe  folutions  is,  however,  never  fufficiently
pure  for  phyliological  experiments.  It  is  always
mingled  with  either  nitrous  gas,  nitrogene,  or
hydrogene,  and  fometimes  with  all  of  them.

i.     From  the  folutions  of  bifmuth,    nickel.


*  As  was  difcovered  by  PrieftleV;  and  the  Dutch  Che-
mifts.


(   220  )

lead,  and  copper,  in  diluted  nitric  acid,  I  have
never  obtained  any  perceptible  quantity  of
nitrous  oxide  :  the  gas  produced  is  nitrous,
mingled  with  different  portions  of  nitrogene.
Antimony  and  mercury,  during  their  folution
in  aqua  regia,  give  out  only  nitrous  gas.

Probably  none  of  the  metallic  bodies,  except
thofe  that  decompofe  water  at  temperatures
below  ignition,  will  generate  nitrous  oxide  from
nitric  acid.  On  cobalt  and  manganefe  I  have
never  had  an  opportunity  of  experimenting  :
manganefe  will  probably  produce  nitrous  oxide.

c.  During  the  folution  of  vegetable  matters*
in  nitric  acid,  by  heat,  very  minute  portions  of
nitrous  oxide  are  fometimes  produced,  always
however  mingled  with  large  quantities  of  nitrous
gas,   and  carbonic  acid.

When  nitric  acid  is  decompounded  by
ether,  fixed  oils,  volatile  oils,  or  alcohol,
towards  the  end  of  the  procefs  fmall  quan-
tities  of    nitrous    oxide    are    produced,    and

*  Such  as  the  leaves,  bark,  and  wood,  of  trees.


( 2^1 )

fometimes  fufficiently  pure  to  fupport  the
flame  of  the  taper.-j-

d.  When  green  oxide  of  iron  is  diflblvcd  in
nitric  acid,  nitrous  oxide  is  produced,  mingled
with  nitrogene  and  nitrous  gas.

e  During  the  con  verlion  of  green  fulphate,  or
green  muriate  of  iron  into  red,  by  the  decom-
pofition  of  dilute  nitric  acid,  nitrous  oxide. is
formed,  mingled  with  different  proportions
of  nitrous  gas  and  nitrogene.

/.  When  folution  of  green  nitrate  of  iron  is
heated,  a  part  of  the  acid  is  decompofed,  red
oxide  is  precipitated,  red  nitrate  formed^  and
impure  nitrous  oxide  evolved.

g.  When  iron  is  introduced  into  a  folution  of
nitrate  of  copper,  the  copper  is  precipitated  in
its  metallic  ftate,  whilft  nitrous  oxide,  mingled
with  fmall  portions  of  nitrogene,  is  produced. =^

'  Both  zinc  and  tin  precipitate  copper  in  its
metallic  form   from   folution  in  the  nitric  acid.


f  As  I  have  obferved  after  Prieftley.
*  As  was  difcovered  by  Prieftley.


(  222  )

During  thefe  precipitations,  certain  quantities
of  nitrous  oxide  are  generated,  mingled  how-
ever with  larger  quantities  of  nitrogene  than
that  produced  from  decompofition  by  iron.
In  all  thefe  procefTes  ammoniac  is  formed,  and
water  confequently  decompofed.

The  decompofition  of  water  and  nitric  acid,
during  the  precipitation  of  copper  from  folution
of  nitrate  of  copper,  by  tin,  zinc,  and  iron,
depends  upon  the  ftrong  affinity  of  thofe  metals
for  oxygene,  and  their  powers  of  combining
with  a  larger  quantity  of  it  than  copper.

X.  Decompofition  of  Aqua  Regia  by  Platina^
and  evolution  of  a  Gas  analogous  to  Oxygenated
Muriatic  Acid,  and  Nitrogene,

a,  De  la  Metherie,  in  his  effay  on  different
airs,  has  afTerted  that  the  gas  produced  by  the
folution  of  platina  in  nitro-muriatic  acid,  is
identical  with  the  dephlogifticated  nitrous  gas
of  Prieftley.   He  calls  it  nitrous  gas  with  excefs


(  223  )

of  pure  air,  and  affirms  that  it  diminifhes,  both
with  nitrous  gas  and  common  air.

h,  I  introduced  into  a  vefTel  containing  30
grains  of  platina,  2050  grains  of  aqua  regia,
compofed  of  equal  parts,  by  weighty  of  concen-
trated nitric  acid  of  1^43,  and  muriatic  acid  of
l,l6.  At  the  common  temperature^  that  is^
49^,  no  aflion  between  the  acid  and  platina
appeared  to  take  place.  On  the  application
of  the  heat  of  a  fpirit  lamp,  the  fohition  gra-
dually became  yellow  red,  and  gas  was  given
out  with  rapidity.  Some  of  this  gas  received
in  ajar  filled  with  warm  water,  appeared  of  a
bright  yellow  color.  On  agitation,  the  greater
part  of  it  was  abforbed  by  the  water,  and  the
remainder  extinguiflied  flame.  ¥/hen  it  was
received  over  mercury,  it  afled  upon  it  with
great  rapidity,  and  formed  on  the  furface  a
white  cruft.

As  the  procefs  of  folution  advanced,  the
color  of  the  acid  changed  to  dark  red,  at  the
fame  time  that  the  produdlion  of  gas  was  much
increafed  ;  more  than  40  cubic  inches  were
foon  colleded  in  the  water  apparatus.


(  224  )

Different  portions  of  the  gas  were  eKaminedj
it  exhibited  the  following  properties  :

1.  Its  color  was  orange  red,*  and  its  fmell
exadly  refembled  that  of  oxygenated  muriatic
acid.

2.  When  agitated  in  boiled  water,  it  was
rapidly  abforbed,  leaving  a  refiduum  of  rather
more  than  one  twelfth.

3.  The  taper  burnt  in  it  with  increafed  bril-
liancy, the  flame  being  long,  and  deep  red  at
the  edges.

4.  Iron  introduced  into  it  ignited,  burnt  with
a  dull  red  light.

5.  Green  vegetables  expofed  to  it  were  in-
ftantly  rendered  white.

6.  It  underwent  no  diminution,  mingled  with
atmofpheric  air.

7.  When  mingled  with  nitrous  gas,  it  gave
denfc  red  vapor,  and  rapid  diminution.

*  This  deep  color  depended,  in  fome  meafurC;  upon  the
nitro-rauriatic  vapor  fufpended  in  it.  I  have  lince  obferved
that  it  is  more  intenfe  in  proportion  as  the  heat  employed
for  the  production  of  the  gas  has  been  ftronger.  The
natural  color  of  the  peculiar  gas  is  deep  yellow.


(  225   )

c.  jFrom  the  exhibition  of  thefe  properties^
it  was  evident  that  the  gas  produced  during  the
folution  of  platina  in  aqua  regia,  chiefly  con-
fifted  of  oxygenated  muriatic  acid,  or  of  a  gas
highly  analogous  to  it.  It  was,  however,  dif-
ficult io  conceive  how  a  body,  by  combining
with  a  portion  of  the  oxygene  of  nitro-muriatic
acid,  could  produce  from  it  oxygenated  muriatic
acid,  apparently  mingled  with  very  fmall  por-
tions of  any  other  gas.

d.  To  afcertain  whether  any  permanent  gas
was  produced  during  the  ebullition  of  aqua
regia,  of  the  fame  compofition  as  that  ufed  for
the  folution  of  the  platina  ;  I  kept  a  large  quan-
tity of  it  boiling  for  fome  time,  in  communica-
tion with  the  water  apparatus  ;  the  gas  generated
appeared  to  be  wholly  nitro-muriatic,  and  was
abforbed  as  fafl  as  produced,  by  the  water.

e.  To  determine  whether  any  nitrous  oxide
was  mingled  with  the  peculiar  gas,  as  well  as
the  nature  and  quantity  of  the  unabforbable  gas,
nitrous  gas  was  gradually  added  to  21  cubic
inches  of  the  gas  produced  from  a  new  folution^

P


^


(  226  )

till  the  diminution  was  complete  :  the  gas  re-
maining equalled  2,3  cubic  inches ;  it  was
unabforbable  by  water,  and  extinguifhed  flame.

In  another  experiment,  when  the  the  laft
portions  of  gas  from  a  folution  were  carefully
received  in  water  previoufly  boiled,  12  cubic
inches  agitated  in  water  left  a  refiduum  of  1.3  ;
whilft  the  fame  quantity  decompofed  by  nitrous
gas,  containing  ,02  nitrogcne,  left  about  1.5

Hence  it  appeared  that  the  aeriform  produdls
of  the  folution  confifled  of  the  peculiar  gas
analogous  to  oxygenated  muriatic  acid^  and  of
a  fmall  quantity  of  nitrogene.

/.  Confequently  a  portion  of  the  nitric  acid
of  the  aqua  regia  had  been  decompofed  ;  but  if
it  had  given  oxygene  both  to  the  platina  and
muriatic  acid,  the  quantity  of  nitrogene  evolved
ought  to  have  been  much  more  conflderable.

g.  To  afcertain  if  any  water  had  been  de-
compofed, and  the  nitrogene  condenfed  in  the
folution  by  its  hydrogene,  to  form  ammoniac,
I  faturated  a  folution  with  lime,  and  heated  it^
but  no  ammoniacal  fmell  was  perceived.


(  227  )

h.  To  determine  if  any  nitrogene  had  entered
into  chemical  combination  with  muriatic  acid
and  oxygene,  fo  as  to  form  an  aeriform  triple
compound,  analogous  in  its  properties  to  oxy-
genated  muriatic  acid,  I  expofed  fome  of  the
gas  to  mercury,  expelling  that  this  fubftance^
by  combining  with  its  oxygene,  would  efFedl  a
complete  decompofition  ;  and  this  was  a61ually
the  cafe  :  for  the  gas  was  at  firft  rapidly  dimin-
ifhed,  and  the  mercury  became  oxydated  ;  its
volume,  however,  foon  increafed ;  and  the
refidual  gas  appeared  io  be  nitrous,  mingled
with  much  nitrogene.  The  exa6l  proportions
of  each,  from  an  accident,  I  could  not  deter-
mine.

This  experiment  was  inconclufive,  becaufe
the  nitro-muriatic  acid  fufpended  in  the  pecu-
liar gas,  from  which  it  can  probably  be  never
perfedily  freed,  ad^ed  in  common  with  it  upon
the  mercury,  and  produced  nitrous  gas  i  and
this  nitrous  gas,  at  the  moment  of  its  produc-
tion, formed  nitrous  acid  by  combining  with  the
oxygene  of  the  peculiar  gas;  and  the  nitrous


tfrtr  I


(   228  )

acid  generated  ^  was  again  decompofed  by  the
niercLiry  ;  and  hence  nitrous  gas  evolved,  and
poffibly  Tome  nitrogene.

/.  Peculiar  circumftances  prevented  me  at
this  time  from  completely  inveftigating  the
fubje^l.  It  remains  doubtful  whether  the  gas
confifts  fimply  of  highly  oxygenated  muriatic
acid  and  nitrogene,-}-  produced  by  the  decom-


^  The  decompofition  of  aeriform  nitrous  acid  by  mercury,
was  firft  noted  by  Prieftley  5  vol.  iii.  pag.  101.  This  decom-
pofition I  have  often  had  occafion  to  obferve.  In  reading
Humbolt's  paper  on  eudiometry,  Annales  de  Chimie,  xxviii,
pag.  150,  I  vi^as  not  a  little  furprifed  to  find  that  he  takes
no  notice  of  this  fad.  He  feems  to  fuppofe  that  nitrous
acid  can  remain  aeriform,  and  even  be  condenfed,  in  con-
tad  with  mercury,  without  alteration.  He  fays,  "  In
mingling  100  parts  of  atmofpheric  air  with  100  of  nitrous
air,  the  air  immediately  became  red,  but  all  the  acid  pro-
duced remained  aeriform  j  and  after  eighteen  hours  fome
drops  only  of  acid  were  formed,  which  fwam  upon  the
mercury."

f  Lavoifier  has  faid  concerning  aqua  regia,  "  In  folu-
'*  tions  of  metals  in  this  acid,  as  in  all  other  acids,  the
"  metals  are  firft  oxydated,  by  attrading  a  part  of  the
"  oxygene  from  the  compound  radical.  This  occafions  the
'^  difengagement  of  a  particular  fpecies  of  gas  not  hitherto
"  defcribed,  which  may  be  called  nitro-rauriatic  gas.    It


(  229  )

pofition  of  nitric  acid  from  the  coalefcitig  affin-
ities of  platina  and  muriatic  acid  for  oxygene  ;
or  whether  it  is  compofed  of  a  peculiar  gas,
analogous  to  oxygenated  muriatic  acid,  and
nitrogene,  generated  from  fome  unknown
affinities.-f*

XL  On  the  aBion  of  the  EleBric  Spark  on  a
mixture  of  Nitrogene  and  Nitrous  Gas,

Thinking  it  poffible  that   nitrous  gas   and

*'  has  a  very  difagreeable  fmell^  and  is  fatal  to  animal  life
"  when  refpired  5  it  attacks  iron,  and  caufes  it  to  ruft  5  it
''  is  abforbed  in  conliderable  quantities  by  water,''  Elem.
Eng.  237.

t  T  have  no  doubt  but  that  the  gas  procured  from  the
folution  of  gold  in  aqua  regia,  is  analogous  to  that  produ-
ced from  platina.

Some  very  uncommon  circumftances  are  attendant  on  the
folution  of  platina  :

1ft.  The  iramenfe  quantity  of  acid  required  for  the  folu-
tion of  a  minute  quantity  of  platina.

2d.  The  great  quantity  of  gas  produced  during  the  folu-
tion of  this  minute  quantity.

3d.  The  intenfe  red  color  of  the  folution,  and  its  per-
fedly  acid  properties  after  it  ceafes  to  a6t  upon  the  metal.


(  ISO  )

nitrogene  might  be  made  to  combine^  by  the
adion  of  the  eledlric  fpark,  fo  as  to  form  nitrous
oxide,  I  introduced  20  grain  meafures  of  each
of  them  into  a  fmall  detonating  tube^  graduated
to  grains,  (landing  over  mercury,  and  con-
taining a  very  fmail  quantity  of  cabbage  juice
rendered  green  by  an  alkali.  After  eledlric
fparks  had  been  pafled  through  the  gafes  for  an
hour  and  half,  they  were  diminiftied  to  about
32,  and  the  cabbage  juice  was  flightly  red-
dened. On  introducing  about  10  meafures  of
hydrogene,  and  paffing  the  eleflric  fpark
through  the  whole,  no  inflammation  or  dimi^
nution  was  perceptible.  Hence  the  condenfa-
tion  mofl  probably  arofe  wholly  from  the  forma-
tion of  nitrous  acid,*  by  the  morp  intimate
union  of  the  oxygene  of  nitrous  gas  with  fome
of  its  nitrogene,  as  in  the  experiments  of
Prieftley.

As  the  nafccnt  nitrogene,    in  the  decompo-


*  For  if  nitrous  oxide  had  been  formed,  it  would  haye
leen  decompofed  by  the  hydrogene.


(  231   )

fition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  combines  with  a
portion  of  oxygene  and  nitrogene,  to  form
nitrous  oxide  ;  it  is  probable  that  nitrous  oxide
may  be  produced  during  the  paflage  of  nitrous
gas  and  ammoniac  through  a  heated  tube.

XIL     Genernl  Remarks,

There  are  no  reafons  for  fuppofing  that  ni-
trous oxide  is  formed  in  any  of  the  procefles  of
nature;  and  the  nice  equilibrium  of  affinity  by
which  it  is  conftituted,  forbids  us  to  hope  for  the
power  of  com pofing  it  from  its  fimple  princi-
ples. We  muft  be  content  to  produce  it,
either  diredlly  or  indired^ly,  from  the  decom-
pofition  of  nitric  acid.  And  as  in  the  decom-
pofition  of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  not  only  all  the
nitrogene  of  the  nitric  acid  enters  into  the  com-
pofition  of  the  nitrous  oxide  produced,  but
likewife  that  of  the  ammoniac,  this  procefs
is  by  far  the  cheapeft,  as  well  as  the  moft  expe-
ditious.     A  mode  of  producing   ammoniac  at


(  232  )

little  expence,  has  been  propofed  by  Mr.  Watt.
Condenfed  in  the  fulphuric  acid,  it  can  be
eafily  made  to  combine  with  nitric  acid,  from
the  decompofition  of  nitre  by  double  affinity.
And  thus,  if  the  hopes  which  the  experiments  at
the  end  of  thofe  refearches  induce  us  to  indulge,
do  not  prove  fallacious,  a  fubftance  which  has
been  heretofore  almoft  exclufively  appropriated
to  the  deftrudlion  of  mankind,  may  become,  in
the  hands  of  philofophy,  a  means  of  producing
health  and  pleafurable  fenfation.


RESEARCH   II.

INTO     THE     COMBINATIONS     OF

NITROUS    OXIDE,

AND     ITS

DECOMPOSITION

BY

COMBUSTIBLE    BODIES.


RESEARCH    II.
DIVISION   I.

EXPERIMENTS  and   OBSERVATIOUS  on  tbc
COMBINATIONS  of  NITROUS  OXIDE,


!.      Combination  of  Water  with  Nitrous  Oxide,

a.  A  HE  difcoverer  of  nitrous  oxide  firft
oblerved  its  folubility  in  water ;  and  it  has
fince  been  noticed  by  different  experimen-
talifts.

Dr.  Prieftley  found  that  water  diflblved  about
one  half  of  its  bulk  of  nitrous  oxide,  and  that  at
the  temperature  of  ebullition,  this  fubftance  was
incapable  of  remaining  in  combination  with  it.*

■'^  Experiments  and  obfervations,  vol.  ii.  pag.  81.


(  236  )

h,  I  introduced  to  9  cubic  inches  of  pure
water^  i.  e.  water  diftilled  under  mercury,  7
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide,  which  had  been
obtained  over  mercury,  from  the  decompofition
of  nitrate  of  ammoniac,  and  in  confequence  was
perfectly  pure.  After  they  had  remained  toge-
ther for  1 1  hours,  temperature  being  46°,  during
which  time  they  were  frequently  agitated,  the
gas  remaining  was  2,3  ;  confequently  4,7  cubic
inches  had  been  abforbed.  And  then,  100
cubic  inches,  ::=:  25300  grains  of  water,  will
abforb  54  cubic  inches,  =27  grains,  of  nitrous
oxide.

c»  The  tafte  of  water  impregnated  with
nitrous  oxide,  is  diftindlly  fvveetifh  ;  it  is  fbfter
than  common  water,  and,  in  my  opinion,  much
more  agreeable  to  the  palate.  It  produces  no
alteration  in  vegetable  blues,  and  efFet5^s  no
change  of  color  in  metallic  folutions.

d.  Thinking  that  water  impregnated  with
nitrous  oxide  might  probably  produce  fome
effefls  when  taken  into  the  ftomach,  by  giving
out  its  gas,    I  drank,   in  June,    1799^   about


(   237   )

3  ounces  of  it^    but   without    perceiving   any
effefls.

A  few  days  ago,  confidering  this  quantity  as
inadequate,  I  took  at  two  draughts  nearly  a
pint,  fully  faturated  ;  and  at  this  time  Mr.
Jofeph  Prieftley  drank  the  fame  quantity.

We  neither  of  us  perceived  any  remarkable
efFedls.

Since  that  time  I  have  drank  near  three  pints
of  it  in  the  courfe  of  a  day.  In  this  inftance  it
appeared  to  a6l  as  a  diuretic^  and  I  imagined
that  it  expedited  digeftion.  As  a  matter  of
tafte,  1  fhould  always  prefer  it  to  common
water.

e.  Two  cubic  inches  of  pure  water,  that  had
been  made  to  abforb  about  1,1  cubic  inches  of
nitrous  oxide  ;  when  kept  for  fome  time  in
ebullition,  and  then  rapidly  cooled,  produced
nearly  I  of  gas.  Sulphur  burnt  in  this  gas  with
a  vivid  rofe-colored  flame.

In  another  experiment,  in  which  the  gas
was  expelled  by  heat  from  impregnated  water,
and  abforbed  again  after  much   agitation  on


(  238  )

cooling  ;  the  refiduum  was  hardly  perceptible^
and  mod  likely  depended  upon  fome  gas  which
had  adhered  to  the  mercury,  and  was  liberated
during  the  ebullition.  Hence  it  appears  that
nitrous  gas  is  expelled  unaltered  from  its  aqueous
folution  by  heat.

/.  I  have  before  mentioned,  Divifion  III^
that  nitrous  oxide,  during  its  combination  with
fpring  water,  expels  the  common  air  diflblved
in  it.  This  common  air  generally  amounts  to
one  fixteenth,  the  volume  of  the  water  being
unity.  A  corredlion  on  account  of  this  circum-
ftance  mull  be  made  for  the  apparent  deficiency
of  diminution,  and  for  the  common  air  mingled
in  confequence,  with  nitrous  oxide  during  its
abforption  by  common  water.

g.  Water  impregnated  with  nitrous  gas  ab-
forbed  nitrous  oxide  ;  but  the  retidual  gas  was
much  greater  than  that  of  common  water,  and
gave  red  fumes  with  atmofpheric  air.  Nitrous
gas  agitated  for  a  long  while  over  water  highly
impregnated  with  nitrous  oxide,  was  not  in  the
fliightefl  degree  diminiflied,  in  one  experiment
indeed  it  was  rather  increafed  j  doubtlefs  from


(  239  )

the  liberation  of  fome  nitrous   oxide   from  the
water  by  the  agitation.

h.  Nitrous  oxide  kept  in  contadi  with  aque-
ous folution  of  fulphurated  hydrogene  and  often
agitated,  was  not  in  the  flighteft  degree  dimi-
nifhed.

Sulphurated  hydrogene,  introduced  into  a
folution  of  nitrous  oxide,  was  rapidly  abforbed,
and  as  the  procefs  advanced,  the  nitrous  oxide
was  given  out.

u  Water  impregnated  with  carbonic  acid,
poflefled  no  acSion  upon  nitrous  oxide,  and  did
not  in  the  flighteft  degree  abforb  it.  When
carbonic  acid  was  introduced  to  an  aqueous
folution  of  nitrous  oxide  ;  the  aeriform  acid  was
abforbed,  and  the  nitrous  oxide  liberated.

h.  From  thefe  obfervations  it  appears  that
nitrous  oxide  has  lefs  affinity  for  water,  than
even  the  weaker  acids,  fulphurated  hydrogene
and  carbonic  acid  ;  as  indeed  one  might  have
conjeflured  a  priori  from  its  degree  of  folubility :
likewife  that  it  has  a  ftronger  attra61ion  for
water  than  the  gafes  not   pofTefled  of  acid   or


(  240  )

alkaline  properties  ;  it  expelling  from  water
nitrous  gas,  oxygcne,  and  common  air  ;  proba-
bly hydro-carbonate^  hydrogene,  and  nitrogene.

li.       Combinations   of  Nitrous    Oxide   with
Fluid  Inflammable  Bodies.

a.     Vitriolic   ether    abforbs    nitrous    oxide
in  much  larger  quantities  than  water.

A  cubic  inch  of  ether,  at  temperature  52®,
combined  with  a  cubic  inch  and  feven  tenths  of
nitrous  oxide.

Ether  thus  impregnated  was  not  at  all  altered
in  its  appearance  ;  its  fmell  was  precifely  the
fame,  but  the  tafte  appeared  lefs  pungent,  and
more  agreeable.  Nitrous  oxide  is  liberated
unaltered  from  ether  at  a  very  low  temperature,
that  is,  at  about  the  boiling  point  of  this  fluid.

For  expelling  nitrous  oxide  from  impregnated
ether,  and  for  afcertaining  in  general  the  quan-
tity of  gafes  combined  with  fluids,  I  have  lately
made  ufe  of  a  very  Ample  method,  which  it
may  not  be  amifs  tg  defcribe.


(  241  )

The  impregnated  fluid  is  introduced  into  a
fmall  thin  tube,  graduated  to  ,05  cubic  inches^
through  mercury.  The  quantity  of  fluid  fhould
never  equal  more  than  a  fifth  or  fixth  of  the
capacity  of  the  tube.

The  lower  part  of  the  tube  is  adapted  to  an
orifice  in  the  Ihelf  of  the  mercurial  apparatus,
fo  as  to  make  an  angle  of  about  40^  with  the
furface  of  the  mercury.

The  flame  of  a  fmall  fpirit  lamp  is  then
applied  to  that  part  of  the  tube  containing  the
fluid  ;  and  after  the  expulfion  of  the  gas  from
it,  the  heat  is  raifed  fo  as  to  drive  out  the  fluid
through  the  orifice  of  the  tube.  Thus  the
liberated  gas  is  preferved  in  a  flate  proper  for
accurate  examination.

Impregnated  ether,  during  its  combination
with  water,  gives  out  the  greater  part  of  its
nitrous  oxide.  During  the  liberation  of  nitrous
oxide  from  ether,  by  its  combination  with  water,
a  very  curious  phaenomenon  takes  place.

If  the  water  employed  is  colored,  fo  that  it
may  be  feen  in  a  flratum  diftindt  from  the  im-
Q


(   242  )

pregnated  ether,  at  the  point  of  contai^  a  num-
ber of  fmall  fpherules  of  fluid  will  be  perceived,
apparently  repulfive  both  to  water  and  ether  ;
thefe  fpherules  become  gradually  covered  with
minute  globules  of  gas,  and  as  this  gas  is
liberated  from  their  furfaces,  they  gradually  dif-
appear.

h.  Alcohol  diflblves  confiderable  quantities  of
nitrous  oxide.

2  cubic  inches  of  alcohol,  at  52^,  combined
with  2,4  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide.  The  alco-
hol thus  impregnated  had  a  tafte  rather  fweeter
than  before,  but  in  other  phyfical  properties
was  not  perceptibly  altered.

Nitrous  oxide  is  incapableof  remaining  in  com-
bination with  this  fluid  at  the  temperature  of  ebul-
lition ;  it  is  liberated  from  it  unaltered  by  heat.

Impregnated  alcohol,  during  its  combination
with  water,  gives  out  the  greater  part  of  its  com-
bined nitrous  oxide  :  on  mingling  the  two  fluids
together,  at  the  point  of  contadl  the  alcohol
becomes  covered  with  an  infinite  number  of
fmall  globules  of  gas,   which  continue  to  be


(  243  )

generated  during  the  whole  of  the  combination^
and  in  paiRng  through  the  fluid  render  it  ahuoft
opaque.

c.  The  eflential  oils  abforb  nitrous  oxide  to
a  greater  extent  than  either  alcohol  or  ether.

,5  cubic  inches  of  oil  of  i^arui  combined  with
^fi  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide  at  51^.  The
color  of  the  oil  thus  impregnated  was  rather
paler  than  before.

Nitrous  oxide  is  expelled  unaltered  from  im-
pregnated oil  of  carui,  by  heat.

1  of  oil  of  turpentine  abforbed  nearly  2  of
nitrons  oxide,  at  57°.  Its  properties  were  not
fenfibly  altered  from  this  combination,  and  the
gas  was  expelled  from  it  undecompounded,  by
heat.

d.  As  well  as  the  efTential  oils,  the  fixed  oils
diflblve  nitrous  oxide  at  low  temperatures,  whilft
at  high  temperatures  they  do  not  remain  in  com-
bination.

1  of  olive  oil  abforbed,  at  6P,  1,2  of  nitrous
oxide,  but  without  undergoing  any  apparent
phyfical  change.


(  244  )
III.  A^ion  of  Fluid  Acids  on  Nitrous  Oxide.

a.  Nitrous  oxide  expofed  to  concentrated
fulpburic  acid,  undergoes  no  change,  and  fuf-
fers  no  diminution,  that  may  not  be  accounted
for  from  the  abftradlion  of  a  portion  of  its  water
hy  the  acid.

h.  Nitrous  oxide  is  fcarcely  at  all  foluble  in
nitrous  acid,  and  expofed  to  that  fubftance,
undergoes  no  alteration.

c.  Muriatic  acid,  of  fpecific  gravity  1,14
abforbs  about  a  third  of  its  bulk  of  nitrous  oxide.
It  fufFers  no  apparent  change  in  its  properties
from  beingthus  impregnated,  and  the  gas  is  again
given  out  from  it  on  the  application  of  heat.

d.  Acetic  acid  abforbs  nearly  one  third  of
its  bulk  of  nitrous  oxide.

e.  Aqua  regia,  that  is,  the  nitro-muriatic
acid,  abforbs  a  very  minute  portion  of  nitrous
oxide.

/.  Nitrous  oxide  was  expofed  to  a  new  com-
pound acid,  conlifting  of  oxygenated  muriatic
acid,  and  fulphuric  acid,  which  I  difcovered  in


(  245   )

July,,  1799)  and  of  which  an  account  will  be
fhortly  publifhed;  but  it  was  neither  abforbed  or
altered.

I  have  before  mentioned  that  the  aqueous
foUitionsof  fulphurated  hydrogene  and  carbonic
acid,  neither  diflblve  or  alter  nitrous  oxide.

IV.  AS'ion  of  Saline  Solutions^  and  other
SuhftanceSy   on  Nitrous  Oxide,

a.  Nitrous  o^cide  expofed  to  concentrated
folution  of  green  fulphate  of  iron,  at  58°,  un-
derwent no  perceptible  diminution  ;  not  even
after  it  had  been  fufFered  to  remain  in  contadl
with  it  for  half  an  hour.

h.  It  underwent  diminution  of  nearly  ,2  when
agitated  in  contadl  with  a  folution  of  red  ful-
phate of  iron,  the  volume  of  the  folution  being
unity.

c.  Solution  of  green  fulphate  of  iron,  fully
impregnated  with  nitrous  gas,  did  not  in  the
flighteft  degree  abforb  nitrous  oxide,  and  ap-
peared to  have  no  adlion  upon  it.


(  246  )

d.  Solution  of  green  muriate  of  iron,  whe-
ther impregnated  with  nitrous  gas,  or  unim-
pregnated,  has  no  affinity  for,  or  adion  upon,
nitrous  oxide,

€,  Solution  of  red  muriate  of  iron  in  alcohol,
abforbed  nearly  one  fifth  of  its  bulk,  of  nitrous
oxide.

/.  .  Solution  of  pruffiate  of  potafh  abforbed
nearly  one  third  of  its  volume,  of  nitrous  oxide,
which  was  again  expelled  from  it  by  heat.

g.  Solution  of  nitrate  of  copper  appeared  to
have  no  affinity  for  nitrous  oxide.

h.  Concentrated  folution  of  nitrate  of  am-
moniac, at  58^,  abforbed  one  eighth  of  its  bulk
of  nitrous  oxide.

/.  Solutions  of  alkaline  fulphures  abforb
nitrous  oxide  in  quantities  proportionable  to
the  water  they  contain  ;  it  is  expelled  from
them  unaltered  by  heat.  None  of  the  hydro-
fulphures  diflblve  more  than  half  their  bulk  of
nitrous  oxide.

k.  Concentrated  folutions  of  the  fulphites
poflefs  little  or  no  a6lion  on  nitrous   oxide :


(247  )

diluted  folutions  abforb  it  in  fmall  quantities,

/.  Concentrated  folution  of  muriate  of  tin
abforbs  about  one  eighth  of  nitrous  oxide ;
more  dilute  folutions  abforb  larger  quantities.

From  thefe  obfervations  we  learn,  that  neutro-
faline  folutions  in  general,  have  very  feeble
attractions  for  nitrous  ojxide  ;  and  as  folutions  of
green  muriate,  and  fulphate  of  iron,  whether  free
from  nitrous  gas,  or  impregnated  with  it,  poilefs
no  adlion  upon  nitrous  oxide,  nitrous  gas  may  be
feparated  from  this  fubftance  by  thofe  folutions
with  greater  facility  than  nitrous  oxide  can  be
feparated  from  nitrous  gas,  by  water  or  alcohol.

Charcoal  abforbs  nitrous  oxide  as  well  as
all  other  gafes ;  and  it  is  difengaged  from  it
by  heat.

I  have  as  yet  found  no  other  folid  body,  not
poflefled  of  alkaline  properties,  capable  of  ab-
forbing  nitrous  oxide  in  any  flate  of  exiflence.

The  bodies  poffefling  the  flrongeft  ailinity
for  oxygene,  the  dry  fulphites,  muriate  of  tin,
the  common  fulphures,  white  prufliate  of  potafh,
and  green  oxide  of  iron,  do  not  in  the  flighteft


(  248  )

degree  aft  on  nitrous  oxide  at  common  tem-
peratures.

V,  A3'ton  of  different  Gafes  on  Nitrous
Oxide,

a.  12  meafures  of  muriatic  acid  gas  were  ming-
led with  7  meafuresof  nitrous  oxide  at  56**.  After
remaining-  together  for  a  minute,  they  filled  a
fpace  equal  to  IQ^  meafures.  When  water
was  introduced  to  them,  the  muriatic  acid  was
abforbed  much  more  flowly  than  if  it  had  been
unmingled.

In  another  experiment,  when  the  gafes  were
faturated  with  water,  9  meafures  of  each  of
them,  when  mingled  and  fufFered  to  remain  in
contadl  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  filled  a  fpace
nearly  equal  to  19  ;  and  after  the  muriatic  acid
had  been  abforbed  by  potafh,  the  nitrous  oxide
remained  unaltered  in  its  properties.

From  the  expanfion,  it  appears  mofl  proba-
ble that  aeriform  muriatic  acid,  and  nitrous
oxide,  have  a  certain  affinity  for  each  other,  and


(  249  )

that  they  combine  when  mingled  together  ;  for
jn  the  laft/ experiment,  the  increafe  of  volume
cannot  be  accounted  for  by  fuppofing  that  ni-
trous oxide  undergoes  lefs  change  of  volume
than  muriatic  acid,  by  aeriform  combination
with  water,  and  that  the  expaniion  depended
upon  the  folution  of  fome  of  its  combined  water
by  the  muriatic  acid.  That  muriatic  acid  and
nitrous  oxide  have  a  flight  affinity  for  each
other,  likewife  appears  from  the  abforption  of
nitrous  oxide  by  aqueous  folution  of  muriatic
acid.

Thinking  that  nitrous  oxide  might  attraft
muriatic  acid  from  its  folution  in  water,  I  ex-
pofed  a  minute  quantity  of  fluid  muriatic  acid
to  nitrous  oxide  ;  but  no  alteration  of  volume
took  place  in  the  gas.

b.  6  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide  were  mingled
with  1 1  meafures  of  fulphureous  acid,  faturated
with  water ;  after  remaining  at  reft  for  fix
minutes,  they  filled  a  fpacc  nearly  equal  to  18
meafures.  Expofed  to  water,  the  fulphureous
acid  was  abforbed,  but  not  nearly  fo  rapidly  as


(  250  )

when  itl  a  free  ftate.  Sulphur  burnt  with  a
vivid  flame  in  the  refidual  nitrous  oxide.  7
meafures  of  fulphureous  acid  were  now  mingled
with  8  of  nitrous  oxide.  They  filled  a  fpace
nearly  equal  to  15|,  and  no  farther  expanfion
took  place  afterwards.

From  thefe  experiments  it  appears  probable
that  fulphureous  acid,  and  nitrous  oxide,  have
fome  affinity  for  each  other.

c.  1 1  meafures  of  carbonic  acid  were  mingled
with  8  of  nitrous  oxide ;  they  filled  a  fpace
nearly  equal  to  ig  meafures.  On  expofing  the
mixture  to  cauftic  potafh,  the  carbonic  aeid  was
abforbed,  and  the  nitrous  oxide  remained  pure.
Hence  it  appears  that  carbonic  acid  and  nitrous
oxide  do  not  combine  with  each  other.

d  Oxygenated  muriatic  acid,  and  nitrous
oxide,  were  mingled  in  a  water  apparatus  :  there
was  a  flight  appearance  of  condenfation  ;  but
this  was  mod  probably  owing  to  abforption  by
the  water  ;  on  agitation,  the  oxygenated  muri-
atic acid  was  abforbed,  and  the  greater  part  of
the  nitrous  oxide  remained  unaltered.


(  ^51    )

e.  Sulphurated  hydrogene  and  nitrous  oxide,
mingled  together,  neither  expanded  or  con-
trail ed  ;  expofed  to  folution  ot  potafh,  the  acid*
only  was  abforbed.

/.  10  meafures  of  nitrous  gas  were  admitted
to  12  of  nitrous  oxide  at  59°.  They  filled  a  fpac6
equal  to  22,  and  after  remaining  together  for
an  hour,  had  undergone  no  change.  Solution
of  muriate  of  iron  abforbed  the  nitrous  gas
without  affecting  the  nitrous  oxide.

g.  Nitrous  oxide  was  fucceflively  mingled
with  oxygene,  atmofpheric  air,  hydro-carbonate,
phofphoratcd  hydrogene,  hydrogene,  and  nitro-
gene,  at  57^  ;  it  appeared  to  poflefs  no  aflion
on  any  of  them,  and  was  feparated  by  water,
the  gafes  remaining  unaltered.

h.  As  nitrous  oxide  was  foluble  in  ether,
alcohol,  and  the  other  inflammable  fluids,  it
was  reafonablc  to  fuppofe  that  its  affinity  for
thofe  bodies  would  enable  them  to  unite  with


*  The  experiments   of  Berthollet   have   clearly  proved
the  perfect  acidity  of  this  fubftance.


(  252  )

it  in  the  aeriform  ftate.  At  the  fuggeftion  of
Dr.  Beddoes  I  made  the  following  experiment:

To  ]2  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide,  at  54°,  I
introduced  a  fingle  drop  of  ether  ;  the  gas  im-
mediately began  to  expand,  and  in  four  minutes
filled  a  fpace  equal  to  lixteen  meafures  and  a
quarter.  When  an  inflamed  taper  was  plunged
into  the  gas  thus  holding  ether  in  folution,  a
light  blue  flame  flowly  pafl"ed  through  it.

A  conflderable  diminution  of  temperature  is
moil  probably  produced,  from  the  great  ex-
panflon  of  nitrous  oxide  during  its  combination
with  ether.

A  drop  of  alcohol  was  admitted  to  14  mea-
fures of  nitrous  oxide.  In  five  minutes,  the
gas  filled  a  fpace  equal  to  fifteen  and  a  third  ;
but  no  farther  diminution  took  place  afterwards.

A  minute  quantity  of  oil  of  turpentine  was
introduced  to  14  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide  ;  it
filled,  in  4  minutes,  a  fpace  rather  lefs  than  14;
and  no  farther  change  took  place  afterw^ards.
Mod  likely  this  contra6lion  arofe  from  the  pre-
cipitation of  the  water   diflblved  in  the  gas  by


(  253  )

the  ilronger  affinity  of  the  oil  for  nitrous
oxide.  To  afcertain  with  certainty  if  any  oil
had  been  diflblved  by  the  gas,  I  introduced
into  it  a  fmall  quantity  of  ammoniac.  It  imme-
diately became  llightly  clouded,  moft  probably
from  the  formation  of  foap,  by  the  combination
of  the  diflblved  oil  with  tlfe  ammoniac.

From  thefe  experiments  we  learn,  that  when
nitrous  oxide  is  mingled  with  either  carbonic
acid,  oxygene,  common  air,  hydro-carbonate^,
fulphurated  hydrogene,  hydrogene,  or  nitro-
gene,  they  may  be  feparated  from  each  other
without  making  any  allowance  for  contraclion
or  expanfion  :  but  if  a  mixture  of  either  muri-
atic acid,  or  fulphureous  acid  gas,  with  nitrous
oxide,  is  experimented  upon  ;  in  the  abforption
of  the  acid  by  alkalies,  the  apparent  volume  of
gas  condenfed  will  be  lefs  than  the  real  one,  by
a  quantity  equal  to  the  fum  of  expanfion  from
combination.  Confequently  a  corredtion  muft
be  made  on  account  of  this  circumflance.

Though  alcohol,  ether^  effential  oils,  and  the
fluid  inflammable  bodies   in  general;  diflj>lve


(  254  )

nitrous  oxide  with  much  greater  rapidity  than
water,  yet  as  we  are  not  perfedly  acquainted
with  their  adlion  on  unabforbable  gafes,  it  is
better  to  employ  water  for  feparating  nitrous
oxide  from  thefe  fubftances ;  particularly  as  that
fluid  is  more  or  lefs  combined  with  all  gafes^
and  as  we  are  acquainted  with  the  extent  of  its
adlion  upon  them.

By  purfuing  the  fubjecS  of  the  folution  of
ellential  oils  in  gafes,  we  may  probably  difcover
a  mode  of  obtaining  them  in  a  ftate  of  abfolute
drynefs.  For  if  other  gafes  as  well  as  nitrous
oxide,  have  a  ftronger  affinity  for  oils  than  for
water,  water  mofi:  probably  will  be  precipitated
from  them  during  their  folution  of  oils  ;  and
after  their  faturation  with  oil,  it  is  likely  that
they  are  capable  of  being  deprived  of  that  fub-
llance  by  ammoniac.

VI.  Jl&ton  of  aeriform  Nitrous  Oxide  on  the
Alkalies,  History  of  the  discovery  of  the  combina-
tions of  Nitrous  Oxide  with  the  Alkalies,

a.     When  nitrous  oxide  in  a  free  ftate   is


(  265  )

expofed  to  the  folid  cauftic  alkalies  and  alka-
line earths,  at  common  temperatures,  it  is  nei-
ther abforbed  nor  adled  upon  ;  when  it  is  placed
in  contad  with  folutions  of  them  in  water,  a
fmall  quantity  is  diflolved ;  but  this  combina-
tion appears  to  depend  on  the  water  of  the  folu-
tion,  for  the  gas  can  be- expelled  unaltered,  at
the  temperature  of  ebullition.

h,  Cauftic  potafh  was  expofed  to  nitrous
oxide  for  13  hours  :  the  diminution  was  not  to
one  fiftieth,  and  this  flight  condenfation  niofi:
probably  depended  upon  its  combination  with
the  water  of  the  gas.

Concentrated  foluticn  of  potafh  -  abforbed
a  fourth  of  its  bulk  of  nitrous  oxide.  When
the  impregnated  iblution  was  heated,  globules
of  gas  were  given  out  from  it  rapidly  ;  but  the
quantity  colled^ed  was  too  fmall  to  examine.

Soda,  whether  folid  or  in  folution,  exhibited
exaflly  the  fame  phsenomena  with  nitrous  oxide.
The  folution  of  foda  abforbed  near  a  quarter  of
its  bulk  of  gas.

A     11    meafures  of  ammoniacal   gas   were


(   256  )

mingled  with  8  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide  over
dry  mercury,  both  of  the  gafes  being  faturated
with  water.  No  change  of  appearance  was
produced  by  the  mixture,  and  they  filled,  after
two  minutes,  a  fpace  equal  to  ig.  On  the  in-
trodu<Slion  of  a  little  water,  the  ammoniac  was
abforbed,  and  the  nitrous  oxide  remained  un-
altered, for  it  was  diflblved  by  water  as  rapidly
as  if  it  had  never  been  mingled  with  ammo-
niac*

7  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide,  expofed  to  6
meafures  of  folution  of  ammoniac  in  water,  was
in  an  hour  diminifhed  to  4j  nearly.  When
the  folution  was  heated  over  mercury,  permanent
gas  was  produced,  which  was  unabforbable  by
a  minute  quantity  of  water,  and  foluble  in  a
large  quantity  ;  confequently  it  was  nitrous
oxide.


*  The  Dutch  chemifts  have  aflerted,  that  mixture  with
ammoniac  prevents  the  abforption  of  nitrous  oxide  by  wa-
ter, either  wholly  or  partially.  Journal  de  Phyfique,
t.  xliii.  part  ii.  pag.  327.  It  is  difficult  to  account  for
their  miftake.


(  ^57  )

d.  Nitrous  oxide  was  expofed  to  dry  cauftic
ftrontian  ;  it  underwent  a  diminution  of  nearly-
one  fortieth,  which  mod.  likely  was  owing  to
the  combination  of  the  ftrontian  with  its  water,

1 1  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide  were  agitated
in  conta6l  with  8  of  flrontian  lime  water  :  nearly
4  meafures  were  abforbed.  The  impregnated
folution  expofed  to  heat,  rapidly  gave  out  its
gas  ;  3  meafures  were  foon  collecS^ed,  which
rhingled  with  a  fmall  quantity  of  hydrogene,
and  inflamed  by  the  taper,  gave  a  fmart  deto-
hation.

e.  Nitrous  oxide  expofed  to  lime  and  argil,
both  wet  and  dry,  was  not  in  the  flightefl  de-
gree adled  upon.

From  thefe  experiments  it  is  evident  that
nitrous  oxide  in  the  aeriform  ftate  cannot  be
combined  either  with  the  alkalies,  or  the  alka-
line earths.  That  a  combination  may  be  efFefled
between  nitrous  oxide  and  thefe  fubftances,  it
muft  be  prefented  to  them,  in  the  nafcent  Jlate.

The  falts  compofed  of  the  alkalies  and  nitrous
oxide,  are  not  analogous  to  any  other  compound
R


(  253  >

fubilances,  being  pofleffed  of  very  Angular  pro-
perties. Before  thefe  properties  are  detailed,  it
may  not  be  amifs  to  give  an  account  of  the
accidental  way  in  which  I  difcovcred  the  mode
of  combination.

In  December,  1 799,  defigning  to  make  »
very  delicate  experiment,  with  a  view  to
afcertain  if  any  water  was  decompofed  du-
ring the  converfion  of  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous
oxide,  by  fulphite  of  potafh,  I  expofed  200
grains  of  cryflalifed  fulphite  of  potafh,  con-
taining great  fuperabun dance  of  alkali,  to  14
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas,  containing  one
eighteenth  nitrogenef.  The  alkali  was  em-
ployed to  preferve  any  amnopniac  that  might  be
formed,  in  the  free  ftate,  as  it  would  otherwife
combine  with  fulphureous  acid.*

The   volume   of  gas  diminifhcd  with  great
rapidity  ;  in  two  hours  and  ten  minutes  it  was


*  Sulphureous  acid  faturates  more  potafh  than  fulphuric
acid,  fo  that  moft  probably  during  the  convcrlion  of  ful-
phite of  potafh  into  fulphate,  portions  of  fulphureous  acid
aro  difcngaged.


(  ^59  )

reduced  to  6-,  which  I  confidered  as  the  limit
of  diminution.  Accidentally,  however,  fufFer-
ing  it  to  remain  for  three  hours  longer,  I  was
much  furprifed  by  finding  that  not  quite  12
cubic  inches  remained,  which  confifted  of
nitrous  oxide^  mingled  with  the  nitrogene  that
exifted  before  the  expei'iment.

In  accounting  theoretically  for  this  phaeno-
menon,  different  fuppofitions  necefTarily  pre-
fented  themfelves.

\i\,  It  was  pofBble,  that  though  fulphite  of  pot-
afh,  and  potafh,  feparately  poffefTed  no  adf  ion  on
free  nitrous  oxide,  yet  in  combination  they  might
exert  fuch  affinities  upon  it  as  either  to  abforb
it,  or  make  it  enter  into  new  combinations.

2dly.  It  was  more  probable  that  the  eauftic
potafh,  though  incapable  of  condenfing  aeriform
nitrous  oxide,  was  yet  poffefTed  of  a  f^rong
affinity  for  it  when  in  the  najcent  Jlate,  and  that
the  nitrous  oxide  condenfed  in  the  experiment
had  been  combined  in  this  ffate  with  the  free
alkali.

To  afcertain  if  the  compound  of  potafh  and


(  'ido  j

folphite  of  potadi  with  fulphatc,  was  capable  of
a6ling  upon  nitrous  oxide,  I  fuffered  a  quan-
tity of  this  fubftance  to  remain  in  conta6l  with
the  gas  for  near  a  day  :  no  change  whatever
took  place.

To  determine  whether  the  diminution  of
nitrous  oxide  depended  upon  its  abforplion  in
the  nafcent  (late,  by  the  peculiar  compound  of
potafh  and  fulphite  of  potafh,  or  if  it  was  fimply
owing  to  the  alkali.

I  mingled  a  folution  of  fulphite  of  potafh  with
cauftic  foda  ;  the  fait,  after  being  evaporated  at
a  low  temperature,  was  expofed  to  nitrous  gas.
The  nitrous  oxide  formed  was  abforbed,  but
in  rather  lefs  quantities  than  when  alkaline
fulphite  of  potafh  was  employed.

Hence  it  was  evident  that  the  alkali  was  the
agent  that  had  condenfed  the  nitrous  oxide  in
thofe  experiments,  for  foda  is  incapable  of  com-
bining either  with  fulphate,  or  fulphite  of  pot-
afh.

To  afcertain  whether  any  change  in  the  con-
ftitution  of  the  nitrous  oxide  had  been  produced


(  261     )

by  the  condcnfation,  I  introduced  a  fmall  quan-
tity of  fulphite  of  potafh,  with  excefs  of  alkali,
that  had  abforbed  nitrous  oxide,  into  a  long
and  thin  cylindrical  tube  filled  with  mercury  ;
and  inclining  it  at  an  angle  of  35^  with  the
plane  of  the  mercury,  applied  the  heat  of  a  fpirit
lamp  to  th^t  part  of  the  tube  containing  the
falts ;  when  the  glafs  became  very  hot,  gas  was
given  out  wit1i  rapidity  ;  in  lefs  than  a  minute
the  tiibe  was  full.  This  gas  was  transfered.into
another  tube,  and  examined;  it  proved  to  be
nitrous  oxide  in  its  higheft  ftateof  purity;*  for
a  portion  of  it  abforbed  by  common  water,  left
no  more  than  a  refiduum  of  y^,  and  fulphur
burnt  in  it  with  a  vivid  rofe-colored  flame.

Being  now  fatisfied  that  the  alkalies  were
capable  of  combining  with  nitrous  oxide;  to
inveftigate  with  precifion  the  nature  of  thefe
new  compounds,  I  proceeded  in  the  follovving
manner.

*  Hence  we  learn  that  fulphite  of  polaflj,  when  ftrongly
heated;  does  not  decorapofc  nitrous  oxide,  even  ia
the  naf cent  Jim  c .


(  262  )

VII.  Combination  of  Nitrous  Oxide  voith
fotafJj,

a.  Into  a  folutlon  of  falphite  of  potadi,  which
had  been  made  by  palfing  fulphureous  acid  gas
from  a  mercurial  airholder  into  cauftic  potafh
dillblved  in  water,  I  introduced  17  grains  of
dry  potafh.  The  whole  evaporated  at  a  low
temperature,  gave  143  grains  of  fait.  This  fait
was  not  wholly  compofed  of  fulphite  of  potafh
and  potadi ;  it  contained  as  well,  a  minute  quan-
tity of  carbonate,  and  fulphate  of  potafh,  formed
during  the  evaporation.*

120  grains  of  it  finely  pulverifed,  and  retain-
ing the  water  of  cryflalifation,  were  expofed
to  15  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas,  over  mercury.
The  nitrous  gas  diminiOied  with  great  rapidity,
and  in  three  hours  a  cubic  inch  and  nine  tenths


•'•^'  See  the  excellent  memoir  of  Fourcioy  and  Vaiiquelin
on  the  fulphureous  acid,  and  its  combinations.  Annales  do
Chimie,  ii,  54.  Or  Nicholfon's  Phil.  Journal;  vol.  i,
pag.  313.


(  263   )

only  remained,  which  confifled  of  nearly  otit
third  nitrous  oxide,  and  two  thirds  nitrogene
that  had  pre-exifted  in  the  nitrous  gas.  The
increafe  of  weight  of  the  fait  could  not  be  deter-
mined, asfome  of  it  was  loft  by  adhering  to  the
vellel  in  which  the  combination  was  effedled,
and  to  the  mercury.  It  prefented  no  diflindl
feries  of  cryftalifations,  even  when  examined  by
the  magnifier;  rendered  green  vegetable  blues,
and  its  tafte  was  very  different  from  that  of  the
remaining  quantity  of  fait  that  had  been  expofed
to  the  atmofphere.  A  portion  of  it  ftrongly
heated  over  mercury,  gave  out  gas  with  great
rapidity,  which  had  all  the  properties  of  the
pureft  nitrous  oxide.

When  water  was  poured  upon  fome  of  it,  no

•  gas  was  given  out,  and  the  whole  was  equably

and  gradually   diffolvcJ.       Alcohol,  as  well  as

ether,  appeared  incapable  of  diflblving  any  part

of  it.

When  muriatic  acid  was  introduced  into  it,
confined  by  mercury,  a  rapid  effervefccnce  took
.plaice.     Part  of  the  gas  difengaged  was  futphu-


(  264  )

reous  acid,  and  carbonic  iciH  .  fK

^as  nitrous  oxide.  "''"'''  ^'^^ ''^•"-nde,

J.     '-^^ean„,berofexperia,entsupo„
^alt    procured  in, hcanner  I  have  Mde

^-bed,w.havievvtoobtainU.co.p„d;
nitrous  oxide  and  Dot^(h    r      r  '

S  mat    hlllo  or  no  gas  was  gi.en  oM
•l.«»mb,„a„„„„f„i,„,„„^,_,  ■      -

1^    ^nn,  ya  the  extreme  and  n^arlv

^2c-P--.y  rop.™i„,  ,^„„  ,„,„  ^^;

%  0,p„„„j,  ,„,„.„^^_


(  265  )

wholly  converted  into  fiilphate  ;  and  after  the
reparation  of  this  by  folution^  evaporation,  and
cryftalifation,  at  a  low  temperature,  I  obtained
the  new  combination,  mingled  with  very  little
carbonate  ofpotafh,  and  flill  lefs  of  fulphite.

The  minute  quantity  of  fulphite  chiefly  ap-
peared in  very  fmall  cryftals  ;  diilint^  from  the
]mafsoffalt,  which  poilefTed  no  regular  cry f-
talifation,  and  was  almoft  wholly  compofed  of
the  new  compound,  intimately  mingled  with
a  little  carbonate.  The  new  compound,  as
nearly  as  as  I  could  eftimate  frqm  the  quantity
of  nitrous  oxide  abforbed,  confided  of  about
3  alkali,  to  1  of  nitrous  oxide,  by  weight.

It  exhibited  the  following  properties  :

1.  Its  tafle  was  cauftic,  and  poilefled  of  a  pun-
gency different  from  either  potafh  or  carbonate
ofpotafh.

2.  It  rendered  vegetable  blues  green,  which
might  poflibly  depend  upon  the  carbonate  of
potafli  mixed  with  it.

3.  Pulverifed  charcoal  mingled  with  a  few
grains  of  it,    and  inflamed,    burnt  with  flight


{  266  )

fcintillations.     Projected  into  zinc  in  a  ftatc  of
fufion,  a  flight  inflamination  was  produced.

4.  When  either  fulphuric,  muriatic,  or
nitric  acid  was  introduced  to  it  under  mercury,
it  gave  out  nitrous  oxide,  mingled  with  a  little
carbonic  acid.

5.  Thrown  into  a  folution  of  fulphurated
hydrogene,  gas  was  difengaged  from^it,  but  in
quantities  too  minute  to  be  examined.

6.  When  carbonic  acid  was  thrown  into  a
folution  of  it  in  water,  gas  was  difengaged ;
on  examination  it  proved  to  be  nitrons   oxide.

7.  A  ^concentrated  folution  of  it  kept  in
ebullition  in  a  cylinder,  confined  by  mercury,
gave  out  a  few  globules  of  gas,  which  were  too
minute  to  be  examined,  and  probably  confifted
of  common  air  previoufly  contained  in  the
water.

c.  In  the  experiments  made  toafcertain  thefe
properties  all  the  fait  was  expended,  otherwife  I
fhould  have  endeavoured  to  afccrtain  what  quan-
tity of  gas  would  have  been  liberated  by  heat  from
a  given  weight ;  and  likewife  what  would  have


(  ^67  )

been  the  efFe6ls  of  admixture  of  It  with  oil.
When  fome  of  the  mixed  fait  was  mingled  with
oil  of  turpentine,  part  of  it  was  diflblvedj  and
the  fluid  became  white  ;  but  no  gas  was  given
out.  On  this  coarfe  experiment,  however,  I
cannot  place  much  dependance.  If  the  com-
bination of  nitrous  oxide  and  potafh  is  capable
of  combining  with  oil  without  decompoiition,
barytcs  and  ftrontian*  will  probably  feparate  the
oil  from  it,  and  thus  it  may  poffibly  be  obtained
in  a  ftate  of  purity.

In  a  rough  experiment  made  on  the  conver-
fion  of  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  oxide,  by  con-
centrated folution  of  fulphite  of  potaOi  with
excefs  of  alkali,  very  little  of  the  nitrous  oxide
was  abforbed.  Hence  It  is  probable  that  water
leflTens  the  affinity  of  potafh  for  nafcent  nitrous
oxide.  ^   '


*  Unlefs  the  fum  of  affinity  of  the  potalli,  oil,  nitrous
oxide,  and  earths,  fhould  be  fnch  as  to  enable  the  nitrous
oxide  to  combine  with  the  earth,  whilft  the  oil  and  alkali
jremained  iu  combination,  &c..


(  268  )

VIII.  Combination  of  Nitrons  Oxide  with
Soda,

The  union  of  nitrous  oxide  with  foda  is
cfFe6led  in  the  fame  manner  as  with  potafh.
The  alkali,  mingled  by  folution  and  evaporation,
with  either  fulphite  of  foda,  or  of  potafh,  is  ex-
pofed  to  nitrous  gas  ;  the  nitrous  oxide  is  con-
denfed  by  it  at  the  moment  of  generation,  and
the  combination  efFed^ed.

As  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  obferve,  nitrous
oxide  is  not  abforbed  to  fo  great  an  extent  by
foda,  as  potaHi.

I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  obtain  the  com-
bination of  nitrous  oxide  with  foda  in  its  pure
ftate.  To  the  attainment  of  this  end,  difficul-
ties identical  with  thofe  noticed  in  the  lafi:  fec-
tion  prefent  themfelvcs.  It  is  extremely  difficult
to  procure  the  foda  perfectly  free  from  carbonic
acid,  and  though  by  ufing  fulphite  of  potafh  the
fulphate  formed  is  eafily  feparated,  yet  flill  evapo-
r^ion  and  cryftalifation  will  not  difengagc  i\\^


(26g)

fafphite  and   carbonate   from    the  new   com-
pound.

The  compound  of  foda  and  nitrous  oxide,
mingled  with  a  little  fulphite  and  carbonate  of
foda,  was  rapidly  foluble,  both  in  warm  and
cold  water,  without  efFervefcence.  Its  folution,
heated  to  ebullition,  gave  out  no  gas.  The
tafte  of  the  folid  fait  was  cauftic,  and  more
acrid  than  that  of  the  mixture  of  carbonate  and
fulphite  of  foda.  V7hen  caft  upon  zinc  in
fufion,  it  burnt  with  a  white  flame.  When
heated  to  40O  or  500^,  it  gave  out  nitrous
oxide  with  rapidity.  Nitrous  oxide  was  ex-
pelled from  it  by  the  fulphuric,  muriatic, .  and
carbonic  acids,  1  believe,  by  fulphurated
hydrogene,^

IX.       Combination    of    Nitrous    Oxide   with
AmmoniaCi

I  attempted  to   eiFedt  this  combination    by

*  For  when  a  little  of  the  mixed  fait  was  introduced  into
a  folution  of  fulphurated  hydrogene,  globules  of  gas  were
given  out  during  the  folution.


(  ^70  )

converting  nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  oxide,  hj
fulphite  of  ammoniac,  wetted  with  flrong  folu-
tion  of  cauftic  ammoniac  ;  but  without  fuccefs  ;
fpr  the  whole  of  the  nitrous  oxide  produced
ijCniained,  in  a  free  ftate.

Whea  Jexpofed  fulphite  of  potaOi,  mingled
by  folutipn  apd  evaporation  with  highly  alkaline
carbonate  of  ammoniacj-l^  to  nitrous  gas,  the
dirpinutiou  was  nearly  one  fourth  more  than  if
pure  fulphite  of  potafh  had  been  employed.
IJence  it  appears  moft  likely  that  ammoniac  is
capable  of  combination  with  nitrous  oxide  in  the
nafgent  (lajte.  ,

.  In  the  experiments  on  the  converfion  of  ni-
trous gas  into  nitrous  oxide,  by  nafcent  hydro-
gene,  and  by  fulphurated  hydrogene,  Ref.  L
Divif  V.  probably  the  water  formed  at  the  fame


f  Carbonate  of  ammoniac  formed  at  a  high  tempera-
ture, containing  near  6o  per  cent  alkali,  and  capable  of
combining  with  fmall  quantities  of  acids  without  giving
out  its  carbonic  acid.  Of  this  fait  a  particular  account  will
be  given  in  the  experiments  on  the  aramoniacal  falts,  which
I  have  often  mentioned  in  the  courfe  of  this  work.


(271   )

time  with  the  ammoniac  and  nitrous  oxide,  pre-
vented them  from  entering  into  combination  ;
pojfihly  the  peculiar  compound  was  formed,  but
in  quantities  fo  minute  as  not  to  be  diftinguifhed
from  fimple  ammoniac  ;*'  for  even  the  exiilence
of  ammoniac  in  thefe  proceiles,  is  but  barely
perceptible.

If  it  fhould  be  proved  by  future  experiments^
that  in  the  decompofition  of  nitrous  gas  by
nafcent  hydrogene,  a  peculiar  compound  of
nitrous  oxide,  water  and  ammoniac,  is  formed,
it  will  afford  proofs  in  favor  of  the  do61rine
of  predifpofi ng  affinity  \\  for  then  this  decom-


*  It  may  not  be  amifs  to  mention  fome  appearances  taking
place  in  the  decompofition  of  nitrous  gas  by  fuJpburated
hydrogepe,  though  it  is  vlfelefs  to  theorife  concerning  thera.
The  fulphur  depofited  is  at  firft  yellow  j  as  the  procefs  pro-
ceeds, it  becomes  white,  and  in  fome  inftances  I  have  fuf-
pe6ted  a  diminution  of  it.

t  Predifpoling  affinity,  the  exiflence  of  which  at  iirfl:
confideration  it  is  difficnlt  to  admit,  may  be  easily  accounted
for  by  fuppofing  the  attractions  of  the  fimple  principles  of
compound  fubftances-     And  this  do6trine  will  apply  in  all


^


rsTK^msesmmfif^B*


(  ^72  )

pofition  might  be  fuppofed  to  depend  upon  thfc'
difpofition  of  oxygene,  hydrogene  and  nitro-
gene  to  alTunfie  the  Hates  of  combination  in
which  they  might  form  a  triple  compound,  of
water,  nitrous  oxide,  and  ammoniac.

Nitrous  oxide  might  probably  be  made  to
combine  with  ammoniac  by  expofing  a  mixture
of  nitrous  gas  and  aeriform  ammoniac,  to  the
fulphites.

It  is  probable  that  nitrous  oxide  may  be  com-
bined with  ammoniac,  by  means  of  double
affinity.  Perhaps  fulphate  of  ammoniac  and
the  combination  of  potafh  with  nitrous  oxide
mingled  together  in  folution,  would  be  con-
verted into  fulphate  of  potafh  and  the  com-
pound of  nitrous  oxide,  and  ammoniac.


inftances  where  the  conftitution  of  bodies  is  known.  Pre-
difpofing  affinity  ought  not  to  be  confidered  as  the  affinity  of
non-exifiing  bodies  for  each  other  j  but  as  the  mutual
affinity  of  their  fimple  principles,  difpofing  them  to  alTume
new  arrangements.


(  273  )

X.  Probability  of  forming  Compounds  of
Nitrous  Oxide  and  the  Alkaline  Earths.

I  attempted  to  combine  nitrous  oxide  with
lime  and  ftrontian,  by  expofing  fulphites  of  lime
and  firontian  with  excefs  of  earth,  to  nitrous
gas ;  but  this  procefs  did  not  fuccced :  the
diminution  took  place  fo  flovvly  as  to  deftroy  all
hopes  of  gaining  any  refults  in  a  definite  time.
Sulphite  of  potalh  is  decompofable  by  barytes^
ftrontian,  and  lime  ;*  confequently  it  was  im-
poilible  to  employ  this  fubftance  to  efFedl  the
combination*

As  the  dry  fulphures,  when  well  made,  con-
vert nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  oxide,  it  is  probable
that  the  union  of  the  earths  with  nafcent  nitrous
oxide  may  be  efFeded  by  expofing  nitrous  gas
to  their  fulphures,  containing  an  excefs  of
earth.

Perhaps  the  combination  of  nitrous  oxide  with


*  See  the  above-mentioned  elaborate  memoir  pf  Fodr-
cfoy  and  VauqOelin,


(  174  )

firontian  may  be  efFe<5led  by  introducing  the
combination  ofpotafli  and  nitrous  oxide  into
Itrontian  lime  water.

It  is  probable  that  nitrous  oxide  may  be  com-
bined with  clay  and  magnefia,  by  expofing
tbefe  bodieSj  mingled  with  fulphite  of  potaili
or  foda,  to  nitrous  gas.

XI.  Additional  Ohfervat'tons  on  the  conihi^
nations  of  Nitrous  Oxide  with  the  Alkalies,

A  defire  to  complete  pbyfiological  inveftiga«r
tions  relating  to  nitrous  oxide,  has  hitherto
prevented  me  from  purfuing  to'a  greater  extent,
the  experiments  on  the  combination  of  thisfub-
ftance  with  the  alkalies,  &c.  As  foon  as  an
opportunity  occurs,  I  purpofe  to  refume  the
fubjedl.

The  obfervations  detailed  in  the  foregoing
fedions  are  fufficient  to  fhow  that  nitrous  oxide
is  capable  of  entering  into  intimate  union  with
the  fixed  alkalies  :  and  as  the  compounds
formed  by  this  union  arc  infoluble  in  alcohol,


(  275   )

decompofable  by  the  acids,  and  heat,  and  pof-
fefled  of  peculiar  properties,  they  ought  to  be
confidered  as  a  new  clafs  of  faline  fubllances.

If  it  is  thought  proper,  on  a  farther  invefti-
gation  of  their  properties,  to  fignify  them  by
fpecific  names,  they  may,  according  to  the  ufu-
ally  adopted  fafhion  of  nomenclature,  be  called
nitroxis  :  thus  the  nitroxi  of  ptajh  would  fignify
the  fait  formed  by  the  combination  of  nitrous
oxide  with  potafh.

Future  experiments  muft  determine  the
different  affinities  of  nitrous  oxide  for  the  alka-
lies, and  alkaline  earths.

With  regard  to  the  ufes  of  thefe  new  com-
pounds it  is  difficult  to  form  a  guefs.  When
they  are  obtained  pure,  and  fully  faturated  with
nitrous  oxide,  on  account  of  the  low  temperature
at  which  their  gas  is  liberated,  they  will  proba-
bly conftitute  detonating  compounds.  From
their  facility  of  decompofition  by  the  weaker
acids,  they  may  pofiibly  be  ufed  medicinally,  if
everthe  evolution  of  nitrous  oxide  in  the  ftomach
ihould  be  found  beneficial  in  difeafes.


(  276  )

XII.  The  properties  of  Nitrous  Oxide  refemhU
thofe  of  fields.

If  we  were  Inclined  fo  generalife,  and  tcy
place  nitrous  oxide  among  a  known  clafs  of
bodies,  its  properties  would  certainly  induce  us
to  confidcr  it  as  more  analogous  to  the  acids
than  to  any  other  fubftances  ;  for  it  is  capable
of  uniting  with  water  and  the  alkalies,  and  is
infoluble  in  moft  of  the  acids.  It  differs,  how-
ever, from  the  flronger  acids,  in  not  poiTeffing
the  four  tafle/  and  the  power  of  reddening
vegetable  blues  :  and  from  both  the  ftronger
and  weaker  acids,  in  not  being  combinable  when
in  a  perfectly   free   flate,  at  common  tempera-


.  *  The  different  perfons  who  have  rcfpired  nitrous  oxide
have,  as  will  be  feen  hereafter,  given  different  accounts  of
the  tafte  ;  the  greater  number  have  called  it  fwcet,  fome
metallic.  One  of  my  friends,  in  a  letter  to  me  dated  Nov.
13,  1799,  containing  a  detail  of  fome  experiments  made
on  the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide,  at  Birmingham,  denotes
the  tafte  of  it  by  the  term  "  fweetiih  faintly  acidulous."
To  me  the  tafte  both  of  the  gas  and  of  its  folution  in  water^
has  always  appeared  faintly  fweetifli.


<  277  )

lures,  with  the  alkalies.  If  it  fhould  be  proved
by  future  experiments,  that  condenfation  by
cold  gave  it  the  capability  of  immediately  forming
neutro-faline  compounds  with  the  alkalies ;  it
ought  to  be  confidered  as  the  weakeft  of  the
acids.  Till  thofe  experiments  are  made^  its
extraordinary  chemical  and  phyfiological  pro-
perties are  fufficient  to  induce  us  to  confider  i|:
as  a  bodyy^i  generis.

It  is  a  lingular  facl  that  nitrous  gas,  which
contains  in  its  compolltion  a  quantity  of  oxygene
fo  much  greater  than  nitrous  oxide,  fho^ild
neverthelefs  pollefs  no  acid  properties.  It  is
tincombinable  with  alkalies,  very  little  foluble
in  water,  and  abforbable  by  the  acids.


DIVISION  IL

On  ibe  DECOMPOSITION  of  NITROUS  OXIDE
by  COMBUSTIBLE  BODIES.  Its  ANALYSIS.
OBSERVATIONS  on  the  different  combinations  of
OXYGENE  and  NITROGENE,


I.      Preliminaries.


Jt*  ROM  the  phsenomena  mentioned  in  Ref.  I,
Divif.  III.*  it  appears  that  the  combuftible  bodies
burn  in  nitrous  oxide  at  certain  temperatures.
The  experiments  in  this  Divifion  vvereinflituted
for  the  purpofe  of  inveftigating  the  precife
nature  of  thefe  combuftions,  with  a  view  of
afcertaining  exadly  the  compofition  of  nitrous
oxide.

It  will  be  feen  hereafter  that  very  high  tem-
peratures are  required  for  the  decompolition  of

*  Seaion  2,


(  279  )

tiitraias  oxide,  by  moll  of  the  combuftible  bodies,
and  that  in  this  proceis  heat  and  light  are  pro-
duced to  a  very  great  extent.  Thefe  agents
alone  are  poflefled  of  a  confiderable  power  of
adlion  on  nitrous  oxide  ;  of  which  it  is  necefiary
to  give  an  account,  that  we  may  be  able  to  un-
derftand  the  phaenomena  in  the  following
fedions.

H.  Converjion  of  Nitrous  Oxide  into  Nitrous
Acid^  arid  a  Gas  analogous  to  Atniofpheric  Aip^
by  Ignition.

a.  Dr.  Prieflley  aflerts,  that  nitrous  oxide
expofed  for  a  certain  time  to  the  a6lion  of  the
electric  fpark,  is  rendered  immifcible  with
water,  and  capable  of  diminution  with  nitrous
gas,  without  fuffeiingany  alteration  of  volume  ;
and  likewife  that  the  fame  changes  are  efteded  in
it  by  expofure  to  ignited  incombuftible  bodies.*

The  Dutch  chemifts  ilate,   that  the  eledrjc

^^  Vol.  ii.   pag.  91.


(  280  )

fpark  pafled  through  nitrous  oxide,  occafions  3^
ftnall  diminution  of  its  vohime,  and  that  the
gas  remaining  is  analogous  to  common  air.-fr
They  conclude  that  this  change  depends  on  the
reparation  of  its  conftituent  parts,  oxygene  and
nitrogen e,  from  each  other.

None  of  thefe  chemifts  have  fufpeded  the
production  of  nitrous  acid  in  this  procefs.

h.  Nitrous  oxide  undergoes  no  change
whatever  from  the  fimple  adlion  of  light.  I
expofed  fome  of  it,  confined  by  mercury,  for
many  days  to  this  agent,  often  paffing  through
it  concentrated  rays  by  means  of  a  fmall  lens.
When  examined  it  appeared,  as  well  as  I  could
eftimate,  of  the  fame  degree  of  purity  as  at  the
beginning  of  the  experiment.

c,  A  temperature  below  that  of  ignition
efFe<9:s  no  alteration  in  the  conftitution  of
nitrous   oxide.     I  pafled    nitrous  oxide  from  a


f  Journal  de  Phyfique,  torn,  xliii,  part  ii.  pag.  330.  They
effeded  the  fame  change  by  pafling  it  through  a  heated
tube.  Dr.  Prieftley  had  publifliod  an  account  of  fimilay
pperimcnts  more  than  two  years  before.


{  281  )

retort  containing  decompofing  nitrate  of  am-
moniac,  through  a  green  glafs  tube,  flrongly
heated  in  an  air-furnace,  but  not  fufFered  to
undergo  ignition.  The  gas,  received  in  a  water
apparatus  exhibited  the  fame  properties  as  the
purcft  nitrous  oxide  ;  fomc  of  it  abforbed  by
water,  left  a  refiduum  of  not  quite  one  thir-
teenth.

d.  The  2iS\on  of  the  ele6lric  fpark  for  a
long  while  continued,  converts  nitrous  oxide
into  a  gas  analogous  tp  atmofpheric  air,  and
nitrous  acid.

I  pafTed  about  1 50  ftrong  fhocks  from  a  fmall
Lcyden  phial,  through  7  ten  grain  meafures  of
pure  nitrous  oxide.  After  this  it  filled  a  fpace
rather  lefs  than  fix  meafures  :  the  mercury  was
rendered  white  on  the  top,  as  if  it  had  been
adled  on  by  nitric  acid.  Six  meafures  of  nitrous
gas  mingled  with  the  refidual  gas  of  the  experi-
ment, over  mercury  covered  by  a  little  water,
gave  red  fumes,  and  rapid  diminution.  In  five
minutes  the  volume  of  the  gafes  nearly  equalled
t-cn.    Thermometer  in  this  experiment  was  58-.


(  282  )

ElecSric  fparks  were  pafled  for  an  hour  and  half
through  7  ten  grain  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide
over  mercury  covered  with  a  little  red  cabbage
juice,  previoully  faturated  with  nitrous  oxide,
and  rendered  green  by  an  alkali.  After  the
procefs  the  gas  filled  a  fpaee  equal  to  rather
more  than  fix  meafures  and  half,  and  the  juice
was  become  of  a  pale  red.  The  gas  was  intro-
duced into  a  fmall  tube  filled  with  pure  water,
and  agitated  ;  no  abforption  was  perceptible  :
7  meafures  of  nitrous  gas  added  to  it  gave  red
fumes,  and  after  fix  minutes  a  diminution  to
g^  nearly.  6§  meafures  of  common  air  from
the  garden,  with  7  of  nitrous  gas,  gave  ex-
aflly  g.

In  this  experiment  it  was  evident  that  nitrous
oxide  was  converted  into  a  gas  analogous  to
atmofpheric  air,  at  the  fame  time  that  an  acid
was  formed.  There  could  be  little  doubt  but
that  this  was  the  nitrous  acid.  To  afcertain  it,
however,  with  greater  certainty,  the  electric
fpark  was  pafTed  through  6  meafures  of  nitrous
oxide,  over  a  little  folution  of  green  fulphate  of


(  263  )

iron,  confined  by  mercury.  As  the  procefs  went
on,  the  color  of  the  folution  became  rather
darker.  When  the  diminution  was  com-
plete, a  little  pruffiate  of  potafh  was  added
to  the  folution.  A  precipitate  of  pale  blue
pruffiate  of  potafli  was  produced.

c.  Nitrous  oxide  was  pafled  from  decompofing
nitrate  of  ammoniac,  through  a  porcelain  tube
well  glazed  infide  and  outfide,  ftrongly  ignited
in  an  air-furnace,  and  communicating  with  the
water  apparatus.  The  gas  colle(?led  was  ren-
dered opaque  by  denfe  red  vapor.  It  appeared
wholly  unabforbable  by  water.  After  the  pre-
cipitation of  its  vapor,  a  candle  burnt  in  it  with
nearly  the  fame  brilliancy  as  in  atmofpheric  £lir.
20  meafures  of  it  that  had  been  agitated  in
water  immediately  after  its  produ61ion,  min-
gled with  40  meafures  of  nitrous  gas,  diminiftied
to  about  47.5  ;  whereas  20  meafures  that  had
remained  unagitated  for  fome  time  after  their
generation,  introduced  to  the  fame  cjuafltity  of
nitrous  gas,  gave  nearly  49.  20  meafures  of
atmofpheric  air,  with  40  of  the  fame  nitrous  gas,
were  condenfed  to  46.


(  284  )

The  water  with  which  the  gas  had  been
in  contadl,  was  ftrongly  acid.  A  little  of  it
poured  into  a  foliition  of  green  fulphate  of  iron,
and  then  mingled  with  pruffian  alkali,  produced
a  green  precipitate.  Hence  the  acid  it  con-
tained was  evidently  nitrous.

That  no  fource  of  error  could  have  exifted
in  this  experiment  from  fiflure  in  the  tube,  I
proved,  by  fending  water  through  it  whilfi:
ignited,  after  the  procefs,  from  the  fame  retort
in  which  the  nitrate  of  ammoniac  had  been
decompofed  ;  a  few  globules  of  air  only  were
produced,  not  equal  to  one  tenth  of  the  volume
of  the  water  boiled,  and  which  were  doubtl'efs
previoufly  contained  in  it.

I  have  repeated  this  experiment  two  or  three
times,  with  fimilar  refults ;  whenever  the  air
was  agitated  in  water  immediately  after  its  pro-
dud  ion,  it  gave  almo/i  the  fame  diminution  with
nitrous  gas  as  common  air  ;  when,  on  the  con-
trary, it  has  been  fufFered  to  remain  for  fome  time
in  contadl  with  the  phlogifticated  nitrous  acid
fufpended  in  it,  the  condenfation  has  been  left


(  285  )

lrith  nitrous  gas  by  five  or  fix  hundred  parts.
Hence  I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  if  it  were
poffiblc  to  condenfe  all  the  nitrous  acid  formed,
immediately  after  its  generation,  fo  as  to  pre-
vent it  from  abforbing  oxygene  from  the  per-
rnanent  gas,  this  gas  would  be  found  identical
with  th^air  of  the  atmofphere.

The  changes  efFecied  by  fire  on  nitrous
oxi-de  are  not  analogous  to  thofe  produced  by
it  in  other  bodies  ;  for  the  power  of  this  agent
feems  generally  uniform,  either  in  wholly  fepa-
rating  the  conftituent  principles  of  bodies  from
each  other,  or  in  making  them  enter  into  more
intimate  union. ^

It  is  a  Angular  phaenomenon,  that  whilfi  it
candenfes  one  part  of  the  oxygene  and  nitrogenc
of  nitrous    oxide,    in  the  form  of  nitrous  acid  ;

^  On  the  one  hand,  it  decompofes  ammoniac  into  hydro-
gene  and  nitrogene,  whilH  on  the  other,  it  converts  free
oxygene  and  nitrogene  into  nitrous  acid.  It  lil^ewife  con-
verts nitrous  gas  into  nitrous  acid  and  nitrogene.  Till
we  are  more  accurately  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  heat,,
light,  and  ele6lricity,  we  iliall  probably  be  unable  to  ex-
plain thefe  phasnomena.


(  2^6  )

it  (houkl  caufe  the  remainder  to  expand,  in  the
ftate  of  atmofpheric  air.  Does  not  this  fa6l
afford  an  inference  in  favor  of  the  chemical  com-
pofition  of  atmofpheric  air  ?

III.  Deconipofiiion  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by
Hydrogens^  at  the  temperature  of  Ignition^ , .

In  the  following  experiments  on  the  decom-
pofition  of  nitrous  oxide  by  hydrogene,  the
gafes  were  carefully  generated  in  the  mercurial
apparatus,  and  their  purity  afcertained  by  the
tefts  mentioned  in  Refearch  I.  They  were
meafured  in  fmall  tubes  graduated  to  grains,
and  then  transferred  into  the  detonating  tube,
which  was  eight  tenths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,
and  graduated  to  ten  grain  meafures.

Thefpace  occupied  by  the  gafes  being  noted
after  the  inflammation  by  the  eleflric  fhock,
green  muriate  of  iron,  and  pruffiate  of  potafh,
were  fucceflively  introduced,  to  afcertain  if  any
nitrous  acid  had  been  formed.  The  abforption,
if  any  took  place,  was  marked>  and  the  gafes


{  287     )

transferred  into  a  narrow  grain  meafure  tube,
and  their  bulk  and  compofition  accurately  afcer-
tained.

b.  The  hydrogene  employed  was  procured  from
water  by  means  of  zinc  and  fulphuric  acid.  50
grain  meafuresofit  firedby  theeledlricfpark^  with
30  grain  meafures  of  oxygene  containing  one
eleventh  nitrogene,  gave  a  refiduum  of  about  4.
Nitrous  gas  mingled  with  thofe  4,  indicated  the
prefence  of  ratherlefs  than  1  of  unconfumed  oxy-
gene. In  another  experiment  23  of  it,  with  20  of
the  fan>€oxygeneleft  rather  morethan6re(iduum.

The  nitrous  oxide  was  apparently  pure,  for
it  left  a  remainder  of  about  ,05  only,  when  ab-
forbed  by  common  water.

c,  50  of  hydrogene  were  fired  with  40  of
nitrous  oxide  ;  the  concuffion  was  very  great,
and  the  light  given  out  bright  red  ;  no  percep-
tible quantity  of  nitrous  acid  was  formed  ;  the
refidual  gas  filled  a  fpace  equal  to  52.  No  part
of  it  was  abforbable  by  water,  it  gave  no  dimi-
nution with  nitrous  gas,  when  it  was  mingled
with  a  little  oxygene,  and  again  a6led  on  byihe


(  188  )

eledric  fpark,  an  inflammation  and  flight  dimi-
nution was  produced.

J,  33  of  hydrogen e  were  fired  with  35  of
nitrous  oxide :  nitrous  acid  was  produced  in
very  minute  quantity  ;  the  gas  that  remained
was  not  abforbable  by  water,  and  filled  a  fpace
equal  to  37  grains.  Nitrous  gas  mingled  with
thefe,  underwent  a  very  flight  diminution.

e.  46  hydrogene  were  fired  with  46  nitrous
oxide.  The  quantity  of  nitrous  acid  formed
was  jufl  fufiicient  to  tinge  the  white  prufRate
of  potafh.  The  gafes  filled  a  fpace  equal  to  49,-
gave  no  perceptible  diminution  with  nitrous
gas,  and  did  not  inflame  with  oxygene.

./.  40  hydrogene  were  fired  with  39  nitrous^
oxide  ;  no  perceptible  quantity  of  nitrous  acid
was  formed.  The  refidual  gas  filled  a  fpace
equal  to  41  ;  was  unabforbable  by  water,  un-
derwent no  diminution  when  mingled  with
nitrous  gas  ;  or  when  acSled  on  by  the  eledric
fpark  in  conta6l  with  oxygene.

g.  20  hydrogene  were  fired  with  64  nitrousr
oxide ;  after  detonation  the   expanfion  of  the^


(  289  )

gafcs  was  greater  in  this  experiment  than
any  of  the  preceding  ones  ;  denfe  white
fumes  were  obferved  in  the  cylinder,  and
a  flow  contra6lion  of  volume  took  place.
After  a  little  green  muriate  of  iron  had  been
admitted,  the  gales  filled  a  fpace  equal  to
T:^  :  pruffiate  of  potafh  mingled  with  the  mu-
riate, gave  a  deeper  blue  than  in  any  of  the
preceding  experiments.  The  refidual  gas  was
unabforbable  by  water:  65  of  it,  mingled  with
65  of  nitrous  gas,  diminifhed  to  93  ;  whilft  65
of  common  air,  with  65  of  nitrous  gas,  gave
84.

h,  8  of  hydrogenc  were  fired  with  54  of
nitrous  oxide  ;  the  fame  phaenomena  as  were
obferved  in  the  lafi:  experiment  took  place ;
nitrous  acid  was  formed ;  after  the  abforption  of
which  the  refidual  gas  filled  a  fpace  equal  to
bb,  50  of  this,  with  an  equal  quantity  of
nitrous  gas,  diminifhed  to  76.  In  thefe  pro-
ceffes  the  temperatures  were  from  56^  to  61°.

Thefe  experiments  are  feled^ed  as  the  moil
accurate  of  nearly  fifty,  made  on  the  infiamma-


(  290  )

ftion  of  different  quantities  of  nitrous  oxide  and
hydrogene.

As  Mr.  Keir  found  muriatic  acid  in  the  fluid,
produced  by  the  inflammation  of  oxygene  and
hydrogene  in  clofed  vefl^els,  in  Dr.  Priefttey*s
experiments,  I  preferved  the  refidual  gas  of
about  3  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide,  that  had
been  detonated  at  different  times  with  lefs  than
a  cubic  inch  and  half  of  hydrogene  ;  but  folu-
tion  of  nitrate  of  filver  was  not  clouded
when  agitated  in  this  gas,  nor  when  intro-
duced into  the  detonating  tube  in  which  the
inflammation  had  been  made.

From  thefe  experiments  we  learn  that  nitrous
oxide  is  decompofable  at  the  heat  of  ignition,
by  hydrogene,  in  a  variety  of  proportions.

When  the  quantity  of  hydrogene  very  little
exceeds  that  of  the  nitrous  oxide,  both  of  the
gafes  difappear,  water  is  produced,  no  nitrous
acid  is  formed,  and  the  volume  of  nitrogene  evol-
ved is  rather  greater  than  that  of  the  nitrous  ox-
ide decompofed.

When  the  quantity  of  hydrogene  is  lefs  than


i


(  291    )

that  of  the  nitrous  oxide,  water,  nitrous  acid,
oxygene  and  nitrogene,  are  generated  in  dif-
ferent proportions ;  one  part  of  the  nitrous
oxide  is  mofl:  probably  wholly  decompofed  by
the  hydrogene,  and  the  other  part  converted
into  nitrous  acid  and  atmofpheric  air,  in  confe-
quence  of  the  ignition.

From  experiments  c^  d,  and  e,  the  compofi-
tion  of  nitrous  oxide  may  be  deduced.  In
experiment  d,  39  of  nitrous  oxide  were  decom-
pofed by  40  of  hydrogene,  and  converted  into
41  of  nitrogene.

Now  from  b  it  appears  that  40  of  hydrogene
require  for  their  condenlation  about  20.8  of
oxygene  in  volume  ;  fo  that  founding  the  efli-
mation  upon  the  quantity  of  hydrogene  con-
fumed,  100  parts  of  nitrous  oxide  would  con-
lift  nearly  of  03.1  of  nitrogene,  and  36.9  of
oxygene.  But  4]  of  nitrogene  weigh  12.4,
Ref.  T.  Div.  I.  Confequently,  deducing  the  com-
pofition  of  nitrous  oxide  from  the  quantity  of
nitrogene  evolved,  100  parts  of  it  would  c.onfi ft
of  63.5  nitrogene,  and  36.5  oxygene.


(   202   )

Tliefe  eftimations  are  very  little  differer>t
from  thofe  which  may  be  deduced  from  the
other  experim-ents,  and  the  coincidence  is  in
favor  of  their  accuracy.

From  the  following  experiment  it  appears  that
the  temperature  required  for  the  decompofition
of  nitrous  oxide  by  hydrogcne  muft  be  higher
than  that  which  is  neceflary  to  produce  the  in-
flammation of  hydrogcne  with  oxygene.  I  in-
troduced into  fmall  tubes  filled  with  equal  parts
of  nitrous  oxide  and  hydrogcne,  {landing  on  a
furface  of  mercury,  iron  wires  ignited  to  difi^erent
degrees,  from  the  dull  red  to  the  vivid  white
heat.  The  gafes  were  always  inflamed  by  the
white  and  vivid  red  heats ;  but  never  by  the
dull  red  heat,  though  the  laft  uniformly  inflamed
mixtures  of  oxygene  and  hydrogcne,  and  at-
niofpheric  air  and  hydrogcne.

Dr.  Prieftley  *  firft  detonated  together  nitrous
oxide  and  hydrogcne  ;  his  experiment  was
repeated  by  the  Dutch  chemifts,  who  found
that  when  a  fmall   quantity  of  hydrogcne  was

*Vol.  ii,  pag.  83.


(  293  )

smployed,  the  nitrous  oxide  was  partially  con-
verted into  a  gas  analogous  to  common  air.
Their  eftimation  of  its  compofition,  which  is
not  far  removed  from  the  truth,  was  founded
on  this  phaenomenon.^

IV.  Decompojition  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by  Phof-
phorus.

a.  Phofphorus  introduced  into  pure  nitrous
oxide  at  common  temperatures,  is  not  at  all
luminous.  It  is  capable  of  being  fufed,  and
even  fublimed  in  it,  without  undergoing  acidifi-
cation, and  without  effefling  any  alteration  in
itscompofition.

About  2  grains  of  phofphorus  were  fufed,  and
gradually  fublimed,  in  2  cubic  inches  of  pure
nitrous  oxide,   over  mercury,  by  the  heat  of  a


*  Journal  de  Phylique,  torn,  xliii.  part  2,  pag.  331.
They  fuppofed  it  to  confift  of  about  37,5  oxygene,  and
62,5  nitrogene.  The  nearnefs  of  this  account  to  the  truth
is  iingular,  when  we  confider  that  they  were  neither  ac-
quainted with  the  fpecific  gravity  of  nitrous  oxide,  nor
with  the  production  of  nitrous  acid  in  this  experiment.


(  ^9^  )

burning  lens.  No  alteration  was  produced  in
the  volume  of  gas,  and  a  portion  of  it  abforbed
by  water,  left  a  reliduum  of  one  tyvelfth  only.

Phofphorus  was  fublimed  in  pure  nitrous
oxide  over  mercury,  in  a  dark  room,  by  an
iron  heated  nearly  to  ignition  ;  but  no  luminous
appearance  was  perceptible,  nor  was  any  gas
decompofed.

b.  Phofphorus  decompofes  nitrous  oxide  at
the  temperature  of  ignition,  with  greater  or  lefs
rapidity,  according  to  the  degree  of  heat.  We
have  already  feen,  that  when  phofphorus  in  aflive
inflammation  is  introduced  into  nitrous  oxide,  it
burns  with  intenfely  vivid  light.

Phofphorus  was  fublimed  by  a  heated  wire  in
ajar  filled  with  nitrous  oxide,  {landing  over  warm
mercury.  In  this  ftate  of  fublimation  an  iron
heated  dull  red  was  introduced  to  it  by  being
rapidly  paflied  through  the  mercury ;  a  light
blue  flanie  furrounded  the  wire,  and  difappeared
as  foon  as  it  ceafed  to  be  red.

To  phofphorus  fublimed  as  before,  in  nitrous
oxide,  over  warm  mercury,  a  thick  wire  ignited


(  295  )

to  whltenefs  was  introduced  ;  a  terrible  detona-
tion took  place,  and  the  jar  was  fhattered  in
pieces.

By  employing  thick  conical  jars,*  containing
only  a  fmall  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide,  I  efFedled
the  detonation  feveral  times  with  fafety  ;  but
on  account  of  the  great  expanfion  of  the  elaftio
produ6ls,  the  jar  was  generally  either  raifed
from  the  mercury,  or  portions  of  gas  were
thrown  out  of  it.  Hence  I  was  unable  to  afcer-
tain  the  exatft  changes  produced  by  this  mode
of  decompofition.

c.  As  my  firft  attempts  to  afcertain  the  confti-
tution  of  nitrous  oxide  were  made  on  its  decom-
pofition by  phofphorus,  I  employed  many  dif-


*  Experiments  on  the  detonatio.u  of  nitrous  oxide  with
phofphorus  in  this  way  require  great  attention.  The  deto-
nating jar  fhould  be  very  conical  3  the  nitrous  oxide  em-
ployed fhould  never  equal  more  than  one  eighth  of  the
capacity  of  the  jar.  The  wire  for  the  inflammation  muft
be  very  thick,  and  curved  fo  as  to  be  ealily  introduced  into
the  jar.  When  ignited,  it  muft  be  inflantaneoufly  pafled
through   the   heated   mercury  into  the  jar.

Perhaps  the  eledric  fpark  might  be  advantageoully  ap-
plied for  detonating  phofphoric  vapor  with  nitrous  oxide.


(296)

fcrent  modes  of  partially  igniting  this  Aibftance
in  it  over  mercury,  fo  as  to  produce  a  com-
buftion  without  explofion.

The  firft  method  adopted  was  inflammation
by  means  of  oxygenated  muriate  of  potafh.  A
fmall  particle  of  oxygenated  muriate  of  potafli
was  infcrted  into  the  phofphorus  to  be  burnt.
On  the  application  of  a  wire,  moderately  hot,
to  the  point  of  infertion,  the  fait  was  decom-
pofed  by  the  phofphorus,  and  lufficient  fire
generated  and  partially  applied  by  the  flight
explofion,  to  produce  the  combuftion  of  the
phofphorus,  without  the  previous  fublimation
of  any  part  of  it.

The  fecond  way  employed  was  the  ignition
of  a  part  of  the  phofphorus,  by  means  of  the
combuftion  of  a  fmall  portion  of  tinder  of  cot-
ton,* or  paper,  in  contadl  with  it,  by  the
burning  glafs.

The  third,  and  moft  fuccefsful  mode,  was
by  introducing  into  the  graduated  jar  containing

*  It  will  be  feen  hereafter  that  thefe  bodies  are  eafily
inflamed  in  nitrous  oxide*


(  ^97  )

the  nitrous  oxide,  the  phofphorus  in  a  fmall
tube  containing  oxygene,  fo  balanced  as  to
fwim  on  the  lurface  of  the  mercury,  without
communicating  with  the  nitrous  oxide.  The
phofphorus  was  fired  in  the  oxygene  with  an
ignited  iron  wire,  by  which  at  the  moment  of
combuftion,  the  tube  containing  it  was  raifed
into  the  nitrous  oxide,  and  thus  the  inflamma-
tion continued.

d.  In  different  experiments,  made  with  accu-
racyjifoundthatthewholeofaquantity  of  nitrous
oxide  was  never  decompofable  by  ignited  phof-
phorus ;  the  combuftion  always  flopped  when
the  nitrous  oxide  remaining  was  to  the  nitro-
gene  evolved  as  about  1  to  5  ;  likewife  that  the
volume  of  nitrogene  produced  was  rather  lefs
than  that  of  the  nitrous  oxide  decompofed,  and
that  this  deficiency  arofe  from  the  formation  of
nitrous  acid  by  the  intenfe  ignition  produced
during  the  procefs.

Of  one  experiment  I  fhall  give  a  detail.

Temperature    being   48°,  two  cubic  inches
of  pure  nitrous  oxide,  which  had  been  generated


(  298  >

over  mercury,  were  introduced  into  ajar  of  the
capacity  of  9  cubic  inches,  graduated  to,l  cubic
inches,  and  much  enlarged  at  the  bafe.  A  grain
of  phofphorus  was  inferted  into  a  fmall  veflel
about  one  third  of  an  inch  long,  and  half  an
inch  in  diameter,  containing  about  15  grain
xneafures  of  very  pure  oxygene  ;  this  veflel,
which  fwam  on  the  furface  of  the  mercury,  was
carefully  introduced  into  the  jar  containing  thq
nitrous  oxide.  The  phofphorus  was  fired  by
means  of  a  heated  wire,  and  before  the  oxygene
was  wholly  confumed,  the  vefTel  containing  it
elevated  into  the  nitrous  oxide.  The  com-
buftion  was  extremely  vivid  and  rapid.  After
the  atmofpheric  temperature  was  reftored,  the
gas  was  rendered  opaque  by  denfe  white  vapor.
When  this  had  been  precipitated,  and  the  fmall
vefTel  removed  from  the  jar,  the  gas  filled  a
fpace  nearly  equal  to  l.Q  cubic  inches.  On
introducing  to  it  a  little  folution  of  green  mu-
riate of  iron,  and  pruffiate  of  potafh,  green
pruffiate  of  iron  was  produced  :  hence,  evi-
dently, nitrous  acid  had  been  formed.


(  299  )

On  the  admiffion  of  pure  water,  an  abforp-
tion  of  rather  more  than  ,3  took  place.

The  16  meafures  reniaining  underwent  no
perceptible  diminution  with  nitrous  gas  ;  the
taper  plunged  into  them  was  inftantly  extin-
guifhed.

To  afcertain  if  the  phofphoric  acid  produced
in  the  experiments  made  under  mercury  did
not  in  fome  meafure  prevent  the  decompofition
of  the  whole  of  the  nitrous  oxide  by  the  phof-
phorus,  I  introduced  into  a  mixture  of  5  nitro-
gene  and  1  nitrous  oxide,  ignited  phofphorus  :
but  it  was  immediately  extingui(hed.*

The  Dutch  Chemifts  found  that  phofphorus
might  be  fufed  in  nitrous  oxide  without  being
luminous.  They  aflert  that  phofphorus  in  a
Hate  of  inflammation,  introduced  into  this  gas,
was  immediately  extinguifhed  ;  though  when
taken  out  into  the  atmofphere,  it  again  burnt
of  its  own  accord.-f-  It  is  difficult  to  account
for  their  miftake.

*  Phofphorus  burnt  feebly  with  a  white  flame  in  a  iiiix*
ture  of  4  nitrogene  and  1  nitrous  oxide.

t  Journal  de  Phyfique,  xliii.  328,


(  300  )

V,  Decompofition  of  Nitrons  Oxide  hy  Flof-
phorated  Hydrogene,

a.  It  has  been  mentioned  in  Ref.  II.  Div.  I.
that  phofphorated  hydrogene  and  nitrous  oxide
pofTefs  no  aflion  on  each  other,  at  atmofpheric
temperatures.

Phofphorated  hydrogene  mingled  with  ni-
trous oxide,  is  capable  of  being  inflamed  by  the
eledlric  fpark,  or  by  ignition.

h.E,  1.  10  grain  meafures  of  phofphorated  hy-
drogene, carefully  produced  by  means  of  phofpho-
rus  and  folution  of  cauftic  alkali,  were  mingled
with  52  meafures  of  nitrous  oxide.  The  eledlric
fpark  pafled  through  them,  produced  a  vivid
inflammation.  The  elaftic  produdls  were
clouded  with  denfe  white  vapor,  and  after  fome
minutes  filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  6o.  On
the  introdudlion  of  water,  no  abforption  took
place.  When  43  of  nitrous  gas  were  admitted,
the  whole  diminifhed  to  70.

jE.  2.  25  of  nitrous  oxide  were  fired  with  10


(  301   >

of  phofphorated  hydrogene,  by  the  ele6\ric
fpark.  After  detonation=^  they  filled  a  fpace
exadlly  equal  to  25.  On  the  admiffion  of
Solution  of  green  fulphate  of  iron,  and  pruffiate
of  potafli,  no  blue  or  green  precipitate  was  pro-
duced. On  the  introdudlion  of  water,  no  dimi-
nution was  perceived.-  25  of  nitrous  gas  ming-
led with  them,  gave  exadlly  50.

JS.  3.   10  of  nitrous  oxide,  mingled  with  20  of
phofphorated  hydrogene,  could  not  be  inflamed.

25  of  nitrous  oxide,  with  20  phofphorated
hydrogene,  inflamed.  The  gas  afler  detonation,
was  rendered  opaque  by  denfe  white  vapor,  and
filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  45.  No  abforption
took  place  when  water  was  introduced.  On
admitting  a  little  oxygene  no  white  fumes,  or
diminution,  was  perceived.  The  eledlric  fpark
paflfed  through  the  mixture,  produced  an  ex*,
plofion,   with  great  diminution.

c.  From  E.  1  it  appears,  that  when  a  fmall  quan-
tity of  phofphorated  hydrogene  is  inflamed  with

*  In  this  experiment,  as  in  the  laft,   denfe  white  vapor
was  produced.


(  302  )

nitrous  oxide,  both  the  phofphorus  and  hydro-
gene  are  confumed  ;  wbilft  the  fuperabundant
nitrous  oxide,  is  converted  into  nitrous  acid  and
atmofpheric  air,  by  the  ignition  ;  or  a  certain
quantity  is  partially  decompofed  into  atmofpheric
airby  the  combination  of  a  portion  of  its  oxygene
with  the  combuflible  gas.

From  E.Qj  we  learn,  that  when  the  phofphorated
hydrogene  and  nitrous  oxide  are  to  each  other
as  25  to  JO  nearly,  they  both  difappear,  whilft
nitrogene  is  evolved,  and  water  and  phofphoric
acid  produced.  Reafoning  concerning  the
compofition  of  nitrous  oxide  from  this  experi-
ment, we  fhould  conclude  that  it  was  compofed
of  about  38  oxygene,  and  62  nitrogene.

The  refult  of  £.  3  is  interefting ;  we  are  taught
from  it  that  the  affinity  of  phofphorus  for  the
oxygene  of  nitrous  oxide  is  ilronger  than  that
of  hydrogene,  at  the  temperature  of  ignition  ;
fo  that  when  phofphorated  hydrogene  is  min-
gled with  a  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide,  not  con-
taining fufficient  oxygene  to  burn  both  its  con-
flituent  parts,  the  phofphorus  only  is  confumed,
whilft  the  hydrogene  is  liberated.


(  30*3  )

In  repeating  the  experiments  with  phofpho-
rated  hydrogene  that  had  remained  for  fome
hours  in  the  mercurial  apparatus^  I  did  not  gain
cxadly  the  fame  refults  ;  for  a  larger  quantity
of  it  was  required  to  decompofe  the  nitrous
oxide,  than  in  the  former  experiments ;  doubt-
lefs  from  its  having  depofited  a  portion  of  its
phofphorus.  They  confirm,  however,  the
above  mentioned  conclulions.

In  the  courfe  of  experimenting,  I  pafled  the
elecSlric  fpark,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  through
about  60  meafures  of  phofphorated  hydrogene.
It  underwent  no  alteration  of  volume.  Phof-
phorus was  apparently  precipitated  from  it,  and
it  ihad  wholly  loft  its  power  of  inflaming,  in
contadl  with  common  air.

VI.  Decompojition  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by  Sul*
fhur.

From    the   phasnomena  before  mentioned,*
*  Ref.  I.  Div.  III.  S.  II.


(  304  )

relating  to  the  combuftion  of  fulphur  in  nitrous
oxide,  it  was  evident  that  this  gas  was  only  de-
compofable  by  it,  at  a  much  higher  temperature
than  common  air.

I  introduced  into  fulphur  in  contadl  with
nitrous  oxide,  over  mercury  heated  to  ]  12® —
114°,  a  wire  intenfely  ignited.  It  loft  much
of  its  heat  in  paffing  through  the  mercury,  but
ftill  appeared  red  in  the  vefTel.  The  fulphur
rapidly  fufed,  and  fublimed  without  being  at
all  luminous.  This  experiment  was  repeated
five  or  fix  times,  but  in  no  inftance  could  the
combuftion  of  fulphur,  by  means  of  the  ignited
wire,  be  cff^edled.

I  inflamed  fulphur  in  nitrous  oxide  in  the
fame  manner  as  phofphorus  ;  namely,  by  intro-
ducing it  into  the  fmall  vefTel  filled  with  oxy-
gene,  and  igniting  it  by  means  of  the  heated
wire.  In  thefe  experiments  the  fulphur  burnt
with  a  vivid  rofe-colored  light,  and  much  ful-
phuric,  with  a  little  fulphureous  acid,  was  formed.

Experimenting  in  this  way  I  was  never,  how-
ever, able  to   decompofe  more  than  one  third


(  305  )

of  the  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide  employed;
not  only  the  nitrogene  evolved,  but  likewife  the
fulphuric  and  fulphureous  acids  produced^  flop-
ping the  combuftion.

I  found  that  fulphur  in  a  Hate  of  vivid  in-
flammation, when  introduced  into  a  mixture  of
one  fourth  nitrogene,  and  three  fourths  nitrous
oxide,  burnt  with  a  flame  very  much  enlarged,
and  of  a  vivid  rofe  color.  In  one  third  nitro-
gene, and  two  thirds  nitrous  oxide,  it  burnt
feebly  with  a  yellow  flame.  In  equal  parts  of
nitrous  oxide  and  nitrogene,  it  was  inftantly
extinguiflied.

Sulphur  burnt  feebly,  with  a  light  yellow
flame,  when  introduced  ignited  into  a  mixture
of  5  nitrous  gas,  and  6  nitrous  oxide.  In  one
third  nitrous  oxide,  and  two  thirds  nitrous  gas,
it  was  inftantly  extinguiflied.  From  many
circumftances,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  ful-
phur is  incapable,  at  any  temperature,  of  flowly
decompofing  nitrous  oxide,  fo  as  tp  burn  in  it
with  a  blue  flame,  forming  fulphureous  acid
alone.  It  appears  to  attradt  oxyg^ne  from  it
u


(   306   )

only  when  intenfely  ignited,  fo  as  to  form
chiefly  fulphuiic  acid,  and  that  with  great
rapidity,  and  vivid  inflammation.

VII.  Decompqfition  of  Nitrous  Oxide  hy  Szd-
phurated  Hydrogene.

a.  Though  nitrous  oxide  and  fulphurated
hydrogene  do  not  adl  upoii  each  other  at  com-
mon temperatures,  yet  they  undergo  a  mutual
decompofition  when  mingled  together  in  certain
proportions,  and  ignited  by  the  elediric  fpark.

From  more  than  twenty  experiments  made
on  the  inflammation  of  fulphurated  hydrogene
in  nitrous  oxide,  I  fele6l  the  following  as  the
moft  conclufivc  and  accurate.  The  temperature
at  which  they  were  made  was  from  4P  to  49°.

I.  E,  \,  About  35  meafures  of  nitrous
oxide  were  fired  with  10  of  fulphurated  hydro-
gene ;  the  expanfion  during  inflammation  was
very  great,  and  the  flame  flcy-blue.  Imme-
diately after,  the  gafes  filled  a  fpace  equal  to
48  nearly.  White  fumes  were  then  formed,
and  they  gradually  contrac5led  to  40.     On  the


(   307   )

admiffion  of  a  little  flrontian  lime  water,  a  flight
abforption  took  place,  with  white  precipitation  ;
and  the  volunne  occupied  by  tlie  refidual  gas
nearly  equalled  37-  On  admitting  nitrous  gas
to  thefe^  no  perceptible  diminution  took  place.
E.  2.  20  fulphurated  hydrogene,  with  25
nitrous  oxide,  could  not  be  inflamed.

30  nitrous  oxide,  with  22  fulphurated  hydro-
gene,  could  not  be  inflamed.

35  nitrous  oxide,  with  20  fulphurated  hydro-
gene,  inflamed  with  vivid  blue  light,  and  great
expanfion.  After  the  explofion,  the  g^fes  filled
exadly  the  fame  fpace  as  before  the  experiment;
no  white  fumes  were  perceived,  and  no  farther
contradion  occurred.  On  the  addition  of
llrontian  lime  water,  a  copious  precipitation,
with  diminution,  took  place ;  and  the  refldual
gas  filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  35^.

E.  3.  47  nitrous  oxide,  and  14  fulphurated
hydrogene,  inflamed.  After  the  explofion,  the
gafes  filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  65 ;  then  white
fumes  formed,  and  they  gradually  diminiflied
to  52.    On  the  introdu<5lion  of  muriate  of  ftron-


(   308  )

tian,  a  copious  white  precipitate  was  produced' ;
and  on  the  addition  of  water,  no  further  ab-
forption  took  place.  To  the  refidual  52,  about
20  of  nitrous  gas  were  added  ;  they  filled  toge-
ther a  fpace  equal  to  about  67.

c.  In  none  of  the  experiments  made  on  the
inflammation  of  fulphurated  hydrogene  and
nitrous  oxide,  could  I  afcertain  with  certainty
the  precipitation  of  fulphur.  In  one  or  two
proceiTes  the  detonating  tube  wSs  rendered  a
little  white  at  the  points  of  contaft  with  the
mercury  ;  but  this  was  moft  probably  owing  to
the  oxydation  of  the  mercury,  either  by  the
heated  fulphuric  acid  formed,  or  from  nitrous
acid  produced  by  the  ignition*  The  prefence
of  nitrous  acid  I  could  not  afcertain  in  thefe  pro-
cefles  by  my  ufual  tefts,  becaufe  the  combuftion
of  fulphur  over  white  pruffiate  of  iron,  converts
it  into  light  green.

When  I  introduced  an  inflamed  taper  into
about  3  parts  of  fulphurated  hydrogene,  and  2
parts  of  nitrous  oxide,  in  which  proportions
they    could    not    have    been    fired    by    th«


(  309  )

dedlric  fpark,  a  blue  flame  pafled  through  them,
and  much  fulphur  was  depofitcd  on  the  fides  of
the  vefiel.  But  this  fulphur  moft  probably  owed
its  formation  to  the  decompofition  of  a  portion  of
fulphurated  hydrogene  not  burnt,  by  the  ful-
phureous  acid  formed  from  the  combuftion  of
the  other  portion.

We  may  then  conclude  with  probability,  that
fulphurated  hydrogene  and  nitrous  oxide  will  not
decompbfe  each  other,  when  a6led  on  by  the  elec-
tric fpark,  unlefs  their  proportions  are  fuch  as  to
enable  the  whole  of  the  fulphurated  hydrogene
to  be  decompofed,  fo  that  both  of  its  conftituents
may  become  oxygenated,  by  attracting  oxygene
from  the  nitrous  oxide  :  likewife,  that  when  the
fulphurated  hydrogene  is  at  its  maximum
of  inflammation,  the  hydrogene  and  fulphur
form  with  the  whole  of  the  oxygene  of  nitrous
oxide,  water  and  fulphureous  acid ;  E,2:  whercr-
as  at  its  minimum  they  produce  water,  and
c]\\Qfiy,  perhaps  wholly,  fulphuric  acid  ;  at  the
fame  time  that  the  nitrous  oxide  partially  de-
compofed,   is  converted  into  nitrogene,   and  3


(   310)

gas  analogous  to  atmofpheric  air,  or  into  nitro-
gene,  nitrous  acid,  and  atmofpheric  air.  E,  1.
E.  3.

By  purfuing  thofe  experiments,  and ufing larger
Quantities  of  gas,  we  may  probably  be  able  to
afcertain  from  them  with  accuracy,  the  com-
pofition  of  fulphuric  and  fulphureous  acids.

I  own  I  was  difappointed  in  the  refults,  for  I
expelled  to  have  been  able  to  afcertain  from
ihem,  the  relative  affinities  of  fulphur,  and
hydrogene  for  the  oxygene  of  nitrous  oxide,
at  the  temperature  of  ignition.  I  conjedlured
that  nitrous  oxide,  mingled  with  excefs  of  ful-
phurated  hydrogene,  would  have  been  decom-
pofed,  and  one  of  the  principles  of  it  evolved
unaltered,  as  was  the  cafe  with  phofphorated
hydrogene.

If  we  eftimate  the  compofition  of  nitrous
oxide  from  the  quantity  of  nitrogene  produced  in
E.  2,  it  is  compofed  of  about  6l  nitrogene,  and
*39  oxygene.


(  311   )

VIII.  Decompofttion  of  Nitrous  Oxide  Ij
Charcoal,

An  account  of  the  analyfis  of  nitrous  oxide
by  charcoal  is  given  in  Ref.  I.  Div.  III.  1  have
lately  made  two  experiments  on  thecombuftion
of  charcoal  in  nitrous  oxide,  in  which  every
precaution  was  taken  to  prevent  the  exiflence  of
fources  of  error.  Of  one  of  thefe  I  Ihall  give
a  detail.

Eji  Temperature  being  5 1°^  about  a  grain  of
charcoal,  which  had  been  expofed  for  fome
hours  to  a  red  heat,  was  introduced  whilft
ignited,  under  mercury,  and  transferred  into  a
graduated  jar,  containing  3  cubic  inches  of  pure
nitrous  oxide,    ftanding  over  dry  mercury.

The  focus  of  a  burning  lens  was  thrown  on
the  charcoal ;  it  inflantly  inflamed,  and  burnt
with  great  vividnefs  for  near  a  minute,  the  gas
being  much  expanded.  The  focus  was  con-
tinually applied  to  it  for  ten  minutes,  when  the
procefs  appeared  at  an  end.  The  gafes,  when
the  common  temperature   and  prefTure  were


(  312  )

reftored,    filled   a  fpace  equal  to   4/2    cubic
inches.

On  introducing  into  them  a  few  grain  mea-
fures  of  folution  of  green  muriate  of  iron,  for
the  double  purpofe  of  faturating  them  with
moifture,  and  afcertaining  if  any  nitrous  acid
had  been  formed,  no  change  of  volume  took
place ;  and  pruffiate  of  potafh  gave  with  the
muriate  a  white  precipitate  only.

On  the  admiffion  of  a  fmall  quantity  of  con-
centrated folution  of  cauftic  potafh,  a  diminu-
tion of  the  gas  Hovvly  took  place  ;  when  it  was
complete  the  volume  equalled  about  3.05  cubic
inches.  By  agitation  in  well  boiled  water,
about  ,9  of  thefe  were  abforbed  ;  the  remainder
appeared  to  be  pure  nitrogene.

The  difference  between  the  eflimation  founded
upon  the  nitrogene  evolved,  and  that  deduced
from  the  carbonic  acid  generated  in  this  experi-
ment, is  not  nearly  fo  great  as  in  that  Ref.  I.
Div.  III.  Taking  about  the  mean  proportions,
we  fhould  conclude  that  nitrous  oxide  wascom-
pofed  of  about  38  oxygene,  and  62  nitrogene.


(  313  )

Charcoal  burnt  with  greater  vivldnefs  than  in
common  air,  in  a  mixture  of  one  third  nitrogene
and  two  thirds  nitrous  oxide.  In  equal  parts  of
nitrous  oxide  and  nitrogene,  its  light  was  barely
perceptible.  In  one  third  nitrous  oxide,  and
two  thirds  nitrogene,  it  was  almoft  imm,ediately
extinguiflied.

As  charcoal  burns  vividly  in  nitrous  gas,
when  it  has  been  previoufly  ignited  to  white-
nefs,  I  introduced  it  into  a  mixture  of  equal
parts  of  nitrous  oxide  and  nitrous  gas  ;  it  burnt
with  a  deep  and  bright  red.


IX.      Decompojition    of    Nitrous    Oxide   hy
Vo-carhonate,


Nitrous  oxide,  and  hydro-carbonate,  pofTefs
no  action  on  each  other,  except  at  high  tem-
peratures. When  mingled  in  certain  propor-
tions, and  expofed  to  the  eledlric  (hock,  a  new
arrangement  of  their  principles  takes  place.

E.  1.  Temperature  being  53^,  35  of
nitrous   oxide,    mingled    with     15    of   hydro-


(314)

carbonate,  were  fired  by  the  electric  Ipark ;
the  inflammation  was  very  vivid,  and  the
light  produced,  bright  red.  After  the
exploflon,  the  fpace  occupied  by  the  gafes
equalled  about  6o.  On  the  admiflion  of  folu-
tion  of  ftrontian,  a  copious  white  precipitate
was  produced,  and  the  gas  diminifhed  by  agita-
tion, to  rather  moi:e  than  35.  When  36  of
nitrous  gas  were  added  to  thefe,  white  fumes
appeared  and  the  whole  diminifhed  to  62.
When  a  little  muriatic  acid  was  poured  on  the
w^hite  precipitate  from  the  folution  of  ftrontian,
gas  was  evolved  from  it,  and  it  was  gradually
diflblved.

E,  2.  22  nitrous  oxide  were  inflamed  with
20  hydro-carbonate  ;  after  the  explofion,  they
filled  a  fpace  equal  to  45  ;  when  ftrontian  lime
water  was  introducied,  white  precipitation  took
place,  and  the  diminution  was  to  31.

To  thefe  31,  14  of  nitrous  oxide  were  ad-
mitted, and  the  electric  fpark  pafled  through
them ;  an  inflammation  took  place  :  carbonic
acid  was  'formed,  after  the  abforption  of  which,


(  315   )

the  gas  remaining  filled  a  fpace  equal  to  43,  and
did  not  diminifh  with  nitrous  gas.

The  hydro- carbonate  employed  in  thefe  ex-
periments, was  procured  from  alcohol  by  me^ns
of  fulphuric  acid.  In  another  fet  of  experi-
ments made  with  lefs  accuracy,  the  fame  general
refults  were  obtained.  Whenever  hydro-car-
bonate inflamed  with  nitrous  oxide,  both  its
conllituents  were  oxygenated  ;  in  all  cafes  car-
bonic acid  was  formed,  and  in  no  inftance  free
hydrogene  evolved,  or  charcoal  precipitated.

In  the  decornpofition  of  nitrous  oxide  by  hy-
dro-carbonate, the  refidual  nitrogenc  is  lefs
than  in  in  other  combuftions.  This  circura-
ftance  I  am  unable  to  explain.

Reafoning  from  analogy,  there  can  be  little
doubt,  but  that  when  hydro-carbonate  is  in-
flamed with  excefs  of  nitrous  oxide,  it  will  be
only  partially  decompounded,  or  converted  into
nitrogenc,  nitrous  acid,  and  atmofpheric  air.

The  Dutch  Chemifts  have  aflerted,  that  char-
coal does  not  burn  in  nitrous  oxide,  except  in
confequence  of  the  previous  decornpofition  of


HiiMI


.      (316)

the  gas  by  the  hydrogenealways  contained  in  this
fubftance ;  and  likewife,  that  when  hydro-car-
bonate and  nitrous  oxide  were  mingled  together,
and  fired  by  the  eleflric  fpark,  the  hydrogene  only
was  burnt,  whilfl  the  charcoal  was  precipitated.
It  is  difficult  to  account  for  thefe  numerous
miftakes.  Their  theory  of  the  non-refpir ability
of  nitrous  oxide  was  founded  upon  them.  They
fuppofed  that  the  chief  ufe  of  refpiration  was
to  deprive  the  blood  of  its  fuperabundant  car-
bon, by  the  combination  of  atmofpheric  oxy-
gene  with  that  principle;  and  that  nitrous  oxide
was  highly  fatal  to  life,  becaufe  it  was  incapable
of  de-carbonatingthe  blood^  !  !

X.      Combujiion  of  Iron  in  Nitrous  .  Oxide.

I  introduced  into  ajar  of  tlje  capacity  of  20
cubic  inches,  containing  11  cubic  inches  of
nitrous  oxide,  over  mercury,  a  fmall  quantity
of  fine  iron  wire  twifted  together,   and   having

*  Journal  dc  Phylique^   xliii.  334..


(317  )

affixed  to  it  a  particle  of  cork.  On  throwing
the  focus  of  a  burning  glafs  on  the  corkf  it
inftantly  inflamed,  and  the  fire  was  communi-
cated to  the  wire,  which  burnt  with  great
vividnefs  for  feme  moments,  projedling  bril-
liant white  fparks.  After  it  had  ceafed  to  burn
the  gas  was  increafed  in  volume  rather  more
than  three  tenths  of  an  inch.  The  nitrous  acid
tefts  were  introduced,  but  no  acid  appeared  to
have  been  formed.  On  expofing  the  gas  to
water,  near  4,*2  cubic  inches  were  abforbed  :  the
7,1  remaining  appeared  to  be  pure  nitrogene.

From  this  experiment  it  is  evident  that  iron
at  the  temperature  of  ignition,  is  capable  of
decompoiing  nitrous  oxide  ;  likewife  that  it  is
incapable  of  burning  in  it  when  it  contains  more
than  three  fifths  nitrogene.
.  I  attempted  to  inflame  zinc  in  nitrous  oxide,
in  the  fame  way  as  iron  ;  but  without  fuccefs.
By  keeping  the  focus  of  a  burning  glafs  upon
fome  zinc  filings,  in  a  fmall  quantity  of  nitrous
oxide,  I  converted  a  little  of  the  zinc  into  white
oxide,  and  confequently  decompofed  a  portion
of  the  gas.


f  SIS  ^


XL      C-mr^^fim  tf  fy  wfiw  u   m  2^Mrmu


VpopkformB^  vUdi  infttmcs  ia  aitroos  g»»
Jjfrfi^Jiriir  3Br,  at  cm*  dca  bdov  .«0»;  re-
far  to  €onimSkm  ia  okroos  onde  a
■c^  MrIicj  toapcntivc.  It  wfll  not  bora  io
,  or  alter  k,  cvca  ai  %11^.
Ihaico&s  inflMinil  pfrapbonsia  utraos
r,  b^  mcansof  a  wire  fipQ^j
batMCigvtod.  Tbe  %fat  pradnccd
%  tkc  iftMUDa  €£  fyropboffiB  ia  oitroas  oside
is  viiitCy  &c  liiai  fodTfri  by  it  io  oi. jgeoe  :
ia  aitHMSgas  it  s  redL

Wbca  lyropQoriK  baims  oat  in  ailroyi  cttkfa^
a  Etdc  iaoofe  of  tbe  FoliBBe  of  gasis  pn
agitated  in


;    bat  Ae  4|aagtitj  ctf"  iraiboair    acid
is  cxticBBeiy  OHnaie.      I  bxvc  utxar


aifymfbarasm  aitmaiandc.


(319)

XII.  Combujiion  of  the  Taper  m  Nitrous
Oxide,

It  has  been  noticed  by  different  experi-
mentalifts,  that  the  taper  burns  with  a  flame
conliderably  enlarged  in  nitrous  oxide  :  fome-
times  with  a  vivid  light  and  crackling  noife,  as
in  oxygene  ;  at  other  times  with  a  white  central
flame,  furrounded  by  a  feeble  blue  one.

My  experiments  on  the  combuftlon  of  the
taper  in  nitrous  oxide,  were  chiefly  made  with
a  view  to  afcertain  the  caufe  of  the  double
flame.

When  the  inflamed  taper  is  introduced  into
pure  nitrous  oxide,  it  burns  at  firfi:  with  a  bril-
liant white  light,  and  fparkles  as  in  oxygene.
As  the  combuflion  goes  on,  the  brilliancy  of  the
flame  diminiflies  ;  it  gradually  lengthens,  and
becomes  furrounded  with  a  pale  blue  cone  of
light,  from  the  apex  of  which  nviich  unburnt
charcoal  is  thrown  off",  in  the  fonii  of  fmoke.
The  flame  continues  double  to  the  end  of  the
procefs.


(  320  )

When  the  refidual  gafes  are  examined  after
combuftion,  much  nitrous  acid  is  found  fuf-
pended  in  them  ;  and  they  are  compofed  of
carbonic  acid,  nitrogene,  and  about  one  fourth
of  undecompounded  nitrous  oxide.

The  double  flame  depends  upon  the  nitrous
acid  formed  by  the  ignition  ;  for  it  can  be  pro-
duced by  plunging  the  taper  into  common  air
containing  nitrous  acid  vapor,  or  into  a  mix-
ture of  nitrous  oxide  and  nitrogene,  through
which  nitrous  acid  has  been  difFufed.  It  is
never  perceived  in  the  combuftion  of  the  taper,
till  much  riitrous  acid  is  formed.

In  attempting  to  refpire  fome  reiidual  gas  of
nitrous  oxide,  in  which  a  taper  had  burnt  out,  I
found  it  fo  highly  impregnated  with  nitrous  acid,
as  to  difable  me  from  even  taking  it  into  my
mouth.

The  taper  burns  in  a  mixture  of  equal  parts
nitrous  oxide  and  nitrogene,  at  firfl  with  a
flame  nearly  the  fame  as  that  of  a  candle  in
common  air  ;  white.  Before  its  extindion  the
interior  white  flame,  and  exterior  blue  flame,
are  perceived.


(   321   )

The  taper  is  inftantly  extinguifhed  in  a  mix-
ture of  one  fourth  nitrous  oxide,  and  three
fourths  nitrogene.

In  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  nitrous  oxide  and
nitrous  gas,  the  taper  burns  at  firft  with  nearly
as  much  brilliancy  as  in  pure  nitrous  oxide  5
gradually  the  double  and  feeble  flame  is  pro-
duced.

XI 11.  On  the  Combuftion  of  different  Com-
pound Bodies  in  Nitrous  Oxide.

All  the  folid  and  fluid  compound  inflammable
bodies  on  which  I  have  experimented,  burn  in
nitrous  oxide,  at  high  temperatures.  Wood,  cot-
ton, and  paper,  are  eafily  inflamed  in  it  by  the
burning  glafs.  During  their  combuftion,  ni-
trous acid  is  always  formed,  carbonic  acid,  and
water  produced,  and  nitrogene  evolved,  rather
lefs  in  bulk  than  the  nitrous  oxide  decompofed.

I  have  already  mentioned  that  alcohol  and
ether  are  foluble  in  nitrous  oxide..  When  an
ignited  body  is  introduced  into  the  folution  of
w


(  3^2  )

alcohol,    or  ether    in   nitrous   oxide,    a  flight
exploflon  takes  place.

XIV.  General  Coriclufions  relating  to  the
Decompofiiion  of  Nitrons  Oxtde^  arid  to  its
Analyfis.

From  what  has  been  faid  in  the  preceding
feciions,  it  appears  that  the  inflammable  bodies,
in  general,  require  for  their  combuflion  m
nitrous  oxide,  much  higher  temperatures  thaa
thofe  at  which  they  burn  in  atmolpheric  air^  or
oxygene.

When  intenfely  heated  they  decompofe  it,
with  the  prcdudion  of  much  heat  and  light,
and  become  oxygenated.

During  the  combuflion  of  folid  or  fluid  bodies,
producing  flame,  in  nitrous  oxide,  nitrous  acid
is  generated,  mofl  probably  from  a  new  arrange-
ment of  principles,  analogous  to  thofe  obferved
in  Sed.  II,  by  the  ignition  of  that  part  of  the
gas  not  in  conta6l  with  the  burning  fubflance.
Likewife  when  nitrous  oxide  in  excefs  is  decom-


(  323  )

pofed  by  inflammable  gafes,  nitrous  acid,  and
Ibmetimes  a  gas  analogous  to  common  air,  is
produced,  doubtlefs  from  the  fame  caufe.

Pyrophorus  is  the  only  body  that  inflames  in
nitrous  oxide,  below  the  temperature  of
ignition.

Phofphorus  burns  in  it  with  the  blufe  flame,
probably  forming  with  its  oxygene  only  phof-
phoreous  acid  at  the  dull  red  heat,  and  with  the
intenfely  vivid  flame,  producing  phofphoric  acid
at  the  white  heat.

Hydrogene,  charcoal,  fulphur,  iron,  and  the
compound  inflammable  bodies,  decompofe  it
only  at  heats  equal  to,  or  above,  that  of  ignition  s
probably  each  a  different  temperature.

From  the  phs&nomena  in  Se6l.  V.  it  appears,
that  at  the  temperature  of  intenfe  ignition,  phof-
phorus has  a  flronger  affinity  for  the  oxygene
of  nitrous  oxide  than  hydrogene  ;  and  reafoning
from  the  different  degrees  of  combuftibility  of
the  inflammable  bodies,  in  mixtures  of  nitrous
oxide  and  nitrogene,  and  from  other   phaeno-


(  324  )

mena,  we  may  conclude  with  probability,  that
at  about  the  white  heat,  the  affinity  of  the  com--
buftible  bodies  for  oxygene  takes  place  in  the
following  order.  Phofphorus^  hydrogene,  char-
coal,* iron,  fulphur,  &c.

This  order  of  attradlion  is  very  difFererat
from  that  obtaining  at  the  red  beat  ;  in
which  temperature  charcoal  and  iron  have  a;
nmch  ftronger  affinity  for  oxygene  than  either
phofphorus  or  hydrogene.-^

The  fmalleft  quantity  of  oxygene  given  in
the  different  analyfes  of  nitrous  oxide  juft  de-
tailed, is  thirty  five  hundred  parts  ;  the  greateft
proportion  is  thirty-nine.

Taking  the  mean  eftimations  from  the  mod
accurate  experiments,  we  may  conclude  that
100  grains  of  the  known  ponderable  matter  of


*  As  is  proved  by  the  decompofition  of  oxide  of  iron  artd
fulphuric  acid  by  charcoal,  at  that  temperature,

f  Hydrogenc  at  or  about  the  red  heat,  appears  to  attraA
oxygene  ftronger  than  phofphorus.  See  Dr.  Prieftley's
experiments,  vol.  i.  page  262.


(  325  )

nitrous  oxide,  confi ft  of  about  3 6, 7  oxygen e,
and  63,3  nitrogene  ;  or  taking  away  decimals,
of  37  oxygeneto63nitroggie;  which  is  identical
with  the  eftimation  given  in  Refearcb  I.

XV.  Obfervations  on  the  combinations  of
Oxygene .  and  Nitrogene.

During  tlie  decompofitions  of  the  combina-
tions of  oxygene  and  nitrogene  by  combuftible
bodies,  a  confiderable  momentary  expanfion  of
the  adling  fubftances,  ^nd  the  bodies  in  contadl
with  them  is  generally  produced,  connedled  with
increafed  temperature ;  whilft  light  is  often
generated  to  a  great  extent.

Of  the  caufes  ofthefe  phasnomena  we  are  at
prefent  ignorant.  Our  knowledge  of  them
muft  depend  upon  the  difcovery  of  the  precife
nature  of  heat  and  light,  and  of  the  laws  by
which  they  are  governed.  The  application  of
general  hypothefes  to  ifolated  fa61s  can  be  of
little  utility  ;  for  this  reafon  I  fhall  at  prefent
forbear  to  enter  into  any  difcuffions  concerning


(  326  )

thofe  agents,  which  are  imperceptible  to  the
fenfes,  and  known  only  by  folitary  cfFedls.

Analyfis  and  fynthefis  clearly  prove  that
oxygene  and  nitrogene  conftitute  the  known
ponderable  matter  of  atmofpheric  air,  nitrous
oxide,  nitrous  gas,  and  nitric  acid.

That  the  oxygene  and  nitrogene  of  atmof-
pheric air  exift  in  chemical  union,  appears
almoft  demonftrable  from  the  following  evi-
dences.

ift.  The  equable  difFufion  of  oxygene  and
nitrogene  through  every  part  of  the  atmofphere,
which  can  hardly  be  fuppofed  to  depend  on
any  other  caufe  than  an  affinity  between  thefe
principles.*

2dly.      The  difference  between  the  fpecific


*  That  attradion  muft  be  called  chemical,  which  enables
bodies  of  different  fpecific  gavities  to  unite  in  fuch  a  manner
as  to  produce  a  compound,  in  every  part  of  which  the  con-
flituents  are  found  in  the  fame  proportions  to  each  other.
Atmofpheric  air,  examined  after  having  been  at  perfe6t
reft  in  clofed  vefTels,  for  a  great  length  of  time,  contains  in
every  part  the  fame  proportions  of  oxygene  and  nitrogene;
whereas  if  no  affinity  exifted  between  thefe  principles,
following  the  laws  of  fpecific  gravity,  they  ought  to  fe^a^


(  327  )

gravity  of  atmofpberic  air,  and  a  mixture  of  27
parts  oxygene  and  73  nitrogene,  as  found  by
calculation  ;  a  difference  apparently  owing  to
expanlion  in  confequence  of  combination.

3dly.  The  converfion  of  nitrous  oxide  into
nitrous  acid,  and  a  gas  analogous  to  common
air,  by  ignition.

4thly.  The  folubility  of  atmofpheric  air  un-
decom pounded  in  water.

Atmospheric  Air,  then,  may  be  confi-
dered  as  the  leaft  intimate  of  the  combinations
of  nitrogcne  and  oxygene.

It  is  an  elaftic  fluid,  permanent  at  all  known
temperatures,  confifting  of  ,73  nitrogene,  and
,27  oxygene.  It  is  decompofable  at  certain  tem-
peratures, by  moft  of  the  bodies  poflefling
affinity  for  oxygene.  It  is  foluble  in  about
thirty  times  its  bulk  of  water,  and  as  far  as  we
are  acquainted  with  its  affinities,   incapable  of

rate  5  the  oxygene  forming  the  inferior,  the  nitrogene  the
fnperior  ftratum.

The  fuppolition  of  the  chemical  compofition  of  atmof-
pheric air,  has  been  advanced  by  many  philofophers.  The
two  firft  evidences  have  been  often  noticed.


(  328  )

combining  with  mofl  of  the  fimple  and  com-
pound fubftances.  100  cubic  inches  of  it
weigh  about  31  grains  at  55°  temperature,  and
30  atmofpheric  preflTure.

Nitrous  Oxide  is  a  gas  unalterable  in  its
conftitution,  at  temperatures  below  ignition.
It  is  compofed  of  oxygene  and  nitrogene,  exift-
ing  perhaps  in  the  moft  intimate  union  which
thofe  fubftances  are  capable  of  afTuming.*
Its  properties  approach  to  thofe  of  acids.  It
is  decompofable  by  the  combuftible  bodies  at
very  high  temperatures,  is  foluble  in  double  its
volume  of  water,  and  in  half  its  bulk  of  moft  of
the  inflammable  fluids.  It  is  combinable  with
the  alkalies,  and  capable  of  forming  with  them
peculiar  falts.  100  grains  of  it  are  compofed
of  about  63  nitrogene,  and  37  oxygene.
100  cubic  inches  of  it  weigh  50  grains,
at  55°  temperature,  and  30  atmofpheric  pref-
fure.


*  For  it  is  unalterable  by  thofe  bodies  wliich  are  capable
of  attracting  oxygene  from  nitrous  gas  and  nitrous  acid,  at
common  temperatures.


(329)

Nitrous  Gas  is  compofed  of  about  ,56
oxygene,  and  ,44  nitrogene,  in  intimate  union.
It  is  foluble  in  twelve  times  its  bulk  of  vvater,_
and  is  combinable  with  the  acids,  and  certain
metallic  folutions ;  it  is  poilefled  of  no  acid
properties,  and  is  decompofable  by  moft  of  the
bodies  that  attraft  oxygene  ftrongly,  at  high
temperatures.  100  cubic  inches  of  it  weigh
about  34  grains,  at  the  mean  temperature  and
prefTure.

Nitric  Acid  is  a  fubflance  permanently
aeriform  at  common  temperatures,  compofed  of
about  1  nitrogene,  to  2,3  oxygene.  It  is  folu-
ble to  a  great  extent  in  water,  and  combinable
with  the  alkalies,  and  nitrous  gas.  It  is  decom-
pofable by  moft  of  the  combuftible  bodies,  at
certain  temperatures.  100  cubic  inches  of  it
weigh,  at  the  mean  temperature  and  prefTure,
nearly  76  grains.


RESEARCH  III.

BELATING   TO  THE    RESPIRATION  OF

I^ITROUS    OXIDE,

AND    OTHER

GASES.


RESEARCH    HI.
DIVISION   I.

EXPERIMENTS  and  OBSERVATIONS  on  the
EFFECTS  produced  upon  ANIMALS  by  the  RES-
PIRATION of  NITROUS  OXIDE.


I.     Preliminaries,

J.  HE  term  re/prab/e,  in  its  phyfiological
application,  has  been  differently  employed.  Some
times  by  the  refpirability  of  a  gas  has  been
meant,  its  power  of  fupporting  life  for  a  great
length  of  time,  when  repeatedly  applied  to  the
blood  in  the  lungs.  At  other  times  all  gafes
have  been  confidered  as  refpirable,  which  were
capable  of  introduction  into  the  lungs  by  volun-
tary efforts,  without  any  relation  to  their
vitality.


(  334  )

In  the  lafl  fenfe  the  word  refpirable  is  moft
properly  employed.  In  this  fenfe  it  is  ufed  in
the  following  fedlions.

Non-refpirable  gafes  are  thofe,  which  when
applied  to  the  external  organs  of  refpiration^
ftimulate  the  mufcles  of  the  epiglottis  in  fuch  a
way  as  to  keep  it  perfectly  clofe  on  the  glottis ;
thus  preventing  the  fmalleft  particle  of  gas  from
entering  into  the  bronchia,  in  fpite  of  voluntary
exertions  ;  fuch  are  carbonic  acid,  and  acid  gafes
in  general.*

Of  refpirable  gafes,  or  thofe  which  are  capa-
ble of  being  taken  into  the  lungs  by  voluntary
efforts.

One  only  has  the  power  of  uniformly  fup-
porting  life  ; — atmofpheric  air.  Other  gafes,
when  refpired,  fooner  or  later  produce  death  ;
but  in  different  modes.

Some,  as  nitrogene  and  hydrogene,  efFedl  no
pofitive  change  in  the  venous  blood.     Animals


*  See  the  curious   experiments  of  Roficr,     Journal  dc
Phyfique,  17Q6,  vol.  1,  pag.  419-


(  335  )

immerfed  in  thefe  gafes  die  of  a  difeafe  pro-
duced by  privation  of  atmofpheric  air,  analogous
to  that  occafioned  by  their  fubmerfion  in  water,
or  non-refpirable  gafes.

Others,  as  the  different  varieties  of  hydro-
carbonate,  deftroy  life  by  producing  fome  pofi-
tive  change=^  in  the  blood,  which  probably  im-
mediately renders  it  incapable  of  fupplying
the  nervous  and  mufcular  fibres  with  principles
eflential  to  fenfibility  and  irritability.

Oxygene,  which  is  capable  of  being  refpired
for  a  much  greater  length  of  time  than  any
other  gas,  except  common  air,  finally  deflroys
life  ;  firft  producing  changes  in  the  blood,
conneded  with  new  living  adlion.-f*

After  experiments,  to  be  detailed  hereafter,
made  upon  myfelf  and  others,  had  proved  that
nitrous  oxide  was   refpirable,  and  capable   of


*  As  appears  from  the   experiments   of  Dr.  Beddoes ;
likewife  thofe  of  Mr.  Watt.

+  As  appears  from  the  experimeHts  of  Lavoifier  and  Dr.
Beddoes ;  and  as  will  be  feen  hereafter.


(  336  )

fupporling  life  for  a  longer  time  than  any
of  the  gafes,  except  atmofpheric  air  and  oxygene,
I  was  anxious  to  afcertain  the  efFeds  of  it  upon
aninnals^  in  cafes  where  its  adlion  could  be
carried  to  a  full  extent  ;  and  to  compare  the
changes  occafioned  by  it  in  their  organs,  with
thofe  produced  by  other  powers.

II.  On  the  refpiration  of  Nitrous  Oxide  by
warm-hlooded  Animals,

The  nitrous  oxide  employed  in  the  following
experiments,  was  procured  from  nitrate  of  am-
moniac, ^  and  received  in  large  jars,  filled  with
water  previoufly  faturated  with  the  gas.  The
animal  was  introduced  into  the  jar,  by  being
carried  under  the  water  ;  after  its  introdudion,
the  jar  was  made  to  reft  on  a  fhelf,  about  half
an  inch  below  the  furface  of  the  water  ;  and  the
animal  carefully  fupported,  fo  as  to  prevent
his  mouth  from  refting  in   the  water.

This  mode  of  experimenting,  either  under
water  or  mercury,  is  abfolutcly  neceflary,   to


(  337  )

afoertaln  with  accuracy  the  efFeilvS  of  pure  gafe^
on  living  beings.  In  fomc  experiments  that  I
made  on  the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide,  by
animals  that  were  plunged  into  jars  of  it  opened
in  the  atmofphere,  and  immediately  clofed  after
their  introdudion,  the  unknown  quantities  of
common  air  carried  in,  were  always  fufficient
to  render  the  refults  perfdflly  inaccurate.

Animals  fufFer  little  or  nothing  by  being  pafied
through  water.

That  the  phsenomena  in  thefe  experiments
might  be  more  accurately  obferved,  two  or  three
perfons  were  always  prefent  at  the  time  of  their
execution,  and  an  account  of  them  was  noted
down  immediately  after.

a,  A  flout  and  healthy  young  cat,  of  four
or  five  months  old,  was  introduced  into  a  large
jar  of  nitrous  oxide.  For  ten  or  twelve  moments
he  remained  perfe6ily  quiet,  and  then  began
to  make  violent  motions,  throwing  himfelf  round
the  jar  in  every  direflion.  In  two  minutes  he
appeared  quite  exhaufted,  and  funk  quietly  to
the  bottom  of  the  jar.     On  applying  my  h^md

X


(  338  )

to  the  thorax,  I  found  that  the  heart  beat  with
extreme  violence  ;  on  feeling  about  the  neck,  I
could   diftincily    perceive  a  flrong   and    quick
pulfation   of  the   carotids.        In    about   three
minutes  the  animal   revived,  and  panted  very
much  ;  but  flill    continued  to  lie  on    his  fide.
His  infpirations  then  became  longer  and  deeper,
and  he  fometimes  uttered  very  feeble  cries.     In
four  minutes  the  pulfations  of  the  heart  appeared
quicker  and  feebler.     His   infpirations  were  at
long   intervals,    and    very    irregular ;    in    five
minutes  the  pulfe  was  hardly  perceptible  ;    he
made  no  motions,  and  appeared  wholly  fenfelefs.
After  five  minutes  and  quarter  he  was  taken  out,
and    expofed  to  the  atmofphere  before  a  warm
fire.     In  a  few  feconds  he  began  to  move,   and
to    take   deep    infpirations.      In  fivQ  minutes
he  attempted  to  rife  on  his  legs ;  but  foon  fell
again,  the  extremities  being  fiightly  convulfed.
In  eight  or  nine  minutes  he  was  able  to  walk,
but   his   motions  were  fl:aggering  and  unequal,
the  right  leg  being  convulfed,  whilfl  the  other
was  apparently  ftifF  and  immoveable  ;  in  about


(  339  )

Balfan  hour  lie  was  almoft  aompletely  recovered^
h>  A  healthy  kitten,  of  about  fix  weeks  oldy
Was  introduced  into  nitrous  oxide.  She  very
foon  began  to  make  violent  exertions,  and  ia
lefs  than  a  minute  fell  to  the  bottom  of  the
receiver,  as  if  apopledlic.  At  this  moment,
applying  my  hand  to  her  fide,  I  felt  the  heart
beating  with  great  violence.  She  continued
gafping,  with  long  infpirations,  for  three
minutes  and  half;  at  the  end  of  five  minnte&
and  half  fhe  was  taken  out  completely  dead.

c.  Another  kitten  of  the*  fame  breed  was
introduced  into  nitrous  Oxide,  the  day  after.
She  exhibited  the  fame  phaenomena,  and  died
in  it  in  about  ^^^  minutes  and  half.

d.  A  fmall  dog  that  had  accidentally  me^
with  a  diflocation  of  the  vertebrae  of  the  loins,
and  was  in  great  pain,  as  manifefied  by  his
moaning  and  whining,  was  ifitroduced  into  f|
large  jar  of  nitrous  oxide.  He  immediately
became  quiet,  and  lay  on  his  {\d.Q,  in  the  jar,
breathing  very  deeply.  In  four  minutes  hi^
tefpiration  became  noify,  and  his  eyes  fparkU4


(  340  )

very  much.  I  was  not  able  to  apply  my  hand
to  the  thorax.  In  five  minutes  he  appeared
fenfelefs,  and  in  feven  minutes  was  perre6^ly
dead.

e,  A  (Irong  rabbit,  often  or  twelve  months
old,  was  introduced  into  nitrous  oxide.  He
immediately  began  to  ftruggle  very  much,  and
in  a  minute  fell  down  fenfelefs  :  in  two  minutes
the  legs  became  convulfed,  and  his  infpirations
were  deep  and  noify  :  in  lefs  than  five  minutes
he  appeared  perfectly  dead.

/.  A  rabbit  of  a  month  old  introduced  into
nitrous  oxide,  became  fenfelefs  in  lefs  than  a
minute  ;  the  pulfations  of  the  heart  were  very
flrong  at  this  moment  :  they  gradually  became
weaker,  and  in  three  minutes  and  half  the
animal  was  dead.

g.  Another  rabbit  of  the  fame  breed,  after
being  rendered  fenfelefs  in  nitrous  oxide  in  a
minute  and  half,  was  taken  out.  He  foon
became  convulfed ;  in  a  minute  began  to  breathe
quickly  ;  in  two  minutes  attempted  to  rife,  but
flaggered,  and  fell  again  on  his  fide.    His  hinder


(  341   )

legs  were  paralytic  for  near  five  minutes.  In
twenty  he  had  almoft  recovered.

g,  A  middle  fized  guinea-pig  was  much  con-
vulfed,  after  being  in  nitrous  oxide  for  a  minute.
In  two  minutes  and  half  he  was  fenfelefs.
Taken  out  at  this  period,  he  remained  for  fome
minutes  by  the  fide  of  a  warm  fire,  without
moving  ;  his  fore  legs  then  became  convulfed  ;
his  hind  legs  were  perfe611y  paralytic.  In  this
flate  he  continued,  without  attempting  to  rife
or  move,  for  near  an  hour,  vyhen  he  died.

h,  A  large  and  old  guinea-pig  died  in  nitrous
oxide,  exhibiting  the  fame  phaenomena  as  the
other  animals,  in  about  five  minutes  and  quar-
ter. A  young  one  was  killed  in  three  minutes
and  half.

i,  A  fmall  guinea-pig,  after  breathing  nitrous
oxide  for  a  minute  and  half,  was  taken  out,  and
placed  before  a  warm  fire.  He  was  for  a  few
minutes  a  little  convulfed  ;  but  in  a  quarter  of
an  hour  got  quite  Well,  and  did  not  relapfe,

k.  A  large  moufe  introduced  into  nitrous
oxide,  was   for  a  few  feconds  very  aflive.     In


(  342   )

half  a  minVite  be  fell  down  fenfelefs ;  in  a  minute
and  quarter  he  appeared  perfedily  dead.

/.  A  moufe  taken  out  of  nitrous  oxide,  after
being  in  it  for  half  a  minute,  continued  con-
vulfed  for  fome*  minutes,   but  finally  recovered.

m,  A  young  hen  was  introduced  into  a  veflel
filled  with  nitrous  oxide.  She  immediately
began  to  ftruggle  very  much  ;  fell  on  her  bread
in  lefs  than  half  a  minute^  and  in  two  minutes
was  quite  dead.

n,  A  goldfinch  died  in  nitrous  oxide  in
lefs  than  a  minute.

In  each  of  thefe  experiments  a  certain  abforp-
tion  of  the  gas  was  always  perceived,  the  water
rifing  in  the  jar  during  the  rcfpiration  of  the
animal.     From  them  we  learn

ift.  That  nitrous  oxide  is  deftruclive  when
refpired  for  a  certain  time  to  the  warm  blooded
animals,  apparently  previoufly  exciting  them  to
a  great  extent.

2dly.  That  when  its  operation  is  flopped
before  complcat  exhauftion  is  brought  on,  the
healthy  living  a<^ion  is  capable  of  being  gra-
dually reproduced,  by  enabling  the  animal  to
refpire  atmofpheric  air.


(   343   )

3(lly.  That  exhauflion  and  death  is  produ-
ced in  the  fmall  animals  by  nitrous  oxide  fooner
than  in  the  larger  ones,  and  in  young  animals
of  the  fame  fpecies,  in  a  fhorter  time  than  in
old  ones,  as  indeed  Dr.  Beddoes  had  conjetSlured
a  priori  would  be  the  cafe.

Moil  of  the  animals  dedroyed  in  thefe
experiments  were  examined  after  death  ;  the
appearances  in  their  organs  were  peculiar.  To
prevent  unneceflary  repetitions,  an  account  of
them  will  be  given  in  the  fourth  fedlion.

III.      EffeBs   of   the   respiration   of  Nitrous
Oxide   upon   animals ^    as     compared  with    thofe
produced  by   their  immerjion  in  Hydrogene  and
Water,

Before  the  following  experiments  were  made,
a  number  of  circumftances  had  convinced  me
that  nitrous  oxide  adled  on  animals  by  produ-
cing fome  pofitive  change  in  their  blood,  con-
ne6led  with  new  living  a6lion  of  the  irritable
and  fenfitive  organs,  and  terminating  in  their
death.


(   344   )

To  afcertain  however,  the  difference  between
the  efFe(5ls  of  this  gas  and  thofe  of  hydrogene
and  non-refpirable  gafes,  I  proceeded  in  the
following  way.

a.  Of  two  healthy  rabbits  of  about  two
months  old,  of  the  fame  breed,  and  nearly  of
the  fame  fize.

One  was  introduced  into  nitrous  oxide.  In
a  half  a  minute,  it  had  fallen  down  apparently
fenfelefs.  On  applying  my  hand  to  the  thorax,
the  a6lion  of  the  heart  appeared  at  firfl,  very
quick  and  ftrong,  it  gradually  became  weaker,
and  in  two  minutes  and  half,  the  animal  was
taken  out  quite  dead.

The  other  was  introduced  into  a  jar  of  pure
hydrogene  through  water.  He  immediately
began  to  ftruggle  very  much,  and  in  a  quarter
of  a  minute  fell  on  his  fide.  On  feeling  the
thorax,  the  pulfations  of  the  heart  appeared  very
quick  and  feeble,  they  gradually  diminifhed  ;
his  breathing  became  momentarily  fhorter,  and
in  rather  more  than  three  quarters  of  a  minute,
he  was  taken  out   dead.     Dr.   Kinglake   was


(  345  )

prefent  at  this  experiment,  and  afterwards
difleded  both  of  the  animals,

h.  Of  two  iimilar  rabbits  of  the  fame  breed,
nearly  three  months  old.  One  was  introduced
into  nitrous  oxide,  and  after  being  rendered
fenfelefs  by  the  refpiration  of  it  for  nearly  a
minute  and  half,  was  expofed  to  the  atmof-
phere,  before  a  warm  fire.  He  recovered  gra-
dually, but  was  occafionally  convulfed,  and  had
a  paralyfis  of  one  of  his  hinder  legs  for  fome
minutes  :  in  an  hour  he  was  able  to  walk.  The
other,  after  being  immerged  in  hydrogene  for
near  half  a  minute,  was  reftored  to  the  atmof-
phere  apparently  inanimate.  In  lefs  than  a
minute  he  began  to  breathe,  and  to  utter  a
feeble  noife  ;  in  two  minutes  was  able  to  walk,
and  in  lefs  than  three  minutes  appeared  perfedly
recovered.

b,  A  kitten  of  about  two  months  old,  was
introduced  into  a  jar  of  nitrous  oxide,  at  the
fame  time  that  another  of  the  fame  breed  was
plunged  under  a  jar  of  water.  They  both
ilruggled  very  much.    The  animal  in  the  nitrous


(  346  )

oxide  fell  fenfelefs  before  that  under  water  had
ceafed  to  ftruggle,  and  to  throw  out  an*  from
its  lungs.  In  two  minutes  and  three  quarters,
the  animal  under  water  was  quite  dead :  it  was
taken  out  and  expofed  to  heat  and  air,  but  did
not  fhew  the  flighteft  figns  of  life.  At  the  end
of  three  minutes  and  half,  the  animal  in  nitrous
oxide  began  to  gafp,  breathing  very  flowly ;
at  four  minutes  and  three  quarters  it  was  yet
alive;  at  the  end  of  five  minutes  and  quarter
it  appeared  perfedly  dead.  It  was  taken  out,
and  did  not  recover.

From  thefe  experiments  it  was  evident,  that
animals  lived  at  leaft  twice  as  long  in  nitrous
oxide  as  in  hydrogene  or  water.  Confequently
from  this  circumftance  alone,  there  was  every
reafon  to  fuppofe  that  their  death  in  nitrous
oxide  could  not  depend  on  the  fimple  privation
of  atmofpheric  air ;  but  that  it  was  owing  to
fome  peculiar  changes  eifedled  in  the  blood  by
the  gas.


(  347   )

IV.  Of  the  changes  effeBed  in  the  Organija-
ilon  of  warm-Hooded  Anhnals,  by  the  refplratmi
of  Nitrous  Oxide.

The  external  appearance  of  animals  that  have
been  deftroyed  in  nitrous  oxide,  is  very    little
different  from  that  of  thofe  killed  by  privation
of  atmofpheric  air.      The   fauces  and  tongue
appear  of  a  dark  red,  and  the  eyes  are  dull^  and
a  little  protruded.     Their  internal  organs,  how-
ever,   exhibit  a  very   peculiar   change.      The
lungs   are  pale  brown   red,   and  covered  here
and  there  with   purple   fpots  ;  the  liver  is  of  a
very   bright    red,    and   the   mufcular   fibre  in
general  dark.     Both  the  auricles  and  ventricles
of  the  heart  are  filled  with  blood.    The  auricles
contra6lforminutes  after  the  death  of  the  animal.
The  blood  in  the  left  ventricle,  and  the  aorta,  is  of
a  tinge  between  purple  and  red,    whilfl  that  in
the  right  ventricle  is  of  a  dark  color,  rather  more
purple  than  the  venous  blood.   But  thefe  appear-
ances, and  their  caufes,  will  be  better  undcrflood
after  the  following  comparative  obfervatioiis  ar^
read.


(   348   )

a.  Of  two  fimilar  rabbits,  about  eight  months
old,  one  A,  was  killed  by  expofure  for  near  fix
minutes  to  nitrous  oxide ,  the  other,  B,  was
deftroyed  by  a  blow  on  the  head.

They  were  both  opened  as  fpeedily  as  poffible.
The  lungs  of  B  were  pale,  and  uniform  in
their  appearance;  this  organ  in  A  was  redder,  and
every  where  marked  with  purple  fpots.  The
liver  of  A  was  of  a  dark  and  bright  red,  that  of
B  of  a  pale  red  brown.  The  diaphragm  of  B,
when  cut,  was  ftrongly  irritable;  that  of  A
rather  darker,  and  fcarce  at  all  contradile.
All  the  cavities  of  the  heart  contrad^ed  for  more
than  50  minutes  in  B.  The  auricles  contraded
for  near  lb  minutes  with  force  and  Velocity  in  A:
but  theventricles  were  almoft  inadive.  The  vena
cava,  and  the  right  auricle,  in  A,  were  filled  with
blood,  apparently  a  fhade  darker  than  in  B,  The
blood  in  the  left  auricle,  and  the  aorta,  appeared
in  A  of  a  purple,  a  (hade  brighter  than  that  of  the
venous  blood.    In  the  left  auricle  of  B  it  was  red.

I  opened  the  head  of  each,  but  not  without
injuring  'the  brains,  fo   that  I  was  unable  to


(  349  )

make  any  accurate  comparifon.  The  color  of
the  brain  in  A  appeared  rather  darker  than
in  B.

b.  Two  rabbits,  C  and  D,  were  deftroyed,
C  by  immerfion  in  nitrous  oxide,  D  in  hydro-
gene:  they  were  both  difledied  by  Dr.  King-
iake.  The  blood  in  the  pulmonary  vein  and
the  left  auricle  of  C  was  of  a  different  tinge,
from  that  in  D  more  inclined  to  purple  red.-
The  membrane  of  the  lungs  in  C  was  covered
with  purple  fpots,  that  of  D  was  pale  and
uniform  in  its  appearance.  The  brain  in  C
was  rather  darker  than  in  D  ;  but  there  was  no
perceptible  efFufion  of  blood  into  the  ventricles
either  in  D  or  C,  The  liver  in  C  was  of  a
brighter  red  than  in  health,  that  in  D  rather
paler.

c.  In  the  laft  experiment,  the  comparative
irritability  of  the  ventricles  and  auricles  of  the
heart  and  the  mufcular  fibre  in  the  tv/o  ani-
mals,  had  not  been  examined.  That  thefe
circumftances  might  be  noticed,  two  rabbits,
E  and  F  were  killed  ;  E  under  water  in  about


(   350  )

a  minute,  and  F  in  nitrous  oxide  in  three,
minutes.  They  were  immediately  openedy
and  after  a  minute,  the  appearance  of  the
heart,  and  organs  of  rcfpiration  obferved.

Both  the  right  and  left  ventricles  of  the  heart
in  F  contraded  but  very  feebly  ;  the  auricles
regularly  and  quickly  contradled ;  the  aorta
appeared  perfedily  full  of  blood.  In  E,  a  feeble
contra6lion  of  the  left  finus  venosus  and
auricle  was  obferved ;  the  left  ventricle  did
not  contradl  :  the  right  contradled,  but
more  llowly  than  in  F.  In  a  few  minutes^
the  contractions  of  the  ventricles  in  F  had
ceafed,  whilst  the  auricles  contradled  as
flrongly  and  quickly  as  beforci  The  blood  in
the  pulmonary  veins  of  F  was  rather  of  a  red-
der purple  than  in  E  ;  the  difference  of  the
blood  in  the  vena  cava  was  hardly  perceptible,
perhaps  it  was  a  little  more  purple  in  F.  The
membranous  fubftance  of  the  lungs  in  F  was
fpotted  with  purple  as  from  extravafated  blood,
whilft  that  in  E  was  pale.  The  brain  in  F  was
darker  than  in  E.  On  opening  the  ventricles
no    extravafation   of    blood    v^as   perceptible.


(  351  )

The  auricles  of  the  heart  in  F  contra(^ed
ftrongly  for  near  twenty  minutes,  and  then
gradually  their  motion  became  lefs  fre-
quent ;  in  twenty-eight  minutes  it  had
wholly  ceafed.  The  right  auricle  and  ventri-
cle in  E,  occafionally  contra<^ed  for  half  an
hour.  The  livers  of- both  animals  were  fimilar
when  they  were  firft  opened,  of  a  dark  red ;
that  of  F  preferved  its  color  for  fome  time
when  expofed  to  the  atmofphere  ;  whllfl  that
ofEalmoft  immediately  became  paler  under
the  fame  circumftances.

The  periftaltic  motion  continued   for   nearly
an  equal  time  in  both  animals.

d.  The  fternum  of  a  young  rabbit  was  re-
moved fo  that  the  heart  and  lungs  could  be
perceived,  and  he  was  introduced  into  a  veiiei
filled  with  nitrous  oxide ;  the  blood  in  the
pulmonary  veins  gradually  became  o)ore  purple,
and  the  heart  appeared  to  beat  quicker  than
before,  all  the  mufcles  contradiing  with'
great  force.  •  After  he  had  been  in  about
a  minute,  fpots  began  to  appear  on  the  iungs^


(  352  J

though  the  contra6lions  of  the  heart  became
quicker  and  weaker ;  in  three  minutes  and
half  he  was  quite  dead;  after  death  the  ventri-
cles contraded  very  feebly,  though  the  con-
tractions of  the  auricles  were  as  ftrong  almoft
after  the  end  of  five  minutes  as  at  firft.  This
animal  was  palled  through  water  faturated  with
nitrous  oxide  ;  poflibly  this  fluid  had  fomc
efFc6l  on  his  organs.

Befides    thefe    animals,    many     others,    as
guinea-pigs,  mice    and   birds,    were    diffedled
after  being  deftroyed  in  nitrous   oxide  ;  in    all
of  them     the   fame    general    appearance    was
obferved.     Their  mufcular  fibre  almofl  always
appeared    Icfs    irritable   than    that   of  animals
deftroyed,  by  organic  teflon  of  part  of  the  ner-
vous fyftem,  in  the  atmofphere.    The  ventricles
of  the  heart  in  general,  contrafled  feebly   and
for  a  very  Qiort  time  ;  whilfl  the  auricles  con-
tinued to  a6l  for  a  great  length  of  time.     The
lungs  were  dark     in    their   appearance,    and
always  fufFufed   here  and  there  with   purple  ;
the  blood  in  the  pulmonary  veins  when  flightly


(  353  )

obferved,  appeared  dark,  like  venous  blood,  but
when  minutely  examined,  was  evidently  much
more  purple.  The  blood  in  the  vena  cava,
was  darker  than  that  in  the  pulmonary  veins.
The  cerebrum  was  dark.

In  a  late  experiment,  I  thought  1  perceived
a  flight  extravafation  of  blood  in  one  of  the
ventricles  of  the  brain  in  a  rabbit  deftroyed
in  nitrous  oxide  ;  but  as  this  appearance  had  not
occurred  in  the  animals  I  had  examined  before,
or  in  thofe  difledied  by  Dr.  Kinglake,  and  Mr.
King,  Surgeon,  I  am  inclined  to  refer  it  to  an
accidental  caufe.  At  my  requeft^  Mr.  Smith,
Surgeon,  examined  the  brain  of  a  young  rabbit
that  had  been  killed  in  his  prefence  in  nitrous
oxide  ;  he  was  of  opinion  that  no  efFuGon  of
blood  into  the  ventricles  had  taken  place.

In  comparing  the  external  appearance  of  the
crural  nerves  in  two  rabbits  that  had  been  dif-
fered by  Dr.  Kinglake,  having  been  deftroyed
one  in  hydrogene,  the  other  in  nitrous  oxide,
we  could  perceive  no  perceptible  difference.

It  deferves  to  be  noticed,  that   whenever  the


■^  •'  ^^'


(  354  )

gail  bladder  and  the  urinary  bladder  have  been
examined  in  animals  deftroyed  in  nitrous  oxide.^
they  have  been  always  difl ended  with  fluid  ;
which  is  hardly  ever^he  cafe  in  animals  killed  by
privation  of  atmofpheric  air.

In  the  infancy  of  my  experiments  on  the
a6lion  of  nitrous  oxide  upon  animals,  I  thought
that  it  rendered  the  venous  blood  lefs  coagu-
lable;  but  this  I  now  find  to  be  a  miftake.  The
blood  from  the  pulmonary  veins  of  animals  kil-
led in  nitrous  oxide,  does  not  fenfibly  differ  in
this  refped  from  the  arterial  blood  of  thofe  de-
ftroyed  in  hydrogene,  and  both  become  ver-
milion nearly  in  the  fame  time  when  expofcd  t©
the  atmofphere.

In  defcribing  the  various  fhades  of  color  of
the  blood  in  the  preceding  obfervations  on  the
different  dilTecSed  animals,  the  poverty  of  the
language  of  color,  has  obliged  me  to  adopt
terms,  which  I  fear  will  hardly  convey  to  the
mind  of  the  reader,  diftin6l  notions  of  the
differences  obfervable  by  minute  examina-
tion   in   the    venous    and    arterial    blood   of


(  353  )

animals  that  die  of  privation  of  atmofpheric
air,  and  of  thofe  deftroyed  by  the  adlion  of
nitrons  oxide.  This  difference  can  only  be
obferved  in  the  vcf!cls-  by  means  of  a  ftrong
light  ;  it  may  however  be  eafily  noticed  in  the
fluid  blood  by  the  introduction  of  it  from  the
arteries  or  veins  at  the  moment  of  their  inci-
fion,  between  two  polifhed  furfaces  of  white
glafs^*  {o  clofely  adapted  to  each  other,  as  to
prevent  the  blood  from  coming  in  contadl  witli
the  atnlofphere.

Having  four  or  five  times  had  an  opportunity
of  bleeding  people  in  the  arm  for  trifling  com-
plaints^ I  have  always  received  the  blood  in
phialsj  filled  with  various  gafes,  in  a  mode
to  be  defcribed  hereafter.  Venous  blood
agitated  in  nitrous  oxide,  compared  with  fimi«
lar  blood  in  common  air,  hydrogene,  and  ni-
trogene,  was  always  darker  and  more  purple


^  The  colour  of  cottimon  venous  blood,  examined  in
this  way,  refembles  that  of  the  paint  called  by  cclour-men
red  ochre  j  that  of  blood  faturated  with  nitrons  oxide^  ap-
proaches to  the  tinge  of  Jake,


^—


~III^M|-  T


(  356  )

than  the  firfl,  and  much  brighter  and  more
florid  than  the  two  lad,  which  were  not  differ-
ent in  their  color  from  venous  blood,  received
between  two  furfaces  of  glafs.  It  will  be  ieQ,n
hereafter,  that  the  coagulum  of  venous  blood
is  rendered  more  purple  when  expofed  to  ni-
trous oxide,  whillt  the  gas  is  abforbed  ;  likewifc
that  blood  altered,  by  nitrous  oxide,  is  capable
of  being  again  rendered  vermilion,  by  expo-
fure  to  the  air.

The  appearances  noticed  in  the  above  men-
tioned experiments,  in  the  lungs  of  animals
deftroyed  in  nitrous  oxide,  arefimilar  to  thofe
obferved  by  Dr.  Beddoes,  in  animals  that  had
been  made  to  breathe  oxygene  for  a  great
length  of  time.

There  were  many  reafbns  for  fuppofing  that
the  large  purple  fpots  in  the  lungs  of  animal*
deftroyed  in  nitrous  oxide,  were  owing  to  ex-
travafation  of  venous  blood  from  the  capillary
veflels ;  their  coats  being  broken  by  the  highly
increafed  arterial  a6lion.  To  afcertain  whether
thefe  phsenomena  exiflcd  at   a    period  of  tb<i


(  357  )

•adlion  of  nitrous  oxide,  when  the  animal  was
o-ecoverable  by  expofure  to  the  atmofphere,

I  introduced  a  rabbit  of  fix  months  old,  into
a  veflel  of  nitrous  oxide,  and  after  a   minute,
when  it  had  fallen  down  apparently    apopledlic,
plungedhimwhollyunderwater;  he  immediately
began  to  ftruggle,  and  what  furprifed  me  very
much,  died  in  lefs  than  a  minute  after  fubmer-
fion.     On  opening  the  thorax,  the  blood  in  the
pulmonary  veins  was  nearly  of  the  color  of  that
in    animals    that   have   been   fimply  drowned.
The  lungs  were  here  and  there,  marked  with  a
few    points  ;  but   there  were  no  large   purple
fpots,    as   in    animals  that    have  been   wholly
deftroyed  in  nitrous  oxide  :    the  right   fide  of
the  heart  only  contradied.     In  this  experiment,
the  excitement  from  the  action  of  the  gas    was
probably  carried  to  fuch  an  extent,  as  to    pro-
duce indiredl  debility.     There   are  reafons  for
fuppofing,  that  animals  after  having  been    ex-
cited to  but  a  fmall  extent  by  the  refpiration  of
nitrous  oxide,  will  live  under  water  for  a  greater
length  of  time,  than  animals  previoufly  made  to
breathe  common  air.


(  358  )

V.     Of  the  refpiralion  of  mixtures  of  Mlrous-
Oxide,  and  other  gafeSy  hy  warm-blooded  Animals.

a,  A  rabbit  of  near  two  months  old,  was
introduced  into  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  hydrp-
gene  and  nitrous  oxide  through  water.  He
immediately  began  to  ftruggle  ;  in  a  minute
fell  on  his  fide  ;  in  three  minutes  gafped,  and
made  long  infpirations  ;  and  in  four  minutes
and  half,  was  dead.  On  di (Ted) ion,  he  exhibited
the  fame  appearances  as  animals  deflroyed  in
nitrous  oxide.

h.  A  large  and  ftrong  moufe  w;is  introduced
into  a  mixture  of  three  parts  hydrogene  to  one
part  nitrous  oxide.  He  immediately  began  to
flruggle  very  much,  in  half  a  minute,  became  ^
convulfed,  and  in  about  a  minute,  was  quite
dead.

c.  Into  a  mixture  of  one  oxygene,  and  three
nitrous  oxide,  a  Anall  guinea-pig  was  introdu-
ced. He  immediately  began  to  ftruggle,  and
in  two  minutes  repofed  on  his  fide,  breathing
very  deeply^    Re  made  afterwards  no  violent


(   359  )

mufcular  motion  ;  but  lived  quietly  for  near
fourteen  minutes:  at  the  end  of  which  time,
his  legs  were  much  convulfed.  He  was  taken
out,  and  recovered.

(h  A  moufe  lived  apparently  without  fufFer-
ing,  for  near  ten  minutes,  in  a  mixture  of  l
atmofpheric  air,  and  3  nitrous  oxide,  at  the  end
of  eleven  minutes  he  began  to  ftruggle,  and  in
thirteen  minutes  became  much  convulfed.

e,  A  cat  of  three  months  old,  lived  for  feven-
teen  minutes,  in  a  very  large  quantity  of  a  mix*
ture  of  1  atmofpheric  air,  and  12  nitrous  oxide.
On  her  firft  introdudlion  fhe  was  very  much
agitated  and  convulfed,  in  a  minute  and  half
fhe  fell  down  as  if  apopledic,  and  continued
breathing  very  deeply  during  the  remainder
of  the  time,  fometimes  uttering  very  feeble
cries.  When  taken  out,  fhe  appeared  almofi:
inanimate,  but  on  being  laid  before  the  fire,
gradually  began  to  breathe  and  move ;  being
for  fome  time,  like  mod  of  the  animals  that  have
recovered  after  breathing  nitrous  oxide,  con^
yulfed  on  one  fide,  and  paralytic  the  other.


(  360  )

y.  A  goldfinch  lived  for  near  five  minutes  in
a  mixture  of  equal  parts  nitrous  oxide  and  oxy-
gene,  without  apparently  fuffering.  Taken
out,  he  appeared  faint  and  languid,  but  finally
recovered.*

"VI.  Recapitulation  of  fa3s  relating  to  the
refpiration  of  Nitrous  Oxide,  by  warm-blooded
Animals.

1.  Warm-blooded  animals  die  in  nitrous
oxide  infinitely  fooner  than  in  common  air  or
oxygene  ;  but  not  nearly  in  fo  fhort  a  time  as
in  gafes  incapable  of  efFedling  pofitive  changes
in  the  venous  blood,  or  in  non-refpirable
gafes.

2.  The  larger  animals  live  longer  in  nitrous
oxide  than  the  fmaller  ones,  and  young  animals


*  Small  birds  fufFer  much  from  cold  when  introduced
into  gafes  through  water.  In  this  experiment,  the  gold-
finch was  immediately  inferted  into  a  large  mouthed
phial,  filled  with  the  gafes,  and  opened  in  the  atniof-
phcre.


^r J—  ...J— .-i


(  361   )

die   in   it    fooner  than    old  ones  of  the  fame
fpecies.

.3.  When  animals,  after  breathing  nitrous
oxide,  are  removed  from  it  before  compleat
exhauftion  has  taken  place,  they  are  capable  of
being  reflored  to  health  under  the  action  of
atmofpheric  air.

4.  Peculiar  changes  are  efFedied  in  the  organs
of  animals  by  the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide.
In  animals  deftroyed  by  it,  the  arterial  blood
is  purple  red,  the  lungs  are  covered  with  purple
fpots,  both  the  hollow  and  compact  mufcles
are  apparently  very  inirritable,  and  the  brain  is
dark  colored.

5.  Animals  are  deftroyed  by  the  refpiration
of  mixtures  of  nitrous  oxide  and  hydrogene
nearly  in  the  fame  time  as  by  pure  nitrous  ox-
ide ;  they  are  capable  of  living  for  a  great  length
of  time  in  nitrotjs  oxide  mingled  with  very  mi-
nute quantities  of  oxygene  or  oommon  air.

Thefe  fails  will  be  reafoned  upon  in  the  next
divifion.


(  362  )

VII.  Of  tie  refpiration  of  Nitrons  Oxide  hy
amphihioiis  Animals.

As  from  the  foregoing  experiments,  it  ap-
peared that  the  nitrous  oxide  deflroyed  warm-
blooded animals  by  increafing  the  living  aflion
of  their  organs  to  fiich  an  extent,  as  finally  to
exhaull  their  irritability  and  fenlibility  ;  it  was
reafonable  to  conje6ture  that  the  cold-blooded
animals,  poilefled  of  voluntary  power  over  ref-
piration,  would  fo  regulate  the  quantity  of
nitrous  oxide  applied  to  the  blood  in  their  lungs
BS  to  bear  its  allien  for  a  great  length  of  time.
This  conje(?ture  was  put  to  the  teft  of  experi-
ment;  the  following  fadls  will  prove  its  error.

a.  Of  two  middle-fized  water-lizards,  one  was
introduced  into  a  fmall  jar  filled  with  nitrous
oxide,  over  moifl  mercury,  by  being  paflcd
throqgh  the  mercury  ;  the  other  was  made  to
breathe  hydrogene,  by  being  carried  into  it  in
the  fame  manner.

The  lizard  in  nitrous  oxide,  in  two  or  three
minutes,  began   to  make  violent  motions,  ap-


rxar^


(   363  )

peared  very  unenfy,  and  rolled  about  the  jar  in
every  direflion,  fometimes  attempting  to  climb
to  the,  top  of  it.  The  animal  in  hydrogene  was
all  this  time  very  quiet,  and  crawled  about  the
veflel  without  being  apparently  much  afFefled.
At  the  end  of  twelve  minutes,  the  lizard  in
nitrous  oxide  was  lying  on  his  back  feemingly
dead ;  but  on  agitating  the  jar  he  moved  a  little  ;
at  the  end  of  fifteen  minutes  he  did  not  move
on  agitation,  and  his  paws  were  reftingonhisbelly.
He  was  now  taken  out  fiifF  and  apparently  life-
lefs,  but  after  being  expoled  to  the  atmofphcrc
for  three  or  four  minutes,  took  an  infpira-
tion,  and  moved  his  head  a  little ;  he  then
raifed  the  end  of  his  tail,  though  the  middle  of
it  was  (till  ftifFand  did  not  bend  when  touched.
His  four  legs  remained  clofe  to  his  fide,  and
were  apparently  ufelefs  ;  but  on  pricking  them
with  the  point  of  a  lancet,  they  became  con-
vulfed.  After  being  introduced  into  fhallow
water,  he  was  able  to  crawl  in  a  quarter  of
an  hour,  though  his  motions  were  very  irre-
gular.    In  an  hour   he  was  quite  well.      The


•ifciMihrrii'^-  'inii-^irnTTtfrirr^


{  3t)4  )

animal  in  hydrogene  appeared  to  have  fuffered
very  little  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  and
had  raifed  himfelf  againft  the  fide  of  the  jar.
At  the  end  of  an  hour  he  was  taken  out,  and
very  foon  recovered.

h.  Some  hours  after,  the  fame  lizards  were
again  experimented  upon.  That  which  had
been  inferted  into  hydrogene  in  the  laft
experiment,  being  now  inferted  into  nitrous
oxide.

This  lizard  was  apparently  lifelefs  in  fourteen
minutes,  having  tumbled  and  writhed  himfelf
very  much  during  the  firft  ten  minutes.  Taken
out  after  being  in  twenty-five  minutes,  he  did  not
recover.  The  other  lizard  lived  in  hydro-
gene for  near  an  hour  and  quarter,  taken  out
after  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes,  he  was  dead.

Thefe  animals  were  both  opened,  but  the
vifcera  of  the  nitrous  oxide  lizard  were  fo  much
injured  by  the  knife,  that  no  accurate  compa-
rifon  of  them  with  thofe  of  the  other  could  be
made,  I  thought  that. the  lungs  appeared  rather
redder.


-_  i!^'*ii:i^j  i-XL.


(  365  )

a.  Of  two  fimilar  large  water-lizards,  one
was  introduced  into  a  veflel  Handing  over  mer-
cury, wholly  filled  with  water  that  had  been
long  boiled  and  fufFered  to  cool  under  mercury.

The  animal  very  often  rofe  to  the  top  of  the
jar  as,  if  in  fearch  of  air,  during  the  firft  half
hour  ;  but  (hewed  no  other  figns  of  uneafinefs.
At  the  end  of  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  he
became  very  weak,  and  appeared  fcarcely  able
to  fwim  in  the  water.  Taken  out  at  the  end
of  fifty  minutes,  he  recovered.

The  other  was  inferted  into  nitrous  oxide.
After  much  ftruggling,  he  became  fenfelefs
in  about  fifteen  minutes,  and  lay  on  his  back.
Taken  out  at  the  end  of  twenty  minutes,  he
remained  for  a  long  time  motionlefs  and  fiifF,
but  in  a  quarter  o^  an  hour,  began  to  move
fome  of  his  limbs.

From  thefe  experiments,  we  may  conclude,
that  water-lizards,  and  moft  probably  the  other
amphibious  animals,  die  in  nitrous  oxide  in  a
much  fhorter  time  than  in  hydrogene  or  pure
water ;  confequently  their  death  in   it   cannot


(  366  )

depcndon  the  fimple  privation  of  atmofpheiic  air.
At  the  feafon  of  the  year  in  which  this  in-
veftigation  was  carried  on,  I  was  unable  to
procure  frogs  or  toads.  This  I  regret  very  much.
Suppofing  that  cold-blooded  animals  die
in  nitrous  oxide  from  politive  changes  ef-
fedied  in  their  blood  by  the  gas,  it  would  be
extremely  interefting  to  notice  the  apparent  al-
terations taking  place  in  their  organs  of  refpira-
tion  and  circulation  during  its  adlion,  which
could  ealily  be  done,  the  membranous  fubftance
of  their  lungs  being  tranfparent.  The  increafe  or
diminution  of  the  irritability  of  their  mufcular
fibre,  might  be  determined  by  comparative  gal-
vanic experiments.

VIII.  EffeBs  of  fohtion  of  nitrous  oxide  in
water  on  Fifhes,

a,  A  fmall  flounder  was  introduced  into  a
vefTel  filled  with  folution  of  nitrous  oxide  in
water  over  mercury.  He  remained  at  refl:  for
ten  minutes  and  then  began  to  move  about  the


(  367  )

jar  in  different  directions.  In  a  half  an  hour  he
was  apparently  dying,  lying  on  his,  fide  in  the
water.  He  was  now  taken  out,  and  introduced
into  a  veflel  filled  with  water  faturated  with
common  air,  he  very  Toon  recovered.

h.  Of  two  large  thornbacks,^^  equally  brifk
and  lively.  One,  A,  was  introduced  into  a  jar
containing  nearly  3  cubic  inches  of  water,
faturated  with  nitrous  oxide,  and  which  pre-
vious to  its  impregnation  had  been  long  boiled  ;
the  other,  B,  was  introduced  into  an  equal
quantity  of  water  which  had  been  deprived  of
air  by  diftillation  through  mercury.'

A,  appeared   very    quiet    for  two   or   three
minutes,  and  then  began  to  move  up  and  down
in  the  jar,  as  if  agitated.     In  eight  minutes  his
motions  became  very  irregular,  and   he  darted-
obliquely  from  one  fide  ofthe  jar  to  the  other.


•^  I  ufe  the  popular  name.  This  fiili  is  very  common  in
every  part  of  England  3  it  is  nearly  of  the  fame  fize  and
color  as  the  minnow,  and  is  diftinguilhed  from  it  by  two
fmall  bony  excrefences  at  the  origin  of  the  belly.  It  H
extremely  fufceptible.


(  368  )

In  twelve  minutes,  he  became  ftill^  and  moved
his  gills  very  llowly.  In  fifteen  minutes  he
appeared  dead.  After  fixteen  minutes  he  was
taken  out,  but  (hewed  no  figns  of  life.

B  was  very  quiet  for  four  minutes  and  half.
He  then  began  to  move  about  the  jar.  In
feven  minutes  he  had  fallen  on  his  back,  but
ftill  continued  to  move  his  gills.  In  eleven
minutes  he  v^as  motionlefs  ;  taken  out  after
thirteen  minutes,  he  did  not  recover.

c.  Of  two  thornbacks,  one,  C  was  introduced
into  about  an  ounce  of  boiled  water  in  contadl
with  hydrogene,  fianding  over  mercury.  The
other,  D,  was  introduced  into  well  boiled  wa-
ter faturated  with  nitrous  oxide,  and  (landing
in  contaft  with  it  over  mercury.  C  lived  near
thirteen  minutes^  and  died  without  being  pre-
vioufly  much  agitated.  D  was  apparently
motionlefs,  after  having  the  fame  afFedlions  as
A  in  the  laft  experiment,  in  fixteen  minutes.
At  the  end  of  this  time  he  was  taken  out  and
introduced  into  common  water.  He  foon  began
to  move  his  gills,  and  in  lefs  than  a  quarter  of


(  369  )

an  hour  was  Co  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to
fwim.

The  laft  experiment  was  repeated  on  two
fmaller  thornbacks  ;  that  in  the  aqueous  iblution
of  nitrous  oxide  lived  near  fcventeen  minutes,
that  in  the  water  in  contadl  with  hydrogene^
about  fifteen  and  half.

The  experiments  in  Ref.  I.  Div.  3,  prove
the  difficulty,  and  indeed  almofl  impoffibility  of
driving  from  water  by  boiling,  the  whole  of  the
atmofpheric  air  held  in  folution  by  it  ;  they
likewife  (how  that  nitrous  oxide  by  its  flrong
affinity  for  water,  is  capable  of  expelling  air  from
that  fluid  after  no  more  can  be  procured  from  it
by  ebullition.

Hence,  if  water  faturated  with  nitrous  oxide
had  no  pofitive  effedls  upon  fifhes  ;  they  ought
to  die  in  it  much  fooner  than  in  water  deprived
of  air  by  ebullition.  From  their  living  in  it  rather
longer;*  we  may  conclude^  that  they  are  de-
ilroyed  not  by  privation  of  atmofpheric  air,  but


*  A  priori  I  expe6ted  that   fitlieS;,  like  amphibious  ani-
mals would  have  been  very  quickly  deftroyed  by  the  a6tioa

of  nitrous  oxide.

Z


(  370  )

from    Ibme  pofitive    change  efFeSed    in    their
blood  by  the  gas.

A  long  while  ago,  from  obferving  that  the
gills  of  filli  bec»?he  rather  of  a  lighter  red  du-
ring their  death,  in  the  atmofphere  ;  I  con-
jedlured  that  the  difeafe  of  which  they  died,
was  probably  hyperoxygenation  of  the  blood
conne6led  with  highly  increafed  animal  heat.
For  not  only  is  oxygene  prefented  to  their
blood  in  much  larger  quantities  in  atmofphe-
ric  air  than  in  its  aqueous  folution  ;  but  like-
wife,  to  ufe  comm.on  language,  in  a  ftate  in
which  it  contains  much  more  latent  heat.
Without  however  laying  any  ftrefs  on  this
fuppofition,  I  had  the  curiofity  to  try  whether
thornbacks  would  live  longetl  in  atmofpheric
air  or  nitrous  oxide.  In  one  experiment,  they
appeared  to  die  in  them  nearly  in  the  fame
time.  In  another,  the  fifli  in  nitrous  oxide  lived
nearly  halfaslongagain  as  that  in  atmofphericair.

XL    Effe&s  of  Nitrous  Oxide   oti   Inje6ts.
The  winged  infefls  furnitlied  with  breathing


(  371  )

holes,  become  molionl^fs  in  nitrous  o;;ide  very
fpeecllly  ;  being  however  pofTeiTecl  of  a  certain
voluntary  power  over  relpiration,  they  fometimes
rccovtr,  after  having  been  expofed  to  it  for  fome
minulcp,  under  the  action  of  atmofpheric  air.

A  butterfly  was  introduced  into  a  fmall  jar,
filled  with  pure  nitrous  oxide,  over  mercury.
He  ftruggied  a  little  during  the  firft  two  or
three  fcconds ;  in  about  feven  fcconds,  his  leg^
became  convulfed,  and  his  wings  were  wrapt
round  his  body  ;  in  about  half  a  minute  he
was  fenfelefs  ;  taken  out  after  fix  minutes,  he
did  not  recover.

Another  butterfly  introduced  into  hydrogene,
became  convulfed  in  about  a  quarter  of  a  minute^
was  fenfelefs  in  twenty  fcconds,  and  taken  out
after  five  minutes,  did  not  revive.

A  large  drone,  after  being  in  nitrous  oxide
for  a  minute  and  a  quarter,  was  taken  out  fenfe-
lefs. After  being  for  fome  time  expofed  to  the
atmofphere,  he  began  to  move,  and  at  lafl  rofe
on  his  wings.  For  fome  time,  however,  he  was
xmable  to  fly  in  a  ftraight  line  ;  and  often  after


(  372   )

defcribing  circles  in  the  air,  fell  to  the  ground
as  if  giddy.

A  large  fly,  became  motionlefs  in  nitrous
oxide  after  being  convulfed,  in  about  half  a  mi-
nute. Another  was  rendered  fenfelefs  in  hydro-
gene,  in  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  a  minute.

A  fly  introduced  into  hydrocarbonate,  dropt
immediately  fenfelefs  ;  taken  out  after  about  a
quarter  of  a  minute,  he  recovered  ;  but  like  the
fly  that  had  lived  after  expofure  to  nitrous
oxide,  was  for  fome  time  vertiginous.

Flies  live  much  longer  under  water,  alco-
hol, or  oil,  than  in  non-refpirable  gafes,  or
gafes  incapable  of  fupporting  life.  A  certain
quantity  of  air  always  continues  attached  in  the
fluid  to  the  fine  hairs  furrounding  their  breathing
holes,  fufficient  to  fupport  life  for  a  fliort  time.

Snails  and  earth-worms,  live  in  nitrous  oxide
a  long  while ,  they  die  in  it  however,  much
fooner  than  in  water  or  hydrogene ;  probably
from  the  fame  caufes  as  the  amphibious  animals.


DIVISION    II.

Of  the  CHANGES  effected  in  NITROUS  OXIDE,
and  other  GASES,  by  the  RESPIRATION  of
ANIMALS.


i

I.     Prelimifiaries.

xVs  loon  as  I  had  difcovered  that  nitrous  oxide
was  refpirable,  and  pofTefTed  of  extraordinary
powers  of  action  dn  living  beings,  I  was  anxious
to  be  acquainted  with  the  changes  efFedled  in
it  by  the  venous  blood.  To  invefligate  thefe
changes,  appeared  at  firft  a  fimple  problem ;
I  foon  however  found  that  it  involved  much
preliminar)'  knowledge  of  the  chemical  proper-
ties and  affinities  of  nitrous  oxide.  After  I  had
afcertained  by  experiments  detailed  in  the  pre-
ceding Refearches,  the  compofition  of  this  gas


(374   )

its  combinations,  and  the  phyfical  changes
efFedled  by  it  in  living  beings,  I  began  my  en-
quiry relating  to  the  mode  of  its  operation.

Finding  that  the  refidual  gas  of  nitrous  oxide
after  it  had  been  breathed  for  fome  time  in  filk
bags,  was  chiefly  nitrogene,  I  at  firft  conjec-
tured that  nitrous  oxide  was  decompofed  in
refpiration  in  the  fame  manner  as  atmofpheric
air,  and  its  oxygene  only  combined  with  the
venous  blood  ;  the  folloVing  experiments  foon
however  convinced  me  of  my  erron

11.  AhforptiGn  of  Nitrous  Oxide  hy  venous
Hooch  Changes  effected  in  the  blood  by  dif-
ferent Gafes,

a.  Though  the  laws  of  the  coagulability  of
the  blood  are  unknown,  yet  we  are  certain
that  at  the  moment  of  coagulation,  a  per-
fectly new  arrangement  of  its  principles  takes
place  ;  confcquently,  their  powers  of  combina-
tion muft  be  newly  modified.     The  affinities  of


(  375  )

living  blood  can  only  be  afcertained  during  its
circulation  in  the  veilels  of  animals.  At  the
moment  of  effiifion  from  thofe  veffels,  it  begins
to  pafs  through  a  feries  of  changes,  which
firft  produce  coagulation,  and  finally  its  com-
pleat  decompofition.

Confequently,  the  aflion  of  fluid  blood  upon
gafes  out  of  the  veflels,  will  be  more  analogous
to  that  of  circulating  blood  in  proportion  as  it  is
more  fpeedily  placed  in  contadl:  with  them.

b.    To  afcertain  the  changes  efFeded   in  ni
trous  oxide  by  fluid  venous  blood.

Ajar,  fix  inches  long  and  half  an  inch  wide^
graduated  to  ,05  cubic  inches,  having  a  tight
fl:opper  adapted  to  it,  was  filled  with  nitrogene,
which  is  a  gas  incapable  of  combining  with,  and
pofleflingno  power  of  a*fl ion  upon  venous  blood.
A  large  orifice  was  made  in  the  vein  of  a  tole-
rably healthy  man,  and  the  Itopper  removed
from  the  jar,  which  was  brought  in  contad  with
the  arm  fo  as  to  receive  the  blood,  and  prefTed
clofe  againfl  the  fkin,  in  fuch  a  way  as  to  leave  an
orifice  jufl  fuflicient  for  the  efcape  of  the  nitro-


(  370  )

gene^  as  the  blood  flowed  in.  When  the  jar  was  full^
it  was  clofed,  and  carried  to  the  pneumatic;
apparatus,  the  mercury  of  which  had  been  pre-
vioufly  a  little  warmed.  A  fmall  quantity  of
the  blood  was  transferred  into  another  jar  tq
make  room  for  the  gas.  The  remaining  quantity
equalled  exadly  two  cubic  inches  ;  to  this  was
introduced  as  fpeedily  as  pofQble,  eleven  mea-
fures  equal  to  ,55  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide,
which  left  a  refiduum  of  —  only,  when  abforb-
ed  by  boiled  water,  and  was  confequently,  per-
fedlly  pure.  On  agitation,  a  rapid  diminution
of  the  gas  took  place.

In  the  mafs  of  blood  which  was  opaque,
but  little  change  of  color  could  be  perceived  ;  but
that  portion  of  it  diffufed  over  the  tides  of  the
jar,  was  evidently  of  a  brighter  purple  than  the
venous  blood.

It  was  agitated  for  two  or  three  minutes,  and
then  fufFered  to  refi^ ;  in  eight  minutes  it  had
wholly  coagulated ;  a  fmall  quantity  of  fe-
rum  had  fcparated,  and  was  diffufed  over  thq
coagulum.      This   coagulum   was  dark;    but


(  37;  )  '

evidently  of  a  more  purple  tinge  than  that  of
venous  blood  ;  no  gas  had  apparently  been  libe-
rated during  its  formation.

The  nitrous  oxide  remaining,  was  not  quite
equal  to  feven  meafures ;  hence,  at  lead  four
meafures  of  it  had  been  abforbed.

To  afcertain  the  nature  of  the  refiduum,  it
was  neceflary  to  transfer  it  into  another  veffel ,
but  this  I  found  very  difficult  to  accomplifh,  on
account  of  the  coagulated  blood.  By  piercing
through  the  coagalum  and  removing  part
of  it  by  means  of  curved  iron  forceps,  I
at  lafi:  contrived  to  introduce  about  4^  mea-
fures of  the  gas  into  a  fmall  cylinder,  gra-
duated to  ,"25  cubic  inches,  in  which  it  occu-
pied of  courfe,  nearly  Q  meafures  ;  when  a  lit-
tle folution  of  ftrontian  was  admitted  to  thefe,
it  became  very  flightly  clouded  ;  but  the  abforp-
tion  that  took  place  did  not  more  than  equal
half  its  bulk.  Confequently,  the  quantity  of
carbonic  acid  evolved  from  the  blood,  or  formed,
inuft  have  been  extremely  minute.

On  the  introdudion  of  pure  water,  a  rapid


(  378   )

abforption  of  the  gas  took  place,  and  after  agi-
tation, not  quite  3  meafures  remained.  Thefe
did  not  ^erceptihly  diminifh  with  nitrous  gas  ;
their  quantity  was  too  fmall  to  be  examined  by
any  other  teft ;  but  there  is  reafon  to  fuppofe
that  they  were  chiefly  compofed  of  nitrogene.

From  this  experiment,  it  appeared  that  ni-
trous oxide  is  abforbed  when  placed  in  contadl
with  venous  blood  ;  at  the  fame  time,  that  i
very  minute  quantity  of  carbonic  acid  and
probably  nitrogene  is  produced.

c.  In  another  fimilar  experiment  when  nearly
half  a  cubic  inch  of  nitrous  oxide  was  abforbed
by  about  a  cubic  inch  and  three  quarters  of
fluid  blood,  the  refidual  gas  did  not  equal  more
than  — ,  the  quantity  abforbed  being  taken  as
unity.  This  fa6l  induced  me  to  fuppofe  that
the  abforption  of  nitrous  oxide  by  venous  blood,
was  owing  to  a  (imple  folution  of  the  gas  in  that
fluid,  analogous  to  its  folution  in  water  or  alcohol.

To  afcertain  if  nitrous  oxide  could  be  ex-
pelled from  blood  impregnated  with  it,  by
heat :  I  introduced  to  1  cubic  inches  of  fluid


(  379  )

blood  taken  from   the  medial  vein,   about  ,6
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide.    After  agitation,
in  feven  minutes  nearly  ,4^were  abforbed.    In
ten  minutes,  after  the   blood    had   completely
coagulated,    the   cylinder   containing  it,    was
transferred  in  conta(5l  with  mercury,  into  a  veiTel
offolution  of  fait  in    water;  this  folution   was
heated  and  made  to  boil.    During  its  ebullition,
the  whole  of  the  blood  became  either   white  or
pale   brown,    and    formed    a    folid    coherent
mafs  ;  whilft  fmall  globules  of  gas  were  given
out  from  it.     In  a  few  minutes,  about   ,25  of
gas  had  colleded.     After  the  veflel  had  cooled,
I  attempted  to  transfer  this   gas  into   a   fmall
graduated  jar  in  the   mercurial  apparatus,  but
in  vain  ;  the  mafs  in  the  jar  was   fo    folid    and
tough,  that  I  could  not  remove    it.     By  tranf-
ferring  it  to  the  water  apparatus,  I  fucceeded  in
difplacing  enough  of  the   coagulum    to    fufFer
the  water  to  come  in  contad  with  the  gas  ;  an
abforption  of  nearly  half  of  it  took  place  ;  hence,
J  conjeBure^  that  nitrous  oxide  had  been   given
out  by  the  impregnated  blood.


(  380  )

d.  Some  frefh  dark  coagulum  of  venous
blood,  was  expofed  to  nitrous  oxide.  A  very
flight  alteration  of  color  took  place  at  the  fur-
face  of  the  blood,  perceptible  only  in  a  flrong
light,  and  a  minute  quantity  of  gas  was  ah-
forbed.  A  taper  burnt  in  the  remaining  gas
as  brilliantly  as  before,  hence,  it  had  apparently
fufFered  no  alteration.

e.  To  compare  the  phyfical  changes  efFe6\ed
in  the  venous  blood  by  nitrous  oxide,  with  thofe
produced  by  other  gafes,  I  made  the  follow-
ing experiments. — I  filled  a  large  phial,  con-
taing  near  14  cubic  inches^  with  blood  from
the  vein  of  the  arm  of  a  man,  and  immediately
transferred  it  to  the  mercurial  apparatus.  Dif-
ferent portions  of  it  were  thrown  into  fmall
graduated  cylinders,  filled  with  the  following
gafes :  nitrogcne,  nitrous  gas,  common  air,
oxygene,  nitrous  oxide,  carbonic  acid,  and
hydrocarbonate.

The  blood  in  each  of  them  was  fucceflively
agitated  till  it  began  to  coagulate  ;  and  making
allowances  for  the  different  periods  of  agitation^


(   381   )

there  was  no  marked  difference  in  the  times  of
coagulation.

The  color  of  the  coagukim  in  every  part  of
the  cylinder,  containing  nitrogene,  was  the
fame  very  dark  reel.  When  it  was  agitated  fo
as  to  tinge  the  fides  of  the  jar,  it  appeared
exa6lly  of  the  color  of  venous  blood  received
between  two  furfaces  of  glafs  ;  no  perceptible
abforption  of  the  gas  had  taken  place.

The  blood  in  nitrous  gas  was  dark,  and  much
more  purple  on  the  top  than  that  in  nitrogcne.
When  agitated  fo  as  to  adhere  to  the  jar  as  a
thin  lurface^  this  purple  was  evidently  deep
and  bright.  An  abforption  of  rather  more
than  ~  of  the  volume  of  gas  had  taken  place.

The  blood  in  oxygene  and  atmofpheric  air,
were  of  a  much  brighter  tinge  than  that  in  any
of  the  other  gafes.  On  the  top,  the  color  was
vermilion,  but  no  perceptible  abforption  had
taken  place.

The  coagulum  in  nitrous  oxide,  when  exa-
mined in  the  mafs  was  dark,  and  hardly  diftin-
guifhable  in  its  color  from  venous  blood  ;  but
when  minutely  noticed  at  thefurface  where  it  was


(  382  )

covered  with  fer.um,  and  in  its  diffafion  over
the  fides  of  the  jar,  it  appeared  of  a  fine  pur-
ple red,  a  tinge  brighter  than  the  blood  in  nitrous
gas.  An  abforption  had  taken  place  in  this
cylinder,  more  confiderable  than  in  any  of  the
others.

In  carbonic  acid,  the  coagulum  was  of  a
brown  red,  much  darker  than  the  venous  blood,
and  a  flight  diminution  of  gas  had  taken  place.

In  the  hydrocarbonate,*  the  blood  was  red,
a  fhade  darker  than  the  oxygenated  blood,  and
a  very  flight  diminution  of  the  gas-}"  was  percep-
tible.

/.  To  human  blood  that  had  been  fatura-
ted  with  nitrous  oxide  whilft  warm  and  con-
flantly  agitated  for  four  or  Ave  minutes,  to
prevent  its  uniform  coagulation,  oxygene  was
introduced  ;  the  red  purple  on  the  furface  of  it.


*  The  hydrocarbonate  employed,  was  procured  from
alcohol,  by  means  of  fulphurlc  acid.  This  gas  contains
more  carbon,  than  hydrocarbonate  from  water  and  charcoal.

'[  The  curious  fa6t  of  the  reddening  of  venous  blood  by
hydrocarbonate,  was  difcovered  by  Dr,  Beddoes.


(  383  )

immediately  changed  to  vermilion  ;  and  on
agitation,  this  color  was  difFufed  through  it.
On  comparing  the  tinge  with  that  of  oxygena-
ted blood,  no  perceptible  difference  could  be
obferved.  No  change  of  volume  of  the  oxy-
gene  introduced,  had  taken  place  ;  and  confe-
quently,  no  nitrous  oxide  had  been  evolved
from  the  blood.

g.  Blood,  impregnated  with  nitrous  gas,  was
expofed  to  oxygene ;  but  after  agitation  in  it
for  many  minutes,  no  change  of  its  dark  purple
tinge  could  be  obferved,  though  a  flight  dimi-
nution of  the  oxygene  appeared  to  take  place.

^.  Blood  that  had  been  rendered  vermilion
in  every  part  by  long  agitation  in  atmofpheric
air,  the  coagulum  of  which  was  broken  and
diffufed  with  thecoagulable  lymph  through  the
ferum,  was  expofed  to  nitrous  oxide  ;  for  fome
minutes  no  perceptible  change  of  color  took
place  ;  but  by  agitation  for  two  or  three  hours,
it  evidently  affumed  a  purple  tinge,  whilft  a
a  flight  abforption  of  gas  took  place.     It  never


(  381  )

however,    became   nearly  fo   dark   as   venous
blood  that  had  been  expofed  to  nitrous  oxide.

i.  Blood,  oxygenated  in  the  fame  manner
as  in  the  laft  experiment,  the  coagulum  of
which  had  been  broken,  was  expofed  to  nitrous
gas.  The  furface  of  it  immediately  became
purple,  and  by  agitation  for  a  few  minutes,  this
color  was  diffufed  through  it.  A  flight  dimi-
nution of  the  gas  was  obferved.  On  comparing
the  tinge  with  that  of  venous  blood  that  had
been  previoufly  expofed  to  nitrous  gas,  there
was  no  perceptible  difference.

k.  Blood  expofed  to  oxygenated  muriatic  acid
is  wholly  altered  in  its  conftitution  and  phyfical
properties,  as  has  been  often  noticed ;  the
coagulum  becomes  black  in  fome  parts,  and
brown  and  white  in  others.  Venous  blood,  after
agitation  in  hydrogene  or  nitrogene,  oxyge-
nates when  expofed  to  the  atmofphere  in  the
fame  manner  as  fimple  venous  blood.  I  had
the  curiofity  to  try  whether  venous  blood
expofed  to  hydrogene,  would  retain  its  power
of    being     oxygenated     longer    than     blood


(   385  )

Saturated  with  nitrous  oxide  :  for  this  pufpofs

fome  fimilar  black  coagulum   was   agitated  for

fometimc  in  two  phials,  one  filled  with  hydrogene,

the  other  with  nitrous  oxide.    They  were  then

fufFered  to  re(l  for  three  days  at    a    temperature

from  about  56°  to  63".     After  being  opened,  no

ofFenfive  fmell  was  perceived  in  either  of  them,

the  blood  in  hydrogene  was  rather  darker  than

at  the  time  of  their  expofure,  whilft  that    in

nitrous  oxide    was   of  a  brighter  purple.      Oa

being  agitated  for  fome  time  in  the  atmofphere,

the  blood  in  nitrous  oxide  became  red,  but  not

of  fo   bright   a   tinge   as    oxygenated  venous

blood.     The  color  of  the  blood    in    hydrogene

did  not  at  all  alter.

/.  To  afcertain  whether  impregnation  with
nitrous  oxide  accelerated  or  retarded  the  putre-
fadlion  of  the  blood  ;  I  expofed  venous  blood  in
four  phials,  the  firft  filled  with  hydrocarbonate,
the  fecond  with  hydrogene  ;  the  third  w^th  atmof-
pheric  air,  and  the  fourth  with  nitrous  oxide.
Examined  after  a  fortnight,  the  blood  in  hydro-
gene and  common  air  were  both  black,  and  flunk

Aa


(  386  )

very  much  ;  that  in  hydrocarbonale  was  red*
and  perfeflly  fweet;  ihatin  nitrons  oxide  appear-
ed purple  and  had  no  difagreeable  fmell.

In  a  fecond  experiment,  when  blood  was
expofed  for  three  weeks  to  hydrocarbonate  and
nitrous  oxide,  that  in  nitrous  oxide  was  darker
than  before  and  flunk  a  little  ;  that  in  hydro-
carbonate  was  flill  perfe6ily  fweet.  The  power
of  hydrocarbonate  to  prevent  the  putrefadlicn
of  animal  matters,  was  long  ago  noticed  by
Mr.  Watt.

m.  Having  accidentally  cut  one  of  my  fingers
fo  as  to  lay  bare  a  little  mufcular  fibre,  I  intro-
duced it  whilft  bleeding  into  a  bottle  of  nitrous
oxide  ;  the  blood  that  trickled  from  the  wound
evidently  became  much  more  purple ;  but  the
pain  was  neither  alleviated  or  increafed.  When
however^  the  finger  was  taken  out  of  the  nitrous
oxide  and  expofed  to  the  atmofphere,  the  wound
fmarted  more  than  it  had  done  before.  After  it
had  ceafed  to  bleed,  I  inferted  it  through  wa-
ter into  a  vefTel  of  nitrous  gas  ;  but  it  did  not
become  more  painful  than  before.


(   387  )

From  all  thefe  obfervations,  we  may  conclude^j

ift.  That  when  nitrous  oxide  is  agitated  in
fluid  venous  blood,  a  certain  portion  of  the  gas
is  abforbed  ;  whilft  the  color  of  the  blood
changes  from  dark  red  to  red  purple.

2dly.  That  during  the  abforption  of  nitrous
oxide  by  the  venous  blood,  minute  portions  of
nitrogene  and  carbonic  acid  are  produced,  either
by  evolution  from  the  blood,  or  from  a  decom-
pofition  of  part  of  the  nitrous  oxide.

3dly.  That  venous  blood  impregnated  with
nitrous  oxide  is  capable  of  oxygenation  ;  and
vice  verfa ;  that  oxygenated  blood  may  be  com-
bined with  nitrous  oxide.

When  blood  feparated  into  coagulum  and
ferum,  is  expofed  to  nitrous  oxide,  it  is  moft
probable  that  the  gas  is  chiefly  abforbed  by  the
ferum.  That  nitrous  oxide  however  is  capable
ofa6ling  upon  the  coagulum,  is  evident  from
d.  In  the  fluid  blood,  as  we  (hall  fee  hereafter,
nitrous  oxide  is  abforbed  by  the  attractions  of
the  whole  compound.


^ftSm^iumtrntmrnm^m^mm^immmmtt^^i'''^!*^


(  388   )

III.  Of  tie  changes  effe^ed  in  Nitrous  Oindt
hy  Rejpration,

To  afccrlain  wbctbcr  the  changes  efFe61ed  in
nitrous  oxide  by  the  circulating  blood  acting
through  the  moid  coats  of  the  pulmonary  vein^
of  living  animals,  were  highly  analogous  to
thofe  produced  in  it  by  fluid  venous  blood
removed  from  the  veflels,  I  found  extremely
difficult.

I  have  before  obferved,  that  when  animals
are  made  to  refpire  nitrous  oxide,  a  certain  ab-
forption  of  the  gas  always  takes  place  ;  but  the
fmaller  animals,  the  only  ones  that  can  be
experimented  upon  in  the  mercurial  apparatus,
die  in  nitrous  oxide  fo  fpeedily  and  occafion  fo
flight  a  diminution  of  gas,  that  T  judged  it
ufelefs  to  attempt  to  analife  the  refiduum  of
their  refpiration,  which  fupports  flame  as  well
as  pure  nitrous  oxide,  and  is  chiefly  abforba-
ble  by  water.

In  the  infancy  of  my  refearches,  I  often
refpired  nitrous  oxide  in  a  large  glafs  bell,  fur-


(  389  )

Tirfliecl  with  a  breathing  tube  and  ftopcock,  and
poifed  in  water  faturated  with  the  gas.

In  two  or  three  experiments  in  which  thenof-
trils  being  clofed  after  the  exhauftion  of  the
lungs,  the  gas  was  infpired  from  the  bell  and
refpired  into  it,  a  coniiderable  diminution  was
perceived,  and  by  the  teft  of  lime  water  fomc
carbonic  acid  appeared  to  have  been  fornied  ;
but  on  account  of  the  abforption  of  this  carbo-
nic acid  by  the  impregnated  water,  and  the
liberation  of  nitrous  oxide  from  it,  it  was  im-
poffible  to  determine  with  the  lead  accuracy,
the  quantities  of  products  after  refpiration.

About  this  time  likewife,  I  often  examined
the  refiduum  of  nitrous  oxide,  after  it  had  been
refpired  in  (ilk  bags.  In  thefe  experiments
when  the  gas  had  been  breathed  for  along  time,
a  confidcrable  diminution  of  it  was  obferved,
and  the  remainder  extinguitlied  flame  and  gave
a  very  flight  diminution  with  nitrous  gas.  But
the  great  quantity  of  this  remainder  as  well  as
other  phaenomcna,  convinced  me  that  though
the  oiled  lilk   was   apparently   air  tight  when


(  390  )

dry,  under  flight  preflure,  yet  during  the  adtion
of  refpiration,  the  moid  and  warm  gas  expired^
penetrated  through  it,  vvhilft  conimon  air  en-
tered through  the  wetted  furface.

To  afcertain  accurately,  the  changes  efFc(3ed
in  nitrous  oxide  by  refpiration,  I  was  obliged  to
make  ufeof  the  large  mercurial  airholder  men-
tioned in  Refearch  I.  of  the  capacity  of  200
cubic  inches.  The  upper  cylinder  of  it  was
accurately  balanced  fo  as  to  be  conftantly  un-
der the  preffiire  of  the  atmofphere.  To  an
aperture  in  it,  a  flop  cock  having  a  very  large
orifice  was  adapted,  curved  and  flattened  at  its
upper  extremity,  fo  as  to  form  an  air-tight
mouth-piece.

By  accurately  clofing  the  nofe,  and  bringing
the  lips  tight  on  the  mouth-piece,  after  a  few
trials  I  was  able  to  breathe  oxygene  or  com-
mon air  in  this  machine  for  two  minutes  or  two
minutes  and  half,  without  any  other  uneafy
feeling  than  that  produced  by  the  inclination  of
the  neck  and  cheft  towards  the  cylinder.  The
power  of  uniformly  exbaufting  the  lungs  and


(  391  )

fauces  to  the  fame  extent,  I  did  not  acquire  till
after  many  experiments.  At  laft^  by  preferving
exadlly  the  fame  pofture  after  exhauflion  of  the
lungs  before  the  infpiration  of  the  gas  to  be  ex-
perimented upon,  and  during  its  compleat  expi-
ration, I  found  that  I  could  always  retain  nearly
the  fame  quantity  ofgas  in  the  bronchial  vefiels
and  fauces  ;  the  difference  in  the  volume  expi-
red at  different  times,  never  amounting  to  a
cubic  inch  and  half.

By  connedling  the  conduciing  pipe  of  the
mercurial  airholder,  during  the  refpiration  of
the  gas,  with  a  fmall  trough  of  mergury  by
means  of  a  curved  tube,  it  became  a  perfedl
and  excellent  breathing  machine.  Fqr  by  ex-
erting a  certain  prelTure  on  the  airholding  cylin-
der, it  was  eafy  to  throw  a  quantity  of  gas
after  every  infpiration  or  expiration,  into
tubes  filled  with  mercury  flanding  in  the  trough.
In  thefe  tubes  it  could  be  accurately  analifed,
and  thus  the  changes  taking  place  at  different
periods  of  the  procefs  afcertained.

Whenever  I  breathed  pure  nitrous  oxide  in  the
mercurial  airholder,  after  a  compleat  voluntary  ex*


(   39'2   )

hauftion  of  my  lungs,  the  plealurable  delirium  wal
very  rapidly  produced,  andbeing  obliged  to  ftoop
on  the  cylinder,  the  determination  of  blood  to
my  head  from  the  increafed  arterial  adiion  in
lefs  than  a  minute  became  fo  great,  as  often  to
deprive  me  of  voluntary  power  over  the  mufcles
of  the  mouth.  Hence,  I  could  never  rely  on
the  accuracy  of  any  experiment,  in  which  the
•gas  had  been  refpired  for  more  than  three
quarters  of  a  minute.

I  was  able  to  refpire  the  gas  with  great  accu-
rac/Yor  more  than  half  a  minute  ;  it  at  firft,
rather  increafing  than  diminifhing  the  power  of
volition  ;  but  even  in  this  (hort  time,  very  ftrong
fenfations  were  always  produced,  with  fenfe  of
fulnefs  about  the  head,  fomewhat  alarming  ;  a
feeling  which  hardly  ever  occurs  to  me  when  the
gas  is  breathed  in  the  natural  pofture.

In  all  the  numerous  experiments  that  I  made
on  the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide  in  this  way,
a  very  confidernble  diminution  of  gas  always
took  place;  and  the  diminution  was  generally
^pparentiy  greater  to  the  eye  during  the  iirft
four  or  five  infpirations.


(  303  )

The  refidual  gas  of  an  experiment  was  alwayi^
examined  in  the  following  manner.  After  being
transferred  through  mercury  into  a  graduated
cylinder,  a  fmall  quantity  of  concentrated  folu-
tion  of  cauftic  potalh  was  introduced  to  it,  and
fufFered  to  remain  in  conta6l  with  it  for  fome
hours  ;  the  diminution  was  then  noted,  and  the
quantity  of  gas  abforbed  by  the  potafh,  judged
to  be  carbonic  acid.  To  the  remainder,  twice
its  bulk  of  pure  water  was  admitted.  After
agitation  and  reft .  for  four  or  five  hours,  the
abforption  by  this  was  noticed,  and  the  gas  ab-
forbed confidered  as  nitrous  oxide.  The  refi-
dual  unabforbable  gas  was  mingled  over  water
with  twice  its  bulk  of  nitrous  gas  ;  and  by  this
means,  its  compolition,  whether  it  confifted
wholly  of  nitrogene,  or  of  nitrogene  mingled
with  fmall  quantities  of  oxygene,  afcertained*

From  a  number  of  experiments  made  at
different  times  on  the  rcfpiration  of  nitrous
oxide,  I  feleft  the  following  as  the  moft  accu-
rate.


(  394  )

E.  1.  At  temperature  54°,  I  breathed  102
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide,  which  contained
near-^  common  air,  for  aboiit  half  a  minute,
feven  infpirations  and  feven  expirations  being
made.  After  every  expiration,  an  evident  dimi-
nution of  gas  was  perceived  ;  and  when  the  lail
full  expiration  was  made,  it  filled  a  fpace  equal
to  62  cubic  inche.s.

Thefe  62  cubic  inches  analifed,  were  found
to  confift  of

Carbonic  acid  . .  3,2
Nitrous  oxide  .  .  29,0
Oxygene  ....  4,1
Nitrogcne  ....        25,7


62,0


Hence,  accounting  for  the  two  cubic  inches  of
common  air  previoufly  mingled  with  the  nitrous
oxide,  71  cubic  inches  had  difappeared  in  this
experiment.

In  the  laft  refpirations,  the  quantity  of  gas
was  fo  much  diminifhed,  as  to  prevent  the  full
expanlion  of  the  lungs  5  and  hence  the  appa-


(  395  )

rent  diminution  was  very  much    lefs  after   the
firft  four  infpirations.

E.  2.  At  temperature  47°,  I  breathed  182
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide,  mingled  with  2^
cubicinchesofatmofphericairj  which  previoufly
exifted  in  the  airholder,  for  near  40  feconds ;
having  in  this  time  made  8  refpirations.  The
diminution  after  the  firft  full  infpiration,  ap-
peared to  a  by-ftander  nearly  uniform.  When
the  laft^compleat  expiration  was  made,  the  gas
filled  a  fpace  equal  to  128  cubic  inches,  the
common  temperature  being  reftored.  Thefe
126  cubic  inches  analifed,  were  found  to  con-
fift  of

Carbonic  acid      ....         5,25
Nitrous  oxide     ....      88,75

Oxygene  5,00

Nitrogene        29,00

Confequently,  in  this  experiment,  93,25  cubic
inches  of  nitrous  oxide  had  difappeared.

In  each  of  thefe   experiments,  the  cylinder
was  covered  v/ith  condenfed   watry   vapor  ex-


f  390  )

ailly  in  thei*ame  manner  as  if  common  air  had
been  breathed  in  it.  It  ought  to  be  oblcrved
that,  E.-].  was  made  in  the  morning,  four
hours  and  half  after  a  moderate  breakfaft ;
whereas,  E.  2.  was  made  but  an  hour  and  quar-
ter after  a  plentiful  dinner  ;  at  which  near  three-
fourths  of  a  pint  of  table-beer  had  been  drank.
From  thefe  experiments  we  learn,  that  nitrous
oxide  is  rapidly  abforbed  by  the  venous  blood,
through  the  moift  coats  of  the  pulmonary  veins.
But  as  after  a  compleat  voluntary  exhauftion
of  the  lungs,  much  relidual  air  mu(t  remain  in
the  bronchial  veffels  and  fauces,  as  appears  from
their  incapability  of  compleatly  collapfing",  it  is
evident  that  the  gas  expired  after  every  infpira-
tion  of  nitrous  oxide  mud  be  mingled  with  differ-
ent quantities  of  the  rcfidual  gas  of  the  lungs;*
whilft  after  a  complete  expiration,  much  of  the
unabforbcd  nitrous  oxide  muft  remain  as  refidual
gas  in  the  lungs.     Now  when  a  complete  expi-


*  By  lungs,  I  mean  in  this  place,  all  the  internal  organs
of  refpiration.


(  397  )

fation  is  made  after  the  breathing  of  atmofpheric
air,  it  is  evident  that  the  refidual  gasof  the
lungs  confifts  of  nitrogene,'^  mingled  with  fmall
portions  of  oxygene  and  earbonic  acid.  And
thefe  are  the  only  produces  found  after  the  ref-
piration  of  nitrous  oxide.

To  afcertain  whether  thefe  producls  were
partially  produced,  during  the  procefs  of  refpi-
ration,  as  I  was  -inclined  to  believe  from  the
experiments  in  the  laft  feifiion,  or  whether  they
were  wholly  the  refidual  gafes  of  the  lungs,  I
found  extremely  difficult.

I  at  fu'Ct  thought  of  bre;ithing  nitrous  oxide
immediately  after  my  lungs  had  beei^  filled  with
oxygene ;  and  to  compare  the  producfls  remain-
ing after  the  full  expiration,  with  thofe  pro-
duced after  a  full  expiration  of  pure  oxygene  ;
but  on  the  fuppofitioii  that  oxygene  and  nitrous
oxide,  when  applied  together  to  the  venous
blood,  mufi:  efFed  changes  in  it  dlPierent  from


•  Becaufe  thefe  products  are  formed  during  the  refpira-
tion  of  common  air.


t  ^98  f

cither  of  them  feparately,  the  idea  was  relin-
quifhed.

I  attempted  to  infpire  nitrous  oxide,  after  hav-
ing made  two  infpirations  and  a  complete  exphv
ration  of  hydrogen e  ;  but  in  this  experiment
the  efFedls  of  the  hydrogene  were  fo  debilitating,
and  the  confequent  ftimulation  by  the  nitrous
oxide  fo  great,  as  to  deprive  me  of  fenfe.
After  the  firtl  three  infpirations,  I  loft  all  power
of  ftanding,  and  fell  on  my  back,  carrying
in  my  lips  the  mouth-piece  fcparated  from  the
cylinder,  to  the  great  alarm  of  Mr.  PatrickDwyer,
who  was  noting  the  periods  of  infpiration.

Though  experiments  on  fucceffive  infpira-
tions of  pure  nitrous  oxide  might  go  far  to
determine  whether  or  no  any  nitrogene,  car-
bonic acid  and  oxygene  were  produ6ls  of
refpiration,  yet  I  diftinclly  faw  that  it  was
impoflible  in  this  way  to  afcertain  their
quantities,  fuppofing  them  produced,  un-
lefs  I  could  firft  determine  the  capacity  of  my
lungs ;  and  the  different  proportions  of  the
gafes  remaining  in  the  bronchial  veflels  after  a


(  399  )

compleat  expiration,  when  atmofpheric  air  had
been  refpircd.

In  fome  experiments  (that  I  made  on  the  ref-
piration  of  hydrogene,  with  a  view  to  deternr)ine
whether  carbonic  acid  was  produced  by  the
combination  of  carbon  loofely  combined  in
the  venous  blood,  with  the  oxygene  refpired,  or
whether  it  was  fimply  give?!  out  as  excrementi-
tious  by  this  blood)  I  found,  without  however
being  able  to  folve  the  problem  I  had  propofed
to  my  lei  fj  that  in  the  refpiration  of  pure  hydro-
gene,  little  or  no  alteration  of  volume  took
place  ;  and  that  the  refidnal  gas  was  mingled
with  fome  nitrogene,  and  a  little  oxygene  and
carbonic  acid.

From  the  comparifon  of  thefe  fai^^s  with  thofe
noticed  in  the  lad  fe6iion  and  in  R.  III.  Dlv:  L
there  was  every  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  hydro-
gene  was  not  abforbed  or  altered  when  refpircd  ;
but  only  "mingled  with  the  refidual  gafes  of  the
lungs.  Hence,  by  making  a  full  expiration  of
atmofpheric  air,  and  afterwards  taking  fix  or
feven  refpirations  of  hydrogene  in  the  mercurial


(  400  )

airholder,  and  then  making  a  compleat  expira-
tion, I  conjedlured  that  the  refidual  gas  and
the  hydrogene  would  be  fo  mingled,  as  that
nearly  the  fame  proportions  fhould  remain  in  the
bronchial  veflels,  as  in  the  airholder.  By  afcer-
taining  thefe  proportions  and  calculating  from
them,  I  hoped  to  be  able  to  afcertain  with
tolerable  exa^lnefs,  the  capacity  of  my  fauces
and  bronchia,  as  well  as  the  compofition  of  the
gas  remaining  in  them,  after  a  complete  expira-
tion of  common  air.

IV.    Refpration  of  Hydrogene,

The  hydrogene  that  I  employed,  was  procu-
red from  the  decompofition  of  water  by  means
of  clean  iron  filings  and  diluted  fulphuric  and
muriatic  acids.  It  was  breathed  in  the  fame
manner  as  nitrous  oxide,  in  the  large  mercurial
airholder.

After  a  compleat  voluntary  exhauftion  of
my  lungs  in  the  ufual  pofture,  I  found  great
difficulty   in  breathing  hydrogene  for  fo  long


(  401   )

^s  half  a  minute,  fo  as  to  make  a  compleat
Expiration  of  it.  It  produced  uneafy  feelings
in  the  chefi,  momentary  lofs  of  mufcular  pow-
er, and  fometimes  a  transient  giddinefs.

In  fome  of  the  experiments  that  I  made  ;  on
account  of  the  giddinefs,  the  refults  were  ren-
dered inconclufive,  by  my  rerhoving  my  mouth
from  the  mouth-piece  after  expiration,  before
the  affiftant  could  turn  the  ftopcock.

The  purity  of  the  hydrogene  was  afcertained
immediately  before  the  experiment  by  the  teft
df  nitrous  gas,  and  by  detonation  with  oxygene
or  atmofpheric  air  ;  generally  12  meafures  of
^tmofpheric  air  were  fired  with  4  of  the  hydro-
gene,  and  if  the  diminution  was  to  ten  or  a  little
inore,  the  gas  was  judged  to  be  pure.

After  the  experiment,  when  the  compleat
expiration  had  been  made  and  the  common
temperature  reftored  ;  the  volume  of  the  gas
was  noticed,  and  then  a  fmall  quantity  of  it'
thrown  into  the  mercurial  apparatus  by  means
of  the  conducing  tube,  to  be  examined.  The
carbonic  acid  was  feparated  by  from  it  by  means


.^


('402  )

of  foli^tipn  of  potafh  or  flrontian  ;  the  quantity  of
oxygeiie  it  contained,  was  afcert^ned  by  means
of  nitrous  gas  of  known  compofition  ;  the
fuperabundant  nitrous  gas  was  abforbed  by
folution  of  muriate  of  iron  ;  and  the  proportions
of  hydrogene  and  nitrogene  in  the  remaining
gas,  difcovered  by  inflammation  with  atmof-
pheric  air  or  oxygene  in  the  detonating  tube
by  the  elecSric  fpark.

a.  The  two  following  experiments  made  upon
quantities  of  hydrogene,  equal  to  thofe  of  the  ni-
trous oxide  refpired  in  the  experiments  in  the  laft
feflion,  are  given  as  the  mod  accurate  of  five.

E.  1.  I  refpired  at  59°  102  cubic  inches  of
hydrogene  apparently  pure,  for  rather  lefs  than
half  a  minute,  making  in  this  time  feven  quick
refpirations.

After  the  complete  expiration,  when  the
common  temperature  was  reftored,  the  gas
occupied  a  fpace'  equal  to  103  cubic  inches
nearly.  Thefe  analifed  were  found  to  confift
of


%.  .i


rfi^H^


(  403  )

Carbonic  acid     .  .  4,0

Oxygene    3,7

Nitrogene       ....  17,3

Hydrogene     ....  78,0


103,0


Now  as  in  this  experiment,  the  gas  was  increafed
in  bulk  only  a  cubic  inch  ;  fuppofing  that  after
the  compleat  expiration  the  gas  in  the  lungs,
bronchia  and  fauces  was  of  nearly  fimilar  com-
pofition  with  that  in  the  airholder,  and  that  no
hydrogene  had  been  abforbed  by  the  blood,  it
would  follow  that  24  cubic  inches  of  hydrogene
remained  in  the  internal  organs  of  refpiration,
and  confequently,  by  the  rule  of  proportion,
about  7,8  of  the  mixed  refidual  gas  of  the  com-
mon air.  And  then  the  whole  quantity  of  refi-
dual gas  of  the  lungs,  fuppofing  the  temperature
59°,  would  have  been  31,8  cubic  inches  ;  but  as
its  temperature  was  nearly  that  of  the  internal
parts  of  the  body,  98°,  it  muft  have  filled  a
greater  fpace ;  calculating  from  the  experiments


')


(  404  )

of  Guyton  and   Vernois,*    about  37, 5[  cubic
inches.

From  the  increafe  of  volume,  it  would  appear
that  a  minute  quantity  of  gas  had  been  gene-
rated during  the  refpiration,  and  this  was,  as
we  fhall  fee  hereafter,  moft  probably  carbonic
acid.§  Likewife  there  is  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that
a  little  of  the  refidual  oxygene  maft  have  been
abforbed.  Making  allowances  for  thofe  circum-
flances,  it  would  follow,  that  the  37,5  cubic
inches  of  gas  remaining  in  my  lungs,  after  a
Gompleat  expiration  of  atmofpheric  air  at  animaK
heat  98°,  equal  to  31,8  cubic  inches  at  bQ"",
were  compofed  of


Nitrogene     ....

2i,g

Carbonic  acid  . ,

4,9

Oxygene     ....

5,0

31,8

■*  Annales  de  Chimie,  vol.  1,  page  279.

f  This  is  only  an  imperfe6t  approximation  j   the  ratio

of  the  increafe  of  expanfibility  of  gafes  to  the  increafe  of

temperature,  has  not  yet  been  afcertained.     It  is  probable

that  the  expanfibility  of  gafes  is  altered  by  their  mixture.

§  For  there  is  no  reafon  to  fuppofe  the  produ6lion  of  nitrogene.


(  405   )

E.  2.  I  rcfpired  for  near  a  half  a  minute  in
the  mercurial  airholder  at  6l°,  182  cubic  in-
ches of  hydrogene ;  having  made  during  this
time,  fix  long  infpirations.  After  the  laft  ex-
piration, the  gas  filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to
184  cubic  inches,  and  analifed,  was  found  to
con  lift  of

Carbonic  acid  ....      4,8

Oxygene      4,6

Nitrogene    21,0

Hydrogene 153,6

184.

Now  in  this  experiment,  reafoning  in  the  fame
manner  as  before,  28,4  cubic  inches  of  hydro-
gene muft  have  remained  in  the  lungs,  and
likevvife  5,5  of  the  atmofpheric  refidual  gas.
Confequently,  the  whole  refidual  gas  was  nearly
equal  to  34  cubic  inches  at  6 Jo,  which  at  98^
would  become  about  40,4  cubic  inches.  And
reafoning  as  before,  it  would  appear  from  this
experiment,  that  the  quantity  of  gas  remaining
in  my  lungs  after  a  compleat  voluntary  refpira-


(  406  )

tion,  equalled  at  98,  about  40  cubic   inches,
and  at  61"^,  34  nearly  :    making  the   neceflary
corredlions ;  that  after  common  air  had  been
breathed,  thefe  34  cubic  inches  confifted  of
Carbonic  acid    ....      4,1

Oxygene 5,5

Nitrogene    ......     24,4

h.  It  would  have  been  poflible  to  prove  the  truth
of  the  poftulate  on  which  the  experiments  were
founded,  by  refpiring  common  air  or  oxygene
after  the  compleat  expiration  of  the  hydrogene,
for  the  fame  time  as  the  hydrogene  was  ref-
pired  and  in  equal  quantities.

For  if  portions  of  hydrogene  were  found  in
the  airholder  equal  to  thofe  of  the  refidual  gafes
in  the  two  experiments,  it  would  prove  that  a
uniform  mixture  of  refidual  gas  with  the  gas
infpired,  was  produced  by  the  refpiration.  That
this  mixture  muft  have  taken  place,  appeared,
however,  fo  evident  from  analogous  fads,  that
I  judged  the  experimental  proof  unnecefiary.
Indeed,  as  mod  gafes,  though  of  different  fpe-
cific  gravities,  when  brought  in  contadl  with  each


{407   )

other,  aflume  fome  fort  of  union,  it  is  more
than  probable,  that  gas  infpired  into  the  lungs,
from  being  placed  in  contact  with  the  refidual
gas  on  fuch  an  extenfive  furface,  muft  inftantly
mingle  with  it.  Hence,  poffibly  one  deep  in-
fpiration  and  compleat  expiration  of  the  whole
of  a  quantity  of  hydrogene,  will  be  fufficient  to
determine  the  capacity  of  the  lungs  after  com-
pleat voluntary  exhauftion,  and  the  nature  of
the   refidual    air.

That  two  infpirations  are  fufficient,  appears
probable  from  the  following  experiment.

E.  3.  After  a  compleat  voluntary  expiration
of  common  air,  I  made  two  deep  infpirations  of
141  cubic  inches  of  hydrogene.  After  the
compleat  expiration,  they  filled  a  fpace  equal
to  rather  more  than  142  cubic  inches,  and
analifed,  were  found  to  confift  of

Carbonic  acid    ....        3,1

Oxygene       4,5

Nitrogene     18,8

Hydrogene 115,6

142.


j:-J»^'-i


(  408  )

Now  calculating  on  the  exhaufted  capacity  of
my  lungs  froni  this  experiment,  fuppofing  uni-
form mixture,  they  would  contain  after  expir
ration  of  common  air,  about  30,7  cubic  inches
at  58°,  equal  to  36  at  98°,  compofed  of  about

Nitrogene   ....    20,9

Oxygene     ....      5,8

Carbonic  acid  . .    4,0


30,7


One  fhould  fuppofe  a  priori  that  in  this  experi-
ment much  lefs  of  the  refidual  oxygene  of  the
lungs  muft  have  been  abforbed,  than  in  Expts.
1  and  2  ;  yet  there  is  no  very  marked  difference
in  the  portions  evolved.  That  a  tolerably  accu-
rate mixture  took  place,  appears  from  the  quan-
tity of  nitrogene.  The  fmaller  quantity  of
carbonic  acid  is  an  evidence  in  favour  of  its
evolution  from  the  venous  blood.

c.  It  is  reafonable  to  fuppofe  that  the  prefTure
upon  the  refidual  gas  of  the  exhaufled  lungs,
mufl  be  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  atmofphere.
But  as  aqueous  vapour  is  perpetually  given  out


(  409  )

by  the  exhalents,  and  perhaps  evolved  from  the
moift  coats  of  the  pulmonary  veflels,  it  is  likely
that  the  relidual  gas  is  not  only  fully  faturated
with  moifture  at  98^,  but  likewife  impregnated
with  uncombined  vapor  ;  and  hence  its  volume
enlarged  beyond  the  increment  of  expanfion
6f  temperature.

Confidering  all  thefc  circumftances,  and  cal-
culating from  the  mean  of  the  three  experi-
ments on  the  compofition  of  the  refidual  gas,
I  concluded,

lit.  That  the  exhauftcd  capacity  of  my  lungs
was  equal  to  about  41  cubic  inches.

2dly.  That  the  gas  contained  in  my  bron-
chial vefTels  and  fauces^  after  a  compleat  refpi-
ration  of  atmofpheric  air,  was  equal  to  about
32  cubic  inches,  its  temperature  being  reduced
to  55°.

3dly.  That  the(e  32  cubic  inches  were  com-
pofed  of  about

Nitrogene  . .  23,0
Carbonic  acid  .  .  4^1
Oxygene    .    . .      4,9


(410  )

d.  In  many  experiments  made  In  the  mercurial

airholder  on  the  capacity  of  my  lungs   under

different  circumftances,  I  found  that  I  threw

out  of  my  lungs  by  a  full  forced  expiration  at

temperatures  from  58°  to  62°

cab.  in.  cub.  in;,

Afterafull  voluntary  infpiration^  from  1 89  to  Igl

After  a  natural  infpiration,  from    . .    78  to    79

Aftera  natural  expiration,  from    ..    67  to    6$

So  that  making  the  corrections  for  temperature,
it  would  appear,  that  my  lungs  in  a  ftate  of  volun-
tary  infpiration,  contained  about  254  cubic  in-
ches ;  in  a  ftate  of  natural  infpiration  about  135  ;
in  a  ftate  of  natural  expiration,  about  118  ;  and
in  a  ftate  of  forced  expiration  41.*

As  the  exhaufted  capacity  as  well  as  imple-
ted  capacity  of  the  internal  organs  of  refpiration
muft  be  different  in  different  individuals,  ac-
cording as  the  forms  and  fize  of  their  thorax.


*  This  capacity  is  moft  probably  below  the  medium,  raj
chcft  is  narrow,  raeafuring  in  circumference,  but  29  inches,
and  my  neck  rather  long  and  llender.


( 411 )

fauces,  and  broncbia  are  difFerent,  it  would  b«
almoft  ufelefs  to  endeavour  to  afcertain  a  firand-
ard  capacity.  It  is  however  probable,  that  a
ratio  exifts  between  the  quantities  of  air  infpi*
red  in  the  natural  and  forced  infpiration,  tbofe
expired  in  the  natural  and  forced  expiration,
and  the  whole  capacity  of  the  lungs.  If  this
ratio  were  afcertained,  a  fingle  experiment
on  the  natural  infpiration  and  expiration  of
common  air,  would  enable  us  to  afcertain  the
quantity  of  refidual  gas  in  the  lungs  of  any
individual  after  a  compleat  forced  expiration."^

V.  Additional  ohjervations  and  experiments
on  tic  Refpiration  of  Nitrous  Oxide,

a.  Having  thus  afcertained  the  capacity  of  my
lungs,  and  the  compofition  of  the  refidual  gas
of  expiration,  I  proceeded  to  reafon  concerning

*  Dr.  Goodwyn  In  his  excellent  work  on  the  connexion
of  life  with  refpiration,  has  detailed  fome  experiments  on
the  capacity  of  the  lungs  after  natural  expiration.  He
makes  the  medium  capacity  about  109  cubic  inches,  which
agrees  very  well  with  my  elUmation. — page  27.


f  411  )

the  experiments  in  fe6lion  III,  on  the  refpiration
of  nitrous  oxide.

In  Exp.  I.  nearly  100  cubic  inches  of  nitrous
oxide,  making  the  corredlions  on  account  of
the  common  air,  were  refpired  for  half  a  minute.
In  this  time,  they  were  reduced  to  62  cubic  in-
ches, which  confided  of  3,2  carbonic  acid,  29
nitrous  oxide,  4,1  oxygenc,  and  25,7  nitrogene.

But,  as  appears  from  the  lad  fe6lion,  there
exifted  in  the  lungs  before  the  infpiration  of  the
nitrous  oxide,  about  32  cubic  inches  of  gas,
confiding  of  23  nitrogene,  4,  J  carbonic  acid,
and  4,9  oxygene,  temperature  being  reduced  to
59*^.  This  gas  mud  have  been  perfedlly  ming-
led with  the  nitrous  oxide  during  the  experi-
menl;  and  confequently,  the  refidual  gas  in  the
lungs  after  the  experiment,  was  of  the  fame
compofition  as  that  in  the  airholder.

Suppofing  it  as  before,  to  be  about  32  cubic
inches  :  from  the  rule  of  proportion,  they  will
be  compofed  of

Nitrous  oxide     .  .       14,7
Nitrogene 13,3


(  413  )

Carbonic  acid      .  .         1,9

Oxygene    2,1

And  the  whole  quantity  of  gas  in  the  l^ngs  and

the  airholder,    fuppofing    the   temperature  50°,

will  equal  94  cubic  inches,  which  are  compofed

of

Nitrous  oxide-    .  .      43,7

Nitrogene  ......      39,0

Carbonic  acid     .  .         5,  2

Oxygene    6,  1

94
But  before  the  experiment,  the  gas  in  the  lungs
and  airholder  equalled   134  cubic    inches,  and
thefe,  reckoning   for   the  common    air,    were
compofed  of

Nitrous  oxide    .  .     100

Nitrogene,    ....      24,3

Carbonic  acid   .  .         4,1

Oxygene       ....         5,6
Hence,  it  appears,  that,  56,3    cubic,  inches  of
nitrous  oxide  were  abforbed  in  this  experiment,
and  13,7  of  nitrogene  produced,  either  by  evo-
lution from  the  bloody  or  decompofition  of  the


-^~^—^~~


(  414  )

nitrous  oxide.  The  quantities  of  carbonic  acid
and  oxygene  approach  fo  near  to  thofe  exifting
after  the  refpiration  of  hydrogene,  that  there  is
every  reafon  to  believe  that  no  portion  of  them
was  produced  in  confequence  of  the  abforption,
or  decompofition  of  the  nitrous  oxide.

h.  In  Exp.  2,  calculating  in  the  fame  manner,
before  the  firft  infpiration,  a  quantity  of  gas
equal  to  21 6^5  cubic  inches  at  47°,  exifted  in
the  lungs  and  airholder,  and  thefe  216,5  cubic
inches  were  compofed  of

Nitrous  oxide,  ....    182,0

Nitrogene      24,9

Carbonic  acid    ....         4,1
Oxygene      5^5

2l6,5
After  the  compleat  expiration,  l6o  cubic  in-
ches remained  in  the  lungs  and  airholder,  which
was  compofed  of

Nitrous  oxide     . .      1 10,6

Nitrogene    36,3

Carbonic  acid      6,8

Oxygene     ..,*...,      6,a


(  435  )

Henqe,  it  appears,  that  71,4  cubic  inches  of
nitrous  oxide  were  abforbed  in  this  experiment,
and  about  12  of  nitrogene  produced.  The
quantity  of  carbonic  acid  and  oxygene  is  rather
greater  than  that  which  exifted  in  the  experi-
ments on  hydrogenc.

c.  From  thefe  eftimationSj  I  learned  that  a
fmall  quantity  of  nitrogene  was  produced  daring
the  abforption  of  nitrous  oxide  in  refpiration.
It  remained  to  determine,  whether  this  nitro-
gene owed  its  production  to  evolution  from  the
blood,  or  to  the  decompofitlon  of  a  portion  of
the  nitrous  oxide.

Analogical  evidences  were  not  in  favour  of  the
hypothefisof  decompofition.  It  was  difficult  to
fuppofe  that  a  body  requiring  the  temperature  of
ignition  for  its  decompofition  by  the  mod  inflam-
mable bodies,  fhould  be  partially  abforbed  and
partially  decompounded  at  98°,  by  a  fluid  ap-
parently pofTefTed  of  uniform  attractions.

It  was  more  eafy  to  believe,  that  from  the
immenfe  quantity  of  nitrogene  taken  into  the
blood  in  nitrous  oxide  ;  the  fyftem  foon  became


-y


(  416  )

bvercharged  with  this  principle/ which  not  beirrg
wholly  expended  in  new  combinations  during
living  adlion,  was  liberated  in  the  aeriform  Itate'
by  the  exhalents^  or  through  the  moift  coats  of
the  veins.

Now  if  the  laft  rationale  were  true,  it  vvould-
follow,  that  the  quantity  of  nitrogene  produced
in  refpiration,  ought  to  be  increafed  in  propor-
tion as  a  greater  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide
entered  into  combination  with  the  blood.

d.  To  afcertain  whether  this  was  the  cafe,  I
made  after  full  voluntary  exhauftion  of  my
lungs,  one  full  voluntary  infpiration  and  expi-
ration of  108  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide.
After  this,  it  filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  99
cubic  inches.  The  quantities  of  carbonic  acid
and  oxygene  in  thefe  were  not  determined  ;  but
by  the  teft  of  abforption  by  water,  they  appeared
to  contain  only  18  nitrogene;  which  is  very
little  more  than  fhould  have  been  given  from
the  relidual  gas  of  the  lungs.

In  a  fecond  experiment,  I  made  two  refpira^
tions  of   108    cubic  inches  of  nitrous    oi  de


(   417    )

Dearly  pure.  The  diminution  was  to  95.  On
analyfing  thefe  Q5,_  I  found  to  my  great  furprife^
that  they  contained  only  17  nitrogene.  Hence,
1  could  not  bat  fufpecl  fpmc  fource  of  error  in
the  procefs.

I  now  introduced  into  a  ftrong  new  filk
bag,  the  fides  of  which  were  in  perfe6l  contacS,
about  8  quarts  of  nitrous  oxide.  From  the
mode  of  introduction,  this  nitrous  oxide  muft
have  been  mingled  with  a  little  common  air,
not  however  fufficient  to  difturb  the  refults.

I  then  adapted  a  cork  cemented  to  a  long
curved  tube  to  my  right  noftril  ;  the  tube  was
made  to  communicate  with  the  water  apparatus;
and  the  left  noftril  being  accurately  clofed,  and
the  mouth-piece  of  the  filk  bag  tightly  adapted
to  the  lips,  I  made  a  full  expiration  of  the  com-
mon air  of  my  lungs,  infpired  nitrous  oxide  fi'om
the  bag,  and  by  carefully  ciofing  the  mouth-
piece with  my  tongue,  expired  it  through
the  curved  tube  into  the  v/ater  apparatus.  In
this  way,  I  made  nine  refpirations  of  nitrous
oxide.     The  expired  gas  of  the  firft  refpiration

Cc.


(  418  )

was  not  preferved  ;  but  part  of  the  gas  of  the
fecond,  third,  fifth,  feventh  and  ninth,  were
caught  in  feperatc  graduated  cylinders.  The
fecond,  analifed  by  abforption,  confifted  of
about  29  ftbforbable  gas,  which  inuft  have  been
chiefly  nitrous  oxide  ;  and  17  unabforbable  gas,
which  muft  have  been  chiefly  nitrogene;  and  the
third  of  2'2  abforbable  gas,  and  8' unabforbable.
The  fifth  was  compofed  of  27  to  6  ;  the  feventh
of  23  to  7,  and  the  ninth  of  26  to  ]  1.

e.  Though  the  refults  of  thefe  experiments
were  not  fo  conclufive  as  could  bewiflied;  yet,
comparing  them  with  thofe  of  the  experiments  in
fe6lion  III.  it  feemed  reafonable  to  conclude,
that  the  produ6iion  of  nitrogene  was  increaled,
in  proportion  as  the  blood  became  more  fully
impregnated  with  nitrous  oxide.

From  this  conclufion,  compared  with  the  phag-
nomenon  noticed  in  fedtion  2,  and  in  Div.  I.
fedlion  4,  I  am  induced  to  believe  that  the  pro-
dudlion  of  nitrogene  during  the  refpiration  of
nitrous  oxide,  is  not  owing  to  the  decompofi-
tion    of  part   of  the     nitrous   oxide,    in   the


Mi


(  419  )

aeriform  ft  ate  immediately  by  the  attradlion  of
the  red  particles  of  venous  blood  for  its  oxygene  ;
but  that  it  is  rather  owing  to  a  new  arrangenient
produced  in  the  priiiciples  of  the  impregnated
bloodj  during  circulation  ;  from  which,  becoming
fuperfaturated  with  nitrogene,  it  gives  it  out
through   the  moid  coats  of  the  vefTels.

For  if  any  portion  of  nitrous  oxide  were  de-
compofed  immediately  by  the  red  particles  of
the  blood,  one  fhould  conjedure,  that  the  quan-
tity of  nitrogene  produced,  ought  to  be  greater
during  the  firft  infpirations,  before  thefe  particles
became  fully  combined  with  condenfed  oxygene.
If  on  the  contrary,  the  whole  of  the  nitrogene
and  oxygene  of  the  nitrous  oxide  were  both
combined  with  the  blood,  and  carried  through  the
pulmonary  veins  and  left  chamber  of  the  heart  to
the  arteries ;  then,  fuppofing  the  oxygene  chiefly
expended  in  living  a^ion,  wbilft  the  nitrogen©
was  only  partially  confumed  in  new  combina-
tions, it  would  follow,  that  the  venous  blood  of
animals  made  to  breathe  nitrous  oxide,  hyper-
faturated  with  nitrogene,  muft  be  different  from


(   4^0  )

comnpion  veilous  blood  ;  and  this  we  have  resf-
tfbn  to. believe  from  the  phaenomena  in  Div.  I.
fedlioa  4,  is  adlually  the  cafe.

/,  Befides  the  nitrogene  generated  during
the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide,  we  have  noticed
the  evolution  of  other  produ<Ss,  carbonic  acid/*
and  water.

Now  as  nearly  equal  quantities  of  carbonic
acid  are  produced,  whether  hydrogene  or  ni-
trous oxide  is  refpired,  provided  the  procefs  h
carried  on  for  the  fame  time  ;  there  is  every
reafon  to  believe,  as  we  have  faid  before,  that  no
part  of  the  carbonic  acid  produced,  is  generated
from  the  immediate  decompofition  of  nitrous
oxide  by  carbon  exifting  in  the  blood.

Confequently,  in  thefe  experiments,  it  mui^
be  either  evolved  from  the  venous  blood  ;  or
formed,  by  the  flow  combination  of  the  oxygene
of  the  refidtlal  air  of  refpiration  with  the  char-
coal of  the  blood.


*  The  oxygene  as  we  Iiave  before  noticed,  moft  proba-
bly wholly  exiflfd  in  the  refidual  gas.


(   421    )

But  if  it  was  produced  by  the  decompofition
of  refidual  atmofpheric  air,  it  would  follow^
that  its  volume  muli  be  much  lefs  than  that  of
the  oxygene  of  the  refidual  air,  which  had
difappeared  ;  for  fome  of  this  oxygene  muft
have  been  abforhed  by  the  blood,  and  during
the  converfion  of  oxygene  into  carbonic  acid  by
charcoal,  a  flight  diminution  of  volume  is  pro-
duced.

In  the  experiments  when  nitrous  oxide  and
hydrogene  were  refpired  for  about  half  a  minute,
the  medium  quantity  of  carbonic  acid  produced,
was  5,6  cubic  inches  nearly.

Now  we  will  affume,  that  the  quantity  of
carbonic  acid  produced,  is  in  the  ratio  of  the
oxygene  diminifhed  ;  and  there  is  every  reafon
to  believe,  that  in  the  expiration  of  atmofphe-
ric air,  the  expired  air  and  the  refidual  air  are
nearly  of  the  fame  compofition.

Hence,  no  more  carbonic  acid  can  remain
in  the  lungs  or  be  produced  from  the  refidual
gas  after  the  compleat  expiration  of  common
air,  than  that  which  can  be   generated   frorn  a


^•■--v


'    (  422   )

volume  of  atmofpheric  air  equal  to  the  refidual
gas  of  the  lungs.

The  refidual  gas  of  the  lungs,  after  compleat
expiration,  equals  at  55©,  32  cubic  inches,  and
32  cubic  inches  of  common  air  contain  8.6
cubic  inches  of  oxygene.

But  in  the  experiments  on  the  refpiration  of
hydrogene,  not  only  5.6  cubic  inches  of  car-
bonic acid  were  produced,  but  more  than  4  of
refidual  oxygene  remained  unabfbrbed.

Hence  it  appears  impoflSble  that  all  the  car-
bonic acid  evolved  from  the  lungs  during  the
refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide  or  hydrogene  could
have  been  produced  by  the  combination  of  char«
coal  in  the  venous  blood  with  refidual  atmof-
pheric oxygene  :  there  is  confequently  every
reafon  to  believe  that  it  is  wholly  or  partially  li-
berated from  the  venous  blood  through  the  moid
coats  of  the  vcfiels.

g.  The  water  carried  out  of  the  lungs  in  fo-
lution  by  the  expired  gas  of  nitrous  oxide,  could
neither  have  been  wholly  or  partially  formed
by  the   decompofition   of  nitrous  oxide.     The


(  423  )

coats  of  the  ve^fels  in  the  lungs,  and  indeed  in
the  whole  internal  furface  of  the  body,  are
always  covered  with  moifture,  and  the  folution
of  part  of  this  moifture  by  the  infpired  heated
gas,  and  its  depofition  by  the  expired  gas,  are
fufficient  caufes  for  the  appearance  of  the
phaenomenon.

There  are  no  reafons  for  fuppoiing  that  any
of  the  refidual  atmofpheric  oxygene  is  imme-
diately combined  with  fixed  or  nafcent  hydro-
gene,  or  hydrocarbonate,  in  the  venous  blood  at
98°,  by  flow  combuftion,  and  confequently
none  for  fuppofing  that  water  is  immediately
formed  in  refpiration.

The  evolution  of  water  from  the  veflels  in
the  lungs,  is  almoft  certain  from  numerous
analogies.

h.  As  from  the  experiments  in  fe<ftion  II.  it
appeared  that  nitrous  oxide  was  capable  of  being
combined  with  oxygenated  blood,  and  vice  verfa,
blood  impregnated  with  nitrous  oxide  capable
of  oxygenation  ;  I  wascuriousto  afcertain  what
changes  would  be  efFe<5led  in  nitrous  oxide  when


(  424  )

it  was  refpiredj,  mingled  with  atmofphe-
rlc  air  or  oxygene.  For  this  purpofe,  with-
out making  a  very  delicate  experiment^  I  breath-
ed in  the  large  mercurial  airholder  about  ]  12
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  oxide,  mingled  with
44  of  common  air,  for  near  half  a  minute,  in
the  ufual  mode.  The  gas,  after  expiration,  fil-
led a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  IIQ.  I  did  not
exa6lly  afcertain  the  compolition  of  the  refidual
gas ;  it  fupported  flame  rather  better  than  com-
mon air,  and  after  the  nitrous  oxide  was  ah-
forbed,  gave  much  lefs  diminution  with  nitrous
gas  than  atmofpheric  air.

i.  I  breathed  a  mixture  of  four  quarts  of
nitrous  oxide  with  three  quarts  of  hydrogene,
in  a  dry  filk  bag,  for  near  a  minute  ;  an  evi-
dent diminution  was  produced  ;  but  on  account
of  the  mode  of  experimenting  it  was  impoflible
to  determine  the  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide  ab-
forbed,  or  the  exa6l  nature  of  the  products.
When  a  taper  was  introduced  into  a  little  of  the
refidual  gas,  it  inflamed  with  a  very  feeble  ex-
plofion.     Now  a  mixture  of  4  parts  nitrous  ox-


(  425  )

ide  and  3  hydrogene,   detonates  when  inflamed
with  very  great  violence.

k.  Nitrous  oxide  can  be  refpired  without
danger  by  the  human  animal  for  a  much  longer
time  than  that  required  for  the  death  of  the
fmaller  quadrupeds  in  it.

I  have  breathed  it  two  or  three  timevS  in  a
confiderable  ilate  of  purity,  in  a  dry  filk  bag,
for  four  minutes  and  quarter  and  four  minutes
and  half:  fome  difeafed  individuals  have  refpi-
red it  for  upwardsof  five  minutes.

In  the  infancy  of  my  experiments,  from  gene-
ral appearances,  I  thought  that  the  proportion  of
nitrous  oxide  abforbed  in  refpiration  was  greater
in  the  firftinfpirationsthanthelafl;  but  this  I  have
fince  found  to  be  amiftake.  In  ihelafl  refpirations
the  apparent  abforption  is  indeed  lefs ;  but  this  is
on  account  of  the  increafed  evolution  of  nitro*
gene  from  the  blood.  When  nitrous  oxide  is
refpired  for  a  long  time,  the  laft  infpirations  arc
always  fuller  and  quicker  than  the  firft  ;  but
the  confumption  by  the  fame  individual  is  nearly
in  the  ratio  of  the  time   of  refpiration.     Three


(  426  )

quarts  i.  c.  about  174  cubic  inches,  areconfumecl
fo  as  to  be  unfit  for  refpiration,  by  an  healthy
individual  with  lungs  of  moderate  capacity,  in
about  a  minute  and  quarter  ;  fix  quarts,  or  348
cubic  inches,  lafl:  generally  for  two  minutes  and
half  or  two  minutes  and  three  quarters  ;  eight
quarts,  or  464  cubic  inches,  for  more  than
three  minutes  and  half;  and  twelve,  or  696
cubic  inches,  for  nearly  five.

The  quantities  of  nitrous  oxide  abforbed  by
the  fame  individual,  will,  as  there  is  every  rea-
fon  to  fuppofe,  be  different  under  different
circumftances,  and  will  probably  be  governed
in  fome  meafure  by  the  (late  of  the  health.  It
is  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  that  the  velocity  of  the
circulation  muft  have  a  confiderable  influence
on  the  abforption  of  nitrous  oxide  ;  probably  in
proportion  as  it  is  greater  a  larger  quantity  of
gas  will  be  conlumed  in  equal  times.

I  am  inclined  from  two  or  three  experiments,
to  believe  that  nitrous  oxide  is  abforbed  more
rapidly  after  hearty  meals  or  during  flimulation
from  wine  or  fpirits,  than  at  other  times.    As


(  427  )

its  abforption-  appears  to  depend  on  a  fimple
folution  in  the  venous  blood  ;  probably  diminu-
tion of  temperature  will  increafe  its  capability
of  being  abforbed.

/.  The  quantities  of  nitrous  oxide  abforbed  by
different  individuals,  will  probably  be  governed
in  fome  meafure  by  the  fize  of  their  lungs  and
the  furface  of  the  blood  vefTels,  all  other  cir-
cumftances  being  the  fame.

From  the  obfervations  that  I  have  been  able
to  make  on  the  abforption  of  nitrous  oxide,  as
compared  with  the  capacity  of  the  lungs,  the
range  of  the  confumption  of  different  individu-
als does  not  extend  to  more  than  a  pint,  or  30
cubic  inches  at  the  maximum  dofe.

We  may  therefore  conclude,  that  the  medium
confumption  of  nitrous  oxide  by  the  refpiratioil
of  different  individuals,  is  not  far  from  two
cubic  inches,  or  about  a  grain  every  fecond,
or  120  cubic  inches,  or  6o  grains  every  minute.

m.  When  nitrous  oxide  is  breathed  in  tight
filk  bags,  towards  the  end  of  the  experiment  as
the  internal  furface  becomes   moid,  as  I  have


before  n^entioned,  a  certain  quantity  of  CO.

rafidualgasofth.         ''  "''™"^   ^'^^e.     The
gas  of  the  common    air    th^  „;*

hardly  ever  amo„       at;    ^^'"°'"'^^-^-'^'

-hairorthe  J„:!V,V't^^--'*'^

''ed.      There  ,s  confequenfjy,    a   perfedl
Propnefy  in  fucceffively  infpirino-       /
*he  whole  of  a  ^iven  ^  ''P'""^

_  o  a  g.ven  quantity  of  nitrous  oxide

tdl  It  ,s  nearJy  confumed.     Jn  the  r.r  •    .•

»«  an  , ™e  re  , „„„„„r  ,.,„„,,■
'l-»P.nceof,..r„Ma„..,-3„f,„p„„,„,f


(  429  )

VI.   On  the  refpiration  of  jitmofpheric  Air.

Having  thus  afcertained  the  abforption  of
nitrous  oxide  in  refpiration,  and  the  evolution
of  nitrogene  and  carbonic  acid  from  the  lungs
during  its  abforption  :  confidering  atmofpheric
air  as  a  compound  in  which  principles  identi-
cal with  thofe  in  nitrous  oxide  exifted,  though
in  different  quantities  and  loofer  combination,
I  was  anxious  to  compare  the  changes  efFetfled
in  this  gas  by  refpiration,  with  thofe  produced
in  nitrous  oxide  and  oxygene ;  particularly  as
they  are  connedled  with  the  health  and  life  of
animals.

The  ingenious  experiments  of  Lavbifier  and
Goodwyn,  prove  the  confumption  of  oxygene
in  refpiration,  and  the  prod u(Si ion  of  carbonic
acid.  From  many  experiments  on  the  refpira-
tion of  common  air.  Dr.  Prieftley  fufpeded  that
a  certain  portion  of  nitrogene,  as  well  as  oxygene,
wasabforbed  by  the  venous  blood.


(  430  )

h.  In  the  following  experiments  on  the  refpi"
ration  of  atmofpheric  air  in  the  mercurial  air-
holder  ;  the  compofition  of  the  gas  before  infpi-
ration  and  after  expiration,  was  afcertained  in
the  following  manner.

Forty  meafures  of  it  were  agitated  over  mercury
in  folution  of  cauftic  potafh^^and  fufFered  to  remain
in  contadl  with  it  for  two  or  three  hours.  The
diminution  was  noted,  and  the  gas  abforbed
Judged  to  be  carbonic  acid.  Twenty  meafures
of  the  gas,  freed  from  carbonic  acid,  were  ming-
led with  thirty  of  nitrous  gas,  in  a  tube  of  ,5
inches  diameter ;  they  were  not  agitated,^  but
fufFered  to  reft  for  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  half,
when  the  volume  occupied  by  them  was  noticed :
and  50  —  m  the  volume  occupied,  divided
by  3  confidered  as  the  oxygefie  x^  and  20  —  x
confidered  as  the  nitrogene.


*  When  they  are  agitated;  a  greater  proportion  of  nitrous

gas  is  abforbed,  condenfed  in  the  nitric  acid  by  the  water  j

and  to  find  the  oxygene^  50  —  m  50  —  m

X   ~    or      ■

3,4  3,5


*  (  431    )

c.  To  afcertain  the  changes  efFefled  in  at-
mofpheric  air  by  fingle  infpirations,
I  made,  after  a  compleat  voluntary  exhauftion  of
my  lungSj  at  temperature  61°,  one  infpiration  and
expiration  of  141  cubic  inches  of  atmofpheric
air.  After  expiration,  they  filled  a  fpace  equal
to  139  cubic  inches  nearly.  Thefe  139  cubic
inches  analifed  were  found  to  confift  of


Nitrogene   ....

101

Oxygene     .  .  . .

32

Carbonic  acid  .

.      5

The    141   cubic   inches    before   infpiration,


were  compofed  of  103   nitrogene,   1  carbonic  |

acid  and  37  oxygene.     The  time  taken  to  per-  ■

form   the    infpiration   and   full  expiration,   was  J

nearly  a  quarter  of  a  minute.

I  repeated  this  experiment  feven  or  eight
times,  and  the  quantity  of  oxygene  abforbed
was  generally  from  5  to  6  cubic  inches,  the
carbonic  acid  formed    from  5  to  5,5,   and  the  ^^

quantity  of  nitrogene  apparently  diminiflied  by
from  1  to  3  cubic  inches.


(   132  )

E.  2.  i  made,  after  a  voluntary  expirafionr  of
common  air,  one  infpiration  and  full  expiration?
of  100  cubic  inches  of  atmofpheric  air.  It  was
diminifhed  nearly  to  QS^  or  99  cubic  inches,
^nd  analifed,  was  found  to  coniiit  oi

Nitrogene     , .      713?

Oxygen e  ....       22.5

Carbonic  acid  .  .  4,5
This  experiment  1  likewife  repeated  four  or  five
times,  with  very  little  difference  of  refult,  and
there  always  feemed  to  be  a  fmall  diminution  of
nitrogene.  I  made  no  corredtions  on  account
of  the  refidual  air  of  the  lungs  in  thefe  pro-
cefles,  becaufe  there  was  every  reafon  to  lup-
pofe  that  it  was  always  of  fimilar  compofition.

c.  Before  I  could  afcertain  whether  fimilar
changes  were  efl^edled  in  atmofpheric  air,  by
natural  infpirations  as  by  forced  ones,  I  was
obliged  to  pradlife  refpiration  in  the  mercurial
airholder,  by  fufFering  the  conducing  tube  to
communicate  with  the  atmofphere  till  I  had
attained  the  power  of  breathing  in  it  naturally,
without  labor  or  attention  ;  I  then  found  by  a


— ««MMm.


(  449  )

IX.    Obfervations  on  the  rejpration  of  Nitrous
Oxide,

The  experiments  in  the  firft  Divilion  of  this
Refearch,  prove  that  nitrous  oxide  when  refpired
by  animals,  produces  peculiar  changes  in  their
blood  and  in  their  organs,  firft  coanedled  with
increafed  living  aflion ;  but  terminating  in
death.

From  the  experiments  in  this  Divifion,  it
appears,  that  nitrous  oxide  is  rapidly  abforbed
by  the  circulating  venous  blood,  and  of  courfe
its  condenfed  oxygene  and  nitrogene  diflributed
in  the  blood  over  the  whole  of  the  fyftem.

Concerning  the  changes  cfFedled  in  the  prin-
ciples of  the  impregnated  blood  during  circula-
tion and  its  adiion  upon  the  nervous  andmufcular
fibre  ;  it  is  ufelefs  to  reafon  in  the  prefent  ftalc
of  our  k no Vv  ledge.

It  would  be  eaiy  to  form  theories  referring
the  a6lion  of  blood  impregnated  with  nitrous
oxide,  to  its  power  of  tuppl  ving  the  nervous  and
mufcular  fibre  with  fuch  proportions  of  condcn-

Ee


(  450  )

fed  nitrogene,  oxygene  and  light  or  etherial
fluid,  as  enabled  them  more  rapidly  to  pafs
through  thofe  changes  which  conftitute  their
life  :  but  fuch  theories  would  be  only  collections
of  terms  derived  from  known  phaenomena  and
npplied  by  loofe  analogies  of  language  to  un-
known things.

We  are  unacquainted  with  the  compofition
of  dead  organifed  matter  ;  and  new  inftruments
of  experiment  and  new  modes  of  refearch  muft
be  found,  before  we  can  afcertain  even  our
capabilities  of  difcovering  the  laws  of  life.


-»:::::2:


RESEARCH  IV.

RELATING   TO   THE

EFFECTS  PRODUCED  BY  THE  RESPIRATION

NITROUS  OXIDE

UPON    DIFFERENT

INDIVIDUALS,


RESEARCH    IV.

RELATING  TO

THE     EFFECTS

PRODUCED   BY    THE

kESPIRATION  OF  NITROUS  OXIDE.


DIVISION  I.

HISTORY  of  the  DlSCOVERT.^EffeBs  produced  &>
ibe  RESPIRATION  of  different  GASES.

-TJL  SHORT  time  after  I  began  the  Audy  of*
Chemiftry,  in  March  IJQS,  my  attention  was
diredled  to  the  dephlogifticated  nitrous  gas  of*
Prieftley,  by  Dr.  Mitchiirs  Theory  of  Contagion  *
The  fallacy  of  this  Theory  was  foon  demori-
flrated,  by  a  few  coarfe  experiments  made  on
fmall  quantities  of  the  gas  procured   from  zinc

*  Dr.  Mitchill  attempted  to  prove  from  fome  phaenome-
na  conneded  with  contagious  difeafes,  that  dephlogifticated
tiitrous  gas  which  he  called  oxide  of  fepton,  was  the  prin-
ciple of  contagion,  and  capable  of  producing  the  mod  terri-
ble effeds  when  refpired  by  animals  in  the  minuteft  quantities
or  even  when  applied  to  the  Ikin  or  mufeular  fibre.


(  454  )

and  diluted  nitrous  acid.  Wounds  were  expof
fed  to  its  adlion,  the  bodies  of  animals  were
immerfed  in  it  without  injury ;  and  I  breathed
it  mingled  in  fmall  quantities  with  common  air,
without  remarkable  efFedls.  An  inability  to
procure  it  in  fufficient  quantities,  prevented  me
at  this  time,  from  purfuing  the  experiments  to
any  greater  extent.  I  communicated  an  ac-
count of  them  to  Dr.  Beddoes.

In  1799,  my  fituation  in  the  Medical  Pneu-
matic Inftitution,  made  it  my  duty  to  invefy^
gate  the  phyfiological  efFedls  of  the  aeriforqj
fluids,  the  properties  of  which  prefented  ^
chance  of  ufeful  agency.  At  this  period  I  re-
commenced the  inveftlgation.

A  confiderable  time  elapfed  before  I  was
able  to  procure  the  gas  in  a  ftate  of  purity,  and
my  firft  experiments  were  made  on  the  mixtures
of  nitrous  oxide,  nitrogen e  and  nitrous  gas,
which  are  produced  during   metallic   folutions.

*In  the  beginning  of  March,  I  prepared  a  large
quantity  of  impure  nitrous  oxide  from  the  ni-
trous folution  of  zinc.     Of  this  I  often  breathed


(  455  )

the  quantities  of  a  quart  and  two  quarts  gene-
rally mingled  with  more  than  equal  parts  of
.  oxygene  or  common  air.  In  the  mod  decifivie
of  thofe  trials,  its  efFeds  appeared  to  be  depref-
ling,  and  I  imagined  that  it  produced  a  ten-
dency to  fainting :  the  pulle  was  certainly
rendered  flower  under  its  operation.

At  this  time,  Mr.  Southey  refpired  it  in  an
highly  diluted  ftate  ;  it  occafioneda  flight  degree
ofgiddinefs,  and  confiderably  diminifhed  the
quicknefs  of  his  pulfe.

Mr.  C.  Coates  likewife  refpired  it  highly  dilu-
ted, with  fimilar  efFeds.

In  April,  I  obtained  nitrous  oxide  in  a  ftatc

of  purity,  and  afcertained  many  of  its  chemical

properties.     Refle<5lions  upon   thefe  properties

and  upon  the  former  trials,  made  me  refoive  to

endeavour  to  infpire  it  in  its  pure   form,  for  I

/aw  no  other  way  in  which  its    refpirability,   or

powers  could  be  determined*

.}{rf 'it.l  ^^';:J  iil;l  .4;  OhH  I;  ^
*  1  did  not  attempt  to  experiment  upon  animals^  becaufe

they  die  nearly  in  eqnal  times  in  non-rcfpirable  gafcs,  and

gafes  incapable  of  fupporting    life  aaJ   pofTeilcd  of  no

action  on  the  venous  blood.


(  456  )

I  was  aware  of  the  danger  of  this  experiments
It  certainly  would  never  have  been  made  if  the
hypothecs  of  Dr.  Mitchill  had  in  the  leat^  influ-
enced my  mind.  I  thought  that  the  effeds
might  be poffiblydeprefling  and  painful,  but  there
were  many  reafons  which  induced  me  to  believe
that  a  fingle  infpiration  of  a  gas  apparently
pofTefling  no  immediate  a6iion  on  the  irritable
fibre,  could  neither  deftroy  or  materially  injure
the  powers  of  life.

On  April  ]  1th,  I  made  the  firft  infpiration  of
pure  nitrous  oxide ;  it  patfed  through  the
bi'onchia  without  Simulating  the  glottis,  and
produced  no  UHcafy  feeling  in  the  lungs.

The  refult  of  this  experiment,  proved  that
the  gas  was  refpirable,  and  induced  me  to  be-
lieve that  a  farther  trial  of  its  efFeds  might  be
made  without  danger.

On  April  ]6th.  Dr.  Kinglake  being  accidentally
prefent,  I  breathed  three  quarts  of  nitrous  ox-
ide from  and  into  a  filk  bag  for  more  than  half
a  minute,  without  previoufly  clofing  my  nofe  or
exhaufting  my  lungs.


(  457  )

The  firft  infpirations  occafioned  a  flight  degree
of  giddinefs.  This  was  fucceeded  by  an  un-
common fenfe  of  fulnefs  of  the  head,  accom-
panied with  lofs  of  diftinft  fenfation  and  volun-
tary power,  a  feeling  analogous  to  that  produced
in  the  firft  ftage  of  intoxication  ;  but  unattended
by  pleafurable  fenfation.  Dr.  Kinglake,  who  felt
my  pulfe,  informed  me  that  it  was  rendered
quicker  and  fuller.

This  trial  did  not  fatisfy  me  with  regarcjl
to  its  powers ;  comparing  it  with  the  former
ones  I  was  unable  to  determine  whether  the
operation  was  flimulant  or  depreffing.

I  communicated  the  refult  to  Dr.  Beddoes,
and  on  April  the  17  th,  he  was  prefent,  when
the  following  experiment  was  made.

Having  previoufly  clofcd  my  noitrils  and
exhaufted  my  lungs,  I  breathed  four  quarts  of
nitrous  oxide  from  and  into  a  filk  bag.  The
firft  feelings  were  fimilar  to  thofe  produced  in
the  laft  experiment ;  but  in  lefs  than  half  a
minute,  the  refpiration  being  continued,  they
diminifhed  gradually,  and  were  fucceeded  by  a


(  458  )

fenftftion  analogous  to  gentle  preffiire  on  all  the
mufcles,  attended  by  an  highly  pleafurable
thrilling,  particularly  in  the  cheft  and  the  ex-
tremities. The  objefls  around  me  became
dazzling  and  my  hearing  more  acute.  Towards
the  laft  infpirations,  the  thrilling  increafed,
the  fenfe  of  mufcular  power  became  greater,
and  at  laft  an  irrefiftible  propenfity  to  a6lion  was
indulged  in ;  I  recollect:  but  indiftindlly  what
Followed  ;  I  know  that  my  motions  were  vari-
ous and  violent.

Thefe  efFeds  very  foon  ceafed  after  refpiration.
In  ten  minutes,  I  had  recovered  my  natural  ftate
of  mind.  The  thrilling  in  the  extremities,
continued  longer  than  the  other  fenfations.*

This  experiment  was  made  in  the  morning;
no  languor  or  exhauftion  was  confequent,  my
feelings  throughout  the  day  were  as  ufual,
tmd  I  paflTed  the  night  in  undifturbed  repofe,

'f-'  Dr.  Beddoes  has  given  fome  account  of  this  experiment,
in  hjs  Notice  of  fppie  obfervations  made  at  the  Medical
Pneumatic  Inftitution.  It  was  noticed  in  Mf.  Nicholfen's
Thil.  Journal  for  May  1 1^^.


(  459  )

The  next  morning  the  recolledlions  of  the
efFefls  of  the  gas  were  very  indiftindl,  and  had
not  remarks  written  immediately  after  the  expe-
riment recalled  them  to  my  mind,  I  fhould
have  eyen  doubted  of  their  reality.  I  was  vvil-
ling  indeed  to  attribute  fomc  of  the  ilrong  emo-
tion to  the  enthufiafm,  which  I  fuppofed  muft
have  been  neceflarily  conne6led  with  the  per-
ception of  agreei^ble  feelings,  when  I  was  pre-
pared to  experience  painful  ftnfations.  Two
experiments  however,  made  in  the  courfe  of
this-day,  with  fceptilm,  convinced  me  that  the
.efFedls  were  folely  owing  to  the  fpecific  opera^
tion  of  the  gas.

In  each  of  them  I  breathed  five  quarts  of
nitrous  oxide  for  rather  a  longer  time  than
before.  The  fcnfations  produced  were  ti miliar,
perhaps  not  quite  fo  pleafurable  ;  the  mufculap
motions  were  much  lefs  violent.  .f.:'^'  ■

Having  thus  afcertained  the  powers  of  the
gas,  I  made  many  experiments  to  afcertain  the
length  of  time  for  which  it  might  be  breathed
with   fafety,  its   effecls  on   the   puife,  and  its


(  46o  )

general  effects  on  the  health  when  often  re(^-
pired.

I  found  that  I  could  breathe  nine  quarts  of
nitrous  oxide  for  three  minutes,  and  twelve
quarts  for  rather  more  than  four.  I  could
never  breathe  it  in  any  quantity,  fo  long  as  five
minutes.  Whenever  its  operation  was  carried
to  the  higheft  extent,  the  pleafurable  thrilling
at  its  height  about  the  middle  of  the  experiment,
gradually  diminiOied,  the  fenfe  of  prefTure  on
the  mufcles  was  loft  ;  imprefEons  ceafed  to  be
perceived ;  vivid  ideas  pafled  rapidly  through
the  mind,  and  voluntary  power  was  altogether
deftroyed,  fo  that  the  mouth-piece  generally
dropt  from  my  unclofed  lips.

Whenever  the  gas  was  in  a  high  ftate  of  pu-
rity, it  tafted  diftindlly  fweet  to  the  tongue  and
palate,  and  had  an  agreeable  odor.  I  often
thought  that  it  produced  a  feeling  fomewhat
analogous  to  tafte,  in  its  application  to  my  lungs.
In  one  or  two  experiments,  I  perceived  a  diftincft
fenfe  of  warmth  in  my  cheft.

I  never  felt  from  it  any  thing  like  oppreffive


(461  )

refpiration  :  my  infpirations  became  deep  ia
proportion  as  I  breathed  it  longer ;  but  this
phaenomenon  arofe  from  increafed  energy  of  the
mufcles  of  refpiration,  and  from  a  defire  of  in-
creafing  the  pleafurable  feelings.

Generally  when  I  breathed  from  fix  to  feven
quarts,  mufcular  motions  were  produced  to  a
certain  extent  ;  fometimes  I  manifefted  my
pleallire  by  ftamping  or  laughing  only  ;  at  other
times,  by  dancing  round  the  room  and  vocife-
rating.

After  the  refpiration  of  fmall  dofes,  the
exhilaration  generally  lafted  for  five  or  fix
minutes  only.  In  one  or  two  experiments
when  ten  quarts  had  been  breathed  for  near  four
minutes,  an  exhilai*ation  and  a  fenfe  of  flight
intoxication  lafted  for  two  or  three  hours.

On  May  3d.  To  afcertain  whether  the  gas
would  accelerate  or  retard  the  progrefs  of  fleep,
1  breathed  at  about  8  o'clock  in  the  evening,
25  quarts  of  nitrous  oxide,  in  quantities  of  fix
at  a  time,  allowing  but  fhort  intervals  between
each  dofe.    The  feelings  were  much  lefs  pleafq-


(  4(52  )

rable  than  ufual,  and  during  the  conluiBption
of  the  two  laft  dofes,  ahnoft  indifferent  ;  indeed
the  gas  was  breathed  rather  too  foon  after  its
production  and  contained  fome  fufpended  acid
vapour  which  ftimulated  the  lungs  fo  as  to  induce
coughing.

After  the  experiments,  for  the  firft  time  I  was
fomewhat  depreffed  and  debilitated  ;  my  pro-
penfity  to  lleep  however,  came  on  at  the  ufual
hour,  and  as  ufual  was  indulged  in,  my  repofe
was  found  and  unbroken.

Between  May  and  July,  I  habitually  breathed
the  gas,  occafionally  three  or  four  times  a  day
for  a  week  together  ;  at  other  periods,  four  or
tive  times  a  week  only.

The  dofes  were  generally  from  fix  to  nine
quarts  ;  their  effeds  appeared  undiminifhed  by
habit,  and  were  hardly  ever  exadly  fimilar.
Sometimes  I  had  the  feelings  of  intenfe  intoxi-
cation, attended  with  but  little  pleafure ;  at
other  times,  fublime  emotions  connedled  with
highly  vivid  ideas  ;  my  pulfe  was  generally  in-
«reafed  in  fulnefs,  but  rarely  in  velocity.


(  463   )

The  genera!  efFefls  of  its  operation  upon  my
"health  and  ftate  of  mind^  are  extremely  difficult
of  defcription  ;  nor  can  I  well  difcriminate  be-
tween its  agency  and  that  of  other  phyfical  and
moral  caufes.

I  flept  much  lefs  than  ufual,  and  previous  to
fleep,  my  mind  was  long  occupied  by  vifible.
imagery.  I  had  a  conftant  defire  of  a6lion,  a
reftleflhefs,  and  an  uneafy  feeling  about  the
praecordia  analogous  to  the  ficknefs  of  hope.

But  perhaps  thefe  phaenomena  in  fome  mea-
fure  depended  on  the  intereft  and  labour  con-
ne(i3ed  with  the  experimental  inveftigation  re-
lating to  the  production  of  nitrous  oxide,  by
which  I  was  at  this  time  inceffantly  occupied.

My  appetite  was  as  ufual,  and  my  pulfe  not
materially  altered.  Sometimes  for  an  hour  after
the  infpiration  of  the  gas,  I  experienced  a  fpe-
cies  of  mental  indolence*  plcafing  rather  than

*  Mild  phyfical  pleafure  is  perhaps  always  deftrudive  to
aftion.  Almoft  all  our  powerful  voluntary  a6lions,  arisfe
cither  from  hope,  fear,  or  deli  re ;  and  the  moft  powerful
from  defire,  which  is  an  emotion  produced  by  the  coalcf-
cence  of  hope  or  ideal  pleafure  with  phyiical  pain.


(  464  )

otlierwife,  and  never  ending  in  riftlefnefs.

During  the  laft  week  in  which  I  breathed  it
uniformly,  I  imagined  that  I  had  increafed  fen-
fibility  of  touch  :  my  fingers  were  pained  by
any  thing  rough,  and  the  tooth  edge  produced
from  ilighter  caufes  than  ufual.  I  was  certainly
more  irritable,  and  felt  more  acutely  from
trifling  circumftances.  My  bodily  ftrength
was  rather  diminifhed  than  increafed.

At  the  latter  end  of  July,  I  left  off  my  ha-
bitual courfe  of  refpiration  ;  but  I  continued
occaflonally  to  breathe  the  gas,  either  for  the
fake  of  enjoyment,  or  with  a  view  of  afcertain-
ing  its  operation  under  particular  circumftances.

In  one  inflance,  when  I  had  head-ache  from
indigeftion,  it  was  immediately  removed  by  the
efFefls  ofa  large  dofe  of  gas;  though  it  after-
wards returned,  but  with  much  lefs  violence.  In
a  fecond  inftance,  a  flighter  degree  of  head-ache
was  wholly  removed  by  two  dofes  of  gas..

The  power  of  the  immediate  operation  of
the  gas  in  removing  intcnfe  phyfical  pain,  I
had  a  very  good  opportunity  of  afccrtaining,


>''  .^


(   433   )

number  of  experiments,  that  I  took  into  my
lungs  at  every  natural  infpiration,  about  13  cu-
bic inches  of  air,  and  that  I  threw  out  of  my
lungs  at  every  expiration,*  rather  lefs  than  this
quantity;  about  12|  cubic  inches.

The  mean  compolition  of  the  13  cubic  inches
of  air  infpired,  was

cub.  in.

Nitrogene     .  .      9,5  ^

Oxygene    .    ,  .    3,4

Carbonic  acid       0,1

That  of  the  12,7  of  air  expired
Nitrogene    .  .      9,3
Oxygene      .  .      2,2
Carbonic  acid       1,2
Thefe  refults  I  gained  from  more  than  20  ex*
periments,  fo  that  I  could  not  poffibly  entertain
any  doubt  of  this  accuracy.

I  found,  by  making  a  perfon  obferve  my  ref-
pirations  when  I  vvas  inattentive  to  the  procefs.


*  The   diminution    of  air   by  iingle  infpirations,  waj
particularly  noticed  by  Dr,  Goodwyn.


(   434   )

that  I  made  about  26  or  27  natural  infpirations
in  a  minute;  So  that  calculating'  from  the
above  eftimations^  it  would  follow,  that  31.6
cubic  inches  of  oxygene  were  confumed,  and
5,2  inches  of  nitrogene  loft  in  refpiration  every
minute,  whilft  26,6  cubic  inches  of  carbonic
acid  were  produced.

To  collefl  the  produd^s  of  a  great  number  of
natural  expirations  fo  as  to  afcerlain  whether
their  compofttion  correfponded  with  the  above
accounts,  I  proceeded  in  the  following  manner.

I  faftened  my  lips  tight  on  the  mouth-piece
of  the  exhaufted  airholder,  and  fufFering  my
noftrils  to  remain  open,  infpired  naturally
through  them,  throwing  the  expired  air  through
my  mouth  into  the  airholder.

In  many  experiments,  I  found  that  in  about
a  half  a  minute,   I  made  in  this  way    14  or   15
expirations.    The  mean  quantity  of  air  colleded'
was  171  cubic  inches,  and  confiftcd  of

cub. in.
Nitrogene     ..       128
Oxygene      . .         29
Carbonic  acid  . .     14


(  435   )

Comparing  tliefe  rcfults  with  the  former  ones^
we  find  the  mean  quantities  of  air  refpired  in
equal  terms  rallier  Icfs  ;  but  the  proportions  ,  of
carbonic  acid,  nitrogcne  and  oxygene  in  the
refpired  air,   nearly  identical.

e.  To  afcertaln  the  changes  effected  in  a
given  quantity  ot  atmofpheric  air  by  continued
refpirations,  I  breathed  after  a  compleat  expi-
ration, at  ten)perature  63O5  161  cubic  inches  of
air  for  near  a  minute,  making  in  this  time,  19
deep  infpirations.  After  the  compleat  expira-
tion, which  was  very  carefully  made,  the  gas
filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to  152  cubic  inches^
fo  that  9  cubic  inches  of  gas  had  difappeared.

The  152  cubic  inches  analifed,  were  found
to  confifl:  of

cub.  in.

Nitrogene  .  .    111,6
Oxygene    . .      23,
Carbonic  acid,     17,4

The  161  cubic  inches  before  infpirationy  were
compofed  of


(  436  )

cub.  In.
Nitrogene  .  .  1 1  7.0
Oxygen e  .  .  4*2,4
Carbonic  acid        ]56

Bat  the  refidual  gas  in  the  lungs  before  the
experiment,  was  of  different  compofition  from
that  remaining  in  the  lungs  after  the  expe-
riment. Making  corredlions  on  account  of
this  circumftance,  as  in  fe6lion  IV.  it  appears
that  about  5,1  of  nitrogene  were  abforbed  in
refpiration,  23,9  of  oxygene  confumed,  and
12  of  carbonic  acid  produced.

I  repeated  this  experiment  three  times  ;  in
each  experiment  the  diminution  after  refpiration,
was  nearly  the  fame ;  and  the  refidual  gas
making  the  neceflary  allowances,  of  fimilar
compofition.  So  that  fuppofing  the  exiftencc
of  no  fource  of  error  in  the  experiments  from
which  the  quantity  and  compofition  of  the  red-
dual  gas  of  the  lungs  were  eftimated  in  fedlion
IV.  the  abforption  of  nitrogene  by  the  venous
blood,  appears  almoft  demon ftrated.


{   437   )

/.  To  compare  the  changes  efFedled  in  at-
mofpheric  air  by  refpiration  of  the  fmaller
quadrupeds,  with  thofe  in  the  experiments  juft
detailed,  I  introduced  into  a  jar  of  the  capacity
of  20  cubic  inches  filled  with  mercury  in  the
mercurial  trough,  15  cubic  inches  of  atmofphe-
ric  air  which  had  been  deprived  of  its  carbonic
acid  by  long   expofure,  to  folution   of  potafh.

Temperature  being  64^,  a  healthy  fmall
moufe  was  quickly  p^^iled  under  the  mercury
into  the  jar,  and  fufFered  to  reft  on  a  very  thin
bitofcheefe,  which  was  admitted  immediately,
after.

He  continued  for  near  40  minutes  without
apparently  fufF^ring,  occafionallj  railing  him-
felf  on  his  hind  legs.  At  the  end  of  50  minutes,
he  was  lying  on  his  fulc,  and  in  55  minutes
was  apparently  dying.  He  was  now  carefully
taken  out  through  the  mercury  by  the  tail,  and
expofed  before  the  fire,  vvhere  he  foon  recovered.
After  the  cheefe  had  been  carefully  removed,
the  gas  in  the  jar  filled  a  fpace  nearly  equal  to
14  cubic  inches;  fo    that    a   diminution   of  a


(  438  )

cubic  inch  had  taken  place.     Thefe    14   cub:C
inches  analifed^  were  found  to  confift  of

cub.  in.

Carbonic  acid   .  ,      2.0

Oxygene       ....       1,4

Nitrogene       . . .    10,6

The  15   cubic   inches   before  the  experimentj
confifted  of

cub. in.

Oxygene    . .      4

Nitrogene  . .    11
•Hence  it  appeared,  that   2,6  cubic  inches   of
oxygene  had  been  confumed,     2  cubic  inches
of  carbonic  acid  produced,  and   about   0,4    of
nitrogend"loft.

The  relation  between  the  quantities  of  oxy-
gene confumed  in  this  experiment,  and  the
carbonic  acid  produced,  are  nearly  the  fame  as
that  of  thofe  in  the  experiments  jufl  detailed  ;
but  the  quantity  of  nitrogene  loft  is  much
fmaller.


(   439  )

VII.     Refpiration  of  Oxygene,

The  gafes  before  and  after  refpiration,  were
analifed  in  thefe  experiments  in  the  manner
defcribed  in  the  laft  fedlion,  except  that  3  of
nitrous  gas  were  always  employed  to  one  of
oxygene.

E.  I.  At  temperature  53°,  after  a  full  forced
refpiration,  I  refpired  in  the  mercurial  airholder,
for  half  a  minute^  102  cubic  inches  of  oxygene,
making  feven  very  long  and  deep  infpirations.
After  the  compleat  expiration,  the  gafes  filled
a  fpace  equal  to  QS  cubic  inches ;  thefe  93
cubic  inches  analiled,  were  found  to  confifl;   of

cub.  in.

Carbonic  acid    .  .       5,9

Nitrogene      ....    33,8

Oxygene 53,3

The  102  cubic  inches  before   the   experiment,
were  compofed  of

cub.  in.

Oxygene      . ,      78
Nitrogene    .  ,      24


(   440  )

The  refidual  gas  in  the  lungs  before  the  expe-
riment, was  32  cubic  inches,  and  compofed  of
about  23  nitrogene,  4,1  carbonic  acid,  and  4,9
oxygene,  Sedlion  IV.  The  refidual  gas  after
expiration,  was  compofed  of  18,2  oxygene,
2  carbonic  acid,  and  11,8  nitrogene.

Hence  the  whole  of  the  gas  in  the  lungs  and
airholder  before  infpiration,  was  134  cubic
inches,  compofed  of

cub.  in.

Oxygene  .  .  82,9
Nitrogene  . .  47,0
Carbonic  acid  .  .    4,1

And  after  refpiration,  125  cubic  inches,  con-
fifting  of

cub.  in.

Oxygene     ....        71,5

Nitrogene  ....        45,6

Carbonic  acid    .  .        7,9
So  that   comparing  the  quantities,  it  appears,
that  11,4  of  oxygene  and    1,4  of  nitrogene,
were  confumed  in  this  experiment,  and  3,8    of
carbonic  acid  produced.


(   441   )

I  was  much  furprlfed  at  the  ftnall  quantity  of
oxygene  that  had  been  confumed  in  this  expe-
riment. This  quantity  was  lefs  than  that  ex-
pended during  the  refpiration  of  atmofpheric
air  for  half  a  minute  :  the  portion  of  carbonic
acid  evolved  was  likewife  fmaller.  I  could
dete(^  no  fource  of  inaccuracy,  and  it  was  diffi-
cult to  fuppofe  that  the  greater  depth  and
fulnefs  of  the  infpirations  could  make  any
difference.

E.  2,  I  now  refpired  at  the  fame  tempera-
ture, after  a  full  expiration,  162  cubic  inches
of  gas,  compofed  of  133  oxygene  and  29  nitro*
gene  for  two  minutes,  imitating  as  much  as
poffible,  the  natural  refpiration.  After  the  oc-
periment,  they  filled  a  fpacc  equal  to  123  cubic
inches.  And  when  the  analyfis  and  calcula-
tions had  been  made  as  in  the  lad  experiment,
it  appeared  that  57  cubic  inches  of  oxygene,
and  2  of  nitrogene  had  been  abfbrbed,  whilft
21  cubic  inches  of  carbonic  acid  had  been
formed.

Now  from  the  eftimations  in  the  laft  fc(51ipn.


(  442   )

it  appears  that  63  cubic  inches  of  oxygene  are
confumed,  and  about  52  cubic  inches  of  car-
bonicacid  produced  every  two  minutes  during  the
natural  refpiration  of  cominon  air.  So  that
fuppofing  the  experiment  accurate,  6  cubic
inches  of  oxygene  lefs  are  abforbed,  and  30
cubic  inches  lefs  of  carbonic  acid  produced
every  minute,  when  oxygene  nearly  pure  is
refpired,  than  when  atmofpheric  air  is  refpired.

Both  thefe  experiments  were  made  in  the
nnorning,  at  a  time  when  I  was  in  perfedl  health  ;
fo  that  there  could  be  apparently  no  fource  of
error  from  accidental  circumftances.

The  uncommon  and  unexpedied  nature  of  the
refults,  made  me  however,  very  fceptical  con-
cerning them  ;  and  before  I  would  draw  any
inferences,  I  refolvcd  to  afcertain  the  compara-
tive confumption  of  atmofpheric  air  and  oxy-
gene by  the  fmaller  quadrupeds,  for  which  pur-
pofe,  I  made  the  following  experiment.

E.  3.  Of  two  ftrong  and  healthy  fmall  mice,
apparently  of  the  fame  breed,  and  cxadly
fimilar.


{   443   )

One  was  introduced. into  ajar  containing  10
cubic  inches  and  ba4f  of  oxygene,  and  3  cubic
inches  of  nitrogcne^  and  made  to  reft  on  a  bit
of  cheefe.

The  other  was  introduced  into  a  jar  contain-
ing fifteen  cubic  inches  and  half  of  atmofpheric
air,  and  made  to  reft  in-  the  fame  manner  on
cheefe.

The  moufe  in  oxygene  began  apparently  to
fuffer  in  about  half  an  hour,  and  occafionally
panted  very  much;  in  about  an  hour  he  lay
down  on  his  fide  as  if  dying.  The  jars  were
often  agitated,  that  the  gafes  might  be  well
mingled.

The  moufe  in  atmofpheric  air  became  very
feeble  in  40  minutes,  and  at  the  end  of  50  mi-
nutes was  taken  out  through  the  mercury  alive,
but  unable  to  ftand.

The  moufe  in  oxygene  was  taken  out  in  the
fame  manner  after  an  hour  and  quarter,  alive,
but  motionlefs,  and  breathing  very  deeply.

The  gas  in  the  jars  Vv'as  examined.  That  in
the  oxygene  jar  filled  a   fpace  exadlly  equal  to


f  444   )

12,7  cubic  inches,  and  analifecl,  was  found  to
confiftof  1,7  carbonic  acid,  '1,6  of  nitrogene,
and  8,4  of  oxygene.  So  that  abfohitely,  2,1
cubic  inches  of  oxygene  and  ,4  ofnitrogenehad
been  con  fumed,  and  1,7  of  carbonic  acid  pro-
duced.

The  gas  in  the  atmofpheric  air  jar  was  dimi-
nifhed  nearly  to  14,4,  and  confilted  of  2,1  car-
bonic acid,  1,4  oxygene;  and  10,9  nitrogene.
So  that  2,7  of  oxygene  and  ,5  of  nitrogene,  had
been  confumed  by  the  moufe  ;  and  2,1  of  car-
bonic acid  produced.

Hence  it  appear^,  that  the  moufe  in  atmof-
pheric air  confumed  nearly  one-third  more  oxy-
gene and  produced  nearly  one-fourth  more
carbonic  acid  in  refpiration  in  55  minutes,  than
the  other  in  an  hour  and  quarter  in  oxygene.
And  if  we  confider  the  perpetual  diminution  of
the  oxygene  of  the  atmofpheric  air  ;  from  which
at  laft  it  became  almoll  incapable  of  fupporting
the  life  of  the  animal  ;  we  may  conclude,  that
the  quantity  of  oxygene  confumed  by   it,  had


(   445   )

the  air  been  perpetually  renovated,  would  have
been  much  more  confiderable.

I  delign  very  fnortly,  to  repeat  thefe  experi-
ments, and  to  make  others  on  the  comparative
confumption  of  oxygene  and  atmofpheric  air,
by  the  larger  quadrupeds.  Whatever  may  be
the  refults,  I  hope  to  be  able  to  alcertain  from
them,  why  pure  oxygene  is  incapable  of  fup-
porting  life.

VIII.  Objervations  on  the  changes  effeBed
m  the  Mood,  by  atmofpheric  air  and  oxygene.

From  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Cigna  and  Dr.
Prieftley,*  it  appears  that  the  coagulum  of  the
venous  blood  becomes  florid  at  its  furface  when
expofed  to  the  atmofphere,  though  covered  and
defended  from  the  immediate  contadt  of  air  by
averv  thick  ftratum  of  ferum.


*  Dr.  Priellley  found  that  it  likewife  became  florid  at
the  furface  when  covered  by  milk  ;  but  that  it  underwent
little  or  no  alteration  of  color  under  water  and  motl  other
fluids.— Vol.  3.  p.  373


(   446  )

Hence  it  is  evident,  that  lerum  is  capable  of
difrolving  either  the  whole  compound  atmofphe-
ric  air,  or  the  oxygen e  of  it.

Suppofing  what  indeed  is  moll:  probable  from
numerous  analogies,  that  it  diflblves  the  whole
compound  ;  it  would  follow,  that  the  coloring
of  thecoagulum  of  blood  under  ferum,  depended
upon  the  decompofition  of  the  atmofpheric  air
condenfed  in  the  ferum,  the  oxygene'|~  of  it
combining  with  the  red  particles,  and  the  nitro-
gene  cither  remaining  diflblved  in  the  fluid,  or
being  liberated  through  it  into  the  atmofphere.
Now  the  circulating  blood  conlifts  of  red  par-
ticles, floating  in  and  ditFufed  through  ferum
and  coagulablc  lymph.

f  There  are  many  analogous  decorapofitions.  Dr.  Prieftley
noticed  (and  I  have  often  made  the  obfervalion)  that  green
oxide  of  iron,  or  the  precipitate  from  pale  green  fulphatc
of  iron  by  cauftic  alkali,  becanie  red  at  the  furface,  when
covered  by  a  thick  ftratum  of  water.  In  my  experiments  on
the  green  muriate  and  lulphate  of  iron,  I  obfervcd  that  part
of  fome  dark  oxide , of  iron  which  was  at  the  bottom  of  a
trough  of  water  Q  inches  deep,  became  red  at  the  furface
nearly  in  the  fame  time  as  another  portion  of  the  fame  preci-
pitation that  was  expofed  to  the  atmofphere.  This  oxyge-
nation muft  depend  upon  the  decompofition  of  atmofpheric
air  conftantly  diflblved  by  the  water.


(  447  )

In  natural  refpiration^  the  red  particles  are  ren^
dared  of  a  brighter  tinge  during  the  paffage  of
the  blood  through  the  pulmonary  veins.  And
as  we  have  feen  in  the  lait  feclions,  during  ref-
pi ration  atmofpheric  air  is  decompofed  \  all  the
oxygene  of  it  confumed^  apparently  a  fmall
portion  of  the  nitrogene  loft,  and  a  confiderable
quantity  of  carbonic  acid  produced.

It  feems  therefore  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  that
the  whole  compound  atmofpheric  air  paffing
through  the  moill  coats  of  the  veflTels  is  firft
diflblved  by  the  ferum  ofthe  venous  blood,  and  in
its  condenled  ftate,  decompofed  by  the  affinity
of  the  red  particles  for  its  oxygene  ;  the  greater
part  of  the  nitrogene  being  liberated  unaltered  ;
but  a  minute  portion  of  it  poffibly  remaining
condcnfcd  in  the  ferum  and  coagulable  lymph,
and  palling  with  them  into  the  left  chamber  of
the  heart.

From  the  experiments  on  the  refpiration  of
nitrous  oxide  and  hydrogene,  it  appears  that  a
certain  portion  of  the  carbonic  acid  produced  in
refpiration,  is  evolved  from  the  venous  blood  \


(   448  )

but  as  a  much  greater  quantity  is  generated
during  the  refpiration  of  common  air  and  oxy-
gene,  than  during  that  of  hydrogene  in  equal
times,  it  is  not  impoffible  but  that  Tome  portion  of
it  may  be  formed  by  the  combination  of  charcoal
in  the  red  particles  with  the  oxygene  diilblved
in  the  ferum  ;  but  this  can  only  be  determined
by  farther  experiments.

Suppofing  that  no  part  of  the  water  evolved
in  folution  by  the  expired  gas  of  common  air  is
formed  immediately  in  refpiration,  it  will  follow
that  a  very  confiderable  quantity  of  oxygene
muft  be  confiantly  combined  with  the  red  par-
ticles, even  allowing  the  confumption  of  a
certain  portion  of  it  to  form  carbonic  acid  ;  for
the  carbonic  acid  evolved,  rarely  amounts  to
more  than  three-fourths  of  the  volume  of  the
oxygene  confumed.

Perhaps  the  ferum  of  the  blood  is  capable  of
difTolving  a  larger  quantity  of  atmofpheric  air
than  of  pure  oxygene.  On  this  fuppofition,  it
would  be  eafy  to  explain  the  fmallcr  confumption
of  oxygene  in  the  experiments  in  the  laft  fediion^


{  465   )

in  cutting  one  of  the  unlucky  teeth  called
dentes  fapientiae,  I  experienced  an  extenfive
inflammation  of  the  gum,  accompanied  with
great  pain,  which  equally  deUroyed  the  power
of  repofe,  and  of  confiftent  action.

On  the  day  when  the  inflammation  was  moit
troublefome,  I  breathed  three  large  dofes  of
nitrous  oxide.  The  pain  always  diminiflied
after  the  firft  four  or  five  infpirations  ;  the  thril-
ling came  on  as  ufual,  and  uneafinefs  was  for  a
few  minutes,  fwallowed  up  in  pleafure.  As  the
former  flate  of  mind  however  returned,  the
itate  of  organ  returned  with  it;  and  I  once
imagined  that  the  pain  was  more  fevere  after
the  experiment  than  before.

In  Augaft,  I  made  many  experiments  with  a
view  of  afcertaining  whether  any  analogy  exilted
between  the  fenfible  effects  of  the  different  ga-
{es  which  are  fooner  or  later  fatal  to  life  when
refpired,  and  thofe  of  nitrous  oxide.

I  refpired  four  quarts  of  Hydrogene*  nearly

♦  Pare  hydrogene  has  been  often  refpired  by  diflferent
Philofophers,  partictalarly  by  Schecle,  Fontana,  and  the
adyentaroQS  and  anfortunate  Rofier.


(  466  )

pore  produced  from  zinc  and  muriatic  acid^  for
near  a  minute,  my  lungs  being  previoufly  ex-
haufted  and  my  noftrils  carefully  clofcd.  The
firft  fix  or  feven  infpirations  produced  no  fenfa-
tions  whatever  ;  in  half  a  minute,  I  perceived
a  difagreeable  oppreffion  of  the  cheft,  which
obliged  mc  to  refpire  very  quickly  ;  this  op-
preffion gradually  increafed,  till  at  laft  the  pain
of  fufFocation  compelled  me  to  leave  off  breath-
ing. I  felt  no  giddinefs  during  or  after  the
experiment ;  my  pulfe  was  rendered  feebler  and
quicker  ;  and  a  by-ftander  informed  me  that
towards  the  laft,  my  cheeks  became  purple.

In  a  fecond  experiment,  when  the  hydro-
gene  was  procured  from  iron  and  diluted  ful-
phuric  acid,  I  was  unable  to  refpire  it  for  fo
long  as  three  quarters  of  a  minute  ;  a  tranfient
giddinefs  and  mufcular  debility  were  produced,
the  pulfe  was  rendered  very  feeble,  and  the  pain
of  fufFocation  was  greater  than  before.

I  breathed  three  quarts  of  Nitrogene  mingled
with  a  very  fmall  portion  of  carbonic  acid,  for
near  a  minute.     It  produced  no  alteration   in


{  467  )

tny  fenfatlons  for  the  firft  twenty  feconds  ;  then
the  painful  fenfe  of  fnfFocation  gradually  came
on,  and  increafed  rapidly  in  the  laft  quarter  of
the  minute,'  fo  as  to  oblige  me  to  defifl:  from
the  experiment.  My  pulfe  was  rendered  feebler
and  quicker.  I  felt  no  afFe6lion  whatever  in
the  head.

Mr.  Watt's  obfervations  on  the  refpiration
of  diluted  Hydrocarbonate  by  men,  and  Dr.
Beddoes's  experiments  on  the  deftrudlion  of
animals  by  pure  hydrocarbonate,  proved  that
its  efFe6ls  were  highly  deleterious.

As  it  deftroyed  life  apparently  by  rendering
the  mufcular  fibre  inirritable  without  producing
any  previous  excitement,  I  was  anxious  to  com-
pare its  fenfible  efFeds  with  thofe  of  nitrous
oxide,  which  at  this  tiuie  I  believed  to  deftroy
life  by  producing  the  higheft  poffible  excite-
ment, ending  in  laefion  of  organifation.

In  the  firft  experiment,  I  breathed  for  near
a  minute,  three  quarts  of  hydrocarbonate  min-
gled with  nearly  two  quartsof  atmofpheric  air.*

*  I  believe  it  had  never  been  breathed  before  by  any
individual,  in  a  ftate  fo  little  diluted.


(  468   )

It  produced  a  flight  giddinefs  and  pain  in  the
head,  and  a  momentary  lofs  of  voluntary  power  :
my  pulfe  was  rendered  much  quicker  and  feeb-
ler. Thefe  efFe6ls  however,  went  off  in  five
minutes,  and  I  had  no  return  of  giddinefs.

Emboldened  by  this  trial,  in  which  the  feel-
ings were  not  unlike  thofe  I  experienced  in  the
firft  experiments  on  nitrous  oxide,  I  refolved
to  breathe  pure  bydrocarbonate.

For  this  purpofe,  I  introduced  into  a  filk  bag,
four  quarts  of  gas  nearly  pure,  which  was  care-
fully produced  from  the  decompolition  of  water
by  charcoal  an  hour  before,  and  which  had  a
vary  flrong  and  difagreeable  fmell.

My  friend,  Mr.  James  Tobin,  Junr.  being
prefent,  after  a  forced  exhauftion  of  my  lungs,
the  nofe  being  accurately  clofcd,  I  made  three
infpirations  and  expirations  of  the  bydrocarbo-
nate. The  firft  infpiration  produced  a  fort  of
numbnefs  and  lofs  of  feeling  in  the  cheft  and
about  the  pedloral  mufcles.  After  the  fecond
infpiration,  I  loft  all  power  of  perceiving  exter-
nal things,  and  had  no  diftind  fenfation  except


(  469  )

a  terrible  oppreffion  on  the  cheft.  During  the
third  expiration^  this  feeling  difappeared,  I
leemed  finking  into  annihilation,  and  had  juft
power  enough  to  drop  the  mouth-piece  from  my
unclofed  lips.  A  fhort  interval  muft  have  paf-
fed  during  which  I  refpired  common  air,  before
the  objedls  about  me  were  diftinguifhable.  On
recolledling  myfelf,  I  faintly  articulated,  "  /  do
not  think  I  Jhall  ciie,^''  Putting  my  finger  on
the  wrift,  I  found  my  pulfe  thread-like  and
beating  with  excefiive  quicknefs.

In  lefs  than  a  minute,  I  was  able  to  walk,  and
the  painful  oppreflion  on  the  chefl  diredted  me
to  the  open  air.

After  making  a  few  fl:eps  which  carried  me  to
the  garden,  my  head  became  giddy,  my  knees
trembled,  and  I  had  jufi:  fufficient  voluntary
power  to  throw  myfelf  on  the  grafs.  Here  the
painful  feeling  of  the  cheft  increafed  with  fuch
violence  as  to  threaten  fufix)cation.  At  this
moment,  I  aiked  for  fome  nitrous  oxide.  Mr.
Dwyer  brought  me  a  mixture  of  oxygenc  and
nitrous  oxide.  I  breathed  this  for  a  minute,  and


(  470  )

helieved  royfelf  relieved.  In  five  minutes,  the
painful  feelingvS  began  gradually  to  diminilli.
In  an  hour  they  had  nearly  difappeared,  and  I
felt  only  exceflive  wcaknefs  and  a  flight  fwim-
ining  of  the  head.  My  voice  was  very  feeble
and  indiftin^l.  This  was  at  tvi'o  o'clock  in  the
afternoon.

I  afterwards  walked  flowly  for  about  half  an
hour,  with  Mr.  Tobin,  Junr.  and  on  my  return,
was  fo  much  fironger  and  better,  as  to  believe
that  the  effects  of  the  gas  had  difappeared  ;
though  my  pulfe  was  120  and  very  feeble.  I
continued  without  pain  for  near  three  quarters
of  an  hour;  when  the  giddinefs  returned  with
fuch  violence  as  to  oblige  me  to  lie  on  the  bed  ;
it  was  accompanied  with  naufea,  lofs  of  me-
mory, and  deficient  fenfation.  In  about  an
hour  and  half,  the  giddinefs  went  off,  and  was
fucceeded  by  an  excruciating  pain  in  the  fore-
head and  between  the  eyes,  with  trantient
pains  in  the  chcfl  and  extremities.

Towards  night  thefe  afFediions  gradually  dimi-


(   171  )

nifhed.  At  ten,t  no  difagreeable  feeling  ex-
cept weaknefs  remained.  I  flept  founds  and
awoke  in  the  morning  very  feeble  and  very
hungry.  No  recurrence  of  the  fymptoms  took
place,  and  I  had  nearly  recovered  rny  ftrength
by  the  evening.

I  have  been  minute  in  the  account  of  this
experiment  becaufe  it  proves,  that  hydrocarbo-
nate  sl6\s  as  a  fedative,  i.  e.  that  it  produces
diminution  of  vital  action,  and  debility,  v^ithout
previoufly  exciting.  There  is  every  reafon  to
believe,  that  if  I  had  taken  four  or  five  infpira-
tions  inftead  of  three,  they  would  have  deftroyed
life  immediately  without  producing  any  painful
fenfation.  Perhaps  moft  of  the  uneafy  feelings
after  the  experiment,  were  connecl^ed  with  the
return  of  the  healthy  condition  of  organs.*


j  I  ought  to  obfervc,  that  between  eight  and  ten,  I  took
by  the  advice  of  Dr.  Beddoes,  two  or  three  dofes  of  diluted
nitric  acid.

*  By  whatever  caufe  the  exhauftion  of  organs  is  produ*
ced,  pain  is  almoft  uniformly  conne6ted  with  their  return-
ing health.  Pain  is  rarely  ever  perceived  in  limbs  debilitated


(  m)

About  a  week  after  this  experiment,  I  at-
tempted to  refpire  Carbonic  acid,  not  being  at
the  tim'e  acquainted  with  the  experiments  of
Rofier.

I  introduced  into  a  filk  bag  four  quarts  of
well  wafhed  carbonic  acid  produced  from  carr
bonate  of  ammoniac*  by  heat,  and  after  a
compleat  voluntary  exhauftion  of  my  lungs,
attempted  to  infpire  it.  It  tafted  llrongly  acid
in  the  mouth  and  fauces,  and  produced  a  fenfe
of  burning  at  the  top  of  the  uvula.  In  vain  I
made  powerful  voluntary  efforts  to  draw  it  into
the  windpipe  ;  at  the  moment  that  the  epiglottis
was  raifed  a  little,  a  painful  Simulation  was  in-
duced, fo  as  to  clofe  it  fpafmodically  on  the
glottis  ;  and  thus  in  repeated  trials  I  was  pre-
vented from  taking  a  tingle  particle  of  carbonic
acid  into  my  lungs.

by  fatigue  till  after  they  have  been  for  fome  hours  at  reft.
Pain  is  uniformly  conne6ted  with  the  recovery  from  the
debility  induced  by  typhus,  often  with  the  recovery  from
that  produced  by  the  ftimulation  of  opium  and  alcohol.

*  Carbonic  acid  is  produced  in  this  way  in  a  high  ftata
of  purity,"  and  with  great  readinefs.


(  473  )

I  tried  to  breathe  a  mixture  of  two  quarts  of
common  air  and  three  of  carbonic  acid,  without
fuccefs ;  it  Simulated  the.  epiglottis  nearly  in
the  fame  manner  as  pure  carbonic  acid,  and
was  perfedlly  non-refpirable.

I  found  that  a  mixture  of  three  quarts  of  car-
bonic acid  with  feven  of  common  air  was  refpi*
rable,  I  breathed  it  for  near  a  minute.  At  the
time,  it  produced  a  flight  degree  of  giddinefs,
and  an  inclination  to  lleep.  Thefe  effedls  how-
ever, very  rapidly  difappeared  after  I  had  ceafed
to  breathe,  =*  and  no  other  afFedlions  followed.

During  the  courfe  of  experiments  on  nitrous
oxide,  I  feveral  times  breathed  Oxygene  procu-
red from  manganefe  by  heat,  for  from  three  to
five  minutes.

In  refpiring  eight  or  ten  quarts  ;  for  the  firft


*  Carbonic  acid  pofTeffes  no  adion  on  arterial  blood.
Hence  perhaps,  its  flight  efFeds  when  breathed  mingled
with  large  quantities  of  common  air.  Its  efFeds  are  very-
marked  upon  venous  blood !  If  it  were  thrown  forcibly
into  the  lungs  of  animals,  the  momentary  application  of  it
to  the  pi^lraonary  venous  blood  would  probably  defbroy  life.


(   474   )

two  or  three  minutes  I  could  perceive  no  effecls.
Towards  the  end,  even  when  I  breathed  very
flowly,  my  refpiration  became  oppreiTed,  and
I  felt  a  fenfation  analogous  to  that  produced  by
the  want  of  frefh  air;  though  but  little  of  the
oxygene  had  been  con  fumed.

In  one  experiment  when  I  breathed  from  and
into  a  bag  containing  20  quarts  of  oxygene  for
near  fix  minutes  ;  Dr.  Kinglake  felt  my  pulfe,
and  found  it  not  altered  in  velocity,  but  rather
harder  than  before.  I  perceived  no  effeds  but
thofe  of  oppreffion  on  the  cheft'^.


^  In  a  converfation  with  Mr.  Watt,  relating  to  the  pow-
ers of  gafes,  that  excellent  philofophcr  told  me  he  had  for
fome  time  entertained  a  fufpicion,  that  the  effects  attribu-
ted to  oxygene  produced  from  manganefe  by  heat,  in  fome
meafure  depended  upon  nitrous  acid  fufpended  in  the  gas,
formed  during  ignition  by  the  union  of  fome  of  the  oxygens
of  the  manganefe  with  nitrogene  likewife  condenfed   in  it.

In  the  courfe  of  experiments  on  nitrous  acid,  detailed  in
Refearch  I.  made  in  September,  06tober,  and  December,
1799,  I  feveral  times  experienced  a  fevere  oppreflion  on  the
cheft  and  difficulty  of  refpiration,  not  unanalogous  to  that
produced  by  oxygene,  but  much  more  violent,  from
breathing  an  atmofphere  loaded  with  nitrous  acid  vapour.
This  fa6t  feemcd  to  confirm  Mr.  Watt's  fufpicion.    I  con-


(  475  )

Having  obferved  in  my  experiments  upon
venous  blood,  that  Nitrous  gas  rendered  that
fluid  of  a  purple  tinge,  very  like  the  color
generated  in  it  by  nitrous  oxide  ;  and  finding
no  painful  efFe6ls  produced  by  the  application
of  nitrous  gas  to  the  bare  rnufcular  fibre,  I
began  to  imagine  that  this  gas  might  be  breathed
with  impunity,  provided  it  were  poffible  in  any
way  to  free  the  lungs  of  common  air  before  in-
fpiration,  fo  as  to  prevent  the  formation  of
nitrous  acid.

On  this  fuppofition,  during  a  fit  of  enthufi-
afm  produced  by  the  refpiration  of  nitrous
oxide,  I  refolved  to  endeavour  to  breathe
Nitrous  gas.

114  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  gas  were  intro-
duced into  the  large  mercurial  airholder  ;  two


fefs,  however,  that  I  have  never  been  able  to  dete6l  any
fnnell  of  nitrous  acid,  either  by  means  of  my  own  or-
gans or  thofe  of  others,  during  the  prodadion  of  oxygene  :
when  the  gas  is  fuffered  to  pafs  into  the  ntmofpherc.
The  oxygene  breathed  in  the  experiments  detailed  in  the
text,  had  been  for  fome  days  in  conta^^  with  water.


(476)

fmall  filk  bags  of  the  capacity  of  feven  quarts
were  filled  with  nitrous  oxide.

After  a  forced  exhauftion  of  my  lungs,  my
nofe  being  accurately  clofed,  I  made  three  in-
fpirations  and  expirations  of  nitrous  oxide  in
one  of  the  bags,  to  free  my  lungs  as  much  as
poffible  from  atmofpheric  oxygene  ;  then,  after
a  full  expiration  of  the  nitrous  oxide,  I  transferred
my  mouth  from  the  mouth -piece  of  the  bag  to
that  of  the  airholder,  and  turning  the  ftop-
cock,  attempted  to  infpire  the  nitrous  gas. —
In  paffing  through  my  mouth  and  fauces,  it
tafted  aflringent  and  highly  difagreeable ;  it
occafioned  a  fenfe  of  burning  in  the  throat,  and
produced  a  fpafm  of  the  epiglottis  fo  painful  as
to  oblige  me  to  defift  inflantly  from  attempts
to  infpire  it.  After  moving  my  lips  from  the
mouth-piece,  when  I  opened  them  to  infpire
common  air,  aeriform  nitrous  acid  was  inflantly
formad  in  my  mouth,  which  burnt  the  tongue
and  palate,  injured  the  teeth,  and  produced  an
inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  which
lafted  for  fome  hours.


(  4/7  )

As  after  the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide  in
the  experiments  in  the  laft  Refearch,  a  fmall
portion  of  the  refidual  atmofpheric  air  rejnained
in  the  lungs,  mingled  with  the  gas,  after  forced
expiration  ;  it  is  mod  probable  that  a  minute
portion  of  nitrous  acid  was  formed  in  this  expe-
riment, when  the  nitrous  gas  was  taken  into
the  mouth  and  fauces/  which  might  produce
its  {Simulating  properties.  If  fo,  perhaps  I
owe  my  life  to  the  circumflance  ;  for  fup-
pofing  I  had  taken  an  infpiration  of  nitrous
gas,  and  even  that  it  had  produced  no
pofitive  cfFedls,  it  is  highly  improbable,  that
by  breathing  nitrous  oxide,  I  fhould  have  freed
my  lungs  from  it,  fo  as  to  have  prevented  the
formation  of  nitrous  acid  when  I  again  infpired
common  air.  I  never  defign  again  to  attempt
fo  rath  an  experiment.

In  the  beginning  of  September  I  often  ref-
pired  nitrous  oxide  mingled  with  different  pro-
portions of  common  air  or  oxygene.  The
efFedls  produced  by  the  diluted  gas  were  much
lefs  violent  than  thofe  produced  by  pure  nitrous


(  47S  )

/

oxide.  They  were  generally  pleafant  :  the
thrilling  was  not  often  perceived,  but  a  fenfe
of  exhiHration  was  almoft  conftant.

Between  September  and  the  end  of  Odlober,
I  made  but  few  experiments  on  refpiration,  al-
moft the  whole  of  my  time  being  devoted  to
chemical  experiments  on  the  produdion  and
analylis  of  nitrous  oxide.

At  this  period  my  health  being  fomewhat
injured  by  the  conftant  labour  of  experiment-
ing, and  the  perpetual  inhalation  of  the  acid
vapours  of  the  laboratory,  I  went  into  Cornwal ;
where  new  aflbciations  of  ideas  and  feelings,
common  exercife,  a  pure  atmofphere,  luxurious
diet  and  moderate  indulgence  in  wine,  in  a
month  reftored  me  to  health  and  vigor.

Nov.  27th.  Immediately  after  my  return,
being  fatigued  by  a  long  journey,  I  refpired
nine  quarts  of  nitrous  oxide,  having  been  pre-
cifely  thirty-three  days  without  breathing  any.
The  feelings  were  different  from  thofe  I  had
experienced  in  former  experiments.  After  the
firft  fix  or  feven  infpirations,  I  gradually  began


(  479  )

to  lofe  the  perception  of  extei^al  things^  and  a
vivid  and    intenle  recolIe6lion  of  fome  former
experiments  paffed  through    my    mind,  fo  that
I  called  out  *^  "what  an  amazing  concatenation  of
ideas  P'     I  had  no  pleafurable  feeling  whatever,
I  ufed  no  mufcular  motion,    nor  did  I  feel   any
difpofition  to  it ;  after  a  minute,  when  I  made
the  note  of  the  experiment,  all  the  uncommon
fenfations  had  vanifhed  ;  they  were  fucceeded
by  a  flight  forenefs  in  one  of  the  arms  and  in
the  leg  :  in  three  minutes  thefe  affections  like-
wife  difappeared.

From  this  experiment  I  was  inclined  to  uip-
|jofe  that  my  newly  acquired  health  had  dimi-
nifhed  my  fufceptibility  to  the  effefls  of  the
gas.  About  ten  days  after,  however,  I  had  an
opportunity  of  proving  the  fallacy  of  this  fupL-
pofition.

Immediately  after  a  journey  of  \*lQ  miles,  in
which  I  had  no  fleep  the  preceding  night,  being
much  exhaufed,  I  fefpired  feven  quarts  of  gas
for  near  three  minutes.  It  produced  the  ufual
pleafurable  effefls,  and  flight  mufcular  motion.


(  480  )

I  continued  exhilarated  for  fome  minutes  after-
wards: but  in  half  an  hour  found  myfelf  neither
more  or  lefs  exhaufted  than  before  the  experi-
ment.    I  had  a  great  propenfity  to  fleep.

I  repeated  the  experiment  four  or  five  times
in  the  following  week,  with  fimilar  eftedls.  M}^
fufceptibility  was  certainly  not  diminifhed.  I
even  thought  that  I  was  more  affedled  than  for-
merly by  equal  dofes.

Though,  except  in  one  inflance,  when  indeed
the  gas  was  impure,  I  had  experienced  no  decifive
exhauftion  after  the  excitement  from  nitrous  ox-
ide, yet  ftill  I  was  far  from  being  fatisfied  that  it
was  unanalogous  to  ftimulants  in  general. —
No  experiment  had  been  made  in  which  the
excitement  from  nitrous  oxide  had  been  kept  up
for  fo  great  a  length  of  time  and  carried  to  fo
great  an  extent  as  that  in  which  it  is  uniformly
fucceeded  by  exceffive  debility  under  the  agency
of  other  powers.

It  occurred  to  me,  that  fuppofing  nitrous  ox-
ide  to  be  a  ftimulant  of  the  common  clafs,  it
would  follow  that  the  debility  produced  in  con-


(  481   )

fequence  of  excefRve  ftiniulation  by  a  known
agent,  ought  to  be  increafed  after  excitement
from  nitrons  oxide.*

To  afcertain  whether  this  was  the  cafe,  I
made  on  December  23d,  at  four  P.  M.  the
following  experiment.  I  drank  a  bottle  of
wine  in  large  draughts  in  lefs  than  eight  mi-
nutes. Whilfl  I  w.as  drinking,  I  perceived  a
fenfe  of  fulnefs  in  the  head,  and  throbbing  of
the  arteries,  not  unanalogous  to  that  produced  ia
the  firft  ftage  of  nitrous  oxide  excitement.
After  I  had  finifhed  the  bottle,  this  fulnefs  in-
creafed, the  obje6ls  around  me  became  dazzling,
the  power  of  diftindl  articulation  was  loft,  and
I  was  unable  to  walk  fteadily.  At  this  moment
the  fenfations  were  rather  pleafurable  than  other-
wife,  the  fenfe  o^  fulnefs  in  the  head  foon  how-
ever increafed  lb  as  to  become  painful,- and  in


*  In  the  fame  manner  as  the  debility  from   intoxicatioB
b/  two  bottles  of  wine  is  increafed  by  a  third.


Gg


(  462  )

left  than  an  hour  I  funk  into  a  ftate  of  infenfi-
bility.*

In  this  fituation  1  muft  have  remained  for
two  hours  or  two  hours  and  half.

I  was  awakened  by  head-ache  and  painful
naufea.  The  naufea  continued  even  after  the
contents  of  the  flomach  had  been  ejefled.  The
pain  in  the  iiead  every  minute  increafed  ;  I  was
neither  feverifh  or  thirfty  ;  my  bodily  and  men-
tal debility  were  exceffive,  and  the  pulfe  feeble
and  quick.  .

In  this  ftate  I  breathed  for  near  a  minute  and
half  five  quarts  of  gas,  which  was  brought  to
me  by  the  operator  for  nitrous  oxide ;  but  as  it
produced  no  fenfations  whatever,  and  apparently
rather  increafed  my  debilty,  I  am  almoft  con-
vinced that  it  was  from  fome  accident,  either
common  air,  or  very  impure^nitrous  oxide.

Immediately  after  this  trial,  I  refpired  12  quarts

*  1  ought  to  obferve  that  my  ufual  drink  is  water,  that
I  had  been  little  accuftomcd  to  take  wine  or  fpirits,  and
had  never  been  compleatly  intoxicated  but  once  before  in
the  courfe  of  my  life.  This  will  account  for  the  powerful
eifc^  of  a  Single  bottle  of  win*.


{  MB  )

ofoxygexit  for  near  four  minutes.  It  produced
no  alteration  in  my  fenfations  at  the  time  ;  but
immediately  after  I  imagined  that  I  was  a  little
exhilirated.

The  head- ache  and  debility  ftill  however
continuing  with  violence,  I  examined  fome
nitrous  oxide  which  had  been  prepared  in  the
morning,  and  finding  it  very  pure,  refpired
feven  quarts  of  it  for  two  minutes  and  half.

I  was  unconfcious  of  head-ache  after  the  third
infpiration  5  the  ufual  pleafurable  thrilling  was
produced,  voluntary  power  was  defiroyed,  and
vivid  ideas  rapidly  pafTed  through  my  mind ;  I
made  ftrides  acrofs  the  room,  and  con-
tinued for  fome  minutes  much  exhilirated.
Immediately  after  the  exhilaration  had  difap-
peared^  I  felt  a  flight  return  of  the  head-ache  ;
it  was  connefled  with  tranfient  naufea.  After
two  minutes,  when  a  fmall  quantity  of  acidified
wiae  had  been  thrown  from  the  flomach,  both  the
naufea  and  head-ache  difappeared  ;  but  languor
and  depreffion  not  very  different  in  degree  from
thofc  exifting  before  the  experiment,  fucceeded.


(  484  )

They  however,  gradually  went  off  before  bed
time.  I  flept  found  the  whole  of  the  night
except  for  a  few  minutes,  during  which  I  was
kept  awake  by  a  trifling  head-ache.  In  the
morning,  I  had  no  longer  any  debility.  No
head-ache  or  giddinefs  came  en  after  I  had
arifen,   and  my  appetite  was  very  gi'eat.

This  experiment  proved,  that  debility  from
intoxicf^tion  was  not  increafed  by  excitement
from  nitrous  oxide.  The  headache  and  de-
preffion,  it  is  probable,  would  have  continued
longer  if  it  had  not  been  adminiftered.  Is  it
not  likely  that  the  flight  naufea  following
the  efFedts  of  the  gas  was  produced  by  new
excitability  given  to  the  ftomach  ?

To  afcertain  ivith  certainty,  whether  the
moft  extenfive  adlion  of  nitrous  oxide  compa-
tible with  life,  was  capable  of  producing  debility,
I  refolved  to  breathe  the  gas  for  fuch  a  time  and
in  fuch  quantities,  as  to  produce  excitement
equal  in  duration  and  fuperior  in  intenfity  to
that  occafioned  by  high  intoxication  from  opium
or  alcohol.


(  485  )

To  habituate  myfelf  to  the  excitement,  and
to  carry  it  on  gradually

On  December  26th,  I  was  inclofed  in  an
air-tight  breathing-box,*  of  the  capacity  of
about  9  cubic  feet  and  half,  in  the  prefence  of
Dr.  Kinglake.

After  I  had  taken  a  fituation  in  which  I  could
by  means  of  a  curved  thermometer  inferted
under  Ihe  arm,  and  a  (lop-watch,  afcertain  the
alterations  in  my  pulfe  and  animal  heat,  20
quarts  of  nitrous  oxide  were  thrown  into  the
box.

For  three  minutes  I  experienced  no  altera-
tion in  my  fenfations,  though  immediately  after
the  introdu^lion  of  the  nitrous  oxide  the  fmell
and  tade  of  it  were  very  evidcutJ

In  four  minutes  I  began  to  feel  a  flight  glow


'^  The  plan  of  this  box  was  communicated  by  Mr.  Watt.
An  account  of  it  will  be  detailed  in  the  Befearches.

\  The  nitrous  oxide  was  too  diluted  to  afl  much ;  it
was  mingled  with  near  i?2  times  it*  bulk  of  atmofpht ric
air.


(  486  )

in  the  cheeks,  and  a  generally  difFufed  warmth
over  the  cheft,  though  the  temperature  of  the
box  was  not  quite  50®.  I  had  negledied  to  feel
my  pulfe  before  I  went  in ;  at  this  time  it  was
104  and  hard,  the  animal  heat  was  08®.  In
ten  minutes  the  animal  heat  was  near  gg%  in  a
quarter  of  an  hour  99.5°,  when  the  pulfe  was
102,  and  fuller  than  before.

At  this  period  20  quarts  more  of  nitrous  oxide
Mrere  thrown  into  the  box,  and  well-mingled
with  the  mafs  of  air  by  agitation.

In  25  minutes  the  animal  heat  was  loo»,
pulfe  124.  In  30  minutes,  !K)  quarts  more  of
gas  were  introduced.

My  fenfations  were  now  pleafant ;  I  had  a
generally  difFufed  warmth  without  the  flighteft
moifture  of  the  fkin,  a  fenfe  of  exhilaration
fimilar  to  that  produced  by  a  fmall  dofe  of  wine,
and  a  difpofition  to  mufcular  motion  and  to
merriment.

In  three  quarters  of  an  hour  the  pulfe  was
104,  and  animal  heat  not  99,5"^,  the  tempera-
ture of  the  chamber  was  64^     The  pleafurabl^


r  487 )

feelings  continued  to  increafe,  the  pulfe  became
-fuller  and  flower,  till  in  about  an  hour  it  was
880,  when  the  animal  heat  was  99°.

20  quarts  more  of  air  were  admitted.  I  had
now  a  great  difpoiition  to  laugh,  luminous  points
feemed  frequently  to  pafs  before  my  eyes,  m}i
hearing  was  certainly  more  acute  and  I  felt  a
pleafent  lightnefs  and  power  of  exertion  in  my
mufcles.  In  a  (hort  time  the  fymptoms  became
ilationary  ;  breathing  was  rather  opprefled,  and
on  account  of  the  great  defire  of  action,  reft
was  painful.

I  now  came  out  of  the  box,  having  been  in
precifely  an  hour  and  quarter.

The  moment  after,  I  began  to  refpire  20  quarts  ^
of  unmingled  nitrous  oxide.  A  thrilling  ex-*
tending  from  the  cheft  to  the  extremities  was
almoft  immediately  produced.  I  felt  a  fenfe  of
tangible  extenfion  highly  plcafurable  in  every
limb ;  my  vifible  impreflions  were  dazzling
and  apparently  magnified,  I  heard  diflindlly
every  found  in  the  room  and  was  perfe(Sly  aware


(  488  )

of  my  fituation.*  By  degrees  as  the  pleafurable
fcnfations  increafed,  I  loft  all  conne61ion  with
external  things;  trains  of  vivid  viiible  images
rapidly  pafled  through  my  mind  and  were  con-
nedled  with  words  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  pro-
duce perceptions  perfe6lly  novel.  I  exifted  in
a  world  of  newly  conne^led  and  newly  modified
ideas.  1  theorifed ;  I  imagined  that  I  made
difcoveries.  When  I  was  awakened  from  this
femi-delirious  trance  by  Dr.  Kinglake,  who
took  the  bag  from  my_  mouthy  Indignation
and  pride  were  the  firft  feelings  produced  by
the  fight  of  the  perfons  about  me.  My  emotions
were  enthufiaftic  and  fublime  ;  and  for  a  minute
I, walked  round  the  room  perfedly  regardlefs
of  what  was  faid  to  me.  As  I  recovered  my
former  ftate  of  mind,  I  felt  an  inclination  to
communicate  the  difcoveries  I  had  made  during
the  experiment.  I  endeavoured  to  recall  the
ideas,  they  were  feeble  and  indiftinfl ;  one
collection  of  terms,  however,  prefentcd    itfelf;

*  In  all  thefe   experiments   after   the   liril  minute,  my
cheeks  became  purple.


(  489  )

&nd  with  the  mod  intenfe  belief  and  prophetic
manner,  I  exclaimed  to  Dr.  Kinglake,  "  Nothing
exijis  hut  thoughts  ! — the  univerfe  is  compofed  of
imprejjions^    ideas,  pJeafures  and  pains  /"

About  three  minutes  and  half  only,  had  elap-
fed  during  this  experiment,  though  the  time  as
meafured  by  the  relative  vividnefs  of  the  recol-
le6led  ideas,  appeared  to  me  much  longer.

Not  more  than  half  of  the  nitrous  oxide  was
confumed.  After  a  minute,  before  the  thrilling
of  the  extremities  bad  difappeared,  I  breathed
the  remainder.  Similar  fenfations  were  again
produced  ;  I  was  quickly  thrown  into  the  plea-
furable  trance,  and  continued  in  it  longer  than
before.  For  many  minutes  after  the  experiment,
I  experienced  the  thrilling  in  the  extremities,
the  exhilaration  continued  nearly  two  hours.
For  a  much  longer  time  I  experienced  the  mild
enjoyment  before  defcribed  connedled  with
indolence ;  no  depreffion  or  feeblenefs  followed.
I  ate  my  dinner  with  great  appetite  and  found
myfelf  lively  and  difpofed  to  a6iion  immediately
after.     I  pafled  the  evening  in  executing  cxpe-.


(  490)

rimettts.  At  night  I  foatid  myfelf  unofually
cheerful  ai>d  aflive ;  and  the  hours  between
eleven  and  two,  were  fpent  rn  copying  the  fore-
going detail  from  the  common-place  book  and
in  arranging  the  experiments.  In  bed  I  en-
joyed profound  repofe.  When  I  awoke  in  the
*morning,  it  was  with  confcioufnefe  of  pleafura*
ble  exiftence,  and  this  confeioufnefe  more  or
lefs,  continued  through  the  day.

Since  December,  I  have  very  often  brealbed
nitrous  oxide.  My  fufceptibility  to  its  power^
is  rather  increafed  than  diminifhed.  I  find  i>x
quarts  a  full  dofe,  and  I  am  rarely  able  to  re(^
pire  it  in.any  quantity  for  more  than  two  minutes
and  half.

The  mode  of  its  operation  is  fomewhat  alte-
red. It  is  indeed  very  different  at  different
times.

I  am  fcarcely  ever  excited  into  violent  muf-
cular  aftion,  the  emotions  are  generally  much
Icfs  intenfe  and  fublime  than  in  the  former
experiments,  and  not  often  connefled  with
thrilling  in  the  extremities.


(  4^1  )

When  troubled  with  indigeftion,  I  have  been
two  or  three  times  unpleafantly  afFedled  after
the  excitement  of  the  gas.  Cardialgia,  eruc-
tations and  unpleafant  fulnefs  of  the  head  were
produced.

I  have  often  felt  very  great  pleafure  when  breath-
ing it  alone,  in  darknefs  and  filence,  occupied
only  by  ideal  exiftence.  In  two  or  three  in  dan-
ces when  I  have  breathed  it  amidft  noife,  the
fenfe  of  heafing  has  been  painfully  afFefled
even  by  moderate  in^enfity  of  found.  The
light  of  the  fun  has  fornetimes  been  difagreeably
dazzling.  I  have  once  or  twice  felt  an  uneafy
fenfe  of  tenfion  in  the  cheeks  and  tranfient'
pains  in  the  teeth.

Whenever  I  have  breathed  the  gas  after  ex-
citement from  moral  or  phyfical  caufes,  the
delight  has  been  often  intenfe  and  fublime.

On  May  5th,  at  night,  after  walking  for  an
hour  ainidft  the  fcenery  of  the  Avon,  at  this
period  rendered  exquifitely  beautiful  by  bright
moonfhine;  my    mind    being    in    a  ftate  of'


(  ^92  )

agreeable  feeling,  I  refpired  fix  quarts  of  newly
prepared  nitrous  oxide.  ,

The  thrilling  was  very  rapidly  produced.
The  objects  around  me  were  perfe^^ly  diftindi,
and  the  light  of  the  candle  not  as  ufual  dazzling.
The  pleafurable  fenfation  was  at  firft  local  and
perceived  in  the  lips  and  about  the  cheeks.  It
gradually  however,  difFufed  itfelf  over  the  whole
body,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  experiment  was
for  a  moment  fo  intenfe  and  pure  as  to  ar/orb
exiftence.  At  this  moment,  and  not  before,  I  loii
confcioufnefs ;  it  was  however,  quickly  reftored,
and  I  endeavoured  to  makeaby-ftander  acquaint-
td  with  the  pleafure  I  experienced  by  laughing
and  ftamping.  '  I  had  no  vivid  ideas.  Tiie
thrilling  and  the  pleafurable  feeling  continued
for  many  minutes  ;  I  felt  two  hours  afterwards,
a  flight  recurrence  of  them,  in  the  intermediate
flate  between  fleeping  and  waking ;  and  I  had  du-
ring the  whole  of  the  night,  vivid  and  agrceable
dreams.  I  awoke  in  the  morning  with  the
feeling  of  refllefs  energy,  or  that  defireofadlion
connecSted  with  no  definite  objedl^  which  I  had


(  493  )

often  experienced  in  the  courfe  of  experiments

in  1799-

I  have  two  or  three  times  fince  refpired  ni-
trous oxide  under  fimilar  circumftances ;  but
never  with  equal  pleafure.

During  the  Jaft  fortnight,  I  have  breathed
it  very  often  ;  the  efFedls  have  been  powerful
and  the  fcnfations  uncommon  ;  but  pleafurable
only  in  a  flight  degree.

I  ought  to  have  obferved  that  a  defire  to
breathe  the  gas  is  always  awakened  in  me  by
the  fight  of  a  perfon  breathing,  or  even  by  that
of  an  air-bag  or  an  air-holder.

I  have  this  day,  June  5th,  refpired  four  large
dofes  of  gas.  The  firft  two  taken  in  the  morn-
ing aded  very  powerfully  ;  but  produced  no
thrilling  or  other  pleafurable  feelings.  The
efFedls  of  the  third  breathed  immediately  after  a
hearty  dinner  were  pleafant,  but  neither  in-
tenfe  or  intoxicating.  The  fourth  was  refpired
at  night  in  darknefs  and  filence  after  the  occur-
rence of  a  circumftance  w^hich  had  produced
fome  anxiety.     This  dofe  afFc6led  me  power-


(   494  )

fully  and  pleaifantly ;  a  flight  thrilling  m  the
extremities  was  produced  ;  an  exhilaration  con-
tinued for  fome  time,  and  I  have  had  but  little
return  of  uneafinefs.     1 1  P.  M.

From  the  nature  of  the  language  of  feeling,
the  preceding  detail  contains  many  imperfec-
tions ;  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  as  accurate
an  account  as  poffible  of  the  flrange  efFedts  of
nitrous  oxide,  by  making  ufe  of  terms  ftanding
for  the  mod  fimilar  common  feelings.

We  are  incapable  of  recolleiling  pleafures
and  pains  of  fenfe.*"  It  is  impoffible  to  reafon
concerning  them,  except  by  means  of  tercns
which  have  been  aflbciatod  with  them  at  the
moment  of  their  exillence,  and  which  are  after-
wards called  up  amidfl:  trains  of  concomitant
ideas.

*  Phylical  pleafure  and  pain  generally  occur  conne(5ted
with  a  compound  impreffion,  i.  e.  an  organ  and  fome
objed.  When  the  idea  left  by  the  compound  irapreflion,
is  called  up  by  being  linked  accidentally  to^  fome  other
idea  or  impreffion,  no  recurrence,  or  the  llighteft  poffible,
of  the  pleafure  or  pain  in  any  form  will  take  place.  But
when  the  compound  impreffion  itfclf  exifls  luithout  the
phyfical  pleafure  or  pain,  it  will  awaken  ideal  or  intello6taal


(  405  )

Wlien  pleafures  and  pains  are  new  or  oon-
ne(3ed  with  new  ideas,  they  can  never  be  inteU
ligibly  detailed  unlcfs  aflboiateJ  dnriwg  their
cxiftence  with  terms  ftanding  tor  analogous
feelings.

I  have  fometiimes  eiiperienoed  from  nitrous
oxide,  lenfations  timilar  to  no  others^  and  they
have  confequently  been  Indefcribable.  This
has  been  likewife  often  the  cafe  with  other
perfons.  Of  two  paralytic  patients  who  were
afked  what   they  felt   after   breathing   nitrous


pleafure  or  pain,  i.  e.  hope  or  fear.  So  that  phyfical  plea-
fure  and  pain  are  to  hope  and  fear,  what  impreflions
are  to  ideas.  For  inllance,  alfuming  no  accidental  aflbcia-
tion,  the  child  does  not  fear  the  fire  before  he  is  burnt.
When  he  puts  his  finger  to  the  fire  he  feels  the  phyfical
pain  of  burning,  which  is  connc6ted  with  a  vifible  com-
pound iraprcflion,  the  fire  and  his  finger.  Now  when  the
compound  idea  of  the  fire  and  his  finger,  left  by  the  com-
pound impreflion  are  called  up  by  his  mother,  faying,
*'  You  have  burnt  your  finger ,'  nothing  like  fear  or  the  pain
of  burning  is  conne6ted  witH  it.  But  when  the  finger  is
brought  near  the  fire,  i.  e.  when  the  compound  impreflion
again  exifts,  the  ideal  pain  of  burning  or  the  paflion  of  fear
is  awakened,  and  it  becomes  conne6led  with  thofc  very
adtions  which  removed  the  finger  from  the  fire.


(496)

oxide,  the  firft  anfwered,  ^^  I  do  not  know  hoiv^
hit  very  queer,'*  The  fecond  faid,  "  I  felt  like
the  found  of  a  harpT  Probably  in  the  one  cafe,  no
analogous  feelings  had  ever  occurred.  In  the
other,  the  pleafurable  thrlings  were  fimilar  to
the  fenfations  produced  by  mufic ;  and  hence,
they  were  con nedled  with  terms  formerly  applied
to  mufic.


DIVISION    11.

DETAILS  of  the  EFFECTS  produced  by  the  RES-
PIRATION of  NITROUS  OXIDE  upon  different
INDIVIDUALS  furnished  by  THEMSELVES.


X  HE  experiments  related  in  the  following
details,  were  made  in  the  Medical  Pneumatic
Inflitution.

AbftracSis  from  many  of  them  have  been
publifhed  by  Dr.  Beddoes.*

I.    Detail  of  Mr.  J.  W.  Toeuv.

Having  feen  the  remarkable  efFedis  produced
on  Mr,  Davy,  by  breathing  nitrous  oxide,  the
18th  of  April;  1  became  defirous  of  taking  fome.

A  day  or  two  after  I  breathed  2  quarts  of  this

*  Notice  of  fome   Obfervations   made  at  the   Medical
Pneumatic  Inftitution.

Hh


(  498  )

gas,  returning  it  back  again  into  the  fame  bag,
after  two  or  three  infpirations,  breathing  became
difficult,  and  I  occafionally  admitted  common
air  into  my  lungs.  While  the  refpiration  was
continued,  my  fenfations  became  more  pleafant.
On  taking  the  bag  from  my  mouth,  I  ftaggercd
a  little,  but  felt  no  other  efFedl.

On  the  fecond  time  of  making  the  experi-
ment, I  took  nearly  four  quarts,  but  ft  ill  found
it  difficult  to  continue  breathing  long,  though
the  air  which  was  left  in  the  bag  was  far  from
being  impure.

The  eftecSs  however,  in  this  cafe,  were  more
ftriking  than  in  the  former.  Increafed  mufcu-
lar  a6tion  was  accompanied  by  very  pleafurable
feelings,  and  a  ftrong  defire  to  continue  the
infpiration.  On  removing  the  bag  from  my
mouth,  I  laughed,  ftaggered,  and  attempted  to
fpeak,  but  ft:ammered  exceedingly,  and  was
utterly  unable  to  pronounce  fome  words.  My
ufual  flate  of  mind,  however,  foon  returned.

On  the  29th,  I  again  breathed  four  quarts.
The  pleafant  feelings  produced  at  firft,  urged


( m )

tnc  to  continue  the  infpiration  with  great  eager-*
nefs.  Thefe  feelings  however,  went  off  towards
the  end  of  the  experiment,  and  no  other  effects
followed.  The  gas  had  probably  been  breathed
too  long,  as  it  would  not  fupport  flame.  I  then!
propofcd  to  Mr.  Davy,  to  inhale  the  air  by  the
mouth  from  one  bag,  and  to  ey.pire  it  from  the
nofe  into  another.  Thfs  method  was  purfued
with  lefs  than  three  quarts,  but  the  efFeds  were
fo  powerful  as  to  oblige  me  to  take  in  a  little
common  air  occafionally.  I  foon  found  my
nervous  fyOem  agitated  by  the  higheft  fenfa-
iions  of  pleafure,  which  are  difficult  of  defcrip-
tion  ;  my  mufcular  powers  were  very  much
ihcreafed,  and  I  went  on  breathing  with  great
vehemence,  not  from  a  difficulty  of  infpiration,
but  from  an  eager  avidity  for  more  air.  When
the  b^gs  were  exhaufted  and  taken  from  me^
I  continued  breathing  with  the  fame  violence^
then  fuddenly  flarting  from  the  chair,  and  vo-
ciferating with  pleafure,  I  made  towards  thofe
that  were  prefent,  as  I  wifhed  they  fhoulcf
participate  in  my  feelings,     I  jftruck  gently   at


(   500  )

Mr.  Davy  and  a  ftranger  entering  tlie  room  at
the  moment^  I  made  towards  him,  and  gave  him
feveral  blows,  but  more  in  the  fpirit  of  good
humour  than  of  anger.  I  then  ran  through
different  rooms  in  the  houfe,  and  at  laft  returned
to  the  laboratory  fomewhat  more  compofed  ;
my  fpirits  continued  much  elevated  for  fome
hours  after  the  experiment,  and  I  felt  no  con-
fequent  depreflion  either  in  the  evening  or  the
day  following,  but  flept  as  foundly  as  ufual.

On  the  5th  of  May,  I  again  attempted  to
breathe  nitrous  oxide,  but  it  happened  to  con-
tain fufpended  nitrous  vapour  which  rendered
it  non-refpirable.

On  the  7th,  I  infpired  7  quarts  of  pure  gas
mingled  with  an  equal  quantity  of  common  air,
the  fenfations  were  pleafant,  and  my  mufcular
power  much  increafed.

On  the  8th,  I  infpired  fire  quarts  without
any  mixture  of  common  air,  but  the  effedls
were  not  equal  to  thofe  produced  the  day  before  ;
Indeed  there  were  reafons  for  fuppofing  that  the
gas  was  impure.


(   501   )

On  the  18th,  I  breathed  nearly  fix  quarts  of
the  pure  nitrous  oxide.  It  is  not  eafy  to  de-
fcribe  my  fenfations  ;  they  were  fuperior  to  any
thing  I  ever  before  experienced.  My  ftep  was
firm,  and  all  my  mufcular  powers  increafed.
My  fenfes  were  more  al-ive  to  every  furrounding
impreflion  ;  I  threw  myfelf  into  feveral  theatri-
cal attitudes,  and  traverfed  the  laboratory  with
a  quick  ftep  ;  my  mind  was  elevated  to  a  mofl:
fublime  height.  It  is  giving  but  a  faint  idea  of
the  feelings  to  fay,  that  they  refembled  thofe
produced  by  a  reprefentation  of  an  heroic  fcene
on  the  ftage,  or  by  reading  a  fublime  paflage
in  poetry  when  circumftances  contribute  to
awaken  the  fineft  fympathies  of  the  foul.  In  a
few  minutes  the  ufual  ftate  of  mind  returned.
I  continued  in  good  fpirits  for  the  reft  of  the
day,  and  flept  foundly.

Since  the  I8th  of  May,  I  have  very  often
breathed  nitrous  oxide.  In  the  firft  experi-
ments when  pure,  its  effedls  were  generally
fimilar  to  thofe  juft  defcribed.

Lately  I  have  feldom  experienced  vivid  ien«


(  56a  )

fations.  The  pleafure  produced  by  it  is  iligbt
and  tranquil,  I  rarely  feel  lublime  emotions  or
increafed  mufcular  power.

J.    W.    TOBIN.

OBoher,  1799-

II.  'Detail  of  Mr.  Wm.  Clayfield.

The  firft  time  that  I  breathed  the  nitrous
oxide,  it  produced  feelings  analogous  to  thofe  of
intoxication.  I  was  for  fome  time  unconfcious
ofexiftence,  but  at  no  period  of  the  experiment
experienced  agreeable  fenfations,  a  momentary
naufea  followed  it  ;  but  unconnedled  with  lan-
guor or  head  ache.

After  this  I  feveral  times  refpired  the  gas,  but
on  account  of  the  fulnefs  in  the  head  and  appa-
rent throbbing  of  the  arteries  in  the brain,*al  ways
defifted  to  breathe  before  the  full  efFe(51s  were
produced.  In  two  experiments  however,  when
by  powerful  voluntary  efforts  I  fucceeded  in
breathing  a  large  quantity  of  gas  for  fome  mi-

*  In  fome  of  thefe  experiments,  hearing  was  rendered
more  acute.


(   503   )

nutes,  I  had  highly  pleafurable  thrillings  in  the
extremities,  and  fuch  increafe  of  mufcular
power,  as  to  be  obliged  to  exert  my  limbs  with
violence.  After  thefe  experiments,  no  languor
or  depreffion  followed.

-William  Clayfield.

III.    Letter  from  Dr.  Kinglake.

In  compliance  with  your  defire,  I  will  en-
deavour to  give  you  a  faithful  detail  of  the
efFedls  produced  on^my  fenfations  by  the  inha-
lation of  nitrous  oxide.

My  firft  infpiration  of  it  was  limited  to  four
quarts,  diluted  with  an  equal  quantity  of  atmof-
pheric  air.  After  a  few  infpirations,  a  fenfe  of
additional  freedom  and  power  (call  it  energy  if
you  pleafe)  agreeably  pervaded  the  region  of
the  lungs  ;  this  was  quickly  fucceedcd  by  an
almofl  delirious  but  highly  pleafurable  fenfation
in  the  brain,  which  was  foon  diffufed  over  ih^
whole  frame,  imparting  to  the  mufcular  pow^r
at  once  an  encreafed  difpofition  and  tone  for
adion  ;  but  the  mental  effedl  of  the  excitement


(   504   )

was  fuch  as  to  abforb  in  a  fort  of  intoxicating
placidity,  and  delight,  volition,  or  rather  the
power  of  voluntary  motion.  Thefe  cffedls  were
in  a  greater  or  lefs  degree  protracted  during
about  five  minutes,  when  the  former  ftate  re-
turned, with  the  difference  however  of  feeling
more  cheerful  and  alert,  for  feveral  hours  after.

It  feemed  alfo  to  have  hftd  the  further  efFecl
of  reviving  rheumatic  irritations  in  the  fhoulder
and  knee-joints,  which  had  not  been  previoufly
felt  for  many  months.  No  perceptible  change
was  induced  in  the  pulfe  either  at  or  fubfequent
to  the  time  of  inhaling  the  gas.

The  efFedls  produced  by  a  fecond  trial  of  its
powers,  were  more  extenfive,  and  concentrated
on  the  brain.  In  this  inflance,  nearly  fix  quarts
undiluted,  were  accurately  and  fully  inhaled.
As  on  the  former  occafion,  it  immediately  proved
agreeably  refpirable,  but  before  the  whole  quan-
tity was  quite  cxhauficd,  its  agency  was  exerted
fo  flrongly  on  the  brain,  as  progrefTively  to  fuf-
pend  the  fenfes  of  feeing,  hearing,  feeling,  apd
ultimately  the  power  of  volition  itfclf.     At  this


(  505  )

period,  the  pulfe  was  much  augmented  both  in
force  and  frequency  ;  flight  convulfive  twitches
of  the  mufcles  of  the  arms  were  alfo  induced  ;
no  painful  fenfation,  naufea,  or  languor,  how-
ever, either  preceded,  accompanied,  or  followed
this  (late,  nor  did  a  minute  elapfe  before  the
brain  rallied,  and  refumed  its  wonted  faculties,
when  a  fenfe  of  glowing  warmth  extending  over
the  fyftem,  was  fpe^diiy  fucceeded  by  a  re-in-
ftatement  of  the  equilibrium  of  health.

The  more  permanent  effects  were  (as  in  the
firft  experiment)  an  invigorated  feel  of  vital
power,  improved  fpirits,  tranfient  irritations  in
different  parts,  but  not  fo  charafieriflically  rheu-
matic as  in  the  former  inftance.

Among  the  circumftances  mofi;  worthy  of
regard  in  confidering  the  properties  and  ad-
miniflration  of  this  powerful  aerial  agent,  may
be  ranked,  the  fdS.  of  its  being  (contrary  to  the
prevailing  opinion*)  both  highly  refpirablc,  and

*  Dr.  Mitchill  (an  Amcricnn  Chemift)  Ims  erroneoiifl/
fapplbfed  its  full  admilfion  to  the  Inngs,  in  its  concentrated
Itate,  to  be  incompatible  with  animal  life,  and  that  in  a
aiore  diluted  form  it  operates  ns  a  principal  agent  in  the


(  5o6  ) ■

falutary,  that  it  impreffes  the  brain  and  fyftem
at  large  with  a  more  or  lefs  ftrong  and  durable
degree  of  pleafurable  fenfation,  that  unlike  the
,  effedl  of  other  violently  exciting  agents,  no  fen-
fible  exhauftion  or  diminution  of  vital  power
accrues  from  the  exertions  of  its  ftimulant  pro-
perty, that  its  mod  excefuve  operation  even,
is  neither  permanently  nor  tranfiently  debilita-
ting ;  and  finally,  that  it  fairly  promifes  under
judicious  application,  to  prove  an  extremely
efficient  remedy,  as  well  in  the  vaft  tribe  of
difeafes  originating  from  deficient  irritability
and  fenfibility,  as  in  thofe  proceeding  from
morbid  affociat ions,  and  modifications,  of  thofe
vital  principles.


produ£lion  of  contagious  difeafes,  &c.  This  gratuitous
pofition  is  thus  unqualifiedly  affirmed.  '^  If  a  full  infpira-
"  tion  of  gafeous  oxyd  be  made,  there  will  be  a  fuddcn
"  extin6lion  of  life  j  and  this  accordingly  accounts  for  the
"  faa  related  by  RufTel  (Hiftory  of  Aleppo,  p.  232.)  and
'^  confirmed  by  other  obfervers,  of  many  perfons  falling
"  down  dead  fuddenly,  when  ftruck  with  the  contagion  of
*'  the  plague."

Vide  Remarks  on  the  Gafeous  Oxyd  of  Azote,  by  Saitiuel
Latham  Mitchill,  M.  D.


(  507  )

If  you  ftiould  deem  any  thing  contained  in
this  curfory  narrative  capable  of  fubferving  in
any  degree  the  practical  advantages  likely  to
refult  from  your  fcientific  and  valuable  invefti-
gation  of  the  genuine  properties  of  the  nitrous
oxide^  it  is  perfedly  at  your  difpofal.

I  am
Your  fincere  friend,

Robert  Kinglake.

Briftoly  June  ]4tb,   1799.
To  Mr.  Davy.

IV.    Detail  of  Mr.  Southey.

In  breathing  the  nitrous  oxide,  I  could  not
didinguifh  between  the firft  feelings  itoccafioned
and  an  apprehenfion  of  which  I  was  unable  to
diveft  myfelf.  My  firft  definite  fenfation  was  a
dizzinefs,  a  fulnefs  in  the  head,  fuch  as  to  in-
duce a  fear  of  falling.  This  was  momentary.
When  I  took  the  bag  from  my  mouth,  I  im-
mediately laughed.    The  laugh  was  involuntary


<  506  )

but  highly  pleafurable,  accompanied  by  a  thrill
all  through  me  ;  and  a  tingling  in  my  toes  and
fingers,  a  fenfation  perfeflly  new  and  delight-
ful. I  felt  a  fulnefs  in  my  chefl  afterwards  ;
and  during  the  remainder  of  the  day,  imagined
that  my  tafte  and  hearing  were  more  than  com-
monly quick.  Certain  I  am  that  I  felt  myfelf
more  than  ufually  ftrong  and  chearful.

In  a  fecond  trial,  by  continuing  the  inhala-
tion longer,  I  felt  a  thrill  in  my  teeth  ;  and
breathing  ilill  longer  the  third  time,  became  fo
full  of  ftrength  as  to  be  compelled  to  exercife
my  arms  and  feet.

Now  after  an  interval  of  fome  months,  during
which  my  health  has  been  materially  impaired,
the  nitrous  oxide  produces  an  effedl  upon  me
totally  different.  Half  the  quantity  affeds  me,
and  its  operation  is  more  violent ;  a  flight  laugh-
ter is  firft  induced,*  and  a  defire  to  continue  the

*  In  the  former  experiments,  Mr.  Sonthey  generally
refpired  fix  quarts^  now  he  is  unable  to  confnme  two.

In  an  experiment  made  fince  this  paper  was  drawn  up,
the  efFed  was  rather  pleafurable.


(  509  )

inhalation,  which  is  counteracted  by  fear  from
the  rapidity  of  refpiration  ;  indeed  my  breath
beconnes  fo  fhort  and  quick,  that  I  have  no  doubt
but  the  quantity  which  I  formerly  breathed,
would  now  deftroy  me.  The  fenfation  is  not
painful,  neither  is  it  in  the  flightefl:  degree
pleafurable.

*  Robert  Southey.


V.    Letter  from  Dr.  Roget.

The  ciFecS  of  the  firft  infpiratrons  of  the  ni-
trous oxide  was  that  of  making  me  vertiginous,
and  producing  a  tingling  fenfation  in  my  hands
and  feet :  as  thefe  feelings  increafed,  I  feemed
to  lofe  the  fenfe  of  my  own  weight,  and  imagined
1  was  finking  into  the  ground.  1  then  felt  a
drowfinefs  gradually  fteal  upon  me,  and  a  dif-
inclination  to  motion  ;  even  the  adions  of
infpiring  and  expiring  were  not  performed
without  effort :  and  it  alfo  required  fome  atten-
tion of  mind  to  keep  my  noftrils  clofed  with  my
fingers.     I  was  gradually  roufed  from  this  tor-


(   510  )

por  by  a  kind  of  delirium,  which  came  on  fo
rapidly  that  the  air-bag  dropt  from  my  hands.
This  fenfation  increafed  for  about  a  minute
after  I  had  ceafed  to  breathe,  to  a  much  greater
degree  than  before,  and  I  fuddenly  loft  fight  of
all  the  obje(5\s  around  me,  they  being  appa-
rently obfcured  by  clouds,  in  which  were  many
luminous  points,  fimilar  to  what  is  often  expe-
rienced on  rifing  fuddenly  and  ftretching  out
the  arms,  after  fitting  long  in  one  pofition.

I  felt  myfelf  totally  incapable  of  fpeaking,
and  for  fome  time  loft  all  eonfcioufnefs  of  where
I  was,  or  who  was  near  me.  My  whole  frame
felt  as  if  violently  agitated  :  I  thought  I  panted
violently  :  my  heart  feemed  to  palpitate,  and
every  artery  to  throb  with  violence ;  I  felt  a
finging  in  my  ears ;  all  the  vital  motions
feemed  to  be  irrefiftibly  hurried  on,  as  if  their
equilibrium  had  been  deftroyed,  and  every
thing  was  running  headlong  into  confufion.
My  ideas  fucceedcd  one  another  with  extreme
rapidity,  thoughts  rufhed  like  a  torrent  through
my  mind,  as  if  their  velocity  had  been  fuddenly


(  511   )

accelerated  by  the  burfting  of  a  barrier  which
had  before  retained  them  in  their  natural  and
equable  courfe.  This  ftate  of  extreme  hurry,
agitation,  and  tumult,  was  but  tranfient.  Every
unnatural  fenfation  gradually  fublided  ;  and  in
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  I  had  ceafed
to  breathe  the  gas,  I  was  nearly  in  the  fame
flate  in  which  I  had  been  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  experiment.

I  cannot  remember  that  I  experienced  the
lead  pleafure  from  any  of  thefe  fenfations.  I
can  however,  eafily  conceive,  that  by  frequent
repetition  I  might  reconcile  myfelf  to  them,
and  pofRbly  even  receive  pleafure  from  the
fame  fenfations  which    were   then    unpleafant,

I  am  fenfible  that  the  account  I  have  been
able  to  give  of  my  feelings  is  very  imperfe<3.
For  however  calculated  their  violence  and
novelty  were  to  leave  a  lading  impreffion  on
the  memory,  thefe  circumltances  were  for  that
very  reafon  unfavourable  to  accuracy  of  com-
parifon  with  fenfations  already  familiar.

The  nature   of  the    fenfations    themfelves.


(   512  )

which  bore  greater  refemblance  to  a  half  deli-
rious dream  than  to  any  diftindl  ftate  of  mind
capable  of  being  accurately  remembered,  con-
tributes very  much  to  increafe  the  difficulty.
And  as  it  is  above  two  months  fince  I  made  the
experiment,  many  of  the  minuter  circumtlan-
ces  have  probably  cfcaped  me.

I  remain

Yours,  &c.

P.    IIOGET.

To  Mr.  Davy.


VI.    Letter  from  Mr.  James  Thomson.

The  firft  time  I  refpired  nitrous  oxide,  the
experiment  v^^as  made  under  a  flrong  impreffion
of  fear,  and  the  quantity  I  breathed  not  fuffi-
cient,  as  you  informed  me,  to  produce  the
ufual  efFe6l.  I  did  not  note  very  accurately  my
fenfations.  I  remember  I  experienced  a  flight
degree  of  vertigo  after  the  third  or  fourth
infpiration  ;  and  breathed  with  increafed  vigor,
my  infpirations  being  much   deeper  and  more


(  513  )

Vehement  than  ordinary.  I  was  enabled  the
next  time  I  made  the  experiment,  to  attend
more  accurately  to  my  fenfations,  and  you  have
the  oblervations  I  made  on  them  at  the  time.

After  the  fourth  infpiration,  I  experienced
the  fame  increafed  a6iion  of  the  lungs,  as  in
the  former  cafe.  My  infpirations  became  un-
commonly full  and  ftrong,  attended  with  a
thrilling  fenfation  about  the  cheft_>  highly  plea-
furable,  which  increafed  to  fuch  a  degree  as  to
induce  a  fit  of  involuntary  laughter,  which  I  in
vain  endeavoured  to  I'eprefs.  I  felt  a  flight
giddinefs  which  lafted  for  a  few  moments  only.
My  infpirations  now  became  more  vehement
and  frequent  ;  and  I  inhaled  the  air  with  an
avidity  ftrongly  indicative  of  the  pleafure  I
received.  That  peculiar  thrill  which  I  had  at
firfl  experienced  at  the  cheft,  now  pervaded
iTiy  whole  frame  ;  and  during  the  two  or  three
laft  infpirations,  was  attended  w^ith  a  remarkable
tingling  in  my  fingers  and  toes.  My  feelings
at  this  moment  are  not  to  be  defcribed  ;  I  felt  a
h  igh,  an  extraordi  nary  degree  of  pleafure,  different

I  i


(   514  )

from  that  produced  by  wine,  being  divefied  of  all
its  grofs  accompaniments,  and  yet  approaching
nearer  to  it  than  to  any  other  fenfation  I  am
acquainted  with.

I  am  certain  that  my  mufcular  firength  was
for  a  time  much  increafed.  My  difpofitlon  to
exert  it  was  fuch  as  I  could  not  reprefs,  and  the
fatisfadtion  I  felt  in  any  violent  exertion  of  my
legs  and  arms  is  hardly  to  be  conceived.  Thefe
vivid  fenfations  were  not  of  long  duration  ;  they
diminifhed  infenfibly,  and  in  little  more  than  a
quarter  of  an  hour  I  could  perceive  no  differ-
ence between  the  ftate  I  was  then  in,  and  that
previous  to  the  refpiration  of  the  air.

The  obfcrvations  I  made  on  repeating  the
experiment,  do  not  differ  from  the  preceding,
except  in  the  circumflance  of  the  involuntary
laughter,  which  I  never  afterwards  experienced,
though  I  breathed  the  air  feveral  times ;  and  in
the  following  curious  fa(^,  which,  as  it  was  de-
pendent on  circumfiances,  did  not  always  occur.

Having  refpired  the  fame  quantity  of  air  as
ufual,  and  with   precifely   the   fame  efFedls,  I


(515   )

was  furprifcd  to  find  niyfelf  afFc^led  a  few  mi-
nutes afterwards  with  the  recurrence  of  a  pain
in  my  back  and  knees,  which  I  had  experienced
the  preceding  day  from  fatigue  in  walking.  I
was  rather  inclined  to  deem  this  an  accidental
coincidence  than  an  ciYe6\  of  the  air;  but  the
fame  thing  confiantly  Dccurring  whenever  I
breathed  the  air,  fhortly  after  fuffering  paim
cither  from  fitigue,  or  any  other  accidental
caufe,  left  no  doubt  on  my  mind  as  to  the
accuracy  of  the  obfervation.

I  have  now  given  you  the  fubdance  of  the
notes  I  made  whilft  the  impreflions  were  ftrong
on  my  mind.  I  cannot  add  any  thing  from
recolledlion  that  will  at  all  add  to  the  accuracy
of  this  account,  or  affiil;  thofe  who  have  not
refpired  this  air,  in  forming  a  clearer  idea  of  its
extraordinary  effcdis.  It  is  extremely  difficult
to  convey  to  others  by  means  of  words,  any
idea  of  particular  fenfations,  of  which  they  have
had  no  experience.  It  can  only  be  done  by
making  ufe  of  fuch  terms  as  are  expreffive  of
fenfations  that  refemble  them,  and  in  thefe  our


(516)

vocabulary  Is  very  defedlive.  To  be  able  at  all
to  comprehend  the  efFcds  of  nitrous  oxide,  it
is  neceffary  to  refpire  it,  and  after  that,  wc  muft
either  invent  new  terms  to  exprefs  thefe  new
and  particular  fenfations,  or  attach  new  ideas  to
old  ones,  before  we  can  communicate  intelligi-
bly with  e<ich  other  on  the  operation  of  this
extraordinary  gas.

I  am  &c.

James  Thomson-
London^  Sept,  21,    1799.
To  Mr.  Davy.


VII,    Detail  of  Mr.  Coleridge.

The  firft  time  I  infpired  the  nitrous  oxide,  I
felt  an  highly  pleafurable  fenfation  of  warmth
over  my  whole  frame,  refembling  that  which
I  remember  once  to  have  experienced  after
returning  from  a  walk  in  the  fnow  into  a  warm
room.  The  only  motion  which  I  felt  inclined
to  make,  was  that  of  laughing  at  thofe  who
were  looking  at  me.     My  eyes  felt  diftended,


(517)

and  towards  the  laft,  my  heart  beat  as  if  it  were
leaping  up  and  down.  On  removing  the  mouth-
piece the  whole  fenfation  went  off  almoft
inftantly.

The  fecond  time,  I  felt  the  fame  pleafurable
fenfation  of  warmth,  but  not  I  think,  in  quite
fo  great  a  degree.  I  wiftied  to  know  what  efFedt
it  would  have  on  my  impreffions  ;  I  fixed  my
eye  on  fome  trees  in  the  diftance,  but  I  did
not  find  any  other  efFed  except  that  they  be-
came dimmer  and  dimmer,  and  looked  at  laft
as  if  I  had  feen  them  through  tears.  My  heart
beat  more  violently  than  the  firft  time.  This
was  after  a  hearty  dinner.

The  third  time  I  was  more  violently  atSled
on  than  in  the  two  former.  Towards  the  laft,
I  could  not  avoid,  nor  indeed  felt  any  wifh  to
avoid,  beating  the  ground  with  my  feet  ;  and
after  the  mouth-piece  was  removed,  I  remained
for  a  few  feconds  motionlefs,  in  great  extacy.

The  fourth  time  was  immediately  after  break-
fafl:.  The  few  firft  infpirations  afFecled  me  fo
little  that  I  thought  Mr,  Davy  had  given  me


(  518  )         -

atmofpberlc  air  :  but  foon  felt  the  warmth  be-
ginning about  my  cheft,  and  fprcading  upward
and  downward,  fo  that  I  could  feci  its  progrefs
over  my  whole  frame.  My  heart  did  not  beat
fo  violently  ;  my  fenfations  were  highly  plea-
furable,  not  fo  intenfe  or  apparently  local,  but
of  more  unmingled  pleafure  than  I  had  ever
before  experienced. *"

S.  T.  Coleridge.

VIII.    Detail  of  Mr.  Wedgwood.

July  23,  I  called  on  Mr.  Davy  at  the  Medi-
cal Inflitution,  who  aiked  me  to  breathe  fome
of  the  nitrous  oxide,  to  which  I  confented,
being  rather  a  fceptic  as  to  its  effe6ls,  never
having  feen  any  perfon  afFed^ed.  I  firft  breathed
about  fix  quarts  of  air  which  proved  to  be  only
common  atmofpheric  air,  and  which  confe-
quently  produced  no  effect.

I  then  had  6  quarts  of  the  oxide  given  me  in

*  The  dofes  in  thcfe  experiments  were  from  iive  to
feven  quarts.


(  519  )

a  bag  undiluted,  and  as  foon  as  I  had  breathed
three  or  four  refpirations,  I  felt  myfelf  afFedled
and  my  refpiration  hurried,  which  efFedl  increa-
fed  rapidly  until  I  became  as  it  were  entranced,
when  I  threw  the  bag  from  me  and  kept  breath-
ing on  furioufly  with  an  open  mouth  and  hold-
ing my  nofe  with  my  left  hand,  having  no
power  to  take  it  away  though  aware  of  the
ridiculoufnefs  of  my  lituation.  Though  appa-
rently deprived  of  all  voluntary  motion,  I  was
fenfible  of  all  that  palTed,  and  heard  every  thing
that  was  faid  ;  but  the  moft  fingukr  fenfation
I  had,  I  feel  it  impoffibJe  accurately  to  defcribe.
It  was  as  if  all  the  mufcles  of  the  body  were
put  into  a  violent  vibratory  motion ;  I  had  a  very
ilrong  inclination  to  make  odd  antic  motions
with  my  hands  and  feet.  When  the  firfl  flrong
fenfations  went  off,  I  felt  as4f  I  were  lighter  than
the  atmofphere,  and  as  if  I  was  going  to  mount
to  the  top  of  the  room.  I  had  a  metallic  tafte
left  in  my  mouth,  which  foon  went  off.

Before  I  breathed  the  air,  I  felt  a  good    deal
fatigued  from  a  very  long  ride  I   had'  had  the


(   520  )

day  before,  bat  after  breathing,  I  loft  all  fen fe
of  fatigue.

IX.    Detail  of  Mr.  George  Burnet,

I  had  never  heard  of  the  effects  of  the  nitrous
oxide,  when  T  breathed  fix  quarts  of  it.  1  felt
a  delicious  tremor  of  nerve,  which  was  rapidly
propagated  over  the  whole  nervous  fyflem.  As
the  adlion  of  inhaling  proceeds,  an  irrefiftible
appetite  to  repeat  it  is  excited.  There  is  now  a
general  fwell  of  fenfations,  vivid,  flrong,  and
inconceivably  pleafurable.  They  ilill  become
more  vigorous  and  glowing  till  they  are  com-
municated to  the  brain,  wjien  an  ardent  flufh
overfpreads  the  face.  At  this  moment  the  tube
inferted  in  the  air-bag  was  taken  from  my
mouth,  or  I  muft  have  fainted  in  extacy.

The  operation  being  over,  the  ftrength  and
turbulence  of  my  fenfations  fubfided.  To  this
fucceeded  a  ftate  of  feeling  uncommonly  ferene
and  tranquil.     Every  nerve  being  gently  agita-


(  521   )

ted  with  a  lively  enjoyment.  It  was  natural  to
expedl  that  the  efFe6l  of  this  experiment,  would
eventually  prove  debilitating.  So  far  from  this
I  continued  in  a  ftate  of  high  excitement  the
remainder  of  the  day  after  two  o'clock,  the
time  of  the  experiment,  and  experienced  a  flow
of  fpirits  not  merely  chearful,  but  unufually
joyous,

George  Burnet.


X.    Detail  of  Mr.  T.  Pople.

A  difagreeable  fenfation  as  if  breaking  out
into  a  profufe  perfpiration,  tenfion  of  the  tym-
panum, cheeks  and  forehead ;  almofl  total
lofs  of  mufcular  power;  afterwards  increafed
povv'crs  both  of  body  and  mind,  very  vivid  fenla-
tions  and  highly  pleafurable.  Thofe  pleafant
feelings  were  not  new,  thiey  were  felt,  but  in  a
lefs  degree,  on  afcending  fome  high  mountains
in  Glamorgan fliire.

On  taking  it  the  fecond  time,  there  was  a
difagreeable  feeling  about  the  face.     In  a  {qw;


(  ^'22  )

feconds,  the  feelings  became  pleafunible  ;  all
the  faculties  abforbed  by  the  fine  pleafing  feel-
ings of  exiflence  without  confcioufnefs  ;  an
involuntary  burft  of  laughter.

Thomas  Pople.


XL     Detail  of  Mr.  Hammick,

Having  never  heard  any  thing  of  the  mode
of  operation  of  nitrous  oxide,  I  breathed  gas  in
a  filk  bag  for  fome  time,  and  found  no  efFefls,
but  oppreffion  of  refpiration.  Afterwards  Mr.
Davy  told  me  that  I  had  been  breathing  atmof-
pheric  air.

In  a  fecond  experiment  made  without  know-
ing what  gas  was  in  the  bag,  I  had  not  breathed
half  a  minute,  when  from  the  extreme  pleafure
I  felt,  I  unconcioully  removed  the  bag  from
my  mouth  ;  but  when  Mr.  Davy  offered  to  take
it  from  me,  I  refufed  to  let  him  have  it,  and
faid  eagerly,  "  let  me  breathe  it  again,  it  is
highly  pleafant  !  it  is  the  ftrongeft  ftimulant  I
ever  felt !"  I  was  cold  when  I  began  to  refpirc,


(    523   )

but  had  immediately  a  pleafant  glow  extending
to  my  toes  and  fingers.  I  experienced  from  the
air  a  pleafant  tade  which  I  can  only  call  fweetly
aftringent ;  it  continued  for  fome  time :  the
fenfe  of  exhilaration  was  lading.  This  air  Mr.
Davy  told  me  was  nitrous  oxide.

In  another  experiment,  when  I  breathed  a
fmall  dofe  of  nitrous  oxide,  the  efFedls  were
flight,  and  fometime  afterwards  I  felt  an  unufual
yawning  and  languor.

The  laft  time  that  I  breathed  the  gas,  the
feelings  were  the  mod  pleafurable  I  ever  expe-
rienced ;  my  head  appeared  light,  there  was  a
great  warmth  in  the  back  and  a  general  unufual
glow  ;  the  tafte  was  diftinguifliable  for  fome
time  as  in  the  former  experiment.  My  ideas
were  more  vivid,  and  followed  the  natural
order  of  aflbciation.  I  could  not  refrain  from
mufcular  adion.

Stephj5:n  Hammick,  Junr.

Sept.  15th.


(  524  )


XII.     Detail  of  Dr.  Blake.

Dr.  Blake  inhaled  about   fix   quarts   of  the
air,  was  afFe6led  during  the  procefs  of  refpiring
it  wi^h  a  flight    degree   of  vertigo,  which  was
almoft  immediately  fucceedcd    by   a    thrilling
fenfation  extending   even    to     the  extremities,
accompanied  by  a  mod  happy  (late  of  mind  and
highly  pleafurable  ideas.  He  felt  a  great  propen-
fity  to  laugh,  and  his  behaviour  in   fome  mea-
fure  appeared  ludicrous  to  thofe   around   him.
Mufcular  power  feemed  agreeably   increafed,
the  pulfe  acquired  ftrength    and  firmnefs,  but
its  frequency    was  fomewhat  diminifhed.     He
perceived   rather   an  unpleafant    tafte    in   the
mouth  and  about  the  fauces  for   fome  hours
afterwards,  but  in  every  other  refpedl,  his  feel-
ings were  comfortable  during  the  remainder  of
the  day.

December^  30th,
To  Mr.  Davy.


(  525  )


XIII.     Detail  of  Mr.  Wansey.

I  breathed  the  gas  out  of  a  filk  bag,  believing
it  to  be  nitrous  oxide,  and  was  much  furprifed
to  find  that  it  produced  no  fenfations.  After
the  experiment,  Mr.  Davy  told  me  it  was  com-
mon air.

I  then  breathed  a  mixture  of  common  air
and  nitrous  oxide.  I  felt  a  kind  of  intoxica-
tion in  the  middle  of  the  experiment,  and
Hopping  to  cxprefs  this,  deftroyed  any  farther
efFedls.

I  now  breathed  pure  nitrous  oxide ;  the  efFedl
was  gradual,  and  I  at  firft  experienced  fulnefs
in  the  head,  and  afterwards  fenfations  fo  de-
lightful*, that  I  can  compare  them  to  no  others,
except  thofe  which  I  felt  (being  a  lover  of  mufic)
about  five  years  fince  in  Weilminfter  Abbey,
in  fome  of  the  grand  chorufTes  in  the  Meffiah,
from  the  united  powers  of  700  inftruments  of
mufic.  I  continued  exhilarated  throughout  the
day,  flept  at  night  remarkably  found,  and   ex~


(  326  )

perienced  when   I  awoke   in   the  morning,    a
recurrence  of  pleafing  fenfation.

In  another  experiment,  the  effed  was  ftill
greater,  the  pulfe  was  rendered  fuller  and
quicker,  I  felt  a  fenfe  of  throbbing  in  the  head
with  highly  pleafurable  thrill ings  all  over  the
frame.  The  new  feelings  were  at  laft  fo  power-
ful as  to  abforb  all  perception.  I  diflinguifhed
during  and  after  the  experiment,  a  tafte  on  the
tongue,  like  that  produced  by  the  contact  of
zinc  and  filver.

Henry  Wansey.


XIV.     Deiail  of  Mr.  Rickman.

On  inhaling  about  fix  quarts,  the  firft  altered
feeling  was  a  tingling  in  the  elbows  not  unlike
the  efFed  of  a  flight  eledric  fl:iock.  Soon  after-
wards, an  involuntary  and  provoking  dizzinefs
as  in  drunkennefs.  Towards  the  clofc  of  the
inhalation,  this  fymptom  decreafcd ;  though  the
nofe  was  flill  involuntary  held  faft  after  the  air-
bag  was  removed.     The  dofe  was  probably  an


(   527   )

undercharge,  as  no  extraordinary  fenfation  was
felt  more  than  half  a  minute  after  the  inhalation.

J.  RiCKMAN.


XV.  Detail  of  Mr.  Lgvell  Edgworth.

My  firft  fenfation  was  an  univerfal  and  con-

liderable  tremor.     I  then  perceived  fome  giddi-

nefs  in  my  head,  and  a  violent  dizzinefs  in  my

fight ;  thofe  fenfations  by  degrees  fubiided,  and

I  felt  a  great  propenfity  to  bite   through    the

wooden  mouth-piece,  or  the  tube  of  the  bag

through  which  I  infpired  the  air.     After  I  had

breathed  all    the   air  that   was    in  the   bag,  I

eagerly  wifhed  for  more.     I  then  felt   a   flrong

propenfity  to  laugh,  and  did  burft  into  a  violent

fit  of  laughter,  and   capered  about  the  room

without  having  the  power  of  reftraining  myfelf.

By  degrees  thefe  feelings  fubfided,  except  the

tremor  which  lafled   for    an    hour  after  I   had

breathed  the  air,  and  I  felt  a  vveaknels  in    my

knees.  The  principal  feeling  through  the  whole

of  the  time,  or  what  I  fhould  call  the  character-


(  526  )

iflical  part  of  the  eftedl,  was  a  total  difficulty  of
reftralning  my  feelings,  both  corporeal  and
mental,  or  in  other  words,  not  having  any
command  of  one'self.


XVI.     Detail  of  Mr.  G.  Bedford.


I  inhaled  6  quarts.  Experienced  a  fenfatiorl
of  fulnefs  in  the  extremities  and  in  the  face^
with  a  defire  and  power  of  expaniion  of  the
lungs  very  pleafurable.  Feelings  iimilar  to
intoxication  were  produced,  without  being  dif-
agreeable.  When  the  bag  was  taken  away,  an
involuntary  though  agreeable  laughter  took
place,  and  the  extremities  were  warm.

In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  above
experiment,  I  inhaled  8  quarts.  The  warmth
and  fulnefs  of  the  face  and  extremities  were
fooner  produced  during  the  infpiration.  The
candle  and  the  perfons  about  me,  afTumed  the
fame  appearances  as  took  place  during  the  efFedl
produced  by  wine,    and   I  could  perceive  no


(   529  )

determinate  outline.  The  defire  and  power  to
expand  the  lungs  was  increafed  beyond  that  in
the  former  experiment,  and  the  whole  body  and
limbs  Teemed  dilated  without  the  fenfe  of  teaiion,
it  was  as  if  the  bulk  was  increafed  without  any
addition  to  the  fpecifiii  gravity  of  the  body,
which  was  highly  pleafant.  The  provocation
to  laughter  was  not  fo  great  as  in  the  former
experiment,  and  when  the  bag  was  removed,
the  warmth  almoft  fuddenly  gave  place  to  a
coldnefs  of  the  extremities,  particularly  of  the
hands  which  were  the  firil  to  become  warm
during  the  infpiration.  A  flight  fenfation  of
fulnefs  not  amounting  to  pain  in  the  head,  has
continued  for  fome  minutes.  After  the  firfi:
experiment,  a  fenfation  in  the  wrifts  and  elbows
took  place,  fimilar  to  that  produced  by  the
electric  (hock.

G.  C.  BEDFORt),

March  30th,   1800.


Kk


(  530  )


XVII.  Detail  of  Miss  Ryland.

After  having  breathed  five  quarts  of  gas,  I
experienced  for  a  (hort  time  a  quicknefs  and
difficulty  of  breathing,  which  was  fucceeded  by
extreme  languor,  refembling  fainting,  without
the  very  unpleafant  fenfation  with  which  it  is
ufually  attended.  It  entirely  deprived  me  of
the  power  of  fpeaking,  but  not  of  recollection,
for  I  heard  every  thing  that  was  faid  in  the  room
during  the  time ;  and  Mr.  Davy's  remark  "  that
my  pulfe  was  very  quick  and  full."  When  the
languor  began  to  fubfide,  it  was  fucceeded  by
reftlefsnefs,  accompanied  by  involuntary  muf-
cular  motions.  I  was  warmer  than  ufual,  and
very  fleepy  for  feveral  hours.

XVIII.  Letter  from  Mr.  M.  M.  Coates.

I  will,  as  you  requeft,  endeavour  to  defcribe
to  you  the  efFedl  produced  on  me  laft  Sunday
fe'pnight  by  the  nitrous  oxide,  and  will  at  the


(  ^31   )

fame  time  tell  you  what  was  the  previous  ftate
of  my  mind  on  the  fubjedi.

When  I  fat  down  to  breathe  the  gas,  I  believed
that  it  owed  much  of  its  efFedl  to  the  predifpo-
fing  agency  of  the  imagination,  and  had  no
expectation  of  its  fenfible  influence  on  myfelf.
Having  ignorantly  breathed  a  bag  of  common
air  without  any  effect,  my  doubts  then  arofe
to  pofitive  unbelief.

After  a  few  infpirations  of  the  nitrous  oxide,
I  felt  a  fulnefs  in  my  head,  which  increafed
with  each  inhalation,  until,  experiencing  fymp-
toms  which  I  thought  indicated  approaching
fainting,  I  ceafed  to  breathe  it,  and  was  then
confirmed  in  my  belief  of  its  inability  to  pro-
duce in  me  any  pleafurable  fenfation.

But  after  a  few  feconds,  I  felt  an  immoderate
flow  of  fpirits,  and  an  irrefiftible  propenfity  to
violent  laughter  and  dancing,  which,  being  fully
confcious  of  the  violence  of  my  feelings,  and  of
their  irrational  exhibition,  I  made  great  but
inefFedual  efforts  to  reftrain  ;  this  was  my  ftate
for  feveral  minutes.    During  the  refl  of  the  day,


(  532  )

I  experienced  a  degree  of  hilarity  altogether
new  to  roe.  For  fix  or  feven  days  afterwards,
I  Teemed  to  feel  moft  exquifitely  at  every  nerve,
and  was  much  indifpofed  to  my  fedentarj^  pur-
fuits ;  this  acute  fenfibility  has  been  gradually
diminifhing  ;  but  I  flill  feel  fomewbat  of  the
efiedb  of  this  nof  el  agent.

Your's  truly,
To  Mr.  Datt.  M.  M.  Coated,

June  lUb,  1800.


DIVISION    III.

ABSTRACTS  from  ADDITIONAL  DETAILS,-

OBSERVATIONS  on  the  EFFECTS  of  NITROUS
OXIDE,  by  Dr.  BEDDOES.^CONCLUSION.


I.  AbstraSfs  from  additional  Details,

JL  HE  trials  related  in  the  following  abftrads,
have  been  chiefly  made  fince  the  publication
of  Dr.  Beddoes's  Notice.  Many  of  the  indivi-
duals breathed  the  gas  from  pure  curiofity.
Others  with  a  difbelief  of  its  powers.

Mr.  Wynne^  M.  p.  breathed  five  quarts  of
diluted  nitrous  oxide,  without  any  fenfation.
Six  quarts  produced  fulnefs  in  the  chefl,
heat  in  the  hands  and  feet,  and  fenfe  of  tenfion
in  the  fingers,  flight  but  pleafant  fenfations.
Seven  quarts  produced  no  new  or  different
efFedts.


(  534  )

Mr.  Mackintosh  feveral  times  breathed
nitrous  oxide.  He  had  fenfe  of  fulnefs  in  the
head,  thrillings,  tingling  in  the  fingers,  and
generally  pleafurable  feelings.

Mr.  John  Cave,  Junr.  from  breathing  four
quarts  of  nitrous  oxide,  felt  fenfations   as  from

fuperior  wine,  and  general  pleafant  feelings.

Mr.  Michael  Castle,  from  five  quarts,
experienced  fenfations  of  heat  and  thrilling,
general  fpirits  heightened  confiderably  as  from
wine  ;  afterwards,  flight  pain  in  the  back  of  the
head.

Mr.  H.  Card  WELL,  from  five  quarts,  had
feelings  fo  pleafurable  as  almoft  to  deftroy
confcioufnefs ;  almoft  convulfed  with  laugh-
ter; for  a  long  time  could  not  think  of  the
feeling  without  laughing  ;  fenfation  of  light-
nefs  for  fome  time  after.

Mr.  Jarman,  from  five  quarts,  great  plea-
fure,  laughter,  certainly  better  fpirits,  glow  in
the  cheeks  which  continued  long.


(  535  )

The  gentleman  who  furnifhed  the  preceding
detail,  had  heard  of  the  efFedts  of  nitrous  oxide^
and  was  prepared  to  experience  new  fenfations;
I  therefore  gave  him  a  bag  of  common  air
which  he  refpired,  believing  it  to  be  nitrous
oxide ;  and  was  much  furprifed  that  no  efFeds
were  produced.  He  then  breathed  five  quarts
of  nitrous  oxide,  and  after  the  experiment,  gave
this  account  of  his  fenfations.

Rev.  W.  A.  Canb,  after  inhaling  the  gas^
felt  the  mofl  delicious  ienfations  accompanied
by  a  thrill  through  every  part  of  his  body.  He
did  not  think  it  poffible  fo  charming  an  efFedl
could  have  been  produced.  He  had  heard  of
the  gas  ;  but  the  refult  of  the  experiment  far
exceeded  his  expe6lations.

May  Qth,   1800.

Mr.  Joseph  Priestley  from  breathing
nitrous  oxide,  generally  had  unpleafant  fulnefs
of  the  head  and  throbbing  of  the  arteries,  which
prevented  him  from  continuing  the  refpiration*


(  536  )

Dr.  Beddoes  mentioned  in  his  Notice,  that
Mr.  JosiAH  Wedgwood  and  Mr.  Thomas
Wedgwood,  experienced  rather  unpleafant
feelings  from  the  gas.  Mr.  Josiah  Wedg-
wood has  fince  repeated  the  trial,  the  efFe6ls
were  powerful,  but  not  in  the  flighted  degree
pleafhnt.

Mr.  R.  BouLTON  and  Mr.  G.  Watt  have
been  much  lefs  afFedled  than  any  individuals.

Many  other  perfons  have  refpired  the  gas,
but  as  their  accounts  contain  nothing  unnoticed
in  the  details,  it  is  ufelefs  to  particularife  them,

The  cafes  of  all  the  males  who  have  been  un-
pleafantly  affefled  fince  we  have  learnt  to  prepare
the  gas  with  accuracy,  are  related  in  this  Sedlion
and  in  the  laft  Divifion.  Thofe  who  have  been
pleafurably  afFefled  after  a  fair  trial  and  whofe
cafes  are  not  noticed,  generally  experienced
fulnefs  in  the  head,  heat  in  the  cheft,  pleafura-
ble  thrillings,  and  confequent  exhilaration.

To  perfons  who  have  been  unaccuflomed  to
breathethroughatube^we have  ufually  given  com-
mon air  till  they  have  learnt  to  rcfpire  with  accu-


(  S37   )

racy:  and  in  cafes  where  the  form  ofthe  mouth  has
prevented  the  lips  from  being  accurately  clofed
on  the  breathing  tube^  by  the  advice  of  Mr.
Watt,  we  have  ufed  a  tin  plate  conical  mouth-
piece fixed  to  the  cheeks,  and  accurately  adapted
to  the  lips  ;  by  means  of  which  precautions,  all
our  later  trials  have  been  perfe<^ly   conclufive.

IL  Of  the  effeBs  of  Nitrous  Oxide  upon  perfons
inclined  to  hyjierical  and  nervous  affeSfions.

The  cafe  of  Mifs N.   and  other   cafes,

detailed  by  Dr.  Beddoes  in  his  Notice,  feemed
to  prove  that  the  a6lion  of  nitrous  oxide  was
capable  of  producing  hyfterical  and  nervous
affedlions  in  delicate  and  irritable  confti-
tutions.

On  this  fubje61,  we  have  lately  acquired
additional  fafls.

Mifs  E.  a  young  lady  who  had  been  fubje<?t
to  hyfteric  fits,  breathed  three  quarts  of  nitrous
oxide  mingled   with   much  common    air,  and


(   538  )

felt  no  efFefls  but  a  flight  tendency  to  fainting.
She  then  breathed  four  quarts  of  pure  nitrous
oxide  :  her  firfl  infpirations  were  deep,  her
laft  very  feeble.  .  At  the  end  (he  dropt  the  bag
from  her  lips,  and  continued  for  fome  moments
motionlefs.  Her  pulfe  which  at  the  beginning
of  the  experiment  was  ftrong,  appeared  to  me
to  be  at  this  time,  quicker  and  weaker.  She
foon  began  to  move  her  hands  and  talked  for
fome  minutes  incoherently,  as  if  ignorant  of
what  had  pafTed.  In  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  (he  had  recovered,  but  could  give  no
account  of  her  fenfations.  A  certain  degree  of
languor  continued  through  the  day.

A  young  lady  who  never  had  hyfterical
attacks,  willied  to  breathe  the  gas.  I  informed
her  of  the  difagreeable  efFe6ls  it  had  fome-
timcs  produced,  and  advifcd  her  if  fhe  had
the  flighteft  tendency  to  nervous  affedlion,
not  to  make  the  trial.  She  perfifted  in  her
refolution.

To  afcertain   the  influence  of  imagination,


f  539  )

I  firft  gave  her  a  bag  of  common  air,  which
fhe  declared  produced  no  efFedl.  I  then  or-
dered for  her  a  quart  of  nitrous  oxide  mingled
with  two  quarts  of  common  air  ;  but  from  the
miftake  of  the  perfon  who  prepared  it^  three
quarts  of  nitrous  oxide  were  adminiftered  with
one  of  common  air.  She  breathed  this  for  near
a  minute,  and  after  the  experiment,  defcribed
her  fenfations  as  unpleafant,  and  faid  fhe  felt
at  the  moment  as  if  fhe  was  dying.  The  un-
pleafant  feelings  quickly  went  off,  and  a  few
minutes  after,  fhe  had  apparently  recovered
her  former  ftate  of  mind.  In  the  courfe  of  the
day,  however,  a  violent  head- ache  came  on,
and  in  the  evening  after  (he  had  taken  a  medi-
cine which  operated  violently,  hyflerical  affec-
tions were  produced,  followed  by  great  debility.
They  occafionally  returned  for  many  days,  and
fhe  continued  weak  and  debilitated  for  a  great
length  of  time.

Mrs.  S.  a  delicate   lady,  liable  to    nervous
afFedlions  who  had  heard  of  the  cafes  juft  de-


(   540  )

tailed,  chofe  to  breathe  the  gas.  By  three
quarts  {he  .was  thrown  into  a  trance,  which
lafted  for  three  or  four  minutes.  On  recover-
ing, fhe  could  give  no  account  of  her  feelings,
and  had  fbme  languor  for  half  an  hour  after-
wards,

Thefe  phsenomena  have  rendered  us  cautious
in  adminiftering  the  gas  to  delicate  females.
In  a  few  inftances  however,  it  has  been  taken
by  perfons  of  this  clafs,  and  even  by  thofe  in-
clined to  hyfterical  and  nervous  complaints
with  pleafurable  efFedls,

Mifs  L.  a  young  lady  who  had  formerly  had
hyfterical  fits,  breathed  a  quart  of  nitrous  oxide
with  three  quarts  of  common  air  without  efFedts.
Two  quarts  of  nitrous  oxide  with  one  of  com-
mon air  produced  a  flight  giddinefs  ;  four  quarts
of  nitrous  oxide  produced  a  fit  of  immoderate
laughter,  which  was  fucceeded  by  flight
exhilaration,  her  fpirits  were  good  through-
out the  day,  and  no  depreflion  followed.


(    54-2    )

the  benefit  it  confers  on  fome  of  the  paralytic^
and  the  injury  it  does  or  threatens  to  the  hyfte-
rical  and  the  exquifitely  fenfible.  I  find  that
five  or  Cix  quarts  operate  as  powerfully  as  ever.
I  feem  to  make  a  given  quantity  go  farther  by
holding  my  breath  fo  that  the  gas  may  be  ab-
forbed  in  a  great  degree  without  returning  into
the  bag,  and  therefore,  be  as  little  heated  be-
fore infpiration  as  poffible. — This  may  be  fancy.
After  innumerable  trials,  I  have  never  once
felt  laffitude  or  depreflion^     Mod  commonly


*  Of  the  fa6ts  on  which  Brown  founded  his  law  of  In-
dire6l  debility,  no  prudent  man  will  lofe  fight  either  in
pra6tifing  or  Undying  medicine.  They  are  incontroverti-
ble.— And  our  new  fa6ts  may  doubtlefe  be  conciliated  to
the  Brunonian  do^Iitrine.

But  to  fuppofe  that  the  expenditure  of  a  quality  of  a  fub-
itance  or  a  fpirit,  and  its  renewal  or  accumulation  are  the
general  principles  of  animal  phaenomena,  fcems  tomea  griev^-
ous  and  baneful  error.  I  believe  it  often  happens  that  excite-
ment and  excitability  increafe,  and  that  they  oftener  decreafe
together  J — In  ihort,  without  generalizing  in  a  manner,  of
which  Brown  and  limilar  theories  had  no  conception,  our
notions  of  the  living  world  will  in  my  opinion,  continue
to  be  as  confufed  as  the  elements  are  faid  to  have  been  in
chaos.     On  fome  future  occafion,  I  may  prefume  to  point


(  541  )

Mifs  B.   Y and  Mifs  S.  T ^  both

ddicate  but  healthy  young  ladies,  were  afFeded
very  pleafantly  ;  each  by  three  quarts  of  nitrous
oxide,  the  lirft    time  of  refpiring   it.     Mifs  B

Y continued  exhilarated  and  in  high   fpi-

rits  for  fome  hours  after  the  dofe.  Mifs  S.  Y —
had  a  flight  head-ache,  which  did  not  go  off
for  fome  hours.

Mrs.  F.  inclined  to  be  hyfteri6al,  breathed
four  quarts  of  nitrous  oxide  mingled  with  com-
mon air.  She  was  giddy  and  defcribed  her
feelings  as  odd  ;  but  had  not  the  flighted  lan-
guor after  the  experiment,

III.  Obfervations  on  the  effects  of  Nitrous
Oxide  ^  by  Dr.  Bed  does.

Neither  my  notes  nor  my  rccollecStion  fupply
much  in  addition  to  what  I  formerly  flated  in
the  Notice  of  Obfervations  nt  the  Pneumatic
Tnjiitulion,  Longman,  The  gas  maintains  its
firft  charatfler  as  w€ll  in  its  efFeds  on  me,  as  in


(  543  )

I  am  fenfible  of  a  grateful  glow  circum  praeor--
dm.  This  has  continued  for  hours.— In  two  or
three  inflances  only  has  exhalation  failed  to  be
followed  by  pleafurable  feeling,  it  has  never  been
followed  by  the  contrary.  On  a  few  occafions
before  the  gas  was  exhaufted,  I  have  found  it
impoffible  to  continue  breathing.

The  pulfe  at  firfi:  becomes  fuller  and  fbronger.
Whenever,  after  expofure  to  a  cold  wind,  the
warmth  of  the  room  has  created  a  glow  in  the
cheeks,  the  gas  has  increafed  this  to  ftrong
flufhing — which  common  air  breathed  in  the
fame  way,  failed  lo  do.

Several  times  I  have  found  that  a  cut  which
had  ceafed  to  be  painful  has  fmarted  afrefh,  and
on  taking  two  dofes  in  fucceffion,  the  fmarting
ceafed  in  the  interval  and  returned  during  the
fecond  refpiration.  I  had  no  previous  cxpefla-
tion  of  the  firft  fmarting.

out  the  region  through  which  I  imagine  the  path  to  wind,
that  will  lead  the  obfervers  of  fome  diflant  generation  to  a
point,  whence  they  may  enjoy  a  view  of  the  fubtle,  bufy
and  intricate  movements  of  the  organic  creation  as  clear  as
Newton  obtained  of  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  raaifes.


(  544  )

The  only  time  I  was  near  rendering  rhyfelf*
infenfible  to  prefent  objedls  by  very  carefully
breathing  feveral  dofes  in  quick  fucceffion,  I
forcibly  exclaimed,  tones  1— In  fa61,  befides
a  general  thrilling,  there  feemed  to  be  quick
and  ftrong  alterations  iti  the  degree  of  illumi-
nation of  all  furrounding  objedls  ;  and  I  felt  as
if  compofed  of  finely  vibrating  firings.  On  this
occafion,  the  fkin  feemed  in  a  flate  of  con-
flriflion  and  the  lips  glued  to  the  mouth-piece,
and  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs  con-
tracted, but  not  painfully.  However,  no  con-
ftridlion  or  corrugation  of  the  fkin  could  be
feen.  I  am  confcious  of  having  made  a  great
number  of  obfervations  while  breathing,  which  I
could  never  recover.

Immediately  afterwards  I  have  often  caught
myfelf  walking  with  a  hurried  fiep  and  bufy  in
foliloquy.  The  condition  of  general  fenfation
being  as  while  hearing  chearful  mufic,  or  after
good  news,  or  a  moderate  quantity  of  wine.

Mr.  John  Cave,  Junr.  and  his  three  friends,
as  well  as  others,  compared  the  efFeds  to  Cham-


(  545  )

pagne.  Moft  perfons  have  had  the  idea  of  the
ef¥ef\  of  fermented  iiqaors  excited  by  the  gas.
It  were  to  be  wifhed  that  we  had,  for  a  fiandard
of  comparifon,  obfervations  on  the  effedt  of
thefe  liquors  as  diverfified  and  as  accurate  as
we  have  obtained  concerning  the  gas  ;  nor  would
more  uniformity  in  the  a6lion  of  thefe  fub-
ilances  be  obferved  if  the  enquiry  were
itri6ily  purfued.  Opium  and  fpirits  feem,  iqi
particular  dates  to  (icken  and  diilrefs  in  the
firft     inftance ;      how    differently     does     wine

at  an  early  hour  and  fatting  adi  upon  thofe
who  are  accuftomed  to  take  it  only  after  dinner  I
I  thought  it  might  be  an  amufing  fpe6!acle
to  fee  the  different  tints  of  blood  flowing  from
a  wound  by  a  leech  in  confequence  of  breathing
different  airs.  The  purple  from  the  nitrous
oxide  was  very  evident.  Oxygene,  we  thought,
occafioned  a  quicker  fiow  and  brighter  color  in
the  blood.  In  another  experiment,  an  inflamed
area  round  the  punciure  from  a  leech  applied  the
day  before^  was  judged  by  feveral  fpe<?tators  to
become  much  more  crimfon  on  the  refpiration  of
L  1


(  546  )

about  20  quarts  of  oxygene  gas,  which  poffibly
adls  more  powerfully  on  inflamed  parts.'*'  Thefe
and  many  iimilar  experiments,  require  to  be  re-
peated on  the  blood  of  fingle  arteries  opened  in
warm  and  cold  animals.

It  has  appeared  to  me  that  I  could  bold  my
breath  uncommonly  long  when  refpiring  oxy-
gene gas  rnixed  with  nitrous  oxide.  While
trying  this  to-day,  (17th  June)^  I  thought  the
fenfeoffmell  much  more  acute  after  the  ni-
trous oxide  than  before  I  began  to  refpire  at
all  ;  and  then  I  felt  confcious  that  this  increafed
acutenefs  had  before   repeatedly   occurred — a

*  After  writing  this,  I  was  prefent  when  an  invalid,  in
whofe  foot  the  gout,  after  much  wandering,  had  at  laft  fixed,
breathed  12  quarts  of  oxygene  gas.  While  breathing,  he
eagerly  pointed  to  the  inflamed  leg ;  and  afterwards  faid  he
had  felt  in  it  a  new  fenfation,  fomewhat  like  tenlion. — I
never  had  feen  oxygene  refpired  where  there  was  fo  much
local  inflammation.

June  18.  After  four  quarts  of  oxygene  with  6  of  nitrous
oxide  and  then  6  of  nitrous  oxide  alone,  violent  itching  of
the  wounds  made  by  the  leech  ;  and  rednefs  and  tumour. —
Both  had  healed,  and  I  did  not  expc6t  to  feel  any  thing
more  from  them. — 1  tried  this  again  with  two  dofes  of  ni-
trous oxide — The  yellow  halo  round  one  wound  changed
to  crimfon,  and  there  was  fo  much  flinging  and  fwelling
that  I  feared  fuppuration. — Abforption  here  was  rapid.


(   547    )

fad  very  capable,  I  apprehend,  of  a  pneumato*
logical  interpretation.

Time  by   my   feelings  has  always   appeared
longer  than  by  a  watch.

I  thought  of  trying  to  obferve  whether  while
I  alternately  breathed  quantities  of  nitrous  oxide
and  oxygene  gas  and  common  air,  I  could  ob-
ferve any  difference  in  the  operation  of  a  blifter
beginning  to  bite  the  fkin.  It  would  be  of
confequence  to  afcertain  the  efFefl  of  regulating
by  compreffion  the  flow  of  blood,  while  fiimu-
lants  of  various  kinds  (and  heated  bodies  among
the  reft)  were  applied  to  or  near  the  extremi-
ties— becaufe  in  erifipelas  and  various  inflam-
matory afi^edlions,  a  ready  and  pleafant  cure
might  be  effe^led  by  partial  compreflion  of  the
arteries  going  to  the  difeafed  part ;  and  a  great
improvement  in  practice  thus  obtained.

But  I  fliould  run  into  an  endlefs  digreflSon,
were  I  to  enumerate  poflible  phyfiological  ex-
periments with  artificial  airs,  or  to  fpeculate  on
the  mechanical  improvement  of  medicine,  which
at  prefent  as  far  as  mechanical  means  of  aff'efl-.


(  548  )       •

ing  the  living  fyftem  are  concerned,  is  with  us
in  a  ftate  that  would  almoft  difgrace  a  nation  of
favages.

IV.    Conclusion.

From  the  fa6ts  detailed  in  the  preceding
pages,  it  appears  that  the  imniediate  efFedts  of
nitrous  oxide  upon  the  living  fyftem,  are  analo-
gous to  thofe  of  difFufible  ftimuli.  Both  in-
creafe  the  force  of  circulation,  produce  plea-
furable  feeling,  alter  the  condition  of  the  organs
of  fenfation,  and  in  their  moft  extenfive  adlion
deftroy  life.

In  the  mode  of  operation  of  nitrous  oxide
and  difFufible  flimuli,  confiderable  differences
however,  exifl.

DifFufible  flimuli  a6l  immediately  on  the
mufcular  and  nervous  fibre.  Nitrous  oxide
operates  upon  them  only  by  producing  peculiar
changes    in    the   compofition    of    the    blood.

DifFufible  flimuli  afled  that  part  of  the  fyflem


(   549  )

moft  powerfully  to  which  they  are  applied,  and
adl  on  the  whole  only  by  means  of  its  fympathy
with  that  part.  Nitrous  oxide  in  combination
with  the  blood,  is  univerfal  in  its  application
and  aflion.

We  know  very  little  of  the  nature  of  excite-
ment ;  as  however,  life  depends  immediately  on
certain  changes  effefled  in  the  blood  i '3  refpi-
ration,  and  ultimately  on  the  fupply  of  certain
nutritive  matter  by  the  lymphatics  ;  it  is  rea-
fonable  to  conclude,  that  during  the  adlion  of
Simulating  fubfianoes,  from  the  increafed  force
of  circulation,  not  only  more  oxygene  and
perhaps  nitrogene  mud  be  combined  with  the
blood  in  refpiration,*  but  likewife  more  fluid
nutritive  matter  fupplied  to  it  in  circulation.


*  See  Dr.  Beddoes's  Corfjideratmis,  fart  1 .  page  26,  His
obfervations  in  the  note  in  the  laft  fedion,  will  likewife
apply  here. — Is  not  healthy  living  a6^ion  dependant  upon
a  certain  equilibrium  between  the  principles  fupplied  to  the
blood  by  the  pulmonary  veins  from  refpiration  and  by  the
lymphatics  from  abforption  ?  Does  not  fenlibility  more
immediately  depend  upon  refpiration  ?  Deprive  an  animal
under  ftimulation,  of  air,  and  it  inftantly   dies  j  probably


(   560  )

By  this  oxygene  and  nutritive  matter  excita-
bility may  be  kept  up  :  and  exhauftion  confe-
quent  to  excitement  only  produced,  in  confe-
quence  of  a  deficiency  of  fome  of  the  nutritive
principles,  which  are  fupplied  by  abforption.

When  nitrous  oxide  is  breathed,  nitrogene
(a  principle  under  common  circumllances  chiefly
carried  into  the  blood  by  the  abforbents  in  fluid
compounds)  is  fupplied  in  refpiration  ;  a  greater
quantity  of  oxygene  is  combined  with  the  blood
than  in  common  refpiration,  whilfl:  lefs  carbonic
acid  and  probably  lefs  water  are  evolved.

Hence  a  fmaller  quantity  of  nutritive  matter
IS  probably  required  from  the  abforbents  during
the  excitement  from  nitrous  oxide,  than  during
the  operation  of  flimulants  ;  and  in  confequence,
exhauftion  rom  the  expenditure  of  nutritive
matter  more  feldom  occafioned.


if  abforption  could  be  prevented,  it  would  Hkewife  fpeedily
die.  It  would  be  curious  to  try  whether  intoxication  from
fermented  liquors  cannot  be  prevented  by  breathing
during  their  operation,  an  atmofphere  deprived  of  part  of
its  oxygene.


(  551   )

Since  Rcfearch  III.  has  been  printed,  I  have
endeavoured  to  afcertain  the  quantities  of  nitro-
gene  produced  when  nitrous  oxide  is  refpired
for  a  confiderablc  time..  In  one  experiment,
when  I  breathed  about  four  quarts  of  gas  in  a
glafs  bell  over  impregnated  water  for  near  a
minute,  it  wasdiminifhed  to  about  two  quarts;
and  the  refiduum  extinguiOied  flame.

Now  the  experiments  in  Refearch  11.  prove
that  when  nitrous  oxide  is  decompofed  by  com-
buflible  bodies,  the  quantity  of  nitrogene
evolved  is  rather  greater  in  volume  than  the
pre-exifting  nitrous  oxide.  Hence  much  of
the  nitrogene  taken  into  the  (yflem  during  the
refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide,  mud  be  either
carried  into  new  combinations,  or  given  out
by  the  capillary  veflels  through  the  fkin.

It  would  be  curious  to  afcertain  whether  the
quantity  of  ammoniac  in  the  faline  matters
held  in  folution  by  the  fecreted  fluids  is
increafed  after  the  refpiration  of  nitrous  oxide.
Experiments  made  upon  the  confumption  of
nitrous  oxide   mingled    with   atmofpheric  air


(  552  )

by  the  fmaller  animals,  would  go  far  to  deter-
mine whether  any  nitrogene  is  given  out
through  the  fkin.

The  various  efFecSls  of  nitrous  oxide  upon
different  individuals  and  upon  the  fame  indi-
viduals at  diiFerent  times,  prove  that  its  powers
are  capable  of  being  modified  both  by  the  pecu-
liar condition  of  organs,  and  by  the  fiale  of
general  feeling.

Reafoning  from  common  phaenomena  of  fenfa-
tion,  particularly  thofe  relating  to  heat,  it  is  proba-
blethatpleafurable  feeling  is  uniformly  conne61ed
with  a  moderate  increafe  of  nervous  ad^ion  ;  and
that  this  increafe  when  carried  to  certain  limits,
produces  mixed  emotion  or  fublime  plealure ;
and  beyond  thofe  limits  occafions  abfolute  pain.
Comparing  the  fads  in  the  laft  divifion,  it
is  likely  that  individuals  pofleffed  of  high
health  and  little  fenfibility,  will  generally  be
lefs  pleafurably  affected  by  nitrous  oxide  than
fuch  as  have  more  fenfibility,  in  whom  the
emotions  will  fometimes  To  far  enter  the  limits


(  553  )

of  pain  as  to  become  lublime  ;*  whilft  tbe
nervous  a6lion  in  fnch  as  have  exquifite  lenli-
bility,  will  be  fo  much  increafed  as  often
to  produce  difagreeable  feeling.

Modification  of  the  powers  of  nitrous  oxide
by  mixture  of  the  gas  with  oxygene  or  common
air,  will  probably  enable  the  mod  delicately
feniible  to  refpire  it  without  danger,  and  even
with  pleafurable  efFc6ls  :  heretofore  it  has  been
adminiftered  to  fuch  only  in  its  pure  form  or
mingled  with  finall  quantities  of  atmofpheric
air,  and  in  its  pure  form  even  the  mod  robull
are  unable  to  refpire  it  with  fafety  for  more  than
five  minutes.

The  mufcular  a^iions-f*  fometimes  conne6i£d

*  Sublime  emotion  with  regard  to  natural  obje6ls,  is
generally  produced  by  the  connexion  of  the  pleafure  of
beauty  with  the  paffion  of  fear.

f  The  immortal  Hartley  has  demonflrated  that  all  our
motions  are  originally  automatic,  and  generally  produced
by  the  adion  of  tangible  things  on  the  mufcular  fibre.

The  common  aftions  of  adults  may  be  diflinguidied  into
two  kinds  3  voluntary  adions,  and  mixed  automatic  a6lions.
The  firft  are  produced  by  ideas,  or  by  ideas  conne6ted  with
pallions.  The  fecond  by  impreflion,  or  by  pleafure  and  pain.


(  554  )

with  the  feelings  produced  by  nitrous  oxide,  feenx
to  depend  in  a  great  meafure  upon  the  par-
ticular habits  of  the  individual ;  they  will  ufually
be  of  that  kind  which  is  produced  either  by
common  pleafurable  feelings  or  ftrong  emotions.
Hyfterical  affedlion  isoccafioned  by  nitrous  ox-
ide, probably  only  in  confequence  of  the  ftrong
emotion  produced,  which  deftroys  the  power  of
the  will,  and  calls  up  feries  of  automatic  motions
formerly  connected  with  a  variety  of  lefs  powerful
but  fimilar  feelings.

The  quicknefs  of  the  operation  of  nitrous
oxide,  will  probably  render  it  ufeful  in  cafes  of
extreme    debility    produced   by  deficiency   of

In  voluntary  a6lion,  regular  affociations  of  ideas  and
mufcular  motions  exift  :  as  when  a  chemift  performs  a  pre-
conceived experiment.

In  mixed  automatic  a6tionSj  the  fimple  motions  produced
by  imprcflion  are  conne6ted  with  feries  of  motions  formerly
voluntary,  but  now  produced  without  the  intervention  of
ideas:  as  when  a  pcrfon  accuftomed  to  play  on  the  harpfi-
chord,  from  accidentally  ftrikiag  a  key,  is  induced  to  per-
form theferies  of  motions  which  produce  a  wcll-remembercd
tune.

Evidently  the  mufcular  anions  produced  by  nitrous
oxide  are  mixed  automatic  motions.


{  555  )

common  exciting  powers.  Perhaps  it  may  be
advantageoufl)'  applied  mingled  with  oxygene
or  common  air,  to  the  recovery  ofperfons  appa-
rently dead  from  fufFocation  by  drowing  or
hanging.

The  only  difeafes  in  which  nitrous  oxide  has
been  hitherto  employed,  are  thofe  of  defficient
fenfibility. — An  account  of  its  agency  in  para-
lytic afFedlions,  will  be  fpcedily  publifhed  by
Dr.  Beddoes.

As  by  its  immediate  operation  the  tone  of  the
irritable  fibre  is  increafed,  and  as  exhauftion
rarely  follows  the  violent  mufcular  motions
fometimes  produced  by  it,  it  is  not  unreafona-
ble  to  expedl  advantages  from  it  in  cafes  of
fimple  mufcular  debility.

The  apparent  general  tranfiency  of  its  opera-
tion in  the  pure  form  in  fingle  dofes  has  been
confidered  as  offering  arguments  againfi;  its
power  of  producing  lafiing  changes  in  the  con-
ftitution.  It  will,  however,  be  eaf)Mo  keep  up
excitement  of  different  degrees  of  intenfity  for  a
great   length  of  time,  either  by    adminillering


(  556  )

the  unmingled  gas  in  rapid  fuccefiive  dofes,  or
by  preferving  a  permanent  atmofpherc,  con-
taining different  proportions  of  nitrous  oxide
and  common  air,  by  means  of  a  breathing  cham-
ber.* That  fingle  dofes  neverthelefs,  are  capable
of  producing  permanent  effcdis  in  fomeconfli-
tutions,  is  evident,  as  well  from  the  hyderical
cafes  as  from  fome  of  the  details — particularly
that  of  Mr.  M.  M.  Coates.

As  nitrous  oxide  in  its  extensive  operation
appears  capable  of  deftroying  phyfical  pain,  it
may  probably  be  ufed  with  advantage  during
turgical  operations  in  which  no  great  efFufion
of  blood  takes  place.

From  the  ftrong  inclination  of  thofe  who  have
been  pleafantly  affected  by  the  gas  to  refpire  it
again^  it  is  evident,  that  the  pleafure  produced,
is  not  lod,  but  that  it  mingles  with  the  mafs  of
feelings,  and  becomes  intclledlual  pleafure,  or
hope.  The  defire  of  fome  individuals  acquainted
with  the  pleafures  of  nitrous  oxide  for  the  gas
has  been  often  fo  ftrong  as  to   induce    them  to

•  See  R.  IV.  Div.  I.  page  478.


(  557   )

breathe  with  eagernefs,  the  air  remaining  in  the
bags  after  the  refpiration  of  others.

As  hydrocarbonate  adis  as  a  fedative,^  and
diniinifhes  living  aflion  as  rapidly  as  nitrous
oxide  increafes  it,  on  the  common  theory  of
excitability:}:  it  would  follow,  that  by  differently
modifying  the  atmofphere  by  means  of  this  gas
and  nitrous  oxide,  we  fhould  be  in  polTeffion
of  a  regular  feries  of  exciting  and  depreffing*
powers  applicable  to  every  deviation  of  the  con-
ftitution  from  health  :  but  the  common  theory

t  R.  IV.  Div.  I.  page  46;.
X  That  of  Brown  modified  by  his  difciples.

*  Suppofing  the  increafc  or  diminution  of  living  a(5^ioa
when  produced  by  different  agents,  uniform,  fimilar  and
differing  only  in  degree  j  it  would  follow^  that  certain
mixtures  of  hydrocarbonate  and  nitrous  oxide,  or  hydro-
gene  and  nitrous  oxide,  ought  to  be  capable  of  fupporting
the  life  of  animals  for  a  much  longer  time  than  pure  nitrous
oxide.  From  the  experiments  in  Ref.  III.  Div.  T.  it  appears
however,  that  this  is  not  the  cafe.

It  would  feem,  that  in  life,  a  variety  of  different  cor-
pufcular  changes  are  capable  of  producing  phaenomena
apparently  (imilar  j  fo  that  in  the  fcience  of  living  a6tion,
we  are  incapable  of  reafoning  concerning  caufes  from  effeds,


(  558  )

of  excitability  is  moil  probably  founded  on  a
falfe  general  i  fat  ion.  The  modifications  of  dif-
eafed  adion  may  be  infinite  and  fpecific  in
different  organs  ;  and  hence  out  of  the  power
of  agents  operating  on  the  whole  of  the
fyftem.

Whenever  we  attempt  to  combine  our  fcat-
tercd  phyfiological  fa6ls,  we  are  flopped  by  the
want  of  numerous  intermediate  analogies  ;  and
fo  loofely  connected  or  fo  independant  of  each
other,  are  the  different  feries  of  phacnomena,
that  we  are  rarely  able  to  make  probable  con-
jeflures,  much  lefs  certain  predi<51ions  concern-
ing tbe  refults  of  new  experiments.

An  immenfe  mafsof  pneumatological,  chemi-
cal, and  medical  information  mufl  be  collected,
before  we  (hall  be  able  to  operate  with  certainty,
on  the  human  conftitution.

Pneumatic  chemiflry  in  its  application  to
medicine,  is  an  art  in  infancy,  weak,  almofl
ufelefs,  but  apparently  poffefTcd  of  capabilities
of  improvement.  To  be  rendered  flrong  and
mature,     ihc    mufl    be   nourifhed   by    fadls.


(   559  )

ilrengthened  by  exercife,  and  cautiouflydiredled
in  the  application  of  her  powers  by  rational
fcepticifm.


APPENDIX.

No.  I.

EjfeBs  of  Nitrous  Oxide  on  Vegetation.

In  July  17gy,  I  introduced  two  I'mall  plants
of  fpurge  into  nitrous  oxide,  in  contac^l  with  a
little  water  over  mercury  ;  after  remaining  in
it  two  days,  they  preferved  their  healthy  ap-
pearance, and  I  could  not  perceive  that  any  gas
had  been  abforbed.  I  was  prevented  by  an
accident,  from  keeping  them  longer  in  the
gas.

K  fmall  plant  of  mint  introduced  into  nitrous
oxide  and  expofed  to  light,  in  three  days  be-
came dark  olive  and  fpotted  with  brown  ;  and
in  about  fix  days  was  quite  dead. — Another
fimilar  plant,  kept  in  the  dark  in  nitrous  oxidCj
M  m


(  562  )

did  not  alter  in  color  for  five  days,  and  at  the
end  of  feven  days,  was  only  a  little  yellower
than  before.  I  could  not  afcertain  whether  any
gas  had  been  abforbed.

I  introduced  into  nitrous  oxide  through
water,  a  healthy  budding  rofe,  thinking  ihat
its  colors  might  be  rendered  brighter  by  the
gas.  I  was  difappointed,  it  very  fpcedily  faded
and  died  ;  poffibly  injured  by  the  folution  of
nitrous  oxide  in  water.

Of  two  rows  of  peas  juft  appearing  above
ground;  I  watered  one  with  folution  of  nitrous
oxide  in  water,  and  the  other  with  common
water  daily,  for  a  fortnight.  At  the  end  of  this
time,  I  could  perceive  no  difference  in  their
growth,  and  afterwards  they  continued  to  grow
equally  faft.

I  introduced  through  water  into  fix  phials,
one  of  which  contained  hydrogene,  one  oxy-
gene,  one  common  air,  one  hydrocarbonate,
one  carbonic  acid,  and  one  nitrous  oxide,  fix
fimilar  plants  of  mint,    their  roots  being  in


(563  )

contact  with  water  and  their  leaves  expofed  to
light.

The  plant  in  carbonic  acid  began  to  fade  in
lefs  than  two  days,  and  in  four  was  dead.
That  in  hydrogene  died  in  lefs  than  five  days  ;
that  in  nitrous  oxide  did  not  fade  much  for  the
firll  two  days,  but  on  the  third,  drooped  very
much,  and  was  dead  at  the  fame  time  as  that  in
hydrogene.  The  plant  in  oxygene  for  the  firft
four  days,  looked  flourifhing  and  was  certainly
of  a  finer  green  than  before,  gradually  however,
its  leaves  became  fpotted  with  black  and  drop-
ped off  one  by  one,  till  at  the  end  often  days
they  had  all  difappeared.  At  this  time  the
plant  in  common  air  looked  iickly  and  yellow,
whilft  that  in  hydrocarbonale  was  greener  and
more  flourifhing  than  ever.

I  have  detailed  thefe  experiments  not  on
account  of  any  important  conclulions  that  may
be  drawn  from  them  ;  but  with  a  view  of  in-
ducing others  to  repeat  them,  and  to  examine
the  changes  efFe<5^ed  in  the  gases.  If  it  fhould
be  found  by  future  experiments,  that  hydrocar-


(  564  )

bonate  generally  increafed  vegetation,  it  would
throw  fome  light  upon  the  ufe  of  manures,
containing  putrefying  animal  and  vegetable
fubflances,  from  which  this  gas  is  perpetually
evolved.

The  chemiftry  of  vegetation  though  imme-
diately connedied  with  agriculture,  the  art  on
which  we  depend  for  fubfiftcnce,  has  been  but
little  inveftigated.  The  difcoveries  of  Prietlley
and  Ingenhoufz,  feem  to  prove  that  it  is  within
the  reach  of  our  inftruments  of  experiment.


No.  11.

APPROXIMATIONS

TO    THB

Composition   and   Weight  of  the   aeriform

COMBINATIONS  of  NITROGENE.
At  temperature  dS*^,  and  atmofpheric  preflure  30.


1(50  Cubic  In.

grains

Nitrogene

Oxygene

Nitrogene

30.04

c

Oxygenc

35.06

T3

6
o

Atmofpher.air

31.10

73.00

27.00

*->

0
1

5

Nitrous  oxide
Nitrous  gas
Nitric  acid

50.20
34.26
76.00

(U    o

00

bfl

63.30
44.05
29.50

36.70

'    55.95

70.50

Nitrogene]  Hydrogenej

*

8

2

Ammoniac

18.05

80.00

20.00

-G

(  567  )

No.  III.

Additional  Ohfervat'wns.

a.  In  Ref.  ifl.  Div.  IV.  Se^.  III.  in  theana-
lyfis  of  nitrous  gas  by  pyrophorus,  as  no  abforp-
tion  took  place  when  the  refidiial  nitrogcne  was
expofed  to  water,  I  inferred  that  if  any  carbonic
acid  was  formed  it  was  in  quantity  fo  minule^
as  to  be  unworthy  of  notice.  A  few  day^  ago,
I  connpleatly  decompofed  a  quantity  of  nitrous
gas  by  pyrophorus,  when  the  refidual  nitrogene
was  expofed  to  folution  offlrontian,  the  fluid
became  flightly  clouded  ;  but  no  perceptible
abforption  took  place.

h.  If  there  was  the  leaft  probability  in  any  of
Dr.  Girtanner's  fpeculations on  the  compofiiion
of  Azote,*  the  experiments  on  the  e:f  haufted
capacity  :}:  of  the  lungs  in  Refill,  might  be
fiippofed  inconclulive.     But  there  appears   to

*  Annales  de  Chimie,  100 ^  and  Mr.  Tillochs  Phil.
Magazine.  24.

\  1  regret  much  that  I  could  not  procure  Dr.  Menzies's
obfervations  on  Refpiration,  while  I  was  making  the  ex-
periments on  the  capacity  of  the  lungs :  they  would  proba-
bly have  faved  me  forae  labor.


(  567  )

be  no  more  reafon  for  iuppofing  that  hydro-
gene  is  converted  into  nitrogene  by  refpiration,
than  for  fuppofing  that  it  is  converted  into
water,  carbonic  acid  or  oxygene  ;  for  all  thefe
produdls  are  evolved  when  that  gas  is  refpired.
From  the  comparifon  of  Exp.  1  with  Exp.  3,
Ref.  iii.  Div.  ii.  Sec.  4,  it  is  aimoft  demoaftra-
ted  that  no  afcertainable  change  is  efFecSled  in
hydrogene  by  refpiration.  The  experiment  of  the
accurate  Scheele  in  which  hydrogene  after  being
refpired  thirty  times  in  a  bladder  wholly  loft  its
inflammability,  may  be  eafily  accounted  for  from
its  mixture  with  the  refidual  gafesof  the  lungs.
About  a  fortnight  ago,  I  refpired,  after  forced
voluntary  exhauftion  of  my  lungs^  my  nofe
being  accurately  clofed,  three  quarts  of  hydro-
gene in  a  filk  bag,  at  four  intervals,  for  near
five  minutes.  After  this  it  was  highly  inflam*
mable,  and  burnt  with  a  greenifh  white  flame
in  contadi  with  the  atmofphere  ;  but  was  not
jfb  explofive  as  before.''^

*  If  loofely  combined  carbon   exifts   in  venous  blood,
hydrogene  may  probably  ditrolve   a  portion  of  it  when


(   568   )

e.  From  what  we  have  lately  heard  of  the  curious
experiments  of  Mr.  Volta  and  Mr.  Carlifle,  it  is
very  probable  that  the  converfion  of  nitrous  gas
into  nitrous  oxide  when  expofed  to  wetted  zinc,
copper  and  tin,  in  contadl  with  mercury,  as
defcribed  in  Ref.  I.  Div.  V.  may  in  fome  mea-
fure  depend  on  the  adlion  of  the  galvanic  fluid.
Whilfi:  I  was  engaged  in  the  ex|)eriments  on  this
converfion,  Dr.  Bcddoes  ^  mentioned  to  mc
fome  curious  fa61s  noticed  by  Humboldt  and
Ritter,  relating  to  the  oxydation  of  metals  by
the  decompofition  of  water,  which  induced  me


lefpired  and  become  ilightly  carbonated.  At  leaft  there
is  as  much  probability  in  the  fappofition  that  carbon  in
loofe  affinity  may  combine  with  hydrogene  at  980  as  that
it  may  combine  with  oxygene.

*  Dr.  Beddoes  has  iince  favoured  me  with  the  following
account  of  tbefe  fa(5ts.

''  Mr.  Humboldt  (ueber  die  gereizte  Fafer  I.  473,  17.Q7)
quotes  part  of  a  letter  from  Dr,  Afh,  in  which  it  is  faid
that  if  txvo  finely  poUPied plates  of  homogeveom  zinc  he  mois-
tened and  laid  together ^  little  cjfc3  foUoius — hut  if  ■z.inc  and
Jilver  he  tried  in  the  fame  ivay,  the  'U)holc  fiirfacc  of  the
filver  ivill  he  covered  ivith  oxydated  zinc.  Lead  and  quick-
Jilver  aH  as  poivcrfully  on  each  other,    and  fo   do  iron  and


(  569  )

to  examine  the  phscnomena  with  more  atten-
tion than  I  (hould  have  otherwife  done. — I  re^
colle6l  obferving  that  fome   of  the  wetted  zinc


copper. — Mr.  Humboldt  (p.  474)  fays  that,  in  repeating  this
experiment,  he  faw  air-bubbles  afcend,  which  he  fuppoies
to  have  been  hydrogene  gas  from  the  decomporition  of
water — When  he  placed  zinc  fimply  on  moift  glafs,  the
fame  phaenomena  took  place,  but  more  llowly  and  later.
The  quantity  of  oxyd  of  zinc  upon  the  glafs  alone  was  in
20  hours  to  that  on  the  filver  as  one  to  three.

In  a  very  ingenious  but  obfcurely  written  traiSt
by  Mr.  Ritter,  entitled,  E'vidence  that  the  galvanic
adion  exifts  in  organic  nature,  81/0.  Jena,  1800 — The
author  obferves,  that  the  care  of  Dr.  Afh  and  Mr.  Hum-
boldt that  the  metals  fliould  touch  each  other  in  as
many  points  as  poffible  was  fuperfliious,  even  if  we  could
grant  that  two  metallic  plates  might  be  made  by  polifliing,
to  touch  in  a  number  of  points.  To  fliew  that  it  was  fuffi-
cient  if  by  touching  in  one  point  only  they  fhould  form  a
compleat  galvanic  circle,  he  dropped  a  fingledropof  diiiilled
water  upon  the  bull  of  a  large  lilver  coin.  A  piece  of  pure
zinc  was  placed  with  its  one  end  on  the  edge  of  the  coin,
while  the  other  was  fiipported  by  a  bit  of  glafs.  The  drop
of  water  was  neither  in  conta6t  with  the  glafs  nor  with  the
point  at  which  the  metals  touched.  I'he  mateiinls  were
left  in  this  fituation  for  four  hours  at  the  temperature  of
680.  On  taking  them  apart,  the  water  had  become  quite
milky  and  had  half  difappeared  j  and  Mr.  Ritter  acluiilly
feparated  a  quastity  of  white  oxide  that  h:id  been  produc^d
in  the  experiment.

The  pieces  of  metal  were  cleaned  and   laid   together  in


(570)

filings  in  nitrous  gas  on  the  fide  of  the  jar  not
in  contadl  with  the  fiirface  of  mercury,  were
very  flowly  oxydated.  Whilft  on  the  furface
of  the  mercury  where  fmall  globules  of  that
fubftance  were  mingled  with  the  filings  of  zinc,
the  decompofition  went  on  much  more  rapidly;


the  fame  manner,  only  that  now  a  piece  of  paper  was  puc
between  the  metals  at  their  former  point  of  contad.  In
four  hours  firft,  and  afterwards  in  ten,  a  faint  ring  of  oxide
only  had  been  produced  of  which  the  quantity  could  not
be  eftimated,  nor  could  it  be  feparated.  In  this  cafe,  the
zinc  bad  fcarce  loft  any  thing  of  its  fplendourj  in  the
former  it  had  been  corroded.  In  many  repetitions  of  the
experiment,  he  found  that  far  more  oxide  was  formed  when
the  metals  touched,  than  when  they  were  feparated  to  the
flighteft  diftance  by  an  infolating  body,  even  air.

On  expofing  thefe  apparatufes  with  fomewhat  more  wa-
ter to  a  confiderable  heat  for  four  minutes,  the  water  in  the

interrupted  circle  continued  quite  clear,  while  that  in  the
other  had  become  milk-white.

The  fame  phaenomena  were  prefented  by  other  pairs  of
metals  in  a  degree  proportional  to  their  galvanic  a6iivity  ;
viz.  by  zinc  and  molybdaena,  zinc  and  bifmuth,  zinc  and
copper,  as  alfo  with  tin  and  filver,  tin  and  molybdaena,
and  lead  and  lilver.  The  experiment  with  tin  was  parti-
cularly decilive,  for  when  in  conta6l  with  no  other  metal
:t  was  fcarcely  at  all  oxydated  by  water,  though  oxydatiou
took  place  when  tin  was  brought  into  contact  with  lilver.


(  571  )

poffibly  through  the  medium    of  the   moiftare,
a  feries  of  galvanic  circles  were  formed.

d.  In  Ref.  II.  Div.  I.  it  is  Hated,  that  nitrous
oxideduringits  folution  by  common  vvater,expeis
about  -g  of  atmofpheric  air  the  volume  of  the
water  being  unity.


and  both  were  conne6led  at  the  other  end  by  a  drop  of
water — What  therefore  took  place  in  Dr.  Alh's  experi-
ment, arofe  from  an  aggregation  of  galvanic  circles  of
different  forms.

By  the  foregoing  experiments,  concludes  Mr.  Ritter,
which  though  capable  of  the  moft  various  modifications,
uniformly  coincide  in  their  main  refult,  it  is  abundantly
proved  that  galvanic  circles  can  he  forrued  of  merely  inorganic
bodies,  hy  ivbofe  completion  there  is  produced  an  a^ton  ivhich
ceafes  ivhen  the  circle  is  opened.  The  manner  in  which  this
has  been  fhewn,  proves  alfo  that  this  adiion  can  cffcdu-
ate fenjibh  modifications  in  organic  bodies  \  and  the  procefs
by  which  thefe  modifications  have  been  cifc61ed,  made
it  evident  that  they  %vere  not  confequences  of  a  momentary
adion  of  the  circle,  hut  of  an  action  that  is  kept  up  ivhile  the
circle  remains  entire )  for  the  procefs  which  brought  this
action  under  the  cognizance  of  the  fenfes  went  on,  while
the  circle  was  unbroken,  and  its  figure  not  brought  back
to  that  of  a  Une,

It  is  fcarce  necefiar)'  to  obferve  that  the  experiments
here  quoted,  arc  far  from  being  the  only  ones  on  which
the  above  conclufions  reft."  T,  11


(  572  )

From  the  delicate  experiments  of  Dr.  Pear
Ion,  on  thepaflage  of  the  e]e61ric  fpark  through
water,  it  appears  however  probable,  that  much
more  than  -^  of  atmofpheric  air  is  fometimes
held  in  folution  by  that  fluid,*  poffibly  the
whole  of  the  air  is  not  expelled  by  nitrous  oxide,
owing  to  fome  unknown  law  of  faturation  by
which  an  equilibrium  of  affinity  is  produced,
forming  a  triple  compound.

■*  Poffibly  a  ratio  exists  between  the  folubility  of  gafes
ID  water,  and  the  folubility  of  water  in  gafes.  It  is  proba-
ble from  Mr.  Wra.  Henry's  curious  experiments  on  the
muriatic  acid,  that  the  abfolute  quantity  of  water  in  many
gafes,  may  be  afcertained  by  means  of  its  decompofition  by
the  ele6iric  fpark.


(  573   )

No,  IV.

DESCRIPTION  OF  A

MERCURIAL  AIR-HOLDER,

Suggefted  by  an  infpeftion  of  Mr.  Watt's  Machine  for
containing  Factitious  Airs,

By  WILLIAM  CLAYFIELD.

Oeveral  modes  of  counterafling  the  prefTure
of  a  decreaiing  column  of  mercury  having  been
thought  of  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  W.  Cox,  the
following  was  at  laft  adopted  as  the  mofl
fimple  and  efFedlual.

Plate  1  Fig.  ],  reprefents  a  fedlion  of  the
m^achine,  which  confifts  of  a  ftrong  glafs  cylin-
der A  cemented  to  one  of  the  fame  kind  B,
fitted  to  the  folid  block  C,  into  which  the  glafs
tube  D  is  cemented  for  conveying  air  into  the
moveable  receiver  E.

The  brafs  axis  F,  Fig.  2,  having  a  double
bearing  at  a^  a,  is  terminated  at  one  end  by  the
wheel  G,  the  circumference  of  which  is  equal
to  the  depth  of  the  receiver,  fo  that  it  may  be
drawn  to  the  furface  of  the  mercury  by  the  cord
h  in  one  revolution  ;  to  the  other  end  is  fitted


(  574)

the  wheel  H,  over  which  the  balance  cord  r  run?
in  an  oppofite  direction  in  the  tpiral  groove  f,
a  front  view  of  the  wheel  H  is  (hewn  at  Fig.  3.

Having  loaded  the  receiver  with  the  weight
I,  fojnething  heavier  than  may  be  necelTary
to  force  it  through  the  mercury,  it  is  balanced
by 4 he  fmall  weight  K,  which  hangs  from  that
part  ofthe  fpiral  where  the  radius  is  equal  to  that
of  the  wheel  G,  from  this  point  the  radius  of  the?
fpiral  mult  be  increafed  in  fuch  proportion,  that
in  every  part  of  its  circuit,  the  weight  K  may
be  an  exacl  coanterpoife  to  the  air- holder.  In
this  way,  fo  little  friction  will  be  produced,
that  merely  plunging  the  lower  orifice  of  the
tube  D  under  mercury  contained  in  the  fraall
veflel  L.  will  be  fufficient  to  overcome  every
refiftancc,  and  to  force  the  gas  difcharged  from
the  beak  of  a  retort  into  the  receiver,  where
whatever  may  be  its  quantit}%  it  will  be  fubjecled
to  a  prefTure  exa<9Iy  correfponding  to  that  of
the  atmolphere.  The  edge  ofthe  wheel  H  being
graduated,  the  balance  cord  c  may  be  made  to
indicate  its  volume.

-Should  it  at  any  time  be  neceffary  to  reduce


(  575  )

the  prefTure  to  the  medium  flandard  of  the
barometer,  it  may  eafily  be  done  by  graduating
the  lower  end  of  the  tube  D,  and  adding  to  the
weights  I  or  K,  as  may  be  found  necefTary  ;  the
furface  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube  pointing  out
the  increafe  or  diminution.

The  concavity  at  the  top  of  the  internal
cylinder  is  intended  to  contain  any  liquid  it
may  be  thought  proper  to  expofe  to  the  ad^ion
of  the  gas.

The  upper  orifice  /,  with  its  ground-ftoppcr,
is  particularly  ufeful  in  conveying  air  from  the
retort  g,  with  its  curved  neck,  into  the  receiver,
without  its  paffing  through  the  tube  D.  In  all
cafes  wherea  rapid  extrication  o!  gas  is  expedled
the  retort^,  (hould  be  firmly  luted  to  the  ori-
fice, and  the  weight  I,  removed  from  the  top
of  the  receiver,  this  by  diminidiing  the  pref-
fure,  will  admit  the  gas  to  expand  freely  in  the
air-holder  at  the  inftant  of  its  formation,  and
prevent  an  explofion  of  the  veflels.  The  fame
caution  muft  beobferved  whenever  any  inflam-
mation of  gas  is  produced  by  the  eledlric  fpark.

The  air  may  be  readily  transferred  through
water  or  even  mercury  by  the  tube  >^,  Fig.  i .


(  570  )

To  prevent  an  abforption  of  mercury  in  cafe
of  a  condenfation  taking  place  in  the  retort
made  ufe  of  for  generating  air,  Mr.  Davy  has
applied  the  ftop-cock  /,  to  which  the  neck  is
firmly  luted.  This  ftop-cock  is  likewife  of  great
fervice  in  faturating  water  with  acid  or  alkaline
gafes,  which  may  be  effedled  by  luting  one
end  of  the  tube  ^  to  the  ftop-cock,  and  plung-
ing the  other  into  the  flu.d  in  the  fmall  veftel  /,
cemented  at  top,  and  terminating  in  the  bent
funnel  ;;z — the  tube  h  having  been  previoufly
removed,  and  the  lower  orifice  of  the  tube  D
either  funk  to  a  confiderable  depth  in  mercury,
or  clofed  with  a  ground  ftopper.  The  bend  of
the  funnel  w,  may  be  accurately  clofed  by  the
introdudlion  of  a  few  lines  of  mercury.

The  application    of  the   ftop-cock   «,    has

enabled  Mr.  Davy  to  perform  fome  experiments

on  refpiration  with  confiderable  accuracy.

Note.  This  apparatus  was  iirft  defcribed  in  the  third  part
of  Dr.  Beddoes's  Conliderations ;  its  relation  to  Mr.  Davy's
experiments  with  the  improvements  it  has  lately  received,
may  probably  be  deemed  fufficient  to  cxcufe  the  re-printing
it. — The  weight  I.  Fig.  2,  having  been  omitted  in  the
plate,  the  reader  must  fupply  the  deficiency,

W  •  \^»


^e^msas^mmmiM


PROPOSAL

FOE
THE     PRESERVATiOX

ACCIDENTAL   OBSERVATIONS

MEDICINE.


iN^  tioiei  bejoad  the  reach  of  hifiorj,  the  medkiaal
application  cf  fabSaDces  cooM  hare  ariien  from  do
other  foarce  than  acddeat.  AoK^ng  artides  of  the  ma-
teria medica  cf  known  origin,  we  are  indebted  to  acci-
dent for  ibme  cf  the  rooft  predons.

Accident  is  CTcry  day  prefcnting  to  different  individnals
the  fpct^de  of  pbaeooGiena,  arifing  fhrn  nnconmica
qaiotities  cf  drugs  on  the  one  hand,  and  (Xi  the  otho*,
from  nncocamoD  conditions  of  the  ijfteni,  wbone  ordlnaiy
powers  only  have  been  knowingly  or  recently  ap|^ed.
What  is  faid  of  drags  may  be  extoided  to  natural  awaits
and  mental  atife^ons.

From  coDFerfatioD  with  a  var.eiy  both  of  medical  prso
titioners  and  cnprofeliiaGal  obienrcrs.  the  aatbor  of  this
propofal  15  perfuaded  that  fcch  aotheotic  occtnTBoces
only,  as  hare  prefeated  tberale'lTes  to  perfons  now  living
would,  if  ihey  could  be  brought  together,  compole  a  body
of  fact,  fo  inftra^ve  to  the  pbilofcpher,  sec  ufefiil  to  tl^
pbyfidan,  that  he  deipairs  cf  niidiEg  2  ttnn  \^onhy  1^
diarafteriaeit.


(  578  )

In  fome  cafes,  the  influence  of  unfufpe6led  poweis  would
be  detected.  In  others,  refources  available  to  the  purpofe
of  relloring  health  in  defperate  fituations  would  be
directly  prefcnted,  or  could  be  detected  by  a  fhort  and  eafy
procefs  of  reafoning.  Some  anomalous  obfervations,  by
ihewing  the  abfence  or  agency  of  conteiied  caufes,  woul^
perform  the  office  oi  experhnenta  cruets — Unufual  affeAions
occur  of  which  an  exa6t  account  would  be  among  the  means
of  removing  from  phyfic  its  opprobrious  uncertainty:  for  ihis
uncertainty  frequently  depends  upon  our  inability  to  diftin-
guifti  the  fubtler  differences  in  cafes  which  refenibie  each
other  in  their  grolfer  features.

No  ttriking  fa6t  can  be  accurately  flated,  in  co!ljun6lion
with  its  antecedent  and  concomitant  circumftances,  without
improving  our  acquaintance  with  human  nature.  Our
acquifltions  in  this  moft  important  branch  of  knowledge^
may  be  compared  to  a  number  of  broken  feries,  of  which
we  have  not  always  more  than  one  or  two  members.  But
every  new  accelTion  bids  fair  to  fill  up  fome  deficiency  j
and  a  large  fupply  would  contribute  towards  conne6ting
feries  apparently  independent,  and  working  up  the  whole
into  one   grand  all-comprehending  chain.

There  are  complaints,  and  thofe  by  far  too  frequent,
where  no  known  procefs  has  a  claim  to  the  title  oi remedial.
Here  the  whole  chance  of  prcfervation  depends  on  th'e  phy-
lician's  capacity  for  bringing  together  fads  that  have
heretofore  flood  remote.  But  no  power  of  combination
can  avail  where  there  are  no  ideas  to  combine.

Every  new  obfervation  therefore,  may  be  confidered  as  a
ftandard  trunk,  fending  forth  analogies  as  fo  many  brancheg
crowned  with  bloffoms,  fome  of  which  cannot  fail  to  be
fucceeded  by  falutary  fruits.  And  were  it  not  abfurd  to
e;;tend  the  illuftrMion  of  fo  plain  a  point,  it  might  be  added^


(  579  )

that  when  by  the  continual  interpofitlon  of  new  trunks,
the  branches  are  brought  near  together,  the  produce  of  each
will  be  ennobled  by  the  a6tion  of  their  refpe€i:ive  principles
of  fecundation.

"Whenever  the  author  has  been  able  to  obtain  certain
information  concerning  any  unufual  appearance  in  animal
nature,  it  has  been  his  cuftom  to  preferve  it ;  and  among
his  papers  he  has  memorandums  which  prove  that  to
our  prefent  eircumfcribed  ideas  concerning  the  dofe
of  medicines  may  be  fometimes  imputed  failures  in
pradice  j  that  certain  (igns  are  not  to  be  taken  in  the
received  fignification  j  and  that  manv  meafures  are  adopted
or  omitted  to  the  detriment  of  invalids,  becaufe  it  is  affumed
that  circumftances  are  neceflarily  connefted  which  may
exift  feparately,  or  that  one  given  natural  operation  is  incon-
liftent  with  another,  to  which  it  may  really  be  fynchronous
or  next  in  order.

Arduous  obfervation  of  the  daily  dates  of  the  hu-
man microcofm  will  be  the  unfailing  confequence  of  atten-
tion to  its  ftriking  phaenomena.  Such  is  the  progrefs  of
curiofity.  Such  the  origin  of  all  the  fciences.  The  more
uniformly  clear  the  iky  under  which  they  tended  their
flocks,  the  lets  likely  were  the  fliepherds  of  Chaldaea,  to
found  the  fcience  of  the  ftars.  And  however  the  difpofition
to  ftudy  aftronomy  might  have  been  ftrengthened  by  the
coincidence  between  the  heliacal  riling  of  Sirius  and  the
ovei-flowing  of  the  Nile,  it  muft,  I  conceive,  have  been
awakened  by  the  afped  of  meteors  and  eclipfes.

Whatever  minute  and  authentic  information  this  im-
perfc6t  ftatement  may  produce,  as  foon  as  it  {hall  amount
to  a  certain  mafs,  the  author  will  prefent  it  to  the  public
arranged.  He  flatters  himfelf  that  no  correfpondent  will  eke
out  by  fuppofition  the  dcfcA  of  genuine  obfervation,  without


(  580  )

cleatly  diftinguifhing  the  one  from  the  other.  He  ftill  m6te
cJonfidently  hopes  that  none  will  be  inftigated  by  this  adver-
tiferaent  to  exercife  his  invention  in  the  manner  of  Pfal-
manafar  and  Chatterton.  Whether  any  literary  forgery
can  be  innocent  is  queftioned— but  a  forged  medical  report
is  a  drawn  dagger  which  the  arm  of  a  credulous  phvfician
may  any  day  plunge  into  the  heart  of  his  defence-
lefs  patient.  The  author  has  heard  fome  inconfiderate
wits  avow,  that  they  have  tranfmitted  to  the  venders  of
quack  medicines  imaginary  cures,  attefted  by  fidtitious
Signatures ;  and  it  is  not  without  apprehenfion  from  the
propeniity  of  men  to  difplay  ingenuity  and  to  relate
wonders  that  he  announces  the  prefent  delign.  But
he  fhall  be  on  his  guard,  and  hopes  to  baffle  attempts  at
impolition.

THOMAS  BEDDOES-
Rodney-Place,  Clifton,  June  1800.


END.


ERRATA.

Page  19  line  15  for  is  read  are

—  35—7  —  for  pritictple  redid  principles

—  42    —  11  —  for  take  read  takes

—  68  Table  5  —  for  5,88  read  15,88

_        04.  _    4  —    for  1    i        read    -i
12  12

—  gs  —    4  —  for  37  read  30,7

—  96  —    3  —  for  38  read  1

38

—  105  —     9  —  for  exa&itude  read  exaiftiefs

—  129  —  21  —  for  41  read  4,1

—  132  —  4  —  for  into  read  in
>—  143  —  13  —  for  25  read  .25
— ■■  186  —  15  —  for  by  read /row

—  208  laftline—  for  abJiraSied  read  attra^ed

—  238  —     5  —  for  gas  read  oxide

—  259  —    4  —  for  12  read  2

—  283  —    4  — for /o/^  read /Vo«

—  315  —  14  —  dele  in

— »        4O9  —   15   — tot  rejpiTatiun  icad  expiration

—  464  —  10  —  for  latter  end  read  end

—  543  —     3         for  exhalation  read  inhalation.

A  few  literal  errors  are  left  to  the  reader's  corre£lion.

K.  B.  The  term  ignited  is  fometimes  ufed  to  fignify  any  tem-
perature equal  to  or  above  a  red  heat,  whether  applied  to  folids,
fluids,  or  aeriform  fubftances.

The  reafons  for  the  ufe  of  the  terms  nitrogene  and  nitrous
nxide,  are  given  in  Mr.  NichoKou's  Journal  for  January.


speedily    will    be   Publisbed,
OBSERVATIONS  on  tke  External  and  Internal  Ufe  of

NITROUS  ACID.

Demonftrating  its  PERMANENT  EFFICACY  in

VENEREAL  COMPLAINTS  ;

And  extending  its  ufe   to  other  dangerous  and  painful
Difeafes.

COMMUNICATED

By  various  Praditioners  in  Europe  and  AsiA;,

TO

THOMAS  BEDDOES,  M.  D.


Of  the  Publisher  may    be  badj  price  is.  6d.
NOTICE  Kjf  OBSEKVATIONS

AT    THE     PNEUMATIC     INSTITUTION,

By  THOMAS  BEDDOES,  M.  D.

This  Notice  contains  fome  trials  of  nitrous  oxide  by  healthy  perfons,
not  in  the  prefcnt  work,  and  fome  cafes  of  palfy  fuccelsCully  treated
by  that  gas.


Printed  by  Biggs  and  Cottle,  St.  Augusti tit's  Bad,


^


^


t>'


COUNT  WAY   LIBRARY    OF   MEDICINE


QD
181

Nl  D31


RARE   BOOKS  DEPARTMENT


#


1
