Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


1  /


CAVE    llUNTINd.


y  K.U  Lai  LarJou  7.  c


'TK


ENAMELS    FROM  THE  VICTORIA  CA\'¥.  pslS.


Lmdan    Uu&iILlb  II  C~  '.&74


wm


^"TIKCl.


CAVE    HI  TN  TIN  CI,


IJESF.ADGIIES   UN


THE   EVIDENCE   OF   CAVES


KKSI'KrTIXc;    TIIK


EARLY     INHABITANTS     OF     EUROPE


i\'*


i;v


W:  BOYD  DAWKINS,   :\I.A.,  KU.S.,  F.O.S.,  F.S.A.,



ILLUSTRATEU  liV  CnUtrmil)  PLATE  AXU   n'OOD^TTS,


MA(^M  I  L  LA  X     A  N  I)     C  O.

1 X74.


[  77/'.   JtiglU  of  Transhd'nni  and  lU-pi'ddudltri  is  /rsi'rn'U.  |


LONDON :

R.   CLAT,   SONS,  AND  TAYLOR,   PRINTERS,

BREAD  tTTRKET  HILU


TO


THE  BARONESS  BURDETT  COUTTS,


THE  FOUNDER  OF  THE  SCHOLARSHIPS


FOR  THE   ENCOURAGEMENT  OF  GEOLOGICAL  SCIENCE


IN  THE   UNIVERSITY   OF  OXFORD,


?;i^i8    ?2Iorh   is    gtbtcatclr.


AS  A   SLIGHT  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  FROM   HER  FIltST  SCniOLAR.


PREFACE.

The  exploration  of  caves  is  rapidly  becoming  an  im-
portant field  of  inquiry,  and  their  contributions  to
our  knowledge  of  the  early  history  of  the  sojourn  of
men  in  Europe  are  daily  increasing  in  value  and  in
number.  Since  the  year  1823,  when  Dr.  Buckland
published  his  famous  work,  the  "  Reliquiie  Diluvianse,"
no  attempt  has  been  made  to  correlate,  and  bring  into
the  compass  of  one  work,  the  crude  mass  of  facts  wliich
have  been  recorded  in  nearly  every  country  in  Europe.
In  this  volume  I  have  attempted  to  bring  the  history
of  cave-exploration  down  to  the  knowledge  of  to-day,
and  to  put  its  main  conclusions  before  my  readers  in
one  connected  and  continuous  narrative.  Since  Dr.
Buckland  wrote,  the  momentous  discovery  of  human
relics  along  with  the  extinct  animals  in  caves  and
river  deposits  has  revolutionised  the  current  ideas  as
to  the  antiquity  and  condition  of  man ;  and  works
of  art  of  a  high  order,  showing  a  familiarity  with
nature  and  an  aptitude  for  the  delineation  of  the  forms
of  animals  by  no  means  despicable,  have  been  dis-
covered in  the  caves  of  Britain,  France,  Belgium,  and
Switzerland,  that  were  the  dwellings  of  the  primeval
European  hunters  of  reindeer  and  mammoths.  The
discoveries  in  Kent's  Hole  and  in  the  caves  of  Belgium
led  to  those  in  the  eaves  of  Brixham  and  Wookey  Hole,


ylii  PR  K  FACE,

and   finally   to  those   of   Auvergnc   and   tlie   south   of
France,  as  well  as  of  Gcnnany  and  Switzerland.

Archaeology,  also,  by  the  use  of  strictly  inductive
methods,  ha.s  grown  from  a  mere  antiquarian  speculation
into  a  science  ;  and  its  students  have  proved  the  truth  of
the  three  divisions  of  human  progress  familiar  to  the
Greek  and  Roman  philosopher,  and  expressed  in  the
pages  of  Hesiod  and  Lucretius — the  Ages  of  St^ne,
Bronze  and  Iron.  The  subdivision  of  the  first  of  these
into  the  older,  or  palseolithic,  and  newer,  or  neolitliic,
by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  is  the  only  refinement  which  has
been  made  in  this  classification.  Sir  Charles  Lyell  has
discussed  the  various  problems  offered  by  the  general
consideration  of  the  first  of  these  divisions  in  ''The
Antiquity  of  Man ; "  while  Sir  John  Lubbock,  in
"  Prehistoric  Man,"  has  followed  Dr.  Keller  and  others
in  working  out  the  past  history  of  mankind  by  a  com-
parison of  the  habitations,  tombs,  implements  and
weapons  found  in  Europe,  with  those  of  modern  savages.
This  work  is  intended  to  be  to  a  considerable  extent
supplementary  to  theirs, — to  treat  of  the  formation  of
caves,  and  of  the  liglit  thrown  by  their  contents  on  the
sojourn  of  man  in  Europe,  on  the  wild  animals,  and  on
the  changes  in  climate  and  geography.

In  treating  of  the  caves  of  the  historic  period,  I  have
given  considerable  prominence  to  the  exploration  of  the
Victoria  Cave,  near  Settle,  which  has  led  to  the  dis-
covery that  many  caverns  were  inhabited  in  this  country
during  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries,  and  that  they  contain
works  of  art  of  a  high  order.  In  the  difficult  task  of
bringing  them  into  relation  with  British  history  and  art,
I  have  to  acknowledge  the  kind  assistance  of  Mr.  E.  A.
Freeman,  the  Rev.  J.  R.  Green,  and  Mr.  A.  W.  Franks.


rUEFACE.  XX

111  the  neolitliic  division  of  the  prehistoric  period,  I
have  published  at  length  my  recent  discoveries  in  the
8ci)ulchral  caves  of  Denbighshire,  and  am  allowed  by  my
friend,  Professor  Busk,  to  reprint  his  description  of  the
human  bones.  To  his  suggestive  essay  on  the  Gibraltar
caves,  as  well  as  to  the  works  of  the  late  Dr.  Tliumam,
and  of  Professors  Broca  and  Huxley,  I  am  indebted  for
the  clue  to  tlie  identification  of  the  neolithic  dwellers  in
caves  witli  the  ancient  Iberians  or  Modern  Basques.
That  portion  of  the  evidence  which  relates  to  France  I
have  verified  by  a  personal  examination  of  the  human
remains  from  caves  and  tombs  in  the  Museums  of
Bordeaux,  Toulouse,  Lyons  and  Paris.

The  results  of  the  exploration  of  the  Hysena-den
of  Wookey  Hole  have  been  given  in  greater  detail  in
the  portion  of  the  work  devoted  to  the  palaeolithic  age
than  they  would  have  been,  had  they  been  before  fully
recorded.  And  in  this  division  of  the  subject  I  have
largely  made  use  of  the  "Reliquiae  Aquitanicae,"  which
embodies  the  discoveries  in  Auvergne  of  my  late  friends
Professor  E.  Lartet  and  Mr.  Christy.  To  the  editors  of
that  work  I  am  indebted  for  permission  to  use  some  of
the  platos  and  letterpress.

The  history  of  the  pleistocene  mammalia,  in  which
palaeolithic  man  forms  the  central  figure,  has  been  my
especial  study  for  many  years.  And  the  evidence  which
is  offered  by  the  animals  as  to  the  geography  and  climate
of  Europe,  which  I  have  published  from  time  to  time
in  the  works  of  the  Palaeontographical  Society,  the
Geological  Journal,  and  in  the  Popular  SciericCy  British
Quarterlf/y  and  Edinburgh  Renews,  is  collected  together
in  this  work,  and  brought  into  relation  with  the  inquiry
into  the  extension  of  ice  over  Euro]>e  in    the  glacial


X  PREFACE.

period,  and  into  the  soundings  of  the  European  seas.
In  approaching  these  and  tlie  like  problems,  I  have  done
my  best  to  arrive  at  the  truth  by  visiting  as  far  as
possible  the  foreign  localities  and  collections,  and  ])y
correspondence  with  the  discoverers  of  new  facts.

In  addition  to  those  names  which  I  have  already
mentioned,  I  have  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  Councils
of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  the  Geological  Society,  and
of  the  Anthropological  Institute  and  to  Mr.  John  Evans,
for  the  use  of  woodcuts ;  to  Mr.  Rooke  Pennington  for
looking  over  some  of  the  proof  sheets  ;  and  to  Professors
Gaudry,  Rutimeyer,  Lortet,  Nilsson,  and  Steenstrlip,  and
the  Rev.  Canon  Grcenwell  for  aid  of  various  kinds.
But  esjKicially  do  I  feel  grateful  to  my  old  friend  and
master,  the  late  lamented  Professor  Phillips,  for  frequent
help  and  prudent  counsel.

In  laying  this  book  before  my  readers  I  would  merely
further  remark,  that  it  is  a  faint  outline  of  a  new  and
vast  field  of  research,  in  which  I  have  attempted  to  give
prominence  to  the  more  important  points,  rather  than  a
finished  and  detailed  history  of  cave-exploration.

w.  n.  D.

The  Owens  CoLLF.r.K,  Manciiesteu,
20th  July,  1874.


C  0  N  T  E  N  T  S.

CHAPTER    I.

INTRODUCTION.


TAOW.


Legends  and  Superstitions  connected  with  Caves  1  -  r>

The  Physical  Division  of  the  Su]»ject r»,  6

The  Biological  Division CA

Men  and  Animals H

Ethnological,  Archaeological,  and  Geo;n^])hical  Bearings  7 — 0

The  Three  Classes  of  Bone-Caves 10,11

History  of  Cave-Explonition  in  Europe 11

(lermany  11,  12

(Jreat  Britain      ....  13—18

France 18—20

Belgium 20, 21

Southern  Eun»i»o   .  21,  22

(JHAPTER  II.

PHYSICAL   HISTORY   OF   CAVES.

(.'aves  formed  by  the  Sea  and  by  Volcanic  Action        ...  23

(L*aves  in  Arenaceous  Rocks 24

Caves  in  Calcareous  Rocks  of  various  ages 2.5—27

Their  Relation  to  Pot-holes,  "Cirques,"  and  Ravine.<«       .  27,  28

Water-Cave  of  Wookey  Hole 29—31

Goatchurch  Cave 31 — 34

Water-Caves  of  Derbyshire 34

Water-Caves  of  Yorkshire — Ingleborough      ....  3o  —39

Rate  of  Deposit  of  Stalagu)ite 39 — 41

Descent  into  Helln  Pot 41—47

Caves  and  Pots  round  Weathercote  47—50

Formation  of  Caves,  Pot-holes,  and  Ravines  ....  .*)()— 57

Caverns  not  generally  formed  in  line  of  Faults    ....  57

Various  Ages  of  Caves ^  .  58-61

Filling  up  of  Caves 61


xii  CONTENTS.

F.UiR

Cave  of  Oaldy 62—68

Black-Rock  Cave,  Tenby 68

Carbonate  of  Lime  dissolved  by  Atmospheric  Water  69 — 70

Circulation  of  Carbonate  of  Lime 71

Temperature  of  Caves 71—72

Conclusion 73

CHAPTER  in.

HISTORIC  CAVB9   IN   BRITAIN.

Definition  of  Historic  Period 74

Wild  Animals  in  Britain  during  the  Historic  Period       .         .  75 — 77

Animals  living  under  the  care  of  Man 77

Classificatory  Value  of  Historic  Animals        ....  78 — 81

The  Victoria  Cave,  Settle,  Yorkshire — History  of  Discovery       .  81 — 85

The  Romano-Celtic  or  Brit- Welsh  Stratum    ....  86—88

Bones  of  the  Animals 88 — 1)0

•Miscellaneous  Articles 90 — 92

The  Coins 93

The  Jewellery,  and  its  relation  to  Irish  Art    ....  94 — 101

Similar  remains  in  other  Caves  in  Yorkshire       .        .        .        .  101

Caves  n8e<l  lus  places  of  Refuge 102

The  evidence  of  History  as  to  Date 103 — HI

Britain  under  the  Romans 103 — 1()5

The  inroads  of  the  Picts  and  Scots 105

The  English  Conquest 107

The  Neolithic  Stratum 111—115

Approximate  Date  of  the  Neolithic  Occupation      .        .        .  115

The  Grey  Clays 116—118

The  Pleistocene  Occupation  by  Hya'nas 118 — 121

Probable  Pre-glacial  Age  of  the  Pleistocene  Stratum           .         .  121 — 125

The  Kirkhead  (Jave 12")

Poole's  Caveni,  Buxton 126

Thor's  Cave,  near  Ashbounie 127  —  12!)

Historic  Value  of  Brit- Welsh  group  of  Caves              ...  121)

Principal  Animals  and  Articles  in  Brit- Welsth  Caves       .         .  130-132

The  Use  of  Horse-flesh 132

(^ave  of  Longl)erry  Bank,  Pembrokeshire       ....  133

CHAPTER  IV.

CAVES   rSED    IN    TUB   AGES   OF   IRON    AND    lUloNZK.

Difference  between  Historic  and  Prehistoric  Time        .                  .  1 34— 136

I     '     The  Prehistoric  Fauna            136    13s

!           Arclia'<>lojrlt-al  ClaHsiticatio% 13S— 1 4o

*'           (-aves  of  the  Imn  Agi*    ........  140


CONTENTS.


xni


Caves  of  the  Bronze  Age  in  Britain

The  Caves  of  the  C^aredu  in  Portu;^!  probably  occupied  by

Cannibals

Cave  of  Ref^io  in  Modena


rA<iic
141-145


14:»-147
14S


CHAPTER  V.

CAVES  or  THE   NEOLITHIC  AOE.

Nemithic  Caves  in  Great  Britain — Perthi-Cliwareu

'^hosdigre

Neolithic  Caves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cefn,  St.  Asaph  .

Chaml^red  Tomb  near  Cefn

Correlation  of  Chambered  Tomb   with  the  Caves  of    Perth i

C/hwareu  and  Cefn

Contents  of  Caves  and  Tombs,  tabulated    ....
Description  of  Human  Remains  by  Professor  Busk
General  conclusions  as  to  Human  Remains


149
ir)6
150-
ICl


156
158
161
164


164
165—186
166—187
197—188


CHAPTER  VI.

THE   RA.NOE   OF   NEOLITHIC    DOLICHO-CEPHALI   AND    IIRACHY-CEPHALI.

Cranial  Terminology 189—190

Dolicho-cephali  and  Brachy-cephali 191 — 194

Range  of  the  Dolicho-cephali  in  Britain  and  Ireland  .        .        .  194 — 197

Range  of  the  Brachy-cephali 197

Their  Range  in  France 198

Caveme  de  Thomme  Mort 198—202

Sepulchral  Cave  of  Verrouy 202

Skulls  from  French  Tumuli 203

The  Dolicho-cephali  of  Iberian  Peninsula — Gibraltar          .        .  204 — 208

Spain — Cueva  de  los  Mnrcielagos 208 — 210

The  Woman's  Cave  near  Albama 210

The  Guanches  of  the  Canary  Isles 211

Iberic  Dolicho-cephali  of  the  same  race  as  those  of  Britain  212

Dolicho-cephali  cognate  with  the  Basque        ....  213 — 215

Sepulchral  Cave  of  Chauvaux 215 — 218

Cave  of  Sclaigneaux 218—220

Evidence  of  Histoiy  as  to  the  Peoples  of  Gaul  and  Spain  .        .  220 — 223

The  Basque  Population  the  oldest 223

Population  of  Britain 224

Basque  Characters  in  British  and  French  Populations  present  225 — 227

Whence  come  the  Basques  ? 227

The  Celtic  and  Belgic  Bradiy-cepbali 228—230

The  Ancient  German  Race 230

General  conclusions 231


»»

«»


•»


xiv  CONTENTS.

CHAPTKK   VII.

CAVES   CONTAINING   HUMAN   RKMAIN8   OF   DOUBTFCL   AGE.

P40K

The  Paviland  Cave 232—234

Cave  of  Engis 234, 235

Trou  du  Frontal 236—239

Cave  of  Gendrou            239

(lailenreuth .        .  240

Neanderthal 240—241

Aurignat* 242 — 247

Bruniquel 247,  248

Cro-Magnon 249 — 250

Lombrive 25C

,j        (.-avillon,  near  Mentone 257

Grotta  dei  Colonihi,  Palmaria,  inlialjited  by  Cannibals    .  25ft — 2(51

General  conclusions  hr  to  Prehistoric  Caves         ....  2(51 — 2(53

CHAPTER   VIII.

THE   PLEISTOCENE  CAVES   OF  (GERMANY  AN1>   (JHKAT    IJUITAIX.

Relation  of  Pleistocene  to  Prehistoric  Period      ....  264

Magnitude  of  Interval 265

Animals 265,  266

Physical  Changes — Excavation  and  filling  up  of  Valloys  267 — 272

Fisherton,  near  Salisbury 267

Freshford,  near  Bath 269

Comparison  of  Deposits  in  Valleys  with  those  in  Caves  272

Difference  of  Mineral  Condition 273

Pleistocene  Caves  of  Germany — Gailenreuth        ....  273 — 276

Kiihloch 276—278

Pleistocene  Caves  of  (treat  Britain 27S

Yorkshire— Kirkdalc      ....  270—284

Derbyshire— Dream  Cave   ....  284,  285

„              „        North  Wales,  near  St.  Asaph  286,  287

(*aves  of  South  Wales  in  Glamorgan  and  Carmarthen  288

„       Pembrokeshire                 289

,,        Monmouth            290

„        Gloucestershire  and  Somersetshire     ....  291

„        the  Mendip  Hills— Hutt^n 292

Banwell 293

Uphill 204

Hyjrna  Den,  Wookey  Hole 295—314

The  district  of  the  Mendip  higher  in  Pleistocene  Age  than  now  .  314

The  condition  of  Bones  gnawed  by  Hya*n«»     ....  314—317

The  faves  of  Devonshire- Oreston 317,318


CONTENTS.


XV


Cares  at  Brixhaiii  ...:..

Kent's  Hole

Proliable  A;^e  of  the  MachairrMlus  in  Kent's  HoIp
Cavea  of  Ireland — Shandon         ....


PAGB

319—324

324—330

:i30— 335

335


(CHAPTER  IX.

THE    INHABITANTS   OF  THE   CAVE.S   OF   NORTH- WESTERN    EUROPE,    ANP   THE
EVIDENCE   OF   THE    FAI'NA    AS   TO  THE   ATLANTIC  COA.ST-MNE.

The  Caves  of  France

Cave  of  Raunie ...

(.^aves  of  P^rigord

„        Belgium

Trou  de  Naiilett^

Caves  of  Switzerland

Cave-dwellers  and  Pala-olithic  Men  of  the  Uiver-jn^vels

Classification  of  Palaeolithic  Caves

Relation  of  Cave-dwellers  to  Eskuiios  ....

Pleistocene  Animals  living  north  of  the  Al])s  and  Pyrenees
Relation  of  Cave  to  River-l)ed  Fauna  ....

The  Atlantic  Coast-line

Distribution  of  PHlteolithic  Implements      ....


•

3:^0

337

.  337-

-347

347,

,  34h

•

349

350

.

a*)l

351  -

a53

.  353

359

35I>

.

3(52

302-

-366

.   .%(5,

307

CHAPTER  X.

THE    FAUNA    OF    THE    CAVE8    OF   SOUTHERN   EUROPE,    AND  THE
AS  TO  THE   MEDITERRANEAN   COA8T-LINE   IN    THE  PLEISTOCEN

Changes  of  Level  in  Mediterranenn  Area  in  Meiocene  and  Pleio-
cene  Ages      ..........

Bone-caves  of  Southern  Europe

Caves  of  Gibraltar

Bone-caves  of  Provence  and  Mentone

Sicily

Malta

Range  of  Pigmy  Hippopotamus  .

Fossil  Mammalia  in  Algeria

Living  Species  common  to  Europe  and  Africa     ....

Evidence  of  Soundings

The  Glaciers  of  Lebanon

Glaciers  of  Anatolia

of  the  Atlas  Mountains

probably  produced  by  elevation  above  the  Sea  .
Mediterranean  Coast-line  com jw rati vely  modem.
Clianges  of  Level  in  the  Sahara


fi


99


EVIDENCE
E   AGE.


369

370
371,  372

373—375

375—377
377
378
379
379

380—382
382

383— 38C
386

387  -389
389
390


xvi  CONTENTS.

(,'HAPTER  Xr.

THK   EUROPKAN   CLIMATE   IN   THE   PLEISTOCKNK   A<JE.

Evidence  of  the  Mamniiilia  as  tc»  Climate 3!>2

Southern  Group  of  Aniuiais \VS6-  WXy

Northern  Group      ...            31i5—  3I>7

Probable  cause  of  Association  of  Northern  and  Southern  Groups  31>7,  3!)S

The  TenijK»nite  Group 3iM)

Species  common  to  Cold  and  Tropical  Climates  400

Extinct  Species 4(H)

Two  Periods  of  Glaciation  in  Brit*\in 401 — 403

Three  Climatal  C/hanges  on  the  Continent 4(  '3

Europe  invaded  by  Pleistocene  ^Vnimals  before  the  (ilacial  Period  4(»4  --4(><»

Mammalia  lived  in  Euro|>e  during  the  second  Glacial  Period      .  4(>(>

The  Glacial  Period  does  not  separate  one  Life-era  from  auothor  4(>7

Bone-caves  inhabited  before  and  after  the  Glacial  Period  4os

Relation  of  Palaeolithic  Man  to  Gbicial  Period        ...  40!i

Age  of  Contents  of  Caves  in  Glacial  Districts      ....  410

(^HAPTEK  Xir.

coxti.r.si<)N'.

Classification  of  Pleistocene  Strat^i  by  the  Mammalia          .         .  412—414

Late  Pleistocene  Division 414

Middle  Pleistocene  Division 415—417

Early  Pleistocene  Mammalia 417_420

The  Pleiocene  Mammalia 420 — 423

Summary  of  Characteristic  Pleistocene  and  Pleiocene  Species  423,  424

Antiquity  of  Man  in  Euroj)e 424 — i^fj

Man  lived  in  India  in  the  Pleistocene  Age      ....  42() — 42*<
Are  the  Palseolithic  Aborgines  of    India  relatinl   to   those  of

Europe? 42H

Takeolithic  Man  in  Palestine 42J)

Conclusion 430

APPENDIX   I.

ON   THE    IN.sTllUMENTS   AND   METHODS   oK  CAVKHrXTINiJ.

Instruments  used  in  Cave-hunting 43.')

Search  after  Bone-caves 437

Three  modes  of  Cave-<ligging 4:  is

StaUi^^mitic  floors  to  be  broken  up 4  In

The  Preservation  of  Fossil  Remains l4o

APPENDIX    n.

()l>s<»rvatitins  on  thr  A(vuniulation  of  Stalii<{Miiti'  iu  tlif  fn^lo-

Uui)Ugh  Cavo 4  12


'     LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

no.  i-A«ii:

Coloured  Enamels  from  Victoria  Cavo Front.

1  Diagram  of  Wookey  Hole,  Cave  and  Raviuo         ....  80

2  Diagram  of  Helln  Pot  and  the  Long  Chum  Cavern   .        .         .         .41

3  Diagram  of  Helln  Pot 42

4  Diagram  of  Helln  Pot,  showing  Waterfall  at  the  bottom    ...  45

5  Waterfall  in  Pot-hole,  at  Weathercote 48

6  Diagram  of  Subterranean  Course  of  Dalebeok    .        .         .         .         .  49

7  Diagram  of  an  acid- worn  juint,  Dovelioles,  Dcrbydliirc          .         .  52

8  Diagram  of  the  Soun^e  of  the  Aire  at  Malham 55

9  A  View  in  tlie  Fairy  Chamber,  CaMy C3

10  Stalagmites  in  the  Fairy  Chamber,  Caldy G3

11  The  Fairy  Chamber,  Caldy 64

12  Pools  in  Fairy  Chaml)er    , .  65

13  Pool  in  Fairy  Chamber 65

14  Eilge  of  i.'ool  in  Fairy  Chamber 65

15  Cone  with  Straw-c(>lumn 65

16  Basin  containing  Cave-pearls 67

17  Fungoid  Structures,  magnified 67

18  Fuugoitl  Structure,  Bhick-rock  Cavo 68

19  View  of  King's  Scar,  Settle,  sliowing  the  Entrances  t.tf  the  Victoria

and  Albert  Caves 82

20  liongitudinal  Section  of  Victoria  Cave *  .  86

21  Vertical  Section  at  the  Entrance  to  the  Victoria  Cave        ...  87

22  Spoon-brooch 91

23  Ornamented  Bone  Fiistener 92

24  Two  Bone  Links 92

25  Bronze  Broo<!h 95

26  Bone  Harpoon .         .         .  112

27  Bone  Bead ]13

28  Stone  Adze  of  doubtful  origin 114

29  Section  below  CJrey  Clay,  at  Entrance  to  Victoria  Cave      .         .         .117

30  Skull  of  Woolly  Hhinoceros,  showing  the  part  which  is  not  eaten  In'

Hya?n.is 119

31  Bronze  Bracelet  from  Thor's  Cave 129

82  Bronze  Knife,  Heathcrv  Burn 142

h


x«i>i  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

33     Bronie  Arml«t,  Bckthcrj  Burn 143

Si    Bronze  Sf.Mr-h^'rtJ.  lluntiioy  iium US

SS     Brorue  Mould  f  .r  c:i.!ting  asooketcd  Celt US

38     Section  of  Care  i'.  rfrthi-Clmareu 152

S7     Pknof  Cavoat  I\rtlu-Chn-areii 154

38  Gl..,i,^..|  -I  -li,  !;l^..=  .lifcr™(;a.V8 167

39  Planof  rli  I'l    ■  ;■■  i  '. .  ;;i:.  ..Id  Tn IflJ

40,  41,  42    Skull  from  Sepulchral  Cave  at  Perth i-Chwareu  .168

43,41,45    Skull  from  Sepulchral  Cava  at  Perthi'Chwar^u .                  .  1S9

46    Section  of  Femur 172

47,  48,  49,  50,  51     Spction  of  Til>i» 178

62,  S3,  54    PlatTcuemic  Tibite I77

55,  G<1,  57,  GS    Human  Femora 182

59,  SO,  01    Skull  from  Cave  at  Cefu,  St  Aauph 1S5

62,  S3,  64    Skull  Irom  Genista  Cave 207

85,  68    Skull  from  <.\iv..'  „r  SiUi;;iimiii 218

67     Platycuemic  Tibm  fivm  Srlm-ueinii 21B

88  Jlap  of  tlio  Distribution  of  Iheric,  Celtic,  and  Belgiu   Peoples  at

dawn  of  Hislory 221

69  fleoliou  of  tlie  Tron  du  Frontal 237

70  Diagram  of  iLuCa-voof  Auriyriac 246

71  Section  acroaa  the  valls7of  the  Vcz^re  and  rock  of  Cro-Miignon  .  249

72  Detailed  Sectiou  of  the  Cflve  of  Cro-Magnon 2SJ

73  Thigh-bone  uf  Child  from  Grottudei  Colomhi      ....  260

74  Section  of  Vnlloy-gravsls  at  Kisherton 283

75  Sectionof  Vnlty ciiivelaat  Freshfurd,  Bath        ....  270
78    Section  of  Gaileureuth  Care 274

77  Plan  of  KirkduU:  OiiTi 279

78  Rectiona  -of  Kirkdnl   CivTe 280

79  Miliar  of  llippopotomus 231

80  Lpg-boiiesguflwi;cil>j-Hj»nai 282

81  ThaDrcani-cnv.,  Wirfcsworth .jgj

82  IrfftLower  Jawof  OliiCtoi.,  rii-Heatou  Cava  .         ,         .287

83  Plan  of  Hja;na  I),  u,  Wm,lii'y  Hole 287

84,  85,  88,  87     Four  ViaHs  of  Flint  Implemouta  frou,  Wookoy  Hole        .  299

8S    SLVliijiisluiiviiigCoulentsof  HytenaDen 304

89  Transvorso  section  of  ditto 305

90  LongitudiDul  section jqq

SI     Longitudinal  section SU

82    Gnawed  Jnmof  H>iiii.ifrom  Wookcy 3I3

93  LlppcranJ  I.owc   J:nv~  of  HyKua  Whelp,  Wookey    ....  315

94  Thigh-bone  of  Woi-lly  I:i:.;  '■  ■  r  ■- gnawed  by  Hjienaa,  Wookcy    .  3]  a

95  Diagram  of  deposits  iii  UjivImi:!  '-aii: ^  32o

96  Lsnceolate  luiplement  from  Kent's  Hole 32g

97  Oval   niplenienfH  from  Kent's  Hole 325

98  Harpoon  from  Seal's  Hole 327

99  Harpoon-heod  from  Kenfa  Hole 327


LIST  OF  ILL  USTRA  TIONS.  x ix

no.  FA  01

100  Hammer-slone 32S

101,  102    Upper  CaDine  of  Machairodus,  Kent's  Hole  .331

103,  104,  105     Incisors  of  Machairodus,  Kent's  Hole    .        .         .        ,.  333

106  Flint-flake,  Les  Eyzies 339

107  Flint  Scraper,  Les  Eyzies 339

108  Flint  Javelin-head,  Laugcrie  Haute 339

109  Flint  Arrow-head,  lingerie  Haute 340

110  Bone  needle,  La  Madelaine 340

111,  112    Harpoons  of  Antler,  La  Madelaine 342

113,  114    Arrow-heads,  Gorge  d*Enfer 342

115  Bone  Awl,  Gorge  d'Enfer 342

116  Carved  Handle  of  Reindeer  Antler 343

117  Two  sides  of  Reindeer  Antler,  La  Madelaine          ....  344

118  Horses  engraved  on  Antler,  La  Madelaine  .344

119  Group  of  Reindeer,  Dordogne 846

120  Mammoth  engraved  on  Ivory,  La  Madelaine 346

121  Carved  Implement  of  Reindeer  Antler,  Goyet       ....  348

122  Eskimos  Spear-head,  bone 353

123  Eskimos  Arrow-straightener  of  Walrus-tooth                 .  354

124  Eskimos  Plane,  or  Scraper 355

125  Eskimos  Hunting  Scene 357

126  Map  of  the  Physiography  of  Great  Britain  in  Late  Pleistocene  Age    .  363

127  Molar  of  Hippopotamus  PerUlandi 377

128  }A.o\sa  ot  EUphas  MelUcTisis 378

129  Map  of  the  Physiography  of  the  Mediterranean  in  the  Pleistocene  Age  381


LISTS   OF   SPECIES   AND   TABLES   OF  MEASUREMENTS.

PAOK

Ijist  of  Animals  extinct  during  the  Historic  Age 78

,,     Animals  introduced  during  the  Historic  Age     ....  79

,,     Coins  found  in  the  Victoria  Cave 93

,,     principal  Animals  and  Objects  found  in  Brit-Wclsh  Strata  in  Caves  131

,,      Animals  found  in  the  Refuse-heap,  Perthi-Chwarcu                          .  160

„     Contents  in  Neolithic  Caves  and  Cairn,  North  Wales                  .  166

Dimensions  of  Perthi-Chwareu  Skulls 171

Dimensions  of  PerthiChwareu  Tibice 173

Proportions  of  ordinary  Tibiie •  .  .174

Comparative  Measurements  of  Skulls 179

Table  of  Long  Skulls  from  Britain  and  Ireland 197

,,      Measurements  of  British  Brachy-cephali,  and  Gaulish  and  Bclgic

Brachy-cephali  and  Dolicho-cephali 199

Measurements  of  various  Skulls 213

Measurements  of  Skulls  of  doubtful  antiquity 236

List  of  Late  Pleistocene  Animals  unknown  in  Britain  in  the  Prehistoric  Age  266

„     Remains  found  in  Wookey  Hyaena  Den 310

I^ate  Pleistocene  Fauna  north  of  Alps  and  Pyrenees                                   360,  361

IJft  of  Animals  from  the  Caves  of  Gibraltar 372

Fauna  from  the  Caves  of  Mentone 373

,,            Bone-caves  of  Sicily 876

List  of  Animals  from  the  Middle  Pleistocene 415

,,            ,,            ,,        Early  Pleistoceup 418

„     Pleistocene  Mammalia 420,  422

„     Characteristic  Animals  of  the  Pleistocene  Period  423

,,             ,,            ,,            ..           Pleiocene  Period       ....  424


ADDITIONS  AND   COERECTIONS.


Page  1,  line  7,  for  "  Cytharon  "  read  "  Citharon."

Page  8,  line  4,  for  "  that "  read  •*  who."

Page  ]  7,  line  5,  for  "  Seine  "  rtad  "  Somme. "

Page  60,  lines  29,  80, /or  *'  nou-osaiferous "  read  "no  ossiferous."

Page  82,  fig.  19,  for  **A,  B,  Albert,  c,  Victoria"  read  **A,  B,  Victoria,  o,
Albert."

Page  95,  fig.  25. — This  design  is  to  be  seen  in  the  chalice  discovered  in  1868,
in  a  rath  at  Ardagh,  Limerick,  and  described  by  the  Earl  of  Dunraven  (Trans.
Royal  Irish  Acad.  xxiv.  Antiquities).  The  chalice  is  mode  of  gold,  silver,  bronze,
brass,  copper,  and  lead,  and  from  the  identity  of  its  inscription  and  ornament
with  those  of  Irish  MSS.  of  ascertained  age,  may  be  referred  to  a  date  ranging
from  the  5th  to  the  9th  centuries.  It  is  also  adorned  with  squares  of  blue  and
red  enamel  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  brooches  from  the  Victoria  Cave,
figured  in  the  coloured  plate.  The  same  design  is  also  presented  by  the  "  bronze
head-ring"  found  in  1747  at  Stitchel,  in  Roxburgh,  (Wilson  "Prehistoric  Annals
of  Scotland,"  ii.  146)  as  well  as  by  one  of  the  silver  articles  known  as  **  The
Norrie  Law  Relics,"  found  in  a  tumulus  on  the  shore  of  the  Bay  of  Largo,
Firth  of  Forth.  Of  the  coins  found  at  the  same  place,  the  latest,  belonging  to
Tiberius  Constantine  (d.  682),  fixes  the  date  as  not  earlier  than  the  7th  century.
Some  of  the  sculptured  stones  of  Scotland,  such  as  the  Dunnichen  stone,  are
ornamented  also  in  the  same  style,  and,  according  to  Professor  Wilson,  belong
to  'Uho  transition  period  from  the  4th  to  the  8th  centuries,  when  pagan  and
Christian  rites  were  obscurely  mingled,"  (ii.  259).  In  Scotland,  therefore,  as  well
as  Ireland,  this  style  of  oniamentation  is  of  the  same  age,  corresponding  in  the
main  with  that  of  Brit- Welsh  articles  in  the  Victoria  Cave,  proved  by  the  asso-
ciated coins  to  be  later  than  the  4th  century.

Page  120,  line  4. — These  teeth  are  considered  by  Dr.  Lei th  Adams  to  belong  to
Elephaa  arUiquus,  which  has  been  discovered  in  other  places  in  Yorkshii-e.  They
may  possibly  belong  to  that  animal;  but  they  may,  with  equal  justice,  be  identi-
fied with  the  wide-plated  variety  of  the  teeth  of  the  Mammoth.  The  great
variation  in  the  width  of  the  component  plates  of  the  fossil  teeth  of  Mammoth
observable  in  the  large  series  from  Crayford  and  the  caves  of  the  Mendip  Hills,
and  in  those  in  the  magnificent  Museum  of  Lyons,  causes  me  to  hesitate  in
considering  them  to  belong  to  th«  rarer  species.


xxiv  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.

Pago  130,  lino  2. — This  has  been  verified  while  these  sheets  were  passing
through  the  press  by  the  discovery  of  Brit- Welsh  articles  in  a  cave  in  Kirkcud-
brightshire by  Messrs.  A.  R.  Hunt  and  A.  J.  Corric,  among  which  are  bone
fasteners  similar  in  outline  to  that  from  the  Victoria  Cave  (Fig.  23).

Page  190. — In  using  this  classification  of  crania,  I  have  puri)osely  attached
higher  value  to  the  two  extremes  of  skull  form,  or  the  long  and  the  broad,  than
to  the  intermediate  oval  forms,  which  cannot  be  viewed  as  distinctive  of  race,
because  they  may  be  the  results  either  of  the  intermarriage  of  a  long-headed
with  a  short-headed  people,  or  of  variation  from  the  ty|)o  of  one  or  other  of  them.

Page  196,  heading, /or  "  Dolicho-cepha  **  read  **  Dolicho-cephali."

Pago  201,  heading,  dele  "  A".

Page  213,  note  2. — ^Thc  **  tete  annulaire,"  or  annular  depression,  is  also  visible
on  some  of  the  broad  as  well  as  the  long  skulls  from  a  '*  Mero\'ingian  "  cemetery
at  Chelles  in  the  same  collection.  The  association  in  this  cemetery  of  tlie  two
skull-forms  is  probably  due  to  the  Merovingians  being  the  masters,  and  the  Celts
the  servants,  and  the  conquerors  and  the  vau(|uibhetl  being  buried  in  the  same
spot.

Page  220,  line  24, /or  "  Volscai"  read  **  Volcai."

Pago  223,  line  25, /or  **  east  '*  read  **  west."

Page  228,  line  3,  dele  "  that."

Page  229,  line  3, /or  "set  foot"  read  ** settled."  The  statement  in  the  text  is
too  strong.  The  conquest  of  Gaul  by  the  Huns  under  Attila  was  averted  by  his
dt'ffAt  in  the  famous  battle  of  Chalons.

Pago  275,  line  21, /or  "are"  read  "is."

Page  279. — Since  this  was  written  a  new  ossiferous  do])osit  lias  b^^cn  found  in  a
fissure  at  I^othorsdale,  near  Skipton,  from  which  the  remains  of  the  Ekphait  anii-
quits  and  Hippopotamus  amphibius  have  been  obtained.

Page  284. — The  ossiferous  fissure  at  Windy  Knoll,  near  Castleton,  recently
explored  by  Messrs.  Tym,  Pennington,  Plant,  Walker  and  others,  h;us  added
several  animals  to  the  pleistocene  fauna  of  that  district — the  bison,  roe,  reindeer,
bear,  wolf,  fox,  and  hyicna,  the  first  of  these  species  being  remarkably  abundant,
and  of  all  ages.  The  remains  were  i)robably  introduced  by  a  stream  from  a  higher
level.

Page  337,  note  2,  line  2,  for  "  the  Revue  "  and  **  les  Materiaux  "  read  **  in  the
Revue"  and  "in  the  Materiaux."

Page  337,  note  6,  /or  "  Aquituinioic  "  read  "  Aquitanicje."

Page  347,  line  6,  for  "mind"  read  "minds."

Page  356,  line  15,  for  "  Port"  read  "  Fort."

Page  361.— Mr.  Ayshford  Sanfonl  adds  the  Fcl is  Ccjfer  to  the  list  from  Bleadon,
ami  the  Ouio  horcalis  to  that  of  the  animals  from  Keut^s  Hole.

Page  386,  line  10,  deJr.  inverted  commas.

Page  380,  line  17,  for  "or  from  1,000  to  2,000  feet  lower  than  the  glacial
covering  "rW  "  thus  diifering  by  a  Hue  of  from  1,000  to  li,(.»00  feet  from  the
glacial  covering"  (Palgrave).


CAVE-HUNTING.


CHAPTER  L

INTRODUCTION.

Legends  and  Superstitions  connected  with  Caves. — ^The  Physica
Division  of  the  Subject. — The  Biological. — The  Inhabitants  of
Caves. — Men  and  Animals. — Ethnological,  Archsoological,  and
Ceographical  Bearings. — The  three  Classes  of  Bone^Caves  :  Historic,
Prehistoric,  Pleistocene. — ^^History  of  Cave  Exploration  in  Europe  :
Germany,  Great  Britain,  France,  Belgium,  Southern  Europe.

Caves  have  excited  the  awe  and  wonder  of  mankind  in
all  ages,  and  have  figured  largely  in  many  legends  and
superstitions.  In  the  Roman  Mythology,  they  were  the
abode  of  the  Sibyls,  and  of  the  nymphs,  and  in  Greece
they  were  the  places  where  Pan,  Bacchus,  Pluto,  and
the  Moon  were  worshipped,  and  where  the  oracles  were
delivered,  as  at  Delphi,  Corinth,  and  Mount  Cythseron ;
in  Persia  they  were  connected  with  the  obscure  worship
of  Mithras.  Their  names,  in  many  cases,  are  survivals
of  the  superstitious  ideas  of  antiquity.  In  France  and
Germany  they  are  frequently  termed  "  Fairy,  Dragons',
or  Devils'  Caves/'  and,  according  to  M.  Desnoyers,  they
are  mentioned  in   the  invocation  of  certain  canonized

B

7


2  CA  VE-HUNTINQ.  [chap.

anchorites,  who  dwelt  in  them  after  having  dispossessed
and  destroyed  the  dragons  and  serpents,  the  pagan  super-
stition appearing  in  a  Christian  dress.

In  the  Middle  Ages  they  were  looked  upon  as  the
^-^  jBwellings  of  evil  spirits,  into  the  unfathomable  abysses
of  which  the  intruder  was  lured  to  his  own  desti-uction.
Long  after  the  fairies  and  little  men  had  forsaken  the
forests  and  glens  of  Northern  Germany,  they  dwelt  in
their  palaces  deep  in  the  hearts  of  the  mountains,
— in  "the  dwarf  holes,"  as  they  were  called — whence
they  came,  from  time  to  time,  into  the  upper  air.
Near  Elbingrode,  for  example,  in  the  Hartz,  the  legend
was  current  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  that
when  a  wedding-dinner  was  being  prepared  the  near
relations  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom  went  to  the
caves,  and  asked  the  dwarfs  for  copper  and  brass  kettles,
pewter  dishes  and  plates,  and  other  kitchen  utensils.'
'*  Then  they  retired  a  little,  and  when  they  came  back,
found  everything  they  desired  set  ready  for  them  at  the
mouth  of  the  cave.  When  the  wedding  was  over  they
returned  what  they  had  borrowed,  and  in  token
of  gratitude,  offered  some  meat  to  their  benefactors."
Allusions,  such  as  this,  to  dwarfs,  according  to  Professor
Nilsson,  point  back  to  the  remote  time  when  a  small
primeval  race,  inhabiting  Northern  Germany,  was  driven
by  invaders  to  take  refuge  in  caverns, — a  view  that
derives  support  from  the  fact  that  in  Scandinavia  the
tall  Northmen  were  accustomed  to  consider  the  smaller
Lapps  and  Finns  as  dwarfs,  and  to  invest  them  with
magic  power,  just  as  in  Palestine  the  smaller  invading

^  The  Natural  History  of  the  Hartz  Forest  (Hercynia  Curioea).
translated  from  the  German  of  H.  Behrens,  M.D.,  by  John  Andree,
1070,  p.  41.


I.]  LEGENDS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.  3

peoples  considered  their  tall  enemies  giants.  The  cave
of  Bauman's  hole,  also  in  the  Hartz  district,  was  said,  in
the  middle  of  the  last  century,  to  have  been  haunted
by  divers  apparitions,  and  to  contain  a  treasure  guarded
by  black  mastiffs  ;  and  in  Burrington  Combe,  in  Somer-
setshire, some  twenty  years  ago,  a  cave  was  dug  out  by
a  working  man,  under  the  impression  that  it  contained
gold.  The  hills  of  Granada  are  still  believed,  by  the
Moorish  children,  to  contain  the  great  Boabdil  and  his
sleeping  host,  who  will  awake  when  an  adventurous
mortal  invades  their  repose,  and  will  issue  forth  to
restore  the  glory  of  the  Moorish  kings.

It  is,  indeed,  no  wonder  that  legends  and  poetical
fancies  such  as  these  should  cluster  round  caves,  for
the  gloom  of  their  recesses,  and  the  shrill  drip  of  the
water  from  the  roof,  or  the  roar  of  the  subterranean
water-falls  echoing  through  the  passages,  and  the  white
bosses  of  stalagmite  looming  like  statues  through  the
darkness,  offer  ample  materials  for  the  use  of  a  vivid  ima-
gination. The  fact  that  often  their  length  was  unknown,
naturally  led  to  the  inference  that  they  were  passages
into  another  world.  And  this  is  equally  true  of  the
story  of  Boabdil,  of  that  of  the  Purgatory  of  St.  Patrick,
in  the  north  of  Ireland,  and  of  the  course  of  the  river
Styx,  which  sinks  into  the  rocks  and  flows  through  a
series  of  caverns  that  are  the  dark  enti-ance-halls  of
Hades.  The  same  idea  is  evident  in  the  remarkable
story,  related  by  iElian  (Lib.  xvi.  16).  "Among  the
Indians  of  Areia  there  is  an  abyss  sacred  to  Pluto,  and
beneath  it  vast  galleries,  and  hidden  passages  and
depths,  that  have  never  been  fathomed.  How  these
are  formed  the  Indians  tell  not,  nor  shall  I  attempt  to
relate.     The  Indians  drive   thither    (every  year)  more

b2


4  CAVE-HUNTING.  [cmap.

than  3,000  different  animals — sheep,  goats,  oxen,  and
horses — and  each  acting  either  from  dread  of  the  dread-
ful abyss,  or  to  avert  an  evil  omen  in  proportion  to  his
means,  seeks  his  own  and  his  family's  safety  by  causing
the  animals  to  tumble  in ;  and  these,  neither  bound  with
chains  nor  driven,   of   their   own    accord   finish  their
journey  as  if  led  on  by  some   charm  ;   and  after  they
have  come  to  the  mouth  of  the  abyss  they  willingly
leap  down,  and  are  never  more  seen  by  mortal  eyes.
The  lowing,  however,  of  the  cattle,  the  bleating  of  the
dieep  and  of  the  goats,  and  the  whinnying  of  the  horses
are  heard  above  ground,  and  if  anyone  listen  at  the
mouth,  he  will  hear  sounds  of  this  kind  lasting  for  a
long  time.     Nor  do  they  ever  cease,  because  beasts  are
driven  thither  every  day.     But  whether  the  sound  is
made  by  those  recently  driven  in,  or  by  some  of  those
driven  in  some  time  before,  I  do  not  express  an  opinion.'*
The  Roman   Catholic    Church  took  advantage  of  this
feeling  of  superstitious  awe,  as  late  as  the  Middle  Ages.
At  the  time  of  the  Reformation  it  was  believed  that  a  cave
at  Bishofferodc  would  prove  the  death  of  some  person  in
the  course  of  the  year,  unless  a  public  yearly  atonement
were  made.     Accordingly  a  priest  came,  on  a  certain
day,  to  the  chapel  on  the  hill  opposite,  whence  he  passed
in  solemn  procession  to  the  cave,  *'  and  let  down  into  it
a  crucifix,  which   he   pulled   up   again,  and   took  this
occasion   to   remind   them   of    hell,  and   to   avoid   the
punishment  due  to  their  sins/'

The  beauty  of  the  interiors  of  some  of  the  caves
could  not  fail  to  give  rise  to  more  graceful  fancies
than  these.  The  fantastic  shapes  of  the  dripstone,
with  which  they  are  adorned,  now  resembling  Gothic
pillars  supporting  a  crystalline  arcade,  or  jutting  out


I.]  PHYSICAL  DIVISION.  5

in  little  spires  and  minarets,  and  very  generally  cover-
ing the  floor  with  a  marble-like  pavement,  and  in  some
eases  lining  the  pools  of  water  with  a  fretwork  of
crystals  that  shine  like  the  facets  of  a  diamond,  were
fitting  ornaments  for  the  houses  of  unearthly  beings,
such  as  fairies.

7%e  Physical  Division  of  the  Subject.

It  is  by  no  means  my  intention  in  this  work  to  give  a
history  of  legends  such  as  these,  but  to  take  ray  readers
with  me  into  some  of  the  more  important  and  more
beautiful  caves  in  this  country.  The  exploration  of  the
chambers  and  passages  of  which  they  are  composed,
the  fording  of  the  subterranean  streams  by  which  they
are  frequently  traversed,  or  the  descent  into  deep  chasms
which  open  in  their  floors,  have  the  peculiar  charm
of  mountaineering,  not  without  a  certain  pleasurable
amount  of  risk.  But  to  physicist  and  geologist  they
oft'er  far  more  than  this.  They  give  an  insight  into
the  wonderful  chemistry  by  which  changes  are  being
wrought,  at  the  present  time,  in  the  solid  rock.  Nor
are  the  conclusions  to  which  we  are  led  by  the  investi-
gation of  these  chemical  changes  merely  confined  to
the  interior  of  caves.  They  enable  us  to  understand
how  some  of  the  most  beautiful  scenery  in  Europe  has
been  formed,  and  to  realize  the  mode  by  which  all
precipices  and  gorges  have  been  carv^ed  out  of  the
calcareous  rock  In  the  next  chapter  we  shall  see  why
it  is  that  the  combination  of  hill  and  valley,  ravine
and  precipice,  present  the  same  general  features  in  all
limestone  districts — why,  for  instance,  the  ravines  of
Palestine  are  the  same  as  those  of  Greece,  and  both  are


6  CA  VE'HUNTINQ,  [chap.

identical  with  those  in  Yorkshire.  The  origin  and  the
history  of  caves  will  be  examined,  as  well  as  their  rela-
tion to  the  general  physical  geography  of  the  calcareous
strata.  All  these  subjects  are  comprehended  in  the  first
or  the  physical  division  of  cave-hunting.

TTie  Biological  Division.

We  must  now  proceed  to  the  definition  of  the  scope
and  object  of  the  second,  or  Biological,  division  of  the
subject.

Caves  have   been   used  by   man,  and  the  domestic

animals  living  under  his  protection,  from  the  earliest

times  recorded   by  history  down  to  the  present  day.

Those  penetrating  the  rugged  precipices  of  Palestine,  we

read  in  the  Old  Testament,  served  both  for  habitation

and  for  burial,  and,  from  the  notices  which  are  scattered

through  the  early  Greek  writers,  we  may  conclude  that

those  of  Greece  were   used   for  dwelling-places.     The

story  of  the  Cyclops  proves  that  they  were  also  used  as

folds  for  goats.    The  name  of  Troglodytes,  given  to  many

peoples  of  the  most  remote  antiquity,  implies  that  there

was  a  time  in    the   history  of  mankind  when  Pliny's

statement    "specus   erat    pro    domibus"    was   strictly

true  ("Hist.  Nat."  I,  v.  c.  50).    The  caves  of  Africa

have  been  places  of  retreat  from  the  remotest  antiquity

down  to  the  French  conquest  of  Algeria,  and  in  1845

several    hundred    Arabs    were    suffocated    in   those   of

Dahra  by  the  smoke  of  a  fire  kindled  at  the  entrance

by  Marshal  (then  Colonel)  Pelissier.     Dr.   Livingstone

alludes  in  his  recent  letters  to  the  vast  caves  of  Central

Africa,   which    offer  refuge  to  whole  tribes  with  their

cattle  and  household  stuff.      In  France,  according  to  M.


I.]  BIOLOGICAL  DIVISIONS,  7

Desnoyers,  there  are  at  the  present  time  whole  villages,
including  the  church,  to  be  found  in  the  rock,  which
are  merely  caves  modified,  extended,  and  altered  by
the  hand  of  man.  The  caves  of  the  Dordogne  were
inhabited  in  the  middle  ages.  Florus  writes  that
the  Aquitani,  "callidum  genus  in  speluncas  se  recipie-
bant,  Caesar  jussit  includi,"*  and  the  same  caves  afibrded
shelter  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  same  region  in  the  wars
of  King  Pepin  against  the  last  Duke  of  Aquitaine.  In
this  country  a  small  cave  in  Cheddar  Pass  was  occupied
till  within  the  last  few  years.  The  caves  in  the  northern
counties  are  stated  by  Gildas  to  have  offered  a  refuge  to
the  Brit-Welsh  inhabitants  of  Britain  during  the  raids
of  the  Picts  and  Scots  ;  and  in  the  year  1 745  those  of
Yorkshire  were  turned  to  the  same  purpose  during  the
invasion  of  the  Pretender.  We  might  reasonably  expect
to  find  in  caves  turned  to  these  uses  objects  left  behind,
which  would  tell  us  something  of  the  manners  and
customs  of  their  possessors,  and  light  up  the  catalogue
of  battles  and  intrigues  of  which  history  generally  con-
sists. The  results  obtained  from  the  Brit- Welsh  group
of  caves,  treated  in  the  third  chapter,  show  that  this
hitherto  neglected  branch  of  the  inquiry  is  not  without
value  to  the  historian.

Caves  containing  remains  of  this  kind  may  be  conve-
niently termed  historic,  because  they  may  be  brought
into  relation  with  history.  It  must,  however,  be  care-
fully remarked  that  the  term  does  not  relate  to  history
in  general^  but  to  that  in  particular  of  each  country
which  happens  to  be  under  investigation.  The  misap-
prehension of  this  has  caused  great  confusion,  and  many
mistakes  in  archaeological  classification  and  reasoning.

^  Moms,  lib.  iii.  c.  x.  Delphin.  4to.  17U,  p.  112.


8  CA  VE-H  UNTING.  [ch  af.

Again,  our  experience  of  the  habits  of  rude  and  unci-
vilized peoples  would  naturally  lead  us  to  look  to  caves,
as  the  places  in  which  we  should  be  likely  to  meet  with
the  remains  of  the  men  that  lived  in  Europe  before  the
dawn  of  history.  Such  remains  we  do  find  that,  placed
side  by  side  with  others  from  the  tombs  and  dwellings,
enable  us  to  discover  some,  at  least,  of  the  races  who
lived  in  Europe  in  long-forgotten  times,  and  to  ascertain
roughly  the  sequence  of  events  in  the  remote  past,  far
away  from  the  historical  border.  It  may,  indeed,  seem
a  hopeless  quest  to  recover  what  has  been  buried  in
oblivion  so  long,  and  it  is  successful  merely  through  the
careful  comparison  of  the  human  skeletons  in  the  caves
and  tombs  of  Britain,  France,  and  Spain,  with  those  of
existing  races,  and  of  the  implements  and  weapons  with
those  which  are  now  used  among  savage  tribes.  By  this
means  we  shall  see  that  there  are  good  grounds  for  ex-
tending the  range  of  the  Iberian  people  over  a  consider-
able area  in  Europe,  and  for  the  belief  that  the  Eskimos
once  lived  as  far  south  as  Auvergne.  In  discussing  both
these  problems  it  will  be  impossible  to  shut  our  eyes  to
the  continuity  that  exists  between  geology,  archaeology,
biology,  and  history — sciences  which  at  first  sight  appear
isolated  from  each  other.

The  bones  of  the  domestic  animals  in  the  caves  will
necessarily  lead  to  the  further  examination  of  the  appear-
ance and  disappearance  of  breeds  under  the  care  of  man.
And  this  complicated  question  has  an  important  b&ring
not  merely  on  the  ethnology,  but  also  on  the  history,  of
some  of  the  European  peoples.  It  must  be  admitted,
however,  that  this  branch  of  the  subject  is,  as  yet,  known
merely  in  outline,  and  we  can  only  hope  to  ascertain  a
few  facts  which  may  form  a  basis  for  future  investigation.


1.]  BIOLOGICAL  DIVISION.  9

From  another  point  of  view  the  contents  of  caves  are
peculiarly  valuable.  They  have  been  used  as  places  of
shelter,  not  merely  by  man,  but  by  wild  animals,  from
the  time  they  first  became  accessible  to  the  present
day.  In  the  same  way,  therefore,  as  now  they  contain,
in  their  superficial  layers,  the  bones  of  sheep,  oxen,
and  horses,  foxes,  rabbits,  and  badgers,  so  in  their  deeper
strata  lie  buried  the  remains  of  the  animals  which  were
living  in  Europe  long  before  the  historic  times.  In
other  words,  they  enable  us  to  make  out  the  groups
of  animals  inhabiting  the  neighbouring  districts,  and
which  in  many  cases  have  either  forsaken  their  original
abodes  or  have  become  extinct.  And  since  those
which  are  extinct,  or  which  have  migrated,  could  not
have  lived  where  their  remains  are  found  under  the  pre-
sent conditions  of  life,  an  inquiry  into  their  histor}^  leads
us  into  the  general  question  of  the  ancient  European
climate  and  geography.  It  is  obvious,  for  example,  that
the  spotted  hyaena,  which  formerly  inhabited  the  caves
of  Sicily,  could  not  have  crossed  over  to  that  island  after
it  was  separated  from  Africa  and  Italy  ;  and  it  would  be
impossible  for  the  musk-sheep,  the  most  arctic  of  the
herbivora,  to  live  as  far  south  as  Auvergne  under  the
present  climatal  conditions.  The  presence,  therefore,  of
these  animals  in  these  districts  is  proof  in  the  one  case
of  a  geographical,  and  in  the  other  of  a  climatal,  change.

The  discussion  of  all  these  questions  is  comprehendc^d
under  the  second,  or  biological,  division  of  cave-hunting,
which  may  be  defined  as  an  inquiry  into  the  remains  of
man  and  animals  found  in  the  caves,  and  into  the  condi-
tions under  which  they  lived  in  Europe.


10  CAVE'HUNTING.  [chap.


The  three  Classes  of  Bone-caves.

In  the  biological  branch  of  the  subject  the  caves
will  be  treated  first  which  are  comprehended  within
the  limits  of  history ;  then  we  shall  pass  on  to  the
investigation  of  Prehistoric  caves,  or  those  which  have
been  inhabited  in  the  interval  that  separates  history
from  the  remote  geological  era,  which  is  characterized
by  the  existence  of  the  extinct  mammalia  in  Europe.
And,  lastly,  those  will  be  examined  which  have  fur-
nished the  remains  of  the  extinct  animals,  and  which
are  termed  by  the  geologists  Pleistocene,  from  the
fact  that  a  larger  percentage  of  existing  species  were
then  living  than  in  the  preceding  Pleio-,  Meio-,  and
Eocene  periods.  The  equivalent  terms  "Quaternary/'
used  by  many  French  geologists,  and  the  "Post-pleio-
cene  division  of  the  Post-tertiary  Formation,"  used  by
Sir  Charles  Lyell,  are  not  adopted  in  this  work,  because
they  imply  a  break  in  the  continuity  of  life,  which  does
not  exist.  "  Pleistocene "  was  invented  and  subse-
quently discarded  by  Sir  C.  Lyell, ^  and  is  at  present
used  by  many  eminent  writers,  such  as  Forbes,  Phillips,
Gervais,  and  others.  The  ossiferous  caves  will  therefore
be  divided  into  the  Historic,  Prehistoric,  and  Pleistocene
groups.  And  it  will  be  more  convenient  to  work  back-
wards in  time  from  the  basis  offered  by  histoiy,  than  to
begin  with  the  Pleistocene,  or  oldest  division,  and  bring
the  narrative  down  to  the  present  day.

This  classification,  founded  in   part  on  the  principle

^  Since  this  was  written,  Sir  C.  Lyell  has  withdrawn  his  term
"  Post-pleiocene  "  in  favour  of  Pleistocene.  ("Antiquity  of  Man,"
4  th  edition,  1873.)


I.]  HISTORY  OF  CAVE-EXPLORATION.  1 1

of  change  in  the  animal  world,  and  partly  on  the  basis
offered  by  history,  coincides,  only  in  part,  with  that
of  the  archsBologists  based  on  the  remains  of  man's
handiwork.  The  Pleistocene  age  is  the  equivalent  of
the  Palaeolithic,  or  that  of  rude  unpolished  stone ;  the
Prehistoric  represents  the  ages  of  polished  stone,  bronze,
and  iron  in  part,  or  those  stages  in  human  progress  when
the  use  of  these  materials  became  general  for  the  pur-
poses of  every-day  life  ;  while  the  Historic  covers  merely
the  later  portion  of  that  of  iron.


History  of  Cave- Exploration  in  Europe.

Germany. — The  rest  of  this  chapter  must  be  devoted  to
an  outline  of  the  history  of  cave-exploration  during  the  last
two  centuries.  The  dread  of  the  supernatural,  which  pre-
served the  European  caves  from  disturbance,  was  destroyed
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  by  the  search
after  "  ebur  fossile,"  or  unicorn's  horn,  which  ranked  high
in  the  materia  medica  of  those  days  as  a  specific  for
many  diseases,  and  which  was  obtained,  in  great  abun-
dance, in  the  caverns  of  the  Hartz,  and  in  those  of
Hungary  and  Franconia.  As  the  true  nature  of  the  drug
gradually  revealed  itself,  the  German  caves  became
famous  for  the  remains  of  the  lions,  hyaenas,  fossil
elephants,  and  other  strange  animals,  which  had  been
used  for  medicine.  We  owe  the  first  philosophical  dis-
cussion on  the  point  to  Dr.  Gesner,^  who,  although  he
maintained  that  the  fossil  unicorn  consisted,  in  some
cases,  of  elephant's  teeth  and  tusks,  and  in  others  of
its  fossil  bones,  did  not  altogether  give  up  the  idea  of

^  HUU  Anim.  vol.  L  Folio,  1603.     Aiticle  *'Monoceia8.  "


1 2  CA  VE-HUNTING,  [chap.

its  medicinal  value.  It  is  a  singular  fact,  that  fossil
remains  of  a  similar  kind  are,  at  the  present  time,  used
by  the  Chioese  for  the  same  purpose,  and  sold  in  their
druggists'  shops.^  The  cave  which  was  most  famous  at
the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  was  that  of  Bauman  s
Hole,  in  the  Hartz,  in  the  district  of  Blankenbourg.  It
is  noticed  in  tlie  Philosophical  Transactions  for  the  year
1662,  and  was  subsequently  described  by  Dr.  Behrens,*
Leibnitz,  De  Luc,  and  Cuvier,  along  with  others  in  the
neighbourhood.  Those  of  Hungary  come  next  in  point
of  discovery,  the  first  notice  of  them  being  due  to  Patter-
son Hayne  in  1672.  They  penetrate  the  southern
slopes  of  the  Carpathian  ranges,  and  are  known  by  the
name  of  dragons'  caves,  because  the  bones  which  they
contain  had  been  considered  from  time  immemorial  to
belong  to  those  animals  by  the  country  people.  These
remains  were  identified  by  Baron  Cuvier  as  belonging  to
the  cave-bear.^

It  was  not,  however,  until  the  close  of  the  eighteenth
century  that  the  exploring  of  caves  was  carried  on  syste-
matically, or  their  contents  examined  with  any  scientific
precision.  The  caves  of  Franconia,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Muggendorf,  were  described  by  Esper  in  1774,  by
Rosenmuller  in  1804,  and  six  years  later  by  Dr.  Goldfuss.
The  most  important  was  that  of  Gailenreuth,  both  from
the  vast  quantity  of  remains  w^hich  it  was  proved  to
contain,  and  the  investigations  to  w^hich  it  led.  The
bones  of  the  hyaena,  lion,  wolf,  fox,  glutton,  and  red

*  Described  by  Professor  Owen,  Quart  Geol.  Journ.  p.  417.
See  Hanbury  on  "Chinese  Materia  Medica,"  1862,  8vo.  p.  40.  S  ui.e
of  the  dragons*  teetli  were  found  in  caves  by  Mr.  ISwinhoe.

2  Hercynia  Curi<»si.

*  See  Cuvier,  Oss.  Foss.  vol.  iv.  pp.  290  et  seq.


I.]  HISTORY  OF  CAVE'EXPLOHATION.  lH

deer  were  identified  by  Baron  Cuvier  ;  while  some  of  the
skulls  which  Dr.  Goldfuss  obtained  have  been  recently
proved,  by  Professor  Busk,  to  belong  to  the  grizzly  bear.
They  were  associated  with  the  bones  of  the  reindeer,
horse  and  bison.  Rosenmuller  was  of  opinion  that  the
cave  had  been  inhabited  by  bears  for  a  long  series  of
generations ;  and  he  thus  realized  that  these  remains
proved  that  the  animals  found  in  the  cave  had  once
lived  in  that  district,  and  had  not  been  swept  from
the  tropics  by  the  deluge.  The  interest  in  these  dis-
coveries was  at  its  height  in  the  year  1816,  when  Dr.
Buckland  visited  the  cave,  and  acquired  that  knowledge
of  cave- exploring  which  he  was  subsequently  to  use
with  such  good  effect  in  this  country.*  From  this
time  down  to  the  present  day,  no  new  fact  of  im-
portance has  been  added  to  our  knowledge  of  caves
by  explorations  in  Germany.

Great  Britain. — The  first  bone-cave  systematically
explored  in  this  country  was  that  discovered  by  Mr.
Whidbey,^  in  the  Devonian  limestone  at  Oreston,  near
Plymouth,  in  1816  ;  and  the  remains  obtained  from  it
were  identified  by  Sir  Everard  Home  as  implying  the
existence  of  the  rhinoceros  in  that  region.  This  dis-
(•overy  followed  close  upon  the  researches  in  Gailenreuth,
and  was  due  in  some  degree  to  the  request  which  Sir
Joseph  Banks  made,  that  Mr.  Whidbey,  in  quarrying  the
stone  for  the  Plymouth  breakwater,  should  examine  the
contents  of  any  caverns  that  he  might  happen  to  meet
with.  It  preceded  Dr.  Buckland's  exploration  of  Kirk-
dale  by  about  four  years.

1  The  references  are  to  be  found  in  Cuvier,  top.  cit.  and  in  Buck-
land,  "Reliquiae  Diluvianas,"  4to.  1822.    Most  of  them  I  have  verified.

2  Phil.  Trans.  1817,  p.  176.


14  CA  VE  HUNTING.  [chap.

In  the  summer  of  1821  a  cave  was  discovered,  in  a
limestone  quarry  at  Kirkdale,  in  Yorkshire,  which  was
found  to  contain  bones  and  teeth  of  animals.  On  hearing
of  the  discovery.  Dr.  Buckland  posted  at  once  from  South
Wales  to  the  spot,  and  published  the  result  of  the  explo-
rations in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  the  next
year.  He  brought  forward  evidence  that  the  cave  had
been  inhabited  by  hyaenas,  and  that  the  broken  and
gnawed  bones  of  the  rhinoceros,  mammoth,  stag,  bison,
and  horse  belonged  to  animals  which  had  been  dragged
in  for  food.  He  also  established  the  fact  that  all  these
animals  had  lived  in  Yorkshire  in  ancient  times,  and  that
it  was  impossible  for  the  carcases  of  the  hyaena,  rhino-
ceros, and  mammoth  to  have  been  floated  from  those
regions  where  they  are  now  living  into  the  position  where
he  found  their  bones.  He  subsequently  followed  up  the
subject  by  investigating  bone-caves  in  Derbyshire,  South
Wales,  and  Somerset,  as  well  as  in  Germany,  and  pub-
lished his  great  work,  "Reliquiae  Diluvianae,"  in  1822,
which  laid  the  foundations  of  the  new  science  of  cave-
hunting  in  this  country.  The  exploration  of  Kirkdale
followed  closely  upon  that  of  Gailenreuth,  and  was  merely
the  application  of  those  principles  of  research  which  had
been  discovered  in  Germany  to  caves  in  a  new  district.

From  this  time  forward  bone-caves  were  discovered  in
Great  Britain  in  increasing  numbers,  and  explored  by
many  independent  observers.  The  famous  cavern  of  Kent's
Hole,  near  Torquay,  furnished  the  Rev.  J.  McEnery,
between  1825  and  the  year  1841,  in  which  he  died,
with  the  first  flint  implements  ever  discovered  in  a
cave  along  with  the  bones  of  extinct  animals.  He  re-
cognized the  fact  that  they  may  be  proof  of  the  exist-
ence of  man  during  the  time  that  those  animals  were


I.]  HISTORY  OF  CA  VE-EXPLORA  TION.  1 5

alive ;  but  the  scientific  world  was  not  then  snflSciently
educated  to  accept  the  antiquity  of  the  human  race  on
the  evidence  brought  forward,  and  Dr.  Buckland  himself
was  so  influenced  by  the  opinions  of  his  times,  that  he
refused  even  to  entertain  the  idea.  Although  the
discovery  was  verified  by  the  independent  researches  of
Mr.  Godwin  Austin  in  1840,  and  by  the  Torquay
Natural  History  Society  in  1846,  the  force  of  prejudice
was  so  strong,  that  the  matter  was  not  thought  even
worthy  of  investigation.  Mr.  McEnery's  manuscripts
were  lost  until  the  year  1859,  when  an  abstract  of  them
was  published  by  Mr.  Vivian,  and  subsequently  they
were  printed  in  full  by  Mr.  Pengelly,  the  able  superin-
tendent of  the  exploration  which  has  been  carried  on
by  a  committee  of  the  British  Association  since  1865,  by
whom  several  thousand  flint  implements  have  been  ob-
tained, under  the  conditions  pointed  out  by  the  Rev.  J.
McEnery  and  Mr.  Godwin  Austen.^

While  the  important  question  of  the  antiquity  of  man
was  being  passed  by  as  of  no  account,  other  caves  were
being  examined  in  this  country.  Those  of  Banwell,
Burrington,  Sandford  Hill,  Bleadon,  and  Hutton,  in  the
mountain  limestone  of  the  Mendip  hills,  were  being
worked  by  the  Rev.  J.  Williams  and  Mr.  Beard,  and
furnished  the  magnificent  collection  of  mammalian  bones
now  in  the  museum  at  Taunton.  In  North  Wales,  also,  Mr.
Lloyd  discovered  a  similar  suite  of  bones  in  the  lime-
stone caves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  Asaph  at  Cefn,
and  in  South  Wales  numerous  remains  were  obtained  by
many  explorers  in  those  of  Pembrokeshire  and  Gower.

^  Pengelly,  "Literature  of  Kent's  Cavern,'*  Devonshire  Associa-
tion. 1868-9.  "Kent's  Hole,"  Lecture,  delivered  in  Hulme  Town
Hall,  1872.


16  CAVE-HUNTING,  [chap.

The  result  of  these  discoveries  was  the  proof  that
certain  extinct  animals,  such  as  the  woolly  rhinoceros
and  the  mammoth,  had  lived  in  this  country  in  ancient
times,  along  with  two  other  groups  of  species  which  are
at  present  known  only  to  live  in  hot  and  cold  climates —
the  spotted  hyaena  and  hippopotamus  of  Africa,  with  the
reindeer  and  the  marmot  of  the  colder  regions  of  the
earth.

The  discovery  in  1858,  and  the  exploration,  of  the  now
famous  cave  of  Brixham,  by  the  Royal  and  Geological
Societies,  marked  the  dawn  of  a  new  era  in  cave-hunting.
Under  the  careful  supervision  of  Mr.  Pengelly,  flint
implements  were  discovered  underneath  stalagmite,
and  in  association  with  the  remains  of  the  hyaena  and
woolly  rhinoceros  and  mammoth,  in  undisturbed  red
loam,  under  conditions  that  prove  man  to  have  been
living  in  Devonshire  at  the  same  time  as  those  animals.
This  singularly  opportune  discovery  destroyed  for  ever
the  doubts  that  had  overhung  the  question  of  the
antiquity  of  man,  and  of  his  co-existence  in  Europe
in  company  with  the  animals  whose  remains  occur  both
in  the  caverns  and  river-deposits.

In  1847  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes  described  certain
rude  flint  implements  that  he  obtained  from  the  flu-
viatile  gravels  of  Abbeville  ("  Antiquit^s  Celtiques,*'
vol.  i.),  along  with  the  bones  of  extinct  animals ;  and  his
discovery  was  treated  with  the  same  scepticism  in  France
as  that  of  the  Rev.  J.  McEner}'-  in  England,  although  it
was  verified  by  flint  implements  being  discovered,  under
exactly  the  same  conditions,  in  the  gravels  of  Amiens,
some  forty  miles  away,  by  Dr.  RigoUot.^  In  the  autumn
of  1858,  Dr.  Falconer,  who  had  been  superintending  the

1  Comptes  Rendus,  1847,  pp.  649-50,  et  1864,  p.  230.


I.]  HISTOR Y  OF  CA VEEXPLORA TION.  1  7

work  in  the  Brixham  cave,  visited  the  collection  made  by
M.  de  Perthes,  while  on  his  way  to  examine  the  caves  of
Sicily,  and  recognizing  man's  handiwork  in  the  imple-
ments, he  asked  his  friend  Mr.  Prestwich  to  explore  the
Valley  of  the  Seine.  This  he  accordingly  did,  and  in
company  with  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.R.S.,  dug  out  with  his
own  hands  an  implement  from  the  undisturbed  strata,^
and  thus  finally  settled  the  disputed  question.  It  is
undoubtedly  true,  that  scientific  opinion  was  tending
towards  the  acceptance  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  man
having  lived  in  Europe  in  the  Pleistocene  age  ;  but  the
researches  in  Brixham  cave  established  the  fact  on  the
highest  possible  authority,  and  confirmed  the  long-
neglected  discoveries  in  the  valley  of  the  Somme.  By
the  end  of  1859  it  was  fully  accepted  by  the  scientific
world,  and  caused  the  exploration  of  caves  to  be  carried
on  with  increased  vigour.

In  December  1859,*  I  began  the  exploration  of  the
hy»ena-den  of  Wookey  Hole,  near  Wells,  Somerset,  in
company  with  the  Rev.  J.  Williamson,  and  obtained
flint  instruments  along  with  the  remains  of  the  mammoth,
hyaena,  woolly  rhinoceros,  and  other  animals,  under
conditions  that  proved  the  contemporaneity  of  man  with
the  extinct  mammalia.  And  from  that  time  down  to
the  present  date  I  have  carried  on  researches  in  caves
ia  various  parts  of  Great  Britain.  Jx\  the  district  of
Gower  also,  many  ossiferous  caverns  were  investigated,
i^  1858-:9-60.1  by  Colonel  Wood  and  Dr.  Falconer,  and
in  qne  of  them  flint  implements  were  obtained  along  with
the  bones  of  the  extinct  n^ammalLa.^    Kent's  Hole,  begun

'  Prestwich,  Phil.  Trans.  1860.    Proceed.  Royal  Soc.  1859.

^  Quart  Geol,  Joum.  Jan.  1801.

'  Falconer,  Palseont.  Mem.  vol.  iL  p.  498.

r


18  CAVE-HUNTING.  [chap.

in  1865  by  the  British  Association,  and  still  being  worked,
furnishes  annually  a  vast  number  of  bones  and  teeth  of
hyaenas,  rhinoceroses,  cave-bears,  and  horses,  and  other
animals,  along  with  flint  and  bone  implements.^

In  1869  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  discover,  and
subsequently  to  explore,  a  group  of  sepulchral  caves  in
Denbighshire,  which  had  been  used  by  an  Iberian  or
Basque  race  in  the  Neolithic  age  (Chapter  V.) ;  and
in  the  following  year  the  Settle  Cave  Committee  began
their  work  in  Yorkshire  under  my  advice.  And  this
has  led  to  the  important  conclusion,  that  a  group  of
caves,  extending  over  a  wide  area  in  the  centre  and
north  of  England,  was  occupied  by  the  Brit- Welsh  in  the
obscure  interval  which  elapsed  between  the  departure  of
the  Roman  legions  and  the  English  conquest.

France. — The  researches  of  Buckland  into  the  caves
of  Great  Britain,  and  of  Goldfuss  and  others  into  those
of  Germany,  and  more  especially  the  publication  of
the  **  Ossemens  Fossiles,"  by  Cuvier,  gave  an  impetus
to  cave-exploration  in  France  which  yielded  the  same
results  as  in  our  own  country.  The  mammalia  obtained
from  the  cave  of  Fouvent  (Haut  Saone)  in  1800  were
described  in  the  "Ossemens,"  as  well  as  those  from
Gondenans.  In  the  Giroude,  the  Cave  of  Avison  was
explored  by  M.  Billaudel  in  1826-27.  In  the  south,
Marcel  de  Serres,  aided  by  MM.  Dubrueil  and  Jeanjean,
examined  the  important  Cave  of  Lunel-viel  in  1824,
and  published  their  results  in  a  work  that  holds  the
same  position  in  France  as  the  ''Reliquiae  Diluvianse"
in  England.  The  caverns  of  Pondres,  Souvignargues,  and
of  Bize  were  explored,  the  two  first  by  M.  Christol
in   1829,  the  last  by  M.  Tournal  in  1833,  and  those  of

^  Hop.  Brit.  Absoc.  1865-72.


I.]  UISTOR  Y  OF  CA  VE-EXPLORA  TION.  1 9

Villefranche  (Pyrenees-orient),  Mialet  (Gard),  and
Nabrigas  (Lozfere)  were  described  by  Do  Series  in
1839,  who  subsequently  added  those  of  Carcas-sonne
to  the  list  in  1842.  In  this  year  MM.  Prevost  and
J.  Desnoyers  explored  the  eaves  of  Montmorency  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  and  described  the  remains
discovered  in  those  of  Bic^tre.  The  Cave  of  Pontil
(Hdrault)  described  by  M.  de  Serres  in  1847,  was
proved  in  1864,  by  Professor  Gervais,  to  contain
two  distinct  strata,  the  neolithic  lying  over  the  palaeo-
lithic, as  i'n  Kent's  Hole.^

In  1860,^  the  famous  Cave  of  Aurignac  was  proved,  by
the  investigations  of  Professor  Lartet,  to  have  been  in-
habited by  man  in  the  life-time  of  the  extinct  mammalia.
Three  years  later  the  caves  of  P^rigord  were  explored
by  that  gentleman,  along  with  Mr.  Christy,  and  yielded
results  which  mark  a  new  era  in  the  history  of  man  in
the  remote  past.  From  the  remarkable  collection  of  im-
plements and  weapons,  the  habits  and  mode  of  life  of  the
occupants  can  be  ascertained  with  tolerable  certainty,
and  from  their  comparison  with  the  like  articles  now  in
use  among  savage  tribes,  it  may  be  reasonably  inferred
that  they  were  closely  related  in  blood  to  the  Eskimo.^
This  most  important  question  will  be  investigated  in  its
proper  place,  in  the  chapter  relating  to  the  palaeolithic
caves  of  France.  Professor  Lartet,  M.  Louis  Lartet,  Sir
Charles  Lyell,  and  other  eminent  observers  believe  further,
that  the  interments  that  have  been  discovered  in  Aurig-

*  The  aathorities  for  this  paragrapli  are  Cuvicr  (Oss.  Foes.),  Des
iioyere  (Article  " Grottes,"  Dictionnaire  Univ.  d'Histoire  Natuielle)
Marcel  de  Serres  (Cavernes  k  Oss.  Foss.  du  Departement  de  TAude^
1839),  Gervais  (Paldoniologie  Frangaise,  1859,  and  Nouvelles  Re-
cherches  snr  los  Animaux  Vertebras,  Vivants  et  Fossiles,  1 8o8-9 -70).
An.  des  Sc.  :    Nat  Zool.  iv.  ser.  t.  xv.


20  CAVE-HUyriNG,  [chap.

nac  and  in  Cro  Magnon/  in  P^rigord,  are  to  be  assigned
to  the  same  relative  age  as  the  occupation  of  the  caves
by  man.  From  the  fact,  however,  that  the  skeletons
in  both  these  cases  were  above  the  strata  accumulated  by
the  palaeolithic  cave-dwellers,  it  may  be  concluded  that
they  were  deposited  after  those  strata  were  formed,  in
other  words,  that  they  are  of  a  later  age.

From  1863  down  to  the  present  time  very  many  caves
have  been  explored  in  France  without  any  further  addi-
tion to  our  knowledge,  excepting  the  verification  of  the
facts,  afibrded  by  the  caves  of  Brixham  and  of  P^rigord,
as  to  the  co-existence  of  man  with  the  extinct  mammalia,
and  his  probable  identity  in  race  with  the  Eskimos.

Belgium. — The  caves  of  Belgium  ^  have  afibrded  evi-
dence of  precisely  the  same  nature  as  those  of  England
and  France.  Dr.  Schmerling,  of  Li^ge,  published  the
results  of  his  researches,  begun  in  1829,  into  the  bone-
caves  on  the  banks  of  the  Meuse  and  its  tributaries,  in
1833-4,  and  proved  that  the  mammoth,  rhinoceros,  cave-
bear,  and  hyaena  formerly  lived  in  that  district.  He  also
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  man  was  living  at  that
remote  time,  from  the  discovery  of  fiint-fiakes  and  human
bones  along  with  tlie  remaius  of  those  animals  in  the
caves  of  Engis  and  Engihoul.  In  1853,^  Professor  Spring
discovered  a  quantity  of  burned,  broken,  and  cut  bones
belonging  to  women  and  children,  in  the  Cave  of
Chauvaux,  which  he  considered  to  imply  that  it  had  been
inhabited  l)y  a  family  of  cannibals.     Axes  of  polished

^  lit'liquise  Aciuitanicae.

'  Kuchcrches  bur  les  Oss.  Foss.  decouvcrts  dana  les  Caverncs  de  la
Province  de  Li6ge,  4to.  atlas  folio.

'  Bull,  de  I'Acadc^mie  Royalo  do  Belgiqno,  1  ser.  t.  xx.  p.  427, 1853  ;
2  ser.  t.  xviii.  p.  479,  1864 ;  xxii.  p.  187,  1866.


1.]  HISTOR  Y  OF  CA  VE-EX FLORA  TION.  2 1

stone  were  also  met  with,  that  indicated  tlie  relative  age
to  be  neolithic.

To  pass  over  the  human  skeleton  found  in  the  Nean-
derthal Cave  in  1857  by  Dr.  Fuhlroth,  which  is  of
doubtful  antiquity,  the  next  discoveries  of  importance
are  those  made  by  M.  Dupont  in  the  years  1864-70,  in
the  province  of  Namur,  that  established  the  fact  that  the
same  race  of  men  who  inhabited  Auvergne  in  the  palaeo-
lithic age  had  also  lived  in  Belgium.  M.  Dupont  con-
siders that  the  interments  in  the  Trou  de  Frontal  *  belong
also  to  the  palaeolithic  age,  and  that  therefore  man  at
that  remote  time  was  possessed  of  religious  ideas.  Before,
however,  this  view  can  be  accepted,  it  will  be  necessary
to  show  the  exact  relation  of  the  bones  of  the  reindeer,
chamois,  mammoth,  and  other  animals  found  outside  the
slab  of  stone,  at  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchral  chamber,  to
the  human  remains  within.  In  this  case,  as  in  Aurignac
and  Cro  Magnon,  the  evidence  seems  to  me  insufl&cient
to  establish  so  important  a  conclusion.

Southern  Eurojje. — In  southern  Europe  the  bone-caves
of  Sicily,  worked  in  1829  for  the  sake  of  the  animal
remains  to  be  used  in  sugar  refining,  were  scientifically
examined  by  Dr.  Falconer  in  1859  ;  those  of  Malta  by
Captain  Spratt  in  the  same  year ;  and  those  of  Gibraltar  by
Captain  Broome  in  the  years  1862-8.  They  established
the  existence  of  the  serval  and  the  African  elephant,  and
other  characteristic  African  species,  in  Europe,  and  offer
as  we  shall  see  in  this  work,  important  testimony  as  to
the  geography  of  the  Mediterranean  area  in  the  Pleisto-
cene age.

In  this  outline  of  the  history  of  cave-exploration  it

^  L'Homme  pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre  dans  les  Environs  de
Dinant  sur  Meuse.     Bruxelles,  1871.     2nd  edit,  1872.


22  CAFE- HUNTING.  [chap.

will  be  seen,  that  the  additions  to  our  knowledge  of  the
past  have  been  neither  few  nor  insignificant,  nor  in  one
line  of  inquiry.  And  if  the  attention  which  is  now  being
directed  to  the  subject  be  due  to  the  general  development
of  scientific  thought,  it  is  equally  true,  that  the  results
have  reacted  on  scientific  thought  in  general,  and  have
especially  benefited  the  sciences  of  geology,  archaeology,
and  history.  A  rich  field  of  investigation  lies  before  the
cave-hunter,  in  Greece,  Palestine,  Lycia,  Persia,  and  the
limestone  plateaux  of  central  Asia;  and  since  these
discoveries  have  been  so  valuable  in  central  and  north-
western Europe,  what  may  we  not  recover  from  the
grasp  of  oblivion,  of  the  infancy  and  early  culture  of
mankind  in  the  very  birth-place  and  "pathway  of  the
nations  "  ?


n.]  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  CAVES.  23


CHAPTER  II.

PHYSICAL   HISTORY   OF   CAVES.

Caves  formed  by  the  Sea  and  by  Volcanic  Action. — Caves  in  Are-
na ceooa  Rocks. — Caves  in  Calcareous  Rocks  of  various  ages. —
Their  Relation  to  Pot-holes,  "Cirques,"  and  Ravines. — The
Water-cave  of  Wookey  Hole. —  The  Goatchurch  Cave.  —  The
Water-caves  of  Derbyshire. — Of  Yorkshire. — llie  Ingleboiough
Cave. — The  Rate  of  Deposit  of  Stalagmite. — The  Descent  into
Hellnpot. — The  Caves  and  Pots  round  Weathercote. — ^The  For-
mation of  Caves,  Pot-holes,  and  Ravines. — Caverns  not  generally
formed  in  line  of  Faults. — Of  various  Ages. — Their  Filling-up.—
The  Cave  of  Caldy. — The  Blackrock  Cave. — Great  quantity  of  Car-
bonate of  Lime  dissolved  by  Atmospheric  Water. — The  Circulation
of  Carbonate  of  Lime. — The  Temperature  of  Caves. — Conclusion.


Caves  formed  by  the  Sea  and  by  Volcanic  Action.

In  this  chapter  we  shall  treat  of  the  origin  of  caves  and
of  their  place  in  physical  geography.  The  most  obvious
agent  in  hollowing  out  caves  is  the  sea.  The  set  of  the
current,  the  tremendous  force  of  the  breakers,  and  the
grinding  of  the  shingle,  inevitably  discover  the  weak
places  in  the  cliif,  and  leave  caves  as  the  results  of  their
work,  modified  in  each  case  by  the  local  conditions  of
the  rock.  Caves  formed  in  this  manner  have  certain
characters   which   are   easily  recognized.      Their  floors


24  CA  VE-HUNTING.  [chap

are  very  rarely  much  out  of  the  horizontal,  their  out-
look is  over  the  sea,  and  they  very  seldom  penetrate
far  into  the  cliflF.  A  general  parallelism  is  also  to  be
observed  in  a  group  in  the  same  district,  and  their
entrances  are  all  in  the  same  horizontal  plane,  or  in
a  succession  of  horizontal  and  pai^allel  planes.  In  some
cases  they  are  elevated  above  the  present  reach  of
the  waves,  and  mark  the  line  at  which  the  sea  formerly
stood.  From  their  generally  inaccessible  position  sea-
caves  have  very  rarely  been  occupied  by  man,  and  the
history  of  their  formation  is  so  obvious  that  it  requires
no  further  notice.  Among  them  the  famous  Fingal's
Cave,  off  the  north  coast  of  Ireland,  and  that  of  Staffa,
on  the  opposite  shore  of  Scotland,  hollowed  out  of
columnar  basalt,  are  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  in
Europe.

In  volcanic  regions  also  there  are  caves  formed  by
the  passage  of  lava  to  the  surface  of  the  ground,  or  by
the  imprisoned  steam  and  gases  in  the  lava  while  it  was
in  a  molten  state :  but  these  are  of  comparatively  little
importance  so  far  as  relates  to  the  general  question  of
caves,  from  the  very  small  areas  which  are  occupied  by
active  volcanoes  in  Europe.  They  have  been  observed  in
Vesuvius,  Etna,  Iceland,  and  Teneriffe.

Caves  in  Areiiaceous  Rocks,

Caves  also  occur  sometimes  in  sandstones,  in  which
case  they  are  the  result  of  the  erosion  of  the  lines  of  the
joints  by  the  passage  of  subaerial  water,  and  if  the  joints
happen  to  traverse  a  stratum  less  compacted  than  the
rest,  the  weak  point  is  discovered,  and  a  hollow  is  forme.d
extending  laterally  from  the  original  fissure.     The  massive


%'t


II.]  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  CAVES.  25

millstone  grit  of  Derbyshire  and  Yorkshire  present  many
examples  of  this,  as  for  instance  in  Kinderscout  in  the
former  county.  The  rocks  at  Tunbridge  Wells  also  show-
to  what  extent  the  joints  in  the  Wealden  sandstones  may
become  open  fissures,  more  or  less  connected  with  caves,
on  a  small  scale,  by  the  mere  mechanical  action  of  water.
M.  Desnoyers  gives  instances  of  the  same  kind  in  the
Tertiary  sandstones  of  the  Paris  basin,  which  have  fur-
nished remains  of  rhinoceros,  reindeer,  hyaena,  and  bear.
Caverns,  however,  in  the  sandstone  are  rarely  of  great
extent,  and  may  be  passed  over  as  being  of  small  im-
portance in  comparison  with  those  in  the  calcareous
rocks.

Caves  in  Calcareous  Rocks  of  various  ages.

It  has  long  been  known  that  wherever  the  calcareous
strata  are  sufficiently  hard  and  compact  to  support  a
roof,  caves  are  to  be  found  in  greater  or  less  abundance.
Those  of  Devonshire  occur  in  the  Devonian  limestone ;
those  of  Somerset,  Nottinghamshire,  Yorkshire,  Derby-
shire, and  Northumberland,  as  well  as  of  Belgium  and
Westphalia,  in  that  of  the  carboniferous  age.  In  France
also,  those  of  Maine  and  Anjou,  and  most  of  those  of  the
Pyrenees  and  in  the  department  of  Aude,  are  hollowed
in  carboniferous  limestone,  as  well  as  the  greater  part  of
those  in  North  America,  in  Virginia,  and  Kentucky.
The  cave  of  Kirkdale  in  Yorkshire,  and  most  of  those  in
Franconia  and  in  Bavaria  penetrate  Jurassic  limestones,
which  have  received  the  name  of  Hohlenkalkstein  from
the  abundance  of  caverns  which  they  contain.  They  are
developed  on  a  large  scale  in  the  Swiss  and  French  Jura,
and  in  some  cases  afford  passage  to  powerful  streams.


26  CA  VE-HUNTING,  [chaf.

and  in  others  are  more  or  less  filled  with  ice,  thus
constituting  the  singular  **glaei^res"  that  have  been  so
ably  explored  by  the  Rev.  G.  F.  Browne.^

The  compact  Neocomian  and  Cretaceous  limestones
contain  most  of  the  caverns  of  Perigord,  Quercy,  and
Angoumois,  and  some  of  those  in  Provence  and  Lan-
guedoc,  those  of  Northern  Italy,  Sicily,  Greece,  Dalmatia,
Carniola,  and  Turkey  in  Europe,  of  Asia  Minor  and
Palestine.

The  tertiary  limestones,  writes  M.  Desnoyers,^  offer
sometimes,  but  very  rarely,  caves  that  have  become
celebrated  for  the  bones  which  they  contain,  such  as
those  of  Lunel-Viel,  near  Montpelier,  those  of  Pondres
and  Souvignargues,  near  Sommi^res  (Gard),  and  of  Saint
Macaire  (Gironde).  The  same  may  also  be  said  of  the
calcaire  grossier  of  the  basin  of  Paris.

Certain  rocks  composed  of  gypsum  also  contain  caverns
of  the  same  sort  as  those  in  the  limestones.  In  Thuringia,
for  example,  near  Eisleben,  they  occur  in  the  saliferous
and  gypseous  strata  of  the  zechstein,  and  are  connected
with  large  gulfs  and  cirques  on  the  surface,  which  are
sometimes  filled  with  water.  In  the  neighbourhood  of
Paris,  and  especially  at  Montmorency,  they  contain
numerous  bones  of  the  extinct  mammalia.  M.  Desnoyers
points  out  their  identity,  in  all  essentials,  with  those
in  calcareous  strata,  and  infers  that  they  have  been
•produced  in  the  same  way.  Some  of  them  may
have  been  formed  by  the  removal  of  the  salt,  which
is  very  frequently  intcrbedded  with  the  gypsum,  by
the  passage  of  water.     In  Cheshire  the  pumping  of  the

^  Ice-caves,  8vo.  18G5,  Longmans.

*  D*Orbigny,  Dictionnaire  Universal  d'Histoire  Naturelle,    Article
"  Grottes/'


II.]  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  CAVES.  27

brine  from  the  saliferous  and  gypseous  strata  produces
subterranean  hollows,  which  sometimes  fall  in  and
eventually  cause  depressions  on  the  surface,  such  as
those  which  are  now  destroying  the  town  of  Northwich,
and  causing  the  neighbouring  tidal  estuary  to  extend
over  what  was  formerly  meadow  land.  This  explanation,
however,  will  not  apply  to  those  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Paris,  because  there  is  no  trace  of  their  ever  having
contained  salt.


The  Relation  of  Caves  to  Pot-holes,   '*  Cirques/'  and

Ravines.

The  caverns  hollowed  in  calcareoua  rocks  present
features  by  which  they  are  distinguished  from  any  others.
They  open,  for  the  most  part,  on  the  abrupt  sides  of
valleys  and  ravines  at  various  levels,  being  arranged
round  the  main  axis  of  erosion  just  as  branches  are
arranged  round  the  trunk  of  a  tree — as,  for  example,  in
Cheddar  Pass.  The  transition  in  some  cases  from  the  val-
ley to  the  ravine,  and  from  the  ravine  to  the  cave,  is  so
gradual,  that  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  all  three  are
due  to  the  same  cause.  The  caves  themselves  ramify  in
the  same  irregular  fashion  as  the  valleys,  and  are  to  be
viewed  merely  as  the  capillaries  in  the  general  valley
system,  through  which  the  rainfall  passes  to  join  the
main  channels.  Very  frequently,  however,  the  drainage
has  found  an  outlet  at  a  lower  level,  and  its  ancient
passage  is  left  dry ;  but  in  all  cases  unmistakable  proof
of  the  erosive  action  of  water  is  to  be  seen  in  the  sand,
gravel,  and  clay  which  compose  the  floor,  as  well  as  in
the  worn  surfaces  of  the  sides  and  the  bottom.

In  all  districts  in  which  caves  occur  are  funnel-shaped


28  CA  VE-  H  UNTING.  [  ch  af.

cavities  of  various  sizes,  known  as  "  pot-holes "  or
"swallow-holes"  in  Britain,  as  "betoires,"  "chaldrons  du
diable,"  "marmites  de  grants/'  in  France,  and  as  "  kata-
vothra  "  in  Greece,  in  which  the  rainfall  is  collected  before
it  finally  disappears  in  the  subterranean  passages.  They
are  to  be  seen  in  all  stages ;  sometimes  being  mere  shallow
funnels,  that  only  contain  water  aft^r  excessive  rain,  and
at  others  as  profound  vertical  shafts,  into  which  the
water  is  continually  falling,  as  in  Helln  Pot,  in  Yorkshire.
The  cirques,  also,  described  by  M.  Desnoyers,  belong  to
the  same  class  of  cavities,  although  all  those  which  are
mentioned  by  the  Rev.  T.  G.  Bonney,*  at  the  head  of
valleys,  and  in  some  cases  hollowed  in  shale  and  igneous
rocks,  are  most  probably  to  be  referred  to  the  vertical,
chisel-like  action  of  streams  flowing  under  physical
conditions,  that  resemble  those  under  which  the  canons
of  the  Colorado,  or  of  the  Zambesi,  are  being  ex-
cavated, and  in  which  frost,  ice,  and  snow  have  played
a  very  subordinate  part.

The  intimate  relation  between  pot-holes,  caves,  ravines,
and  valleys  will  be  discussed  in  the  rest  of  this  chapter,
and  illustrated  by  English  examples ;  and  then  we  shall
proceed  to  show  that  the  chemical  action  of  the  carbonic
acid  in  the  rain-water,  and  the  mechanical  friction  of  the
sand  and  gravel,  set  in  motion  by  the  water,  by  which
Professor  Phillips  explains  the  origin  of  caves,  will
equally  explain  the  pot-holes  and  ravines  hy  whieh  they
are  invariably  accompanied.

^  Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  xxvii.  312.


II.]  WOOKEY  HOLE  CAVE.  29


The   WateV'Cave  of  Wookey  Hole,  near  Wells,

Samerset.

Caves  may  be  divided  into  two  classes :  those  which
are  now  mere  passages  for  water,  in  which  the  history  of
their  formation  may  be  studied,  and  those  which  are  dry,
and  capable  of  affording  shelter  to  man  and  the  lower
animals.  Among  the  water-caves,  that  of  Wookey  Hole^
is  to  be  noticed  first,  since  its  very  name  implies  that  it
was  known  to  the  Celtic  inhabitants  of  the  south  of
England,  and  since  it  was  among  the  first,  if  not  the  first,
of  those  examined  with  any  care  in  this  country,  Mr.
John  Beaumont*  having  brought  it  before  the  notice  of
the  Royal  Society  in  the  year  1680.

The  hamlet  of  Wookey  Hole  nestles  in  a  valley,
through  which  flows  the  river  Axe,  and  the  valley  passes
insensibly,  at  its  upper  end,  into  a  ravine,  which  is  closed
abruptly  by  a  wall  of  rock  (Fig.  1),  about  two  hundred
feet  high,  covered  with  long  streamers  and  festoons  of
ivy,  and  afibrding  scanty  hold,  on  its  ledges  and  in  its
fissures,  to  ferns,  brambles,  and  ash  saplings.  At  its  base
the  river  Axe  issues,  in  full  current,  out  of  the  cave,  the
lower  entrance  of  which  it  completely  blocks  up,  since
the  water  has  been  kept  back  by  a  weir,  for  the  use  of  a

1  When  the  EDglish  conquered  Somerset  from  the  Brit- Welsh,  tliey
translated  the  Celtic  Ogo  into  Hole,  whence  the  cave  and  village  of
Wookey  Hole  were  named,  jast  as  they  translated  a  neighbouring
hUl,  called  Pen,  into  Knowle,  tlie  generic  .Celtic  term  in  each  case
being  used  to  specify  a  particular  object  There  are  many  other
instances  of  the  like  use  of  a  Celtic  name  by  the  English  con-
querors of  the  Celts.  In  the  Limestone  plateau  of  Llanamynech,
near  Oswestry,  there  is  a  cave  called  "  The  Ogo."

2  Phil.  Trans.  1680,  p.  1.


80  CA  VE-HUNTINQ.  [chap.

paper-mill  a  little  distance  away.  A  narrow  path  through
the  wood,  on  the  north  side  of  the  ravine,  leads  to  the
only  entrance  now  open.'  Thence  a  narrow  pass^e  leads
downward  into  the  rock,  until,  suddenly,  you  find  your-
self in  a  large  chamber,  at  the  water  level.    Then  you  pass


■UiBgratn  of  Wookoy  Hole  C»ve  aud  lUvinu.


over  a  ridge,  covered  with  a  delicate  fretwork  of  dripstone,
with  each  tiny  hollow  full  of  water,  and  ornamented  with
brilliant  lime  crystals.  One  shapeless  mass  of  dripstone
is  known  in  local  tradition  as  the  Witch  of  Wookey,
turned  into  stone  by  the  prayers  of  a  Glasti)nbury  monk.
Beyond  this  the  chamber  expands  considerably,  being
some  seventy  or  eighty  feet  high,  aud  adorned  with
beautiful  stalactites,  far  out  of  the  reach  of  visitors.  The
water,  whi<;h  bars  further  entrance,  forms  a  deep  pool,
which  Mr.  James  Parker  managed  to  cross  on  a  raft  (see
Appendix  I.)  into  another  chamber,  which  was  appa-
rently easy  of  access  before  the  construction  of  the  weir.
It  was  ill  this  further  chamber  that  Dr.  Buckland  found
human  remains  and  pottery.

The  cave  has  been  proved  to  extend  as  far  as  the
village  of  Priddy,  about  t%vo  miles  off,  on  the  Meudip  hills,
by  the  fact  observed  by  Mr,  Beaumont,  that  the  water
used  in  washing  the  lead  ore  at  tliat  spot,  in  his  time,
found  its  way  into  the  river  Axe,  and  poisoned  cattle  in
I  Tbo  cave  is  accegaible,  and  can  be  examined  without  any  climbing.


ilJ  TH E  OOATCHURCH  CA  VE.  3 1

the  valley  ctf  Wookey.  And  this  observation  has  been
verified  during  the  last  few  years  by  throwing  in  colour
and  chopped  straw.  The  stream  at  Priddy  sinks  into  a
swallow-hole  (Fig.  1),  and  has  its  subterranean  course
determined  by  the  southerly  dip  of  the  rock,  by  which
the  joints  running  north  and  south  afford  a  more  free
passage  to  the  water  than  those  running  east  and  west.
The  cave  is  merely  a  subterranean  extension  of  the  ravine
in  the  same  line,  as  far  as  the  swallow-hole,  and  all
three  have  been  hollowed,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  by
the  action  of  the  stream  and  of  carbonic  acid  in  the
water.

Tlie  Goatchurch  Cave.

The  largest  cavern  in  the  Mendip  hills  is  that  locally
known  as  the  Goatchurch,  which  opens  on  the  eastern
side  of  the  lower  of  the  two  ravines  that  branch  from  the
magnificent  defile  of  Burrington  Combe,  about  two  miles
from  the  village  of  Wrington,  at  the  height  of  about
120  feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  ravine.  After  creeping
along  a  narrow,  muddy  passage,  with  a  steep  descent  to
the  west,  at  an  angle  of  about  30'',  you  suddenly  pass
into  a  stalactitic  chamber  of  considerable  height  and
size.  From  it  two  small  vertical  shafts  lead  into  the
lower  set  of  chambers  and  passages  ;  the  first  being
blocked  up,  and  the  second  being  close  to  a  large  barrel-
shaped  stalagmite,  to  which  Mr.  Ayshford  Sanford,  Mr.
James  Parker,  and  myself  fastened  our  ropes  when  we
explored  the  cave  in  1864.  The  latter  affords  access
into  a  passage,  beautifully  arched,  and  passing  horizon-
tally east  and  west,  and  just  large  enough  to  admit  a  man
walking  upright.     At  the  further  end  numerous  open


32  CA  VE-HUNTINO.  [chap.

fissures,  caused  by  the  erosion  of  tbe  joints  in  the  lime-
stone, cross  it  at  right  angles,  and  pass  into  several  ill-
defined  chambers,  partially  stalactitic,  but  for  the  most
part  filled  with  loose,  bare,  cubical  masses  of  limestone.
Two  of  the  transverse  fissures  lead  into  a  large  chamber,
at  a  lower  level.  At  its  lower  end,  on  crawling  along
a  narrow  passage,  we  came  into  a  second  chamber,
also  of  considerable  height  and  depth,  at  the  bottom  of
which  the  noise  of  flowing  water  can  be  heard  through
two  vertical  holes,  just  large  enough  to  admit  of  access.
On  sliding  down  one  of  these  we  found  ourselves  in  a
third  chamber,  which  was  traversed  by  a  subterra-
nean stream,  doubtless  in  part  the  same  which  dis-
appears in  the  ravine,  at  a  point  eighty  feet  above  by
aneroid  measurement.  The  temperature  of  the  water,
as  compared  with  that  of  the  stream  outside  (49"*  :  59**),
renders  it  very  probable  that,  between  the  point  of  dis-
appearance in  the  ravine  and  reappearance  in  the  cave,
it  is  joined  by  a  stream  of  considerable  subterranean
length,  since  the  water  could  not  have  lost  ten  degrees
in  the  short  interval  which  it  had  to  traverse,  were  it
supplied  only  from  the  stream  in  the  ravine.  From
the  point  of  its  disappearance  in  the  cave,  the  water
passes  downwards  to  join  the  main  current  flowing
underneath  Burrington  Combe,  that  gushes  forth  in  great
volume  at  Rickford.  The  lowest  portion  of  the  cave
was  eighteen  or  twenty  feet  below  the  stream,  and  220
feet  below  the  entrance  of  the  cavern.

On  examining  the  floors  of  the  chambers  and  passages,
we  discovered  that  they  were  composed  of  the  same  kind
of  sediment  as  that  which  is  now  being  deposited  by  the
water  in  Wookcy  Hole,  and  there  could  be  no  doubt  but
that  they  had  been  originally  traversed  by  water.     For


ir.J  THE  QOATCHUIWH  CAVE.  33

this  to  have  taken  place  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  that,
while  the  Goatchurch  was  a  water  cave,  the  ravine  on
which  it  opens  was  not  deeper  than  the  entrance — in  other
words,  that  in  the  interval  between  the  formation  and
excavation  of  the  chambers  and  passages,  to  the  present
time,  the  ravine  has  been  excavated  in  the  limestone  to
a  depth  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet,  and  the  water
which  originally  passed  through  the  entrance  has  found
its  way,  by  a  new  series  of  passages,  to  the  point  where
it  appears  at  the  bottom  of  the  cave.

We  obtained  evidence  that  the  horizontal  passage,
immediately  below  the  first  vertical  descent,  had  been
inhabited  at  a  very  remote  period.  At  the  spot  where
Mr.  Beard,  of  Banwell,  obtained  a  fine  tusk  of  mam-
moth, we  found  a  molar  of  bear,  and  a  fragment  of
flint,  which  were  imbedded  in  red  earth,  and  were  under-
neath a  crust  of  stalagmite  of  about  two  inches  in  thick-
ness. It  would  follow  from  this,  that  the  date  of  the
formation  of  this  part  of  the  cave  was  before  the  time
when  the  traces  of  elephants,  l)ears,  and  of  man  were
introduced.

The  cave  is  the  resort  of  numerous  badgers.  On  hid-
ing ourselves  in  one  of  the  transverse  fissures,  and
throwing  our  light  across  the  horizontal  passage,  these
animals  ran  to  and  fro  across  the  lighted  field  with  ex-
traordinary swiftness,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  white
streaks  on  the  sides  of  their  heads,  which  flashed  back
the  light,  they  would  not  have  been  observed.  Though
they  are  rarely  caught,  they  must  be  abundant  in  the
district.

Like  all  the  other  large  caverns  in  the  district,  it  has  its
legends.  The  dwellers  in  the  neighbourhood,  who  have
never  cared  to  explore  its  recesses,  relate  that  a  certain

D


s


34  rAVEHUSTiyG.  [chap.

dog  put  in  here  found  its  way  out,  after  many  days,  at
Wookey  Hole,  having  lost  all  its  hair  in  scrambling
through  the  narrow  passages.  At  Cheddar  the  same
legend  is  appropriated  to  the  Cheddar  cave.  At  WTookey
tiie  dog  is  said  to  have  travelled  back  to  Cheddar.  Some
eighteen  years  ago,  while  exploring  the  limestone  caves
at  Llanamynech,  on  the  English  border  of  Montgomery-
shire, I  met  with  a  similar  story.  A  man  playing  the
bagpipes  is  said  to  have  entered  one  of  the  caves,  well
provisioned  with  Welsh  mutton,  and  after  he  had  been
in  for  some  time  his  bagpipes  were  heard  two  miles  from
the  entrance,  underneath  the  small  town  of  Llanamynech.
He  never  returned  to  tell  his  tale.  The  few  bones  found
in  tlie  cave  are  supposed  to  be  those  which  he  had  picked
on  the  way.  This  is  doubtless  another  form  of  the  story
of  the  dog ;  both  owe  their  origin  to  the  vague  impres-
sion, which  most  people  have,  of  the  great  extent  of
(taverns,  and  both  versions  are  equally  current  in  France
and  Germany.

27ic   Water-cares  of  Derbyshire.

Th(»  ('el('l)rat(Ml  cavern  of  the  Peak,  at  Castleton  in
Derbyshire,  presents  tlie  same  essential  character  as  that
of  Wookcv  Hole.  It  runs  into  the  hill-side  at  the  end
of  the  rjtviiie,  and  is  traversed  l)y  a  powerful  stream  of
wafer,  which  lias  been  met  with  in  drivino;  an  horizontal
adit  in  lead-mining  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the
entranci',  and  tinallv  traced  to  a  distant  swallow-hole.
At  a  little  distance  from  Buxton  a  smaller  cave,  known
as  r(H>le\s  (^ivern,  is  in  part  traversed  by  water,  which
has  found  an  outlet  at  a  lower  level,  and  allowed  of
the    present    entrance    lu'ing    used   by    the    Brit-Welsh


IT]  THE  INOLEBOROUOH  CA  VE,  35

(Romano-Celtic)  inhabitants  of  the  district  as  a  habita-
tion in  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries.*  There  are,  besides
these,  very  many  others,  some  known,  others  unknown,
that  debouch  on  the  sides  of  the  dales  in  Derbyshire
and  Staffordshire,  and  are  all  well  worthy  of  examina-
tion, since  they  illustrate  not  merely  the  histor}''  of
the  formation  of  caves,  but  also  have  been  proved  to
contain  works  of  art,  pottery  and  flint  implements,
and  the  remains  of  animals,  such  as  the  mammoth  and
rhinoceros.

The   Water-caves  of  Yorhshi)^.

The  caves  in  the  mountain  limestone  of  Yorkshire
rival  in  size  those  of  Carniola,  or  those  of  Greece,  and
they  are  to  be  seen  in  all  stages  of  formation.  In  their
gloomy  recesses  all  the  higher  qualities  of  a  mountaineer
may  be  exercised,  and  there  is  sufficient  danger  to  give  a
keen  zest  to  their  exploration.  The  mountain  streams
sometimes  plunge  into  a  yawning  chasm,  locally  known
as  a  pot,  and  at  othei^s  emerge  from  the  dark  portals  of  a
cave  in  full  current.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  place  in  the
world  where  the  subterranean  circulation  of  water  may
be  studied  with  better  advantage.

Ingleborough  forms  a  centre  from  which  the  rainfall
on  every  side  finds  its  way  into  the  dales,  through  a
system  of  caves  more  or  less  complicated,  which  during
the  last  forty  years  have  been  thoroughly  explored  by
Mr.  Farrer,  Mr.  Birkbcck,  and  Mr.  Metcalfe.  On  the
south  it  collects  in  a  ravine,  and  then  leaps  into  a  deep
bottle-shaped  hole  called  "  Gaping  GilW'  into  which  Mr.

*  Both  of  these  caves  are  kept  in  excelh^nt  order,  and  the  latter  is
lighted  with  gas.

D   2


3  G  CA  VE-H  UN  TING.  [chap.

Birkbeck  unsuccessfully  attempted  to  descend,  the  sharp
edges  of  the  rock  cutting  the  rope,  and  very  nearly
causing  a  serious  accident.  In  depth  it  is  about  three
hundred  feet.  The  stream  thence  finds  its  way  through
a  series  of  chambers  and  passages  until  it  reappears  in  the
famous  Ingleborough  cave,  that  was  explored  by  Mr.
Farrer  in  the  year  1837,  and  proved  to  pass  into  the
rock  between  seven  and  eight  hundred  yards.

The  present  entrance  of  the  Ingleborough  cave '  is  dry,
except  after  heavy  rains,  when  the  current  reverts  to  its
old  passage.  The  following  admirable  account  of  the
interior  is  given  by  Professor  Phillips  : — *

*'  From  Mr.  Farrer's  plan  and  description,  as  given  in
the  *  Proceedings  of  the  Geological  Society,'  June  14,
1848,  and  from  information  obligingly  communicated  to
me,  a  clear  notion  of  the  histor}''  of  this  most  instructive
spar  grotto  may  be  formed.  For  about  eighty  yards
from  the  entrance  the  cave  has  been  known  imme-
morially.  At  this  point  Josiali  Harrison,  a  gardener  in
Mr.  Farrer's  service,  broke  through  a  stalagmitical  barrier
which  the  water  had  formed,  and  obtained  access  to  a
series  of  expanded  cavities  and  contracted  passages,
stretching  first  to  the  N.,  then  to  the  N.W.  ;  afterwards
to  the  N.  and  N.E.,  and  finally  to  the  E.,  till  after  two
years  spent  in  the  interesting  toil  of  discovery,  at  a
distance  of  702  yards  from  the  mouth,  the  explorers
rested  from  their  labours  in  a  large  and  lofty  irregular
grotto,  in  which  they  heard  the  sound  of  water  falling
in  a  still  more  advanced  subterranean  recess.  It  has
been  ascertained,  at  no  inconsiderable  personal  risk,  that

*  The  cave  is  admirably  preserved  by  the  care  of  the  owner,  J.
Farrer,  Esq.,  and  may  be  visited  without  any  difficulty.
'  Rivers,  Mountains,  and  Sea-coast  of  Yorkshire,  8vo.  1854,  p.  34.


II. J  THE  INQLEBOROUGU  CAVE,  37

this  water  falls  into  a  deep  pool  or  linn  at  a  lower  level,
beyond  which  further  progress  appears  to  be  impracti-
cable. In  fact  Mr.  Farrer  explored  this  dark  lake  by
swimming — a  candle  in  his  cap  and  a  rope  round  his
body.

"  In  this  long  and  winding  gallery,  fashioned  by
nature  in  the  marble  heart  of  the  mountain,  floor,  roof,
and  sides  are  everywhere  intersected  by  fissures  which
were  formed  in  the  consolidation  of  the  stone.  To  these
fissures  and  the  water  which  has  passed  down  them,  we
owe  the  formation  of  the  cave  and  its  rich  furniture  of
stalactites.  The  direction  of  the  most  marked  fissures
is  almost  invariably  N.W.  and  S.E.,  and  when  certain
of  these  (which  in  my  geological  work  I  have  called
master  fissures)  occur,  the  roof  of  the  cave  is  usually
more  elevated,  the  sides  spread  out  right  and  left,  and
often  ribs  and  pendants  of  brilliant  stalactite,  placed  at
regular  distances,  convert  the  rude  fissure  into  a  beautiful
aisle  of  primaeval  architecture.  Below  most  of  the
smaller  fissures  hang  multitudes  of  delicate  translucent
tubules,  each  giving  passage  to  drops  of  water.  Splitting
the  rock  above,  these  fissures  admit,  or  formerly  admitted,
dropping  water :  continued  through  the  floor,  the  larger
rifts  permit,  or  formerly  permitted,  water  to  enter  or
flow  out  of  the  cave.  By  this  passage  of  water,  con-
tinued for  ages  on  ages,  the  original  fissure  was  in  the
first  instance  enlarged,  through  the  corrosive  action  of
streams  of  acidulated  wat^r ;  by  the  withdrawal  of  the
streams  to  other  fissures,  a  different  process  was  called
into  operation.  The  fissure  was  bathed  by  drops  instead
of  streams  of  water,  and  these  drops,  exposed  to  air
currents  and  evaporation,  yielded  up  the  free  carbonic
acid  to  the  air  and  the  salt  of  lime  to  the  rock.     Every


3  8  CA  VE-H  UN  TING.  [chap.

line  of  drip  became  the  axis  of  a  stalactitical  pipe  from
the  roof;  every  surface  bathed  by  thin  films  of  liquid
became  a  sheet  of  sparry  deposit.  The  floor  grew  up
under  the  droppings  into  fantastic  heaps  of  stalagmite,
which,  sometimes  reaching  the  pipes,  united  roof  and
floor  by  pillars  of  exquisite  beauty/'

At  the  time  of  its  exploration,  the  water  stood  at  a
considerably  higher  level  inside  than  at  the  present  time,
and  formed  deep  pools.  The  barrier  of  dripstone  has  been
cut  through,  and  the  water  level  lowered,  and  a  passage
made  for  a  considerable  distance.  Inside,  the  old  water
line,  which  separat<3d  the  subaerial  from  the  subaqueous
dripstone,  is  very  distinct,  the  former  being  deposited  in
thick  bofcses,  crumpled  curtains,  drops,  straws,  pyramids,
and  other  fantastic  drip-structures,  while  the  latter  is
honeycombed,  and  composed  of  rounded,  grape-like
masses.  Between  them  an  ice-like  coatinor  of  stalaormite
forms  a  dividing  line,  now  supported  in  mid  air,  but
that  formerly  shot  across  the  surface  of  the  pools  that
have  been  drained,  or  rested  on  the  mud  and  stones
which  had  been  brought  down  by  the  stream  in  ancient
times.  In  some  places  it  still  rests  on  the  surface  of  the
pools.

A  stalactitic  curtain  on  the  right-hand  side  presents  a
very  singular  appearance,  its  surface  being  covered  with
an  abundant  crop  of  tiny  club-like  bodies  about  one-tenth
of  an  inch  in  length,  and  consisting  each  of  a  shining
drop  of  water,  enclosing  a  minute  fungus.  These  may
possibly  explain  in  some  degree  the  peculiar  fungoid-
appearance  of  certain  small  bosses  of  dripstone  which
I  iiave  met  with  in  the  caves  of  Pcmbrokeshii'e :  for  an
accumulation  of  carbonate  of  lime  on  such  a  nucleus
would  produce  the  forms  which  they  assume  (see  Fig.  1 7).


I  I.J  THE  INGLEBOBOUGJI  CAVE,  39

There  are  also  magnificent  groups  of  dripstone,  and
each  joint  in  the  rock  is  adorned  with  lines,  and  pipes,
and  fringes  of  calc  spar,  or  widened  out  into  roof-shaped
hollows,  and  traversed  by  deep,  vertical  grooves,  caused
by  the  passage  of  water  laden  with  carbonic  acid.  The
general  surface  of  the  roof,  where  the  rock  is  bare,  has
had  its  fossils  etched  out  by  the  acidulat<3d  water.  In
one  place  you  may  stand  under  a  branching  coral,  with
its  sides  and  base  distinctly  marked,  and  in  another  fossil
shells  stand  out  almost  in  their  original  beauty.

Bate  of  the  Accumulation  of  Stalaymite.

The  rate  at  which  the  calcareous  matter  is  bein^^
deposited  at  the  present  time  is  very  easy  to  be
estimated,  for  that  accumulated  since  the  passage  was
cleared  out  is  white,  and  contrasts  with  the  dirty,  grey-
red  colour  of  the  older  kind.  In  one  case  a  thickness  of
0*24  had  been  formed  in  thirty-five  years,  by  the  w^ater
flowing  down  the  side  of  the  passage  excavated  by  Mr.
Farrer,  while  in  another,  in  about  the  same  time,  0*05
inch  had  been  formed.  This  would  give  an  annual
accumulation  of  0'0068  in  the  one  case,  and  in  the  other
about  one-fifth  of  that  amount.  This  rate  does  not
agree  with  the  rate  of  increase  noted  by  Mr.  Farrer  and
Professor  Phillips  in  the  case  of  a  large  stalagmite  called
the  Jockey  Cap,  on  which  a  line  of  drops  is  continually
falling  from  one  point  in  the  roof.  Its  circumference
in  1839  measured  118  inches,  in  1845,  120  inches,
and  in  1873,  I  found  it  to  be  128  inches.  The  annual
rate  of  increase  from  1845  to  1873  is  '2941  inch,
and  that  from  1839  to  1845  is  '2857.  I  found,
however,  that  the   most  remarkable  increase  was  that


40  CA  VE'H  UNTING.  [chap.

in  height.  In  1845  its  apex  was  9525  inches  frova
the  roof,  in  1873,  87  inches,  which  would  imply  an
annual  deposit  of  not  less  than  '2946.  (See  Appendix  II.)
At  this  rate  it  will  arrive  at  the  roof  in  alx)ut  295  years.
But  even  this  comparatively  short  lapse  of  time  will
probably  be  diminished  by  the  growth  of  a  pendant
stalactite  above,  that  is  now  being  formed  in  place  of
that  which  measured  10  inches  in  1845,  and  has  since
been  accidentally  destroyed.

It  is  very  possible  that  the  Jockey  Cap  may  be  the
result,  not  of  the  continuous,  but  of  the  intermittent
drip  of  water  containing  carbonate  of  lime,  and  that
therefore  the  present  rate  of  growth  is  not  a  measure  of
its  past  or  future  condition.  Its  age  in  1845  was  esti-
mated by  Professor  Phillips  at  259  years,  on  the  suppo-
sition that  all  or  nearly  all  of  the  carbonate  of  lime  in
each  pint  was  deposited.  If,  however,  it  grew  at  its
present  rate,  it  may  bo  not  more  than  100  years  old;
and  if  it  be  taken  as  a  measure  of  the  rate  generally,
all  the  stalagmites  and  stalactites  in  the  cave  may  not
date  further  back  than  the  time  of  Edward  HI.

It  is  evident,  from  this  instance  of  rapid  accumula-
tion, that  the  value  of  a  layer  of  stalagmite  in  measuring
the  antiquity  of  deposits  below  it,  is  comparatively
little.  The  layers,  for  instance,  in  Kent's  Hole,  which
are  generally  believed  to  have  demanded  a  considerable
lapse  of  time,  may  possibly  have  been  formed  at  the  rate
of  a  quarter  of  an  inch  per  annum,  and  the  human  bones
which  lie  buried  under  the  stalagmite  in  the  cave  of
Bruniquel,  are  not  for  that  reason  to  be  taken  to  be  of
vast  antiquity.  It  may  be  fairly  concluded,  that  the
thickness  of  layers  of  stalagmite  cannot  be  used  as  an
argument  in  support  of  the  remote  age  of  the  strata


II.J  THE  EXPLOkATlOS  OF  HELLN  POT.  41

below.  At  tlie  rate  of  a  quarter  of  an  inch  per  annum,
twenty  feet  of  stalagmite  might  be  formed  in  1,000
years.

The  Descent  into  Ilelln  Pot.

The  subterranean  passages  grouped  round  Helbi  Pot,
a  tremendous  chasm  near  Selaide,  on  the  east  of  Siraon'a
Fell  in  Ribblesdale,  illustrate  in  a  remarkable  degree
the  mode  in  which  the  water  is  at  present  wearing  away
the  rock.  Those  which
have  been  explored  con-
stitute the  Long  Churn
Cavern,  which  is  com-
paratively easy  of  access
through  a  hole  known  as
Diccan  Pot  (Fig.  2,  a).
On  descending  into  it,  the
visitor  finds  himself  in
the  bed  of  a  stream  that
now  roars  in  a  water-
fall, now  gurgles  over  the
large  fallen  blocks  from
the  roof,  and  that  here
and  there  has  worn  for
itself  deep  pools  by  the  mechanical  friction  of  the  sand
and  pebbles  brought  down  by  the  current.  If  it  be
followed  down  after  passing  over  a  waterfall,  the  light  of
day  is  seen  streaming  upwards  beneath  the  feet  from  the
point  where  the  water  leaps  into  the  great  chasm  of
Helln  Pot  (Figa  2,  h.  3,  a).  Above  the  entrance  there
is  a  complicated  network  of  passages,  some  dry,  and
some  containing  streams  which  have  not  yet  been
fully  explored.


CAVE-HUNTINU.


[c.


The  two  actions  by  which  caves  ai'e  hewn  out  of  the
calcareous  i'o<'k  are  seen  here  in  operation  side  by  side.
Below  the  level  of  the  stream  the  rock  is  seen  to  be
smoothed  and  polished  by  the  mechanical  action  of  the
materi:ils  swept  down  by  the  cuiTeiit.     Above  the  water-


level  the  sides  of  the  cave  are  houevL-onibed  and  eaten
into  the  most  fantastic  and  complex  shapes,  the  result-
ant surface  (-see  Fig.  7)  bearing  small  points  and  keen
knife-edges  of  stone,  that  -stand  out  in  relief  and  mark
the  less  sohil)le  jwrtions  of  the  rock.  This  is  due  to  the
chemical  eHl-ct  (»f  the  carbonic  acid  in  the  water  per-
colating through  the  strata.

The  ilelhi  Pot,  into  which  the  stream  flowing  through
the  Long  Chuni  Cave  falls,  is  a  fissure  (Figs.  2,  3,  4)


n.J  THE  EXPLORATION  OF  UELLN  FOT,  43

a  hundred  feet  long  by  thirty  feet  wide,  that  engulfs  the
waters  of  a  little  stream  on  the  surface,  which  are  dissi-
pated in  spray  long  before  they  reach  the  bottom.  From
the  top  you  look  down  on  a  series  of  ledges,  green  with
ferns  and  mosses,  and,  about  a  hundred  feet  from  the
surface,  an  enormous  fragment  of  rock  forms  a  natural
bridge  across  the  chasm  from  one  ledge  to  another.  A  little
above  this  is  the  debouchement  of  the  stream  flowing
through  the  Long  Churn  Cave  (Fig.  3,  a),  through  which
Mr.  Birkbeck  and  Mr.  Metcalfe  made  the  first  perilous
descent  in  1847.  The  party,  consisting  of  ten  pei-sons,
ventured  into  this  awful  chasm  with  no  other  apparatus
than  ropes,  planks,  a  turn-tree,  and  a  fire-escape  belt.
On  emerging  from  the  Long  Churn  Cave  they  stood  on
a  ledge  of  rock  about  twelve  feet  wide,  and  which  gave
them  free  access  to  the  "  bridge ''  (Fig.  2,  6).  This  was
a  rock  ten  feet  long,  which  rested  obliquely  on  the  ledges.
Having  crossed  over  this,  they  crept  behind  the  waterfall
which  descended  from  the  top,  and  fixed  their  pulley,
five  being  let  down  while  the  rest  of  the  party  remained
behind  to  hoist  them  up  again.  In  this  way  they  reached
the  bottom  of  the  pot,  which  before  had  never  been  trod
by  the  foot  of  man.  Thence  they  followed  the  stream
downwards  as  far  as  the  first  great  waterfall,  down  which
Mr.  Metcalfe  was  venturesome  enough  to  let  himself
with  a  rope,  and  to  push  onwards  until  daylight  failed.
He  was  within  a  very  little  of  arriving  at  the  end  of
the  cave  into  which  the  stream  flows,  but  was  obliged
to  turn  back  to  the  daylight  without  having  accom-
plished his  purpose.  The  whole  party  eventually,  after
considerable  danger  and  trouble,  returned  safely  from
this  most  bold  adventure.

A  second  descent  was  made  in  1848  from  the  surface,


44  CAVE  HUNTING.  [chap.

and   a  third  in  the  spring  of  1870,  in  both   of  which
Mr.  Birkbeck  took  the  lead.     The  apparatus  employed
consisted   of  a   windlass   (Fig.  3),   supported   on   two
baulks  of  timber,  and  a  bucket,  covered  with  a  shield,
sufficiently  large  to  hold  two  people,  and  two  guiding
ropes  to  prevent  the  revolution  of  the  bucket  in  mid
air.     There  was  also  a  party  of  navvies  to  look  after
the   mechanical   contrivances,   and   two   ladders   about
eight   feet  long   to   provide   for   contingencies   at  the
bottom.     Thirteen  of   us  went  down,  including   three
ladies.    As  we  descended,  the  fissure  gradually  narrowed,
until  at  the  bottom  it  was  not  more  than  ten  feet  wide.
The  actual  vertical  descent  was  a  hundred  and  ninety-
eight  feet.     After  running  the  gauntlet  of  the  water-
fall we  landed  in  the  bed  of  the  stream,  which  hunied
downwards  over  large  boulders  of  limestone  and  lost
itself  in  the  darkness  of  a  large  cave,  about  seventy
feet  high.     We  traced  it  downwards,  through  pools  and
rapids  to  the  first  waterfall,  of  about  twenty  feet.     This
obstacle  prevented  most  of  the  party  going  further,  for
the  ladders  were  too  short  to  reach  to  the  bottom.     By
lashing  them  together,  however,  and  letting  them  down,
we  were  able  to  reach  the  first  round  with  the  aid  of
a  rope,  and  to  cross  over  the  deep  pool  at  the  bottom.
Thence  we  went  on  downwards  through  smaller  water-
falls and  rapids,  imtil  we  arrived  at  a  descent  into  a
chamber,  where  the  roar  of  water  was  deafening.    Down
to  this  point  the  daylight  glimmered  feebly,  but  here  our
torches  made  but  little  impression  on  the  darkness.    One
of  the  party  volunteered  to  go  down  with  a  rope,  and
was   suddenly   immersed   in    a   deep    pool ;    the   rest,
profiting  by  his  misadventure,  managed  to  cling  on  to
small  points  of  rock,  and  eventually  to  reach  the  floor


II.]  THE  EXtLORATION  OF  HELLN  POT.  45

i»f  the  chamber.  We  stood  at  last  on  the  lowest
accessible  point  of  the  cave,  about  300  feet  from  the
surface.  It  was  indeed  one  of  the  most  remarkable
sights  that  could  possibly  be  imagined.  Besides  the
waterfall  down  which  we  came,  a  powerful  stream  poured
out  of  a  cave  too  high  up  for  the  torches  to  penetrate
the  darkneiw,  and  fell  into  a  deep  pool  in  the  middle  of


Fill.  *.  — I)iii;(riim  of  HtUn  I'ot,  showiiij(  Watorfnll  at  the  Bottom.

the  floor,  causing  such  a  powerful  current  of  air  that  all
our  torches  were  blown  out  except  one.  The  two  streams
eventually  united  and  disappeared  in  a  small  black
circling  pool,  which  completely  barred  further  ingress.
The  floor  of  the  pot  and  the  cave  was  strewn  with
masses  of  limestone  rounded  by  the  action  of  the
streams ;    and  the  water-channels  were    smoothed    and


46  CAVE  HUNTING.  [chap.

grooved  and  polished,  in  a  most  extraordinary  way,  by
the  silt  and  stones  carried  along  by  the  current.  Some
of  the  layers  of  limestone  were  jet  black,  and  others
were  of  a  light  fawn-colour,  and  as  the  strata  were
nearly  horizontal,  the  alternation  of  colours  gave  a
peculiarly  striking  effect  to  the  walls.  Beneath  each
waterfall  was  a  pool  more  or  less  deep,  and  here  and
there  in  the  bed  of  the  stream  were  holes,  drilled  in  the
rock  by  stones  whirled  round  by  the  force  of  the  water.
High  up,  out  of  the  present  reach  of  the  water,  were  old
channels,  which  had  evidently  been  watercourses  before
the  pot  and  cave  had  been  cut  down  to  their  present
level.  In  the  sides  of  the  pot  there  are  two  vertical
grooves  reaching  very  nearly  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,
which  are  unmistakeably  the  work  of  ancient  waterfalls.
There  was  no  stalactite,  but  everywhere  the  water  was
wearing  away  the  rock  and  enlarging  the  cave.  We
found  our  way  back  without  any  difficulty,  a  small
passage  on  the  right-hand  side  enabling  us  to  avoid  the
very  unpleasant  task  of  scrambling  up  two  of  the  water-
falls. We  arrived  finally  at  the  top,  after  about  five
hours'  work  in  the  cave,  wet  to  the  skin.

We  had  very  little  trouble  in  making  this  descent,
because  of  the  completeness  of  Mr.  Birkbeck's  prepara-
tions ;  but  we  could  fully  realize  what  a  dangerous  feat
the  first  ex[)]orers  perfonned  when  they  ventured  into
an  unknown  chasm,  comparatively  unprepared.  The
very  name  ''  Helhi  Pot,''  =  ^Ellan  ?ot,  or  Mouth  of  Hell,
testifies  to  the  awe  with  which  the  Angles  looked  down
into  its  recesses.'

Such  is  the  interior  of  one  of  those  great  natural
laboratories  in  which  water  is  wearing  away  the  solid

^  On  the  Ordnance  Maps  it  is  wrongly  printed  Alum  Pot


ii.J  THE  CAVES  AND  POTS  AT  WEATHERCOTE.  47

rock,  either  hollowing  it  into  caves  or  cutting  it  into
ravines.  At  the  bottom  of  Helln  Pot  it  was  impos-
sible not  to  realize,  that  the  enormous  chjism  had  been
formed  by  the  same  action  as  that  by  which  it  was
being  deepened  before  our  eyes.  It  was  merely  a
portion  of  the  vast  cave  into  whidi  it  led,  which
had  been  deprived  of  its  roof,  and  opened  out  to
the  light  of  heaven.  The  bridge  was  but  a  fragment
of  the  roof  which  happened  to  fall  upon  the  two  ledges.
The  rounded  masses  of  rock  at  the  bottom  are  fraffments
that  have  fallen  probably  within  comparatively  modern
times.  The  absence  of  stalactites  and  of  stidaomites
proves  that  the  destructive  action  is  rapidly  going  on.

The  water-course  at  the  bottom  contained  pebbles  and
boulders  of  limestone,  and  gritstone  rounded  by  friction
against  one  another  and  the  rocky  floor.  The  gritstone
has  probably  been  derived  from  the  w^eck  of  the  boulder
clay  on  the  surface  above  the  Helln  Pot,  and  ultimately
torn  from  the  millstone  grit  of  the  higher  hills  in  the
district.

Caves  and  Pots  at   Weathercote.

On  the  north  side  of  Ingleborough  the  series  of
caves  and  pots  round  the  little  Church  of  Chapel-en-le-
Dale  are  especially  worthy  of  attention.  The  chasm  at
Weathercote  opens  suddenly  in  the  hill-side,  and  is
perfectly  accessible  to  visitors.  You  come  suddenly
upon  a  cleft  a  hundred  feet  deep,  with  its  ledges  covered
with  mosses,  ferns,  and  brambles ;  at  one  end  a
body  of  water  rushes  from  a  cave,  and  under  a  great
bridge  of  rock,  and  falls  seventy-five  feet,  a  mass  of
snow-white  foam  filling  the  bottom  wuth  spray  (Fig.  5).
The  large  masses  of  rock  piled  in  wild  confusion  at  the


48  VAVK-HVNTimf.  [chap.

bottom,  the  dark  shadows  of  the  overhangiDg  ledges,
and  the  thick  covering  of  green  moss,  to  which  the
spray  clings  in  tiny  glittering  drops,  form  a  picture
which  cannot  easily  be  forgotten.  In  the  sunshine  an
almost  circular  rainbow  is  to  be  seen  from  the  bottom.
The  stream  passes  from  the  bottom  into  a  cave,  and
tlience  downwards  to  two  large  pots  (Fig.  6),  about  two
liundred  yards  away.  In  flood-time  the  channel  has
been  known  to  become  blor-ked  up,  and  Wcathereote  has


been  filled  to  tlie  brim.  Usually  after  heavy  rains  the  cur-
rent is  said  to  flow  so  violently  into  the  first  of  the  pot-
holes, that  it  throws  up  stones  at  least  thirty  or  forty  feet
from  the  bottom,  witli  a  peculiar  rattling  noise.  From
tliis  strange  phenomenon  it  is  known  as  Jingle  Pot,  while
the  lower  of  the  two  is  termed  Hurtle  Pot,  because  in


II.]  THE  F0T-H0LE8  AT  CBAPBL-EN-LE-DALB.  4S

flood-time   the  water  whirls  so  fast   round,  that  it  is

"  hurtled  "  out  at  the  top.     The  wat«r  flowing  throupli

"Weathercoto  is  derived   from   the

little  stream   of  EUerbeck,  which  j.    UfHjL,

disappears   in  the  limestone    hilJa  ^JhiIkkm'

about  a  mile  to  the  north,  and  runs

at  right  angles  tu  Dalebeck,  or  the

stream  flowing  down  to  Ingleton,

which  it  has  been  proved  to  join

at    a  spot   below   Jingle    Pot,   by

Mr.  Metcalfe,  who  made  his  way

down  into  it  from  the  chasm  of

AVeathercote.

The  eouree  of  Dalebeck,  as  you
pass  up  the  valley  of  Chapel-en-Ie-
Dale,  affords  a  striking  instance  of
the  dependence  of  scenery  upon
the  nature  of  the  rock.  In  its  lower
portion  it  has  cut  out  for  itself  a
deep  ravine  in  the  hard  Silurian
strata,  in  which  you  come  upon  JIHiltil

the  waterfalls,  deep  pools,  and  trees,
that  look  as  if  they  had  been  trans-
ported bodily  from  the  district  of
Cader  Idris,  and  inserted  into  the
limestone  scenery  of  the  dales.
The  Silurian  rocks  are  very  much
contorted,  and  on  their  waterworn
edges  lie  the  nearly  horizontal  lime-
stone strata,  in  which  the  upper
part  of  the  valley  has  been  scooped.
As  we  rise  the  ravine  opens  into
a  valley  (Fig.  6),  along  which  the


5  0  CA  VE'HUNTINO.  [chap.

beck  flows,  until  suddenly  it  is  lost  in  a  fissure,  at  a  place
called  Godsbridgc.  Its  subterranean  course  is  marked,
first  of  all,  by  a  small  depression  known  as  Sandpot,  and
still  higher  by  Hurtle  Pot.  It  ultimately  reappears  at
the  surface,  above  Weathercote,  and  after  passing  through
a  picturesque  cavern,  known  as  the  Gatekirk,  its  fountain-
head  is  reached.  The  subterranean  portions  of  its  course
are  in  the  same  right  line  as  the  open  valley,  and  the
pot-holes  have  been  formed  in  the  same  manner  as
Helln  Pot,  by  the  passage  of  water  at  a  time  when  the
drainage  found  its  way  down  the  valley  at  a  higher
level  than  at  present,  very  much  sls  it  does  now  in  times
of  extraordinary  floods.

Water-caves  such  as  these  are  by  no  means  uncommon
in  Yorkshire.  In  the  dales  there  is  scarcely  a  mass  of
limestone  without  its  subterranean  water  system,  as  well
as  channels  deserted  by  water,  which  are  now  dry  caves
situated  at  higher  levels.  These  are  always  arranged  on
the  line  of  the  natural  drainage,  and  generally  open  on
the  sides  of  the  valleys  and  precipices.  If  you  look
northward  from  the  flat  crown  of  Ingleborough,  you  can
see  the  ravines  which  radiate  from  it  on  the  surface  of
the  shale  below,  abruptly  ending  in  pot-holes  when  they
reach  the  limestone.  In  each  case  the  streams  reappear,
issuing  out  of  the  caves  at  the  points  in  Chapel-en-le-
Dale,  where  the  horizontal  beds  of  limestone  rest  on  the
upturned  edges  of  the  impermeable  Silurian  rocks.

lite  Foriiuition  of  Cares  and  tlieir  Relation  to  Pot-hole^

and  Ravines.

The  general  conditions  under  which  caves  occur  in
limestone  rocks,  and  the  phenomena  which  they  present,


n]    FORMATION  OF  CAVES,  POT-HOLES,  AND  RAVINES,    51

may  be  gathered  from  the  above  examples.  Universally
the  pot-holes,  ravines,  and  caverns  are  so  iisso<nated
together,  that  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  they  are
due  to  the  operation  of  the  same  causes.

It  requires  but  a  cursory  glance  to  see  at  once  that
running  water  was  the  main  agent.  The  limestone  is  so
traversed  by  joints  and  lines  of  shrinkage,  that  the
water  rapidly  sinks  down  into  its  mass,  and  collects  in
small  streams,  which  owe  their  direction  to  the  dip  of
the  strata  and  the  position  of  the  fissures.  These
channels  are  being  continually  deepened  and  widened
by  the  mere  mechanical  action  of  the  passage  of  stones
and  silt.  But  this  is  not  the  only  way  in  which  the
rock  is  gradually  eroded.  The  limestone  is  composed  in
great  part  of  pure  carbonate  of  lime,  which  is  insoluble
in  water.  It  is,  however,  readily  dissolved  in  any  liquid
containing  carbonic  acid,  which  is  an  essential  part  of
our  atmosphere,  is  invariably  present  in  the  rain-water,
and  is  given  oflP  by  all  organic  bodies.  By  this  in-
visible agent  the  hard  crystalline  rock  is  always  being
attacked  in  some  form  or  another.  The  very  snails  that
take  refuge  in  its  crannies  leave  an  enduring  mark  of  their
presence  in  a  surface  fretted  with  their  acid  exhalations,
which  sometimes  pass  current  among  geologists  for  the
borings  of  pholades,  and  are  the  innocent  cause  of  much
speculation  as  to  the  depression  of  the  mountain-tops
beneath  the  sea  in  comparatively  modem  times.  The
carbonic  acid  taken  up  by  the  rain  is  derived,  in  the
main,  from  the  decomposing  vegetable  matter  which
generally  forms  the  surface  soil  on  the  limestone.

The  view  from  the  ancient  camp  on  the  top  of  Ingle-
borough  offers  a  striking  example  of  the  effect  of  rain-
water in  eroding  the  surface  of  the  limestone.     As  you

E  2


o-l  VAVE-HVSTING.  [chap.

look  down  over  the  dark  crags  of  millstone  grit,  great,
grey,  pavement-like  masses  of  limestone  strike  the  eye,
standing  above  the  heather,  perfectly  bare,  and  in  the
distance  resembling  clearingg,  and  in  rainy  weather
sheets  of  snow.  On  approaching  them  the  surface  of
erosion  becomes  more  and  more  apparent,  and  the  shapes
due  to  the  mere  accident  of  varying  hardness  in  the  rock,
or  the  varying  quantity  of  water  passing  over  it,  present
a  most  astonishing  variety.  There  are,  however,  general
principles  underlying  the  confusion.  The  lines  of  joints
in  the  strata  being  lines  of  weakness,  searched  out  by
the  acid-laden  water,  have  been  widened  into  chasms,
sometimes  of  considerable  depth ;  and  as  they  cross
at  right  angles,  the  whole  surface  is  funned  of  rectan-
gular masses,  each  insulated  from  its  fellow,  and  some  of
them  detached  from  tlie  strata  beneath  so  as  to  form
rocking-stonea.  The  mode  in  which  the  acid
has  attacked  one  of  these  joints  in  the  lime-
stone of  Doveholes  in  Derbyshii-e  is  repre-
sented in  Figure  7,  the  surface  being  houey-
(;ombed  and  worn  into  sharp  points,  solely  by
chemical  action.  I'he  minute  fossil-shells  also,
and  fragments  of  erinoid  standing  out  in  bold
relief,  lead  to  the  same  conclusion — that  the
denuding  agent  is  chemical  and  not  mecha-
Fi...  7.  — uia.  nical.  Each  of  tlie  upper  surfaces  of  the  blocks
atiii-woru  is  travcrscd  by  small  depressions,  which  are
iI'!iUT>uriiy-  valley  systems  in  miniature,  in  which  the  tiny
fliiirc.  valleys  converge  into  a  main  trunk  leading

into  the  nearest  chasm.  There  are  also  tiny  caves  and
hollows,  that  are  sometimes  mistaken  for  borings  made  by
pholas.  In  the  chasms  the  vegetation  is  most  luxuriant,
and  the  dark  gi-een  fronds  of  harts-tongue,  the  delicate


11.  J    FORMATION  OF  CAVESy  POT-HOLES,  AND  RAVINES,    53

Lady-fern,  and   the   graceful  Asplenium  nigrum  grow
with  a  rare  luxuriance.

In  these  pavements  every  feature  of  limestone  scenery
is  represented  on  a  minute  scale.  There  are  the  valley
systems  on  the  surface,  determined  by  the  direction  of
the  drainage  ;  the  long  chasms  represent  the  open  valleys
and  ravines,  and  the  caves  cand  hollows,  for  the  most
part,  run  in  the  line  of  the  joints.

The  carbonic  acid  has  left  precisely  the  same  kind  of
proof  of  its  work  within  the  caves  as  we  find  above-
ground  ;  and  it  would  necessarily  follow,  that  to  it,  as
well  as  to  the  mechanical  power  of  the  w^aters  flow-
ing through  them,  their  formation  and  enlargement
must  be  due,  as  Professor  Phillips  has  pointed  out  in
his  "Rivers,  Mountains,  and  Sea  Coast  of  Yorkshire,*'
pp.  30-1.

From  the  preceding  pages  it  will  be  seen  that  caves
in  calcareous  rocks  are  merely  passages  hollowed  out
by  water,  which  has  sought  out  the  lines  of  weakness,
or  the  joints  formed  by  the  shrinkage  of  the  strata
during  their  consolidation.  The  work  of  the  carbonic
acid  is  proved,  not  merely  by  the  acid-worn  surfaces  of
the  interior  of  the  caves,  but  also  by  the  large  quantity
of  carbonate  of  lime  which  is  carried  away  by  the  water
in  solution.  That,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  mechanical
friction  of  the  stones  and  sand  against  the  sides  and
bottom  of  the  water-courses,  is  sufficiently  demonstrated
by  their  grooved,  scratched,  and  polished  surfaces,  and
by  the  sand,  silt,  and  gravel  carried  along  by  the
currents.  The  generally  received  hypothesis,  that  they
have  been  the  result  of  a  subterranean  convulsion,  is
disproved  by  the  floor  and  roof  being  formed,  in  very
nearly  every  case,  of  solid  rock;  for  it  would  be  unrea-


54  CAVE-HUNTING.  [chap.

sonable  to  hold  that  any  subterranean  force  could  act
from  below,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  hollow  out  the
complicated  nnd  branching  passages,  cit  diflferent  levels,
without  affecting  the  whole  mass  of  the  rock.  Nor  is
there  cause  for  holding  the  view  put  forth  by  M.  Des-
noyers^  or  M.  Dupont,^  that  they  are  the  result  of  the
passage  of  hydrothermal  waters.  The  causes  at  present
at  work,  operating  through  long  periods  of  time,  offer  a
reasonable  explanation  of  their  existence  in  every  lime-
stone district ;  and  those  which  are  no  longer  watercourses
ran  generally  be  proved  to  have  been  formerly  traversed
by  running  water,  by  the  silt,  sand,  and  rounded  pebbles
which  they  contain.  In  their  case,  either  the  drainage
of  the  district  has  been  changed  by  the  upheaval  or
depression  of  the  rock,  or  the  streams  have  searched  out
for  themselves  a  passage  at  a  lower  level.

But  if  caves  have  been  thus  excavated,  it  is  obvious  ..

•f

that  ravines  and  valleys  in  limestone  districts  are  due
to  the  operation  of  the  same  causes.  If,  for  instance,
we  refer  to  Figures  1  and  6,  we  shall  see  that  the  open
valley  passes  insensibly  into  a  ravine,  and  that  into  a
cave.  The  ravine  is  merely  a  cave  which  has  lost  its
roof,  and  the  valley  is  merely  the  result  of  the  weather-
ing of  the  sides  of  the  ravine.  There  can  be  no  manner
of  doubt  but  that,  in  both  these  cases,  the  ravine  is
gradually  encroaching  on  the  cave,  and  the  valley  on
the  ravine  ;  and  if  the  strata  be  exposed  to  atmospheric
agencios  long  enough,  the  valley  of  the  Axe  will  extend
as  far  as  Priddy  (Fig.  1),  and  that  of  Dalebeck  to  the
watershed  above  the  Gatekirk  cave  (Fig.  6).

'  Op.  fit.  Article  Grottes.

'  L* Homme  pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre  dans  les  Environs  de
T)inant  snr  Meiiso,  liruxelles,  1871.


II.]    FORMATION  OF  CAFSa,  POT-HOLES,  AND  BAVINES.    55

In  the  same  manner  the  lofty  precipice  of  Malham
Cove,  near  Settle,  in  Yorkshire  (Fig.  8),  is  slowly  falling
away  and  uncovering  the  subterranean  course  of  the
Aire.  Eventually  the  ravine  thus  formed  will  extend  as
far  as  Malham  Tarn,  and  the  Aire  flow  exposed  to  the
light  of  day  from  its  source  to  the  sea.'


Fill.  8.— Di«Brnm  of  .1oiirp«  of  the  Aiir  st  Malh.m.


This  view  is  applicable  to  many  if  not  to  alt  ravines
and  valleys  in  calcareous  rocks,  euch  as  the  Pass  at
Cheddar,  or  the  gorge  of  the  Avon  at  Clifton,  and  those
of  Derbyshire,  Yorkshire,  and  Wales.  And  since  the
agents  by  which  the  work  is  done  are  universal,  and
calcareous  rock  for  the  most  part  of  the  same  chemical
composition,  the  results  are  the  same,  and  the  calcareous
scenery  everywhere  of  the  same  type.  In  the  lapse  of
past  time,  so  enormous  as  to  be  incapable  of  being  grasped
by  the  human  intellect,  these  agents  are  fully  capable
of  producing  the  deepest  ravines,  the  widest  valleys,
and  the  largest  caves.

This  view  of  the  relation  of  caves  to  ravines  was  so
strongly  held  by  M.  Desnoyers,  that  he  terms  the  latter
"cavemes  h.  ciel  ouvert."     I  arrived  independently  at

'  The  'bare  pftveraents  above  Malham  Cove  are  worthy  of  a  ca.nta\
examination.


56  CA  VE-HUNTING.  [chap.

the  same  conclusion  after  the  study  of  the  scenery  of
limestone  for  many  years.

In  many  cases,  however,  in  northern  latitudes  and  in
high  altitudes,  the  ravine  or  valley  so  formed  has  been
subsequently  widened  and  deepened  by  glacial  action.
That,  for  instance,  of  Chapel-en -le-Dale  bears  unmistake-
able  evidence  of  the  former  flow  of  a  glacier,  in  the
roches  moutonnees  and  travelled  blocks  that  it  contains.
To  this  is  due  the  flowing  contour  and  even  slope  of  its
lower  portion.

The  pot-holes  and  "  cirques  "  in  calcareous  rocks  with
no  outlet  at  the  surface,  may  also  be  accounted  for  by  the
operation  of  the  same  causes  as  those  which  have  pro-
duced caves.     Each  represents  the  weak  point  towards
which  the  rainfall  has  converged,  caused  very  generally
by  the  intersection  of  the  joints.     This  has  gradually
been  widened  out,  because  the  upper  portions  of  the  rock
would  be  the  first  to  seize  the  atoms  of  carbonic  acid,
and   thus   be  dissolved  more   quickly  than   the   lower
portions.     Hence   the   funnel  shape   which   they  gene-
rally assume,  and  which  can  be  studied  equally  in  the
compact  limestone  or  in  the  soft  upper  chalk.     They
are  to  be  seen  on  a  small  scale  also  in  all  limestone
"  pavements.''      Sometimes,  however,  the   first  chance
which  the  upper  portions  of  the  funnels  have  of  being
eroded  by  the  acidulated  water,  is  more  than  counter-
balanced by  the  increased  quantity  converging  at  the
bottom,  and  the  funnel  ends  in  a  vertical  shaft.     If  the
area  in  the  rock  thus  excavated  be  sufliciently  large  to
allow  of  the  development   of  a  current  of  water,  the
mechanical  action  of  the  fragments  swept  along  its  course
will  have  an  important  share  in  the  work,  as  we  have
seen  to  be  the  case  in  Helln  Pot.


ii.J        CAVES  NOT  GENERALLY  IN  LINE  OF  FAULTS.       57

Caves  not  generally  found  in  Line  of  Faults.

In  some  few  cases  the  lines  of  weakness  wliieh  liave
been  worn  into  caves,  pot-holes,  ravines,  and  valleys,
may  have  been  produced,  as  M.  Desnoyers  believes,
by  subterranean  movements  of  elevation  and  depression  ;
but  in  all  those  which  I  have  investigated  the  faults
do  not  determine  the  direction  of  the  caverns.  The
mountain  limestone  of  Castleton,  in  Derbyshire,  oflfers
an  example  of  caves  intersecting  faults  without  any  de-
finite relation  being  traceable  between  them.  The  rami-
fications of  the  Peak  cavern  traverse  the  Speedwell  Mine
nearly  at  right  angles,  and  the  water  flowing  through
it  has  been  traced,  Mr.  Pennington  informs  me,  to  a
swallow-hole  near  Chapel-en-lc- Frith,  running  across  two,
if  not  three  faults,  which  are  laid  down  in  the  geological
map.  As  a  general  rule  caverns  are  as  little  affected
by  disturbance  of  the  rock  as  ravines  and  valleys  which
have  been  formed  in  the  main  irrespective  of  the  lines
of  fault.

M.  Desnoyers  points  out  the  close  analogy  between
caverns  and  mineral  veins,  and  infers  that  both  are  due
to  the  same  causes.  This,  undoubtedly,  exists  in  that
class  of  veins  which  are  known  to  miners  as  "pipe''
and  '*flat  veins;"  and  there  is  clear  proof,  in  the
majority  of  cases,  that  the  cavities  in  which  the  minerals
occur  have  been  formed  by  the  action  of  running  water,
and  have  subsequently  been  more  or  less  filled  with
their  mineral  contents ;  and  these  have  been  deposited
on  the  sides  of  the  cavity  by  the  same  "  incretionary^ "

^  I  haye  used  the  term  incretionary  as  implying  an  accumulation  of
mineral  matter  from  the  circumference  of  a  cavity  towards  its  centre,


58  CA  VE-HUNTING,  [chap.

action,  as  that  by  which  dripstone  is  now  being  formed
in  the  present  caves  from  the  solution  of  carbonate  of  lime.
Such  veins  present  every  conceivable  form  of  irregu-
larity, and  frequently  contain  silt,  sand,  and  gravel,
which  have  been  left  behind  by  their  streams,  and  their
history  is  identical  with  that  of  the  caverns.

It  is  not  so,  however,  with  the  second  class  of  veins,  the
''rake,"  "right  running,"  and  "cross  courses,"  as  the
miners  term  them,  or  those  which  occupy  lines  of  fault
The  fissures  which  contain  the  ore  are  proved  very  fre-
quently, by  their  scratched  and  grooved  sides,  and  polished
surfaces  or  slicken-sides,  to  have  been  the  result  of  sub-
terranean movements  by  which  the  rock  has  been  broken
by  mechanical  force.  They  have  been  subsequently
modified,  in  various  w^ays,  by  the  passage  of  water,  and
filled  with  minerals,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  preced-
ing class.  With  this  exception  they  present  no  analogy
to  the  caverns,  with  which  they  contrast  strongly  in  their
rectilinear  direction,  as  well  as  in  their  purely  mechani-
cal origin.

The  vanous  Ages  of  Caves.

It  is  very  probable  that  caves  were  formed  in  calca-
reous rocks  from  the  time  that  they  were  raised  to  the
level  of  the  sea,  since  tliey  abound  in  the  Coral  Islands.
"Caverns/'  writes  Prof.  Dana,*  "are  still  more  re-
markal)le  on  the  Island  of  Atiu,  on  which  the  coral-reef

as  in  the  caso  of  an  apjate.  Concretionary  action,  with  which  it  18
fjjenerally  confused,  ought  to  be  defined  as  the  deposition  of  successive
layers  of  matter  round  a  nucleus  or  centre.  The  one  action  operates  from
the  circumference  to  the  centre,  the  other  from  the  centre  to  the  cir-
cumference.

'  (\)rals  and  Coral  Islands,  1872,  p.  301.


II.]  THE  VARIOUS  AGES  OF  CA  VES,  59

stands  at  about  the  same  height  above  the  sea  as  on
Oahu.  The  Rev.  John  Williams  states — that  there  are
seven  or  eight  of  large  extent  on  the  Island  of  Tuto  ;
one  he  entered  by  a  descent  of  twenty  feet,  and  wandered
a  mile  in  one  only  of  its  branches,  without  finding  an
end  to  *  its  interminable  windings/  He  says — '  Innu-
merable openings  presented  themselves  on  all  sides  as
we  passed  along,  many  of  which  appeared  to  be  equal
in  height,  beauty,  and  extent  to  the  one  we  were  follow-
ing. The  roof,  a  stratum  of  coral-rock  fifteen  feet  thick,
was  supported  by  massy  and  superb  stalactitic  columns,
besides  being  thickly  hung  with  stalactites  from  an  inch
to  many  feet  in  length.  Some  of  tliese  pendants  were  just
ready  to  unite  themselves  to  tlie  floor,  or  to  a  stalagmitic
column  rising  from  it.  Many  chambers  were  passed
through  w^hose  fret-work  ceilings  and  columns  of  stalac-
tites sparkled  brilliantly,  amid  the  darkness,  with  the
reflected  light  of  our  torches.  The  effect  was  produced
not  so  much  by  single  objects,  or  groups  of  them,  as  by
the  amplitude,  the  depth,  and  the  complications  of  this
subterranean  world.'"

Calcareous  rocks  might,  therefore,  be  expected  to  con-
tain fissures  and  caves  of  various  ages.  In  the  Mendip
Hills  they  have  been  proved  by  Mr.  Charles  Moore  to
contain  fossils  of  Rhsetic  age,  the  characteristic  dog-fishes,
Acrodiis  minimus,  and  Ilyhodus  reticiikitus,  the  elegant
sculptured  Ganoid  fish,  Gryrolepis  tenuistriatus,  and  the
tiny  marsupials,  Microlestes  and  its  allies.  This  singular
association  of  terrestrial  with  marine  creatures  is  due  to
the  fact,  that  while  that  area  was  being  slowly  depressed
beneath  the  Rhaetic  and  I.iassic  seas,  the  remains  were
mingled  together  on  the  coast-line,  and  washed  into  the
crevices  and  holes  in  the  rock.


60  CAVE-HUNTING.  [chap.

The  older  caves  and  fissures  have  very  generally  been
blocked  up  l>y  accumulations  of  calc-spar  or  other  mine-
rals, and  they  are  arranged  on  a  plan  altogether  inde-
pendent of  the  existing  systems  of  drainage.

It  is  a  singular  fact  that  no  fissures  or  caves  should,
with  the  above  exception,  contain  the  remains  of  animals
of  a  date  before  the  Pleistocene  age.  There  can  be  but
little  doubt  that  they  were  used  as  places  of  shelter  in  all
ages,  and  they  must  have  entombed  the  remains  of  the
animals  that  fell  into  them,  or  were  swept  into  them  by
the  streams.  Caves  there  must  have  been  long  before,  and
the  Eocene  PalaBotheres,  and  Anoplotheres  met  their  death
in  the  open  pit-falls,  just  as  the  sheep  and  cattle  do  at
the  present  time.  The  HyaBnodon  of  the  Meiocene  had,
probably,  the  same  cave-haunting  tastes  as  his  descend-
ant, the  living  Hyaena,  and  the  marsupials  of  the  Mesozoic
age  might  be  expected  to  be  preserved  in  caves,  like  the
fossil  marsupials  of  Australia.  The  chancer  of  preser-
vation of  the  remains  when  once  cemented  into  a  fine
breccia,  or  sealed  down  w^th  a  crystalline  covering  of
stalagmite,  are  very  nearly  the  same  as  those  under
which  the  Pleistocene  animals  have  been  handed  down
to  us.  The  only  reasonable  explanation  of  the  non-
discovery  of  such  remains  seems  to  be,  that  the  ancient
suites  of  caves  and  fissures  containing  them,  and  for  the
most  part  near  the  then  surface  of  the  rock,  have  been
completely  swept  away  by  denudation,  while  the  present
caverns  were  either  then  not  excavated  or  inaccessible.

Such  an  hypothesis  will  explain  the  fact  that  the
non-ossiferous  caverns  are  older  than  the  Pleistocene  age,
not  merely  in  Europe,  but  in  North  and  South  America,
Australia,  and  New  Zealand.  The  efiect  of  denudation
in   rendering   the  geological   record  imperfect,  may  be


11.]  THE  FILLING  UP  OF  CAVES..  61

gathered  from  the  estimate,  which  Mr.  Prestwich  has
formed,  of  the  amount  of  rock  removed  from  the  crests
of  the  Mendips  and  the  Ardennes,  which  is  in  the  one
case  a  thickness  "  of  two  miles  and  more,"  and  in  the
other  as  much  as  "three  or  four  miles." ^  Under  these
conditions  we  could  not  expect  to  find  a  series  of  bono
caves  reaching  far  back  into  the  remote  geological  past,
since  the  caves  and  their  contents  would  inevitably  be
destroyed.

The  Filling  up  of  Caves.

We  must  now  consider  the  condition  under  which
caves  become  filled  up  with  various  deposits.  If  the
velocity  of  the  stream  in  a  water-cave  be  lessened,  the
silt,  sand,  or  pebbles  it  was  hurrying  along  will  be
dropped,  and  may  ultimately  block  up  the  entire  water-
course. In  bringing  this  to  pass,  however,  the  carbonate
of  lime  in  the  water  plays  a  most  important  part.  If
the  excess  of  carbonic  acid  by  which  it  is  held  in  solu-
tion be  lost  by  evaporation,  it  immediately  reassumes  its
crystalline  form,  and  shoots  over  the  surface  of  the  pool
like  plates  of  ice,  or  is  deposited  in  loose  botryoidal
masses  at  their  sides  and  on  their  bottoms;  and,  since
the  atmospheric  water  very  generally  percolates  through
the  crannies  in  the  rock,  the  sides  and  roof  of  the  chan-
nel, above  the  level  of  the  water,  are  adorned  with  a
stony  drapery  of  every  conceivable  shape.  The  rate  at
which  this  accumulation  takes  place  depends  upon  the
free  access  of  air  necessary  for  evaporation,  and  is
therefore  variable, — as  in  the  case  of  the  Ingleborough
cave.      In     all     the    caves    which    I    have    examined

^  Prestwich,  Ann.  Address  Geo).  Soc.  1872,  p.  84.


6  2  CA  VE  HUNTING,  [chap.

there  is  a  free  current  of  air.  If  a  water-channel  becomes
blocked  up  by  cither  or  both  these  causes,  the  joints  and
fissures  in  the  rock  offer  an  outlet  to  the  drainage,  more
or  less  free,  at  a  lower  level,  as  in  the  Ingleborough
cave,  Poole's  cave,  near  Buxton,  and  many  others.
Sometimes,  however,  owing  to  the  increased  rain-fall,
or  to  the  obstruction  of  the  lower  channels,  the  water
re-excavates  the  old  passages,  as  we  shall  see  to  have
been  the  case  with  tlie  famous  caverns  of  Kent's  Hole
and  Brixham.  In  the  summer  of  1872,  a  sudden  rain-fall
not  merely  opened  out  for  itself  a  new  passage  into  a
swallow-hole  close  to  Gaping  Gill,  on  the  flanks  of  Ingle-
borough, but  forced  its  way  out  through  the  old  entrance
of  the  Ingleborough  cave,  breaking  up  the  calcareous
breccia,  and  removing  the  large  stones  in  its  course.  A
cave  obviously  may  become  dry,  either  by  the  drainage
passing  along  a  lower  level,  or  by  the  elevation  of  the
district  by  subterranean  energy.  After  it  has  been  for-
saken by  the  stream,  the  particles  brought  down  by  the
atmospheric  water  percolating  through  the  joints,  tend
to  fill  it  up  on  the  surface,  and  these  may  be  either  of
clay,  loam,  or  sand.

These  actions  may  be  studied  in  this  country  in  the
well-known  caves  of  Ingleborough,  Buxton,  Cheddar,
Wookey  Hole,  and  a  great  many  others  in  Derby-
shire, Yorkshire,  Staffordshire,  Durham,  Cumberland,
and  Wales.

The  Cave  of  Caldy.

Among  the  most  beautiful  stalactite  caverns  in  this
country  is  that  on  the  island  of  Caldy,  immediately
opposite  to  Tenby  in    Pembrokeshire,  discovered  some


II.]  THE  CAVE  OF  CALDY.  1)3

years  ago  in  the  limestone  cliff,  and  explored  by  Mr.
Ayshford  Sanford  and  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Wiuwood,  in
1S66,  and  subsequently  by  the  writer  in  1871  and
1873.  On  creeping  through  a  narrow  entrance  witb  an
outlook  to  the  sea  on  a  precipitous  side  of  a  (quarry,  a
passage  leads  to  a  chamber  of  considerable  horizontal


extent,  the  bottom  being  covered  with  silt,  on  which
stand  pedestals  of  dripstone  from  an  inch  to  two  feet
in    length,    each   rising   from    a   thin   calcareous   crust


Fio.  10.— Stalagmilea  in  the  Fairy  Chamber,  Caldy.

which  does  not  altogether  conceal  the  silt  below.  From
it  a  low  entrance  leads  into  a  fairy-like  chamber,  the
floor  consisting  of  a  rich  red,  crystalline  pavement,  per-
fectly horizontal,  and  studded  here  and  there  with  round


CA  VE-HVNTINd.


[CI


bosses  (Figs.  9,  10,  U),  either  red  or  snow-white.  From
the  roof  hang  stalactites  offering  the  same  beautiful  con-
trast of  colours,  forming  a  delicate  canopy  of  tassels,  or
passing  downwards  -to  the  floor  and  constituting  slender
shafts  about  three  feet  long,  and  about  the  diameter  of


Tlifl  Kuiry  ChaniLier,  CalJy.


straws.  Each  of  these  is  hollow,  translucent,  and  more
or  less  traversed  by  water,  and  in  some  places  each  stood
next  its  fellow,  almost  as  close  as  the  straws  in  a  corn-
field. Sometimes  the  shaft  stands  on  a  cone  (Fig.  11)
of  dripstone,  more  or  less  raised  above  the  floor.  Small
pools  of  water  occupy  hollows  in  the  pavement,  each
lined  with  glittering  crj-stals  of  calcite  (Fig.  12),  which
arc  slowly  shooting  over  the  surface,  and  converting
some    of  the  open  hollows   into  bottle-shaped  cavities


11.]


FHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  CArBS.


(Fig.  13).  Their  sidea  and  bottoms  are  covered  with  a
crystaUine  growth  of  singiJar  beauty,  of  which  an  idea
may  be  formed  by  woodcut  14,  which  represents  the
edge.  Where  the
drip  happened  to
fall  into  a  shallow

pool,     it     gradually  Fjo.  12.-Pi>oI»inF»iry  CUmW.

built  up  for  itself  a  cone,  on  the  lower  portion  of  which
the  varying  water-level  is  marked  by  horizontal  rings  of
crystals  (Fig.  15),  and  the  normal  water-
line  by  the  upper  horizontal  plate.  Some-
times these  were  united  to  the  roof  by
a  slender  straw-shaft.  In  Figure  1 1  the
original  shaft  has  been  broken  away,  and  Fm.  is.  —  Pool  in
as  the  direction  of  the  drip  has  slightly  *"^
shifted,  a  new  one  gradually  descended,  until  finally  it
became  cemented  to  the  side  of  the  cone.


—Edge  of  Fool  in  Fuirj  Chunb«T.


The  history  of  these  structures  is  very  evident  The
straw-like  stalactites  were  formed  by  the  evaporation
of  the  carbonic  acid  from  the  surface  of  each  drop  of
water,  as  it  accumulated  in  one  spot,  and  the  consequent


6  6  CA  VE-H  UNTING.  [chap.

deposit  of 'carbonate  of  lime  around  its  circumference.
It  could  not  be  formed  in  the  centre,  because  of  the
continual  movement  of  the  successive  drops  in  falling.
By  a  circumferential  growth  of  this  kind  a  small  crystal
tube,  of  the  diameter  of  a  drop,  is  slowly  developed,
which  continues  to  lengthen  until  the  result  is  one  of  the
straw- columns,  with  a  hole  in  the  centre  for  the  passage
of  the  water,  which  cannot  readily  part  with  its  carbonic
acid  till  it  arrives  at  the  end  of  the  tube.  Sometimes
the  hole  has  been  subsequently  blocked  up  by  calc-spar,
or  the  general  surface  been  covered  over  with  successive
layers,  until  it  becomes  a  mass  of  considerable  diameter.
If  the  drop  fell  into  a  deep  pool,  the  straw-colunm  was
continued  down  to  the  water-line ;  if  in  shallow  water,
or  on  the  floor,  a  pedestal  was  built  up,  as  is  represented
in  the  preceding  figures.  The  crystallization  going  on  in
the  pools  is  greater  at  the  surface  than  below,  because  of
the  greater  evaporation,  and  consequently  the  stalagmitic
film  is  gradually  extending  over  it  on  every  side  from
the  edges  (Figs.  12,  13).

As  I  broke  my  way  into  some  of  the  unexplored
recesses,  through  the  thickly  planted  straw-shafts,  and
scene  after  scene  of  fairy  beauty,  unsullied  by  man,
opened  upon  my  eyes,  the  ringing  of  the  fragments  on
the  crystalline  floor  that  accompanied  almost  every
movement  made  me  feel  an  intruder,  and  sorry  for
the  destruction.

In  some  places,  where  the  drip  was  continuous,  and
the  calcareous  basin  which  it  had  built  up  for  itself
shallow,  small  spherical  bodies  of  calcite  were  so  beauti-
fully polished  by  friction  in  the  agitated  water,  that  they
deserve  the  name  of  cave-pearls  from  their  lustre.  In
Fig.  16  I  have  represented  a  tiny  basin  with  its  pearly


"■]


parsicAL  aisTORY  of  caves.


contents.  Where  the  drip  had  ceased  to  be  contmuous
each  of  these  formed  a  nucleus  for  the  deposit  of  calcite
crystals,  by  which  they  were  united  to  the  bottom  of
the  basiu.

In  the  principal  chamber  in  the  caTe,  which  is  very
nearly  free  from  drip,  the  upper  surfaces  of  the  stones
and  stalagmites  on  the  floor  are  covered  with  a  peculiar
fuugoid-like  deposit  of  calcite,  consisting  of  rounded
bosses,  attached  to  the  ge-
neral surface  by  a  pedicle
(see  Figs.  17,  18)  some-
times not  much  thicker
than  a  hair.     They  stood

,  ,  .  Fin.  Ifl. — B««in  conUining  C»ve-p«ir]«.

close   together  at  various

levels,  following  the  inequalities  of  the  surface  of
attachment,  and  being  on  an  average  about  0"2  inch
long.  Several  microscopical  sections  (Fig.  17)  showed
that  each  was  formed  ori-
ginally on  a  slight  elevation
of  the  general  surface,  which
woiUd  cause  a  greater  eva-
poration of  water  than  the
surrounding  portions,  and
therefore  be  covered  with  a  |
greater  deposit  of  calcite.
This  process  would  go  on
until  the  height  was  reached
to  which  the  water  slowly  passing  over  the  general
surface  would  no  longer  rise.  Hence  the  remarkable
uniformity  of  the  height  of  the  bosses.  The  evapo-
ration is  greater  at  the  point  furthest  removed  from
the  general  surfax^e,  and  therefore  the  apex  is  larger
than  the  base  (see  Fig.  17).     In  Figure  18  they  stand


68  CAVE-nUNTINO.  (chap.

as  thickly  together  as  trees  in  a  Tirgin  for^t,  and
are  developed  in  greatest  vigour  where  the  small  emi-
nences cause  a  greater  evaporation  than  the  small  depres-
sions, and  are  stoutest  and  strongest  at  the  free  edges.
Some  of  the  pedicles,  as  in  the  figure,  present  traces  of
erosion,  the  outer  layers  having  been  eaten  away  by  acid-
laden  water.

Some  of  these  singular  little  bosses  may  have  been
moulded  on  minute  fungi,  such  as  those  in  the  cave  of
Inglcborough,  but  their  presence  is  not  revealed  by  the
microscope.

The  Black-rock  Cave,  near  Tenby.

I  met  with  this  remarkable  kind  of  calcareous  depo-
sition in  a  second  cave  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tenby.
When  examining  the  Black-rock  quarries  in  1871,  the
workmen  pointed  out  a  small  opening  which  they  be-
lieved to  be  the  entrance  of  a  cave,  but  which  was  too
small  for  them  to  enter.  By  knocking  off,  however,  a
few  sharp  angles,  I  got  into  a  small  chamber  about  five
feet  high,  with  sides,  roof,  and  bottom  covered  with
massive  dripstone.  A  few
I  loose  stones  rested  on  the
bottom.  The  whole  sur-
I  face,  even  including  the
stones  upon  the  floor,  one  of
which  is  figured  (Fig.  18),
I  was  so  completely  covered
FI0.1B.— Fnngoid8tractnre,BUck-rock  with  these  peculiar  fungoid
bodies,  that  it  was  impos-
sible to  move  without  destroying  hundreds  of  them.
All  were  about  the  same  height,  0'2  inches,  snow-white.


II.]       CARBONATE  OF  LIME  REMOVED  BY  STREAMS.       69

or  of  a  rich  reddish  brown,  and  conformed  to  the  unequal
surface  on  which  they  stood.  It  is  quite  impossible  to
describe  the  eflTect  of  a  whole  chamber  bristling  with
these  peculiar  structurea  The  only  author  by  whom
they  are  mentioned,  Mr.  John  Beaumont — who  described
the  caves  of  Mendip  in  1680,  considered  them  to  be
veritable  plants  of  stone. '  The  beautiful  forms  assumed
by  the  dripstone  in  the  caves  of  Caldy  and  Black-rock
are  by  no  means  uncommon,  but  I  have  never  met  with
them  anywhere  else  in  such  perfection.  They  may  be
studied  in  all  stalactitic  caverns.


Great   Quantity  of  Carbonate   of  Lune  dissolved  by

Atmospheric  Water.

A  small  portion  only  of  the  carbonate  of  lime  is  depo-
sited as  tufa  or  dripstone  in  the  neighbourhood  of  tlie
rock  from  which  it  has  been  derived,  as  compared  with
tliat  carried  by  the  streams  into  the  rivers,  and  the
rivers  into  the  sea.  An  idea  of  this  quantity  may  be
formed  from  the  calculation  of  the  solid  matter  con-
veyed down  by  the  Thames,  given  by  Mr.  Prestwich  in
his  Presidential  Address  to  the  Geological  Society  in
1871,  p.  Ixvii.

"  Taking  the  mean  daily  discliarge  of  the  Thames  at
Kingston  at  1,250,000,000  gallons,  and  the  salts  in  solu-
tion at  nineteen  grains  per  gallon,  the  mean  quantity  of
dissolved  mineral  matter  there  carried  down  by  the
Thames  every  twenty-four  hours  is  equal  to  3,364,286
11)S.,  or  150  tons,  which  is  equal  to  548,230  tons  in  the
y(\'ir.     Of  this  daily  quantity  about  two-thirds,  or  say

'  Phil.  Trans.  April  7th,  1680,  p.  731.


70  CA  VE-HUNTING.  [chap.

1,000  tons,  consist  of  carbonate  of  lime  and  238  tons  of
sulphate  of  lime,  while  limited  proportions  of  carbonate
of  magnesia,  chlorides  of  sodium  and  potassium,  sul-
phates of  soda  and  potash,  silica  and  traces  of  iron,
alumina,  and  phosphates,  constitute  the  rest.  If  we
refer  a  small  portion  of  the  carbonates  and  the  sulphates
and  chlorides  chiefly  to  the  impermeable  argillaceous
formations  washed  by  the  rain-water,  we  shall  still  have
at  least  ten  grains  per  gallon  of  carbonate  of  lime,  due
to  the  chalk,  upper  greensand,  oolitic  strata,  and  marl-
stone,  the  superficial  area  of  which,  in  the  Thames  basin
above  Kingston,  is  estimated  by  Mr.  Harrison  at  2,072
square  miles.  Therefore  the  quantity  of  carbonate  of
lime  carried  away  from  this  area  by  the  Thames  is  equal
to  797  tons  daily,  or  290,905  tons  annually,  which  gives
140  tons  removed  yearly  from  each  square  mile  ;  or,  ex-
tending the  calculation  to  a  century,  we  have  a  total
removal  of  29,090,500  tons,  or  of  14,000  tons  from
each  square  mile  of  surface.  Taking  a  ton  of  chalk,  as
a  mean,  as  equal  to  fifteen  cubic  feet,  this  is  equal  to
the  removal  of  210,000  cubic  feet  per  century  for  each
square  mile,  or  of  ,-^  of  an  inch  from  the  whole  surface
in  the  course  of  a  century,  so  that  in  the  course  of
13,200  years  a  quantity  equal  to  a  thickness  of  about
one  foot  would  be  removed  from  our  chalk  and  oolitic
districts."

This  destructive  action,  operating  through  long  periods
of  time,  destroys  not  merely  the  general  surface  of  the
limestone,  but,  where  it  is  localized  by  the  convergence
of  water,  is  capable  of  excavating  the  deepest  gorges
and  the  longest  caves.  The  quantity  of  material  carried
away  in  solution  is  a  measure  of  the  power  of  carbonic
acid  in  the  general  work  of  denudation.


II.]         THE  CIRCULATION  OF  CARBONATE  OF  LIME.       71

The  Circulation  of  Carbonate  of  Lime.

The  circulation  of  carbonate  of  lime  in  nature  pre-
sents us  with  a  never-ending  cycle  of  change.  It  is
conveyed  into  the  sea  to  be  built  up  into  the  tissues
of  the  animal  and  vegetable  inhabitants.  It  appears  in
the  gorgeous  corallines,  nuUipores,  calcareous  sea-weeds,
sea-shells,  and  in  the  armour  of  crustaceans.  In  the  tis-
sues of  the  coral-zoophytes  it  assumes  the  form  of  stony
groves,  of  which  each  tree  is  a  colony  of  animals,  and  in
the  wave-defying  reef  it  reverts  to  its  original  state  of
limestone.  Or,  again,  it  is  seized  upon  by  tiny  masses  of
structureless  protoplasm,  and  fashioned  into  chambers  of
endless  variety  and  of  infinite  beauty,  and  accumulated
at  the  bottom  of  the  deeper  seas,  forming  a  deposit  analo-
gous to  our  chalk.  In  the  revolution  of  ages  the  bottom
of  the  sea  becomes  dry  land,  the  calcareous  debris  of
animal  and  vegetable  life  is  more  or  less  compacted
together  by  pressure  and  by  the  infiltration  of  acid-
laden  rain-water,  and  appears  as  limestone  of  various
hardness  and  constitution.  Then  the  destruction  begins
again,  and  caves,  pot-holes,  and  ravines  are  again  carved
out  of  the  solid  rock.

The  Ihnperatnre  of  Caves.

The  air  in  caves  is  generally  of  the  same  temperature
as  the  mean  annual  temperature  of  the  district  in  which
they  occur,  and  therefore  cold  in  summer  and  warm  in
winter.  This  would  be  a  suflScient  reason  why  they
should  be  chosen  by  uncivilized  peoples  as  habitations.

The  very  remarkable  glaciferes,  or  caves  containing  ice
instead  of  water,  in  the  Jura,  Pyrenees,  in  Tenerifie,  Ice-


7  2  CA  VE-HUNTING.  [chap.

land,  and  other  districts  of  high  altitude  and  low  tempera-
ture, in  which  the  temperature  even  in  summer  does  not
rise  rnuch  above  freezing-point,  may  be  explained  by  the
theor}^  advanced  independently  by  De  Luc  and  the  Rev.
G.  F.  Browne.  "  The  heavy  cold  air  of  winter,"  writes
the  latter,  "sinks  down  into  the  glaci^res,  and  the
lighter,  warm  air  of  summer  cannot  on  ordinary  princi-
ples dislodge  it,  so  that  heat  is  very  slowly  spread  in
the  caves  ;  and  even  when  some  amount  of  heat  does
reach  the  ice,  the  latter  melts  but  slowly,  since  a  kilo-
gramme of  ice  absorbs  79"*  C.  of  heat  in  melting ;  and
thus  when  ice  is  once  formed,  it  becomes  a  material
guarantee  for  the  permanence  of  cold  in  the  cave.  For
this  explanation  to  hold  good  it  is  necessary  that  the
level  at  which  the  ice  is  found  should  be  below  the  level
of  the  entrance  to  the  cave  ;  otherwise  the  mere  weight  of
the  cold  air  would  cause  it  to  leave  its  prison  as  soon  as
the  spring  warmth  arrived."  It  is  also  necessary  that  the
cave  should  be  protected  from  direct  radiation  and  from
the  action  of  wind.  These  conditions  are  satisfied  by  all
the  ghici^res  explored  by  Mr.  Browne.*  The  apparent
anomaly  that  one  only  out  of  a  group  of  caves  exposed
to  the  same  temperatures  should  be  a  glacifere,  may  be
explained  by  the  fact  that  these  conditions  are  found  in
combination  but  rarely,  and  if  one  were  absent  there
would  be  no  accumulation  of  perpetual  ice.  It  is  very
probable  that  the  store  of  cold  laid  up  in  these  caves,
as  in  an  ice-house,  has  been  ultimately  derived  from
the  great  refrigeration  of  climate  in  Europe  in  the
Glacial   Period.

^  "Jco-Caves  in  France  and  Switzerland.''    Longmans,  18G5,  p.  296.


II.]  CONCLUSION.  73

Conclusion.

In  this  chapter  we  have  examined  the  physical  history
of  caves,  their  formation,  and  their  relation  to  pot-holes,
cirques,  and  ravines;  and  we  have  seen  that  they  are
not  the  result  of  subterranean  disturbance,  but  of  the
mechanical  action  of  rain-water  and  the  chemical  action
of  carbonic  acid,  both  operating  from  above.  We  have
seen  that  cave-hunting  is  not  merely  an  adventurous
amusement,  but  also  a  quest  that  brings  us  into  a  great
laboratory,  so  to  speak,  in  which  we  can  see  the  natural
agents  at  work  that  have  carved  out  the  valleys  and
gorges,  and  shaped  the  hills  wherever  the  calcareous
rocks  are  to  be  found.

The  rest  of  this  treatise  will  be  devoted  to  the
evidence  which  they  oflfer  as  to  the  former  inhabitants,
both  men  and  animals,  of  Europe.


74  HISTORIC  CA  VES  IN  BRITAIN.  [chap


CHAPTER  III.

HISTORIC   CAVES   IN   BRITAIN.

Definition  of  Historic  Period. — Wild  AnimalB  in  Britain  daring  the
Historic  Period. — Animala  living  under  the  care  of  Man. — Classi-
ficatory  value  of  Historic  Animals. — ^The  Victoria  Cave,  Settle,
Yorkshire. — History  of  Discovery. — The  Romano-Celtic  or  Brit-
Welsh  Stratum. — The  Bones  of  the  Animals. — Miscellaneous
Articles. — ^The  Coins. — ^The  Jewelry,  and  its  Relation  to  Irish
Art. — Similar  Remains  in  other  Caves  in  Yorkshire. — These  Caves
used  as  Places  of  Refuge. — The  evidence  of  History  as  to  Date.—
Britain  under  the  Romans. — The  Inroads  of  the  Picts  and  Scots. —
The  English  Conquest. — The  Neolithic  Stratum. — ^The  approxi-
mate Date  of  the  Neolithic  Occupation. — The  Grey  Clays. — ^The
Pleistocene  Occupation  hy  the  Hyaenas. — The  probahle  Preglacial
Age  of  the  Pleistocene  Stratum. — The  Kirkhead  Cave. — Poole's
Cave,  near  Buxton. — Thor's  Cave,  near  Ashbourne. — Historic  value
of  Brit- Welsh  Group  of  Caves. — Principal  Animals  and  Articles.
— The  use  of  Horse-flesh. — The  Cave  of  Long-berry  Bank.

Definition  of  Histoinc  Period.

In  the  preceding  chapter  the  origin  of  caves  has  been
discussed,  as  well  as  their  relation  to  the  physical  geo-
graphy of  the  districts  in  which  they  are  found.  We
must  now  pass  on  to  the  biological  division  of  the  sulv
ject,  which  relates  to  the  animals  that  they  contain  and
the  inferences  that  may  be  drawn  from  their  occurrence.


III.]  RiaiORIC  ANIMALS.  75

The  caves  will  be  divided  into  historic,  prehistoric,  and
pleistocene,  according  to  the  principles  laid  down  in  the
first  chapter.

It  is  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  define
with  precision  the  point  where  legend  ends  and  history
begins  ;  but  the  line  may  be  drawn  wth  convenience  at
the  first  beginning  of  a  connected  and  continuous  narra-
tive, rather  than  at  the  first  isolated  notice  of  a  country.
If  we  accept  this  definition,  the  historic  period  in  Great
Britain  cannot  be  extended  further  back  than  the  tem-
porary invasion  of  Julius  Caesar,  b.c.  55,  even  if  so  far,
since  of  the  interval  that  elapsed  between  that  event  and
the  subjugation  under  Claudius,  in  the  year  a.d.  43,  we
know  scarcely  anything.  Of  the  events  which  happened
in  this  country  before  Caesar's  invasion  there  is  no  docu-
mentary evidence,  although,  by  the  modem  method  of
scientific  research,  we  are  able  to  extend  the  narrative
away  from  the  borders  of  history  far  back  into  the  archae-
ological and  geological  past.

Wild  Animals  in  Britain  during  the  Historic  Period.

During  the  historic  period  great  changes  have  taken
place  in  the  animals  inhabiting  Great  Britain.  The  wild
animals  have  been  diminished  in  number,  and  their
area  of  occupation  has  been  narrowed  by  the  increase
of  population  and  the  improvement  in  weapons  of  de-
struction. The  brown  bear,  inhabiting  Britain  during
the  time  of  the  Boman  occupation,  was  extirpated  pro-
bably before  the  tenth  century.  The  current  belief  that
it  was  destroyed  in  Scotland  by  the  founder  of  the
Gordon  family  in  1057  is  unsupported  by  any  docu-
mentary evidence  which  I  have  been  able  to  discover;


76  HT8T0RIC  CAVES  IN  BRITAIN.  [chap.

the  crest  of  the  Gordons,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been
derived  from  the  last  of  those  animals  slain  in  the  island,
consisting  of  three  boars',  not  hears',  heads.  The  last
wolf  is  said  to  have  been  destroyed  in  Scotland  in  1680,
while  in  Ireland  the  animal  lingered  thirty  years  later  to
be  a  terror  to  the  defenceless  beggars.  It  was  deemed
worthy  of  a  special  decree  for  its  destruction  in  the  reign
of  Edward  I.  The  wild  boar  was  extinct  before  the
reign  of  Charles  I.,  while  the  beaver,  which  was  hunted
for  its  fur  on  the  banks  of  the  Teivi  in  Cardiganshire
during  the  time  of  the  first  Crusade,  became  extinct
shortly  afterwards.  The  stag  was  so  abundant  in  the
south  of  England  as  recently  as  the  reign  of  Queen
Anne,  that  she  saw  a  herd  of  no  less  than  five  hundred
between  London  and  Portsmouth.  At  present  the  animal
lives  only  in  a  half-wild  condition,  in  the  forest  of  Ex-
moor  and  the  Highlands  of  Scotland ;  while  the  rocdeer
is  now  only  found  wild  in  Scotland,  although  it  formerly
ranged  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the
countiy.

The  reindeer  is  proved  to  have  been  living  in  Caith-
ness as  late  as  the  year  1159,  by  a  passage  in  the
Orkneyinga  Saga.

The  common  rat,  Mas  decunutniiSy  is  the  only  wild  or
semi-wild  animal  that  has  migrated  into  this  country
during  the  historic  period  contrary  to  the  will  of  man.
In  1727  it  {Pallas,  GUres)  had  begun  to  invade
Southern  Russia  from  the  regions  of  Persia  and  the
Caspian  Sea.  Thence  it  swiftly  spread  over  Asia  Minor,
and  while  it  was  advancing  to  the  west  overland,  it
was  carried  by  8hi]).s  to  nearly  all  the  ports  in  the
world.  It  arrived  in  Hritain  certainly  before  the  year
I7li0,    t\\\i\   lias    since    noarlv   externiinatod    the    bhu'k


III.]  HISTOBIC  ANIMALS.  77

indigenous  species.  It  is  the  only  wild  animal  which
is  known  to  have  invaded  Europe  since  the  pleistocene
age,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  the  true  elk.

Animals  living  under  the  care  of  Man.

The  fallow-deer,  indigenous  in  the  countries  bordering
on  the  Mediterranean,  was  probably  introduced  by  the
Komans,  since  its  remains  occur  in  refuse-heaps  of
Roman  age,  such  as  that  of  London  Wall,  and  of  Col-
chester, while  it  has  not  been  met  with  in  older  deposits.
To  them,  also,  we  probably  owe  the  introduction  of  the
pheasant,  which  was  sufficiently  abundant  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  London  in  the  time  of  Harold  to  be
mentioned  as  one  of  the  articles  of  food  eaten  on  feast-
days  by  the  households  of  the  Canons  at  Waltham  Abbey
in  1059.  The  domestic  fowl  has  left  the  first  traces  of
its  presence  in  this  country  in  the  Roman  refuse-heaps,
although  it  was  known  to  the  Belgse,  according  to  the
testimony  of  Caesar,  before  the  first  Roman  invasion.

The  earliest  mention  of  the  domestic  cat  in  this
country  is  to  be  found  in  the  laws  of  Howel  Dha,*  that
were  probably  codified  at  the  end  of  the  tenth  or  in  the
eleventh  century,  although  many  of  the  enactments  may
be  of  a  much  earlier  date.  The  king's  cat  is  assessed  at
eightpence,  or  twice  as  much  as  that  belonging  to  any
subject  The  ass  ^  was  certainly  known  in  Britain  in  the
days  of -^thelred  (a.d.  866-871),  when,  according  to  Pro-
fessor Bell,  its  price  was  fixed  at  the  large  sum  of  twelve
shillings.  The  larger  breed  of  cattle  represented  by  the
Chillingham  ox,  and  descended  from   the   great  Urus,

^  Leges  Wallise.

2  Bell,  "  British  Quadrupeds,*'  8vo.  p.  386.


78


HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  BRITAIN.


[CHILF.


first  appears  in  this  country  about  the  time  of  the  Eng-
lish invasion.  It  gradually  spread  over  those  districts
conquered  by  the  English,  until  the  small  aboriginal
dark-coloured,  short-horn  Bos  longifrons,  which  was
the  only  domestic  breed  in  the  prehistoric  and  Roman
times,  is  now  only  to  be  met  with  in  the  hill  country  of
Wales  and  of  Scotland,  in  which  the  Brit-Welsh  or
Romano-Celtic  inhabitants  still  survive.


Classificatory  value  of  Histomc  Animals.

The  principal  changes  in  the  fauna  of  Great  Britain
during  the  historic  age  are  the  extinction  of  the  bear,
wolf,  beaver,  reindeer,  and  wild  boar,  and  the  introduc-
tion of  the  domestic  fowl,  the  pheasant,  fallow-deer,  ass,
the  domestic  cat,  the  larger  breed  of  oxen,  and  the  com-
mon rat ;  and  as  this  took  place  at  different  times,  it  is
obvious  that  these  animals  enable  us  to  ascertain  the
approximate  date  of  the  deposit  in  which  their  remains
happen  to  occur.  And  for  this  purpose  the  following
table  ^  may  be  consulted : —


Animals  Extinct.

A   D

Brown  bear   .

cii-ca

500—1000

Keindeer

>>

1200

Beaver .

n

11     1200

Wolf    .

M

1680

Wild  boar     .

>>

1620

^  The  authorities  for  the  preceding  paragraphs  will  be  found  in
Chapter  11.  of  my  Preliminary  Treatise  on  the  **  lielation  of  the
Pleistocene  Mammalia  to  those  now  living  in  Europe"  (Palseont.
Soc.  1874).


before

65  B.C.

circa

>i

>»

>i

»

449  A.D.

»

800—850

>>

800—1000

}»

1727—30

ni.l  VALUE  OF  ANIMALS  IN  CLASSIFICATION.  79

Animals  Imtboduoed.

DomeBtic  fowl       ....

Fallow-deer

Pheasant

Domestic  ox  of  Urns  type

■\BB  ....

Oat      ......

Common  rat  ....

Some  or  other  of  these  anim^ala  are  met  with  in  the
peat-bogs  and  alluvia,  and  in  caves,  but  far  more  abun-
dantly in  the  refuse-heaps  left  behind  by  man,  by  whom
they  have  here  been  used  either  for  service  or  for  food.

The  disappearance  of  certain  wild  species,  from  the
areas  in  which  they  lived  on  the  continent,  in  historic
times,  has  not  been  ascertained  so  accurately  as  in  this
country,  and  many  animals,  which  have  become  extinct
in  our  restricted  and  highly-cultivated  island,  are  still
to  be  found  in  the  continental  forests,  morasses,  and
mountains.  The  brown  bear  is  still  to  be  met  with  in
the  Pyrenees,  the  Vosges,  and  in  the  wilder  and  more
inaccessible  portions  of  northern,  middle,  and  southern
Europe.  The  wolf  still  survives  in  France,  and  during
the  late  German  war  preyed  upon  the  slain  after  some  of
the  battles.  It,  as  well  as  the  wild  boar,  ranges  through-
out the  uncultivated  regions  of  the  continent.  The  beaver
still  lives  in  the  waters  of  the  Rhone,  as  well  as  in  the
rivers  of  Lithuania  and  of  Scandinavia,  and  the  rein-
deer, now  restricted  to  the  regions  north  of  a  line  passing
east  and  west  through  the  Baltic,  extended  further  south,
in  sufficient  numbers  to  be  remarked  by  Caesar,  among  the
more  noteworthy  animals  living  in  the  great  Hercjuian
forest,  which  overshadowed  northern  Germany  in  his
days.     This  forest  also  aflforded  shelter  to  the  true  elk


80  HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  BRITAIN.  [chap.

and  the  bison,  both  of  which  still  live  in  Lithuania,  as
well  as  to  the  Urus,  which  was  hunted  by  Charles  the
Great,  near  Aachen,  and  probably  became  extinct  in  the
fifteenth  or  sixteenth  century.  The  lion  inhabited  the
mountains  of  southern  Thrace  in  the  days  of  Herodotus
and  of  Aristotle,  and  became  extinct  in  Europe  between
330  B.C.  and  the  days  of  Dio  Chrysostom  Rhetor
(a.d.  100),  who  expressly  says  that  there  were  no  lions
in  Greece  in  his  time.  The  panther  also  inhabited  the
same  district  when  Xenophon  wrote  his  "  Treatise  on
Hunting."

The  fallow-deer  was  believed  by  the  late  Professor
Edouard  Lartet  to  have  been  introduced  into  France  by
the  Romans.  On  a  visit,  however,  to  Paris  in  Sep-
tember 1873,  Professor  Gervais  called  my  attention  to  an
antler  of  the  animal  in  the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  said  to
have  been  found  in  a  refuse-heap  along  with  axes  of
polished  stone.  It  must  therefore  have  lived  in  France
in  the  Neolithic  age,  if  it  were  obtained  from  an  undis-
turbed deposit.  It  gradually  spread  into  Germany  and
Switzerland,  until  in  the  eleventh  century  it  was  suffi-
ciently abundant  to  be  mentioned  among  the  articles  of
food  in  a  metrical  grace  of  the  monks  of  St.  Gall.

**  Imbellcm  damam  facial  benedictio  siimmam."  ^

The  domestic  fowl  is  to  be  recognized  on  Gallic  coins
l)efoi-c  the  Roman  invasion,  and  therefore  was  probably
known  at  the  very  dawn  of  Gallic  history.  The  larger
breed  of  oxen,  descended  from  the  Urus  type,  has  been
known  in  France,  Germany,  Lombardy,  Scandinavia,
and  Switzerland,   in   the   remote   division   of  the  pre-

^  Benedict,  ad  Mensas  Ekkehardi  Monachi  Sangallensis,  1.  129.


III.]  THE  VICTORIA  CAVE.  S\

historic  age  known  as  the  Neolithic.*  The  buffalo,  on
the  other  hand,  of  the  Roman  Campagna,  was  introduced
into  Italy,  according  to  Paulus  Diaconus,  in  the  year
596,  and  the  domestic  cat,^  known  to  the  Greeks  from
their  intercourse  with  Egypt,  became  familiar  to  the
eyes  of  the  inhabitunts  of  Rome  and  Constantinople
as  early  as  the  fourth  century  after  Christ.

It  is  evident  from  the  survival  of  the  wolf,  the  bear,
beaver,  reindeer,  and  the  wild  boar  on  the  continent  at
the  present  time,  that  the  chronological  table  which  I
have  constructed  for  Britain  is  inapplicable  to  Europe  in
general.  In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the
varying  ranges  of  the  animals,  it  seems  impossible  to
form  any  similar  scheme.

The  historic  caves  are  cliaracterized  by  the  presence
of  some  of  these  animals,  as  well  as  of  coins  and  pottery,
and  other  articles  by  which  the  date  of  their  occupation
may  be  ascertained.

Tlic  Victoria  Cave,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

The  most  important  historic  cave  in  this  country  is
that  discovered  by  Mr.  Joseph  Jackson,  near  Settle,  in
Yorkshire,  on  the  coronation  day  of  Queen  Victoria,  in
1838,  and  whicli  has  therefore  been  called  the  Victoria
Cave.  It  runs  horizontally  into  the  precipitous  side  of
a  lonely  ravine  known  as  King  s  Scar  (Fig.  1 9),  at  a
height  of  alx)ut  1,450  feet  above  the  sea,  according  to
Mr.  Tiddeman,  and  it  consists  of  three  large  ill-defined
cliambers  filled  with  debris  nearly  up  to  the  roof.

»  Bufifon,  Quadrupeds,  1.  v.  p.  52;  1.  x.  p.  G7.  Sir  O.  C.  T^wis,
*•  Xotcjs  and  Queries,"  2nd  series,  1.  ix.  pp.  4,  5.

-  See  Ilolleston,  Journ.  Anat.  and  Phyj».,  1808,  pp.  51-2.  Ix^nz,
**  Zoologie  der  Alten."

(;


HISrOHW  CA  VES  IN  BRITAIN.


[Oi


The  entrances  face  to  the  aouth-weat,  and  open  at
the  bottom  of  au  overhanging  clifl'  at  the  point  where
a  scree,  or  accumulation  of  fragments  fi-om  the  cliff
above,  gradually  slopes  down  to  the  bottom  of  the
valley,    about    one   hundred    feet    below.      When    Mr.


Jackson  made  his  discovt'iy,  he  passed  inwards  through
a  small  entrance,'  and  was  rewarded  by  finding  in  the
earth  on  the  floor  a  numlicr  of  Roman  coins,  together

'   Fi(;.  ]^A.


III.  HISTORY  OF  DISCO VJCRY,  83

with  ornaments  and  implements  of  hronze,  and  some
brooches  of  singular  taste  and  beauty,  with  imple-
ments of  bone,  and  large  quantities  of  broken  bones
and  fragments  of  pottery.  The  collection  was  very  mis-
cellaneous ;  for  besides  iron  spear-heads,  nails,  daggers,
spoon-brooches  of  bone,  spindle- whorls,  beads  of  amber
and  of  glass,  there  were  bronze  brooches,  finger- rings,
armlets,  bracelets,  buckles,  and  studs.  All  were  lying
pele-mele  together,  side  by  side  with  the  broken  bones
of  the  animals,  and  the  whole  set  of  remains,  with  the
exception  of  some  of  the  brooches,  was  of  the  kind
which  is  usually  met  with  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Roman  camps,  cities,  and  villas  which  have  been  sacked.
The  fragments  of  Samian  ware  and  Roman  pottery
scattered  through  the  mass,  as  well  as  coins  of  Trajan
and  Constantine,  proved  further,  that  the  cave  had  been
inhabited  after  the  Roman  invasion,  and  not  earlier  than
the  middle  of  the  third  centuiy  ;  and  the  rude  imitations
of  Roman  coins  were,  according  to  Mr.  Roach  Smith,'
-probably  in  circulation  for  some  centuries  after  the
departure  of  the  Romans  from  Britain. — '*  And  although
some  of  these  remains  are  indicative  of  sepulture,  yet
from  the  evidence  furnished  there  appeal's  no  positive
proof  of  their  having  formed  part  of  funereal  deposits.
A  more  satisfactory  conclusion  seems  to  arise  in  con-
sidering that  these  caves  (i.e.  the  group)  may  have  been
used  as  places  of  refuge  by  the  Romanized  Britons
during  the  troublous  times  at  and  after  the  close  of  the
fourth  century."     This  conclusion  we  shall  see  fully  borne

^  Roach  Smith,  "Collectanea  Antiqiia,"  vol.  i.  No.  /),  p.  72,  1844.
It  is  noticed  by  Eckroyd  Smith,  Trans.  Historic  Society  of  Lancia-
shire  and  Cheshire,  May  11,  1SG5  ;  and  by  Mr.  Denny,  Trans.  (Jeol.
and  Polytechnic  See.  of  West  Killing',  l^yj.


84  htstohtc  ca  rns  ix  Britain.  [chap.

out  by  tlie  evidence  siibserjueiitly  obtained.     Mr.  Jaek-
.son  gives  tlie  following  account  of  the  discovery  : —

'*  The  entrance  was  nearly  filled  up  with  rubbish,  and
overgrown  with  nettles.  After  removing  these  ol^struc-
tions,  I  was  obliged  to  lie  down  at  full  length  to  get  in.
The  first  appearance  that  struck  me  on  entering  was
the  large  quantity  of  clay  and  earth,  which  seemed  as  if
w\ashed  in  from  without,  and  presented  to  the  view
round  pieces  like  balls  of  different  sizes.  Of  this  clay
there  must  be  several  hundred  w^aggon  loads,  but
abounding  more  in  the  first  than  in  the  branch  caves.
In  some  parts  a  stalagmitic  crust  has  formed,  mixed  with
bones,  broken  pots,  &c.  It  was  on  this  crust  I  found
the  principal  part  of  the  coins,  the  other  articles  being
mostly  imbedded  in  the  clay.  In  the  other  caves  very
little  has  l)een  found.  When  we  get  through  the  clay,
which  is  very  stiff  and  deep,  we  generally  find  the  rock
covered  with  bones,  all  broken  and  presenting  the
appearance  of  having  been  gnawed.  The  entrance  into
the  inner  cave  has  been  walled  up  at  the  sides.  In  the
inside  were  several  large  stones  lying  near  the  hole,  any
one  of  which  would  have  completely  blocked  it  up  by
merely  turning  the  stone  over.  I  pulled  the  Avail  down,
jind  the  aperture  was  now  about  a  yard  Avide,  and  two
fe(»t  high.  On  digging  up  the  clay  at  about  nine  or  ten
inches  deep,  I  found  th(»  original  fioor  ;  it  was  hard  and
gravelly,  and  strewed  with  bones,  l)roken  pots,  and  other
objects.  The  roof  of  the  cave  was  beautifully  hung
with  stalactites  in  various  fantastic  forms  and  as  white


as  snow."  *


The  interest  in  these  dis(*overies  led  ^Ir.  Dennv,  Mr.
Fiirrer,  and   other  gentlenK^n  to  examine  the  superficial

^   "Collectanea  Anticpia,"  vol.  i.  No.  5,  pp.  G9,  70.


111.]  HISTORY  OF  EXPL01<ATli>S\  S.)

stratum  from  time  to  time,  until,  in  1870,  Sir  James
Kay-Shuttle  worth,  Mr.  Walter  Morrison,  Mr.  Birkbeck,
and  other  gentlemen  in  the  neighbourhood  formed  a
committee  for  the  investigation  of  the  contents  of  the
cave,  which  had  been  placed  at  their  disposal  by  the
courtesy  of  the  owner,  the  late  Mr.  Stackhouse.  They
were  aided  by  the  assistance  of  Sir  C.  Lyell,  Sir.  J.
Lubbock,  and  Mr.  Darwin,  Professor  Phillips,  Mr.
Franks,  and  others,  and  by  a  grant  obtained  from  the
British  Association,  and  have  carried  on  the  work  since
that  time  with  comparatively  little  interruption.  Mr.
Jackson,  the  original  discoverer,  superintended  the
workmen  ;  while  I  identified  the  works  of  ait  and  the
mammalian  remains  that  were  discovered,  and  drew  up
for  the  committee  the  reports  brought  before  the  British
Association  in  1870,  1871,  and  1872,  and  before  the
Anthropological  Institute  in  1871.  Mr.  Tiddeman  also
contributed  a  report  on  the  physical  history  of  the  cave,
which  is  printed  in  the  British  Association  Report  for
1872,  and  subsequently  in  the  Geological  Magazine,
January  1873.^


-  The  Victoria  Cave  has  engaged  the  attention  of  the  following
writers :—  Farrer,  Proceed.  Soc.  Antiquaries,  vol.  iv. ; — Koach  Smith,
and  Jackson,  '*  Collectanea  Antiqua,"  vol.  i.  No.  5,  1844; — Denny,
Proceed.  GeoL  and  Polytechnic  Society  of  the  West  Eiding  of  York-
shire, 1859; — Eckroyd  Smith,  Trans.  Hit^toric  Society  of  Cheshire,
May  11,  1865;— Boyd  Dawkins,  "Nature,''  April  21,  1870;  British
Assoc.  Reports,  1870;  Macmillan's  Magazine,  Sept.  1871  ;  Journ.  An-
throp.  Institute,  1871  ;--Tiddeman,  "  Nature,"  1872 ;— Boyd  Dawkins
and  Tiddeman,  British  Assoc.  Eeports,  1872  ;— Tiddeman,  Gcol.  Mag.,
Jan.  1873 ; — Boyd  Dawkins,  Proceed.  Manch.  Philosophical  Soc,
Feb.  1873; — Brockbank,  Proceed.  Manch.  Philosophical  Soc,  March
1873.


8(J  msTOIilC  CAVEH  J.V  BUITAJN.  [chap.

Thi'  Jiomniio-Ci'hic  or  Jirit-WeUk  Stratum.

The  I'uiniiiitttrc  resolved  not  to  begin  at  the  entrance
wliioli  Mr.  Jackson  discovered  in  1838  (Fig.  19  a),  but
to  niakf  :i  new  jjiissage,  at  a  point  where  daylight  could
he  seen  through  tlie  chinks  of  the  broken  debris,  which
tluTL'  prevented  access.  Ground  was  broken  on  a  amall
plateau  ill  front  of  tliis  (Figs.  19  b,  20),  which,  from  the
suuiiy  aspeet  and  commanding  view,  would  naturally  be


Fro-  -211.  -l,.,iiailii,liiu.l  SMioH  of  Virtfiris  Cai-p.

rluwen  by  the  iIweHers  in  the  cave  as  their  more  usual
jdaee  for  eating  and  lounging,  and  in  which  we  might
therufoiv  e-vpect  to  find  the  remains  of  whatever  they
had  drop|)cd  or  lost.  The  gloomy  recesses  of  a  cave,
indeed,  even  if  lit  up  by  large  fires  or  by  torches,  are
not  fitted  for  any  other  purjiose  than  for  sleeping  or
eoufrealmeiit ;  and  if  we  add  in  this  case  the  damp  cold
ehiy  under  foot  and  the  constant  drip  of  the  water  over-
head, it  was  o)dy  reajonablo  to  infer  that  most  of  their
life  was  spent  out  of  doors,  and  that  the  cave  was  used
nieri'ly  as  a  place   of    retirement  for  shelter.      As  the


Ml.]


THE  BHir.n'ULSII  STiiATl^M.


treucli  progi't'&sed  we  dug  first  of  nil  thrmigh  a  tliirkiicss
of  two  foet  (Figs.  20,  21)  of  angtibr  blocks  of  limestone,
that  had  fallcu  from  the  cliff  above,  and  that  rested  on
a  black  layer  {No.  4)  (containing  the  kind  of  remains
which  we  had  expected.  The  layer  was  composed  of
fragments  of  lyone  and  charcoal,  snrrounding  the  burnt
stones  which  had  formed  the  ancient  hearths,  and  con-
tained large  quantities  of  the  broken  bones  of  animals
which  had  been  used  for  food,  and  coins  and  articles  of
luxuiy,  an  well  as  those  instruments  which  were  more
naturally  suited  for  the  half-savage  life  of  dwellei-s  in
caves.     As  we  opened  out  the  new  mouth,  the  angular


.   Poat-Koman  Tsliis

,   KomHDO- Celtic    Stntani,
Brit-Wilsli


..  Talus

:.   NeoHtliic  Iloriznii


fragments  disappeared  and  the  black  layer  rose  to  the
Hurface,  composing  the  floor,  and  lying  in  some  places
beneath  enormous  blocks  of  limesto)ic  which  had  fallen
from  the  roof  since  its  actrumulation,  and  being  conti-
nuous with  the  layer  in  which  Mr.  Jack«on  first  made
his  discoveries.

It  was  evident  that  this  stratum  had  been  formed
during  the  sojourn  of  man  in  the  cave,  and  we  shall


88  HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  BRITAIN.  [chap.

find,  in  the  examination  of  the  remains  which  it  furnished,
proof  that  it  is  connected  with  the  obscure  history  of
Britain  during  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries.  We  will
take  each  group  of  objects  in  its  proper  class,  beginning
with  what  at  first  sight  seems  the  least  promising,  the
broken  bones  of  the  animals  that  supplied  the  inhabitants
with  food.

The  Bones  of  the  Animals.

The  bones  of  the  Celtic  short-horn  {Bos  longifrons)
were  very  abundant,  and  proved  that  a  variety  of  ox,
indistinguishable  from  the  small  dark  mountain  cattle  of
Wales  and  Scotland,  was  the  chief  food  of  the  inha-
bitants. A  variety  of  the  goat  with  simple  recurved
horns,  which  is  commonly  met  with  in  the  Yorkshire
tumuli  explored  by  Canon  Greenwell,  and  in  the  deposits
round  Roman  villas  in  Great  Britain,  furnished  the
mutton ;  while  the  pork  was  supplied  by  a  domestic
breed  of  pigs  with  small  canines ;  and  since  the  bones
of  the  last  animal  belong  for  the  most  part  to  young
individuals,  it  is  clear  that  the  young  porker  was
preferred  to  the  older  animal.  The  bill  of  fare  was
occasionally  varied  by  the  use  of  horse-flesh,  which
formed  a  common  article  of  food  in  this  countiy  down
to  the  ninth  century.  To  this  list  must  be  added  the
venison  of  the  roedecr  and  stag,  but  the  remains  of  these
two  animals  were  singularly  rare.  Two  spurs  of  the
domestic  fowl,  and  a  few^  bones  of  wild  duck  and  grouse,
complete  the  list  of  animals  which  can  with  certainty
be  affirmed  to  have  been  eaten  by  the  dweller's  in
the  cave.  The  numerous  unbroken  bones,  some  ver}"
gigantic,  of  the  badger,  and  those  of  the  fox,  wild-
cat, haro,   and   watd'-vole,  commonly  called  water-rat.


HI.]  THE  BONE^  OF  THE  ANIMALS.  8!)

have  probably  been  introduced  Hubseijuently,  from
those  animals  having  used  the  cave  as  a  place  of  shelter.
There  were  also  bones  of  the  dog,  which  from  their
unbroken  condition  proved  that  the  animal  had  not
l)een  used  for  food,  as  it  certainly  was  used  by  the
men  who  lived  in  the  caves  of  Denbighshire  in  the
Neolithic  age.  The  whole  group  of  remains  implies
that  the  dwellei^s  in  the  Victoria  (.-ave  lived  upon
their  flocks  and  herds,  rather  than  bv  the  chase.
And  since  the  domestic  fowl  was  not  known  in
Britain  until  about  the  time  of  the  Roman  invasion,  the
presence  of  its  remains  fixes  the  dat^  of  the  occupation
as  not  earlier  than  that  time.  On  the  other  hand,  since
the  small  Celtic  short-horn  {Bos  loiujifroiis)  was  the  only
domestic  ox  in  use  known  in  Roman  Britain,  and  ainc(^
it  disappeared  from  those  portions  of  the  country  which
were  conquered  by  the  English,  along  with  its  Celtic
possessors,  the  date  is  fixed  in  the  other  direction  as  being
not  much  later  than  the  Northumbrian  conquest  of  that
portion  of  Yorkshire.  I  shall  return  to  this  part  of
the  subject  presently ;  here  I  wnll  only  remark,  that
the  present  distribution  of  the  lineal  descendants  of  the
Celtic  short-horn,  the  small,  dark-coloured  Scotch  and
Welsh  cattle,  corresponds  with  those  regions  on  which
the  Celtic  population  fell  back  before  the  English.  And
its  survival  in  Wales,  and  until  comparatively  recently  in
Cornwall,  Cumberland,  and  Westmoreland,  may  be
accounted  for  by  the  fact,  that  in  those  districts  the
Celtic  populations  of  Roman  Britain  were  not  displaced
by  the  English  invaders.^

The  larger  breed  of  cattle  known  in  its  purity  as  the

^  See  Palaeont.  Society,  1874 — Boyd  Dawkins'  l*roliminary  Treatise,
C.'hapter  11.


90  HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  BR  IT  A  IK  [chap.

white  OX  of  Chillingliam,  from  which  all  our  purely
English  breeds  have  been  derived,  was  imported  origin-
ally by  the  English,  and  spread  over  the  whole  country
which  they  occupied,  until  at  last  the  smaller  and  more
ancient  oxen  survived  only  in  a  few  isolated  areas  in  the
north  and  west  of  Britain.  This  displacement  of  the
Celtic  short-horn  by  the  English  oxen  of  the  Urus  type
corroborates,  in  a  striking  degree,  the  truth  of  Mr.
Freeman's  view  of  the  ruthless  destruction  of  everything
Roman  and  Celtic  at  the  hands  of  the  English.  It  is
clear,  therefore,  that  from  the  examination  of  the  bones
we  may  infer  that  the  cave  was  occupied  before  the
Celtic  short-horn  was  supplanted  in  this  district  by
the  larger  domestic  breed  of  oxen,  and  after  the  intro-
duction of  the  domestic  fowl,  that  is  to  say,  in  the
interval  which  elapsed  between  the  Roman  and  English
invasions.

We  must  now  treat  of  the  remains  of  man's  handiwork
in  the  cave.

Miscellaneous  Articles,

The  ornaments  and  implements  of  bone  consist  of
carefully  smoothed  pins,  and  points  intended  to  be  fitted
to  a  handle,  knife-handles  made  of  bone  and  antler  ;
three  spindle-whorls  made  of  the  perforated  head  of  a
femur ;  a  stud  ;  a  perfect  spoon-shaped  fibula  (Fig.  22),
which  corresponds  with  one  of  those  in  the  Museum  of
the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  as  well  as  several  fragments,
and  which  when  in  use  was  passed  through  holes  in
the  clothes,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  two  ends  alone
were  visible.  These  are  ornamented,  and  the  shaft
and  the  whole  back  is  more  or  less  polished  by  wear.
Eight  articles  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  the  handles
of  gimlets  (Figs.  2:i,  24),  and  most  probably  have  been


'.]


MIiiVELLA})EOV a  ARTICLES.


91


used  as  studs,  or  links,  for  fastening  together  clothing.
The  fact,  indeed,  that  some  have  the
central  hole  worn  by  the  friction  of  a
thong  or  string  of  some  kind,  coupled
with  the  worn  state  of  some  of  their
surfaces,  renders  this  guess  very  likely
to  be  true.  In  Fig.  24,  a,  the  ornament
in  right  lines,  which  once  covered  the
surface  as  in  Fig.  24,  6,  is  very  nearly
obliterated  by  friction  against  some
soft  body  such  as  clothing.  A  refer-
once  to  the  figures  will  give  a  better
idea  of  their  shape  and  ornamentation
than  a  mere  description.  Two  perfo-
rated discs  may  have  been  used  as
studs.  There  are  also  many  nonde*
script  articles,  consisting  of  sockets
made  of  antler  of  stag,  and  bone  rods
carefully  roiinded,  together  with  cut
bones  of  uncertain  use.  For  the  iden-
tification of  the  ivory  boss  of  a  swonl-
hilt  1  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of
ilr.  Franks.

Besides  the  ornaments  in  bone  and
antler,  there  were  seven  glass  beads,
five  transparent  and  two  of  a  bluish
tint,  and  one  of  jet  turned  in  a  lathe  ;
as  well  as  a  fragment  of  a  jet  bracelet.
Among  the  articles  of  daily  use  were
many  rounded  pebbles,  with  marks  of
fire  upon  them,  which  had  probably
been  heated  for  the  purjwse  of  boiling
water.  Pot-boilers,  as  they  are  called,
of  this  kind  are  used  by  many  savage    bi^d.^BTlfrin"«i


92


niSTORlt  CAVES  IX  BHITAIK.


[ci


pooplos  at  the  proseiit  day,  and  if  we  wished  to  liesit
water  in  a  vessel  that  would  not  sttind  the  fire,  we
should  be  obliged  to  employ  a  similar  method.  Other
stoues  formed  parts  of  ancient  hearths,  and  two  or  three
gi-QOved  slidja   of    sandstone    had    evidently  been   used


for  rounding  and  sharpening  bone  pins.  The  fragmoutw
of  pottery  were  veiy  abundant,  and  were  all  of  the  type
usually  found    round    Roman  villas.     C*ne  fragnifnt  of


i^^Pisi'^fc


Samiiin  ware  wiia  ornament(;d  with  the  representation  of
n  hunt.

This  group  of  articles  throws  but  little  light  on  X\w
date  of  the  oeeupation  of  the  lave.  The  .Samian  ware,
and  the  ivury  boss  of  a  Roman  sword,  merely  imply  tliat
it  Wii.s  either  llouian  nr  jiost-Koman.


III. I  THE  roiys.  93

The  Coins.

If  we  turn  now  to  the  coins,  we  shall  find  the  date  to
lie  within  narrower  limits  than  those  fixed  hy  the
animals.     They  consist  of: —

Two  silver  of  Trajan,  d.  117.

Four  bronze  of  Tetricus  I.,  |

One  bronze  of  Tetricus  11.,  J       '      "*   '

One  bronze  of  Gallienus,  d.  2C)H.

One  bronze  of  Constantino  IL,  d.  .'U.S.

<  )nc  bronze  of  Constans,  d.  353.

Three  barbarous  imitations  in   bronze  of  coins  of  Tetricus,  circa

4()0_oOO  A.D.

In  a  group  of  coins  such  as  this  the  latest  only  give  a
clue  to  the  date,  since  the  earlier  may  have  remained  in
circulation  long  after  they  were  stnick.  In  India,  for
examph-s  those  of  Al(»xand(»r  the  Great  have  not  yet
disappeared  from  the  country,  and  in  Spain,  in  the  shops
of  Malaga,  Moorish,  Roman,  and  even  Phoenicifin  coins
were  current  in  1863,  as  well  as  all  those  which  have  been
struck  since.^  We  may  therefore  disregar<l  the  earliest
coins,  and  fix  our  attention  more  particularly  on  those  of
the  Constantine  family,  and  the  bronzf^  minimi  men-
tioned last  in  the  list.  The  presence  of  the  coin  of
Constans  implies  that  the  cave  was  occupied  either
during  or  after  837  a.d.,  when  he  ascended  the  throne  ;
while  the  date  of  the  minimi  has  not  been  ascertained
with  accuracy.  "  They  abound  upon  all  Roman  sites,
such  as  Verulam  and  Richborough.  In  size  they  come
nearest  to  those*  struck  under  Arcadius  and  his  suc-
cessors, and  I  think  that  you  will  not  be  far  wrong  in
assigning  them   to  the  first   half  of  the   fifth  century.

^  li.    D.    Darbisbiro,     Proceed.    Manchester    Xuniisnmtic    Society,
Part  II.  18G5  :  ^'  On  some  Autonomous  Coins  of  Ancient  Spain."


1)4  HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  BRITAIN.  [chap.

The  latest  of  the  genuine  Roman  coins  found  in  this
country  are  those  of  Arcadius  and  Honorius ;  at  least,
the  finding  of  any  of  later  date  is  quite  exceptional.
AVhat  the  currency  was  between  that  time  and  the  com-
mencement of  the  Saxon  coinage  it  is  hard  to  say.  It
seems  probable,  however,  that  gold  and  silver  had  nearly
disappeared,  and  that  the  needs  of  a  small  local  com-
merce were  supplied  by  the  Roman  copper  coins  of  which
abundance  remained  in  the  country,  and  by  small  pieces
struck  after  their  model,  not  improbably  by  private
speculators."  This  opinion,  which  Mr.  John  Evans,  F  JI.S.,
has  been  kind  enough  to  write  me,  coincides  with  that
of  Mr.  Newton,  as  well  as  that  of  Mr.  Roach  Smith  ;
and  we  may  therefore  assume,  with  tolerable  certainty,
that  the  cave  was  inhabited  during  the  first  half  of  the
fifth  century  or  afterwards,  at  a  time  when  the  with-
di-awal  of  the  Roman  Legions  had  left  the  colony  of
Britain,  whose  youth  and  vigour  had  been  consumed  in
the  fierce  struo^gle  of  the  rivals  for  the  throne  of  the
West,  a  prey  to  the  barbarian  invaders.

It  is  of  course  conceivable  that  some  of  these  coins
may  have  been  dropped  at  one  time,  and  some  at  another,
but  nevertheless  it  seems  very  probable  that  the  whole
accumulation  belongs  to  the  same  relative  age.  But
whether  this  be  accepted  or  not,  it  is  certain  the  cave
was  inhabited  during  the  time  that  the  minimi  were  in
circulation, — that  is  to  say,  during  the  first  half  of  the
fifth  century,  or  from  tliat  time  forwards.

The  JeiceUerf/,  and  its  Relation  to  Irish  Art,

This  conclusion  as  to  the  date,  derived  from  the  coins,
is  confirmed  in  a  remarkable  degree  by  the  examination
of  the  articles  of  luxury.      Besides  two  hrunz<.'  brooches


iilJ  the  jewellery.  95

of  the  Roman  pattern,  known  by  archseologists  as  harp-
shaped  (Coloured  Plate,  fig.  5),  was  one  of  the  split-ring
type,  with  a  moveable  pin,  which  is  generally  assigned  to
the  later  period  of  the  Roman  occupation  of  this  country.
One  type  of  brooch  was  composed  of  two  circular  plates
of  bronze,  soldered  together,  the  front  being  very  thin
and  bearing  flamboyant  and  spiral  patterns  in  relief  (Fig.
'lb),  of  admirable  design  and  execution.  The  original
of  the  figure  was  discovered  by  Mr.  Jackson,  and  is
more  perfect  than  any  of  those  which  we  obtained  in
our  excavations.  It  is  altogether
unlike  any  Roman  brooch  properly
so  called,  both  in  its  composite
make  and  style  of  ornament.  A
similar  brooch  has  been  discovered
at  Brough  Castle,  in  Westmore-
land, and  was  figured  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Antiquarian
Society  (vol.  iv.  129),  by  Sir  ,,..  ,,_,„„.  ^^^
Jami's  Muagrave,  and  a  second  is  (immnii  sUe).

preserved  in  the  JVIusemn  of  the

Royal  Irisli  Academy  (492).  The  style  corresponds
with  that  of  a  medallion  ou  a  Runic  casket  of  silver-
bronze,  figured  by  Prof  Stevens,  and  stated  to  have
been  obtained  from  Northumbrian  Britain,  as  well
as  that  of  a  brooch  in  the  Museum  at  Mainz,  assigned
by  the  same  authority  to  the  third  or  fourth  century.
It  is  also  to  he  met  with  in  the  illuminations  of  one
of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  at  Stockholm,  as  well  as
in  those  of  the  Gospels  of  S.  Columban,  preserved
in  the  library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  and  in  the
"  Book  of  Kells  "  (8-9(tO).'  In  all  these  cases  it  cannot  be
'  Vetustft  Monumenta,  vol.  vi.


9f;  niSTHHIC  CA  VKS  JX  BRITAIN  [chap.

attirmed  to  be  Komaii,  and  it  is  not  presented  by  orna-
ments of  either  purely  English  or  Teutonic  origin.  It
is  most  closely  allied  to  that  work  which  is  termed
by  Mr.  Franks  "late  Celtic."  From  its  localization  in
Britain  and  Ireland,  it  seems  to  be  probable  that  it  is  of
Celtic  derivation ;  and  if  this  view  be  accepted,  there  is
nothing  at  all  extraordinary  in  its  being  recognized  in
the  illuminated  Irish  Gospels.  Ireland,  in  the  sixth  and
seventh  centuries,  was  the  great  centre  of  art,  civiliza-
tion, and  literature  ;  and  it  is  only  reasonable  to  8upi)ose
that  there  would  be  intercourse  between  the  Irish  Chris-
tians and  those  of  the  west  of  Britain  during  the  time
that  the  Romano-Celts,  or  Brit- Welsh,  were  being  slowly
pushed  to  the  westward  by  the  heathen  English  invader.
Proof  of  such  an  intercourse  we  find  in  the  brief  notice
in  the  **  Annales  Cambrioe,"  in  which  Gildas,  the  Brit-
Welsh  historian,  is  stated  to  have  sailed  over  to  Ireland
in  the  year  a.d.  5(15.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable
that  about  tliis  time  there  was  a  Brit-Welsh  migration
into  Irehuid,  as  well  as  into  Brittany.

Nor  is  it  at  all  strange  that  the  same  style  of  orna-
ment sliouhl  occur  in  some  few  cases  in  North  Germany.

'*  The  (!on(juest  of  Britain,"  writes  the  Rev.  J.  R.
Green  ('^History  of  the  English  People,"]).  !()*),  **  had
thrust  a  wedge  of  heathendom  into  the  heart  of  the
Western  Churcli.  On  the  one  side  lay  Italy  and  Gaul,
wlios(»  Churches  owned  obedience  to  the  see  of  Rome,  on
the  other  the  free  Celtic  C^hurch  of  Ireland.  But  the
condition  of  the  two  portions  of  Western  (Miristendom
was  very  ditibrent.  While  the  vigour  of  Latin  diris-
tianity  was  exhausted  in  a  l)are  stniggle  for  life,  Ireland

^  I  have  to  thank  the  Kev.  J.  K  (irceii  for  allowing  me  to  <iuote
lliia  pns«agtj  from  \m  work,  wliich  is  now  in  tho  press.


III.]  IRISH-CELTIC  AltT.  1»7

as  yet  unscourged  by  invaders  had  drawn  from  its
conversion  an  energy  such  as  it  has  never  known  since.
Christianity  had  been  received  there  with  a  burst  of
popular  enthusiasm.  Letters  and  arts  sprang  up  rapidly
in  its  train  ;  the  science  and  Biblical  knowledge  which
had  fled  from  the  continent  took  refuge  in  famous
schools  which  made  Durrow  and  Armagh  the  univer-
sities of  the  West.  The  new  life  soon  beat  too  strongly
to  brook  confinement  within  insular  bounds.  Patrick,
the  first  missionary  of  Ireland,  had  not  been  half  a
century  dead,  when  Celtic  Christianity  flung  itself  with
a  fiery  zeal  into  battle  with  the  mass  of  heathenism
Avhich  had  rolled  in  upon  the  Christian  world.  Irish
missionaries  laboured  among  the  Picts  of  the  Highlands,
among  the  Frisians  of  the  northern  seas  ;  Columban
founded  monasteries  in  Burgundy  and  the  A[)ennines;
the  canton  of  St.  Gall  still  commemorates  in  its  name
the  missionary  before  whom  the  spirits  of  flood  and  fell
fled  wailing  over  the  waters  of  the  Lake  of  C^onstance.
For  a  time  it  seemed  as  if  the  course  of  the  world's  his-
tory was  to  be  changed,  as  if  the  older  race  that  Roman
and  Teuton  had  swept  before  them  had  turned  to  the
moral  conquest  of  its  conquerors,  as  if  Celtic  and  not
Latin  Christianity  was  to  mould  the  destinies  of  the
Churches  of   the  West.''

It  is  impossible  that  Irish-Celtic  art  should  not
have  made  itself  felt  wherever  the  Irish  missionaries
penetrated,  and  especially  in  the  gorgeous  illuminated
Gospels,  which  it  was  the  pride  of  S.  Columban  and
his  school  to  have  made,  and  which  now  excite  our
wonder  and  admiration.  The  early  Christian  art  in
Ireland  grew  out  of  the  late  Celtic,  and  was,  to  a
great  extent,   free  from  the  influence  of  Rome,  w^hich

H


9S  THE  nCTOJilA   CAVi:.  [ciiAP.

is  stamped  on  the  Brit- Welsh  art  of  the  same  age
ill  this  country.  The  style,  therefore,  of  these  circuhir
brooches,  from  its  correspondence  with  that  of  the  Irish
illuminated  gospels,  aflfords  reasonable  grounds  for  the
belief  that  the  Victoria  Cave  was  inhabited  in  the  sixth
century,  or  possibly  later,  but  before  the  English  invaders
had  swept  the  Brit- Welsh  away  from  the  district.

Two  other  brooches  were  also  discovered  in  the
black  layer,  which  are  even  of  greater  interest  than  those
which  have  just  been  described.  The  one  represents  a
dragon  (colored  Plate,  fig.  3),  with  its  eye  made  of  red
enamel ;  the  other  (colored  Plate,  fig.  7)  shaped,  like  the
letter  S,  has  its  front  composed  of  an  elaborate  clois-
sonnde  pattern  in  red,  blue,  and  yellow  enamels,  and
is  of  the  same  design  as  two  brooches  in  the  British
Museum,  discovered,  one  near  Whittington  Hill,  in  Glou-
cestershii'c,  and  the  other  near  Malton,  in  Yorkshire.
All  three  were,  undoubtedly,  turned  out  of  the  same
artistic  school,  and  they  may  have  been  made  by  -one
workman.  The  enamel,  in  all  these  examples,  seems
to  have  been  inserted  into  hollows  in  the  bronze,  and
then  to  have  been  heated  so  as  to  form  a  close  union
with  them,  and  in  some  cases  where  it  has  been  broken,
as  in  colored  Phite,  fig.  7,  small  fragments  still  remain
to  attest  the  completeness  of  the  fusion  with  the  bronze.
The  style  of  workmanship  is  neither  Koman  nor  Teu-
t()ni<'.  An  enamelled  fibula  with  sjiirals  in  relief,  found
at  li(*ichenbach^  (Soleure)  in  a  post- Roman  sc^pulchre,
and  figured  by  Bonstettin,  is  of  a  similar  design,  and
it  may  be  trace<l  also  in  two  brooches  obt^ained  by
the  Abl)e  Cochet,    from    the    Merovingian  Cemetery  of

^  Anti(ji»it('.s  Suisses,  Soroml  Supplemciit ;  Lausanne,  18G7,  p.  15,
n.  xii.  Iig8.  3,  \.


III.]  •  EXAMELLEh  JKWELLEllW

Envermcu,^  although  they  are  of  more  massive  and
square  construction  than  those  of  Yorkshire.

One  harp-shaped  brooch  (colored  Plate,  fig.  1)  is
ornamented  with  diamonds  of  blue  enamel,  separated
by  small  triangles  of  red,  and  sliows  in  its  Roman  design
and  Celtic  ornamentation  the  union  between  (\»ltic  and
Roman  art.  A  similar  specimen  from  Brough  Castle,
Westmoreland,  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  and
may  have  been  turned  out  of  the  same  workshop.  We
also  met  with  an  enamelled  disk  (colored  Plate,  fig.  6),
and  a  finger-ring  (fig.  4)  of  bronze-gilt,  ornamented  with
blue  enamel.

Several  enamelled  fibuloe  in  the  British  Museum,  ob-
tained by  Sir  James  Musgravc,  at  Kirby  Thon*,  West-
moreland, belong  to  the  same  style  of  art  as  those  of  the
Victoria  cave,  and  were  associated  with  th<*  same  class  of
remains.  Shields,^  scabbards,  horse  traj^pings,  and  other
articles  have  also  been  discovered  in  this  county,  decorated
in  the  same  fashion  with  coloured  enamels,  and  especially
a  bronze  vase  from  the  late  Roman  tumuli,  called  the
Bartlow  Hills.  They  all  bolonor  to  the  chiss  termed  "  late
Celtic  "  by  Mr.  Franks,  and  are  considered  by  him  to  be
of  British  manufacture.

This  view  is  supported  by  the  (mly  niference  to  the
art  of  enamelling  which  is  furnished  by  tlu.'  classical
writers.  Philostratus,  a  Greek  sophist,  who  left  Athens
in  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  to  join  the  Court
of  Julia  Domna,  the  wife  of  the  Emp(*ror  Severus,
writes: — "It  is  said  that  the  barbarians  living  in  or  by
the  ocean,  pour  these   colors  (tho8(»  of  the  horse   trap-

^  IjB  Seine  Inforieure,  4to.,  1807,  p.  203.

2  See  Kemble,  **  Hone  Femles,'*  4to.  ;  Description  of  Plates  by  A.
AV.  Franks,  p.  04.


loo  TJfE  VICTORIA  CAVE,  [cnAr.

plugs)  on  heated  bronze,  that  these  adhere,  grow  as  hard
as  stone,  and  preserve  the  designs  that  are  made  in
tliem/*^  Mr-  Franks'  opinion  that  this  passage  relates
to  Britain,  seems  to  be  more  probable  than  that  of  the
eminent  French  archaeologist,  M.  de  Laborde,  who  holds
that  it  relates  to  Gaul  and  especially  to  "  Belgica."  ^

When  we  consider  the  variety  of  enamelled  objects
which  have  been  discovered  in  the  north  of  England,  it
seems  to  be  by  no  means  improbable  that  the  principal
centre  of  the  art  enamelling  was  here  rather  than  in  the
south  ;  and  this  conclusion  is  considerably  strengthened
by  the  fact  that  under  the  Romans  political  power
centered  in  the  district  between  the  H  umber  and  the
Tyne,  and  that  York,  and  not  London,  was  the  capital  of
Britain  and  the  seat  of  the  Roman  Prefect.  It  is  worthy
of  remark,  that  since  the  Emperor  Severus  built  the  wall
which  bears  his  name,  marched  in  person  against  the
Caledonians,  and  died  at  York,  the  account  of  the
enamels  may  have  been  brought  to  the  court  of  the
Empress  Julia  from  this  very  region,  and  thus  come  to
be  recorded  by  Philostratus.

Two  harp-shaped  fibuhe,  obtained  by  Mr.  Jackson
from  tlie  Victoria  cave,  and  ornamented  with  enamel,
are  coated  with  silver,  and  in  one  of  them  two  small
blocks  of  that  metal  still  remain  firmly  imbedded  in  the
l)r()nze.  It  is  very  probable  that  most  of  the  ornaments
were  phited  either  with  silver  or  gold,  traces  of  which,
in  s(mie  <Mse.s,  still  remain.

Among  the  miscellaneou.^  objects  in  metal  are  a  bronze

^lanvfut),  Tft  (€  ffvritjTanOai  Kai  XiOovadaif  icai  irijiiei.y    &  iyp6<f>ri   (Icon,
lib.  i.  c.  28).     The  art  was  evidently  unknown  in  Home  at  this  time.
-  Notice  ties  Kmauxdu  Mu8<*u  dii  Louvre,  1857,  pp.  iT),  2(5.


III.]  MISCELLANEOUS  BROSZE  ARTICLES.  101

wire  brooch  (colored  Plate,  fig.  8),  two  bniceletH,  composed
of  twisted  bronze-gilt  wire;  and  one  fragment  in  solid
bronze,  ornamented  with  right  lines;  one  plain  bronze
finger-ring  ;  two  small  buckles,  respectively  of  bronze
and  of  iron,  and  a  small  bronze  flattened  pin  (colored
Plate,  fig.  2),  ending  in  two  points  to  which,  at  finst,  we
were  unable  to  assign  a  use.  When,  however,  the  two
points  were  compared  with  the  circles  on  the  ornaments
of  bone  (Fig.  22),  there  was  but  little  doubt  that  this
curious  object  was  employed  as  a  pair  of  fixed  com-
passes. There  were  also  iron  articles  which  were  too
much  corroded  to  admit  of  a  guess  at  their  probable  use,
besides  a  Roman  key,  knife-blades,  and  a  spt*ar-head
discovered  by  Mr.  Jackson.

The  number  of  ornaments  found  in  the  Victoria  Cave
from  time  to  time  by  various  explorers  is  very  con-
siderable. They  are  scattered  in  the  private  collections
of  Messrs.  Jackson  and  Eckroyd  Smith,  and  in  the
Museums  of  Giggleswick  Grammar-school,  and  of  Leeds,
and  the  British  Museum.

Similar  remains  in  other  Caves  in  Yorkshire.

The  Victoria  cave  is  by  no  means  the  only  one  in  the
district  that  has  furnished  works  of  art  and  the  remains
of  animals.  The  Albert  cave  (Fig.  19,  c.)  close  by  is,  as
yet,  only  explored  sufficiently  to  prove  that  it  contains
the  same  kind  of  objects  ;  and  from  that  of  Kelko,  over-
looking Giggleswick,  they  have  been  obtained  by  Mr.
Jackson ;  ^  as  well  as  from  that  of  Dowker-bottom  between
ArnclifTe  and  Kilnsay,  by  Mr.  James  Farrer  and  Mr.

^  Eckroyd  Smith,  Trans.  Hist.  8oc.  Lancashire  and  Cheshire,  18GG.
Limestone  Caves  of  Craven.


1 0 2  O THEll  ( '.1 1  'AN  IN  YOliKSUIJiE.  [ch a v

Deuny.^  From  the  last,  seven  spoon-shaped  bi'ooches
of  bone,  and  two  s})indle-\vhorls  of  Samian  ware  of
the,  bottom  of  a  vase,  are  preserved  in  the  Britisli
Museum,  as  well  as  a  bronze  needle,  and  brooches
both  harp-sliaped  and  diseoid,  and  fragments  of  pot-
tery. Three  coins  in  bronze,  according  to  Mr.  Farrer,*
}>rove  that  the  date  of  the  accumulation  is  late  or  post-
Roman,  one  being  of  Claudius  Gothicus,  whose  reign
ended  ad.  270,  and  two  belonging  to  the  Tetrici,  A.n.
267-273,  since  they  would  remain  in  circulation  for
some  time  after  they  were  struck.  A  bronze  pin,  in
the  possession  of  Mr.  Jackson,  from  Dowker-bottom,  is
remarkable  for  the  head  being  plated  with  silver.

The  fragment  of  flattened  antler  from  this  cave,  referred
by  Mr.  Denny  to  the  elk,  most  probably  belongs  to  the
crown  of  an  old  antler  of  the  stag,  and  the  remains  of
the  *^Canis  ])rima3vus"  of  that  author  cannot  be  distin-
guished from  those  of  a  large  dog.  The  bones  of  the
wolf,  and  an  enormous  stag  in  the  Museum  of  the
Philosophical  Society  at  Leeds,  are  probably  much  older
than  the  Brit-Welsh  stratum.

These  Cares  usexi  as  Places  of  Refuge.

The  jjresence  of  these  works  of  art,  in  association  with
the  remains  of  the  domestic  animals  used  for  food,  is
only  to  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  in  the  way  pro-
posed by  ^Ir.  Dixon.  Men  accustomed  to  luxury  and
refinement  were  (•om[)elled,  by  the  pressure  of  some  great
calamity,  to  flee  for  refuge,  and  to  lead  a  half-savage  life
in    these    inch.'ment   caves,    with    whatever   they    could

»  Proc.  Ge<»l.  and  Tulj'teclniic  iSoc.  of  West  Riding  of  YorksliiriN
1859,  p.  4.")  et  i(fi/.

*  J)eiiny  and  FarnT,  op.  cit.  1864-'),  411  et  t^eq.  ]  Farrcr,  Proc.
Soe.  Anti<i.  vol.  iv.


III.]  EVIDENCE  OF  UISTi>HY  Ai^  TO  DATE,  10;{

ti-ansport  thither  of  their  propi'rty.  'J'liey  wt^n*  also
acconipauied  by  their  families,  for  the  number  of  per-
sonal ornaments  and  the  spindle-whorls  imply  the
l»resence  of  the  female  8t»x.  We  may  also  infer  that
they  were  cut  oft'  from  the  civilization  to  which  they
had  l>een  accustomed,  since  they  were  compelled  to
extemporize  spindle-whorls  out  of  the  pieces  of  the
vessels  that  they  brought  with  them,  instead  of  using
those  which  had  l)een  manufactured  for  the  [purpose.

The  evidence  of  llistovti  as  to  the  Date.

We  have  already  seen  from  the  examination  of  the
coins,  that  the  Victoria  cave  was  occHipied  during  or  after
the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century,  and  from  the  works  of
art  that  it  may  have  been,  and  probably  was,  occupied  at
a  later  time.  To  fix  the  latest  i)ossible  limit  to  the  occu-
pation of  the  grou])  of  caves  to  which  it  In^longs,  we
must  appeal  to  contemporary  history.

During  the  fii*st  four  centuries  of  lioman  dominion  in
Britain,  the  spread  of  the  manners  and  arts  of  the  great
mistress  of  the  world  followed  close  upon  her  success  in
arms ;  and  the  policy  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  her  generals,
Agricola,  bore  fruit  in  the  adoption  of  her  civilization  by
the  British  provincials.  The  population  clustered  round
the  Roman  stations,  and  cities  sprang  uj),  such  as  Chester,
Bath,  York,  and  Lincoln,  betw(*en  which  a  ready  com-
munication was  maintained  by  the  roads  that  still  remain
as  monuments  of  engineering  skill,  and  which,  in  many
cjises,  have  l)ecn  used  uninterruj)tedly  from  that  time  to
the  present  day.  Agriculture  was  carried  on  to  such  an
extent,  that  Britain  became  one  of  the  principal  corn-
producing  regions  of  the  Roman  Empire  ;  and  a  commerce
with  foreign  countries  was  carried  oji  from  the  ports  on  the


104  HLSTORH'  CAVES  ly  Yorkshire.  [chap.

banks  of  the  Thames  and  the  Severn  (Gildas,  i.).  The
mineral  sources  were  also  fully  explored  ;  tin  was  sought
in  the  mines  of  Cornwall,  lead  in  those  of  Derbyshire
and  Somersetshire,  and  iron  in  the  forest  of  Dean,  Sussex,
and  Northumberland.  Nor  w^as  this  material  prosperity
unaccompanied  by  the  signs  of  luxury  and  culture.
Numerous  villas  were  dotted  throughout  the  province,
resembling  in  size  and  plan  the  quadrangle  of  a  mediaeval
college  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge,  and  even  in  ruins
astonishing  us  by  their  magnitude  and  the  beauty  of
their  tessellated  pavements.  York  was  the  capital  of
the  province  and  the  centre  of  government,  and  con-
sequently Yorkshire  must  have  l^een,  if  anything,  more
completely  penetrated  with  the  Roman  arts  and  civiliza-
tion than  any  other  pnrt  of  Jiritain.  The  relation  of  the
Roman  conquerors  to  the  conquered  Celtic  inhabitants  was
somew^hat  analogous  to  that  which  now  exists  between
the  English  and  the  subject  nations  in  India.  Latin  was
the  language  spoken  by  the  higher  classes  in  the  cities,  of
the  army,  and  probably  of  tlie  courts  of  law  ;  while  in
the  country  the  Celtic  tongue  held  its  ground,  and  still
survives  in  the  language  of  Wales.  Christianity  was
probably  professed  in  this  country  about  the  time  of
Constantine,  and  became  the  dominant  religion  by  the
middle  of  the  fifth  century,  if  not  before.

Undernc  ath  all  the  outward  signs  of  prosperity  during
the  Roman  rule  in  Britain,  there  were  causes  at  work
which  ensured  the  ruin  of  the  province.  The  policy  of
centralization,  and  the  very  perfection  of  the  machinery
for  government  on  autocratic  ])rinciples,  which  brought
about  the  destruction  of  the  Roman  Empire,  as  in  our
own  days  they  have  nearly  ruined  France,  bore  fruit  in
Britain  in  the  lu'lplcss  apathy  of  the  provincials  when


III.]  RAIDS  OF  rjrrs  AND  SiUJTS.  1().>

the  machinery  was  broken  up.  Jt  is  therefore  no  wonder
that  when  the  Roman  garrison  was  finally  withdrawji
from  this  country,  in  the  year  409,  tlu?  provincials
were  left  an  eiisy  prey  to  their  enemies.  Nor  need  we
wonder  that  they  set  up  isolated  centres  of  government,
which  we  may  term  communes,  in  the  year  410,  in
which  each  city  stood  out  for  itself,  instead  of  combining
together  for  the  common  weal.  From  this  time  forward
the  inhabitants  of  the  Roman  province  of  Britain,  severed
from  the  Roman  Empire,  became  a  prey  to  the  many
tyrants  who  sprang  up,  and  the  anarchy  followed  m
pathetically  described  by  Gildas.  It  wa^  at  this  time
that  the  coinage  became  debased,  and  Roman  coins
afforded  the  patterns  for  the  small  bronze  minimi  of  the
Settle  cave,^  which  are  so  abundant  among  the  ruins
of  Roman  cities  in  this  country,  such  as  8t.  Alban's.

The  invaders  of  Britain  must  now  be  considered.  The
Picts  and  Scots  had  secured  a  rude  liberty  under  the
protection  of  their  mountains  and  morasses,  rather  than
by  their  success  in  arms  against  the  Roman  legions,  and
their  raids  into  the  Roman  province  had  been  curbed  by
the  walls  and  lines  of  forts,  extending,  the  one  from  the
Firth  of  Forth  to  the  Firth  of  Clyde,  the  other  from  the
Sol  way  Firth  to  the  Tyne.  In  spite  of  these,  however,
from  time  to  time,  in  the  fourth  century,  they  carried
desolation  into  Northumberland  and  Yorkshire,  even  if
they  did  not  penetrate  fiirther  into  the  south.  And  on
the  withdrawal  of  the  Roman  legions,  at  the  beginning  of
the  fifth  century,  their  raids  were  organized  on  a  much
larger  scale.  In  the  pages  of  Gildas  we  have  a  melan-
choly picture  of  their  results.     In  the  letter  written  to

^  Tliemitlioritics  for  tliis  paragraph  are  Gildas,  Ncniiiiis,  and  others,
printed  in^'Monuiin-nta  Histr>ricu  JJritaiinica,"  lnli<f.  Rolls  l*ublication.


10()  HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  YORKSHIHE,  [chap.

^tius,  the  Roman  commander  in  Graul,  in  446,  the
Bri tains  are  desmhed  as  sh(»ep,  and  the  Picts  and  Scots
as  wolves.  "  The  barbarians  drive  us  back  to  the  sea ;
the  sea  drives  us  back  again  to  perish  at  the  hands  of
the  barbarians,"  are  tlie  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  the
em])assy/  One  plea  for  aid,  which  they  advanced,  is
especially  interesting,  because  it  shows  incidentally  that
the  Roman  civilization  did  not  disappear  with  the  with-
drawal of  the  legions — the  plea  that  unless  they  were
succoured  the  name  of  Rome  would  be  dishonoured.
Nerved  by  despair,  the  British  in  the  following  year  take
up  arms,  and,  according  to  Gildas,  leave  their  houses  and
lands,  and  taking  shelter  in  mountains  and  forests,  and
in  caves,'  succeed  in  driving  back  their  Pictish  and
Scottish  enemies.

It  is  veiy  significant  that  caves  should  be  mentioned
in  this  account ;  for  the  region  of  Craven  is  one  of  the
very  fvw  in  the  country  in  which  they  are  sufficiently
abundant  to  allow  of  their  being  used  as  places  of
shelter  on  a  scale  sufficiently  large  to  be  recorded  in
history ;  and  when  we  consider  that  one  of  the  natural
highways  from  Scotland  into  central  England  lies
through  that  district,  it  seems  to  me  extremely  pro-
bable that  the  group  of  caves  of  which  Victoria  is  one
is  that  referred  to.  On  this  point  it  is  worthy  of  record,
that  in  the  year  1745,  when  the  younger  Pretender  was
at  Shap,  and  it  was  doubtful  w^hether  he  would  take  the
route  through  Ribblesdale  or  by  way  of  Preston,  the  eldest

^  **  KepoUuiit  nos  Barl)ari  ad  marc,  rcpellit  iios  niaiv  ad  Barbaros  ;
inWr  hxc  oriuiitur  duo  genera  fiinoruai;  aut  jugulamur  aut  mcrgimur."
(JiLDAS,  xvii.

'"'  **Brit()nt's  dv  ipsis  nioiitilms,  spiduncis  ao  saltibns  diimis  constrti^
continue  irluUlabant/'    (Jildas,  xvii.      Uada,  77 «W.  Ecdts.  lib.  L  cxiv.


iiij  rnt:  esuusu  lyvAsufX.  107

80U  of  one  of  the  landowners  near  Settle,  was  liidden,
along  with  the  family  plate,  in  a  (*ave  close  to  the
Victoria,  in  the  belief  that  the  Highlanders  were  in  the
habit  of  eating  children  as  well  as  of  laying  hands  on
the  precious  metals.  The  historical  notice  tallies  exactly
with  the  geographical  position,  and  is  not  inconsistent
w^th  the  evidence  oflered  by  the  coins  and  other  remauis.
The  date,  therefore,  of  the  occuj^ation  may  probably  be
iujsigned  as  alK)Ut  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century.

This,  however,  is  not  the  latest  date  that  can  be
assigned.  In  the  year  449,  the  three  ships  which
contained  Hengist  and  his  warriors,  landed  at  Ebbsfleet,
in  Thanet,  and  the  first  English  colony  was  founded
among  a  people  who  were  known  to  the  strangers  as
**  Brit-Welsh."  ^  From  that  time  a  steady  immigration
of  Angle,  Jute,  Saxon,  and  Frisian  set  in  towards  the
eastern  coast  of  Britain,  as  far  north  as  the  Firth  of
Forth,  until,  in  the  first  half  of  the  sixth  century,  the
whole  of  the  eastern  part  of  our  island  was  taken  pos-
session of  by  various  tribes,*  whose  names,  for  the  most
part,  still  survive  in  the  names  of  our  counties.  The
principal  rivers  also  afforded  them  a  free  passage  into
the  heart  of  the  country,  and  the  kingdom  of  Mercia  gra-
dually expanded  until  it  embraced,  not  only  the  basin
of  the  Trent,  but  reached  as  far  as  the  line  of  the  Severn.
The  river  H umber  afforded  a  base  of  operations  for  the
Anglian  freebooters,  who  founded  the  kingdom  of  Deira
or  modern  Yorkshire ;  while  the  camp  of   Bamborough

^  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle,  pamm.

2  Anglo-Saxon  Clironiclr,  a.d.  449.  "  From  Anglia,  wliich  has
ever  since  remaint'd  wanU;  between  the  Jutes  and  Saxons,  came  the
men  of  Eiist  Anglia,  Middle  Anglia,  Mercia,  and  aU  Xorth-hunihria."
The  MS.  A,  from  which  this  was  taken,  ends  in  a.d.  97r».  The  i»as8age
was  taken  from  Lioda  who  lived  in  the  ^<th  century.


108  HISTORIC  CAVES  IN  YORKSHIRE,  [chap.

was  the  centre  from  which  Ida,  who  landed  with  fifty
ships  in  the  year  547,  conquered  Bernicia,  or  the  region
extending  from  the  river  Tees  to  Edinburgh.  The  tide
of  English  colonization  rolled  steadily  westward,  until,  at
the  close  of  the  sixth  century,  the  hilly  and  impassable
districts  culminating  in  the  Pennine  Chain,  and  extend-
ing southwards  from  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland,
through  Yorkshire  and  Derbyshire,  formed  the  barrier
between  the  Brit- Welsh  kingdoms  of  Elmct  and  Strath-
dyde  on  the  east,  and  the  English  on  the  west.  To  the
south  of  this  the  Brit- Welsh  dominion  was  bounded  by
the  river  Severn,  and  included  Chester  and  the  whole  of
the  basin  of  the  Dee ;  while  Somerset,  Devon,  and
Cornwall,  and  the  district  round  Bradford  and  Malmes-
bury  formed  the  kingdom  of  West  Wales.*

The  long  war  by  which  the  borders  of  England  were
gradually  pushed  to  the  west,  at  the  expense  of  the
Brit- Welsh,  was  one  of  the  most  fearful  of  which  we
have  any  record.  The  English  invaders  came  over,  with
their  wdves  and  children  and  household  stuff,  in  such
force  that  the  country  which  they  left  behind  was  left
desolate  for  several  centuries.  Worshippers  of  Thor  an<l
Odin,  and  living  a  free  life,  equally  divided  between
farming,  hunting,  and  war,  they  w^ere  mortiil  foes  to
(Uiristianity  and  to  Roman  civilization.  They  destroyed
the  Brit- Welsh  cities  with  fire  and  sword  ;  and  the  ashes
of  the  Roman  villas,  which  are  to  be  found  in  nearly
every  part  of  the  Roman  province  of  Britiiin,  testify  to
the  keenness  of  their  hate  to  everything  which  was  at
once  Christian,  Roman,  and  Celtic.  Gildas  forcibly  de-
scribes the  destruction  which  they  wrought  among  his
countrymen,  by  the  mrta]>hor  tliat  "the  flame  kindled
'  8»M'  K.  A  Fn'oman,  **  Is'nrm.m  Conquest, ''  vol.  i.


III.)  TIIK  COXf^UEST  OF  ELME1\  U)!)

in  the  east,  raged  over  nearly  all  the  land,  until  it  flared
red  over  the  western  ocean."  ^  In  the  conquered  districts
the  Brit-Welsh  were  either  exterminated  or  enslaved,
and  their  civilization  was  wholly  replaced  by  the  rude
culture  of  the  English.

It  follows,  from  the  nature  of  this  conquest,  that  any
group  of  remains,  such  as  those  in  the  caves  under  con-
sideration, must  I>e  assigned  to  the  time  l)efore  tht^
English  had  possession  of  the  district,  and  we  must  there-
fore see  what  historical  proof  is  to  be  found  on  the  point.

At  the  close  of  the  sixth  century  the  Brit-Welsh
kingdom  of  Elmet  (in  the  basin  of  the  river  Aire) — a
name  which  still  survives  in  Barwi<;k-in-Elmet,  a  little
village  about  seven  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Leeds —
extended  over  the  countrj'  round  Leeds  and  Bradford,
passing  westwards  towards,  if  not  into,  Lancashire,  and
northwards  probably  so  as  to  embrace  Ribblesdale,  and
forming  a  banier  to  the  westward  advance  of  the  Eng-
lish possessors  of  eastern  Yorkshire.  Its  downfall  will
give  us  the  latest  possible  limit  which  we  are  seeking  for
the  Brit- Welsh  occupation  of  the  Victoria  Cave.  The
two  kingdoms  of  Deira  and  Beniicia  had  united  to  form
the  powerful  state  of  Northumbria,  at  the  beginning  of
the  seventh  century,  under  iEthelfrith,  who  canied  on  the
war  against  the  Brit- Welsh  with  greater  vigour  than  his
predecessors.  In  607  ^  he  marched  along  the  line  of  the
Trent,  through  Staffordshire,  avoiding  thereby  the  diffi-
cult and  easily-defended  hilly  country  of  Derbyshire  and

^  **  Confovebatur  .  .  .  de  mari  usque  ad  mare  ignis  oriontalis
sacrilegorum  raanu  exaggeratus,  et  finitimas  quasque  civitatcs  populans,
qui  non  quievit  acconsus  donoc  cunctam  pene  exurc^ns  insular
Ruperficiem,  rubra  occidentalem  trucique  oceanum  lingu^  delam-
beret" — xxiv.

2  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle.


1 1  0  niSTOIiir  CA  VES  I\  YOliKSniRE.  [chap.

East  Laiiciisliire,  to  the  battle  near  Chester,  famous  for
the  destruction  of  the  power  of  Strathclyde,  and  the
death  of  the  monks  of  Bangor,  who  fought  against  him
witli  their  prayers.  By  this  decisive  blow,  the  English
first  set  foot  on  the  coast  of  the  Irish  Channel,  and
Strathclyde  and  Elmet,  on  the  one  hand,  were  cut
asunder  from  Wales.  On  the  other  Chester  was  so
thoroughly  destroyed  that  it  remained  in  ruins  for
nearly  three  centuries,  to  be  rebuilt  by  ^thelflaed,  "  the
Lady  of  the  Mercians,''  in  907,  and  the  plains  of  Lan-
cashire lay  open  to  the  invader.^  This  western  advimce
of  the  Northumbrians  was  completed  by  the  conquest  of
Elmet,  in  616,  by  Eadwine,  and  the  whole  district  from
Edinburgh,  as  far  south  as  the  Humber,  and  as  fiir  west
as  Chester,  became  subject  to  his  rule.*  The  latest  pos-
sible date,  therefore,  that  can  be  assigned  for  the  occu-
pation of  these  caves  by  the  Brit-Welsh  is  detennined  by
that  event.  It  cannot  be  later  than  the  first  quarter  of
the  seventh  century,  or  the  time  when  what  remained  of
Roman  art  and  civilization  in  that  district  was  swept
away  by  the  ancestors  of  the  present  dalesmen.  The
relics  in  the  caves  must  have  been  accumulated  in  the
two  centuries  which  elapsed  between  the  recall  of  the
legions  in  the  days  of  Honorius  and  the  English  conquest.
They  are  traces  of  the  anarchy  which  existed  in  those
times,  and  they  tell  a  tale  of  woe,  wrought  on  the  Brit-
Welsh,  by  Pict,  Scot,  or  Englishman,  as  eloquently  as
the  lament  of  fJildas,  or  the  mournful  verses  of  Tallicsin.

^  On  the  datc^  of  tho  conquost  of  Lancasliiiv  sre  ** Manchester  Phil,
and  Lit.  JSoc.  Proc."  1873,  p.  25.  In  working  out  this  somewhat
difficult  question,  1  am  indebted  to  the  Kev.  J.  K.  (Jreen  for  most
vahiable,  aid.

*  Gildas,  Xennius,  the  Annales  Cambria',  B.Tda,  and  the  Anglo-
Saxon  Chroniele  are  tlie  aulliurities  for  these  statements.


iii.J  THE  XKOLITinr  STIiA  TIM.  1 1  1

They  complete  the  picture  of  the  desohitioii  of  those
times  revealed  by  the  ashes  of  the  vilhis  and  cities
which  were  burned  by  the  invaders.

We  have  now  examined  the  evidence  as  to  date  offered
by  the  contents  of  these  caves,  and  we  have  seen  that  it
agrees  with  the  contemporary  history.  It  may  there-
fore be  concluded  that  it  hes  in  the  fifth  and  sixth
centuries,  possibly  the  first  quarter  of  the  seventh.

7'he  Neolithic  Stratum.

This  occupation  of  the  Victoria  Cave  by  the  Rrit-
Welsh  is  a  mere  episode  in  its  history.  It  wjis  inhabited
by  man  in  the  neolithic  age,  at  a  time  so  remote  that
the  interval  between  it  and  the  historical  period  can
only  1x3  measured  by  the  rude  method  by  which  geolo-
gists estimate  the  relative  age  of  the  rocks.  At  the
entrance  the  dark  Romano-Celtic  or  Brit- Welsh  stratum
(Fig.  20,  No.  4  ;  Fig.  21,  No.  4)  lay  l^uried,  as  we  have
seen,  under  an  accumulation  of  angular  fragments  of  stone
which  had  fallen  from  the  dift'.  It  rested  on  a  similar  accu-
mulation (Fig.  20,  No.  3  ;  Fig.  21,  No.  3)  which  was  no
less  than  six  feet  thick,  and  at  the  bottom  of  this,  at  the
pomt  where  it  was  based  on  a  stift'grey  clay,  a  bone  harpoon
(Fig.  26)  wjis  discovered,  as  well  as  charcoal ;  a  bone
Ix^ad  (Fig.  27),  three  rude  flint  flakes,  and  the  broken
bones  of  the  brown  bear,  stag,  hoi^se,  and  Celtic  short-
horn {Bos  longlfrons).  The  harpoon  is  a  little  more
than  three  inches  long,  with  the  head  armed  with  two
barbs  on  each  side,  and  the  base  presenting  a  mode  of
securing  attachment  to  the  hcindle  which  has  not  before
been  discovered  in  Britain.  Instead  of  a  mere  projection
to  catch  the  li<][atures  bv   which   it  was  bound  to  the


112


THE  ni'TimiA  rAl'E.


[C-,


shaft,  tlicre  is  a  well-cut  bavb  on  eitlier  side,  poiuting  in
a  contrarj-  direction  to  those  which  form  the  head.
Ample  use  for  such  an  instrument  would  be  found  in
Malham  tarn,  some  three  miles  off,  and
very  probably  also  in  that  which  formcily
existed  close  by  at  Attermire,  but  which
has  been  choked  up  by  peat,  and  is  now
turned  into  grass-land  by  drainage.  The
remains  of  the  lirown  bear  consist  of
numerous  hollow  bones  and  teeth,  and
the  shaft  of  a  femur  with  its  articular
ends  broken  off,  has  Iwen  polished  by
friction  against  some  soft  substance,  so
that  its  surface  has  a  lustre  like  that  of
glass.

The  question  naturally  arises,  who  were
the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  cave  whose
rude  impleiQents  occur  in  this  lower  stra-
tum ?  From  the  few  remains  which  we
discovered,  they  were  hunters  and  fisher-
men, and  the  possessors  of  domestic  oxen,
and  possibly  horses,  and  in  a  much  lower
Ktate  of  civilization  than  the  Brit-Welsh
inhabitants  who  succeeded  them  in  the
cave  after  a  long  interval.  There  is  no
proof  that  they  used  a  coinage,  or  that
they  were  acquainted  with  metal,  Tlie
conclusion  that  they  were  neolithic  is
""'"Xc)."""'"'  Ijiised  on  the  following  evidence : — In
1871  the  Exploration  Committee  exa-
mined a  small  cave  about  200  yards  off,  in  King's
Scar,  and  obtained  the  broken  bones  of  the  stag,  Celtic
short-honi  {Bos  loif/i/riyv.':),  gout,  and  horae,  a   whet-


1 II.]  THE  NEOLITHIC  STUATVM.  \  \  3

stone,  and  a  rudely  chipped  scraper,  to  which,  euljsc-
(juently,  Mr.  John  Birkbeck,  jun.,  made  the  important
addition  of  part  of  a  human  thigh-bone.  This  set  of
remains,  the  human  thigh-bone  excepted,  agrees  with
those  in  the  lower  stratum  in  the  Victoria  Cave,  not
merely  in  the  absence  of  metal,  but  also  in  aflFording
signs  of  a  comparatively  rude  civilization  ;  and  we  might
reasonably  expect  that  the  two  caves  so  close  to  eacli
other,  would  have  been  occupied  by  the  same  people  at
approximately  the  same  time.  If  this  be  alhnved,  the
thigh-bone  may  be  assigned  to  one  of  these  earlier  in-
habitants, the  place  of  habitation  being,  as  is  frotjiiciitly
the  case,  subsequently  used  for  purposes
of  burial  The  thigh-bone  itself  is  cha-
riteterized  by  the  great  development  of
tlie  muscular  ridge  known  to  anatomists
as  the  linea  (ispern,  implying  the  pecu-
liar flatness    of  shin    which    is  termed    *■''"■  27— ii.>m-iH«.i

(iiuliiral  Bi/e.  I

by  Professor  Busk  platycnemism.  This
peculiar  form  has  been  met  with  in  the  neoHtliic  tumuli
of  Yorkshire,  explored  by  the  Rev.  Canon  GrccnwcU,  aw
well  as  in  the  human  remains  which  I  have  discovered
in  the  neolithic  caves  and  chambered  tombs  of  Denbigh-
shire ;  and  since  it  has  not  been  obsci-vcd  in  any  human
skeletons  in  this  country  which  are  not  of  that  jigc,  it
may  be  fairly  taken  to  prove  that  a  neolithic  people
formerly  lived  in  Ribblesdale.  And  further,  since  the
traces  of  rude  culture  met  with  in  these  two  caves  are
the  same  as  those  which  characterize  neolithic  burial  and
dwelling  places  throughout  Europe,  they  may  he  assigned
to  that  remote  age.  Similar  human  remains  were  obtainc<l
l)y  j\Ir.  Farrer  from  the  Dowkcr-liottom  Cave,  and  imj>lv
thiit  that  cave  also  waH  used  as  a  neolithic  burial-pltice.


114  THE  VICTORIA  CAVE.  [chap.

Tlie  identification  of  this  race  with  the  Basque
or  Iberian  stock,  from  wliich  are  descended  the  small,
dark  peoples  of  Derbyshire,  Wales,  and  certain  parts  of
Ireland,  must  be  referred  to  the  chapters  on  the  Neolithic
Caves.


I''

Firi.  iS.  — SlotiL-  \i\/x- :  II,  aide  viuw ;  b,  ei\\^  (uutural  size).

The  ix'puted  discovery  of  an  adze  (Fig.  28),  of  a
variety  of  greenstone  wliich  Mr.  Wyiidham  identifies
with  raehipliyr,  many  yeai-s  ago  iu  the  Victoria  Cave,
may  offer  additional  evidence  as  to  its  having  been
occupied  by  a  neolithic  tribe.  It  was  presented  to  the
Museum  of  the  Philosophical  Society  at  Leeds  by  Mr.
.Tacksoii,  and  figured  by  Mr.  Denny  among  the  remains
from  tlie  Caves  of  Craven,  aiid  presents  characters
that  have  not,  to  my  knowledge,  been  met  with  in
any  other  neolithic  implement  fouml  in  Great  Britain :
one  end  being  roughly  chipped  for  insertion  into  a
socket,  wiiilc  the  other  is  carefully  ground  into  a
chisel  edge.  In  these  respects,  as  Mr.  O'Callaghau  and
Mr.  Denny  have  observed,  it  bears  a  striking  resemblance
to  tlie  stone  adzes  used  hy  the  South  Sea  Islanders,
and  I'spocially  in  Tahiti ; — a  resemblance  so  strong  that,


III.]  DATE  OF  NEOLITHIC  OCCUFA TION.  1 1 5

unless  it  had  been  traced  from  the  hands  of  the  dis-
coverer into  the  Museum  at  Leeds,  it  would  Ije  con-
sidered by  many  archaeologists  as  an  implement  actually
obtained  from  the  South  Seas  It  may  have  been  derived
from  the  lower  stratum,  which  furnished  the  equally
peculiar  harpoon,  Fig.  26.

The  Approximate  Date  of  the  Neolithic  Occupation.

From  the  position  in  which  these  remains  occurred,
it  is  obvious  that  a  neolithic  tribe  occupied  the  cave
before  the  accumulation  of  the  angular  fragments,  six
feet  in  thickness  (Fig.  20,  No.  3 ;  Fig.  21,  No.  3),  just
as  the  date  of  the  Brit- Welsh  occupation  is  fixed  as
being  after  this,  and  before  the  accumulation  of  the
two  feet  of  debris  above  (No.  5).  And  in  this  we  have  a
means  of  roughly  estimating  the  interval  of  time  l3etween
them.  It  is  clear  that  the  accumulation  of  two  feet  of
angular  fragments,  torn  away  by  the  action  of  the
weather  from  the  cliff,  has  been  formed  in  about  1,200
years,  i.e.  between  the  Brit-Welsh  occupation  and  the
present  time.  If  it  be  admitted  that  equal  quantities
of  the  cliff  have  been  weathered  away  in  equal  times,  it
will  follow  that  the  thickness  of  six  feet  between  the
Brit- Welsh  stratum  and  that  under  examination  was
formed  during  a  time  thrice  as  long,  or  3,600  years  ;  and
that  consequently  the  date  of  the  earlier  occupation  of
the  cave  by  man  is  fixed  as  being  about  4,800,  or  5,000
years  ago.  It  is  perfectly  true,  that  in  ancient  times
the  frosts  may  have  been  more  intense  than  they  are
now,  and  therefore  that  the  rate  of  weathering  may  have
been  faster.  To  the  objection  that  possibly  a  large  mass
of  cliff  may  have  tumbled  down  at  one  time,  and  subse-

T  2


116  THE  VICTORIA  CAVE,  [chap.

quently  been  disintegrated,  it  may  be  answered,  that  at  the
point  at  the  entrance  where  the  section  was  taken  there
was  no  evidence  of  any  such  fall ;  the  angular  blocks,
both  above  and  below  the  Brit- Welsh  stratum,  being  as
nearly  as  possible  of  the  same  size,  and  not  lying  with
their  faces  parallel  to  each  other,  as  would  have  been  the
case  had  they  been  disintegrated  fallen  blocks.  Never-
theless this  attempt  to  fix  a  date  cannot  lay  claim  to
scientific  precision,  and  in  that  respect  is  neither  better,
nor  worse,  than  any  other  similar  attempt  founded  on
the  rate  at  which  a  valley  is  being  excavated,  or  alluvium
being  deposited,  or  on  the  retrocession  of  a  waterfall,
such,  for  example,  as  Niagara.  It  is  merely  valuable  as
enabling  us  to  form  some  sort  of  idea  of  the  high
antiquity  of  the  neolithic  men  who  left  these  remains
behind  in  the  cave.

As  the  trench  (see  Figs.  20,  21)  begun  on  the  outside
passed  into  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  tlie  accumulation
of  stones  above  the  neolithic  stratum  disappeared,  and
the  latter  became  intermingled  with  the  Brit-Welsh  layer
above,  so  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  distin-
guisli  tbe  one  from  the  other  had  not  the  talus  marked
the  interval  in  the  plateau  outside.  The  talus  also
above  the  Brit-Welsh  stratum  ceased  at  the  entrance,
although  here  and  there  large  blocks  of  stone,  fiiUen
from  time  to  time  from  the  roof,  rested  on  its  upper
surface.

Tlie  Grey  Clays.

Immediately  below  the  neolithic  stratum,  a  deposit  of
stitf  grey  clay  of  unknown  depth  occupies  both  the
entrance  and  the  inside  of  the  cave  (Figs.  20,  21),  con-
tainijig  fragments  of  limestone  and  large  angular  l)locks


Ill.j


THE  GHEY  CLAYS.


117


which  had  fallen  from  the  rouf.  A  shaft  sunk  to  a  (U»i>lh
of  twenty-five  feet  near  the  entrance  failed  to  arrive  at
the  bottom,  but  presented  the  following  srotiDii  in
descending  order :  stiflf  grey  clay  with  layer  of  stalagmite
six  feet  thick  ;  a  finely  laminated  calcareous  clay  twelve
feet  thick  ;  and  below,  a  similar  bed  of  clay  to  that  on  the
surface.  In  a  second  sliaft  sunk  to  the  depth  of  twelve
feet  fiirther  within  the  cave,  the  base  of  the*  grey  clay
was  not  reached.^


Fui.  29.  -Section  )>eIow  Grey  Clay  at  cntniurr.

A  third  shaft,  at  the  entrance,  however,  penetrated  the
clay,  No.  1  of  Figs.  20,  21,  29,  at  a  depth  of  about  five
feet,  and  revealed  the  existence  below  of  a  reddish-gi-ey
loamy  cave-earth  (Fig.  29,  a),  containing  bones  and
teeth  of  the    same  animals  as  those  from  the   caverns

*  The  section  of  the  Victoria  Cave  publislied  by  Mr.  Tiddeman  in
the  Geological  Magazine  expresses  tho  relation  of  the  clay  with
boulders  to  the  cave-earth  with  greater  clciirness  than  I  could  observe
on  the  ground.  The  laminated  clay  is  not  yet  proved  to  occupy
such  a  large  area  in  the  cave,  or  to  be  so  regularly  deposited,  or  so
clearly  defined.  It  occurs  at  various  levels  in  the  mass  of  the  grey
clay  in  the  section  (to  be  seen  on  May  21, 1873),  above  and  below  the
cave-earth. — "The  Older  Deposits  in  the  Victoria  Cave,"  Geol.
Mag.  X.  p.  11.


118  THE  VICTORIA  CAFE.  [chap.

of  Kent  s  Hole,  Wookey  Hole,  and  others,  which  belonged
to  a  group  that  invaded  Europe  before  the  glacial  period,
and  that  inhabited  the  region  north  of  the  Alps  and  the
Pyrenees  in  pre-  and  post-glacial  times/

We  subsequently  discovered  the  cave-earth  to  be  from
three  to  four  feet  thick,  and  that  it  rested  on  an  accumula-
tion (Fig.  29,  b)  of  large  blocks  of  limestone,  the  interstices
between  which  were  filled  with  clay,  sometimes  laminated
and  at  others  homogeneous,  as  well  as  with  coarse  sand.
Below  this  we  broke  into  an  empty  passage,  one  side
of  which  was  formed  l)y  the  solid  rook,  and  the  other  of
blocks  of  stone  imbedded  in  the  clay.

As  we  opened  out  a  horizontal  passage  towards  the
cave-eartb,  A,  from  the  outside,  the  talus  (Fig.  29,  c)  of
angular  debris  was  cut  through  first,  which  gradually
became  more  and  more  clayey  in  its  lower  portions  :  at
one  point,  D,  there  were  several  glaciated  blocks,  some
imbedded  in  clay  and  others  perfectly  free.  It  rested
obliquely  on  the  edges  of  the  cave-earth,  and  passed
gradually  at  the  entrance  into  the  clay  occupying  the
interior  of  the  cave.

IVie  Fleistoccne  Occupation  hy  Ilycenas.

I'he  remains  of  the  spelaean  variety  •  of  the  spotted
hyaena  were  very  abundant  in  the  cave-earth,  consisting
of  fragments  of  skulls,  jaws,  and  bones,  and  especially
of  coprolites,  which  formed  irregular  floors,  accumu-
lated during  successive  occupations  of  the  cave  by
that  animal.     All  the  bones  were  gnawed  and  scored  by

1  See  Plssays  by  the  writer  in  "  Pop.  Sci.  Eev."  Oct.  1871  :  "  On  the
relation  of  the  Pleistocene  Mammalia  to  the  Glacial  period."  "  On  the
Classification  of  the  Pleistocene  Strata  of  Euroj>e  hy  means  of  the
Mammalia;"     Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  June  1872.


III.]      THE  PLEISTOCENE  OCCUPATION  BY  HYjENAS.     119

teeth,  the  lower  jaw  s  were  without  the  angle  and  coronoicl
process  (see  Fig.  92),  and  the  lioUow  bones  which  contain
marrow  were  broken,  while  those  which  were  solid  and
marrowless  were  for  the  most  part  perfect :  and  this  held
good,  not  merely  of  the  remains  of  the  hyoena,  but  of  those
of  all  the  animals  which  constituted  their  prey.  The  bones,


Fig.  30. — Skull  of  Woolly  Rhinoceros,  showing  the  part  wliich  is  not  eaten  by

the  hyrcnas.

for  example,  of  the  woolly  rhinoceros  are  represented
merely  by  the  hard  distal  portion  of  the  shaft  of  the
humerus,  and  of  the  solid  bones  of  the  ulna  and  radius,
while  the  only  portions  of  skull  are  the  solid  pedestal
offered  by  the  nasal  bones  on  which  the  front  horn  was
supported,  and  a  few  smaller  fragments.  The  pedestal
in  question  is  depicted  by  the  dark  shaded  portion  of


120  THE  VICTORIA  CAVE.  [chap.

Fig.  30,  the  outline  of  the  skull  and  lower  jaw  being
taken  from  one  of  Professor  Brandt's  plates  of  the
Woolly  Rhinoceros  found  in  Siberia.^  The  teeth  which
imply  the  presence  of  the  mammoth  (milk  molars  3  and
4)  were  those  of  a  young  individual,  as  is  very  generally
the  case  in  caves  which  have  been  occupied  by  hysBuas.
The  young  would  naturally  be  more  exposed  to  the  attack
of  those  cowardly  beasts  of  prey  than  the  adult,  armed
with  its  long  curved  tusks,  and  defended,  not  merely  by  its
thick  skin,  but  also  by  the  covering  of  wool  and  long  hair
which  is  peculiar  to  the  species.  Besides  these  animals,
the  reindeer,  red-deer,  bisoD,  horse,  the  brown,  grizzly,  and
great  cave  bears,  were  preyed  upon  by  the  hyaenas  and
dragged  into  the  cave.  All  these  species  were  dis-
covered within  an  area  of  a  few  square  yards  of  cave-
earth,  which  passes  into  the  interior  of  the  cave  under
the  grey  clay.  They  belong  to  that  well-defined  group
known  as  pleistocene,  quaternary,  or  post-pleiocene,  which
was  proved  to  have  inhabited  Yorkshire  ^  in  ancient  times
from  Dr.  Buckland  s  discoveries  in  Kirkdale,  and  Mr.
Denny's  examination  of  the  river-deposit  at  Leeds,  in
which  the  remains  of  the  hippopotamus  were  obtained.

The  last  and  most  important  addition  to  this  fauna
is  that  of  man,  a  fragment  of  fibula  in  the  same
mineral  condition  as  the  rest  of  the  pleistocene  bones,
having  been  identified  by  Professor  Busk  with  an
unusually  massive  recent  human  fibula.  Although  the
fragment  is  very  small,  its  comparison  with  the  abnormal
specimen  in  Professor  Busk's  possession  removes  all  doubt

^  M^m.  do  TAcad.  Imp.  des  Sciences  de  St.  Pc^terabourg,  C*  Ser.
tome  V.  1840,  PL  xiiL  Fig.  1.

«  See  my  "  Pleistocene  Mammals  of  Yorkshire,"  (JeoL  and  Poly-
teclinic  Soc.  of  West  Riding  of  Yorks.     Leeds,  Aug.  Gth,  1866.


III.]     PHE'GL AVI AL  AQE  OF  FLEIHTOCENE  STRATUM.    121

from  my  mind,  as  to  its  having  belonged  to  a  man,  who
was  contemporary  with  the  cave-hyeena  and  the  other
pleistocene  animals  found  in  the  cave.

The  probable  Pre-glacial  Aye  of  the  Pleistocene

Stratum.

Is  this  occupation  of  the  Victoria  Cave  by  the  pleisto-
cene mammalia  pre-glacial  or  post-glacial  ? — before,  or
after,  the  great  lowering  of  the  temperature  in  northern
Europe  ?  This  difficult  question  can  only  be  answered
by  an  appeal  to  the  physical  history  of  the  clay  and
cave-loam,  and  to  the  evidence  as  to  glacial  action  in
the  district,  and  to  the  distribution  of  the  mammalia
in  Great  Britain  during  the  pleistocene  period.  Glaciers
have  left  their  marks  in  nearly  every  part  of  Lancashire
and  Yorkshire,  and  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Victoria  Cave.  The  hill-sides  around  are  studded
w^ith  large  ice-borne  Silurian  rocks;  boulder-clay  occu-
pies nearly  every  hollow  on  the  elevated  plateaux  ;  and
moraines  are  to  be  observed  in  nearly  every  valley.
At  the  entrance  of  the  cave  itself,  ice-scratched  Silurian
grit-stones  are  imbedded  in  the  clay,  which  abuts  directly
on  the  cave-loam,  and  passes  insensibly  into  the  clay,
with  angular  blocks  of  limestone  within  the  cave.  They
may  possibly  be  the  constituents  of  a  lateral  moraine  in
situ,  as  Mr.  Tiddeman  suggests,  or  they  may  merely
be  derived  from  the  wast^e  of  boulder-clay  which  has
dropped  from  a  higher  level.

The  latter  view  seems  to  me  to  be  most  likely  to  be
true,  because  some  of  the  boulders  have  been  deprived
of  the  clay  in  which  they  were  imbedded,  and  are  piled
on  each  other  with  empty  space  between  them,  the  clay


122  THE  VICTOEIA  CAVE,  [cuap.

being  carried  down  to  a  lower  level  and  re-deposited.
Their  position,  however,  on  the  edges  of  the  cave-earth
implies,  in  any  case,  that  they  had  been  dropped  after
its  accumulation.

There  is  another  point  to  be  considered  in  the  phy-
sical evidence.  The  deposits  above  the  cave-earth,
occupying  the  interior  and  entrance  of  the  cave,  have
been  introduced  by  the  rains,  either  through  the
entrance,  or  through  the  crevices  which  penetrate  the
roof,  and  consist  of  a  finer  detritus  washed  out  of  the
boulder-clay  on  the  surface  at  a  higher  level.  The  cave-
earth,  however,  although  it  has  been  introduced  in  the
same  way,  cannot  be  accounted  for  on  the  supposition
that  it  was  derived  from  the  boulder-clay,  with  which
it  contrasts  in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  loam,  of  a  reddish
grey  colour,  containing  a  large  percentage  of  carbonate
and  phosphate  of  lime.

Similar  deposits,  characterized  by  their  red  colour,  are
to  be  found  in  nearly  all  the  caves  of  the  south  of  Eng-
land, in  France,  and  southern  Europe,  not  complicated,
as  here,  by  the  glacial  phenomena  of  the  district.  Had
the  layer  been  formed  in  the  Victoria  Cave,  from  the
destruction  of  the  l)oulder-clay,  it  would  have  been
identical  in  composition  with  the  deposits  above.

The  laminated  portions  of  the  grey  clay  are  considered
by  Mr.  Tiddcman  to  have  been  formed  by  the  flow  of
water  through  the  entrance,  derived  from  the  daily
melting  of  the  glacier  which  occupied  the  valley  in
ancient  times,  and  he  compares  it  with  a  similar  lami-
nation in  the  boulder-clay  at  Ingleton,  which  has
been  described  by  Mr.  Binney  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Clifton,  near  Manchester,  under  the  expressive  name  of
"book-leaves.'*     Since,   however,  similar  accumulations


III.]     PREGLACIAL  AGE  OF  PLEISTOCENE  STRATUM,    123

are  being  formed  at  the  present  time  at  the  bottom  of
pools  in  many  eaves,  as,  for  example,  in  that  of  Ingle-
borough,  they  cannot  be  taken  to  imply  a  glacial  origin.
They  are  not  found  merely  in  one  sj)ot  in  the  Victoria
Cave,  but  are  scattered,  more  or  less,  through  the  general
mass  of  the  clay,  and  occur  abundantly  even  below  the
cave-earth,  having  been  deposited  in  the  interstices
between  the  large  blocks  of  limestone.  In  these  positions
they  are  of  uncertain  age,  and  there  is  no  reason  why
some  of  the  hollows  which  we  discovered  below  the
cave-earth  (Fig.  29,  b)  should  not  be  filled  with  them  at
the  present  time  by  the  heavy  rains.  They  dip  at  all
angles,  and  are  conformable  to  the  surfaces  on  which
they  have  been  dropped.

The  most  important  argument  in  favour  of  the
pre-glacial  age  of  the  mammaliferous  cave-earth  is
afforded  by  the  range  of  the  animals  in  Great  Britain
during  the  time  that  certain  areas  were  occupied  by
glaciers.  In  a  paper  read  before  the  Geological  Society
in  1869,  I  showed  that  those  areas  in  Great  Britain  in
which  the  marks  of  glaciers  were  the  freshest  and  most
abundant  coincided  with  those  which  were  barren  of
the  remains  of  the  pleistocene  mammalia,  and  I  there-
fore iiifen-ed  that  this  was  due  to  the  fact,  that  the
areas  in  question  were  covered  by  ice  at  the  time  that
pleistocene  animals  were  so  numerous  in  the  caves,  and
river- deposits  of  southern  and  eastern  England,  and  on
the  continent.  In  a  map  published  in  1871,  Cumber-
land, Westmoreland,  Lancashire,  and  the  greater  portion
of  Yorkshire  are  represented  as  being  one  of  these
barren  areas,  in  which  no  pleistocene  mammalia  have
been  observed.  It  is  obvious  that  the  hyaenas,  bears,
mammoths,  and  other  creatures  found  in  the  pleistocene


124  THE  VICTORIA  CAVE,  [chap.

stratum,  could  not  have  occupied  the  district  wlien  it
was  covered  by  ice  ;  and  had  they  lived  soon  after  the
retreat  of  the  ice-sheet,  their  remains  would  occur  in  the
river-gravels,  from  which  they  are  absent  throughout  a
large  area  to  the  north  of  a  line  drawn  between  Chester
and  York,  whilst  they  occur  abundantly  in  the  gkcial
river  deposits  south  of  that  line.  On  the  other  hand,
they  belong  to  a  fauna,  that  overran  Europe,  and  must
have  occupied  this  very  region  before  the  ghicial  period,
since  their  remains  have  been  found  in  pre-glacial  strata
to  the  north  in  Scotland,  to  the  south  at  Selsea,  and
to  the  east  in  Norfolk  and  Suffolk.  It  may,  therefore,
reasonably  be  concluded  that  they  occupied  the  cave  in
pre-glacial  times,  and  that  the  stratum  in  which  their
remains  lie  buried,  was  protected  from  the  grinding  of
the  ice-sheet,  which  destroyed  nearly  all  the  surface
accumulations  in  the  river-valleys,  by  the  walls  and
roof  of  rock,  which  has  since,  to  a  great  extent,  been
weathered  away.^  This  view  is  also  held  by  Mr.
Tiddeman.

The  exploration  of  the  Victoria  Cave,  which  has
hitherto  yielded  such  interesting  evidence  of  three  dis-
tinct occupations — first  by  hyaenas,  then  by  neolithic
men,  and  lastly  ])y  the  Brit-Welsh,  is  by  no  means
complete.  The  cave  itself  is  of  unknown  depth  and
extent,  and  the  mere  removal  of  so  much  earth  and
clay  as  it  is  at  present  known  to  contain  will  be  a
labour  of  years.  The  results  of  the  exploration,  up
to  the  present  time,  arc  of  almost  equal  value  to  the
archoeologist,  to  the  historian,  and  the  geologist,  and
prove  how  close  is  the  bond  of  union  between  three
branches  of  human  thought  which  at  first  sight  appear

'  See  r>iit  Ass,  Reports,  Bradford,  1873.


III.]  THE  KIRKHEAD  CAVE.  125

remote  from  each  other.  The  discussion  of  the  pro-
blems connected  with  the  neolithic  and  pleistocene
strata  must  be  refeiTed  to  the  fifth  and  following
chapters.

The  Kirkhead  Cave,

Other  caves  in  this  country,  besides  the  group  under
consideration  in  Yorkshire,  have  been  occupied  by  the
Brit- Welsh.  That  known  as  the  Kirkhead  Cave,  on
the  eastern  shore  of  the  Promontory  of  Cartmell,  on  the
northern  shore  of  Morecambe  Bay,  explored  by  Mr.
J.  P.  Morris,'  and  a  Committee  of  the  Anthropological
Society  in  1864-5,  contained  remains  of  the  same  type
as  those  of  the  Brit-Welsh  stratum  in  the  Victoria  Cave.
In  the  debris  which  formed  the  floor  and  extended  to  an
unknown  depth  below,  a  coin  of  Domitian,  "a  trefoil-
shaped  Roman  fibula,"  a  pin,  ornamented  with  green
enamel,  and  a  bronze  ring  were  discovered  in  association
with  broken  remains  of  domestic  animals — Bos  longi-
frons,  pig  and  goat,  dog  and  horse,  as  well  as  stag,
roe,  wild  goose,  and  many  human  bones.  A  bronze  celt
and  a  spear-head  were  also  found,  at  a  depth  re-
spectively of  five  and  six  feet,  and  a  flint  flake  at  a
depth  of  seven  feet ;  and  fragments  of  pottery,  a  bead
of  amber,  cut  bones,  the  perforated  head  of  the  femur,
and  other  articles.  From  this  group  of  remains  it  may
be  inferred  that  the  cave  was  occupied  by  the  Brit-
Welsh,  and  before  them  by  the  users  of  bronze,  and
possibly  by  a  neolithic  people,  and  that  it  had  at  some
time  or  another  been  used  as  a  place  of  burial.  Just
inside  the  entrance,  which  overlooked  the  sea  at  a
height  of  45  feet,  a  semi-circular  breastwork  of  large

*  Mom.  Anthrop.  Soc.  vol.  ii.  p.  358.


126  POOLE'S  CAVE,  [chap.

stones  rendered  the  cave  habitable,  and  capable  of  easy
defence.

Mr.  Morris's  view  that  the  discovery  of  a  bronze  celt,
flint  flakes,  and  coins  in  this  cave  proves  that  all  three
were  in  use  at  the  same  time,  and  by  the  same  people,  is
not  borne  out  by  the  published  account  of  the  excavation.
There  is  no  proof  that  the  deposit  had  not  been  dis-
turbed, or  that  the  articles  were  not  dropped  at  different
times.  And  in  support  of  this  conclusion,  it  may  be
advanced,  that  there  is  no  case  on  record  of  the  discovery
of  bronze  celts  or  swords  along  with  any  Koman  coins
under  conditions  which  would  prove  that  they  were  in
use  at  the  same  time.  Had  such  been  the  case  the
ruins  of  the  many  Roman  villas  and  cities,  destroyed  by
the  English,  would  have  furnished  some  examples.  At
Silchester,  even  such  a  rare  article  as  a  Roman  eagle  has
been  met  with.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  with
Sir  John  Lubbock,  Mr.  Evans,  and  other  eminent
archaeologists,  that  the  use  of  bronze  for  weapons  had
been  superseded  by  that  of  iron  before  the  dawn  of
history  in  this  country.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  flint
flakes  ;  since  my  discovery  of  several  inside  a  Roman
coffin  at  Hardham,  near  Pulborough,  in  Sussex,  in  a
cemetery  that  belongs  to  the  later  portion  of  the  Roman
dominion  in  Britain,  proves  that  they  were  used  for
some  purpose  at  that  time.^

Poole s  Cave,  near  Buxton.

In  the  collection  of  articles  obtained  from  Poole  s  Cave,
in  Buxton,  in  Derbyshire,  I  identified,  in  1871,  in
company  with  Mr.  Pennington,  bronze  Roman  coins,
minimi,  Samian  and  other  ware,  and  large  quantities  of

*  Sussex  Arcluool.  Coll.,  18fi3.


III.]  THORS  CAVE,  127

broken  bones  of  the  same  animals  as  those  from  the
Victoria  Cave.  A  bronze  harp-shaped  fibula  of  the  type
of  Fig.  5  of  the  coloured  Plate  is  inlaid  with  silver,  and
is  so  perfect  that  it  might  still  be  used.

Thors  Cave,  near  Ashbourne.

A  cave  also,  in  Staffordshire,  four  miles  from  Ham,
explored  by  the  Midland  Scientific  Association  in  1864,^
under  the  supervision  of  Mr.  Carrington,  has  furnished
articles  of  the  same  kind  as  those  of  Yorkshire.  It  is
known  as  Thor's  cave,  and  penetrates  the  lofty  cliff  of
limestone,  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  Manifold,  at  a
height  of  about  254  feet  from  ilni  bottom  of  the  viilley,
and  about  900  feet  above  the  sea,  running  horizontally
inwards,  and  being  divided  inside  by  a  row  of  buttressed
columns  into  two  noble  gothic  aisles.  Its  bottom  was
occupied  by  clay,  in  which,  near  the  entrance,  there  were
thick  layers  of  charcoal  at  depths  of  two,  three,  and
four  feet  below  tlie  surface,  mingled  with  broken  bones
and  pottery,  that  indicated  the  spots  where  fires  had
been  kindled.    The  articles  discovered  were  as  follows : —

''Bronze, — Armlet,  two  fibulse  of  harp  pattern  (see
coloured  Plate,  Fig.  5),  two  plain  breast-pins  and  rings,
a  curious  wheel-shaped  instrument.

*'  Iron, — Large  triangular  fork,  arrow-heads,  lance-
heads,  several  knives  and  a  chopper,  of  singular  shapes,
reaping  hook  (?),  adze,  pins,  two  girdle  hooks  (?),  &c.

'*  Bone. — Seven  snags  of  deer's  horns,  variously  cut  and
perforated,  several  others  not  perforated,  curious  bone
comb  ornamented  with  circles,  flat  bone  perforated  with

1  Trans.  Midland  Sci.  Ass.,  Sess.  1864-5,  pp.  1—6,  19,  29,  Plates
1 — 15,  "Report  on  the  Exploration  of  Thor's  Cave,"  by  E.  B^o^vn,  Esq.


128  TH0R8  CA  VE.  [chap.

four  holes,  two  leg-bones  carved  at  the  ends,  pin,  a  large
quantity  of  bones  of  animals  that  had  been  consumed  for
food.

"  Stone. — Greenstone  pounder,  fragments  of  querns,
perforated  disk,  &c.

"Pottery, — A  large  collection  of  fragments  of  various
periods,  among  the  rest  several  pieces  of  true  Samian
ware."

IVIr.  Edwin  Brown,  from  whose  report  this  list  is  taken,
concludes  that  Thors  cave  Avas  occupied  during  "the
late  Celtic  and  Romano-Celtic  periods."  The  harp-fibula?
are  of  a  pattern  identical  with  several  of  those  discovered
in  the  Victoria  Cave,  and  the  holes  at  their  upper  ends
were  probably  intended  for  the  reception  of  enamel.
The  bronze  instrument,  consisting  of  a  disk  cut  out  into
a  flamboyant  pattern  like  that  of  the  round  brooch  from
the  Victoria  Cave  (Fig.  25),  and  joined  to  a  central  stem
ornamented  with  waved  lines,  was  intended  for  suspen-
sion ;  possibly,  as  Mr.  Carrington  suggests,  it  may  have
been  used  for  spinning.  It  is  a  remarkably  fine  example
of  Brit- Welsh  or  late  Celtic  art.  The  bone  comb  is  of  the
same  type  as  those  from  the  Brit- Welsh  caves  of  York-
shire. It  is  evident,  from  Mr.  Brown's  account,  that  there
were  distinct  layers  of  occupation ;  but,  unfortunately,
the  articles  found  in  each  Avere  not  separated  from  the
rest.  One  armlet  (Fig.  31),  composed  of  a  thin  plate
of  bronze,  and  ornamented  with  a  dotted-line  pattern,
is  of  the  peculiar  tyj^e  whicli  is  characteristic  of  the
bronze  age.

The  cave  had  also  been  used  as  a  place  of  sepulture,
for  near  ''  the  pulpit  rock,"  and  at  a  depth  of  five  feet
from  the  surfiicc*,  a  skeleton  rested  in  the  sitting  posture
which    is   so   characteristic   of  neolithic   interments   in


111.]  HI.^iTOEIC  VALUE  OF  BltlT-WKLHH  CAVES.  129

Europe.  It  had  also  been  entered  by  uum  even  before
any  of  these  accumulations.  "  In  the  south  recess,
behind  and  below  any  traces  of  man's  occupation,  the
diggers  came  upon  a  kind  of  flooring  of  tabular  masses


of  breccia  stretching  almost  across  the  cave,  and  on  one
side  attached  firmly  to  the  wall,"  beneath  which  rested,
in  the  undisturbed  clay,  a  deer's  horn,  rudely  sawn  across
and  perforated  by  two  holes,

Tlior's  Cave,  therefore,  like  the  Victoria,  has  been
occupied  by  man  in  the  Brit-Welsh  stage  of  the  historic
period,  as  well  as  in  the  bronze,  and  possibly  in  the
neolithic  ages.

Historic  Value  of  Brit-Welsh  Group  of  Caves.

The  discovery  that  caves  were  used  as  habitiitions  by
men  accustomed  to  the  elegance  of  civilized  life,  not
merely  in  Yorkshire,  but  in  districts  so  far  removed  fi-om
each  other  as  Staffordshire  and  the  extreme  north  of
Lancashire,  during  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries,  implies
the  pressure  of  a  far-reaching  calamity  by  which  they
were  driven  from  their  homes.  It  completes  and  rounds
off  the  story  of  the  social  condition  of  the  country  during
these  troubled  times,  which  is  revealed   in  the  sacked


1 30      PRINCIPAL  AXFMJ LS  IN  BRIT^  WELSH  CA  VES,  [chap.

and  burned  Brit- Welsh  cities  and  villas,  as  well  as  in  the
scanty  records  of  the  English  invasion.

Subsequent  investigation  will  probably  show  that
caves  were  occupied  at  this  time  in  every  part  of  the
country  which  was  conquered  by  the  English.  In  the
upper  stratum  of  Kent's  Hole,  for  example,  near  Tor-
quay, similar  articles,  with  the  exception  of  the  enamels,
have  been  discovered.  There,  however,  the  occupatioji
may  have  been  considerably  later  than  in  the  caves  of
Yorkshire,  ])ecause  the  Roman  civilization  was  not  sup-
planted in  Devonshire  by  the  English  until  the  beginning
of  the  ninth  century.  The  river  Tamar  then  marked  the
frontier  between  the  English,  and  the  Brit-Welsh  of  the
promontoiy  of  Cornwall,  which  represented  the  dominion
of  West  Wales  in  the  days  of  Ecgberht.^

In  the  numerous  caves  of  Wales,  on  the  other  hand,
which  I  have  explored,  there  is  no  trace  of  inhabitants
uf  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries,  a  circumstance  that  is
easily  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  Wales  was  nut
invaded  at  that  time  by  the  English.  There  wouhl
therefore  be  no  reason  for  the  civilized  Brit- Welsh  to
fly  to  caves  fur  refuse.


Principal  Animals  and  Articles  in  Brit-Wtdsh  Caves.

The  fulluwiug  are  the  mure  important  animals  and
articles  found  in  the  group  of  caves  under  consideration.
The  species  are  identical  with  those  which  I  have  tabu-
lated from  refuse-heaps  uf  Roman  age.^

^  See  E.  A.  Freeman,  "  Xorman  Conquest,''  vol.  i.  p.  43.
2  Preliminary  Treatise  on  the  Relation  of  the  Pleistocene  Mam-
malia to  those  now  living  in  Europe.     Pala?ont.  Soc.  1874,  chap.  ii.


111.]


CONTENTS  OF  HISTORIC  CA  VEH


131


Li*/  0/  Principal  Animals  and  Ohjet'U  found  in  Brit-  WcUh  Strata  in  Catex,


Akimalh.


Domestic.

Canis  fa  miliaria — Dog  ....

Su9  scTofa — Pig

Equus  caJlmllus — Horse  ....
;   Bos  longifrons — Cf Itic  Sh<»rt-liorii
Capra  Airci«— Goat

WlLP.

Canis  vulpfs — Fox

Melfis  tcxiis — Ba(igor  ....
Cervtis  tlaphtts — Stag  ....
Cervus  capreolus — Koe  ....


Roman  coins  or  Imitations
Knamc'lUHi  ornaments  in  bri>nzc  .
Bronze    ornaments    inlaid    with

silver

Iron  articles

Samian  ware

Black  ware

Bone-spoim  fibulae  (Fig.  22)    .     .
Ik)nc  combs


Virl«iria

1

Kolkii

ihowkrr

.Dottuiii.

1

Kirk-

h«*N4l.

i

Cavern.

1

Th.)

1
1

X

X

X

X

1

X

f

X

X

X

X

1     X

f

X

X

X

X

X

?

i     X

X

X

X

X

1

X

X

X

X

X

I

X

X

X

X

?

X

...

X

•  •  •

.  .  .

X

X

■  •  •

X

X

X

?

X

•  ■  •

X

X

...

f

X

X

X

X

X

X

1     X

X

X

X

...

X

X

X

...

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

•  •  •

X

X

X

,     X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

...

«  ■  •

X

X

X

...

X

All  the  less  important  animals  and  articles  are  omitted
from  this  list.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  brown  bear,
the  wolf,  and  the  fallow-deer  are  absent.  The  brown
bear  was  probably  at  this  time  very  rare  in  Britain,
since  its  remains  have  been  met  with  in  but  two  out  of
the  many  Roman  refuse-heaps  in  the  countr}^,  at  London
and  Colchester.  The  w^ell-known  lines  of  Martial,  how-
ever, imply  that  it  was  imported  from  Britain  to  Rome  at
this  time —

**  Nuda  Caledonio  sic  pectora  prsebuit  urso,
Haud  falsa  pendens  in  cruce  Laureolus.''

It  probably  became  extinct  about  the  ninth  or  tenth
century.  The  w^olf  obviously  would  not  be  likely  to  be
used  for  food,  although  it  probably  w^as  abundant  in  the
district.     The  fallow-deer  also  had  not  penetrated  into

K    12


132  THE  USE  OF  HORSEFLESH.  [chap.

the  hilly  districts,  although  it  had  become  naturalized  in
this  country  by  the  Eomaus,  so  as  to  have  been  frequently
used  as  an  article  of  food  before  the  English  invasion.
I  have  seen  its  characteristic  antlers  in  refuse-heaps,
both  in  London  and  Colchester,  which  have  furnished
lloman  coins  and  pottery.

The  beaver  was  probably  very  rare  in  the  fifth  and
sixth  centuries,  and  has  been  met  with  in  no  cave-
deposit,  either  historic  or  prehistoric,  in  this  country.
It  was,  however,  known  to  the  Anglian  conquerors
of  Yorkshire  (Northumbria),  who  called  Beverley  (lea,
leag-)  after  its  name.

The  Use  of  Ilorsejlesh.

The  broken  bones  of  the  horse,  in  all  the  caves  above
mentioned,  leave  no  room  to  doubt  that  horseflesh  was  a
common  article  of  food  at  that  time.  It  was  so,  indeed,
throughout  Eoman  Britain,  and  after  the  English  inva-
sion was  used  as  late  as  the  Council  of  Celchyth,^  in  the
year  787.  It  was  forbidden  by  the  Church  because  it  was
eaten  by  the  Scandinavian  peoples  in  honour  of  Odin.
In  Norway,"  Ilacon,  the  foster-son  of  iEthelstan,  was  com-
pelled to  eat  it  by  the  bonders,  in  956,  and  the  revolt  of
the  bonders  which  ended  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Stikkle-
stadt,  in  which  Olaf  met  his  death,  in  1030,  was  caused
by  his  cruelties  to  the  eaters  of  horseflesh.  As  Chris-
tianity prevailed  over  the  worship  of  Thor  and  Odin,  it

^  "Equos  etiampleriqueiiivobis  comedunt,quod  nullusChristianorum
in  orientalibus  facit."  Iladdan  and  Stubbs,  **  Councils  and  Ecclesi-
astical Documents  relating  to  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,"  vol.  iL  p.  4r)9.

*  Lain^,  "Norway,"  p.  310.  Mr.  Laing  justly  argues  that  the  habit
(»f  eating  horsellosh  in  Norway,  wliere  pasturage  is  scant,  must  have
])een  acquired  in  the  luxuriant  grassy  steppes  of  Central  Asia  by  the
ancestors  of  tho  Scandinavians.


m.]  CAVB  OF  LONOBERRY  BANK.  133

was  banished  from  the  table.  The  present  prejudice
against  its  use  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  change  in
taste,  which  has  been  brought  about  by  an  ecclesiastical
rule  aimed  against  a  long-forgotten  faith.  The  rule  was
not,  however,  always  obeyed,  for  the  Monks  of  St.  Gall,
in  the  eleventh  century,  not  only  ate  horseflesh,  but
returned  thanks  for  it,  in  a  metrical  grace,  written  by
Ekkehard  the  Younger  (died  1036) : —

'*  Sit  feraliB  equi  caro  dulcis  sub  cruce  Christi." '

Tlie  Cave  of  Longhei*ry  Bank,

The  cave  of  Longberry  Bank,  near  Penally,  in  Pem-
brokeshire, may  also  be  classed  with  those  which  were
inhabited  in  historic  times,  since  it  contained  red  fine-
grained pottery  of  a  kind  commonly  found  in  the  ruins
of  Eoman  villas.  It  was  explored  by  the  Rev.  H.  H.
Winwood,  in  1866,  in  whose  collection  are  the  remains  of
the  Bos  hngifronSy  goat,  badger,  dog,  as  well  as  shells  of
oyster,  large  limpets  and  mussel  from  the  neighbouring
shore.  Some  of  the  bones  are  burned.  Several  human
vertebrae  and  a  metacarpal  were  probably  the  traces  of  an
interment  of  unknown  date  ;  and  the  two  flint  flakes  are
of  uncertain  age.

The  results  obtained  by  the  exploration  of  the
caves  described  in  this  chapter  are  to  be  taken  merely
as  the  first-fruits  of  a  new  line  of  inquiry,  which  is
likely  to  throw  light  on  many  points  relating  to  art,
history,  and  the  range  of  the  animals,  and  not  as  being
perfect  or  final.  On  the  continent,  no  historic  caves  of
importance  have  as  yet  been  explored.

^  Benedict,  ad  Mensas  Ekkebardi  Monachi  Sangallensis,  Pertz.  Mon.
Germ.,  vol  vi.  p.  117.


134         CAVES  USED  IN  IRON  AXD  BRONZE  AGES.      [chap.


CHAPTER  IV.

CAVES  USKD  IX  THE  AGES  OF  IRON  AND  OF  BRONZE.

The  DifTerence  between  Historic  and  Prehistoric  Time. — The  Pre-
historic Fauna. — The  Archajological  Classification. — Caves  of  the
Iron  A  (TO. — Caves  of  the  Bronze  Age  in  Britain. — The  Caves  of
Cesareda  in  Portugal  probably  occupied  by  Cannibals. — The  Cave
of  lieggio  in  Apulia.

The  Difference  hetween  Historic  and  Prehistoric  Time.

It  will  be  necessary  before  we  examine  the  group  of
naves  used  by  man  in  prehistoric  times,  to  point  out  the
important  difference  in  the  measurement  of  time  within
and  beyond  the  borders  of  history.  When  we  speak,
for  example,  of  the  date  of  the  Norman  Conquest,  we
imply  that  we  can  ascertain  by  historical  records,  not
merely  that  it  succeeded  the  invasion  of  Britain  by  the
English  or  Danes,  and  happened  before  our  own  time,
but  that  the  interval  which  separates  it  from  those  events
can  be  accurately  measured  by  the  unit  of  years.  If,  how-
ever, we  attempt  to  ascertain  the  date  of  any  event  which
happened  outside  the  historical  limit,  we  shall  find  that
it  is  a  question  solely  of  relation.  When  we  speak,  for
examj)le,  of  the  neolithic  age,  we  merely  mean  a  certain
stcige   of  human  progress  which   succeeded  the  paloec-


IV. J  HISTORIC  AND  PREHISTORIC  TIME,  135

litliic,  and  preceded  the  bronze  ago,  hut  we  have  no
proof  of  the  length  of  the  interval  dividing  it  from  tlie
one  or  the  other.  The  historic  "  when  ? "  implies  *'  how
long  ago  ? "  the  prehistoric  "  when  ?  "  merely  implies  a
definition  before  and  after  certain  events,  without  any
idea  of  the  measurement  of  the  intervals.

An  attempt  to  ascertain  the  absolute  date  of  pre-
historic events  must  of  necessity  fail,  since  it  is  based
on  the  improbable  assumption  that  the  physical  agents
have  acted  uniformly,  and  that  therefore  the  results  may
be  used  as  a  natural  chronometer.  The  present  rate  of
the  accumulation  of  d^hrisy  as  at  the  Victoria  Cave  of
the  preceding  chapter,  or  of  that  of  silt  in  the  deltas
of  rivers,  such  as  the  Nile,  or  the  Tinibre,  may  convey
a  rough  idea  of  the  high  antiquity  of  prehistoric  deposits  ;
but  a  slight  change  either  of  the  climate,  or  of  tlie
rainfall,  would  invalidate  the  conclusion.  When  the
greater  part  of  Europe  lay  buried  under  forest,  when
Palestine  supported  a  large  population,  and  when  glaciers
crowned  some  of  the  higher  mountains  of  Africa,  such
as  the  Atlas,  the  European  and  Egyptian  climates
were  probably  moister  than  at  the  present  time,  and
the  rainfall  and  the  floods  greater,  and  consequently  the
accumulation  of  sediment  quicker  than  the  observed  rate
under  the  present  conditions.  And  in  the  same  way  all
estimates  of  the  lapse  of  past  time,  based  upon  the
excavation  of  a  river  valley,  or  the  retrocession  of  a
waterfall,  such  as  Niagara,  lie  open  to  the  same  kind  of
objection.  It  is  not  at  all  reasonable  to  suppose  that
the  complex  conditions  which  regulate  the  present  rate
of  erosion,  have  been  the  same  during  the  time  the  work
has  been  done,  and  it  therefore  follows  that  the  work
done  is  a  measure  of  the  power  employed,  and  not  of


1  ;j6  prehistoric  FA  UNA.  [cdap.

the  length  of  time  during  which  it  has  been  in  operation.
We  must,  therefore,  give  up  the  idea  of  measuring  the
past  beyond  the  memory  of  man,  as  represented  in
historical  documents,  by  the  historic  unit  of  years.  We
can  merely  trace  a  definite  sequence  of  events,  separated
one  from  another  by  uncertain  intervals.  And  for  that
series  of  events  which  extends  from  the  borders  of
history  back  to  the  remote  age  where  the  geologist,
descending  the  stream  of  time,  meets  the  archaeologist,
I  have  adopted  the  term  prehistoric*

The  Prehistoric  Fauna.

The  prehistoric  period  is  characterized  by  the  arrival
of  the  domestic  animals  in  Europe,  under  the  care  of
man.  The  dog,  swine,  horse,  horned-sheep,  goat.  Bos
longifrons,  and  the  larger  ox  descended  from  an  ancestor,
according  to  Professor  Eutimeycr,  of  the  type  of  the
great  Urus,  make  their  appearance  togetlier,  in  association
with  the  remains  of  man,  in  the  neolithic  staffe  of
civilization.^  Subsequently  they  spread  over  the  whole
of  our  continent,  for  the  most  part  under  the  care  of
man.  'The  Bos  longi/rons,  however,  and  possibly  also
the  Urus,  reverted  to  feral  conditions,  just  as  the  horses
and  oxen,  in  the  Americas  and  Australia,  have  done  at
the  j)resent  time,  and  their  remains  are  therefore  fre-
quently found  in  association  with  animals  undoubtedly
wild.  The  domestic  horse,  the  variety  of  hog  descended
from  th(5  wild  boar,  and  the  domestic  cattle  derived  from
'the  Lrus,  may  possibly  have  passed  under  the  yoke  of  man,

•

^  "  Pleistoceife  Mammalia/'  Pal«ont..Soc.  18G6.  Introd.  Intemat.
Congress  <3f  Prehistoric  Archajology,  Paris,  and  Norwich  volumes.

*  These  questions  are  treated  in  detail  in  my  Preliminary  Treatise,
"  Brit.  Pleist.  Mammalia."    Palnpont.  Soc.  1874.


IV.]         DOMESTIC  ANIMALS  DERIVED  FROM  ASIA,        137

in  Europe,  since  their  wild  stocks  were  to  be  fouiul  in
that  area,  both  in  the  prehistoric  and  pleistocene  times.
This,  however,  cannot  be  affirmed  of  the  swine  descended
from  the  southern  variety  of  Sus  Indtca,  or  of  the  Celtic
shorthorn,  of  the  sheep,  or  goat,  since  their  wild  ancestors
were  not  indigenous  in  Europe.  These  animals  must
have  been  domesticated  in  some  area  outside  Europe ;
and  since  central  Asia  is  the  region  where  the  wild  stocks
still  exist,  from  which  all  the  domestic  animals  are
descended,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  were
domesticated  in  that  region,  and  thence  introduced,  by  a
race  of  shepherds  and  herdsmen,  into  our  quarter  of
the  world.

This  conclusion  is  considerably  strengthened  by  the
evidence  which  Professor  Heer  has  advanced,  as  to  the
vegetables  used  by  the  dwellers  on  piles  in  the  Swiss
lakes,  among  which  some,  such  as  the  two  kinds  of
millet,  the  six-rowed  barley  (hordeum  hexastichon),  the
Egyptian  wheat  (triticum  turgidum),  and  a  weed  (Silene
cretica),  accidentally  brought  along  with  them,  are
^stinctively  of  southern  derivation.

The  most  important  wild  animals  living  in  this
country  during  the  prehistoric  period  are  the  urus,  the
gigantic  skulls  of  which  occur  in  the  peat  bogs  of
England  and  Scotland,  the  Irish  elk,  the  moose  {Cervus
alces),  and  the  reindeer.  The  two  last  are  far  more
abundant  in  the  north  than  in  the  south  of  Britain  ;  their
remains  have  been  discovered  in  the  neighbourhood  of
London,  those  of  both  animals  at  Walthamstow,  and
those  of  the  latter  at  Crossness  in  Kent,  on  the  banks
of  the  Thames.  The  remains  of  the  bison  have  not  been
recorded  from  any  prehistoric  deposit  in  this  country.

The  Irish  elk  is  the  only  animal  which  has  become


138  THE  ARCHJEOLOOICAL  CLASSIFICATION.        [chap.

extinct;  while  the  moose,  or  true  elk,  is  the  only  wild
species  which  has  not  been  proved  to  have  been  living
in  the  preceding  age.     The  stag  was  very  abundant.

The  prehistoric  fauna  is  distinguished  from  that  of  the
pleistocene  not  merely  by  the  appearance  of  the  animals
above  mentioned,  which  were  hitherto  unknown,  but  by
the  absence  of  many  species  which  were  living  during
the  latter  period.  The  cave  bear,  woolly  rhinoceros,  and
mammoth,  for  example,  became  extinct,  the  musk-sheep
and  lemming  were  banished  from  a  temperate  latitude  to
take  refuge  in  the  regions  of  the  north,  while  the  spotted
hyoena,  the  hippopotamus,  and  Felis  caffer,  retired  to  the
warm  regions  of  Africa,  where  they  are  still  living.

The  Archceological  Classification.

The  prehistoric  period  has  been  classified  by  the
archaeologists  according  to  the  stages  of  human  progress
which  it  presents.  At  the  frontier  of  history,  in  each
country,  we  find  that  the  dwellers  were  acquainted  with
the  use  of  iron,  and  had  found  it  to  be  the  most  con-i
venient  material  for  the  manufacture  of  cutting  weapons
and  implements.  Before  this  the  voice  of  tradition
points  out  that  bronze  was  the  only  mat^irial  used  for
these  purposes,  and  stone  before  bronze.  These  three
stages  of  human  culture,  or  the  ages  of  iron,  bronze,  and
stone,  have  been  fully  verified  by  investigations  which
have  been  made  in  various  parts  of  Europe,  into  the
prehistoric  habitations  and  burial-places  of  man.

This  classification  by  no  means  implies  an  exact
chronology,  or  that  any  one  of  these  ages,  with  the
exception  perhaps  of  the  first,  covered  the  whole  of
Europe  at  the  same  point  of  time,  but  that  the  order  in


IV.]  THE  RELATION  OF  THE  THREE  AGES.  131)

which  they  followed  each  other  is  the  same  in  each
country  which  has  been  explored.  There  is  good  reason
for  the  belief,  that  at  the  time  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian
empires  were  in  the  height  of  their  glory,  Northern
Europe  was  inhabited  by  rude  polished-stone-using  races.
And  it  is  a  well-ascertained  fact,  that  while  the  inhabitants
of  Britain  and  Scandina^'ia  were  in  their  bronze  aire,  the
Etruscans  and  Phoenicians  were  in  their  full  power  in
the  south.  It  is  obvious  again,  that,  even  in  the  same
country,  the  poorer  classes  must  have  been  long  content
to  use  the  ruder  and  more  common  materials  for  their
daily  needs,  while  the  richer  and  more  powerful  used  the
rarer  and  more  costly.  These  three  ages  must  therefore
necessarily  overlap.  "  Like  the  three  principal  colours
of  the  rainbow,"  whites  ]\Ir.  Evans,*  **  these  three  stages
of  civilization  overlap,  intermingle,  and  shade  off  the  one
into  the  other  ;  and  yet  their  succession,  as  far  as  Western
Europe  is  concerned,  appears  to  be  equally  wtII  defined
with  that  of  the  prismatic  colours,  though  the  proportions
of  the  speetnim  may  vary  in  different  countries."  They
cannot  reasonably  be  viewed  as  hard  and  fast  lines  of
division,  mapping  off  successive  quantities  of  time.

The  age  of  stone  is  subdivided  by  Sir  John  Lubbock
into  the  neolithic  periods,  or  that  in  which  polished  stone
was  the  only  material  used  for  cutting,  and  the  palajo-
lithic,  in  w^hich  mankind  had  not  learnt  to  giind  and
polish  his  implements.  The  latter  belongs  to  the  pleisto-
cene, or  quaternary  period,  since  the  palaeolithic  imple-
ments are  found  in  association  with  the  remains  of  the
animals  characteristic  of  that  age.

The  prehistoric  caves,  therefore,  may  be  divided  into
three  classes  if  the  archaeological  method  of  analysis  be

*  "  Ancient  Stone  Implements  of  Great  Britain,"  p.  2.


140  CAVE  OF  THE  IRON  AGE.  [chap.

employed:  1,  into  those  containing  evidence  of  the  use
of  iron ;  2,  those  containing  proof  of  the  knowledge  of
bronze ;  3,  and  lastly,  those  in  which  traces  of  polished
stone  weapons  have  been  discovered  unassociated  with
metals.  By  the  animal  remains  which  they  contain
they  may  be  distinguished  from  those  of  the  pleistocene
age,  both  by  the  absence,  as  well  as  the  presence  of
certain  species  which  have  been  enumerated.

From  the  archaeological  point  of  view,  two  out  of  the
four  ages  are  still  represented.  Stone  is,  at  the  present
time,  the  only  material  used  in  the  more  remote  regions
of  Australia,  although  it  is  fast  being  replaced  by  iron,
which  has  superseded  bronze,  and  is  spreading  rapidly
over  the  whole  earth.  The  group  of  historic  caves
described  in  the  preceding  chapter  may  be  said  to  belong
to  the  iron  age,  that  is  to  say,  to  that  later  portion  of  it
in  which  the  events  are  recorded  in  history.

The  traces  of  the  occupation  of  caves  by  man  in  the
iron  and  bronze  ages  are  so  extremely  scarce,  that  it  is
certain  that  they  were  but  rarely  used  as  habitations.
Man  had  sufficiently  advanced  in  civilization  in  those
times  to  construct  artificial  dwellings  and  tombs  for
himself,  instead  of  using  the  natural  shelters  which
w^ere  so  very  generally  occupied  in  Europe  by  his
ruder  neolithic  predecessors.

Cm^e  of  the  Iron  Age.

In  the  course  of  the  systematic  exploration  of  caves
in  the  Mendip  Hills,  carried  on  by  Messrs.  Ayshford
Sanford,  Parker,  and  myself,  a  cave  was  examined  in
Burrington  Combe,  near  Wrington,  in  Somerset,  which
may  be  referred  to  the  iron  age,  and  which  we  named
Whitcombe's  Hole.     It  opened  upon  the  side  of  that


IV.]  CA  VES  OF  THE  BRONZE  AGE.  141

magnificent  combe,  at  a  height  of  about  135  feet  from
the  bottom  and  fifteen  from  the  top,  and  ran  horizontally
inwards,  the  floor  being  formed  of  an  accumulation  of
earth  mingled  with  charcoal,  and  containing  numerous
broken  bones  and  teeth.  The  latter  belonged  to  the  wolf,
fox,  badger,  rabbit,  hare,  stag,  goat,  and  Celtic  shorthorn.
In  the  lower  portion  were  the  fragments  of  a  rude,  un-
ornamented  urn  of  a  coarse  black  ware,  with  the  rim
turned  at  right  angles,  along  with  a  bent  piece  of
iron,  which  bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  those  found
strengthening  the  corners  of  wooden  cofiins  in  the  Gallo-
Roman  graves  on  the  banks  of  the  Somme.  The
fractures  of  the  bones,  with  one  exception,  were  caused
by  the  hand  of  man,  and  not  by  the  teeth  of  the  carni-
vora.  The  position  renders  the  cave  eminently  fitted  for
concealment,  for  while  commanding  an  extensive  view
down  the  Coml)e,  it  is  invisible  both  from  above  and
below,  and  opening  on  the  face  of  an  almost  vertical
cliff,  it  is  easily  defended.  If  the  urn  be  sepulchral,  the
interment  must  be  of  a  later  date  than  the  occupation,
because  it  is  made  in  t\\e,dcb7*is  which  resulted  from  the
latter.  *

Caves  of  the  Bronze  Age  in  Britain.

The  cave  of  Heathery  Burn,^  near  Stanhope,  in  Wear-
dale,  CO.  Durham,  is  the  only  one  in  this  country  that
has  furnished  a  large  scries  of  articles  of  the  bronze
age.     It  is  described  by  Mr.  Elliott  as  running  into  the

^  Somerset  ArchcDol.  and  Nat.  Hist.  Soc.  18G4.  "  On  the  Caverns  of
Burrington  Combe."

2  ElUott,  "Geologist,"  18G2,  p.  34,  ditto  p.  167.  Huxley,  ditto,
p.  205.  Carter  Blake,  ditto,  p.  312.  Mackie,  "Proceed.  Soc.  Antiq."
2nd  Series,  vol.  ii.  p.  177.


142  KIRKHEA  D  CA  VE,  [chap,  i v.

precipitous  side  of  a  ravine,  at  a  height  of  about  1 0  to
12  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Stanhope  Bum,  and  as
being  partially  traversed  by  water.  Since  its  discovery  in
1861,  it  has  been  altogether  destroyed  by  the  removal
of  the  stone  to  be  used  as  a  flux  in  smelting  the  ore  of
the  Weardalc  Iron  Company,  and  an  admirable  section
of  its  contents  was  therefore  visible  from  time  to  time.
A  stratum  of  sand  at  the  bottom,  two  feet  nine  inches
thick,  deposited  by  the  stream,  and  containing  angular
masses  of  limestone  that  had  dropped  from  the  roof,  was
covered  by  a  sheet  of  stalagmite  three  inches  in  thickness.
On  this  rested  a  mass  of  bones  and  implements  imbedded
in  silt  or  sand,  and  sealed  over  by  a  thickness  of  stalag-
mite of  from  two  to  eight  inches.


FitJ.  32. — Hroiizo  Knife,  Heathery  Burn  (natural  size).

On  removing  the  upper  of  these  two  stalagmitic  floors
a  perfect  human  skull  was  discovered,  along  with  broken
bones  of  animals,  charcoal,  limpet  shells,  bone  pins,  an
instrument  of  bone  like  a  paper-knife,  coarse  potter}^
with  fragments  of  chert  imbedded  in  its  mass,  a  portion
of  a  jet  armlet,  as  well  as  several  boars*  tusks.  The  same
stratum  at  another  place  furnished  a  singular  bronze
knife  with  a  socket  for  the  handle  (Fig.  32),*  bronze  pins,
celts,  an  armlet  of  twisted  wire  (Fig.  33),  along  with
shells  of  limpet,  mussel,  and  oyster,  and  charcoal,  and  at
a  third,  on  the  other  side  of  the  watercourse,  a  bronze

*  This  woodcut,  as  well  as  Fi^s.  33  and  35,  have  been  kindly  lent
by  the  Council  of  the  Society  of  Antitpiaries.


144      BEONZE  ARTICLES  AND  HUMAy  SKELETONS,    [chap.

spear-head.  Subsequently,  many  articles  were  added  to
the  above  list,  seven  plus,  three  rings,  two  split-rings,
a  "razor,"  disk,  three  socketed  celts,  one  chisel,  two
gouges,  and  four  spear-heads  of  bronze,  and  a  fine
bracelet,  and  two  ornaments  of  the  horse-shoe,  or  split-
ring  type,  made  of  thin  plates  of  gold.  One  of  the
spear-heads,  in  the  collection  of  the  Ecv.  Canon  Green-
well,  is  represented  in  Fig.  34.  There  were  also  waste
pieces  of  bronze,  and  the  half  of  a  bronze  mould  for
casting  celts,  Fig  35,  in  which  one  of  the  associated
celts  had  actually  been  cast,  since  it  is  of  the  same  pattern.
These  articles  were  probably  concealed  in  the  cavern  by
workers  in  bronze,  who  were  prevented,  by  some  unfore-
seen accident,  from  obtaining  them  again.  The  charcoal
and  the  broken  bones  of  the  Bos  loiigi/roiis,  badger,  and
dog,  imply  that  the  cave  had  been  used  as  a  habitation  ;
and  possil)ly  the  two  human  skulls,  which  have  been
described  by  Professor  Huxley  and  Mr.  Carter  Blake,  may
have  belonged  to  the  possessoi's  of  the  hoard  of  bronze
and  gold.  Both  were  discovered  in  the  same  stratum
and  below  the  floor  of  stalagmite.

The  more  perfect  of  the  two  skulls  is  considered  by
Professor  Huxley  to  belong  to  the  same  long-headed
race  of  men  as  that  found  at  Muskham,  in  the  valley  of
the  Trent, — to  a  form  which  he  tenns  the  River-bed  type,
and  that  Cannot  be  separated  from  those  obtained  from
the  long  tumuli  of  the  South  of  England,  and  con-
sidered by  Dr.  Thurnam  to  belong  to  a  Neolithic  Basque,
or  Iberian  population.

Articles  distinctly  of  the  bronze  age  have  been  already
noticed  as  having  been  met  with  in  the  caves  of  Kirk-
head,  in  Cartmell,  and  in  Thor's  Cave,  in  Staffordshire.
From  the  latter  the  bracelet  of  thin  bronze,  Fig.  31,  was


IV.]  THE  CA  VES  OF  CE^SA  RED  A,  1 4  5

obtained  by  Mr.  Carrington,  of  WettOD.  The  rarity  of
bronze  implements  in  caves  in  Britain  and  the  Continent
is  probably,  to  a  large  extent,  due  to  the  value  of  the
material,  and  to  the  fact  that  it  could  be  re-melted.  If
a  bronze  article  happened  to  be  broken,  the  pieces
would  naturally  be  kept  for  future  use,  and  not  thrown
away,  as  in  the  case  of  a  fractured  stone  implement.
The  former,  therefore,  arc  rare,  the  latter  comparatively
abundant.

The  cave  called  the  Cat-Hole,  in  Gower  (Glamorgan),
explored  by  Colonel  Wood  in  1864,  contained  several
human  skeletons,  flint  flakes,  fragments  of  red  pottery
marked  with  a  string,  cut  bones,  a  stone  muUer,  and
a  bronze  socketed  celt.  The  last  is  of  the  same  pattern
as  some  of  those  in  the  collection  of  the  Rev.  Canon
Greenwell,  from  Heathery  Burn,  and  has  been  cast  in
a  mould  similar  in  size  and  ornamentation  to  that
figured  in  woodcut  35.

The  Caves  of  CSsareda  probably  occupied  by  Cannibals.

The  contents  of  three  caves^  in  the  Iberian  peninsula,
referable  to  the  dawn  of  the  bronze  age,  render  it  very
probable  that  the  use  of  human  flesh  was  not  unknown
in  those  times.

In  1867  Senhor  J.  L.  Delgado  described  his  researches
in  the  caverns  of  CSsareda,  in  the  valley  of  the  Tagus,
in  the  Casa  da  Maura,  Lapa  Furada,  and  Cova  da  Maura.

^  Commissao  Geologica  de  Portugal.  EstudoA  Geoligicos.  Da
Existencia  do  bomen  no  nosso  Bolo  em  Tempos  mui  remotes  provada
pelo  estudos  des  cavemas.  Primeiro  opusculo.  Noticea  dcerca  das
Grutas  da  CSsareda.  Por  J.  F.  N.  Delgado  com  a  versao  em  Francez
por  M.  Dalhuuty.

L


146  CA  VE8  OF  VESA  REDA.  [chap.

Tlie  first  of  these  contained  two  distinct  strata.  The
lower,  consisting  of  sand  mixed  with  fragments  of  rock,
rested  on  the  stalagmite,  and  contained  fragments  of
charcoal,  one  implement  of  bone,  and  many  of  flint,  a
scraper,  a  flake,  and  an  arrow-head.  The  broken  bones
and  teeth  belonged  to  tlie  following  animals  : — The  lynx,
fox,  brown-bear,  dog  and  wolf,  a  species  of  deer,  the
water-vole,  and  the  rabbit.  None  of  the  remains  of  the
carnivora  had  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  fire,  or
had  been  used  for  food.  A  human  skull  with  lower  jaw
was  dug  out  of  the  deepest  part,  but,  since  the  matrix
had  been  disturbed,  it  had  probably  been  interred  after
the  accumulation  of  the  deposit.

It  is  recognized  by  Professor  Busk'  as  belonging  to
the  same  long  type  as  the  skulls  of  the  caves  of  Gib-
raltar and  the  Basque  graveyard,  measuring  in  length
67  inches,  in  breadth  5*3,  in  height  5*5,  and  therefore
possessing  cephalic  and  latitudinal  indices  of  *785  and
•820.'

The  upper  stratum,  a  sandy  loam,  contained  a  large
quantity  of  stones,  and  numerous  articles  fabricated  by
man :  polished-stone  axes,  flakes,  and  other  instruments
of  flint,  bone,  and  antler,  fragments  of  coarse  black
pottery,  with  bits  of  calcareous  spar  imbedded  in  its
substance,  and  two  plates  of  schist  ornamented  with  a
rude  design,  which  may  have  been  used  as  amulets.
Fragments  of  chanjoal  were  scattered  throughout  the
matrix,  and  adhered  to  some  of  the  pottery  and  to  the
burnt  pebl)les.  The  most  abundant  remains  were  those
of  man.  They  were  to  be  counted  by  thousands,  and
were  so  fragmentary  and  scattered  that  it  was  impossible

^  Ethnol.  Journ.  X.S.  7,  p.  43.

-  For  definition  of  these  terme,  seep.  190.


IV.]  £ VIDENCE  OF  CANNIBA LlSSf.  1  4  7

to  put  together  one  perfect  skeletou.  The  teeth,  belong-
ing for  the  most  part  to  children  or  fully-grown  adults,
were  particularly  abundant.  The  long  bones  had  lost,
very  generally,  their  articular  ends,  had  been  fractured
longitudinally,  and  some  of  them  had  been  cut  and
scraped.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  this  accumulation
was  formed  by  a  tribe  of  cannibals :  the  evidence  that
human  flesh  formed  their  principal  food  being  precisely
of  the  same  nature  as  that  by  which  the  flint-folk  of  the
Perigord  are  proved  to  have  subsisted  on  the  flesh  of
the  reindeer.  Professor  Busk,^  however,  is  inclined  to
believe  the  facts  in  support  of  cannibalism  insufl&cient.
The  associated  animals  consisted  of  the  bat,  dormouse,
rabbit,  horse,  a  small  ox,  allied  to  Bos  longifrons^  sheep
or  goat,  wild  cat,  wolf,  fox,  and  dog.  The  contents
of  the  other  two  caves  were  precisely  of  the  same
nature,  and  had  been  accumulated  under  the  same
conditions.

A  bronze  arrow-head,  discovered  in  the  upper  stratum,
and  the  ornamentation  of  the  stone  amulet,  consisting  of
alternate  triangles  and  zigzag  ladders,  as  remarked  by
Mr.  John  Evans,  indicate  that  the  upper  deposit  belongs
to  the  age  of  bronze,  and  probably  to  an  early  stage,
when  stone  was  being  superseded  by  bronze,  since  many
stone  celts  were  found  in  the  same  spot.

The  ancient  burial-places  of  Ultz,  in  Westphalia,
furnish  a  second  case  of  the  practice  of  cannibalism,
according  to  M.  Schaaft*hausen  of  Bonn.  They  are
probably  of  the  age  of  bronze.

^    International   Congress    of    Prehistoric    Archaeology,    Norwich
Volume,  p.  84.

'^  International  Congress,  Paris  Volume,  p.  159.


1    -^


148  THE  CAVE  OF  REOGIO.  [chap.

The  Cave  of  Eeggio,  in  Modena.

The  human  remains  in  a  cave  in  the  province  of
Reggio/  on  the  northern  flank  of  the  Apennines,  brought
before  the  Prehistoric  Congress  at  Bologna  by  M.  TAbb^
Chierici,  and  considered  by  him  to  be  proofs  of  canni-
balism, are  probably  merely  the  result  of  interment  in  a
refuse-heap  that  had  previously  been  accumulated.  They
were  associated  with  bronze  pins,  rivets,  polishednstone
axes,  and  various  implements  of  bone,  fragments  of
pottery  and  of  charcoal,  bones  of  pig,  sheep,  and  dog,
and  belong  therefore  to  the  period  of  transition  from  the
neolithic  to  the  bronze  age.

The  caves  have  contributed  but  very  little  to  our
knowledge  of  the  bronze-folk  in  any  part  of  Europe.
Examples,  such  as  those  given  above,  are  scattered  through
France  and  Spain,  but  they  are  not  sufl&ciently  important
to  require  notice.  We  could  not  expect  that  men,  in
the  high  state  of  civilization  implied  by  the  beautifril
jewellery  and  ornaments  which  are  distinctive  of  the
bronze-folk,  would  have  chosen  the  wild,  half-savage  life
which  is  involved  in  cave-habitation.

^  Prehistoric  Congress,  Brussels  Volume,  1872,  p.  363.


v.]  TBE  NEOLITHIC  CA  VE8.  149


CHAPTER  V.

CAVES    OF   THE   NEOLITHIC   AGE.

Neolithic  Caves  in  Great  Britaiii. — ^The  Kefaae-beap  at  Perthi-
Chwareu. — ^The  Sepulchral  Caves. — The  Neolithic  Caves  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Cefn,  St.  Asaph. — The  Chambered  Tomb  near
Cefn. — Interments  in  Tomb  and  Caves  of  the  same  age. —
Contents  of  Tomb  and  Caves. — Description  of  Human  Eemains
by  Professor  Busk — From  Cave  No.  1  at  Perthi-Chwareu — from
Cairn  at  Cefh — from  Cave  at  Cefn. — General  Conclusions  as  to
Human  Bemains.

It  is  evident,  from  the  scanty  remains  found  in  caves,
that  they  were  not  the  normal  habitations  of  men  in  the
Bronze  or  Iron  stages  of  culture.  We  shall,  however,
find  that  they  were  used  by  the  neolithic  peoples,  both
for  shelter  and  for  burial,  in  nearly  every  portion  of
Europe  which  has  been  explored.

Neolithic  Caves  in  Great  Britain. — Pertki-Chtvareu .

The  most  remarkable  examples  of  caves,  turned  to
both  these  uses,  in  Britain,  are  ofiered  by  the  group
clustering  round  a  refuse-heap  at  Perthi-Chwareu,  a
form  high  up  in  the  Welsh  hills,  about  ten  miles  to  the
east  of  Corwen,  and  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the  little
villaw  of  Llandejjla,  in  Denbicrhshiro.


150       THE  REFCTSE-HEAF  AT  PERTHI-CHWAREU.     [chap.

The  ReficSe-heap.

The  first  intimation  of  any  prehistoric  remains  in  that
locality  was  afforded  by  a  small  box  of  bones  forwarded
to  me  by  Mr.  Darwin,  in  1869  ;  and  this  I  was  able  to
follow  up,  through  the  kind  assistance  of  Mrs.  Lloyd,
the  owner  of  the  property  on  which  they  were  found,
from  time  to  time,  during  1869-70-71-2.  The  moun-
tain limestone,  which  there  forms  hill  and  valley,  consists
of  thick  masses  of  hard  rock,  separated  by  soft  beds  of
shale,  and  contains  large  quantities  of  pro/fwch",  crinoids
and  corals.  The  strata  dip  to  the  south,  at  an  angle
of  about  1  in  25,  and  form  two  parallel  ridges,  with
abrupt  faces  to  the  north,  and  separated  from  each
other  by  a  narrow  valley,  passing  east  and  west  along
the  strike.  The  remains  sent  by  Mr.  Darwin  were
obtained  from  a  space  between  two  strata  near  the  top
of  the  northern  ridge,  whence  the  intervening  softer
material  had  been  carried  away  by  water.  Its  maximum
height  was  6  inches,  and  its  width  20  feet  or  more ;
and  it  extended  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  bed  of
the  rocks.  The  bones,  which  had  evidently  been  washed
in  by  the  rain,  and  not  carried  in  by  any  camivora,
belong  to  the  following  species  : —

Conis  fftmUuirU — The  r)og.        Jiuit  longifrous — The  Celtic  Short-
horn.

Cauls  vnlpes — The  Fox.  Efpius  caballas — The  Horse.

Mtles  tftxKs — The  Badger.  Arvirohi  amphihiux — The  Water-

rat.

Sffs  srrofa — The  Pig.  Leptis  tlrnidus — The  Hare.

Cervffs  cnjweohis — The  Roe-        Lepus  ntnindus — The  Babbit,
deer.

Cerinis  elaphus — The  Red-deer.   The  Eagle.

Capra  hircus — The  Goat.


V.  ]  THE  JIEMA  rXS  OF  A  NIMA  LS.  151

Nearly  all  the  bones  were  broken,  and  belonged  to
young  animals.  Those  of  the  Celtic  short-horn,  of  the
sheep  or  goat,  and  of  the  young  pig,  were  very  abundant ;
while  those  of  the  roe  and  stag,  hare  and  horse,  were
comparatively  rare.  The  remains  of  the  domestic  dog
were  rather  abundant,  and  the  percentage  of  young
puppies  implies  also  .that  they,  like  the  other  animals,
had  been  used  for  food.  Possibly  the  hare  may  also
have  been  eaten,  but  its  remains  were  scarce,  and  be-
longed to  adults.  Some  of  the  bones  had  been  gnawed
by  dogs.  The  only  reasonable  cause  that  can  be  assigned
for  the  accumulation  of  the  remains  of  these  animals  is,
that  the  locality  was  inhabited  by  men  of  pastoral  habits,
but  yet  to  a  certain  extent  dependent  on  the  chase,  and
that  the  relics  of  their  food  were  thrown  out  to  form  a  re-
fuse-heap. The  latter  had  altogether  disappeared  from
the  surface  of  the  ground,  from  the  action  of  the  rain  and
other  atmospheric  causes,  while  those  portions  of  it  which
chanced  to  be  washed  into  the  narrow  interspace  between
the  strata  were  preserved,  to  mark  the  spot  which  it
once  occupied.

There  was  nothing  in  the  deposit  that  fixes  the  date
of  its  accumulation.  It  may  have  been  of  the  stone,
bronze,  or  iron  age  ;  but  from  the  presence  of  the  goat,
short-homed  ox,  and  dog,  it  certainly  does  not  date  so  far
back  as  the  epoch  of  the  reindeer,  mammoth,  rhinoceros,
and  cave-hyaena.  The  presence  of  the  Celtic  short-horn
throws  no  light  upon  the  antiquity,  because  for  centuries
after  it  had  ceased  to  be  the  domestic  breed  in  England
it  remained  in  "Wales,  and  still  lives  in  the  small  black
Welsh  cattle,  that  are  lineal  descendants  of  those
which  furnished  beef  to  the  Roman  provincials  in
Britain.


153     SEPULCHRAL  CAVSS  AT  PERTB1-CH1VARBJ7.   [cHxr.

The  Sepulchral  Caves.

While  the  refuse-heap  was  being  explored,  I  chose  a
email  depression  (Fig.  36  a)  in  the  precipitOHS  side  of  lie
southern  ridge,  that  formed  a  kind  of  rock  shelter  over-
looking the  valley,  and  that  seemed  to  be  a  likely  place
for  the  abode  of  man,  or  of  wild  animals.  On  setting
the  men  to  work,  in  a  few  minutes  we  began  to  discover
the  remains  of  dog,  marten-cat,  fox,  badger,  goat,  Celtic
short-hom,  roe-deer  and  stag,    horse,   and    large  birds.


— Section  of  Cave  at  Perthi-Cliwaroii.     Scale  12  feet  to  1  inch.


Mixed  with  these,  as  we  proceeded,  we  began  to  find
human  bones,  between  and  underneath  lai^e  masses  of
rock,  that  were  completely  covered  up  with  red  silt  and
sand.  As  these  were  cleared  away,  we  gradually  realized
that  we  were  on  the  threshold  of  a  sepulchral  cave.  In
the  small  space  then  excavated,  human  remains,  belong-
ing to  no  fewer  than  five  individuals,  were  found.    Sub-


v.]  REMAINS  OF  MAN  AND  ANIMALS,  153

sequently  the  work  was  carried  on  by  Mrs.  Lloyd,  under
the  careful  supervision  of  her  agent  Mr.  Reid.  The  rock-
shelter  narrowed  into  a  "  tunnel  cave,"  that  penetrated
the  rocks  in  a  line  parallel  to  the  bedding,  and,  roughly
speaking,  at  right  angles  to  the  valley,  having  a  width
varying  from  3  feet  4  inches  to  5  feet  6  inches,  and  a
height  from  3  feet  4  inches  to  4  feet  6  inches.

The  entrance  was  completely  blocked  up  with  red
earth  and  loose  stones,  the  latter,  apparently,  having
been  placed  there  by  design  (Figs.  36,  37).  The  inside
of  the  cave  was  filled  with  red  earth  and  sand  to  within
about  a  foot  of  the  roof.  The  remains  were  found,  for
the  most  part,  on  or  near  the  top  ;  but  in  some  cases
they  were  deep  down.  One  human  skidl,  for  example,
was  found  six  inches  only  above  the  rocky  floor.  The
human  bones  were  associated  with  those  of  the  animals
of  which  a  list  has  been  given,  and  occurred  in  little
confused  heaps.  One  human  femi^r  was  in  a  perpen-
dicular position.  The  account  of  the  continuation  of
the  digging  is  given  almost  in  the  words  of  Mrs.  Lloyd.
On  the  second  day,  after  an  hour's  work,  a  human  skull
was  found  near  the  roof  of  the  cave,  resting  on  a  femur ;
then  eleven  feet  explored  brought  to  light  a  large
quantity  of  human  bones,  including  nine  femurs.  The
third  and  fourth  days  were  devoted  to  clearing  out  the
cave  (Fig.  36-7  b)  up  to  this  point,  and  to  excavating
about  four  feet  further  in,  or  fifteen  from  the  entrance.
During  the  work  two  teeth  of  a  horse  were  found,  resting
on  the  floor  near  the  entrance,  and  nine  more  about  ten
feet  within  the  cave ;  also  a  boar's  tusk  of  remarkable
size,  and  close  by  a  mussel  and  cockle-shell,  and  valve  of
Mya  truncatcty  along  with  a  quantity  of  human  and
other  bones  ;  including  five  skulls,  more  or  less  perfect.


154      SEPULCHRAL  CAVES  AT  FBRTHl-CHWARBV.    [chap.

and  many  fragments.  All  these  skulls  were  found
between  the  tenth  and  fifteenth  feet  from  the  entrance.
During  the  fifth  and  sixth  days,  the  work  was  superin-
tended by  Mr.  Eeid,  who  entirely  cleared  the  cave  for
about  thirteen  feet  further :  the  first  eight  feet  yielded  a
small  quantity  of  human  and  other  bones,  including  the


PInn  of  Cavo  at  Pertlii-Chwareu.


perfect  skull  of  a  marten-cat  and  the  incisor  of  a  wild
boar.  The  only  implement  found  in  the  cave,  a  broken
flint  flake,  occurred  here,  and  a  nearly  perfect  human
skull,  lying  face  downwards,  with  the  pelvis  adhering  to
one  side.  The  last  five  feet  furnished  only  two  bones,
both  of  the  short-homed  ox.  The  end  of  the  cave  was
composed  of  unproductive  grey  clay.     (Figs.  36-7  c.)


v.]  HUMAN  REMAINS.  155

Small  fragments  of  charcoal  occurred  throughout  the
cave,  and  a  great  many  rounded  pebbles  from  the  boulder
clay  of  the  neighbourhood.

The  human  remains  belong  for  the  most  part  to  very
young  or  adolescent  individuals,  from  the  small  infant
to  youths  of  twenty-one.  Some,  however,  belong  to
men  in  the  prime  of  life.  All  the  teeth  that  had  been
used  were  ground  perfectly  flat.  The  skulls  belong  to
that  type  which  Professor  Huxley  terms  the  "  river-bed
skull."  Some  of  the  tibiae  present  the  peculiar  flattening
parallel  to  the  median  line,  which  Professor  Busk  denotes
by  the  term  platycnemic,  and  some  of  the  femora  were
traversed  by  a  largely  developed  and  prominent  linea
aspera ;  but  these  peculiarities  were  not  seen  on  all  the
femora  and  tibiae,  and  cannot  therefore  be  considered
characteristic  of  race,  but  most  probably  of  sex.  They
were  not  presented  by  any  of  the  younger  bones.

All  the  human  remains  had  undoubtedly  been  buried
in  the  cave,  since  the  bones  were  in  the  main  perfect,
or  only  broken  by  the  large  stones  which  had  subse-
quently fallen  from  the  roof.  From  the  juxtaposition
of  one  skull  to  a  pelvis,  and  the  vertical  position  of  one
of  the  femora,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  bones  lay  in
confused  heaps,  it  is  clear  that  the  corpses  had  been
])uried  in  the  contracted  posture,  as  is  usually  the  case
in  neolithic  interments.  And  since  the  area  was  insuffi-
cient for  the  accommodation  of  so  many  bodies  at  one
time,  it  is  certain  that  the  cave  had  been  used  as  a
cemetery  at  different  times.  The  stones  blocking  up  the
entrance  were  probably  placed  as  a  barrier  against  the
inroads  of  wild  beasts.

These  remains  are  the  first  in  this  country  which
present  the  peculiar  character  of  platycnemism,  noticed


156  HUMAN  AND  ANIMAL  BONES.  [chap.

by  Professor  Busk  and  Dr.  Falconer  in  human  remains
in  the  caves  of  Gibraltar,  and  by  Dr.  Broca  in  some  of
those  from  the  dolmens  of  France,  and  subsequently  in  the
celebrated  skeletons  found  in  the  cave  of  Cro-magnon.  I
have  also  observed  the  same  peculiar  flattening  of  the
tibia  in  the  only  fragment  of  human  bone  obtained  by
Mr.  Foote,  in  the  Lateritic  deposits  of  the  eastern  coast
of  Southern  India,  along  with  the  stone  implements
figured  in  the  Norwich  Volume  of  the  International  Con-
gress of  Prehistoric  Archaeology  (1868,  p.  224).

The  remains  of  the  animals  associated  with  the  human
bones  belong  to  the  same  species  as  those  mentioned
above  from  the  debris  of  a  refuse- heap,  and  are  in  a
similar  broken  and  split  condition.  They  may  have
been  deposited  at  the  same  time  as  the  human  skeletons,
but,  from  the  fact  that  some  of  them  are  gnawed  by
dogs,  it  is  most  probable  that  they  were  accumulated
while  the  cave  was  used  as  a  dwelling.  If  the  bodies
were  placed  on  an  old  floor  of  occupation,  and  after-
wards disturbed  by  rabbits  and  badgers,  the  remains
would  be  mingled  together  as  they  were  found  to  be
mingled.  The  contents  had  evidently  been  disturbed  by
the  burrowing  of  all  these  animals.

Subsequently  we  discovered  and  explored  no  less  than
four  other  sepulchral  caves,  within  a  few  hundred  yards
of  the  refuse-heap,  in  which  the  corpses  had  been  buried
in  the  same  crouching  posture.  From  one  on  the  farm
of  Khosdigre  we  o])tained  a  perfect  celt  of  polished
greenstone  which  had  never  been  used  (Fig.  38),
together  with  several  flint  flakes,  and  numerous  frag-
ments of  pottery,  rude,  black  inside,  hand-made,  and
contuiiiing  in  their  substance  small  fragments  of  lime-
stone.


T.]  POTTERY  AND  IMPLEMENTS.  157

Similar  potsherds  are  preserved  in  the  Oxford  Museum,
from  the  auperficial  deposits  of  the  caves  of  Gailenreuth
and  Kuhlock,  and  I  have  observed  them  also  among  the
remains  from  Kent's  Hole.  The  celt  was  most  pro-
bably, from  its  unworn  condition,  buried  with  the  dead,


Fia.  3S. — Greenstone  Celt,  Rhosdigre  Care.


and  it  stamps  the  neolithic  age  of  the  interments  of  the
whole  group.

Among  the  broken  bones  from  this  cave  were  the  teeth
of  the  brown  bear,  and  the  lower  jaw  of  a  wolf;  and
the  fractured  bones  of  the  dog  implied  that  that  animal


i  58  INTERMENTS  OF  NEOLITHIC  AGE.  [chap.

miiiistered  to  the  appetite,  as  well  as  obeyed  the  com-
mands, of  the  neolithic  inhabitants.  I  have  met  with
similar  evidence  of  the  use  of  dog's  flesh  for  food  among
the  broken  bones  which  Canon  Greenwell  obtained  from
the  neolithic  tumuli  of  the  Yorkshire  Wolds.  On  the
other  hand,  the  marks  of  the  teeth  of  dogs,  or  wolves,
on  some  of  the  human  femora,  implied  that  those
animals  made  their  way  into  this  cave  and  feasted  on
the  corpses.

The  neolithic  age  of  these  interments  is  proved,  not
merely  by  the  presence  of  the  stone  axe,  or  of  the  flint
flakes,  but  by  the  burial  in  a  contracted  posture,^  and  the
fact  that  the  skulls  are  identical  with  those  obtained
from  chambered  tombs  in  the  south  of  England  proved
to  be  neolithic  by  Dr.  Thurnam.

The  number  of  skeletons  of  all  ages,  and  of  both  sexes,
buried  in  these  caves  was  very  considerable ;  and  they
had  been  placed  on  the  old  floor  of  occupation  at  suc-
cessive times.  In  that  of  Rhosdigre  the  accumulation  of
charcoal,  broken  bones,  and  fragments  of  pottery  below
some  of  the  human  skeletons,  proved  that  it  had  been
used  for  a  habitation  before  it  was  used  for  a  burial-
place.  It  is  very  probable  that  originally  the  head  of  a
family,  or  a  clan,  or  a  tribe,  was  buried  in  his  own  cave-
dwelling,  and  that  it  was  afterwards  used  as  a  cemetery
for  his  blood  relations  and  followers.

^  ]>urial  in  the  contracted  posture,  which  is  bo  characteristic  of  the
neolithic  age,  was  probably  due,  as  is  suggested  by  my  friend  Mr.  John
Evans,  F.h\S.,  to  the  habit  of  sleeping  in  that  posture  and  not  at  full
length  on  a  bed.  The  body  was  not  laid  out  after  death,  but  may
have  been  folded  together,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ancient  Peruvian  mum-
mies. No  regularity,  however,  in  the  contracted  posture  could  be
observed  in  the  many  tumuli  and  caves  which  I  have  explored,  although
very  generally  the  corpse  had  been  interred  on  its  side.


V.J  NEOLITHIC  CAVES  NEAR  ST.  ASAPH.  159

The  Neolithic  Caves  in  the  neighbourhood  o/Cefn^  near

St.  Asaph.

The  same  class  of  remains,  referable  to  the  neolithic
age,  have  been  met  with  in  the  caves  in  the  limestone
clitfs  of  the  beautiful  valleys  of  the  Clwyd  and  the
Elwy,  near  St.  Asaph.  In  the  collection  of  fossil  bones
in  the  possession  of  Mrs.  Williams  Wynn,  discovered  in
1833,  in  a  cave  at  Cefn,  by  Mr.  Edward  Lloyd,^  is  a
human  skull  and  lower  jaw,  along  with  platycnemic
limb-bones.  They  were  found  mingled  with  the  bones
of  goat,  pig,  fox,  and  badger,  and  cut  antlers  of  the
red-deer,  inside  the  lower  entrance  of  the  cave,  in  which
the  extinct  pleistocene  animals  were  found  in  the  valley
of  the  Elwy.  Four  flint  flakes  also  were  discovered
along  with  them.

The  skull  in  its  general  features  strongly  resembles
those  found  in  the  group  of  caves  at  Perthi-Chwareu,
and  presents  a  cephalic  index*  of  '770,  which  comes
wdthin  the  limits  of  the  extreme  forms  from  that  locality.
Professor  Busk,  however,  as  will  be  seen  in  his  account
of  this  skull,  because  of  its  low  altitudinal  index — '702,
as  compared  with  "710  of  the  lowest  Perthi-Chwareu
skull — is  inclined  to  view  it  as  of  a  different  type.  The
conditions,  on  the  other  hand,  under  which  it  was  found
appear  to  me  to  be  circumstantial  evidence  that  the
interment  is  of  the  same  relative  age  as  that  of  Perthi-
Chwareu.  Both  were  in  caves :  in  both  the  remains  of
the  same  domestic  and  wild  animals  were  found  in  the
same  fragmentary  condition.  Flint  flakes  also  occurred
in  both ;  and  what  is  more  important,  the  platycnemic

1  Edinburgh  New  Phil.  Soc.  (1833),  No.  27,  p.  40.
■'*  For  the  definition  of  the  term,  see  p.  190.


160         CAVES  OF  BRYSOILL  AND  PLA8  HEATON.       [chap.

limb-bones  in  both  imply  a  somewhat  similar  mode  of
life  in  the  people  to  whom  they  belonged.  This  body  of
evidence,  in  favour  of  the  interments  having  been  made
by  the  same  race  of  men  who  lived  some  time  in  Den-
bighshire, seems  to  me  of  greater  weight  than  that  to  the
contrary  afforded  by  the  difference  of  '008  in  the  altitu-
dinal  indices  of  the  skulls.  After  a  comparison  of  the
carefully  prepared  measurements  of  the  crania  published
in  the  "Crania  Britannica''  with  those  published  else-
where, I  cannot  resist  the  conviction,  that  if  similar
modes  of  life  and  of  burial  in  Britain  imply  an  identity
of  race,  cranial  variation  within  the  limits  of  that  race  is
by  no  means  very  small  Absolute  purity  of  blood  in  an
island  so  near  the  Continent  as  Britain  cannot  be  looked
for ;  and  unity  of  type  resulting  from  isolation  from  other
races,  such  as  that  presented  by  the  Australians,  is  not
likely  to  be  met  with.  It  is  therefore  very  probable  that
some  of  the  variations  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  blend-
ing of  different  ethnical  elements  in  one  race.  I  am  con-
sequently inclined  to  view  the  interments  in  these  two
caves  as  having  been  made  by  the  same  people,  in  spite  of
the  small  cranial  difference  manifested  by  the  Cefn  skull.

The  cave  in  Brysgill,  a  small  ravine  leading  into  the
valley  of  the  Elwy,  explored  by  Mr.  Mainwaring  and
Mrs.  Williams  Wynn  in  1871,  furnished  evidence  of  the
occupation  of  man,  probably  of  the  neolithic  age.  From
a  dark  layer  composed  of  loam,  black  with  fragments  of
charcoal,  a  flint  arrow-head,  a  core,  a  flake,  and  broken
bones  of  the  horse,  Bos  longifrons,  goat,  and  dog,  were
obtained,  as  \vell  as  a  few  human  bones  which  had  not
been  broken  by  design.

The  excavations  carried  on  in  the  small  tunnel-cave
of  Plas-Heaton,  by  Mr.  Ilcaton  and  Professor  Hughes,


V.J  REMAINS  FROM  TOMB  AT  CEFN,  161

have  shown  that  it  was  inhabited  at  two  different  ages.
In  the  upper  or  prehistoric  stratum  were  broken  bones  of
the  dog,  badger,  goat,  Bos  longi/rons,  and  stag ;  Avhile
in  the  lower,  or  pleistocene,  were  the  remains  of  the
hyaena,  reindeer,  cave-lx»ar,  and  the  lower  jaw  of  the
glutton.

The  Chauihercd  Toiiib  near  Cefn,  St,  Amph,

AVhile  the  caves  at  Perthi-Chwareu  w^re  being  ex-
plored, the  accidental  discovery  of  human  remains  in  the
cairn  of  Tyddyn  Bleiddyn,  near  Cefn,  St.  Asaph,  in  1869,
led  to  a  systematic  examination  of  its  contents  by  Mrs.
Williams  Wynn,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Rev.
D.  R.  Thomas,  myself,  and  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Winwood,
which  has  resulted  in  the  proof,  that  the  people  who
buried  their  dead  in  caves  used  stone-chaml)ered  tombs
for  the  same  purpose.

'J'lie  cairn  of  loose  fragments  of  limestone  had  been
removed  for  road-mending  before  the  cap-stones  of  the
stone  chamber  were  exposed,  and  these  were  broken
l)efore  any  scientific  observation  was  made.  The  Rev.
D.  R.  Thomas,  however,  rescued  many  of  the  human
remains  from  destruction,  and  began  the  exploration
which  defined  the  extent  of  the  cham]>er  A  (Fig.  3.9).

Subsequently  it  was  resumed  in  my  presence,  and  the
chamber  a  (Fig.  39)  fully  cleared  out.  At  the  point  c
it  was  partially  shut  off  from  the  passage  b  by  a  slab
of  stone  18  inches  high.  The  passage  led  from  the
chamber  in  a  northern  direction,  and  w^as  6  feet  long
by  2  wide.  The  chamber  gradually  naiTOwed  towards
the  passage,  being  5  feet  wide  at  its  ])road  end,  and  9
feet  long.     In  the  passage,  as  well  as  in  the  chamber,

M


162


SUCCESSIVE  INTERMENTS.


[chap.


there  were  human  bones  belonging  to  individuals  who
had  been  buried  in  a  crouching  posture.  Unfortunately,
as  the  remains  have  been  scattered,  it  is  impossible  to
ascertain  the  exact  number  of  the  burials.  I  have,
however,  restored  one  skull  and  examined  seven  frontal
bones,  and  other  remains,  which  indicate  that  there  were
at  least  twelve  persons,  varying  in  age  from  infancy  to

full  prime,  buried  in  this  tomb.  In
addition  to  these,  there  is  a  large
box  of  bones  in  the  possession  of
the  Rev.  D.  R.  Thomas,  as  well
as  other  remains  in  other  hands.
But  although  the  exact  number  of
bodies  interred  cannot  be  made
out,  there  is  full  proof  that  there
were  too  many  to  have  been  de-
posited at  one  time  in  so  small  a
cubic  area;  and  therefore  they
must  have  been  deposited  at  dif-
ferent times,  as  in  the  caves  at
Perthi-Chwareu.  There  were  no
remains  of  either  wild  or  domestic
animals;  and  the  only  foreign
object  was  a  small  slightly  chipped
Fig.  39.— Plan  of  Chambered    flint  pebble.    From  the  remarkable

Tomb  at  Cefu.  «  ,.  «  ^ ,  ,   ,  «

coniormation  ol  the  nasal  bones  of
some  of  the  skulls,  it  w^ould  seem  likely  that  the  burial-
place  belonged  to  one  family;  but,  for  a  reason  (see
Notes  on  Human  Remains,  p.  183)  stated  by  Professor
Busk,  this  is  by  no  means  a  certain  inference.

The  plan  of  the  chamber  and  passage  corresponds
with  that  of  the  long  barrow  of  West  Kennet,  figured
in  tlic  ''  Crania  Britannica,"  and  with  that  of  the  crom-


v.]  REMAINS  FROM  SECOND  CHAMBER.  163

Iccli  of  Le  Creux  dcs  FtSes,  Guernsey,  described  by
Lieutenant  Oliver.^  In  the  former  of  these  the  corpses
were  buried  in  a  contracted  posture,  along  with  flint
scrapers  and  fragments  of  rude  pottery.  In  the  latter
the  original  contents  have  disappeared.  To  speak  in
general  terms,  the  chamber  and  passage  belong  to  the
class  of  tombs  which  Dr.  Thurnam  names  **  Long  Bar-
rows," and  Professor  Nilsson  "  Ganggrjiben,"  and  which
are  found  in  Scandinavia  and  France,  as  well  as  in
Britain.  And  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  partial
insulation  of  the  chamber  A  (Fig.  39)  from  the  passage  B
by  a  slab  (c),  which  does  not  reach  up  to  the  height
of  tlie  walls,  is  to  be  seen  in  similar  tombs  both  in
Guernsey  and  in  Brittany.

A  second  and  larger  chamber,  composed  of  cave  slabs
of  limestone,  was  discovered  in  the  siime  cairn  in  1871
by  the  Rev.  D.  R.  Thomas,  and  completely  excavated  by
him  along  with  myself  and  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Winwood.
It  was  of  a  rudely  triangular  form,  10  feet  long  by  6
wide,  traversed  by  a  partition  of  slabs,  and  provided
with  a  uan-ow  passage  10  feet  long  by  2  feet  6  in
width,  opening  to  the  north,  and  fenced  oft'  completely
from  the  chamber  by  a  slab,  as  in  the  preceding  case.
Both  the  chamber  and  the  passage  were  full  of  human
remains  of  all  ages,  buried  in  a  contracted  posture ;
the  number  of  interments  being  far  too  great  to  have
allowed  the  bodies  to  have  been  deposited  at  one  time.
From  the  former  I  identified  the  broken  jaw  of  a  roe-
buck and  remains  of  goat,  a  broken  flint,  and  round
pebbles  of  quartz,  while  in  the  latter  there  were  the  teeth
and  bones  of  the  dog  and  the  pig.

^  Journal  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London,  vol.  ii.  New  Scries,
No.  1,  April  1870,  p.  45,  pi.  vii.  fig.  3.

M    '2,


164      BURIALS  IN  TOMB  AND  CA  VES  OF  SAME  AGE.     [chap.

Some  of  tlie  tibiae  from  both  the  chambers  were
phitycnemic,  but  that  character  was  only  to  be  recog-
nized in  the  older  bones.  The  skulls,  from  the  second
of  the  two  chambers,  agree  so  exactly  with  those  from
the  caves,  tliat  it  is  not  necessary  to  add  to  the  table
of  measurements  which  Professor  Busk  has  drawn  up
(p.  171).

Correlation  of  Chamhered  Tomb  irith  Intendments  in  the
Caves  of  Perth i'Ch  ware u  and  Cefn.

Nor  are  we  without  evidence  that  the  buildera  of
this  cairn  belonged  to  the  same  race  as  those  who  buried
their  dead  in  the  caves  of  Perthi-Chwarcu  and  of  ('Cfn.
The  crania  and  the  limb-bones  are  identical,  and  in  both
the  tombs  and  caves  the  dead  were  buried  in  a  con-
tracted posture.

Why  then,  it  may  be  asked,  were  the  remains  of
animals  so  rare  in  the  one  and  so  abundant  in  the
other  ?  In  my  opinion  this  difference  may  be  explained
b}'  the  hypothesis,  invented  by  Professor  Nilsson,  of  the
origin  of  chambered  tombs.^  The  idea  of  the  "gallery
graves,"  according  to  that  high  authority,  was  derived
from  the  subterranean  house  in  which  the  deceased
lived,  and  in  which  he  was  buried  after  his  death,  after
the  fashion  of  the  Eskimos  at  the  present  day.  The  plan
of  the  houses,  like  that  of  the  ancient  Lycian  dwellings
described  by  Sir  Charles  Fellovves,  was  preserved  in  the
tombs,  and  probably  for  many  ages  after  houses  were  no
longer  made  in  that  fashion  ;  since  the  principle  of  con-
servatism  and   the   force   of  custom   are   more  deeply

^  Nilsson's  "  Stone  Age,"  translated  by  8ir  J.  Lubbock.


v.]  THESE  NEOLITHIC  MEN  HEIIDSMEN,  1(55

rooted  in  religious  and  solemn  ceremonial  than  in  the
changes  of  every-day  life.

The  rarity  of  the  remains  of  the  animals  may  be
explained  by  the  fact  of  these  tombs  never  having  been
used  as  dwellings,  while  their  abundance  in  the  caves
may  be  accounted  for  by  the  latter  having  been  inhabited
by  man,  and  thus  the  idea  of  the  dead  resting  in  his
own  house  would  be  the  cause  of  burial  both  in  caves
and  chambered  tombs.  It  is  not  at  all  strange  that  the
same  race  should  have  used  both  for  sepulture,  when  we
consider  that  a  **  gallery  grave"  is  an  artificial  cave,  and
that  natural  caves  are  few  in  number.

This  ancient  race  is  proved  by  the  remains  to  have
been  pastoral,  rather  than  dependent  on  the  chase,  their
principal  food  being  the  domestic  goat,  the  short-horn
{Bos  longifrons),  the  horse,  and  hog.  They  are  also
proved  to  have  been  neolithic,  not  merely  by  the  dis-
covery of  a  polished  stone  axe  in  one  of  the  caves,  but
also  by  the  shape  of  the  "gallery  graves,"  which  Pro-
fessor Nilsson  and  Dr.  Thurnam  aOTee  in  referrinor  to
that  stage  of  culture.

Table  of  Contents  of  Cares  and  Chambered  Tomb.

The  contents  of  the  caves  and  the  stone  chambers
may  be  gathered  from  the  Table  w^hich  we  give  on
the  next  page.

The  broken  bones  of  the  hare  prove  that  there  was  no
prejudice  against  its  flesh,  as  was  the  case  among  the
neolithic  dwellers  in  the  Swiss  Pfahlbauten.  We  shall
see  in  the  next  chapter  that  the  animal  was  also  eaten
l)y  the  dwellers  in  the  neolithic  caves  both  of  France
and  Belgium.


l(if»  CONTENTS  (tF  CAVES  AND  TOMB.  [ch.ip.

Utt  <•/  iil,jf<-l>  ia  yailithir  Curf4  aitd  Caira  t*  IfoTtk  WtJet.


C»,<i>f«..uli..th  -!>.«
,Vh»  (mi/a— tin .  .  .
E'/iiM  athilUa—Worvf.

fl.w^i.i.^./rOM-Crlti.-Sln

CaiuK  JupH* — Wulf  .
roaU  i-h/;k»— Fiix  .     .

/'nrxiairfM— llFiir

-VM-t  »r™;,i-WiUl  lt:«ir
IWrii-  claph«.i—»Uii  .
Cfrria  eiiurcnhii' — Kcip
l^«,isctt«irnln>-  lliiKTiit
l..j,<'K  l„m<lH'~\l«n-  .

rnli-hf.HVlt,.  .  .  .
Flint  Fljiki-Hort'lii,,.,


wi

t'  1

^

-i

^

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

V

X

V

y

X

X

X

X

Description  of  the  Human  Remains  hij  Professor  Busk.

Vor  the  following  account  of  the  human  remains,  re-
jfi-iiited  from  the  "Journal  of  the  Ethnological  Society,"
January  1871,  I  am  iudohtctl  to  the  kimlness  of  my
fiiend  Professor  Busk,  to  whom  examples  of  all  the
forms  were  forwanlcd  : —

.\:,l^>  .,,1  Ih'  Ihnifii,  ntmmi,».     By  Profeasor  RusK,  F.R.S.

§    1,    iNTHIirnCTlON.

']'lic  remains  discovered  in  tlic  sopuluhral  cnve  at  Perthi-Cbvareu,
according  to  a  list  furniiilied  bv  Tklr.  liojd  Bawkins,  are  u  nnder ;  but


v.]  BUSK  ON  HUMAN  BONES  FROM  PERTHLCHWAHEU.  167

I  believe  this  catalogue  does  not  include  all  that  were  found  in  the
locality.*

1.  Eleven  more  or  less  perfect  skulls,  some,  however,  represented
by  mere  fragments.

2.  Twelve  mandibles.

3.  Seven  arm-bones  or  humeri — four  right  and  three  left.

4.  Six  uhife.

o.  Twenty-two  thigh-bones,  including  five  pairs,  five  odd  ones  of
the  right  side,  and  Eeven  of  the  left ;  and  amongst  them  are  three  of
very  young  children.

6.  Seventeen  tiU<e  or  leg-bones,  nine  of  the  right  and  eight  of  the
left  side,  and  apparently  none  of  them  in  pairs  ;  so  that  there  must
probably  have  been  a  good  many  more.

7.  Eight  astragatL

«S.  Nine  ra/ranea,  or  heel-bones.

The  number  of  individuals,  therefore,  whose  relics  were  deposited
in  this  cavern  could  not  have  been  loss  than  sixteen,  and  may  have
been  many  more.  They  appear  to  have  been  of  all  ages  and  of
both  sexes.

Of  the  other  bones  of  the  skeleton,  of  which  there  must  have  been
abundance,  I  have  received  no  information.

In  the  Cefn  Cave  there  were  discovered  : —

1.  One  mandible.

2.  One  hum^nt^,

3.  Two  uln<p,

4.  A  pair  of  thigh-bones.

5.  A  pair  of  leg- bones.

and  in  the  tumulus  : — 1.  Portions  of  seven  skulls.

2.  Two  right  humeri.

3.  A  pair  of  uhut,

4.  A  Ti^i  femur.

From  St.  Asaph  the  only  bone  that  has  come  under  my  observation
is  a  single  cahuria,

§  2.    Description  of  the  Bones  prom  the  Cavern  at

Peuthi-Chwareu.

(a.)  General  Condition. — In  general  condition,  as  regards  colour  and
texture,  these  bones  present  some,  but  no  very  striking,  differences ;

^  Tlicse  are  merely  samples  of  the  large  number  of  human  skulls  and  bones
which  were  discoveretl.


168


SKULLS  FROM  PERTHICHWAREU.


[chap.


on  the  whole  they  are  much  alike,  though  it  might  be  supposed  that
some  have  lain  longer  in  the  ground  than  the  others.  One  or
two  among  them  (but  these  are  apparently  the  younger  bones)  are
fragile ;  the  majority,  however,  are  as  firm  as  common  churchyard
bones,  and  some  have  quite  the  natural  degree  of  hardness.  They  are
of  a  lightish-yellow  colour,  do  not  adhere  to  the  tongue,  and  afford
scarcely  any  earthy  smell  when  breathed  upon  or  moistened  :  only
one  among  them  presents  any  staining  from  oxide  of  manganese  ;  and
this  exists  in  diffuse  blotches,  and  is  not  at  all  of  the  dendritic  form.
Many  are  partially  covered  with  a  very  thin  film  of  crystalline
carbonate  of  lime.


Figs.  40,  41,  42-  Skull  from  Sepulchral  Cave  at  rerthi-Cliwareii.

(b.)  The  ^Skulls. — Of  these  only  three  of  the  more  perfect  have  come
under  ray  observation.  These  alone  will  form  the  subject  of  what  I
have  to  remark  on  this  portion  of  the  skeleton.  But  in  the  subjoined
Table  I.  (p.  171)  I  have  given,  together  with  the  dimensions  of  these
three,  those  of  five  others  which  have  been  furnished  to  me  by
Mr.  Dawkins.

In  the  specimen  No.  1  (Figs  40,  41,  42)  the  entire  facial  part  is
wanting,  together  with  the  whole  of  the  base  and  a  great  part  of  one
side  of  the  calvaria.  The  skull  is  of  an  oval  form,  symmetrical,  with
a  rather  i)rominent  occiput.  The  region  of  the  vertex  is  slightly  and
evenly  arched ;  and  the  forehead,  though  not  high,  is  vertical,  and


v.|


SKULLS  FROM  PERTHlAmWAREU.


169


slii^htly  compressed  on  the  sides.  The  sutures  are  all  open  and  finely
serrated.  The  frontal  sinuses  are  distinct  though  small.  The  supra-
orbital ridge  is  thin,  hut  rather  prominent  towards  the  external  angular
process.  The  mastoid  processes  are  very  large,  and  the  digastric
fo^m  remarkably  deep.  The  occipital  spine  is  very  prominent,  as  are
the  lateral  ridgea  The  temporal  ridges,  also,  and,  in  short,  all  the
muscular  impressions,  are  very  strongly  marked.

The  skull  is  evidently  that  of  a  powerful,  muscular  man,  in  the
prime  of  life,  anl  apparently  of  robust,  but  not  coarse  build. ^


Figs.  43,  44,  45.— Skull  from  Sopulcliral  Cave  at  Pertlii-Chwarcu.


Skull  No.  2  (Figs.  43,  44,  45)  is  that  of  an  adult  male,  presenting
as  nearly  as  possible  the  same  dimensions,  form,  and  other  characters
as  that  above  described,  except  that  the  bone  is  somewhat  thicker  and
heavier.     The  muscular  ridges  and  impressions  are  even  more  strongly

^  Amongst  the  Kciss  crania  desfribetl  bj'  Prof.  Huxl<^y,  this  most  cl')sely
resembles  Lis  No.  5  ;  but  it  is  of  the  same  tyjje  as  No.  3  and  No.  7,  and  not  very
far  from  that  of  the  Towyn-y-capel  cranium,  through  which  the  transition  to
the  Mewsladc  form  ("Nat.  Hist.  Rev,"  vol.  i.  p.  174,  pi.  v.)  is  very  easy.


170  t£tE  AXXULAIRK  [chap.

developed  than  in  the  fonner,  and  especiallj  the  temporal  ridges
immediately  above  the  external  angalar  processes.  The  left  maxilla
remains  loosely  attached,  containing  the  two  bicuspid  teeth,  which  are
of  small  size,  and  worn  quite  flat,  and  to  such  an  extent  as  to  render
it  probable  that  the  man  was  somewhat  advanced  in  yean,  although
none  of  the  sutures  are  closed.  The  face  is  strictly  orthognathous^  and
the  skull  dolichocephalic  and  aphanozygous.^

Skull  No.  3  is  the  entire  calvaria  of  a  very  young  individual  The
two  milk-molars  remain  on  either  side ;  and  behind  them  the  first
true  molar  is  fully  out,  but  not  in  the  least  worn.  The  indsors  and
canines  have  fallen  out  The  former,  from  the  size  of  the  alveoli^
were  of  the  permanent  set,  but  not  the  latter.  The  age  of  the
individual,  therefore,  may  be  estimated  as  about  seven  or  eight.

The  only  point  worthy  of  notice  in  this  calvaria  is  the  existence  of
a  well-marked  depression  across  the  middle  of  the  occipital  bone,
which  appears  exactly  as  if  it  had  been  caused  by  the  constriction  of
a  bandage.  The  depression  barely  extends  beyond  the  lambdoidal
suture  into  the  parietals.  It  requires,  perhaps,  some  imagination  to
l)erceiye  the  slight  traces  of  a  corresponding  depression  in  the  fore-
part of  the  skull ;  but  I  thiuk  a  faint  depression  may  be  there  per-
ceived on  careful  inspection.  The  effect  of  the  occipital  constriction,
if  it  be  such,  reminds  one  of  some  of  the  deformed  French  skulls
described  by  M.  Foville  -  and  by  M.  Gosse.^  In  all  other  respects  the
skull  is  well  formed  and  symmetrical.  It  is  strictly  orthognathous,
and  of  a  broad  oval  shape.

If  deformed  artificially,  it  would  come  under  the  head  of  "  tete
annulaire ''  of  M.  Crosse ;  and  Dr.  Foville  shows  that  this  kind  of
deformation  arises  from  the  popular  custom  of  applying  a  kind  of
bandago  round  the  head  of  the  new-bom  infant,  which,  passing  over
the  anterior  fontanolle,  descends  obliquely,  and  is  crossed  behind  the
occiput  and  brought  back  and  tied  in  front.  This  band,  or  *'  serre-
trfte,"  ho  states,  is  worn  during  the  first  year,  and  for  a  longer  period
by  female  children  than  by  males.  Dr.  Lunier  gives  pretty  nearly  the
same  account,  adding,  however,  further  particulars.^  It  may  be
I'enmrked,  also,  that  the  Berbers,  who  formed  great  part  of  the  Moorish

*  The  forms  most  cloarly  rcsombliug  this  skull  amongst  thost'  from  Koiss  are
NoH.  3  niul  7.

"  Deforiiuition  ilii  crano  n^sultant  do  la  methodc  la  plus  generale  dt*  oouvnr  la
trt(>  (Ics  cnfaiis.      I*aris,  181)4.

*  Ksnai  Hur  li's  «l(* formations  artitirirlles  du  crane,  imr  L.  A.  Gosse,  de  Geneve.
Paris,  iSCf).

*  Jterlieri'lies  sur  (luchpica  deformntions  ilu  crane  observees  dans  Ic  Depane-
ment  lies  Dt'ux-Sdvres  ("Ann.  Meiliro-psychologi<pif").     Paris,  1852.


MEASUMEMEXT  OF  SKI'LIS.


153?,  Ml

r

?

1

1

1

_?.

9   ■

■XBpnisjiiqd-a
JO   lUnivntiJiKj

-™«1I»I!**0

Pip??  If

IsisiSiJ

'  1  '

"f  1  s

?  !

-Blimi     IBIBUUJ

SS5!S|||

j'ls  s

a  s

2

S   1?

9^?p«p  1  ¥j

s

s

;

-  s

£

£!  =  =  =  :  1  =

iisiS

9

s

a    S

-[muhono  (a)

=

?

^

«

:  ^1

■m^HM  <9)

SSSSSS  IS

S

g  s

S

lb

s

s  t,

■(niiwj  (!■)

SSS°3S  IS

:

g  s

s

1

I

~9~

'  1

[iitiipMi!iii<n

SS|:S|  1

s    i

1

i  i"^

-aausiiajumai!,')

~BUi  1 S

1

I    1

l£gS  1  1  !«

%

S  i-5

1 1 SS 1  1  1

s

1

■»

ri

sl:-

i;:sss;s

s

3

s

si!

^

2   i^

sun'w  imeusd    1     lii!;°"S"

s

;  s  -  Is  il

■Hiir«JiwiuiiA  ;    l°S*"3  IS

«    jw

¥■

«       p          =0

:  \i

■siiipw  piatuj  1   i*^^*!;!^:

"

?>

s

3

sis

S:;

oi;=j  iisEMM

1
3

«

S    1

■■KJ«    -s-jwi;

s

5

!

S

SSS-iSES

2

g

s

s  li

SSSS3SI3

5

■-

J

21;

5

s  a

t

;

s    I

■l'i8«H    1     1  SSS  MM

S

s

9      '.'

fii"

s  1^

-nip-iu  1  SSSS§SSS

S

E

?

7.     1^

ill

EKSJSSiS

i

1
1

1

■

_«„.„,„,

■

31

i-

:!

172


THIGH-BONES.


[chap.


forces  that  invaded  Europe  in  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  centuries,
used  to  elongate  the  skull  posteriorly  and  flatten  the  forehead.

(c.)  Thigh'hotif». — I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  only  a
single  perfect  specimen  of  the  thigh-hones.  This  is  an  entire  bone,
18*2  inches  long,  with  a  least  circumference  of  3*5.  Its  perimetral
index  ^  consequently  is  '192,  which  is  about  the  normal  standard.  The
linea  aspera,  at  the  middle  of  the  bone  more  especially,  is  very
prominent,  so  that  the  bone  may  be  termed,  in  some  degree,  carinated
(Fig.  46).  The  shaft  is  straight ;  and  the  chief  peculiarities,  besides
the  prominent  linea  a^pera,  which  it  presents,  are  (1)  an  annsudl
compression  in  the  anteroposterior  direction  in  the  upper  part,  for  the
extent  of  about  three  inches  below  the  trochanter  minor.  At  about
two  inches  below  that  process,  or  at  a  point  corresponding  with  the
lower  part  of  the  insertion  of  the  pectinem  muscle,  the  shaft  measures

•9  X  1*45,  whilst  in  three  other  ordinary /emora
with  which  I  have  compared  it,  the  bone  at
the  corresponding  part  measures  *9  x  1*20,
•9x110,  -9x1  15,  showing  that  the  Perthi-
Chwaren  femur  is  unusually  expanded  laterally
in  the  upper  part  of  the  shaft.  The  conse-
quence is  to  give  the  bone  at  that  part  a  pecu-
liar aspect,  which  is  especially  seen  in  an  acute
internal  angle,  and  one  rather  less  acute  exter-
nally, instead  of  the  usually  rounded  internal
and  external  bordere*.  (2)  The  distal  ex-
tremity appears  to  be  rather  disproportion-
ately large  as  compared  with  a  recent  well-formed  bone  of  the  same
length,  the  condyles  measuring  2 "5  X  3-3  injrtead  of  2  4  X  3*05  ;  and
the  lower  part  of  the  shaft  is  also  somewhat  expanded.  But  the
chief  peculiarity,  as  above  remarked,  is  the  compression  of  the  shaft
in  the  upper  part.  Besides  the  linea  aapera,  all  the  muscular  impres-
sions are  strongly  marked,  and  especially  those  for  the  insertion  of
the  gluteus  maximus  and  the  trochanter  viitwr.  The  neck  is  long  and
very  obli(iue,  and  the  head,  upon  which  only  a  small  portion  of  the
articular  surface  is  left,  must  have  had  a  diameter  of  about  1*9.

^Ir.  Boyd  Dawkins  has  furnished  me  with  the  principal  dimensions
of  several  other  femora^  varying  in  length  from  16  to  18  inches,  and
affording  an  average  length  of  about  17,  corresponding  to  a  mean
height  of  the  individuals  of  about  5  ft.  4  in.  to  5  ft.  5  in.,  the  tallest  being

'  This  iinlcx  is  obtuinoil  In-  divitliiio;  tlie  least  circuniforonco  by  the  length  of
th<'  ]M)ne.


Fk;.  4rt.


V


v.]


PLATYCNEMIC  LEG-BONES,


173


perhaps  5  ft.  6  in.,  and  the  shortest  about  5  ft.  2  in.,  no  doubt  a  woman.
The  mean  perimetral  index  of  the  eight /(rmora  is  '186,  which  shows,  in
comparison  with  the  usual  thickness  of  well-formed  male  thigh-bones
of  the  present  day,  a  certain  degree  of  slendemess.  That  this  is  not
altogether  owing  to  the  circumstance  that  the  bones  include  those  of
perhaps  more  than  one  female  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  in  no
instance  does  the  perimetral  index  exceed  '192,  and  in  one  thigh-bone,
18"-2  long,  it  is  not  more,  if  the  circumference  is  correctly  given,  than
'1 78,  the  normal  perimetral  index  fur  the  adult  male  femur  in  this
country  being  taken  as  about  194.

(d.)  Tibi(r, — Of  the  leg- bones  brought  under  my  notice,  five  are
entire  and  five  more  or  less  defective.  The  principal  dimensions  and
proportions  of  these  bones,  so  far  as  they  could  be  taken,  are  given  in
the  subjoined  Table.


Tahli:  II. — DiinensionSy  Ac,  of  Ptrthi-Chtmireu  Tibia,


Meuu.


x».

length.

1.

14-9

13-7

3.

i:j-2

4.

12-9

5.

129

6.

—

7.

-

:         8.

9

i      '•

TrauiiverHC    I     t  „-ui  .  Antcni-poaterior
diameter,        ,.,>eum-  'I'nueter

fileue  i    and  transverse

leieuie.  diameter  of  uliaft.


pruximai
en«l.


135


2^8
27
3  0
2-5
2-5


2  7


3-2
2-9
3  0
2-5
275


2  8«


140  X  SO
120—75
135  X  ^0
125  X  70
100  X  70
135  X  90
140  X  90
130—70
135  X  85


129  X  79


I


Periinetral    '^^^^
«"*»«•         index.


•214

•571

•211

•t)25

•227

•592

•193

•541

•ill

•700

—

•t>66

—

•642

•538

—

•629

•211

•611

In  this  Table  the  Unyth  means  the  extreme  length  of  the  bone  as
measured  from  the  summit  of  the  spinous  process  to  the  point  of  the
internal  malleolus;  and  the  numbers  in  the  fifth  column  represent  the
antcro-posterior  and  the  transverse  diameter  of  the  shaft  at  the  point
wliere  the  popliteal  line  terminates  at  the  inner  border  of  the  bone,
which  is  usually  about  an  inch  and  a  half  below  the  nutritive
foramen.  The  latitudinal  index  represents  the  relation  that  the
transverse  diameter  bcai^  to  the  antero  posterior,  and  it  is  employed
to  indicate,  with  some  degree  of  precision,  the  actual  amount  of
compression  or  flattening  of  tlie  shaft  as  compared  with  the  normal


j"<

'  «


174


PLATYCNEMIC  LEG -BONES.


[chap.


form,  which  may,  so  far  as  my  observations  show,  be  taken  for  the
ordinary  English  tibice  as  /rom  '700  or  *800,  or  in  the  mean  at  '730,
as  will  be  seen  in  the  subjoined  Table,  which  contains  the  proportions
of  thirteen  leg-bones  taken  indiscriminately  from  a  drawer  in  the
College  of  Surgeons.

Table  III. — Proportions,  <ftf.,  of  ordinary  Tibicc.


No.

Length.

1.

16-7

2.

16-4

3.

15-8

4.

15-5

5.

15-3

6.

15-2

7.

150

8.

15-0

9.

160

10.

15-5

11.

13-6

12.

13-4

13.

12-8

Mean        15  1


Transverse

diameter,

proximal

end.


315

3-2

2-95

2-95

2-9

3  0

2-8

2-6

2-6

3  0

2-8

2-75

2-5


2-88


Least
circum-
ference.


3-4
3-5
3  0
2-9

2-8
3-2
2-8
2-8
2-8
2-9
2-9
27
2-4


A  nter«)-postcriur
diameter  and
transverse  dia-
meter of  sliaft


Perime-
tral  index.


130
150
120
140
130
140
140
120
120
120
120
120
100


X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X


100

115

90

90

90

90

90

85

90

95

90

85

85


2  9


12(5  X  91


•202
•213
•189
•122
'160
•218
•187
•187
•187
'198
•214
•201
•187


•188


Lalitu-
dinal
index.


•769
•7f»6
•750
•642
•692
•642
•642
•709
•782
•791
•750
•708
•850


•730


Comparison  of  the  mean  proportions  given  in  the  two  Tables
sliows  : —

(1)  That  the  Perth i-Chwareu  leg-bones  are,  on  the  whole,  shorter,
and  absolutely  smaller  in  all  dimensions  but  one,  viz.  in  the  antero-
posterior diameter  of  tlie  shaft,  which,  notwithstanding  the  smaller
size  generally  of  the  bones,  is  rather  greater  (that  is  to  say,  in  the
proportion  of  129  to  12C)  than  in  the  ordinary  run  of  English  tibM.

(2)  That  their  perimetral  index  is  greater,  showing  that,  in  pro-
portion to  their  length,  the  "Welsh  bones  are  somewhat  thicker,  or  in
the  proportion  of  211  to  188.

(3)  But  the  most  marked  difference  is  seen  in  the  latitudinal  index,
which  in  the  Perthi-Cbwareu  bones  is  -Gil,  and  in  those  of  the
ordinary  type  -730,  varying  in  the  former  case  from  •r)38  to  '700,  and
in  the  latter  from  -042  to  -850;  but  the  last  is  probably  an  exceptional
case.     In  accordance  with   this,  we  find  that  the  mean  transverse


v.]  PLATYCNEMIC  LEG-BONES.  175

diameter  of  the  shaft  at  the  point  above  indicated  is  greatly  under
the  usual  mark,  viz.  as  79  to  91.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Perthi-Chwareu  tibice  are  more  com-
pressed or  flattened  than  the  usual  run  of  modem  European  tibice ;  in
other  words,  they  belong  to  the  platycnemic  type.

As  this  is,  I  believe,  the  first  instance  in  which  the  occurrence  of
tibice  of  this  peculiar  conformation  has  been  observed  in  this  country,
the  circiunstance  is  of  some  interest,  especially  with  relation  to  tlie
occurrence  of  priscan  bones  of  the  same  type  elsewhere.

This  peculiar  conformation  of  the  tibia,  to  which  we  gave  the  name
of  "  platycnemic,"  was,  I  believe,  first  noticed  by  Dr^  Falconer  and
myself,  in  1863,  in  the  human  remains  procured  by  Captain  Brome
from  the  Genista  Cave,  on  Windmill  Hill,  Gibraltar,  of  which
an  account  will  be  found  in  the  Transactions  of  the  International
Congress  of  Prehistoric  Archaeology  for  the  year  1868  (p.  161) ;  and
a>>cut  the  same  time,  or  in  May  1864,  AL  Broca^  independently
observed  the  same  condition  in  libitti  procured  from  the  dolmen  of
Chamant  (Oise),  and  afterwards  in  bones  from  the  dolmen  of
^lain tenon  (Eure-et-Loire).  Similar  bones  have  since  been  noticed  in
other  localities  on  the  Continent,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  diluvium  of
Montmartrc,  by  M.  Eugene  Bertrand.  But  that  the  peculiarity  in
question  is  not  common  in  all  the  varieties  of  priscan  man  belonging
to  the  reindeer  period  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  has  not  been
observed  in  any  of  the  tibiit^  exhumed  by  M.  Dupont  in  the  Belgian
caves.

M.  Broca's  almost  exhaustive  remarks  upon  the  anatomical,  physio-
logical, and  pathological  relations  of  this  form  of  tibia  leave  but  little
to  be  said  under  those  heads.  I  would,  however,  venture  to  add  a  few
words  as  to  its  ethnological  significance.  But  before  doing  so  I  would
remark  that  there  appear  to  be  two  forms  of  platycnemism,  apparently
indicative  of  some  ditierence  in  the  cause  or  nature  of  this  aberration
from  the  more  usual  shape  of  the  bone.  To  save  many  words,  I
subjoin  outlines  of  several  well-marked  instances  of  platycnemic  bones,
all  drawn  of  the  natural  size  and  in  the  same  position,  the  letter  (a)
in  each  corresponding  to  the  interosseous  ridge,  and  (6)  to  the  arista
or  shin.

The  line  b  c,  drawn  through  the  criata  and  the  middle  of  the
posterior  surface  of  the  bono,  is  bisected  by  another  (ad),  drawn  at
rip;ht  angles  to  it,  at  the  level  of  the  interosseous  ridge.

*  **Memoires  8ur  les  osseinens  des  Eyzies."  Paris,  1868.  **Oii  the  Human
Skulls   and  Boues  fouud  in  Xlm   Cave  of    rio-niaj^non, "  Ikdic^uia*    A<[uitauifRS


176


PLA  rYCNEMIC  LEG-BON E8.


[chap.


In  Fig.  47,  which  represents  what  may  be  regarded  as  a  normal
tibidj  the  length  of  that  portion  of  the  antero-posterior  line  which  is
behind  the  transverse  line  is  to  that  of  the  anterior  as  274  to  1,000,


h


a


whilst  in  Fig.  48,  taken  from  M.  Broca's  outline  of  the  Cro-magnon
tibiay  which  would  seem  to  represent  the  extremest  degree  of  platy-
cnemism  as  yet  observed,  the  proportion  in  question  is  as  623  to  1,000.


h


(I


h


a


.    it


r
Vui.  4ii.


c
Fn;.  ;"0.


Yiv.,  51.


Figs.  41),  50,  51,  are  taken  from  as  many  of  the  Gibraltar  tibia-^^  in
which  the  proportion  varies  from  GOO  to  523,  whilst  it  will  be  observed
that  in  Figs.  52,  53,  54,  taken  from  the  most  platycnemic  of  the  Perthi-
C'hwareu  tihia,,  the  proportion  in  one  only  differs  in  any  considerable

'   IJiit  tlicsr  iw'o  liv  no  iiiran*.  cxlnnu'  iustaiu-oH  of  the  Gibraltar  tihiir.


v.]  PLATTCSEMISM  NOT  A  RACE-C'JIARAGT£R.         177

<]pgree  from  the  extreme  normal  proportion  ahown  in  Fig.  47;  and  in
this  it  ii  as  512  to  1,000,  whiUt  in  Fig.  53,  whicb  id  nevertbeleaa
undoubtedly  platycnemic,  the  proportion  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  the
moat  triangular  form  of  bone.

It  would  aeem,  therefore,  that  platycnemiam  nay  arise  from  an
uuueual  antero- posterior  ezpanaion  of  the  bone,  either  in  front  or
behind  the  level  of  the  interoaseous  ridge.  What  this  difTerence  may
indicate,  or  of  what  importanoe  il  may  be  in  the  conaidei&tion  of
questions  relating  to  pUttycnembm,  I  am  not  prepared  to  discuss  ;  but
a^  in  all  probiibility  it  is  connected  with  a  dilf«rence  in  the  cause  of


Plr;


Flo.  51.


the  d<rformstion  (if  it  be  deformation),  I  have  thought  that  the
observation  should  be  recorded,  and  would  merely,  in  addition,  lemark
that,  so  far  as  I  have  noticed,  the  occasional  and  not  infrequent
platvcnemisni  observed  in  the  sbin-boue^  of  negroes  i*  what  may  be
termed  anterior,

Wilh  respect  to  the  ethnological  value  rf  the  platycnemic  tibia,  1  con-
ceive we  are  as  yet  vory  much  in  the  dark.  That  it  is  a  race-charactei
would  aeem  to  me  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  seeing  that  it
would  be  difficult  to  find  any  other  pointa  of  resemblance  between  the
(.'ru  magnon  plalyctieniic  men  and  those  whose  remains  were  met  with
in  the  (jibraltar  caves,  although  the  platycnemiam  is  of  the  esme
kind  in  each;  and  atiil  less  could  the  former  gigantic  race  be  identified
with  the  occupants  of  the  Perth i-Cli ware u  sepulchre,  from  whom  they
dilT'ir  not  only  in  stature,  but  even  more  remarkably  in  cranial
C'Hiforniation.

IF,  then,  platycnemiam  cannot  be  regarded  as  of  any  value  as  a
TUC3-chaiacter,  it  can  a  /oiiiori  be  still  less  looked  ujion  as  indicative

N


1 78  PROBABLE  CAUSE  OF  PLATTCXEMISM.        [chap.

of  simian  tendencies,  a  notion  that  M.  Broca  seems  somewhat  indioed
to  favour.  It  is  qnite  trae  that  the  tibug  of  the  gorilla  and  of  the
chimpanzee  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  platycnemic ;  bat  it  is  by  no
means  so  much  so  as  the  hnman  platycnemic  bone.  The  tibia  of  a
male  gorilla  in  the  College  of  Sargeons  has  a  latitudinal  index  of  *681,
and  that  of  a  female  of  '650,  whilst  that  of  the  chimpanzee  is  "611,
or  exactly  the  mean  of  the  Perthi-Chwaren  bones.  It  is  needless  to
insist  upon  the  other  marked  distinctions  between  the  simian  and  the
haman  tibia ;  but  as  regards  platycnemism  it  will  be  obyioos,  if  we
are  disposed  to  trace  it  to  any  genetic  descent,  that  the  desoenddnt
has,  in  this  respect,  at  one  time  far  ouinsimianized  the  Simie

Bat  this  comparison  with  the  anthropoid  apes  may,  perhaps,  afford
ground  for  a  suggestion  respecting  some  possible  connection  between
this  peculiar  form  of  the  tUda  and  the  habits  of  the  people  amongst
whom  it  has  been  observed.  One  great  dbtinction  between  the
human  and  the  simian  foot  consists  in  their  respective  adaptations  to
totally  distinct  functions.  In  the  one  case  it  is  simply  an  oigan  of
support  and  progression  ;  in  the  other,  for  the  most  part,  of  prehension.
This  nece&'iarily  involves  a  considerable  difference  in  the  proportions,
SiC,  of  the  muscles  by  which  the  greater  mobility  and  adaptability  of
the  foot,  and  more  particularly  of  the  digits,  are  ensured.  Would  it
not,  thon,  be  admissible  to  inquire  how  far,  at  any  rate,  posterior
platycnemism  may  be  connected  with  the  greater  freedom  of  motion
and  general  adaptability  of  the  toes  enjoyed  by  those  peoples  whose
feet  have  not  been  subjected  to  the  confinement  of  shoes  or  other
covcringA,  and  who  at  the  same  time  have  been  compelled  to  lead  an
active  existence  in  a  rude  and  rugged  or  mountainous  and  wooded
country,  where  the  exigencies  of  the  chase  would  demand  the  utmost
agility  in  climbing  and  otherwise  ?

Some  common  cause  of  this  kind  would  seem  to  be  not  improbable ;
and  it  would  not,  perhaps,  be  difficult  to  ascertain  whether  it  is  a
vera  causa  or  not.  But,  with  respect  to  this,  observations  are  at
jiresent  wanting.

From  the  foregoing  data  we  may  conclude  : —

(1)  That  the  Perthi-Chwareu  bones  belonged  'to  a  race  characterized

by  the  proportionally  rather  large  dimensions  of  the  cranium,  whose

form   presents  nothing  very  remarkable,  and  is  pretty  nearly  con-

fornmblo  to  several  of  those  found  by  Mr.  Laing  in  the  ancient

shell  mounds  in  Shetland.^

*  A«  regards  the  absolute  dimensions  of  the  Bkulls,  it  would  seem  that  the
Wulsh  crania  stand  high  in  the  scale— qnite  as  high  as  any  of  the  existing  races


V.J  VOyCLUi^lONS.  179

(2;  That  this  form  is  distinctly  different  from  that  of  the  Mewslado
skull,  in  which  the  vertical  region  is  somewhat  flattened,  as  is  the
case  also  with  several  Anglesey  crania,  which,  however,  appear  to
pass,  by  gradual  transition,  into  the  Keiss  and  Perthi-Chwareu  shape,
through  such  a  form  as  that  of  the  Towyn-y-capel  skull  figured  by
Professor  Huxley;*  and  the  whole  of  them  consequently  may  be
regarded  as  belonging  to  the  so-called  "  River-bed  skulls "  of  that
author,  excepting  the  Borris  cranium,  which  appears  to  belong  to  a
different  type  altogether.

(3)  That  the  people  whose  remains  were  found  in  this  locality  were
of  low  stature  (the  mean  height,  deduced  from  the  lengths  of  the
long  bones,  being  little  more  than  5  feet),  the  tallest  being  5  ft.  6  in.,
and  the  shortest  adult  not  more  than  4  ft.  10  in.,  the  intermediate
ones  being  5  ft.  1  in.  and  5  ft.  2  in.

(4)  That  the  proportions  of  the  long  bones  are  rather  thick,  and
the  muscular  impressions  in  all  are  very  strongly  marked.

(5)  That  the  tibue  are,  for  the  most  part,  of  a  much  more  com-
pressed form  than  those  of  the  modern  English,  but  that  this  platy-
cnemism  does  not  appear  to  be  exactly  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which
is  exhibited  in  the  Gibraltar  bones  and  in  those  from  Cro-magnon  (as
figured  by  M.  Broca),  the  difference  consisting  in  the  fact  that  in  the
two  latter  instances  the  bone  is  expanded  backwards  behind  the
transverse  plane  at  the  interosseous  ridge  as  much  as  it  is  in  front  of

of  inankiml.      1  have  made  the  comparison  in  a  rough  way  in  tlie  following
manner  : —

If  the  numbers  representing  the  hngth,  breadth,  and  hciijht  of  the  skull  are
added  together,  a  number  is  obtained  w^hich  will,  of  course,  in  some  measure,
indicate  the  gross  dimensions  of  tlie  skull.  From  the  rather  numerous  data
furnished  by  my  own  Tables  of  Measurements  I  obtained  the  results  stated  in
the  subjoined  list,  in  wliich  the  gross  mean  dimensions  of  vniious  sets  of  crania
are  contrasted.

1.  Scandinavian  priscan  skulls  of  tho  neolithic  eporh    .  1888

2.  Esquimaux  and  Greenlanders 18 '81

3.  Perthi-Chwareu  skulls IS'Bf)

4.  Modern  Europan 18 '58

5.  Various  ancient  and  priscan  skulls IS'r);")

i).  Bunnese IS.*)/)

7.  Cuflres  and  Zooloos  (cxtratropical  negroes) 18*-15

8.  Derbyshire  tumuli 18*42

9.  Tasmanian iri)/)

10.  Hottentot 17*80

11.  Negroes  (intertropical) 17*07

12.  Australian 17*58

13.  Bushmen 17*48

14.  A^cddahs        17  00

15.  Andiunane.se 17*00

^  **  Xotes  on  the  Human  Konmins  from  Keiss,"  p.  85.

N    2


180  HUMAN  REMAINS  FROM  TOMB  AT  CBFN.       [chap.

that  plane,  whilst  in  the  Welsh  tibice  it  is  the  anterior  portion  of  the
shaft  only  which  is  expanded  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  platycnemism
in  them  is  due  simply  to  an  ahsolnte  compression  of  the  shaft

§  3.  Human  Remains  from  the  Cbfn  Tumulus.

These  remains,  as  suhmitted  to  my  inspection,  consist  of : —

(1)  Portions  of  three  frontal  hones,  two  of  which  are  nearly  com-
plete, and  one  constituted  of  little  more  than  the  superciliary  region.

(2)  Two  parietals  and  a  left  temporal,  probably  belonging  to  the
sitfne  skull  as  the  more  mutilated  frontal

(3)  Portions  of  four  thigh-bones,  two  left  and  two  rights  one  of
the  latter  wanting  the  proximal,  the  other  both  extremities.

We  have  thus  the  remains  of  three  individuals  from  this  interment.

I.  The  Frontal  Bones, — No.  1.  The  least  transverse  diameter,
immediately  behind  the  external  angular  processes,  is  3'*6,  and  its
greatest  (at  the  coronal  suture)  about  4'''3.  Longitudinal  arc,  4''1.
The  profile  outline  of  the  forehead  is  slightly  receding ;  the  £rontal
sinuses  moderately  developed ;  and  the  supraorbital  border  thin  and
acute,  whilst  the  glabellar  eminence  is  large  and  prominent.  The
bone  is  a  good  deal  compressed  on  the  sides,  so  as  to  have  almost  the
appearance  of  having  formed  part  of  a  cymbecephalic  skulL  The
bone  itself  is  thin,  and  probably  without  any  diploe.

No.  2  presents  exactly  the  same  characters,  except  that  the  longi-
tudinal arc  is  greater,  being  5"- 3.  The  postorbital  or  least  transverse
diameter  is  3"*1:,  and  the  coronal  or  greatest  4"  4.  The  frontal
sinuses  are  well  developed  ;  the  supraorbital  ridge  rather  prominent,
but  thin  and  sharp ;  the  external  angular  process  prominent  and
thick.  Glabellar  eminence  largo  and  prominent.  The  nasals  remain
in  fiifff,  and  project  almost,  if  not  quite,  horizontally  forwards,  with  a
rapid  curve  at  first,  and  then  straight  out.  The  general  contour  of
the  bone  is  exactly  like  that  of  No.  1,  in  which  also,  although  the
nasals  are  wanting,  the  position  of  the  surface  by  which  they  were
attached  shows  that  they  must  in  all  probability  have  resembled  those
of  No.  2.  The  crista  galli  of  the  ethmoid,  which  is  left  in  situ,  ia
remarkably  thick  and  high.

No.  3  is  a  portion  of  a  larger  and  wider  bone,  the  postorbital
diameter  being  at  least  4''-0.  The  frontal  sinuses  are  very  large,  but
distinctly  defined,  as  the  remainder  of  the  supraorbital  border  is  not
thickened.  Owing  perhaps  to  the  greater  prominence  of  the  sinuses,
the  glabella  does  not  appear  so  protuberant  as  in  the  other  instances.


v.]  THE  THIGHBONES.  181

The  nasal  bones  remain  and  project  forwards  in  the  same  curious
fashion  as  in  ^No.  2.  The  frontal  crest  on  the  inner  surface  is
remarkably  developed,  being  at  least  half  an  inch  high,  though  it  is
separated  by  a  wide  notch  from  the  equally  strongly  developed  crista
gain  of  the  ethmoid.

^0.  4,  when  the  three  bones  of  which  it  is  composed  are  put
together,  consists  of  the  greater  part  of  the  parietal  region  of  the
skull,  to  which,  as  before  said,  the  last-described  frontal  may  have
belonged.  The  left  parietal  is  quite  perfect;  and  a  considerable
portion  of  the  right  also  remains,  together  with  the  entire  left
temporal ;  so  that  a  very  sufficient  estimate  of  the  proportions  of  the
parietal  region  of  the  skull  can  be  obtained.

As  well  as  can  be  estimated,  the  parietal  longitudinal  arc,  or  length
of  the  sagittal  suture,  is  b'-2.  The  vertical  transverse  arc,  or  that
drawn  from  one  auditory  foramen  to  the  other,  over  the  point  of
junction  of  the  coronal  and  sagittal  sutures,  is  12"  2,  the  parietal
13",  and  the  occipital  ll''^.  In  the  temporal  bone,  the  external
auditory  foramen  is  large,  the  mastoid  process  of  moderate  size^  but
the  digastric  fossa  is  wide  and  deep.  The  channels  for  the  middle
meningeal  artery  and  its  branches  are  large  and  deep  ;  and  very  deep
depressions  on  the  sides  of  the  sagittal  suture  show  that  the  t/landulce
Pacchioni  must  have  been  greatly  developed.  The  bone  is  very  thin,
and  with  scarcely  a  trace  of  diploe  where  its  structure  is  visible.
None  of  the  sutures,  however,  which  are  strongly  serrated,  are  in  the
slightest  degree  closed,  although,  as  I  should  imagine,  the  skull  must
have  been  that  of  a  man  beyond  the  middle  period  of  life.

II.  The  Thigh-bones, — Two  of  these  bones,  which,  though  much
alike,  differ  sufficiently  to  show  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  same
individual,  are  decidedly  carinate.

No.  1  wants  the  upper  and  lower  ends.  The  least  circumference  of
the  shaft,  which  is  at  a  point  about  3^  inches  below  the  trochanter
minor,  is  3* -2.  That  process,  as  well  as  all  the  other  musctdar  impres-
sions, is  strongly  developed ;  and  that  for  the  insertion  of  the  gluteus
rmuimusiA  peculiar  in  presenting  the  form  of  a  deep  elongated  pit
instead  of  a  roughened  elevation  as  usual.  The  antero-posterior  and
transverse  diameters  of  the  shaft,  about  1 J  inches  below  the  trochanter
minor,  are  '85  x  1  "4  ;  and  the  shaft  at  this  part,  like  that  of  the  above-
described  from  Perth i-Chwareu,  presents  a  rather  acute  or  narrow
external  and  internal  border  instead  of  the  usual  more  rounded  form.
Lower  down,  the  shaft  becomes  strongly  carinate ;  and,  owing  to  the
flattened  form  of  the  anterior  surface,  its  transverse  section  aflfords  a
subtriangular  figure  (fig.  55).     The  walls,  or  cortical  substance,  are


182


TUIGH-BOSES.


[CI,


r.ither  tliickor  than  nsaal,  and  the  Bubstance  of  the  bone  ia  dense
and  hard.

Xo.  i  is  very  similar  in  chancter  to  the  foTcgoing,  bat  is  not  quite
80  much  compressed  in  the  upper  part,  measuring  '8  x  1*2.  Never-
theleSB  the  incer  border  la  Terjr  acute,  and  the  outer  more  so  tbtn  in


II  form  of  t>mui:  The  nhaft  lower  dovn  is  not  so  stronglj
carinate  as  it  is  in  the  former  instance,  but  is  slill  so  in  some  d(!gree
(Fig.  5C) ;  and  the  watla  (or  cortical  substance)  are  still  thicker  in
proportion.

X<i.  3.  A  third  specimen  consista  of  the  lower  half,  or  rather  more,
of  the  right  /nuiir.  Tlie  least  circumference  is  3''2.  The  bone  ex-
hibits no  special  external  charaderB,  and  is  in  no  degree  carinated,
Tlio  shnft,  at  about  llie  middle  of  its  lengtli,  is  somevhat  angular  in
front ;  and  (be  pit  for  the  origin  of  the  i>op/iUiii  muscle  is  deeper  and


perhaps  larger  than  in  most  bones  of  the  same  size.  The  tesfunj  of
the  cortical  eubBlauco  is  quito  cbuineous ;  and  it  is  extremely  thick,
fco  that  llie  medullary  canal  ia  reihiceil  to  a  caliLrc  of  little  more  than
tj'*:ir>  ill  its  longest  diameter.  The  shaft,  hosrever,  is  straight,  and
exliibila  no  other  sign  whatever  of  having  been  affected  with  rnrhiti*,
it  is,  however,  a  curious  circumstance  that  many  of  the  Gibraltar
thigh-lwacs,  mo^t  of  which  arc  carinate,  present  the  same  thickening
uf  the  cortical  substance  (Fig.  ■''").


v.]  LEG-BONKS.  1S3

Xo.  4.  A  fourth  specimen  is  constituted  of  merely  a  portion  of  the
shaft,  about  1 2  inclies  long,  and  without  either  extremity.  Its  least
diameter  is  .S'^'S,  and  its  antero- posterior  and  transverse  diameters,  at
the  same  point  as  in  the  other  bones,  1  x  1*25,  or  pretty  nearly  in
the  usual  proportions.  Nevertheless  the  bone,  throughout  its  whole
remaining  extent,  is  less  rounded  on  the  inner  side  of  the  shaft  than
is  usual.  The  trochanter  minor  is  of  gigantic  size  ;  and  the  shaft  of
the  bone,  about  and  below  the  middle,  exhibits  a  subtriangular  aspect
(Fig.  dS)^  though  scarcely  to  be  called  carinate.  The  cortical  substance
id  of  the  normal  thickness.

III.  Tibiit. —  No.  1  consists  of  the  greater  portion  of  the  left  tibia,
wanting  only  the  lower  extremity.  The  proximal  end  measures  2*9
X  1*9  ;  and  the  diameters  of  the  shaft,  about  the  middle,  are  1*2  X
•75,  giving  a  latitudinal  index  of  'GSO.  The  shin  is  remarkably  sharp
and  prominent,  and  rather  curved  over  to  the  outer  side ;  and  the
apparent  compression  or  tendency  to  platycnemism  may  in  some
measure  be  referred  more  to  the  production  in  front  of  the  anterior
part  of  the  bone  than  to  actual  narrowing  of  the  |>osterior  side  of  the
triangle,  which  is  nevertheless  rather  more  rounded  than  in  most
cases.  The  axis  of  the  shaft  is  quite  straight ;  and  the  bone  has  not
the  least  rickety  appearance.

No.  2  is  also  a  portion  of  the  left  tibia.  Both  extremities  are
wanting,  and  the  bone  otfers  nothing  worthy  of  remark.  Its  least
circumference  is  2''-65 ;  and  the  shaft,  at  the  middle,  measures  l^'l
X  "G;")  ;  so  that  the  latitudinal  index  is  about  '040,  showing  a  slight
degree  of  compression.  The  entire  length  of  the  bone  may  be  esti-
mated as  rather  more  than  13  inches,  corresponding  to  a  height  of
about  5  ft.  4  in.  or  5  ft.  5  in.,  so  that  the  subject  may  be  supposed  to
have  been  a  female.

These  remains  represent  at  least  four  individuals — one  probably
somewhat  aged,  another  of  strong  and  robust  make,  and  one,  in
all  probability,  a  woman  -  in  fact,  a  family  group.  No  correct  idea
can  be  formed  of  the  cranial  conformation  of  these  persons.  In
general  shape  it  would  seem  to  correspond  with  that  of  the  Perth i-
Chwareu  skulls ;  but  two  of  them  at  any  rate  are  of  smaller  size,  if
wo  may  judge  from  the  least  frontal  diameter.  The  forehead  also  is
perhaps  a  little  more  reclined.  The  most  striking  feature  in  two  of
the  specimens,  and  which  appears  also  to  have  existed  in  a  third,  is
the  extraordinary  projection  forwards  of  the  nasal  bones.  In  the
present  case  this  may  probably  be  regarded  as  a  family  peculiarity ;
but  with  reference  to  it,  it  should  be  remembered  that  M.  Broca^  has

^    L(X\  rit.  ]i.   114.


184  CONCL  U8I0NS,  [chap.

described  a  very  similar  condition  in  the  skull  of  the  **  Old  man  "  of
Cro-magnon,  in  whom,  he  says,  ''the  ridge  of  the  nose,  alightly
depressed  at  its  base,  rises  again  almost  immediately,  and  advances
boldly  forward,  making  a  rapid  curve,  with  the  concavity  directed
rather  forward  and  especially  upward,  so  that  the  lower  ends  of  the
ossa  nasi  are  placed  18  mm.  ('7  inch)  in  front  of  a  line  dropped
vertically  from  the  froiito-nasal  suture."

The  condition  of  the  bones  from  the  Cefn  tumulus  differs  veiy
considerably  from  that  of  the  remains  from  Perthi-Chwareu.  They
all  have  an  appearance  of  much  greater  antiquity.  With  the  exception
of  the  very  dense  ftmur,  they  adhere  to  the  tongue  ;  and  they  are  all
deeply  stained  with  manganous  oxide,  by  which  the  substance  even
of  the  hardest  portions  is  stained  to  a  depth  of  more  than  one-eighth
of  an  inch.  That  this  discoloration,  which  for  the  most  part  does
not  assumo  the  dendritic  appearance,  is  due  to  manganese  and  not  to
any  vegetable  stain,  is  quite  certain.

The  form  of  the  skull,  so  far  as  it  can  be  ascertained  from  such
imporfect  remains,  and  the  rather  platycnemic  shape  of  the  tibio!,  may
perhaps  justify  our  supposing  that  the  Cefn  bones  belong  to  a
cognate  race  to  those  whose  remains  were  deposited  at  Perthi-Chwareu,
or  to  one  which  had  lived  under  similar  conditions.  But  the  cranial
data  are  hardly  sufRcient  to  allow  of  any  satisfactory  inference  being
drawn  from  them  ;  and  as  regards  the  tibuef  it  has  already  been
pointed  out  that  platycnemism  cannot,  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge,  bo  regarded  as  an  important  ethnological  character  amongst
priscan  peoples,  though  it  may  undoubtedly  be  considered  a  character
betokening  remote  antiquity.

§  4.  JSkull  from  the  Cefn  Cave,  near  St.  Asaph.

The  only  specimen  of  human  remains  from  this  locality  is  a  nearly
entire  calvaria,  wanting  the  whole  of  the  face  below  the  superciliary
border.

In  the  middle  of  the  left  parietal  bone  is  a  small  irregular  opening,
with  short  radiating  lines  of  fracture  proceeding  from  it ;  but  this
appears  to  have  been  recently  caused,  and  from  the  inside.

The  bone  generally  is  of  a  brown  colour,  and,  as  regards  firmness,
in  a  natural  condition;  and  it  does  not  adhere  to  the  tongue.  Judging
from  its  aspect  alone,  it  would  not  appear  to  be  of  any  very  great
antiquity ;  but  as  it  has  lain  in  a  dry  soil,  and  sheltered  from  rain  or
moisture,  this  appearance  may  be  deceptive.


v.]


SKULL  FROM  CEFN  CAVE.


185


Its  dimensions  are  given  in  Table  I.  (mpra\  from  which  it  will  be
seen  that  the  cephalic  or  latitudinal  index  is  '770,  and  the  altitudinal
•702.  It  belongs,  therefore,  to  the  category  of  subbrachy-cephalic
skulls  of  Thurnam  and  Professor  Huxley.

In  the  side  view  (narirui  IdtertdU — Plate  7,  Fig.  59),  it  so  closely
resembles,  except  in  one  respect,  that  described  and  figured  by  Professor
Huxley  (/oc.  cit,  p.  1 25,  Figs.  60,  61)  from  the  bed  of  the  Nore,  at  Boms,
in  Ireland,  that  we  can  scarcely  refuse  to  recognize  a  common  character
between  them,  which,  since  in  the  present  case  it  cannot  be  looked  upon
as  denoting  a  mere  family  relationship,  may  reasonably  be  regarded  as


Fi(iS.  59,  60,  61.— Skull  from  Cave  at  Cefn,  St.  Asaph.


indicative  of  some  affinity  of  race.  The  chief  di£ference  observable
in  this  view  of  the  two  skulls  is  the  greater  development  of  the  frontal
sinuses  in  the  Borris  calvaria.  The  occipital  view  (norma  occipitalis^
Fig.  8)  is  also  very  similar,  except  that  in  the  Borris  skull  the  greatest
width  appears  to  be  in  the  temporal,  and  in  the  other  the  parietal
region.  In  the  Borris  skull,  also,  there  is  a  shallow  groove  in  the
course  of  the  sagittal  suture,  which  does  not  exist  in  that  from
St.  Asaph.

The  Borris  skull  is  said  to  be  of  the  extraordinary  length  of  8
inches ;  and  this  may  account  for  the  much  lower  cephalic  index  of
the  skull,  whose  absolute  width  in  reality  somewhat  exceeds  the  Cefn


18G  SKULL  FROMCEFN  CAVE.  [chap.

specimen  (5''9  and  5''7),  whilst  the  altitudinal  as  compared  with  the
latitudinal  is  but  very  little  greater  than  it  would  be  were  the  skalls
reduced  to  the  same  breadth.  They  may  both,  therefore,  be  regarded
as  '^  low,"  or,  as  this  class  of  skull  might  be  termed,  in  the  euphoniooa
language  of  craniologists,  '' tapinocephalic/'  One  great  peculiarity
of  the  Cefn  cranium  (which  exists  also,  but  apparently  not  to  quite
so  great  a  degree,  in  the  other)  is  the  absolute  horizontality  of  the
plane  of  the  subinial  portion  of  the  occipital  bone.  And  it  is  to
this  flattening  that  the  comparative  lowness  may  perhaps  be  chiefly
attributed.

The  sutures,  where  visible,  appear  to  be  open.  The  mastoid
processes  and  all  other  muscular  impressions  are  strongly  marked.

A  third  skull  of  very  similar  character,  except  that  it  is  not  so  much
depressed,  has  come  under  my  observation.  It  was  discovered  in  a
submarine  or,  rather,  subterranean  peat-bed  or  ancient  forest,  30  feet
below  the  sea-level,  at  Sennen,  near  the  Land's  End,  in  Cornwall ;
and  a  brief  notice  and  outline  figure  of  it  will  be  found  in  the
"Natural  History  Review"  for  1861.'  The  Sennen  skull  has  the
same  elongated  form ;  but  it  is  higher  than  either  the  Cefo,  St.
Asaph,  or  Borris  crania,  having  an  altitudinal  index  of  '730.

On  the  whole,  these  three  skulls  (i.e.  those  from  Borris,  Sennen,
and  St.  Asaph)  would  appear  to  have  a  common  character,  and  to  bo  of
a  difl'erent  type  from  either  the  Perthi-Chwareu  or  the  Mewslade  form.

As  a  rule  it  may,  I  think,  be  stated  that  in  all  brachy- cephalic  skulls
the  breadth  exceeds  the  height,  whilst  the  reverse  is  the  case  in  the
dolicho-cephalic.  Individual  exceptions  are  of  course  not  unfrequently
met  with,  more  especially  among  very  mixed  races,  such  as  the  modern
English  ;  but  I  am  myself  acquainted  with  only  two  dolicho-cephalic
7'(tces,  properly  so  termed,  in  which  the  rule  does  not  hold  good.  These
are  the  Tasmanian  (not  Australian)  and  the  Bushman.

Any  exceptions,  therefore,  to  either  rule  among  ancient  and,  conse-
quently, less  mixed  races  are  worthy  of  being  noted.

As  regards  modern  brachy- cephalic  skulls  the  law  holds  almost
universally,  the  only  marked  exception,  except  in  an  individual  here
and  there,  being  in  two  Karen  skulls,  in  which,  although  both
decidedly  brachy-cephalic,  the  respective  iudiccd  stand  as  *848  to  '924,
and  as  -700  to  812.

Among  priscan  brachy-cephalic  skulls  the  most  remarkable  and
important  exceptions  I  have  met  with  occur  among  the  neolithic  crania
in  the  Copenhagen  Museum,  more  than  half  of  which  are  brachy-

»  Vol.  i.  i-.  174.  1.1.  V.


v.]    GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  AS  TO  HUMAN  REMAINS,  187

cephalic,  and  most  of  the  others  nearly  so,  the  mean  cephalic  index  of  21
fekulls  being  •790,  whilst  the  mean  altitudinal  is  as  high  as  810.  In
fact,  oat  of  12  skulls  whose  indices  vary  from  '795  to  '838,  no  fewer
than  10  have  the  latitudinal  index  less  than  the  altitudinal.

The  exceptions  to  the  rule  as  applied  to  dolicho-cephalic  skulls  also
appear  to  be  far  more  common  among  the  ancient  than  among  the
modern,  excepting  the  two  races  I  have  above  referred  to.

In  a  long  list  of  ancient  and  priscan  skulls,  I  find  the  following
having  the  tapino-cephalic  character  : —


1.  From  tho  Thames  alluyiiim  at  Old  Ford

2.  From  the  same  deposit  at  East  Ham .     .     .

3.  From  the  same  deposit  at  Battersea  .     .     .

4.  From  the  same  deposit  at  London  Bridge   .

5.  From  tumulus  at  iStanshope

6.  A  Guannhe  skull

7.  A  Guanche  skull

8.  C'ufii,  St.  Asaph's


U  Iml.

Alt.  Ind.

•792

•753

•774

•690

763

•745

•762

•611

•768

•684

•775

•787

•768

•684

•770

.•702

The  number  is  but  small,  it  must  be  confessed,  and  perhaps  hardly
sufficient  to  do  more  than  prove  the  rule ;  but  still  I  think  it  will  be
found  worth  inquiry  whether  a  departure  from  the  rule  in  question
was  morn  frecpent  among  the  unmixed  or  little-mixed  races  of  ancient
times  than  it  is  amongst  similarly  unmixed  races  of  the  present  day ;
and  whether  consequently  its  infraction  in  a  considerable  number
of  instances  may  or  may  not  be  indicative  of  a  lower  type,  as  which
we  are  accustomed  to  regard  tho  Tasmanian  and  Bushman  races.

(jeneral  Oonclimous  as  to  Human  Remains.


The  human  remains  in  the  caves  of  Perthi- Chwareu
and  Cefn,  and  in  tlie  cairn  near  the  latter  place,  imply-
that  the  men  to  which  they  belonged  were  a  short  race,
the  tallest  being  about  5  feet  6  inches,  and  the  shortest  4
feet  10  inches.^     Their  skulls  are  orthognathic,^  or  not

^  The  stature  is  obtained,  according  to  Prof.  Humphry's  method,
from  the  length  of  the  femur,  which  is  27*5  of  stature  taken  as  100.

2  0f>^05  straight,  yvudo^  jaw,  with  profile  vertical,  as  opposed  to  tt^o-
7i'fiO«9,  with  projecting  jaws,  or  "snouty."


188  OENEHAL  CONCLUSIONS.  [chap.

presenting  a  lower  jaw  advancing  beyond  the  vertical  line
dropped  from  the  foreliead ;  in  shape  ortho-cephalic,  or
subbrachy-cephalous,  and  of  fair  average  capacity.  The
face  was  oval  and  the  cheek-bones  were  not  prominent.
Some  of  the  individuals  were  characterised  by  the
peculiar  flattening  of  shin  (platycnemism),  which  pro-
bably stood  in  relation  to  the  free  action  of  the  foot
that  was  not  impeded  by  the  use  of  a  rigid  sole  or
sandal.  This  character,  however,  is  neither  peculiar  to
race,  nor  to  be  viewed  as  a  tendency  towards  the  simian
type  of  leg.  These  conclusions,  which  Professor  Busk
has  arrived  at  from  the  examination  of  the  remains
which  were  submitted  to  him,  have  been  fully  borne  out
by  the  numerous  skeletons  which  have  been  subsequently
discovered,  both  in  the  sepulchi-al  caves  at  Ehosdigre
and  in  a  second  chamber  in  the  cairn  of  Tyddyn  Bleiddyn
near  Cefn.


VI. j  RANGE  OF  NEOLITHIC  RAGES,  189


CHAPTER  VI.

THE     RANGE    OF    NEOLITHIC    DOLICHO-CEPHALI     AND

BRACHY-CEPHALI.

Itelation  of  Human  Kemains  to  those  found  in  Tumuli  in  Britain. —
The  Dolicho-cephali  and  Brachy-cepbalL — Their  Hange  in  Britain
and  Ireland — in  France. — The  Caveme  de  THomme  Mort. — The
Sepulchral  Cave  of  Orrouy. — The  Tumuli — In  Belgium. — The
Sepulchral  Caves  of  Chauvaux  and  Sclaigneaux. — The  Dolicho-
cephali  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula — Gibraltar — Spain. — Cueva  de
los  Murcielagos. — The  Woman's  Cave  near  Alhama  in  Granada. —
The  Guauches  of  the  Canary  Isles. — Iberic  Dolicho-cephali  of  the
same  race  as  those  of  Britain,  France,  and  Belgium — Cognate  or
Identical  with  the  Basque  Eace. — Evidence  of  History  as  to
the  I'eoples  of  Gaul  and  Spain. — The  Basque  Populations  the
Oldest. — The  Population  of  Britain. — Basque  characters  in  Present
Population  of  Britain  and  France. — Whence  came  the  Basques  %
— The  Celtic  and  Belgic  Brachy-cophali. — The  Ancient  German
Kace. — General  Conclusions.

The  lielation  of  the  Human  Remains  to  those  found  in

British  Ttcmuli.

Before  we  examine  the  relation  of  this  ancient  neo-
lithic race  of  men  to  those  who  have  left  their  remains
in  tumuli  and  caves  in  other  regions,  it  is  necessary  to
define  the  cranial  terminology,  as  adopted  by  Professors
Busk,  Huxley,  Dr.  Thurnam,  and  other  high  authorities.


192  THE  DOLICHO-CEPHALL  [cnxr,

into  the  broad,  the  oval  skulls  being  the  intermediate
forms ;  and  this  would  naturally  result  from  the  inter-
mingling of  the  blood  of  the  two  races.  There  may,
liowever,  liavc  l):'en  a  tendency  towards  ortho-cephalism
in  the  dolicho-cephali,  without  any  admixture  of  foreign
l)loorl,  since  absolute  unity  of  form  could  not  be  cxpect<5d.

The  skull  of  the  primary  interment  in  the  barrow  of
Wiiitcrbournc  Stoke  is  taken  by  Dr.  Thurnam  as  typical
of  the  dolicho-cephalic  class.  "The  greatest  length  is
73  inches  (the  glabello-inial  diameter  7*1  inches) ;  the
greatest  breadth  is  5*5  inches,  being  in  the  proportion  of
7.>  to  the  length  taken  as  100.  The  forehead  is  narrow
and  receding,  and  moderately  high  in  the  coronal  region,
behind  which  is  a  trace  of  transverse  depression.  The
parietal  tubers  are  somewhat  full,  and  add  mat<^rially
to  the  breadth  of  this  otherwise  narrow  skull.  The
posterior  borders  of  the  parietals  are  prolonged  back-
wards, to  join  a  complex  chain  of  Wormian  bones  in  the
line  of  the  lambdoid  suture.  The  superior  scale  of  the
occiput  is  full,  rounded,  and  prominent ;  the  inion  more
])ronouneed  than  usual  in  this  class  of  dolicho-ccphalic
skulls.  The  superciliarics  are  well  marked,  the  orbits
rather  small  and  long ;  the  nasals  prominent,  the
facial  bones  short  and  small ;  the  molars  flat  and  idmost
vertical ;  the  alveolars  short,  but  rather  projecting.  The
mandible  is  comparatively  small,  but  angular;  the  chin
square,  narrow,  and  prominent."^

Dulicho-cephalic  skulls  in  general  (and  in  part  ortho-
ee])haUc)  are  jiossessed,  according  to  Dr.  Thurnam,  of
the  following  characters  (Vol.  iii.  p.  69) : — "The  supra-
ciliary  ridges  am  less  strongly  marked  than  in  the  brachy-
C(»phalic.    There  is  none  of  the  prognathism,  exaggerated

^  "Antlirop.  Mom/'  vol.  i.  p.  144.


VI.]  THE  BRACUY-CEFHALL  193

malar  breadth  or  great  width  of  the  nasal  openings,  which
give  such  an  air  of  savageness  and  ferocity  to  the  New
Caledonians  and  Caroline  Islanders ;  but  the  very  reverse
of  all  these.  They  are  indeed  more  orthognathic  even
than  many  Europeans,  and  the  facial  characters  generally
are  mild,  and  without  exaggerated  development  yi  any
one  direction."  Their  faces  are  oval.  The  upper  jaw  is
small,  and  the  sockets  of  the  incisors  and  canine  almost
vertical.  The  supra-occipital  region  is  full  and  rounded,
and  there  is  a  post-coronal  annular  depression  on  the
skull,  termed  by  Dr.  Gosse  "  tete  annulaire.''  The
length  is  mainly  due  to  the  development  of  the  occiput,
a  condition  that  is  termed  by  M.  Broca  **  dolicho-cephalie
occipitale,"  as  distinguished  from  the  "dolicho-cephalie
frontale"  of  other  races.  The  teeth  are  worn  flat.  The
bones  associated  with  the  skulls  of  this  character  show
that  the  stature  of  the  race  was  short,  5  feet  5  inches
being  the  average  height.

In  the  br achy- cephalic,  or  broad  skulls,  on  the  other
hand,  the  supraciliary  ridges  are  more  strongly  marked
than  in  the  preceding  group ;  the  cheek-bones  are  high
and  broad,  the  sockets  for  the  front  teeth  are  oblique,
and  the  mouth  projects  beyond  the  vertical  dropped  from
the  forehead,  presenting  the  character  of  prognathism.
The  face,  instead  of  being  oval,  is  angular  or  lozenge-
shaped.  On  the  back  of  the  head  the  occipital  tubero-
sity, or  probole,  is  the  most  prominent  feature,  and
there  is  also  generally  an  occipital  flattening,  which  may
have  been  caused  by  the  use  of  an  unyielding  cradle-
board  in  infancy.  The  entire  maxillary  apparatus  is  so
largely  developed,  that  the  term  "  macrognathic,''  intro-
duced by  Professor  Huxley,  is  particularly  applicable
to  them.     The  "  type  mongoloide "  of  Dr.  Pruner-Bey

o


194  lUNOE  OF  DOLICHO'CEPHALl  [chap.

is  closely  allied   to,   if  not  identical   with,    this   form
of  skull.

The  stature  of  the  British  brachy-cephali  is  much
greater  than  that  of  the  dolicho-cephali,  the  average  for
the  adult  male  being  5  feet  8*4  inches,  according  to  Dr.
Thumam.

The  human  remains  from  the  caves  and  chambered-
tombs  of  Denbighshire  belong  to  the  first  of  these  divi-
sions, in  the  possession  of  every  one  of  the  characters
assigned  to  it  by  Dr.  Thurnam,  although  the  crania
belong  to  the  ortho-cephalous  portion  of  the  series,  that
is,  tending  towards  broad-headed ness.  It  may  therefore
be  inferred  that  they  belong  to  the  same  race  as  the
neolithic  raisers  of  the  long-barrows,  a  race  which  we
shall  presently  see  to  be  identical  with  the  ancient
Iberians  and  modem  Basques.


The   Rancfe   of    the   l)ulichO'Cej)holl    in    Britain   and

Ireland,

The  same  class  of  human  remains  has  been  obtained
from  caves  in  other  districts  in  Great  Britain.  In  the
Oxford  IMuscum  a  human  skull,  from  the  cave  of  Llan-
debie,  possesses  cephalic  index  of  '72;  while  a  second,
from  the  cave  of  Uphill  in  Somersetshire,  explored  by
Mr.  James  Parker  in  18G3,  measures  '723.  (See  p.  197.)
The  latter  was  associated  with  rude  i)ottery,  charcoal,
and  the  remains  of  the  following  amimals  :  the  wild-cat,
(lo^S  fox,  badger,  pig,  stag.  Bos  lomjlfrons,  goat,  ami
water-rat.  Most  of  the  remains  belong  to  young  indi-
viduals, and  some  have  been  gnawed  by  dogs,  wolves,
or  foxes.


VI.]  IN  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND.  lt;5

111  Yorkshire  a  human  femur  presenting  an  enormous
development  of  the  linea  aspera,  which  implies  the
possession  of  the  platycnemic  character,  has  been  met
with  in  a  cave  in  King's  Scar,  near  Settle  (see  p.  113),
and  fragments  of  a  long  skull  are  preserved  in  the
Museum  at  Leeds  from  that  of  Dowkerbottom.

Professor  Turner  has  described^  the  remains  found  in
a  cave  in  the  Old  Red  sandstone  on  the  shore  of  the  bay
of  Oban  in  1869  by  Mr.  Mackay.  There  were  two
human  skeletons,  along  with  the  broken  and  burnt  bones
of  the  roe  and  stag,  limpet-shells,  flint  nodules,  and  flint
flakes.  One  of  the  leg-bones  is  platycnemic,  and  the
fragments  of  skull  may  probably  be  referred  to  the
dolicho-cephalic  type.

The  same  type  of  skull  has  also  been  obtained  by
the  Kev.  Canon  Greenwell,  from  the  neolithic  tumuli  of
Yorkshire,  along  with  the  same  group  of  animals  as  in
the  caves  at  Perth i-Chwareu,  the  Bos  longijrons,  goat,
horse,  dog,  and  stag ;  and  Professor  Rolleston,  F.R.S.,
informs  me  that  some  of  the  associated  human  leg-bones
are  platycnemic.  It  is  also  recognized  by  Professor
Huxley  as  identical  with  his  river-bed  type  of  skulls
from  alluvial  deposits  near  Muskham  in  the  valley  of
the  Trent,  Ledbury  Hall  in  the  valley  of  the  Dove,  and
in  Ireland  from  the  bed  of  the  Nore  in  Queen's  County,
and  from  that  of  the  river  Black  water.  To  it  also
Professor  Huxley  refers^  five  or  six  out  of  the  seven
skulls  obtained  by  Mr.  Laing  from  the  stone  cists  in  the
burial  mound  at  Keiss  in  Caithness,  and  associated  with
rude  w^eapons  and  implements  of  bone  and  stone.     They

*  Brit.  Assoc.  Report,  1871,  p.  160,  "On  Human  and  Animal  Bones
and  Flints,  from  a  Cave  at  Oban,  Argyleshire,"  by  Prof.  Turner.
^  Huxley  and  Laing,  "Prehistoric  Remains  of  Caithness,''  p.  1 19  it  seq.

O   2


yj^j  EASCE  OF  DOUCBO<EFHA  [<

pror/a'olr  t^l^i^g^d  to  the  iiiLaHtants  of  the  neighboar-
ing  borgL,  or  circrukr  stooe  dvcIliDg,  in  and  around
whkrh  were  the  broken  bones  of  the  following  animal
remaiiijs  :  the  ^^^  hnyifron$j  goat,  stag,  hog,  horse,  dog,
fox,  grampus  or  unall  whale,  dolphin  or  some  other
small  ceta/::ean,  great  auk  (^{(xi  impennis^  now  extinct
in  Europe),  lesser  ank,  cormorant,  shag,  solan  goose,  cod,
lob^t^r,  and  shell-fish.  A  lower  jaw  also  of  a  child,
broken  after  the  same  manner  as  other  refuse  bones,
is  considered  by  Professor  Owen  and  Mr.  Laing  to  prove
that  human  flesh  was  sometimes  used  for  food.  The
reindeer  was  living  in  the  district  at  this  time,  since
its  remains  have  been  identified  by  Dr.  Campbell  fix^m
the  Harlx^ur  moimd,  one  of  the  many  refuse-heaps  in
the  neighbourhood.

The  same  kind  of  skull  is  also  described  by  Professor
Wilson  under  the  name  of  "  boat-shaped "  or  **  kumbe-
cepliiilic,"  from  the  ancient  stone  chambers  and  tumuli


of  Scotland.


1


In  the  Table  on  the  next  page,  showing  the  relative
size  and  shape  of  the  more  important  long  skulls  of
Britain  and  Ireland,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  extreme
long-headedness  of  those  from  the  long  barrows  is
not  poHHCssed  by  those  either  of  the  caves  and  tombs  of
DciibighHhire  or  of  the  river-bed  type  of  Huxley,  repre-
fl(»nt(*(l  by  the  skulls  from  Muskham,  Ledbury,  Black-
wut(»r  (Ireland),  and  Keiss.

Th(^  greater  breadth  of  the  skulls  from  the  caves  and
tonil)s  of  Denbighshire,  as  compared  with  those  of  the
typi(*al  long  skulls  from  the  long  barrows,  may  possibly
bi»  due  to  a  mixture  with  the  broad-headed  race.  In
that  ease,  however,  none  of  the  tallness,  or  prognathism,

»  **  lhrt)hi8toric  Annals  of  Scotland."


VI.]


IN  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND,


of  the  latter  has  been  handed  down.  It  is  most  pro-
bably a  mere  variation  within  the  limits  of  one  race,
and  is  unaccompanied  by  the  fusion  of  dolicho-cephalic
with  brachy-cephalic  characters,  such  as  M.  Broca  and
Dr.  Thurnam  have  observed  in  the  skulls  from  tombs
and  caves  in  France.


SKULfJI.


Mean  of  48  males,  Brit.,  Thurnam,  long

barrows

Mean  of  19  females,    Brit.,  Thnmam

long  barrows >

Mean  of  10  skulls,  Perthi-Chwareu  Cave

Skull  from  Llnndebie  Cave

,,  Uphill

Mean  of  6  skulls  from  Koiss.     (Huxley)
Skull  from  Muskham     .     .     .
Ledbury  Hall    .     .
Blackwater,  Ireland


ft


ft


»>
»»
tt


1

•

>4

1

•

a

•

a
g

itnd.
h.  Indi

1

4i

:5
7-7

6-5

5-62

a

21-8

i6

<

•780

•716

7-45

5-8

5-8

20-6

•710

•780

7  07

5-5

5  6

20  0

•765

7-8

5-8

—-

•720

—

7-86

5-43

—

•728

7-22

5-45

6-19

•756

•716

7  0

5-4

—

—

•770

—

7-16

5-5

—

•770

—

7-2

5-65

•780

From  the  examples  given  in  the  preceding  pages  it
is  evident  that,  in  ancient  times,  long-headed  men
of  small  stature  inhabited  the  whole  of  Britain  and  Ire-
land, burying  their  dead  in  caves,  but  more  generally  in
chambered  tombs.  They  were  farmers  and  shepherds,
and  in  this  country  in  the  neolithic  stage  of  culture.
In  the  solitary  case  offered  by  the  Harbour  mound  at
Keiss  they  were  cannibals.'

The  Range  of  the  Brachy-cephali.

No  human  remains  of  the  brachy-cephalic,  or  broad
type,  as  defined  by  Dr.  Thurnam  have  been  obtained

^  The  evidence  of  cannibalism  in  the  contents  of  the  tumuli  seems
to  me  to  be  doubtful.


198  BRITISH  BRAOHY-CEPHALI.  [chap.

from  the  caves  in  Britain.  The  evidence,  however,  is
decisive  that,  in  the  Bronze  age,  a  tall,  round-headed,
rugged-featured  race  occupied  all  those  parts  of  Britain
and  Ireland  that  were  worth  conquering,  and  drove
away  to  the  west  or  absorbed  the  smaller  neolithic
inhabitants.  And  the  identity  of  their  skull-form,  in
the  series  of  interments  in  the  round  and  bowl-shaped
barrows,  extending  from  the  Bronze  age  down  to  the
date  of  the  Roman  occupation  of  Britain,  shows  that,
both  in  the  North  and  the  South,  this  large-sized
coarse -featured  people  was  in  possession  at  the  time  of
tlie  Roman  conquest.

Tlie  size  and  shape  of  the  typical  broad  crania  may
be  gathered  from  the  first  two  columns  of  the  following
Table,  which  is  an  abstract  of  those  published  by  Dr.
Thurnam  in  *'  Crania  Britannica,"  and  the  '*  Memoirs  of
the  Anthropological  Society."

The  Range  of  the  Dolicho-cephali  and  Brachy-cepJiali
in  France  in  the  Neolithic  Age. — The  Cavcme  cle
lllovime  Mort,

The  researches  of  M.  Broca  and  Dr.  Thurnam  into
the  caves  and  tombs  of  France  prove  that  the  .«mall
doliclio-cophali  and  the  tall  brachy-ccphali  lived  in  that
country  in  the  neolithic  age.  We  are  indebted  to  tlie
former  for  a  most  important  account  of  the  Caverne  de
rHoninie  Mort,  which  reproduces  all  the  essential  points
which  we  have  observed  in  the  sepulchral  caves  of
Denbighshire.

The  Caverne  de  THomme  Mort^  is  situated  in  a  lonelv
ravine  that  penetrates   the  wild  limestone  plateau,   in

*  Prehistoric  Congress,  Brussels  Volume,  1872,  p.  182.


V..1


ilEA.^UBEMENTS  OF  SKULL;^.


1J)9


Mtasurements  of  British  Brachy-etphalij  and  (fauUAh  and  Belgic

Brachy-cephM  and  Dolicho-cephnli,


Skull.


i  J


f


I     1  ^  c>


TYPirAL   BKOAD   SKULLS.— BRITAIN.

Mean    of    56   males,    Brit.    Round  /
Harrow.s S

Mcjin  of  14  females,  Brit.  Kouml
Barrow.s

LONO   AND   SHORT  8KULI*S. — FRANrK.

Tumulus,  Noyelles-sui  -mcr-Sommo
"Grotto,"  Nogent  les  Vierges,  Oisc


♦  >


»»
»»
»»
»»
t  f


«»
»»
»»
»»


♦  »
»»

»♦


Dohmn  Du Val,  Senlia,  Oiso


»»


♦  »  f»

*•  **

»»  »»
Cliamant


»f


»»


»»
»)


Cave,  Orrony,  Oise  .


> »

J »
♦  »

» f


t»

» »
»»
»»
> »

»»

»»


» »

«>
»♦


Ijouibrive,  Ari^ge

Dolmen,  Meutlou,  Seine  et  Oi


se


»»


»»


»»


»»
Lozerre.s

Tomb,  Maintenon;  Eurc  et  Loire


»»


»>


Tumulus,  Bnugon,  Deux  Sevres
l)olmon,  Meloisy,  C6te  d'Or  .
Avignon  CO,  Vaucleuse  .     .     .


»«


♦  »


Oenthoil,  Genera


If


»»


Mean

Judge's  Cave,  Gibraltar  (Busk)
ChauvQux  Cave  (Virchow) ...
Sclaigueaux  Cave.  Skull  1.  (Amould)

2.  .

3.  .

4.  .


»>


»»
♦  »


i»


»♦


»»


1-^^.  -

N.

6

'9

N.

7

2

7

3

7

1

C

9

7

3

7

i

N.

6-

(]

1

2

f

2

N.

4

1

1

4

X.B.(?)

7

4

7-

1

7

2

7-

1

6

i

C

6

««

/

■2

G

8

N.

7

4

i

N.

6

7"

7

7

2

7

3

7

2r>

/

7

6

•7

N.

7

3

6

■9

7

•8

I.

•4

6

•9

(?)

N
N


71

69

7-35

7-3r)

7-25

6-9

6  95


6-6p
5-8p
5-2p
6-7p
5-9p
r>-4p
5'2p
6-6p
6*6p

r>-5

6-8
5-3

r>-5

5-5

r>-8p

5-4p

5-9p

5-5p

5-6p

5-9

5-75

5-8

5-9


r»-5

5-9.'»p
5-7
5-8p
T)  r»

5*4p

6-5

5-8

5-5p

5'6p

5  6p

•i-6

5-4

5-3

6-5

6-25

6-76


5-5
5-5
5-2
5-2
5-6
5-5
5-6
5-4
5-6
6-8


5-4
5*3
5-3
5-7
/>-6
6-4
5  5
5-4
5  1
5-7

5-5
5  9
5  5
5  7


5-5


5-5


5-4
5-3
5-4
6 -26


21-
20-3

20  8
20*
20-9
20-7
21-8

21  1
20  -5

20  5
1.9-5


20-3

•81

21-

•80

20-1

•71

20-8

•80

20-9

•85

20-6

•74

20-8

•70

19-7

•84

20-2

•77

20-8

•76

•80

•71

—

•78

—

•74

21-2

•78

•77

20 -1

•75

20-7

•83

19-2

•82

199

•85

20-9

•81

20-4

•84

—

•78

20-8

•81

19-2

•82

20-7

•85

20-8

•79

•79
•75
•71

•80

•75
•84
•70
•75
•81


•78

•792
71-8
81  1
81-6


-i  M


•79
•76
•71
•73
•79
•75
•75
•81
•78
•80


•72
•72
•74
•81
•78
•bO
•83
•75
•76
•77

•82
•84
•76
•78


•74

•78


•77

1-8
73-7
70-6


•  N,  Xeollthic  ;  B,    Bronzp ;  I,  Iron.


200  CAVERNE  VE  VHOMME  MORT  [chap.

the  south-west  of  the  department  of  Lozfere,  near  the
hamlet  of  Vialle,  in  the  commune  of  St  Pierre  des
Tripids.  It  was  discovered  by  the  peasants,  and  its
contents  were  partially  disturbed  by  their  search  after
hidden  treasure  before  it  was  explored  by  Dr.  Pruniferes.
In  front  of  the  cave  was  a  platform,  composed  of  earth
mingled  with  fragments  of  charcoal,  forming  a  layer
about  forty  centimetres  thick,  in  which  were  the  stones
of  seven  hearths,  flint-flakes  and  scrapers,  lance-heads,
broken  bones  of  the  hare,  fallow-deer,  roe,  pig  (or  wild-
boar).  All  the  flints  were  worked,  and  one  lance-head
had  been  chipped  out  of  the  stump  of  a  celt  and  pre-
sented portions  of  the  polished  surface,  thus  fixing  the
neolithic  age  of  the  accumulation.  Coarse  pottery  was
also  met  with.

The  bones  of  the  hare  were  very  abundant,  and
proved  that  there  was  no  prejudice  against  the  use  of
its  flesh.  In  the  caves  of  Perthi-Chwareu  we  have  also
seen  that  this  was  the  case.

The  refuse-heaps  ceased  abruptly  at  the  entrance  of
the  cave,  at  a  point  where  the  traces  of  a  waU,  composed
of  large  stones,  was  visible.  Immediately  behind  this
were  human  bones,  in  a  thick  layer  of  dry  sand,  scat-
tered about  in  the  wildest  confusion,  which  was  probably
the  result  of  successive  interments,  as  well  as  of  subse-
(juent  disturbance  by  burrowing  animals  and  treasure-
seekers.  Two  bone-points  and  a  flint  arrow-head  were
the  only  implements  discovered  within  the  sepulchral
chamber.

Two  small  human  bones,  bearing  undoubted  marks  of
having  been  burnt,  were  discovered  in  the  refuse-heap  ;
but  they  do  not,  as  M.  Broea  justly  observes,  imply  the
practice  of  cannibalism,  since  they  may  have  fallen  out


VI.]  USED  BY  A  SMALL  DOLICHO-CKPHALL  201

of  the  burial-place,  aud  subsequently  have  come  into
contact  with  the  fire  on  one  of  the  hearths.

It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  number  of  interments
in  this  cave.  Exclusive  of  the  many  skulls  which  have
been  destroyed  or  lost,  M.  Pruni^res  obtained  nineteen
very  nearly  perfect,  which  are  described  by  M.  Broca
{IS  seven  male,  six  female,  three  of  uncertain  sex,  and
three  children.  They  are  remarkable  for  the  softness
of  their  contours,  the  delicacy  of  their  features,  and  the
orthognathism  of  their  faces.  The  forehead  is  wide  and
high,  and  the  vertex  and  the  occipital  region  of  the
skull  well  rounded.  The  cephalic  index  varies  between
•680  and  "78,  the  mean  of  the  whole  series  being  •732.

M.  Broca  remarks,  that  these  crania  contrast  strongly
with  those  of  the  present  broad-headed  inhabitants  of
the  district,  and  that  they  differ  from  those  found  in
the  dolmens  by  M.  Pruniferes  in  their  greater  length,
in  the  smallness  of  their  features,  and  the  weakness  of
their  muscular  impressions.  The  study  of  the  bones  of
the  skeleton  confirms  these  differences.  The  men  who
buried  their  dead  in  the  Caveme  de  THomme  Mort
were  smaller  than  the  dolmen  builders,  their  bones  were
more  slender,  and  they  were  altogether  a  less  muscular
race.  They  are  considered  by  M.  Broca  to  represent  the
neolithic  aborigines ;  and  if  his  description  and  mea-
surements be  compared  with  those  of  the  dolicho-cephali
of  Britain,  given  by  Dr.  Thurnam  (p.  191  et  seq.),  it  will
be  seen  that  they  are  identical  with  the  latter,  which  is
the  oldest  race  yet  known  to  have  occupied  Great  Britain
since  the  close  of  the  pleistocene  period.

At  a  little  distance  from  the  sepulchral  cave,  and  in
the  same  ravine,  M.  Broca  explored  a  large  cavern,  which
had  been  occupied,  probably  by  the  same  people,  since


202  SEPULCHRAL  CAVB  OF  ORROUY.  [chap.

the  same  kind  of  instruments  were  discovered  as  in  the
refuse-heap.  So  that  we  have  here,  side  by  side,  the
abode  and  the  sepulchre  of  the  same  ancient  tribe.


The  Sepulchral  Cave  of  Orrouy.

The  sepulchral  cave  of  Orrouy  (Oise)  described  by  M.
Broca,  in  which  the  remains  of  about  fifty  individuals
were  interred,  furnished  both  types  of  skull,  united,
according  to  Dr.  Thurnam  and  M.  Broca,^  by  a  series  of
intermediate  forms,  that  prove  a  fusion  of  blood  between
the  broad-  and  the  long-headed  peoples.  On  referring
to  the  preceding  Table  (p.  199)  it  will  be  seen  that  the
cephalic  index  varies  from  '75  to  88.  Eight  out  of  the
series  of  twenty-one  skulls  united  the  characteristic
doliclio-cephalous  fore-head  with  the  brachy-cephalous
middle  and  liind-liead.  "We  have  here,''  writes  Dr.
Thuniam,  "a  veritable  hybrid  form  of  cranium,  resulting
from  the  mixture  or  crossing,  under  certain  circum-
stances unknown  to  us,  of  a  dolicho-cephalous  with
a  brachy-cephalous  race."

"...  In  the  Orrouy  skulls  of  hybrid  form,  two
encephalic  growth-tendencies  ap}x?ar  to  me  distinguish-
al)le  ;  one,  the  longitudinal  or  fronto-occipital ;  the  other
a  transverse,  or  bi-parietal  and  temporal  one.  Now  the
remarkable  supramastoid  depressions,  visible  in  the  hind-
head  of  these  skulls,  seem  to  be  well  explained  by  the
idea  of  an  intersection  or  crossinof  of  these  two  ten-
dencics  in  the  brain-growth ;  corresponding,  as  they
must  have  done,  to  the  angles  formed  by  the  posterior
surfaces  of  the  middle,  the  lower  surfaces  of  the  posterior

^  Bull.  Soc.  Atillirop.  iv.


VI  1  SKULLS  FROM  FRENCH  TUMULI,  203

iiad  temporal  lobes  of  the  cerebrum,  and  the  upper  sur-
face of  the  cerebellum/' '

In  eight  out  of  thirty-four  humeri  the  fossa  of  the
olecranon  is  perforated.

The  human  remains  occurred  in  the  same  confusion
as  at  Perthi-Chwareu,  and  were  associated  with  frag-
menta  of  coarse  pottery,  flint  flakes,  and  bones  of  rumi-
nants. The  occurrence  of  polished  stone  celts  indicates
the  neolithic  age  of  the  interment.

Skulls  from  French  Tumuli,

Both  long  and  broad  skulls  also  occur  in  the  eham-
l)cred  tombs  of  France,  althougli  the  latter  by  far  pre-
dominate. Those  from  the  Long  Barrow  at  Chamant
are  dolicho-cej)halic  and  ortho-cephalic,  with  cephalic
index  ranging  from  '71  to  '78  (Broca),  and  other  similar
cases  are  quoted  by  Dr.  Thurnam  from  Noyelle-sur-Mer,
Fontcnay,  and  other  tumuli.  In  the  large  sepulchral
chamber  at  Meudon,  that  contained  200  skeletons,  the
majority  of  the  skulls  were  brachy-cephalic,  although
twenty  of  them  were  of  the  ortho-cephalic  type.  This
mixture  may  be  accounted  for,  most  probably,  by  the
two  races,  which  are  clearly  defined  from  each  other  in
Britain,  being  intermingled  in  France.

Dr.  Thurnam,  summing  up  the  whole  evidence  as
roirards  the  distribution  of  races  in  the  tombs  of  Gaul,
concludes  that  the  two  races  came  into  contact  in  Gaul
at  an  earlier  period  in  the  neolithic  age  than  in  Britain.
And  this  must  necessarily  have  been  the  case  from  the
gi.'ographical  position  of  our  island,  which  could  only  be
invaded,  in  those  times,  by  the  races  in  possession  of  the

*  Anthrop.  Mem.  i.  490.


204  THE  XEOLITHIC  CAVES  OF  GIBRALTAR        [chaf.

contignoii3  mainland  of  France  and  Belgium.  Both
these  regions  must  have  been  conquered  before  an  in-
vasion could  have  taken  place.


The  DoIicho'Cephali  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula,

Gibraltar.

The  researches  carried  on  from  1863  to  1868,  by
Captain  Brome,  aided  by  Dr.  Falconer  and  Professor
Busk/  into  the  caves  of  Gibraltar,  have  resulted  in  the
proof  that,  in  the  neolithic  age,  that  barren  rock  was
inhabited  by  a  race  of  men  identical  with  that  which  is
found  in  the  long  barrows  and  caves  of  Great  Britain.

The  enlargement  of  the  military  prison  on  the  top  of
Windmill  Hill  revealed  the  existence  of  a  deep  fissure,
containing  dark  earth,  mingled  with  charcoal  and  broken
bones,  which  led  into  a  series  of  chambers.  The  upper
of  these  is  described  by  Captain  Brome  as  being  com-
pletely choked  up  to  the  roof  with  earth,  charcoal,  and
decomposed  bones  of  mammals,  birds,  and  fishes,  flint
flakes,  and  pottery.  Below  were  two  floors  of  stalag-
mite, filled  with  loose  stones  and  earth,  through  which
a  shaft  penetrated  into  a  fissure  at  a  lower  level,  leading
into  a  lower  chamber  that  had  a  free  communication
with  the  surface,  since  the  current  of  air  was  so  strong
as  to  extinguish  the  lamps.  In  this  also  human  remains
and  works  of  art  were  met  with.  The  passages  were
very  complicated,  and  in  some  of  them  a  red  breccia
contained  the  remains  of  the  pleistocene  mammals,  the
spotted  hyaena,  the  Rhinoceros  heviitoechus,  and  others.
This  series  of  passages  and  chambers  is  described  by

*  I^roliistoric  Congress,  Xorwich  Volume,  18C9.


VI.]  USED  AS  DWELLINGS  AND  TOMBS.  205

Captain  Brome  and  Professor  Busk  as  "Genista  Cave
No.  1."

A  second,  or  "  Genista,  No.  2,"  was  discovered  by
C^aptain  Brome  opening  on  the  surface  near  the  West
Cliff,  with  its  floor  covered  with  stalagmite,  under  which
was  the  same  class  of  remains  as  that  above  mentioned.
Subsequently  a  third  and  fourth,  '*  Genista,  3  and  4,"
were  explored  with  the  same  results,  of  which  the  latter,
opening  on  the  face  of  a  vertical  cliff*  40  feet  below  the
summit,  from  its  diflSculty  of  access  must  have  been
used  as  a  place  of  refuge  rather  than  of  habitation  or
burial.  With  this  exception,  the  whole  group  of  Genista
Caves  contained  human  bones,  resting  in  the  greatest
confusion,  and  proving  that  since  the  bodies  had  been
interred  the  contents  had  been  disturbed,  either  by  the
burrowing  of  animals  or  by  the  action  of  water,  pools  of
which  were  present  in  some  of  the  chambers.  Evidence
of  the  former  presence  of  water  was  to  be  seen  in  the
sheets  of  stalagmite  on  most  of  the  floors.  The  same
confusion  would  result,  as  is  suggested  by  Professor
Busk,  by  interments  at  successive  times.  The  intimate
association  of  the  fractured  bones  of  the  animals,  and  the
charcoal,  broken  pottery,  and  other  traces  of  occupation,
with  the  human  bones,  may  be  accounted  for  in  the  same
manner  as  the  similar  mixture  of  remains  in  the  caves
of  Denbighshire.  If  the  caves  had  been  inhabited  at
one  time,  and  subsequently  set  apart  for  burials,  the
human  bones  would  become  intermingled  with  the
accumulation  of  refuse  on  the  floors  by  the  causes  above
mentioned.

The  bones  of  the  animals  associated  with  the  human
remains  belong,  according  to  Professor  Busk,  to  the
domestic  ox  of  various  sizes,  goat,  ibex,  hog,  arvicola.


J.3,T:\LL'^  JV  *^£XISTA  caves,  [chap.

':*i:^-rr.  iic-  in-i  a  sproies  of  phocsena,  fish,

i  m  :-llii=«:-Su     The  pottery  is  for


zz-i  II.*:':  tolt:  linl-ziii-r.  o»:dLr=e  aud  impeifectlj  bmnt;
-- "  tl-r  Tr^irrls  iL.  ^.-z^r  c3.sks  hid  singular  perforated
-^-  ~:i.  -irLiljir  :•:■  ih.>5fr  still  in  uae  by  the  Kabyles  of
Al^'rrla.  ixL.'i  s-muv  of  zhr:  Berber  tribes.  Some  of  it,
l:- rtT^v^r.  Ls  •>:  a  £ne  re^i  ware  turned  in  the  lathe,  and
ir:'. i'.Iy  ii.rr*>iace»i  ar  a  later  period,  even,  as  remarked
hy  Mr.  Fruiks  after  the  Komun  occupation  of  Spain,  to
whicL  he  ref'rrs  a  brcinze  fi«h-hook,  the  only  metallic
article  found  in  tLe  group  of  caves.  The  implements  pf
Yfjii*:  consist  of  a  Leedle,  and  rounded  pins  and  spikes.
Ol^:  cannon-bone  of  a  small  ox  bears  marks  of  sharp
cuts  with  an  e*3ge  of  metal,  inflicted  probably,  as
Pn.'fessor  Busk  suggests,  "  in  an  attempt  to  hamstring
the  animal,  as  is  sometimes  done  at  the  present  day  in
the  Spanish  bull-ring."  It  may  possibly  be  more  modem
than  the  stoue  implements  found  in  the  same  cave.

The  as^Oi.iatcd  stone  articles  are  celts  of  polished
'Tcen.stone.  .<imilar  to  that  found  in  the  neolithic  cave
at  Perthi-Chwareu  (^Fig.  3SV,  flakes,  a  greenstone  chisel,
4uerns  and  rubbing-stones,  a  whetstone  perforated  for  sus-
fiension,  and  a  fragment  of  an  armlet  made  of  alabaster.
A  snitill  lump  of  coarse  plumbago  may  have  been  used
for  persfinal  ornament.

The  human  remains  examined  bv  Professor  Busk
>)(longerl  to  a  Icirge  number  of  individuals  of  all  ages,
jiiid  are  for  the  most  part  in  a  fragmentary  condition.
Sr^rnc  of  the  thigh-bones  are  carinate,  and  remarkable
for  the  enormous  development  of  the  linea  aspera
and  the  thickness  of  their  walls  (Fig.  57),  the  me-
dulhiry  cavity  being  reduced  to  a  small  size,  as  in
those  figured  from  the  tumulus  at  Cefn.     Some  of  the


VI.J


HUMAN  REMAINS,


207


tibiae  arc  platycnemic,  presenting  the  peculiar  lateral
flattening  which  first  attracted  the  attention  of  Dr.
Falconer  and  Professor  Busk  (Figs.  49,  50,  and  51),  but
which  M.  Broca  has  since  determined  in  the  tumuli
and  caves  of  France,  and  I  have  discovered  in  those  of
Denbighshire  (p.  177).


Fi(;s.  62,  63,  64. — Cranium  from  Genisla  Cave  (Busk).


The  only  two  crania  sufficiently  perfect  to  allow  of  a
(comparison  Ixung  made,  from  Genista  Cave  No.  3,  are
perfectly  symmetrical,  and  belong  to  a  high  type
(Figs.  62,  63,  and  64).  "  They  are  dolicho-cephalic,  quite
orthognathous,  and  wholly  aphanozygous.  In  one  the
frontal  sinuses  are  considerably  more  developed  than
they  are  in  the  other,  but  in  neither  is  there  any  thick-


208  SPANISH  DOLICHO-CEPHALI.  [chap.

ening  of  the  supra-orbitaJ  border"  (Busk).  The  teeth  are
worn  flat.  They  both  belonged  to  men  in  the  prime  of
life.  A  third  skull,  from  Genista  Cave  No.  1,  belongs
to  the  same  type.  The  measurements  of  the  two  most
perfect  skulls  are  given  in  the  same  table  as  those  from
North  Wales  (p.  171).

Gibraltar  has  also  been  occupied  in  ancient  times  by
broad-headed  men,  similar,  in  M.  Broca's  opinion,  to  those
interred  in  the  cave  of  Orrouy.  In  1864  human  bones,
together  with  a  skull  (for  measurements  see  p.  199),
were  dug  out  of  the  Judge's  Cave  by  Sir  James  Cochrane.
The  tibiae  are  platycnemic,  and  the  skull  is  described
by  Professor  Busk  as  being  '*  perfectly  symmetrical,
brachy-cephalic,  slightly  prognathous,  but  with  vertical
teeth,  aphanozygous.  The  forehead  is  well  arched,  and
the  supra-orbital  border  slightly  elevated,  the  orbits
being  square,  and  the  nasal  opening  elongated  and  P3n-i-
form."  The  cephalic  index  is  '792.  The  age  of  these
skeletons  is  uncertain.

Spain, —  Cueva  de  los  Mxircielagos.

Professor  Busk  ^  calls  attention  to  the  fact,  that  a  long
skull  similar  to  that  from  Gibraltar  has  been  found  in
Spain,  in  an  ancient  copper-mine  of  the  Asturias,  toge-
ther with  hammers  made  of  antler,  and  that  it  bears
*'the  closest  possible  resemblance  "  to  the  Basque  skulls,
described  by  M.  Broca,  from  Guipuscoa  on  the  Spanish
and  St.  Jean  de  Luz  on  the  French  side  of  the  Pyrenees.
He  points  out,  also,  the  resemblance  which  exists  between
the  crania  figured  by  Don  Gongora  y  Martinez,  from  the
caverns   and    dolmens   of   Andalusia   and   those   under

*  Prehistoric  Congress,  Norwich  Volume,  1809.


VI.]  CAVES  OF  ANDALUSIA.  209

consideration ;  finally  arriving  at  the  conclusion  that
"  a  pretty  uniform  priscan  race  at  one  time  pervaded
the  peninsula  from  one  end  to  the  other,  and  that  this
race  is  at  the  present  day  represented  by,  at  any  rate,
a  part  of  the  population  now  inhabiting  the  Basque
provinces."

In  the  work  of  Don  Manuel  Gongora  y  Martinez  *
referred  to,  there  is  a  most  interesting  account  of  the
prehistoric  antiquities  of  Andalusia.  Several  interments
are  described  in  the  Cueva  de  los  Murcidlagos,  a  cave
running  into  the  limestone  rock,  out  of  which  the  grand
scenery  of  the  southern  part  of  the  Sierra  Nevada  has
been,  to  a  great  extent,  carved.  In  one  spot,  a  group  of
three  skeletons  was  met  with,  one  of  which  was  adorned
with  a  plain  coronet  of  gold,  and  clad  in  a  tunic  made
of  esparto-grass,  finely  plaited,  so  as  to  form  a  pattern
which  resembles  some  of  the  designs  on  gold  ornaments
from  Etruscan  tombs.  At  a  spot  further  within,  a
second  group  of  twelve  skeletons  lay  in  a  semicircle,
around  one  considered  by  Don  Manuel  to  have  belonged
to  a  woman,  covered  with  a  tunic  of  skin,  and  wearing
a  necklace  of  esparto-grass,  a  marine  shell  pierced  for
suspension,  the  carved  tusk  of  a  wild  boar,  and  earrings
of  black  stone.  There  were  other  articles  of  plaited
esparto-grass,  such  as  baskets  and  sandals  ;  flint  flakes,
pieces  of  a  white  marble  armlet,  polished  axes  of  the
type  of  fig.  38,  bone  awls,  and  a  wooden  spoon,  together
with  pottery  of  the  same  type  as  that  from  Gibraltar,
fragments  of  charcoal,  and  bones  of  animals.

Although,  in  this  cave,  there  were  no  traces  of  metal,
except   gold,  in  a  second,  in  the  same  neighbourhood,

^  Don  Manuel  Gongora  y  Martinez,  "  Antiguedadea  PreliLstoricas  de
Andalucia."     Madrid,  1868.     8vo.

P


210  THE  WOMAN'S  CAVE.  [chap.

similar  interments  were  met  with  in  association  with
copper  (bronze)  implements,  and  with  pottery  of  the
same  kind.

These  interments  in  caves  are  of  the  same  order
as  those  from  Gibraltar;  and  since  the  skulls  agree
with  those  from  the  latter,  there  can  be  little  doubt
but  that,  in  the  neolithic  age,  the  long-headed  small
race  under  discussion  had  possession  of  the  southern
provinces.

The  Woman's  Cave,  near  Alhama.

This  conclusion  derives  additional  support  from  the
discoveries  subsequently  made  by  Mr.  McPherson^
in  the  Woman's  Cave,  near  Alhama,  in  Grenada^  of
implements  of  bone,  flint,  and  greenstone  of  the  neo-
lithic age,  mingled  with  charcoal,  pottery,  and  human
skeletons  of  the  same  type  as  those  from  Gibraltar.
The  human  skull,  figured  by  Mr.  McPherson,  is  dolicho-
cephalic, and  the  thigh-bone  is  remarkable  for  the  ex-
treme development  of  the  Imea  aspera,  which  assumes
the  form  of  a  stout  ridge  sweeping  from  one  extremity
of  the  shaft  to  the  other.

This  long-headed  race,  burying  their  dead  in  caves,
also  erected  dolmens  in  Andalusia.  In  the  dolmen
of  De  los  Eriales  -  human  remains  were  discovered  along
with  bronze  (copper?)  lance-heads,  and  pottery  of  the
same  sort  as  that  of  the  caves.  It  is,  therefore,  evident
that  the  practice  of  burial  in  caves,  and  of  erecting
dolmens,  was  carried  on  by  the  same  people  in  Britain,
in  France,  and  in  Sjiain.

'  "Tho  Woman's  Cavo,"  4to.  Parta  I.  and  II.  1870-1.  Cadiz,
Federico  Joly  y  Velasco.

^  Don  Manuel  Gongora  y  Martinez,  oj),  cit


VI. J  TUE  OUANCHES.  211

The  Giianches  of  the  Canary  Ides,

'J'lie  Guanclies,'  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  Canary
Isles,  are  considered  by  Berthollet,  Glas,  and  other  high
authorities,  to  be  allied  to  the  Berbers  of  North  Africa  in
language.  At  the  time  of  their  discovery  and  conquest
by  the  Spaniards,  they  are  described  by  Miss  Haigh  as
being  unacquainted  with  the  use  of  any  metal,  and  as
fashioning  their  weapons  out  of  a  black,  hard  stone.
The  Guanches  of  Teneriffe  lived  principally  in  caves,  pre-
ferring for  their  winter  residence  those  near  the  coast,  and
*'  in  the  summer  those  in  the  higher  parts  in  the  interior
of  the  island,  whence  they  could  enjoy  the  fresh  air  of
the  hills.''  Some  of  these  caves  have  been  excavated  by
the  hand  of  man,  and  are  divided  into  square  chambers,
containing  rock-hewn  benches,  **  and  deep  niches  made
to  contain  vessels  of  milk  or  water."  Thev  had  also
stone  houses,  thatched  with  straw  or  fern.  They  also
buried  their  dead  in  sepulchral  caves,  belonging  each  to
a  family  or  clan,  entrances  to  which  are  carefully  con-
cealed, and  are  now  discovered  only  by  accident.  In  them
the  dead  were  placed  either  upright,  or  lying  side  by  side
on  wooden  scaffolds,  after  having  been  prepared  with
salt  and  butter  and  thoroughly  dried  and  wrapped  in
the  tanned  skins  of  sheep  or  goat.  In  some  cases  the
prepared  body  was  placed  in  the  sitting  posture.

They  were  possessed  of  a  settled  government  by
**  Menceys,"  or  chiefs  subordinate  to  one  head,  and
were  divided  into  "nobles  and  common  people,  and
had  a  code  of  punishment  for  the  robber,  murderer,
and  adulterer."

^  Ethnological  Journ.  N.S.  vii.  p.  107.

r  "2


212  IBERIC  DOLICHO-CEPHALl.  [chap

Their  food  consisted  of  sheep  and  goats,  roasted
barley  ground  between  two  stones,  and  the  fruit  of  the
arbutus,  date-palm  and  fig,  as  well  as  fish  and  rabbits.
Their  fences  were  made  of  reed,  their  ropes  and  nets
of  rushes,  and  their  baskets,  mats,  and  bags,  of  palm-
leaves.  They  manufactured  vessels  out  of  clay  or  hard
wood,  needles  of  fishbones,  beads  of  clay,  and  they
especially  excelled  in  the  art  of  tanning.  The  civili-
zation of  this  very  interesting  people  may  fairly  be
taken  to  be  a  fragment  of  that  of  North  Africa  and
of  Europe  in  the  neolithic  age,  protected  by  insulation
from  the  influences  by  which  it  was  swept  away  from
the  countries  bordering  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, just  as  the  old  Norse  customs  and  legends  are
preserved  by  the  present  inhabitants  of  Iceland  in
greater  purity  than  in  Norway.

The  Berbers  are  viewed  by  Professor  Busk  as  of  the
same  non-Aryan  stock  as  the  Basque,  and  the  civili-
zation of  the  Guanchcs  may  therefore  be  taken  to  repre-
sent that  of  the  Iberic  peoples  of  Spain,  among  whom
caves  were  used  in  like  manner  for  habitation  and
burial.

Iberic  DolicJw'Cejyhali  of  the  same  Race  as  those  of

Britain,

If  this  group  of  Iberic  skulls  be  compared  with  those
from  the  caves  and  tumuli  of  Great  Britain  (see  Table,
p.  197  and  that  below)  it  wnll  be  seen,  that  what  Pro-
fessor Busk  observes  of  the  ancient  population  of  Spain
is  equally  true  of  that  of  our  country  in  the  neolithic  age.
And  the  identity  of  form  is  especially  remarkable  in
the  crania  from  the  sepulchral  caves  at  Perthi-Chwareu,


VI. J        DOLTCHO-CEFUALI  COGNATE  WITH  BASQUE.      213


the  difference  between  them  being  so  small  as  to  be  of
little  account : —


Mean  of  10  skulls  from  Perthi-Chwareu
Mean  of  2  Nkulls  from  Genista  Cuvis  )

No.  3  (Busk) I

Mean  of  40  male  Basque  skulls  from  j

Guipuscoa  (Thumam) j

Mean  of  20  female,  ditto  ....
Mean  of  19  skulls,  chiefly  male  .  .
Mean  of  57  female  ditto,  St.  Jean  de  )

Luz \


Length.

Brdth.

Height.

Circum-
ference.

rei»h.

index.
•765

7  07

6.5

5-6

20  0

7-35

6  •55

5-9

20-7

•755

7-2

5-5

5-4

—

•760

6-9

5-3

5  0

•760

7-4

5  6

54

•760

7  02

5^0

— —

—

•799

The  Dolicho'Cephcdi  cognate  with  the  Basque.

Nor  can  the  truth  of  Professor  Busk's  conclusion,  that
the  group  of  skulls  in  question  belong  to  a  people  akin
in  blood  to  the  modern  Basques,  be  disputed.  We  are
indebted  to  M.  Broca^  for  the  elaborat<5  description  of
seventy-eight  Basque  crania  from  a  village  cemetery  in
Guipuscoa,  and  of  fifty-eight  from  an  ossuary  at  St.  Jean
de  Luz,  in  which  they  had  been  collected  in  the  reign  of
Francis  I.,  1532.  In  both  these  groups  the  long  and  oval
types  predominated,  the  broad  type  being  represented  by
64  (Thumam)  per  cent,  in  the  one,  and  37*36  per  cent.
(Broca)  in  the  other ;  a  difference  that  is  doubtless  caused
by  the  greater  mixture  of  blood  in  the  south-west  of
France  than  in  the  north-west  of  Spain,  shut  off  from
the  broad-headed  Gallic  tribes  by  the  Pyrenees.*     Six

1  Broca,  "Bull.  Soc.  Anthrop."  s.s.  t.  i.  p.  470 ;  t.  ii.  p.  10-30  ;
s.s.  t  iii.  p.  43-101.  The  cephalic  index  in  the  preceding  Table  dififers
slightly  from  that  given  by  M.  Broca.  Thumam,  "Anthrop.  Mem,**
iii.  p.  64  et  seq.

^  These  skulls  are  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  the  Anthropological
Society  at  Paris,  where  by  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Broca  I  was  allowed
to  study  them  in  the  autumn  of  1873.  Some  were  marked  with  the
"  tete  annulaire.**


214  RANGE  THROUGH  FRANCE.  [chap.

skulls,  obtained  by  Professor  Vircliow  from  Bilbao,  agree
in  all  particulars  with  those  from  Guipuscoa.  M.  Broca
has  further  shown,  that  this  group  of  Spanish  skulk
offers  all  the  characters  of  the  black-haired,  swarthy,
oval-faced,  Basque  population  of  the  surrounding  re-
gion, and  it  therefore  follows,  that  they  may  be  taken
as  standards  of  comparison,  as  typical  of  the  ancient
Basque  crania,  modified,  it  may  be,  to  some  extent,  by
the  infusion  of  other  blood.  Their  agreement,  therefore,
with  the  skulls  from  Gibraltar  implies  that  the  latter  are
also  Basque.  And  since  they  agree  also  with  those  from
the  cave  of  Perthi-Chwareu,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  pre-
ceding Table,  the  men  who  buried  their  dead  in  the
caves  of  North  Wales  in  the  neolithic  age,  are  proved
to  belong  to  the  same  stock.

The  same  long-headed,  small  race  also  inhabited
France,  side  by  side  with  the  broad-headed  Gallic
tribes ;  and  since  to  it  belong  the  skeletons  in  the
Cave  de  rilomme  Mort,  which  M.  Broca  refers  to  the
neolithic  aborigines,  it  may  reasonably  be  concluded
that  in  Gaul,  as  in  Britain,  it  was  the  older  of  the  two
races.  The  two  have  also  been  met  with  in  the  caves  of
Belgium.  If  we  allow  that  an  aboriginal  Basque  popu-
lation spread  over  the  whole  of  Britain,  France,  and
Belgium,  and  that  it  was  subsequently  dispossessed  by
broad-headed  invaders,  the  two  extremes  of  skull-form
and  of  stature,  and  of  the  gradations  between  them,  may-
be satisfactorily  explained.  And  this  view  coincides
with  the  well-ascertained  facts  of  history.

Dr.  Thumani  w^as  the  first  to  recof]rnize  tliat  the  lon<T
skulls,  out  of  the  long  barrows  of  Britain  and  Ireland,
were  of  the  Basque  or  Iberian  type,  and  Professor
Huxley  holds  that   the  river-bed  skulls  belong  to  the


VI.]  DOLICHO-CEPHALI  OF  BELGIUM.  215

same  race.^  (Compare  Table  p.  197  with  the  preceding.)
We  have  therefore  proof,  that  an  Iberian  or  Basque  popu-
lation spread  over  the  whole  of  Britain  and  Ireland  in
the  neolithic  age,  inhabiting  caves,  and  burying  their
dead  in  caves  and  chambered  tombs,  just  as  in  the
Iberian  Peninsula  also  in  the  neolithic  age.


Dolicho-ceplmli  and  Brachy-cephali  in  Neolithic  Caves

of  Belgium, — Chauvaux.

Both  these  forms  of  skull  have  been  met  with  in  Bel-
gium, the  one  in  the  famous  cave  of  Chauvaux,  the
other  in  that  of  Sclaigneaux.

The  first  of  these  is  a  rock-shelter  passing  into  a  small
cave,  at  the  base  of  the  limestone  cliff  on  the  Meuse,
opposite  the  little  village  of  Riviere,  between  Dinant
and  Namur.  It  was  known  to  contain  human  re-
mains in  1837-8,  and  was  partially  explored  in  1842
by  Dr.  Spring,  who  published  his  account  of  the  dis-
coveries in  1853,  and  subsequently  in  1864  and  1866.
Below  a  thin  layer  of  loam  was  a  floor  of  stalagmite,
concealing  a  vast  number  of  broken  human  bones  mixed
pele-mele  with  those  of  wild  and  domestic  animals,
and  associated  with  charcoal  and  coarse  pottery.  Two
polished  stone  celts  indicated  the  neolithic  age  of  the
accumulation  ;  one  of  them  resting  close  to  a  skull
which  had  been  fractured  by  a  blow  from  a  blunt
instrument,  such  as  it  may  have  inflicted.  The  human
bones  belonged  to  infants  and  young  adults.

From  the  fractured  and  burnt  bones  of  the  animals  it
is  clear   that   they  had  been  accumulated  in  the  cave

*  Laing  and  Huxley,  "  Prehistoric  Remains  of  Caithness."


216  THE  SEPULCHRAL  CAVE  OF  CHAUVAUX.        [chap.

during  the  time  that  it  was  inhabited  by  man.  Dr.
Spring'  inferred  that  the  broken  human  bones  proved
that  human  beings,  as  weU  as  the  animals,  formed  the
food  of  the  cave-dwellers,  and  further,  since  all  the  human
remains  belong  to  young  individuals,  that  the  canni-
balism was  not  accidental,  or  caused  by  famine,  but  the
result  of  a  deliberate  selection.

The  facts  which  induced  Dr.  Spring  to  come  to  this
conclusion  are  interpreted  by  M.  Dupont*  in  a  dif-
ferent manner.  He  holds,  that  the  proportion  of  young
individuals  is  not  greater  in  Chauvaux  than  that  which
he  has  observed  in  other  sepulchral  caves  in  Belgium,
and  that  there  is  nothing  which  forbids  the  supposition
that  this  also  was  used  as  a  place  of  interment.  The
human  bones  may  have  been  broken  by  the  foxes  and
badgers,  which  are  so  abundant  in  the  district,  and
have  been  mixed,  by  their  continual  burrowing,  with
the  remains  of  the  animals  in  the  old  refuse-heap
accumulated  on  the  floor  during  the  habitation  of  man.
Such  a  mixture  of  remains  we  have  already  observed  in
the  caves  of  North  Wales  and  Gibraltar.  The  recent
researches  of  ]\I.  SoreiP  leave  no  room  for  doubting
the  truth  of  M.  Dupont's  interpretation.  Two  perfect
human  skeletons  were  discovered  along  with  flint
flakes,  pottery,  a  barbed  arrow-head,  and  many  scattered
human  bones  not  broken  by  design,  while  the  long
bones   of    the   associated    animals   bore   unmistakeable

'  Spring,  **  Ball.  Acad.  Roy.  de  Belgiquo,"  1  scr.  L  xx.  p.  427  ;  2  ser.
1.  xviii.  p.  479 ;  1.  xxii.  p.  187.

*  Dupont,  **L*Homme  pondant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre  dans  les
environs  de  Dinant  sur  Meuse/'  2d  edit.  p.  222.

*  Soreil,  "  Sur  Nouvelle  Exploration  de  la  Caveme  de  Chauvau,"
Conj^ros  Intern.  Anthropologie  et  d'Archeologie  Prehistoriques,
p.  381  et  seq.  Bruxelles,  1872.


v/.]  HARE  USED  FOB  FOOD.  217

traces  of  having  been  split  for  the  sake  of  the  marrow.
On  one  long  bone,  for  example,  of  the  ox,  there  were
cuts  made  by  a  flint  implement,  as  well  as  the  mark  of
the  blow  by  which  it  had  been  split  longitudinally  ;  and
another  ox-bone,  and  the  canine  of  a  boar,  bore  marks  of
burning.  The  bones  of  the  animals  were  very  abundant,
and  belonged  to  the  following  species :  beaver,  hamster,
and  other  small  rodents,  hare,  badger,  fox,  boar,  stag,
roe,  ox,  and  goat.  In  this  case,  as  in  the  caves  of
Perthi-Chwareu,  and  of  THomme  Mort,  the  inhabi-
tants had  used  the  hare  for  food,  as  well  as  the  other
animals,  and  did  not  share  the  prejudice  against  the
use  of  its  flesh  for  food,  which  Caesar  remarks  of  the
inhabitants  of  Britain  (Comm.  1,  xii.).

The  cave  must,  therefore,  be  viewed  as  a  place  of
sepulture  for  a  neolithic  people,  whose  implements
abound  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  not  as  having  been
inhabited  by  a  race  of  cannibals.

The  bodies  had  been  interred  in  the  crouching  posture,
with  their  thighs  bent,  their  heads  resting  on  their  arms,
and  their  faces  turned  towards  the  valley.  They  rested
side  by  side  in  two  small  holes,  which  had  been  dug  in
the  deposit  containing  the  bones  of  the  animals,  and  the
skeletons  were  cemented  to  the  rock  by  stalagmite,  and
surrounded  by  large  stones.  They  belonged  to  in-
dividuals far  past  the  prime  of  life.

Both  skuUs  were  dolicho-cephalic,  and  the  most
perfect  of  them  is  described  by  Professor  Virchow  as
presenting  a  parietal  flattening,  which  is  probably
analogous  to  the  **t6te  annulaire,"  so  commonly
present  in  the  long  skulls  of  the  neolithic  age.  It
possesses  a  cephalic  index  of  '72  ('718  Virchow).  The
sutures   in    both  the    skulls   were    very  nearly   oblite-


218  BRACHY'CEPHALI  FROM  [chap.

rated.     The  measurements  are  given   in   the  Table  in
page  199.

The  crania,  in  all  these  characters,  are  to  be  classified
with  the  long  skulls  from  the  caves  and  chambered
tombs  of  France,  Britain,  and  Spain.  They  belong  to
people  in  the  same  stage  of  culture,  and  praetismg  the
same  mode  of  burial  in  a  crouching  posture.  Chauvaux
is  the  furthest  cave  to  the  east  on  the  continent  of
Europe,  in  which  traces  of  this  long-headed  race  have
been  observed.

The  Cave  of  Sclaigneanx.

The  cave  of  Sclaigneaux,'  explored  by  M.  Amould,
near  the  hamlet  of  that  name,  fourteen  miles  from
Namur,  has  been  proved  to  contain  human  bones,
lying  mixed  with  those  of  the  animals  in  the  refuse-
heap  on  the  floor,  as  in  the  cave  of  Chauvaux.  The
animals  belonged  to  existing  species  : —


Hedgehog.

Fox.

Rabbit

Boar.

Badger.

Dog.

Ox.

Horse.

Beech-marten.

Wild  Cat.

Croat.

liodents

Weazel.

Hare.

Stag.

Bones  of  birds,  frogs,  and  fishes  were  also  met  with.
Intermingled  with  these  were  human  skeletons,  disposed
in  a  rude  sort  of  order,  and  belonging  to  bodies  which
had  been  interred  at  different  times.  From  the  lower
jaws  M.  Arnould  calculates  that  the  number  of  bodies
interred  was  not  less  than  sixty-two,  of  which  twelve
belonged  to  aged  individuals,  twenty-one  to  those  in  the
prime  of  life,  sixteen  to  young  adults,  and  thirteen
to  children.

'  International  Congress,  Bnixelles,  1872,  p.  370.


VI.]


(Uyj^J  OF  aCLAIGNEAUX,


219


The  emnia  (Figs.  65,  66)  are  brachy-ccplialic  (sec
Table,  p.  199),  and  are  possessed,  according  to  M.
A  mould,  of  the  following  characters.  The  apex  of  the
cranial  vault  is  flattened,  probably  artificially,  and  the


Figs.  65,  66. — Skull  from  Cave  of  Sclaigneaux.     (Amould.)


parietal  bosses  are  largely  developed,  to  which  is  due
the  great  width  of  the  skull.     The  surciliary  ridges  are
strongly  marked,  and  the  malar  bohes  are  prominent.
In  all  these  particulars  they  agree  with
the  broad  skulls,  as  defined  by  Dr.  Thur-
nam,  discovered  in   the   round   tumuli
of  Britain  and  the  sepulchral  caves  of
France.

Some  of  the  leg-bones  presented  the
antero-posterior  flattening,  or  platycne-
mism,  observed   in  the  skeletons  from
the  caves  of  Gibraltar,  and  in  France   Fio.  67.  —  Piatyme-
and  Great  Britain  (Fig.  67).     It  is  due,      sciaigneaux.    ^^
as   in  those  from  North  Wales,  to  the
anterior  expansion  of  the  bone,  and  not  to  the  posterior,
as  is  the  case  with  those  from  the  cave  of  Cro-Magnon.


220  HISTORIC  EVIDENCE,  [chap.  vi.

A  beautifully  chipped  arrow-head,  with  barbs  and
central  tongue  for  insertion  into  the  shaft,  of  the  same
type  as  one  from  Chauvaux,  implies  that  these  remains
belong  to  the  neolithic  age.  Implements  of  bone,  and
a  shell  perforated  for  suspension,  were  also  found.

The  Evidence  of  History  as  to  the  Peoples  of  Gaul  and

Spain,

The  extension  of  this  non- Aryan  race  through  France,
Spain,  and  Britain,  in  ancient  times,  based  solely  on  the
evidence  of  the  human  remains,  is  confirmed  by  an
appeal  to  the  ethnology  of  Europe  within  the  historic
period.  In  the  Iberian  peninsula  the  Basque  populations
of  the  west  are  defined  from  the  Celtic  of  the  east  by  the
Celtiberi  inhabiting  the  modem  Castille  (see  Map,  Fig.
68).  In  Gaul  the  province  of  Aquitania  extended  as
far  north,  in  Caesars  time,^  as  the  river  Garonne,  con-
stituting the  modern  Gascony,  to  which  was  added,  in
the  days  of  Augustus,  the  district  between  that  river
and  the  Loire ;  a  change  of  frontier  that  was  probably
due  to  the  predominance  of  Basque  blood  in  a  mixed
race  in  that  area  similar  to  the  Celtiberi  of  Castille.
The  Aquitani  were  surrounded  on  every  side,  except  the
south,  by  the  Celtoe,  extending  as  far  north  as  the  Seine,
as  far  to  the  east  as  Switzerland  and  the  plains  of  Lom-
bardy,  and  southwards,  through  the  valley  of  the  Rhone
and  the  region  of  the  Volsca),  over  the  Eastern  Pyrenees
into  Spain.  The  district  round  the  Phocaean  colony  of
Marseilles  was  inhabited  bv  Liorurian  tribes,  who  held
the  region  between  the  river  Po  and  the  Gulf  of  Genoa,
as  far  as  the  western  boundary  of  Etruria,  and  who  pro-

^  (/a?sar,  i.  50.


Km,  6S.— Pislrilmtion  of  Basque,  ('eltii',  and  Bclgic  rcopUs,  bI  d«wn  of  HUlory.


222       LIGUMIANS,  LIBYANS,  BERBERS,  KABYLE8.     [chap.

bably  extended  to  the  west  along  the  coast  of  Southern
Gaul  as  far  as  the  P}Tenees.'  They  were  distinguished
from  the  Celtae,  not  merely  by  their  manners  and  cus-
toms, but  by  their  small  stature  and  dark  hair  and  eyes,
and  are  stated  by  Pliny  and  Strabo  to  have  inhabited
Spain.  They  have  also  left  marks  of  their  presence  in
Central  Gaul  in  the  name  of  the  Loire  (Ligur),  and  pos-
sibly in  Britain  in  the  obscure  name  of  the  Lloegrians.
They  invaded  Sicily  ^  as  the  Sikelians,  and  if  the  latter
be  identified  with  the  Sikanians  considered  by  Thucy-
dides '  and  other  writers  to  be  of  Iberian  stock,  it  will
follow  that  they  are  a  cognate  race.  Their  stature  and
swarthy  complexion,  as  well  as  the  ancient  geographical
position  conterminous  with  the  Iberic  population  of  Gaul
and  Spain,  confirm  this  conclusion.  The  non-Aryan  and
probably  Basque  population  of  Gaul  was  therefore  cut
into  two  portions  by  a  broad  band  of  Celts,  which  crosses
the  Eiistcni  Pyrenees,  and  marks  the  route  by  which  the
Iberian  peninsula  was  invaded.

The  ancient  population  of  Sardinia  is  stated  by  Paus-
anias  to  be  of  Liljyan  extraction,  and  to  bear  a  strong
resemblance  to  the  Iberians  in  physique  and  in  habits
of  life,  while  that  of  Corsica  is  described  by  Seneca  as
Ligurian  and  Iberian.  The  ancient  Libyans  are  repre-
sented at  the  present  day  by  the  Berber  and  Kabyle
tribes  which  are,  if  not  identical  with,  at  all  events
cognate  with  the  Basques.     We  may  therefore  infer  that

1  "Bull.  Soc.  Anthrop  de  Paris,"  2  ser.  t.  111.,  p.  118.

2  "  1  )io(lorus  Siculus,"  iv.  G ;  v.  39.  Steur,  "Ethnograpbio  des  Peuples
de  TEiirope,"  p.  31  et  seq. ;  Donaldson,  "  Varronianw."  p.  70  ^^  stq.
Dion.  Hal.  i.  22.  See  also  Niobuhr  and  Mommsen.  Tbe  docu-
mentary evidence  is  so  uncertain  as  to  tbe  aflinities  of  tbe  Ligur ians
tbat  scarcely  any  two  writers  agree.     **  Quot  homines  tot  sententia-."

•''  Tbucydides,  vi.  2.


vi.J  THE  BASQUE  POPULATION  THE  OLDEST.  223

these  two  islands  were  formerly  occupied  by  this  non-
Aryan  race,  as  well  as  the  adjacent  continents  of  Northern
Africa  and  Southern  Europe.

The  Basque  Population  the  Oldest.

The  relative  antiquity  of  these  two  races  in  Europe
may  be  arrived  at  by  this  distribution.  The  Basques,
Sikani  or  Ligurian,  are  the  oldest  inhabitants,  in  their
respective  districts,  known  to  the  historian ;  while  the
Celts  appear  as  invaders,  pressing  southwards  and  west-
wai-ds  on  the  populations  already  in  possession,  flooding
over  the  Alps  and  under  Brennus  sacking  Eome,  and
by  their  union  with  the  vanquished  in  Spain  constituting
the  Celtiberi.  We  may  therefore  be  tolerably  certain
that  the  Basques  held  France  and  Spain  before  the  in-
vasion of  the  Celts,  and  that  the  non- Aryan  peoples
were  cut  asunder,  and  certain  parts  of  them  left — Ligu-
rians,  Sikani,  and  in  part  Sardinians  and  Corsicans — as
ethnological  islands,  marking,  so  to  speak,  an  ancient
Basque  non-Aryan  continent  which  had  been  sub-
merged by  the  Celtic  populations  advancing  steadily
westwards.

At  the  time  of  the  Roman  conquest  of  Gaul,  the
Belgse  were  pressing  on  the  Celts,  just  as  the  latter
pressed  the  Basques,  the  Seine  and  the  Marne  forming
their  southern  boundary,  and  in  their  turn  being  pushed
to  the  east  by  the  advance  of  the  Germans  in  the  Ehine
provinces.  Thus  we  have  the  oldest  population,  or
Basque,  invaded  by  the  Celts,  the  Celts  by  the  Belgae,
and  these  again  by  tlie  Germans  ;  their  relative  positions
stamping  theii-  relative  antiquity  in  Europe.


224  THE  POPULATION  OF  BRITAIN.  [chap.

The  Population  of  Britain.

The  Celtic  and  Belgic  invasion  of  Gaul  repeated  itself,
as  might  be  expected,  in  Britain.  Just  as  the  Celts
pushed  back  the  Iberian  population  of  Gaul  as  far  south
as  Aquitania,  and  swept  round  it  into  Spain,  so  they
crossed  over  the  Channel  and  overran  the  greater  portion
of  Britain,  until  the  Silures,  identified  by  Tacitus  ^  with
the  Iberians,  were  left  only  in  those  fastnesses  that
formed  subsequently  a  bulwark  for  the  Brit- Welsh  against
the  English  invaders.  And  just  as  the  Belgsd  pressed
on  the  rear  of  the  Celts  as  far  as  the  Seine,  so  they
followed  them  into  Britain,  and  took  possession  of  the
"  Pars  Maritima,"  *  or  southern  counties.  The  unsettled
condition  of  the  country  at  the  time  of  Caesar's  in-
vasion was,  probably,  due  to  the  struggle  then  going
on  between  Celts  and  Belgae.

The  evidence  offered  by  history  as  to  the  distribution
of  these  races  confirms  that  which  has  been  arrived
at  by  the  examination  of  the  caves  and  tumuli.  In
the  one  case  the  Basque  peoples  are  merely  knowTi
in  a  fragmentary  condition  in  Britain,  Gaul,  and  Sicily,
w^hile  in  the  other  those  fragments  are  joined  together
in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that,  in  the  neolithic
age,  they  extended  uninterrupedly  through  Western
Europe,  from  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  in  the  south  to
Scotland  in  the  north,  before  tliey  were  dispossessed  by
their  broad-headed  enemies.  It  is  impossible  to  define
with  precision  their  ethnological  relation  to  the  non-
Aryan  inhabitants  of  Italy  and  the  coasts  of  the  Medi-
terranean,  such  as  the  Etruscans  and  Tyrrhenians.     I

^  Tacitus,  "Agricola/*  xi.  2  Cajsar,  i.  12.


VI.]  BASQUE  ELEMENTS.  225

am,  however,  inclined  to  hold  that  they  are  all  branches
of  the  same  race  of  "  Melanochroi,"  differing  far  less
from  each  other  than  the  Celtic  from  the  Scandinavian
branch  of  the  Aryan  family/

Basque  Element  in  present  British  and  French

Populations.

This  non-Aryan  blood  is  still  to  be  traced  in  the
dark-haired,  black-eyed,  small,  oval-featured  peoples  in
our  own  country  in  the  region  of  the  Silures,  where  the
hills  have  afforded  shelter  to  the  Basque  populations
from  the  invaders.'  The  small  swarthy  Welshman  of
Denbighshire  is  in  every  respect,  except  dress  and
language,  identical  with  the  Basque  inhabitant  of  the
Western  Pyrenees,  at  Bagn^res  de  Bigorre.

The  small  dark-haired  people  of  Ireland,^  and  espe-  *
cially  those  to  the  west  of  the  Shannon,  according  to
Dr.  Thurnam  and  Professor  Huxley,  are  also  of  Iberian
derivation,  and  singularly  enough  there  is  a  legendary
connection  between  that  island  and  Spain.  The  human
remains  from  the  chambered  tombs  as  well  as  the  river-
beds prove  that  the  non-Aryan  population  spread  over  the
whole  of  Ireland  as  well  as  the  whole  of  Britain.  Il'he
main  mass  of  the  Irish  population  is  undoubtedly  Celtic,
crossed  with  Danish,  Norse,  and  English  blood.

^  Prof.  Huxley  brings  them  into  relation  with  the  ancient  Egyptians,
the  *''•  Melanochroi ''  of  India,  and  the  Australians,  *'  Critiques  and
Addresses,"  p.   134;  Prehistoric  Congress,  Norwich  Volume,  p.  ^
et  sfq.

2  See  Prof.  Huxley's  "Critiques  and  Addresses,"  p.  167.

^  For  a  masterly  account  of  the  varying  stature  in  Britain  and  Ire-
land, see  Dr.  Beddoe's  Essay,  "  Anthrop.  Soc.  Mem.  *  iiL  p.  384 — 573.

Q


226  BASQUE  ELEMENT  IN  FRANCE.  [chap.

The  Basque  element  in  the  population  of  France
is  at  the  present  time  centered  in  the  old  province  of
Aquitaine,  in  which  the  jet-black  hair  and  eyes,  and
swarthy  complexion,  strike  the  eye  of  the  traveller,  now
as  in  the  days  of  Strabo,^  and  form  a  vivid  contrast
with  the  brown  hair  and  grey  eyes  of  the  inhabitants  of
Celtica  and  Belgica  (see  Map,  Fig.  68).  If  Fig.  68
be  compared  with  the  map  published  by  Dr.  Broca
("M^moires  d'Anthropologie,"  t.  i.  p.  330),  which  shows
at  a  glance  the  average  complexion  prevailing  in  each
department,  and  the  relative  number  of  exemptions  per
1,000  conscripts,  on  account  of  their  not  coming  up  to
the  standard  of  height  (1*56  metre  =  5  feet  1^  inches),
it  will  be  seen  that  the  only  swarthy  people  outside
the  boundary  of  Aquitaine  constitute  five  ethnological
islands.  Of  these  Brittany  is  by  far  the  largest,  probably
because  its  fastnesses  afforded  a  shelter  to  the  Basques,
who  were  being  driven  to  the  south-west.  The  depart-
ment of  the  Meuse,  in  the  north,  and  those  of  Tarn
and  Arri^ge,  in  the  south,  are  also  sundered  from
the  main  body,  while  those  of  the  Upper  and  Lower
Alps  present  us  with  the  descendants  of  the  ancient
Ligurian  tribes.

The  people  with  dark-brown  hair,  considered  by  Dr.
Broca  to  be  the  result  of  the  intermingling  of  a  dtirk
with  a  fair  race,  are  scattered  about  through  Aquitaine,
and  occur  only  in  two  departments  in  northern  Celtica.
The  fair  people,  on  the  other  hand,  are  massed  in  north-
ern Celtica  and  Belgioa.     The  relation  of  complexion  to

^  **  roi/c  /i€i'  'AkvVrai'oi/?  reXeu*^  lltjWnyfiirovQ  ov  rrj  yXwrnj  fAovov
oXXa  Kai  Tot9  (Tw/iao'ir,  efiKJxpf'is  *ll3t)p(.a'i  fjaWov  T/  raXaraic  *  rnvs  li
XoiTTOvc  TaXrtTtKov^  fiiy  ri)y  oi//ir,  ofioyXwrrov^  h*  ov  irai'rac,  aXA'  criovc
fAiKpoy  n a paXXarr 6 tTaQ  ralg  yXunrair,*^ — Lib.  iv.  c.  1,  §1.


VI. J  BASQUES  CAME  FROM  THE  EAST.  2 'J 7

stature   may   be  gathered   from  the  following  table  of
exemptions  per  1,000  for  each  department : —

DepartomenU  noirs     ....     98*5  to   189

gris-fonc^s      .     .     64*     ,,     97
gris-clairs  .     .     .     48  8  „     63*8


it


„         blancs-claire   .     .     23*     „     48*5


From  this  table  it  is  evident  that  the  swarthy  people  are
the  smallest  and  the  fair  the  tallest,  the  intermediate
shades  beinjj  the  result  of  fusion  between  the  two
extremes.

The  distribution  therefore  of  the  small  swarthy  Basque,
and  tall  fair  Celtic  and  Belgic  races  in  France  at  the
present  time,  corresponds  essentially  with  that  which  we
might  have  expected  from  the  evidence  both  of  history
and  of  the  neolithic  caves  and  tombs.^

When  we  consider  the  many  invasions  of  France,  and
the  oscillations  to  and  fro  of  peoples,  the  persistence  of
the  Basque  population  is  very  remarkable.  It  is  not  a
little  strange  that  the  type  should  be  so  slightly  altered
by  intermarriage  with  the  conquering  races.

Whence  came  the  Basques  ?

From  what  region  did  the  Basques  invade  Europe  ?
M.  Broca,  from  their  identity  with  the  Kabyles  and
Berbers,  holds  that  they  entered  Europe  from  northern

^  The  correspondence  of  my  map,  Fig.  68,  with  that  of  M.  Broca,
is  one  of  those  undesigned  coincidences  which  are  so  valuable  in
arriving  at  truth,  for  his  most  admirable  essay  on  the  Ethnology  of
France  did  not  come  into  my  hands  until  my  own  map  was  engraved.
M.  Broca  takes  a  different  point  of  view  to  that  advanced  in  these
pages,  holding  that  the  Celts  were  dark  and  the  Belgic  were  blue-eyed
tall  Kymri  or  Cimbi-i.  The  Celts  known  to  history  were  undoubtedly
a  tall  fair  race.

Q  2


228  CELTIC  AND  BELOIC  BRACHYCEPHALL        [chap.

Africa,  spreading  over  Spain,  and  passing  over  the
Pyrenees  into  southern  France.  It  seems,  however,  to
me,  that  from  their  range  as  far  north  as  Scotland,
and  at  least  as  fnr  to  the  east  as  Belgium,  that  they
travelled  by  the  same  route  that  the  Celtic,  Belgic,  and
Germanic  tribes  travelled  long  ages  afterwards,  coming
from  the  east  and  pushing  their  way  to  the  west :  and
that  while  one  section  chose  this  route,  another
mastered  northern  Africa,  following  the  same  westward
direction  as  the  Saracens,  On  this  hypothesis  this  great
pre-Aryan  migration  would  start  from  the  central
plateau  of  Asia,  from  which  all  the  successive  invaders
of  Europe  have  swarmed  off.

This  view  of  the  eastern  derivation  of  the  Basque
peoples  is  confirmed  by  the  examination  of  the  breeds
of  domestic  animals  which  they  possessed.  The  Bo8
longifronSy  the  sheep,  and  the  goat  are  derived  from
wild  stocks  that  are  now  to  be  found  only  in  central
Asia  ;  and  the  dog  and  breed  of  swine  with  small  canines
were  also  probably  imported  after  they  had  become  the
servants  of  man  in  the  east.^

The  Celtic  and  BeUjic  Brachy-cephctli,

The  occurrence  of  broad-skulls  in  the  tumuli  in  this
country,  and  in  cavos  and  tumuli  in  France,  proves  that
the  Basque  peoples  were  invaded  during  the  neolithic

^  In  treatinfij  this  difliciilt  subject,  I  have  purposely  omitted  to  use
the  uncertain  light  of  philolo^'v.  We  may  expect  to  derive  as  much
knowledge  as  to  the  relations  between  Tyrrhenian,  Ligurian,  Basque,
and  other  obscuro  non- Aryan  peoples  from  the  study  of  languages,  as
we  have  already  obtained  of  the  Arvans  bv  the  same  mnans.  It  is
very  probable  that,  like  the  Sanscrit,  the  Bisque  roots  will  be  found
widely  spread  both  in  Asia,  Asia  Minor,  Europe,  and  N.  Africa.


VI.]        BRACHY-CEPEALI  REPRESENTED  BY  CELTS,      229

age.  And  since  Dr.  Thumam  has  shown  that  they
are  identical  in  form  with  Celtic  and  Belgic  skulls,^  it
follows  that  one  or  the  otlier  of  these,  probably  the  Celtic
or  the  older,  was  in  possession  of  portions  of  Britain,
Ireland,  and  Gaul  at  that  remote  time.  It  is  of  course
conceivable  that  non-Celtic  races,  physically  allied  to
the  Celts  or  Belgoe,  are  represented  by  the  human  re-
mains in  question ;  but  in  that  case  they  have  left  no
mark  behind  by  which  they  can  be  identified.  And  the
supposition  is  rendered  imi)robable  to  the  last  degree  by
the  fact,  that  the  older  or  conquered  race — the  Basque
— still  survives,  in  the  area  under  consideration,  the  in-
vasions and  vicissitudes  which  it  has  undergone.  A  for-
tiori, would  their  conquerors  have  had  a  still  greater
chance  of  survival,  in  the  fastnesses  which  are  offered
by  these  countries.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  presume
that  the  broad-headed  peoples  in  the  neolithic  caves  and
tombs  are  represented  by  the  Celts,  and  possibly,  though
not  probably,  in  part  by  the  Belgao,  rather  than  by
the  equally  broad-headed  Wends,  Sclavonians,  and  Fins,
which  are  not  known  by  the  historian  to  have  set
foot  in  Gaul  or  in  Britain.  The  successive  invasions
of  Europe  have  been  invariably  from  the  east  to  the
west,  so  far  as  we  have  any  certain  knowledge ;  and  it  is
most  improbable  that  Wends,  Fins,  or  Sclaves  should
have  occupied  these  countries  and  subsequently  have
retreated  eastwards  against  the  current  of  the  Celtic,
Belgic,  and  Germanic  invasions.

The  Celtae  may,  therefore,  be  inferred  to  have  occupied
Gaul  and  Britain  in  the  ages  of  polished  stone,  bronze,
and  of  iron,  their  encroachment  on  the  non- Aryan  peoples
Ijeing  regulated  by  their  strength,  and  the  amount  of

^  "  Anthrop.  Mem."  Vols.  i.  and  iii.     (Crania  Britannica.)


230  THE  AXCIENT  GEBMANS.  [chaf.

pressure  on  their  rear.  The  Belgae  probably  were  not
known  in  Gaul  until  the  later  portion . of  the  iron  age,
and  were  of  small  importance  as  compared  with  the
Cells,  whose  arms  were  felt  alike  in  Greece,  Italy,  Spain,
and  Asia  Minor.

The  Celts  were  a  tall,  fair-haired,  blue-eyed  race
(Xanthochroi),  contrasting  strongly  with  the  Basque
"  Melanochroi  "),  and  in  those  particulars  agreeing  with
the  Germans.^

ITie  Ancient  German  Race.

The  Germans,  in  the  days  of  Caesar,  were  advancing
on  the  Belgae  in  the  Rhine  provinces,  and  on  the
Helvetii  in  Switzerland,  and  are  recognized  by  Tacitus,*
in  Britain  as  the  red-haired,  t^ll  inhabitants  of  Caledonia.
Subsequently  they  spread  over  the  west  and  south  of
luirope,  as  Goths,  Franks,  Scandinavians,  English  and
Normans  ;  in  this  country  sweeping  the  Brit-Welsh  into
the  hilly  fastnesses  of  Wales,  making  settlements  on
many  points  of  the  coasts  of  Ireland,  and  leaving  behind
them,  to  this  day,  a  considerable  infusion  of  German
blood  in  the  Celtic  and  Basque  populations.  They  were,
unlike  the  present  inhabitants  of  North  Prussia  and
southern  and  middle  Germany,  a  dolicho-cephalic  people,
their  lengtli  of  head  being  due,  according  to  Gratiolet,
to  a  frontal  instead  of  an  occipital  development,  which
causes  the  long-headedness  of  the  Basques.  The  Anglo-
Saxon  skull  is  defined  by  Dr.  Thurnam  iis  prognathous,
with    large    fjicial    bones,    and   with    a    cephalic    index

^  800  Huxlov's  **  ('litiquos  ami  AddreF^es/*  p.  167  et  srq.
'  *'  Hutil.T  ( 'al«Ml(>niam  halatantinm  coiiifp,  magni  artu«  ( rermaniwim
origineiu  a«isev<'iMiit.  "     Agrioola,  c.  xi.


VI.]  CONCLUSIONS.  231

averagiug  *75.  And  these  characters  are  equally  to
be  found  in  the  Gothic,  Frankish,  and  Scandinavian
crania.

General  Conclusions.

In  this  outline  of  the  ethnology  of  Gaul  and  Britain ,
it  will  be  seen  that  two  out  of  the  three  ethnical  elements
(if  the  Belgic  be  classed  with  the  Celtic),  of  which  the
present  population  is  composed,  can  be  recognized  in  the
neolithic  users  of  caves  and  builders  of  chambered  tombs.
A  non-Anan  race  either  identical  or  cosfnate  with  the
Basque  is  the  earliest  traceable  in  these  areas  in  the
neolithic  age,  and  it  probably  arrived  in  Europe  by  the
same  route  as  the  Celtic  and  Germanic,  passing  west-
wards from  the  plains  of  central  Asia.

There  is  no  evidence  of  S})ain  having  been  peopled
from  northern  Africa,  the  identity  of  the  Berber  and
Kabyle  with  the  Basque  being  due  to  their  being
descended  from  the  same  non-Aryan  stock  in  possession
of  southern  and  western  Europe,  and  northern  Africa.
They  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  cousins  rather  than
as  connected  by  descent  in  a  right  line.

The  Basque  race  was  probably  in  jwssession  of  Europe
for  a  long  series  of  ages,  before  hordes  either  identical
or  cognate  with  the  Celts  gradually  crept  westward  over
Germany  into  Gaul,  Spain,  and  Britain,  driving  away,
or  absorbing,  the  inhabitants  of  the  regions  which  they
conquered.


232      CAVES  WITH  REMAINS  OF  DOUBTFUL  AGE.     [chap.


CHAFrER  VIL

CAVES  CONTAINING  HUMAN  REMAINS  OF  DOUBTFUL  AGE.

The  Caves  of   Paviland. — Engis. — Trou  du  Frontal. — Gendron. —

Neanderthal.— Gailenreuth.—Aurignac. — Braniquel ^Cro-MagnoD.

Lombrive. — Cavillon,  near  Mentone. — Grotta  del  Colombi  in  Island
of  Palmaria,  inhabited  by  Cannibals. — General  Conclusions.

There  are  many  prehistoric  caves  in  Britain  and  on  the
Continent  which  do  not  contain  remains  sufficiently
characteristic  to  fix  the  date  of  their  use,  either  for
occupation  or  burial,  unless  the  term  neolithic  be  under-
stood to  cover  the  wide  interval  between  the  palaeolithic
stage  of  the  pleistocene  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  bronze


age  on  the  other.


The  Paviland  Cave.


The  Cave  of  Goat  s  Hole  ^  at  Paviland,  in  Glamorgan-
shire, explored  by  Dr.  Buckland  in  1823,  offers  an  in-
stance of  an  interment  having  been  made  in  a  pre-existent
deposit  of  the  pleistocene  age.  It  consists  of  a  chamber
facing  to  the  sea,  in  a  cliff  of  limestone  100  feet  high,
at  a  level  of  from  30  to  40  feet  above  the  high- water
mark.  Its  floor  was  composed  of  red  loam,  containing
the  remains  of  the  woolly-rhinoceros,  hysena,  cave-bear,

^  ''  Keliqnitp  Diluvianac,*'  p.  ^i2  et  »eq.


▼II.J  THE  PA  VI LAND  CA  VE.  233

and  roaromotb.  Close  to  a  skull  with  tusks  of  the
last  animal  a  human  skeleton  (equalling  in  size  the
largest  male  skeleton  in  the  Oxford  Museum)  was  dis-
covered ;  and  in  the  soil,  "  which  had  apparently  been
disturbed  by  ancient  diggings,"  were  fragments  of  char-
coal, a  small  chipped  flint,  and  the  sea-shells  of  the
neighbouring  shore.  Certain  small  ivory  ornaments,
found  close  to  the  skeleton,  are  considered  by  Dr.
Buckland  to  have  been  carved  out  of  the  tusks  of  the
mammoth  near  which  they  rested ;  and  he  justly
remarks  that,  "iis  they  must  have  been  cut  to  their
present  shape  at  a  time  when  the  ivory  was  hard,  and
not  crumbling  to  pieces,  as  it  is  at  present  at  the
slightest  touch,  we  may  from  this  circumstance  assume
for  them  a  high  antiquity."

May  we  not  also  infer,  from  the  fact  of  the  manu-
factured ivory  and  the  tusks  from  which  it  was  cut  being
in  precisely  the  same  state  of  decomposition,  that  the
tusks  were  preserved  from  decay,  during  the  pleistocene
times,  by  precisely  the  same  agency  as  those  now  found
perfect  in  the  polar  regions — namely,  the  intense  cold ;
that  after  the  skull  of  the  mammoth  had  been  buried
in  the  cave,  the  tusks,  thus  preserved,  were  used  for  the
manufacture  of  ornaments ;  and  that,  at  some  time  subse-
quent to  the  interment  of  the  ornaments  with  the  corpse,
a  climatal  change  has  taken  place,  by  which  the  tem-
perature in  England,  France,  and  Germany  has  been
raised,  and  the  ivory  became  decomposed  that  up  to
that  time  had  preserved  its  gelatine  ?  On  this  point  it  is
worthy  of  remark  that  fossil  tusks  have  been  discovered
in  Scotland  sufficiently  perfect  to  be  used  as  ivory.
The  ornaments  may,  however,  not  have  been  made  from
the  fossil  tuskf?.


234  THE  CAVE  OF  EKQIS  [chap.

The  presence  of  the  bonea  of  sheep  underneath  the
remains  of  mammoth,  bear,  and  other  animals,  coupled
with  the  state  of  the  cave  earth,  which  had  been  dis-
turbed  before  Dr.  Buckland's  examination  of  the  cave,
would  prove  that  the  interment  is  not  of  pleistocene  date.
No  traces  of  sheep  or  goat  have  as  yet  been  afforded  by
any  pleistocene  deposit  in  Britain,  France,  or  Germany.

Dr.  Buckland  s  conclusion,  that  the  interment  is  rela-
tively more  modern  than  the  accumulation  with  remains
of  the  extinct  mammalia,  must  be  accepted  as  the  true
interpretation  of  the  facts.  The  intimate  association
of  the  two  sets  of  remains,  of  widely  diverse  ages,  in
this  cave  show  that  extreme  care  is  necessary  in  cave
exploration.

The  Cave  of  Engis.

Human  remains  have  been  obtained  from  some  of  the
caves  of  IJelgium  under  circumstances  which  are  generally
consiJcHid  to  indi.:ate  that  they  are  of  the  same  antiquity
as  the  skc'letoijs  of  the  animals  wdth  which  they  are  asso-
ciated. The  possil)ility,  however,  of  the  contents  of  caves
of  different  ages  l)eing  mixed  by  the  action  of  water,  or
by  the  burrowing  of  animals,  or  by  subsequent  inter-
ments, renders  such  an  association  of  little  value,  unless
the  evidence  be  very  decided.  The  famous  human  skull
discovered  by  Dr.  Schmerling^  in  the  cave  of  Engis,
near  Liege,  in  1S33,  is  a  case  in  point.  It  was  obtained
from  a  mass  of  breccia,  along  with  bones  and  teeth  of
niaminoth,  rliiuoeeros,  horse,  hyoena,  and  bt»ar ;  and  sub-

*   S(■}nllo^lin^^  ''  Kpclirn'ln's  sur  los  Os^onipnts  Fossilrs  dfoouvorts
'Inns  li's  ('nvrriH's  do  la  [)ruvincr'  de  Lif^^p."  4to.  183.'^-t,  p.  29  et  urtf.


vii.]  OF  DOUBTFUL  AGE,  235

sequeutly  M.  Dupoiit  *  found  in  the  same  spot  a  human
ulna,  other  human  bones,  worked  flints,  and  a  small
fragment  of  coarse  earthenware.  The  discovery  of  this
last  is  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  human  remains  being
of  a  later  date  than  the  extinct  mammalia,  since  pottery
has  not  yet  been  proved  to  have  been  known  to  the
palaeolithic  races  who  co-existed  with  them,  while  it  is
very  abundant  in  neolithic  burial-places  and  tombs.
The  fact  of  all  the  objects  being  cemented  together  by
calcareous  infiltration  is  no  test  of  relative  acre,  which
cannot  be  ascertained  without  distinct  stratification,
such  as  that  in  the  caves  of  Wookey  and  Kent's  Hole.

It  seems  therefore  to  me,  that  the  conditions  of  the
discovery  are  too  doubtful  to  admit  of  the  conclusion  of
Sir  Charles  Lyell  and  other  eminent  writers,  that  the
human  remains  are  of  palaeolithic  age.

The  skull  is  described  by  Professor  Huxley  ^  as  being
of  average  size,  its  contour  agreeing  equally  well  with
some  Australian  and  European  skulls;  it  presents  no
marks  of  degradation,  "  and  is  in  fact  a  fair  average
human  skull,  which  might  have  belonged  to  a  philoso-
pher, or  might  have  contained  the  thoughtless  brains  of
a  savage."  Its  measurements  fall  within  the  limits  of
the  long-skulls  described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  and
it  certainly  belongs  to  the  same  class.

^  Diipont,  "UHomnie  pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre,  dans  les  environs
de  Dinant  sur-Meuse,"  p.  ix.  The  implements  are  paleolithic  (see
p.  22),  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  they  are  of  the  same  antiquity  as
the  human  remains.     They  may  be,  and  probably  are,  much  older.

■^  "  Man's  Place  in  Nature,"  chap.  iii.  Lyeiri*  "  Antiquity  of  Man,*'
1st  edition,  p.  63.


236


THOU  DU  FRONTAL.


[OHAP.


The  following  Table  will  show  the  variation  in  size
and  form  of  the  skulls  mentioned  in  this  chapter  :

Mtaturemenis  of  Skulls  of  doubtful  antiquity.


L«>ngth.  Breadth.

I

1

Height.

Cireuin.
ference.

Cenba-

lie
index.

AlUtai-
diiiaJ
index

Engis  (Huxley) .     .     .     .17-7
Trou  du  Froiitid  (Pruner-  !    ^.^

Bey ^    ^^

Oailenreuth  (Dawkins)    .   ,    6*82
Neanderthal(Schaafihaii8eii),  12-0
Cro-Magiion,  No.  1  (Broca)!    7*95
M    2      „      1    7-52

„    8      „      !    7-94

j

5-4

5-6

5-5

5-75

5-86

5-39

5-94

—

20-5

21-55

21-55

23

22-36

21-26

22-24

•700

•811

•813

•720

•780

•71

•74

1  S  p  1  1  1  1

Trou  du  Frontal.


The  human  skeletons  in  the  Trou  du  Frontal,  situated
in  a  picturesque  limestone  cliff  on  the  banks  of  the
Lesse,  near  Furfooz,  are  considered  by  M.  Dupont  to
be  of  the  same  age  as  the  contents  of  the  caves  close
by  the  Trou  des  Nutons  and  Trou  Kosette,  which  have
been  inhabited  by  palc'eolithic  savages.  The  following
is  the  section  (Fig.  69)  which  he  gives  of  the  deposits.
Close  to  the  river  Lesse  is  the  alluvium  (No.  1),  below
which  is  a  clay  (No.  2),  with  angular  blocks  passing
upwards  under  the  rock  shelter,  and  filling  the  cave.
Under  this  is  a  stratum  of  loam  (No.  3),  resting  on
gravel  (No.  4).  Sixteen  human  skeletons  were  disco-
vered in  the  sepulchral  cavity  (s),  at  the  mouth  of
which  was  a  large  slab  of  rock  (d),  by  which  it  was
originally  blocked  up.  A  singular  urn,  with  a  round
bottom  and  with  the  handles  perforated  for  suspension,
was  found  at  the  entrance,  together  with  flint  flakes,
ornjiniriits  in   fluorine,  and  eocene  shells  perforated  for


ru.J


THE  BUFU8E-EEAP  ANV  HEARTH.


suspension.  Outside,  at  the  points  H  H,  was  an  uccu-
mulation  of  broken  bones,  belonging  to  the  lemming,
tiiilless  hare  (Lagomys),  beaver,  wild  cat,  boar,  horse,
stag,  urus,  chamois,  goat,  and  other  animals,  birds  and
fishes.  From  the  occurrence  of  fragments  belonging  to
two  reindeer,  it  is  considered  by  M.  Dupont  to  belong
to  the  reindeer  age.  The  old  hearth  was  close  by,  at
F  (Fig.  f


eO.—Rtri  on  of  Uia  Trou  da  Frontal      (Dnpont  )


From  this  section  we  may  infer,  that  the  rock-shelter
was  used  by  man  at  the  i»oiiit3  h  r  and  F  before  the
formation  of  the  stratum  No.  2,  which  is  probably
merely  sub-aerial  rain-wash,  due  to  the  disintegration  of
the  a^^ljaeent  rocks,  and  that  the  sepulchral  cavity  was
a  place  of  burial  either  before,  or  while  No,  2  was
accumulated.  Can  we  further  conclude  that  there  is  any
necessary  connection  between  the  refuse-heap  and  the
sepulchre  in  point  of  time  ?  M.  Dupont  holds  that  the
contents  of  all  the  caves  in  the  clifF  are  palaeolithic,  and


233  THE  CRANIA.  [ceat.

that  the  sepulchral  cavity  is  therefore  of  that  agc.^  It
seems  to  me,  liowever,  that  the  evidence  in  favour  of
this  view  is  not  conclusive.  The  burial  place  may  have
belonged  to  one  people,  and  the  refuse-heaps  in  the
neighbouring  caves  and  outside  the  slab  in  the  rock-
shelter  of  the  Trou  du  Frontal  to  another.  The.  form  of
the  urn  is  remarkably  like  some  of  those  which  have
been  obtained  from  the  neolithic  pile-dwellings  of
Switzerland,  and  therefore  may  possibly  imply  that
the  interment  is  of  that  age.

The  human  remains  were  mixed  peh  m^le  with  stones
and  yellow  clay  within  the  chamber.  Two  skulls,  suffi-
ciently perfect  to  allow  of  measurement,  show  that  their
possessors  were  broad-headed  (brachy -cephalic),  and  of
the  same  type  as  those  of  Sclaigneaux.  They  are  con-
sidered by  the  late  Dr.  Pruner-Bey  to  belong  to  the
"  type  Mongoloide,"  and  are  believed  by  M.  Dupont
to  prove  tliat  the  paloeolithic  inhabitants  of  Belgium
were  a  ^loiigoloid  race.  They  seem,  however,  to  be
of  the  same  general  order  as  the  broad-skulls  from  the
neolithic  caves  and  tombs  of  France,  and  from  the  round
barrows  of  Great  Britain,  as  well  as  those  from  the
neolithic  tombs  of  Borreby  and  Moon  in  Scandinavia.
And  they  are  looked  upon  by  MM.  de  Quatrefages,
Virchow,  and  Lagneaux,^  as  presenting  the  same  typp
as  that  which  is  to  be  recognized  in  the  present  popula-
tion of  Belgium,  in  the  neighbourhood,  for  example,  of
Antwerp.

These  affinities  may  be  explained  by  the  view  ad-
vanced by  Dr.  Thurnam,  that  the  broad-heads  of  the
British,   French,    and   Scandinavian   tombs  are   cognate

^   DupoTit,  np.  n'f.  p.  56.

'   Prehistoric  ('ongress,  Brussels,  1872,  p.  540  et  s^q.


vii.]  THE  CAVE  OF  GEXDllON.  239

with  the  modem  Fin ;  or  by  the  higher  generalisation
of  Prof.  Huxley,  that  the  Swiss  "  Dissentis  '*  skull,  the
South  German,  the  Selavonian,  and  the  Finnish,  belong
to  one  great  race  of  fair-haired,  broad-headed,  Xantho-
chroi  **  who  have  extended  across  Europe  from  Britain
to  Sarmatia,  and  we  know  not  how  much  further  to  the
east  and  south."  ^

Besides  these  broad  crania,  M.  Lagneaux  ^  calls  atten-
tion to  a  fragment,  sufficiently  perfect  to  indicate  a  skull
of  the  long  type  (trbs  dolicho-c^phale),  and  that  diflfered
from  them  in  many  other  particulars.  In  the  Trou  du
Frontal,  therefore,  there  is  proof  that  a  long  and  a  short-
headed  race  lived  in  Belgium  side  by  side,  just  as  a
similar  association  in  the  cave  of  Orrouy  establishes  the
same  conclusion  as  to  the  neolithic  dwellers  in  France.
And  since  skulls  of  both  these  types  have  been  dis-
covered in  the  neolithic  caves  of  Schugneaux  and  Chau-
vaux,  the  interment  in  the  Trou  du  Frontal  may  pro-
bably be  referred  to  that  date.

The   Cave  of  Gendron.

The  sepulchral  cave  of  Gendron  ®  on  the  Lesse,  in
which  fourteen  skeletons  were  discovered  lying  at  full
length,  and  in  regular  order,  along  with  one  flake  and
some  fragments  of  pottery,  is  of  uncertain  age,  since
those  articles  were  found  at  the  entrance,  and  have  no
necessary  connection  with  the  interments.  And  if  they
were  deposited  at  the  same  time,  M.  Dupont's  view  that
they  stamp  the  neolithic  age  is  rendered  untenable  by

*  Huxley  and  I>ainp,  "  Prehistoric  Eemains  of  Caithness.*'
'  Intern.  Congress,  Brussels  Volume,  p.  549.
^  Dupont,  op,  cif.  p.  140.


240  THE  CAVE  OF  OAlLENREUTB.  [chaf.

tbe  fact  that  flakes  and  rude  pottery  were  in  use  as  late
as  the  date  of  the  Roman  conquest  of  Britain,  and  are
frequently  met  with  in  association  with  articles  of
bronze  and  of  iron.  And  for  the  same  reasons  the
neolithic  <age  of  the  human  bones  in  the  Trou  de  Sureau
and  of  the  Trou  de  Pont-Jt-Lesse  is  open  to  considerable
doubt.  The  contents,  however,  prove  these  caves  to  be
post-pleistocene.

Cave  of  Gailenreuth.

The  same  uncertainty  overhangs  the  age  of  the  inter-
ments in  the  cave  of  Gailenreuth,  in  Franconia,  from
which  Dr.  Buckland  ^  obtained  a  human  skull  of  the
same  broad  type  as  that  from  Sclaigneaux,  along  with
fragments  of  black  coarse  pottery,  one  of  which  is  orna-
mented with  a  line  of  finger-impressions.  ITie  skull  is
remarkable  for  the  great  width  of  the  parietal  protu-
berances, and  the  flattening  of  the  upper  and  posterior
region  of  the  parietal  bone.  Its  measurements  are  given
in  the  Table,  p.  236,  from  which  it  will  be  seen  that  it
belongs  to  the  same  class  of  skulls  as  those  from  the
neolithic  caves  and  tumuli  of  France.

Cave  of  Neanderthal.

The  extraordinary  skull  found  in  1857  in  the  cave  of
Neanderthal,^  by  Dr.  Fuhlrott,  with  some  of  the  other
bones  of  the  skeleton,  was  not  associated  with  any  other

^  Buckland,  **  Reliquiae  Diluviana?."  p.  1 35.  These  specimens  are  in
the  Oxford  Museum,  and  are  identified  by  Lord  Enniskillen  as  having
been  derived  from  Gailenreuth.

2  Schaaffhausen,  translated  by  Busk,  **Nat.  Hist  Review,"  April
1801.  Huxley,  "Man's  Place  in  Nature,"  iii.  p.  156-171.  Lyell's
"  Antiquity  of  Man,"  1st  edition,  p.  75.


VII.]  SKULL  FROM  CAVE  OF  NEANDERTHAL.  241

animals  from  which  its  age  could  be  inferred.  "  Under
whatever  aspect,"  writes  Professor  Huxley,  **  we  view  this
cranium,  whether  we  regard  its  vertical  depression,  the
enormous  thickness  of  its  supraciliary  ridges,  its  sloping
occiput,  or  its  long  and  straight  squamosal  suture,  we
meet  with  ape-like  characters,  stamping  it  as  the  most
pithecoid  of  human  crania  yet  discovered.  But  Prof.
SchaafFhausen  states  that  the  cranium,  in  its  present
condition,  holds  1033*24  cubic  centimetres  of  water,  or
about  63  cubic  inches,  and  as  the  entire  skull  could
hardly  have  held  less  than  an  additional  1 2  cubic  inches,
its  capacity  may  be  estimated  at  about  75  cubic  inches,
which  is  the  average  capacity  given  by  Morton  for
Polynesian  and  Hottentot  skulls.

So  large  a  mass  of  brain  as  this  would  alone  suggest
that  the  pithecoid  tendencies,  indicated  by  this  skull,
did  not  extend  deep  into  the  organization,  and  this
conclusion  is  borne  out  by  the  dimensions  of  the  other
bones  of  the  skeleton,  given  by  Prof  SchaafFhausen,
which  show  that  the  absolute  lu'iglit  and  relative  pro-
portions of  the  limbs  were  quite  those  of  a  European
of  middle  stature.  The  bones  are  indeed  stouter,  but
this,  and  the  great  development  of  the  muscular  ridges
noted  by  Dr.  Schaaff hausen,  are  characters  to  be  expected
in  savages.  The  Patagonians,  exposed  without  shelter  or
protection  to  a  climate  possibly  not  very  dissimilar  from
that  of  Europe  at  the  time  during  which  the  Neander-
thal man  lived,  are  remarkable  for  the  stoutness  of  their
limb-bones.

In  no  sense,  then,  can  the  Neanderthal  bones  be  re-
garded as  the  remains  of  a  human  being  intermediate
between  men  and  apes ;  at  most  they  demonstrate  the
existence  of  a  man  whose  skull  may  be  said  to  revert

R


t


242  TH  E  INTERMENT  IN  A  VRIGNA  C.  [chap.

soniewliat  towards  the  pithecoid  type — just  as  a  carrier,
or  a  poulter,  or  a  tumbler  may  sometimes  put  on  the
plumage  of  its  primitive  stock,  the  Colmnba  liviaJ'

This  skull,  like  the  preceding,  belongs  to  the  dolicho-
cephalic division,  reaching  the  enormous  length  of
twelve  inches,  with  a  parietal  breadth  of  5*75.

A  long-skull  found  near  Ledbury  Hill  in  Derbyshire,
and  belonging  to  the  river-bed  type  of  Prof.  Huxley,
comes  so  close  to  this  one  of  Neanderthal,  that  were  it
flattened  a  little  and  elongated,  and  possessed  of  larger
supraciliary  ridges,  it  would  be  converted  into  the  nearest
likeness  which  has  vet  been  discovered.^

lite  Caves  of  France. — Aunfjnac.

In  the  cave  of  Neanderthal,  the  question  of  the  anti-
(juity  of  the  human  remains  is  not  complicated  by  the
juxtaposition  of  extinct  pleistocene  animals  or  of  palaeo-
lithic implements.  Those  caves,  however,  in  France
which  claim  especial  attention,  Aurignac,  Bruniquel,  and
Cro-Magnon,  are  e(|ually  famous  for  their  interments,
and  the  pahT?oIithic  implements  which  they  have  fur-
nished, along  with  the  remains  of  the  mammoth,  woolly
rliinoccros,  and  other  extinct  animals.

Tl)cy  have  both  been  inhabited  Ijy  palaeolithic  man,
and  l)een  used  some  time  for  burial.  Does  the  period  of
habitation  coincide  with  that  of  the  burial  ?  This  impor-
tant (piestion  has  been  answered  almost  universally  in  the
atiirmative,  and  the  interments  are  viewed  iis  eWdence
of  a  belief  in  the  supra-natural  among  the  most  ancient
inhabitants  of  Europe*,  as  well  as  offering  examples  of
tlirir  physi(jue.

'  Huxley  and  Laing,  "  ]Vehis»toric  Kemains  of  Caithness,"  p.  115.


VII.]  HISTORY  OF  DISCOVERY,  243

The  fonions  cave  of  Aurignac,  near  the  town  of
that  name,  in  the  department  of  the  Hante  Garonne,
was  explored  and  descril^ed  by  the  late  M.  Ed.  Lartet,
and  his  conclusions  were  adopted  by  Sir  Charles
Lyell  in  the  first  three  editions  of  the  "  Antiquity
of  Man."  In  the  fourth  edition/  however,  the  latter
autlior,  after  a.  reconsideration  of  all  the  circumstances,
qualifies  his  acceptance  of  the  palaeolithic  age  of  the
interments,  and  shares  the  doubts  which  have  been  ex-
pressed by  Sir  John  Lubbock  and  Mr.  John  Evans.
The  evidence  is  as  follows  : —

]\[.  Lartet's  account  falls  naturally  into  two  parts  :
first,  the  story  which  he  was  told  by  the  original  dis-
coverer of  the  cave ;  and,  secondly,  that  in  which  the
results  of  his  own  discoveries  are  described.  We  will
begin  with  the  first.  In  the  year  1852,  a  labourer,
name<l  Bonnemaison,  employed  in  mending  the  roads,
j)ut  his  hand  into  a  rabbit-hole  (Fig.  70,  /),  and  drew
out  a  human  bone,  and  having  his  curiosity  excited,
he  dug  down  until,  as  his  story  goes,  he  came  to  a
great  slab  of  rock.  Having  removed  this,  he  discovered
on  the  other  side  a  cavity  seven  or  eight  feet  in  height,
ten  in  width,  and  seven  in  depth,  almost  full  of  human
bones,  which  Dr.  Amiel,  the  Mayor  of  Aurignac,  who
was  a  surgeon,  b(Jieved  to  represent  at  least  seventeen
individuals.  All  these  human  remains  were  collected,
and  finally  committed  to  the  parish  cemetery,  where
they  rest  to  the  present  day,  undisturbed  by  sacrilegious
hands.  Fortunately,  however,  Bonnemaison  in  digging
his  way  into  the  grotto,  had  met  with  the  remains
of  extinct  animals,  and  works  of  art ;  and  these  were

^  (-ompare  Lyell,  1st  edition,  p.  182  et  scq.^viiiYi  4th  edition,  p.  122
ct  seq.

R    2


244  Af.  LARTF^rS  EVIDENCK  [chap.

preserved  until,  in  1860,  M.  Lartet •  accidentally  heard
of  the  discovery,  and  investigated  the  circumstances  on
the  spot.  He  found  that  Bonnemaison,  and  the  sexton
who  had  buried  the  human  remains,  had  taken  so  little
note  of  the  place  where  they  were  interred,  that  it  could
not  be  identified,  and  on  examining  the  cave  he  found
that  the  interior  had  been  ransacked,  and  the  original
stratification  to  a  great  extent  disturbed.  M.  Lartet's
exploration  showed  that  a  stratum  containing  the  re-
mains of  the  cave-bear,  lion,  rhinoceros,  hysBna,  mam-
moth, bison,  horse,  and  other  animals,  and  palaeolithic
implements,  like  those  of  Perigord,  extended  from  the
plateau  {d)  outside  into  (h)  the  cave.  On  the  outside  he
met  with  ashes,  and  burnt  and  split  bones,  which  proved
that  it  had  been  used  as  a  feasting-place  by  the  palaeolithic
hunters ;  within  he  detected  no  traces  of  charcoal,  and
no  traces  of  the  hyaenas,  which  were  abundant  outside.
Inside  ho  met  with  a  few  human  bones  in  the  earth
which  Bonnemaison  had  disturbed,  which  were  in  the
same  mineral  condition  as  those  of  the  extinct  animals,
and  ho,  tlierefore,  inferred  that  they  were  of  the  same
a^e.  Such  is  the  summary  of  the  facts  which  M.  Lartet
discovered.  He  has,  of  his  own  personal  knowledge,
only  })roved  that  Aurignac  was  occuj)ied  by  a  tribe
of  hunters  during  the  paloeolithic  age,  and  that  it  had
been  used  as  a  burial-place.

Is  he  further  justified  in  concluding  that  the  period  of
palieolithic  occupation  coincides  with  that  in  which  the
burial  took  place  ?  Bonncmaison's  recollections  may  be
estimated  at  their  proper  value  by  the  significant  fact,
that,  in  the  short  space  of  eight  years  intervening
between  the  discovery  and  the  exploration,  he  had
fornrotten   where   the  skeletons   had  been  buried.     And


VII.]      SKELETONS  ABOVE  PALJEOLITHIC  HTBATVM.      245

even  if  Ilia  account  be  true  iu  the  minutest  dutuil,  it
does  not  afford  a  shadow  of  evidence  in  favour  of
the  cavo  having  been  a  place  of  sepulchre  in  palseo-
lithic  times,  but  merely  that  it  had  been  so  used  at
some  time  or  another.  If  we  turn  to  the  diagram  con-
structed by  M.  Lartet  to  illustrate  his  views  ("  Ann.  des
Sc.  Nat.  Zool.,"  4*  at5r.,  t.  xv.,  pi.  10),  and  made  for
the  most  part  from  Bonncmaisou's  recollections ;  or  to
the  amended  diagram  (Fig.  70)  given  by  Sir  Charles
Lyell  ("  Antiquity  of  Man,"  Ist  ed.,  Fig.  25),  we  shall  see
that  the  skeletons  are  depicted  above  the  stratum  (b)  con-
taining the  palaeolithic  implements  and  pleistocene  mam-
malia ;  and  therefore,  according  to  the  laws  of  geological


/J^i0^


evidence,  they  must  have  been  buried  after  the  .sub-
jacent deposit  was  accumulated.  The  previous  disturb-
ance of  the  cave-earth  does  away  with  the  conclusion,
that  tlic  few  liuman  bones  found  by  M.  Lartet  are
of  tlie  same  age  as  the  extinct  mammalia  in  the  deposit.
The  absence  f>f  charcoal  inside  was  quite  as  likely  to  be


2iG  INTERMENTS  NOT  PALAEOLITHIC.  [chap.

due  to  the  fUet  that  a  fire  kindled  inside  would  fill
the  grotto  with  smoke,  while  outside  the  palaeolithic
savage  could  feast  in  comfort,  as  to  the  view  that  the
ashes  are  those  of  funereal  feasts  in  honour  of  the
dead  within,  held  after  the  slab  had  been  placed  at  the
entrance.  The  absence  of  the  remains  of  hyaenas  from
the  interior  is  also  negative  evidence,  disproved  by
subsequent  examination.

The  researches  of  the  Rev.  S.  W.  King,  in  1865,  com-
plete the  case  against  the  current  view  of  the  palaeolithic
character  of  the  interments,  since  they  show  that  M.
Lartet  did  not  fully  explore  the  cave,  and  that  he  con-
sequently wrote  without  being  in  possession  of  all  the
facts.  The  entrance  was  blocked  up,  according  to  Bonne-
niaison,  by  a  slab  of  stone,  which,  if  the  measurements
of  the  entrance  be  correct,  must  have  been  at  least  nine
feet  long  and  seven  feet  high,  placed,  according  to  M.
Lartt't,  to  keep  the  liya^nas  from  the  corpses  of  the  dead.
It  need  hardlv^  be  remarked,  that  the  access  of  these
bone-eating  animals  to  the  cave  would  be  altogether  in-
compatiljle  with  the  preservation  of  the  human  skeletons,
had  they  l)eon  buried  at  the  same  time.  The  enormous
slal)  was  never  seen  l)y  ]\L  Lartet,  and  it  did  not  keej)
out  the  hya'nas.  In  the  collection  made  by  the  Rev.  S.
AV.  King  from  the  interior  there  are  two  hyrenas'  teeth,
and  nearly  all  the  antlers  and  bones  bear  the  traces  of
the  gnawing  of  these  animals.  The  cave,  moreover,  has
tiro  entrances  instead  of  one,  as  ^I.  Lartet  supposed
when  his  pa})er  in  the  "  Annales  "  was  published.  The
bones  of  the  sheep,  or  goat,  also  obtained  from  the
inside,  and  preserved  in  the  Christy  ]\Iuseum,  afford
strong  evidence  that  the  interment  is  not  palaeolithic  ;
and  a  framient  of  ])otterv,  affreeinor  exactlv  with  that


VII.]  CAVERN  OF  BRUNIQUEL,  247

used  ill  the  neolitliic  age,  probably  indicates  its  relativx*
antiquity.  This  conclusion  has  also  l^een  arrived  at  by  the
two  most  recent  explorers,  MM.  CWtaillac  and  Gautier.

The  skeletons,  therefore,  in  the  Aurignac  cave  cannot
be  taken  to  be  of  the  same  age  as  the  stratum  on  which
they  rested  ;  but,  so  far  as  there  is  any  evidence,  may
probably  he  referred  to  the  neolithic  age,  in  which  the
custom  of  l)urial  in  caves  prevailed  throughout  Europe.

Cavoni  of  Bmniquel.

The  famous  cavern  of  Bruni(pel,  explored  by  the
Vicomte  de  Lastic  in  1863-4,^  and  described  by  Pro-
fessor Owen,  is  also  one  of  the  class  which  has  furnished
human  bones,  along  with  the  remains  of  the  extinct
mammalia.  It  penetrates  a  cliff  in  the  Jurassic  lime-
stone, opposite  the  little  village  of  Bruniquel  (Tarn  and
Garonne),  about  forty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  river
Aveyron.  The  bottom  was  covered  with  a  sheet  of
stalagmite,  resting  on  earth  and  blocks  of  stone,  for  the
most  part  finely  cemented  into  a  breccia,  that  is  black
with  the  particles  of  carbon  constituting  the  "limon
noir''  of  the  workmen,  four  or  five  feet  thick,  beneath
which  is  the  **  limon  rouge,"  or  red  earth  without
charcoal,  from  three  to  four  feet  thick.  Every  part  of
the  breccia  is  charged  with  the  broken  remains  of  the
wolf,  rhinoceros,  horse,  reindeer,  stag,  Irish  elk  and  bison,
and  palaeolithic  implements  of  flint  and  bone ;  some  of
the  latter  having  well-executed  designs  of  the  heads  of
horses  and  reindeer,  which  prove  that  the  cave  had
been  used  as  a  place  of  habitation  by  the  hunters  of
those  animals.  Imbedded  in  the  breccia  at  a  depth
of   from    three   to    five   feet   human    bones   were   met

1  rhil.  Trans.  159,  p.  517.


250  SECTION  OF  DEPOSITS.  [chap.

the   preceding  figure,  whicli  I   am  kindly  allowed  to
]>orro\v  from  the  **  Reliquiae  Aquitanicse "  (Fig.  39).

At  the  time  of  its  discovery  in  1868,  in  the  course  of
making  an  embankment  for  the  railway  close  by,  and
of  obtaining  material  for  mending  the  roads,  it  was
completely  blocked  up.  On  the  removal  of  this  (6),
l)y  the  contractors  MM.  Bertoii-Meyroii  and  Delmar^
tlie  entrance  was  exposed,  and  human  remains  and
worked  flints  revealed,  which  were  carefully  exhumed
in  the  presence  of  MM.  Laganne,  Galy,  and  Simon.
At  this  stage  of  the  exploration  M.  Louis  Lartet
was  deputed,  by  the  Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  to
superintend  the  work,  and  from  his  report  the  following
account  is  taken  (Lartet  and  Christy,  "  liel.  Aq.,"  p.  60)
by  the  courtesy  of  the  editoi's.

**The  cave  of  C^ro-Magnon  is  formed  by  a  projecting
ledge  of  cretaceous  limestone  (rich  with  fossil  corals
and  polyzoans),  liaving  a  thickness  of  8  metres  and  a
length  of  17  metres  (Fig.  72,  p).  The  bed  Avhich  it
overlies,  and  the  destruction  of  which  has  given  rise  to  the
cave,  abounds  with  Rlujuchondla  ves/jcrtilio,  which  is  a
type  fossil,  fixing  the  geological  horizon.  The  dtJbris  of
this  marly  and  micaceous  limestone  had  accumulated  on
the  original  floor  of  the  cavern  to  a  great  thickness,  at
least  for  0*70  metres  (see  Fig.  72,  a),  when  the  huntei-s
of  the  reindeer  stopped  here  for  the  first  time,  leaving  as
a  trace  of  their  short  stay  a  blackish  layer  (Fig.  72,  b),
from  0*05  to  0*15  metre  thick,  containing  worked
flints,  bits  of  charcoal,  broken  or  calcined  bones,  and
in  its  up])er  portion  the  elephant  tusk  before  alluded
(()  (Fig.    72,  a).

*'  This  first  hearth  is  covered  by  a  layer  (r),  0'2.)  metre
thick,  of  cal(are<)us  debris,  detachetl  l>it  by  bit  from  the


TRACES  OF  OCaVPATIOK.


251


I'oof,  during  the  temporary  disuse  of  the  shelter.  Tlien
follows  iiiiother  thin  layer  of  hearth-stuff  (d),  O'lO
nictiL  tl  ick  ilso  contdining  pieces  of  charcoil  bones,
aud  norked  fl  nts      Ihi-*  bed  \a  in  its  turn  overUm  by  a


JO


►■  Tliird  InviT  nf  ashen,  fti'.

i  I!(;<1  carl'li,  with  bones,  k>:.

II  Thickeat  lityiir  of  osIiph,  Iihiu'h.  <ti

I  Vt'llowisli  cartli,  «ith  Iwiies,  Hint!

T  Thill  licl  of  hearth- si ti If.


T'  rrojecliii^cBliclrofharJ  timeiitonr.
V  I'IsRV  ol  the  ]>illartnailo  to  support

a  Tiisk  of  ail  «Unhulit.
h  lluupa  of  an  old  man.
c  Birick  of  fciieiss.
d  lliiiunn  baiifs.

<:  Slabs  of  stone  fallen  fi  om  lliv  roof
at  dilfcii'tit  times.


layer  of  fallen  lime.stone  rubbish  (e),  0"50  metre  thick.
Lastly,  there  is  oxer  these  a  scries  of  moi-e  important
layiTrt,  all  of  them  containing,  in  diftcrent  proportions,


254  THE  ASSOCIATED  ORNAMENTS.  [chap.

partly  repaired  within  ;  indeed  our  physicians  think  that
she  survived  several  weeks.  By  the  side  of  the  woman's
skeleton  was  that  of  an  infant  which  had  not  arrived  at
its  full  time  of  foetal  development.  The  other  skeletons
(Fig.  70,  cl)  seem  to  have  been  those  of  men.

**  Amidst  the  human  remains  lay  a  multitude  of
marine  shells  (about  300),  each  pierced  with  a  hole,
and  nearly  all  belonging  to  the  species  Littorina  littorea
so  common  on  our  Atlantic  coasts.  Some  other  species,
such  as  Purjnira  Icqnllus,  Turritella  communis^  &c.,
occur,  but  in  small  numbci's.  These  are  also  perforated,
and,  like  tlie  others,  have  been  used  for  necklaces,
bracelets,  or  other  ornamental  attire.  Not  far  from  the
skeletons,  I  found  a  pendant  or  amulet  of  ivory,  oval,
flat,  and  pierced  with  two  holes.  M.  Laganne  had
already  discovered  a  smaller  specimen ;  and  M.  Ch.
Grenier,  schoolmaster  at  Les  Eyzies,  has  kindly  given
me  another,  quite  similar,  which  he  had  received  from
one  of  his  pupils.  There  were  also  found  near  the
skeletons  several  perforated  teeth,  a  large  block  of
gneiss,  split  and  presenting  a  large  smoothed  surface  ;
also  worked  antlers  of  reindeer,  and  chipped  flints,  of
the  same  types  as  those  foun<l  in  the  hearth-layers
underneath.

**....  The  presence,  at  all  levels,  of  the  same  kind
of  flint  scrnpers,  ns  finely  chipped  as  those  of  the  Gorge
d'Eufer,  and  of  the  same  animals  as  in  that  classic
station,  evidently  shows  them  to  be  relics  of  the  suc-
cessive hal)itation  of  the  Cro-Magnon  shelter  by  the
same  race  of  nomadic  hunters,  who  at  first  could  use
it  merely  as  a  rendezvous,  where  they  came  to  share  the
spoils  of  the  chase  taken  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  but
<*oming  ngain,  they  mndo  a  more  permanent  occupation.


vii]  INTERMENT  NOT  PROVED  PALEOLITHIC,         255

until  their  accumulated  refuse  aixl  the  dtJbris  gradually
raised  the  floor  of  the  cave,  leaving  the  inconvenient
height  of  only  1*20  metre  between  it  and  the  roof;
and  then  they  abandoned  it  by  degrees,  returaing  once
more  at  hist  to  conceal  their  deod  there.  No  longer
accessible,  except  perhaps  to  the  foxes  above  noticed,
this  shelter,  and  its  strange  sepulture,  were  slowly  and
completely  hidden  from  sight  by  atmospheric  degrada-
tion l)ringing  down  the  earthy  covering,  which,  by  its
thickness,  alone  proves  the  great  antiquity  of  the  burial
in  the  cave/'

These  conclusions  as  to  the  age  of  the  burial  do  not
seem  to  me  to  be  supported  by  the  facts  of  the  case.  That
the  cave  was  inhabited  by  a  tribe  of  palaeolithic  hunters
there  can  be  no  doubt,  but  no  evidence  has  l^een  brought
forward  that  it  was  used  by  them  for  the  burial  of  their
dead.  They  "  abandoned  it  by  degrees,"  but  what  proof
is  there  that  they  **  returned  once  more  to  conceal  their
dead  "  ?  The  interments  are  at  a  higher  horizon  than  the
strata  of  occupation,  and  therefore  later,  and  although
paheolithic  implements  have  been  found  "  near ''  them,
the  value  of  the  latter,  in  indicating  the  date,  is  destroyed
by  their  occurrence  throughout  the  old  floors  below.
If  we  suppose  that  long  after  the  cave  had  been  in-
hal)ited  by  the  hunters  of  the  reindeer,  it  was  chosen  by
a  family  as  a  burial-place,  all  the  conditions  of  the  dis-
covery will  be  satisfied.  The  pre-existent  strata  would
be  disturbed  in  the  process  of  burial,  and  the  burrowing
of  foxes,  and  possibly  of  rabbits,  might  bring  the  palaeo-
lithic implements  into  close  association  with  the  human
bones.  Taking  the  w^hole  evidence  into  account,  I  should
feel  inclined  to  assign  tlie  interment  to  the  neolithic
age,  in  which  cave-burial  was  so  common ;  but  whatever


256  THE  CAVE  OF  LOMBRIVE.  [chap.

view  be  held,  the  facts  do  not  waxrant  the  human
skeletons  being  taken  as  proving  the  physique  of  the
palaBolithic  hunters  of  the  Dordogne,  or  as  a  basis  for  an
inquiry  into  the  ethnology  of  the  palaeolithic  racea

The  largest  cranium  (see  Table,  p.  236),  belonging  to
an  old  man,  had  the  frontal  region  well  developed,  is
orthognathic,  with  upturned  nasals,  and  dolicho-cephalic.
The  occipital  protuberance,  or  probole,  is  smalL  The
bones  of  the  extremity  imply  a  stature  of  not  less  than
five  foot  eleven  inches  for  the  man  ;  the  femur  is  carinate,
and  the  tibice  platycnemic  (see  Fig.  48).

The  Cave  of  Lombrive.

The  human  bones,  obtained  by  MM.  Garrigou,  Filhol,
and  Rames,  from  the  cave  of  Lombrive  ^  in  the  Depart-
ment of  Arifege,  are,  equally  with  those  cited  above,  of
doubtful  antiquity.  They  were  discovered  on  the  super-
ficial sandy  loam,  passing  in  places  into  a  calcareous
breccia,  which  rests  at  various  levels  in  the  chambers,
passages,  and  fissures,  along  with  bones  of  the  brown-
bear,  urus,  small  ox,  reindeer,  stag,  horse,  and  dog.
From  the  occurrence  of  the  reindeer  the  deposit  is
assigned  to  the  palaeolithic  age.  But  since  this  animal
has  been  proved  to  have  been  eaten  in  Scotland  by  the
neolithic  men  of  Caithness,  and  to  have  inhabited  Britain
in  the  prehistoric  age,  it  is  by  no  means  improbable  that
it  may  also  have  lived  in  the  region  of  the  Pyrenees  in
post-pleistocene  times.  The  presence  of  the  dog  and  the
small  domestic  ox  {Bos  longifrons  ?)  fixes  the  date  of
the  accumulation  as  not  being  earlier  than  prehistoric;

*  Vogt,  "  Lectures  on  Man/'  pp.  329-380.      Thurnani,  "Antbrop.
Mem.''  i.  501.


VII.]  CAVE  OF  CAVILLON.  237

for  both  those  auimals  were  introduced  into  Europe  by
neolithic  peoples.

The  two  human  skulls,  described  by  Professor  Vogt,
from  this  deposit  confirm  this  conclusion,  since  they  are
of  the  broad  type,  and  differ  in  no  important  character
(Thurnam)  from  those  of  the  neolithic  brachy-cephali  of
France  and  Belgium.

The  Cave  of  Cavillon,  near  Mentone,

The  cave  of  Cavillon,  explored  by  M.  Riviere,  in  1872,
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mentone,  a  few  hundred  yards  on
the  Italian  side  of  the  frontier  of  France,  is  another  case
of  the  occurrence  of  human  remains  in  association  with
those  of  the  extinct  animals.  The  floor  is  composed  of
dark  earth,  full  of  charcoal  and  fragments  of  bones,
mingled  wnth  blocks  of  stone  which  have  dropped  from
the  roof.  Below  it,  at  a  depth  of  six  and  a  half  metres,
a  skeleton  was  met  with,  as  well  as  flint-flakes,  rude
instruments  of  bone,  and  a  number  of  shells  perforated
for  suspension.  The  skull  was  covered  with  a  head-dress
of  more  than  200  perforated  sea-shells.  It  rested  in  an
attitude  of  repose,  with  the  legs  and  arms  bent,^  as  may
be  seen  in  the  admirable  photo-lithograph  given  by  M.
Riviere  in  the  volume  of  the  **  International  Congress  of
Prehistoric  Archaeology,*'  published  at  Brussels,  pi.  6.
The  teeth  and  bones  of  hyaena,  lion,  woolly  rhinoceros,
mammoth,  and  other  pleistocene  animals  occurred  both
in  the  soil  above  and  below,  and  for  that  reason  both  the
discoverer  and  Sir  Charles  Lyell  believe  that  the  inter-
ment dates  back  to  the  time  when  those  animals  were

^  It  has  been  dug  out  in  its  natural  position,  and  is  now  to  be  seen
in  the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  in  Parifl,  where  I  studied  it  in  tlie  summer
of  1873.


258  GROTTA  DEI  COLOMBI  [chap.

living.  If,  however,  neolithic  savages,  or  those  of  a  later
age,  had  buried  the  skeleton  in  the  earth  containing  the
extinct  animals,  all  the  circumstances  which  have  been
noticed,  either  by  Mr.  Pengelly  or  Mr.  Moggridge,^  may
be  Stitisfactorily  explained.  There  are  no  stalagmites
to  divide  one  stratum  from  another,  and  were  an  in-
terment made  in  the  cave  at  the  present  time,  the
discoverer  two  or  three  centuries  hence  might  assert,
with  equal  justice,  that  it  took  place  in  the  pleistocene
age,  because  of  the  association  with  the  animals  charac-
teristic of  that  remote  period.

The  superficial  portions  of  the  cave-earth  had  cer-
tainly been  disturbed,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
disturbance  did  not  extend  down  to  the  horizon  where
the  skeleton  rested.  Nevertheless,  Mr.  Pengelly  con-
cludes that  the  interment  is  of  palaeolithic  age  from  its
analogy  with  that  of  Cro-Magnon  and  Paviland,  which
we  have  seen  to  be  of  equally  doubtful  antiquity  It
seems  to  me  that  this  conclusion,  which  is  almost  univer-
sally accepted,  is  not  warranted  by  the  facts,  and  that
it  cannot  l)e  used  in  support  of  any  speculation  as  to  the
condition  of  man  in  the  pleistocene  age.

Tlic  skull  is  described  by  M.  Rivifere  as  long,  the
thigli-l)ones  are  strongly  carinate,  and  the  tibia?  are
platycnemic  as  in  the  case  of  those  from  Cro-Magnon,
(iibniltar,  Sclaigneaux,  and  North  Wales.

(irofta  del  CoJomhi  in  Island  of  Pidniaria,  inhabited

hf/  Cannibals.

AVc  are  indel>ted  to  Professor  Capellini  for  an  account
of  the  exploration  of  the  Grotta  dei  Colombi,  a  cave  in  a

^  IVngolly,  "  The  Cave  Man  of  Men  tone,"  Trans.  Devon  Ass.  1873.
Moggri(lg(%  r>rit.  Ass.  Edinburgh,  1873.


viT.]  INHABITED  BY  CANNIBALS,  259

vertical  cliff  in  the  island  of  Palmaria/  overlooking  to
the  south  the  Gulf  of  Spezzia.  In  the  red  loam,  com-
posing the  floor,  were  numerous  flakes  and  scrapers,  a
rounded  "striker"  of  Saussurite,  quartz,  pebbles,  frag-
ments of  pottery,  a  bone  needle,  a  whistle  made  of  the
first  phalange  of  a  goat's  foot,  shells  perforated  for
suspension,  Xatica  mille-pimctaia,  Pectunculus  ghj-
chneris,  and  Patella  ccernhia,  together  with  bones  of
goat,  hog,  ox,  wolf,  wild  cat,  and  broken  and  cut  human
bones  belonging  to  children  and  young  adults.

Among  the  remains  Professor  Capellini  dmws  attention
in  particular  to  the  thigh-bones,  scorched  by  fire,  one  of
which  bears  incisions  on  its  posterior  face  made  by  a  flint
implement  in  cutting  away  the  flesh  (PL  73,  «),  and  is
also  marked  by  scraping.  He  considers  that  they  belong
to  an  ape,  closely  allied  to  the  Macacus  innuus  of  Gibraltar
and  North  Africa,  and  concludes,  therefore,  that  the
animal  was  living  in  Palmaria  at  the  time  that  the
cave  was  inhabited.  This  identification  is  forbidden
by  the  spongy  texture,  the  rounded  contour,  and  the
absence  of  epiphyses  that  imply  that  the  bone  was  very
young,  and  that  in  the  adult  it  would  l)e  fiir  larger  than
any  thigh-bone  of  tlie  apes.  On  comparing  his  figures
with  eight  femora  belonging  to  young  children,  from  the
cairn  at  Cefn,  and  the  caves  at  Perthi-Chwareu,  I  find
that  they  agree  in  every  particular  with  two,  the  flat-
tening of  the  inferior  extremity,  considered  by  Prof
Calori  to  be  a  non-human  character,  being  equally  met
with  in  all,  and  being  relatively  greater  in  the  younger
than  the  older.  They  offer,  therefore,  unmistakeable
proof  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  cave  were  cannibals
(Fig.   73).     I   am  informed  by  my  friend.  Prof.  Busk,

^  Prehistoric  Congress,  Bologna  Volume,  p.  391,  1873.

S   2


TflWll-BOXE  OF  CHILV.


[CI


that  the  bone  figured  belonged
to  a  child  about  eight  yeara
old.  The  outline  b  in  the
figure  represents  the  contour
of  one  of  the  femora  from  the
cavern  at  Cefn,  described  in
the  fifth  chapter.

In  this  cave,  as  in  those
qiiot^'d  above,  there  are  no
polished  stone  implements,  or
works  of  art,  that  establish
that  these  feasts  were  carried
on  in  the  cave  by  neolithic
{■aiiDibals,  for  the  rude  flint-
flakes  and  bone  articles,  taken
by  Professor  Capelliui  to  fix
its  date,  are  common  btith  to
the  paleeolithic  and  the  bronze
agos.  Nevertheless,  since  the
inhabitants  have  left  bi'hind
no  trace  of  any  metal,  and
siiiec  their  food  was  wholly
supplied  by  the  existing  ani-
mals, they  were  probably  in
the  neolithic  stage  of  cul-
ture, if  this  be  taken  to
cover  the  wide  interval  ex-
tending from  the  pleistocene
to  the  age  of  bronze.  They
arc  proved,  by  the  rudeness
of  their  implements,  to  have
been  savages  of  a  very  low
order.


VII.]  GENERAL  VONCIAJ SIGNS,  261

AVc  may  gather  from  various  allusions,  and  stories
scattered  through  tlie  classical  writers,  such  for  example
as  tliat  of  the  Cyclops,  that  the  caves  on  the  shores
of  the  ]\IoditeiTanean  wctc  inhahited  hy  cannibals  in
ancient  times.  In  the  island  of  Palmaria  we  meet
with  unmistakeable  proof  that  it  was  no  mere  idle
tale  or  poetical  dream.  But  we  have  no  proof  that
cannilnilism  wa^  universally  practis(?d  at  any  stage  in
the  history  of  man.  All  the  caves  of  Europe,  explored
up  to  the  present  time,  merely  afford  some  three  or  four
examples  in  the  neolithic  and  bronze  ages.  In  the
pleistocene  there  is  no  instance  which  is  devoid  of
doubt.  This  atrocious  practice  is  therefore  to  be  viewed
as  abnormal,  and  it  probably  became  ingraft^^d  into  the
religious  ideas  of  the  nations  of  antiquity  from  the
liorror  by  which  it  was  suiTounded,  ultimately  surviving
in  the  form  of  human  sacrifices  to  the  offended  god^.

General  Conclusions  as  to  Prehistoric  Caves,

We  have  seen  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  chapters  that
the  prehistoric  caves  which  are  so  unimportant  in  the
ages  of  bronze  and  iron,  were  used  in  the  neolithic
age  throughout  western  Europe  Ijoth  for  habitation
and  burial,  and  that  they  therefore  offer  us  most
valuable  materials  for  working  out  the  ethnology  of
Europe  at  that  remote  time.  The  two  races  of  men,
the  remains  of  which  they  contain,  are  represented
by  the  modern  Basque  and  Berber  on  the  one  hand,
and  on  the  other  by  the  Celt,  and  in  Russia  and
Germany  l)y  the  cognate  Finn,  Sclave,  and  Wend.
And  since  all  the  human  remains  described  in  the
present  chapter,  those  of  (-ro-Magnon  and  possibly  of


262  CONDITIONS  OF  LIFE  [chap.

tlie  Grotta  dei  Colombi  being  exempted,  belong  to  one
ur  other  of  these  types,  they  may  be  referred  to  the  neo-
litliic  age  with  a  high  degree  of  probability.  In  the
])rescut  stage  of  the  inquiry,  it  is  much  safer  to  put
tliem  into  a  distinct  class,  apart  from  those  to  which  we
can  assign  a  relative  age  with  tolerable  certainty.

In  the  long  ages  which  elapsed  between  the  close
of  the  pleistocene  period  and  the  dawn  of  history
other  races  than  these  may  have  occupied  Europe,
and  have  passed  away  without  leaving  any  clue  as
to  their  identity.  But  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge  we  are  justified  only  in  concluding,  that
the  oldest  population  in  prehistoric  times  was  non-
Aryan,  the  traces  of  which  are  left  behind  not  merely
in  the  caves  and  tombs,  but  in  language,^  and  in  the
small  dark-liaired  inhabitants  of  western  and  southern
Europe.

The  prehistoric  peoples  lived  under  physical  con-
ditions very  (liferent  from  those  of  central  and
western  Europe  at  the  present  lime  ;  the  surface  of  the
country  being  covered  with  rock,  forest,  and  moi-ass,
which  jifforded  shelter  to  the  elk,  bison,  urus,  stag,
niegaceros,  and  wild  boar,  as  well  as  to  innumerable
wolves.  They  arrived  from  the  east  with  cereals  and
domestic  animals,  some  of  which,  such  as  the  Bos
lonijifroits  and  Sus  palu,stn's,  reverted  to  their  original
wihl  state.  From  the  very  exigencies  of  their  position
they  lived  partly  by  hunting,  and  they  gi-adually  pushed
their  way  westward,  carrying  with  them  the  rudiments
of  that  civilization  which  we  ourselves  possess.

^  Sec  on  this  point  a  valuable  essay  by  ^fr.  Hyde  Clark,  **  Palestine
Kxploratiou    Fund  (Quarterly  Statement,"   X.S.   April   1^71,  p.    97


r(


Srn


VI I.J  IN  PBEHISTORIC  AGE,  26:J

It  is  an  open  question  whether  they  came  into  con-
tact with  tlie  palaeolithic  races  which  preceded   them.

The  climate  which  they  enjoyed  was  sufficiently  severe
to  allow  the  reindeer  to  inhabit  the  district  on  which
now  stands  the  city  of  London,  and  its  severity  may  also
be  inferred  from  the  thickness  of  the  bark  of  tlie  Scotch
firs,  observed  by  Mr.  Godwin-Austen  in  the  submarine
forests  of  the  south  of  England,  and  by  Mr.  James
Geikie  in  those  of  Scotland.  The  area  of  Great  Britain
wiis  gi'cater  tlien,  than  now,  since  a  plain  extended
seawards  from  the  coast-line,  nearly  everywhere,  sup-
porting a  dense  forest  of  Scotch  fir,  oak,  birch,  and
alder,  the  relics  of  which  are  to  be  seen  in  the  beds
of  peat,  and  the  stumps  of  the  trees,  near  low-water
mark  on  most  of  our  shores.  And  it  may  be  inferred
that  the  forest  extended  a  considerable  distance  from
the  present  sea  margin,  from  the  large  size  of  the
trunks  of  the  trees.^

^  The  authorities  for  these  facts  will  be  found  iu  my  "  Preliminary
Treatise/'  Palaiont.  Soc.  1874:.  The  prehistoric  age  of  the  forest  is
to  be  fixed  by  the  presence  of  the  goat  and  Bos  longifrons,  both  of
which  were  unknown  in  Europe  in  the  pleistocene  age.


264  RELATION  OF  FLEI8T0CBNB  [chaf.


CHAPTER  VIIL

THE     PLEISTOCENE    CAVES    OF    GERMANY    AND    GREAT

BRITAIN.

Relation  of  Pleistocene  to  Prehistoric  Period. — Magnitude  of  the  In-
terval.— Animals. — Physical  changes. — Excavation  and  filling  up
of  Valleys  :  Fisherton ;  Freshford. — Comparison  of  Deposits  in
Valleys  with  those  of  Caves. — Differences  of  Mineral  Condition. —
The  Pleistocene  Oaves  of  Germany  :  Gailenreuth ;  Klihloch. —
Of  Great  Britain.— The  Caves  of  Yorkshire :  Kirkdale.— Of  Derby-
shire :  The  Dream  Cave. — Of  North  Wales,  near  St.  Asaph. —
Of  South  Wales,  in  counties  of  Glamorgan,  Caermarthen,  Pembroke.
—  Of  Monmouth. — Of  Gloucestershire.— Of  Somersetshire  :  Uphill,
Banwell,  lUeadon,  Sandford  Hill,  Wookey  Hole.— The  District  of
Mendip  higher  in  Pleistocene  age  than  now. — ^The  condition  of
bones  gnawed  l>v  Hya?nas. — The  Caves  of  Devonshire  :  Oreston ;
r>rixham  ;  Kent's  Hole. — The  probable  age  of  the  Machairodus  of
Kent's  Hole. — Those  of  Ireland,  Shandon.

Relation  of  Pleistocene  to  Prehistoric  Period.

We  have  seen,  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  chapters,  that  the
caves  offer  vahiable  information  as  to  the  prehistoric
ethnology  of  Euro}x*,  and  tliat  they  prove  the  ancient
neolithic  popuhition  to  stand  directly  related  to  the
Basque  and  Celtic  elements  in  the  present  inhabitants  of
Britain,  France,  and  Spain.  We  shall  discover  in  the
course  of  this  and  the  following  chapters  that  no  such


vii:.]  TO  PREHISTORIC  AGE.  265

continuity  can  be  made  out  between  the  palaeolithic
man  of  the  pleistocene  age  and  any  of  the  races  now
living  in  our  quarter  of  the  world ;  and  we  shall  see
that  he  is  separated  from  his  neolithic  successor  by
an  interval  of  time,  the  length  of  which  cannot  be
measured  in  terms  of  years.  Before  the  pleistocene
group  of  caves  be  examined,  it  will  be  necessary  to
define  the  relation  that  exists  between  the  prehistoric
and  the  pleistocene  periods.

The  Animals — Magnitude  of  Interval.

The  prehistoric  mammalia  consist,  as  we  have  seen
(p.  136),  with  the  solitary  exception  of  the  Irish  elk,  of
the  wild  animals  at  present  living  in  Europe,  together
with  the  domestic  species  and  varieties  introduced  by
man,  probably  from  central  Asia.  In  the  rest  of  this
work  we  shall  have  to  deal,  not  merely  with  the  wild
animals  at  present  inhabiting  Europe,  but  also  with
those  which  have  either  become  extinct,  or  have  migrated
to  Asia,  America,  or  Africa.  Besides  this  addition  to
the  European  fauna  in  the  pleistocene  age,  the  total
absence  of  the  domestic  animals  is  a  most  important
feature.  The  dog,  goat,  sheep,  Celtic  short-horn,  and
domestic  swine  are  conspicuous  by  their  absence :  the
reputed  association  of  their  remains  Tvith  those  of  the
pleistocene  mammals  being  due,  in  all  the  cases  which
I  have  examined  in  France  and  Britain,  to  a  confusion
bet\veen  distinct  strata  in  the  same  cave  or  river-deposit,
which  are  respectively  of  pleistocene  and  prehistoric  or
historic  ages.  Thus  in  the  excavations  in  the  gravel
underneath  London,  the  Celtic  short-horn  and  goat  of
the  superficial  strata  are  very  generally  mixed  with  the


26 G  THE  AXIMALS.  [chap.

r

reindeer  and  mammoth  of  the  pleistocene  gravels  below,
bv  the  collectors,  and  the  names  of  the  domestic  auimals
have  crept  into  the  pleistocene  lists.  None  of  the  domestic
animals  have  been  recorded  fix)m  any  carefully  explored
strata  of  that  age  in  any  part  of  Europe.

The  foll^nving  late  pleistocene  species  were  unknown
in  Britain  in  the  prehistoric  age  : —

Glutton.  Poached  marmot

Spotted  hyaL'ua.  Tailless  hare.

Panther.  .  Leput  diluvianus.

Lion.  Arvicola  Guliefmi,

Lynx.  Cave-bear.

FtlU  Cafrr.  Ehinoceroi  hemiicechu^,

^lusk-sheep.  B.  ticIiorhinu$,

Bison.  Elejjhas  antiqutu

Hippopotamus.  Mammoth.

Lemming.

The  glutton,  lynx,  bison,  and  lemming,  still  live  in
Europe,  the  spotted  hy^enii,  Fells  Coffer,  and  hippopo-
tanuis  are  peculiar  to  Africa,  the  lion  to  Africa  and  Asia,
and  the  last  seven  species  are  extinct.  The  Machairodus
cuUridi'us  and  Rhinoceros  meyarhlnus  probably  disaj)-
])eared  in  an  early  stage  of  the  pleistocene.  It  may
reasonably  l)e  inferred,  from  the  migration  and  extinction
of  so  many  species  between  the  close  of  the  pleistocene
and  l)eginniiig  uf  the  historic  period,  that  the  interval
was  of  considerable  IcDgtli ;  for  it  would  be  imix)8siblc
for  such  changes  to  have  taken  place  in  a  short  time.

The  same  sliarp  line  of  demarcation  exists  between
the  two  faunas  on  the  continent.  The  panther.  Fells
Cdffer,  lynx,  spotted  liyrena.  musk-sheep,  hippopotamus,
and  the  extinct  ji:roup  disappeared.  The  African  elephant
forsook  Spjiin  and  Sicily,  the  striped  hyaena  the  south  of
Fi'ancr,  hcfore  the  prehistoric  pericwl  :  while  the  Elejy/uis


viii.J  PllY^WAL  CHANG  EH,  267

meridionalis  and  pigmy  hippopotamus  of  Sicily,  and
the  pigmy  elephant  and  gigantic  dormouse  of  Malta,
became  extinct.  Speaking  in  general  terms,  the  wild
fauna  of  Europe,  as  we  have  it  now,  dates  from  the
beginning  of  the  prehistoric  age,  and  consists  merely  of
those  animals  which  were  able  to  survive  the  changes
by  which  their  pleistocene  congeners  were  banished  or
destroyed.  The  arrival  of  the  domestic  animals  under
the  care  of  man  in  the  neolithic  age,  and  their  extension
over  the  whole  of  Europe  in  a  wild  or  semi-wild  state,
coupled  with  the  disappearance  of  the  wild  species  men-
tioned above,  constitutes  a  change  in  the  mammal  life
at  least  as  important  as  any  of  those  which  define  the
meioceiie  from  the  pleiocene,  or  the  pleiocene  from  the
pleistocene  periods.

Physical  changes — The  excavation  andjilling  up  of

Valleys.

The  magnitude  of  the  interval  between  the  two
periods  may  also  be  gathered  from  the  great  changes
which  have  taken  place  in  physical  geography.  In
nearly  every  valley  in  Great  Britain,  certain  areas  to
be  mentioned  presently  excepted,  are  strata  of  sand
and  gravel,  proved  to  be  of  pleistocene  age  by  their
fossil  mammals,  and  by  their  fluviatile  shells  to  have
been  deposited  by  rivers.  They  occur  at  various  heights,
forming  sometimes  teiTaces,  and  at  others  isolated
patches,  which  were  accumulated  when  the  river  flowed
at  their  level,  and  before  the  valleys  were  cut  down  to
their  present  depth.  Those  at  Fisherton  near  Salisbury,
described  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  Mr.  Prestwich,  Mr.  John
Evans/  and  others,  may  be  taken  as  an  example.

^  "  Quart.  C^ol.  Journ."  xx.  p.  1^8  et  i/e'i.


268


VALLEY  GRAVELS  AT  FI8HERT0N,


[chap.


The  valley  through  which  the  river  Wily  flows  is
excavated  in  the  chalk  (Fig.  74),  and  on  its  northern  side
fluviatile  deposits  occur  at  two  levels,  represented  in
the  accompanying  section.  One  patch  of  gravel,  about
twelve  feet  thick,  a,  lies  al>out  eighty  feet  above  the
present  level  of  the  Wily ;  while  a  second,  6,  consisting
of  clayey  brickcarth  or  loam,  with  seams  of  gravel,  and
fluviatile  shells,  sweeps  down  from  a  lower  point  to  the


N.
CsMtrrrftY


s.


RAtLWAY  Ctrrrttu*


Cmalk
Fn;,  74.- -Section  of   \'iill«'y-gravrls  at  Fisliortoii.


^Kvaiis.)


bottom  of  the  valley,  and  passes  under  the  river.  From
the  deposit  a,  Dr.  Blackmore  obtained  many  nidely-
chipi)ed  implements,  of  the  same  palaeolithic  type  as
those  found  with  the  extinct  mammalia  in  the  gravel
l)cds  at  Amiens  and  Abbeville  in  the  valley  of  the
Somme.  In  the  deposit  h,  fossil  mammalia  were  met
with  belonmno:  to  the  following  animals  : —


Spotted  hyofMia.

Wild  boar.

Lion.

Horse.

liL-indet'r.

"Wool I V  ihinocerw

V

Stag.

Mammoth.

JJisoii.

Loinining.

I-riis.

Pouched  marmot.

Mnsk-slieop.

Hare.

viii.J      VALLEY  EXCAVATED  IN  PLEIHTOOENE  AGE.      269

Dr.  Blackmore  subsequently  discovered  a  flint  imple-
ment along  with  these  animals,  of  the  same  type  as  those
previously  met  with  in  the  deposit  a.

A  horizontal  stretch  of  alluvium,  c,  deposited  by  the
floods,  occupies  the  present  bottom  of  the  valley.  In
tliis  section  it  is  plain  that  the  gravels  and  brickearth  at
a  and  b  were  deposited  by  a  river,  which  formerly  flowed
at  those  levels.  In  other  words,  the  valley  of  the  Wily  was
excavated  during  the  time  that  the  pleistocene  strata  a
and  b  were  being  formed,  while  palaeolithic  man  and
the  extinct  animals  were  living  in  the  neighbourhood.
The  position  also  of  b  lielow  the  present  bottom  of  the
valley  proves  that  the  latter  then  was  deeper  than  it  is
now.  The  prehistoric  alluvium,  c,  represents  the  last
stage  in  the  liistory  of  the  valley  in  which  it  is  beginning
to  be  filled  with  the  deposits  of  floods.  While  it  was
l)eing  accumulated  none  of  the  animals  of  a  and  b  were
living  in  the  district  except  the  hare,  urus,  stag,  horse,
and  wild  boar.

A  somewhat  similar  section  is  exposed  in  the  valley  of
the  Avon  at  Freshford,  near  Bath,  in  a  railway  cutting,
at  a  height  of  about  thirty-five  feet  above  the  river.  A
thick  mass  of  gravel  abuts  directly  against  a  cleft  of  inferior
oolite  (Fig.  75),  and  gradually  dies  down  to  the  alluvium.
In  it  Mr.  Charles  Moore  discovered  the  remains  of  the
musk-sheep,  and  the  Rev.  II.  H.  Win  wood  those  of  the
mammoth,  bison,  horse,  and  reindeer.  In  this  case  the
pleistocene  strata  occupied  the  side  of  one  of  the  valleys
which  had  been  deepened  since  the  time  of  their  deposit.

The  alluvium  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bath  contuins
in  its  lower  portion  a  layer  of  peat,  with  bones  of  the
Celtic  short-horn  {Bos  longifrons),  stag,  roe,  horse,  goat,
and  pig ;  and   in   its  upper  part  are  old  refuse  heaps,


270  I'ALLBY-anAVELS  AT  FRESHFORD.  [chap.

proved   to  be  Roman  by  the   coins  and  ware,  which
are    also  met  with    at   various   points  underneath    the


ill


Kuifiicc    soil,    ami    sometimes    at    considerable    dt.'iiths.
It  is,  flii'ivforo,  of  ])rcIii8tori«-  and  liistoiir  :ig<',  and  .siiicc


viir.J  CHANGE  IN  PHYSICAL  CONDITION.  271

it  is  found  only  in  the  valley  bottoms,  we  may  conclude
that  the  present  courses  of  the  rivers  along  the  sides
of  which  it  is  found  date  back  from  the  prehistoric  age  ;
while  their  ancient  courses  are  marked  by  the  fluviatile
deposits  with  the  extinct  mammalia  standing  at  various
levels,  the  higher  being  the  older.  In  the  section  at
Fisherton  we  have  evidence  that  the  river  flowed  at  a
lower  level  in  the  pleistocene  age  than  in  the  prehistoric,
and  in  that  at  Freshford  that  the  lower  portion  of  the
valley  had  been  excavated  after  the  pleistocene  strata
had  been  formed.  One  or  other  of  these  physical  changes
is  to  be  traced  in  nearly  all  river  valleys.'  We  may
conclude  that  both  imply  a  considerable  lapse  of  time,
l)ecause  similar  changes  are  now  produced  with  extreme
slowness.  In  the  pleistocene  river  deposits,  which  lie
scattered  about  at  various  heights  on  the  valley  sides,
we  seek  in  vain  for  neolithic  implements,  or  domestic
animals.  In  the  low-lying  alluvia,  and  accumulations
of  peat,  we  seek  equally  in  vain  for  traces  of  palaeo-
lithic man,  or  of  the  extinct  mammalia,  except  the
Irish  elk.

AVe  may  also  gather,  from  the  localization  of  the  pre-
historic alluvia  close  to  the  present  streams,  that  the
time  represented  by  its  accumulation  is  insignificant
in  comparison  with  the  long  lapse  of  ages  implied  by
the  pleistocene  gravels  and  brickearths,  that  were  de-
posited at  various  heights  during  the  excavation  of  the
valleys.  The  general  surface  of  the  valleys  has  under-
gone but  little  change  since  history  began,  and  the
excavation  by  the  rivers  has  been  so  small  as  to  have
escaped  accurate   measurement.     The  alluvia  represent

1  See  Prestwich,  "Phil.  Trans."  18G0,  p.  277,  and  1864,  p.  247,
and  "Quart.  Geol.  Journ.*' jt)(w^**?«  1859-70.


272  DEPOSITS  IN  VALLEYS  AND  CAVES,  [chaf.

the  principal  work  done  since  the  close  of  the  pleistocene
period.

The  most  important  testimony  that  the  interval  be-
tween the  two  periods  was  very  long,  is  offered  by  the
climatal  change,  and  the  severance  of  Britain  from  the
continent  The  arctic  severity  of  the  pleistocene  winter
in  these  latitudes  had  passed  away  before  the  prehistoric
age,  and  the  pleistocene  valleys  of  the  North  Sea,  St
George  s  Channel,  the  British,  and  Irish  Channels  bad
been  depressed  beneath  the  waves  of  the  sea  before  any
prehistoric  strata  yet  known  had  been  deposited.  The
evidence  that  these  changes  actually  took  place  must  be
referred  to  the  two  following  chapters.

Comparison  of  Deposits  in  Valleys  with  those  in  Caves.

If  these  valley  deposits  be  compared  with  the  con-
tents of  some  of  the  bone  eaves,  such,  for  example,  as
those  of  the  Victoria  Cave  (compare  Figs.  74  and  75
with  Figs.  20,  21,  2f)),  it  will  be  seen  that  they  present
the  same  section.  The  pleistocene  gravels  and  brick-
eartlis  of  the  one  correspond  witli  the  lower  strati  of  the
other,  and  contain  the  same  extinct  animals.  The  pre-
historic alluvium  of  the  one  is  represented  by  the  layer
containing  neolithic  bronze  or  iron  implements,  as  well
as  the  same  animals ;  while  the  historic  strata  are
rei)resrnted  in  both  by  the  superficial  accumulations.
The  only  diftcrenee  indeed  between  the  one  and  the
other  is,  that  in  the  former  the  strata  of  the  three
periods  are  spread  over  a  wide  area,  while  in  the
latter  they  are  super-imposed  in  vertical  order,  the
pleistocene  below,  the  prehistoric  in  the  middle,  and
the  historic  on  the  surface.


VIII.]  MINERAL  CONDITION.  273

Difference  in  Mineral  Condition  of  Deposits  in  Caves.

The  prehistoric,  and  the  historic  strata  in  caves  differ
from  the  pleistocene  in  their  physical  constitution.  They
are  darker  in  colour,  and  more  loosely  stratified,  and
contain  bones  in  a  more  friable  and  less  mineralized
condition,  and  are  more  free  from  stalagmite.

The  Caves  of  Germany :   Gailenreuth.

The  use  of  fossil  bones  for  medicinal  purposes  led,  as
I  have  already  mentioned  in  the  first  chapter,  to  the
exploration  of  caves,  which  were  first  scientifically  exa-
mined in  Germany  towards  the  close  of  the  eighteenth
century.  They  abound  in  all  the  limestone  plateaux,
especially  in  the  region  of  Franconia,  and  in  that  of  the
Hartz.  Among  them  the  most  interesting,  perhaps,  is
^that  of  Gailenreuth,  explored  by  Esper,  Rosenmtiller,
Goldfuss,  Buckland,  Lord  Enniskillen,  and  Sir  Philip
Egerton.  It  penetrates  a  lofty  cliff,  that  forms  a  side  of
the  deep  gorge  which  the  river  Weissent  has  cut  in  the
rock,  at  a  point  about  three  hundred  feet  above  the
water  level.

The  entrance.  Dr.  Buckland  ^  writes,  is  about  seven
feet  high  and  twelve  feet  broad,  and  within  it  a  short
passage  leads  into  two  chambers  (Fig.  76,  A  and  b),*  hung
with  stalactites,  and  with  the  floors  covered  by  a  dense
stalagmitic  pavement,  that  has  been  more  or  less  broken
up  by  repeated  diggings.     These   floors  are    perfectly

1  "  Keliquiffi  Diluviance."     4to.  1824,  p.  133.

2  I  am  indebted  to  Lord  EDniskillen,  who  explored  Gailenreuth
along  with  Sir  Philip  Egerton,  for  several  corrections  in  Buckland's
section.


274


OAILENKEUTH  CAVE


liorizoutal,  the  level  of  that  of  b  being  coosiderably
below  that  of  A.  They  rest  on  an  accumulation  of
reddish  grey  loam,  containing  pebbles,  and  angular
limestone  blocks,  and  vast  quuDtities  of  the  bones  and
teeth  of  the  animals  formerly  living  in  the  district.  The
depth  of  this  ossiferous  deposit  has  not  been  ascertained,


but  in  the  further  end  of  the  chamber  b,  it  has  been
proved  to  be  more  thau  twenty-five  feet  thick.

The  remains  of  the  animals  lie  scattered  in  the  wildest
fionfusion  ;  sometimes  being  completely  matted  together,
but  more  generally  each  bone  is  enveloped  in  eartli.
They  belong  to  tlie  lion,  the  cave  variety  of  the  spotted
liyajna,  the  cave-bear,  grizzly  bear,  mammotii,  Irish  elk,
and  reindeer,  as  well  as  to  those  species  which  are  still


viii.J  FILLED  BY  A  STREAM,  275

to  be  found  in  Gcrmaay,  such  as  the  glutton,  brown  bear,
wolf,  fox,  and  stag.

It  is  very  difficult  to  account  for  such  an  accumu-
lation as  this,  but  it  was  probably  introduced  through
the  present  entrance,  and  thence  into  the  chamber  B,
passing  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  levels.  The  teeth-
marks  on  the  bones  show  that  some  of  the  animals
had  formed  the  prey  of  the  hyaenas,  but  had  they
introduced  all  the  bones  there  would  have  been  dis-
tinct strata  marking  the  floors  of  occupation,  as  in
Wookey  Hole  (Fig.  88).  Moreover,  no  perfect  skulls,
such  as  those  of  the  bears,  would  have  escaped  their
powerful  teeth.  The  pebbles  in  the  loam  bear  testi-
mony to  the  passage  of  a  current  of  water.  And  if
we  suppose  that  the  cave  was  subject  to  floods,  such
as  those  in  the  water-caves  described  in  the  second
chapter,  the  scattering  of  the  bones  through  the  loam
may  be  explained.  This,  however,  could  not  have
happened  had  the  cave  then  opened  on  the  face  of
a  nearly  vertical  cliS*,  and  the  only  condition  under
which  it  would  have  been  possible  are,  that  the  present
entrance  should  have  been  directly  connected  with  a
stream  flowing  from  the  surface,  that  is  to  say,  over  the
space  now  occupied  by  the  gorge  of  the  Weissent.  If
this  view,  advanced  by  Dr.  Buckland,  be  accepted,  the
remoteness  of  the  date  of  the  filling  up  of  the  cave  may
be  measured  by  the  fact,  that  since  that  time  the  gorge
has  been  cut  down  by  the  Weissent  to  a  depth  of  more
than  300  feet.

The  stream  by  which  the  contents  of  the  cave  were
introduced  had  a  course  probably  analogous  to  that  of
Dalebeck  (Fig.  6)  and  the  remains  of  the  animals  were
caught  up  from  the  surface,  and   accumulated  in  the

T  2


276  CAVE  OF  K UHLOCH  [chaf.

subterranean  chambers  which  it  traversed.  Their  abund-
ance offers  no  obstacle  to  this  view,  since  wild  animals
frequent  their  drinking  places  in  vast  numbers,  and  fall
a  prey  to  the  carnivora  which  lurk  near  the  streams,
and  very  many  tumble  into  the  natural  pitfalls,  or  swal-
low-holes, so  universal  in  limestone  districts.

The  Cave  of  Kiihloch.

Very  many  otlier  caves  occur  in  the  neighbourhood,
most  of  them,  such  as  those  of  Zahnloch,  celebrated  for
the  abundance  of  fossil  teeth,  Mokas,  Kabenstein,  and
others,  of  which  the  cave  of  KUhloch  alone  demands
notice.

The  cave  of  Kiihloch  is  situated  opposite  to  the  castle
of  Raben stein,  in  the  gorge  of  the  Esbach,  at  ahont  thirty
feet  from  the  bottom.  Its  exterior  presents  a  lofty  arch
in  a  nearly  perpendicular  cliff,  about  thirty  feet  wide  and
twenty  feet  high,  and  the  entrance  gradually  leads  into
two  large  chambers  "  both  of  which  terminate  in  a  close
round  end,  or  cul-de-sac,  at  the  distance  of  about  100
feet  from  the  entrance.  It  is  intersected  by  no  fissures,
and  has  no  lateral  communications  connecting  it  with
any  other  caverns,  except  one  small  hole  close  to  its
mouth,  and  which  opens  also  to  the  valley."  The  first
thirty  feet  present  a  steep  slope  towards  the  entrance.
Dr.  Buckland  describes  the  contents  of  the  chambers  in
the  following  words  :^ —

"  It  is  literally  true  that  in  this  single  cavern  (the  size
and  proportions  of  which  are  nearly  equal  to  those  of
the  interior  of  a  large  church)  there  are  hundreds  of
cart-loads  of  black  animal  dust  entirely  covering  the

1  Op.  cit.  p.  137.


viii.]  INHABITED  BY  BEARS,  277

whole  floor,  to  a  depth  which  must  average  at  least  six
feet,  and  which,  if  we  multiply  this  depth  by  the  length
and  breadth  of  the  cavern,  will  be  found  to  exceed  5,000
cubic  feet.     The  whole  of  this  mass  has  been  again  and
again  dug  over  in  search  of  teeth  and  bones,  which  it
still  contains  abundantly,  though  in  broken  fragments.
The  state  of  these  is  very  diflerent  from  that  of  the
bones  we  find  in  any  of  the  other  caverns,  being  of  a
black,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  dark  umber  colour
throughout,  like  the  bones  of  mummies,  and  many  of  them
readily  crumbling  under  the  finger  into  a  soft  dark  powder
resembling  mummy   powder,    and   being  of  the  same
nature  with  the  black  earth  in  which  they  are  embedded.
The  quantity  of  animal  matter  accumulated  on  this  floor
is  the  most  surprising,  and  the  only  thing  of  the  kind
I  ever  witnessed  ;  and  many  hundred — I  may  say  thou-
sand— individuals  must  have  contributed  their  remains  to
make  up  this  appalling  mass  of  the  dust  of  death.     It
seems  in  great  part  to  be  derived  from  comminuted  and
pulverized  bone  ;   for  the  fleshy  parts  of  animal  bodies
produce  by  their  decomposition  so  small  a  quantity  of
pei-manent  earthy  residuum,  that  we  must  seek  for  the
origin  of  this  mass  principally  in  decayed  bones.     The
cave  is  so  dry,  that  the  black  earth  lies  in  the  state  of
loose  powder,  and  rises  in  dust  under  the  feet ;  it  also
retains  so  large  a  proportion  of  its  original  animal  matter
that  it  is  occasionally  used  by  the  peasants  as  an  enrich-
ing manure  for  the  adjacent  meadows.     I  have  stated
that  the  total  quantity  of  animal  matter  that  lies  within
this  cavern  cannot  be  computed  at  less  than  5,000  cubic
feet ;  now  allowing  two  cubic  feet  of  dust  and  bones  for
each  individual  animal,  we  shall  have   in  this  single
vault    the  remains  of  at  least  2,500  bears,  a  number


278  CAVES  OF  YORKSHIRE.  [chap.

which  may  have  been  supplied  in  the  space  of  1,000
years  by  a  mortality  at  the  rate  of  two  and  a  half  per
annum."

Dr.  Buckland's  explanation,  that  the  cave  was  inhabited
by  bears  for  long  generations,  is  probably  true.  The
absence  of  pebbles  and  silt  show  that  water  had  no
share  in  the  introduction  of  the  remains;  their  pre-
servation is  due  to  the  dryness  of  the  cave,  and  to  its
proximity  to  the  outer  atmosphere.

The  famous  caves  of  Sundwig,  Schartsfeld,  and  Bau-
man  s  Hole,  belong  to  the  same  class  as  Gailenreuth,  and
offer  no  differences  which  need  be  described.

These  explorations  establish  the  fact  that^  in  the
antediluvian  age  Avhich  we  now  term  pleistocene,  the
lion,  the  cave-bear  and  grizzly  "bear,  and  cave-hyaena
abounded  in  Germany,  and  that  they  sought  as  their
prey  not  merely  the  wild  animals  now  living  in  that
region,  l)ut  the  reindeer,  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros,
and  Irish  elk.  All  the  discoveries  in  the  German  caves
from  the  date  of  tlie  exploration  of  Gailenreuth  have
merely  verified  this  conclusion  without  adding  any  ne>\
fiict  of  importance.

Tlie   Caves  of  Great  Britain.

These  discoveries  in  the  German  caA^es  led  to  the
exploration  of  those  in  our  country.  Dr.  Buckland
visited  Gailenreuth  in  1816,  and  in  1821  applied  the
result  of  his  knowledge  gained  in  Germany  to  the  in-
vestigation of  the  famous  cavern  of  Kirkdale.^

'    Op.  cit.  p.  1.  et  st'q.


viji.]  KIRKDALE  CAVE.  279

The  Ihj(Ena-den  at  Kirkdah:

The  cave  of  Kirkdale  (F"iga  77,  78)  was  discovered  in
a  quarry  in  the  vale  of  Pickering,  about  twenty-five
niilos  to  the  NN.E.  of  York,  at  a  point  where  the  dale
of  Holmbeck  joins  Kirkdale.  The  entrance,  eighty  feet
above  the  valley  bottom  and  twenty  feet  from  the  surface


of  the  plateau  above,  was  about  three  feet  high  and  six
feet  wide,  and  led  into  a  passage  from  five  to  ten  feet
wide,  which  ran  nearly  horizontally  into  the  rock,  and
branched  offinto  smaller  ramifications.  Its  general  form
and  size  may  be  gathered  from  the  examination  of  the
accompanying  woodcuts,  which  were  published  by  Mr.
Taylor  in  "  Macmillan's  Magazine,"  in  September  1862.
The  roof  was  for  the  most  part  free  from  stalactite,  and
there   was  no  continuous  coating  of  stalagmite  on  the


280


KIRKDALE  CAVE


[chat.


floor,  but  merely  here  and  there  a  few  calcareous  bosses
termed  "  cows'  paps  "  by  the  workmen.

A  layer  of  fine  red  loam  covered  the  bottom,  in  the
lower  portions  of  which  were  large  numbers  of  gnawed
and  broken  bones,  and  teeth,  for  the  most  part  of  the
same  species  as  those  formed  in  the  German  caves.  In
some  places  they  were  lying  in  little  confused  heaps,
and  in  others,  where  the  loam  was  thin,  were  exposed
to  the  calcareous  drip  and  cemented  into  a  mass,  their


SmmrjiSM  •f  S^tKtm


S MOT  19m  f  MmM  men  C .  P.  (skk  MJim^       ^


Omimm»L  Ummrm.


s;j


5  ^
^  9


Kic.  78. — Sections  of  Kirkdale  Cave.     (Taylor.)


upper  portions  projecting  through  the  stalagmite  **like
the  legs  of  pigeons  through  pie-crust,"  and  their  irregular
distribution  resembling  that  of  the  fragments  scattered
on  the  floor  of  a  dog-kennel.

The  remains  of  the  animals  were  incredibly  abundant,
when  the  small  space  in  which  they  were  packed  was
taken  into  consideration.  Those  of  the  hyaena  are  esti-
mated l.)y  Dr.  Buckland  as  belonging  to  between  two  or
three  hundred  individuals  of  all  ages.     The  lion  and  the


VIII.]  INHABITED  BY  HYENAS.  281

cave-bear,  the  wUd  boar,  the  hippopotamus  (Fig.  79)  aa
extinct  kind  of  elephant  {E.  antiquus),  and  the  rhino-
ceros named  by  Dr.  Falconer  R.  heviitCEchus,  the  rein-
deer, and  Irish  elk  are  also  represented,  but  the  species
of  most  common  occurrence  are  the  biBoii  and  the  horse.
With  a  few  exceptions  all  the  bones  with  marrow  were
liroken,  and  scarred  by  teeth,  while  the  solid  and  marrow-
less  were  more  or  less  perfect.

Dr.  Buckland's  method  of  solving  the  problem  of  the
introduction  of  remains  of  so  many  and  different  ani'
inals  into  so  small  a  space,
is  a  model  of  scientific  ana-
lysis. He  argues  from  the
abundance  of  the  remains  of
the  hy^na,  and  from  the
correspondence  of  their  teeth
with  the  marks  on  the  bones,
and  from  the  quantity  of
their  coprolites,  that  the  cave
was  inhabited  by  many  gene-
rations of  those  animals,  and

that  the  gnawed  fragments  were  relics  of  their  prey.  The
liy^uas  of  the  present  day  inhabit  caves  strewn  with  the
bones  of  their  prey,  which  are  crushed  by  their  powerful
jaws  into  the  same  form  as  those  of  Kirkdale.  He  further
demonstrated  the  truth  of  his  couclusion  by  the  crucial
experiment  of  subjecting  the  leg-bone  of  an  ox  to  a
spotted  hyajna  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  Womb-
well's  Menagerie.  "  I  was  able,"  he  writes,'  "  to  observe
the  animal's  mode  of  proceeding  in  the  destruction  of
bones :  the  shin-bone  of  an  ox  being  presented  to  this
hysena,  he  began  to  bite  ofl"  with  his  molar  teeth  large
1  Op.  cit.  p.  38.


BOXES  aXAWED  BY  UryBXAS.


fragments  from  its  upper  extremity,  and  swallowed
them  whole  aa  fast  as  they  were  broken  off.  On  his
reaching  the  medullary  cavity,  the  bone  split  into
angular  fragmt-nts,  many  of  which  he  caught  up  greedily
and  swallowed  entire :  he  went  on  cracking  it  till  he  had
extracted  all  the  marrow,  licking  out  the  lowest  portion


1^.  oDtivm  ill


of  it  willi  liis  luTif^uc  :  this  done,  lie  left  untouched  the
!o\v(.T  I'oiulylr,  w]ii<:h  i-outjiiiiH  no  marrow,  and  is  very
Iiard.  TUi-  sitatc  and  form  of  this  residuary  fragment
iirc  pifcisoly  liki'  tiiosc  of  siiiiilar  bones  at  Kirkdale  ;
tlir  marks  of  toflli  on  it  arc  very  few,  as  the  Iwne  usually
gjivc  off  a  splinter  l>ofnrc  tlic  large  conical  teeth  had
f<irf(d  a   bnli'  tliroujrli   it:  thrsf  few,  however,  entirely


mil]  KIHKDALE  a  den  OF  llYji*:NAt^,  283

resemble  the  impressious  we  find  on  the  bones  at  Kirk-
dale  ;  the  small  splinters  also  in  form  and  size,  and
manner  of  fmcture,  are  not  distinguishable  from  the
fossil  ones.  I  preserve  all  the  fragments  and  the  gnawed
portions  of  this  bone,  for  the  sake  of  comparison  by  the
side  of  those  I  have  from  the  antediluvian  den  in  York-
shire :  there  is  al)solutely  no  diflFerence  between  them,
except  in  point  of  age.  The  animal  left  untouched  the
solid  bones  of  the  tarsus  and  carpus,  and  such  parts  of
the  cylindrical  bones  as  we  find  untouched  at  Kirkdale,
and  devoured  only  the  parts  analogous  to  those  which  are
there  deficient.  The  keeper,  pursuing  this  experiment
to  its  final  result,  presented  me  the  next  morning  with
a  large  quantity  of  album  grcecum,  disposed  in  balls,
that  agree  entirely  in  size,  shape,  and  substance  with
those  that  were  found  in  the  den  at  Kirkdale.  The
power  of  his  jaws  far  exceeded  any  animal  force  of  the
kind  1  ever  saw  exerted,  and  reminded  me  of  nothing
so  much  as  of  a  miner's  crushing  mill,  or  the  scissors
with  which  they  cut  off  bars  of  iron  and  copper  in  the
metal  foundries."

The  exact  correspondence  of  one  of  the  fragments  of
the  tibia  of  an  ox,  gnawed  by  the  Cape  hyaena,  with  the
corresponding  bone  of  the  bison  from  Kirkdale,  may  be
gathered  from  a  comparison  of  the  two  figured  in
Fig.  SO,  in  which  the  teeth-marks  a,  6,  and  c,  are  very
distinct.  The  same  kind  of  identity  runs  through  the
whole  series  of  bones  gnawed  by  the  living  and  fossil
hyaenas.

Dr.  Buckland's  conclusion,  that  the  Kirkdale  cave  was
the  den  of  the  spotted  hyaenas  {H.  crouta)  that  preyed
upon  the  animals  of  Yorkshire  in  ancient  times,  and
that  it  was  undisturbed  down  to  the  time  of  its  explora-


284  CAVES  OF  DERBYSHIRE.  [chap.

tion,  cannot  be  disputed.  The  tread  of  the  hyseoas  in
their  passage  to  and  fro  had  polished  some  of  the  bones
and  jaws  scattered  on  the  floor,  and  the  polished,  surfaces
were  uppermost,  the  rest  of  the  fragments  being  rough.
And  Prof.  Phillips  informs  me  that  the  leg-bone  of  a
ruminant  was  discovered  wedged  into  a  small  fissure
in  the  floor,  with  that  portion  which  was  within  reach  of
the  hyaena's  teeth  gnawed  away,  while  the  rest  was
uninjured.  The  hyaena  had  lost  his  bone  in  the  fissure,
and  was  only  able  to  nibble  the  end  which  projected.
In  these  incidents  we  have  a  vivid  picture  of  an  hyaena's
den  in  Yorkshire  during  the  pleistocene  age,  with  the
contents  left  in  their  natural  order  and  not  rearranged
by  the  passage  of  water.

The  Victoria  cave  near  Settle,  in  Yorkshire,  described
in  the  third  chapter,  has  also  been  occupied  by  hyaenas.


Cai'es  of  Derbi/shire :  the  Dream-cave  near  Wtrksworth.

The  Dream-cave,  near  Wirksworth,^  in  Derbyshire,
contrasts  witli  that  of  Kirkdale  in  the  perfect  state  of
the  bones  which  it  contains.  It  was  discovered  in  1822,
in  following  a  vein  of  lead  (Fig.  81).  The  miners
suddenly  broke  into  a  hollow,  c,  filled  with  red  earth
and  stones,  and  as  they  continued  their  shaft  downwards
the  sides  continually  closed  upon  them  until  the  roof  of
a  cave  was  revealed.  A  nearly  perfect  skeleton  of  the
rhinoceros  was  discovered  in  the  earth,  as  well  as  bones
of  the  horse,  reindeer,  and  urus.  After  a  large  quantity
of  the  earth  had  been  removed,  the  surface  soil,  t,  at  a  little
distance  began  to  sink,  and  ultimately  a  vertical  shaft

'   BucklanH,  op.  cit.  p.  fil.


vui.)  DHEAMC'A  VE.  285

was  found  to  coiiiiect  the  cave  with  the  surface.  Into
tills  tlte  animals  had  fallen,  just  as  at  the  present  time
sheep  and  oxen  frequently  perish  in  similar  natural  pitfalls
in  the  limestone  strata.

Other  caves  and  fissures  in  Derbyshire  have  yielded
remains  of  the  extinct  animals  :  those  of  Balleye,  near


Flrj   81  — Tl  e  Dreiin  cav     W  rkKworth      (Bo  kUnd  )
K  Sliaft  followmg  lead-vein.  _  I  AntJer  of  deer.

B  Snp|ioaed  continuation  »(  lead-vein.       a  Ehinoeeros.
c  Cave.  a  Iimetton«.

D  Swnl low-hols.  I  Natui^  entrance.

r.  Ouiireroua  loam.


Wirkswortb,  and  of  Doveholes,  near  Chaple-en-le-Frith,
the  mammoth,  and  a  small  eave  in  Hartle  Dale,  near
C'astleton,  explored  by  Mr.  Pennington  and  myself  in
1872,  the  mammoth  and  the  woolly  rhinoceros.


28G  CArKS  NEAR  ,S7\  ASAPJI.  [chap.

The  Caves  of  North  Wales,  near  St.  Asaph.

The  ossiferous  caves  aud  fissures  at  Cefn,  near  Sf.
Asapli,  in  the  mountain  limestone  that  forms  the  south
side  of  the  Vale  of  Clwyd,  were  first  described  in  1833/
by  the  Rev.  Edward  Stanley,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Nor-
wich, who  explored  that  which  Mr.  E.  Lloyd  had  dis-
covered about  half-way  down  the  vertical  cliff,  in  tlie
grounds  of  Cefn  Hall.  It  consists  of  a  narrow  passage,
turning  on  itself,  and  communicating  with  the  surface  of
tlie  cliff  by  two  entrances,  which  were  completely  blocked
up  with  red  silt,  containing  a  vast  quantity  of  bones  in
very  bad  preservation.  The  bottom  has  not  yet  been
reached.  In  one  portion  I  found,  in  1872,  a  deposit  of
comminuted  bone  with  scarcely  any  mixture  of  loam,
that  rose  in  clouds  of  dust  as  it  was  disturbed.  The
animals  belonged  to  the  same  class  as  those  of  Germany,
the  cave-boar,  spotted  liyrena,  and  reindeer,  as  well  as
tlie  hippopotamus,  Elephas  autiquus  and  Rhinoceros
h(')uit(Tchus  of  the  Kirkdale  cave.  Pebbles  derived  from
the  l)oulder  clay,  and  rounded  waterworn  fragments  of
bono,  showed  tlint  the  contents  had  been  introduced  into
this  cave  by  a  stream.  J^ome  of  the  remains,  which
were  marked  with  teeth,  may  have  been  introduced  by
the  liya3iias.  The  iliiit-flakes  found  with  the  human
skull  and  cut  antlers  of  stag,  already  referred  to  in  the
fifth  chapter,  were  discovered  in  the  lower  entrance.

The  same  group  of  animals  has  been  obtained  by  Mrs.
Williams  Wynn,  the  Rev.  I).  R.  Thomas,  and  myself  out
of  a  horizontal  cave  at  the  head  of  the  defile  leadinir

^  "Kdinburgh  New  Phil.  S<>c."  No.  *J7,  p.  40.  Falconer, "  Palajont.
^Fem."  ii.  i>.  r>41.  1  have  examined  iiearl}-  all  the  contents  of  these
caves.


vni.]  PLA.H  llEATON  VAVE.  287

down  from  Cefii  to  Pont  Newydtl,  in  which  the  remains
are  embedded  in  a  stiff  elay,  consisting  of  rearranged
bouhler  clay,  and  are  in  the  condition  of  watcrwom
pebbles.  From  it  I  have  identified  the  brown,  grizzly,
and  cave-bear.  A  further  examination  by  the  Rev,  D.
H.  Tiiomas,  and  Prof.  Hughes,  has  recently  resulted  in
the  discovery  of  rude  implements  of  felstone,  and  a  tooth
wliich  has  been  identified  by  Prof.  Busk  as  a  human
molar  of  unusual  size.'


Fiii.  Sa.  — I,pft  r.r.iv.-r  Jiiw  of  niiiKoii.  Plna  Benton  C


A  third  cave  in  the  neighlx>urhood  at  Plas  Henton,
explored  in  1870  by  Mr.  Heaton  and  Prof.  Hughes,  fur-
ni.'jhedthe  remains  of  the  cave-bear,  spotted  hy»na,btson,
and  reindeer,  and  a  remarkably  fine  specimen  of  the  lower
jaw  of  a  glutton  (Fig.  82),  which  I  have  described  in  the
"Geological  Journal  "  {vol.  xxvii.  p.  406).  In  a  fourth
cave,  at  Galtfaeuan,  the  bear  and  reindeer  were  dis-
covered. It  is  evident  from  the  presence  of  numerous
bones  gnawed  by  hytenas  in  these  caves,  that  the  valleys
of  the  Chvyd  and  the  Elwy  wxre  the  favourite  haunts
of  that  animal  in  the  pleistocene  age.

'  Antlirop.  Institute  Meeting,  0  Dec.  1873.


288  '-'^  ^^^  OF  00  WBR.  [CHAP.

Caves  of  South  Wales  in  the  counties  of  Glamorgan

and  Caemiarthen.

The  earliest  cavern  explored  in  South  Wales  is  that
of  Crawley  Rocks/  Oxwich  Bay,  about  twelve  miles  fix)m
Swansea.  It  was  discovered  in  quarrying  the  mountain
limestone  in  1792,  and  contained  the  remains  of  the
elephant,  rhinoceros,  ox,  stag,  and  hyaena.  It  was  com*
pletely  destroyed  before  Dr.  Buckland  identified  these
animals  in  the  collection  of  Miss  Talbot  of  Penrice  Castle.'

The  line  of  cliffs,  bounding  the  rocky  peninsula  of
Gower,  contains  the  cave  of  Paviland,  described  in  the
seventh  chapter  (p.  232),  as  well  as  the  group  explored  by
Colonel  Wood  of  Start  Hall,  fix)m  the  year  1848  •  to  the
present  time.  Bacon  Hole,  Minchin  Hole,  Boseo's  Den,
Devil's  Hole,  Crow  Hole,  Raven's  Cliff,  Spritsail  Tor,  and
Long  Hole,  which  are  described  by  the  late  Dr.  Falconer.
The  Rhinoceros  hemitcechus  was  met  with  in  comparative
abundance,  and  in  association  with  the  woolly  rhino-
ceros, mammoth,  and  E.  antiqnus.  In  Bosco's  Den  there
were  no  l(»ss  than  750  shed  antlers  of  reindeer ;  and  in
Long  Hole,  many  flint-flakes  were  discovered  in  1860
underneath  the  stalagmite,  and  in  association  with  the
extinct  mammalia,  which  prove,  as  Dr.  Falconer  points
out,  that  man  inhabited  that  district  in  the  pleisto-
cene age.

These  caves  and  fissures  were  at  all  levels  in  the  clifi',
and  in  some  the  bottoms  were  covered  with  a  stratum  of
marine  sand  with  sea  shells,  which  showed  that  they
had  been  washed  by  the  sea  before  they  had  been  filled
by  the  ossiferous  debris.     Most  of  them  had  probably

1   Buckland,  op.  cit.  80.  -  Op.  cit.  p.  80.

3  Falconer  "  Paheont.  Mem."  ii.  498.


VIII.]  CAVES  IN  FEMBROKESHIRE.  289

been  filled  by  streams  in  the  same  manner  as  Gailen-
reuth  and  Wirksworth.  They  abound  on  the  coast
merely  because  a  clear  section  has  been  worn  by  the
waves.  A  straight  cut  through  the  rocks  in  any  part  of
the  district  would  probably  show  them  to  occur  in  equal
abundance  inland.

Caves  in  Pembrokeshire.

The  patches  of  limestone  on  the  opposite  side  of  Caer-
marthen  Bay,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tenby,  also
contain  ossiferous  caverns.  The  Rev.  G.  N.  Smith/  ot
Gurafriston,  has  made  a  fine  collection  of  bones  and
teeth  of  mammoth  and  hysBua,  from  a  fissure  in  the
Blackrock  Quarry,  close  to  Tenby,  from  a  fissure  in  the
cliff  on  Caldy  Island,  and  from  the  Coygan  cave  in  an
outlier  of  limestone,  near  Pendine,  and  has  discovered
flakes  of  flint  and  of  a  peculiar  hornstone  in  the  **  tunnel
cave "  termed  the  Hoyle,  underneath  stalagmite,  in  a
stratum  containing  bones  of  the  bear  and  reindeer.
With  the  exception  of  the  fissure  in  the  Blackrock
Quarry  none  of  these  have  been  fully  explored.  On  a
visit  to  Tenby,  in  1872, 1  obtained  many  flint  flakes,  and
bones  broken  by  man,  from  the  breccia  in  the  Hoyle  ;
and  from  a  fissure  on  Caldy  Island,  numerous  bones  and
teeth  of  young  wolves,  which  represented  a  whole  litter,
and  two  metatarsals  of  bison,  cemented  together  into  a
compact  mass.

The  discovery  of  mammoth,  rhinoceros,  horse,  Irish
elk,  bison,  wolf,  lion,  and  bear,  on  so  small  an  island  as
Caldy,  indicates  that  a  considerable  change  has  taken

^  "  On  ilw.  Tenby  Bone  Caves,"  by  a  Pembrokesbire  Rector.  Xon-
(lun ;  Kent  and  Co.

U


•290  BRISTOL  CUAXXEL  IBEX  DRY  LAND.  [chap.

place  in  the  relation  of  the  land  to  the  sea  in  that  dis-
trict since  those  animals  were  alive.  It  would  have
been  impossible  for  so  many  and  so  large  animals  to
have  obtained  food  on  so  small  an  island.  It  may
therefore  be  reasonably  concluded  that,  when  they
perished  in  the  fissures,  Caldy  was  not  an  island,  but
a  precipitous  hill,  overlooking  the  broad  valley  now
covered  by  the  waters  of  the  Bristol  Channel,  but  then
affording  abundant  pasture.  The  same  inference  may
also  be  drawn  from  the  vast  numbers  of  animals  found
in  the  Gower  caves,  which  could  not  have  been  supported
by  the  scant  herbage  of  the  limestone  hills  of  that  dis-
trict. We  must,  therefore,  picture  to  ourselves  a  fertile
plain  occupying  the  whole  of  the  Bristol  Channel,  and
supporting  herds  of  reindeer,  horses,  and  bisons,  many
elephants  and  rhinoceroses,  and  now  and  then  being
traversed  by  a  stray  hippopotamus,  which  would
afford  abundant  prey  to  the  lions,  bears,  and  hyaenas
inhabiting  all  tlio  accessible  caves,  as  well  as  to  their
great  enemy  and  destroyer  man.  We  shall  see  in  the
ninth  chapter  that  the  elevation  of  the  whole  district
al)Ovc  its  present  level  is  part  of  the  general  elevation
of  north-western  Europe,  and  no  mere  small  or  local
])hcnomenon.

Care  in  Monmouthsliire.

King  Arthur's  cave/  on  the  side  of  a  beautifully
wo()(1(m1  knoll,  overlooking  the  valley  of  the  Wye,  near
Whitchurch,  in  Monmouthshire,  explored  by  the  Rev.
W.  S.  Symonds  in  1871,  is  a  hyaena  den,  like  that  of
Kirkdale,  containing  the  gnawed  remains  of  the  lion,

1  Soo  ''  Brit.  Assoc.  IJep.'*  1871.     "  Geol.  Mag."  viii.  433.


viii.J  FISSURES  OF  DURDHAM  DOWN.  291

Irish  elk,  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros,  <and  reindeer.
Flint  flakes,  however,  occurred  in  the  undisturbed  strata,
which  prove  that  it  was  also  the  resort  of  man.  Mr.
Symonds  believes  that  the  sand  and  gravel  inside  were
deposited  by  the  Wye,  at  a  time  when  it  flowed  300
feet  above  its  present  course,  or  before  the  valley  was
cut  down  to  that  depth.  If  this  conclusion  be  true,  the
date  of  the  occupation  must  be  separated  from  the  pre-
sent day  by  a  vast  interval,  which  is  only  to  be  measured
by  the  subsequent  erosion  of  the  valley  by  the  slow
operation  of  the  subaerial  agents,  running  water,  ice,
snow,  and  carbonic  acid.

The  only  remains  of  the  mammoth  which  I  have
examined  belong  to  young  individuals,  and  consist  of  the
second  and  third  milk-molars,  a  fact  which  I  have  very
generally  obsers^ed  in  hysenas'  dens.  The  older  mam-
moths would  not  fall  an  easy  prey  to  so  cowardly  an
animal.  The  cave  had  also  been  inhabited  by  man  after
the  pleistocene  age,  for  coarse  pottery  of  the  neolithic
kind,  and  flint  flakes,  were  dug  out  of  an  upper  stratum,
while  I  was  watching  the  excavation,  in  company  with
the  Rev.  W.  S.  Symonds,  and  the  "  Wanderers  "  field  club.

Caves  of  Gloucestershire  and  Somersetshire.

The  outliers  of  mountain  limestone,  on  the  southern
side  of  the  Bristol  Channel,  have  long  been  known  for
their  ossiferous  caverns  and  fissures.  From  a  fissure  in
Durdham  Down,^  near  Bristol,  Mr.  J.  S.  Miller  obtained
fragments  of  bones,  about  the  year  1820,  and  among
them  Dr.  Buckland  notices  the  fossil  joint  of  the  hind-leg
of  a  horse,  the  astragalus  being  held  in  natural  position,

^  Buckland,  op.  cit.  p.  60.

u  2


292  CAVB8  OF  THB  MBNDIP  HILL8.  [obap.

between  the  tibia  and  the  calcaneam,  bj  stalagmite.
Subsequently  a  large  series  of  animalfl  of  the  same
species  as  those  of  Gk>wer  were  discovered  in  it  by  Mr.
Stutchbury,  and  are  preserved  in  the  Bristol  Muaeuin.

Caves  of  the  Mendip  HiUs.

The  caves  of  the  Mendip  Hills  were  known  to  contain
bones  as  early  as  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  oentnxy,
when  that  of  Hutton/  near  Weston-super-Mare,  was  dis-
covered in  working  the  ochre  and  calamine  which  fills
some  of  the  fissures.  The  miners  having  opened  an
ochre  pit,  south  of  the  little  village  of  Hutton,  discovered
a  fissure  in  the  limestone  fiill  of  good  ochre,  which  they
followed  to  a  depth  of  eight  yards,  until  it  led  into  a
cavern,  the  floor  of  which  was  formed  of  ochre,  with  large
quantities  of  white  bones  on  the  surJhce,  and  scattered
through  its  mass.  Dr.  Caleott  describes  the  bones  as
projecting  from  the  sides,  roof,  and  floor  of  the  excava-
tion in  such  quantities  as  to  resemble  the  contents  of  a
charnel-house.  Subsequently  it  was  fully  explored  by
the  Rev,  D.  Williams,  and  Mr.  Beard,  of  BanwelL

We  owe  the  exploration  of  the  neighbouring  caves
of  Banwell,  Sandford  Hill,  Bleadon,  Goat's  Hole,  in
Burrington  Combe,  and  Uphill,*  to  the  joint  labours  of
the  two  above-mentioned  gentlemen,  extending  over
the  period  which  elapsed  between  1821  and  1860.  The
vast  quantity  of  remains  which  they  obtained  can  only
be  realized  by  a  visit  to  the  Museum  of  the  Somerset
Archaeological  and  Natural  History  Society,  at  Taunton.*

^  Backland,  op.  cit     Eutter,  "Delineations  of  Someiset,''  p.  100.
^  See  Bucklaud,  op,  cit.     Butter,  op.  cU,

^  See  "  Catalogue  of  Mammalia,  in  Taunton  Museum,"  by  W.  A.
Sanford,  Esq.     Som.  Arcliwol.  Soc.


VIII.]  BANWELL.  29:?

They  belong  to  the  same  species  as  tliose  already  men-
tioned from  the  eaves  of  South  Wales.  The  fauna  of  the
Mendip  is,  however,  characterized  by  the  great  number
of  lions,  and  by  a  few  fragments  of  the  glutton.  Of  the
former  animal,  Mr.  Ayshford  Sanford  and  myself  have
met  with  sufficient  remains  to  figure  nearly  every  por-
tion of  the  skeleton,  and  the  skulls  prove  that  it  was
not  a  tiger,  as  it  is  considered  to  be  l)y  some  naturalists,
but  a  true  lion,  ditfering  in  no  respect,  except  in  its  large
size,  from  those  now  living  in  Asia  and  Africa-
All  these  caverns  consist  of  chambers  at  various  levels
more  or  less  connected  with  fissures,  and,  from  the  per-
fect condition  of  the  bones  they  must  have  been  inacces-
sil)le  to  the  bone-destroying  hyaena.  Their  contents
were  introduced,  as  is  suggested  by  Dr.  Buckland,  from
the  surface  by  streams  falling  into  swallow-holes  (see
Fig.  81),  which  have  now,  under  the  changed  physical
conditions,  ceased  to  flow.

The  extraordinary  quantity  of  remains  preserved  in
one  cave  may  be,  to  some  extent,  verified  by  a  visit  to
that  at  Banwell.  It  consists  of  two  large  chambers,
the  upper  one  filled  w^ith  thousands  of  bones  of  bison,
horse,  and  reindeer,  taken  out  of  the  red  silt  which
originally  filled  it  to  the  roof ;  the  lower  one  full
of  the  undisturbed  contents,  from  which  the  bones
project  in  the  wildest  confusion.  This  accumulation
has  been  introduced  by  water,  through  a  vertical  fis-
sure which  opened  on  the  surface.  It  is  evident,  from
the  very  nearly  perfect  skulls  of  wolf  and  bear  which
Avere  discovered,  that  the  cave  was  not  used  as  a  den
by  the  hyaenas.  They  are,  however,  proved  to  have
been  living  close  by  at  the  time,  since  their  skulls,  and
the  gnawed  antlers  of  reindeer,  have  been  discovered


294  UPHILL,  [chap.

inside.     They  were  probably  swept  in  by  the  stream
along  with  the  other  bones.


The  Ui^hUl  Cave.

The  Cave  of  Uphill,^  discovered  in  1826,  by  some
workmen,  and  explored  by  the  Rev.  D.  Williams,  merits
especial  notice,  from  the  peculiar  conditions  under  which
the  remains  of  the  extinct  animals  occun-ed.  Like  the
other  caves  of  the  Mendips,  it  consists  of  fissures  open-
ing into  chambers.  In  the  upper  part  of  one  of  these
fissures  were  the  remains  of  rhinoceros,  hyaena,  bear,
horse,  bison,  and  wild  boar,  imbedded  in  loam  which
rested  on  two  large  masses  of  limestone  that  had  fallen
so  as  to  l>lock  up  the  fissure.  Below  tliis  were  no  re-
mains of  the  extinct  animals,  and  the  fissure  ultimately
led  into  a  cave  opening  upon  the  line  of  cliffs.  This
latter  had  been  inhabited  within  historic  times,  since
many  bones  of  sheep,  or  goat,  and  pieces  of  pottery,
w^ere  met  with,  as  well  as  a  coin  of  the  Emperor  Julian.
Ill  this  case,  owing  to  the  extraordinary  accident  of  the
fissure  being  blocked  up  by  a  fell  of  stone,  the  pleisto-
cene accumuhition  is  vertically  above  the  historic  ;  and
had  the  barrier  given  way,  j\Ir.  Williams  would  un-
doubtedly have  discovered  the  remains  of  the  extinct
mammalia,  lying  in  a  lieap  above  the  comparatively
modern  historic  stratum.  It  seems  to  me  very  probable
tliat  some  such  accident  may  have  caused  the  occurrence
of  the  pleio(.'eue  machairodus  in  the  Kent's  Hole  cavern,
in  association  with  the  pleistocene  mammalia.  In  the
long  lapse  of  ages  between  the  pleistocene  and  the  pre-
sent day,  such  accidents  would  be  likely  to  occur  in  some

^  Ituttcr  givos  a  very  good  section  of  this  cave  (o/>.  cit,  p.  7S).


viii.i  i{ya:na-i>en  at  wookfa'.  295

f(uv  c.-iverns,  and  \vc  might  cxj)ect  to  find  remains  of
widely  different  ages,  in  certain  exceptional  cases,  lying
side  by  side,  or  even  the  older  resting  vertically  over  the
newer.  At  all  events  w^e  must  conclude,  that  super-
position, or  association,  cannot  be  rigidly  enforced  as
tests  of  relative  age  in  all  ossiferous  caverns.


The  Ifi/cetia-ihn  of  Wookei/  Hole,

The  Hyoena-den  of  Wookey  Hole,^  near  Wells,  on  the
south  side  of  the  Mendips,  which  I  explored  with  the
Rev.  J.  Williamson  in  1859,  and  in  the  following  years
with  Messrs.  Willett,  Parker,  and  Ayshford  Sanford,  is
wortliy  of  a  more  detailed  notice,  because  it  was  among
the  first  caverns  in  this  country  in  w-hich  works  of  art
were  found  under  conditions  that  proved  the  co-existence
of  man  with  the  extinct  mammalia.

The  ravine  in  which  it  was  discovered,  in  1852,  is  one
of  the  many  which  pierce  the  dolomitic  conglomerate,
or  petrified  sea-beach,  of  the  Triassic  age,  resting  at  the
foot  of  the  cliffs  from  which  it  was  torn  by  the  waves,
and  overlying  the  lower  slopes  of  the  Mendips  (see
Fig.  1).  Open  to  the  south,  it  runs  almost  horizontally
into  the  mountain-side,  until  closed  abruptly  northwards
by  a  perpendicular  wall  of  rock,  200  feet  or  more  in
height,  ivy-covered,  and  affording  a  dwelling-place  to
innumerable  jackdaws.  Out  of  a  cave  at  its  base,  in
which  Dr.  Buckland  discovered  pottery, and  human  teeth,
flows  the  river  Axe,  in  a  canal  cut  in  t\iQ  rock.  In
cutting  this  passage,  that  the  water  might  be  conveyed
to  a  large  paper-mill  close  by,  the  mouth  of  the  hysena-

-  ''  Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  1862  :  On  a  ITyrona-den  at  Wookey  Hole.
Also  "Quart.  Geol.  Joiirn."  18G3.


296  HISTORY  OF  DISCOVERY  [cbif.

rlen  was  intersected  in  1852,  and  from  that  time  np  to
December  1859  it  was  undisturbed  save  by  rabbits  and
badgers,  and  even  they  did  not  penetrate  far  into  the
interior,  or  make  deep  burrows.  Close  to  the  mouth  of
the  cave  the  workmen  (employed  in  making  this  canal)
found  more  than  300  Boman  coins,  among  which  were
those  of  Allectus  and  of  Commodus.  When  the  Rev.  J.
Williamson  and  myself  began  our  exploration,  about
twelve  feet  of  the  entrance  of  the  cave  had  been  cut
away,  and  large  quantities  of  the  earth,  stones,  and  animal
remains  had  been  used  in  the  formation  of  an  embankment
for  the  stream  which  runs  past  the  present  entrance  of
the  cave.

According  to  the  testimony  of  the  workmen,  the  bones
and  teeth  formed  a  layer  about  twelve  inches  in  thick-
ness, which  rested  immediately  upon  the  conglomerate-
floor,  while  they  were  comparatively  scarce  in  the  over-
lying mass  of  stones  and  red  earth.  The  workmen  state
also  that  at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  the  cave  the  hill-
side presented  no  concavity  to  mark  its  presence.  So  com-
j)letely  was  the  cave  filled  with  debris  up  to  the  very  rouf,
that  we  were  compelled  to  cut  our  way  into  it.  Of  the
stones  scattered  irregularly  through  the  matrix  of  red
earth,  some  were  angular,  others  w\ater-worn  ;  all  are
derived  from  the  decomposition  of  the  dolomitic  con-
glomerate in  which  the  cave  is  hollowed.  Near  the
entrance,  and  at  a  depth  of  five  feet  from  the  roof,  were
three  layers  of  peroxide  of  manganese,  full  of  bony
splinters,  and,  passing  obliquely  up  towards  the  southern
side  of  the  cave  and  over  a  ledge  of  rock  that  rises
abruptly  from  the  floor:  further  inwards  they  became
interblended  one  with  another,  and  at  a  distance  of
fiftoon  feet  from  the  entrance  were  barely  visible.     In


VIII.]  AXI)  EXFLOHATIOX.  297

jincl  l)et\veen  tlicsc  the  animal  renmiiis  were  found  m
the  greatest  abuiKlance,

While  cutting  our  way  inwards  (Figs.  83  and  88),  we
finind  an  angular  piece  of  flint,  which  had  evidently  been


Tio.  83— Plan  of  Hjaua  den  nt  Wool.<7  Hole,

Kight  lin<^  =  !>rctioiiii ;  dotted  arvaa  =  bone-heds ;  shaded  areas  =  aslies  and

iniplcmenls.

chipped  by  human  agency,  and  a  water-worn  fragment
of  a  belcmnite,  which  probably  had  been  derived  from


2fi8  FLIXT  IMPLEMEyTS  FOUXD  [chap.

the  nii<^lilx»urin^  nuirlstone  rocks.  Bones  and  teeth  of
the  woolly  rhinoceros,  reindeer,  stag,  Irish  elk,  mammoth,
liya?na,  cav^^-hcar,  lion,  wolf,  fox,  and  horse  rewarded
our  lal)ours  ;  and  frogs'  remains,  cemented  together  by
stalagmite,  were  abundant  at  the  mouth.  The  teeth
preponderated  greatly  over  the  hones,  and  the  great  bulk
were  those  of  the  horse.  The  hyiena-teeth  also  were
very  numerous,  and  in  all  stages  of  growth,  from  the
young  unwoni  to  the  old  tooth  worn  down  to  the  very
gums.  Those  of  tlie  mammoth  had  belonged  to  a  young
animal,  and  one  had  not  been  used  at  all.  The  hollow
bones  were  completely  smashed  and  splintered,  and
scored  with  tooth-marks,  while  the  solid  carpal,  tarsal,
and  sesamoid  bones  were  uninjured,  as  in  the  Kirkdale
Cave.  The  organic  remains  were  in  all  stages  of  decay,
some  cruml)ling  to  dust  at  the  touch,  while  others  were
]»r»rfectly  ])re.sorvod  and  had  lost  very  little  of  their
liT'latiiic.

Ill  IsOo  wc  resumed  our  excavations  ;  and,  in  addi-
tion to  the  above  remains,  found  satisfactory  evidence  (»f
the  former  }>resence  of  man  in  the  cave.  Our  search
was  rewarded  by  one  oval  implement  of  white  flint,  of
rude  workmanship  (Figs.  84,  S;!,  8(),  87),  one  chert
arrow-head,  a  rougldy-chippcd  and.  a  round  flattened
]>iec(5  of  chert,  together  with  varicnis  splinters  of  flint,
wliieh  liad  ai)parently  been  knocked  off  in  the  manufac-
ture of  some  implement.  Two  rudely-fashioned  bone
arrow-heads  were  also  found,  which  unfortunately  were
sii]>se(iuently  lost  l)y  the  photographer  to  whom  they
were  s(?nt  ;  they  reseml)led  in  shape  an  e<juilateral
triaiJixh'  with  tlie  anMes  at  the  base  bevelled  oftl  All
wercj  found  in  and  around  th(»  same  spot,  in  contact
with    some   livaMia-teeth,    ])etween    the   diirk   bands    of


[II.]  ALOXG  WITH  VLEIHTOCESE  ANIMALS.  2!)!)


(.  S4,  SfF,  SO,  87,— Four  Vipn-s  of  Flint  Im[i|pnipn(»  foiiii.I  in  the  II)iEiLa-<I«ii
at  Woolfj-  \UV;  uunr  Wl-IIs.


300  MAX  roEVAL  WITH  [chap.

rnangan^:>*f-,  at  a  depth  of  four  feet  from  the  roof,  and
at  a  di.stance  of  twelve  feet  from  the  present  entrance
(Fig,  83,  ah

That  there  might  V^e  no  mistake  abont  the  acenracy
of  the  observations,  I  examined  every  shovelful  of  de-
bris as  it  was  thrown  out  by  the  workman ;  while  the
f^xaet  sjK>t  where  they  were  excavating  was  watched  by
my  colleague.  The  figured  implement  was  picked  out
of  the  undisturbed  matrix  by  him ;  the  rest  were  found
by  me  in  the  earth  thrown  out  from  the  same  place.

The  lines  of  peroxide  of  manganese  must  have  been
accumulated  on  the  old  floors  of  the  cave,  because  they
were  associated  with  numerous  splinters  and  gnawed
animal  remains ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  latter
were  introduced  by  the  hyaenas.  Those  animals  have
a  iK'culiar  habit,  as  Dr.  Buckland  proved  by  experiment,
of  gnawing  similar  bones  in  precisely  the  same  way ;
fliid  a  comparison  of  the  relics  of  the  meals  of  the  hyaenas
in  the*  Zoolorrjrtal  Gardens  with  those  in  the  cave,  shows
tlh'it  tlio  Ijitler  have  passed  between  the  jaws  of  a  like
nniinal  that  once  inhabited  Somersetshire.  Coprolites  of
flic  same  animal  were  very  abundant,  and  in  some  places
formed  a  greyish-white  layer  of  phosphate  of  lime.
There  were<  also  other  equally  unmistakeable  traces  of
the  animal  in  fragments  of  bone,  polished  by  their
tread,  as  in  the  Kirkdale  cave.  It  is,  therefore,  only
reaH()nal>h'  to  suppose  that  these  remains  of  animals  w^ere
broii{j;ht  into  the  cave  from  time  to  time  by  hyaenas,
and  l(^ft  on  tlic  floors.  That  they  were  not  introduced
by  wat(»r  is  proved  by  the  preservation  of  the  delicate
]»roeess('s  and  ]>oints  of  bone,  w^iicli  would  certainly  have
been  broken  i)i  triVisitu.  Since,  then,  the  implements,
which,  b(»yond  doubt,  had  been  fashioned  by  man,  were


VIII.]  UW^NAS  IN  SOMERSET.  301

underneath  one  of  these  old  floors,  it  was  certain  that
man  was  contemporary  in  the  district  with  the  hyaena
and  tlie  animals  on  which  it  preyed,  and  the  fact  that
they  were  found  only  on  one  spot  implies  that  they
were  deposited  by  the  hand  of  man.  To  suppose  that
a  savage  would  take  the  trouble  to  excavate  a  trench
twenty-four  feet  long — for  twelve  feet  of  the  former
mouth  of  the  cave  Lad  been  cut  away — with  miserable
implements,  and  consequently  with  great  labour,  and
having  excavated  it  again  to  fill  it  up  to  the  very  roof,
is  little  less  than  absurd.  Nor  could  such  an  operation
take  place  in  such  a  deposit,  without  the  stratification  of
the  layers  being  destroyed.  The  absence  of  pottery  and
human  bones  precludes  the  idea  of  the  cave  ever  having
been  a  place  of  sepulture,  such  as  Aurignac  or  Bruniquel.
This  discovery,  therefore,  of  itself  stamps  the  contempo-
raneity of  man  with  the  extinct  mammalia,  and  following
close  on  the  similar  discoveries  in  Brixham  cave,  to  be
mentioned  presently,  puts  the  question  beyond  all  doubt.
In  April  1861  we  resumed  our  excavations;  and,  as
we  made  our  way  inwards,  found  that  the  cave  began  to
narrow,  and  ultimately  to  bifurcate,  one  branch  extend-
ing vertically  upwards,  while  the  other  appeared  to
extend  almost  horizontally  to  the  right  hand.  As  we
reached  the  middle  constricted  passage,  the  teeth  became
fewer,  while  the  stones  were  of  larger  size  than  any  that
we  had  hitherto  discovered.  The  great  majority  of  the
gnawed  antlers  of  deer  were  found  at  this  part,  also  the
posterior  half  of  a  cervine  skull,  the  right  upper  jaw  of
wolf,  and,  what  is  more  remarkable,  a  stone  with  one  of
its  surfaces  coated  wuth  a  deposit  apparently  of  stalag-
mite :  this,  however,  was  much  lighter  than  stalagmite,
and  not  so  good  a  conduc^tor  of  heat ;    and,  on  analysis.


302  ANCIENT  FLMWk  [<


I  found  that  it  consisted  of  phoi^liate  of  Ubu;  vith  a
little  carbonate,  and  a  very  small  portioa  of  petooade  of
manganese.  Doubtless  the  sai&oe  of  tlie  sfaHie^  coirered
with  phosphate  of  lime,  formed  part  of  the  aneient  floor
of  the  cave,  and  hence  was  coated  with  aOmm  graeum ;
while  the  lower  part,  being  imbedded  in  the  earth  on  the
floor,  was  not  so  coated.  This  deposit  may,  periiapB^
explain  the  absence  of  round  balls  of  coprolite,  which,
assuming  that  the  cave  at  the  time  was  mora  damp  than
that  at  Kirkdale,  would  be  trodden  down  on  the  floor
liy  the  hyaenas,  instead  of  presenting  a  rounded  Ibim.
The  stone  also  itself  exhibits  tooth-marka  underneath
the  coating  of  album  grcBcum^  and  probably  was  gnawed
by  the  hyaenas,  like*  the  antlers,  for  amusement.  This
discovery  proves  that  violent  watery  action  had  but
small  share,  if  any,  in  filling  the  cave ;  for  in  that  case
the  soft  covering  would  have  been  removed  from  the
Htone.  Similar  evidence  is  oflered  by  the  wonderful
j)r(sservatioii  of  Rome  of  the  more  delicate  fragments  of
bone,  Hucli  as  the  palatine  process  of  the  maxilla  of  the
wolf.

The  section  made  in  cutting  this  passage  presented
irregular  layers  of  peroxide  of  manganese,  full  of  bony
splinters,  and  each  more  or  less  covered  by  a  layer  of
honcjH  in  various  st^iges  of  decay.  These  layers  were
absent  from  the  upper  portion  of  the  passage.  There
were  niasst  s  of  prisms  of  calc-spar  scattered  confusedly
through  the  matrix.  After  excavating  the  vertical
branch  as  far  as  we  dared  (for  the  large  stones  in  it
made  the  task  dangerous),  we  were  compelled  to  leave
off,  having  penetrated  altogether  only  thirty-four  feet
fi'om  the  entrance.  No  flint  implements  rewarded  our
search  this  year.     Teeth  were  far  moixj  numerous  than


VIII.]  AREAS  OF  OCCUPATION.  303

bones,  probably  because  they  are  more  durable  as  well
as  because  of  their  rejection  by  the  hysBiias.  One  jaw
was  bitten  in  two,  and  the  fragments  found  about  a  foot
apart  in  the  undisturbed  matrix,  just  as  they  had  been
dro[>pcd  from  the  mouth  of  the  hyaena.

In  the  spring  of  1862  Mr.  Parker,  Mr.  Willett,  and
myself  resolved  to  verify  the  association  of  articles  of
man  s  handiwork  along  with  the  extinct  mammalia,  by
cleaning  out  the  cave,  which  was  courteously  placed  at
our  disposal  by  the  owner,  Mr.  Hodgekinson.

Our  first  task  was  to  clear  the  contents  out  of  the
l)ortion  of  the  cave  nearest  the  mouth,  or  the  antrum
(Fig.  81^,  a),  and  as  we  excavated  onwards  many  traces
of  the  presence  of  man  were  met  with.  A  wide  area  on
the  left-liand  side  (6),  where  the  roof  and  floor  of  the
cave  gradually  met  together,  furnished  innumerable  frag-
ments of  charcoal,  and  many  flint  implements  associated
with  the  remains  of  the  horse,  rhinoceros,  and  hyyena.
One  fragment  of  bone  in  particular,  belonging  to  the
rhinoceros,  had  been  calcined,  and  its  carbonized  con-
dition bore  unmistakeable  testimony  that  it  had  been
burnt  while  the  animal  juices  w^ere  present.  There  were
many  other  bones  also  burnt,  which  indicated  the  place
where  fires  had  been  kindled,  and  food  cooked.  As  we
dug  our  way  forward  we  met  with  a  third  area  (c),  that
furnished  flint  and  chert  implements  under  the  same  con-
ditions of  deposit  as  that  which  tempted  us  to  carry  on
our  excavations.  Its  relation  to  the  old  floors  of  hysBna-
occupation  is  shown  by  the  dark  lines  over  the  area  c
in  Fig.  88.  At  last  the  large  open  chamber  (a)  wa*s
cleared  ;  it  measured  about  thirty  feet  wide  by  six  feet
high,  and  it  extended  forty  feet  inwards.  On  the  left
there  was  a  small  upward-turning  passage,  very  nearly


304  attJOIOXTAL  rAmAQM.  (oun

blocked  np  viih  a  mam  ci  Bfhpnitff ;  at  the  bitter
end  a  Tatkal  fiaanre  egtended  ^vaids  (f),  to  Ae  aar-
Ikc  This  fiamie  has  safaaeqaentlj'  been  ptoTwI  to  ex-
tend downwards  to  the  rig^  and  will  ibiiililliw  finniA
latge  quantities  of  animal  mnaina  to  fiitnie  e^doRaEa.

The  Luge  chamber  now  tamed  abnqttlj  to  the  M^
and  we  giadoallj  wfxked  onr  way  into  a  aniall  banam-
tal  passage  about  four  feet  hi^     Hon  llieie  wMaa


n  tbruugh  a  of  Fig.  83,  nhuwiog  coDtsDtn  of  HjBna-den.
t  =  fiiat  iiui'lejucnts ;  thick  linn  nbore  =  old  llagn.

interval  of  from  tbree  to  four  incbea  between  the  roof
and  contents,  traversed  by  stalactites,  which  in  some
places  formed  a  aiuootb  undulating  drapery  with  stony
tftsaels,  and  in  others  tiny  pillars  extending  down  to  the
dfibria,  and,  as  it  were,  propping  up  the  roof.  These
pedestals  (see  Fig.  15)  gradually  expanded  into  round
pliitca  of  tjtalagmite,  wlticb  sometimes  met  and  formed  a
font-innous  riust.     In  home  places  an  infiltration  of  car-


Till.]  THE  BONE-BEDS.  305

bouate  of  lime  had  cemented  organic  remains,  stones,
and  earth  into  a  hard  mass,  which  had  to  be  broken  up
with  gunpowder  before  it  could  be  removed  out  of  the
cave.  The  excitement  of  extracting  from  these  blocks
their  treasures  was  of  the  very  keenest,  for  we  could  not
tell  what  a  stroke  of  the  hammer  would  i-eveal.  Some-
times an  elephant's  tooth  suddenly  came  to  light,  at
others  a  hyaena's  jaw,  or  a  rhinoceros'  tooth,  or  the
antler  of  a  reindeer,  or  the  canine  of  a  bear.  The  bones
were  so  numerous  that  they  scarcely  attracted  att-ention.
In  one  fragment  of  this  breccia,  now  in  the  Brighton
Museum,  are  a  tusk  and  carpal  of  mammoth,  the  right


l(


Fifi.  89 —T ranis  er^e   '•ti.lijn   tliroutli   B  ol    fig.   83.
]   =  rid  enrtli  ,  2  -  lone  1ml  ,  S  =  dark  cavlb.

ulna  of  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  and  an  antler  of  reindeer.
In  a  second,  two  shoulder-blades  and  two  haunch  bones
of  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  with  a  coprolite  and  lower  jaw
of  cave  hyaena.  As  the  men  removed  the  large  blocks
they  were  brought  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave  to  be
broken  up  by  our  smaller  instruments.  Presently  the
passage  narrowed  to  about  six  feet,  and  presented  the
following  section  (Fig.  89).  On  the  floor  of  the  cave
tlierc  was  a  layer  of  red  earth  two  feet  in  thickness,
and,  as  usual,  containing  a  few  organic  remains  and
many  stones  (Fig.  89,  1).  Upon  this  rested  a  most
remarkable  accumulation  of  l)oneH,  and  teeth,  matted


S»"


306  THB  BONB-BEDS.  [obap.

and  compacted  together,  from  three  to  four  inches  thick,
and  extending  horizontally  from  one  side  of  the  paonge
to  the  other  (Fig.  89,  2).  Next  came  a  layer  of  dazk
red  earth  (Fig.  89,  3),  loose  and  friable,  three  to  £rar
inches  thick,  supporting  in  its  sar£Euse  a  few  loimded
stalagmites,  and  a  few  stalactitic  pillars,  that  apanned
the  interval  of  from  three  to  fonr  inches  between  it  and
the  roof.  This  bone-bed  was  about  seven  feet  wide  and
fourteen  feet  long,  affording,  therefore,  a  square  area  of
ninety-eight  feet  (see  dotted  area  B  Fig.  83,  and  in  Fig;
90).     The  enormous  quantity  of  the  remains  of


laige


Fici.  90. — I/)ugitU(liual  Section  through  B  and  c  of  Fig.  S3,  showing  bone-beds.

Dotted  area  =  bone-bed.

number  preserved,  because  most  of  the  bones  were  as
soft  as  wet  mortar.  The  five  hundred  and  fifty  speci-
meus  obtained  must  be  looked  upon  merely  as  a  small
fraction  of  the  whole.

We  presently  passed  beyond  the  bone-bed,  and  found
that  the  passage  bifurcated  (Fig.  83,  c  and  d),  the
smaller  branch  going  straight  forwards  and  gently  up-
wards (Fig.  90),  while  the  larger  stretched  at  right
angles  from  it  and  passed  gently  downwards.  In  the
former  there  was  a  second  bone-bed  similar  in  every
respect  to  that  already  described,  which  continued
undiminished  in  thickness  until  it  rested  directly  on


viii.]  TEE  BONE-BEDS,  307

the  floor.  It  afforded  a  square  area  of  about  fifteen
feet.  The  passage  was  about  sixteen  inches  high  and
three  feet  wide,  and  gradually  narrowed  until  at  a
distance  of  twelve  feet  from  the  bifurcation  a  stalactite
six  inches  long  reached  the  floor  and  formed  a  vertical
bar,  as  if  to  forbid  another  ingress.  When  this  had
been  explored  as  far  as  we  could  crawl,  the  larger  branch
(Fig.  83,  D,  and  Fig.  91)  engaged  our  attention,  and  we
soon  discovered  a  third  layer  of  bones  of  the  same  cha-
racter as  the  others,  and  in  the  same  position,  excepting
that  in  some  places  it  was  in  immediate  contact  with
the  roof  In  width  it  was  six,  in  length  fourteen,  and
in  square  area  eighty-four  feet.  From  its  further  end  to
the  termination  of  the  passage  there  was  not  the  slightest
vestige  of  bones  or  teeth,  and  a  stift*  grey  clay  rested  on
a  horizontal  layer  of  sand  on  the  floor.  Here  the  pas-
sage suddenly  turned  upwards  until  it  became  so  small
and  barren  that  it  was  not  worth  our  while  to  pursue  it
farther.  It  doubtless  rises  to  the  surface,  like  the  large
fissure  opposite  the  entrance  of  the  cave  shown  in  Fig.  88.^
The  exploration  was  resumed  the  following  year  by
Mr.   Ayshford  Sanford   and  myself,    and  yielded  vast

^  An  incident  connected  with  our  work  illustrates  remarkably  the
attachment  which  a  dog  will  suddenly  show  towards  a  stranger.  In
our  lodging  at  Wells  there  was  a  beautiful  Scotch  deerhound,  named
**Luna,"  whose  master  was  away  at  the  time.  Luna  persisted  in
being  with  us  day  and  night.  In  the  morning  she  walked  with
us  to  the  cave,  and  lay  watching  at  the  entrance  till  we  came  out,  for
she  Avas  afraid  to  venture  into  the  darkness.  In  the  evening  she
returned  home  with  us.  She  continued  to  do  this  the  whole  time  of
that  year  s  excavations.  It  was  only  natural  to  suppose  that  when  we
left  she  would,  like  other  dogs,  pick  up  new  friends.  But  she  did
nothing  of  the  kind.  When  we  inquired  the  next  year  upon  our  re-
turn, Ave  were  told  that  poor  Luna  refused  food  the  day  wo  left,  and
gradually  pined  away  and  died.

X  2


308  A8HB8  AND  IMPLEMENTS.  itamja.

quantities  of  fossil  remains.  We  eleared  out  tbe  qpaoe
marked  1863  in  the  plan,  and  discovered  a  flint  imide-
ment  at  the  point  marked  d^  in  Fig  83.  My  firiend  the
late  Mr.  Wickham  Flower  has  also  worked  the  cave,
more  particularly  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  entzanoe
chamber.

The  ashes  and  implements  were  found  in  positions^
near  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  where  man  himaelf  may
have  placed  them  (see  Fig&  83,  88),  with  the  exception
of  the  flint  implement  at  c2,  and  an  ash  of  Ixme  im-
bedded in  the  earthy  matrix  between  the  canine  tooth
and  a  coprolite  of  the  hysena,  and  cemented  to  a
iragment  of  dolomitic  conglomerate.  This  was  found
far  in  the  cave,  either  at  the  entrance  of  the  passage^
B,  or  in  the  middle  of  the  passage  D.  The  latter
passage  yielded  the  only  rolled  flint  without  traoea  of
man's  handiwork.  The  materials  out  of  which  the  im-
plements were  made  were  used  pretty  equally.  All
those,  like  Fig.  84,  were  of  flint ;  all  those  chipped  into
a  rounded  form  and  flat-oval  in  section  of  chert  from
the  Upper  Greensand ;  while  the  flakes  consisted  of
both  used  indifferently.  Besides  these  three  tjrpical
forms,  which  were  most  abundant,  is  a  fourth,  in  form
roughly  pyramidal,  with  a  smooth  and  flat  base,  and  a
cutting  edge  all  round.  Of  these  we  found  but  two
examples,  both  consisting  of  chert.  In  form  they  are
exactly  similar  to  several  hundreds  found  in  a  British
village  at  Stanlake,  in  Berkshire,  and  to  those  I  dis-
covered in  a  cemetery  of  the  same  age  at  Yamton,  near
Oxford.  They  strongly  resemble  a  cast  I  have  of  one
found  by  M.  Lartet  in  the  cave  of  Aurignac.  Were  it
not  for  this  similarity,  I  should  look  upon  them  as
cores  from  which   flakes  had  been  struck.     The  rest


viii.J  BURST  BONES.  309

are  mere  splinters,  irregular  in  form,  and  probably
made  in  the  manufacture  of  the  various  flint  and  chert
implements.  All  the  flint  implements  have  been  al-
tered in  colour  and  structure,  either  by  heat  or,  as  is
more  probable,  by  some  chemical  action.  Without  ex-
ception, the  old  surfaces  present  a  waxy  lustre  (by  the  .
absence  of  which  forgeries  are  easily  detected),  the  colour
is  of  a  uniform  milk-white,  and  the  ordinary  conchoidal
fracture  is  replaced  by  that  of  porcelain.  Some  are  not
harder  than  chalk.  I  have  met  with  weathered  and  cal-
cined flints  in  Sussex  in  which  similar  changes  are
observable,  and  in  which  the  difference  in  the  results  of
chemical  action  and  heat  can  hardly  be  detected.  The
chert  implements,  on  the  other  hand,  show  no  traces  of
any  such  changes,  but  are  similar  in  colour  and  structure
to  the  rocks  from  which  they  came — the  Upper  Green -
sand  of  the  Blackdown  Hills.

All  the  fragments  of  calcined  bone,  with  the  exception
of  one  already  mentioned,  were  found  near  the  entrance
(see  Fig.  83,  6),  and  in  a  place  more  suitable  for  a  fire  than
any  other  in  the  cave.  I  can  identify  none  of  them  as
human.  The  coarse  texture,  the  structure,  and  the
thickness  of  one  indicate  a  fragment  of  along  bone  of  the
rhinoceros.^  All  resemble  many  splinters  strewn  about
in  other  parts  of  the  cave,  which  are  not  calcined,  but
were  evidently  introduced  by  the  hyaenas.  The  calcina-
tion may  therefore  be  due  to  the  accident  of  their  lying
upon  the  surface  at  the  time  the  fire  was  kindled.

The  remains  obtained  in  1862-3  from  three  to  four
thousand  in  number,  affbrd  a  vivid  picture  of  the  animal
life  of  the  time  in  Somerset.     They  belong  to  the  fol-

^  Possibly  it  may  have  belonged  to  ElephaSy  but  its  more  compact
texture  seems  to  me  to  indicate  rhinoceros.


310  ANIMAL8  IN  CAVE  \^


lowing  animals^  the  numbets  repreaentiiig  the  jaws  ud
teeth  only,  and  the  implements : —

Man 35    WooOy  BhinoeerM    .

Cave-UjaBDE 467    RhimioearoM  kemiitKdkmi

Cave-Lion 10

Cave-Bear .27

Grizzly  Bear    .....     1 1

Brown  Bear 11

Wolf 7

Fox 8

Mammoth 30


Mono     ....

.    .  401

The  Great  Uriu    .

.    .     IS

BiMUi      ....

.    .    30

The  Imh  Elk  .    .

.    .    SS

Beindeer     .    .    .

.    .    30

Bed  Deer     .    .    .

.    .      S

Tiemming     .    .     .

.    .      1

The  remains  of  these  animals  weie  so  intermingled
that  they  must  have  been  living  together  at  the  same
time.  They  lie  large  with  small,  the  more  with  the  leas
dense,  and  are  not  in  the  least  degree  sorted  by  water.
There  is  no  evidence  of  the  hyaena  sacceeding  to  the
cave-bear,  or  the  reindeer  to  the  urns,  or  that  the  bears
came  here  to  die,  as  in  some  of  the  German  caves,  or
that  the  herbivores  fell,  or  were  swept  into  open  fissures,
and  left  their  remains,  as  iu  the  caves  of  Hutton  and
Plymouth.  On  tlie  contrary,  the  numerous  jaws  and
teeth  of  b}  ajna,  and  the  marks  of  those  teeth  upon  nearly
every  one  of  the  specimens,  show  that  they  alone  in-
troduced the  remains  that  were  found  in  such  abund-
ance. And  they  preyed  not  merely  upon  horses,  uri,
and  other  herbivores,  but  upon  one  another  (Figs.
92,  33),  and  they  even  overcame  the  cave-bear  and
lion  in  their  full  prime.  Some  of  the  bones  of  the
larger  animals,  and  in  particular  a  leg-bone  of  a
gigantic  urus,  have  been  broken  short  across  and  not
bitten  through — a  circumstance  which  points  towards
one  of  the  causes  of  the  vast  accumulation  of  bones  in  so
small  a  cave.     It  is  well  known  that  wolves  and  hyssnas


VIII.]


INTRODUCED  BY  HYAUNAS.


311


at  the  present  day  are  in  the  habit  of  hunting  in  packs,
and  of  forcing  their  prey  over  precipices.  The  Wookey
ravine  is  admiral >ly  situated  for  this  mode  of  hunting,
and  would  not  fail  to  destroy  any  animal  forced  into  it
from  the  hill-side.  It  is  therefore  very  probable  that
the  hyaenas  sometimes  caught  their  prey  in  this  manner.
They  would  not  have  dared  to  attack  the  bears  and  lions
unless  these  had  been  disabled.

But  if  all  the  remains  of  the  animals  were  introduced
by  the  hyaenas,  they  certainly  in  some  cases  do  not
occupy  the  exact  position  in  which  they  were  left  by
those   animals.     One    of    the    bone   layers    (Fig.    91)


Fio.  91.


■Longitudinal  Section  through  D  of  Fig.  83.
Dotted  area  —  bone-bed.


for  instance,  actually  touched  the  roof.  This,  indeed,
has  been  used  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  their  having
been  introduced  by  water,  from  some  unknown  reposi-
tory. But  if  this  hypothesis  be  admitted,  we  are  landed
in  the  following  dilemma  :  either  the  introducing  cur-
rent of  water  must  have  passed  down  the  vertical  pas-
sages, or  upwards  through  the  horizontal  mouth  of  the
cave.  In  the  former  case  the  three  bone  layers  would
not  have  been  found  in  the  narrow  passages,  but  would
have  been  swept  out  into  the  wide  chamber,  where  the
force  of  the  hypothetical  current  must  have  abated.  In
the  latter  case  the  great  bulk  of  the  remains  w^ould  have


■H


312      BONS-BEDB  FBOBABLY  FLOATED  UFWAMOm.    [chap.

been  found  in  the  chamber,  and  not  in  die  smaller  paa-
sages.  Moreover,  the  afaa^MM  of  marks  of  tainport  bjr
water,  and  eapecially  of  that  sorting  action  which  water
as  a  conveying  agent  always  maniftats^  rendens  tiie  view
of  their  being  so  introduced  untenable.  On  tlie  other
band,  the  horizontality  of  llie  layers  of  bone^  and  the
presence  of  sand  and  of  red  earth,  imply  that  water  was
an  agent  in  re-arranging  the  bones  and  in  introdocii^
some  of  the  contents  of  the  cave.  The  only  acdntioii  of
the  difficulty  that  I  can  hazard  is  the  ocdnirence  of  floods
from  time  to  time,  during  the  occupation  of  the  hjSBnas^
similar  to  those  which  now  take  place  in  the  caverns  of  the
neighbourhood.  A  few  years  ago,  llie  outiet  of  the  Aze
in  the  great  cave  was  partially  blocked  up^  and  the  water
rose  to  a  height  of  upwards  of  sixteen  feet,  leaving  a
horizontal  deposit  of  red  earth  of  the  same  nature  as  that
in  the  hyaBna-den.  Now  if  we  suppose  that  similar  floods
were  caused  by  an  obstruction  in  the  ravine  below  the
liya?na-den,  it  may  have  been  flooded,  just  as  the  upper
galleries  of  the  great  cave,  and  the  water  laden  with
sediment  might  have  elevated  the  layers  of  matted  bone,
and  some  of  the  scattered  remains  on  the  surface,  while
the  current  was  insufficient  to  disturb  the  stones,  or  to
affect  to  any  extent  the  deposits  of  former  floods.  The
buoyancy  of  the  organic  remains  is  not  required  to  be
greater,  on  this  hypothesis,  than  in  that  of  their  having
been  introduced  by  a  current  through  the  vertical  pas-
sages. Some  of  the  wet  bones  taken  straight  from  the
cave  were  sufficiently  light  to  be  carried  down  by  the
current  of  the  Axe.

All  these  facts  taken  together  enable  us  to  form  a  clear
idea  of  the  condition  of  things  at  the  time  the  hysena-
den  was  inhabited.    The  hyaanas  were  the  normal  occu-


VIII.]        CAVE  INHABITED  BY  MAN  AND  HYENAS,       313

pants  of  tlie  cave,  and  thither  they  brought  their  prey.
We  can  realize  those  animals  pursuing  elephants,  and
rhinoceroses  along  the  slopes  of  the  Mendip,  till  they
scared  them  into  the  precipitous  ravine,  or  watching  until
the  strength  of  a  disabled  bear  or  lion  ebbed  away  suffi-
ciently to  allow  of  its  being  overcome  by  their  cowardly
strength.  Man  appeared  from  time  to  time  on  the  scene,
a  miserable  savage  armed  with  bow  and  spear,  unac-
quainted with  metals,  but  defended  from  the  cold  by  coats
of  skin.^     Sometimes  he  took  possession  of  the  den  and


•      %

%     1
I      •


N


.   V


u>


Fig.  92.— Gnawe<i  jaw  of  Hysena,  from  Hyaena-den  at  Wookey  (4).

Dotted  outline  =  portion  eaten.


drove  out  the  hyaenas ;  for  it  is  impossible  for  both  to
have  lived  in  the  same  cave  at  the  same  time.  He
kindled  his  fires  at  the  entrance,  to  cook  his  food,  and
to  keep  away  the  wild  animals ;  then  he  went  away,
and  the  hyaenas  came  to  their  old  abode.  While  all
this  was  taking  place  there  were  floods  from  time  to  time
until  eventually  the  cave  was  completely  blocked  up
with  their  deposits.

^  Bone  needles  were  found  in  Kent's  Hole  and  in  many  foreign
caves  of  this  age.


314  THM  DIBTBIOT  THEN  EIOHMM.         [our.  tiii^

The  winter  cold  at  the  time  mwsk  have  been  Yery
severe  to  admit  of  the  pres^ice  of  the  leiiideer  and
lemming.

The  district  of  the  Mendip  HiUs  at  a  higher  lensd

than  now.

When  we  reflect  on  the  vast  quantities  of  the  vemuns
of  the  animals  buried  in  the  caves  of  so  limited  an  ana
as  the  Mendip  Hills»  it  is  evident  that  there  moat  have
been  abundance  of  food  to  have  enabled  them  to  live
in  the  district  The  great  marsh  now  extending  from
Wells  to  the  sea,  and  cutting  off  the  Mendips  from  the
fertile  region  to  the  south,  was  probably  a  rich  valley  at  a
higher  level  than  at  present,  joining  the  westward  plains
now  submerged  under  the  Bristol  ChanneL  An  elevar
tion  of  from  100  to  300  feet  would  produce  the  physical
conditions  necessary  for  the  sustenance  of  the  herbivora
found  in  the  caves  both  in  South  Wales  and  Somersetshire.

TJie  characters  of  a  Hyrnia-den.

The  remains  of  the  animals  which  have  been  eaten  by
the  cave-hyaena,  may  be  recognized  by  the  following
characters.  All  are  more  or  less  scored  by  teeth,  and
the  only  perfect  bones  are  those  which  are  solid,  or  of
very  dense  texture.  The  skulls  are  represented  merely
by  the  harder  portions.  That  of  the  woolly  rhinoceros^
for  example,  by  the  hard  pedestal  which  supports  the
anterior  horn  (see  Fig.  30).  Several  of  these  pedestals
occurred  in  the  Wookey  hysena-den.  The  lower  jaws
also  have  lost  their  angle  and  coronoid  process,  and  are
gnawed  to  the  pattern  of  the  shaded  portion  of  Fig.  92,
the  less  succulent  part  bearing  the  teeth  being  rejected.


316


BOM  a  QMA  WED  BT  BYMWAM.


[-


Tbis  holdB  good  of  the  jaws  of  all  die  r"™" *■  ao  per-
■istently,  that  out  of  moie  than  two  himdnd  from
Wookcy  there  was  only  me  exoeptioiL  Hie  jaw  6L  the
{^nttou  (Fig.  82),  from  Fhs
Heatcai,  is  also  gnawed  to
the  Bame  shape,  and  raie  vi
those  of  the  cave-bear  frnn
the  cavexn  of  Lhetm,  eoo-
aidered  by  H.  Ctaziigon  to
have  been  fiuhioned  by  the
hand  of  man  into  an  impl^
ment,  seems  to  me,  aftw  a
caiefnl  comparison  in  ctmi*
'  pany  with  Dr.  Falconer,  re-
ferable solely  to  the  gnaw-
ing of  the  byGBna.  In  Fig.
92,  the  lower  jaw  of  an
axlult  hyeena  is  represented,
and  in  Fig.  93  (1)  the  upper
and  lower  jaws  of  a  byaanan
whelp.  In  the  latter  the
teeth  marks  a  and  h  are  re-
markably distinct'
ri«.  «.-Uft  Ti,igh-bon.  of  Woolly      ^he    marrow  -  containing


Sh&d<Hl  {mrU


annweii  by  Hytenw ;  boucs  are   alflo   anlversally

ik-ft.     (Wookey  Hole.)  ■'

splintered  away,  until  either
the  articular  ends  alono  are  left,  as  in  Fig.  80,  or  in
some  cases,  as  in  that  of  the  femur  of  woolly  rhino-
ceros (Fig.  94),  the  dense  central  portion  bearing  the
third   trochanter  is   preserved.    This  fragment  is   ei-

'  TlioH)  woodblocks  wore  uaed  in  my  eaiajr  on  Hyenas  in  the
"  Nfttunl  UiAtory  Review,"  and  have  be«n  lent  liy  the  kindiMM  of
Measn.  Williania  and  Iforg&te.


VIII.]  CA  VES  OF  DE VONSHIRE,  317

tremcly  abundant  in  nearly  all  the  hysena-caves  in
this  country.  From  the  invariable  habit  of  the  hysena
leaving  tlie  bones  of  its  prey  in  fragments  of  this
kind,  their  dens  are  characterized  by  the  absence  of
perfect  long-bones  and  skulls,  and  consequently,  when
these  occur  in  a  cave  it  is  certain  proof  that  it  was  not
occupied  by  these  animals.  In  a  great  many  caves,
however,  the  gnawed  fragments  are  associated  with  the
perfect  bones,  as,  for  example,  at  Banwell,  a  circum-
stance that  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  untouched  car-
cases and  the  gnawed  fragments  being  swept  in  from  the
surface  by  a  stream  falling  into  a  swallow-hole.  In  all
hyaena-dens  also  are  large  quantities  of  album  grcBCum^
as  well  as  fragments  of  bone  more  or  less  polished  by
the  friction  of  the  hyaena's  feet.

The  Caves  of  Devonshire.

The  ossiferous  caves  on  the  south  coast  of  Devonshire,
explored  during  the  last  fifty  years,  are  by  far  the  most
important  in  this  country,  since  they  were  the  first  which
were  scientifically  examined,  and  the  first  which  esta-
blished the  co-existence  of  man  with  the  extinct  mam-
malia.

We  owe  the  full  details  of  their  history  to  the  labours
of  the  distinguished  cave-hunter  Mr.  Pengelly,  F.R.S.,'
whose  writings  are  freely  used  in  the  following  account.

The  Oreston  Caves.

The  first  intimation  of  the  presence  of  fossil  bones  in
the  district  was  furnished  by  Mr.  Whidbey,  the  engineer

^  Pengelly,  "  Literature  of  the  Oreston  Caverns,"  Trans.  Dev.  Ass.
1872.     Buckland,  op.  cit.


318  THB  FISaURBS  AT  ORBSION.  [cbip.

in  charge  of  the  constraction  of  the  Plymooth  bfeakwater,
who  discovered  numerous  bones  and  teeth,  imbedded
in  clayey  loam,  in  some  cayemous  fissures  at  Qreeton,
which  were  brought  before  the  Boyal  Society  by  Sir
Everard  Home  in  1817.  Thus  Dr.  Buckland's  reseftrchfls
in  Kirkdale  were  anticipated  by  four  years.  From  time
to  time,  since  that  date,  several  other  fissures  and
caves  close  by  have  famished  remains  of  rhinocenM^
mammoth,  hyaena,  lion,  and  other  animals.*  Among  the
bones  and  teeth  originally  sent  up  by  Mr.  Whidbey  am
several  which  were  identified  by  Prof.  Busk/  as  belongs
ing  to  the  Rhinoceros  megar^inua,  a  species  tiiat  is
vastly  abundant  in  the  pleiocene  strata  of  norliheni  Italy
and  is  also  represented  in  the  early  pleistocene  forest-bed
of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  and  in  the  lower  brickeartlis  of
the  valley  of  the  Thames  at  Grays  and  Cmyford.  This
is  the  only  case  on  record  of  the  discovery  of  the  animal
in  a  cavern  deposit.

The  cavernous  fissures  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Yealmp-
ton,^  about  seven  miles  east-south-east  fix)m  Plymouth,
explored  by  Mr,  Bellamy  and  Colonel  Mudge,  R  A.,  F.R.S.
in  1835-6,  contained  the  remains  of  the  hysena  and
rhinoceros,  and  the  other  animals  more  usually  associated
with  them.  They  were  probably  filled,  as  in  the  case
of  Oreston,  mainly  by  the  streams  which  introduced  the
pebbles.  They  may,  however,  from  time  to  time  have
been  inhabited  by  the  hyaenas,  although  the  presence  of
three  skulls  of  that  animal  forbids  the  supposition  that
they  dragged  in  all  the  fossil  bones.

^  **  Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  xxvi.  457,  e(  seq.

'^  "Tlie  Literature  of  the  Caverns  near  Yealmpton,  South  Devon,"
by  W.  Pengelly,  F.K.S.,  F.S.  A.     Trane.  Devon  Ass.,  1870.


VIII.]  THE  CA  VES  AT  BRIXHAM.  319

The  Caves  at  Brixham.

The  series  of  fissures  accidentally  discovered  in  1858,
ill  quarrying  the  rock  which  overlooks  the  little  fishing
town  of  Brixham,  known  as  the  Windmill  cave,  was
selected  by  the  late  Dr.  Falconer,^  as  a  spot  in  which
thorougli  investigation  would  be  likely  to  decide  the  then
doubtful  question  of  the  co-existence  of  man  with  the
extinct  mammalia.  Kent's  Hole  had  been  disturbed  by
repeated  diggings,  and  the  results  might  be  viewed  with
susi)icion.  He,  therefore,  urged  the  importance  of  a
systematic  examination  of  this  virgin  cave  with  such
efiect,  that  it  was  undertaken  by  the  Eoyal  and  Geolo-
gical Societies,  and  a  committee  was  appointed,  com-
prising, amongst  others.  Dr.  Falconer,  Prof.  Ramsay,  Mr.
Prestwich,  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  Prof.  Owen,  Mr.  Godwin-
Austen,  and  Mr.  Pengelly.  To  the  superintendence  of
the  last  is  mainly  due  the  minute  care  with  which  the
exploration  was  conducted.  The  remains  have  been
identified  by  Dr.  Falconer  and  Prof.  Busk.  The  work
was  commenced  in  July  1858,  and  completed  in  the
summer  of  1859.^

The  cave  consists  of  three  principal  galleries,  with
diverging  passages,  running  in  the  direction  of  the  joints
from  north  to  south,  and  from  east  to  west,  communi-
cating with  the  surface  at  four  points.  The  following  is
the  general  section  (Fig.  95)  of  the  deposits  in  descend-
ing order.

^  Falconer,  "  Palfeont.  Mem."  ii.  48G,  591.

-  Proceed.  Koyal  Sue.  xx.  p.  514.  "Report  on  the  Exploration  of
Urixhara  Cave,"  by  W.  Pengelly,  F.RS.,  G.  Bush,  F.R.S.,  John  Evans,
F.Ii.S.,  and  Joseph  Prestwich,  F.li.S.  This  report  was  delayed  by
the  death  of  Dr.  Falconer.


IXPLBMMNTS-ASD  AlUMAIA


[«


(A.)  On  the  floor  was  a  layer  of  stalagmite,  -raiying
&om  a  fev  inches  to  upwards  of  a  £x)t  in  thiffknawt
and  containing  only  twenty-five  bones,  among  wMeh
were  the  humerus  of  a  bear,  and  the  antler  of  a  ran-


(B.)  Reddish  care-earth  with  fragments  and  blocks
of  limestone,  aod  of  stalagmite,  generally  averaging  frun
two  to  four  feet  In  it
1,102  bones  were  dlaoo-
vered  irregularly  scattered
through  its  maai^  and
belonging  to  mammotli,
woolly  rhinoceros,  lion,
cave,  grizzly,  and  brown .
bears,  reindeer,  and  othera
They  varied  in  state  of
preservation,  and  some
were  scored  and  marked
by  teeth.  Associated  with
these,  thirty-six  rude  flint
implements  were  met  with,
of  indisputable  human
workmanship,  and  of  the
same  general  order  as
those  figured  by  the  Bev.
J.  MacEnery  from  Kent's
Hole.  Among  them  was
one  lanceolate  implement
with  rouiidcil  point  and  uiiworked  butt  end,  considered
by  Mr.  Joliii  Evans,  F.R.S.,  of  the  type  of  those  usually
found  in  the  valley  gravels.'  There  was,  therefore,  the
most  conclusive  evidence  that  man  inhabited  the  neigh-
"  Ancient  Stono  Tmplemente,"  p.  46-8.


VIII.]  HISTORY  OF  DEPOSITS.  321

bourliood,  either  before  or  during  the  time  of  the  accu-
muhition  of  B,  and  before  those  physical  changes  took
j)lace  by  which  the  red  silt  ceased  to  be  deposited,  or
the  stalagmite  above  began  to  be  formed.

(C.)  At  the  bottom  of  the  cave-earth  was  a  deposit  of
gravel,  principally  of  rounded  pebbles  and  devoid  of
fossils.

The  early  history  of  the  cave,  as  shown  by  these  de-
I)osits,  is  given  by  Mr.  Prestwich,  in  the  report  presented
to  the  Royal  Society,  as  follows  :  —

'*  Looking  at  all  the  phenomena  of  Brixham  cave,
the  conclusion  your  reporter  has  arrived  at  is,  that  the
formation  of  the  cave  commenced  and  was  carried  on
^simultaneously  w- ith  the  excavation  of  the  valley  ;  that
the  small  streams  flowing  dow^n  the  upper  tributary
branches  of  the  valley  entered  the  western  openings  of
the  cave  and,  traversing  the  fissures  in  the  limestone,
escaped  by  lower  openings  in  the  chief  valley,  just  as
the  Grotto  d'Arcy  was  formed  by  an  overflow  from  the
cave  taking  a  short  cut  through  the  limestone  hills,
round  w-hich  the  river  winds.  These  tributary  streams
brought  in  the  shingle  bed  (Fig.  95,  c),  w^hich  fills  the
bottom  of  the  fissure.  It  was  only  during  occasional
droughts,  when  the  streams  were  dry,  that  the  cave  seems
to  have  been  frequented  by  animals,  their  remains  being
very  scarce  in  that  bed,  while  indications  of  man  are  com-
paratively numerous.  As  the  excavation  of  the  valley
proceeded,  the  level  of  the  stream  was  lowered  and  be-
came more  restricted  to  the  valley-channel.  The  cave
consequently  became  drier,  and  was  more  resorted  to  by
predatory  animals,  who  carried  in  their  prey  to  devour,
and  was  less  frequented  by  man.  At  the  same  time  Avith
the  periodical  floods,  which  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,

Y


322  CA  VE  FILLED .  WITH  DEPOSITS  [cuAr.

from  other  investigations,  were  so  great  during  the  qua-
ternary period,  the  cave  would  long  continue  to  be  sub-
ject to  inundations,  the  muddy  waters  of  which  depomted
the  silt  forming  the  cave-earth,  burying  progreasiYely  the
bones  left  from  season  to  season  by  succeeding  geneiar
tious  of  beasts  of  prey.  By  the  repetition  at  distant
intervals  of  these  inundations,  and  by  the  accumulation
during  the  intervening  periods  of  fresh  crops  <^  bones,
the  bone-bearing  cave-earth,  B,  was  gradually  formed.
During  this  time  the  occasional  visits  of  man  are  in-
dicated by  the  rare  occurrence  of  a  flint  implement*  lost^
probably,  as  he  groped  his  way  through  the  dari^  pas-
sages of  the  cave.  As  the  valley  became  deeper,  and  as
with  the  change  of  climate  at  the  dose  of  the  (pleisto^^
cene)  quaternary  period  the  floods  became  lees^  bo  did
the  cave  become  drier  and  more  resorted  to  by  imimalR,
At  last  it  seems  to  have  become  a  place  for  permanent
resort  for  bears ;  their  remains  in  all  stages  of  growth,
including  even  sucking  cubs,  were  met  with  in  the  upper
part  of  the  cave-earth,  in  greater  numbers  than  were  the
bones  of  any  other  animals.  These  animals  resorted
especially  to  the  darker  and  more  secluded  flint-knife
gallery,  where  221  out  of  366  of  their  determinable  bones
were  found,  whereas  only  twenty-six  were  met  with  in
the  reindeer  gallery.

"  Finally,  as  the  cave  became  out  of  the  reach  of  the
flood  waters,  the  drippings  from  the  roof,  which  up  to
this  period  liad,  with  the  single  exception  before  men-
tioned, been  lost  in  the  accumulating  cave-earth,  or  de-
posited in  thin  calcareous  incrustations  on  the  exposed
l>ones,  now  commenced  that  deposit  of  stalagmite  which
sealed  up  and  preserved  undisturbed  the  shingle  and
cave-earth  deposited  under  former  and  different  condi-


Mil.]  BY  A  STJiEAM  AND  UE-EXCAVATEl).  323

tions.  Tlic  cave,  however,  still  continued  to  be  the
occasional  resort  of  beasts  of  prey  ;  for  sparse  remains  of
the  reindeer,  together  with  those  of  the  bear  and  rhino-
ceros, w^ere  found  in  the  stalagmite  floor.  After  a  time
the  falling  in  of  the  roof  at  places  (and  any  earthquake
movement  may  have  detached  blocks  from  it),  and  the
external  surface  weathering,  stopped  up  some  parts  of  the
cave,  and  closed  its  entrances  with  an  accumulation  of
debris.  From  that  time  it  ceased  to  be  accessible,  ex-
cept to  the  smaller  rodents  and  burrowing  animals,  and
so  remained  unused  and  untrodden  until  its  recent  dis-
covery and  exploration."  ^

ilr.  Pei]gelly  points  out^  an  episode  in  the  history  of
the  cave,  between  the  formation  and  the  filling  up  with
its  present  contents,  which  is  of  considerable  importance,
viewed  in  relation  to  the  deposits  in  Kent's  Hole.  Over
the  empty  space  in  D,  of  Fig.  95,  is  an  ancient  stalagmit<i
floor,  E,  constituting  the  present  ceiling,  and  shutting  off*
D  from  the  tnie  roof  above,  E.  At  the  time  this  was
formed,  the  cave  must  have  been  filled  up  to  that  level
with  deln'is,  fragments  of  wdiich  are  set  in  the  inferior
])ortion  of  the  calcareous  sheet.  Subsequently,  and  before
the  present  contents,  A  and  B,  were  introduced,  the
whole  of  this  material  has  been  swept  away,  pro-
bably by  an  unusual  flood  similar  to  that  alluded
to  in  the  second  chapter  in  the  Clapham  cave.  The
pieces  of  stalagmite  in  the  cave-earth  are,  probably,
some  of  the  relics  of  the  older  floor.  This  filling  up,
re-excavating,  and  re-filling  with  its  present  contents,
are  phenomena  which  considerably  complicate  the  pro-

1  "Proceed.  Iloyal  Soc."  1872,  vol.  xxii.  p.  523-4.

2  "  Trans.  Devon  Ass."  On  the  Introduction  of  Cavern  Accumu-
lations.

Y    2


■-      .»■


324  KBNTS  EOLB.  ^at.

blenis  offered  not  merely  by  Brixham  cave,  but  alao  by
those  of  Kent's  Hole.

Two  other  caverns  in  the  neighbonihood  of  Brizbam,
the  ''  Ash  Hole  "  and  ''  Bench,''  have  ako  yielded  the
remains  of  the  reindeer,  hyaena,  and  Beveral  other
pleistocene  species,  and  are  folly  described  by  Mr
Pengelly,  iu  his  essays  contributed  to  the  Devonahhe
Association.^

KefU's  Hole.

The  celebrated  cave  of  Kent's  Hole,'  known  from  time
immemorial,  was  first  found  to  contain  fossil  bonea  \iy
Mr.  Northmore,  und  Sir  W.  C.  l^velyan  in  1824,  and
was '  subsequently  explored  by  the  Bev.  J.  MacEnery
iu  the  five  following  years,  during  which  he  met  with
Hint  implements  in  association  with  the  extinct  animals
in  the  undisturbed  strata,  and  obtained  the  teeth  of
tlie  sabre-toothed  feline,  named  by  Prof.  Owen  Machai-
rodus  latidenSy  which  has  never  before  or  since  been
discovered  in  any  other  cavern  in  Britain.  His  manu-
scripts unfortunately  were  not  used  until  they  passed
into  the  hands  of  Mr.  Vivian,  of  Torquay,  who  published
an  abstract  in  1859.  Subsequently  they  were  published
in  full  by  Mr.  Pengelly,  in  18G9.  The  discovery  of  the
flint  implements,  verified  by  Mr.  Grodwin  Austen  in
1840,  and  six  yeai-s  later  also  by  a  committee  of  the
Torquay  Natural  History  Society,  was  received  with  in-
credulity by  the  scientific  world,  until  the  result  of  the

1  "  Trans.  Devon  Ass."  1870.

'-'  Pengelly,  "Literature  of  Kent's  Hole:*'  Trans.  Ass.  Devon.
18G8  9-70.  (Jodwin  Austen,  "  Proceed.  Geol.  Soc." iii  286-7.  "TiaM.
Geol.  Sjc."  vi.  p.  433,  H  wq.    Vivian,  "Brit  Ass.  Rep."  1847,  p.  75.


vrii.j  HISTORY  OF  EXPLORATION.  '^25

ex[)loration  of  the  Brixham  cave  had  placed  the  fact  of
the  co-existence  of  man  with  the  extinct  mammalia
l)eyond  all  doubt.  In  1864  a  committee^  was  appointed
l)y  the  British  Association  for  the  carrying  on  the  inves-
tigation, which  from  tliat  time  to  the  present  has  been
conducted  under  the  careful  supervision  of  Mr.  Pengelly.

The  cave  consists  of  two  parallel  series  of  chaml^ers
and  galleries,  an  eastern  and  a  western,  which  penetrate
the  low  cliff  of  Devonian  limestone  in  the  direction  of
the  joints,  with  a  northern  and  southern  entrance,  veiy
nearly  at  the  same  level,  *'  about  fifty  feet  apart,  from
180  to  190  feet  above  the  level  of  mean  tide,  and  about
seventy  feet  above  the  bottom  of  the  valley  immediately
adjacent."  The  largest  chamber  of  the  eastern  series  is
sixty-two  feet  from  east  to  west,  and  fifty-three  from
north  to  south.  The  extent  of  the  cave  has  not  yet  been
ascertained.

The  contents,  examined  with  the  minutest  care  (on
Mr.  Pengelly's  method,  see  Appendix  I.),  were  found  to
be  an*anged  in  the  following  order.

(A.)  The  surftice  was  composed  of  dark  earth  var}'ing
in  thickness  from  a  few  inches  to  a  foot,  on  which  rested
large  blocks  of  limestone,  fallen  from  the  roof.  It  con-
tinued medit€val  remains,  Roman  pottery,  and  combs
fashioned  out  of  bone,  similar  to  those  discovered  in  the
Victoria  and  Dowkerbottom  caves  in  Yorkshire,  which
prove  that  the  cave  was  frequented  during  the  historic
j)eriod.  A  barbed  iron  spear-head,  a  bronze  spear-head,
other  bronze  articles,  and  polished  stone  celts,  establish

^  The  committee  consisted  of  Sir  C.  Lyell,  Prof.  Phillips,  Sir  John
Lubbock,  Mr.  John  Evans,  Mr.  Edward  Vivian,  Mr.  William  Pengelly,
to  which  subsequently  Mr.  George  Busk,  Mr.  Boyd  Dawkins,  and
Mr.  Ayshford  San  ford  were  added.


326  DSPOaiTS  IN  KENTB  HOLM.  [obaf.

the  fact  that  it  was  also  used  during  the  iron,  bronie,
and  neolithic  ages.  This  stratam  contained  liie  brolEcn
bones  of  the  short-hom  (Boa  longifrom),  goat,  and
horse,  lai^  quantities  of  charooal,  and  waa  to  a  great
extent  a  refuse-heap  like  that  in  the  Victoria  cavo.

(6.)  Below  this  was  a  stalagmite  floor,  varying  id
thickness  from  one  to  three  feet,  coTering


letil.     (K


(C.)  The  red  earth,  with  atones,  bones  of  the  ex-
tinct animals,  and  flint  implements,  associated  together
in  the  greatest  confusion,  as  well  as  large  lumps  of
stalagmite  and  of  breccia,  which  had  been  torn  out  of  a
prt;-existout  floor.  In  the  "  vestibule,"  near  one  of  the
entrances,  a  black  layer  beneath  the  stalagmite,  com-

>  i'or  Y\)is.  SC  to  100  I  om  indebted  to  the  kindiieM  of  Kr.  Evana.


V'lll.]


IMPLEMENTS  LEFT  BEHIND  BY  MAN.


32


posed,  to  a  great  extent,  of  charcoal,  indicated  the
position  of  the  fire-places,  and  contained  a  vast  number
of  rude  unpolished  palaeolithic  implements.  There  were
also  local  stalagmitic  bands.  The  flint  implements  were
met  with  at  various  depths,  and  consist  of  three  distinct
types  :  the  lanceolate,  Fig.  96,  the  oval,  with  edge  care-
fully cliipped  for  cutting.  Fig.  97,  and  the  flake   (see


Fio   98. — lIari»oon  from  Kent's  Hole  (I).     (Evans.)

Fig.  106).  Besides  these  a  few  implements  have  been
discovered  of  the  same  shape  as  those  found  in  the  gravel
beds ;  in  outline  and  section  roughly  triangular,  and
tapering  to  a  point  from  a  blunt  base,  which  was  pro-
bably intended  to  be  held  in  the  hand.^  Several  articdes
of  bone  and  antler  were  also  met  with,  comprising  an
awl,  or  piercer,  a  needle  with  the  eye  large  enough  to


Fid.  99. — Hurpoon-hoail  fnmi  Kent's  Hol«!  (1).     (Kvjins. )


admit  small  packthread,  and  three  harpoon-heads,  one  of
which  is  barbed  on  both  sides  (Fig.  98),  the  others  being
merely  barbed  on  one  side  (Fig.  99).  A  rounded  pebble
of  coarse  red  sandstone,  battered  into  a  cheese-like  form,
by  being  used  as  a  hammer  (Fig.  100),  was  also  found.
All  these  articles  bring  the  palaeolithic  inhabitants  of
Kent's  Hole  into  relation  with  those  of  the  caves  and

^  Seo  Evans'  "  Ancient  Stone  Implements,"  Fig.  388.     It  is  unne-
cessary to  describe  the  implements.


328  ^BB  BHSCCIA.  [cbu.

rock-shelters  of  the  south  of  France,  to  be  described  iu
the  next  chapter.

(D.)  The  cave-earth  rested  on  a  compact,  daik  led
breccia  composed  of  angular  fr^m^ita  of  limestone  and
pebbles  of  Bandstone  embedded  in  a  sandy  calcaieoiu
paste,  identical  in  constitation  vith  the  fragments  of  the
older  breccia  discovered  in  the  cave-earth.  It  has  far-
nished  bones  of  bears,  and  font  flint  implementa  The
cave-earth,  c,  and  the  breccia,  ^aeem  to  stand  to  one
another  in  an  inverse  ratio  as  regards  thickness  :  where
the  former  was  thin,  the  latter  was  sometimes  as  much
as  twelve  feet  thick.    From  this  relation,  as  well  as  from


the  imbedded  fragments  of  the  latter,  it  may  be  con-
cluded that  the  former  is  the  more  modem,  and  that  in
the  interval  between  their  accumulation  the  latter  had
been,  to  a  considerable  extent,  broken  up.

Tliero  is  very  good  reason  for  the  belief,  that  before
any  of  the  present  cave-earth  was  introduced,  Kent's
Hole  had  been  filled  nearly  to  the  roof  by  an  older
cave  accumulation,  now  represented  by  the  undisturbed
breccia  and  the  included  iragments.  In  a  portion
of  tlie  cave  termed  the  "gallery,"  there  is  a  sheet  of
stalagmite,  extending  overhead  from  wall  to  wall,  and
constituting  a  ceiling  that  readies  from  wall  to  wall.


VIII.]  KENTS  HOLE  FILLED  TWICE,  329

without  further  support  than  that  offered  by  its  own
cohesion.  Above  it,  in  tlie  limestone  rock,  there  is  a
considerable  alcove.  This  branch  of  the  cavern,  there-
fore, is  divided  into  three  stories  or  flats,  that  below  the
floor  occupied  with  cave-earth,  that  between  the  floor
and  the  ceiling  entirely  unoccupied,  and  that  above  the
ceiling  also  without  a  deposit  of  any  kind.  For  such  a
sheet  of  stalagmite  to  have  been  formed  it  is  absolutely
necessary  for  the  cave  to  have  been  filled  up  to  its  level
with  materials  of  some  kind,  just  as  it  is  necessary  for
the  formation  of  a  film  of  ice  that  it  should  be  crystallized
from  the  surftice  of  w^ater.  We  may,  therefore,  infer
that  Kent's  Hole,  like  Brixham,  was  originally  filled  up
to  the  level  of  the  ceiling  (see  Fig.  95,  e),  then  that  the
contents  were  swept  out,  with  the  exception  of  the
breccia,  and  lastly,  that  the  present  cave-earth  was
introduced.  The  occurrence  of  the  remains  of  bear,  and
of  flint  implements,  in  this  breccia  also  proves  that  man
and  bears  were  living  in  the  district,  while  it  was  being
accumulated,  probably  by  the  action  of  the  floods  to
which,  from  time  to  time,  the  cave  was  subjected.  All
the  flint  implements  in  the  breccia  are  of  the  ruder  and
larger  form  which  is  presented  by  those  from  the  pleisto-
cene deposits  of  the  Somme,  Seine,  and  the  rivers  of  the
south  and  east  of  England.

While  engaged  in  the  identification  of  the  mammals
in  1869,  with  Mr.  W.  A.  Sanford,  I  detected  splinters
of  bears  canines,  from  the  cave-earth,  remarkable  for
their  density,  crystalline  structure,  and  semi-conchoidal
fracture,  which  were  in  the  same  mineral  state  as
those  from  the  older  breccia.  One  of  these  had  been
fashioned  into  a  flake  after  its  mineralization,  and  pre-
sented an  edge  chipped  by  use.     The  tooth  from  which


330  THE  AQE  OF  THB  MACHAIR0DU8  [oBAr.

it  was  struck  was,  probably,  imbedded  and  mineralixed
in  the  older  breccia,  then  washed  out  of  it^  and  after-
wards chosen  for  the  mannfactore  of  an  implement.  It
was  already  fossil  and  altered  in  structure  in  the  palaeo-
lithic age.

The  probable  Age  of  the  Machairodus  of  Kenfs

Hole.

The  most  remarkable  animal  discovered  in  the  cave,
by  the  Rev.  J.  MacEnery,  is  the  Machairodus  Uuidens^
or  large  lion-like  animal,  armed  with  double-edged
canines,  in  shape  like  the  blade  of  a  sabre,  and  with  two
serrated  edgc&  Five  canines  and  two  indsors  were  dug
out  of  the  cave-earth,  c,  in  the  Wolfa  Passage,  along
with  vast  quantities  of  bones  and  teeth  of  the  mammoth,
rhinoceros,  Irish  elk,  horse,  and  hy»na.  One  of  the
canines  is  represented  in  Figs.  101,  102,  which  are  taken
from  one  of  the  original  plates  drawn  for  Dr.  Buckland,
and  now  in  the  Museum  of  the  Torquay  Natural  History
Society.  The  two  incisors,  Figs.  103,  104,  105,  are
also  cliiiracterised  by  their  serrated  edgea  A  third  was
discovered  l)y  tlie  exploration  committee  in  the  same
spot,  in  1872,  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  from  that  in
Figs.  103,  104,  which  finally  dispelled  the  scepticism  of
some  eminent  naturalists  as  to  whether  any  of  these
teeth  had  been  obtained  in  the  cave  by  the  Rev,  J.  Mac
Enery.

The  Machairodus  latidens  has  been  found  in  pleisto-
cene strata  in  two  localities  in  France :  in  a  deposit  of
diluvium,  near  Puy,  by  M.  Aymard,  and  in  the  cavern
of  Baume  in  the  Jura,  considered  by  M.  Ltirtet  to  be  of

^  For  an  account  of  ^rachairodna,  see  "  Brit.  Pleistocene  Mammalia,'*
Palieont.  Soc,  Fel'uhr,  cxxii.  p.  184.


viii.i  j.v  A'K.vi-.^  liuLB.  ;i:n

prtiglacial  age."  In  the  hitter  it  was  associated  with  the
horse,  ox,  wild-boar,  elephant,  a  iion-ttchorine  species
of  rhinoceros,  the  cave-bear,  and  the  spotted  hyaena.  In
tlie  autumn  of  lH7.i,  I  mot  with  proof  that  the  animal
also  lived  in  Fiaiiee  in  the  plciocene  period.  M.  Lortet,
the    Director   of  the  Museum   of  Natural  History,    at


X'\>i'vi  ('Aiiiiicor  MatliBirodiis,  Ki-iit'*  Hull'  (j).     (MacEner;-.)


Lyons,  called  my  attention  to  a  canine,  in  the  Palais  dcs
Heaux  Arts,  wliich  coincides  exactly  in  all  its  dimensions
with  one  of  tliose  from  Kent's  Hole.  It  was  found  at
Cliagny  (Sa6ni:  et  Loire)  near  Dijon,  along  with  Mastu-

'  Gervais,  "  Zool.  et  I'dleotit.  Fraiiv^ses,"  ISoil,  p.  251.  "Animaux
Vcil<;bri-M,  Vivantset  Fossilea,"  1SC7-'J,  p.  TB,  [il.  xviii.  Larlet,  I'rfl-
liistoric  Cutigreas,  Paris  VQlunic,  18GS,  p.  21)9.


-•  1


r      •  t  J


«

;^/,  ^>f;  V  *^;%vi:  vf  ^.v^  :y>rl*sK*«Kr  («emd.  befiote  the  aietie
,t,ti^/:*f>,  ;.^/;  *;iKk.'rTj  fr^il  [^ia&«9EMiD  of  the  Tmlley  of
^uf  Vj»y.,*.:i  ^'ti^uiM^  abd  of  the  low  gnMmds  which
ttoff  \.f'.  vjrhiii  r)i<'.  1  OO'fathom  line  off  the  Atlantic
►J*//Mr  of  \V#'>.ti'rn  VviUi:fz.  There  must  Deeessarilj  have
l^'^/f  a  i-.v/ifi^in^  t/>  ari'l  fro  of  aminal  life  over  the
(/m;iI,  r<'ftil'-.  low-lying  region,  which  is  now  submerged
^*.<'<'  Mh|i,  l''i^,  lii^'^;  Mild  liefoi-e  the  temperature  of
Kninnr  ImmI  Im'^h  HuHir!i(?iitly  lowered  to  exterminate  or
fliiVM  out  llin  moiiUm^'ii  formH,  it  is  most  natural  to
nn|i|MMin  I  lull'  in  warm  msaHons  some  of  the  southern
niiiiiMMiiliii  wiMilil  find  their  way  northwards,  and  espe-


MjyEHAL  STATE  NO  TEST  OF  AGE.


333


cially  a  fomiidabie  carnivore  such  as  the  machairodua.
TIic  exticme  rarity  of  its  remains  forbids  the  hypothesis
that  it  was  a  regular  inhabitant  of  Britain  during  the
pleistoccui;  age.

On  the  otlier  hand,  the  recent  discovery  of  a  second
incisor  in  tlie  npjjerniost  portion  of  the  cave-earth,  in  '
July  1872,  in  the  same  condition  as  the  remains  usually
found,  and  associated  with  the  bones  and  teetli  of  hy%na,
horse,  and  bear,  is  considered  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell  and


,.  JU3,  104,  105.


limlus,  Ktjiit'B  iroU  (1).    (MucEnery.)  i


Mr.  Pengelly  proof  of  the  animal  having  lived  during  the
deposition  of  the  later  cave-earth,  or  in  the  later  stage
of  the  pleistocene.  The  condition  of  a  bone,  however,  is
a  very  fallacious  guide  to  its  antiquity,  and  although  the
fragments  of  the  older  contents  of  the  cave  are  in  a  dif-
ferent mineral  state,  it  is  improbable  that  the  ossiferous
contents  of  so  large  a  cave  should  have  been  mineralized
ctactly  in  the  same  way.  Nor  is  an  appeal  to  its  perfect
'  Tlieso  li^ures  liave  been  liii.dly  IciiL  by  Hit'  PnlwontogTa^liical


334    MACHAIE0DU8  BELONQaTO  BABLT  DKFOBIT.  [(


state  conclusive,  since  several  teeth  of  bear,  which  I  have
examined  from  the  breccia,  are  equally  perfect.

The  view  of  the  high  antiquity  of  machaiiodus  in
Kent's  Hole  derives  support  from  the  diacoveiy  of  JZ&»*
noceros  megarhintis  at  Oreston,  a  species  which  is  very
abundant  in  the  Italian  pleiocene  strata,  and  not  un-
common in  those  of  France, — a  species  with  its  head-
quarters  in  the  south,  but  ranging  as  fisur  north  as  Norfolk
in  the  early  stage  of  the  pleistocene  age,  represented  by
the  forest  bed  of  Cromer,  and  that  lived  in  the  valley
of  the  Thames,  while  the  gravel-beds  of  Crayford  and
Grays  Thurrock  were  being  deposited  by  the  ancient
river.  The  occurrence  of  either  of  these  animals  in  a
cave  is  exceptional,  and  the  presence  of  both  in  caves  on
the  edge  of  the  great  plain  extending  southwards  from
the  present  coastline  of  Devon,  seems  to  me  to  imply
that  both  were  open  during  the  early  stage  of  the  pleis-
tocene, while  the  pleiocene  mammalia  were  retreating
before  the  southward  advance  of  the  mammoth,  woolly
rhinoceros,  spotted  hyaena,  reindeer,  and  their  congeners,
at  a  time  anterior  to  the  lowerinj;  of  the  temperature
that  culminated  in  the  glacial  period.  For  these  reasons
it  seems  to  me  probable  that  the  machairodus  belongs
to  an  early  rather  than  a  late  stage  in  the  history  of
Kent's  Hole.

.There  is  an  important  point  of  resemblance  between
the  mode  of  the  occurrence  of  the  machairodus  in  Kent's
Hole,  and  of  the  megarhine  rhinoceros  at  Oreston,  The
remains  of  both  were  met  with  only  in  one  spot,  and
were  not  scattered  through  the  chambers  and  passages.
It  may  have  happened  that  in  the  physical  changes
which  those  caves  have  undergone,  both  were  preserved
in   a  fissure   like    that   described  in   the    Uphill   cave


VIII.]  CAVKS  OF  IRELAND.  335

(p.  294),  and  tliat  subscciueiitly  they  dropped  down  and
became  iml)edded  in  a  newer  deposit.  In  fixing  the  age
of  strata  in  ca\'es  it  seems  to  me  that  the  zoolocrical
evidence  is  of  fiir  greater  weight  than  that  of  mere
position,  which  may  be  the  result  of  accidental  circum-
stances.

The  Caves  of  Ireland.

The  caves  of  Irehind  would  probably  afford  as  rich  a
fauna  as  those  of  Britain,  had  they  been  explored  with
cipial  care.  In  one  at  Shandon,  near  Dungarvan,  Water-
ford,  remains  of  the  brown  bear  {U.  arctos)  reindeer,
horse,  and  mammoth  were  discovered  in  1859,  by  Mr.
Brenan.*  The  first  of  these  animals  became  extinct  in
Ireland  before  the  historic  period,  while  it  survived  in
Britain  at  least  as  late  as  the  Roman  occupation.

The  cave-bear  is  also  recorded  by  Dr.  Carte/  from  the
same  place,  but  the  thigh  bone  assigned  to  it  seems  to
me  to  belong  to  the  brown,  or  common  species.  The
mammoth,  so  abundant  in  Britain,  has  only  been  dis-
covered in  two  other  localities  in  Ireland,  at  White-
church  near  Dungarvan,  and  at  Magherr}''  near  Belturbet.^

The  range  of  these  animals  over  Great  Britain  and
Ireland  in  the  pleistocene  age  enables  us  to  realize  the
ancient  physical  geography,  which  will  be  treated  in  the
next  and  following  chapters  as  part  of  the  general  ques-
tion of  the  physical  condition  of  north-western  Europe
at  that  time.

^  *'  Journ.  Royal  Dublin  Soc."  ii.  p.  344.

•  "Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Dublin,"  x.  p.  147.  "Journ.  Royal  Dublin
Soc."  ii.  p.  352.

''  Scott,  "CJeol.  Soc.  Dublin,"  Feb.  10,  1864.


3SCli>


^  ^   Ji   Til


^tJtSL'^lxnlisSi


1   JL  -=.:.*  ai.z   ?"~^n--r-*  — IiiuB^ia  -u


■: 1^     ».«.v     1.  ..i\v    ^.'I

k  m

I'  //.ill'   '  'j;J',»«  /  ';)  /•;/v«Mj-,  i/j  rrai:r-t.-.     Ill  that  of  Bruni-
T"  '    "•'    'I"  '.  h'^w  IoiiimI  onlv  in  tlie  lnVlicr  moiintjiins


IX.]  BAVME.  337

inhabiting  the  plains  of  the  region  of  the  Volga  and  of
southern  Siberia,  have  been  identified  by  Prof.  Owen ;
while  in  the  collection  obtained  by  Mr.  Moggridge  from
the  caves  of  Mentone,  Prof.  Busk  has  recognized  the
marmot.  With  these  exceptions  there  is  no  distinction
between  the  faunas  of  the  bone-caves  of  this  country
and  of  France.^

The  Cave  of  Baume.

The  MachairodiLS  hxtidens^  or  great  sabre-toothed
feline  of  Kent's  Hole,  has  been  discovered  in  the  cave
of  Baume  in  the  Jura,  according  to  M.  Gervais,*  along
with  the  horse,  ox,  wild-boar,  elephant,  a  non-ticho-
rhine  species  of  rhinoceros,  the  spotted  hyaena,  and  the
cave-bear,  or  the  same  group  of  animals  as  that  with
which  it  is  found  in  Kent's  Hole.  The  cave  is  con-
sidered by  M.  Lartet  *  to  be  of  preglacial  age.


The  Caves  of  PSrigord.

The  caves  and  rock-shelters  of  PSrigord,  explored  by
the  late  M.  Lartet  and  our  countryman,  Mr.  Christy/

^  An  account  of  the  numerous  caves  of  France  will  be  found  in  the
works  of  M.  de  Serres,  the  ''  Eevue  Arch^ologique,"  ''  Les  Mateiiaux
pour  THistoire  de  rHomme.*'

»  Boyd  Dawkins,  "  Brit.  Pleist.  Mam.  Palaeont.  Soc."  1872,  p.  189.

•  Gervais,  "  Animaux  Vert6br^8,"  p.  78,  pL  xviii

^  Lartet,  International  Congress,  Paris  Volume,  p.  269.

•  "Cavemes  du  PSrigord,"  "Revue  Arch6ologique,"  8vo.  1864.
**  Keliquiae  Aquitainicae,''  4to.  1865-74.  This  magnificent  history  of  the
researches,  in  the  prosecution  of  which  Mr.  Christy  lost  his  life,  was
published  at  his  expense  under  the  editorship  of  Prof.  Bupert  Jones,
!F.R.S.,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  the  liberty  to  use  the  letterpress
and  engravings  quoted  in  this  book.

Z


338  CA  FBS  AND  BOCKSBBLTMBa  [cur.

1863-4,  have  not  only  afforded  comiilative  pnxtf  of  the
co-existence  of  man  with  the  extinct  miMnmiLli^  but  have
^ven  us  a  clue  as  to  the  race  to  which  he  bdongedL
They  penetrate  the  sides  of  the  valleys  of  the  Doxdogne
and  Vez^re  at  various  levels,  as  may  be  seen  in  Fig.
71,  and  are  full  of  the  remains  left  behind  fay  iheir
ancient  inhabitants,  which  give  as  vivid  a  pictoxe  of  the
human  life  of  the  period,  as  that  revealed  of  Italian
manners  in  the  first  century  by  the  buried  dtiee  of
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  The  old  floors  of  hmnaa
occupation  consist  of  broken  bones  of  animals  killed  in
the  chase,  mingled  with  rude  implements,  weapons  of
bone,  and  impolished  stone,  and  charcoal  and  faomt
stones  which  point  out  the  position  of  the  hA^jj^w,

Flakes  (Fig.  106)  without  number,  rude  stone-eottei^
awls,  lance-heads,  hammers,  saws  made  of  flint  or  of  cherts
rest  pMe-mMe  with  bone  needles,  sculptured  reindeer  ant-
lers, engraved  stones,  arrow-heads,  harpoons,  and  pointed
bones,  and  with  the  broken  remains  of  the  animals  which
had  been  used  as  food,  the  reindeer,  bison,  horse,  the
ibex,  the  saiga  antelope,  and  the  musk  sheep.  Tn  some
cases  the  whole  is  compacted  by  a  calcareous  cement  into
a  hard  mass,  fragments  of  which  are  to  be  seen  in  the
principal  museums  of  Europe.  This  strange  accumula-
tion  of  ddbris  marks,  beyond  all  doubt,  the  place  where
ancient  hunters  had  feasted,  and  the  broken  bones  and
implements  are  merely  the  refuse  cast  aside.  The  reindeer
formed  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  food,  and  must
have  lived  in  enormous  herds  at  that  time  in  the  centre
of  France.  The  severity  of  the  climate  at  the  time  may
be  inferred  by  the  presence  of  this  animal,  as  well  as  by
the  accumulation  of  bones  on  the  spots  on  which  man
had  fixed  his  habitation.     Indeed,  had  not  this  been  the


t.]


OF  P^BIGORD.


339


case,  the  decomposition  of  ho  much  animal  matter  would
have  rendered  the  place  uninhabitable  even  by  the  lowest
savage.

Besides  the  animals  mentioned  above,  the  cave-bear
and  lion  have  been  met  with  in  one,  and  the  mammoth
in  five  localities,  and  tlieir  remains  bear  marks  of  cutting


Fio.  106.  —  Flint-  Fig   107 —Flint  Scraper,  _.
Uake,  L™  EyzifiB  tjzics  (})      (lartet  and

(t).     (Lartelimil  Christy )

Christy.)


Fia  108.— Flint  Jarelin-Iiead,
Laugerie  Haute  (J).  (Lutet
and  ChrUty.)


or  scraping,  which  show  that  they  fell  a  prey  to  hunters.
The  Irish  oik,  also,  and  the  hyEena  occur  respectively  in
the  cave  of  Laugcrie  Basse,  and  of  Moustier,  but  the  latter
certainly  did  not  gain  access  to  the  refuse-heaps,  because
the  vertebrae  are  intact  which  it  is  in  the  habit  of  eating.

z  2


340


IMFLBMMSTB  USED  BY


U


For  the  same  leason  also,  H.  Lartet  infisn  tiiat  tiw
hunteiB  were  not  aided  in  the  chase  bj  die  dog:
There  is  no  evidence  that  they  were  poneaaed  of  aaj
domestic  animal.  There  were  no  spindle  wheela  to
indicate  a  knowledge  of  spinning;  nor  potBherds  to  sihow
an  acquaintance  with  the  potter's  art  In  bodi  then
respects  they  resemble  the  Fuegians;  Estimos^  and  Ans-
tralians,  and  contrast  strongly  with  the  neolifliie


Fio.  109.— Flint  Arrow-
head, Laugerie  Haute
0).  (Lartet  and  ChriBty.)


Fio.  110.— Bono  needle,  Le

liadelaine  ft).     (Urtot

andChrirty.)


The  broken  bones  show  that  the  reindeer  famished  the
more  usual  food^  and  next  to  that  the  horse,  and  then
the  bison.  And  from  the  absence  of  the  vertebrse  and
pelvic  bones  of  the  two  latter  animals,  M.  Lartet  con-
cludes that  they  were  cut  up  where  they  were  killed,  and
the  meat  stripped  from  the  backbone  and  the  pelvis.
Their  food  was  probably  cooked  by  boiling,  the  number
of  round  stones  used  for  heating  water  and  bearing


IX.]  PALAEOLITHIC  HUNTERS.  341

marks  of  fire,  like  the  "  pot  boilers  '*  of   some  of  the
American  Indians,  being  very  considerable.

Among  the  stone  implements  flint  flakes  were  in-
credibly numerous,  and  the  number  of  chips  scattered
about  as  well  as  the  blocks  of  flint  from  which  they  had
been  struck,  proved  that  they  had  been  made  on  the
spot ;  most  of  these  flakes  were  notched  by  use  (Fig.
106).  Instruments  with  the  ends  carefully  rounded  off
(Fig.  107)  were  also  abundant,  and  from  their  analogy
with  similar  instruments  used  by  the  Eskimos,  there
can  be  but  little  doubt  that  they  were  intended  for  the
preparation  of  skins  (compare  Fig.  107  with  Fig.  124).
The  ends  of  some  were  chipped  to  a  point  for  insertion
into  a  handle,  while  others  rounded  at  both  ends  were
probably  used  freely  in  the  hand.  In  the  cave  of  Mous-
tier  oval  implements  were  met  with,  resembling  those
figured  from  the  caverns  of  Kent's  Hole  and  Wookey
(Figs.  84  and  97).  The  spear,  javelin,  and  arrow-heads
of  flint  presented  two  modes  of  attachment  to  the  shaft,
the  base  of  some  being  squared  off"  with  a  notch  above
for  the  ligature  (as  in  Fig.  108),  while  in  others  (Fig.
109)  it  tapered  off"  into  a  point  intended  for  insertion.
This  latter  form  has  been  obtained  also  in  Kent's  Hole.

The  bone  needles  are  carefully  smoothed,  and  were
pierced  with  a  neatly-made  eye  (Fig.  110)  by  means  of
pointed  flakes  which  were  found  along  with  them,  and
the  use  of  which  M.  Lartet  demonstrated  by  experi-
ment. They  had  been  sawn  out  of  the  compact  meta-
carpals and  tarsals  of  the  reindeer  ^  and  the  horse,
and  subsequently  rounded  on  fragments  of  sandstone,
the  grooves  of  which  fitted  them.     In  this,  therefore,

^  The  same  bones  of  the  ox  and  horse  are  now  imported  into*
Britain  from  South  America  for  the  manufacture  of  buttons.


m  thft  faUt  rf«wMR  ht  alw  TC  fate  tiiUj  hii^
Itefete  ■•  devetf  MeAodfcf  vUdbAdr  aMdlKvai
— nnfii'tiuKJ.  TWj  wcte  paUiT-  wmd  I
idriiM  toj^Bther,  d*  tcBdoK  of  m  luaJwi  fa
lluead,  M  aaioag  Ae  moders  ^^^^— ■


i


.  li^.—IIuTpooiiHof  Autler,  La  HadcUiue.    (Luiat  >ud  C

turn,  ns,  IM.— Arrow-hcwls,  Ootko d'Enfer.     (Brocfc)

Kirt.  lie— Bone  Awl,  GoTKa  d'KnfBr  <)).     (BroM.)


'■'))(!  Iii'IuIr  of  arrows  and  lances  are  made  principally
(lut.  of  reindeer  antler,  and  arc  barbed,  the  barbs  gene-
j-iilly  being  grooved,  and  rjirved  on  both  sides  of  the  axis


ix.J  FIGURES  OF  JXIMALK  :U:i

(FigH.  Ill,  112,  li;))  ;  but  iii  some  cases,  as  in  Fig.  114,
the  barbs  arc  only  on  one  side.  Many  bones  and  antlers
are  variously  carved  into  shapes  for  which  it  is  impos-
sible to  assign  a  definite  use.     Fig.  115  is  a  bone  awL

The  most  remarkable  remains  left  behind  by  man  in
these  refu.sc-hcap8  are  the  sculptured  reindeer  antlers,
and  the  figures  engraved  on  fragments  of  schist  and  on
ivory.  A  well-defined  outline  of  an  ox  stands  out
boldly  from  one  piece  of  antler,  A  second  presents  us
witJi  a  most  elegant  design  :  a  reindeer  is  kneeling  down
in  an  easy  attitude  with  its  head  thrown  up  in  the  air,
so  that  the  antlers  rest  on  the  shoulders,  and  the  back
of  the  animal  forms  an  even  surface  for  a  handle,  which


i]  Handle  of  Bmideer  Antlpr  (}1.     (I.nrttt  ajid  ChriRty.)


is  too  .'mall  to  lie  giasped  in  an  ordinary  European  hand
(Fig,  IIG).  In  a  third  a  man  stands  close  to  a  horse's
head,  and  hard  by  is  a  fish  like  an  eel;  and  on  the  other
side  of  the  same  cylinder  are  two  heads  of  bison,  drawn
with  sufficient  clearness  to  ensure  recognition  by  anyone
who  had  ever  seen  that  animal  (Fig.  1 1 7).  On  a  fourth  the
natural  curvature  of  one  of  the  tines  has  been  taken  ad-
vantage of  by  the  artist  to  engrave  the  head,  and  the
characteristic  recurved  horns  of  the  ibex  ;  and  on  a
fifth  are  figures  of  horses  (Fig.  1 1 8),  in  which  the  upright
disheveled  mane  and  shaggy  ungroomed  tail  are  repre-
.scnted  with  admirable  spirit.     At  first  sight  it  would


TBX  DXBIGira  TSUB  TO  NATUMM


ICUIL


appear  that  the  artiat  had  dnwD  II10  headfl  out  of  tH
proportion  to  the  hodiea.  A  hone*B  akeleten,  howera;
from  the  palaeolithic  "station''  at  Bolnte^  lately  set  up
in  the  Muaeum  atLycaUpjatiTeBliiat  thiaisnot  thecal^
since,  as  M.  Lortet  pointed  out  to  m^  it  j


for  its  massive  head,  and  small  body.  In  Fig.  119  a
group  of  reindeer  are  seen,  two  on  their  bscks,  and
two  i-D  the  act  of  walking.  The  Irish  elk,  red-deer,
and  probably  rhinoceros,  are  also  depicted,  the  figareB
upon  the  bard  schist  being  feebly  and  oncertainly  drawn.


Fla.  lis. — Honea  eagraved  on  Antler,  L«  Hadelaine  ({).     (LarUt  and  Chriitf .


as  might  be  expected  from  the  character  of  \h»  toola
The  most  clever  sculptor  of  modem  times  would,
probably,  not  succeed  very  mach  better  if  his  graver
was  a  splinter  of  flint,  and  stone  and  bone  were  the
materials  to  be  engraved.  One  pecaliarity  runs  through
the  figures  of  animals.    With  hut  two  exceptions  none


ix.\  AXD  DRAWy  FROM  LIFK.  345

of  the  feet  are  represented,  a  circumstance  which  is
probably  due,  as  Mr.  Franks  has  suggested  to  me,  to  the
fact  that  the  hunters  merely  represented  what  they  saw
of  the  animal,  of  which  the  feet  would  be  concealed  by
the  herbage.

The  most  striking  figure  that  has  been  discovered
is  that  of  the  mammoth,'  Fig.  120,  engraved  on  a  frag-
ment of  its  own  tusk,  the  peculiar  spiral  curvature  of
the  tusk  and  the  long  mane,  which  are  not  now  to  be


Fio.  119.— Groui'of  ReiiiJeer,  DonIogD«.     (Drooa.)

I'ouiid  in  any  living  elephant,  proving  that  the  original
wa.s  familiar  to  the  eye  of  the  artist.  The  discovery
of  whole  carcases  of  the  animal  in  northern  Siberia,
preserved  from  decay  in  the  frozen  clilfs  and  morasses,
has  made  us  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  the  long
hairy  mane.  Had  not  it  thus  been  handed  down  to
our  eyes,  we  should  probably  have  treated  this  moat
accurate  drawing  as  a  mere  artist's  freak.  Its  pecidi-
arities  are  so  faithfully  depicted  that  it  is  quite  impos-
1  'BojA  DawkinB,  "  Bange  of  tbe  Mammoth,"  Pop.  Sc.  Rev.  July,
18C8.


346  THE  WIQUBB  OF  THE  UAMUOTB.  [cauK

Bible  for  the  animal  to  be  confoimded  vith  eidier  of  the


two  living  species.     These  drawings  probably  employed


IX.]  HUNTERS  NOT  CANNIBALS,  347

the  idle  hours  of  the  hunter,  and  perpetuate  the  scenes
which  he  witnessed  in  the  chase.  They  are  full  of  artistic
feeling,  and  are  evidently  drawn  from  life.  The  mam-
moth is  engraved  on  its  own  ivory,  the  reindeer  generally
on  reindeer  antler,  and  the  stag  on  stag  antler.

From  all  these  facts  we  must  picture  to  our  mind,  that
these  ancient  dwellers  in  the  caves  of  Aquitaine  lived  by
hunting  and  fishing,  that  they  were  acquainted  with
fire,  and  that  they  were  clad  with  skins  sewn  together
with  sinews  or  strips  of  intestines.  That  they  did  not
possess  the  dog  is  shown,  not  merely  by  the  negative
evidence  of  its  not  having  been  discovered,  but  also  by
the  fact  that  the  bones  which  it  invariably  eats,  such
as  the  vertebrae,  are  preserved.  They  did  not  possess
any  domestic  animals,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that
they  were  acquainted  with  the  potter's  art.  M.  de
Mortillet's  view,  that  the  art  of  making  pottery  was
unknown  in  the  palaeolithic  age,  seems  to  me  to  be
probably  true,  the  reputed  cases  of  the  discovery  of
potsherds  being  always  connected  with  suspicious  cir-
cumstances, which  render  it  probable  that  they  were
subsequently  introduced.

Besides  the  remains  of  the  animals  in  the  refuse-heaps
were  fragmentary  portions  of  human  skeletons,  which,
however,  were  not  scraped  or  broken  so  as  to  imply  the
practice  of  cannibalism.

Caves  of  Belgium.

The  researches  of  Dr.  Schmerling^  into  the  caves  of
Belgium,  in  1829-30,  revealed  the  fact  that  the  animals

^  "  Recherchcs  sur  les  oss.  foss.  decouverts  dans  les  Cavernes  de
Li<'»ge."     4to.


348


CAVBa  OF  BELGIUM.


[CBAT.


80  abundant  in  the  caves  of  Gennany,  were  equally
numerous  in  those  in  the  ndghbouifaood  of  Li^ge^  and
the  flint  flakes,  and  the  fragments  of  human  bones,  which
he  found  may  possibly  be  of  palesolithic  age.  He  also
discovered  the  remuns  of  the  porcupine,  a  species  no
longer  living  north  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees.  The
systematic  exploration,  however,  of  the  pakeolithic  caves
in  that  district  was  not  carried  out  until,  in  the  year
1864,  M.  Dupont^  began  the  investigation  of  those  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Dinant-sur-Meuse,  on  behalf  of
the  Belgian  Government.    His  results,  based  upon  the


Fio.  121  .—Carved  Implement  of  Reindeer  Antler,  Goyet  (i).    (IHipont.)

examination  of  upwards  of  twenty  caves  and  rock-
shelterSy  are  published  in  a  series  of  papers  read  before
the  Eoyal  Academy  of  Belgium  and  subsequently  in  a
separate  work.  Besides  the  remains  of  the  ftnitn^V
living  in  Belgium  within  the  historic  period,  he  met
with  the  ibex,  chamois,  and  marmot,  which  are  now  to
be  found  only  in  the  mountainous  districts  of  Europe,
the  tailless  hare,  lemming,  and  arctic  fox,  of  ihe
northern  regions,  the  Antelope  saiga,  grizzly  bear,  lion,
hysena,  and  others.  Most  of  these  species  occurred  in
refuse  accumulations,  their  remains  being  in  the  frag-
mentary condition  of  those  of  the  French  cavea     The

^  Dupont,  "  L'Homme  pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre  dans  lea  En-
virons de  Dinant-sur-Meuse."     2nd  edit  p.  187.


IX.]  THOU  DE  NAULETTE.  349

associated  implements  are  of  the  same  type  as  those  of
P^rigord,  and  some  of  them  are  ornamented  in  the  same
manner  as,  for  example,  that  from  the  cavern  of  Goyet,
Fig.  121,  termed  a  "Mton  de  commandement,"  but
which,  from  its  analogy  with  similar  articles  in  the
British  Museum,  is  most  probably  an  arrow-straightener.
Those  of  flint  are  also  of  the  same  kind,  and  in  several
of  the  caves  there  was  the  same  association  of  frag-
mentary human  remains  with  the  relics  of  the  feasts  as
in  the  French  refuse-heaps.

Trou  de  Naulette.

The  human  remains  consisting  of  a  lower  jaw,  ulna
and  metatarsal,  discovered  in  the  large  cavern  of  Naulette,*
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Lesse,  in  association  with  the
broken  remains  of  the  rhinoceros,  mammoth,  reindeer,
chamois,  and  marmot,  are  undoubtedly  of  palaeolithic
age,  since  they  rested  in  an  undisturbed  stratum.  M.
Dupont  gives  the  following  section  in  descending  order.

METRES.

1.  Sandy  grey  and  yellow  clay 2*90

2.  Yellow  grey  clay  with  stones  and  bones  of  ruminants    0*45

3.  Stalagmite.

4.  Tufa.

5.  Three  bands  of  clay  alternating  with  stalagmite.

6.  Sandy  clay  with  human  bones  at  the  depth  of  four  metres.

7.  Stalagmite.

8.  Cave-earth  with  bones  gnawed  by  hyaenas.

The  human  jaw  is  remarkable  for  its  prognathism,
which,  according  to  Dr.  Hamy,  is  greater  than  that  which

^  Dupont,  op.  cit.  **  Bull.  Acad.  Roy.  de  Belgique,"  xxii.  p.  20.
Hamy,  **  Pal^ontologio  Humaine,"  p.  231.


350  CAVBa  OF  aWITZEBLANIk  [<mp.

has  been  observed  in  any  living  lacea.  The  cave  had
afforded  shelter  to  the  hyaanas  before  it  had  been  used
by  man.

The  Caves  (^Switzerland.

The  eaves  of  Switzerland  also  contain  the  same  claps  of
rude  implements  and  carvings.  Pro£  Bapert  Jonea  has
called  my  attention  to  a  recent  discovery  of  carved  rein-
deer antlers^  and  harpoon-heads»  similar  to  those  figured
from  the  Dordogne,  in  a  cave  in  the  Canton  of  Schaaff-
hausen/  along  with  the  bones  of  hyaena^  reindeer^  and
mammoth.  In  that  of  Yeyrier/  carved  implements  were
found  along  with  the  remains  of  the  ox,  horsey  i^omt^a^
and  ibex,  some  of  which,  shown  to  me  by  Dr.  Goese^  at
the  meeting  of  the  French  Association  fixr  the  Advance-
ment of  Science,  at  Lyons  in  1873,  are  of  the  same  form
and  size  as  the  arrow-straightener  from  the  cave  of  Goyet
(Fig.  121).

We  may,  therefore,  infer  that  the  same  palaeolithic
race  of  men  once  ranged  over  the  whole  region  from  the
Pyrenees  and  Switzerland,  as  far  to  the  north  as  Belgium.
And  since  Prof.  Fraas  has  obtained  similar  implements
from  a  refuse-heap  at  Schussenreid  in  Wttrtemberg,  they
wandered  as  far  to  the  east  as  that  district,  while  the
discoveries  in  Kent's  Hole  and  Wookey  Hole  prove  that
they  extended  as  far  to  the  west  as  Somersetshire  and
Devonshire.

^  The  discovery  will  shortly  be  published  by  Prof.  Heine,  of  Zorich.
2  "  MatiSriaux  pour  THistoire  de  rHomme,"  May  1869,  p.  272.


XL]      IMPLEMENTS  IN  CA  VES  AND  RIVER-DEPOSITS.    351

Cave-dwellers  and  Pakeolithic  Men  of  the  River-

gravels.

These  palaeolithic  cave-dwellers  are  considered  by  Mr.
Evans  ^  to  belong  to  the  same  race  as  those  who  have  left
their  rude  flint  implements  in  the  river-gravels  in  the
valleys  of  the  Thames,  the  Somme,  the  Seine,  and  in  the
eastern  counties,  as  far  to  the  north  as  Peterborough.
We  must,  how^ever,  allow  that  a  marked  difierence  is  to
be  observed  between  a  series  of  flint  implements  found
in  the  caves,  as  compared  with  a  series  found  in  the  river-
strata,  although  some  forms  are  common  to  the  two  ;  as
for  instance  some  of  those  found  in  Brixham  and  Kent's
Hole.  This  difference  can  scarcely  be  explained  on  the
supposition  that  the  small  things  would  be  less  likely  to
be  preserved  in  tlie  fluviatile  deposits,  because  it  leaves
the  rarity  in  the  caves  of  the  larger  fluviatile  forms  un-
accounted for.  It  is  perhaps  safer,  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  to  consider  the  two  sets  to  be  distinct
from  each  other.  The  direct  superposition  in  Kent's
Hole  of  the  stratum  with  the  ordinary  cave-type  of  im-
plement, over  that  with  the  ordinary  fluviatile  type,
may  perhaps  prove  that  the  latter  is  the  older.

Classification  of  Palceolithic  Caves.

The  palaeolithic  caves  are  divided  by  M.  Lartet  ^  into
four  groups,  according  to  the  species  of  animals  which
they  contain  ;  into  those  of  the  age  of  the  cave-bear,  of
the  age  of  the  mammoth  and  woolly  rhinoceros,  of  the

^  *'  Ancient  Stone  Imi)lementfi."

2  "Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat."  4th  sor.  1.  15,  p.  231.


352       CLAaaiWIOATION  OW  FAZJEOUTEIO  OAVMBL    [our.


age  of  the  reindeer,  and  of  the  age  of  bison.  Dr.  Hamy
follows  Sir  John  Lubbock/  in  considering  the  age  of  tlM
cave-bear  to  be  co-extensiye  with  that  of  the  nuimmoth,
and  in  the  classification  of  caves  he  adopts  a  series  of
transitions.  M.  Dupont  divides  the  caves  of  fidginm
into  those  belonging  to  the  age  of  the  mammotih,  and  to
that  of  the  reindeer.

It  is  easy  to  refer  a  given  cave  to  the  age  of  the  rein-
deer or  of  the  mammotii  because  it  contains  ihe  remains
of  those  animalsi  but  the  division  has  been  rendered
worthless  for  chronological  purposes,  by  the  fiiet  that
both  these  animals  inhabited  the  region  north  of  the  Alps
and  Pyrenees  at  the  same  time,  and  are  to  be  found
together  in  nearly  every  bone-cave  explored  in  that  area.
The  diflference  between  the  contents  of  one  palssolithic
cave  and  another,  is  probably  largely  due  to  the  Cbu^  that
man  could  more  easily  catch  some  animals  than  others,
as  well  as  to  the  preference  for  one  kind  of  food  before
anotlicr.  And  the  abundance  of  the  reindeer,  which  is
supposed  to  characterise  the  reindeer  period,  may  reason-
ably be  accounted  for  by  the  fact,  that  it  would  be  more
easily  captured  by  a  savage  huuter,  than  the  mammoth,
woolly  rhinoceros,  cave-bear,  lion,  or  hysana.  The  classi-
fication will  apply,  as  I  have  shown  in  my  essay  on  the
pleistocene  mammalia,^  neither  to  the  caves  of  this
country,  of  Belgium,  nor  of  France,  and  my  views  are
shared  by  M.  de  Mortillet,'  after  a  careful  and  inde-
pendent examination  of  the  whole  evidence.

The  division  of  the  caves  also  into  ages,  according  to

*  Hamjy  op.  cit.    Lubbock,  "  Prehistoric  Man."
«  "  Quart.  Geol.  Joum."  June  5,  1872.

'  Prehistoric  Congress,  Brussels  Volume,  1872,  p.  432.     ''M^m.
Anthrop.  Soc.  de  Paris,"  2nd  sir.  t.  6,  p.  170.


IX.]        RELATION  OF  CAVE-DIVELLERS  TO  ESKIMOS.     353

the  various  types  of  implements  found  in  them,  proposed
by  ]\1.  de  JMortillet,  seems  to  be  equally  unsatisfactory;
for  there  is  no  greater  difference  in  the  implements  of  any
two  of  the  palaeolithic  caves,  than  is  to  be  observed  be-
tween those  of  two  different  tribes  of  Eskimos,  while  the
general  resemblance  is  most  striking.  The  principle  of
classification  by  the  relative  rudeness,  assumes  that  the
progress  of  man  has  been  gradual,  and  that  the  ruder
implements  are  therefore  the  older.  The  difference,  how-
ever, may  have  been  due  to  different  tribes,  or  families,
having  co-existed  w^ithout  intercourse  with  each  other,
as  is  now  generally  the  case  with  savage  communities ;
or  to  the  supply  of  flint,  chert,  and  other  materials  for
cutting  instruments,  being  greater  in  one  region  than  in
another.

Relation  of  Cave-dwellers  to  Eskimos.

Can  these  cave-dwellers  be  identified  w^ith  any  people
now  living  on  the  face  of  the  earth  ?  or  are  they  as  com-
pletely without  representatives  as  their  extinct  contem-
poraries, the  mammoth  and  the  woolly  rhinoceros  ?
Absolute  certainty  we  cannot   hope   to   obtain  on  the


Fig.  122. — Eskimos  Spear-head,  bone  (J).


point,  but  the  cumulative  evidence  enables  an  answer  to
be  given  which  is  probably  true.  Along  the  American
shore  of  the  great  Arctic  Ocean,  in  the  region  of  ever-
lasting snow,  dwell  the  Eskimos,  living  by  hunting  and

A    A


xsKtMO's  iMPLioiamt  or


[«


fishing,  speaking  the  same
language,  and  using  the
same  implementB  from  tiie
Straits  of  Behring  on  tiw
west,  to  Greenland  on  the
east  Their  implements  and
Teapons,  brought  homeliy
the  arctic  explorer^  enaUe
us  to  institate  a  compa-
rieon  with  thoBe  found  in
the  palffiolithic  cares.  Hie
harpoons  in  the  Aahmo-
Ican  collection  at  Oxford,
bronght  over  bj  Captain
Beechey  and  Lieut  Haid-
ing  from  West  G^eorgia,  as
well  as  those  in  the  British
Museum,  are  almost  idea-
tical  in  ehape  and  design
with  those  from  the  caves
of  Aquitaiue  and  Rent's
Hole ;  the  only  difference
being  that  some  of  the
latter  have  grooved  barba
The  heads  of  the  fowling
and  iishing  spears,  darts,
and  arrows,  as  well  as  the
form  of  their  bases  for  in-
sertion into  the  shafts,  are
also  identical  (Fig.  122),  as
may  be  seen  from  a  com-
parison of  Fig.  122  with
Figs.  99  and  114.     The


SAME  TYPE  AS  THE  PALEOLITHIC.


355


curiously  carved  inatniraent.  Fig.  123,  which  the  Eulti-
ni03  use  for  straightening  their  arrows  is  variously
ornamented  with  designs  of  animals,  analogous  to  those
cut  on  the  reindeer  antlers  in  Aquitaine ;  and  if  it  be
compared  with  the  so-called  "  biton  de  commandemeot,"
Fig.  121,  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  latter  also  was  pro-
bably intended  for  the  same  pur-
pose ;  the  difference  in  the  shape
of  the  hole  in  the  two  figured
specimens  being  also  observable
in  the  series  of  Eskimos  arrow-
straighteners  in  the  British  Mu-
seum, and  being  largely  due  to
friction  by  use.  Many  of  the  im-
plements are  the  same  in  form.  An
Eskimos  stone  scraper  for  preparing
skins,  or  plane  for  smoothing  wood,
is  represented  in  Fig.  124,  which
is  inserted  in  a  handle  of  fossil
mammoth  ivory,  obtained  from  the
frozen  ice-cliffs  on  the  shores  of  the
Arctic  sea.  If  it  be  compared  with
Fig.  107  from  the  caves,  it  will  be
seen  to  be  of  the  same  pattern.  It
is  indeed  not  a  little  singular,  that
the  handle  in  which  it  is  imbedded
should  have  been  formed  out  of  the
tusks  of  the  same  species  of  ele-
phant as  that  which  was  depicted  by  the  palaeolithic
hunter  (see  Fig.  120),  in  the  south  of  France.

Some  of  the  Eskimos  lance-heads  of  stone  in  the
British  Museum  are  of  the  same  type  as  that  figured
from  the  caves  of  the  Dordogne  (Fig.  108).


[o.  124.— Eakimos  Pkn«

or  SCT«i»r   (()■     (Urtet
«nd  ChriMy.)


356  ^'tBT  OF  ESKIMOS  {our.

The  most  remaikahle  objects  brought  home  from  the
northern  re^ons  are  the  implements  of  bone  and  antier
which  are  ornamented  with  the  figures  of  animals  hunted
by  the  Eskimos  on  sea  or  land  On  the  side  of  one  bow
in  the  Ashmolean  Museum,  used  for  drilling  hotes^  yon
see  them  harpooning  the  whale  from  their  sidn  boata^
and  catching  birds.  On  a  second  they  are  harpooning
walrus  and  catching  seals ;  on  a  third  llie  seals,  are  being
dragged  homa  The  huts  in  which  they  live,  the  tethered
dogs,  the  boat  supported  on  its  platform,  and  their  daily
occupations  are  faithfully  represented  One  bow  is
ornamented  with  a  large  number  of  porpoiseB,  while
on  another  is  a  reindeer  hunt  in  which  the  animals  are
being  attacked  while  they  are  crossing  a  ford  On  a  bone
implement  in  the  British  Museum  from  Port  Glaranoe,
the  reindeer  are  being  shot  down  by  archers  (Fig.  125).
The  arrow  straightener.  Fig.  123,  is  adomed  with  a
reindeer  huDting  scene,  in  which  the  animals  are  seen
browsing  and  unsuspicious  of  the  approach  of  the  hunters,
who  are  advancing,  clad  in  reindeer  skins  and  wearing
antlers  on  their  heads.

A  comparison  of  these  various  designs  with  those
from  the  caves  of  France  and  Belgium  shows  an  identity
of  plan  and  workmanship,  with  this  difference  only,  that
the  hunting  scenes  familiar  to  the  palaeolithic  cave-
dweller  were  not  the  same  as  those  familiar  to  the
Eskimos  on  the  shores  of  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Each  sculp-
tured the  animals  he  knew,  and  the  whale,  walrus,  and
seal  were  unknown  to  the  inland  dwellers  in  Aquitaine,
just  as  the  mammoth,  bison,  and  wild  horse  are  unknown
to  the  Eskimos.  The  reindeer,  which  they  both  knew,
is  represented  in  the  same  way  by  both.  The  West
Georgians  made  their  dirks  of  walrus  tooth,  and  oma-


IX.]  COMPARED  WITH  PALJSOLITHIC.  357

mcuted  them  with  carvings  of  tlie  backbones  of  fishes ;
the  people  of  Aquitaine  used  for  the  same  purpose  rein-
deer antlers,  and  ornamented  them  with  figures  of  that
animal  (see  Fig.  116).  And  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that
the  latter  had  sufficient  artistic  feeling  to  depict  the
mammoth  on  mammoth  ivory,  the  reindeer  generally  on
reindeer  antler,  and  the  stag  on  its  own  antler.

An  appeal  to  the  habits  of  these  two  peoples,  now
separated  by  so  wide  an  interval  of  space  and  time,  tends
also  to  show  that  they  are  descended  from  the  same
stock.     The  method  of  accumulating  large  quantities  of


Fig.  125.— Eskimos  Huiiting-8f!ene  (j).     (Fort  Clarence.)

the  bones  of  animals  around  their  dwelling-places,  and  the
hal^it  of  splitting  the  bones  for  the  sake  of  the  marrow,
is  the  same  in  l)oth.  Their  hides  were  prepared  by  the
same  sort  of  instruments  and  in  the  same  manner,  and
the  needles  with  which  they  were  sewn  together  are  of
the  same  pattern.  The  few  remains  of  man  among  the
relics  of  feasts  in  the  caves  of  Belgium  and  France,  show
the  same  disregard  of  sepulture  as  that  implied  by  the
human  skulls  lying  about  along  with  numerous  bones  of
walrus,  seal,  dog,  bear,  and  fox,  in  an  Eskimos  camp  in
Igloolik,  which  were  carried  away  by  Captain  Lyon,
without  the  slightest  objection  on  the  part  of  the  rela-
tives of  the  dead.

All  these  facts  can  hardly  be  mere  coincidences,  caused
by  both  peoples  leading  a  savage  life  under  similar  cir-
cumstances :    they   afford   reasons   for   the   belief  that


358  BaKlMOS  FBOBABLT  THE  hmAT.

m

the  Eskimos  of  North  America  are  ocmnected  faj  blood
with  the  pakeolithic  cave-dwellen  of  Eniopa  To  tiie
objection  that  sayage  tribes  living  nnder  similar  oondi-
tions  use  similar  instraments^  and  diat^  therefore,  the
correspondence  of  those  of  the  EskimoB  with  those  of  the
reindeer  folk  does  not  prove  that  they  belong  to  the
same  race,  the  answer  may  be  made,  that  there  are  no
two  savage  tribes  now  living  which  use  the  same  wf  of
implements,  without  being  connected  by  bhxML  Tlie
agreement  of  one  or  two  of  the  more  common  and  ruder
instruments  may  be  perhaps  of  no  value  in  ftlaBaification,
but  if  a  whole  set  agree,  fitted  for  variona  naes,  and  some
of  them  rising  above  the  most  common  wants  of  savage
life,  we  must  admit  that  the  argument  as  to  race  is
of  very  great  value.  The  implements  found  in  Belgium,
France,  or  Britain  diiSer  scarcely  more  from  those  now
used  in  West  Georgia,  than  the  latter  do  from  those  now
in  use  in  Greenland  or  Melville  Peninsula.  The  conclu-
sion, therefore,  seems  inevitable,  that  so  far  as  we  have
any  evidence  of  the  race  to  which  the  dwellers  in  the
Dordogne  belong,  that  evidence  points  only  in  the  dircc-
tion  of  the  Eskimos.

This  conclusion  is  to  a  great  extent  confirmed  by  a
consideration  of  the  animals  found  in  the  caves.  The
reindeer  and  tlie  musk  sheep  afford  food  to  the  Eskimos
now,  just  as  they  afforded  it  to  the  palsdolithic  hunters  in
Europe.  No  naturalist  would  deny  that  the  pleistocene
musk  sheep  is  of  the  same  species  as  that  of  North  Ame-
rica, and  although  the  animal  is  extinct  in  Europe  and
Asia,  its  remains,  scattered  through  Germany,  Bussia  in
Europe,  and  Siberia,  show  that  it  formerly  ranged  in  the
whole  of  that  area.  The  enormous  distance,  therefore,  of
southern  France  from  the  northern  shores  of  America,


IX.]  REPRESENT ATIV EH  OF  CAVE-DJVELLBRH,         359

cannot  be  considered  as  an  obstacle  to  this  view,  for,  to
say  the  least,  paloeolithic  man  would  have  had  the  same
chance  of  retreating  to  the  north-east  as  the  musk  sheep.
The  mammoth  and  bison  have  also  been  tracked  by
their  remains  in  the  frozen  river  gravels  and  morasses
through  Siberia,  as  far  to  the  north-east  as  the  American
side  of  the  Straits  of  Behring.  palaeolithic  man  appeared
in  Europe  with  the  arctic  mammalia,  lived  in  Europe
along  with  them,  and  disappeared  with  them.  And
since  his  implements  are  of  the  same  kind  as  those  of
the  Eskimos,  it  may  reasonably  be  concluded  thot  he  is
represented  at  the  present  time  by  the  Eskimos,  for  it  is
most  improbable  that  the  convergence  of  the  ethno-
logical, and  zoological  evidence  should  be  an  accident
These  views,^  which  I  advanced  in  1866,  have  been  to
a  great  extent  accepted  by  Sir  John  Lubbock  in  his  last
edition  of  Prehistoric  Man.


Pleistocene  Animals  living  to  the  North  of  the  Alps

and  Pyrenees.

The  principal  mammalia  inhabiting  Britain,  France,
and  Germany  during  the  pleistocene  age,  and  contem-
porary with  man  in  Europe,  are  given  in  the  following
table,  which  shows  that  the  fauna  of  the  region  to
the  north  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees  was  remarkably
uniform.  The  cave-fauna  of  Provence,  Italy,  and  Spain,
will  be  treated  of  in  the  next  chapter.

'  **  Eskimos  in  the  South  of  Gaul."    Saturday  Review,  December
8th,  18GG.     Edinburgh  Review,  «  Prehistoric  Times."    October  1870.


I'll


"SXimS-


bpH  ■*■!■■■    ii  I


MM


I  i


MrmMiliaiit  dimii—\
rJinTm'm'jJnnnui'.    1


iU;


m


'■    Friii  i.ii-.lni— Leolnra  .

i   Tel'',JI,f,r-Ctmickt  '.
I   >VJI,p,.„^-Wll.lCit    .


li-HarKn
-IM— Pule-1


['•nil    fr nu  —  GtUiljrl
nil-;.  Iiioui-Wolf    .    .


.wily  Hhlnict


"l


I  Jl.ubfiflx-Ul«)n

Rberp I

ClmnHriii  ....  I
Aatllme  Hfwi-SaigB  .
.«»  wnJh-WiM  Bo*r  .

/Vrrwt  fupmrtut  -  lUw  .

(V  ppHj  KugacrnH—l  rish

Elk

<]Hr

Ilipiini<niimv$     ampH-

Uippnpnliimin  .    .    1


362        COAHT-LISE  OF  NORTH-WESTERN  EUROPE     [cHir.


Cave  Fauna  the  same  as  River-bed  Fauna.

If  this  list'  of  animals  from  the  caves  be  compared
with  that  of  the  river-deposits  of  Britain  and  the  couti-
ncait,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  same  fauna  is  present  in
both,  and  that  they  are  therefore  of  the  same  geological
aire.*  This  was  the;  conclusion  to  which  Dr.  Falconer
W21S  lud  by  the  examination  of  the  caves  of  Grower,  and
it  has  bc*(Mi  confirmed  by  every  subsequent  discovery,


The  Pkiistocene  Coast-line  of  North-Western  Europe.

'l'h(*  i(l(Mitity  of  the  British  pleistocene  fauna  with  that
of  the  continent,  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the
])h*i.st()(;ene  age  Britain  was  connected  with  the  adjacent
(i()untri(».s  by  a  bridge  of  land,  over  which  the  wild  animals

h.'ul  fnM»  means  of  migration.  And  this  might  be  brought
al)out  by  a  comparatively  small  elevation  of  the  area.
'I1i(.'  soiiiKlinirs  .sliow  that  Britain  and  Ireland  constitute
merely  th(;  uplands  of  a  plateau  now  submerged  to  the
extent  of  alxnit  100  fathoms,  on  the  side  of  the  Atlantic.
On  the  east,  it  extends  at  a  depth  of  from  twenty  to
iifty  fathoms,  in  the  direction  of  Belgium;  and  on  the
south  it  is  only  sunk  from  twenty  to  forty  fathoms  below
the  sea-level.  Imni(*diately  to  the  westward  of  this
lim*  th(^  sea  deepens  so  suddenly,  that  there  is  scarcely
any   dillereui'e   hetwcen  the  lines  of   100    and  of  200

*  Tho  anthoritios  for  tho  foreign  lists  of  animals  will  be  found  in  the
'*  (^ujirt.  (Ii'ol.  .Journ."  1871^,  p.  424.  The  British  animals  have  been
dcterniined  principally  by  myself  and  Dr.  Falconer.

-  **  ClaHrtitication  of  th«j  Pleistocene  Strata,"  Quart  Gcol.  Journ.
Nov.  1S7'2,  p.  ilO.


IX.]  IN  PLEISTOCENE  AOB.  363

fathoms,  autl  the  depth  rapidly  increases  to  2,000.    Were


Fig.  12S.— Pbywograpby  of  Great  Britain  in  Late  Pleistocene  Age.

ShndeJ  area  =  Uivl  now  subiucrgod  ;  dotted  area  =  reRiou  occupied  by  utimaU  ;

plain  area  =  rcRJon  occupied  by  glacien.

this  plateau  elevated  above  the  sea  to  au  extent  of  100


^1


364  ATLANTIQ  SHORE  AT  [cuil

fiftthoms,  the  tract  ahaded  in  the  map  (Fig.  126)  would
unite  the  British  Ides  to  the  oontment^  and  the  ThameB
and  other  rivers  on  the  eastern  coast  would  unite  wifli
the  Elbe  and  the  Rhine  to  form  a  liyer  debouching  on
the  North  Sea,  somewhat  after  the  manner  which  I  have
represented  by  taking  the  deepest  line  of  sonndinga.  The
Straits  of  Dover  would  then  be  the  watershed  between
this  valley  of  the  German  Ocean,  as  it  may  be  teniied«
and  that  of  the  English  Channel,  in  which  the  Seine  and
the  Somme  and  other  French  rivers  joined  those  of  die
south  coast,  and  ultimately  reached  the  Atlantic.  Evi-
dence that  the  latter  river  flowed  in  the  coarse  M«gMil
to  it  in  the  map  is  affi>rded  by  the  discovery  of  the
fresh- water  mussel  {Unio  pictarum),  recorded  fay  Mr.
Godwin  Austen  ^  to  have  been  dredged  up  fay  CSipfaun
White  from  a  depth  of  from  50  to  100  finthomsy  not
very  far  from  what  I  have  taken  to  be  its  month.  We
are  also  indebted  to  Mr.  Godwin  Austen  for  the
discovery  near  this  spot  of  banks  of  shingle  and  lit-
toral shells,  which  indicate  the  position  of  the  ancient
coast-line.

The  view  that  the  100-fathom  line  marks  the  limit  of
the  pleistocene  land  surface  to  the  west,  is  held  by  Sir
H.  de  la  B6che,  Mr.  Godwin  Austen,  Sir  Charles  Lyell,
and  other  eminent  geologists,  and  it  is  supported  by
many  facts  that  can  be  explained  in  no  other  manner.
To  pass  over  the  discovery  of  a  fresh-water  shell  at  the
bottom  of  the  English  Channel,  quoted  above,  the  distri*
bution  of  fossil  mammalia  at  the  bottom  of  the  German
Ocean  (represented  in  Fig.  126  by  the  dotted  area)  is

^  Godwin  Austen,  "  Quart.  Geol.  Joum."  vol.  i  p.  69.  De  la  B^be,
"  Theoretical  Researchee,"  p.  190.  Ljell,  "Antiquity  of  Man,"  4th
edit  p.  328.


IX.]  ONE-HUNDRED  FATHOM  LINE,  365

analogous  to  that  which  we  find  in  the  river  gravels  and
brick-earths  on  the  land.  The  quantity  of  teeth  and
bones  belonging  to  the  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros,
liorse,  reindeer,  and  spotted  hyaena,  and  other  animals,
dredged  up  by  the  fishermen  in  the  German  Ocean  is
almost  incredible.  Mr.  Owles,  of  Yarmouth,  informed
me  in  1868  that  oflf  that  place  there  is  a  bank  on  which
the  fishing  nets  are  rarely  cast  without  bringing  up
fossil  remains.  It  seems  most  probable,  that  these  accumu-
lations have  been  formed  under  subaerial  conditions  near
the  drinking  places,  or  below  the  fords,  which  were
used  for  ages  by  the  pleistocene  animals.  I  might  quote
jis  an  example  of  a  similar  deposit  of  fossils  on  the  land,
that  discovered  in  1866  by  Captain  Luard,  R.E.,  in
digging  the  foundations  of  the  new  cavalry  barracks  at
Windsor,  which  consisted  mainly  of  bones  and  antlers
of  reindeer,  with  a  few  carnivores,  such  as  the  brown
bear  and  wolf,  that  usually  follow  reindeer  in  their
migrations  in  Siberia.^  Were  this  submerged  it  would
be  a  case  precisely  similar  to  that  oflf  Yarmouth.

The  ancient  forest,  exposed  at  low  w^ater  under  the
cliflfs  on  the  Norfolk  and  Suflfolk  shores,  flourished  when
the  land  stood  higher  than  it  does  now.  Traces  of  a
similar  forest,  also  at,  and  below,  low- water  mark,  have
been  met  with  on  the  shore  at  Selsea,  near  Chichester,
in  Sussex  ;  and  remains  of  the  mammoth  have  been
dredged  up  in  several  places  off  the  coast,  as  for  example
in  Torbay  and  in  Holyhead  harbour,  or  found  in  gravel
beds  near  low-water  mark,  as  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and
on  the  north  coast  of  Somerset  at  St.  Audries,  near
Watch et,  where  a  skull  with  gigantic  tusks  rested  in  the

^  The  accumulation  of  the  remains  of  reindeer  in  the  limited  area  of
the  excavation  was  enormous.


cf  Sooik  Wales  aad
Uaad  «f  CUdf  .  aad  it
caij  beaeeonted  ftr  liy  tfce  deniiaft  of  As
w-botli— ,  ao  iw  to  dlmr  af  Adr  ■'
plaiiia  cmctwl  wiA  ahailiMl  paatifc  Ifc
fixe,  to  me  that  tfce  uttmgmjiagmm^Wig,  laS,  ngn-
aoitB  widi  toicnUe  aenmcj  tke  aMietf  eoMfrfiM  of
Bntain,  and  of  tke  adjacmt  futm  of  tfce  ^^■"^■if^  in
the  pleirtocene  age.  Tlie  ftrtik  ndleya  of  die  Bb^j^
Chamid,  Briefed  CSiamid,  and  tke  Gomaii  Oeean^woaU
affotd  eostenaaee  to  a  laige  and  varied  finma^  and
nmneroos  hainTOTei^  eadi  as  the  Rmdeer^  bieon,  and
hone,  would  ea|^y  fiiod  to  tlie  pabBoGtliie  Imnten^  wiio
followed  them  in  their  annual  migrations  And  it  must
be  remarked  on  this  hypothesis,  that  the  Talley  of  the
Garonne  would  offer  a  free  passage  both  to  the  animals
and  to  the  hunters  of  Auvergne  down  to  the  prairie,  ex-
tending as  far  as  the  100-fathom  line  off  the  French
coast,  and  that  the  hunting  grounds  would  reach  to
Devonshire  and  Somerset  without  any  barrier  except  that
offered  by  the  rivers.  It  is  therefore  no  wonder  that  the
implements  in  the  caves  of  Kent's  Hole,  Wookey  Hole,
and  the  South  of  France,  should  be  of  the  same  type.

Distribution  of  Pakeolithic  Implements  in  this  Area.

This  geographical  configuration  in  pleistocene  times
may  perhaps  account  for  the  distribution  of  the  palaeo-
lithic implements  in  the  river  graveLs.    The  Seine  and


IX.]      HUNTINQ'OROUNJJS  OF  PALEOLITHIC  TRIBES.     367

the  Somme  debouch  into  the  same  valley  as  the  rivers  of
the  south  of  England,  and  the  Straits  of  Dover  mark  the
position  of  a  low  watershed  leading  into  the  valley  of
the  German  Ocean,  on  the  sides  of  which,  in  the  eastern
counties,  river-bed  implements  are  so  numerous.  These
are  of  the  same  type  in  northern  France,  Sussex,  Hamp-
shire, Kent,  and  as  far  north  as  the  Wash ;  and  were
therefore  used  by  the  same  race  of  men.  The  difference
between  them  and  those  of  the  cave-dwellers  in  the  south
and  west,  may  be  due  to  their  possessors  occupying  dif-
ferent hunting  grounds.  Each  tribe  of  American  Indians
at  the  present  time  has  its  own  territory  for  hunting,
which  is  jealously  guarded  against  encroachment,  and
in  which  the  articles  peculiar  to  the  tribe  are  being
accumulated  in  the  refuse-heaps,  while  other  sets  are
being  accumulated  in  other  districts.  If  we  suppose  that
the  palaeolithic  savages  divided  up  their  hunting  grounds
in  this  manner,  the  difference  which  exists  between  the
implements  of  the  river-beds  and  caves  may  be  readily
explained,  as  well  as  their  being  found  for  the  most  part
in  dilFerent  areas.

The  pleistocene  climate  in  the  area  north  of  the  Alps
and  Pyrenees  will  be  treated  in  the  eleventh  chapter,
after  the  examination  of  the  cave-fauna  of  southern
Europe.


368       FAUNA  OF  CAVES  OF  BOUTHMRlf  MUBOFM.     [cuf.


CHAPTER  X.

THE  FAUNA  OF  THE  CAVES  OF  SOUTHERN  EUBOFB  AND  THE
EVIDENCE  AS  TO  THE  MEDITERBANEAN  OOAST-UKB  IN
THE  PLEISTOCENE  AGE.

Cbanges  of  Leyelin  the  Meditermaean  mo  in  Ifaioeene  and  PtoiocMMi
Agea. — ^Bone-cavea  of  Soathern  Euxope. — Of  Gibndftar. — Of  Ro-
Yence  and  Mentone. — Of  SioQy. — Of  Mflta. — ^Bangs  of  'Fifpsj
Hippopotamna.— Foaail  Mammalia  in  Algerifti — ^living  Spedaa  eom-
mon  to  Eniope  and  Africa. — Evidence  of  Bounding^— The  €Haci«a
of  Lebanon. — Of  Anatolia. — Of  Atlas. — GlacierB  probably  prodnoed
by  elevation  above  the  Sea. — Mediterranean  Coast-line  compara-
tively modem.

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen  that  north-western
Europe  was  elevated,  during  the  pleistocene  age,  to  an
extent  of  at  least  600  feet  above  its  present  level ;  so
that  Ireland  was  united  to  Britain,  and  Britain  was
joined  to  the  mainland  of  Europe,  proof  of  this  eleva-
tion being  dependent  upon  the  soundings  on  one  hand,
and  the  distribution  of  the  fossil  mammalia  on  the  other.
Such  a  change  must  necessarily  have  affected  the  whole
physical  conditions  of  the  area,  since  the  substitution  of
a  mass  of  land  for  a  stretch  of  sea,  and  the  higher  altitude
of  the  land,  would  tend  to  produce  climatal  extremes  of
considerable  severity.  It  is  indeed  no  wonder  that
during  this  time  of  continental  elevation,  the  hills  of


X.J  MEWCENE  AND  OTHER  CHANGES  OF  LEVEL.       369

Wales,  Yorkshire,  Derbyshire,  Cumbria,  and  Scotland
sliould  be  crowned  with  glaciers,  or  that  there  should
have  been  a  migration  to  and  fro  of  animals,  comparable
to  that  which  is  now  going  on  in  Siberia  and  the
northern  portions  of  North  America.  The  condition  of
southern  Europe  at  that  time  has  a  most  important
bearing  on  any  conclusion  which  may  be  draw^n  as  to
the  pleistocene  climate  in  France,  Germany,  or  Britain.
For  if  it  be  proved  that  the  Mediterranean  Sea  was  then
smaller  than  it  is  now,  the  greater  land-surface  would
increase  both  the  heat  of  the  summer  and  the  cold  of
the  winter  in  central  and  north-western  Europe.


Cliamjes  of  Level  in  Mediterranean  area  in  Meiocene

and  Pleiocene  Ages.

The  geological  evidence  that  the  JMediterranean  re-
gion has  been  subjected  to  oscillations  of  level  during
the  tertiary  period,  is  clear  and  decisive.  Prof.  Gaudry^
has  proved,  in  liis  work  on  the  fossil  remains  found  at
Pikermi,  that  the  plains  of  Marathon,  now  so  restricted,
must  have  extended  in  the  meiocene  age  far  south  into
the  Mediterranean,  so  as  to  aflford  pasture  to  the  enormous
troops  of  hipparions  and  herds  of  antelopes,  the  masto-
dons and  large  edentata,  revealed  by  his  enterprise.  The
rocky  area  of  Attica,  as  now  constituted,  could  not  have
sui)ported  such  a  large  and  varied  group  of  animals,  nor
could  the  broken  hills  and  limestone  plateaux  have  been
inhabited  by  hii)parions  and  antelopes,  if  their  habits  at
all  resembled  those  of  their  descendants  living  at  the
present  time.     It  may,  therefore,  reasonably  be  concluded

^  "  Lea  Gas.  Foss.  de  Pikermi,"  4lo.


:J70  BOSE'CAVES  of  SOUTHERS  EUBOPE.  [chaf.

that  Greece,  iu  those  times,  was  prolonged  southwards,
and  united  to  the  islan<ls  of  the  Archipelago  by  a  stretch
of  land.  If  Africa  were  then  as  now  the  head-quarters
of  the  antelopes,  it  is  very  probable  that  one  of  the  lines
by  which  they  passed  over  into  Europe,  and  spread  over
France  and  Germanv,  was  in  this  direction.  Neverthe-
less,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  changes  of  level,  which
have  taken  place  since  the  meiocene  age  in  those  regions,
are  so  complicated  as  to  render  it  almost  impossible  to
restore  the  meiocene  geography.

In  the  succeeding,  or  the  pleiocene  age,  the  presence
of  the  African  hippopotamus  in  Italy,  France,  and  Ger-
many, can  only  be  accounted  for  by  a  more  direct  con-
nciction  with  the  African  mainland  than  is  offered  by  a
rout(i  through  Asia  Minor.  It  would  seem,  therefore,
that  the  Mediterranean  Sea  could  not  then  have  formed
tlie  same  barrier  to  the  northern  migration  of  the  animals
Avliicli  it  d(>es  now.  In  many  regions,  however,  the
pn'S(;nt  land  was  tlien  sunk  beneath  the  sea,  and  marine
strata,  of  ])leiocone  ago,  were  accumulated  in  the  Val
d*Ariio,  Sicily,  and  southern  France.

Tli(5  ])]iysical  geography  '  of  the  Mediterranean  in  the
pleistocene  age  may  be  ascertained  with  considerable
accuracy  l)y  the  distribution  of  the  animals,  coupled  with
tlie  evidence  of  the  soundings.

Ihne-caves  of  Southern  Europe,

Tlie  mammalia  in  the  bone-caves  of  southern  Europe
diflrr  from  those  of  the  region  north  of  the  Alps  and
Tyronoes  iu  the  absence  of  the  arctic  species,  and  the

^  Some  parts  of  the  rest  of  this  cha])ter  have  been  published  in  the
"  J*opular  Science  Keview,"  March  1873.


X.]  OF  GIBRALTAR,  371

presence  of  some  which  are  of  a  more  strictly  southern
type.  Nevertheless,  the  influence  of  the  mountains  in
lowering  the  t^imperature  in  their  neighbourhood  is  to  be
traced  in  the  presence  of  the  remains  of  certain  animals.
Thus,  in  the  caves  of  Gibraltar  we  find  an  ibex,  which
cannot  be  distinguished  from  those  of  the  Spanish  sierras,
and  in  Mentone  and  Provence,  a  marmot,  specifically
identical  with  that  of  the  Alps.

The  bone-caves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Mediter-
ranean afford  most  important  testimony  as  to  the  geo-
graphical changes  which  have  taken  place,  since  the
animals  found  in  them  lived  in  that  region.  We  will
take  those  of  the  Iberian  peninsula  first.

Caves  of  Gibraltar.

Ossiferous  caverns  have  long  been  known  to  occur  in
the  fortified  rock  of  Gibraltar,^  but  were  not  examined
scientifically  until  the  year  1863,  when  the  researches  of
Captain  Brome,  Prof.  Busk,  and  Dr.  Falconer,  proved  that
pleistocene  species  were  buried  in  considerable  numbers
in  its  cavities  and  fissures.  Of  these  the  most  important
is  the  great  perpendicular  fissure  in  Windmill  Hill,  called
the  Genista  cave,  which  has  been  traced  down  to  more
than  a  depth  of  200  feet  From  the  upper  portion
were  obtained  the  polished  stone  implements,  human
skulls,  and  other  neolithic  remains  described  in  the
sixth  chapter,  p.  204,  which  prove  that  Gibraltar  was
inhabited  by  the  Basques  in  the  neolithic  age,  while
the  remains  from  the  lower  revealed  the  presence  of  a
singularly  mixed  group  of  animals,

^  "  Palaeontographical  Memoirs,"  vol.  ii.  p.  554.  Busk,  Prehis-
toric Congress,  Norwich  volume,  1869.

B   B   2


372  MAMMALS  IN  IBERIAN  PENINSULA.  [chap.

The  fossil  bones  have  been  referred  by  Prof.  Busk  and
Dr.  Falconer  to  the  following  species : —

Lrpus  cuniculuSf  rabbit.  Equus  caballva^  horse.

Felis  leo,  lion.  Rhinocerm  hemitcechuJi,

F,  parduSy  paDther.  Capra  ihex,  i»>ex.

F,  cafer.  Sus  sav/a^  vild-boar.

F.  pardina^  lynic  Cervus  elaphus,  red  deer.

F,  servdly  serval.  C,  capreoltu^  roe.

Utbus  feroXy  grizzly  bear.  C,  dama,  fallow  deer.
Canis  lupus,  wolf.

The  spotted  hysena,  the  serval,  and  Felis  coffer,  are
species  now  peculiar  to  Africa,  and  it  is  obvious  that
they  could  not  have  found  their  way  into  Gibraltar
under  the  present  physical  conditions  of  the  Mediterra-
nean. Elephants  and  rhinoceroses  could  not  have  lived
on  so  barren  and  treeless  a  rock,  unless  it  had  overlooked
a  fertile  plain,  nor  would  the  camivora  have  chosen  it
for  their  dens,  had  it  then  been  cut  off  from  the  feeding-
ground.s  of  the  lierbivoi'es.  Their  presence,  therefore,  as
Dr.  Falconer  justly  remarks,  implies  the  existence  of
land  now  sunk  beneath  the  waves,  l)ut  then  extendinir
southwards  to  join  Africa.

To  the  African  animals,  mentioned  above  as  inhabit-
ing the  Iberian  peninsula  in  the  pleistocene  age,  M.
Lartet  has  added  the  African  elephant  (E,  A/ricanus)
and  the  striped  hya?na  (//.  striata),  which  have  been
found  in  a  stratum  of  orravel  near  Madrid  alon<r  with
flint  in^plements.^  None  of  the  purely  arctic  mammalia,
such  as  the  reindeer,  musk  sheep,  or  woolly  rhinoceros,
so  abundant  in  France,  Germany,  and  Britain,  have  been
met  with  south  of  the  Pyrenees.


1  tip


CuiPi»tes  Kt;iidus,''  xlvi.  1858.


X.]  CAVES  OF  PROVENCE  AND  MENTONE.  373

BonC'Cm^es  of  Provence  and  Mentone.

The  arctic  animals  arc  also  absent  from  the  numerous
bone-caves  and  bone  breccias  of  Provence  and  Mentone.
The  pleistocene  fauna  of  Provence  consists,  according  to
M.  Marion,^  of  the  spotted  hyaena,  and  lion,  Elephas
antiquus  or  straight-tusked  elephant,  Rhinoceros  hemi-
tcechus,  wild-boar,  urus,  stag,  liorse,  and  rabbit.  The
breccias  in  the  island  of  Ratonneau  have  also  furnished
the  porcupine,  brown  bear,  and  tailless  hare.  Man  is
proved  to  have  been  living  in  the  district  at  the  time  by
the  discovery  of  perforated  and  cut  bones,  in  the  cave  of
Rians.

The  fissures  and  caves  of  Mentone,  explored  by  Mr.
Moggridge^  in  1871,  and  subsequently  by  M.  Riviere,
contained  a  fauna  composed,  according  to  Prof.  Busk,  of
the  following  species : —


Marmot.

Brown  bear.

Field-vole.

Cave-bear.

Lion.

Roe.

Panther.

Stag.

Lynx.

Ibt'X.

Wildcat.

Urus.

Spotted  h3*aena.

Horse.

Wolf.

Wild -boar.

Fox.

Rhinoceros  hemiloechvs

Along  with  these  were  large  quantities  of  charcoal
and  flint  flakes,  which  proved  that  man  had  inhabited
the  district  while  the  deposits  were  being  formed.

^  Prehistoric  Congress,  Paris  volume,  p.  96.
2  "  Brit.  Ass.  Reports,"  Edinburgh,  187L


374  STRATA  IS  CAVE  OF  CAVILLOX  [chap.

Mr.  Moggridge  gives  the   following  accomit  of  the

results  of  his  exploration  : —  ^

"  The  caves  of  the  red  rocks,  half  a  mile  out  of  Men-
tone,  are  in  lofty  rocks  of  Jurassic  limestone  on  the  shore
of  the  Mediterranean,  and  at  an  average  height  of  100
feet  above  that  sea,  the  rocks  themselves  attaining  an
elevation  of  260  feet.  They  have  now  been  repeatedly
rifled  by  the  learned  or  the  curious ;  but  when  the
l)rincipal  cave  (Cavillon)  was  nearly  intact,  the  author
made  a  section  of  it  from  the  modem  or  highest  floor,
down  to  the  solid  rock.  There  were  five  floors  formed
in  the  earth  by  long-continued  trampling  ;  on  each,  and
near  the  centre,  were  marks  of  fire,  around  which  broken
l)ones  and  flints  were  abundant,  except  upon  the  lowest^
where  but  few  bones  occurred,  and  no  flints.  The  bones
were  those  of  animals  still  existing.  Few  implements
were  found,  but  many  chips  of  flint,  some  cores  and
stones  used  as  hammers.  Perhaps  this  cave  was  used  as
a  place  for  manufaeturing  flints,  which  must  have  been
carried  from  their  native  bed,  distant  about  one  mile.

*'  Tliere  is  nothing,  to  evince  the  action  of  water;  on
tlie  coiitrarv,  tli(.'  iiunierous  stones  that  occur  are  all
aiij^ular  ....  l>elow  these  caves  a  slope  of  about  ISO
feet  descends  to  tlie  edge  of  the  sea.  Through  the  upper
j>ai't  of  tiiis  slope,  at  distances  from  the  cave  of  from  0
to  ten  feet,  is  a  railway  cutting  GOO  feet  long,  fifty-four
feet  dee]),  and  sixty  feet  above  the  sea.  The  mass  re-
moved in  making  this  cutting  was  composed  of  angular
stones  not  waterworn.  Loose  at  the  surface,  it  soon
became  a  more  or  less  mature  In'cccia,  for  the  most  part
so  hard  that  it  was  blasted  with  gunpowder."  In  this
breccia,  and  at  various  depths,  some  of  more  than  thirty

Brit.  Assoc.  Kep."  1^^7I.


]      u


X.]  OF  DIFFERENT  A QE8.  375

feet,  the  author  has  taken  out  teeth  of  the  bear  {Ursus
spelceus)  and  of  the  hyaBna  {Hycena  spelcea)  while  with
and  below  those  teeth  he  found  flints  worked  by  man.

The  subsequent  exploration  by  M.  Riviere  ^  has  re-
sulted in  no  important  addition  to  the  fauua  :  the  famous
human  skeleton  having  been,  as  I  have  already  remarked
in  the  seventh  chapter,  interred  in  the  pleistocene  strata,
and  probably  not  palaeolithic.  It  may  possibly  be  of  the
era  of  the  upper  floors  described  by  Mr.  Moggridge,  in
which  all  the  remains  belong  to  living  species.*

This  cave-fauna  is  more  closely  related  to  that  of
southern  Europe  than  to  that  north  of  the  Alps  and
Pyrenees.  The  striped  hyaena  found  in  the  cave  of
Lunel-viel,  H^rault,  by  Marcel  de  Serrcs,  along  with
the  reindeer  and  other  animals,  probably  belongs  to  the
same  southern  group.

Bone-caves  of  Sicily.

Certain  members  of  the  African  fauna  are  also  proved
to  have  ranged  northwards  over  Europe  in  the  direction
of  Sicily,  by  the  discoveries  in  the  caves  of  that  island.
The  Sicilian  bone-caves  have  been  worked  for  the  sake

^  Decouverte  d'une  SqueletU  Uumaine  de  Vepoque  Paleolithique  dans
les  Caverfies  de  Baousse-Raussey  dites  Grottes  de  Menton^  1873;  also  Pre-
historic Congress,  Brussels  volume.  M.  Riviere  adds  the  Wapiti,  or
large  variety,  and  the  Ceiviis  Gorsicanus,  or  small  variety  of  the  stag,
the  chamois,  and  the  woolly  rhinoceros  (the  two  last  of  which  may  be
perhaps  identical  with  the  ibex  and  Ji,  hemitoechtis,  determined  by
Prof.  Busk,  as  neither  is  mentioned  by  M.  Rivi6re),  and  the  Gapra
jyrimigenia  of  Gervais,  a  large  goat  commonly  found  in  neolithic
caves.

2  The  depth  at  which  the  skeleton  was  found  is  a  matter  of  dispute^
the  estimates  varying  from  seven  feet  (Pengelly)  to  (6'55  m.)  21*49  feet
(Riviere).  Pengelly,  Gave  man  of  MevUone,  **  Trans.  Devon  Ass."  1873^
pp.  10  and  13.


3 7f>  BONE-i 'A  VES  OF  SICIL Y,  [chap.

of  the  bones  since  the  year  1829  ;  and  of  these  many
shiploads  were  sent  to  Marseilles  from  San  Giro,  belong-
ing, according  to  M.  de  Christol,  principally  to  the
hippopotamus.  In  1859/  Dr.  Falconer  examined  the
collections  made  from  this  cave,  as  well  as  those  which
remained  in  situ,  and  carried  on  further  researches  into
a  second  in  the  neighbourhood,  known  as  the  Grotto  di
Maccagnone,  and  in  the  following  year  two  others  were
discovered  and  explored  in  northern  Sicily  by  Baron
Anca.    The  species  were  as  follows  : —

IlomOf  man.  JSiis  scrofa^  boar.

FelU  leoy  lion.  EUphas  anCujaus,

Ilycena  crocuta,  spotted  hysena.       Elephas  Africanus^  African  ele-

Ursmferox,^  grizzly  bear.  pbant.

Cants.  Hippopotamus  myor,  hip[>o-

CervuSy  deer.  potamus.

Bos,  ox.  Hippopotamus  Pentlandi,

EquuSy  horse.  Lepim,

The  presence  of  man  was  indicated  by  charcoal  and
flint  flakes.

The  African  elephant  was  obtained  from  three  caves  :
from  that  of  San  Teodoro,  by  r>aron  Anca;  from  Grotta
Santa,  ncnr  Syracuse,  by  the  Canon  Alessi ;  and  from  a
cave  near  Palermo,  by  ]\I.  Charles  Gaudin.  It  is  obvious
that  the  presence  of  this  animal,  as  well  as  of  the  spotted
hyaena,  in  Sicily  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the  hypo-
thesis that  a  bridge  of  land  formerly  existed,  l»y  which
they  could  pass  from  their  head-quarters,  that  is  to  say
Africa.  On  the  other  hand  tlie  })resence  of  the  grizzly
bear,  and  of  the  Elephas  antiquus  implies  that  they

»  "  Paloeont.  Mem."  ii.  p.  543.

^  It  is  of  the  same  species  as  the  bear  from  Grays  Thurrock.


passed  over  into  Sicily,  from  their  European  head-
quarters, before  the  existence  of  the  Straits  of  Messina,
since  both  animals  are  abundant  on  the  mainland  of
Euroj)e.  The  larger  species  of  hippopotamus,  doubtfully
referred  by  Dr.  Falconer  to  the  H.  major  {  =  H.  amphi-


Uular  of  Hippopotamut  PtiUlandi  {)).     (Sicily. )


hius),  may  have  crossed  over  either  from  Italy,  where
its  remains  are  very  abundant  in  the  pleiocene  and
pleistocene  strata,  or  from  Africa.

A  small  species  of  hippopotamus,  H.  Pentlandi,  Fig.
127,  occurs  in  incredible  abundance  in  the  Sicilian  cavpA
It  bears  the  same  relation,  in  point  of  size,  to  the  fossil
variety  of  the  African  hippopotamus,  as  the  living  H.
Uberiemis  does  to  the  latter.

Bone-caves  of  Malta.

The  bone-caves  of  Malta  were  first  scientifically  ex-
])lored  by  Admiral  Spratt.  in  1858,  and  subsequently  by
Dr.  Lcith  Adams,  and  others.  The  Maghlak  Cave  near
the  town  of  Crendi,  contained  lai^e  quantities  of  the
Hippopotamus  Pentlandi,  together  with  the  gigantic
dormouse,  named  Myoxas  Melitensis.  A  short  distance
off  a  second  cavcm,  explored  by  Dr.  Leith  Adams,  con-
tained numerous  remains  of  at  least  two  species  of  pigmy


378  RANQK  OF  FJQStY  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  [chaf.

clephaot  about  the  height  of  a  small  horse.  Its  small  size
may  be  gathered  from  the  accompanying  woodcut  (Fig.
128)  of  the  last  lower  true  molar,  taken  from  the  litho-


Fio.  12S.— HoUr  of  EUpkat  iteliletuu,  Malta  (]).    (Falconer.)

graph. published  in  Dr.  Falconer's  "  Palseontographical
Memoirs,"  voL  ii.  pi.  xii.

Range  of  Pigmy  Hippopotamus.

The  pigmy  hippopotamus  has  lived  also  in  other  dis-
tricts in  the  Mediterranean  region.  One  of  its  teeth,
now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  was  discovered
by  Dr.  Lc'ith  Adams,  in  Candia.  In  1872  I  identified
in  tlie  Oxford  Museum  a  last  lower  true  molar,  which
oxttnds  the  range  of  this  species  to  the  mainland  of
Kurope.  It  was  obtained  by  Dr.  Eolleston  from  a
Greek  tomb  at  Jlogalopolis,  in  tlie  Peloponese,  and  waa
probably  dorivod  from  one  of  the  many  caves  in  tlie
limestone  of  that  district.  For  tliis  extinct  animal  to
have  spread  from  Sicily  to  Malta,  from  JIalta  to  Candia,
and  from  Candia  to  tlic  Pt'loponcse,  or  vice  versd,  these
throe  islands  must  have  Iwon  united  to  the  Peloponese
and  liave  boon  the  higher  grounds  of  land,  now  sub-
morged  beneath  the  waves  of  the  ModiteiTanean.

The  view  therefore,  advanced  by  Dr.  Falconer  and
Admirjil  Spititt,  that  Europe  was  connected  with  .\fiioa


X.]  MJ  MMA  L8  OF  ALGERIA.  379

by  a  bridge  of  land,  extending  northwards  from  Sicily,
is  fully  borne  out  by  an  examination  of  the  fossil
remains  both  of  that  island  and  of  Malta  (see  Fig.  129).*


Fossil  Mammalia  in  Algeria.

If  the  African  mainland  extended  to  Europe  in  the
direction  of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and  of  Malta  and
Sicily,  so  as  to  afford  passage  for  the  African  mammalia
into  Europe,  it  would  equally  afford  passage  for  the
southern  advance  into  Africa  of  some  of  the  European
mammalia.  Evidence  of  this  we  meet  with  in  a  stratum
of  clay  at  Mansourah,  near  Constuntine,  in  Algeria,
described  by  M.  Bayle  in  1854.^  The  animals  which  he
obtained,  consisting  of  the  ox,  antelope,  hippopotamus,
and  elephant,  have  been  described  by  Prof.  Grorvais.
An  examination  of  his  figure  of  a  fragment  of  a  molar
tooth  leaves  no  room  for  doubt,  that  the  Elephas  meri-
dionalis  was  living  in  north  Africa  during  the  pleistocene
age ;  that  is  to  say  an  extinct  animal,  the  head-quarters
of  which  are  to  be  found  in  Italj[,  ranged  as  far  south
as  northern  Africa.

Living  Species  common  to  Eurojye  and  Africa.

The  former  continuity  of  Africa  by  way  of  the  Iberian
peninsula  and  Sicily,  may  also  be  inferred  by  the
distribution  of  the  mammalia  at  the  present  time.
Prof.  Gervais  ^  observes  that  most  of  the  insectivora  are

^  Falconer,  "  Paljeont.  Mem."  vol.  ii.  p.  552.  Spratt,  "  Quart
Geol.  Joiirn."  xxiii.  p.  203.

2  "  Bull.  Soc.  G^ol.  Fr."  2*  e6r.  t.  xi.  p.  340.

^  Oervaie,  "  ADimaux  Vert^bres  Vivants  et  Fossiles,"  4to.  p.  88.


.":•-      .:..::_-. .1.;    f^tnv^i  fxin  ibe  smdj  of  tke

;.-^: '-"-..  :.    LT^    .':r::'>:-rk:^  kiti  Kifijileiiieiifeed  hy  the

rv   -•-  ^    :'  '.'-'.  •■.-zi^ili.z^    Xivi  •iUKT  die  StzaitBof

■    ■   ■    "  _■    11      ■!-  A:l.:Lr!:  0*an  fbaJlows,  mjtil

_.  >  ."  rj:i  ::  ii  n  :  ra-re  than  from

-'     '  :  ."     1.-      :'-:'-'^ri.  T.ir;fa  au-i  Ceuta  th'.*

.■..-■  :    i:'.  f.iTlonis.  aua  tbence,  iu

:.„■  -  .-■■     ■ '-.    -■'■■;.'-!;.■    i^^j-ri.-  t>  the  extent  of

'/■■  :     -■  .-        :  "..  ;:.-.       A:,    -".-rv.itiv.n   of  ivO   fathoms

■.■,,.■,  .  .."  ■    -  :n;  ■:■;?.:  :■:■    mi-;  a    linrricr  of  land

r.':', ■.■,'..',   .\J  ■:■  c  :o  ^iiA  .Si-.i:]!,  and  to  insulate  the  deeji

M''i,f.'/r:jr.';!!j  u-:-lii  tV.rit  tlio  Atlantic.     The  soundings

tc't  .vt.i^ii  .-i'riiy  .-(lid  'i'uni.--  are  2*jt.'  fathoms  ;  Ijetwecn  the

f'lirn'r    j.|;i'':    fuid    Miilra,  55  fathoin.s ;  between  Malta

:iiiil  til'-  Atrifiiri  iii;iiiilaiid,  ."144  fathcm?!.     An  elevation

of  lOO  f:rllii>ii)i  wurdil  .■;ufti(;o  therefore  to  connert  Afrit-a

willi  Siiily,  iind  lo  Jiisiiiat'r  the  eastern  from  the  western

Vl.-.|iN-ni(n-;iii  ri.-|,l)i,'^.     To  tlif  east  of  Sicily  the  sound-

iuy.i  I'v.-.il  ;i  .|.|,llj  -.r..v--r  2,000  fafhoma.  and  this  dpri>


BVtDBSCK  OF  SOUXlfimiS.


1— -T


\n*^.H-u\  to^  \fr'rjsL:Jjz  Sra  nuirgin  cf  the  pkisloeeiie  age,
hiit^f/y/ii  M  c^L.r^  of  TcJeanic  aetiTitTy  such  ms  Sicily
;i/i/J  u»h  Ar^'hip^LaigOy  local  changes  of  lerel,  even  of
((f^;^f>;r  //jdgrjitud^,  m&y  hare  taken  place.

Tiji^.  vi^;w  of  tbefonner  elevation  of  the  Mediterranean
/if  <?;i  f//  a  liciglit  of  from  two  to  three  thousand  feet  above
lUt',  \frt'.t^A'.ui  h;v';l  w'ill  go  far  to  explain  the  remarkable
Uw*rA  iff  \i\iu*\i:r6  discovered  in  Sjiia^  Anatolia,  and

Tlui  (Jl/iciers  of  Lebanon.

\h\  I  looker,  in  hin  journey  to  Syria  in  1860,  discovered
lliiit  thn  c'iMliirH  of    Lebuuon  grew   principally  on  one


X.J  IN  PLEISTOCENE  AGE.  383

Spot,  on  old  moraines  which  traverse  the  head  of  the
Kedisha  valley.  This  valley  terminates  in  broad,  shal-
low, open  basins  at  a  height  of  about  6,000  feet  above
the  sea,  resembling  the  corries  of  the  Highlands;  and
one  of  these,  in  which  the  cedars  grew,  was  divided
into  two  distinct  flats  by  a  transverse  range  of  ancient
moraines  from  80  to  100  feet  high  and  with  perfectly
defined  boundaries.  "  The  rills  from  the  surrounding
heights  collect  in  the  upper  flat,  and  form  one  stream,
which  winds  among  the  moraines  on  its  way  down  to
the  lower  flat,  whence  it  is  precipitated  into  the  gorge  of
the  Kedisha.  The  cedars  grow  on  that  portion  of  the
moraine  which  immediately  borders  this  stream,  and
nowhere  else ;  they  form  one  group  about  400  yards
in  diameter,  with  an  outstanding  tree  or  two  not
far  from  the  rest,  and  appear  as  a  black  speck  in  the
great  area  of  the  corry  and  its  moraines,  which  contain
no  other  arborious  vegetation,  nor  any  shrubs,  but  a  few
berberry  and  rose  bushes  that  form  no  feature  in  the
landscape."  ^

In  ancient  times,  therefore,  the  glaciers  descended  to  a
height  of  about  6,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  were  fed
by  the  perennial  snow-fields  of  the  crest  of  Lebanon.

The  Glaciers  of  Anatolia.

The  former  presence  of  glaciers  at  nearly  the  same
altitude  has  also  been  proved  by  the  travels  of  Mr.
GifFord  Palgrave  in  Anatolia,^  especially  in  the  valley
through  which  the  Chorok  flows,  and  in  the  mountainous
country   to   the   north-east,  between   Georgia   and   the

1  Hooker,  "Nat.  Hist.  Review,"  II.  p.  12,  1861.
'  Nature^  vol.  v.  p.  444 ;  vol.  vi.  536.


■  ■.PT


59r


384  GLACIKBS  OF  ANATOUA,  [<

Kaek  Sea.  The  river  Choiok  runs  about  120  miles  in
a  north-easterly  dbrectlon,  and  is  separated  from  the
Eozine  hy  a  mountain  chain  reaching  a  heig^it  off  11,000
feet,  thos  fonning  a  long  strip  of  land,  which  is  called
Lazistan  after  its  inhabitants^  a  tribe  of  Lazes.  It  then
tnms  suddenly  to  the  north,  where  it  fidls  into  the  sea.
The  southern  side  is  determined  by  mountains  of  Greta-
ceous»  Jurassic,  and  Plutonic  rocks,  which  form  the
watershed  between  the  tributaries  of  the  Black  Sea  and
Persian  6ul£  Three  laigc  moraines  are  to  be  found  on
the  southern  side  of  the  valley,  their  lower  extremity
about  5,000,  their  upper  origin  nearly  8,000  feet  above
the  sea.  No  moraines  are  seen  where  the  chain  does
not  reach  an  altitude  of  7,000  feet,  though  angular
boulders  are  not  uncommon.  The  upper  mountain
contours  arc  invariably  rounded,  and  smoothed  off,  and
the  sides  are  scooped  too  widely  for  the  depressions  to
have  becD  caused  by  water.  Low  down  in  the  valley
the  slopes  terminate  in  rifted  precipices.

That  these  moraines  were  posterior  to  the  volcanic
eruptions  in  the  district,  is  evident  from  the  examination
of  a  broad  stone  ridge,  near  the  highest  point  to  the  east
of  Erzeroum,  where  at  a  height  of  7,000  feet  the  Jurassic
limestone  was  intx^rrupted  by  a  volcanic  outbreak  of
several  miles  in  extent.  •  Traces  of  a  crater  were  visible.
Above,  the  granite  peaks  rose  to  a  height  of  9,000  feet ;
below,  a  wide  moraine  crossed  the  road,  composed  of
volcanic  fragments  mixed  with  granite.  Consequently,
it  must  have  been  formed  after  the  volcano  had  become
extinct.  Similar  traces  are  to  be  found  at  Eeskeem
Boughaz.  Mr.  Palgrave  concludes  **  that  the  ice-cap  of
the  north-eastern  Anatolian  watershed,  in  post-pleiocene
(pleistocene)  times,  must  have   i-eached  downwards,  on


X.]  OLACIERS  OF  ANATOLIA.  385

the  northern  side  of  the  range,  to  7,000  feet  above  the
present  sea-level,  while  some  of  the  glaciers  issuing  from
it  descended  to  about  4,500  of  the  same  measurement. '*
Striated  aud  ice-worn  boulders,  especially  of  granite,
were  very  abundant.  This  region,  it  must  be  observed,
is  within  sight  of  the  lofty  granite  range  of  Tortoom,
which  is  "  streaked  with  perpetual  snow."

After  leaving  the  Chorok  valley  and  getting  on  to  the
watershed,  at  a  distance  of  fifty  miles  to  the  north-east,  Mr.
Palgrfive  reached  the  main  ridge  or  backbone  of  the  land.
Here,  among  the  limestone  ledges,  about  6,400  feet  above
the  sea,  is  a  colossal  moraine,  formed  of  worn  granite
blocks,  partly  overgrown  with  forest,  and  descending  from
a  height  of  over  8,000  feet.  It  is  divided,  by  a  valley,
from  a  lofty  undulating  granite  plateau  that  is  scooped
out  here  and  there  into  deep  oval  lakes,  always  full  of
blue  water.  The  sides  of  the  plateau  are  strewn  with
boulders  of  granite,  brought  from  the  higher  peaks  about
five  miles  off.  These  boulders  occur  in  greater  or  less
abundance  down  to  the  basin  of  the  Ardahan,  near  the
sources  of  the  Kur  or  Cyras,  which  joins  the  Araxes
before  flowing  into  the  Caspian.  The  height  of  this
Ardahan  basin  is  about  6,500  feet;  it  is,  but  for  a  slight
easterly  slope,  a  water  level.  The  bottom  consists  of
deep  alluvial  soil  mixed  with  detritus  and  boulders ;  the
sides  are  rounded  and  smoothed,  and  bear  every  mark  of
long  ice-covering.  These  plateaux,  studded  with  lakes,
stretch  east  to  Russo-Georgia,  till  their  greatest  height  is
gained  at  Kel  Dagh,  a  mountain  about  11,000  feet  high  :
thence  they  descend  to  the  plains  of  Georgia  and  the
Black  Sea.

No  glacial  marks  have  been  observed  on  the  sea-ward
side  of  the  range,  except  at  Hamshun  in  the  Lazistan

c  0


-'■"71


twt  ahyr«  the

flBiikfli  m  kflgifcu  iingdbr  m

aad  yiCt«d  onr  vitk

UA  waar  mdcr  the  biK  rf  Ti

of  %^%0  £E«t,  it

ing  from  the  U^^  dopo^  aad

fcdire  TaDej  iMt  fiv  bdov,  vUck

Uk;  hig^Mst  and  widest  pnt  rf  Ae

perpetual  ioe  had  onee  ezistBd  m

fttrnish  at  kaat  ooe  g^acict    Vwam  1km

that  the  limited  iee-cap  of  the  TTmihAmm   fc^wwu

ext^:iided  no  futher  down  than  8,500  or  9,000  fise^  or

from  1,000  to  2,000  feet  lower  than  the  glacial  ooTeting

of  t}i';  inland  rangr-.


77//f  Olncierx  of  the  Atlas  Mountains.

Similar  traces  of  glaciers  have  been  obeerred  in  the
AtloM  mountains  by  Mr.  George  Maw,^  in  his  travels
in  Morocco  with  Dr.  Hooker  and  l^Ir.  Ball  in  1871.
**  MUtv  four  liours'  continued  ascent/'  he  writes  (p.  19),
**  tlic  t<!rrnination  of  the  glen  comes  into  full  view,  and
vfi\  ol)Hcrvc  with  great  interest  that  it  is  closed  by  a
group  of  moraines,  proving  the  former  existence  of
glacififH  in  i\\(\  Atlas,  and  confirming  my  opinion  that
the  ^rcjil   1)ou1r1er  1)cds  flanking  the  chain  are  also  of

*  "  A  •Foiirnoy  to  Morocco,  and  tho  Ascent  of  the  Great  AtlaBy^Svo.
Hlntitr,  Trtmhridgo,  Salop.


X.J  GLACIERS  CAUSED  BY  ELEVATION.  387

glacial  origin.  Two  villages,  probably  the  highest  in  the
Atlas,  are  built  on  the  principal  moraine ;  Eitmasan,  at
its  base,  at  a  height  of  6,000  feet,  and  Arroond,  near  its
summit,  at  a  height  of  6,800  feet ;  the  terminal  angle  of
the  larger  moraine  having  a  vertical  height  of  800  feet.
It  is  composed  of  immense  blocks  of  porphyry,  lying
at  a  steep  angle  of  repose,  up  which  it  takes  us  nearly
an  hour  to  climb.  The  existence  of  these  moraines  in
latitude  30^°  N.  (the  latitude  of  Alexandria)  is  perhaps
the  most  interesting  fact  we  noticed  during  our  journey,
for  this  is  the  most  southerly  point  at  which  the  evidence
of  extinct  glaciers  has  been  observed,  and  tends  to  con-
firm the  opinion  entertained  by  many  geologists,  that
the  refrigeration  during  the  glacial  period  was  almost
universal."

Glaciers  probably  the  result  of  elevation  above

the  Sea.

The  elevation  of  the  African  moraines  above  the  sea,
of  about  6,000  feet  and  upwards,  is  nearly  the  same  as
those  of  Asia  Minor.  If  the  mountains  of  the  Atlas,
Lazistan,  and  Lebanon  shared  in  the  upward  movement
of  the  Mediterranean  area,  the  addition  of  3,000  feet  to
the  height  could  not  fail  to  leave  •  marks  behind  of  the
low  temperature  thereby  caused.  It  is  very  probable,
that  during  the  time  the  Mediterranean  was  reduced  to
two  land-locked  seas,  these  mountains  were  covered  with
snow-fields,  and  constituted  the  ice-sheds  of  glaciers.

From  the  range  of  the  mammalia  we  have  inferred  the
existence  of  land  barriers,  extending  across  from  Africa
to  Spain  and  Italy,  and  from  Candia  to  Greece,  and  their
actual  existence   beneath  the   sea  has  been  proved  by

c  c  2


3>S  PLEISTOCEXE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  [chap.

s^nindincr^,  which  necessitate  an  elevation  of  from  400
to  5<»0  fatlioms  to  bring  them  above  the  sea-level.  We
have  al>o  seen  that  the  higher  mountains,  which  most
pn:>1>ably  participated  in  this  upward  movement,  l>ear
traces  of  a  lower  temperature  in  the  moraines  of  the
Athis  and  Lazistan.  The  hypothesis  of  such  an  elevation
durincT  the  i>leistocene  ac]re  may  therefore  be  taken  to  be
proved  so  fiir  as  it  exphiins  two  widely  different  classes  of
fi\cts,  the  distribution  of  the  mammals  and  the  existence
of  plat^iors  where  they  are  now  unknown.

The  physical  condition  of  the  Mediterranean  area,  in
the  pleistocene  age,  may  be  summed  up  as  follows.  The
mainland  of  Africa  extended  northwards  to  join  Europe,
in  the  direction  of  Gibraltar  and  Italy.  The  islands  of
]\Ialta  and  Sicily  were  hilly  plateaux,  overlooking  an
undulatory  plain.  Corsica  and  Sardinia  w^ere  joined  to
Italy,  Majorca  and  ]Minorca  to  Spain,  Candia  to  Pelopo-
iiese,  and  CVprus  to  Asia  Elinor.  The  area  now  occupied
by  the  Adriatic  Sea  constituted  the  lower  valley  of  the
To,  and  the  Archipelago  was  a  plain  studded  witli
volcanic  cones;  and  at  the  same  time  glaciers  crowned  the
hi<i;her  mountains  of  northern  Africa  and  of  Asia  Minor.

1'he  substitution  of  land  for  a  stretch  of  sea,  in  the
JMediterranean,  could  not  fail  to  cause  the  summer  heat
to  be  more  intense  in  the  rerion  to  the  north  than  at
the  present  time,  while  the  increased  elevation  would
])roduce  a  greater  severity  of  winter  cold,  as  Mr.  Godwin
Austen  has  pointed  out  in  the  case  of  the  hills  of
IJevonshire.  When,  indeed,  we  consider  that  the  pleis-
tocene land  surface  extended  from  the  snowy  heights
of  Athis,  as  far  north  as  the  100-fathom  line  off  the
coast  of  Ireland,  we  miglit  expect  to  find  African  animals,
su('li  as  the  spotted  hy:rna  and  Felis  coffer,  ranging  as


X.]  OF  THE  MEDITERRANEAN.  389

far  north  as  Yorkshire,  for  the  only  barrier  to  their
migration  would  be  tliat  offered  by  the  severity  of
a  pleistocene  winter.

]\[edit€rranean  Coast-line  comparatively  modeim.

The  submergence  of  the  barriers,  and  the  constitution
of  the  Mediterranean  as  we  find  it  now,  have  probably
taken  phice  but  a  short  time  ago,  from  the  geological
point  of  view,  though  we  know  that  for  the  last
3,000  years  the  coast-line  has  been  on  the  whole
unchanged,  except  from  the  silting  out  of  the  sea  by  the
sediment  of  rivers,  such  as  the  Po,  and  the  elevation
and  depression  of  small  areas  by  volcanic  energy,  as  at
Santorin.  The  physical  character  of  the  shores  testifies
to  the  truth  of  this  view.

"  On  entering  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,''  Mr.  Maw
writes,  "  from  the  Atlantic,  a  notable  change  takes  place
in  the  aspect  of  the  coast.  Cape  St.  Vincent,  on  the
Atlantic  coast,  presents  a  bold  line  of  cliffs  to  the  sea,
and  bluff  cliffs  extend  many  miles  towards  the  Straits ;
but  as  soon  as  these  are  passed,  a  change  of  coast-form
takes  place,  which  must  be  noticeable  to  every  observer.
Cliffs  on  the  sea-board  become  the  exception,  and  the
general  line  of  the  coast  is  merely  a  shelving  under  the
sea  of  the  general  hill-and-valley  system  of  the  land,  the
sea  running  up  all  the  depressions,  and  the  land  elevations
spreading  out  into  the  sea  with  scarcely  any  abrupt
cliff-line  of  demarcation.  The  uneven  sea-bottom  of  the
Straits  seems  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  contour  of  the
adjacent  land,  consisting  of  rolling  alternations  of  hill
and  valley,  which  must  have  received  its  conformation
by  subaerial  agencies/'


-^^'.-i-f    .3  Ll'lL  U  ZZS   r_r-2LtJL±


i


.:..    '.'•    L*:  ir-'nz  -n*i^i=    c   .:-.  :;i-    .iTCi;i.


.  V ;.     .  .i.",--      7---:    u:'i»rr.   -•   i:-!":    .c    "^'"n— ^t^ -~r.-r,s

•  '  •■'■-•-    11     "^I-    - — ^-    L£    r.'.'C  7^      ■•i-i     S^s;!     -.W?     T>%t

■.:    ....•:  ::.':.   iLi.--;^!.!^  :■:    •Ih:   RiTi-in   s:!;^^*^^^  the

. . .  ;.  • .  '.:. .   •  i'.r.*  t  -r:  Jr.  iri  :L-r  d-r^p  b^Ts  muring  up
•.. :  .:.•.;.-.-:..  i.j  vj.  i-r'-.  Til:}:  ir.:ii:  Lavr  hid  an  origin

I-    -  .:;.•.---. -,^:  Z'j  ^ii:  oir  -rve:;  ro  the  f:ill  force  of
'..:.j     T^-r:  pr-^:L:  a.r^pr:»::  of  the  M-^iiterranean


•:  ".'  /


'.    Ji  *  —  1 L  ''  "-r"  V-.- * t T? 2:; '•".


li  i*.  :f  ::.  :  .M-  ■:/•  ri-.r.-  .;n  ^^pm  La^  Wii  dopres-seJ  to  an
;«iii  /-;.*  ^:  :;■;::  'J-'^''^  Vj  ^j,'.'«.'0  f';«;t  siii'i-e  tlio  i»lcistoceiie
:i'f,  V.  •:  iif."  prv*:"  Jh'it  ili''^  p'jion  to  the  suuth  has  beeu
'  l':'.;iN  'I  !';  tl,.,»  I  At'-nt  iji  r-uriijparativt;Iy  modem  times.
Mr.  .\I;iv.,'  in  |ji-;  ytuiuf-y  in  1^73  to  the  Northern
S;r|i:ii;i,  oil  ,«i\i  ^1  i;ii-<:d  h'-aclies  at  a  height  of  2,000  feet,
;inr|  lo;iiij  aij<l  :  |jin;rl<;-l;<-rls  as  high  as  2,700  feet.  He
llji'icfMp-  r»,iir|ii.|«s  tij.ii  the  i»art  of  the  Sahara  which  he
f>:\t\nii'i\  li;j(l  l)(M  ]]  rai.-iMl  at  least  3,000  feet  above  the
M'A.     Thr.si!  ch.'jn'n's  of  level,  the  same  in  amount,  but

'  ••  (J«'.o1m;m«'.i1  Nutr;<  on  aJounicy  from  Algiers  to  Morocco/'     Geol.


x-l  AND  IN  THE  MEDITERRANEAN.  391

iD  opposite  directions,  were  probably  compensatory  and
simultaneous.  Northern  Africa  may  have  been  cut  off
from  the  central  and  southern  portions  of  the  continent
by  the  sea  extending  over  the  Sahara,  during  the  time
that  the  Mediterranean  was  represented  by  the  two  in-
land salt  lakes  figured  in  the  accompanying  map  (Fig.
129).  And  while  the  region  of  the  Sahara  was  being
elevated,  that  of  the  Mediterranean  was  probably  being
depressed.

These  changes  in  the  relation  of  sea  to  land,  and  the
greater  elevation  of  the  mountains  in  the  neighbouring
countries,  must  have  affected  not  merely  the  climate  of
southern,  but  also  of  north-western  Europe,  and  ought
not  to  be  left  out  of  account  in  any  theory  relating  to
pleistocene  climate.


yj'l        EVIhESCE  OF  MAMMALS  AS  TO  CLIMJLTE.       Tchaf.


CHAPTER  XL

THK    LLROPEAX   CLIMATE   IX   THE   PLEISTOCENE    AGE.

'Wif,  ':viIenoe  of  the  Mammalia  as  to  Climate. — The  Southern  Gxoap.
— Thf:  Xorthem  Group. — Probable  cauae  of  Aaaoeiation  of  Xozthem
and  .S  iUthem  Groups. — The  Temperate  Group. — Species  common
to  <l'AA  and  Tropi«jal  Climates. — Extinct  Species. — Two  Periods
of  Glaciation  in  Britain. — Three  Climatal  Changes  represented  on
the  Continfrnt. — Europe  invaded  by  Pleistocene  ^fftn^fn^tlg  before
the  Glacial  Period. — Mamnuds  lived  in  Britain  during  the
'>.<',f/)\A  Toe  or  <'flarial  Stage. — The  Glacial  Period  does  not
-'  '  iiat';  one  Lif—^rri  from  another. — Relation  of  Palaeolithic
Min  to  <')lacial  Perio'l. — Age  of  Contents  of  Caves  in  Glaciated
i)i.-Miol.s.

Tlie  Evidence  of  the  Mammalia  as  to  Climate.

In  tlj('.  last  three  chapters  we  have  seen  that  the
r;iv(-inaini!ialia  throw  great  light  on  the  pleistocene
gcofrnipliy  of  Eur()j)e,  and  that  there  is  reason  for  the
Ixilicf  tli;it  th(;  Jaiid  surface  then  extended  northwards
and  wcstw'iirds,  so  as  to  include  Ireland  ;  and  southwards
to  join  Africa,  in  the  direction  of  Sicily,  Malta,  and
(ilil)iallar.  W(3  must  now  pass  on  to  the  consideration
of  lh(;  cliniato  on  this  great  continental  area,  which
would  allow  of  so  large  and  varied  a  fauna  existing  in
our  ([uarlcr  of  lli(i  world.


xi.J  SOUTHERN  ANIMALS.  393

The  Southern  Group  of  Animals.

The  pleistocene  fauna  is  remarkable  for  the  mixture
of  species.  It  consists  of  forms  now  banished  to  South
Africa,  Northern  Asia,  and  America,  or  to  the  severe
climate  of  high  mountains,  mingled  with  those  which
lived  in  Europe  in  the  historic  age,  and  those  which  have
wholly  disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  We  will
take  the  living  species  first.

The  southern  group  consists  of  the  following  ani-
mals : —

Lion.  Serval.

Caffir  Cat.  Hippopotamus.

Spotted  nya}na.  African  Elephant.

Striped  Uyaina.  Porcupine.

At  the  present  day  the  lion  ranges  over  the  whole  of
Africa,  with  the  exception  of  Egypt  and  the  Cape
Colony,  whence  it  has  been  driven  out  by  the  hand  of
man.  In  Asia,  the  maneless  variety  inhabits  the  valley
of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  and  the  districts  bordering
on  the  Persian  Gulf;  and  in  India,  according  to  Mr.
Blyth,  the  province  of  Kattywar  in  Guzerat.  Although
now  only  found  in  these  hot  regions,  it  is  proved,
by  the  concurrent  testimony  of  Herodotus,  Aristotle,
Xenophon,  iElian,  and  Pausanias,  to  have  inhabited  the
mountains  of  Thrace,  and  of  Asia  Minor,  and  it  probably
became  extinct  in  Europe  before  the  end  of  the  first
century  after  Christ.^  We  may  therefore  infer  that  it
possessed  a  sufficient  elasticity  of  constitution  to  endure

^  See  "  British  Pleistocene  Mammalia/'  Palseont.  Soc.  Felts  spelaa,
c.  xviii.


*


*       ,


•   ■-       —


•        t


-  *   ■•    •         _  I


.    ■.•■»'-


.    •        .  •


.  k  ^4


]■■  '


A  m

••  ♦  "1

1


.; *.'..*     ■...'.  J  •'.'■  .-ji  ::;.:?:.:!  ;j-f  tiiC  liipp' ►]-•  .:amu>

•  •»  i.'i  /..I-.'  1  •{.'."■'I  !i"!i]  -'/itli'.-rii  Eur-.'}".',  as  far  ii«.»ri!i  a.s
V'./i.  li.M.  iji,'!' J  ;uiy  oth'-r  than  l';nip»'.Tat»j  (.■«"»ii«lilion<.
It  r/.iiM  i,/,t  I,;i'.«-  rijiliin-'l  a  winti.T  .sufficiently  suwre
Ni  I'r.ti  ill'-  liv'j  .  with  a  thirk  roatirifj  of  ice,  without
h.i'vin;'  it,  pi'.'iit,  hahits  |irofnuinlly  moditicil  ;  ami
Mirh  an  .ilti-r.-itiun  nf  hahits  wuuM  certainly  leave  its
Mi.iil.,  in  nih«r  iMoililicati<in.s  in  the  fossil  skeleton  than
ihn.r  inirnitr  ilill'i  rrn«-rs  wiiielj  have  heen  observed,  when


XI.]  THE  NOUTIIERN  ANIMALS.  395

it  is  compared  with  that  of  the  living  Hippopotamus
amphibius.  The  porcupine  of  southern  Europe  has  been
found  as  far  north  as  the  caves  of  Belgium  (Schmerling).

The  Northern  Group.

The  northern  group  consists  of  those  animals  which
are  now  only  to  be  met  with  in  the  colder  regions  of  the
northern  hemisphere,  either  in  low  latitudes  or  at  great
altitudes.

Marmot.  Arctic  Fox.

Pouched  Marmot.  Musk- sheep.

Lemming.  Keindeer.

Alpine  Hare.  Ibex.

Tailless  Hare.  Chamois.
Glutton.

To  this  list  the  paloeolithic  man  of  the  caves  must  be
added,  since  he  is  probably  related  by  blood  to  the
Eskimos,  and  appeared  in  Europe  simultaneously  with
the  arctic  group  of  animals.

The  testimony  of  these  animals  as  to  climate  is  directly
opposed  to  that  of  the  preceding  group,  since  they
now  only  flourish  in  the  arctic  regions,  or  in  moun-
tainous districts  in  which  the  climate  is  severe.  The
marmot,  in  the  pleistocene  age,  lived  in  Belgium,  and
descended  from  the  Alpine  heights  as  far  as  the  shores  of
the  Mediterranean,  where  it  has  been  met  with  in  the
caverns  near  Nice.  The  pouched  marmot,  Spei^nophilus
citillus  of  the  Don  and  Volga,  penetrated  as  far  to  the
west  as  Somersetshire.  The  Alpine  hare,  now  found
only  in  the  colder  climates  of  northern  Europe,  Asia,  and
America  (with  the  solitary  exception  of  Ireland),  ranged
as  far  down  the  valley  of  the  Rhine  as  Schussenreid,  in
Suabia.     The  two  carnivores  now  dwelling  in  the  colder


' ..   ■-■  ,..:-  -  :r  Tr.-.Ivcrme,  an«l  the

-  -.:.'■_.  :lt  :Lr  a^  far  south  as
r    :.•    ..f   >.lu=.>::irv:'.l,    ami    both

■■:         :    -r-ii.kiLv.  :;r:..l  of  uoithcrn

I-  -r:  IT. :..   iz  its  haMt  of  all

■  ■:     ■.  :>  l:  riziv.  r-.str^.-rod  to  the

'  .     -.:..:.  ...  ~L-rv  ::  thrives  in  the

■  _  ^7   .:.">.  :.::  tvo!i  Wing  driven

._.":.7„:   >:t-.:::v  of  the  winter.

m

-  :  -r..  r-,:.:A:i:?,  from  its  j>rosent
,r   >:r  .:?.  .11.  i   tLrouirli    the   vast

':.i>y...    :::     Eurojv,    Germany,

-     ■..  -.:.  ■.  ■':r:  :.-  :hv  barrier  offered

V.  ■     «"...::  :!:>  *.vrgv area  its  remains

::.  :!-.    :-.  i'^  .:-:•.  r.  and  both  these

:  ■.    :?;.  :  ./vv{.  v.vrc-  hunted  by  the

■  -     :   A  :i:::a!iio,  just  as
':'-.■:  :...>  .:.  :'..e  ^horc^  of  the

-   .;  :".  ..-i.   .■.:■.::::.'<  l^e  nnv  in«lex

.    '.  .    :!>:.•.•::.■.   a^v.  their  piv-

.    .     ;  :...  A":s  .■:.  1  rvrourt'S  inii»lic.>

::.:i:v.  au"!  Britain  was

::  :hev  now  cnjuv  on

in  uw  northern  Asiatic

~^  ■  1    ^        '  ..     :.::'..::: '.i:;:i;dos  of  Anierit-a.      Unt

'■■-  '       ■    ->■  -    .    :..  ::!■.. '.y  oi-j-o-scd  t«.>  that  whieli

•     ^  ■  -    --  *  -    ■  V-  ,  .1.  '-•  •- :'  ::iv  southern  group  of  animals."

i  i.i-  :-  :.:.  iT...i  ..:  -i-..ati'r  lL-ni;i]i  in  my  '*  Essay  on  ('lassifn\'\tion,'*
^"|;'iJ  ';..,!.  Jv:ini.  Xov.  l>7l\ai:.l  in  the  »' Intkvluetic.n  to  Driiish
I'l'-.i.XhrMti':  M.'.niiii.-ili.i/'  ]\ilH.ont.  Soc.


1  -


XI.]  ASSOCIATION  OF  GROUPS.  397

And  the  remains  of  the  two  groups  of  animals  are  so
associated  together  in  the  caves,  and  river-deposits  of
Europe,  nortli  of  the  Pyrenees,  that  it  is  impossible  to
deny  the  fact  that  it  was  the  common  feeding-ground
of  both  during  the  same  era.^


Probable  Cause  of  Association  of  Northern  and

Southern  Groups.

Must  we  then  infer  that  in  the  pleistocene  age  the
present  habits  of  the  musk-sheep,  the  reindeer,  chamois,
or  ibex,  were  so  changed  as  to  allow  them  to  flourish
side  by  side  with  the  hippopotamus,  or  vice  versd  ?  Was
the  climate  colder  than  it  is  now  in  Europe,  or  was  it
hotter  ?  How  was  this  singular  association  of  northern
and  southern  species  brought  about  ?  The  problem  may
be  solved  if  we  refer  to  the  present  distribution  of  ani-
mals in  northern  Asia  and  North  America.  As  the
winter  comes  on  the  arctic  species  gradually  retreat
southwards,  and  occupy  the  summer  feeding-grounds  of
the  elk,  red-deer,  and  other  creatures  which  are  unable
to  endure  the  extreme  severity  of  an  arctic  winter.  In
the  spring  the  latter  pass  northwards,  to  enjoy  the
summer  herbage  of  that  area,  which  had  been  the  win-
ter-quarters of  the  arctic  group  of  animals.     Thus  there

^  Mr.  James  Geikie's  view  ("The  Great  Ice-Age,"  8vo.  1874)
that  the  mixture  of  the  northern  and  southern  forms  is  due  to  the
destruction  of  ossiferous  strata  by  streams,  which  subsequently  depo-
sited remains  of  widely  different  ages  together,  is  rendered  untenable
by  the  fact  that  they  are  generally  preserved  in  the  same  mineral  state.
It  would  have  been  impossible  for  this  to  have  taken  place  without
leaviDg  decided  traces  behind  in  the  rolled  and  water-worn  condition
of  tlie  older  series,  such  as  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  the  eocene  and
meiocene  fossils  in  the  Eed  Crag  of  Suffolk.


:  - •      _=  Li: - r  •  zxi  cliha te  jsZ'  ge^jgraphy.    [chap.

>  L  .::LTj.i:-i  f "c-.i^.- ^ :-:  *i::  fr»>,  orirthe  same  region,
:  tit  Lr.T:.  li  l  ilr  "r-r—r-rriTT  animals,  and  their  remaiiis
n-f^  -r.-i-^-fiirlT  '-e.-r-riir  more  or  less  associated  in  the
r.v-::-:-T«.^:"f,  i^  ^^'1  as  in  oaves,  where  these  last  happen
::  :..::ir  I"  -rrrlrm  Asii.  and  in  America,  the  only
:•: :.::  Iltj  ">.:"eei.  :'-r  nonhrm  and  temperate  zoological
:r  •  -:i:v5  if  :li:  ::i^rir:::oi  by  the  fluctuating  annual
:.:L:".rr:.rir..  j-:::  :lrre  are  no  great  hilly  barriers
rii^z^r^z  -i-f*  --i  TT^:,  :o  prevent  free  migration  to  the
r.  r:_  :r  >  .::L  I:  refrrcnc-e  I*?  made  to  the  map.  Fig.
l.-r.  ::  ~:..  '•:  s-ren  that  these  conditions  were  amply
jviti-n.  :  :l  :Lv  ;lris:LX"vEe  r.ge.  ITiere  were  no  physical
larrlir-  ::  nijr.ition.  frm  the  shores  of  the  Mediterra-
cvin.  as  :Ar  i:  r:ii  as  Ireland.  If  the  winter  cold  were
w-r?,  :-e  rvii.i'jer  and  musk-sheep  might  advance  as
far  s: u:h  ?-s  the  Pvrenees,  and  if  the  summer  heat  were
int'.'i.S'?  there  would  be  nothing  to  forbid  the  hippopo-
rr-.n.us  :;r. ;  :':.e  A:V:::i!i  carnivores  advancing  northwards.
I:  =-•■!:.-  :  '  iv.-  :':.-.:  thi-  i>  tlio  only  h\'pothesis  which
v:\\\  -:i'>:y  ;-//.  tl:-  faots  of  the  case.  The  traces  of
^'1 1'-i-  r-  ;.!.  1  .-i:"W-t:»/*v;<  where  tliev  are  no  lonsfcr  found
|.r«..v.'  tiiUi  :li'  wintvr  was  severe  :  while  the  warmth  of
til'-  .-uniMi' T  ^'  rin.<  to  1m?  suflicientlv  demonstrated  by
tli«'  presence  of  Alri«an  si«eeies.  Such  extremes  of  tern-
pcnit'.ire  are  prcscntetl,  more  or  less,  by  all  continents
ext^  uding  from  high  to  low  latitudes.  They  are  modified
in  Europe  at  the  present  time  by  the  warm  current  of
tlie  (iulf  Stream,  by  the  large  area  now  occupied  by  the
M(Mlit(.'rranean  Sea,  and  by  the  submergence  of  the  pleis-
tocene lowlands  on  the  Atlantic  border.


XI.]  TEMPERATE  ANIMALS,  3i)9

The  Temperate  Group.

The  third  group  of  pleistocene  mammalia  consists  of
those  still  living  in  the  temperate  zones  of  Europe,  Asia,
and  America  :


Beaver.

Wulf.

Ilaro.

Fox.

Rabbit.

Horse.

Wild  Cat.

Urus.

Martin.

Bison.

Stoat.

A  ntelopf  saigtt

Weasel.

Wild  Boar.

Otter.

Stag.

Brown  Bear.

Roe.

Grizzly  Bear.

The  range  of  many  of  these  animals  has  been  pro-
foundly modified  since  the  pleistocene  age.  The  Ante-
lope saiga  of  the  Don  and  Volga  lived  as  far  to  the
west  as  Aquitaine.  The  grizzly  bear,  instead  of  being
restricted  to  its  American  habitat  in  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains, ranged  over  the  whole  of  Siberia  into  Europe,  as
far  to  the  south  as  the  Mediterranean,  and  westwards  as
far  as  Gibraltar.

The  urus '  still  lives  in  the  larger  domestic  cattle,  and
the  bison  is  represented  in  Europe  by  those  which  are
protected  by  the  forest  laws  of  Lithuania,  and  in  North
America  by  the  vast  herds  w^hich  are  rapidly  being
exterminated,  like  the  red  Indian,  by  the  rifles  of  the
settlers.  The  horse  was  as  abundant,  and  as  widely
spread  over  Europe,  as  the  urus  and  the  bison  ;  accord-
ing to  Prof.  Brandt  it  now  no  longer  lives  in  Siberia
in  a  wild  state.

*  "  Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  xxii.  391.


«     .


K    ^"


4.    \   .


>        ...71.


•  -  -  •  •  ^  %

i  .  ..  •  ■■  ...  ..k  A.  >>.>••.  Ik'l  tl.t'l

■  •  ^  11

I  '  ...     •  >".'  ■'  ..-..1         •%.'  '       l.l'        .T''Lt.«l«l<Ii'.l

...  J

:;.'    M"' !.'! < ,  (,tl ■!.<   ./','../<;,.».  r.i"  j. {:_.'.    -ii- 'i'''-t'.H:'tl*t  i]  ii-.:.<.


vi<  -.-.••I  ;i  ;i  ii'.iili.ru  {^^v\\\,  .-iijn-  it  i<  iin-t  with  in  va-t
;iliiiii'l,iii«-<-  in  til*'  ai'rt ir  i-roi,,n.<  nf  Siln'ria,  as  \\v\\  a>  in
l'jm»|H',  :in'l  ha.    n«»t    Ihih  fV)un<l  <nntli  of  tin.*  Alj»s   an«l


XI.]  COLD  AND  HOT  CLIMATED,  401

Pyrenees.  The  cave-bear  has  not  l)oen  discovered  either
in  the  extreme  north  or  in  the  south  of  Europe,  and
may  therefore  be  considered  of  temperate  range ;  and  the
Irish  elk,  identiBed  by  Prof.  Brandt,  from  the  caves  of
the  Altui  Mountains,  had  a  similar  range  in  middle
Europe.  The  mammoth,  endowed  with  an  elastic  con-
stitution, was  able  to  endure  the  severity  of  an  arctic
climate  in  Siberia  and  North  America,  and  the  tem-
perature of  the  latitude  of  Rome  and  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,"  and  consequently  tells  us  as  little  of  the  pleis-
tocene climate  as  the  panther,  fox,  or  w^olf.

The  evidence,  therefore,  as  to  climate,  offered  by  the
extinct  animals  in  the  caves  is  of  the  same  nature  as
that  of  the  living.  There  is  the  same  mixture  of  northern
and  southern  forms,  which  can  only  be  accounted  for
satisfactorily  by  seasonal  migrations,  according  to  the
summer  heat  and  winter  cold,  such  as  those  which  are
now  observed  to  take  place  in  Siberia  and  North  America.

Before  we  consider  the  relation  of  the  pleistocene
animals  buried  in  the  caves  and  river  deposits  to  the
glacial  period,  it  is  necessary  to  define  what  is  meant  by
the  term  glacial.

Two  Periods  of  Glacial  ion  in  Britain,

At  the  close  of  the  pleistocene  period  the  climate
gradually  became  colder,  until  ultimately  it  was  arctic  in
severity  in  northern  Europe.  The  researches  of  many
eminent  observers  prove  that  an  enormous  sheet  of  ice,
like  that  under  which  Greenland  now  lies  buried,  ex-
tended over  North  Britain,  Wales,  and  Ireland,  leaving

*  See  Falconer,  **  Palaeont.  Mem."

D    D


402  TJVO  ICE  AGES  IiX  BRITAIN  [chap.

its  mark  in  the  far-travelled  blocks  of  stone,  the  moraines,
and  the  grooves  which  pass  over  the  surface  irrespective
of  the  minor  contours.  The  land  then,  most  probably,
as  Prof.  Ramsay  and  Sir  Charles  Lyell  believe,  stood
higher  than  it  does  now.  To  this  succeeded  a  period  of
depression,  during  which  the  mountains  of  Wales  were
submerged  to  a  height  of  at  least  1,300  feet  ;  and  the
waves  of  the  sea  washed  out  of  the  pre-existing  glacial
detritus  the  shingle  and  sand,  termed  the  "middle  drift,"
which  occurs  also  in  Scotland  and  Ireland.^  Then  the
land  was  re-elevatcd  above  the  waves,  and  a  second
period  of  glaciers  set  in,  traces  of  which  occur  abundantly
in  Wales,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  the  white  areas  in
Fig.  126.  They  were,  however,  of  far  less  extent  than
those  which  preceded  them,  occupying  isolated  areas
instead  of  forming  one  continuous  icy  covering  to  the
country.  The  glacial  phenomena  may  be  briefly  summed
up  as  follows:  1.  As  the  pleiocenc  temperature  was
lowered,  the  glaciers  crept  down  from  the  tops  of  the
mouiitiiins,  until  at  last  they  united  to  form  one  con-
tinuous ice  sheet,  moving  resistlessly  over  the  smaller
hills  and  vallevs  to  the*  lower  grounds,  and  the  first
ice  or  ghicial  j)eriod  set  in.  2.  Then  followed  the  era
of  dejn-ession  beneath  tlie  sea.  3.  And,  lastly,  on  the
laud  re-emcro;inii^  from  tlie  sea  the  second  ice  or  ijlacial
period  l)egan.  The  climate  during  the  marine  depression
must  obviously  have  been  milder  than  that  of  either  of
the  glacial  periods,  because  of  the  moderating  effect  of
the  wide  extent  of  sea.

^  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  kind  assivStance  of  Professors  HiiH
and  Ilaikne.-s,  Mr.  Kinahan,  and  tlic  TJev.  H.  M.  Close,  in  correlatini^
the  Irish  witli  tlie  Enuli^h  glacial  deposits.  The  reader  will  find  the
glacial  period  most  ably  treated  in  Lyell's  *^  Antiquity  of  Man."


XI.]  AXD  ON  THE  CONTINENT.  401^

The  exact  relation  of  the  boulder  clays  with  marine
shells,  in  the  centre  and  south  of  Britain,  to  the  detritus
left  behind  by  the  ice-sheet  in  the  north,  has  not  as  yet
been  satisfactorily  ascertained.  It  is  very  probable  that
the  elevation  of  land  in  the  north  was  simultaneous  with
a  southern  depression,  wliich  allowed  of  icebergs  deposit-
ing their  burdens  in  the  eastern  counties,  in  the  valley
of  the  Thames,  and  as  far  south  as  Selsea,  on  the  coast
of  Sussex.

Th^ee  CUinatal  Changes  represented  on  the  Continent.

These  changes  of  climate  have  also  been  observed
on  the  continent  of  Europe.  The  Swiss  geologists
have  shown  that  the  Alpine  glaciers  extended  farther
than  they  do  at  the  present  time,  and  that  they  pre-
sent two  stages  of  extension,  the  first  of  which  is  of
greater  magnitude  than  the  second.  The  Alpine  blocks
and  moraines  have  been  traced  far  down  into  the  plains
of  Lombardy,  northwards  into  the  valley  of  the  Rhine,
and  in  France  as  far  south  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhone  as
Valence.  The  admirable  essay  and  map  brought  by
MM.  Falsan  and  Cbantre,  before  the  meeting  of  the
French  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  at
Lyons,  in  1873,  show  that  there  were  two  periods  of
glaciation  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhone,  the  one  being  due
to  the  movement  of  an  ice-sheet  irrespective  of  the  lower
hills,  the  other  being  merely  the  work  of  the  glaciers
localized  in  the  valleys.  These  in  all  probability  corre-
spond in  point  of  time  with  the  like  stages  of  the  com-
plicated glacial  phenomena  in  Britain.  At  this  time  the
glaciers  of  the  Pyrenees,  now  so  small,  extended  at
least  from  thirty  to  forty  miles  from  their  present  posi-

D  D  2


ipermophHiu  ctlillKi-


jSSbI:


Ibh  Ears  ....
Dytfrii    dormlu— Pot


FVIfi  jKinlxs— LroiiirJ


fftniui  jlrhUa— eirlpeil


_„„,„,,.
'-'"'■K"


ill

»ki

■ff

n^™,.i.v.

rr.

-  [

II  Iff

-1.'

Chi

Hhllliiil!  illlil

1

■;';:;:  ;':     ;,;  ■:  ;  ;  ;  j  ;  ^

]  '  '  1            i

—

1

11

i

^
1

1

1

1

1

i

i'

J

1
i

i

1

i
1

1

1

1

J

J

1

1

FSIiM^iellsii    .    }

),

X

X

y

^

X

X

y

y

7

y

X

""p3S5ii,';r,  1

X

X

y

X

X

X

ArrloMII    fliiriK^a— 1

Coniiii.m  Mmuol.  .    1

toiMr  illxr— DMiver .    .

J<

t-rpm  llaWiii-Hon     .

xTyi

|.>i>rH>rP     .    .    .    f

y

timtH«re    .    .    .    1

X

y

M

IVmHih      ...    I

i/irfr.""',tor«la-Pot-j

y

'f?'"''^h

^

>      X

5,

J,

J,

3^

X

^

X

^

X

y

X

F'lU  i«<flui—htovtr-i  ■

TtHr  ni fir- CnOlrCiit  .

;.VFf.c<f«.-WllrtC.l    .

I

.Uui-Mi.rmlTiiIaliJ"!    .

ilpr,:acnKHill(iaT.ipt\

J,F..-apotMd  Hr»n.  (

><

■"      H

^

^

K

»

X

X

.^

y

y

X

//inriwulrlnla  -atripedl

.l(»/(^  ..nrtM-Murt™

„..,.,.,-H»-M.J

X

Unat                     .     .    1

>

X

X

X

V

X

y

X

'■'C, """.-""")

^

X

X

X

y

X

["(■fill  iieiFFii  — Cove-I

X      K

X

X

X

X

X

y

y

y

y

X

(■..n(.r"W-?Di     .    .

X

X

Cant.    lD!A>i*.-Antloj

y

K

=<      X      «

y

X

V

X

X

X

X

X

X

y

y

X

Arri.iiTiF.I<-phant   .    f

«

X     i<     K

K

it

X

y

X

X

X

X

X

X

y

X

X

X

)lhli"imot  lirJiorhiiriiiX

K

X

X

J^

X

«

X

fllllno«r™i«-».>rM«.  :

fl««nu-T;ri:«     .    .    .

Jha  M«ii— BtKon  .    ,    .

y

°'Sir"*'""°"}

y

j4

r^pm /'«-Iliox.    .    .

"sr.»i,""°'"7)

y

y

y

y

.4nJ»ni<rm(fla-Bnlg»    .

y

.'c„.«V..-WilJB«r  .

'■f  rr».  r(np*Bl-SUg     .

On-m  !»»!»««»— Iriih

X    y

«

y

y

X

>

y

C-fn-'FuMTOBJiii— Rein-

X

y   X

y

■x

K

X

>!

X

X

+

n

+

K

y

y

X

if".    («ir.  «.v"->-

■<

^

«

^-«^•


362        OOAST^LIHB  OF  NOBTE-WESTMRN  EUBOFE  .  [ohap.

Cave  Fauna  the  same  as  RiverAied  Fauna.

If  this  list^  of  animals  from  the  caves  be  compared
with  that  of  the  river-deposits  of  Britain  and  the  conti-
nent,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  same  feiuna  is  present  in
both,  and  that  they  are  therefore  of  the  same  geological
age.'  This  was  tiie  conclusion  to  which  Dr.  Falconer
was  led  by  the  examination  of  the  caves  of  Gk>wer»  and
it  has  been  confirmed  by  every  subsequent  discovery.

The  Pleistocene  Coast-line  of  North-  We^m  Europe.

The  identity  of  the  British  pleistocene  &una  with  that
of  the  continent,  leads  to  tiie  conclusion  that  in  the
pleistocene  age  Britain  was  connected  with  the  adjacent
countries  by  a  bridge  of  land,  over  which  the  wild  animals

had  free  means  of  migration.  And  this  might  be  brought
about  by  a  comparatively  small  elevation  of  the  area.
The  soundings  show  that  Britain  and  Ireland  constitute
merely  the  uplands  of  a  plateau  now  submerged  to  the
extent  of  about  100  fathoms,  on  the  side  of  the  Atlantic.
On  the  east  it  extends  at  a  depth  of  from  twenty  to
fifty  fathoms,  in  the  direction  of  Belgium ;  and  on  the
south  it  is  only  sunk  from  twenty  to  forty  fathoms  below
the  sea-level.  Immediately  to  the  westward  of  this
line  the  sea  deeppns  so  suddenly,  that  there  is  scarcely
any  difference  between  the  lines  of   100   and  of  200

^  The  authorities  for  the  foreign  liats  of  animals  will  be  foondin  the
"  Quart.  Geo!.  Joum/'  1872,  p.  424.  The  British  animals  have  been
determined  principally  by  myself  and  Dr.  Falconer.

-  "Classification  of  the  Pleistocene  Strata,"  Quart  GeoL  Joom.
Not.  1872,  p.  410.


ix.l  IN  PLEI8T0CBSE  AQB.  363

fathoms,  and  the  depth  rapidly  increases  to  2,000.    Were


FiO.  126.— Physiography  of  Orcil  Britain  in  Lata  rkiatucBoe  Age.

Rhoded  area  =  land  now  submerged ;  dotted  ai'ea  =  re^tion  occupied  by  animals  ;

plain  area  —  region  occupied  by  glaciers,

this  plateau  elevated  above  the  sea  to  an  extent  of  100


1

lid  I


364  ATLANTIC  SHORE  AT  [cH;

&thoiiiB,  the  tract  shaded  m  the  map  (Fig.  126)  would
unite  the  British  Isles  to  the  continent,  and  the  Thames
and  other  rivers  on  the  eastern  coast  would  uiiitt?  with
the  £lbe  and  the  Rhine  to  form  a  river  deljouching  on
the  North  Sea,  Bomewbat  after  the  manner  which  I  have
represented  by  taking  the  deepest  line  of  soundings.  The'
StraitB  of  Dover  would  then  he  the  watershed  between
this  valley  of  the  German  Ocean,  as  it  may  be  termed,
and  that  of  the  English  Channel,  in  which  the  Seine  and'
the  Somme  and  other  French  rivers  joined  those  of  th«
Bouth  coast,  and  ultimately  reached  the  Atlantic.  Evir
dence  that  the  latter  river  flowed  in  the  course  asaigued
to  it  in  the  maji  is  afforded  by  the  discovery  of  tha
fresh-water  mnasel  {Unio  pictorum),  recorded  by  Mr.
Godwin  Austen  ^  to  have  been  dredged  up  by  Captain
White  from  a  depth  of  from  50  to  100  fathoms,
very  far  from  what  I  have  taken  to  be  its  mouth.  Wa
are  also  indebted  to  Mr.  Godwin  Austen  for  the
discovery  near  this  spot  of  banks  of  shingle  and  lit-
toral shells,  which  indicate  the  position  of  the  ancient
coast-line.

The  view  that  the  100-fathom  line  marks  the  limit  of
the  pleistocene  land  surface  to  the  west,  is  held  by  Sir
H.  dc  la  BSche,  Mr.  Godwin  Austen,  Sir  Charles  Lyell,
and  other  eminent  geologists,  and  it  is  supported  by
many  facts  that  can  be  explained  in  no  other  manner.
To  pass  over  the  discovery  of  a  fresh-water  shell  at  the
bottom  of  the  English  Channel,  quoted  above,  the  distri-
bution of  fossil  mammalia  at  the  bottom  of  the  German
Ocean  (represented  in  Fig.  126  by  the  dotted  area)  is

1  Godwin  Austen,  "  Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  vol.  I  p.  69.  Do  la  B6c1m,
" Theoretical  BeBearches,"  p.  190.  Lyell,  "Antiquity  of  Man,"  Idi
edit.  p.  32H.


IX.]  ONE^HUNDRED  FATHOM  LINE.  365

analogous  to  that  which  we  find  in  the  river  gravels  and
brick-eailhs  on  the  land.  The  quantity  of  teeth  and
bones  belonging  to  the  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros,
horse,  reindeer,  and  spotted  hyaena,  and  other  animals,
dredged  up  by  the  fishermen  in  the  German  Ocean  is
almost  incredible.  Mr.  Owles,  of  Yarmouth,  informed
me  in  1868  that  ofi*  that  place  there  is  a  bank  on  which
the  fishing  nets  are  rarely  cast  without  bringing  up
fossil  remains.  It  seems  most  probable,  that  these  accumu-
lations have  been  formed  under  subaerial  conditions  near
the  drinking  places,  or  below  the  fords,  which  were
used  for  ages  by  the  pleistocene  animals.  I  might  quote
as  an  example  of  a  similar  deposit  of  fossils  on  the  land,
that  discovered  in  1866  by  Captain  Luard,  RE.,  in
digging  the  foundations  of  the  new  cavalry  barracks  at
Windsor,  which  consisted  mainly  of  bones  and  antlers
of  reindeer,  with  a  few  carnivores,  such  as  the  brown
bear  and  wolf,  that  usually  follow  reindeer  in  their
migrations  in  Siberia.^  Were  this  submerged  it  would
be  a  case  precisely  similar  to  that  ofi*  Yarmouth.

The  ancient  forest,  exposed  at  low  water  under  the
clifi*s  on  the  Norfolk  and  Sufiblk  shores,  flourished  when
the  land  stood  higher  than  it  docs  now.  Traces  of  a
similar  forest,  also  at,  and  below,  low-water  mark,  have
been  met  with  on  the  shore  at  Selsea,  near  Chichester,
in  Sussex  ;  and  remains  of  the  mammoth  have  been
dredged  up  in  several  places  ofi*  the  coast,  as  for  example
in  Torbay  and  in  Holyhead  harbour,  or  found  in  gravel
beds  near  low-water  mark,  as  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and
on  the  north  coast  of  Somerset  at  St.  Audries,  near
Watchet,  where  a  skull  with  gigantic  tusks  rested  in  the

^  The  accumulation  of  the  remains  of  reindeer  in  the  limited  area  of
the  excavation  was  enormous.


366  MIGRATION  OF  ANIMALS.  [chat.

gravel.  In  all  these  facts  we  have  ample  proof  that
Britain  stood  at  a  higher  level  in  the  pleistocene  age
than  at  the  present  day.

The  vast  abundance  also  of  the  mammalia  in  the  caves
of  South  Wales  and  Somerset,  and  their  presence  in  the
Island  of  Cakly,  and  it  may  be  added  in  Ireland^  can
only  be  accounted  for  by  the  elevation  of  the  present
sea-bottom,  so  as  to  allow  of  their  migration  over
plains  covered  with  abundant  pasture.  It  seems,  there-
fore, to  me  that  the  accompanying  map,  Fig.  126,  repre-
sents with  tolerable  accuracy  the  ancient  coast-line  of
Britain,  and  of  the  adjacent  parts  of  the  continent  in
the  pleistocene  age.  The  fertile  valleys  of  the  English
Channel,  Bristol  Channel,  and  the  German  Ocean,  would
afford  sustenance  to  a  large  and  varied  fauna,  and
numerous  herbivores,  such  as  the  reindeer,  bison,  and
horse,  would  supply  food  to  the  palaeolithic  hunters,  who
followed  them  in  their  annual  migrations.  And  it  must
be  remarked  on  this  hypothesis,  that  the  valley  of  the
Garonne  would  offer  a  free  passage  both  to  the  animals
and  to  the  hunters  of  Auvergne  down  to  the  prairie,  ex-
tending as  far  as  the  100-fathom  line  off  the  French
coast,  and  that  the  hunting  grounds  would  reach  to
Devonshire  and  Somerset  without  any  barrier  except  that
offered  by  the  rivers.  It  is  therefore  no  wonder  that  the
implements  in  the  caves  of  Kent's  Hole,  Wookey  Hole,
and  the  South  of  France,  should  be  of  the  same  type.

Distribution  of  Palceolithic  Imphments  in  this  Area,

This  geographical  configuration  in  pleistocene  times
may  perhaps  account  for  the  distribution  of  the  palaeo-
lithic implements  in  the  river  gravels.     The  Seine  and


IX.]      HUi^TlJf^-OROUSDS  OF  PALEOLITHIC  TRIBES.     367

the  Somme  debouch  into  the  same  valley  as  the  rivers  of
the  south  of  England,  and  the  Straits  of  Dover  mark  the
position  of  a  low  watershed  leading  into  the  valley  of
the  German  Ocean,  on  the  sides  of  which,  in  the  eastern
counties,  river-bed  implements  are  so  numerous.  These
are  of  the  same  type  in  northern  France,  Sussex,  Hamp-
shire, Kent,  and  as  far  north  as  the  Wash;  and  were
therefore  used  by  the  same  race  of  men.  The  diflference
between  them  and  those  of  the  cave-dwellers  in  the  south
and  west,  may  be  due  to  their  possessors  occupying  dif-
ferent hunting  grounds.  Each  tribe  of  American  Indians
at  the  present  time  has  its  own  territory  for  hunting,
which  is  jealously  guarded  against  encroachment,  and
in  which  the  articles  peculiar  to  the  tribe  are  being
accumulated  in  the  refuse-heaps,  while  other  sets  are
being  accumulated  in  other  districts.  If  we  suppose  that
the  palseolithic  savages  divided  up  their  hunting  grounds
in  this  manner,  the  difference  which  exists  between  the
implements  of  the  river-beds  and  caves  may  be  readily
explained,  as  well  as  their  being  found  for  the  most  part
in  different  areas.

The  pleistocene  climate  in  the  area  north  of  the  Alps
and  Pyrenees  will  be  treated  in  the  eleventh  chapter,
after  the  examination  of  the  cave-fauna  of  southern
Europe.


368        WAVSA  OF  CAVES  OF  SOUTllEBN  BVBOPE.      [ca*t.  i


CHAPTER  X.

THE  FAVKA  07  THE  CAVES  OP  SOUTHEEN  EUBOPE  AND  THB  \
BVIDeNCB  AS  TO  THE  MEDITEKRAXEAN  COAST-LINE  \S  «
THE  PUISTOOEN'E  AGE.

ChangM  of  LbtbI  in  tlie  MediteTTaDenii  area  in  Meiocene  and  Fleiocens
AgM. — Bon»«avcs  of  Southern  Europe.— Of  Gilimltar.— Of  Pro-
Tenofl  uid  Montone. — Of  SiciJy. — Of  Malta. — Range  of  Pigmy
Hippopcrtuniu. — FoseilMamnialiain  Algeria.— Li vinj;  Species coDi'
mon  to  Earope  *tid  Africa, — Evidence  of  Soundings. — The  Glacien
of  LebanoiL — OrAnattilia.^ — Of  Allan. — Gtaciera  probaHy  produced
by  elevation  above  the  Sea. — Mediteiranean  Coast-line  compan-
tively  modern.

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen  that  north-westem
Europe  was  elevated,  during  the  pleistocene  age,  to  an
extent  of  at  least  600  feet  above  its  present  level ;  so
that  Ireland  was  united  to  Britain,  and  Britain  was
joined  to  the  mainland  of  Europe,  proof  of  this  eleva-
tion being  dependent  upon  the  soundings  on  one  hand,
and  the  distribution  of  the  fossil  mammalia  on  the  other.
Such  a  change  must  necessarily  have  affected  the  whole
physical  conditions  of  the  area,  since  the  substitution  of
a  mass  of  land  for  a  stretch  of  sea,  and  the  higher  altitude
of  the  land,  would  tend  to  produce  climatal  extremes  of
considerable  severity.  It  is  indeed  no  wonder  that
during  this  time  of  continental  elevation,  the  hills  of


X.]  MEl<>CE2^e  AND  OTHER  CHANGES  OF  LEVEL.       369

Wales,  Yorkshire,  Derbyshire,  Cumbria,  and  Scotland
sliould  be  crowned  with  glaciers,  or  that  there  should
have  been  a  migration  to  and  fro  of  animals,  comparable
to  that  which  is  now  going  on  in  Siberia  and  the
northern  portions  of  North  America.  The  condition  of
southern  Europe  at  that  time  has  a  most  important
bearing  on  any  conclusion  which  may  be  drawn  as  to
tlie  pleistocene  climate  in  France,  Germany,  or  Britain.
For  if  it  be  proved  that  the  Mediterranean  Sea  was  then
smaller  than  it  is  now,  the  greater  land-surface  would
increase  both  the  heat  of  the  summer  and  the  cold  of
the  winter  in  central  and  north-western  Europe.


Changes  of  Level  in  Medltci^anean  area  in  Meiocene

and  Pleiocene  Ages.

The  geological  evidence  that  the  Mediterranean  re-
gion has  been  subjected  to  oscillations  of  level  during
the  tertiary  period,  is  clear  and  decisive.  Prof.  Gaudry^
has  proved,  in  his  work  on  the  fossil  remains  found  at
Pikermi,  that  the  plains  of  Marathon,  now  so  restricted,
must  have  extended  in  the  meiocene  age  far  south  into
the  Mediterranean,  so  as  to  afford  pasture  to  the  enormous
troops  of  hipparions  and  herds  of  antelopes,  the  masto-
dons and  large  edentata,  revealed  by  his  enterprise.  The
rocky  area  of  Attica,  as  now  constituted,  could  not  have
supported  such  a  large  and  varied  group  of  animals,  nor
could  the  broken  hills  and  limestone  pkteaux  have  been
inhabited  by  hipparions  and  antelopes,  if  their  habits  at
all  resembled  those  of  their  descendants  living  at  the
present  time.     It  may,  therefore,  reasonably  be  concluded

^  "  Lee  Oss.  Foss.  de  Pikermi,"  4to.

B    B


370  BOUfM-OArBS  OF  SOVTHEKN  EUROPE.  [cbap,

that  Greece,  in  those  times,  was  prolonged  southwards,
and  united'  to  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago  hy  a  atretch
of  land.  If  ASncB.  were  then  aa  now  the  head-quartere
of  the  antelopes,  it  13  very  probable  that  one  of  the  lines
by  which  they  passed  over  into  Europe,  and  spread  over
Fiance  and  Germnny,  was  in  this  direction.  Neverthe-
less, it  must  be  admitted  that  the  changes  of  level,  which
hare  taken  fdace  eLqcc  the  mciocene  age  in  those  regions,
are  so  complicated  as  to  render  it  almost  impossible  to
zestore  the  meiocene  geography.

In  the  succeeding,  or  the  jileioceue  age,  the  preaeDce
of  the  A&ican  hippopotamus  in  Italy,  France,  and  Ger-
many, can  only  be  accounted  for  by  a  more  direct  con-
nection witii  the  African  mainland  than  is  offered  by  a
route  through  Aaia  Minor.  It  would  seem,  therefore,
that  the  Mediterranean  Sea  could  not  then  have  formed
the  same  barrier  to  the  northern  migration  of  the  animals
which  it  does  now.  In  many  regions,  however,  the
present  laud  was  then  sunk  beneath  the  sea,  and  marine
strata,  of  pleiocene  age,  were  accumulated  in  the  Val
d'Amo,  Sicily,  and  southern  France.

The  physical  geography '  of  the  Mediterranean  in  the
pleistocene  age  may  be  ascertained  with  considerable
accuracy  by  the  distribution  of  the  animals,  coupled  with
the  evidence  of  the  soundings.

Bone-caves  of  Southern  Europe.

The  mammalia  in  the  bone-caves  of  southern  Europe
differ  from  those  of  the  region  north  of  the  Alps  and
Pyrenees  in  the  absence  of  the  arctic  species,  and  the

>  Some  parts  of  Ite  reat  of  this  chapter  bare  been  paUubvd  in  tbe
"  Fopnlar  Science  Beview,"  March  1873.


-•J


OF  GIBRALTAR.  371


presence  of  some  which  are  of  a  more  strictly  southern
type.  Nevertheless,  the  influence  of  the  mountains  in
lowering  the  temperature  in  their  neighbourhood  is  to  be
traced  in  the  presence  of  the  remains  of  certain  animals.
Thus,  in  the  caves  of  Gibraltar  we  find  an  ibex,  which
cannot  be  distinguished  from  those  of  the  Spanish  sierras,
and  in  Mentone  and  Provence,  a  marmot,  specifically
identical  with  that  of  the  Alps.

The  bone-caves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Mediter-
ranean afibrd  most  important  testimony  as  to  the  geo-
graphical changes  which  have  taken  place,  since  the
animals  found  in  them  lived  in  that  region.  We  will
take  those  of  the  Iberian  peninsula  first.

Caves  of  Gibraltar.

Ossiferous  caverns  have  long  been  known  to  occur  in
the  fortified  rock  of  Gibraltar,^  but  were  not  examined
scientifically  until  the  year  1863,  when  the  researches  of
Captain  Brome,  Prof.  Busk,  and  Dr.  Falconer,  proved  that
pleistocene  species  were  buried  in  considerable  numbers
in  its  cavities  and  fissures.  Of  these  the  most  important
is  the  great  perpendicular  fissure  in  Windmill  Hill,  called
the  Genista  cave,  which  has  been  traced  down  to  more
than  a  depth  of  200  feet.  From  the  upper  portion
w^ere  obtained  the  polished  stone  implements,  human
skulls,  and  other  neolithic  remains  described  in  the
sixth  chapter,  p.  204,  which  prove  that  Gibraltar  was
inhabited  by  the  Basques  in  the  neolithic  age,  while
the  remains  from  the  lower  revealed  the  presence  of  a
singularly  mixed  group  of  animals.

I  "  Palaeontographical  Memoirs,"  vol.  ii.  p.  554.  Busk,  Prehis-
toric Congress,  Norwich  volume,  1869.

B   B    2


372  MA  MM  A  LS  IN  IBERIAN  PENINSULA .  [chap.

The  fossil  boues  have  been  referred  by  Prof.  Busk  and
Dr.  Falconer  to  the  following  species : —

Lepus  cuniculv^,  rabbit.  Equtts  caballus^  borse.

Felis  leo,  lion.  Rhinoarras  hemitoechun.

F,  pardus,  panther.  Capra  ibex^  ibex.

F,  cafer.  Sus  sc/v/Oy  wilJ-boar.

F,  pardina,  lynx.  Cervm  elaphiu,  red  deer.

F,  serval,  serval.  C,  capreoltu^  roe.

Utbus  fei'oxy  grizzly  bear.  C.  dama,  fallow  deer.
Canis  lupus,  wolf.

The  spotted  hyaena,  the  serval,  and  Felis  cqffei\  are
species  now  peculiar  to  Africa,  and  it  is  obvious  that
they  could  not  have  found  their  way  into  Gibraltar
under  the  present  physical  conditions  of  the  Mediterra-
nean. Elephants  and  rhinoceroses  could  not  have  lived
on  so  barren  and  treeless  a  rock,  unless  it  had  overlooked
a  fertile  j)lain,  nor  would  the  carnivora  have  chosen  it
for  tlieir  dens,  liad  it  then  been  cut  off  from  the  feeding-
grounds  of  the  herl;>ivores.  Their  presence,  therefore,  as
Dr.  Falconer  justly  remarks,  implies  the  existence  of
land  now  sunk  beneath  the  waves,  Imt  then  extendiuir
southwards  to  join  Africa.

To  the  African  animals,  mentioned  above  as  inhabit-
ing the  Iberian  peninsula  in  the  pleistocene  age,  M.
Lartet  ha.s  added  the  African  elephant  {E,  Africa nus)
and  the  striped  hyaena  (//.  striata),  which  have  been
found  in  a  stratum  of  orravel  near  Madrid  alonor  with

o  o

flint  implements.^  None  of  the  purely  arctic  mammalia,
such  as  the  reindeer,  musk  sheep,  or  woolly  rhinoceros,
so  abundant  in  France,  Germany,  and  Britain,  have  been
met  with  south  of  the  Pyrenees.


1  «


Cuiiiptes  Roiidus,''  xlvi.  1^58.


X.]       CAVES  OF  PROVENCE  AND  MENTONE,  37;J


Bone-caves  of  Provence  and  Mentone.

The  arctic  animals  are  also  absent  from  the  numerous
hone-caves  and  bone  breccias  of  Provence  and  Mentone.
The  pleistocene  fauna  of  Provence  consists,  according  to
M.  Marion,^  of  the  spotted  hyseua,  and  lion,  Elephas
antiquus  or  straight-tusked  elephant,  Rhinoceros  hemi-
tcechus,  wild-boar,  urus,  stag,  liorse,  and  rabbit.  The
breccias  in  the  island  of  Ratonueau  have  also  furnished
the  porcupine,  brown  bear,  and  tailless  hare.  Man  is
proved  to  have  been  living  in  the  district  at  the  time  by
the  discovery  of  perforated  and  cut  bones,  in  the  cave  of
Rians.

The  fissures  and  caves  of  Mentone,  explored  by  Mr.
Moggridge^  in  1871,  and  subsequently  by  M.  Rivik-e,
conta,ined  a  fauna  composed,  according  to  Prof.  Busk,  of
the  following  species : —


Marmot.

Brown  hear.

Field-vole.

Cave-hear.

Lion.

Il<ie.

Panther.

Stag.

Lynx.

I  hex.

Wildcat.

Urus.

Spotted  hyaena.

Horse.

Wolf.

Wild-hoar.

Fox.

Bhiiwcei'os  hemilcechus.

Along  with  these  were  large  quantities  of  charcoal
and  flint  flakes,  which  proved  that  man  had  inhabited
the  district  while  the  deposits  were  being  formed.

^  Prehistoric  Congrees,  Paris  volume,  p.  96.
2  "  Brit.  Ass.  Reports,''  F^inhurgh,  187L


374  STRATA  IS  CAVE  OF  C  A  VILLON  [chaf.

Mr.  Moggriclge  gives  the  following  account  of  the
results  of  his  exploration  : —  ^

"  The  caves  of  the  red  rocks,  half  a  mile  out  of  Men-
tone,  are  in  lofty  rocks  of  Jurassic  limestone  on  the  shore
of  the  Mediterranean,  and  at  an  average  height  of  100
feet  above  that  sea,  the  rocks  themselves  attaining  an
elevation  of  260  feet.  They  have  now  been  repeatedly
rifled  by  the  learned  or  the  curious ;  but  when  the
principal  cave  (Caviilon)  was  nearly  intact,  the  author
made  a  section  of  it  from  the  modem  or  highest  floor,
down  to  the  solid  rock.  There  were  five  floors  formed
in  the  earth  by  long-continued  trampling  ;  on  each,  and
near  the  centre,  were  marks  of  fire,  around  which  broken
bones  and  flints  were  abundant,  except  upon  the  lowest^
where  but  few  bones  occurred,  and  no  flints.  The  bones
were  those  of  animals  still  existing.  Few  implements
were  found,  but  many  chips  of  flint,  some  cores  and
stones  used  as  hammers.  Perhaps  this  cave  was  used  as
a  place  for  manufacturing  flints,  which  must  have  been
carried  from  their  native  bed,  distant  about  one  mile.

**  There  is  nothinc^.  to  evince  the  action  of  water  :  on
the  contrary,  the  jiunierous  stones  tliat  occur  are  all
angular  ....  Below  these  caves  a  slope  of  about  ISO
feet  descends  to  the  edge  of  the  sea.  Through  the  upper
part  of  this  slope,  at  distances  from  the  cave  of  from  0
to  ten  feet,  is  a  railway  cutting  600  feet  long,  fifty-four
feet  deep,  and  sixty  feet  above  the  sea.  The  mass  re-
moved in  making  this  cutting  was  composed  of  angular
stones  not  waterworn.  Loose  at  the  surface,  it  soon
became  a  more  or  less  mature  breccia,  for  the  most  part
HO  hard  that  it  was  blasted  with  gunpowder."  In  this
breccia,  and  at  various  depths,  some  of  more  than  thirty

'  ''Brit.  Assoc.  Rep."  1871.


x.-]  OF  DIFFERENT  AGES.  375

feet,  the  author  has  taken  out  teeth  of  the  bear  {Ursus
spelceiis)  and  of  the  hyaena  {Hycena  spelcea)  while  with
and  below  those  teeth  he  found  flints  worked  by  man.

The  subsequent  exploration  by  M.  Riviere  ^  has  re-
sulted in  no  important  addition  to  the  fauna :  the  famous
human  skeleton  having  been,  as  I  have  already  remarked
in  the  seventh  chapter,  interred  in  the  pleistocene  strata,
and  probably  not  palaeolithic.  It  may  possibly  be  of  the
era  of  the  upper  floors  described  by  Mr.  Moggridge,  in
which  all  the  remains  belong  to  living  species.*

This  cave-fauna  is  more  closely  related  to  that  of
southern  Europe  than  to  that  north  of  the  Alps  and
Pyrenees.  The  striped  hy»na  found  in  the  cave  of
Lunel-viel,  H^rault,  by  Marcel  de  Serrcs,  along  with
the  reindeer  and  other  animals,  probably  belongs  to  the
same  southern  group.

Bone-caves  of  Sicily.

Certain  members  of  the  African  fauna  are  also  proved
to  have  ranged  northwards  over  Europe  in  the  direction
of  Sicily,  by  the  discoveries  in  the  caves  of  that  island.
The  Sicilian  bone-caves  have  been  worked  for  the  sake

^  Decouverte  dune  Squelette  Uumaine  de  V^poque  Paleolithigttt  dans
Us  Cavemes  de  Baoussi-Bousse,  dites  Grottes  de  MerUoUy  1873;  also  Pre-
historic Congress,  Brussels  volume.  M.  Riviere  adds  the  Wapiti,  or
large  variety,  and  the  Cevvus  CorsicamiSy  or  small  variety  of  the  stag,
the  chamois,  and  the  wooUy  rhinoceros  (the  two  last  of  which  may  be
perhaps  identical  with  the  ibex  and  H.  IiemitoeckuSy  determined  by
Prof.  Busk,  as  neither  is  mentioned  by  M.  Riviere),  and  the  Capra
primigenia  of  Gervais,  a  large  goat  commonly  found  in  neolithic
caves.

2  The  depth  at  which  the  skeleton  was  found  is  a  matter  of  dispute^
the  estimates  varying  from  seven  feet  (Pengelly)  to  (C-55  m.)  21*49  feet
( Rivike).  PengeUy,  Cave  man  of  Mentone,  *'  Trans.  Devon  Ass."  187 \
pp.  10  and  13.


376  BONE-CAVES  OF  SICILY.  [chap.

of  the  bones  since  the  year  1829  ;  and  of  these  many
shiploads  were  sent  to  Marseilles  from  San  Ciro,  belong-
ing, according  to  M.  de  Christol,  principally  U^  the
hippopotamus.  In  1859/  Dr.  Falconer  examined  the
collections  made  from  this  cave,  as  well  as  those  which
remained  in  situ,  and  carried  on  further  researches  into
a  second  in  the  neighbourhood,  known  as  the  Grotto  di
Maccagnone,  and  in  the  following  year  two  others  were
discovered  and  explored  in  northern  Sicily  by  Baron
Anca.    The  species  were  as  follows  : —

IlomOy  man.  Sits  scro/a^  boar.

Ftiis  ieOf  lion.  EUphas  antiqans,

Hycena  crocuta^  spotted  hyaena.        Efephas  A/ricanus,  African  ele-

UrsHs  ferox,^  grizzly  bear.  phant.

Cam's.  Hippopotamus  major ,  hippo-

CervuSf  deer.  potamus.

Bos,  ox.  JIif)j)opotamus  Pentlandi,

Equus,  horse.  Lrpii^.

The  i)resen(.'e  of  man  was  iiulieated  l)y  charcoal  and
flijit  flakes.

The  African  elephant  was  ol)tained  from  three  caves  :
from  that  of  San  Teodoro,  by  Uaroii  Anca;  from  Crotta
Santa,  near  Syracuse,  l)y  the  Canon  Alessi ;  and  from  a
eiive  near  Palermo,  l)v  M.  Charles  Gaudiii.  It  is  obvious
that  the  presence  of  this  animal,  as  well  as  of  the  spotted
hyjena,  in  Sicily  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the  hypo-
th(^sis  that  a  l)ridgc  of  land  formerly  existed,  by  which
they  could  pass  from  their  head-quartei*s,  that  is  to  say
Africa.  On  the  other  hand  the  })resence  of  the  grizzly
hear,  and   of  the  Elephas  antiquus  imi)lies   that  they

»   ''  Paheont.   Mem."  ii.  p.  r)43.

-  It  is  of  the  .^mo  species  as  the  bear  from  Grays  Thurrock.


x"!  OF  MALTA.  377

passed  over  into  Sicily,  from  their  European  head-
quarters, before  the  existence  of  the  Straits  of  Measina.
fiince  both  animals  are  abundant  on  the  mainland  of
Europe.  The  larger  species  of  hippopotimus,  doubtfully
referred  by  Dr.  Falconer  to  the  //.  major  (  =  if.  amphi-


PtTttiandi  (}).     (SioUj. )


bins),  may  have  crossed  over  either  from  Italy,  where
its  remains  are  very  abundant  in  the  pleiocene  and
pleistocene  strata,  or  from  Africa.

A  small  species  of  hippopotamus,  H.  Pentlandi,  Fig.
127,  occurs  in  incredible  abundance  in  the  Sicilian  caves.
It  bears  the  same  relation,  in  point  of  size,  to  the  fossil
variety  of  the  African  hippopotamus,  as  the  living  H.
libcriensis  does  to  the  latter.

Bone-caves  of  Malta.

The  bone-caves  of  Malta  were  first  scientifically  ex-
plored by  Admiral  Spratt,  in  1858,  and  subsequently  by
Dr.  Leith  Adams,  and  others.  The  llaghlak  Cave  near
the  town  of  Creitdi,  contained  large  quantities  of  the
IJippopotdVius  PentUindl,  togetlier  with  the  gigantic
dormouse,  named  Myoxus  MeUtensis.  A  short  distance
off  a  second  cavern,  explored  by  Dr.  Leith  Adams,  con-
tained numerous  remains  of  at  least  two  species  of  pigmy


378  BASGE  OF  PIGMT  BIPFOPOTAXCS.  [chaf.

elephant  aboat  the  height  of  a  fonall  hoise.  Its  Btnall  size
may  be  gathered  firom  the  accompoiiTing  woodcnt  (Fig.
128)  of  the  last  lower  trae  molar,  taken  from  the  litho-


Fia.  128.— MoUr  of  f^cpAot  ITfltlcmnt.  Uklte  <i>.    (Falconer.)

graph  .  published  in  Dr.  Falconer's  "  Palfeontographical
Memoirs,"  voL  ii.  pL  xii.

Range  of  Pigmy  Hippopotamits.

The  pigmy  hippopotamus  haa  lived  also  in  other  dis-
tricts in  the  Mediterranean  region.  One  of  its  teeth,
now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  was  discovered
by  Dr.  Leitli  Adams,  in  Caiidia.  In  1872  I  identified
in  tlni  Oxfi'id  Museum  a  last  lower  true  molar,  which
cxti-iifls  the  range  of  this  species  to  the  mainland  of
Kuropc.  It  wa.s  olitained  by  Dr.  Rolieston  from  a
I'ircek  tomb  at  Megalopolis,  in  the  Peloponose,  and  was
j)robalily  derived  from  one  of  the  many  caves  in  the
limestone  of  that  district.  For  this  extinct  animal  to
have  spread  from  .Sicily  to  Malta,  from  Malta  to  Candia,
and  from  Ciindia  to  the  Peloponese,  or  vice  versA,  these
tlirci!  islands  must  liavc  been  united  to  the  Peloponese
anil  iiave  been  the  higher  grounds  of  land,  now  sub-
inerj^ed  lieiieatli  the  waves  of  the  Mediten-anean.

'I'iie  view  tlierefore,  advanced  by  Dr.  FalcoDer  and
Aduiind  Spratt,  that  Europe  was  eonnected  with  Africa


It.]  MJMMALS  OF  ALGERIA.  379

by  a  bridge  of  laud,  extendiug  northwards  from  Sicily,
is  fully  borne  out  by  an  examination  of  the  fossil
remains  both  of  that  island  aud  of  Malta  (see  Fig.  129)/


Fossil  Mammalia  in  Algeria.

If  the  African  mainland  extended  to  Europe  in  the
direction  of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and  of  Malta  and
Sicily,  so  as  to  afford  passage  for  the  African  mammalia
into  Europe,  it  would  equally  afibrd  passage  for  the
southern  advance  into  Africa  of  some  of  the  European
mammalia.  Evidence  of  this  we  meet  with  in  a  stratum
of  clay  at  Mansourah,  near  Constantine,  in  Algeria,
described  by  M.  Bayle  in  1854.^  The  animals  which  he
obtained,  consisting  of  the  ox,  antelope,  hippopotamus,
and  elephant,  have  been  described  by  Prof.  Grervais.
An  examination  of  his  figure  of  a  fragment  of  a  molar
tooth  leaves  no  room  for  doubt,  that  the  Elephas  meri-
dionalis  was  living  in  north  Africa  during  the  pleistocene
age ;  that  is  to  say  an  extinct  animal,  the  head-quarters
of  which  arc  to  be  found  in  Ital^,  ranged  as  far  south
as  northern  Africa.

Living  Sjyecies  common  to  Eurojye  and  Africa.

The  former  continuity  of  Africa  by  way  of  the  Iberian
peninsula  and  Sicily,  may  also  be  inferred  by  the
distribution  of  the  mammalia  at  the  present  time.
Prof.  Gervais  ^  observes  that  most  of  the  insectivora  are

^  Falconer,  "Palajont.  Mem."  vol.  ii.  p.  552.  Spratt,  "Quart
Geol.  Journ."  xxiii.  p.  203.

2  "  Bull.  Soc.  G^ol.  Fr.'*  2*  g6r.  t.  xi.  p.  340.

^  Gervais,  **  Animaux  Vert^bres  Vivants  et  Fossiles,"  4to.  p.  ^>^.


380       SPECIES  COMMON  TO  EUROPE  AND  AFRICA,    [chap.

the  same  in  Europe  and  north  Africa.  The  genette  and
ferret  {Factor ins  fitro),  the  Mangousta  Widdringtoni
(Gray),  and  tlic  fallow  deer,  are  common  to  Spain
and  Africa.  The  porcupine  of  Algeria  belongs  to  the
same  species  as  that  of  Italy  and  Sicily,  and  the  wild
boar  does  not  present  any  characters  of  importance  by
which  it  can  be  separated  from  that  of  Europe.  From
the  present  range,  therefore,  of  the  mammalia  the  same
conclusion  may  be  drawn  as  to  the  continuity  of  Africa
with  Europe  as  is  aflbrded  by  their  distribution  in  the
pleistocene  age.

Evidence  of  Soiuidings.

These  conclusions  derived  from  the  study  of  the
mammalia,  are  corroborated  and  supplemented  by  the
evidence  of  the  soundings.     As  we  enter  the  Straits  of

Gibraltar  (Fij^.  129)  the  Athiiitic  Ocean  shallows,  until
lM^t\v(.'(»n  TaiigicM's  and  Tarifii  it  is  not  more  than  from
270  to  :K)0  latlioins.  JJotwcon  Tarifa  and  Ceuta  the?
sea  nicasuros  I'rom  :]i){)  to  400  fathoms,  and  thence,  in
passing  eastwards,  suddenly  dee])eiis  to  the  extent  of
over  1,500  fathoms.  An  elevation  of  400  fathoms
would  be  quite  suflicient  to  raise  a  barrier  of  land
between  Morocco  and  Spain,  and  to  insulate  the  deep
Mediterranean  basin  from  the  Atlantic.  The  soundings
between  8ieilv  and  Tunis  are  2G0  fathoms  ;  between  the
former  })la(*e  and  Malta,  55  fathoms;  between  Malta
and  the  Afriran  mainhnid,  344  fathoms.  An  elevation
of  400  fathoms  would  suftiee  therefore  to  conne(*t  Africa
Avith  Sieilv,  and  to  insulate  the  eastern  from  the  western
Mediterranean  depths.  To  the  east  of  Sicily  the  sound-
ings  reveal  a  (h'pth  of  over  2,000  fathoms,  an<l  this  deep


EVIDEXVE  OF  SOVXDINOA  381


382  MEDITERRANEAN  SHORES  [chap.

basin  extends  as  far  to  the  east  as  Cyprus  and  Asia
Minor.  Between  Candia  and  the  Peloponese,  the  sea  is
4G0  fiithoms  deep.  An  elevation  therefore  from  400  to
500  fathoms  would  allow  of  the  passage  of  Hippopota'
inns  Fentlandi  from  Candia  to  the  Peloponese,  and
thence  by  southern  Italy  into  Sicily  and  Malta.  I  have
therefore  represented  in  the  map  what  would  be  the
necessary  result  of  the  elevation  of  the  bottom  of  the
Mediterranean  to  that  extent.  Two  great  barriers  of
land  would  unite  Africa  with  Spain  and  Italy,  and
enable  the  African  mammalia  to  find  their  way  into
the  reo-ions  north  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  The
sliallowness  of  the  sea  at  those  two  points  indicates  the
existence  of  the  sunken  barriers.  The  African  elephant
however  did  not  pass  far  northwards,  since  it  has  only
been  met  with  in  Spain  and  Sicily.

Such  a  change  in  level  as  this  would  convert  the
Adriatic  into  dry  land,  and  cause  the  islands  of  the
(JriM'iaii  Andiipelago  to  rise  high  above  the  surrounding
plains.  The  500-fathom  line  is  therefore  taken  to  re-
present the  probable  sea  margin  of  the  pleistocene  age,
although  in  centres  of  volcanic  activity,  such  as  Sicily
and  the  Archipelago,  local  changes  of  level,  even  of
greater  magnitude,  may  have  taken  place.

This  view  of  the  former  elevation  of  the  Mediterranean
area  to  a  lieiuht  of  from  two  to  three  thousand  feet  above
the  present  level  will  go  far  to  ex})lain  the  remarkable
traces  of  glaciers  discovered  in  Syria,  Anatolia,  and
Morocco.

'T/tc  Uhiciers  of  Lebanon,

Dr.  Hooker,  in  his  journey  to  Syria  in  1860,  discovered
that  the   cedars  of    Lebanon  grew    principally  on   one


X.]  IN  PLEISTOCENE  AGE.  383

spot,  on  old  moraines  which  traverse  the  head  of  the
Kedisha  valley.  This  valley  terminates  in  broad,  shal-
low, open  basins  at  a  height  of  about  6,000  feet  above
the  sea,  resembling  the  corries  of  the  Highlands ;  and
one  of  these,  in  which  the  cedars  grew,  was  divided
into  two  distinct  flats  by  a  transverse  range  of  ancient
moraines  from  80  to  100  feet  high  and  with  perfectly
defined  boundaries.  "  The  rills  from  the  surrounding
heights  collect  in  the  upper  flat,  and  form  one  stream,
which  winds  among  the  moraines  on  its  w^ay  down  to
the  lower  flat,  whence  it  is  precipitated  into  the  gorge  of
the  Kedisha.  The  cedars  grow  on  that  portion  of  the
moraine  which  immediately  borders  this  stream,  and
nowhere  else ;  they  form  one  group  about  400  yards
in  diameter,  with  an  outstanding  tree  or  two  not
far  from  the  rest,  and  appear  as  a  black  speck  in  the
great  area  of  the  corry  and  its  moraines,  which  contain
no  other  arborious  vegetation,  nor  any  shrubs,  but  a  few
berberry  and  rose  bushes  that  form  no  feature  in  the
landscape.''  ^

In  ancient  times,  therefore,  the  glaciers  descended  to  a
height  of  about  6,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  were  fed
by  the  perennial  snow-fields  of  the  crest  of  Lebanon.

The  Glaciers  of  Anatolia.

The  former  presence  of  glaciers  at  nearly  the  same
altitude  has  also  been  proved  by  the  travels  of  Mr.
Giffbrd  Palgrave  in  Anatolia,^  especially  in  the  valley
through  which  the  Chorok  flows,  and  in  the  mountainous
country   to   the   north-east,  between   Georgia   and   the

1  Hooker,  "  Nat.  Hist.  Eeview,"  II.  p.  12,  1861.
'  Nature,  vol.  v.  p.  444 ;  vol.  vi.  536.


384  GLAriEH.^  OF  ASATOLIA,  [chap.

Black  Sea.  The  river  Cborok  runs  about  120  miles  in
a  north-easterly  direction,  and  is  separated  from  the
Euxine  by  a  mountain  chain  reaching  a  height  of  11,000
feet,  thus  forming  a  long  strip  of  land,  which  is  e;tlled
LazLstan  after  its  inhabitants,  a  tribe  of  Lazes.  It  then
turns  sud<lenly  to  the  north,  where  it  falls  into  the  sea.
The  southern  side  is  determined  by  mountains  of  Creta-
ceous, Jurassic,  and  Plutonic  rocks,  which  form  the
watershed  between  the  tributaries  of  the  Black  Sea  and
Persian  Gulf.  Three  large  moraines  are  to  be  found  on
the  southern  side  of  the  valley,  their  lower  extremity
alx>ut  5,000,  their  upper  origin  nearly  8,000  feet  above
the  sea.  No  moraines  are  seen  where  the  chain  does
not  reach  an  altitude  of  7,000  feet,  though  angular
boulders  are  not  uncommon.  The  upper  mountain
contours  arc  invariably  rounded,  and  smoothed  off,  and
the  sides  are  scooped  too  widely  for  the  depressions  to
lijive  1)0(41  caused  l)v  water.  Low  down  in  the  valley
tli<'^  slopes  terminate  in  rifted  precipices.

That  these  moraines  were  posterior  to  the  volcanic
eru})tions  in  the  district,  is  evident  from  the  examination
of  a  broad  stone  ri<lge,  near  the  highest  point  to  the  east
of  Krzeroum,  where  at  a  height  of  7,000  feet  the  Jurassic
limestone  was  inteiTiH)te<l  by  a  volcanic  outbreak  of
several  miles  in  extent.  Traces  of  a  crater  were  visible.
Above,  th(i  granite  peaks  rose  to  a  height  of  9,000  feet ;
below,  a  wide  moraine  crossed  the  road,  composed  of
volcanic  fragments  mixed  with  granite.  Consequently,
it  must  have,  l)een  formed  after  the  volcano  had  become
extinct.  Similar  traces  are  to  be  found  at  Keskeem
IJoughaz.  Mr.  Palgrave  concludes  "that  the  ice-cap  of
the  north-eastern  Anatolian  watershed,  in  post-pleiocene
(pleistocene)  times,   must  have    reached  downwanls,  on


X.]  GLACIERS  OF  ANATOLIA,  385

the  nortlierii  side  of  the  range,  to  7,000  feet  above  the
present  sea-level,  while  some  of  the  glaciers  issuing  from
it  descended  to  about  4,500  of  the  same  measurement."
Striated  and  ice- worn  boulders,  especially  of  granite,
were  very  abundant.  This  region,  it  must  be  observed,
is  within  sight  of  the  lofty  granite  range  of  Tortoom,
which  is  "  streaked  with  perpetual  snow.'*

After  leaving  the  Chorok  valley  and  getting  on  to  the
watershed,  at  a  distance  of  fifty  miles  to  the  north-east,  Mr.
Palgrave  reached  the  main  ridge  or  backbone  of  the  land.
Here,  among  the  limestone  ledges,  about  6,400  feet  above
the  sea,  is  a  colossal  moraine,  formed  of  worn  granite
blocks,  partly  overgrown  with  forest,  and  descending  from
a  height  of  over  8,000  feet.  It  is  divided,  by  a  valley,
from  a  lofty  undulating  granite  plateau  that  is  scooped
out  here  and  there  into  deep  oval  lakes,  always  full  of
blue  water.  The  sides  of  the  plateau  are  strewn  with
boulders  of  granite,  brought  from  the  higher  peaks  about
five  miles  oS.  These  boulders  occur  in  greater  or  less
abundance  down  to  the  basin  of  the  Ardahan,  near  the
sources  of  the  Kur  or  Cyras,  which  joins  the  Araxes
before  flowing  into  the  Caspian.  The  height  of  this
Ardahan  basin  is  about  6,500  feet ;  it  is,  but  for  a  slight
easterly  slope,  a  water  level.  The  bottom  consists  of
deep  alluvial  soil  mixed  with  detritus  and  boulders ;  the
sides  are  rounded  and  smoothed,  and  bear  every  mark  of
long  ice-covering.  These  plateaux,  studded  with  lakes,
stretch  east  to  Kusso-Georgia,  till  their  greatest  height  is
gained  at  Kel  Dagh,  a  mountain  about  11,000  feet  high  :
thence  they  descend  to  the  plains  of  Georgia  and  the
Black  Sea.

No  glacial  marks  have  been  observed  on  the  sea-ward
side  of  the  range,  except  at  Hamshun  in  the  Lazistan

c  c


S'-G  GLACIERS  OF  THE  ATLAS.  [c«af.


roouEiUiiL'i,  "t^iv-^n  the  Rhrer  Biom  and  Tielazond.
lh:r^,  hi  C. !><.*«.*  f«t^t,  is  a  granite-strewn  plateau,  thinly
giv^n  witti  gras^,  sheltered  from  the  sea  br  lofty  peaks
on  the  nonh-west,  and  backed  to  the  south-east  by
trhmf:jAod^  ja?g^i  granite  clifis,  the  highest  12,500
feet  aVj\e  the  sea.  "The  plateau  itself  is  about  forty
mileis  in  length,  iiregalar  in  breadth,  its  sur&ce  rounded
and  jotted  over  with  Vxrolders.  But  just  as  my  track
led  near  under  the  base  of  Verehembek,  at  an  altitude
of  S,300  feet,  it  crossed  a  large  broad  moraine,"  descend-
ing from  the  higher  slopes,  and  having  its  base  in  a  broad
liare  valley  not  far  below,  which  showed  that  here,  at
the  highe.st  and  widest  part;  of  the  Lazistan  chain,
perpetual  ice  had  once  existed  in  sufficient  quantity  to
funjish  at  least  one  glacier.  From  this  case  it  seems
that  the  limited  ice-cap  of  the  Hamshun  highlands
extended  no  further  down  than  8,500  or  9,000  feet,  or
from  1,000  to  2,000  feet  lower  than  the  crlacial  coverino*
of  t]if:  inl.'iiirl  rang^-.

77/^'  O'lftriers  of  the  Alios  Mountains.

Similar  traces  of  glaciers  have  l)een  obser^'ed  in  the
Atlas  mountains  by  Mr.  George  Maw,^  in  his  travels
in  Morocco  with  Dr.  Hooker  and  Mr.  Ball  in  1871.
**  After  four  hours'  continued  ascent,"  he  writes  (p.  19),
"tlic  termination  of  the  glen  comes  into  full  view,  and
we  observe;  with  great  interest  that  it  is  closed  by  a
group  of  moraines,  proving  the  former  existence  of
glaci(;r.s  in  the  Atlas,  and  confirming  my  opinion  that
the  gn*at    boulder  beds  flanking  the  chain  are  also  of

'  "  A  Journey  to  Morocco,  and  the  Ascent  of  the  Great  AtlaB,"8vo.
Sliit<».r,  Troiihridgo,  Salop.


.]  GLACIERS  CAUSED  BY  ELEVATION.  387

jlacial  origin.  Two  villages,  probably  the  highest  in  the
Ulas,  are  built  on  the  principal  moraine;  Eitmasan,  at
ts  base,  at  a  height  of  6,000  feet,  and  Arroond,  near  its
nmrait,  at  a  height  of  6,800  feet ;  the  terminal  angle  of
he  larger  moraine  having  a  vertical  height  of  800  feet,
t  is  composed  of  immense  blocks  of  porphyry,  lying
t  a  steep  angle  of  repose,  up  which  it  takes  us  nearly
n  hour  to  climb.  The  existence  of  these  moraines  in
atitude  30^°  N.  (the  latitude  of  Alexandria)  is  perhaps
he  most  interesting  fact  we  noticed  during  our  journey,
or  this  is  the  most  southerly  point  at  which  the  evidence
►f  extinct  glaciers  has  been  observed,  and  tends  to  con-
irm  the  opinion  entertained  by  many  geologists,  that
he  refrigeration  during  the  glacial  period  was  almost
miversal."

Glaciers  probably  the  result  of  elevation  above

the  Sea.

The  elevation  of  the  African  moraines  above  the  sea,
f  about  6,000  feet  and  upwards,  is  nearly  the  same  as
hose  of  Asia  Minor.  If  the  mountains  of  the  Atlas,
iazistan,  and  Lebanon  shared  in  the  upward  movement
f  the  Mediterranean  area,  the  addition  of  3,000  feet  to
he  height  could  not  fail  to  leave  marks  behind  of  the
Dw  temperature  thereby  caused.  It  is  very  probable,
hat  during  the  time  the  Mediterranean  was  reduced  to
wo  land-locked  seas,  these  mountains  were  covered  with
now-field  s,  and  constituted  the  ice-sheds  of  glaciers.

From  the  range  of  the  mammalia  we  have  inferred  the
xistence  of  land  barriers,  extending  across  from  Africa
>  Spain  and  Italy,  and  from  Candia  to  Greece,  and  their
ctual  existence   beneath  the   sea  has  been  proved  by

c  c  2


388  PLEISTOCENE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  fcHAP.

soundins^s,  Avhicli  necessitate  an  elevation  of  from  400
to  500  fathoms  to  bring  them  above  the  sea-level.  We
have  al«o  seen  that  the  higher  mountains,  wliieh  most
probably  participated  in  this  upward  movement,  bear
traces  of  a  lower  temperature  in  the  moraines  of  the
Atlas  and  Lazistan.  The  hypothesis  of  such  an  elevation
during  the  pleistocene  age  may  therefore  be  taken  to  be
proved  so  far  as  it  explains  two  widely  different  classes  of
facts,  the  distribution  of  the  mammals  and  the  existence
of  glaciers  where  they  are  now  unknown.

The  physical  condition  of  the  Mediterranean  area,  in
the  pleistocene  age,  may  be  summed  up  as  follows.  The
mainhind  of  Africa  extended  northwards  to  join  Europe,
in  the  direction  of  Gibraltar  and  Italy.  The  islands  of
Malta  and  Sicily  were  hilly  plateaux,  overlooking  an
undulatory  plain.  Corsica  and  Sardinia  were  joined  to
Italy,  Majorca  and  Minorca  to  Spain,  Candia  to  Pelopo-
nese,  and  (y[)rus  to  Asia  jMinor.  The  area  now  occu})ied
by  the  Adriatic  Sea  constituted  the  lower  valley  of  the
Po,  iiiul  the  Archipelago  was  a  plain  studded  with
volcanic  cones;  and  at  the  same  time  glaciers  crowned  the
higher  nioiintains  of  northern  Africa  and  of  Asia  Minor.

The  8ul)stitution  of  land  for  a  stretch  of  sea,  in  the
^Mediterranean,  could  not  fail  to  cause  the  summer  heat
to  be  more  intense  in  the  region  to  the  north  than  at
tlie  present  time,  while  the  increased  elevation  would
produce  a  greater  severity  of  winter  cold,  as  Mr.  Godwin
Austen  has  pointed  out  in  the  case  of  the  hills  of
Devonshire.  AVhen,  indeed,  we  consider  that  the  pleis-
tocene land  surface  extended  from  the  snowy  heights
of  Atlas,  as  far  north  as  the  100-fathom  line  off  the
coast  of  Ireland,  we  might  expect  to  find  African  animals,
such  as  the  spotted  liyaena  and  Felis  coffer,  ranging  as


X.]  OF  THE  MEDITERRANEAN.  389

far  north  as  Yorkshire,  for  the  only  barrier  to  their
migration  would  be  that  offered  by  the  severity  of
a  pleistocene  winter.

Mediterranean  Coast-line  comparatively  modeim.

The  submergence  of  the  barriers,  and  the  constitution
of  the  Mediterranean  as  we  find  it  now,  have  probably
taken  place  but  a  short  time  ago,  fi*om  the  geological
point  of  view,  though  we  know  that  for  the  last
3,000  years  the  coast-line  has  been  on  the  whole
unchanged,  except  from  the  silting  out  of  the  sea  by  the
sediment  of  rivers,  such  as  the  Po,  and  the  elevation
and  depression  of  small  areas  by  volcanic  energy,  as  at
Santorin.  The  physical  character  of  the  shores  testifies
to  the  tioith  of  this  view.

**  On  entering  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,'*  Mr.  Maw
writes,  "  from  the  Atlantic,  a  notable  change  takes  place
in  the  aspect  of  the  coast.  Cape  St.  Vincent,  on  the
Atlantic  coast,  presents  a  bold  line  of  clitfs  to  the  sea,
and  bluff  cliffs  extend  many  miles  towards  the  Straits ;
but  as  soon  as  these  are  passed,  a  change  of  coast-form
takes  place,  which  must  be  noticeable  to  every  observer.
Cliffs  on  the  sea-board  become  the  exception,  and  the
general  line  of  the  coast  is  merely  a  shelving  under  the
sea  of  the  general  hill-and-vallcy  system  of  the  land,  the
sea  running  up  all  the  depressions,  and  the  land  elevations
spreading  out  into  the  sea  with  scarcely  any  abrupt
cliff-line  of  demarcation.  The  uneven  sea-bottom  of  the
Straits  seems  to  be  a  contiimation  of  the  contour  of  the
adjacent  land,  consisting  of  rolling  alternations  of  hill
and  valley,  which  must  have  received  its  conformation
by  subaerial  agencies."


390  CHANGES  OF  LEVEL  IN  THE  SAHARA  [chap.

"  Corsica,  and  the  adjacent  islands  of  Elba,  Capraja,
and  Monte  Christo,  are  also  remarkable  for  the  absence
of  cliffs,  and  are  wanting  in  those  abrupt  escarpements
separating  land  and  water  which  are  so  abundant  on  our
own  coasts.  Their  aspect  is  that  of  mountain-tops
rising  out  of  the  sea,  suggesting  to  the  eye  the  seaward
prolongation  of  their  subaerial  contour  of  sloping  hill-
sides and  river-cut  valleys,  as  though  the  sea  had  not
stood  sufficiently  long  at  its  present  level  to  excavate  an
escarpement.  The  deep  intersecting  bays  that  occur  along
the  coast  from  Marseilles  to  the  Riviera  suggest  the
same  conclusion,  the  undulating  land  surface  spreading
down  to  the  water's  edge,  and  the  deep  bays  running  up
tlie  intervening  valleys,  which  must  have  had  an  origin
common  with  that  of  their  landward  prolongations.**

It  is  impossible  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  full  force  of
this  reasoning.  The  present  aspect  of  the  Mediterranean
is,  geologically  speaking,  a  thing  of  yesterday.

Chamjes  of  Level  in  the  Sahara  coincident  tcith  those

in  the  Mediterranean.

But  if  the  ilecliterrauean  area  Las  been  depressed  to  an
amount  of  from  2,000  to  3,000  feet  since  the  pleistocene
ago,  we  have  proof  that  the  region  to  the  south  has  been
elevated  to  that  extent  in  com^^aratively  modern  times.
i\Ir.  Maw/  in  liis  journey  in  1873  to  the  Northern
Saliara.,  ol)served  raised  beaclies  at  a  height  of  2,000  feet,
and  loam  and  sbin^le-beds  as  liiorh  as  2,700  feet.  He
therefore  coneludes  that  the  part  of  the  Sahara  which  he
ex[)lored  liad  been  raised  at  least  3,000  feet  above  the
sea.     Tliese  clianges  of  level,  the  same  in  amount,  but

^  "  Geological  Notes  on  a  Journey  from  Algiers  to  Morocco."  Geol.
Soc.  Feb.  2o,  1874.


X.]  ^^D  IN  THE  MEDITERRANEAN.  391

in  opposite  directions,  were  probably  compensatory  and
simultaneous.  Northern  Africa  may  have  been  cut  oflf
from  the  central  and  southern  portions  of  the  continent
by  the  sea  extending  over  the  Sahara,  during  the  time
that  the  Mediterranean  was  represented  by  the  two  in-
land salt  lakes  figured  in  the  accompanying  map  (Fig.
129).  And  while  the  region  of  the  Sahara  was  being
elevated,  that  of  the  Mediterranean  was  probably  being
depressed.

These  changes  in  the  relation  of  sea  to  land,  and  the
greater  elevation  of  the  mountains  in  the  neighbouring
countries,  must  have  affected  not  merely  the  climate  of
southern,  but  also  of  north-western  Europe,  and  ought
not  to  be  left  out  of  account  in  any  theory  relating  to
pleistocene  climate.


392        EVIDENCE  OF  MAMMALS  AS  TO  CLIMATE.       [chap.


CHAPTER  XI.


THE    EUROPEAN   CLIMATE   IN   THE   PLEISTOCENE   AGE.

The  evidence  of  the  Mammalia  as  to  Climate. — ^The  Southern  Group.
— The  Northern  Group. — Probable  cause  of  Assoeiation  of  Northern
and  Southern  Groups. — The  Temperate  Group. — Species  common
to  Cold  and  Tropical  Climates. — Extinct  Species. — Two  Periods
of  Glaciation  in. Britain. — Three  Climatal  Changes  represented  on
the  Continent. — Europe  invaded  by  Pleistocene  Mammals  before
the  Glacial  Period. — Mammals  lived  in  Britain  during  the
Second  Ico  or  Glacial  Stage. — The  Glacial  Period  does  not
separate  one  Life-era  from  another. — Relation  of  Palaeolithic
!Man  to  Glacial  Period. — Age  of  Contents  of  Caves  in  Glaciated
Districts.


Tlie  Evidence  of  the  Mammalia  as  to  Climate.

In  tlic  last  three  chapters  we  have  seen  that  the
cave-mammalia  throw  great  light  on  the  pleistocene
geography  of  Europe,  and  that  there  is  reason  for  the
belief  that  the  land  surface  then  extended  northwards
and  westwards,  so  as  to  include  Ireland  ;  and  southwards
to  join  Africa,  in  the  direction  of  Sicily,  Malta,  and
Cibraltar.  We  must  now  pass  on  to  the  consideration
of  the  climate  on  this  great  continental  area,  which
would  allow  of  so  large  and  varied  a  fauna  existing  in
our  quarter  of  the  world.


XI.]  SOUTHERN  ANIMALS.  393

The  Southern  Growp  of  Animals,

The  pleistocene  fauna  is  remarkable  for  the  mixture
of  species.  It  consists  of  forms  now  banished  to  South
Africa,  Northern  Asia,  and  America,  or  to  the  severe
climate  of  higli  mountains,  mingled  with  those  which
lived  in  Europe  in  the  historic  age,  and  those  which  have
wholly  disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  We  will
take  the  living  species  first.

The  southern  group  consists  of  the  following  ani-
mals : —

Lion.  Serval.

CafBr  Cat.  Hippopotamus.

Spotted  Ifyajna.  African  Elephant.

Striped  Hyaena.  Porcupine.

At  the  present  day  the  lion  ranges  over  the  whole  of
Africa,  with  the  exception  of  Egypt  and  the  Cape
Colony,  whence  it  has  been  driven  out  by  the  hand  of
man.  In  Asia,  the  maneless  variety  inhabits  the  valley
of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  and  the  districts  bordering
on  the  Persian  Gulf;  and  in  India,  according  to  Mr.
Blyth,  the  province  of  Kattywar  in  Guzerat.  Although
now  only  found  in  these  hot  regions,  it  is  proved,
by  the  concurrent  testimony  of  Herodotus,  Aristotle,
Xenophon,  iElian,  and  Pausanias,  to  have  inhabited  the
mountains  of  Thrace,  and  of  Asia  Minor,  and  it  probably
became  extinct  in  Europe  before  the  end  of  the  first
century  after  Christ.^  We  may  therefore  infer  that  it
possessed  a  sufficient  elasticity  of  constitution  to  endure

^  See  **  British  Pleistocene  Mammalia,"  Palseont.  Sec.  FdU  spelasa^
c.  xviii.


394  CAFFIR  CAT  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  [chaf.

a  considerable  degree  of  cold,  although  its  present  dis-
tribution implies  that  it  is  better  fitted  to  thrive  in  a
tropical  than  in  a  cold  climate.  The  Caffir  cat  {Felis
coffer  of  Desmarest)  is  an  African  species,  which  has
been  discovered  by  Mr.  Ayshford  Sanford  and  myself,
in  Somersetshire ;  it  also  occurs  in  the  caves  of  Ger-
many, France,  and  Gibraltar.  The  spotted  hysena  now
lives  only  in  South  Africa,  while  the  striped  species
ranges  through  Africa  and  the  warmer  regions  of  Asia.
It  was  extremely  rare  in  Europe  in  the  pleistocene  age,
and  has  not  been  identified  in  any  deposit  further  north
than  Lunelviel,  in  southern  France.  The  hippopotamus,
now  found  only  in  middle  and  southern  Africa,  is  proved
by  its  fossil  remains  to  have  formerly  dwelt  in  the  region
of  the  Lower  Nile,  as  well  as  in  Algeria.  The  serval  and
African  elephant  have  been  found  in  the  Iberian  penin-
sula, and  the  latter  in  Sicily.

The  evidence  afforded  by  the  animals,  as  to  the  pleisto-
cene climate  of  those  portions  of  Europe  which  they
inhabited,  differs  considerably  in  point  of  value,  but  on
the  whole  indicates  that  it  was  temperate,  or  com-
parativ^ely  hot ;  for  although  the  elasticity  of  constitution
which  we  know  to  have  been  j)osscssed  by  the  lion,  was
probably  shared  by  the  spotted  hyaena,  it  is  very
unlikely  that  so  aquatic  an  animal  as  the  hippopotamus
could  have  ranged  from  southern  Europe,  as  far  north  as
Yorkshire,  under  any  other  than  temperate  conditions.
It  could  not  have  endured  a  winter  sufficiently  severe
to  cover  the  rivers  with  a  thick  coating  of  ice,  without
having  its  present  habits  profoundly  modified ;  and
such  an  alteration  of  habits  would  certainly  leave  its
mark,  in  other  modifications  in  the  fossil  skeleton  than
those  minute  differences  which  have  been  observed,  when


XI.]  THE  NOIiTIIERN  ANIMALS.  395

it  is  compared  with  that  of  the  living  HippopotanvM
amphibius.  Tlie  porcupine  of  southern  Europe  has  been
found  as  far  north  as  the  caves  of  Belgium  (Schmerling).

The  Northern  Group.

The  northern  group  consists  of  those  animals  which

are  now  only  to  be  met  with  in  tlie  colder  regions  of  the

northern  hemisphere,  either  in  low  latitudes  or  at  great

altitudes.

Marmot.  Arctic  Fox.

Pouched  Marmot.  Musk-sheep.

Lemming.  Keindeer.

Alpine  Hare.  Ibex.

Tailless  Hare.  Chamois.
Glutton.

To  this  list  the  palaeolithic  man  of  the  caves  must  be
added,  since  he  is  probably  related  by  blood  to  the
Eskimos,  and  appeared  in  Europe  simultaneously  with
the  arctic  group  of  animals.

The  testimony  of  these  animals  as  to  climate  is  directly
opposed  to  that  of  the  preceding  group,  since  they
now  only  flourish  in  the  arctic  regions,  or  in  moun-
tainous districts  in  which  the  climate  is  severe.  The
marmot,  in  the  pleistocene  age,  lived  in  Belgium,  and
descended  from  the  Alpine  heights  as  far  as  the  shores  of
the  Mediterranean,  where  it  has  been  met  with  in  the
caverns  near  Nice.  The  pouched  marmot,  Spe^^yiophilus
citillus  of  the  Don  and  Volga,  penetrated  as  far  to  the
west  as  Somersetshire.  The  Alpine  hare,  now  found
only  in  the  colder  climates  of  northern  Europe,  Asia,  and
America  (with  the  solitary  exception  of  Ireland),  ranged
as  far  down  the  valley  of  the  Rhine  as  Schussenreid,  in
Suabia.     The  two  carnivores  now  dwelling  in  the  colder


396  REINDEER  AND  MUSK-SHEEP.  [chap.

regions  of  the  north,  the  glutton  or  wolverine,  and  the
arctic  fox,  have  been  discovered,  the  one  as  far  south  as
France,  the  other  as  far  as  Schussenreid,  and  both
probably  occupied  the  whole  of  Germany,  and  of  noithem
Russia,  in  the  pleistocene  age.

The  musk-sheep,^  the  most  arctic  in  its  habit  of  all
the  herbivores,  is,  at  the  present  time,  restricted  to  the
high  latitudes  of  North  America,  where  it  thrives  in  the
desolate,  treeless,  baixen  grounds,  not  even  being  driven
from  its  haunts  by  the  extreme  severity  of  the  winter.
It  has  been  traced,  by  its  fossil  remains,  from  its  present
abode,  across  Behring's  Straits,  and  through  the  vast
Sil^erian  steppes,  into  Russia  in  Europe,  Germany,
Britain,  and  as  far  south  and  west  as  the  barrier  offered
by  the  Pyrenees.  Throughout  this  large  area  its  remains
occur  in  association  with  the  reindeer,  and  both  these
animals,  as  1  have  remarked  above,  were  hunted  by  the
2)alieolithic  dwellers  in  the  caves  of  Aquitaine,  just  as
they  ai'e  now  hunted  by  the  Eskimos  on  the  shores  of  the
Arctic  Oceau.

If  the  i^resent  habits  of  these  animals  be  any  index
to  their  mode  of  life  in  the  pleistocene  age,  their  pre-
sence in  the  area  north  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees  implies
that  the  climate  in  France,  Germany,  and  Britain  was
severe,  or  analogous  to  that  which  they  now  enjoy  on
the  tops  of  lofty  mountains,  or  in  the  northern  Asiatic
steppes,  or  the  high  northern  latitudes  of  America.  But
this  conclusion  is  diametrically  opposed  to  that  which
is  based  on  the  evidence  of  the  southern  gi'oup  of  animals.^

^  "Ovihos  mosrhitus,'^  Palceont.  Soc.  1872,  p.  27,  et  $eq.

^  This  is  treated  at  greater  length  in  my  **  Essay  on  Classification,"
Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  Nov.  1872,  and  in  the  "  Introduction  to  British
Pleistocene  ^laminalia,"  Palseont.  Soc.


XI.]  ASSOCIATION  OF  GROUPS.  397

And  the  remains  of  the  two  groups  of  animals  are  so
associated  together  in  the  caves,  and  river-deposits  of
Europe,  north  of  the  Pyrenees,  that  it  is  impossible  to
deny  the  fact  that  it  was  the  common  feeding-ground
of  both  during  the  same  era.^

Probable  Cause  of  Association  of  Northern  and

Southern  Groups.

Must  we  then  infer  that  in  the  pleistocene  age  the
present  habits  of  the  musk-sheep,  the  reindeer,  chamois,
or  ibex,  were  so  changed  as  to  allow  them  to  flourish
side  by  side  with  the  hippopotamus,  or  vice  versd  ?  Was
the  climate  colder  than  it  is  now  in  Europe,  or  was  it
hotter  ?  How  was  this  singular  association  of  northern
and  southern  species  brought  about  ?  The  problem  may
be  solved  if  we  refer  to  the  present  distribution  of  ani-
mals in  northern  Asia  and  North  America.  As  the
winter  comes  on  the  arctic  species  gradually  retreat
southwards,  and  occupy  the  summer  feeding-grounds  of
the  elk,  red-deer,  and  other  creatures  which  are  unable
to  endure  the  extreme  severity  of  an  arctic  winter.  In
the  spring  the  latter  pass  northwards,  to  enjoy  the
summer  herbage  of  that  area,  which  had  been  the  win-
ter-quarters of  the  arctic  group  of  animals.     Thus  there

^  Mr.  James  Geikie's  view  ("The  Great  Ice-Age,"  8yo.  1874)
that  the  mixture  of  the  northern  and  southern  forms  is  due  to  the
destruction  of  ossiferous  strata  by  streams,  which  subsequently  depo-
sited remains  of  widely  different  ages  together,  is  rendered  untenable
by  the  fact  that  they  are  generally  preserved  in  the  same  mineral  state.
It  would  have  been  impossible  for  this  to  have  taken  place  without
leaving  decided  traces  behind  in  the  rolled  and  water-worn  condition
of  the  older  series,  such  as  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  the  eocene  and
meiocene  fossils  in  the  Eed  Crag  of  Suffolk.


398         PLEISTOCENE  CLIMATE  AND  GEOGRAPHY,     [cbap.

is  a  continued  swinging  to  and  fro,  over  the  same  region,
of  the  arctic  and  the  temperate  animals,  and  their  remains
must  necessarily  become  more  or  less  associated  in  the
river-deposits,  as  well  as  in  caves,  where  these  last  happen
to  occur.  In  northern  Asia,  and  in  America,  the  only
boundary  between  the  northern  and  temperate  zoological
provinces  is  that  constituted  by  the  fluctuating  annual
temperature,  and  there  are  no  great  hilly  barriers
running  east  and  west,  to  prevent  free  migration  to  the
north  or  south.  If  reference  be  made  to  the  map,  Fig.
126,  it  will  be  seen  that  these  conditions  were  amply
satisfied  in  the  pleistocene  age.  There  were  no  physical
barriers  to  migration,  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterra-
nean, as  far  north  as  Ireland.  If  the  winter  cold  were
severe,  the  reindeer  and  musk-sheep  might  advance  as
far  south  as  the  Pyrenees,  and  if  the  summer  heat  were
intense  there  would  be  nothing  to  forbid  the  hippopo-
tamus and  the  African  carnivores  advancing  northwards.
It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  the  only  hypothesis  which
will  satisfy  all  the  facts  of  the  case.  The  traces  of
glaciers  and  snow-fields  where  they  are  no  longer  found
prove  that  the  winter  was  severe  ;  while  the  wanntli  of
the  summer  seems  to  be  sufficiently  demonstrated  by
the  presence  of  African  species.  Such  extremes  of  tem-
perature are  presented,  more  or  less,  by  all  continents
extending  from  high  to  low  latitudes.  They  are  modified
in  Europe  at  the  present  time  by  the  warm  current  of
the  Gulf  Stream,  by  the  large  area  now  occupied  by  the
Mediterranean  Sea,  and  by  the  submergence  of  the  pleis-
tocene lowlands  on  the  Atlantic  border.


xi.^  TEMPERATE  ANIMALS.  3i)9

The  Temperate  Group.

The  third  group  of  pleistocene  mammalia  consists  of
those  still  living  in  the  temperate  zones  of  Europe,  Asia,
and  America  :


Beaver.

Wolf.

Hare.

Fox.

Eabbit.

Hor8e.

Wild  Cat.

Uru8.

Martin.

Bison.

Stoat.

Antelope  saiga.

Weasel.

Wild  Boar.

Otter.

Stag.

Brown  Bear.

lioe.

Grizzly  Bear.

The  range  of  many  of  these  animals  has  been  pro-
foundly modified  since  the  pleistocene  age.  The  Ante-
lope saiga  of  the  Don  and  Volga  lived  as  far  to  the
west  as  Aquitaine.  The  grizzly  bear,  instead  of  being
restricted  to  its  American  habitat  in  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains, ranged  over  the  whole  of  Siberia  into  Europe,  as
far  to  the  south  as  the  Mediterranean,  and  westwards  as
far  as  Gibraltar.

The  urus  ^  still  lives  in  the  larger  domestic  cattle,  and
the  bison  is  represented  in  Europe  by  those  which  are
protected  by  the  forest  laws  of  Lithuania,  and  in  North
America  by  the  vast  herds  which  are  rapidly  being
exterminated,  like  the  red  Indian,  by  the  rifles  of  the
settlers.  The  horse  was  as  abundant,  and  as  widely
spread  over  Europe,  as  the  urus  and  the  bison  ;  accord-
ing to  Prof.  Brandt  it  now  no  longer  lives  in  Siberia
in  a  wild  state.

'  "Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  xxii.  391.


400  ANIMALS  COMMON  TO  [chap.

Species  common  to  Cold  and  Tropical  Climates.

The  panther  or  leopard,  which  has  been  found  alike
in  Britain,  France,  and  Germany,  has  at  the  present
day  a  most  extended  range  through  Africa,  from  Barbary
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  throughout  Persia  into
Siberia.  In  this  latter  country  Dr.  Gothelf  Fischer
describes  it  as  living  in  the  same  districts  in  the  Altai
]\Iountains,  and  in  Soongaria,  as  the  tiger.  The  fox
and  wolf  are  like  instances  of  carnivores  being  able  to
endure  great  variations  in  temperature  without  being
specifically  modified.  These  three  animals,  therefore,
tell  us  nothing  as  to  the  pleistocene  climate.

•

Extinct  Species.

Tlie  extinct  i^leistocone  species  may  also  be  divided
into  tlie  same  classes  as  the  living,  by  an  appeal  to  their
geoG^rajJiical  distrilnilion.  Two  out  of  the  three  species
of  rliinoceros  found  in  the  caves  {li,  meijarhinus  and  R.
heinifacJius),  and  an  elephant  with  slightly  curved  tusks
{E.  (nitiquu,s),  had  their  head-quarters  south  of  the  Alps
and  Pyrenees,  whence  they  wandered  northward  as  (av
as  the  latitude  of  Yorkshire.  The  pigmy  elephant  and
the  dwarf  hippopotamus  are  i)eculiar  to  the  south,  and
the  ]\rachairodus  lafidevs^  or  large  sabre-toothed  felis,
is  a  survi\al,  from  the  pleiocene  age,  of  a  peculiarly
southern  tyi^e.

The  woolly  rliinoceros,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be
viewed  as  a  northern  form,  since  it  is  met  with  in  vast
abundance  in  the  arctic  regions  of  Siberia,  as  well  as  in
Europe,  and  has  not  been  found  south  of  the  Alps  an<l


-...J  COLD  AND  HOT  CLIMATES,  401

Pyrenees.  The  cave-bear  has  not  been  discovered  either
in  the  extreme  north  or  in  the  south  of  Europe,  and
may  therefore  be  considered  of  temperate  range  ;  and  the
Irish  elk,  identified  by  Prof.  Brandt,  from  the  caves  of
the  Altai  Mountains,  had  a  similar  range  in  middle
Europe.  The  mammoth,  endowed  with  an  elastic  con-
stitution, was  able  to  endure  the  severity  of  an  arctic
climate  in  Siberia  and  North  America,  and  tlie  tem-
perature of  the  latitude  of  Rome  and  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,'  and  consequently  tells  us  as  little  of  the  pleis-
tocene climate  as  the  panther,  fox,  or  wolf.

The  evidence,  therefore,  as  to  climate,  offered  by  the
extinct  animals  in  the  caves  is  of  the  same  nature  as
that  of  the  living.  There  is  the  same  mixture  of  northern
and  southern  forms,  which  can  only  be  accounted  for
satisfactorily  by  seasonal  migrations,  according  to  the
summer  heat  and  winter  cold,  such  as  those  which  are
now  observed  to  take  place  in  Siberia  and  North  America.

Before  we  consider  the  relation  of  the  pleistocene
animals  buried  in  the  caves  and  river  deposits  to  the
glacial  period,  it  is  necessary  to  define  what  is  meant  by
the  term  glacial.

Two  Periods  of  Glaciation  in  Britain,

At  the  close  of  the  pleistocene  period  the  climate
gradually  became  colder,  until  ultimately  it  was  arctic  in
severity  in  northern  Europe.  The  researches  of  many
eminent  observers  prove  that  an  enormous  sheet  of  ice,
like  that  under  which  Greenland  now  lies  buried,  ex-
tended over  North  Britain,  Wales,  and  Ireland,  leaving

*  See  Falconer,  **  Palacont.  Mem.'*

D    D


1


402  TWO  ICL  AflKS  h\  UlilTAJX  [t

its  mark  in  the  fer-tsraTeUed  blocks  of  stone,  the  miMatnes,
and  the  grooves  which  pass  over  1^  sorfitce  ixTeepeetive
of  the  minor  contours.  The  land  then,  ttiost  piobaUj.
as  Fro£  Ramaay^  and  Sir  Charles  Ly^  believe,  stood
higher  than  it  does  now.  To  this  sacceeded  a  period  ai
depreamoti,  during  which  the  monntuns  of  Wales  wen
submerged  to  a  height  of  at  least  1,300  feet ;  and  1^
waves  of  the  sea  washed  oat  of  the  pre-existing  glacial
detritoB  the  shingle  and  sand,  termed  the  "  middle  drift,"
which  occurs  also  in  Scotland  and  Ireland.^  Then  the
land  was  re-elevated  above  the  waves,  and  a  second
period  of  glaciers  set  in,  traces  of  which  occur  abondautJy
in  Wales,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  the  white  areas  in
Fig.  126.  They  were,  however,  of  far  less  extent  thui
those  which  preceded  them,  occupying  isolated  areas
instead  of  forming  one  continnons  icy  covering  to  the
country.  The  glacial  phenomena  may  be  briefly  summed
up  aa  follows:  1.  As  the  pleiocene  temperature  was
lowered,  the  glaciers  crept  down  from  the  tops  of  the
mountains,  until  at  last  they  united  to  form  one  con-
tinuous ice  sheet,  moving  resistlessly  over  the  smaller
hills  and  valleys  to  the  lower  grounds,  and  the  first
ice  or  glacial  period  set  in.  2.  Then  followed  the  era
of  depression  beneath  the  sea.  3.  And,  lastly,  on  the
land  re-emerging  from  the  sea  the  second  ice  or  glacial
period  began.  The  climate  during  the  marine  depression
must  obviously  have  been  milder  than  that  of  either  of
the  glacial  periods,  because  of  the  moderating  effect  of
the  wide  extent  of  sea.

'  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  kind  assistance  of  Profeasors  Hull
and  HarkneEs,  Mr.  KinahaTi,  and  the  Rev.  H.  Itt.  Close,  in  correlating
the  Irish  with  the  English  glacial  deposits.  The  reader  will  find  the
glociat  period  most  ably  treated  in  Lyeil'a  "  Antiquity  of  Man."


XI.]  AND  ON  THE  CONTINENT.  40;}

The  exact  relation  of  the  boulder  clays  Avith  marine
shells,  in  the  centre  and  south  of  Britain,  to  the  detritus
left  behind  by  the  ice-sheet  in  the  north,  has  not  as  yet
been  satisfactorily  ascertained.  It  is  very  probable  that
the  elevation  of  land  in  the  north  was  simultaneous  with
a  southern  depression,  which  allowed  of  icebergs  deposit-
ing their  burdens  in  the  eastern  counties,  in  the  valley
of  the  Thames,  and  as  far  south  as  Selsea,  on  the  coast
of  Sussex.

Three  Clunatal  Clianges  represented  on  the  Continent.

These  changes  of  climate  have  also  been  observed
on  the  continent  of  Europe.  The  Swiss  geologists
have  shown  that  the  Alpine  glaciers  extended  farther
than  they  do  at  the  present  time,  and  that  they  pre-
sent two  stages  of  extension,  the  first  of  which  is  of
greater  magnitude  than  the  second.  The  Alpine  blocks
and  moraines  have  been  traced  far  down  into  the  plains
of  Lombardy,  northwards  into  the  valley  of  the  Rhine,
and  in  France  as  far  south  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhone  as
Valence.  The  admirable  essay  and  map  brought  by
MM.  Falsan  and  Chantre,  before  the  meeting  of  the
French  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  at
Lyons,  in  1873,  show  that  there  were  two  periods  of
glaciation  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhone,  the  one  being  due
to  the  movement  of  an  ice-sheet  irrespective  of  the  lower
hills,  the  other  l)eing  merely  the  work  of  the  glaciers
localized  in  the  valleys.  These  in  all  probability  corre-
spond in  point  of  time  with  the  like  stages  of  the  com-
plicated glacial  phenomena  in  Britain.  At  this  time  the
glaciers  of  the  Pyrenees,  now  so  small,  extended  at
least  from  thirty  to  forty  miles  from  their  present  posi-

D  D  2


PLEISTOCENE  MAMMALIA


1


tion  down  into  the  plains,  leaving  IieUind  most  astound-
ing evidences  of  tbtir  presence  in  the  valley  of  the  ,
Qaronne  and  elsewhere.  On  the  Spanish  frontier,  for '4
example,  one  of  the  precIpitoOB  ndes  of  the  valley,  ne«
the  Pont  du  'Bay,  is  so  smoothed  and  polished  Uiat  it  k
baie  of  vegetation  except  in  the  deep  grooves,  wkich  oikt
a  precaiioas  sapport  to  the  roots  of  ferns  and  <tf  dwaif
beeches.  The  hills  of  Daaphiny  also  and  Anveifpie  wen
crowned  with  glaciers,  and  those  oil  tlie  lat^  have
been  shown  by  MM.  Falsan  and  Chaniie  to  have  been
contonninous  with  those  of  the  Alps.

The  inte^lacial  period  of  marine  de^oeesioii  in  &itain
is  represented  in  Switzerland  by  the  lignite  beds  d
Dtirnten,  Utznach,  and  Pfoffikoa,  the  last  td  whicli  rests
upon  and  is  covered  by  the  boulder  drift.  The  fosril
remains  from  DUmten,  identified  by  Dr.  Falcone  and
Fruf.  Riltimeyer,  prove  that  two  southern  animals,  EU-
phasantiquus  ajid  Rhinoceros  megarhinus,  inhabited  the
district  in  the  interval  between  the  retreat  of  one  set  of
glaciers  and  the  advance  of  another.  They  probably
migrated  from  the  plains  of  Lombardy,  where  they
abounded  in  the  pleistocene  age.

Europe  invaded  by  Pleistocene  Mammals  before  the
Glacial  Period.

What  is  the  precise  relation  of  the  pleistocene  mam-
mals to  these  two  periods  of  cold  ?  Did  they  invade
northern  and  central  Europe  during  the  first  or  the
second,  before  or  after,  the  marine  submergence  indicated
by  the  "middle  drift?"  Wc  might  expect,  d  priori,
that  as  the  temperature  became  lowered,  the  northern
mammalia  would  gradually  invade  the  region  occupied


XI.]  PBEGLACIAL  IN  EUROPE.  405

before  by  the  pleiocene  forms,  and  that  the  reindeer,
the  mammoth,  and  woolly  rhinoceros  would  gradually
supplant  the  southern  Rhinocei*os  Etiniscus  and  Ehphas
meridioncdis.  Traces  of  such  an  occupation  would
necessiirily  be  very  rare,  since  they  would  be  exposed
to  the  grinding  action  both  of  the  advancing  glacial
sheet,  and  subsequently  to  that  of  the  waves  on  the
littoral  zone  during  the  depression  and  re-elevation
of  the  land.  At  the  time  also  that  the  greater  part
of  Great  Britain  was  buried  under  an  ice-sheet,  it  could
not  have  been  occupied  by  animals,  although  they  may
have  been,  and  most  probably  were,  living  in  the  districts
farther  to  the  south,  which  were  not  covered  by  ice.  The
lalx)urs,  however,  of  Dr.  Bryce,  Prof.  Archibald  Geikie,
and  others  prove  that  one  at  least  of  the  characteristic
pleistocene  mammalia — the  mammoth — lived  in  Scot-
land along  with  the  reindeer  before  the  deposit  of  the
lower  boulder-clay ;  while  Mr.  Jamieson  has  pointed
out  that  it  could  not  have  occupied  that  area  at  the
same  time  as  the  ice,  and  therefore  must  be  referred  to
a  still  earlier  date.'  The  teeth  and  bones  discovered  in
the  ancient  land  surface  at  Selsca,  under  the  boulder  drift,
also  very  probably  indicate  that  the  mammoth  lived  in
Sussex  before  the  glacial  submergence,  although  they
were  never  admitted  by  Dr.  Falconer  to  be  of  the  same
age  as  the  remains  of  Eleplms  antiquus  from  the  same
preglacial  horizon.  The  animal  also  occurs  in  the  prc-
glacial  forest-bed  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk.  On  a  careful
examination  of  the  whole  evidence,  I  am  compelled  to
believe,  with  Mr.  Godwin-Austen  and  Prof.  Phillips,
that  the  d  priori  belief  that  the  pleistocene  mammalia
occupied  Great  Britain  before  tlie  period  of  the  ice-sheet

1  *' Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  xxi.  161.


4U(i  fLKisruCEKE  MAMMALIA  rii.STdl.ACIAL       |cii*r.«

I
jiiid  submergence  is  fully  lM)nie  nut.  by  the  few  incoo-i
testiible  proofs  that  have  bi-ou  lirouglit  forward  of  the
rumaius  being  found  in  prcglacial  deposits.  Aud  tb».
sftinty  evidence  on  the  point  i»  just  what  might  ba
expected  from  the  rare  accidents  under  which  the  bonea
in  superficial  deposits  eould  have  withatood  the  grind*
ing  of  the  ice-sheet,  and  the  subsequent  erosive  action
of  the  waves  on  the  coastr-line.  It  may  therefore  be
concluded,  that  the  pleistocene  mammalia  amved  in
Europe  before  the  temperature  had  reached  its  minimum-
in  the  glacial  period. '  Ou  the  other  hand,  the  occurrencft
of  mammnliferous  river  strata,  either  in  hollows  of  the
boiikler-clay  as  at  Hoxue,  or  in  valleys  excavated  after
its  deposition  as  at  Bedford,  prove  that  the  characteristic
animals  occupied  Britain  after  the  retreat  of  the  ice-
sheet,  and  after  the  re-emergence  of  the  land  from
beneatli  the  glacial  sea.

Mammalia  lived  in  Britain  durinfj  the  Second  Ice  or
Gk(cial  Period.

The  distribution  of  the  animals  in  the  river  deposits
gives  us  a  clue  to  the  physical  geography  during
the  second  ice  period.  In  an  essay  read  before  the
Geological  Society  in  1869,  and  in  a  second  printed  in
the  "Popular  Science  Review"  in  1872,  I  showed  that
there  was  a  singular  irregularity  in  the  contents  of  the
river  strata,  and  that  while  the  fossil  mammalia
were  abundant  throughout  the  area  (marked  with  dots
in  the  map,  Fig.  126),  there  were  certain  districts  in
which  they  had  not  been  met  with.  One  of  these  barren
areas  comprises  (plain  in  the  map,  Fig.  126),  nearly  the
whole  of  Wales.     A  second  includes  a  large  iKtrtion  of


XI  ]  IN  B1HTAIN  DURING  HKCtiNl)  ICE  AGE.  4()7

litincasliirc,  Yorkshire,  Cumberland,  Westmoreland,  and
the  whole  of  Scotland  (if  the  preglacial  mammals  in  the
low  district  between  the  Frith  of  Forth  and  Frith  of
Clyde  in  the  map  be  omitted),  and  a  third  is  represented
by  nearly  the  whole  of  Ireland.  These  areas  are  re-
markable for  the  absence  of  the  mammalia  from  the
river  deposits.  They  are  also  characterised  by  the  fresh-
ness of  the  ice  marks  which  they  present.  Nearly  every
valley  has  its  own  system  of  grooves  and  its  own  set
of  moraines ;  and  the  mounds  of  clay  and  marl  left
behind  by  the  local  glacier,  as  it  slowly  retreated  to
higher  levels  till  it  finally  disappeared,  are  to  be
observed  in  great  abundance.  If  we  bring  these  facts
into  relation,  the  barrenness  of  the  areas  may  be  reason-
ably explained  by  the  presence  of  glaciers,  ivhile  the
pleistocene  mammals  were  living  in  the  south  and  east
(see  map.  Fig.  126).  A  barrier  of  some  kind  may
reasonably  be  inferred  to  have  prevented  their  range
over  those  districts,  and  its  nature  is  indicated  by  the
ice  marks.  It  is  very  probable  that  these  glaciers  had
not  passed  away  before  the  close  of  the  pleistocene  age :
for  in  that  case  the  characteristic  animals  would  be  dis-
covered in  the  river  gravels,  which  are  later  than  the
deposits  of  local  glaciers  in  those  districts.

The  Glacial  Period  does  not  separate  one  Life-era

from  anotlicr.

The  lowering  of  the  temperature  which  culminated  in
the  glacial  period  has  left  palpable  traces  behind  in  the
changes  which  it  caused  in  the  European  fauna.  As  the
pleiocene  climate  became  colder,  the  animals  unfitted  to
endure  the  cold,  such  as  the  deer  of  the  Indian  types  of


408  RELATION  OF  FALICOUTUJC  MAX  [iH»r

Axis  and  Rusa,  either  migrated  to  the  south  or  became
txtinct,  while  their  feetling-grouuds  were  invaded   by
tlic  dwellers  in  the  temperate  zone,  the  stag,  roe,  bison,
jiiid  other  animals.    These  lu  their  turn    were  pushed
forward    by    the    arctic    group    of  nuimals,    the   muak-
sbeep,  leuimiug,  reindeer,  and  others,  the  progress  being
in   the  main  steadily  to  the  south  while  the  cold  was
increasing,  and  the  retrt-at  being  steadily  to  the  north
while  it  was  decreasing.     It  will  follow  from  this,  that
the  same  district  iu  central  or  uorth-westeru  Europe  ^
would  be  traversed  by  these  migratory  bodies  of  animal^J
b(»tb  iu  their  southern  advance  in  preglacial  and  glaciall
times  and  their  northern   retreat  in  postglacial  tiraeH,.l
and  that,  therefore,  their  fossil  remains  cannot  afford  a  »]
means  of  fixing  the  preglacial,  glacial,  or  postglacial,   '
age  of  the  deposit  in  which  they  are  found,  where  it  is
not  marked  by  traces  of  glaciation.     Sir  Charles  Lyell'a
view,  that  the  glaciid  period  cannot  be  fnken  us  a  land-
mark in  the  classification  of  the  European  pleistocene
deposits,  is  fully  borne  out  by  the  facts,  and  still  less
can  it  be  taken  as  a  hard  and  fast  line  between  one  fauna
and  another.       It  caunot  be  considered  a  life-era  like
the  eocene,  meiocene,  pleioeene,  or  prehistoric  divisions
of  the  tertiary  period.

Bone-caves  inhahited  hefore  and  after  Ice  Period.

If  we  allow  that  the  lowering  of  the  temperature  was
the  principal  cause  of  the  presence  of  temperate  and
arctic  animals,  in  a  region  before  inhabited  by  species
fitted  to  live  in  a  comparatively  warm  climate,  it  will
follow  that  bone-caves  cannot  be  said  to  be  either  pre-  or
postglacial,  by  an  appeal  to  their  fossil  mammalia.     If


XI.]  TO  GLACIAL  PERIOD,  409

they  were  opeu  before  the  minimum  of  temperature  was
reached,  they  would  afford  shelter  to  the  animals  then
in  the  neighbourhood,  and  they  would  continue  to  be
occupied  in  the  south  during  the  vast  period  of  time
represented  by  the  enormous  physical  changes  in  the
region  north  of  the  line  of  the  Thames,  during  the
development  of  the  ice-sheet,  the  submergence  and  the
re-elevation  of  nearly  the  whole  of  Britain  and  Ireland.
As,  however,  the  cold  increased,  the  percentage  of  arctic
animals  would  also  increase,  and  the  more  temperate
species  be  weeded  out.  For  these  reasons  it  has  seemed
to  me,  that  the  machairodus  of  Kent's  Hole,  and  the
Rhinoceros  megarhinus  of  Oreston,  represent  an  early
stage  of  the  pleistocene  period,  before  the  arctic  mam-
malia were  present  in  full  force  in  the  caves.  It  is  very
probable  that  vast  herds  of  reindeer  lived  in  the  south
of  France,  while  northern  Britain  lay  buried  under  the
ice-sheet,  as  well  as '  during  the  two  succeeding  physical
changes.


Relcition  of  PakeoUthic  Man  to  Glacial  Period.

What  then  is  the  relation  of  the  palaeolithic  hunter
of  reindeer  in  France  and  Britain  to  the  glacial  period  ?
Is  he  pre-  or  postglacial  ?  The  only  evidence  on  the
point  is  that  offered  by  the  associated  mammalia  which
occupied  France,  Germany,  and  Britain  before  and  after
the  point  of  minimum  temperature  was  reached  in  these
latitudes.  Man  may  have  inhabited  the  caves  not
merely  of  France,  but  of  Devonshire  and  Somerset,  at
any  time  during  that  long  period.  The  position  of  the
palaeolithic  refuse-heap  discovered    by    Prof.    Fraas  at


411)  TEST  IIF  JOE  IIF  CAVEtc!,'  DBFO.srTS.  [cnAr.

SchusaeiireicI,  resting  ou  a  moraine  of  the  extinct  glacirr
of  tlie  Bbine,  proves  that  the  palseolithic  Ealdmos  livi-d
in  Suabia  after  the  retreat  of  the  glacier  when  the  tem-
perature became  warmer,  towards  the  close  of  thf"
pleistocene  age  or  in  the  later  glacial  atage.  The  same
conclusion  has  been  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Prestwich  as  to
the  sojourn  of  palfeolithic  man  (of  the  river-bed  type)
la  Bedfordshire  and  Suffolk,  the  gravels  in  which  the
implements  are  found  being  of  a  lat<?r  age  than  the
boulderKrlay  of  those  districts.  We  have  tuerefoi-e
proof  that  man  lived  in  Germany  and  Britain  after  the
maximum  glacial  cold  had  passed  away,  and  we  may
also  infer  with  a  high  degree  of  probability  that  he
migrated  into  Europe  along  with  the  pleistocene  mam-
malia in  the  preglacial  age.

Test  of  age  of  contentt  of  caves  in  Glaciated  Districts,

The  probable  date  of  the  introduction  of  the  contents
into  ossiferous  caves  in  glaciated  areas  may  be  ascer-
tained by  an  examination  of  the  river  deposits.  If  the
animals  found  in  the  caves  inhabited  the  surrounding
country  after  the  melting  of  the  ice,  their  remains  will
occur  in  the  postglacial  gravels.  If  they  are  not  found,
it  may  be  inferred  that  they  had  retreated  from  the  dis-
trict, before  the  latter  were  deposited.  It  is  obvious
that  they  could  not  have  lived  in  any  district  while  it
was  covered  with  iee  or  by  the  sea.  It  may  therefore
be  concluded  that  their  remains  in  the  eaves  were  most
probably  introduced  before  the  gUicial  conditions  had
set  in.  Preglaeial  deposits  in  a  cavern  would  be  pro-
tected from  the  grinding  of  the  ice-sheet,  the  action  of


XI.]  THE  VICTORIA  CAVE.  411

the  waves  in  the  depresjsion,  and  re-elcvation  of  the
hind,  and  the  subsequent  glacial  erosion  which  would
inevitably  destroy  Dearly  all  the  fluviatile  ossiferous
strata.  By  this  test  the  pleistocene  strata  in  the  Victoria
Cave,  near  Settle,  may  be  considered  preglacial,  as
well  as  the  hyjena-den  at  Kirkdale,  which  has  always
been  referred  by  Prof.  Phillips  to  that  age.  If  this
be  allowe<l,  the  small  fragment  of  human  bone  found
by  the  Settle  Cave  Exploration  Committee  in  the
former  cave  in  1872  establishes  the  fact  that  man  lived
in  Yorkshire  before  the  glacial  period.  The  man  to
whom  it  belonged  was  probably  devoured  by  the  hyoenas
which  dragged  into  their  den  the  woolly  rhinoceros,
reindeer,  and  other  creatures  whose  gnawed  bones  were
strewn  on  the  floors.


ivyvLrniya  riiAi'TEic.


CHAPTER  XII.

CONCLUSION.

<  'litBaifi cation  of  Pleistocene  Strata  by  means  of  the  Mammalia. —
The  lata,  middloj  and  early  Pkiatocene  Diviaiona. — The  Pleiocene
Mammalia. — Summary  of  characteristic  Pleioccne  and  Pleistocene
Spoeies. — Antiquity  of  Man  in  Europe. — Man  lived  in  India  in
Pleistocene  Age.-^Are  the  Palieolitliic  Aborigines  of  India  related
to  those  of  Euiope  1 — Palsaolitliic  Maa  li?ed  in  Palestine. — Con-
clusion.

The  auimala  inhabiting  the  cavea  have  been  enumerated
in  the  last  three  chapters,  and  we  have  discussed  the
inferences  drawn  from  their  distribution  as  to  the  pleisto-
cene climate  and  geography  of  Europe.  It  remains  for
us  noWj  in  conclusion,  to  define  the  pleistocene,  and  to
see  in  what  relation  it  stands  to  the  pleiocene  period.


Classification  of  Pleistocene  Strata  by  means  of  the
Mammalia.

The  pleistocene  period  was  one  of  very  long  duration,
and  embraced  changes  of  great  magnitude  in  the  geo-
graphy of  Europe,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  ninth  and
tenth  chapters.  The  climate,  which  in  the  preceding
pleiocene  age  had  been  temperate  in  northern  and  middle
Europe,  at  the  beginning  of  the  pleistocene  gradually
passed  into  the  extreme  arctic  severity  of  the  glacial


XII.]         CLASSIFICATION  OF  PLEISTOCENE  STRATA,       413

period.  This  change  caused  a  corresponding  change
of  the  forms  of  animal  life  ;  the  pleiocene  species,  whose
constitutions  were  adjusted  to  temperate  or  hot  climates,
yielding  pjace  to  those  which  were  better  adapted  to  the
new  conditions.  And  since  there  is  reason  for  the  belief
that  it  was  not  continuous  in  one  direction,  but  that
til  ere  were  pauses  or  even  reversions  towards  the  old
temperate  state,  it  follows  that  the  two  groups  of  animals
would  at  times  overlap,  and  their  remains  be  intermingled
with  each  other.  The  frontiers  also  of  each  of  the  geo-
graphical provinces  must  naturally  have  varied  with  the
season  ;  and  the  competition  for  the  same  feeding-grounds
between  the  invading  and  retreating  forms  must  have
been  long,  fluctuating,  and  severe.  The  passage,  there-
fore, from  the  pleiocene  to  the  pleistocene  fauna  might
be  expected  to  have  been  extremely  gradual  in  each
area.  The  lines  of  definition  between  the  two  are  to  a
great  extent  arbitrary,  instead  of  being  marked  with
sufficient  strength  to  constitute  a  barrier  between  the
tertiary  and  post-tertiary  groups  of  life  of  Lycll,  or
between  the  tertiary  and  quaternary  of  French  geologists.
The  principle  of  classification  which  I  have  proposed  ^  is
that  offered  by  the  gradual  lowering  of  the  temperature,
which  has  left  its  mark  in  the  advent  of  animals  before
unknown  in  Europe  ;  and  according  to  it  I  have  divided
the  pleistocene  deposits  into  three  groups.

1.  Those  in  which  the  pleistocene  immigrants  had
begun  to  disturb  the  pleiocene  mammalia,  but  had  not
yet  supplanted  the  more  southern  animals.  No  arctic
mammalia  had  as  yet  arrived.  To  this  group  belongs
the  forest-bed  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  and  the  deposit
at  St.  Prest,  near  Chartres.

1  "Quart.  Geol.  Joum."  1872,  p.  410.


414  lATF.  rLEISTilOENE.  [aur.

2.  That  in  which  the  characteristic  pleiocene  doer  had
disappeared.  The  even-t-ocd  nimiuanta  are  priDcipally
represented  by  the  stjig,  the  Irish  elk,  the  roe,  liismi,  and
urua.  Elephaa  meridionalis  and  M/iinocei'us  etriiscus
had  retreated  to  the  south.  To  this  group  belong  tlie
brick-earths  of  the  lower  valley  of  the  Thames,  the  river-
deposit  at  Clacton,  the  cave  of  Baumo  in  the  Jura,  and
a  nver-deposit  iu  Auvergne.

3.  The  third  division  is  that  in  which  the  true  arctic
mammalia  were  among  the  chief  inhabitants  of  the
region  ;  and  to  it  bolong  most  of  the  ossiferous  caves
and  river-deposits  in  middle  and  northern  Europe,

These  three  do  not  correspond  with  the  prcglaeial,
glacial,  and  postglacial  divisions  of  the  pleistocene  strata,
in  ceutial  and  north  Britain  ;  since  there'  is  reason  to
lielieve  that  all  the  animals  which  oecupied  Britain  after
tile  maximum  cold  had  passed  away,  bad  arrived  here
in  their  southern  advance  before  that  maximum  cold  had
been  reached ;  or,  in  other  words,  were  both  pre-  and
postglacial.

This  classification  does  not  apply  to  pleistocene  river-
strata  south  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,  infx)  which  the
arctic  mammalia  never  penetrated.

The  Late  Pkisfocene  Division.

The  late  pleistocene  division  corresponds  in  part  with
the  reindeer  period  of  M.  Lartct ;  but  it  comprehends
also  his  other  three  periods  ;  for  the  spotted  hysena,  the
lion,  the  cave-bear,  the  mammoth,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,
the  bison,  the  reindeer,  and  the  urus  are  so  associated
together  in  the  caves  and  river  deposits  of  Great  Britain
and  the  continent  that  they  do  not  afford  a  means  of


xir.]  MIDDLE  PLEISTOCENE,  415

classification.  The  arctic  division  of  the  mammalia,  de-
fined in  the  preceding  chapter,  wjis  then  in  full  possession
of  the  area  north  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,  and  the
Rhinoceros  megarhinus  and  Eleplms  meridionaVs  had
disappeared.  With  three  exceptions,  to  be  noticed  pre-
sently, all  the  ossiferous  caverns  of  France,  Germany,
and  Britain,  belong  to  this  division  of  the  pleistocene.

The  Middh  Pleistocene  Division,

The  middle  division  of  the  pleistocene  mammalia  may
now  be  examined,  or  that  from  which  the  characteristic
pleioccne  deer  had  vanished,  and  were  replaced  by  tlie
invading  forms  from  the  temperate  zones  of  northern
Asia.  It  is  represented  in  Britain  by  the  mammalia
obtained  from  the  lower  brick-earths  of  the  Thames
valley,  at  Crayford,  Erith,  Ilford,  and  Gray  s  Thurrock,
by  those  from  the  deposit  at  Clacton,  and  most  probably
by  those  of  the  older  deposit  in  Kent's  Hole,  and  by  the
Rhinoceros  mef/arhinus  of  Oreston.^     They  consist  of —

Man,  Ilftmo.  Roedeer,  C.  capreolns.

Lion,  Felia  leo  spelaa.  Musk  Sheep,  Ovihos  laoschatua.

Wild  Cat,  F.  catus.  Khphas  antiquus.
Spotted  Hyaena,  Hyrvna  croruta      ^rammoth,  E.  primi genius.

var.  it)}fl(va.  Horse,  Equus  cabalhis.

Grizzly  Bear,  Urstis  ferox.  Woolly  Rhinoceros,  Rhinocer<>s
Brown  Bear,  U,  arctos.  tichnrhimis.

Wolf,  Canist  lupiut.  H.  hemitcechus.

Fox,  C.  vulpes,  Ik.  megarhimis.

Otter,  Lvira  vulgaris.  Wild-boar,  *SV«  arrofa.

\Jr\i8,  Bos  pnmigenifis.  Hippopotamus,  Ilipjyopotamns
Bison,  Bison  priscus.  amphihiu4.

Irish  Elk,  CervKS  megnceros.  Beaver,  Castor  JUtfr.

Staff,  C  elaphus,  Water-Rat,  Arvicola  amphibia.
Brown's  Fallow  Drt«*r  C.  Browni.


1  ((


Quart.  Geol.  Journ."  xx.  p.  457.


416  THE  I.OHEH  bhlCK.F.AUTUS.  (cnAP.

The  discovery  of  a  Hiut-flake  in  the  undisturbed  lower
brick-eai-tbs  of  Crayford,  by  the  Rev.  0.  Fisher,  in  the
presence  of  the  writer,  in  April  1872,  proves  that  masii
was  living  while  these  fluviatile  strata  were  being  dfi-^
posited.

If  these  mamTnalia  be  compared  with  those  of  the
forest-bed  or  the  pleiocene  ago  on  the  one  hand,  and  \vith
the  late  pleistocene  on  tbe  other,  it  will  be  seen  that  they
are  linked  to  the  former  by  Rhinoceros  mef/arhinus,  and  to
the  latter  by  the  musk  slieep.  The  presence  of  the  latter,
the  moat  arctic  of  the  herbivores,  in  aueh  strunge  company
is  most  abnormal,  and  suggests  the  idea  that  the  remains
belong  to  two  distinct  eras.  The  skull,  however,  which
I  found  at  Crayford  in  1S67,  and  presented  to  the
Museum  of  the  Geological  Survey,  rested  in  intimate
association  with  the  boiies  of  other  species,  is  in  thtfj
same  mineral  state,  and  bears  no  marks  of  being  a  "  dfr'
rived  fossil."  It  i»  the  only  trace  of  the  animal  as  yet
obtained  from  the  lower  brick-earths.

The  absence  of  the  reindeer,  so  numerous  io  the  valley
of  the  Thames,  while  the  late  pleistocene  strata  .were
being  accumulated  by  the  river,  and  the  abundance  of
remains  of  the  stag,  seem  to  me  to  point  backwards
rather  than  forwards  in  time,  and  to  imply  that  the
lower  brick-earths  are  not  of  late  pleistocene  ege ;  just
as  the  absence  of  tbe  characteristic  early  pleistocene
species  shows  that  they  are  not  of  that  age.  The
evidence  seems  to  be  sufficieiit  to  establish  a  stage
intermediate  between  the  two.  Nevertheless,  it  is
sufficiently  conflicting  to  cause  Dr.  Falconer  to  come
to  the  conclusion  that  these  strata  are  of  pleiocene  date,
and  Mr.  Prestwich  to  believe  that  they  belong  to  a  late
stage  in  the  pleistocene.


1


XII.]  EARLY  PLEISTOCENE  A GE.  4 1 7

During  the  middle  pleistocene,  in  the  Thames  valley,
and  at  Clacton,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  elephant,  and
mammoth  competed  for  the  same  feeding-grounds  with
Bhinoceivs  hemitORchus,  R,  megarkiiws,  hippopotamus,
and  Ehphas  antiquus.  Although  all  the  characteristic
pleiocene  deer  had  retreated,  the  reindeer  had  not  yet  in-
vaded tliat  area :  it  was  occupied  by  the  stag,  roe,  the
Irish  elk,  and  Brown's  fallow  deer.  The  whole  assemblage
of  animals,  the  musk  sheep  being  excepted,  implies  that
the  climate  was  less  severe  at  this  time,  than  when  the
reindeer  spread  over  the  same  area  in  the  late  pleistocene
age,  and  was  far  more  numerous  than  the  stag.  It
may,  indeed,  be  objected  that  the  classificatory  value  of
the  musk  sheep  is  quite  as  great  as  that  of  Rhinoceros
megarhimcs ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  lower  brick-earths,
the  evidence  of  the  latter  as  to  climate  agrees  with  that
of  the  whole  assemblage  of  animals,  while  that  of  the
former  is  altogether  discordant-
There  are  no  caves  either  in  Britain  or  on  the  conti-
nent which  can  be  referred  with  certainty  to  this  middle
division.  The  machairodus,  however,  of  Kent's  Hole,
and  of  the  cavern  of  Baume  in  the  Jura  (see  p.  33V),  and
the  megarhine  species  of  rhinoceros  from  the  fissures  of
Oreston,  probably  inhabited  those  regions,  while  the  tem-
perate group  of  animals  held  possession  of  the  valley  of
the  Thames,  and  of  that  now  sunk  beneath  the  North  Sea.

The  Early  Pleistocene  Mammaliiu

The  fossil  mammalia  must  now  be  examined,  which
inhabited  Great  Britain  during  the  early  pleistocene
period,  and  before  the  maximum  severity  of  glacial  cold
had  as  yet  been  reached.     The  fossil  bones   from  the

E  E


AXIMALS  FliilM  THE  FOREST  UED.


[n


fore3t-b*.'(i,  which  underlies  tbeliouldcr-oUiy  on  the  shores
of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  have  for  many  years  attracted
the  attention  of  naturalists  and  geologists.  The  magni-
ficent collections  of  the  Rev,  Juhn  Gunu,  and  the  Inte
Rev.  S.  W.  King,  gave  Dr.  Fulconerthe  means  of  proving
that  the  fauna  of  the  ancient  submerged  forest  differed
from  that  of  any  geological  period  which  we  have  hitherto
discussed ;  and  the  careful  diagnosis  of  all  thi;  fossils
from  this  horizon  which  I  have  been  ahlc,  to  meet  with,
shows  that  it  was  of  a  very  peculiar  diaracter.  being
closely  allied  to  the  pleioeene  of  the  south  of  France  and
of  Italy,  and  yet  possessing  sjiecies  which  are  undoubtedly
pleistocene.  The  following  list  is  necessarily  very  im-
perfect, since  the  fragmentary  nature  of  the  fossils  renders
a  specific  identification  very  ha^tardoua ;  and  it  only
includes  those  which  I  have  been  abb'  to  identify  with
any  degree  of  certainty.


Tt'lpa  Euro/yrn
TroffonfhrriMm  Cii
Cantorfber.

V.  areerntttsa,
VaHi»  Input.
C.  vulpes.
Maehairodui.
Cervut  mfiiiKfi-iit.
V.  eaprcolui.


■  Cerviu  Poligiiaetig.
C.  carnulor»m.
C.  tmrticomii.
C.  Stdgviiekii.
BoK  priviigeniut.
Hippvpotamut  major,
Su*  tcrofa.
Equtu  cabatlui.
Rhinoceros  rlruKut.
a.  mtgarhinus.
Klephat  meridiimalit.
K.  antiques.
E.  pnmiffeniut.


From  the  examination  of  this  list,  the  peculiar  mixture
of  pleioeene  and  pleistocene  species  is  evident.  The
Ursus  ai'vemensis,  Census  Polignactis,  Hippopotamus
major,  Rhinoceros  eti'iiscis,  and  R.  megarhinus,  the  horse,


xii.l  '     THE  MIXED  FAUNA.  419

Elephas  meridionaUs,  and  E.  antiquus  were  living  in  the
pleioccnc  age  in  France  and  Italy,  and  probably  in  Norfolk.
The  cave-bear,  the  wolf,  fox,  mole,  beaver,  Irish  elk,  roe,
stag,  urus,  wild-boar,  and  the  mammoth  have  not  as
yet  been  discovered  in  tlie  continental  pleiocenes,  as
judged  by  the  standards  offered  by  the  Val  d'Amo  and
Southern  France.  They  are  more  or  less  abundant  in  the
late  pleistocene  age.  This  singular  association  seems  to
me  tx)  imply  that  the  fauna  of  the  forest-bed  is  interme-
diate between  the  two,  and,  from  the  fact  that  only  three
out  of  the  whole  series,  viz.  Ursus  arvernensis,  Rhino-
ceros eiricscus,  and  Cervus  Polignacus,  are  peculiar  to
the  continental  pleiocene,  that  it  is  more  closely  allied
to  the  pleistocene  than  to  the  pleiocene.

It  is  also  very  probable  that  this  early  pleistocene  age
was  of  considerable  duration ;  for  in  it  we  find  at  least
two  forms  (and  the  number  will  probably  be  very  largely
increased)  which  are  unknown  in  continental  Europe,
although  pleiocene  and  pleistocene  strata  have  been
diligently  examined  in  France  and  Germany.  The  very
presence  of  the  Cervus  SedgwicJcu  and  C\  verticomis
implies  that  the  lapse  of  time  was  sufficiently  great  to
allow  of  the  evolution  of  forms  of  animal  life  hitherto
unknown,  and  which  disappeared  before  the  middle  and
late  pleistocene  stages.  The  Trogontherium  also,  as  well
as  the  Cervus  carnutorum,  both  of  which  occur  in  the
forest-bed  and  in  the  gravel-beds  of  St.  Prest,  near
Chartres,  and  which  are  peculiar  to  this  horizon,  point
to  the  same  conclusion.

The  deer  of  the  forest-bed,  in  this  list,  do  not  repre-
sent approximately  the  number  of  species :  there  are  at
least  five,  and  perhaps  six,  represented  by  a  series  of
antlers,  which  I  do  not  venture  to  quote,  l)ecause  I  have

£  E  2


420  {■!.h-IOC£KE  MAMMALIA.  [en

uot  Iwtu  able  to  compare  them  with  tliose  of  tbe  pleio-  1
cene3  of  the.  Val  d'Aruo,  of  Marseilles,  or  of  Auvergne,

Dr.  Falcoiior  pointed  out  tliat  one  of  the  peculiar  i
characters  of  the  fauna  of  the  foreat-bed  is  the  presence  I
of  the  mammoth  ;  and  the  evidence  on  which  he  consi-
dered the  animal  to  be  of  preglacial  age  in  Europe  liaa  '
iKicn  fully  verified  by  the  molars  from  BactoD,  which  are  ■
now  in  the  Manchester  Museum,  They  are  associated  |
with  £lfiphas  meridionalis  and  E.  antiquus,  and  are
inorusted  with  precisely  the  same  matrix  as  the  teeth  j
and  bones  of  those  species.

No  caves  have  been  discovered  containing  this  pecu-1
liar  assemblage  of  fos.=iil  animals.


T/if  Plfiovene  Mam


Tlie  relation  of  tlie  pleistocene  to  the  pleiocene  fauna
is  a  question  of  very  great  difficulty,  because  the
latter  has  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  defined,  although
Prof.  Gervais  and  Dr.  Falconer  have  given  the  more
important  species  from  Auvergne,  Montpelher,  and  the
Val  d'Arno.  The  following  list  is  taken  from  Prof.
Oervais's  great  work  "Zoologie  ct  Pal^ontologie  Fran-
daises,"  p.  349,  the  term  pseudo-pleiocene  merely  imply-
ing that  the  fauna  differs  from  that  of  the  marine
deposit  of  Montpeilier,  which  he  takes  as  his  standard.

Pseudo-pleiocene  of  Issoire.

Jll/itria  rr/ottn.  C'triiut  pardinfUfU.

Castor  Utiodortmii.  C.  arvernetisit.

Arctomgt  antiqna.  ('.  causaiiuK

Arvi<ola  robvttui.  6'ut  arwrnensis.


xir.J


ANIMALS  OF  LSSOIRE  AXD  MONTPELLlEli.         421


Lepu$  LacoBti,
Mastodon  arvemensvn,
Tapirus  arvemensU,
Rhinoceros  eUUus  ?
Bos  elatus,
Cervus  polycladus,
C,  ardetis,
C,  cladocerus.
C.  issiodorensis.
C.  Perrieri,
C,  ttutriarum.


L'rsus  arvtrnensin.
Canis  borbonidiu.
Felis  pardinetisif,
F,  arvernetms,
F.  brevirostris,
F,  issiodorensis,
Machairodus  cultrid^ns,
Hycena  arvernensis.
JI,  Perrieri.
Lutra  Bravardi,


To  these  animals  Dr.  Falconer^  adds  Hippopotamus
major y  Elephas  antiquus,  and  Rhinoceros  megarhinus,
and  he  identifies  Rhinoceros  elatus  with  his  new  species
Rhinoceros  etruscus.  Prof.  Gaudry  agrees  with  me  in
the  belief  that  Hycena  Perrieri  is  identical  with  //.
striata  or  the  striped  species.

Prof.  Gervais  also  identifies  the  Equtis  robust  us  of  M.
Pomel,  from  the  same  locality,  with  the  common  Horse,
Bquius  fossilis.

The  fauna  of  Montpellier  is  certainly  very  different
from  that  of  Issoire  ;  but  since  it  is  neither  meiocene  nor
pleistocene,  it  must  belong  to  one  of  the  intermediate
stages  of  the  pleiocene.     It  includes


SemnopiHucus  monspessidanxis,
Macactis  priscas,
Chalicomya  sigmodus,
Lagomys  loxodus.
Mastodon  bremrostris.
Rhinoceros  megarhiniis.
Tapirus  minor,
Antilope  Cordieri.
A.  hastata.


Cervus  Cuvieri.
C.  australis.
Sus  provincialis,
llycenodon  insiynis,

Hycena ?

Machairodus,
Felis  Christolii.
Lutra  affinis.


1  "Palseont.  Mem.'*  vol.  ii.  p.  49.


4-22  JMMALS  OF  VAL  ffJRNO.  [chap.

The  Mastodon  hrcvirostris  of  tbis  list  is  couaidered  by  '
Dr.  FidcDiH'i-  to  Ite  idt^iititjal  with  M.  urverncnsis  of  MM.
(Vnisnt  and  Jobeit,

The  fauna  of  t!n^  \:\\  li'Arno  diffl-rs  from  that  of
Moutpclticr  and  of  Aiivurgne,  :iud  yet  is  considered  by
Dr.  Ftilt^oner  to  bi*  umiiiontly  tyjiiL-ul  of  the  Eiimiieaii
plcioceue.*  The  iininials  identiftcd  hy  bim  in  the
nmsc'iims  of  Italy  ar'-  us  follow  :  —


FrIU.

k'tf/iliitf  mrrit/i-'ii"li

Jlsitva.

Khimecmn  rtruaru:

It.  mi'jarliiifwi.

JU-ul'xha  <iri-cr„e,isig.

U.  IteiitiOrrliuH.

il.  fi;rm<>!.

Ilippnji-kuiii'g  taoj'i

Klfi-hiu  antupiu*.

All  these  aniiuida,  with  the  exi:eption  of  Ithinoccros
hemittechus,  have  been  discovered  in  tlic  paeudopleio-
ceue  of  Issoire,  while  the  raegarbine  rhinoceros  and
Mastodon  arveriiensis  are  the  only  two  which  have  beeo
obtained  from  the  marine  sanda  of  MoutpelUer.  The
pk'iocene  animals,  therefore,  inhabiting  Northern  Italy
are  more  eloselj"  allied  to  those  of  Auvergue  than  to
those  of  Montpellier.

If  tliese  three  localities  be  taken  as  typical  of  the
pleiocciie  strata,  we  shall  find  that  several  of  the  species
range  as  fiU'  noi'th  as  Britain,  and  occur  in  deposits  which
fioni  the  evidence  of  the  mollusca,  have  been  assigned  to
that  age.  Mastodon  arvernensis,  Ehphus  meridionalis,
and  [frsns  ai'i-ernensis,  have  been  obtained  from  the  old
land-surface  which  underlies  the  siind  and  shingle  of  the
Norfolk  Crag,  in  company  witli  many  forms  of  deer  and
antelopes  which  have  not  yet  been  identified,  while  the
Hippai'ion  is  found  in  the  marine  crags  of  Suffolk.
'  "  I'alreont.  Mdoi."  vol.  ii.  I'p   ISW,  mO.


XII.]  PLEIOCENE  ANIMALS.  423

The  animals  which  especially  characterize  the  ]>leio-
cene  strata  of  Europe  are  Machairodus  cnltridens,
Mastodon  arvemensis  and  M.  Borsoni,  besides  the
genus  Tapir.

If  this  fauna  be  compared  with  that  of  the  preglaci.il
forest-bed,  it  w411  be  seen  that  the  difference  between
them  is  very  great.  The  pleiocene  mastodon,  tapir,  the
majority  of  the  deer,  and  the  antelopes  are  re[>laced
hy  forms  such  as  the  roe  and  the  red-deer,  unknown  up
to  that  time.  Nevertheless  many  of  the  pleiocene  ani-
mals were  able  to  hold  their  ground  against  the  pleisto-
cene invaders,  although,  subsequently,  as  I  liave  already
shown,  they  disappeared  one  by  one,  being  ultimately
beaten  in  the  struggle  for  life  by  the  new  comers.  The
progress  of  this  struggle  has  been  used  in  the  preceding
pages  as  a  means  of  classification.  This  fauna  lias  not
been  discovered  in  any  cave.


Summary  of  Characteristic  Pleistocene  and  Pleiocene

Sj^ecies.

The  following  are  the  salient  points  of  the  pleistocene
age  oflfered  by  the  study  of  the  land  mammalia  in  the
area  north  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees.

The  Pleistocene  Period.

A. — 71ie  latest  stwjf,

Palteolithic  Man.  Stag,  comparatively  rare.

Woolly  Rhinoceros,  abundant.  Northern  forma  of  lif«  in  full

Mammoth,  abundant.  possession  of  area  north   of

itcindeer,  abundant.  Alps  and  Pyrenees.


424  CHABACTISKISTIC  SfECIE.-^.  \c».m-.

B.  —  77'e  ml,Ule  3lf!/^.
Paleolithic  Min.  Ithiaocernf    tnf,ja,-hiiini,    slill

Machaii-odns  latidrnt.  Ih-ing.

Stag,  abundant.  Woolly  Uiiinoceraa,  present.

Xortham  furms  of  life  prosont,  but  not  ia  force.

i'.~TiMrarl-/tta<]e.

The  followiug  are  iiiiim;il8  jieeultau  to  this  stage  : —

Troffontherium  C'uvirri.  Cei-viit  Seilgmirkii.

Genu  verticofuit.  ''-  cnrnuUiru'iu

The  following  make  tlieir  apfR'amuce  ;  — Tlic  beaver,,
muak-shrew,  cave-b(*ar,  roe,  stag,  Iriali  elk.  urus,  and
bison,  wild-boar,  horst%  (2),  mammotb,  wolf,  ami  fox.

The  pleiocene  Ursus  arverofmis.  Census  Poligiiacus,
Rfaiioceros  etrasciis,  ami  El*i[ihas  meriil  tonal  is  still
living.


MattvdiiK  arvfi-ueiiti*.  Hipparum  gracilf.

M.  Bononi.  Ko  livinjj  apecios  of  J'luropean  Deer.

The  three  subdivisions  of  the  pleistocene  do  not  apply
to  the  region  south  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,  because  the
northern  group  of  animals  did  not  pass  into  Spain  and
Italy.  In  these  two  countries  we  find  southern  and
plftioceue  animals  living  throughout  the  pleistocene  age,
whieli  in  France  and  Britain  lived  only  in  the  two  earlier
stages.

Antiquity  of  Man  in  Europe.

No  remains  have  been  discovered  up  to  the  present
time  in  any  part  of  Europe  which  can  be  referred  with
certainty  to  a  higher  antiquity  than  the  pleistocene  age.


xii]  ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.  425

The  palaeolithic  people  or  peoples  arrived  in  Europe  along
with  the  peculiar  fauna  of  that  age,  and  after  dwelling
here  for  a  length  of  time,  which  is  to  be  measured  by  the
vast  physical  and  climatal  changes,  described  in  the  last
three  chapters,  finally  disappeared,  leaving  behind  as
their  representatives  the  Eskimos  tribes  of  arctic  Ame-
rica. There  is  no  evidence  that  they  were  inferior  in
intellectual  capacity  to  many  of  the  lower  races  of  the
present  time,  or  more  closely  linked  to  the  lower  animals.
The  traces  which  they  have  left  behind  tell  us  nothing
as  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  doctrine  of  evolution,
for  if  it  be  maintained  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  first
appearance  of  man  as  a  man,  and  not  as  a  man-like
brute,  is  inconsistent  with  that  doctrine,  it  may  be
answered  that  the  lapse  of  time  between  his  appearance
in  the  pleistocene  age  and  the  present  day,  is  too  small
to  have  produced  appreciable  physical  or  intellectual
change.  Also,  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  we  have
merely  investigated  the  antiquity  of  the  sojourn  of  man
in  Europe,  and  not  the  general  question  of  his  first
appearance  on  the  earth,  with  which  it  is  very  generally
confounded.  Dr.  Falconer  well  remarked  that  the
origines  of  mankind  are  to  be  sought,  not  in  Europe,
but  in  the  tropical  regions,  probably  of  Asia.  To  these
we  have  no  clue  in  the  present  stage  of  the  inquiry.
The  higher  apes  are  represented  in  the  European  meio-
cene  and  pleiocene  strata,  by  extinct  forms  uniting  in
some  cases  the  characters  of  different  living  species,  but
they  do  not  show  any  tendency  to  assume  human  cha-
racters. It  must  indeed  be  allowed,  that  the  study  of
fossil  remains  throws  as  little  light  as  the  documents  of
history  on  the  relation  of  man  to  the  lower  animals.
The  historian  commences  his  labours  with  the  high  civili-


426  PI.EmTOCEtiE  MAN  IN  ISDIA.  [ca^r.  '

sation  of  Assyria  and  Egypt,  ami  can  merely  guess  at
the  steps  by  which  it  was  achieved ;  the  palaeontologist
meets  with  the  traces  of  man  in  the  pleistocene  strata,
and  he  too  can  merely  guess  at  the  antecedent  steps  by
which  man  arrived  even  at  that  culture  which  is  implied
by  the  implements.  The  latter  has  proved  that  the
antiquity  of  man  is  greater  than  the  fui-mcr  had  sup-
posed. Neither  has  contributed  anything  towards  the
solution  of  the  problem  of  his  origin.

Mail  lined  ill  Iiitliu  in  I'lcisfocciie  Age.

The  researches  of  the  Geological  Surveyors  has  shown.
tluit  in  ancient  time.s  man,  in  the  same  stage  of  civi-
lization as  the  paleolithic  man  of  Europe,  lived  in
Southern  India  and  in  the  valley  of  the  Narbadd.  In
ISO'S'  Mr.  Bruce  Foote  described  the  flint  implcmenta
which  were  discovered  over  a  large,  area  in  the  districts
of  Madms,  either  in  the  red  clayey  deposit  known  as
Laterite,  or  in  such  positions  as  implied  that  they  bad
been  washed  out  of  it.  They  all  belong  to  the  same
rude  types  as  those  of  the  pleistocene  strata  of  North-
western Europe.  A  small  fragment  of  bone  was  the
only  fossil  which  had  up  to  that  time  been  discovered  in
the  Laterite,  and  this  I  was  able  to  identify  in  1869  aa
a  portion  of  a  human  tibia  of  the  abnormal  platycnemic
variety,  which  has  been  described  in  the  fifth  chapter  of
this  work,  from  the  European  caves  and  tombs.  The
Lateritic  deposits  themselves  are  strictly  analogous
to    our    river-strata   and    brick-earths    in    their    consti-

'  "  Quart.  Guol.  Joiirii."  xiiv.  p.  484.  "  iDternatioiial  CoDgreBB,"
Norivicli  vctlume.     See   also  "  Evana'  Ancient  Stono  I m piemen t»,"

p.  570.


XII.]    PALEOLITHIC  IMPLEMENTS  OF  THE  NARBADA.    427

tution,  and  in  their  resting  at  various  levels  above  the
sea,  and  were,  as  Mr.  Foote  remarks,  formed  under
conditions  diflerent  to  those  which  are  now  going  on  in
that  district.  They  prove  that  the  period  of  the  sojourn
of  palaeolithic  man  in  Southern  India  is  divided  from  the
present  day  by  considerable  geographical  changes,  such
as  the  elevation  of  land,  and  the  erosion  and  breaking
up  of  accumulations  which  were  once  continuous.  We
have  seen  that  somewhat  similar  changes  have  happened
in  Europe,  in  the  interval  which  separates  the  pala3o-
lithic  period  from  our  own  time.

The  discovery  of  a  rudely  cl lipped  implement  of
quartzite,  of  the  pointed  oval  shape  common  in  the
gravels  of  Britain  and  France,  published  by  Mr.  M<,'dli-
cott  in  1873,  in  the  "  Records  of  the  Geological  Survey
of  India,"  proves  further  that  man  wus  a  member  of  the
remarkable  fauna  which  inhabited  the  valley  of  the
Narbadd  in  ancient  times.  It  was  dug  out  of  reddish
uuatratified  clay  by  Air.  Racket  at  a  depth  of  tlirL-c  feet
from  the  upper  surface,  which  was  covered  by  twenty
feet  of  ossiferous  gravel,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Nar-
badd near  the  valley  of  Bhutra.  Tlie  cLiy  belongs  to
the  same  fluviutile  series  as  that  from  which  the
mammalia  were  obtained  and  named  l)y  Dr.  Falconer
in  1828.  Both  clay  and  gravel  are  shown  to  be  of
fluviatile  origin,  by  the  presence  of  fresh-water  mussels
of  the  varieties  still  living  in  the  adjacent  river.

The  fossil  bones  belonsj  to  extinct  and  livin^^  animals.
Among  the  former  are  two  kinds  of  elephant  (E.  namadi-
cus)  and  (E.  stegodon  insignis),  one  of  which  is  closely
allied  to  the  European  E,  anil qu us,  two  species  of  hippo-
l)Otamus,  one  {II.  paUmndicus)  with  four  incisors  in  front
of  the  jaws  like  the  African,  and  a  second  with  six  incisors


428  VAL^VLITHIC  AHOHlUiNm  Of  [chap,  '

belonging  to  tlie  extiuct  division  of  hexaprotodon,  a
large  ox  {Bos  namadicus),  a  deer  and  a  bear.  The
living  forms  are  represented  by  the  buffalo  {Buhalus
namadicus),  which  is  identical  with  the  wild  arose  from
which  the  Indism  domestic  buffaloes  have  descended,
and  the  gav^ial,  or  long-suouted  Gangetic  crocodile.  This
imperfect  list,  borrowed  from  Dr.  Falconer,'  shows  that
there  is  the  same  mixture  of  extinct  with  living  forms
in  the  valley  of  the  Gauges,  while  the  clays  and  gravels
were  being  accumulated,  as  we  have  observed  in  the
pleistocene  deposits  of  Europe,  and  the  fauna  may  there-
fore be  referred  to  the  pleistocene  age,  and  probably,  as
Mr.  Medlicott  proposes,  to  the  late  division  of  that
age.  The  exact  correspondence  of  the  quartzite  imple-
ments with  those  which  are  so  abundant  in  the  European
river-strata  of  the  same  age,  adds  additional  weight  to
this  conclusion.

Are  the  Paleolithic  Aborigines  of  India   related  to
those  of  Europe  ?

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  Dr.  Falconer,  writing
in  1865  of  the  peculiar  fauna  of  the  Narbadd,  should
have  held  the  view  that  man  was  living  in  India  at  that
time,  and  that  the  memory  of  the  hippopotamus  was
handed  down  in  Aryan  traditions,  under  the  striking
name  of  the  water  elephant.  "  After  reflecting,"  he
writes,  "on  the  question  during  many  years  in  its
palseontological  and  ethnological  bearings,  my  leaning  is
to  the  view  that  Hippopotamus  namadicus  was  extinct
in  India  long  before  the  Aryan  invasion,  but  that  it  was

'  "  FaliGont.  Mem."  ii.  C42,  el  /xintim.


xir.]  INDIA  AND  EUROPE.  429

familiar  to  the  earlier  indigenous  races."  (ii.  p.  644.)
This  inference  is  proved  to  be  literally  true  by  the
discovery  of  the  palfleolithic  implements  in  the  ossiferous
strata  of  the  Narbadd,  which  must  have  required  long
ages  for  their  accumulation  and  subsequent  erosion.

We  may,  therefore,  conclude  that  palaeolithic  man
inhabited  both  Europe  and  India  in  the  pleistocene  age.
And  possibly  the  identity  of  the  implements,  in  these
two  remote  regions,  may  be  accounted  for  in  the  same
manner  as  the  identity  of  Aryan  root-words,  by  the  view
that  their  fabricators  may  have  come  from  the  same
centre  of  dispersal,  by  the  same  routes  as  those  which
were  subsequently  used  by  the  pre- Aryan,  and  Aryan,
invaders  of  Europe  and  India.  But  whether  this  be
accepted  or  not,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  man  who
inhabited  both  these  regions  was  in  the  same  rude
stage  of  human  progress,  and  played  his  part  in  the
same  life-era.

Palceolithic  Man  lived  in  Palestine.

The  discovery,  by  the  Abb^  Richard,^  of  a  palaeolithic
flint  implement,  of  the  ordinary  river-bed  type,  on  the
surface  of  a  stratum  of  gravel  between  Mount  Tabor  and
the  lake  of  Tiberias,  lends  great  weight  to  the  view  that
the  Aborigines  of  India  and  Europe,  whose  implements
are  found  in  the  deposits  of  rivers,  migrated  from  the
same  centre,  since  it  bridges  over  the  great  interval  of
space  by  which  they  were  isolated.  It  is  very  probable,
that  future  discoveries  may  reveal  the  presence  of  a
tolerably  uniform  priscan  population,  in  the  pleistocene

^  This  implement  was  exhibited  before  the  Meeting  of  the  British
Association  at  Edinburgh,  in  1871.


i


428  PALEOLITHIC  ABORIGINES  OF  [chap.

belonging  to  the  extinct  division  of  hexaprotodon,  a
krge  ox  {Bos  namadicus),  a  deer  and  a  bear.  The
living  forms  are  represented  by  the  buffalo  {Buhalus
namadicus) y  which  is  identical  with  the  wild  arnee  fix)m
which  the  Indian  domestic  buffaloes  have  descended,
and  the  gavial,  or  long-snouted  Gangetic  crocodile.  This
imperfect  list,  borrowed  from  Dr.  Falconer,*  shows  that
there  is  the  same  mixture  of  extinct  with  living  forms
in  the  valley  of  the  Ganges,  while  the  clays  and  gravels
were  being  accumulated,  as  we  have  observed  in  the
pleistocene  deposits  of  Europe,  and  the  fauna  may  there-
fore be  referred  to  the  pleistocene  age,  and  probably,  as
Mr.  Medlicott  proposes,  to  the  late  division  of  that
age.  The  exact  correspondence  of  the  quartzite  imple-
ments with  those  which  are  so  abundant  in  the  European
river-strata  of  the  same  age,  adds  additional  weight  to
this  conclusion.


Are  the  PalcBolithic  Aborigines  of  India  related  to

those  of  Eityvjye  ?

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  tliat  Dr.  Falconer,  writing
in  1865  of  the  peculiar  fauna  of  the  Narbadd,  should
have  held  the  view  that  man  was  living  in  India  at  that
time,  and  that  the  memory  of  the  hippopotamus  was
handed  down  in  Aryan  traditions,  under  the  striking
name  of  the  water  elephant.  "After  reflecting,"  he
writes,  "on  the  question  during  many  years  in  its
palaeontological  and  ethnological  bearings,  my  leaning  is
to  the  view  that  Hippopotamus  namadicits  was  extinct
in  India  long  before  the  Aryan  invasion,  but  that  it  was

^   *'  Paljcont.  Mem."  ii.  042,  et  pansim.


XII.]  CONCLUSION.  431

throwing  great  light  on  the  fragmentary  records  of  those
obscure  times.  In  treating  of  these  questions,  it  has
been  necessary  to  discuss  problems  of  deep  and  varied
interest  to  the  ethnologist,  pliysicist,  and  historian,  some
of  which  have  been  partially  solved,  while  others  await
the  light  of  the  higher  knowledge  which  \vill  be  the
fruit  of  a  wider  experience.


t

t

I


APPENDICES.


F    F


lySTEUMEXTS  FOR  CAVE-IIUXTIXO  435


I


APPp:Nr)ix  \,—i\  30.


ON   THE   INSTRUMENTS   AND   METHODS   OF   CAVE-HUNTING.


Instruments  used  in  Cave-hunting. — The  Search  after  Bone-caves. — The
three  modes  of  Cave-digging. — Stalagmitic  Floors  to  be  broken  up. —
Preservation  of  Fossil  Bones.


Instruments  iiscd  in  Gavr-huntinf/.

The  instruments  which  Mr.  James  Parker,  Mr.  Ayshford  San-
ford  and  myself  have  found  most  vahiable  in  cave-hunting,  apart
from  the  tools  of  the  workman,  are  as  follow  : —

1.  A  hammer  with  an  ash  handle  about  twenty  inches  long,
inserted  into  a  square  head  of  best  steel,  ending  in  a  chisel  edge
in  the  same  plane  as  the  handle,  weighing  almost  eight  ounces,
and  seven  inches  in  length.

2.  A  steel  chisel  ten  inches  long.

3.  A  prismatic  compass.

4.  A  thermometer  for  taking  the  temperatures  of  the  air  and
water.

5.  An  aneroid.

6.  A  steel  measuring  tape.

7.  Abney's  patent  level  which  is  used  for  laying  down  datum-
line  for  plan,  as  well  as  for  taking  the  dips  and  angles.

In  making  a  plan  we  have  found  it  useful  to  mark  the  datum-
line  by  a  stout  string  or  wire  and  to  measure  from  it  as  the  work
proceeds,  indicating  on  the  sides  and  floor  of  the  cave  the  points
of  measurement,  with  paint  or  wooden  pegs.

F   F  2


4:jg


RIIF£S  AND  liAFTA


8.  A  stout  rope  not  less  iLau  twenty  feet  long  witli  a  horse's
girth  at  the  end  is  ueceasarj'  for  the  exploration  of  vertical  tieeures,
BO  that  the  explorer  may  be  let  down  without  any  great  danger.
No  large  unknown  caves  should  he  explored  without  a  rope,  or
by  a  party  less  than  three  in  number.  In  exploring  the  caves
of  Burrington  Combe  we  used  a  rope  sixty  feet  long.  The  descent
iiilo  Helln  Pot,  described  in  the  second  chapter,  p.  41,  was
^fleeted  in  the  fullowing  manner.  A  strong  platform  of  timber
was  made  over  the  opcci  fissure,  and  from  it  a  square
"  c^e  "  or  "  basket "  of  the  ordinary  kind  used  in  mining  woa
let  down  for  the  lirst  drop  of  108  feet.  It  was  prevented  froml
twisting  round  by  two  guide  topes.  For  the  rest  of  the  falls  we.
had  two  ladders  eight  feet  long,  and  a  ro|ie,  without  which  wa-
should  Iiave  been  unable  to  reach  the  bultora.

9,  In  the  exploration  of  water-cavei,  in  which  there  are  some^,
times  sheets  of  water  of  considerable  size  and  depth,  a  raft  ai&y
be  used,  such  as  that  devised  by  Mr.  James  Parker  for  thsj
navigation  of  the  great  cave  of  Wookey  Hole.  It  consisted  of  a...
platform  8Upport4>d  on  barrels  and  built  as  follows  :  A  frame  of'
stout  poles  was  mnde ;  two,  a  a,  being  eight  feet  long,  with  lour,
others,  ^,(^,  lashed  firmly  across,  each  four  feet  in  length.  The  space


j_j_


I    r


_L


I    i


d  was  converted  into  a  platfonn  by  nailing  boards  across,  and
this  was  buoyed  up  by  a  beer-barrel  at  each  end  in  the  interspace
e.  The  barrels  were  attached  to  the  raft  by  two  loops  of  rope  ff,
passing  over  from  b  to  c,  and  thus  kept  in  place,  although  ihey
freely  twisted  and  turned  in  actual  use.  The  ropes  had  an  ad-
vantage over  iron  hoops  for  the  attachment  of  the  barrels,  because
when  tLey  were  tightened  the  platform  was  raised  above  the
water,  when  they  were  loosened  it  was  lowered,  and  thus  tha
raft  could  be  adjusted  to  the  weight  to  be  carried,  to  the  depth


SEARCH  AFTER  BONE  CA  VES,  437

of  the  water,  and  the  distance  of  the  water-line  from  the  roof.
A  raft  of  this  kind  will  bear  tliree  persons,  and  is  sufficiently
light  to  be  carried  over  the  shallows.  With  it  Mr.  Parker  made
his  way  for  a  considerable  distance  in  the  Wookey  Hole  cavern,
and  subsequently  I  penetrated  as  far  as  the  water-line  would
allow  me  to  get.  A  long  pole  is  also  necessary  for  punting.
Mr.  Parker  found  by  experience  that  a  raft  made  of  boards
nailed  on  the  top  of  two  beer-barrels  was  too  unstable  to  be  of
any  use.  In  making  his  way  across  subterranean  pools  the  cave-
hunter  ought  to  be  prepared  for  accidents,  for  the  depth  is  very
uncertain,  and  the  water  sufficiently  cold  to  cause  cramp.  For
the  exploration  of  ordinary  water-caves  a  raft  is  unnecessary,
but  no  attempt  should  be  made  without  a  rope.  In  Yorkshire
and  Derbyshire  there  is  an  unlimited  field  for  adventure  in  the
subterranean  water-courses.

10.  The  most  convenient  lights  for  use  in  caves  are  the  common
composite  candles.  Paraffin  candles  are  open  to  the  objection
that  they  gutter,  lanthoms  do  not  give  a  sufficiently  diffused
light,  and  the  smoke  of  paraffin  torches,  or  flambeaux  dipped  in
turpentine  or  tar  is  intolerable.  Magnesium  wire  reveals  the
beauties  of  the  higher  roofs.

The  Search  after  Ossiferous  Caves.

Many  of  the  ossiferous  caves,  and  especially  those  of  the
neolithic  and  pleistocene  ages,  have  their  entrances  masked  by
debris  which  has  been  accumulated  from  the  surface  above  during
the  long  lapse  of  ages.  In  their  discovery  I  have  found  rabbits,
foxes,  and  badgers  of  the  greatest  service,  since  these  animals
generally  make  their  burrows  in  such  places.  And  where  their
earths  are  met  with  at  the  base  of  a  vertical  wall  of  rock,  I  have
very  generally  found  a  cave.  They  were  my  sole  guides  to  the
discovery  of  the  five  sepulchral  caves  at  Perthi  Chwareu,  described
in  the  fifth  chapter,  in  a  district  in  which  up  to  that  time  caves
were  not  known  to  exist.

The  dwellers  in  caves  very  generally  chose  for  their  habita-
tions the  sunny  side  of  the  ravines  and  valleys,  and  the  spots


438  TUE  METIIoOS

which  comuiaaded  a  widt!  view,  and,  therefore,  theii'  remains
are  to  he  looked  for  iu  those  places,  rather  tban  on  tlie  cold
and  sunless  sides,  or  whore  an  enemy  might  approach  without
observation.


T/u  Scientific  Methods  of  Cave-diffffiiu/.

The  exploration  of  an  ossiferous  cavern  with  Bufflcitnt  accu-
racy to  bo  of  scientific  value,  mny  be  carried  out  In  all  tunnel
caves,  or  those  extending  horizontally  into  the  rock,  by  one  of
the  three  following  methods  wiiich  may  be  adapted  to  the
local  conditions: —

The  first  step  to  take  in  all  cases  is  to  make  a  plan  of  the  en-
trance, and  to  cut  a  passage  down  to  tbe  rock  at  the  entrance,  so
us  to  obtain  a  clear  idea  of  the  sequence  of  tlie  strata.  In  the
hytena-den  at  Wookey  Hole,  we  first  of  all  cut  a  passage  through
the  cave-earth  which  extended  from  the  roof  to  the  floor,  and  then
removed  the  earth  on  either  side  in  blocks,  untU  ultimately  tlie
chamber  and  passages  described  in  tbe  eighth  chapter  were
cleared  of  their  conttuts.  Our  work  Wiis  nuMaTired  evcTy  even-
ing, and  each  bone  and  object  found  was  labelled  with  the  date
which  was  recorded  on  the  ground  plan.  Vertical  sections  were
also  taken  from  time  to  time.  This  mode,  supplemented  by
constant  supervision  of  the  workmen,  was  sufficiently  accurate
to  satisfy  the  demands  of  scientific  research.

Tlie  Victoria  Cave,  where  the  demarcation  between  the  strata
was  very  distinct,  was  explored,  while  the  work  was  under  my
direction  up  to  September  1873,  in  a  somewhat  similar  fashion.
It  was,  however,  impossible  on  account  of  the  great  depth  of  the
deposits  to  cut  a  passage  down  to  tlie  rock  at  the  entrance.  We
therefore  examined  tlie  superficial  strata  througbout  the  cave,
merely  gauging  the  thickness  of  those  below  by  sinking  three
shafts.  Where  a  cave  is  sufficiently  high  to  allow  of  the  work
being  carried  on,  it  is  better  to  clear  out  one  stratum  before
another  is  disturbed.

The  most  elaborate  and  perfect  method  of  cave  exploration  is
that  which  lias  been  used  by  the  committee  in  Kent's  Ilole,


OF  CA  VE  DIGOINO,  439

under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Pengelly,  who  writes  as
follows  '} —

"  The  following  is  the  method  of  exploration  which  has  been
observed  from  the  commencement,  and  which  it  is  believed
affords  a  simple  and  correct  method  of  determining  the  exact
position  of  every  object  which  has  been  found.

"  1.  The  black  soil  accessible  between  the  masses  of  limestone
on  the  surface  was  carefully  examined  and  removed.

*•  2.  The  limestone  blocks  occupying  the  surface  of  the  de-
posits were  blasted  and  otherwise  broken  up,  and  taken  out  of
the  cavern.

"  3.  A  line  termed  the  '  datum-line,'  is  stretched  horizontally
from  a  fixed  point  at  the  entrance  to  another  at  the  back  of  the
chamber.

"  4.  Lines,  one  foot  apart,  are  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the
datum-line,  and  therefore  parallel  to  one  another,  across  the
chamber  so  as  to  divide  the  surface  of  the  deposit  into  belts
termed '  parallels.'

"  5.  In  each  parallel  the  black  mould  which  the  limestone
masses  had  covered  is  first  examined  and  removed,  and  then  the
stalagmite  breccia,  so  as  to  lay  bare  the  surface  of  the  cave-earth.

"  6.  Horizontal  lines,  a  foot  apart,  are  then  drawn  from  side
to  side  across  the  vertical  face  of  the  section  so  as  to  divide  the
parallel  into  four  layers  or  '  levels,'  each  a  foot  deep.

"  Finally  each  level  is  divided  into  lengths  called  '  yards,'  each
three  feet  long,  and  measured  right  and  left  from  the  datum-line
as  an  axis  of  abscissae.

"In  fine, the  cave-earth  is  excavated  in  vertical  slices  or  parallels
four  feet  high,  one  foot  thick,  and  as  long  as  the  chamber  is
broad,  where  this  breadth  does  not  exceed  thirty  feet.  Each
parallel  is  taken  out  in  levels  one  foot  high,  and  in  each  level  in
horizontal  prisms  three  feet  long  and  a  foot  square  in  the  section,
so  that  each  contains  three  cubic  feet  of  material."

"This  material,  after  being  carefully  examined  in  situ  by  candle-
light, is  taken  to  the  door  and  re-examined  by  daylight,  after
which  it  is  at  once  removed  without  the  cavern.     A  box  is  ap-

*  Brit.  Ass.  Reports,  1865,  p.  18.


440  STALAGMITE  TO  BE  BROKEy  TUBOl'GH.

propi'iated  to  each  yard  exclusively,  and  in  it  are  placed  all  the

objects  of  interest  which  tlie  prism  yields.  The  boxes,  each
having  a  label  contaiuiug  the  data  necessary  for  defining  the
situation  of  its  contents,  are  daily  sent  to  the  honorary  secretary
of  the  committee,  by  whom  llie  specimens  are  at  once  cleaned
and  packed  in  fresh  boxes.  The  labels  are  numbered  and  packed
with  the  specimens  to  which  they  respectively  belong,  and  a
record  of  the  day's  work  is  entered  in  a  diary.

"  The  same  method  is  followed  in  tlie  examination  of  the  black
mould,  and  also  of  the  stalagmitic  hi-eccia,  with  the  single  excep-
tion that  in  these  coses  the  parallels  are  not  divided  into  levels
and  yards."

A  careful  i-ecord  of  the  work,  and  minnte  sections  should  ba
taken  daily  on  the  spot.


Tlie  Stahigmitic  Floor  to  be  hrohcn  vp.

In  all  coaes  the  crystalline  flooring  of  stalagmite  and  stalag-
mitic  breccias  which  often  occur,  should  be  broken  up,  or,  if
necessary,  blasted  with  gunpowder.  The  former  verj'  frequently
conceals  the  pleistocene  remains,  and  the  latter,  which  is  in
Kent's  Hole  many  feet  thick,  often  contains  the  traces  of  man
and  wild  animals.  Sometimes  it  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish
the  breccia  from  the  rocky  floor.

Where  the  ossiferous  deposit  fills  a  vertical  fissure  it  must  be
worked  on  the  same  plan  as  in  ochre-mining,  by  sinking  a  shaft.
To  dig  into  it  from  below  (where  this  is  possible)  is  very  dan-
gerous, because  of  the  large  imbedded  stones  which  fall  some-
times without  any  warning.

The  Presei'vation  of  Fossil  Bemahis.

The  fossil  bones  and  teeth,  which  have  very  generally  lost
their  gelatine  and  have  a  tendency  to  crumble  and  split  to  pieces
in  drying,  should  be  gradually  dried,  and  from  tirae  to  time
saturated  with  a  weak  hot  solution  of  gelatine  or  glue.  Silicate
of  soda,  sometimes  called  "  liquid  glass,"  or  melted  paraffin  (not


FRE3ERVA TION  OF  EEMAIN8.  441

the  oil),  may  also  be  used  for  the  same  purpose.  If  tlie  bones
are  extremely  soft,  tliey  may  be  rescued  from  destniction  by
letting  them  dry  in  the  matrix,  saturating  them  and  the  matrix
ivith  a  solution  of  gelatine,  and  then  clearing  off  the  latter.  In
this  manner  I  preserved  the  skull  of  the  musk  sheep  \vhich  is
now  in  the  Museum  of  the  Geological  Survey  in  Jennyn  Street,
London.


RATE  OF  ACCUMULATION


APPENDIX  IT.— r.  40.

Obiervalions  on  the  Rate  nl  which  Stalugmite  is  6eiw^  aeciimulnlal
in  the  Inglehorough  Cave.  Proceed.  Lit.  aud  Phil.  Soc.
Manch.  April  1873.

The  oiily  attempt  to  measure  with  accuracy  the  rate  of  the
accumulation  of  atalagmito  iu  caverns,  in  tliia  country,  ia  that
made  by  Mr.  Jamea  farrer  in  the  lugleborough  Cave,  in  tha
j-rars  1839  tind  18413,  and  publishi^d  by  Prof.  Phillips  in  the
"  Rivers,  Mountains,  and  Sea  Coast  of  Yorkshire "  {second
edition,  1855,  pp.  34 — 35).  The  stalagmite  of  which  the  mea-
surements were  taken  is  that  termed,  from  its  shape,  the  Jockey
Cap.  It  rises  from  a  crystalline  pavement  to  a  height  of  about
two  and  a  half  feet,  and  is  the  result  of  a  deposit  of  carbonate
of  lime,  brought  down  by  a  line  of  drops  that  fall  into  a  basin
at  its  top,  and  flow  over  the  general  surface.  On  March  13th,
1873,  in  company  with  Mr.  John  Birkbeck  and  Mr.  Walker,  I
was  enabled  by  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Farrer  to  take  a  set  of
measurements,  to  be  recorded  for  use  in  after  years.

For  the  sake  of  insuring  accuracy  in  future  observations,  three
holes  were  bored  at  the  base  of  the  stalagmite,  and  three  gauges
of  brass  wire,  gilt,  inserted ;  gauge  No.  1  in  the  following  table
being  that  on  the  S.S.E.,  No.  2  on  N.N.E.,  No.  3  on  the  West  side.
The  curvilinear  dimensions  were  taken  with  fine  iron  wire,  or
with  a  steel  measure  ;  and  the  circumferential  around  the  base
along  a  line  marked  by  the  three  gauges.     Tlie  measurements  2,


OF  STALAGMITE.


443


3,  and  4  of  the  table  were  taken  on  the  loth  of  March,  by  Mr.
Walker,  and  their  accuracy  may  be  tested  by  the  fact  that  they
coincide  exactly  with  No.  1,  which  I  took  two  days  before.

The  lengths  of  wire,  properly  labelled,  are  deposited  in  the
Manchester  Museum,  the  Owens  College,  for  future  observers.

In  the  following  table  I  have  given  my  own  measurements
and  compared  them  with  those  taken  by  Mr.  Farrer.


TABLE  OF  MEASUREMENTS.


13th  Mar.

1873.

Inches.

1839.
Inches.

30  Oct.

1845.

Inches.

Increase

since

1839.    1845.

Rate  of  Increase

per  ainiunt

Indies.

1  Basal  circumference  at  Gauges...

2  Gauf^  No.  1  to  Gauge  No.  2

5  ..           2            «           S

4       ..           8            ..           1

6  Gauge  No.  1  to  hole  in  centre  of

basin  at  apex

•       »»          2       »f         t»

7  .,           8        „          „

8  HeiKht  from  Gauire  No.  1

128
52-625
85  0
40-375

80

29-5

81-4

20-0

20-4

20  7

267
26-6
36  0
87

118

21-0
32  0

120

85  0
95-25
10
65-25

10

5-0
40

K

10
8  25

-2941— -2857

9       M              „                2min.....

10    MH-rfniUm    .TT-.Tt.--rtrtr-. ........ ,....,

1

11  Tape    measurement    on    slope

Gauge  No.  1  to  edge  of  apex.

12  „           No.  2       „

IS       «,              „   maximum    „

14  Roof  to  apex  of  Jockey  Cap

15  Roof  to  tip  of  stalactite

204G

16  Stalactite  to  apex  of  Jockey  Cap

Unfortunately  I  have  been  unable  to  identify  the  exact  spots
where  the  stalagmite  was  measured  by  Mr.  Farrer,  so  that  the
only  measurement  which  affords  any  trustworthy  data  for  esti-
mating the  rate  of  increase  is  number  14  With  regard  to  tliis,
the  only  possible  ground  of  error  is  the  erosion  of  the  general
surface  of  the  solid  limestone,  of  which  the  roof  is  composed,  by
carbonic  acid,  since  the  year  1845,  and  this  is  so  small  as  to  be
practically  inappreciable.  We  have,  therefore,  evidence  that
the  Jockey's  Cap  is  growing  at  the  rate  of  '2946  of  an  inch  per
annum,  and  that  if  the  present  rate  of  growth  be  continued  it
will  finally  arrive  at  the  roof  in  about  295  years.  But  even  tliis
comparatively  short  lapse  of  time  will  probably  be  diminished  by
the  growth  of  a  pendent  stalactite  above,  that  is  now  being
formed  in  place  of  that  which  measured  ten  inches  in  1845,  and
has  since  been  accidentally  destroyed.     It  is  very  possible  that


444    STJLAOMITEH  A'OT  SECESSAEILY  OF  GREAT  AGE.


r


the  Jockey  Cap  may  be  tli«  resnlt  BOt  of  tbe  contiimons  but  of
tfae  iutenuittent  drip  of  water  containing  a  variabli?  quantity  of
carbonate  of  lime,  and  tlist,  therefore,  the  present  rate  of  growth
is  not  a  measure  of  ita  past  or  future  condition.  Its  possible
age  in  1845  was  estimated  by  Prot  Phillips  at  259  years,  on
the  supposition  tliat  the  grain  of  carbonate  of  lime  in  each
pint  was  deposited.  If,  however,  it  grew  at  its  present  rate  it
may  be  not  more  than  100  years  old.  All  the  stjilagmites  and
stalactites  in  the  Ingleborough  Cave  may  not  date  further
back  than  the  time  of  Edward  III.  if  the  Jockey  Cap  be  taken
aa  a  measure  of  the  rale  of  deposition.


INDEX.


INDEX.


A.


Abberille,  fiint  implomontH  of,  16.

Aborigines  (palaeolithic)  of  India,  428,
429.

Acid-worn  joint,  Dovoholes.  Derbyshire,
52.

Adams,  Dr.  Leith.  explores  bone-caves  of
Malta,  377 ;  finds  tooth  of  pigmy  hip-
popotamus in  Candia,  378.

Adriatic  Sea,  the,  388.

Africa,  mainland  of,  379  ;  moraines  in,
387 ;  physical  geography  of,  in  pleisto-
cene age,  870;  spacies  of  European
mammalia  found  in,  380.

African  animals  in  the  Iberian  peninsula,
372 ;  elephant,  the,  372,  876.

Age  of  caTcm  deposits,  test  of,  410.

Albert  Cave,  the,  Settle,  101.

Ale&si,  Canon,  cited,  376.

Algeria,  fossil  mammalia  in,  379.

Alps,  the,  animals  living  to  the  North  of,
359,  360 ;  glaoiers  of,  403.

Altai  mountains,  the,  Irish  elk  in,  401  ;
panther  in,  403.

America,  animals  in,  896-399.

Amiens,  flint  implements  in  the  gravels
of,  16.

Anatolia,  the  glaciers  of,  383-385.

Anca,  Baron,  on  caves  of  northern  Sicily,
376.

Andalusia,  prehistoric  antiquities  in,  209.

Animals  in  Brit- Welsh  caves,  130,  181 ;
classificatory  value  of,  78 ;  domestic,
derived  from  Asia,  187 ;  evidence  of,
as  to  climate,  392 ;  extinct  species
of,  400 ;  historic,  75,  76 ;  living  under
the  care  of  man,  77 ;  migration  of,
306  ;  northern  group  of,  395 ;  pleis-
tocene, living  to  the  north  of  the  Alps,
359-361  ;  unknown  in  Britain  in  the
prehistoric  a^e,  2<)6  ;  prehistoric,  265  ;
probat)le  cause  of  astiiociation  of  species,
397  ;  southern  group  of,  393 ;  temperate
group  of,  399.
Antelope  saiga,  the,  336,  348,  399.

Antelopes,  spread  of,  iuto  Europe,  370.


Antiquity  of  Man  In  Europe,  424.
A'luitaino,  implements  in  the  caves  of,

35i,  355 ;  palioolithic  hunters  in,  847  ;

the  people  of,  356,  357.
Ardennes,  rock  denuded  from  the,  61.
Arenaceous  rocks,  caves  in,  24.
Aniould,  M.,  on  the  cave  of  Sclaigneaux,

218.
Arrows  used  by  palaK)lithic  hunters,  842.
Art  of  the  Eskimos,  856.
Arthur's  cave,  King,  290.
Ashmolean    Museum,  harpoons  in   the,

354,  356.
Asia,  domestic  animals  of  Europe  derived

from,  137 ;  the  lion  in,  898.
Ass,  the,  77.
Atlantic  Ocean,  the,  880;  shore,  the,  at

one  hundred  fathom  line,  865.
Atlas  mountains,  glaciers  of  the,  386.
Aurignao,  the  cave  of,  19 ;  bones  found

in,  246 ;  discovery  of,  248 ;  interment

in,  242  ;  skeletons  of  man  above  palaso-

lithio  stratum  of,  245.
Austen,     Mr.     Godwin-    (see    Godwin -

Austen).
Auvorgne,  paleeolithic  men  in,  21.
Avison,  cave  of,  18.
Axe,  the  river,  29.
Aymard,  M.,  cited,  330.


B.


Badger,  the  (see  Mela  (axtu).

Banwoli,  cave  at,  293.

Basques,  the,  eastern  derivation  of,  227,
228 ;  elements  of,  in  British  and  French
populations,  225;  in  Britain  and  Ire-
land in  the  neolithic  age,  215 ;  the
Dolicho-ce{)hali  cognate  with,  213 ;  the
oldest  neolithic  population,  223.

Baumann's  Hole,  12.

Baume,  the  cave  of,  animals  found  in,
337.

Bayle,  M. ,  on  animals  from  Mansourah,
379.

Bear,  the,  75,  79,  131, 146  ;  in  Germany,


,  448  'A-L

VrS ;  in  Ihfl  mat  at  KUUooh,  27  :  tha

MTO,  ISa,  27S,  Ml :  tha  ijriul;,  27H,

Stfl,  871.  a».
Bmrd,  Mr.,  or  Banwall,  oitoil,  15,  33;

ax^onttions  of.  ^1
BMument,  Mr.  Jolui,  do»oribM  Wmikey

Hole,  20;  on  fan^nil  BlrucCimui,  U9.
B»«vBr,  tlio,  78. 79,  l»±
RckTMM,  Dr.,  dted,  12.
llalgliim,  bnichf -cmihalic  ikulla  found  in,

WS  ;  oam  in,  20,  347  ;  dolich'>-««|>ha-

lioikulliia,  215.
Bell,  ProreHor,  on  tha  a«,  77.
Bertniaii,  M.  Eujr^a,  dted,  1TB.
aUftndol,  M..  cited.  18.
Birkbeck,  Mr.,  died,  3G;  dcucondi  into

HeUn  Pot.  43.
Biiihofferodo,  cars  at,  i.
B'no,  tho,  SO.  adS,  SS9.
BUckwore,  I>r.,  cited,  268,  3G9.
Bluk-Rock  Cave,  the,  iieur  Touby,  «3.
Blnke.  Mr.  CmUn,  cilod,  lit.
Blylh,  Mr.,  oitcd,  3fl3.

Bow,  UiB  wiij,  m,  'U.

Bone-bods,  the,  in  Wookoy  Hole  Hyasua-
Han,  30&-i)07.

Bons-oaveB,  before  and  nfter  the  ice-
period,  403 ;  exploration  of,  in  Gn»t
Britain,  13  i  in  Southern  Euroi«,  il.
370,  S73,  S75,  377  ;  tho  three  ohuieti  of,


10.


e  hiLrpoan,  round  in  Victoriii  Cave,


144,1


I.  186,  194,  MO,  262,  269.


BoMo's  Dbh,  288.

Boulder  olays,  403.

Broehj-cephali,  the  Belgian,  199,  216  ;
Bridsh,  193,  199  :  French,  199,  202,
203  ;  represented  by  Ccltn,  229.

Bradley,  Mr,,  cited,  190.

Brandt,  Profeinor,  cited,  399  ;  on  tha
IriibElk,  401.


,  Mr.,


>  of,  i


Bristol  Channel,  the,  290.

Britoia,  care  exploration  in,  13;  during
the  secand  ice  age,  406  ;  historto  cavea
in,  81 ;  hiatonc  period  in,  76;  inha-
biUnte  of,  in  the  neolithic  a^,  19)  ;  in
the  pleistocene  age,  366  ;  mammalia  in,
during  the  aecond  ice  a^e,  406  ;  popu-
lation of  in  time  of  Cinar,  224  ;  raids
of  Picts  and  Scots  in.  105 ;  range  uf
dolicho-cephali  in,  and  Ireland,  194;
Bomao  dominion  m,  103;  two  period*
of  glaciation  in,  401  ;  wild  animala  in,
75.

British  braohv-eephali,  198.  1K9.

Bril-Welsh  caves.  Via.  130.

Brinham,  caves  at,  Ifi,  319;  implements


Hrocn,  U.,  eSled,  164;  ou  BKHjueenuna,
213;  on  thoCaremeds  I'HommeMort,
198,200,201 ;  derivatioaof  theBaaiDei
tnnn  Afrioa,  227.  228  ;  on  platycnomic
tibia,  176 ;  aepulcbral  caye  of  Oirouf ,
203.

Broma,  Captain,  roiearchca  of,  21,  204.

Bronia  nge  in  Britaiii,  oaves  of  the,  141 ;
annlet  (rum  Tbor's  oaro,  128 ;  artioloi
from  Heathery  Burn,  142.

Brooches  foniid  m  the  Victoria  chts,  (PS.

Brown,  Mr.  E.l«iQ,  on  Thor'a  cave,  128.

Broima,  the  Buv.  O.  F.,  eiplomtioDB  of,
26  i  on  the  temperature  of  oateo.  72.

Bruniquel.  cnva  of,  40  ;  doeeription  of,
217;  inlermonta  of  doubtfnl  age  io,
218.

Brjce,  Dr.,  cited,  405.

BtyBniU,  cave  of,  IBO.

BabnlKi  nomailiciu.  42S.

BuokWid.  Dr.,  cited,  13, 18,  30, 130. 2M.
SH.S,  295,  300;  on  Oailonreutb  («v«,
Z73,  274  ;  Rirkdale,  14,  280,  381,  283  ;
KUIilooh,  276;  Paviland,  23*.

Buffalo  [n  Italy,  81,

Biuk,  ProCvoor,  cited,  13,  120, 1G5.  162.
1 89, 258  ;  on  fowil  boQ«  in  the  Iberian
neninsulB,  373 ;  human  bonoa  fn,iD
Perlbi.^:hwareu  caves,  166-179  :  hiimou
remains  from  Cefn  tumulus,  ISO-ISfl  ;
human  skull  from  caves  of  O&au-e-la,
146,  147 ;  skulls  fonnd  in  »pain,  208,
20y  ;  the  Berbers,  212 ;  the  founa  of
Hentonc,  373  ;  researohee  of,  in  ewraa
of  Gibraltar,  204-208,  371,


Campbell,  Dr.,  cited,  196.

Cfla.j  famitim-i,,  131,  144,  ISO,  157, 16B,
256;  fupiu,  166;  m'pa.  131,150.166.

Capellini,  Professor,  cited,  258;  on  the
Grotta  doi  Colombi,  359.

Caprahiiou.  131,  l.W,  166.

Carbonala  of  lime,  circulation  of,  71 ;  in
Thamea  water,  70;  removed  by  streamL
89.

CarlaUlae,  M„  cited,  247.

Carte,  Dr. ,  cited,  335.

Cat,  CalBr,  394  ;  domestic,  77,  81.

Cat-Hole  cave,  in  Gowar,  145.

Cave-pcarta,  66.

Caves,  biological  division  of,  6-9 ;  claoiS-
cation  of  palieolithic,  351 ;  coneluiion*
aa  to  prehistoric,  261 ;  oontaioing  re-
mains of  doubtful  age,  232  ;  oontenta
of  hiatoric,  131 ;  deposita  in  valteys  and
in,  272,  273  ;  exploration  of  European,
11  ;   filling  up  of    61  ;    formation  of.


,  106;   legends   and


INDEX.


440


superstitions  of,  2 ;  not  generally  found
in  line  of  faults,  57  ;  of  bronze  age  in
Britain,  141;  vf  neolithic  a^^e,  149;
physical  division  of,  5  ;  physical  history
of/  2.J,  65  ;  relation  or,  to  i*ot-holes,
"L'ir«iuc8,"  and  Ravines,  27,  54;  re-
sults of  the  exploration  of  Enn)pean,
430 ;  temperature  of,  71  ;  tost  of  so^q
of  de(>o.sits  in,  410;  u8o<l  as  jtlaces  of
refuge  ;  various  a^^es  of,  58 ;  Albert,
lOl;  of  Andalusia,  208,  2(K» ;  Aqui-
tainc,  347,  354  ;  Aungnac,  2  i:i ;  Avi^on,
18  ;  Banwell,  2D3  ;  Haumunn's  Hole,
12 ;  Riume,  3:J7  ;  Belj^um,  347  ;  Bishof-
ferofle,  4 ;  Black  Rock,  08 ;  Iosco's
Den,  288;  Britain,  278;  Brit-Wclsh,
130 ;  Brixham.  319  ;  Bruniquel,  247  ;
Bn-sgill,  100;  CaMy,  62  ;  Canary  Isles,
211  ;  Cat-Hole,  145 ;  Cavillon,  257  ;
Cefn,  164,  106,  2M6 ;  C€sare<la,  145;
Chauvaux,  215  ;  ('oloiubi,  258  ;  Crawley
Rocks,  288;  Cro-Ma^ion,  249;  Den-
bighshire, 18  ;  Derbyshire,  284 ;  Devon-
shire, 317 ;  Dowkerbottom,  lOl  ;
Dream,  the,  284  ;  Enpis,  234  ;  Fingal,
24 ;  France,  3^36 ;  Fnmconia,  12 ;
Gailenreuth,  273  ;  Gatekirk,  50  ;  Gen-
dron,  2:39;  Genista,  205,  371;  Gib-
raltar, 204,  371  ;  Goatchurch,  31-34 ;
Gower,  288  ;  Heathery  Btini,  141  ;
Hut  ton,  292  ;  Ingle  borough,  36  ;  Ire-
land, tW}5  ;  Kelko,  101  ;  Kent's-Hole,
324  ;  King  Arthur,  290 ;  King's  Scar,
112;  Kirkdade,  280 ;  Kirkhead,  125;
KUhloch,  276;  Laugerio  Basse,  339;
L' Homme  Mort,  198,  200;  Llandebie,
194 ;  Llananiynech,  34 ;  Lombrivc,
256  ;  Longl»erry  Bank,  l.*W ;  Long
Chum,  41  ;  Lunel-viel,  336,  375 ;  Mac-
cagnone,  376 ;  Mai,dilak,  377  ;  Maltii,
377  ;  Moustier,  341  ;  Naulette,  349  ;
Neanderthal,  240  ;  North  Wales,  286  ;
Oban,  195 ;  Orrouy,  2()2 ;  Favilan*!,
232  ;  Peak,  34  ;  Fcmbroke:.hii-e,  289  ;
F6rigord,  337;  Perthi-Chwareu,  152,
157,  167;  Plas  Heaton,  160,  287;
Poole,  34, 126  ;  Provence  and  Mentone,
873;  Reggio,  148;  Rians,  373  ;  Rhos-
digre,  166,  166,  188;  San  Ciro,  376  ;
ScTuigneaux,  218 ;  Sicily,  875  ;  South
Wales,  288  ;  Thors,  127  ;  Uphill,  294  ;
Victoria,  81,  110,  118,  121,  284,  411  ;
Weathercoto,  47 ;  Whitcombo,  140 ;
Womans,  210  ;  Wookey,  17,  29  ;  York-
shire, 101.  278.

Cavonio  de  rUomnio  Mort,  198,  200.

Cavillon,  cave  of,  257  ;  palux)lithic  skele-
tons in,  257  ;  strata  in,  374.

Cedars  of  Lebanon ,  the.  Dr.  Hooker  on,
382.

C-efn,  caves  at,  286 ;  chambered  tomb
near,  161  ;  discovery  of  bones  at,  15,
159  ;  Professor  Busk  on  human  remains
from  tumulus  at,  180-184 ;  on  skull
from,  184-167.

Celts,  bi-achy-cephali  represente<lby,  229.


CtrcHS  alcit,  137;  rnvrfolua,  131,  150,
166;  cnrituUtvumy  419,  424;  ti*pfmjtj
131,  150,  166;  /W/f/»(irMjr,  418,  419,
424;  .Sff/j^M-tc/M*,  419,  424;  verticorniHf
419,  424.

C^viroda,  caves  of,  145  ;  ondcnce  of  can-
niltalism  in,  147.

Chautre,  M.,  cited,  403.

C'haiiel-en-le-Dale,  valley  of,  49,  63.

Chauvaux,  cave  of,  20,  215.

C'hestor,  sack  of,  110.

Chierici,  TAbl.)^,  on  remains  from  the
cave  of  lieggio.  148.

Chillingham  ox,  the,  77,  90.

Christol,  M.  de,  cited,  376.

Christv,  Mr.,  cited,  19 ;  on  the  caves  of
P^rigord,  337.

"  CSrtiues"  in  calcareous  rocks,  56.

Classification  of  pleistocene  strata,  412-
414.

Classificatory  value  of  historic  animids,78.

Ck)se,  Rev.  H.  M.,  cited.  402.

Climate,  ovidonco  of  animals  as  to,  892,
401  ;  i>leistocene,  398.

Coast  line  of  North-Westcni  Euroi>e  in
pleistocene  age,  362.

Cochrane,  Sir  Jau)es,  cited,  208.

Coins  in  the  Victoria  cave.  Settle,  93.

Corsica,  absence  of  cliffs  in,  39(>.

Crania  from  Genista  cave,  207.

Cranial  terms,  definition  of^  190.

Cmven,  caves  near,  106.

Crawley  Rocks,  the  cavern  of,  288.

Crayfoni,  discovery  of  a  flint-flake  at,  416.

Cro-Magnon,  cave  of,  249;  ornaments
foimd  in,  264  ;  position  of  human  skele-
tons in,  253  ;  section  of  deposits  in,
250;  the  human  tibias  of,  176;  traces
of  occupation  in,  251.

Cuvier,  Baron,  cite.!,  12,  13,  18.


D.


Dalebeck,  the,  course  of,  49.

Dana,  I*rofessor,  on  caverns,  58.

Darbishire,  Mr.  R  D.,  reference  to,  93.

Dauphiny,  the  hills  ofl  404.

Dclgado,  Senhor  J.  L.,  on  researches  in
the  caves  of  C^sareda,  145,  14G.

De  Luc,  M.,  cited,  12.

Denbighshire,  sepulchral  caves  in,  18.

l>enny,  Mr.,  cite<l,  120.

Derbyshire,  caves  of,  284.

Desnoyers,  M.,  cited,  25,  26,  28 ;  on  the
analogy  between  caverns  and  mineral
veins,  57  :  relation  of  caves  to  ravines,
66.

Devonshire,  caves  of,  317.

Dio  Chrysostom  Rhetor  on  the  lion,  80.

Dog,  the  {iee  Canis /ami Han's),

Dolicho-cephali,  British,  191,192;  their
range  in  Britain  and  Ireland,  194-197  ;
cognate  with  the  Basque,  218 ;  of  Gib-
raltar, 204-207.

G   G


450  r.n

Diinroun  at  Malta,  the,  KT.

Ii.)vkmbmuim  cave.  IDl.Ufi.

DiHiiu-cave,  ueur  WirluMOrtli,  SSI.

Dubruell,  M.,  cito.1, 18.

Diijwnt.  M.,  cited,  21ll,  537,  23ft :  -lin-
oorarlw  of,  '21  333  ;  uivestigal.iaiii  «(,
in  lAiiant'4Ui^Meus«,  SiS ;  oa  the  Trou
(le  NauletM,  SK.

DiirUham  Do*m,  fismres  of.  2111.

Wlmton,  the  li^ilo  bod  of,  tOi.


Goula,  the.  ISO.
"  Bbur  6»hIo,"  II,
anrlaa,Sir  Pbilip,  eitod.  273.
£l«ih*at,  the  A&ioim.  Ul  :  fuund  ddm-

Ukdrid.  371  i  in  Siolb,  37S,  1194.
Hhpin  cuKiViM,  2de,  asi.  373.370,  too.

m,   til  i  mtlifiui,.  37s,  400  ;    mrri-

ilinM,  427;  primgnJii*  («e  J/ummuCA)  ;
(ri«<dDN>  ^Minu,  427.

Elic,  Iba.  78,  137.

Elmat,  nmiiuBatuf,  109.

Kiiunsls  in  thg  nnrlh  ot  En^rUad,  100 ;
meoticHiad  b;  I'hUojtratiu,  lUl.

Kn^.  c&re  uf,  334.

KnjcllHh  laTRnon.  tho,  107.

Enni^llen,  Lord,  citod,  273.

Kaamfitiiiii  of  pleincene  age,  421.

&liiiuoa.  Bit  of  tbo,  3M ;  impleraeiita  of
tbo,  351 ;  in  Kncope,  42fi  i  probH.blx
tlm  reproBentnlireB  of  cBV&3ffolIerd,
SOS  ;  relntiua  of  oore-dvellera  to,  353.

Eurciiia,   ROliquity  of  man  in,  421 ;   cli-


and,  380;  Soiithom,  bonc^Tes  ot.
370  ;  fnuntt  in  cnvcs  of,  368.
Evans,  Mr.  John,  cited,  17, 147, 15S,  243,
218,  267  ;  on  coins,  94 ;  on  the  iron,
bronio,  and  atooo  aj^i,  130;  on  the
palaeolithic  cav


Fnrnsr,  Mr.,  etploratfnnior.M:  i
lifS  i  on  ruuBtnt  from  UowLarbottma
oave.  113;  «U,b«:iniU.  .  .

Fauna,  eavo,  identical  with  river-bed,
36-2  ;  chaajfei  in  the,  of  Great  Britaia,
78 ;  of  Moiittwllior,  421 ;  of  tioutbera
Euntpe,  tea,  373 ;  the  pleiocene.  430  -
the  pleiHtoasDo,  393,  417 ;  the  prehii-
torio.  136,  137.

Felit  niffrr.  tho.  13S,  2S6,  388  ;  in  Iheriu
juDiii'iilB.  372  :  in  Soaieraut  31)4.

FbIIo^os,  Sip  Charfes,  cited,  164.

ni.ul,f,  cu.iu.>elle,l,  99.

Fin^da  cav,.,  -24.

Fixchcr,  Dr.  Gotheif.  on  tho  puithar,  4

Fi»her,  Kev.  0.,  discofsr*  a  flmt-flake  «t
Crsyford,  *!d.

Fiaber'on,  valley. gravele  at.  218.

Fismiru.  37,  SS ;  of  Dnrdham  Down,
an  ;  of  Moiitone,  373;  uf  madmiQ
Hill.  37L

Flint  llalttM  and  sorapcra  in  cave*  of  Pfti-
ponl,  "■"'     ' -..__.-_-    «-..


Flonw  on  the  A<|uitani,  7,

Foolo,  Mr.  Bnioo,  oitod,

'  n^lemsnta  from  Madi


Europe,  3«0.


idmga


,    Southern


1  flint'


Fo^il  niRmmalia  troni  ibe  Uermiui  OcoHl, ',
364,  8fl5.

FoviUo,  M.,  cited.  170.

Foirl,  the  domoatic.  77,  30.

Foi,  the  Arctic,  34'^,  39IS,  400.

Fraiu.  ProrMror,  cited,  35U,  406.

Franco,  Bnwue  peoples  in,  228  ;  caves  in,
IS,  Ui'l,  33(1;  xkulU  Trnm  Muiuli  in,
2{i3  ;  the  dolicho-cepLali  and  braohv-
ctpliali  in,  laS.

Fran^nia.  carasof.  72.

FraokB,  Mr.,  cited,  20B ;  on  drawing  of
pnlteolithic  hniitors,  31fi ;  on  enamol-
lintr.  100:  on  "late  Celtic  "art,  96.99.

Freeman,  Mr.  E.  A.,  on  the  dominioD  of
West  Wales  in  the  days  of  Ecgborht,
130  :  on  tho  Norman  (jonqnest,  lOS.

Frwhford,  pleistocene  deposits  at,  269.

Fuhlrott,  Ur.,  skull  foun.l  by,  24U.


Fairy  Chamber,  the,  Cal.ly,  63,  84,

Falconer,  Dr.,  ciled,  17,  21,  150,  176,
281,  283,  318,  362,  40l,  418,  4)8,  4-il,
436,  4-,i7  ;  on  bonea  fr.im  8an  Ciro,  iJU  ;
on  niamnuils  in  the  Iberian  peninsula,
37'2 ;  on  tho  fauna  of  the  forest  bed,
420  ;  on  the  hip|>opotamus,  377  ;  on
the  /lifpopolamuM  nanutdinit.  428, 1-29 ;
renenrches  of,  in  Caves  of  Uibmttar,
201-207.

Fallon  deer,  the,  77 ;  in  Britain,  131  ;  in
France.  SO;  in  Kpoin  ami  Africa,  360.

Falun,  M.,  cited,  403,


Oailcureuth.  cave  of,  12,  240,  273  ;  filled

by  a  stream,  275.
GaroiiJie,  vallev  of  the,  366,
(inrriffou,  M.,  cited,  316,
Gatekirk  cavern.  50.
Gaudin.  M,  Charles,  cited,  376.
Gnuilry,  Frofeseor,  cited,  421  ;  on  fnudl

remains  at  Pickenui,  3tiy,
Raul  and  i^pain,  tho  peoples  of,  220.
Gantier,  M.,  citsd,  247.
Gcikie,  Mr.  James,  cited,  263.
Geikie,  Profssior  A.,  cited,  405.
Oendroa,  cave  of,  239.
<!eni-la.  civea,  tho,  20.') ;  articles  in,  206  :

human  r^moina  in,  207,  371.


INDEX.


451


Geography,  pleistocene,  89S.
Goruiau  Ocean,  foHsil  uiamniulia  in,  364.
German  race,  the  ancient,  23().
Germany,  bean}  in,  27S  ;  cave-exploi  ation

in,  11,  12.
Genrais,  M.,  cited,  19  ;  list  of  picioceno

mammalia  by,  42l» ;  on  Eqt'UA  rtMnnttus,

421 ;  on  mammalia  from  Algeria,  379.
Genner,  Dr.,  cited,  11.
Gibraltar,    the  neolithic  caves  of,   204,

371  ;  the  Straits  of,  ;iS9.
Gildas  on  the  character  of  the  English

conquest,  104,  108.
Glacial  periotl,  the,  407  ;  the  relation  of

paU^ithic  man  to,  409.
Glaciation  in  Britain,  two  periotlH  of,  401.
Glaciers  of  Alpn,  403  ;  of  Anatolia,  383  ;

of    Lebanon,   382 ;    in    Mediterranean

area  caused  partly  by  elc\ ation,  387;

of  Pvrenec*,  40  L
Glutton,  the,  2«(;,  27r>,  390 ;  jaw  of,  fioin

Plas  lleaton  cave,  2>>7.
Goat,  the  (««  Otpra  hircus).
Goatchurch  cave,  31 ,  32 ;  legend  of  the

dog  at,  34.
Goldfu««  cited,  18.  273.
Go<l win-Austen,    Mr.,    cited,    2f?3,    388,

405  ;    on  the  fresh- water  mussel,  3t)4  ;

researches  of,  15.
Gosse,  M.,  cited,  170,  193,  350.
Gower,  caves  of,  288.
Great  Britain,   cave-exploration  in,   13;

historic  |.>eriod  in,  75.
Green,  llev.  J.  11.,  on  the  conquest  of

Britain,  96.
Green w^ell,  Rev.  Canon,  discoveries  of,  in

tumuli,  195.
Grey  clays  in  Victoria  cave,  116.
Grotto  di  Mactaunone,  376  ;  tlei  Colombi

inhabite<l  by  cannibals,  258 ;  thigh-bone

of  child  from,  2()0.
(Juanche.s  of  the  Canary  Isles,  the,  211.
Gunn,  Itcv.  John,  cited,  418.


H.


Ilarkncss,  ProfcRsor,  cited,  402.

Hamy,  Dr.,  cited,  349,  352  ;  on  the  cave-

Iwar,  352.
Hare,  the,  at  Pcrthi-Chwareu,  150,  166;

in  Suabia,  395  ;  mentioned,  266,  348 ;

used  tor  fo.Kl  in  neolithic  times,  165,

217,  373.
Ilarfjooiis  used  by   paljcolithic   hunters,

342.
Heathery    Bum,   cave  of,   141  ;    bronze

articles  in,  144.
Heaton,  Mr.,  cited,  287.
Heer,  Professor,   on  vegetables  used  in

Swiss  lake  dwellings,  137.
Helln  Pot,  descent  into,  41  ;  description

of,  45  ;  exploration  of,  43.
llipparion  found  in  Suffolk,  422  ;  fprariU,

424.


HippopotamuK,  266  ;  amphifjiun^  138,  370,
394,  395,  417  ;  UUrunsijf,  377  ;  mijor,
377,  418  ;  namndtras^  428  ;  iMliwiudicHt,
427  ;  l\nUaiuU  (pigmy),  267,  377,378,
4(M).

Bistoric  animals,  75,  78 ;  period,  defini-
tion of,  75  ;  jieriod,  diflorence  between,
an<l  prehistoric,  134.

Histor}',  the  evidence  of,  as  to  the  peoples
ot  Gaul  and  Spain,  220.

Ht>oker,  Dr.,  oito<i,  386  ;  on  the  cedars
of  LelMinon,  382,  ;i8:J.

Hoi-se,  tho,  136,  160,  166,  399,  418.

Horseflesh,  the  uso  of,  132.

Howel  Dha,  tho  laws  of,  77.

Hu'^hes,  Professor,  cited,  287.

Hull,  Piofe.*«*or,  ciUnl,  402.

Hunting  grounds  of  i»alieolitliio  tribes,
367.

Hutton,  cave  of,  292.

Huxley,  ProfesH>r,  cite<l,  144,  155,  179;
on  brachy-cephalic  skulls.  193 ;  on
dolicho-cojjhalic  skulls,  195;  on  the
classification  of  crania,  liK> ;  on  tho
skull  from  Kngis  cave,  2>'^5  ;  on  the
skull  from  Neanderthal  cave,  241.

Hya)na,  the,  animals  at  Wookey  Hole  in-
tro<iucetl  by,  310 ;  bones  gnawed  by,
282, 316 ;  gnawed  jaw  of,  from  Woi)key,
313 ;  man  coeval  with,  in  Somerset,
300 ;  Perritri,  421  ;  the,  pleistocene
occupation  of,  in  Victoria  cave,  118  ;
sptfaa  (spotted),  138,  266,  872,  375,
394  ;  striped,  266,  336,  394.

Hya'ua-den,  characters  of  a,  314  ;  Kirk-
dale,  279.

I.

Iberian    peoples,    225 ;    peninsula,    the

mammals  in,  372.
Ilwric  dolicho-ccphali,  the.  212.
Ice  period  in  Britain,  402,  406,  408.
Implements  used  by  ()aliJColithic  hunters,

340,  \m.
India,  man  in,  in  pleistocene  age,  426.
Ingleborough  cave,  36,  37.
Ireland,  caves  in,  335;   dolicho-cephalic

skulls  in,  194-197.
Irish-Celtic  art,  97.
Irish  Elk,  the,  79.  137,  278,  401.
Iron  age,  the,  cave  of,  140,  141.
Issoire,  ^^''^ndo-ploioceno  mammalia  of,

420.
Italy,  animals  in  the  museums  of,  422.


J.


Jackson,  Mr.  Joseph,  discovers  the  Vic

toria  cave,  81,  84.
Jamieson,  Mr.,  cited,  405.
Jeanjean,  M.,  cited,  18.
Jewellery  in  Victoria  cave,  95.
Jones,  Professor  Rupert,  cited,  350.

0   G    2


Kdka(«vD,  101.

Kouf  a  Hola  covem.  I),  U,  824,  3iE  ;  «^
of  iHiii-^i.'.w^'  of.  930 :  de|ic»ul.t  in,
Saa,  3Z7  ;  the  brecoiii  In.  328,  ith).

KiWr,  Rov-  8-  W.,  r.«oiirdi«»  of,  248.

Kini!  1  Scar,  cave  in,  coniAtD  humsJi
tumurin,  113,  19S

Kirkilsle  OHTe.  U,  279.

Kirkhend  ouve,  1*J&.

KUblucli  Duve,  27e.  277.


1..


17S  ;  Bkullj  otilu.


Luing:   Mr    cited

by  195  i9Q
Lumeaui  M     citeJ   238  ~3')
LnuOGB  u»d  by  poliful  th  c  buQtors  342.

lartot  Frorewv>T  E  c  ted  19  340  114  ;
eii  lomtioia  of  24t  OQ  fowil  remaini.
found  nair  Miidnd  3"2  on  tho  «.««
nf  A   r  k  (H.      41     on  tho  cstb  of  P*ri-


MftJiid,  f««

Uachlak  cave,  »77.

MAlhani  Oove.  £5.

MalU,  bone-mvBB  or.  377.  .

Manunalia,  cUsmiliailitHi  of  iileiatOMt,*  1
strata  hy  moanii  of.  412-416;  eatif  1
iilelsljKwne.  417:  ctidBtios  of.  u  h>-|
dimaia,  393;  in  Algeria,  S7ll :  in.'
Biltoin  during  tho  BBCoud  iue-«B8,  *04r)
ill  tho  Iberinn  peiiinaula,  3T3;  "■- -
pleiuoeue,  420.

MammriUi,  the,  200,  27S,  359,  (01;  flipini  I
of,  -Me.  .  I

Mail.  aDtJqiiity  of,  in  Europe,  424  ;  coeval  I
icith  hyiMiiia  in  Somerwt,  300 ;  in  loiMKa
in  i>1eitl«»u«  ago,  426  i  !□  Paleaiinefl


1  161.


L«mn  n^

m  237  SM  848

tf     1

-u  Ml    U9     160    100     373;

It  am)

Lim ''Bt.no

boB  the  220  222.

of  ,.1     t
Lion     the

ri«onnf  6

2bb    348     3  3,    eitinct    in
80     nmgeof  3od
tttoita  found    n  Cro-Ma^on

ilJWIliB

cave.  264.

.lananiyiicoh,  caves  at,  34.

Llandehie,

CBvoot.  lai.

ioyd,  Mr.

,  cited,  16,  2S6.

lombrive.

cavo  of.  256.

iongberrj-

Bank,  cavo  of,  133.

«ng  Chui

■ncavern,  tho,  41.

lortot,  M.

,  oiled,  3*4.

Luard,  Cdi

)t«in.  discoiera  fossil  manimais

atWiJ-or,366.

Lubbock,

Sir  John,  dted,243,  359  ;  on

the  (ton

0  age.  139.

Lunel-viol,

,  cave  of,  336,  376.

Marion.  M.,  oited.  373.
MartiuBi,  Don  Manuel  O    „
pnihistorio  ontiquitien   of  Audolui

jr<i.re^o>iri»rwn«>,  331,  332,  4S3-1S(  |l

Bonohi,  423,  424;  brmr
lis*.  Mr,  GoOTg*.  on  oonst  of  Usditl.

raiean.  388 ;  on  glaciers  of  the  Atli^  ^

3S«  ;  on  k-vel  in  tho  aJiarn,  390.
JIcKdotjv  Itev.  J.,  riiwovors  the  Madai-

Toilm  lalidrni  in  Kent's  Hole  caTero.

330;  manuBCripts  of,  15.
McPhoraon,  Mr.,  cited,  210.
Motlilorranean   area   in   mciocene   age,

changes  of  level  in,  389,  390.
Mediteitauenn,  the,  physical  condition  of,

iu  pleiatooeno  age,  3al,3S8;  tbeshores

of,  382.
Mo,llioott,  Mr.,  cited,  427.
Mtif  toxNJ.  131,  144, 160, 160.
Mendip  Hills,  the,  ""     "- '  '™-


the(


f,  314.


,„,.,  cited, 170.

Lvell,8irCharlea,  cited,  19,235,257,207,
333,  402 ;  on  the  cave  of  Aurignac,  243,
245  i  on  tho  glaciai  period,  403.

L)n)!,the,  140,200.


„ , yi  of,  373.

Motcalto,  Mr.,  Mted,  36;  descends  ii

Hollu  Pot,  43.
Mineral   condition  of  deposits  in  cav
273.

[ocuridin),  Mr.,  dtcd,  373 ;  on  the  ■
plomtion  of  Mentone,  374.
lontpellier,  the  fauna  of,  421.


ccaOTone,  Grotto  Ji,  ?7B.
,.-l,mro.la,    e;tllri<le>n,    201
lOa,  417  ;  a  ploiocene  spec
ioiifs  Hole,  324,  334  ;  in  mc  ti..
l!a'it.ie,  337  ;  prubnblo  ago  of,  330.


332;  I


Moustier,  cave  of.  341.


IXDEX.


453


Muek  sheep,  tho.  138.  266  ;  at  Cravford,

416  ;  raii^ri>  of.  396.
Myoxttt  MtUUntiff  377.


N.


Naulette,  Trou  de,  remains  ftmnd  in  the,
349.

Neatidertha]  cave,  the,  21 ;  human  skull
found  hi,  240.

NeoHthic  a^^e,  interments  of,  158.

Neolithic  caves  of  Franco,  198;  of  Gib-
raltar. 204  ;  of  Spain,  208  ;  of  Wales,
169,  166.

Neolithic  races,  range  of,  189.

Nilsson,  Profo8.sor,  cite<l,  163  ;  on  dwarfs,
2  ;  on  origin  of  chambered  tombs,  164,
165.

North  Wales,  the  caves  of,  286.


O.


Oban,  remains  in  a  cave  at,  195.
OrfcHton  cave,  13,  317  ;  Jihinocerai  nutya-

rhhiut  of,  415.
Orrouy,  the  sepulchral  cave  of,  202.
Owen,  Professor,  cited,  196,  324  ;  on  tho

cave  of  Bruniquel,  247,  248.
Oxford  Museum,  the,  human  skull  from

cave  of  Llandobie  in,  194  ;    molar  of

pigmy  hi[>]><)potamuB  in,  378.


P.


Pahcolithic  art,  257  ;  caves,  classification
of,  351,  352  ;  hunters,  instruments  used,
by,  34<J ;  hunters,  not  cannibals,  347  ;
implements,  354,  306  ;  man  in  Euroj>e,
395^  429  ;  man,  relatit)n  of,  to  glacial
period,  409 ;  man  in  India,  426 ;  man
in  I'alestine,  429 ;  man  of  the  river-
gravels,  351 ;  tribes,  hunting  grounds
of,  3r»7.

Palestine,  pahcolithic  man  in,  429.

Pal^^mve,  Air.  Gilford,  on  glaciers  of
Anatolia,  3«:i-385.

Panther,  the,  266,  400.

Parker,  Mr.  James,  cited,  30,  141,  194.

Pavilaud  cave,  232.

Peak,  cavern  of  tho,  34.

Pembrokeshire,  caves  in,  289.

Pengelly,  Mr.,  cited,  333  ;  on  Brixhara
cave,  16,  323  ;  on  Cavillon  cave,  258 ;
on  I>evonshire  caves,  317

Pennington,  Mr.,  cited,  126,  285.

IMrigord,  caves  of,  19  ;  articles  found  in
the,  337-339.

Perthes,  M.  Boucher  de,  on  flint  imple-
ments, 16,  17.

Perthi-Chwareu,  pottery  and  implements
from,  167;  Professor  Husk  on  human
l>ones  from,  167-179 ;  refuse  heap  at.


119;  remains  of  aninmls  at,  151.  15.V
156,  187  ;  remains  of  man  at,  163-156;
pe|»ulchral  caves  at,  162.

Phahlbauten,  the  Swiss,  165.

Phillil.8,  Professor,  cited,  284,  405,  411  ;
on  formation  of  aives,  53  ;  on  stalag-
mite, 89,  40;  on  the  Ingleborough
cave,  36;  on  the  origin  of  caves.
26.

Physiography  of  Great  Britain  in  late
pleistocene  age,  363  ;  of  Mediterranean
in  pleistocene  age,  381.

Picts  and  Scots,  raids  of,  in  Britain,  105.

Pickermi,  fosbil  remains  at,  3^.

Plas  Hcaton,  the  tunnel-cave  of,  160,  287.

Platycnemic  leg-lK>nefl,  173-176.

IMatycnemism,  Professor  Busk  on,  177-
179.

Pleiocene  and  pleistocene  characteristic
animals,  423 ;  species  in  Europe,  mix-
ture of,  418.

Pleiocene  mammalia,  the,  420;  period,
the,  424  ;  species,  machairotlKs  a,  332,
333.

Pleistocene  age,  the,  10 ;  animals  living
in,  359-361  :  physiography  of  Mediter-
ranean in,  381,  388  ;  remains  of  animals
before  the,  60 ;  climate  and  geography,
896 ;  coast-line  of  North  -  Western
Europe,  362 ;  divisions^  early,  417  ;
divisions,  late,  414  ;  divisions,  middle,
416;  rehition  of,  to  prehistoric  period,
2^>4,  265;  strata,  classification  of,
412.

Po,  tho  river,  389.

Poole's  cavern,  34,  126.

Pot-holes  and  "cirques"  in  calcareous
rocks,  56.

Porcupine,  in  Spain  and  Africa,  380;
found  in  Belgium,  396.

Prehistoric  i>eriod,  the,  archeological
classification  of,  138  ;  conditions  of  life
in,  262  ;  difference  between  the  historic

.  and,  134  ;  relation  of  pleistocene  to.
264.

Prestwich,  Mr.,  cited,  267,  271,  416 ;  on
Brixham  cave,  321 ,  322  ;  on  carbonate
of  lime  in  Thames  water,  69  ;  on  the
<liscovcries  in  the  valley  of  the  Somme,
17  ;  on  the  denudation  of  the  Mendiits
and  Ardennes,  61 ;  on  palaeolithic  man.
410.

Provence,  bone-caves  of,  373.

Pruncr-Bey,  i)r.,  cited,  19a

Pruni^res,  Dr.,  cited,  2(M).

Purpura  lapitlut  in  cave  of  cro-Magnon,

PjTenees,  the,  animals  living  to  the
North  of  the  Alps  and,  359-361  ;
glaciers  of,  403.


Quati-efages,  M.  de,  cited,  238


454


INDEX.


BaWi,  tiM  {m  l^mi  emmicmbu).
BMBM^Tt  PiPof— of»  cstady  408.

«ii«  tthad  Of,  ^SL
64.


c«r»  <<  in  Modflni,  148.
........jr,  Hm,  7tf,  79, 278;  almBoeoCfiii

aiddte  iMIoeeM  dMrioB.  418;  in-


fKfiflff  of,  845,  808 :  in  tiM  OMf  «£
Lombnw,  268;  in  tte


ciVin-


ford,  88$ ;  In  thtt  IVoo  da  Frante],
aB7>-Hp6riod  of  M.  LMrtot^  414 ;  m^
of,  898.


BhMo  agv,  foMfli  of,

JW«oe«rM«Cnrjau,  418,  418,  424;  ilcaii.
Umskms,  281,  288. 872,  400, 417 :  wumw-
Mnug,  200,  884,  400,  404,  mTm-
418 ;  tuAorHnut  (wo^y),  119, 188,  S78,
400.

Bhoidigro  osfo,  188 ;  oontento  of,  188 ;
grMMtoQe  odi  from,  188.

BiiHM,  mwe  of,  873.

mUkBfd,  the  A^M,  dted,  428.

Bifftro,  U,,  ezplomtioiisof,  287, 878,  S7&

Boodoor,  the,  /d.

BoUeotoo.  Dr.,  dted,  11^ ;  diooofery  of
pigmy  mppopotamtu  by,  378*

Boman  dommkm  in  BritiOii,  108, 104.

BoMnmmier,  citod,  12, 18,  278.

Bitim^yor,  Fkof omor,  citod,  188,  401


S.


Sahara,  the,  changes  of  level  in,  309.
Samian  ware  in  the  Victoria  cave,  92 ;  in

the  Dowkerbott^im  cave,  102.
San  C'iro,  cave  of,  370.
Schaaflrhau«on,  M.,  cited,  147  ;   on    the

Rkuil  from  Neanderthal,  241.
Schmerlin^',  Dr.,  citod,  395;   researches

of,  20,  234,  347.
Sclai;j^eaux,  cave  of,  218  ;    platycneniic

tibia  from,  219
Sanford,  Mr.,  Ayshford,  citod,  31, 63, 140,

29.J,  ;307,  394.
Second  ice  or  glacial  periotl,  406.
Selsea,  remains  found  at,  405.
SerrcH,  M.  de,  cited,  19.
Serval,  the,  21,  372,  394.
Sicily,  bone- caves  of,   21  ;  the  Iberians

in,  222 ;  species  from,  376.
Skulls,  mcahurements  of  brachy-cephalic

and  dolicho-cephalic,  199;  from  Porthi-

Chwareu,   171  ;  of  doubtful  antiouity,

236 ;  table  of  dolicho-cephalic,   found

in  Britain  and  Ireland,  197.
Smith,  Mr.  Hoach,  on  Koman  coins,  83.
Smith,  Kcv.  G.  N.,  on  Tenby  bone-caves,

289.
8olutr<J,  horse's  skeleton  from,  344.
Somerset,  liya-nas  m,  301  ;  mammalia  in

the  caves  of.  :U)6.
Sorcil,  M. ,  on  the  cave  of  Chauvaux,  216.


ftmmUin^    ofUbow  ^  In.  Sovftoni

BiinMM.880.
BmOtWrnlm.  env«oi;288;

in*  888.
SontihofB  BoMpob  boDocnt^m  ot  21.
Spnn,  aitioltti  loond  in  n

in,  268;  Idttorieil  OfidaioelM  to  tlm

peoBieo  of  QmI  and,  220^482.

SpnuC  Admfml.  o^tonftioM  ol^  SI.  877.
luring;  Dr.,  diMovwte  of,  20;  on  «iM

OKfoof  duumuis,  215k  218.
Staff,  tbo.  78, 188.
8tetagmito,imtoof  Oonoeamnklion  of,


Stanloj,  BoT.  &.  oftod,  288.

iJMf  yg/ffffrtf  ■  2ra.

&i«  «m^  m.  180, 188.
SwttMfittid.  OMW  of ,  860.
Sjmondfl,   Bov.  W.  8.,  oa^lom  King
Arthnr'ooKfOb  280^  281.


T.

Tbpir,  tho  «28.

Tempecatoro  of  oav«t,  71.

Tenl^,  onYO  of  (khij  nonr,  82;  tlio
Biaok  Book  near,  88.

Thames  waAor,  oarbonatt  of  Hmo  In,  88,
70.

ThomaiL  Bot.  D.  R,  on  oltambered  ionb
atCefii,  188.

Thoi'a  cave,  near  Aahbonnie,  127 ;  ooon-
pied  by  Brit- Welsh,  129.

Thurnam,  Dr.,  cited,  144;  on  classifica-
tion of  crania,  190 ;  on  craniology  of
Britain  in  neolithic  aj^e,  191 ;  on  dolicho-
cephalic skulls,  192;  on  skulls  from
cave  of  Orrouy,  202.

Tiddeman,  Mr.,  on  the  Victoria  cave.  85.
122.

Troglodytes,  name  of,  6.

Tnnjouthenum  cnvuri,  419,  424.

Tropical  and  cold  climates,  animals  com-
mon to,  400.

Trou  du  Frontal.  236  ;  crania  in,  233.

Tunbridt'o  Wells,  rocks  at.  25.

Turner,  Professor,  on  remains  in  a  cave
at  Oban,  195.

TnrriteUa  communis  in  cave  of  Cro-
Magnon,  251.

Tuto,  islands  of,  caves  in,  59.

Tyddyn  Bieiddyn,  cairn  of,  188.


U.


Ultz,  burial-places  of,  in  Westphalia,  147.
Unlo  mctorum  dredged  from  bottom  of

English  Channel,  364.
Uphill,  cave  of,  294 ;  skull  from.  194.
Unis,  the,  77,  80,  136,  373,  399.
Ursus  arctos,  166,  835.
Vrsut  arvernennin,  418,  419,  422,  424.
Vrsu4  speiaus,  375.
