Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 82         MR. C. DAWSON": SUPPLEMENTARYNOTE ON                     [April I914,



 3. SUPPLE]kKENTARY NOTE On /,he DISCOVERY o f a PAL~OLITS_IC
     HUMAN SKULL aJ~ MANDIBLE at PILTDOWI~ (SussEx). :By
      CHARLES DAWSON, F.S.A., F.G.S., and ARTHU~ SMIT~[
      WOODWA~D, LL.D., F.R.S., Pres.G.S. W i t h an Appendix by
      Prof. GRAFTO~ ELL1OT S~tlT~I, M.A., M.D., V.P.R.S. (Read
      December 17th, 1913.)
                               [PLATESXlV & XV.]
                                   CO~TENTS.                               Page
           I. Geologyand Flint-Implements ..............................    82
          II. Description of the Nasal Bones and Lower Canine
                Tooth of Eoanthropus dawsoni, and some Associated
                Mammalian I~emains .......................................  86
         III. (Appendix). On the Exact Determination of the Median
                Plane of the Piltdown Skull .............................. 93

             I. GEOLOG:t~ AXD FL1NT-htPLE~tENTS.                [C. D.]
 SINCE reading our paper ,m December 18th, 1912,1 we have
continued our researches in the Piltdown gravel.
   The whole bed is divided into four well-defined strata.      The
topmost consists of surface-soil, containing pieces of iron-stained
subangular flint derived from stone ancient gravel, similar to
those beneath.      This surface-soil also contains a mixture of
pottery and implements of various ages.
   Beneath is the second bed of undisturbed gravel, varying from
a few inches to 3 feet in thickness. I t is from the centre of
this bed that the triangular Palmolithic implement mentioned and
figured in our former paper ~ was obtained. I t contains rolled
and subangular flints similar to those found in the strata above
and below, and is mostly pale yellow in colour with occasional
darker patches.
   The third bed, though not always present, is well marked, where
it does occur, by reason of its dark ferruginous appearance, and
chiefly consists of pieces of ironstone and rolled and suhangular
flints deeply patinated and iron-stained. As in most other beds of
this description, the ferruginous colour of the gravel and of the
fossils within it often varies in intensity, from a dull pale-brown
to a lustrous blue-black, within the space of a few inches, the
latter eolour being due to the presence of ferrous sulphide of iron.

      Q. J. G. S. vol. lxix (1913) pp. 117-44.
   2 Ibid. p. 122, footnote 1 & pl. xvi, fig. 2.I find that my former descrip-
tion of these worked flints has been repeatedly misquoted. I took care not to
describe these artefacts as of Chellean age ; but, for purposes of comparison,
I mentioned the work upon one face of the implements as being s i m i l a r
to those of the Chellean s t a g e, that is, one of culture. How far culture
can be ' zoned' with age remains to be proved, but there must always exist
obvious limitations to such a system.--C. D.
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



Vol. 7o.~        T~IE I)ISCOV:ERY OF T H E P I L T D O W l g SKULL.           83

All ~ossils found by us (with the exception of the remains of
deer) were discovered or have been traced to this third dark bed.
   The dark bed rests unevenly upon a fourth, which we iden~qfied
this year. I t consists of very pale-yellow, finely-divided sand and
clay, and appears 'co be a SOle of solidified mud reconsh~cted from
the Wealden strata, beneath it (Tunbridge Wells Sand, Hastings
Beds). This fom~h stratum, less fllan a foot thick, has so fa,r
proved unfossiliferous, but contains flints of a much larger size

         Fig. 1.--Section-of gra~,el-bed at Piltdown (Sussex).
             Approxi,mate scale =1/2~ of the natural size.




 than any of those"in the overlying'strata. These big buff-colom'ed
 ilints vary from 6 to 15 inches in length by 3 to 6 inches
 in width. They are usuMly flat on one side and uneven and
 hmmnocky on t[ie other, which gives them a very characteristic
 appear~mce. As they lie in the bed their flat sides are uppermost,
 a n d where they impinge upon the bed above they are deeply
  stained with iron. They are thickly patinated, and saturated to
  the core with iron.
                                                             ,    1}2
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 N~         MR. t'. ])AWSON : SUI'PLEMENT~.~,RY~N'OTEON"           [April ~9 ~4,

    The character of these flints is often so changed as to resemble
 ironst~me, and sonm can be sclatched and disintegrated with a
 penknife. This feature may well account for the apparent absence
 of flints overlying the stili higher and older strata in the Weald.
 They have a roughl.v-smoothed surface, but bear no striations or
 9frost-fractures.'   The presence of flints of so large a size, and
 comparatively little worn and rolled, in the middle of the Wealden
 area, ix a point of great interest.   No implements or ' E o l i t h s '
 have occurred in this bed, although the latter are faMv common in
 all the overlying stnllaL
    A few derived Chalk fossils have been found by us in the flints
 from the grovels, and include (according to 5{r. C. D. Sherborn
 and Mr. T. H. W i t h e r s ) : - -
        Ecld,mcorg~" cMgaris (= E. scutat~ts Leske), of the shape characteristic
          of the zone of Micraster vor-testvdinariltm.
        Inocemm~s im'o~slan~" (Woods), also a form typical of the same
          horizon.
     The tabular flints so common in the Piltxlown grovel are doubt-
 less derived from the regular layers which occur at the base of the
 zone of 3licrasl(',r ('or-a'ngui~u~, and in t h e upper pal~ of t h e
 zone of ~I. co~'-lesludi~ari'~tm.    In age, therefore, the derived
 Chalk fossils and the flints are very similar, belonging to an
 horizon well exposed at present ill the" soutlwrn Chalk escaq)ment
 (as, for example, at OffLam) near Lewes. I
     Our first work this year was to clear away completely all d~bris
 overlying the floor of the dark grovel-bed from the vicinity of the
 spot where the mandible and piece of occipital bone were found
 last year, so that the irregularities of its level might be full s-
 exposed. We found that the floor was full of depressions, often
 measuring 2 to 7 feet, across and 1 to 2 feet in depth. Into these
 depressions had been drifted the dark ferruginous gravel, and
 in places there vet remained small undisturbed patches. The area
 s,~ exposed by us measured about 20 feet square.
     Following a small rift or channel in the floor which was yet
 tilled with undisturl~ed gravel, we discovered another fragment of
 a tooth of Stcgo,lo~ bearing three cusps. This specimen was
 worked out ver~ carefully, and preserved in the gravel matrix. I t
 seems probable, from its general appearance and condition, that
 this fragment is a pin, ion of the same molar as that to which
 the two fmgntents found last year belonged: like them, it is
 shattered, and shows little sign of rolling. If so, it must have been
 broken before its original deposition, and not by the workmen.
 The other polr         were found about 10 yards away, in d6bris
 e~,mposed of the dark grovel.
     In a depression adjoining that in which a pin, ion of the human
 m'mdible occurred, was found what al)pears to be a flint-flake
 r, mghly worked on one face and stained dark brown (PI. XIV,
   1 ,Cretaceous :Rocks of Brita~in: the Upper Chalk' Mere. Geol. Surv.
 vol. iii (1904) I)P* 46---t7.
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



Vol. 7o.]        'rile   :DIS(_',O~'ERY O:F T H E   PILTDOWN   SKULL.         85


figs. 1 a-1 c) ; also a triangular flint of Palmolithic outline (P1. X I u
 Jlgs. 2 a 2 c), but h a v i n g ' E o l i t h i c ' 'edge-chipping' about the
apex, the colour and p~tination resembling those of the ' Eolithic '
f,)mls found in the pit genendly. Among some of the disturbed
gravel in the pit Dr. Smith Woodward found a flint worked on
()he face and simply flaked on the other face, and similar to the
 Palmolithic flints described in our last paper.
    An incisor of a Beaver (Castor ,fiber) and portion of a mandible
.ecurred in the dark gravel: the former ch)se to the Sl)Ot where
the molars were found last year, and the latter some 12 yards
away to the south. One of the molars agrees in size with a .~ocket
.,f the alveolar border.
    The whole of the work was 1)erforee carried on very slowly, ~md
 we found it impossible to eml)loy more than one lab~mrer, for the
actual excavation had to he closely watched, and each spadeful
(~rcfully examined. The gl-avel was then either wash~d with a.
sieve, or strewn on specially-prepared ground for the rain to wash it ;
after which the layer thus sprea.d was mapped out in squares, and
minutely e.~mfined section by section.
    While our labourer was digging the distm'bed grovel within 2 or
:~ feet from the spot where the mandible was found, ] saw t w ,
hunmn nasal 1)ones lying together with the remains of a turbinated
bone beneath them iJ~ silva. The turbinal, however, was in such
l):~d condition t h a t it fell apalr on being touched, and had to be
recovered in fragments by the sieve ; but it has been pieced together
s:Ltisfaetorily by Mrs. Smith Woodward.
    All the gravel iJ~ situ excavated within a radius of 5 yards of the
spot where the mandible was found, was set apart a~ld searched
 with especial care, and was finally washed and strewn as before
 mentioned. I t was in this spread t h a t Father Teilhal<l de Cha~xlin,
who worked with us three days last smnmer, on August 30th, 1913,
discovered the canine tooth of Eoa,nthropus, hereafter described.
] n this way also Dr. Smith Woodward recovered a small fragment
of a tooth of Rhinoceros~ in the same state ()f mineralization
 as the fragments of teeth of St.eyodo,n and ~lfa,~'todol~.
    Thm~ now remains little excavation to be done in the immediate
 vicinity of the site of these remains. Other excavations which we
 have made in the pit have so far proved unproductive of fossils;
 but we have Ol~med up sonm trial-holes wtfieh give evidence of a
 continuation of the bedded g~uvel to the west, under the plough-
 land there, and across the small valley on the east near Moon's
 'Farm House.

                                    Conclusions.
  ,, We cannot resist the conclusion t h a t the thilxl or ' dark bed' is,
 inl the main, composed of Plioeene drift, probably reconstructed
 i n the Pleistocene Ev)eh. The evidence seems to point towards
 a marking-off vf the third or ' dark bed' from the second or
 lighter bed, t h a t contained a triangular Paheolithic implement,
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 ~()   DR. ~.. S:M:ITt[ WOODWARD : THE :PILTDOW~ SKULL [ A p r i l 1 9 1 4 ,

 one face only of which was worked and was struck in a manner
 somewhat similar to those of the Chellean stage.
    As regards the human remains discovered, including the canine
 tooth, there is nothing in their mode of occurTence to favour t h e
 idea that they may have belonged to different individuals. Putting
 aside the human remains and those of the beaver, the remains of
 the fauna all point to a characteristic l a n d fauna of Pliocene
 age; and, though all are pol~ions of hard teeth, they are rolled
 and broken) The human remains, on the other hand, although
 of much softer matt, rial, are not rolled, and the remains of"
 beaver are in a similar condition. I t would, therefore, scent that
 the occurrence of these two indixiduals belongs to one of the
 periods of reconstruction of this gravel, though for other reasons
 beS,re stated by us, this is not pelffectly ee:~fin."


 ]l. DESCRII'TIO3" OF 'rilE NASAL BO-N-ES A3"I) LOWE~ C:t3-INE
      WooTl[ OF ]:b'O~NTtlROPU.5"D_4I~c;OIYI, A.N-DSOME ASSOCI.~tTED


 Eo ANTHROI~USDAWSONI.
    A fresher study of the c~ufiunl of _Eoanl]lrol)us shows that the
 slight longitudinal ridge along the outer face at the hinder end of
 the parietal region is not median, but one of a pair such as fre-
 quently occurs in the lower types of human crania. The occipital
 and right l~u~ietal bones thus need slight re-adjustment in t h e
 published reconstruction (as described by Prof. G. Elliot Smith in
 a,l appendix to this paper, p. 93), but the result does not a l t e r
 essentially any of the conclusions ah'eady reached. The only real
 addition to our knowledge of the skull is made hy the diseovel5- of
 the nasal bones.
     Like the cranial elements, the n a s a l bones are comparatively
 stout; ~md they are thickened at the upper border, suggesting
 a massive and somewhat overhanging hrow-ridge. They are so
  well preserved that they tit pc:fleetly at the median suture, and
  show that they form a gently-rounded arch, constricted above
 and widening below, but with scarcely any upturning at the lower
 l~rder (Pl. XV, figs. 1 (,-1 d). Both are narrower above than below,
 and the hone of the right side is considerably wider in its upper
  part than that of the left side. Below the irregular l'oughening a~
  the upper thickened end, the outer face of the bone is nearls~ smooth;
  while the inner face of each is marked, as usual, with the longi-
  tudinal groove for the nasal nerve (P1. XV, figs. 1 c & 1 d, ~t.). T h e
  left natal (figs. 1 b & 1 c) is complete, and shows well the extension of
 the infero-external angle, by which the slightly-concave, free lower.
 border of the bone is lengthened. The right nasal (P1. XV, fig. l d )
   t That of Stegodo~t probably presented a more rolled appearance before it;
 was shattered.
   :: See Discussion, Q. J. G. S. vol. lxix (1913) p. 151.
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 Vol. 7o.~          A~I) ASSOCI~kTED MAMMALIAN REI~AII~S.                              87

 is obviously broken at this angle.                   The     following      are some
 measurements (in m i l l i m e t r e s ) : -
      Width of naturally apposed nasals at the upper end ...............          13
      Width of naturally apposed nasals at the lower end (about) ...              15
      Length of %be median suture .............................................   14
      Maximum length of the nasals ..........................................     18
      Length of the upper border of the left nasal ........................        7
          Do.        do.     do.         right nasal ........................     10
          Do.       lower    do.         left nasal ........................      10
          Do.        do.     do.         right nasal (about) ............         11
    Comparison proves that these nasal bones resemble those of
 the existing Me 'l~nesian and African races, rather than those of the
 Eurasian type.
    The remains of a t u r b i n a l found beneath the nasal bones
 are too much crushed and too fragmentary for description; but
 it may be noted that the spongy bone is unusually thick, and has
 split longitudinally into a series of long and narrow strips.
    The remarkable new c a n i n e t o o t h (P1. XV, figs. 2 a - 2 e ) is
 certainly that of a Primate Mammal, and may therefore be referred
 without hesitation to JEoanthropus. As it belongs to the right
 side of the mandible, corresponds in size with the jaw already found
at the same spot, and agrees with the molar teeth in having been
 considerably worn by mastication, it may almost certainly be
 regarded as part of the specimen previously described. No trace
 of the socket for the tooth is seen in the bone pl~served at the
 s)~nphysial end of the ~l~gmentarv mandible, but its position can
 be determined approxima.tely by reference to the corresponding
tooth in the Apes.
    The crown of the tooth is conical in shape, but much laterally
compressed, so that its inner (lingual) face is concave, while its
outer (labial) face is only gently convex. The extreme apex is
missing, but whether by wear or by accidental fracture cannot be
decided. In the upper half of the outer face (P1. XV, fig. 2 a)
the thin layer of enamel is shown, marked by the usual faint
transverse striations (or imbrications); but below this the tooth
is encrusted with a film of hydrated oxide of iron, which has broken
away at the base of the crown, removing the enamel with it. The
darkly-stained dentine is thus exposed here, and the only mark of
the lower limit of the crown is a faintly-impressed transverse line
just above the constricted neck of the tooth. The enamel on the
inner face of the crown (P1. XV, fig. 2b) has been completely
removed by mastication, while that of the outer face, showing its
prismatic sh~cture, is exposed in worn section along the edges of
the apical portion.     The sul~ace of wear forms a simple gently-
curved concavity, evidently produced by a single opposing tooth ;
and it extends to the basal edge of the crown, as indicated by
the clear ending of the cement along its lower margin.               I t is
probably almost parallel with the original inner face of the crown,
and the wear has been sufficient near the apex to expose the
secondary dentine at the upper end of the pulp-cavity.                 The
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 88    DR. ~t. SXI]:H WOODWARD: TIIE P[LTDOWN SKL'LI~ [April I9X4,

 Fig. 2.--t~esto,ration, of the mandible of Eoanthropus dawsoni, in
      left side side ~iew (A) (tud upper view (B) ; two-thirds of
      the nc~tural size.




extent of this pulp-cavity, which is widely open at the lower end
of the root, is well shown in two radiographs prepared by
Mr. Archibald D. Reid (P1. XV, figs. 3a & 3b). It is filled with
grains, of ironstone or sand. The anterior (median-interstitial)
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 Vol. 7o.J          A~-D ASSOCIATED ]~[A.M:~[AI,IAN R E M A I N S ,                        89

 edge of the crown (P1. X V , fig. 2c) widens below to tt triangular
 tumid area, which is sharply bounded by the outer face, the inner
 worn face, and the constricted neck of the tooth.         W h e t h e r or
 not this area was originally covered to any extent by enamel is
 unce,acain: appeal~nces rather suggest t h a t it is invested, instead
 of enamel, with a direct continuation of the cement-layer of the
 root.   The posterior (lateral interstitial) edge of the crown
 (P1. XV, fig. 2 d) is shall), and is not produced below into any
 inner (lingual) protuberance or heel.
    The root of the tooth is complete, somewhat deeper than t h e
 crown, and tape/~ only slightly downwards from the con.~tricted neck

 Fig. 3.--Restoration of the skull and ,ma~,dible of Eoanthropus
  dawsoni, left lateral view ; nearl;~l tt lhi~'d of the ,~alural size.




to the tnmcated lower end. I t is irregularly ovoid in trunsverse
section (P1. X u fig. 2e), the 1)ostero-external (latclal-interstitial+
labial) face being gently convex, while the antero-internal (median-
interstitial + lingual) face is flattened.     I t is invested with a
distinct layer of cement, which is seen in cross-section both at the
lower end and at the base of the crown on tlm inner (lingual) face.
Much of this cement, especially on the flattened face, appears to
be deposited in small, ill-defined, and irregularly-arlanged globules.
   The following measurements (in millimetres) may be cited : - -
     Depth of crown preserved (measured along the outer face) ...                   11'5
     Maximum (antero-posterior) width of crown              .....................   10"0
        Do. (inferno-external) breadth of crop,u1 ..................                10"5
        Do. width of the worn inner face ...........................                 9"0
     Depth of root ............................................................     18"0
     Width of flattened face of root at the upper end ..................             9"5
       Do.       do.     do.       do. at the lower end ..................           7"0
     Smaller diameter of root at the upper end ........................              7"0
       Do.       do.      do. at the lower end ........................              5"0
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 90    :DR. A. S M I T I [ VI'OODWARD : T H E I~II,TI)OWN SKL'r,L        [April I 9 I 4 ,

    The canine tooth thus described is distinctly larger than any
 hitherto found in the genus Homo, and differs fundamentally in
 having completely interlocked with its opposing tooth, which
 worked downwards on its inner face as far as the edge of the
 gum. Its e~xct position in the jaw remains uncel~min, but its
 crown must have risen well above the level of the other teeth, and
 its state of wear implies its sepal-ation fi'om the anterior premolar
 by a slight diastcma, as in the Apes. I f the root was originally
 inclined in a p'hne ahnost parallel with that of the anterior end of
 the jaw, as in the Al~s, the crown must have been more nearly
 upright than that shown in the hypothetical restoration which
 I made ~ )'ear ago. 1 :If, also as in the Apes, the flattened face of
the root was ahnost parallel with the plane of the mandibular
 symphysis, the concave worn face of the crown would be turued
completely backwards and inwards (that is, towards the tongue).
 In this case (P1. XV, fig. 4, and figs. 2-3, pp. 88 &.8.9) the opposing
 upper canine tooth must have been shol~er and wider than the per-
manent ul)per canine in the Recent Apes, for in them the worn
surface of the lower canine ix continued at least slightly over the
outer (labial) side of the crown behind, so that it is visible
in l~teml-cxternal view.       There is no cvidence of wear by the
outer upper incisor, such as sometimes occurs in the Apes; for
this wear leaves :~ small facettc in a plane distinct from that made
by the canine, and never extends more than about half-way down
the crown.
    The degree of wear of this newly-discovered canine tooth is of
especial inh~rest, when considered in connexion with the worn
condition of the first and second molars in the mandible to which
it apparently belongs. An already described, both these molars
are flattened by mastication down to the level of the middle area of
their crown, while the third molar (known only by its socket)
must have been frilly in place (see P1. XV, figs. 5 a & 5 b). The
permanent canine should therefore bc completely extruded and
in use, whether the order of appearance of the teeth corresponded
with tl~t in Man or with that .in the Apes. As, however, the
enamel of its inner face is not merely worn, but entirely removed
by mastication, the tooth must have been well used for a con-
s~demble I~riod.     ] t probably, therefore, came into place before
the second and third molars, ~ts in M a n - - n o t after one or both of
these teeth, an in the Apes.
    This appearance of a human order of tooth-succession in the
mandible of Eoanthropus suggests the desirability of making a
very careful comparison between the shape of the tooth now
described, and that of the lower canine in Man as well as in the
Al~S. As is already known, the permanent canine in some of
the Australian and Tasmanian aborigines is comparatively large,
with its blunt apex slightly projecting above the level of the
dental series; but in this tooth, as in the more normal human

                  1 Q . j . G . S . vol. lxix (1913) p. 133, fig. 4 b.
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 Vol. 70.]        X~'D ~SSOCIXTE~) M.~XLT.~- ~ L n S .                        91

 permanent canine, the outer (labial) face of the crown is com-
 paratively narrow and deep, and is not continued in a gradual
 curve round the posterior (lateral interstitial) face t o the same
 extent as in the fossil tooth. The milk-canine of Man, how-
 ever, may be much more satisfactorily compared. In this tooth
 the gently-convex outer (labial) face of the acuminate crown
 (P1. XV, fig. 6 a) is relatively wider than in the permanent canine,
 and gradually curves round to the posterior (lateral-interstitial)
 face, exactly as in the fossil (P1. XV, figs. 2d & 6d) ; while the
 inner (lingual) face (fig. 6 b) is distinctly concave, and, if its
 enamel were removed, would correspond very closely with the
 worn face of the latter specimen (fig. 2 b). Seen from the flattened
 anterior (median interstitial) face (P1. XV, figs. 2 c & 6 c), these two
 canines appear to be remarkably similar in shape, although, as might
 be expected, the root is somewhat the shol~er in the milk-tooth.
 In all the existing Apes, and in the extinct Dryopithecus, the
 permanent lower canine is more conical than that of Eoanthropus,
 with a more extensive production inwards of the base of the crown
 on the lingual side. It also appears to be usually larger and stouter
 in .proportion to the size of the jaw. The crown of the milk-
 canine in the Apes, however, like that in Man, is much more
 compressed, with a concave inner (lingual) face and a gently-
 convex outer (labial)face, so that it closely approaches the fossil
in shape (P1. XV, figs. 8 a-8 d): the only notewol~thy difference
 being that, in the Apes, there is already the characteristic small
produced heel or ledge at the base of the crown, at the hinder
 (median-interstitial) end of the inner (hngual) face.
    It results, therefore, from these comparisons that, among known
Upper Tertiary and Recent Anthropoids, the pelTnanent lower
canine of Eoanthrop~s agrees more closely in shape with the milk-
canine both of Man and of the Apes than with the COlTesponding
pernmnent tooth in either of these groups. It is also obvious
that the resemblance is greater between Eocr~lh.ro2~ls and Homo
than between the former and any known genus of Apes. I n other
words, the permanent tooth of the extinct Eoantl~roipus is almos~
identical in shape with the temporary milk-tooth of the existing
Honw. Hence it forms another illustration of the well-known
law in mammalian paheontology, that the permanent teeth of an
ancestral race agree more closely in pattern with the milk-teeth
than with the permanent teeth of its modified descendants.
    In this connexion, it is interesting to add that even in Homo
sapiens, if the base of the crown of the canine were raised in
the gum to the same level as tlmt of the adjacent teeth, its apex
would frequently project well above the rest of the dental series.
The relatively large size and depth in the milk-dentition is espe-
cially well seen in a preparation in the Central Hall of the British
Museum (Natural History) ; see P1. XV, fig. 7.
   For valuable help in making these studies, I have again to
th,unk Mr. W. P. Pycraft and Prof. Arthur S. Underwood.
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



.02   D]~. A. S M ] T H W O O D W A ] { D : T I I E P I L T D O W N   SKULL   [April 5914,

                          The Associated Mammalia.
 STEGODO~-o

    The new fragment of a molar of Ste!]odou ix pal~ of an unworn
 plate showing three cusps in line, the outelunost being smaller and
 much less elevated than the two others. I t evidently belongs to
 the hinder end of a molar, and it may perhaps be pal~ of the same
 specimen as the fragments already described.

 RH]~OCFa~OS. (P1. XIV, figs. 3 a & 3 b.)
    Rhinoceros is represented only by the anterior crest o f an upper
 cheek-tooth, which has been broken and rolled before burial, and is
 as highly mineralized as the pieces of molars of Steqodon and
 Mastodon.      This specimen has, therefore, the appearance of a
 derived fossil. As shown in anterior view (fig. 3 a ) t h e crown
 is rather low, and as seen from above (fig. 3 b) the inner expansion
 of the crest is very wide a~ the base. The basal c i n ~ d u m is pre-
 served only on the anterior face, and does not appear to have
 extended round the inner end of the crest. The enamel of the
 inner expansion is almost smooth, but that on the sides of the thin
 part of the crest is marked by a coarse rugosity and a few vel~ical
 corrugations. The specimen cannot be specifically determined with
 certainty ;' but, on direct comparison, it is found to agree best with
 the anterior crest of upper premolar 3 of Rhinoceros mercki
 ( = l~h. leptorhinus Owen) and Rh. etmtscz,s. So far as general
 shape is concerned, it m i g h t belong to either of these species;
 but, as pointed out to me by Prof. Boyd Dawklns, the peculiar
 coarse rugosity of the enamel is most closely similar to t h a t of
 Rhinoceros etrusc~ts.

 CAstor.
    A fragment of the alveolar po,%ion of the inner face of the
 iaghlb mandibular minus of Castor corresponds in size with the true
 molar described last year) This tooth, in fact, fits well the socket
 for m. 2. The newly discovered louver incisor may also, perhaps,
 belong to the same mandible.

                EXPLANATION OF PLATES XIV AND XV.

                                         PLATE XIV.
 Fig. 1. Flaked flint, showing few flakings on one face (1 a), a simple flake on
           the other face (1 b), and its tabular shape in edge-view (1 c). Natural
           size. (See p. 84.)
      2. ' Eolith,' showing flaked edge (2 a), simply-flaked face (2 b), and edge-
           view (2 c). Two-thirds of the natm~l size. (Seep. 85.)
      3. I~hinoceros cf. etrv.scus Falconer: imperfect anterior crest of right
           upper premolar 3, front view (3 a) and inner view (3 b). Nahlral
           size. (See p. 92.)

                 "2 Q.J.G.S. vol. lxix (1913) p. 143 & pl. xxi, fig. 7.
           Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                                          on May 31, 2016
                                            QUART. JOURN. GEOL. Soc. VOL. LXX, PL. XIV.


                            2b.                          2c.                   2a.,.




1C.
       #


    J ,;




                                                         m




                                               .].a.,.




6. M. Woodward,      del.                                                              ~, ~   , 1~ ~~o ~ ~ ~ ~ b~l


             FLINTS AND R H I N O C E R O S                  FROM   PILTDOWN   (SUSSEX).
       Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                                      on May 31, 2016

                                          qUART. JOURN. GEOL. Soc. VOL. LXX, PL. XV.


            la~.            lb.           6a.           6b.           6c.                    6d.




                                         2~ @            -2b
      T~.




                                                 2e.




                        A




                                                                                 lI     iI

                                                                                 ..,q
                                                                                    I


                                                                                 s




8. hi. Woodward, dei.                                                            Bemro~e, ~110,,b e r ~

                            EOANTHROPUS,         HOMO, S I M I A .
Downloaded from http://jgslegacy.lyellcollection.org/ at University College London
                               on May 31, 2016



 Vol. 70.]           x,xD XSSOC[iTED 3[AMMALIX~" REMAINS.                                      93

                                           PLATE XV.
 Fig. 1. EoaM,hrop~,s da~r:so~ii A. S. Woodward: nasal bones in front view
           (1 a), left side view (1 b), with left nasM from within (1 c) and right
          nasal from within (1 d). Natural size. c.--=-inner crest ; n. = groove
          for nasal nerve. (See p. 86.)
      2. Do. : right lower canine tooth in outer or labial view (2 a), inner or
          lingual view (2 b), anterior or medi0m-interstitial view (2 c), posterior
          or laterM-interstitial view (2 d), and outline transverse section of
          neck (2 e). Natural size. (See pp. 87 89.)
      3. Do. : radiograph of the right lower canine tooth from ~dthout (3 a) and
          in side view (3 b). Natural size. (See p. 88.)
      4. Do.: right mandibular rainus with canine tooth, outer view. Two-
          thirds of the naturM size.
      5. Do. : impression of cavity for roots of lower molar 3 ; outer (5 a) and
          anterior (5 b) views, with cro~al in restored outline, l~IaturM size.
      6. Homo sapiens Linn. : right lower m~lk-eanlne in outer or labial view
           (6 a), inner or lingual view (6 b), anterior or median-interstitial viow
           (6 c), posterior or lateral-interstitig.1 view (6 d), and outline transverse
           section of neck (6 e). Twice the ImturM size. (See p. 91.)
      7. Do. : right lower milk-canine and milk-inCisors, outer antero-lateral
           view. Three-hMves of the natural size. (See p. 91.)
      8. Simia satyr~ts Lilm. : right lower milk-canine in outer or labial view
           (8 a), inner or lingmal view (8 b), anterior or median-interstitiM view
           (8 c), posterior or lateral-interstitiM view (8 d), and outline transverse
           section of neck (8 e). Four-thirds of the natural size. (See p. 91.)


 A,PPENDI,~.---On the E ~ C T             ])E'rERMINATION oj~' the MEDrX~
      PL:tNE o f the PILTI)OW~- SKULL.                By P r o f . G. ELLIOT
      SMITt~, M . A . , M . D . , V . P . R . S .
      A t t h e m e e t i n g of t h e Geological Society w h i c h was held on
 D e c e m b e r 18th, 1912, I gave m y filet impressions of t h e cranial
 cast w h i c h Dr. S m i t h W o o d w a r d h a d s e n t m e t h r e e days before
 the meeting.
      On t h e p r e s e n t occasion it is n o t m y i n t e n t i o n to say a n y t h i n g
 f u r t h e r ill reference to t h e brain of' Eoanthroi~us (because I
 a m p r e p a r i n g a full r e p o r t u p o n it for p r e s e n t a t i o n to t h e R o y a l
 Society i ) ; but, as t h e r e has been considerable criticism of t h e
 r e s t o r a t i o n of t h e brain-case, I s h o u l d like to t a k e this oppor-
 t u n i t y of expressing m y opinion t h a t none of t h e criticism has
 a f f e c t e d t h e accuracy of t h e prelimina~ T note u p o n t h e cranial
 cast w h i c h I c o m m u n i c a t e d to this Society in D e c e m b e r 1 9 1 2 3
      As t h e correct restoration of t h e c r a n i u m was t h e necessary
 p r e l i m i n a r y to a n y detailed s t u d y of t h e f o r m of t h e brain,
 Dr. S m i t h W o o d w a r d k i n d l y p e r n f i t t e d m e to e x a m i n e t h e frog_
 m e n t s of t h e skull, a n d m a k e an i n d e p e n d e n t i n v e s t i g a t i o n w i t h
 ~he view of d e t e r m i n i n g w h a t positions t h e y originally occupied
 in t h e skull. T h i s e x a m i n a t i o n revealed a m u l t i t u d e of s t r u c t u r a l
 f e a t u r e s w h i c h indicate precisely t h e h ~ e position a n d o r i e n t a t i o n
 of each of t h e f r a g m e n t s ; a n d t h e r e is n o w no d o u b t t h a t t h e
    i [Communicated to the Royal Society at the meeting on February 19th,
 1914.]
      Q. J. G. S. vol. lxix (1913) pp. 145-47.
