144        ~fm c. DAWSONAND DR. A. SMITH WOODWARD [VO1.lxxi,



4. O~ a BONE IMPLEMENT ~'om PILTDOW~ (SUSSEX). By
    CHX]~LES Dkwso~, F.S.A., F.G.S., and A. SMITH WooJ)w~aD,
    LL.D., F.R.S., Pres.G.S. (Read December 2nd, 1914.)
                              [PLATE XIV.]
 DI~RI~rO the past season we have spent much time in examining
 the Piltdown gravel, working round the margin of the area
 previously explored in detail. 1 In proportion to the amount of
 material removed, however, discoveries were few. Rolled frag-
 ments of teeth of Rhinoceros 2 and Mastodon, as highly mineralized
 as before, were again found in place in the dark gravelS; and they
 seem to belong to the Pliocene species Rh. etruseus and ~ . arvern-
 e~sis, already provisionally recorded.    No human remains were
 met with; but a large piece of bone evidently worked by man
 compensates for much disappointment, and proves to be so sing,uhr
 that it is worthy of special description.
     This bone implement was found about a foot below the surface,
 in dark vegetable soil, beneath the hedge which bounds the gravel-
 pit, and within 3 or 4 feet of the spoil-heap whence we obtained
t h e right parietal bone of the human skull. On being washed
 away, the soil left not the slightest stahl on the specimen, which
 was covered with firmly-adherent pale-yellow sandy clay, closely
 similar to that of the flint-beating layer at the bottom of the
 gravel) T h e bone, therefore, cannot have lain buried in the soil
 for any long period, and was almost certainly thrown there by
 the workmen with the other useless dfibris when they were digging
 gravel from the adjacent hole. It is much mineralized with oxide
 of iron, at least on the surface, and it agrees in appearance with
 some small fragments of bone which we found actually in place in
 the clay below the gravel. Its surface is yellowish brown, the
 eu$ facets being slightly darker than the rest; but the bony
 tissue within is yellowish or creamy white, and the whole is much
 less darkly stained than the bones from the gravel immediately
 above. As it lay in the rock it was broken across at its middle,
 and the two broken faces are stained like the rest of the bone:
 at its thinner end it was accidentally shattered by our workman's
 pick.
     The implement (P1. XIV) is a stout and nearly straight
 narrow plate of bone, 41 em. long and varying from 9 em.
9to 10 cm. in width, with the thicker e n d artificially pointed
 or keeled, the thinner end artificially rounded.          One face
  1 See preceding paper8 in Q. g. G. S. vol- lxix (1913) pp. 117-51, and
vol. lxx (1914) pp. 82-89.
     Found by Dr. A. I)avidson Black, of Wesf~rn Reserve Univeraity,
Cleveland (Ohio) U.S.A.
  a No. 3 of section, Q. J. G. S. vol. lxx (1914) fig. 1, p. 83~
  4 No. 4 of section, i5/d.
                                                                                                       QUART. JOURN. GEOL. Soc. VOL. LXXI, Pt.. XIV.



                 5.

            ,/




                                                               .q
                                                                                                          p.




                                                        .                             #.        ~:.!




                       -4

                                                                                           =_




                                                                                                                                    .




                            \        i                                          t
                                 i

                                g.
                                                                                77.

                                     BONE   IMPLEMENT   FROM        PILTDOWN   (SUSSEX).
G. M. Woodward, del.                                                                                                                    S=,,.os~.Cot~o.,ae,-by.
part 1]        ON k BONE IMPLEMENT FROM PILTDOW~r.                        145

 (P1. X]V, fig. 1) is slightly convex from side to side, with a
dense longitudinally-fibrous texture which shows that it is the
unwrought original outer surface of the bone. The other face
(fig. 2), which is more irregular and slightly concave in its middle
portion, has a coarser and less firm texture, indicating the wall
of a marrow-cavity which is more or less damaged by fracture,
attrition, and decay. The bone at the pointed end measures 5 cm.
in maximum thickness, while the thickness at the rounded end
scarcely exceeds 8 cm. Its nearly parallel lateral edges show no
signs of cutting or polishing, and in the half with the rounded
end one edge is much thicker titan the other. The thicker edge
(fig. 8) here forms a flattened wall nearly at right angles to the
convex face, With the same dense fibrous texture indicating that
it represents the original outer surface of the bone. The thinner
edge (fig. 4) is irregularly broken, exposing hone of a coarser
and less firm texture. The specimen, t h e r e f o r e , a p p e a r s
to be a l o n g i t u d i n a l s t r i p f l a k e d f r o m a limb-bone by
a blow a t t h e t h i c k e r end, in t h e same way as f l i n t -
i m p l e m e n t s were f l a k e d f r o m t h e i r o r i g i n a l cores.

   The only known Pliocene or Pleisteeene limb-bone big enough
to have produced the flake is that of a Proboscidcan; and direct
comparison shows that the specimen was probably taken from the
postero-external part of a left femur, in the region of the third
trochanter and immediately above it (text-figure, p. 146). In
fact, the thick ttattened lateral edge (Ph XIV, fig. 8) passes, just
beyond the transverse fracture, into a sharply-rounded edge (t),
between which and the broken margin of the marrow-cavity there
is a distinct hollowing of the surface; and, if the bone here again
retains its original outer surface, as it appears to do, this must
represent part of the third trochanter itself. In support of this
interpretation, it may be noted that the structural fibres of the
Pil~lown specimen are not directly longitudinal, but make a very
acute angle with the flattened lateral edge, exactly as in the part
of the Proboscidean femur with which the fossil has just been
compared. Some conh-aetion has taken place at intervals along
the line of these fibres, and decay has widened the cracks inf~
small superficial grooves (P1. XIV, fig. 1, g), :resembling those
in a subfossil femur of .Elephas from a lake-deposit in Egypt,
now in the British Museum (No. NI: 8526). Microscope-sections
of the specimen show that there is no difference between its
minute strueh~re and that of Proboscidean bone ~--the narrow,
elongated bone-cells being united by very numerous canaliculi,
of which the majority are nearly s ~ i g h t and extend at righ~
angles to the long axis of the cells.
   While these comparisons seem to be saVisfactory, however, i~
must be admitted that the genus and species to which ~he Pro-
boscidean belonged cannot be determined. The third trochanter
  1 See ' Catalogu,~ of the Histological Series contained in the Museum of the
Royal College of Sargeons ' vol. ii (1855) p]. xii, figs. 17-20.
      nr
ouai~e of ~ ~Ctfe~u~ of Elephas in the bone from which the im-
    meridionalis _N'esti: hinder t~w,   plement was made was in line
    showing the Tart of the bo~w        with the rest of the edge, and
    represented ~y the Piltdoum         not pro~etting ; but the promi-
    imptement ; one-eighth of the       nence of this feature varies con-
    natural size.                       siderably in one and the same
                                        species, as shown by the series
                                        of femora of .Elephas lrrimi-
                                        genius in the British Museum.
                                        The microscopical structure is
                                        also not distinetive.      I t can
                                        only be s t a f ~ that the original
                                        femur must have been as large
                                        as that of •. meridionalis
                                        fi'om the Forest Bed in the
                                        British Museum (No. M 6928),
                                        which measures 1"25 metre in
                                        length (see text-figure).
                                            The two ends of the imple-
                                        ment a r e shaped entirely by
                                        cutting, and bear no marks of
                                        grinding or rubbing, except
                                        perhaps a slight battering at
                                        the point. Most of the cut
                                        facets are small, and many of
                                        them suggest that they were
                                        made by some primitive tool,
                                        presumably a flint. The gently
                                        rounded end (P1. XIV, fig. 5),
                                        which seems to have been a
                                        ragged flake trimmed for com-
                                        fortable handling, exhibits three
g....                                   rows of facets, one bevelling the
                                        edge of the outer face, another
                                        that of the inner face, and a
                                        third mw being directly ter-
                                        minal. The facets of the outer
                                        and terminal rows have especi-
                                        ally sharp margins ; but those
                                        of the inner row are less well
                                        defined, owing to the coarser
                                        and more fragile nature of the
                                        bony tissue at this edge. The
                                        thicker end of the implement
                                        is trimmed to a sharp vertical
                                        keel by the cutting of the
                                        lateral edges, and this keel is
                                        slightly reduced in depth by a
                                        little similar cutting of the
                                        outer and inner surfaces of the
                                        bone. The trimming extends
                                        farthest along the inner lateral
                                        edge, where the bone has been
~&l~ l ]      THE BONE I~PLEMEI~T FROM PILTDOWI~~                 147
larger than elsewhere, and notably long and narrow. The shorter
trimmed outer edge (P1. XIV, figs. 3 & 6) has been worked with
much labour across the direction of the structural fibres, and. is
irregularly hollowed with numerous small cross-cuts. Similar cuts
pass over the inner or medullary surface (fig. 2) of the bone,
which is only worked slightly. The trimming of the outer
surface (fig. 1) extends as far from the sharp terminal keel as
that of the outer lateral edge, and the facets here are narrow and
smooth like those of the inner edge.
    The thicker or outer lateral edge of the implement, just beyond
its ~orked pel~ion and directly opposite the beginning of the
worked portion of the thinner lateral edge, is marked by a smooth
and rounded groove (figs. 1-3, p), which passes from the inner to
 the outer surface of the bone with a slight inclination outwalxls in
 the direction of the keeled end. This groove is cylindrical, not
 hourglass-shaped, and presents the appearance of having been worn
 smooth by friction ; while on each side of it both the colour and the
 texture of the bone suggest that it represents a perforation, from
 which the outer wall has been accidentally broken away. On the
 inner surface of the bone, just within this groove, the beginning of
 another perforation is clearly seen (fig. 2, x), as if an attempt had
 been made to remedy the defect.
     A close examination of the implement leaves no doubt that the
 working and cutting of the bone were done when it was in a com-
 paratively fresh state. As the longitudinal grooves of decay on
 the outer surface (fig. 1, g) pass over the cut facets, they are
 presumably later than the working. It is, therefore, evident that
 the individual who made the implement was contemporary with an
 elephant bigger than the Ma~mnoth (JElephasprimigenius). Such
  gigantic elephants are only known to have lived in Western Europe
 at the end of the Pliocene and the beginning of the Pleistocene
  Period. The nature of the implement itself thus confirms our con-
  clusion based on its mineral condition, that it originally occmTed
  in the lowest layer of the Pilfxlown section. This layer sometimes
  passes imperceptibly into the overlying gravel in which the skull
  of JEoanthropus was found, and there is no reason to suppose that
  it is substantially older than the latter. Like the evidence pre-
  viously described, the discovery therefore seems to suggest that the
  deposits date back at least to the beginning of the Pleistocene
  Period.
     As f~ the probable use of the implement, it can only be remarked
  that we have no evidence to guide us. Its shape is unique, and an
  insh~nent with a point would be serviceable for many purposes.

    In conclusion, we must again express our thanks to Mr. George
 M. Maryon-Wilson, the Lord of the Manor of Barkham, and
 his tenant, Mr. Robert Kenward, for allowing us to continue
 excavations in the Pilklown gravel-pit.
148        mR. c. w w s o ~   x x D ~R. X. S M I T ~ W O O D W ~   [vol.Ixxl,

                    EXPLANATION         O F P L A T E XIV.
 Bone implement from a gravel near Piltdown Common, Fletching(Sussex);
                        half of the natural size.
        Fig. 1. Original outer surface of bone.
             2. Original inner (medullary) surface of bone.
             3. Original outer edge of bone.
             4. Inner flaked edge of bone.
             5. Worked rounded end of bone.
             6. Details of cut facets on outer edge of bone.
g = grooves along structural lines caused by decay; p = artificial hollow,
    apparently the inner wall of a perforation from which the outer wall has
    been accidentally broken away ; t = third trochanter of the femur from
    which the implement was made; x = a shallow pit, probably the
    beginning of an artificial perforation.

                                DISCUSSION.
   Mr. G. F. LAWRENCE said t h a t the form of the implement
suggested a club. Its general surface was older than the cutting,
being different in colour and more abraded.
    Mr. W. DxLv. said t h a t the tool-marks on the bone were of a
character similar to those on an artificially-cut bone in his pos-
session, which was found in the peat, during the dock-excavation
at Southampton, in association with a hammer-stone of Neolithic
age. The tool-marks appeared to have been made, not with a flint
flake, but with some stronger cuttiug or chopping implement.
    :Mr. REOI~AL]) SMITH said t h a t there was one point on which all
were agreed t h a t there was human work on the bone exhibited.
I f it came in t h a t condition from the clay below the gravel (as the
incrustation suggested), then it would rank as by far the oldest
undoubted work of man in bone, nothing universally accepted as
such occurring elsewhere before the period of Le Moustier. The
possibility of the bone having been found and whittled in recent
times must be considered ; and, if it were not shaped in its fossil
state, it had evidently never been used for any purpose such as
grubbing for roots, as the cuts were unscrat~hed, and must have
been made with an even-edged chopper. Experiment might prove
whether a similar surface could now be produced by cutting, as
opposed to fracture. The perforation was not in the centre of the
edge, and some theory m i g h t be based on the dh'ection in which
the hole was worn, as if by the friction of a t h o n g ; b u t he could
not imagine any use for an implement t h a t looked like part of a
cricket-bat. The discoverers were to be congratulated on providing
a new and interesting problem, such as would eventually provoke
an ingenious solution.
    Mr. E. A. MARTIN wished to call attention to certain marks
leading from the perforation, which seemed to show t h a t a thong
had passed through the hole, and had been bound tightly around the
bone. The thong-marks suggested t h a t the pointed end of the
bone was t h a t by which it wm~ held, and t h a t its purpose was t h a t
of a club.
                                                    [September 17th, 1915.]
 part 1]      o~ A BOI~I~ ~ s ~ . M E N _ T . . ~ ~   PILTDOWN.        149

     Mr. A. S. K ~ x ~ D wlshe~i~o congratulate the Authors on t h e
  discovery of a new problem from Pilt~lown. From the differences
  between the cut portion of the bone and the natural surface, he con-
 sidered it possible that the bone was not in a fresh state when cut.
  He suggested that possibly experiments made on a fresh bone
  might throw light on the question as to how the cuts were made.
     Mr. F. P . ME~rELL said that experience in countries where
  elephants were still plentiful showed that the bones began to
  weather rapidly as soon as the flesh had decayed away. There was
  consequently no difficulty in detaching pieces from such bones, bu~,
  they were usually so splintery and even friable, that they were
  unsuitable for any kind of serviceable implement. It seemed to
  him very remarkable that so primitive a being as EoanthroTu8
  should be capable of making and using any implements at all.
     1~[r.S. H. W A R R ~ congratulated the Authors upon the interesl;
  and importance of the discovery. The implement seemed to
  him to be a hacking-tool rather than a club; but he thought
  it a mistake to imagine too much specializationof use in such
  primitive implements. It had always appeared to the speaker
9 that wood and bone must have been used before flint,and the
  evidence from Pi]Mown seemed to confirm this opinion.
     The PRESl])ESZ (Dr. A. SMIzR WOODW~LRD), replying on behalf
  of the .Authors,thought that every circumstance of the discovery
  pointed to the contemporaneity of the implement with ~oanthroTus.
  Mr. Dawson and he were of opinion that the bone was fresh when
  it was cut. They had not made any experiments in cutting bone
  with flints. He regretted that the use of the implement still
  remained a problem. The most plausiblesuggestion that he had
9 received was, that i~ might have been a digging stick; but it bore
 "no marks of battering and scratching.




   Q. J. G. S. No. 282.                                           ~r
150             . R~XSED B E A C H ON T ~ E COAST OF J E R S E r .                   [voL lxxi.




5. On a RAISE]) B~.ACa on the SOUTHERN COAST of JERSEY. By
 ANDREW DUNLOP, M.D., F.G.S. (Read November 18th, 1914.)
 IN June last Mr. Emile F. Guiton, a member of the Geological
 Section of the Soci6t6 Jersiaise, drew my attention to a raised beach
which had been exposed in the course of some building operations
 on the southern coast of the island.
   I t is on the east side of the ridge between Le Hocq and Pontae,
and the section showing it runs from under the surface of the
eastern slope about 25 feet westwards: here it is terminated by
the rock, fine red granite, which makes a steep descent, and passes
under the bed of pebbles. I t is nearly at right angles to the
mare axis of the ridge, and faces northwards. The ridge here
bends somewhat inwards, so that there was ground sloping to the
north-east covering the beds before they were laid bare, and the
underlying rock seems also to slope in the same direction.
   The middle of the section shows the following succession of beds,
~rom above downwards : - -
                                                                 Thickness in feet    inches.
  1. Loam ..................................................... about 4                  2
  2. Stiff brownish red clay ................................. ,,     1                  0
  3. Y e l l o w cl~y, containing waterworn pebbles and
          angular blocks .........................................    3                 4
  4. Coarse b r o w n sand                                         '      ,,   3        6
  5. W a t e r w o r n pebbles   ......................................        4        6

   At the western ~end of the section is a band of stiI[ brownish-
yellow Clay, about 2 feet thick, which lies on the sloping rock, and,
passing, downwards, is continued for a short distance under the
lowest bed.
   The lowest bed (5) consists of well-rounded and waterworn
pebbles with coarse sand and some angular fragments. The pebbles
are of all sizes up to one measuring nearly 2 feet in longest
diameter, and they are mostly of fine red granite, but there are
some of diabase and quartzite, and a few of flint. Some of the
granite pebbles had Undergone so considerable an amount of
decomposition, that they could be broken with the fingers. At the
eastern end of the bed and for the greater part of its length, the
pebbles are closely packed together; but at its western end, where
they have been thrown up on the clay-band covering the sloping
rock, the pebbles are more thinly scattered in the sand.

   The overlying bed (4) is of coarse brown sand.         For some
distance from its eastern end under the slope it is well marked off
from the pebbles beneath ; but, farther on, it seems to merge into
them. The western extremity of the bed, or of the combined beds,
rises and caps the rock which bounds the section, covering also
                b
            J
     .fJ'

                    /   -



                            1

                        f



                                -J
                                               r~

                                                c~


                                               p~




                                                II ~
                                       .p~--




                                               II II


~J




                                               c~




                                     ~o,~-



                                               II
152             ~R. A. VV~-LOPOX ~ ~ISED BEACH               [VO1. Ixxi,

the end of the ehy-band, and forming a foot or t~vo of firmly-
compacted sand containing some pebbles. At the end of the 1 ~ l ,
lower down, a large angular block rests upon the cla~--band which
covers the granite.
   The next bed above (3) consists of yellow clay, perhaps somewhat
sandy ill places, containing numerous~well-rounded pebbles, and, in
its western half, a good deal of angular rubble. I t seems to lie in
a hollow in the sandy bed below, and its eastern end (immediately
under the slope) rests on a mass of angular fragments, which are,
apparently, disintegrating rock i~ situ. None of the pebbles reach
the size of the biggest in the bed below ; but, like these, they are
mostly of fine red granite, with some of diabase and quartzite,
and a few of flint.
  The layer of clay (2) is of elongated lenticular shape, and i~
about 10 feet long.
   The topmost bed (1) is of yellow clayey loam and earth. I t
descends the slope covering the ends of the lower beds, and contains
a layer of rubble which might be artificial, but has, more probably,
been calTied down from the highest part of the ridge. A limpet-
shell was found at the bottom of this loam where it passes over the
bed of sand (4). The surfaces 6f the shell were dull and lustreless,
its apex was somewhat abraded, and its margin fvas woral. Some
fragments of shells of the same kind were noticed on a heap of sand
and pebbles, and in some loam thrown aside by the workmen.
   The section is perhaps some 30 or 40 yards from the nearest part,
of the shore, and its height above mean sea-level, measured by
Mr. Messervy, is just over 53 feet, or about 85 feet above mean
high tide. As there was some doubt, however, as to the exact level
of the base from which the measurements were .taken, it is possible
that the height may be from 8 to 5 feet less.
   On the opposite o1" western side of the ridge, near the top, a
section is shown in a quarry, where yellow loamy clay is seen lying
on the rock as it slopes towards the shore. The bed is from 2 or 3.
to over 10 feet thick ; it contains angular blocks, mostly at its base,
and in one place it shows distinct lamination. The raised beach on
the St. Clement's. road, which I described a good many years ago, 1.
is about a quarter of a mile farther inland. At one time it was
seen in an interesting section, but now it is unfortunately buried
under a mass of fallen earth and vegetation.
   Flint, of course, is foreign to the island, but flint-pebbles are
found in the recent beaches, more especially on the north-eastern
coast, where they occur in large numbers. They have also been
found in two of our low-level (about 25 feet above mean sea-level)
raised beaches, as well as associated with other pebbles in the chy~
                   I Q. j. G. S. vol. x]_ix (1893) p. 526.
part 2]         o x THE SOUTHER~ COAS~ OF JERSEI'.                153

 :Not long ago, Mr. Sinel found some pebbles of Devonian shale,
 with typical fossils, in what appeared to me to be the remains of a
 raised beach on the south-western coast of the islafld. They were
 probably derived from the Devonian rocks of the opposite coast of
 France.
     Recently, Colonel Warton has pointed out a raised beach, which
 had not been previously noticed, in the railway-cutting a little
 beyond the enid of the platform of the Eastern Raihvay-station.
 I t lies in a hollow in the rock, and consists of rolled pebbles in a
 mah~ix of coarse brown sand. I t is about 8 feet thick, and is
 covered with a thick bed of yellow clay, which forms the rest of the
cutting. Its base is 5 feet above the railway-line, and about
,_55 feet above mean sea-level.


                           , Discusslo~r

   The PRESIDENT (Dr. A. SMITH WOODWX~)) emphasized the
 importance of studying the superficial deposits of Jersey, in view
of the recent discovel T of a typical Pleistocene mammalian fauna
m the cavern of La Cotte, St. Brelade's Bay.
   Mr. W. WHITXKER suggested that, as no occurrence of shells
 had been noted, there might be a doubt whether the beds described
 were really a raised beach, although their pebbly character pointed
~hat way. They might be Drift, perhaps of fluviati!e origin.
 He hoped that the Author would continue his work on the
uurface-deposits of Jersey, and that we should thus be placed in
 possession of a connected account of them.
   Mr. G. BXRROW regretted the absence of the Author, as one
 would like to know more of the deposits taken to be part of the
raised beach. The evidence from the Channel Islands formed an
important addition to that already obtained from the Scilly Isles,
(~ornwall, and the opposite coast of France.
   In Cornwall and the Scilly Isles, the raised beach~ had at one
~ime existed over a large part of the coast-line, and a considerable
portion of the rock-shelf, upon which the beach-deposit rested, still
remained. But the greater part of the deposit had now gone, and
material of more recent formation rested on its platform. In
Cornwall the variation in these was not great, and no deposit of
undoubted Glacial age had been recognized ; but, in the Scilly Isles,
lenticular patches of stones, some glacially striated, were found by
the speaker. These occurred in a curious sandy material covering
a rather wide extent. It was found later to correspond, both in
composition and in stratigraphical position, with the L i m o n
of the French coast, which was examined under the guidance of
Dr. Charles Barrois : here, however, no Scratched stones were seen.
The pebbles of the tree beach-material in the Scilly Isles appeared
~o be all of local origin, but thcse of the distinctly newer Glacial
4eposi~ were largely foreign to the islands.
154         RAISED BE~Ca 0~" TaE COXST OF JZaSZr         [VO1.lxxi,
   The basal bed shown in the Author's section seemed to corre-
spond rather wi.'th the Glacial deposit than with the older raised-
beach material.
   Dr. A. STRX~_~ expressed his ssanpathy with the Author on
the circumstances that had prevented his p~sence at the Meeting.
The section described appeared to be one of a number of examples
of raised beach that had escaped destruction on rocky coasts in
the Isle of Portland, in Cornwall and Devon, in South Wales and
elsewhere. The shells that were usually abundant in the beach
were absent , and the caution exercised by a previous speaker in
accepting the beach as such was so far justified. In other respects,
however, the section appeared to be convincing.
  9The age of the beach was doubtful on the South Coast o f
England, but in South ~Tales the deposit definitely preceded the
manifestation of glacial phenomena. Falconer proved that some of
the mammalian remains of the caves of South Wales were embedded
in a sand which belonged to the raised beach. I t was to be hoped
that the Author would continue his researches, and would be able
to throw light on the relation of the Jersey beach to the mam-
malian remains, to which reference had been made by the President.
   Dr. N. O. HOLST, who was invited [iv:the President to take pal~
        9    .      .               -.   .'~   t'-.         o

in the discussmn, said that he consldere~l the loams covermg the.
Channel Islandswthe uppermost deposit in the Author's sectionw
to be the same as those that he had seen in Belgium, in Northern
France, and in the Thames Valley. During his stay in England
he had had so far little opportunity of studying the loams of the
Thames Valley, but perhaps he would be able to express a more
definite opinion when he had seen more of them.
