From Matter to Spirit (Sophia Elizabeth De Morgan, 1863)
========================================================
Sophia Elizabeth De Morgan — Ten years of table-turning experiments by the mathematician's wife — the landmark domestic record of phenomena. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (frommattertospi03morggoog) — 1863 first edition.

Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I

.^/^pt.MMo'^' /^Mf^y-n^^. \

TEN YEARS' EXPERIENCE

m

SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS.

1 ?. ^ I

LOKOOB*

PBINXBD BT 8POTTI8WOOD1 AVD CO-

VB^-bTBKXT SQUABS

-)1

,0

FEOM MATTEE TO SPIRIT.

5^^7V

THE RESULT OF

TEN YEARS' EXPERIENCE IN SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS.

INTENDED AS A aUIDE TO ENQUIREB8.

BY C. D.

WITH A PREFACE BY A. B.

T^ irycv/io Sirov bi\<si irpti, Kol r^y (pwy^v ainov iucouuSf

LONDON:
LONGMAN, GREEN, LONGMAN, ROBERTS, & GREEN.

1863.


PREFACE.

-•o»-

IT is but now and then that a pre&ce is contributed by one
^w^ho is not the author : and only now and not then, or
else then and not now, that the writer of the pre&ce declares
he will not stand committed either for or against the con-
clusions of the book. But this happens in ih.e present case.
I am satisfied, by the evidence of my own senses, of 8ome of ,
the &ct8 narrated : of some others I have evidence as good as
testimony can give. I am perfectly convinced that I have
both seen, and heard in a manner which should make im-
belief impossible, things called sp iritual which cannot be
taken by a. rational being to be capable of explanation by
imposture, coincidfiiicc^ or mistake. So &r I feel the ground
firm under me. But when it comes to what is the cause of
these phenomena, I find I cannot adopt any explanation
which has yet been suggested. If I were bound to choose
among things which I can conceiye, I should say that there is
some sort of action of some combination of will, intellect,
and physical power, which is not that of any of the human
beiags present. But, thinking it very likely that the imiverse
may contain a few agencies^say half a million<-— about which
no man knows anything, I cannot but suspect that a small

VI PREFACE.

proportion of these agencies — saj five thousand — may ha
severally competent to the production of all the phenomena,
or may be quite up to the task among them. The physical
explanations which I have seen are easy, but miserably in-
sufficient : the spiritual hypothesis is sufficient, but ponder-
ously difficult. Time and thought will decide, the second
asking the first for more results of trial.

We, respectable decemnovenarians as we are, have been so
nourished on theories, hypotheses, and other things to be
desired to make us wise, that most of us cannot live with an
imexplained &ct in our heads. If we knew that omniscience
would reveal the secret in a quarter of an hour, we should in
one minute have contrived something on which to last
through the other fourteen. The commonest of all questions
is, * How do you account for . . . ? ' and woe to him who,
not having an answer of his own, shall refiise to accept that of
the querist. So habitual is this propensity that even irony
&ils to tell upon it : what is the use of quizzing the action of
the lungs or the circulation of the blood ? In one instance a
joke about explanations has been taken for fact, and ex-
planations given of it. Bacon, or Selden, or some such dry
humorist, put forth the sarcasm of the old man who took
Tenterden steeple to be the cause of the Goodwin sands,
because he never heard of the sands tmtil after the steeple
was built. Those who should have been hit by this, but were
not, accepted the fact, and proceeded to account for it. They
put forth that some funds destined for lights or other
warnings were diverted to build the steeple; whence of
course increase of wrecks. So it would seem that any sar-
casm aimed at universal expositors may be but a missionary to
the cannibals, one dinner more.

All who have studied the history of opinions will feel

PREFACE. VU

satisfied that the matter is in a right train. Trj to balance a
level on the palm of the hand with the bubble in the middle :
who can do it ? Not one in a htmdred. The little air-drop
is always in extremes : it may stay in the interval for a few
seconds, and then comes a tiny xmconscious motion .which
sends it right up to one end or the other. This is a true
picture of the mode by which human intelligence deals with
conclusions : and this is the way in which we come by all we
know in most things. If, being in all other respects what we
now are, we had been a cautious, logical, self-knowing set of
improved gorillas, content to wait for a decision tmtil we
had got what your way-feelers call grotmd enough, we should
have made what we knew four thousand years ago ground
enough to sleep upon. But, being what we are, we hunt our
arguments, not to arrive at opinions, but to support them.
Of the book of nature, and of the book of experience, may be
said * what was said long ago of another book, that we search
for what we want to find, and take good care to find it. This
is our character, and we must not quarrel with it : we have
got a great deal by allowing it to have its way, and we
may expect more ; one side or the other, or both together,
catch a truth and cut its wings ; a hundred years hence it will
matter little which. ^

Those who aflirm that they have seen faith-staggering |
occurrences, are of course supposed to be impostors or dupes. /

* Hie liber est in quo quserit sua dogmata quisque,
Inyenit et pariter dogmata quisque sua.

Which has been translated, and more, as follows : —

One day at least in every week,

The sects of every kind.
Their doctrines here are sure to seek.

And just as sure to find.

VUl PBEFAGE.

To this there can be no objection : a pretty world we sbotild
live in if the arrangement did not demand moral courage from

those who offer evidence of wonders. For every truth wMch
cowardice has delayed, a thousand falsehoods have been pre-
\i vented from gaining existence. But there is one mode of
treatment which, though not of any ultimate harm as to the
matter in hand, is of bad example : the visionaries are re-
proached for not accommodating their narratives to the
swallow of their hearers. In many ways it is intimated to
them, in effect, that they ought to have come forward with
something less extraordinary, in order that they might have
been believed ; as if the object of a story were assent and
nothing else. This is a principle of danger, when applied, as
it is every day, in our courts of law. The examining counsel
draws himself up, and — with that fearful moral elevation
which it is given to none but brief-holders to attain — thunders
out, * Do you expect the jury to believe . • .' Honour to
the first judge who shall stop the volley with ' Brother Buzfriz !
the witness is to mind his truths the jury will take care of the
credibility.'' In the courts of law, I say, this is a dangeroua
principle : because good or evil, justice or injustice, will be
consummated before the court rises. But out of court, in
matters of asserted fact or theory, the harm is transient, the
good permanent. The man who demands credible story,
and makes onslaught upon all that is beyond his power to
receive, as certainly either &lsehood or delusion, is fiir more
usefrd than he knows of, though not exactly in the way he
thinks of. He takes himself to be separating the wheat from
the tares : but God has been kinder to our race than to leave
that matter in hia hands. He cuts everything to the groimd :
buv the wheat of the moral imiverse has a durable root, which
gives growth after growth, each stronger than the last ; while

PREFACE. IX

the tares, though their roots are also pretty tough, have
shoots which, are weaker and weaker. Hack away then, say
we to him, and never stop to look what is before you ; your
work is judged by quantity, not by quality.

There are some who feel afraid of these gallant slashers, and
decline to encourage their laudable propensity by giving any-
thing marvellous in their presence. There is, to many, some-
thing unpleasant in the alternative of knave or fool, when
invited to select a character for themselves out of the pair.
Do those who quail before this option remember how high
a compliment they pay to the proposers of it? If they
do, and are willing to pay that compliment, there is nothing
to be said. But if they be really of opinion that the other
parties are little worth minding, and yet feel annoyed, it is
because, as very often happens, they do not understand what
in law is called the plea to the jurisdiction. Nine-tenths of
the positive opinions which are given in conversation or writ-
ing are given judicially : that is, the proposer speaks to his
conclusion as positively as if it were his office to kifbw the
truth ; and implies that any opposition is a thing for him to
judge of. He is annihilated by being reduced, no matter in
how courteous a way, from judge to counsel : but this is what
must be done ; the jurisdiction must be denied. Some persons
pull him off the bench with httle ceremony ; but this is hard
upon a poor fellow who really believes in his own right to
decide : the great art is to pull the bench from imder him
without his seeing exactly how he comes to tumble, and with-
out proceeding to sit upon it yourself. There is but one of
the species I am discussing who deserves no consideration : it
is the one who passes from party to judge in the course of
the process. He begins with confession of a mind not made
up ; he only wants to hear the evidence ; he is quite aware of

X PREFACE.

the importance of dispassionate inquiry ; — all addressed to a
person who is not anxious to make proselytes, nor even, to
enter on the subject. In this way a statement of testimony is
obtained, at the end — it may be in the middle — of which the
candid inquirer vaults on to the seat of judgment, and proceeds
to pass sentence. Such a judge is an awkward imitator
of Joshua the son of Nun ; awkward in the omission of
ia most material point. My son, said Joshua, give glory,
and confess, and tell me, and hide not: and after he had
thus wormed out the acknowledgment of hidden treasure,
he thimdered forth, Why hast thou troubled us ? But in the
interval — and the corresponding procedure is quite forgotten
by the judge I speak of — he had sent messengers, and verified
the statement.

I write, as will be guessed, for and to those who have been
staggered either by what they have seen, or by what they
have heard and cannot reject. They are very many in num-
ber, if we include those who think more than they like to con-
fess. And no wonder : for by one of those epidemic move-
ments which seem to be made for the advancement both of
truth and of falsehood, there has been a sudden and general
recognition of the existence of phenomena which historical
inquiry shows never to have been entirely imknown. When
I say phenomena^ I mean certain appearances^ which are
to be finally knit on either to some truth or to some
delusion. All at once, I say, the whole world is made
alive to the existence of these phenomena ; and two parties
are in conflict about their meaning. The opinions of our
race seem to have some affinity with the things which
learning caUs Crustacea^ and common life crabs, lobsters,
&c. • The creature is bound in a hard shell, which at cer-
tain periods it throws off, and manages to take a good

^'

FREFACi:. XI

growth teibre tlae new shell is hardened. Our ghost-shell
has certainly cracked ; but what and how much of growth the
notion wiU get before the new integument is stiff enough for
a philosopher, is still to be seen. It adds not a little to the
wonder that the epidemic broke out among a people who have
the reputation of a dry, practical, unimaginative temperament ;
broke out, I say, for it came on them like the small-pox, and
the land was spotted with mediums before the wise and prudent
had had time to lodge the first half dozen in a madhouse. And
when the infection had crossed the sea, and London and Paris
were running* after tables in a new sense, no very deep
leaearch made it apparent that every one of the new pheno-
mena — I believe literally every one — was as old* as history.
This very remarkable point is to some an evidence of delusion
or imposture ; they argue that the old divinations were one or
the other, whence the modem phenomena, being of the same
character as phenomena, must be of similar source. But it
ought to be obvious that the proper way is to settle the
modem phenomena first, and to return from them to the old
ones ; instead of founding a conclusion about the new upon
pure assumption as to the old. It would be a very curious
thing if in a country in which knowledge of antiquity does
not flourish, persons of no information should have hit upon
striking resemblances to old forms of delusion or fraud. There

* One of the Fathers, but I have mislaid the reference, speaks of
divination fer tabtUas et capras^ by tables and goats ; an odd association.
The "wrord crepa would be the legitimate companion substantive of
crepoj and would mean a crack or rap. But the word is only found in
Meatus {teste Foreellini), who says that crepa are goats, qttod cruribus
crepent. There is enough in this to raise a suspicion that crepa did
actually exist in what would have been its primitive sense, and that the
Father who is cited was speaking of divination by tables and raps.
There is also crepus, for which see any account of the Lupercalia.

Xll PBEFAGE.

are some, of whom I avow mjself one, whose minds cannot
re^se the belief that the qw>d semper quod ubique has a
foundation of reality, open to suspicion that the real &ct may
have been distorted or misinterpreted. I look for the dis-
covery of the sea'Something, which shall explain what won-
dering sailors have called the aea-serpent Mr. Owen and his
brethren may be quite right when they announce that this or
that description is utterly at variance with all structures
hitherto examined : and I hold it most probable that when tlie
sea- something actually comes before them, they will find it
harmonising with other animals in its anatomical features.
Or if, which may happen, it should turn out to be quite ex-
ceptional, what will it be but a water ornithorhyncus, or a
marine boomerang? Before the duck-billy which now has the
first of the two names, was actually killed and given to the
zoologist, he — not the duck-bill, who knew better, but the
zoologist — is said to have supposed that some tricky wonder-
monger had stuck the biU of a duck upon the neck of a
quadruped. What a grand resource is belief in imposture I \
There are savages, we are told, who fill their stomachs with
clay when food is scarce ; which clay they vomit when they
get a meal. In like manner the civilised man of non-nescience —
a word I take the liberty of using for science, since two nega-
tives make an afiirmative — distends his theory-bag with
belief in imposture imtil he can find something to satisfy his
appetite. Self-knowledge would do better; this valuable
commodity would not only keep the wind out of the recep-
tacle, but it need not be displaced to make room when whole*
some aliment comes to hand.

Imposture may be called the Zadok of those whom I de-
scribe ; Coincidence is their Nathan : and this priest and this
prophet anoint Solomon Self-conceit king. It is all coinci-

r

PBEFACX. XIU

dence from beginning to end. If a man see the image of a
friend of whom he was not thinking at the moment, and
blew nothing except that he was &r away, and if at that
moment or close to it that friend should have died — ^I take a
phenomenon of which most non-nescients admit that some of
the thousands of seriouslj affirmed cases are trae— it is a comet-
dence. What is coincidence ? The falling of two things to-
gether. And how did these two things fidl together ? Whj,
they arrived at the same time. And how came this about ?
Because one happened to happen at the same moment in which
the other happened to happen. And to what are we to
attribute this ? To coincidence. There seems something veiy
candid about this circular reasoning ; this making coincidence
to be its own explanation. The truth is that the last assertion
meana unconnected coincidence : but the presence of the adjeo-
tiye strips the theory naked, while the omission hides the
tatters of coincidence, the explanation under the respectable
garments of coincidence the fru;t. Accordingly, those who
rely on coincidence are not in the habit of reminding their
hearers what sort of coincidence they mean.

One of the great pursuits of the world is the study of
evidence : we are all engaged upon it in one way or another.
. But, as generally happens when a word goes much about, it
picks up more than one meaning in its travels. Accordingly,
evidence passes for that which is given and intended to produce
an effect, and also for that which does produce it : there is the
9^od debet monstrari, that which may properly be tendered
in aid of a conclusion, and the quod facit videre^ that which
gives perception of truth or falsehood. The difference, and
the ^llacies of confusion, are strikingly illustrated in the
coittts of law. While the case is preparing for trial it is the
^wyer's business to collect what he then calls the evidence,

XIV PBEFACE.

the matter whicli is to be offered to the jury. It is his dut^
to see that his ' evidence ' is quod debet monstrart^ not
only addressed to the points raised by the pleadings, but in
conformity to certain rational roles which are laid down.
And thus it comes before the jury, who are sworn to give a
true verdict according to the * evidence,' which is now * the
quodfacit videre. So far good ; the law must decide what is
and what is not fit to be offered as material for evidence.
But it may happen that matter slips in which the court would
have prevented if it could, but could not, or at least did not
prevent. And now comes one of those collisions in which the
jury mind rules contrary to the legal mind. If the ghost of
the murdered man were to make his appearance in court in a
form which no one could possibly attribute either to impos-
ture, optics, or chemistry, and were solemnly to declare that
the prisoner was not the murderer, and then to vanish through
the roof, the judge would, no doubt, instruct the jury that
they must dismiss the respectable apparition from their minds
altogether ; that even if the spirit had offered to be sworn and
to stand cross-examination, there would be very grave doubt
whether his evidence could have been received, from his
probable want of belief in a future state ; but that, as matters
stood, it was clearly their duty to take the vision ^ro non viso.
To which the jury would reply, if they believed the ghost, by a
verdict of not guilty. No honest men would ever make be-
lieve that they do not believe what they have in any way

* An exquisite proof of the need of the distinction occurred a few
months ago. The jury asked the judge whether they were bound to find
according to the evidence whether they believed it or not. The judge
kept his countenance, and told them they yjere not bound; but he
ought to have told them that, in the juiy-meaning of the word,
evidence is not evidence until it is believed.

PREFACE. XY

been made to believe, if they clearly understand what they
are doing. This case is only an extreme illustration : I will
now state what happened a few years ago. A sued B on a
bill of exchange : B's defence was I forget what insufficiency ;
that he had accepted a bill was admitted. Now the truth •
was that B had taken up his bUl, released himself irom all
liability, and had the paper in his own hands to prove it.
But, strange as it may seem, this circumstance was not pleaded
in defence to the action ; why, did not appear. Accordingly,
there can be no doubt that payment could not either legally or
reasonably be put forward on the defendant's behalf. By
accident, or as an incident of the defence that was made, the
bill was actually produced, in a manner which showed that
the defendant had taken it up, and was the legal possessor of
the piece of paper. The jury were instructed to find for the
plaintifi^; they evidently demurred, and the judge pressed the
matter, telling them in effect that they were to pretend to
believe they did not know that the bill had been taken up.
The jury were not to be persuaded, and foimd for the de-
fendant ; the judge warning them that the parties would be
put to the expense of a new trial ; which I think did not
happen.

I hold, of course, that the jury were as iully justified in
their verdict as the judge would have been, if he could
have done it, in keeping the unpleaded fact out of their way.
Though the preceding anecdote is only introduced in illus-
tration of the two meanings of the word evidence, the ap-
proval which will be generally given to the verdict turns
upon a point which receives very little attention, though all
are concerned with it, both in and out of court. What is
belief? A state of the mind. What is it often taken to be?
An act of the mind. Tke imperative future tense — I will

XVl PBEFACE.

believe, thou dbalt believe, &c., which has no existence ex-
cept in the grammar-book, represents a futile attempt whicli
people make upon themselves and upon others. We all
know what a horrible chapter of human history has the
second person for its heading : the only thing to be said for tibe
actors is that they believed in the first person, which, besides
making them think the means they used were competent,
gave the honest among them a tendency to suppose that pro-
fe»don might be taken for belief; the dishonest wanted only
profession. The judge thought the jury could believe or not,
as they liked : that is, he thought they could, by an act of
the will, put their own minds into the state in which they
would have been if they had not known of the payment.
This they could not have done : all that was in their power
was to encourage that puzzle-headed — but doubtless, very
honest — confusion between belief and acknowledgement
which is usually in the heads of those who say, * I never will
believe . . . .'

The attempt to induce others to will a belief or an un-
belief is exceedingly common among all sides of all questions.
There is no arguing against it : for it is a lurking attempt,
unsuspected by those who make^it. I go on to something
in which those who have thought and read about belief as
belief may not be quite hopeless of exciting useful reflection.
Let the evidence tendered be what it may, it is an error to
suppose it ought to produce the same effect on different
persons. It is nonsense to say. Strip your mind of aU bias,
and make it equally ready for all impressions : you might as
well tell a wrongly bent twig to please to put itself straight,
that you may then give it another bend in the pr<fper way.
It is evidence which must both unbend and bend : it is not in
the power of anyone to alter his state by wiU. A person who

PREFACE* XVU

finds another easier to convince than himself calls the other
credulous ; but when the other is the harder, the first calls
him unreasonable. Every one is just at the right point ; and
all the initial difference between himself and others is pre-
disposition. What right then has anybody to talk to any-
body else about matters of opinion ? It would seem that we
are to say — ^that is, if we may coin a new word merely to
imitate an old pun — that orthorhopy is my allowance of
rope and heterorhopy another person's : that right bias and
wrong bias are purely relative terms. An astronomer knows
it has been found that people have different knacks of
observing : that with the same thing to note, and the same
clock to note it by, one person will nearly always be a little
in advance of another, and a little behind a third. Nothing
can bring them to a habit of agreement ; it is their nature :
and they call these differences j^er^onaZ equations^ though to the
unlearned non-equations would have been nearer the mark.
But what if all the world be too quick or all too slow ;
surely then there is no such thing as correct astronomy :
what if the disagreements be in all cases only different
versions of too soon, or different versions of too late. It must
be answered that first, there is good presumption that all
kinds of hiunan errors take opposite directions : and next that,
if not, it would be of no more consequence than if all the
clocks in the world were too &st, or all too slow, so long as
they keep as close to one another as now. This last may be
true enough, but the hopes of humanity must lie in the first :
a nice mess we are in if it should happen that all bias is one
way, and that what we caU opposite tendencies lie only in the
differences of one kind of tendency. Suppose, to put a case,
that all mankind have a bias of credulity which is, one man
with another, as 1000; while the most strong-minded, the

a

XVIU PREFACE.

pinks and tulips of philosophy, have as much as 999, and
poor blind spiritualists only 1001 . Think of this as certainly
not impossible, and then read the slashing review which 999
wrote against 1001, beginning * After all the diflFiifidon of
education, after all the triumphs of science, in the middle of

our enlightened century ' Or take it the other way,

let our bias be that of incredulity, in which case 1001 writes
as above against 999. Put all these things together and stir
them up; the result will be a gradual perception of the
meaning and force of difference of opinion, and perhaps a
suspicion that the rational point for the time being is some-
where between the two extremes, and that the people who
* don't know what to make of it,' are nearer the true result
of the present state of materials than either negative philo-
sophers or positive spiritualists. But, as already hinted, these
intermediaries will not settle the question ; the disputants
must do that : all that the undecided can attempt is inducing
both parties to keep the peace, to suspect the existence of
their several biases, and to acknowledge that they are sup-
porting their theories, ready made by help of prepossessions,
not dispassionately constructing them.
J^ The spiritualists, beyond a doubt, are in the track that has
led to all advancement in physical science: their opponents
are the representatives of those who have striven against
progress. I take for granted that there is a large body of
' unexplained phenomena. Imposture men and coincidence
V men I leave to see their king anointed, and to rejoice and say,
x«ong live the king. When navigators first began to make
observations with instruments on deck, the self-sufficient
called them star-shooters, and when a star's altitude was taken
would ask if they had hit it. When the pendulum was first
employed in this coimtry to measure time, the incredulous
were more than usually happy in their jests upon the swings

«i«i

FEEFACE. ZIZ

swangs, as they called them. It is likely enough that the
first set reallj believed that the navigators were pretending to
hold communication with the heavenly bodies ; and that the
second set took the regularity of the movements of the
pendulum for a succession of coincidences. But there is a y^
higher class of obstructives who, without jest or sarcasm, bring ]
up piinciples, possibilities, and the nature of things. These 1
most worthy and respectable opponents are, if wrong, to be
reckoned the lineal descendants of those who proved the earth
could not be roimd, because the people on the under side
would then tumble off. This sect is usefid in raising doubts j
and difficulties, but absurd when it pronoimces decisions upon^
them. It was proper to suspect that the locomotives would,
with a flat wheel on a flat rail, revise to go on for want
of fliction, the wheels doing what by military analogy might
be called goose-roll : but it was absurd to affirm this incapacity
as existing. When the great engineer said before the parlia-
mentary committee that he expected more than ten miles an
hour, the greater barrister — greater for the moment — turned
away and said, ' I will not ask this witness another question.'
The barrister's* moment is gone : the engineer's moment is a
long future. Any one who chose might collect such a list as
"would powerfully edify those who can do without, and woidd
not do a bit of good to those who want the warning.

I have said that the deluded spirit-rappers are on the \
right track : they have the spirit and the method of the grand ;
time when those paths were out through the uncleared forest
in which it is now the daily routine to walk. What was

* When I saj the hamster, I mean the clients who instmcted him.
The hint is worth giving, for people who know that Garrick would have
l)een one of the last men to give a kingdom for a horse, are apt to think
that learned counsel are the fools they are paid to be taken for. Are
the bar better actors than Garrick ?

a 2

XX FBEFACE.

f

that spirit? It was the spirit of universal examinatioii,
wholly unchecked by fear of being detected in the investi-
gation of nonsense. When the Eoyal Sodety was founded,
the fellows set to work to prove all things, that they might
hold fast that which was good. They bent themselves to the
question whether sprats were young herrings. They made a
circle of the powder of a unicorn's horn, and set a spider in
the middle of it ; * but it immediately ran out : ' they tried
several times, and the spider ' once made some stay in the
powder.' They inquired into Kenelm Digby's sympathetic
powder — * Magnetical cures being discoursed of, Sir Gilbert
Talbot promised to communicate what he knew of sym-
pathetical cures; and those members who had any of the
powder of sympathy, were desired to bring some of it at the
. next meeting.' Jime 21, 1661, certain gentlemen were ap-
pointed * curators of the proposal of tormenting a man with
the sympathetic powder : ' I cannot find any record of the
residt. And so they went on, until the time of Sir John Hill's
satire, in 1751. This once well-known work is, in my judg-
ment, the greatest compliment the Royal Society ever received.
It brought forward a number of what are now feeble and
childish researches in the * Philosophical Transactions.' It
showed that the inquirers had actually been inquiring : and
that they did not pronoimce decisions about * natural know-
ledge ' by help of * natural knowledge.' But for this, Hill
would neither have known what to assail, nor how. Matters
are now entirely changed. The scientific bodies are far too
N well established to risk themselves. Ihit qui zonam perdidit —

Let him take castles who has ne'er a groat.

' These great institutions are now without any collective pur-
\ pose, except that of promoting individual energy : they print

FBEFACE. ZXi

foT their contributors, and guard tHemselves by a general
declaration that they will not be answerable for the things
they print. Of course they will not put forward anything for
everybody : but a writer of a certain reputation, or matter of
a certain look of plausibility and safety, will find admission.
This is as it should be : the pasturers of flocks and herds and
the hunters of wild beasts are two very different bodies with
very different policies. The scientific academies are what a
spiritualist might call ' publishing mediums ; ^ and their spirits
fell occasionally into writing which looks as if minds in the
higher state were not always impervious to nonsense.

Again, the spiritualists have taken the method of the old
time. There was a strong head, one Bacon, who laid down a
scheme of philosophising which, in England,* is supposed to
have been the guiding star of all subsequent successes. But
Bacon was great as a destroyer, feeble as a constructor : he
could upset, but he could not set up. His plan was to collect
all the facts ; after which, to use his own expression, sciences
would be made as easily as a circle is drawn with a pair of
compasses. But no answer has ever been given to the question.
What science owed its birth or growth to Bacon^s directions
how to make a science ? Many have profited much by the
descriptions which Bacon (Beacon?) has given ef error: a
few may have profited a little by his expositions of the way
to truth. Those who are acquainted with the build of the
successful sciences can only bring themselves within the pale
of the established worship by making induction mean other
things besides itself. It is universally acknowledged that
Bacon's attempt at a discussion of heat^ on his own plan of

* The Bacon-worship of the continent was much less than that of
England, though not smalL The reaction is now so strong that it is
protested against as excessive by the French translator o/AristotUf
Barthdlemy St.-Hilaire. This was written before I saw liebig's assault.

XXU PBEFACE.

setting up, does not come near enough to deserve even the
name of a failure. There was another strong head, called
Newton, whose opinion of Bacon may be gathered from the
&ct that he does not, in any one of his works, make any
allusion* whatever to Bacon's name, system, or writings. To
this Newton we owe, inter multa alia, the foimdation of
our present knowledge of the moon's motion. How did he
proceed ? By collecting fiicts ? No I by vigorous and
rigorous — I had written one of these words, and afterwards
could not tell which ; but both are true— developement of
one of the most outrageous ideas that ever was conceived, and
trying how its consequences worked. His predecessors had
started the notion that dead matter pulls other dead matter ;
they had an idea that the pull of the earth kept the moon at
proper satellite distance. Newton trumped their trick with a
vengeance : for he made it his hypothesis that every atom of
matter pulls everi/ other atom, I purposely avoid the grand
words gravitate towards and attract : they mean pull without
volition, or they mean nothing. There are stars in the milky
way of which it is now pretty clear that their light takes at
least scores, probably hundreds of years to reach us, at the
express speed of 190,000 miles odd in a second and no stop-
pages. Newton laid down as his theory that there is not a
particle in the salt-cellar in any one of these stars but is
always pull, pull, pulling, at every particle in the salt-cellar
on our earth ; aye, and in the pepper-box too : our pepper
and salt, of course, using retaliatory measures. And he had
the impudence to say. Hypotheses non Jingo ! But for all

* Newton, in some cf his early optical writings, uses the phrase
experirnentum crticis, which raises a presumption, though by no means a
proof, that he had looked into Bacon's writings. If he had really dona
so, his silence must be intentional

PREFACE. XXUl

that, to Newton we owe it, and by aid of this supposition too,
that the moon is of use in finding longitude. He himself
clearly shows that when he talks about matter pulling matter,
he means that matter, no matter how, does move and change
place as it would do if it had all these pulls upon it. Gravity,
says he — ^the cause of these motions — exists and acts, but I
have not yet found out the cause of it. Many of his followers
believe in the very pull ; and all the early opponents of course
took the theory in this sense.

Suppose Newton had merely collected his fiicts; where
should we have been now ? A person who knows the lunar
theory would smile at the idea of a speculator of 1660 presented
with two hundred years of accurate meridian* observations of
the sun, moon, and planets, at two remote observatories, and
requested to make an inductive astronomy out of them which
should give equally accurate predictions for time to come.
He would smile again when he remembers the state of
meteorology. For many a year have observations been made
with aU that ends in ometer ; thermometer, barometer, hygro-
meter, eudiometer, anemometer, &c. And good has been
done by it : but where is our science ? Who can make the
weather of the last three months predict that of to-morrow ?

* James II. has had great notoriety as an actual administrator of naval
affairs : but few can remember how much is due to Charles IL, wHen
they think of the progress of navigation. I hardly know whether this
may not be the first place in which the three royal foundations are
pointedly mentioned together : and of these the second and third were
not merely promoted by the ^i^, but called into existence by the man.
First, the Eoycd Society^ which by strong pressure induced Newton not
merely to print but to write the Frincipia. Secondly, the Royal Obser-
vatory^ from which came the few lunar observations which were essential
to Newton's work : and no such observations had ever been made before.
Thirdly, the Royal Mathematical School, attached to Christ's Hospital,
for the education of navigators.

XXIV PKEFAGE.

He will not have to wait for fame until lie can acknowledge it
only per tahulas et crepas. When Murphy's almanac foretold
the coldest day of the winter, the public, as soon as they saw
that the day named was colder than any that had gone before,
did not wait to try the future, but thronged to buy in such
crowds that the police were called in to keep order. The
time may come when some weather Newton, with an atrocious
theory, and access to one year's observations of some observa-
tory, may point out the direction of progress. Never has any
way been made by observation alone. Facts have sometimes
started a theory ; but until sagacity had conjectured, divined,
guessed, surmised — for more choices, see Roget, § 514— what
they pointed to, the &cts were a mob, and not an army.

Some theory, then, is essential : a bad one may lead to dis-
covery. The Ptolemaic hypotheses improved astronomy. Of
the two great theories of light, emanation and undulation, one
must be wrong, if not both : but both have added largely to
knowledge. The time may come when a step * nearer to the

* At present it seems more likely that attraction will drive out
mattery by and with the aid of repulsion. The current of physical pbilo-
sop ^^te tol^j^ifrds Priestley's notion that an atom is but a centre of
. ; '*■ ^attraction and repulsion, a termimts ad quern for a pull, a terminus a
quo for a push. Well ! but surely there is something to be pushed and
pulled, to push and pulL Here will arise in due season a dispute
parallel to that which is attached to the names of Collier and Berkeley.
"What a comfort it should be to think that this source never can run dry.
Go as far as we may, we shall always be able to raise the question
whether we have arrived at the direct action of Deity, or whether we
are still in second causes. I speak of this life : of the fature state we
are informed by some theologians, but quite out of their own heads, that
' all wants will be supph'ed without eflfort, an^ all doubts resolved with-
out thought. This a state \ ' not a bit of it : a mere phase of non-
existence ; annihilation with a consciousness of it, such as I shall pre-
I sently allude to. The rapping spirits know better than that; their
; views, should they really be human impostures, are very, very singular.

(

PREFACE. XXV

first cause shall raise a smile whenever gravitation is men-
tioned : the time may come when attraction shall be saddled
with some contemptuous nickname, say the pally -hauly
crankum. But this will only be done by the pseudosophs :
those who add wisdom to knowledge will be able to remember
what this — then to be called —^pure theory has added to the
stock of power. The number 999 of the day, when he writes
against number 1001, will twit him with being one who
* ought rather to have hved in the days of our well-meaning,
but blinded, 'ancestors, who were duped by the notion of
matter attracting (I) matter.*

The followers of a* theory are of two kinds; both equally
apt to use it with effect. There are those who hold it tenta-
tively, as consolidating existing knowledge, and suggesting the
direction of inquiry : there are those who believe in it as re-
presenting the true cause. The first may be the wiser ; but
the second are likely to be the more energetic. Now the
spiritualists, so called, meaning all who receive the facts, or
some of them, as facts, may be divided into those who believe
Ihat the communications are spiritual, those who do not see
what else they can be, and those who do not see what they
can be. All who inquire further, let them think what they
may, will, if they shape their inquiries upon the spiritual
hypothesis, be sound imitators of those who led the way in

In spite of the inconsistencies, the eccentricities, and the' puerilities
which some of them have exhibited, there is a uniform vein of descrip-
tion running through their accounts which, supposing it to be laid down
by a combination of impostors, is more than remarkable, even mar-
vellous. The agreement is one part of the wonder, it being remembered
that the ' mediums ' are scattered through the world ; but the other and
greater part of it is that the impostors, if impostors they be, have com-
bined to oppose all the current ideas of a future state, in order to gain
belief in the genuineness of their pretensions.

\

ZXVl PBEFACE.

physical science, in the old time. I do not apeak of those who
suspect imposture : to them it belongs to inyent catch-tests.
I do not speak of those who think they can set out with a
view of the naturally possible and impossible ; they can arrive
at their conclusions by piu-e logic : let them learn Barbara,
Celarentj &c. with all speed, and set about imitating those of
the schoolmen who have made the name of their whole order
a by- word. But to those who know the truth of facts, and
who do not know what can and cannot be — at least out of the
exact sciences — it will appear on reflexion that the most pro-
bable direction of inquiry, the best chance of eliciting a satis-
factory result, is that which is suggested by the spirit hypo-
thesis. I mean the hypothesis that some intelligence, which is
not that of any human beings clothed in flesh and blood, has
a direct share in the phenomena.

Take this hypothesis on its own d priori probability, and
compare it with that of attraction. Suppose a person wholly
new to both subjects, wholly undrilled both in theology and
in physics. He is to choose between two assertions, one true
and one Mse, and to lose his life if he choose the false one.
The first assertion is that there are incorporeal intelligences
in the universe, and that they sometimes communicate with
men : the second is that the particles of the stars in the milky
way give infinitesimal permanent pulls to the particles on our
earth. I suspect that most, even among those who have all exist-
ing prepossessions, would feel rather puzzled to know which they
would have chosen, had they been situated as above described.

The simple form of the hypothesis, namely, the cooperation
of an intelligence which is not that of living human beings, is
far too elementary to be the pabulum of most persons : they
could as soon make pure nitrogen do the work of nitrogenised
food. We must have something more positive than this.

PBEFACE. XXVn

Accordingly, some will have the phenomena to be, as the
phenomena themselyes declare, caused bj departed spirits ;
some have recourse to infernal agency. Angels, and such in-
termediate spirits as fairies, &c., have not, I believe, been
called in. I have been told of a hardy speculator who is pre-
paring to give the world the theory that all matter thinks, and
that the atmosphere is competent to be the cause of the as-
serted communications. All this is quite in the spirit of phi-
losophy, as times go. My state of mind, which refers the
whole either to unseen intelligence, or something which man
has never had any conception of, proves me to be out of the
pale * of the Eoyal Society. I could bring a very long list of
names, including some of the most celebrated of our own day,
who have made it, some their principle and all their practice,
to take all the imaginable causes of a known effect, and to de-
clare, or to act as if they declared, that one of them mttst be.
They can no more keep a set of facts uninvested in a theory,
than a person of the usual prudence can hold back his money
when a mania for speculation is in the market. ' For
Heaven's sake,* said the people at the time when the South Sea

i * The letters F.E.S., of which everybody knows the English meaning,
have two esoteric significations. My more learned reader knows the old
distinction between in je and in ratione. Looking at the homo trium
literarumf the thief of the secrets of nature, as a follower of natural know-
ledge, a promoter of man's power over matter, and an augmenter of the
conveniences of life, he well deserves the honourable title oiFautor Realis
SdentuB. But when I turn to the mental side of the question, and
consider the action of his physics, as presented by himself, upon the
iiund and thought of man, I see what induces me to think the time
must come when one of his predicates will be Fdlsm Batumi^ Sacerdos,
No blame upon him. To every system its proper time and place. The old
schoolmen manured the ground ; he has raised a plentiful crop ; and
tihe time will come when there will be bread, leavened bread, and plenty
for all

\

XXVIU PREFACE.

bubble gave birth to offspring like itself, * let us but subscribe
to something ; anything is better than nothing at all.'
y^ I hold those persons to be incautious who give in at once to
the spirit doctrine, and never stop to imagine the possibility of
imknown power other than disembodied intelligence. But I
am sure that this calling in of the departed spirit, because
they do not know what else to fix it upon, may be justified by
those who do it, upon the example of the philosophers of our
own day. Some flints are foimd in what they call the drift,
curiously cut, and, for various reasons believed to owe their
shape to agents different from those which give other flints
their multitudinous configurations. These queer-shaped
things are tolerably like the tools of savages. The geologists
do not hesitate a moment : these are the works ofmen^ and
the whole history of the human race must shifli its basis. And
why are these flints the works of men ? I can learn nothing
but what amounts to this, that the geologist does not see
what else they can he. He calls in his higher power the mo-
ment he wants to steady his mind upon an explanation : as to
waiting a while for further knowledge, that would not suit the
hunger of the theory-bag. At last human remains are
found, in positions which favour the supposition that we have
got the bones of those who owned the axes, as well as the
axes themselves. Does this provoke new inquiry into the
epoch of these remains ? With a few it may, but not with
the many. The rapid arrival at conclusions is as conspicuous
among the geologists as among the spiritualists. For reasons
above given, both are in the right track.

So soon as any matter excites warm discussion and lively
curiosity, • attempts at imposition commence. Some forged
flints — perhaps also bones — ^have certainly been put into the
drift; and some forged spirits have made their communi-

PREFACE. TTiy

cations. The philosophical world is of easy belief in fraud :
they can credit any amount of skill and ingenuity, provided
only that what they cannot otherwise explain, except un-
palatably, may be thereby shown to be trick. If it were meted
to them in their own measure it would go hard with their
characters: but the outer world is not so imreasonable as
they are ; and of this they get the benefit. I do not wish to
be understood as discouraging suspicion ; my own admissions
show that I ought to stand up for the keenest scrutiny.
What I reprobate is, not the wariness which widens and
lengthens inquiry, but the assumption which prevents or
narrows it; the imposture theory, which frequently infers
imposture from the assumed impossibility of the phenomena
asserted, and then alleges imposture against the examination .
of the evidence. And further, when I speak of the !
* philosophical world,' I make a reference which needs
special explanation, and a good deal of it, ^

There are four courts of the mind, if the phrase may be used.
First, for the strict reasoning of the exact sciences, purely
mathematical or purely logical, resting on those universally
acknowledged laws for which consciousness has only to
examine itself. I speak not merely of conclusions which
require thought and learning, but also of the assents which
all persons give to maxims of common life; whether syn-
thetical, as that a straight line is the shortest distance between
two points ; or analytical, as that none are left when all are
gone. Secondly, for the evidence of the senses to things
which are. Thirdly, for the authority of others, as to
principles which can be made certain, if true; or the
testimony of others, as to things or events which can be
known, if they really exist or actually happened. Fourthly,
for principles which are presented as more or less obvious,

XXZ FBEFAGE.

but not capable of the absolute demonstration of logic or
mathematics. The first three courts are . peaceable and
quiet places of business : the fourth is half the battle groTind of
the greatest human difiei-ences, ambiguity in meaning of
words being the other half. I do not include experience^
which is a compound usually of perception and testimony.

Absolute demonstration, perception by the senses, and the
testimony of others (a word which may include authority j
when properly used), are the three things by which conclu-
sions may be obtained irom without. But in each of the
three we may be deceived, now and then : and in each of the
three we seek the protection of the plural number. A ma-
thematician knows that, when his demonstration is complicated
and lengthy, he is glad to fortify himself by another, con-
ducted on a different principle. In matters of sense, there
are many cases in which touch, smell, or hearing, are called
in to confirm the sight, or vice versd. We all know the over-
powering effect of the second witness. And yet in all three
cases there may be collusion. The second demonstration may
contain the &.ulty point of the first in a different form ; the
two senses may — in mania it would seem they sometimes
do — back each other in deceiving the mind; and two
witnesses may be speaking in fi^udulent concert. Neverthe-
less, all deductions made, demonstration, perception, and tes-
timony, are our three supports; and, in at least ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred, neither of them leaves reasonable
doubt, when applied to matters within its scope, and when
not opposed by one of the same kind, or by one of the others.

It is far otherwise with the fourth court of human know-
ledge, the principle, the thing which must be, the dictum of
common sense, what nobody can deny, the impress of nature
on our minds, &c. &c, &c. Out of this court comes all phi-

FBE7ACE. XXXI

losophj except exact science ; all morals except what is
founded on belief in human testimony, bearing witness to
actual revelation ; and no mean portion of all other conclu-
sions. And from this court comes all denial of what I have
said about this court. I am speaking of what cannot be es-
tablished either by demonstration, sense, or testimony : and
the fourth court, name it by what name you will, is the
giver of law to what I call the 'philosophical world.' I may
be supposed to define * philosophy ' as being the handling of
all that cannot be proved either by pure logic applied to un-
cqntroverted* postulates, by the senses, or by testimony : there
is much to be said for this definition, but here I am only con-
cerned with it as being the best way of describing a world
which delights to call itself * philosophical,' and to which I
am ready to concede the name on my own terms. This
world must be distinguished, on the one hand, from the very
small world which cultivates true philosophy in a manner
which leads them towards that acquired ignorance^ that docta
ignorantiaj of which Nicolas of Cusa — to whom I suppose we
owe the phrase — says ' quanto in hac ignorantia profundius
docti fuerimus : tanto magis ad ipsam accedemus veritatem.'
It must be distinguished, on the other hand, from that very
large world, nearly all the rest of society, which the school I
speak of is sometimes falsely accused of corrupting. Falsely :
for the truth is that mt/ philosophers — ^those of whom I speak —
are guilty of no more than methodical cultivation of a propen-
^ty of our nature : and we must not describe as part of their
crop the weeds which would have grown if they had never
^dled a spade. They are those who have reduced human

* Uncontrovertedf not incontrovertible. The undented is one thing ;
the undeniaJtiU is another. People pass over the first, and fight about
the second.

XXXU PREFACE.

infirmity to a system. They are of every kind of pursuit, aj3.d
of every kind of temperament : they are not to be judged as a
body by those who stand out offensively, and who are a tarifle
more respectable than the others. Conspicuous among the moss,
a minority very considerable in number, and xmreproved by
the rest, are the set who do the looking down from a higlier
sphere, with smiles of contempt and eyes of pity, when thejr
meet with a man or woman who sets their trite saws at
naught ; the supernal part of whose mission it is to be usefiil
to reasonable persons by accustoming them to the practice of
courtesy * under difficulties. These are the brighter lights of
the system ; the others are more reserved : they hide their
candle imder a bushel in the company of those who are not
airaid of the craft, and remove the covering when they get
among their own set, where they back the bites of their
bolder comrades, and bite the backs of their opponents. The
difference, such as it is, is a distinction : but a Mussulman is a
Mussulman, whether sunny or shy.

I should be very loath to say that the whole of this * philo-
sophy ' is ignorance : there is a part of it which is always
craving a hearing, and comes recommended by the attribute
quod semper y quod uhique. We have for instance — to take

* Why do not these people take to writing doctrinal novels ? There
is a satirist who would be an odious prig if he were to come forward in
person, with nothing but his infallible judgments, and his sneers at
public men who differ from them. But he joins his own better nature
to what would otherwise be insufferable insolence, by putting his opinions
into the mouth of a genial parson of the old school, who lubricates dog-
matism with port wine, and hates Lord Brougham and a supper of
nothing but sandwiches on a common principle. And so he produces
what is exquisite reading. His method has the advantage of allowing what
philosophy seldom allows, the influence of years upon stiffiaess of opinion
and roughness of manner. Dr. FoUiot and Dr. Opimian, as from one
hand at different times, are worth comparing together.

FKEFACE. XXXIU

the two &eling8 which the philosophy man takes least note
o^the moral sense, as we call it, and the aspiration after
a fiitare state, anterior to all discnssion about either reason
or revelation. Take the notion of a future state : it will
bear question whether human beings are capable of conceiving
themselves annihilated. With many, at least, of those who
profess to have no hope, there is a dread of non-existence
which, when closely examined, shows that it is imagined
a consciousness of it remains. An American spiritualist
relates that a friend, of very ' sceptical principles,' observed to
him, ' I guess I should not like to be annihilated.' When
asked why not^ he replied, ' I am afraid that perhaps I should
regret it afterwards.' If it be a practical impossibility for a
human being to think himself out of existence, this point of
structure is matter for very grave thought. But to assert,
aa even theologians have done before now, that immortality
is brought to light by it, without other help, is very grave
nonsense.

The positive part of our natural 'philosophy' is en-
titled to examination, as likely to lend strength to conclusions.
The negative part is to the full as difficult as the spirit the-
ory. Here we have our possibilities and our impossibilities ;
our knowledge of what would be the necessary connexion, if
only they did exist, of things which we thereupon declare do
not exist ; and all that comes of fQtering the consequences of
<his philosophy into the ordinary action of life. When ex-
amples are asked for, there is a kind of difficulty which de-
mands extreme cases. Take an ordinary instance, and the
toig is so common, and done by so many at once, and with
such an air of eveiy-day habit, that we hardly see what is
done, even when we look, if unpractised in the kind of exami-
nation necessary. A person not used to military sights, watch-

b

XXXIV PBEFACB.

ing a whole companj at drill, cannot follow the easy and
aimiiltaneous movement of the muskets ; it isnext to impossible
to keep the eye fixed on one. But let there be in front what
they used to call a fugleman^ who directs the rest by exagge-
rating the requisite actions, or — ^as I once saw — a grotesque
urchin who placed himself as near as he may, and imitates
with a stick ; the unaccustomed spectator will soon have light
thrown upon the whole business. Now I shall place a fugle-
man in front of some of the companies, not meaning of course
that the cases I point out are anything but exaggerations of
what usually happens.

1. A philosopher, far too respectable to be named with the
companions I mean to give him, once contended that, on any
theory of consciousness except the one he favoured, man would
be the ' dupe and victim of a perfidious Creator.' According to
this announcement God had a duty towards man before * his
creation, the violation of which would have been perfidy, that
is, treacherous breach of faith. The reader will be surprised
to learn that the philosopher quoted was a Genevan, who also
believed that God had foreordained — t. e, determined before
their creation — that millions upon millions of human beings,
designated beforehand, should be punished to all eternity, " to
the praise of his glorious justice," as the Westminster coiifes-
sion has it. This instance weU illustrates the inconsistency
which prevails far and wide among those who find first princi-
ples in the fourth source.

♦ The point of my remark may be illustrated by a very short dialogue
which is reported to have taken place between a hero of our Uteniture
and a person who desired to be thought of his acquaintance as they
came out of church : — * A good sermon to-day, Dr. Johnson.* — * That
may be, sir, but I 'm not sure that you can know it.'

PREFACE. ZXXy

2. Jean Mealier, a French parish priest, who died in 1733,
aged 55, was a man who performed his functions without re-
proach or suspicion, and was benevolent to the utmost £sir-
thing he could spare from the wants of life. He lefl a bulky
mannscript which he called his Testament, aU or part of which
was printed imder the title of Bon Sens : it was translated into
English in 1826. The doctrine of the work is that there
ia no God, which is in £ict its sole argument. Among the
supports of this doctrine is the assertion that ^ a universal God
would have instituted a universal religion,' that is, would have
made all men of one religion. This worthy priest, to whom
there was no God, knew how the universe would have been
£tshioned if there had been one : he looked at the first cause
from an earlier point of view.

3. Many years ago, a miserable pot-boy fired a pistol at the
Queen. When questioned ♦ about his motive he answered, ' I
don't think a woman ought to rule over such a coimtry as
this.' The case is extreme, no doubt : but it fugles admirably
for a very large class of the philosophical principles. Politics
and social economy are derived from the fourth court, and
morals to match fi:om — Heaven doesn't know where.

4. There was an insurrection of colonies against the mother
country which had enough of defensible grounds, but the
craving for philosophy based it upon a principle — ' We hold
this maxim to be self-evident, that all men are bom free and
equal.' No doubt the fact is true ; the slightest experience
of new-bom in&nts verifies it. But the erection of the fact
into a Tna-gim is a good instance of the way in which bias

♦ Privately, of course, for our law, though it gives such an object th«
honours of a trial for high treason, does not condescend to solicit an
explanation of ' the principles on which he acted.'

b 2

XXXVl PREFACE.

assumes more than is wanted, and does not know what to do
with the rest : for philosophy does not allow any part of a
' self-evident* notion to be returned upon her hands. If the
sturdy patriots had contented themselves with declaring it self-
evident that they must have their own way, they would have
given an answer, not only to the claims of Great Britain, but
to that awkward question, ' How about the Negro ? '

5. Though we have seen something of 'What else can
it be ? ' I add an instance which came to my knowledge many
years ago. A certain accusation was contemplated, which
turned upon whether goods were or were not, for a time, de-
posited at . ' How can we prove this on oath ? ' asked

one accuser. * Oh I I'll swear to it,' said another. ' How do
you know ? ' asked the first. * Why ! where else could they
have been ? ' said the second.

Absurd extremes of these and other kinds may enable some,
on both sides of the spirit question and others, at least to sepa-
rate the knowledge of the fourtii court, — which takes in all
that is neither demonstration, sense, nor testimony — and to
take it at a more reasonable valuation than is usual. Our age
of the world presumes itself free from reliance on what I
have separated from the rest, because it has long known that
the preceding age had that very defect. But those who have
been much in contact with both see that both have the same
features. The development of reasons for this assertion would
lead me too &r : and the time for it is not come ; but it is
coming. Other revivals are in progress, besides that of the
possibility of communication with higher worlds of thought :
among them is the study of those minds which have been on
the shelves for a century and a half, covered with dust and
nicknames. As this study goes on, it will be accompanied by
a comparison which will show that many of the tunes of new

PBBFACE. XXXVll

philosophy, though played on another instrument, are the old
tunes over again.

I should have been well pleased to have borne equally hard
upon both sides of the spirit controversy, but circumstances
make this impracticable. The spiritualist appeals to evidence :
he may have enough, or he may not ; but he relies on what
has been seen and heard. When he assumes that there is a
world of spirits, it is no more than all nations and ages have
assumed, and many on alleged record of actual communica-
tion, which all who think him a fool ought to laugh at. If
he should take the concurrent feeling of mankind as pre-
sumption in favour of such a world — a thing which may
be known — he is on more reasonable ground than the oppo-
nent, who draws its impossibility — a thing which cannot be
known — out of the minds of a very small minority. He may
be wrong, then, and I hold him too hasty: but his error
is one which cannot be ascertained except by further use
of his own method ; he may work his own cure, if cure be
needed. But the opponent philosopher, if he be wrong, is
obnoxious to all that can be said against wrong reason. He
takes a mode in which he can only be right by accident, and
in which he can only guard against error by also guarding
against truth. Very many may be suspected of the wish to
be coimted wise by receiving nothing : they know that there
are Candides in plenty. * Oh ! * said that simple youth, * le
grand homme que ce Poco-curante : rien ne pent lui plaire.'
Those who are inclined to watch anyone of the class, whatever
his guiding instincts, will observe the wonderful fertility of
his brain ; he produces maxim after maxim, mostly negations,
and can make them as long as anyone will listen. In many
cases his principles have so close a fit that it may be sus-
pected the things they were to apply to were measured for

XXXVIU PREFACE.

them. This rate of production is suspicious: as the very old*
English song against the clergy says —

Ther beth so manye prestes, hii ne muwe noht alle be gode.

And when a satirist says * not all' we may be sure he means
'very few.' If the fourth-court reasoner be wrong, his
own maxims can never extricate him. Accordingly, his
methods of proceeding have a score of weak points for one
which is incident to the plan of looking at evidence, and de-
ciding upon it. I will not call him the modem schoolman,
because there is one point of difference in his favour, or at
least in favour of his deductions. The old schoolman kept
close to the meaning of his words, and kept strictly to logic:
usually, that is; no rule without exception. Hence a false
principle would lead to felse deductions. The modem philo-
sopher—I mean the man of the fourth court — is lax in
phraseology and illogical in inference; consequently, a false
principle may end in a true deduction, either by shifl of
meaning, or error of reasoning. It may be said that he is just
as likely to produce felse conclusions out of true principles :
this diminishes his advantage, but does not exhaust it, if, as
may be suspected, his false maxims far outnumber his true
ones.

The full comparison of the two ages of the world, the old

* The song, which I casually turned up while this page was in pro-
gress, has been the means of extruding a line which I intended for the
place. When I have noticed philosophical minds, such as we meet with
every day, strong in our ignorance as in triple mail, dealing out a pro-
fusion of undeniable principles, and sneering away like omninescience
at everyone who * can 't see that,' my admiration of the facility with
which they supply the power their Creator forgot to give them often
brings into my head — but never off my tongue ; manners before eveiy-
thing — a slang line which I suppose is part of a more modem song: —

Go it, ye cripples ! crutches are cheap !

PBEFACE. ZXXIX

and new mediaeval — as they may one day be called — is too
large an undertaking for a preface. The dispensation which
is perLaps at the beginning of its end has selected the weaker
points of the old day, and has attached them to the word
schoolman, which has been made a term of contempt. An age
to come may possibly repeat this process ; and if it should get
hold of schoolboy, as the word by which to make the smaller
man of the second mediaeval period the representative of his
time; I think equal justice will be done. Should I have life
and opportunity, I contemplate a sketch of the affinities and
consanguinities of the two periods : and the handling of the
spirit-hypothesis, whether in the hands of advocates or oppo-
nents, will furnish striking instances.

I began this preface by stating that certain phenomena,
which I myself witnessed, had satisfied me of the existence of
a real somewhat in the things called spiritual manifestations.
My reader may desire to hear something about my own expe-
rience of these phenomena; and the more, as neither they, nor
himdreds of others of the same force but different kinds, have
produced either acceptance or rejection of the spirit-hypothe-
sis. With the following preliminary explanation, I will state
some things which have happened to myself in general terms.
When a person relates a wonder which he has seen to
another person whom he desires to convince, but whose mind
is well barricaded by fourth-court principles against the recep-
tion of the explanation which the narrator — perhaps on prin-
ciples of the same kind — desires to advocate, both parties very
often proceed in a way which may be well illustrated by diffi-
culties of frequent occurrence in money transactions. The
narrator forgets that the things which he has seen and heard
are not made visible to the sight and hearing of the receiver of
his testimony ; the evidence he offers is of a secondary cha-

racter, though the evideace he received nas primaty. He
tenders a cheque upon a most respectable firm, Meaare. Fact &
Co., to an immense amount : and might properly be anavered
by,—' My dear Mend, I know that your credit is good, aa
things in general go, but I really must make inqniiy before I
take 80 large a cheqne as this for value.' On the other hand,
the receiver of the testimony brings a few positions out of his
stock of laws of nature, notions of possibility and imposaibili^,
diotat«B of commoii Bsnse, &c. &o., on which he deairea the giver
to conclude that the evidence of his own senses is good for
nothing, because it would prove that what canuot be can be,
which ia absurd, Q. E. D. He tenders a cheque upon his
house, Meaara. First Principles & Co., and might, with equal
propriety, be answered by, — ' My good fellow, I know your
credit in that qu^ter is unlimited ; but the truth is, they give
nnhmit«d credit to so many, that I doubt their lasting through
any twenty-four hours in the year.' Each of these parties
deals unreasonably with the other. Now my reader will
understand that I do not make any demand upon him : he will
give me credit, if not himself a goose, for seeing that the
tender of an anonymous cheque would be of equal effect,
whether drawn on the Bank of England or on Aldgat« Pump.
My thesis is that he has asked of me a specimen of what
makes me believe in the reality of some of the things called
spirit-manifeatationB. Whether or no he shall allow me to
have had the ground I say I had, is to me indifferent, and lo
the question irrelevant. I confesa that for a litfle while I
thought I had thrown salt on the tail of an impossibility. I
felt what the French call desoriente, but fortunately not au bout
de mon Latin, though the phrases are of the same family. So
I went back to the old quiddity-mongers, and fortified myself
with ab actu ad posae valet conaequetUia. My state required

/

PBEf AGE. Xli

SO mnch relief that I had recourse to Arifitotle, who sajs— 'Znj
reader must excuse translation, it is really too deep — Ta 2e
ysvofjLcva (jtarepov on dwara * ov yap kyivtro il Ijv ^ivvara, I,
it will be observed, had my own senses to preserve from utter
confutation : my reader wiU not require the strong medicines
wMch I prescribed for myself; he has but to set me down for
a liar, a dupe, or a hoaxer, and he gets off cheaper than I did.
Ten years ago, Mrs. Hayden, the well known American
medium, came to my house alone. ThB sitting began imme-
diately after her arrival. Eight or nine persons were present,
of all ages, and of all degrees of belief and unbelief in the whole
thing being imposture. The raps began in the usual way.
They were to my ear clean, clear, ^nt sounds, such as would
be said to ring, had they lasted. I likened them at the time
to the noise which the ends of knitting-needles would make,
if dropped from a small distance upon a nuurble slab, and
instantly checked by a damper of some kind : and subsequent
trial showed that my description was tolerably accurate. I
never had the good luck to hear those exploits of Latin muscles,
and small kicking done on the leg of a table by machinery,
which have been proposed as the causes of these raps : but
the noises I did hear were such as I feel quite unable to im-
pute to either soiu*ce, even on the supposition of imposture.
Mrs. Hayden was seated at some distance from the table, and
her feet were watched by their believers until faith in pe-
dalism slowly evaporated. At a late period in the evening,
after nearly three hours of experiment, Mrs. Hayden having
risen, and talking at another table while taking refreshment,
a child suddenly called out, * Will all the spirits who have
been here this evening rap together ? ' The words were no
sooner uttered than a hailstorm of knitting needles was heard,
crowded into certainly less than two seconds ; the big needle

N

xlii PREFACE.

sounds of the men, and the little ones of the women and chil-
dren, being clearly distinguishable, but perfectly disorderly
\ in their arrival.

For convenience I shall speak of these raps as proceeding
from spirits — the reader may say that the spirit was Mrs.
Hayden ; the party addressed, a departed friend, the devil, or
what not. Though satisfied that the soimds were made
amosgepotically,* I prefer the word spirit, as briefer than
' amosgepotic influence.'

On being asked to put a question to the first spirit, I
begged that I might be allowed to put my question mentally
—that is, without speaking it, or writing it, or pointing it out
to myself on an alphabet, — and that Mrs. Hayden might hold
both arms extended while the answer was in progress. Both
demands were instantly granted by a couple of raps. I put the
question and desired the answer might be in one word, which
I assigned; all mentally. I then took the printed alphabet,
put a book upright before it, and, bending my eyes upon it,
proceeded to point to the letters in the usual way. The word
chess was given, by a rap at each letter. I had now a
reasonable certainty of the following alternative : either some
thought-reading of a character wholly inexplicable, or such
superhuman acuteness on the part of Mrs. Hayden that she
could detect the letter I wanted by my bearing, though she
^ (seated six feet from the book which hid my alphabet) could

* I present this word as one which will be fonnd very convenient :
it may frequently effect a compromise. For example, I have lately
heard of someone who declared in an elaborate article that he would not
believe the evidence of his senses unless the facts presented were capable
of explanation on some (by him) received hypothesis. I could go with
him as far as this, tjiat I would not trust my own eyes and ears for
anything except what could safely be attributed to an amosgepotic
source.

PREFACE. xliii

see neither my hand nor my eye, nor at what rate I was
going through the letters. I was fated to be driven out of
the second alternative before the sitting was done.

At a later period of the evening, when another spirit was

under examination, I asked him whether he remembered a

certain review which was published soon after his death, and

vrliether he could give me the initials of an epithet (which

Happened to be in five words) therein applied to himself.

Ck>nsent having been given, I began my way through the

alphabet, as above : the only difference of circumstances being

that a bright table-lamp was now between me and the

medium. I expected to be brought up at, say the letter f ;

and when my pencil passed that letter without any signal, I

"was surprised, and by the time I came to k, or thereabouts, I

paused, intending to announce a failure. But some one called

out, * You have passed it ; I heard a rap long ago.' I began

again ; and distinct raps came, first at c, then at d. I was now

satisfied that the spirit had failed ; and I thought to myself

that it was rather hard to expect him to remember a passage

in a review published in 1817, or thereabouts. But, stopping

to consider a little more, it fiashed into my mind that c. D.

were his own initials, and that he had chosen to conmience

the clause which contained the epithet, 1 then said nothing

but *I see what you are at : pray go on,' and I then got t

(for The) , then the f I wanted — of which not one word had

been said, — and then the remaining four initials. I was now

satisfied that contents of my mind had been read which could

not have been detected by my method of pointing to the

alphabet, even supposing that could have been seen.

I gave an account of all this to a friend who was then alive,
a man of ologies and ometers both, who was not at all disposed
to think it anything but a clever imposture. ' But,' said he,

xliT PREFACE.

' what yon t«U me U very ungular : I ahall go myself to MJri
Hay den : I ahall go alone and not giro my name: I don'
think I ahall hear anything from anybody : but if I do I ehai
find out the trick; depend upon iti ahall find It out.' He wen
accordingly : and came to me to report progreM. He toll
me that he had gone a step beyond me, for be had ineiBted oi
taHog bis alphabet behind a large folding screen, and ""Ir'";
bia questions by the alphabet and a pencil, aa well as re-
ceiving the answers. No persons except himself and Mrs.
Hayden were in the room. The ' spirit' who came to him
was one whose unfortunate death was fiilly detailed in the
usual way. My Mend told me that he waa ' awe-struck,' and
had nearly forgotten all his precautions.
^ The things which I have narrated were Ihe beginning of a
long series of experiences, many as lemarkable aa what I have
given; many of a minor character, separately worth little, but
jointly of weight when considered in connexion with the more
decimve proois of reali^; many of a confirmatory tendenoy oa
mere &ct£, but of a character not sustentive of the gravity
and dignity of the spiritual world. The celebrated apparition
of Giles Scrog^s is a serious personage compared to some
which have fallen in my way, and a logical one too. If these
things be spirits, they show that pretenders, coxcombs, and
liars are to be found on the other side of the grave as well as
on this ; and what for no 7 as Me^ Doda said.

The whole question may receive such perBCvering attention
as shall worm out the real truth ; or it may die away, obtain-
ing only casual notice, until a new outburst of phenomena
recalls its history of this day. But this subsidence does not
seem to bq^. It is now twelve or thirteen years ^ce tbe
matter b($;an to be everywhere talked about : during which
time there have been many announcements of the total ex-

PBEFACE. xlv

tmction of the ' spirit-mania.' But in seyeral cases^ as in Tom
Moore's fable, the extinguishers hare caught fire. Were it
the absurdity it is often said to be, it would do much good by
calling attention to the ' manifestations ' of another absurdity,
th^ philosophy of possibilities and impossibilities, the philoso-
phy of ^Q fourth court. Extremes meet : but the * meeting'
is often for the purpose of mutual exposure, like that of silly
gentlemen in the day of pop-and- paragraph duels. This on
the supposition that spiritualism is all either imposture or
delusion : it cannot be more certainly one or the other than is
the philosophy opposed to it. I have no aquaintance either
with P or Q ; but I feel sure that the decided conviction of
all who can see both sides of the shield must be that it is more
Hkely that P has seen a ghost than that Q knows he' cannot
have seen one. I know that Q aaya he knows it : on which
suprhj passim,

I now give place to the author, with the statement that,
though generally cognizant of each other's views, both the
author and myself had substantially finished before either set
eyes on what the other had written. Between us we have, in a
certain way, cleared the dish ; like that celebrated couple of
whom one could eat no fat and the other no lean.

A. B.

July 1863.

CONTENTS.

CHAP. PAOB
PREFACE ....... V-xlv

I. INTBODUCTORT — METHOD OF EXPERIMENTING . . 1

II. RAPPING AND TABLE-MOVING HEALITT OF PHENOMENA 11

III. writing: FIRST EXPERIMENTS . . . .29

IV. MESMERISM . * 42

Y. MEDIUMSHIP : MODES OF INFLUENCE . . .52

VI. MEDIUMSHIP {continued) : writing — vision —

DRAWING 58

VII. MEDIUMSHIP (continued): the voice and hearing 77

VIII. MEDIUMSHIP : NATURE OF INFLUENCE . . .92

IX. PROCESS OF DEATH AND FORMATION OF THE SPIRITUAL

BODY . * 119

X. DAYBREAK 176

XI. THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT 192

XII. APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH 216

Xm. CORRESPONDENCE AND DEVELOPEMENT . . .267

XIV. INFLUX AND INSPIRATION 319

XV. THE WORD OF GOD 344

NOTES TO CHAPTER XV 381

FROM MATTER

ErraUi.

Page xiii.

^ C

«
«

■»

fc /

with initials, I hold myself responsible. ^^ere nctuico
or authorities are given at length, the evidence xayj^ be
taken for what it is worth.

When a strange tale reached us, twglvg^yearfi ^go^
of noises which had been heard in America, and attri-
buted to spirits, everybody laughed. As the stories

2 FBOM HATTER TO SPIRIT.

multiplied, a few persons in England began to think
they must have some origin at least, and to wonder why,
if spirits could rap in the United States, they did not
do so in our own country. Then we began to hear of
' mediums,' people only in whose presence these seem-
ingly fastidious spirits would make their appearance ;
and at length curiosity was still further excited by the
appearance of a medium in London. Mrs. Hayden
became the wonder of a day ; but people fancied that
they could detect imposture, and, though none was ever
fairly proved, the interest flagged and the * medium '
returned to America, having sown the seed of a tree
the extent of whose growth has yet to be measured.
Since that time the experiments have been laughed at,
talked of, and tried, with more or less of intelligence
and belief ; and, though the subject has not yet lived
through the ridicule bestowed on every fact new to the
world's experience, enough of interest prevails to justify
a narrative of experiences, and some conjectm-es on the
truths to be thence deduced.* One thing is certain ; if
these phenomena are not the result of imposture and
delusion, the study of them involves questions worthy the
deepest consideration of the theologian and the man of
science. Whether they have any claim to be considered

* Since this was written Mr. Home's book has appeared. The
narratives it contains are far more wonderful than any I can oflfer here,
but they are given with a different object, and are, I believe, perfectly
trustworthy.

METHOD OF EXPEBIHENTINa. 3

in the higher point of view, it is the object of the follow-
ing pages to show.

Some readers may like, while mentally following the*
course described, to experiment for themselves, and thus,
if successful, verily my statements as they go on. To
such readers a few directions how to proceed may be
acceptable, and with this view I prefix them to my own
narrative and conclusions.

There is a general and not unreasonable dislike to
paid mediums amolng those who cannot find out how far
such mediums could impose upon credulity ; hence the
question is often asked, * What can be done to enable us
to see these things for ourselves ? ' To this there is only
one answer, ' You must earnestly and patiently try for
yourselves.' If any number of persons can be found
who will do so, let them, having first secured perfect
confidence in each other's good faith and a determina-
tion to avoid all tricks or trifling, begin their experi-
ments.

I suppose six or seven men and women — fewer would
be enough, more than seven are too many — sitting round
a table. If any one of the party is highly nervous or
hysterical, that one should not join the circle, at least
in the commencement of operations ; for though it is
likely that the physical condition on which the power of
* mediumship ' depends may exist in him or her in a very
high degree, yet the consequences might be injurious
to health. Children, in my opinion, should rarely be

B 2

4 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

allowed to join. The causes of this injurious ten-
dency may be guessed at when we arrive at some con-
'clusion as to the agency at work in producing the
phenomena.

Among the party of healthy persons ready to form a
circle, it is hardly likely that one or more should not
possess the organisation necessary for a medium. As
far as I have seen, the faculty often accompanies the
isparkling dark eyes and hair of what phrenologists call
[the nervous-bilious temperament. Blue eyes and fair
hair are also generally favourable, but great exercise of
mediumship is likely to exhaust the more delicate con-
stitution of the nervous sanguine. But though these
two temperaments, as well as that having blue eyes
and brown hair, are very often found in the strongest
mediums, it does not appear that the power depends on
any complexion or temperament.

The length of time during which the party sitting
round the table should remain with their hands placed
on it before abandoning any hope of success, depends
on conditions not yet known. In general, the question
is settled in about twenty minutes. Then, if any effects
are produced, the table will appear to throb or vibrate
under the hands as if charged with a kind of electricity.
Do not attend to the supposition that this arises only
from pulsation at the finger-ends produced by pressure.
Let it be so. Further experiment will give rise to
further conjecture. Then the table will crack or creaky

METHOD OF EXPEBnfENTINO. 5

and some one will have a theory about the wood getting
warm. But if there be more than an average amount
of * medium ' power in the circle, the table (which ought
not to be a large one) will show symptoms not referable
to heut It will begin to move, and unless the party
keep to their resolution to take all that comes without
argument, much time and power will be lost in such
observations as * You pushed it then ; ' * No, indeed, the
impulse came from the opposite side,' &c.

The table perhaps will move in a circuitous di-
rection, or perhaps will at once * tip ' down to one
side. If it goes round, one of the party will save
time by asking the invisible influence* to tip it, and
the request is almost sure to be followed by the move-
ment required.

To avoid confusion, one person only should speak.

Let a request then be made to tip 80 many times^
and, if vou find that the desired number of movements
occur, agree how many shall stand for 'Yes,' how many
for *No,' and how many for * Doubtful.' When these
preliminaries are settled, ask, * Can the name be given
if the alphabet is repeated ? ' Suppose the reply to be
in the affirmative, it will be better to find out who is to
repeat it, as an uncertainty on this head sometimes
causes difficulty. It can be ascertained by mentioning

* In using this and similar expressions, I do not intend here to
indicate the nature of the influence, nor to imply that it is external or
intemal to onrselres. That question must be considered hereafter.

r - '■ "i. «*— »

FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

Errata.

Page xiii, line 1, for his read his'
)) f> » 17, omit the comma
yy ^f M 6, for and was reacf and I was

ti I09f M 3, „ phenomena „ phenomenon

» 153, „ 9, <|/|f«r appeared in$ert substantial

»i 175, „ S, „ happiness „ a comma

„ 224 to 234, wueri marks of quotation throughout

„ 270, line 8, for then read their

„ 300, „ 15, „ World „ Word

„ 326, „ 18, „ at „ as at

„ 329, „ 35, „ conclude read include

„ 330, „ 6, „ UDder-g7t)wth „ undue g^rowth

,, 330, „ 15, „ brains „ nerves

„ 331, „ 4, „ classes. Life, if this is, read classes, life

„ 346, „ 16, „ earth, read earth.

* From Matter to Spirit,'

with initials, I hold myself responsible. Where names
or authorities are given at length, the evidence must be
taken for what it is worth.

When a strange tale reached us, twelvfeyiMxa-ago,
of noises which had been heard in America, and attri-
buted to spirits, everybody laughed. As the stories

B

J

b FBOM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

the names of those present^ and begging that the table
may be tipped at the right name. Then if the person
indicated repeats the alphabet slowly, not dwelling
longer on one letter than another, but giving time after
each for the movement to be made, the table will be
found to tip at some letter. Note that, and repeat the
alphabet again, and so on till a name is spelled^
beginning again after each letter is obtained. The
name will in all probability be at once recognised.
Then ask for a sentence or communication from the
unseen power, which will be given at once by the
alphabet and the tipping. Those who really desire to
try the nature of the phenomenon will do wisely not to
put test or leading questions, but to take what comes,
and wait with patience for an explanation of all inco-
herencies. I would also say. Let the questions of
will-power, and unconscious muscular action, &c., which
will naturally arise in the mind, be deferred for the
present

It is certain that great activity in the brains of those
concerned interferes with the experiment. The sentence
received will perhaps contain a special message to the
person chosen to repeat the alphabet, or it may be a
general greeting or piece of advice, or possibly a
direction how to improve the circle by changing places
or otherwise. The person to whom the message is
given may perhaps say, ^If this is from a spirit at all^
I am sure it is not from — , the phraseology is so

^^^^/"^^"^mmmmmmsmmsf'^mtmi

METHOD OF EXPEBIMENTINO. 7

unlike his. Take all you can get. If the examination
is pursued in a good and serious spirit you have a
better chance of receiving communications of the same
character^ and these are far less puzzling and misleading
than the merry but foolish sentences which are some-
times given when the party only assembles for fun.
And at this stage of the enquiry all discrepancies must
be left for future consideration.

Perhaps, instead of the table tipping or moving, raps
or sounds will be heard, like slight discharges of
electricity, in or on the wood of the table. With these
proceed exactly as with the tipping, first securing a
perfect understanding between the source of the sounds
and the circle around the table, and then repeating the
alph/ibet as directed. It sometimes happens that
instead of the occurrence of sounds or movements, the
hand of one of the party may be agitated perhaps with .
some violence. If this person takes a pencil, the hand
will be moved backwards and forwards, round and round,
sometimes in irregular forms, sometimes in long lines
of consecutive curves and waves, till at length it settles
itself into a steady movement, tracing letters and at
length legible words and sentences. The rapidity or
slowness of the writing will depend on the character of
medimn power, and possibly on the temperament of
the writer. Additional power is sometimes gained by
another person placing a hand on the writer's wrist.

The writing should not be allowed to continue if

8 FBOM HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

flippant or irreligious sentences are given, nor if the
writer feels exhausted. I do not pretend to account
for the fact, at all events not in this place, but I believe
that when the communications are foolish or malignant
in their meaning, the persons through whose agency
they are given will be likely to suffer more or less
exhaustion.

The movement of the hand may perhaps resolve itself
into drawing instead of writing, though it is, I think,
generally found that drawing is a later developement
This is often more enigmatical, but unless objects of a
frightful or very grotesque character are drawn, is most
likely of no hurtful tendency. More will be said of the
writing and drawing hereafter.

If, instead of any of the above-mentioned results
. taking place, one of the party becomes drowsy as if
mesmerised, and then falls either into a trance or a
series of strange contortions and movements, there is
no cause for fear. This very seldom occurs ; when it
does, it is a proof of great susceptibility in the ^ medium '
and of power in the circle, and in this case means are
generally afforded, either by the writing of the indivi-
^ dual affected or by means of one of the others, to obtain
directions either to demesmerise the person, which is
done by making transverse passes across the face, or as
is more commonly the case, to * let him alone, he will
not be hurt.' It is well on first trying the experiment

METHOD OF EZPEBIHENTINa. 9

to have one person in the party who is accustomed to all
the various phases of the phenomenon. I cannot too ^
strongly impress on those who wish to give the whole a
fair trials the absolute necessity of unanimity, and the
great advantage of serious, even religious feeling among
the members of the circle.

To persons well accustomed to witness these mani-
festations the foregoing dii-ections may seem unduly
minute. The details could not be avoided if the in-
structions are to be at all useful, and a conviction that
they are really needed has led many friends to urge
their insertion.

When parties form circles without the presence of a
practised * medium,' great wonders must not be expected
at once. There is a process of developementreqidred for
even the lowest manifestations, by which I mean those
having reference to the external senses of touch, sight,
and hearing. Those who mistrust the mediumship of
strangers must take the longer but more satisfactory
course of gradual developement.

I believe that the amount of imposture among 'paid
mediuTna has been greatly overrated. If they were such
well-practised jugglers as is sometimes supposed, how
does it happen that hours sometimes pass without any
manifestation at all taking place ? Sut, even after a
large deduction is made for imposture on the part of
the * medium,' and for credulity and self-deception on

10 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

that of the enquirer, a sufficient number of genuine
cases of apparent spiritual communication remain to
set aside the idea of coincidence, and to challenge
enquiry into their nature and origin.

A few of these instances, for the truth of which I can
vouch, will be given in the next chapter.

11

CHAPTEE 11.

RAPPING AND TABLE-MOVING — REALITY OP PHENOMENA,

TT is now ten years since I began attentively to
-^ observe the phenomena of * Spiritualism.' My
first experience occurred in the presence of Mrs. Hayden
from New York. I never heard a word which could
shake my strong conviction of Mrs. Hayden's honesty ;
indeed, the result of our first interview, when my name
was quite unknown to her, was sufficient to prove that
I was not on that occasion the victim of her imposture,
or my own credulity.

A party of friends, many of them known in the
literary world, permitted me to join them, and another
literary friend, Mr. James,* a man of unimpeachable
truthfulness, undertook to arrange a meeting with
Mrs. Hayden, whom we were to visit at her lodging
near Cavendish Square. At the appointed time we
went, and were shown into a scantily furnished drawing-
room. We had ample opportunity, of which we availed

* All names are changed op suppressed through every experience
narrated.

12 FROM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

ourselves, for examining the old Pembroke table and
the other furniture before Mrs. Hayden and our friend
Mr. James made their appearance. She was introduced
to us, but was evidently a stranger to any of our names,
which were never mentioned. As my own experience
is to be narrated, I may premise, that I had deter-
mined not to ask for nor to dwell in thought on the
name of any departed friend, and when the rest sat down
I begged leave to sit out of the circle. This per-
mission was not given, Mrs. Hayden saying, as we have
since proved, that perfect unanimity was a necessary
condition of success. I then took my place at the
table with my friends. We sat for at least a quarter
of an hour, and were beginning to apprehend a failure,
when a very small throbbing or patting sound was heard,
apparently in the centre of the table. Great was our
pleasure when Mrs. Hayden, who had before seemed
rather anxious, said ' They are coming.' * Who wm*€
coming ? ' Neither she nor we could tell. As the sounds
gathered strength, which they seemed to do with our
necessary conviction of their genuineness, whatever
might be their origin, Mrs. Hayden said, * There is a
spirit who wishes to speak with some one here, but as
I do not know the names of the gentleman and ladies,
I must point to each in turn, and when I come to the
right one, beg that the spirit will ra/p^ This was agreed
to by our invisible companion, who rapped in assent.
Mrs. Hayden then pointed to each of the party in turn.

BAPPING AND TABLE-MOVINa. 13

To my surprise, and even annoyance, (for I did not wish
this, and many of my friends did,) no sounds were heard
until she indicated myself, the last in the circle, I was
seated at her right hand ; she had gone round from the
left, I was then directed to point to the letters of a large
type alphabet, and I may add, that, having no wish to
obtain the name of any dear friend or relation, I certainly
did not rest, as it has been surmised is often done, on
any letter. However, to my astonishment, the not
common name of a dear relation who had left this
world seventeen years before, and whose surname was
that of my father's, not my husband's family, was spelt.
Then this sentence — */ am happy ^ and with F. and
(j.' (names at length). I then received a promise of
future communication with all three spirits ; the two
last had left the world twenty and twelve years before.
Other persons present then received communications by
rapping; of these some were as singularly truthful
and satisfactory as that to myself, while others were
false and even mischievous. One, if I remember rightly,
contained an accusation of murder against a living
person ; another professed to come from a * spirit ' which
was quite unknown to the lady thus visited, and who
was then, and I believe remains to this time, quite
incredulous on the subject.

The occurrences of this first sitting are narrated in
this detailed manner because the experiment was tried
under very favourable circumstances, and because the

14 FBOM HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

various successes and failures on that occasion served
afterwards to indicate the simpler laws regulating the
appearance of the phenomenon. After this meeting our
names were made known to Mrs. Haydep.

We agreed next to meet at the house of one of those
who had been present on the first evening. As before,
I narrate my own share in the proceedings.

We had not sat for many minutes when the same
sound was heard as on the previous occasion, and again
it was for me. The presence of the other two friends
was announced by the first * spirit,' and each rapped at
my request, a very decided difference being perceptible
in the sounds, such as might be expected between the
influence of a man of firm and energetic will, and that
of one much younger, less powerful, and more imagi-
native. The first heard sound was different from botL
Each of the two who had not hitherto spoken was to
give some sentence by which I might recognise him. The
older * spirit,' which gave the name of one who during
his stay on earth was constantly occupied in religious
thought, and in anticipations of the fulfilments of the

promises of Scripture, gave this sentence : * My ,

why do you doubt the holy attributes of Ood^ when
this is in perfect accordance with His teaching ? '

This was certainly the sort of sentiment, but not the
phraseology, likely to have been used by the person,
whose name, I ought to have said, had been correctly
given by the raps.

RAPPINa AND TABLE-MOVING. 15

The name of the younger spirit was very peculiar,
and very unlikely to have been heard by anyone
present, with all of whom I had become acquainted
many years subsequently to my relation's death, and I
had never been in the habit of speaking of him. With
Mrs. Hayden's permission I took a writing portfolio, and
set it upright between her eyes and the alphabet so as
completely to prevent her seeing the letters. The
singular name was given with perfect accuracy. I
asked then for a proof of identity, and received this: —
'2>, e, a, r, e, 8, V Every one wrote and expected

* Dearest ,' and all but myself were puzzled and

annoyed when, instead of my name, the three letters

* hy 6, r,' were given. This completed the name of an
attached friend of my communicant, from whom he had
received much kindness, and who did not long survive
him. The sentence was : —

* Dear Esther is with m^, and we long to clasp you
in our arms in this bright world of glory.^

Here again a mixture and an incongruity. The
identification of the two ^ spirits,' both by name and
the meaning of the sentences, was complete ; but then,

* clasp you in our arms,'* &c., was so wholly unlike any
language used by my relations when with us, that it
puzzled me. I afterwards found that this was a phrase
of Mrs. Hayden's ; and it occurred more than once in
communications given by raps in her presence. Some
of my friends thought this improbable phraseology a

16 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

proof of imposture; I preferred waiting, and hoped
that further experiment would help me to discover the
cause of these discrepancies.

On the occasion of a third sitting with Mrs. Hayden,
a person was present who, if not absolutely disbeliev-
ing, was at least very doubtful of the possibility of
* raps' without imposture. For a long time nothing
happened. I then begged the person in question to
leave the room ; immediately the raps were heard, and

Mrs. Hayden said, ^ They do not like A .' I asked

why they did not rap before, and the reply was, ^A

unconsciously repels its.' In answer to our questions,
however, we foimd that the current once established

would not be interrupted, and on the return of A

to the table the rapping continued, and many, very
curious communications were given to several of the
party.

The promises made at Mrs. Hayden^s were kept.
Many experiments were tried in private, and it was
found that a number of persons, both in and out of my
own family, possessed the faculty of ' mediumship ' in a
greater or less degree. I found, however, what I had
noticed at first, that the communications were always
given in the spelling and phraseology of the person
through whose agency they come.*

A little incideftt at this time gave me some idea of

* This statement is more easily verified when the * medium ' is very
young, or uneducated*

BAFPINCt AND TABLE-MOYING. 17

the process of rapping, and of the share which the

organisation of the medium is made to take in it. A ^^

little girl in the house had been moving a saucer, and

throagh the tipping of this a name was spelt, with the

words, * lean rap through you (meaning myself) to-day.*

This was not expected but it was worth trying, and I

therefore went into an uncarpeted room barely furnished,

and sat down by the table, on which I laid my arm.

Very soon loud raps, which I called some of the family

to hear, resounded on the table. There seemed to be

power enough to rap the number of times desired, but ^

• not to indicate letters so as to spell anything. The

sounds soon ceased and never returned. As each rap

seemed to •be shot through my arm it was accompanied

by a feeling like a slight blow or shock of electricity and

an aching pain extending from the shoulder to the hand,

which remained for more than an hour after they had

entirely ceased. This experiment seemed to prove that

the nerves of the human body were necessary, if not for

the production, at least for the props^tion of the sounds.

Many strange vagaries of table-moving have been

witnessed which must be very slightly noticed here. A

medium would lay one hand on a small table, and with

the other play a waltz or lively tune on the piano.

The quick jerks and movements of the table kept

perfect time to the music. Another time a gentleman

at one end of a room placed his fingers on a little table

desiring audibly that it should move to the other end,

c

18 FHOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

making three, four, or more turns as the case might
be, before reaching the end of its journey. This was
obeyed punctually, to the satisfaction of a roomful of
friends, to all of whom it was evident that the medium
could not, if he would, have produced the movements
by voluntary action of the muscles. These things are
only referred to in passing. They are curious, but hardly
furnish sufficient presumptive evidence of an agency
distinct from that of the medium to be used in illustra-
tion of an argument.

At this time much writing and drawing was going on
among a few friends. Of these more will be said here-
after. This chapter being devoted to rapping and
tipping, the first form in which * spirit knowledge'
reached me, I give a few more instances of success and
failure in communications received in this way.

A friend who is mentioned here as Mrs. J went

in company with six persons to visit Mrs. Hayden, to
whom they were all unknown. In the account first

written to me by Mrs. J , no names were given, but

I was told that they were all persons chosen for high
intelligence, good judgment, and integrity. The party
sat for nearly an hour, and then, perceiving no sign of
sound or movement, left Mrs. Hayden, who appeared
to all of them troubled and annoyed by the failure.

Another friend, quite unacquainted with Mrs. J at

this time, found that she had the power of ' medium-
ship,' and that the names of deceased persons whom she

BAPPING AND TABLE-MOVINO. 19 •

did not know were often given to her. The form in
which her mediumship appeared was that of tipping.
One evening some weeks after the failure of Mrs.

J 's experiment, which I had never mentioned to

my ' medium ' friend, I was sitting with the latter at a
small table, when very unexpectedly the name of a near

relation of Mrs. J , whom I had known well during

life, was given. Something was to be said to me, and
it appeared that there was a great wish on the part of
the ^spirit' to communicate with her relation. In
answer to my question why her name was not given to
Mrs. J at Mrs. Hayden's, she said (by tipping) :

^ / could not There were two persona in the circle
whose preseTice prevented itJ*

^Were they men, or women?'

Ans. * A man and a vjoman.^

' Can you give their initials ? '

' Yes ; X. F., and Y. Z:

A verbatim report, as above, of this conversation was

sent to Mrs. J , from whom I received a list of the

six persons who had been present at the sitting. Among
them were Mr. X. F. amd Mrs. F. Z. All the party
were of that class of mind which is more deeply im-
pressed with the impossibility than with the possibi-
lity of any occurrence contrary to the usual apparent
' order of nature.'

About a year or more after my first acquaintance
mth Mrs. Hayden, a person came into my house who

c 2

y

20 FROM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

was found to be endowed with the * medium ' faculty
in a high degree. She lived with us more than six
years, and of her perfect good faith (for indeed she
had not skill to deceive) in the matter of spirit mani-
festations, neither I nor any of my friends who watched
her narrowly could have any doubt. When she first
came into the family I noticed in her the dark spark-
ling eye which has so often been found to accompany
magnetic sensitiveness and great mesmeric power, what
one might imagine a quality of rapid conduction. She
y^began, too, before any mention was made of * spiritual '
phenomena, to talk of curious dreams and visions
which she had had. Of these some had been literally
fulfilled ; others, and those the most interestmg, appeared
to me to convey a splendid symbolism, the application
of which she did not understand, but was able to
appreciate when it was explained to her. These seem-
/ ing indications of medium power deserve notice, in

order that persons who have had similar experience
may be led to try whether their faculty may be made
useful in the present enquiry. Jane also talked of
sounds attributed to Jvauntinga having been heard in
several houses in which she had lived. That all these
peculiar experiences were not to be attributed to fancy
or superstition was amply proved in the sequel. Sus-
pecting from her temperament that she was one with
whom a table or other article might move readily, I
begged her to sit down with me and one or two others.

HAPPINa AND TABLE-MOYINQ. 21

She had heard of tahle-turnvngy but never of rapping ;
nor did any one of us expect a manifestation which we
had often tried in vain to obtain. The sounds came
almost immediately, first a throbbing, then a creaking,
then a full well-formed sound like a concussion of air,
which she said passed through her arms like an electric
shock. She was not at all hurt by these experiments,
and though a delicate person, seemed to gain strength
and spirits during the two years and half in which they
continued ; for they ceased entirely after that time, and
though many friends would have given her money if
she could have * got the raps,^ she never could gratify >^
their wish.

It soon appeared that no surname could be given
through Jane's mediumship. Occasionally a christian
name, if not an uncommon one, was rapped out ; but
notwithstanding this difficulty, the professed 'spirit'
always found a way of making its identity known, and
the relationship between it and the enquirer in the
circle was always truly particularised.

As a curious instance of identification by raps, I
will mention here, although it has appeared in another
place, a fact which occurred during the period of Jane's
mediumship. I had been brought into communication
with a person in a state of frenzied excitement owing
to the suicide of her brother, who killed himself in a fit
of intoxication. This brother and sister were unknown
toth to Jane and myself, and she had never seen the

•^

/

22 FBOU HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

survivor. But some days after my interview with the
sister, as a party was sitting round the table expecting
^manifestations' from their friends, loud sounds were
heard which interfered with and disturbed everything
else. After much questioning and cross-examining it
was discovered that the disturber waa a man whom I
had not known in his earthly life, that he had de-
stroyed himself, and wished to speak to me. I guessed
the name of the unhappy suicide, begging him if possible
to prove his identity. A series of sounds then pro-
ceeded apparently from the pedestal of the table, which
were recognised as the noises produced by sawing,
planing, screwing, hammering, filing, &c., aU per-
fectly distinct. We asked whether this was meant to
show us that the spirit had been a carpenter and joiner,
and found that such was the intention. I had no idea
of this at the time, but found on inquiring that it was
quite true.

Although the medium, Jane, had the organisation
necessary for the transmission of raps when in the
presence of some persons, she could not obtain them
when alone, or when in company with most of those
with whom she came in contact. I found that^ when
absent from my house, she had tried among her own
friends, but never with any decided success. She was
always most successful when sitting beside me, and as I
judged from that circumstance that some share of the
pow^r of transmission belonged to myself, the C9.use d

RAPPING AND TABLE-MOVINa. 23

my very remarkable experience at Mrs. Hayden's met
with a possible explanation.

The spelling of those sentences which were given
through Jane was, as I before observed, always hers.
* Beautiful' was ^butifvly * writing' ^ritingy &c.,
except on some rare occasions when educated persons
were present whose strong medium power, as I con-
jecture, overcame hers. This fact relating to spelling
and forms of expression applies to every phase of
mediumship I have hitherto seen; whether the ex-
planation to be given will be as satisfactory to the
reader as to myself, must be determined hereafter. I
may here mention that Jane had very little perception
of, or memory for, the surnames of individuals, and
could rarely give me correctly the name of any friend
who called in my absence, or any message in which a
surname was required. The organ called 'individuality'
was small in her, while in Mrs. Hayden's forehead I
noticed that all the perceptions were large and full. I
do not mean to attach much importance to this ob-
servation, till a greater number of facts have been
recorded, connecting the character of communications
given through the agency of any medium with his or
her cerebral developement.

Jane was extremely fond of flowers, and the messages
given by rapping, as well as those when her mediumship
had taken another form, almost always contained descrip-
tions of gardens, and references to wreaths and nosegays

24 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

of flowers. When we come to the aymbolisTth i^vhich is
almost invariably used through all mediums by the
unseen influences, some explanation of this also will be
attempted.

Poor Jane died two years ago of rapid consumption.
Lest it should be supposed that the exercise of her
medium power injured her, I ought to say that for
three years, during which time her health was good, the
manifestations had ceased. Her last illness was brought
on by cold, and imprudent treatment of a constitution
' always delicate. A few days before her death she gave
me a solemn assurance that she had never deceived me
in the slightest degree in any particular connected with
spiritual manifestations ; * but,' she said, ' I have from
my infancy seen and heard far more curious things than
I have ever talked of to anyone.'

Jane's mediumship was never successful in the
presence of persons who allowed their unbelief to
appear. She even said that she could /e^i an opposition,
whether it were open or concealed. I believe that the
uncertainty and inconclusiveness of evidence on many
ghost stories may be accounted for by ignorance of the
conditions of mediumship and the different degrees of
power in different persons. Of this the *Cock Lane
Ghost ' was in all probability an example. For a long
time the cause of the sounds defied all attempts at
discovery; at length it was found that they were heard
only in the presence of an ignorant young girl? who

bApping and table-moting. 25

could only declare that she did not make them. Dr.
Johnson was not a little proud of his sagacity in con-
cluding that as the sounds were only heard in the
presence of this young girl, she must have made them,
consciously, and was therefore an impostor. The
means taken to prove imposture were wonderfully sci-
entific, and more to be admired than imitated. When
the poor girl had been frightened by the sight of so
many fine people, it would have been strange indeed if
the nerves which were to serve as telegraphic wires had
not been deranged in their action. After the savans
of that time had found out how the raps could be
stopped, they discovered how they were made. The
^1 was laid down with a board placed by her, and she
was then told that, if she did not make the ghost come,
she would be severely punished. Accordingly she took
the best means she could of producing the eflfect of his
ghostly presence by tapping on the board with her
finger, and so the matter was settled.

The rappings in the house of the father of John
Wesley may be better understood now, than at the time
of their occurrence. Accounts of these have appeared
in the Spiritual Magazine, but the whole story will be
remembered by all readers of Southey's Life of Wesley.

The most remarkable instance of tahle-^moving with
ft purpose which ever came under my notice occurred
at the house of a friend, whose family like my own
were staying at the sea-side. An account of this has

26 FBOM MATTEK TO SPIRIT.

appeared in print before, but it is so much to the
purpose here that I cannot resist adding it to the
collection of experiences.

My friend's family consisted of six persons, and a
gentleman, now the husband of one of the daughters,
joined them, and was accompanied by a young member
of my own family. No paid person was present. A
gentleman, who had been expressing himself in a very
sceptical manner, not only with reference to spirit
manifestationSf but on the subject of spiritual existence
generally, sat on a sofa two or three feet from the dining-
room table, roimd which we were placed. After sitting
some time we were directed by the rapping to join
hands and stand up round the table without touching
it All did so for a quarter of an hour, wondering
whether anything would happen, or whether we were
hoaxed by the unseen power. Just as one or two of the
party talked of sitting down, the old table, which was
large enough for eight or ten persons after the manner
of a lodging-house, moved entirely by itself as we
surrounded and followed it with our hands joined, went
towards the gentleman out of the circle, and literally
pushed him up to the back of the sofa, till he called out
^Hold, enough!'

Of the marvels in the way of table-moving, &c.,
occurring in Mr. Home's presence, his own account,
corroborated by so many witnesses, speaks with suffi-
cient detail. In referring to his very powerful me-

^

HAPPING AND TABLB-MOYING. 27

diumship, I only add one to the number of persons by
mrhom the facts are attested. It is only in Mr. Home's
presence that I have witnessed that very curious ap-
pearance, or process, the thrilling of the table. This
takes place for some seconds, perhaps more, before it
rises from the floor. The last time I witnessed this
phenomenon, an acute surgeon present said that this
thrilling^ the genuineness of which was unmistakable,
was exactly like what takes place in that aflFection of
the muscles called subaultus tendinum. When it
ceased, the table rose more than two feet from the
floor.

The ' tipping ' appears to be the easiest method of
communication for the unseen influences, as it is the
most readily obtained by the circle of experimenters.
By it, as indeed by aU methods, very strange and
absurd communications are sometimes given. I have
seen instances, and been told of others, in which long
incongruous strings of names and titles have been spelt
out; such as, Richard Coeur de Lion, Pythagoras,
Byron, Cheops, and Mr. Fauntleroy, the list perhaps
ending with T. Browne or J. Smith. The givers of
these names seem to delight only in buflfoonery or
abuse, and perhaps, after playihg absurd and mis-
chievous tricks for days or even weeks, will seem to
come in a body, giving all their names with the in-
formation that they are come to say ^Oood-hy for
ever.' After this their names or sobriquets do not

28 FROM MATTES TO SPIRIT.

appear again. Of course it would not be to the pur-
pose to try, in the present state of the inquiry, to account
fully for these strange proceedings. Even on the
supposition that names thus given proceed from real
existences, we must imagine either that the names are
assumed for fun, or that some unknown law connect-
ing the name with the character or nature is involved.
Of this law, of which we seem to have a little glimmer-
ing, I shall speak further on. Whatever may be the
cause of the foolish and mischievous visitations referred
to, their very frequent occurrence is a sufficient reason
for the repetition of a caution already given ; namely,
that those who wish to try experiments must, if they
do not desire to be repelled in the outset, preserve a
really religious, earnest, and truth-loving spirit. The
absence of this temper of mind in the party will soon
be followed by such manifestations as those last de-
scribed, which are really hurtful to mediums, and from
their reckless and untruthful character very unlikely
to lead to just conclusions on the whole subject.

29

CHAPTEE III.

WRITING — FIRST EXPERIMENTS.

TVUEINGr the two first years of our experience in
■^ spirit manifestations, the power of mediumship
was found to exist in a greater or less degree, and in
diflferent forms, in about thirty persons. Among these
were men, women, young persons, and children, persons
of all ages, of all stations in society, and all degrees
of education and varieties of disposition and intellect.
Experiments tried with such extensive means of obser-
vation can scarcely fail to be useful in assisting conjec-
ture on the subject ; and in the hope that they may be
interesting, I extract some of the most remaricable
instances from a record kept at the time.

When the involuntary writing is first seen in imper-
fect mediums, unaccompanied by its more striking
allied forms of manifestation, rapping, moving furni-
ture, &c., it is generally thought to be the result either
of an uncontrolled self-delusive imagination, or of
some undeveloped faculty in the mental nature of the
writer akin to that described by some physiologists

30 FKOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

as unconscious cerebration^ or an action carried on in
the brain without the knowledge of the mind. The last
view is often taken by thoughtful persons on the first
appearance of the phenomenon in themselves or others.
Less scientific observers are apt to attribute the whole
to fancy. Uneducated people say the medium ^ gives
way/ and are confirmed in this luminous view of the
matter by the fact that the movement of the hand can
be generally, though not always, prevented with ease.
But when it is found that the rapping or moving stops

after the spelling of some such sentence as * Let

hold the pencil, I can write by his hand,' and that no
eflFort of will can reproduce the raps, or gain communis
cation in any other way than that promised, it is
impossible to avoid the conclusion that the same agency
is at work in both forms of mediumship. But the re-
spective parts taken by the medium and by the unseen
power, if the latter exist, remain to be seen.

A great deal of nonsense, as has been said, is often
written at first by mediums. This is reverted to here
by way of caution, for excepting the proof that, if the
unseen influences emanate from beings in another
state, they are if anything in a lower mental and moral
condition than ourselves, I know of nothing to be
learnt by it. The verses written by the unseen power
are often curious and quaint, sometimes ridiculous.
But verses not of a low and mischievous character have
been given to us as to many other experimenters. • The

WRITING: FIRST EXPERIMENTS. 31

best of these contained beautiful ideas connected with
the happiness of a life among the blessed and good
in the world of good spirits and angels, very lovely
descriptions of the scenery of that world or worlds, and
much affectionate anticipation of reunion among friends
and future progress in happiness together. These were
the elementary thougJUa only. The language and
forms of imagery might be traced in every instance
which I have seen to the brain of the medium. This,
I think, will be found true throughout aU the mani-
festations, and in none is it more apparent than in the
writing, from T. L. Harris's always remarkable and
frequently poetical productions, down to verses written
with excessive rapidity by the hand of a child eight
years old. I would say then, even at the risk of
repetition, the elementary idea or truth sought to be
conveyed does not originate with the medium ; the lan-
guage, spelling, and form of expression is his or hers.
It is true that mediums like Mr. Harris and others
whom we have known produce both prose and verse in
a vartety of styles, so as to favour the idea of a variety
of influences, according to the names of poets or others
given as the inspirers of the composition : but it will be
found that the latter never exceeds the ability of the
writer to attain and comprehend, though its meaning
and characters may be beyond or outside of what he
would have himself originated.
The name of a great poet was once given to me by

.\

1

32 FROM MATTEB TO SFIBIT.

the hand of a very young medium, and I, who was then
inexperienced in the whole proceeding, asked for a
complete little poem in three verses for a friend. The
child, of course, could have no idea of what was coming,
as my request was a sudden thought, but in about five
minutes three verses were written with very great
rapidity, describing the approach of an army, a battle
on the bank of a river, which ran red with the blood of
the combatants, another battle on hills whose greenness
was especially noticed, and a third when the flowers
were in bloom, and when the chief was dead* The metre
was uncommon, and though the lines were grotesque,
they were not inharmonious. One of our greatest
living authors, himself a fine poet, pronounced these
three stanzas to contain a poetical element which couUi
hot have proceeded from the mind of a young child.
In the following spring, several months after the
writing, the applicability of this rhythmical production
to the three battles of Alma, Inkermann, and Bala-
clava was apparent. But they were written long
before the Crimean War broke out.

In what follows, as indeed in all that has been said,
I know not how to secure anything like a belief in the
trustworthiness of a narrator who is not at liberty to
authenticate the truth of any one narrative by the
names of those concerned. Perhaps some honesty of
purpose may appear in the method both of experi-
menting and of recording results ; this, however, will

wnrriNG: first exfebiments. 33

only be sufficient to stimulate enquiry, and so I leave
my statements, even if ridiculed in the first instance,
to receive a larger amount of consideration when the
experience of each individual shall have enabled him to
verify them for himself.

Many considerations yet remained, and many expe-
riments were still to be tried, before we could have full
reason for believing that another intelligence was
concerned, or, in other words, that an invisible being
directed the operations of the telegraphic wire whose
mechanism was in our own organisation.

From the beginning of my experience in these mani-
festations, two circrumstances had struck me forcibly as
forming an element of the question as to their nature.
The first of these was the invariable assertion that they
were caused by ^spirits,'' and that these spirits had
once lived in the body on earth. The other circum-
stance was that, whatever the name given, and through
whatever means or mediumship it came, the phrase-
ology always agreed with the relationship claimed. To
make my meaning more intelligible: Suppose that
writings are given purporting to come from the sister
or brother of a person present, and that a family party,
in which all kinds of relationships are found, compose
the circle. The writing, in mentioning members of the
family to each other, will always specify them correctly
by the relationship subsisting among them. For
example; — A supposed brother writing to his sister

D

34 FBOH MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

about her son by the hand of a stranger medium^ will
speak of the son as ^ my nephew/ and to the son^ of
' my sister,' * your mother,' &c, I never saw this ML
It seems difficult to believe that any v/nconsdovs
action of the brain can, without the least premeditation,
produce expressions which fall into such coherence of
meaning.

Here is a curious and perfect illustration of what I
mean, obtained in an experiment which was tried in
order to ascertain, whether a * spirit,' having written
something by one medium, can repeat the same word,
or convey the same idea, by another who is unac-
quainted with it. In answer to this general question,
we were told that this could sometimes be done, but that
it depended on the mental harmony subsisting between
the medium and the spirit^

Two young mediums were, present ; I placed a paper
before one of them, begging that some word might be
written which might be either literally or substantially
repeated by the hand of the other, who was reading
quietly at a distance. The writing was—

^ Yes I can. '' Your '

* That is what you mean to write ? ' (pointing to the
word yoUy but not repeating it.)

Ans. ' Yea:

The name given of the spirit was that of one of my
nieces. I laid another paper before the other medium,
begging him to hold the pencil for a moment. His

^

WBITIKa: FIBST EXFEBIMENTS. 35

hand wrote, * My (mnd! We then told him the object
of the experiment, and showed him the word * Y<m '
written by the first medium*

Here the icfoa, and not the word, was conveyed by
the medium's writing.

Another time I asked this question : —

' If I were to write down the name of a flower, and
Emily (a very young medium) were to write another,
each keeping the idea of that flower in our minds, but
not mentioning the names to each other, could you
(the spirit) write a tlurd and different name, by our
joined hands ? '

Ans. ^Yes, with Emily and you, but not with all
mediums.'

I then wrote IRo^e^ and Emily wrote Bweetpea.
Neither meAtioned these names aloud. But Emily's
hand with mine on the wrist wrote IMy. Again,
Emily wrote JeB8<vnvme\ I, Mignonette^ and our joined
hands wrote Larkspur. This was done four times
in all, the three i^ames each time being clear and
distinct from each other. Then our hands wrote,
* Leave off; the power is gone.' It seemed to me that
if either Emily or I had influenced the writing by
muscular or mental power, the result would not have
been a clearly written name, but a mixture of our
thoughts.

While the opportunity for making experiments
lasted, we obtained stronger presumptive evidence

D 2

36 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

than any yet given of the existence of another will
and intelligence in the source of the writing, quite
independent of the will of the medium or mediums.

Three writers were present^ Edward^ John, and my-
self. I, however, could not write alone, and could only
strengthen the power of others by laying my hand on
the wrist. After preliminaries were settled, and the
name of a spirit given who declared himself able to
draw a figure or mark by one, and to repeat it by the
others, what follows took place.

By Edward's hand with mine on it, this figure was
drawn. This was hidden immediately,
and John, who had been at too great a
distance from us to see anything if he
had tried, took the pencil. I did not go near him.
Edward, who cared little about the experiment, was

■W^Q

a

reading. John's hand made several attempts. I give
a tracing of the last four.

When No. 3 was drawn, I, thinking the spirit had
succeeded, said, * Is it not done ? ' John's hand then

WRITING: FIRST EXPERIMENTS.

37

made another quadrangular figure, with the horizontal
lines fine, and the perpendicular ones thick (No. 4).
This characteristic of the figure drawn by Edward's and
my hand I had not noticed before.

I now felt that it would be more satisfactory if we,
who really did feel an interest in the result, did not know
the pattern figure. It was therefore drawn by the
hand of John, who put it away at once. Then Edward
held the pencil, which, with my hand upon it, drew
No. 2.

Pattern figure, drawn by John.

No. 2.

No. 2, drawn by Edward's and my hands. The
pencil was moved so as to double the lines. This
appeared like an effort to alter the position of the
figure, which is less upright than the pattern.* When
the pencil stopped I asked, * Is that it ? ' Ans. * Yes.'
E, * Most likely it is all wrong.'
Myself. * I expect this is a failure, John.'

38 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

John then took his drawing from his pockety and
we found that the two differed only in size, and in the
inclination of the lines.

The next was less successful : as before, it was by
John's hand alone, hidden immediately.

After four attempts had been made by Edward's
hand and mine, I asked whether it was done.

Ans. ^NO.'

* Which is the nearest of the four figures? '

This figure (No 2) was pointed out; we found it the

Pattern figure. No. 2.

most like of the four. The double line appeared like
an intention to form the inner angle.

The next had the pattern figure by John's hand.

This time the con-
trol over Edward's
hand and mine
seemed to be almost
lost. Eight figures
Pattern figure. were drawn, all cir-

cles, with some other lines. Then we were told that
the spirit could not do it, but that this was the nearest

WBIXma: FIRST EXFEBIMENTS. 39

A day or two after trying this experiment, we learned
more through writing, by John's hand, of the difficulty
found by spirits* in transmitting what they wish to
say through mediums. We were told that unless the
directing power had complete control, the thought
uppermost in the medium's mind would be given, and
this made it extremely difficult, when anything was
written by one medium, to repeat it by another ; * for,'
it was said, ^the medium always begins to guess a/nd
think whether it is right. When marks or figures are
drawn there is less difficulty, because the medium is
not so likely to imagine a figure.' This, if it be true,
shows that the positive action of the brain is exactly
opposed to the passive state required by the unseen
power for impression. It is also one cause, among
many others, of the great difficulty of obtaining tests
when tests are sought for. Perhaps, also, it may serve
to throw light over the admitted fact that so large a
proportion of powerful mediums are at present among
the uninformed and uncultivated classes. If spiritual^
ism, as such, is ever generally received and thoroughly
understood, this will cease to be the ceuse.

ft

We had sometimes asked questions and received for

answers, * I cann4>t tell you this by E '« hand^ let /

D hold the pendlJ The explanation sought for

^ I need hardly say that I am compelled to use these ezpiessionB in
naErating incidents or mentioning communications.

40 PROM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

has then been given by D , who nevertheless might

be unable to write many things which were given "with

great clearness by the hand of E . Some mediums

appeared more completely under the control of some
spirits than others, and I soon thought that in the
characters of those who wrote, even under the supposed
influence of spirits whom they had never known, a
resemblance might be seen between the mind or dis-
position of the spirit and that of the medium. The
following little incidents well illustrate this, and help
to indicate the conditions necessary for full communi-
cation.

A young lady (whose mediumship has not been
referred to before, and whom I call Charlotte) was
trying experimeAts in a room the windows of which
opened on a garden, in which her sister, also a writing
medium, was walking. The name of my relation who
is represented as having first communicated with me
at Mrs. Hayden's was given. I write the initials as

M . I then asked, ' Gould you^ M , vyriie by

the hand of ATnelia ? ' (the young lady in the garden).

The reply was, 'I canTwt write by her hcmd, but
my (relation specified) ccmJ

We then called from the window begging Amelia to
come in, for that a spirit who had never written by her
before, had promised to write by her hand. She took
the pencil and, after some preliminary practice of
scrawls and flourishes as described, wrote the promised

WRITINa: FIRST EXPERIMENTS. 41

name cut lengthy with a characteristic sentiment refer-
ring to the progress of spiritual enlightenment. This
spirit was the second who had communicated with me
at Mrs. Hayden's. We then asked ' Why could not

M write by Amdia^a handV The answer was,

^ Dispositions do n/>t harmonise,^

A gentleman whose literary works had always been
characterised, after the manner of Fuseli's paintings,
by a tendency to the sanguinary and terrific, once asked
me to place my hand on his wrist, in order to * set his
hand going/ The two hands soon moved, and the
usual scrawling practice was made, but my arm felt
stiff and painful eyen to the shoulder and neck. After
one or two efforts the names of Cathervne de Medids
and Maria Mannimg were written. We left off im-
mediately. Had I not felt uneasiness in the arm
before the two names appeared, the sensation might
have been fairly ^scribed to fancy. Certainly the pain
lasted for more than an hour after . the pencil was
dropped.

In the next chapter I will give the explanations we
received of the agency by which, as is asserted, spirits
act through mediums.

42

CHAPTER IV,

MESMEBISH.

BEFORE entering on an explanation of the manner
in which^ as asserted by themselves^ the ^ unseen
powers' influence the mediums, it is necessary to say a
few words on that which preceded * Spiritualism' in
the world, namely, 'Mesmerism.' Those who are
acquainted with the processes and phenomena of mes-
merism will at once understand the description of this
mode of operating; but to many persons meamerisra is
only another word for some mysterious and fearful,
perhaps dangerous operation, which puts people into
strange unnatural states, or throws them into an end-
less sleep. For readers in this vague and imaginative
state of mind, some farther explanation is wanted,
especially as my object will be to show the connection
between spiritualism and mesmerism-whatever may
be the physical agencies at work in and the ultimate
cause of both.

Long before the rappings, &c., were hetird of, I had
' / made many experiments in mesmerism, aU of which

MESHEBISIL 43

had the cure of disease for their object; and though
* pheoomena were never sought after, several very re-
markable cases occurred, with a very few of which I
will trouble the reader. They will help to throw light
on the more mysterious occurrences which afterwards
took place.

!• The following will show the power of mesmerism

over the muscles of the body. I leave to physiologists

to describe the momner of its action through the

nerves. A baby, ten weeks old, which from its birth

had been unable to hold up the feet in their natural

position, at right angles to the legs, was brought to me

by its mother, who wished to be taught how to bandage

the legs, according to the directions of an eminent

surgeon. The feet hung quite powerless, in a line with

the legs. While I was considering the best way of

bandaging such very small limbs, it occurred to me

to show the mother how to mesmerise them, as that,

I thought, could do no harm, and, from what I had

seen, would be likely to strengthen the joints. I had,

however, no expectation of What actually occurred. A

few passes were made — perhaps twelve, at most twenty

in all— from the knees to the end of the little feet

Afber about six passes the feet began to rise, and

immediately gained their natural position. I went on ;

the muscles gained a power which they never had

before; the bandages were returned to the hospital;

ftnd the cure was complete, having been accomplished

44 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

in about five minutes. In due time the baby ran
alone, as if nothing had ever been the matter with his
legs.

2. A child who was mesmerised for the cure of
severe headaches aflforded me an opportunity of ob-
serving that remarkable state which has been called
* community of sensation.' This state, according to the
assertions made by the involuntary writing, aflfords a
key to some of the mysteries of spiritual action, as the
happy occurrence of a Greek inscription with its two
Egjrptian counterparts on the Eosetta stone afforded the
means of interpreting the unknown hieroglyphic. The
phenomenon of community of sensation deserves espe-
cial notice ; and the experience afforded by it may be
applied, although the internal cause of its appearance
is still hidden from our knowledge.

The boy, in a sleep-waking state, was talking to me
of his headache, when a slight blow was accidentally
given me by a person passing. It was scarcely worth
notice, but the child called out, *Who knocked my
arm ?' Perceiving that he was then in the state which
I had often heard of, but never seen before, I tried the
effect of other sensations. I tasted sugar, and he liked
the sweetness; I took mustard, and he complained
grievously of the pungency ; a pin's point touching my
hand seemed to give him great pain, and for a short
time he appeared to reciprocate all my physical feelings.
This susceptibility was, however, soon lost. After a

HESMEBISM. 45

few experiments his sensations became confused; and
though when my arm, for instance, was pinched^ he
felt aoTnethingy he could not tell where the sensation
arose, and talked of his back being hurt« When he
returned to his normal state his head ached, and I
therefore never made more than one or two trials of
this again. On one occasion the little boy was placed
as the last of a chain of eight or nine persons, holding
each other's hands. The first in the chain took a pinch
of snuff, and the child sneezed, and talked of our
putting snuff in his nose. I need hardly say that,
unlike the action of an electric shock under similar
circumstances, the sensation of snuff-taking was not
felt by any other of the party.

3. Many patients have spoken of light which they said

they saw streaming from my fingers. The description

of tiiis appearance varied with the subjects. It has

been observed by as many as eight persons during

a few weeks, some of these being magnetised, some

in a normal state. The boy of whom I have spoken,

and also the motlier of the baby, herself unmesmerised,

saw this very plainly. The mother saw a cloud of

light resting on the baby's leg as the foot received

the mesmerism. One of the most remarkable instances

of this perception occurred in a person holding a very

respectable place in a public charitable institution.

This person looking steadily at the fingers of a strong

mesmeriser saw streams of light ; and when the fingers

46 FBOH MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

were directed downwards on some water in a tumbler,
observed the rays, each of which appeared like a little
sunbeam with a line of silver in the centre, fall into
the water, gradually filling it, and then rising in the
glass till the latter was full of mist Then she said
the water seemed to move or boil, gradually surging
up like the waves of a tiny sea, till it reached its
greatest degree of agitation or * boiling point.' The
subsidence, which took place gradually, always occupied
the same number of minutes as the ^boiling.' Of
course those who had no power of vision saw nothing
of this occult action. Among mesmerised persons
some perceived a movement among the particles of
water, while to some it appeared brighter than before.
One mesmerised girl who saw this said that the small
insects in the water fell down as if struck by electricity;
but this could not be confirmed, as no one but herself
could discern insects so minute. An account of this
phenomenon appeared in ^ The Zoist,' at that time the
organ of magnetic experiments. Its truth was after-
wards attested in the same periodical by two respectable
clergymen, each of whom had repeated and verified
the experiments for themselves.

4. I once tried a few passes over the spine of a poor
little deformed child, asking her whether she felt them.
Her answer was, * No^ I canH fed anything but warmth;
bwt I d/yrCt like it^ because I am afraid of lightnimg,
a/ad now there ia lightning coming on meJ^ The

MESMEItlSM. 47

action of the water, and the sight of luminous rays
issuing from the hand, are brought forward here in
proof of the assertion, that a fluid influence or force
emanates from the hand of a powerful magnetiser^ and
to persons in some states is sensibly perceptible.

5. Two instances of clairvoyance wiU be adduced,
because they wiU be found of use in illustrating laws
which we were afterwards told by the unseen influences
pervade the whole universe of spiritual life; and
which must therefore be interpreted before a knowledge
of spiritual language or operations can be attained.

A youDg and ignorant girl while under mesmeric
treatment for fits, from which she quite recovered, fell
into the state called clairvoyance. In one of her
liveliest moods she proposed to go and find one of my
femily, who was visiting at a house with which I was un-
acquainted. It was more than a mile distant from my
own home, and I knew nothing of it but the street in
which it stood. As soon as I had agreed to * go with
her,' which was done by merely holding her hand,
she asked me to direct her. I did so as feir aa the
street, listening to her remarks as we mentally went
on, as if we had been walking together in London.
When we reached the comer of the street I told her
I did not. know the number, and she must ask the
first person she met to show her — 's house. She
answered that she would do so, and in a minute said,
' IFeare there ; this is the houseJ^ 'Knock at the door,'

48 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

I said. ^ / canH yet ; I am only just m at the garclen
gateJ'

She then talked of ringing at the bell, saying there
was no knocker ; spoke (apparently) to some person who
had come to her spiritually-found door, and asked if B.
was there.

* He says. Yes. We may go up-stairs.'

She described the staircase and its decorations,
talked of many shut doors on the landing, and of
hearing voices within. Then she said she had got into
the room where B. was. The furniture of this room
was described, and her description, which included some
rather minute and unusual details, proved accurate.
Everything about chairs, curtains, glasses, &c, was
verified afterwards. And one part of her account
was this : —

^ I see a gentleman (describing age and appearance)
sitting beside B. They are talking together. I canH
hear what they say, B. is povatvng with his finger at
you, and the other is looking at me. Now the other
gentleman has fetched a lady, and the lady has joined
them, and they are all three talking together J*

The exact time when she said this was noted, B,
soon after came in and confirmed all she said. But that
which puzzled me then, and has since served as an
illustrative fact, was the girl's statement, that B. was
^ pointing,' and his friend * looking,' at her and myself.
B. was at that moment telling his friend some of the

J

T

MESMERISM. 49

most curious things that had taken place during the
mesmerising, and the gentleman had called to his wife
to come and hear what was said.

On another occasion this girl, making a mental (or
rather spiritual) journey through some streets in the
neighbourhood, described a chapel on fire, the flames of
which had broken out after she was put to sleep, and
the fire had not been mentioned in her hearing. She
spoke of the number of engines successively arriving,
the difficulty of getting water, the shouting and bad
language of the mob, which she said she heard, and,
what I thought the^ strangest of all, of the diffi-
culty of getting into the chapel through the locked
iron gates. This difficulty was surmounted, as she said,
after some men in the crowd had climbed the railings ;
and she was then able to get in at the chapel door,
when she traced the origin of the fire, and gave me a
full description of the inside of the building in its burnt
and dismantled state. Two messengers were sent out
separately to ascertain what was. going on at the fire
(half a mile from the house), and from these, in turn,
we received a full confirmation of all her statements.

This girl, like some of the others, saw the light from
her mesmeriser's hand, and once when the hands were
rubbed together she exclaimed that they were on fire.

Every wonderful effect produced by mesmerism has
since found its explanation or its counterpart in the
spiritual phenomena, so that, had unseen powers beea

E

50 FROM HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

truly working for our instruction, they could not have
taken a hetter method of giving the needful elementary
knowledge than by making us acquainted with the
processes and results of mesmerism. As all the infor-
mation that can be obtained on the subject of mes-
merism is valuable, for its power in healing disea^
when properly applied is unquestionable, I would
recommend those interested in the subject to read
Earth's 'Manual of Mesmerism,' in which everything
connected with the practice of magnetism is included;
and for many very interesting details connec^ted with the
subject, a little collection of cases entitled * Clairvoyance
in Hygienic Medicine,' by Jacob Dixon. An extract
from this interesting little work will be found farther on.
/'^Persons in some of the highest mesmeric states do
indeed appear to have passed the boundaries of material
life, and to have gained an insight into the world of
spirit. Of this I had one striking experience long
before the time of the raps, seeing-mediums, and
mysteries of the present day. It is certain that when
this happened^ though too many instances of earthly
clairvoyance had come to my notice to allow of my
, remaining sceptical in that direction, yet I held all

Y

belief in real intercourse with spirits to be a delusion,
caused by some unknown action of the brain. This
scepticism was shaken by the following occurrence.
Being invited by a friend to see a young lady in a state
ivhich he called spiritual clairvoyance, in which she

MESMEBISM. 51

professed to see and converse with spiritual beings, I
entered the room after she was mesmerised, and my
name was not mentioned aloud. I took my seat un-
noticed by her side, and listened to her exquisite i^
description of the scenes in which she believed herself
to be. Although the great beauty of the imagery, and
its wonderful coherence with her theory of symbolism,
puzzled and surprised me, I set the whole down in my
own mind as the working of a highly excited poetical
fancy. At length my friends asked her whether she
could look for any spirit for the lady sitting beside her.
She would try. I mentioned two, only naming their
relationship to myself, giving neither the age nor sex
of either. She then said, */ am now in a garden
quite full of flowers. There is a group of chil'
dren hanging garlands over a lamh. How they have
covered that lamb with flowers ! Two children come
out from the group. The girl is the oldest. They are
ten cmd eight years old.^ She then described perfectly
every feature of the two children I had asked for,
dwelling with animation on their beautiful appearance ^
and surroimdings. The age she mentioned was, how-
ever, much in advance of the reality. When I remarked
this, she was silent a minute, then said, ^ They say that
I see them as they a/re iww ; you must remember that
tfwy have been here some timeJ It then appeared that
the ages she mentioned were exactly what they would
have been had the two remained on earth.

E 2

52

CHAPTER V.

MEDIUMSHIP — MODES OF INFLUENCE.

THOUGH a kind of resemblaDce between the mes-
meric and spiritual phenomena could not escape
notice when our experiments were first made, I had no
idea whatever of the real connection between the two
processes, nor of the nearness to identity of the agencies
employed.

But as soon as it appeared that several of our friends
were sufficiently under the control of the invisible
power to give answers apparently independent of our
thoughts, I began to make enquiries as to the nature
of the influence and the manner of using it.

A young man, sitting in a circle, had his arm shaken
with irresistible violence, making innumerable curves
and lines. When this had gone on some time, a very
intelligent person in the party, who had been observing
all that passed, said, ^ I am sure that all this is some
action of electricity.' Instantly the hand wrote, with
exceeding rapidity, and no spaces between the words.

MEDIUMSHIP — MODES OF INFLXTENCE, 53

^ YovuTerightUiadedricityth^^
spi/riUhatguidesthedectricityJ*

Another time^ I asked a young writing-medium, quite
unconnected with the one above mentioned —

^ How do spirits write through mediums V

Ana, * The spirit mesmerises the medium.'

Another statement through a medium still younger :

* Spirits take hold of the wrist.'

Q. ' If you take hold of the wrists and so produce a
mechanical movement of the hand, how is it that the
answers come m the Ui/ngua^e of the medium f '

Ans. ^Because we do not take hold of it in your
way: .

Q. 'How, then?'

Ans. ^ It is done by the spiritual fluids which comes
from the brain to the hand:

At this point of the dialogue, it appeared as if our
informant could not tell us all we wanted to know by
writing, and a sketch was drawn (Fig. 1), which,
strange and grotesque as it is, by the hand of a child
who could not draw, conveys the idea required. The
good spirit above is throwing the influence through the
higher portions of the brain, namely, the organs of
veneration, benevolence, ideality, and the intellectual
j)ortion. The evil spirit, nearer to earth, is trying to
mesmerise the base of the brain. I cannot help con-
necting this illustration through a quite uninformed
medium with some experiments in writing made

54 FBOM lUTTEH TO 8PIHIT.

through my friend Miss L , who ha« sometimes

been obliged to leave off, from the character of the
writing, the paiu in the nape of the necic, and a chill
which she frequently feels, and which always gives hei
the idea of an earthly or evil influence.

Fig. I.

The illnsttation in the diagram was afterwards con-
firmed by the hand of another medium, with the
additional intelligence that ' Spirits often influence
through each other.'

I asked for a drawing of the process, when two

UEDIUUSHIP — UODES OF INFLUENCE. 55

persons' handfi were joined, and the drawing Ho. 2 was
made. These two sketches, strange aa they are, are
nearly fao-similes of the ori^nal, which was, however.

Fig. 2.

too large for this page. According to the law of
symbolism a]fra,jB in operation, by which it appears
tJiat the character of the representative imagery used

56 FROM. MATTER TO SPIRIT.

always depends on the brain of the medium, the appear-
ance depicted may-not be exactly what we should see
if we had the power of vision. It is certain that, in
circles, when a hand has been moved to write, a person
having the gift of spirit-sight has declared that the
form of a hand was visible immediately over the hand
of the writer. Perhaps both this appearance and the
illustrative drawing are meant to convey the same idea,
of an influence emanating from the spirit and directing
the muscles of the medium; and the extended arms
and active position of the superincumbent figure may
possibly be the only forms in which the directing
influence could convey the idea by a child of twelve
years old. I was told at the time, but have not now a
record of the words, that the agency employed in
rapping and moving substances was of an electrical
character, but rather more material and less refined
(proceeding from a source nearer earth) than that by
which the hand is moved to write or draw : that the
processes of rapping and moving involve two actions, the
chargi/ng of the table, (fee, and a current of spiritual fluid
passed through the medium, to produce raps thrown
oflf in successive shocks or blows instead, like the draw-
ing or writing, of flowing in one continuous stream.

I asked the question, ^ When a spirit writes through
a medium diredhig the spvritual fluid through the
brain to the hand, how is the thought conveyed V

Ans. * Whoutefoev the spirit thinks, the medium,
writes.^

MEDIUMSHir — MODES OF INFLUENCE. 57

Thus was given in part the information sought for.
We had something like a coherent* theory, and could
compare the action of human mesmerism, when the
mesmerised person shares the sensations or feelings of
the mesmeriser, or imitates his movements, with the
presumed spiritual influence. We were also furnished
with a key to the mystery of the diflBculty found in
communicating by some mediums, and the impossibility
of doing so by others, while in some cases writing and
drawings are executed with great ease and rapidity.
This part of the subject being one of the most com-
plicated of the whole, will be entered on at greater
length hereafter.

As to the order in which the phenomena are deve-
loped in a medium, I believe that the table-moving is
generally one of the first to appear; the writing
precedes the drawing; vision is a later and more in-
ternal process, and hearing later stilL But the earlier
and most material forms of mediumship, such as rap-
ping and table-moving, do not seem to be susceptible
of any great change or refinement ; the communications
given aft^r a year's practice being no more exalted than
those first received ; while all the more internal forms,
such as writing, drawing, seeing, and hearing, are
capable of being imfolded and refined to an indefinite
degree.

So much comes under the head of * Vision,' in
connection with other modes of mediumship, that I
proceed to give some instances of spiritual sight.

58

CHAPTEE VL

HEDiUMSHiP {continued) : whiting — vision — drawing.

AS an answer to the question '-How is vision pro-
duced f ' a drawing had been made in which the
seer is represented as lying back with the eyes shut
and receiving a current of * spiritual fluid ' from the
two hands of a spirit. The current from the left hand
enters the right eye, and reissuing from the left eye of
the seer, joins the right hand fingers of the spirit again.
Quite unexpectedly to me, the words ' /ti,' and ' Otdy
were written by the eyes, thus indicating a kind of circle.
These first explanatory notes and illustrations will here-
after, doubtless, appear as rude and imperfect as the
first guesses of the alchemists at the simple elements are
seen to be by the analytical chemists of our own time.

I next asked how the character of the vision was
determined, and was told, * Whatever the apvrit thinkdy
the medium sees.^

The following instances of vision are transcribed
nearly verbatim from notes taken during their occur-
rence. They were as little expected or understood by

mediumshif: yision. 59

the mediums as by myself, and the seers being either
intimate friends or members of my own family^ were of
course unpaid.

On one of those occasions on which a circle of friends
had assembled for experiments^ a vision was seen, which
is well worthy of notice^ both because it was preceded
by the sensible mesmerising of the seer^ and on account
of its own beautiful imagery and meaning.

There had been a slight movement of the table^
which soon however became steady, and the hand of a
young man present was moved to vnrite * Join hands

round the table* After a time, Sirs. D , a lady of

high intellectual power, declared that she could not
keep her eyes open. We begged her not to combat the
influence. Her hands were then drawn away from
those of the rest of the party, who sat quietly watching
her. She did not sleep, but could not open her eyes,
and she said she felt a sensation like cool fanning over
her face and brow. This lasted some minutes, and
from its distinctness seemed to surprise her very much.
She said that it was a most delightful feeling, but she
could not guess whence it was, nor what it was for,
though she felt as if some one were very near her. At
length she exclaimed, ^ Now I see! ^ and described the
vision, which was written from her own words.

* I see a church of emeralds. An altar, over which
is a beautiful bright light, and a steeple, illuminated.
The pavement is inlaid and of the richest colours. A

60 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

great deal of purple, but no black. The deepest colour,
that which would have been black, is blue. The ends
of the pews are arched, and all of precious stones.

^ Now I see a number of people coming. There is
so much purple about them. They have loose robes of
purple. They appear to have formed ranks on each
side, and a number of beautiful children are come, all
in white, with wreaths held up over their heads. They
pass up the church and are kneeling before the illu-
minated part, which is a tower rather than an altar.

' Now I see a beautiful altar, not a crescent. The
top is inlaid with marble of beautiful colours, highly
polished. The windows are purple and gold. In thie
centre of each window is a largp precious stone ; it is as
large as a dinner-plate. The first is bright gold, the
second is ruby or carbuncle, the third is bright blue.
Now I see them (the people) all going up the immense
tower. What a height ! It makes me giddy to look at
it ! Now they have wings, and I see them all in the
air. There is a bright circle, and they have passed
through it. They are all gone into heaven.

^ Everything is dissolving, and a bright light coming
again. Where the illuminated tower stood, I see the
cross of Christ, and beside it stands our Saviour. Oh I
how beautiful He looks ! pointing upwards towards His
cross I '

The seer said that the church appeared to be more
than a mile in lengths She was impressed to believe

mediumship: vision. 61

that the figures in purple were those who had suffered
for the faith of Christ, and the young ones in white, the
purified spirits of those who went to heaven by His means.

We then asked for a fuller explanation, and obtained
the following in writing, by the hand of the young man
who had first written : —

Q. * What do the emeralds mean ? '

Atis, ^New. It is the New Church that is fast
coming. Watch the course of events throughout the
world,'

Q. What is meant by the wreaths that the young
ones held ? '

Ans. ^ Innocence. Never cease watching the course
of God's providence.'

Q. ' WTio are you who give us this information ? '

Ans. *F .' The name of the older spirit who

had spoken to me at Mrs. Haydeh's, and who has been
described as delighting, in his life on earth, in antici-
pations of the fulfilment of prophecy, and the establish-
ment of the Saviour's kingdom.

After this, Mrs. D 's eyes continuing tightly shut,

^e asked for directions how to open them. It was
written, ^Just touch her forehead between the eyes, and
they will ojpen.^ I did so, and the lids began to rise.
Then it was written, ' Touch her eyelids^ They opened
immediately.

' The scenes of the vision,' Mrs. D said, * came

one after another like dissolving views*'

62 FROM MATTBK TO SMBIT.

Both she and the young man by whose hand the
explanation was written were of a character, and
possessed of a cerebral organisation, which well fitted
them to receive and appreciate such communications.

Mrs. D soon had experience of a different chsr-

racter from that described. One instance of this
afforded a means of recognising the spirit seen. The
lady had become partially entranced, having her eyes
close shut, but in no other way showing that she was
under influence, when she began to describe scenes
through which she seemed to be passing. I give
as nearly as I can her own words ; —

^ These green slopes are very lovely, with their
patches of flowers, and ferns, and brushwood. This
young girl is Ellen; quite herself, so fresh, and fair
and young. She is looking at me with her bright
smile from behind a rosebush ; she seems to be just
pushing aside the branches to let me see her face.
Now I see that with the other hand she holds the hand
of a noble-looking old man whom she calls ,' (men-
tioning the relation and describing the face, features,

and manner of the older spirit whom Mrs. D had

never seen in life, but who was the one mentioned
as having given her the vision of the church, and as
having a mind much in harmony with her own).

* Ask him,' I said, Ho take some means of identifying
himself for me, if possible ? ' She waited a minute, then
said ;

mediumship: vision. 63

'I see him kneeling in prayer; a book lies open
before him in a character which I do not know.'

^Perhaps it is Greek,' I suggested. 'If it is the
spirit named, he used to read the Greek Testament
habitually.'

'No, I know the Greek letters well ; this is a black
square character, which looks very ancient. The volume
itself has a black cover.'

When in another minute her eyes opened, I laid
before her a Hebrew Bible which had been constantly
read in this life by the spirit,

' That,' said the seer, ' is the book itself I '

Mrs. D , on seeing afterwards a bust of the same

person, immediately and without any word from me,
recognised it as a likeness of the reader of the Hebrew
Bible.

The seer of the next vision, Miss L , has been

already slightly referred to. Of middle age, quiet,
practical and unimaginative in her habits, and truly but :
not ostentatiously christian in conduct, she readily wins,
and never to my knowledge has lost, the confidence
of those who know her. My own acquaintance wj^h
her has lasted thirteen years, and during that time
many of the most internal spiritual phenomena have
occurred.

Very soon after the discovery of Miss L 's power

in writing, her hand with mine on it (it would not move

64 FHOM MATTER TO SPIRIT,

without) * was guided to write, ' / could show myself
to you^ if you would look in the crystcd.^

This crystal, the action of which on the eye will be

explained farther on, is simply an egg-shaped piece of

clear glass given to me by a friend who had seen

similar glasses used in Lancashire by fortune tellers, or,

' as they used to be called, peepers.

The assertion of Miss L 's capability of seeing

in the crystal proved true. The manner of its first
occurrence was, in few words, as follows. Having
placed the glass on the table, covering it so closely as
to shut out from it and from her own eyes every
vestige of light, or reflection of the articles in the room,
she sat down in perfect quietness gazing on the glass.
After about ten minutes she said that it appeared to
have become cloudy, then dark, then an opaque black.
After this some light appeared, apparently from with-
in the ci'yataly and the latter cleared. Then followed a
succession of scenes gradually becoming more and more
beautiful, each one appearing for a minute or so, then
melting away like a dissolving view^ and after a little
clouding of the crystal, giving way to its successor.
For the most part each of the earlier scenes was charac-
terised either by a gate, an arch, a bridge, or some
other image typical of a passage from one state into

* Experimenters will find this need of two hands a good t«st of the
writing not being their own origination. See p. 35.

hebiuhshif: tision. 65

another. I have seen this in all instances of well-
developed crystal vision.

Miss L generally seemed to pass through two

doors or gates, before she saw any persons whom she
could recognise as her earthly friends.

After the last arch had been passed through, and
the crystal had become clear, the same spirit who had
desired her to look was plainly recognised by Miss
L ^ Every portion of her dress^ which was ex-
tremely beautiful, was minutely described by the seer,
and the precision with which other spirits, friends and
relations of the one first seen, were described, enabled
me to recognise them at once. In an instance
whidi I am about to nanrate particularly, this recog-
nition did not take place at the time, and the whole
occurrence deserves attention as a proof that the vision
could not be the effect of any occult action, either o{
the mediums or my own brain^

All the earlier portions of the vision had been passed

through, and Miss L described herself as * seeing^

or * heimg in^ a very lovely park, in which were trees
loaded with blossoms, and ^ass gemmed with bright
flowers. Children were playing on the grass in groups,
making wreaths of the flowers, and all seemed a picture
of beauty and happiness. ' Among the children,' she
said, * I see some young people and some who are old,

or elderly. There is Ellen, and M , and F •

(the two who had rapped at Mrs, Hayden's), and with

66 FEOM IfATTEB TO 8FIBIT.

them is a stranger^ one whom I have never seen before.
He is a new spirit, and they are bringing him here, and
seem to wish to introduce him to us. He is dressed
like a clergyman.' She then described very minutely
the features and expression, including a peculiar mode
of shutting the eyes^ of the person she saw. Strange to
say, I had no idea who the spirit was, and puzzled
myself for some time with vain attempts to conjecture.
We asked him to show us something by which I shotdd
be enabled to guess ; something that would remind me
of his tastes or pursuits when with us. She said, ^ He
is holding a picture.' This ought to have been a guide,
but I had identified the living man so completely in
my own mind with other studies of a more learned
character, that the description of his image in the
crystal was not recognised.

The next morning, being with a writing-medium by
whom the name of one of those seen in the crystal had
been given, I asked who was the old gentleman whom
Miss L— had seen with the spirits on the previous
evening. The name of one who had left this world
three or four months before was written. The cor-
rectness of Miss L 's description was now apparent,

and I wondered that I had not recognised the spirit,
nor remembered that soon after his departure a promise
had been given through a writing>-medium that he
would show himself to the first person who could see
and describe him. In thinking how I should be able

UEDinifSHiP: TisiON. 67

to prove the identity of this spirit, or at least the
agreement of the appearance with the written name, I
remembered a good photograph of him which had
been carefully locked up as a treasure, and which Miss

Ii 5 who since I received it had only visited me on

the one occasion when she looked in the crystal, had
never seen. There was no name attached to the
photograph.

One evening when I expected a visit from Miss

L , I laid this framed photograph, and another of

a friend of hers which is in a case, on the table. They
were in the midst of a quantity of books, papers, and
work, and looked as if they had been placed there

accidentally. Miss L sat down by the table, and

after a very few sentences had passed between us, her
attention was drawn to the likeness in the frame.
* Will you excuse me?' she said, taking it up; *but I
think I know this face. I must have seen this gentle-
man here.'

*No, you have not. He has not been here for many
years. You did not know him, I think. Look at this
other photograph of .'

She looked, said it was like, but could not forget the
first

'I am certain, I have seen that face somewhere.

Did he belong to the ? ' (an institution in which

she had been interested).

' No, indeed.'

T 2

68 FBOH HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

She was evidently unconvinced^ and though appa-
rently trying to turn her attention to other things,
could not keep it from the photograph. After some
time she exclaimed —

^Now I know that picture I That is ihe new spirit
whom I saw in the crystal I Did not I tell you his
eyes and hair were/ &c. Ac, pointing out the charac-
teristic trait she had remarked

The power of seeing and recognising is not, of oourse,
confined to cr^sto^-seers. Jane, the medium before men-
tioned, through whose fiskeulty of transmitting raps we
were enabled to make so many observations on the
phenomena, had occasionally the power of seeing the
spirits after their presence had been announced in a
circle. Eight or nine persons were on one occasion
sitting round a table. In the party was a lady till that
evening a stranger to all present, but whose own
medium powers it afterwards appeared were consider-
able.* The name of this lady's husband, with a long and
suitable message to his wife and children, had been
rapped out, when suddenly the sounds ceased, and aU
felt disappointed by the early termination of the sitting.

Jane, however, said, * I seem to be in a cloud ; I shall
see something.'' She looked towards the new member
of the circle, and declared that she saw standing beside

* ThiB) as in my own first experience at Mrs. Hajden's, was no donbt
an element of success. The wife was the medium through whom, though

wioorOcumalyy the husband was able to transmit &miliar thoughts to
Jane.

MEBIUKSHIP : VISION. 69

the lady a gentleman, whose appearance, both as to
dress (which was a uniform) and person, she described
with the utmost minuteness, mentioning the form and
position of two scars on the face. She said that he held
out his hand, on the fourth finger of which was a
carious ancient-looking gold ring, to which he seemed
to invite her notice. The lady, though evidently sur-
prised and affected, said nothing till Jane had described
the exact form of the ring. Then we were told that
this antique ring, the valued gift of a dear friend, had
been worn till the last hour of his life by her husband.
After Jane had left the room the lady showed us the
ring, which had been on her finger unnoticed among
many others before the circle commenced, but had been
put with her bracelets into her bag as Jane came in, for
we were not sure how metals or jewellery might affect
the influence. The next morning Jane, who had not
seen the gold ring^ cut out its form in paper. It was
exactly like. It may be thought that some kind of
clairvoyance enabled the medium to see the ring in the
lady's possession; but, on that supposition, how did
she know that it had been worn and valued by the hus-
band sufficiently to serve as a test of identity almost as
good as the scars, which, it must be remembered, were
seen at the same time ?

In exploring such an untrodden region, the asser-
tion of one seer alone cannot be held of value, unless, as
in the foregoing instances, it affords conclusive evidence

70 FBOM MATTBB TO 8PIBIT.

of the apparent presence and identity of some spirit,
which evidence, to be satisfactory, should be quite
independent of any information received from others.

Mrs. D 's perception of the Hebrew Bible^ of which.

I had not thought for years; Miss L— 's description
of the * new spirit,' whose name I did not conjecture
till the next day, when it was written by the other
medium, and afterwards confirmed by the recognition
of the parties ; and Jane's account of the antique ring^
were all of this class* In none of these instances can
the action of one brain upon another be traced as the
supposed cause of vision without resorting to a mode of
explanation not coherent with the other phenomena,
' and far more complicated and obscure than that which
admits the influence of another intelligence in their
production.

Whether the next case of vision will be thought to
involve the necessity of other presences I am not sure.
It was my own experience, the only time when I ever
saw what appeared to be an external and objective
reality not apparent to all others.

I was at a church with a little girl. It is needless
to give an assurance of the truthfulness of my young
companion, as her trustworthiness is not a necessary
element in the question. But my own credibility as a
narrator is requisite to give my experience value in the
judgment of those who would draw inferences from it
and other similar £a>cts.

HEBIUHfiHIP: VISION. 71

While listening with extreme pleasure and deep
attention to the preacher's beautiful illustrations of our
Lord's discourse to the Samaritan woman, of the foun-
tains of living water springing up unto everlasting life,
I suddenly saw over the shoulders of the preacher what
appeared like the outlines of three bright heads, so
brilliant as to cast the light-coloured wall behind into
shadow. I touched my young companion, asking her
(she had much power of vision) whether she had seen
anything ; I was beginning to add, ' I saw three,' when
she stopped me, saying, *I will tell you afterwards,'
When we left the chiwch she told me that just before
I spoke she had seen three heads — only the head and
neck — beside the preacher. She could not discern the
faces. When we reached home she drew the sizes,
which differed from each other a little, and the relative
position of these heads, with perfect accuracy. I cannot
believe that the words ' I aa/w three^ even if she heard
them, could have suggested to her mind precisely the
same vision as had appeared to myself.

The last instance is of external vision shared by two
persons. The next one of what is called inner vision^
It also occurred to myself. A young servant, Hannah,
also having the sparkling black eyes so often seen in
mediums, had during her stay in my house obtained
the gift of hearing, a manifestation of which more will
be said in the next chapter. Not only the sentiments,
but often the phrases she used, resembled those of the

72 FROM MATTES TO SPIRIT.

person whose voice she professed to hear^ and when
a communication, perhaps a medicine or mode of treat'
ment in illness, could not be given in any other way, it
has frequently been whispered to this young girL She
could also see sometimes, and though this faculty
diminished as the hearing strength«»ied, she was able to
describe very perfectly the personal appearance of the
departed friend who usually spoke to her, and whom
she resembled in quality of mind and character, though
she had never seen him in life.

One evening, while talking to a friend of another
who was gone, I became, without apparent cause, very
sleepy. The feeling of an influence like mesmerism
remained with me after I had gone with my children
to their nursery, an4 became so strong that I could not
open my eyes. Suddenly I had, not the sight, but — ^so
vivid that I could have described every feature with
perfect accuracy — an impression of the face of the friend
of whom we had been talking down stairs. He looked
smiUng and more happy than in life, the complexion
far clearer and fairer, and the countenance brighter
than I had ever known it. The glad expression made
me feel happy. I asked the young girl if any spirits
were present. She listened, then said —

*Mr. E.' (the spirit whose voice she always professed
to hear) ^says that a newly come spirit is here with
them ; Mr. B. thinks you can see him.'

' I have seen a face,' I answered ; ' tell me his name.'

MEBIUKSHIP : VISION. 73

She replied, * Mr. James.' This was the right name,
but VLB we had often expected and hoped to see or
hear from this spirit, her giving the name would not
have been any evidence at alL So far it might all
have been guess-work tr coincidence. This possibility,
however, was soon put out of the question. Next day,
I got accidentally into an omnibus, in which was a per-
son of strong mediutn power also acquainted with the
departed Mr. James, and who was then returning from
a visit to some friends> interested like myself in the
investigation of these phenonema. He accosted me
with —

* There appears to be a reason for my meeting you.

Last night at the 's Mr. James announced himself.

We asked him whether he had been to see you, and he
said that he would go at once. We then concluded that
he was absent, by his not answering our questions ; but
he soon returned, and said that he had seen you, but was
not sure of your recognising him. He said you did not
shake hands with him as usual. In fact, he seemed
disappointed.'

I then asked at what time in the evening this had
taken place, and was told at half-past eight, being just
the time at which I believed that the face of my friend
had appeared to me.

In the chapter on writing an instance is recorded in
which the two fearful names of Catherine de Medida and
Maria Manning were written by the hand of a gentle-

74 FROM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

man with my own placed on the wrist: the painful feeling
left in the arm and shoulder on that occasion were
noticed. The reader will remember too that when an
illustrative sketch was made of the method of influencing,
the evU influence was represented as coming from a
figure on the ground, and being directed towards the lower
portion, what is called the basilar region, of the brain,
while the higher organs are subjected to a stream or ray
emanating from a figure above. When the little drawing
was made I had not even a guess, much less a theory,

on the subject; and Miss L , when she saw the

following crystal vision, was not only as little informed
on the method of influence as I had been, but was
quite unacquainted with phrenology.

* Here is a park, or at least green grass, with oars
lying down. They are painted red and blue : I suppose
I am to go over the water. No ; down a lane, and
into a kind of hall or theatre with benches rising one
above another all around. The seats are empty.
In the centre, below, is an altar, and upon it a crucifix
with our Saviour. In front of the crucifix there stands
a vase of beautiful fresh flowers. I see behind the
altar a marble tomb. What a bright light comes from
the tomb and the cross I Over the altar there is a board
like a sign-board.' I hope I shall be able to read that
inscription! But the letters don't come out clear yet.
It is getting cloudy — now clear again, and the benches
are quite full of people. A man is here in a soldier's

hediuhship: vision. 75

uniform with a wand in his hand pointing to the letters.
Still they are misty, I can't read them. I don't like the
look of that man, and none of the people seem to
like him.'

^I wish,' I said, ^that we could have some sign
whether they like his presence.'

* They have all bent their heads down sadly. They
do not like it. Oh, how my neck aches ! '

She put her hand to her neck just at the base of the
brain. Without saying a word to her I demesmerised
the spot by a few horizontal passes, while she continued
looking earnestly at the crystal, the shelter for which,
built up of large books, quite hid her face.

* How is the pain now ? '

^ Grone. That man is gone, and they are all looking
up joyfully.'

* Tell me when or how the man went away.'

* I don't know ; just as you asked me about the pain
he had disappeared. Oh ! the light from the tomb and
the cross is glorious I It is a church, and I think it
must be something about death they are going to show
us. Here is a sweet-looking lady in a white dress, with
a crimson border. She is pointing to the letters. Now
I shall be able to make it out (reads) —

' " 7, a, m, <, A, «, i, i, gr, A, t jHT, 6, t^ A, a, i, 6, e, — "
I can't read the next : at the end it is — " have life^^ '

' Perhaps it is, " / am, the Light. He that believeth
on Me shall have life^ '

76 FBOH MATTER TO SPIRIT.

^ Yes. That is it. Now I see what the cross and the
tomb meant. In the lane again. Coming back. Now
it is all gone I '

Here it will be seen that the words presented to the
seer were not precisely those of our Lord. They seem
to be a compound of the two sentences^ * / am the
Resurrection and the Life: He that helieveth on Me
ahail never dieJ* ' I aw, the light of the worldj &c. I
presume that the manner in which the words were
collocated and shown to Miss L were those best
adapted to convey to her mind^ imperfectly impressed
with the Scripture phraseology, the beautiful teaching
of the vision.

Within a month from this time, the departure of a
neaf and desir friend was witnessed by the seeress and
myself.

Gases of vision might be multiplied to a very great
extent, and I shall hereafter have to recur to several
modifications. But enough have been here given for
specimens of the diflFerent kinds of spiritual sight. It
will soon, I think, be found that the diflFerent varieties in
each mode of manifestation are produced by diflFerent
degrees rather than by dissimilarity in kind of influence.
These varieties, too, seem in a great measure to depend
on the varying susceptibility of the human frame to the
reception of the unseen power.

77

chapti;e VII,

KEDiUHSHiF {continued) — the voice and heaking.

npHE first conjeetures sifi to the cause of writing,
-*- drawing, hearing, &c., are, naturally enough, that
the medium is the subject of some irregular action of
the nerves and muscles, perhaps also of the brain, which
may be traced by physiologists, but whose cause lies quite
beyond the penetration of the uninitiated : a process
like that which goes on in dreams, which, though held
by the ignorant to have something awAil and mysterious
in their natures, are easily enough placed by the
scientific to the score of late suppers, soiu: wines, and
other similar causes. In mentioning our first experiences
of writing, drawing, and vision, I have tried to choose
those instances which are best calculated to place the
phenomenon beyond the region of subjectivity. Perhaps
the following instance of hea/ring will have the eflfect
of producing similar conclusions as to that mode of
manifestation. A sick person, who was in the habit of
receiving visits from a kind friend whose mesmerism
had sometimes been useful, having means of com-

78 FKOM MATTER TO SPIBIT.

munication with the unseen influences through mediums,
received some instructions through the last-named
channel on the nature and beneficial action of mes-
merism. At one time, when a slight increase of illness
had taken place, a writing-medium, who may be called
Mary, wrote one day, giving the name of a spirit —

* I have been just now to Mrs. E to tell her to

come and see you. She will come to-day or to-morrow
evening.'

The time at which the spirit said she had been to

Mrs. E was noted down. Neither Mrs. N , the

sick person, nor the medium, expected a verification of
the spirit's writing, but the note of time was kept,
because some coincidences had occurred before of im-
pressions given to Mrs. E exactly at the time when

her presence was desired. On that evening the
invalid was sufficiently better to sit in a room on a
ground floor from which everything that passed in the
entrance-hall could be heard. Only the medium knew
of the communication. That day passed, and no Mrs.

E came. Next day, when the idea of the visit had

been given up, the medium's hand again wrote, 'She
could not come last night, but will this evening.' Mrs.
N begged another firiend to make a note of the com-
munication, namely, that the spirit had spoken audibly

to Mrs. E at nine o'clock the day before, to desire

her to go to Street. The note was made. Mrs.

;g lived at a distance of three miles from the house.

MEDIUMSHIP — THE VOICE AND HEARING. 79

That evening Mrs, N— , hearing the bell and the
entrance of some visitor into the hall, went directly out

of her sitting-room and found that Mrs. E had

just entered. The only words that had passed between
her and the servant contained an enquiry as to Mrs.

N 's health, to which the servant replied, * She is

down-stairs.' Mrs. E looked relieved on seeing

Mrs. N , saying, ^I feared you were ill, for I was

sent here by , naming the spirit.' * Then,' said

Mrs. N , ^you must come up-stairs and tell as

well as myself how the direction was given.'

Mrs. E had no idea why this request was made

of her, but complied, and when the three were together,
said —

* I was sitting at table yesterday with my family, when

whispered to me, "Go to Street to Mrs.

N ^." I said, "Is she ill? It is inconvenient for me

to visit her to-day or to-morrow, as I am going into the
country the day after." He said again: "She is not
very ill, but you could do her good." So,' said Mrs.

E , * as I could not come to see you yesterday, I came

this evening, though it was inconvenient, as all our
preparations are made for going into the country early
to-morrow.'

* What time did this happen ? ' asked.

* At five minutes before nine in the morning.'

This agreed to within a minute or two with the time
of the medium's writing.

80 FBOU HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

The young servant (mentioned p. Tl), who sometimes
heard whispers^ was one night called up on account of
the sudden illness of one of the family. She had
asserted from the first that the spirit speaking to her
gave the name of a departed medical friend of her
master's whom she had never seen in life, though she
described his voice and appearance correctly, and the
expressions she used were very like his. I attributed
this resemblance and her power of conveying his forms
of thought and expression to a similarity in the two
characters, and to this probably the completenesa of the
mediumship was due.

When the young girl saw the sick person in great
pain, she listened for a minute, then said : —

* Mr. — — says you must have two medicines '
(naming them), * in turn, every five minutes.* She pro-
cured and mixed the medicines. At the end of about
five minutes she said:

* Now, Mr. — says the first medicine has done its
work, I am to give you the second.' She gave it^ and
in less than ten minutes from the time when she
entered the room the suflTerer was quite relieved.

No communications are more interesting than those
which, coming in one form through one medium, are
confirmed through another by a different mode of
mediumship.

Of this kind was the following instance of the writing
of one medium, the vision of another, and the hearing of

MEDIUMSniP — THE TOICE AKD HEABING. 81

a third, all independently of each other, agreeing in the
same statement. By it also we were taught that in the
spiritual heavens there are sedsons^ or, as we might
call them, waves of influx from the first fountain of life.
And that the returns of these seasons, in which spiritual
gifts are plenteously distributed through angels and
spirits to us on earth, are the realities whence the
churches of Christendom, deriving through the Jews,
have their periodic festivals. This last very beautiful
fact has been conveyed to us in many forms, and
demands earnest and careful study from the professors
of religion.

(From my note-book) : —

Last Monday Mrs. B described to me a very

lovely vision she had had of Mrs. A— (a very
amiable young woman who had died not long before

in her first confinement). Mrs. E saw her beneath

some beautiful branches and wreaths of flowers of
soft and brilliant colours, chiefly green. I thought
but little of this ; in truth, we are in the habit
of hearing so many things of the kind, that many are
overlooked; but this evening it was whispered to

Mrs. E as she sat by me, ' The flowers you sa/w are

in owr arbour. It is Jinishedy and we shall have a
feast thereJ^

Still I did not pay much attention to the subject,
though I was pleased to see Mrs. K— — — 's great interest

a

82 raOH ICJITTER TO SPIRIT.

in and delight at her vision of her friend. This morn-
ing (dated the following day) Jane's hand wrote : —

* Our garden is so beautiful^ I wish yon could see it,
and our arbour is finished. (The medium had not heard
of Mrs. R 's vision.)

* Who has seen your arbour ? *
< A- and Mrs. R .*

* We have a mother and a baby with us, who have
been helping to make the arbour. They are just come
here from another sphere, and are staying in our house
till theirs is ready.'

* Were there any other children left in this world by
the mother ? '

* No, there were no others. She came from London.
I think you will find out who she is.'

16^^. This evening it was whispered again to Mrs.

R , that they (the spirits) could not stay long,

they were so busy preparing for the feast.

19th. Yesterday evening I saw Mrs. R again..

She told me of another beautiful vision of ^ the arbour,'
which was prepared for the feast. Grrapes, peaches,
apricots, and many other fruits were placed on long
tables. covered with white satin and gold, in a kind of
raised embroidery. The most lovely flowers hung in
all directions, and the branches interlaced overhead.
Birds were flying about within the arbour.

During the evening a lady, whom I had not seen for
several weeks, came in. We did not speak of the arbour

MEDIUMSHIP -^ THE TOICE AKD HEASIDG. 83

or anything connected with it, but our last visitor told
us that she had acquired a kind of internal vision. She
can see with her eyes shut, and her fingers pressed on
them (this pressure of the eyes is not uncommon in
clairvoyance). We begged her to try then if she could
see anything, believing that the presence of mediums
would ensure magnetic power. She shut her eyes, and
pressing her fingers on them, soon exclaimed :

^ I am in a large and beautiful garden, like
a park. Little lambs are playing about, and there
are horses here too. Oh I this is not lighted by our
sun, but what a lovely light!

' I am to go farther. Here are high trees with their
hranchea interlaced above ! How very lovely it is 1 It
forms an immense green arbour, nearly a mile long. It
is ftdl of flowers hanging in wreaths around; and
bouquets of lovely flowers, geraniums and roses. It is
all set out with splendid fruits, grapes, Reaches, every-
thing ; and birds are flying about.

* It is all gone. I have never seen anything so lovely
before 1 '

Then we told her of the preceding visions and
communications, and that we were waiting to hear the

name of the feast. Mrs. R especially was de-

Ughted by the description, which,, in every respect but
the little lambs and horses, agreed so entirely with her
™ion of the night before.

By the writing next day we were told that another

o2

84 FBOH MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

friend of ours would see the feast (this was verified,
but the vision was a very slight one, and though
there were some curious and rather diflferent particulars,
I have not kept a memorandum of it). That they ' call

it the feast of ,' a very illegible word, which the

medium could not read, but which, guessing letter by
letter, and asking the spirit to confirm my guesses when
right, I found to be * Tabernacles.' The writing-medium
had a good deal of acquaintance with Jewish customs,
and knew, when thus reminded of the fact, that at this
feast a tent or place open to the sky is decorated for
reception, its covering being evergreens ; but she had
not been thinking of her Jewish friends, nor recall-
ing the feast, till I deciphered and guessed the word
* Tabernacles.*

It will be said that this agreement of the three

mediums in their description, proves nothing but sym-

»

pathy of brain. This has been said to me on similar
occasions by scientific men. I can imagine the
brains of three persons being impressed with a simi-
lar thought at one time. But in this case the
first was visiouy in which the mother and baby were
seen. The next writing, by a person who had not
heard of the vision — ^in fact, she was away from the

house during the whole of Mrs. E 's visit ; and the

third, the impromptu vision of my unexpected visitor,
who came in when we were not speaking of the arbour,
and who saw, in addition to the other things, larnba

MBDIUMSHIP — THE VOICE AND HEARING. 85

and horees. These two last images will give . more
significance to the vision in the minds of those who
are acquainted with the doctrine of correspondence.
Then, the two last ladies knew nothing of Jewish
customs, yet that which was said by the writing-medium
to be the * Feast of Tabernacles ' was described by both.

Here is another instance of the spiritual perception
of two persons at once. I do not deny that the brain
may sympathise in these cases — ^though, as in this
instance, the diflferent external form of perception
would rather contradict that idea — but the sympathy I
believe to lie deeper than the material brain, even in
the spirit of the se^r or writer ; and when the spirits of
two persons act in unison, those persons are together in
the spiritual world.

I was once sitting by Mrs. E , when she suddenly

said she heard the sound of music at a distance. I felt
then externally the fanning which has been before
described, and internally a strange chaos or confusion
of thought, which at length settled itself, and I seemed
to hear the words of a little Christmas hymn, ending
with —

GhriBtmas gifts for all,

By the Spirit poured,
Hallelujah! Hallelujah!

Praise the Lord.

As the impression strengthened, I said, ' I seem to hear
internally a little Christmas hymn.' * I hear,' she said,

86 FBOM MATTER TO SPlBIT.

^ no words, but real music, like a pealing organ, and
many voices singing hjrmns of praise.'

The spiritual hearing seems generally to be a later
developement than the gifts of writing, drawing, or
seeing. All have their place in the order of spirit life,
and that order would of itself form a study. The more
external developements are first; the internal ones
later; as in life, come, first perceptions, then intel-
lect, then matured earthly, and, finally, heavenly
aflfections. We shall find that this is the process of the
heavenly training — first, that which is natural or ex-
ternal, afterwards that which is spiritual. Again, there
are degrees above and beyond this : for the intellectual
of the brain corresponds to the perception of the spirit ;
and the love of the heart, as it is commonly said with
more truth than is suspected, corresponds with a higher
and more heavenly opening — that which Swedenborg
calls the celestial degree. To apply this to the order of
developement, sight or vision corresponds with intellect,
or the first degree of spirit life ; sound or hearing with
love in the highest sense, or the celestial degree. Be-
sides this order, each gift has its own degrees of
developement, becoming more and more internal as
the inner life expands into the outer.

I have heard those friends to whom the inner voice
has come speak of it as seeming to be formed into
sound, with mental confusion, as if numerous ideas and
sounds were thronging together in the mind, quite

MEDIITMSHIP — THE TOICB AND HEARING. 87

beyond the thinker's power to arrange. In this state
all that can be done is to wait. It is the action of
spiritual influx, and we shall have further examples of
its work. Impression, which may never get beyond the
most internal degree of consciousness, is sometimes
projected into sight, sometimes into audible sound and
its other forms. But here we find another proof of
correspondential action : for that which seems, according
to the spirit's description, to be thrown in through the
external organs to the spiritual sensorium, where it
forms impression, is also, when the power is strong
enough, carried out again to the external sense;
exactly as the perceptions are carried from external
objects through the nerves to the brain, and again back
to obey the dictates of the will, through another series
of channels, to the bodily organs. Of the very impor-
tant part which the ganglionic system takes in all these
processes, I am not qualified to speak with anything
like distinctness. It is supposed by some to be the
apparatus through which the actions of the soul itself
are carried on. It is quite certain that many clair-
voyants refer their power of seeing with the eyes shut
to the solar plexus, which is the centre of this
sympathetic system of nerves. Then, in other cases
again, the power of seeing is referred to the forehead,
or brain. But in the matter of hearing^ in the most
marked instances that I have ever known of an internal
voice audible only to the subject or medium, the

88 FROM HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

process of formation of sound seems to originate near
the pit of the stomachy namely, in the great solar plexus ;
and this may justify the assertion of Swedenborg^ that
the deepest and most internal degree, corresponding
to celestial love, has its seat not in the brain, but more
near the heart.

The following extract from Dr. Dickson's little work
contains an instance of spiritual hearing: —

* I have some notes which point at the introduction
of a spiritual element into the circuit. The clairvoyante
was behind her usual hour one morning. She said
that when about half way, a voice sounded, *^ Go back."
She thought it was some distant exclamation, and
proceeded. She heard the voice again, and felt her-
self stopped by some invisible agency, still hearing
" Gro back." She returned home. Her little boy had
fallen and was considerably hurt. She said that the
same voice said what she should do in her perplexity^
namely, "Magnetise, and arnica lotion." When she
was in the sleep, she said that she found it was her
mother and another spirit who had turned her back.

*She drew her hand wavingly from mine one day
on her passing into the sleep, and said, "'VSTiat a
beautiful red and blue ray came from your hand 1 "
*^ And yet I don't feel well," I said. ** It came from
Dr. Ley," she answered. ** We are on these occasions
surrounded by invisible friends, who sometimes mag-
netise through you, and who make use of my tongue.

MEDIUMSHIP — THE YOICE AND HEABING. 89

I have to express what they would say, which I do very
vrnperfecUy.^^ *

* The same day she was, while in the sleep, locally
magnetising a patient. He said, " That does me good."
" We shoidd do much more good, " she replied, " if all
were believers like you." He asked, ** How is it you
know so well what to do in this state ? " She pointed
upwards. "Is the mind," he went on, **in this state
among spirits ? " "I see them about us," ** Are you
in spirit as you will be after death?" "Indeed I
hope to be better and l\appier. You may awake me
now." '

Some years ago, Miss Emma Jay, now I believe
married and in America, came to England. The
manifestation of the voice in Miss Jay's case was very
remarkable. During the impression she appeared like
a person under very powerful mesmerism, with gasping,
twitching of the muscles, and other very perceptible
effects of the unseen magnetic influence. When the
system was quite brought xunder the controlling power,
the eyes were shut; or if the lids were in the least
degree open, the eyeballs were turned up, and the
subject was, with very little variation, apparently in a
state like that of some clairvoyantes. A question was
put to her ; she waited for a minute, and then gave an
answer, in expression, range of thought, and beauty

^ Thifl ifl a confirmation of former statements respecting language.

90 FEOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

of imagery, far surpassing anything she could achieve
in her normal state. When out of the trance, she
described herself as being quite passive, listening to
her own words, and learning from the spirit, who had
control over her organs, exactly as she would have done
to the teaching of another person. She said tiiat
explanations given through her were often quite un-
expected, and contrary to her previous notions. With
a very finely developed brain, and a nervous system
calculated to receive and transmit the influence, the
medium's education had not been at all proportionate
to her natural abilities. Yet few persons, especially
women, could have entered at all on questions which
she, or the spirit controlling her, discussed and answered
with great ability and clearness. Miss Jay's voice
and manner differed much when under different in-
fluences, but the phraseology was always, with vari-
ations, her own, and the chains of argument such as
her well-organised brain was able to convey.
/ Mr. T. L. Harris, who has in a high degree the internal
voice, dwells much on the phenomenon of internal
respiration. This breathing, deeper in the system than
that of the lungs, seems to be a usual accompaniment
of all states of impression and clairvoyance. It may be
observed in the deep mesmeric sleep or trance, and the
change from it to the external process of inspiration
and expiration of the lungs is very curious indeed.
I have seen persons just waking from a trance, cough

MBDIITMSHIP — THE VOICE AND HEARING, 91

and breathe with difficulty, often declaring that the
entrance of the coarse outer air is painful to them,
after the pure atmosphere of the spirit world in which
they have been breathing. It is said, and I believe
with truth, that no real influx can take place till the
medium is susceptible of this state. It seems to be an
ebb and flow of the spirit within, agreeing with the
waves of influx from the spirit without, whose action,
as has been said, is so often perceptible as fanning, or
a current of fresh, pure air. When our pulmonary
breathing and spiritual breathing are brought into
harmony of action, or polarised together, we shall all
be receptive, as a natural condition of every-day life, of
the streams of influx from higher beings.

92

CHAPTEE VIII.

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OF INFLUENCE.

WHEN an enquirer ventures into a new region of
knowledge, he has not only to establish, but
to systematise facts; and in the first arrangement,
these will probably not hold the same rank as they
will take when the now unrecognised territory has
been measured, observed, and cultivated. The order^
too, in which facts present themselves to such an en*
quirer, is not always that in which the whole is most
easily communicated, and the earliest information
must be rather a history of discovery than a well-
digested essay on the subject

I do not forget that the theme of spirit life and
impression has been far more fully discussed by
Swedenborg and a few others than it can be in such
a slight account as this. But the seers do not assume
that every step is to be established. They speak with
the authority of teachers ; as a dweller in the land can
give descriptions of every part from his own know-
ledge ; while one who undertakes to gather from the

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OF INFLUENCE. 93

accounts of travellers, mtUst needs have a very undi-
gested mass of material to work upon. This may
explain the seeming repetitions and returns to the
same subject in its diflferent forms, which could not
be avoided in framing an explanation like the present
from many and various experiences.

Supposing the explanations as to the cause of drawing,
writing, &c., generally oflfered to the scientific world
to be received, and these processes with the more inter-
nal ones to be attributed to irregular cerebral action,
self-delusion, &c., we must then fall back upon that
portion of the phenomena which has been declared to
be of the most material kind ; namely, the raps and
movements. And we shall find their use, for no ex-
planation involving subjectivity can apply to experi-
ments whose results can be seen, heard, and felt by a
number of persons in a quiet waking state, and which
can be repeated whenever the trial is made under
favourable conditions. After the subjective theory,
the next in order is imposture, and when this is dis-
posed of, we have to deal with *the Devil,' whose
name I really did not wish to have introduced here.
Now, having shown ample reason to believe that all the
manifestations emanate from one source, we must
settle which of the three is the moving power. Un-
conscious cerebration, self-delusion, or any other mental
vagary, can produce writing and drawing; it cannot
make intelligent sounds audible to eight or nine people

94 FBOM HITTER TO SFIBIT.

at one time, nor can it cause the movement of furni-
ture either with or without an intelligent aim. The
instances of tables rising from the floor to the height
of three or four feet are so well attested that I hardly
feel it necessary to refer to them. I have myself
often witnessed this marvel under circumstances which
put delusion or visual deception qmte out of the
question. Neither could it be any hallucination of the
kind which made the sceptical gentleman against
whom the table rushed call out to beg that it would
stop.* And there was neither hand nor foot on that
table, nor any professional medium in the room. The
heaviest weight which I have ever seen rise by means of
invisible agency, was a mahogany dining-table. It rose
evenly a few inches from the floor, remaining raised while
the friend who accompanied me placed his hand under
one castor, and I had mine under that which stood
diagonally opposite. Two other friends had their
hands under the other castors, but it is evident that
if my companion and I could be certain that the
cross castors rested on our hands, the table, if levels
must have been entirely off the ground, and the pos-
sibility of ocular delusion vanishes.

With respect to raps and movements, then, the ocular
delusion or general delusion theory must be aban-
doned ; so must the unconscious cerebration. As to the

* See p. 26.

MEDITJMSHIP — NATURE OF INFLUENCE. 95

Origin of Evil, who has been flattered by being sup-
posed to be the chief actor in all the manifestations ;
of his and all other agencies I need only say, on the
highest authority, * By their fruits ye shall know them.'

But it is to the nature of the agency used, and then
to the intelligent but unseen being directing it, that
our next enquiry must be directed. In Chapter IV.
several cases of mesmerism have been detailed. I
have chosen these from among many others, not for
their novel or striking character, but because they
will furnish a key to the knowledge of the agency
employed in producing the spirit manifestations.

The different forms of mediumship, afi has been seen,
are often accompanied or preceded by feelings such
as are produced by mesmerism. Fanning, a warm or
cool current of air, chilliness or drowsiness, with some-
times a tingling like that produced by the wires of a
galvanic battery, and, during the raps, slight shocks
like electricity passing through the arm of the medium,
are among the commonest of the sensations. It is
indisputable that the medium is under mesmeric in-
fluence, but what is that influence? and in these cases
whence does it proceed ?

The instances already given, and which might be
supported by hundreds beside, prove that their source
is not to be found in the medium or in any other
member of the circle. The communications are coherent
and intelligible ; often, too, quite new to every person

96 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

present. It seems then not a hasty assumption that
they are the work of an intelligent unseen being,
acting by means of a force similar to mesmerism
upon the system of the medium.

I may here allude, but very slightly, to the experi-
ments of physiologists, showing the relation between
the electric, magnetic, and nervous forces. All that I
can venture to say is, that their effects prove them to
be analogous but not identical in their nature. Elec-
tricity in the form of galvanism shares with the nervous
forces the power of circulating along the nerves, and,
like mesmerism,* contracting the muscles. A strong
current of electricity also evolves magnetism. We
know, too, how effects, very like those of electricity and
magnetism, appear in mesmerism, and its other fonii
electro-biology. The action of the positive and nega-
tive wires of a voltaic battery produces chemical
composition a\id decomposition, and a stream from the
fingers of a powerful magnetiser causes immediate and
perceptible granulation in scalds and wounds. But, as
far as I have seen, water is the only material element
affected by the mesmeric force in such a way as to
change (to susceptible persons) its taste and appearance,
while, as is well known, the galvanic current can be made
to act upon matter much more extensively.f

♦ See p. 43.

t I have heard of a trial made by a powerful mesmeriser, showing
that paper prepared for photography is acted on by the emanation from

■ mi I

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OF INFLUENCE, 97

It maybe a question whether all the * imponderables,*
as they have been called, are the effects of vibrating
currents whose differences and resemblances depend on
the number and direction of their undulations. As it
is only the one which I believe to be the most intense
and most refined with which I have to do, I do not pursue
the comparison with related agencies. But I am not the
first to believe in a connection between all the forces in
creation (such a belief is involved in a perception of
the harmony of nature), and the probability of our
finding a scale advancing in purity and intensity as we
trace them up from their action in forming the matter
of the coarsest mineral, to their work in the most
delicate forms of animal life.

There is no doubt, I believe, in the minds of physio-
logists that the nerve force, whatever may be its nature,
is that which, passing along the nerves, conveys im-
pressions from the organs of sense to the brain, and
again, through another series of nerves, the dictates of
the will from the brain to the muscles. That it also,
possibly in a more refined form, permeates the brain,

the fingers in the same manner as by the rays of the sun. This ex-
periment should be repeated. It might help us to find what are the
properties in common between light and the nervous or mesmeric
current, which also, as has been said, excites the sensation of light on the
^ye, in a state, the physical conditions of which are not yet known. And
this knowledge may throw some light on the doubtfiil question of
spirit-photography, a question into which I am not qualified to enter.

H

98 FBOH KATTBB TO SPIBIT.

and is, 60 to speak, the circulating medium of thaught
and feeling, is unquestioned.

The nerves themselves, which, branching ofif in pairs
from the brain and spinal marrow, form channels for the
* nerve force, or ^ nerve fluidy consist each of a bundle
of fibres encased in a sheath. Each fibre, when sub-
jected to microscopic examination, is seen to be formed
of a transparent enveloping membrane, enclosing the
white medullary substance of the nerve which serves
as the medium for the transmission of the force.
Through the centre of this white substance runs a small
flattened fibre ; the whole forming a perfect apparatus —
a telegraphic cable for the transmission of the refined
electricity which conveys the messages between the
spirit and body.

Sir Benjamin Brodie, in some wise and excellent
strictures* on the mental and bodily ruin produced by
the forcing education of this time, says : * The nervous
force is consumed equally in bodily and mental exer-
tion, and if over much of it is expended in one way,
there must be proportionally less in another.' A recent
writer on psychology, J. D. Morel, has, with the later
German physiological writers, very properly assigned
its due importance to the nerve force in all enquiries
relating to mind. Mr. Morel speaks of three forces,
diflfering from each other according to their diflferent

* Psychological Enquiries.

\,f<..^'-^ ' - •' — »'

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OF INTLUENCE. 99

functions and operations* If, as well as three kinds, he had
said three hundred thousand degrees of force, the writer
might have been nearer the truth, though still far
away from perfect accuracy. But we can form a very
imperfect conjecture as to the limits of these degrees ;
for when, leaving the observation of that which we are
used to call wholly material, because perceptible to our
outward senses, we approach the more delicate parts of
our organisms, whose existence can only be known by
their results, the study becomes more difficult and com-
plicated. This difficulty arises, in a great measure,
from the fact that few persons besides those in a
seemingly abnormal state, magnetic or somnambule,
can make observations on the forces in question.
These persons, too, differ in their powers of perception,
so that emanations quite unseen by one are very
visible to another, and perhaps vary so much in the
appearance they present to a third and still deeper seer,
that his accounts of what he sees are supposed to
contradict the statements of the two first. In confir-
mation of this I have only to refer to the notes made
by Reichenbach of the visions of his ' sensitives,' and to
my own experiments with mesmerised water. These
differences in vision, however, point to the boundary
lines of the different degrees both of internal percep-
tion and refinement of nervous influence. The^ner
the degree of nervous circulating medium in action, the
deeper will be the internal opening, and vice versa.

B 2

100 FBOM HATTER TO SPIRIT.

In leaving the outer senses of sight, hearing, &c., with
their appropriate nerve force, we come to the first
degree of internal sight and hearing, with^ their appro-
priate magnetic agency. And as I suppose the dis-
tinction between electricity and the nervous force to be^
that the first exists in that degree of refinement calcu-
lated to act on inanimate matter, and the last in that
higher form by which the functions of animal life are
carried on, so, when leaving the outer senses, we come
again into the region of internal sense, we find the far
imore refined emanations only perceptible to those
whose state corresponds with their nature and use.

Whatever may be the essential nature of this vital
influence, it can hardly be doubted that it is in
operation in difierent degrees of refinement and in-
tensity in every human being. Neither will it be
questioned, certainly not by those who have seen much
of mesmerism, that an influence passing from the mes-
meriser to the patient, and akin to the nerve force, is
the active medium of mesmeric operations.

This force or fluid, then, or one whose effects on the
r system are precisely similar, but perhaps more refined,
is that by which all the operations of mediumship are
carried on, and the source from whence it irrvmediately
flows is an unseen and iatelligent heing^ asserting
itself to be a spirit^ which has quitted the material
earthly form.

The names of Swedenborg and Jung Stilling will

i

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OF INFLUENCE, 101

have little authority for persons who have hitherto been
accustomed to consider the * Mystics' as dreaming
speculators, having no foundation but fancy for their
theories, and no proof to offer of the truth of their
assertions. When we know practically, however, the
results of mesmerism and the sensation always described
by persons under its influence, we can better form a
judgment on what is said by the professed believers in
spiritual influence, whose teachings were given before
the modern manifestations were thought of. Long after
I had heard of and felt the sensation of fanning, a cool
breeze, a cold chill draught, or an electric current, of
which mention is made as among the commonest
experiences of mediums, I read the following in
Swedenborg's Spiritual Diary. The italics are not y
Swedenborg's : —

^ A spirit is compared to Uie wind (John iii. 8) ;
hence it is that spirits have come to me both now,
and very frequently before, witli windy which I felt vn
the face ; yea, it also moved the flame of the candle,
and likewise papers ; the wind was cold, and in-
deed most frequently when I raised my right arm,
which I wondered at, the cause of which I do not yet /
know.' /

On one occasion, when in the company of two or
three mediums I paid a visit to a house believed to be
haunted, a most perceptible wind arose in the basement ^
rooms, accompanied by a kind of vapour or steam.

/

102 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

This took place when the house was quite empty, and
all the windows and doors Were shut. -Jane, the
medium, often felt such a chill breeze in the circle, and
has always declared her conviction that it emanated
&om a bad influence.

From Mr. Howitt's * History of the Supernatural ' I
extract the following, which occurs in the chapter on
Jung Stilling:^—
y *At Marburg one of the students who attended
Stilling's class, and whom he continued to know in
after-life as a most excellent man, brought him a
printed account of a strange occurrence which hap-
pened to his father when a young man, and to his
grandfather. The latter had written down the whole
narration, and printed it for circulation only amongst his
friends. It is very large, being given in complete de-
tail, with the conversation betwixt the grandfather and
the spirit. The spirit described himself to have been
one of their ancestors one hundred and twenty years
before, and identified himself by their genealogical
table. He appeared sometimes three or four times a day
as a little man, dressed in a blue coat and brown waistcoat,
with a whip hanging at his girdle, and knocked audibly
at the door before entering. He was extremely im-
portunate that the son should go to a certain tree in a
certain meadow, under which, by digging, he would find
a deposit of money. This money seemed to have
chained him to the spot all these years, during which

MEDIUUSHIP — NATUBIB OF nTFLUSNGE. 103

he had not found a medium in the family to whom he
could make himself apparent. But he appeared also to
have a deed of blood on his soul, for he " took down
the son's Bible from a shelf, to which was attached a
small hymn book, and pointed out with his finger the
hymn beginning «HaTe mercy, gracious Gkxi,' and the
third verse of which had the words *From guilt of
blood deliver me,^ ^^ &c. The spirit continued its im-
portunities from January 1 to April 30, 1755.

^ Neither father nor son would listen to him, con*
sidering him as a tempter ; but this the spirit denied,
and to convince them, joined with them in singing
hymns, caUing on the name of Jesus, and declared that
he was always glad to hear the Word of God. He
joined them in the reading of the Scriptures, and, on
coming to the words in the 8th chapter of the Epistle to
the Bomans, " We are saved by hope," &c., he clapped
his hands, and exclaimed, ^* yes, yes, saved by hope 1 "
He declared that he was going through a course of
purification sent from Grod.

*Yet there were circumstances which made the
father and son believe that he was far from this puri-
fication, for fire streamed from every finger when he
became angry at their resistance to his wishes. Still
more, when he touched the Bible it smoked, and the
marks of his thumb and finger shrivelled up the
leather of the binding where he held it, and also the
paper where he pointed out the place in the hymn.

104 FBOK MATTER TO SPIBIT.

'^From guilt of blood deliver me," was black and singed.
The Bible with these marks is ^^ preserved in the famil j^
and many creditable persons have seen it^ and may sdll
see it." Still further, on one occasion vrishing the
son to shake hands with him, he recommended him
first to lay his handkerchief over his hand. This
was done, and the handkerchief was found with the
five fingers of a hand burnt in, so that the first and
middle fingers were, in part^ burnt entirely through,
but the thimib and two other fingers were burnt black
and singed* This handkerchief was sent roimd amongst
friends and acquaintances, who assured Stilling of the
truth of the whole,, and then these singular relics were
laid up for the inspection of all respectable visitors,
and for posterity. The whole account was signed and
attested by father and son, the clerk of the peace, the
Impeiial Commissioner of Liquidation, and the school-
master of the place, on May 16, 1765.

*The fiery touch of the spirit which induced the
fether and son to believe it a bad one, modem, spirit-
ualists can testify to belong to many spirits. How
often have we seen fire streaming even from the finger
of a medium? How often have spirits, before
shaking hands with you, desired you, at Mr. Home's,
to lay your handkerchief over your hand first?' How
often have you felt the touch of spirit fingers prick as
from the sparks of electricity ?

* And Stilling,' Mr. Howitt continues, ^ soon came to

MBDIUMSHIP — NATUKE OF INFLUENCE. 105

understand this. He says,* ^^ Lights electricity, mag^
netisTn, galvanic matter, and ether, appear to be aU
one and the same body under different modificationan
This light or ether is the element which connects soul
and body, and the spi/ritual and material world to-
gether.^^

* In these words Stilling, above half a century before
Eeichenbach's experiments on the Odyle force, an-
nounced that force as a modification of electricity,
magnetism, &c. ; which Eeichenbach confirms. The
spirit eventually, notwithstanding its fire, was accom-
panied by another radiant little spirit, and finally
appeared white and radiant itself, full of joy, announcing
its deliverance from the probationary state ; knelt with
the son, and uttered a beautiful prayer and thanks-
giving to God, which Stilling gives ; and then took his
leave, saying they would see him no more, which proved
true.

* As regards the touch of spirits, it yet appears true,
that according to the state, the sensation they occasion
is more or less agreeable. Stilling says : — " When a
departed spirit is tranquil in its mvnd, its touch is felt
to be like the softness of a cool air, exactly as when
the electric fluid is poured upon any part of the
hodyJ^ And how fully can this be confirmed by spirit-
ualists. How frequently is the approach of spirits at

•

* The italics are mine.

106 FBOH UATXEB TO SPIBIT.

seances perceived by the cool atmosphere which pre*
cedes them.'*

As far as I have had experience in this matter of
touch and atmosphere, it has seemed to me that the
temperature depended chiefly on the nearness of the
spirit to earth, and this nearness might arise either
from recent departure or from earth-clinging tendency.
The lady who saw the vision of the church spoke of the
exceeding pleasantness, * delightful sensation,' of the
fanning. When I was once at one of Mr. Home's
circles, my hand, lying quietly on my knee, was touched
and held for a moment by something which I tried to
hold, but which vanished from my grasp. The feeling
of this touch was warm, soft, and delightful There
was more of meaning and reality in it — ^it was more
like the loving pressure of a hand in a higher sort of
life, more vital than this, than I can describe ; and I
believed I recognised the spirit whose hand it was. In
the account given by *Verax' of a seance with Mr.
Home, the same sensation is described.

I once mesmerised a little child for weakness of
sight. During the process he became in some degree
clairvoyant, but never quite forgot what had passed
during the mesmerism. He sometimes averted the
presence of a lady dressed in white, who, he said, could
tell him little things in answer to questions. One day

* Howitt's History of the Supernatural, voL I pp. 34-37.

MEDIUKSHIP — NATtTRB OF INFLUENCE. 107

when some reference had been made to the presence of
the lady, I was called away from my patient, who, how-
ever, called me quickly back, saying that he did not want
the lady to touch him. I hurried to him again, and was
told that the lady had taken hold of his hand, but
quitted it on my return. I of course believed that the
white lady was a result of imagination, or of some
cerebral delusion, and was rather surprised when he
said, * I showed you where she touched my hand ; it
does hurt me so.' I looked at the spot he pointed out
at first, and there saw a little round mark presenting
the appearance of having been touched with a hot iron.
This must have been freshly made, from its appearance
and the pain it gave, yet there had been neither burn
nor hurt of any kind since the mesmerising began.

It will be remembered that the mesmerised girl
^hose clairvoyance was so remarkable saw my hands
*as if they were on fire,' when they were rubbed
together. The coincidence of all these testimonies
cannot be overlooked.

So we come back to the explanation given at the
outset by the writing, * It is electricity that moves the
drrriy but there is a spirit that guides the electricity.^
And again, as to the modes of manifestation. For
vision —

*The spirit mesmerises the eye, then whatever
image is in the mind of the spirit is seen by the
medium.'

108 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

As we go on, we shall find that an image in the mind
of a spirit constitutes the state or surroundings of that
spirit; consequently, whatever is in the mind of the
mesmerising power becomes objective when the mes-
merised or the medium is, so far, let into a spiritual
state. Whether the external eye of the medium is by
the process brought into uniformity of action with the
internal perception, I do not pretend to say; all that
is asserted is, that vision arising from the opening of
the inner sense is produced by the direction of a
mesmeric force through the eye by an invisible agent.

When the force is directed through the brain to the
muscles of the arm, the medium is made to write or draw
according to the feeling or thought of the spirit.
Here the very important law of symbolism or cor-
respondence plays an important part in giving form
to the writings and representations. But as it is not
the place to enter on this at present, the accounts already
given of writing and drawing, with their moving cause,
have been short and elementary. They are to be
spoken of more fully when all their conditions can be
considered.

The raps and movements seem to be produced by a
stream of mesmeric force directed through the brain
and given ofiF through the muscles of the medium. It
seems that great power and great control are required
to produce sounds which are of rarer occurrence than
the other so-called physical manifestations, requiring as

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OP INPIUENCB.- 109

they do a sudden influx and interruption of the current
at the precise moment wlien the letter is repeated.

The phenomena of crystal-seeing has always appeared
so weird and mysterious that among educated persons
its possibility has been utterly denied; while among
untaught believers it is looked upon as magical.
Crystal vision is a well-attested fact, having its laws
and conditions like other phenomena in this world of
known and hidden causes^ and a little careful observa-
tion may clear away some of that obscurity which has
kept it as the property of witches and sorcerers.

The crystal, which is a clear spherical or egg-shaped
piece of glass or rock crystal, seems to produce on the
eye of the seer an effect exactly like what would ensue
tinder the fingers of a powerful mesmeriser. The
person who looks at it often becomes sleepy. Some-
times the eyes close. At other times tears flow. These
effects are like those produced by the fingers of a
mesmeriser. Then a cloudiness or mist comes over the
sight ; and lastly, where before, the glass with its re-
flection of surrounding objects had been clearly seen,
a perfect black, opaque sphere appears to the gazer.
This is a sign that the outer eye is acted on in such a
way as to allow of other impressions than those from
without to be presented to the seer's view. I dare not
say to the sensorium of the seer, for that word is
commonly used for the centre of all impression from the
i^tural world. Although spiritual sight is now induced.

110 FROM HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

material vision is not necessarily interrupted. I have
known eases in which the seer has looked off, talked
about subjects in the room, even left the room for a
time, and then returning to the crystal, has exclaimed,
* Here it is, all just as I left it.' The only difference
noticed has been some change in the position or
appearance of * the people in the crystal'

As an explanation of crystal-seeing, a spiritual drawing
was once made representing a spirit directing on the
crystal a stream of influence, the rays of which seemed
to be refracted, and then to converge again on the side
of the glass sphere before they met the eye of the seer.
An enquirer, better acquainted than myself with polar-
isation, refraction, &c., of light, would perhaps have
been able to trace the analogy between the laws of
external or natural, and those of internal or spkitual
vision.

The material brain of the medium seems to be the
apparatus used for the transmission of thought. It has
been said that the kind of sentiment and phraseology
are always modified by the mental and moral peculiaritieB
of the medium. This naturally gives rise, in the first
instance, to mistrust in the persons present. And when
we have such sentences spelt out as * We have seek
butiful flowers herey we cannot wonder that new
enquirers form a very low idea either of the honesty of the
medium or the orthography of the spirits. All kinds of
explanations of this have been attempted by persons who

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OP INFLUENCE. Ill

thought that the communicatioiis thus strangely spelt
or expressed approved themselves in other respects as
from their departed friends. It has been supposed they
adopted a kind of phonetic writings and even carried
their old habits of contracting their words into the next
state. I do not deny that this last may be the case
sometimes, or rather that when spirits are able they may
repeat their old customs in order to be recognised ; but
I believe that the sentences, whether written, rapped,
heard, or spoken, are always such as could find expression
in the mind of the medium or mediums, and are inva-
riably transmitted in language with which those ininds
are familiar. It will, however, be modified by the
kind of influence or the character of the impressing
spirit. Although many cases are on record of the
speaking of languages unknown to the medium, I do
not find any reason to alter my conclusion. In every
distance of which I have heard, the person to whom
the foreign language has been addressed, and who is of
course present, has had, perhaps unconsciously, strong
medium power. Even in the direct writing, where the
work seems to be done by the spirit quite independent
of the medium, we shall find the interference of his
brain, or perhaps of the atmosphere emanating from it,
proved by the spelling and expression. For instance,
^ Baron Gruldenstiibbe been unacquainted with
Greek or German, the direct writings obtained in his
presence could not have been in those languages.

112 FBOM HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

From this last circumstance and many experiences I
was led to perceive that a certain resemblance of
character between the spirit and the medium must
form a necessary condition of any kind of spirit message.
This is illustrated in the case of the two young ladies
called in the foregoing pages Charlotte and Amelia.*
Another may be found in that of a lady of my acquaint-
ance who has had her hand impelled to write. The
medium's characteristics are intellectual power, bene-
volence, and truthfulness, with a quick sense of humour.
In all these qualities but the last mentioned the spirit
who gives his name was deficient, and the result is such
as the very narrow channel allowed by the aflSnity
of the two minds affords. A series of very meagre
attempts at humour are made, promises to ^make
merry' which are fulfilled by drawing such objects as
children would hardly laugh at, and assertions which are
afterwards contradicted, being the production of the
spirit by the hand of this medium, who naturally
wonders at the appearance of writing and drawing so
little in harmony with her own cultivated taste. It is
possible, however, that other causes may determine the
direction of this her first stage of mediumship, for all
who have been practised declare that the acquisition
of the power is a gradual and well-marked process,
beginning with what may be called low and external

* See page 40.

MEDIUMSHIF — NATUBB OF INFLUENCE. 113

communications, and proceeding step by step, until the
highest inspirations with which the brain can be
impressed are transmitted and received.

As to the varying powers of transmission by different
brains. Phrenology, though not an admitted fact in
all its details, is generally received in its principles by
mental philosophers. By this I mean that the de-*
pendence of character generally on the form and size of
the brain, and its modification according to tempera-
ment, are admitted by those who deny the classing and
division of organs made by Gall. It is enough for
my purpose now, that the principle is admitted to the
extent of taking for granted, as by Alexander Bain in
his late work on phrenology, that the foirm and size of
the brain are indications of the mental and moral
eharacter. This is almost implied in the very objection
raised. Mr. Bain says of the classification of functions,
* the whole system wants revision,' appearing to forget
that the * system ' is the result of observations on heads
and the corresponding developements in character, and
not an arbitrary arrangement of qualities made with-
out any reference at all to the brain or its external
Daeasurements. Those who criticise the arrangement of
phrenology, while they accept it in its general prin-
ciples, will do well to remember that before the form of
brain was observed in connection with diversity of
character, the study of mental science was carried on in

I

114 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

the same way as navigation would be in a ship without
charts, compass, or rudder.

Some very good phrenologists believe, and most con-
sistently, that not only every convolution, but every fibre
of the brain has its own especial function, each one form-
ing a telegraphic wire for the conveyance of impression,
and each kind of impression differing in the least possible
degree from that transmitted by the fibre nearest. Thus
every convolution or group of fibres in the brain will
form a whole, of which the portions fexthest from the
centre have a function which approximates to that of the
outer fibres of the neighbouring group. And this inter-
blending, this shading together among the * organs,' is in
wonderful harmony with our observations on mind, and
affords a beautiful explanation of the shades and diver-
sities of character. And the brain itself has been sup-
posed to consist of many different degrees, each
corresponding to the nerve fluid, or life force, circu-
lating in it. This thought was first given to me by a
friend, to whom many mental communications are
made by the * inner voice ' and by ^ impression.' She
had been told by a very acute phrenologist, whose
judgments of character have been wonderfully true,
that she was fond of guessing riddles. This lady
is not accomplished in riddles, and cares little for
them, but she is a highly developed spiritualist, having
internal perceptions of correspondence and symbolism
in many degrees. Hence she judged, and was con-

!■ ir-,!.^-! ....i,jpi^acansggBS»ain»*^Ki^ig^<q3ca*^—PIP<acy

MEDIXTMSHIP — NATUBB OF INFLUEKCB. 115

firmed in the thought by the spiritual influences around
her, that that portion of her brain whose function
might have enabled her to guess riddles^ had a higher
internal developement, and in its more spiritual action
had given her a mental faculty like that of the Sphinx
of Egypt, the eaypounder of riddles.

I am quite aware of the very great imperfection of
the thoughts now ofiFered for consideration on this very
wonderful and complicated subject. I have tried not to
assume as established truth more than is generally
known; the rest is matter of suggestion, and to that
portion much of what follows must be allotted. I sup-
pose that impressions from external objects pass from
the organs of sense through the nerves of sight, hearing,
&c., to the brain, where they are then received among
the sets of fibres or convolutions adapted to receive
these impressions — ^as by the optic nerves of sense
come the perceptions of form, size, colours, &c.; and
again from these, the series adapted to convey the
still more complex perceptions which form data for
comparing an reflecting, and so on ; while from the
brain, another series of nerves conveys the dictates of
the will to the muscles of the body. This rough
statement may show what is meant by the following
analogy between one of the best attested facts in
mesmerism and the transmission of thought through
mediums, as seen in the spiritual phenomena.
In that very curious mesmeric state called ^ commu-

I 2

116 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

nity of sensations,' we find that impressions are trans-
mitted fromfh the brain and nervous system of the
mesmeriser to that of the mesmerised, and this when
the senses of the patient seem to be closed to all
external objects. And a current of power or influence
is established by some mysterious union between the
two systems, so that it appears, and probably is the
fact, that one nervous force acts equally through both.

If I am right in extending the functions of reception
and transmission even into the fibres of the brain itself,
and supposing that each fibre is a channel for the
conveyance of a specific feeling or mental impression,
it will be easy to see that in order for one brain to
obtain mesmeric control over another, the two brains
must contain many fibres having similar functions, or, in
other words, that the two characters must be alike in
many points. The various degrees of power possessed
by mesmerisers over different patients may be partly ac-
counted for in this way, and may also depend on some
unknown conditions in the temperaments of each by
which the quality of the nerve force is afifected.

In the spiritual manifestations it is asserted by
the unseen power that the eflfects are produced by
spirits taking the place of an earthly mesmeriser. And
the conditions already laid down being kept in mind,
we see how the communications made through any
medium will be modified by his character ; for a spirit
wishing only to convey mischievous or destructive ideas

T> » ii' tm

MEDIUMSHIP — NATURE OF INFLUENCE. 117

cannot find means to transmit them through a brain
whose fibres are found only to receive the highest
feelings, while a brain in which only the lowest elements
predominate cannot furnish a channel for the beneficent
influence of a good spirit.

In this part of the enquiry, though the interior action
of the brain has been hinted at, I have not spoken of
the action on the soul ; because that portion of our being
has yet to be considered.

But how do spirits become mesmerisers ? This, the
most puzzling portion of a difficult question, can only be
answered, as other portions have been, hypothetically,
but for the conjecture I am about to oflfer there is a
strong though indirect evidence arising partly from
observation, partly from the coherence of the statements
made by the unseen powers, and partly from the
beliefs and legends of all times, and, to crown all, that
which all Christians venerate as revelation.

These presumptive arguments may receive con-
firmation from the accumulating mass of testimony
now coming from all quaiters, and the coherence of the
whole may recommend it to the notice of those who
would not think any separate portion of the subject
worthy of attention if taken apart from the rest.

The nerve force, with all its related invisible and
more refined agencies, constitutes the life of the body,
inasmuch as it forms the instrument without which
sensation, thought, and motion could not go on. Closely

118 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

connected, if not one form of this, is the agency
employed in mesmerism. According to the common
definition, the life force, even in its least refined degree,
is immaterial, because imperceptible to the senses in
their usual state. When the life of the body ceases, all
we know is that the material, which is in fact a
residuum or deposit, whose formation has been the
work of the spirit, decays and returns to its original
elements, like the withered husk when its contained
fruit is ripe. But this immaterial vital portion of our
frame is no less a reality than its outer covering, and,
unlike it, has never been seen to fall to dust.

What, then, becomes of that which permeates and
animates the body ? Let us not seek the living among
the dead. In the next chapter I will bring together
some experiences which may help us to follow the
released spirit, and, by connecting the visions of clear-
seers with some of the reasonings of physiologists, to
find whether the spiritual body possesses powers of the
same kind, though intensified and exalted in degree, as
those which it wielded when in its now forsaken shell.

119

CHAPTER IX.

PBOGESS OP DEATH Al^D FOBMATION OF THE SPIRITUAL

BODY.

* I lOW axe the dead raised, and with what body do
•*-*- they come ? '

Analogy, though a bad master, is often a very good
assistant in difficult enquiries. I intend to call in its
aid as a pioneer to reasoning in this xmtrodden ground^
to strengthen a theory which has more than mere con-
jecture in its favour. Following the analogy afforded
by all the successive formations of nature^ we find
simple elements reproduced in a more refined compli-
cated form in the grade of being next above that in
which they first appear. Thus, the vegetable has in
itself the same elements as the mineral combined under
the new conditions necessary to organic life. The
simplest animal has the elements of organic life in a
higher degree and in the conditions necessary to the
developement of its organisation ; the next above has
again the elements of the first under new and more
refined relations. The higher the animal, the more

■■

120 FBOM MATTEB TO SFIBIT.

complicated and refined is the combination. And at
the top of the scale we find Man, who, in the most
perfect organisation apparent to our bodily senses,
combines with all the elements of organic also the
highest animal life, and, as might be expected, a aoTW^
thi/ngj possibly the result in some part of the more
refinepl combination, superadded.

This is well said by the physiologist Bichat: —

^La vie, examinee plus en detail, nous offire deux
modifications remarquables. L'une est commune au
vegetal et ^I'animal; I'autre est le partage special de ce
dernier. Jetez, en effet,les yeux sur deux individus dans
chacun de ces r^gnes vivans, vous verrez I'un n'exister
qu'au dedans de lui, n'avoir avec ce qui I'environne des
rapports de nutrition, nidtre, croitre et perir fixe au sol
qui en refut le germe; I'autre, allier k cette vie interieure,
dont il jouit k plus haut degre, une vie exterieure qui
6tablit des relations nombreuses entre lui et les objets
voisins, marie son existence a celles de tons les . au-
tres etres. Ten eloigne ou Ten rapproche suivant ses
craintes et ses besoins, et semble ainsi, en lui appro-
priant tout dans la nature, rapporter tout k son ex-
istence isolee.

^ On dirait que le vegetal est I'ebauche, le caneuas de
I'animal, et que pour former ce dernier il n'a &llu que
revetir ce canevas d'un appareil d'organes exterieures
propres a etablir des relations.'

Seasoning thus from analogy, we may naturally

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 121

expect an uninterrupted rising scale in the order of
creation. But that which is in the next degree above
cannot be observed, as that below ourselves, by the
means of our senses. We have to rise from things which
are seen to those which are unseen; and in gaining a
glimpse of the something beyond the apparent life of man
in less well-explored pathways than those of natural
science, we must avail ourselves of help from whatever
source or direction it may come. As all that I have
hitherto said, both in the way of fact and reasoning, has
been first suggested by my own experience, gathered in
different forms, it seems the most natural course, at
this stage of the enquiry, to give, in the order in
which I have received them, explanations and illus-
trations of the process of death and the formation of
the spiritual body. As before, I only ask for belief
in the narrators' honesty : whether any, and how much
value will be attached to the facts narrated, will
depend entirely on the mental state of the reader,
and his ability to receive and appreciate evidence of
the nature adduced.

When we found that so many unexpected explana-
tions came by the hand of the young medium who
drew the sketches of spiritual impression, I begged for
as clear a description as could be given of the process
of death. Having myself read some American accounts
of visions, dreams, &c., referring to this subject, I had a

•

rather vague notion of the spirit breaking away full

122 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

formed from its earthly covering, and floating at once
on high in a body prepared to enter into the happy
spheres.* Beports of visions which had reached me
confirmed this belief. I was, therefore^ pleased and
surprised when, by the drawing, a wonderful and
systematic process, coherent in all its parts, and making
no extravagant demand on our powers of belief, was
imfolded. The person by whom the drawing was made
was too young to have thought on the subject, and his
hand moved without, as in some cases, being touched
by that of another person.

The pencil traced a recumbent figure, evidently
meant to represent a dying person. From many points
of this figure, the hand of the medium formed long
lines which met in a point placed carefully at a short
distance above the figure. As the lines were multiplied,
the point was also increased in size till it became a
small globe or circle, and from that circle other lines
were drawn out to represent the body and limbs of
another and smaller figure. The larger figure below,
and the smaller one above, were then numbered, and
notos, to correspond with the numbers, written below.
From this diagram it appeared that the process of
death, and the entrance into another state, is as natural
(in the sense of orderly) an event as the birth of a
child.t No more real mystery, nothing more super-

* 1 had not at that time read Swedenborg's description of death,
t The unborn child lives only an organic life. The processes of animai

THE SPIKITUAL BODY. 123

natural (in the sense of miraculous), accompanies a
departure from, than an entrance into, this world ; for
that which passes the ken of mortal eyes is not
necessarily outside the order of creation.

The lines drawn from the recumbent figure, and
meeting above, represent the ^spiiitual fluid.' This
will be recognised as that invisible element of the body
which, drawing nourishment from its surroundings, is
the essential agent of vital force, of will — power, and
even of thought and feeling. That it quits the body at
death is certain, for it is not, like the material part,
left to decay. It becomes a question whether, having
been only elaborated in the animal frame, this, the
most delicate and vital portion, ceases to exist when its
source is destroyed ; or whether, having its source in a
power above and beyond the body which it has animated
and inhabited, it passes away, prepared by its sojourn
here for another dwelling, when its earthly one is
capable of containing it no longer. I have digressed in
order to identify the 'spiritual fluid' of the invisible
writer with a part or the whole of the magnetic or
vital forces spoken of before. It will afterwards be
seen that these vital forces are what constitute the soul,
in its most material and most refined elements.

The * spiritual fluid,' then, was represented a^ coming

from every portion of the frame, its streams meeting

life come into action when it enters this world. See Bichat, 8ur la Vie
tt la Mori.

124 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

neax the heart — I think at the great solar plexus- -and,
having passed away through the brain, uniting again
above the body, there to form the new body which is
destined to be the future dwelling of the spirit These
streams appeared by the drawing to carry from the
material body each its own type of life, by which I mean
that each minute current is adapted to fill one place
and form one specific portion only, in the new combina-
tion. Thus the spiritual fluid, leaving the hand of the
material body, will enter the nucleus of the spiritual
organism, to be again projected, and to form the hand
of the risen being. As the butterfly's folded wing can
be traced under the shell of the chrysalis, and may even,
in its rudimentary state, be seen in the caterpillar before
its first chaoge, so every portion of the resurrection
body is contained and wrapped up during life in the
material form. This is the teaching given by our
invisible companions, by means of the involuntary
writing. The clearest explanation came by the hand
of a yoimg person who had no preconceived ideas on
the subject ; but similar descriptions have been given
by many seers and mediums, each one ignorant of what
has been said by others. I speak now of modem days,
the days of spirit mediumship; but let anyone look
through the* records of old times, the teaching of

* For most copious details on the spiritualism of early times, see
"W. Howitt's ' History of the Supernatural,' &c., just published ; a work
so full of information in every branch of Spirit History, that^ had not

THE SPIRITUAL BODT. 125

ancient uninspired philosophers, and the mythologies
of early religion, and he will find that what is brought
forward with the expectation of ridicule in these
Christian days, and this vaunted * nineteenth century,'
Las been a universal belief, held with more or less of
modification, according to the seer's mind, and waiting
for the fulness of time for its clearer revelation, yet
as the truth that the future state is a continuation of
the earth life, and the heavenly body an outbirth from
the material form.

Having given the spirit's account of the passing over
the boundary, I will bring together a few records of
appearances, drawn from the statements made by
persons who profess to have a more than ordinary
faculty of vision. At the risk of censure for repeating
what has appeared elsewhere, I first give every
trustworthy account which has come to my own
knowledge.

First, appearances to those present at the time of

death. Many years ago, Mrs. D , a person in

humble life, but of tried and proved truthfulness, and
rather matter of fia^t in her mental habits, said to me,

this little book been completed before it came into the hands of the
present writer, the appearance of a smaller work on the subject would
have seemed superfluous. A few questions, however, are touched in
this volume which have not come within the scope of Mr. Howitt's
book ; but it is quite impossible to avoid repeating a very few of his
amply detailed statements in illustration and proof of the spirit's
assertions.

126 FBOM MATTEB TO SFIBIT.

in a conversation about ghosts and ghost-seeing, * I
never saw a ghost, but I have seen a spirit rise.'

^ If you will tell me exactly what you saw,' I said, ^ I
will write it as you speak, and will beg you to sign
your name.'

This she did, and the present account is copied from
her own words as I wrote them, and she put her
signature : —

* When I was sixteen years old, I was nursing a child
of seven who had been ill since his birth with disease of
the head. He had been for some days expected to die,
but was quite sensible. About noon I left him in a
little back parlour on the ground floor. His mother
and a friend were with him. I was returning from the
kitchen to the child, and had just reached the top of the
staircase, when I saw, coming from the door of the
room, the form of a little child. It did not step on the
ground, but immediately went up over the staircase and
disappeared from me. The bed on which the sick child
had been lying was close to the door of the room, and
that door was not more than about a foot from the top
of the staircase which I came up. As I entered the
room, his mother said, " He is just gone." The figure
that I saw was a little child, fair and fresh-looking, and
perfectly healthy. It looked fatter and younger than
the little sick boy, and had a very animated, happy
expression. It was like a living child, only so light.'

Compare the above account of a vision by a girl of

■4'
i

THE SPIBITUAL BODY. 127

sixteen with the following narration of an imperfect
perception of the same kind, which occurred, later in
life, to the same person.

* More than twenty years after that^ I was sitting up
with the mother of a child who had been ill three or
four days with fits. It was more than two years old.
The mother had one arm under the child's head. I
was on the other side of the bed, lying by the baby, and
the fire was burning brightly on the same side of the
room as that on which the ijaother sat. Suddenly T
saw the fire darkened by something that seemed to
flutter or move backwards and forwards before it. I
noticed this to the mother, who was between the bed
and the fire ; but she did not see it, and declared that
the fire was bright. The fits left the child about six
o'clock, and it lay perfectly still till it had ceased to
breathe about half-past ten. I saw the darkening of the
fire for an hour before the child died, and the instant it
expired the fire was distinctly visible. J. D.'

The seer of the above was an uneducated woman who
could not account for the variation in her two visions,
and who had certainly never heard of the difierent
degrees of opening of the spirit sight. To me, therefore,
the account of the second vision confirmed the truth of
the first. Had she invented both stories, she would
most likely have made the second instance appear the
most striking and wonderfuL But she was not given to
invention.

128 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

I was myself once standing with a person who had
sometimes the gift of spiritual vision^ beside a bed on
which lay one whose life was departing. The breathing
was ceasing slowly when I noticed a thin white mist
which seemed to rise two or three inches above the
bed. My companion appeared also to be looking at
something. Her eyes, which always had a strange
/ glitter when they encountered any object unseen by
others, were raised gradually from the recumbent form
to the top of the bed ; then, returning, seemed to rest
half-way between, gazing, as far as I could see, on
vacancy. This earnest gaze lasted more than a minute.
I looked at her enquiringly, but she did not speak.
She told me a few minutes after what she had seen^
thus : —

* I was looking at a mist which seemed to be rising
from the bed, and which I have noticed some time, when
my attention was drawn upwards, and I saw a pillar of
light, between sunshine and moonlight, rising three or
four feet. Within this was a still brighter light,
becoming more brilliant at the centre ; and from the
centre to the circumference, from within outwards, it
was all working together with intense rapidity. I saw
^ it once again, but slightly afterwards, just as the last
breath was drawn. It seemed then to pass off by the
top of the bed.' The seer has been a trusted friend of
my own for many years ; her character for truthfulness
is quite above suspicion.

THE SPIKITUAL BODY. ltd

On giving an account of this appearance to a friend,
he told me that a similar statement had been made by
a girl in whose character for truth he had entire confi-
dence. The incident occurred in Euboea, where my
informant has an estate on which he has lived many
years.

The young woman had nursed her mother, who
was confined to her bed by long and wasting illness.
The poor invalid died gradually ; the feet first, then the
legs, becoming numb and powerless. At length life
seemed to be confined to the head and upper part of
the body. One night, or rather towards morning, the
poor girl awoke suddenly and saw a strong light rising
to some height above the sick woman, from whom it
seemed to emanate. It passed away in an upward
direction, and disappeared. The girl in great terror
called out to her mother, but received no answer. She
then ran to a friend (a confidential servant of my infor-
mant), and told her what she had seen. Her friend
returned to the cottage, where they found the mother
quite dead.

The late Miss W , well known at one time in the

mesmerising world, told me that she once nursed an
uncle through his last illness. As he died, a very small
bright cloud, appearing to come firom the nostrils,
passed away, and rising while she watched it, disap-
peared by the ceiling. This is another instance of a
diflFerence in the power of vision.

K

130 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

My readers who are old enough to remember some
of the early observations on magnetised girls, may
recall the assertion made by one of the Okeys, who, being
taken by her mesmeriser into one of the hospital wards,
declared that she always saw a cloudy figure, to which
she gave some slang name, rising from the beds of cer-
tain patients. It was asserted by her mesmeriser, that
in all those cases where- she had represented the form
as tall, the patient died ; but there was a chance of re-
covery for those from whom it only seemed to emanate
to a lesser height. This statement is not held of great
importance in the present enquiry, for the experiments
seem not to have been made in a very careful manner,
but they serve as corroboration of a fact otherwise
well attested. The shorter figure was probably an
efflux of the most external spiritual fluid of the sick
person.

In like manner, Mr. A. J. Davis's account of his
clairvoyant vision of a death may be referred to. Not
having his * Great Harmonia,' in which the narrative
may be found, I cannot give an extract, and I only write
from memory. The history is a very interesting one,
and its close agreement in many points with the visions
of other seers places it beyond the pale of fiction. The
writer, who is said to be a genuine clairvoyant and
medium, describes the gathering of the life-force or
nerve-spirit from every part of the body in the head,
whence it again reissues, forming a cloud of beautiful

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 131

mellow light above the figui'e. Within this atmosphere
the new head, then the body and limbs of the spirit
appear, Mr. Davis, like J, D— r-, dwells on the fresh-
ness and bloom of the newly-formed spiritual body.
Until the completion of the form, a stream of electric
light is seen passing from the head of the dying person
to the beautiful figure above, and when the work is
done, and the life, having quitted its old tabernacle,
has found and animated its new house, this last link
with earth is broken, and the freshly-formed being passes .
upwards to its new home. The cord of electric light
carrying the nourishment from the old envelope to the
new form, makes the analogy between the earthly and
spiritual bii'ths complete. Two friends who have the
gift of vision declare, that they know when a spirit
appearing to them has not permanently entered its
next stat« by the line of electric light which it seems to
draw after it.

Accounts of the process of death have been given by
various seers. These narrators, it must be remembered,
are all quite independent of each other, and their
descriptions were given, with one exception, long before
spiritualismy in the modern sense, was known. I do
not class the following with the foregoing visions,
because the first statements were made by observers of
the process itself, who described as much as was visible
to them on different occasions of death. The more
detailed accounts which follow come from persons who

K 2

132 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

profess to have gained a general insight by clairvoyance
into the whole subject.

The following is from ' Guardian Spirits,' A Case of
Vision into the Spiritual World, from the German of
H. Werner, New York, 1847. The author, Werner,
was pastor of Beckelsberg, Stulz, on the Rhine. The
translator, A. E. Ford, appears, by his prefacey to have
been a Swedenborgian, but the absence of a definite
Swedenborgian doctrine from the theology of the
seeress is a guarantee for the translator's general fidelity.
The revelations are in a series of dialogues between the
author and his patient R .

* Author. You said that the magnetic sleep was simi-
lar to death. Explain this to me if you can.

* iJ. Yes, certainly ; the magnetic state is similar to
death. The way in which the soul leaves the body I
cannot now explain to you ; I can only give you an
image of it as I feel it. It seems to me now as if in
the waking state the body were the house of the soul,
and it might look out now at this window, now at that.
In the somnambulic state, however, the soul has gone
out and shut the door of its dwelling. For this reason I
now see you and myself as a third person does a group. I
am at your left, and am looking at you and at my own
body.

* Author. Will this be the case in dying ?

*iJ. Yes; only with this difference — that return to
the body is no longer possible. In dying, the spirit

!**•

THE SPIRITUAL BODT. 133

leaves its residence exactly as in the magiietic sleep-
But as it cannot be without the soul (because they are
tibere united as body and soul), for this reason it cannot
rise without it. The latter does not part with the body
so easily as the spirit, which is divine in its quality ; only
with hard struggles does the soul leave the body, with
which it has much affinity, and which it greatly loves.
For this reason, it also for the most part takes with it
its corporeal appendages, which often are not the best ;
because they have grown, as it were, into its very
nature.
^ Author. What distinction is there between spirit and

80Ul?

*iJ. The spirit is the life of the aoul^ the eternally
divine, begotten from God. The latter (the soul) be-
longs to its personal essence and completes its whole.
In its essence it is a spirit body, and hence can put on
altogether the nature of the spirit and supernaturalise
itself; and on the other hand, can overcome the spirit,
and more and more corporealise and debase itself. It
is the countenance of the spirit, its characteristic form
or clothing, as you will. Neither can subsist without^
the other ; they are as closely united as soul and body ;
how, I cannot tell. These are connections that exceed
the power of my eye.

'Author. But perhaps you can tell me how both are
united with the body ?

^22. Yes, I can. The soul is the internal sense of

134 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

the man, by which the spirit eaypreasea its essential
activity* The latter gives to the soul power for its
vital expressions. But that these may be manifested,
there is required still a third, which is superadded, and
which, at the same time, moves and animates the body.
This is an exceedingly fine substance, of which the soul
itself seems almost entirely to consist, and with which
it pervades the body in all its parts.

^Author. Is this the so-called nerve-spirit?

*ii. You have the right idea. It is what gives to the
body eternal life, nobility, and power, but the name does
not please me.

* Author, Do you know any which describes it
better ?

* R. No, I know no word for it.

* Author. What becomes of this nerve-spirit in
death?

* R. It is indeed taken out of the essence of the soul,
but by its operations in the body has more of its nature
than the soul ; in itself considered, it is always its in-
strument for operating in the external world. And

•when the soul parts from the body, this fine substance
accompanies it ; for it is as well a part of the soul as of
the body. Should it stay in the body, this would live
on although the soul had left it. This is in some
measure the case in my present state. ... In death,
the soul is the body of the spirit, and is destined, if the
spirit is not to miss the high end of its creation, to be*

"■7 "^-^.i^.^^^ ■ 1— ^"■— — — "••»^B

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 135

come one with it, to be spiritualised. This presents
itself to me as another dying ; the nerve-spirit is des-
tined at last, as what is more gross and corporeal, to be
entirely removed, and the soul to assume the nature of
the eternal light of the spirit.

^Author. To what purpose does the nerve-spirit serve
after death ?

*J?. It does not renounce its nature, although in-
visible to the bodily eye ; it is very gross and corporeal
in comparison with the essence which spirit and soul
make together. The soul cannot free itself immediately
after death ; each, it may be said, takes something of
lower desire with it into the other state, and this is
what attracts and weighs the nerve-spirit downward to
the earth. Souls quite earthly wrap themselves
gladly in it, and give thereby the characteristic form
to their spirit. By the aid of this substance, they
can make themselves seen, heard, and felt by men.
They can excite sounds m the atmosphere of the earthJ*

I now extract from the * Seeress of Prevorst :' —

* She, the seeress, was frequently in that state in which
persons who have the faculty of ghost-seeing perceive
their own spirit out of their body, which only enfolds it
as a thin gauze. She often saw herself out of her body,
and sometimes double. She said, "It often appears
to me that I am out of my body, and then I hover
over it, and think of it^ but this is not a pleasant
feeling, because I recognise my body ; but if my soul

136 FBOH MATTER TO SPIKIT.

were bound more closely to my nerve-spirit, then
would this be in closer inuon with my nerves, but the

bonds of my nerve-spirit are daily becoming weaker."

• - • • • • •

*The seeress said that the separation of the spirit
from soul and body in sleep-waking bore a great
resemblance to death, but was not the same. When the
spirit quits the body, in the last moments, it becomes
weak and helpless ; it cannot draw the soul after it,
and can only wait. The djdng person is then unconr-
sdoua of all that happens ; the future is hidden from
him, and he can no longer express himself. When,
previously to this moment, a dying person declares
that he is now certain of the existence of a future state,
&c., it is because the soul, being no longer under the
direction of the brain, recovers its natural power of
clear-«seeing and' hope of the future, which had been
before obscured. When the spirit has quitted the body,
the soul knows it can no longer stay, but struggles to
be free. This is the moment of the death-agony, and
at this moment, instead of the now powerless spirit,
the spirits of the blest stand by to aid the soul ; and the
struggle is. longer or shorter, in cases of natural death,

■

in proportion to the ease or difficulty with which the
soul can separate itself from earthly things.

* With respect to the nerve-spirit, or nervous prin-
ciple of vitality, she said that through it the soul was
united to the body, and the body with the world. . . .

THE SFIBITUAL BOBT.

137

* The nerve-spirit is immortal^ and accompanies the
soul after death, unless when the soul is perfectly pure,
and enters at once among the blessed.* By its means
the soul constructs an airy form around the spirit.
It is incapable of increase or growth after death, and by
its means the spirits who are in the mid region are
brought into connection with a material in the at^
mosphere which enables them to make themselves heard
and felt by man, and also to suspend the property of
gravity, and more heavy articles. When a person dies
in a perfectly pure state, he does not take this nerve-
spirit with him. Though indestructible, it remains with
the body, and at the general resurrection is united
to the soul, and constructs it an aerial form. Blessed
spirits, to whom this nerve-spirit is no longer attached,
cannot make themselves heard or felt ; they appear no
more. The purer the spirit is, the higher grade it
holds in the mid region, or intermediate state, and
the more entirely it is separated from the nerve-spirit.'
There is some discrepancy in the account of the
final destination of the nerve-spirit. The seeress says
that the purer it is, the more completely it is thrown
oflf. It appears to be the connecting link between
the electricity in the atmosphere and the soul. It is
the magnetic fluid in its animal degree, which I have
tried to indicate in the preceding pages as the vital

» 1 Cor. XV. 48.

mm

136 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIKIT.

were bound more closely to my nerve-spirit, then
would this be in closer union with my nerves, but the

bonds of my nerve-spirit are daily becoming weaker."

#. • . * * * *

*The seeress said that the separation of the spirit
from soul and body in sleep-waking bote a great
resemblance to death, but was not the same. When the
spirit quits the body, in the last moments, it becomes
weak and helpless ; it cannot draw the soul after it,
and can only wait. The dying person is then uncon-
edoua of all that happens ; the future is hidden from
him, and he can no longer express himself. When,
previously to this moment, a dying person declares
that he is now certain of the existence of a future state,
&c., it is because the soul, being no longer under the
direction of the brain, recovers its natural power of
clear-iseeing and' hope of the future, which had been
before obscured. When the spirit has quitted the body,
the soul knows it can no longer stay, but struggles to
be free. This is the moment of the death-agony, and
at this moment, instead of the now powerless spirit,
the spirits of the blest stand by to aid the soul ; and the
struggle is longer or shorter, in cases of natural death,
in proportion to the ease or diflSculty with which the
soul can separate itself from earthly things.

* With respect to the nerve-spirit, or nervous prin-
ciple of vitality, she said that through it the soul was
united to the body, and the body with the world. . . .

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 137

' The nerve-spirit is immortal^ and accompanies the
soul after death, unless when the soul is perfectly pure,
and enters at once among the blessed.* By its means
the soul constructs an airy form around the spirit.
It is incapable of increase or growth after death, and by
its means the spirits who are in the mid region are
brought into connection with a material in the at^
mosphere which enables them to make themselves heard
and fdt by man, and also to suspend the property of
gravity, and more heavy articles. When a person dies
in a perfectly pure state, he does not take this nerve-
spirit with him. Though indestructible, it remains with
the body, and at the general resurrection is united
to the soul, and constructs it an aerial form. Blessed
spirits, to whom this nerve-spirit is no longer attached,
cannot make themselves heard or felt ; they appear no
more. The purer the spirit is, the higher grade it
holds in the mid region, or intermediate state, and
the more entirely it is separated from the nerve-spirit.'

There is some discrepancy in the account of the
final destination of the nerve-spirit. The seeress says
that the purer it is, the more completely it is thrown
off. It appears to be the connecting link between
the electricity in the atmosphere and the soul. It is
the magnetic fluid in its animal degree, which I have
tried to indicate in the preceding pages as the vital

» 1 Cor. XV. 48.

138 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

instrument in our bodies, and the element which we
iave in common with those who have left the eai-th
and are invested with a new form; but it seems
questionable that this most earthly portion of the
spiritual should ever be reunited with it again * at the
general resurrection,' after the pure spirit has disen-
cumbered itself of its most earthward-tending vestment.
That, in this particular, the mind of Friderica
Hauflfe was influenced by the opinions of Justinus
Kemer, her physician, is quite possible ; but it seems
more likely, as all her teaching seems to have been
new to him, that either he or the English translator
(I have not the original to refer to) have mistaken the
speaker's meaning.

Next to these German seeresses, and on account of
their many points of resemblance, I will place a far
older description — that of Socrates, or, more properly,
of Plato in the words ascribed by him to Socrates.
We cannot expect that these Greek sages and seers,*
living 400 years before that full revelation of im-
mortality which was made by the Saviour, should
give as perfect a description as St Paul of the entrance
into the next state. Every seer clothes the truth he
imparts in the thoughts familiar to his mind, and this
description of Socrates is, as might be expected, full
of the imagery drawn from the religion of his country ;

* Socrates at least was spiritually gifted. Witness his demoD, or
guardian spirit^ and his dreams.

THE SPIKITTJAL BODY. 139

but making all allowance for Greek mythology, we
have a statement nearly resembling that of the seeresses
quoted. The latter part, concerning the manner in
which the good are received in the next state, is like
some of the descriptions which follow this extract from
the ' Phaedo :' ♦—

*The soul, then, the part without form, imma-
terial,t is that which goes to inhabit another place,
invisible like itself, noble and pure in nature ; namely,
to Hades, the true world of spirits, near the good and
wise Grod. And there, if God wills, my soul must im-
mediately go. For can the soul, being of a nature so in-
finitely superior — can it, when separated from the body,
at once be dispersed into nothing, and utterly destroyed,
as some people think ? Far otherwise, dear Cebes
and Simmias! Much more must it follow that the
part which has taken its departure in purity, not
encumbered by any of the bad impure passions of
human nature, because it had endeavoured through life
to remain uninfluenced by them, and to fly from all
that was bad — devoting itself to true philosophy, and
aiming to die happily, for this is right and true phi-
losophy, is it not ? — how much more likely must it be

* I prefer Lady Chatterton's translation to Dr. Whewell's, because it
is a trifle clearer, and is quite as faithful to the original Either yersion
vould serve my purpose.

t Socrates seems to belieye that vhat is generally inyisible must be
without form.

140 FBOM HATTEB TO SFIBIT.

that the soul so prepared will depart to its kindred
spirits — to the region of the Divine, the Immortal, the
Wise, where it must attain true happiness and be freed
from all errors and ignorance, and fears and wild de-
sires, and all other human influences — and dwell hence-
forth with the gods, as those are taught to expect who
are consecrated in the holy mysteries?'
To this Gebes assents.

* But I think that if the soul departs from the body
polluted and impure, because it has always been in-
fluenced by the body, and has served it, and delighted
in its evil passions, and allowed itself to be deceitfully
charmed by its desires and pleasures, so that it believes
in nothing that is not material and corporeal, and can
put faith in nothing except what can be touched and
seen, or drunk, or used for enjoyment, because it
darkened its eyes, and deafened its ears, and hated and
dreaded the invisible and intellectual objects which
are the aim of philosophy — dost thou think that
such can be pure in itself, or fitted for a region of
p\irity ? '

* Not in the least,' said he. *No, for it must be drawn
away by the corporeal encumbrance * which this

* In the 'Timseus' of Plato the philosopher speaks of what he calls

^XVtML — ^the vehicle of the souL The deseription of this, which con-
stitutes the connecting link between soul and body, identifies it with
the ' nerve-spirit * of the seers and the ' spiritual fluid ' of my yonrng
medium.

THE SMMTtTAL BODY. 141

habit of living in, and being influenced by, the body
must create.*

* Certainly.'

* And in this case, the soul (which survives the body)
must be wrapped up in a helpless and earthy covering,
which makes it heavy and visible, and drags it down to
the visible region, away from the invisible region of
spirit world. Hades — which it fears. And thus these
wandering souls haunt, as we call it, the tombs and
"monuments of the dead, where such phantoms are
sometimes seen. These are apparitions of souls which
departed from the body in a state of impurity, and
still partake of corruption and the visible world, and
therefore are liable to be still seen. .... And these
are not the souls of good men, but of bad, who are thus
obliged to wander about suflfering punishment for their
former manner of life which was evil. And thus they
wander, until, by the longing which clings to them
for earthly things, they are again enclosed in a body,
chained to one most probably with habits resembling
those which they had acquired during their former

lives Those who had indulged in gluttony and

contemptuous pride, who had been brutalised by
drunkenness, devoid of any feeling of shame or self-
restraint, would naturally pass into such bodies as asses

and other beasts And therefore it is probable

also of the rest, that each will go into the state which
most resembles the condition they had striven to attain

142 FHOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

either by indulging in bad propensities or by omitting'
to cultivate the better instincts of their nature.'

We shall perhaps return to Socrates, in a comparison
of ancient and modern speculations concerning the
destination of souls.

Some particulars of a case of lucid vision induced by
magnetism are given in a little work, * Somnolism and
Psycheism,' by J. Haddock, M.D., London, 1851.

^The patient, Emma, while in a state of ecstasy, made
some revelations in which man is represented as a
spiritual being, rising from what she calls " the shell "
of the dead material body, immediately after death ; or
as soon as the connection between the soul and its mate-
rial covering is completely severed, which, she says, does
not occur sometimes until a day or two after what
appears as death. The risen and emancipated spirit
is a perfectly organised existence, preserving the human
form, and having a complete sensational perception of his
fellow-spiritual beings, and the beautiful scenery of the
spiritual spheres, that is, provided he was, during life,
in a moral state in harmony with those spheres. . . .

* It seems (said the clairvoyante) as if the idea of
what you should say comes into the mind, and they
(the angels) tell you what you want to know. When
I got with the angels, I seemed like one who had gone
a long journey and got home ; but I could not tell how
I went the journey. When I was seated near the
fountain, I asked how people got there, meaning, how

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 143

they left the world by death. It was told me, they were
not always dead when their friends thought so, for all
the actions of the body stop by degrees.* It was some-
times two or three days after what is called death, but
was not always alike; some were a longer, others a
shorter time. During this time they were like a
person asleep, and in a state between this world and the
next. As soon as people rise into the spirit-world,
angels talk to them, and tell them where they are, and
try to lead them upwards.'

I once asked, by the hand of a boy, some questions
relating to the same subject, of a spirit, or rather an
unseen intelligence. The medium's style of speaking
was very laconic, and accordingly the spirit information
was given in few words.

Q. ^Is going into a trance the same process as
dying ? '

A, * Not exactly.'

Q. * How does it diflFer ? '

A. ^ The spirit returns.'

Q, * Can you describe to me the sensation of dying.
Do people suffer pain ? '

A, ' Sometimes they do.'

Q. ' Had you any pain in dying ? '

A. None.'

Q. ' Do you remember the last time you spoke ? '

* See Bich&t, 8ur la Vie et la MorU

144 FBOM HATTER TO SPIBIT.

A.

A.
A.
A.

Q.

A.

Ye&:

What did you feel after that ? '
As if I was going to sleep.'
What was the next sensation ? '
As if I was shut up in my body.*
What was the next thing? '
I came out.'
And then ? '

Collect
together.'

The line was drawn round the words as if to illustrate
the collecting or embodiment. About the same time
a very young child wrote, ^It is not death, only the
spirit breaking looae.^

By the hand of another child was written, purporting
to be from a spirit —

' We are never tired, because we have in us the
strength that comes from the body when we leave it.
When we were on earth, the strength of our spirits was
locked up; but now we have the everlasting* and
beautiful strength of the spirit, and the strength we
take from the body, which mingles with the spirit
strength.'

(It was here observed that at death the body decays.)

* Imperishable.

I^BM

'w^mm^i^'mm^^mmm

THE SPIBITUAL BODY. 145

^ I know, but when we go, the strength that was in
our body goes with us.'

The idea of the * sleep,' and the state between this
world and the next, was conveyed, in the drawing of
the process of death, by the spirit's passing through a
state represented by a plain. It must cross a river
before it gets into a, state in which it can recognise friends.

^The Birth into Spirit Life,' is the title of one of
the most interesting articles in the * Spiritual Magazine.'
The writing is anonymous, but the name of the medium
is known to me, and is a sufficient guarantee for its
genuineness.

' I lived alone on the earth at the time of my de-
parture from it, and was attended by two faithful
servants. I had left them suddenly, and they had
stretched my body on the couch where in my last
illness I had been carefully attended by their hands.
I closed my eyes on nature and opened them on
spirit life. I saw my two attendants busy with a corpse
and also occupied in ministering to my spirit form
that stood upright before them. They were anxious to
perform aright the new and mournful duties that now
devolved upon them in the natural sphere, and that
desire caused them to fulfil the use that now pertained
to them,* that of tending an immortal spirit, on his

* This seems probable, as the liberated spirit would be able to see
the spirits of his attendants, and, as will be explained in the chapter

146 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

first entrance upon that life which is but one step re-
moved above nature.

* I have just said that I did not know I had left the
world, and yet I, beheld my corpse stretched on the bed
I had lain and suffered on. I have not made that state-
ment without a purpose, being desirous to show that
the one condition is not incompatible with the other.
It is so to the spirit in the flesh, but not to the spirit
out of it, for both the one and the other are in a per-
fectly normal condition for the time being, and there-
fore that which would be abnormal to the one is
perfectly normal to the other, and a normal or usual
state of mind will not surprise or cause extraordinary
emotion to the person experiencing it. Thus it would
cause a spirit very great astonishment, should he be
suddenly brought back into nature ; he would not com-
prehend many things that he saw, and he would wonder
why he did ndt behold those objects that are purely
spiritual which he had been accustomed to in the world
of spirit. He would find himself in a totally abnormal
condition. And so if a person in the flesh be elevated
into the spiritual regions, he is much astonished at the
objects he there beholds ; he also is in an abnormal, or
extraordinary state of mental perception. But, when a
spirit has left the natural firame, then is spirit life with

on Coirespondence, their mah to do all they could for him would place
their spirits in the attitude of doing kind offices for his spiritual foim.

TK£ SPIBITUAL BODY. 147

all its concomitants a perfectly homogeneous existence^
and he is not aware that he has ever dwelt in any other
sphere. So when I beheld my natural frame delicately
tended^ I found that I myself — ^my spirit — ^was provided
for as to all my requirements, and by the same persons
with whom I had been accustomed to associate during
my life in the world. And it being according to divine
appointment that both good offices should be simul-
taneously performed, all appeared to my new-born spirit
perceptions to be perfectly harmonious and congenial.
.... Spirit life dawns upon the senses of mankind, not
with surprise, nor necessarily with pleasure to the good,
nor pain to the unheavenly, but it does so to every grade
of human beings with a perfectly normal perception
of all its realities and in all its varieties of aspect;
for it is the life we have all along been recipient of, and
it is just as natural for us to become suddenly conscious
of it as it is for the infant to be ushered into the
material world without consciously experiencing any
unusual degree of excitement from the occurrence.
The outward consciousness of both the one and the
other is gradually developed, the experience of each in-
dividual varying, just as at the birth of the soul into
its first garb or covering.*

The next experience is slightly different.

l2

148 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

THE PROCESS OF DEATH.

* The first lesson, I think, every spirit learns, is one in
reference to death. The general impression is, that
persons suflFer intensely in their last moments, and we
hear much of "the agonies of death." These how-
ever are generally imaginary, and in most cases there
is little or no consciousness of suflfering: even when
there is a struggle, it is only an eflfort, painless in its
character, of the spirit to burst the bonds that have
bound it to the physical body: this struggle may
create contortions of the body, but in most cases all
consciousness of pain has passed away. This was my
own experience, and I have been told by many others
that it was theirs. I experienced but very little suflfer-
ing during the last few days of my life, though at first
there were struggles, and my features were distorted;
but I learned, after my spirit had burst its barriers
and was freed from its connection with the external
body, that these were produced by it in its attempt to
sever this connection, which in all cases is more or less
diflScult; the vital points of contact being suddenly
broken by disease, the union in other portions of the
system is necessarily severed with violence, but, as far
as I have learned, without consciousness of pain.
Like many others, I found that I was unable to
leave the form at once. I could feel myself gradually

I

THE SPIRITUAL BODY* 149

raised from my body, and in a dreamy, half-conscious
state. It seemed as though I was not a united being
— that I was separated into parts, and yet despite
of this there seemed to be an indissoluble connect-
ing link. My spirit was freed a short time after
the organs of my physical body had entirely ceased
to perform their functions. My spiritual form was
then united into one, and I was raised a short
distance above the body, standing over it by what
power I was unable to tell. I could see those who
were in the room around me, and knew by what was
going on that a considerable time must have elapsed
since dissolution had taken place, and I presume I
must have been for a time unconscious ; and this I find
is a common experience, not, however, universal. As
consciousness returned to me, the scenes of my whole
life seemed to move before me like a panorama ; every
act seemed as though it were drawn in life size and was
really present : it was all there, down to the closing
scenes. So rapidly did it pass, that I had little time
for reflection. I seemed to be in a whirlpool of ex-
citement ; and then, just as suddenly as this panorama
had been presented, it was withdrawn, and I was left
without a thought of the past or future to contemplate
my present condition. I looked around me, and I
thought, if there is a possibility of spirits (for I seemed
half-conscious now that I was a spirit) manifesting
themselves to those still in the form, how gladly would

^ I

150 FROM IfATTEB TO SPIBIT.

I now do 80, and thereby inform my friends and others
of my condition, at least as far as I understood it
myself, which I confess was not very far. Everything
seemed to be in a whirl of motion ; scarcely had one
desire come, before another was presented. I said to
myself, ^' Death is not so bad a thing after all, and I
should like to see what that country is that I am going
to, if I am a spirit.^

'I had heard the spiritualists say that the newly-*bom
spirits were always receired in the arms, and wel-
corned by kind and loving guardian spirits; finding
none around me, for I had seen no spirit out of form
yetj I concluded this was not true. Scarcely had this
thought passed through my mind, when two, with
whom I was unacquainted, but toward whom I was
attracted, appeared before me. They were men of
intelligence, but like myself, had given no special
attention to the higher principles of spirituality ; they
knew my name, although I did not reveal it, and they
shook hands with me in a hail-fellow'-well-met sort of
way, that was very pleasant to me. They then con-
ducted me from the room where I bad died, and in
which I had remained until this time. Everything
around me seemed shadowy, yet through these shadows
they conducted me to a place where there were a
number of spirits assembled ; these had been in spirit-
life a longer time than I had. I might mention the
names of some of these, but I prefer not to do so now.

k -*— ^^^^^"It..^

THE SPIRITUAL BODT. 151

* I remaiDed in conversation with these spirits for some
time, and then, without knowing why or how, I was
attracted back to the place in which my spirit had
separated itself from the form. I then found that I
must have been in their company much longer than I
supposed, as, contrary to the experience of many whom
I have since met, I did not attend my own funeral; and
I would here remark, that it is generally gratifying to a
spirit to do this, and where the body can be kept for
some time, they gladly embrace the opportunity of at-
tending on this ceremony, and listening to and aiding
those who officiate on such occasions.' *

As to show the common truth pervading all these
descriptions, with the variety of imagery according to
the character of both spirit and medium, a genuine
collection of statements made either through clairvoy-
ants or mediums is valuable, I add one more account by
a spirit, through the writing of a child, of the * entrance
into life.'

' When a mortal dies, some friendly spirit enters the
room and strews rose-leaves over the floor and the

■

body. They then take a tiny silver bell, and ring it,
which is the signal for the spirit to come out of the

body. When I came away, rang one of these tiny

bells. It ^as so gentle that I came directly to sense.

* A Narrative of the Experience of Horace Abraham Acklef/y M,D.y
late of Cleveland^ OhiOf since his entrance into Spirit-life,

152 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

I rose up and stood by the window. The smell of rose-
buds made the room like paradise. The golden light
was shining on the wall, and something seemed to call
me. I turned, and it seemed as if a gulf were opening
at my feet, and then I saw before me a dark thing like
a shadow. Something told me it had been myself, and
then came and took me away.'

Mr. Haddock's seeress often saw persons in the body
as shadows, while those in the spirit-form appeared
to her. With respect to the bell and the rose-leaves,
the reason of their being used in the description will
appear in the chapter on correspondence. I have often
seen bells drawn or written of by mediums, and have
always found a bell to be a symbol of spiritual com-
munication, or revelation. Eose-leaves and buds typify
affectionate feelings. The spirit who wrote had a loving
welcome to its new home.

A young friend of my own, while in a clairvoyante
state, was questioned on the process of death. The
following vision was presented to her. It must be
remembered that this was not a description of any
departure taking place at the time. It was rather an
illustrative picture, imaged forth in the forms familiar
to the seer's mind.

THE SPIRITTTAL BODY. 153

VISION, SEEN JANUARY 11, 1859.

*I said I saw a glorious sunset. It is wonderful
indeed ! This sunset is shown me as a type of earthly
Ufe.

* Across the glowing sky hastens a group of angels.
What are they bearing along with them ? Ah, I see
now. They carry a golden cross, a golden cup, and a
lily crown. How beautiful are those angels ! but they
hasten rapidly away. I am going with them. I see
where they are going. It is towards the earth, where it
is cold and twilight. They are gone to comfort a little
child — a little pale, very pale child. The child is
about to die. Yes, it is for this child that the angels
have brought these glorious gifts of the cross, the cup,
and the lily crown. Ah, how pale is the little child !
Now it is dying ! But how can I describe the wonder-
ful process of death ? It is too interior to be described,
and should be witnessed. An angel has taken the
child, and is drawing forth the internal of the child into
the external. The old external child will die, but the
new child will be drawn forth, and becomes the ex-
ternal. The mode of this is more wonderful than can
be conceived. The angel draws forth, as with a magnet,
the various particles of the child, and attracts them into
a new form. First of all, as by a wonderful music, all
the particles of hearing are drawn forth. Later on, the

154 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

particles of vision, and then the child will behold as
well as hear. It is most wonderful ! '

All accounts of death-beds are full of interest, but it
is very seldom that the diflFerent stages of the process
are so well marked as to render them apparent to
bystanders ; and the sorrow of friends, whose eyes are
bent on the mortal coil and blind to the beautiful work
which is going on as the case of clay is deserted, only
throws a gloomy horror over the scene. In the next
chapter I shall try to gather a few out of the numberless
records of * last words ' and looks which strengthen the
conjecture, that the spirit often has a glimpse of the
promised land before it is free to pass the barrier.
A good collection of well-authenticated death-bed
memoirs, with notes of the nature of the disease, its
duration, and the mental and physical state of the dying
person, would be a valuable contribution to psychical
knowledge.

The last testimony, before we refer to the authority
of Scripture, will be furnished by Swedenborg, whose
writings I quote as I would those of Socrates, not
putting implicit faith in the revelations of either.
Both were philosophers, though in diflFerent lines of
wisdom, and both, Swedenborg preeminently, gifted
seers. Like other seers, they received spiritual truths
under the imagery with which their brains were familiar,
and thus were liable to fall into what to other minds
might seem partial error. For every human being has

T

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 155

his own sphere of spiritual perception, which is to him
the spiritual world. Into this sphere he comes when-
ever, by the shutting of the outer material sense, the
internal life is entered. And spirits sympathising
with the seer can communicate their thoughts through
his brain, so the ideas and images presented la his
spiritual state are what he will describe and possibly
believe to be absolute truths.

This remark should be kept in mind, and applied to
each of the seers quoted, in explanation of their
resemblances and diflFerences. The more highly in-
formed the seer, the nobler and truer will be the
symbolism his mind can offer to the spirits' teaching.
And a philosopher who only ceased his scientific enquiries
when his perceptions were turned inwards on a world
above and beyond that explored by the senses, could
not fail of bringing to the new region a rich apparatus
of acquired facts and well-observed objects. As much
of literal truth, therefore, as can come from the
spiritual into the material world may be looked for
in the visions and narrations of Swedenborg, who gives
as follows : —

THE PROCESS OP DYINa — RESURRECTION.

*When the body is no longer able to perform its
functions in the natural world, corresponding to the
thoughts and affections of its spirit which it has from

156 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

the spiritual world, then man is said to die. This takes
place when the respiratory motions of the lungs and
the systolic motions of the heart cease ; but still man
does not die, but is only separated from the corporeal
part which was of use to him in the world: for man
himself lives. It is said man himself lives, because
man is not man from the body, but from the spirit,
since the spirit thinks in man, and thought with affec-
tion makes man. Hence, it is evident that man when he
dies, only passes from one world into another. Hence
it is that death,* in the word in its internal sense,
signifies resurrection and continuation of life. The
inmost communication of the spirit is with the respira-
tion and the motion of the heart; its thought with
the respiration and the affection, which is of love, with
the heart ; wherefore, when these two motions cease in
the body, there is immediately a separation. Those
two motions, namely, the respiratory motion of the
lungs, and the systolic motion of the heart, are the
very bonds, which being broken the spirit is left to it-
self, and the body being thus left without the life of its
spirit, grows cold and putrefies. That the inmost
communication of the spirit of man is with the respira-
tion and with the heart, is because all the vital motions
thence depend, not only in general, but also in every
part. The spirit of man after the separation remains a

* A confirmation of this will be found further on, in the firequent
spiritual predictions of death.

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 157

little while in the body, but not longer than till the

total cessation of the heart's action^ which takes place

with vaxiety, according to the state of the disease of

which man dies ; for the motion of the heart with

some continues a long while, and with some not long.

As soon as this motion ceases, the man is resuscitated,

but this is done by the Lord alone. By resuscitation

is meant the drawing forth of the spirit of man from

the body, and its introduction into the spiritual world,

which is commonly called resurrection. The reason

why the spirit of man is not separated from the body

before the motion of the heart has ceased, is, because

the heart corresponds to affection, which is of love,

which is the very life of man, for from love everyone

has vital heat ; wherefore, as long as this conjunction

continues, so long there is correspondence, and thence

the life of the spirit in the body. How resuscitation

is effected has not only been told me, but also shown

by living experience. The experiment itself was made

with me, in order that I might fully know how it was

done. I was brought into a state of insensibility as to

the bodily senses, thus almost into the state of the dying;

yet the interior life, with thought, remaining entire, so

that I perceived and retained in memory the things which

occurred, and which occur to those who are resuscitated

from the dead. I perceived that the respiration of the

body was almost taken away ; the interior respiration,

which is of the spirit, remaining, conjoined with a slight

159

that they wished

t was afterwards

its last thought

s to the thoughts

affection in this

'ceive, and also to

it were, a pulling

of my spirit, from

vas from the Lord,

vVhen the celestial

ii, they do not leave

but when the spirit

11 company with the

>art from them; and

•' from the Lord's spi-

.11 to him the use of

, lie only thought. It

: those angels seem, as

iie left eye towards the

e might be opened and

• Iocs not perceive other-

:>ut it is an appearance.

.' been rolled off, there

' •] »scure, as when a man,

.;]i the eye-lashes. This

me of a heavenly colour,

it this takes place with

^ is felt to be rolled off

158 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

and tacit respiration of the body. Then there was first
given communication as to the pulse of the heart with
the celestial kingdom^ since that kingdom corresponds
to the heart with man. Angels thence were also seen,
some at a distance, and two near the head, at which they
were seated. Thence all proper affection was taken,
but still there remained thought and perception. I was
in this state for some hours* The spirits then who were
around me removed themselves, supposing that I was
dead. There was also perceived an aromatic odour,* as
of an embalmed corpse, for when the celestial angels
are present, then what is cadaverous is perceived as
aromatic; and spirits perceive this; they cannot approach.
Thus also evil spirits are kept away from the spirit of
man, when he is first introduced into eternal life. The
angels who were seated at the head were silent, only
communicating their thoughts with mine; and when
these are received, the angels know that the spirit of
man is in such a state that it can be drawn forth from
the body. The communication of their thoughts was
made by looking into my face, for thus communication
of the thoughts is made in heaven. Because thought
and perception remained with me, in order that I might
know and remember how resuscitation is effected, I per-
ceived that those angels first enquired what my thought
was, whether it was like the thought of those who die,

* This seems to justify many stories of sweet odours near the death
beds of the good.

THE SPIRITtJAL BODT. 159

which is usually about eternal life ; and that they wished
to keep my mind in that thought. It was afterwards
said that the spirit of man is held in its last thought
when the body expires, until it returns to the thoughts
which are from its general or ruling affection in this
world. Especially it was given to perceive, and also to
feel, that there was a drawing, and, as it were, a pulling
out of the interiors of my mind, thus of my spirit, from
the body ; and it was said that this was from the Lord,
and that hence is resurrection. When the celestial
angels are with a resuscitated person, they do not leave
Mm, because they love everyone ; but when the spirit
is such that he can no longer be in company with the
celestial angels, he desires to depart from them; and
when this is the case, angels come from the Lord's spi-
ritual kingdom, by whom is given to him the use of
light ; for before he saw nothing, he only thought. It
was also shown how this is done : those angels seem, as
it were, to roll off the coat of the left eye towards the
septum of the nose, that the eye might be opened and
be enabled to see. The spirit does not perceive other-
wise than that it is so done, but it is an appearance.
When the coat seems to have been rolled off, there
appears something lucid but obscure, as when a man,
on first awakening, looks through the eye- lashes. This
obscure lucidity appeared to me of a heavenly colour,
but afterwards it was said that this takes place with
variety. Afterwards something is felt to be rolled off

160 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

softly from the face, and when this is done, spiritual
thought is induced. That roUing oflF from the face is
likewise an appearance, for by it is represented that he
comes from natural thought into spiritual thought.
The angels are extremely cautious lest any idea should
come from the resuscitated person but what savours of
love. They then tell him that he is a spirit.'*

The 'appearances' spoken of by Swedenborg are
correspondential : of this more will be said presently.
The *bell' and the * rose-leaves ' are also symbols.
And by comparing the imagery in these visions and
descriptions we shall find a common idea in all,
underlying the symbolisation, which receives its form
according to the mind of the recipient. In the vision
(p. 153), the angel draws forth, as by a wonderful
music, the interior of the child, and the sense of hearing
is first developed. Hearing and sound, all the mediums
tell us, correspond to the affection of love, which is
characteristic of the celestial kingdom ; light and sight,
to knowledge, and to the lower or spiritual degree.
Thus the clairvoyant's vision and Swedenborg's de-
scription are accordant as to the order in which
spiritual perceptions are opened. And the spirit who
smelt the rose-leaves and heard the silver bell of the
welcoming angel was bom into a loving region before
his spiritual sight was opened.

* Heaven and HeUj pp. 445-450.

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 161

Turning io the natural aspect of the subject. The
two seeresses whose descriptions of body, soul, and spirit
agree so entirely, teach us ^that the spirit, which is
divine in its nature, goes first, and the soul and nerve-
spirit — by the combination of which (if they are not
diflferent degrees of the same) animal and organic life
is sustained — follow. In the order indicated, that
which is less material, the spirit, is first disengaged.
This is in accordance with Swedenborg*s celestial
degree. Then comes the soul with its atmosphere of

* nerve-spirit.' This, we are told, being intimately
united with the body, does not quit it till after appa-
rent death, being gradually drawn away. Bichat says
that animal life ceases first, organic life afterwards.
AH agree that the elements leave in the order of their
independence of the material substance : and thus the
symbolic statements of the spirit through a medium,

. the description of the clairvoyants, and the observations

' of the physiologist, confirm each other. After all, we
are led back to the old exploded idea of spirit, soul,

: and body. How firmly this division was believed in by
early writers may be seen in a well-compiled little
volume, by Greorge Bush, Professor of Hebrew in New

■ York University. The book is entitled : The Soul^ or
an Enquiry into Scriptural Psychology^ as developed
by the use of the terms Soul^ Spirit, Life, &c.y viewed

• iw its bea/ring on the doctri/ne of the Resurrection.
The following extract is to the purpose : —

M

162 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

*This distinction (into spirit, soul, and body) Vas
clearly recognised in the ancient philosophies* The
three-parted hypostases of body, spirit, and soul, was
familiar even among the fathers of the Christian
Church, of whom no one is more explicit than
Irenseus : '' There are three, of which the perfect man
consists, flesh, soul, spirit; the one, the spirit, giving
figure; the other, flesh, beiiij^ formed. That, indeed,
which is between these two is the soul, which some-
times following the spirit is raised by it; and some-
times consenting to the flesh, falls into earthly lusts." *

^ Origen speaks with equal distinctness to the same
effect : —

* ** There is a three-fold partition of man, the body or
flesh, the lowest part of our nature, on which the old
serpent by original sin inscribed the law of sin, and by
which we are tempted to vile things, and as oft as we
are overcome by temptation are joined fast to the devil
ITie spirit, by which we express the likeness of the
divine nature, in which the Creator, from the archetype
of His own mind, engraved the eternal law of the
honest by his own fingers, and by which we are firmly
conjoined to Him, and made one with Him ; and then
the soul, intermediate between these two, and which, as
in a factious commonwealth, cannot but join with one or

* Iren^ens, lib. y. c. i. I give a translation rather more literal than
that of Professor Bush.

THE SPIRITUAI, BODY. 163

other of the fonner parties, being solicited this way and
that, and having liberty as to which it will adhere. If
it renounce the flesh and join with the spirit, it will
itself become spiritual : but if it cast itself down to the
desires of the flesh, it will itself degenerate into the body."

' • • • • In the Alexandrian philosophy in particular,
which favoured the . Pythagorean and Platonic, the
distinction above mentioned is very plainly recognised,
as they denominated the irvwiia as the rational soul
iyovsy TO Xoyucov mind, and the ^inj^^ sensitive soul, to
hrtOvfMjTueov, that which desires or lusts). Josephus
also gives us intimations to the same effect. Thus,
in his accoimt of the creation he says (lib. i. c. i.), *' Grod
took the dust from the ground and formed man, and
inserted in him a spirit and a soul." Thus, too, in the
apocryphal book of Wisdom (chap. xv» 11), ** Foras-
much as he knew not his Maker, and Him that inspired
into him an active soul, and that breathed into him a
living spirit."

* In the book of Enoch, likewise apocryphal, we
find mention made of ra 'jrvevfjLara t&v '^^vj(jS>v rZv
airodavovTiov av0pay/r»v, the spirits of the souls of
dead men; and again, t^ irveufuvra t^ iieiropsvofuua
airo TYJ9 '^vyYj9 avr&if m i/e TfJ9 adptcos, spirits going
forth from their soul as from the flesh. For ourselves
(says Dr. Bush), we read in these extracts intimations of
a great psychological feet, viz. that the wpsvfia is to \
the 'y^vxn^ the spirit to the soul, what the soul is to the \

» 2 I

164 FBOM MA^TTEfi TO SMBtT.

body; The soiil is a kind of irivolucrum lo the spirit^
what Plato calls the stSaXov, image, of the spirit. Thei
yfrvxv IS the spiritual body or body of the spirit, sen
called, however, not as denoting its true ontological
nature, which is psychical (?), but rather its uses as
constituting the form through which the aflfections^of

the spirit manifest themselves As it is through

the gross material body that the soul manifests itself in) i
the present world, so we are warranted in believing that
it is through the soul that the spirit manifests itself in '
the other world ; in other words, it performs for the
spirit the office of a body, and is consequently so
termed.' * ,

. The last authority I shall bring forward is that of
the Apostle Paul. To professing literal Christians his
assertiott may be held sufficient even without all the
Confirmation brought from other sources, while that
living confirmation will show .to learned readers that
the Apostle taught a real doctrine, an absolute fact,
tinadilterated by any Grr^ek philosophy or popular
superstition. Unbelievers, too, may learn from real
occurrences leading up to those spiritual truths whicb
are the beginning and end of Scripture teaching, that
the simple and grand assertions of Holy Writ are all in?
harmony with the order of creation.

St. Paul (l Cor. xv.) gives a clearer and more

■* I U-»«JUL'I' "~ f^ ' »■►- ■ P ' «J" >7W^ < ». ■■ -^J". ^ — . * ■' . ■■ i ' » . l . i j TO ■' I ■' t

. THE SPIBITtJAL 30Dt.. 165

concijse description of the, process of death thun ias
been received .froip. any seer or philosopher; but a
literal translation from the Greek is needed to make,
this apparent. The words of our received translation
are not quite so specific aa- those of the original^ and
the introduction of italics, to supply the supposed
sense in" the common ; version, leads to a less defined
meaningihan that of the writer. The followirig.is slightly
varifed'from the authorised version. : ^We must jread it
with, the .idea of the natural x resurrection i3iat has
been described : —

- 1 . ■ *

Corinthians xv. 35-57.

35 'fiut some/wUl »ay^ How are> tJiA dead raised^
and with what body do they comef

36 Ohfooliah^onel Thai tvhich thoit aowestia mt
quickenedy except it die.

37 And what, thou sowest, thou doet^not sow the
bodyithat is to come, but bare grainy perhaps wheat, or
any other grain. »

, 38 But God gives' it a body accordiTig as He v)ill,
and to each of the seeds its own body. :

39 All flesh is not the same: but one flesh of men^
another flesh of beasts,: another of fishes^, another of
birds, . '

: AO And heavenly bodies^ and earthly bodies; but
the glory of the heavenly is one^ and th0 glory of th^
ea/rthly is. another^ .

J V»«J ^av .. J..h« \>aj '^'i

:^H

166 FBOH UATTEB TO SPIRIT.

41 One glory of the suuy and another glory of the
moon, and another glory of stars, for star differeth
from sta/r in glory.

42 So also the resurrection {apdaraa-is, standing up)
of the dead* It is sown in corruption; it is raised in
vncorruption.

43 It is sown in dishonou/r; it is raised in glory.
It is sown m weakness ;itis raised i/n power*

4^ It is sown a soul body, it is raised a spiritual
body. There is a soxd body, and there is a spiritual
body.

45 So it is written. The first human Adam became
a Ivvi/ng soul, the last Adam a vivifying spirit

46 But not the spiritual first, but the sovUsh; then
the spiritual*

47 The first ma/n from earth, earthy (clayey); the
second man the heavenly.

48 LiJee to earthly material a^re the earthly, amd
like to that which is heavenly (in its nature) are the
heavenly.

49 And as we have borne the vmage of the earthly,
we shall bear also the ima^e of the heavenly.

50 But I say this brethren, that flesh and blood are
not able to vaheril the kingdom of Ood, nor does decay
vnherit vncorruption.

51 Behold, leocplain to you a mystery. All indeed
will not sleep, but all will be changed.

52 In an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at

ll W iKftM*^!

THE 8PIBITUAL BODY. 167

the last trumpet: for the trumpet will sound, and
the dead wiU rise mcorraptible, and we shall be
cha/ngedn

53 For U must he that this corruptible clothe itself
in incorrupOon, and this Tnortal clothe itself in that
which cannot die.

54 But when this corruptible has pv^t on incorrup-
tion, and this mortal has put on irrnnortaZityy then is
fulfilled the written word. Death is absorbed (or ended)

n victory*

5i5 Where is thy sting , Death f Where is thy mc-
tory^ Hadesf

56 The stvng of Death is sin, and the power of sim,
the law (the Jewish law)*

57 But thank Ood, who gi/veth us victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ,

Some words in the above have been slightly altered,
only because the ear, accustomed to attach a definite
meaning to a series of phrases, receives the same with
difficulty in a new and partly diflFerent sense. Some
have been changed in order to give what seems to me
a more fsdthful rendering of St. Paul's meaning. Of
these last, the most important is the word psychidal or
eovlish, used instead of natural* It would be tedious
if I were to attempt to go into details as to which
versions favoured this or the other reading. I wiU
only say that the word translated a/mmal is an adjective

168 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

formed from PsychCj whicli word bears the meanings
80ul,< and no other, ia every Greek writing. The
rendering of this word by natural does not. convey;
its full meaning. It has sometimes been translated

* animal^ but that gives rather its lower than its highear'
import. A German translator of the Vulgate has re-,
ceived this idea in full, and has given for it the word

* tAiemcAe ' (like the beast).

Verse 44, *It is sown,' &c., implies that a process
goes on something like that with seed which is not put
into- the ground to grow up at some uncertain and far
distant future, but as having its life continued, and .
developed from the parent plant. It does not appear
that, by the analogy of sowing,. Paul meant the bnriah
of our, bodies, though their being laid in the ground
has favoured this notion. The seed of which he speaks >
in his comparison is the living spirit given, the ^ breath
of life' breathed into the psychical body for its uses' in
the world.: The psychical, or soulbody, is our present i
body, which is animated by a soul : this is man as he is
here. ■ The spiritual is the next body, animated by a
spirit,; so, the Apostle says, * there are (in man) the
soiil body and the spirit body' — averse 45. In the
quotation which follows, *The first human (avOpanros)
Adam was made/ &c., the word translated ' was made '
should be ^became,' or 'passed into,' a living soul -^ the
Greek. word always implying transition, whereas *was
made ' conveys a vague idea of briginal formation, the-

^

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 169

carrying on of which application to the second Adam
falsifies the whole meaning. St. Paul completes hiS'
answer to the question, * How are the dead raised, and
with what body do they come?' by saying (verse 46) -
that the soul life is first developed, the spiritual after-
wards, ap the soul takes that place in the spirit man^
which the material body had held in the mortal being >
before death. -*

In verse 47, the difierent natures of the two bodies
are recognised: the^r«^, the man in this world, formed '
of th<^- same elements as the material creation; the>
a^condy the spiritual man, being of heavenly elements,
r have here omitted *the Lord firom heaven,' because it
is not found' in the most authentic manuscripts. It is
omitted by Lachmann, the German editor, whose*
edition includea every careful emendation; and the-
supposed reference to the Saviour is not required in this .
plaoe — for the work of the Lord, in the risen and
rising man, is fully treated of in other parts of the
chapter.: The verses, from 35 to 53 inclusive, relate
entirely to the process of putting oflF the perishing
material, and being clothed in that inner body whose
^heaveiiward developement during our earthly existence
defends on purity of aim and obedience to the will of
Grod. One who has lowj sensual, earthly desires, has
for his new .body that soul which has been materialised;
and rendered akin to earth, while one who by prayer
and love of the Highest has united his spirit with

170 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

the Holy Spirit of the Lord, has the refined aod
spvrituaMsed soul for hi9 hew investiture.

The Apostle winds up by saying that the * hidden
thing,' or * secret,' which he has told them is, that at the
end of this earthly life we do not go into a long sleep,
but are changed^ and that the change takes place at
once; i.e. at the time when the body dies.

The destination of the spirit and the work of the
Lord is described earlier, and at the end of the chapter.
• Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first-fruits
of them that slept.' By the word translated ^ firsts
fruita^ is not meant the ea/rlieat fruit or produce, but
an offering set apart as especially belonging to God, as
were the first-fruits among the Jews. Those who
'slept' had not risen &om ^ Hades,' their first state
after death, for the victory over Hade$ was not gained*
It needed the Word * made flesh to re-open the channel
for the descent of the Holy Spirit; ia other words, to
open the kingdom of heaven*

* For as in Adam, or in the natural man (the body),
all die, so in Christ (the spirit) shall all be made alive.
But Christ the first-fruits (first returned to the Source
of Life), afterwards they that belong to Christ at His
coming, or in His presence.'

* Then cometh the end, when He shall have delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the Father, when He

* The Word, or Logos, will be spoken of hereafter, in the chapter on

Scripture/ - ;. . ^.

. THE SPIBITUAL BODY. 171

shall have put down all rule^ and authority^ and power.
For He must rule till He ha^e put all enemies under
His feet.'

* The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death/
This last death refers to death in its largest sense^
the death of the soul. * Fear not,' our Saviour says, ' him
that can kill the body.' As a necessary consequence of
the continued reign of Christ, sin will disappear, and
the 80ul» freed from its impurities, will no longer be
drawn downward towards its material covering, but
rise, at once spiritualised and gaining more and more
vitality as it ascends to the Pure Fountain and
Source pf Life.
If before writing the foregoing paraphrase I had seen

* Stanley's Commentary on the Epistles of St. Paul to
the Corinthians,' the chapter would have been given
in Dr. Stanley's words. I have however let it remain,
being in substance the same as the version of that
excellent writer, to whose whole work I refer my
readers*

Of verse 40, Dr* Stanley says of heavenly bodies:

* In the first instance^ he (Paul) means the angels.'
Dr. Stanley omits the word ' Lord ' in verse 47, follow-
ing, as I have done here, the Crreek of Ijachmann. His
aote on verse 48 is: —

'The earthy, ol x^^^^^ ™^^ ^^ their mortal state;
the heavenly, oi hrovpavioi^ Christians after the resur-
rection.*

L

172 FKOM MATTEB TO SPrRlT,

Verse 52 J * Behold I show you a mystery,' is ihuas
paraphrased: — * Behold, look .my words, full in the
face, they contain a truth which we are slow to recognise,,
but which is true notwithstanding.' Of all the various
readings of this perplexed passage (Stanley says), that
of the. received text, as contained in the five MSS*^
he enumerates, is the best. * We shall all of us not die-
but be changed.' . . . 'Although it is by no means'
certain that all of us, (i. e. myself and the Corin--
thians) shall die, yet it is certain that we shall all^
be changed. The passage is personal to hiniself and
his readers, and^ is written in the same ex|)ectation
as that expressed in the parallel passages, i . that
the end of all things would take place in that gene-
ration.'*

I believe that St. Paul's metoing was much more
simple. He wrote to those who believed deatli^to be
an endless sleep ; he tells theim that he will make
clear to them what has been a mystery, namely> that
the common lot and apparent end of humanity is not^
extinction, but change of state.

I have now brought together evidence from many'
sources, of the fact that the end of earth life is also the
entrance into the spiritual state, or the resurrection.
And I think it will be found on examination that every
Scripture expression which seemg to imply an in-

* Stanley's Commentary ^ p. 333. -

■ uw* ^v'^'nav— "^i^^^p

'"TTHE SPlRITtTAL BODY. 1 73

tetveniiig sfete of unconsciousness or sleep of the souls
is really figurative. When the day of judgment is
described, the inhabitants of the world are spoken of
as sheep and goats. We know that the souls passing
through the judgment are not sheep and goats, therefore
the same allegorical or figurative form which cannot be
denied to one part of our Lord's parable must be ex-i-
tended to the rest. Indeed, St. Paul's expressions of ' in
a mbmeDt, in the twinkling of an eye,' seem meant
to convey the idea that the change is not to be de-
ferred for an indefinite time after death, but takes
place at once. The * trumpet 'of the angel probably
conveys- "the same truth as the ^bell ' of the receiving
spirit.

If further proof is wanted that the change is efiected
at once and at the time of death, we shall find it in the
words of Christ, when He speaks of Hhe God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who is Tiot the God of the
dead, but of the living,' implying that the Patriarchs
so often quoted by the Jews sure living and ccmacwus
beings. ' '

' It has also been my aim to show that the spiritual
body, or the soul, being an organisation embodying all
those forces whose deposit is the material form, issues
from its shell carrying with it into the next state all
the energies it possessed in this, unincumbered by
the trammels of the flesh. That among the vital
elements which in every shade and degree: of refinement

174 FBOM MATTEB TO SnRIT.

exist in every human being, is the nervous force, or' the
agency used in mesmerism, and that all the spiritiial
mamfestations are thereby produced ; the spirits most
nearly allied to matter acting most easily on matter and
on gross outward natures, while those of a higher d^ree
impress the finer and more internal portions of the
brain, and through them the soul. In the chapter on
Inspiration we must consider the highest action of the
highest influence, that on the most internal spirit, by
the Holy Spirit of Grod.

The power of imparting vital or magnetic influence
possessed by spirits seems to be referred to by St* Paul,
when he says, * The second heavenly man is a life-
giving spirit'

Many instances might have been brought together,
showing how a* healing influence like that of an earthly
mesmerism has been often felt in illness, procuring rest
and relieving pain. I have drawn so largely on my
readers' capacity for belief even while confining myself
to facts in illustration of the usual spiritual phena<r
mena, that I will not go furth^ ; but if ancient tra-
dition and modem spiritual communications are to be
trusted, every spirit, in or out of the flesh, exercises an
influence for good or evil, for health or disease, on those
spirits whose qualities fit them to imbibe that in-
fluence. From the beings whose wretched lives and
mischievous statements evince the depravity of their
nature comes a hurtful and weakening magnetism.

THB SPIRITUAL BODY. 175

while from the loving friend who, passed away,
tries to pour gladness into the sorrowing soul by an
assurance of his presence and happiness from higher
and still higher sources, through angels and archangels,
streams the heavenly life, even from the Sun of
Righteousness about to rise with heaZing on His wings.

i7e-

CHAPTEE X.

DAYBREAK.

rjlHE apparent recognition by the dying of those who
-^ have gone before, is a common and notorious fact.
So very numerous, indeed, are instances of this kind,
that each reader will probably be able to recall to
his own mind incidents more convincing and better
adapted to support my other assertions than a large
collection of accounts received from strangers. I will,
therefore, only mention a very few instances in illus-
tration of all that has been, and remains to be, said
on the process of death and the entrance into another
state.

A very complete description of the feelings of a
dying person is given in a letter from Admiral (then
Captain) Beaufort, to Dr. WoUaston. This may be
found, extracted from the autobiography of Sir John
Barrow, in Haddock's Somnolism and Psycheism, to
which work I have before referred, and to which I
am indebted for more than one interesting extract.
* Many years ago, when I was a youngster on board

DAYBREAK. 177

one of His Majesty's ships in Portsmouth harbour,
after sculling about in a very small boat, I was en-
deavouring to fasten her alongside the ship to one of
the scuttlings ; in foolish eagerness I stepped upon the
gunwale ; the boat of course upset, and I fell into the
water, and, not knowing how to swim, all my eflForts
to lay hold either of the boat or the floating sculls
were fruitless. The transaction had not been observed
by the sentinel on the gangway, and, therefore, it was
not till the tide had drifted me some distance astern of
the ship that a naaii in the foretop saw me splashing in
the water, and gave the alarm. The first lieutenant
instantly and gallantly jumped overboard, the carpenter
followed his example, and the gunner hastened into a
boat and pulled after them.

'With the violent but vain attempts to make myself
heard, I had swallowed much water. I was soon ex-
xiausted by my struggles ; and, before any relief reached
me, I had sunk below the surface — all hope had fled,
all exertion ceased, and I felt that I was drowning. So
far these facts were either partially remembered after
my recovery, or supplied by those who had latterly
witnessed the scene; for during an interval of such
agitation a drowning person is too much occupied in
catching at every passing straw, or too much absorbed
by alternate hope and despair, to mark the succession
of events very accurately. Not so, however, with the
fact which immediately ensued. My mind had then

N

178

FBOU HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

si

undergone the sudden revolution which appeared to
you so remarkable, and all the circumstances of which
are now as vividly fresh in my memory as if they had
occurred but yesterday.

*From the moment that all exertion had ceased —
which I imagine was the immediate consequence of
complete suffocation — a calm feeling of the most
perfect tranquillity succeeded the most tumultuous
sensation. It might be called apathy, certainly not
resignation; for drowning no longer appeared an evil:
I no longer thought of being rescued, nor was I in any
bodily pain. On the contrary, my sensations were now
of rather a pleasurable cast, partaking of that dull but
contented sort of feeling which precedes the sleep
produced by fatigue. Though the senses were thus
deadened, not so the mind ; its activity seefmed to he
invigorated in a ratio which defies all description;
for thought rose after thought with a rapidity of
succession that is not only indescribable, but probably
inconceivable, by anyone who has not been himself
in a similar situation. The course of these thoughts I
can even now in a great measure retrace: the event
that had just taken place, the awkwardness which
produced it — the bustle it must have occasioned, for
I had observed two persons jump from the chains —
the effect it would have on a most affectionate father,
^he manner in which he would disclose it to the rest

wtmsmmmBmsm

BATBBEAJC 179

of the family, and a thousand other circumstances
minutely associated with home, were the first series of
reflections that occurred. They took, then, a wider
range: our last cruise — a former voyage and ship-
wreck — my school, the progress I had made there, the
time I had misspent, and even all my boyish pursuits
and adventures. Thus, travelling backwards, every
incident of my past life seemed to me to glance across
my recollection in retrograde procession ; not, however,
in mere outline as here stated, but the picture filled
up, with every minute and collateral feature ; in short,
the whole period of my existence seemed to be placed
before me in a kind of panoramic review, and each
act of it seemed to be accompanied by a consciousness
of right or wrong, or by, some reflection on its cause or
consequences — ^indeed, many trifling events, which had
been long forgotten, then crowded into my imagination,
and with the character of recent familiarity.

May not all this be some indication of the almost
infinite power of memory with which we may awaken
in another world, and be compelled to contemplate our
past lives ? Or might it not, in some degree, warrant
the inference that death is only a change or m^diftca^
tion of our existencey in which there is no real pause or
interruption? But however that may be, one circum-
etance was highly remarkable, that the innumerable
ideas which floated into my mind were all retrospective;

Jf 2

180 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

yet I had been religiously brought up; my hopes and
fears of the next world had lost nothing of their early
strength, and at any other period intense interest and
awful anxiety would have been excited by the mere
idea that I was floating on the threshold of eternity;
yet at that inexplicable moment, when I had a full
consciousness that I had already crossed that threshold,
not a single thought wandered into the future ; I was
wrapt entirely in the past.. The length of time that
was occupied by this deluge of ideas, or rather the
shortness of time into which they were condensed, I
cannot now state with precision; yet, certainly, two
minutes could not have elapsed from the moment of
suflfocation to the time of my being hauled up.'

The rest of Captain Beaufort's letter contains the
account of his physical sensations on being restored to
the consciousness of this world.

Sir William Hamilton, in his lecture on * The CorV'
servative Faculty^ says : —

* On this theory [of attention, &c.], the proposition
with which I started, — ^that all mental activities, all acts
of knowledge, which haye been once excited, persist, —
becomes intelligible; we Txey^r wholly lose them, but
they become obscure. This obscuration can be con-
ceived in every infinite degree, between incipient lates-
cence and irrecoverable latency. The obscure cognition
may exist simply out of consciousness, so that it can be
recalled by a common act of reminiscence. Again, it

.JiJi — ^JS^BSSSB^^^^^^^a^

DATBREAE. 181

may be impossible to recover it by an act of voluntary
recollection; but some association may revivify it enough
to make it flash after a long oblivion into conscious-
ness. Further, it may be obscured so far that it can
only be resuscitated by some morbid aflfection of the
system ; or, finally, it may be absolutely lost for us in
this life, and destined only for our reminiscence in the
life to come.^ * (The italics are mine.)

Admiral Beaufort's sensations were those of a person
about to leave this world by a sudden and violent,
though happily incomplete, severance of the bond be-
tween body and soul. These instances of revival of
memory do not occur so frequently just before death
(as far as we know) as during the last illness, when, in
dreams and so-called delirium, the soul often returns to
the scenes of childhood, and seems to wander with its
first friends in its earliest home. But a few hours
before death not only is the presence of already gone
friends discerned, but perceptions of beautiful scenery,
sounds of exquisite music, and sometimes even the
objects required for a long journey, seem to be present
to the mind of the departing traveller.

It would be strange indeed if this were not the case,
and if, in all the varieties and combinations of disease by
which death is caused, the last perceptions of earthy
and first of Heaven, should not vary greatly in the!

♦ Hamilton's * Lectures on Metaphysics,* toL ii. p, 215,

182 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

order of their occurrence. It is as if the walls of
the prison giving way, the captive before his escape
looks sometimes through one, and sometimes another
opening, into the region beyond, whence the friendly
inhabitants come to guide him on his way.

It was not long since a daughter was describing to me
her mother's last hours. * The night before her death,'
she said * we heard her name her sister, who had been
dead for years.' She said that her sister stood beside
the bed, and she lay and talked with her for two hours.
We could not distinguish what she said, but when I
heard that her sister was there, I felt sure that my
mother was going.

In these conversations between the parting and
departed spirits it seldom happens that words are
articulated, while yet audible sounds issue from the
lips. It may be that the spirit, held by a slender
bond to the body, still moves those nerves and muscles
yhich it had been accustomed to control, but from
their incomplete and inharmonious action, the tele-
graphic wires only give sign of a power at their inner
end, by an incoherent vibration in place of a regular
movement. Many times the loveliest scenes are spoken
of, though the failing strength is insufficient to describe
them. Very often the traveller seems to recognise
wcUeVy and sometimes this is spoken of as a sea, or
a river, which he has to cross. This fact of frequent
occurrence is used by Mr. Dickens in his touching

m^im

DAYBBEAK. l83

of the death of little Paul Dombey. The novelist is a
close observer of nature, and it is likely that he here
describes what has come under his own notice.

Within the last ten years an authoress died whose
works are the outpourings of a mind full of graceful
and lovely images. As her last moments approached^
she looked up with an expression of quiet delight,
repeating thrice, very softly, the words *How beau-
tiful ! '

It is difficult in the great wealth of illustrations
which abound in this part of the subject, to make a
selection. I wish if possible to bring those to notice
which I know to be strictly true, and which may
afterwards be referred to as instances of spiritual corre-
spondence.

One, dying young and pure, told her nurse a few
hours before her spirit was released, that there was
water to be crossed, and beyond that she saw an
Oriental scene. The nurse did not know that the
opening vision had disclosed the imagery of the spiritual
Easty the morning land of those who love the Lord.

A description of the last hours of a most lovely and
heavenly-minded child, was given to me by a friend. I
repeat it as it came to her from the mother, whose
expressions of yearning love for her child, and con-
sciousness of his spiritual presence, led the narrator to
enquire about the circumstances under which the young
traveller was released.

184 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

Q, *How was it with your poor little boy at the
last?'

Mother: * After many months' suffering, at length the
morning came when God called him from us. He had
frequently spoken about his approaching death, ajoid
sought to realise the change before him. Our Ininister
was very kind and often came to pray and talk with
him, but for a very long time he could not get rid of
the idea that when He came to Jordan he should be
unable to pass over. The morning on which he died
having bade all the family farewell, he lay for some
time quite quiet, when at length he said to his father,
who was sitting at his bedside, ** Father, do pray take
out the vri/ndow. Don^t you see that the glass prevents
my getting away, you must see how I a/m tryi/ng to get
outy and caTvaot get OAvay!^ His father opened
the window, but still the poor little feUow did not seem
quite satisfied. Again he spoke in the great stillness of
the room, his voice sounding strong and clear ; he was
evidently replying to some question which he had
heard asked.

* " TeSy^ he said, ^^my nams is John L , and I

come from M . Yes, I have told lies, hut I pro^

mise to do so no more ! "

* We were astonished and awestruck. We felt that he
saw and heard an angel invisible to us. Again he
said : —

* " Mother, here is grandmother come ! you must se$

DATBBEAE. 185

her ! And she is with such a great cam/pany^ and they
say that they are come to take me away with them.^
Soon after that he gently breathed his last.'

' Such,' says the narrator, * was my conversation with

Mrs, L . Doubtless, dear friend, you will agree. /

with me that the "great company " was a holy assembly
of ministering spirits sent by God to conduct the poor
child's soul safely across the mystery of " Jordan," so
much dreaded by him, and you will rejoice, as I did, on
hearing of the comfort vouchsafed to the sorrowing
mother through a ** vision of angels." '

The next account does not bear quite the same force
of evidence which I should wish to belong to my own
or intimate friend's experience. While trying to choose
among various descriptions one or two calculated to
illustrate the fact of the spiritual opening before de-
parture, I received the following in the words of an
eye-witness. My informant has only been a few weeks
in my family. As far as I can judge her character
is decidedly truthful, and her powers of invention not
great. She always keeps to a story which she has once
told, without deviation from the original version, and
though when I heard this account I tried to test her
by suggesting additions she rejected all these, and
adhered literallv to her first statement. It would
however not have been thought worthy of a place here,
hut for the recognition of her departed sister and the
description of the corresponding light. The subject

186 FROM HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

was suggested by some questions I put to her, she having
told me of a fright occasioned by the reappearance of
a worldly wealth-loving spirit which was seen by three
persons, and which made her so uncomfortable that she
left the house at which it occurred. I asked her
whether she had been present at the departure of this
spirit, to which she answered that she had, but that the

death was very unlike that of , a near relation^

* which was so happy 1 Oh I that was beautiful ! I
shall never forget that scene as long as I live.'

I begged for a description, and she went on : —

* He was a real good man, he had led a good life,
and done much for the poor. His illnesS was terrible,
but he said he did not suffer. " Whatever God," he said,
" pleases to inflict on me, that I can bear contentedly."
Just before he died he looked round the bed and saw

us all round him, and he said, " Oh dear J , and

A , and D , do all of you try to come to our

Father ! " And then he looked up and called three

times " C (the name of a relation who had gone

before), I am coming to you, to be with Jesus Christ ! "
** And there," he said, pointing to the right-hand comer
of the room, where there was a bright light which we
&11 saw

'I interrupted her — "You mean a candle or moon-
light?"

*No. I don't know what it came from. It was
like a bright twinkling star, with rays all coming out

BATBBEAE. 187

quickly from the middle to the outside, and the centre
was very bright indeed. Well, he pointed to it, " And
there," he said, " is Jesus Christ, who died to save the
world ; I am going to Him." Those were the last
words he spoke. We all saw the light — everyone in
the room — and it moved from where it was when we
first saw it, and came and rested on the bed just as he
died/

This vision of Christ given to the dying man is only
one in addition to an infinite number of similar occur-
rences. A near connection of my own asserted the
continual visible presence of the Saviour, some time
before she was released. The seeming mystery of the
appearance in so many dififerent aspects of the Word
Tnade flesh, will become clear as we learn more of the
laws of spirit manifestation.

In the last chapter I have brought forward many
concurrent testimonies of seers to the fact that spiritual
hearing is developed in the process of change, before
spiritual sight. Swedenborg gives as a reason, that in
the next state the spiritual developement is in a dififerent
order to that in which it takes place while we are in
the body. In the last process we are penetrated, in the
first instance, as it were from without, and so the more
external vision is generally developed before hearing.
After the change the developement takes place from
within, and the heavenly or higher angels are first
associated with the parting spirit. The accounts are

188 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT,

very numerous of heavenly music being heard around
the beds of the young and pure, and if the sounds have
not been audible to others, which is occasionally the
case, the glow on the countenance of the listening
traveller about to wend his way hence shows the
delight inspired by the angels' welcome.

The last moments of the little captive in the Temple,
Louis XVII., as described by Beauchesne, are an instance
of this, when hearing in a preeminent degree was the
spirit sense awakened to bring joy to one whose cup on
earth was so full of woe.

Gromin, seeing the child calm, motionless, and mute,
said to him, * I hope you are not in pain just now ? '

* Oh yes I I am still in pain, but not nearly so much.

The music is so beautiful 1 '

«

Now there was no music to be heard, either in the
tower or anywhere near.* No sound from without could
reach the room where the young martyr lay expiring.
Gomin, astonished, said to him * From what direction
do you hear this music ? '

* From above.'

* Is it long that you have heard it ? '

' Since you knelt down. Do you not hear it ? Listen !
Listen ! ' And the child, with a nervous motion, raised
his faltering hand, as he opened his large eyes, illumi-
nated by ecstatic delight. His keeper, unwilling to
destroy this last sweet illusion, listened also, with the
, pious desire of hearing what could not possibly be

-^f^mmar

DAYBREAK. 189

heard. After a few moments of attention, the child
again started, his eyes sparkled, and he cried out, in
intense rapture, * From amongst all the voices I have
distinguished that of my mother.'

That word, as it left the orphan's lips, seemed to re-
lieve him of all suflfering ; his knitted brow relaxed, and
his look lighted up with that calm brightness given by
the certainty of deliverance or victory. His eye fixed on
an invisible object, his ear attentive to the far distant
sound of one of those concerts that human ear hath
never heard. A new existence seemed to break in upon
his young soul.

A moment after, the brightness of that gleam was
gone. His arms were crossed upon his breast, and an
expression of sad discouragement was visible in his
countenance. Gromin looked close at him, and followed
all hia motions with a troubled eye. The child's breath-
ing was not more powerful, but his eye was waudering
slowly and confusedly, and from time to time it turned
to the window. Gomin asked him what so interested
him in that direction. The child looked at his keeper
a few moments, and then, as if he had not understood
the question, though it was asked him again, made no
reply.

Lasne came upstairs agaiq, to relieve Gromin, and
the latter went out of the room, his heart very heavy,
but not more uneasy than he had been the day before,
for he did not even yet anticipate so sudden a closer

192

CHAPTEE XI.

THE HOME OF THE SPIBIT.

rilHE universal law of developement from within out-
-*" wards had been very partially applied to our
future state^ as indeed it had only been dimly appre-
hended, when we received the first descriptions of the
* Spirit homes.' This fact should be remembered to
prevent the supposition that a hypothetical explanation
preceded or accompanied the experiments. So far was
this from being the case, that the first accounts of
spiritual scenery, varying in character^ but seeming
always to be in harmony with the tastes and tendencies
of the spirit when on earth, were very puzzling. Some-
times the whole appeared to be allegorical in the sense
in which the word allegory is commonly used. Then
the assertions of literal truth and absolute objectivity
threw the whole again into confusion.

The first glimmering of light which broke up the
darkness arose from the observation that, by whatever
means of communication accounts came, the various
images by which they were conveyed always consisted

THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT. 193

of objects familiar to the writer's mind^ and were also,

as far as I could judge, in accordance with the feelings

and pursuits of the spirit. I also perceived, that if

through one medium a supposed spirit described him-

-^^e^f as having passed through certain states, something

ing the same construction would be given through

te a different mind and hand. I will try to illustrate

f meaning. A kind-hearted high-spirited young lad

xed. Soon after his depaHure his name was written

oy the hand of a boy resembling himself. In answer to

a question relating to his new state and his entrance

into it, the medium's hand drew a river, on one bank of

which was a scene evidently meant to be rather gloomy

and uninviting, while on the opposite side was first a

plain, then ranges of hills rising one beyond the other,

and just over the top of the last and highest, a sun.

The medium's hand drew ships and boats crossing the

stream, and a bridge. By the writing then it was told

that some people went by the ships, some by boats, and

some walked, or rode over the bridge. I asked, * How

did you go ? ' the answer was * jum/ped over.^ Another

medium, describing the entrance into the spirit world,

drew gates, railway trains, bath chairs and carriages, and

wrote of these methods as suited to the different degrees

of velocity with which spirits entered their new state.

Now in narrating these statements I do not mean of

course to imply that the descriptions are literally true,

neither do I mean to say that the ideas fixed by memory

o

194 nOH MATTEB TO SFIBIT.

in the spirit^s mind may not make them bear to him an
appearance of absolute truth. It is certain that these
and many statements which at first sight seem absurd
and unaccountable have been made^ and our present
work is to find in what sense or manner they are to be
understood. Every mode described is found to be
familiar to the mind of both medium and spirit, as in
the case of the boy, when the writing described the
readiest way the spirit could imagine of effecting a
sadden and unobstructed change of state.

The accounts given by the same professing spirit
through diflferent mediums were also at first very puzzling
in their dissimilarity^ but it soon became evident that
the same fact was conveyed under different images.
For instance, by one medium the spirit said, * / have
crossed two rivers since I came here, and am n/yw rest-
i/ag.^ By another; — 'J walked through a gate into a
beautiful field and gathered flowers — then passed
through cmother gate and am here, where there is more
beautiful fruit than any you have in your world.^
Each of these descriptions implies two changes in an
advancing state, and a re^ in which something is
gathered or appropriated. This appropriation was
afterwards described by a more matter-of-fact medium
as ' learning mxrre of Ood.^ The last expression, which
barely conveys the truth, may seem to some minds a
very poor description of the happiness of heaven, but
the poverty will be in their own inadequate conception.

THE HOME OP THE SPIRIT. 195

* Eye has not seen, and ear bas not heard,' the smallest
fraction of the rich imagery with which such * learning,'
must be invested, as all the mysterious realities of
creation unfold themselves to the soul of man in an
approach to the source whence it has its origin.

The first particular description of a spirit's home which
we ever received was declared to be from one who,
when on earth, was pure, innocent, and self-sacrificing ;
and in whose name assertions had been often made
of the objective reality of his abode, and of the con-
stantly increasing glories and beauties springing up
around him, with the developement of his internal
thoughts and feelings and the increase of his knowledge.
A picture of the house had been asked for, and by the
hand of a very young medium an outline was drawn,*
which in touch and style was very like the drawing of
the spirit when on earth. It was of the interior of a
house, on the ground-floor. There was a spacious room
with doors opening into a vestibule, thence into a garden.
On one side of the room a sofa was placed, and on each
side of the open door were vases of flowers. A large
table stood in the centre of the room, and on it were
many articles. The most conspicuous of these was a
double vase or pair of vases, in the form of cornucopias,
full of flowers. The shape of this, which is very pretty,
is now common, but had certainly never been in any of
the shops at the time of the drawing. It was recognised
as a new shape when it appeared several months after-

o 2

196 FROM MATTBB TO SPIRIT.

wards. All round the walls were portraits of the family
of the spirit.

The outside of the house was then drawn. It consisted
of three stories, and round the outside of the ground-
floor was a colonnade covered with glass, and having
creeping plants twined around each pillar. Through
the opened wooden doors could be seen the table, &c.,
which had been represented in the interior. The second
floor had one window, and appeared to be covered within
with vines and festooning plants. The third consisted
of two little rooms, each having one window, and each
being surmounted with a dome and cross.

We were told, by the writing of the same medium,
that in the lower room all the friends of the spirit could
assemble ; in the second only the dearest of all, those
who were friends in spirit ; and into the top little rooms
the spirit went to be quite alone, to pray and think.
After this time, by another and a very young medium it
was written, ' A fountain has sprung up in my house.^

Now, though it was very evident that this house in
some way typified the soul, with its external, its spiritual,
and its innermost or heavenly affections (of which all
centred in the cross), still the drawing of the house was
an enigma. The positive assertion of objective reality
on one side, and the equally positive contradictions by
other spirits who professed to have means of knowing,
threw the whole into confusion. At the end of some
months after the explanation of the drawing had been

THE HOME or THE aPIRlT. 197

abandoned aa hopeless, it was seen by a person whose
finely developed brain, in which little but the faculty of
language had been cultivated by education, admirably
qualified her to receive new truths. By the hand of
this person an explanation was written, by which both
the present drawing and all the former contradictory
statements were harmonised and accounted for. It
came in answer to questions, and was as follows : —

Q. ' Are the house, and the fountain, and the other
beautiful objects real and palpahle to you, as the
objects on earth are to uaV

Ans. ' Yea, yea'

Q. ^ Are there really pid.urea of your famU/y vn
your house ? '

Ans. ' They aire pictures on the walla of memory.^

Q. ^ Is the whole symbolical, and drawn in this way
merely from the imposaibility of expressing it other-
wise through the medium. ? '

Ans. ' All in my soul, that is the house. And they
are external as they project themselves from the iriTier.
As I gain knowledge, one representative after another
takea the form, of the beautiful things I draw'

Q. ' Do you mean that thinga in your degree are as
real to you, as the outward objects in our state are to
us?'

Ans. ' Can you not see that as soon as the life
principle in trees and flowers becomes external it is
real to you, but is in fact no new creation^ The

198 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

painter, sculptor, andpoet, as rapidly as they embody
their ideal on canvass or in marble. .... / cannot
esxfpress all I would, but the fa/st of their embodying any
existing ideal, however high or low, awakens a more
perfect life of conception deeper in the sold ; thus here
as well OjS there (m the spirit stale as on the earth)
the arts are living and eternal progressive realities J 0.

Before commenting on this, I will finish my detail of
commmiications on this subject.

An interesting communication connected with the
home of the spirit was made among the circle of friends
whom I have spoken of as taking part in the experiments.
I can vouch for its truth. The following was received
in a letter : —

* A , J , B , and F , were with E

(a clairvoyante, not professional) May 1 9, 1 85-. E

had for some time been asleep, and describing heavenly
scenes ; she became silent for a little while, when she
was asked, " Where are you now ? " She immediately
answered, " C is with me. He looks very beauti-
ful. He has a mansion in which he lives. There is a
marble table in it. The Word is on the table open at
St. John. He has a great many flowers all around him,
and some in his hand and on the tAble. There is a
bookcase too in the room, with the Word in the centre
and a star above it. He has a small garden which
he cultivates, and which is full of red and white roses.
He has pictures in his house of all his family."

TKE HOME OF THB 8PIB1T. 199

E was asked how C looked. She answered,

" Veiy beautiful, nothing dark about him. (The fea-
tures of the spirit, whom the meditim had never seen in
life, were then described, and the age mentioned.) He
says he has not been studying much lately, as he has
been so anxious to watch and prevent other spirits from
writing in his family. He is sorry, too, to see his
mother fret about his leaving her, and he has also been
much occupied in drawing their thoughts to the LordJ"

Twice this last was mentioned. We then asked E

the meaning of buds and flowers. She replied, " Buds
are the beginning of spiritual ideas. As the buds gra-
dually open, there is an increase of faith ; as th^ be-
come fiill-blown on earth, they are ready for heaven.
It takes a long time to be full-blown." '

This account was contained in a letter to one of the
relations of the spirit. This pecson went immediately
to a medium through whom what purported to be the

spirit of C had written before. The question was

asked, ' Did you speak to E on such a night '! '

Ans. (By the medium's hand) ' Yes.'

Q. ' Did she see your house and garden ? '

A. 'Yes.'

Q. ' What flowers were there in the garden ? '

A. ' Roses, red and whit«,'

Q. ' And in your room ? '

A. 'A table.'

Q. ' What was the table made of ? '

200 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

The hand wrote * Ivory ' and scratched it out, then
wrote * Marble.'

Q. ' What was on the table ? '

A. ^ Bible.'

Q. * What was it open at ? '

A. (With some difficulty) ' Isaiah.'

Now either the J. written by the medium's hand as
the beginning of John had suggested Isaiah, and the
spirit losing control could not guide the hand, or by
some deeper law, Isaiah took the place of St. John in
the mind of the medium. A guess may be formed on
this subject further on.

We once had much communication with a spirit who
had lately left the world, and in whom the family afifection
seemed to overpower every other feeling. The survivors
were doubtful as to the future life, or at least did not
realise its immediate occurrence or its glorious happi-
ness for souls in a prepared state. The writing, which
gave the name of the departed one, conveyed earnest
entreaties that her family might be told that * she was
still alivey and could speak to theinJ*

When I asked what sort of place she was in, the
answer was, ^It is my homCy but they are not thereJ*

Then she wished that they might learn of the realities
of the Gospel, as, she said, she was now receiving it.

Not only happy, but unhappy, desponding, and even
wicked spirits have sometimes asserted their presence.
In answer to our enquiries about their state and sur-

fl

THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT. 201

roundings, we have been told of places with which they
were familiar, and which they did not seem to distinguish
from their old earthly haunts, afterwards of either
^ going into a place whence they would rise higher,' or of
* being very miserable.' We will hope that even from
this misery they might rise in time, for none who have
come to us have seemed absolutely without good feeling.

At p. 21 I have told of rapping which was meant to
imitate the sounds in a carpenter's workshop. The
sounds professed to come from a poor drunkard who
had hung himself in the workhouse. After I had found
that the description of his occupation was a true one,
his presence was again announced by the same means
(raps) when only three persons were present, one of
whom had the gift of seeing and sometimes even hear-
ing the spirits. The poor suicide said that ' he was very
miserable; that he had been taught about Ood a/nd
Christ when on earth, but had never thought it was
realy or that he should be alive after his deathJ* He
wished his sister (who had intemperate habits) to be
told about him, and urged to reform, and he said * he
did not know how to riseJ*

Foolish as it may appear, I must say that I talked to
the unseen as I would have done to an apparent pre^
sence. I found that we (who were nearer his former
condition) seemed more real and authoritative to him
than any of those higher beings who could have led him
upwards, but whose presence he seemed to think an

\

202 FROM MATTES TO SFIBIT.

illusion. This fact^ which I have met with more than
once^ was evidently xmexpected by the medium, and
struck me very much.

While the dialogue with the invisible went on, the raps
which had come in assent to my entreaties that he
would try to pray for help, &c., suddenly ceased, and
the medium, who felt a cloud coming over her sight,
said she should soon see him. In a minute or two she
declared that she saw a man looking very sad and dark.
* He aeetnay she said, * to he in a cave with others — aU
are wretched-loohing ; he is the beety hut he is dressed
in dark grey rags.'*

* Does he hear me ? ' I asked.

* He bows his head.'

Then I went on talking as one would do to an em-
bodied soul in a similar state.

* Now,' she said, * he looks more cheerful. He will
mind what you say. And now I see a little hole at the
end of the cave^ and light is coming in.^

I should hardly have ventured to recount the above,
if it had not been so perfectly in harmony with the
assertions of Swedenborg, who describes caves — gloomy
workhouses, and dull miserable stone-yards, with many
disgusting accompaniments — as the environments cor-
responding to the state of those who leave this world in
the guilty or degraded position of the suicide spirit..

As the person who saw them * in the cave ' was
certainly quite ignorant of Swedenborg's writings, the

THE HOME OF THE SPIBIT. 203

agreement of her vision with the great seer's description
•was the more remarkable.

It is only right that apparently conflicting statements
should be given. Many descriptions of * houses ' were
gathered at the same time from different sources and
through different mediums, and to one of these, if not to
the first drawing of the house, the following refers. It
was written by the hand of a person quite unconnected
with any of the spirits whose homes had been described,
and the asserted name of the unseen writer was that of
one who on earth had made little advance in Christian
purity or self-denial, and who, by his own account, was
still in a very undeveloped state indeed.

Though the last spirit almost charges the first with mis-
take and consequent misrepresentation, yet the accounts
agree in principle, both showing that the condition of
the soul is what lends it imagery. This had been
realised in an intense degree by the first loving and un-
selfish spirit, while the perceptions of the less advanced
being were only dim and cloudy. The mind of the
medium through whom the last was written was, how-
ever, in a more mature state than that of the young
person who drew the house.

In answer to a question from the medium as to the
description given of spirit life it was written —

* / say that what such spirita write and reveal is
what can only be compared to looking through glasses
which distort Tljfy think they see, and when they are

204 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

unable to find suitable words, they use what they think
most analogous* Even on the lower regions of heaven
there is no distress to the bodies of spirits. AU their
wants are spiritually supplied; hut there are no
chairSy no sofas, no teTnples, nx> canopies, nothing, in
short, your limited language can describe ; and it is
only a vain attempt to comfort the left behind relations
to write such things. I can give you no better idea of
the state of the part of heaven where I am staying,
than by asking you to shut your eyes, and think of the
glowing colours of some sunset, which have remained
in your recollection. There was red, blue, rather
purple, perhaps al/most green, where the gold tinged
the blue to the greenish tint AU these things have
na/mes on earth as colours ; but the colours themselves,
where wilt thou find them ? Not m your tin boxes, or
tubes, or onthe canvasses of the most celebrated painters.
Thus heaven has its couches, its rests, its coverings, its
comforts ; none need mourn for those of earth ; but
attempt to name them with the equivalent on earth, the
resemblance dies away, as dies away the gold, and the
mxiny hues of an autumn sunset even whilst seen
most vivid. How cold the reality of the sky no longer
thus illumined, I need not say ; but so are the attempts
to raise the thoughts of mortals to the realities of

* This is not inconsistent with my statement, that spirits having no
language impress the thought, and it finds expression in the medium's
words. .

THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT. 205

heaven; never to he fulfilled^ for the words fail as
well as the ideas. A belief in the 'power of writing by
spirits will increase as the world grows older; and
when once that has become more general, the spirits
will be less afraid to say the truth, that of all heavenly
things granted to spirit life, none can be revealed.
They are kept — why not ? — to entrance life on heaven,
which to many sorrowing hearts needs as much of the
creature comforts as ever sorrow on earth required to
keep up the failing strength for life ; for there are
sorrows which cease not when this earth vanishes, and
as prison diet must needs be a generous one, so the
spiritual body unhinged in its dearest feelings re-
quires that strengthening which belongs to spirit life^
all wonderful to man as he cuwakens into it^

As any descriptions professing to come from spirits
through the hand of a perfectly honest writer are
curious and interesting, I add the following from the
same source as the above : —

^ 7 said that spiHts far advanced on heaven were
shy of beginning relations with those of earth, and
that numbers were waiting on the confines of the land
they had left with regret, ready to communicate under
any name they could take to insure them attention. I
also said that numbers were occupied in watching the
entrance on to heaven of spirits released from earthly
bodies. You are right in believing the spirits have
tlieir bodies^ and they spend ages, according to earthly

206 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

calculation, m this frivolous althaugh to a certain
extent i/rvtereating occupation before they attempt their
own road upwards. For I must com/pare the ascent
into the higher heaven to the ascent of a hill, or rather
succession of hills, each swmm/vt revealing a higher
grade of ascent. This so far as I know, for I have
only overlooked the beginning of the ascent myself. I
see others pass up and down ; there is no difficulty in
returning a second time. If once the road has been
traversed, a spvrit is free of the part traversed. ....
A wish is often fdt to communicate, to relieve the
tedium of eternity ; for tedium there is in many cases,
and discontent — oh, how much ! Only those who learn
content on earth amidst lifers hardest lessons, or are
constitutionally contented, begin spirit life with any
amount of life happiness on heaven : not idle content,
however.^

I have said that this spirit's own account of his state
and doings was not very favourable. What he calls
heaven, other spirits call the spirit-world. The distinc-
tion is not very important as long as we remember that
all communications recognise an intermediate or first
state, which seems to be a continuation of the earthly
condition, before the upward or downward course is
taken. The following, which describes his own stat«
and confirms some of my former assertions, is worth
notice : —

^I am glad that spirits are always sure of being

THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT. 207

together when love has united them on earth ; and when,
spirits are awfully distant from each other ^ it is the
fault of one or other of them. God permits union, and
He does not compel it ; and the good or the better — for
Tnany are better who cannot justly be called good —
a/re able to go to the- less good, and the less good may

mever trouble the better. There are occupations

and amusements in heaven suited to every spirit for
their recreation^ and a great many spirits do nothing
at all for a long time after they come through death
to heaven ; and if you wonder at this, I think you will
be still more surprised to learn that one of the most
idle spirits of heaven is the spirit wJto writes by your
hand; and the cause is, that the dissatisfaction of
spirit life is so greal, that there is a feeling of utter
despair at the impossibility of working into better life.
But this di/minishes slowly, very slowly ; al first by de-
grees, but not for years of earthly measurement Then
cometh the ivish* to be better; it comes quicker to
some than to others, and in a great rnany the wish
does not awaken till after a whole generation has
come through death to life ; and the companionship of
others is instrumental i/n a/wakening the wish, with"
out which heaven is as the slumber of the grave.
And there is not so much inaccura,cy as some think
in talking of the sleep of death; but it is not a

♦ This spirit is only describing those of his own acquaintance, who
seem neither to have high aims, nor absolute criminal dispositions.

208 mOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

necessary condition of spirit life, and there are some
who pass at once into enjoym^t ; for it is nx)t enjoyment
to be doing nothing^ while the better are at once emr-
ployed, and progressing into higher states of spiritual
happiness."^

Let us see how the above conflicting statements can
be reconciled.

In travelling into the region of * houses not made
with hands,' a region where the only experience which
we have for guide is in itself a mysterious study — ^ such
stuff as dreams are made of — we can still find a little
guidance in analogy which will lead us from the known
and seen to the hidden and unknown.

We have seen that the mysterious germ of life said by
the seeress to be * begotteu from God ' is placed at its
origin in circumstances to attract to itself those particles
which are necessary to form a soul-body, or a body
whose whole organisation is animated and pervaded by
the soul. At birth, the enclosure which serves to
nourish it is thrown off. In like manner, by means
of what has been called the nerve-spirit, impressions
are gathered from the external creation to the soul,
which thus, through means expressly provided by the
body, is nourished and matured by the impressions
it receives during its life on earth from external
nature. The body then, having in its wondrous che-
mistry supplied those fluids or imponderable forces
which have acted as channels to transmit the required

THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT. 209

sustenance through the nerves and brain to the soul,
has done its work. It declines and dies, as in the earlier
period the sustaining envelope is left, or as the withered
husk falls from the perfected fruits Then the soul,
-with all the memories and impressions of which it has
become the storehouse, takes its place, and the more
mtemal spirit developed and advanced animates the
* spiritual body.' But, according to the belief of most
thoughtful men,* we are, even in this earthly life, the
architects of our own surroundings ; external nature
supplies the cause whose effect is produced through the
senses and brain, according to a type or idea in the
mind, and the susceptibility to impressions from out-
ward objects varies in quantity and in relative propor-
tion, and forms the distinctive character of each
individual.

Let us apply the last thought to the appearances and
realities of the next state into which the spirit enters

* Mental philosophers are of three classes : the IdealistSf who believe,
with Berkeley and others, that ideas are communicated without any real
substratum; the Realists^ who hold that we perceive outer things as
they really are ; and a third, who may be called Intermediate Idealiata
— of this class are the great majority of philosophers, who believe that
matter is a something external to ourselves which produces its appro-
priate impression or idea on the senses and mind, but which requires its
appropriate receptivity in the mind to give it form and character.
The ideas of Plato show that he belongs to this third class, and the
observations of phrenologists, which prove a variety of susceptibilities to
impressions, are strongly in favour of the doctrine.

P

210 FROM MATTES TO SPIRIT,

in a purer form^ the gross corporesU paiHicles of eartib
having been replaced by the inner 8<mlJ)odyj and
having within itself those essential types or id«as
whose developement is to be the work of its everlasting
life. Of these^ the most external— the framework, so to
speak — are what have been nourished by its earthly
surroundings into the memory of persona, things,
events, or feelings. As in this world memory is called
by mental philosophers the consciousness of the past,
so in the next, where the relations of time are (^ang^,
the memory in all cases where the affections are con-
cerned will probably appear only a continuation of the
feeling. In Admiral Beaufort's narrative, and other
similar descriptions, the recollections of a life are spoken
of as presenting themselves at once in the shortest
possible time to the mind. According to the process
of developement from within outwards, those most ex-
ternal recollections which have been appropriated or
drawn into its life by the spirit become perfected ideas,
and only require the influx of vitality from within
to throw them off, as the bark of a tree is driven to the
surface with the rise of the vital sap. According to all
the descriptions I have received this is what really
takes place ; and all the feelings, and impressions on
earth remain in the soul, and find their appropriate
nourishment and external objectivity in the next sphere,
where they thus become the seeming realities of the
heavenly scenery. But these are not the only realities.

THH HOHB 07 THZ SPIRIT. 211

for the rapid spiritual developemeiit multiplies and
ma^ifies every perception, so that the forroB and huei
and sounds by which a single idea is eonditioued are
immeasurably more numerous than those which charao
terise the corresponding ideas of the soul in its earthly
embryo state.

We must remember that the first spirit, whose house
was described, spoke of the embodiment of an exist-
ing ideal, aa awaJtening a more perfect life of conception
deeper in the soul; by which was meant that, a^i a
natural consequence of the developement outward, a
oorreeponding increase of life will take place in the
innermost spirit or germ of vitality, which, according to
the two seeresses before quoted, receives its essence
from the Divine Source. This is entirely in harmony
■with all the laws of natural growth, and receiving it as
not only fair conjecture, but one supported by the
assertions of spirits, as well as the analogies of nature,
we may trace its consequences on the whole circle of
our spirit life. Surely the internal influx will be of
the same character as the outer developement, or the
nature of the man would have changed. If our
thoughts, prayers, and aspirations rise to the great
Father of our spirits, we draw a large amount of
heavenly life into the soul; the second man from
heaven is nourished and strengthened, and we con-
stantly Hee, as the spirits write, into a higher and more
internal state. If, on the contrary, the thoughts and

212 FROM KATTEB TO SPIRIT.

mclinations tend downwards, in an earthward instead
of a spiritual direction, the stream of vital influx must
of necessity dwindle and diminish : ' The soul that
sinneth, it shall die.'

Can we not trace the process ?

The next state will be only a continuation of thoughts
and feelings spent on earthly and sensual objects,
a turning back to the world which is left behind,
instead of a pressing on to the things which are before.
And so a gradual inversion of the usual spiritual progress,
or, in other words, a decline from higher to lower forms
of life. The seers and Socrates speak of this degrada-
tion of the soul that clings to earth, when, becoming an
impoverished essence, seeking earthly enjoyments of
which it has only the recollection, it falls in turn into
the states of the lower animals, according to the
character of its propensities, and finally even loses the
degree of the animal, and sinks through lower and
lower degrees of the less organised creation till the
lowest is reached,

Socrates says : * Those who had indulged in gluttony
and contemptuous pride — who had been brutalised by
drunkenness, devoid of any shame or self-restraint,
would naturally pass into such bodies as asses and other

beasts While those who have had a propensity

to injustice, to tyrannise over others and rob them,
pass into the bodies of such animals as wolves, hawks;,
and vultures; for where else could such go?'

I

THE HOWE OF THE SFIBIT. 213

* \^^thout doubt,' said Cebea.

' And therefore it is probable also of the rest, that each
will go into the state which most resembles the condition
they had striven to attain, either by indulging in bad
propensities, or by omitting to cultivate the better
instincta of their nature.' (PkcBdo.) This gradual but
certain declension issues in the final extinction of the
souL

This agrees with St Paul's doctrine. 'Fear not him
who can kill the body, and after that hath no more Uiat
he can do,' &c. The ' eternal punishment' of the wicked
is truly spiritual punishment, as eternal * life should
be spiritual life. The second spirit, who combated
the idea of objective reality in heaven, though he ad-
mitted the reality of appearances, also writes : —

'There is no hell for the wicked, OTily more or lees
happy places for the just, according to their virtuous
avoidance of the wickedness of this world, and a place
of improvement and instruction for all.'

This may be and probably is true as the induenciiig
spirit perceives it. His own state is not very unlike
what it was here. Many, by his description (p. 203),

* I may not here enter into all the reeaoiis for r^ecting the obusI
translation of dudhoi, bnt m; Btat«ment is not new. The vord has hIwhjs
been obscure to scholars, and I can only beg that its application bj
ancient writers in the Bense I have assigned to it should be examined.
Flato'a atom, or .£oaB, were breathii^ of spirit power &om Ood, thui
Ages in one sense.

214 FSOH UATTER TO SPIBIT.

are in the same condition and continue so for a long
time; but it follows as a necessary consequence of
the universal law of spiritual attraction and sympathy,
which must operate more strongly when the bonds
of the body are cast aside, that the ill^lisposed will
congregate together, as in this world, in lower and
yet lower depths of sin. During the life on earth,
the direction of the will may be more easily changed,
and through that influence described in Scripture
as the work of God's Holy Spirit in the souls of
men, higher aspirations may and do take the place of
the lower propensities. But in a state where all affinities
will impel with greater force, like will consort with
like, good or even a desire for good will rise to Grod,
and hopeless evil will sink to eviL

When we examine into the imiversal law of symbolLsm,
or the correspondence of the internal of one state with
the external of those above, we shall find how this
massing together of wickedness will be inevitably
accompanied by a loss of all the beautiful perceptions
and sensations which make an advance in the heaven-
ward course so glorious ; how darkness and chill or a
smouldering fire will be substituted for the light and
warmth of the Sun of righteousness ; how discord and
strife, instead of love and harmony, will pervade the
whole, and form the lamentable surroundings of the
descending spirit. That this is the fact is asserted
by all mediums, as the foregoing accounts show.

THE HOME OF THE SPIRIT. 215

* Hell '* is the Scripture name given to this condition.
We need not try to change it.

Thus are built for us those many spiritual mansions
of which our Lord tells us, and to which His ascent into
heaven opened the way.

But it is evident that we are ourselves the architects
of our houses, not so much by our own acts, as by our
own state, and that state depends on our reception of
the higher life from above, the influx of the Comforter,
the Spirit of Truth.

It is agreeable to all the analogy of nature that there
will be a kind of order in the developement after death ;
but when state perceptibly determines what we call
time and place here, this order Will follow the degree of
strength of impressions. Thus, as in Admiral Beaufort's
description, those nearest the time of death will form
the first on awakenings so the next state will appear to
be only a continuation of this, without the suflfering
which has preceded the change. Then, a gradual un-
folding of the storehouse. All the memories of this
world, with their treasured loves, their hoarded know-
ledge, and their innumerable scenes and pictures, will
be as an opened rolls forming what in the grand but real
sjrmbolism of Scripture is called the book of judgement :
*And the judgemeilt was set, and the books were
opened.'

* The word Hell is not always used in the Greek when it is found in
the English Testament. In most places the original word is Hades, or
the spirit-world.

216

CHAPTEE XII.

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.

TF this chapter were meant to be merely a collection
-■- of ghost stories, chosen without regard to any-
thing but careful authentication, it would soon swell
into a volume ; for almost every friend can give a well
attested tale of a ghost, either direct or traditionary :
but my intention is more definite, and every instance
is chosen either for the purpose of illustrating what has
preceded, or of furnishing data for further reasoning.

It seems needless, at this stage of our inquiry, to go
over all the arguments for or against appearances after
death ; the simple fact, that in all ages and nations such
appearances have been believed in, is enough to
establish a foundation for the conjecture that, under
certain unknown but not very uncommon conditions,
the spirits of the departed are able to show themselves
to the living. For a great vaiiety of facts connected
with this subject I refer to Mr. Dale Owen's ^ Footfalls
on the Boundaries of another World,' Mr. Hewitt's * Su-
pernatural in all Ages and Nations,' and a large number

APFEABAKCE8 AFTER DEATH. 217

of well-attested statements in the Spiritual Magazine
and other publications, all showing that, if evidence ia
insufficient to establish their truth, it cannot be held to
confirm that of any single occurrence. Much of the
mystery in which this subject ia veiled ia due in part
to the manner in which it has been treated by so-
c&lled sensible persons and scientific men; by those
who, when other subjects are in question, boast of their
eunestness in collecting fiicts before trying to form
conclusions. In the matter of spiritual appearances,
it is certain that wherever their occurrence is asserted
a very uniform series of phenomena has been described.
The sudden terror, not always fear, but often rather due
to physical than mental action on the nerves, the
electric thrill or shudder, the faintness, sometimes
sleepiness, sometimes a sudden wakening from sleep,
occasionally an appearance of lambent flame or blue
mist, and sometimes even a phosphorescent or sulphu -
reous smell, are among the commonest of the facts
attested. We may say that these are all the produce
of ignorance and superstition; but why should ^o-
rance and superstition always f^ee so well in their
fictions? There must be some good reason for this
E^reemeut ; but as it is not for one who has hazarded
conjectures as to the causes of rapping, writing, and
crystal-seeing, to enter into any train of reasoning
which supposes only hallucination or subjective mental
action in the asserted appeaxance of ghosta, I will only

218 FBOM MATTER TO SPIBIT.

give a few well attested instances ef different kinds of
apparitions, and then try to explain and classify them
according to the theories of spiritual and material
existence already given.

From all the information which we have been able to
gain from professedly spiritual sources, as well as by
inferences drawn from the facts themselves, it appears
that these apparitions are of different kinds, or rather
degrees; varying from that of the low material ghost
— ^who enters with a loud rap at the door, passes with a
heavy footstep round the room, pulls the curtains or
bedclothes, and behaves in an obtrusive unmannerly
way, and who seems plainly visible to the bodily eye,
audible to the ear, and even palpable to the touch,-**
to the beautiful angelic vision of the lost parent Or
child, whose glorious appearance, though perhaps only
seen in a dream, gives comfort and gladness to the
mourner. The first kind are of the earth, earthy ; and
with these lowest I begin. Such are described as seen
by the Seeress of Prevorst and by the seeress in
Ouardian Spi/nta. These ghostly forms were often
seen by others beside the seeresses themselveSj though
it is most probable that the condition of mediumship of
both these Women rendered it more easy for the spiiits
to clothe themselves in an atmosphere by which they
were rendered visible* On the subject of these low
earthly souls, I have already quoted Socrates, who speaks
of them as retaining enough of earthly material to

iting that epirits.
) to gather fromj
earest in affinitjl
th of the body'

AFFBABANC£3 A7T£K DEATH. 219

maba themaelves »een and heard, and who haunt
about graveyards, and otlier places where the heavy
damp state of the air ia Buitable for their appearance.

In answer to questioDa as to the means by which
apparitions of this kind are produced, an assertion ia
constantly made by the spiritual writing that spirits,
□ear to earth, even if not evil, are able t
the atmosphere the finer elements nearest i
with their own external. The growth of the body'
during earthly life by the developement of the spirit
elements within is thus described ; the spirit and its
surroundings possess an attractive power, which gathers
according to its quality corresponding substances from
the enveloping body. Before birth the formation takes
place in this way, and during the earth-life we subsist
by taking into and assimilating with our systems
particles from the air, and from the solid substances
aiound us. But in the future state only that most
e:^rtial portion of the soul which forms the new body
can have any affinity with earth, and, aa in the case of
those spirits whose aspirations and affections are directed
upwards the outer material is thrown more and more'
oflf, so with the downward-tending spirit there is a con-
stant yearning for association and assimilation with
earth. Hence the magnetic power which these last
possess of gathering around their spiritual forms a
covering of matter, which, though delicate and refined
to uSj is coarse and heavy to them. It does not appeat

i

220 FROM HATTER TO SPIRIT.

that the spirits maJdng themselves visible by this pro-
cess are all, without exception, of an earth-tending
nature. Those recently departed may occasionally
become apparent as a necessary consequence of the new-
ness of their entry into life ; but it is probable that
those haunting spirits which are said to return year after
year, or at longer or shorter periods, in some places, and
to appear in the dress they used to wear in life, are of
this character.

Of this kind of manifestation, too, are said to be the
fisunous * hands,' visible to many persons through Mr.
Home's wonderful mediumship. They are not neces-
sarily those of earth-clinging beings, but I am not
aware of any instance in which a heavenward-tending
spirit has after a long period of time made a hand
visible and palpable to the touch. What electric or
magnetic state of the medium enables the spirit to clothe
itself in this material covering has yet to be discovered,
as well as the physical part of the other conditions
of mediumship. I have been assured, by three persons
of unquestionable truth, of the sight and touch of hands
without the presence of any known medium^ and in a
waking state. In one case it was the hand of a baby
seen by its little brother on the father's pillow, and soon
after felt by the mother to touch her own hand. An-
other time a child saw and described to me a beautiful
rosy dimpled hand, which she recognised as that of one
who had left her. In these cases the seer was the

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 221

medium of manifestg^KroT g7>pn wa f^onftiflfir ^^^
In^^^rii^f^ nf nnrrf.Ap ondence^ i n its relation to manifesta-
tion, we shall see why the hand^ which is always used
Bs a type of power, should be so often seen. I have
known mediums and clairvoyants of a common-place
and rather imgifted nature able to see only the feet
of very refined heaven-tending spirits, while the whole
form of others, who in life had been nearer to their own
nature, was plainly seen and described. In the case of
the hands, seen in Mr. Home's presence, we may gather
from the letter of Verax, himself a spiritual medium,*
that they were not all equally visible to all the party.
T^he sight of each person was in proportion to the affinity!
with the spirits, and the degree of spirit vision thence I
acquired ; for, as I have already said, spirits can only
find channels for manifestation in any form through
that mental organisation which they have in common
with the medium : and this does not imply that a low
spirit cannot make itself heard or seen, or otherwise
communicate, in any degree at all, through a person
with noble qualities and high aspirations ; because there
is a mixture of elements in the highest as well as in the
lowest human being. It is the difierence of proportions
and combinations that causes varieties of character.
But in the instances of assuming a visible form, it
follows as a necessary consequence of what I have said,

♦ See Incidents in my lAfe, by D. D. Home.

222 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

that the more earthly the spirit, the greater will be the
number of persons to whom it can show itself. In the case
1/ of hauntings, it has been surmised that e^en the place
itself furnishes odylio or magnetic conditions which en-
able the spirits to clothe themselves in a visible form.
This is in some measure confirmed by the fact that dis-
\ turbances cease when the house or room is rebuilt.

In order to begin at the very lowest step of the scale,
I will narrate some circumstances which came under
my own observation, in which all the phenomena of
* haunting ' occurred. Every incident of the story was
known to me as it took place, and if the sounds and
appearances described, with the large amount of con-
firmation they received from facts afterwards mad^
known to us, can be attributed to imagination in the
first place, or coincidence in the second, I do not se^
how any amount of evidence short of actual sight caa
determine the cause of any occurrence whatever. The
narrative is given in the words of an eye and ear-witness
who was quite unprepared for any such disturbances in
the house, as she was ignorant of its former history and
character, and never felt a sensation like fear until the
last visit, when the sound of a voice was heard from the
keyhole of the door. As in former narrations, names
are suppressed and initials changed.

* In the summer of 18 — we went for a few weeks to

House, in the village of D . Its damp and

dilapidated condition rather repelled me, but for a short

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 223

time in a dry hot summer this seemed of little importance.
We knew nothing of any former occupant. The house
consisted of three stories above the basement : namely,
ground floor, containing dining-room, &c. ; first floor,
drawingroom and three bedrooms; second floor, bed-
room to the front over the drawingroom, and three
small chambers to the back, the second and third open-
ing from the first ; and the third, a very small room, or
rather closet, having for window only the glass panes of
a door which faced the fireplace, and opened on the
landing of a little ladder staircase under a cover, and
outside the house. The lower steps of this little flight
adjoined the door of the small bedroom below. The
windows of all the bedrooms at the back of the house
are sheltered from the road, and, considering that the
house is in a village and surrounded by other houses,
nothing can be more secluded than the two rooms at the
top and the bottom of the staircase.

^ On the basement is a kitchen having a dark larder,
entered by a door on the one side, and scullery on the
other. In the scuUeiy is a sink, and on the left of this
sink a doorway leading through a dark stone passage to
a deep well, from which pipes were once placed to
supply water to the house above.

* On the first night of our stay I heard at midnight three
loud knocks at the door of my room. A servant had
been left in the house by the person from whom I hired it,
and I concluded that it was she who wanted to speak to

224 FBOH HATTER TO SPIBIT.

me, as all my family were in bed. I called to the
person to enter, but no one came in. The knocks were
twice repeated and twice answered. At length I got up,
opened the door, and found nobody.

The next morning my servant, who had slept in the
little back room, begged that she might not be required
to occupy it again, as she had not closed her eyes all
night. She did not give any reason for her wakefulness
or her request, but I concluded that she felt the oppres-
siveness of the air (the weather was very hot), and com-
plied with her wish. She was a sensible Scotch girl,
quite incredulous on the subject of ghosts, and rather
priding herself on her superior understanding. After
some time a young woman from the country, who had
once lived in the family, came to see us, and, the rest of
the house being full, occupied the little back room.
Just before midnight I went to all the rooms to see all
my family settled, and found that the new comer was in
my servant's room, which was very small even for one
person. She declared that nothing should induce her
to sleep in that * dreadful hole ;' that as soon as she was
laid down she heard a sort of sobbing or sighing close
to the head of the bed, near the fireplace, with a strange
noise, as if 'some one were sweeping a broom or duster
all round the paper of the room. My own servant then
told me that on the night when she had slept in that
room, though she did not hear the sighing, she was con-
scious of a presence which prevented her resting, as if

APPSABANCES AFTBR DEATH. 225

some one were standing dose to her pillow. She also
heard the sweeping round the paper. Both women
declared positively that there had been no previous
communication between them, and I knew well that
both were thoroughly truthful. Indeed, it would have
been very foolish in my servant to frighten her visitor
heedlessly, for it was very inconvenient to her to have a
companion in a bed little larger than a child's crib.

Another person, a well-known sensitive, slept one
night in the little back room. She afterwards said that
she had not rested at all. She had a sensation through
the night as of a tight bandage across her forehead, a
cold perspiration, and a feeling of horror, connected
with the door opening into the little room. A young
man of 20, a complete unbeliever, afterwards occupied
the same room (that adjoining the back room), and
described a similar feeling. To get rid of the oppres-
sion he rose at daybreak, and went out into the open
air. After this no one slept in the back room. Two
days before we left the house, a young lady, who had
lived for three years in a remote part of the country,
came, with two other friends, to visit us. The three
had found the house with difiSculty, and the young lady,
who is a remarkable clairvoyante, noticed the small
oddly shaped rooms, and the antiquated look of the
whole place (for the premises did not consist only of the
house, but included a yard, and a wooden bridge across
it to stabling on the other side), and expressed a wish

Q

226 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

to go over the whole. I gladly assented. I told her
that I fancied the house was haunted, but no one room
was specified. Nothing passed which could induce her
to look for ghosts in one part more than in another.

My three friends then went through the first floor
bedroom to the bottom of the little ladder staircase, and,

Miss desiring it, they went up. I, being lame, did

not follow them, but went up inside the house to meet
them as they entered the little back room. When I
reached the door-step I found that they had just got

into the room. Miss was standing looking at the

fireplace, which, it must be remembered, was opposite
the glass door through which they entered, close to the
bed's head. Her friends held each a hand, and spoke
to her anxiously, as well they might, for she looked
frightfully pale and horror-stricken. At first she seemed
unable to speak, then only said, 'Take me away.' We
all hurried down stairs, and she told us that while going
up the little flight of steps, she had not thought of
seeing anything, and when she got to the door, though
there was something white by the fireplace, she took it
for a towel or some shavings. She was, however,
made to look at this, and she then saw the figure of a
small woman kneeling, in a white night-dress. She did
not see the head. The dress was stained with blood ;
and there was a pool of blood on the floor. On the
stairs a man passed her, dragging up a small woman

against her will. Miss seemed in a great hurry to

get away.

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 227

We left the place two days after this; and in the
course of three or four weeks, removed to a new house.

A person from D was recommended to me to fit

carpets, &c., whose exceeding deafness was a great draw-
back to her in her. work, though, as it made conversa-
tion impossible, it gave me security that she could not
have heard of these disturbances from any of my ser-
vants. I had been with her for some hours giving
directions, &c., when I thought of asking * If she knew

the house at D ?' She looked mysterious, and said

she did n't know much of it. * What do you know ? '
* No further than that they say it 's haunted.'
'Will you tell me all you have heard about it?'
She then told me that ' it belonged, years ago, to Mr.

L 9 but he went to live in another house. He had

a daughter very small in her figure, and gentle, but

" silly like," not crazy. Mr. T married her for her

money, for she inherited a good deal from her father,
and the house came into her possession. He ill-used
his poor little wife terribly, and dragged her about.
And he took her to that house and shut her up there.
When she died she was out of her mind, but there was
some mystery about her death. Some gentlemen and
ladies tried to find it out, but nothing was known satis-
factory, only they say the house has been troubled at
times ever since, and nobody stays long in it.'

*Do you know in what part of the house he kept her?'
* A little back room at the top of the house ; but I

Q2

228 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

never was there, myself so I only speak as I Ve been
told.'

Soon after this time, being in the village^ and finding
the outer gate open, I went in for the ostensible purpose
of asking about the rent, &c., the house being to let
The landlord, who was in the house, told me that all
noiaes could be accounted for by the falling in of a
chimney, which had been shaking for some time. I
went up stairs with him, and found that the chimney
and fireplace of the little back room had sunk so com-
pletely that the fireplace was lodged on that of the room
below. I told the landlord of the various occurrences
that had come to my knowledge, observing that though
the falling of brick and mortar might be heardy it could

not produce an apparition as seen by Miss , nor

the feeling of horror described by persons who had no
idea of any catastrophe having taken place in the house.
The landlord said that anyone might have it for the rest
of his term for a mere trifle, for he «ould not dispose of
it, and that he should leave it in thorough repair. Soon
after thiis, I found a broker's wife, who was left in charge,
standing at the outer gate. She said she was afraid of
remaining within the house ; for that one day, as she
stood at the sink in the scullery, a woman, whose face
was^ bound up like a dead person's, came out of the well-
passages, touched her shoulder in passing, and, crossing
the scullery, disappeared in a, little low closet opposite
the sink. I enquired about the character of this woman.

APPEARANCES AFTEB DEATH. 229

and found that I was not the only person to whom her
story had been told, though the hearers were generally
incredulous, and ready to condemn her.

The house stood empty for some time after the
repairs, which, however had not been very complete.
In the course of a few months some friends, one of
whom had the faculty of spirit vision, went with me to
pay a visit to it. As no one came to answer the bell
we supposed the house was empty, and went to the
agent for the key. We then unlocked both garden
gate, and house door, and found all the lower rooms
shuttered up and empty. The lady, who is a seeress,
vrent up the little ladder followed by her husband,
and on reaching the glass door said, ' There are people
inside, they have got a fire here ; but the door is locked,
so we must go up inside the house.' The other lady
said that * of course the people could not hear the bell if
they shut themselves up in that room.' We went up
stairs inside, and when we reached the door between
the two little rooms, my friend looked strange and dis-
mayed. The room was quite empty. * I am sure,' she
said, ^ I saw them both, the man stood here ! ' pointing to
the place, * and left the room as we came to the glass
door. The woman sate crouched down there,^ pointing
to the spot by the fireplace where the figure had been

seen by Miss , and whence the sounds had issued.

*She is very small and looks imbecile; she had on a
lUac dress. They had quite a bright fire when I saw

230 FROM MATTBK TO SPIRIT.

them from outside.' We stood looking for a minute or
two, nothing of course being visible to anyone except
this lady, who seemed, after a time, to see the little
woman again, for she said, * I can't bear the look of those
dull grey eyes.' Then she said that both had gone
down stairs, and ran off quickly to follow them, not
stopping till she got to the side of the well, from which
it must be remembered the broker's wife had declared
the apparition had come. When beside the well,
Mrs. — — appeared to be under a kind of spiritual
impression, and told us that the cruelty practised by
the man on the poor woman was beyond description.
* They,' she said, meaning the spirits, * say that they
need not show me all. I think she was drowned in
this well ; she was kept upstairs in that little room ; one
night she got out of bed, fell on the fender, and cut
her forehead open. Another time she escaped, and ran
down stairs, he pursuing her ; then she threw herself into
the well ; he did not drown her. I do not think she was
here m'ore than a fortnight, and he brought her late one
night in a little fly ; not one of those flies or cabs that
are used now, but a little narrow fly, in which the
people sit opposite each other. He is an ill-looking
man, with shaggy hair, and thick eyebrows, and a low
forehead, he is what they call beetle-browed. His
complexion is coarse, but not red.'

Soon after this time another party visited the house,
getting the keys as before from the agent The visitors

mm

APPEARANCES AFTEB DEATH. 231

-were Mrs. , the seeress, two sisters, who had more

or less of medium power, two ladies of middle age and
unquestionable good sense and truthfulness, and myself.
All went down stairs, a^ the little room at the top was
quite empty, and felt free from any presence. As we
all stood roimd the kitchen table (the only piece of
furniture in the house), I mentioned a visit which had
been paid to the place since our last, by some other
friends, one of whom saw a spirit disappear near a
large flag-stone in the larder. As I mentioned this
circumstance a great crash was heard, apparently from
those stones ; I examined the larder immediately and
found it quite empty. The hand of the younger lady
was moved to write, * The stone is spiritually fixed, you
cannot move itJ From it all sorts of noises were heard,
differently perceptible however to the different mem-
bers of the party, one of whom heard nothing at all.
To some of us they appeared like footsteps, flutterings,
and little tappings. Two or three cloudy forms were
said by the two medium ladies to be visible to them,
and to pass about in the kitchen and scullery. This
time the first seeress saw another woman, with the
woman and man. At length a wind, sensible to most of
us, and strongly so to myself, arose in the kitchen,
which also seemed filled with a kind of cloud or steam.
One lady felt herself pulled and pushed more than
once, and she as well as myself had an oppressive pain
in the head, like that which is sometimes felt in

232 FBOM HATTER TO 8PIBIT.

thundery weather. The turmoil and wind in the

kitchen increasing, Mrs. , the first seeress^ thought

that we had better leave the house. We ascended the
kitchen stairs, the lady who bad been pushed and pulled
leaving with some reluctance, for she wanted to see
more. Before leaving the house, we saw that all the
windows were safely barred, and the doors of the rooms
shut. All were satisfied that we left the house empty
as we found it. I then locked the house door with the
key which I had carried the whole time, and all six
stood outside the door listening to the confused noise
within. These sounds were like the mingling of a
thousand discordant voices at a distance, as if from a
disturbed noisy crowd. As we listened, the lady who
had been pushed before asked why I was pulling her
dress — I had not touched her. Just then the noise
seemed to condense into one horrid hissing sound, which
uttered an imprecation on our eyes in four words, the
first of which was indistinct. Some people thought
that the wicked spirit could not utter the holy name
which he was trying to profane. I had never felt any-
thing like fear till that moment, but a horror seized me,
and I felt as if nothing could induce me to enter

that house again. Mrs. , the seeress, and her

little boy, who had joined us from the outside, both
heard it as well as mysel£ Miss L. heard a hissing.
In order to make sure that my ears had not deceived
me, I took Mrs. -^ aside and begged her to repeat the

APPJBABAKGES AFTSB BEATH. 233

i^ords she had heard if she did not mind doing so.
She told me the three last as I had heard them. The
little boy, when asked, said he had heard ^ bad words/
but we did not wish him to specify more particularly.
Neither of the other three ladies heard anything.

Soon after this time I learnt that between thirty and
forty years ago, at the time indicated by the date on
the family grave, two little flies exactly answering to
the description given by the seeress were kept in the
village. I fonnd an old lady, the wife of the person who
had owned these carriages, and learned from her that
all the books had been destroyed when her husband
gave up business. So no further information could be
obtained. Gruided by my first information from the old
deaf woman, I tried to learn more of the character of
the man. One lady, with whom I accidentally met,
gave me some particulars, among others, that he was a
coarse, ill-looking, beetle-browed man, who never looked
anyone in the face ; that his wife was small in person,
and deficient in intellect, but that his ill-usage made
her worsCt From another person who gave information
with reluctance, I heard that she died raving mad from
ill-treatment^ and that an unsuccessful suit had been
instituted to get a divorce by some of her family, on the
ground of cruelty. After this time I met with a person
who knew the man well, and who spoke of his having
appeared since his death in other places in which he
had lived on earth* This person said that his conduct

234 FBOM MATTEB TO STPIBIT.

tx) his wife was horrible, but that to all he was a bad
avaii'icioua man. When I asked if he ever swore, she
said ' he seldom spoke without an oath, and his tone
was always a snarl.' His usual imprecation, one which
he had used in speaking to her, was the one I had heard.
All this information was given me before I mentioned
anything connected with my former enquiries. To this
day, I have not ascertained with certainty where or how
the poor woman died, for there are conflicting statements
on this subject, among those who profess to know, some
asserting that her death occurred in the village of

D , and some that she died at a greater distance

from London.

It is now some years since I met with a gentleman
who had had some strange experiences in the matter of
'hauntings,' which the communications between a
clairvoyante in his house and the spirits rendered still
more remarkable. This gentleman told me that from
the revelations of the clairvoyante he had been enabled
to discover much of the former history of his house,
which history he had been able to verify. One day the
clairvoyante told him that the spirit would appear to
her in her waking state, on a certain day and hour, and
my informant, to d-efeat the intention, for he feared the
effect on the young woman's nerves, sent her out. She,
however, for some reason or other, unexpectedly returned
before the appointed time, and the meeting took place.
The clairvoyante, who never, in her waking state, re-

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 235

f

t

membered what she had said when mesmerised^ met the
spirit,; and the description she gave agreed entirely
with h«r account when in her lucid state. She was,
however, much frightened by the encounter. A very
respectable man' living in the same house gave me an
account of his seeing this spirit. He had been utterly
imbelieving, and had laughed at my informant and the
clairvoyante on account of their belief. But he said,
that one day on entering an upper room he saw the
spirit. She was in a white dress. It seemed as if an
electric shock came from her eyes, and fixed him to the
spot on which he stood. He saw her for a few seconds,
then she disappeared. The above was taken from the
accounts of the parties themselves, and finds a place
here on account of the electrical effect described by the
last person.

In * Guardian Spirits' we find an account of a
spirit by the sight of which the seeress was greatly
terrified.

' He,' she says in answer to her magnetiser's questions,
*is a frightful object.' .... 'The form of a man,
dressed in a dirty countryman's frock, not very tall.
His face, like his whole figure, is dark gray, inclining to
black, it has no proper features, but is all rough and
ragged. The eyes are like those of a bear ; he appears
to be bent and grown together in a shocking strange
manner, a true monster ; he has crooked club-feet, and
a form crippled all over, with shockingly long fingers.

236 FBOH HATTBB TO SPIRIT.

This spirit, it appeared, bad been a monk in this life ;
he murdered and buried five of his ovm children in the
monastery. He also committed crimes of other kinds.^

This is very much like the Afreet of Egypt and the
East, and the dark spirits mentioned by the Seeress of
Prevorst The Afreet is thus described in the * Bahar
Danush ' quoted by Southey :

* He beheld a black demon heaped on the ground like
a mountain, with two large horns upon his head, and a
long proboscis, fast asleep. In his head the Divine
Creator had joined the likenesses of the elephant and the
wild bull. His teeth grew out as the tusks of a boar,
and all over his monstrous carcase hung long shaggy
hairs, like those of the bear. The eye of mortal form
was dimmed at his appearance, and the mind at his
horrible form and frightful figure was confounded. He
was an Afreet created from mouth to foot by the wrath
of God. His hair like a boar's, his teeth like a bear's.
No one ever beheld such a monster — crook-backed and
crabbed-faced, he might be seen at the distance of a
thousand furlongs.'

My object in making the extract is only to show the
resemblance between descriptions of wicked spirits of
the same class, and the continuance of a belief in Afreets
in the East.

Mrs. Poole's account, which may be found in her
'English Woman in Egypt,' is given in part in Mr.
Howitt's * Supernatural in all Ages ' &c.

APPEARAKOES AFTEB DEATH. 237

*Mrs. Poole and her brother, Mr. Lane^ took an
eligible house in Cairo^ but in a few days were greatly
disturbed by continued knockings; and the servants
began to quit them. Two maids left them almost
directly. They said that the house was haunted by
Afreets. They themselves were greatly disturbed by
these knockings; and one morning hearing a noisy
dispute between their servants, they demanded the
cause of it, and were informed that there was a devil
in the bath, that nobody had been able to live in the
house for a long time on account of this devil ; only one
person, who had soldiers and slaves, had been able to
hold out nine months ; for the rest a month at most was
enough.

' This was agreeable intelligence, and it now came out
that a former tenant of the house had murdered a poor
tradesman who had entered the court, and two slaves,
one of these, a black girl, in the bath. The Afreet con-
tinued among them by marching round and round the
gallery leading to the different rooms as if in clogs,
striking the doors as he passed as if with a brick.
They hunted after him, but could detect nobody. One
night a servant shot at the Afreet, and for some time they
were quiet, but it soon began again. The loud knockings
went on; heavy weights seemed to foil under the
window of the room in which they sat ; there were loud
tramplings as in clogs, and blows on the doors and
water-jars placed in recesses in the gallery. These

240 VBOM IIJLTTEB TO SPIRIT.

some time. I do not treat this with ridicule, because
the same tales have come from so many different and
unconnected sources, and because both the shooting of
the Egyptian Afreet and the laying of the Welsh ^host
may possibly bear the same interpretation. This * laying '
of a spirit is almost always done by the eye, and only
some gifted individuals are able to perform the feat.
Now supposing an earth-tending spirit to have co^-ered
itself in a partially material wrapping, the envelope,
according to the statements of the seers, is held over
its form by a kind of magnetic attraction possessed by
the spirit To dissolve the union between the spirit
body and the semi-material particles polarised to it, as
steel filings to a magnet, a contrary magnetism is
required, and this is supplied by the mesmeric power
of some person in the body. The 'shooting' may act
as a decomposing power by changing ail the atmospheric
conditions about the earth-covered spirit, by which
operation all the adhering particles are detached, and
precipitated. On the supposition that the laying of
these ghosts has consisted in detaching earthly particles
from the spiritual form, there is no reason why the
process of attraction and assimilation should not begin
again, and a visible husk be assumed as before. This
would account for the temporary disappearance of the
spirits, and their re-intrusion again after a time in their
old haunts. In the cases of * laying' by religious
rites, which are very well attested, I imagine the

AFPEABAKCES AFTEB DEATH. 241

process to be moral rather than physical, and to consist

of an effect on the feelings of the spirit, by which it is

induced to direct its thoughts into higher regions,

and so to lay aside its earthly investiture. All persons

"whio believe in communication with spirits say that

one of the strongest motives that unhappy spirits have

for seeking the living, is to obtain the aid of their

prayers. Our own experience has strongly confirmed

this. A case of this kind was that of the poor carpenter

(p. 201), and I was then told that to him the higher

spirits who would lead him in an heavenward direction

were scarcely perceptible ; he had known nothing while

he was here of a state like theirs, and was unprepared

to enter into it when he left this world ; and as similarity

of etate in the spirit constitutes nearness, he was far

removed from his guides, who were able to approach

him only through the intervention of one in the body,

with whom he was in a kind of rapport, and whose

assertions he believed. While on the subject of * laying '

ghosts I may notice the strange old fiction, as it is

considered, of laying them in the Med Sea. When we

enter into the doctrine of correspondence into which

spirit-language falls when it comes through a mortal

brain, we shall see how significant is this apparently

absurd idea. We shall find that Egypt typifies, both

in Scripture and in all spiritual communication, the

natural state, out of which every soul must be led before

it comes into Canaan, the higher or truly spiritual

B

242 nOH HATTER TO 8PIBIT.

degree. These poor spirits are supposed, in their
hankering after the flesh-pots of Egypt or their desire

4

to return to the natural state, to have passed over the
boundary between the two conditions, and thus the
laying them in the Hfed Sea is only a correspondential
way of expressing their being sent back into the state
proper for them.

A very interesting account of haunting may be found
in the second volume of the * Spiritual Magazine,' en-
titled * Clamps in the Wood,' by Mr. Howitt. I have not
the number containing the article, but can give, from
recollection, a sufficiently correct account of the facts to
illustrate other statements. I have also more than
once heard them in Mr. Hewitt's own words. The
house called * Clamps in the Wood,' stands in a lonely
neighbourhood in Derbyshire, in a mining district.
The spirits by whom this house is haunted are believed
to be those of miners. According to the descriptions
received by Mr. Howitt on the spot, these spirits
present dififefent appearances to diflFerent seers. To
the grandmother, who saw them first, they appeared as
lights issuing from the wall, moving about the room
and returning by the way whence they came. These
lights are about two feet high, and in the centre of each
is a brighter light, radiating and working aatwards
as rapidly as possible. Compare this account with
that of the person who saw the departed spirit (p. 128),
and the instance (p. 257) in this chapter. After a time.

_j

APPEABANCES A7TEB DEATH, 243

a.8 the old woman's vision opened^ she distinguished the
forms of men within the external luminous atmosphere,
and saw that they were black and shining. This is the
appearance of men working in the lead mines. The son
never saw more than the atmosphere of the figures, but
took^ great delight in watching them, and called them
his glorious lights. They were only visible in winter.

In many legends and histories of haunted houses, the

spirits are said to appear periodically, at longer or

shorter intervals of time. None of these haunting

spirits are of a high order, though some are very low

and wicked ; while some are, like those at ' Clamps in

the Wood,' quite harmless, perhaps even kindly disposed.

But they are all more or less nearly allied to matter, and

in some material circumstance one condition at least

of their periodical visits may be sought for. It has

lately been found that there is a periodicity in certain

magnetic conditions of the atmosphere, under which also

the aui'ora borealis is most frequently observed. Admiral

Fitzroy gives the period of eleven years for a rise in the

magnetic state, at the end of which time it is at ita

highest point, the same condition recurring at the end

of another eleven years. The appearance of spots in

the sun is said to be coincident with this highest degree.

; It has occurred to me as possible, that the recurrence

of ghostly visitations may be traced to a similar cause

as that of the aurora borealis, namely, the increase or

diminution of certain magnetic conditions of the atmo

b2

i

244 . FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

flpbere. fieaders of Beichenbach may remember that
some of his sensitives, in whom the spiritual eye was
shown to be partially open by their perception of the mes-
meric stream from the hand, described a luminous ap-
pearance precisely resembling that of an aurora radiating
and scintillating from the poles of a spherical magnet.

Many spirits are said to appear like those at Clamps,
only at one season of the year, some every three, and
some every five years. It may be that the atmospherio
state which enables them to show themselves only
occurs at these periods, and it is also possible that a
certain time is needed for them to attract to themselves
those particles by which they are rendered visible. The
haunted house mentioned early in this chapter is said to
be visited periodically, and the year in which the sounds
and sights were witnessed was one of intense heat
Very beautiful auroras were seen during the summer,
and thunder and lightning and various meteoric pheno-
mena also occurred. Since that time the house has been
quiet, but it is possible that the alterations and repairs
made by the last occupant may have put the spiritual
visitors to flight. This only time can show.

Among the lowest spirits are those whose mental
state has been imperfect, and whose character has on
earth assimilated them in some measure to the animals.
We know that the brain of man and its animating soul
contains portions similar to the brains of animals.
Every man or woman has in his or her brain all the

AFPEAMNCES AFTEB BBATH. 245

fibred through which the animal instincts come into
ckction — and something more. But the * something
XKiore' is that which assimilates him to the angels.
Now supposing the brain to be very deficient in all the
liiglier portions of organic fibre, but to have the lower
ones in fair developement, and of course in correspond-
ing activity, the result will be a character deficient in
the moral and intellectual qualities, but active in the
animal propensities and feelings. This is the case with
many idiots and imbeciles. They may be perfectly
harmless, and even affectionate, and we may suppose
that^ when the spirit has thrown off its outer husk and
covering, a more exalted organisation will succeed to
the first, which indeed is like an imperfect machine,
unfitted for the work it has to do on earth. But the
first state of the soul after its change will be exactly
that iti which it leaves this world ; and as every quality
has its corresponding form, the conclusion is unavoidable
that the unhappy beings in whom animal instincts and
propensities greatly predominate will bear in the ex-
ternal of the spirit body the impress of its inner life.
This, slightly modified, is the old Eastern doctrine. It
is found among the Greeks, in Plato among the rest, and
in many xiations at the present time. An account was
given to me, years ago^ of an apparition illustrating
this. It was seen by many persons in the beautiful
region in which its appearance took place, and many
persons in the neighbourhood attested its frequent

246 FBOU HATTER TO SPIRIT.

visits. But the one from whom the statement was
received was an eye-witness of the phenomenon, a man
who until that occasion had never seen anything of the
kind, and who had neither any belief in nor fear of ghosts.
He was a well-informed and educated man. From him I
learned that one evening, as it grew dusk, he was walking

along a coimtry lane leading from grange to the

village. His road lay on the hill side. He was followed
closely for some paces by a large dog, white and reddish-
brown. At first he scarcely noticed his companion^
then, seeing that it was diflFerent from any of the dogs
belonging to the neighbouring farmers, he turned and
looked steadily at it. He saw that it was larger than a
common-sized Newfoundland dog, and that its fece bore
some resemblance to a calf's, the reddish-brown being
mixed with white on the face. As he looked, the
creature disappeared, and my friend declared that a
fear such as he never felt before, an intense horror,
seemed to take possession of him. He reached his
home with difficulty, and was ill from the nervous
shock for a day or two after. This apparition was
occasionally seen for some months ; then, some workmen
digging under the walls of — grange, in order to
"enlarge the building, came upon a skeleton which, by
the red hair, was taken for the remains of a poor im-
becile boy who had once lived in the house, and who had
disappeared in a suspicious manner, his removal being
attributed, as happens in country neighbourhoods, to

APPElBANCES AFTER DEATH. 247

anyone and everyone who could be supposed to have
an interest in his absence.

I should not have ventured to repeat this story if it
tad not been attested by many persons, whose evidence
•was corroborated by my friend.

These earth-tending spirits are in every way disagree-
able, as are spirits in the body of the same character.
But besides the fear and horror produced by the sight
of a aupeTTiatural object, there seems to be an eflfect
produced on the nerves like a shock of electricity or a
wrongly directed galvanic current. I pass from these
very low spirits to others who may be harmless or good,
and who are attracted to their friends by sympathy and
affection.

We need not look for an envelope of material particles
in these less earthly cases, for the conditions being
favourable, a person whose spiritual eye is opened will
always see those spiiits with whom he is en rapport
As I have made this assertion before, I give two instances
of it here, in which a spirit still in the body was seen
by one bound to it by magnetic rapport and aflfecti.on.
The condition of being still in the body, and the short-
ness of time consumed in the whole occurrence, seem to
preclude the idea of the. vision being quite of the same
class as those already described. I have the strongest
possible evidence of the truth of the next instances,
which are given without change of initials.
A lady. Miss F ^ was ill in a distant part of the

248 FBOM MATTEB TO 6PIBIT.

country. A friend, Mrs. W , who is, owing to some

natural cause, in strong magnetic rapport with Miss

F , while visiting Mrs. N— , expressed great

sympathy for the sick person and desire to give her

comfort. Both Mrs. W— and Mrs. N are the

subjects of spiritual experiences. Mrs. If observed

that her friend while talking looked for a minute or two
abstracted and absent (Qy. — Was the word ahserd
first applied in this sense ?), after which she conversed
as before. The time was well marked : a few minutes
before four o'clock, the dinner hour. On the next
morning, or that following, a letter came from the

mother of Mrs. W , in whose house the invalid was

living. The writer said that on the day in questzon,
while lying down at about four o'clock in an upper
room, she heard her daughter's footsteps up the staiis,
and then saw her pass along the passage and enter

Miss F 's chamber. Although Mrs. W 'a back

was towards her mother, the seer had a perception of
her face. Neither walls nor doors offered any obstacle
to the mother's vision ; and the dress, hat, and mantle
described in the letter, were those which Mrs. W — —
wore, and which had not been taken off during her

conversation with Mrs. N .

Another very remarkable example of the same kind,
proving the strong magnetic affinity between the same
two ladies, ha^ lately been told me by Mrs. W— — .
Miss F earnestly longed to receive the communion

'^•^'^'m'^fmmmK^^mmmmf^mmmimm

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 249

in the little village church in the place at which she was
staying ; severe illness^ however, prevented her leaving
the house, and a kind sympathising friend who was
with her suggested that, by turning her thoughts in the
right direction she might receive as much benefit in
the spirit as she would have done by being present in
the body to partake of the Lord's Supper. This Miss

Y did, and such a calm and peaceful state ensued,

that she quite ceased to lament her inability to be pre-
sent. But on the very day on which the sacrament

'was given, Mrs. W , between two and three hundred

miles oflf, had a vision of Miss F sitting quietly in

her place in the little village church (which was very
dvsty), waiting to receive the rite.

These are confirmations of Swedenborg's assertion,
that sympathy with, or even thought of, a person
produces presence in the spirit-world, and the spiritual
state is subject to the same conditions. It thus becomes
easy to explain the many instances of appearance of
those just gone or going, to friends whom either they
love, or with whom they wish to communicate. The
state of a spirit im/mediatdy after quitting the body,
before it has undergone any of the future changes
for better or worse, is so like that of many spirits in the
flesh, which, like that of the lady mentioned last, are
easily detached from their earthly covering, that the
occurrence of similar phenomena in both states is quite
intelligible. I have heard it said by seers, to whom the

250 FBOU 1£ATTEB TO SPIBIT.

appearance of spirit still in the body is not uncommon^
that they can always tell when one has entered its future
home, by the absence of a line of light which forms the
electric chain connecting the spirit with its tabernacle.
This agrees with the statement in p. 131.

When living persons are able thus to sho^w them-
selves to those whose sight is opened, they appear to
those with whom they are present in the body in a more
or less abstracted state, the degrees of which vary from
an apparent reverie to a deep magnetic trance. And if
the mother who saw the sympathising visitor pass to the
sick room had not had her spiritual vision opened,
nothing would ever have been known on the matter,

except Mrs. W ^'s expressed wish to give comfort to

the sufferer.

The following incident was well known at the time of
its occurrence to a large number of persons in India. It
is a striking instance of the presence of a departed
spirit caused by its last wish to see a near relative.
The story was given to me by an Indian officer, whose
father, the seer, was also a servant of the Company.
My informant received it from more than one of the
gentlemen present, who made notes of the circumstance
at the time. The initials are changed.

The regiment to which Mr. C belonged was

stationed near a little village up the countiy, and in the
hunting season parties were formed, who on returning
from the hunt breakfasted at each other's quarters. One

■^^9

APPEARANCES ATTEB DEATH. 251

raoming, when it was Mr C 's turn to receive his

friends, he awoke at daybreak, and saw the figure of a
^woman standing beside his bed. Being quite without

fear or superstition, Mr. C concluded at once that

the appearance was produced by some ocular delusion.
He sat up in bed, rubbed his eyes, and expected his
visitor to depart. But she still stood there, and he, being
determined to settle the question, got up, crossed the
room to the washitlg-stand, washed his face, and, turning
again to the spot, saw the apparition still in its place.
He went up to the figure, recognised her as his sister,
a-nd exclaiming, * Good God ! — ^what brings you here ? '
swooned away.

Mr. C was imable to join the hunting party that

morning, but made breakfast for his friends on their
return. While they talked of his inability to go with
them, he set down the teapot, and, with his hair literaUy
standing on end, pointed to a spot in the room where
no one present could see anything. ' Is it possible,' he
said, ' that none of you see the woman standing there? '
His friends declared that the place was quite vacant,

but Mr. C went on, ' I tell you all she stands there,

and she came to me early this morning. She is my

sister whom I left in England. I am confident we

shall hear of her death. Each of the gentlemen present
made a note of this assertion. As soon as news could

arrive by the mail, Mr. C heard of his sister's death,

and of the earnest wish expressed by her before she left

S52 TBOM KATTEB TO BPIBIT.

this world, that her brother would take charge of her two
children. The two sons were brought op by the unde.
In the recently published Memoirs of the Rev. J.
Leifchild is the following account of an apparitioii at
the time of death. It seems to have been caused \f)
the affection of the departing spirit for his own family,
to whom bis thoughts reverted before his final departure
from this world. Mt. Leifchild, the writer of these

1, Bays: —

' I give an account of an occurrence which soon sftei
befell my aunt, for the truth of which as an event I csn
vouch, but of which I can oflFer no solution. She was
standing in a little shop fronting the street, while >
customer was being served. On a sudden her absent son
passed in the street before her, and as he parsed gave her
a look of recognition, which so surprised and overjoyed
bbr, that, forgetting everything else, she rushed into the |
street after him. When there she could not see him,
and concluded that he had gone to the siley which
led to the Abbey (my father pointed this out to me,
and the place of apparition), and meant to hide himself
awhile. We all went in search of bun, as soon as ve
could aesemhle, bat could not discover any trace of
her son. My aunt then concluded that she had seen
his spirit and fell seriously ill. I noted the circum'
stances in writing at tbe time and pondered over them.

'A few weeks afterwards my father came to see
and my aunt truly divined his errand. He had recei

APFEARANCEiS AFTER DEATH. 25Z

ft letter from the captain of the ship in which her son
-was sailing, stating that the unfortunate lad had fallen
-from the mast and fractured his skull. While lying on
liis deathbed he directed the captain to write to my
father, whose address he named. The dates of this mis-
fortune and of her hallucination corresponded precisely.
The deceased was a clever, amiable, and handsome youth,
and his mother never completely recovered her animation
after his death.' •

It is very desirable in this inquiry, to find instances of
reappearance in which the complete identification of
the spirit by one having the faculty of mediumship
may connect the spiritual manifestations with that
world into whose partially opened door we are trying
to get an insight. Such, given us by words, is the
experience of a friend whose interest in the phenomena
is well known to a large circle of inquirers, to whom
also his name, if it could be given, would be suflScient
guarantee for the truth of any narrative, however
extraordinary. The medium or seeress is a lady
whose gift consists in remarkably clear vision in every
degree. The bright letters in which the spirit appeared
to write his name will remind the reader of the inscrip-
tion read by Miss L in the crystal.

Another very interesting feature of this case is the
introduction of a new law, that which governs names
and associations, as an element in the question.

* Vol. ii. p. 21.

254 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

^Some few years ago I was in frequent commn-'
nication with a friend, a clergyman, who was much
interested in geology^ and who had some original views
connected with the causes of the various changes
discovered in the earth's surface. After a month had
elapsed, during which no letter reached me from him,
I received an intimation from his fiEkmily of his sudden
death. On the evening of the day on which this inti-
mation reached me I was engaged to meet a friend at

y the house of a lady who had given some very con-
vincing proofs of her power to communicate with those
mysterious beings, or powers, commonly known as
** spirits." I was desirous of testing whether a spirit
lately entered upon the spirit-world col d or w^ould
immediately communicate with a friend on earth. I
therefore adopted the following course. Having con-
versed for about an hour upon indifferent subjects, I at
length asked the lady if she saw near me any spirits
whom she had never seen before ? After waiting a few
seconds she replied that she did see two or three, all of
whom had only lately entered the next world. She then
described the appearance of one, whom she said called

himself B , and who intimated that he had died a

violent death. That this person was then dead I was

y not aware, but some weeks afterwards I discovered that
this statement was true, he being supposed, at the time
of his appearance, to be a prisoner in the East.

' The second spirit the same lady described as looking

APFEABANCES AFTEB DEATH. 255

ildeiT^ rather tall, and with a clerical appearance about

lixn. But she remarked that he did riot know how to

yanrrvmunicate with her^ as he was evidently ignorant of

blie very elements of the laws by which spirits in and

oix'b of the body can exchange ideas and thought. After

a. €g^w minutes' disappearance the same spirit reappeared,

and with him the spirits of two eminent Geologists,,

"botii of whom had before communicated with the lady

"wliose powers were being thus tested. By their evident

direction (according to the lady's description), my friend

then wrote letters and words, which were described as light

brilliant words, and said, "When on earth I was known

as the Rev. , of ," and then he added

that he had much now to tell in connection with a
scientific problem (in which we had been much and
mutually interested), and which problem his change of
state had enabled him, in a great measure, to solve.

* The principal points of interest in this investigation

appeared to me to be : first, that the young lady did

not personally know the clergyman in question, nor did

she know of his death ; secondly, the Christian name,

surname, place of residence, personal appearance, and ^

profession of the person, were correctly given ; thirdly,

the immediate reference to a scientific investigation

which we had ceased to write about only when he died ;

fourthly, the fact of his finding a difficulty in making

his thoughts palpable to the lady, or, in other words, in

eommunicating with her, until he was taught how to

v^

256 FBOM MATTER TO SPIBIT.

do 80 by those more experienced than himself. Thus

appearing to indicate that there is a law in these

».

matters and conditions which must be fulfilled, just
as certain laws must be obeyed in all sciences^ in ordei
to obtain constant results.'

Within the last few years an incident involving some
amount of evidence occurred among the circle of friends
mentioned as having been deeply interested in the
manifestation. A member of one of the families wbs
taken away. Some little time after the name was
given, as in many other cases, with accounts of the
spirit's progress and state. One day the appearance of
a light which was said to be seen by two persons, and
which was asserted by the writing to be occasioned hy
the presence of the spirit, excited some attention, and a

letter was written to Miss S , at that time in the

north of England, telling of the occurrence. The day
after this letter had been sent, the spirit told, through
the writing, of having been to see firieuds on earth, and
among others named Miss S— — , who was said to have
been visited on the Friday before at twenty minutes
after eleven in the evening.

Q. ^ Was it in a dream ? '

A. * No, she was awake, arid I think she saw wy
atmosphere^*

It will be remembered that no part of this had been

communicated to Miss S , from whom, however, a

letter came in answer to the one sent, from which the
following is an extract : —

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 257

* What you tell me of the sight seen by and

— - determines me to mention a little incident which

I liardly liked to name to you, thinking it too slight to
trouble you with. One evening last week, I was sitting
alone by the parlour fire rather late, about eleven I

think, thinking of and very earnestly wishing to

see her, or some indication of her, and wondering, as
S^wedenborg says that " thought is presence," whether
my musings would have brought us nearer each other.
I was conscious of a very strong desire to see her, and

exclaimed involimtarily, *^ Dear 1 Can you give

me a sign? " or something to that effect, and looked up.
At that moment I saw a round golden light, silvery at
the edges, a sort of dazzle rather than a shape (the
writer afterwards described a rapid radiating or corrus-
cating appearance in the light, of which other instances
occiu: in the course of this narration). Having looked
up so suddenly, I fancied it might be the sudden move-
ment of the eyes that had created the appearance,
especially as I doubted whether — cared enough for
me, to be likely to give me a thought. It was but of a
few seconds' duration, yet perfectly plain, and rfeminded
me of a magnificent golden rosy glow I had seen, but
then with my eyes shut (though wide awake), after my
father's death.'

In the ' Spiritual Magazine' for January 1863, is a
very interesting letter from the father of a young,
innocent^ and happy spirit, whose affection for his

s

i

258 FBOM IfATTEB TO SPIBIT.

earthly friends led him to give a farewell look to Hiem
before he sought his new home. From long* acquaint^
ance with the family I am certain of the good faith of
the narrator, and can have no doubt of the accuracy of
the .statement. It will be seen that in this appearance
there was nothing painful or horrifying, but that the
idea of sunshine was connected with the visit of the
spirit on the seer's mind. Mr. Barth says :

' On May 14, 1861, our son George, a most exceUen^
and religious youth of 19 years, was removed from this
to the spirit world. Perceiving that the time of his
departure was near, his mother and I alone watched by
his bedside. When the last breath had been taken in
and expired, I quietly remarked, ** He is now goneJ^
His mother inquired the time, and then, seeing the
rising sun shining over the blind of the room, which had
an aspect to the east, she said : '^ See, the natural sun is
just rising as our dear boy is rising to his heavenly home.''
I have an object in noting the rising of the sun at the
moment of his departure.

* Mr. Williams, a highly intelligent and worthy man,
is united to our eldest daughter. At this time he wa?
staying at his. house in the city, his wife having been
only a few days previously confined. He was sleeping
in a room the windows of which faced the east. He
states that he was soundly asleep, his hands outside the
bedclothes, when he was suddenly aroused by feeling
each of his hands firmly grtusped and pressed. He

^PBAEANOES ' AFTEB DEATH. 259

instantly sat up, and by the bedside stood Q-eorge, hold-
ing his hands, and smiUng in his face with a look of
peculiar sweetness and kindness. G-eorge was attired
(^seemingly) in his night-dress. Mr. Williams was not
&t all alarmed ; he knew it was G-eorge in the spirit, and
bis presence filled him with a calm feeling of peace
and happiness which remained for many hours*

' They thus held hands and looked on one another for
a minute or longer, then the grasp relaxed, and George's
spirit faded away. Mr. Williams noticed that the
rising sun was shining into his room over the blind.
His impression was and still is, that he saw George by
this light and not by any other. At 8 o'clock, Mr.
Williams went to his wife's room and told her, in the
presence of his mother and the nurse, that George was
dead. " Have you heard from my father ? " was the
natural query. '^ No, but I have seen G-eorge, he came
for a minute this morning at sunrise." Mr. Williams,
finding that his wife was quite incredulous, for she did
not believe her brother so near the end of his earthly
life, only quietly repeated what he had said, and ex-
pressed his belief that a letter would be received firom
Mr. Barth. In an hour later Mr. Williams received
the letter which he expected.

'Mr. Williams and George were mutually much
attached, in all his boyhood anxieties his brother James
was George's confidant and friend* Hence a parting
yiait, and a parting smile, and a last friendly grasp of

8 2

260 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

the hand was that which a departing spirit mig^ht l^e
glad to give to his friend and brother, but he could not
go in the body, nor give it while his body kept hina.'

' There is little, very little in this narration to those
who sneer " at the credulity of some people " who mistake
the coincidence of a dream with a death for a fact ; but
there is much, very much in it, much matter for thought
and speculation to those who can believe the apparition
to be a genuine reality. Was George seen ? Were his
hands felt? Why did he come in his night-dress?
Why could he not stay or speak ? These are all serious
queries, and many other serious questions might depend
on the replies, if we could aak and give them. If the
evidence be accepted, it proves that the spirit lives on
when the body is dead. The spirit was able to be vi-
sible and tangible, it had form and features spiritually
resembling those left on the bed. How did it pass
through the intervening space of three or four miles ?
Why did it go away, and where did it go to ? Answer
these queries, and next comes. Where is this spirit
now?

* Q-eorge appeared twice afterwards to a lady at High-
gate, walking into her dining-room at mid-day, and
bringing with him two of her spirit children, one in each
hand. He was grateful to her while in the world for
many kind attentions. The lady saw him quite dis-
tinctly floating a little above the floor with her two
dear departed children, and smiling on her. She knew

APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 261

at the time they were all three spirits, hut they gave
lier no alarm. . . . George also appeared to our friend
and former servant Anne, who lived with us as cook for
twenty years, and now resides at Hounslow. He
appeared to her at her bedside in his nightrdress, before
she heard of his decease.

' A few nights after the funeral, a Mrs. H who was

an inmate of our house, and who was sleeping in the next
room to George, often visited him at night if she heard
him coughing, and did many kind attentive acts, was
awakened by hearing most extraordinary and beautiful
music. (George was a fine pianist andmusical enthusiast;
in fact his devotion to music hastened his removal from
this state.) She got out of bed and opened her bed-
room door to listen, wondering that my two girls should
be at music at that hour, but all was quiet. She went
back to bed, and presently the music recommenced,
wonderful music she says. She got up and opened her
window, and saw by the gaslight people walking about,
but the music was not in the street. Again she listened
in the house and out of the house, and the music ceased.
When she was quiet in bed it recommenced and she fell
asleep listening to it. Whence came this unearthly
music? ♦ ♦ ♦ George Barth.'

The last instance is in the words of a mother who
received comfort from the vision she describes, from
whose own writing it is here copied.

*0n the — of it pleased the Almighty to

262 FBOM MATTER TO SFIRIT*

remove from us our greatly beloved child Anne, after a
severe illness of about three weeks. For long after I
could not alas I reconcile myself to the bitter thouglit
that I was never more in this life to behold her who for
nearly eight years had been the object of such tender
.are ; at length one strong desire took possession of my
mind, namely, that I might see her in a dream. Day
after day it seemed strange that she who was ever
present to my waking thoughts should never be present
to my imagination when asleep. At length I laid open
my heart before the Lord who commands us to make
known all our requests to Him in prayer. I made it a
subject of daily supplication that he would grant me
this consolation, but week after week passed, month
after month and my petition was still unanswered, and
I began to fear it was a presumptuous prayer and not
according to His will. Under this impression I cast
myself again before Him, declaring these my doubts,
imploring forgiveness if I sinned, and once more as if
for the last time oflfering up my petition. This was
nearly seven months after our sad bereavement. That
night I went to bed and to sleep, when towards morning
it appeared to me that I awakened, the room was quite
light, and on looking towards the doorway I beheld three
figures, the two outward ones were clothed in long loose
white dresses, and on their heads, completely covering
their faces, were white hoods. Between them stood my
blessed child, clothed also in white, but her head and

APFEABA17CES AFTEB DEATH. 263

face vrere uncovered, and her fair hair long and in

-waves upon her shoulders and sparkling with light, as

■was also her face, where heavenly joy and happiness

^vere strongly marked. Her head was thrown back and

lier eyes raised towards heaven ; nor did she cast one

look upon the earth. Her affections seemed placed on

things above ; where her treasure was, there her heart was

also I It appeared as if she had unwillingly left her

heavenly abode, and anxiously longed to return to it.

She was raised a little above her companions ; her feet

were not visible, but seemed as if wrapped in a white

cloud. Her face and form were just what they had been

when she inhabited this earth, and yet there was this

remarkable difference that she was every way larger and

the countenance was expressive of a more matured

intelligence than could belong to one so young. There

was, besides, an indescribable something not belonging

to a world of sin and sorrow. I was in the act of

stooping forward in order to gaze more earnestly on this

lovely vision when all disappeared and I saw nothing

but the light of day shining into the room.'

In the lowest class of spirits we find the strange and
hideous forms. Among those who are not evil, though
held to earth by the recollection of earth-life, as also in
the recently departed, are the spirits who are recog-
nised by the dress they wore when in the body. These
last, the ' ghosts in costume,' have excited a great deal
of ridicule; but their appearance may be readily

264 ntOH VATTEB TO fiPIBIT.

explained on the principle to whicli I have adverted in
the chapter on The Home of the Spirit. We have, in
. speaking of the manifestatjons, Bald that * Whatever the
impressiog spirit thinks, the medium sees,' and the
same idea may be conveyed by saying, that, as every
thought or feeling in the earth-life leaves it« imp-ess
on the soul, that soul, when it becomes the body of the
spirit, has only to recall the memory of any particular
^ condition to produce the appearance desired. An
instance of this may be found in the officer's uniform
and the antique ring shown to the medium Jane, and
recognised by the wife of the spirit.

The lower the spirit, the more material are its con-
ditions, and the more easily and outwardly is its ap-
pearance impressed on the seer's eye. Sometimes
indeed, it seems as if little more than external sight is
required for the perception of the apparition. But as
/^we rise in the scale, we find that the internal sight or
vision of the soul must be opened. The spiritual eye
is needed to discern the objects of spirit-life, and every
ascending degree in the next state requires for its per-
ception, a corresponding increase of internal vision.
^ It is a noteworthy fact too, that in all these mani-
festations the sensation produced in the seer is one of
pain or pleasure corresponding to the state of the spirit
and its nearness to, or exaltation above, this earth.
The low, haunting spirits, produce headache and a
sensation of horror, of which an example was seen in

aw

APFEABANGES AFTEB DEATH. 265

tite "witnesses of the phenomena in the haunted house,
and in the statement of the gentleman who saw the
^ppaxition like a calf, who was seized with a horror
suchL as he had never felt before. The sceptical man

J felt a painful electric shock. Mr. C fainted,

but, whether from surprise, or the earthly tendency of
the spirit, I have no means of knowing.

But Miss S derived nothing but pleasure from

the light that dazzled and scintillated before her

spiritual eye ; Mr. Williams, to whom the good and

pure young Greorge Barth paid his parting visit, ^waa

filled with a calm feeling of peace and happiness

which lasted many hours ; ' and though the mother,

whose lovely vision of her chUd is last in the series,

does not speak of happiness, her words express the

delight she ftlt in the answer given to her anxious

prayer.

Having already spoken of the magnetic state of the

atmosphere as a possible condition in the productioD of

these phenomena, we may indicate to future observers

the hour of day as an element in the question. It

may be that, as dark midnight, and the sun's absence

are favourable for the appearance of the earth-bound

spirit, the bright sunrise, as in the case of Greorge Barth

and the mother's vision, is both a favourable condition

and a natural correspondence for the appearance of the

rising angeL

Its full and specific meaning is seldom, if ever, given.

266

FBOM IfATIEB TO SPIBIT.

to the Apostle's description of the kinds of bodies in
which spirits of contrary direction are clothed. ^ As is
the earthy (like earthy matmal) so are they ^rhidi are
earthy. And as ib the heavenly (spiritoal essence) so
are th^ which are heavenly.'

^^^^^■^■^^^■^^■■"■■"^■■^"■■■■■■■^^■^■^^^^^■^■i^iHHHQBHi

267

A

CHAPTER XIIL

COBRESPOKDENCE AND DEYELOPEMENT,

LL the various communications which I have ever \

seen, professing to come from spiritual sources of
a higher character, agree in stating that no true know-
ledge of the nature of spiritual impression can be
attained without a clear idea of the agreement by
correepondence between the natural and spiritual worlds.
That this truth involves a doctrine which at first sight
appears mystical and imaginary cannot be denied. It
is, however, intelligible enough, and as certain as any
branch of knowledge which can be deduced by well-
marked steps from indisputable principles. The very
clear explanation of correspondence given by Sweden-
borg has not received the attention it deserves, partly
perhaps from the positiveness and great copiousness of
his style, and partly from the difficulty found in appre-
hending the reality of the doctrine by those who have
had no conscious experience of spirit-life. But after ^
the inquirer has found, as we did, that this principle of
correspondence^ and this only^ furnishes a key to the

y

268 FROM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

difficulties of all spirit communication and inspired
writing, he cannot do better than turn to the pages of
the neglected Mystic^ where he will find a coherent
explanation of a system of which only the very simplest
elements can be given here.

It has been partly the object of the foregoing pages
to show that every human being has ydthin himself
different degrees of life to be developed and matured in
succession. Within the body is the soul, which, accord-
ing to the teaching of Scripture, passes away at the first
change, death, and, animated by the spirit, becomes the
body of the next life. And the spirit, by which name
we recognise the intensest life now known to us, is
to become external as we approach the higher states.

" In this world, impressions made on the soul through
what is called memory remain, and pass with it into the
next life (for if this were not the case, our conscious
identity would be lost) ; and, being gradually radiated or
thrown ofif from the centre, they become the external of
the spiritual being. Thus we see that the intemcU of
the man, is the external of the spirit, and extending
the principle from individuals to the mass, we find that
the inner state of the material world forms the outer
or phenomenal form of the spiritual sphere. Every

i feeling or thought hidden iu the depths of the spirit,
passes with the swiftness of lightning into the soul, and
thence by the nerves into the body, where it is mani-
fested by its appropriate action. Between each of these

COBRESPONDENCB AND DEVELOPEMENT. 269

diflFerent degrees of feeling or thought a resemblance or
correspondence exists, so that, to a person in whom the
spiritual degree is opened, as in a state of clairvoyance
arising from mesmerism or accidental trance, that
"wtich is felt in the material body shows itself in action
in the sonl or spiritual body, because, in the internal
state^ the soul is seen as the body of the man.

Clairvoyants always assert that their perceptions re-
semble those of persons immediately after death, when
the soul has become the body, and the entranced person
holds converse with those dwellers in the spirit spheres
with whom he is in harmony or affinity.

Thus the whole of the inner spiritual world, underlying
and pervading the world of matter in which, as in a
husk or shell, it is enveloped, must correspond to its
external in all its details, as soul to body and as spirit
to soul. A few instances from the visions and writings
already repeated heye will illustrate this truth more
clearly than any explanation. The clairvoyante girl *
who mentally visited the house at which my friend was
dining saw one gentleman * looking ' at her mesmeriser,
while the other was * pointing ' to herself. She had no
idea that the process of mesmerism and the curious
phenomena she exhibited were the subject of conversa-
tion between the gentlemen, nor could we, when after-
wards told of it, imagine the how or the why of what

* Page 48.

>

^

/

270 FROM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

she described, till a better knowledge of correBpondenoft
funushed the key to her vision.
/ The symbolisation will undergo a greater change but
will be more complete in itself, as the lucidity of the
subject increases, or, in other words, as he rises to a
higher state. The young lady * who described the two
little children in a beautiful garden, wreathing a lamb
with flowers, saw then heavenly or spiritual bodies ; and
their surroundings corresponded to the state of happiness
and innocence in which she foimd them. Flowers are
always spoken of by the spirits as the correspondence of
the first natural truths of the spiritual world — ^the
wreathing them together is the combination of this
knowledge; and the dressing of the lamb symbolises
their adding this wreath of spiritual growth to the inno-
cent purity of their own hearts. If this is thought fanciful
let it be remembered that she spoke it as she saw it, and
that similar imagery has been seen by all mediums and
seers, and explained in all instances as I have explained
'\ this.

If the dififerent degrees of spiritual and material per-
ception were not very distinct in life, we should be
always in danger of confusing the perceptions of the two
states, as is indeed sometimes done by imperfectly
developed clairvoyants, who cannot tell whether a scene
is presented to the bodily or the spiritual eye ; and who

* See page 5h

CORRESPONDENCE AND DEYELOPEMENT. 271

are often reproached for falsehood when they describe
truly what they see.

The seer to whom the fair young girl Ellen appeared
axQong green slopes and ferns, and by the rose bushes,
saw her in the abode which the feelings and memories
of a pure yoimg soul had prepared, for each of these
objects of external nature correspond to some spiritual
state. I shall be able to make this clearer in speaking
of universal correspondences and representations.

I have said how greatly we were at first puzzled by
the seemingly discordant statements given through
different mediums on the condition and progress of
spirits, and how it was gradually found that the same
fact was asserted by all, though clothed by each writer
or seer in the imagery peculiar to himself. How, in
short, the brain of the medium, or rather that of which it
is the organ, qualifies and lends its own type to the
elementary truth. We had also found that, to enable a
spirit to communicate through a friend on earth, a
certain amount of resemblance or agreement of character
was indispensable ; so, whether the imagery presented
by the medium's mind be simple or elaborate, the
impressing spirit must not only be able to enter into it
but to carry it out through all its adaptations and com-
binations. If the thought ordy were imparted, it can
hardly be supposed that, as in the case of rapping or
tilting, and even of writing, every letter should be given,
and corrected if not properly transmitted. But that any

272 FROM HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

thought can exist in the mind^ unclothed in some form,
has been doubted by many philosophers, and is positively
denied by all spiritual seers ; and this denial is supported
by every fact connected with clairvoyance and spirit
mediumship. A lady of great intelligence and truth-
fulness, who has carefully observed the working of her
own mind during spiritual impression, declares that
with every change of thought and words she is conscious
of a series of images or pictures passing through her
brain. Our word iraagme has arisen from some dim
perception of this truth ; and the word ' idea ' is derived
&om the Greek to aee^ for spiritual sight corresponds
with earthly knowledge. I must not, however, venture
to advert to language in connection with spirit, for proo&
of the spiritual origin of words are endless, and not till
we ascend to the first divine stream whence all the rivers
of tongue have flowed over the earth's surface, shall we
be able to arrive at a true philosophy of language.
^ We have reason, then, to believe that the spirit or
communicating power is cognizant of all the different
forms in which truths may be conveyed through a variety
of mediums, but that each medium is chosen for a
special quality which enables him to transmit the senti-
ments required. In this world, ideas conveyed from one
person to another must always fall into language com-
prehended both by speaker and hearer, but the same
thought would be expressed in very different terms
to a child and to a philosopher, supposing the speaker

COKRESFONDENCS AND DEYELOPEMENT. 273

kble to perceive and meet the requirements of both
ninds.

If^ therefore^ we in this life thus adapt our speech to
bhe hearer, how much more must this adaptation be
required when the communicant is raised a degree
in existence above the recipient. For the language is
different. In the case of communication from spirit "^^^^
to mortal, the imagery or ideas contained in the
medium's brain takes the place of words. And each
medium furnishes a different capacity for the transmis-
sion of feeling or thought, and a different vocabula/ry
or series of images, in which to embody it. But, by ^
what we have already seen, both elementary thoughts
and varieties of imagery must exist in the mind of the
higher being, and as we have seen that in the next
world the subjective becomes objective, both are real ex-
istences in that world, in which all thoughts and feeU
ings are realities more glorious and more abimdant y
than the external objects of the material state.

Swedenborg treats of the subject of correspondence
at length and with great clearness of illustration, but
even while he shows its value as a key to the difficulties
of all inspired writing, he is quite aware of its obscurity.
Mystical and obscure as it is, the notice could not be
omitted in a narrative of the manner in which spiritual
knowledge is believed to have been attained by gradual
steps from material manifestations. Every vision seen,
and every communication made, has been set forth in

T

274 FBOlf HATT£B TO SPIKFT.

such imagery as could be explained oa this principle of
correspondence and representation, and became intelligi-
ble and coherent on this principle only; and every expla-
nation given has declared that the place and condition
of every being in the world of spirits takes its form
according to the law by which the external of one state
agrees with the internal of that below it. Many persons
will be able to recall deep and vivid dreams, in which
they have felt themselves near to lost friends. Perhaps
a river has parted the dweller on earth from the
dweller in heaven, or perhaps the spirit in the body
has looked up at the liberated bright ones, who stood
above on an ascent which he could not climb. This
is a common experience illustrating the law. When-
ever a true correspondence can be traced in dreams,
the imagery will be found to be qualified by the state
and character of the dreamer.

The language of symbolism or correspondence, then,
is the language of spirit in its communication with
material beings; and the character of the symbolisation,
besides being modified by the mind through which it
falls, is also subject to variations of form, as the more
and more internal degrees of spirit-life are opened in
the recipient, whether by writing, drawing, vision, or
any other form of communication. This process of
opening from the outer to the inner, or, if we choose,
ascending from the lower to the higher, takes place with
every kind of variety during the developement of

•

GOBRESPONBENCE AND BEYELOFEMENT. 275

mediumship. But though there are varieties in the

developement of individuals, one orderly law of ascent,

which may be traced in each person's experience,

prevails. When raps or movements have been given

for months through a medium, they will sometimes cease

suddenly, and their place will be either taken at once

by another form, such as writing, or the whole influx

departs; and when it returns again after a season,

which the medium feels to be a blank, will reappear

with great energy in a higher mode of manifestation.

After the medium Jane had been the channel for the

transmission of raps for many months, the sounds

ceased and her hand wrote, 'There will be no more

raps in this house : they have done their work and been

of great use ; but we must now turn to higher things.'

This could not be ascribed to Jane's own will, for while

the rapping mediumship lasted, she was taken notice of

by many of my friends, and more than one person, not

perfectly certain of her good faith, offered her money to

reproduce them. The experience of many mediums

will confirm this fact of cessation and reappearance. I

am not sure, however, that the disappearance of a lower

phase of mediumship on the appearance of the higher

is universal, for Mr. Home, besides his more wonderful

gifts of vision, hearing, &c., seems also to have the same

remarkable external manifestations as he had years ago.

Something of this may be due to his having been born

with all the conditions of a medium, while in most

T 2

276 FBOM HATTEB TO SFIBIT.

persoDB they are a gradual growth. It is the fact that
those whose spiritual education has begun on the most
material plane^ are carried up higher and higher, till
the most internal state of which the subject is capable
is reached, and as each degree is opened, the raanifesta-
tions in those below it usually disappear. The original
magnetic or physical condition necessary for impres-
sion of any kind, is one, perhaps the sole element
possessed in common by the inspired prophet and the
table-moving medium. It is of the upward process
that we have now to speak, and we will suppose it to
begin on the lowest plane. After it has been found
that a person is endued with medium power of an
external character, the form will sometimes change
suddenly and quickly. In such a case I have seen
every limb thrown into strong convulsive action, as if
the unseen influence must permeate every nerve and
fibre before the power wielding it could obtain fall
control of the wu'es of the human electric telegraph*
A sleep or trance often ends the process, which is of
the same nature as the ecstasies and convulsions occur-
ring during revivals and in times of religious excite-
ment. After the spirit has thus taken possession, its
presence is manifest in all the different ways described-
This action on the nerves seems to be the physical part
of the unfolding, the operation by which the harmonious
action of spirit and body is established ; but much more
is yet to come.

COBRBSPONDENCB AND DEVBLOPEMENT. 277

When the process of developement has begun in a

heaven-seeking soul, the road is far from being smooth

or strewn with roses, for the living spirit within, tending

outwards from its central stream, meets those channels

of impression from external nature whose images are the

types of its essential thought and feeling, and a struggle

often ensues, before spirit, soul, and body can be made

to act in unison. If we hesitate and ponder over this,

deeming it a mere fanciful metaphor, let us compare

the process of which I have spoken with those of which

indeed it is the higher counterpart, namely the two first

stages of earth-life. All are equally holy and wonderful,

and if I have called the spiritual developement the

higher, it is only in obedience to the recognised law of

gradation from matter to spirit*

In the first state of earth-life, the nine months of
organic existence, the vital germ draws firom its sur-
roundings nourishment whereby the new being is formed
which, on entering this world at birth, casts off the enve-
lope through which the component particles had passed
into the frame. Then a fresh process of attraction and
assimilation begins, lajsting through this life, till, on its
entrance into another state, the body, that material re-
siduum or envelope, which has served the same purpose
as the former, but for which there is now no farther use,
is thrown aside. The uniformity of these two processes
has been touched upon before in considering the birth
into spirit-life : I bring it forward again in illustration

278 FBOU MATTEK TO SFIBIT.

of the spiritual developement, by which each one ought
to be, and at some more advanced time will be^ prepared
during this stage of existence for an entrance into the
next.

The internal attractive force corresponding to the
germ of animal life, then, is spiHt, which, as the seeress
says, is ^begotten from OodJ^ And the surroundings
which are to convey nourishment to this infant spirit
till it reaches the full stature of a son of God, are the
thoughts, knowledges, and feelings gathered by the at*
tractive mental powers from the whole Book of Nature.
The soul is as a mental and moral storehouse, sup-
plying material to the spirit from its garnered harvests ;
and by the quality of ideas, images, and feelings with
which we nourish and invest the heavenly germ, we
determine our future angel-rise in the world of Ught,
or descent and extinction in the Abyss of Darkness,

The conscious developement of spirit-life in a medium
diflfers only in degree from the less strongly marked
spiritual experience gone through by all souls upon
earth. The two ought to unite and run in one stream
as in the case of Swedenborg, who would have been held
in honour for Christian goodness and scientific acquire-
ment even if he had never risen beyond the material
plane, and seen the forms of all his earlier intuitions
in the spirit-world. It is of the conscious developement
of spiritual action that I have now to speak, and, having
slightly sketched the nature of developement as it has

^■■■■■RSBH

CORRESPONDENCE IlSD DBYlfiLOPEMENT. 279

"been imparted by the unseen teachers, to give what ac-
oount I can of the sensations accompanying the process,
dFrom the descriptions of those who have experienced it

A very interesting account of such an experiment is
given by a lady who signs herself * Comfort,' in a letter
■to Mrs. Newton Crosland, It is so much to the
purpose, that its entire omission here would be Shake-
speare's grandest play without its chief character.

' It is just a year since my hand was first guided by
spirit-power to write. The discovery of this new
influence dwelling within one, and softly propelling the
hand to write words and sentences foreign to the ideas
existing within one's own mind, must certainly be one
of the most astounding moments in a human life. I
know that to myself the surprise waa beyond descrip-
tion, especially as I had been very sceptical regarding
all that I had ever heard of " spirit-mediums." It is
true I had heard only of spiritualism and its manifes-
tations through table-tilting, rapping, and occasionally
of writing, but had never seen nor had communication
with any spirit-medium until this mysterious influence
showed itself in our family circle, first in a younger
brother, and then in myself. We had for years believed
in the phenomena of mesmerism, and I immediately
felt that this was a kindred phenomenon. The surprise
and interest excited by the discovery it is scarcely pos-
sible to describe.
* Of the true nature and of the sacred mysteries to

280 FBOtf KATTEB TO SPIBIT.

which the writing, or, in £Etct^ any branch of natediuznship,
tends ; of its dangers^ its trials, and of the Islyts which
guide the developement of spiritualism, we "were all
then entirely ignorant, and to this utter ignorsuice must
be ascribed several months of the most psiixiful be-
wilderment and extremest distress of mind. Had we
been enabled to profit by the experience of other
mediums, my early initiation would probably have been
of a far less painful character ; but there must be the
pioneers in all new discoveries of untrodden lands, and
happy indeed those who through suffering are enabled
to save others from suffering ! The first communica-
tions written thus mysteriously through my hand, and
with ever-increasing sensations as of a most powerfu]
mesmeric influence over my whole frame, were given, as
usual, in the names of beloved departed friends and
relatives, and were simple messages of affectionate
greeting. Believing that communications proceeding
from a higher state of spiritual developement than that
of our earth, must be heavenly, pure, and true, I of
course at first implicitly believed every word written by
the spirit-power, believing also every word literally, not
even symbolically. Little were we any of us aware
that the intensest antagonism between truth and false-
hood, between light and darkness, encounters the
astounded and unprepared pilgrim upon his first en-
trance into the realm of spirit. The very slightest veil
but separates man in the natural world from the

■■

C0IiBE8P0NDENGE AND DETELOPEMENT. 281

spiritual world, which encircles him; and when that
'veil is raised, as it has been occasionally by the Divine
•wisdom in many previous ages, even as now in our own
'time, the soul discovers itself surrounded by a host of
new and terrible enemies, bs well as by hosts of all-
powerful angelic friends. But the language at first
even of the angelic host is an incomprehensible mystery,
for it is a language of symbols, which the newly-born
child of spirit learns to construe only by slow and
painful degrees.

* Within a fortnight of the day when spirit-medium-
ship first came through the writing to myself, a gradual
and marked change in the communications had set
in. Painful messages connected with the temporal
life were written, instead of those simple greetings of
love from departed friends, which had first arrived.
At the same time with these temporal communications
came also very lovely explanations of various passages
in the Gospels which had always been obscure to
myself, and the most earnest commands were given to
pray unceasingly to Christ as the Saviour and to trust
in the Almighty's " eternal love, mercy, and peace."
The darkness was to come. Angelic love, however,
hastened to place as guides in the hands of the igno-
rant traveller the staff of prayer and the lamp of faith.
By-and-by the messages became more and more painful,
more and more temporal and exciting in their nature,
because connected with my own family circle and

282 raOM HATTEB TO 8PIBIT.

dearest frienda. At length, written in the beloved
name of a departed brother, came announcements of
the approaching deaths of those dearest to mjBel^
accompanied with the most painful details, and with
Erections for all the various medicines which would be
required to ease their approaching change. . . . •
The physical mesmerisms upon me at this time were
extraordinary ; I felt frequently as if enveloped in an
atmosphere which sent through my whole frame warm
streams of electricity in waving spirals from the crown
of my head to the soles of my feet ; and occasionally,
generally at midnight, I was seized with twitchings, and
convulsive movements of my whole body, which were
distressing beyond words. All these symptoms at
length came to a crisis in a frightful trance.'

The writer recovered from this trance, went into the
country, and regained a calmer state of mind, with a
return of physical strength. She continues : —

* Being too much distressed at the issue of my first
experiment in spirit-writing, I was not inclined to
return to it, even had I not given my solemn promise
to avoid all relapses into the mysterious experienca
And thus several weeks passed on. Soon, however, I
discovered that the mesmeric .life was, though latent,
still an ever-present guest within me, a guest who
would assert his presence. My hands, either the right
or left (for the influence affected both nearly equally),
if lying passive on my lap, or upon a table, or book,

OOBBESFONBEKGE AND DEYELOPEMENT. 283

-woiild begin to be moved to write ; often half a word,
or a. whole one, or a name, would be written before I
coiild stop them. I found that the tip of my finget
placed upon a flat hard surface, would convey ideas
and sentences to my brain, as though words were
wxitten through the finger instantaneously upon the
liard surface. I hardly knew whether I felt the words
or read them. Also, strange knowledges regarding the
medical properties of plants and their spiritual signifi-
cations came to me if I held them or rubbed them upon
the palm of my hand. I felt as though my palms had
become clairvoyant, as in fact I had in an earlier stage
discovered that the region about my heart- possessed the
same singular faculty when the point of my fingers was
pressed against it,

' The strange idea thus began to dawn within me, that
revelation of the most sacred and spiritual knowledges
can come through many other portions of the body
than those usually employed to read printed books or
even the book of Nature. I began to perceive that the
fleshly tabernacle is of so wonderfully spiritual a con-
stitution that every portion of it can reflect the know-
ledge of the external world through its walls for the
edification of the indwelling soul, its guest, whilst the
soul can call forth from the invisible world knowledges
unrevealed to the ordinary senses, and pour them
through every portion of its tabernacle for their mani-
festation to the external world. This was a lovely

284 FBOM HATTER TO SPIRIT.

belief, and came in the train of many other beauti-
ful ideas, clearing away much which had been always
stumbling-blocks in my entire belief in the Scripture,
and the possibility of vmmedidte revelation. Sut pain,
darkness, and terror accompanied the light and the
beauty ; and I did not then, nor till long after, arrive at
the blessed assurance that antagonism is, under the
divine conmiand, one great means of all progression,
especially in spiritual and mental things. These new
trials came in terrible words, referring once more to
those deaths so much dreaded by myself, being' written
within my body, spite of my Inost earnest struggles
against the power, sometimes when my eyes were
closed. The words were written in white or grey hnes
upon a dark ground, I felt them within my eyelids, or
upon my breast, or within the palms of my hands. I
found my physical organism become a mystic book upon
which an unknown most subtle and omnipotent power
could write His will. These words would often fill me
with the greatest horror, and, to prevent their being
inscribed, I have many and many a time started up and
walked rapidly out into the fresh air, using every power
of my mind to withdraw myself entirely from the inner
into the external life ; but in vain : a power far mightier
than my own will had commenced its lovely mysterious
work within me, and was moulding my mind and body
into that mystic organism for which we at the present
day have no other term, or perhaps dare use no other,

COBBESPONDEKCB AND DEYELOPEMENT. 285

-fclxan medium of spirit. So many of these organisms
a.x-e being developed at the present time^ that it is the
"bounden duty, especially of medical men, to calmly
a.iid philosophically investigate the phenomena. ....
Bixt to return to the inward spiritual writing. The
ivriting developement, no longer permitted to find its
natural outlet through the hands, had now become
im^ward* But painful as this was, and produced by a
eliecked effort of nature, still a fresh spiritual manifesta-
tion developed out of it, the mediumship of drawvng.
Together with the inward written words or sentences,
now came single figures and groups of figures, all in
outline of white or grey upon a dark ground; the
explanations of which were written above their heads,
beneath their feet, upon their robes, or on scrolls in
the heavens, or upon the earth, upon their hands, upon
their swords and shields, or even sometimes as if pro-
ceeding from their lips. I could not wake in the
morning without these figures instantly being drawn
within my brain, over and through my heart, or within
. my hands. They were at once a torment and a delight
— they were such a wonderful experience, so new, so
awful, often of the most portentous nature, and had a
character about them very much akin to Michael
Angelo's Creation. Three groups I especially remember
— the " Descent of the New Jerusalem " (a majestic
woman clothed in wonderful draperies studded with
jewels, and wearing many crowns, and a singularly

286 FBOU MATTER TO SPIRIT.

beautiful breaaiylate), the « End of the World," and the
** Last Judgement." Also a less majestic figure painfiilly

•

affected me at this time. Waking in the nighty the
strange drawing process instantly commenced^ and I
felt and saw within me the figure, whose countenance
greatly resembled that of Christ, descending from a
morning sky towards me, and bearing upon his shoul-
ders a large cross, whilst from his lips proceeded
these words, "Love, Mercy, Peace; but not till after
death." Again my soul trembled with anguish, for that
strange portentous word Death was ever written within
me or without. ....

' About this time I took a pencil one day to make a
sketch; and whilst talking to a friend who came to
speak to me at the table where I was drawing, my
hand rested listlessly upon the paper before me for a
minute or two. To my surprise, my hand was moved
and began drawing, not the design that I had had in
my mind to make, but a little head, and then a very
curious initial letter, like, and yet not quite like, an
initial letter in some old missal. I was surprised
indeed, as I had never heard before of spiritual draw-
ing. This, surely, could not bring with it pain like the
writing, nor yet bewilderment. How little did I com-
prehend the new class of instruction which was now
awaiting me I The first drawings were very rude indeed,
like the uncertain tottering lines of a child, and also
singularly resembling the designs of the very early

COBRESPONDBNCE AND DBVELOPEMENT. 287

Italian painters — ^heads of Christ, angels, and curious
female figures seated within spheres and hearts; and
always these drawings were accompanied with strange
ornaments of spiral and shell forms, with dots and
scroll-like ciphers, which I thought odd at the time,
but only months afterwards, when accidentally referring
to them, discovered to be the first undeveloped attempts
at writing one of the " spirit languages," so frequently
I know to be referred to in your book. ... At times
the power was withdrawn, and some other branch of
spiritual developement would take its place. Often, too,
when I most earnestly desired to have a spiritual draw-
ing given me, nothing but the merest scribble came.
The fear also of the bewilderment of the spirit-writing
accompanied me for several months whenever I drew,
for at times my hand, while drawing an angel's robe,
would have written through it, in curious ornament or
pattern upon the drapery, words which made my soul
die within me. There was always that terrible word
Death. At length, through God's blessing, and in His
own time, the key came to me. What was this word
when translated into the language of heaven — not of
earth — of immortal, not mortal thought ? Change —
change of state — of life — a birth into another life ! And
then many words and sentences began to assume other
significances than those we generally assign them. And
ideas of most lovely new truths gradually unfolded
themselves, and old truths breathed upon by spirit were

288 nOX M^TTIB TO SPIRIT.

no longer dry bones, but clothed in the blooming fresh-
ness of immortal life. But all had to be learnt through
prayer, faith, love, and obedience. .... Gomfobt.*

In this instance we find a narrative of the different
stages of the process in the order in which they were
developed in a graceful, sensitive, and highly educated
mind. But it retains its general features in every case
that I have seen; or rather, whenever the develope-
ment is to be complete^ and the influence of the highest
character. Of this more in the chapter on Inspiration.
In the first instance come the names of dear friends
and relations, and even in their varieties a law of
affinity may be traced corresponding with some of the
higher and more hidden d^ees of our relationship
to each other and to our Heavenly Father in the
spiritual church or mystical body of Christ. To this
wonderful affinity I will if possible return. And not
only are the names of those near and dear to the
medium given, but numbers of ancestry of whom the
writer has perhaps never heard and with whom there
has been no attraction of affection; the magnetic
rapport of family descent taking its place. When a
question was once put to the influences giving these
names, as to the reason of their visits, the reply was,
'We shall meet you in that order in the next life.'
And do we not enter this life welcomed by the nearest?
It is only a regular developement of the same law that
brings the dearest as the nearest — first the fieunily

* See Light in the Valley, p. 114.

GOBBESPONDENCE AND DEVELOPEMENT. 289

affections which are next to earth, then affinities
which have less of the material and more of the
spiritual element. With the near relations, or some-
times, when there are none, almost taking their place,
come a tribe of strangely mixed influences of the most
incongruous kind, and from these are received number-
less false and contradictory statements. I believe these
spirits to be of the class described by the spirit (p. 205) as
gossipping worthless beings who gladly take the oppor-
tunity of a return to earthly companionship. These are
the (Myria in the valley, which must be passed before
the mountain can be ascended ; and the only safeguard,
the staff on which the traveller must lean as he traverses
the rugged path, is unbounded faith in the Heavenly
Guide and Saviour. After these seemingly purposeless
writings, come another series, of a class a degree higher.
Each of these is signed by some name which may be
considered a generic term for some species of intdlectual
influence. Of these are the Byrons, Shelleys, Goethes,
Luthers, and others ; they bear some kind of mental re-
lation to the medium, and take that part in his spiritual
developement which is represented by his ruling mental
quality. Again, they have to give place to a higher
order of influences, emanating from beings whose per-
sonaUty is lost in the names of those holy societies to
which they are sympathetically bound, for the spiritual
as well as the material world is governed by the laws of
orderly affinity. Thus Love^ Hope, Comfortj &c., are the

u

290 FBOM MATTEB TO SFIBIT.

names giveii in the more advanced stages of influx, and,
even as in the earlier times of the world's spirit-historj,
a Name higher and holier than all has sometimes been
attached to the counsels of Love and Purity. I hesitate
to mention this, from the apprehension that those from
whom the things of the spirit are as yet hidden may
think that I deal lightly with the hoUest of subjects ; hut
when we remember how often, in the last days of ^ood
men and women on earth, the visible presence of the
Lord has been granted to the inner sense, we must be
content to receive the fact with reverence, and to trust to
time for its explanation. Whenever the name of Christ
is given in writing, or the form is represented in draw-
ing or vision, the description or picture is exactly that
image which the medium's mind has been accustomed
to contemplate as the likeness of the Saviour.

^ Comfort ' has spoken of the fact that most mediums
/ whose aspirations are high, and whose state and progress
/ is guarded by earnest prayer^ are told of their own ap-
proaching death and that of their friends. But as all the
language used by the higher spirits is correspondential,
this is liable to great misunderstanding if interpreted
literally. Unless it be a real prediction, by a spirit
still very near earth, of the material change of the
medium, the death foretold is that withdrawal of the
soul from its earthly loves which must precede its 1
regeneration. The material death may be truly fore-
told by a low spirit whose clairvoyance resembles that

CORRESPONDENCE AND DEVELOPEMENT. 291

of a person in the body, but such a spirit never gives
any but an earthly name, and its character has been
already sufficiently dwelt on for recognition. But the
death foretold and insisted on by the higher and
purer influences is that * death unto sin,' of which the
Apostle Paul writes, and which is followed by a new
birth unto righteousness. The prediction of death, then,
is the announcement of the first step in a journey
whose every portion has its distinct phraseology in the
symbolical language of spirit. That soul, whose reli-
gion is of an intellectual and moral character, is said to
be still ' sojourning in EgypV All the trials, back-
slidings, and encouragements attending a rise into a
higher spiritual state, are marked, as the events of a
weary pilgrimage through the desert. I have known
many instances of this, and have heard a medium or
clairvoyante asked to describe the spiritual state of a
person, when, without any previous reference to the
language of Scripture, the answer, if a verbal one, has
been couched in words borrowed from the journey
of the Children of Israel to the Land of Promise.
Egyptian darkness, Egyptian bondage, and the Exodus
into the Heavenly Canaan, are not merely historical
facts of Scripture, or fanciful allegories thence derived
by Bunyan and by the early Methodists, but are true
symbols, having their deep internal sense in the very
heart of our spiritual life, which is life itself.

There is an element in the process of developement,

17 2

292 FKOM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

which requires deep attention^ for it will be found to
throw light on all questions connected with spiritual
influx. Each developement, in whatever form it takes
place^ consists of stages or series, corresponding to the
flowing and ebbing waves of influx, of which the regu-
lar fanning already spoken of, is a miniature repre-
sentation. At the commencement of each series, or at
the beginning of the whole, come visions or writings, in
which are embodied, swathed up as it were, in simple
and perhaps grotesque form, the whole of the series of
revelations which are to follow. It is as if the teacher
should say in simple words, * I am going to tedch you on
such a aubjectJ* Then the outline or epitome of that
subject is set forth; the chrysalis form is shown in
rough and bold but undeveloped state. Gradually, and
in its own order, each portion is drawn out^ and a series
of pictures or writings, showing the forms and relations
of all the parts, is made ; and at length the most perfect
tracery, the most delicate shades of which every touch
has its meaning, form the whole into a symbolism as
wonderful in its perfection and coherence as the grandest
allegory ever composed. I do not mean to imply that
either the execution or the imagery is always beautiful or
perfect, but that, with reference to the medium's power,
the coherence of the symbolisation and the relation of
each part to the other is complete.

Mr. Wilkinson, in the course of a description of
drawings by the hand of his wife, says : —

GORBESPONDENCE A17D DEYELOFEMENT. 293

* Since I commenced giving this narrative, a new
developement has shown itself in the nature of the
drawings. The flower forms have ceased, and churches,
temples, and buildings, have been drawn, and after being
sketched my wife has been impressed to begin to paint
them, which she has done already with some success,
being told in writing what colours to use, and feeling
the brush sensibly moved through her hand

* In all the drawings, from the commencement to this
time, there is markedly a series of progression or
developementf so that the whole of them are wanted to
tell the story they would convey to «8.' *

I may refer to the drawings of ^ Comfort' and to those
of Mrs. William Wilkinson in full confidence that all
persons who have carefully examined both will see how
fully they confirm my words.

In its more outward bearing it is exceedingly in-
teresting to watch the progress of a spiritually drawn
picture. Its growth from the smallest original germ,
its gradual expansion, and enlargement at the extre-
mities or circumference, might suggest thoughts to a
physiologist on the production of perfect forms from a
simple cell. The first mark which appears under the
pencil is perhaps a dot. This is gradually increased till
it becomes a large circle, from which other circles are
expanded. The first becomes a head ; the last^ body,
arms, and legs ; and in every portion of the figure, when

* Spirit Drawings^ p. 34.

:'9mmmmmmm^^^^g9^^ « "w

294 FBOH UATTEB TO SPIRIT.

complete, may be traced its derivation from the original
germ in the first expansion of the circle. Often the
process is more complicated and curious, and the un-
suspecting artist is made to depict many forms, each
complete in its kind, before he arrives at the last. And
throughout the whole drawing every part, which has been
traced, shaded over, and erased, till it assumes the W
form given, contains within itself or has passed through
a whole series of correspondential figures, rising from
the lowest to the highest degree which is arrived at, or
which the medium's mind is capable of transmitting.
It seems that in spirit manifestation nothing stands alone
or without direct reference to its ' antecedents and se-
quents.' So we do not find any drawing or vision with-
Out meaning, or without the characteristics which mark
its place in the scale. The diflferent degrees must be
passed through before the guiding influence can arrive
at that one which is to be represented.

Hence many drawings (and every phase of medium- I
ship partakes of the same character) are prophetic,
rising from the present to the future state of the subject
Some are retrospective, having their subject and origin
earlier than this state and time, reaching it gradually,
and perhaps even passing beyond it. There is a pecu-
liar vrvterferencef if I may so call it, to which all medium
developements are subject. This arises from the in-
troduction of a fresh influence, which we must supp<?^^
to be more powerful than that moving the hand or

'•■^' "^v-r— -i-'V'— .fiBw - J. - ...^ I i^^mmmmi^^g^mtw^

CORKESPONDENCB AND DEVBLOPEMBNT. 295

impressing the vision, and which at once takes the
j>lace of the controlling spirit. A hand may be moving
t>o draw part of a series of pictures, descriptive of some
spiritual truth. A stranger suddenly enters the room —
'the images alter at once, and not until something is
drawn plainly intended for the new-comer, does it
"become evident that his state is now the one illustrated.
The efflux from the more recent sphere has overpowered
the former guiding influence. This impression by
atmospheric efflux seems to be perceptible sometimes
in the natural degree in other spiritual gifts, and to
give the power of seeing the antecedents or the futures
of those with whom the seer is in magnetic relation.
The well-known story of Zachokke^ who saw all the
former life of a young man whom he met with
accidentally, is a case in point. Zschokke says that it
often happened to him, while talking with a stranger,
to be so impressed in this way that the words and fea-
tures of his companion were hardly perceived, and he
seemed to himself as if contemplating, in a kind of
dream, the person's whole foregoing history.

I believe that this impressibility to atmospheres
which constitutes a medium is possessed by gypsies in
a great degree. The gypsy as often tells the past as
the future of the person consulting her. But she has
the clairvoyante perception usually in the natural
degree, like Zschokke, and this distinguishes her
^fortunes ' from the visions or drawings of a spiritual

296 FBOH HATTEB TO SPIBIT.

medium, through whom they are given correspondoi-
tially. I once asked a gypsy how she saw the fortune by
looking at the hand. She began to tell me a long
history about planets &c., which I cut short by talk-
ing of crystal visions. *Ah, then,' she said, *you
know as well as I do. We see it all in ghosU
* All at once ?' I asked. * No, as the things come, one
after another, in clouds ; but differently with different
people.'

It is more difficult to trace the developement of
spiritual hearing than of the other forms, because, except
to the medium himself, the progress cannot, as in the case
of the drawing or vision, be made apparent to others.
I have been told of strange sensations at or below the
pit of the stomach, and an extraordinary unformed
gurgling rising up till it reached the head of the
medium, when it seemed to form into a clear and
audible sound. The conflicts and struggles described
in all these processes are not absent in this form of deve-
lopement, and, as in the others, they are of two kinds, or
rather degrees ; one being produced by the antagonism,
in a physical sense, of the bodily organs to the spiritual
action, the other, the constant combat between good and
evil by which every step of the road must be conquered
and held, in the process of regeneration. Many per-
sons, when the mediumship is established, hear often
a tempting insidious whisper prompting to evil, and,
following this, the voice which is recognised as coming

■ ..b J'lU

COKRESPONDENCE AND BEVELOPEMENT. 297

from the angel-giver of all good counsel. Literally the
' two Voices.'

The observation of this fact ought to be turned to
practical use. It is not at all uncommon for confessed
murderers to declare that they were urged on by a
luhispering voice to the commission of the deed. Such'
assertions cannot palliate guilt, but they are numerous
enough to claim serious attention, with a view of
ascertaining both the nature of the phenomenon, and
the conditions which favour its occurrence.

In the instance of the hissing whisper heard by four
persons at the door of the haunted house, there was
every reason to believe the spirit of so very low and
earthly a character, that none of his most unpleasing
demonstrations required an internal opening for their
reception. His voice was like the whisper of a wicked
degraded being in the flesh, yet had enough of that
which was unearthly to show that it came from no
mortal being. The daemon of 8ocrates was an instance
of a guardian spirit, but its efforts seemed to be confined
to warnings, and the mediumship, as far as it is re-
corded, did not rise much above the commonest mani-
festations.

In the developement of hearing, the order in which
the names of impressing spirits appear is the same as
in the other forms of mediumship.

To give an idea of the immense variety in drawingSy
msvonSy and hearing y is impossible, for their number is,

298 FROM MA.TTER TO SPIRIT.

as the varieties of feelings and perceptions in mediums,
modified by every degree of opening between tlie mate-
rial and spiritual states.

All this will sound absurd and fantastic enough — ^but
the chronicler who narrates experience truly, and tries
thence to deduce a theory according to which all the
phenomena may become intelligible, must not be afraid
of a few startling assertions. The announcement of
most useful discoveries has been as startling to minds
unsuspicious of their causes, and perhaps as opposed to
scientific conviction, as are these guesses at spiritual
laws to the advanced science of our time. But scien-
tific men must not forget that till the first facts in
any study have been ascertained, inquirers are not in a
position to judge of inferences. Let the first experi-
ments be tried ; we may then argue fairly about
Conclusions.

A more complete view of this subject of correspon-
dence in its relation to mediumship, may be gained by
altering the light in which it was first looked at. I
have tried to show, that both by reasoning from the
phenomena, and by the assertions of the unseen
influences, we are led to conclude that the world of
spirit is as the vitalising and forming soul of which the
outer world is the material husk. If this be so, it
follows as a consequence that every object in creation
outlies and typifies its animating cause in the world of
spirit. And so every created thing represents some

W^. JP ^S^^P^^^^^^^p^^

CORRESPONDENCE AND DEVELOPEMBNT. 299

spirit-power, each 'power being a modification of the
one great central force, whose origin is in the will of
the Most High.

Each mind ha^ ita own peculiar set of symbols, but
there are some representations common to all, for all
liave perceptions of nature, and elementary spiritual
truths, in common; and the correspondence of natu-
ral objects with universal spiritual truths cannot be
confined to individual perceptions. A few of these
universal symbols have often been used in the writings
and drawings, and by tracing them through all their
combinations, we shall find that the laws regulating the
spirit-world are, in their degree^ the perfect counter-
parts of those governing the universe of matter. It
could not be otherwise, as a little thought will show,
but these truths are little suspected. When, for in-
stance, we hear the yearnings of friends for those who
are gone, and the painful anxiety with which they ask,
^ Shall we really he together y and recognise and love
each other y in the next life V it is plain that they have
not made their own the grand fact, that throughout all
creation sympathy and aflSnity are the only bonds
of union ; and dislike and unsympathy the powers that
repel and create distance. That which in matter is
chemical attraction and affinity, in spirit is love and
sympathy ; and when men's minds are in a condition to
compare the two, I believe it will be found that every
property of matter, ascertained in every direction of

300 FBOM liATTER TO SF^tlT.

scientific inquiry, has its corresponding phenomenon in
the inner world. Not to multiply instances needlessly^
I will mention one or two universal symbols; the
thought can be traced out by each one for himself; but
to some minds, the combinations will occur readily,
while to others the idea will seem valueless. The
perception and appreciation of different truths appear
to depend on mental elements, whose proportions and
combinations are shown by the form of the brain. In
the next chapter I shall try to glance at the subject of
phrenology in connection with influx.

The most important, as it is the most universal spiri-
tual symbol, is the Sun, which is used as a representation
of the Divine power in its direct action on the spirits
In other words, it typifies the Lord the Living World.
I once asked a spirit impelling the hand of a child,
* How does Jesus Christ appear m your world ? ' It
was written, * He gives the life to our Sun.^ At this
time the statements of Swedenborg, though known
verbally, were unintelligible to me. But I soon found
a wonderful agreement in all good spirit communications
on this subject. We are told in the Bevelations that in
the sphere to which the holy John was raised in his
glorious vision, * The Lord was the light thereof.^

A very little girl who had the gift of vision was once
describing to a friend and myself what she saw. We
had listened with great interest to her description of
very beautiful imagery, wondering at the symbolisation.

mfBWfsmm

COBBESPONDENGE AND DEYELOFEMENT. 301

of which the little seer never suspected the meaning,
when she said : —

'Now I see the Sun, and in it a nfiost beautiful face.^
* Wlioae faceV we asked. She hid her own and replied,
thM she must not ady the nxjrnie^ but that she should
soon see something more which would tell us. She
was silent for a minute or two, then said : —

'I see a very ki/adrlooking man sitting down with
some dear little children beside him. One is on his
knee, and he is kissing iL^

No child could have invented this vision with its
gradual descent from the high internal degree in which
she saw the Word as the divine life-giver, to that in

which He was manifested to her spirit aa the Saviour

«

who loved and blessed the little children. This child was
too young to have been taught any doctrine about the
divinity of Christ. She had been told to obey and trust
Him, but beyond the natural love which the gospel narra-
tive inspired, her belief was of the simplest possible kind.
The Sun of our system is conjectured to be one of the
many centres round each of which circle systems of
worlds. Inasmuch as from the sun of each system are
poured down the life-giving rays on surrounding worlds,
we trace in it the material of which our Father's love
and wisdom constitute the internal soul; and of that
love and wisdom in its action on our own spirits we find
the embodiment in the Son of God, the Word mxide flesh.
From this central type all others may be traced* As

302 FBOH MATTER TO SPIBIT.

the sunbeam falling on different objects is divided into
its component rays, sp that one thing reflects the red,
another the blue, and another the yellow light, with all
their varieties of combination, so is the action of the
divine light, the Wordy upon all spiritual natures of every
degree, and their appearance in the world of spirit is
according to laws exactly parallel with our laws of optics.
The evil spirit who is always seen as black or grey, or
of a leaden colour, cannot reflect the light of heaven
which, being received according to every possible variety
by the heaven-tending spirits, gives every possible variety
to their appearance. The loving nature reflects the red
element, the intellectual the blue, with all their inter-
mediate shades and degrees. Let anyone listen to the
description of a clairvoyante in a high degree of spiritual
developement, and he will receive a fuller and more
convincing illustration of this law of correspondence
than any I can give. The young lady who ^ found ' the
two children often gave wonderful explanations of her
correspondential visions. But her knowledge was gained
from spiritual sight and not from education. She
always described herself as passing from one degree to
another in a series of ascents. In the first she went
through lanes, groves, and gardens, like those of earth,
* only clearer and brighter and more reaV Then she
rose one degree and entered the gold and silver garden,
in which all the colouring of the vegetation was of the
brilliancy of metals. Her last and highest degree was

COKKESPONDENCE AND DEVELOPEMENT. 303

the jewelled garden where all the plants and trees, glo-
riously clear and delicate, shone with the rich splen-
dour of diamonds and coloured gems. In all these
she told of the spirits who dwelt there, and the ex-
planation of this wondrous imagery formed one of the
most beautiful and coherent lectures I ever heard.
Every portion of the dress of these dwellers in the spirit-
spheres shone with the glow and colouring reflected from
the * Light of the world ; ' and not only the robes, but
the crowns, clasps, and gems had each its own special
significance, whether in relation to the part of the
spiritual body which it adorned, or to the Sun whence all
the glory and splendour was derived.

Of the same character is the following vision of
Elizabeth Squirrell, published in the * Spiritual Maga-
zine ' for May 1863.

* The first time I saw a spirit, or into the spirit-world,
was on the afternoon of the third Sunday of my illness,
when I had a vision, but of such glorious beauty and
truth, that I can render but a faint reflection. I was
only twelve years old when this vision occurred. . . .
An hour before the vision I had as little conception of
what was awaiting me, as if I had never even heard of
existence beyond the natural one ; I had always, however,
considered intercourse with spiritual beings possible,
but this was wholly an intuitive conviction. I will de-
scribe, as well as I am able, my first vision, and you will
then have some idea of the nature of allmy spirit-seeings.,

304 FROM HATTER TO SPIRIT.

'I have always looked upon that first visioii as the
truest and most beautiful of all the spiritual scenes I
have witnessed. It came to me when I was in an
agony of mind consequent on a dread of death m^hicli
lay on me continually for many days like a nightmare.
I thought I was a great sinner, and that because of it
God could not love me, and I imagined, whenever I
thought of dying, hell with all its horrors yawning^ at
iQy feet. On the afternoon of the day of my vision I
lay on my sick bed in unusual weariness and listlessness
of body, but with the fullest and deepest tranquillity of
mind. I was so peaceful that I could have Tancied my-
self on the eve of an everlasting rest. There was no
gloom of doubt hanging over my soul, no fears brooding
within it, nothing came between it and its glorified
Eedeemer. Everjrthing about me tended to enhance
this pure celestial joy. It was early evening, and
within my room the sun shone, not with his most vivid
glory, but with a gentle fervour. The part of the sky
visible to me where I lay was of a stainless blue, while
in strong relief to its thrilling clearness stood ranged, as
far as my eye could look, a long line of tall green
poplars. By my bedside were seated my father and my
brother. I had held a long conversation with my dear
relations which had exhausted me, and I had lain quite
calm and still for many minutes in order to recover my-
self. As I lay thus unmoving with my eyes closed, my
friends, thinking me asleep, suspended their talking.

■«i^>9^9l

mmmmm

CORBESPONDENCB AND DEVELOPBMENT. 305

»>nd throughout the apartment there was a dead silence.
I was, however, thoroughly awake. I was so far from
iDeing in a dreamy unconsciousness, as to be almost pre-
■fcernaturally wakeful, and being painfully cognisant of
aU surrotmding objects and motions.

* While lying in this still and thoughtful position, my
attention was suddenly arrested by distant sounds as if
of human voices singiug. These voices were indescrib-
ably sweet and mellifluous, but carried to such ethereal
lieights as to induce in the listener a "tremulous
felicity of fear." I listened with my whole soul and
sense absorbed in what I heard. The singing ceased
not for many minutes ; and when it did cease, such an
excessive brightness of light so filled and illumined the
whole room, that my friends were hidden from me, and
I only saw one unspotted space of colourless brightness.
. ' A moment it remained full and fixed, and then it
parted and dissolved on either side of me, while I felt
as if rapidly ascending upwards higher and higher.
I seemed to ascend with full consciousness about me,
until I felt as if finally leaving the earth and winging
my way to Grod, and with a mortal's fear I shook with
amazement and apprehension. As I faltered, my ascent
was stopped, and I stood in a small enclosed space with
nothing remarkable about it save one very large
window which fronted the place where I stood, and
through which was pouring a flood of brilliancy utterly
overwhelming. I seemed to wait here a long while, and

X

306 FROM HATTEB TO SFIBIT.

feeling that I was in His hand, I prayed to G-od that
if it were His will to show me further of His mysteries,
He would enable me to endure their presence without
shrinking. Before I had ended praying, I was aware
of a presence beside my own in the place, and looking
up I beheld a person of majestic mien and stature,
gazing on me with looks of anxious and troubled tender-
ness. He did not speak until I asked him fearfully
and humbly, " Where am I ? Tell me, I beseech you,
Sir, to where am I brought ? '* " Ah poor distrustful
child," replied the spirit, ** can you not trust in Him
when your Grod is pleased for an instant to separate you
from your earthly friends and habitation ? But come
with me, for I have much to show you, but if you fear,
you cannot receive any truth arighV^ I answered that
I would have courage, and taking me by the hand he
led me up a long and narrow ascent, on the top of
which stood a large mansion. A house it certainly was,
though unlike those we inhabit here. It appeared
reared of the choicest and fairest marble, was vast but
most exquisitely proportioned, and altogether lovely and
pure in appearance. An extensive portico was supported
on either side by four colossal pillars, each of which
was thickly studded with what seemed diamonds ; the
entire top of the portico was wreathed about with white
blossoms. As we neared this lovely palace I grew too
happy for containment, and cried out with rapture to
my guide : —

CORRESPONDENCE AND DEVBLOPEMENT. 307

C €(

Surely this is the house called Beautiful! it
cnust be angels alone who could dwell here ! "

* On entering this lovely palace to which my spiritual
guide had brought me, a scene burst on my bewildered
gSLze, which could not be depicted so as to be realisable
l>y any except with the pen and spiritual knowledge of
an angel. Of its solemn grandeur^ mighty vastness,
a.iid surpassing glory and beauty, I can give no adequate
description whatever ; did I make an attempt, I should
"be only wasting words in vain speech. We were
ushered into what seemed a temple, for an immense
concourse of persons were assembled as if for worship.
I can give you no idea of the space occupied by this
assemblage, or of the number of the assembled. The
former appeared to be illimitable, and yet to be tra-
velled over at a glance, while the latter was so great
that the mind could not calculate it. The persons of
tie assembled were all so perfect, pure, and beautiful,
that I felt assured that I was in the midst of a company
of that heavenly host we read of in Scripture as " en-
camping round those that fear the Lord."

* Every individual of this vast congregation was arrayed
in a garment of purest white, while girdles of gold
encircled their waists, crowns of gold their heads, and
each held a book and a stringed instrument. On the
latter they with one accord performed, accompanying
the music with their voices.

' I, a poor frail child of eaurth introduced into such

! X2

308 FBOM ICATTEB TO SPIRIT.

hitherto unimagined glories and felicities, stood still,
speechless and afraid, npt daring to utter a word.
My guide saw my amazement, and, taking me aside,
spoke unto me as follows. " You are afraid," said lie
in tones of great severity. I dared not avoid a reply,
and said, " Forgive me 1 You are a spirit, perhaps in-
deed an angel, and such scenes as these ai*e your daily
meat and drink. With me it is otherwise." To this
my guide replied : " You ought as a ChristiaQ to possess
unlimited confidence in the good providence of God,
knowing that all things shall work together for good to
those that fear Him : not even a sparrow falls to the
ground without our Heavenly Father's notice ; He has
numbered the very hairs of our heads. But come,*' added J
he, ** come with me : we must give you spiritual instruc-
tion, and so help you to gain the necessary confidence
in our Lord," And again taking my hand, this spirit
led me into an apartment, small, but the perfection
of beauty and order. In this room a few persons
were convened, bearing a close resemblance to those
of the larger congregation. In the centre of this
group, and in the attitude of one who teaches, stood a
man of most solemn and heavenly bearing. Before him
lay an open book, apparently the word of Grod; his
right hand reverently grasped its leaves, while at
intervals he stooped and touched it aflfectionately with
his lips. The preacher, for such he evidently was, was
descanting on the love and wisdom of God, as seen in the

^^■1 Lj ''^'''^'fi^B9999cr'ijr:.u9*jJBaimamessBBBi^SBSSSBf^safS'!!PSfSSSy?ip

COKBESPONDENCB AND DEVELOPEMENT. 309

C5xeation and preservation, and then in the redemption
SLU-d regeneration of man. I listened breathlessly, .for
"fclie words seemed as if spoken exclusively to me:
I listened, and presently my terror had fled, my assu-
x^uace was full and unbroken. Presently the preacher
ended his discourse, the assembly dispersed, and again
taking my hand, my guide led me forth into a place
or state even more glorious and grand than I had seen.
There were mingled young and old, all uniting in
perfect peace and harmony, although variously em-
ployed. Some were formed into groups, whence they
sang and read together from the word of God; some
^weie dictating spiritual exercises and lessons, while
others were instructing little children in the way and
work of Grod. Every individual was beautiful — not one
deformity of face or form was distinguishable of all the
myriads that were here convened together. Every face
was a sure index of its possessor, and reflected back
nothing but the light of a pure, holy, and loving soul :
none were unemployed, all were in happy joyous activity.
There were no bickerings, no angry contentions ; here
each acted towards the other with perfect charity and
love, and with all meekness, patience, and gentleness ;
wisdom and intelligence in their brightest array beamed
from every eye and sate upon eVery brow. There was
no subject of a moral, spiritual, or celestial interest, of
which they could not converse, and with the fullest un-
derstanding of what they uttered. I can still remember

310 FKOM MATTEB TO SPIKIT.

the substance of what they spoke ; but to reproduce
it in their own language^ would be beyond a mortal's
power. Whilst I waited in this heavenly abode^ a
company of spirits came round me, and, conversing
gently with me, gave me much spiritual counsel, and
even temporal advice. They told me the nature of mj
illness, and what would be the best treatment for me to
receive. They assured me of many strange conditions
of body into which I should relapse, and of much per-
secution and contempt of which I should become the
subject. **But,^ added they, "be assured that every-
thing will ultimately tend to the glory of God, and to
the progress of your own regeneration." '

In this last description of a vision, which seems to
have closely resembled an awakening after death, we
find the order of developement the same as that given
by Swedenborg and other seers — tilie hearing first, then
the vision. This is the opening from within outwards,
not, as in the growth of mediumship, the gradual pene-
tration from without to the inner sense. The vdndow
opening on the second degree is an example of the kind
of symbolism so often mentioned*
" Water is one of the symbols common to all mediums
and seers, and all agree in assigning the same meaning
to it. It is truth in every degree, whether forming a
J stream or river to be crossed — which is a new truth or
degree of knowledge gained before another state can be
entered — or springing up as a fountain, such as the

^■'^ia»""«3^^-^^*w^BaK^^i^P^IB»WBaMPBa^"*«iW5

COBRESPOKBENCE AND DEYELOFEMENT. 311

young spirit described as having risen* up in his
liouse.

The good spirit, whose face Miss L recognised in

-the photograph, first announced his presence by drawing /^
a well, from which a man was winding up buckets of
ivaber. He said that he had been ^working Jiardy
drawing much water and drinking some.^ His ideas
of spiritual life while upon earth were possibly very
different from those which awaited his earnest, truth-
loving mind on his entrance into the next life.

I have spoken of the ExodvLB^ and must recur to it,
as to other forms of symbolisation, in treating of the
correspondences in Scripture. But there is one other
image equally common, the fitness of which will be at
once recogDised. Spiritual developement, as has been
said, is in its degree a process like birth in the material
plane. If, therefore, the law of symbolisation holds
good in all its relations, we must expect, by tracing
this correspondence into its different relations, to find
the material symbol answering to mediumship. And
no one type, through all the range of experiences, is used
so often as that of a child. I have known very many
persons, who, before the opening of any spiritual degree,
have wondered at the number of times they have
dreamed of young infents or little children. Every-
thing connected with the care and growth of infants
gradually appears in these dreams, and the appearance
and character of the little subjects of the dream corre-

312 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

spond to the Idnd of mediumship about to appear. It
would require many pages to enter fiilly into this most
wonderful yet most coherent portion of the subject
Let it be remembered that the promise of a child is the
prediction of a spiritual opening in an individual, and
then it will be seen how deep a signification is borne by
the prophecies of Scripture on the birth of Our Xiord,
Himself the focus and embodiment of all spirit-life in its
descent on earth. In the language of correspondence,
the birth of a child typifies the growth and xmfolding of
the spirit. Had the followers of Joanna Southcot been
able to interpret this inner tongue, they would not have
brought ridicule on themselves and their cause by con-
founding the symbol of spirit-life with the conditions of
the outer world.

Such visions as those of Elizabeth Squirrell partake
of the character of dreams, of which it seems the place
to speak here. I believe that it will be found that the
conditions under which dreaming takes place are very
like those of some other forms of mediumship. The
dream is an opening, in a greater or less degree^ of the
inner sense during sleep, and to gain some idea of these
degrees of opening, we must consider the phenomena of
clairvoyance. It generally happens, when change of
state is complete, that the clairvoyante forgets on
awakening what has been said or seen in the trance.
But this must depend on the completeness of the open-*
ing or closing ; I have heard a clairvoyante say, ^ De^

^^^"^^^■^^^^■■■VlMV^ViV

COBBESFONDEKCE A17B BEYELOFEHENT. 313

mesmerise me thoroughly when you awake me: I do
not wish to remefmber what I have seen when I awakeJ*
And impressions are often made, the effect of which
remains on awaking, though the clairvoyante has then
no idea whence they came. All mesmerists would con-
firm this. I have seen a girl who had an habitual nervous
catch when awake. In her lucid state she promised her
xnesmeriser that she would not twitch her arm. When
awake, she found herself unable to do so, but did not
know what prevented her. In these cases the change of
state seemed to be complete.

I was once told by a patient who remembered every-
thing on awaking that in her case the streams of mes-
merism only went a very short way into the brain. Had
they penetrated to the top and back of the head — she
pointed to the organ called firmness — all would have
been forgotten.

All these degrees of penetration and opening of the
inner sense, with the remembrance or forgetfulness, may
be applied to dreams. I know many persons who, on
going to sleep, feel a sensation like fa/nning or mesmer-
ising. After this they are impressed in different degrees,
sometimes only having a kind of idea, sometimes a dim
vision of scenes and figures following each other and
melting away in turn like dissolving views, and some-
times falling into a sleep more or less deep, in which
all the scenes and pictures become more vivid and real.'
In the deeper state resembling trance, the dreamer

314 FBOH MATTES TO SPIRIT.

enters as a clairvoyante into the spiritual state^ of which
the incidents are probably more often forgotten than re-
membered.

On the physiological conditions by which these
remembrances are regulated I will not presume to
give an opinion. They must be investigated by those
whose scientific knowledge of their brain and nerves
will give them an excellent foundation for experiments
in the higher branches of psychology, when attention is
systematically directed to the meeting-point of the two.
It is quite certain that deep spiritual dreams are some*
times recollected, but in this case they may perhaps be
called trance visions. Such, too, are those in which the
dreamer or seer seems, like E. Squirrell, to pass from
one state to another by well-marked degrees, each state
being a farther advance than the preceding, into the
spirit-world. Of this kind are those which are some-
times remembered as a ^ dream within a dream,' and on
awaking the outer dream is remembered, but the inner
dream sometimes lost. * I once,' said a friend, * wished
much to understand some spiritual truth which seemed
to me to defy explanation. One morning the whole of
what I wished to know became quite intelligible; the
difficulties had disappeared, and a clue unsuspected
before seemed to have been given. I could not help
connecting this enlightenment with my dream of the
previous night, or rather morning, in which, after going
through a gate, I found myself walking in a pleasant

'^f^^^^u^mmi^^mm^mm^^^^

OORBFSPONDENGE AND BEYELOPEMENT. 315

field. Beside me was a much esteemed friend who had

lately left this world, and^ as he walked along with a

tright countenance and elastic step, I wondered that he

virhose death had so lately caused our sorrow, should be

so well and strong. My companion opened another

gate, telling me that he was going to take me to a house

Ixidden behind some trees, where some friends of his

^would give me what I wanted. I was conscious of great

delight in the society to which I had been admitted, but

remembered nothing more, and the awakening was

sudden and complete. It hardly seemed as if I had slept

at all.' This last remark reminds one of the return

to outer life from clairvoyance, when the mesmerised

person will often feel quite certain he has never

been asleep. The first gate in the dream implied

the change to a state like the spirit's most external

one ; the other gate which he opened was a degree still

deeper.

Many really prophetic dreams arise from the opening
of a degree in which some spirit conditions, such as the
substitution of state for time and place, are attained, but
the dreamer, still among objects of this world, is in the
situation of an earthly clairvoyante. There are some
strange grotesque dreams having also something of the
prophetic character, which arises from the annihilation of
that perception of sequence which constitutes Time, and
which have a kind of symbolism of the very simplest
character. Of this class are the dreams spoken of in

316 FBOH HATTEE TO SPIBIT.

dream-books, and interpreted after a lawless fashion by
ignorant people, who however perceive, in their constant
recurrence in connection with some event of life, a co-
herence claiming a nobler origin than the pork chops
and other indigestibles which have been made answerable
for them by the learned. For example, we often hear
even educated persons say, ' Whenever I dream of such
an object or fact, a certain event happens.' The object
or fact symbolises the event, and the symbol, often a
strange or familiar one, is remembered but not understood.
Such is the dream of stale meat or decaying fleshy so
generally believed to precede a death. I am speaking
now of the belief gained from dream-books, and held by
the uneducated; but it is easy to see that this stale
meat is a universal symbol for the very lowest material
view of the change into another state. A person whom
I know to be truthful has many times announced to me
that a death would be heard of, for she had been dreaming
of being at church. At first I took little notice of this,
but found at last that her expectation was always con-
firmed by the reception of the news. In her case the
symbol of death was a degree higher than the meat, for
she was a religious but not an enlightened woman, and
her idea of death was connected with some indefinite
notions of religion. All dreams of every degree which
are not merely derived from confused action of the brain
as sleep is coming on (and which of course compose the
greater number) occur after the brain and nerves have

^r^^^mm m^^^mm^^^^^^m^'''^i^^^^^m'mr^^^m^^amt^

CORRESPONDENCE AND DBVELOPEMENT. 317

been calmed by the first sleep. Hence the saying that
^ morning dreams come trae.'

There is one deeply interesting question allied to the

subject of dreams. When we seem, in, sleep, to be with

friends who are gone, are they really with U8^ or do

their images only recur, in either a typical order or an

incoherent jumble, to our minds? If my attempt to

trace some of the simplest laws of spirit-life has not

been altogether a failure, this question is answered

already. I have endeavoured to show that (independent

of revelation) there is the strongest presumption of the

continued existence after death of all human beings ;

that we, during this life, under certain conditions, pass

into a state, something like that of those who are gone ;

that this occurs in clairvoyance, dreams, &c. ; that the

risen being passes from one state to another of glory

and happiness, or the reverse ; and that our ability to

perceive beings and objects in these diflferent states

depends on the seer's capacity for entering into deeper

and deeper degrees of inner life. When to these we

add the fact, proved by so much experience, that aflfection

and sympathy are affinity and attraction, and thought,

presence in the spirit state, we find the strongest reason

for believing that dear friends are really present with

us in our dreams. Indeed, it is only strange that we

are not more often conscious of their presence : but this

unconsciousness is not a proof that they are not there,

for they may be with us, yet unable, from the failure of

318 FROM UATTEB TO SPIBIT.

magnetic conditions^ to make their presence apparent ;
or, the conditions being favourable, we probably often
receive from them comfort and counsel, the memory of
which is lost. If our friends sometimes appear to us
in dreams under strange aspects and circumstances, this
is but an illustration and confirmation of those laws of
correspondence which I have tried to explain. We see
a dear sister, or brother, looking younger and brighter
than when on earth, but we cannot reach him, or
perhaps he cannot speak to us, though we speak to him.
Or perhaps he stands on a hill which we cannot climb,
and we wonder, if his love is like ours, that he does not
come nearer. All these varieties of perception are
caused by varieties of state, and the symbolical form
assumed by all communications from a spirit in the
next to one in this state. We began this chapter with
symbolism, and to that universal law we have returned.
Many and various are the hidden spiritual treasures
which will be brought to light when the knowledge
of Correspondence is gained. Only its simplest elements
can be attained in this life, but as the window * opens
wider between this state and the next, the objects of the
spirit-spheres will become more clearly visible.

The difference of perception in the two states is ex-
pressed by the apostle: 'Now we see as in a glass,
darkly (or in symhols — the Greek word is enigmas)^ but
theriy face to face^

* Wind^w^ in Hebrew, is a word formed from one expressing

spiritual yision.

319

CHAPTER XIV.

INFLFX AND INSPIXIATIOX.

T HAVE already made large demands on my reader's
-^ power of belief, but for every inference hitherto
drawn there has been a foundation of some kind
in experience. If the theory of Inspiration in the
following chapter should seem more systematic and
complete than is justified by facts, I beg to be under-
.stood as only oflfering thoughts suggested by much
fragmentary information gained from various sources on
an obscure subject. If I can thus give a new direction
to an inquiry, which must be completed by better and
more advanced thinkers than myself, some indulgence
may perhaps be extended to errors which will soon
become apparent, but which at this stage of knowledge
are unavoidable.

We have seen that all communication from the
spiritual sphere is couched in the language of Cor-
respondence (though in simple messages from spirits
near to earth this may not be at first apparent), and
that, in the developement of mediumship, the character

320 FBOlf MATTER TO SPIRIT.

of the impressing spirit rises with the gradual opening
of the inner sense. The symbolism also consists of
different degrees, rising from the representations of
objects near to earth — ^which express good or ill accord-
ing to their characters and the character of the spirit
whose surroundings they are — ^to the glorious imagery
of the highest angel world. Two conditions are neces-
sary — the character of the inspiring source, and that of
the medium or channel of communication ; for by both
these acting together the quality and form of the
message is determined. Not that the human vessel
alters the heavenly stream, but that each current has its
separate source and its appropriate channel^ and the
most direct channels must be traversed by streams from
the purest fountain before the work of spiritual regene-
ration is complete. To attain this state of receptivity,
a purifying process is needed ; but the amount of puri-
fication required varies in different individuals, and
this explains the fact that to innocent loving children *
visions and communications of the highest character
are sometimes given, confirming the words of the
Psalmist, * Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings.
Thou hast revealed streTigth ; ' and the assurance of our.
Lord, in speaking of little children, that * Of such is
the kingdom of HeavenJ

Before going farther into detail as to the elements of
character required for each degree of communication,

* See page 301.

j;jj'J,- ^— T^^~'^^i^

^^■^m^mmmmmnmmB^^'^^^Kim^mm''^^f'^mm^fmmm

INFLUX AND INSPIRATION. 321

I must say a few words on the division of the brain by
phrenologists, involving a mental analysis so wonderful,
-that had it been the result of thought and invention
only, its author would have been set on a pedestal as a
philosopher, instead of rather being held worthy of the
pillory as a quack. But Gall did not invent, probably
no human mind could invent the marvellous grouping
of mental elements which his system displays. He
simply observed patiently and carefully, what mental
and moral tendencies were found united with certain
forms and proportions of brain, and when his arrange-
ment of faculties was completed, the whole, barring
some imperfection inseparable from a first work, dis-
played such a harmonious system as no mental philo-
sopher has ever tried to frame without falling into a
hopeless confusion.

The lower range of organs in the head contain that
portion of the brain which is used in the reception of
impressions from earth. They form the animal elements
of character. Sensuality in every form, Combativeness,
Destructiveness, Secretiveness, Love of Gain, &c. These
are the organs ministering to self, needed in due pro-
portion in this life, but sadly overgrown through in-
dulgence, and requiring all the restraint that conscience
and religion can impose, until their power shall be
diminished, by that conquest of evil by good, which the
fuller developement of their superiors will effect.
These self-organs do not lie in the forehead. The

T

322 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

lowest range there consists of susceptibilities of the
very simplest impressions from the outer world. Form,
Size, Colour, Sound, Number, and Language, the last
being behind the eye, which itself corresponds * with
intellectual light.

These are the mental perceptions needed for carry-
ing on material life, and many of these as well as the
less exalted feelings, are shared with us by the animal
creation in their different degrees. Above the lowest,
at the back of the head, comes a range one d^ree
higher. They are the affections, binding us to our
kind ; Adhesiveness, Love of Children, Love of Home,
Caution, &c. In the front, the higher intellectual organs
are compounded of the lower and simpler ones. The
powers of observing events and individual things are
centred, as might be expected, between and above
those perceptions of which the knowledge of individuals
and events is formed. Ascending one step we find
Comparison immediately above the last named, and in
the middle of the forehead. The function of this organ
is analogy and classification, the perception of objects in
space, according to some metaphysical writers ; and its
situation directly above the perception of complete
objects, and slantingly above Locality^ the perception of
relative place, shows how well it was so designated.

* I think it is Mr. J. D. Morell who remarks, that the nerve of sight
is nearer the intellectual region, and the nerve of hearing nearer the
affectional portion of the brain.

T^K^T^

(

INFLUX AND INSPIBATION. 323

Comparison, when fully developed in an intellectual
"brain, gives a perception of analogies, and, united with
SL neighbouring organ, the perception of differences,* a
power of classification.

Causality, on each side of Comparison, is always
defined to be the power of tracing cause and effect.
This power has been called by some of the best mental
philosophers, the Jinowledge of objects in time. I pre-
fer this last definition. It is situated above all the
simple perceptions and immediately over Time and
Order, It is a complex perception, uniting the func-
tions of all below it. Close above this is the Perception
of Differences already mentioned, and ascending a step
on each side, the portion of brain which has been called
Ideality, whose function, however, seems hardly to be
as yet understood, and to which I must return after the
examination of those in the top of the head. And here
on the vertex as a centre, to which all others should
converge, we find that organ whose work it is to convey
impressions to and. from the Highest. Veneration is
the name given. I believe that just as the Philopro-
genitiveness conveys those impressions from parent to
child, and vice versa, of which the parental feeling is
composed, so does the high and central organ commu-
nicate with its Holy Object. It is the perceptio4 and

* No. 20 in Gall's numbering. This was named, Wit or Humour, be-
cause it gives that needful element of humour, a quick perception of
what is incongruous, but its elementary function is simpler and higher.

Y 2

■

I

324 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

impression of our relation with our Heavenly Father.
But each organ has different degrees of action^ and
though the highest impressing power of Veneration
is divine, yet that organ is, like the others, open to
action from lower sources.* On each side of Veneration
is Hope, the perception of the future ; in its proper and
highest function, the knowledge of our next state. In
front of Veneration and between it and the higher
intellectual organs lies Senevolence, whose function i^
the conveyance of all kind and good feeling among
men. On each side of Benevolence is Sympathy, called
from its lowest form of action Imitation, and above this
and between Hope and Idesllity lies the organ of Marvel-
lousness, giving in its higher action a relation with the
inhabitants of the spirit world ; as Hope which it imme-
diately adjoins gives the perception of our own futura
In its lowest form of action and poverty of combination,
Marvellousness degenerates into wonder-loving and

* Whenever it is possible I am glad to confirm a theoretical state-
ment by a fact, and facts illustrating this scale of influences may be
found in the phenomena of Phreno-Mesmerismf or excitement of the
different cerebral organs of a sensitive person while under mesmeric
influence. I once asked leave of a patient to tiy some experiments of this
kind. The eyes were tightly shut, and I pointed to some of the organs :
when my finger was directed to Veneration, the patient said, ' I don't
know why, but I feel as if I must get wp and how io y<m^ and the action
would have followed the word if I had not desisted. This was one of
many such instances. The feeling induced by spiritual action on an
organ is that which necessarily follows from the relation of the redpifiut
with the giver of the influx.

1' iin' .. ■■gT'*»;y.>JF. -vj „ M, ^.n.. >■<»_, .g,L _'■■*' "Ui --i-, - ''W-i*. !:*i-"— ..^jy^^SS^-.,-.." .>"

INFLFX AND INSPIRATION. 325

STiperstition. The poet's especial organ of Ideality, above

CoBstructiveness and adjoining Marvellousness, seems to

consist in a redundancy of imagery borrowed both from

below and above, for its power of adaptation and putting

together arises from Constructiveness, and its material

may be found both in the earthly perceptions and in the

spirit spheres.* Behind Veneration is an organ whose

name must I think at some time be changed. It is called

Finymess, and is supposed to give persistency of action

or feeling, which in truth it does, but only in its lower

form : and on each side is Justice, giving a perception of

the relative rights of our fellow beings. I have passed

* That combination of organs by which the poet's gift is secured

seems to give rather an intense perception of harmony between the

inner and outer worlds than any special redundancy of ideas, though

this last forms a mighty element of power. All the undefined charm of

real poetry arises from the correspondential element, which gives to the

simplest utterances the depth and beauty of their internal sense.

Wordsworth is an instance of a writer whose verse is less melodious

than that of many less impressive poets, but its soul-touching character

is due to this internal perception. The absence of the quality makes his

often quoted man who could look at every object only in its earthly

aspect: —

* A primrose on the river's brim

A yellow primrose was to him,

And it was nothing more.'

And Dante, though with a more dramatic and less analysing eye, saw,
like Swedenborg, the visions of another state, is not only the seer
describing what he really perceived in the world of spirits, but the poet,
who, if his internal sense had not enabled him to recognise the realities
of that world, would still by his indwelling faculty have given a true
imagery to his grand Drama.— P. 12.

326 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

these last organs over quickly, as my object in giving
the slight sketch has been to show the gradual ascent
from the lowest and most earthly feelings to those
which place us in relation with the highest spiritual
spheres. The lower form the animal, the higher the
angel. And their place in the head corresponds with
the work they have to do.

It will be said, what has all this to do with inspiration ?
Truly, I could not write of inspiration without having
secured an understanding on the part of my reader of
the degrees of receptivity in the brain corresponding
with the character of influx from a spirit source.

Appended to Mrs. Crosland's Light in the Valley^ are
some little diagrams drawn by a spiritual medium illusi-
trating the direction in which the influence comes from
the spirit to the medium at the different stages of de-
velopement. Such diagrams are probably not exact
representations, though at page 54 they may be the
best illustration that can be given of the subject. In
the earliest stage, the influence falls in a horizontal
direction ; the spirits, though not necessarily evil, are
near to earth. They give earthly names, and act on that
part of the soul of which the affectional portion of the
brain is the organ. Of these are all the near friends
and relations ; they generally convey their messages in
very simple imagery ; and with them, as if taking ad-
vantage of the opening of the inner sense, come the
worthless and mischievous beings, who, like the bad

I ^ I J» i^^fl^^^p^^i^^^^ep^EaSPfS

wjwiiiiii II

INFLFX AND INSPIRATION, 327

spirit in the diagram, mesmerise the basilar region of
the brain.

After this series, the direction of influences as given
in the diagram is diagonal, falling from above sideways
on the head. This comes from the second order of
spirits, described before, as giving the names of those
who when on earth were distinguished by some strongly
marked feature of intellectual or moral character.
These spirits are represented as acting on those portions
of the brain which are fitted to receive the higher order
of impressions from earth, and the names they give
correspond with their work. Sometimes these are of
poets, and sometimes philosophers or philanthropists,
each having some general aflfinity with the character
of the medium, and showing by the name both the
spirit's own character and that of the society or order
to which it belongs. For we are told, that in the state
in which sympathy is as nearness or affinity on earth,
spirits fall as by natural attraction into those groups in
which they find companionship ; as we do here whenever
the conditions are favourable. By the hand of a
writing medium, who is an admirer of Moore or Camp-
bell, some kind of imitation of their lyrics may be
written, with the signature of either poet, and the
writer, till the matter is understood, glorifies himself ac-
cordingly. But the pleasure taken in any one phase of
mediumship short of the highest, is a halting on the
middle step of the ladder, and will hinder progress.

328 FROM HATTEB TO SPIRIT.

So the direction of influence gradually rises, till at
length it falls vertically into the top of the head, and
then the highest and holiest names are given as the
sources of inspiration.

While all these diflferent currents are at work, good and
evil contending for mastery, all sorts of cross-magnetisms
occur, and the spiritual growth is a struggle and a
process in which we may trace an order analogous to
that of the moral growth and intellectual developement
of every human being.

It is this struggle of contending forces which is re-
presented as the exodus of the spirit, when it comes out
from the Egypt of intellectual labour into the wider land
of spiritual knowledge, and those ideas and perceptions
which had been the object of its striving in the first
state have become the instruments for embodying the
more enlarged perceptions of the next.

The word Influx includes every degree of spiritual
impression : Inspiration should I think be limited to
the direct action of the Holy Spirit upon the spirit of
man-; and the inner breathing, which in different de-
grees accompanies every stage of developement, is most
silent and deep when coincident with impressions from
the Highest Source. It is the effect of Inapi/rcLtion.

As the typical people could not have their ark of
the covenant, or their holy of holies before the exodus
from Egyptian bondage was complete, so must each
soul get beyond the bondage of ideas gained by its own

- ii»l,l ^M^p-iMp^W^^^^png»— ^^^^^^^^^^Wf^lP

INFLUX AND INSPIRATION. 329

intellectual eflfort before he can be enlightened by the
communioii of the Holy Ghost. The process of libera-
tion -wliicli I have described as a struggle, includes both
the conquest of self in the most internal feelings, and
the perceptible action of spirit influence. Neither can
be well or safely accomplished without constant and
earnest prayer, which is as sending up a vessel to re-
ceive the heavenly current, whose gentle but irresistible
power will purify body, soul, and spirit, bringing all
into perfect harmony with the will of Grod. When the
Boul has thus been made ready, swept and garnished,
the sunlight will fall direct from above as into a temple
whose roof is open towards heaven ; while into the earthly
tabernacle whose windows open towards the world, it
will enter through the mist and smoke of earth, re-
fracted and dimmed by every material object.

A young child has all the mental and moral elements
of character from the earliest period, but all are not
matured at the same time. The physical senses first
become receptive and are strengthened by impression
suited for their exercise.

The simplest mental perceptions come next, and
then, as needed by the incyreased requirements, all the
others in turn ; but the more complex the receptivity
(for I conclude those generally named reasoning powers
among receptivities, or perceptions) the longer does it
take in gaining strength and maturity ; and I believe it
will be found that the simpler mental perceptions grow

330 FKOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

faster than even the earliest affections. There seems to

be in each life a fixed period for the strengtheniDg of

different elements of character, and the growth of the

portion of brain by which impressions forming that

element are conveyed. Wrong training and forcing,

as in the vegetable world, may give an under-growth

and prematurity to any organ, or set of organs, but it

should be the teacher's study to find out the heavenly

or natural order, and when his teaching is added to the

teaching of nature, to supply the growing soul with

those impressions only which can give it strength

and nourishment. When God's will is thus carefully

obeyed in education, we shall cease to see young brains

crammed to insanity, by an excess of indigestible food,

and young brains strained and worn out by the effort to

carry burdens beyond their strength, till the whole system,

if it survive the one grand triumph of a college honour

or a gold medal, falls prostrate on entering the threshold

of life, unfitted for that real labour, for which these

early triumphs ought only to have been the preparation.

It is not only the stronger brains of men that are thus I

sacrificed. The institutions called Ladies' Colleges

might, but for this infraction of God's law, be a boon

to women, and an instrument of great good to the

world, but by the forcing system which is encouraged

by the directors and teachers, young girls whose brains,

like delicate quick growing plants, need warmth and

ease, and sunshine to strengthen the fibre for fiiture ^

INFLFX AND INSPIRATION. 331

"w^ork, are urged to compete in examinations, till
ambition takes the place which more genial womanly
feelings should have filled, the time is fully occupied
"by preparing for classes. Life, if this is, becomes a
turden, instead of a delight, and mind and body, both
of which should have been strengthened by a timely
alternation of nourishment and rest, become weak and
inejBficient, through the undue demand made on
their powers. We may hope that our great-grand-
children will be wiser than ourselves. If they are so,
what idea will they form of their ancestors' wisdom,
when theyhear that in 1863, young girls were in the
habit of attending as many as seven classes at a college,
and spending eight, ten, or even twelve hours out of
the twenty-four, in the brain and nerve-destroying
work of passing for examination ?

The passions are to the moral nature, what the per-
ceptions are to the mental. After them, the aflfections
strengthen, as the need for them arises, and friendly
affection and parental love are, in full maturity, before
religious feeling has attained its growth. Each age has
its appointed work to do, and its capabilities prepared.
Were this not the case, that wonderful adaptation which
is seen throughout aU God's creation would be wanting
in his most complete works. As we should expect, in
the natural order of developement, those feelings
which form the link between us and Heaven are the
last matured, and they must come into full exercise

332 FBOM MATTER TO SFIBIT.

as we approach the change for which all earlier
developements are intended to prepare us. It is a
melancholy reversal of orderly growth, when the re-
ligious life is weak in the aged heart.

All periods of growth, whether in the natural world,
spoken of in the Hebrew as a day^ in the spiritual dis-
pensations as they are sometimes called, in the periods
of a life's teaching, or in the flow and ebb of the life-
stream from heaven in the soul, arise from the action of
successive waves of influx from the First Fountain. The
subject is too complicated to be entered on in detail,
were I able to do more than give the merest outline of
the teaching that has come to us. But a question
arises at the outset, which must be met to avoid seeming
incoherence. In what does the wave of influx which
opens the perceptions to all external nature differ from
that by which glimpses are gained of the world of
spirit ?

' That is not first (in its earthly developement) which
is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterwards
that which is spiritual.' The outer sense is opened first.
The influx differs only in its degree of action. That
which gives life to the body and opens the external
perception is the tide of our every day life and growth,
and falls in with our natural habits and feelings, so we
find no unusual state induced by it, and hence receive
all from God unacknowledged. And as the wave of
influx falls into the material sphere, it gives birth to all

"^w^^^ wm

INFLUX AND INSPIRATION. 333

time discovery and real science, while the recipient who
IjinowB not whence his power is derived, believes that
Ills own unaided genius is the cause of all his mental
a^^hievements.

With two exceptions the spiritual communications in
the early part of this volume came through young or
uncultivated mediums. The following through an
educated mind is on the subject of influx in the natural
world. It is written through the hand of Wm. Howitt,
-whose uninfluenced works need no eulogium from
me.

*He who bestows intelligence, who ever and anon
endows the earth with a new man or a new discovery,
breathing intimations of a new dawn, opening vistas
into new regions of capability, and thus for ever adding
to the mass of human achievement and scientific afflu-
ence, yet taking no credit for it, but allowing his
children to adorn themselves in his own splendours and
his own honours ; shall he stint his gifts according to
the laws of the world's wisdom ? Who has set bounds
to his power or his will, to his munificence, or the modes
of his operation ? Who has issued laws of reason, and
rules of logic which shall bind Him ? His paths are
still higher than the clouds, or the atmosphere of earth;
ay, far beyond the stretch of the subtlest wit's imagina-
tion ; and as he astonished, and even scandalised the
world of old by walking with the untaught, and abiding
with the little ones of the earthy so now, and in many a

334 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

coming age, his footsteps will be seen amid the wilder-
ness of strange things, and his profoundest plans shall
appear but folly to the glow-worm greatness of proud
dust.

' Throw thyself boldly on the broad sea of divine
bounty, and thou shalt swim in the unfailing billows of
life and spirit. The world is still before the hopeful
son of the infinite, fresh as when first trodden by the
first man. As God perpetually clothes anew the bosom
of the earth with verdure and flowers, and ripens ever
anew fruits as luxuriant as at first, so does he still pour
into the heart-soil of new generations the powers and
the glories of new thought. Neither knowledge, nor
invention, nor imagery, nor truth, nor imagination
shall grow old or threadbare : whilst new years return,
new flowers wave in the warm breeze, new harvests
ripen, and the soul of man, feeding on the soul of the
infinite, desires to grow more like its Maker, and finds
in the consciousness of his blessings, an ever-expanding
greatness in himself.'

* Man, awakening to his place and progress in eternity,
seems to exist in an isolated state, unseeing of more
ethereal natures, and apparently unseen of them. But
this isolation is only apparent ; around him swarm more
advanced beings, and from them he receives various and
incessant aids, influences and ministrations. Through
them all is diffused the infinite life and soul of the
universe; the ocean of oceans, the atmosphere of

INFLUX AND INSPIRATION. • 335

atmospheres, embracing, quickening and sustaining all
things within it ; the principle of all being, spirit, intelli-
gence, and power, the one great omnipresent soul, the
illimitable and incomprehensible God.

^ Unseen, yet ever present, ever and ubiquitously
cognisant, Grod is perpetually felt in the forces and ten-
dencies of our nature. Whilst leaving us as it were
alone, that we may assume and possess freedom, he is
never absent in his vigilant and love-inspired providence,
and having, consistent with this necessary freedom, in
all ages made his presence more sensibly felt by pro-
phets and saints, by dreams and inspirations, in this
more advanced age, he steps, as it were more palpably
from his concealment, and by the spirit of his Son,
CJhrist the Word, and by a host of his divine messengers,
converses more openly with his creatures.

* So fail the proud in despising the treasure-chambers
of humility, forgetting that their own birth is from the
earth, the common matrix of the diamond, the ruby,
the gold widely worshipped, the lofty priest, the infinite
beauty and poetry of the flower-kingdom, and all the
mineral and chemic substances with which physical
science works proudly yet darkly, but on its useful way
by hands whose touch it feels not. Happier far are
those who are too humble for conceit — the dazzled
darkness of men erring at summer-noon — but feel the
guidance of angel-fingers, and fear no misleading in
the garden of Grod.

336 FROM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

* The children trust and play — the blind think they
see and drudge — the mill-horses of physical fixation.
Better the broad hemisphere of spirit than the narrow
workshop of artisan intellect.'

When the influx comes direct from a spiritual source
to the spirit of men^ it demands for its reception a
more internal opening of the senses, and, to prevent
confusion, the outer or every day senses must be closed
during its entrance. Thus, inspiration in any degree
causes an unusual state in the receiver, while, as has
been said, the passage of the spirit through all
degrees till it results in the usual cerebral action, is
only the work of every-day thought and life. That
which is known as genius results from receptivity of
brain and temperament. The gifted man of genius
may be inspired so as to become a glorious prophet, but
genius is not inspiration.

The whole human race is God's child, and, as the
little crystal teaches us the form and properties of the
massive rock, we may learn from the natural growth of
an infant mind, the order followed by our Heavenly
Father in His spiritual education of the world. This
thought has been treated before by religious writers,
who might, perhaps, have used it with fuller eflFect if
they had made a clear distinction between spiritual and
intellectual receptivity in education.

The young perceptions of the infant nation open,
like those of a child, on the outer world, from which

INFLUX AND INSPIBATIOK. 337

ixnpressioiis can only be taken in and assimilated by
degrees. The period of this reception is the earliest of
tide world's history; all natural objects now become
fsimiliar to the race, that they may serve as the material
for future knowledge ; and this is the time when Adam
xiames the creatures and the trees in Paradise. But
ixito such simple minds the spiritual stream pours
swiftly, and the rise may be rapid : and hence, perhaps,
tlie very general idea of a golden age, when men talked
-with ihe powers of Heaven. In these early times,
-when the knowledge of external nature has not reached
"below the surface of things, the waves of influx find
"but a simple alphabet to write with; but though the
imagery cannot go beyond the knowledge gained, it
ifl equally good for all the purposes of spiritual teach-
ing, and, in fact, the only form in which the Word of
God can descend into the souls of men. Thus,
though the early religions are expressed in the most
familiar symbols, those symbols are true, and the ex-
pression is the work of the Holy Spirit, representing
the internal state of the recipient. But as the age
passes on, and new generations take place of the old,
a deeper and better comprehension of material laws is
gained, and the old symbols are cast aside as childish
notions by the learned of the time, who know them
only in their outer sense. On the other hand, those
well-defined forms and positive expressions, which are
rejected by the uninspired philosopher, become objects

z

338 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

of blind adoration to the uninspired devotee, who guards
them jealously, believing that, were his idols cast from
their altars, nothing would be left. This is the beginning
of the conflict between science and religion. In the full-
ness of time, a fresh supply of divine life (called reactioa
in the world) gives light to the stored up knowledge ;
Grod breathes into man the breath of life, 'the dry
bones live,' and all the outer world is seen to be in.
harmony with, and representative of, the spirit world
within. Such a wave entered the soul of Swedenborg,
and the so-called Mystics, all of whom agree in the
truth symbolised, but differ as to the form in which
it was made known to them. Again, the shell
strengthens and becomes incrusted around its germinal
idea, and the searcher into natural truth condemns it
altogether as a worn-out superstition. In this manner,
forms of worship grow up and decay : but throughout
all the changes which* follow each other in an ascending
scale from the simplest idea of a higher spiritual power
to the teaching of the Son of God, the symbol used
wraps up and involves an eternal truth, to be gradually
evolved as the prophetic mind becomes furnished with
images for its expression, and as the nation is prepared
to receive it.

I have tried to trace the process of developement in
its different forms ; in the birth of a child, in the earthly
life of a man, in the growth of the soul, and in the
never-ending advancement of the future life. Growth

INFLUX AND INSPIRATION. 339

om within, and rejection of the outer garment when
it has ceased to embody the vital force, is seen in all
processes and in every degree of creation. It is the
law of influx, which is the same as saying it is the law
of life. Compare the earlier with the later descriptions
given in this book. One of the first sensations men-
tioned was that of regular fanning accompanying
impression. This is produced by the spiritual influx in
its simplest form, falling in regular waves corresponding
to the waves of light or the breathing of the lungs,
each breath bearing in a fresh supply* of vitalising power.
Agreeing with this idea of growth, it is found that not
only is each vision (or other form of impression) a
series of scenes, but that the visions themselves follow
each other in regular order, every successive series form-
ing a necessary part of what the first vision or drawing
comprehended as if in rude outline, so that no one part

* There is, I think, reason to suspect that the Greek word ohlav in its
primary sense signified wave of influx. Its Latin equivalent cBVum is
sometimes used without reference to time, and in the sense of growth ;
as by Horace,

* Crescit occvlto veiut arbor avo

Fama MarcellV — Ode xii. b. 1.

Here the gradually expanding growth of a tree, to which the increase
of Marcellus's fame is compared, conveys the exact idea.

Plato's well-known doctrine that God made the world by the Logos,
through the iBons (vu&vti) which were supposed to be spiritual emana-
tions, becomes intelligible with my reading of the word auiv. This will
appear more plainly in the next chapter, in which the Logos will be
spoken of. It is to the purpose that the Welsh call the stream of inspi-
ration falling on the bard the divine Awen,

Z 2

340 FBOH HATTER TO SFIBIT.

of the whole process could have been left out. And the
character of the instruction rises by successive waves
from the simplest influx to the highest and holiest
degree of inspiration. A similar process on a larger
scale is carried on in the spiritual teaching of nations
and of the world.

Prophecy, though in later times the word has acquired
a limited meaning, was not originally confined to pre-
diction. This will be more apparent in the next
chapter. The commonest forms in which coming events
are seen in these times are clairvoyance or dreams ;
for when the spiritual sense is opened in either stat^
the conditions of time and place, which are measures of
our present life, disappear, and m whatever direction
the spirit is drawn by sympathy, events which have not
yet occurred will appear present. Persons too may be
seen in a spiritual state who are at the time strangers
to the bodily sense, but who are met and recognised
years after. Many prophecies given in all forms of
spirit mediumship are symbolical, and these are never
understood till fulfilment. Of this kind were many of
the prophecies of Scripture, and the predictions of the
heathen oracles ; but the first, being in a higher degree,
and given from a divine, not simply a spiritual source,
were far more comprehensive and universal than the
local or personal predictions of Delphi or Dodona.

We have always found spiritual predictions, if from a
worthy source, fulfilled, though the fulfilment has taken
place in a manner and at a time quite unexpected.

!■- --^ -^^ ~".«««V-»'-^--»-'-^^'^V'J— ifrv*^ -^■^. .,.L<AF.>^,^*:!s,if5S

INFLUX AND INSPIKATION. 341

Time seems to be an element which cannot be trans-
lated from the spirit language into ours, and if any spirit
seems to hazard an assurance that in one or two years,
or days, or hours an event will occur, it may be con-
cluded, either that the period indicated is not to be
understood as an earthly measure of time, or that the
influence, if a good one, has not complete control over
the medium.

In times when the action of spirit was more observed
and better understood, a prophet was the recipient of the
wave of influx, though the form it might take would be
according to his organisation and power of transmission,
and as the prophet has been the receiver and transmitter,
so the priest has been held to be the interpreter of
spiritual symbols ; hence there has always been a class
possessing a knowledge of their inner meaning, and by
this class the knowledge has been formed into an
esoteric system. The careful exclusion from the mys-
teries of all but those who had been initiated was
perhaps inevitable, for to most persons the inner sense
wotild be a sealed book, and the external a meaningless
or possibly dangerous rite. The Egyptian hieroglyphic
is an instance of symbolical writing intelligible only to
the priestly caste. And we shall find in the hiero-
glyphics an illustration of another statement, namely,
that some objects are found to bear the same corre-
spondential meaning in religious writing throughout
the world. Perhaps the sim which is always given in

342 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

modern spiritual experience as the material outbirth
of the Highest Power, the first remove from pure spirit,
is the most universal of these symbols. In all heathen
worship, in the grotesque and mystical Egyptian, in the
graceful refined Greek, and the beautiful easily-inter-
preted Scandinavian mythology, every legend and fable
has made the sun and his power as, after the Unkn(yum
Cause, first the type, and then the object of adoration.
And this could not be otherwise, for till the inner
essence is openly manifested the type will be generally
worshipped. The religion is according to the spiritual
degree of the worshipper, and there must be as great a
variety in the forms of mythology as there are pro-
cesses in nature and powers of spiritual reception in
the medium.* To the seer of any country, the pheno-
mena peculiar to his native land furnish the scenes and
actors in his spiritual drama; but there are also ele-
ments common to all religions, and these have been
thought to prove a derivation of their legends from

* Another illustration of my meaning. Each of the mythological
deities personifies some manifestation of spiritual power. Thus Hexmes
or Mercury represents the spiritual influence in many of its well-known
forms of action. Both in the Greek and Latin mythologies he is a
healer ; his Caduceus had the power of giving health, of inducing sleep
and of waking the sleeper. He is the Tnessenger of the gods, and in the
Greek is called rjyiirofp dviipav, the leader of dreams, because his office is
to conduct dreams from Zeus, by whom they are sent, to the sleeper.
In the ancient Arcadian religion Hermes is the fertilising god of the
earth.

«S3B*

INFLUX AND INSPIRATION. 343

one another, or from a common origin. It is true that
all the reh'gions of the world have a common origin,
but that lies deep in the inner spirit of mankind and
its receptivity of the divine light, and is not merely
tbe inherited legendary lore of a remoter age.

It is not doubted that even in the earliest Gentile
religions a very large amount of spiritual truth under-
lies the now worn-out human element ; when we have
learned to distinguish the two, and trace the boundary
line which separates them, the study of mythology will
become both more interesting and more philosophical.
The symbols will afford a key to the national character,
both moral and mental, and their inner sense will show
us to what degree the education of His children had
been carried at that time by our Heavenly Father.

In these days of scientific research, when matter
and its supposed inherent laws are dwelt upon to the
exclusion of all that cannot be seen and heard and felt,
unbelief must and will prevail for a season. But if we
are now near the culminating point of an intellectual
age, when some of the creeds and symbols which have
embodied spiritual truth in former times are rejected
as dry crusts, we are also entering upon an age of
influx, when that which is superfluous and material in
religious systems will fall away and perish, while all
that is true will remain, a pure channel for the life and
light of the Word of God.

344

CHAPTEE XV.

THE WORD OF GOD.

TT7HAT is the meaniiig of the phrase^ the "Wobd

' ' OF GrOD ? Within the churches and without the

churches^ applied vaguely by honest reli^onists, and

fietlsely by dishonest ones^ the simple phrase^ which in

old times conveyed the idea of the Messenger of Peace,

has become the watchword of strife.

f

The words have lost their first import as the know-
ledge of internal spiritual things has died away. It
is an instance of what has been already said^ that with
the growth of time expressions and symbols, losing
their essential meaning, are ill-used by the theologian
and rejected by the philosopher.

We must look to the Bible, its acknowledged record,
for the meaning of the Word, and we may find, as
in other cases, that when its specific sense becomes
clear, all the learned rubbish which has accumulated
round the phrase will fall away, taking with it the
confusion and discord inseparable from argument un-
enlightened by spirit.

THE WORD OF GOD. 345

The Hebrew debar y translated Word, bears in its

root the idea of driving, or throwing oflf ; that is, ema-

xxation or efflux. I must beg the reader to follow me

patiently through a few texts, applying this thought

till the invariable use of it in the sense of spiritual

influx has made its original meaning apparent. And^

remembering that the Word is the holy influence of

Grod's Spirit on the spirit of man, we should also bear

in mind the description given in the last chapter, of

the action of successive waves of influx in creation. I

have spoken of its earliest creating action in the

mineral, then in the vegetable, then in the animal

world — ^higher still, its descent into the mind, where it

operates as intelligence; and, finally, its more direct

influx, giving spiritual life and impression to the soul

of man. Every wave forms an aldv, an age, period, or

day, and each wave, acting on the conditions prepared

for it by its forerunner, leaves the world one degree

higher in developement and refinement, so that the last

age is always one degree in advance of the preceding.*

* Whether these effects are each respectively produced by successive
waves or by one period of efflux in its different degrees, I do not con-
jecture. The result is the same, nor does it affect the truth of the
doctrine that it* was held 2,500 years ago. I have been assured by an
eminent naturalist that the successive formations in the geological and
zoological worlds bear evidence of having residted from an order such
as I have described. A developement by successive outpourings of
creative power is very different from that by which our pedigree is traced
&om apes and monkeys.

346 FBOH KATTER TO SPIRIT.

In this first sense of creative energy, we find the
Word used in the Psahns : — * By the Word of the Lord
were the heavens made^ and aU the host of them^ by
the breath of His mouthJ

This is generally passed over as if meaning simply,
' By command of the Lord,' &c. But, if the Psalmist
had a distinct meaning, he would not have said, in this
general half-figurative way, that the Lord made the
heavens by His command, and then breathed their
spiritual inhabitants into being. I take the mea ni ng
to be — the heavens, or higher worlds, were the result
of the outpouring of God's vital power, their hosts, one
degree above, by a higher efflux.

In Psalm cxlvii. 15, is another instance of the applica-
tion of the Word to natural creation, * He sendeth
forth His covimandment upon earth. His Word rwnr-
neth very swiftly.^ The context shows that a simple
dictate or ordinance could not be meant.

Again, verse 18 — ^ He sendeth forth His word, and
meUeth them {ice\ He causeth His wind {or spirit) to
Tnove^ and the waters fiowJ*

In its healing life-giving character. Psalm cvii. 20 —
' He sent His Word, and healed them. In its action
on the spirit — 'Quicken Thou 7ne axicordvag to Thy
Word;'* and again — * Thy Word hath quickened me.^

In these, which are chosen from many instances, the

y^ vital emanation from God, who is the Fountain of life,

is spoken of as the Word. But when we examine the

y

THE WORD OF GOD. 347

number of cases in which the Word is spoken of as
coining to the prophets, we shall find but a small pro-
portion in which the full sense would be attained by
translating debar as a word in the sense of an audible ^
sound, or even a command. Like all spiritual influx it
takes diflerent forms of manifestation. It comes some-
times as an audible voice, sometimes as an impelling
influence, sometimes by writing, and sometimes, indeed
most often, by vision. Whenever a prophet utters his
inspiration (and the diflerent forms of utterance show
that by the same law which I have traced the phrases
and symbols are those of the recipient), the expression
is, * The Word of the Lord ' came to that prophet. The
burthen of a prophet is the influx which presses him,
that which he must utter before he can speak from him-
self. In Malachi i. 1, we find, * the burden of the Word
of the Lord^

1 Samuel iii. 6. * The Word of the Lord was rare in
those days : visions were not frequent^ *

This clearly expresses the fact that the influence from
God was at that time not often received. The history
goes on to tell of the voice heard by the child Samuel,
evidently not an alarming sound, for he supposed that
Eli had called him. In Genesis xv. 1, we find that the
Word of the Lord came to Abraham in a vision.
In 1 Kings xiii. 1. ^And behold! there came a man

* This is De Wette's translation ; the EngKsh common version differs,
but is less coherent. Either translation would support my argument.

■^

348 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

of Ood out of Jwdah by the Word of the Lord ' (by
the impelling influence). Here the two words used to
express the divine power in Man of ' God and Word
of the Lord are dilBFerent ; the prophet is a man of the
spiritual powers, Elohim ; the Word is from Jehovah,
the highest name.

When Jehoram and Jehoshaphat went together
against the king of Moab, and became uneasy as to the
success of their enterprise, Jehoshaphat asks, verse 11,
J^ ^la there Twt here a prophet of the Lord,

^ that we may enquire of the Lord by him?^ (One of

the king of Israel's servants tells him that Elisha is
there.)

12 And Jehoshaphat said, ^ The Word of the Lord
is with him.''

The kings then went to Elisha, who after some hesi-
tation allowed himself to be consulted, but the influx
was not on him constantly, for he required the power of
music to induce the prophetic state. He says, verse 15,

* But now bring me a minstrd.^ And it came to
pass when the minstrel played, the hand of the Lord
cams upon him.

In 2 Chron. xviii. 4, Jehoshaphat says [to Ahab king
of Israel, ^ Enquire I pray thee at the Word of the
Lord to-day.'*

Four hundred prophets were consulted, who de-
livered their oracles, but they were not trusted. Jeho-
shaphat asks for a prophet of the Lord ; and Micaiah is

^

THE WOKD OP GOD. 349

"brought to him. The messenger who brought Micaiah^

^verse 12, begs him, ^ Behold the words {oradea) of the

jprophets are good to the king with one assent ; let thy

^ijuord I pray thee he like theirs^ and apeak thov,

good^

1 3 And Micaiah said^ ^As the Lord (Jehovah) li/veth,
even what my Ood {Ely spiriUpower) saith^ that wiU
I speak^

Micaiah's ' Word ' comes in the form of a fine sym-
bolic vision.

16 ^/ did see aU Israel scattered upon the moun-
tains as sheep that have no shepherd; and the Lord
said ; " These have no master^ let them return every
7na/a to his house in peaceJ^^ '

18 Again he said^ 'Hear the word of the Lord^
And again the word comes to him in a vision higher in
degree and more internal than the first, for the
first is only earthly, the last spiritual symbolisation, ,
In Num. xii. 6, the Lord said, 'Hear novo ray words.
If there he a prophet among you, I the Lord will make
myself known to him in a vision, and will speak with
him in a dream.^

It would be tedious to enumerate all the instances in
which the Word of the Lord is said to have come in
one form of manifestation or other to the prophets.
And the same prophet who uttered the Word^ or Words,
saw also visions. Isaiah i. begins —

1 The vision of Isaiah, &c. Ver. 10, Hea/r the Word
of the Lord, &c.

350 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

Chapter ii. ver. 1, The Word that Isaiah the prophet
saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

Isaiah ix. 8, The Lord sent a word unto Jacobs and
. it lighted upon Israel. This last has great meaning-, it
is a part of the prophecy of the Saviour.

Jeremiah v. 13, And tlie prophets shall become

wiTid^ the Word is not in them.

y/ I might multiply quotations, but these will be

suflScient to prove my assertion, that the expression

* Word of God ' meant originally the Holy Influx by

/p^hich our Heavenly Father has in all time acted on

^ the spirits of His children for their instruction and

guidance. Plato, who seems to have risen to a spiritual

knowledge beyond all except the early prophets of

Judea, called this Word the Logos,* and taught that

\,^by it the world was created through the aeons, al&vss.

We will now turn to the New Testament — the history
of the New Covenant, the higher dispensation and more
complete union of the Spirit of God with the spirits
of men than was possible during the earlier ages of
the world, but for which union the whole Jevdsh dis-
pensation had been the preparation. And here we find
the word in Greek, the Logos, John i. 1. But we must
remember, that the Hebrew debar and its Greek
^synonym logos comprehend eveiy degree of eflflux from
the source of life, whether it result in the formation of
a world, in a prophetic dream, or in a healing miracle.

* See note 1.

THE WORD OF GOD. 35 L

The Apostle John's description of the word is im-
measurably more perfect and more sublime than any
attempt at explanation ever made by scholars or

theologians.

John, Chapter i.

1 In the beginning was the Wordy and the Word
"was with Oody and the Word was Ood.

2 The same was in the beginning with Ood.

3 All things tvere made by Him* and without Him
was not anything Tnade that was made,

4 In Him, {or in it) was life ; and the life was the
light of men.

5 And the light shineth in darkness ; and the dark-
ness compreheTided it not.

6 There was a man sent from Ood whose name ivas
John.

7 The same came for a witness^ to bear witness of
that Light, that all through hi/m might believe.

8 He was not that Light, but was to bear witness
of that Light.

9 The true Light vjos that which, coming into the
world, lighteth every man.

10 He was in the world, and the world was made
by Him, and the world knew Him not.

11 He came unto His own, and His own received ^
Him not

* The Greek would bear ' by itf and this translation might suit the
original meaning till after the birth of Christ.

352 FBOM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

12 But 08 many as received Hi/rriy to them gave He
power to become children of Oody and sons of God,

m

even to them that believe on His name.

13 Which were bom, not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the wiU of man, but of Ood.

14 And the Word became* fiesh and dwelt with us,
and we beheld His glory, the glory GjS of ah only

\ begotten of a Father, fuU of grace and truth.

Nothing can more Kterally agree with the explanation
given of the Word than the assertion that m it is life,
for the creating and vitalising influx is life itself, and
(light, in every degree, from the sun's ray and its
appointed mental receptivity to the intellectual and
spiritual light with which, in their degrees, the ray
corresponds. John the Baptist, having the inner vision,
was to bear witness, and saw in the perfect symbolism
of heaven the dove alighting on the Word made flesh.

In early times the Word of God falling on the spirits
of holy men made them sons of God, regenerate through
the Word. But in the fullness of time, that the Spirit
of God might be more closely united with the spirit of
man, the divine efflux became flesh, and, having been
the bearer to earth of purification, redemption, and
forgiveness, ascended again to the former state, and
shed forth the Holy Spirit upon all believers. This
opening of the kingdom of heaven is the cUmax in the

♦ €ytyerOf passed into, occurs 1 CorintliiaBS rv.

THE WORD OF GOD. 353

history of the Word itself, but its work, in the form of
the Holy Spirit the Comforter, is still going on, and of
its triumphant progress a glorious vision was seen by
the aged John, in Patmos.

Ebvelation, Chapter xix.

1 1 And I saw heaven opeTiedy and behold a white
horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful
arid Truey a/ad in righteousness he doth judge and
make war.

12 His eyes were as afiame offire^ and on his head
were many crowns ; and he had a nxmie written^ thai
no mmi knew, but he himself.

13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in
blood: and his nxume is called The Word of Gtod.

Every word of this splendid imagery has its sym-
bolical meaning. The Word is on a white horse, i.e.
supported and carried through by a pure intelligence.
Perfect truth is His essence ; His eyes, a flame of fire,
show the brightness of spiritual knowledge; and the
crowns, his manifold powers. We have still to consider
names^ and we shall find the fullness of meaning con-
veyed by the expression. He had a name written, that
no man knew, but He Himself. He purifies the world,
* bearing the sword and treading the wine-press' — ^and
this will be the work of the living Word till the
conquest of all evil is complete and His name ia
known, King of kings, and Lord of lords.

A A

354 FBOM tfATTEB TO SPIBIT.

The Word of Crod, then, is the phrase used in
Scripture to express the outpouring efiSux from our
heavenly Father in its creating, life-giving, and in-
spiring energy, and in its redeeming and sanctifying
power; and the Bible is the history of the Word in
all its degrees of action and modes of manifestation,
\/ from the simple processes of magnetic healing and
clairvoyance to its full and perfect manifestation in the
person of the Saviour, the Word made flesh.

If this is true, we may expect to find allusions io
various magnetic and spiritual processes in the Bible.
And we shall not be disappointed. I will first bring
together a few instances of spiritual action in its lowest
forms.

In 2 IQngs v. 10, we find a reference to mesmerism
made in such words as to lead to the belief that it was
commonly practised by the prophets, who were also in
early times called healers. Naaman the Syrian having
been sent to the ICing of Israel in order to be cured of
his leprosy, Elisha shows him how much more power-
fill is the healing which he practises than the mesmerism
which was expected. The prophet desires Naaman to
wash seven times in Jordan.

Verse 11 But Naaman was wroth^ a/ad said,
Beholdy I ihoughty He will surely come out to me, and
stand, and call on the name of the Lord his Ood,
and move up and down his hand [marginal reading]
over the part, and recover the leper.

THE WORD OF GOD. 355

We find another instance in the history of the

prophet Elisha, of whom Jehoshaphat says. The Word

of Ood is with hi/m. Hearing of the death of the

widow's son, Elisha first sends his staff" by Grehazi,

desiring him to lay it on the face of the child. (All

mesmerisers have seen similar processes.) But this is

ineflfectual, and Grehazi returns, telling his master of

the failure.

2 Kings iv. 33. He {Elisha) went m therefore^ and
shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the
Lord.

34 And he went up, and lay upon the child, and
put his mouth upon his mouthy and his eyes upon his
eyes, and his havds upon his hands : and he stretched
hvmselfupon the child ; arid the flesh of the child waoced
warm,

35 Then he returned, and walked in the house to
and fro ; a/ad went up, and stretched himself upon him:
and the child sneezed seven times, and the child
opened his eyes. y

I have not referred in the preceding pages to a form of
mesmerism known as Hypnotism, and practised by some
persons with success. In this process, sleep, or a per-
fectly passive state, is induced by making the patient
fix his eyes on some object held before him. During
this passive or receptive state a healing influence seems
to be imhibed ; but I have been told that the operator
is as much exhausted by the process as by regular mes-

A A 2

356 FROM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

merism. Any operation by which an internal state is
induced, or, which is the same thing, by which the
external perceptions are shut up, is beneficial, provided
the brain and nerves are not tried during the quiescent
state.

We find a striking instance of this mode of cure,
with many noteworthy circumstances, in Numbers xxL 6.
The children of Israel having become discontented, on
account of the hardships they endured in the wilder-
ness —

Verse 6 The Lord sent fiery* serpents among the
people, and they bit the people; and much people died.
Then Moses prayed for the people, and, after the Divine
direction —

Verse 9 Moses made a serpent of brass, and putU
on a pole, amd it ca/me to pass, that if a serpent had
bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass,
he lived.

Thus there was not only the operation of healing
in the way described as hypnotism, but the beautiful
symbol of the Great Healer, who was to be raised up
before He could draw all men to Him. The image is
very perfect, if we remember that the mode of healing
produces a more internal state in the subject.

I need hardly refer to the direct healing of our Lord
and His apostles. But a few words are necessary to

^ See Note 2 at the end of the book.

THE WORD OF GOD.

357

f^how that even these eflFects of the vitalising power of

the Word were processes of which the immediate cause

and agency can be traced. If by miracle we understand

an act not coming under this definition, then assuredly

the cures, and even the raising of the dead by the living

Word, were not more miracles than the birth of a child

or the growth of a tree. But their cause, though real

and apparent, lay far beyond the reach of educated

or uneducated humanity, unassisted by spiritual power.

When the Saviour was among believers, the very eflFort

of His will, uttered in * Damsel, I say unto thee. Arise 1 '

poured life into the lifeless girl ; and in like manner.

His Word raised the widow's son and the entombed

Lazarus. When He restored the man blind from birth,

a process was used, and the clay which contained the

vital influence was to remain on the eyes till washed off

at the Pool of Siloam. But we learn in Mark vi. 5,

that He could there do no mighty work, save that He

laid His hands on a few sick folk and healed them.

. The corresponding verse in Matthew says. He did not

many mighty works there, because of their uribelief

(Matt. xiii. 58.)

We see, then, that even the Word itself needs some-
thing in the recipient to make it eflfective. That
something is faith, without which we can do nothing,
but with which we may by God's help move moun-
tains.

I have traced the Word of God from its lowest to its

358 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

highest degree of healing. We find it also in earthly
clairvoyance and in heavenly vision. For the first, when
Saul had lost his asses, he went to a prophet to find
* where they were.' And this was called enquiring of
Ood equally with the most importaat consultations.

Saul, having his money ready for the prophet's gift
or fee, asks where a prophet may be found.

1 Samuel ix. 9. Beforetime in larad^ when a man

*

went to enquire of Ood, thus he apake. Gome, and let
iL8 go to the seer : he that is now called a jprojphet was
beforetime called a seer.

Samuel tells Saul that the asses about which he had
come to consult him will be found, and then follows
the history of Samuel's noble seership and ministry of
the Word.

Every part of the Bible is full of spiritual vision in
every degree, so that the enumeration of instances would
only cease when the greater part of Scripture had been
copied out. After earthly clairvoyance, which we find
in Samuel and Balaam, we may mention divining in a
cup or a crystal, for the process is the same.

Joseph's brethren had left the court of Pharaoh to
return to their fether, and Joseph, to bring them back,
orders his steward to put money into all their sacks,
and his own cup into the sack of Benjamin. The
steward, who searches the sacks, is directed to say;

Gen. xliv. 5. Is not this it i/n which my Lord
drinkethj and whereby indeed he divineth ?

THE WORD OF GOD. 359

Much has been said in the foregoing chapters on the
gradual opening of the spiritual sense. An illustration
of this part of the subject is found in the narrative of
Elisha's vision of Elijah's removal from earth.

2 Kings ii. 9. Arid it came to paaa, when they were
gone over^ that Elijah said unto Eliaha, Ask what I
shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee.
And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of
thy spirit be upon me.

10 A.7id he said, Thou hast asked a hard thvng:
nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from
thee, it shall be so v/nto thee; but if not, it shall not
be so.

Elisha saw the chariot and horses of fire and the
whirlwind which formed the sublime symbolism of the
prophet's change of state.

We have seen (p. 193) that in any removal, a
symbolism immeasurably lower in degree, but the same in
its correspondential character, would be presented to the
vision of any seer whose spiritual sense was opened to a
degree in which spiritual take the place of earthly objects.
Elijah, it appears, was not certain whether his successor
was susceptible of as great a degree of spiritual sight
as he himself possessed, and this vision was mentioned
as a test by which the depth of Elisha's power could.be
estimated. Elisha had not, until the time of his pre-
decessor's departure, equalled him in prophetic power,
and the greater opening took place on the occurrence

360 FROM MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

of a spiritual process involving a large outpouring of
influence.

Of Ezekiel's glorious visions I am almost afraid to
speak. Such imagery is too high to receive a short or
simple interpretation, but the vision in the first chapter
is in one respect so like the developements of writing
and seeing which have been described, that I refer to it.
It seems to be the description of successive outpourings
of spiritual power, with all their characteristic circum-
stances, and, following one of the laws of spirit-mani-
festation, it is the introduction to and epitome of all
succeeding visions. The imagery is perfectly symbolical
of the action of spiritual power.

Ezek. i. 13. As for the likeness of the living creatures^
their wppearance was like bumi/ng coeds of fi/re : it
went up cmd down among the living creatures f and
the fire was bright, and ouJt of the fi/re went forth
lightning.

Compare the description, pp. 128 and 186, of the sdn-
tillating appearance in the light* and of the luminous
rays, like flashes of fire and lightning, seen by sensitives;

The picture rises to the likeness of a throne, and of
Him who sat on it, and the imagery becomes grander,
till in the centre of a rainbow the prophet sees the
likeness of the glory of the Lord.

28 And when I sa/w it, I fM on my face, and I
heard the voice of Hvm that spake.

* Note 3.

THE WORD OF GOD. 361

As before described, sight in this instance comes
first., then the deeper state, preceded by trance, or fall-
ing on the face, and then the opening of the spiritual
eax. The succeeding visions are continuations of this
introductory one, which exceeds in splendour of imagery
and intensity of correspondential meaning everything
but the spiritual scenes in the Apocalypse.

I must not remain too long in the consideration of
the Jewish Scriptures. Simple imagery, such as has
often been met with in dreams and visions in these days,
is found in the vision of Peter, by which he was directed
to instruct the family of the Gentile Cornelius, who was
himseK also spiritually told where to find the welcome
teacher. The whole history, contained in Acts x. xi.
is too well known to be extracted, but it should be
read in connection with the thoughts suggested by
an examination into spiritual phenomena.

A very simple suggestive vision was given to the
Apostle Paul, Acts xvi. 9, There stood a man of
Macedonia : and prayed hi/niy aayvag^ Come over into
Macedonia^ and help us. This vision had an earthly
sphere for its object, and the imagery was earthly and
simple accordingly.

The sudden conversion of the Apostle Paul was

brought about in a manner which is intelligible to

those who have witnessed many spiritual manifestations

in various forms and degrees.

The outpouring of influence was apparent to some of

362 FBOX MATTEB TO SPIBIT.

the company in one way, to othera in another, ^wiiik
Saal himflelf^ ita immediate object, received it Jui a
stroke of lightning by which he became for a time
miable to see.

Actsix. 3—

And as h^ journeyed, he ca/ms near Damascus: and
svddenly there shi/aed rotund about him a light froTn
heaven;

4 And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying
unto him, Saul, Said, why persecutest thou met

5 And he said. Who art thou. Lord? And the
Lord said, I a/mJesus whom, thou persecutest; it is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

6 And he trembling and astonished said. Lord,
what wilt thou have m^ to dof And the Lord said
unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be
told thee what thou mvst do.

7 Arid the men which journeyed with him stood
speechless, hearing a voice^ but seeing no m/jm.

8 And Saul arose from the earth ; and when his
eyes were opefned, he sa/w no mom, but they led him by
the hand, and brought him into Damascus.

When Paul afterwards gives a narrative of these
occurrences, he says —

Acts xxii 9 And they that were with ms saw indeed
the light, and were afraid; but they heard not the
voice of him that spake to me.

This seems like a contradiction, but I do not think it

THE WORD OF GOD. 363

really so. Persons who have seen much of such

manifestations as even those lesser ones which I have

described, know how every degree and variety of sight

ajid hearing would be opened in an assembly of people

of different degrees of susceptibility on such an occasion.

The first history says, * hearing a voice (perhaps only a

sound), hut aeevng no rrwin! This does not imply that

none of the party saw the light, but that they did not

know whence it came. As in the history of Peter and

Cornelius, a second person, Ananias, was at the same

time called to participate in the work.

The outpouring on the day of Pentecost was at-
tended with the ^ usual concomitant phenomena — a
rushing mighty wind, an appearance of flame or fire in
the form of cloven tongues, and then the influx of the
spirit.

In the marginal reading, chap. iL 6, we find, instead of
when this was noised abroad [Greek, when this voice
came\ which las^ referring to the spiritual voice of the
apostles, is no doubt the right translation. That the
multitude consisted of the devout Jews, from every
nation under heaven (ver. 5) is plain from the different
languages in which the Word came to the ear of each.
The faith of these devout men formed a fit condition
for such reception. The sound {this voice) was spiritual ;
but as in other manifestations, each hearer's inner sense
formed it into the words and phrases familiar to his
ear.

364 FBOM MATTEK TO SPIRIT.

The spiritual writing is mentioned in Scriptuxe v^
every degree, from that by the hand of a prophet to the
direct impress of the finger of God.

The highest instance occurs Exodus xxxiL 15 —

And Mosea turned, cmd went down from, the Tncmntf
and the two tables of the testimony were in his hxznd:
the tables were written on both their sides ; on the one
side and on the other were they written.

16 And the tables were the work of Ood^ and the
writing was the writi/ng of Ood, graven upon the tables.

There can be no question that this was direct spirit-
ual writing in the very highest degree. Precisely the
same word (for writing*) occurs in 2 Chron. xxi. 12,
where we find that

There came a writing to him, {Jehoram, king of
Judah) from Elijah the prophet^ sayi/ag^ Thus saith
the Lord God of Israel^ &c.

The margin gives, which was written before his
deathy but this is mere conjecture of the translators,
who were naturally puzzled by the statement; for
Elijah had been dead at the time of Jehoram's recep-
tion of the writing four years at least

In 1 Chron. xxviii. we have a notable instance of
spirit writing and drawing, on an occasion where sym-
bolism of the most perfect kind was necessary. While
instructing his son to build the temple, for which he
had received Divine direction —

* See note 4.

THE WORD OF GOD. 365

Verse 11 Then David gave to Solomon his son the
jpoMenm of the porch^ &c. &c.

12 And the pattern of all that he had by the spirit y
of the courts of the house of the Lord.

19 All this {*8aid David) the Lord made me wnder^
staTid in writing by His hand upon mey even all the
'works of this pattern.

The vision of writing, Daniel v., is another instance,
and which also in many respects resembles those which
have come under our notice. There is no reason to be-
lieve that the part of a hand which formed the first
part of the vision, was seen by any one but Belshazzar.
The king saw the part of the hand that wrote. The
Magi could not read the writing, and it is not certain that
they even saw it. But Daniel, by his inner vision, is
able to interpret, and before the writing is left complete,
tlie hand had disappeared. This is very like the way in
which one part is developed from another in aU the
forms of manifestation.

The Temple built by Divine direction is generally
believed to have been symbolic and representative, every
part corresponding with some spiritual state or process.
The outer court, the Temple, and the Holy of Holies
typify the body, soul, and spirit of man, and the entrance
of the High Priest only on rare and important occasions,
denotes a periodical opening of the inner state, corre-

* These two words are interpolated, but seem to be needed for the

sense.

366 FBOM HATTER TO SPIBIT.

sponding with those periods of influx from which the
Jewish festivals, and thence those of our Church took
their origin. Like all the other spiritual material
events narrated in Scripture, the rending of the veil
of the Temple, when the last breath was drawn by
the Saviour, was in glorious correspondence with that
which took place on the cross, when the veil which had
hidden the highest influence from the soul of man, was
rent apart, and the Holy Spirit was hereafter to descend
on the humblest follower of Christ, without intervention
of priest or ceremonial. Another beautiful material
image of a spiritual event was the rolling away the
stone from the sepulchre, to permit the egress of
Him whose rising was as the opening of the closed
tomb to all the dead, both in the body and in the
spirit.

In Exodus xxviii. we find long directions for the con-
struction of an ephod or priest's dress, but there is, I
believe, only one passage which can lead to a conjecture
of the manner in which it was used. This occurs 1 Sam.
XXX. 7, Arid David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahi-
melech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod.
And Abiathar brought the ephod to Davids
8 And David enquired at the Lord, &c
It appears by this that the ephod was not a ceremo-
nial robe, but a real instrument, and David could use it
as well as the high priest, for he enquired at the Lord,
or induced in himself a spiritual state, as we have seen

THE WOKD OF GOD. 367

can be done, though in a lower degree, by gazing at a
crystal. Whether it was a like process may be conjec-
tured from the account given of the ephod, breastplate,
and Urim and Thummim, by Josephus. * In the void
space of the garment there was inserted a piece about
the bigness of a span, embroidered with gold and other
colours of the oracle, and called easeUy which, in the
Greek language, signifies oracleJ* — Josephus, Antiqui-
ties, Book III. ch. viL 5.

And of the Urim and Thummim (by some translated
Xiights and Perfections, by others Manifestations and
Truth)—

* For as to these stones, which, as we told you before,
the high priest bare on his shoulders, which were sar-
donyxes (and I think it useless to describe their nature,
they being so well known to everybody), the one of
them shined out when God was present at their sacrifices :
I mean that which was in the nature of a button on his
right shoulder, bright rays darting out thence and being
seen even by those who were most remote, which splen-
dour was not before natural to the stone. This has
appeared a most wonderful thing to such as have not
so far indulged themselves in philosophy as to despise
Divine revelation, yet I will mention what is still more
wonderful than this. God declared beforehand by
those twelve stones which the high priest bore on his
breast, and which were inserted into his breastplate,
^ when they should be victorious in battle, for so great a

368 FBOM MATTER TO SPIBIT.

splendour shone forth from them before the army b^an
to march, that all the people were sensible of GocTs

«

being present for their assistance. Whence it came to
pass, that those Greeks who had a veneration for our laws,
because they could not possibly contradict them, called
this breastplate *^ the oracle." Now this breastplate and
this oracle left oflF shining 200 years before I composed
this book, Grod having been displeased at the transgres-
sion of his laws.' — Antiquities, B. III. c. iiL 6.*

Prideaux says that the oracle was given by an audible
voice from the mercy-seat between the cherubim. We
may well imagine it given either by vision qt voice, for,
as we have seen, any opening of the spiritual state may
y result in any mode of manifestation. We know from
Diodorus, that the chief judge of Egyjjt carried on his
breast an image symbolic of Truth with its eyes shut,
formed of precious stones, ^lian says that these stones

/ were sapphires. We have had much experience of the
property of the sapphire, of very quickly inducing spiri-
tual vision. It seems to be more powerful than a

\ common crystal.

The teraphim formed part of the apparatus in the early
times of the Jewish history. T, in Arabic, takes the
place of S. I imagine that the word may be the same as

* As Josephus wrote 200 years after the phenomenon had ceased to
appear, and had neither seen it himself nor had the report from eye-
witnesses, we may easiLy imagine the description to be imperfect. He
was perhaps mistaken in supposing that the brightness of the stonee was
apparent to all present.

^

THE WORD OF GOD. 369

seraphim (see Note 2), and have seen conjectures that
-the cherubim by the mercy-seat were of a like nature.
This requires much examination^ with all the other
appliances and symbols of the Jewish worship, which
cannot be understood until viewed by the light of the
Spirit.

The laying on of hands should not be unnoticed in an
enumeration of the various forms in which we have
seen a resemblance between the incidents of Scripture
history and the modern phenomena. I have said that
the power is always strengthened, I should have said
that it is often apparently communicated, by the hand of
a medium laid on the wrist of another to produce
writing, or on the shoulder to produce vision. A finger
of a powerful medium will convey the current to another
person. How often this fact is mentioned, or how im-
portant a part it bears in the history of the Word, I
need not say. In Deut. xxxiv. 9, And Joshua the son
of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom ; for Moses had
' laid his hands upon hi/m.

It is almost needless to quote the New Testament, for
the instances are very numerous in which mention is
made of the communication of the spirit,either for healing
or sanctifying, in this way. In 2 Tim. i. Paul writes —
6 Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou
stir up the gift of God, which is m thee by the putti/ag
on of my hands. /

When the spirit shall have returned, and brought

B B

370 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT,

that living light into the churches by which all will be
seen to have some element of truth, and which, by
being common to all, will unite the members of every
sect into the true church of Christ, this laying on of
y hands will be a powerful and holy process, not as now,
a powerless though significant form. The touch of the
archbishop, bishop, or priest, is eflFective just in pro-
portion as he has the spirit, and the other person the
receptive power ; and the degrees of both can only be
known by the result.

The gradual rise and developement of spiritual influ-
ence is one of the most marked characteristics of the
spiritual education of the Jews; and for this there
is a parallel in the manifestations. In every deve-
lopement the names of earthly relations are first
given; then those of persons who, when on earth,
bore a moral or intellectual affinity with the medium ;
and afterwards, the designations of those heavenly
natures known as love, faith, hope, and their^ modifi-
cations. These three degrees correspond with body,
soul, and spirit, and the highest influx, which has
its receptivity in the highest portion of the brain and
the noblest part of the human soul, is the Holy Grhost,
direct from the Most High. But even the lower ema-
nations are of different degrees, as the spiritual powers
tfrom which they proceed approach the Divine essence.
A long-continued communication with spirits of the
lower natures, to the exclusion of the higher influences,

THE WORD OF GOD. 371

is a lingering on the road to that heaven which can

only be attained by the communion of the Holy Grhost.

In the spirit world or state, where everything appears

as it is, and is as it appears^ the nature or character of

any one is implied in the n^.me — ^which is not given

arbitrarily as names are here, but falls, as it were,

naturally, on the hearer. Hence, with the ascending

series of names is the ascending series of spiritual

natures from which influences are received by the

medium. If this is so in the spiritual training of an

individual, how much more must it be traceable in the

education of a nation, in which all the states and

processes of individual teaching are exhibited on a

larger scale I

The Jews are the type and example of all our

Father's spiritual teaching, and this passage from lower

to higher degrees of influence may be found in

their history. The first and most maxked record of a

change is found in Gren. iv. 26. The preceding history

is part literal and part symbolical ; the second chapter

especially, narrating the origin of Eve, seems to have a

correspondential liieaning which is more coherent than

its literal one; for it relates to the developement or

opening of the spiritual degree in the natural man,

which was before unaided. * Adam had no help meet

for him.^ And the method by which this internal

opening took place was a trance — for deep sleep is not

I the true interpretation. But I must not enter into

i B B 2

372 FBOH MATTEB TO SFIBIT.

these difficult chapters here. The last verse of chapter
iv. is, * Then began men to call upon the name of the
Lord.^ Hitherto the spiritual powers to which man-
kind had looked were those near to them, the Elohim,
the Gods — or in their communications Jehovah Elohim,
the Lord God, or the highest spiritual power to which
their thoughts could rise, or by which their suscepti-
bilities of impression could be acted on. But after
a long series of events, detailed in familiar forms and
language, but all having reference to the spiritual
progress of men in those early times, men began to call
upon, or to be called by^ the name of Jehovah, the
Highest Name.

The marginal reading, to be called by, seems more
correct than the text, if we understand the meaning
of cally though, from want of the knowledge that a
real spiritual process is involved, it has lost its original
force. To be 'called by,' means to be influenced by
the highest degree of spirit of which the soul is re-
ceptive. The word call is used both in the active and
passive sense — He will surely call on the name of the
Lord his God ; and, ' Then began men to be called by
the name of JehovahJ* The last expresses a change or
ascent in the receptivity of influence, a higher degree
of inspiration, and a better knowledge of the object of

worship.

There is even at this day much mystery surrounding
this holy name, which has been believed by learned

THE WORD OF GOD. 373

Jews to contain in its letters a mystical representation
of the Divine essence. So sacred is the word held, that
since some centuries before Christ it has never been
pronounced on ordinary occasions in reading the Scrip-
tures. The word Adonai, or * Lord of the age,' or * eternal
Xiord,' is substituted for it. The tetrdgrammatony or
four Hebrew letters forming the sacred word, having lost
their vowel-sounds, remain only iTin^; but the vowel-
points used in the word Adonai were affixed, and hence
the name is spelt Jehovah ; but the Jews mamtain that
this is not the correct sound : and there exists a beau-
tiful tradition, that whenever the holy name shall be
pronounced in the right manner the wanderers on the
face of the earth will be restored to their own land.

When Moses was called by the Lord to lead the
children of Israel out of captivity. Exodus vi. :

2 And Ood (Elohim) spake unto Moses, and said
unto hiniy I (am) Jehovah ;

3 And I appeared unto AbraJiarriy unto Isaxic, and
v/rvto Jacobs as El Shaddaiy and by my nxime Jehovah
I was Tiot known to them*

El Shaddaiy ^the powerful,' translated ^Grod Almighty,'
might perhaps be better rendered according to its
primary meaning ; El being always spiritual power in a
good and high sense, and Shaddai coming from a word
implying to shed, or pour out. El Shaddai is the pourer
forth of spirit-power, the spiritual shedder. Balaamj
when entranced, saw the vision of El ShaddaL

374 FBOM MATTER TO SPIRIT.

This reminds us of the descriptions of spiritual
action given both by clairvoyantes and by €he seera
to whom the bright radiating or scintillating appearance
was visible. Jehovah^ the highest name, has a fiax
grander and more internal signification than El Shaddai ;
but we must understand far more of these heavenly
subjects than is known at present before we can com-
prehend the advance from the lower to the higher
name. All the Divine teaching through the prophets
was directed to keep the worship of the Jews to the
Highest Name, or Jehovah. There is no doubt that by
Baalim spiritual powers of a lower order are meant,
and these being more accessible, the people were easily
drawn away to them. They are false gods in the sense
in which low earthly spirits are false, not in the sense
of unreal spiritual powers ; and all the prohibitions about
witchcraft, &c., arise from the readiness of the people
to trust to lower spirits. These injunctions can hardly
apply to our time, if communications are sought only for
instruction.

The applications of the word Name, in the sense
which I have assigned to it, are very numerous in the
Old Testament, not, however, to the exclusion of the
lower meaning.

As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of
the Lord ca/iised him to rest; so didst Thou lead thy
people to make thyself a glorious name.

1 Kings ix. 3. And the Lord said unto him (Solomon)

THE WORD OF GOD. 375

• . • / have hallowed this house which thou hast built^
to jyid my na/rae therefor ever.

rsalm cxlviii. 13. His name alone is excellent.

All through the Jewish dispensation, the Name of

the Lord indicates the spiritual degree into which the

Hebrew nation have entered at the time. There is

something very significant in the belief that they are as

yet unable to pronounce the word Jehovah aright. In

tlie spiritual lauguage of correspondence the voice

typifies the affection, as the name impUes the character

or essence. When the Jews have a true feeling of and

towards the loving essence of our 'Father, they will

regain the state originally intended for them. Will

not this be when they receive His manifestation in the

person of the Saviour, beholding the glory of Grod in

the face of Christ ?

The name of Jesus is said to have been announced
by the angel to Mary — * Thou shaU conceive in thy
worrib^ and bri/ng forth a son, and shalt caU his naw,e
JesusJ*

And to Joseph (Matthew i. 21) — ^And she shall
bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus
(Saviour), for he shall save his people from their
sinsJ*

This name is spiritually communicated in both in-
stances. Zacharias, when the infant John was brought
into the Temple, wrote, under the influence of the
Spirit, His name is John. Our Lord says to His

376 FBOM MATTER TO SPIKIT.

disciples, / am, come m vny Father^s name, And^
Whatsoever ye shall a^k m my Tw/me that will I do,
that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

Peter's statement on the occasion of the healings of
the blind man, shows that he assigned the full import
to the word Name.

Acts iii. 16. And His Na/me through faith in His
Name hath made this man strong.

And the high priest's question. Acts iv. 7, By whoit .
power, or by what namey have ye done this f

Peter, having replied that it is by the name of Jesus
Christ, of Nazareth, says —

Neither is there salvation i/n any other; for there is
none other name under heaven given among men
whereby we must be saved.

In Acts XV. 17, the Apostle James, in order to prove
that the Gentile converts were not bound by the law of
Moses, quotes the prophet Amos, That the residtie
of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles
upon whom my name is caUed, saith the Lord, who
doeth all these things.

We rise to the highest Name in the Christian dis-
pensation. Paul writes (Philippians iL 9) —

Wherefore Ood hath highly exalted Him, and hath
given Him a na/me which is above every name :

10 That at the Tiame of Jesus every knee should
bow, of (things) in heaven and i/n earth, and under
the earth;

THE WORD OF GOD. 377

11 And every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of Ood the Father.

The meaning of being called in the name is^ as I
liave said^ the same as being filled with the spirit of
Christ, for holy influence can fall only into the soul
•whose aspirations are pure and good and holy. No
hatred, no impurity, no pride, can hold its place, if the
Comforter is to enter. Surely of all those moral states
which act as obstacles to the influx of God's Spirit,
there is one which must be most active, that of attri-
buting to the Source of all holiness, and whose name is
liove, wrath, cruelty, and revenge, and all the lowest
feelings of humanity. It is true that in the old Scrip-
tures we meet with such phrases aa a jealous Grod, &c.,
but we must remember that the inspiration could only
fall into the words and ideas familiar to the receivers,
and these impressions were suited to the character of
receptivity inseparable from the e gree of spiritual
education attained at the time.

We look down with supreme contempt on the heathen,
who attributed to their deities actions which at this
time bring men to the gallows ; but for those who have
seen the glory of God in the face of Christ, we are no
better than the heathen. We malign and misrepresent
the God whom we worship, I had lately an instance
of this blasphemy of the Holy Ghost in a letter from a
friend, who writes of the little children in a fishing
village far from London, —

378 FROM MATTEB TO SPIRIT.

*They<ire well taught as to conduct, and are good
kind-hearted little creatures, who sit round and sing
hymns about blood and wrath and damnation, with the
utmost good humour.'

When the Saviour took the fishermen's children on
his knees and blessed them, did he teach them about
blood and wrath and damnation? Those who write
and teach such hymns profess to be called in the name
of Christ. Let them think whether they do not take
that ^ame in vain —

For the Lord vriU not hold him guUUeaa that taJceth
Hia name m vam.

The trials and conflicts encountered by mediums on
their entrance into spiritual life are to the temptation
of the Saviour as the atom to the crystal, or as the
crystal to the rock, but they are similar in kind ; and so
for every state and process of spiritual developement we
have a type and example in the Book of the Spirit.
This thought brings up a serious question ; —

Is all that I have described as spiritual developement,
with all its accompanying processes and trials, due to
* unconscious cerebration,' or self-delusion, or irregular
nervous action, or imposture ?

'It is,' wiU be the unhesitating answer of those
whose philosophical compass points in a contrary
direction.

Then the Bible is a history on a large scale, and of
great antiquity, of unconscious cerebration, irregular

THE WORD OF GOD. 379

nervous action, self-delusion, and imposture. It is
haxd to say in what way those who pronounce the
judgement can escape the conclusion.

But we who lean on the Book which has furnished
spiritual food to all ages and conditions of men, whose
prophecies have been fulfilled and are going on to their
completion in the second coming of the Saviour, which
is the entrance of the living Word into every soul —
we need not fear that our staflF will ever prove to be a
broken reed.

The thought may occur — If it be true that the Bible
is only a history of these mesmeric and psychological
phenomena, it loses at once all its authority and itB
sacred character. These mesmeric and psychological
phenomena are parts of a great whole, and are found to
be a connecting link between what has been called the
world of matter, and the world of spirit. And the
ascent from matter to spirit is not difficulty neither are
their respective boundaries undefined, if we remember
that matter is the deposit of the life force, and that it
becomes dead, and falls back into other forms, only to
be acted on by new forces in the constant outpouring
of spirit from the Fountain of life. We need not appre-
hend a diminished reverence for Scripture. The Bible
will be found full of instruction, comfort, and hope for
every soul in need, and in every degree of spiritual
opening, and all the more when the obscure and myste-
rious passages whose meaning has been lost, are restored,

380 FBOM KATTEB TO SFIfilT.

to life by a better knowledge of the states they describe,
and when the things of the Spirit are recognised in the
world as they are treated of in the history of the Word
of God.

There is a deep meaning in the fact that the lowest
spirit manifestations^ or those in which the action of
spiritual electricity on material substances is displayed,
appeared soon after the means of communicating by
earthly electricity were completed. We do not despise
the child who first tried to catch up a thread by a piece
of amber or sealing-wax, for the knowledge growing out
of that simple experiment led to results which are yet
far in the future. Neither should we undervalue the raps
and movements, strange and childish as they appear:
they form but the lowest step of a ladder whose base is
on the earth, and whose top rests at the feet of the
Lamb in the centre of the Throne.

381

NOTES TO CHAPTER XV.

Note 1, p. 350.

The word Loikh signified, in ancient Irish, the Holy Spirit.
The belief in divers spiritual emanations coming in successive
Tvaves fi:om the first fountain, and forming the pleroma of
heaven, was not confined to the Platonic philosophy; it is
found in all Eastern nations, and the Jews held it in a distinct
though modified form in the Cabbala. Much of the con-
fusion in which these doctrines are involved arises from our
loss in this time of their essential spiritual truth. This, like
all other such truths, is embodied in the phraseology and
ideas of the people holding it, and is besides much incrusted
with material growth. These two circumstances have been
both cause and effect of the utter contempt with which it has
been treated by the learned of modern times.

Note 2, p. 356.

I omitted to give in the right place a description of visions
in which angels or very beautiful spirits were seen attending
on a sick person. A writing medium was asked what those
angels were, and her hand wrote * seraphs, or healing angels.*

The serpents which bit the children of Israel were sarapk,
translated fiery serpents, so, we may suppose, was the brazen
one made in imitation. Gesenius says, on the word seraphim^

382 NOTES.

that if anyone wishes to follow the Hebrew usage of language,
in which aaraph is a serpent, he may render it winged serpent,
since the serpent among the ancient Hebrews (Num. xxi. 8,
2 Kings xviii. 4), and among the Egyptians (Herod, ii. 74,
Aelian, Var. Hist. ii.l7, 2), was the symbol both of wisdom and
healing power. This notion is criticised very severely by the
Editor of the Lexicon ; but though the ' notion of winged
serpents surrounding the throne of God, is wildly incon-
gruous,' yet there is imquestionably a something which the
magnetic serpent has in conmion with the glorious angel,
though this something may be only a symbol.

Not one of the explanations given by Gesenius is satisfectoiy.
There seems to be an imsuspected truth concealed in these
and some other obscure Hebrew expressions, the understand-
ing of which might throw some light on this part of my
subject. I ask pardon of unlearned readers, though more
apology is due to learned ones, for tryii^g to call attention to
these words in connection with spiritual processes, while I
am unable to do more than guess at their specific meaning.

One derivation of the word seraph, traces it from the
Arabic ; if so, it is possible that it may be connected with the
word rapha, to heal. I must, however, in order to justify my
interpretation, * healer,' connect the word seraph with winged
serpent. I believe that the healing power of the angel, and
the magnetic property of the serpent, are the attributes which
have made one the symbol of the other, and that this sym-
bolization was really used may be proved from the remains of
early Egyptian worship. The seraphim, or supposed repre-
sentations of glorious angels, are not originally Hebrew figures.
Whatever their use, or whatever they represent, they were
symbolic images derived from Egypt, and adapted to the holy
worship of the tabernacle and temple. For the Cherubim of

NOTES. 383

the Temple were acknowledged by antiquarians to have been
Seraphim. We find in Isaiah vi. 2 — * Above it stood the
Seraphims,' which in the Septuagint is translated * the Cheru-
him stood round about hinu * The description in the same
chapter, of figures with faces and wings, identifies the two.
Kemembering that the Cherubim are essentially the same as the
Seraphim, we may turn to some of the earliest representations
of cherubim, and see whether the original identity of these
symbols with that of the * winged serpent' will not be apparent.
I find in Kitto's Cyclopsedia of Biblical Literature, art. Cheru-
bim, an engraving of old Egyptian sculptures, such as are
found on a tablet or shrine. One of these consists of two
figures standing on each side of a representation of the
Divine power (a winged globe), with wings outstretched,
exactly in the position of the Cherubim in the Temple, and
each of these figures is a winged serpent-, not the serpent with
its tail in its mouth, like the ancient symbol of eternity, or
rather, perhaps, of an age or aiwv, but a waved serpent, not
unlike those in the caduceus or staff of Mercury, which also
had healing power, or like the Egyptian symbol of healing.
The name of the Egyptian healing god was Serapis, in whose
temples, as in those of jEsculapius, the sick man passed a night,
and the remedy was revealed in a dream. There is evidence
that other mesmeric phenomena were introduced in the Sera-
peia, or temples of healing, but I have not the authority at
hand.

It has never been clearly settled what was the nature of the
teraphim, images which were used early in the Jewish wor-
ship (Judges xvii. 5).

The man Micah had an house of gods ^ and made an ephod,
and teraphim, and consecrated (H.eh., filled with the hand), one
of his sons, who became his priest. The teraphim were used

1

384 NOTES.

afterwards, even as late as the time of David. We have seen
that the ephod was put on to induce a spiritual state ; is it
not likely that the teraphim, a kind of household god, used
in conjunction with an ephod, were for some similar purpose ?
Spencer, De Legibus Hebraeorum, tries to show, Grom the
constant interchange of T and S in Eastern language&y that
teraphim and seraphim are the same, or kindred words. I find
in Eitto^s Cyclopedia, that the Targum on Hosea iii. 4, calls
the teraphim the expounder of oracles. The Babbi Levi ben
Grerson says that the teraphim were human figures, by which
the imagination of diviners was so excited that they supposed
they heard a low voice speaking about fiiture events, with
which their own thoughts were filled, &c. Many etymologists
connect the word with depamveiVy ' to heal.* As the spiri-
tuality of the Jewish worship declined, and their moral sense
deteriorated, these images were formed in the most horrible
way, and the adoration or invocation of them became idolatry
of the worst kind, when the idol worshipped becomes the
representation of an evil spirit. There is nothing wrong in
the ephod or teraphim mentioned in the Book of Judges.
The original use of the whole apparatus seems to involve
some process of healing, and also of producing a spiritual
state.

QepairevEiv is the Greek ' to heal,' whence our English
' therapeutics.' One sect, either connected with, or a division
of the Essen&<9, was called therapeutse, healers. The Essenea
were a contemplative sect who had spiritual gifia. They had
their name from Essen, an oracle. Here, again, we find the
prophetic and healing gifls conjoined.

There is another obscure word which with its derivation
seems to bear a distinct specific meaning, in reference to
spiritual processes. This is the word naphal, translated

NOTES. 385

' to fall.' Gesenius says that it is in one sense ' used of
a. prophet "who sees visions/ The word used to express
tlie state of Balaam when he saw the visions of God (El
scbaddai) is nophely * fallen.' I think * entranced ' or * clear-
seeing ' would be better. In many places naphal is used to
express inspiration, Isaiah ix. 8 : The Lord sent a word into
Jacob and it lighted {nxvphaV) upon Israel,

The spirit of God, or the hand of God, is said to descend

(naphal) upon anyone. Ezekiel viii. 1 the hand of

the Lord God fell there upon me, Ezekiel xi. 6 : And the
Spirit of the Lord fell (naphal) upon me and said unto me,
&c. It is used for the coming on of a deep sleep (trance ;
the same word is used when God is represented as taking the
rib from Adam).

Gen, XV. 12. And a deep sleep fell upon (naphal) Abram,
There are other senses in which the verb is used, but this
one, which expresses spiritual influx, or its magnetising effect,
seems to be the primary. We know how often mention is
made in Scripture of sleep or trance, as the effect of spiritual
action. It is one of the commonest phenomena described,
and its occurrence is spoken of, as in the modem experience,
as occurring in every degree, from the deep sleep of Adam, to
the * eyes heavy with sleep,' of the Apostles on the Mount of
Transfiguration. Mahomet, who saw visions, has been sup-
posed to have had epilepsy; in antiquated phrase, ^falling
sickness.' It is more likely that he had simple trances, for
the reception of spiiitual influx does not depend on nor
cause, epileptic attacks, though it is always found that the
complaint predisposes to clairvoyance and other magnetic
states.

The word nuph, probably related to naphal, means to
move up and down, Naaman says, ^ / thought he would move

c c

386 NOTES.

up and down his hand over the part,^ &c. This is to mcsmerifle.
Again, nepheah is the soul or life. Elisha, when he mesmer-
ised the widow's son, prayed, ^Let now the soul of this child, I
pray thee, return unto him,* Is nephesh a kindred word ?

Naphal refers especially to the influx of spirit power. My
object now is, by showing that this word and the word rapha,
to heal, are used in the same connection, to bring forward
another instance in which the two modes of spiritual manifes-
tation are attributed, in the more ancient Jewish history, to
the same class of people.

In that obscure and much disputed passage. Gen. tI. 4,
And there were giants in those days, &c. the word translated
giants is nephilim, the plural of a noun made from naphal.
The word is only used twice, and in both places is translated
giants. The other instance is Numb. xiii. 33 — And there
we saw the giants (nephilim) the sons of Anak, of the
nephilim.

But the same people are called Hephaim, healers, also
translated giants. Josh. xii. 4 — And the coast of Og king of
Bashan, of the remnant of the giants (Eephaim) that dwelt at
Ashtaroth and Edrei,

Deut. ii. 10. The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a
people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims ; which also
were accounted giants (Rephaim) as were the Anakims.
This is not the same attribute as the size and strength ; they
were tall and strong, like the sons of Anak, of whom the king
of Bashan was one, and like them they were accounted
Rephaim, healers. Gen. xiv. 5 — And smote the Rephaims in
Ashteroth Karnaim,

I suppose the two words nephilim and Rephaim to express
respectively men having both spiritual vision and healing
power. There is one more word which seems to bear a

NOTES. 387

spiritual as well as a natural sense ; this is Gebir, powerful ;
trans, mighty. We find El Gebor, the mighty God.

The word is also used of Balaam, * the man (Gebir) which
sa'w the visions of El Shaddai/ &c.

May I venture to suggest the application of these different
readings to. Gen. vi. 4 ? — There were men having magnetic power
in the earth in those times ; and after that, on the marriage of
the sons of God (this always means men having an influx of
spirit y * to them gave he power to become sons of God'') with the
daughters of men, their children became powerful prophets
which were of oldy men of the Name,

It may be that the word translated of old is of the age in
the sense of aJwv — ^Welah, awen ; I know too well the misleading
nature of etymologies, especially in an ancient obscure lan-
guage, to do more than hint at this possible application of the
difficult word nolam. Indeed, it is with much hesitation that
I have tried to call attention to these few words in Hebrew,
which have never yet received any coherent or definite ex-
planation. There are many more such words, and I believe
that their meaning, as well as that of the whole Scripture nar-
rative, will become clear as the processes to which they relate
are studied and understood.

Note 3, p. 360.

The moving or scintillating appearance of spiritual light has
been several times mentioned in this book. It appears to be a
phenomenon often visible to seers, and gives the idea of in-
tense hfe. The Hebrew word rachaph, and its Syriac equiva-
lent, seem to express this movement. I have lately seen it
translated by a good scholar, * to vibrate or fan.' Gesem'us
says it is figuratively (?) * used of the Spirit of God, who

388 NOTES.

brooded over the shapeless mass of the earth, cherishing and
vivifying/ It occurs in Gen. i. 2 : And the spirit of God
moved over the face of the waters. In Sjrriac it is used in
speaking of Elisha vitalizing the bodj of the dead child, and
also of a voice descending from heaven. It is the word for
brooding over, and vitalizing, as a hen does her eggs.

All the above actions are spiritual, in one or other degree.
The ancient Eastern nations had more real knowledge than ia
attributed to them.

Note 4, p. 364.

The Hebrew word is michtab. It occurs in Exod. xxxii-
16, Deut. X. 4 (in both which places it is used for the Divine
writing of the law), and 2 Chron. xxi. 12, for the letter of
Elijp,h, which I believe to have been spiritually written. On
the word michtam, found at the heading of three psalms,
Gesenius and his EngHsh editor are at variance — Gesenius
believing the word to be the same as michtab, with the com-
mon change of b for m, the Editor approving the rather &nci-
ful translation, golden poem. We know that David^s hand
was spiritually guided for the patterns of the Temple ; does
Michtam of David mean that the psalm was written under
spiritual influence ?

LONDOK

PRINTEI) BY BPOTTI'SWOODE AND GO.

KKW-STRKET BQUABB

[JUIiY 1864.]

GEirEBJLL nST OF WORKS

PUBLISHED BT

Messrs. LONGMAN, GREEN, and CO.

PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

Historical Works.

The HISTOBY of EKGLAKD from the Fall of Wolsey to the Death
of Elisabeth. By James Anthony Fboude. M.A. late Fellow of Exeter
College, Oxford. Third Edition of the First Eight Volumes.

Vols. I to IV. the Eeign of Henry VIII. Third Edition. 64«.

Vols. V. and VI. the Ileigns of Edward VI. and Hary. Third Edition, 2S«.

Vols. VII. and VIII. the Beign of Elizabeth, Vols. I. and II. Thi: d
Edition, 28«.

The HI8T0BT of ENGLAKD from the Accession of James II. By
Lord MaCaulay. Three Editions aa follows.

LIBIU.BY Edition, S.vols. 8vo. £4.

Cabinet Edition, 8 yoIs. post 8vo. 48«.

People's Edition, 4 yoIs. crown 8vo. 169.

BEYOLUTIOirS in ENailSH EISTOBT. By Robert Yauguan,
D.D. 3 Yols. 8vo. 45«.

Vol. I. Revolutions of Bace, 16«.

Vol II. Revolutions in Religion, 15««

Vol. III. Revolutions in Grovemment, 15*.

The EISTOBT of ENaiAlTD daring the Keign of George the Third.
By Williak Mabsey, M.P. 4 vols. 8vo. 48*.

The COKSTITTTTIOKAL HISTOBY of ENaiAlTD, since the Acces-
sion of George III. 1760—1860. By Thomas Ebskine May, C.B. 2 vols.
8vo. 38*.

LIVES of the QUEENS of EN0LAHD, from State Papers and other
Documentary Sources : comprising a Domestic History of England from the
Conquest to the Death of Queen Anne. By Agnes Stbickland. Revised
Edition, with many Portraits. 8 vols, post 8vo. CO*.

A

2 NEW WORKS published by LONGMAN i.ND CO.

LECTUBES on the HISTOBY of EKOLAITD. By WrLUAM Tjovg-
UJLK. Vol. I. from the earliest times to the Death of King Edward II. wiHk
6 Maps, a coloured Plate, and 53 Woodcuts. 8?o. lbs,

A CHBONICLE of ENGLAITD, from B.C. 55 to ▲.!>. 1 485 ; written
and illustrated ^ J. E. Doyle. W.iih'Sl Desigvs enpsviid 'On Wood and
privteA in Coleoa by £. Biwns. it*. 4e«.

HISTOEY of CIVILISATION. By Henry Thomas Buckle. 2 toIs.

Price £1 17».

Vol. T. England and France^ Fourth Edition, 21«.
Vol. IL J^ainraMdJSc&Uttnd, Second £di4i«i^ tas.

DEKOCBiKTY in AKEMCA. By Alexis De Tocqxjeviixe. Trans-
lated by Heney Beeyx, with an Introductory Notice by the Trauslatcn*.
2 vols. 8V0. 2U.

The SPANISH CONdlTEST in AHEEICA, and its Kelation to the
History of Slavery and to the Government of Colonies. By Arthur Hsxps.
4 vols. 8vo. £3. VOLS. I. and II. 28v. VofLS. III. and IV. 168. each.

HISTOBY of the BEFOBMATION in ETTBOPE in the Time of

Calvin. By J. H. Meelb D'Aitbignb, D.D. WoLS, I. and II. Svo. 288. and
Vol. III. V2s.

LIBBABY HISTOBY of EBANCE, in 5 vols. 8¥a By £c«e Eyamb

C&ows. Vol. 4. 14b. Vol. II. 15«. Voac. in. 18s. VtXL. TV. near^ leaGty.

LECTTTBES on the BXBWXS «f TSiLSCl. By the OflEte % James

Stepheit, LL J>. 2 vols. 6¥0. 248.

The HIBVOBT of ^COtESGE. By €. Tfiisftw«LUL, O.B., Lord Bishop
of St. David's. 8 vols. -ftvo. ^4 or in 8 vols. fop. Ut.

The TALE of the GBEAT FEBSIAN WAB, from the Histories of
Herodotus. Bf the Bev. G. W. Cox, M.A. late Saholar of Tnn. OoU. Obsb.
Fcp. 8vo. 7«. 6a.

ANCIENT HISTOBY of EGYPT, ASSOtaUL, ud iBASYIteHm. By

the Author of 'Amy Herbert.* Fcp. Svo. 6s.

CBITICAL HISTOBY of tlM LANe^AfiS «ad HCSBAtTffBE of

Ancient Greece. By Williax Muj&e, of CaldwaU. 5 vols. 8ve..^ 8k.

HISTOBY of the LITEBATITBE of ANCIENT «BE!E€S. By Pro-
fessor K. O. MI^ller. Translated by the SUgbt Hon.49ir GsoBaB Corhs-
WALL Lewis, Bart, and by J4W. Donaldson, D.D. 3 vols. 8vo..S6s.'

HISTOBY of the BOUANiS under the Efl^IlS. By HtQ Bev.

Charles Merivale, B.D. 7 vols. Svo. with Maps, £5.

The FALX of the BOMAN BEPTTBIiIC : a Short Hisfany «f the Last

Century of the Commonwealth. By the Bev. Charles .Msstvaue, ED.
12mo..7«. 6d.

The BIOeBAPHICAL HISTOBY of PHILOSOPHY, from its Origin

in Greece to the Present Day. By George Henry Lewes. Bevised and
enUu^ed Edition. Svo. 16s.

HISTOBY of the INDXrCTIVE SCIENCES. By Wsuliav Whewell, ^

DJD. P.B.S. Master df Trill. Coll. Canteb. Third Edition. StoIs. crown \
Svo. 24s.

.^i

KBW WORKS PUBLISHED BY LONGMAN aicd CO. s

CRmCAL and HI8T0BIGAL X8SATS contributed to the Edinburgh
JSevieto, By the Kight Hon. Lqbd MAC4.xrL^T.

liiBBASY Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. 36s,

Tba.tkllbb'8 Edition, in 1 vol. tu.

In Pocket Volumes, 3 vols. fcp.<2l«.

People's Edition, 2 vols, crown 8vo. Sa.

ZGYFT'8 PLAGE in UimTEBSAL HISTOBY ; an Historical Investi-
gation. By C. C. J. BuNSBN, D.D. Translated by C. H. Cotteell, MA.
With many Illustrations. 4 vols. 8vo. £o 8«. Yol. Y. is nearly ready.

MATTN DEB'S HlfiTOBICAL TBEASITBT ; comprising a General In-
troductory Outline of Universal History, and a series of Separate HistorieSf
Pep. 8vo. Ifis.

HISTOBICAL and CHBONOLOGICAL ENCYGLOPiEDIA, presenting
in a brief and convenient form Chronological Notices of all the Great Events
of Universal History. By B. B. WoodwjlRD, P.S.A. Librarian to the <^een.

[ Jn the press.

HISTOBY of CHBISTIAN laSflSOKS; their Agents and their Results
By T. W. M. ISabshall. 2 vols. 8vo. 24».

HISTOBY of the EABLY CH7BGE, from the First Preaching of the

Gospel to the Council of Nicsea, a.d. 325. By the Author of *Amy Herbert.*
Fcp. 8vo. 48. 6d.

HISTOBY of WESLEYAN HETHODISH. By Geosob Smith,
PJk.S. New Edition, with Portraits, in 31 parts. Price 6d. each.

HISTOBY of KOBEBN HTTSIG; a Coarse of Lectures delivered at
the Bioyal Institution. By John Hullah, Professor of Vocal Music in
King's College and in Queen's College, London. Post 8vo. 68. 6(1.

HISTOBY of MEDICnrE, from the Earliest Ages to the Present
Time. By Edwaed Meeyon. M.D. F.G.S. Vol. I. 8vo. 12*. 6dL

Biography and Memoirs,

Vm JOHH ELIOT, a Biography: 1590 — 1632. Br John Forstbr.

With Two Portraits on Steel from the Originals at PoYt Eliot. 2 vols,
crown 8vo. SQs.

LETTEBS aad LIS'E of FBAKGIS BAGON, including all his Occa-
sional Works. Collected and edited, with a Commentary, by J. Speddinq,
Trin. Coll. Cantab. Vols. I. and U. 8vo. 248.

LIFE of BOBEBT STEPHENSON, F.B.S. By J. C. Jeaffreson,
Barrister-at-Law; and William Pole, P.B..S. Memb. Inst. Civ. Eng.
With 2 Portraits and many Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo. [Nearly ready.

APOLOGIA pro VITA SUA: being a Replj to a Pamphlet entitled
* What then does Dr. Newman mean ?* By John Hbnet Newman, DJ).
Svo. 14«.

NEW WORKS PUBLISHED BY LONGMAN aitd CO.

LITE of the DUKE of WELLINaTON. By the Bev. G. R. Gleto,
M.A. Popular Edition, carefully revised; with copious Additions. Crown
8vo. 69.

Brialmont and Oleig's Life of the Dnke of Wellington. 4 vols.
8vo. with Illustrations, £2 149.

Life of the Dnke of Wellington, partly from the French of M.
BniALMONT, partly from Oriarinal Documents. By the Rev. G. B
GLEia, M.A. 8?o. with Portrait, los,

FATHER MATHEW: a Biography. By John Francis Magctire,
M.P. Second Edition, with Portrait. Post 8vo. 12«. 6(2.

Uome ; its Rnler and its Institntions. By the same Author. New-
Edition in preparation.

LITE of AMELIA WILHELMIITA SIEVEKINa, from the German.
Edited, with the Author's sanction, by Cathebine Winkwoeth. Post 8vo.
with Portrait, 129.

FELIX MEin)ELSSOHK'S LETTERS from Italy and Switzerland,
translated by Lady Wallace, Third Edition, with Notice of Mendel-
ssohn's Life and Works, by Henry F. Choeley ; and Letters from 1833 to
1847, translated by Lady Wallace. New Edition, with Portrait. 2 vols,
crown Svo. 69. each.

DIARIES of a LAD7 of QUALITT, from 1797 to 1844. Edited, with
Notes, by A. Hay ward, Q.C. Second Edition. Post 8vo. 109. fid.

RECOLLECTIONS of the late WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, M.F.

for the County of York during nearly 30 Years. By J. S. Hasposd, D.CJj.
P.R.S. Post 8vo. 79.

LIFE and CORRESFONDENCE of THEODORE PARKER. By

John Weiss. With 2 Portraits and 19 Wood Engravings. 2 vols. Svo. 30».

SOUTHET'S LIFE of WESLEY. Fifth Edition. Edited by the Rev.
C. *C. Southby, M.A. Crown Svo. 79. 6d.

THOMAS MOORE'S MEMOIRS, JOURNAL, and CORRESPOND-

ENCE. Edited and abridged from the First Edition by Earl Russell.
Square crown Svo. with 8 Portraits, 129. 6e2.

MEMOIR of the Rev. SYDNEY SMITH. By his Daughter. Lady
Holland. With a Selection from his Letters, edited liy Mrs. AusTix.
2 vols. Svo. 2S9.

LIFE of WILLIAM WARBURTON, D.D. Bishop of Gloucester irom
1760 to 1779. By the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. Svo. with Portrait, 189.

FASTI EBORACENSES : Lives of the Archbishops of York. By the
late Rev. W. H. Dixon, M.A. Edited and enlarged by the Rev. J. Raiite.
K.A. In 2 vols. Vol. I. comprising the lives to the l)eath of Edward UL
Svo. 159.

YICISSITTTDES of FAMILIES. By Sir Bernard Burke, Ulster
King of Anns. Fibst, Second, and Third Series. 3 vols, crown Svo.
129. Qd, each.

NEW WORKS PUBLISHED BY LONGMAN and CO. 6

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. Bj Nassau W. Senior. Post Syo.
price 10«. Qd.

SSSAYS in ECCLESIASTICAL BIOGEAPHT. Bj the Eight Hon.
Sir J. Stephen, LL.D. Fourth Edition. 8vo. 149.

ASAGO'S BIOGRAPHIES of DISTINGTTISHED SCIENTIPIC MEK.
By FsANgoia Abaoo. Translated by Admiral W. H. Smyth, F.B.S. the
Bev. B. Powell, MA. and B. Gbant, M.A. 8vo. 18«.

XATTKBEB'S BIOGRAPHICAL TBEASTIBY: Memoirs, Sketches, and
Brief Notices of aboye 12.000 Eminent Persons of All Ages and Nations.
Pep. 8yo. 10a.

Criticism^ Philosophy^ Polity^ (^c.

PAPIHIAH: a Dialogue on State Affairs between a Constitutional
Lawyer and a Country Gtentlemau about to enter Public Life. By Gboboe
Atkinson, B.A. Ozon. Serjeant-at-Law. Post Svo. 58,

On BEPBESENTATIVE GOYEBNMEin^. By John Stuart Mill.
Second Edition, Svo. 9s,

DissertatiGns and Disenssions. By the same Author. 2 vols. Svo.
price 248,

On Liberty. B7 the same Author. Third Edition. Post Svo. 7a, 6d,

Principles of Politieal Economy. By the same. Fifth Edition.
2 vols. Svo. 30«.

A System of Logic, Eatiocinatiye and Indnetiye. By the same.
Pifth Edition. Two vols. Svo. 25«.

Utilitarianism. B7 the same. Svo. 5a,

LOBB BACON'S WOBKS, collected and edited by E. L. Ellis, M.A.
J. SPEPDiNa, M.A. and D. D. Heath. Vols. I. to V. Philosophical Works
5 vols. Svo. £4 Qa, Vols. VI. and VIL Literary and Professional Works
2 vols. £1 16«.

BACON'S ESSAYS with ANNOTATIONS. By E. Whatbly, D.D.
late Archbishop of Dublin. Sixth Edition. Svo.lO^. 6c;.

ELEICENTS of LOGIC. By E. Whately, B.D. late Archbishop of
Dublin. Ninth Edition, Svo. 10*. Qd, crown Svo. 49. Qd,

Elements of Rhetoric. By the same Author. Seventh Edition.
Svo. lOf. M, crown Svo. 4s. 6c2.

English Synonymes. Edited by Archbishop Whately. 5th Edition.
Fcp. Svo. Zs.

HISCELLANEOITS REKAINS from the Common-place Book of the
late Archbishop Whately. Edited by Miss £. J. Whately. Post Svo. 6f.

NBW WORKS TOSUSBED BT LONGHAN Ain> CO.

B88AYS on the ADUNISTBATIOHS of eSEAT BBITAIir Irom

1783 to 1830, contributed to the Udinburgh Review bv the Biffbk Him. Sir
G. C. Lewis, Bart. Edited by the Right Hon. Sir E. Head, Burt. 8ro.
with Portrait, 15«.

Bv the mum Auihor,

A Dialogue on the Best Form of Goyemment, 4ff. 6<L

Essaj on the Origin and Pomatien of the Senaaee LaagnageSy

price 7a. fid.

Historical Snryey of the Astronomy of the Aneienti, 15c.

Inquiry into the Credibility of the Early Roman History, 2 rols.
price 30tf .

On the Methods of Observation and Reasoning in Politics, 2 vols.

price 28«.

Irish Distnrbances and Irish Church Question, 12s.

Remarks on the XTse and Abuse of some Political Terms, 9^.

On Poreign Jurisdiction and Extradition of Criminals, 2^. 6d,

The Pables of Babrius, Greek Text with Latin Notes, Fast I.
58. 6d. Pabt U. 38. 6d.

Suggestions for the Application of the Egyptological Xellied ta

Modem History, 18.

An OXTTLIEE of the EECESSART LAWS of THOUGHT : a Treatise
on Pare and Applied Logic. By the Host Rev. If. TuoMaofzr, I>J). Axfsb-
bishop of York. Crown 8vo. 58. 6d.

The ELEMEHTS of LOGIC. By Thokas Shevdsii, M.A. of SL
Peter's Coll. Cantab. Crown Sro. [Jvst readjf.

ANALYSIS of Mr. MILL'S STSTEM of LOGIC. By W. SrsBBiiro^
M.A. Fellow of Worcester College, Oxford. Post 8vo. [Jiut read^

SPEECHES of the RIGHT HOH. LORD MAGATTLAT, comcted by

Himself. 8to. 129.

LORD MACAULATS SPEECHES on PARLIAMEHTART REFORM

in 1831 and 18S2. 16mo. is.

A DICnOEART of the EEGLISH LANGUAGE. By R G. Ijltham^

M.A. M.D. 7.B.S. Founded on that of Dr. Johnsok, as edited by the Rer.
H. J. Todd, with numerous Emendations and Additions. Pablisiiing in 36
Parts, price Ss. 6d. each» to form 2 vols. 4to.

The English Language. By the same Anther. Fifth Edition. Svo.

price 18t.

Handbook of the English Language. By the same Author. Ponrth
Edition. Crown 8yo. 78. 6d.

Elements of Comparative Philology. Bj the same AnthoCi tvo. 2U.

NEW WQf]LK& WSLOSESD fix LONGMAK i.iri> GQ. ' 7

'nOBAVmm of ZITIKISH WOSM aaul f SBA.SS8, classified and
ananged «o as totuoilitale the Ezpreauon of Ideas, and aaaiBfe in Literary
Gomimsition. ByP.H. Aoget,M.J>. 14t^Editum. Grown a>ro. 1Q». 6d.

LECTUBES on the BCIEKCE of LAJTGHAffE, delivered at the Royal
Institution. By Max Mxjlleb, M.A. Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford.
PiBfli SssiEa, rourth Edition. Svo. 128, &RcasT> Seslbs, with SI Wood-
cuts, price 189.

The DEBATES ; a Series of Complete Debates, Oudines of Debates,
aod QnestioBU for (Disousiion. B^r F* !Eowtok. Fcp. 8vo. 6s,

A COTIBSE of ENGLISH BEADIHG, ad^ted to every taste and
capacity ; or. How and What to Bead. By the Bev. J. Ftcsopt, B.A. Fcp.
Svo. 5s.

JKAXTJAL of EKGM8H UTEBATUBE, Historical and Critical: with
a Chapter on English Metres. Bj
Uniy. Ireland. Post SvalOs. 6d.

a Chapter on English Metres. By T. Abitold, B.A. I^of. of Eng. Lit. Gath.
- - ■ ■ Pc

fiOTTTHETMB DOCTOB, complete in One Yolame. Edited by the Eev.
J. W. Waxxxx, B.D. .Square crown Svo. 12«. 6<2.

HISTOBICAL and CBITICAL COMHENTABT on tbe GLB TESTA-

MENT; with a New Tbrandation. By M. M. Kaubcw, 3>h.D. Vol. I.
Genesis, Svo. 18«. or adapted for the General Beader, lis. Vol. II. JExodus,
15ft. or adapted for the General B^bder, ISs.

A Bebrew Grammar, with Exercises. By the same. Pabt I. Out-
lines with ExerciseSy Svo. 12/8, Qd. Key, &5. Past IL Exceptional Forms
and CotistrueUans, ISk. 6d.

A KZW LATDT-iarGUSS BICTI0KABT. By the Ber. J. T. White,
MA. of Corpus Ghristi Ccillegeuand Bev. J.E.Biddxe* MJl of St. Edmund
Hall, Oxford. Imperial Svo. 4&8,

A Diamond Latin-SngMidi Biotionary, or Guide to the Meaning,
Quality, and Accentuation of Latin Glassioal Words. By the Bev.. J, £.
Kiddle, M Jl. 32mo. 4s.

A HEW EHGLISH-GBEEK LEXICOH, containing all the Greek
Words used by Writers of good authority. By C. D. Yokge, B JL Fourth
Edition. 4to. 21s.

A LEXICOH, EHGLISH and GBEEK, abridged for the Use of
Ikshools from his ' EngUab*Gbeek Leadoon ' by the Autdior, G. D. Yohge, B Jk.
Square 12mo. [Just ready.

A GBEEK-JBHGLISH LEXXGOH. Compiled by fi. G. Ioddell, D.D.
Dean of Ohrist Ghnrdi. and B..SCOXT, D.D. Master of BaUiol. Fifth Edition.
Crown 4to. Sis. Qd.

A Lexicon, Greek and English, abridged from Libdeix and Scott's
Oreek'EnffUsh Lexicon. Tenth Edition. Square 12mo. 7s. 6d,

A PBACTICAL DICTIOHABY of the FBEHCH and BF^LISH LAH-

GTJAGES. By L. Co]!rTANSBA.ir. 7th Edition. Post Svo. 10«. &?.

Oontansean'a Pocket Dictionary, Prench and English ; being a clG«e
Abridgment of the above, by the same Author. 2nd Edition. ISmo. is.

NBW WORKS PUBLI8HBD BT LOWGMiOff xwd €©.

ABAGO'S P0F7LAB ASISOVOMT. Translated by Admiral W. H.
Smyth, P.ILS. and R. Srajst, MjI. With 25 Hafcwr ancE 368 WoocUsats.
2 YolB. 8to. £2 6«.

Arago's Meteorological Essays, with Introdnction by Baron Hum-
boldt. Translated under the superintendence qf Major-General E. Sabihb»
BJk. 8T0.189.

The WEATHEB-BOOK; a Manual of Practical Meteorology. By
B«ar- Admiral Bobkkt Prrz ItOY, B-IT 7.B.S. Third SdUdon, within
Diagrams. Svo. 158.

SAZBTS WEATHIB 8T8TEK, or Lunar Inflneiiee on Weathei;
By S. M. Saxbt, 11.N. Principal Instructor of Ifavid Bngiaeers, H.M.
Steam Ueserve. Second Edition. Post Svo. 4^.

DOVE'S LAW of STOBMS considered in connexion with the ordi-
nary Movements of the Atmosphere. Translated by B. H. Scox^ M.A.
T.CJD. ^o,19a,6d.

CELESTIAL OBJECTS for COMMON TELESCOPES. By the Kev.
T. W. Webb, M.A. P.BJI.S. WithMap of the Moon, and Woodcuts. I6kno. T».

PHTSICAL GEOOBAPHT for SCHOOLS and GEHEBAL BEATIEBS,

By M, P. Mauht, LL.D. Author of 'Physfcal Geograpby of the Sea*' Ac.
Pop. 8vo. with 2 Plates, 2«. e&

A BICTIOHABT, Geographical, Statistical, and Historical, of the
various Countries, Places, and Principal Natural Objects in the World. Bf
J. B.. M'CuLLOCH, Esq. With 6 Maps. 2 volfe». 8vo. 690;

*

A GEHEBAL DICnOiTABT of GEOGBAFHT, Descriptive, Physical,
Statistical, and Historical : forming a complete Gazetteer of the World. By
A. Keith Johnston, P.B.S J!. Svo. 30«k

A MAVITAL of GEOGBAPHY, Physical, Industrial, and PbKtical.
By W. Hughes, P.R.G.S. Professor of Geography in Sing's CoIIef5», and in
Queen's College, London. With 6 Maps. Pojk Svo. 7«. (5d*

Or in Two Parts ^— Past I. Europe, 3s. M. Past II. Asia, AMGa,.Aaieric%
Australasia, and Po]yue8ia» ^

The Geography of British History; a Geographical description of
the British Islands at Successive Periods^ from the Earfimt ISussto the
Present Day. By the same. With 6 Maps. Pep^ Svo. St, «d.

The BBITISH EMPIBE ; a Sketch of the Geography, Growth, Natural
and Political Peaturesof the United Kingdom,, its Cok>Bie»aDdIl8peBde»>
cies. By Cabolike Bbay. With 5 Maps. Pep. Svo. %8. 6dL

COLONISATION and COLOEIES : a Scries of Lectures dettfered be-
fore the University of Oxford. By HERlffATT Mebivai^, M.A^ Profeflsor of
Political Economy. Svo. 18«,

The AFBICAHS at HOME : a popular Description of AfHca and the
Africans. By the Rev. R. M. Macbbaib, M.A. Second Edition ; including
an Account of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile. With Map and 70
Woodcuts. Pep. Svo. 5ft

MAITHDEB'S TBEASTTBT of GEOGBAPHT,. Physical, Historical,
Descriptive, and Political. Completed by W. Stjghejt, P.R.GJ5. With T
Maps and 16 Plates. Pcp.Svp. 10«.

HfEW WOKKS TUBLIBHED BT LONOMAN AST) CO.

11

Natural History and Popular Science.

ELXMEKT8 of PHTSIC8 «r NATUSAL FHIL060FHY. Bj

' "NeiIj Aswott, M.D. T.R.S. Ftiysician Extraordmary to the Queen. Sixth
Edition. Pajeit I. Svo. 10s. Qd,

lT CONSIDEBED as a MOD£ of MOTION ; a Course of Lecture^
JLeliyered ali the Boyal Institution. By Professor JoHir Tysdall, F JLS.
Orowa Svo. wafth Woodoats, 12*. Qd.

<CAN08, the Character of their Phenomena, their Share in the
itructure and Composition of the Surfd^e of the Globe, &c. By G. Pouletx
:k;BOPX, M.P. F.BJ3. Seooad Edition. Svo. with illustrations, 15«.

LEATISE on ELECTBICITT, in Theory and Practice. By A.
)£ I.A BiVM^ "PtgL in the Academy of Geneva. Tnausiated i:^ C. V. Walkejb;
f.R.S. 3 vols. Svo. with Woodcuts, iS3 13&

iCOEEELATIOV of FHTSICAL F0B€S6. By W. B. Grots,
t-C. V.P.E,.S. Fourth Edition. Svo. Is, Qd,

GEOLOGICAL HAGAZUTE; or, Monthly Joarnal of Geology
Mited by T. SiUPEST Jokes, F.G.S. Professor of Geology in the E. M.
)Uege, Sandliarst; assisted by J. C. Woodwaud, F.G.SrF.Z.S. British
Luseum. Svo. with Illustrations, price 1«. 6c^. monthly.

riDE to OE0ZX)GT. By J. Phillips, M.A. Professor of Geology
the University of Oxford. Fifth Edition; with Plates and Diagrams.
Tcp. Svo. 4s.

^LOSSAST of MIITEEALOGT. By H. W. Bristow, F.G.S. of
Geoiogicaft Survey of Great Britain. With 486 Figures. Crown Svo. 12«.

[LLIFTS EI.EHENTABY INTBODTTCTION to MIKEEALOGY,

with extensive Alterations and Additions, by H. J. Bsooke, F.K.S. and W.
H. Millee, F.G.S. Post Svo. with Woodcuts, 18«.

DEE HOETEN'S HANDBOOK of ZOOLOGY. Translated from
the Second Dutch Edition by the Bev. W. Claek, M.D. F.E.S. 2 vols. Svo.
with 24 Plates cf Figures, «0«.

Le GOHPA&ATIVE AKATOMY and FHYfilOLOGY of the VEBTE-

brate Animals. By Richard OwEiir, F.&.S. D.CJJ. 2 vols. Svo. with
upwards of l;200 Woodcuts. I J» the press.

ItOHES WtTROVT HANDS : an Account of the Habitations con-
structed by various Animals, classed according to their Principles of Con-
struction. By Bev. J. G. Wood, M.A. F.L.S. Illustrations on Wood by
G. Pearson, tr(mi Drawings by F. W. £^1 aad £. A. Smith. In course of
publication in 20 Farts, Is. each.

riTAL of 0(ELENTS1ATA. By J. Reat Greene, B.A. M.K.L A.

Edited by the Rev. J. A. Galbraith, M.A. and the Rev. S. HAUGHioJsr,
M.D. Fcp. evo. with as Woodcuts. 6«.

[ilanual of Protozoa ; with a General ImtroductiofiCB the IHrlnciples of
Zoology. By the same Author and Editors. Fcp. Svo. with 16 Woodcuts, 2ff.

Kannal of taw lEeUUoidB. By J. Abjohv, M.D. F.R.& and the

same Editors. Fcp. Svo. with 3S Woodcuts, 7s. Qd.

18 NETf WORKS PUBLISHED BT LONGMAN aud CO.

THE ALPS: Sketches of Life and Nature in the Mountains. .Bj
Baron H. Yov Berlepbch. Translated hy the Bev. L. Stephbit, H.A.
With 17 lUustratioos. 8vo. 15«.

The SEA and its LIVIirG WOHSEBS. . By Br. G. Habtwio.

Becoud (English) Edition. 8vo. with many niustrations. 18s,

The TROPICAL WORLD. Bj the same Author. With 8 Chromo-
lylographs and 172 Woodcuts. 8vo. 2U.

SKETCHES of the NATTTRAL HISTORY of CETLON. By Sir J.

ExEBSOir Teenekt, K.C.S. LL.D. With 82 Wood Engravings. Post 8vo.
price 129. Qd,

Ceylon. By the same Author. 5th Edition ; with Maps, &c. and 90
Wood Engravings. 2 vols. 8vo. £2 10«.

XARYELS and KYSTERIES of INSTINCT ; or, Curiosities of Animal
Life. By 6. Gassatt. Third Edition. Fcp. 8vo. Is.

HOME WALKS and HOLIDAT RAMBLES. By the Bey. C. A.
JoHirs, BA. F.L.8. Fcp. 8vo. with 10 Illustrations, 6s,

KIRBT and SPENCE'S INTRODTTCTION to ENTOMOLOGY, or

Elements of the Natural History of Insects. Seventh Edition. Crown 8vo.
price 6s,

MAXTNDER'S TREASURY of NATITRAL HISTORY, or Popular
Dictionary of Zoology. Revised and corrected by T. S. Cobbold. M.D,
Fcp. 8vo. with 900 Woodcuts, IQs.

The TREASURY of BOTANY, on the Plan of Maunder's Treasury.
By J. LiNDLEY, M.D. and T. Moobe, F.L.S. assisted b¥ other Practical
Botanists. With 16 Plates, and many Woodcuts from aeslKns by W. H.
Fitch. Fcp. 8vo. iln the press.

The ROSE AMATEUR'S GUIDE. By Thouas Biters. Sth Edition.
Fcp. 8vo. 48.

The BRITISH FLORA; comprising the Phsenogamous or Flowering
Plants and the Ferns. By Sir W. J. Hooker, K.H. and G. A. Walxzr
Arnott, LL.D. 12mo. with 12 Plates, 148. or coloured, ils.

BRYOLOOIA BRITANNICA; containing the Mosses of Great Britain
and Ireland, arranged and described. By W. Wilboe. 8vo. with 81 Plates
4&8. or coloured, £4 4s.

The INDOOR GARDENER. By Miss Malino. Fcp. 8vo. with
coloured Frontispiece, 5s,

LOUDON'S ENCYCLOPJEDIA of PLANTS ; comprisintr the Specific
Character, Description, Culture, History, &c. of all the Plants found in
Great Britain. With upwards of 12,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. £3 13«. 6<i.

Loudon's Encyclopeedia of Trees and Shrubs ; containing the Hardy
Trees nnd Shrubs of Great Britain scientifically and popularly described.
With 2,000 Woodcuts 8vo. 6Qs.

HISTORY ot the BRITISH FRESHWATER ALOJE. By A. H.
Habsall, M.D. With 100 Plates of Figures. 2 vols. 8vo. price £1 18*.

NEW WORKS PUBLISHED BY LONGMAN and CO. 18

MATJNDEB'S SCIENTIFIC and LITEBABT TBEASTTBT ; a Popular
iEiu^clopeedia of Science, Literature, and Art. Fcp. 8vo. \0s.

A BICTIONABT of SCIENCE, LITERATUEE and ABT ; comprising
the History, Description, and Scientific Principles of every Branch of
Human Knowledge. Edited byW. T. Bbande, F.B.S.L. and £. Fourth
Edition, revised and corrected. [ Jn t?ie press.

£SSAY8 on SCIENTIFIC and other SUBJECTS, contributed to the
Mlinburgh and Quarterly Reviews. By Sir H. Holland, Bart. M.D.
Second Edition. 8vo. 14>«.

X:SSATS from the EDINBTIBeH and QITABTEELT BEVIEWS;

with Addresses and other pieces. By Sir J. F. W. Herschel, Bart, M.A.
8?o. 18«.

Chemistry^ Medicine^ Surgery^ and the Allied

Sciences.

A DICTIOHABY of CHEMISTBT and the Allied Branches of other
Sciences ; founded on that of the late Dr. Ure. By Henby Watts, F.C.S.
assisted by eminent Contributors. 4 vols. Svo. in course of publication in
Monthly Parts. Vol. 1. 31«. 6d. and Vol. XL 26«. are now ready.

HANDBOOK of CHEMICAL ANALYSIS, adapted to the Unitary
System of Notation : Based on Dr. H. Wills* Anleitung zur chemiscJten
Analyse. By F. T. Coninoton, M.A. F.C.S. Post Svo. Is. 6d.— Tables of
Qualitative Analysis to accompany the same, 2«. Qd.

A HANDBOOK of VOLTTHETBICAL ANALYSIS. By Kobert H.
Scott, M.A. T.C.D. Post Svo. 49. M,

ELEMENTS of CHEMISTBY, Theoretical and Practical. By William
A. MiLLEE, M.D. LL.D. F.R.S. F.G.S. Professor of Chemistry, King's
Collie, London. 3 vols. Svo. £2 lia. Past I. Chemical Physics.
Third Edition enlarged, 12«. Pabt II. Inobganic Chemistby. Second
Edition, 20s. Part III. Oeoanic Chemistby. Second Edition, 20s.

A MANUAL of CHEMISTBY, Descriptiye and Theoretical. By
William Odling, M.6. F.B.S. Lecturer on Chemistry at St. Bartholo-
mew's Hospital. Pabt I. Svo. 9s.

A Conrse of Practical Chemistry, for the ns^^ of Medical Students.
By the same Author. Part I. crown Svo. with Woodcuts, 4s. 6<i. Pabt II.
(completion) just ready.

The DIAGNOSIS and TBEATMENT of the DISEASES of WOMEN ;

including the Diagnosis of Pregnancy. By Geaily Hewitt, M J). Physician
to the British Lying-in Hospital. Svo. lAs.

LECTXTBES on the DISEASES of INFANCY and CHILDHOOD. By

Chables West, M.D. Ac. Fourth Edition, revised and enlarged. Svo. 14s.

EXPOSITION of the SIONS and SYMPTOMS of FSEONANCY:

with other Papers on subjects connected with Midwifery. By W. F.
MoNTOOMEBY, M.A. M.D. M.R.IJl. Svo. with Illustrations, 25s. .

14 NEW WOUKS PUBLisHXD BT LONGMAN Aim 00.

A BT8TEM vf Sra#XBT, Theoreticul and Ftacuscal. In ITreadses

by Various Authors, nrratiged and edHed fey T. fiOLxas, HJL Oaatab.
Assistant-Sui^eon to St. George's UospitsiL 4 vols. Svo.

ToL I. OMwal Pathology. 21«.

Yel. n. lAcal Injnriefl^Diseases of the ISy^* 21«.

T«l. ni. OperatiT« Surgeiy. Diseases «f tlie Organs «f Spscial
Sense, Respiration, Circulation, Locomotion and InaervaitiaxL 218.

Yel. IT. Diseases «f tlie AlioMiitary Canal, of Cke JJraM-gemitmxy

Oi^ikvs, of the 3%yroid, Mamma and Skin ; 'with Appendix of MisceBaneous
Subjects, and Genebax Index. [JEarl^ in October.

LECTTJBES on the FBINCIPLE8 and PRACTICE of PHYSIC. Bj

Thomas Watson, M.D. Physician-Extraordinary to the Queen. Fourth
Edition. 2 vols. Svo. 319.

LECTITEES on STJBGICAL PATHOLOGY. By J. Paget, F.RS. Sur-
geon-Extraordinary to the Queen. Edited by W. Txteneb, MJB. 8\'0. with
117 Woodcuts, 21«.

A TREATISE «n the COirriKlTED FEYES8 of GBEAT BXITAHr.

By C. MuscHlsoir, M J). Senior Fliysioian to the London Fever HospitaL
Svo. with coloured Plates, 18«.

DEM0B8TBATI0BS of MICBOSCOPIC AHATOICY ; a Guide to tiie
Examination of the Animal Tissues and Fluids in Health and Disease, for
the use of the Medical and Veterinary Professions. Founded on a Course of
Lectures delivered by Dr. Haklet, Prof, in Univ. ColL London. Edited by
G. T. Brown, late Vet. Prof, .in the Bo^ AgricColl. Cirencester. Svo.
with Illustrations. [Ifearly neo^.

ANATOMY, DESCBIPTIYE and 89B0ICAL. Bj Hemut Gilat,

F.R.S. With 410 Wood Engravings from Dissections. Third Edition. \if
T. fl0LMSS, M.A. Cantab. Boyal Svo. 2$«.

PHYSIOLOGICil. ANATOMY «sid PHYSIOLOGY <tf MAN. By the

late R. B. Todd, M.D. P.R.S. and W. Bowman, F,R.S. of King's CoH^e.
With DQmerous Illustratious. Voii. II. 8vo. 2&8.

A New Edition of the FIB8T YOLXTKE, by Dr. Lioksl S. Bkals,

is preparing for publication.

The CYCLOPJEDLA. of ANATOMY And PHYSDOLOGT. Edited by

the late R. B. Todd, M.D. F.R.S. Assisted by nearly all the most •eminent
cultivators of Physiological Science of the present sg&. 5 vols. 8va with
2,853 Woodcuts, £6 Qs.

A DICTIONABY of PRACTICAL MEDICHTE. By jJ Coflaks^ M.D.

F.R.S. Abridged f^om the langer work by the Author, assisted by J. C.
Copland. 1 vol. Svo. [7» tlie press.

Dr. Copland's Dictionary of Practisal MedkiAe (dae iai;ger wcrk).
8 vols. Svo. £5 11«.

The WORKS of SIR B. a BBODIE, Bart. Edbed by Chasles
Hawkins, F.&X).S.S. 2 vols. Svo. iimiktprm.

linSVi WOBJCS PirBKJSSBS BT hQI»eMAJ» MSJf Ca lA

HIBTWCAt. HQSXS aai BasllCiaOiBS. % Sir H. Bollahd, Bartu
ttUE>. Thi»ft Edition Sto^ 18«.

rs HEDICAL DICTIONABT, or Encyclopaedia of Medical
Science. Ifuith Edition^ brought down to tko prtsant time*. bg( Ajuec
fiBNBY, M.^k 1vol. 8vo. lln the press,

A MANTTAL of MATEBIA HEDICA and THXEAPSimeS, abridged
from Dr. Pbkei&a.'s Elements by F. J. Fasjsb, IMJX Gaatab. aMistod bjF
S. BliiiT£BT, M.B.C.S. and' by R. WitBRnraxoif, P.G.S. 1 voL 8vo»

Dr. Pereira*B Elements of Materia Mediea and TlLerapeutios, Third

Xldition* Bv A. S. T^ylos. DLD. andG.O. Bf:BS> M.X)k 3iV<»]tt.8vovWiib
iMniieroiw Woo«Ebwfati, SlS i:5aw

JI^^ JFT?»^ -irto,. and Illustrated Editions.

The^ KEW TESTAKSITT tf Q¥X iiOBD and SAVXOffK JX8¥II

CHBIST. Illustrated with numerous Engravings on. Wood flnsm the OLD
MASTERS. Crown 4to. price e&s. cloth, gilt top ; or price £5- 5a. elegantly
bound in morocco. [Z» October,

liTXA GiSBKANDCA ; nymns for the Sundays and Chief Festivals of
the Christian Year. Translated by Cathbriitb Wikewobis : 123 Illus-
trations on Wood drawn by J. Leighton, F.S.A. Fcp. 4to. 21«.

CI^TSf and FABEZEMS; MOSAIL EXBXEin^; with Aphorisms, Adage?,
and Proverbs of all Nations: coiaprisiug 121 Illustrations on Wood by J.
LbickbioSs F.S.A. with an appropriate Text by R. Pigott. Imperial 8vo.
3K. Qd,

BIWTAJrS PneUStnrft PBOGBBSS : witK \%^ lUiistratieiis OQ Steel
and Wood by C. Bennett ; and a Preface by the Am. 6. Km a»fiBT. Fcp.
4to. 219.

T3m XZST0E7 of OOS LttKB, as exemplified in Works of Art :
with that of His Types, St. John the Baptist, and other Persons of tbs Old
and New Testament. By Mrs. Jameson and Lady Eastlakb. Being the
)\}urth and concludinR SsBixa of ' Sacred and LegsBdary tat-* witfai 31
Etchings and 281 Woooeuts. 2 vols, aqnace crown 8vo. 4&»,

In the same Series, by Mrs. Jameson.

L»9inAi oi thft Sadttte and MaatTXt.. Fourtb EdkioB*, witli 19
Etebinga andl87 WoodeuAs. 2 tqIs. 31a QA,

Legends of the Monastic Orders. Third Edition, with 11 Ebchings
and 88 Woodcuts. lvol.21«.

Legenyia af tHa Madonna. Third Editioiv with ^ Etchings sad 165

Woodcuts. 1 vol. 21«.

ArtSj Manufactures,^ 4:e.

EirCTCLOFJEBIA of ABCHITECTUBE, HistoricaU Theoreticalv and

Practical. By Joseph Gwilt. With more than 1,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. 42*.

14 3nEW WOmSE prmsnED bt liONGMAlT awd CO.

A. tllLU tf naSKET, TlworeCical uid Piraeiical. In Treatises
r« Tk-. c-( Antten. xma^ed watA edited by T. Houob, M JL CSantab.

toS4.i^eorge*sHospitaL 4¥ol».S¥a.

Sis.
TiLXL iMBlI^ivziM— IMseaMiaftkeSfB. 2U.

•f the <>rsaiui «f i^ecial
on, Circulailoo, Locomotkm aod ImnrratiaiL, 21s.

; vitili Apyeiictix of Miaoelaneous
\Early «» Ortofter.

UBCTUSSS •m t&« FKUGLPLBS and FRACTICE of PHYSIC. Bj
7- «».s Wxrs«:y. MJ). liiystciaii-ExtnordiiiAiy to the Queen. Poortfa

2 VOk^ m-ol ^tf.

M SUXGICAL PATHOLOer. Bj J. Paget, F.RS. Sot-
c^> - E3.tT^^ii-:ai7U>ibeQaeca. Edited I7 W. Tusiteb, IkLB. 8\t>.witii

A isxAxus «A th» oosmnrsD tstsks or sseat bbixadt.

1^ C XrxcsisoT. HJ). Senior fliyaciaii to tiie London Bern HaqstaL

BAMeiSLKAZniVS «f HICBOBOQFIC AKATOMT; a Guide to tlie
Eiax .-a: rx cf tV AnincaZ TIsmws and Fhnds in Health and Btseaa^ ibr
ib^ B^ . ' x-> M-^y-a! sud VHerinary Professions. Voanded on a Course of
V^<^,i7*^ ^^-v^rcd t^Dr. Haklkt. Prof, in Unir. ColL London. £dited hj
i« I 1* -ra, tee Vet. Pitit ia tbe Sf^alAgricOoU. Cirencester. 8to.

ATATOHT. BSSCUPIIVE and SVBSICAL. %f HnffST Oxat,
F S.!^ W.:'- 4:« Wood Eocrsvings flnom Dissectioos. Tkird fiditioq, \f
T. MoLasL MO. Caatab. &^^SroL2S<.

PKTS«IIM&CAL AHATOKT and PHT8I0L06Y «f MAH. l^the
)M.> K. R Tvvi»a. X JX F.KJS. sad W. Bowvax, FJLS. of King's CoQece.
W:ta ■BiC!«w«is IlHBtracions. ToL.ILSro.2Sf.

A H«v Xiitiam «f t^ FISST TOLmB, by Br. I^okki. S. BsiLB,
t» ftrparlz^ f .«- pnblkaticn.

Ite CTCr^ftPgWA af AHAXOKT and PXYSOLCWT. Editod bj

tV 2ss> K. B. Toi%iK HJ>. ¥.RjS^ Assisted Iq* nearly aU the most entnent
t ^ T-»:.x*c of Ph^>:-y.oidcal Science of the present aga. 5 vols. 8va with
:ln:>5 W .v^K-.^ts» £A OS.

A UGIIiar AST «f PXACTKAL MXBICnrS. By J,' CoPUkxm ILD.
F JLS. Abriiced fK>m the faoeer work. }as the Author, assisted kgr i. C
Cori-AXi^ lita.STo. [luthefreu.

Br. OiflaaTs Katxnazy of Ptaetieal Medieime (the lai^er work>

S TOCs. <v^ £3 llSL

na WVIXS «f sot B. C BB|H& Bait. Edited bj Ckaues
BAVEnB^FBjCj&B. 2vols.si^^^L {At A*

VmW WOKES rvBUSraB bt LOHOKUff tuo CO:

K VAHUAL of HATEBIA XESTCA tLoi TEXSUimeS, abridged
from Dr. PB»Kiai'a EienienU by 1\ J. Eiiia, JUX Cutab. Hiiiteil br
■. Bbittebt, M.R,C.3.«inibjR. WiBKiaoios, P.C.S. Ivot. Std.

Dx. Pereira'B Elements of Xat«ri» IfMUiia and IhwftpaittlQi, Third
Gdition. By 4. S. TiTT.Da. ILD. and G. O. Kem. M.D» »««!«. S*g.witb
HmuerotiB WoatfCaai, £3 tit.

TTie Fine Artu, and JUustrated Editii/Tis.

Tli» ICEW TSSTAKSITT •! e¥K UKO ud 8AT10TE ISHB

CKKIST. Illustrated irlth aumeronH EiiEraviiigB on Wood fFsin tbo OLD
MA8TBK8. Crow.i no. price 633. cloth, gilD toy ; or pric* £J M. *l.wnitly

A drawn by I. Leigutoh, f.S.A. Vvp. Mo. :

CktV and TiXLnrt M MUS EHBlEin ; with AphorisniB, Adafren,

and ProverbB of all nntkms: compriBhig lil IlliintrntioiTii on Wund by J.

LbkihtosiP.S.A, wilhaiiaijpropriituTnl by IL I'lourt. lujporlnl 8»o.

n>« EZ8X9B7 of OUB I«BB, u exemplified in Work* af Art t
with that of His Typea, 8t. John theBaptisl, »iid othrr Pithohb of tJlri Old
Md New TeBlamert. Ay Mm. J*»E80ii and Lady EiatHKH. BrluK thn
t^urlilt iwd cooFludiiiK BebJU or 'tjacnd uid ifivnuiarj Art/ vita »
ECcbmsaud^dl Woodeuia. £ rub. squBtu crown Bvu. «U.

In the aame Scries, l>y Mn. Jamhtcs.

lamndb «tf U>* S*Uti Mud Km^e*. fooith XdkioB. with 1)

EWbiii«« wdlST V«0dcii*3. l«l<.31jLa>L
Legends of tie Honaitio Otdera. Third Edition, with 11 Ewhinge

and as Woodcuts. lvo1.21>.
LtgBiub- tf t&* »-<~.~ Third Editivn, viik ia Meida^» Md l£f

Woodcuts. Hoi. ZH.

Hi«<*^" ■

16 NEW WORKS published bt LONGMAN axb CO.

TTTSCAH SCULPTOBS, their Liyes, Works, and TimeB. With Illas-
trations from Original Dravings and Photogpraphs. By Chasuk C.
- Ferkiits. 2 Tola, imperial 8yo. lln tJie prsss.

The ENGIHEEB'S HANDBOOK; explaining the Principles which
should guide the young Engineer in the Construction of Machinery. By

C. S. LOWEDBS. Post 8V0. 58.

The ELEMENTS of MECHANISM, for Stadents of Applied Mechanics.
By T. M. GooDEVE, M.A.. Professor of Nat. Philos. in King's ColL I^ondon.
With 206 Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 68. 6d.

ITBE'S BIGTIONABT of ABTS, MANUPACTUBES, and MINES.

Bie-written and enlarged by Bobebt Hunt, P.B.S. assisted hy numerous,
gentlemen eminent in Science and the Arts. With 2,000 Woodcuts. 8 toIs.
8vo. £4.

ENGYCLOPADIA of CIVIL ENGINEEBING, Historical. Theoretical,
and Practical. By £. Csest, C.E. With aboye 3,000 Woodcuts. Svo. 42a.

TBEATISE on MILLS and MILLWOBK. Bj W. Fairbaibn, C.£.
P.B.S. With 18 Plates and 322 Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo. 325. or each toL
separately, 168.

ITsefaP Information for Engineers. By the same Author. First
and Second SEBiES,with many Plates and Woodcuts. 2 vols, crown 8to.21«.
or each vol. separately, 10«. 6d.

The Application of Cast and Wrought Iron to Bnilding Purposei.

By the same Author. Third Edition, with Plates and Woodcuts.

[^Nearljf readjf.

The FBACTICAL MECHANIC'S JOITBNAL: An Illustrated Eecord
of Mechanical and Engineering Science, and Epitome of Patent Inventions.
4to. price la. monthly.

The PBACTICAL BBAITOHTSMAN'S BOOK of INBITSTBIAL DE-
SIGN. By W. Johnson, Assoc. Inst. C.E. With many hundred Illustrations.
4to. 2&8. dd.

The PATENTEE'S MANUAL ; a Treatise on the Law and Practice of
Letters Patent for the use of Patentees and Inventors. By J. and J. H.
Johnson. Post 8vo. 7s. Qd.

The ABTI^AN CLUB'S TBEATISE on the STEAM ENGINE, in its

yarious Apnlications to Mines, Mills, Steam Navigation, Bailways and Agri-
culture. By J. BouENE, C.B. Fifth Edition ; with 37 Plates and 546 Wood-
cuts. 4to. 4&8.

A Catechism of the Steam Engine, in its various Applications to
Mines, Mills, Steam Navigation, Railways, and Agriculture. By the same
Author. With 80 Woodcuts. Pep. 8vo. 6».

The STOBT of the GITNS. Bj Sir J. Ehbrson Tbnnent, E.C.S.

P.R.S. With 33 Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 7». 6d.

The THEOBT of WAB Illnstrated by nnmerons Examples from His-
tory. By Lieut.-Col. P. L. MaoDougall. Third JSdition, with 10 Plans.
Post 8vo. lOs.ed.

NEW WOBKS PUBLISHED BT LONOMAJN' and CO. 17

COLLIEBIES and COLLIEBS; A Handbook of the Law and leading.
Cases relating thereto. By J. C. Fowlbb, Barrister-at-Law. Fcp. Sro. €«.

The ABT of PEBFITHEBT ; the History and Theorj of Odours, and
the Methods of Extracting the Aromas of Plants. By Dr. Pibsbb, F»G.S.
Third Edition, with 53 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 10». 6d.

Chemical, Natural, and Physical Magic, for Juveniles daring the
Holidays. By the same Author. With 30 Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. 3«. 6d.

The Laboratory of Chemical Wonders: a Scientific Melange for
Young People. By the same. Crown 8to. 5«> Qd,

TALPA; or the Chronicles of a Clay Farm. By C. W. Hoskykb,
Esq. With 24 Woodcuts fh>m Designs by 6. Cbuieshaitk. 16mo. 68. 6d,

H.E.H. the FBIHCE CONSOBrS FABMS: An Agricultural Memoir.
By John Chalmebs Mobtoit. Dedicated by permission to Her Majesty
the QuEBir. With 40 Wood Engravings. 4to. 62s. 6d.

Handbook of Farm Labour, Steam, Water, Wind, Horse Power,
Huid Power, &c. By the same Author. 16mo. Is. Qd.

Handbook of Dairy Husbandry; comprising the General Manage-
ment of a Dairy Farm, Sto. By the same. 16mo. Is. 6d.

LOTTDON'S ENGYCLOPJEDI/L of AGBICTrLTTTBE : comprising the
Laying-out, Improvement, and Management of Landed Property, and the
Cultivation and Economy of the Productions of Agriculture. With 1,100
Woodcuts. Svo. Sis. 6d.

Loudon's Encylopaedia of Gardening: Comprising the Theory and
Practice of Horticulture, Floriculture, Arboriculture, and .Landscape Gar-
dening. With 1,000 Woodcuts. 8vo.81«. 6d.

Loudon's EneyclopsBdla of Cottage, Farm, and Villa Architecture
and Furniture. With more than 2,000 Woodcuts. 8vo.42«.

HISTOBT of WIKDSOB GBEAT FABK and WIKBSOB FOBEST.

By William Menzibs, Besident Deputy Surveyor. Dedicated by per-
mission to H. M. the QvEEif. With 2 Maps, and 20 Photographs by the
Eabl of Caithbess and Mr. Bbmbbidob. Imperial folio, £8 8«.

BATLBOirS ABT of YALlTIirG BEHTS and TILLAGES, and Claims
of Tenants upon Quitting Farms, both at Michaelmas and Lady-Day.
Eighth Edition, adapted to the present time by J, C. Mobton.

Religious and Moral Works.

An EXPOSITION of the 39 ABTICLES, Historical and Doctrinal.
By E. Habold Bbowbe, D J). Lord Bishop of Ely. Sixth Edition, Svo. 189.

The Pentateuch and the Elohistie Psahns, in reply to Bishop Colenso.
By the same Author. Svo. 2t.

Examination Questions on Bishop Browne's Exposition of the
Articles. By the Bev. J. Goblb, M.A. Fcp. Zs. Qd,

18 KSW WO&ES FVBLiSBisii WF LOIfGKAir Msv CO.

Vrns LSCTVBSft on tlift CHAJtACTBE of 81. YAIT^; bemg the
Hnlflean leetiunt for mOL By the Reiw J. & Bowsozr^ DiB. Seeond
Edition. 8vo. 98.

A CnmeAL snd eUtkWHfMieAJt GOKMESJMXT oufgH PAUL'S

Epistles. ByC. J.Ei:.LiC0TT, I>.D. Lord Bishop of Gloucester and&ristoL Sro.

€halatiftB% Third Edition, 8«. 6<i.

EpheaiaBS, Third Edition, &8^8dL.

Pastoral EpiatleB, Second Edition, lOff. 6dl

Pldlippiaas^ Colossiaxu, and PMlamon^ Second E^tion, IQe. 6cL

Ihaisalioniams Second Edition, 7«. 6«£.

Historical Lootnres on iht Lif^ of onr Lortt Josua G&riat :. beinf^ the
Hiilsean Lectures for 1859. By .the same. Third Edition. 8vo. 10s. Qd.

The Destiny of the C^eatnre ; and other Sermona preached before
the University of Cambridge. By the same. Post 8vo. Ss.

The Broad and tha Harrow Way ; Two Sermons pceached before
the University of Cambridge. By the same. Crown Svo. 28.

Bev. T. E. HOBSI'S IlfTBOB¥CTION to th« GBITICAL KCVBY

and Knovledge of the Holy Scriptures. Eleventh Edition, conwdad and
extended under careful Editorial revision. Witk 4Wap»and28 UToodcuts
and Facsimiles. 4 vols. 8vo. £8 ISs, Gd.

Bar. T. H. Horse's CoDipaiidiena lutvadmctikm tathe! fttndyefthe

Bible, being an Analysis of the hu^pefr work 1^ l&e same Aiuthor. Be^^ifited
by the Bev. JoHir Aybe, MA* With Maps. &c. Post 8vo. 94l

The TBEASXTBT of BIBUS WSOfWlXOfSfB^ onr the Plaa ofMaiinder's
TrCTsuries. BytfaftB«v. Jos9 Al3iB» M.iL Pep. Svo.. with Maps aauilltaa*
tmtions. £Mi. thtt,

Tke GBBBX TBSTABnSlTT; with Notes, GrammtMieal and Exegetical.
By the Bev. IT. VTebstss, M Jl. aaid« the Ktev. "VT. P. "WrEKra 80fflr> MA, 2
vols. 8vo. £2. 4a.

Moil, I. the GeayeiaaBd Acts, 2»a,

ToL. IL the Bpistle» and Apoca^pse^ 24».

The FOXTB EXPEBIHEBTS in Church and State ; and the Conflicts
of Churches. By Lord Bobebt MoNT^au, M.P. 8vo. 12*.

EYBBT-DAT aCBIPTVBB BOTXCHI^RES explamed and illustrated;
Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark. By J. £. Pbsscoxt, M.A. late
Pellow of C. C. ColL Caoiiab. 8vo. 9*.

The PBBTATEireH and BOOK of J08HT7A Criticall^r Exaraihedl
By X W. CoLBirao, D.D. Lord Bishc^of NataL Puts J, ^» PeuiaimtcA
eaxtmined as an Hietorical Narrative. 8«o. Qs. Pabt IL tha Atm and
Authorship of the Pentat&uch Considered, 7s. Qd. Past III. the Book of
Deuteronomj^ 8s. PjlET IY. theMrsi 11 Cheaters qf Gewasi&.4»aminMiamd
separated, wtth Bemarks on the Creation, the Fall, etnd tHa JSelnge, IQs. 6cK.

NEW WO&SB TUBXISHBD BT IjONGMAK aitd 00. 19

The LIFE mnd EPISTLES of ST. FAVL. By W. J. CoimiBAmB,

M.A. late Fellow of Trin. Coll. Cantab, and J. S. Howsoir, D.D. Prinoipal of
the Collegiate Institution, Liverpool.

LiBSABY Edition, vith all the Original DliuiratioiiB, MMfta, LaudKapes
on Steel, Woodcuts, &c. 2 vols. 4to. 48$,

Iktebhediate EBmoiir, with a Selection of Maps, Flates, and Woodcuts.
2 vols, square crown 8vo. Sl«. 6d,

PeopxsNs EDiTioir, revised and condensed, with 46 IfliuitratioDS and
Maps. 2 vols, crown 8vo. 12s.

The VOTAtJE and SHIFWBECK of ST. PATO; with DissOTtstions.
on the Ships and Navigation of the Ancients. "By Jjjees Skiih, F.£.S*
Crown 8vo. Charts, Ss, 6d.

HIPFOLYTXJS and his AOS; or, the Begiirahigs and Prospects of
Christianity. By Baron BuifSEir, D.D. 2 vols. 8vo. SOc.

Ontlines of the Philosophy of VniYorsal History, applied to Lan-
guage and Religion : Containing an Account of the Alphabetical CaafeMBoes.
By the same Author. 2 vols. 8vo. 38«.

Aimlocta Ante-Nicaena. B7 the same Author. 3 vols. Svo. 42s.

THEOLOOLl QfEKMASyUL Translated by Subahnah Wwkworvb.:
with a Preface by the Eev. C. KiirGH9LBT ; and a Letter by Baron BuifBEir.
F-cp. 8¥0. 68,

IKSTBirCTIOlfS in the DOCTBIHE and PBACTICE off CHSIS-

tianity, as an Introduction to Conflri
LardBishGpt»fCaloutta. ISmo. 2ft.(M.

tianity, as an Introduction to Confirmation. By O. E. L. CoTioir, D.D.
~ "iBisl -- -

ESSATS on BELIGION and LITEEATUBE. By Cardinal Wibe-
UJLS, Dr. D. B.OCK. F. H. Laiko, and other .Wzitenk Edited hj H. fi.
Maithxetg, J) J>. Svo.

ESSAYS and BEVIEWS. By the Rev. W. Temple, D.B. the Rev.
IL Williams, B.D. the Bev. B. Powell, M.A. the Bev. H. B. WiLsoir,
B.B. C. W. GtooDWix, M.A. the Eev. M. Pathsozt, B,D, and the Bev. B.
3^0WETT, M.A. nth Edition. Fcp. 8vo.5«.

■mHEIirS SCCLBBIASTICAL HISTOBT. Mukdock and Soames's
Translation and Kotes, re-edited by the Bev. W. Stussq, MJI. 8 vols.
8vo. 45*.

The GENTILE and the JEW in the Conrts of the Temple of Christ :
an Introduction to the History of Christianity. From the Gecman oi Profl
DoLUKeES, by the Bev. JK. Daensll, MA. 2 vols. Svo. 21b,

PHTSICO-PBOPHETICAL ESSATS, on the Locality of the Eternal
Inheritance, its Nature and Character ; the Besurrection Body ; axid Idie
Mutual Becognition of Glorified Saints. By the Bev. W. LisxBX, F.G.S.
Crown Svo. 6«.

BISHOP JEBEK7 TAYLOB'S EITTIBE WOBKS: With Life by
Bishop Hssbb. Revised and corrected by the Bev. C. P. £dx3« 10 vols.
Svo. £5 58,

10 NEW WORKS PUBLISHED by LONGMAN akd CO.

PASSnrO THOUGHTS on BELIGIOH. By the Author of «Amjr
Herbert.' 8th Edition. Fcp.Svo. 5«.

Thoughts for the Holy Week, for Young Persons. Bj the same
Author. 2d Edition. Fcp.Svo. 2«.

Night Lessons from Scripture. By the same Author. 2d Edition.
SSmo. S8.

Self-Ezamination before Confirmation. By the same Author. 32mo.
price l8. 6d.

Beadings for a Month Preparatory to Confirmation, from Writers
of the Early and English Church. By the same. Pep. 4^.

Beadings for Every Day in Lent, compiled from the Writings of
Bishop Jbsemy Tatlob. By the same. Fcp. 8vo. 6«.

Preparation for the Holy Communion; the Devotions chiefly from
the works of Jebemt Tatlob. By the same. 32mo. Ss,

MOBKIirG CLOUDS. Second Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 5«.

The Afternoon of Life. By the same Author. Second Edition.
Pep. 58.

Problems in Human Nature. By the same. Post 8vo. 5s.

The WIPE'S MAKITAL ; or. Prayers, Thoughts, and Songs on Several
Occasions of a Matron's Life. By the Bev. W. Calyebt, MA. Crown Svo.
price 109. 6d.

SPntmrAL songs for the SUNDAYS and HOLIDAYS through-
out the Tear. By J. S. B. Moksell, LL.D. Yicar of Egham. Third Edition.
Pep. 8vo. 49. 6d.

HYKNOLOGIA CHBISTIANA : or, Psalms and Hymns selected and

arranged in the order of the Christian Seasons. By B. H. Kennedy, D.D.
Prebendary of Lichfield. Crown 8vo, Is. 6d.

LYBA SACBA; Hymns, Ancient and Modem, Odes and Fragments
of Sacred Poetry. Edited by the Rev. B. "W. Sayile, M.A. Fcp. 8vo. 6*.

LYBA GEBHANICA, translated from the German by Miss C. Wink-
WOBTH. PiBST Sebies, Hymns for the Sundays and Chief Pestivals;
Second Sebies, the Christian Life. Pep. 8vo. 68. each Sebies.

Hymns from Lyra Germanica, 18mo. Is,

LYBA EUCHABISTICA ; Hymns and Verses on the Holy Communion,
Ancient and Modern : with other Poems. Edited by the Rev. Obey Ship-
ley, M.A. Second Edition, revised and enlarged. Pep. Svo. 7s. Qd.

Lyra Messianiea; Hymns and Verses on the Life of Christ, Ancient
and Modern ; with other Poems. By the same Editor. Pep. Svo. 78. ed.

Lyra Mystica ; Hymns and Verses on Sacred Subjects, Ancient and
Modern. Porming a companion volume to the above, by the same Editor.
Pep. Svo. INearly ready.

NEW WORKS PTJBUSHED BY LONGMAN aitd CO. 21

I4YBA DOMESTICA; Christian Songs for Domestic Edification.
Translated from the Psaltery and Harp of C. J. P. SpiTTi.,and ftrom other
sources, by Richabd Massie. Fibbt and Second Sebies, fcp. 8vo.
price 48. 6d. each.

The CHOBALE BOOK for ENGLAND; a complete Hjmn-Book in
accordance \irith the Services and Festivals of the Church of England : the
Hymns translated by Miss C. Winkwobth » the tunes arranged by Prof.
• W. S. Bennett and Otto Goldschmidt. Fcp. 4to. lOtf. ed.

Congpregational Edition. Fcp. 8vo. price U, 6d,

Travels, Voyages, <^c.

EASTEBN EUBOFE and WESTEBN ASIA. Political and Social
Sketches on Russia, Greece, and Syria. By Henby A. Tilley. With 6
lUustrations. Post 8vo. lOs. 6d.

EXPLOBATIONS in SOTTTH-WEST AFBICA, from Walvisch Bay to
Lake Neami aud the Victoria Falls. By Thomas Baines. 8vo. with
Map and Illustrations. [/» October.

SOTTTH AMERICAN SKETCHES; or, a Visit to Eio Janeiro, the
Organ Mountains, La Plata, aud the Parand,. By Thomas W. Hinchlifp,
M.A. F.B.G.S. Post 8vo. with Illustrations, 12«. ed.

EXPLOBATIONS in LABBADOB. By Henbt Y. Hiin>, M. A.
F.B.G.S. With Maps and Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo. 32ff.

The Canadian Bed Biver and Assinniboine and Saskatchewan

Exploring Expeditions. By the same Author. With Maps and Illustrations.
2 vols. 8vo. 4&8.

The CAPITAL of the TYCOON ; a Narrative of a Three Years' Resi-
dence in Japan. By Sir Buthebpobd Alcock, K.C.B. 2 vols. 8vo. with
numerous Illustrations, 42«.

LAST WINTEB in BOMB and other ITALIAN CITIES. By C.

R. Weld, Author of * The Pyrenees, West and East,* &o. 1 vol. post 8vo;
with a Portrait of * Stella,* and Engravings on Wood firom Sketches by
the Author. lln the Autumn.

AUTUMN BAHBLES in NOBTH AFBICA. By John Ormsbt,

of the Middle Temple, Author of the * Ascent of the Grivola,* in 'Peaks,
Passes, and Glaciers.* With IS Illustrations on Wood from Sketches by the
Author. Post 8vo. Ss. 6d.

PEAKS, PASSES, and GLACIEBS; a Series of Excursions by
Members of the Alpine Club. Edited by J. Ball, M.B.I.A. Fourth
Edition ; Maps, Illustrations, Woodcuts. Square crown 8vo.21«.— Tbavbl-
LEBs' Edition, condensed, 16mo. bs. 6d.

Second Series, edited by E. S. Kbnnbdt, M.A. F.R.G.S. With
many Maps and Illustrations. 2 vols, square crown 8vo. 4&8.

Kineteen Haps of the Alpine DistrictB, from the First and
Second Series of Peaks^ Passes^ and Glaciers, Price Is. Qd.

NSW WOSKS YUSUSHSB ST LOKGMASr jjstd GO.

Tk« INUAMITE KOUKTAINB. fixcnisions throoirli TjroL^ Carintlua,
Oarniolm and Fiiuli in 1861, 1982, and 18M. By J. Gelbekt aad O. C.
CxcscKiu^ FJLGJI. With anmerotu OhostralMXis. fiqwve erown
8vo. 21«.

MOUKTAOnSXBnra in IMl; a Vacation Tour. By P^f. J.
TxitbaUh F.&.S. Square orown Bvo. with C Views, 7c. 6d.

A SmniEB lOITB in tlie OKUOVS aaul ITALIAN TALLETB of

the Bernina. By Mrs. Heztsy Fbeshfield. With £ Coloured Ma(is and
4 Views, Fost8vo.lO».6^

Alpine Byeways ; or, Light Leaves gathered in 1859 and 1860. Sy
the same Authoress. Post 8vo. with JQlustrations, 10s. 6d,

A LADY'S TOUB BOITITD MOKTE BOSA; including Visits to the
Italian Valleys'. With Map and Illustrations. Post 8vo. 14ff.

CnmiB to tke PYB£¥EES, for the use of Mountaineers. Bj
Chablxb Pacxz. With Maps, ftc and a new Appendix. Fc{l 6*.

OUIBE to the GENTBAL ALPS, including the Beroeee OberUuid,

Eastern Switeerland, Lombardy, and Western ^TyroL By Josif Bau.,

M.B.IJL. Potft 8vo. with 8 Maps, 7«. ed. or with aa IirrK(H>TrcTiO]r oa

Alpine Travelling, and on the Greology of the Alps, te. ed, ISie Isiboduc-

lON separately. Is.

Q«ida to th« WMtem A1|miu By the same Andior. Willi an
Article on the .Geology -of the Alps 1^ M.E. Desok. Post 8vo. wit^ Mapa,
ice. Is. 6(2.

A WEEK at the LAKD'B END. By J. T. Blight ; assisted by K
U. BoDD, B. Q. Couch, and J. Bax.fs. With Map and 86 Woodcuts. Pqp.
Svo.«t.6iL

TI«ITS to BEHABBABLE PLACES : Old Halls, Battie-Fields, and
Scenes Illustrative of Striking Passages in English History and Poe^.
iQy WiiiUAM HowiTT. 2 vols, square orown 8vo. with Wood Eognnriiiga,
price 25«.

The BTTBAL LIFE of ENGLAND. By the same Aathor. With
Woodcuts hy Bewick and Williams. Medium 8v<>. 12«. 'Qd.

Works of Ficdon.

LATE LAUBELS : a Tale. By the Author of ' Wheat and Tares.* S
vols, post 6vo. 15*.

GBYLL GBANGE. By the Author of * Headlong HaU.' Post 8vo.

price 7«. Qd,

A FIBSI FBIENBSHIP, [Reprinted from Frasei^s Mugazae.']
Crown 8vo. 7«.64i.

THALATTA ; or, the Great Commoner : a P«^tical BosaaDce. Cn»wn

8vo. 2s.

NBW WOSKS PTTBLISSEBD V¥ lAXBSQMMUt Jonr €01 29

JELUKSTOITE PBIOBY. By L. K. Coicnr. 2 vols, post 8yo. 2ls.
lESUAoe : a Tale. By the same. Post 8yo. 9^. Bd.

^nL« LAST of the OLD SQTTIBES. Bj thaBeT. J. W. Wabtsb^ B.D.
Second Edition. Pep. 9T0.4r. 6cL

and STOBIES by the Anthor of < Amy Herbert,' anifomt
ISdition, each l^ory or Tale m a single Yolume.

Amt Hebbest, 29,Qd.
Gbbtbitde, 28. 6d.

ExPSRIEirCB OF LiPE, 29. 6(2.

Glbyb Hali., 3».!6<2.

Itoss, 39. Cd,

IKaeo-abbi Pescztal, 69.
Laitrtozt Pabsoitage, 49. eisC
XJssuiA, 4a«dL

A. Glimpse of the Worlds By the Anthor of 'Amy Herbert' Fop. Ts, Sd.

XSSSAYS on FICnOIF ; comprising Articles on Sir W. Sgovt, Sir £L B.

liTTTOir, Colonel Sbniob, Mr. Thackerat, and Mrs. Bbechbb Stowe. Bee-
printed duefly flroiu the JEdinburffK Quarterly , and WestmiM^w^ Jle9imi»\
with large Additions. By Nassau W. Sxkeob. fost 8v<k Ite. M.

TEhB &LAM130B&: A Tale of Borne and Jadsa. By G. J. WBrrm

Mbhtlllk Grows 8to.

Digby Grand, an Autobiography. By the same Author.. 1 toI. 5«.
Kate Coventry, ^n Autobiography. By the sune. 1 tc^ 5fi
Ctonoral Ifounee, or the Lady and the Locusts. By the same. I tqI. St,
Solmby House, a Tale of Old Northamptonshire. 1 toI. 5#.
Good for Nothing, or All Down Hill. By the same. 1 vol. (Sj.
The Queen's Maries, a Romance of Holyrood. 1 ¥oL <«;.
T&e Interpreter, a Tale of the War. By the same. I vof. 5«.

TALES from GBESK MYTHOLOGY. By the Be^. a W. Cos, M. A*

late Schol^ of Trin. ColL Ozon. Second Edition. Square 16mo.. Ss. tti.

Tales of tba Gods and HertMt^ By the same Author. Second
Sditxon. IFcpw Svo^, 6a

Tales of Thebes and Argos. By the same Author. Fcp. 9fo. 4s. 6<f.

ThiWABDBll': aNorel. By Antbosff Tboexofb. Oown 9fo.3ii. %</.

Barchester Towers : a Sequel to * The Warden.' By the same
Author. Crown 8vo. .59.

The SIX SISTEBS of the YALLBYS: an Historical Eomance. By
W. Bbamley-Moobb, M.A. Incumbent of Gerrard's Cross, Bucks. With
14 Illustrations on Wood. Crown. Svo.. 59.

24 NEW WORKil FVBLISHBD BY LONGMAN and CO.

Poetry and the Drama,

XOOBX'S POETICAL WOSKS, Cheapest Editions complete in 1 toI.
including the Autobiographical Prefaces and Author's last Notes, which are
■tiU copyright. Grown 8vo. ruby type, with Portrait, .7«. 6d. or People's
Edition, in larger type, 12f . 9d,

Moore's Poetical Works, as above. Library Edition, mediam 8vo.
with Portrait and Vignette, 21«. or in 10 vols. fop. 3ff. 6(2. each.

TEHNIEL'S EDITION of MOOBE'S LALLA BOOSS, with 68 Wood
Engravings from original Drawings and other Illustrations. Pep. 4to. 2l9.

Moore's Lalla Bookh. 32mo. Plate, 1«. 16mo. Vigcette, 2s, 6d.
Square crown 8vo. with 13 Plates, 158,

MACLISE'S EDITION of MOOBFS IBISH MELODIES, with 161
Steel Plates from Original Drawings. Super-royal 8vo. Sis. Qd.

Moore's Irish Melodies, 32mo. Portrait, U, 16mo. Yignette, 2s. 6tL
Square crown 8vo. with IS Plates, 21«.

SOITTHET'S POETICAL WOBES, with the Author's last CoTrections

and copyright Additions. Library Edition, in 1 vol. medium 8vo. with
Portrait and Yignette, 149. or in 10 vols. fcp. Ss. 6d. each.

LAYS of ANCIENT BOME ; with Ivry and the Armada, By the
Bight Hon. Lom> Macaulat. 16mo. 49. 6d,

Lord Macanlay's Lays of Anoient Borne. With 90 Dlnstrations on
Wood, Original and from the Antique, from Drawings by G. Scoaxs, Fcp.
4to. 219.

POEMS. By Jbak Iitoblow. Seventh Edition. Pop. 8vo. 5s.

POETICAL WOBES of LETITIA ELIZABETH LANDON (L.E.L.)
2 vols. 16mo, 109.

PLATTIME with the POETS : a Selection of the best English Poetry
for the use of Children. By a Lady. Crown 8vo. 69.

The BEVOLUTIONABY EPICE. By the Right Hon. BsHJAMiir

DiBBAELI. Fcp. 8V0. 59.

BOWDLEB'S FAMILY SHAKSPEABE, cheaper Genuine Edition,
complete in 1 vol. lai^e type, with 36 Woodcut Illustrations, price 149. or
with the same Illttstbations, in 6 pocket vols. 59. each.

An ENGLISH TBAGEDY ; Mary Stuart, from Schiller ; and Mdlle.
De Belle Isle, from A. Dumas,— each a Play in 5 Acts, by Fbakces A Jnf b
Kbmble. Post 8vo. 129.

Rural Sports^ <^c.

ENCYCLOPEDIA of BTTBAL SPOBTS; a complete Account, His-
torical, Practical, and Descriptive, of Hunting, Shooting, Fishing, Badng,
&c. By D. P. Blainb. With above 600 Woodcuts (20 from Designs by
JoHB Lbbch). 8vo. 429.

NEW WORKS PUBLISHED BY LONGMAN XSD CO. U

COL. HAWKEB'S UrSTBTTCTIONS to YOUNe SFOBTSUEN in all

that relates to Guns and Shooting. Bevised by the Author's Soir. Square
crown 8vo. with lllustratious, lbs,

UrOTES on BIFLE SHOOTING. By Captain Heaton, Adjutant of
the Third Manchester Bifle Volunteer Corps. Fcp. 8vo. 28. Qd,

Tlie DEAD SHOT, or Sportsman's Complete Gaide ; a Treatise on
the Use of the Gun, Dog-breaking, Pigeon* shooting, &c. By Mabesmav .
'Fcp, 8vo. with Plates, 6s,

The CHASE of the WILD BED DEEB in DEVON and SOMEBSET.

By 0. P. CoLLYKS. With Map and Illustrations. Square crown Sto. 168,

The FLT-FISHEB'S ENTOMOLOGT. By Axf&bd Rokat^ds. With
coloured Representations of the l*Jatural and Artificial. Insect. 6th Edition ;
with 20 coloured Plates. 8vo. 149.

HANDBOOK of ANGLING : Teaching Fly-fishing, Trolling, Bottom-
fishing, Salmon-fiiihing; with the Natural History of Biyer Pish, and the
best modes of CatchiuK theiu. By £fhbmbba. Pep. Woodcuts, 68.

The CBICKET FIELD ; or, the History and the Science of the Game
of Cricket. By J. Pycboft, B.A. Trin. Coll. Oxon. 4th Edition. Pep.
8vo. 68,

The Cricket Tutor ; a Treatise exclnsivcly Practical. By the same.
l8mo. 18.

The HOBSE'S FOOT, and HOW to KEEP IT SOUND. By W.

Miles, Esq. 9th Edition, with lllustratious. Imp. 8vo. VZs. Qd,

A Plain Treatise on Horse-Shoeing. By the same Author. Post
8vo. with Illustrations, 25.

General Bemarks on Stables, and Examples of Stable Fittings. By
the same. Imp. 8vo. with 13 Plates, 155.

Bemarks on Horses' Teeth, adapted to Purchasers. Bj the same
Author. Crown 8vo. Is. 6d,

The HOBSE : with a Treatise on Draught. By William Youatt.
New Edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, lUs. ed.

The Dog. By the same Author. Svo. with numeroos Woodcuts, 6«.

The DOG in HEALTH and DISEASE. By Stonbhenqb. With 70
Wood Engravings. Square crown Svo. 15*.

The Greyhound. By the same. With many Illustrations. Square
crown Svo. 21«.

The OX ; his Diseases and their Treatment: with an Essay on Parturi-
tion in the Cow. By J. B. DoBSOir , M.B.C.V.S. Post 8vo. with Illustrations.

IJttst ready.

NSir W<9BS8 PBa&mniD sr UXSGMAX tLsro CO.

Oommerce, Nav^tim, und Meroamiaie Affairs.

Th« LA.W «f VATI01I8 Considered as iDdependent BoHtiad Can-

munities. By Tbatsba Twibs, D.€ Jj. "Bapm Frofessor of •Ciiril Imw too. the
TJnivenityof Oxford. 2 toIa. 8vo. 30*. or separately, Pijzr L ^£aee, 13m,
fkXT n. iFor, Ite.

A DICnONABT, Practical, Theoretical, «Dd fiistencal, of Com-
xneroeuid Gommerdal Nangaifcion. ^ J. R. IK'Cuxi^ocH, Esq. Sva wttfa

The STUBT of STEAX and the KABOTE EVOHTS, for Yooiig
BeaOfBceis. ^y'B.M.fiAXBT^JLJQ^. Post 8vo. with 67 S^iBgnans, fie 6dL

A HATTTICAL BICTIOKAET, defining tlie l^echnical Ijangiiaee i^
lati^e to the Building and Equipmeiit of SaUiofrVesaels and Stevner^ Ac.
By Abthvx TfiNoaro. BeoDnd £dttioxL ; with rbsfeee and ISO WfMdontB.

A XAKTTAL for HAYAL CABET8. By J. McNeil Botd, late Cap-
tain B^N. Third Bffitiim; with 240 "Woodcuts -and 11 oqIoiop^ ftatea.
FMt»vo.l2i.6<2.

%* Every Cadet in the Boyal Navy is required by the Begula^ns of the
Admiraltgr lo have a cosy of this woick on his entry into the Navy.

Works of Utility and General Information.

MOBEBN COOEEBY for FEIYATE PAMTTJTO, nsdnced to a System
of Easy Practice in a Series of carefully-tested Becelpts. By £^zA Acrov.
Kewly revised and enhoged; with 6 Plates, Pigures, vnd 150 Woodcuts.
Pep. 8vo.7<. 6c{.

On FOOB And its !DI0E6TIOir; an Introductioii to Dietetics. Ify
W. BEiiTTOir, M.D. Physician to St. Thomas's Hospital, &c. Wifli 4B Wood-
cuts. Post8vo.l2«.

ABITLTERATIOirfl BEfSCTEB ; or Plain Instmctioofi for the Dis-
covery of Frauds in Pood and Medicine. By A. H. Hassaix, M J). Grown
8vo. witb Woodcuts, 1^. M,

ThM YINE And iits FBTTTT, in relation to the ProdscliDn of Wine.
By Jajibs L. DsiriLUf. Crown 8vo. 8«.B<2.

WIXE, tliA YIKX, and the GELLAB. By Thouas Q.BiBAM, Wiih
28 Illustrations on Wood. 8vo. 16ff.

A PXACTHSAL ISEATIBE on BBEWIF0 ; with Pormnlse for Public
Brewen, and Instructions for Private Pamilies. ByW.BLA.GE. 6vo.10t.6c2.

SHOBT WHIST; its Rise, Progress, and Laws; with the Laws of

Piquet, Cassino, Ecart6, Cribbage, and Backgammon. By Miy'or A. Pep.
8vo. 3«.

NEW WORKS FfrBLi8]ixi)> bt LONGKAN asj> COw 9

HIKTS on ETIi^UETTE and the ITSAfiES of SOdETT ; with a
Glance at Bad Habits. Bevised, with Additioiu^ b j a Ladt of Bi^x. Fcp.
Hvo. 2t, Qd,

Tlie CASHrST LAWTEB ; a Fopi^lar Digest of the Laws of England,

CSml and Criminal. 19fft JSdiHon, exberOBA
Acts of the Session* ISOsi and X86))w Fcil&vo.

CSml and Criminal. 19^ JBdiHon, ejfienAeA by the AuthcHr; inrfaAmg tba

Th# PHILOSOPHY oi HEALTH ; or, an Expotitioa of the Fhjno^
logical and Sanitary Conditions ccaiducdve to Hiunan. Longevitj aoid
Happiness. % Southwood Smith, VLJX, Eterenth Edition, rcnrised and
o^Uarged : witfi New Plates> StTO. IJnst rm^

HINTS to M OtBEBS en the XAHAeSXEKT of their HEALTH

during the Period of Pregnancy and in the Ljing-in Boon. Bj T.Buxfi.
HJD. Fep. SVO.&S.

The Maternal Management of Children in Health and IHieaae. By

the same Author. Fcpu 8to. 6«.

MOTES on HOSPITALS. By Flohence NiOHTXMQALn. Tlard Edi-
tion, enlarged ; with 13 Plana. Post 4to. 18«;

C. M. WILLICH'S POPULAB TABLES for ascertaining the Yalne
of Lifehold, Leasehold* and Ghureh Propertj, Benewal Pines, te, ; the
Public Fundi; Annual Ayerage Price and Interest on Consols firom 1731 to
1831; Chemical, Geographical, Astroaoomical. Trigooometrical Talries^ &o.
Post 8vo. 105. . .

THOMSON'S TABLES of INTEBEST, at Three, Four, Four and a
Half, and Five per Cent, from One Pound to Ten Thousand and from 1 to
365 Days. 12mo. Zs.Qd,

MATTNDEB'S TBEAS7BT ef ENOWLEBGE and LIBBABT of

Beference: comprising an English Dictionary and Grammar, a Universal
Gazetteer, a Classical Dictionary, a Chronology, a Law Dictionary, a Synop-
sis of the Peerage, useflil Tables, &c. Fcpw 8vo. Ite.

General and School Atlases.

An ELEMENTABT ATLAS of HISTOBY and eEOGEAPHT, from
the commencement of the Christian Era to the Present Time, in 13 ei^oured
Haps, chronologically arranged, with illustralive Memoirs. By the Bev.
J. S. BsxwEB, M^. Boyal 8vo. 128. ed.

SCHOOL ATLAS of PHYSICAL, POLITICAL, and COMMEBCIAL
GEOGBAPHY.in 17 full-coloured Maps, accompanied by descriptive Letter-
press. By E. HuOHES, F.B.A.S. Boyal Svo. 10«. 6d.

BISHOP BTTTLEB'S ATLAS of ANCIENT GEO0BAPHY, m a Series
of 24 full-coloured Maps, accompanied by a complete Accentuated Index.
New Edition, corrected and enlarged. Boyal 8vo. 12s.

28

NEW WOfiKS PUBLISHED BT LONGMAN and CO.

BISHOP BUTLER'S ATLAS of MODESN 0EOGBAFEY, in a Series
of S3 full-coloured Maps, acoompanied by a complete Alphabetical Index.
New Edition, corrected and enlarged. Koyal 8vo. lOs. Qd,

Iv conaeqoenoe of the npid advanoe of
g«ograpl ileal discovery, and the many re*
cent changes, throafrh political caaaee. In
the boondaries of various eoantriea, it has
been foand neoesrary thoronghly to revise
thii lonjc-established Atlas, and to add
several new Haps. New Maps have been
irlven of tiie following oonntries : Falntma^
OaiMula.and the adjacent provinces of New
BruntmUk. NovaSeotia^ and Newfaundlandt
the Awttriean 8taU» bordering on the
Pacific, BatUm Australia, and New Zea-
land. In addition to these Maps of
WfUm Austraiia and Tasmania have
been given in compartments: thus com-
pleting the revision of the Map of Anttra^
tuia, rendered necessary by the rising
importance of our Australasian posses-
sions. In the Map of BuropSt Iceland has
also been re-drawn, and the new boundaries

of France, Itafp, and Aualria represented.
The Maps ot the three last-named oountrias
have been carefully revised. The Map of
Switzerland has been wholly' re-drawn,
showing more accurately the physical
features of the country. AJriea has been
carefully compared with the diaooveries of
LrviHGSTOVs, BuBTOir, Spkks, Baxth,
and other explorers. The number of Maps
is thus raised ft-om Thirty to Thirty-thrsa.
An entirely new Ivnix has been am-
structed ; and the price of the work has
been reduced from 12«. to HaLf-a-Guinea.
The present edition, therefore, will be
found much superior to former ones; and
the Publishers feel assured that it will
maintain the character which this work
has so long enioyed as a popular and com-
prehensive School Atlas.

XIDDLE-CLASS ATLAS of GENEBAL GEOGBAPHY, in a Series of
29 fUll-ooloured Maps, containing the most recent Territorial Changes and
Discoveries. By Waxtes M'Leod, F.IL6.S. 4to.5«.

PHYSICAL ATLAS of GBEAT BBITAIN and IBELAKD; compris-
ing 80 full-coloured Maps, with illustrative Letterpress, forming a Concise
Synopsis of British Physical Geography. By Waltsb M*Leod, F.B.G.S.
Fcp.4to.7«. 6d.

Periodical Publications.

The EBUrBITBGH BEYIEW, or CBITIGAL JOXTBITAL, published
Quarterly in January, April, July, and October. 8vo. price 6s. each No.

The GEOLOGICAL MAGAZINE, or Monthly Journal of Geologj,
edited hy T. Rupebt Jones, F.G.S. assisted by Henbt Woodwam), P.G.S.
8vo. price Is. Qd. each No.

PBASEB'S XAGAZIKE for TOWN and COmiTBT, published on
the Ist of each Month. 8vo. price is. 6d. each No.

The ALPINE JOUBNAL: a Record of Mountun Adventure and
Scientific Observation. Bv Members of the Alpine Club. Edited by
H. B. GBOBeB, M.A. Published Quarterly, May 81, Aug. 81, Nov. SO, Feb. 28.
8vo. price Is. 6d. each No.

INDEX.

Acton's Modem Cookery 26

Afternoon of Life 20

A u:ock's Residence in Japftn 21

Alpine Guide (The) il

Joqmal(The) 28

Apjobn's Manual of the Metalloids 11

Araoo's Biofpraphies of Scientific Men .... 5

Popular Astronomy 10

Meteorological Essays 10

Arnold's Manual of Ensrlish literature.... 7

Arkott's Elements of Physics 11

Atherstone Priory •. 23

Axkinson's Papinian fi

Autumn Holidayof a Coontrt Parson 8

Atbb's Treasury of Bible Knowledge 18

Bacok's Essays, by Whatblt fi

Life and Letters, by Spbddino 3

Works, by Exxxs Spbduiho, and

Heath 5

Bain on the Emotions and Will 9

on the Senses and Intellect 9

on the Study of Character 9

Bainrs's Explorations in 8. W. Africa .... 21

Ball's Guide to the Central Alps 23

Guide to the Western Alps 22

Batldon's Rents and Tillages 17

Bbrlrpst h's Lift and Nature in the Alps ... 12

Black's Treatise on Brewing 26

Bi.ACKr.Br and Frikolandbr's German and

English Dictionary 8

Blaine's Rural Sports 24

Bltobt's Week at the Land's End 22

Boornb's Catechism of the Steam Ensine. . 16

Treatise on the Steam Engine ... 16

Bowdlrr's Family Sbarspbarr 24

Boyd's Manual for Naval Cadets 26

Bramlbt-Moobb's Six Sisters of the Valleys 23
Brands's Dictionary of Science, Literature,

andArt 13

Brat's (C.) Education of the Feelings 9

Philosophy of Necessity 9

(Mrs.} BritbhEmpire 10

Brbwbu's Atlasof History and Geography 27

Brinton on Food and Digestion 26

Briitow's Glossary of Mineralogy 11

Brodib's (Sir C. B.) Psychological Liquirles 9

Works 14

Brown's Dem<nutrations of Microscopic

Anatomy. 14

Brownb's Exposition of the 30 Articles. . ... 17

Pentateuch and Elohistlc Psalms 1 7

B oc klb's History of Clrilization 2

Boll's Hints to Mothers «7

Maternal Management of Children. 27

BoNSBM'sAnalectaAnte-NicsBna 19

AncientEgypt 3

Hippolytus and his Age 19

Philosophy of UniTersal History 19

BnnTAN's Pilgrim's Progress, illustrated by

Bkmnbtt. 15

Borkb's Vicissitudes of Families 4

Botlbr's Atlas of Ancient Geography 27

Modem Geograplqr 28

CabinetLawyer tj

CALVERT'sWife's Manual .. ,. 20

Cats and Farlib's Moral Emblems IS

Chorale Book for England 21

CouNso (Bishop) on Pentateuch and Book

of Joshua ]g

CoLLTNS on Stag-Hunting in Devon* and

Somerset 25

Commonplace Philosopher in Town "and

Country g

Companions of my Solitude '.'.",'.'. 8

Coninoton's Handbook of Chemical Ana-
lysis ; 15

CoNTANSBAo's Pockct Freuch and English

Dictionary 7

Practical ditto !!!!..!! 7

CoNYBBARB aud Howson's Life and EpisUes

of St. Paul.... « 19

Copland's Dictionary of Practical Medicine 14

Abridgment of ditto 14

x°^°!L»,''^*'^"cWoo to Confirmation 19

Cox's Tales of the Great Persian War *

Tales fh>m Greek Mythology 23

^— Tales of the Gods and Heroes 23

Tales of Thebes and Argos 28

Crbsy's Encyclopsedia of CivilEncdneering 16

Crowb's History of France 2

D' Aobionb's History of the Befbrmation in

the time of Caltin 2

Dead Shot (The), by Marksman " 86

Urn LA Ritb's Treatise on Electricity II

Drnman's Vine and its Frait 26

Db TooQOBrncLB's Democracy in America. . S

Dianes of a Lady of Quality 4

DisR ARLi's ReTofutionary Efplck 24

Dixon's Fasti J^orocenses 4

DoBsoN on the Ox 26

Dolltnobr's Introduction to History of

Christianity ,. 19

Dovb's Law of Storms. 10

Dotlb's Chronicle of England 2

80

NEW WORKS PUBLISHED BT LONGMAN Air d CO.

Edinbarch ReTiew (The) S8

Xllice,aTale S3

Eixicott'i Broad and Narrow Way 18

Commentary on Ephesiani ...... 18

•.— Destiny of tae Creature 18

——^— Lecturei on Life of Christ 18

Commentary .on Galatians 18

Paitoral Epiat... 18

Philippians, &c.. 18

TheiiiaonianB... 18

EMayt and KeTiews 19

Enayf on Religion and Literature, edited

by Mam Ml NO 19

Evays written in tlie Intervali of Baaineu 8

Faibbaibm^b Applieation of Cast and

Wrought Iron to Building 16

Information forEngineera... 16

. TreatiM on Mills & Millw^rk 16

First Friendship «. 22

Fits JBov's Weather Book 10

Fobotbb's Life of Sir John Elhit 3

Fowua's Collieries and Qdllea. 17

FraMr*» Magi at— 28

FBaaiBriaLB's AJi^lne Brwa^ 22

■ ■ Tottr in the GxisoM 22

Friends in CouBctl • 8

From Matter to Spirit •

Fnooma'sSLiatoryvf Sagfand...... 1

Oabbatt's Marvelf and Mysteries of

Instinct 12

6cologi«»l Magazine U, 28

Qilbbrt and CnvAcB&&*s Dotonite Mem-
tains 22

CKwobvb's Elements of Meohaoism 16

Ooblb's (Questions on fiaowHs's Exvositim

of the » Artksles \1

G*at'« Anatomy 14

OBaB»B'* Manual of Coelenteratsk... U

Manual of Protozoa ..» H

Gbovb on Cor I elatioa of fkyiical Foraefl.. 1 1

OryU Grange „.. 22

QwiLT • Encydopaadi* of Architecture .... 16

H a n db oe fc of Angliag, ligr Bp—»— a .^ .. .. 2B

Habtwio's Sea and it« LiTing Wendcn.... \%

TroMioal World 12

Hassau's Adulteratk>ns Detected 26

British Freshwater Algsa 12

Ha wkbr's iBiitf Ufctions to Teung I^HMrtmen 26

Hbahom's Mates on UJAe ^leotiag 25

Bslm's Spanish ConQueat in Ameriea. ..... 2

BBBscaax.'s Eisajrs nrom the SdiaiMur^

andQnartvrl) Re-views IS

.; Outlines of Astronomy 9

IlBwiTTon the Diseases of Women 13

HiNCKi,irr*8 South American Sketches 21

Hind's Caiiaditm Exuloring Expeditions ... 21

Expluratiuna in Labrador 21

Hints onEiiquette 27

Hou.amd'» Chapters en Mental PbTsi^ogy 8

Easays un Seientiflc 8«h)eets. . . . IS

MvdMl Notes and Reflectiens. . 16

Uouiaa's System of burgcry U

HooKBR and WAUuta-ABwon's British

Flora 12

HoopBB'sMedieiil Dictionary 16

Hobmb's Introduction t« the Seciptmres .... 18

— Compendium of ditto 18

HosBTMs' Talpx 17

Howm's History of the Supernatural 8

Rural Lite of EnglBBd 22

Visits to BeHiarkable Plaece 22

HowsoK*s Hulsean Lectures on St. Paral.... 16
HcoHBs's (E.) Atlas of Physical, Political

and Commercial Geography ft

CW.) Geography of Britidi His-
tory M

Manual of Geoeraphy ..... W

Hvu.ah*s History of Modern Munc S

Hymns frmn Zyra G'emianica 90

Imobkow's Poems f4

Jambsom's l>gends of the Saints and Mar-
tyrs \h

Legends of the Madonna 16

Legends of the Monastic Orders 1 h

Jambsom and Easttjlkb's History of Onr

Lord U

Johns's Home Walks and Holiday Rambles 12

Johnson's Patentee's Manual IC

— Practical DnnuditsmaB.. M

Johnston's Gazetteer, er Geogra|>hiiCBl DId.

tionaiy 10

JoMBs's CSiristianity and GoDBmon BBBm.... •

KAi.iseH*s Conrnwrntary ob. tt* QUI

I ment «.

— "— ~-^— Hebiew GzaBuuar....... .<

Kbm BXiz's Plays

f

r

Kbnnbdt's Hymnologia Christian*
KiBBT and Spbmcb's JBatomoIogy ..

Lady's Tour Ronnd Monte Rosa ....
Landon's (L. E. L.) Poetical Works..

LateLaureis

Latham's ComparatHe Phflohvy..... .

English IMctionary

Handbook of the EngKsh

24

guage.

WcMrk on the English laeafOMtf

Lc'sure Hoars in Town

LrwBs's Biowraphical History of PhHosc^hj'
Lxwu on the Astronomy of rae Ancienta ...
on the Credibiltty of Saxij Roman

Histrarr .»

Dtakigaeon Ooi«rnnent

■ on Egyptologioal Method

. Esi«ysoB AaministratioBs ..........

Fables of BA.BHn7a. ........I

— — . OB Foreign Jurisdiction

on Irish Disturbaneea

■ on Obserratioo and Reascninc in

Politics.... M.. ..........

. OB PolHicttl Terms

OB the Romance Lang ua ges..........

•jL and Scott's Greek- EngushLexieina

LrfDOBIO. ^^_

— ■ -__— AhriclBed ditto

LiNDLCT and Moobb's TVeasunr of Botaor

Ltstbb's Physico-Prophetical Essays

LoN«MAir's Lectures on the H isto gy. of £a^

land

Loudon's Encyeiopadia of Agricultare....
Cottage, Farm,

and Villa Architecture

-Gardening

.Plants

-Trees ft Shmfea

LowMDBs's Engineer's Handbook

LyraDomesiica

Euchariatica

■Oermanica 16,

IS
19

2
17

17

n
tt

91

-Mesuanica

-Mystica.
-Sacra

i

V£W 'WOBSfi TiTBLiBSBB BT I/JNGUASf ^jn> GO.

91

LocviAT^ (Lord) Enuw ,.,. S-

Hktoty of Engkpid 1'

TiaytafAiioleilt«onM ft'

— . : MUoeUuMoas Writinpi 6

^. - — apeacfliM <m Ihnrlfaunentery

Befbnn ...*«•••..««•«<......«....«.• 6'

MAciniAi»*« AMoMia«tCiGme 10

Maci>ouoaxi.'s Theory of Ww.« IS !

'McIiBoo*! Hiddle-CniMB Jktte of OawMd

OeoKraplnr .....^ .^., IB

RiyikMa Atte.itf Gnat Britain

and Inlaiia 18

ftf cCdumw^ Dksttonanr of GomiiMrce 16

Geographical Dictionary 10

ICaooiab's Life of Father Mathew 4 '

Bome and its BnlerB ..^...t -4

SCAx>nm*s XndoorChudener .«.*.. 11

Maps from Peaks, Phwi, and Oiaden .... 16
Marsraix's History of Cluristian Missions . 3

Masut's History of Eneland I

MAVHimii'sBiocxaphicalTreasiuy 6

■ ■ ■ •Geographieal g^reawny 10

HirtoflealTiwMiny 8

SeJenUAcand LHenoyTnasmgr 18

TTCMuryafKnonrLe^ 17

— < TroMmryof KatnralHlstoty .. 11

SCAOMr'sPlmrieal Geqnwphy 10

Mav V Consnttttional Sistoty of England. . 1

lia£nnLui*sI%byCh»nd...^. IS

■ ■ . . Q encofal Bomwa n

Gladiatora ...^ 13

1 GoodfbrNothliis., is

- ... iHelnihylIonse>..>. IS

Inlermter 13

— — KsteCoventry 13

— .^Queen^MariM 13

MaNDBXissoaN's Letters 4

Maifstas' Windsor Great Park ]7

M«uTAXiB*s(H.)Oolanisationaiid Colonies 10
^— ~~~ (C.) Fall ofthe Roman Bepablie 1

- Bomans imder the Empire 1

MmTcnc's History of Medicine...^ 8

Miiiis on Hone'sFoot 15

On Hones' Teeth 16

>——. on Horse Bhoeinc ^ 15

onStables IS

Mux on L ibert 5

on Repr e aB nt a tJ ^BGoTCinineMt ...... 6

-— ~. on Utilitarianism. 5

Mux's IMawrkations and Diseaisions 5

Politieal iieonomy 6

^^->- &rstem of I/Mdc 6

MiumrsElementsof Chemistey. 13

MoNHu.'s Spiritual Songs 20

MoNTAsc's Experiments in Church and

State 18

MoKTooiiaRT on the Signs and Symptoms

of Preraiancy 18

Mooaa'slrish Melodies « 14

lAllaBookh 14

Memoirs, Journal, and Correspon-
dence..... ........................ ......... 4'

Poetical Workj 24

MoRBzx's Elements of Psychology 9

Mental Philosophy 9

Morning Clouds 20

MoRToirs Handtxxdc of Daiiy Husban<by . . 1 7

. Farm Labour 17

Prince Consort's Farms 17

MotBBiif '• Ecclesiastical History 19

Mou.sr's (Max) Lectures on the Science of

Language 7

(K. O.) Literature of Ancient

Greece 2

Mdrcbtsom on Continued Fevers I4

Murb's Language and Literature of Greece 1

Kew Testaumt illnstrated wifli Woofi Bn-

giavinas from the OldMasten |5

NswauLRts Xpdioeia mo Vlttl Sdt 3

KioKxuia«XBlsJEiotesaB,-BoivltitIa........... fl7

OmwaH Gomw tf ^raoUeal

13
IS

Orksbv's Rambles in Algma and Trniis. ... 11
Owbh'« Comparative Anatomgr and Phjnsio-
logy of VotehnrtB lintmrti .>,.■.».. >.^ . . . . il

FAORB'sOnldato the
pAaK*ti LMtnmrnn

II

14

pARKaa^ OnuoAmn) Idft,1qr 'Wans 4

Peaks, Passes, and^fauiaB,«Ber]as ii

Pbrrira's Etemeots of Materia Medina. ... U

Manual of MatexlaMediea i»

Paaann^ Tuaoan SoiflptOES i«

PaizxiM'b Guide to Geolov^ n

r-:^*2:S^''o^te''<Bflnilogy n

PiassR'sArtofPefAiraery .TT?.., n

—-r-r Chemieal, Natural, ud Fhyaieal

Magic 17

^rZir^^SSttli?^"^ Chwnioal \raiden 17

Playtime with the Poets u

Practical Mw^enic'sJOTmal.. — m

Pancon's Scripture DifHeultles ig

Problems in Human Nature. 20

PToaovT'« Course of iPhn gii^Ti iUffl^faf 7

cri<tetFiSr!!^.!!!?^..:.:: S6

GricketXnUv 15

Reeieations of a Coontiy

Srrtbs , g

Rn>Di,B's Biamond Latin-JbwIiikliiiBtiQnary 7

RivBRs's Rose Amateur^B Gnlde 11

BooBRs's Correspondenee of Gnyson ...... 9

Eclipse of Faith 9

Defence of ditto 9

EssaysfromtheiSii^idttryA JRevieio 9

Fulleriana 9

Reason and Faith 9

Roobt's Tiicsaums of Engli^ Words and

Plurases

Row Aj.Ds's Fly-Fisher's EntomoloiEy 16

Bowtom's Debater J.. 7

82

NEW WORKS PUBLISHED BT LONGMAN Ain> CO.

Baxbt's study of SteMn M

Weatlicr STttem 10

Scott's Handbook of Yolnmetrical Analysis 13

ScRorson Volc*not 11

ficif ion*! Btotrntphical Sketchcf 5

EiMiyt cm Fiction IS

Bbwku.'* Amy Herbert t3

■ — Ancient Hiitory ^ S

Were HbII M

Earl '• Daughter S3

Experience of Life 23

^Gertrade t3

OHmpae of the World SS

Hi»tdry of the Early Chtneh S

— ■■■ Iron. 83

Katharine Aihton S3

— Lancton Faraonaffe S3

liarnret PvreiTal S3

Wight hggona from Scripture .... SO

Paatinx Tlioughta on Beligion .... 'JO

Preparation for Communion SO

———ReMKiigB for Confirmation so

K^edingt for Lent SO

Seif-Examination before Confir-
mation SO

StorieeendTalee S3

Thoughti for the Holy Week 20

Uraula ._,. S3

Shaw's Work on Wine S8

Shbddbn'b Elementi of Logic 6

Short Whiit S6

SiBVBKiKo'g (.Ambi.ia> Life, by Winkwortb 4

Smith's (Socthwood) Ptiilocophy of Health 27

(J.) Voyage and Shipwreck ot St.

Paul 19

3[G.)WesleTan Methodism 3

(Stdnbt) Memoir and Letters 4

^Miscellaneous Works 8

Sketches of Moral Philo-
sophy 8

WitandWisdom 8

Southbt's (Doctor) 7

Poetical Works. S4

Stbbbjno's Analysis of Miu.'s Logic 6

STBfHBNioN's cK.) Lifc by Jbapprbsom and

Pox.B 3

Sticphbk's Essays in Ecclesiastical Bio-
graphy 5

Lectures on the History of

France S

STONBBBNOBon thc Dog 25

on the Greyhound 25

Strickjuimd's Queens of England 1

TAn.oR*s (Jeremy) Works, edited by Edbk 19

Tbknbmt's Ceylon IS

Natural History uf Ceylon 12

Story of the Guns 16

Thalatta 22

Theologia GerreanJca if

Thirlwaix's History of Greeee S

Tw»csoi«'s (Archbialiop) Iawb of Thought 6

(J.) Tables of Interest »

Tillbt's Eastern Europe acd Western Asia tl
Todd's Qrclopsedia of Anatomy and Phy-
siology 14

and BowMAir'a Anatomy and Phy-
siology of Han. H

Troixopb's Barchest#r Towers 23

Warden. H

Twiss's Law of Nations tt

Ttnoaix's Lectures on Heat H

Mountaineering in 1861 2S

Urb^s IMetionary of Arts, Konufkctures,
andMines U

Vakdbr Hobtbn's Handbook of Zoology.. U
Yauohan's (U.) Revolutions in English

History '

CR. A.) Hours with the Jljities 9

Warburton s Life, by Watsom *

Wartbr's Last of the Old Squires S3

Watson's Principles and Practice of Pbysie 14

Wattb's Dictionary of Chemistry »

Wbbb's Celestial Objects for Common Tele-

scopes 1«

Wbbstbr & WiLBiHtoN's Greek Testament Hi

Wbld's Last Winter in Rome. 21

Wbixinoton^s Life, by Briax^okt sod

Glbis 4

^by GX.B10 *

Wbsi.bt's Life, by Soothbt >. *

Wbst on the Diseases of Infancy and Child-

hood *»

Wh atblt's English Sy oonymes ^

Remains ^

^Rhetoric •:■ *

Whbwkll's History of the Inductive Sa-

ences ••••• '

Wuitb and Riddlb's Latin-Englidi Dic-
tionary ..•••• '

WiLBBRPORCB (W.) Rccollections of, by

Harford.. *

WitLicH's Popular Tables ^

Wilson's Bryologia Britannica |*

Wood's Homes without Hands -. • • • ' '

Woodward's Historical and .ChronoIoKicsI
Encyclopaedia *

Yokob's English- Greek Lexicon I

Abridge'' ditto J

YooNu's Nautical Dictionary ^

Tot/ATT on the Dog ^

onthe Horse '^

BPOTTISWOODS Airi> CO., PBIKTBBS, KBTV-STBEEX SQirABV, L05D0V

I

<

•• •/■

BOUND III

3 9015 01
JUL22 1947

UNIV. OF MICH.

DO NOT REMOVE
OR
