ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF NUMBERS: I. CONTINUITY AND IRRATIONAL NUMBERS; II. THE NATURE AND MEANING OF NUMBERS
Richard Dedekind (1831-1916)
Authorized translation by Wooster Woodruff Beman. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company; London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., 1901.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier essaysontheoryof00dedeuoft.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

THEORY OF NUMBERS

I.  CONTINUITY  AND  IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS
II.  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  NUMBERS

RICHARD  DEDEKIND

AUTHOKICEO  TRAMSLATIOH  BT

WOOSTER  WOODRUFF  BEMAN
morBsaoK  or  mathkmatics  in  tnr  univbiuiitv  or  michioah

CHICAGO

THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  COMPANY

LONDON  AGENTS

Kboan  Paul,  Trrnch,  TrObnbr  &  Co.,  Ltd.

1901

TRANSLATION  COPYRIGHTED
BY

The  Opbn  Court  Publishing  Co,
1901.

CONTENTS

I, CONTINUITY  AND  IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.

PAGE

Preface i

I.  Properties  of  Rational  Numbers 3

II.  Comparison  of  the  Rational  Numbers  with  the  Points

of  a  Straight  Line 6

III.  Continuity  of  the  Straight  Line 8

IV.  Creation  of  Irrational  Numbers  12
V.  Continuity  of  the  Domain  of  Real  Numbers . .  19

VI Operations  with  Real  Numbers ai

VII. Infinitesimal  Analysis 24

II. THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.

Prefaces 31

I. Systems  of  Elements 44

II.  Transformation  of  a  System 50

III.  Similarity  of  a  Transformation. Similar  Systems .  53

IV.  Transformation  of  a  System  in  Itself 56

V.  The  Finite  and  Infinite 63

VI. Simply  Infinite  Systems. Series  of  Natural  Numbers  .  67

VII.  Greater  and  Less  Numbers 70

VIII. Finite  and  Infinite  Parts  of  the  Number-Series ...  81
IX. Definition  of  a  Transformation  of  the  Number  Series

by  Induction 83

X.  The  Class  of  Simply  Infinite  Systems 92

XI. Addition  of  Numbers 96

XII. Multiplication  of  Numbers 101

XIII.  Involution  of  Numbers 104

XIV.  Number  of  the  Elements  of  a  Finite  System ....  105

CONTINUITY  AND  IRRATIONAL
NUMBERS

CONTINUITY  AND  IRRATIONAL

NUMBERS.

ly  if  Y  attention  was  first  directed  toward  the  consid-
^^^  erations  which  form  the  subject  of  this  pam-
phlet in  the  autumn  of  1858.  As  professor  in  the
Polytechnic  School  in  Zurich  I  found  myself  for  the
first  time  obliged  to  lecture  upon  the  elements  of  the
differential  calculus  and  felt  more  keenly  than  ever
before  the  lack  of  a  really  scientific  foundation  for
arithmetic.  In  discussing  the  notion  of  the  approach
of  a  variable  magnitude  to  a  fixed  limiting  value,  and
especially  in  proving  the  theorem  that  every  magnitude
which  grows  continually,  but  not  beyond  all  limits,
must  certainly  approach  a  limiting  value,  I  had  re-
course to  geometric  evidences.  Even  now  such  resort
to  geometric  intuition  in  a  first  presentation  of  the
differential  calculus,  I  regard  as  exceedingly  useful,
from  the  didactic  standpoint,  and  indeed  indispens-
able, if  one  does  not  wish  to  lose  too  much  time.  But
that  this  form  of  introduction  into  the  differential  cal-
culus can  make  no  claim  to  being  scientific,  no  one
will  deny.  For  myself  this  feeling  of  dissatisfaction
wi»8  so  overpowering  that  I  made  the  fixed  resolve  to
keep  meditating  on  the  question  till  I  should  find  a

2  CONTINUITY  AND

purely  arithmetic  and  perfectly  rigorous  foundation
for  the  principles  of  infinitesimal  analysis.  The  state-
ment is  so  frequently  made  that  the  differential  cal-
culus deals  with  continuous  magnitude,  and  yet  an
explanation  of  this  continuity  is  nowhere  given  ;  even
the  most  rigorous  expositions  of  the  differential  cal-
culus do  not  base  their  proofs  upon  continuity  but,
with  more  or  less  consciousness  of  the  fact,  they
either  appeal  to  geometric  notions  or  those  suggested
by  geometry,  or  depend  upon  theorems  which  are
never  established  in  a  purely  arithmetic  manner.
Among  these,  for  example,  belongs  the  above-men-
tioned theorem,  and  a  more  careful  investigation  con-
vinced me  that  this  theorem,  or  any  one  equivalent  to
it,  can  be  regarded  in  some  way  as  a  sufficient  basis
for  infinitesimal  analysis.  It  then  only  remained  to
discover  its  true  origin  in  the  elements  of  arithmetic
and  thus  at  the  same  time  to  secure  a  real  definition
of  the  essence  of  continuity.  I  succeeded  Nov.  24,
1858,  and  a  few  days  afterward  I  communicated  the
results  of  my  meditations  to  my  dear  friend  Dur^ge
with  whom  I  had  a  long  and  lively  discussion.  Later
I  explained  these  views  of  a  scientific  basis  of  arith-
metic to  a  few  of  my  pupils,  and  here  in  Braun-
schweig read  a  paper  upon  the  subject  before  the  sci-
entific club  of  professors,  but  I  could  not  make  up
my  mind  to  its  publication,  because,  in  the  first  place,
the  presentation  did  not  seem  altogether  simple,  and
further,  the  theory  itself  had  little  promise. Never-

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  3

theless  I  had  already  half  determined  to  select  this
theme  as  subject  for  this  occasion,  when  a  few  days
ago,  March  14,  by  the  kindness  of  the  author,  the
paper  Die  Elemente  tier  Funkiionenlehre  by  E.  Heine
{Crelle's  Journal,  Vol.  74)  came  into  my  hands  and
confirmed  me  in  my  decision.  In  the  main  I  fully
agree  with  the  substance  of  this  memoir,  aqd  in-
deed I  could  hardly  do  otherwise,  but  I  will  frankly
acknowledge  that  my  own  presentation  seems  to  me
to  be  simpler  in  form  and  to  bring  out  the  vital  point
more  clearly.  While  writing  this  preface  (March  20,
1872),  I  am  just  in  receipt  of  the  interesting  paper
Ueber  die  Ausdehnung  eines  Satzes  aus  der  Theorie  der
trigonometrischen  Reihen,  by  G.  Cantor  {Math.  Annaien,
Vol.  5),  for  which  I  owe  the  ingenious  author  my
hearty  thanks.  As  I  find  on  a  hasty  perusal,  the  ax-
iom given  in  Section  II.  of  that  paper,  aside  from  the
form  of  presentation,  agrees  with  what  I  designate
in  Section  III.  as  the  essence  of  continuity.  But  what
advantage  will  be  gained  by  even  a  purely  abstract
definition  of  real  numbers  of  a  higher  type,  I  am  as
yet  unable  to  see,  conceiving  as  I  do  of  the  domain
of  real  numbers  as  complete  in  itself.

I.

PROPERTIES  OF  RATIONAL  NUMBERS.
The development of the arithmetic of rational
numbers is here presupposed, but still I think it
worth while to  call attention to certain important

4  CONTINUITY  AND

matters  without  discussion,  so  as  to  show  at  the  out-
set the  standpoint  assumed  in  what  follows.  I  regard
the  whole  of  arithmetic  as  a  necessary,  or  at  least  nat-
ural, consequence  of  the  simplest  arithmetic  act,  that
of  counting,  and  counting  itself  as  nothing  else  than
the  successive  creation  of  the  infinite  series  of  positive
integers  in  which  each  individual  is  defined  by  the
one  immediately  preceding ;  the  simplest  act  is  the
passing  from  an  already-formed  individual  to  the  con-
secutive new  one  to  be  formed.  The  chain  of  these
numbers  forms  in  itself  an  exceedingly  useful  instru-
ment for  the  human  mind;  it  presents  an  inexhaustible
wealth  of  remarkable  laws  obtained  by  the  introduc-
tion of  the  four  fundamental  operations  of  arithmetic.
Addition  is  the  combination  of  any  arbitrary  repeti-
tions of  the  above-mentioned  simplest  act  into  a  sin-
gle act ;  from  it  in  a  similar  way  arises  multiplication.
While  the  performance  of  these  two  operations  is  al-
ways possible,  that  of  the  inverse  operations,  subtrac-
tion and  division,  proves  to  be  limited.  Whatever  the
immediate  occasion  may  have  been,  whatever  com-
parisons or  analogies  with  experience,  or  intuition,
may  have  led  thereto  ;  it  is  certainly  true  that  just
this  limitation  in  performing  the  indirect  operations
has  in  each  case  been  the  real  motive  for  a  new  crea-
tive act;  thus  negative  and  fractional  numbers  have
been  created  by  the  human  mind  ;  and  in  the  system
of  all  rational  numbers  there  has  been  gained  an  in-
strument of  infinitely  greater  perfection. This  system.

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  5

which  I  shall  denote  by  R,  possesses  first  of  all  a  com-
pleteness and  self  containedness  which  I  have  desig-
nated in  another  place*  as  characteristic  of  a  body  of
numbers  [ZahlkOrper]  and  which  consists  in  this  that
the  four  fundamental  operations  are  always  perform-
.  able  with  any  two  individuals  in  JR,  i.  e.,  the  result  is
always  an  individual  of  R,  the  single  case  of  division
by  the  number  zero  being  excepted.

For  our  immediate  purpose,  however,  another
property  of  the  system  R  is  still  more  important ;  it
may  be  expressed  by  saying  that  the  system  R  forms
a  well-arranged  domain  of  one  dimension  extending
to  infinity  on  two  opposite  sides.  What  is  meant  by
this  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  my  use  of  expressions
borrowed  from  geometric  ideas ;  but  just  for  this  rea-
son it  will  be  necessary  to  bring  out  clearly  the  corre-
sponding purely  arithmetic  properties  in  order  to
avoid  even  the  appearance  as  if  arithmetic  were  in
need  of  ideas  foreign  to  it.

To  express  that  the  symbols  a  and  b  represent  one
and  the  same  rational  number  we  put  a  =  ^  as  well  as
b=a.  The  fact  that  two  rational  numbers  a,  ^  are
different  appears  in  this  that  the  difference  a — b  has
either  a  positive  or  negative  value.  In  the  former
case  a  is  said  to  be  grratrr  than  b,  b  less  than  a ;  this
is  also  indicated  by  the  symbols  a >^,  b <^a.\  As  in
the  latter  case  b  —  a  has  a  positive  value  it  follows

•Vorlttungtm  Ub*r  Zahlmtktitrit,  by  P.  G.  Lejenne  Dirichlet.  id  ed.  1 139.
t  Hence  in  what  follows  the  lo-called ''aluebralc  "  Rreater  and  leu  ar*
nnderatood  unless  the  word  "absolute"  is  added.

6  CONTINUITY  AND

that  b'y-a,  a<Cb.  In  regard  to  these  two  ways  in
which  two  numbers  may  differ  the  following  laws  will
hold :

I.  If  a^b,  and  /5><r,  then  a"^  c.  Whenever  a,
c  are  two  different  (or  unequal)  numbers,  and  b  is
greater  than  the  one  and  less  than  the  other,  we  shall,
without  hesitation  because  of  the  suggestion  of  geo-
metric ideas,  express  this  briefly  by  saying :  b  lies  be-
tween the  two  numbers  a,  c.

II.  If  a,  c  are  two  different  numbers,  there  are  in-
finitely many  different  numbers  lying  between  a,  c.

III.  If  a  is  any  definite  number,  then  all  numbers
of  the  system  Ji  fall  into  two  classes,  Ai  and  A<i,  each
of  which  contains  infinitely  many  individuals  ;  the  first
class  ^1  comprises  all  numbers  ai  that  are  <;a,  the
second  class  A^  comprises  all  numbers  a^  that  are
>  a;  the  number  a  itself  may  be  assigned  at  pleasure
to  the  first  or  second  class,  being  respectively  the
greatest  number  of  the  first  class  or  the  least  of  the
second.  In  every  case  the  separation  of  the  system
R  into  the  two  classes  Ai,  A^  is  such  that  every  num-
ber of  the  first  class  Ax  is  less  than  every  number  of
the  second  class  A^.

II.

■  COMPARISON  OF  THE  RATIONAL  NUMBERS  WITH
THE  POINTS  OF  A  STRAIGHT  LINE.

The  above-mentioned  properties  of  rational  num-
bers recall  the  corresponding  relations  of  position  of

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  7

the  points  of  a  straight  Hne  Z.  If  the  two  opposite
directions  existing  upon  it  are  distinguished  by
"right"  and  "left,"  and/,  q  are  two  different  points,
then  either  p  lies  to  the  right  of  q,  and  at  the  sajne
time  q  to  the  left  of/,  or  conversely  q  lies  to  the  right
of/  and  at  the  same  time/  to  the  left  of  q.  A  third
case  is  impossible,  if  p,  q  are  actually  different  points.
In  regard  to  this  difference  in  position  the  following
laws  hold  :

I.  If  /  lies  to  the  right  of  f,  and  q  to  the  right  of
r,  then  /  lies  to  the  right  of  r;  and  we  say  that  q  lies
between  the  points  /  and  r.

II.  If  /,  r  are  two  different  points,  then  there  al-
ways exist  infinitely  many  points  that  lie  between  p
and  r.

in.  If  /  is  a  definite  point  in  Z,  then  all  points  in
Z  fall  into  two  classes,  Pu  P'ly  <^ach  of  which  contains
infinitely  many  individuals  ;  the  first  class  P\  contains
all  the  points  /i,  that  lie  to  the  left  of  /,  and  the  sec-
ond class  /j  contains  all  the  points /»  that  lie  to  the
right  of  /  ;  the  point  /  itself  may  be  assigned  at  pleas-
ure to  the  first  or  second  class.  In  every  case  the
separation  of  the  straight  line  Z  into  the  two  classes
or  portions  /*i,  A.  is  of  such  a  character  that  every
point  of  the  first  class  P\  lies  to  the  left  of  every  point
of  the  second  class  P^.

This  analogy  between  rational  numbers  and  the
points  of  a  straight  line,  as  is  well  known,  becomes  a
real  correspondence  when  we  select  upon  the  straight

8  CONTINUITY  AND

line  a  definite  origin  or  zero-point  o  and  a  definite  unit
of  length  for  the  measurement  of  segments.  With
the  aid  of  the  latter  to  every  rational  number  a  a  cor-
responding length  can  be  constructed  and  if  we  lay
this  off  upon  the  straight  line  to  the  right  or  left  of  o
according  as  a  is  positive  or  negative,  we  obtain  a
definite  end-point  /,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the
point  corresponding  to  the  number  a  ;  to  the  rational
number  zero  corresponds  the  point  o.  In  this  way  to
every  rational  number  a,  i.  e.,  to  every  individual  in
R,  corresponds  one  and  only  one  point/,  i.  e.,  an  in-
dividual in  Z.  To  the  two  numbers  a,  b  respectively
correspond  the  two  points/,  q,  and  if  a^b,  then/
lies  to  the  right  of  q.  To  the  laws  i,  ii,  iii  of  the  pre-
vious Section  correspond  completely  the  laws  i,  ii,  in
of  the  present.

III.

CONTINUITY  OF  THE  STRAIGHT  LINE.

Of  the  greatest  importance,  however,  is  the  fact
that  in  the  straight  line  Z  there  are  infinitely  many
points  which  correspond  to  no  rational  number.  If
the  point  /  corresponds  to  the  rational  number  a,
then,  as  is  well  known,  the  length  op  is  commensur-
able with  the  invariable  unit  of  measure  used  in  the
construction,  i.  e.,  there  exists  a  third  length,  a  so-
called  common  measure,  of  which  these  two  lengths
are  integral  multiples. But  the  ancient  Greeks  already

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  9

knew  and  had  demonstrated  that  there  are  lengths  in-
commensurable with  a  given  unit  of  length,  e.  g.,  the
diagonal  of  the  square  whose  side  is  the  unit  of  length.
If  we  lay  off  such  a  length  from  the  point  o  upon  the
line  we  obtain  an  end-point  which  corresponds  to  no
rational  number.  Since  further  it  can  be  easily  shown
that  there  are  infinitely  many  lengths  which  are  in-
commensurable with  the  unit  of  length,  we  may  affirm:
The  straight  line  L  is  infinitely  richer  in  point-indi-
viduals than  the  domain  R  of  rational  numbers  in
number-  individuals.

If  now,  as  is  our  desire,  we  try  to  follow  up  arith-
metically all  phenomena  in  the  straight  line,  the  do-
main of  rational  numbers  is  insufficient  and  it  becomes
absolutely  necessary  that  the  instrument  .^constructed
by  the  creation  of  the  rational  numbers  be  essentially
improved  by  the  creation  of  new  numbers  such  that
the  domain  of  numbers  shall  gain  the  same  complete-
ness, or  as  we  may  say  at  once,  the  same  continuity,
as  the  straight  line.

The  previous  considerations  are  so  familiar  and
well  known  to  all  that  many  will  regard  their  repeti-
tion quite  superfluous.  Still  I  regarded  this  recapitu-
lation as  necessary  to  prepare  properly  for  the  main
question.  For,  the  way  in  which  the  irrational  num-
bers are  usually  introduced  is  based  directly  upon  the
conception  of  extensive  magnitudes — which  itself  is
nowhere  carefully  defined — and  explains  number  as
the  result  of  measuring  such  a  magnitude  by  another

zo  CONTINUiry  AND

of  the  same  kind.*  Instead  of  this  I  demand  that
arithmetic  shall  be  developed  out  of  itself.

That  such  comparisons  with  non-arithmetic  no-
tions have  furnished  the  immediate  occasion  for  the  ex-
tension of  the  number-concept  may,  in  a  general  way,
be  granted  (though  this  was  certainly  not  the  case  in
the  introduction  of  complex  numbers);  but  this  surely
is  no  sufficient  ground  for  introducing  these  foreign
notions  into  arithmetic,  the  science  of  numbers.  Just
as  negative  and  fractional  rational  numbers  are  formed
by  a  new  creation,  and  as  the  laws  of  operating  with
these  numbers  must  and  can  be  reduced  to  the  laws
of  operating  with  positive  integers,  so  we  must  en-
deavor completely  to  define  irrational  numbers  by
means  of  the  rational  numbers  alone.  The  question
only  remains  how  to  do  this.

The  above  comparison  of  the  domain  R  of  rational
numbers  with  a  straight  line  has  led  to  the  recognition
of  the  existence  of  gaps,  of  a  certain  incompleteness
or  discontinuity  of  the  former,  while  we  ascribe  to  the
straight  line  completeness,  absence  of  gaps,  or  con-
tinuity. In  what  then  does  this  continuity  consist?
Everything  must  depend  on  the  answer  to  this  ques-
tion, and  only  through  it  shall  we  obtain  a  scientific
basis  for  the  investigation  of  all  continuous  domains.
By  vague  remarks  upon  the  unbroken  connection  in

•  The  apparent  advantage  of  the  generality  of  this  definition  of  number
disappears  as  soon  as  we  consider  conipleif-ifuinbers.  According  to  my  view,
on  the  other  hand,  the  notion  of  the  ratio  between  two  numbers  of  the  same
kind  can  be  clearly  developed  only  after  the  introduction  of  irrational  num-
bers.

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  XI

the  smallest  parts  obviously  nothing  is  gained ;  the
problem  is  to  indicate  a  precise  characteristic  of  con-
tinuity that  can  serve  as  the  basis  for  valid  deductions.
For  a  long  time  I  pondered  over  this  in  vain,  but
finally  I  found  what  I  was  seeking.  This  discovery
will,  perhaps,  be  differently  estimated  by  different
people  ;  the  majority  may  find  its  substance  very  com-
monplace. It  consists  of  the  following.  In  the  pre-
ceding section  attention  was  called  to  the  fact  that
every  point  p  of  the  straight  line  produces  a  separa-
tion of  the  same  into  two  portions  such  that  every
point  of  one  portion  lies  to  the  left  of  every  point  of
the  other.  I  find  the  essence  of  continuity  in  the  con-
verse, i.  e.,  in  the  following  principle  :

'*  If  all  points  of  the  straight  line  fall  into  two
classes  such  that  every  point  of  the  first  class  lies  to
the  left  of  every  point  of  the  second  class,  then  there
exists  one  and  only  one  point  which  produces  this  di-
vision of  all  points  into  two  classes,  this  severing  of
the  straight  line  into  two  portions."

As  already  said  I  think  I  shall  not  err  in  assuming
that  every  one  will  at  once  grant  the  truth  of  this
statement ;  the  majority  of  my  readers  will  be  very
much  disappointed  in  learning  that  by  this  common-
place remark  the  secret  of  continuity  is  to  be  revealed.
To  this  I  may  say  that  I  am  glad  if  every  one  finds
the  above  principle  so  obvious  and  so  in  harmony
with  his  own  ideas  of  a  line  ;  for  I  am  utterly  unable
to  adduce  any  proof  of  its  correctness,  nor  hns  any

12  CONTINUITY  AND

one  the  power.  The  assumption  of  this  property  of
the  line  is  nothing  else  than  an  axiom  by  which  we
attribute  to  the  line  its  continuity,  by  which  we  find
continuity  in  the  line.  If  space  has  at  all  a  real  ex-
istence it  is  not  necessary  for  it  to  be  continuous ;
many  of  its  properties  would  remain  the  same  even
were  it  discontinuous.  And  if  we  knew  for  certain
that  space  was  discontinuous  there  would  be  nothing
to  prevent  us,  in  case  we  so  desired,  from  filling  up
its  gaps,  in  thought,  and  thus  making  it  continuous;
this  filling  up  would  consist  in  a  creation  of  new  point-
individuals  and  would  have  to  be  effected  in  accord-
ance with  the  above  principle.

IV.

CREATION  OF  IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.
From  the  last  remarks  it  is  sufficiently  obvious
how  the  discontinuous  domain  R  of  rational  numbers
may  be  rendered  complete  so  as  to  form  a  continuous
domain.  In  Section  I  it  was  pointed  out  that  every
rational  number  a  effects  a  separation  of  the  system  R
into  two  classes  such  that  every  number  ax  of  the  first
class  A\  is  less  than  every  number  a^  of  the  second
class  Ai ;  the  number  a  is  either  the  greatest  number
of  the  class  A\  or  the  least  number  of  the  class  A^.  If
now  any  separation  of  the  system  R  into  two  classes
A\,  Ai,  is  given  which  possesses  only  tJiis  characteris-
tic property  that  every  number  a\  in  A\  is  less  than
every  number  ai  in  Ai,  then  for  brevity  we  shall  call

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  13

such  a  separation  a  cut  [Schnitt]  and  designate  it  by
{A\,  A-i).  We  can  then  say  that  every  rational  num-
ber a  produces  one  cut  or,  strictly  speaking,  two  cuts,
which,  however,  we  shall  not  look  upon  as  essentially
different ;  this  cut  possesses,  besides,  the  property  that
either  among  the  numbers  of  the  first  class  there  ex-
ists a  greatest  or  among  the  numbers  of  the  second
class  a  least  number.  And  conversely,  if  a  cut  pos-
sesses this  property,  then  it  is  produced  by  this  great-
est or  least  rational  number.

But  it  is  easy  to  show  that  there  exist  infinitely
many  cuts  not  produced  by  rational  numbers.  The
following  example  suggests  itself  most  readily.

Let  Z>  be  a  positive  integer  but  not  the  square  of
an  integer,  then  there  exists  a  positive  integer  X  such
that

x«<z?<cx  +  i)*.

If  we  assign  to  the  second  class  A\,  every  positive
rational  number  a\  whose  square  is  >  D,  to  the  first
class  A\  all  other  rational  numbers  a\,  this  separation
forms  a  cut  (^1,  A%),  i.  e.,  every  number  a\  is  less
than  every  number  a^.  For  if  ai  =  0,  or  is  negative,
then  on  that  ground  a\  is  less  than  any  number  aj,
because,  by  definition,  this  last  is  positive;  if  a\  is
positive,  then  is  its  square  </^,  and  hence  <xj  is  less
than  any  positive  number  a\  whose  square  is  >/?.

But  this  cut  is  produced  by  no  rational  number.
To  demonstrate  this  it  must  be  shown  first  of  all  that
there  exists  no  rational  number  whose  square  =  D.

M  CONTINUITY  AND

Although  this  is  known  from  the  first  elements  of  the
theory  of  numbers,  still  the  following  indirect  proof
may  find  place  here.  If  there  exist  a  rational  number
whose  square  =D,  then  there  exist  two  positive  in-
tegers /,  »,  that  satisfy  the  equation

/»—/?««  =  0,
and  we  may  assume  that  u  is  the  least  positive  integer
possessing  the  property  that  its  square,  by  multipli-
cation by  D,  may  be  converted  into  the  square  of  an
integer  /. Since  evidently

X«</<(A+1)«,
the  number  »'  =  /  —  \u  is  a  positive  integer  certainly
less  than  u. If  further  we  put

/  =  /?«— X/,
f  is  likewise  a  positive  integer,  and  we  have
n  —  Du'^  =  {^>?  —  D)  C/3_Z>K>)=0,
which  is  contrary  to  the  assumption  respecting  u.

Hence  the  square  of  every  rational  number  x  is
either  <2?  or  >  D.  From  this  it  easily  follows  that
there  is  neither  in  the  class  Ai  a  greatest,  nor  in  the
class  A%  a  least  number. For  if  we  put

we  have

and

x{x^  +  ^D)

2x{D—x*)
^  3;c2  +  Z>

y ^ (3^2  -f  z>)«

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  15

If  in  this  we  assume  x  to  be  a  positive  number
from  the  class  A\,  then  x^<iD,  and  hence  ^>jc  and
y^ <^D.  Therefore^  likewise  belongs  to  the  class  A\.
But  if  we  assume  ;c  to  be  a  number  from  the  class  A%,
then  x^'^D,  and  hence  y <,x,  y'^0,  and  ^>Z?.
Therefore  y  likewise  belongs  to  the  class  At.  This
cut  is  therefore  produced  by  no  rational  number.

In  this  property  that  not  all  cuts  are  produced  by
rational  numbers  consists  the  incompleteness  or  dis-
continuity of  the  domain  H  of  all  rational  numbers.

Whenever,  then,  we  have  to  do  with  a  cut  (^1,  Af)
produced  by  no  rational  number,  we  create  a  new,  an
irraiional  number  a,  which  we  regard  as  completely
defined  by  this  cut  (^1,  /fj);  we  shall  say  that  the
number  a  corresponds  to  this  cut,  or  that  it  produces
this  cut.  From  now  on,  therefore,  to  every  definite
cut  there  corresponds  a  definite  rational  or  irrational
number,  and  we  regard  two  numbers  as  different  or
unequal  always  and  only  when  they  correspond  to  es-
sentially different  cuts.

In  order  to  obtain  a  basis  for  the  orderly  arrange-
ment of  all  real,  i.  e.,  of  all  rational  and  irrational
numbers  we  must  investigate  the  relation  between
any  two  cuts  {Ax,  At)  and  (Bi,  B%)  produced  by  any
two  numbers  a  and  p.  Obviously  a  cut  {^A\,  At)  is
given  completely  when  one  of  the  two  classes,  e.  g.,
the  first  A\  is  known,  because  the  second  At  consists
of  all  rational  numbers  not  contained  in  A\,  and  the
characteristic  property  of  such  a  first  class  lies  in  this

i6  CONTINUITY  AND

that  if  the  number  ax  is  contained  in  it,  it  also  con-
tains all  numbers  less  than  a\.  If  now  we  compare
two  such  first  classes  A\,  B\  with  each  other,  it  may
happen

1.  That  they  are  perfectly  identical,  i.  e.,  that  every
number  contained  in  A\  is  also  contained  in  B\,  and
that  every  number  contained  in  B\  is  also  contained
in  A\.  In  this  case  A%  is  necessarily  identical  with
B%,  and  the  two  cuts  are  perfectly  identical,  which  we
denote  in  symbols  by  a  =  )3  or  )8=:a.

But  if  the  two  classes  A\,  B\  are  not  identical,
then  there  exists  in  the  one,  e.  g. ,  in  A\,  a  number
a'\^^b'%  not  contained  in  the  other  B\  and  conse-
quently found  in  B^  \  hence  all  numbers  b\  contained
in  B\  are  certainly  less  than  this  number  a'\=^b\  and
therefore  all  numbers  b\  are  contained  in  A\.

2.  If  now  this  number  a'\  is  the  only  one  in  A\  that
is  not  contained  in  B\,  then  is  every  other  number  a\
contained  in  A\  also  contained  in  B\  and  is  conse-
quently ^^'ij  i-  e.,  a'\  is  the  greatest  among  all  the
numbers  ai,  hence  the  cut  i^Ax,  A^)  is  produced  by
the  rational  number  a  =  a'i  =  b'^.  Concerning  the
other  cut  {Bx,  B^)  we  know  already  that  all  numbers
bx  in  Bx  are  also  contained  in  Ax  and  are  less  than
the  number  a'x^b'^  which  is  contained  in  Bi ;  every
other  number  b%  contained  in  B^  must,  however,  be
greater  than  b'%,  for  otherwise  it  would  be  less  than
a'l,  therefore  contained  in  Ax  and  hence  in  Bx ;  hence
b*t  is  the  least  among  all  numbers  contained  in  B%,

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS,  VJ

and  consequently  the  cut  (^i,  8%)  is  produced  by  the
same  rational  number  /S  =  ^'j  =  rt'i  =a.  The  two  cuts
are  then  only  unessentially  different.

3.  If,  however,  there  exist  in  A\  at  least  two  differ-
ent numbers  a'\=^h'i  and  a"\^=b"%,  which  are  not  con-
tained in  B\,  then  there  exist  infinitely  many  of  them,
because  all  the  infinitely  many  numbers  lying  between
a'\  and  a"\  are  obviously  contained  in  A\  (Section  I,
ii)  but  not  in  B\.  In  this  case  we  say  that  the  num-
bers a  and  y3  corresponding  to  these  two  essentiallv
different  cuts  (y#i,  Ai)  and  (^i,  B%)  are  different,  and
further  that  a  is  greater  than  /8,  that  /5  is  less  than  a,
which  we  express  in  symbols  by  a^  ^  as  well  as  /3<;o.
It  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  definition  coincides  com
pletely  with  the  one  given  earlier,  when  a,  /3  are  ra
tional.

The  remaining  possible  cases  are  these :

4.  If  there  exists  in  B\  one  and  only  one  number
^'i  =  a'9,  that  is  not  contained  in  A\  then  the  two  cuts
{A\y  Ai)  and  (B\,  B^)  are  only  unessentially  different
and  they  are  produced  by  one  and  the  same  rational
number  a  =  a't  =  i>'i  =  /3.

5.  But  if  there  are  in  Bi  at  least  two  numbers
which  are  not  contained  in  Ai,  then  ^>*o,  a<C/3.

As  this  exhausts  the  possible  cases,  it  follows  that
of  two  different  numbers  one  is  necessarily  the  greater,
the  other  the  kss,  which  gives  two  possibilities.  A
third  case  is  impossible.  This  was  indeed  involved
in the  use  of  the  comparative  (greater,  less)  to  desig-

x8  CONTINUITY  AND

nate  the  relation  between  o,  ^  ;  but  this  use  has  only
now  been  justified.  In  just  such  investigations  one
needs  to  exercise  the  greatest  care  so  that  even  with
the  best  intention  to  be  honest  he  shall  not,  through
a  hasty  choice  of  expressions  borrowed  from  other  no-
tions already  developed,  allow  himself  to  be  led  into
the  use  of  inadmissible  transfers  from  one  domain  to
the  other.

If  now  we  consider  again  somewhat  carefully  the
case  o>-^  it  is  obvious  that  the  less  number  )3,  if
rational,  certainly  belongs  to  the  class  A\ ;  for  since
there  is  in  A\  a  number  a'i  =  d'2  which  belongs  to  the
class  Bi,  it  follows  that  the  number  p,  whether  the
greatest  number  in  Bi  or  the  least  in  B^  is  certainly
<a'i  and  hence  contained  in  Ai.  Likewise  it  is  ob-
vious from  a>  )8  that  the  greater  number  a,  if  rational,
certainly  belongs  to  the  class  B^,  because  o>  a'l.  Com-
bining these  two  considerations  we  get  the  following
result:  If  a  cut  is  produced  by  the  number  a  then  any
rational  number  belongs  to  the  class  Ai  or  to  the  class
A3  according  as  it  is  less  or  greater  than  a ;  if  the
number  a  is  itself  rational  it  may  belong  to  either
class.

From  this  we  obtain  finally  the  following  :  If  a>  /3,
i.  e.,  if  there  are  infinitely  many  numbers  in  Ai  not
contained  in  Bi  then  there  are  infinitely  many  such
numbers  that  at  the  same  time  are  different  from  a  and
from  j8;  every  such  rational  number  ^  is  -<a,  because

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  19

it  is  contained  in  A\  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  >-/3
because  contained  in  B%.

V.

CONTINUITY  OF  THE  DOMAIN  OF  REAL  NUMBERS.

In  consequence  of  the  distinctions  just  established
the  system  H  of  all  real  numbers  forms  a  well-arranged
domain  of  one  dimension  ;  this  is  to  mean  merely  that
the  following  laws  prevail  :

I.  If  o>/8,  and  /S>'y,  then  is  also  a>y.  We
shall  sr  /  that  the  number  /3  lies  between  a  and  y.

II.  If  a,  y  are  any  two  different  numbers,  then
there  exist  infinitely  many  different  numbers  /3  lying
between  a,  y.

III.  If  a  is  any  definite  number  then  all  numbers
of  the  system  H  fall  into  two  classes  2(i  and  Hs  each
of  which  contains  infinitely  many  individuals;  the
first  class  "iXx  comprises  all  the  numbers  ai  that  are
less  than  a,  the  second  ^3  comprises  all  the  numbers
as  that  are  greater  than  a ;  the  number  a  itself  may  be
assigned  at  pleasure  to  the  first  class  or  to  the  second,
and  it  is  respectively  the  greatest  of  the  first  or  the
least  of  the  second  class.  In  each  case  the  separation
of  the  system  H  into  the  two  classes  ^1,  "iXi  is  such
that  every  number  of  the  first  class  "iXx  is  smaller  than
every  number  of  the  second  class  2tj  and  we  say  that
this  separation  is  produced  by  the  number  a.

For  brevity  and  in  order  not  to  weary  the  reader  I
suppress  the  proofs  of  these  theorems  which  follow

ao  CONTINUITY  AND

immediately  from  the  definitions  of  the  previous  sec-
tion.

Beside  these  properties,  however,  the  domain  K
possesses  also  continuity^  i.  e.,  the  following  theorem
is  true  :

IV.  If  the  system  H  of  all  real  numbers  breaks  up
into  two  classes  2ti,  2(2  such  that  every  number  ai  of
the  class  2fi  is  less  than  every  number  a2  of  the  class
2(2  then  there  exists  one  and  only  one  number  a  by
which  this  separation  is  produced.

Proof.  By  the  separation  or  the  cut  of  H  into  "iXx
and  ^2  we  obtain  at  the  same  time  a  cut  (/^i,  Ai)
of  the  system  R  of  all  rational  numbers  which  is  de-
fined by  this  that  Ax  contains  all  rational  numbers  of
the  class  2ti  and  Ai  all  other  rational  numbers,  i.  e.,
all  rational  numbers  of  the  class  2t2-  Let  a  be  the
perfectly  definite  number  which  produces  this  cut
{^A\,  Ai).  If  )8  is  any  number  different  from  a,  there
are  always  infinitely  many  rational  numbers  c  lying
between  a  and  fi.  If  /?<a,  then  ^<a;  hence  ^  be-
longs to  the  class  Ai  and  consequently  also  to  the
class  Til,  and  since  at  the  same  time  )8<^  then  /3  also
belongs  to  the  same  class  2li,  because  every  number
in  2^2  is  greater  than  every  number  c  in  Hi-  But  if
y8>a,  then  is^>a;  hence  ^  belongs  to  the  class -(^a
and  consequently  also  to  the  class  2(2,  and  since  at
the  same  time  )8>r,  then  /?  also  belongs  to  the  same
class  2X2,  because  every  number  in  2li  is  less  than
every  number  c  in  2t2- Hence  every  number  (i  differ-

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  21

ent  from  a  belongs  to  the  class  ^1  or  to  the  class  2tt
according  as  )8<a  or  p'>a;  consequently  a  itself  is
either  the  greatest  number  in  2li  or  the  least  number
in  2lit  i-  c-i  a  is  one  and  obviously  the  only  number
by  which  the  separation  of  /I  into  the  classes  2lu  ^s
is  produced. Which  was  to  be  proved.

VI.
OPERATIONS  WITH  REAL  NUMBERS.

To  reduce  any  operation  with  two  real  numbers
a,  /3  to  operations  with  rational  numbers,  it  is  only
necessary  from  the  cuts  (Ai,  j4i),  {Bi,  B%)  produced
by  the  numbers  a  and  /3  in  the  system  R  to  define  the
cut  (Ci,  Cj)  which  is  to  correspond  to  the  result  of
the  operation,  y.  I  confine  myself  here  to  the  discus-
sion of  the  simplest  case,  that  of  addition.

If  c  is  any  rational  number,  we  put  it  into  the  class
C\,  provided  there  are  two  numbers  one  a^  in  A\  and
one  bi  in  B\  such  that  their  sum  a\-\- b\>^c\  all  other
rational  numbers  shall  be  put  into  the  class  Ct.  This
separation  of  all  rational  numbers  into  the  two  classes
C\,  C%  evidently  forms  a  cut,  since  every  number  C\  in
Cx  is  less  than  every  number  c^  in  d.  If  both  a  and
/8  are  rational,  then  every  number  ci  contained  in  C\  is
<o-|-^,  because  fli<tt,  b\<P,  and  therefore  tfi  +  ^i
<tt-j-)8;  further,  if  there  were  contained  in  Cj  a  num-
ber c%<ia-\-  p,  hence  a-\-  P  =  c^-\-p,  where /  is  a  pos-
itive rational  number,  then  we  should  have

22  CONTINUITY  AND

which  contradicts  the  definition  of  the  number  c^,  be-
cause a — \p  is  a  number  in  A\,  and  ^ — \p  a  number
in  B\\  consequently  every  number  c<i,  contained  in  Cs
is  >a-f- A  Therefore  in  this  case  the  cut  (Ci,  Ci)  is
produced  by  the  sum  o+  )3.  Thus  we  shall  not  violate
the  definition  which  holds  in  the  arithmetic  of  rational
numbers  if  in  all  cases  we  understand  by  the  sum
a-f^  of  any  two  real  numbers  a,  /S  that  number  y  by
which  the  cut  (Ci,  Ci)  is  produced.  Further,  if  only
one  of  the  two  numbers  a,  ^  is  rational,  e.  g.,  o,  it  is
easy  to  see  that  it  makes  no  difference  with  the  sum
y^o  + /S  whether  the  number  a  is  put  into  the  class
A\  or  into  the  class  A%.

Just  as  addition  is  defined,  so  can  the  other  ope-
rations of  the  so-called  elementary  arithmetic  be  de-
fined, viz.,  the  formation  of  differences,  products,
quotients,  powers,  roots,  logarithms,  and  in  this  way
we  arrive  at  real  proofs  of  theorems  (as,  e.  g.,  l/2-l/3
:=l/6),  which  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  have  never
been  established  before.  The  excessive  length  that  is
to  be  feared  in  the  definitions  of  the  more  complicated
operations  is  partly  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  subject
but  can  for  the  most  part  be  avoided.  Very  useful  in
this  connection  is  the  notion  of  an  interval,  i.  e.,  a
system  A  of  rational  numbers  possessing  the  follow-
ing characteristic  property:  if  a  and  a'  are  numbers
of  the  system  A,  then  are  all  rational  numbers  lying
between  a  and  a'  contained  in  A.  The  system  R  of
all  rational  numbers,  and  also  the  two  classes  of  any

IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  23

cut  are  intervals.  If  there  exist  a  rational  number  a\
which  is  less  and  a  rational  number  a%  which  is  greater
than  every  number  of  the  interval  A,  then  A  is  called
a  finite  interval ;  there  then  exist  infinitely  many  num-
bers in  the  same  condition  as  a\  and  infinitely  many  in
the  same  condition  as  a% ;  the  whole  domain  R  breaks
up  into  three  parts  A\,  A,  A\  and  there  enter  two  per-
fectly definite  rational  or  irrational  numbers  aj,  as
which  may  be  called  respectively  the  lower  and  upper
(or  the  less  and  greater)  limits  of  the  interval;  the
lower  limit  01  is  determined  by  the  cut  for  which  the
system  A\  forms  the  first  class  and  the  upper  at  by  the
cut  for  which  the  system  A^  forms  the  second  class.
Of  every  rational  or  irrational  number  a  lying  between
ai  and  a)  it  may  be  said  that  it  lies  within  the  interval
A.  If  all  numbers  of  an  interval  A  are  also  numbers
of  an  interval  B,  then  A  is  called  a  portion  of  B.

Still  lengthier  considerations  seem  to  loom  up
when  we  attempt  to  adapt  the  numerous  theorems  of
the  arithmetic  of  rational  numbers  (as,  e.  g.,  the  theo-
r'-m  {a-\-bY=^ac-\-bc')\,o  any  real  numbers.  This,
however,  is  not  the  case.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  it
all  reduces  to  showing  that  the  arithmetic  operations
possess  a  certain  continuity.  What  I  mean  by  this
statement  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  genera]
theorem  :

•*  If  the  number  X  is  the  result  of  an  operation  per-
formed on  the  numbers  a,  fi,  y,  .  .  .  and  \  lies  within
the  interval Z,  then intervals  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  can  be

24  CONTINUITY  AND

taken  within  which  He  the  numbers  a,  )8,  y,  .  .  .  such
that  the  result  of  the  same  operation  in  which  the
numbers  o,  /?,  y,  .  .  .  are  replaced  by  arbitrary  num-
bers of  the  intervals  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  is  always  a  number
lying  within  the  interval  Z."  The  forbidding  clumsi-
ness, however,  which  marks  the  statement  of  such  a
theorem  convinces  us  that  something  must  be  brought
in  as  an  aid  to  expression  ;  this  is,  in  fact,  attained  in
the  most  satisfactory  way  by  introducing  the  ideas  of
variable  magnitudes,  functions,  limiting  values,  and  it
would  be  best  to  base  the  definitions  of  even  the  sim'-
plest  arithmetic  operations  upon  these  ideas,  a  matter
which,  however,  cannot  be  carried  further  here.

VII.
INFINITESIMAL  ANALYSIS.

Here  at  the  close  we  ought  to  explain  the  connec-
tion between  the  preceding  investigations  and  certain
fundamental  theorems  of  infinitesimal  analysis.

We  say  that  a  variable  magnitude  x  which  passes
through  successive  definite  numerical  values  ap-
proaches a  fixed  limiting  value  a  when  in  the  course
of  the  process  x  lies  finally  between  two  numbers  be-
tween which  a  itself  lies,  or,  what  amounts  to  the
same,  when  the  difference  x — a  taken  absolutely  be-
comes finally  less  than  any  given  value  different  from
zero.

One  of  the  most  important  theorems  may  be  stated
in  the  following  manner  : "  If  a  magnitude  x  grows

IKRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  25

continually  but  not  beyond  all  limits  it  approaches  a
limiting  value."

I  prove  it  in  the  following  way.  By  hypothesis
there  exists  one  and  hence  there  exist  infinitely  many
numbers  02  such  that  *  remains  continually  <o2;  I
designate  by  IX^  the  system  of  all  these  numbers  oj,
by  ^1  the  system  of  all  other  numbers  ai ;  each  of  the
latter  possesses  the  property  that  in  the  course  of  the
process  x  becomes  finally  >oi,  hence  every  number  a\
is  less  than  every  number  as  and  consequently  there
exists  a  number  a  which  is  either  the  greatest  in  2li
or  the  least  in  2tj  (V,  iv).  The  former  cannot  be  the
case  since  x  never  ceases  to  grow,  hence  a  is  the  least
number  in  Jts  Whatever  number  a\  be  taken  we  shall
have  finally  ai<ar<tt,  i.  e.,  *  approaches  the  limiting
value  a.

This  theorem  is  equivalent  to  the  principle  of  con-
tinuity, i.  e.,  it  loses  its  validity  as  soon  as  we  assume
a  single  real  number  not  to  be  contained  in  the  do-
main K  ;  or  otherwise  expressed  :  if  this  theorem  is
correct,  then  is  also  theorem  iv.  in  V.  correct.

Another  theorem  of  infinitesimal  analysis,  likewise
equivalent  to  this,  which  is  still  oftener  employed,
maybe  stated  as  follows  :  *'If  in  the  variation  of  a
magnitude  x  we  can  for  every  given  positive  magni-
tude S  assign  a  corresponding  position  from  and  after
which  X  changes  by  less  than  5  then  x  approaches  a
limiting  value."

This  converse  of  the  easily  demonstrated  theorem

26  CONTINUITY  AND

that  every  variable  magnitude  which  approaches  a
limiting  value  finally  changes  by  less  than  any  given
positive  magnitude  can  be  derived  as  well  from  the
preceding  theorem  as  directly  from  the  principle  of
continuity.  I  take  the  latter  course.  Let  8  be  any
positive  magnitude  (i.  e. ,  8>0),  then  by  hypothesis
a  time  will  come  after  which  x  will  change  by  less
than  8,  i.  e.,  if  at  this  time  x  has  the  value  a,  then
afterwards  we  shall  continually  have  x'^a  —  8  and
j:  ■<«-(- 8.  I  now  for  a  moment  lay  aside  the  original
hypothesis  and  make  use  only  of  the  theorem  just
demonstrated  that  all  later  values  of  the  variable  x  lie
between  two  assignable  finite  values.  Upon  this  I  base
a  double  separation  of  all  real  numbers.  To  the  sys-
tem 2^2  I  assign  a  number  as  (e.  g. ,  a-|-  8)  when  in  the
course  of  the  process  x  becomes  finally  <a2 ;  to  the
system  2ti  I  assign  every  number  not  contained  in  2I2;
if  ai  is  such  a  number,  then,  however  far  the  process
may  have  advanced,  it  will  still  happen  infinitely  many
times  that  a:>  as-  Since  every  number  ai  is  less  than
every  number  aa  there  exists  a  perfectly  definite  num-
ber a  which  produces  this  cut  (2li,  ^2)  of  the  system
H  and  which  I  will  call  the  upper  limit  of  the  variable
X  which  always  remains  finite.  Likewise  as  a  result
of  the  behavior  of  the  variable  x  a  second  cut  (^i,
B2)  of  the  system  ^  is  produced  ;  a  number  /?2  (e.g.,
a  —  8)  is  assigned  to  32  when  in  the  course  of  the  pro-
cess :r  becomes  finally  >/3;  every  other  number  J82,
to  be  assigned  to  32>  has  the  property  that  x  is  never

• IRRATIONAL  NUMBERS.  27

linaljy  >^2 ;  therefore  infinitely  many  times  x  becomes
<)S2  ;  the  number  fi  by  which  this  cut  is  produced  I
call  the  lower  limiting  value  of  the  variable  x.  The
two  numbers  o,  yS  are  obviously  characterised  by  the
following  property:  if  c  is  an  arbitrarily  small  positive
magnitude  then  we  have  always  finally  x<,a-\-t  and
xy>ft  —  €,  but  never  finally  jr<o — c  and  never  finally
x'^P-^€.  Now  two  cases  are  possible.  If  o  and  /9
are  different  from  each  other,  then  necessarily  o>^,
since  continually  02>/?2;  the  variable  x  oscillates,
and,  however  far  the  process  advances,  always  under-
goes changes  whose  amount  surpasses  the  value
(a — P)  —  2e  where  c  is  an  arbitrarily  small  positive
magnitude.  The  original  hypothesis  to  which  I  now
return  contradicts  this  consequence;  there  remains
only  the  second  case  a  =  ft  and  since  it  has  already
been  shown  that,  however  small  be  the  positive  magni-
tude c,  we  always  have  finally  jr<a-fe  and  .x>/3 — e,
X  approaches  the  limiting  value  a,  which  was  to  be
proved.

These  examples  may  suffice  to  bring  out  the  con-
nection between  the  principle  of  continuity  and  in-
finitesimal analysis.

THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF
NUMBERS

PREFACE  TO  THE FIRST  EDITION.

IN  science  nothing  capable  of  proof  ought  to  be  ac-
cepted witliout  proof.  Tliough  this  demand  seems
so  reasonable  yet  I  cannot  regard  it  as  having  been
met  even  in  tlie  most  recent  methods  of  laying  the
foundations  of  the  simplest  science  ;  viz.,  that  part  of
logic  which  dtals  with  tlie  tluory  of  numbers.*  In
speaking  of  arithmetic  (algel)ra,  analysis)  as  a  part
of  logic  I  mean  to  imply  that  I  consider  the  number-
concept  entirely  independent  of  the  notions  or  intui-
tions of  space  and  time,  that  I  consider  it  an  imme-
diate result  from  the  laws  of  thought.  My  answer  to
the  problems  propounded  in  the  title  of  this  paper  is,
then,  briefly  this:  numbers  are  free  creations  of  the
human  mind  ;  they  serve  as  a  means  of  apprehending
more  easily  and  more  sharply  the  difference  of  things.
It  is  only  through  the  purely  logical  process  of  build-
ing up  the  science  of  numbers  and  by  thus  acquiring

•of  the  works  wliirli  liave  conio  timlcr  iiijr  observation  I  mention  the  val-
uable t^hrbuih  lirr  Arilhmctik  ««./  Ali;rhr,i  of  I^  Schr«Vil«T  (LcipziK,  1H73),
wliich  contains  a  biblioKrapliy  of  the  xiibjert,  anil  in  adflilion  tli»  memoirs  of
Kroncckcr  and  von  Holniho1t«  uj)on  the  Nurnber-Conrepi  ami  upnnCountinK
and  Mcasiirinx  (in  the  colleriion  of  philoxophical  rssays  ptib1!<thod  in  Imnor
of  E.  Zcllcr,  I.cip/if;.  ''^87).  The  appearance  of  these  memoirs  has  induced
me  to  publish  my  own  views  in  many  respects  similar  but  in  foundation
essentially  different,  whirh  I  formulated  many  year*  ago  in  abtoluto  ind»>
p«ndenc«  of  the  work*  of  otberi.

32  THE  NATURE  AND

the  continuous  number-domain  that  we  are  prepared
accurately  to  investigate  our  notions  of  space  and
time  by  bringing  them  into  relation  with  this  number-
domain  created  in  our  mind.*  If  we  scrutinise  closely
what  is  done  in  counting  an  aggregate  or  number
of  things,  we  are  led  to  consider  the  ability  of  the
mind  to  relate  things  to  things,  to  let  a  thing  corre-
spond to  a  thing,  or  to  represent  a  thing  by  a  thing,
an  ability  without  which  no  thinking  is  possible.
Upon  this  unique  and  therefore  absolutely  indispen-
sable foundation,  as  I  have  already  affirmed  in  an  an-
nouncement of  this  paper,!  must,  in  my  judgment,
the  whole  science  of  numbers  be  established.  The
design  of  such  a  presentation  I  had  formed  before  the
publication  of  my  paper  on  Continuity,  but  only  after
its  appearance  and  with  many  interruptions  occa-
sioned by  increased  official  duties  and  other  necessary
labors,  was  I  able  in  the  years  1872  to  1878  to  commit
to  paper  a  first  rough  draft  which  several  mathemati-
cians examined  and  partially  discussed  with  me.  It
bears  the  same  title  and  contains,  though  not  arranged
in  the  best  order,  all  the  essential  fundamental  ideas
of  my  present  paper,  in  which  they  are  more  carefully
elaborated.  As  such  main  points  I  mention  here  the
sharp  distinction  between  finite  and  infinite  (64),  the
notion  of  the  number  \Anzahl'\  of  things (161),  the

*  See  Section  III.  of  my  memoir,  Continuity  and  Irrational  Numbers
(Braunschweig,  1872),  translated  at  pages  8  et  seq.  of  the  present  volume.

tDirichlet's  Vorlesungen  iiber  Zahlentheorie,  third  edition,  1879,  §  163,  note
on  page  470.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  33

proof  that  the  form  of  argument  known  as  complete
induction  (or  the  inference  from  «  to  «-|-  1)  is  really
conclusive  (59),  (CO),  (80),  and  that  therefore  the
definition  by  induction  (or  recursion)  is  determinate
and  consistent  (126).

This  memoir  can  be  understood  by  any  one  pos-
sessing what  is  usually  called  good  common  sense  ;
no  technical  philosophic,  or  mathematical,  knowledge
is  in  the  least  degree  required.  But  I  foci  conscious
that  many  a  reader  will  scarcely  recognise  in  the
shadowy  forms  which  I  bring  before  him  his  numbers
which  all  his  life  long  have  accompanied  him  as  faith-
ful and  familiar  friends  ;  he  will  be  frightened  by  the
long  series  of  simple  inferences  corresponding  to  our
step-by-step  understanding,  by  the  matter-of-fact  dis-
section of  the  chains  of  reasoning  on  which  the  laws
of  numbers  depend,  and  will  become  impatient  at
being  compelled  to  follow  out  proofs  for  truths  which
to  his  supposed  inner  consciousness  seem  at  once  evi-
dent and  certain.  On  the  contrary  in  just  this  possi-
bility of  reducing  such  truths  to  others  more  simple,
no  matter  how  long  and  apparently  artificial  the  series
of  inferences,  I  recognise  a  convincing  proof  that  their
possession  or  belief  in  them  is  never  given  by  inner
consciousness  but  is  always  gained  only  by  a  more  or
less  complete  repetition  of  the  individual  inferences.
I  like  to  compare  this  action  of  thought,  so  difficult
to  trace  on  account  of  the  rapidity  of  its  performance,
with  the  action  which  an  accomplished  reader  per-

34  THE  NA  TURE  AND

forms  in  reading  ;  this  reading  always  remains  a  more
or  less  complete  repetition  of  the  individual  steps
which  the  beginner  has  to  take  in  his  wearisome
spelling-out ;  a  very  small  part  of  the  same,  and  there-
fore a  very  small  effort  or  exertion  of  the  mind,  is  suffi-
cient for  the  practised  reader  to  recognise  the  correct,
true  word,  only  with  very  great  probability,  to  be
sure;  for,  as  is  well  known,  it  occasionally  happens
that  even  the  most  practised  proof-reader  allows  a
typographical  error  to  escape  him,  i.  e.,  reads  falsely,
a  thing  which  would  be  impossible  if  the  chain  of
thoughts  associated  with  spelling  were  fully  repeated.
So  from  the  time  of  birth,  continually  and  in  increas-
ing measure  we  are  led  to  relate  things  to  things  and
thus  to  use  that  faculty  of  the  mind  on  which  the
creation  of  numbers  depends  ;  by  this  practice  con-
tinually occurring,  though  without  definite  purpose,
in  our  earliest  years  and  by  the  attending  formation
of  judgments  and  chains  of  reasoning  we  acquire  a
store  of  real  arithmetic  truths  to  which  our  first  teach-
ers later  refer  as  to  something  simple,  self-evident,
given  in  the  inner  consciousness ;  and  so  it  happens
that  many  very  complicated  notions  (as  for  example
that  of  the  number  \Anzahl'\  of  things)  are  errone-
ously regarded  as  simple.  In  this  sense  which  I  wish
to  express  by  the  word  formed  after  a  well-known
saying  det  6  av^pwiros  apiOfiriTi^u,  I  hope  that  the  follow-
ing pages,  as  an  attempt  to  establish  the  science  of
numbers  upon  a  uniform  foundation  will  find  a  gener-

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  35

ous  welcome  and  that  other  mathematicians  will  be
led  to  reduce  the  long  series  of  inferences  to  more
moderate  and  attractive  proportions.

In  accordance  with  the  purpose  of  this  memoir  I
restrict  myself  to  the  consideration  of  the  series  of
so-called  natural  numbers.  In  what  way  the  gradual
extension  of  the  number-concept,  the  creation  of
zero,  negative,  fractional,  irrational  and  complex
numbers  are  to  be  accomplished  by  reduction  to  the
earlier  notions  and  that  without  any  introduction  of
foreign  conceptions  (such  as  that  of  measurable  mag-
nitudes, which  according  to  my  view  can  attain  per-
fect clearness  only  through  the  science  of  numbers),
this  I  have  shown  at  least  for  irrational  numbers
in  my  former  memoir  on  Continuity  (1872);  in  a  way
wholly  similar,  as  I  have  already  shown  in  Section  III.
of  that  memoir,*  may  the  other  extensions  be  treated,
and  I  propose  sometime  to  present  this  whole  subject
in  systematic  form.  From  just  this  point  of  view  it
appears  as  something  self-evident  and  not  new  that
every  theorem  of  algebra  and  higher  analysis,  no  mat-
ter how  remote,  can  be  expressed  as  a  theorem  about
natural  numbers, — a  declaration  I  have  heard  repeat-
edly from  the  lips  of  Dirichlet.  But  I  see  nothing
meritorious — and  this  was  just  as  far  from  Dirichlet's
thought — in  actually  performing  this  wearisome  cir-
cumlocution and  insisting  on  the  use  and  recognition
of  no  other  than  rational  numbers. On  the  contrary,

*  Paget  8  et  saq.  of  the  present  volume.

36  THE  NATURE  AND

the  greatest  and  most  fruitful  advances  in  mathematics
and  other  sciences  have  invariably  been  made  by  the
creation  and  introduction  of  new  concepts,  rendered
necessary  by  the  frequent  recurrence  of  complex  phe-
nomena which  could  be  controlled  by  the  old  notions
only  with  difficulty.  On  this  subject  I  gave  a  lecture
before  the  philosophic  faculty  in  the  summer  of  1854
on  the  occasion  of  my  admission  as  privat-docent  in
GOttingen.  The  scope  of  this  lecture  met  with  the
approval  of  Gauss ;  but  this  is  not  the  place  to  go
into  further  detail.

Instead  of  this  I  will  use  the  opportunity  to  make
some  remarks  relating  to  my  earlier  work,  mentioned
above,  on  Continuity  and  Irrational  Numbers.  The
theory  of  irrational  numbers  there  presented,  wrought
out  in  the  fall  of  1853,  is  based  on  the  phenomenon
(Section  IV.)*  occurring  in  the  domain  of  rational
numbers  which  I  designate  by  the  term  cut  \Schnitt'\
and  which  I  was  the  first  to  investigate  carefully ;  it
culminates  in  the  proof  of  the  continuity  of  the  new
domain  of  real  numbers  (Section  V.,  iv.  ).f  It  appears
to  me  to  be  somewhat  simpler,  I  might  say  easier,
than  the  two  theories,  different  from  it  and  from  each
other,  which  have  been  proposed  by  Weierstrass  and
G.  Cantor,  and  which  likewise  are  perfectly  rigorous.
It  has  since  been  adopted  without  essential  modifica-
tion by  U.  Dini  in  his  Fondamenti  per  la  teorica delle

♦Pages  12  et  seq.  of  the  present  volume.
tPage  20  of  the  present  volume.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  37

funzioni  di  variabili  reali  (Pisa,  1878);  but  the  fact  that
in  the  course  of  this  exposition  my  name  happens  to
be  mentioned,  not  in  the  description  of  the  purely
arithmetic  phenomenon  of  the  cut  but  when  the  au-
thor discusses  the  existence  of  a  measurable  quantity
corresponding  to  the  cut,  might  easily  lead  to  the  sup-
position that  my  theory  rests  upon  the  consideration
of  such  quantities.  Nothing  could  be  further  from
the  truth  ;  rather  have  I  in  Section  III*  of  my  paper
advanced  several  reasons  why  I  wholly  reject  the  in-
troduction of  measurable  quantities;  indeed,  at  the
end  of  the  paper  I  have  pointed  out  with  respect  to
their  existence  that  for  a  great  part  of  the  science  of
space  the  continuity  of  its  configurations  is  not  even
a  necessary  condition,  quite  aside  from  the  fact  that
in  works  on  geometry  arithmetic  is  only  casually  men-
tioned by  name  but  is  never  clearly  defined  and  there-
fore cannot  be  employed  in  demonstrations.  To  ex-
plain this  matter  more  clearly  I  note  the  following
example :  If  we  select  three  non-collinear  points  Ay
B,  Cat  pleasure,  with  the  single  limitation  that  the
ratios  of  the  distances  AB,  AC,  BC  are  algebraic
numbers, t  and  regard  as  existing  in  space  only  those
points  M,  for  which  the  ratios  of  AAf,  BAf,  CAf  io  AB
are  likewise  algebraic  numbers,  then  is  the  space  made
up  of  the  points  M,  as  is  easy  to  sec,  everywhere  dis-

*  Pages  8  et  seq.  of  the  present  voluoia.

t  Dirichlnt's  VorUmngtn  \Aber  ZahUmtkt»rit,  |  139  of  the  second  edition,
1 160  of  the  third.

38  THE  NA  TURE  AND

continuous;  but  in  spite  of  this  discontinuity,  and  de-
spite the  existence  of  gaps  in  this  space,  all  construc-
tions that  occur  in  Euclid's  Elements,  can,  so  far  as  I
can  see,  be  just  as  accurately  effected  as  in  perfectly
continuous  space ;  the  discontinuity  of  this  space
would  not  be  noticed  in  Euclid's  science,  would  not
be  felt  at  all.  If  any  one  should  say  that  we  cannot
conceive  of  space  as  anything  else  than  continuous,  I
should  venture  to  doubt  it  and  to  call  attention  to  the
fact  that  a  far  advanced,  refined  scientific  training  is
demanded  in  order  to  perceive  clearly  the  essence  of
continuity  and  to  comprehend  that  besides  rational
quantitative  relations,  also  irrational,  and  besides  al-
gebraic, also  transcendental  quantitative  relations  are
conceivable.  All  the  more  beautiful  it  appears  to  me
that  without  any  notion  of  measurable  quantities  and
simply  by  a  finite  system  of  simple  thought-steps  man
can  advance  to  the  creation  of  the  pure  continuous
number-domain ;  and  only  by  this  means  in  my  view
is  it  possible  for  him  to  render  the  notion  of  continu-
ous space  clear  and  definite.

The  same  theory  of  irrational  numbers  founded
upon  the  phenomenon  of  the  cut  is  set  forth  in  the
Introduction  d.  la  thiorie  des  fonctions  d'une  variable  by
J.  Tannery  (Paris,  1886).  If  I  rightly  understand  a
passage  in  the  preface  to  this  work,  the  author  has
thought  out  his  theory  independently,  that  is,  at  a
time  when  not  only  my  paper,  but  Dini's  Fondamenti
mentioned  in  the  same  preface,  was  unknown  to  him.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  39

This  agreement  seems  to  me  a  gratifying  proof  that
my  conception  conforms  to  the  nature  of  the  case,  a
fact  recognised  by  other  mathematicians,  e.  g.,  by
Pasch  in  his  Einleitung  in  die  Differential-  unJ  Integral-
reehnung  (Liipzif;,  1883).  But  I  cannot  quite  agree
with  Tannery  when  he  calls  this  theory  the  develop-
ment of  an  idea  due  to  J.  Bertrand  and  contained  in
his  Traill  d\iriihmHique,  consisting  in  this  that  an  ir-
rational number  is  dtfintd  by  the  specification  of  all
rational  numbers  that  are  less  and  all  those  that  are
greater  than  the  number  to  be  defined.  As  regards
this  statement  which  is  repeated  by  Stolz — apparently
without  careful  investigation — in  the  preface  to  the
second  part  of  his  I'orlesungen  iiber  allgemeine  Arith-
metik  (Leipzig,  1886),  I  venture  to  remark  the  follow-
ing :  That  an  irrational  number  is  to  be  considered
as  fully  defined  by  the  specification  just  described,
this  conviction  certainly  long  before  the  time  of  Ber-
trand was  the  common  property  of  all  mathematicians
who  concerned  themselves  with  the  notion  of  the
irrational.  Just  this  manner  of  determining  it  is  in
the  mind  of  every  computer  who  calculates  the  ir-
rational root  of  an  equation  by  approximation,  and  if,
as  Bertrand  does  exclusively  in  his  book,  (the  eighth
edition,  of  the  year  1885,  lies  before  me,)  one  regards
the  irrational  number  as  the  ratio  of  two  measur-
able quantities,  then  is  this  manner  of  determining  it
already  set  forth  in  the  clearest  possible  way  in  the
celebrated  definition  which  Euclid  gives  of  the  equal-

40  MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.

ity  of  two  ratios  {^Elements,  V. ,  5) .  This  same  most
ancient  conviction  has  been  the  source  of  my  theory
as  well  as  that  of  Bertrand  and  many  other  more  or
less  complete  attempts  to  lay  the  foundations  for  the
introduction  of  irrational  numbers  into  arithmetic.
But  though  one  is  so  far  in  perfect  agreement  with
Tannery,  yet  in  an  actual  examination  he  cannot  fail
to  observe  that  Bertrand's  presentation,  in  which  the
phenomenon  of  the  cut  in  its  logical  purity  is  not
even  mentioned,  has  no  similarity  whatever  to  mine,
inasmuch  as  it  resorts  at  once  to  the  existence  of  a
measurable  quantity,  a  notion  which  for  reasons  men-
tioned above  I  wholly  reject.  Aside  from  this  fact
this  method  of  presentation  seems  also  in  the  succeed-
ing definitions  and  proofs,  which  are  based  on  the
postulate  of  this  existence,  to  present  gaps  so  essential
that  I  still  regard  the  statement  made  in  my  paper
(Section  VI.),*  that  the  theorem  liii/  3  =  1/6  has  no-
where yet  been  strictly  demonstrated,  as  justified  with
respect  to  this  work  also,  so  excellent  in  many  other
regards  and  with  which  I  was  unacquainted  at  that
time.

R.  Dedekind.
Harzburg,  October  5,  1887.

*  Pages  21  et  seq.  of  this  voluma.

PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

THE  present  memoir  soon  after  its  appearance  met
with  both  favorable  and  unfavorable  criticisms ;
indeed  serious  faults  were  charged  against  it.  I  have
been  unable  to  convince  myself  of  the  justice  of  these
charges,  and  I  now  issue  a  new  edition  of  the  memoir,
which  for  some  time  has  been  out  of  print,  without
change,  adding  only  the  following  notes  to  the  first
preface.

The  property  which  I  have  employed  as  the  defi
nition  of  the  infinite  system  had  been  pointed  out  be-
fore the  appearance  of  my  paper  by  G.  Cantor  i  Ein
Beitruf^  zur  Mannigfalti}:kfilslfhrf,  Crdle's  Journal^  \'ol.
84,  1S78),  as  also  by  Bolzano  {Paradoxien  des  Unend-
lichen,  %  20,  1851).  But  neither  of  these  authors  made
the  attempt  to  use  this  property  for  the  definition  of
the  infinite  and  upon  this  foundation  to  establish  with
rigorous  logic  the  science  of  numbers,  and  just  in  this
consists  the  content  of  my  wearisome  labor  which  in
all  its  essentials  I  had  completed  several  years  before
the  appearance  of  Cantor's  memoir  and  at  a  time
when  the  work  of  Bolzano  was  unknown  to  me  even
by  name.  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  interested
in  and  understand  the  difficulties  of  such  an  investi-

4S  THE  NATURE  AND

gation,  I  add  the  following  remark.  We  can  lay  down
an  entirely  different  definition  of  the  finite  and  infinite,
which  appears  still  simpler  since  the  notion  of  smi-
ilarity  of  transformation  is  not  even  assumed,  viz. :

"A  system  S  is  said  to  be  finite  when  it  may  be  so
transformed  in  itself  (36)  that  no  proper  part  (6)  of  6*
is  transformed  in  itself;  in  the  contrary  case  6"  is
called  an  infinite  system."

Now  let  us  attempt  to  erect  our  edifice  upon  this
new  foundation!  We  shall  soon  meet  with  serious
difficulties,  and  I  believe  myself  warranted  in  saying
that  the  proof  of  the  perfect  agreement  of  this  defini-
tion with  the  former  can  be  obtained  only  (and  then
easily)  when  we  are  permitted  to  assume  the  series  of
natural  numbers  as  already  developed  and  to  make
use  of  the  final  considerations  in  (131);  and  yet  noth-
ing is  said  of  all  these  things  in  either  the  one  defini-
tion or  the  other!  From  this  we  can  see  how  very
great  is  the  number  of  steps  in  thought  needed  for
such  a  remodeling  of  a  definition.

About  a  year  after  the  publication  of  my  memoir
I  became  acquainted  with  G.  Frege's  Grundlagen  der
Arithmetiky  which  had  already  appeared  in  the  year
1884.  However  different  the  view  of  the  essence  of
number  adopted  in  that  work  is  from  my  own,  yet  it
contains,  particularly  from  §  79  on,  points  of  very
close  contact  with  my  paper,  especially  with  my  defi-
nition (44).  The  agreement,  to  be  sure,  is  not  easy
to  discover  on  account  of  the  different  form  of  expres-

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  43

sion ;  but  the  positiveness  with  which  the  author
speaks  of  the  logical  inference  from  nXo  n-\-\  (page
93,  below)  shows  plainly  that  here  he  stands  upon  the
same  ground  with  me.  In  the  meantime  E.  Schroder's
VorUsungen  uber  die  Algebra  der  Logik  has  been  almost
completed  (1890-1891).  Upon  the  importance  of  this
extremely  suggestive  work,  to  which  I  pay  my  highest
tribute,  it  is  impossible  here  to  enter  further ;  I  will
simply  confess  that  in  spite  of  the  remark  made  on
p.  253  of  Part  I.,  I  have  retained  my  somewhat  clumsy
symbols  (8)  and  (17);  they  make  no  claim  to  be
adopted  generally  but  are  intended  simply  to  serve
the  purpose  of  this  arithmetic  paper  to  which  in  my
view  they  are  better  adapted  than  sum  and  product
symbols.

R.  Dedekind.
Harzburg,  August  24,  1893.

THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF
NUMBERS.

I.

SYSTEMS  OF  ELEMENTS.

1.  In  what  follows  I  understand  by  thing  every
object  of  our  thought.  In  order  to  be  able  easily  to
speak  of  things,  we  designate  them  by  symbols,  e.  g.,
by  letters,  and  we  venture  to  speak  briefly  of  the
thing  a  or  of  a  simply,  when  we  mean  the  thing  de-
noted by  a  and  not  at  all  the  letter  a  itself.  A  thing
is  completely  determined  by  all  that  can  be  affirmed
or  thought  concerning  it.  A  thing  a  is  the  same  as  b
(identical  with  h),  and  b  the  same  as  a,  when  all  that
can  be  thought  concerning  a  can  also  be  thought  con-
cerning b,  and  when  all  that  is  true  of  b  can  also  be
thought  of  a.  That  a  and  b  are  only  symbols  or  names
for  one  and  the  same  thing  is  indicated  by  the  nota-
tion a-^b,  and  also  by  b  =  a.  If  further  b  =  c,  that
is,  if  c  as  well  as  a  is  a  symbol  for  the  thing  denoted
by  b,  then  is  also  a  =  c.  If  the  above  coincidence  of
the  thing  denoted  by  a  with  the  thing  denoted  by  b
does  not  exist,  then  are  the  things  a,  b  said  to  be  dif-
ferent, a  is  another  thing  than  b,  b  another  thing  than

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  45

a ;  there  is  some  property  belonging  to  the  one  that
does  not  belong  to  the  other.

2,  It  very  frequently  happens  that  different  things,
a,  b,  c,  .  .  .  for  some  reason  can  be  considered  from
a  common  point  of  view,  can  be  associated  in  the
mind,  and  we  say  that  they  form  a  system  S;  we  call
the  things  a,  b,  c,  .  .  .  eUntents  of  the  system  S,  they
are  contained  in  S\  conversely,  S  consists  of  these
elements.  Such  a  system  S  (an  aggregate,  a  mani-
fold, a  totality)  as  an  object  of  our  thought  is  like-
wise a  thing  (1);  it  is  completely  determined  when
with  respect  to  every  thing  it  is  determined  whether
it  is  an  element  of  .S*  or  not.*  The  system  S  is  hence
the  same  as  the  system  T,  in  symbols  5=7",  when
every  element  of  S  is  also  element  of  7',  and  every
element  of  T  is  also  element  of  S.  For  uniformity  of
expression  it  is  advantageous  to  include  also  the  spe-
cial case  where  a  system  ^  consists  of  a  single  (one
and  only  one)  element  a,  i.  e.,  the  thing  a  is  element
of  S,  but  every  thing  different  from  a  is  not  an  ele-
ment of  .*>.  On  the  other  hand,  we  intend  here  for
certain  reasons  wholly  to  exclude  the  empty  system
which  contains  no  element  at  all,  although  for  other

*In  what  manner  this  determination  is  brouKht  about,  and  whether  we
know  a  wnyof  (lcci<linK  upon  it,  is  a  matter  of  indilTerencc  for  all  th.it  follows;
the  general  laws  to  bo  developed  in  no  way  depend  upon  it;  they  hold  under
all  circumstances.  I  mention  this  expressly  because  Kronccker  not  long  ago
[CrtUf't  Journal,  Vol.  99,  pp.  334-3361  hat  endeavored  to  impose  certain  limi-
tations upon  the  fri-e  formation  of  concepts  in  mathematics  which  I  do  not
believe  to  bo  justified  ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  call  to  enter  upon  this  mat-
ter with  more  detail  until  the  distinRuishetl  mathematician  shall  have  pub-
lished his  reasons  for  the  necessity  or  merely  the  expediency  of  these  Itoii-
UtioDs.

46  THE  NA  TURE  AND

investigations  it  may  be  appropriate  to  imagine  such
a  system.

3.  Definition.  A  system  A  is  said  to  be  part  of  a
system  6"  when  every  element  of  A  is  also  element  of
S.  Since  this  relation  between  a  system  A  and  a  sys-
tem S  will  occur  continually  in  what  follows,  we  shall
express  it  briefly  by  the  symbol  A^S.  The  inverse
symbol  S\.  A,  by  which  the  same  fact  might  be  ex-
pressed, for  simplicity  and  clearness  I  shall  wholly
avoid,  but  for  lack  of  a  better  word  I  shall  sometimes
say  that  ^S"  is  whole  of  A,  by  which  I  mean  to  express
that  among  the  elements  of  6"  are  found  all  the  ele-
ments of  A.  Since  further  every  element  j  of  a  system
S  by  (2)  can  be  itself  regarded  as  a  system,  we  can
hereafter  employ  the  notation  s^S.

4.  Theorem. A^A,  by  reason  of  (3).

5.  Theorem, li  AiB  and  BiA,  then  A  =B.
The  proof  follows  from  (3),  (2).

6.  Definition.  A  system  A  is  said  to  be  a  proper
\echter'\  part  of  S,  when  A  is  part  of  S,  but  different
from  S.  According  to  (5)  then  S  is  not  a  part  of  A,
i.  e.,  there  is  in  S  an  element  which  is  not  an  element
of  ^.

'  7.  Theorem.  If  A^B  and  B^C,  which  may  be
denoted  briefly  by  A^B^C,  then  is  A^C,  and  A  is
certainly  a  proper  part  of  C,  if  ^  is  a  proper  part  of
.5  or  if  .5  is  a  proper  part  of  C.

The  proof  follows  from  (3),  (6).

8. Definition. By  the  system  compounded  out  of

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  47

any  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  to  be  denoted  by  IH  (^,  B,
C,  .  .  .)  we  mean  that  system  whose  elements  are  de-
termined by  the  following  prescription :  a  thing  is
considered  as  element  oiVii  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)  when  and
only  when  it  is  element  of  some  one  of  the  systems
A,  B,  Ct  .  .  .,  i.  e.,  when  it  is  element  of  A,  or  B,  or
C,  .  .  .  We  include  also  the  case  where  only  a  single
system  A  exists;  then  obviously  2X1  (A)  =  A.  We
observe  further  that  the  system  ZVL  (A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)
compounded  out  of  A,  B,  C,  ...  is  carefully  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  system  whose  elements  are  the
systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  themselves.

1>.  Theorem.  The  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  Are  parts
ollUiA,  B,  C,  .  .  .).

The  proof  follows  from  (8),  (3).

10.  Theorem.  If  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  are  parts  of  a  sys-
tem S,  then  is  Vfl  (A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)  i  S.

The  proof  follows  from  (8),  (3).

11.  Theorem.  If  B  is  part  of  one  of  the  systems
A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  then  is  PMXl  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .).

The  proof  follows  from  (9),  (7).

12.  Theorem.  If  each  of  the  systems/*,  Q,  .  .  .
is  part  of  one  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  then  is

m  (P,  Q.  ■  ■  •)  nn  (a,  b,  c,  . .  .>.

The  proof  follows  from  (11),  (10).

13.  Theorem.  If  A  is  compounded  out  of  any  of
the  systems  B,  Q,  .  .  .  then  is  AilU  {P,  Q,  .  .  .).

Proof.  For  every  element  of  A  is  by  (8)  element
of  one  of  the  systems  P,  Q,  .  •  -,  consequently  by  (8)

48  THE  NATURE  AND

also  element  of  JTT  (/*,  Q,  .  .  .)>  whence  the  theorem
follows  by  (3).

14.  Theorem.  If  each  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .
is  compounded  out  of  any  of  the  systems  P,  Q,  .  .  .
then  is

1\\{^A,B,  C,  .  .  .)nXi{F,  <2,  •  •  .)

The  proof  follows  from  (13),  (10).

15.  Theorem.  If  each  of  the  systems  F,  Q,  .  .  .
is  part  of  one  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .,  and  if
each  of  the  latter  is  compounded  out  of  any  of  the
former,  then  is

:n(/',  <?, . .  .)=miA,B,  c, . .  .>

The  proof  follows  from  (12),  (14),  (5).

16.  Theorem. If

A=m  {p,  Q)  and  ^==:n  {q,  h)

then  is  211  {A,  i?)  =  >n  {P,  B).
Proof. For  by  the  preceding  theorem  (15)
m  {A,  P)  as  well  as  m  (P,  B)--=in  {P,  Q,  P).

17.  Definition.  A  thing  g  is  said  to  be  common
element  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .,  \i  it  is  contained
in  each  of  these  systems  (that  is  in  A  and  in  B  and
in  C .  .  .  .).  Likewise  a  system  T'is  said  to  be  a  com-
mon part  of  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  when  T'is  part  of  each  of
these  systems;  and  hy  the  community  \Gemeinheit'\  of
the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  we  imderstand  the  perfectly
determinate  system  (0  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)  which  consists
of  all  the  common  elements  g  oi  A,  B,  C,  .  ,  . and

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  49

hence  is  likewise  a  common  part  of  those  systems.
We  again  include  the  case  where  only  a  single  system
A  occurs;  then  ®  {A)  (is  to  be  put)  =zA.  But  the
case  may  also  occur  that  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .
possess  no  common  element  at  all,  therefore  no  com-
mon part,  no  community  ;  they  are  then  called  sys-
tems without  common  part,  and  the  symbol  (5  C-^,  B,
C,  .  .  .)  is  meaningless  (compare  the  end  of  (2)).
We  shall  however  almost  always  in  theorems  con-
cerning communities  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  add  in
thought  the  condition  of  their  existence  and  to  dis-
cover the  proper  interpretation  of  these  theorems  for
the  case  of  non-existence.

18.  Theorem.  Every  common  part  of  A,  B,  C, . . .
is  part  of  ^  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .).

The  proof  follows  from  (17).

19.  Theorem.  Every  part  of  <5  {A^  B,  C,  .  .  .)is
common  part  oi  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .

The  proof  follows  from  (17),  (7).

20.  Theorem.  If  each  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .
is  whole  (3)  of  one  of  the  systems  P,  Q,  .  .  .  then  is

(5  (/',  Q,  .  .  .)  i(R  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)

Proof.  For  every  element  ol  (^  (  P,  Q,  .  .  .)  \s
common  element  oi  B,  Q,  .  .  .,  therefore  also  common
element  oi  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .,  which  was  to  be  proved.

so  THE  NATURE  AND

II.

TRANSFORMATION  OF  A  SYSTEM.

21.  Definition.*  By  a  transformation  \_Abbildung'\
<f>  oi  a  system  ^  we  understand  a  law  according  to
which  to  every  determinate  element  s  of  6"  there  be-
longs a  determinate  thing  which  is  called  the  trans-
form of  s  and  denoted  by  <f>{s);  we  say  also  that  ^(s)
corresponds  to  the  element  s,  that  <f>{s)  results  or  is
produced  from  s  by  the  transformation  «/>,  that  s  is
transformed  into  <^  (j)  by  the  transformation  </>.  If  now
7' is  any  part  of  S,  then  in  the  transformation  </>  of  ^
is  likewise  contained  a  determinate  transformation  of
T,  which  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  may  be  denoted  by
the  same  symbol  <^  and  consists  in  this  that  to  every
element  /  of  the  system  7"  there  corresponds  the  same
transform  <^(/),  which  /  possesses  as  element  of  S;  at
the  same  time  the  system  consisting  of  all  transforms
^(/)  shall  be  called  the  transform  of  7"  and  be  denoted
by  <f>{T),  by  which  also  the  significance  of  ff>{S)  is
defined.  As  an  example  of  a  transformation  of  a  sys-
tem we  may  regard  the  mere  assignment  of  deter-
minate symbols  or  names  to  its  elements.  The  sim-
plest transformation  of  a  system  is  that  by  which  each
of  its  elements  is  transformed  into  itself ;  it  will  be
called  the  identical  transformation  of  the  system.  For
convenience,  in  the  following  theorems  (22),  (23),
(24),  which  deal  with  an  arbitrary  transformation  ^  of

♦See  Dirichlet's  Vofitsunger,  ubcr  ZahUntheorie,  3d  edition,  1879,  %  163.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  51

an  arbitrary  system  S,  we  shall  denote  the  transforms
of  elements  s  and  parts  T  respectively  by  s'  and  7";
in  addition  we  agree  that  small  and  capital  italics
without  accent  shall  always  signify  elements  and  parts
of  this  system  S.

22.  Theorem.* 11  AiB,  then  A'Mf'.

Proof.  For  every  element  of  A'  is  the  transform
of  an  element  contained  in  /I,  and  therefore  also  in  B.
and  is  therefore  element  of  B*,  which  was  to  be  proved.

23.  Theorem.  The  transform  of  iH  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)
is  m  (A',  B',  C, .  .).

Proof.  If  we  denote  the  system  211  {A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)
which  by  (10)  is  likewise  part  of  S  by  J/,  then  is  every
element  of  its  transform  M'  the  transform  ///'  of  an
element  m  of  Af;  since  therefore  by  (8)  «  is  also  ele-
ment  of  one  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  and  conse-
quently tn  element  of  one  of  the  systems  A' ,  B" ,  C,
.  .  .,  and  hence  by  (8)  also  element  of  JH  {A',  B",  C,
.  .  .),  we  have  by  (3)

M'\m{A',B',  C,  .  .  .).

On  the  other  hand,  since  A,  B,  C, .  .  .  are  by  (9)  parts
of  M,  and  hence  A',  //,  C,  .  .  .  by  (22)  parts  of  Af,
we  have  by  (10)

IXK^A',  B-,  C,  .  .  .)M^'.

By  combination  with  the  above  we  have  by  (5)  the
theorem  to  be  proved

Ar=m(,A\  B-,C',.  ..).

*See  theorem  37.

Sa  THE  NATURE  AND

24.  Theorem.*  The  transform  of  every  common
part  of  .^,  ^,  C,  .  .  .,  and  therefore  that  of  the  com-
munity ^  {A,  B,  C,  .  ..)  is  part  of  (5  (^',  £',  C, .  . .).

Proof.  For  by  (22)  it  is  common  part  of  A',  B\
C,  .  .  .,  whence  the  theorem  follows  by  (18).

25.  Definition  and  theorem.  If  ^  is  a  transforma-
tion of  a  system  S,  and  \\i  a  transformation  of  the
transform  S'  :=^<f>(S),  there  always  results  a  transfor-
mation 6  of  S,  compounded^  out  of  ^  and  \\i,  which  con-
sists of  this  that  to  every  element  j  of  .S  there  corres-
ponds the  transform

where  again  we  have  put  <f){s)=s'.  This  transforma-
tion 6  can  be  denoted  briefly  by  the  symbol  i/^.<^  or
ij/ff},  the  transform  6(s)  by  il/<{>{s)  where  the  order  of
I  he  symbols  <f),  if/  is  to  be  considered,  since  in  general
the  symbol  <j>\l/  has  no  interpretation  and  actually  has
meaning  only  when  i/r(/)-}j.  If  now  x  signifies  a
transformation  of  the  system  t{/{s')=^i{/(f>(s)  and  rj  the
transformation  x^  ^^  ^^^^  system  ,.9'  compounded  out
of  i/r  and  X.  then  is  x^(^)  =  X^(^')=vi^')  =  V^(^)'>
therefore  the  compound  transformations  x^  and  r]<f>
coincide  for  every  element  j  of  .S",  i.  e.,  x^  =  i/<^-  In
accordance  with  the  meaning  of  6  and  rj  this  theorem
can  finally  be  expressed  in  the  form

♦See  theorem  29.

t  A  confusion  of  this  compounding  of  transfonnations  with  that  of  sys-
tems of  elements  is  hardly  to  be  feared.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  53

and this transformation  compounded out  of  <^,  i/',  ;(
can  be  denoted  briefly  hy  y^^^.

III.

SIMILARITY  OF  A  TRANSFORMATION. SIMILAR
SYSTEMS.

2G.  Definition.  A  transformation  ^  of  a  system  5
is  said  to  be  similar  \ahnlich'\  or  distinct,  when  to  dif-
ferent elements  a,  b  of  the  system  S  there  always  cor-
respond different  transforms  a'=^^(a),  /i'=r<^(/*).
Since  in  this  case  conversely  from  s'  =  t"  we  always
have  j  =  /,  then  is  every  element  of  the  system  S'  •=
^  (S)  the  transform  /  of  a  single,  perfectly  determi-
nate element  s  of  the  system  S,  and  we  can  therefore
set  over  against  the  transformation  <^  of  ^  an  inverse
transformation  of  the  system  S' ,  to  be  denoted  by  ^,
which  consists  in  this  that  to  every  element  s'  of  S'
there  corresponds  the  transform  ^(j')  =  j,  and  obvi-
ously this  transformation  is  also  similar.  It  is  clear  that
<f>(S')  =  S,  that  further  ^  is  the  inverse  transformation
belonging  to  $  and  that  the  transformation  ^<j>  com-
pounded out  of  <f>  and  $  by  (25)  is  the  identical  trans-
formation of  S  (21).  At  once  we  have  the  following
additions  to  II.,  retaining  the  notation  there  given.
27.  Theorem.*  If  /I'  iJT,  then  ^  ^  A
Proof.  For  if  a  is  an  element  of  j4  then  is  a'  an
element  of  A',  therefore  also  of  /f,  hence  —  //,  where
d  is  an  element  of  B ;  but  since  from  a'  =^b'  we  always

*  See  theorem  n.

54  THE  NA  TURE  AND

have  a  =  b,  then  is  every  element  of  A  also  element  of

B,  which  was  to  be  proved.

28.  Theorem. If  ^'=:^',  then  ^  r=^.
The  proof  follows  from  (27),  (4),  (5).

29.  Theorem.* If  G  =  ^(^A,  B,  C,  .  .  .),  then

G  =  ^iA',  B',  C,  .  .  .).
Proof.  Every  element  of  &{A',  B',  C",  .  .  .)  is
certainly  contained  in  S',  and  is  therefore  the  trans-
form ^' of  an  element  ^^^'^  contained  in  6";  but  since  ^i,"-'
is  common  element  of  A',  B',  C, . . .  then  by  (27)  must
g  be  common  element  of  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  therefore  also
element  of G', hence every  element of  ^{A', B' ,

C,  .  .  .)  is  transform  of  an  element  g  of  G,  therefore
element  of  G\  i.  e.,  6(^',  B',  C,  .  .  .)iG',  and  ac-
cordingly our  theorem  follows  from  (24),  (5).

30.  Theorem.  The  identical  transformation  of  a
system  is  always  a  similar  transformation.

31.  Theorem.  If  «/>  is  a  similar  transformation  of
6"  and  ij/  a  similar  transformation  of  <I>{S),  then  is  the
transformation  </'</)  of  S,  compounded  of  <f>  and  i/^,  a  sim-
ilar transformation,  and  the  associated  inverse  trans-
formation \jr^  =  ^\l/.

Proof.  For  to  different  elements  a,  b  oi  S  corre-
spond different  transforms  a'  =  <f>{a),  d'  =  <f}{l>),  and
to  these  again  different  transforms  \p{a')=^^{a),
xl/{6')z=il/(ft{l>)  and  therefore  \j/<f>  is  a  similar  transfor-
mation. Besides  every  element  i/^(^(j)i=:i/f(/)  of  the
system  ^<^(6')  is  transformed  by  if  into  s':=(f>(s)  and

•  See  theorem  24.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  55

this  by  $  into  j,  therefore  i^^(j)  is  transformed  by
^^  into  J,  which  was  to  be  proved.

32.  Definition.  The  systems  R,  S  are  said  to  be
similar  when  there  exists  such  a  similar  transforma-
tion i^  oi  S  that  <l>{S)=/i,  and  therefore  $(^)  =  ^
Obviously  by  (30)  every  system  is  similar  to  itself.

33.  Theorem.  If  R,  S  are  similar  systems,  then
every  system  Q  similar  to  R  is  also  similar  to  S.

Proof.  For  if  <f>,  tf/  are  similar  transformations  of
5,  R  such  that  <f,{S)  =  R,  ^(R)=Q,  then  by  (31)  ^^
is  a  similar  transformation  of  ^such  that  tfn^(S)=^  Q,
which  was  to  be  proved.

34.  Definition.  We  can  therefore  separate  all  sys-
tems into  classes  by  putting  into  a  determinate  class
all  systems  Q,  R,  S,  .  .  .,  and  only  those,  that  are
similar  to  a  determinate  system  R,  the  re^resfn/a/ire
of  the  class ;  according  to  (.33)  the  class  is  not  changed
by  taking  as  representative  any  other  system  belong-
ing to  it.

35.  Theorem.  If  /?,  S  are  similar  systems,  then
is  every  part  of  5"  also  similar  to  a  part  of  R,  every
proper  part  of  .S  also  similar  to  a  proper  part  of  R.

Proof.  For  if  ^  is  a  similar  transformation  of  S,
<f,{S)  =  R,  and  TiS,  then  by  (22)  is  the  system  sim-
ilar to  Tff>(7^iR;  if  further  T  is  proper  part  of  S,
and  s  an  element  of  .S"  not  contained  in  T,  then  by  (27)
the  element  <j>(^s)  contained  in  R  cannot  be  contained
in  «^(7')  ;  hence  ^(7")  is  proper  part  of  R,  which  was
to  be  proved.

56  THE  NATURE  AND

IV.

TRANSFORMATION  OF  A  SYSTEM  IN  ITSELF.

36.  Definition.  If  </>  is  a  similar  or  dissimilar  trans-
formation of  a  system  S,  and  ^(6")  part  of  a  system
Z,  then  «/>  is  said  to  be  a  transformation  of  6"  in  Z,  and
we  say  S  is  transformed  by  <^  in  Z.  Hence  we  call
<^  a  transformation  of  the  system  6"  in  itself,  when
^{S^^S,  and  we  propose  in  this  paragraph  to  investi-
gate the  general  laws  of  such  a  transformation  <^.  In
doing  this  we  shall  use  the  same  notations  as  in  II.
and  again  put  <^(j)  =  j',  <t>(T)=  T'.  These  trans-
forms s',  T'  are  by  (22),  (7)  themselves  again  ele-
ments or  parts  of  S,  like  all  things  designated  by  italic
letters.

37.  Definition.  K  \s,  called  a  chain  \Kette\,  when
K'^K.  We  remark  expressly  that  this  name  does
not  in  itself  belong  to  the  part  K  of  the  system  6",  but
is  given  only  with  respect  to  the  particular  transfor-
mation <^ ;  with  reference  to  another  transformation
of  the  system  S  in  itself  K  can  very  well  not  be  a
chain.

38.  Theorem. ^  is  a  chain.

39.  Theorem.  The  transform  K'  of  a  chain  ^is
a  chain.

Proof.  For  from  K"^  K  it  follows  by  (22)  that
(A'')'3A",  which  was  to  be  proved.

40.  Theorem.  If  A  is  part  of  a  chain  K,  then  is
2\soA'^K.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  57

Proof.  For  from  A^  K  it  follows  by  (22)  that
A'\K',  and  since  by  (H7)  K'iK,  therefore  by  (7)
A'^K,  which  was  to  be  proved.

41.  Theorem.  If  the  transform  A'  is  part  of  a
chain  Z,  then  is  there  a  chain  K,  which  satisfies  the
conditions  A^K,  K'^L;  and  VXiA,  L)  is  just  such  a
chain  A'.

Proof.  If  we  actually  put  K—  JU  {A,  L),  then  by
(9)  the  pne  condition  AiK  '\s  fulfilled.  Since  further
by  (23)  K'  —  IX{{A',L')  and  by  hypothesis  A'iL,
L'iL,  then  by  (10)  is  the  other  condition  K'^L  also
fulfilled  and  hence  it  follows  because  by  (J>)  LiK,
that  also  K'^K,  i.  e. ,  K  is  a  chain,  which  was  to  be
proved.

42.  Theorem.  A  system  il/ compounded  simply
out  of  chains  A,  li,  C,  ...  is  a  chain.

Proof.  Since  by  (28)  M'  ^  V^{A\  B',  C\  .  .  .)  and
by  hypothesis //'i/f,  ITiB,  C'iC,  .  .  .  therefore  by
(12)  Af'iM,  which  was  to  be  proved.

43.  Theorem. The  community G  of  chains  A

B,  C,  ...  is  a  chain.

Proof. Since  by  (17)  G  is  common  part  of  A,  B,

C,  .  .  .,  therefore  by  (22)  G"  common  part  of  A',  /f,
C,  .  .  .,  and  by  hypothesis /^'i^,  B'iB,  C'iC,  .  .  .,
then  by  (7)  G'  is  also  common  part  of  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .
and  hence  by  (18)  also  part  of  G,  which  was  to  be
proved.

44.  Definition.  If  A  is  any  part  of  S,  we  will  de-
note by  Af,  the  community  of  all  those  chains  (e.g.,  S)

58  THE  NATURE  AND

of  which  A  is  part ;  this  community  A„  exists  (17)  be-
cause A  is  itself  common  part  of  all  these  chains.
Since  further  by  (43)  A^  is  a  chain,  we  will  call  A^
the  chain  of  the  system  A,  or  briefly  the  chain  of  A.
This  definition  too  is  strictly  related  to  the  fundamen-
tal determinate  transformation  ^  of  the  system  6"  in
itself,  and  if  later,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  it  is
necessary  we  shall  at  pleasure  use  the  symbol  <f>o{-^)
instead  of  A^,  and  likewise  designate  the  chain  of  A
corresponding  to  another  transformation  w  by  o)o(^).
For  this  very  important  notion  the  following  theorems
hold  true.

45.  Theorem. AiA„.

Proof.  For  A  is  common  part  of  all  those  chains
whose  community  is  A^,  whence  the  theorem  follows
by  (18).

46.  Theorem. (AgYiAg.

Proof. For  by  (44)  A„  is  a  chain  (37).

47.  Theorem.  If  .^  is  part  of  a  chain  JC,  then  is
also  AgiA".

Proof.  For  A^  is  the  community  and  hence  also
a  common  part  of  all  the  chains  A',  of  which  A  is
part.

48.  Remark.  One  can  easily  convince  himself  that
the  notion  of  the  chain  A^  defined  in  (44)  is  com-
pletely characterised  by  the  preceding  theorems,  (45),
(46),  (47).

49.  Theorem. A'i{A„y.

The  proof  follows  from  (45),  (22).

MEAMNG  OF  NUMBERS.  59

50.  Theorem. A'^A^

The  proof  follows  from  (49),  (46),  (7).

51.  Theorem. \i  A  '\s  z.  chain,  then  Ao  =  A.
Proof. Since  A  is  part  of  the  chain  A,  then  by

(47)  Ao^A,  whence  the  theorem follows  by  (45),  (5).

52.  Theorem, li  Bi  A,  then  BiA^
The  proof  follows  from  (45),  (7).

53.  Theorem.  If  BiA^,  then  BgiA^,  and  con-
versely.

Proof.  Because  Ag  is  a  chain,  then  by  (47)  from
BiA„,  we  also  get  B„iA„;  conversely,  if  B„iA„,  then
by  (7)  we  also  get  BiA„  because  by  (45)  BiB^

54.  Theorem. If  BiA,  then  is  B^\A^
The  proof  follows  from  (52),  (58).

55.  Theorem. If  BiA„  then  is  also  BiA^
Proof. For  by  (53)  BJA„,  and  since  by  (50)  BiB^

the  theorem  to  be  proved  follows  by  (7).  The  same
result,  as  is  easily  seen,  can  be  obtained  from  (22),
(46),  (7),  or  also  from  (40).

56.  Theorem. If  BiA^  then  is  (//„)' i(.4J'.
The  proof  follows  from  (53),  (22).

57.  Theorem  and  definition.  (^„)'  =  (^')^,  i.  e.,
the  transform  of  the  chain  of  A  is  at  the  same  time
the  chain  of  the  transform  of  A.  Hence  we  can  desig
nate  this  system  in  short  by  A'„  and  at  pleasure  call  it
the  chain-transform  or  transform-chain  of  A.  With  the
clearer  notation  given  in  (44)  the  theorem  might  be
expressed  by  <^(<^„(/*))  =  <^,.(«^(/^)).

Proof. If  for  brevity  we  put {A')o  =  A, Z  is  a

6o  THE  NA  TURE  AND

chain  (44)  and  by  (45)  A'^L;  hence  by  (41)  there  ex-
ists a  chain  ^satisfying  the  conditions  A^K,  K'iL;
hence  from  (47)  we  have  A^,iK,  therefore  {A^'iK',
and  hence  by  (7)  also  {Ag)'iL,  i.  e. ,

{A;)'i{A\.

Since  further  by  (49)  A"^{A,)',  and  by  (44),  (H9)
(y^o)'  is  a  chain,  then  by  (47)  also

(^')o^(^o)',

whence  the  theorem  follows  by  combining  with  the
preceding  result  (5).

58.  Theorem.  Ao=^VPi{A,  A'^),  i.  e.,  the  chain  of
A  is  compounded  out  of  A  and  the  transform-chain
oiA.

Proof. If  for  brevity  we  again  put
L=A\  =  {A;)'  =  {A\  and  K=m{A,  L),
then  by  (45)  A'iL, and  since  Z  is  a  chain,  by  (41)
the  same  thing  is  true  of /T;  since  further  .<4  3  A' (9),
therefore  by  (47)

On  the  other  hand,  since  by  (45)  AiA^,  and  by  (46)
also  LiAg,  then  by  (10)  also

whence  the  theorem  to  be  proved  Ag  =  Ji  follows  by
combining  with  the  preceding  result  (5).

59.  Theorem  of  complete  induction.  In  order  to
show  that  the  chain  A^  is  part  of  any  system  2 —  be
this  latter  part  of  S  or  not — it  is  sufficient  to  show,

p. that  A^X  and

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  6i

<T.  that  the  transform  of  every  common  element  of
Ag  and  2  is  likewise  element  of  2.

Proof.  For  if  p  is  true,  then  by  (45)  the  com-
munity G^  =  ©(/^o,  2)  certainly  exists,  and  by  (18)
AiG\  since  besides  by  (17)

then  is  G  also  part  of  our  system  S,  which  by  ^  is
transformed  in  itself  and  at  once  by  (55)  we  have  also
G'IA„.  If  then  a  is  likewise  trije,  i.  e,,  if  G^'?2,  then
must  G'  as  common  part  of  the  systems  A„,  2  by  (18)
be  part  of  their  community  G,  i.  c.,  6^  is  a  chain  (37),
and  since,  as  above  noted,  A  i  G,  then  by  (47)  is  also

A„iG,
and  therefore  by  combination  with the  preceding  re-
sult Gz=A„,  hence  by  (17) also  A„\%,  which was  to
be  proved.

GO.  The  preceding  theorem,  as  will  be  shown  later,
forms  the  scientific  basis  for  the  form  of  demonstra-
tion known  by  the  name  of  complete  induction  (the
inference  from  n  to  n -\- \)  ;  it  can  also  be  stated  in
the  following  manner:  In  order  to  show  that  all  ele-
ments of  the  chain  A„  possess  a  certain  property  €
(or  that  a  theorem  5  dealing  with  an  undetermined
thing  «  actually  holds  good  for  all  elements  n  of  the
chain  A,^  it  is  sufficient  to  show

p.  that  all  elements  a  of  the  system  A  possess  the
property  (£  (or  that  5  holds  for  all  tf's)  and

<r.  that  to  the  transform  n'  of  every  such  element
n  of  Ao  possessing  the  property  (£,  belongs  the  same

62  THE  NA  TURE  AND

property  (£  (or  that  the  theorem  5,  as  soon  as  it  holds
for  an  element  n  of  A^,  certainly  must  also  hold  for
its  transform  «').

Indeed,  if  we  denote  by  2  the  system  of  all  things
possessing  the  property  (£  (or  for  which  the  theorem
S  holds)  the  complete  agreement  of  the  present  man-
ner of  stating  the  theorem  with  that  employed  in  (59)
is  immediately  obvious.

Gl. Theorem. The  chain  of  "iXi^^A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)  is

znc^o,  B„  Q ).

Proof.  If  we  designate  by  M  the  former,  by  A'
the  latter  system,  then  by  (42)  A!"  is  a  chain.  ^  Since
then  by  (45)  each  of  the  systems  A,  £,  C,  .  .  .  is  part
of  one  of  the  systems  A^,  Bf,,  C^,  .  .  .,  and  therefore
by  (12)  M^Ky  then  by  (47)  we  also  have

On  the  other  hand,  since  by  (9)  each  of  the  systems

A,  B,  C,  .  .  . is  part  of  Af,  and  hence by (45),  (7)

also  part  of  the  chain  M^,  then  by  (47)  must  also  each

of  the  systems  A^,  B^,  C^,  .  .  .  be  part  of  M^,  therefore

by  (10)

KIM,

whence  by  combination  with  the  preceding  result  fol-
lows the  theorem  to  be  proved  M,  =  K  (5).

62.  Theorem.  The  chain  of  &{A,  B,  C,  .  .  .)  is
part  of  ©(^„,  B„,  Q,  .  .  .).

Proof.  If  we  designate  by  G  the  former,  by  AT  the
latter  system,  then  by  (43)  A'  is  a  chain.  Since  then
each  of  the  systems  A^,  B^,  Q,  ,  .  . by  (45)  is  whole

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  63

of  one  of  the  systems  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .,  and  hence  by  (20)
GiK,  therefore  by  (47)  we  obtain  the  theorem  to  be
proved  G^'^K.

63.  Theorem.  If  K'^LiK,  and  therefore  X  is  a
chain,  L  is  also  a  chain.  If  the  same  is  proper  part
of  K,  and  U  the  system  of  all  those  elements  of  K
which  are  not  contained  in  Z,  and  if  further  the  chain
l/f,  is  proper  part  of  K,  and  V  the  system  of  all  those
elements  of  A"  which  are  not  contained  in  (/„,  then  is
K  =1X1  {Mo,  V)2indL  =  m{C/'o,  n-  If  finally Z=^
then  Fi  V.

The  proof  of  this  theorem  of  which  (as  of  the  two
preceding)  we  shall  make  no  use  may  be  left  for  the
reader.

V.

THE  FINITE  AND INFINITE.

64.  Definition.*  A  system  S '\s  said  to  be  infinite
when  it  is  similar  to  a  proper  part  of  itself  (32);  in
the  contrary  case  S  is  said  to  be  2^  finite  system.

65.  Theorem.  Every  system  consisting  of  a  single
element  is  finite.

Proof.  For  such  a  system  possesses  no  proper
part  (2),  (6).

•  If  one  doe*  not  care  to  employ  the  notion  of  •ImlUr  tystetn*  (32]  he  mutt
say :  -V  is  taid  to  be  infinite,  when  there  it  a  proper  part  of  6'  (6)  in  which  5
can  be  distinctly  (similarly)  transformed  (26),  (36].  In  this  form  I  tubmiited
the  definition  of  the  infinite  which  forms  the  core  of  my  whole  investiKaiion
in  September,  iSSa,  to  G.  Cantor  and  several  year*  earlier  to  5>chwarz  and
Weber.  All  other  attempt*  that  have  come  to  my  knowledce  to  distinguish
the  infinite  from  the  finite  seem  to  me  to  have  met  with  *o  little  tuccM*  that
I  think  I  may  be  permitted  to  (ore|o  any  criticism  o(  them.

64  THE  XATURE  AND

60. Theorem. There  exist  infinite  systems.

Proof.*  My  own  reahii  of  thoughts,  i.  e.,  the  to-
tahty  S  of  all  things,  which  can  be  objects  of  my
thought,  is  infinite.  For  if  s  signifies  an  element  of
S,  then  is  the  thought  /,  that  s  can  be  object  of  my
thought,  itself  an  element  of  S.  If  we  regard  this  as
transform  ^{f)  of  the  element  s  then  has  the  transfor-
mation <^  of  Sf  thus  determined,  the  property  that  the
transform  S'  is  part  of  S\  and  S'  is  certainly  proper
part  of  Sy  because  there  are  elements  in  6*  (e.  g,,  my
own  ego)  which  are  different  from  such  thought  /  and
therefore  are  not  contained  in  S' .  Finally  it  is  clear
that  if  a,  b  are  different  elements  of  ^9,  their  trans-
forms a',  b'  are  also  different,  that  therefore  the  trans-
formation <^  is  a  distinct  (similar)  transformation  (20).
Hence  S  is  infinite,  which  was  to  be  proved.

67.  Theorem.  If  R.  S  are  similar  systems,  then  is
R  finite  or  infinite  according  as  S  is  finite  or  infinite.

Proof.  If  .S"  is  infinite,  therefore  similar  to  a  proper
part  S'  of  itself,  then  if  R  and  S  are  similar,  ^9'  by
(33)  must  be  similar  to  R  and  by  (35)  likewise  similar
to  a  proper  part  of  iP,  which  therefore  by  (33)  is  itself
similar  to  R\  therefore  R  is  infinite,  which  was  to  be
proved.

68.  Theorem.  Every  system  S,  which  possesses
an  infinite  part  is  likewise  infinite  ;  or,  in  other  words,
every  part  of  a  finite  system  is  finite.

*A  similar  consideration  is  found  in  8  13  of  the  Paradox ien  eies  Unend-
lichen  by  Bolzano  (Leipzig,  1851).

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  65

Proof.  If  7' is  infinite  and  there  is  hence  such  a
similar  transformation  i/r  of  T,  that  ^(T')  is  a  proper
part  of  T,  then,  if  T  is  part  of  S,  we  can  extend  this
transformation  i/r  to  a  transformation  </>  of  ^  in  which,
if  J  denotes  any  element  of  5,  we  put  <f>{s)=^\J/(s)  or
(f}(^s)=s  according  as  s  is  element  of  yor  not.  This
transformation  ^  is  a  similar  one;  for,  if  a,  b  denote
different  elements  of  S,  then  if  both  are  contained  in
T,  the  transform  <f>(a)  =\l/(a)  is  different  from  the
transform  </>(/■)  ^i/'C^Ot  because  ^  is  a  similar  transfor-
mation ;  if  further  a  is  contained  in  T,  but  b  not,  then
is  <ft{a)=tl/{a)  different  from  ^(/J)=r^,  because  ^(a)
is  contained  in  T;  if  finally  neither  a  nor  fi  is  con-
tained in  T'then  also  is  <f>i  a)  =  a  different  from  <ft{fi)—/>,
which  was  to  be  shown.  Since  further  ^(  7')  is  part
of  T,  because  by  (7)  also  part  of  S,  it  is  clear  that  also
«^(5)  iS.  Since  finally  ^(  T)  is  proper  part  of  T  there
exists  in  7" and  therefore  also  in  .S,  an  element  /,  not
contained  in  1^(7")  r<^(  7') ;  since  then  the  transform
<f>{s')  of  every  element  j  not  contained  in  7'is  equal  to
s,  and  hence  is  different  from  /,  /  cannot  be  contained
in  <f>iS)  ;  hence  iftiS)  is  proper  part  of  .S"  and  conse-
quently .S'  is  infinite,  which  was  to  be  proved.

«)'.»,  Theorem.  Every  system  which  is  similar  to
a  part  of  a  finite  system,  is  itself  finite.

The  proof  follows  from  (67),  (68).

70.  Theorem.  If  a  is  an  element  of  S,  and  if  the
aggregate  7' of  all  the  elements  of  .S  different  from  a  is
finite,  then  is  also  S  finite.

66  •  THE  NA  TURK  AND

Proof.  We  have  by  (64)  to  show  that  if  <^  denotes
any  similar  transformation  of  6"  in  itself,  the  trans-
form <t>{S)  or  S'  is  never  a  proper  part  of  6"  but  al-
ways =^S.  Obviously  ^=211  («,  T)  and  hence  by
(23),  if  the  transforms  are  again  denoted  by  accents,
5'  =  in(<Jf',  T'),  and,  on  account  of  the  similarity  of
the  transformation  <^,  a'  is  not  contained  in  T'  (26).
Since  further  by  hypothesis  S'^S,  then  must  a'  and  like-
wise every  element  of  T'  either  =<?,  or  be  element  of
T.  If  then — a  case  which  we  will  treat  first — a  is  not
contained  in  T',  then  must  T'iTsiTid  hence  2 '  :=  T,
because  «^  is  a  similar  transformation  and  because  T'is
a  finite  system;  and  since  a',  as. remarked,  is  not  con-
tained in  T',  i.e.,  not  in  T,  then  must  a'  =^a,  and  hence
in  this  case  we  actually  have  S'  =  S  as  was  stated.  In
the  opposite  case  when  a  is  contained  in  T'  and  hence
is  the  transform  ^'  of  an  element  i>  contained  in  T,  we
will  denote  by  6''the  aggregate  of  all  those  elements  u
of  T,  which  are  different  from  /> ;  then  T=lVii/>,CP)
and  by  (15)  ^=:n(rt,  l>,  (/),  hence  S'  =  m{a',  a,  U').
We  now  determine  a  new  transformation  if/  oi  T  \n
which  we  put  \p{l>)=:a,  and  generally  \p(jt)  =  u',
whence  by  (23)  i/^ ( T)  =  211  (a',  U').  Obviously  i/r  is
a  similar  transformation,  because  <^  was  such,  and  be-
cause a  is  hot  contained  in  ^and  therefore  also  a'  not
in  [/'.  Since  further  a  and  every  element  u  is  differ-
ent from  b  then  (on  account  of  the  similarity  of  <^)
must  also  a'  and  every  element  u'  be  different  from  a
and consequently contained in  T;  hence ip^T^^T

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  67

and  since  T  is  finite,  therefore  must  ^  (  7')  =  T,  and
VPi{a',  ir)=T. From  this  by  (15)  we  obtain

m{a\  a,  U')  =  l\{{a,  T)
i.  e.,  according  to  the  preceding  S' =S. Therefore
in  this  case  also  the  proof  demanded  has  been  se-
cured.

VI.

SIMPLY  INFINITE  SYSTEMS. SERIES  OF  NATURAL
NUMBERS.

71.  Definition.  A  system  N  is  said  to  be  simply
infinite  when  there  exists  a  similar  transformation  ^of
.A^in  itself  such  that  iV  appears  as  chain  (44)  of  an
element  not  contained  in  ^(A').  We  call  this  ele-
ment, which  we  shall  denote  in  what  follows  by  the
symbol  1,  the  base-element  of  N  and  say  the  simply
infinite  system  N  is  set  in  order  \j^eordnet'\  by  this
transformation  «^.  If  we  retain  the  earlier  convenient
symbols  for  transforms  and  chains  (IV)  then  the  es-
sence of  a  simply  infinite  system  N  consists  in  the
existence  of  a  transformation  <^  of  N  and  an  element  1
which  satisfy  the  following  conditions  a,  fi,  y,  h:

a. JSTiN.

ft.  iV=l,

y. The  element  1  is  not  contained  in  JV'.

8. The  transformation  <f>  is  similar.
Obviously  it  follows  from  o,  y,  8  that  every  simply  in-
finite system  JVis  actually  an  infinite  system  (64)  be-
cause it  is  similar  to  a  proper  part  JV'  of  itself.

68  THE  NA  TURE  AND

72.  Theorem.  In  every  infinite  system  6"  a  simply
infinite  system  N  is  contained  as  a  part.

Proof.  By  (G4)  there  exists  a  similar  transforma-
tion ^  of  6"  such  that  ^{S')  or  S'  is  a  proper  part  of
S',  hence  there  exists  an  element  1  in  6*  which  is  not
contained  in  S' .  The  chain  iV^l^,  which  corresponds
to  this  transformation  <^  of  the  system  6"  in  itself  (44),
is  a  simply  infinite  system  set  in  order  by  ^ ;  for  the
characteristic  conditions  a,  ^,  y,  S  in  (71)  are  obvi-
onsly  all  fulfilled.

73.  Definition.  If  in  the  consideration  of  a  simply'
infinite  system  iV  set  in  order  by  a  transformation  <^
we  entirely  neglect  the  special  character  of  the  ele-
ments; simply  retaining  their  distinguishability  and
taking  into  account  only  the  relations  to  one  another
in  which  they  are  placed  by  the  order- setting  trans-
formation <^,  then  are  these  elements  called  natural
numbers  or  ordinal  numbers  or  simply  numbers,  and  the
base-element  1  is  called  the  base-number  of  the  number-
series  N.  With  reference  to  this  freeing  the  elements
from  every  other  content  (abstraction)  we  are  justified
in  calling  numbers  a  free  creation  of  the  human  mind.
The  relations  or  laws  which  are  derived  entirely  from
the  conditions  a,  /?,  y,  8  in  (71)  and  therefore  are  al-
ways the  same  in  all  ordered  simply  infinite  systems,
whatever  names  may  happen  to  be  given  to  the  indi-
vidual elements  (compare  1H4),  form  the  first  object  of
the  science  of  numbers  or  arithmetic.  From  the  general
notions  and  theorems  of  IV.  about  the  transformation

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  69

of  a  system  in  itself  we  obtain  immediately  the  follow-
ing fundamental  laws  where  a,  b,  .  .  .  vi,  n,  .  .  .  always
denote  elements  of  N,  therefore  numbers,  A,  B,  C, .  . .
parts  of  N,  a,  b',  .  .  .  m',  n  ,  .  .  .  A\  B' ,  C  .  .  .  the
corresponding  transforms,  which  are  produced  by  the
order-setting  transformation  <^  and  are  always  ele-
ments or  parts  of  N;  the  transform  //  of  a  number  n
is  also  called  the  numhvr /o//o7vinjr  n.

74.  Theorem.  Every  number  «  by  (45)  is  con-
tained in  its  chain  tt,  and  by  (53)  the  condition  nim^
is  equivalent  to  n^it/i^.

75.  Theorem. By  (57)  «'„rr-- («..)'=  («'),.

76.  Theorem. By  (46 )  n'Jn,.

77.  Theorem. By  (58)  n,  —  l]\{n,  «'„).

78.  Theorem.  A'':^!!!  (1,  iV'),  hence  every  num-
ber different  from  the  base-number  1  is  element  of  N',
i.  e.,  transform  of  a  number.

The  proof  follows  from  (77)  and  (71).

79.  Theorem.  JV  is  the  only  number-chain  con-
taining the  base- number  1.

Proof.  For  if  1  is  element  of  a  number- chain  A',
then  by  (47)  the  associated  chain  A^^A',  hence  N=K,
because  it  is  self-evident  that  K  \N.

80.  Theorem  of  complete  induction  (inference
from  «  to  «').  In  order  to  show  that  a  theorem  holds
for  all  numbers  ;?  of  a  chain  m,,  it  is  sufficient  to  show,

p. that  it  holds  for  n -m,  and

<r. that  from  the  validky  of  the  theorom  for  a  num-

70  THE  NATURE  AND

ber  n  of  the  chain  vi„  its  validity  for  the  following
number  n  always  follows.

This  results  immediately  from  the  more  general
theorem  (59)  or  (60).  The  most  frequently  occurring
case  is  where  m  =  1  and  therefore  m^  is  the  complete
number-series  TV.

VII.
GREATER  AND  LESS  NUMBERS.

81.  Theorem.  Every  number  n  is  different  from
the  following  number  n'.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80)  :

p.  The  theorem  is  true  for  the  number  «  =  1,  be-
cause it  is  not  contained  in  N'  (71),  while  the  follow-
ing number  1'  as  transform  of  the  number  1  contained
in  ^is  element  of  N' .

0-.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n  and  we
put  the  following  number  n'  ^p,  then  is  n  different
from  /,  whence  by  (26)  on  account  of  the  similarity
(71)  of  the  order-setting  transformation  <^  it  follows
that  «',  and  therefore  /,  is  different  from  /'.  Hence
the  theorem  holds  also  for  the  number/  following  «,
which  was  to  be  proved.

82.  Theorem.  In  the  transform-chain  n\  of  a  num-
ber n  by  (74),  (75)  is  contained  its  transform  n\  but
not  the  number  n  itself.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80)  :

p.  The  theorem  is  true  for  «=  1,  because  l'„  =  iV^,

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  71

and  because  by  (71)  the  base-number  1 is  not  con-
tained in  N' .

u.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  and  we
again  put  n  =ip,  then  is  n  not  contained  in /„,  there-
fore is  it  different  from  every  number  q  contained  in
pg,  whence  by  reason  of  the  similarity  of  <^  it  follows
that  n' ,  and  therefore/,  is  different  from  every  num-
ber q'  contained  in  p\,  and  is  hence  not  contained  in
p'„.  Therefore  the  theorem  holds  also  for  the  number
p  following  n,  which  was  to  be  proved.

83.  Theorem.  The  transform-chain  n\  is  proper
part  of  the  chain  «,.

The  proof  follows  from  (76),  (74),  (82).

84.  Theorem. From  m,  =  »,  it  follows  that  m  =  n.
Proof. Since  by  (74)  m  is  contained  in  m  ,  and

«<,  =  «„"  2n(«,  ft\)
by  (77),  then  if  the  theorem  were  false  and  hence  m
different  from  n,  m  would  be  contained  in  the  chain
«',,  hence  by  (74)  also  w,i«'„  i.  e.,  »,^«', ;  but  this
contradicts  theorem  (83).  Hence  our  theorem  is  es-
tablished.

85.  Theorem.  If  the  number  n  is  not  contained
in  the  number-chain  A',  then  is  K^n\.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80) :

p.  By  (78)  the  theorem  is  true  for  «=  1.

0-. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  then  is

it  also  true  for  the  following  number /  =  «';  for  if  /

is  not  contained  in  the  number-chain  K,  then  by  (40)

n  also  cannot  be  contained  in  A'  and  hence  by  our

72  THE  NA  TURE  AND

hypothesis  K^n\\  now  since  by  (77)  n\=p„=z
2n(/,  /'„),  hence  A' 3 IH  (/,/'„)  and  /  is  not  contained
in  K,  then  must  Kip\,  which  was  to  be  proved.

86.  Theorem.  If  the  number  n  is  not  contained
in  the  number-chain  K,  but  its  transform  n  is,  then
K=n\.

Proof.  Since  n  is  not  contained  in  K,  then  by
(85)  K^n\,  and  since  n'^K,  then  by  (47)  is  also
n\^K,  and  hence  K^=n\,  which  was  to  be  proved.

87.  Theorem.  In  every  number-chain  K  there  ex-
ists one,  and  by  (84)  only  one,  number  k,  whose  chain
k,  =  K.

Proof.  If  the  base-number  1  is  contained  in  K,
then  by  (79)  K^N=^\„.  In  the  opposite  case  let  Z
be  the  system  of  all  numbers  not  contained  in  K\
since  the  base-number  1  is  contained  in  Z,  but  Z  is
only  a  proper  part  of  the  number-series  iV,  then  by
(79)  Z  cannot  be  a  chain,  i.  e.,  Z  cannot  be  part  of
Z\  hence  there  exists  in  Z  a  number  n,  whose  trans-
form n'  is  not  contained  in  Z,  and  is  therefore  certainly
contained  in  K\  since  further  n  is  contained  in  Z,  and
therefore  not  in  A',  then  by  (8G)  K=n\,  and  hence
k  =  n',  which  was  to  be  proved.

88.  Theorem.  If  m,  n  are  different  numbers  then
by  (83),  (84)  one  and  only  one  of  the  chains  m^,  n„  is
proper  part  of  the  other  and  either  n„im\  or  m„?tn\.

Proof.  If  n  is  contained  in  ;;/^,  and  hence  by  (74)
also  «^3  vi„,  then  m  can  not  be  contained  in  the  chain  v^
(because  otherwise  by (74) we  should  have  mj^n^,

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  73

therefore  m„^=n,,  and  hence  by  (84)  also  m^:^h)  and
thence  it  follows  by  (85)  that  n^im\.  In  the  contrarj'
case,  when  n  is  not  contained  in  the  chain  w,,  we  must
have  by  (85)  m^in\,  which  was  to  be  proved.

89.  Definition.  The  number  m  is  said  to  be  less
than  the  number  n  and  at  the  same  time  n  greater  than
w,  in  symbols

when  the  condition

is  fulfilled,  which  by  (74)  may  also  be  expressed

90.  Theorem.  If  w,  n  are  any  numbers,  then  al-
ways one  and  only  one  of  the  following  cases  A,  /i,  v
occurs :

X. m  =  n, n  =  m, i.  e.,  m,  =  n,
/*.. m<^n,  ny>m, i.  e.,  «..-Jm',
V. /»>•«, n<^m, i.  e. ,  m_,^n\.

Proof.  For  if  X  occurs  (84)  then  can  neither  ft.
nor  V  occur  because  by  (8:i)  we  never  have  n,in',.  But
if  X  does  not  occur  then  by  (88)  one  and  only  one  of
the  cases  fi,  v  occurs,  which  was  to  be  proved.

91.  Theorem. n*^n'.

Proof.  For  the  condition  for  the  case  v  in  (90)  is
fulfilled  by  »i  =  n'.

92.  Definition.  To  express  that  m  is  either  =n
or  <;«,  hence  not  >• «  (90)  we  use  the  symbols

«<«  or  also  «>«

74  THE  KATURE  AISID

and  we  say  m  is  at  most  equal  to  n,  and  n  is  at  least
equal  to  ///.

93.  Theorem. Each  of  the  conditions

rrfKn, m  •<  n  , n^i  m^
is  equivalent  to  each  of  the  others.

Proof.  For  if  tn<ti,  then  from  X,  fi  in  (90)  we
always  have  n^irfi,,,  because  by  (76)  m\^m.  Con-
versely, if  n„itn„,  and  therefore  by  (74)  also  nim^,  it  fol-
lows from  m„=:Vi\{f>i,  f'>'^  that  either  n=^tu,  or  n^in\„
i.  e.,  n'^m.  Hence  the  condition  m<^n  is  equivalent
to  «^3w^.  Besides  it  follows  from  (22),  (27),  (75)
that  this  condition  n^^tn^  is  again  equivalent  to  ti\im\,
i.  e.,  by  fi  in  (90)  to  m<in',  which  was  to  be  proved.

94.  Theorem. Each  of  the  conditions

m'  < //, m'  •<  «', m<C,n  •

is  equivalent  to  each  of  the  others.

The  proof  follows  immediately  from  (93),  if  we
replace  in  it  m  by  m',  and  from  /i  in  (90).

95.  Theorem.  If  /<w  and  m<n  or  if  /<»/,  and
m<Cn,  then  is  /<«. But  if  l<m  and  m<n,  then  is

Proof.  For  from  the  corresponding  conditions
(89),  (93)  m,M',  and  «,3w„,  we  have  by  (7)  n,M\  and
the  same  thing  comes  also  from  the  conditions  fn„M„
and  n„im\,  because  in  consequence  of  the  former  we
have  also  m\M\.  Finally  from  m„M„  and  nj^ttn^  we
have  also  «„^4,  which  was  to  be  proved.

96.  Theorem.  In  every  part  7"  of  iV  there  exists
one  and  only  one  least  number  k, i.  e.,  a  number  k

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  73

which  is  less  than  every  other  number  contained  in
T.  If  7^  consists  of  a  single  number,  then  is  it  also
the  least  number  in  T.

Proof.  Since  T„  is  a  chain  (44),  then  by  (87)  there
exists  one  number  k  whose  chain  k,=^  T^.  Since  from
this  it  follows  by  (45),  (77)  that  T^mik,  i\),  then
first  must /i  itself  be  contained  in  /'(because  other-
wise TiJ^\,  hence  by  (47)  also  T,iA\,  i.  e.,  /tik'^,
which  by  (83)  is  impossible),  and  besides  every  num-
ber of  the  system  T,  different  from  k,  must  be  con-
tained in  k\,  i.  e.,  be  >^  (89),  whence  at  once  from
(90)  it  follows  that  there  exists  in  T'one  and  only  one
least  number,  which  was  to  be  proved.

97.  Theorem.  The  least  number  of  the  chain  n„  is
H,  and  the  base-number  1  is  the  least  of  all  numbers.

Proof.  For  by  (74),  (93)  the  condition  min,  is
equivalent  to  »»>;«•  Or  our  theorem  also  follows  im-
mediately from  the  proof  of  the  preceding  theorem,
because  if  in  that  we  assume  T=:n^  evidently  >t  =  »
(51).

98.  Definition.  If  n  is  any  number,  then  will  we
denote  by  Z,  the  system  of  all  numbers  that  are  na/
greater  than  n,  and  hence  not  contained  in  n'^  The
condition

by  (92),  (93)  is  obviously  equivalent  to  each  of  the
following  conditions :

m  <  «, tfi  <C  «', n^int^

99.  Theorem. liZ„  and  niZ^.

76  THE  NATURE  AND

The  proof  follows  from  (98)  or  from  (71)  and  (82).

100.  Theorem.  Each  of  the  conditions  equivalent
by  (98)

m^Z„, mKn,  m  <i «', n^^ m„
is  also  equivalent  to  the  condition

Proof.  For  if  tniZ,.,  and  hence  m<n,  and  if  l'iZ„,
and  hence  /</«,  then  by  (95)  also  /<«,  i.  e.,  l^Z„\  if
therefore  m^Z„,  then  is  every  element  /of  the  system
Z„,  also  element  of  Z„,  i.  e. ,  Z,„  3  Z„.  Conversely,  if
Z„3Z„,  then  by  (7)  must  also  miZ„,  because  by  (99)
m  ^Z„,  which  was  to  be  proved.

101.  Theorem.  The  conditions  for  the  cases  X,  fi,
V  in  (90)  may  also  be  put  in  the  following  form :

X. m=^n, n^m, Z,„^=Z,^

fj.. m  ■<  «, «  >•  m, Z,„,  3  Z„

V. m'>n, fK^m, Z„,iZ,„.
The  proof  follows  immediately  from  (90)  if  we  ob-
serve that  by  (100)  the  conditions  «^3  w^  and  Z„IZ„  are
equivalent.

102.  Theorem. Zi  =  l.

Proof.  For  by  (99)  the  base-number  1  is  con-
tained in  Zi,  while  by  (78)  every  number  different
from  1  is  contained  in  \\,  hence  by  (98)  not  in  Zi,
which  was  to  be  proved.

103.  Theorem. By  (98)  N=m{Z„,  n\).

104.  Theorem.  n  =  ^{Z„,  «„),  i.  e.,  n  is  the  only
common  element  of  the  system  Z„  and  n„.

Proof. From  (99)  and  (74)  it  follows  that  n  is

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  77

contained  in  Z^  and  n„ ;  but  every  element  of  the  chain
n^  different  from  n  by  (77)  is  contained  in  n\,  and  hence
by  (98)  not  in  Z^,  which  was  to  be  proved.

105.  Theorem.  By  (91),  (98)  the  number  n'  is  not
contained  in  Z^.

106.  Theorem.  If  ffK^n,  then  is  Z„  proper  part
of  Z^  and  conversely.

Proof.  If  nKCn,  then  by  (100)  Z„^Z^,  and  since
the  number  «,  by  (99)  contained  in  Z„,  can  by  (98)
not  be  contained  in  Z„  because  «>/«,  therefore  Z^  is
proper  part  of  Z^.  Conversely  if  Z^  is  proper  part  of
Z^  then  by  (100)  m^n,  and  since  ///  cannot  be  =«,
because  otherwise  Z„  =  Z^,  we  must  have  m  ■<  n,  which
was  to  be  proved.

107.  Theorem. Z„  is  proper  part  of  Z,.

The  proof  follows  from (106),  because  by  (91)

108.  Theorem. Z,.  =  >n(Z„  «').

Proof.  For  every  number  contained  in  Z,.  by  (98)
is  <  «',  hence  either  =  «'  or  <  n',  and  therefore  by  (98)
element  of  Z^.  Therefore  certainly  Z„  J2n(Z«,  »').
Since  conversely  by  (107)  ZJ^Z^.  and  by  (99)  n'iZ^,
then  by  (10)  we  have

m(z„«')^z..

whence  our  theorem  follows  by  (5).

109.  Theorem.  The  transform  Z\  of  the  system
Z„  is  proper  part  of  the  system  Z« .

Proof.  For  every  number  contained  in  Z\  is  the
transform  m'  of  a  number  m  contained  in  Z„,  and  since

78  THE  NATURE  AND

m^n,  and  hence  by  (94)  m'  <n' ,  we  have  by  (98)
Z'„iZ„.  Since  further  the  number  1  by  (99)  is  con-
tained in  Z„,  but  by  (71)  is  not  contained  in  the  trans-
form Z\,  then  is  Z\  proper  part  of  Z^.,  which  was  to
be  proved.

110.  Theorem. Z„=mi},  Z',.).

Proof.  Every  number  of  the  system  Z„  different
from  1  by  (78)  is  the  transform  m'  of  a  number  m  and
this  must  be  <n,  and  hence  by  (98)  contained  in  Z„
(because  otherwise  my>n,  hence  by  (94)  also  vi'^r!
and  consequently  by  (98)  m'  would  not  be  contained
in  Z„);  but  from  miZ„  we  have  m'iZ',,,  and  hence
certainly

z„.nn(i,  z'„).

Since  conversely  by  (99)  13  Z„,  and  by  (109)  Z' JZ,,,
then  by  (10)  we  have  211(1,  Z',^iZ„,  and  hence  our
theorem  follows  by  (5).

111.  Definition.  If  in  a  system  E  of  numbers
there  exists  an  element  g,  which  is  greater  than  every
other  number  contained  in  E,  then  g  is  said  to  be  the
greatest  number  of  the  system  E,  and  by  (90)  there  can
evidently  be  only  one  such  greatest  number  in  E.  If
a  system  consists  of  a  single  number,  then  is  this  num-
ber itself  the  greatest  number  of  the  system.

112.  Theorem.  By  (98)  n  is  the  greatest  number
of  the  system  Z„.

113.  Theorem.  If  there  exists  in  E  a.  greatest
number  g,  then  is  E  iZ^

Proof. For  every  number  contained  in  E  is  Kg,

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  79

and  hence  by  (98)  contained  in  Z^,  which  was  to  be
proved.

114.  Theorem.  If  E  is  part  of  a  system  Z^,  or
what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  there  exists  a  num-
ber n  such  that  all  numbers  contained  in  E  are  <«,
then  E  possesses  a  greatest  number  f^.

Proof.  The  system  of  all  numbers  /  satisfying
the  condition  E  ^  Z^ — and  by  our  hypothesis  such
numbers  exist — is  a  chain  (37),  because  by  (107),
(7)  it  follows  also  that  E^Z^,  and  hence  by  (87)  =^„
where  g  signifies  the  least  of  these  numbers  (Ofi),  (07).
Hence  also  E  iZ^  therefore  by  (I>H )  every  number  con-
tained in  E  is  ^^,  and  we  have  only  to  show  that  the
number  g  is  itself  contained  in  E.  This  is  immediately
obvious  if  ^=1,  for  then  by  (H>2)  Z^.,  and  consequently
also  7^  consists  of  the  single  number  1.  But  if^is
different  from  1  and  consequently  by  (78)  the  trans-
form/' of  a  number/,  then  by  (lOH)  is  E  \1\{{Z^  g);
if  therefore  g  were  not  contained  in  E,  then  would
EiZ^  and  there  would  consequently  be  among  the
numbers/  a  number /by  (91)  <C,g,  which  is  contrary
to  what  precedes  ;  hence  g  is  contained  in  E,  which
was  to  be  proved.

115.  Definition.  If  /<///  and  w<//  we  say  the
number  m  lies  between  I  and  n  (also  between  n  and  /).

11(5.  Theorem.  There  exists  no  number  lying  be-
tween n  and  //'.

Proof. For  as  soon  as  m  ■<  «',  and  hence  by  (93)

8o  THE  NA  TURE  AND

mKn,  then  by  (90)  we  cannot  have  n<Cm,  which  was
to  be  proved.

117.  Theorem.  If  /  is  a  number  in  T,  but  not  the
least  (96),  then  there  exists  in  T  one  and  only  one
next  less  number  s,  i.  e.,  a  number  s  such  that  s<i,t,
and  that  there  exists  in  7' no  number  lying  between  s
and  /.  Similarly,  if  /  is  not  the  greatest  number  in  T
(111)  there  always  exists  in  7' one  and  only  one  next
greater  number  u,  i.  e.,  a  number  u  such  that  /<?/,
and  that  there  exists  in  T  no  number  lying  between  /
and  u.  At  the  same  time  in  T  t  v&  next  greater  than  j
and  next  less  than  u.

Proof.  If  /  is  not  the  least  number  in  T,  then  let
^  be  the  system  of  all  those  numbers  of  5"  that  are
</;  then  by  (98)  EM„  and  hence  by  (114)  there
exists  in  ^  a  greatest  number  s  obviously  possessing
the  properties  stated  in  the  theorem,  and  also  it  is  the
only  such  number.  If  further  /  is  not  the  greatest
number  in  T',  then  by  (96)  there  certainly  exists  among
all  the  numbers  of  7',  that  are  >  /,  a  least  number  u,
which  and  which  alone  possesses  the  properties  stated
in  the  theorem.  In  like  manner  the  correctness  of  the
last  part  of  the  theorem  is  obvious.

118.  Theorem.  In  iVthe  number  «'  is  next  greater
than  n,  and  n  next  less  than  «'.

The  proof  follows  from  (116),  (117).

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  8i

VIII.

FINITE  AND  INFINITE  PARTS  OF  THE  NUMBER-
SERIES.

119.  -Theorem. Every  system  Z^  in  (98)  is  finite.
Proof  by  complete  induction  (80).

p. By  (65),  (102)  the  theorem  is  true  for  «  =  1.
0-. If  Z^  is  finite,  then from  (lOH)  and  (70)  it  fol-
lows that  Z„.  is  also  finite,  which  was  to  be  proved.

120.  Theorem.  If  m,  n  are  different  numbers,  then
are  Z^,  Z„  dissimilar  systems.

Proof.  By  reason  of  the  symmetry  we  may  by
(90)  assume  that  m<C.n;  then  by  (lOfi)  Z^  is  proper
part  of  Z^,  and  since  by  (119)  Z„  is  finite,  then  by  (64)
Z„  and  Z„  cannot  be  similar,  which  was  to  be  proved.

121.  Theorem. Every part E of the number
series  N,  which  possesses  a  greatest  number  (111),  is
finite.

The  proof  follows  from  (113),  (119),  (68).

122.  Theorem.  Every  part  6''of  the  number-series
N,  which  possesses  no  greatest  number,  is  simply  in-
finite (71).

Proof.  If  u  is  any  number  in  (/,  there  exists  in  C
by  (117)  one  and  only  one  next  greater  number  than
u,  which  we  will  denote  by  ^(«)  and  regard  as  trans-
form of  u.  The  thus  perfectly  determined  transforma-
tion ^  of  the  system  6'^has  obviously  the  property
a. .AC^O^^.

i.  e.,  C/^is  transformed  in  itself  by  ^. If  further  ^,  v

82  THE  NA  TURE  AND

are  different  numbers  in  U,  then  by  symmetry  we  may
by  (90)  assume  that  u<^v\  thus  by  (117)  it  follows
from  the  definition  of  i/r  that  </'(«)<?'  and  v<Ci(f(7f),
and  hence  by  (95)  i/r(«)  <;i/r(?')  ;  therefore  by  (90)  the
transforms  \jf{u),  ^(»)  are  different,  i.  e.,

8.  the  transformation  \j/  is  similar.
Further,  if  «i  denotes  the  least  number  (96)  of  the
system  I/,  then  every  number  u  contained  in  C/  is
>«i,  and  since  generally  «<;i/r(a),  then  by  (95)  «i  •<
^(«),  and  therefore  by  (90)  ui  is  different  from  </'(«),
i.  e.,

y.  the  element  ui  of  6^ is  not  contained  in  *!/{(/).
Therefore  tlf^C/)  is  proper  part  of  6^ and  hence  by  (64)
C/is  an  infinite  system.  If  then  in  agreement  with
(44)  we  denote  by  i/'„(^),  when  F  is  any  part  of  C/,
the  chain  of  F  corresponding  to  the  transformation  ^,
we  wish  to  show  finally  that

ft.  ^=.^„(;/i).
In  fact,  since  every  such  chain  i/'„(F)  by  reason  of  its
definition  (44)  is  a  part  of  the  system  C/  transformed
in  itself  by  i/',  then  evidently  is  i/^X^i)  ^^5  conversely
it  is  first  of  all  obvious  from  (45)  that  the  element  ui
contained  in  C/is  certainly  contained  in  \i>„(u\)\  but
if  we  assume  that  there  exist  elements  of  U,  that
are  not  contained  in  \p^{u\),  then  must  there  be  among
them  by  (96)  a  least  number  7V,  and  since  by  what
precedes  this  is  different  from  the  least  number  ui  of
the  system  U,  then  by  (117)  must  there  exist  in  U
also  a  number  v  which  is  next  less  than  w,  whence  it

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  83

follows  at  once  that  w=^^^v);  since  therefore  v<^w,
then  must  v  by  reason  of  the  definition  of  w  certainly
be  contained  in  ^„("i);  but  from  this  by  (55)  it  fol-
lows that  also  ^(7'),  and  hence  w  must  be  contained
in  j/r„(«i),  and  since  this  is  contrary  to  the  definition  of
zt/,  our  foregoing  hypothesis  is  inadmissible  ;  therefore
U^^X^\)  21°*^  hence  also  6^^=^,(1/1),  as  stated.  From
a,  y3,  y,  S  it  then  follows  by  (71)  that  U\s^  simply  in-
finite system  set  in  order  by  ^,  which  was  to  be  proved.

123.  Theorem.  In  consequence  of  (121),  (122)
any  part  7" of  the  number-series  A' is  finite  or  simply
infinite,  according  as  a  greatest  number  exists  or  docs
not  exist  in  T.

IX.

DEFINITION  OF  A  TRANSFORMATION  OF  THE
NUMBER-SERIES  BY  INDUCTION.

124.  In  what  follows  we  denote  numbers  by  small
Italics  and  retain  throughout  all  symbols  of  the  pre-
vious sections  VI.  to  VIII.,  while  Q  designates  an
arbitrary  system  whose  elements  are  not  necessarily
contained  in  N.

125.  Theorem.  If  there  is  given  an  arbitrary  (sim-
ilar or  dissimilar)  transformation  ^  of  a  system  O  in
itself,  and  besides  a  determinate  element  <u  in  O,  then
to  every  number  n  corresponds  one  transformation
^^  and  one  only  of  the  associated  number-system  Z^
explained  in  (98),  which  satisfies  the  conditions;*

*For  clearness  here  and  in  the  followinK  iheoroin(ii6)  I  have  especially
mentioned  condition  I.,  althouxh  properly  it  is  a  consequence  of  II.  and  III

84  THE  NA  TUKE  AND

I.  </^„(z„)^n

II. ./r„(l)  =  <0

III.  </'„(/')  =  ^ </'„(/),  if  i<,'i,  where  the  symbol
6\l/^  has  the  meaning  given  in  (25).

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80).

p.  The  theorem  is  true  for  n^^l.  In  this  case  in-
deed by  (102)  the  system  Z„  consists  of  the  single
number  1,  and  the  transformation  i^j,  is  therefore  com-
pletely defined  by  II  alone  so  that  I  is  fulfilled  while
III  drops  out  entirely.

cr.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «  then  we
show  that  it  is  also  true  for  the  following  number
p  =  n',  and  we  begin  by  proving  that  there  can  be  only
a  single  corresponding  transformation  i/'^  of  the  sys-
tem Z^,  In  fact,  if  a  transformation  xp^,  satisfies  the
conditions

II'.  ^,(1)--

Iir.  i/'^(/«')=^^i/v('")»  when  m<Cp,  then  there  is
also  contained  in  it  by  (21),  because  Z„iZf  (107)  a
transformation  of  Z„  which  obviously  satisfies  the
same  conditions  I,  II,  III  as  \p„,  and  therefore  coin-
cides throughout  with  \p„ ;  for  all  numbers  contained
in  Z„,  and  hence  (98)  for  all  numbers  ni  which  are
<!/,  i.  e.,  <«,  must  therefore

ilf^{m)  =  tlf„{m)  (m)

whence  there  follows,  as  a  special  case,

since  further  by  (105),  (108)/  is  the  only  number  of

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  85

the system  Z,  not  contained  in  Z^,  and since  by  III
and  («)  we  must  also  have

there  follows  the  correctness  of  our  foregoing  state-
ment that  there  can  be  only  one  transformation  i/^,  of
the  system  Z,  satisfying  the  conditions  I',  IT,  III',
because  by  the  conditions  (w)  and  (/)  just  derived
\^f  is  completely  reduced  to  ^„.  We  have  next  to  show
conversely  that  this  transformation  i/r,  of  the  system
Z^  completely  determined  by  (w)  and  (/)  actually
satisfies  the  conditions  I',  IT,  III'.  Obviously  I'  fol-
lows from  (w)  and  (/)  with  reference  to  I,  and  because
tf(0)3Q.  Similarly  IT  follows  from  (»/)  and  II,  since
by  (99)  the  number  1  is  contained  in  Z„.  The  correct-
ness of  III' follows  first  for  those  numbers  w  which
are  <«  from  (w)  and  III,  and  for  the  single  number
m  =  n  yet  remaining  it  results  from  (/)  and  (w).  Thus
it  is  completely  established  that  from  the  validity  of
our  theorem  for  the  number  n  always  follows  its  valid-
ity for  the  following  number/,  which  was  to  be  proved,
120.  Theorem  of  the  definition  by  induction.  If
there  is  given  an  arbitrary  (similar  or  dissimilar)  trans-
formation tf  of  a  system  O  in  itself,  and  besides  a  de-
terminate element  w  in  O,  then  there  exists  one  and
only  one  transformation  ^  of  the  number-series  .A',
which  satisfies  the  conditions

I.  ^^,{N)^Q
II.  i/^(i)=«

86  THE  NA  TURE  AND

III.  \j/{n')  =  0[l/{n'),  where  n  represents  every  num-
ber.

Proof.  Since,  if  there  actually  exists  such  a  trans-
formation \l/,  there  is  contained  in  it  by  (21)  a  trans-
formation \j/„  of  the  system  Z„,  which  satisfies  the  con-
ditions I,  II,  III  stated  in  (125),  then  because  there
exists  one  and  only  one  such  transformation  i{/„  must
necessarily

'/'(«)  =  '/'«(«)•  («)

Since  thus  if/  is  completely  determined  it  follows  also
that  there  can  exist  only  one  such  transformation  if/
(see  the  closing  remark  in  (130)).  That  conversely
the  transformation  i{/  determined  by  («)  also  satisfies
our  conditions  I,  II,  III,  follows  easily  from  («)  with
reference  to  the  properties  I,  II  and  (/)  shown  in  (125),
which  was  to  be  proved.

127.  Theorem.  Under  the  hypotheses  made  in  the
foregoing  theorem,

where  7' denotes  any  part  of  the  number-series  JV.

Proof.  For  if  /  denotes  every  number  of  the  sys-
tem T,  then  iff^T^)  consists  of  all  elements  i/'C/'),  and
6\I/{T)  of  all  elements  Bipi/)',  hence  our  theorem  fol-
lows because  by  III  in  (126)  ij/{/')  =  Oij/(^).

128.  Theorem.  If  we  maintain  the  same  hypoth-
eses and  denote  by  Og  the  chains  (44)  which  corre-
spond to  the  transformation  $  of  the  system  Ci  in  itself,
then  is

Mean/J^g  of  J^UMBER^.  87

Proof. We  show  first  by  complete  induction  (80)

that

^(^)3d,(a,).

i.  e., that  every transform ^(«) is  also element  of
^,(a)). In  fact,

p.  this  theorem  is  true  for  «  =  1,  because  b)'  (126,
II)  ^(l):^w,  and  because  by  (45)  <i*3d.,(o>).

cr.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  and  hence
^(«)3tf,(a)),  then  by  (55)  also  d(i/f(«))3^,(«)»  '•  e.,  by
(126,  III)  ^(«')id,(ci>),  hence  the  theorem  is  true  for
the  following  number  n,  which  was  to  be  proved.

In  order  further  to  show  that  every  element  v  of
the  chain  ^,(<i>)  is  contained  in  ^(iV),  therefore  that

tf,(«)^^(^)
we  likewise  apply  complete  induction,  i.  e.,  theorem
(59)  transferred  to  O  and  the  transformation  $. In
fact,

p. the  element  w  =  ^(l),  and  hence  is  contained  in

a.  If  V  is  a  common  element  of  the  chain  0^(w')
and  the  system  ^{N),  then  v  =  ^(«),  where  n  denotes
a  number,  and  by  (126,  III)  we  get  6{y)^  $^{n)  =
^{n),  and  therefore  6{y)  is  contained  in  i^{N),  which
was  to  be  proved.

From  the  theorems  just  established,  }p(N)i$X^)
and  ^„(a))5^(A^),  we  get  by  (5)  ^{N)^6,{ia),  which
was  to  be  proved.

129.  Theorem.  Under  the  same  hypotheses  we
have  generally :

88  THE  NATURE  AND

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p. By  (128) the  theorem holds for  «  =  1, since
l„  =  iVand  i/r(l)  =  ft,.

0-. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then

^('A(«o))=^C^<.('/'(«)));

since  by  (127),  (75)

d(V'(«„))=.^  («'.),
and  by  (57),  (126,  III)

we  get  ^(«'^)=:d,(^  («')),

i.e.,  the  theorem  is  true  for  the  number  n'  following

«,  which  was  to  be  proved.

130.  Remark.  Before  we  pass  to  the  most  im-
portant applications  of  the  theorem  of  definition  by  in-
duction proved  in  (126),  (sections  X-XIV),  it  is  worth
while  to  call  attention  to  a  circumstance  by  which  it
is  essentially  distinguished  from  the  theorem  of  dem-
onstration by  induction  proved  in  (80)  or  rather  in
(59),  (60),  however  close  may  seem  the  relation  be-
tween the  former  and  the  latter.  For  while  the  theorem
(59)  is  true  quite  generally  for  every  chain  A„  where
A  is  any  part  of  a  system  6*  transformed  in  itself  by
any  transformation  <^  (IV),  the  case  is  quite  different
with  the  theorem  (126),  which  declares  only  the  exist-
ence of  a  consistent  (or  one-to-one)  transformation  i^
of  the  simply  infinite  system  1^.  If  in  the  latter  the-
orem (still  maintaining  the  hypotheses  regarding  fi
and  9)  we  replace  the  number-series  \„  by  an  arbitrary

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  89

chain  A„  out  of  sucli  a  system  S,  and  define  a  trans-
formation ^  of  Ag  in  r2  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that
in  (12G,  II,  III)  by  assuming  that

p.  to  every  element  a  of  A  there  is  to  correspond  a
determinate  element  ^(a)  selected  from  O,  and

<r.  for  every  element  n  contained  in  A^  and  its
transform  n  =:<f>(n),  the  condition  i/r(  «')n.^»/^(«)  is  to
hold,  then  would  the  case  very  frequently  occur  that
such  a  transformation  ^  dots  not  exist,  since  these  con-
ditions p,  <r  may  prove  incompatible,  even  though  the
freedom  of  choice  contained  in  p  be  restricted  at  the
outset  to  conform  to  the  condition  o-.  An  example  will
be  sufficient  to  convince  one  of  this.  If  the  system  .S
consisting  of  the  different  elements  a  and  fi  is  so  trans-
formed in  itself  by  «^ that  a'  fi,  //—</,  then  obviously
a,  =  d,—.S;  suppose  further  the  system  O  consisting  of
the  different  elements  a,  /?  and  y  be  so  transformed  in
itself  by  $  that  d(a)=-p,  6{p)-  y,  6(y)^  a;  if  we
now  demand  a  transformation  ^  of  a,  in  O  such  that
^(<i)=rra,  and  that  besides  for  every  element  «  con-
tained in  a,  always  \jf  (»')-.=  6 if; (»),  we  meet  a  contra-
diction ;  since  for  n=za,  we  get  \f>{f>)~  6(a)=  fi,  and
hence  for  n  =  fi,  we  must  have  ^{a)-^${P)—y,  while
we  had  assumed  ^{a)  =:a.

But  if  there  exists  a  transformation  ^  of  A„  in  O,
which  satisfies  tht-  foregoing  conditions  p,  <t  without
contradiction,  then  from  (*»())  it  follows  easily  that  it
is  completely  determined  ;  for  if  the  transformation  ;(
satisfies  the  same  conditions,  then  we  have,  generally.

90

THE  NATURE  AND

^(^n)=il/(n),  since  by  p  this  theorem  is  true  for  all  ele-
ments n  =  a  contained  in  A,  and  since  if  it  is  true
for  an  element  n  of  A^  it  must  by  o-  be  true  also  for  its
transform  «'.

131.  In  order  to  bring  out  clearly  the  import  of
our  theorem  (126),  we  will  here  insert  a  consideration
which  is  useful  for  other  investigations  also,  e.  g.,  for
the  so-called  group-theory.

We  consider  a  system  Q,  whose  elements  allow  a
certain  combination  such  that  from  an  element  v  by
the  effect  of  an  element  w,  there  always  results  again  a
determinate  element  of  the  same  system  fi,  which  may
be  denoted  by  <d.v  or  <dv,  and  in  general  is  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  va>.  We  can  also  consider  this  in
such  a  way  that  to  every  determinate  element  a>,  there
corresponds  a  determinate  transformation  of  the  sys-
tem Q  in  itself  (to  be  denoted  by  o}),  in  so  far  as  every
element  v  furnishes  the  determinate  transform  a)(v)  =
wv.  If  to  this  system  fi  and  its  element  a>  we  apply
theorem  (126),  designating  by  w  the  transformation
there  denoted  by  6,  then  there  corresponds  to  every
number  n  a  determinate  element  «/'(«)  contained  in  fi,
which  may  now  be  denoted  by  the  symbol  to"  and  some-
times called  the  «th  power  of  w;  this  notion  is  com-
pletely defined  by  the  conditions  imposed  upon  it

II. 0)1  =  0)

III. co'-'^wo)",
and  its  existence is  established  by  the  proof  of  the-
orem (126).

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  gx

If  the  foregoing  combination  of  the  elements  is
further  so  qualified  that  for  arbitrary  elements  /i,  v,
CO,  we  always  have  o)(v/i)  =<i»v(/i),  then  are  true  also
the  theorems

w"  -^^^  o)"  o), a)*"  o)"  =^  o)"  o)*",

whose  proofs  can  easily  be  effected  by  complete  in-
duction and  may  be  left  to  the  reader.

The  foregoing  general  consideration  may  be  im-
mediately applied  to  the  following  example.  If.S'is
a  system  of  arbitrary  elements,  and  Q  the  associated
system  whose  elements  are  all  the  transformations  v  of
5  in  itself  (30),  then  by  (25)  can  these  elements  be  con-
tinually compounded,  since  v{S')^S,  and  the  transfor-
mation lav  compounded  out  of  such  transformations  v
and  <i>  is  itself  again  an  element  of  O.  Then  are  also
all  elements  w"  transformations  of  .V  in  itself,  and  we
say  they  arise  by  repetition  of  the  transformation  <i>.
We  will  now  call  attention  to  a  simple  connection  ex-
isting between  this  notion  and  the  notion  of  the  chain
(i»^(/i)  defined  in  (44),  where  A  again  denotes  any  part
of  S.  If  for  brevity  we  denote  by  A^  the  transform
o)"(-,4)  produced  by  the  transformation  w",  then  from
III  and  (25)  it  follows  that  u){A„)  =  A„..  Hence  it  is
easily  shown  by  complete  induction  (80)  that  all  these
systems  A„  are  parts  of  the  chain  w,{A) ;  for

p.  by  (50)  this  statement  is  true  for  n=\,  and
<r. if  it  is  true  for  a  number  «,  then  from  (55)  and
from  A„.^=w{A„)  it  follows  that  it  is  also  true  for  the
following  number  «',  which  was  to  be  proved. Since

92  THE  NATURE  AND

further  by  (45)  ^3<dX^),  then  from  (10)  it  results  that
the  system  K  compounded  out  of  A  and  all  transforms
A„  is  part  of  <d„(^)-  Conversely,  since  by  (23)  (o(A')
is  compounded  out  of  w{A)=^Ai  and  all  systems
tji(^A„)^^A„.,  therefore  by  (78)  out  of  all  systems  A„,
which  by  (9)  are  parts  of  A",  then  by  (10)  is  w(A')3A',
i.  e.,  A'is  a  chain  (37),  and  since  by  (9)  A  3  A',  then
by  (47)  it  follows  also  that  that  a)„(^)3Ar.  Therefore
u)^(^)=Ar,  i.  e.,  the, following  theorem  holds :  If  w  is  a
transformation  of  a  system  S  in  itself,  and  A  any  part
of  S,  then  is  the  chain  of  A  corresponding  to  the  trans-
formation 0)  compounded  out  of  A  and  all  the  trans-
forms a" (A)  resulting  from  repetitions  of  w.  We  ad-
vise the  reader  with  this  conception  of  a  chain  to  re-
turn to  the  earlier  theorems  (57),  (58).

X.

THE  CLASS  OF  SIMPLY  INFINITE  SYSTEMS.

132.  Theorem.  All  simply  infinite  systems  are
similar  to  the  number-series  N  and  consequently  by
(33)  also  to  one  another.

Proof.  Let  the  simply  infinite  system  Q  be  set  in
order  (71)  by  the  transformation  0,  and  let  w  be  the
base-element  of  O  thus  resulting ;  if  we  again  denote
by  6„  the  chains  corresponding  to  the  transformation
6  (44),  then  by  (71)  is  the  following  true :

a.  e(n)3fi.

/3. n=;^,(a)).

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  93

y. o)  is  not  contained  in  ^(O).

8. The  transformation  tf  is  similar.
If  then  ^  denotes  the  transformation  of  the  number-
series  iV  defined  in  (126),  then  from  ^  and (128)  we

get  first

^(iV)  =  0,

and  hence  we  have  only  yet  to  show  that  ^  is  a  sim-
ilar transformation,  i.  e.,  (2fi)  that  to  different  num-
bers HI,  n  correspond  different  transforms  ^{ni),  ^(«).
On  account  of  the  symmetry  we  may  by  (!>0)  assume
that  m^n,  hence  m\n\,  and  the  theorem  to  prove
comes  to  this  that  ^{n)  is  not  contained  in  ^(»'«).  and
hence  by  (127)  is  not  contained  in  $\p{n,).  This  we
establish  for  every  number  «  by  complete  induction
(80). In  fact,

p.  this  theorem  is  true  by  y  for  n  =  \,  since  ^  ( 1 )  =  «
and  ^(l„)^^(A^)=rn.

or.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then  is  it
also  true  for  the  following  number  «';  for  if  ^(«'),
i.  e.,  dtff{n),  were  contained  in  6iff(n\),  then  by  S  and
(27),  </'(»)  would  also  be  contained  in  *!/{»',)  while
our  hypothesis  states  just  the  opposite  ;  which  was  to
be  proved.

133.  Theorem.  Every  system  which  is  similar  to
a  simply  infinite  system  and  therefore  by  (132),  (33)
to  the  number-series  JVis  simply  infinite.

Proof.  If  n  is  a  system  similar  to  the  number-
series  JV,  then  by  (32)  there  exists  a  similar  transfor-
mation ^  of  .<V  such  that

94  THE  NA  TURE  AND

I.  ^(^N^=£l;
then  we  put

II.  ,/r(l)  =  a).

If  we  denote,  as  in  (26),  by  ^  the  inverse,  likewise
similar  transformation  of  O,  then  to  every  element  v
of  O  there  corresponds  a  determinate  number  \j/(v)=n,
viz.,  that  number  whose  transform  ij/{n)  =  v.  Since
to  this  number  n  there  corresponds  a  determinate  fol-
lowing number  <f}(^n)  =  n',  and  to  this  again  a  deter-
minate element  ij/{n')  in  Q  there  belongs  to  every  ele-
ment V  of  the  system  Q  a  determinate  element «/'(«')  of
that  system  which  as  transform  of  v  we  shall  designate
by  0(v).  Thus  a  transformation  ^  of  fi  in  itself  is  com-
pletely determined,*  and  in  order  to  prove  our  the-
orem we  will  show  that  by  ^  fi  is  set  in  order  (71)  as  a
simply  infinite  system,  i.  e. ,  that  the  conditions  a,  fi,
y,  S  stated  in  the  proof  of  (132)  are  all  fulfilled.  First
a  is  immediately  obvious  from  the  definition  of  6.
Since  further  to  every  number  n  corresponds  an  ele-
ment v  =  <f>{N),  for  which  0(v)  =\{/(n'),  we  have  gen-
erally,

III. xl,{n')^dxp{n),

and  thence  in  connection  with  I,  II,  a  it  results  that
the  transformations  6,  ij/  fulfill  all  the  conditions  of
theorem  (126);  therefore  fi  follows  from  (128)  and  I.
Further  by  (127)  and  I

and  thence  in  combination  with  II  and  the  similarity

*  Evidently  0  is  the  transformation  «^  i^  ^  compounded  by  (25)  out  of  ^,  0,  i/(.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  95

of  the  transformation  ^  follows  y,  because  otherwise
1^(1)  must  be  contained  in  i/r(vV'),  hence  by  (27)  the
number  1  in  N' ,  which  by  (71,  y)  is  not  the  case.  If
finally  /x,  v  denote  elements  of  ft  and  m,  n  the  corre-
sponding numbers  whose  transforms  are  ^(w)  =  fi,
tff(n)=:v,  then  from  the  hypothesis  0(jj.)  =  ff(v)  it  fol-
lows by  the  foregoing  that  i/'(w')  =  ^(«'),  thence  on
account  of  the  similarity  of  tp,  <f>  that  m'  =  n',  m=:n,
therefore  also  fi.=^v;  hence  also  B  is  true,  which  was
to  be  proved.

134.  Remark.  By  the  two  preceding  theorems
(132),  (133)  all  simply  infinite  systems  form  a  class  in
the  sense  of  (34).  At  the  same  time,  with  reference  to
(71),  (73)  it  is  clear  that  every  theorem  regarding
numbers,  i.  e.,  regarding  the  elements  n  of  the  simply
infinite  system  iVset  in  order  by  the  transformation  <^'
and  indeed  every  theorem  in  which  we  leave  entirely
out  of  consideration  the  special  character  of  the  ele-
ments n  and  discuss  only  such  notions  as  arise  from
the  arrangement  <^,  possesses  perfectly  general  validity
for  every  other  simply  infinite  system  O  set  in  order  by
a  transformation  fl  and  its  elements  v,  and  that  the
passage  from  iV  to  Q  (e.  g.,  also  the  translation  of  an
arithmetic  theorem  from  one  language  into  another)
is  effected  by  the  transformation  i/^  considered  in
(132),  (133),  which  changes  every  element  n  of  TV  into
an  element  v  of  O,  i.  e.,  into  ^(w)  This  element  v
can  be  called  the  «th  element  of  O  and  accordingly
the  number  n  is  itself  the  nth  number  of  the  number-

g6  THE  NATURE  AND

series  N.  The  same  significance  which  the  transfor-
mation <^  possesses  for  the  laws  in  the  domain  A^,  in
so  far  as  every  element  n  is  followed  by  a  determinate
element  ^ («)  =  «',  is  found,  after  the  change  effected
by  i/',  to  belong  to  the  transformation  B  for  the  same
laws  in  the  domain  n,  insofar  as  the  element  v  =  i/'(«)
arising  from  the  change  of  n  is  followed  by  the  ele-
ment f){y)^=il/(^n')  arising  from  the  change  of  «';  we
are  therefore  justified  in  saying  that  by  i/^  <^  is  changed
into  S,  which  is  symbolically  expressed  by  S^ij/xfuj/y
<f>=z^6il/.  By  these  remarks,  as  I  believe,  the  defini-
tion of  the  notion  of  numbers  given  in  (73)  is  fully
justified.  We  now  proceed  to  further  applications  of
theorem  (126).

XI.
ADDITION  OF  NUMBERS.
135.  Definition.  It  is  natural  to  apply  the  defini-
tion set  forth  in  theorem  (126)  of  a  transformation  ip
of  the  number-series  N,  or  of  the  function  i/r(«)  deter-
mined by  it  to  the  case,  where  the  system  there  de-
noted byn  in  which  the  transform  i/'(A^)  is  to  be  con-
tained, is  the  number-series  iV  itself,  because  for  this
system  fi  a  transformation  ^  of  O  in  itself  already  ex-
ists, viz.,  that  transformation  ^  by  which  iV  is  set  in
order  as  a  simply  infinite  system  (71),  (73).  Then  is
alsoQ  =  A^  6*  («)  =  </)  («)  =  «',  hence

I..,/r(A^)3.V,

and  it  remains  in order  to  determine  i/^  completely

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  97

only  to  select  the  element  w  from  0,  i.  e.,,  from  N,  at
pleasure.  If  we  take  u)=l,  then  evidently  \^  becomes
the  identical  transformation  (21)  of  N,  because  the
conditions

«A(l)  =  l.  «A(«')  =  («A(«))'
are  generally  satisfied  by  ^  («)  =  «.  If  then  we  are  to
produce  another  transformation  «^  of  N,  then  for  m  we
must  select  a  number  m  different  from  1,  by  (78)  con-
tained in  N,  where  m  itself  denotes  any  number ;  since
the  transformation  ^  is  obviously  dependent  upon  the
choice  of  this  number  w,  we  denote  the  correspond-
ing transform  </'(«)  of  an  arbitrary  number  n  by  the
symbol  m-\-n,  and  call  this  number  the  st/m  which
arises  from  the  number  m  by  the  addition  of  the  num-
ber n,  or  in  short  the  sum  of  the  numbers  >//,  n.
Therefore  by  (12G)  this  sum  is  completely  determined
by  the  conditions*

II. «4-  1  —m\
III. w -f  «' =  (« -I- «)'.

1 3r.. Theorem. «'.  -|-  «  =  m  -f  n' .
Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p. the  theorem  is  true  for  «r==l,  since  by  (llir),  II)
ni'  4 1  =:(w')'  =  (w-f  1)',
and  by  (1H5,  III)  (w -f  l)'  =  w+ 1'.

*The  above  Hrfmitinn  of  a<l<lition  based  immadialely  upon  theorem  (ia6i
seems  to  me  to  be  the  simpU-si.  By  the  aid  of  the  notion  developed  10(131)
we  can,  however,  drfini;  tho  tuin  iw-f  w  by  ^"(m)  or  also  by  ^"•(wj,  where  4  has
a^nin  the  forcKoinx  mcaninK-  In  order  to  show  the  complete  aKreemcnt  of
these  definitions  with  the  forcK^inK.  we  need  by  (ti6)  only  to  sliow  that  if
^t[in\  or  ^"'(m)  is  denoted  by  ^'iv),  the  conditions  <^[\\  =  m',  <^{n'\  -.^^(k)  are
fulfilled  which  is  easily  done  with  the  aid  of  complete  indnction  (So;  by  the
help  of  (131).

98  THE  NATURE  AND

0-.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  and  we
put  the  following  number  «'=/,  then  is  w'-j-«=r
ni^p,  hence  also  (;//'+ «)'  =  (w +/)',  whence  by  (135,
III)  m'  -\-p  =  m-\- p';  therefore  the  theorem  is  true
also  for  the  following  number  p,  which  was  to  be
proved.

137.  Theorem, m'  -\-  n  =  {tn  -\-  n)'.

The  proof  follows  from  (136)  and  (135,  III).

138.  Theorem. l-j-n  =  n'.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80).  For
p.  by  (135,  II)  the  theorem  is  true  for  n  =  l.
a-.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n  and  we
put  n'^p,  then  1  -|-  «=/,  therefore  also  (1  -f  n)'=p',
whence  by  (135,  III)  l-\-p=p',  I  e.,  the  theorem  is
true  also  for  the  following  number/,  which  was  to  be
proved.

139.  Theorem. 1  -\-  n  =  n-\-l.

The  proof  follows  from  (138)  and  (135,  II).

140.  Theorem, w  -f-  «  =  «  -|-  ni.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80).  For
p.  by  (139)  the  theorem  is  true  for  n  =  l.
<r.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then  there
follows  also  (m-j-ny  =  (n +  »/)',  I  e.,  by  (135,  III)
m  -\-  »'=  n  -\-  m',  hence  by  (136)  m  -\-  «'=  «'  -f-  w;  there-
fore the  theorem  is  also  true  for  the  following  number
«',  which  was  to  be  proved.

141.  Theorem, (/-\-m')-{- n  =  /-\-{m-\-n).
Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  99

p.  the  theorem  is  true  for  «  =  1,  because  by  (135,
II,  III,  II)  (/+w)  +  ]  =(/+///)'= /+w'= /+('«+ !)•

0-.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  then  there
follows  also  ((/-I- ///)-|-«)'  =  (/-f(w +  «))',  i.e.,  by
(135,  III)

(/+ OT)  H- «' =  /  +  (w  +  «)' = /-t- (w -f  «') ,

therefore  the  theorem  is  also  true  for  the  following
number  n' ,  which  was  to  be  proved.

142.  Theorem. m-\-n'^m.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p.  by  (135,  II)  and  (HI)  the  theorem  is  true  for
«  =  1.

<r.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then  by
(95)  it  is  also  true  for  the  following  number  «',  be-
cause by  (135,  III)  and  (1»1)

w  -f  «'=  (w  -f  «)'>/»  +  «,

which  was  to  be  proved.

143.  Theorem.  The  conditions  w>  a  and  w -|- »>
a-\-n  are  equivalent.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For

p. by  (135,  II)  and  ('.»4)  the  theorem  is  true  for

<r.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  then  is  it
also  true  for  the  following  number  «',  since  by  (94)
the  condition  w  -f  «  >  rz  4  «  is  equivalent  to  (w  -|-  «)'>
(a-|-«)',  hence  by  (135,  III)  also  equivalent  to

w  -f-  «'  >  <»  +  «'»
which  was  to  be  proved.

lOO  THE  NATURE  AND

144.  Theorem. \i  m^ a  and  n^b,  then  is  also

m  -\-  n'^  a  -\-  b.
Proof. For  from  our  hypotheses  we  have  by  (143)
w  +  « > ^  +  «  and  n-\-a^b-\-  a  or,  what  by  (140)  is
the  same,  a  -j-  «  >  a  -f  ^,  whence  the  theorem  follows
by  (95).

145.  Theorem. If  m-\-7i=ia-\-  n,  then  m  =  a.
Proof. For  if  w  does  not  =dr,  hence  by  (90)  either

w>a  or  m<^a,  then  by  (143)  respectively  w  +  «>
a-\-  n  or  w  -f  «  <  a  -f  «,  therefore  by  (90)  we  surely
cannot  have  m-\-  n  =  a-\-  n,  which  was  to  be  proved.

146.  Theorem.  If /^  «,  then  there  exists  one  and
by  (157)  only  one  number  m  which  satisfies  the  con-
dition m-\-  n  =  L

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p. the  theorem  is  true  for  «  =  1. In  fact,  if  />1,
i.  e.,  (89)  if  /  is  contained  in  N' ,  and  hence  is  the
transform  tn'  of  a  number  m,  then  by  (135,  II)  it  fol-
lows that  /^=tn-\- 1,  which  was  to  be  proved.

a.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then  we
show  that  it  is  also  true  for  the  following  number  «'.
In  fact,  if  />  «',  then  by  (91),  (95)  also  />  n,  and  hence
there  exists  a  number  k  which  satisfies  the  condition
l:=k-\-  n  ;  since  by  (138)  this  is  different  from  1  (other-
wise /would  be  =n')  then  by  (78)  is  it  the  transform
tn'  of  a  number  m,  consequently  l=m'  -\-n,  therefore
also  by  (136)  l  =  m-{-n',  which  was  to  be  proved.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  loi

XII.
MULTIPLICATION  OF  NUMBERS.

147.  Definition.  After  having  found  in  XI  an  in-
finite system  of  new  transformations  of  the  number-
series  N  \xi  itself,  we  can  by  (126)  use  each  of  these
in  order  to  produce  new  transformations  ^  of  N.
When  we  take  i\  =  N,  and  H{n)  =  m -{- n  =n-\- m,
where  w  is  a  determinate number,  we  certainlj'  again

have

I.  ,f>(JV)iAr,

and  it  remains,  to  determine  ^  completely  only  to  se-
lect the  element  w  from  JV  at  pleasure.  The  simplest
case  occurs  when  we  bring  this  choice  into  a  certain
agreement  with  the  choice  of  ft,  by  putting  w^-m.
Since  the  thus  perfectly  determinate  ^  depends  upon
this  number  w,  we  designate  the  corresponding  trans-
form fpin)  of  any  numlxr  /;  by  the  symbol  m  X  n  or
m.n  or  mn,  and  call  this  number  the /»ro<///t-/ arising
from  the  number  m  by  multiplication  by  the  number  //,
or  in  short  the  product  of  the  numbers  m,  n.  This
therefore by  (12G) is  completely  determined  by  the

conditions

II. ///.I -: m

III. w  //' w  //  f  m,

148.  Theorem, m' n -  m  n -\- n.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p. by  (147,  II)  and (1:55,  II)  the  theorem is  true
f  or  «  =:^  1 .

I02  THE  NA  TURE  AND

0-. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  we  have
in'  n -{- m'  =  (m  n -{- n) -\-  in

and  consequently  by  (U7,  III), (141), (140),  (136),

(141),  (147,  III)

in'  n'  =  mn-{-{n-\-  m')  =  inn-\-  {m' -\-  n)  ^=mn-\-  {m-\-n')

=  {in  n -\-  111) -\-  n'  r=  m  n'  -\- n' \

therefore  the  theorem  is  true  for  the  following  num-
ber «',  which  was  to  be  proved.

149.  Theorem. l.«  =  «.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p. by  (147,  II)  the  theorem  is  true  for  «  =  1.
XT. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  then  we
have  l.«+l--=«H-l, i.  e.,  by  (147,  III), (135,  II)
1.  «'  =  «',  therefore  the  theorem  also  holds  for  the  fol-
lowing number  «',  which  was  to  be  proved.

150.  Theorem. nin  =  nin.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For

p by  (147,  II),  (149)  the  theorem  is  true  for  n  =  \.

0-. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then  we

have

mn-\-in  =  nin-\-in,

i.  e.,  by  (147,  III),  (148)  inn'  =:n'in,  therefore  the  the-
orem is  also  true  for  the  following  number  «',  which
was  to  be  proved.

151.  Theorem. /(w  +  «)  =  /w  + /«.
Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For

p.  by  (135,  II),  (147,  III), (147,  II) the  theorem
is  true  for  n  =  l.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  103

0-. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  we  have
l(m  \n)-\-l=  (^im  -\-ln)-\-l;
but  by  (147,  III),  (135,  III)  we  have

i{m  -f  «)  -f  /=  i{m  +  «)'  =  l{m  +  «'),
and  by  (141),  (147,  III)

{Im  +  /»)  4-  /=  /»!  +  (/«  +/)  =  /»!  4-  /«',
consequently  /{m-\-  n')  =  /m-\-  /n', i.  e.,  the  theorem
is  true  also  for  the  following  number  n',  which  was  to
be  proved.

152.  Theorem, {m -\- fi)/—m/-]- n/.
The  proof  follows  from  (151),  (150).

153.  Theorem. {/m)n  =  /{rfin).
Proof  by  complete  induction  (SO). For

p. by  (147,  II)  the  theorem  is  true  for  «^1.

a. If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  «,  then  we

have

{/m)n-\-  /m  =  /{mn)-\-  /m,

i.  e.,  by  (147,  III),  (151),  (147,  III)

(^/m)n'  =  /(m ft-}-  m)  =  /(w »') ,
hence  the  theorem  is  also  true  for  the  following  num-
ber «',  which  was  to  be  proved.

154.  Remark.  If  in  (147)  we  had  assumed  no  re-
lation between  w  and  0,  but  had  put  w  =  k,  ${n)  =
m  -\-  n,  then  by  (126)  we  should  have  had  a  less  simple
transformation  ^of  the  number-series  N;  for  the  num-
ber 1  would  ^(1)  =  ^  and  for  every  other  number
(therefore  contained  in  the  form  n)  would  ^(«')  =
mn-\-k\  since  thus  would  be  fulfilled,  as  one  could

104  THE  NATURE  AND

easily  convince  himself  by  the  aid  of  the  foregoing
theorems,  the  condition  i}/{n'^=6il/{n),  i.  e.,  tp{n')  =
m-\-iff{n)  for  all  numbers  n.

XIII.

INVOLUTION  OF  NUMBERS.

155.  Definition.  If  in  theorem  (126)  we  again  put
Q  =  JV,  and  further  u>  =  a,  6{ti)  =  an  =  na,  we  get  a
transformation  (/^  of  iV  which  still  satisfies  the  condi-
tion

I. yp{N)'iN',
the  corresponding  transform  \p{n)  of  any  number  n
we  denote  by  the  symbol  a",  and  call  this  number  a
power  of  the  base  a,  while  n  is  called  the  exponent  of
this  power  of  a. Hence  this  notion  is  completely  de-
termined by  the  conditions
II. a^  =  a
III. a"'  ==za.a"  =  a*'.ao

156.  Theorem. «'"+"  =  rt'" . a".

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p.  by  (135,  II),  (155,  III),  (155,  II)  the  theorem
is  true  for  n=z\.

or.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  we  have
«"'+« .a=^{a"'  .a'')a;
but  by  (155,  III),  (135,111)  a"'+"  .a  =  a^"'+"'' =  a"'+''\
and  by  (153),  (155,111)  {a"" .a")a:z=za'"{a" .a)--=a'" .a"';
hence  a""^"'  =  a'".a"',  i.  e.,  the  theorem  is  also  true  for
the  following  number  n',  which  was  to  be  proved.

157.  Theorem. (<?'")'•  =  «'"''.

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS  105

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80) For
p. by  (155,  II),  (147,  II) the theorem  is  true  for
n  —  \.

<r.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  we  have
(a"")" .  a"'  =  a""" .  a"
but  by  (155,  III)  (a"*)- . a*"  =  (a")-',  and  by  (156),  (147,
III)  a"" .a"  =  0"""^"  =  a'^''  ;  hence  («"•)"=«'""',  i.  e.,
the  theorem  is  also  true  for  the  following  number  n\
which  was  to  be  proved.

158.  Theorem. {ahy  =  a''.l>''.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80).  For
p.  by  (155,  II)  the  theorem  is  true  for  n  =  \.
a.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  »,  then  by
(150),  (153),  (155,  III)  we  have  also  {aby.a  =
a(a-./J")  =  (a.<i")/J-  =  a-".iJ-,  and  ihws' {{a  hy  .a),b  —
{ar'.b-^b;  but  by  (153),  (155,  III)  {(^ahy.a)b  =
{aby .{ab')={af>y',  and  likewise

{a"'  .b'')bz=a'''.{b-.b)  =  a''.b''\
tnerefore  (aby'  =^a'''.b'' ,  i.  e.,  the  theorem  is  also  true
for  the  following  number  //',  which  was  to  be  proved.

XIV.
NUMBER OF  THE ELEMENTS  OF  A  FINITE  SYSTEM.

159.  Theorem.  If  2  is  an  infinite  system,  then  is
every  one  of  the  number-systems  /.^  defined  in  (98)
similarly  transformable  in  2  (i.  e. ,  similar  to  a  part  of
2),  and  conversely.

Proof.  If  2  is  infinite,  then  by  (72)  there  certainly
exists  a  part  T  oi  2,  which  is  simply  infinite,  there-

io6  THE  NATURE  AND

fore  by  (132)  similar  to  the  number-series  iV,  and  con-
sequently by  (35)  every  system  Z„  as  part  of  iVis  sim-
ilar to  a  part  of  T,  therefore  also  to  a  part  of  2,  which
was  to  be  proved.

The  proof  of  the  converse — however  obvious  it
may  appear — is  more  complicated.  If  every  system  Z„
is  similarly  transformable  in  2,  then  to  every  number
n  corresponds  such  a  similar  transformation  a„  of  Z„
that  a„(Z„)3  2.  From  the  existence  of  such  a  series
of  transformations  a„,  regarded  as  given,  but  respect-
ing which  nothing  further  is  assumed,  we  derive  first
by  the  aid  of  theorem  (126)  the  existence  of  a  new
series  of  such  transformations  i/',,  possessing  the  spe-
cial property  that  whenever  m<n,  hence  by  (100)
Z^iZ„,  the  transformation  i/r„,  of  the  part  Z^  is  con-
tained in  the  transformation  xjr^  of  Z„  (21),  i.  e.,  the
transformations  ip^  and  \p„  completely  coincide  with
each  other  for  all  numbers  contained  in  Z„,  hence  al-
ways

In  order  to  apply  the  theorem  stated  to  gain  this  end
we  understand  by  fl  that  system  whose  elements  are
all  possible  similar  transformations  of  all  systems  Z„
in  2,  and  by  aid  of  the  given  elements  a„,  likewise
contained  in  Q,,  we  define  in  the  following  manner
a  transformation  ^  of  O  in  itself.  If  /8  is  any  element
of  fi,  thus,  e.  g.,  a  similar  transformation  of  the  de-
terminate system  Z„  in  2,  then  the  system  a„iZ„,)
cannot  be  part  of  fi(Z„')^  for  otherwise  Z„.  would  be

MEANING  OF  NUAfBERS.  107

similar  by  (35)  to  a  part  of  Z,„  hence  by  (107)  to  a
proper  part  of  itself,  and  consequently  infinite,  which
would  contradict  theorem  (119);  therefore  there  cer-
tainly exists  in  Z„.  one  number  or  several  numbers  p
such  that  a„.  (/)  is  not  contained  in  P{Z„) ;  from  these
numbers /we  select — simply  to  lay  down  something
determinate — always  the  least  k  (96)  and,  since  Z„.  by
(108)  is  compounded  out  of  Z„  and  n',  define  a  trans-
formation y  of  Z„,  such  that  for  all  numbers  w  con-
tained in  Z^  the  transform  y(w)  — /9(w)  and  besides
y(«')^a„.(^);  this  obviously  similar  transformation  y
of  Z^  in  S  we  consider  then  as  a  transform  $(fi)  of  the
transformation  ft,  and  thus  a  transformation  d  of  the
system  O  in  itself  is  completely  defined.  After  the
things  named  O  and  $  in  (12G)  are  determined  we  se-
lect finally  for  the  element  of  O  denoted  by  w  the  given
transformational',  thus  by  (12(;)  there  is  determined
a  transformation  \p  of  the  number-series  A^\n  Q,  which,
if  we  denote  the  transform  belonging  to  an  arbitrary
number  n,  not  by  ^(«)  but  by  ^„  satisfies  the  condi*

tions

II.  ^1=01

III.  ^„.  =  tf(^0

By  complete  induction  (80)  it  results  first  that  ^.  is  a
similar  transformation  of  Z„  in  2;  for

p. by  II  this  is  true  for  «  =  1.

(T.  if  this  statement  is  true  for  a  number  »,  it  fol-
lows from  III  and  from  the  character  of  the  above  de-
scribed transition  $  from  ^  to  y,  that  the  statement  is

io8  THE  NATURE  AND

also  true  for  the  following  number  n' ,  which  was  to  be
proved.  Afterward  we  show  likewise  by  complete  in-
duction (80)  that  if  m  is  any  number  the  above  stated
property

actually  belongs  to  all  numbers  «,  which  are  >  w,  and
therefore  by  (93),  (74)  belong  to  the  chain  ?//„;  in
fact,

p.  this  is  immediately  evident  for  n=^m,  and
<7.  if  this  property  belongs  to  a  number  n  it  follows
again  from  III  and  the  nature  of  6,  that  it  also  belongs
to  the  number  «',  which  was  to  be  proved.  After  this
special  property  of  our  new  series  of  transformations
\p„  has  been  established,  we  can  easily  prove  our  the-
orem. We  define  a  transformation  ;(  of  the  number-
series  N,  in  which  to  every  number  n  we  let  the  trans-
form ;((«)  =  »/r„(«)  correspond;  obviously  by  (21)  all
transformations  }p„  are  contained  in  this  one  trans-
formation x-  Since  i/^„  was  a  transformation  of  Z„  in
2,  it  follows  first  that  the  number-series  iVis  likewise
transformed  by  x  in  %  hence  x(A^)^2.  If  further  m,
n  are  different  numbers  we  may  by  reason  of  sym-
metry according  to  (90)  suppose  nK^n;  then  by  the
foregoing  x(w)  =  i/r,„(z«)  =  i/^„(w),  and  x(«)  =  '/'„(«) ;
but  since  i/^„  was  a  similar  transformation  of  Z„  in  S,
and  w,  n  are  different  elements'  Ot  Z„,  then  is  ^„{ni)
different  from  </'„(«),  hence  also  x(^)  different  from
x(«),  i.  e.,  X  is  a  similar  transformation  of  N.  Since
further  JV  is  an  infinite  system  (71),  the  same  thing

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  109

is  true  by  (67)  of  the  system  \{N^  similar  to  it  and
by  (68),  because  x(-^)  is  part  of  2,  also  of  2,  which
was  to  be  proved.

160.  Theorem.  A  system  2  is  finite  or  infinite,
according  as  there  does  or  does  not  exist  a  system
Z^  similar  to  it.

Proof.  If  2  is  finite,  then  by  (159)  there  exist
systems  Z^  which  are  not  similarly  transformable  in
2;  since  by  (102)  the  system  Z\  consists  of  the  single
number  1,  and  hence  is  similarly  transformable  in
every  system,  then  must  the  least  number  k  (96)  to
which  a  system  Z^  not  similarly  transformable  in  2  cor-
responds be  different  from  1  and  hence  by  (78)  =r«',
and  since  «  <  «'  (91)  there  exists  a  similar  transforma-
tion ^  of  Z„  in  2 ;  if  then  ^{Z^  were  only  a  proper  part
of  2,  i.  e.,  if  there  existed  an  element  a  in  2  not  con-
tained in  1^(7,),  then  since  -^,  ITK/T.,  »')  (108)
we  could  extend  this  transformation  ^  to  a  similar
transformation  ^  of  /T^  in  2  by  putting  ^(«')=:a,  while
by  our  hypothesis  Z^.  is  not  similarly  transformable
in  2.  Hence  ^(Z,)— 2,  i.  e.,  Z„  and  2  are  similar
systems.  Conversely,  if  a  system  2  is  similar  to  a
system  Z„,  then  by  (119),  (67)  2  is  finite,  which  was
to  be  proved.

161.  Definition.  If  2  is  a  finite  system,  then  by
(160)  there  exists  one  and  by  (120),  (33)  only  one
single  number  n  to  which  a  system  Z„  similar  to  the
system  2  corresponds  ;  this  number  n  is  called  the
number  \Anzahl'\  of  the  elements  contained  in  2  (or

no  THE  NATURE  AND

also  the  degree  of  the  system  2)  and  we  say  2  consists
of  or  is  a  system  of  n  elements,  or  the  number  n  shows
/!<?re/ wawy  elements  are  contained  in  2.*  If  numbers
are  used  to  express  accurately  this  determinate  prop-
erty of  finite  systems  they  are  called  cardinal  numbers.
As  soon  as  a  determinate  similar  transformation  \p  of
the  system  Z„  is  chosen  by  reason  of  which  i}/(Z„)=^Z,
then  to  every  number  m  contained  in  Z„  (i.  e.,  every
number  m  which  is  <«)  there  corresponds  a  determi-
nate element  \(/{m)  of  the  system  2,  and  conversely
by  (26)  to  every  element  of  2  by  the  inverse  trans-
formation xj/  there  corresponds  a  determinate  number
m  in  Z„.  Very  often  we  denote  all  elements  of  2  by  a
single  letter,  e.  g.,  a,  to  which  we  append  the  distin-
guishing numbers  m  as  indices  so  that  if/^m)  is  denoted
by  a„.  We  say  also  that  these  elements  are  counted
and  set  in  order  by  \\i  in  determinate  manner,  and  call
a„  the  wth  element  of  2 ;  if  m  <i  n  then  a^.  is  called
the  element  following  a„,  and  a„  is  called  the  last  ele-
ment. In  this  counting  of  the  elements  therefore  the
numbers  m  appear  again  as  ordinal  numbers  (73).

162.  Theorem. All  systems  similar  to  a  finite  sys-
tem possess  the  same  number  of  elements.

The  proof  follows  immediately  from  (33),  (161).

163.  Theorem. The  number  of  numbers  contained
in  Z„,  i.  e. ,  of  those  numbers  which  are  <«,  is  n.

*For  clearness  and  simplicity  in  what  follows  we  restrict  the  notion  of
the  number  throughout  to  finite  systems ;  if  then  we  speak  of  a  number  of  cer-
tain things,  it  is  always  understood  that  the  system  whose  elements  these
things  are  is  a  finite  system.

4

MEANING  OF  NUAfBERS.  \\\

Proof. For  by  (32)  Z„  is  similar  to  itself.

164.  Theorem.  If  a  system  consists  of  a  single
element,  then  is  the  number  of  its  elements  =1,  and
conversely.

The  proof  follows  immediately  from  (2),  (26),  (32),
(102),  (161).

165.  Theorem.  If  T  is  proper  part  of  a  finite  sys-
tem 2,  then  is  the  number  of  the  elements  of  T'less
than  that  of  the  elements  of  2.

Proof.  By  (68)  T'  is  a  finite  system,  therefore
similar  to  a  system  Z„,  where  m  denotes  the  number
of  the  elements  of  T\  if  further  n  is  the  number  of
elements  of  2,  therefore  2  similar  to  Z„  then  by  (35)
T\s  similar  to  a  proper  part  E  of  Z,  and  by  (33)  also
Z„  and  E  are  similar  to  each  other ;  if  then  we  were
to  have  n<m,  hence  Z„  iZ„,  by  (7)  E  would  also  be
proper  part  of  Z^,  and  consequently  Z„  an  infinite
system,  which  contradicts  theorem  (119);  hence  by
(90),  «  <  «,  which  was  to  be  proved.

166.  Theorem.  If  r='lXliB,  y),  where  B  denotes
a  system  of  n  elements,  and  y  an  element  of  F  not
contained  in  B,  then  T  consists  of  «'  elements.

Proof.  For  if  B  =  \j/{Z„),  where  ^  denotes  a  sim-
ilar transformation  of  Z,,  then  by  (105),  (108)  it  may
be  extended  to  a  similar  transformation  ^  of  Z„.,  by
putting  ^(«')=rry,  aud  we  get  ^(Z„.)  =  r,  which  wis  to
be  proved.

167.  Theorem. If  y  is  an  element  of  a  system  T

112  THE  NA  TURE  AND

consisting  of  n  elements,  then  is  n  the  number  of  all
other  elements  of  F.

Proof.  For  if  B  denotes  the  aggregate  of  all  ele-
ments in  r  different  from  y,  then  is  r=^2n(^,  y);  if
then  b  is  the  number  of  elements  of  the  finite  system
B,  by  the  foregoing  theorem  //  is  the  number  of  ele-
ments of  r,  therefore  =«',  whence  by  (26)  we  get
b  =  n,  which  was  to  be  proved.

168.  Theorem.  If  A  consists  of  m  elements,  and
B  oi  n  elements,  and  A  and  B  have  no  common  ele-
ment, then  Vil{A,  B)  consists  of  m -\-  «  elements.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80). For
p. by  (166), (164),  (135,  II)  the  theorem  is  true
for  «  =  1.

cr.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  then  is  it
also  true  for  the  following  number  «'.  In  fact,  if  V  is
a  system  of  n  elements,  then  by  (167)  we  can  put
r  =  21T(^,  y)  where  y  denotes  an  element  and  B  the
system  of  the  n  other  elements  of  F.  If  then  ^  is  a
system  of  m  elements  each  of  which  is  not  contained
in  F,  therefore  also  not  contained  in  B,  and  we  put
V[l{A,  B)z='^,  by  our  hypothesis  m-\-n  is  the  number
of  elements  of  2,  and  since  y  is  not  contained  in  2,
then  by  (166)  the  number  of  elements  contained  in
VfliX  y)  =  (w  +  «'),  therefore  by  (135,  III)  =r;w-f «';
but  since  by  (15)  obviously  211(2,  y)  =  7ri(,A,  B,  y)  =
TXliA,  F),  then  is  m-{-  n  the  number  of  the  elements
of  TXl{^A,  F),  which  was  to  be  proved.

169.  Theorem. If  A,  B  are  finite  systems  of  m,  n

MEANING  OF  NUMBERS.  113

elements  respectively,  then  is  TXii^A,  j9)  a  finite  sys-
tem and  the  number  of  its  elements  is  <w-|-  «.

Proof.  If  B'^A,  then  IXiiA,  B')  =  A,  and  the
number  tn  of  the  elements  of  this  system  is  by  (142)
<;««-}-«>  as  was  stated.  But  if  .5  is  not  part  of  ^,
and  T  is  the  system  of  all  those  elements  of  B  that
are  not  contained  in  A,  then  by  (165)  is  their  number
pKn,  and  since  obviously

in^A,  B)  =  m{A,  T),
then  by  (143)  is  the  number  m-\-p  of  the  elements  of
this  system  <w-j-  «»  which  was  to  be  proved.

170.  Theorem.  Every  system  compounded  out  of
a  number  n  of  finite  systems  is  finite.

Proof  by  complete  induction  (80).  For
p.  by  (8)  the  theorem  is  self-evident  for  n  =  \.
<T.  If  the  theorem  is  true  for  a  number  n,  and  if  2
is  compounded  out  of  n  finite  systems,  then  let  A  be
one  of  these  systems  and  B  the  system  compounded
out  of  all  the  rest;  since  their  number  by  (167)  =«,
then  by  our  hypothesis  .5  is  a  finite  system.  Since
obviously  2  =  211  (-4,  B),  it  follows  from  this  and  from
(169)  that  2  is  also  a  finite  system,  which  was  to  be
proved.

171.  Theorem.  If  i/'  is  a  dissimilar  transformation
of  a  finite  system  2  of  /r  elements,  then  is  the  number
of  elements  of  the  transform  ^(  2)  less  than  «.

Proof.  If  we  select  from  all  those  elements  of  2
that  possess  one  and  the  same  transform,  always  one
and  only  one  at  pleasure,  then  is  the  system  T  of  all

114  THE  NATURE  AND

these  selected  elements  obviously  a  proper  part  of
%  because  i/r  is  a  dissimilar  transformation  of  S  (26).
At  the  same  time  it  is  clear  that  the  transformation
by  (21)  contained  in  «/r  of  this  part  T'is  a  similar  trans-
formation, and  that  i/'(7')  =  i/^(2)  ;  hence  the  system
^(2)  is  similar  to  the  proper  part  T'of  2,  and  conse-
quently our  theorem  follows  by  (162),  (165).

172.  Final  remark.  Although  it  has  just  been
shown  that  the  number  m  of  the  elements  of  i^(2)  is
less  than  the  number  n  of  the  elements  of  2,  yet  in
many  cases  we  like  to  say  that  the  number  of  ele-
ments of  (/r(2)^«.  The  word  number  is  then,  of
course,  used  in  a  different  sense  from  that  used
hitherto  (161);  for  if  a  is  an  element  of  2  and  a  the
number  of  all  those  elements  of  2,  that  possess  one
and  the  same  transform  i/^(a)  then  is  the  latter  as  ele-
ment of  «/'(2)  frequently  regarded  still  as  representa-
tive of  a  elements,  which  at  least  from  their  deriva-
tion may  be  considered  as  different  from  one  another,
and  accordingly  counted  as  «-fold  element  of  i/'(2).
In  this  way  we  reach  the  notion,  very  useful  in  many
cases,  of  systems  in  which  every  element  is  endowed
with  a  certain  frequency-number  which  indicates  how
often  it  is  to  be  reckoned  as  element  of  the  system.
In  the  foregoing  case,  e.  g.,  we  would  say  that  n  is
the  number  of  the  elements  of  1/^(2)  counted  in  this
sense,  while  the  number  in  of  the  actually  different
elements  of  this  system  coincides  with  the  number  of
the  elements  of  T. Similar  deviations  from  the  orig-

MEANING  QF  NUMBERS.  115

inal  meaning  of  a  technical  term  which  are  simply  ex-
tensions of  the  original  notion,  occur  very  frequently
in  mathematics ;  but  it  does  not  lie  in  the  line  of  this
memoir  to  go  further  into  their  discussion.
