A Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain (Daniel Defoe, 1724)
==========================================================
Defoe's pioneering work of travel writing and social observation; the first comprehensive survey of Britain's economy and society before the Industrial Revolution. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive item bim_eighteenth-century_a-tour-thro-the-whole-i_defoe-daniel_1762_1 (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_a-tour-thro-the-whole-i_defoe-daniel_1762_1) and Internet Archive item tourthrowholeisl02defouoft (https://archive.org/details/tourthrowholeisl02defouoft) and Internet Archive item bim_eighteenth-century_a-tour-thro-the-whole-i_defoe-daniel_1762_3 (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_a-tour-thro-the-whole-i_defoe-daniel_1762_3) and Internet Archive item tourthrowholeisl04defouoft (https://archive.org/details/tourthrowholeisl04defouoft).

* 
# * 
oe 
. 
* 
ö % 
— 
. 
| * 
. 
* 
i 

( my {1 y 

Wt Ae ; 

j iy 1 > 

ill 0 itt 
0 Fü 
Haun 
4 
— 
* 
5 - 
» 
o 
& £ : 
2 5 
\ 
1 — 
pe 
4 — 
I * 
= 
* 
5 


, 
- 
' 
13 
4 
4 
- 
\ 
p 
* * 
» 
— 
” 
*» 
Vs a 
CY 
Oe EI TI eo ee es erg ons ian emmy ni, 8 


IT © 


Thro' the Whole ISLAND of 


lex E BRITAIN. 


Divided into 
Cixcurrs 07” JOURNIES. 


Containing, 

I. A DESCRIPTION of the | Palaces, vba, NY Li- 
Principal Cities and Towns, bra ries, Shipping in the Tbamer, 
their Situation, Gov ernment, and Trade, by means of that 

and Commerce. noble River, Ec. 

II. The Cuſtoms, Manners, Ex- V. The Produce and Improve 
erciſes, Diverſions, and Em- ment of the Lands, the Trade 
ployments, of the People, and Manufactures, 

III. The NatureandVirtue of the Vi. The Sea Ports and Fortifica- 
many Medicinal Springs with tions, the Courſe of Rivers, ant 
which both Parts of the united | the Inland Navigation. 
Kingdom abound; particularly VII. The Public Edifices, Seats, 

EX . thoſe of Bath, Tunbridge, Bri- and Palaces, of the NonBir1TY 

= /-/, Cheltenham, Moffat, Kc. and Gentry, 

iv. An ample Deſcription of VIII. The Ifles of dh Scilly, 


London, including Weſtminſter Portland, Ferſey, Guern FEA 
and Saunboark, their Br:dges, And the other Ong 2755 and 
Squares, Hoſpitals, Churches, ih Illes of moſt 3 


Inter ſperſed with Uſeful Ons ERVATITOxs. 


particularly, fitted for the Peruſal of ſuch as deſire 
Trarel over the IS LAND. 


By a GENTLEMAN. 
"The SIXTH EDITION. 


With very great Additions, Improvements, and Corrections; which 
bring it down to the End of the Year 1761. 


5 123 I 


5 


— 


In Four VOLUMES. 


"With an INDE X to Fer J. olume. 
= OE: J. 


ZL MM . 
Printed for D. Browne, T. Os Borne, C. Hire and © 
L. Hawss, A. MilLas, J. BuckLawy, J. Riviso- 
TON, S. CROWDER and Cꝰ. W. JounsToN, T. Loxo- 
MAN, T. Lowrpks, B. Law and _ T. Cas Long. 


Wo and G. Eng. 1762. : EY 


8 WO TTER a2 -44 N 
P 


| , A , 
4 ” a : & * 
4 a _— 8 2 - 
. 1 * * L 
7 | 8 L Q ? 2 ; . 
* 1 , 


HE kind Reception which the 
[fy 7 8) ſeveral Editions of this Work 
Ent have met with, makes it need- 
les to trouble the Reader with a 
long Preface, _ SET . 
How Ev RR, it would be doing Injuſtice 
to the Original Author, as well as depriving 
the Reader of the Satisfaction he ought to 
have in knowing how much he may de- 

pend on the Merits of the Piece, if we did 

not tranſcribe the following Account which 
he gives of the Pains he took, and how well 

qualified he was for ſuch a Taf. 


TE Preparations for this Work, 
* ſays he, have been ſuitable to the Au- 
© thor's earneſt Concern for its Uſefulneſs, 
© Seventeen very large Circuits, or Journeys, 


; » a 
bo IE been taken through Gören Parts Ms : 
J rately, and Three general Tours over 
< almoſt the whole Engliſh 


PREFACE: 


Part of the 


3 
J ot OH 
EP 


"Aland; in all which the Author has not 
been wanting to treaſure up juſt Remarks 


_.© upon particular Places and Things; ſo i 


that he is very little in Debt to other 


” « Bevivrs theft ſeveral Journies i in Eng- 
and, he has alſo lived ſome time in Scot- 
land, and has travelled critically over great | 


c Part of it : He has viewed the North Part 


« of England, and the South Part of Scot- 
. Jars, Five ſeveral times over. 
is hinted here, to let the Readers know, 
« what Reaſon they have to be ſatisfy d with 
« the Authority of the Relation; and that 
the Accounts here given are not the Pro- 
duce ofa curſory View, or raiſed upon the | 


1 borrowed LH of other Obſervers.” 
| Tr1s was Part of the Author's Preface Þ 


to his F irſt Edition. 


All which 


Mens Labours, and gives but very few 
Accounts of Things but what he has been 
an Bye-Witnos, of himſelf. 


Tur ſucceeding Editions, and particu- W 
rip the TT 1 have received great Im- 
| ” provements, 3 


ver 


10t 


rks | 


ace 


; lay, public - ſpirited Work, 


PREFACE =» 


provements, as well as very conſiderable 


$ Additions ; which not only Time, but the 
Erecting of new Structures, the Adorning 

of many fine Seats, and the Alterations in 

Harbours, Ports, . Havens, made neceſ- 
ſary to be taken notice of. Such Changes 
will always happen, as leave Room for 
Improvement in a Work of this Nature. 


And here it becomes us thankfully to ac- 


knowlege ourſelves indebted to e 
worthy Gentlemen, who have kindly com- 
municated to us many curious and intereſts 

ing Particulars. | 


WIr I reſpect to the preſent Edition, 


A beſides what has been hinted above, it is 
proper to add, that the Whole is brought 
down to the Year 1761 ; and it might be 
thought by ſome ungrateful i in us, if we did 
not acknowilege ourſelves indebted for many 
jof our later Obſervations, and Accounts of 
| Improvements and Alterations owing to 


ime and particular Circumſtances and 
Attempts, to a truly valuable, and, we may 


Political RY of Great Britain. 8 


SEVERAL Gentlemen having expreſſed 
: Deſire of having a Set of Maps, of a pro- 


f Der and to bind with the 5 Edition 
| of 


intitled, Me 


vi EEE PCH. 
of this Work, the Proprietors engaged ſe - 
veral eminent Geographers and Engravers 
to draw and engrave, in a neat Manner, a 
new Set of Maps of Great Britain, and the 
ſmaller Iſlands, with general Maps of Eng- 
land and Scotland, on a larger Scale than any i 
Maps of this Size have been drawn. Theſe 
met with Approbation, whether inſerted in 
their proper Places in the Work, or bound 
by themſelves in a Pocket Volume. In 
them (for the Benefit of Travellers) are 
included Tables of the High and Croſs 
Roads to the ſeveral Cities and Towns, the 
M.iarket-Days, Diſtances in meaſured Miles 
from London, or from Town to Town nd 1 
other uſeful 1 13 
hs | > 5 Io 


* 
4 


„ 
FS 
* 
4 
— £ 1 8 3 
2 * 1 Gy n * 1 * 1 2 LE 0 4 7 I 5 * n 5 
ee eo e Os 


[<oNTENTS 
e g 


VOLUME L 


"Ta £5 © TER C 


A Deſcription of Part of the County of Ef. 
ſex, and of the County of Suffolk, Sc. 
Page I 


en, Te 


PA eee eee + wet: 


E LETTER 
A Deſtription of the Counties of Norfolk and 
Cambridge, and ba- N of RUS! not touched 
on in the former, 1 25254 


e LE a 

A Deſcription of the County of Kent, &c. 12 3 
LETTER N 

A Deſcription of the County of Suſſex, other 


Par of Kent, and Part of Haats, Surry, | 
VE: E 


L ET. 


N. 


w CONTENTS. 
P 
o 4 Deſeription of Part of the County of Middle. : 
ſex, Part ef Hants, and the County of 
58 Sc. N 25% T 

IL ET TE R VL = 


A Deſcription of the County of Dorſet, Part of 
Somerſetſhire, Devonſhire, Cornwall, Se. 
| 916 


: LETTER VIL = 
41 more particular Deſcription of the Scilly Ilan ds, 
than bad been given before, . | 389 


Through the Is LAN D 500 


| GREAT BRITAIN. 


""_ tt. 
ANTE 1 


LETTER IL 
A DESCRIPTION of Part of the County 
of ESSEX, and of the County ane 


FN Sc. 


| STR, 
CN RSS Y FI: ET out from Ke on my Firſt 1 


Se ney, Eaſtward; and took a Circuit down 
by the Coaſt of the Thames through the 
Marſhes or Hundreds, on the South-ſide 
of the county of Ehe, to Malden, Col- 
TW: and Harwich, thence continuing on the Coaſt 
Sf Seit to Yarmouth ; ; thence round by the Edge of 
he Sea, on the North and Weſt⸗-ſide of Norfolk, to 
in, i Mich, and the wh thence back again on 
Vor. I, the 


£ , 


* 


the North · ſide of S gt; thence into the County of 
Cambridge; and fo to the Weſt- part of Z/ſex, ending 
it in Mi adleſex, near the place where I began: reſerv- 
ing the Middle or Centre of the ſeveral Counties to 
ſome little Excurſions, which I made by themſelves. 
After we have paſſed Mile-End, as it is called, 
Part of the Town not thinly inhabited) the firſt Vi. 
lage we come to is Bow, where a large Manufactory 
of Porcelain is carried on. T hey have already made 
large Quantities of Tea- cups, Saucers, Plates, Diſhes, 
Tureins, and moſt other Sorts of uſeful Porcelain; 
- which, though not ſo fine as ſome made at Chelſea, or 


as that brought from Dre/den, is much ſtronger than 


either, and therefore better for common Uſe; and, being 


much cheaper than any other China, there is a greater 


Demand for it. The Proprietors of this Manufactory 


have alſo procured ſome very good Artiſts in Painting, 
who are employed in painting ſome of their fineſt Sort 


of Porcelain, and is ſo well performed, as to equal moſt 


of that from Dreſaen in this Reſpect. If they can work 
this, ſo as to underſell the foreign Porcelain, it may 
become a very profitable Buſine's to the Undertakers, 
and ſave great Sums to the Public, which are annually 
ſent abroad for this Commodity. 
Paſſing Boto- Bridge, where the County of Eſſex 
begins, ] came firſt to the Village of Sirarfarth, which 
is erent! iy increaſed of late Years i in Houſes and Inha- 
bitants, every Vacancy being filled up, in a manner, 
with che Addition of two little new-built Hamlets, as 
they may be called, on the Foreſt-ſide of the Town ; 
namely, Maryland Point, and the Grade! Pits, one 
facing the Road to „ vodford and Epping, and the 
other that to yard. As for the Hither-part, it is 
almoſt joined to Bow, in ſpite of Rivers Canals, 


! Mzrſby grounds, Tc, 


Tux fame Increaſe of Buildings may be hes pro- 
portionally in the other Villages adjacent, eſpecially on 


the F oreſt- Age, ag at Low be) View, Layton ſtone, | al. 
hamſter 


=... 4 TOUR th Eſſex. 


Eſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. 


tham/low, I IVaodfard, WWanſted, Wet: Ham, Plato, 

Upton, &c. and this, generally ſpeaking, of handſome 
targe Houſes, from 200. to 501. a Year, being chiefly 
the Habitations of the rich Citizens, who are able to. 
kcep'a Country-Houſe, as well as a Ton one, or of 
ſuch as have left off Trade altogether. This is ſo 


apparent, that, they tell me, there are no leſs than 200 


Coaches kept by the Inhabitants within the Circum- 
ference of the few Villages named above, beſides ſuch 
as are kept by accidental Lodgers. 

There have been diſcerned of late Yeurs; in the 


| Bottom of Hackney- marſb, between Old. Ford and the 


Agel, the Remains of a great Stone Cauſeway, which 
is ſuppoſed to have been the Highway, or great Road, 
from Landon to Eſſex, inſtead of that which now 
leads over the Bridge between Bow and Stratford. 
That the great "Road lay this Way, and that the 
ereat Cauſeway continued juſt over the River, where 
now the Temple-Mills ſtand, and paſſed by Sir Henry 
Hicks's Houſe at Ruckhelt, is not doubted ; and that it 
was one of thoſe famous Highways made by the 
Romans there is undeniable Proof, by the ſeveral 


Marks of Roman. Work, and by Roman Coins, and 


other Antiquities, found "there: ſome of which were 


collected by the late Reverend Mr, Strype, Vicar of 


Low-Layton, 


The Land in the Neivhboutliood of Stratford, 


AMaryland- Point, &c. has of late Years'been much 


Improved by the Cultivation of Potatoes, which have 
increaſed ſo much, as that ſome hundred Acres are 
annually planted there; and the digging of the Land, 
together with the dreſſing it for the Potatoes, as alſo 
when the Roots are dug up, prepares the Ground ſo 
well, that whatever is ſown or planted afterwards ſuc- 
ceeds to Admiration. But by the Culture of theſe 
Roots, the great Tythes of theſe Pariſhes are reduced 
to leſs than half of their former Value, ſince it has been 


- UB x3: 1 5 detetmined 


E — 


| 4 | T 0 0 R rhro Eſſex. 
1 that the Tythe of Potatoes belongs to the 
„ =: 3 | 25 N 
From hence the great Road paſſed up to Layton 
one, a Place known now by the Sign of the Green- 
Man, formerly a Lodge upon the Edge of the Foreſt; 
and, crofling by N anſtead houſe, the noble Seat of Earl 


Tilney, went over the ſame River, which we now crofs 


4 at ford; and, paſſing that Part of the great Foreſt 


called Henault- Fore/?, came into the preſent great 
Road, a little on this Side the Jha/ebone, a Place fo 
called, becauſe a Rib-bone of a large Whale, taken in 
the River of Thames, was fixed there in 1658, the Year 
that Oliver Cromwell died. | | : 

According to my Intention, of effectually view- | 
ing the Sea-coaſts of £Z//ex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, I 
went from Stratford to Barking, a large Market-town, 
_ chiefly inhabited by Fiſhermen, whoſe Smacks ride in 
the Thames, at the Mouth of Barking Creek, from 
whence their Fiſh are ſent up to London, to the Market 
at Billingſgate, in ſmall Boats, Pap 7 
TPhheſe Fiſhing- ſmacks are very uſeful Veſſels to the 

Public upon many Occaſions ; as particularly in time 
of War they are uſed as Preſs- ſmacks, running to all 
the Northern and Weſtern Coaſts to pick up Seamen 
to man the Navy, when any Expedition is at hand, 
that requires a ſudden Equipment. At other times, 
being excellent Sailors, they are Tenders to particular 
Men of War, and, on an Expedition, they have been 
made uſe of as Machines, for the blowing up fortified 
Ports, as formerly at St Malo, and other Places. 

The Pariſh of Barking is very er and has two 
Chapels of Eaſe, to wit, one at ford, and one on the 

Side ot the Foreſt, called New chapel. 

This Side of the County is rather. rich from the 
Nature of its Land, than from the Number of its Inha- 
bitants, which is occaſioned by the Unhealthineſs of 
the Air; for theſe low Marſh-grounds, which, with 
al! the South- ſide of the County, have been gained, 


No 
49 


8 


2 


Eſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. 


as it were, out of the River Thames, and the Sea, 


{ where the River is wide-enough to be called ſo, begin 


here, or rather at /Ye/t- Ham, by Stratford, and extend 
themſelves from hence Eaſtward; growing wider, till 
we come beyond Tilbury, when the flat Country lies 
ſix, ſeven, or eight Miles in Breadth, and is both un- 


healthy and unpleaſant, 


However, it is very good Farming in the Marſhes, 


becauſe the Landlords let good Penyworths, though 


the Land is rich; for, it being a Place where every 
body cannot live, thoſe that venture it will have En- 
couragement; and it is but reaſonable they ſhould. 

In paſſing from Barking to Dagenham, we ſaw the 
Place where was the famous Breach, that laid near 


5000 Acres of Land under Water; but which, after 


near ten Years Inundation, and the Works being 
ſeveral times blown up, was at laſt effectually ſtopped _ 
by Captain Perry, who for ſeveral Years had been em- 
ployed in the Czar of Muſcovy's Works, at Veronitza, 
on the River Don. | | 175 
Great Part of the Lands in theſe Levels, eſpecially 


thoſe on this Side Ea/?-Tilbury, are held by the 


Farmers, Cow-keepers, and Grafing- Butchers, who 


live in and near London, and generally ſtock them witi 


Lincolnſhire and Leiceſterſhire Wethers (which they 
buy in Smithfield, in September and October, when the 
Graſiers ſell off their Stocks), and feed here till Chriſt- 


mas or Candlemas; and, though they are not made 
much fatter here than when bought in, yet very good 


Advantage accrues by the Difference of the Price of 
Mutton between Adichaelmas, when cheapeſt, and 
Candlemas, when deareſt ; and this is what the But- 


chers call, by way of Excellence, right Marſh Mutton. 
| This Mutton is generally taken, by Perſons who are 
ignorant in the Choice of Meat, to be turnep-fed, be- 


cauſe the Fat generally turns yellowiſh; but this is a 
great Miſtake; for the Sheep, which are fatted with 


13 deſigued the Works at Sheerneſs. The Eſplanade of 


6 0 TO UR thro Eſſex. 
1 are by far the beſt of any killed for the 
r 

At the End of theſe Marſhes, cloſe to the Edge of 
the River, ſtands 7:/bury- Fort, which may julily be | 
looked upon as the Key of the City of London : It is a 
regular Fortification: the Deſign of it was a Pentagon, | 
but the Water-baſtion, as it ſhould have been called, 
was never built : the Plan was laid out by Sir Mertin 
Beckman, chief Engineer to King Charles II. who allo 


the Fort is very large, and the Baſtivns the largeſt of 
any in England. The Foundation is laid upen Piles 
Uriven down two an End of one another, ſo far, till 
they were aſſured they were below the Chanel of the 
River, and that the Piles, which were ſhod with Iron, 
entered into the ſolid Chalk-rock, adjoining to the 
Chalk- hills on the other Side, 
The Works to the Land -lide are complete; the 
Baſtions are faced with Brick. There is a double 
Ditch or Moat, the innermoſt of which is 180 Feet 
broad; a good Counterſcarp, and a Covered Way 
marked out, with Ravelins and rg but they 
have not been completed. 
On the Land- ſide there are alſo two ſmall Redoubts 
of Brick; but the chief Strength of this Fort on the 
Land- ſide conſiſts in being able to lay the whole Level 
under Water, and ſo to make it impoſſible for an Ene- BY 
my to carry on Approaches that Way, 
On the Side next the River, is a very ſtrong Cur- 
tin, with a noble Gate called the //atergate in the 
Middle, and the Ditch is paliſadoed. At the Place 
where the Water-baſtion was deſigned to be built, and 
which, by the Plan, ſhould run wholly out into the 
err, ſo as to flank the two Curtins, on each Side, 
Rands an high Tower, which, they tell us, was built 
in Queen Elizabetb's Time, and was called the Black- 


Fes 
5 ore this Curtin is a Platform in the Place of n 
| 5 Counter- 


13 „ OO KO & 1 


Md 


Filer  Girar BiYTarn,  _ WM 


Counterſcarp, on which are planted 106 Cannon, ge · 
nerally carrying from 24 to 46 Pound Ball; a Batte 
ſo terrible, as to ſhew the Conſequence of that Place: 


beſides which, there are ſmaller Pieces planted between 


them; and the Baſtions and Curtins alſo are planted 
with Guns, fo that they muſt be bold Fellows who 
will venture in the biggeſt Ships to paſs ſuch a Battery, 
if the Men appointed to ſerve the Guns do their 


Duty. | > 


From hence there is nothing for many Miles to- 
gether remarkable, but a continued Level of unhealthy 
Marthes, called The Three Hundreds, till we come before 
Leigh, and to the Mouth of the Rivers Chelmer and 
Blackwater, ſaving that the Towns of Horndon, Ray- 
ley, and Rochford, lie near the Sea-coaſt, extending in 


the Order J have named, but are of no Note. The 


above Rivers, united, make a large Firth, or Inlet of 
the Sea, which our Fiſhermen and Seamen, who uſe it 
as a Port, call Malden-water. | 

In this Inlet is ere Oyth Iſland, fo well known 
by our London Men of Pleafure for producing vaſt 
Numbers of Wild-ducks, Mallards, Teals, and Wi⸗ 


geons, that the Iſland ſeems covered with them at 
certain times of the Year, and they go from London for 


the Pleaſure of Shooting; and often come home with 


an Eſſer Ague on their Backs, which they find an 


heavier Load than the Fowls they have ſnot. | 
On the Shore, beginning a little below Candy //and, 


or Leigh Road, lies a great Shoal or Sand, called the 
Black Tail, which runs out near three Leagues intothe - 


Sea, due Eaſt; at the End of it ſtands a Pole or Maſt, 


ſet up by the Trinity-houſe of London, as a Sea-mark : 
this is called Shze-beacon, from the Point of Land 
where this Sand begins, which is called Shoeberry-neſs, 
from a Town of that Name, which ſtands by it 


From this Sand, and on the Edge of Shoeberry before 
it, or South-weſt of it, all along, to the Mouth of 
Colche/ter-water, the Shore is full of Shoals and Sands, 

| ö with 


+ Is A TOUR thro' 1 


with ſome deep Channels between; all which are ſo 
full of Fiſh, that the Barking Smacks are well em- 
ployed here, and the Shore ſwarms, beſides, with ſmall | 


|  Fither-boats, belonging to the Villages and Towns on 
the Coaſt, which come in every Tide with what they 


take; and, ſelling the ſmaller Fiſh in the Country, 
ſend the beſt and largeſt upon Horſes, which travel 
Night and Day, to London Market. 

f On this Shore alſo are taken the beſt and moſt re- 
liſhing, though not the largeſt, Oyſters in England. 
The Spot from whence they have their Appellation is 
a little Bank called Moel fleet, in the Mouth of the 
River Crouch, called Crook/ea-water ; but the chief 
Place where theſe Oyſters are now had is from 
venboe, and the Shores adjacent, whither they are 
brought by the Fiſhermen, who take them at the 


5 Mouth of Colhefier-water, and about the Sand they 


call the Spits, and carry them up to Myvenboe, where 
they are laid in Beds or Pits on the Shore to feed, as 
they call it; and then, being barrelled up, and 3 : 
to Colchefter, which is but three Miles off, they are ſent 
to London by Land, and are from thence called Col- 
che/7er Oyſters. A great Quantity of theſe Oyſters are 
brought from the Coaſt of Sſſex, near Begnar, where 
8 have ſeen more than a Dozen Veſſels together dredg- 
ing for Oyſters, which were carried to Calchter and 
laid in their Beds. 
Thhke following ſhort Account of the Nature of theſe 
green or Colcheter Oyſters, and the Manner of me- 
ing them, cannot fail of being acceptable. 
In the Month of May the Oyſters caſt their 
© Spawn, which the 1 call hop Spat. It re- 
ſembles a Drop of Candle - greaſe, and is about the 
Bigneſs of an Halfpeny. The Spat cleaves to Stones, 
old Oyſter ſhells, Pieces of Wood, and ſuch- like 
© things = the Bottom of the Sea, which they call 
* Cultch. It is probably conjectured, that the Mat, in 
24 Hours, begins to have a Shell. | 


K 6 tf 


6 


In 


* 


* 


R K K K A A K c _@a_ 


ga Fad fa o ͤᷣͤ K ͤ K 
A R K M 3a 


R K KM M m mW M K _ @a 


A A „ „ 


XR „ 


Eſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. 6 


In the Month of May the Dredgers (by the Law 


of the Admiralty. r have Liberty to catch all 


manner of Oyſters, of what Size ſoever. When 
they have taken them, with a Kniſe they raiſe the 
ſmall Breed from the Cultch ; and then they throw 
the Cultch in again, to preſerve the Ground for the 
future, unleſs they be ſo newly ſpat, that they cannot 


be ſafely ſever'd from the Cultch : In that Caſe they 


are permitted to take the Stone or Shell, &c. that 
the Spat is upon; one Shell having many times 20 
Spats. 


4 "After the Month of May it is F elony to carry 


away the Cultch, and puniſhable to take any other 
Oyſters, unleſs it be thoſe of Size, that is to ſay, 
3 the Bigneſs of an Half- crown Piece, or when 
the Shells being ſhut, a fair Shilling will rattle be- 


tween them. 
« The Places where theſe Oyſters are chiefly e 


are called the Pontburnbam, Malden, and Colu- 


waters : The latter takes it Names from the River 
Coln, which paſſes by Colche/ter, gives Name to that 
Town, and runs into a Creek of the Sea, at a Place 
called the Hythe, being the Suburbs of the Town. 

This Brood, and other Oyſters, they carry to 


Creeks of the Sea, at Brickelſea, Merſea, Lagno, 


Faringrego, WL \yvenhae, Tolesbury, and Salt Coaſe, and 


there throw them into the Channel, which they call 
their Beds, or Layers, where they grow and fatten z  ** 


and in two or three Years the ſmalleſt Brood will be 


Oyſters of the Size aforeſaid. Thoſe Oyſters, which 


they would bave green, they put into Pits about three 
Feet deep in the Salt-marſhes, which have over 
flowed only at Spring-tides, to which they have 
Sluices, and let out the Salt-water untill it is about 


a Foot and a half deep. 


The Pits in which the Otter become green, 
are thoſe which are only overlowed by the dea in 


Spring Tides; lo that during the Neap Lides a green 
Bs Scum 


+: 1 4 OUR thro 


a 


E᷑ſſex. 
© Scum. is formed over the Surface of the Water, 
which being taken in by the Fiſh daily, gives them 
their green Colour, for which Reaſon the People 
Of. Colcheſter never chuſe to eat the geen Oyſters, 
but always prefer the white, believing them to be 
more wholeſome. | 

« The Oyſters, when the Tide comes in, lie with 
their belle Shell downwards; and, when it goes 


„ 


0 


. out, they turn on the other Side. They remove not 


from their Place, unleſs in cold Weather, to cover 
themſelves in the Ooze. 
© The Reaſon of the Scarcity of Oyſters, and con- 
© ſequently of their Dearneſs, is, becauſe they are of 
* late Years bought up by the Dutch, 

- £ There are great Penalties by the Admiralty-Court 
c laie upon thoſe that fiſh out of thoſe Grounds which 
the Court appoints, or that deſtroy the Cultch, or 
© that take Oyfters that are not of Size, or that do not 
© tread under their Feet, or throw upon the Shore, a 
< Fiſh which they call a Five finger, reſembling the 
© Rowel of a Spur, becauſe that Fiſh gets into the 
'< Oyſters when they gape, and ſucks them out, 
© The Reaſon why ſuch a Penalty is ſet upon any | 
that ſhall deſtroy the Cultch, is, becauſe they find, 
that, if that be taken away, the Ooze will increaſe g 
and then Muſſels and Cockles will breed there, and 
deſtroy the Oyſters, they having not whereon to 
ſtick their Spat. © || 
The Oyfters are fick after they have ſpat, but in 
June and July they begin to mend, and in Augu/# WE 
< they are perfectly well. The Male Optter i is Black- 
© fick, having a black Subſtance in the Fin; che 
« Female White-ſick (as they term it), having a milky 
c Subſtance in the Fin. They are falt i in the Th 
« ſalter in the Layers, but falteſt at Sea.” 

"They take alſo at Colcheſter fine Soals, which gens 
rally yield a ook Frice at London Market; allo ſome- 
| times 


% „ „ A A 


Eſſex. GREAT BRITAIN, 11 
times middling Turbut, with Whitings, Codlings, and 


large Flounders. 2A | 


In the ſeveral Creeks and Openings, on this Shore, 


are alſo other Iſlands, but of no great Note, except 
Merſey, which lies between the two Openings of 
Malden-water and Coleheſter- water; and is a Place of 
fuch difficult Acceſs, that 'tis thought to000 Men 


might keep Poſſeſſion of it againſt a great Force, whe- 
ther by Land or Sea. On this Account, and becauſe, 


if poſſeſſed by an Enemy, it would ſhut up all the Na- 
vigation and Fiſhery on that Side, a Fort was built on 


the South-eaſt Point of it; and generally, in a Dutch. 
War, a ftrong Garriſon is kept there to defend it. 

Alt this Place may be ſaid to end, what we call The 

| Three Hundreds of Eſſex, which include the marſhy- 
Country; to wit, Barn/table Hundred, Rochford Hun- 


dred, and Dengy Hundred. 


One thing deſerves Mention here; which is, That 
all along this Country it is very quent to meet with 
Men that have had from 5 or 6, to 14 or 15 Wives; 
and I was informed, that in the Marſhes, over againſt - 

Candy Iſlaud, was a Farmer, who was then living 
with the 25th ; and that his Son, who was but 35 
| Years old, had already had about 14. Indeed this. 
Part of the Story T only had by Report, though from 


good Hands : But the other is well known, and will 
be atteſted, about Fobbing, Curringham,  T bunder fly, 


Hen fleet, Prittlewell, Matering, Great Stambridge, 
Cricſſes, Burnham, Dengy, and other Towns of the: 
like Situation. The Reaſon, as a merry Fellow 


told me, who ſaid he had had abouta Dozen, was this,, 


That they being bred in the Marſhes themſelves, and 
ſeaſoned to the Place, did pretty well; but that they . 
generally choſe to. leave their o.n Laſſes to their 


Neighbours out of the Marſhes, and went into the 
Uplands for a Wife: That when they took the young 
Women out of the wholeſome freſh- Air, they were 
clear and healthy; but, when they came into the 

| B 6 Marihes 


- 


8 


Ay 
* 


— 


12 100 T OUR thro Eſſex. 
Marſhes amonglt the Fogs and Damps, they preſently 
change Complexion, got an Ague or two, and ſeldom 
held it above half a Year, or a Year at moſt: And 
- then, ſaid he, we go to the Uplands again, and fetch 
another. So that marrying of Wives was reckoned a 
kind of good Farm to them. Nor do the Men in theſe 
Parts hold it out, as in other Countries; for we ſeldom 
meet with very ancient People among the Poor; inſo- 
much that hardly one half of the Inhabitants are Na- 
tives of the Place; but ſuch as come from other Parts 


for the Advantage of good Farms. 
From the Marſhes, and low Goounds, being not 


Able to travel without many Windings and Indentures, 


by reaſon of the Creeks and Waters, I came up to the 
ancient Town of Malden, ſituate at the Conflux of two 
principal Rivers, the Chelmer and the Black-water, 
where they enter the Sea. It is built in the Form of a 
- Croſs, is a Liberty in itſelf, and has a convenient Haven 
for Ships: it conſiſts of one Street near a Mile long, 
beſides Lanes, &c, It is governed by two Bailiffs, 
Aldermen, Steward, Recorder, &c, and ſends two 
Members to Parliament. Here is a good public 
Library for the Uſe of the Miniſter and the Clergy of 
the Hundreds adjoining to the Sea; and any Gentle- 
man may borrow a Book, upon depoſiting the Value 
of it. 
The Channel called Malden-water is navigable to 
the Town; where, by that means, is a great Trade 
for carrying Corn by Water to London; the County 
of Eſſex being (eſpecially on that Side) a great Corn | 
Ountr | 
Malden was a Roman Colony, which Camden dif- 
fidently conjectures to be the ancient Camalodunum. 
But Mr. Salmon will have it to be the Villa Faujlin, 
which has been ſo long attributed to St. Eamund 5 
bury : But however that be, it was here the Britons, 
under the valiant Queen Boadicia, cut in Pieces the 


tenth 8 killed above $0,000 Romans, and de- 


—_ 


Eſſex. ; Grear BRrITaAiN. 13 


ſtroyed the Colony; - but ſhe was afterwards overthrown 
herſelf in a great Battle, 60, ooo Britons lain, and 

| herſelf and Daughters moſt inhumanly treated and diſ- 
| graced, by thoſe great Reformers of the World, who, 


in her Caſe, forgot not only the Honour due to the Sex, 


but that which the truly Brave ſhew to the Brave in 


Misfortune. 


Being obliged to come thus far into the Uplands, 1 
made it my Road to paſs thro? Mitbam; A pleaſant, 
well-ſituated Market-town, in which, and in its 
Neighbourhood, are many Gentlemen of good F or- 


tune and F amilies. 


Nearer Chelmsford, hard by Buchan is the famous 


Seat of Beaulieu, in which King Henry VIII. very 


much delighted. It is the largeſt difice in the County 


next Audley- end. 
Tue Product of all this Part of the Country i is Corn, : 


as that of the marſhy feeding Grounds is Graſs, where 


their chief Buſineſs is Breeding of Calves, which I : 


need not ſay are the beſt and fatteſt, and the largeſt 


Veal in England, if not in the World. 


Colcheft er, the Iciani of the Romans, according to ; 


Mr. Salmon, is pleaſantly ſituated upon an Eminence 


above the River Coin. It is a large and populous 


Town, adorned with handſome Streets, and, though it 
cannot be ſaid to be finely built, yet there are Abun- 
dance of good Houſes in it. In the Concluſion of the 
great Civil War it ſuffered a ſevere Siege, which, as 
it made a reſolute Defence, was turned into a Blockade, 


wherein the Garriſon, and Inhabitants alſo, ſuffered 


the utmoſt Extremity of Hunger, and. were at laſt 


obliged to ſurrender at Diſcretion 3 when their two 
chief Officers, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Liſle, 


were cruelly ſhot to Death under the Caſtle-wall for 
their Bravery, 


The battered Walls, the Breaches in the Turrets, 


. 


and the uin Churches, {ill thew Marks of this 


14 ATOUR mt Effex. 


Siege, except that the Church of St. Mary (where they 


had the Royal Fort) is rebuilt; but the Steeple, which | 
was two Thirds battered down (the Beſieged having a | 


large Culverin upofi it, which did much Execution), 
remains ſtill in that Condition. 
The Lines of Contravallation, which ſurrounded 
the whole Town, and the Forts of the Yeliegers, re- 
main very viſible in many Places. 
Te River Coln, which paſſes through the Town, 
| encompaſſes it on the North and Eaſt; and ferved, in 
time of War, for a complete Defence on thoſe Sides. 
There are three Bridges over it, = it is navigable 


within three Miles of the Town, for Ships of large | 


Burden ; a little lower it may receive even a Royal 
Navy; and up to that Part called the Hythe, cloſe to 
the Houſes, it is navigable for Hoys, and ſmall Barks ; 


for which it is indebted to three ARs of Parliament | 


paſſed for that Purpoſe, one in the Reign of King 

 Filham III. one in that of King George I. and the 

other in that of King George II. 

The Hythe is a ſong Street, paſſing from Weſt to 

Faſt, on the South-fide of the Town, and is ſo popu- 

— 1 towards the River, that it may be called, The 
Wapping of Colcheſter. There is one Church in that 


Part of the Town, a large Quay by the vgs, and al 


good Cuſtom houſe. 
The Town chiefly ſubſiſts by the Trade of making 


Bays, though indeed all the Towns around carry on 
the fame Trade; as Kelvedin, Witham, Cogg/hal!, 
Brawitree, Bocking, &c. and the whole Country, large 
as it is, may be ſaid to be employed, and in Part main- 
tained, by the Spinning of Wool, for the Bay-Trade 
of Colche/ter, and its 7 Villages. 

The Town of Colchefter has been ſuppoſed to con- 


tain about 40,000 People, including the Out villages 
within its e which there are many, the Li- 


ng of a large Extent. It is go- 


igh- Steward, a Recorder, or his 
8 1 Ps 


berty of the I' own 
verned by a Mayor, 


, ea ac. wo. 


* 


SEE — 


ww © aw ty 0. 


tion. 


Eſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. 15 


Deputy, eleven Aldermen, a Chamberlain, a Town- 
clerk, Aſſiſtants, and eighteen Common-councilmen z ; 


and ſends two Members to Parliament. | 
There are in Colcheſter eight Churches, beſides thoſe | 
which are damaged, and five Meeting-houſes, whereof 


two for Quakers ; beſides one Dutch, and one French 
Church. Its other public Edifices are, 


1. Bay- Hall, where the Goodneſs of the Manufac- 
* of Bays made in this Town is aſcertained by a 
Corporation eſtabliſhed for this Purpoſe, conſiſting of 


a Set of Men, called Governors of the Dutch Bay-hall. 


2. The Guildhall of the Town, called by them the 
Moot hall; contiguous to which is the Town-gaot. | 

3. The Wort. "houſe for the Poor, 

4. A Grammar Free ſcbool; which has good Al. 


lowance for the Maſter, who is choſen by the Town. 


5. The Caſtle of Colcheſter is a Monument of the 


Antiquity of the Place, being built, as the Walls of 


the Town alſo are, with Roman Bricks ; and the 
Roman Coins dug up here, and plowed up in the Fields 
adjoining, confirm it. The Inhabitants boaſt, that 
Helena, the Mother of Conſtantine the Great, firſt Chri- 


ſtian Emperor of the Romans, was born there: but it 


would be hard to make it out. Mr. Camden ſays, 


That this Caftle was, in his Time, ready to fall with 
Age; and yet it has ſtood a large Number of Years 
ſince, and perhaps is not much worſe than it was then, 
although it received ſeveral Cannon-ſhot in the laſt 
Siege of the Town, which made no Impreſſion upon 
it, as the Beſiegers found, and therefore left off firing 
againſt it, and the rather, as the Garriſon made no great 
Uſe of it againſt them, The Queen's- Head in the 
Market-place, and the Stable, are alſo Reman Build- 
ings. There was likewiſe a Roman Military Way 
from C olcheſter, by ieee ee and farther 


that Way. 


6. Two Charity ſchools, fupported by W 


From 


\ 

16 A TOUR tw Eſſex. 8 
From Colchefter I took a Turn down to the Coaſt, 
The Land running out a great Way into the Sea, 
South, and South-eaſt, makes that Promontory of 
Land, called the Ne, well known to Seamen who 
uſe the Northern Trade. Here one ſees a Sea open as 
an Ocean, without, any oppoſite Shore, though it be no 
more than the Mouth of the Thames. This Point, 
called the Naſe, and the North-eaſt Point of Kent near 
Margate, called the No:th-Foreland, make the Mouth 

of the River, and the Port of London, and is above 60 
Miles over. „%% 
But, as it is pretended by ſome, that, according to 
the preſent Uſage of the Cuſſom bouſe, the Port of Lan- 
don is not allowed to extend ſo far, tis thought proper 
to inſert the Clauſe taken from the Act of Parliament, 

eſtabliſhing its Extent. : 
To prevent all future Differences and Diſputes, 
touching the Extent and Limits of the Port of Lon- 
don, the ſaid Port is declared to extend, and be ac- 
counted, from the Promontory, or Point, called the | 
North-Foreland, in the Iſle of Thanet, and from « 
thence Northward, in a right Line, to the Point t 
called the NAsE, beyond the Gunfizet, upon the t 
Coaſt of Eſſex; and ſo continued Weſtward through- c 
out the River Thames, and the ſeveral Channels, 0 
Streams, and Rivers falling into it, to London bridge; E 
ſaving the uſual and known Rights, Liberties, and t 
Privileges of the Ports of Sandwich and 1pſwich, and : 
\ 
1 
{ 


Ws CE Wd aero. nee 
ot e- 


— * n — — 5 : : . NEE EEE NEIAVIN N 
2823 — rows ä IE Les. ts ws . ; 
a F F | - N - 2 ä — Dottie — — om : 
i — ů ů ů ů ů Er mar ng ne nn OY ORs Ferre 
eee * Nee ee n 4 D 
by 7 2 a 4s * 1 5 5 


” 
Pale” 
8 


8 3 1 REIN q l — 
PS e n 4 2 
„ an if Wt tm r no nc * "IR 
_ _ l 88 — — A A 
| Wks = 


bo 8 7 
— tne l 
rn <8 ou ion "ELLE 2" -. 
„ r 
E: MET wy alias — Arad . 


either of them, and the known Members thereof, and 
of the Cuſtomers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and their 
Deputies, of and within the ſaid Ports of Sandwich 
and Ipſtbich, and the ſeveral Creeks, Harbours, and 
© Havens, to them, or either of them, reſpectively be- 
© longing, within the Counties of Kent and Ex. 0 
Notwitbſtanding which, the Port of London, as in a 
Uſe ſince the ſaid AR, is underſtood to reach no farther MF » 
than Graveſend in Kent, and Tilbury-point in Eſſex i . 
| e 55 e 6 


g 


R K 1A A A A A A A M A A 


and the Ports of Roche/ter, Milton, and Feverſbam, 
belong to the Port of Sandwich. 

In like manner the Ports of Harwich, Colche/ter, 
75 yvenboe, Malden, Leigh, &e. are ſaid to be Members 
= of the Port of Ipſwich. 

This Obſervation may ſuffice for what is needful to 
be ſaid upon the ſame Subject, whert I come to ſpeak of 
the Port of Sandwich, and its Members, and their Pri- 
vileges with reſpect to Rocheſler, Milton, Heverſbam, 
&c. in my Circuit through the County of Kent. 

At Walton, under the Naſe, they 0 


to Copperas-ftones in great Quantities; and there are 
u- ſeveral large Works called Copperas-houſes, where it 
er is made with great Expence. 

it, Prom hence we go back into the County about four 
; Miles, becauſe of the Creeks which lie between; and, 
8, turning Eaſt again, come to Harwich, on the utmoſt 
u- Eaſtern Point of this large County. a 


- Harwich is a Town ſtrong by Situation, and may 


ne be made more ſo by Art. The Harbour or Road is 


m one of the ſecureſt in England, and covered at the En- 


nt trance by Landguard-fort, and a Battery of Guns to 
he the Seaward, juſt as at T/bury, and-which ſufficiently 
h- WW defend the Mouth of the River. Though the Entrance 
8, or Opening of the River into the Sea is very wide, 
e; eſpecially at High- water, at leaſt two Miles, if not 
d three, over; yet the Channel, in which the Ships muſt 
1d keep and come to the e ig, is deep, narrow, and 
d lies only on the Side of the Fort; ſo that all Ships 


ir which come in, or go out, muſt come within Gun- 
> WW ſhot of the Fort. 

d The Fort is on the Sufo.# Side of the Baß but 
e- ſtands ſo far into the Sea, upon the Point of a Sand, 


or Shoal, running out towards the E//ex Side, that, in 
in a manner, it covers the Mouth of the Haven: and our 
er Surveyors of the Country affirm it to be in the Coun- 
; ty of Sex. The making this Place, which was for- 


ad merly no other than a Sand is in che Sea, ſolid enough for 
- the 


Eſſex, GREAT BRITAIN. - 17 


nd on the Shore 


= 
— M _ 
ICE NY ETD 2 2 K 2 ras fy OPT FINN 4 = 
AAA fe 2c Andes — a; 7 72 — n * 5 3 : Z * 
„„ 20 IN * IF 4 


18 4 TOUR * 


Years Labour, frequent Repairs, and a prodigious Ex- 
Tides affect it. 


greateſt Number that ever the World ſaw together. 
bour; and there have been 100 Sail of Men of War 


7 _—— * . 8 RE a 3 — po dnt — 9 9 . \ 
OE LL LS NE ER NE ee — TR * go ——— 8 — 4 gh Ie ans DI rn 
- hy "hu 8 * * 9 l 9 4 2 * p N v . - » 
„ : « * 4 


| Lo 
A © 
2 4 2 " * P 7 A hy L „* . 2 . hg 2 882 « N — =_ l : = 
2 - ba — 5 * Y 5 1 0" wm 4 5 * 3 „ — e * LA ra 9 
0 — T” * N e tn CAT O48. on — 44 WA 6 ak rn r, wo n * „re r — 8 
8 * 2 N b . OE I re cn - por” <p 0 bn x 0 - 1 WR mg ones TP 
* * " SY A * 
r d r e ES i eue . e eee e 
* 8 * A N * * 8 _ : . q N £ N WM 4 * 8 * 9 _ —" a 
. 7 , * > * . 
* go by 
3 > F 
[i 
4 : 
. 


deed true; for there is a ſort of Clay in the Cliff, be- 
tween the Town and the Beacen-hill adjoining, which 


7 Water of a certain "Ray or Well, which, nung in 
the 


1 

& 4 ; 

1 1 
1 

4 ' 

34 L 
4: 3 
In * * 


Eger 


the Foundation of ſo good a Fortification, eoſt many 
pence ; but it is now fo firm, that neither Storms nor 


The Harbour is of a vaſt Extent; for the River 
Stour from Maningtree, and the River Orwel from || 
TIpfwich, empty themſelves here: and the Channels of 
both are large and deep, and ſafe for all Weathers; 
and where they j join, they make a large Bay, or Road, | 
able to receive the biggeſt Ships of War, and the 


In the Dutch War, great Uſe was made of this Har- 


with their Attendants, and between 3 and 400 Sail of 


Colliers, all riding in it at a time, with great Safery and 


Con venience. 


77 ñ ỹð=bTT ̃ ⁵œ d ¶ d . f ̃ N 8 


Harwich is the * where che Packet. boats be- 1 


tween England and Holland go out, and come in. The | 
Inhabitants are far from being famed for good Uſage to 
Strangers; but, on the contrary, are deemed extrava- 
gant in their Reckonings, in the Public-houſes: this 
has encouraged the ſetting up ef Sloops, which they 
now call Paſſage boats, to go directly from the River 
Thames to Holland though the Paſſage may be ſomes | 


thing longer, yet the Mafters of the Sloops are ſaid to 
be more obliging to Paſſengers, and more reaſonable 


in the Expence, and the Veſſels good Sea-boats. Har- 


toich has been a Sufferer on this Account. 


The People of Harwich boaſt, that their Tow! is 
walled, and their Streets paved, with Clay; and yet, 
that one is as ſtrong, and the other as clean, as thoſe 
that are built or paved with Stone. The Fact is in- 


when it falls down into the Sea, where it is beaten 
with the Waves and the Weather, turns gradually in- 
to Stone. But the chief Reaſon aſſigned is from the 


Eſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. © 19 


the Cliff, runs down into the Sea among thoſe Pieces 


of Clay, and petrifies them as it runs ; and the Force 
of the Sea often ſtirring, and perhaps turning the 


Lumps of Clay, when Storms of Wind may give Force 


enough to the Water, cauſcs them to harden- every 8 
where alike; otherwiſe thoſe which were not quite 
ſunk in the Water of the Spring, would be petrify'd 


but in Part. Theſe Stones are gathered up to pave the 


Streets, and build the Houſes, and are indeed very 
hard. It is alſo remarkable, that ſome of them, taken 
up before they are thoroughly petrify'd, will, upon 
breaking them, appear to be hard as a Stone without, 
and ſoft as Clay in the Middle; whereas others, that 
have lin a due time, will be thorough Stone to the 
Centre, and full as hard within as without. 
On the Promontory of Land, called Beacon hill, 


which lies beyond, or behind the Town, toward the 
Sea, is a Light-houle, to give the Ships Direction in 


their ſailing by the Harbour, as well as their N 


into it at Night. 
This Town was formerly fortiſied; but in the Reign 


of King Charles I. the F ortifications were demoliſhed. 


It has ſince been ordered to be fortify'd again, and 
Ground has been bought accardingly, to the King's 
Uſe, by Act of Parliament: but nothing more has 


been done in it yet; and indeed, it is many Years ſince 


the Government, having a better Security in the Bri- 
tiſh Shipping, have had Occaſion to fortify Towns to 


the Landward. 
It was incorporated in the 13th of Edward U. 


The Harwich Men pretended a Grant from Edw. III. 
to take Cuſtom- duties for Goods coming into the 


Haven, till, on a Complaint made by the Town of 


| Ipſwich that it was an Infringement upon their Liber- i 
tics, an Inquiſition was appointed by that Prince at 
Ipſebich, the 14th of his Reign, by which it was de- 


termined chat Harwich, in favour of Ipſwich. 
Heumis after all, may be ſaid to be a neat, __ 
Wel- 


20 ' 4 TOUR thro Eſſex. 


well built Town; enjoys a good Maritime Trade; is 
governed by a Mayor, &c. has a Market every Tueſ- 
day and Friday, and two annuals Fairs, one on May— 
day, the other on October the 18th; and returns two 
Members to Parliament. 

Landguard . fort was built in me Reign of Ting 
James I. and was a much more conſiderable Fortifica- 
tion than at preſent ; having had four Baſtions, named 
the King's, the Queen's, Holland's, and Warwicts, 
mounted with 60 very large Guns, particularly thoſe 
on the Royal Baſtion, where the King's Standard was 
_ diſplayed, which would throw a 28 Pound Ball over 
Flarwich; and it had a conſtant Garriſon, with a 
Chapel, and many Houſes, for the Governor, Gun- 
ners, and other Officers. But it has been demolithed, 
and a ſmall Platform made inftead of it, by the Water- 


ſide ; but yet, as the particular Current of the Chan- 


nel, which Ships muſt keep in, as L have ſaid, obliges 


them to paſs juſt by the Fort, the Harbour is ſufficient- 


Iy defended on the Sea ſide from any ſudden Invaſion. 
At Harwich are two hot and two cold Salt- 


Water Baths, of elegant Structure and curious Con- 


trivance, with private 'Drefling-Rooms for Gentlemen 
and Ladies, ſeparated from each other. 

The Buildings ſtand in a large Reſervoir, contain- 
ing many hundred Tons of pure Sea-water, renewed 
by every Tide from the Sea; from this Reſervoir the 
Baths are continually ſupplied with pure running Sea- 


water, at any Hour of the Day, by a Contrivance that | 


erat reſembles a natural Spring. 

And for the Eaſe and Convenience of ſuch as are 
lame, or have not Strength to plunge themſelves, 
there is a Crane Chair of particular Contrivance. 

There are alſo Vapour Baths, either for immerſing 
the whole Body, or any particular Limb or Limbs, in 
the Steam or Vapour of hot Sea-water. Here is alſo 
Partial Large Bathing, for which a curious Machine is 
e to throw Sea- water, either hot or Cold, (in a 

| | con- 


»*» ws tt 


able Market-town. 


Eflex GREAT BRITAIN. 21 
continual Stream, and any deſired Velocity) upon any 


Part of the Body. | | 
The Phyſicians well know the great Uſe of theſe ſorts 


8. 


of Bathing in many Diſorders. 


On the Road from London to Colche/ter lie four 
good Market Towns, at near equal Diſtance from one 


| another, Rumfard, Brentwood, Ingat/ione, and Chelmſ- 


ard, Rumford is noted for two Markets, one. for 


# Calves and Hogs, the other for Corn and other Provi- 
ſions, moſtly bought up for London Market. 


Rumford is governed by a Bailiff and Wardens, who 
are impowered by Patent, though no Corporation, to 
hold a Court every Week, for the Trial of Treaſons, 


Felonies, Debts, or other Actions. It has a Charity- 


ſchool for 50 Boys and 20 Girls. | | 
Brentwood and Ingatſtone are large thoroughfare 
Towns, full of Good Inns, chiefly maintained by the 
Multitude of Carriers and Paſſengers conſtantly paſſing 
this Way to London, with Droves of Cattle, Proviſions, 


and ManufaQures. 


 Che!msford is chiefly ſupported by the ſame Buſineſs, 
It is the County-town, where the Aſſizes are held; 


| and ſtands on the Corflux of two Rivers, the Chelmer, 
whence the Town derives it Name, and the Cann ; and 


has a good Free-ſchool belonging to it. | 
Eaſt of Brentwood, lies Biljericay, a pretty conſider- 
Near Chelmsford ſtands a Seat of the Right Honour- 

able the Earl of Fitzwwa!ter, which is ſeen on the Left- 


hand of the Road, juſt before you enter the Town. 


The Houſe is large, and having been lately new-front- 
ed, makes an handſome Appearance. 

Five Market- towns fill up the reſt of this Part of the 
County, Dunmow, Braintree, Thaxted, Ha'/led, and 
Coggſball, all noted for the Manufacture of Bays. But 


Dunmoto I muſt particularly mention, on account of 


_ famous old Story of its Flitch of Bacon; which is 
this © =. | | | 
| One 


Cuſtom in the Priory here : That whatever married 
Man did not repent of bis heiug married, or differ and 
diſpute with his Wife, within a Year and @ Day after 
bis Marriage, and would fwear to the Truth of it, 
kneeling upon two hard pointed Stones in the Priory 
Churchyard, et up for that Purpaſe, in Preſence of the 


Prior and Convent, ſuch hn ſhould have a Flitch of 


Bacon. 
P' unis has been actually clad and received, as ap- 
pears by the 1 Record there: 


Dun moto Priory, I a Court Baron of the Ri ght 
Aer. 1 Worſhipful Sir Thomay May, 
Knight, there holden on Friday the 27th Day of 
June, in the 13th Vear of the Reign of our Sove- 
reign Lord William III. by the Grace of God, of 


England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, = 
Defender of the Fe aith, Sc. and in the Wome of our 


Lord 1701, before Thomas I beeler, CC IE. 
Steward there. | | 


Homage. 2 Beaumont, 
= Henrietta Beaumont, I ge 

Annabella Beaumont, pinſders, 

Jane Beaumont, 


us” 
aryl hbeeler, 


E it 1 That at this Comet; it is found - | 


vnd preſented by the Homage aforeſaid, That 
Fobn Reynalds of Hatfield- Regis, alias Hat fie'd- Broads 
 oake, in the County of E Yes, Gent. and Anne his Wife, 
have been married for the Space of 10 Years laſt paſt, 
and upward. And it is hkewiſe found, preſented, and 
adjudged, by the Homage aforeſaid, that the ſaid John 
Reynolds, and Anne his Wife, by means of their quiet 
and peaceable, tender and loving Cohabitation, for the 
Space of Time aforeſaid (as appears by Reference to 
the 


a 


22 © A TOUR: HV E'ſſex. 


One Robert Fitzwalter, a powerful Baron in this 
County, in the Time of Henry III. inſtituted a 


> 


> BS SO HSSOt 


* 


895 


| Eſſex. GRTAT BeiTAin 23 


Kuſtomed Oath, whereby to intitle themſelves to have 


Neynolds, and Anne his Wite, in their proper Perſons; 
Wind humbly prayed, that they might be admitted to 
take the Oath aforeſaid: Whereupon the ſaid Steward, 


8 Oath, and receiving the Bacon aforeſaid ; that is to fay, 
to the two great Stones lying near the Church- Door 


and Anne his Wife, kneeling ddwn on the ſaid two 


aforementioned Oath, in theſe Words. , 


W Nor, ſince you were married Mon and id iſe, 
y Houſbold Brawls, or contentious Strife, 


| Offended each other in Deed or IWard 4 


| pronounced Sentence for the ſame in theſe Words; 


he ſaid Homage), are fit and.qualified Perſons to be 
admitted by the Court to receiye the ancient and ac- 


he Bacon of Dunmow delivered unto them, according 
to the Cuſtom. of the Manor : Whereupon, at the 
Court, in full and open Court, came the. ſaid John 


with the Jury, Suitors, and other Officers of the Court, 
proceeded, with the uſual Solemnity, to the antient 
and accuſtomed Place for the Adminiſtration of the 


within the ſaid Manor: where the faid Jahn Reynolds, 

Stones, the ſaid Steward did adminiſter unto them the 
/*O U do ſubear, by Cuſtom of Confeſſion; + 
That you never made nuptia! Tranſgrefſiomg  , 

Or otherwiſe, in Bed or Board, 

Or, in a Twelvemonth's time, and a Day, 

Repented not in Thought any way; 


Or, ſince the Charch Clerk ſſaid Amen, | 148 OT i I 
Wfh'd yourſelves unmarry'd again; — 


Baut continue true, and in Deſire, 


As when you join Hands in holy Choir. 


And immediately thereupon the ſaid Jahn Reynolds, 
and Anne his Wife, claiming the ſaid Bacon, the Ct 


$7 NCE to theſe Conditions, without any Fear, 
Both, of your own A.cord, do freely ſtear, 

| | © > A We. 

6 : * 


24 4 TOUR thro 


Eſſex Sa 


A whole Gamen of Bacon you do receive, 9 
And bear it away with Love and good Leave: hea 
For this is the Cuſtom of Dunmow well known ; Ing. 
MM 50 the Pleaſure be urs, the Bacon's your ow, Ine 
Sol, 
Aud erg a Gamon of Bacon was delivered W wh 
to the ſaid John Reynolds, and Anne his Wife, with the the 
uſual Solemnity. vn. 
And alſo William Parſley, of Much Ey/ton in the del. 
County of Eſſex, and Fane his Wife, being married for the 
the Space of three Years laſt-paſt, and upwards, byMW a < 
means of their quiet, peaceable, tender, and loving Fat 
Cohabitation for the ſaid Space of Time, came and Pe 
claimed the faid Bacon, and had it delivered unto them, ¶ cre 


according to the aforeſaid Order, 
Thomas Wheeler, Stowird 

The Flitch was alſoclaimed by one John Shakeſhanks, 
emen and Anne his Wife, of M eatbersſield, in 
the ſame County, on Thurſday, June 20, 1751, 
Formerly, it is thought, the Foreſts of Epping and 
Henault took up all the South Part of the County; but] 
particularly we are aſſured, that it reached to the River 
Chelmer, and into Dengy Hundred; ; and from thence cee 
again Weſt to Epping and M altbam, where it continues 
to be a Foreſt ſtill, 

The Conftitution of this Foreſt is beſt ſeen, as to its th 
Antiquity, by the pleaſant Grant of it from Edward af 
the Confeſſor, before the Norman Conqueſt, to Randolpb WW bri 
Peperking, one of his Favourites, who was after called 44 
Peverell, and whoſe Name remains ſtill in ſeveral the 
: Villages i in this County; as particularly that of Hat- WM © 

field Peverell, in the Road from Chelmsford to Witham, | abe 
which is ſuppoſed to be originally a Park (called a 

Field in thoſe Days); and Hartfield may be as much f 
as to ſay, a Park for Deer; for the Stags were in Be 
thoſe Days called Harts; fo that this was neither more fea 
nor leſs than. 3 * $ 1 or Deer: =. 

: park, I. 
3 | This = 


b-: Suffolk. Onan BRITAIx. 27 


Tbis Randolph or Ralph Peverell had, it ſeems, a 
beautiful Lady to his Wife, who was Daughter of 
Ingelrick, one of Edward the Confe/ſor” $ Noblemen :. 
Ine had two Jons by her, William Peverell, a famed. 
Soldier, and Lord or Governor of Dover-caſtle ; 
which he ſurrendered to William the Norman, after. 
W the Battle in Suſſex ; and Pain Peverell, his youngeſt, 
= who was Lord of Cambridge e. When the eldeſt Son 

delivered up the Caſtle, the Lady above-named was. 
there; and the Norman fell in Love with her, and had 
a Son by her, who was called William, after the 
Father's Chriſtian Name, but retained the Name ef 
= P:v:rell, and was afterwards, as Hiſtory acquaints us, : 
created by Wilitam I. Lord of Nottingham. © : 

This Lady, as is ſuppoſed, by way of Penance for 
her Frailty, founded a Nunnery at the Village of Har- 


A. Peverell, mentioned above, where ſhe lies buried 


fin the Pariſh: church, and her Memor 58 is preſerved by 
a Tomb-ſtone under one of the N 
Grant 1 have mentioned being to be found in Camden, 


indows. The 


I (hal) not tranſcribe it here. 
I ſhall now, in purſuance of my firſt Deſign, pro- 


ceed to the County of Suffolk, 


From Harwich therefore, having a mind to 6855 


| the Harbour, I ſent my Horſes round by Maningtree, 
a good, but dirty Market-town, where is a Timber-. 
bridge over the Stour; or, as it is more uſually called, 
Aaningtree water ; and took a Boat for Ipfwich up 
che River Orwell, known beſt by the Name of Ipfwict< 


water, by which Paſſage from Harwich to Ipſwich, it is 


about 12 Milves. 


In a Creek in this River, called L avington- creeh, * | 
faw at Low-water ſuch Shoals of Muſlels, that great 


Boats might be loaded with them, and the Quantizy | 


ſcarce diminiſhed to the Eye: 
{wich is ſeated at the Diſtance: of 12 Miles from 


Far my * the Edge of the River, wiich tak nga 
| C ſhort. 


p APY 9 
. 
22 of FRO 


V 


Town, and many Ships of that Burden have been built 


Tide, which riſes ſometimes 13 or i, F cet, and gives 
them 24 Feet Water very near the. 


the Cheapneſs of building, and fitting out their Ships 


—— we. Aral Rte 9. : 1 1 1 
* . i - . — „ 5 
— 2 2 * > 8 ä 
a i 5 I 1 | 
_ 8 — . 
a V nw - — * * 3 — jw a 8 
K W ew Nr EE LY . - 4 


up the Ships after the Voyage Room for. erecting 


8 <> r 
. 8 — IT 
a th b \ res ** 
» . A A 
7 WAS 


&c. on the eaſieſt Terms; and eſpecially for the noi- 
ſome Cookery, which attends the boiling their Blubber, f 
which may be on this River, remote from any Places of 


' think meanly of it. | gs 
It has a very ſpacious Market- place; in the midi 
of that is a fair Croſs, in which is the Corn- market. 


modious, and vulgarly, but erroneouſly, * 
| | | 5 + - ma 


> 


ſhort Turn to the Weſt, the Town forms there a kind 
of Semicircle, or Half-moon, upon the Bank of. the 
River. It is very remarkable, that tho* Ships of 50 
Tons. may, upon a Spring-tide, come up very near this 


there, yet the River is ſcarce navigable above the 
Town, not even for the ſmalleſt Boats; nor does the 


| own, flow much 
farther up the River than the Town. | | 

No Place. in Britain is 5 ified like Ipſtwich for 
carrying on the Greenland Fiſhery ; whether we reſpe& 


and Shallops ; furniſhing, victualling, and providing 
them with all kinds of Stores ; Convenience for laying 


their Magazines, Warehouſes, Ropewalks, Cooperages, | 


Reſort ; then the Nearneſs to the Market for the Oil, 


when it is made; and, which above all ought to be rt WM wt 


garded, the ry as that ariſes from this, Conf . 
deration, that the fame Wind which carries them from Wh 
the Mouth of the Haven, is fair to the very Seas of WW 
Greenland. | on Co 


I pſiich was formerly much more conſiderable for; 


Trade than at preſent ;. but yet it may be accounted a the 
neat and well-built Town, and much larger than many WW; 
Cities; carries on ſtill a conſiderable Maritime Trade; 
and tho! it is but thinly inhabited, to what it has been, 
yet whoever looks into the Churches and Meeting: 
houſes on a Sunday, will not, even in this Particular, Wboy, 


Adjoining are the Shambles or Butchery, very com- Na Re 


Suffolk, GREAT BRITAIN. 27 
have been built by Cardinal Molſey; for it owes its 
Original to a much later Date; viz. to the goth Year 
of Queen Elizabeth, Behind this is the Herb - market, 
and in a ſpacious Street a little diſtant is a Market ſor 
Butter, Poultry, and other Country Proviſions, and 
another for Fiſh, with which the Town is ſerved in 
great Plenty. It has five Market: days weekly; Tu- 
doy and Thurſday for ſmall Meat; Medncſday and 
7-day for Fiſh; and Saturday for all Sorts of Provi- 
ſions. It has alſo five annual Fairs; one on April 23. 


% ˙ VM . . OO 8 


tone on May 7. and 8. one on July 25. one on the 11h 
and 12th of Augiſti ſor Cattle alſo; and the fifth on 


11 September rA. which is à very conſiderable one for But- 


ger and Cheeſe, to which the whole Country round re- 
bort, to furniſh themſelves with Winter Stores; as do 
g alqo many of the London Dealers in thoſe Commodities, 
„oho, however, are not ſuffered to buy till after the firſt 
1- WE three Days of the Fair. CCC 


There are even now in this Town 12 Pariſh- 
| churches; out of 14, which there once were; and two 
Chapels in the Corporation - liberty, out of ſeveral 


©- WY which have been demoliſhed, beſides Meeting houſes, 
ee. and it once abounded with Religious Houſes, 
m which have yielded to the Fate of the Times. 


= Here! is alſo a fair Town- hall, with a ſpacious | 
Council- chamber, and other commodious Apartments; 


for a Shire-hall, where the County-Seffions are held for 
d a Wthe Diviſion of /pſwich ; a large public Library, ad- 


oining to a noble Hoſpital founded: by che Town, | 


ny f 

de; called Chri/?'s . Hoſpital, for the Maintenance of poor 
em Children, old Perſons, Maniacs; and in it Rogues, 
ng- Vagabonds, and ſturdy Beggars, are kept to hard La- 


bour. Alſo adjoining to this is a good Free- ſchool 
and there is likewiſe the noble Foundation of Mr. Hen, 


iat ooley, Anno 15 56. for poor old Men and Women. 
cet It is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, 
my - Recorder, 12: Portmen, four of which, beſides the 
o bailiffs, are Juſtices of the! Peace, two Coroners, 24. 
E n 0 18 09 wr 4 Com 


Jon A TOUR # Suffolk. 


and 12 of them Headboroughs, and 15 Petty-Conſta- 


riffs for the County excepted. Nor are they obliged 
to pay any Tolls or Duties in any other Parts of the 


by he incurred a Forfeiture of all his Effects and Pe co 


ferments; and being afterwards pardoned, 


Common-councilmen, who are alſo High-Conſtables, 


bles; and ſends two Members to Parliament. 

Its Privileges are extraordinary; for the Bailiffs paſs 
Fines and Recoveries, hear and determine Cauſes, as 
well Criminal as Civil, arifing in the Town, and even | 
Crown Cauſes, preferably to any of his Majeſty's 
Courts at Veſtminſter. They appoint the Aſſize of 
Bread, Wine, Beer, &c. No Freeman can be ob- 
liged to ſerve on Juries out of the Town, or bear any 
Offices for the King, without his own Conſent; She- 


— ww as tooco- C 


Kingdom, having caſt the City of London in a Trial 
at Law for Duties demanded by the City of Freemen's 
Ships in the River Thames. They are intitled to all | 
Waifs, Eſtrays, Sc. to all Goods caſt on Shore within 
their Admiralty-Juriſdicton, which extends on the 


Coaſt of Eſſex beyond Harwich, and on both Sides the «< 


Suffolk Coaſt; and their Bailiffs even hold their Ad- 
miralty-Court beyond Landguard- fort, &c. And by 1 
a ſolemn Deciſion in their Favour by an Inquiſition WW a 
taken at Ip/avich, in the 14th of Edward III. they car- t. 
ried the Point, which Harwich conteſted with them, 
of taking Cuſtom - duties for Goods coming into Har- ir 
ꝛwich Haven, which was determined to belong ſolely to b. 
the Bailiffs and Burgeſſes of 3 as I before hinted. 
In King John's Reign was a Mint in this Town. | 

J ſhall juſt mention, in this Place, though it be ge. 
nerally known, that the famous Cardinal e, 
Archbiſhop of Yor#, was born in this Town, his Father 
being a Butcher in it; though, according to Dr. Frddzsy 
who publiſhed his Will, he ſeems to have been a Man 


of Subſtance for thoſe Times. This Prelate roſe to the. 


bigheſt Pitch of Honour and Grandeur, that it was 


poſſible for a Subject to attain to; and was ſuddenh S: 


{tripped of all, having been caſt in a Premunire, here H 


and fe- 
ſtotel 


Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 29 


ſtored to ſome Part thereof, particularly to the Archbi- 
ſhoprick of ra, he was arreſted for High- Treaſon 


at his Archiepiſcopal Palace at Catuocd in Toriſbire; 
and died at Leicęſter Abbey, (as he was carrying to 
London) where he was buried. . 

The French Refugees, when they firſt came over to 
England, began a little to take to this Place; and ſome 
Merchants attempted to ſet up a Linen Manufacture 


in their Favour; but it did not meet with the expected 
W Succeſs, and at preſent I find very little- of it. The 
| poor People are however employed, as they are allover 


the adjacent Counties, in ſpinning Wool for other 


= Towns where Manufactures are ſetiled. _ | 
Ihe Country round /pſwich, as are all the Coun- 


ties ſo near the Coaſt, is chiefly applied to Corn, 
of which a very great Quantity is continually ſhipped 


off for London; and ſometimes they load Corn here 
for Holland, eſpecially if the Market abroad is en- 


couraginnn 8 
There. is a great deal of good Company in this 


Town; and tho here are not ſo many of the Gentry 


as at Bury, yet is has more than any other Town in 


mY 


the County. 


I take Ipſwich to be one of the moſt agreeable Places 
in England, for Families who have lived well, but may 
be reduced to live within a narrow Compaſs; for, 

I. Here are good Houſes, at eaſy Rents. 


2. An airy, clean, and well-governed Town. 81 
23. Very agreeable and improving Company, almoſt 


af exe lIIIII Ions Lav. 
4. Plenty of all manner of Proviſions, whether Fiſh 
or Fleſh, gms of the Kind, and'icheap. __ 
5. Eaſy Paſſage to London, either by Land or Wa- 
ter, the Coach going through in a Day. 


Thomas Fennereau, Eſq; Member of Parliament for 


Sudbury, has a fine Seat and Park in this-Town; the 


Houſe indeed is built in the antient Taſte, but very 
commodious ; *tis called Chrift church, and was a 
. 5 C3 Priory, 


-+ alt 


ON. 


go A TOUR thi Suffolk, 
_ Priory, or Religious Houſe, in former Times. The 
Greenland Park is a great Addition to the Pleafantnek 
of this Town, the Inhabitants being allowed to-divert 
themſelves there with Walking, Bowling, &c. 
In this Park are ſome of the moſt beautiful Deer 
the Kingdom; they are of a fine white Colour potted | 
with Black, like Harlequin Dogs, with bald Faces: 
theſe, er with the fallow Deer, e A fine 
Variety ins Pank. / 1 55 
1 cannot omit in this Place 0 following Abu > 
of an excellent Charity for the Relief and Support of 
the Widows and Orphans of poor Clergymen of the | 
County of Suffoth, which was begun in the Vear 1 . 
by a voluntar Subſeription of a ſmall Number of Cen. 5 
tdttlemen and Clergy, in and about -[pfwich and bnd. 
Dridge, and has ſince that time been carried on with 
ſuch Suceeſs, that the yearly Collection, which in 1704. 
was but 67, by gradual Advances every Year, amounted WF . 
in the Vear 1740. to ee 25, 6d. and in the whole 35 


2 —— Wm w/o nt 2 „ 


hoes © 
— 


E Won ar wee EET NEO TIN 
; _ 8 e 
rn. . S 


2 SS AY IT, 20 Am Pm: 


— uf 


Years, to the Sum of 4416“. gs. gd. and has gone d on 
equally proſperouſly ever fince. 4 

s the yeatly Subſcriptions, there Jade been T 
divers Gifts and Legacies given to the ſaid Society, tb J 


the Uſes above · mentioned, to the Amount of 55. 
17. which Sum is laid out in Scurb- Sea Annuities, . Þ 
and kept: for raiſing a capital Stock for the general WM - 
Benefit of the Charity; and the Intereſt arifing from it | £ 
_ hath been, and ſtill is, every Vear applied to the Relief h 
und Support of the ſaid Widows and Orphans. f 
From Ipfwich, I took a Turn to Hadley, famous for K 
the Many rdom of Dr. Rowland Taylor, who was 
| burnt at pr wo harwd, Anno 1555. On the Place h 
Where he was nen 1 nee a Stone, with this 
ien l | . 


— (Mano: 1 555. 
* Dy. Taylor, for defending ids 70 oe 
1 In this Place _ his m_ 82 


— 
C 


Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN. Ix -- 
It has been a Town Corporate, governed by a 
Mayor, Sc. But 'a D. Warranty being brought 
ert WW again their Charter, in the Reign of King James II. 

it has not been renewed ſince, Here are two weekly 
in Markets, and two annual Fairs. It deals much in 
ed Corn, and abounds with all manner of Proviſions. 
: be Town is large, and 'tolerably well built; but 
ne being in a Bottom, is generally dirty. Its Church is a 
- handſome Building, graced with à Spite:Bteeple; and 
ne WW being near the Middle 'of the Town, is an Ornament 


of W& -to it. Tis of ſome Note ſtfll for the Manufzcture of 
e Woolen Cloths, but not of ſo much as it yas'formerly. 


A little to the South-welt ſies Nrylam, a large 
Market-town, in a Bottom, upon the Fran, oV er 
{| which is a good Bridge. "The Bays trade is catried on 
2 „er s 


habitants at preſent e 
Perpetuanas, Sc. 


Simon Theobald; ſurnamed Sudbury, Archbiſbop of 
Canterbury, tranſlated thither e Anno 1375 . 


was a Native of this Town.” He was mutdere® at 
o * 30 . | -C & „ 34 $55 2 4 the 


has. a 


F 4 TOUR H Suffolk, 


the Inſtigation of one John Ball, a ſeditious and fana- | 


tical Preacher in JYat Tyler's Rebellion. He was a 


Prelate of good Character for Learning and Charity. 
He built the upper End of St. Gregory s Church in Sud. 
| bury, where his Head is ſtill ſhewn: it was, not long ſince, 
intire, covered with the Fleſh and Skin dried by Art, | 
the Mouth wide open, occaſioned by Convulſions thro' | 
the hard Death he died, having ſuffered eight Blows | 
before his Head was cut off. e founded in the Place 
where his Father's Houſe ſtood a neat College, which 
he furniſhed with Secular Prieſts and other linifters, | 
and likewiſe endowed it bountifully. 
Near Sudbury is Melferd, a pleaſant Villa and 
3 the largeſt in ngland, being about a N. 
Length. The Church is a fine Edifice, and ſtands at | 
the North-end of it. Melford has an annual Fair, | 
divers good Inns, many handſome Houſes, and credit- | 
able bean, Here lived the unhappy Mr. Drew, 


Who, in the Year 1739, was barbarouſly murdered ; 


and his Son, Mr. Charles Drew, executed for it; who YL 
effected it either with his own Hands, or by thoſe of 
another Perſon, whom he procured to do it, for the 

ſake of enjoying his Eſtate. This Parricide was at- 
tended with Cireumſtances of great Horror. 1 
In my Way from hence to St. Edmund's- bury, I | 
paſſed due North through Lavenbam, or Lanham, a | 
etty good Town, ſtanding upon a Branch of whe 2 

River Breton. It has a ſpacious Market-place, which || 
was formerly of much better Account than at preſent. 
It had many Years ago great Advantage from its 
dat though this is loſt, yet it 


Trade i in blue Cloths ; 


od. Trade for gerges, Weh Says, &. 


made here ; ſpins a great deal of fine Yarn for 5 | 

and has of late flouriſhed much, by ſetting up an Hall 
for ſelling Wool, the Town being daten ſituat- 

ed for that Purpoſe. | 

Type Church an nd Steeple. here are e juſtly accounted | 
the finelt i in the County. k is fituate on an Hill n 
_ 


ile inn 


RSS 2 8 i F * hy — 


1 


8 


1 3 | 5 deing 5 


Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN, 33 
the Weſt-ſide of the Town, the Nat being 3 


Feet high. 


Eaſt of Lavenham, alt pretty near it, is Bilson, 


= a Market- town, noted for the Clothing- trade, its good 
| Church, its mean Buildings, and Dirtineſs. 


Bury St. Edmunds, is lituate on the Weſft-ſide of 


| the River Lach, which within theſe few Years has 


been made navigable from Lynn to Fornbam, a Mile 
North of the Town. It is ſo regularly built, that 


almoſt all the Streets cut one another at Right Angles. 


It, ſtands on an eaſy Aſcent, and overlooks a fruitful 
incloſed Country on the South and South- weſt ; on the 
North and North-weft the moſt delightful champain 
Fields, which extend themſelves to Lynn, and that Part 
ofthe Norfolk Coaſt; and on the Eaſt the Country is 

artly incloſed, and partly open. No wonder then that 
it is called the AMonipelier of Sfoll, and even of Eng- 


ande and indeed a certain antient Author ſays no more 


than it deſerves; . That the Sun ſhines not upon a 


= < Town more agreeable in its Situation.“ 


It is governed by an Alderman, who is their chief 
Magiſtrate, a Recorder, 12 capital Burgeſſes, and 24 
common Burgeſles ; 3 and ſends two Members to Par- 
liament. | 

It has two plentiful weekly Markets on Wedneſdays 
and Saturdays; and three annual Fairs; one three 


Days before and three Ng. after the Feaſt of St. 


Matthew; and it is generall J protracted to an uncer- 
1 


tain Length, for the Diverſion of the Nobility and 
Gentry that reſort to it in great Numbers, | 
The Abbey, once fo famous, was firſt built of 
Wood by Sigebert King of the Eft Angles, ſoon after 
Chriſtianity was planted here; and when finiſhed, 
(about the Year 638 ) that King retired into it, and 


| Wut bimſelf from the Woild. 


King Lamund, from whom the Town takes its 
Name, began to reign over the Ea Angles Anno 85. 
in tae 26: Year of bis Age, and SAR 15 Tears; 


"4 1 TOUR thro' Suffolk. 
being kiſted Tune 870. as ſuppoſed, at Hoxne, at 29 


Vears old, and his Corpſe was 33 Vears after removed 


to Bury, The Abbey was much enriched thereby, | 


and the Monks, who were of the Benedictine Order, 


found means, about the Year 1020, to get it intirely 


to themſelves, excluding the 'Seculars; and King 


Canute, in the 4th Year of his Reign, founded a more 


magnificent Church, in Honour of St. Zdmund, which | 
was finiſhed in 12 Years, and dedicated to Chr int, St. 


Mary. and St. Edmund. 


Uvius Prior of Hulm, who was conſecrated the firſt . 
Abbot, Anno 1020, got the Abbey exempted from 


Epiſcopal Juriſdiction, and encompaſſed that and the 


Town with a Wall and Ditch; the Ruins of which, 
in ſeveral Places, are ſtill to be ſeen: and the Abbots 


afterwards were made Parliamentary. Barons. But in 


the Reign of King Henry VIII. it ran the common Fate 
Houſes, and that Prince put an End to 


of all Religious 
all its Glory. 


When the Abbey was in its Proſperity, there was 2 
Chapel at every one of the five Gates, and the Town 
abounded with Chapels and Oratories. *Tis. poſſible WF 
_ theſe might be Hoſpitals : for there was an Hoſpital of 


St. Peter's without Ri/by-gate; an Hoſpital of S.. 


Saviour's without North-gate ; an . Hoſpital of St. by 
Nicholas at or near Ea/t-gate; and God's houſe, or St. 


John's, at the South gate; a College of Prieſts with a 
Gild to the Holy or Sweet Name of Tſe, the Situation 
of which I could not find ; and an H 

at Babioell, or the Toll gate. But at this time there 
are only two Churches, which indeed are very beauti- 
ful and ſtately, and ſtand in the ſame Church-yard; 


the one dedicated to St. Mary, the other built in the 


Reign of Edward VI. to St. James. The latter has a 
convenient Library; and at the Weſt-end of the 


South Ayle are interred the Bodies of the late Lord 


Chief Baron Reynolds, and his Lady, to whoſe Me- 
moxies two large Monuments are erected. The W 
n | oa i OM Ot ao ie? 1 


U f 0 % 


ouſe of Grey-Friar: 


tt. = . K 4 a ©, „ , Ke LA .. 


my p< hk wy 


Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN, 1 
of St. Mary has on the North. ſide of the Altar (to 
which we approach by a fine Aſcent of ſix Steps) the 
Tomb of Mary Queen of France, Sifter to Henry VIII. 


and Wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, Her 


Coffin is of Lead, and has this Inſcription on it; 


Mary Queen, 15 33. of France, Edmund H. SENT OR 


There are other handſome Monuments in this Church. | 


The other moſt rematkable public Buildings are the 
Abbey-gate, which is till a fine Monument of whatthe 


Abbey once was; the Guild-hall ; the Wool-hall ; 


the Shire-houſe ; the Market-croſs ; and the Gram- 


mar- ſchool, endowed by King Edward VI. 


Such as is the Town for Situation, is the Neighbour- 


= hood and Gentry about it for Politeneſs; and no Place 


glories in handſomer Ladies, or better Families. 
In the Path-way between the two Churches it was 

that Arundel Coke, a Barriſter at Law, in the Year 
1721, attempted (with the Aſſiſtanceof one Moodbourne, 
a barbarous Aſſaſſin) an unheard of Outrage on his 
Brother-in-law, Edward Criſpb, Eſq; for the ſake of 
poſſeſſing what he had. He had invited him, his Wife 


and Family, to Supper with him; and in the Night, 


on Pretence of going to ſee a Friend to them both, he 
led him into the Church- yard, When, on a Signal he 
gave, the Aſſaſſin made at Mr. Criſp with an Hedge- 
bill, and in a moſt terrible manner mangled his Head 


and Face; and, fuppoſing him dead, there left him; 


and Cote returned, as if he knew nothing of the Matter, 
to the Company. But it happening that Mr. Criſp 
was not killed, and coming back to Cotes Houſe to 


the Company all bloody, and cruelly mangled, the 


ſhocking Sight amazed and confounded them all; Cote, 
that he was not dead; the reſt, that he had met with 
ſo ſtrange a Difaſter. Mr. Criſp ſurvived this Out- 


rage many Yeats, and Cote and Mocubourne the hired 


Ailaflin, were juſtly executed for a Villainy ſo deteſta- 
ble, that it hardly had its Parallel. The Gentleman 


not being killed, the Aſſaſſins were tried and condemn- 


C6 ed 


36 _. 4 TOUR th Suffolk 


ed on the Statute for defacing and diſmembring, called 


= The Coventry Act And Cote was fo goed a Lawyer, 


and ſo hardened a Wretch, that he thought to have 1ay- 


ed himſelf, by pleading, that he intended not to deface, | 


but to:4i//, Some nice People ſay, the Law was a lit- 
: te ſtrained in their Puniſhment, as the Gentleman re- 


covered; but, ſurely, if in any Caſe the Letter might | 
be diſpenſed with, and the Spirit be brought in Aid of 
it, it was right in this: And it would have been next 
to a national Diſgrace, not to have a Law that would 


reach ſo flagrant and complicated a Wickedneſs. 


There is little or no Manufacturing in this Town, 
except Spinning; the chief Buſineſs of the Place de- 
pending upon the neighbouring Gentry, who cannot 
fail to cauſe Trade enough by the Expence of their 
Families and Equipages, among the People of a Coun: | 

try Town. Edward I. and Edward II. had each a 
Miat at Bury, and ſome of their Penics.coined there 

are yet remaining. Stow, in his Survey of London, 
' ſays, That here was alſo a Mint in King 7ohn's 


# I? 17 , 


This Place has been famous for ſeveral Conventions 
of the Nobility and Parliaments. The Barons made 
their League here againſt Ig os A Parliament 

enry III. and another 


was held here in the Reign of Hen and 
in that of Edward I, In the Reign of Edward III. the 


' Townſmen broke open the Abbey, carried off its I'rea- | 
_ ſures, Books, and Charters, and made the Abbot and 
Monks their Priſoners, till they had ſealed a Charter of 
Iacorporation for the Town, and given in the-Cuſtody 
of all the Town-gates, and the Wardſhjp of all us 
_ Orphans ; but 19 of the Rioters were executed, the 
gs that had il 
been extorted from the Abbot made void. A 
Parliament was alſo held here in the Year 1447, in 
the 251h Year of Henry VI. At a Meeting of this 
Hu mphry, Duke of Gyouce/ter,] 
Regent of the Kingdom, during the Abſence Rig | 
; ! | , | f 1 


Town fined 60,0007. and all the Writi 


ad 
Parliament, the good Hu 


\ 


Suffolk. Gre EAT; BRITAIN. ; 
Henry V. and in the Minority of Henry VI. and, to 


| his Ji Hour, the Safeguard of the Nation and Darling 
of the People, was baſely murdered here; by whole 


Death the Gate. was opened to that dreadful War be- 
tween the Houſes of Lancaſter and York, which ended 


in the Deſtruction of the very Race which are ſup- 


poſed to have contrived that Murder. 
As I made ſome Stay at p/wich and Bury, being 


& obliged to wait the Leiſure of a Gentleman, who ac- 
companied me Part of this Journey, I made ſeveral 


Excurſions more inland than I had at firſt intended 


© when I ſet out, and viſited the following Towns : 


As, firſt, Boxford, which is about ſeven Miles from 


: Sudbury, and is a neat and well-built Village, and 


carries on a conſiderable Traffick, Queen Elixabeib 


founded here a Grammar Free- ſchool. 


At Bures on the Stour King Edward was crowned, 


and not at Bury. It has a good Bridge on that River. 


Anno 1733, the Spire of the Steeple of the handſome 
Church here was burnt by Lightening, the Bell-frames 


deſtroyed, and the Bells melted. 


Clare is ſituate on the Stour, about 14 Miles from 
Bury, and is-but a poor Town, and dirty, the Streets 
being unpaved, But yet the Civil and Spiritual Courts 


are held at it, and it has a good Church ; and ſhews © 


{till the Ruins of a ftrong Caſtle, and an 'old Monaf- 
tery. It has a Manufacture of Says, and gives Title 
of Marquis to his Grace the Duke of Newca/lle of 
the Pelham Family, as it did to that of Holles before. 
Not far from Clare is Honedon, where, in the Year 
1687, the Sexton digging a Grave, found a large 
Quantity of Saxen Coins. Ns 1 
Cavendiſh upon the Stour deſerves Mention, for 


giving Name to the noble F amily of che Dukes of 


Devonſhire. © 
Haverhill ſtands partly i in E/ſex and partly i in S. 
folk. By the Ruins of a Church and Caſtle ſtill to be 
ſeen here, it apps to have been « greater Conſe - 
| quence 


IE — " 


PPP 
K — 5 —— rye 


— a. 1 
ICE —_— — FOE 
. 1 1 
eee * . ED wp 5 
„ % % Ne „ — 5 SAT = 
: n . 1... ̃²— Ferro 
* CEE 


- — as 1 


1 
1 
2 
1 
3-4 
4 
3 
5 
14 
2 
$ 
#43 
+4 
2 
2 
1 
1 
9 4 
1 
4 
* 
1 4 
1 
14 
83 
$-'Y 
£ 
65 
4A 
— 
Pk 
> TR 
f.83 
' 
. 
14 
74 
© 
b 
[4 
FT 
—— 9 
$ 
3 
* 
* I 
2's 
''F 
1 
8 
b 
"+ 
* 
; 
6 
12 
; 
2-4 
$3 


n © af . % i 5 1 or”; = a _—_— 
% we Boe ng CORY ow LE RAT ES”... CO IEEE LIEBE 
I - z 1 by . „ 
* „ — — 
— 5 * « * 3 - N 
* * — — ** 11 — —— os ＋ 9 8 n 
X2 8 Joon 8 . 


. ä 
mmmmamm 


— 


1 —— PII 


fare Town, and has two annual F. ASS: 


= = n 
, 4 — 
. * — 
- ä erat bur _ a 
- 2 — 
—ͤ—— —— 1 . ̃ . —˙· > ves 
> — OO ON . 


4 TOUR e Suffolk 


38 g 
quence formerly than at preſent, Now I am at th, 
Dave; ſhall juſt mention = ' 
Ledgate, on account of its giving Birth and Name « 
to the famous Poet, Orator, M athematician, and Phi. þ 
Tofopher, John Ledgate, who died in 1440. Here at b 
to be ſeen the Ruins of a ſtrong Caſtle. BD 
Stoke juxta Neyland has a fair Church and Steeple, WW 2 
 Giffard's-hall, in this Pariſh, is a noble old Seat belong. a 
ing to Sir Francis Mannock, Bart. And Pendering- h S 
was the Seat of the late Sir John Williams, Alderman W 2 
of London. HL: 
Stratford is a thoroughfare Village of great Traffic W 
and is employed in the Woolen ING 8 
 Efterbergholt, near four Miles from Stratford, and h 
half a Mile North of the Stour, is a large and handſome . 7 
Village, employed in the Woolen Way, but not to ſo 8 
great a Degree as formerly. It has a good Church, is 
but the Steeple is in Ruins, and the Bells are rung by te 
Hand, in a kind of Cage, ſet up in the Church- yard. C 
A little South of the Church is an elegant Houſe of Sir 8 N 
Jaa Hankey, Alderman of London. 13 
Needham is a thoroughfare Town, about hind Miles N 
North-weft from Ipſwich. It is tolerably well built, BF tt 
has ſeveral conſiderable Dealers in it, and formerly o 
carried on a large Trade in the Woolen Manufactures, 1 
which it has loſt for ſome Years. | ES 
- Stow- market, about three Miles from Wien 3a P. 
a tolerable Town, with a ſpacious Church, and Spire. Fe 
| Steeple. N 
And five Miles firther, being eight from Pury, is ed 
Fulpit, famous for the white Bricks made there. It w 
has an handſome Church and Spire: Steeple, fu 
At Norton, near Wuit, King Henry VIII. was in- ct 
duced to dig for Gold. He was Tifappotnres, but the = th 
Diggings are viſible at this Day. W fir 
Txworth, about ſeven Miles from Bury, is a. Hiedy 14 w. 
built Town, with a mean Market; z but is a'thorough- Bi M 


© Baotſaah 


1 


W 7.7 /aay. 


| Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 39 
Botſdale is along, mean- built, dirty, 'thorough-fare 
Town; yet it is remarkable for a Grammar Free- 
W ſchool, founded by Sir Nicholas Bacon, and eſtabliſhed 
. by Queen ZE/izabeth, The Maſter and Uſher are to 
be elected out of Bennet College Cambridge, where Sir 


Nicolas was educated. . The Maſter enjoys a Salary of 
20l. per Annum, beſides the Benefit ofthe School houſe, 


= | and the Uſher $81. with a Houſe and Yard. The 


School-houſe was in the Gift of the late Edmund Bri- 
tiffe, Eſq; Sir, Nicolas alſo bequeathed 20/7. a Year to 
the ſaid College for ſix Scholars out of this School, to 
whom likewiſe Archbiſhop Teniſon was ſaid to have 
ven fix Pounds annually. There is mean Market 
here every. Thurſday, and an annual Fair on Holy 

Malden- hall, about 10 Miles North-weft from Bury, 
is ſituate on the River Larke ; it is a Town of very ex- 


tenſive Limits, pleaſant and well- built, and has a fine 


Church, and lofty Steeple. It has a plentiful Friday 
Market, and a very conſiderable annual Fair, which 


laſts four Days. A little North of the Church is the 


Manſion-houſe of Sir Thomas Hanmer, Bart. who, in 
the Reign of Queen Anne was Speaker of the Houſe 


5, Town was conſumed by Fire. | . | 


Ichwarth was once a Pariſh, but now is a noble 


4 Park, in which is the Seat of the Earl of Brio]. This 
Park is full of fine Timber, and there are a great 


Number of the fine Harlequin Deer, which I mention- 


ed to be in Mr. Fonnereau's Park near Ipſwich. Fheſe 
were the only Parks in England, in which theſe beauti- 
ful Deer were to be found; but from theſe, divers 


curious Noblemen have been ſupplied with ſonfje of 
them. It is a Place of great Antiquity, and what con- 
firms it is, what that learned Antiquarian Dr. Battley, 


g writes, That in his Memory a large Pot'of Roman 


Money was found here, 3 PIN '; 
A ny 2 F 2 | ebenham, 


40 A TOUR Hr Suffolk M> 
Diabenbam, 12 Miles North of 1p/wich, is a tolerably i 
clean, though mean-built Town, and among ven 
dirty and heavy Roads, being ſeated on an Hill. The { 
Church is a good Building, the Market: place tolerable, ! 
and there is a Free- ſchool, founded by Appointment of Hf 
„ + ic: 1 
Miendlaſbam is a dirty and poor Town, but ha! 
an handſome Church, and a ſmall Tue/day's Market, | 
ye is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, | © 
ten principal Burgeſſes, and 24 Common-councilmen: i 
ſends two Members to Parliament, and gives Title of 
Baron to the Lord Corniba lis. It is ſituate in a Bg. 
tom between two Rivers, is meanly built, and the 
Streets dirty, Near the Weſt-end of the Church ate 
ſtill to be ſeen ſome of the ruinous Walls of theM 
Caftle. 1 oi a CC 

My Friend, having finiſhed his Buſineſs in tho 
Parts of Sz fo which lie round the Towns of Bury 

and [p/wich, gave me an Opportunity of reſuming my 
Journey according to the Plan I laid down at the Be-. 
| ginning of the Letter: and ſo from the former of thele 

own I returned, by St:w- market and Needham, to 
Ipſwich, that J might keep as near the Coaſt as wa 
proper to my deſigned Circuit; having determined to 
take the Opportunity, which he told me, his Aﬀainl 
would give me, of making two or three Excurſion 5 
from Moodbridke, Aldboraugh, and Southwould, to, 
make my Obſervations on that Part of Sfolł which 
have not yet touched upon. From p/wich therefore 
went to J/oodbridge, and from thence to Orford on the 
Sea- Coaſt. Tl = 
N oodbridge is a Market-town, fituated on the Rival 
Deben, about 11 Miles from the Sea. This Rive 


being navigable to the Town for Ships of conſiderable be. 
Burden, it drives a pretty good Trade with Holland 7. 
Newcaſtle, and London; and has Paſſage- Hoys, that go ſm 
to and return from Londen weekly. It has a fie kn 


Church and Steeple, and traded formerly in Sach- 
ET. - N OE cloth, | 


JW Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 4.1 
Cloth, and now in refining Salt. The Shire-hall is 
an handſome Pile of Building, where the Quarte:- 


wu ſeſſions for this Part of the County are held, and under 


it is the Corn-croſs. One Street in it, called Stone- - 

| /ireet, is well built and paved; but the reſt are dirty. 
The Market- place is alſo well enough built; but the 
reſt of the Town is mean. The Quays and Ware- 
houſes are very commodious; and here is a Grammar 


„bool, and an Alms-houſe, erected in 1 587, by Thomas 


Seckford, Maſter of the Requeſts, for, thirteen. Men 


| and three Women, which is well endowed. It has a 
„pretty good Market on Wedneſdays, and two annual 


Pairs. 1 3 YEE 
alton has been an antient Market-town, and, 
though the Market is now diſuſed, the Croſs is ſtill re- 


: Y maining. In the neighbouring Pariſh of Felixflow, on 
the Cliff from the Sea, and about a Mile from the Coin 
ide of /oodbridge-haven, are diſcerned the Ruins of a 


quadrangular Caſtle advantageouſly ſituated; of which 
nothing now remains but the Foundation of one Side 
of the Wall. The reſt has been devoured by the Sea; 
and in all Probability theſe Remains muſt in a few 
Years undergo the ſame Fate. It was built principally 
of Rock-ſtones ; but the many Roman Bricks ſtill to 
be ſeen, and Roman Coins which have been diſcovered 
among the Ruins of the Side Walls, as they have been 
waſhed away by the Sea in the preſent Age, are an un- 
Wy deniable. Evidence, that it was a Place of (conſiderable 
W Antiquity, probably a Reman Colony, which might 
_ give Name to the Hundred of Calnies, in which it 
titood. E * 12 

| Now begins that Part, which is ordinarily called 


His Suffolk ; which, being a rich Soil, is for a long 


= way wholly employed in Dairiesz and famous for the 

beſt Butter, and perhaps the worſt Cheeſe, in England. 
be Butter is barreled, and ſometimes pickled up in 
> BY {mall Caſks, in which it keeps ſo well, that I have 
„known a Firkin of df Butter ſent to the Maſt Indies, 


42 A TOUR thr Suffolk, Ms, 
and brought back to England again, perlectiy good and 7. 
ſweet. che 
From hence turning down to the Shore, we ſee ry 
Or or dus ſi, a noted Point of Land for the Guide of | 7/ 
the Colliers and Coaſters, and a good Shelter for then fit 
to ride under, when a ſtrong. North - eaſt Wind blows no 
1 makes a foul Shore on the Coaſt. pe 
Orford i is ſituate on the North- weſt Side of Per Rive Iv 
Pang -whence it had its Name. It was formerly z ca) 
Town of good Account, having a ſtrong Caſtle i tur 
reddiſh Stone for its Defence, of which, and of a Bene. 
dictine Nunnery near the Quay, are ſtill to be ſeen dir 
conſiderable Ruins. The Sea has ſo much withdrawn w 
itſelf from this Town, that it is robbed of its chief ha 
Advantage, and deſerves not the Name of an Harbour, I. 
The Town is mean, and no one contends for an In. ge 
tereſt in it, but ſuch as want to make themiſelves: . 
Merit in the Choice of the two Members which it re. ve 
turns to Parliament. It is a Town Corporate, and is | an 
governed by a Mayor, 8 Portmen, and 12 Burgeſſes; ti! 
it has alſo a mean Monday Market, and an annual Fair, tu 
It had the Honour to give Title of Earl to the braut = 7 
Admiral Nel which, being many Tears extin, 63 
was revived in the Perſon of Sir Rob ere pal, "whoſe til! 
'Grandſon now enjoys it. tra 
About three Mites from Orford is Aldhurgh, 2% tra 
Town pleaſantly fituated in a Valley. It has tuo? 
Streets, each near a Mile long; but its readth, which an 
was more conſiderable formerly, i is not proportionable, the 
and the Sea has of late Years ſwallowed up one whole (4; 
Street. The Town, though meanly built is clean, Fo 
and well peopled in the Seafaring The Sea ha 


waſhes the Eaſt- ſide of it, and the River Ald tuns not Wl or 
far from the South-end of it, affording a good Quay. the 
In the adjacent Seas, Sprats, Soals, and Lobſters, arc thi 
caught in abundance. The Town trades to Ne C 
for Coals; and from hence Corn is exported, They 

| n of * as alſo the Manors of Scots and Pit 


Taskardi - 


S Suffolk. 


4 Fiſhery, And here alſo, and at Sole or Southwould, 


* 


GRTAT BRITAIV. 43 
Tashards in the Neighbourhood, formerly belonged to 


WS the Monaſtery of Snape, and were firſt granted, with 
wat Monaſtery, to Cardinal V olſey, and ſoon after to 
omas Duke of Norfolk. Aldburgh is ptetty well 
W ſituated for Strength, and has ſeveral Picees of ' Can- 
non for its Defence. The Church, which is a good 
dice, ſtands on an Hill a little Weſt of the Town. 
lt is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, ten 
W capital Burgeſfſes, and 24 inferior Offieers; and ſends 
two Members to Parliament, ooh 


From Aldburgh, 1 paſſed through Saxminden, a littſe 


dirty Market. town, to Duntoich, a very amient Town, 
Ws which, by Roman Coins dug up there, is ſuppoſed to 
have been a Roman Station. In- the Reign of 

l. it was ſo conſiderable a Plate, that it had 130 Bur- 
geſſes, and was valued to that King at 50. and 60,000 
Herrings. We read, that in the Reign of Henry II. it 
vas a very famous Village, well ſtored with Riches, 
W and fortified with a Rampart, ſome Remains of which 
till appear: It is governed by two Bailiffs, and ſends 
two Members to Parliament. 


TVillam 


Before theſe times, in the Reign of Kin & Sigebert, io 


ego. Dunwich was à Biſhop's See; and ſo continued 
till William I. made his Chaplain Bifhop of it, and 
tranſlated the See to Thetford, which was afterwards 


tranſlated from thence to Norwich. EN 


There were ſeveral Religious Houſes in Dunwich, 


and ſome pretend no leſs than fifty Churches: But 
there is a certain Account of fix Pariſh- Churches, and 
chree Chapels, beſides the ſeveral Religious Houſes. 
Four of theſe Pariſh-churehes, and the three Chapels, 
bave been long devoured by the Sea ; and one of the 
WT others met with the ſame Fate in this Age, ſo that 
there is only one now ſtanding; and what remains of 


this once famous Place, is but a pitiful Parcel of ſorry 


Cottages, yet it ſends two Members to Parliament. 


Hereabouts they begin to talk of Herrings, and the 


rg 


44. 4A TOUR wr Suffolk 
the next Sea port, they cure Sprats in the ſame Man. 3 
ner as they do Herrings at Yarmouth. | 


From Dunwich we went to Southwould, pleaſamy 4 


ſituated on an Hill, and almoſt ſurrounded with the $f 


and the River Blyth, over which it has a Bridge, 8 
drives a conſiderable Trade in Salt and old Beer, and in 
Herrings, Sprats, &c. The Coaſt lies due Not tbe 
from'Orfordneſs to Southwould ; a bold Shore, an 


ſafe Anchoring all the Way. A little to the South of 


the Place laſt mentioned, the Sea breaking in upon te 


Shore makes a Creek, which, when entered ſpreadinyſ 
out divides to. Dunwich, Seuthwould, and Walder ſivid 
While the Town of Dunwich retained any Trade, ſhe 
laboured inceſfantly, (her very Exiſtence dependig 


upon it) to diſtreſs Southwould; till, to end the Diſpute, - 


the latter was incorporated by Henry VII. Thi 


Town of Southwenld, which, like Dunwich, ſtands ou 


a Cliff, at the coming in of the Tide is almoſt ſu-Þ 
rounded by the Ocean. It has ſome Share of Com 


merce from its Situation; and, whenever the Rive 


Blyth, which falls into the Creek before deſcribed 
ſhall be rendered navigable, (to effect which an Ad 
paſſed in the Year 1757) it cannot but be of greif 


Benefit, as well to the Town as to the Country abou 


it. The free Britiſb Fiſhery, eſtabliſhed within the 


few Years by Act of Parliament, revived the, Courag|l 


of its Inhabitants, 'and has been in many reſpects ſer- 
viceable to the Place; more particularly in recom 
mending it to the Notice of the Legiſlature, in conſe : 
quence of which an Act paſſed Anne 1740-73 f 
opening, cleanſing, repairing and improving the 
to be in Force for 21 Years: but that not having an 
ſwered the deſired End, another Act was paſſed for en- 
larging the Term to 21 Vears more, and for amendin 
and altering the Powers granted by the former Act 
* it is hoped, will complete the intended Pu- 
Socuthibould is a Member of the Port of Yarmouth; 
and / alberſwick, commonly written OO is a . 
N reck 


Poffolk. GREAT BRITAIx. 45 


fan Creek to Southwonuld, At preſent theſe Places are but 
itile regarded, but our Poſterity will, from Experience, 
nc iſcover, that a navigable River and good Harbour 
Se aeſerve to be purchaſed here, though at a conſiderable. 
reren, 1 
du The oy before the Town, antiently called from 
or {thence Soul-bay, now commonly, tho? corruptly, Sole- 
an ay, was a frequent Station of the Royal Navy during 
h the Dutch Wars, and is memorable for two famous 
the Sea-ſights, the former, June 3, 1665, and the latter 


lig May 28, 1672, both to the Difadvantage of the Dutch. 
1,88 This Bay was formerly bounded by Ea/fton-neſs, 
ſhef& fo called becauſe ſuppoſed to be the moſt Eaſtern point 
ing of this Coaſt, and another Cape to the South-eaſt of 
ute Dumuich ; but the Sea having removed theſe Marks, 
hö it may now be ſaid to leave Covehith-neſs, with the 
oY Burnet, a Sand lying before it, on the North, and- 
fr. 7 hirp-ne/s on the South, a very commodious Road for 
m Ships, and juſtly famous for its Fiſhery, particularly for 
vel Soals, which, in point of Size and Flavour, are not in- 
ech ferior to any caught upon the Coaſt of th's Iſland. 
aa The Traffick of my Friend at Z/oodbridge, Aldburgh, 
en and this Place, gave me the Opportunity I hinted at, 
ou of making Excurſions into the main inland Parts of 
e Sol, adjacent to thoſe Towns, which 1 ſhall tran. 
8 ſcribe from my Memorandum book, in the Order I ſet 
et. them down. © e | C4 
m. Uford, two Miles North-eaſt of //oodbridge, is at 


e- preſent of no great Remark ; but fer the Ruins of a 


Chapel, called Sogenboc Chapel. | 
% in the Hundred of Har!/mere ſtands Broome, a noble 
n. old Manſion, which for many Ages has been the Seat 
of the noble Family of Cornwallis. In this Pariſh of 
rome is an Alms-houſe for poor Widows, fronting 
1;88 the Hall; but not endowed. = „ 
1 Wickham Market is ſituated about four Miles from 
I bodbridge. The Church is built on an Hill, and, 
chough the Steeple be but 23 Yards high, affords the 
a8 beſt Proſpect of any in S for, in a clear Day, 
* | | | near 


46 _ 4 TOUR thro Suffolk 
near 50 Pariſh-churches may be ſeen from it. It is {tire 
now only a Village, but has ſome Trade, and the Civil 


and Spiritual Courts are held in it. 1 ; 
Snape was once noted for a famous Monaſtery, few lar, 
Remains of which are now to be ſeen. It has a con-. He 
ſiderable annual Fair for Horſes, which laſts four Days, M pla 
2 Auguft 11, to which the London Jock ies te- 5 
- - AOL „ N b = ; q 
At Sudlourne is a fine Seat of the Lord Viſcount Pie 
Hereford. | 4 IN 3 Bu 


At Eafton is the Seat of the Earl of Rechford. ine 
Letberingbam was of Note for a little Priory, which m. 
was obtained at the Diſſolution by Sir Antony l ingfiad, ¶ an 
and Sir Henry Spelman. tells us, that, as a Judgment for big 
the Sacrilege, he died without Iſſue Male. It was con- to\ 
verted into a Manſion houſe, and is now. the Seat of {Mt ve! 
the antient Family of the Nauntons, ; Sir Roger Naun. Fr 
ton was in the, Reign of King James I. Secretary of int 
State, and Maſter of the Court of Wards and Liveries tat 
He died Anno 1630. In the Abbey is a long Gallery, is 
adorned with ſeveral valuable Pictures: and in Letber- Mt & 
ingham Church are ſome elegant Monuments of the M 
Ming fields emen è , 

Rende!ſham was antiently famous for being the Royal th. 
Reſidence of Redwald King of the E Auges. Hugh “ 

Hitz- Otho procured a Market and Fair fon this [Town 
from King Edward I. Digging here about 60 Years ar 
ago; an ancient Sulver Crown was found, weighing W 
about Vo Ounces, ſuppoſed to have belonged to Red. P:? 
wald, or ſome other King of the Haft- Angles ; which | de 
was ſold, and melted down for the ſake of the Metal. 18 

. At. Butley, two Miles Welt of Orford, was a Priory 
of Canons Regular; founded by Rarnuph de Glanvilh, I m 
Chief Juſtice of England, to the Honour of the Bleſſed Te 
Virgin. The Ruins of the Abbey, which are ſtill to B 
be ſeen, ſhew it, to have been very large; and the F 
C; 


Gate - houſe is a, magaificent Building: it remains int 
i 


37 ge 4. ob * 


[1 t 
4 ; 


Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN 47 


L * 
18 


ivil of Arms, finely cut in Stone. 


ew large Town, well-built, and pleaſantly ſeated near the 


\n. Head of the River Ore; it has a ſpacious Market- 


ys, place; the Church is built of black Flint, and is a very 
te ME ately and noble Edifice, wherein ſeveral of Motobrays, 

Dakes of Norfolk, lie buried. The Caſtle is a fair 
int Piece of Antiquity, being a large, beautiful, and ſtrong 


Building; and contains within the Walls now ſtand-⸗ 
ing an Acre 1 Rood 11 Perches, and was formerly 


ch much larger. Its Walls are 44 Feet high, very thick, 
ls, and pretty intire ; and it has 13 Towers, 14 Feet 
for bigher than the Walls, two of which are, Watch- 
n. towers. It was both by Art and Nature formerly 
of very ſtrong, there are two good Alms- houſes, and a 
1. M8 Free-ſchoo!, founded by Sir Robert Hitcham (who is 
of interred in the Church), for 40 poor Boys, who are 
s taught to read, write, and caſt Accoompts; and 10ʃ. 
y, is given to ſettle each of them Apprentice. This 
Gentleman bought of the Duke of Norfs/4 the Cattle, 
Manor, Cc. and gave them to Pembroke hall in Cam: 


the Lady Zane was proclaimed Queen by the Vor, 
umberland Faction. <> CE 
n Haleſworth, North-eaſt of Framlinghem, is a large 
rs and good Market-town, fituate upon the River Blyth, 
o WW which runs through it. The Streets are clean, and 
. partly paved. It has a very neat Church, beautifully 


decorated within ; and is noted for Linen-yarn, which 
is ſpun in the Neighbourhood. „ 
Blithburg, four Miles Eaſt of Haleſworth, was for- 
merly a Place of good Note; but now has nothing to 
recommend it but its Church, which is a fine old 
Building, and kept in good Repair. „ 
Hoxne is the Place where Edmund, King of the 


3 tire, and is embelliſhed in the F ront with many Coats 
Framlingham, ſituate North-weſt of Alaburgb, is 8 


bridge. To this Caſtle Queen Mary I. retired, when 


| Eaft- Angles, was murdered, by the Pagan Danes, be- 
cauſe. he would not renounce his Faith, e i 


” * 2 7 . 
i % 5 
1 
— Pens ——— ñ ͤ44α' P ———— . ̃ ˙n«mß———.. ,,,. ,,, 7— roo 
. ww 
” —— > 29 „ — 1 N * — o 2 o as 


— — 


2:6 2 + cet 4044S + — 46 * 


- * e 
— * — — 2 2 © Py * 


4 "A TOUR thre Suffolk 


870. and his Body was removed to \ Bury, as mentione 1 


befgre. 8 


- Bungay is del ightfully ſituated on the River 22 


ney, which, being navigable from Tarmouth, is a Bene. 


fit to its Trade: It is # Borough-town (in the Hun. 
dred of Wangford), well-built, and conſiſts of two 


diſtinct Pariſhes, with two Parith- churches anſwering 
to the Largeneſs of the Town, one of which is a ſumy. 


tuous Structure (wherein is erected a fine double Or. 


gan); and its beautiful Steeple (in which is a Ring of 
eight Bells) is an Ornament to the Town. Between 


| theſe two Churches are to be ſeen the Ruins of a Be. 


nedictine Nunnery. Here alſo remain the Ruins of : | 


very ſtrong Caſtle, ſuppoſed to have been built by the 
Bigods Earls of Nor. Here is a Market weekly on 
Thurſdays, well ſerved with all manner of Proviſions, i 
There is alſo a large Common belonging to the Town, 
which is of great Advantage to the Inhabitants : ov 


this Common is a Race. ground, which is kept in good 


Order. This whole Town, (except one ſmall Street) 
was deſtroyed by Fire March 1, 1688-9, the Loſs was 
computed at 29,896/. and upwards. 
The Caftle was ſo ſtrong, that Hugh Bigud Earl of | 
Norfolk, its Owner, in the Wars between the Emprek | 

Maud and King Stephen (with the latter of whom be 


ſided) made this Boaſt upon it : 


2 JI in my Caſtle of Bungay, 
Upon the River Waveney, 


I would not care for the King of Cockney, | 


But he was erst forced to compound with King 
Henry II. for its Preſervation. Here is a Grammar: 


fchool, with ten Scholarſhips for Emanuel 2 alley 
| Cambridge. „ | 
In this Excurſion I ſtretched to Ws, ſtil arti 


North eaſt ; a large ill-built Market-town, ſituate on 
the : Waveney, It has a fine Church and Steep'e; 
| a Gram 


Suffolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 49 
| Grammar and Engliſb School, well endowed; a. | 

W plentiful Market, and a Common of above 1000 Acts: S 

T he Streets are well paved and clean, but the Houſes 

are but ordinary. The Ruins of another Church, 

called Ingate Church, are to be ſeen here, which was 

| formerly the Pariſh-church to the Town. _ 

In the Church at Beccles is the following remarkable 

-& Epitaph, written in the Law Stile: 


Hic jacet corpus Thome Wron gey, generoſe „ unius 
attornatorum domini Regis de Banco apud Weſim. 

| Fuxta libertates & privilegia ejuſdem curiæ, tertio die 

Apfrilis, privilegio j uo non obſtante, morte arreflatur 
Hic in ſepulcri priſona detinetur; nec aliqua legis ſub- | 

tilitate ab eadem ante general gaolæ deliberationem 

| literandum ; cum Chriſius ad totum terrarum orbem 
judicanaum venerit. J 

| In Engliſh thus : | 

Here lies the Bop of Thomas Ii rongey, Gent One 
of the Attorneys of the King's Bench at Neſiminſter. 

According to the Liberties and Privileges of the 

ſame Court, on the third Day of April, his Privilege 
notwithſtanding, it was arreſted by Death, and is 

here detained in the Priſon of the Grave. From 
| whence it ſhall not by any Quirk be again delivered 
before the general Goal-delivery, when Chrift ſhall 

come to judge the whole World. | 


Bu & cofile, ſituate at the Mouth of the 1 | 
was a Place of conſiderable Note in the Time of the. 
q Somans. "The Walls on the Eaſt, North, and South 
Sides, are ſtill landing, pretty intire. The River: 
being a Defence on the Weſt, no Wall was wanting 
there. | 5 
I returned from theſe Excurſions to Seuthwould, in 

_ to proceed on my Journey, according to my firſt 

an. 85 
At this Town i in particular, and ſo at all the Towns. 
on this Coaſt, from CI to Yarmouth, is the or- 

Vor. I. D dinary 


* 


„een Sr 


dinary Place where our Summer Friends the Swallows 


firſt land, when they come to viſit us; and here they 
may be ſaid to begin their Voyage, when they go back 


into warmer Climates. I was ſome Years before at 
this Place, about the Beginning of October; and, lodg. 


ing in an Houſe that looked into the Church yard, I 
obſerved in the Evening an unuſual Multitude of Swal- 
lows fitting on the Leads of the Church, and covering 
the Tops of ſeveral Houſes round about. This led me 
to enquire what was the Meaning of ſuch a prodigious 
Multitude of Swallows ſitting there? I was anfwered, 
That this was the Seaſon when the Swallows, their 
Food failing here, began to leave us, and return to the 
Country, wherever it be, from whence they came; 
and that, this being the neareſt Land to the oppoſite 
Coaſt, and the Wind contrary, they were waiting for 
»a Gale, and might be ſaid to be Vind bound. 

This was more evident to me, when in the Morn- 
ing I found the Wind had come about to the North- 
welt in the Night, and there was not one Swallow to 
be ſeen, e e 

Tertain it is, that the Swallows neither come hither 
merely for warm Weather, nor retire merely from 
Cold: they (like the Shoals of Fiſh in the Sea) purſue 
their Prey; being a voracious Oreature, and feeding as 


they fly; for their food is the Inſects, of which, in our . 


Summer Evenings, in damp and moiſt Places, the Air 
is full; and, when cold Weather comes in, and kills 
the Infects, then Neceſſity compels the Swallows to 


quit us, and follow their Food to ſome other Climate. 


This paſſing and repaſſing of the Swallows is obſerv- 
ed no-where ſo much as on this Eaſtern Coaſt ; name. 
ly, from above Harwich. to the Eaft Point of Norfolk, 


called Vintertonneſs, North; which is oppoſite to Hol. 


land. We know nothing of them any farther North; 
the Paſſage of the Sea being, as I ſuppoſe, too broad 


from Fl:mbro' Head, and the Shore of Holderne/s in 


| York ire &c. . 
ox This 


Suffolk. GRTAT BRITAIN. * 


This Part of England is remarkable for being the ; 
firſt where the Feeding and Fattening of Sheep and 


other Cattle with Turneps was practiſed in England, 

KW which is made a very great Part of the Improvement 

of their Lands to this Day; and from whence the Prac- 

tice is ſpread over moſt of the Eaſt and South Parts of 

England, to the great Enriching of the Farmers, and 

TS Increaſe of fat Cattle: and though ſome have objeded 

| againſt the Goodneſs of the Fleſh thus fed with Tur- 
neps, and have fanſied it would taſte of the Root, yet 


upon Experience it is found, that the Mutton fed upon 


this wholeſome Root is the ſweeteſt which is brought 


to London. 8 . „ : 
The County of Suffol# is particularly famous for 


: furniſhing the City of London, and all the Counties 


round, with Turkeys ; inſomuch that more Turkeys 


are bred in this County, and the Part of Norfolk that 
C joins to it, for Sale, than in all the reſt of England; and 


they are generally of a larger Size than thoſe which are 
bred in any other Part of the Kingdom. _ N 
Nor will this be found an inconſiderable Article, if 


it be true, that 300 Droves of Turkeys have paſſed, in 


one Seaſon, over Stratford. bridge, on the River Stour, 
on the Road from [p/wich to London; each Drove ge- 
nerally containing from 300 to 1000 Turkeys, which 


at 500, one with another, will be 150,000 in all; and 


yet the Numbers which are driven by Newmarket- 


beath, and the open Country, and the Foreſt, and alſo 
| thoſe by Sudbury and Clare, are much greater, 


For the further Supplies of the Markets of London 


MW with Poultry, in which theſe Countries particularly 
E abound, they have within theſe few Years found it 


practicable to make the Geeſe travel on Foot too, and 
prodigious Numbers are brought up to Londen in like 
Droves from the fartheſt Parts of Norfolk, even from 
the Fen- Country, about Lym, Downham, F/iſbich, 
and the aſhes ; as alſo from all the Eaſt fide of Nor- 


| falk and Suffolk ; and *tis very frequent now to meet 


D'2 10880 


= ., AFOUR- oy Suffolk 


that the Geeſe may feed on the Stubbles as they g. 
Thus they hold on to the End of Oelober, when the 


| Feet, and ſhort Legs, to march in. | 


and Day; fo that they bring the Fowls 70, 80, or 100 
faſtened together by a Piece of Wood lying croſs wise 


Yield a good Price at Market; and more out of this 


Reaſon of my ſpeaking of it here. 


a conſiderable Market town, ſtanding near the Ses. 


L _z 


1000 or 2000 ina Drove, They begin to drive then 
generally in Auguſt, when the Harveſt is almoſt over, 


Roads begin to be too ſtiff and deep for their broad | 


Beſides ſuch Methods of driving theſe Creatures on 
Foot, they have invented a new kind of Carriage, being 
Carts formed on Purpoſe, with four Stories of Stages, to 
put the Poultry in, one above another, whereby one 
Cart will carry a very great Number; and, for the 
ſmoother going, they drive with two Horſes abreaſt, 
like a Coach; thus quartering the Road for the Eaſe 
of the Poultry, and changing Horſes, they travel Night 


Miles in two Days and one Night : the Horſes are 


upon their Backs, by which they are kept even and 
together; and the Driver fits on the Top of the Cart, 
as in the public Carriages for the Army, &c. 

In this manner vaſt Numbers of Turkey-poults and 
Chickens are carried to London every Year, which 


County than any other Part of England, which is the i 


In this Part, which we call High Suffolk, there are 
not ſo many Families of Gentry or Nobility, as in the 
other Side of the Country : but it is obſerved, that, 


though their Seats are not here, their Eſtates are ; andi 


the Pleaſure of JYe/? Suffolk is much of it ſupported by 
by the Wealth of High Suffolt for the Richneſs ofthe | 
Lands, and Application of the People to all Kinds of þ 
Improvement, are ſcarce credible. The Farmers 
alſo are ſo conſiderable, and their Farms and Dairies ſo 
large, that tis frequent for a Farmer tò have 10000 
Stock upon his Farm in Cows only. _ | | 
From Southeuould, Coaſt - wiſe, I proceeded to Lege, 


It 


"WW Suffolk. GRTAT BRTTATx. 53 
It is indifferently well-built. The Church, which 
is ſituate near a Mile on the Weſt fide of the Town, 


is a good Building; but, for the Eaſe of its Inhabitants, 


there is a Chapel in the Town, wherein divine Service 
is ſometimes celebrated. The Neſs below the North - 
end of the Town is the moſt Eaſtern Point of Land in 
Britain. Its principal Trade is Fiſhing for Herrings 
and Mackre). It has a noted Market weekly on . 
| xe/days 3 and two ſmall Fairs yearly, the one on the _ 
Iſt Day of May, and the other on the 29th of Septem- 
r. Beſides the preſent Chapel, here was formerly, 
Vat the South end of the Town, a Chapel called Good- 
croſs Chapel, which hath been long ſince deſtroyed by 
the Sea. This Town, having been Part of the antient 
Demeſnes of the Crown, hath a Charter, and a Town 
ſeal; but the greateſt Privilege it now enjoys from its 
W Charter, is, that of its Inhabitants not ſerving on Juries, 
Neither at the Seſſions or Aſſizes. 3 


I ſaw a beautiful Monument of that excellent Judge 


ir 7%n Holt, at Redgrave, the F amily-ſeat, with the 
following Inſcription upon it: 3 : 


4 NI. S. Grp 
D. Johannis Holt, Equitis Aur, 
Totius Angliæ in Banco Regis 
per 21 Annos continuos 
Capitalis Juſtitiarii; 
Qulielmo Fegi, Annæque Reginæ, 
Confilarii perbetui; | 
Libertutis ac Legum Anglicarum 
Aſſertoris, Vindicis, Cuſtodis, 
igilis, Aeris, & Intrepidi, 
Rolandus Frater Unicus & Heres 
 Optime de ſe Merito 
„„ 
Die Martii Yto. 1709. ſublatus eff 
ex Oculis naſtris. 
Natus 30. Decembris, Anno 1640. | 
3 © == 08 


= - ck — on, > FAD — 
= _ | | = : _ — 
N 8 OVS N f a 2 
—— ́ Ae Aber, rh igr CS * NS ee ee 
8 > . _—_— - — xx = : * — 15 
Hoo OS bs = *. 5) 5/2 h4.o8 5 = a | 
2 . 5 — 1 "od 3 — TSTY 
5 1 - Wa — RT 
2 * n * wry a - — 
n — 1 * 8 CERT - == =_ 
l 24433 OE N N t 
bo | | l 
; 4 
\ 
7 5 
- % 1 


—— ———— Fa ny | 
Peres r 


ED PE RIVER 

reg. 
5 
n 


3 — 
— ES 88 — awed ew m 7 1 — _s * — * P 
0% wad, + Ah Reb . „„ renee cate weed SL 
p 4 rr 1 * 88 "Pau —— — 6 
a 8 ea. I 4 — 
— 1 -» as 
g . — 2 
F - 
" . 
; 
* - 


— nn : 1 
11 r 12 22 
„, e e a \ 
n b * 24 2 
a Prat Den RE Eat 
S = 8 . 7 Ihe 


— # 4 TOUR the 


In Engliſh thus : 


Sacred to the Memory of Sir Jobn Holt, Knight, Lord 
Chief Juſtice of the King's-Bench for the Space of 
21 Years ſucceſſively, and of the Privy Council to | 


King William and Queen Anne; a vigilant, penetrat- 
ing, and intrepid Aſſertor, Vindicator, and Guardian 
of the Liberty and Laws of England. | 

Rowland, his only Brother and Heir, erected this Mo. 


nument as a Teſtimony of the ſtrongeſt Obligations, 
He departed this Life the 5th of March, in the Yea MR 


1709. The Day of his Birth was the 3oth of 
December, in the Year 1040. „ 


I believe, Sir, you will allow, that I have written 


enough for one Letter. I will therefore only further 
add, that I am, 5 ” 
| | Your humble Servant, 


— 


— . 


ER 


Containing a Deſcription of the Counties Ul 


NoRFOLK and CAMBRIDGE, and that 

Part of Ess x not toucbed on in the former. 

$1 R, | 
F ROM High-Suffolk, I paſſed the Vaveney, neut 


Schole Inn; and ſo came into Norfolk © and bete 


we ſee a Face of Diligence ſpread over the whole 
Country: the vaſt Manufactures carried on chiefly by 
the Norwich Weavers. employ all the Country round 
in ſpinning Yarn for them ; and alſo uſe many _—_ 
= | | 1. Pack 


Norfolk. 


? en at ld 1 ae. aa Py as 


— wo FA MP — — a 


9p — 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. © 55 6 1 


Packs of Yarn, which they receive from other Coun 
tries, even from as far as Yorkſhire and //e/tmoreland. 
This Side of Norfolk is very populous, and filled with 
a great Number of conſiderable Market-towns ; info- 
much that between the Borders of Suffolk and the City 


| of Norwich on this Side, which is not above 22 Miles in 
Breadth, are the following Market-towns ; | 


Thetford, Hingham, Harlefton, 
Dis, ' FWeſt-Dezrham, Eaft Deer bam, 
Harling, | Attleborough, „ 
Bucknam, Frindham, Laddon, &c. 


Moſt of theſe Towns are very populous and large; 


but that which is moſt remarkable is, that the whole 


Country round them is iaterſperſed with Villages ſo 


large, and fo full of People, that they are equal to 
s Market-towns in other Counties. | 


An eminent Weaver of Nerwich gave mea Scheme 


ol their Trade on this Occaſion, by which, calculat- 


ing from the Number of Looms at that time employed 


in the City of Nerwich only, he made it appear, that 


there were 120,000 People buſied in the Woolen and 
Silk Manufactures of that City only: not that the 


People all lived in the City, though Norwich is very 
large and populous ; but they were employed for ſpin- 


ing.the Yarn uſed for ſuch Goods as were all made in 
that City. | Eo. a” 
This ſhews the wonderful Extent of the. Norwich 


Manufacture, or Stuff-weaving Trade, by which ſo 
| many Families are maintained. 


This Throng of Villages continues thro? all the Eaſt 
Part of the County, which is of the greateſt Extent, and 
where the Manufacture is Chiefly carried on. If any 
Part of it be thin of Inhabitants, it is the Weſt Part, 
drawing à Line from about Brandon, South, to Waſſing- 
bam, North. This Part of the County, indeed, is full 
of open Plains, and ſomewhat ſandy and barren, but 


Vet feeds great Flocks of Sheep. 


74 5 NOR. 


6 OF FOUR wo Norfolk. 
NORWICH is the Capital of the County, and 


the Centre of all the Trade and Manufactures which 
J have juſt mentioned; an antient, large, rich, and 


; | wa | ir 
populous City. If a Stranger were only to ride thro' 1 
or view the City of Norwich on ordinary Days, he it 
would be induced to think it a Town without Inhabit. B 
ants; but, on the contrary, if he was to view the City, t. 
either on a Sabbath day, or on any public Occaſion, he tt 
would wonder where all the People could dwell, u 
the Multitude is ſo great: but the Caſe is this; the 
Inhabitants, being all buſy . at their Manufactures, 8. 
dwell in tneir Garrets at their Looms, and in their v 
'Combing-ſhops, as they call them, Twiſting mills, N V 
and other Workhouſes; almoſt all the Works they 
are employed in n done within Doors. v 
Thbere are in this City 32 Pariſhes, beſides the Ca-. o 
thedral, and a great many Meeting- houſes for Diſſent. t 
ers of all Denominations. The Caſtle is antient MW © 
and decayed, and now for many Years paſt made uſe b. 
of as a Gaol, _ | JFF a 
This City, it is ſaid, was built by the Saxons out of v 
the Ruins of Venta Icenorum, now called Caſter, where 8 
ſome Years ſince were found ſeveral Roman Urns. In 
_ the time of the S2xons it was the principal Seat of the p 
 Eaſt-Angles, and was reduced to Aſhes by Sueno the 
Dane. It was re-edified, and Famine only compelled 8 
it to yield to Milliam the Norman. Mo 
The famous Rebellion of Kett, the Tanner of a 
indbam, in the Reign of Edward VI. reduced it again fr 
to a ruinous State; but it was happily reſtored by) C 
Queen Elizabeth, who ſent hither Part of the Fleming: it 
that came over from the cruel Perſecution of the Duke Z 
of Alva; to whoſe Induſtry and Example is owing B 
the rich Manufacture of Stuffs for which this City is ſo t 
famous. Y e . 1 E 
The Walls of this City are reckoned three Miles in a 


Circumference, taking in more Ground than the City of 
London, within the Walls; but much of that * 
N : e 5 ies 


I Norfolk. GREAT BRITA. 57 
lies open in Paſture- fields and Gardens; nor does it 
ſeem to be, like ſome antient Places, a decayed declin- 
ing Town, the Walls only marking out its antient 
| Dimenſions ; for we have not Cauſe to ſuppoſe, that 
it was ever larger or more populous than it is now. 
But the Walls ſeem to be placed, as if it were expected 
| that the City would in time increaſe ſufficiently to fill 
| them up with Buildings. There are 12 large Gates, 
ell, WE which give Entrance to the City. 8 | 

the BE Vorwich is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, two 
ee, We Sheriffs, Steward, 24 Aldermen, 60 Common-council, 
ell with a Town: clerk, Sword- bearer, &c. and ſends two 
ls, Members to Parliament: 8 | 


There are annually choſe eight Wardens of the 
Worſted weavers, four out of the City, and four out 
a: of the adjacent Country, who are ſworn to take Care 


ite that there be no Fraud in the ſpinning, weaving, or 
nt dying the Stuffs. They have a Seat in the Town- 
ſe ball, with this Inſcription over it, Worſted Reformed ; 
and there is alſo a Company of Manufacturers of 
of WF Woolen, called the Ruſſia Company, who have another 
re deat in it, with this Inſcription, Fidelitas Artis. 
In | The Stocking Manufacture in this Town was com- 
he puted, ſeveral Years ago, at 60,000. per Ann. 
he BH The Cathedral is a fine Fabric, and the Spire- 
ed Steeple beautiful, and, next to Saliſbury, and the Cu- 
pola of St. Paul's, the higheſt in England. It is not. 
of antient, the Biſhop's See having been firſt at Thetford, 
in We from whence it was not tranſlated hither till the 12th 
y Century ; yet the Church has ſo many Antiquities in 
„tt, that our late great Scholar and Phyſician, Sir Thomas 
e Brows, thought it worth his while to write a whole 
Book to collect the Monuments and Inſcriptions in 
lo BF this Church, to which I refer the Reader. It had an 
| Hoſpital in it, for 100 poor Men and Women, and 
15 a fine Market-croſs. - That called  Bridewell, is a 
of large and moſt beautiful Building of ſquare Flint, 


8 1 


Here is a very fine Market for Corn, Fleſh, Fiſh, and 
Poultry; all which are generally ſold at very reaſons, 
ble Rates, fo that the Woolen Manufacturers can live 
as cheap here as in moſt Parts of England. There i 
alſo a Place called the Madder-mart, from whence we 
may conclude, that Madder was formerly cultivated in 
this County, as it certainly was in many other Par 
of England. In ſhort, the Culture of this valuable Dye 
was diſcontinued on Account of the many Diſputes 
with the Clergy about Tythes, ſo that when the 
Tythe of Madder was determined to be vicarial, it 
was totally neglected, and our Neighbours the Dat 
availed themſelves of this, and have for many Year, 


paſt received between one and two hundred thouſand 


Pounds Sterling from England annually for this Dye. 
The River Tare runs through this City, and is na- 
vigable thus far without the Help of Locks or Stops; 
and being increaſed by other Waters, paſles afterwards 
through a long Track of the richeſt Meadows, and the 


largeſt, take them altogether, that are any: where in 


England, lying for many Miles in Length, from this 
City to Yarmeuth, including the Return of the aid 


Meadows on the Bank of the Maveney, South, and on 


the River Thyrn, North. 

I There are fix large Bridges over the River running 
through the City, called Helleſden, Coflany, Bla 
friars, Dye bridge, FWhite-friars, and Biſbopſgate, 
Bridges; and to repair theſe Bridges, as alſo the Walls 

and Gates, and the City Waſtes, Staiths, and Wharf 


(which were become ſo ruinous, that the ordinary 


Revenue of the City was inſufficient for that Purpoſe), 
an Act of Parliament paſſed in the Year 1725 b. 
which laid divers Tolls and Impoſts on particular 
Goods and Merchandizes brought up the River Yare. 
One thing is proper to be mentioned here, which 


Hiſtory accounts not fer. It is this: The River 


Maveney is a conſiderable River, and of a deep and full 
Channel, navigable for * Barges as high as = 
| all 


ran Mull 


F Ge. A Red Mt — ln ee . wm. ooo ea CE a a 


a + _awsSs e dS LÞ]- foo mand wa, dS 


a Aa tw. TD20t 


WON | 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 579 


and Bungay ; it runs for a Courſe of about 50 Miles, 
between the Counties of Suffolk and Vorſolt, as a . 


Boundary to both; and puſhing forward, though with 


a gentle Stream, no one would doubt, when they ſee 
the River. growing broader and deeper, and going 


directly towards the Sea, even to the Edge of the 


| Beach, and within a Mile of the main Ocean, but 
| that it would make its Entrance into the Sea at that 


Place, and afford a noble Harbour for Ships at the 
Mouth of it; when, on a ſudden, the Land riſing high 
by the Sea-lide, croſſes the Head of the River, like a 
Dam, checks the whole Courſe of it, and it returns, 
bending its -Courſe Weſt, for two Miles, or there- 


| abouts ; and then turning North, through another 
| long Courſe of Meadows (joining to thoſe juſt now 
| mentioned), ſeeks out the River Yare, joins its Water 
| with that, and both find their Way to the Sea to- 


gether. . . 8 
Some of our Hiſtorians tell a long fabulous Story of 


this River's being once open, and a famous Harbour 


for Ships belonging to the Town of Lee/?ef adjoining z 
but that Yarmouth envying the Proſperity of Leo/ief, 
made War upon them ; and that after many bloody 


Y Battles, as well by Sea as by Land, they came at laſt 


to a decifive Action at Sea with their reſpective Fleets ; 


but the Leofof Fleet being overthrown, and utterly de- 


ſtroyed, the Yarmouth Men either actually ſtopped up 


the Mouth of the ſaid River, or obliged the vanquiſhed 
 Leojief Men to do it themſelves, and bound them never 
| to attempt to open it again. | 


I ſee no Authority for this Relation, neither do the 


| Relaters agree either in the Time or in the Particulars 
of the Fak. | 


In this vaſt Track of Meadows are fed a prodigious 
Number of Black Cattle, which are ſaid to produce the 
fatteſt Beef, though not the largeſt, in England; and 


the Quantity is fo great, as that they not only ſupply 
| the City of. Norwich, is Town of Yarmouth, and 
CE 4 


the 


60 
the Country adjacent, but ſend great Quantities of them 
weekly, in all the Winter- ſeaſon, to London. 
And this in particular is worthy Remark, That the 
Groſs of all. the Scots Cattle, which come yearly into 
England, are brought to a ſmall Village lying North of 
the City of Norwich, called St. Faith's, where the 


TOUR thro Norfolk. 


Norfolk Graſiers go and buy them. 


Theſe Scots Runts, as they call them, coming out 


of the cold and barren Mountains of the Highlands in 
Scotland, feed ſo eagerly on the rich Paſture in theſe 
Marſhes, that they thrive in an unuſual manner, and 
grow very fat; and the Beef is ſo.delicious for Taſte, 

that the 3 prefer them to the Engliſß Cattle, 
which are much larger and fairer to look at. Some 
have told me, and I believe with Truth, that there are 
above 40, ooo of theſe Scots Cattle fed in this County 
every Year, and moſt of them in the Marſhes between 

Norwich, Beccles, and Yarmouth, in which they are fed 
till Winter, when they are removed into the drier 
ſandy Land, where they conſtantly have large Crops 
of Turneps, on which they are fatted; and their Dung 
is ſo good Manure to the Land, that they always have 
2 good Crop of Corn afterwards. Before the Graſiers 
made uſe of this Manure, there were many Eſtates in 


this County, where the Land was lett under five Shil- 


lings per Acre, which have ſince been lett for twenty. 
_- Yarmouth is an antient Town, much older than 
Nortvich; and though not extending over fo much 
Ground, yet better built, and 'more complete, and for 
Wealth, Traffick, and Advantages of its Situation, in- 
finitely ſuperior to Norwich, 5 
It is ſituated on a Peninſula between the River Yar? 
and the Sea; the two laſt lying parallel to one another, 
and the Town in the Middle, 
Weſt-ſide of the Town, and being grown very large 
and deep, by receiving all the Rivers on this Side the 
County, forms the Haven; and the Town facing to 
the Weſt alſo, and open to the River, makes the jor 
ed. 6 | uay 


The River lies on the 


Norfolk. ' GREAT BRITAIN. 6r 
day in England, if not in Europe, at leaſt equalling 
Ss Marſeilles itſelf, Lo . 5 
| The Ships ride here fo cloſe (as it were, keeping 
| up one another, with their Head-faſts on Shore) that, 
| for half a Mile together, they go croſs the Stream with 
| their Boltſprits over the Land, their Bows or Heads 
touching the very Wharf; ſo that one may walk from 
Ship to Ship as on a floating Bridge, all along by the 
Shore ſide. The Quay reaching from the Drawbridge 
| almoſt to the South-gate, is ſo ſpacious and wide, that 
in ſome Places it is near 100 Yards from the Houſes 
to the Wharf. In this pleaſant and agreeable Range of 
E Houſes are ſome magnificent Buildings, and, among 
the reſt, the Cuftoin houſs and T own-hall, and ſome 

Merchants Houſes, which look like little Palaces, rather 
than the Dwelling-houſes of private Men. People 
are carried here all over the Town, and from the Sea- 
fide, for Six-pence, in what they call a Coach, but *tis _ 

only a W heelbarrow drawn by one Horſe, without any 
$ Covering. 15 ö e 
The greateſt Defe& of this beautiful Town ſeems 
© to be, that though it is very rich, and increaſing in 
Wealth and Trade, and conſequently in People, there 
is not Room to enlarge it by new Buildings; being 

E precluded on the Weſt and South ſides by the River, 
and on the Eaſt-fide by the Sea, ſo that there is no 
Room but on the North-end without the Gate; and 
there the Land is not very agreeable : but had they 
thad a larger Space within the Gates; there would be- 
fore this time have been many ſpacious Streets of Build- 
ings erected, as is done in ſome other thriving Towns 
in England. | VV 5 
During the Fiſhing- fair, as they call it, ones ſees the 
Land covered with People, and the River with Barks 
and Boats, buſy Day and Night, landing and carrying 
goit the Herrings, which they catch here in — in⸗ 
Neredible Quantities. I happened to be there during 
their Fiſhing-fair, when I told, in one TR 
Hs Barks 


VC „ 


4 0 


that are taken hereabouts. 


Cables do from the Norte 


62 AMOUR Norfolk. 
Barks and F iſhing-veſlels, coming up the River, all 


loaden with Herrings, taken the Night before ; and 
this over and above what was brought on Shore on the 
Dean, (that is. the Sea ſide of the Town) by open 
Boats, which they call “* Cables, and which often bring 
in two or three + Laſts of Fiſh at a Time. The) 
Barks often bring ten Laſts apiece. - TT” 
This Fiſhing fair begins on Micbhaelmas- day, and 
laſts all the Month of October, by which time the Her- 


rings draw off to Sea, ſhoot their Spawn, and are no 


more fit for the Merchants Buſineſs; at leaſt not thoſe 


© 


The Quantity of Herrings cured and exported an- 


nually from this Town, one Year with another, is 


50,000 Barrels: befides which, great Quantities are 


brought in for the Conſumption of the adjacent Coun- 


try Lowus, for 30 Miles from the Sea; to which they 


are carried every Tide during the whole Seafon. Here 
is almoſt as great a Fiſhing for Mackarel in the Spring, 


as for Herrings in September. 

The Number of Veſſels employed by this Tow in 
the Fiſhery is 150, and between 40 and 50 Sail in the 
Exportation; which is made to Genoa, Leghorn, Naple, 
Meſſina, and Venice, as alſo to Spain and Portugal: 
and with them are likewiſe ex ported great Quantities 
of Worſted Stuffs, and Stuffs made of Silk and W ortted, 
Camlets, &c. the Manufactures of the neighbouring 


City of No, wich, and the Places adjacent. 


Beſides this, they carry on a very conſiderable Trade 
with Holland, exporting a vatt Quantity of Wooden 


Manufactures every Year. They have alſo a Fiſhing: 


* The Cobles are open Boats which come from the North, from | 


Scarborough, Whitby, &c. to Yarmouth, to lett themſelves out to fil 
for the Merchants during the Fair- tine. £ 
_ + A Laſt is ten Barrels, each Barrel containing 1000 Herrings. 
& The Barks come from the Coaſt of Kent and Suſſex, as frm Fat 
fone, Dover, and Rye, in Kent, and from Brighthelmſtcne in Suſſex ; and 
Jett themſelves out to fiſh for the Merchants during the ſaid Fair, as tht 


2 


trade 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 63 


trade to the North Seas for White Fi iſh, which from 
the Place are called the North Sea Cod. 

They have likewiſe a conſiderable Trade to Norway, 
and to the Baltic, from whence they bring back Deals, 


and Fir-Timber, Oaken Planks, Baulks, Spars, Oars, 
Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, Canvas, and Sail-cloth, with 
| all manner of Naval Stores, tor which they generally 


have a Conſumption in their own Port. 

Add to this the Coal-trade between Newwca/?le and 
the River Thames, in which they are ſo improved of 
late Years, that they have now a greater Share of it 
than any other Town in England ; and have quite 
wrought the {p/wwich Men out of it, who had formerly 
the chief Share of the Colliery in their Hands. The 
Quantity imported, one Year with another, is about 
35,000 Chaldrons. 

For the carrying on of all theſe Erudes, they have a 
very great Number of Ships, either of their own, or 
employed by them, 

The Quantity of Corn and Malt exported from this 
Town exceeds that of any Port in England, London not 
excepted, Of late Years, it has amounted to upwards | 


| of 220,000 Quarters per Annum. 


Belides F iſhing veſſels above-mentioned, the Inha- 


bitants of this Town are Owners of about 250 Ships. 


The Haven was preſerved, and the Piers maintained, 
by Contribution, till the Time of King Charles II. 


And it ought to be mentioned to the Honour of the 
Public-ſpiritedneſs of their Anceſtors, That in Queen 
8 E/:zabeth's Time the Town, out of its Corporation- 


Eſtate, and publick, Treaſure, expended 31,0004, a 
very great Sum in theſe Days; but a much greater in 
thoſe. In the Reign of Cre, . an a paſted, 


& giving Power to levy certain Duties for the ſame good 
Purpoſes 3 and theſe have been continued by ſubſequent 


Acts, 
To all this I muſt add. without Compliras to the 
Town, that the Merchants, and even the Generality 
| of 


64 _4 TOUR thu Norfolk 


of Traders of Yarmouth, have a very good Reputation 


in Trade, as well Abroad as at Home, for fair and ho. 
nourable Dealing; ; and their Seamen, as well Maſterz 
as Mariners, are juſtly eſteemed among the ableſt and 
molt expert Navigators in England. 

This Town, however populous and large, had ll 
lately but one Pariſh-church, dedicated to St. Nicolas, 
though it is very large. It has an high Spire, which is 


an uſeful Sea-mark. It was built by that famous Bi. 
- "ſhop of Norwich, William Herbert, who flouriſhed in 


the 8 of William II. and Henry I. Villiam of 
 Malmſbury calls him Vir pecunioſus, ſrom the Works of 
Charity and Munificence, which be has left as Wit. 
neſſes of his immenſe Riches; for he built the Cathe. 
dral Church, the Priory for 60 Monks, the Biſhop's 
Palace, and the Pariſh-church of St. Leonard, all in 
Norwich; this great Church at Yarmouth, the Church 
of St. Margaret at Lynn, and of St. Mary at E/mhani, 
He removed the Epiſcopal See from Thetford to Nor- 
wich, and inſtituted the Cluniac Monks at Thetford, and 
gave thous, or built them, an Houſe. 

But in the Reigns of Queen Aune, and King Geergel, 
two Acts paſſed for building a new Church or Chapel 
of Eaſe in Yarmeuth, and for enlightening the Streets of 
the Town, and other Purpoſes; all which is performed 

in ſo complete a manner, as to be worthy of the Place. 
Alſo in the Act which paſſed in the Year 1723, and 
which has been ſince renewed, Proviſion was made for 
preſerving of Ships wintering in the Haven from Acci- 


dents by Fire. This Proviſion was a very necellary I 


one; for the Haven is fo very commodious for the ſe⸗ 
cure and ſafe lying of Ships in the Winter- ſeaſon, that 
| ſeveral hundred Sail are yearly laid up and winter in 
it, which he ſo contiguous to one another, and ſo neal 
_ the Houſes, that, in cafe of Fire, not only the Ships, 
but the Town would be in POPE of being totally 


. 


Hen | 


Norfolk. 


GREAT BRITAIN, 65 
Here is one of the fineſt Market- places, and the beſt 


ſerved with Proviſions, in England, London excepted. 


The Streets are all exactly ſtrait from North to South, 


che Lanes or Alleys, which they call Rows, crofling 


them in ſtrait Lines alſo from Eaſt to Weſt ; fo that it 


is the moſt regular-built Town in England, and ſeems 
as if it had been erected all at once, upon an uniform 


Plan- 
The Corporation fend two Members to Parliament 


and conſiſts of a Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Cham- 


berlain, Burgeſſes, and Town clerk ; and is a Court 


| of Record, and of Admiralty : in the firſt they try Civil 


Cauſes for unlimited Sums; and in the other have a 


Power to try, condemn, and execute, without waiting 
| for a Warrant from above. This Power they ex- 
| erted once, in executing a Captain of one of the 
| King's Ships of War in the Reign of King Charles II. 
for a Murder committed in the Street; the Circum- 
ſtance of which did indeed call for Juſtice : but ſome 

thought the 1 not have ventured to exert it, as 
they did. 
mint reſented-it, or blamed them for it. 


owever, I never heard, that the Govern- 


This Town is bound by its Charter, granted by 


Henry III. to ſend to the Sheriff of Norwich every 
Year, a Number of Herrings baked in 24 Paſties, which 
are to be delivered to the Lord of the Manor of Fa/?- 
Carlton, who is to give a Receipt for them, and then 
to carry them to the King. | 


It is a well- governed Town; and I have no where 


in England obſerved the Sabbath day more ſtrictl y kept, 


or the Breach of it ſo conſtantly puniſhed, as in this 


Place; which I mention to their Honour. 


Clay and Blackney are regarded jointly as a Part of 


| Yarmouth ; Clay is looked upon as the principal Place, 
though Blackney gives Name to that Creek which ſup- 
| plies them both with an Harbour. They have between 
them 15 Sail of ſmall Veſſels, and it may be 60 Fiſh- 

n. It is * * 3 20,000 Quarters 


of 


E 
1 
1 
1 
4 
14 
1 
i 
i | 
_—_ 
11 
; 
{| 
iy 
| 
« B'S 


66 Ann thee.) Nor 


of Malt and had Corn, and carry at leaſt as much „ 
Coalt-wiſe ; they bring in about 60600 Chaldrons t 


Coals, and the Remainder of their Trade conſiſts in n 
Deals, Balks, Fir-timber, Pantiles, and Iron. On WW 7 
would imagine that Clay was in a better Condition in tr 


1406, when James, Son of Robert III. King of Scars, MR - 
and himſelf afterward King James I. was brought in 
Priſoner there, being taken at a great Diſtance bya ne 


Ship of Force. 


From Yarmouth I reſolved to purſue my firſt Defign; N 


to wit, to view the Sea-ſide on this Coaſt, which h & 
particularly noted for being one of the moſt dangerous th 
and moſt fatal to Sailors in all Britain; and the more N 
ſo, becauſe of the great Number of Ships, which are N cc 
continually going and coming this Way, in their Pa, WF of 
ſage between London and all the Northern Coaſts of WM ty 
EI i Act 5; E Ss © 
The Reaſon of which is, that the Shore from the th 
Mouth of the River Thames to Yarmouth Road, lies in in 
a ſtrait Line from South-fouth-eaſt to North- north- C. 
weſt, the Land being on the Weſt or Larboard-fide. WF ur 
From Winter tonneſs, which, is the utmoſt eaſterly Point WF th 
of Land in the County of Norſolè, and about fou ou 
Miles beyond Yarmouth, the Shore falls off for near bo ve 
Miles to the Weſt, as far as Lynn and Boſton, till the th. 
Shore of Lincolnſbire trends North again for about bo or 
Miles more, as far as the Humber; whence the Coat ſo 
of Yorkſhire, or Helderneſs, which is Part of the Ealt- WW be 
Riding, ſhonts out again into the Sea, to the Spun x 
and to Flamborough- Head, as far Eaſt almoſt as the if, 
Shore of No» falt had given back at Minterton, making z 
a very deep Gulf, or bay, between thpſe two Points d Rc 
interton and the Spurn-Head; ſo that the Ships WM thi 
going North are obliged to ſtretch away to Sea fron Wt D. 
Aintertonneſs; and leaving the Sight of Land in the be 
deep Bay I bave mentioned, that reaches to Lynn, and on 
the Shore of Lincolnſbire, they go as I obſerved, North, op 


or ſtill Norih-nocth- weſt, to meet the Shore of _ 
Le e | nel, i 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 67. 
neſs, which, as I ſaid, runs out into the Sea again at 


the Spyrn - this they leave alſo, and the firſt Land they 
| make, is called, as above, Flambereuzh - Head, fo that 


Wintertonneſs, and Flambarough Head, are the two Ex- 
tremes of this Courſe. There is, indeed, the Spurn- 
Head between; but, as it lies too far in towards the 


| Huber, they keep out to the North, to avoid coming 
near it. 17 8 f 


In like manner the Ships which come from the 
North, leave the Shore at Flamborough-Head, and 


| ſtretch away South- ſouth-eaſt for Yarmouth Roads; and 


the firſt Land they make is. VWintertonneſs, as above. 

Now, the Danger of the Place is this: If the Ships 
coming from the North are taken with an hard Gale 
of Wind from the South-eaſt, or from any Point be- 


| tween North-eaſt and South-eaſt, ſo that they cannot 
| weather Wintertonneſs, they are thereby kept within 
chat deep Bay; and, if the Wind blows hard, are often 
in Danger of running on Shore upon the Rocks about 


Cromere, on the North coaſt of Norfelk, or ſtranding 


upon the flat Shore between Cromere and Hells, All 


the Relief they have, is good Ground-tackle to ride it. 


out, which is very hard to do there, the Sea coming 


very high upon them; or if they cannot ride it out, 


| then to run into the Bottom of the great Bay, to Lynn, 
| or Be/ton, which is a very difficult and deſperate Puſh? 
ſo that ſometimes, in this Diſtreſs, whole Fleets have 


been Joſt here all together. 0 OT Ei $4g 
In the fame Danger are ſhips going Northward ; for- 
if, after paſſing by Winterton, they are taken ſhort with 
2 North-eaſt Wind, and cannot put back into the 
Roads, which very often happens, they are driven upon 
the ſame Coaſt, and embay'd juſt as the latter. The 


| Danger on the North-part of this Bay is not the ſame, 


becauſe if Ships going or coming ſhould be taken ſbort 


on this Side Flamborough, there is the River Humber 


open to them, and ſeveral good Roads to have recourſe 
92 | | toz 


theſe Towns are; 


Norfolk. ; GREAT BRITAI N. : 69 


few, rid it out, at a Diſtance ; the reſt, bein 0 We 
140 Sail, were all driven on Shore, and daſhed to 


| Pieces, and very few of the People on Board were 


faved. At the very ſame unhappy Juncture, a Fleet 


| of loaden Ships were coming from the North, and, 
| being juſt croſſing the ſame Bay, were forcibly driven 
| into it, not able to weather the Neſs, and ſo were in- 
volved in the ſame Ruin as the light Fleet was; alſo 
| ſome coaſting Veſſels laden with Corn from Lynn and 


Vells, and bound for Holland, were with the ſame un- 
bappy Luck juſt come out, to begin their Voyage, 
and ſome of them lay at Anchor : theſe alſo met with 


| the lame Misfortune, ſo that, in the Whole, above 
doo Sail of Ships, and above 1000 People, were loſt 
in the Diſaſter of that one miſerable Night, very few 


eſcaping. | | . | 
Cromere is a Market-town cloſe to the Shore of this 
dangerous Coaſt : I know nothing it is famous for (be- 


| ſides its being thus the Terror of the Sailors), except 
good Lobſters, which are taken on that Coaſt in great 
Numbers, and carried to Norwich, and in ſuch Quan, _ 
I tities ſometimes too, as to be conyeyed by Sea to 


London. „„ | 
Farther within the Land, and between this Place 
and Norwich, are ſeveral good Market-towns, and a 


great many Villages, all diligently applying to the 


Woolen Manufacture; and the Country is exceeding 
fertile, as well in Corn as Paſture; particularly the 
| Pheaſants (which was very pleaſant to behold) were 


in ſuch great Plenty, as to be ſeen in the Stubble like 


Cocks and Hens; a Teſtimony (by the way) that 


the County had more Tradeſmen than Gentlemen in 


it. Indeed this Part is fo intirely given up to Induſtry, 


that what with the Scafaring-men on the one Side, and 


the Manufacturers on the other, we ſaw no idle Hands 


here, but every Man buſy. Some of the principal of 
I, Hickling 


and ſometimes ſent to Holland, and to the Halli. 


70 AT OUR Hes Norfolk. NN 

1. Hickling and Nor th-IValtham, noted andy for 
Market each. | 
2. Alſbam, a poor Town, noted for Enitters, | 

3: Worfted, for the Invention and twiſting of Yarn, 

ſo called; ; alſo famed for Stockens and Stuff 

Catton, noted for a brazen Hand being carried 

before the Steward of the Demeſne, inſtead. of a Mace, 

and for a Bridge over the'Duze. 

Reepham, for a good Malt. market; Wii no 
Church at all out of three: for there are only the Ruins 
of one of them ſtanding. 

6. Holt, for giving two Lord Mayors of the Name 
of Greſham (who were rothen) to London, in 1537, 

„ 
. Fakenham, noted for nothing, but for having had 
Salt-pits formerly ; and, 
8. St. Faith's, whither- the Drovers bring their WW 
Black Cattle to ſell to the Nor folk Graſiers, as I ob- W+-/ 
ſerved before. = 
| Not far from Cromere is Greſham, the Birth- plate | 
of the generous Founder of the Royal. Exchange and 
Greſham: College, London. 

From Cremere we rode on the Strand, or open Shore, 
to Meyburne Hope, the Shore ſo flat, that in ſome Places 
| the Tide ebbs out near two Miles. From Mepbun 
Weſt lies Clye, where are large Salt-works, and very 
good Salt made, which is ſold all over the County, 


From Che we go to Marbam, and to Mell, all Town 
on the Coaſt, in each whereof there is a very con{ider- 
able Trade carried on with Halland for Corn, which 
that Part of the County is very full of, beſides the great 
Trade driven here from Holland, back again; which 
I take to be a Trade carried on with much Teſs Ho- 
neſty than public Advantage. 
Wells, three Leagues Weſt by North of Clay, is 1 
Member of the Port of Lynn, and much more con- 
ſiderable than any of the fore-mentioned Places; 5 


hk. ] =» 4 
— 
_ 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 71 
Inhabitants having at preſent about 30 Veſſels, three of 
Which are upwards of 100 Tons; and beſides theſe, 
at leaſt a Dozen of Fiſhing-boats, employing in the 
Whole not fewer than 200 Men; and yet this Place 
eems to be but reviving, there being evident Marks, 
that it was larger and of greater Conſequence in former 
times. aha, | | 
At Holkham in Norfolk, two Miles Weſt of Wells, 
and the ſame Diſtance Eaft of Burnham. is the Seat of 
She late Earl of Leiceter; where his Lordſhip built a 
Fne large Houſe, moſt Part of curious white Brick, 
me It confilts of a Front of four Wings, and is above 330 
„ Weet in Width, — . 
The ſeven Purnhams, which are ſo many ſmall 
ad owns called by the ſame Name, and each employed 
n the fame Holland Trade as Marham and Peil, he 
eir Wn and near the Sea-coaft to the North-weſt of Mal- 
0b- % n. JV 
HFurnbam-Overy, two Leagues further Weſt by 
ate NPouth, is accounted a Creek to Wells, and is a little 
rowing Place, having fix Veſſels belonging to it. But 
Prancufto, which is very near, and is allo a Creek to 
Helle, is now, and was formerly, much ſuperior to it. 
This, as the beſt and moſt accurate Critics agree, was 
þ Roman, Station called by them Brannodunum, and 
ery Nas the Head quarters of the Colonel of the Dalmatian 
try, Worſe, poſted here under the Command of the Count 
lt, r the Saxon Shore for the Protection of the Country. 
wi l Circumſtances concur in the Support of this Opi- 
der- ion; the Name fignifies a Camp or Fortreſs, ſeated” 
ch na Hill, overlooking the Sea; there have been Coins, 
reat ms, and other Antiquities, frequently found in the 
uch Neighbourhood; but what is moſt to be relied on, is 
Ho- e admirable Situation of the Place at the Elbow, 
here the Coaſt runs away South, and where the Pro- 
is 2 ince was expoſed to the Depredations of Pirates, 
:on-WWcaded in thoſe Days, tho unheard of in ours. 


A 


I 


From 


AS 
From the Sea-coaſt we turned to the South-weſt, 
thro' Snetham, a ſmall Market-town, to Ca/?le- -rifag 

an old decayed Borough-town, with hardly ten Families 
in it, which yet ſends two Members to Parliament; 
but ſbews a great many Marks of Roman, Saxon, and 

Daniſh Antiquities in and about it. 

On the Left we ſaw Walſingbam, an ancient Ton, 
famous for the old Ruins of a Monaſtery there, and 
the Shrine of our Lady, as noted as that of St. Then 


à Becket at Canterbur <A hence called, Our Lady if 


Falſingham. Two Wells here are Rill called by the 
Name of the Bleſſed Virgin. The Soil here! is noted fi 
producing good Saffron. 

Near this Place, at Raynham, i is the fine Seat of th 
Lord Viſcount Townſhend. 

Not far diſtant is Houghton, the ſtately Seat of the Ea 
of Orford, the Gardens and Plantations of which ar 
very large and beautiful. Many of the Trees wer 
planted by Sir Robert Malpole himſelf. 


The Extent of the Building, including the Colon 
. 


nade and Wings, which contain the Offices, is 459 
Feet; the main Body of the Houſe extends 166 Feet 
The Hall, which is fniſhed in the Inſide with oo 
is a Cube of 40 Feet; the Salon 40 by 3o Feet; and 
| the other Rooms are 18 Feet high. The Ruſtic and 
Attic Stories are 12 Feet high each; under the Ruſlic 


Story are arched Vaults. The whole Building is df 


Stone, and is crowned with an Entablature of the Jos 
Order, and a Baluſtrade above; and there is a Cupol 
at each Corner of the Houſe with Lanterns upon then, 
The Houſe, for the Compaſs of Ground it ſtands % 
is reckoned as convenient, as finely. ornamented, aut 
as well furniſhed, as any Houſe. in the Kingdom 
Here is a noble Collection of Capital Pictures of ti 
greateſt Maſters, which the Earl had been many Yea 
collecting at a great Expence. 
This ſtately St 8. ructure, begun in the Vear 171 


Was as completely finiſhed, Inſide and Outſide, ou 
z 


* TOUR thro Norfolk; F 


Mt I 


| Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. 73 
| Year 1735. the noble Founder having had the ſingu- 


| Years. - 


Angle, we were informed, bath this Inſcription upon it. 


when he was Duke of Lorrain, was entertained at 
| Houghton with the moſt magnificent Repaſt that per- 


| Fowl, or JJ" and every other Viand, was of the 


jar Felicity to continue firſt Miniſter of State for 20 


The Foundation-flone, placed in the South-eaſt © 


Hic me poſuit 
ROBERTUS ille WALPOLE, 
| Duem tu non neſcies, Poſteritas ; 
Fundamen ut efſem Domis 
In Agro Natali extruende, _ 
24* Die Man, A. D. M Dec XXII. £ 
| Faxit Deus, 
Poſiquam maturus Avi Dominus 
Diu lætatus fuerit abſoluta, | 
 Incolumem tueantur incolumes, = 
Ad ſummam Diem, | ye 
Et Nati W & qui naſcentur ab lis, 


Thich may be thus tranſlated: 3 
Here that Sir ROBERT WALPOLE, with whom 
thou, Poſterity, ſhalt not be unacquainted, bath fixed 
me to ſtand, as the Foundation of a Seat deſigned to 
be built in his native Country, the 24th Day of May. 
in the Year 1722. God grant, that after its Maſter, . 
to a mature Old-age, ſhall have long enjoyed it in 
Perfection, his lateſt Deſcendents may ſafely poſſeſs 
it, in an unimpaired . to the End of Time. 
By this Inſcription one may imagine, that Sir Robert 
had in his Thoughts the uncertain State (in all Ages 
and Countries) of Prime Miniſters, and of the ſuperb 
Structures built by them in the Height of their Power. 
The preſent Emperor of Germany, being in England 


haps was ever given in this Kingdom; but all the Fiſh,” 


75 A TOUR ths Norfolk 


Produce of England, Wales, and Scotland; and the 
Variety ſuch, as was never before known or collected 
at one Table; Relays of Horſes being provided on the 
Roads to bring Rarities from the remoteſt Parts. 


We proceeded hence to Jynn, another rich and po- 


pülous Port- town, well built, and well ſituated, at the 
Jouth of the River Ouſe ;. which has the greateſt Ex. 
tent of Inland Navigation of any Port in England, 
London excepted. The Reaſon whereof is, that more 
navigable Rivers empty themſelves here into the Sea, 
including the Waſhes, which are Branches of the ſame 
Port, than at any one Mouth of Waters in England, 
except the Thames and the Humber. By theſe navigable 
Rivers the Merchants of Lynn ſupply about ſix Coun- 
ties wholly, and three Counties in Part, with their 
Goods, eſpecially Wine and Coals; to wit, by the 
Little Ouſe, they End their Goods to Brandon and T het- 
ford ; by the Lake, to Milden- hall, Barton- Mills, and 
St. Edmundſ/bury ; by the River Cam, to Cambridge; 
by the Great Ouſe itſelf, to Ely, to St. Ives, to St. 
Nets, to Barford-bridge, and to Bedford; by the 
River Nyne, to Peterborough ; by the Drains and 


Waſhes to Viſbich, to Spalding, Market -deeping,. and 


Stamford; beſides the ſeveral Counties into which 
theſe Goods are carried by Land-carriage, from the 
Places where the Navigation of thoſe Riyers ends ; 
which has given Riſe to this Obſervation on the Town 
of Lynn, That Jl: bring in more Coals than any Sea- 
port between London and Newca/ile, and import more 
Wines than any Port in England, except London and 
Briſtol: their Trade to Norway, and to the Baltic Sea, 
is alſo great in Proportion; and of late Years they 
have extended it farther to the Southward. | 
There are many Gentry at Lynn, and conſequently 
more Gaiety than in Yarmouth, or even in Norwich. 


It was firſt called Lynn Epiſcopi, as the Property of 


the B ſhop of Norwich, till the Diſſolution of Monaſte- 
1 . . lies 


% * 


Q@ R- > 2R2V=- © 


45 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAI W. 75 
ries by King Henry VIII. when that Prince becoming 


itz Poſſeſſor, conferred on it the Name of _ Regis. 


It is ſituated towards the Mouth of the Great Ouſe, 
encompaſſed with a deep Trench, walled almoſt all 


round, containing about 2400 Houſes, and divided by 
four Rivulets arched over with about 15 Bridges. It 


extends along the Eaſt · ſide of the River; which in high 


| Spring-tides flows above 20 Feet perpendicular, and is 


about the Breadth of the Thames above Bridge for the 
Length of a Mile, and is divided into nine Wards. 


On the North-end, towards the Sea, ſtands St. Ann - 


Fort, with a Platform of 12 large Guns, commanding all 
the Ships which paſs by the Harbour; and towards the 


Land, beſides the Wall, there are nine regular Baſtions, 


and a Ditch, nearly in the Form of a Semicircle, which 
make it above halfa Mile in Breadth. The Town is 


ſo antient as to be ſuppoſed the ſame. with Maiden- 


Bower, according to ſeveral old Hiſtorians,  _* 


Its moſt remarkable Edifices and Places are as fol- 


8 low : St. Mourgaret's- Church; the Town-hall; Bride- 


well; the Cu/tom-houſe, and the Exchange ; the Mar- 
ket-croſs ; St. Nicolas's Chapel; A Saints Church; 
the Free. ſchool; the Hoſpitals; the Statue of King 


James II. King Fohn's Sword and Cup; the com- 


mon Staith yards; the Lady's Hout; the public 


Library; the King's Staith yard, &c. Of which 


briefly in their Order; and firſt of St. Margaret's- 

Church. > 8 Eg 25 | 
This Church, which was formerly an Abbey, and is 
one of the largeſt Parochial Churches in England, is 
adorned with a very fair and high Lantern, covered 
with Lead, containing the Clock-bell, which may be 
heard all over the Town. Its Height is 132 Feet. 


0 


Atthe Weſt-end ftands a Stone Tower, 82 Feet high; 


and facing the Street a Moon-dial, deſigned to tell 
the Increaſe and Decreaſe of that Planet, with the exact 


Hour of the Day. It moves by Clock-work. Over 
the Tower is a Spire 193 Feet high, in Form of a 
F * Pyramid; 


6. 4 TOUR tbr Norfolk. 


Pyramid; near to which is the Bell- tower built of 


F fee Mone, 86 Feet high, containing a Ring of eight 


Bells. In this Church is kept the Biſhop's Court, 


when he comes hither on his Viſitation. 


The Town: houſe, called Trinity-hall, is an antient 5 
and noble Building, which makes a fine Appearance. / 


Adjoining to it is the Houſe of Correction, called 


_ Bridewel!, with Apartments proper for the Reception 
of ſuch as are put there; who beat and dreſs Hemp 


during their Confinement. 


The Exchange i is a fair Structure of Fre ree: ſtone, with | 


two Orders of Columns, ſituated in the Middle of the 


55 Town, and built at the Expence of Sir Fohn Turner, 
Knight; and within it is the Com- houſe, containing 


' ſeveral commodious Apartments. 


The Market-houſe is a new Edifice of Free "Gone. 
in the modern Taſte, 70 Feet high, erected on four 
Steps, neatly adorned with Statues, and other Orna- 


ments; with an Inſcription giving an Account of its 
former Condition, and preſent Rebuilding. 

St. Nicolas's Chapel is very antient, and | ſtands at the 
North end of the Town. * 
Margaret's, and is eſte emed one of the faireſt and 
largeſt religious Fabrics in England; it has a Bell. 
tower of Free · ſtone, and a pyramidal octangular Spire 
over it, both which together are 170 F ect from the 


Ground. | 
»A, Saints Ckurchs as South Lynn, belonging for- | 


merly to the Carmelite and White Friers, on the Ruins 


of whoſe Monaſtery it is built. Tho? not large, it is 
neat, ſolid, and regular, in form of a Croſs, within 2 


Church- ard well walled in. 


On the North-fide of S?. Margaret 5 Church-yard is 


| the Fr ee-ſchool, a ſtrong and beautiful Building. 7 


The only Fabric formerly belonging to any Reli- 


gious Order, now ſtanding, i is the Grey- Friers Steeple, 
a noted Sea-mark ; which was repaired and amended 


out of the Ruins of a demoliſhed Chapel in the Year, 


1539 


is an Appendage to St. 


".. mY Yo AY We” . CORES 


ay 


* CO Q 


Id 


Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN... 77 


1539. It may not be amiſs to mention here a remark- 


able and laudable Order, that was made in the Year 


1588. That on every firſt Monday in the Month, 


| there ſhould be a Meeting of the Mayor, Aldermen, 


ſome of the Common-council, -and the Preachers, in 


order to ſettle Peace and Quietneſs between Man and 
Man, and to decide all manner of Controverſies : this 


was called The Feaſt of Reconciliation, 

In the Pariſh of All. Saints is a ſmall Hoſpital for four | 
poor Men to live Rent- free. St. Mary Magdalen's 
Hoſpital, founded in the Reign of King Stephen, for a 
Prior, and 12 Brethren and Siſters, continued in a 


| flouriſhing Condition about 400 Years ; and devolved 


to the Crown, at the making the Statute for Diſſolution 
of Religious Houſes in the Reign of Edward VI, in 


whoſe Time it was robbed, and almoſt levelled with 


the Ground, by Kett's Mutineers, at their Return from 
their fruſtrated Attempt to ſurprize Lynn ſo that it 
remained deſtitute of Brethren and Siſters, except ſome 
poor People, whom the Mayor and Burgeſſes main- 


| tained, with Deſign to ſupport the antient Hoſpital, till 


King James I. upon Petition reſtored them theit Lands, 


| granted them many Privileges, and incorporated them: 
but in the Year 1643. it was a ſecond Time deſtroyed 
by Fire, by the Earl of Mancheſter's Forces, when they 
beſieged ty 


un, then ſtanding out for the King. In the 
Year 1649. the Corporation rebuilt it very commo- 


W diouſly, as at preſent, with two Courts, a Chapel, ard 
| convenient Apartments for the Maſter, Brethren, and 


diſters, and ſeveral Inſcriptions commemorating the 


late Diſaſter. It is now committed to the Care of two 


of the elder Alder men, choſen for th at Purpoſe-by the 


other Governors. 5 
In the great Market- place is a Statue of King 
James II. erected in the Vear 1686. with an Inſerip- 
tion, that may ſerve for a Satire on the undue Com- 
| pliments which are frequently paid to Princes, during 
the Time of their Proſperity. It ſtands on a Pedeſtal, 


which 


- 


78 1 + 0 UR thro Norfolk. 
which has ſeveral Embelliſhments, and is incloſ 


within a Palifade of Iron. The Inſcription is a 
follows : 


Non immemor 2 
uantum divinis invict. rincipis 
V j A C034 1 5 
Virtutibus debeat, 
— Regie Majeſtatis Effaiem, 
Aternum Fidei et Obſequii 
Maonumentum, erexit 
8. i: 2, . 
Anno Salutis 1686. 


"A Engliſh thus: 

The Aldermen and 2 of Lynn, not for- 
getting how much they owe to the divine Virtues a 
the invincible King James II. as a laſting Monu- 
ment of their Faith and Loyalty, have erected thi 
Statue of his * Majeſty, "ne 16866. 


In 1682. an old ruinous Building, ed 4 was once 
a Chapel, was, by the Corporation, and other Inhabit- 
ants, made a public Receptacle for poor Children to 
learn to ſpin Wool: here they are alſo taught to read. 
It is now, by Act of Parliament, ſettled and veſted in 
the Guardians of the Poor. 
+ The Corporation boaſts of having been preſented h 
King John with a very rich.double:gilt — and Cover, 


weighing 73 Ounces, which is — to this Day, 


and uſed on public Occaſions: and at the ſame time a 
large Sword with a. Silver. Mounting, from his own Side, 
as is engraven on the Inſcription on the-Hilt, _ 
_ The Entrance into the common Staith-yard-from 
the Tue/day Market, is by two. large Gate-ways, with 
habitable. Rooms over them. It is a beautiful ſpacious 
* wg with a en. Quay or What, 
 furrolinde 


ofed 


> as 


were conſiderable Benefactors. 


Gaywood, &c. 


modious. 


| Norfolk. GREAT BRITAIN. E "59 


ſurrounded with Warehouſes and Granaries for all 
ſorts of Merchandize, with capacious Vaults. | 

At a ſmall Diſtance from the Town, ſtands a ruin- 
ous Pile, called The Lady's Mount, or Red Mount; 


| wherein formerly was a Chapel dedicated to the Bleſſed 


Virgin, which ſerved as a Receptacle for Pilgrims tra- 
velling this Way towards the celebrated Convent of 


| Orr Lady at Walſingbam. 


"The Library at Sr. Nicolas was erected by a volun- . 
tary Subſcription of ſeveral hundred Pounds; to which 
the late Lord Viſcount Toꝛonſbend (who took his Title 
of Baron from this Town) Sir Robert Falpole, Sir 
Charles Turner, and Robert Britife, Eſq; deceaſed, 

here is alſo another 
Library at St. Margaret's, to which the late Thomas 
Thurlin, D. D. Prefident of St. Jobn's College in 


Cambridge, bequeathed all his Books; and alſo left an 
Exhibition of fix Pounds a Year to a poor Scholar, who 


ſhould go from the Grammar-ſchool to St. Fobn's 
College in Cambridge; and forty Shillings yearly to- 
wards the cloathing three of the pooreſt Inhabitants of 


The Inhabitants-of Dynn ſuffer great Inconvenience 


from the Want of freſh water Springs within the 


Town ; with which Element, however, they ate ſup- 
pct from a River running by Gaywoed, and by leaden 


Pipes from Middleton and Mintling. 


The King's Staith hard is a very handſome Square, 


with Brick Buildings fronting each Way; in the Centre 


of which ſtands the Statue of James I. in a Nich front - 
ing the Weſt. Here the greateſt Part of imported 


| Wines are landed, as it has a convenient Qua) A 


large Wine-vaults, 
The Entrance of its Port, which is ſo capacious.as 


to hold 200 Sail of Veſſels, is ſomewhat difficult and 


dangerous; but when entered, it is ſafe and com- 


E 4 +245 5+ 5 Mak 


D r 


9 
- 0 
uy 0 OR _ „ oe 


1 — 22 OTE EI I ITN — 8 
- 
9 


5 


= = by —ͤ—Uꝙͤʃ — CESS — — 59 — | = O_ ? 
= | — = \ l 
„ Ve. 1 $3, 1 : \ — Foo - - . 
LOSE ie ERR PE LDCS oo wont: bom e i eine Ry et aa ae ee e res ai a eV are, 3 
—— pan'; — 1 * ! % 49 1” nt n e 4 N 88 — 3 — 30 2 PILE IP 5 _ = 
* «1 — > Re — — <A — 2 22 41 * — . range» a + n 2 Ch 
1 3 * * N —— = — . Bod nnhncs Ae 0 e 


D720 0 SONG. 
— 
ae 4 


k 


˙᷑k5 41TOUR toy - Norfolk 


From what has been ſaid; it will be obſerved, that 
the Situation of this Town renders it capable of being 


made very ſtrong; and in the great Civil War it was 


ſo, a Line of Fortification not; KW round it at 


Diſtance from the Walls; the Ruins, or rather Re. 
mains, of which Works appear to this Day: nor would 


it be an hard Matter to reſtore the Baſtions, with the 


Ravelins and Counterſcarp, upon any ſudden Emer. 


gency, to a good State of Defence; eſpecially as they 
are able to fill all their Ditches with Water from the 
Sea, in ſuch a Manner that it cannot be drawn off, 


This Town ſends two Members to Parliament. 
They paſs over here in Boats into the Fen Country, 


and over the famous Waſhes into Lincolnſhire ; but the 
Paſſage is very dangerous; for here Paſſengers often 


miſcarry, and are loſt; but then it is uſually on their 


venturing at improper Times, and without the Guides, 


which if they would be perſuaded not to do, they | 
would very rarely fail of going or coming ſafe. | 
_ Litcham, in Lynn Channel, is a Creek dependent 
upon that Port, having ſix Sail of Veſſels, and is in 2 


very thriving Way. The Corn and Malt Trade, to 


_ Holland particularly, for which they lie very convenient. 
Iy, may be ſaid to have preſerved theſe Ports, long 


declining, and ſome of them almoſt expiring. ._ 


From Lynn, I bent my Courſe Southward to Down- 


ham, where is an ugly wooden Bridge over the Oe; 


at which, as Helling head informs us, in October 1508. 
were taken 17 monſtrous Fiſhes, from 20 to 27 Feet 
+ RY | NE | 
When we were at Downham, we took a Turn to 


* £ 
— 


” * 


the antient Town of Thetford, ſituated partly in Nor- 


folk, and partly in Suffolk, It was raiſed on the Ruins 
of the antient Sitomagus, which was deſtroyed by the 
Danes. It is at preſent but meanly built; but by the 


Ruins of Churches and Monaſteries ſtill remaining, ap- 


| pears to have been formerly of great Account; and 


even ſo far back as the Time of King Edward the 
5 | „„ Confeſſer, 


F oh. <> ob. o6 a Sod an a2 


„ e O3XA ww... «= 89V Fx, op FA we ed > 


* * * gre 
ba 8s. . k) ac ©. 4 as OT I. WP 


S US Ws C0 CO 


Cam. GN EAT BRITAIN, in © 
Confeſſor, it had 947 Burgeſſes, and in that of William 


I. 720 Manſions. On the Suffo/k Side there now re- 


main the Ruins of ſix Churches and Monafteries, and 


there were ſeveral others in the Town; but now there 


are but three Pariſh-Churches ſtanding intire, one on 
the Suffo/k, and two on the Norfalt Side. It is, how- 
ever, a Town Corporate, governed by a Mayor, Al- 


dermen, and Common- council; has three annual 
Fairs, a plentiful weekly Market, and is a kind of See 


duffragan to that of Nerwzch. In the 7th Year of King 


James I. an Act paſſed for the Founding of an Hoſpi- 


tal, a Grammar: ſchool, and Maintenance of a Preacher 


in this Town for ever, according to the laſt Will of 


| - Sir Richard Fulmerſton. Sir Foſeph Milliamſon, Secre- 


tary of State to King Charles II. built here a new 


| Council-houſe, and was otherwiſe a good Benefactor to 


the Place. There is a large Mount here, called Caſtle- 


| Hill, thrown up to a-gieat Height, and fortified with a 


double Rampart, | which Sir Henry Spelman. thinks 
was a Daniſh Camp. The Lent Aſſizes are uſually 
held here: and the Town ſends two Members to 


Parliament. . 5 Eh 


From Thetford we croiſed the Ouſe to Brandon in 


Suffolk, which gives the Title of an Zngh/b Duke, to 

Duke Hamilton of Scotland. This is no ill - built Town, 
and has a goed Church belonging to it. It gave a 
| - Lord Mayor 40 London, Anno 144 5. to wit, Sir Simon 


Eyre, Draper, who built Leadenhall for the Uſe of the 
City, and left 5000 Marks, a very great Sum in thoſe 
Days, to charitable Uſes. Brandon has loſt its Mar- 
ket, but ſtands conveniently upon the Ouſe, over which 


it has a Bridge, and a Ferry to convey Goods to and 
from the Iſle of Eh, to which we directly bent our 
Courſe, and entered Cambridgeſbire . | 
Me made an Excurfion from El/y-Northwards up to 
the Fens; but we ſaw notbing that Way worth re- 
marking, but deep Roads, vaſt Drains, and Dykes of 


Es == Water, 


ns of T OUR zhro Cain, 


Water, which area 3 though, with all this, 
very rich Soil, bearing a great Quantity, of Hemp, but 
2 bad unwholeſome Air. 
Mijßbich, however, which dies on the Northern Ex. 
tremity of the County, bas not oniy been of Note in 
the Time of Milliam d. who built a Caſtle here, but 
is now a well. built Market-town, has a good Town. 
Hall, and is eſteemed — Trading town in the Ile 
of 2 as having the Convenience of good Water. 
carriage to Tonzon, whither they ſend great Quantities 
of Oil and Butter, and bring back all Sorts of Com. 
modities, with which the whole Ille 1 1s furniſhed ; 5 for 
it has aplentiful Market. 
| A good Way lower down, to the $outh-welt, are 
the Market- towns of Merſh and T horney; the firſt i; 
very inconſiderable, the other is delightfully fituated ; 
and the Land about it very fruitful in Graſs and Trees; 
and fince the 'Fens have been d rained, it produces very 
good Crops of Corn. His Grace the Duke of Beafard 
has a good old Seat at Therney, which he is.annually 
embelliſhing by Plantations of Trees, Oc. and has an 
=_ Eſtate of 19,000 Acres of Land in thi 
Loeve 
The Je of u is encompaſſed with the Ouſe, and 


other Waters. The City is ſituated on an ill, in the 


Middle of a great Plain. It is full of Springqs, inſo- 
much that in the principal Street, in the Eaſt Part of 
the Town, there are Wells bricked up Knee - high, al- 
moſt at every hundred Yards, which the whole Yer 
enerally overflow from one to another, all the Way 
| cm the Dedlivity of the Hill on which the Town 
ſtands. The Soil is exceeding rich, and the City “ 
encompaſſed with Gardens, the Produce of which is-o 
excellent, that it furniſhes all the Country for 20 Miles 
rund, even as far as Cimbridee, and St. Ives; the for- 
mer vf which has almoſt all its Garden-fiuff from 
hence. Great Quamtities of Strawberries are cultivated 
here, 3 of the white Oe" ſort. 


BEE WE” :; „ TY kk. Vw R 


EE od er Rent RE 


29 


« 
— 


n cam. GREAT BRIT MIN. 83 
„Eh is obſerved to be the . e ſub- 
t ordinate to the Biſhop in its Civil Government, and 

unrepreſented in Parliament. Here is a Free- ſchool 


x- | and two Charity-ſchools. | 
in The Minſter is.a noble Pile, but it is,probable will 
ut not ſtand long; ſo much is it, and has been for Years 


. paſt. neglected Dr. Sherlock, the preſent Biſhop of 
le London, when Biſhop of Saliſbury, as will be obſerved 
ob in its Place, ſet a much better Example than has been 
© WW followed here; obliging thoſe, who are moſt concern- 
1 ed, to contribute to maintain what maintained them. 
Of And conlidering that the Revenues of this See of HEA 

are very ample, that it may be deemed-one of the 
* richeſt in the Kingdom, it is much to be lamented, that 
no Proviſion is made out of them to preferve ſuch. a 
1 Structure as this from the Ruins of Time. What Pity, 


5 WW that Eccleſiaſtical Perſons of late Days ſeem to think 
y | there is no other Uſe to be made of the Church Re- 
d venues, than to raiſe private and obſcure Families. 
y The Conſequence, perhaps, however, .of promoting 


private and obſcure Perſons to the principal Dignities in 
the Church ; the End leaſt to be ſerved, by thoſe Pro- 
motions, moſt in View to be ſerved. But. Biſhop Main- 


et, Archbiſhop Sheldon, Milliam of ictbam, and 
1 many other Eccleſiaſtics of prime Note, would have 
p told ſuch Clergymen as are governed by Views ſo low, 


that they were not Views fit for Gentlemen and 
Churchmen to purſue. _ 3 
On the Eaſt-ſide of the Cam, a litile below EY, 
ſtands So, a little Market- town towards the Bor- 
ders of. Syfolk, near the Marſhes, which were formerly 
dangerous to paſs; but now there is a Cauſeway made, 
which leads very ſecurely over them. Here are the 
Remains of an antient Church, which was ruined hy 
the Danes. | 5 
Me proceeded hence to Newmarket. Near Snaybell, 
as we went, we ſaw a noble Seat of Admiral. Nſſal, 
created Earl of Oryord, for _ glorious Victory I 


ton, AL rs an 
— AAS att. 
7 a 


— 


n 


1 — — — —— — —— 
" l l —_ = mY _— \ 
FF 8 PERS; 2 EN erer a mY — = ENT = A 
- 0:0 ay tv Wat 1 hol, e . N 7 =_ . l : 


1 — 
„ r e . 
. r rr 2 
e — . >= o we — OSS 
RAT TR, cas da a 


— n_ m 


— by vor 


4 Fg 
\ 


on 

2 Es ana 5 | Z 

\ —_ e 2 „. „ r 

. * Y * ; 8 - — . — . * "I = . — 0 is 

PPP W . it e Fe  ac. cents a : 5 TE —_ 4 
F E - 3 , a n * * 
n w 1 5 1 bee — —— 1 « = ” * 
0 


ed under his Command over the French F leet, and the 


burning their Ships at La Hogue. 


The Situation of this Houſe is low, and on the Edpe 
of the Fen Country; but the Building is fine, the 
Apartments noble, and the Gardens well-finiſhed. On 
we Earl's Death it devolved to Samuel Sandys, Eſq; 
"now Lord Sandys, in = of his Wife, one of the 
"Earls Heirs. 


Arriving at Newmarket in the Month of Oateler, 1 | 


had the Opportunity to ſee the Horſe- races, and a great 
Concourſe of the N. 

London, as from all Parts of England; but they were 
all ſo intent, ſo eager, ſo buſy upon what is called the 


ſharping Part of the Sport, of Wagers and Bets, that 


to me they ſeemed rather ſo many Horſe- courſers in 
Smithfield, than Perſons of Quality, who deſcend ſo 
low as even to circumvent one another; and, if I may 
"ſpeak it, pick one another's Pockets. Jo ſee a Perſon 
of Diſtinction, who perhaps being ennobled, his Word 
of Honour, by the Laws of the Land, is to be eſteemed 
and received with equal Sanction, in our Courts of 
' Juſtice, as an Oath of a Perſon of lower Rank, level 
'himfelf with a Groom, or a Riding-boy, and put his 
Credit and Honour in the Hands of ſuch, with a Bribe 
to betray his Maſter, and his Truſt, is a thing ſcarce 
credible among thoſe who are really Men of Honour; 
and yet it is too often the Caſe (to the indelible Shame 
of Men of Rank and Quality be it ſpoken i in particular, 
and to the Reproach of the Nation in general) thatit 
is not the beſt Horſe that wins the Race, but that which 


"is deſtined for Victory by a Combination! 
Before I was let into the Secret, as it is called, which 
is indeed nothing but the knaviſh Part of the Sport, I 


was much diverted with theſe Races: but when I was, 
I rejoiced at the Regulation that it has met with, from 
the Power that only had Authority to make it. For 
this Diverſion becoming a public Nuiſance, by ſpread- 
Ing itſelf i in little Matches all over the * om, the 

| > 


2 TOUR N G 


22 2 


obility and Gentry, as well from 


ys ge + res — 2 > wy 


ka FA 


bbs 0 + 


_—_— 


cam. GREAT BRITAIN. . 85 


Leg iſlature took Co N of it, and in the 1 3th of 
King George II. a 
lows; to wit, 


aw paſled, which injoins as fol- 


That none but the Owners. of Horſes ſhall enter 
them, and but one Horſe at a time: 

That no Plate under 501. Value ſhall be run Pot 
on Penalty of 200/.—and 1001. on ſuch as ſhall 
advertiſe, print, or publiſh any Advertiſement of 
a Plate to be run for of leſs Value than gol. 


Five Years old Horſes to carry 10 Stone; Six, 11; 


Seven, 12 ; on the Forfeiture of the Horſe, and 


200]. The Race to be degun and ended in one 
Day. 


x Matches to be at Newmarket, and Black- Hambleton, 


 York/hire, only; on Penalty of 200. 
But Gifts left for annual Races not to be altered. 
Somerſetſhire Penalties to go to Bath Hoſpital. 
Entrance-money to be pas. to the ſecond-beſt 
Forſe. 
Newmarket is a band well. built Town; ; and, 


i being a Thorough-fare, reaps no ſmall Advantage by 
that means, as well as from the Races. It conlifts 


chiefly of one lon Street, the North-ſide of which is in 
Suffolk, and the South in Cambridgeſhire. The King 
has an Houſe of his own, where he reſides when he 


thinks fit to come to the Races. The Town has two 
| Churches belonging to it, and a Free-ichool endowed 
by King Charles II. | 


J went in the Intervals of the Sport to fon the fine 


Seats of the Gentlemen in the neighbouring County; 


tor this Part of S folk, being an open champain Coun- 
try, and in an healthy Air, is formed for Pleaſure, and 
all kinds of rural Diverſion; and the Country is ac- 


cordingly in a manner covered with fine Palaces of the 
Nobility, and pleaſant Seats of the Gen 


tr 
Euſton hall, the Seat of the Duke of coating tax! in 


| he open Country towards the Side of Norfolk, not far 


from 


"0 
3 
+ 
4 
6 . 
7 
* 
7 1 
4 _ 5 
. 1 
4 6: i / 
4 15 
1 * 5 
„ 
Fi 
2 
== 
ey 
5 
a 
8 
1 
o 
? 
. 
3 
1 
1 
EW 
$- EF , 
2 7 ; 
2 "4 
* 1 
2 6 
- 
SY 
N * 
* 
_ p 2 l 
$ Þ” l - 
1 
4 =— 
: l 
3 
5 - 
> h 
: 
2 
13 ; 
7 
4 
4 
N 
s 
4 
5 
Py 
* 
: = 
: 4 
4 4 
I o N 
a L 
* 9 
> 
* 
— 
85 
: 
1 
z 
{ 
oo 
$ = 
. = 
: 1 
FL f 
. 01 
; } 
z 1 
bo 
= 
TY 
1 : 
, 1 
+ 
? - 
N ! 
: N 
1 
” oo 
4 3 
N : — * 
7 1 
? 4 
IN K 
? 4 
= 1 : 
MW 
5 3 
- - 
— — 


wed aries ans. 


ED Co 


mY 388 8 9 
Wo AE oh ants ee eee wc eee eee eee s r A - . 
_ Ld dba. monk = 2 CC OT \ — — 8 12 I ® 
K — 1 
—— 


on 


= „ 
9 of 
- K 
= N r 
— 3 rr 


3 * — r — 1 —— Ae _ - ah low oe 
3 N we 0 A 
my . ²˙ 1 rar roo er, E — — 
2.6 Po _— _ 8 ; 
4 _ 


* A . 
. 5 * 8 * 
"4 * — wh * » ' "—_ FO: > LAY pan * * 4 


e re ere ar ns. * 
— e = * * * 


6  ATOUR#r Dun 
from Thetford; a Place capable of all that is pleaſant 


- 


Can, 
and delightful in Nature, and greatly improved hy 


Art. 1 e 
From thente I went to Ruſbbroot, formerly the Seat 


of the noble Family of Fermyns, Lord Dover, and 


now of the Houſe vf Davers. Then we ſaw Brerth, 
the Seat of the Earl of Dy/ert, and the antient Palace 
of Lord Cornivallis, with feveral others moſt agreeably 


ſituated, and adorned with the Beauties both of Art and 


Nature. 


Wie entered Cambridgeſbire out of Suffolk with al 


the Advantage that can be imagined; Juſt upon thoſe 
pleaſant and agreeable Plains, called Newmarket -heath, 
Acroſs which extends a Fortification, or Ditch, with a 
Rampart, commonly called The Devils Dyke, 28 


Morks of an extraordinary Nature are generally, by 


the Vulgar, attributed to that Prince of Darkneſs; but 


g the Gentry, it is beſt ænoun by the Name of 


Rech- Dyke, from Rech, a ſmall Market- town lying 


near the Heath. It is Suppoſed to have been the 
Boundary oſ the Kingdom of the EH-Angles. 


Paſſing this Ditch, we ſee from the Hills called Cy 
»:ag0g, or rather Fogmapey, a rich and pleaſant Vale 
Weſtward, covered with Corn- fields, Gentlemens 
Seats, Villages; and at a Diſtance, to crow all the 
reſt, that antient and truly noble Univerſity and Town 


of GCumbriuge, Capital of the County. 


In the Ground between theſe Hills and Camöriqh. 


grows naturally abundance of Lariſpur, which being 


-mtermixetd with the Wheat, makes a fine Appearance, 
"The blue and white Flowers which riſe to the Heipht 
of the Corn, as the Ears become Tipe, make a fine Va- W 
2 wrth the Larkſpur. 


ambriugehire, except the Fen Part, is 'alm6l 


wholly a Corn Country”; and-of that Corn, five Parts 
in ſix of all they Tow is | 
to Ware and Royion, and other great Malting towns in 


arley, Which is generally fold 


Fier tfordſpire, and is the Fund from whence that valt 
| | - | Quantity 


= A DO 4, uy a en - 


EATS 


Kamm nor Saxon, but Britiſh. King 


| cipecially in the Raeing- ſeaſon. 


Cam. GR RT BRITAaINx. 87 


Quantity or Matt, called Merr/ordfbire Malt, is made, 


and vrhich is eſteemed thecheſtin glam. As Et, 


Suffolk, and Norfolk, are talcen up in Mlanufactures, 
and famed for Induſtryęthis County has no Manufacture 
at all; nor are the Poor, except the Huſbandmen, 
noted for any thing ſo much as Sloth; to their Re- 


| proach be it ſpoken! What che [Reaſon of it ie, I 


know not. . | | 
On the Top of Hogmugeg Hills appears an antient 
Camp, or Fortification, with a treble Rampart and 
Ditch, which moſt of our Writers ſay was neither 
James II. cauſed 
a ſpacious Stable to be built in the Area of this Camp, 
for his Running- horſes, and made old Mr. Frampton 
Maſter or Inſpector of them. The Stables remain ſtill 
there, though they are not often made uſe of. Earl 
Codolphin has here a fine Houſe on the very Summit of 
the Hill, to which his Lordſhip frequently Teforts, 


As we deſcended Weſtward, we Faw the 'Fen 


Country on our Right, :almoft-all:covered with Water 


like a Sea, The -41:thaelmas Rains, having been very 
great. that Year, ſent down vaſt Floods: of Water from 
the Upland Counties; and thoſe 'Fens being the Sink 


of no leſs than 12 Counties, they are often thus over- 


flowed. The Rivers which thus empty themſelves 
into theſe Fens, and carry off the Water, are the Cm 
or Grant, the Great Ouſe and Little Ouſe, the Nene, 

the elland, and the River which runs from Bury to 


_ Mildenhull, The Counties which theſe Rivers drain, as 


above, are thoſe of 
* 'Cambrittze, | Oxford, Vor foll, 


Bahr, elle zun, He. 


Thoſe marked with-(*:)-empty all their Waters this ay, 
|  thereſt but in Part. | , 
2 Rn 


#V% 


88. +: 4 TOUR: Ou 
In a Word, all the Water of the middle Part of En. 
land, which does not run into the Thames, or the Tre, 


* 


comes down into theſe Fens. | : 
In theſe Fens are abundance of thoſe admirable Pieces 


of Art called Ductoys; and it is incredible what Quan- 


tities of Wild-fowl of all forts, Duck, Mallard, Teal, 
Wigeon, &c. they take in them every Week during 
the Seaſon: it may indeed be gueſſed at in ſome mens. 
ſure by this, that there is a Duckoy not far from Eh, 
which yields the Landlord 500. a Year clear of the 
Charge of maintaining a great Number of Servants for 
the Management; from whence alone they aſſured meat 


St. Ives (a Town on the Ouſe, whither the Fowls ate 


always brought to be conveyed to London), that they 


generally ſent up 3000 Couples a Week. 
There are more of theſe about Peterborough, from 
whence Waggon-loads are ſent up twice a Week to 


London. I have ſeen theſe Waggons, before the Ad 
of Parliament to regulate Carriers, drawn by ten or 
twelve Horſes apiece, ſo heavy were they loaden. 


As theſe Fens appear overwhelmed with Water,! 


_ obſerved, that they generally at the latter Part of the 


Year appear alſo covered with Fogs ; ſo that, when 


the Downs and higher Grounds of the adjacent Coun- 


try glittered with the Beams of the Sun, the Ie of Ely 


i ſeemed wrapped up in Miſt and Darkneſs, and nothing 
could be diſcerned, but now-and-then the Cupola of 
_ Ely Minſter. | 


One could hardly ſee this from the Hills, without 


Concern for the many thouſand Families confined to 
thoſe Fogs, who had no other Breath'to draw, than 


what muſt be mixed with the choaking Vapoum, 


which ſpread over all the. Country but, notwithſtand- i 


ing this, the People, eſpecially thoſe that are uſed to it, 
Ive as healthy as thoſe in a clearer Air, except now. 


and- then an Ague, which they make light ef; and 


there are great Numbers of very antient People among 


them. An act paſſed a few Years ago, for the more 


effectu 


Cam. (GREAT BRITAIN. - 89 
eftectual Draining and Preſervation of Haddenham Le- 


vel in the Ile of Ely, which contains 6500 Acres, 
which were overflowed chiefly through the Neglect of 


preſerving and clearing the Out falls into the Sea; and 


as theſe Grounds are naturally very rich and fertile, it 
may be imagined, what a Benefit muſt accrue to the 


Public by this Means, when the Draining and Reco- 
very of them can be completed. | 1 


Having been at Sturbridge- fair, when it was in its 


Height, in the Month of September, the Year before I 


was at Newmarket, I muſt ſay, that it is not only the 
greateſt in the whole Nation, but I think in Europe; 
nor are the Fair at Leipſick in Saxeny, the Mart at 
Frankfort on the Main, or the Fairs at Nuremberg or 
{usburg, reputed any-way comparable to this at Stur- 


| bridge *. 


It is kept in a large Corn- field, near Cheſterton, ex- 


| tending, from the Side of the River Cam, towards the 
| Road, for about half a Mile ſquare. e 
If the Field be not cleared of the Corn before a cer- 


tain Day in Auguſt, the Fairkeepers may trample it 
under-foot, to build their Booths or Tents. On the 
other hand, to balance that Severity, if the Fairkeepers 
have not cleared the Field by another certain Day in 


September, the Ploughmen may re-enter with Plough | 
and Cart, and overthrow all into the Dirt; and as for 


the Filth, Dung, Straw, Cc. left. behind by the F air- 


keepers, which is very conſiderable, theſe become the 
Farmers Fees, and make them full Amends for the 
| trampling, riding, carting upon, and hardening the 


Ground. 


It is impoſſible to deſcribe all the Parts and Circum- 
ces of this Fair exactly; the Shops are placed in Rows 
like Streets, whereof one is called Cheapſide; and here, 


as in ſeveral other Streets, are all Sorts of Traders, who 


| fell by Retale, and come chiefly from London. Here 
This Fair is pretty much dwindled fincs this Account of it; tho 


't is ill very conſiderable, | 
x may 


N 
| 
4 


} 
N 
3 L 
a 
=: . 
= 
«7 | : 


may be ſeen Goldſmiths, Toymen, Braſiers, Turner, 
Milaners, Haberdaſhers, Hatters, Mercers, Draper, 


 Pewterers, China-ware-houſes, and, in a Word, a 


Trades, that can be found in London; with Coffee. 
houſes, Taverns, and Eating-houſes, in great Num. 
bers; and all kept in Tents and Booths. 

'Fhis great Street reaches from the Road, which goe 


from Cambridge to Newmarket, turning fhort out of i 


to the Left towards the River, and holds in a Line nent 
half a Mile quite down to the River - ſide. In another 
Street parallel with the Road are the like Rows of 


Booths, but ſomewhat larger, and more intermingled 
with Wholeſale Dealers; and one Side, paſſing out of 
this laſt Street to the Right-hand, is a great Square, 
formed of the largeſt Booth, called the Duddery; but 


whence ſo called I could not learn. The Area of thi 
Square is from 80 to 100 Yards, where the Dealer 


have room before every Booth to take down and open 


their Packs, and to bring in Waggons to load and un. 
load. 3 8 j 

This Place being peculiar to the Wholeſale Dealer 

in the Woolen Manufacture, the Booths or Tents ate 


of a vaſt Extent, have different Apartments, and the 


Quantities of Goods they bring are fo great, that tc 
Inſides of them look like ſo many Blactruelle hallt, and 


are vaſt Warehouſes ow up with Goods to the Toy, 


In this Duddery, as I have been informed, have been 
ſold roo, ooo Pounds - worth of Woolen ManufaQures 
zin leſs than a Week's time; beſides the -prodigious 
Prade carried on here by Wholeſalemen f/om Zonam, 

and all Parts of England, who tranſact their Buſineb 


-wholly in their Pocket- books; and, meeting their 


Chapmen from all Parts, make up their Accounts, te. 


cCeive Money chiefly in Bills, and take Orders. Theſe 
Money chiefly 


they ſay, exceed by far the Sale of Goods actual) 
brought to the Fair, and delivered in Kind; it being 
frequent for the London Wholeſalemen to carry back 
Orders from the Dealers, for 10, ooo Pr ” 
| | a 


Cam 


Cam. GREAT BRITAIN. 91 
Goods a Man, and ſome much more. This eſpecially 
reſpects thoſe People who deal in heavy Goods, as 
Wholeſale Grocers, Salters, Braſiers, Iron -merchants, 
Wine-merchants, and the like; but does not exclude 
the Dealers in Woolen Manufactures, and eſpecially 


in Meroery- goods of all forts, who generally manage 


their Buſineſs in this manner. | 
Here are Clothiers from Halifax, Leeas, Wakefield, 

and Huthersfield, in Yorkſhire, and from Rochdale, Bury, 

&c. in Lancaſbire, with vaſt Quantities of Yorkſhire 


Cloths, Kerſeys, Pennyſtones, Cottons, &c. with all 


forts of Manche/ter Ware, Fuſtians, and Things made of 
Cotton Wool; of which the Quantity is ſo great, that 


they told me there were near 1000 Horſe · packs of ſuch 


Goods from that Side of the Country, and theſe took 
up a Side and Half of the Duddery at leaſt; alſo a 
Part of a Street of Booths was taken up with Upholſ- 
ters Ware; ſuch as Tickens, Sackens, Kidderminſter 
Stuffs, Blankets, Rugs, Quilts, Tc. = 

In the Duddery I ſaw one Warehouſe, or Booth, 


conſiſting of ſix Apartments, all belonging to a Dealer 


in Norwich Stuffs only, who, they ſaid, had there above 


8 20,0007. Value in thoſe Goods. 


Weſtern Goods had their Share her * d ſeveral 


| Booths were filled with Serges, Duroys, Druggets, 
| Shalloons, Cantaloons, Devenjhire Kerfies, '&c. from 


Exeter, Turnton, :Briftol, and other Parts Weſt, and 
ſome from London alſo. 2815 n 
But all this is ſtill outdone, at leaſt in Appearance, 


by two Articles, which are the Peculiars of this Fair, 
and are not exhibited till the other Part of the Fair, or 


the Moolen Manufacture, begins to cloſe up: theſe are 
the Wool, and the Hors. There is ſcarde any Frioe 
fixed for Haps in £ng/and, till they ænow hom they (el! 
at Sturbredge-fair, Phe Quantity that appears in the 
Fair, is indeed prodigious, and they take up a large 
Part of the Field, on which the Fair is 
elves: they are brought directly from a 

| Jex, 


pt. to themm- 


a . 
Ne- 8 — , „ ee. 


EET En OS 


= _ om ons 
eee . ry IE IEEE — * 
» . —— — . — 6 
1 A 
. 


- <i-  TACAL Core i 209d et EE A eee . r 


_ --- 
*S, 8 


e 


„ ] ATU Cn 
Eſſex, from Canterbury and Maidſtone in Kent, and 
from Farnham in Surry ; beſides what are brought 


from London, of the Growth of thoſe and other 
Places. 


The Article of Wool is of ſeveral Sorts; but prin- 


cCipally Fleece Wool, out of Lincolnſhire, where the 


longeſt Staple is found, the ber pes of thofe Parts being 


: of the largelt Breed. 


The Buyers are chiefly the Manufacturers of Nor- 


| folk, Suffolk, and Eſſex ; and it is 2 rb Quan- 


tity they buy. 
— 1 faw what I have not n in any other 
County of England, a Poclet of Wool; which ſeems 


to have been at firſt called ſo in Mockery, this Pocket 
being fo big, that it loads a whole Waggon, and reaches 
beyond the moſt extreme Parts of it, hanging over both 


before and behind; and theſe ordinarily weigh a Ton, 


or 2500 Pound Weight of Wool, all in one Bag. 
The Quantity of Wool only, which has been ſold 
at this Place, at one Fair, has been ſaid to amount to 


50 or 60,0001). in Value; ſome ſay, a great deal more. 
By theſe Articles, a Stranger may take ſome Guels 
at the immenſe Trade which is carried on at this Place; 


_ / what prodigious Quantities of Goods are bought and 


fold, and what a vaſt Concourſe of erte are ſeen here 


| from all Parts of England. 


1 might proceed to. ſpeak of ſeveral other Sorts of 
Engliſh Manufactures, which are brought hither to be 
ſold; as all Sorts of wrought Iron, and Braſs- ware 


from Birmingham ; edged Tools, Knives, &c. from 
Sheffield; Glaſs Wares, and Stockens, from Notting- 
: ham and Leice/fer ; and unaccountable Quantities of 
| other Things, of ſmaller Value, every Morning. 


To attend this Fair, and the prodigious Crouds of 


People which reſort to it, there are Hackney Coaches, 
which come from Londen, and ply all Day long, to 
carry the People to and from Cambridge; 3 "o there 
the major Part of them lodge. . 


It 


SO Nos ce rr rRHHm=D,A = 


ng 


Cam. GREAT BRITAIN. 


It is not to be wondered at, if the Town of Cam- 
}rigge cannot receive or entertain the Numbers of Peo- 
ple that come to this Fair; for not Cambridge only, but 
all the Towns round are full; nay, the very Barns and 
Stables are turned into Inns, to lodge the meaner Sort 


| of People: as for the Fair-people, they all eat, drink, 


and ſleep, in their Booths, which are ſo intermingled 
with Taverns, Coffee-houſes, Drinking-houſes, * : 
ing-houſes, Cooks Shops, &c. and fo many Butchers : 
and Higglers from all the neighbouring Counties come 
in every M orning with Beef, Mutton, Fowls, Butter, 
Bread, Cheeſe, Eggs, and ſuch Things, and go with 


them from Tent to Tent, from Door to Door, that 


there is no Want of Proviſions of any Kind, either 
dreſſed, or undrefied. Ts ty parry © 
In a word, the Fair is like a well- governed City, and 
there is the leaſt Diſorder and Confuſien (I believe) 
that can be ſeen any where, with ſo great a Concourſe 
of Peoples {th os 3s BEE 2X 5 
Towards the middle of the Fair, and when the great 
Hurry of Wholeſale Buſineſs begins to be over, the 


Gentry come in, from all Parts of the Country round; 


and though they come for their Diverſion, yet it is 
not a little Money they lay out, which generally falls 
to the Share of the Retailers; ſuch as the Toy-thops,. 
Goldſmiths, Brafiers, Ironmongers, Turners, Milaners, 


Mercers, &c. and ſome looſe Corns they reſerve for the 
_ Puppet-ſhews, Drolls, Rope- dancers, and ſuch-like ; 
of which there is no want. The middle Day of the 


Fair is the orſe-fair, which is concluded both with 
Horſe and Foot-races. In leſs than a Week after the 
End of the Fair, ſcarce any Sign of it remains, except 


by the Heaps of Dung, Straw, and other Rubbiſh, 


which is left behind, trod into the Earth, and'is as 


good as a Summer's Fallow for the Land; and, as I 


have ſaid above, pays the Huſbandman well by the Uſe 
of it. t orien pi 5 . | 
| I ſhould: 


_ — "> 


222 
1 
e COM ee e eee e eee r | 
E f ay = | = l | 
7 I - er. Gow 8 
o ne Pu Ho 2 2 —2 —.2 0 
— - — ITY — — ——ꝛ ˙.uvCgj64 Dr = | ” | _ 
_— IA — — — . 
. , — mn. — 
ne A Boe ra —— — — — y Err — INES ES earn at es — * — 
a . * 1111 » n 
. 21 Ry I * - n 
. os 
' Þ 
- 


r 


= 2 FC — 
» 2 — CAE rent) get 


Fm 9 
; — 


9 | A T OUR ri | 
I ſhould have mentioned, that here is a Court of 


Juſtice always open, and held every Day in a Shed built 


on Purpoſe in the Fair: this is for keeping the Peace, 
and deciding Controverſies in Matters arifing from the 
Buſineſs of the Fair. The Magiſtrates of the Univer. 
ſity of Cambridge are Judges in this Court, as being in 
their Juriſdiction, by ſpecial Privilege. Here they de- 
termine Matters in a ſummary Way, as is practiſed in 
thoſe: we call Pye-poruder Courts in other Places, or as 
a Court of Conſcience ; and they have a final Authority 
without Appeal. | ODS 
Having juſt mentioned the Puppet-ſhews, Drolls, 


Oe. with which the People are entertained during the 
Time of this Fair, I cannot but relate a deplorable 
Accident that happened on this Occaſion, at Burwell 
in this Neighbourhood, as follows. . 

On the Sth of September 1727. about eight at Night, 
a Puppet ſhew being to be acted in a Barn thatched 


with Straw, a Fellow attempted to thruſt himſelf in 


without paying; but being refuſed, and the Door 


locked, and, as ſome report, nailed, to keep out In- 
truders, the Villain threatened he would ſet the Barn 


on Fire over their Heads, in Revenge. There was a 
Place adjoining to the Barn, where were Hay and Straw; 


and a Boy ſetting down a wooden Lantern with a ſhort 
Candle in it at alittle Diſtance, whilſt he was looking 
thro? a Hole at the Sight, the villainous Fellow afore- 
ſaid beat the Lantern about, till the Fire took the 
Straw, which he left burning, and ran away. There 
was a Floor above them, and the Flame, getting into 


the falſe Roof, ſpread like Wildfire. The People in 


the utmoſt Conſternation, all making to the Door, 
which opened inwards, fell upon one another, and be- 
came, as it were, ſo many Baricadoes to hinder it being 
opened: and juſt at this fatal Criſis, the Fire having 


| ſeized ſome, and dreadful Shrieks and Cries reſounding 


on every Side, the Floor fell in, and ſmothered almoſt 
all; for not above five or fix eſcaped; and about 120 


Cam, 


3 


Men, 


— WP a 5 a V7 Va, EF ry W 


Sy OS CY WO 


— x 


* 


we © wo a cit 


ww © @ 0 _ 1 Usy 


** 


d UQ UN 1 


O 


— 
hd 


Cam. GREAT BRITAIN. 95 
Men, Women, and: Children, miſerably periſhed, 
The next Day it was one of the moſt ſhocking Sights 
that ever was- beheld, to ſee the Relations: of the un- 
happy Perſons. flocking thither to find and. own the 
Bodies, ſome. of their Brothers, ſome of their Chil- 
iren, ſome of their Wives and Huſbands, which 
they found. Difficulty enough to diſcover; for ſome 
of them had their Heads. burnt off, ſome their 
Legs, ſome their Hands and Arms, and others were, in 
z manner, conſumed. to Aſhes. And at laſt, moſt of 
the mangled Bodies were carried in Carts, and put pro- 
miſcuouſly into a large Hole dug in the Church-yard. 
for that Purpoſe. Among the unfortunate Sufferers 
were ſeveral young Gentlewomen of conſiderable For- 
tunes. EE, | 
About four Years after this, another terrible Fire 
happened, which almoſt conſumed the whole Town 
of Barnwell. | | 
Within theſe few Years, a fine Road, of about four 
Miles in length, is completed, from the Town of Cam- 
bridge to Hogmagog- hills; which, by reaſon of the for- 
mer Badneſs of the Way in that Place, is an exceeding. 
uſeful Benefaction to the Town; which generous 
Work was done, as ſome ſay, in purſuance of the Will 
of Villiam Fortes, Eſq; of Cambridge; as others, by 
virtue of a Legacy of Hobſon, the famous Letter- 
carrier. | 
The two Univerſities of Cambridge and Oxford are 
ſo much the Glory of this Nation, that it would be an 
almoſt an unpardonable Defect in ſuch a Work as this, 
not to take particular Notice of them. I ſhall refer 
that of Oxford to its proper Place; and here give as 
brief an Account as I can of this of Cambridge, and of 
de Originals and Founders of the ſeveral Colleges, to- 
gether with the Favours and Advantages that have 
deen within theſe few Years conferred upon it by his 
late Majeſty, and other Benefactors. . 


6 - ATOUR av Ow 


The Town is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen; 


but, with regard to the Government of the Univerſity, 


'T hat has a Chancellor, eligible every three Years, aut 


manere in eodem Officio durante tacito Conſenſu Senatis 
Cantabr. The preſent Chancellor is his Grace the 
Duke of Newca/?/e. He hath under him a Commi/ſary; 
who holds a Court of Record of Civil Cauſes for all 
_ privileged Perſons and Scholars, under the Degree of 
Maſter of Arts. 


They have alſo an High Steward, chofen by the- 
Senate, and holding by Patent from the Univerſity, 


The preſent High-Steward is the Earl of Hardwicke, 


"The Vice Chancellor is annually choſen on the 4th of 
November, by the Body of the Univerlity, out of two 


Perſons, nominated by the Heads of the Colleges. 


Two Proctors are allo annually choſen, as at Or * 


as alſo are two Taaers, who, with the Proctors, hape 


Cognizance of Weights and er N as Clerks of the 


Market. 


The Univerſity has alſo a Cuſtos Archivorum, te 
Regiſter ; three Eſquire Beadles, one Yeoman Beadle, 


and a Library-keeper. 
The Vice-Chancellor ſometimes viſits the Tavern, 


and other Public-houſes in Perſon: but the Proctors do 


it very frequently, and have Power to puniſh offending 


Scholars, and to fine the Public- houſes who entertain 
them aſter eight at Nig ight in the Winter, or nine in the 


Summer. 
As to the Antiquity of the Univerſity of Cambridre; 


the Story goes, that Cantaber, a Spaniard, 270 Years 


before Chriſt, firſt founded it; and that Sebert, King 


of the Eaſi-Angles, reſtored it, Anno Cht 111 630. Al- 


terwards, as the learned Camden obſerves, it lay a long 
time neglected, and was overthrown by the Danijh 
Storms, till all: Things revived under the Norman Go- 
vernment. Soon after Inns, Hoitels, and Halls, were 
built for Students, th? without Endowments. There 
are now 8 Colleges and Halls, which differ 1 55 in 

ame, 


: Cam. GNA BRITAIL V. ; 97 


: W Name, being equally endowed and privileged; 16 . 
» Wl Maſters, 406 F ellowſhips : about 662 Scholarſhips, 
t MW 236 Exhibitions; and the whole Number of Maſters, 
s WW Fellows, Scholars, Exbibitionerp, and other Students, 
e are about 1500. 
; J ſhall now give a brief Account of the Colleges, 
l and begin with, | 
f I. PeTzr-Hovss, bo 
| | Which was founded by Hugb Balſham, Biſhop of 
© Eh, Anno 1257. when 55 Prior of £/y. But at firſt 
.me Scholars had no other Conveniences than Cham- 
bers, which exempted them from the high Rates im- 
f WW poſed on them by the Townſmen for Lodgings. The 
0 WW Endowment was ſettled by the ſame Hugh, — Biſhop, 
Anno 1284. for a Maſter, 14 Fellows, Sc. Which 
LNumber might be increaſed or diminiſhed according to 
ede Improvement or Dimunition of their Revenues. 
on 2. CLARE-HALL 
BD Was founded in the Year 1340. by Richard Bade, | 
Chancellor of the Univerſity, with the Aſſiſtance of the 
„ Lady Elizabeth Clare, Counteſs of Uifter. He had be- 
fore built an Houſe called Unzver/ity- Hall, wherein the © 
Scholars lived upon their own, Expence for 16 Years, ” 
till it was accidentally deſtroyed by Fire. The Foun- 
er, finding the Charge of Rebuilding would exceed his 
n Wl Abilities, had the kind Afiſtance of the ſaid Lady, thro” 
whoſe Liberality it was not only rebuilt, but endowed. 
lt has been lately new- built, all of Free- -ſtone, and is 
one of the neateſt and moſt uniform Houſes in the Uni- 
eerſity, and is delightfully lituated, the River Gan run- : 
"> ung thro the Garden. | V 
3. PEMBROKE: Hair | 
"2 Was founded in the Year 1347. by the Lady Mary 
1 dt. Paul, Counteſs of Pembroke, third Wife to 3 
nare de 7 alentia, Earl of Pembroke ; who having been 
unbappily ſlain at a Tilting on his Wedding- day, ihe 
ntirely ſequeſtered herſelf from all worldly Delights, - 
and, among mes ious Acts, built this College, which 
ne, Vor. I. F.:? tas. 


os ATOUR ty Cam. 
has been ſince much augmented by the BenefaQtiong 
of others. N % to i ae: 2h 
4. ST. BENNET's, or Coxrus-CHRISTI 
5 „F STERN. „ 
Was founded by the Society of Friers in Corpus 
Cbriſti, in the Year 1346. This roſe out of two 
Guilds or Fraternities, one of Corpus on and the 
other of the Bleſſed Virgin, which after a long Emula- 
tion, being united into one Body, by a joint Intereſt 
built this College, which took its Name from the ad- 
joining Church of St. Benedict. Their greateſt modern 
BenefaRor was Dr. Matthew Parker, once Maſter of 
the College, and afterwards Archbiſhop of Canterbury, 
who, by his prudent r N recovered ſeveral 
Rights of the College; and, beſides two Fellowſhips 
. five Scolarſhips, gave a great Number of excellent 
| MS. to their Library, which were moſtly collected out 
of the Remains of the old Abbey-Libraries, Colleges, 
and Cathedrals, and chiefly relate to the Hiſtory of 


England. 

2 „%% T. 8 
Was founded about the Vear 1353. by William 
Fat man, Biſhop of Norwich. It was built upon a 
Place which once belonged to the Monks of Ely, and 
was an Houſe for Students before the Time of Biſhop 
Bateman, who, by Exchange for the Advowſons of 
certain Rectories, got it into his own Poſſeſſion. He 
Was a great Maſter of Civil and Canon Law; where- 
upon the Maſter, two Fellows, and three Scholars (the 
Number appointed by him at the firſt Foundation), 
were obliged to follow thoſe two Studies. It has 
been ſince much augmented by Benefactors, and the 

Number of its Members is proportionably increaſed. 
c 6. GoNeviL and Carvs Colle 
Anno 1348. EdmundGonevil founded an Hall, called 
after his Name, upon the Place where now are the 
Orchard and Tennis-court of Bennet-College. But 
- Within five Years after it was removed into the Hoes 


Cam. GrraTt BriTAins 99 
where it now ſands, by Biſhop Bateman, Founder of 
Trinity-Hall. Anno 1607. Fohn Caius, Doctor of 
Phyſic, improved this Hall into a new College, ſince 
chiefly called by his Name ; and it has of late K. re- 
ceived conſidetable Embelliſhments, Sc. . 
| 5 7. KING's-CoLLEGE © © 
Was founded in the Year 1451: by King Henry VT, 
It was at firſt but ſmall, being built by that Prince tor 
a Rector and 12 Scholars only. Near it was a little 
Hoſtel for Grammarians, built by William Bingham, 
which was granted by the Founder to King Henry, for 
the Inlargement of his College. Whereupon he united 
theſe two, and, having inlarged them, by adding the 
Church of St. ohn Zachary, founded à College for a 
| Provoſt, 70 Fellows and Scholars, three Chaplains, Se. 
be Chapel belonging to this College is deſervedly 
| reckoned one of the fineſt Buildings of its Kind in the 
World. It is 304 Feet long; its Breadth, including 
ö the Cells or er on each Side, is 73 broad; 
is Height to the Battlements is gr Feet; it has not 
one Pillar in it, and the Roof is arched with Stone. It 
| has 12 large Windows on each Side, finely painted; 
| and the Carving, and other Workmanſhip, ofthe Stalls 
| ſurpaſſes any thing of the Kind. It conftitutes one Side 
oda large Square; for the Royal Founder deſigned, 
\ WE that the College ſhould be a Quadrangle, all of equal 
: Beauty: but the Civil Wars, in which he was imvolyed 
| with the Houſe of York, prevented his eee e 
5 it; and the Proſecution of his good Deſign was te- 
ſerved to our own Time. What has been added with- 
in theſe few Years paſt, is not only an Ornament to the 
College, but to the whole Univerſity. The new, Build- 
ing, which is of Stone, runs from the Weſt-end of the 
Chapel, a little detached from it, to the Southward, 
makes another Side of the Square, and contains ſpaci- 
ous Chambers and Apartments, being 236 Feet in 
Length, and 46 in Breadth. The new Senate- hall, 
which makes the Angle parallel to the Chapel, is no- 
e ching 


r * 


SE SS - — WT 


ac 1 
/ ͤůͤ—— . ͤ—9 ! — 
as... ep” 
4 p * — ” 1 


—̃ = 2 a9es% 1, 580 


e e IS rey 


2572 . 
* K 
r ils: © gs 
. = * 
w_—— * 
N 


109 ; N A TOUR thro Cam 


thing ſo well contrived for the Purpoſe, as the Thea- 
tre at Oxford. 
Febr. 1734. the W 


Hands a conſiderable Number, which they made Pre- 


ſents of to their particular Benefactors, and divided 


among themſelves, and the Fellows of the College; 
but it is ſuppoſed, that the Workmen ſecreted many; 
for this Coin was very ſcarce before, but after this was 
much eaſier to be met with. + 
. 8. QuEEN's-ColLECGE 
Was founded by Queen Margaret of Anjou, Wife 


of King Henry VI. in the Year 1448. but the trouble. 


ſome Times that followed, would not give her Leave 
to complete the Fabric. The firſt Maſter of it, Andrew 
Ducket, procured great Sums of Money from well diſ. 
poſed Perſons, towards Finiſhing of this Work ; and 
ſo far prevailed with Queen Elizabeth, Wife of King 


Ediuard IV. that ſhe perfected what her profeſſed Ene- | 


my had begun. The Reverend Mr. Ferdinando 
Smithes, Senior Fellow of Queen's College, who died in 


November 1725. ore 1500 l. to the ſame, to be ap- 
propriated to the 
time of their taking their Maſters Degree. 


ſe of three Bachelors of Art, till the 


9. CATHARINE-HALL | 


Was founded in the Year 1459. by Robert I/ocd.. 


lark, third Provoſt of King's College; and the Hall was 
built over-againſt the Carmelites Houſe, for one Maſter 
and three Fellows. The Numbers have been ſince 


greatly increaſed, as well as the Revenues. A great 


Part of it is lately new-built, and may be ſaid to be a 


beautiful and regular Fabric. 


10. IEsus COLLEGE ö.A 


| Was Farided Jones 1497. by John Alcocke, Biſhop ; 
of Eq, out of an old Nuanery dedicated to St. Rade. 


gund, 


orkmen, digging for the Founda- 

tion of the new Buildings of this College, found a great 
Number of Broad Pieces of Gold, of the Coin of King 
Henry V. exceeding fair. As ſoon as it was known, 
the Governors of the. College got out of the Workmens 


— — 0 — — e — 


e. 22e £A -., 


— 


O 


Cam. GREAT Britain. 101 
eund, given him by King Henry VII. and Pope Julius 
II. on account of the ſcandalous Incontinence of the 


Nuns, in order to be by him converted to this Uſe. 


And this Prelate eſtabliſhed in it a Maſter, fix Fellows, 


and ſix Scholars: but their Numbers have been much | 


increaſed by Benefactions. 
11. CHRIsT's Cork ken 

Was founded by the Lady Margaret, Counteſs of 
Richmond, Mother of King Henry VII. Anno 1506. 
upon the Place where God's Houſe formerly ſtood. She 
ſettled there a Maſter and 12 Fellows, &c. which 
Number in King Edward VI's Time being complain- 
ed of as favouring of Superſtition, by alluding to our 
Saviour and his 12 Diſciples, that Prince added a 13th 
Fellowſhip, with ſome new Scholarſhips. This Col- 
lege has been, within theſe few Years paſt, adorned 


with a very fine new Building, 


12. St. Joun's CoLLEE (.A. 
Was founded about the Year 1506. by the fake 
Lady, upon the Place where, Anno' 1134. Nigel or 


Neal, fecond Biſhop of Eh, founded an Hoſpital for 
Cadces Regular; ; which, by Hugh de Balſbam, was 


converted into a Priory dedicated to St. John, and, by 
the Executors of the ſaid Counteſs of Richmond, into a 

'ollege, under the Name of the ſame Saint. For ſhe 
died before it was finiſhed, which retarded the Work 
for ſome time; but it was afterwards carried on by her 
Executors and in the Beginning of the Reign of 
King James I. was greatly inlarged with fair new 
Buildings. This College, pleaſantly ſituated by the 
River, is no leſs remarkable for its Number of Stu- 


Cents, and its beautiful Groves and Gardens, than for 
its ſtrict and regular Diſcipline. It has a noble Li- 


brary, which has been of Jate Years greatly augmented, 


by the Acceſſion of the Library of Dr. Gunning, no 


of Ely, who bequeathed the ſame to it. 
13. MAGDALEN COLLEGE | 


Was founded Anno 1542. by Thomas Audley, Lord 
Chancellor of England, and was afterwards inlarged 


F 2 and 


N 
* 
* 
4 
# 

F 
4 
o 
3 
* 


5 
— i 
5 . 
1 
1%. 
7 
9 
8 
1 
SE. 
1 
| 
LY 5 
#. » 
v7 7 
* - =] 
> oy o 
LS 
5 33 WE 
X O48. 00 
4*:Þ 
43 
A 
«& * 
7 Fo i 
GG: Þ- 
be rh 2 
1 
a * 
>. 7 
oY Fe. = 
kd Se 
*:,Þ£ 
+= 
5 
1 
78S. 
KAY } 


XI 
1 

15 
i * 
1 
1 Fat 

RH 
$1 

"Rx 
121 
51 
* 4 

* 

N 


— 5 ti —ꝓV— — 
— 
arr” r PEA r 
7 
DEF 
2 


wy 
POO ae G2 ar bn ABA rents ps A eee 


the late 


—————— 


— — — 
7 ym mere ns 
*. 
R 
, - 


102 ATOUR thu Cam. 
and endowed by Sir Chriſſepher Mrey, Lord Chief Juf. 
tice of England. This College ſtands by itſelf on the 


North-weſt Side of the River, and hath been of late 
Vears improved and adorned by an handſome Piece of 


Building. A Fellowſhip of a conſiderable Value has 


been lately founded at this College, which is appropri- 
ated to Gentlemen of the County of Norfo/k, and called 
The Traveling Norfolk Fellotuſbip. | 

To the Library of this College were left a valuable 
Collection of Pamphlets, by . ... . . Pepys, Eſq; as alſo 


great Numbers of Papers relating to the Navy and Ad. 
miralty. The Benefactor bequeathed the Preſſes, as 


well as the Books and Papers, and they are kept in 


the manner he left them. 


14. Tamer COLLEGE 55 
Was founded Anno 1546. by King Henry VIII. out 
of three others: St. Michael's College built by Hlervit 
of Stanton, in the Time of Edward II. King's. hall, 
founded by Edwerd III. and Fenwick's Heſtel. Its 
worthy Maſter, 7. Neuil, Dean of Canterbury, repair- 


ed, or rather new- built, this College, with that Splen - 


dor and Magnificence, that for Spaciouſneſs, and the 
Beauty and Uniformity of its Buildings, it is hardly to 
be outdone. All which has been ſince ſtil] further im- 
proved, by a moſt noble: and ſtately Library, begun by 

— Dr. Jſaac Barrow: A Building, for 
the Bigneſs and Deſign of it (ſays a Right Reverend 


Prelate) perhaps not to be matched in theſe Kingdoms. 


'Fhis College is likewiſe rendered famous on account 


of ſeveral great Men it has educated, as the Lord Bacon, 


Sir Iſaac Newton, Dr. Barrow, Mr. Ray, and Dr. 
Bentley, its late learned Maſter. 7u'y 4, 1755. was 
finiſhed and erected in Trinty-Chapel, Cambridge, by 
Dr. Smith, that long ſtudied Piece of Sculpture of dit 
Tſaac Newton, which is allowed by the beſt Profeſſors of 
Art, to be a complete Maſter-piece of the celebrated 
Mr. Roubiliac. | | 
15. EMANUEL COLLEGE 


Was founded Anno 1 584. by Sir Walter Mildmay, 


Chancellor | 


ERR PacSun ß ke $9. ab as 92 |, 


Benefactors. 


* 


cam. GAT BRITAIV. 63 
Chancellor of the Exchequer to Queen Elizabeth, ina 


Place where was formerly a Convent of Dominicans, 
founded in the Year 1280. by the Lady Alice, Count- 
eſs of Oxford. After the Suppreſſion of Monaſteries it 


came into the Poſſeſſion of Mr. Sherwood, of whom Sir 


Walter ſeems to have bought it. It has a very neat 
Chapel, built not many Years ago, by the Bounty of 


Pr. William Sancroft, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and 


others. And the Library belonging to it, has received 


ol late Years a fine Addition, by the valuable Collec- 
tion of Books of the ſame Archbiſhop, given to it on 
the Deceaſe of that Prelate. 5 


16. S1DNEY-SUsSEX COLLEGE. 5 
Was founded by virtue of the Will of the Lady 
Frances Sidney, Counteſs of Suſſex, who died Anno 
1589. and by her Will left 5000 J. for the Founding of 


a College, to be called Sidney Suſſex. It was erected 


on the Place were formerly the Monaſtery of Grey- 
Friers, built by King Edward I. had flouriſhed. But 
though this College owes its Riſe to the Bequeſt of 
this Lady, and the Care of her Executors, it is exceed- 
ingly improved by the Benefactions of Sir Francis 


 Clrk, who, beſides erecting a Set of new Buildings, 
augmented the Scholarſhips, and founded four Fellow-. 


„with eight Scholarſhips more; and moreover Sir 


* 
Jobn Brereton left to it above 2000 /. 1 5 
| - Theſe are the ſixteen Colleges or Halls in this Uni- 


— 


The Schools of this Univerſity were at firſt in pri- 
vate Houſes, hired from ten Years to ten Years for 
that Purpoſe, by the Univerſity; in which time they 


might not be put to any other Uſe. Afterwards pub- 
lic Schools were built at the Charge of the Univerſity, 
in or near the Place where they now ſtand ; but the 
preſent Fabric, as it is now built of Brick and rough 


Stone, was erected partly at the Expence of the Uni- 
verlity, and partly by the Contributions of ſeveral 


F 4 - The 


; 8 * — — 
8 1 " 
1 * N a r , 033% ach my ä , 7 7 " ; Fey 1 
— Ü] TT TS Ns 7 GIA y PEERS 1 FE2 4 bak AVI EY Tal Wes. es O66 * * - 
o l : 
= _ _ * 2 = —_ o _ we —— 5 oy" 8 0 — 8 ay 8 
3 r 9 n 45 eee . . IIS © - 2365! Bone” F wy 6 3 25 _— = — — 
* l _ = I» l e ä rr e eee * e DRE . dy. x Wh rd ky þ wb UII. ne Foy Wt ol OY ROUTERS 1 n 
4 —7 = — 1 — ea r eee 5 IDE, | PPC PCP 
5 meme, l , B "x" ** * = rater vn RL : — 
N | —_ - — ! Ia | 
. : - 22 OE 2 6 


i 

: 
= 
Þ 

1 
11 

[ 

! 4 


As. * TOUR thre Cam. 


The Univerſe ty- Library was firſt built by Retheram 
* Archbiſhop of Jork, who, with Tonſtal, Biſhop of 7 


Ham, furniſhed it Fe choice Books; few whereof are 


to be found at preſent. But it contained nevertheleſs 
about 14000 Books, when his late Majeſty King 

| George I. was graciouſly pleaſed, in the Beginning . 
his Reign, to 2 the large and curious Library of 


De. John Mcor, Biſhop of Fh, who died Fly 30, 


1714. and, as a Mark 07 bis Royal Favour, to beſtow 
it upon this Univerſity. 


There have been very lately great en and 


Alterations made in the . for the better Diſpo- 


ſition of this valuable Royal Preſent, which conſiſted 
of upwards of 30,000 Volumes, and coſt the King 
6000, Guineas. And we cannot but obſerve, in this 
Place, That the late Lord Viſcount Tywnſend, baving 
underſtood that the Univerſity, to ſhew their Grati. 
tude, and do Honour to the Mans of his late Majeſty 


King George I. intended to erect a Statue of that Mon. 


arch, was pleaſed to offer to cauſe the ſame to be carv- 
ed, and ſet up in the ſaid Library at his own Expence; 


| which generous Tender was received by the Univerſity 


in the Manner it deſerved, and with Circumſtances 
equally to their own and his Lordſhip's Honour. And 
in the Month of Ociober 17 39. in purſuance thereof, a 
fine Marble Statue of this great Prince was accordingly 
crected in the Senate-hall of X7ng's-College ; on which 
are the on, Kan opera ; VIZ. oY the Front : 


G E Q R Gy 1H. 
Optimo Principi, 
Mag ne ” Britannie Regi, 
Ob 2 gnia ejus in hanc Academiam 
erita, 
Senatus Cantabrigienſis 
In perpetuum 
6 rari Animi Teflimanium 
Statuam 


Mortuo ponendam 
Detrevit, : That 


C: 


Th 


Cam. GREAT BRI1ITAI N. =, 105 
That is, By the Senate of Cambridge it was decreed, 

That a Statue ſhould be erected to his late moſt 
Excellent Majeſty George I. King of Great Britain, 
as a perpetual Monument of their Gratitude for his 


 fgnal Benefits to this Univerſity, On the _ 
| CAROLUS | 


Vicecomes Townſhend, 
Summum tum Academiz, tum 
Keipublicæ Decus, 

Pro Eximia, gua Regem coluerat, 
Pietate, proque ſingulari, 
Qua Academiam foverat, 
Caritate, Statuam 
A Senatu Academico decretam 
Sumtibus ſuis e Marmore 
Faciendam lhcavuit. 


That! is, Charles Lord Viſcount Totonſbend, a ded 
Ornament both of the Univerſity and the State, 
agreeably to his ſingular Loyalty towards his Prince, 

and the particular Affection wherewith he had fa- 
voured the Univerſity, engaged to have the Statue, 
which was decreed by the Senate of ee 
made of Marble at his own Expence. 


CAROLUS Filius 
Vicecomes Townſhend, 
Virtutum æque ac Honorum 
Paternorum Heæres, 
Sltatuam, 
uam Pater Morte ſubita Midi 
1 wa ore: religuerat, 
'erficiendam, 
Altque in hoc ornatiſſimo 
Academic Loco collocandam, 
Curavit, 


That is, Charles the Son, Lord Viſcount Townſhend, 


Heir alike to the Virtues and Dignities of his Father, 
5  F$ + © 217000 


106 4 TOUR Aπάeͤ Can: 
cauſed this Statue, which his Father, ſurpriſed b 
ſudden Death, had left imperfect, to be completed, 
and erected in this moſt honourable Place of the 
Univerſity” TED 
The ſame beneficent King, not contented with 
having given this noble Inſtance of his Royal Bounty 
to * of Cambridge, in the Year 1724. wag 
graciouſly pleaſed to confer another Mark of his Favour 
upon them, and which extended to the Univerſity of 
of Oxford, in creating a new Eſtabliſhment in a mo | 
uſeful Branch of Learning, which was much wanted, 
and for which till that time there had been no Provi- 
fion : this was, to appoint two Perſons, not under the 
Degree of Maſter of Arts, or Bachelor of Laws, ſkilled 
in Modern Hiſtory, and in the Knowlege of Modern 
Languages, to be nominated King's Profeſſors of Mo- 
dern Hiflory, one for the Univerſity of Cambridge, and 
the other for that of Oxford; who are obliged to read 
Lectures in the Public Schools, atparticulartimes; each 
of which Profeſſors to have a Stipend of 400/. per Annum; 
out of which each Profeffor is obliged to maintain, 
with ſufficient Salaries, two Perſons at leaſt, well quali- 
fied to teach and inſtruR in writing and ſpeak ing the 
ſaid Lauguages, gratis, twenty Scholars of each Univer- 
ſity, to be nominated by the King, each of which is 
obliged to learn two, at leaſt, of the ſaid Languages. 
8 The ſame Excellent Prince alſo was pleaſed to ap- 
point twelve Perſons, choſen out of each of the Univerſi- 
ties, to be Preachers in the Royal Chapel of Yhitehall, 
at ſtated Times, with handſome Salaries ; and declared, 
That he would cauſe a particular Regard to be had to 
the Members of the two Univerſities, in the Diſpoſi- 
tions of thoſe Benefices which fell into the Royal Gift. 
A very fine Marble Statue, dong by Ry/drack, of the 
late Duke of Somerfet, who was Chancellor of this 
Univerſity for above ſixty Years, was placed, in 7 | 
1756. in the Senate-houſe at Cambridge, on the Rig - 
hand of the Eaſt Door, juſt before the Pillars that ſup- 
port the Gallery at the End, It exhibits 1 
8 91 ” igure 


Cam.  GreaT BrITAin, Toy 
Figure of the Duke in the younger Part of his Life, 
raiſed on a ſquare Pedeſtal, and dreſſed after Yangyte's 
Manner, with the Enſigns of the Order of the Garter, 
leaning in an eaſy Poſture on his left Arm, and 'holding 
out a Roll in his Right hand. The whole Piece has 
a very graceful and majeſtic Look, is extremely well 
executed, and does Honour to the ingenious Artif, 
It was a Preſent made to the Univerſity by the Duke's 
illuſtrious Daughters, the Marchioneſs of Granby and 
Lady Guernſey. The following Inſcription in Capitals 
is ſet on the Front of the Pedeſtal. . 
„„ %% ALTO 5 
Pvc SOMEERSETENSI 
STRENVO IVRIS ACADEMICI DEFEENSORT 
ACERRIMO LIBERTATIS PUBLIC AE VINDICI 
1 STATVAM 
| LECTISSIMARVM MATRONARVM MYNYS 
| L. M. PONENDAM DECREVIT 
ACADEMIA CANTABRIGIENSIS 
QUAM PRAESIDIO SVO MVNIVIT 
AvXIT MVNIFICENTIA 
PER ANNOS PLVS SEXAGINTA 
TTT 
That is, To Charles Duke of Samerſet, a ſtrenuous De- 
fender of the Rights of the Univerſity, a zealous 
Aſſertor of public Liberty, this Statue, the Gift of 
two moſt excellent Matrons, was willingly and de- 
ſervedly placed by the Decree of the Univerſity, 
which he, Chancellor of it above ſixty Vears, de- 


fended by his Power, augmented by his Munificence. 
| On the Reverſe: © e 
eee 
SVAE IN PARENTEM PIETATIS 
| IN ACADEMIAM STYDIL 
MONVMENTVM 
ORNATISSIMAE FAEMINAE 
' FRANCISCA MARCHIONIS DE GRANBY CONIVRX. 
CHARLOTTA BARONIS DE GVERNSEY 
8. P. FACIENDAM CVRAVERVNT 
„ | That 


ges AUR Cam 
That is, This Par Monument of filial Duty to their 
Parent, of their Affection for the Univerlity, the 
moſt accompliſhed Ladies, Frances, Wife of the 
Marquis of : Granby, Charlotte, of Lord Guernſey, 
cauſed. to be erected at their own Expence, 27556. 


On the 29th of April, 1755. his Grace the Duke of 
Newcaſtle, Chancellor of this Univerſity, attended by 
the Heads and Doctors, and almoſt all the Members 
of the Senate houſe, proceeded from Clare- hall to the 
Place intended for the Erection of a new Public 
Library, and there his Grace, after a ſhort Addreſs in 
Latin for Succeſs to the Undertaking, laid the firſt 
Stone; in the hollow Part of which was placed a great 
N umber of Gold and Silver Pieces of his preſent Ma- 


E 


Conſtanmæ æternitati gue ſacrum ; 
cans oc Orientale: Bibliotbecæ Publice 
| Egregia Georgii Imi 

Britanniarum Regis 
Liberalitate locupletatæ 
Vetuſtate obſoletum inſtauravit 
Georgii IIdi Principis optimi 
| AMunificentia 


Accedente 


4 mans Yeah ABI Ts eter — — . — NTT 8 
—— - - * 
1 — 


VNWobiliſſimorum virorum [= 
Thome Holles Ducis de Newcaſtle 
Academiæ Cancellarii 
Fhillippi Comitis de Hardwick Angliæ Cancellarii 
Academiæ ſummi Seneſchalli 
Ac plurimorum Preſulum optimatum,, 
Aliorumque Academie fautorum 
 Prepenſa i in Rei literariæ incrementum 
 Splendoremgue benignitate 
lapidem hunc immobilem 
| _ Operis exardium 


wm a ac ”" — 4. << aw... wy 


Cam. 


Ipſius auſpiciis ſuſceptis 


Aida ili Patrocinia, Procuratione, 
Hieliciter, Deo propitio, per ficiendi, 
Circum Ne Frequentiſſima Academicorum Corona: 
| Prid. Kalend, Maii, M. Doc ttt. 
Sug manu: ſolemniter peſuit 
Academiæ Cancellarius. 


That i is, Sacred to Conſtancy and Eternity This Eaſts 
ſide of the Public Library, ' enriched 55 the ſingular 
Liberality of George I. King of Great Britain, when 
decayed with Age, was rebuilt by the Munificence 
of the beſt of Princes George II. with the additional 

Bounty of the moſt noble Thomas Holles, Duke of 
Netocaſtle, Chancellor of the Univerſity, Philip Earl 
of Hardwicke, Lord High-Chancellor of England, 
High- Steward of the ſame, of ſeveral eminent Pre- 
lates, and other Patrons of the Univerſity, warmly 
affected to the Increaſe and Splendor of Learning. 
This immoveable Stone, the Beginning of the Work, 
under the ſaid Auſpices, Authority, Parscage, and 
Procuration undertaken, and, by God's Help, to 
be happily perfected, in Preſence of a numerous 
Aſſembly of the Gentlemen of the Univerſity, 
the Chancellor thereof laid ſolemnly, with his own 
Hand, on the laſt Day of April 1755. | 


Some other Benefactions to this Univerſity, within 


theſe few Years paſt, are as follow: 
On the Death of Mrs. 4ddenbroke (Mar. 1720.) 


— 


Widow of an eminent Phyſician of that Name, the 


Sum of about 4000 J. devolved to this Univerſity ; 
which, by the Doctor's Will, was to be applied to the 
building and furniſhing a Phyſical Hoſpital in Cam- 
bridge, in which poor diſeaſed, People were to be ad- 
mitted for Cure gratis. The Maſter and Fellows of 


Catharine- hall were appointed Truſtees of this Charity. 
This Hoſpital was erected a few Years after; but one 
of the Executors of Mrs, adentroke, | in whoſe Hands | 


the 
2 


GREAT BRITAIN, 409 


1 


4 
8 
"_ * 
N 
(ns 
id ; 
= MM » 
1 
* =_ 
Fi :y $ 
7 4 
0 
2 ff 
2 
4 
Ss. 
8 
1 
— 1 1 
7 = 
8 
14 
. ſl 
* = 
1 
oy . 
SY 
21 
5 6 3 - 
4 
I 
1 
: o i 
OS 
1 4 = 
q 
"iP 
I * 


- l 4 N = 5 ä 
25 1 5 N bt, — x” yt + 
TE EE EI . D _— a a 
3 2 FFT 0 5 8 
, 


but the Gatehouſe, which is the Priſon, and an artifici 


110 ATOUR i Cam. 
the Money was lodged, failed, which put a Stop to the 
completing of this Building. But in the Year 1758. 


the Univerſity having obtained a Decree in Chancery 
for a Sum of Money ariſing from the Eſtate of the 


Truftee, in whoſe Hands the Money had been, they 


are now finiſhing the Building with it. 
Dr. Fobn — who died 


April 25, 1728, leſt 
to the Univerſity of Cambridge a Sum o 8 
erecting a Profeſſorſhip for Natural Philoſophy, with a 
Proviſion of 1501. per Annum for the Support and 
Maintenance of the ſame for ever. He likewiſe be- 
queathed to the ſaid Univerſity his Collection of Foſſils, 


and other natural Curioſities, and fuch a Part of his 


Library moreover, as was neceſſary to illuſtrate his 
faid Collection. „ 

I ſhall not here enter into the puerile Diſpute (which 
has ſo much engaged ſeveral learned Pens, that might 
have been better employed), whether this Univerſity 
or that of Oxford is. the more antient. Their Emula- 
tion ought to be more worthily founded ; and indeed 
they have ſo much to boaſt, as to the great and ſhining 


' Ornaments they have reſpectively produced to Church 


and State, and the Figuge they make in the Common- 
wealth of Learning, that it is ſtrange {og ttifling a Con- 


' tention ſhould have been ſo warmly maintained; only, 


it muſt be conteſſed, that it is more kept up by Tyro's 
than Adepts. e „3 | 
Cambridge cafile was built by Vila the Norman, 
as one of thoſe many which he erected in divers Parts, 
to curb his new Subjects. It was ſtrong and ſtately, 


and had in it, among other ſpacious Apartments, a 
magnificent Hall. Th 
and Timber of it were ere of Henry IV. 
of the Maſter and Fellows of Ning hall, towards the 
u 


is being neglected, the Stones 


ilding of their Chapel. Nothing is now flandin 


kigh Hill of a fteep Aſcent, and level af Top. 


Ad- 


Adjoining to the Town-hall of Cambridge, is a new 
Shire houſe, built with Brick and Stone, at the Expence 


of the County; wherein are two Courts; one for Nie 
prius, the other for Common Law, which were open- 


eld by Lord Chief Juſtice ##es, and Mr. Baron Clarke, 


Auguſt 11, 1747. r 
The Town of Cambridge is very large 
Streets are narrow, the Houſes ill- built, and the greateſt 


Part of them much out of Repait; ſo that, were it not 


for the Colleges, and other public Edifices, it would 


make but a mean A 


Here is a good M Market for Fiſh, Butter, Garden- 
ware, c. at the upper End of which is a very hand- 
ſome Conduit, which ſupplies the Inhabitants with 
freſh Water : this is brought by a ſmall Channel from a 
Brook about three Miles from Cambridge, and is con- 
veyed through the principal Street to the different Parts 


| of the Town; this was made at the Expence of Hob- 


ſon the Letter- carrier, who left an Eſtate in Land to the 
Corporation, for keeping the Channel and Conduit in 
conſtant Repair for ever. h 


From Cambridge the Road lies North · weſt, on the 


Edge of the Fens, to Huntingdon. On the great Poſt- 
Road betwixt Ray/ton and Huntingdon ſtands the little 
Market-town of Caxton, remarkable for being the 
Birth- place of Caxton, the firſt Printer in England, 
The Roman Way paſſes from Arington N. W. thro? 
Holm into this Town, and fo on to Papworth, higher 
up on the ſame Road; which three laſt-mentioned 
Places are Villages only. On this Side, it is all an 
agreeable Corn Country, adorned with ſeveral Seats of 
Gentlemen; but the chief is Vimple- hall, former! 

built, at a vaſt Expence, by a late Earl of Radner. k 
was afterwards bought by his Grace Febn Holles Ca- 


vendiſh, late Duke of Newcaftle ; in a Partition of 


whoſe vaſt Eftate, it fell to Edward: late Earl of Ox- 
ford and Mortimer, in Right of his Lady, the only 
Daughter of the ſaid Duke; who brought the Earl this 


Cam: OGCnxar BrrTain. 111 


1 moſt of its 


4 FO La, Aer 


te, | 


65 


. 3 
2 S r 2 
— * — W * n. 2 * *. 
IT ob FEE rr EIOITE SD 
2 oe Ga r - an Les AI hy 1 - 
= IS. — We ens . — 


NO CN = Arn er. + - — 8 
... PR ED 


3 
1 


1211 2 A TOUR He Cam. 
Eſtate, and many others, ſufficient to denominate her 
one of the richeſt Heireſſes in Great Britain; but his t 
Lordſhip parted with it, a little before his Death, to 
the Right Honourable the then Lord Chancellor Hard. 
-wicke, who now poſſeſſes it. It is ſituated in a very 
dirty Country; and, notwithſtanding the Coſt beftow.. 
ed upon it from its firſt Owner to this Time, the Gar- 
dens and Building are both in a bad Taite. +9 
In the Neighbourhood of this Town, are many Saf- 
fron Grounds, where a much greater Quantity of Saf. 
fron is annually produced than is at preſent at Saffron 
Malden; fo that the Market which was formerly kept 
there for this Commodity is now kept at Linton, a 
ſmall Market - town, of no Note, ſaving that a Roman 
Military Way falls into the Itening here. Z 
Near this Town is a noble Seat of the Right Honour- 
able Lord Montford, called ons <p The 
Houſe ſtands on an Eminence, fo as to command a 
Proſpect to the oppoſite Side of the County, which is 
upwards of twenty Miles. The Building is lofty, and 
the Apartments large; but the two Stair-caſes, on 
each Side of the Hall, occupy ſuch large Spaces, as to 
leflen the Number of Rooms, which, from the out- 
ward Grandeur of the Building, any Perſon would na- 
turally expect; inſomuch that, on viewing the Inſide 
of the Houſe, the Spectator will be ſurpriſed to ſee the 
Bulk of ſo large a Front taken up by theſe Stairs. 
IIe Fall is very Doble; it is thirty- five Feet ſquare, 
and thirty Feet high; the Approach to this Hall, is by 
a noble Flight of Stone Steps; the Floor being elevat- 
ed nine Feet from the Ground; ſo that the Servants 
Offices are below, on the Level of the Ground; but, 


* es <- — = 
, e 


Gs — — 


beſides theſe, there are two Wings of Offices of a large ſt: 
Extent; fo that the whole Front is near 500 Feet in Al 
Length: the Park was not very large, but the late MW an 
Lord added more Land to it: the Roads to this Park ſti 
from Linton, and through the Park, are made very do 

| me 


good, though it is in a very dirty Country, 
I 5 Moſt 


Eflex. GREAT BRITAIN. 113 
Moſt of the Lands in this, and ſome other Parts of 
this County, are ſo full of Melilot, as to fill the Land, 
and become a very bad Weed; for the Seeds mix with 
the Corn in ſuch Quantities, as to give a nauſeous 
Taſte to their Bread, which is very diſagreeable to 
Strangers, thaugh the Inhabitants, who have been long 
accuſtomed to cat it, do not complain of it. 6 


From Cambridgeſhire, my Deſign e me, and 
the direct Road in part concurring, I came back, 
through the Weſt ſide of the County of Eſſex, and firſt 
to Saffron- M alden. 

Saffion-IValden is a fair Town, with a good Church, 
where ſtands a Monument of the Lord Audley, C han- 
cellor to King Henry VIII. who made him a Grant of 
certain Lands belonging to a diſſolved Monaſtery near 
this Town, which takes its Name from the great Quan- 
tities of Saffron, which formerly grew in the Grounds, 
and were cultivated hereabouts, and anſwered exceed- 
ing well in the Manufacturing; but how it came into 
Decay, nobody could account to me, tho' there may 
be ſtill ſeen a great many Acres of Saffron-ground 
about this Town. This Commodity was never known 
to grow in England, till the Reign of Edward III. 
This Town was incorporated by Edward III. with 24 
Aldermen, out of whom were yearly choſen a Trea- 
ſurer (the head Officer for that Year) and two Cham- 
berlains his Aſſiſtants. But by a Charter of King 
Gilliam and Queen Mary, it has a Mayor. It has four 
Fairs a Year, an Alms-houſe well endowed, and a 
Free-ſchool on a Royal Foundation. 

Near this Town, on the Side of Cambridge Road, | 
ſtands the noble and ſtately Palace of Audley- Inn, or 
Audley- End, formerly the largeſt Palace in England; 

and, tho” a great Part of it has been pulled down, is 
ſtill one of the moſt magnificent Structures in the King- 
dom. It was built, out of the Ruins of the aboyg- 


mentioned Monaſtery, by Themen ſecond Son of Thewge 
uke 


114 4 TOUR tro Fx 


| Duke of Norfolk, who married the only Daughter and 
Heir of the afore named Lord Audley. This Thomas 
was ſummoned to Parliament in Queen Elizabeth, 
Time, as Lord Audley of Walden; and was afterward, 
created Earl of Syffo/# by King James I. to whom he 
was firſt Chamberlain, and afterwards Lord High. 
Treaſurer. It was deſigned for a Royal Palace for that 
King; and, when it was finiſhed with all the Elegance 
and polite Taſte of the Times, the King was invited 
to ſee it; and, as he paſſed to Newmarket, he took up 
a Night's Lodging there : when, after having viewed 
it with great Surprize and Aſtoniſhment, the Earl 
- aſked him, how he approved of it? Who anſwered, 
Very well. But troth, Man, faid he, it is #90 much for 
a King ; but it may do for a Lord High Treaſurer , 
and ſo left it upon the Earl's Hands, who is reported to 
have had then an Eftate of 50,000 /. a Year, which has 
been gradually decaying ever ſince, and is now reduced 
to about 3000 J. a Year, with Incumbrances upon it, 
King Charles II. purchaſed this Houſe, and ſo it became, 
what it was originally deſigned for, a Royal Palace. 
The King mortgaged the Hearth-tax to the Earl, to 
anſwer the * and appointed James, 
then Earl of Suffolt, Houſekeeper thereof, with a Salary 
of 10001. a Year; which Office continued in the Fa- 
mily till the Revolution, when the Hearth-tax was 


aboliſhed : And, the Exigence of the State being ſuch, 


as it could not afford to pay the Purchaſe-money, King 
William III. re granted the ſaid Houſe to the Family ; 

upon which Henry Earl of Suffolk (who, in his Father's 
Life-time, was created Earl of Bindon, to qualify him 


to hold the Marſhal's Staff) pulled down a great Part 


of this noble Edifice. And yet it is ſtill, as I ave ſaid, 
very large, and makes a grand Appearance. You 
enter at a wide Pair of Iron Gates, into a moſt ſpacious 
Court- yard, on each Side whereof was formerly a Row 
of Cloyſters, in which ſtood the Out- offices belong 
0 the Houſe; which have been all pulled down, 


SO „ ACM» wag = 44 


2 
ſup · 


> wy rere 


— yy 


bang ©, <7 


fupplied with a Stone Wall. Vou paſs in at the Fore- 
front, through Part of the Houſe, into a large open 
Quadrangle, incloſed by four different Parts of it, and 


alſo ſurrounded with Cloyſters. The Apartments 
above and below are very lofty and ſpacious; and there 


is a Gallery, which extends the whole Length of the 


Back-front of the Houſe, and is Judged to be the largeſt 


in England. The Gardens are indifferent, but very ca- 
able of Improvement. Behind the Houſe is a fine 
Park, extending to Saffron-Falden, well ſtored with 


Deer, but not vver-burdened with Timber; in which 


there is a riſing Spot of Ground, whereon, if the Houſe 
had been erected, it would have had a much better 
Effect as to Proſpect; for its preſent Situation is low: 


neither are the Grounds about it very fertile, nor, I 


think, the Situation healthy. © 
But, however great and magnificent this Houſe ap- 
pears, it bears an indelible Stain, if what is ſaid be true, 


That it was built with Span; Gold, upon the Ruin of 
the Great and Learned Ralegh, who fell by the Re - 
venge of Spain, the Arts of Gundamor, the Avarice of 
Suffolk, and the unpardonable Weakneſs of his own 
ng. | fb ETA 


At a ſmall Town called Litilebury, not far from 
Audley- Inn, is an Houſe which was erected by the fa- 
mous Mr. Winſtanley, who built Eadyſtone Light houſe, 
and periſhed in it, as I ſhall mention in its Place. The 


ſame Gentleman was famous alſo for his Waterworks, 
full of whimfical, but ingenious Contrivances. 


But I ought not to omit, that near /cleton and Stret- 


bal, upon the River Cam, lies Che/terford ; where, in 


the Year 1719. werediſcovered tie Veſtigia of a Roman 


City. The Foundation of the Wa' s is very apparent 


quite round, though level with the Ground, including 
about 50 Acres. Great Part of it ferves for a Cauſe- 
way to the public Cambridge Road from London. . The 
Crown- Inn is built upon it. In the North-weſt End 


of the Town is the Foundation of a Roman Temple. 
. Many 


Eſſex. GR TAT BRITAIV. ang 


116 FOUR Eſſex. 
Many Reman Coins have been found in the Borough. 
field, as they term the antient City, whoſe Name was 
' -  Cambaritum, according to Dr. Stukely. In this Pariſh, 
they ſay, has been a Royal Manor. Not far off, by 
. Audley Inn, is a great Reman Camp, upon an Emi- 
nence, where now ſtands an Hunting-tower of Brick, 
A little North of this Part of the Country riſes the 
River Stour, which, for a Courſe of fifty Miles or 
more, parts the two Counties of Suffolk and £/ſex; 
paſſing trough or near Haveril, Clare, Cavendiſh, 
Halſted, Sudbury, Buers, Nayland, Stretford, Dedham, 
LAaningtree, and into the Sea at Harwich. 7 
As we came on this Side, we ſaw at a Diſtance 
Braintree and Backing, two large and populous Towns, 
which join together, being parted by a little Stream of 
Water. Theſe were formerly very rich and flouriſh- 
ing, occaſioned by the great Trade for Bays, which 
were manufactured in ſuch Quantities in theſe two 
Towns, as to ſend weekly to London four, five, or fix 
Waggons laden with them; but this Trade having 
greatly decreaſed in a few Years, the Inhabitants were 
in a very miſerable Condition; for, by an Increaſe of 
their Poor, their Pariſh-rates were riſen ſo high, that, 
in the Year 1738. the Poors Rate in Bocking Pariſh 
was nine Shillings in the Pound; which, together with 
their other Rates and Taxes, rendered it very burden- 
ſome to all the Inhabitants : and at the ſame time, the 
Small-pox having infeſted both the "Towns, their 
arkets were almoſt deſerted by the Country- people. 
[The Pariſh of Bocking is a Deanry, and the Living is 
valued at upwards of 5004. per Annum. x 
Near Braintree is the Pariſh of Black-Netley, in 
which are a few ſcattered Houſes, ſcarcely worth no- 
ticing, except in Honour to the Memory of the late 
learned Mr. Ray, who was born and reſided here ſome 
of the latter Years of his Life. Here he alſo died, and 
was buried in the .Church-yard, over whoſe Grave 2 
Monument was erected, with an Inſcription amor" $ 
. Wnic 


* NTT NT eee eee 
7 — - F ——— ener * 
Y - \ 5 = = =_ — ET 9, = - = 
- nme = * - * 
— — — 
2 * 4 2 TY N N 1 ATED EE 7p 5m 0 gps 


Eflex. GREAT BRITAIN. 11 * 
which being long, we ſhall refer the Learned to the 
Original, and content ourſelves with giving the Eng- 
liſd, for tke fake of our common Readers, and in Re- 
gard to ſo great a Man, who was an: honour to his 
Country. It _ be thus rendered: 3 Ez 
© The mortal Part of the moſt learned Fohn Ray, 
© A, M. is depoſited in this narrow Tomb; but his 
« Writings are not confined to one Nation; and his 
Fame, every where moſt illuſtrious, renders them 
© immortal, Formerly he was Fellow of Trinity-Col- 
lege in Cambridge, and of the Royal Society in Lon- 
don; a ſingular Ornament of both. In every kind 
of Science, as well divine as human, moſt expert. 
And, like a fecond Solomon (to whom alone, per- 
haps, he was inferior), from the Cedar to the Hyſ- 
ſop, from the largeſt of Animals to the ſmalleſt In- 
ſects, he arrived at a conſummate Knowlege. And 
not only did he moſt accurately diſcourſe of Plants 
ſpread over the Face of the whole Earth; but, max - 
ing a moſt ſtrict Search, even into its inmoſt Bowels, 
whatever deſerved Diſcuſſion throughout all Nature, 
he deſcribed. While on his Travels abroad, he di- 
ligently diſcovered what had eſcaped the Obſervation 
of others, and firſt brought to Light many things 
moſt worthy of Remark. Further than this, he was 
endowed with ſo unaffected a manner of Behaviour, 
that he was learned without Pedantry; of a ſublime 
Genius, and at the ſame time {which is rarely known) 
of an humble and modeſt Diſpoſition: Not diſtinguiſn- 
ed by an illuſtrious Extraction, but (which is greater) 
by his own Virtue. Little ſolicitous about Wealth 
* and Titles, he choſe rather to deſerve than to poſſeſs 
them. Content with his own Lot, he wow old in 
a private Station, worthy a more ample Fortune. 


In every other reſpect, he readily obſerved Modera- 


tion; in Study, none. | 
To conclude : To all theſe Perfections he added 


* a Piety free from Artifice z bearing an intire and 
| | - | 6 hearty 


_ = 
— 


— A TOUR thro” Eſſex! 
< hearty Veneration for the Church of England, which 


© he confirmed with his laſt Breath. Thus, happily, 


© in a virtuous Retirement, lived he, whom the preſent 


Age reveres, and Poſterity will admire,” 


Ni. B. This Monument, beginning to want Repair, by 
ſſtanding expoſed in the Church-yard, was removed, 


and ſet-up jn the-Chancel of Black-Netley Church. 


To the Epitaph is added, on the Table on the 


Faſt- ſide, a Latin Inſcription, which may be thus 


This Cenotaph, formerly expoſed to the open Air | 


© in the Church-yard, defaced by the Injuries of the 


. © Weather, and juſt falling into Ruins, was by 7, 
© Legge, M. D. repaired, and removed under Shelter, 


« March 17,1737. 


The Country hereabout is pleaſant, havin 8 many 
Riſings and Falls, with great Plenty of Water. pe 


Fields are well cultivated, ſo as to render the whole 


Face of the Country like a Garden. 


Near Braintree is Felſted, a ſmall Place, but nated 
for a flouriſhing Free-ſchool, of an antient Founda- 


Ingateſtone hall, one of the Family-Seats of Lord | 
Petre, lies at a fmail Diſtance from the public Road, 


on the Right-hand, about a Quarter of a Mile ſhort of 
Tngateſione Town, „ FR ke. 
Phe Houſe is ſituated very low, ſo as not to be ſeen 
at a ſmall Diſtance. It is a large, irregular Building, 
and the Gardens are old ; tho' there were many Altera- 
tions made in them for the better, by the late Lord, be- 
fore he came of Age; but as this was not the Seat 
where he intended to reſide, his Lordſhip did not em- 
loy his fine Genius in modelling of theſe Gardens ; 
ut his whole Thoughts were bent to embelliſh his 


noble ſeat at Therndon, which is ſituated on a riſing 
- Ground,. about three Miles on the Right-hand of 


Brentwoed 


" 
—— — — . — — — — — ¶[ äP! Ee SA NB EET i * 4 — \ 
g g . * 


) Wriex, GREAT BRITATN. 119 
1 renttvood in Efſex where his Lordſhip had laid a 
5 plan for an Houſe and Gardens, which, had he lived 
t Wi execute it, would have been an Honour to the 
Nation. | | | 
The Houſe was deſigned to be 265 Feet in Front, 
excluſive of the Offices. The principal Front was to 
the South-eaſt Aſpect, where was deſigned a ſpacious 
Court; and before it a Terrace-walk near 200 Feet 
broad, and of a great Length; on the other Side of 
this, was to have been a Lawn of Graſs, containing 
near 200 Acres of Land, and to be bounded by Plan- 
nations of Trees, and handſome Farms. EL 
| On the Back front of the Houſe was to be a noble 
ange of Stoves for tender Exotic Plants; which 
| would have far exceeded whatever had been done of 
this Nature, even by the greateſt Princes in £robe. 
The Park, which lies on the North eaft and North- 
| weſt Side of the Houſe, is very large, and well ſtocked 
with Timber, which, fully grown, adds greatly to the 
Beauty of the Place. In many Parts of this Park are- g 
large Incloſures, made by the late Lord, and converted 1 
to Nurferies, completely ſtored with all Trees ang 
Shrubs, that will live in the open Air in this Climate; 1 
ſo that if theſe Trees had been planted out, according to 1 
his Lorcſhip's Deſign, it would have been the moſt 
beautiful and complete Plantation perhaps in Europe. 
Through the Park there is already an Avenue cut 1 
leading from Brentwood to the Houſe, three Miles in . Il 
Length; on each Side of it were to be Plantations of 1% 
Trees, in regular Clumps, which would have had a 
3 Effect, as People paſſed through them up to the 
ouſe. 
The Kitchen-garden was actually finiſhed, and laid 
out with great Judgment. This was ſituated behind 
the Offices, ſo that it would not have appeared in Sight 
from the Houſe, and was detached from the other Gar- 
dens; and thereby not expoſed to Strangers, wha 


ms »YP ###X# * — 


20. ATOUk FIA 


| might have Admittance to walk through the Pleaſure. | 


garden and Plantations. 


In ſhort, the whole Plan was the moſt extenſive and 
Fo of any yet executed in this Kingdom. But his -| 


ordſhip's immature and much-to-be lamented Death 
pit a Stop to the further Execution of it. | 


In the Pariſh-church of Ingate/tone are to be ſeen the 
Monuments of this noble Family, who by a conftant 


Series of beneficent Actions to the Poor, and Bounty 
upon all charitable Occaſions, gained to themſelves an 
affectionate Eſteem thro? all that Part of the Country, 


ſuch as no Prejudice ariſing from a Difference in Reſi- 
gion could or ought to impair; for great and good Ac. 


tions command our Reſpect, whatever the religious 
Opinions of the Benefactors may be. 

From hence we crofſed the Country to the great 
Foreſt, called Zpping- Fo: eſt, reaching almoſt to Lon- 
don. The Country on that Side of 5 ex is called the 
Roodings, T ſuppoſe becauſe there are no leſs than ten 


Towns almoſt all together, called by the Name of Rood- 


ing; and is famous for good Land, good Malt, and 
dirty Roads, the latter being in the Winter hardly 


paſſable for Horſe or Man. In the Midſt of this we 


foe Chipping-Onger, Hatfield, Broad-Oak, Epping, and 


many Foreſt-towns, famed alſo for Agriculture, and 


good Malt. 
On the South · weſt of the County i is IValtham- Abbey, 
which was formerly a Monaftery, built by Harold, Son 


to Earl Godtoin, in Honour of the Croſs. The Town 

is faid to have been built and peopled by one Tovius, 
- towards the Latter-end of the Saxon Reigns. This 
Town is ſeated on the River Lee, where the Streams, | 


being divided, incloſe ſeveral ſmall Iſlands, which, in 


times of great Floods, are commonly overflowed : but | 


theſe Meadows produce great Plenty of Graſs in Sum- 


mer, ſo that here are many K Farms, which turn 


to good Account, 5 
The 


ld SS —  w- S ä 3 


* =_— pea A x Ts 7 = 


Flex. GREAT BRITAIN. ret 
The Abbey is turned into a Seat. The Gardens be- 


| longing to it were, ſome Years ſince, in great Reputez 


put ſince the Taſte for incloſed Gardens has been con« 
demned, they have been little frequented. 5 
At this Abbey was buried the Body of King Harold, 
{ain in the great Battle in Sgſſex, againſt William the 
Norman, whoſe Mother begged that Favour of the 
Victor; but no Monument was built for him, only a 
flat Grave-tone, on which was fignificantly engraven, 
Harald Infelix ! | BID: ms 1 
From hence I came again over the Lower or Weſt- 
ern Part of the Foreſt, where it is beſpangled with 
Villages, filled with fine Seats, moſt of them built by 
Citizens of London ; but the Luſtre of them ſeems to be 
intirely eclipſed by /Zanfled- Houſe, the magnificent 
Palace of Earl Tilney, which I barely mentioned, p. 4. 
and intimated,. that I would touch upon it again ; as 
] ſhall now briefly do. 14 5 
'This noble Seat was prepared by his Lordſhip's 


| Grandfather, Sir Jab Cbild, in his Life-time, whe 
| added to the Advantage of its Situation a vaſt Number 
i of Rows of Trees, planted in curious Order for 


£ 


Avenues and Viſtas, all leading up to the Spot of 
Ground where the old Houſe ſtood. | 

In the Place adjoining, the late Lord, before he was 
ennobled, and ſome Years before he began the Foun- 
dation of his new Houſe, laid out the moſt ſpacious 
Pieces of fine Ground in Gardens, that are to be ſeen 
in this Part of England. The Green-houſe is an-excel - 
lent Building, fit to entertain a Prince ; it is furniſhed 
wich Stoves, and artificial Places for Heat, from an 
Apartment which has a Bagnio, and other Con- 
veniences, which render it both uſeful and pleaſant. 
Theſe Gardens have been ſo much the Admiration of 


the Public, that it has been the general Diverſion cf the 


Citizeps to go out to ſee them, till the Crouds grew: ſo 

great, that his Lordſhip was obliged to reſtrain the 

ihewing them to particular and ſtated Times. | 
Vol. I. 7 | G | 8 JThe 


x22 A T OUR thr# Eſſex, 

The Houſe was built ſince theſe Gardens were finiſh. 
ed. It is all of Portland Stone in the Front, which 
gives it a moſt magnificent Effe at a Diſtance as the 
Nature of that Stone, except in London, where it is 
tinged with Smoke, is to grow whiter and whiter, the 
longer it ſtands in the open Air. 

As the Fore-frontof the Houſe looks through a long 
Row of Trees, reaching to the great Road at Leighton. 
fione ; fo the Back- front reſpects the Gardens, from 
which you fall down an eaſy Deſcent, which lands you 
upon the Terrace, and gives a moſt beautiful Proſpect 
to the River, which isall formed into Canals and Open- | 
ings, to anſwer the Views from above; and beyond the M -; 
River, the Walks and Wilderneſſes go on to ſuch a | 
Diſtance, and in ſuch a Manner, up the Hill, as they j 
before went down, that the Sight is loſt in the Woods 
adjoining, and it looks all like one continued planted W 
Garden, as far as the Eye can reach = 1 

IJ have not room in this Letter to ſay half what | 
might be ſaid of this truly noble Palace. 

Wn Earl Tilney's Houſe, and the reſt of the 32 
Dwellings on that Side of the Foreſt (for there are 
ſeveral good Houſes at Wanſted, only that they ſeem, 
as | have ſaid, all loſt in the Luftre of his Lordſhip's 

Palace), I went South, towards the great Road over 
that Part of the Foreſt called the Flats: And by this 
Turn came neceſſarily on to Stratford, where ] ſet out. 
And here I ſhall conclude my Second Letter, with 


_— . that I am, 
Nur moſt humble Servant, 


£ — : 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 123 


LET T 


Containing a DescnreTION of the County. of 
; | IO Oc. | | 


1 - 


15 SHALL begin my Account of the famous Coun- 


of Kent at Deptford, It was antiently called 


Weſt 1 and is a large Town, and ſo much 
ee that an handſome new Church has been built a 
there, dedicated to St. Paul. 


Here a Storehouſe was built by K Henry vin. 


who alſo incorporated certain Officers by the Name of 
| Maſter and Wardens of the Hely Trinity + theſe were 
to take care of the Building, Keeping, and Conducting, 


of the Royal Navy. Their Hall or Houſe was adjoining 


to the Church: and the Treaſurer of the Navy had alſo 


a convenient Houſe at the Dock for his Reſidence. 
Here is a Foundation belonging to the ſaid Corpora- 

tion of Trinity houſe, by whom it was built at different 

Times, and in two Places, not quite contiguous, The 


old Part contains 21 Houſes, the new 38, or decayed 


Pilots, or Maſters of Ships, or the Widows of {uct ; 
the Men are allowed 205. the Women 16s. per 
Month. 

But what Deptford is maſh noted for, is its noble 
Dock, where the Royal Navy was uſed to be built and 


| repaired, till it was found more convenient to build the 


larger Ships at Mocliuich, as I ſhall mention in its Place; 

not withſtanding which, the whole Area of the Yard is 
now enlarged to more chan double whatit formerly was: 
It has a wet Dock of two Acres, for Ships, and another 


of an Acre and Half, for Maſts; beſides an [nlarge- 
ment of its Storehoules, Dwelling-houſes, Launches, 
Ec. * to it. | 


G3 From 


124 A TOUR thro 
From Deptford proceeded to Greenwich, one of the 
moſt delightful Spots in Britain. The Park, in which 


is the fine Obſervatory called Flamſtead. houſe, from the 
late famous Mathematician of that Name, the Royal 


Houſe, but more eſpecially the noble Hofpital, deſerye 
particular Notice. | 
The Ground on which Part of this Hoſpital now 


ſtands, is the ſame on which was formerly ſituated the 


vw x Palace of our Kings. Here Hem y VIII. beld 
his Feaſts with Jouſts and Tournaments: The Ground, 
which was called the T:/t-yard, is the Spot on which the 


Faſt Wing of the Hoſpital is built. 


The Park was inlarged, walled about, and planted, 
by King Charles II. ſoon after the Reſtoration ; and 
the Deſign or Plan of a Royal Palace was then laid out, 
one Wing of which was finiſhed in a magnificent Man- 


ner, and makes now the firſt Wing of the Hoſpital to- 


wards London. 


The Royal Palace now remaining, was originally 


built by Humphry Duke of Glouce/ler, ſurnamed the 
Good, Brother of Henry VI. and called by the ſaid Duke 
Placentia. King Henry VII. much enlarged it, added 


to it a ſmall Houſe of Friers- Mendicant, and finiſhed a 


Tower begun by Duke Humphry on the "Top of the 
Hill, where now ſtands the Royal Obſervatory ; from 
which is a moſt pleaſant Proſpect down to the winding 
River, and the green Meadows. It was completed by 
King Henry VIII. and afterwards much inlarged and 
beautified by Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton, 
who dwelt in it. Here Queen Mary and Queen Eliza- 
beth were born, and here died King Edward VI. 


The Hoſpital was founded by King William and 


Queen Mary, in the Year 1694. for the Relief of Sea- 
men, their Widows and Children, and Encouragement 


of Navigation. Three Tables are hung up at the | 


Entrance into the Hall, which record the Names of 
ſevetal generous Benefactors to this noble Charity, 
amounting in the Whole to the Sum of 58, 209“ 
And in the Year 1732. the forfeited Eſtate of the 2 

| TS. I 


Kent, 


Honourable the Lord Viſcount Gage, a Peer of Ireland, 


recovered out of the Hands of certain private Perſons 
who had purchaſed the ſame, at a Rate vaſtly diſpro- 


portionate to the Value), amounting to near 6000/. 
er Annum, was given by Parliament to carry on and 
complete this Work; which has enabled them to pro- 
ſecute it with ſuch Vigour and Succeſs, that a great Pro- 
reſs has been made ſince that Time, towards com- 
pleting this ſumptuous Edifice. 
The Hall is very noble, and finely painted by the 
late Sir James Thornhill, At the upper End of it, in an 
Alcove, are repreſented the late Princeſs Sophia, King, 


George I. King George II. Queen Caroline, the late 
Queen Dowager of Pruſſia, Daughter of King George I. 
Frederic Prince of F/ ales, the Duke of Cumberland, and 


the five Princeſſes, Daughters of King George II. On 
the Cieling over the Alcove, are her late Majeſty Queen 


Anne, and Prince George of Denmark, And on the 


Cieling of the Hall, are King William and Queen 
Mary, with ſeveral fine emblematical Figures. | 
On a Pedeſtal in the middle of the Area of the Ho- 


ſpital, TO the Thames, is a Statue of his Majeſty 
I. . | N 


King George . „ 
Anno 1705. 100 diſabled Seamen were the firſt that 


were received into this Hoſpital ; but the preſent Num- 


ber was made up in December 1737. a complete 1000. 


To each 100 Penſioners ſix Nurſes are allowed, who 


are to be Seamens Widows, at 10% per Annum, and 
25. per Week more to thoſe. who attend in the Infir- 


mary. Their common Cloathing is Blue, with Braſs 


Buttons. 


The Chapel is decorated with curious carved Work, 
and is as gay, with Gilding, as if the true Proteſtant 


Simplicity were forgotten in its Ornaments, c. 
The Church of Greenwich is a handſome new-built 
Edifice, dedicated to St. Alphage, Archbiſhop of Canter- 
bury, who is ſaid to have been killed by the Danes on 
the Spot where the Church ſtands, Anno 1012s 


Kent. GREAT Barrain. . tag 
Earl of Derwentwater (being by means of the Right 


9 


ns ATOUR tv 


founded by Sir William Boreman, Knight; the other ſet 
up by Mr. Jehn Roan, who left his Eſtate for teaching 
Boys in Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic ; allowing 
405. a Year for each Boy's Cloaths : their Number is 
20. | oe 
There is alſo an handſome College in this Town, 
which fronts the River, for the Maintenance of 20 poor 
Men and a Maſter, founded and well endowed by 
Henry Earl of Northampton, and committed by him to 
the Care of tho Mercers Company of London. A Cha- 
pel belongs to this College, where the Earl's Body is 


laid, which, as well as his Monument, was removed 
hither a few Years ago, from the Chapel of Dover 


Caſtle, whereof he was Conſtable. N 


This Town may be ſaid to be one of the genteeleſt, 


as well as pleaſanteſt, in England the Inhabitants are 
many of them Perſons of Note and Faſhion, who have 


ſerved abroad in the Fleets or Armies, and here paſsthe 
' Remainder of their Days in Eaſe and Delight; having 


the Pleafure to refle& upon the Dangers they have gone 
through, and the faithful and honourable Parts they 


have acted on the public Stage of Life in their Coun- 


try's Cauſe. 


A Market was erected in the Vear 1 37. at this 
Town, the Direction of which is in the Governors of 
the Hoſpital; and the Profits which ſhall ariſe from it 


are to be carried to the Uſe of that fine Foundation. 
The River Thames is here very broad, and the Chan- 


nel deep; and the Water, at ſome very high Spring- 
_ tides, is ſalt ; but, in ordinary Tides, ſweet and freſh, 


The King's Yachts always lie here. 
Near the Town of Greemuich, has for many Years 
flood a Magazine for Gunpowder, in which frequently 
were repoſited from 6 to 8000 Barrels. The apparent 


Danger it was expoſed to, of being blown up-by 
Treachery, Lightening, or other Accidents, Juen 
from its defenceleſs Situation and ruinous Con 2 


Kent. 


There are two Free- ſchools in this Pariſh, one 


E 


London and M ęſtminſter, as well as the Banks of the 


caſioned, fo long ago as in the Year 1718. an Applica- 
tion to Parliament for the Removal of the Magazine 


more and mote dangerous, and out of Repair. z 


| down and removing the Magazine for Gunpowder,' and 


in Kent, and erecting inſtead thereof a new Maga ine for 


County of Eſſex, and applying a Sum of Money towards 


upon an Act, made in the laſt Seſſion of Parliament, for @ 
Weekly Compoſition for Lands and Hereditaments, pur- 


Kent: GREAT BRITAIN 127 
and the extenſive and ſcarce reparable Damage, which 
the Exploſion of ſuch a Quantity of Gunpowder might 
have been attended with, not only to that Part of the 
Town neareſt to it, but to. the Royal Palace and the 
magnificent. Hoſpital there, and which might even by 

the Shock affect the Dock-yards and Store-houſes both _ 
at Deptford and Moolivich, and even the Cities of 


River on both Shores, and the Navigation upon it, oc- 


to ſome ſafer and more convenient Place; and his 
Majeſty King George I. was pleaſed then to give Or- 
ders to the Officers of the Ordnance to remove it. 
But no Proviſion being made for purchaſing Land to 
build another, and to defray neceſſary Expences, no- 
thing was done in it; and the old Magazine grew 
In the Year 1750. the Application to Parliament 
was renewed, when his late Majeſty gave Orders 
for an Eſtimate of the Expence to be laid before the 
Houſe ; which was done in the Year 1754. together 
with a Survey recommending a proper Place, &c. 
The good Work in the Year 1760. was ſollicited 
with ſuch proper Effect, that an Act paſſed in the 
Beginning of that Year, intitled, An Ads for taking 


all Buildings thereunto belonging, ſituate near Greenwich 


Gunpowder at Purfleet, near the River Thames, in the 


thoſe Purpoſes ; and for obviating Difficuities ariſing 


chaſed for his Majefty's Service at Portſmouth, Chat- 
ham, and Plymouth; to which I refer the Reader. 

The Country behind Greenwich adds to the Pleaſure 
of the Place: Zlack-heath, both for Beauty of Situation, 


1 
? 
* 
' 
- 
L 
i 
3 
1 
1 
t 
x 
A 


728 4 TOUR thro" Kent 


and an excellent Air, is not outdone by any Spot of 
Ground in England. 


Near this is a vaſt Hill, uſed as a Butt for Archers, 
and 4 in great Requeſt among the neighbouring People, 


til! King Henry's VIIPs Time; whence it took the | 
Name of Shooter's Hill. 
On the Eaſt-ſide of Blact- heath ſtands the Hoſpital I 


built by Sir Fohn Morden, Bart. a Turkey Merchant, 


Several Years before his Death, which happened in 
1 708. he erected this ſpacious Structure, in form of a 
College, ſolely at his own Charge, in a Field called 
Great Stone Field, not far from his own Habitation, 


for the Reception of poor, decayed, honeſt Merchants, 


_ whereof in his Life-time he placed 12 there. But, by 

reaſon of great Loſſes, they were reduced- to four in 
the Lady Morden's Time, who was forced to retrench 
the Expences of the Houſe, becauſe the Share allotted 


her by the laſt Will of Sir Jehn, and ſome Parts of his 
Eſtate, did not anſwer ſo well as was expectec. 
When ſhe died, Sir John's whole Eſtate coming to 


the College, the Number was again increaſed, and there 
are at this time 35 poor Gentlemen in the Houſe; and 


the Number not being limited, they are to be increaſed 


as the Eſtate will afford; for the Building was deſign- 
eld for, and will conveniently hold, 40. 


Seven Tur hey, Merchants have the Direction and Viſi- 


tation ofthis Hoſpital, and the Nomination of the Per- 
ſons to be admitted into it; and as often as any of theſe 


ſeven die, the Survivors are to chooſe others to fill up 


The Treaſurer of this Hoſpital has 401. per Annum. 
There is alſo a Chaplain, who is to read Prayers twice 


a Day in the Chapel, and to preach twice every Sunday. 
His Salary at firſt was 30. a Year ; but the Lady 
Morden doubled it at her Death. She was in other Re- 


ſpects a Benefactreſs to the College; and as ſhe put up 
ber Hulband's Statue in a Niche over the Gate of the 
College, 


. 8 R a% 


| this County. 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN, 129 


College, the Truſtees have alſo put up her's in another 
Niche adjoining to that of her Huſband. 

The Penſion is 201. per Annum each. At firſt they 
wore Gowns, with the Founder's Badge, which they 
have not done for ſome Years. 

The Chapel within the College is neatly wainſcoted, 
and hath a coſtly Altar-piece ; and it has a Burying- 
place adjoining, for the Members of the College. The: 
Founder, according to his own Deſire, was buried ins 
a Vault under the Communion-table of this Chapel: 

The Chaplain, the Treaſurer, the Merchants, are 


all indiſpenſably obliged to be reſident there; and, un- 


leſs in caſe of Sickneſs, no other Perſons are to refde,, 
live, or lodge there; and no one is to be admitted as a. 
Penſioner, who cannot bring a Certificate to prove 
bimſelf upwards of 60 Vears of Age. | 

In a Word, as the Situation of the Place is TR 
the Air good, and the Endowment ſufficient, this may 
be ſaid to be one of the moſt comfortable and elegant . 
Pieces of Charity in England. 

Near this College is the noble Houſe, or rather Pa- 
Wong, of Sir Gregory Page, Bart. whoſe Father was a- 
Brewer at Greenwich, a few Years ago. It is one of 


| the fineſt Seats in Engloud belonging to a private Gen- 


tleman; and the Park, Gardens, and Country round it, 
contribute to make it a moſt delightful. * truly noble 
Habitation. 

It was begun, raiſed, and covered, in the Space of 
I Months; which ſhews how ſoon a large Building, 
may be finiſhed, where Money, the Sinews of Build- 


ing, &c. is not wanting. 


On the other Side of the Heath, North; is Charlton;. 
a well- built pleaſant Village.. The Church was beau-- 
tified and repaired: by Order of Sir Edward Newton, _ 
Bart. who was Tutor to King James the Firſt's Son. 
Prince Henry; and is one of the fineſt Churches in- 


s At 


130 4 TOUR Fhro 


% 


Kent. 


At the Entrance of this Village, fronting Blackheath, 
ſtands the antient Houſe built by the ſame Sir Edward 


| Newton, who had this Manor granted to him by King 
3 I. It is a long Pile of Building in a Gothic 


aſte, having four Turrets on the Top : the Court be- 


fore the Houſe is ſpacious, at the Entrance of which are 


two large Gothic Piers to the Gates, and in a Line on 
the Outſide of the Wall is a long Row of Cypreſs trees, 
which are ſome of the oldeſt in Eng/and. On the 


Back of the Houſe are large Gardens, remaining in the 


fame Taſte in which they were formerly laid out; and 
behind theſe is a ſmall Park, which joins to WWaolwich- 
Common, This Rouſe is now in the Poſſeſſion of the 
Earl of Ancram. 

Charlton is noted for the Fair held in its Neighbour- 
hood on St. Luke's Day, October 18. called Horn- ſair; 


the Rudeneſs practiſed in which, in a civilized, well- 


governed Nation, may well be ſaid to be unſufterable, 


The Mob at that time take all Kinds of Liberties, and 


the Women are eminently impudent that Day; as if 


it were a time that juſtified the giving themſelves a 


Looſe to all manner of Indecency without any Re- 


| proach, or without incurring the Cenſure which ſuch 
Behaviour would deſerve at another. 


And this in a Circumſtance, which (far from bein 
to be gloried in) ought to be diſcountenanced by the 
Sex, as fixing the Brand of Incontinence on too many 


of them, which they have little Reaſon to be proud 


of. 
A vulgar Tradition gives the following Origin to this 


| diſorderly Fair; namely, That one of the Kings of 


England, ſome ſay King John, for he had a Pans at 
Ettham in this Neighbourhood, being hunting near 


| Charltan, and ſeparated from his Attendants, entered 
into a Cottage, and found the Miſtreſs of it alone; 
and ſhe being handſome, the King took pegs Fa 

her ; and, having eo over her Modeſty, * 


3 


_— vv 5 5 wS MWy,W- 


», _ % ww 


Kent. GRTAT BRITAIN. 131 


the critical Moment her Huſband came in; ; and, 
| threatening to kill them both, the King was forced to 


diſcover himſelf, and to compound with Gold for his 
Safety, giving the Man moreover all the Land from 
thence as far as the Place now called Cuckold's Point; 


and, making him Maſter of the whole Hamlet, eſtab- 


liſhed a Fair in favour of his new Demeſne; and in 


Memory thereof, Horns, and Wares and Toys of alt 


Sorts made of Horn, are fold at this Fair. | 
Through this Town lies the Road to Vooltvich, 2 
Town ſituated on the Bank of the River, and wholly 
taken up by, and in a manner raiſed from, the Yards 
and Works erected there for the Naval Service. For 
here, when the Buſineſs of the Royal Navy increaſed, 
and Queen Elizabeib built larger and greater Ships of 
War than were uſually employed before, new Docks 


and Launches were erected, and Places. prepared for 
the building and repairing Ships of the largeſt Size ; be- 


cauſe here was a greater Depth of Water, and a freer 
Channel, than at Deptford. 
The Docks, Yaris, and all the Buildings belonging, 


to it, are encompaſſed with an high Wall, and are ex- 
_ ceeding ſpacious and convenient; and fo prodi ouſly: 


full of all Sorts of Stores of Timber, Plank, Maſts, 
Pitch, Tar, and other Naval Frovilions, as can a 


be calculated: 


Beſides the Building-yards,. here is a large Rope- 
walk, where the biggeſt Cables are made for the Men 
of War; and, on the Eaſt or Lower-part of the 
Town, is the Gun · yard, commonly called the Part, 
or the Gun-park, where is a prodigious Quantity of 


Cannon of all Sorts for the Ships of War, every” 
Ship's Guns apart; heavy Cannon for Batteries, and 


Mortars of all Sorts and Sies; infomuch that, as I was: 


+iformed, here have been ſometimes laid up at once: 


between 7 and 8000 Pieces of Ordnance, beſides Mor 


tars, and Shells 2 beyond Number. 35 


G 6 Here: 


By CT OUR av - - Kel 

Here alſo is the Houſe where the Firemen and Engi- 
neers prepare their Fire- works, charge Bombs, Car- 
eaſſes, and Grenadoes, for the public Service. The 
Royal Regiment of Artillery does Duty at Mool- 
wich. : 

Here is uſually a Guard-ſhip riding, eſpecially i in time 
bf War. The Town of late Years is much inlarged 
and beautified ; ſeveral fine Docks, Rope-yards, and 
capacious Magazines, added; and the — Founcery 
for Cannon repaired and improved. The Thames is 
here at high Water near a Mile over, and the Water 
falt upon the Flood; and as the Channel lies ſtrait Eat 
and Weſt for thout three Mhles, the Tide runs very 
ſtrong, and the River is intirely free from Shoals and 
Sands, and has ſeven or eight Fathom Water; fo that 
the biggeſt Ships may ride here with Safety, even at low 
Water. 

The Pariſh- church of —— has been lately re» 
built as one of the 50 new Churches. 

From this Town, till we come to Graveſend, the 
whole Shore is low, and ſpread with Marſhes and un- 
healthy Grounds, except ſome few Intervals, where the 
Land bends inward, as at Erith, Green-hythe, North. 
feet, &c. in which Places the Chalk Hills almot j join 


the River; and from thence the City of Landon, the 


adjacent Counties, and even Holland and Flanders, are 
Jupplied with Lime, or with Chalk to make it. 
From theſe Cliffs, on the River- ſide, the Rubbiſh of 
the Chalk, which they muſt be otherwiſe at the Charge 
of removing, is bought and fetched away by Lighters 
and Hoys, and carried to all the Forts and Creeks in 
the oppolite County of £//zx, and even to Suffolk and 
Norfolk, and ſold there to the Farmers to lay upon 
their Land, which they do in prodigious Quantities, and 
are glad to give from 25s. 64. to 4˙ a Load for it, ac- 
gording to the Diſtance. 
This is the Practice in all the Creeks and Rivers in 
ls 


Kent, GREAT BRITAIN. 133 
Eſſex, even to Malden, Colebeſter, the Naſe, and into 
Harwich Harbour up to Maningtree and Ipſwich; as 
alſo in Suffolk, to Alaborough, Orford, Dunwich, & woldy 
and as high as Yarmouth in Norfolk. 

Thus the barren Soil of Kent (for ſuch the chalky 
' Grounds are eſteemed) makes the ſtrong clay Lands of 

Eſſex rich and fruitful ; and the Mixture of Earth 
forms a Compoſition, which, out of two barren Ex- 
tremes, makes one prolific Medium. | | 

Behind theſe marſhy- Grounds in -Kent, at a ſmall 
Diſtance, lies the Road from London to Dover, on 
which, or near it, are feveral good Towns; for Ex» 
ample, £ /tham, formerly a Royal Palace, when the 
Court was kept at Greenwich ; and Queen Elizabeth, 
who (as before ſaid) was born at Greenwich, was often 
carried to Eltbam by her Nurſes, to draw in the whol- 
ſome Air of that agreeable Place ; but at-preſent there 
are few or no Signs of.the old Palace to be ſeen. | 
It is now, however, a pleaſant Town, very hand- 

ſomely built, full of good Houſes; and many Families 
of rich Citizens inhabit there, who bring a great deal 
of good Company with them. 

Near Eltham lies Cheſilhurſt, where is the Burying- 
place of the Family of the I alſingbams, who reſided in 
this Pariſh for ſeveral Generations. 

This. Village is noted for the Retirement of the 
famous Camden; who. reſided: here for ſeveral Years, 
and here compoſed the greateſt Part of his Annals of 
Queen Elizabeth. 

From this Side of the Country, all pleafant and gay, 
we go over Shooters hill, where the Face of Things 
ſeems quite altered; for here we have but a. chalky 
Soil, and far from rich; much overgrown with Cop- 
pice- wood, which is cut for Fagots and Bavins, and 
lent up by Water to London. Upon the Top of this 
Hill, is a Spring which conſtantly overflows the Well, 


and in the ſevereſt Winters is not frozen. Here they 
make 


+ 


134  : TOUR bre Kent. 


make thoſe F agots, which the Wood- mongers call t 
Oftreywood, and in particular thoſe ſmall light Baving W # 
which are uſed in Taverns in London to light their d 
Fagots, and are called in the Javerns, a Bruſ, and by : 
the Wood-men Pimps. It is incredible what vat i 
Quantities of theſe uſed to be laid up at /Yoohwich, 0 
Erith, and Dartford; but ſince the Taverns in Lanidin 1 
are come to make Coal-fires in their upper Rooms, ( 


that Trade declines; and though that Article would 
ſeem to be trifling in itſelf, it is not immaterial to ob- ä 
ſerve what an Alteration it makes in the Value of thoſe 2 
Woods in Kent, and how many more of them, than l 
uſual, are yearly grubbed up, and the Land made fit 
for the Plougb. 4 
Dar: ford is an handſome large Town, having many I - 
good Houſes in it, and is finely watered by two or three WW * 
; | good Springs; the River goes through the Fown, and ; 
| 8 diſcharges itſelf into the Thames. _ 
=_ The firſt Mill alſo, for Slitting of Dove of Iron fr 
| 5 making of Wire, was on this River. | 
| There are two Church-yards here, one about the 
Þ Church, and the other on the Top of the Hill towards 
North. flect ; in the latter of which you may look over . 
the Tower of the Church, the Ground riſing fudden]y I 
ſo very high. | 
Here is a my 200d Market for Corn on Saturdays | 
and an annual Fair on the 22d of July. - 
Graveſend lies on the North- ſide of Kent, on the | 
River Thames, about fix Miles Eaſt from Dartford, and 
about the ſame Diſtance from Rocheſter. The Towns 
of Graveſend and Milton were incorporated in the 10th 
Year of Queen Elizabeth, by the Name of the Port- 
reve, Jurats, and Inhabitants, of the Towns of Grave- 
| fend and Milton. As this Place is the moſt frequented 
Paſſage of raking Boat for London, by Perſons who 
come from Dover, Rocheſter, &c. or through any Patt 
of * from foreign Parts, — ar 
8 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 1357 
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Companies of the City of 
London, to receive all eminent Strangers and Embaſſa- 
dors here, in their Formalities, and fo to attend them 
to London in their Barges, if they came by Water: and 
if they came by Land, they were ordered to meet them 
on Black- heath, on Horſeback; in their Gowns. So 
much did that wiſe Queen conſult the Honour and 

Grandeur of the City! | 
King Henry VIII. raiſed here a Platform of Guns, 


and another at Milton, as well as two others over 


againſt them on the Eſſex Side, for the Security of the 
River. But, ſince the Erection of Tilbury- fort, thele 
have been demoliſhed, 
lere is a very handſome Charity given by one Mr. 
Henry Pinnock, in the Year 1624. of 21 Dwellings, 
and an Houſe for a Maſter-weaver to employ the Poor: 
and a good Eſtate is alſo ſettled for the Repairs, | 
In this Town, on the Eaſt-ſide, is ſtill ſtanding the 
Body of an antient Chapel, which ſeems to have be- 
longed to ſome Religious Houſeg for Places in the 
Walls of the Vault remain ſtill for Holy-water. A 
Market is kept here on Wedneſdays and Saturdays, and 
an annual Fair on the I * of October, which laſts a 
Week. 

There have been very great Improvements made of 
the Lands near this Town within a few Years paſt, by 
turning them into Kitchen-gardens, the Land being 
| freſh for this Purpoſe, as alſo pretty moiſt, and the 
Town having good Quantity of Dung made in it, with 

which they manure the Land: it produces good Gar- 
den- Stuff in great Plenty, wherewith they not only ſup- 
ply the 'Fowns for ſeveral Miles round, but alſo fend 
great Quantities to the London Markets; particularly 
Aſparagus, which is ſo much eſteemed, that the Name 
of Graveſend will bring a better Prien than what is 
brought from any other Place, this having obtained a 
pon Reputation than Batterſea, which was ſome 
Years ſince famous for it. | 


* 


136 
As Graveſend is the great Ferry (as they call it) be⸗ 


tween London and Eaft- Kent, it is hardly credible what 


Numbers of People paſs here every Tide, as well by 
Night as by Day, between this Town and London. Al- 
molt all the People of Za/?-Xent, when they go for Lon- 
don, go no farther by Land than this Town; and then 
for 94. in the Tilt-boat, or 15. in a ſmall Boat or 
Wherry, are carried to London by Water. | 

The Paſſage to and from Graveſend to London is 


made very commodious and ſafe for Paſſengers, by an 
Act of Parliament paſſed in 1736-7. for regulating the 


Company of Watermen, &c. between Graveſend and 
Windfor. | „„ 
One Thing for which this Town deſerves No- 


tice, is, that all the Ships which go to Sea from 


London, take, as we ſay, their Departure from hence; 
for here all outward- bound Ships muſt top, come to 
an Anchor, and ſuffer what they call a ſecond Clearing; 


to wit, here a Searcher of the Cuſtoms comes on board, | 


looks over all the Cockets or Entries of the Cargo, and 
may, if he pleaſes, romage the whole Lading, to ſee if 
there are any more Goods than are entered; which 
however they ſeldom do; tho' tliey forget not to take 
a Compliment for their Civility ; and, beſides being 
well treated on board, have generally three or five 
Guns fired in: Honour to them, when they go off. 


The Method of cauſing all Ships to ſtop here is 


worth obſerving, and is as follows: | 5 
When a Merchant-ſhip comes down from London 
(if they have the Tide of Ebb under Footy, or a freſh 


Gale of Wind from the Weſt, ſo that they have what 


they call Freſh-way, and the-Ships come-down apace), 
they generally hand fome of their Satls; haul up a Fore-- 
fail or Main- fail; or lower the Fore· top ſail, ſo to 


flacken her Way, as ſoon as they come to the Od 


Man's Head : when they open the Reach, which they 
call Graveſend Reach, which begins about a Mile and 


A TOUR thro 1 


Kent. 


they intend to bring to, as the Sailors call it, and come 
to an Anchor. | | 
As ſoon as they come among the Ships that are in 
the Road (as there are always a great many), the 
Centinel at the Block-houſe on Graveſend Side fires his 


Muſquet, which is to tell the Pilot, he muſt bring to; 


if he comes on, as ſoon as the Ship paſſes Broad-ſide 
with the Block-houſe, the Centinel fires again ; which 
is much as to ſay, hy don't you bring to? If he drives 


a little farther, he fires a third time, and the Language 
of that is, Fring to immediately, and let go your Anchor, 


or we will make you. 8 
If the Ship continues to drive down, and does not 


jet go her Anchor, the Gunner of the Fort is called; 


and he fires a Piece of Cannon, though without Ball; 
and that is ſtill a Threat, though with ſome Patience, 
and is meant to ſay, Will you come to an Anchor, or will 


you not? If he ſtill ventures to go on, by which he 


gives them to underſt and he intends to run for it, then 


the Gunner fires again, and with a Shot; and that Shot 


is a Signal to the Fortreſs over the River, to wit, 711. 
bury fort, and they immediately let fly at the Ship from 
the Guns on the Eaſt Baſtion, and after from all the 
Guns they can bring to bear upon her: it is very ſe} 
dom that a Ship will venture their Shot, becauſe they 


can reach her all the Way to the Hope, and round the 


Hope- Point almoſt to Hole- Haven, though it is ſaid, 
this has been done once or twice; but the Occaſion 


muſt be very extraordinary to make a Ship run the 


Riſque. As for Ships coming in, they all go by here 


without any Notice taken of them, unleſs it be to put 


Waiters on. board, if they are not ſupplied before. 


We ſee nothing remarkable on the Road hereabouts 
but Gad';=h;/l, a noted Place for robbing of Seamen, 


after they have received their Pay at Chatham. 9 98 
From Gad g- hill we come to Reche/ter Bridge, the 


OY 


GxreaT BrITain, 137 
Half above the Town, they do the like, to ſignify, that 


bigheſt, 


J 
r OT OA REIT Ti mr Te PI eat, 
p rr Dan obo an R - G 1 0 — 
— a RIOT: . II WEOIITY EE ODT SY, Oey” oo TT wc c ens (2 : \ 
— . 2 — — ee) D — nn — 7 — 8 er OO * a = — — © 


24% A TOUR Kent: 


higheſt, and the ſtrongeſt built, of all the Bridges in 


| England, except that of London, Some indeed ſay, the 
Bridge of Newca/tle upon Tyne exceeds all the Bridges 


in England for Strength ; but then it is neither ſo high, 
nor ſo long, as this at Rocheſter. It it is ſupported by 
03 Arches, and was built by Sir Robert Knowles in the 


Reign of Henry IV. and railed in with Iron at the 


Charge of Archbiſhop Varbam. 

T be River Medway, at this Place, is very broad and 
rapid. Rocheſter was the Roman City Durobrivis, and 
was very ſtrong, being walled about and ditched, 

Many Antiquities have been found hereabouts. This 

City ſtands in an Angle of the River, and ſeems to have 

been of a ſquare Form, the atling ftreet running di- 


rectly through it. Moſt of the Walls ſtill remain; 


and a large Piece of the Roman Wall, made of Rubble- 


ſtone laid ſloping ſide - ways, is to be ſeen near that An- | 


gle below the Br.dge, encompaſſed by the River with 
Roman Bricks in ſeveral Places. 
Rocheſter, Stroud, and Cbatham, are three diſtin 


Places, but in a manner contiguous. 


' Rocheſter has ſuffered very much by Fire and War. 


It conſiſts chiefly of a large ill- built broad Street. 
Stroud is ſeparated from it ws. 4 by the Bridge, and may 


alone paſs for a ſmall City, and is well- built, but has 


nothing very remarkable in it. 


I be Caſtle of Rachefter was irofted by King Wit. 


liam I. upon one Angle of the River. The Walls of 


the great Tower now left are four Yards thick. The = 


Body of the Cathedral was built before the Conqueſt, 


and repaired by Biſhop Gundulph, who likewiſe built 


the Caſtle. The great Tower is called Gundulph's 
Tower. . The chalky Cliff under the Caftle- wall, next 


the River, is a romantic Sight. The Rapidity of the 


Stream waſtes it away, and then huge Tracts of the 


Wall fall down. On the North- ſide of the North weſt 


oe of the Church is ON Effgies. The 


Front 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 129 
Front of the Church is of the old Work, but a new 


Window put in the Middle. The Eaſtern Gate of the 


City was pulled down not very long ago, the Stones of 
which were of a Roman Cut. The Town houſe and 
Charity-ſchool are two of the beſt public Buildings in 
Rocheſter and Stroud, except the Churches. Roche/ter 
returns two Members to Parliament, | 
But Chatham being the chief Arſenal of the Royal 
Navy of Great Britain, is the molt conſiderable of the 
Kind in the World. It was made a Royal Yard by 
Queen Elizabeth, and owed its firſt Eſtabliſhment to 


| that great Seaman Sir John Hawkins, who deſerves to 


be ſtiled the Father of our Mariners, for ſettling that 
ineſtimable Fund of Charity there, denominated from 
thence the Che/t of Chatham, The private Buildings, 


zs the Houſes of the Sea- Officers, Directors, Inſpectors, 


and Workmen belonging to the Royal Navy, are 
well-built, and many of them ſtately. But the public 
Edifices there, are, indeed, like the Ships themſelves, 
ſurpriſingly large, and in their ſeveral Kinds beautiful, 


The Warehouſes, or rather Streets of Warehouſes, and 


Storehouſes for laying up the Naval Treaſure, are the 


| largeſt in Dimenſion, and the moſt in Number, that 


are any-where to be ſeen in the World. The Rope- 
walks for making Cables, and the Forges for Anchors 
and other Iron- work, bear a Proportion to the reſt; as 


alſo the Wet-dock, Canals, and Ditches, for keeping 


Maſts and Yards of the greateſt Size, where they lie 
ſunk in the Water to preſerve them : the Boat-yard, 
Rope-yards, the Anchor-yard, Forges, Founderies, all 
not eaſy to be deſcribed. 1 

WMe come next to the Stores themſelves, for which 
all this Proviſion is made; and, firſt, to begin with the 
Ships that are laid up there: The Sails, the Rigging, 


the Ammunition, Guns, great and ſmall Shot, ſmall 


Arms, Swords, Cutlaſſes, Half-pikes, with all the other 
Furniture belonging to the Ships that ride at their 


Moorings in the River Medway, Powder excepted, 


which 


140 AT OUR thro» Kent. 
which is generally carried to particular Magazines, to 
avoid Diſaſter; all theſe Stores are repoſited in ſeparate 
Buildings and Storehouſes, appropriated for the Furni- 
ture of every Ship, and may be taken out on the moſt 
emergent Occaſion, without Confuſion. 
Beſides theſe, are Warehouſes for laying up the Fur- 


niture, and Stores for Ships in general, and for the 


furniſhing other Ships to be built, or for repairing and 
ſupplying the Ships already there, as Occaſion may re- 
quite. = = | | 
For this Purpoſe there are ſeparate and*reſpeQive 
Magazines of Pitch, 'Far, Hemp, Flax, Tow, Reſin, 
Oil, FT allow; alſo of Sail-cloth, Canvas, Cables, ſtand- 
ing and running Rigging, ready fitted, and Cordage 
not fitted; with all Kinds of Ship-chandlery Neceſſa- 
ries, ſuch as Blocks, Tackles, Runners, &c. with the 
Cooks, Boatſwains, and Gunners Stores, and alſo An- 
chors of all Sizes, Grapnels, Chains, Bolts, and Spikes, 
wrought and unwrought Iron, Caſt iron Work, ſuch 
as Pots, Caldrons, Furnaces, &c. alſo Boats, ſpare 
Maſts and Yards, with a great Quantity of Lead and 
Nails, and other Neceſſaries, too many to be enu- 
merated, Zou N | : 
Too obſerve theſe Things deliberately, one would al- 
| moſt wonder what Ships they were, and where they 
ſhould be found, which could either for Building or 
Repairing, Fitting or Refitting, call for ſuch a Quan- 


tity of all theſe Things: but when, on the other hand, 


one ſees the Ships, and conſiders their Dimenſions, and 
conſequently the Dimenſions of all things which be- 
long to them, how large, how ſtrong, every thing 
muſt be, how much of the Materials muſt go to the 

making every thing proportionable to the Occaſion, 
the Wonder would change its Proſpect, and one would 
be as much amazed to think how and where they ſhould. 
be ſpplicds — Why. 

The particular Government of theſe Yards is very 

remarkable, the Commiſſioner, Clerks, A | 


323 GOES: abi. alt ad i. 


A Fo is YA GY Toes Wet ˙ wes 


Things is not to be matched by any in the World. 


- 1 . 25 | 
Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 141 


Dock-keepers, Watchmen, and all other Officers with - 
out Doors, with the Subordination of all Officers, one 
to another reſpectively, as their Degrees and Offices 
require. The Watchmen are ſet duly every Night at 
tated and certain Places within the ſeveral Yards, with 


every one a Bell over his Head, which they ring or 


toll every Hour, giving ſo many Strokes as the Hour 


reckons; and then one taking it from another through 
every Part of the Yard, and of all the Yards, makes 


the Watch be performed in a very exact and regular 
Manner. in the River is a Guard-boat, which, like 
the Main-guard in a Gariſon, rows the Grand Rounds 
at certain Times, by every Ship in the River, to ſee 
that the People on board are at their Poſt : if the Man 
placed to look out in each Ship does not call, h 
comes there? the Guard-boats board it immediately, to 
examine into the Defect of Duty. 


The Expedition that has been ſometimes uſed here 
in fitting out Men of War, is ſcarce credible ; for the 


Workmen told us, That the Royal Sovereign, a Firſt- 


rate of 106 Guns, was riding at her Moorings, intire- 


ly unrigged, and nothing but her three Maſts ſtanding, 
as is uſual when a Ship is laid up; and that ſhe was 
completely rigged, all her Maſts up, her Yards put to, 


ter Sails bent, Anchors and Cables on board, and the 


Ship ſailed down to Black- Stakes in three Days, Sir 
Cloudefly Shovell, being then her Captain. 
I do not vouch the Thing: but when I conſider, 


firſt, that every thing lay ready in her Storehouſes, and 
wanted nothing but to be brought out and carried on 
board; 1000 or 1500 Men to be employed in it, and 
more, if wanted; and every Man knowing his Buſi- 
neſs perfectly well; Boats, Carriages, Pullies, Tackles, 


Cranes, and Hulk, all ready ; I do not know but it 


might be done in one Day, if it were tried. Certain 


it is, the Dexterity of the Engliſb Sailors, in thoſe 
The 


Cc. within Doors; the Store-keepers, Yard-keepers, - 


* 
k 
z 
7 
72 
5 
#1 
$17. 
22 
4 ; 
7605 
F 
$3? 
ane +. 
7 
* 
i 
Ws” 
* 
1 
F: 4 
” 1 
i 7 l 
L 
3 5 * 
4 
F 
Ty 
* 
1 
& 
1 
: 
\ 
* 
Ly 4 
3 
9 
o I. 
: 
i 
"5 
ol 
7% 
1 
3 
1 
: 
: - 
? 
* 
7 
14 
1 
i 
1 
oF? 
14 
- 
7 
4 
1. 
1 [ 
. Js 
bd 1 
4 
$1 
. fo 
1 
24 
E 
12 
= 
+ 
1. 
1 AM 
4 
1 
if 
2 
2 
12 
| F 
* 
j 
: 
1 
1 
1 
1 


72 , 
FE 1 
* VII tra * , . | 
eee er GET ay ec WiFi ts DG ered," , Re ea 4 
: * 4 » - HR Lg - 
— 5 8 , p : 

ab n 
= D es 5 
g R . - * 

& 1 


142 . 0 UR thro” Kent. | 


The Building-yards, Docks, Timber-yard, Deal. 
yard, Maſt-yard, Gun-yard, Rope-walks, and all the 
other Yards and Places ſet apart for the Works belong. 
ing to the Navy, are like a well-ordered City ; and 
though the whole Place is, as it were, in the utmoſt 


Hurry, yet you-ſee no Confuſion; every Man knows 


his Buſineſs ; the Maſter-builders appoint the Work. 
ing or Converting, as they call it, of every Piece of 


Timber, and give to the other Head- workmen, or 


Foremen, their Moulds for the ſquaring and cutting 
out of every Piece, and placing it in its proper Byrth 
(fo they call it) in the Ship that is in Building; and 


every Hand is buſy in purſuing thoſe Directions, and 


ſo in all the other Works. | 
January 1, 1750. Notice was given to the Inhabit- 
ants in the Neighbourhood of Chatham Dock, (from 


the Entrance of Smithfield-Bank to the Hill-houſe) to | 
quit their Houſes in 30 Days; Intrenchments being 


to be thrown up in their Room; about which neceſſary 
Work of Defence, the Soldiers quartered in that 


Neighbourhood direQly began, with an Augmentation 


of Sixpence a Day to their Pay, ſo that within theſe 
three or four Years paſt, the Fortifications which ſur- 
round the Dock-yard are greatly ſtrengthened and 
enlarged, as well on the Extremities of the Dock-yard 
on the River Medibay, as on the Land- ſide towards 
Brumpton, where they are near three Miles in Circum- 
ference, fenced with a ſtrong Barricado of very ſtout 


Timbers, and a deep dry Ditch ; and at proper Diſ- 


tances are Baſtions, faced with Stone and Sods, and 
are well fortified with heavy Cannon; which Baſtions 
are ſo diſpoſed and ſituated, that were an Enemy to get 
Poſſeſſion of the firſt, next Gillingham, towards the En- 
trance of the River, it is ſo expoſed to the Fire from 
the ſecond as not to be maintained but at great Ha- 
zard, and ſo one annoys the other progreſſively, to the 
great Fort at the Entrance of the Dock-yard, con- 

tiguous to the Town of Chatham, which —_— . 
1 <4: 6 : | le 


- Abuſes committed in it. In theſe 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 143 
Mile in Length, the Buildings whereof are not elegant, 
being chiefly inhabited by the Workmen of the Dock- 
yard, where are now conſtanly employed 2200 Men. 
By the new additional Works and Fortifications on 
the Land ſide aforementioned, is incloſed Brumpton- 
hill, of a conſiderable Height and Extent, wheteon is 
lately erected three Ranges or Streets of Houſes, pa- 
rallel to each other; they are three Stories high, with 


Garrets, neatly ſaſhed, Sc. which ſerve as Barracks 


for the Soldiers. 
They are {ti]] continuing the ſaid Buildings, all neat 
and uniform, ſo that for Beauty, Strength, Conveni- 


ence, and the immenſe Quantities of all Sorts of Stores 


for the building and equipping the largeſt Ships of 
War, this Dock-yard of Chatham may juſtly be oaths | 
ed the moſt complete of any in the World. 

Rocheſter has two Markets, on I/edneſdays and Pri. 
days, and, by Grant from King Henry I. two annual 


Fairs; wiz. Aay the 19th, and November the 3oth, 
The Ground on that Side of the Town next the River 
is very low and marſhy, being overflowed by every 


high Tide, which renders the Situation unpleaſant, and 
the Air unwholeſome, from the Yapoun which ariſe 


from theſe ſalt Marſhes. 


it may not be amiſs in this Place to take Notice, 
that there is in the River Medway, at Rocheſler, and in 
ſeveral of its Creeks and Branches within the Juriſdic- 
tion of the City, an Oyſter-fiſhery, which is free to 


every one who has ſerved ſeven Years Apprenticeſhip 
to any Fiſherman or Dredger, who is free of the ſeid 
_ Fiſhery ; and the Mayor and Citizens of Roche/?er hold 
2 Court, commonly called An Admiralty Court, once a 


Year, or oftener, when Occaſions have'requredt, far 
the regulating of the ſaid Fiſhery, and to prevent 
— they appoint 

from time to time, when Oyſters ſhall and ſhall not be 
dredged and taken, which they call opening and ſbutting 
te Grounds z allo the —— each W {ball 
take 


144 4 TOUR: bro Kent, 
take in a Day, which is uſually called Setting the Stimm. by 
They have a Power to go on — and enforce theſe 

Orders; and when they have not found them duly ob- 

ferved, or that the Brood or Spat has been taken, 

which ſhould have been preſerved, they ſeize and throw 
into the River and Creeks the Brood, or ſuch Oyſters 
as have exceeded the preſcribed Quantity. 

Perſons who dredge or fiſh for Oyſters, not being free 

of the Fiſhery, ate called Cable hangers, and are pre- 

ſented and puniſhed by the Court. Every licenſed 

Dredger pays 65. 8 d. yearly to the Support of the | 

Courts. But ſeveral licentious Perſons having, in Pro- 

ceſs of Time, conteſted the Authority of this Court, 
and great Inconveniencies ariſing from it, to the en- 

dangering the Fiſhery, and to the Deſtruction of all 
good Order and Rule, the Corporation and free Dred- | 
germen applied to Parliament, and an Act paſled, Anns 

1729. eſtabliſhing the Juriſdiction of the City of Ro- 

cheſter, and enforcing the Authority of the ſaid Courts; 
and ſince that another Act explaining and ſupplying 
Defects ; fo that at preſent this Fiſhery is in a flouriſn- 
ing Condition, and all fair Dealers find their Account 
| Init. -- | „„ 
It is about 16 or 18 Miles from Rochęſter Bridge to 

Sheerneſs Fort by Water, on the River Medway; of 

this it is about 14 Miles to Black-fakes, The Chan- 
nel is ſo deep all the Way, the Banks ſo ſoft, and the 
D Reaches of the River ſo ſhort, that, in a Word, it is the 
ſafeſt and beſt Harbour in the World; and we ſaw two 
Ships of 80 Guns, each riding afloat at Low-water, 
within Mufquet- ſhot of Reche/ter Bridge, The Ships 
ride as in a Mill pond, or a Wet-dack, except that be- 
ing moored at the Chains, they ſwing up and down 
with the Tide; but as there is Room enough, they are 
moored in ſuch a manner, that they cannot ſwing foul 
of one another: nor did I ever hear of any Accident | 
that befel any of the King's Ships here by Storms and ar 
Weather, except in that dreadful Tempeſt in 1703- tio 
BY - „„ | | DE | when ing 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. © 145 
when the Royal Catharine was driven on Shore, and, 
receiving Damage, ſunk; and the Ship, being old, 
could not be weighed up again. | 
There are two Caſtles on the Shore of this River, 
oppolite to each other, the one at Upnor, the other 
called Guulingham Caſtle, both deſigned to guard two 
Reaches of the River; beſides at a Place called 7% 
Swamp, a Fort now known by the Name of Bird's- 
Net Fort, and another at Coctham Hood, all which, 
(HE they might be made of great Service in Time of 
Var, in cafe of ſuch another daring Attempt as the 
Dutch made upon the Royal Navy in this River, on 
the 22d of June 1667) J found ſtrangely neglected 
when I laſt viſited them, which was ſo lately as in the 
Year 1752. Ll own, I was ſurprized at this Neglect; 
and hope it is not, now (that we are at War with 
our natural Enemy the French) continued; and yet our 
Superiority at Sea, the Fort at Sheerneſs, the new 
Fortifications , at Chatham, I doubt not, will be ſuffi - 
cient to prevent our ever receiving ſuch another Af- 
front from any Enemy whatever, for at that time all 
was left unguarded ; and every thing concurred to in- 
vite the Eaemy. There were about 12 Guns at the 
Ille of Shepey, where now Sheernes Fort is built; the 
Dutch ſoon diſmounted moſt of them; after which. 
they went boldly up to Black fates with their whole: 
Squadron; and ſeven of their biggeſt Men of War 
went up as high as Upnor, where they did what Miſ- 
* they could, and on their retiring carried off the 
Royal Charles, a Firſt-rate Ship of 100 Guns, burn 
ing the London, and ſeveral others, beſides damaging 
moſt of the Ships that were within their Reach; and, 
all things conſidered, it was a Wonder they went 
away without ruining all the reſt of the Navy that was 
in that River. 15 | | 35 
 Sheernefs, which guards the Entrance into the River 
at the Point of the Ile of Shepey, is a regular Fortifica- 
tion, and has ſuch a Line of heavy Cannon command- 
ing the Mouth of the River, that no Fleet of Men of 
Yr - "ms FFW 


ww ATOUR tb Kent. 
War could attempt to paſs by, without hazarding 


being torn to pieces. | „ by 
It is not only a Fortreſs, but a good Town 
with ſeveral Streets in it, and Inhabitants of ſeveral 


Sorts, but chiefly ſuch, whoſe Buſineſs obliges them to 


reſide here. The Officers of the Ordnance have here 


an Office; they being often obliged to be at this Place 


many Days together, eſpecially in Time of War, when 


the Rendezvous of the Fleet is at the Nore, to fee to 
the furniſhing every Ship with military Stores, as Need 


requires, and to cheque the Officers of the Ships in 


their Demands of thoſe Stores, H c. 
Here is alſo a Yard for building Ships, with a Dock, 


intended chiefly for repairing Ships that may meet with 


any ſudden Accident. But then it is to be obſerved, 
that thoſe are generally but for Fifth and Sixth-rate 
Ships, ſmall Frigates, Yachts, and ſuch Veſſels; tho 


once, when I was there, I faw one upon the Stocks of 
64 Guns *. This Yard is a late thing alſo, and built 


many Years ſince that Fort. In making fome Altera- 


tions at Sheerneſs, Anno 1760. a Ball was found that 
weighed 64 Pounds, ſuppoſed to have been fired by the 


Dutch in their Attempt above-mentioned. | 
Shepey- 1/e is ſuppoſed to be ſo called, from its being 


one of the firſt Places in England, where Sheep were 
kept, or from its affording great Plenty of thoſe uſeful | 


Animals. This Iſland is encompaſſed with the mixed 
Waters of the Thames and the Medtbay on the Weſt, 


with the Swale on the South, and with the main Oceas 


on the North and Eaſt. It hath great Plenty of good 
Corn, but wants Wood. It is about 21 Miles in Com- 


paſs. Copperas and Brimſtone were formerly made 


in the Iſle of Shepey. : Sg 
Here are ſeveral Tumuli, in the marſhy Parts all over 
the Iſland, ſome of which the Inhabitants call Cotereli: 
theſe are ſuppoſed to have been caſt up in Memory of 
ſome of the Daniſb Leaders, who were buried 5 : 
| | or 


* It is now very much augmented, and rencered in all ReſpeC's ſo 
commodious, that Ships of great Force are built there, 


Kent: GREAT BRITAIN 147 
for the Danes have often made this Hand the Scene of 
their Ravages and Plunder. CC 
There was antiently a Bridge and Cauſeway be- 
tween this Ile and Harty this was called Thrembethe- 
pridge, as afterwards the Ferry was called Tremod-Ferry. 
The common Way into this Ifland, from the main 
Land of Kent, is by King's-ferry, where a long Cable 
of about 140 Fathom, being faitened at each End acrofs 
the Water, ſcrves to get over the Boat by Hand. 
On the main Side of the Ferry is a ſmall Stone 
Building, which will hold nine or ten Perſons : this is 
ſaid to have been erected by one George Fox, who ſtay- 
ing once there a long while in the Cold, waiting 7M 
the Ferry-boat, and being much affected with it, built 
this Place to ſhelter others from the like Inconvenience. 
For the Maintenance of this Ferry, and keeping up 
the Highway leading to it, through the Marſhes, for 
above a Mile in Leneth, the Land-occupiers tax them- 
ſelves one Peny per Acre for freſh Marſh-land, and one 
Peny for every 10 Acres of ſalt Marſh-Jand per Annum. 
"This Tax, together with ſome Lands belonging to the 
Ferry, has from time to time kept the ſaid Ferry and 
Cauſeway with a Wall againſt the Sea, in good Repair; 
as alſo the Boats, Cables, and an Houſe for the Ferry - 
keeper, who is obliged to tow all Travellers over free, 
except on four Days yearly; viz. Palm-monday, Il hit. 
monday, St. Fames's Day and Michaelmas, when an 
| Horſeman pays two Pence, and a Footman one Peny : 
but on Sundays, or after Eight o' Clock at Night, there 
is no Paſſage gratis; ſo that at ſuch times the Ferry- 
| keeper will demand ſix Pence of every Horſeman, and 
two Pence of every Footman; and in theſe Caſes the 
Land-occupiers pay as well as Strangers. The Keeper 
of this Ferry is allowed 24 l. per Aun. by the Land: oc- 
cupiers, beſide what he makes in carrying over Paſ- 
ſengers in the Night- time, and on Sundays : and to this 
he has another Perquiſite added; which is to dredge 
for Oyſters within the eb his Ferry-lork, which 
| | 112 | ex- 


_ - LTOUR SY Kew 


extends one Tow's Length (as they term it); i. . 60 


Fathoms, on each Side of the Caſtle. 85 


In the upper Grounds of this Iſland is great Plenty a 


of good Corn; but equal Scarcity of freſh Water, moſt 
of their Springs being brackiſh, _ 5s 

A great Number of marine Plants grow in the alt 
Marſhes, which induce the Curious in Botany to viſit 


this Iſland frequently in the midſt of Summer, when 


the Plants are in Perfection. 


At the South- weſt Point of the Iſle of Shepey, where 


the Eaſt Sale parts from the Welt, and paſſes on as 


above, ſtands Queenborough; ſo called by King Ed. 
zward III. in Honour of his Queen Philippa, Daughter 


to William Earl of Hainault and Holland. Here was a 


Caſtle erected by King Edward III. as a Defence of 


the Mouth of the River Mediuay. In the Building of 


this Caſtle, that Prince was aſſiſted by Milliam of 


F'ickham, who was then Surveyor of the King's Works, 


and afterwards Biſhop of J/7inche/ter. This Caſtle was MW 


repaired in the Year 1536. by King Henry VIII. who 
at the ſame time built others at Deal, /Yalmer, &c. 


for the Defence of the Sea-coaſts. The Governors of 


 Bueenborough Caſtle were formerly honoured with the 


Title of Conſtable; and by the Liſt of them it ap- 


pears, that many of them were Men of great Con- 
ſideration. Is (1 
At preſent there are not any Remains of this Caſtle 
to be ſeen; the Ground where it ſtood is moated round; 
and there is a Well about 40 Fathom deep, {till re- 
maining. By the ſeveral Ordinances which were made 
by King Edward III. relating to Naval Affairs, it ap- 
pears this Place was then very famous; but at preſent 
it is a miſerable dirty Fiſhing- town; yet has a Mayor, 
Aldermen, Cc. and ſends two Burgeſſes to Parlia- 
ment; although the chief Traders of this Town ſeem 


to be Alehouſe-keepers and Oyſter- catchers, and their 


Votes at an Election for Parliament-men are the prin- 


Cipal Branch ot their ſcandalous Traffick, A pernicious | 
i — | | e Practice 


— * — wp 


— 


— . — 2 2 =, — —ę— - 


we ce © © My 


"OW" 


Kent. GREAT Britain. 149 
Practice] too much followed in better Towns, and 


which may one Day be of fatal Conſequence to the 
Liberties of Britain, | Fe | 
Here we took Boat, and went up the Eaſt Swale to 
Milton, or Middleton, as formerly called, which lies, as 
it were, hid among the Creeks; for it is almoſt out of 
Sight as well by Wate as by Land; and yet it is a 
large Town, has a conſiderable Saturday Market, for 
Corn, Fruit, and other Proviſion; and the Oyſters 
taken in the Grounds about this Town are the moſt. 


famous of any in Kent, This Town is governed by 
an Officer, who is called by the old Saxen Name Port- 


reve; he is choſen. annually on St. James's Day, and 
ſuperviſes the Weights and Meaſures all over the Hun- 


dred of Milton. It had antiently a Royal Palace for 


the Kentiſh Kings. Sp TE | 

[ took a View, while I was in theſe Parts, of Cob- 
bam-hall, fix Mi iles from Chatham, the Seat of the Earl 
of Darnley, an handſome Brick Houſe, built by Inigo 


Jones, and remarkable for the excellent Marble Chim- 
ney pieces in moſt of the Rooms. 


At Raynham Church, near Roche/ter, we ſaw ſeveral 
Monuments of the Family of the Earl of Thanet; and 


the Steeple is reckoned a Sea-mark. | 


From hence, keeping the Coaſt and the great Road 
together (for they are ſtill within View of one another), 
we come to Sittingbourn, formerly a Market. town, but 
{till a conſiderable Thoroughfare, and full of good 
Inns I ine, : 

Juſt by the Town are the Ruins of a Fortification 
railed by King Alfred, when in Purſuit of the Danes, 
called Bavord caſtle, Here they boaſt much of one 


| Norwood having entertained King Henry V. on his 
_ triumphant Return from France; and though the En- 


tertainment was, according to the Times, very ele- 
gant, yet the whole Expence of it amounted to no more 


than 9s. 94. | ES, 
CET „ - 


150 Ts 4 TOUR thro | 1 Kent 


In January 1737-8. were found in a Shave belong. 
ing to the Eſtate of Sir John Hales, who lives in this 
Neighbourhood, and within his Manor of Tun/#all, near 
Sittingbourn, ſeveral hundred Broad-pieces of Gold, 
which were thought to have been concealed in the 
Civil Wars by an Anceftor of Sir John, They were 
found by a poor Boy, who was rambling in the Cop- 
pice; and not knowing their Value, was play ing with 


ſome of them at a Farmer's, who got Poſſeſſion of | 


them; but, not being able to keep the Secret, he re- 


funded 624 of the Broad-pieces for the Uſe of the 


Crown, tho' Sir Jobn laid Claim to the Whole, as did 


the Lord of the Manor of Milton, which is paramount 
to that of Tunflall. I 


From Sittingbourn we came to Fever/ham; a large 


fair Town, having one long and broad Street: it has 


1 where the Market is kept on 


Wedneſdays and Saturdays; and there are two annual 
Fairs in this Town, of 10 Days each; viz. on Febru- 
ary the 14th, and on Auguſt the iſt. This Town is 
well peopled, and in a flouriſhing State, being in the 
Neighbourhood of one of the beſt Parts of Kent, and 
baving a commodious Creek to bring in, or carry out, 
their Goods ; but many of the Inhabitants have carried 
on the Smuggling Trade for Years, for which this 


Creek lies very convenient. Brandy, and often French | 


Wines, are fold here at low Rates, eſpecially at ſuch 
times as the Smugglers have been apprehenſive of Diſ- 
- covery ; to prevent which, they have been known to 
fell their Wines to any Perſons who would venture to 
purchaſe them, for 2 d. a Quart. . 

The Fiſhermen here have a good Cuſtom: They 
will admit no one to take out his Freedom, unleſs 
he be a married Man. The Trade for Oyſters here 


with the Dutch is ſo large, as to bring in between 2 


and 3000. per Ann. ready Money, from Holland, for 
this Commodity only. e 1 


* 00096" IF. - 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 15 


The Fiſhermen of this Town have a Law among 
themſelves, by which they are reſtrained from bringing 
Oyſters into the Town but at certain Times, and in 


limited Quantities, fo that it is impoſſible to get any 
Oyſters there, but at particular times. 


At Fever/ham are the Remains of a Monaſtery, 


founded by King Stephen, where he was buried with 


his Family. At preſent nothing is left but two Gate- 
houſes, of mean Structure. At the Diſſolution, they 
ſay, the Coffin of Lead, which held the Royal Body, 
was taken up and ſold ; but the Corpſe was thrown 


into the Thames, and taken up by ſome Fiſhermen. 
Here, in the Year 903. King Ethelſian enacted Laws. 


It was at the Mouth of this Swale, namely, at Shell- 


refs, ſo called from the Abundance of Oyſter-ſhells al- 


ways lying there, that the Smack in which the late 
King James II. embarked for his Eſcape into France, 
ran en Shore, and being boarded by the Fiſhermen, 


the King was taken Priſoner; the Fiſhermen and 
| Rabble treated him, even after they were told who he 
was, with the utmoſt Indecency, uſing his Majeſty 


with fuch perſonal Indignity, and ſearching him in fo 


rude a manner, that the King himſelf ſaid, he was never 
more apprehenſive of loſing his Life than at that time. 
He was afterwards carried by them up to the Town, 

where he was not more nobly treated for ſome time, 


till certain neighbouring Gentlemen of the County 
came in, who underſtood their Duty better, by whom 
he was preſerved from farther Violence, till Coaches 


and a Guard came from London, by the Prince of 


Orange's Order, to conduct him with Safety and Free- 


dom to London; where he was much better received. 

_ Having mentioned the Tombs of King Stephen, and 
his Queen, in Feverſbam, I know nothing elſe this 
Town is remarkable for, except the moſt notorious. 

Smuggling Trade, which I have mentioned, and which 


is carried on partly by the Aſſiſtance of the Dutch in 


their Oyſter-boats ; nay, even the Owling Trade, or 


H 4 clandeſtine 


—_ 4 TOUR wv Kei 
clandeſtine Exporting of Wool, ſeems removed from 

"Romney Marſh, to this Coaſt; and a great deal of it 
has been carried on between the Mouth of the Ef 
Stoale and the North Foreland. 

From this Eat Swale, and particularly from thefe 
three Towns, ©rueenborough, Milton, and Teverſpam, 


the Fiſh- market at Bi lingſgate is ſupplied with ſeveral 


Sorts of Fiſh ; but particularly with the beſt and largeſt 
Oyfters, ſuch as ſome call Stewing, others Milton Oy. 


ſters ; as they are from the Ee Side with a ſmaller i 


well as with a greater Sort, called //a/lfeet. 

I ſhall now crofs the Hills from Milton to Maidſſone, 
on the River Medway, near 10 Miles diftant from Ro. 
cheſter to the South-eaſt. 


Maidſtone is a very antient Town: the River Med. 


toay, over which it has a Bridge, is navigable up to it 
by large Hoys, of 50 or 60 Tons Burden, the Tide 
flowing quite up to the Town. In 1739. an Act 
paſſed for making it ſurther navigable, of which I ſhall 
take proper Notice, when I come to ſpeak of the Tim- 
ber in Suſſex, 

Here. is carried on a ManufaQure of 1286 ales, 
and likewiſe, in the Neighbourhood, are great Flants- 
tions of Hops, which were ſuppoſed to be firſt planted 
here at the Beginning of the Reformation; which * 
Occafion to the following Diſtich 3 | 


p Hops, Reformation, hors and Bree 
Came into England all i in a re ear. - 


Maidftone is eminent for Plenty of Proviſions for 
Richneſs of Lands, and for the beſt Market in the 
County, not excepting either Reche/ter or Canterbury. 


It has alſo an handſome Bridge, Ape 66” the Opinion 


of ſome, is inferior only in Length to that of Roche/er. 


| From this Town, and the neighbouring Parts, Zone 
don is ſupplied with more Particulars r from any 


wage Market-town in 2 wh Og 


I, From 


9 1 1 r a «® 


Kent, GREAT BRITAIN. on 153 


I. From the Meald of Kent, which begins but about: 


fix Miles off, and particularly from that Part 
which lies this Way, they bring the large Kentiſh 
Bullocks. 
2. From hence are brought great Quantities of the 
largeſt Timber for Supply of the King's Yards 
at Chatham, and often to London; moſt of which 
is at preſent brought by . Land- carriage to Maid- 


one. 


3. From the Country adjoining, great Quantities of 


Corn are brought up to London; alſo Hops, Ap- 
ples, and Cherries. 

4. A Kind of Paving Gone, called Kenttſh rags, 
about eight or. ten Inches ſquare, exceeding 
durable, uſed to pave Court-yards, &c. 


5. Fine white Sand for the Glaſs-houſes, eſteemed 


the beſt in England for melting into Flint glaſs, 

and Looking glaſs Plates; and for the Stationers- 
„ 3 called Writing. jand. 

All that Side of the County which I have mentioned, 

as it is marſhy and unhealthy, by its Situation among; 

the Waters, is chiefly inhabited by Ship-builders, Fiſher- 


men, Seafaring men, and Huſbandmen, and ſuch as 


depend upon them; and very few Families of Note are 
found among them. But as ſoon as we come down 
Boxley Hill from Rocheſter, or Hollingbourn-hill from 
Milton, to the well-watered Plain on the Banks of the 
Medway, we find the Country every where beſpangled 
with populous Villages, and delicious Seats of the No- 


bility and Gentry; and eſpecially on the-North-ſide of 


the River, beginning at Aylesferd on. the Medway, the 
Seat of the Earl of "that Name, and looking Eaſt to- 
wards the Sea, to Eaſtwell near A4/bford, the Seat of the 
Earl of I incbelſeu. 

There is not much Manufacturing i in this County : 2 


what is left, is chiefly at Canterbury, and in this Town 


of Maidſlone, and its Neighbourhood. The: Manu- 


—— of this Town is principally Linen-thread, as L 
H 5 have: 


4 
* 
v1 
5 
1 
þ 
* 
4 
+ 
: 
| 
* 
: . 
"307 
x * 
RP 
4 
« 
2. 
4 
0 
5 
k 
& 
þ 
1 
5 
D v5 
9 
i# 

- | 1 
; 
if 
FT 

1 $ 
L 
14 
$ 5 
* 
F 
[2-Y 
#7 
42 
x 
12 
4 * 
[4 
* 
6 & 
g 
if 
14 
Fa 
f 
4 
17 
1 
. a2 
** 
7 7 
4 
18 
* 
47 
= 'Y 
12 
6b 
1 
* 


154 ATOUR th Kent. 
have ſaid, which they make to pretty good Perfection, 


though not extraordinary fine. At Cranbrook, Tenter. | 
den, Goudhur/t, and other Villages in the Neighbour. 


hood of this Place, was once a conſiderable Cloathing- 
trade carried on; and the Yeomen of Kent, of whom ſo 
much has been faid by Fame, and who inhabited theſe 


Parts, were generally much enriched by it; but that ; 


Trade is now quite decayed, and ſcarce 10 Clothiers 
left in all the County. | - 
In this Neighbourhood there is a large Paper-mill 


erected, where the beſt Engliſh Writing Paper is | 


made, which is equal in Goodneſs to any brought from 
Holland. - „ 

The Farmers, and Deſcendents of theſe Clothiers, 
upon the Elections of Members for the County, ſhew 
themſelves ſtill there; for there are ordinarily 14 or 
1500 Freeholders brought from this Side of the Coun- 


ty, who, for the Plainneſs of their Appearance, are call- 
ed the Grey Coats of Kent ; but are fo conſiderable, that 


Whoever they vote for is ſure to carry it ; and there- 
fore the Gentlemen are very careful to preſerye their 
Intereſt among them. 


© This Town of Maidſtone is a Peculiat of the Arch- 


biſhop of Canterbury, who is the proper Incumbent, 
and puts in a Curate to officiate for him. The Arch- 
_ biſhop has a Palace here, which is eſteemed very an- 
tient, to which there is a Chapel belonging. The 
Architecture is Gothic, but good of the Kind; and 
ſome Parts of it have been repaired after the modern 
Manner, Maidſtone was a Roman Station, named 
Vagmacis or Madviacis, from the Britifh Word Mad- 
wes, the Meadows on the River Yoga, which are here 
beautiful. The Archiepiſcopal Palace was founded by 
Jahn Uford, and finiſhed by Simon Iſlip. The College 
or Hoſpital was erected by Archbiſhop Boniface, and a 
Chantry by Themas Anindel, now the Free-ſchool, 


About the Year 1720. ſeveral Canoes were dug up, 


made of hollowed Trees, in the Marſhes of the River 
Medibaꝝ 


r 


the following extraordinary 5 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIV. 1355 


Medway above Maidſdone. In the Lands of Dr. Doda 
at Addington, near Malling, in the Year 1720. a Britiſh 


Coin of Amber was found in the Foundation of a Stone 


Wall: the Convex Side was plain; on the Concave 
was a Britiſh Horſe, rude enough.. 

The Aſſizes are ſometimes held here, and always the 
County Elections. It is governed by a Mayor and: 
12 Jurats, and returns two Members to Parliament. 

Charing, not far off, was the antient Durolenum, 


| ſituated upon a Spring of the River Len. Here the- 


Archbiſhops of Canterbury had a caſtellated Palace, 
given them by ſome of the firſt Saxon Kings, of which 
there are large Ruins. | 

In my Way to Maidſtone, on a former Journey, F 


ſaw Mareworth Caſtle, the Seat of the Earl of Ve- 


moreland; a fine Piece of Architecture, deſigned by 
Colin Campbell, in Imitation of an Houſe in Italy built 
by the —— Palladio. It is a Square, extending 88 
Feet, and has four Porticoes of the 7onic Order, In 
the Middle there riſes above the Roof a ſemicircular 
Dome, which has two Shells; the one forms the Stucco- 


Cieling of the Salon, being 36 Feet Diameter; the 


outward Shell is Carpentry, covered with Lead. Be-- 


tween theſe two Shells is a ſtrong Brick Arch, that 
brings 24 Funnels to the Lantern ;. which is finiſhed 


with Copper-; but by this Contrivance the Misfortune 


is, that. the Chimneys often ſmoke. On a riſing 


Ground, within a Mile of Aylesford, I viewed an An- 
tiquity, vulgarly called Kertſcotty- houfe; which are three 


reat Stones piled on each other, and deemed the- 

Tombs of Kentigern and Horbus, two Daniſh Princes, 
ſlain in Battle, and there buried. 

In proſecuting-my Journey from Maidſtone to Can-- 


1 cannot belp mentioning Lenbam, a Town 


about 17 Miles diftant from that City; in relation to 
which the Right Rev. Continuator of Camden ect 


156 A TOUR trthro Kent, 
C At Lenham, ſays he, is a Thing exceeding re- 
markable, mentioned on the Fomb of Robert -- thy 
c « fon, Eſq; in the Church there, who was Grandchild 
to that truly religious Matron, Mary Honeyword, 
Wife of Robert Honeywoed, of Charing, Eſq. She 
had at her Deceaſe, lawfully defcended from her, 


* 


R R R „„ 


* 


the fourth. Her Renown liveth with her Poſterity; 

| '© her body lieth in the Church; and her Monument 

may be ſeen in Mart J. hall, in Effex, where {te 
died.“ 


From hence 1 purſued my Journey to Canterbury, : 


which all Writers agree was called, by the Britons, 
Kent, and is the Duroverno of the eee, of which 
Town, and its Antiquities, ſo much has been ſaid, and 

fo accurately, that I need no more than mention it 
| briefly. However, I obſerve here, 

1. That Auguſtine, the Monk, the firſt Chriſtian 
Preacher that came from Rome into this Iſland, ſettled 
in this Place: but that he was the firſt that preached 

| Chriſtianity in the Iſland (as ſome have ſuggeſted) is a. 


' Miſtake; as the famous Conference between him and | 


the Monks of Banchor in Wales ſufficiently teſtifies. 


2. That ſeven Archbiſhops of Canterbury, including 


that Auguſtine, lie buried here in one Vault. 

23. That Thomas d Becket, Archbiſhop of this See, 
inſulted the King his Sovereign in an unſufferable 
Manner; inſomuch that in the eign of Henry II. he 
was here murdered by the Connivance, as ſome ſay, of 


the King; and they ſhew what they cal his Blood 5 


upon the Pavement at this Day. 
4. That they ſhew the Stone Steps abend to his 
Shrine (he being afterwards canonized) worn away to 


5. That the Bodies of King Henry IV. and of Ba. | 
* ward the Black * ate buried here; and the aten 
| nlincent 


wa „ mw 231 


367 Children; 16 of her own Body; 114 Grand- 
children; 228 in the third Generation; and g in 


a Slope, by the Knees of te Pilgrims, who vilited 
It | 


1 1 F —_— —_ 1 2 N 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 157 


nificent Effigies of the latter, very curiouſly carved, hes 
on his Tomb or Monument. Here is a prett Chapel, 
originally deſigned for the Celebration of M ſes for the 
Soul of King Henry IV. 
6. That the kamente Wealth iced by: Votaries 
and Pilgrims, for ſeveral Ages, to the Shrine of Becket, 
was ſuch, that the famous Eraſmus, who ſaw it, ſays 
of it thus: All ſhone, ſparkled, glittered, with rare 
Hand very large Jewels; and even in the whole 
Church appeared a Profuſeneſs above that of Kings.“ 


3 ſhort, Gold was one of the meaneſt Treaſures of his 


Shrine : and at the Diſſolution, as Dugdale obſerves, 
the Plate and Jewels filled two great Cheſts, each 
whereof required eight Men to carry it out of the 
Church. And Camden ſays, the Name of Chriſt, to 
* whom it was dedicated, was almoſt laid aſide for that 
of St. Thomas.“ | 

7. That all this immenſe F with the Lands 
and Revenues of the whole Monaſtery, were ſeized up- 
on by King Henry VIII. at the general Suppreſſion of 
Religious Houſes, except ſuch as are annexed to the 
Deanry and Chapter, and to the Revenue of the Arch= 
biſhoprick, which are not very conſiderable. There 
is an old Picture of Becker's Martyrdom, and an antient 
Painting upon the Wall, of the Siege of Feruſalem, in 
the Habits of our Anceſtors. 

8. Here are alſo to be ſeen the Moriuitients of ir. 
dinal Courticello, Cardinal Pole, Archbiſhop Chichſey; 
Archbiſhop Peckham's, carved in Wood upwards of 
450 Years ago; Biſhop Marton, the Duke of Cla- 
rence, Archbiſhop n with mat others of leſs 
Note. 
The Cathedral is a large and noble Pile vg: 
very curious Remnants of painted Glaſs are ſtill to be 
ſeen in the Windows. It is intirely vaulted with Stone, 
and of a very pretty Model; but much too high for its 
Breadth, as all Gothic Buildings were. The middle 
Tower is very beautiful; but the Tower and Spire at 


2 DATOUR W Kent 


the Weſt End and Weſt Front are mean, and very 


little of Symmetry was obſerved by the firſt Builder, if 
we ſuppoſe the whole was erected at once. The Me. 
tropolitan Chair is of grey Marble, ſtanding behind the 
High Altar. The Cl iſters are pretty good, and near 
them a very large Chapel, called the Sermon-houſe, 
wainſcoted with {ri Oak. Under it is a large Pro- 


teſtant French Church, given firſt by Queen Elixzabetb 
to the Walloons, who fled hither from the Perſecution: 
of the Duke d Alva. The Number of theſe Refugees | 


has been fince very much increaſed by French Proteſt- 


ants obliged to leave their native Country, through the 15 


Cruelty of Louis XIV. 


The Cloſe where the Houſes of the r 
Rand, is very ſpacious and fair, and a great many good 


Houſes are built in it, and ſome with pretty Gardens. 


This City ſends two Members to Parliament, and has. 


a Free- ſchool. , it]: 
Here are many Remains of. Reman and Saxon Build- 


ings. This City. is ſtrongly walled about, with many | 
Towers at due Intervals, a deep Ditch cloſe underneath, 


and a great Rampart of Earth within. The Materials 
.of the Walls are chiefly Flint; 
The Caſtle was built in the Reign of King Wil. 


Hon I. of the ſame Form, and the Walls of the ſame _ 
Thickneſs, with that of Rochefter. Dung con- hill, a very 


high Mount, ſeems to have been Part of the old Cal- 


tle. Oppoſite to it, without the Walls, is an Hill ſeem-- 


ing to have been raiſed by the Danes, when they be- 
ſieged the City. The Top of Dungeon- hill is equal to 


the Top of the Caſtle, and exhibits a fine Pioſpect Þ| 


over the City and Country.. 
Of Angu/iine's Monaſtery, two Gates remain next 
the City, and both very ſtately. Perhaps one belong- 
ed to King Ethelbert's Palace, the other to the Mona- 
fiery, which doubtleſs was very ſplendid; for it covers 
a great Compaſs of Ground, and is ſurrounded with a 
very high Wall. There were continual Quarrels be- 
| ns : | tween 


-. Sona aa — 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 159 
tween the Monks of Auguſtine and of thoſe of Thomas 
J Becket, both very rich, and very contentious, . 

Near this Monaſtery is a vaſt angular Piece of a 
Tower (befides half of another) about 30 Feet high, 
which has been undermined by digging away a Courſe 

at Bottom, in order to be thrown down ; but happened 
only to disjoint itfelf from the Foundation, and lodged 
itſelf in the Ground in the preſent inclining State, 
Thus, being equally poiſed, it preſents a View of 
Terror, and forbids a too near Acceſs. 

The adjacent Cloſe is full of religious Ruins, and in 
a Corner of it are the Walls of a Chapel, ſaid to have 
been a Chriſtian Temple before Augu/tine's Time, and 
re- conſecrated by him to St. Pancras. Near it is a 
little Room, ſaid to have been King Ethelbert's Pagan 


| Chapel. WED 


_ Eaſtward of this, and farther out of the City, is S:. 
Martin's Church, ſaid to be Auguſtine's firſt See, and 
the Place whither King Ethelbert's Queen uſed to repair 
to divine Service. It is built moſtly of Roman Brick, 
In the Middle is a very large old-faſhioned Font, ſup- 
poſed to be that where the King was. baptized. 

North of the City is a very ſmall Remainder of $7. 
Gregory's Chapel, founded probably by Augu/iine to the 
Honour of that Pope, his Patron. 
The City has been much advantaged by the Settle- 
ment in it of 2 or 3000 French Proteſtants, Men, 
'Women, and Children, owing to the abovementioned 
Expulſion of the French Proteſtants under Louis XIV. 

The Employment of thoſe Refugees was chiefly 
Broad Silk Weaving, which has ſuffered ſeveral 
Changes and Alterations 3 but is ſtill carried on here 
to ſome Account. N | 
gut what have added moſt to the Advantage of Can- 
terbury, are the Hop-grounds all round the Place, to 
the Amount of ſeveral thouſand Acres,. infomuch that 
Canterbury was, for ſome time, the greateſt Plantation 
of Hops in the whole Ifland, Cw of FR Bar 


I. 22 | 


160 of TOU K 299 Koa 


IFhiijlaple, a Place of little Conſequence in former 


times, is now, from its being a Kind of Fort to Canter. | 


bury, become a Town of briſk Trade, and a great deal 
of Buſineſs. Fever/ham was indeed of. Note in earl 


Times, but would probably have ſhared the Fate of 


other Towns, and ſunk in conſequence of the Loſs of 


its famous Abbey, but for its commodious Creek, by 
which it is not barely ſuſtained, but is in a very thriv- 


| ing Condition, exporting (when they are plenty) large 
Quantities of Qyſters to Holland. The ſame may be 
affirmed of Milton, and Queenborougbh in the Ile of 


Shepey , and if we take in Koche/ter, and its Dependen- | 


cies on the Medway, we may, without Injury to 
Truth, aſſert, that there come annually from theſe 
Places to London, from 7 to oo Veſſels of all Sizes. 
The Shore from Hhitftaple, and the Eat Swals, 
affords nothing remarkable but Sea-marks, and ſmall 
- Towns on the Coaſt, till we come to Margate, noted 
for King William's frequently Landing here in his Re- 
turns from Holland, and for ſhipping a vaſt Quantity 
of Corn for London Market, moſt, if not all of it, the 
Product of the Iſle of Thanet, in which it ſtands. 
Here is lately erected a Salt-water Bath, which has 
performed great Cures in nervous and paralytic Caſes, 
and in Numbneſs of the Limbs; and ſeems. every Day 
to be more and more in Requeſt. „„ 
But it may not be unacceptable to tranſcribe a few 
Lines from Camden, in Honour to the Induſtry of the 


* 


- Inhabitants in this Part of the Iſle of Thaner, which! 


recommend to the Admiration (for I doubt it would be 
too much to ſay Imitation) of the reſt of Britain, both 
North and South. It is as follows: 


© Nor mult J here omit the Mention of a Thing 


very much to. the Honour. of the Inhabitants of 


Harbours of Murgate, Ramſgate, and Brod/teer ; 
namely, that they are exceeding induſtrious, and are, 


A „ „ 0 


bah 


AMOS Ma u ma WM h dd m . tans - 


Thanet, of thoſe eſpecially who live near the Roads or 


as it were, amphibious Creatures, and get their Living 


MOST ih P ß PUB. * 


* * A „ „ * * © 3Þ«= A £6 * 


Kent, GREAT BRITAINNx. 161 


« both by Sea and Land. They deal in both Ele- 
ments, are both Fiſhers and Ploughmen, both Huſ- 
bandmen and Mariners; and the ſelf. ſame Hand 
that holds the Plough, ſteers the Ship. According 
to the ſeveral Seaſons, they make Nets, fiſn for Cod, 
Herring, Mackrel, Sc. go to Sea themſelves, and 
export their own Commodities. And thoſe very 
Men alſo dung their Ground, plow, ſow, harrow, 
reap, inn, being quick and active in both Employ- 
ments; and ſo the Courſe of their Labours runs 
round. And when there happen any Shipwrecks, as 


Shelves ſo much dreaded by Seamen lie over againſt 
it; namely, the Godwin, the Brakes, the Four- foot, 
the Mhitdict, &c.), they are extremely induſtrious to 
ſave the Lading. _ : 


In this Ifle there are great Quantities of Garden- 
ſeeds annually raiſed, from whence the Seed-ſhops in 


London are ſupplied with their greateſt Stock of Seeds. 


Theſe are brought by Water to Billingſgate. 


At Stanar in the Iſle of Thanet, the Rutupiæ of the 


Romans, is to be ſeen the Sepulchre of Vortimer, King 


of the antient Britons; who, having vanquiſhed the 
Saxons in many Battles, and at laſt driven them out of 


the Iſland, ordered, before his Death, that he ſhould be 
buried here, on a fond Conceit, that his Corpſe would 
fright them from landing any more upon this Coaſt; 
like the great Scipio, who, having ſubdued the Cartha- 
ginians, ordered his Tomb to be turned towards Afri- 
ca, to fright them from the Coaſt of Italy. But the 


poor Britons ſoon tound the Difference between a Ang 


in the Feld, and one in the Grave. 


On the North-eaſt Point of this Land, is the Pro- 
montory, or Head-land, which I have often mentioned, 


called the North-Foreland ; which, by a Line drawn 
due North to the Naſe in E, about fix Miles ſhort 
of Norwich, makes the Mouth of the River Thames, 


an the Port of London. As ſoon as any Veſſels. paſs 


there do here now-and-then (for thoſe Shallows and 


this 


N * 
; 
Fo 
[ 
£ 
3 
1 
LY 


162 4 TOUR thi Kent, K 
this Foreland from, London, they are properly ſaid to M 1 
be in the open Sea; if to the North, they enter the WM b 
German Ocean; if to the South, the Channel, as tis p 
Called, that is, the narrow Seas between Eugland and p 
France ; and all the Towns or Harbours, before we hi 
come this Length, whether on the Kent!/h or Er M is 
Shore, are called Members of the Port of London—ex- tc 
cept thoſe that belong to the Ports of Sandwich and WM o 
Ipfwich. e | 5 ̃ 7 
On the Nerth- Foreland is a new Mark, erected by v 
the T7 inity houſe Men at the public Expence ; beinga tl 


round Brick Lower, near 80 Feet high. Here the MI fi 
Sea gains ſo much upon the Land by continual Winds WM 1 
at South weft, that, within the Memory of ſome of the tl 
Inhabitants, above 30 Acres of Land have been loſt in B 
one Place. | | Tn 


From this Point Weſtward, the firſt Town of Note b. 
is Ramſgate, a fmall Port: the Inhabitants are fond of C 
having us call it Raman gate; pretending that the 

Romans, under Julius Ceſar, made their firſt Attempt 

to land here, and that, being driven back by a Storm, 

be ſoon returned, and, coming on Shore with a good 

Body of Troops, deat back the Britons, and fortified 
bis Camp, juſt at the Entrance of the Creek, where 
the Town now flands ; while others as poſitively aſ- 
fert, that that great Commander firſt landed at Deal; as 
I ſhall preſently obſerve. eh , 

In the 22d Year of his late Majeſty King George II. 

an Act of Parliament paſſed, appointing Truſtees for 
enlarging and maintaining this Harbour, and a Duty on . 
= - Shipping was granted for thoſe Porpoſes. | | 
Ihe Work was accordingly begun, and for ſome |} 
| time carried on with great Vigour, and a very noble 
Stone Pier was carried out from the Shore on the Eaſt- 
fide of the propoſed Harbour, to the Diſtance of 770 
Feet. This Pier, ſo far as finiſbed, is perhaps the molt 
complete Piece of Architecture of the Kind in the 
World, and well deſerves a particular Deſcripin. 


n 


A 

0 
* 
1 
d 

& | 
* ; 
14 


wy vw WW is aA . 


Kent. GRTAT BRITAIN. 163 


The Foundation of is it laid in Caiſſons, and is 45 Feet 


broad; the Height, from the Foundation to the upper 
Part of the Torus, is 38 Feet © Inches; tis carried up 


perpendicular to the Top of the Caiſſon, which is a 


little above Low- water Mark at a Spring- tide, and then 
is raiſed battering on each Side with rough Stone, ſo as 
to be reduced about ten Feet in Breadth at the ſeiting 
on of the Facia, This Work, towards the Sea, is 
crowned with a Facia and Torus of wrought Stone, 
which ſupports a Parapet-wall of the ſame, riſing from 
the Torus five Feet ſix Inches on the Outſide, and 
fix Feet from the Level of the Torus on the Inſide. 
To this Parapet you riſe by two Steps on the Inſide, 
the firſt one, the ſecond two Feet broad; and the 


| Breadth of the Parapet is four Feet; ſo that there re- 


mains a Walk on the Top of the Pier of 27 Feet broad, 
beſides the two Steps; guarded by the Parapet on tbe 
Outſide, but quite open towards the Harbour : On the 
Weft-fide they have carried out a Wooden Pier, which 


is but a very indifferent Piece of Work, about 600 


Feet from the Shore, and then began to continue it 
with Stone Work as on the Eaſt- ſide. But about the 
Year 1754. Diſputes aroſe among the Truſtees, and a 
Majority of them at a Meeting determined to con- 
tract the Harbour, and accordingly begun a contracted 
Plan on the Weſt- ſide, which occaſioned an Applica- 
tion to Parliament, ſetting forth the Abſurdity of the 
Contraction, which was ſtrongly urged by the Advo- 


cates for the extended Plan, and no lefs warmly contra- 


dicted by their Opponents, before a Committee of the 


- Houſe of Commons. The Reſult was, an Addreſs to 


the Crown in April 1755. to appoint proper Officers 


to ſurvey the Harbour, and report their Opinion: 


Accordingly, in September 1755. Sir Piercy Brett, a 
Gentleman, who, to his eminent Humanity, Courage, 
and Abilities in Maritime Affairs, has added the Know- 
lege of a moſt experienced and accurate Engineer, 


together with Captain De/maretz, were appointed to 


make 


S 


162 


be in the open Sea; if to the North, they enter the 


German Ocean; if to the South, the Channel, as 'tis 


called, that is, the narrow Seas between England and 


France; and all the Towns or Harbours, before we 
come this Length, whether on the Kent!/h or Eſſex | 
Shore, are called Members of the Port of Londen—ex- | 
cept thofe that belong to the Ports of Sandwich and 


On the Nerth- Foreland is a new Mark, erected by 
the 77 inity houſe Men at the public Expence ; being a | 
round Brick Tower, near 80 Feet high, Here the 
Sea gains ſo much upon the Land by continual Winds 
at South weft, that, within the Memory of ſome of the | 
Inhabitants, above 30 Acres of Land have been loſt in 


one Place. | | 
Prom this Point Weſtward, the firſt Town of Note 
is Ramſgate, a fmall Port: the Inhabitants are fond of 
having us call it Raman gate; pretending that the 
| Romans, under Julius Cæſar, made their firſt Attempt 


to land here, and that, being driven back by. a Storm, 


he foon returned, and, coming on Shore with a good 
Body of Troops, beat back the Britons, and fortified 


his Camp, juſt at the Entrance of the Creek, where 


the Town now ſtands; while others as poſitively aſ- 


ſert, that that great Commander firſt landed at Deal; as 


I ſhall preſently obſerve. | 


In the 22d Year of his late Majeſty King George ll. | 


an Act of Parliament paſſed, appointing Truſtees for 
enlarging and maintaining this Harbour, and a Duty on 
Shipping was granted for thoſe Porpoſes. 


The Work was accordingly begun, and for ſome | 


time carried on with great Vigour, and a very noble 
Stone Pier was carried out from the Shore on the Eaſt- 
fide of the propoſed Harbour, to the Diſtance of 770 
Feet. This Pier, ſo far as finiſbed, is perhaps the molt 


complete Piece of Architecture of the Kind in the 


World, and well deſerves a particular Deſcripugn- 


4 TOUR bw Kent. 
this Foreland from London, they are properly ſaid to 


2 % 2. mae pnms ww.ctc waz: 


tw + << OO a. Go 


Kent. 


900 7 


„ WW 7s aa e 


GREAT BRITAIN. 163 
The Foundation of is it laid in Caiſſons, and is 45 Feet 
broad; the Height, from the Foundation to the upper 
Part of the Torus, is 38 Feet 6 Inches; tis carried up 
perpendicular to the Top of the Caiſſon, which is a 
little above Low- water Mark at a Spring- tide, and then 
is raiſed battering on each Side with rough Stone, ſo as 


to be reduced about ten Feet in Breadth at the ſetting 


on of the Facia. This Work, towards the Sea, is 
crowned with a Facia and Torus of wrought Stone, 
which ſupports a Parapet-wall of the ſame, riſing from 
the Torus five Feet fix Inches on the Outſide, and 
ſix Feet from the Level of the 'Torus on the Inſide. 


To this Parapet you riſe by two Steps on the Inſide, 


the firſt one, the ſecond two Feet broad; and the 
Breadth of the Parapet is four Feet; ſo that there re- 
mains a Walk on the Top of the Pier of 27 Feet broad, 


beſides the two Steps; guarded by the Parapet on the 


Outſide, but quite open towards the Harbour: On the 
Weft-fide they have carried out a Wooden Pier, which 
is but a very indifferent Piece of Work, about' 600 
Feet from the Shore, and then began to continue it 
with Stone Work as on the Eaſt-fide. But about the 
Year 1754. Diſputes aroſe among the Truſtees, and a 
Majority of them at a Meeting determined to con- 
tract the Harbour, and accordingly begun a contracted 
Plan on the Weſt-ſide, which occaſioned an Applica- 


tion to Parliament, ſetting forth the Abſurdity of the 


Contraction, which was ſtrongly urged by the Advo- 
cates for the extended Plan, and no lefs warmly contra- 


dicted by their Opponents, before a Committee of the _ 
- Houſe of Commons. The Reſult was, an Addreſs to 


the Crown in April 1755, to appoint proper Officers 
to ſurvey the Harbour, and report their Opinion: 
Accordingly, in September 1755. Sir Piercy Brett, a 
Gentleman, who, to his eminent Humanity, Courage, 


and Abilities in Maritime Affairs, has added the Know- 


lege of a moſt experienced and accurate Engineer, 
ether with Captain De/maretz, were appointed to 


164. PF Kent. 


make the ſaid Survey. And they reported, that, ac. | 


cording to their Judgment, the Wood already made, 
and every Plan hitherto propoſed, ſeemed liable to 
very material Objections, as the Depth of Water at 
the Entrance of the Harbour would be no more than 


4 Feet 10 Inches. They therefore propoſed to carry 


out the Work ſo far as to place the Pier Heads in 8 
Feet Water, at 300 Feet Diſtance from each other, 
and to have a Baſon on the Eaſt-ſide of the Harbour 


for the Reception of Ships which were there built, and | 


liable to receive Damage by lying aground. 'They 
alſo reported that they thought proper that the Work 
done on the contrary Plan ſhould be taken up. They 
obſerved, that when the Harbour was completed, 
whatever Form or Dimenſions it may have, it may be 
liable to collect ſome Sallage ; and concluded with 
their Opinion, that the executing the Work in the 


Manner laid down in their Plan, would make a fate 
and commodious Harbour for Ships, not exceeding 300 8 


Tons Burden. = | 
In conſequence of this Survey, a. Bill was brought 
into Parliament in the Year 1756. for making a Har- 


bour according to the Plan annexed to the faid Re- 


port, which the Advocates for the Contraction op- 
poſed with no leſs Zeal and Heat, than they had for- 
merly done the firft Plan, and, at a very conſiderable 
Expencez purſued it thro' the Houſe of Commons to the 
the Houſe of Lords, where it was (after long Alterca- 
tions) finally rejected. Since that nothing further has 


been done, and the Work remains a Britiſh Babel, 


ſtopt by the Confuſion of Tongues. A ſtanding Mo- 
nument of the good Taſte, Inftability, and Folly of our 


Countrymen, and unluckily fixed in the moſt conſpi- 


cuous Point in the whole Univerſe. 


Kicbborougb. caſtle is a Mile diſtant from Stanar and 


Sandwichi At the Foot of it runs the River coming 
from Canterbury. This River at firſt diſcharged itielt 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 16 

into the Sea by Ebbesffete, North of the Roman City 
Rutupie, now Stanir; till the Sand pouring upon it, 
obliged the Stream to ſlide under the Cliff of Rich- 
urough-caſtle, and fo by Sandwich, Hither the Ro- 
mans reſorted for the molt delicious Oyſters. The 
Caſtle is a noble Remnant of Roman Antiquity, The 
Walls on three Sides are pretty intire, and in ſome 
Places ftill about 25 or 3o Feet high, without any 
Ditch. The Side next the Sea being upon a kind of 
Clif, the Top of the Wall 1s but level with the 
Ground. Here, in the latter Times of the Empire, 
the Legio II. Aug. was quartered, And from the 
Condition of the Walls it muſt have been deſtroy'd 
with great Violence, probably by the Saxons, In 
the Way to Sandwich, upon an Eminence, is the Re- 
mainder of an Amphitheatre made of Tur, probably 
for the Exerciſe and Diverſion of the Gariſon. Before 
Sandwich Gates are two Reman Tumuli, on one of 
which ſtands a Windmill. And South of Sandwich, 
on the Sea-ſhore, are fix large and broad Celtic Tu- 


muli, at equal Diſtances. This flat Coaſt is fenced 


againſt the Ocean by the Sand-downs. From Sand- 
wich, as far as Hythe, the Coaſt of France was viſible 
all the Way as we rode. The late Reverend Mr. 
| Lewis publiſhed, a few Years ago, a curious Hiſtory of 
the Iſle of Thanet, to which I ſhall rc':r for ſeveral 
Particulars, which deſerve the Attention uf a Traveller. 
Senawich, one of the Cinque ports (and, as ſuch, 
returning two Members to Parliament), lies in the 
Bottom of a Bay, at the Mouth of the River Srour, 
formerly a Town of great Repute and "Trade. It de- 
cayed inthe Saxons Time, and was utterly ruined by the 
Danes. Being raiſed again, it had the Misfortune to 
be reduced to Aſhes in King John's Keign ; after 
which it was rebuilt, But in the Reign of Queen 
47ary, the Mouth of its Harbour wasſo choaked up by 
a Ship of great Burden, which ſunk in it, and gave 
Mortunity to the Sands and Beach fo to fill it up, 
—_— : that 


166 A TOUR thro Kent, 


that it was incurable : the Town of conſequence fell 


* 5 
. 


to Decay, and is now a poor Place. 


Here are three Churches, three Hoſpitals, a Cuſtom- | 


houſe, a Quay, and a Free-ſchool, built out of the 
Ruins of the Carmelites Monaſtery, by Sir Roger Man. 
word, who was Lord Chief Baron, where 1s an En- 
dowment for ſending off every Year two Scholars to 
Lincoln-College, Oxford, Its Corporation goes by the 
Name of the Mayor, Jurats, and Commonalty. It 
has two weekly Markets, and a Fair the 23d of No- 
vember, which holds three Days. on 


The Duke of Alva's Perſecutions of the Proteſtants 
in the Low Countries, drove a Multitude of Malloons 7 


over hither, who brought with them the Ingenuity and 
Application for which they had been always di- 


tictinguiſhed; theſe diligent and active People ſettled a 
Manufactory of Flannel or Bays, at Sandwich ; by 
theſe the Silk Looms were ſet up at Canterbury, where | 
they ſtill ſublift ; and they alſo introduced the making 


of Thread at aiq/tone, where it yet remains, and 
merits more Notice and Encouragement than it has 
bitherto met with. | | : 

- Sandwich is noted for Carrots, which are brought 


to London during the Winter Seafon ; and from hence 


it is that moſt of the Markets are ſupplied with theſe 


Roots, which are eſteemed the ſweeteſt, as they are 


alſo the largeſt, which are produced in England, or 
perhaps in Europe. ; | 
From this Place alſo the Seedſmen in London are 
furniſhed with a great Quantity of their Seeds : the 
Land being light, ſandy, and freſh, is very good for 
producing molt Sorts of Seeds; and the Ground being 
pretty low, the Plants when they ſprout do not ſo 
often receive a Blight, as in many other Places. 
Not far from hence is Hingham, which gives Title 
of Baron to Ear} Cowper, From hence I went to Deal, 
called by Cæſar, Dola, he having landed not far from 


* 


that Place. Near it is the famous Road for Ship pili, 


1 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN, 167 
Jo well known all over the trading World by the Name 
of the Downs, and where almoſt all Ships which arrive 


from foreign Parts for London, or go from London to 


T foreign Parts, and paſs the Channel, generally ſtop; 


the Homeward- bound, to diſpatch Letters, ſend their 


Merchants and Owners the — News of their Arrival, 
and ſet their Paſſengers on Shore; and the Outward- 


bound, to take in freſh Proviſions, to receive their laſt- 


Orders, Letters, and Farewels, from Owners and 


Friends, &c. Sometimes, when the Wind preſents 


fair, Ships come in here, and paſs thro” at once, with- 
cout coming to an Anchor; for they are not obliged to 
ſtop, but for their own Convenience. 


The Downs would be a very wild and dangerous 


Road for Ships, were it not for the St Fore/and,” an 
Head of Land forming the Eaſt Point of the Kentifh 
Shore; and is called the South, as its Situation reſpects 


the North- Foreland; and which breaks the Sea off, 


which would otherwiſe come rolling up from the Weſt, 


to the Flats or Bank of Sands, called the Godivin, which 
for three Leagues together, and at about a League, or 


League and half Diſtance, run parallel with the Shore, 
and are dry at low Water; fo that theſe two, breaking 


all the Force of the Sea, on the Eaſt, South, and South- 


weſt, make the Downs accounted a very good Road. 
And yet on ſome particular Winds, and eſpecially if 
they over-blow, the Downs proves ſuch a wild Road, 
that Ships are driven from their Anchors, and often run 
on Shore, or are forced on the Godw:n Sands, or into 
Sandwich-bay, or Ramſgate-pier, in great Diſtreſs: this 
is particularly when the Wind blows hard at South- 
eaſt, or at Eaſt-by-north, or Eaft-north-eaſt, and ſome 


other Points; and terrible Havock has been made in 


W the Downs at ſuch times. DEW. : 
| But the moſt unhappy Inſtance that can be given of 
any Difaſter in the Downs, was in the time of that ter- 
rible Tempeſt, which we call by Way of Diſtinction, 
great Storm, November 27, 1703. Unhappy in 
| Par- 


Y cg» Maa — - mes — 1 — = nt 2 — 1 — ba - 1 _— —— ES 22 e — * — 
6 C ˙. ià- 1 — rs LICE . - — . 9 (EI o eee e 2 * F 
CO OO Pe OI * ICS - n . e 0 5 . N e CTF a ] · c 


168 4 TOUR Kent, 


particular, for that there chanced at that time to be a 


great Part of the Royal Navy come into the Downs, | | 


in their Way to Chatham, to be laid up. 1 
Five of the biggeſt Ships had the good Fortune to 
puſh through the Downs the Day before, finding the 


Wind blew then very hard, and were come to an An- 
chor at the Gunffeet; and had they had but one fair 


Day more, they had been all ſafe at the Nore, or in the 


River Medway at Black-/takes. 16 


There remained in the Downs about 12 Sail, when 
this terrible Tempeſt began, at which time England 
may be ſaid to have received the greateſt Loſs that ever 


happened to the Royal Navy at one time, either by 


Weather, by Enemies, or by any Accident whatſoever, 
The ſhort Account of it is as follows: 3 

The Northumberland, a Third Rate, carrying 70 
Guns, and 353 Men; the Ręffloration, a Second Rate, 


carrying 76 Guns, 386 Men; the Stitling-Caſtie, a 


Second Rate, carrying 80 Guns, and 400 Men, but 
had only 319 Men on board; and the Mary, a Third 


Rate, of 64 Guns, having 273 Men on board; thele 
were all loſt, with all their Men, except one Man out 


of the Mary, and 70 Men out of the Stirling-Caſtle, 
wo were taken up by Boats from Deal. 


All this, beſides the Loſs of Merchants Ships, which 


was exceeding great, not here only, but in almoſt ail 


the Ports in the South and Weſt of England, and alſu 
3 


The Town of Deal is very much improved of late 
Years ; to which the great Reſort of Seamen from the 
Ships in the Downs has not alittle contributed. 


The great Conveniency of landing here has alſo | 

been of infinite Benefit to the Place, fo that it is large 
and populous, divided into the upper and lower Towns, 
adorned with many fe ir Buildings, being, in effect, the 


principal Place upon the Downs; and, on that Ac- 
count, having both in War and Peace a continual Re- 


ſort of People. Henry VIII. for its Protection, $ot 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 169 
only built a Caſtle here, but alſo two others, one on the 
| North called Sandown Caſtle, and another on the 
South, ſtiled /Falmer Caſtle ; fo that, in all reſpeRs, 
Deal is the moſt flouriſhing Place upon this Coaſt ; 
enjoys a. very conſiderable Portion of Trade, and has, 
for the preſent, eclipſed Sandwich, the Port to which 
it is a Member. | | | 
I took a View of Sandown Caſtle, Deal and N almer R 
Caſtles. 85 | | | 
Sandown Caſtle is compoſed of four Lunets of very 
thick Arched-work of Stone, with many Port- holes 
for great Guns. In the Middle is a great round | 
Tower, with a Ciſtern at Top; and underneath, aan 
arched Cavern Bomb- proof. A Foſs encompaſſes the } 
Whole, to which is a Paſſige over a Draw. bridge. 
Between Walmer Caſtle and Deal, was probably the 
Spot where Cæſar landed in his firſt Expedition, be- 
cauſe it is the firſt Place where the Shore can be aſcend- 
ed North of Dover; and exactly anſwers his aſſigned 
Diſtance of eight Miles. In his ſecond Expedition, 
with many more Ships, and upon a more perlect 
Knowlege of the Country, he might land at Deal. 
Dover ſtands in a moſt romantic Situation : it is a 5 
great Valley, and the only one about this Coaſt, where | 
Water is admitted inwards of the Cliff, which tis here 
very high. The Sea formerly came a good way higher 
up, and made a large Port. Anchors have been found 
above the Town. The Roman City Dubris was to 
the South of the River. The Roman //atling-flireet . 
enters it at Bigin- gate, coming very ſtrait from Canter - 
bury over Barham-down, where it is very perfect. Some | 
of the Walls are left. The Churches are of a very an- 
tique Make: that of St. Martin was Collegiate, found- 
ed by Wightred King of Kent, and is a venerable Ruin. 
It was built in Form of a Croſs, Of the Priory (now | 
a Farm-houſe), are large Remains. The Hoſpital over- 
againſt it is made a Store-houſe. Here the Knights 
- Hoſpitallers or Templars lodged, as they came into or 


Vox. * went 


* 


170 4 TOUR 8 


went out of the Kingdom. The Piers which form the 


Haven, or large Baſon, are coſtly and great Works, | 


Above is a Fort with four Baſtions of modern Date. 
The broad Beach, which lies at the Mouth of this-great 
Valley, and was the Harbour in Cæſar's Time, is very 


delightful. One long Street here is named Snaregate, | 
from the moſt tremendous Rocks of Chalk, which | 


project directly over the Houſes. 


Dover Caſtle is very large, and ſituated upon a Rock, 
rugged and ſteep on every Side; but towards the Seca it | 
riſes to an extraordinary Height. "Though of late | 
Years neglected, it was once ſo well fortified, 'and of 
ſuch Importance, as to be accounted the Key of Eng- | 
land. And William I. when he had an Eye upon the | 


Kingdom, took an Oath of Harold, that he ſhould de. 


liver into his Hands this Caſtle with the Well, which 
is 60 Fathoms deep, and ſaid to be the Work of Fulizs 
Cz/ar. In ſhort, it was the ſtrongeſt old Fortification 


in the World; and takes up 30 Acres of Ground. 


When one takes a View of the Sea, and the Objects 
beneath one, from the craggy and lofty Rock on which 


the Caſtle ſtands, and from the Cliffs adjacent, it is 
impoſſible for ſuch as have read our admirable Shake- 


peare's Deſcription, in his King Lear, of the Profpe& | 


yielded thence, to avoid wiſhing to recolleQ it; a De- 
ſcription ſo full of Nature and Terror, that the bare 
Reading of it requires as ſteady an Head to avoid the 
Dizzineſs mentioned in it, as is neceſſary from a Sur- 
vey on the Spot. I will tranſcribe them, as what will 


afford the beſt Idea that Words can give, to one who 


has not been at Dover, of the noble, but dreadful View 
I have mentioned. | | 


Come on, Sir - here's the Place—Stand till — Hino fear ful 
And dizzy tis, to caſt one's Eyes fo low ! 
The Crows and Choughs, that wing the mid-way Air, 
Shew ſcarce ſo groſs as Beetles, Half-woy down 
Hangs one that gathers Sampire ;-—Dreadful Trade! 
5 | Zo Methinks 


F 1 0 — 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 171 
Methinꝶs he ſcems no bigger than his Head. 
De Fiſhermen, that welt upon the Beach, 


Appear like Mice ; and yon tall anchoring Bark, 


 Diminiſt a to her Cock ; her Cock, a Bucy, 


Almoſt too Pars for Sight. The murmuring Surge, 


That on th' unnumber'd idle Pebbles chaſes, 


Cannot be heard fo high. Til look no more, 
Leſt my Brain turn, and the deficient Sight 
Topple dotrun headlang, | | 


The Braſs Gun, called Pucen Elizabeth's Pocket 
Piſtol, is a great Curioſity, 22 Feet long, and is excel- 


lently well wrought, requires 1 8 Pounds of Powder, and 
carries a Ball ſeven Miles. Here are two very old 
Keys, and a braſs Horn, which ſeem to be the Enſigns 
vf Authority belonging to the Conſtable of the Caſtle, 
or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. One Part of 
the Fortifications conſiſts of a circular Work, in which 
ſtands an old Church, ſaid to have been built by La- 
cius the firſt Chriſtian King of Britain, out of ſome of 


the Roman Ruins; for there are huge Antiquities of 


Roman Brick laid into the Work; and the Remainder 
is of Stone, originally cut by the Romans. It is in Form 


of a Croſs, and has a ſquare Tower in the Middle. 


'The Stone Windows are of much later Date than the 


Building: but the greateſt Curioſity is the Pharos, or 
Rami W 
the Church. This Building was made uſe of as a 
Steeple, and had a pleaſant Ring of Bells, which S 


atch-tower, ſtanding at the Weſt-end of 


George Rooke procured to be carried away to Portſmouth. 
Since which time, the Lead which covered it, has been 
taken away by Order of the Officers of Ordnance ; fo 
that this rare Piece of Architecture is left expoſed to 
the Sea and Weather, Here was found a Coin of 
Diocleſian. The Erpinghams Arms are patched up 
againit ons Side of the Pharos; ſo that it ſeems to have 


been repaired in the Days of King Henry V. when the 


Lord Erpingbam was Warden of Dover Caſtle. 
FER ED — — Upon 


* 


172 A TOUR hro Kent. 
Upon another Rock, over againſt that on which the; 
Caſtle is ſituated, and almoſt as high, are the Remains 
of an old Watch-tower, now vulgarly called Breden- 
lane, otherwiſe Devil's drop, from the Strength of the 
Mortar. Here the new Conſtable of the Caſtle is 
ſworn. Under this Place King Henry VIII. built the 
Mole or Pile called the Pier, that Ships may ride there- 
in with great Safety. But though it was done with 
vaſt Labour and Expence, by large Beams faſtened in 
the Sea, bound together with Iron, and great Piles of 
Wood and Stone heap'd upon all; yet the Fury of the 
Sea was ſoon too hard for the Work, and the Timbers 
beginning to disjoint, Queen Elizabeth expended great 
Sums upon it. And ſeveral Acts have paſſed to repair 
And reſtore the ſame; ſome of which alſo include the 
Reſtoration and Preſervation of the Harbour of Nye, 
particularly, one paſſed in the 11th and 12th Years of 
the Reign of King William III. to be in Force till 
Hay 1, 1709. another made in the 2d Year of Queen 
Anne; another made in the 4th Year of King George I. 
to be in Force till May 1, 1727. another made in the 
9th Year of King George I. intitled, An Act for com- 
pleting the Repairs of the Harbour of Dover, and for re- 
floring the Harbour of Rye to its antient Goodneſs ; 
which was to be in Force till May 1. 1744. From 
thence, by an Act paſſed in the 11th of his late Ma- 
jeſty King George II. 21 Years were further granted, 
which Term will expire May 1, 1765. O. S. all which 
baving been inſufficient to anſwer the intended Pur- 
poſe, another Act was made in the 29th Year of his 
ſaid Majeſty, intitled, An Ae for enlarging the Terms 
and Powers, granted and continued by feveral its 4 
Parliament, for repairing the Harbour of Dover, in the 
County of Kent, for 21 Years, after the other Terms 
were expire. . 
Dover, the Portus Dubris of the Romans, is one of 
the Cinque Ports, and returns two Members to Parlia- 
ment : It was formerly bound to ſend 21 Ships 5 the 
: | N : Vas. 


Kent. GxrEAT BRITAIN. 173 
Wars. It affords a See to the Suffragan of the Arch- 
biſhop of Canterbury, as often as any Tuch i is appointed. 

Here moſt of the Bulineſs of theſe Ports in general is 
done, and the Courts are kept. The other Cinque 
Ports are Haſtings, Hythe, Romney, and Sandwich. 
Haſtings has two Appendages, namely, //7nchelſea and 
Rye, which, as well as Ha/tings, are in Su//ex, and the 
others in Kent; ; they have all great Privileges ; their 
Burgeſſes are called Barons; who, on the Coronation 
of our Sovereigns, ſupport the Canopy over their 
Heads, have a Table at the King's Right Hand, the 
Canopy for their Fee, and enjoy other Privileges. The 
Lord Warden of theſe five Ports is generally one of 
the firit Noblemen in the Kingdom. : 

'The Packets for France go off here, in time of 
Peace, as alſo thoſe for Oftead, with the Mails for 
Flanders; and all thoſe Ships which carry Freights 
from New York to Holland, and from Virginia to Hol- 
land, come generally hither, and unlade their Goods, 
enter them with the Cuſtom- houſe Officers, pay the 
Duties, then enter them again by Certificate, re-load 
them, and draw back the Buty by Debenture, and ſo 
they go away for Holland. 

As we paſs from Dover to the ſmaller Cinque-Ports 
of Hythe, Romney, and Rye, we fee Folk/tone, a little 
Village now, which the Sea has made great Inroads 
upon ; but which formerly made a greater Figure. A 
copious Spring went through the Town. Two Pieces 


of old Wall, ſeemingly Reman, hang frightfully wer 


the Cliff. Here are ſome old Guns, one of Iron of a 
very odd Caft, doubtleſs as old as the Time of King 

Henry VIII. Many Roman Coins have alfo been 
found. - And here a Nunnery was built by Eanſwide, 
Daughter of Eadbald, King of Kent. This Place is 
now principally of Note 17 a Multitude of Fiſhing- 
boats belonging to it, which are one Part of the Year _ 
employed in catching Mackrel for the City of London. 


The Fall/lone Men catch them, and the London and 
> ES. Barłing 


— 
15 * 


WM. A TOUR thro Kent. 
Barking Mackrel-Smacks, of which I have ſpoken at 
large in E//ex, come down and buy them, and whiſk 
away to Market under ſuch a Croud of Sails, that one 
would wonder they could bear them. About Michael- 
mas, theſe Folkſtone Barks, among others from Shire- 
ham, Brigbthelmſtone, and Rye, go away to Yarmouth 
and Zeofoff, on the Coaſt of Norfolz and Suffolk, and 
catch Herrings for the Merchants there. It hath been 
_ , obſerved of ſome Hills in the Neighbourhood of Folk- 
lone, as the Right Rev. Continuator of Camden takes 
notice, that they have viſibly ſunk, and grown lower, 
within the Memory of Man. ** 
Sandgate Caſtle, ſituated in the Bottom of two Hills, 
on the Sea-ſhore, hath about 16 Guns to defend the 
Fiſhing-craft from the Inſults of Privateers, in Time of 
War : it hath ſeveral good Houſes about it, and was 
built by King Henry VIII. . 
Alfter we have paſſed this Caſtle, we enter upon the 
Beach. Here are many Springs, which, deſcending 
from the higher Ground, fink immediately into this 
Beach, rendering it alittle boggy. | 5 
 F#iythe, one of the Cinque Ports, and which, as ſuch, 
returns two Members to Parliament, ſtands on the 
Edge of the leſs Ridge; but the Marſh has intercepted 
it from the Sea. 8: F 
Hythe in Saxon ſignifies a Port, or Station; but at 
preſeat it hardly anfwers the Name; for the Sands have 
fo choaked it up, that the Sea is ſhut out from it to a 
great Diſtance. This Town, as alſo' Veſt Hythe, 
from which the Sea retired above 200 Years ago, owe 
their Original to Lemanis, or Limne, a Roman Port, of 
which more anon, now a little Village adjoining, 
which was formerly a very famous Port, before it was 
ſhut up with Sands thrown in by the Sea; which gave 
Riſe to the two Hytbes before-mentioned, which, in 
their Turns, have met with the ſame Fate. A particu- 
lar Providence happened at Hythe, April 24. 1739. 
About 11 O'Clock the Steeple of their 9 N 
„ | : which. 


TD 


did; this of At 
| notwithſtanding ſome chargeable Attempts to reſtore . 


Kent GREAT BRITAIN. 175 
which were ſix Bells, ſell down. About 10 Petfons 


were preſent when it fell, waiting in the Chureh Porch 
for the Keys to go up into the Steeple for a View; but 


ſome Delay being made in bringing them, they happi- 
ly received no other Damage than being greatly fright- 


ened. In a Vault under the Church we ſaw a vaſt 


Heap of human Bones, ſome of an extraordinary Size, 


ſaid to be gathered up after a bloody Battle fought be- 
tween the Britons and Danes. 

Hythe had antiently four Pariſhes, though now there 
is only a Chapel dependent upon the Pariſh Church of 


 Saltwoand,. Hence it appears, that the Welfare of all 


theſe Places, \pringing from their Ports, ſhifted as thoſe 
is now in a manner utterly loſt, 


Its + 

About a Mile diſtant from it is Saltwood Caſtle, 2 
ſtrong Seat of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury. The 
duter Wall has Towers and Battlements, and a deep 
Ditch. Within, and on one Side, ſtands the main 
Body of the Palace. There are two great and high 
Towers at the Gate of this, over which are the Arms 


? of Ar-hbiſhop Courtney, the Founder. This inner 
Work has a ſtronger and higher Wall, with a broad 


embattled Parapet at top. Within is a Court, but the 
Chapel 185 demoliſhed. The Floor of the ruinous 
Chapel i 18 tr rod 


is a large ſquare Well, ſeemingly Raman. They ſay - 


that Anchors have been dug up hereabouts, which 
makes it likelv, that the Romans had here an Iron 


Forge; and ſome will have it, that the Sea came up 


formerly to it, and ground this Opinion on theſe An- 


chors found here. 
A little Way farther (at the End of the Srane Areet, 


the Roman Road from Canterbury) is. the Port of Le- 
*manis or Limne, mentioned above. At Limne Church, 


from the Brow of the Hill, may be diſcerned the ruin- 
2 4 8 ous 


ly vaulted. In the Middle of the Court ü 


= threw down a whole populous Village 


176 AIO Ken. 
ous Roman Walls, ſituate almoſt at the Bottom of the 
Marſhes. pleaſant Brook, which riſes from the 
Rock, Weſt, of 4 Church, runs ſor ſome Space on the 
Eaſt Side of the Wall; then paſſes through it, and ſo 
along its lowermoſt Edge, by the Farm-houſe at Bot- 
tom: here Coins have been found. Once the Sea- 
bank broke, and admitted the Ocean into all the ad- 
jacent Marſhes. The Port is now called Shipway, 
where the Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports was for- 
merly ſworn, the Courts kept, and all the Pleas relating 
| thereto, till Dover ſuperſeded it. 
Romney is a large fine Village, and likewiſe a Cinque- 5 
Port, and, as ſuch, returns two Members to Parlia- 
ment: It is the chief Town-of the Marſh-grounds 
which were antiently Part of the Sea, called Komney- 
marſh ; and has Old Romney and Lech for its Members, 
It is ſeated on an high Hill of Gravel and Sand, and on 
the Weſt Side of it had a pretty large Harbour, guarded | 
' againſt moſt Winds, before the Sea retired from jt. In 
the Year 1287. when the Town, was at its Height, it 
was divided into 12 Wards, had five Pariſh Churches, 
a Priory, and an Hoſpital for the Sick. But it has 
been dwindling till it came to its preſent low Condi- 
tion, ever ſince the Reign of Edward I. when an Inun- 


dation-of the Sea deſtroyed, Men, Cattle and Houſes, 
Prom hill, 


and removed the Rother, which uled to empty itſelf 


into the Sea at Romney, out of its Channel, ſtopping 
up its Mouth, and opening it a nearer Paſſage into the 
Sea by Rye; leaving here only a little Bay for F n 


boats. 


From Romney mar (b the Shore extends itſelf a great 2 


Way into the Sea, and makes that Point of Land call- 
ed Dengyneſs. Juſt by the River Rother ſtands the 
little Town of Appledore, which, by Diſuſe, has loſt its 
Market, and is of no Net now. The Sea formerly 
came up to it. | 


Tenterden, | 


Kent. GREAT BRIT AIV 177 
Tienterden, a Mayor Market-town, lies a little to the 
N. W. of Appledore, near the Heald. Here is a Gram- 
mar Free-ſchool, founded by Mr; Hayman, the Anceſtor 


olf Sir Peter. It has a very good and high Steeple, 


which, they ſay, was the Cauſe of the Godioin- Sands, 
an Eſtate that belonged to Earl Godwin, and was 
guarded from the Sea by a Wall; but they were ſo in- 
tent on building the Steeple, that the Wall was neg- 
leted, and the Land overflowed, which they could 
never afterwards recover. * | 
Afford; allo a Mayor-town, ftands on the great 
Road, upon the River Szour. It is a pretty well-built 
Market-town. The Church is large, and was for- 
merly Collegiate: they hold Pleas for any thing not 
exceeding 20 Marks. | 

Near this Town is an antient Seat of the Thanet 
Family, called Hothfield, which is large, but ſituated in 
a low marſhy Soil, which renders it unhealthy, eſpe- 
cially in the Mealds of Rent. . 

Newenden deſerves to be mentioned for what it once 
was, having formerly been a fine City, which Camden 


calls Anderida. It was deſtroyed by the Saxons, but 


rebuilt in the Reign of Edward I. and called Netwen- 
den, as much as to ſay, according to Camden's Etymo- 


logy, a nec gity in a little Valley. It had then an 
Harbour muCMrequented ; but it is now a moſt miſer- 


able Village, with a few poor Houſes in it, the beſt an 
Alehouſe; and the Church is ill- built, and out of Re- 
pair. It has a very indifferent Bridge over the Rother, 
avid River, which divides at this Place Kent from 
Suſſex, and about nine Miles off empties itſelf into the 
Harbour of Rye. Roman Coins have been dug up 
here. : + Fe; 7 
North- weſt of Newenden is Cranbrook, a large Mar- 
ket-town, noted for having been one of the firſt Places 
where the Cloth- manufacture was ſet up in England, 
which is now very much in its Wane here. But here 
I will conclude my third Letter; and am, Sir, 5 
Tours, &c. 5 


E , EB 


„ 5 A TOUR tro © Suſſex. 


CET n w. 


Containing a Deſcription of the County of Susszxx, 
other Parts of KENT, and Part of Hans, 
SURREY, Cc. 


NOW enter the County of Sz/ex, and ſhall begin 

my Letter with an Account of Ry. 

It is ſituated in the moſt Eaſtern Part of Sy//ex, upon 
an Hill, which is — with Rocks, that are in- 
acceſſible on the Sea-fide. There is nothing now, but 
ſome Remains of its old Walls, to be ſcen, and the 
Ditches are almoſt filled up. Its Trade is in Hops, 
Wool, Timber, Kettles, Cannon, Chimney- backs, 
&c. which are caſt at the Iron- works at Ba#ely, about 
| four Miles from Rye, on the North-weſt, and Breed, 
about five Miles diſtant South-weſt. It is a very great 
Misfortune, that its Harbour has been ſo much da- 
maged by the Sea, and neglected; for it is almoſt filled 
up in ſeverat Places, where it was formerly the deepeſt 
and moſt convenient. Some conſiderable Families, 


who have Lands near, have taken Advanc 
extend them farther upon thoſe Sands, which the Sea 
in Storms has thrown up againſt them; and by diggin 
Ditches, and making Drains, there are now Fields — | 
Meadows, where antiently was nothing but Water. 
By this Means, Ships only of a middle Size can come 
within any convenient Diſtance of the Town, whereas 
formerly the largeſt Veſſels, and even whole Fleets to- 
gether, could anchor juſt by the Rocks, on which the 
Town ſtands: and as this Port lies over-againft 
Dieppe in France, and there is no other Port between 
| Portſmouth and Dover, which can receive Ships of 
Burden, not only the Danger of the Sea, but, * 
| 88 1 


Suſſex, GREAT BRITAIN. 179 
of War, of the Enemy, were eſcaped by the Conve- 
niency of this Harbour. But it being by the Means T 
have mentioned, and by the Inning of the Channel and 
waſte Lands (which prevented the Flux and Reflux of 
the Tide), in Danger of being utterly loſt, an Act of 
Parliament paſſed in 1721. which enacts, That no new 
Walls, Banks, Dams, or Stops, ſhalk thereafter be 
erected om either Side of the Water, that might ſtop or 

alter the Flux or Reflux of the Sea, between the Mouth 
of the Harbour, bounded by the Camber and Cafitr- 
Points, and New Shutt near Craven Sluice, ö 

In 1723. another Act paſſed for completing the Re- 
57 of the Harbour of Dovrr, and for reſtoring the 

arbour of Rye to its antient Goodneſs, which ſtill 
continued to be choaked up, and almoſt ruined, by the 
Shifting of the Beach without, and ſetiling of the Sullage 

within, and ſtopping the Flux of the Tide, which this 
Act propoſed ſhould have its free Courſe through the 
Jcotch flat and Craven Sluices, or into ſuch other Cut 
7 Channel as ſhould be found moſt proper and expe- 
lent. „ ; „ 

And in 1724. another Act paſſed for making the laſt 
Act more eftectual, ſo far as a to the Harbour of 
Rye; in which a Power was given to change the De- 
ſign of making a Paſſage by the above- named Sluices, 
and to open a new Cut from the Vincbelſea Channel, 
right out to the Sea. And they actually began, in 
purſuance of this Act, to cut a broad and deep Canal, 
which was to be carried to the Sea on the Side of H- 
chelſza, for the Uſe of the two Boroughs. But ſtill 
theſe Proviſions being found inſufficient, another Act 
paſſed in 1737-8. for continuing the Term and Powers 
granted by the former Acts, for repairing the Harbour 
of Dover, and for reſtoring that of Rye to its antient 
Goodneſs, to which I muſt refer the Reader, and to 
what J have ſaid in my laſt, treating of Dover, p. 172. 

Rye furniſhed the Fleet of Edward III. with nine 
Ships, and 156 Men. * might ſtill, tho” perhaps 


AOR Suſſex. 
it might prove expenſive, be a large and commodious 
Haven made here, and there is no Place would be 
more fit for a Royal Yard, in which Ships might be 
built and equipped with great Conveniency. Timber 
and Iron would be at hand; and if Hemp and Flax 
were raiſed in the adjacent Country, Ropes and S.il- 
cloth might be produced with the like Eafe. This 
would not only be beneficial to the Counties of Suſſex 
and Kent, but alſo to the Nation in general, as great 
Savings might ariſe from hence, in the Article of Ship- 
building; a ſafe and good Port be obtained, where it 
is much wanted, and all thoſe Advantages be retrieved, 


which our Anceſtors poſſeſſed, when this Port and that 
of Minchelſea were in a flouriſhing Condition, and 


which were of great Importance to them, and, no 


Doubt, would be ſo to us, whenever this Nation is at 


War with France. 
The Houſes of Rye are well- enough built, and of 
Brick, tho' generally = -faſhion'd; but there are ſome 
very neat ones of a modern Taſte. There is a ſmall 
Settlement of French Refugees in this Town, moſtly 
Fiſhermen ;. who have a Miniſter of their own, Arch- 
biſhop ale was intruſted by the King with Money 
for the Relief of Refugees, and it is probable that the 


Miniſter here might be paid out of this Fund, but 


ſcarcely by the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, as ſuch. 
The Church is handſome and large; but there are ſo 
many Diſſenters in the Town, and ſo few of the 
Eftabliſh'd Church, that they have wall'd off, and con- 
- verted the Weſtern Part of it into a Magazine for 


Planks. But there are two well-built Rte Dockers - 


one for the Preſbyterians, the other for the Quakers 
Another Church, which belonged to a Monaſtery now 


: demoliſhed, is alfs turned into a kind of Storehouſe 


for Planks, Hops, and other Merchandize. At the 
_ North-eaſt of Rye are the Remains of an old Fort, 


which commands the Town and Harbour, and. ſerves 
T _ the Town-gaol, | 


BT | Sls, 


The 


— —— cP—k 
' 


J 
1 
| 
| 
| 


Edward l. pry on an Hil 


" dullex, (© GREAT MEITAIN. | x 


The Corporation, which is only by Preſcription, 


conſiſts of a Mayor, 12 Jurats, and the Freemen. 
Here is a free Grammar-ſchool, which was erected in 


1044. by Mr. Peacock, one of the Jurats, who alſo en- 
dowed it with 32 J. a Year, for teaching all the Chil- 
dren. of the Town. 

His Majeſty King George I. on his Return from 


Hanover, January 3. 1725-6. was obliged to put in 


here, after a very dangerous and tempeſtuous Paſſage, 
the Fleet, as was ſaid, being unable to make Dover, 
and it was then experienced: what a Benefit it would 


have been to have had this only conſiderable Haven, 
as it formerly was, between Portſmouth and Dover, 


reſtored to its priſtine flouriſhing State ; for his Majeſty 
was under great Difficultiesto land there, and the larger 
Ships were unable to follow him. ? 
His late Majeſty King George II. was ſtill in reater 
Danger, i in making for thisPort, than his Royal Father, 


on his Return likewiſe from his German Dominions, 


from a violent Storm, which En December 20. 


1730, = 
This Town was, as I have faid, one of the Appen- 


dages, as WVinchelſea was the other, to Haſtings, as a 


Cinque-Port, and enjoyed the fame Privileges z and 
each of the three returns two Members of Parliament. 

Old MWincbelſea ſtood upon the Sea-ſhore, about two 
or three Miles from the Place where the New ſtands. 
It had formerly a large and ſpacious Harbour, was a 


Place of great Trade, ind had no leſs than 18 Churches 


in it. But it was intirely deſtroyed by the Sea, and 


that ſmall Part which is not bury'd in the Sands, is 


now Marſh and Meadow-land. Lo the S. W. of Rye 


and the N. E. of New I incbelſea, is ſtill to be ſeen, in 


the Midit of a large Plain, an old Tower, which pro- 


bably ſtood by the Sea. 


New W inchelſea is faid ita have been built by King 
Old, 


about two Miles from the 


1 4 TOUR et Suſſex. 


Old, and the like Diſtance from Rye, and partly in a lit. 
tle Valley, where it had an Harbour; but Anno 1250. 
the latter Part of this met with the ſame Fate as the 
former. It never was comparable to the old Town, 
having but three Pariſh- Churches when it moſt flouriſh- 
ed; and now there only remains the Chancel of one, 
which-is more than large enough for the Inhabitants. 
But yet the Town was every-where accommodated with 
fine ſtone arch'd Vaults, for ſtowing of Merchandize, 
and was laid out with admirable Regularity, the Streets 
being divided into 32 Quarters. Some of the Stone- 
work of th: three Gates are ſtill to be ſeen. The Sea 
is now above a Mile diftant from it, the Harbour being 
choaked up with Sands; and Grafs grows, not only | 
where the Harbour was, but even in the Streets ; and 
indeed there are only a few Houſes remaining in the 
upper Part of the Town. Among the Ruins of the 
Walls to the S. E. are the Remains of a Caſtle, as ſome 
fay ; or of a Monaſtery, as others will have it 
_ FFinchelſea furniſhed the Fleet of Edward III. with 21 
-Ships, and 596 Seamen. Henry VIII. for the Protec- 
tion of it, built Camber Caſtle, at the Expence of 2 30001. 
which, even in the Purſe of the Crown, was no incon- 
 fiderable Sum in thoſe Days. 
Hastings is the chief of the five Cinque - Ports, and, 
with its two Members above, was obliged to furniſh 
the King with 20 Ships for any Naval Expedition, in 
Recompence for the ample Immunities it enjoyed, as 
one of the five Ports. It is about eight Mies from 
. It conſiſts of two great Streets, with a 
Pariſh-Church in each, and ſeveral good Houſes; but 
its Harbour, formerly fo famous, is now a poor Road 
for ſmall Veſſels, having been ruined by the Storms, 
Which from time to time have been ſo fatal to its neigh- 
bouring Ports of Rye and Winchelſaa. We faw here 
the Ruins of an antient Caſtle ; and, about three Miles 


off, Bull-hide Haven, where William the N 


Suſſex GREAT BRITAIN, 183 
| {aid to have landed in his Invaſion of England; tho” 
- ſome ſay it was at Haſtings, and others at Pevenſey, 
an Harbour more Weſtward, which has likewiſe been 
deſtroyed by the Sea. But, be that as it will, it was at 
Haſtings that he muſtered his Army, after he had burnt 
his Ships, being determined to conquer or periſh in the 
Attempt ; or rather, as another Author has obſerved, 
that he might not be obliged to divide his Army, 
which 3 have been the Caſe, if he had preſerved 
his Ships; and probably, while he made an Advance 
into the Country, at the Head of Part of his Army, 
Harold might have ſtepped in between, and cut off 
thoſe who were leſt to guard the Ships, and then with 
more Eaſe have attacked, and perhaps beat, that Part 


commanded by the Norman himſelf. 


The deciſive Battle which he fought Anno 1066. 
with King Harold, was upon a Plain called Heath. field, 
about ſeven Miles from Heſtings, for an Account of 
which I ſhall refer to the Hiſtorians. In the Place 
where Hareold's Body was found, the Norman inſtituted 
an Abbey of Benedictine Monks, dedicating it to St. 
Martin; and from the Fight aforeſaid, it is called 
Batile Abbey; and ſoon drew to it, by a Fair held 
every Sunday and Holiday, ſuch a Reſort, that it be- 
came an handſome Town. It ſtill retains the Name 
of Battle, and ſome Remains of the Abbey are yet to 
be ſeen, and make Part of the Houſe of the Lord Viſ- 
count Zfontacute, a Roman-catholic Peer; of which 
more in another Place. - ER 5 

A little beyond Ho//ings to Bourn, we rode upon the 
Sands in a ſtrait Line for 18 Miles, all upon the Coaft 
of Suſſex, paſſing by Pemſey or Pevenſey Haven afore - 
mentioned, and the Mouth of the River, which comes 
from Battle, without ſo much as knowing that there 
was a River, the Tide being out, and all the Water 
ſinking away in the Sands. This Town of Battle is 
remarkable for little now, but making Gunpowder, 
and the beſt perhaps in Europe. Near Battle 957 

1 : ä ew 


184 * 4 TOUR tro Kent. 
ſhew us an Hill with a Beacon upon it, now called 
Beacon hill, but was formerly called Standard hill; 
where the "Wer man ſet up his great Standard of De- 
Hance, the Day before the decilive Battle with Harold 
and the Engliſßſ. | 
From the Beginning of Romney-marſh, that is to ſay, 
at Sandgate or Sandfoot Caitle, near Hjthe, to this 
Place, the Country is a rich fertile Soil, full of feeding 


Grounds; and an incredible Number of large Sheep 


are fed every Year upon them, and ſent up to London 
Market, "Theſe Romney- marſh Sheep are counted ra- 
ther larger than the Leiceſterſpire and Lincolnſhire 
Sheep, of which ſo much is ſaid elſewhere 

Beſides the vaſt Flocks of Sheep, as above, abun- 
dance of large Bullocks are fed in this Part of the 
Country; and eſpecially thoſe they. call Stall'd or 
Houſe «ed Oxen, from their being g kept within the Far- 


mers Sheds or Yards all the latter deaſon, where they 
are fed for, the Winter- market, and generally deemed 


the largeſt Beef i in England, | 
In — as in other Parts of England, are 


found great Timber trees, lying at Length under 
Ground, as black as Ebony, and " for Uſe, when 
dried in the Sun. 

From hence it was that, turning North, 400 tra- 
verſing the deep, dirty, but rich Part of theſe two 
Counties, my Curioſity led me to ſee the great Foun- 

deries, or Iron-works, which are in this County, and 
where they are carried on at ſuch a prodigious Expence 
of Wood, that even in a Country almoſt all over-run 
with Timber, they begin to complain of the great 
Conſumption of it by thoſe Furnaces, and the Appre- 
henſion of leaving the next Age to want Timber for 


building their Navies. 


After J had been fatigued in paſſing chi deep and ; 
heavy Part of the Country, thought it would not be 
2a. to my * I refreſhed * with a * 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 185. 
of Tunbridge-wells, which were not then above 12 


Miles out of my Way. 
When I came to the Hells, which were about four 


Miles nearer to me than the Town, ſuppoſing me then 


at Battle, to the Southward of them, I found a great 


deal of good Company there ; and particularly made 
an Obſervation, that thoſe People who have nothing to 
do any-where elſe, are the buſieſt People at Tunbriage. 
After the Appearance is over at the Wells (Where 
the Ladies are all in Deſbabille), and at the Chapel, the 
Company go home; and, as if it was another Species 
of People, or a Collection ſrom another Place, you are 
ſurpriſed to ſee the Walks covered with Ladies com- 
pletely dreſſed, and gay to Proſuſion; where rich 
_ Cloaths, Jewels, and Beauty, dazle the Eyes from one 

End of the Range to the other. 

The Air here is excellent, and the Proviſions of all 
Sorts very reaſonable: particularly they are ſupplied _ 
with excellent Fiſh, of almoſt all Sorts, from Rye, and 
other Towns on the Sea-coaſt; and I ſaw a Turbut of 
near 20 Pounds Weight fold there for three Shillings. 
In the Mackrel Seaſon, they have them here from Haſt: 
ixgs, within three Hours of their being taken out of the 
Sea; and the Difference which that makes in their 
Goodneſs, I need not mention. 

They have likewiſe here N of Wild- fo wl of 
the beſt Sorts; ſuch as Pheaſants, Partridges, Wood- 
cocks, Snipes, Quails, &c. particularly they have from 
the South. downs the Bird called a heat ear, or which 
I think I may call the Engli/h Ortelan, the moſt deli- 
cious Taſte for one Mouthful (for it is hardly more) 
that can be imagined : but theſe are very dear at Tun- 
bridge; they are much cheaper at Seaford, Lewes, and 
thay Side of the Country. 
Tunbridge is ſituated upon the little River Tunn DT. 
runs into the AZedway hard by. On the Southern 
Bank of the River are to be ſeen the Ruins of an old 


Callle, built by a natural Son of Richard J. Du 
a . 8 0 | 


186 4 TOUR tr”? Kent. 
of Normandy, who, as Mr. Camden tells us, exchanged 
his Lordſhip of Bryany in that Duchy for Tunbridge, 
The Church is a modern Building; the Houſes in the 
Town are moſtly ill built, and the Streets ſorrily 

aved. | N 

N The Wells are about four Miles from the Town, and 
the Rocks a few Miles from them, and worth a Tra- 
veller's Curioſity, as they are ſeveral prodigious Heaps 
of firm Stone Rocks, though ſome Miles diſtant from 
the Jn. #$ -- | e 
The Buildings at the Wells have much the Advan- 
tage of thoſe in Tunbridge, and may be ſaid to confti- 
ſtute a large and populous Town themſelves. There is 
a Church, or rather a Chapel of Eafe, which is very 
neat. This new Town, as I may call it, ſtands in a 
Bottom between two Hills, one of which is called 
Mount Sion, and the other Mount Ephraim, which are 
generally covered with good Houſes, fine Gardens, 
and Fruit-trees. The Wells might be more properly 

called Spelbus /? Mell; for the Water riſes in a Pariſh 
of that Name. The Well which contains them is 
paved, and ſurrounded with a low Wall, with Stairs to 
go down. Near the Well is a long Walk, paved, 
and covered over, wherein to walk in bad Weather, 
and while they are taking the Waters, and where like- | 
wiſe the Band of Muſick have Place. There are alſo 
Rooms to drink Chocolate, or Coffee, and to play at 
Cards, &c. likewiſe an Hall to dance in. Not far off 
ws Well is a Market well ſtored with Proviſions of all 
: orts. | TE „ 

A very eminent Phyſician is of Opinion, that the 
Waters of Bath, Tunbridge, Cheltenham (or Scarborough, 
which partake of the ſame Qualities), and Hriſtel, 
make the general Kinds of moſt of the various Mineral 
Waters on the Globe; and that he therefore who 
underſtands theſe, cannot be much at a Loſs to deter- 
mine the Virtues and Efficacy of any new Kind. And 
as this learned Gentlemen has favoured me with his 

EE | = Opinion 


Kent. GREAT BRITAIN. 187 
Opinion of theſe ſeveral Waters, I ſhall communicate 
the ſame in their reſpective Places. . | 
And, firſt, this is what he ſays of the Nature, Effi- 
cacy, and Qualities, of theſe of Tunbridge. Des 
« Tunbridge Waters (ſays he) are nothing. but an 
© Impregnation of Rain, or compreſſed Cloud-waters, 
in ſome of the Eminences of the neighbouring Coun- 
< try. And indeed all Hills, and conſpicuous Eleva- 
© tions, are mere hollow Neſts of ſome Minerals. Iron 
and Sulphur are the moſt common and univerſal Mi- 
© nerals; and almoſt all Kinds of Stone fit for making 
«© Fences or Edifices have in their Compoſition one or 
both of them. All the Y arieties of hard, black, dark, 
or greyiſh Stones, abound with ferrugineous Particles; 
and Iron is ſo neceſſary, eſpecially in Countries be- 
« tween the Tropics and the Poles, for 1 
that there is ſcarce a Mile ſquare within the Compals, 
© where it may not be found with its impregnated Wa- 
© ters. This is demonſtrable by the Action of the Load- 
« {tone on moſt Minerals, the Magnet itſelf ſeeming to 
© be ſcarce any thing but a purer Clod of Iron: and 
pure poliſhed Iron, we know, with very ſimple Ma- 
nagement, becomes highly magnetic. Hence we 
5 
* 
* 
% 
& 
* 
o 
5 
® 
8 
5 
* 
5 
c 
« 


% 


account for the Frequency of chalybeat Mineral 
Waters, of ſome Degree of Strength or other, ſo 
readily to be found between the Poles and Tropics. 
And this is a bountiful Proviſion of Nature to thoſe 
colder Climates, where animal Food, and ferment- 
ed Liquors are ſo neceſſary for the Support, Comfort, 
and greater Proportion of animal Force required in 
them, for their Defence from the Swarming of ra- 
venous Animals, and for hunting animal Food, 
where the Vegetable is neither ſo proper, nutritive, 
nor abounding, as in theſe kindlier Climates between 
the Tropics towards each Side of the Equator. Mi- 
neral chalybeat Waters brace the Solids, which ant- 
mal Food, and fermented Liquors, in any Plenty, 
are apt to relax; and wind up the Springs of animal 
IHE er Motion, 


I 


> 
4 
6 
s 
[5 
o 
C 
c 
* 
A 
o 
* 
» 
C 


„ 2 


C 
4 
a 
o 
£ 
* 
* 
4 
C 
6 
% 
4 
bo 
4 
£ 
— 
* 
bo 
C 
C 


c 
* 
2 


88 A I NFUXK nw MM 
Motion, to keep the Blood fluid, which the juſt- 


mentioned Indulgences are diſpoſed to thicken. Soft 


Stone, Marle, alkalious Clay, and all Kinds of bitu. 
minous Earths, have a larger Quantity of Sulphur in 
them ; for Sulphur, Oil, and Bitumen, always leave 
Earth brittle, ſpongy, and alkalious (Alkalies being 


only an harder earthy Sponge); and when the watry 


Impregnations meet, they naturally produce by Fer- 
mentation ſome Degree of Heat in the Mixture, 
There is in Nature (as this learned Gentlemen 


thought) but one Kind of Salt, which is Nitre; and 
the Variety ariſes ſrom a Mixture of Sulphur, Earth, 


or Iron, in different Proportions combined in their 
Compoſition, Nitre however, and Sea-ſalt, have 
their principal Efficacy from the predominant Prin- 


ciple in their Texture: and thus Tunbridge Waters 


are only a finer Solution of blue Vitriol, or natural 
Salt of Steel, or Rain- waters, inimitable by Art in 
fuch ſalutary Effects as Nature always produces. 
For Example: Though Art may imitate, in preci- 
ous Stones, all the Varieties of Colours, Reflexions, 
RefraQions, and Emiſſions of Light; yet there is al- 
ways ſome one peculiar Property, as of Hardneſs, 
Weight, or Water, which diſcovers the Sophiſtica- 
tion, In like manner, all the Wines on the Globe 
may be ſo imitated, that neither Eye, nor Palate, nor 
the Perception of their Effects on animal Bodies, can 


6 diſcover the Fiction; and this without one Drop of 


the Juice of the Grape, from the ſaccharine Quali- 


ty only of almoſt all Fruits, Seeds, or Herbs: yet, 


by analyſing them in ſome proper Menſtruum, the 
Cheat may be found out. Thus we may imitate all 
the ſeveral Mineral Waters on the Earth, and pretty 


nearly conciliate all their general or groſſer ſalutary 


Virtues on diſeaſed Animals: yet there is an unac- 
countable Something in the "Taſte, Lightneſs on the 
Stomach, Chearfulneſs and Alacrity they give, which 
all our Skill can never beſtow, The Principle of 

. N 1 Individuation, 


Suſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. 189 
«© Individuation, the Size of their laſt and leaſt Parti- 
cles, the Proportion of the ſeveral Parts of the Com- 
poſitionto the watry Menſtruum, and the due Time 
of their Impregnation, are, and ever will be, un- 
known to us; as will conſequently the Degree re- 


quired to wind up, ſtrengthen, and contract, the re- 
laxed Solids of diſeaſed human Bodies, to ſuch an 


and hin the concreted Juices, as theſe active, ſtrong, - 


and invigorating Waters of Tunbridge uſually do: for 


in all robuſt Conſtitutions but partially depraved, in 
the cold chronical Diſtempers of ſuch Habits, in ner- 
vous Diſorders, and low Spirits, in weak Digeſtions, 
and groſs Habits, they are extremely ſucceſsful, eſpe- 
| cially i in the hotter Seaſons of the Year.” Thus far 
this learned Gentleman. - 
During the time I was at Tunbridge formerly; I 
made an Excurſion to Knowl-houſe, about ſeven Miles 
from Tunbridge, and one from Sevencat, belonging to 
the Duke of Dorſet - it is ſituated in the Middle of a 
Park, and at that time was an antient Stone Fabrick ; 
but had nothing more remarkable in it, than ſome ex- 
cellent Pictures. The Park is beautified with many 


ry 
(4 
& 
ov 
C 
0 
(9 
„Height, that they may be enabled to grind, diſſolve, 
& 
* 
& 
& 
* 
- 
. 


large old Beech Trees, and the Turf is perhaps as fire 


as any in the World. 

A few Miles North-weſt of Tunbridge lies Sevenoak, 
ſo called from ſeven large Oaks that grew near the 
Place. It is a Market-town, governed by a Warden, 
and Aſſiſtants; but is noted for nothing more than 
being a great Thoroughfare Town. It has a good 


Hoſpital for maintaining and teaching poor Children, 


erected by Sir Milliam Sevenrak, Lord Mayor of Lon- 
don, who was a Foundling, and took his Name from 
the Town. 
cd left Tunbridge, and re: 3 Suſſexat + Linas thro? ; 
the deepeſt, dirtieſt, but in many reſpects the richeſt and 
moſt FAIRE Country i in all that Part of E e 
he 


{ - 


190 . 4 TOUR thr ZGuſſex. 
The Timber I ſaw here was prodigious, as well for 
Size as Plenty; and ſeemed in ſome Places ſuffered to 
grow, only becauſe it was ſo far off any Navigation, 
that it was not worth carrying away. In dry Summers 
indeed, a great deal is carried to Maidſſone, and other 
Places on the Medwey; and ſometimes I have ſeen 
one Tree on a Carriage, which they call there a Tug, 
drawn * Oxen; and even then it is carried ſo little 
a way (being thrown down, and left for other Tugs to 
take up, and carry on), that ſometimes it is two or 
three Years before it gets to Chatham ; for if once the 


Rains begin, it ſtirs no more that Year ; and ſometimes 
a whole Summer is not dry enough to make the Roads 
paſſable. | 7 


And here I ſhall obſerve, That in the Year 17 39-40. 
an Act paſled, intitled, An Act to revive, explain, and 


amend, an Af made in the 16th and 17th Years of the | 


Reign of his late Majefly King Charles II. intituled, An 
A for making the River of Medway navigable, in the 
_ Counties of Kent and Suſſex, © 
The Preamble to this AR will ſet this Matter in a 


proper Light: and it is to this Effect: That the above- 


mentioned Act of Parliament of the 16th and 17th of 
Charles II. was never yet carried into Execution; al- 
though the making the ſaid River navigable was likely 
to be of great Utility to the Public, by reaſon of large 
Quantities of Timber growing on the Mealds of Kent 
and Suſſex, which is ee to be the beſt in the King- 
dom, for the Uſe of the _ Navy ; and which now, 
through the Badneſs of the Roads in thoſe Parts, can- 
not be conveyed to any Market but at a large Ex- 
m__ oy | 
That therefore the preſent Undertakers being de- 
ſirous to begin, carry on, and complete, the Navigation 
of ſuch Part of the antient River Medway, and Streams 
falling into it, as run from Foreft-row in Suſſex, to 
| Maidſtone in Kent, this Act incorporates them for = | 


* 4 


— 


Suſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. -— 191 
Purpoſe, by the Name of The Company of Proprietors of 
the Navigation of the River Medway. . 

We muſt refer to the Act itſelf for farther Particu- 
lars; and ſhall only obſerve, That if this Work can 
be completed, it will be of inconceivable Advantage to 
the Public ; not only for the excellent Timber which 
it will be a Means of conveying to proper Markets, but 
for the eaſy and ſpeedy Carriage of Iron, Ordnance, 
Balls, and other Materials of War, forged in or near 
the ſaid River, which at ſome times of the Year cannot 
be brought through the Vealds of the two Counties 
and for the Carriage of Wood, Corn, Grain, Hay, 
| Hops, Wool, Leather, and all manner of Proviſions, 
as alſo of Coals, Lime, Stone Wares, and all other 
Neceſſaries and Commodities, to the great Improve- 
ment of Trade and Commerce, 2 He. 
CL etduet is a pleaſant Town, large, well-built, agreea- 
bly ſituated in the Middle of an open Champain oc 
try, and on the Edge of the South-downs, the moſt de- 
lightful of their Kind in the Nation; it lies on the 
Bank of a little wholeſome freſh River, within 12 Miles 
of the Sea, and was formerly encompaſſed with a Wall; 
„ but there are few Remains of it now to be ſeen, But 
what contributes to the Advantage of this Town is, 
that both it, and the Country adjacent, are full of the 
Seats of Gentlemen of good Families and Fortune ; of 
which the Pelbams muſt be named with the firſt, whoſe 
Chief is his Grace the Duke of Newca/i/e, Here are 
alſo the antient Families of Gage, Shelly, &c. formerly 
 Roman-catholics, but now Proteſtants, with many 
others, Lewes returns two Members to Parliament. 
It has five Churches in it. Near it is an old demoliſh- « 
ed Caſtle, in the Neighbourhood of which was fought 
that bloody Battle between King Henry III. and his 
Barons; the Event of which conſtrained the King to 
accept of hard Conditions of Peace, and to give his Son 
as an Hoſtage for Performance, 3 
; N 15 Seaford, 


 .41TOUR iv - offs 
Seaford, in the Neighbourhood of Lewes, enjoys the 
Privilege of ſending two Gentlemen to Parliament, as 
done of the Members of the Cinque- Ports. 
I ought not to forget, that Newhaven, alſo in this 
Neighbourhood, was formerly noted for its ſafe and 


good Harbour for Ships of conſiderable Burden ; 1 


for want of a Proviſion for maintaining the Timber 
Piers, which it had for Time immemorial, it was quite 
negledted, the Harbour choaked up with Sand and 
Beach, and the Piers were rotten and decayed, oO 
remedy theſe Evils, an Act paſted, Anno 1731. for re- 
pairing, and keeping in Repair, the ſaid Piers and Har- f 
bour; and this is ſo far brought to Effect, that it be- 
came very thriving both in Commerce and Ship- 
building; ſmall Veſſels of different Sizes are built here, 
and in Proportion as the Port improves, its Trade will 
increaſe, _ | ff. | 
From Lewes, following ſtill the Range of the South- 
downs, Weſt, we ride in View of the Sea, and on a fine 
Carpet Ground, for about 12 Miles, to Brighthelm/tone, 
a poor Fiſhing-town, old-built, and on the very Shore 
of the Sea. Hence again (as I mentioned at Fo/{/one 


and Dover), the Fiſhermen, having large Barks, go 


away to Yarmouth, on the Coaſt of Norfolk, to the 
Fiſhing- fair there, and hire themſelves out for the Sea- 


men to catch Herrings for the Merchants; and they 


tell us, that theſe make a very good Buſineſs of it. 
The Sea is very unkind to Brighthelmſione, having, 
by its continual Encroachments, ſo gained upon the 
Town, that in a little time the Inhabitants may reaſon- 
ably expect it will eat away the whole Place, above 
1009 Houſes having been devoured by the Water in a 
%% ER TIOE 9, 
From hence, ſtill keeping the Coaſt on the Left, we 
come to Shoreham, a Town chiefly inhabited by Ship- 
_ carpenters, Ship-chandlers, and all the ſeveral Trades 


depending upon the Building and Fitting up of Ships, 


th 


which is their chief Buſineſs, It ſtands at the Mou E 
I _ | g 6 7 N : ; * of 


Me 


of the Ader. Veſſels of a large Size, ſome for the Uſe 
of the Navy, but moſt for the Merchants Service are 
here conſtructed. The Demand of late for theſe are 
ſo great, and the People ſo induſtrious, that it is aſſert- 


ed, there is ſometimes not ſo much as a ſingle Perſon 


who receives Alms; a Circumſtance worthy not only 
of Praiſe, but of Imitation. Shoreham is juſtly noted 
for Sailors, and for neat and ſtout Sea-boats. 3 
Tue Builders of Ships ſeem to have ſettled here chiefly 
becauſe of the Quantity and Cheapneſs of Timber in 


the Country behind them; being the ſame wooded 


Country I mentioned above, which ſtill continues 
through this County and the next. The River this 
Town ſtands upon, though not navigable for large 
Veſſels, yet ſerves to bring dawn this large Timber in 
Floats from Bramber, Steyning, and the Country ad- 
jacent. . : N Wt 


CT 


and other Works, for the Security and Improvement 
of it, and for keeping the fame in Nopdirz and to em- 
power Commiſſioners named in it, or any Eleven of 
them, at any time after the firſt Day of June, in the 
ſaid Year 1760. to makea new Cut through the Sea- 
beach, oppoſite to the Village, called Kingſton- by-Sea. 
about a Mile to the Eaſtward of the Town, and to 
erect a Pier or Piers, and to do ſuch other Works as 
mall be neceſſary, in order to make and maintain a 
new and. more commodious Entrance into the faid 
Harbour; and it is not doubted, that the ſame will be 
made of great Utility to the Trade and Navigation of 
the Kingdom . 2 e 
Here, in the 


— 


mpaſs of about ſix Miles, are three 


viz, Shoreham, Bramber, and Steyning. | 
Shoreham and Steyning are pretty little Market - towns; 
but Hramber, after I have — the Ruins of an 
| K | old 


| Borough-towns, which ſend Members to Parliament, 


; 5 Vor. I. 


The Navigation through the preſent Entrance into 
the Harbour of New Shorebam, being become danger- - 
ous, an Act paſſed in the Year 1760. for erecting Piers, 


— 
be 


194 4 TOUR ro Suſſex. 1 
old Caſtle, hardly deſerves the Name of a Town, bav- 
ing not above 20 Families in it, and of them but few _ 
above aſking Alms, as you ride by. The chief Houſe 
in the Town, when I was there, was a Publick-houſe, 
the Landlord whereof boaſted, that upon an Election, 
Juſt then over, he had made 300 J. of one Pipe of 
The Caſtle of Bramber, however, appears to have 


deen a Place of Strength. There is, beſides Part of | 1 


the outward Wall, one Side of a Tower of great 
Height now remaining; and it is ſurpriſing it does not 
tumble down with the firſt high Wind. It is moſt beau 
tifully covered with Ivy, and is a fine Object viewed at 
a Diſtance from the Hills. 
"This is not the only Town in this County, where 
the Elections have been ſcandalouſly mercenary, inſo- 
much that it has been ſaid, there was, in one King's 
Reign, more Money ſpent at Elections than all the 
Lands in the Pariſhes were worth, at 20 Years Pur- 
77. 0 ͤĩ ß IE 2 
I ſhall name in particular but one more, and that is 
TFinchelſea ; which is rather the Skeleton of an antient 
City, than a real Town, where the old Gates ſtand 
near three Miles from one another over the Fields, and 
the very Ruins are ſo buried, that they have made good 
Corn Fields of the Streets, and the Plough goes over 
the Foundations, nay, over the firſt Floors of the 
Houſes, and where nothing of a Town ſeems to re- 
main: yet, at one Election for Members, the Struggle 
was ſuch, between Sir John Banks, and Colonel Dra- 
per, a neighbouring Gentleman, that I was aſſured the 
latter ſpent 11,000/. and loſt it too. What the other 
ſpent, who oppoſed him, may be gueſſed at, ſeeing he 
who ſpent moſt was almoſt ſure to carry his Election. 
Near Steyning, the famous Baronet of the Name of 
 Fagg had an antient Seat. And thence, paſſing by the 
Seat of Sir Jobn Shelley, prettily ſituated in the Middle 
of a Grove, we come ta Arundel, a decayed * 
| O. 


- 


8 
* 
_ 
— — 


Suſſex. Great BRITAI N. | 195 | 
alſo. It ſtands near the Mouth of the River Arun, * 


in, and for-repairing, and keeping in Repair, the Har- 


and old Piers, erecting Locks, &c, 


' Deptford, and up the Mediuay to Chatham; as alſo 
Weſtward to Port/mouth, and even to Plymeath, and 


the Navy is carried on: The Timber ſhipped off 
here, is eſteemed the beſt and largeſt that is brought by 


valuable in its kind above the ſtrait Timber. 


Cioſtle at Arundel, which has the Privilege to give to its 


in the Church are four old and ſtately Monuments of 


the beſt and largeſt Mullets in England; a Fiſh very 


to Parliament. 


wal pleaſant and delightful Miles in Znglend, whether — 


which heretofore had a good Harbour, called Arundel 


Port, or the Harbour of Little Hampton, capable of re- 
ceiving Ships and Veſſels of a conſiderable Burdenz 


but, a Beach being thrown up by the Sea, it was quite 
choaked up, and the Navigation of the Arun obſtructed, 

ſo that the Harbour was rendered in a manner uſeleſs. 
But in the Year 1733. an Act paſſed for erecting Piers 


bour there, by cutting a Channel through the Beach 


: 


One great Advantage to the Country, from this Ri- 
ver, is the ſhipping off great Quantities of Jarge Timber 
here; which is carried up the Thames to Mooltoich and 


indeed to all the King's Vards, where the Buſineſs of 
Sea from any Part of England; "alſo great Quantities 
of Knee- timber are had here, the largeſt of which is 
This River, and the old, decayed, once famous 
Poſſeſſor the Title of an Earl and Peer of the Realm 
without Creation, and which belongs to the noble Fa- 
mily of Howard, Earls of Arundel, and Dukes of Nor- 
folk, is all that is remarkable here; except it be, 'that 


the Earls of Arundel; and that in this River are caught 


good in itſelf, and much valued by the Gentry round. 
and often- ſent up to London. It returns two Members on 


From hence to the City of Chicheſter are 12 of the 


we go by the Hill, or Downs, or by mo Plain, or in- 
cloſed * | 
K 2 To 


F 
W 
; ag * BY I LY 3 
2 n 


-196 


4 TOUR tro Suffex, 
To the North of Arundel, and at the Bottom of the 

Hills, and conſequently in the ala, is the Town of 

Petworth, a large, handſome Country Market-town, 


and very populous ; and as it ſtands upon an Aſcent, 
and is dry and healthy, it is full of Gentlemens Fami- 


lies, and good well- built Houſes, both in the Town 


and Neighbourhood ; but the Beauty of Petworth is the 


antient Seat of the old Family of Percy, Earls of Nor- 
thumberland, now extinct ; whoſe Daughter, the ſole 


Heireſs of all his vaſt Eſtates, married Charles Seymour, 


late Duke of Somerſet ; and among other noble Seats 


brought his Grace this of Perworth. 
Seat of the Earl of Egremont, deſcended from a Daugh- 
ter of his Grace, © 3 | 

The Duke pulled down the antient Houſe, and on 


- modelled Houſes then in Britain. 


*Tis now the 
the ſame Spot built from the Ground one of the beſt- 


'The Apartments are very noble, wel] contrived, and 
richly furniſhed ; but the Avenues to the Front want 


Space: In the Armory in this Houſe, they ſhew, beſides 


| ſeveral other Curioſities, a Sword, which is ſaid to be 


the Sword of Hotſpur ; and the Date upon the Blade 


ſeems to countenance the Opinion. It is not ſo un- 


| weildy as other antient Swords uſually are. 


woody 


From Petworth Weſt, the Country is a little leſs 
than the /eald ; and a great many fine Seats 
begin to ſhew their Heads above the Trees; as the 
Duke of Richmond's Seat at Godwoed, near Chichefter ; 
the Seats of the late Earls of Tankerville, Scarborough, 


But the Seat of Lord Viſcount Montacute, called 


 Cawarey, near Midburſt, the Midæ of the Romans, 


” 

te — 
n 
EE 


in Winter, The Houſe is ſquare, and at each Corner 


Which ſends two Members to Parliament, deſerves a 


— 


particular Mention. It is ſituated in a Valley, encom- 
aſſed with Lawns, Hills, and Woods, thrown into a 

Par k, the River running underneath, which renders the 

Place very agreeable in Summer, but makes it dampiſn 


19 


Suſſex. GREAT BRITAIN. 197 
FT is a Gothic Tower, which have a very good Effect, 
= H when viewed from the 1ifing Grounds. The Hall is 
cieled with 1r:/þ Oak, after the antient manner. The 
Walls are painted with Architecture by Robert, the 
Statues by Goups, the Stair-caſe. by Pelegrini. The 
large Parlour, or Room at the Hall, is of Holbeir's 
painting; where that great Artift has deſcribed the 
Exploits of King Henry VIII. before Boulogne, Calais, 
his Landing at Portſmouth, his magnificent Entry into 
London, &c, In the other Rooms are many excellent 
Pictures of the Anceſtors of the Family, and other 
 Hiſtory-paintings of Holbein, relating to their Actions 
in War, The Rooms are ſtately and well- furnithed, ' 
adorned with many Pictures. There is a long Gallery 
with the 12 Apoſtles, as big as Life; another very neat 
one, wainſcoted with Norway Oak, where are many 
antient Whole-length Pictures of the F amily, in their 
proper Habits. There are four Hiſtory-pieces, two 
Copies of Rapbuel's Marriage of Cupid and P/yche, and 
_— old —_— and Are. Paintings from Hattle- 
abbey 
The Park is noble, having a great W 3 
Grounds in it, and is well wooded with Pines, Firs, 
and other Evergreen- trees, which are grown to a large 
Size; and here are ſome of the largeſt Cheſnut - trees 
perhaps in England. The Valleys which run through 
the Park, are well ſupplied with Water, which 9 2 
| the Graſs in a conſtant Veda. e 6 4 
icnefier is aA neat. and pret large ity: Galle 
round, R River Lavant 3 — Poe. of the 
Walls. Two principal Streets croſs it at right Angles - 
| upon the cardinal Points, where ſtands a curious Crofs, 
and Market-houſe upon Pillars, erected by Bi ſhop 
Nead. This Crofs was repaired and beautified Anno 
1746. by the late Duke of Richmond fo that it is now 
the fineſt Craſs in England, Coventry excepted, The 
Church takes up one of theſe Quadrants. It is re. 
merkable for two Side Ailes on both Sides, and the 
K 3 b Pictures 


= | 
| 
3 : 


| 108. AT QUR 4650! Suſſex, s 
Pictures of all the Kings and Queens of England ſince - 
Lui (the South- Saxon Monarch, who made this his 
Royal Seat ; and repaired the antient Roman Caſtle or 
Walls, leaving his Name to the 3 on the South- 
ern Wall, as, on the oppoſite Wall, all the Biſhops, 
3 The Monuments of Biſhop Carleton and Biſhop 
King are in this Church, whoſe K are curiouſly [ 
done in Marble. | 
In the Year 1723. in digging a Foundation at Chi- 
_chefter, was ſound, pretty deep in the Ground, a large 
Stone, fix Feet long and three broad, with a Roman 
Inſcription on it. In digging up the. Stone, a few of 
the Letters were eraſed ; but they were calily en 


| _ Neptune et Minervæ remplum, pro ſalute dem 4 
=_ vine ex auttoritate Tiberii Claudii, Cogidubni 
1 regis, legati Augusti in Britannia, collegium fa- . 
= | brarum, et qui in e a ſacris, vel honorati ſunt 
| die fuo dedicaverunt; donante aream Pudente Pu- 
| | deuentini filie, eek | 10 
1 | That is, N 
1! This Temple was dedicated to Neptune and Mi rwe, 
| 3 rag” of the Imperial Family, by the Au- 
1 thority of Tiberius Claudius. It was erected by 
due College of Artificers of King Cogidubnus, Au- 
1 guſtus s Lieutenant in Britain, and by thoſe who 
| officiated as Prieſts, or were, honoured, in it, at 
2 their own Expence; the Ground Mie given dy 
| 5 Pudens the Son of Pudentinus. PROT 


BM This Stone was s preſented to the late Duke of Rich- 

it | mond, who placed it in a Temple on a Mount in his 
„ Garden at Gedweoed, between the Statues of Neptune 
|| and Minerva. 
Thbis City returns two Members to Parliament. . 
T is notaPlace of much Trade, nor is it very populous; + 
„ dut wichin theſe few Years they are fallen into a new | 


Suſſex GREAT BRITAIN. 199 
way of managing the Corn-trade here, which turns 
very well to Account; for whereas the Farmers, gene- 
rally ſpeaking, uſed to carryall their Wheat to Farnham 
Market, which is very near 40 Miles, by Land- car- 
riage, and from ſome Parts of the Country more than 
that, ſome money'd Men of Chicheſter, Emfworth, and 
other Places adjacent, joined their Stocks together, 
and built large Granaries near the Croot, where the 
Veſſels come up ; and here they buy and lay up all the 
Corn, which the Country on that Side can ſpare ; and, 
having good Mills in the Neighbourhood, they grind 
and dreſs it, and ſend it to Londen in the Meal by long 
Sea , ̃è ¼ 
This is a great leſſening to Farnbam Market; but 
if the Market at London is ſupplied, the coming by Sea 
from Chicheſter is every whit as much a public Good, 
as the encouraging of Farnbam Market, which was 
once, of itſelf, the greateſt Corn- market in England; 
| Hempſtead in Hertfordſhire, and London, "excepted. - 
; Ibis carrying of Meal by Sea is now practiſed from 
ſeveral other Places on this Coaſt, even as far as 
a Seutba ma. din ROC 5 
_ Chicheſter, beſides the Cathedral, has five ſmall. 
Churches. About three Miles from t is the Houſe of 
his Grace the Duke of Richmond, called Godword. It 
was the antient Seat of the Earls of Northumberland, 
and in a very ruinous Condition ; but the late Duke 
of Richmond built ſome Offices, which were to have 
correſponded with a Manſion-houſe deſigned by Colon 
Campbell, and publiſhed by him in his Vitruvius Britan- 
nicus, But the late Duke, a little before his Death, 
altered his Deſign, and built a noble Apartment on the 
South-ſide of the Houſe, caſed with Portland Stone, 
which was to have been one of the Wings to the 
Houſe his Grace propoſed to erect, had he lived a few 
Years longer. OT.” . 
His Grace had a noble Menagerie, where he kept a 
i K great 


| apo A'TOUR tho Suffex. 
= - wy Variety of foreign Animals and Birds. The 
1 ark is ſmall, but plante d with Clumps of ſeveral Sorts 
of Oaks, to the Weſt and North of the Houſe; but on 
the Eaſt and South- ſide of the Park, there are Clumps 
of the different Sorts of Pines and Firs. 
It has an eaſy Deſcent to the Eaſt, S. and S. W. with 
the Proſpect of a rich and beautiful Landſcape, bound- 
ed by the Sea for 30 Miles in Length. The fe of 
igbt terminates the South - weſt Proſpect, and the fa- 
mous St, Reot' s hill covers it from the North, His 
late Grace erected. a Room on a riſing Ground, at the 
7 — Part of the Park, from whence is a View of the 
ountry for many Miles, and a noble Proſpect of the 
Sea, from the Harbour of Portſmouth quite round by 
the Je of Wight, many Leagues out to Sea. In this 
Room the Duke frequently entertained Company at 
Dinner, there being a good Kitchen built near it, with 
many other Conveniencies; a very pretty Garden, 
ſtored, with a great Variety of curiaus' Plants and 
Tt Flowers in Front, and on each Side of the Room, ſo a8 
t to render the Place verpdelightful,  . 
ol Near Gedwoed is a Seat of the late Right Hengurdble- 
l | bk - the Counteſs Dowager of Derby; it is called Halnaker, 
| and was formerly in the Poſſeſſion of the Delawars. 
| | The antient Part of the Houſe is the Remains of a Ca- 
| 


| file: from the Windows of the Front there is a fine 
Proſpect of the Sea. The Park is ſmall, but very beau- 
_ _ tiful The late Earl of Du made conliderable Ad- | 
Wil —  Gvitions tothe Houſe. | 
} About three Miles to the Eaſt of can lies 
| | Charleton, a ſmall Village, remarkable for being the 
| Seat of Fox-hunters. Here are many ſmall Huhting- - 
| houſes built by Perſons of Quality, who reſide there 
| during the Seaſon for Fox-hunting ; but the moſt beau- 
tiful of theſe Buildings is that of — the late 
Duke of Richmond. . 
_ is * a —_ Room, * was deſigned by 


oF 
3 

. 2 
2 


. 


Suſſex, GRPAT BRITAIN. 20 


the Right Hon, the Earl of Burlington, where the Gen- 


tlemen Fax<hunters dine every Day together, during 
their Stay at the Village. 3-468 

By the Side of this Village is a Foreſt, which was 
formerly in the Poſſeſſion of the Lumleys, but for ſome 
Years belonged to the late Duke of Richmond, who 
greatly beautified it, by cutting fine Ridings through 
the ſeveral Parts of it, and making many new Planta- 


tions in it. | 


About a Mite from Chicbeſter, on the London Road, 


is erected (ſince the late Rebellion) a ſtrong Fort, well 


plarited -with Guns ; this Fort being the only Pai ee f 


! 


it is a deep Marth. 5 | 
About three Miles from the Town is the Pariſh- 
church of Peſom, which is a large handſome Building. 
In it is a very antient Monument, with a Female Fi- 
gure upon it, ſuppoſed: to repreſent the Daughter of 
King Canute.” Im digging not long ago in the Church, 
was found the Head of a Man in Stone. The Sculp- 
ture of the Hair and Features is very diſcernible. From 
the Chin to the Crown are about 20 Inches; and con- 


the Town by Land, as all the reſt of the Ground about 


ſequently the Height of the whole Body of the Figure 


muſt have been about 15 Feet. It is conjectured to 


have heen one of the Saren Idols. The Head, by Di 


rection of the Miniſter of the Pariſh, is now repoſited 
in the Church; which is hardly to be reconciled to 


Propriety, if it really is what it is conjectured to be. : 


The Stalls in this Church have very antient Carvings 


upon them. . 


From Chichefer, the Road lying till Weft, we paſy 

in Sight of the Earl of Sealer bag fine Seat at Sau- 
ed, an Houſe ſurrounded with thick" Woods, through 

which there are the moſt agreeable Viſtas cut that are 


to be” ſeen any- where in England; and particularly act 


the Weſt Opening, which is from the Front of the* 


_ Houſe, they ſit in the Dining: room; and ſee the * 


K 5 


* 
.. . 


1 


r 


— yoo 


3 


_ o 
.. 2 ⁵³ ⁰¹¹ AI ̃ N — — 


202 A TOUR tho Hants, 
and Harbour of Portſmouth, the Ships at Spithead, and 


alſo at St, Helen's ; which, when the n ny, 
ne to be there, is a glorious Mgt. , 


In our Paſſage to Portſmouth, we paſſed by yn wu 
and by Poricheſter, a Caſtle built out of a Roman City, 
where ny of the French Priſoners are now (1760.) | 
| ſecured. 
On the Eaſt. ſide of the Harbour lies the Iſland of 
Poriſea, about 14 Miles in Compaſs, fertile in Corn, 
and very pleaſant, ſurrounded at High-water on all 
Sides by the Sea; but united to the Continent at the 
Northern Extremity by Port-. bridge, which was for- 
merly defended by a Fortreſs. 
In Portſmouth — 1000 Sail of the biggeſt Ships 
may ride ſecure. The Mouth is not ſo broad as the 
Thames at We/lmin/ter, and that ſecured on Goſport 


wer ” 1 2 
DONG 
> 


A 


r a os e e 


Side by Charles Fort, James Fort, Borough Fort, and 


Bloc houſe Fort, which has a Platform of above 20 
great Guns level with the Water. On the other Side 


dy Portſmauth, ſtands South ſea Caſtle, built by King 


, #4: 8 ” -þ > aid * 
. m 
— — . 4 tt $297 Vp iauet e Se AI MT Me. aA 109 ati HHP Lee re Ee ee ee — ä ee CEOS 
lb - > 


* 8 ” 
Oe HAI ——— — — 


— — cc 


—— 
e e rr 
4 


rw 229244, — — . ot K — 


2 
ha. « . 
4 ot 8 * 2 9 
4 r TT ͤ 77777 ee ade 
© RIRer — —ũ——ũ e. 4. as 67 


* n 
1 — 2 — * . — 
4 
rr os —— 5 


=—_ VIII. The Government has within theſe few 
Years bought, and annually occupied, more Ground 
for additional Works, and no doubt it may be made 
impregnable ; for a ſhallow Water may be brought 
quite round it. The Yards, the Docks, the Store- 
houſes, where all the Furniture is laid up in the exacteſt 
Order, (ſo that the Workmen can find any Imple- 
ment in che Dark) exceed Imagination; as do the im- 
menſe Quantities of all Sorts of military and naval 
Stores. The Ropehouſe is 870 Feet long, I's con- 
tinued Room, almoſt a Quarter of a Mile. I had the 
Pleaſure of ſeeinga great Cable made here, in my firſt 
Viſit to that Place: it required 100 Men to work at it, 
and fo hard is the Labour, that they. could Work but 
four Hours in the Da 


a. 
The {malleſt Number of Men contiaually employed, 


2 * * 


"a es» de W ws 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. + 203 
in the Yard is 1000, and that but barely ſufficient. 


Theſe, now in Time of War, are diſciplined and form- 


ed into a Regiment, as they were in the laſt War: 


The Commiſſioner is Colonel; the Builder is Lieu- 


tenant- Colonel; the Clerk of the Checque Major; and 
the reſt of the Officers, Captains, Lieutenants, &c. 


Here is alſo a good Counterſcarp, double Moat, with _ 


Ravelins in the Ditch, and double Paliſadoes, and ad- 
vanced Works, to cover the Place from any Approach, 
where it might be practicable. The Strength of the 
Town is alſo conſiderably augmented on the Land- 
ſide, by the Fortifications raiſed of late Years about the 
Docks and Yards ; and thoſe Parts made a particular 
Strength by themſelves : and though they are indeed 
in ſome Senſe independent one on another, yet they co- 


ver and ſtrengthen one another, ſo that they cannot be 


ſeparately attacked on that Side, while they are both ia 
the ſame Hands, : 1 
Theſe Docks and Yards are now like a Town, and 


are a kind of Marine Corporation within themſelves ; ” 


there being particular large. Rows of Dwellings, built 
at the public Charge, within the new Works, for all 
the principal Officers of the Place ; efpecially fur the 


Commiſſioner, the Agent of the Victualling, and ſuch- 


like. | 
This Haven is ſo well known, as to require no very 


particular Deſcription: Yet from the Excellency of it, 


we will examine it by the CharaGeriſtics of a perfect 


Harbour, laid down from the ableſt Writers on naval 
Affairs; premiſing, that my give theſe only as ideal 


Marks of what, according to their Conceptions, ſhould 
belong to a Place deſerving that Title. The firſt then 


is, That it be ſo ſituated, and of ſuch a Figure, as 


© to be ſecure from all, or at leaſt from moſt Winds. 
The Harbour of Port/mouth is ſo covered by the Towns 
of Portſmouth and Goſport, the Common, the Bheck- houſe, 
Gun-wharf, Dock-yard, 1 and the 1 | 


— 


re Hin: 
Hill of Periſdotun, that the Wind cannot blow from 

any Point of the Compaſs to the Detriment of Ships at 

Anchor init. The ſecond Rule is, That it be of a pro- 

« per Depth, fo that Ships of any Size may lie _—_ 


© without raking their Bottoms.” This Port is 
deep, that a Firſt- rate Ship can ride at the loweſt Ebb, 


Without touching the Ground; and as ſhe lies at An- 
chor, ſhe can take in her Sea-ſtores and Guns, and be 
at Sea in Half an Hour. The third is, That the Bot- 
© tom be found and fit for Anchorage,” In reſpect to 


this, no Harbour can more exactly anſwer the Deſcrip- 


tion than that of Portſmouth. The next requires, 
That there be no ſudden Rocks, Shelves, Sands, or 


© other troubleſome Impediments,” From all theſe this 


Haven is intirely exempt. The fifth demands, That it 
* ſhould be capacious, fo as to hold a large Number 
© of Ships with Eaſe and Safety; and, if poſſible, di- 
© vided into ſeveral Branches.“ This noble Port is ſo 


ſpacious, that it can conveniently contain the whole 


Royal Navy, or at leaſt as great a Part thereof as is 


ever laid up in ordinary. The main Harbour runs up 


directly two Miles in Length from South to North, 
and then ſeparates into two Branches, one running N. 
N. W. and the other N. E. each of them nearly of 


the ſame Extent. The ſixth Requiſite is, That there 


be no Bars or other Obſtructions to embarraſs its 


Entrance, and which may render the Acceſs difficult 
© or dangerous.“ Part ſmouth Harbour is not broader 


at the Mouth, as I have already ſaid, than the Thames 


at He/tminſfler ; and as the Water flows ſeven, and 
ebbs but five Hours, the Flux is greater out than in, ſo 


that the Bottom is always ſcouring, and the Water 


running out at an Angle throws the Bar to the S. W. 


which is called the Spit, and leaves a deep Channel, 
cloſe. under Shore, to South-ſea Caſtle, The next 
demands, That the Sides, or the Mouth, be well pro- 
tested by Forts, Block-houſes, and other Fortifica- 
* T.. tions, 


„ F „ 
bt — . — 
— eG Gta — ——— — — —— 
— — 


s —— —— a er er rr PIO , 
— 


——— 


by thoſe by whom they are beſt. | | ; 
farther required, That in the Night Seafon, or in 
Time of Danger, there may be a Boom or. Chain 
© in Readineſs to ſecure the Entrance.“ This there 


Hants, : G REAT BR FTAIN. : 205 . 
« tions, more eſpecially if it be ſeated immediately up- 


on the Sea.“ There is ſcarre any thing in this re- 


ſpect wanting that could be wiſhed at Portſmouth for 


if attacked by Sea, the Enemies Ships muſt come di- 


rectly under South. ſea Caſtle, and be afterwards expoſed 
to a long Train of Cannon from the Town and the 
Block- houſe, which muſt rake them fore and aft, for a 
Mile together, before they reach the Haven's Mouth; 
and when ſtopped there, liable to their accumulated 
and conſtant Fire. The eighth is, That it have a, 
Pharos or Light-houſe, or other conſpicuous Sea- 
marks.“ Portſmouth is as much diſtinguiſhed in this 
as in any of the other Particulars. The ninth Poſi- 
tion is, That there be an Arſenal for building and re- 
« pairing Ships, commodious in all reſpects, and more 
« eſpecially for launching them.“ The Yard of Po: 
mouth is ſo convenient, that it has ſcarce its equal. 
Here are four Docks, one of them fo large as to admit 
two capital Ships at a time; ſo that five may be docked. 
and cleaned in a Day, while the Spring Tides con- 
Ulonh ; and 
the Improvements made here for ſetting of Maſts, and 
rigging. with the utmoſt Diſpatch, are ſuch, as would 
demand a, long Deſcription. The next is, That 
there be Plenty of Naval Stores, Ammunition, 
* and Provifions of every Sort.“ It may be affirmed, 
that there is no Place in Europe where theſe are to be 
found better in their reſpective Kinds, in larger Quan- 
ties, or in more complete Order; inſomuch, that they 


tinue; that is, between 40 and 50 in a 


aſtoniſh ordinary Spectators, and to are moſt. admired 


allo is at Portſmouth, lying at the Bottom of the Har- 


bour's Mouth, which can be raiſed and faſtened im- 
mediately an both Sides, ſo as to ſtop any naval Force, 


* A : 


W 


underſtood. It is 


| 
| 


%% n 


which muſt be expoſed to the Artillery of the Town, 


Block- houſe, and Gun-wharf; which laſt contains all 
the Cannon of the Ships in ordinary, and where a moſt 
deſtruQive Battery may be raiſed at Pleaſure. The 
laſt is, That there be a conſtant and ſufficient Gariſon 
for the Security of the Port, againſt any ſudden At- 
« tempt to ſurprize, or any Deſcent that may be made 
© in order to reduce it.” This alſo there is at Port. 
mouth; which is now a Town regularly fortified in the 
modern Stile; and the Common, the -yard, and 
the Gun-wharf, are likewiſe ſo effectually ſecured, that 
it would neceſlarily require a a very numerous Army 
to inveſt and beſiege it; nor could it then be taken 
without affording Time ſufficient for its Relief. But 
how ſuch a Deſcent ſhould be made, at leaſt in our 
Days, is not eaſy to conceive. 
0 Thus it appears that Portſmouth derives from Na- 
ture all the Prerogatives the moſt fertile Wits and 
" moſt intelligent Judges could deviſe or defire ; and 
that theſe have been ſeconded by Art, without Con- 


ſideration of Expence, which, in national Improve- 


ments, is little to be regarded. Add to all this, the 
ſtriking Excellence of its Situation, which is ſuch, as if 
Providence had expreſly determined it for that Uſe to 
which we ſee it applied, the bridling the Power of 
France, A further, indeed a very capital Convenience 
to the Harbour of Port/mouth, is the ſafe and ſpacious 
Road of Spithead, which lies between the Continent 
of Hampſhire and the Ile of Fight, and is about 20 
Miles in Length, and, in ſome Places, no leſs than 
three in Breadth 3 ſo that it is capable of holding 1000 
Ships at a Time, without the leaſt Difficulty or Danger. 
It is defended from all Winds blowing from the Weſt 
to the South-eaſt by the high Lands of the 7/e of 
Migbt, and from the Winds of the oppoſite Quarter 
by the main Land of Hampſbire, the Town of Port/- 
mouth fronting the Middle of the Road. I he very 
Sands in its Neighbourhood contribute to its Safety; * 
/ >, 2p or. 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 207 


for Inftance, the Spit, lying to the North, breaks the 
Sea on that Side, as the Hor/es Bank does to the Eaſt, 
and No-Man's-Land and the Mather Bank on the 
South. As to the Bottom, it is perfectly ſound and 
ood, and the Flux and Reflux of the Sea repairs all 
the Injuries done by the Anchors. The Reader will 


be pleaſed to remark, that the Limits of this Road are 


exactly diſtinguiſhed by Buoys properly placed; ſo 
that here, as well as in reſpect to the King's Yard and 
the Harbour, the ſingular Security and admirable Con- 
gruity of every thing has induced the Sailors, a ſenſible. 
though not a ceremonious fort of People, to expreſs . 

Fate and Safety they enjoy, by calling it the King's 


the 
Bed-· Chamber. The Reader, I ſay, will remark, that 


all this ariſes from the Additions to, and Improvements 


made by Art on, the Advantages bountifully beſtowed 


by Nature; and this in a long Series of Vears, after 


much Obſervation, and with a large Expence. 
Here is a School founded by the Government for the 


inſtructing of Youth in Mathematicks and Naviga- 


tion, to qualify them for the Sea Service. 


Portſmouth returns two Members to Parliament. It 


is a well-inhabited, thriving Corporation; and is greatly 


inriched by the Fleet's having fo often and ſo long lain 
there, as well as large Fleets of Merchant-men : be- 
ſides, the conſtant fitting out of Men of War, and the 
| often paying them, at Port/mouth, has made a great 
| Concourſe of People to it. Caniden, fo long ago as the 
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, takes notice, that Portſ- 
mouth was populous in time f War, but not ſo in time 
of Peace but now the Buſineſs of the Navy is fo great- 


I; increaſed, and ſo much of it always done here, that 


it may be ſaid, that there is more to do at Porsf< - 
mouth, even in time of Peace, than was then intime of 


War. | 


| The Government of the Place is by a Mayor and 
Aldermen, c. and the Civil Government is no more 


interrupted by the Military, than if there were no Gari- 


4 


* 1 


"er a e DL Se” 


28 ATOUR"r# Hants, 
ſon there: ſo that we have very ſeldom had any Com- 
plaint either of Want of Diſcipline among the Soldiers, 


» 7 


or Want of Prudence in the Magiſtrates.. 
Since the Increaſe of Buſineſs at this Place; the Con- 
| fluence of People has been ſo great, that the own not 
admitting any Inlargement for Buildings, a kind of 
Suburb, or rather a new Town, has been built on the 
heathy Ground adjoining, which is ſo conſiderable, that 
itpromiſes to outdo, for Numbers of Inhabitants and 
Beauty of Buildings, even the Tow itſelf; and the 
rather, as it is unconfined by the Laws of the Gariſon, 
and unincumbered with the Corporation-Badges, Free- 
doms, Town-duties, Services, and the like. © © - 
In the Year 1753. an Act paſſed, for building a Cha- 
pel on the Common, in the Pariſh of Portſea, and for 
veſting Power in certain Truſtees for the Regulation 
thererf; the Preamble to which ſets forth, that the ſaid 
Pariſh is large and populous ; and that that Part of it, 
which is commonly called The” Common, is of late 
Years very much increaſed in the Number of Houſes 
and Inhabitants, inſomuch that the Pariſh Church is 
not capable of holding onet-hird Part of the Inha- 
bitants profeſfing the Doctrine of the Church of 
England; and that the faid Pariſh Church being 
ſituated more than a, Mile from The Common, many 
of the aged, decayed, infirm, and ſickly Perſons, 
who are Inhabitants of the ſaid Common, are prevent 
ed from attending divine Service: wherefore the In- 
habitants of the ſaid Common have. agreed among 
themſelves to erect and build a Chapel, in ſome con- 
venient Place, upon, in, or near the faid Common, at 
their own Expence. See the Act. 


© Fuly 3. 1760. at Twelve in the Morning a dread- 
ful Fire broke out in the Dock yard of this Place, in a 
ine Pile of Building that was filled with ſome of the 
| beſt Stores for his Mi r 
| of which were Pitch, 'Tar, Oil, and Turpentine; in 
| this upper, Cables, Ropes, Sails, and Canvas, Th 


lajeſty's Navy; in the lower Part 


net 


W * 
* 


Hants, GREAT BRITAIN. 209 


next Store-houſe was the Spinning-houſe, and above it 
Hemp. The next, where the Bell ſtood, was a long 


Lane, pied up with decayed Stores; the next to that, 
were the Rope - makers Laying-walk, and the Tar- 
ing-walk, over which were Sails, Canvas, and Ropes; 
all which were conſumed. The Beams, by the Vio- 


lence of the Fire, flew in the Air like ſo many Paper 
Serpents, and many of them fell in Goſport, It rained 
very hard all Night. It is thought that the Stores 
caught Fire by ds Lightning, which was very terri- 


ble, the Element appearing as all on a Blaze, In the 


Warehouſes conſumed, were repoſited 1050 Tons of 


Hemp, 500 Tons of Cordage, and about 700 Sails, 


beſides many hundred Barrels of Tar, Oil, &c. Vet 


with all this Devaſtation, amounting to a very great 


Loſs, ſuch was the Diligence exerted, and ſuch was 
the Quantity of Stores in the naval Way at Chatham, 
and other Magazines of this Nature, that all was eaſi- 
2 very ſoon ſupplied, without any very ſenſible. 


$ by the Public, tho' in the 4 of a heavy ang 
expenſive War. 


Next, we arrived at the Painſdownn Hills, which are 
of Chalk, and at a moderate Diſtance from the Shore | 
extend themſelves into Sufſex, 


Here we turned to admire the Face of the Ground 
we had paſſed. The Ports, Creeks, Bays, ' Ocean, 
_ Caſtles, and Ships, the % of Fight, Portebeſter, the 
conſiderable Town of Goſport, Portſmouth, Southamp- 
ton, Chicheſter, and all the Coaſt from Portland ifle 0 
Suſſex, were comprebended under one View. 


From Portſmouth, Weſt; the Country lies Jew and: 5 


flat, is full of Creeks and Inlots of the Sea and Rivers, 
all the Way to 18 Me ; ſo. that we ferry over three 

times in about 18 Miles, Besides going over the Bridge 
at Tichfeld. The firſt of theſe Fe a is at Portſmouth 
itſelf, to wit, crofs the Mouth of the Harbour, from 


the Point above-mentioned, to Goſport; a large Town" 
FTC 


9 . 


l FRO eG ng Iron recs rs 


210 A'TOUR:avo. Hants. 
and of great Trade, eſpecially in time of War, and 
which has been very lately improved by an Hoſpital, 
and by ſtrong Fortifications. From thence we ride to 
Tichfield, as above, where we paſs the River Alre. 
Thence, at about four Miles, we paſs another River at 
Buſſelton, narrow in Breadth, but exceeding deep, and 
eminent for its being able to carry the largeſt Ships : 

here is a Building yard for Ships of War; and in King 

Milliam's Time two Eighty-gun Ships were launched 

here. It ſeems, the Safety of the Creek, and the 
Plenty of Timber in the Country behind it, are the 

| Reaſons of building fo much in this Place. "IH 
From hence, when we come oppolite to Southampton, 
we paſs another Creek, which comes down from Win- 
che/ter, and is both very broad and deep. On the op- 
poſite Bank ſtands the antient Town of Southampton, 
on the other Side of which comes down another large 
River, called the 7%, entering Southampton Water by 
Redbridge ; ſo that the Town of Southampton ſtands 
upon a Point running out into the Sea, between two - 
very fine Rivers, both navigable for ſome Way up the 
Country, and particularly uſeful for bringing down 
Timber out of one of the beſt wooded Counties in 
Britain; for the River on the Weſt-ſide of the Town. 
comes by the Edge of New. forgſti. But of late Years, 
and fince the above was written, there has been ſo 
much Timber cut down in this Foreft, and ſuch Neg- 
le& in fencing and ſecuring the young Trees, that un- 
leſs there be more Care taken to preſerve it, there will 
be ſcarce any Timber left there.in a few Years ; and 
here it may not be amiſs to take notice, that the Per- 
fons, whoſe Employments were deſigned to preſerve 
and encourage the Growth gf Timber, are generally 
the People who deſtroy it: which they are led by 
the Perquiſites of their Places, which ought never to be 
allowed of. But perhaps there is not a more extraor- 
dinary Employment, than that of Surveyors of the 
Woods, as it hath been managed of late Years. : 
| = | But 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 211 


But now that we are in the Neighbourhood of | 


Portſmouth, we cannot paſs over in Silence the extra- 
ordinary Will of Richard Norton, Eſq; which at the 
time made much Noiſe in the World, c. 
This Gentleman died in December 1732. and left 
his Real Eſtate of about 60007, per Ann. and a Per- 
ſonal, ſaid to be to the Value of 60,000 J. to the Poor, 


Hungry, and Thirſty, Naked and Strangers, Sick, 


© Wounded, and Priſoners, to the End of the World; 


and appointed the Parliament of Great Britain to be 
his Executors ; and, in caſe of their Refuſal, the Bi- 
ſhops; and left his Pictures, and other Valuables, to 


the King. But his Will was afterwards ſet. aſide on 


the Score of Inſanity : ſtrong Marks of which it car- 


ried in the Face of it. = 


and near it is Warblington, formerly a beautiful Seat of 


. Hence from Ports-bridge, upon a little Turning of E 
the Shore, we ſee Havant, a ſmall, but neat Market- 
town, in which are Houſes of good Accommodation: 


the Earls of Saliſbury, and afterwards of the Cottons. 


Before theſe lie two Iflands; the larger called Haling, 
the other:Thorney; and each has its Pariſh-church. The 


Hills leading from Havant to Portſmouth (on which 
are placed Beacons, to give Notice of Invaſions in times 


8 


of Danger) afford a moſt delightful View of the Sea, 


for Miles together. 


Southampton is a truly antient Town, which, having 


been many Years decaying in its Trade, of late has 
very much improved in that of Portugal Wines, which 


are imported here, and ſent into many Places Inland, 
where formerly the London Merchants uſed to deal; 


and that in great meaſure owing to the Duties being 
eaſier at Southampton than a They alſo carry 


on ſome Trade with the of Fer/ey and Guernſey. 


The Town is large and populous, has a fair High- 

ſtreet, .a»; ſpacious Quay, and, if its Trade ſhould, 

thoroughly revive, is able to contain great Numbers af 
People. There is | a French Church, and no incon- 


ſiderable 


212 TOUR '2&ro' Fut. 
ſiderable Congregation belonging to it, ws a Free 
ſchool founded dy Zdward VI. Here are ſtill ſome - 
Merchants, who trade to Newfoundland for Fiſh, 
which they carry to the Streights, &c. and ſome Ship. 
building alſo is carried on here, though not near 10 
much as formerly. 
The Town returns two Members to ParHeekent, 
Tt.had formerly the fole Privilege from the Crown of 
importing Wines; which, though a vaſt Advantage 
to it, the Corporation either careleſsly or corruptly { old 
to Londen, © 
The Situation of Southampton between two Rivers 
was to its Advantage formerly, in point of Strength; 
and it is, beſides, ſtrongly walled with very large Stones, 
full of thoſe little white Shells, like Hone combs, which | 
grow upon the Backs of Oyſters. This is a fo C 
Stone extremely hard, and = ems to be gathered near 
the Beach of the Sea. Theſe Walls wy many — 1 
nets and Towers, in ſome Places double ditch'd; but 
the Sta encompaſſes near half. the Town. I was 
built in the Reign of Ediuard III. | 
-F obſerve they have a Method of breaking ho Force ff - 
of the Waves here, by laying a Bank of Sea ore, as 
they call it. It is compoſed of long, flender, and ſtrong 
Filaments, like pill'd Hemp, very tough and durable; 
I ſuppoſe thrown up by the Sea: and this performs its 
Work better than Walls of Stone, or natural Cliff 
-At the South-eaſt Corner, near the Quay, 'is a Fort = 
with ſome Guns upon it, called the Tower. On one 
was an Inſeription, denoting its being erected by King 
 Hemry VIII. in the Year 1542. In the North- weſt 
Corner was a ſtrong Caftle, with a Mount, walled 
about at top, as a Keep: ; $ kw food a round Stone 
Tower, with a winding 
The Main of this. Town conſiſts neben Street, 
running through its Length. There are in it many 
a religious Ruins, and great Warehouſes, Cellars, 
Sore n Oc. Part of the old Wall, which once 
defſfended 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 213 
defended the Place, is ſtill ſtanding. It is well - peopled, 
and has five Churches. This Place is memorable for 
the Experiment of King Canute, who, to ſilence the 
PFlattery of his Courtiers, ſeated himſelf on the Banks of 
the River, with all his Regal Ornaments, and c#m- 
manded the Tide not to approach his Footſtool. | 
About a Mile from this Town, on the Banks of the 
River /tching, is a vaſt large Pile of Earth, which riſes 
in the Form of a Cone, from a large wide Foundation, 
of great Extent and Circumference, which they call 
Bevis-Mount. It is ſuppoſed to be an antient Fortifi- 

cation, thrown up by the Saxons, under the Command 
of Bevis, to oppoſe the Paſſage of the Danes over the 
| River, who lay encamped on the other Side. The 
River is not very large, but the Tide running up into 
* good Way beyond the Town, forms a kind of 
Fay juſt under this Mount, which being contiguous to 
an Eſtate belonging to the late Earl of Peterborough, 
his Lordſhip purehaſed it, and converted it into a kind 
of Wilderneſs; andas it was full of Trees and Bram- 
bles, he cut through them divers circular and intricate 
Walks and Labyrinths. His Lordſhip uſed frequently 
to divert himſelf by dropping his Friends in the midit 
of this Wilderneſs, and, ſtealing away, let them wan- 
der up and down, till they found their Way out of it. 
The Mount terminates above, as is feigned of Parnaſ- 
ſus, in a kind of Fork; and between the two Spires is 
a Bowling- green, or Parterre, adorned with fine ta- 
lian Marble Statues, brought by his Lordſhip from 
abroad, It lies open on the Side facing the River, 
and, when the Tide is in, gives a molt agreeable Pro- 
ſpect. On one Side of this Parterre, declining gra- 
dually from the Top of gge of the Spires to the Green, 


is planted a little Vine, expoſed to the South; and 
on the other Side, on the very Summit of the Spire, 
ſtands a Summer-houſe, elegantly built and contrivęd, 
with a good Cellar under it, where his r 
his Wines, having no good Cellarage at his Houſe, 


214 ATOUR the 


Which is near a Quarter of a Mile from the Mount, 


Hants. 


from which his Lordſhip called it- Bevis- Mount. He 


intended to rebuild the Houſe, and convert all the 


Grounds'lying between it and the . into Gar- 


dens, had he lived a little longer. 


There are many things fabled wen of Bevis, as there 5 
are in Wales and Cornwall of King Arthur, both of 


whom have ſuffered much from Legendary Wiiters 


and Tradition; for as King Arthur perform'd many 


brave and gallant Acts in War, and was of greet 
bodily Strength, ſo Bevis, who was a Saxen Lord, 


was a Man of much military Courage and Conduct, as 


was there defeated. It is faid his Sword may be! 


well as perſonally ſtrong. He was a great Oppoſer of 
the Normans, and followed them down to // ales, and 


gave them Battle, near Caerd'f, in Glamorganſbire, but 
1 


ſeen at Arundel Caſtle; yet there are ſome who, fre 


the Fables with which their Stories are mübgied, 
doubt whether ever there were ſugh Perſons as either 


of them. 
Within theſe few Vears, Senthampton hab been much 


reſorted to for Sea bathing; and it muſt be owned, it is 


a very convenient Place for that uſeful and ſalutary Pur- 
poſe; but in this Particular 1 is not to be compared to 


| Portſmouth.” 


On the Left-hand, about three Mi's es down the Ri- 


ver, are the Ruins. of the once celebrated Littleley or 


| Nettley- Abbey; the Chureh of which has a little Part 
of the Roof ſtanding, with many Rooms, as the Re- 


| Mounds, Part of which kept up the Bounds of Fiſh- 

owings were conveyed 

rt on the Banks of the 

River, which is ſuppoſed to have been erected as a De- 

fence to the Abbey. Though the Floors of the Fort 

; dees yet the Walls are itill perfect and intire; and 
e 


— 


fectory. Sc. which Kill diſtinctiy ſne what a hand- 


ſome Edifice it once was. Round the Whole are large 


ponds above, whoſe Ovez 
down for freſh Water, to 


the Moat round it remains, and Water in it. The 


largeſt Ivies I ever ſaw grow out of the Ruins of the 
| Abbey 


3 INE, e 6 * . 
TOW Fo bad? 8 e p 5 hs 
. 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 215 
Abbey and Church. The great Church of Romſey (of 
which Town hereafter) and this, ſeem to have been 
duilt on a like Model. 

"At Southampton, I took a Paſſage over to the Ie of 
IVieht,and in two Hours arrived at t Cowes, by the Way 
paſſing by Calſbot Caſtle, 

This Caſtle is on the Eaſt Point of the New Foreſt, 

It is ſuppoſed capable of guarding the Entrance into 
Southampton Water, which is not two Miles broad, and 


the Channel for Ships very narrow. About two Miles 


from the Cattle, on the oppoſite Side, 3 is the Mouth of 
the River Hamble, in which the Tide flows up part of 
12 Miles to Biſbop's-Walton. 

Cowes is the chief Sea-port Town in this Iſland, and, 
in time of War, the general Place of Rendezvous for 
Merchant-ſhips waiting for Convoys, being ſecur'd, in 
ſome meaſure, by the Guns of the Caſtle, but more by 
the Neighbourhood of Portſmouth, We walked four 
| Miles, and came to 

Newport, the principal Town in the Iſland, which 
returns two Members to Parliament. It is large and 
populous. 

The Iſland is very Plena and ſo froitful, that One 
Year's Crop will ferve the Inhabitants for ſeven Years; 
who therefore ſupply Port/mouth, and the Parts adja- 
cent, with the Surplus. Ir abounds particularly in 

Corn, Cattle, Hares, Rabbets, Wild-fowl, Fiſh, Sc. 
It is 60 Miles in Circumference. Its Militia is the 
beſt diſciplined in England. Its Wool, in F ineneſs, i is 
next to that of Cotſibold. Carrisbrooł Caſtle, now in 
Ruins, is noted for being the Place of Impriſonment of 
King Charles I. carried thither from Aur/t. Caftle, 
a Caſtle built by Henry VIII. for the Security of the 
New Foreſt. 1 
Sanham, in the 1/le 0 fea Wieht, has alſo a Caſtle; ſo 
has Sourh-Yarmouth in Norfolk, and which returns two 
Members to Parliament, "Ms. 
|  Spithead, 


. 4A TOUR Fro . Hants, 
| Spithead, (between Portſmouth and this Iſland) and 
St. Helen's, near the Iſſe of Wight, are famous for the 
Rendezvous of the Royal Navy of England. 
Aßppledore- come is a _ beautiful Seat in this Ile, be- 
longing to the late Sir Robert Mor ſſey, Bart. 5 
Near a Village called Ryd are the Ruins of Quar 
Abbey, now a Farm. houfe, whoſe Situation is beauti- 
ful, in the midſt of fine Woods and Meads. 
This Iſland is noted for having been once advanced 
to the Title of a Kingdom, by King Henry VI. in be- 
half of Henry Beauchamp, Earl of // arwick, his great 
Favourite, who was crowned King of Wight, and of 
the Iſles of Zer/ey and Guernſey, in 1445. but, dying 
two Years after, the Iſle loſt the Title; for King Ed- 
ward IV. who ſucceeded Henry, beſtowed it upon his 
Father: in law, Richard i ooduille, Earl Rivers, with 
the Title of Lord of Wight, as the late Earl of Derby 
was, and as the preſent Duke of Athol is, Lord of the 
Iſle of Man. 1 VV 
Returning to Southampton, I. was at the Extent of 
my propoſed Journey Welt, intending to look no farther 
this Way for the preſent. I went North-eaſt, leaving 
Mincheſtern a little on the Left; and came into the 
Par:ſqgouth Road at Petersfield, a Town chiefly noted 
for its Inns, and ſtanding in the Middle of a Country 
that uſed to abound with Oak-timber, and which re- 
turns two Members to Parliament. From hence we 
came to Alton, and in the Road thither began a little to 
taſte the Pleaſure of the Weſtern Downs, which reach 
from Winche/ter almoſt to that Place. . 
The Duke of Bolton has two noble Seats in this 
County, one between Alton and Alres ford, and one at 
Baſing, of which hereaſter. 5 
Alton, is a ſmall Market- tien, of no Note; neither 
is there any conſiderable Manufacture in all this Part 
of England, except a little Drugget and Sballoon- mak- 
ing; otherwiſe the whole Counties of Kent, 2 
| | 47 LY 


0 
50 


ply his Table at Chelſea, 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 249 


Surry and Hampſhire, are not employed in any con- 


ſiderable Woolen Manufacture. 


From Alton we came to Farnham, a large populous 
Market-town, the fartheſt that Way in the County of 
Surry, from London; and, excepting Hempſtend and 


London, as we obſerved above, was once the greateſt 
Corn- market in England, particularly for Wheat, of 


which vaſt Quantities uſed to be brought hither every 
Market-day. But for ſome Years paſt, its Market for 
Corn has very much dwindled ; but it has ſo greatly 
improved in its Hops, for upwards of 50 Years to- 
gether, that it may be ſaid to outdo Canterbury, Maid- 


| /fone, and any of the Places in Kent, moſt noted for 


that Commodity; and this not only in Quantity, but 
Goodneſs. In ſhort, all the Neighbourhood about 


Farnham is one general Hop- ground; and, to ſhew 


the Excellency of the Product, Farnham Hops now 


lead the Price at all Markets in England. Their Su- 


periority in this Article is owing to their great Care 


in picking, drying, and fine Bagging. | 


At this Town is a Caftle built by a Biſhop of in- 
chetler, which has been in a conitant Succeſſion poſſeſl- 


ed by the Biſhops of that Dioceſe ever ſince King Ste- 


pben's Time to this Day, though the preſent Biſhop has 
not been there theſe 12 Years ; for though it is a fine 
Situation, and affords a noble Proſpect, yet it is bleak, 
and the Apartments are too extenſive to be warm. 
The Kitchen Utenſils exhibit a pleaſing Idea of the old 
Vngliſb Hoſpitality ; for which benevolent Purpoſe 


ſuch immenſe Revenues were formerly given to Ec- 


cleſiaſtics. This Palace is a magnificent Structure, 


it is deeply moated, and ſtrongly walled, with Towers 


at proper Diſtances. It ſtands upon the Edge of an 
Hill, where there is a fine Park, ſtocked with 700 Head 


of Deer, the Property of the Biſhop, who has them 


ſent, together with Fruit from the Garden, Oc. to ſup- | 


Vox. I. IL. 1 


— 


— — * — pee 7 de — ne 8 
PESO 7 K. — — 7 2 — 
— 8 1 — — 9 £2 2 e = — they 95 — - 
— — — + AN 9 rm_" — <a ne ar es oY 5 bo — * 2 
—̃ ] In. . Ag * — 2 bs —— 
vi hs 9p * — ee . — r ———— 2 
— — DO — rt watt >a ute ar hel eo ry — — - — — — R . 
* 1 — * —— — e ps __ 


— — 2 


runnin 


| | for their Conveniency. 


218 ATOUR tw Surry. 
One large and broad Street of the Town below-hil] 
fronts the Caſtle, in which an elegant Muſick-room 
has been lately built, at the Expence of Mr. Baker, 
who has furniſhed it with a very fine Organ, The 
Main of the reſt of the Town conſiſts of a long ſtrait 


Street, croſſing it at right Angles. The River runs 


parallel to it on the South. | 

About two Miles from Farnham is More-park, for- | 
merly the Seat of Sir //i/lam Temple, who, by his Will, | 
ordered his Heart to be put into a China Baſon, and 


buried under a Sun dial in his Garden; which was ac- 
cordingly perſormed. This Houſe is ſituated in a 


Valley, ſurrounded on every Side with Hills, having a 
inning Stream through the Gardens, which, with a 
ſmall Expence, might be made to ſerpentize through 


all the adjacent Meadows, in a moſt delightful 


manner. Going. from this Seat, on the Left-hand, 
under an high Cliff, is a noted kind of natural Grotto, 
which they call Moetber Ludee's Hole, through which 
runs a fine and ftrong Rill of Water. The Grotto is 
large, but diminiſhes and winds away, as the Spring | 
ſeems to have directed it. The Owner has paved the 
Bottom of it with a kind of moſaic Tile, and has ſe- 
parated the wider Part from the narrower behind by 
a little Parapet, through which iſſues the Flow of Wa- 
ter, which trills through Marble Troughs, one below 


another, till it is conveyed out of the Grotto; and 


there murmuring down a conſiderable Declivity, over 
many artificial Steps, falls into the River on the Right- 
band; all which gives a very delighful Entertainment 
to ſuch as chooſe in warm Weather to make little 


* 


Collations or Viſits, there being Settees, with Arms, 


From this Grotto you command a fine Proſpect of 


| the Meadows and Woods which lie below it, and 


over. againſt it; and theſe are bounded again by Hills; 


Situations imaginable, 


which makes the Whole one of the moſt romantic 


About 


* . 


17 * 


Surry, GREAT BRITAIN. 219 
About a Mile onwards from the above deſcribed 
Grotto, is the Seat lately poſſeſſed by Mr. Child, and 
now in the Poſſeſſion of Themas Orby Hunter, Eſq; 
who has made great Improvements in the Gardens. 
It is built on the Site of Waverley-Abbey, a Monaſtery 
for Ciſtercian Monks, built by William Giffard, Biſhop 
of M incheſter; the Kitchen of which, and other Parts 


of its Ruins, are ſtill ſeen pretty intire, and were a few 


Years ago much more ſo, before it fell into the Hands 


of a Farmer, who uſed to load his Teams with the 
Ruins to mend the Roads, and for his private Pur- 


poſes. 
County of Surry, I took the Coach-Road over Bag/bot- 
heath, and that great Foreſt, as it is called, of Mindſor. 
Bagſhot-heath, which at preſent is an horrid barren 
Country, is capable of great Improvement, as may be 


| judged by the ſeveral Incloſures on the Borders of it, 
and ſome in the Centre alſo, which, from being in the 
{ame Condition (as we at-preſent fee the whole Face 


of the Country thereabouts very barren, yielding no- 
thing but Heath and Worts), now produces good Corn 


and Graſs ; and in ſome Parts are Plantations of Trees, 
which thrive. well. On the Edge of this Heath are 
ſeveral Seats of Noblemen; but thoſe which require 


Notice are, firſt, the late Earl of Arran's, which is a 
large Incloſure, the Wood- walks and other Plantations 


2 of two Miles in Circumference; and 


the Park, which runs on the other Side of the Houſe, 


is upwards of three Miles. The Plantations in this In- 
Cloſure have made good Progreſs, which is a Proof, 
that the Soil thereabouts is, as I have faid, capable of - 


£ 
. 


great Improvement. ISS 1 
Tbe Duke of Roxborough has a Seat in this Place, 


From Farnham, that I might take in the whole 


Ii 


r 


where his Grace uſed to reſide a great Part of the Sum- 


mer and Autumn, for the Pleaſure of Shooting, his 


Grace being fond of that Sport. 


L 2 Abou 


3 
4% 


Lp 
* 


220 A FOVUR e Saur 
About four Miles from Hagſbot, and. three from 
N octenbham, upon the Foreſt, is Eaſtham/tead Park, 
now in the Poſſeſſion of William Trumbull, Eſq; Son 
of Sir William Trumbull, who was Secretary of State to 
Eing William III. This was — Gas of King 
Henry VIII. and to this Houſe his Queen retired from 
the Court. This Park, though ſtill incloſed with a 
Pale, has been for ſome Years diſparked, and turned 
into Farms; but by the preſent Poſſeſſor is ſo well laid 
out and improved, as to have the Beauties of a Park, a 
Farm, and Garden, all blended together; which ren- 
ders it extremely agreeable, and, at the ſame time, 
profitable to the Matter : and altho' Part of the Soil of 
this Park is as bad as any Part of Z/tneſor Foreſt, yet 
by the Draining and Dreſſing of the Land, there have 
been as good Crops of Hay and Corn produced on it, 
as can be produced from Land of much greater Price; 
which is another ſtrong. Proof of this Foreſt being ca- 
pable of great Improvements. The Owner has latel 
converted the greateſt Part of the Land into a Par 
Again. | | „C 
| This Deſart of Land, of the like kind of Soil as 
about Bagſbot, lies extended ſo much, that ſome ſay 
there are not leſs than 100,000 Acres, that lie all toge- 
ther, reaching out every Way in the Counties of Surry, 
Hampſhire, and Berk/hire ; beſides a great Quantity of 
Land, almoſt as bad as that between Godalmin and 
Petersfield, on the Road to Portſmoutbh, including ſome 
Hills called the Hind head, and others, 1 
It may not be amiſs to take notice of a common 
 Mitlake in relation to Bagſbot Mutton, ſo much valued 
by the Gentry, which they ſuppoſe to be fed there, 
and, from the Poorneſs of the Soil, rendered ſmaller 
than moſt other Mutton in England; whereas I am 
credibly informed, that none of the Sheep are fed at 
Bagſhet, being brought from and fed upon Hampſhire 
- Downs, and ſent to London. There are but three in- 
' . conſiderable Butchers in Bagſbot, who hardly fell Mut- 
: 5 | | ton | 


o 


* y— r 9 1 4722 


TV 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 221 
ton enough to ſupply the three Inns, viz. the Red. 


Lion, the King's- Arms, and the H/hite- Hart, 
Through this Deſart we come into the great Weſt- 


ern Road, leading from. London to Saliſbury, Exeter, 


Kc. and oaſs the Thames at Stanes. 
The Bridge of Stanes, and Egham Cauſeway, which 


are Part of the Highway from London, to the Weſt of 
England, having been, for ſome time, in a ruinous and 


dangerous Condition, and the Tolls and Duties laid by 
an Act paſſed in the Reign of Henry VIII. and another 
in that of Queen Elizabeth, amounting to no more 
than the clear Sum of 45“ per Annum, the Bridge- 
maflers were obliged to exact, at the Ferry there, ex- 
orbitant Rates for conveying Paſſengers over the 
Thames, in order the better to ſupport the ſaid Bridge 
and Cauſeway : and yet all proving inſufficient, as well 
as burdenſome, another Act palſed in the Seſſion of 
1739-40. for. the more effectual Maintenance and 
Well-keeping of them both: and the Act provides, 


that in caſe of the Reparation of the Bridge, or any 
other Accident which ſhall hinder Paſſengers or Car- 
riages going over it, the Ferry ſhall exact no higher 


Rate for conveying over ſuch Paſſengers, &c. than are 
laid for paſſing over the Bridge. 
Here recollecting that I had yet left the Inland 


Towns of the two Counties of Kent and Suſſex, and 


great Fart of the County of N 98 out ot * Ace 


Count: 


From $tanes I turned 8. and S. E. to Chertſoy, ano- 
ther Market- town, where is a Bridge over the Thames 
this Town is noted for the Burial- place of Henry VI. 
whence his Bones were afterwards removed to Mindſar 
by Henry VII. and alſo for its being the Retreat of the 
tamous Mr, Abraham Cowley, where he lived diſtant 


from Hurries of the Court and Town, intirely taken 


up in Country-Buſineſs, Farming, and Hulbandry, for” 
his Diverſion, and where he alſo dy'd. 
From this Town, wholly employed i in Malting, and 
1 ö in 


in Barge-carriages down the River to London, I went 


away South to Woting, a private Country Market- 


town, ſo out of the Way, that it is very little heard of 
in Kugland. It claims, however, ſome Honour, from 
its being once the Reſidence of the old Counteſs of 
Niehmond, Mother to King Henry VII. who made her 
laſt Retreat here, where the King her Son built, of ra- 
ther repaired, an old Royal Houſe, on Purpoſe for her 
Reſidence, and where ſhe ended her Days in Honour 
and Peace; the former Part of her Life having been 
much expoſed to Storms and Dangers under the tur- 
bulent Reigns of the two preceding Monarchs, 
From hence we came to Guilford, a handſome and 
conſiderable Market-town. Here ſometimes the Aſ- 
ſizes are held, but always Elections for Parliament- 
| Men for the County; the Town itſelf returning two. 
The River, which, according to Mr. Camden, is called 

the M ey, and which falls into the Thames at Oatlands, 
is made navigable to this Town, which adds greatly to 
its Trade; and by this Navigation a great Quantity 
of Timber is brought down to London, not from the 
Neighbourhood of this Town only; but even from the 
woody Parts of Suſſex and Hampfhire above 30 Miles 
from it, the Country Carriages bringing it hither in 

the Summer by Land. V 
Here is a ſmall Remainder of an old Manufacture 
in the Clothing-trade; and it extends itfelf to Godalmin, 
Haſelmere, and the Vale Country, on the Side of the 
Holmwioed (of which I ſhall ſpeak on another Occaſion) 
quite to Darking, Theſe Cloths of a middling Price 
have formerly been in great Repute, but afterwards loſt 
their Credit for ſome time, till, by the Application and 
Skill of the Clothiers, of late they revived, whilſt the 
Clothiers of Cranbroo and Tenterden in Kent, whoſe 

Goods are of the ſame Kind, are almoſt ſunk to no- 

thing, as I have already obſerved, p. 154. 177. 
Ibis Clothing-trade, however ſmall, is yet very 
aſſiſting to the Poor of this Part of the Country, _— 
We TE | hs . 


%%%! ! AAS ß th Abs 


F - 


„ 


0 a= & 


2 O& 


Commons and Heath-ground thereabouts. 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 223 


the Lands, as I have noted, are but indifferent, the In- 
habitants generally Cottagers, living rage © by the 
ere is 4 
School founded by Edward VI. and an Alms-houſe 
by George Abbot, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and en- 
dowed by him with Lands worth 300 J. a Year, of 
which he ordered 100 1. to be employed in ſetting the 
Poor at work, and the other 2004. for the Mainten - 
ance of a Maſter, 12 Brethren and eight Siſters, who 
are each to have 25. 6d. a Week. Here is a Corpora - 
tion conſiſting of a Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, &c, 
and the Town returns two Members to Parliament, It 
is ſaid the Occaſion of this Erection and Endowment 
was to attone for his accidentally killing a Man. 
But what ſtruck me moſt, were ths vida of an old 
Caſtle, and ſome of the Remains of a Palace of great 
Extent, which, as appears by the beſt Authorities, was 
the Reſidence of Ethelwald,, one of the Saxon Kings, 
about 800 Years ago. It alſo appears from the Foun- 


dations that have been dug up, at ſome Diſtance from 
the Place where the Ruins ſtand, that the whole De- 


clivity of the Hill on the Eaſt-fide of the River Mey 
was occupied by this Monarch. I believe it was the 


Queen of this Potentate, £bby, whoſe favourite Refi- 


dence was called EN“ S Home, or Ebby's Houſe, now 
converted into E e ð ð oo On 

On Wedneſday the 23d of April, 17495. the Upper 
Church at Guilford in Surry fell down. It was an an- 


tient Building, and, not long before, 750 l. were ex- 


pended upon it in Repairs ; there was Preaching in it 
on the Sunday before, and Workmen were employed 
in taking down the Bells, who providentially had quit- 
ted the Spot about a Quarter of an Hour before the Ac- 


cident happened, ſo that not one Perſon received any 


Hurt: Three Bells had been taken down, and the 
other three fell with the Steeple, which broke the 


Body of the Church to Pieces, though the Steeple re- 
ceived but little Damage by the Fall, 


4 | From 


224 


From Guilferd the Road to Farnham is very remark- 
able; for it runs along Weſt from Guilford, upon the 


Ridge of an high chalky Hill, no wider than the Road 
itſelf; and the Declivity begins on either Hand, at the 
very Edge that bounds the Highway, and is very fteep 


and high. From this Hill is a Proſpect either Way, 


lo far, that it is ſurpriſing ; inſomuch that one ſees to 
the North, or North weſt, over Bagſbot heath, one 
Way, to the South-eaſt into Sv//ex the other Way, 


ꝛlmoſt to the South-downs, and Weſt to an unbounded 
Length, where the Horizon only reſtrains the Lye. 


This Hill being all Chalk, a Traveller feels the Effect 
of it in an hot Summer's Day, when the Reflexion of 
the Sun makes the Heat almoſt inſupportable, This 
Hill reaches from Guilford ſo far as within two Miles 
and an half of Farnham. = 


Tue Hill, or rather the Aſcent of it hom Guilford, 
is called df. Catharine's Hill, where a yearly Fair is 


held; on the Summit whereof ſtands the Gallowsz 
Which is ſo placed, that the 'Town's-people, from the 
Higb. it ect, may lit at their Shop doors, and ſee the 


. * 


Criminals executed. 


Near te. on the Leſt hand Side of the Nad 


leading to 


odalmin, are the Remains of an antient 
Chapel, firuated on the Summit of an Hill, ſo as to be 
ſeen at a conſiderable Diſtance every Way, This is 
called St. Catharine's Chapel. The Materials with 
which this was built, are a fort of Tile, which, when 
broken, has the Appearance of Iron within; and the 
Cement which joins theſe Tiles is now ſo hard, as 
ſcarce to be penetrated with the ſtrongeſt Inſtrument, 


The only Remains of this Chapel are the outſide Walls, 
which being built with theſe Materials, have refiſted 
the Weather, and the common Fate of Things. 


| The great Road from London to Chiche/ter, and from 
London to Portſmouth, lying through Guilford, it is 


conſequently a Town very well furniſhed with Inns 
for Accommodation of Travellers. Y” 


24 TOUR bv Surry, 


£@ aA =, 2 TT. wc EE et D 


As 


6 


„ 4 Be 2 RS 


TG 7 


ee" 
2 0 


(h WU ws uu 


. % o I IJ © (3 Fr fois 


Surry, - GREAT BRITAIN, 225 


As is Gedalmin alſo, the next Town, within three 


Miles of it, noted likewiſe, of late Years, for the Im- 


poltreſs Mary Tofts, who ſo long amuſed Stateſmen, 


_ Phyſicians, Anatomiſts, and, in ſhort, all Degrees of 


Men, learned and unlearned, with her infamous Rab- 
bet · productions, &. i 44 
Stocken-weaving is the only ManufaQure worthy of 
Notice carried on in this Town. The beſt whited- 
brown Paper is ſaid to come from hence, and that the 
Manufacture was ſet up in the Reign of James I. An 
Hoſpital was built and endowed about 150 Years ago, 
by Richard M yat of Chelmsford, Eſq; for 10 old Men. 


In the Year 1739. the Small-pox carried off, in this 


Town, upward of 500 Perſons in the Space of three 
Months, which was more than a third Part of the In- 
habitants. Could this Devaſtation have been made by 


| Tnoculation, had it been tried? So much terrified as 
the Inhabitants of all Country Towns and Villages 


are at the Appearance of this Diſtemper but in a ſingle 


Perſon, it is ſurpriſing, that this preventive Practice (in 


which the Body is previouſly prepared, the favourable 


Kind of the Pock in a manner choſen, and the Fever 


by this means rendered only ſymptomatic) is not 
oftener fallen into. eo Soo 

From Guilford lies a Croſs road, as it may be called, 
to London, not frequented by Coaches or Carriers, or 
the ordinary Paſſengers to en tho” it is by ſome 
reckoned the neareſt Way, and is, without Queſtion, 
much the pleaſanter Road, if not the pleaſanteſt in this 


Part of England; viz. From this Town to Leatherhead 
10 Miles; from Leatherhead to London, over Banſtead- 


dotons, 15 Miles; or, if you pleaſe, by Ep/om, 17 Miles; 
which, though it is called the fartheſt Way, makes 
Amends abundantly by the Advantage and Pleaſantneſs 
of the Road, and this being now a Turnpike-Road, is 
O well repaired, as that many Stage · coaches and other 


Carriages paſs that Way to Portſmouth, Chichefter, and 


other Places, 


L 5 „„ 


WP * by Nature more deliginiul by Art, 


226 A TOUR tho Surry. 
In the Road from Guilford to Epſom, being 15 Miles, 
ou meet with a Town almoſt 'at every two Miles 
nd, in or near which is an handſome Seat. The Road 
is always good, being a very hard Gravel, On the 
Right-hand of the Road lie the Downs, which have 
conſtantly a great Number of Sheep feeding on them 
and on the Left, the Parks, Gardens, and cultivated 
Fields, belonging to the ſeveral Gentlemen who inhabit 
thoſe. Seats ; all which render the Road very Pleaſant 
and agreeable. ; 
The Seat of the Lord Onſlow, which is the firſt 
on the Road from Guilford, is a noble Edifice, built 
after an Italian Model. The Gardens are beautiful, 
and laid out in the modern Taſte. It has Plenty of 
good Water, and commands a delightful Proſpect over 
a large Country, as far as Mindſor Great Park. The 
Houſe is ſeen from the Road up a grand Avenue, and 
preſents itſelf to Travellers to — what it really is, one 
of the fineſt Seats in this Part of the Kingdom. | 
On the ſame Road is an antient Seat, now in the 
Poſſeſſion of Mr. Fox Lane, Member of Parliament 
for York City; which, though an old Buildin 
| having an open Fasten in Front, towards the — 
is rendered very pleaſant; and the preſent Poſſeſſor, 
being a Perſon of fine Faſte, is beautifying the Houſe 
within, and making pleaſant Plantations about it; 
which will be a great Embelliſhment to the Seat. 
Near this Road alſo is the Seat of Sir Conyers Darcy, 
ſituated on an Eminence, ſo as to be ſeen many Miles 
diſtant. The Houſe is a large new Edifice, having a . 
— behind it, and is n. welt: timbered on every | 
ide 
| TT ought not to omit mentioning the Seat 5 the late 
Arthur Moo e, Eſq; at Fetcham, near Leatherhead, af- 
terwards in the offeion of Thomas Ravel, Eſa; 
where no Coſt has been ſpared-to make a moſt beauti- 


T* 


Surry. GREAT B&rrtain. 227 
| Two Miles from Guilford, on the Banks of the ey, 
f was a fine Seat, which belonged to Lord Onſſotu, but 
y when. ſaw it, it was in the Poſſcflion of General 


Onſloto, called Pyrford, and is n 


: _ eſpecially for the beautiful Intermixture of Wood and 
; Water in the Gardens and Grounds adjoining. The 
= Houſe was large, but much out of Repair; and fince, 
t * l have been informed, is pulled down, and moſt of the 
t F Timber about it fold. Adjoining to the Park is a very 
= convenient and ingenious Rec, the firſt of the Kind 
t in this Part of England, Near this is a ſmall pleafant 
= Seat, now in the Poſſeſſion of the Hon. Thomas King, 
, | Son to Lord-Chancellor Xing; the Gardens belonging, 
f to this Houſe, have been lately much improved ; the 
T4 Waters enlarged, and the whole opened according to 
© the modern Taſte, and, was there a better Houſe, it 
d might be reckoned one of the prettieſt Villa's for a 
16 Summer Retreat in that Part of the Country. 3 
= = At Painſbill, near Cobham, is the Seat of the Hon. 
1 = Charles Hamilton; who has made great Improvement 
nt by inclofing a large Tract of Land defigned for a Park, 
et which was moſt of it ſo poor, as not to produce any 
Sy thing but Heath and Broom z but by burning of the 
r, Heath, and ſpreading of the Aſhes on the Ground, a 
ie Crop of Turneps was obtained; and by feeding Sheep 
tz on the Turneps, their Dung became a good Manure 
| to the Land: ſo that a fine Sward of Graſs is now 
Ys upon the Land, where it was judged by moſt People 
es | impoſſible to get any Herbage, This is the fort of 
a Improvement, which was mentioned in Norfolt, where 
ry ö&b Land has been raiſed from five Shillings an Acre per 
5 Ann. to 30 or 405. and were this fort of Huſbandry 
ate practiſed in many other Parts of England, it would be 
af- ol great Service to the Public, and amply increaſe the 
{q; Value of the Lands to the Proprietor. 85 
1ti⸗ The Lands which Mr. Hamilton has incloſed, have 


| kne Inequalities; for every hundred Yards there are 
BS 2 - great 


228 4A TOUR thro Surry 


great Hollows, then riſing Grounds again, ſo that the 


Bp Proſpect is continually changing, as you walk over it ; 


and (if we may gueſs by what this Gentleman has al- 
ready done) the Whole will be laid out conformably 
to the natural Situation of the Ground; and when the 
Plantations, which are already made, are grown up, it 
will be a delightful Place; and this upon a Spot of 
Ground, which lay almoſt neglected, before this Gen- 
tleman became poſſeſſed of it; ſo that whatever is here 
laid out, will be intirely an Improvement, ſince with- 
out it tbe Land would have produced very little Rent 
to the Proprietor. And would the Gentlemen who in- 
cloſe large Tracts of Land into Parks, follow this Gen- 
tleman's Method, of e wg Land as is of little 


Value, and improve it, by making a good Sward upon 


it, their Eſtates would be greatly benefited by it. 
The Houſe which at preſent is on the Spot, is ſmall, 
being what Mr. Hamilton found built on it by his Pre- 
deceſſor; to which he has only added one handſome 
Room on the Backſide, which is elegantly fitted up, 
and furnifhed with good Pictures: but as there are fo 
many better Situations for an Houſe in the Middle of 
the Park, it is ſuppoſed he will erect a new Manſion- 
Houſe, anſwerable to the Deſign of his Plantations, 
This Gentleman has lately planted a Vineyard there. 
At Bzffeet near Cobham, is the handſome Houſe of 
the late Lieutenant-General Corutwall. The Rev. 
and ingenious Mr, Spence has made neat Improvements 
to a ſmall Place in the General's Neighbourhood, 
which ſhew what can be performed, ata ſmall Expence, 
by # Man of Taſte, as he is known to be. : 
The River Mole, which riſes near Darking, paſſes 
along by the Side of this Park, and in its Courſe ſer- 
pentizes about in fo pretty a manner, that you frequent» 
ly loſe Sight of it; and by its Windings makes the 
Courle almoſt four Miles within the Compaſs of this In- 
cloſure. Indeed this River is very narrow, and in dry. 
Weather the Current is low, and the Water not well 
TE | coloured, 


} 


/ 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 229 


coloured, which, it muſt be allowed, takes off from its 
Beauty; yet there is room for great Improvements, by 
ſloping off the Banks, ſo as to have a better View of 
the Water; and in many Places, by taking away fome 
of the little Projection of the Banks, it may be widen- 
ed, ſo as to appear conſiderable at ſome Diſtance 
which, if done, will add much to the Beauty of the 
Place. . 75 N 
Near Cobham is the Houſe of Mr. Bridges, which is 
built in a fingular Taſte, ſomething after the Model of 
an Italian Villa, but very plain on the Outſide. The 
Apartments within ſeem very commodious, and the 
principal Rooms are elegantly fitted up, the Cielings 
being gilt, and all the Members are richly ornamented: 
the Offices below are very convenient, and judiciouſly 
contrived to anſwer the Purpoſes for which they were 
deſigned. But what chiefly ſtruck 'my Curiofity on 
ſeeing it, was a falſe Story contrived on each ſide of 
the Houſe, taken from the Difference in the Height of 
the Side-rooms, from thoſe principal Apartments : and 
theſe are converted into long Galleries, with a ſmall 
Apartment at one End, which affords a Communica- 
tion between them. In the Attic Story are good Lodg- 
ing-rooms, which are well laid together; ſo that for 
the Size of this Houſe, there is hardly any other near 
London, which has more uſeful and elegant Apart» 
ments. | | | 
The Situation of it is on an Eminence, fo that it 
commands the Proſpect of the adjacent Fields, which 
are kept in very exact Order; and there is a Declivity 
from the Houſe to the River Mole, which paſſes along 
by the Side of this Gentleman's Garden : and here it 
appears much more conſiderable than in any other 
Part of its Courſe ; for Mr. Bridges has taken away ſo 
much of the Earth of the Banks, as to make the River, 
in ſome Places, four or five times broader than it natu- 
rally was, ſo that it makes an handſome Appearance. 
And by the Side of the Water, he has Goes the 
| = | arth 


| 230 N A TOUR thro Surry. 


Earth into a natural Slope, with a broad Graſs- walk, 


planted with ſweet Shrubs on each Side; and at the 
End of the Walk is a fine Room, which has a View of 
the Water lengthwiſe, and is a ſweet Retreat in hot 
Weather, being ſhaded by large Elm- trees on the 
South-ſide, and having the Water on the North and 


| Eaſt-fides, which renders it very cool and pleaſant, 


This Houſe is ſituated about half a Mile from the pub- 
lic Road to Port/mouth, and is ſo much hid by the 


Trees near it, as not to be ſeen until you rife on the 


Common or Heath beyond Cobham, where, in ſeveral 


Paris of the Road between that and Ripley, you have a 


fine View of it. On the Left-hand of the great Road 

to Guilford, before we reach Ripley, is Oetham, the 
Seat of the Right Hon. Lord King, whofe Park joins 
to the great Road. This was purchaſed by the Chan- 


_ Cellor when he was Sir Peter King; the Houſe was 


greatly repaired and beautified by the late Lord; and 


the preſent Lord has made great Improvements in the 
Park Gardens, fo as to render it as pleaſant as any Seat 


can be, where there is a Want of Water. 
The Pariſh-Church ſtands almoſt oppoſite to the 


Houſe; and in the Church-yard is a Tomb erected 


over a Grave, in which is depoſited the Corpſe of a 


Carpenter of this Place, with the following merry | 


Epitaph upon the Tomb-ftone: 


JohN SpoNG, died November 17, 1736. 
Who many a ſturdy Oak has laid along, 
Fell d by Death's furer Hatchet, here lies Spong. 

Poſts oft he made, yet ne er a Place could get, 
And liv'd by Railing, tho” he was no Mit. 
Old Saws he had, alths' no Antiquarian, 
And Styles corn ected, yet was no Grammarian, 
Long liv'd he Ockham's premier Architect, 
And, laſting as his Fame, a Tomb t ercet, 
In vain we ſee an Artiſt ſuch as he, 0 
Whoſe Pales and Gates were for Eternity; 


S 


Surry; GREAT BRITAIN. - 231 


So here he reſts from all Life's Toils and Follies, © 
Oh ! ſpare, kind Heaven, his Fellow Lab' rer Hollies, 


At the North · caſt End of this Range of fine Seats, 
is Leatherhead, a little Thoroughfare- town, with a 


Stone-bridge over the Mole; which is ſo called, from 


its remarkable Sinking into the Earth, at the Foot of 
Box- hill, near a Village called 44:c&/eham; and work- - 
ing its Way under Ground like a Mole, riſing again at 
or near this Town of Leather bead; where its wander- 


ing Streams are united again, and form a pretty large 
River, as they were before, running together under 


Leatherhead Bridge, and from thence to Cobham; and. 


ſo it purſues its Courſe to the Thames, which it joins 


at Moleſey, which, doubtleſs, takes it Name from the 


River. 98 
And here I cannot but take notice of an unaccount- 


able Error, into which all the Writers I have met with 


have unwarily fallen, on account of this little River 
hiding itſelf in the Earth, and finding its Way under- 
ground, from the Foot of Beechworth, or Betſworth 


Caſtle, near Box- hill, and then rifing again at Leather- 
head, as above; as if the Water had at once ingulfd 


itſelf in a Chaſm of Earth, or ſunk in a Whirl-pit. 
The great Camden” has not alittle contributed to-this 
Error in his Account ofit ; but as he is in ſome mea- 


ſure ſet right by an Obſervation and Note in the laſt 
Edition of his Britannia, by the Right Rev. Continua- 
tor, I ſhall have the leſs Occaſion to infift upon the 
Matter ; and ſhall therefore refer to them. 


The Town of Dar#ing is eminent for ſeveral things 


worth Obſervation ; as, firſt, for the great Raman 
Highway, called Srony-/ireet, which paſſes through its 


Church-yard : Secondly, for alittle Common or Heath, 


called the Cottman Dean, or the Heath of Poor Cot- 
tages (for ſo the Word ſignifies) belonging to the 


Town; and where their Alms-houſe ſtands, which 


ſome learned Phyſicians believe to be the beſt Air in 


Eng- 


232 " A TOUR U Surry, 
England: Thirdly, for Mr. Howard's Houſe and Gar- 
den, called Deepden; which ſtands in a ſmall Valley, 
environed with ſteep Hills on every Side: The Level- 
ome about the Houſe was laid out into pleaſant 
Walks and Gardens, which were planted with a great 
Variety of Exotic Trees and Plants, and the Hills were 
planted with Trees on every Side, excepting the South 
Aſpect, which was planted with Vines; and formerly 
there has been ſome tolerable good Wine made there, . 
tho' the Hill is ſo ſteep, that it is very difficult to walk 
up it. At preſent the Gardens and Vineyard are neg- 
lected, and many of the Exotic Trees have been de- 
ſtroyed. On the Summit of the Hill, above the Vine- 
yard, is a Summer-houſe, from which, in a clear Day, 
vou my diſcern the Sea over the South- dotons, near 
Arundel. 2 5 „ | WOT 
The Market of Daring is the moſt famous in Eng- 
land for Poultry, and particularly for the fatteſt 
Geeſe and the largeſt Capons. They are brought 
hither from as far as Horſbam in Suſſex ; and it is the 
Buſineſs of all the Country, on that Side, for many 
Miles, to breed and fatten them up; and ſome are ſo 
large, as to be little inferior to Turkeys : I have ſeen 
them ſold from 4s. to 4s. 6d. each, and weighing from 
40'4 or 65; piece. 
On Hely Thurſday here is alſo a Fair, chiefly for 
Lambs, and the greateſt in England of that Kind, I 
have paſfed over the ſo much celebrated Houſe of Mr. 
Evelyn at Wotton, near Darting, not that it is not 
worth Notice, but becauſe ſo many others have ſaid ſo 
From Box hill, and particularly from this Part of it, 
is a fair View, in clear Weather, quite over the Weald 
of Suſſex to the South-downs ; and, by the Help of 
Glaſſes, the Town of Horſham, Aſhdown Foreſt, the 
Earl of Egremont's Houſe at Pei worth, and the South- 
dotuns, as they range between Brigbtbelmſtons and 
Arundel, may be plainly ſeen; beſides an unbounded 


Proſpect into Kent, * 8 
8 5 But 


. 
# 
4 
0 
| 
3 
11 | 
l 
1 " 
Fil 
| 
| 
1 
1 
— 


A KK ANNA f N AA 23a A 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 233 


But a much nobler Proſpect ſtill does Leith-hill af- 
ford. I ſhall give it in the Words of Mr. Dennis, as 
written to his Friend Mr. Serjeant, as follows: - 

I never in all my Life (ſays that famous Critic, 
who deſerved a better Fate than he met with) left 
the Country without Regret, and always returned to 
it with Joy. The Sight of a Mountain is to me 
more agreeable than that of the moſt pompous Edi- 
« fice; and Meadows, and natural winding Streams, 
© pleaſe me before the moſt beautiful Gardens, and the 
« moſtcoſtly Canals.” We have lived ta ſee this judi- 


XR 


cious Choice become general, tho' the old neglected 


Bard. did not. So much (ſays he) does Art appear 
to me to be ſurpaſſed by Nature, and the Works of 


Men by the Works of God. 


In a late Journey which I took into the Wild of 


© Suſſex, I paſſed over an Hill which ſhewed me a 


more tranſporting Sight, than.ever the Country had 
ſhewn me before, either in England or Italy. The 
Proſpects which in /za/y pleaſed me moſt, were that 
of the Valdarno from the Apennines; that of Rome, 
and the Mediterrancan from the Mountain of Viterbo; 
of Rome, at 40, and of the Mediterranean at 50, 
Miles Diſtance from it ; and that of the Campagne of 
Rome, from Tivoli and Freſcati; ſrom which two 
Places you ſee every Fort of that famous Campagne, 
even from the Bottom of Tivoli and Freſcati, to the 
very Foot of the Mountain of Viterbo, without auy 
thing to intercept your Sight, But from an Hill, 
which I paſled in my late Journey into Suſſex, I had a 
Proſpect more extenſive than any of theſe, and which 
ſurpaſſed them at once in rural Charms, in Pomp, 
and in Magnificence. The Hill which I ſpeak of, is 
called Leith-hill, and is about five Miles Southward 


© from Darking, about fix from Box- hill, and near 12 
from Zp/om. It juts itſelf out about two Miles be- 


8 none that Range of Hills, which terminates the 
* North-downs to the South. When I ſaw, from one 


of 


* Sce his Letters Familiar, Moral, and Critical, Vol. I. p. 39. 


r — g᷑g᷑çV:4 4 „ — ry _ * 
* 
= Þs 


GG HAND 0H K 9 aa 


„ „ W A K O „ „ „ „ „ „ „. aA „. „ 


„ round Soy 


of thoſe Hills, at about two Miles Diſtance, that Side 


of Leith. hill which faces the Northern Downs, it 


appeared the beautifulleſt Proſpect I had ever ſeen: 


but after we conquered the Hill itſelf, I ſaw a Sight 


that would tranſport a Stoic ; a Sight that looked like 
Inchantment and Viſion, but Viſion beatific. Be- 
neath us Jay open to our View all the Wilds of 
Surry and Suſſex, and a great Part of that of Kent, 
admirably diverſified in every Part of them with | 
Woods, and Fields of Corn and Paſture, being 

every-where adorned with ſtately Rows of Trees. 

This beautiful Vale is about 30 Miles in Breadth, 


and about 60 in Length, and is terminated to the 


South by the majeſtic Range of the Southern Hills, 
and the Sea: and it is no eaſy Matter to decide, 


whether theſe Hills, which appear at. 30, 40, 50 | . 


Miles Diſtance, with their Tops in the Sky, appear 


more awful and venerable, or the delicious Vale be- 
tween you and them more inviting. About Noon, 


in a ſerene Day, you may, at 30 Miles Diſtance, 


fee the very Water of the Sea, tho' a Chaſm of the 


Mountains. And that which, above all, makes it a 
noble Proſpect, is, that at the ſame time that, at 30 
Miles Diſtance, you behold the very Water of 
the Sea, at the ſame time that you behold to 
the South the moſt delicious rural Proſpet in 


the Wofld, at that very time, by a little Turn 
of your Head towards the North, you look 


full over Bex-hill, and fee the Country beyond it, 
between that and London; and, over the very Sto- 
macher of it, ſee St. Paul's at 25 Miles Diſtance, 


and London beneath it, and Highgate and Han ſtead 


beyond it, . 15 
© It may, perhaps (adds this famous Critic), appear 


incredible to ſome, that a Place, which affords ſo 


great and fo ſurpriſing a Proſpect, ſhould have re- 
mained ſo long in Obſcurity *; in fo great Obſcuri- 
ty, that it is unknown to the very Frequenters cf T7 p- | 

Es | ä 
=D} This Letter is dated Aug. 27. 1717. Eo 


WY — W hy, © 12 R 12 * 


WY „ w „ 


r 


in a great meaſure cleared off. 


Surry. | GREAT BRITAIN. ” 235 | 
« /om and Box-hill, But, alas] we live in a Country 


© more fertile of great I hings, than of Men to admire 
© them. Who ever talked of Cooper's-hill, till Sir 
= John Denbam made it illuſtrious? How long did 


Ailton remain in Obſcurity, while 20 paltry Authors, 
© little and vile, if compared to him, were talked of, 


© and admired ? But here in England, 19 in 20 approve 


© by other Peoples Opinions, and not by their own.“? 
The Vale beneath Boa: hill is, for many Miles Eaſt 


and Weſt, called the Holmmbard or Holmeſdale ; in the 


woody Part of which were often found Out-lying Red 
Deer; and in the Days of King James II. or while he 
was Duke of Tori, they hunted the Jargeſt Stags here, 
that have been ſeen in England. The Duke took great 
Care to have them preſerved for his own Sport ; but 


| they have, ſince that, been moſt of them deftroyed. 
This Holmiard is now chiefly overgrown with 


Furz ; but was famous for producing ſuch Quantities 


of Strawberries, that they were carried to Market by 


Horſe: loads, | 
It is ſuggeſted, that this Place was, in antient Times, 
the Retreat, for many Ages, of the native Britons, 
whom the Romans Could never drive out; and, after 
that, it was the like to the Saxons, when the Danes 
harrafled the Nation, and ravaged the Country where- 
ever they came. On this Account they retain here in 
Memory the following Lines: 5 7 85 
This is Holmeſdale, 
. Never conquer'd, never ſhall. . 


The Country, though wild ſtill, and perhaps have- 
ing the fame Countenance now in many Places, as it 


had a thouſand Years ago; yet, in others, it is culti- 


vated, and has Roads paſſable enough in the Summer, 
quite through it, on every Side; and the Woods are 
Keeping along the Bottom of theſe Hills, and yet 
not entering into this Vale, the Country is dry, ſandy, 
. . 8 0 


5 
„„ 444 
\ Py 


_— EIT 


P . Ct 9. 1 oe 
uw» „ 


nn Surry. 
or gravelly, and full of Gentlemens Houſes, and good 
Towns; though, if we go but a little to the Right- 


hand South, into the wild Part, is a deep, ſtrong, and, 
in the wet Seaſon, an unpaſſable Clay. 5 


In paſſing through Halmoeſdale, (upon the Ridge of 
Mountains which extend from Kent to the Land's end) 
you come to Wotton, a ſmall Village, near which is 


the antient Seat of the ZEvelyns, which is ſituated 


amongſt Meadows, having pleaſant Streams of Water 
paſſing through them, and the neighbouring Hills co- 
vered with Woods, which renders the Situation plea- 
ſant in the Summer-ſeaſon ; but the Roads about it 


being very bad in Winter, it is not fo convenient an 


Habitation at that Seaſon. There are in the Skirts of 


this Pariſh, Pits out of which they dig Jet. 


Traveling Eaſt at the Foot of the Hills, we came 
to Rygate, a large Market-town, ſituated in the Valley 
of Holme/dale ; where are ſtill to be ſeen the Ruins of | 
a Caſtle, with a long Vault, and a Room at the End of | 


it; in which, it is ſaid, the Barons who were in Arms 


againſt King John held their private Meetings. | 

Here is a Seat belonging to the late Mr. Parſon's 
Family; which is beautified with Plantations, and a 
large Piece of Water. The Houſe (which was for- 
merly a Priory) is very large. 'There are two large 
Halls, each of them 50 Feet long, and of a proportion- 
able Breadth; but the Cielings are much too low, 
which is a common Fault in moſt antient Buildings, 


Ty here is a great Quantity of Carving about this Houle, 


which appears to have been ſtanding many Years. 
The Houſe and Gardens are ſurrounded with Hills 


on every Side, ſo as to render the Proſpect very 


romantic. Tor EC 6:5 | 
In this Town the late Lord Shafteſbury had an Houſe; 
to which he frequently retired, when he was inclined to 
ſeclude himſelf from Company. This Houſe is now 
poſſeſſed by a private Gentleman, who has laid out and 
planted a ſmall Spot of Ground in ſo many little Parts, 
; | i VC az 


Kent, GREAT BAH T ANN. 
as to compriſe whatever can be fuppoſed i A the moſt 
noble Seats : ſo that it may properly be called a Model 
of a Garden and Park, for in the Garden there is a 
Mount, a River, a Parterre, and Wilderveſs, and with- 
out that, a Laun with four or five Deer, terminated by 
a ſmall Wood, and yet the whole Compaſs of Ground 


is not more than four Acres. The Name it paſſes un- 


der to the Inhabitants of Rygate, is, The World in an 
Acre of Land. 

Near Rygate are two miſerable Borough- -towns, 
which nevertheleſs ſend each of them two Members to 
Parliament; to wit, Gation under the Side of the Hill, 
almoſt at Rycate, which alſo returns two Members; 3 

and Blechingly more Eaſtward 

| Rygate is noted for a N + of white Free- Bead. 

which is ſoft, and endures the Fire very well in Win- 

ter, but neither Sun nor Air: It is much uſed by Chys 

miſts, Bakers, Glaſs houſes, &c. | 
At Blechingly are an Alms-houſe and a Free- en 
At Nut field, between Rygate and Blechingly, is ano- 

ther Branch of the Family of Evelyn, which has flouriſh- 

ed there many Vears. 

From hence, croſſing ſtill all the Roads leading from 

London into Suſſex, we came to a Village called God- 

= fone which lies on the Road from London to Lewes, 


Keep eping on ER, we came to Maſterham, a neat 
handſome, well- built Market · town, the firſt in Kent on 
that Side. The late Earl of Jerſey built (or rather 
finiſhed, for it was begun by a private Gentleman) a 
very noble Houſe here, called Sguirries, which is now 
in the Poſſeſſion of a Deſcendant of Sir ahn Ward, 
who was Lord Mayor of London in the Year 1724. 
Ie Houſe ſtands on a ſmall Eminence, regarding the 

Land in the Front; but on the Back of the Houſe the 
Ground riſes very high, and is divided into ſeveral 
wy Slopes, which, as 5 the Hills are to the South Wea | 
| eſt 


= >. A TOUR thro” Surry, 
Welt of the Houſe, renders the Situation damp and 
cold. Near the Houſe are ſome Woods, thro? which 
the preſent Poſſeſſor has cut ſeveral Ridings, but many 

of them are too ſteep for that Purpoſe; and on the 
South ſide of the Hill, above the Houſe, ariſe nine con- 
ſiderable Springs, which unite at a ſmall Diſtance, and 
form the River Dart, which runs through Dartford, 
and afterwards diſcharges itſelf into the Thames. 

All this Part of the Country, from Guilford to this 
Place, is very agreeably pleaſant, healthy, and fruitful ; 
and is overſpread with good Towns, Gentlemens 
Houſes, populous Villages, abundance of Fruit, with 
Hop-grounds and Cherry-orchards, and the Lands well 
cultivated : but all on the Right-hand, that is to ſay. 
South, is over-grown with Timber, has abundance of 
waſte and wild Grounds, and Forefts, and Woods, 
with many large Iron-works, at which they caſt Iron 
. Caldrons, Chimney-backs, Furnaces, Retorts, Boiling- 
pots, Iran Cannon, Bomb-ſhells, Stink-pots, Hand- 

.grenadoes, Cannon-ball, Q. ES TT Ms 
From hence going forward Eaſt, we come to River- 
head, a Tov on the Road from London to Tunbridge ; 
and then having little to add to what we have ſaid of 
. Kent, except ſome pretty Market towns, ſuch as Mro- 
tham, commonly called Reotham, Tatun malling, &c. 
I turned North, and came to Bromley, a Market - town, 
made famous by an Haſpital, or College, built there by 
Dr. John Warner, Lord Biſhop of Rechefter, for the 
Relief of 20 poor Widows of loyal and orthodox Cler- 
gymen, who are allowed each 207, per Ann. and a 
Chaplain 50/. and it has had many Gifts and Chari- 
ties beſtowed an it ſince. 0 


Near this Town we turned away by Beckenham, and 
through Norwood, to Croydon. In the Way we ſaw 
Duliich or Sydeubam- tells, where great Crouds of the 
lower Claſs of People uſed to throng every * 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 239 | 
from London, to drink the Waters there and at S:re- 


| tham, and the rather, becauſe it lies ſo near London, 
that they can walk to it in the Morning, and return at 


Night. | | | 
Tbe Green-man, a noted Houſe of good Entertain- 
ment at Dulwich, has a Well. of the ſame Waters in. 
great Perfection. An handſome Room is built at one 
Fad of the Bowling green, for Breakfaſting, Dancing, 
and Entertainment. A Part of the faſhionable Lux- 
ury of the preſent Age; which every Village, for ten 
Miles round London, has fomething of: Diverſions of 
no ſort of Uſe, but to bring the Men and Women 
eaſily into each other's Company ; and fo to ſerve for 
Markets, as I may, for ſuch young Women as may 
be afraid of being not enough ſeen once a Week at 
Church, or heard ſufficiently of, to their Commenda- 
tion, in Acts of Houſewifry at Home: but too often af - 
ford Opportunities for Intrigues and Amours, which 
give the Heart- ach to Parents and Huſbands. 445 
The fine Walk through the Wood, over - againſt the 
Green. man, affords, when at the Top of it, a noble 
Proſpect: but yet it is exceeded from an Hill behind 


the Houſe at the Right-hand, for the Diſtinctneſs as 


well as Nobleneſs of it ; for here, as from the Centre 
to the Whole (the Oat of Honour Hill, as it is called, 
juſt by you, cloathed very agreeably with Wood), 
you have in your Eye (in ſuch a maaner, that you can 
diſtinguiſh, as if in a Table) the very Houſes, as well 
as Churches, and other public Edifices, from Putney- 
bridge down to Chelſea, and all the adjacent Villages, 
Weſtminſter, London, Deptford, Greenwich, Black-wall, 
a conſiderable Part of Kent, Eſſex, and, beyond and 
| over the great Metropolis, Highgate, Hampſtead, as far 
| as the Eye can reach. A Proſpect ſo little known too, 
that it would be ſurpriſing to ſay it, did we not ac- 
count for it by the Fondneſs which we have far foreign 
Curioſities, and by the Neglect, which it is a Part of 


240 4A4TOUR tho curry. 

an Engliſhman's Character to have for thoſe much 

greater of his own. 1 25 IH, | 
Croydon has a great Corn-market ; but chiefly for 

Oats and Oatmeal for the Service of London. The 


Town is large, and full of Citizens from Londen + in it | | 


is the antient Palace of the Archbiſhops of Canterbury, | 


and ſeveral of them lie buried in the Church here; 
particularly Archbiſhop V hitgiſt, who not only repair- | 
ed the Palace, but built and endowed the famous Ho- 


ſpital (which is for a Warden, and 28 Men and Wo- 
men), and the Free-ſchool,  , _ 
_ From hence we paſſed by Beddington, where is the 


Seat or Manſion houſe of the antient Family of the | 


Carews. The Houſe is noble, and the Gardens fine: | 
yet Architects ſay, that the two Wings are too deep for | 
the Body of the Houſe ; that they Would either have 

been more aſunder, or not ſo long. The Court before 
them is extremely fine, as is the Canal in the Park be. 
fore the Court, having a River running through it: 
the Gardens take up all the flat Part of the Park with 
Viſtas, or ProſpeRs, for two or three Miles. The 


Orange-trees, which were formerly growing here in | 


the open Ground, are now dead. They had moving 
Houſes to ſhelter them in the Winter from the Incle- 
mencies of our Climate; but a few Years ſince, the 
Owner was at the Expence of erecting a fine Green- 


| "houſe, with Saſhes in Front; the Top of the Houſe 


to take off in Summer : ſince which time the Trees 
have been conſtantly decaying for, ſtanding as it were 
in a narrow Alley, between two Walls, when the Top 
is taken away, the Current of Air is fo great, as to 
break the Branches, and prevent the Growth of the 
Trees. They had flood in the Ground above 100 
Years, and produced annually great Quantities of 
Fruit. | 7 2 . 
From hence it is but a little Mile to Caſbalton, 2 
Country Village, ſituate among innumerable Springs 
of Water, which, all together, form a River in the ver) 


Street 


„ | Surry. GreaT BarrTain. 241 
JN Street of the Town, and joining the other Springs, 
| which come from Croydon and Beddington, make one 
or Stream, called the Wandell. This Village, though 
ne lying among ſuch delightful Springs, is yet upon firm 


it | Chalk; and having the Downs adjoining, makes the 
„ | moſt agreeable Spot on this Side of London, as is abun- 
„ dantly teſtified by its being crouded, as it were, with 
r. fine Houſes of the Citizens of London; ſome of which 


are built with ſuch a Profuſion of Expence, that they 
look rather like Seats of the Nobility, than the Coun- 
try houſes of Citizens and Merchants. I cannot dwell. 
on the Deſcription of all the fine Houſes in this and 
the neighbouring Villages: I ſhall ſpeak of them again 
in Bulk, with their Neighbours of Mitcham, Stretbam, 
Tooting, Clapham, and others; but I muſt take a Trip 
here croſs the Downs to Epſom. Ts | 
Banſtead-· dotuns need no Deſcription other than this, 
that, being ſo near London, and ſurrounded, as they are, 
with pleaſant Villages, the Ground ſmooth, ſoft, level, 
and dry (even in but a few Hours after Rain), they 
_ conſpire to make the moſt delightful Spot of Ground 
of that Kind in all this Part of Britain. 
Four Miles over thoſe delicious Downs bring us to 
Et/om, a well-built, large, and handſome Village, 
which abounds with fine Houſes, the Retreats prinei- 
pally of the London Merchants. It was much fre- 
quented a few Years ago, on account of its Mineral 
Waters, which iſſue from a riſing Ground nearer A/hred 
than Z£p/om : but they are now, though not impaired 
In their Virtues, yet pretty much ſo in their Reputa- 
tion; poſſibly owing, more than any thing elſe, to the 
Place being too near London for a Journey for the Qua- 
lity and Gentry; according to the old Saying, Far- 
fetch d, and dear bought, is fitteſt for the Ladies. 
'Fhe Town, however, for the very Reaſon that the 
Waters are leſs in Repute, to wit, its Vicinity to Lon- 
on, begins to be again reſorted to in the Summer, by 
Peo „e of Fortune; and may, perhaps, in the Revolu- 
be M tions 


242 AT OUR tho Surry. 
tions of Vogue and Faſhion, or Whimſy, be one 
Day, once more, a Shewing, or Market place for the 


Sex, eſpecially as the new Bridge at I gſiminſter is now 


finiſned, which will induce the Gentry, at that End of 
the Town, to paſs over it into Surry, as they may do 
ſo without going thro' the whole Length, and dirty, or 
hard-paved rattling Streets of London. | 1 
There are a great many fine Seats-round this Place, 
which we have not Room to deſcribe: ſuch as the late 
Lord Baltimore's, Lady Fielding's, Mr. Mitebell's at 
Caſbalton, and many others; allo that formerly called 


* 
8 


Nonſuch, which was once a Royal Palace, and finely. 


ſituated, King Charles II. gave it to the Ducheſs of 
Cleveland, and the fold it to Lord Berkeley, who built a 
fine Seat with the Materials of it, near Ep/om, called 
Durdans. Nonſuch is now but a Farm-houſe, and 
 Durdans is in the Poſſeſſion of the Lord North and 
_ Guiiford. . =} 
From Epfom, that I might thoroughly viſit the 
County of Surry, I rode over ſtiff Clays, and through 
very bad Roads, to King/fone; from whence I had a 
fine View of Hampion court, at a Diſtance ; but that 
I reſerve for another Journey. 


King ſtomis a very old Market-town, remarkable for | 


2 Free ſchool, erected and endowed by Queen Elixa- 
beth ; an Alms-houſe, built in 1570. by Alderman 
Clever of London, and endowed with Lands of 80/. a 


Tear; an Houſe where formerly reſided the great Earl | 


of Warwick, ſurnamed Make-king, beſides Coomb, 
which was likewiſe his, but afterwards in the Family 


of the Herveys, and now in the Poſſeſſion of Jon 


Spencer, Eſq; from whence the Waters of certain 
Springs are ſaid to be conveyed in leaden Pipes under 


the Road, and the Thames, to Hampton-court, three 
Miles in Length. Several of the old Saxon Kings 


were not only crowned, but had their actual Reſidence 
here; whence it took its Name of King's. toton. Er 
EF | a 


Furry. GREAT BRITAIN. 349 
had once the Privilege of ſending Burgeſſes to Parlia- 
ment, but that has been long loſt. | 

From hence turning Southward, on the Road to 
Guilford, we come to E/ber, where was formerly a 
Seat built by Cardinal 7///ey, to which, during his Mi- 
niſtry, he frequently retired for Amuſement. The 
Gate to this Gothic Building remaining, was turned into 
a Dwelling-houſe, purchaſed by the late Right Hon. 
Henry Pelham, Eſq; who beautified the old Part, and 
made additional Buildings to it in the ſame Gothic 
Stile, and laid out the Grounds about it in ſo elegant 
a Taſte, as makes it one of the fineſt Seats in the 
| Neighbourhood of London but the Houfe ſtands ſo 
low, as not to be ſeen, until you come very near it; 
and the River AZole, running near the Back ofthe Houſe, 
renders it very damp, which greatly diminiſhes the 
Pleaſure of the Place, though there "ab been no Coft 
@ ſpared to render it elegant, Bonn tt 

Near Aſher, on the Left hand of the great Road, lies 
Claremont, which was a ſmall Houſe, built under an 
Hill covered with Wood, by the late Sir John Van- 
brugh, and purchaſed by his Grace the Duke of Neto- 

IE <44le, who has been at a great Expence in beautifying 
for the Gardens, c. and has added to the Houſe a great 
Za- MW Extent of Buildings, in the ſame Stile with the original 
nan WF Houle ; and has alſo built one large Room, in which 
. 2 bis Grace entertains foreign Embaſſadors, and where, 
Zar! I all the magnificent Dinners, which the Duke makes in 
mb, the Country, are ſerved up. The Houſe is ſituated ſo 
nily near the Hill, that the Moiſture iſſuing from thence 
fobn I occaſions it to be damp; and the Winds, being rever- 
tain berated back from the Woods, on the Houſe, cauſe 
nder moſt of the Chimneys to ſmoke, ſo that this is a bad 
hree WF Habitation in Winter: but as it is the Place to which 
ings bis Grace uſually retires from public Buſineſs, when- 
ence ever his Leiſure will permit, he has not ſpared Expence 
to render it as agreeable as poſſible; though, as ſeve- 


244 A TOUR thro Surry, 8 
ral Perſons have had the Contrivance of his Gardens 
and Buildings, there is not any uniform Taſte to be 
found in either; which is greatly to be regretted, ſince 
the noble Owner has been ſo much intent on having it 
worthy of himſelf. i . 8 
From hence, turning on the Right towards the 
Thames, we paſs Walton and Weybridge, where are fe. 
veral fine Seats ; but particularly thoſe of the Earls of | 
Lincoln and Portmore. CES: 
In the firſt of theſe is a noble Terrace-walk, ele. 
vated ſo high above the Level of the neighbouring 
Ground, as to afford a Proſpect of the Country, as alſo 
a View of the River Thames for ſome Miles in | 
Extent. * 0 5 
The other Seat was beautified by the Counteſs of 
Dorcheſter, in the Reign of King James II. Here is a 
fine Walk planted with Acacia- trees, which, at the 
time of Planting, were eſteemed great Curioſities. 5 
But, having mentioned Walton, J muſt not paſs by 
the public Spirit of Samuel Dicker, Eſq; of that Place; 
who applied to Parliament, in the Seſſion of 1746). 
for Powers to erect a Bridge there, the Act for which 
paſſed in 1747. and the Bridge finiſhed in Auguſt } 
1980... 5 2 DE 
'h conſiſts of four Stone Piers, between which are 
three large Truſs-Arches of Beams and Joiſts of Wood, 
ſtrongly bound together with Mortices, Iron Pins, and | 
Cramps. Under theſe three large Arches the Water 
conſtantly runs; beſides which, there are five other Wt! 
Arches of Brick-work on each Side, to make the Al- 
cent and Deſcent more eaſy : but there is ſeldom Wa- k. 
ter under any of them, except in great Floods ; and 
four of them on the Middleſex Side are ſtopt up, being | 
on an high Ground, whither the Floods never reach. 
The middle Arch, when viewed by the River: ſide, 
| affords an agreeable Proſpect of the Country, beauti- 
fully diverſified with Wood and Water, which are er 
ſeen through it to a conſiderable Diſtance, 8 pro- 
„„ 8 igious | 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 245 
digious Compaſs of this great Arch, to a Perſon below, 
occaſions an uncommon Senſation of Awe and Surprize, 
as it appears like an Overftretch, or an Extreme; and 
his Wonder and Attention are raiſed, when he pro- 
ceeds to take notice, that all the Timbers are in a fal- 
ling Inclination (there not being diſcoverable one up- 
right Piece), and conſiders alſo the very ſmall Dimen- 
ſions of the Piers that ſupport the Whole. Et Kg 

In paſſing up the Bridge, when you come paſt the 
Brick-work, the vacant Interflices between the Tim- 
bers yield a Variety of Proſpects at every Step, which, 
| when at the Centre, are feen to great Advantage : but 
& tho' each Side of the Road is very well ſecured by the 
Timber and Rails, to the Height of eight Feet ; yet, as 
it affords only a Parapet of wide Lattice work, and the 
Apertures even with the Eye are large enough to admit 
the Paſſage of any Perſon to go through, provided he 
_ climbs, or is lifted up; and as the Water is ſeen thro? 
every Opening ata great Depth below; thoſe who are 
not uſed to ſuch Views, cannot approach the Side 
without ſome little Apprehenſion. e 

Theſe Openings between the Braces and Rails 
might have been eaſily cloſed with Boards: but they 
are left ſo, to admit a free Paſſage for the Wind and 
1 are Air, to keep the Timber more found, and that any 
ood, the leaſt Decay might be at once perceived and re- 
and MW paired. CEE. þ 
Tater Without doubt it is a noble Work, and well worth 
other the Trouble of viſiting. From this Bridge to Hamp- 
> Af. ton, the fame Gentleman made a new Road, which is 
Wa- kept in good Repair, and renders the Paſſage to the 


and Bridge very good at all times. ; 
being . Near Weybridge is a pleaſant ſmall Seat, lately in the 
ach. Poſleflion of Philip Southcote, Eſq; called Nobourn farm. 
ſide, ¶ The Houſe is fituated low, but is not very damp ; and 
-auti- {Was the Advantage of being ſcreened from the Vio- 
1 are ence of ſtrong Winds, by tall Trees in the Neighbour- 
pro- hood. In the Front of the Houſe is a ſmall Iſland, 
gious 55 MY which, 


the Houſe. The Water ſurrounding this Illand is con- 


eee eee 
4 1 4 yy 24 ä 9 —- p 
— — "I Lat of oe ay 8 em, 
— . 8 - 


| Houſe are kept very neat, being rolled and fed; ſo f 
that there is a fine Carpet of Grafs, the Walks round 


te Prefect. 
| ſeveral fine Houſes; and Chert/ey Bridge appears as if 


whole Spot may juſtly be deemed one of the tweetelt| 
Retirements near London, 


to Ham and Pam little Villages; the firſt, fa- 
Aale, cloſe by the River, poſſeſſed by the late Earl ff 
Dyſart; an Houſe King Charles II. uſed to be fte. 


0 the End of the Village of Peterſbam, where the 


| Houſe, kult by the late Earl of Rocheſter, Lord Higl 


BG _ - 4 TOUR tr” Surry, 
which, in Summer, is ſtocked with Sheep, which are 
conſtantly feeding | in View of the principal Rooms of 


ducted in a ſerpentine Form. The Fields above the 


them being made dry by Gravel, and, on each Side, 
planted with ſweet Shrubs and T leres in a rural man- 
ner. At the Upper- part of theſe Fields is a Spot of 
Ground laid out in Gardens, which, being too regular, 
do not ſo well correſpond with the other Parts, W 


which afe laid out to anſwer the Name of a Farm 
very properly : but this Part has ſomething of too much 


Stitine(s and Regularity to agree with the reſt, 

From this Spot of Ground is a moſt delightſul Pro- 
ſpect over a large Extent of Meadows bounded by the 
River Thames, which winds in an-agreeable manner; 
and, having frequently large Weſt- country Barges fail- 
ing in it, with their broad Sails, they appear as ſo 
many moving Objects in a uns, and greatly enliven 


From hence alſo are ſeen 10 or 12 V ages, and 
it were intended for a principal Object. Indeed the 


Keeping the River now on my Left, 2s I did befor 
on my Right hand, drawing nearer to London, we came 


mous for a pleaſant Palace of the late Duke of Lauder . 
quently at, and was exceedingly pleaſed with. The 
Avenues of this fine Houſe, to the L.and- ſide, lead vp 


Wall of New Park comes alſo cloſe to the Town, on 
the other Side; in an Angle of which ſtood a delicious 


I reaſuret 


Pro- 


y the 
mer; 
ſail- 
as ſo 


liven! 


, and 
as if} 


J the 


ceteſt! 


zeforef 


came 
„ tas 


uder- | 
ar] off 
e fre- - 
The 
ad up 
re the 
n, on 


licious 


3 High 
>aſurer! 


Surry. GREAT BRITAIN. 247 
Treaſurer in King James Il's Reign, as alſo in Part of 
Queen Anne's Reign. This fine Houſe was burnt 


down in the Year 1720. by an accidental Fire, fo ſud- 
den and furious, that the Family, who were all at home, 


had ſcarce time to ſave their Lives. 


Nor was the Houle, though fo exquiſitely finiſhed, 
ſo beautiful within and without, the greateſt Loſs ſu:- 
tained : the rich Furniture, the curious Collection of 
Paintings, and the ineftimable Library of the firſt Earl 
of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England, were 
here wholly conſumed ; a Loſs irreparable, as the 
latter contained, among other valuable Things, ſeve- 
ral Manuſcripts relating to thoſe Times, and to Things 
tranſacted by himſelf, and by- the King his Maſter, 
both at Home and Abroad, befides other rare and cu- 


rious Collections made by that noble and learned Au- 
thor in foreign Countries. | 3 


The Offices eſcaped the Fate the Houſes met with : 


and on the fame Spot of Ground, where the Houſe 


ſtood, the late Earl of Harrington erected another, af- 
ter a Deſign of the Earl of Burlington; and when I 
have faid this, 1 need not fay it is equally a convenient 
and elegant Edifice. The Front indeed, next the 
Court, has not a very ſtriking Appearance, being ver# 


plain, and the Entrance into the Houſe not greatly to 
be praiſed : but the South Front next the Garden. tho” 


very plain, yet is bold and regular. The Aparimayits 


| next the Garden, which are chicfly deſigued tor. Staté, 


are alſo elegant, and beautifully fimthed. | 
The Gardens, which before were crouded Wit 


| Plantations near the Houſe, are now laid open in 


Lawns of Grafs ; and the Kitechen-ga:den, which was 
ſituated on the Eaſt. ſide of the Houſe, is removed wut 
of Sight, and that Ground is now converted into an 
open Slope of Graſs, which leads up to a Terrace of 


| great Length; from whence is a Proſpect of the River 


Thames, the Town of Twickenham, and all the beauti- 
ful Seats round about that Part of the Country, almoſt 
| . 0 


248 ATOUR ti Surry. 
to King flon-bridge, On the other Side of the Terrace, 
on a riſing Ground, is a large Plantation of Wood; 
and on the Summit of the Hill, is erected a fine Pleaſure- 
Houſe, which commands a Proſpect of the Country 
every Way, for many Miles: fo that by Foreigners il 
this View is eſteemed the moſt beautiful of any near 
London. 1 Dy 
From hence we came to Richmond, lately the delight- | 
ful Retreat of hislate Majeſty and his Royal Conſort the 
Queen, who took great Pleaſure therein to the Time 
of her Death; and made not only noble Improvements | 
and Alterations there, but purchaſed ſeveral fine Houſes 
on Kew green; as that of Lady Eyre, for his Royal | 
Highneſs the Duke ; that of Sir Thomas Abney for the 
Princeſſes; and his late Royal Highneſs Prince Frede- 
ric, mean while, made conſiderable Improvements in 
the fine Houſe and Gardens belonging formerly to the 
Lady Capel; while her Majeſty uſed to divert herſelf 
at her Royal Dairy-houſe, and in her Hermitage, Mer- 
lin's Cave, and other charming Improvements, which | 
me made in the Park and Gardens of this delightful i 
Place : alt which are ſo well known, that we need 
not inſiſt upon them; nor on the noble Proſpect which 
Richmond- Hill affords. . 55 
The Court, being ſo near, muſt needs have filled 
Richmond, which was before a moſt agreeable Retreat 
for the Firſt and Second-rate Gentry, with a great deal 


of the beſt Company in England. And indeed this 
Town, and the Country all round it, have much in- 
creaſed in Buildings lately. IP 7 4 
Here is an Alms-houſe, built by Duppa, Biſhop of | 
Wincheſter, in the Reign of Charles II. purſuant to a Vow | 
he made in that King's Exile, for the Support of 10 | 
poor Widows. Here is alſo another Alms- houſe, en- 
dowed with above 100/. a Year, which has, ſince its 
Foundation, been conſiderably increaſed by John 
Mitchel, Eſq;. Here are alſo two Charity-ſchools, 
one for 50 Boys, the other for 50 Girls, 8 
ö ; | : 


I the Building, and the Grounds, large Sums of Money 


Surry. * GREAT BRITAIN 249 

The Lord Viſcount Palmer/ton, the worthy Son and 
Succeſſor to the Honour and Eſtate of the great Sir 
IVilliam Temple, has a fine Seat and Gardens (hard by) 
at Sheen, The Gardens were finiſhed, as well as con- 


| trived, by the „ ies Genius of Sir William; and as they 


were his laſt Delight in Life, ſo they were every way 


5 ſuited to be ſo, to a Man of his Senſe and Capacity, 


who knew what kind of Life was beſt fitted to make a 
Man's laſt Days happy. 1 
Rochampton deſerves to be particularly mentioned, 
as it is one of the pleaſanteſt Villages near London, 
having many fine Houfes of Merchants, which are pro- 
perly ſcattered about, ſo as not to appear like a Street 


or Town; which is too much the Fault of moſt other 


Villages | 
The Bowling green Houſe at Putney is pleaſantly 


ſituated, and affords a fine Proſpect. It is now turned 


into one of thoſe faſhionable Summer Breakfaſting- 


places, which level all Diſtinction, and mingle the 


Sexes together in Company; and already ſeem, with 
the Aſſembly- rooms, that have for many Years been 


ſet up in all Places of genteel Reſort, to have gone a 
great Way in giving Licentiouſneſs to the one Sex, and 


in enabling the other to throw aſide that decent Re- 


| ſerve and Baſhfulneſs, which were wont to be thought, 
by our Forefathers, the greateſt Graces of the charm- 


ing 8 foe | : 
Several fine Houſes are very lately built, as I may 
ſay, on the Brow of the Heath, overlooking the River 
Thames, which delight the Eye. 
At Peckham is the Seat of the late Lord Trevor; 
which was built in the Reign of King James II. by Sir 


Thomas Bond, who was deeply engaged with that un- 
_ fortunate Prince in his Schemes; and being obliged to 


quit the Kingdom with him, the Houſe was plundered 
by the Populace, and became a Forfeit to the Crown. 


Ms were 


250 A TOUR thr Surry if 
were expended ; for the Whole was executed accord- 
ing to the politeſt Taſte of thoſe Times. | 

A private Gentlemen purchaſed this Seat ſoon after 
the Death of the late Lord Trevor; and had begun to 
make great Alterations, particularly in cutting down 
Hedges, and removing Walls and Buildings, which in- 
tercepted the Proſpect of the neighbouring Fields; ſo 
that, had the Gentleman lived a few Years longer, he 
would have intirely altered it to the modern Paſte of | 
Gardening, and rendered it a ſweet Retirement. 

It is not eaſy to deſcribe the Beauty with which the 

Banks of the Thames ſhine on either Side of the River, | 
from Richmond to London, much more than our An- | 
ceftors, even but one Age ago, knew any ring of, If } 
for pleaſant Villages, great Houſes, Palaces, Gardens, 
&c. it was true in Queen Elizabeth's Time, according 
to the Poet, that : 


The Thames wit h Royal Tyber may compare ; 


What may be faid of it now? when, for - one fine | 
Houſe to be ſeen then, there are, for aught I know, 
100, even as you ſit in a Boat, and paſs up and down 
XR. OT 3 : 
Firſt, beginning from Ham- houſe, as above, Rich- 
mond Palace ſalutes the Eye, being formerly no more 
* 0 a Lodge in the Park, but now makes a Royal 
Igure. | „ 5 hs 
From Richmond to London the River-ſides abound 
with Villages, and thoſe Villages fo full of beautiful | 
Buildings, charming Gardens, and rich Habitations of | 
People of Quality, that nothing can equal it; no, not | 
the Country for 20 Miles round Paris, tho? that in- 
deed is a kind of Prodigy. 55 . 146 OR 
Ic is impoſſible in one Journey to deſcribe effeQually 
this Part of the County of Surry, lying from King /ion 
to Landon and Greenwich, where I ſet out; I muſt 
therefore quit the ample Subject, and come to | 
| | ; 2 ; . Southwart, 


Surry. OGOrrar BRITAIN. 251 
Southwark, a Suburb to, rather than a Part of Lon- 


don; though it returns two Members to Parliament : 


and of which this may be ſaid with Juſtice, that it 

would be ws. E 
it Royal City, were not London by. 

To give you a brief Deſcription of Southwark, it 


might be called a long Street, of-about nine Miles in 
Length, as it is now built on Eaſtward; reaching from 


| Vaux-hall to London- bridge, and from the Bridge to 


Deptford, and up to Deptford bridge, which parts it 
from Greenwich, all the Way winding and turning as 
the River does ; except only in that Part, which reaches 
from Cuckold's-point to Deptford, which winds ſome- 
what more than the River. : 

In the Centre, which is oppoſite to the Bridge, it is 
thickened with Buildings, and may be reckoned near 


a Mile broad; viz., from the Bridge to the End of © 


Kent-ftreet and Blackman ftreet, and about the Mint. 
The Borough of Southwark is exceeding populous. 
Take it as it was antiently bounded, it contained nine 
Pariſhes ; but as- it is now extended, and joins with 
Deptford, it contains eleven large Pariſhes, = 
A further Deſcription of Southwark I defer till 1 
come to ſpeak of London, as one general Appellation 
for the two Cities of London and We/tmin/ter ; for all 
the Borough of Southwark, and all the Buildings and 


Villages included within the Bills of Mortality, make 


but one LonDox, in the general Appellation. 


I am, &c. 


„ LE T- 


— 


2 | n 8 x 
C eee nn 5 , 
— 933 n 5 2 * 


252 A TOUR tro Midds. 


EEE . 


Containing a Deſcription of Part of the County of 


MipprESsEx, Part of Haxzs, and the County | 


T Wirrs, Cc. 
1 2 


MS I came down from Xingſton, in my laſt Circuit, 


2 by the South Bank of the Thames, on the Surry 
Side of the River; I now go up to Hampton- court, on 
the North Bank, and on the Middleſex Side; which I 


mention, becauſe, as the Sides of the Country border- 
ing on the River lie parallel, ſo the Beauty of the Coun- 
try, the pleaſant Situations, the Splendor of innumera- 
ble fine Buildings, Noblemens and Gentlemens Houſes 
and Citizens Retreats, are ſo equal a Match to what I 


had deſcribed on the other Side, that one knows not 


to which to give the Preference: but as I muſt ſpeak 
of them again, when I come to write of the County 


of Middleſex, which I have now purpoſely omitted ; 


1 paſs them over here, except the Palace of Hampton 
only, which I mentioned-in Middleſex, for the Reaſons 
above. RVs 
Hampton- court lies on the North Bank of the River 
Thames, about two ſinall Miles from King ſton. It was 
built by Cardinal Molſey, and fell to the Crown, when 
the King ſeized his Effects and Eſtate, as did alſo | 
H/hitehall, another Houſe of the Cardinal's building. 
Whoever knew Hampton court before it was begun 
to be rebuilt, or altered, by the late King William, 
muſt acknowlege, it was a very complete Palace then, 
and fit for a King; and though it might not, accord- 
ing to the modern Method of Building, paſs = a 
| l | | | ing 


Middx. GREAT BRITAIN. 257 
Thing exquiſitely fine, yet itſhewed a Situation exceed- 
ingly capable of Improvement, and of being made one 
of the moſt delightful Palaces in Europe. 

This her Majeſty Queen Mary was fo ſenſible of, 
that while the King had ordered the pulling' down the 


old Apartments, and building them up in that moſt 


beautiful Form, in which we ſee them now appear, her 
Majeſty, impatient of enjoying ſo agreeable a Retreat, 


fired upon a Building, formerly made uſe of, chiefly for 


landing from the River, and therefore called the Water- 
gallery. Here ſhe ordered all the little, neat, curious, 
Things to be done, which ſuited her own Convenien- 


cy; and made it the pleaſanteſt little Palace within 


Doors, that could poſſibly be made; though its Situa- 
tion would not allow it to ſtand after the great Build- 
ing was finiſhed. | | 

The Queen had here her Gallery of Beauties, being 
the Pictures, at full Length, of the principal Ladies in 


her Retinue. Her Majeſty's Apartments, for her pri- 


vate Retreat only, were exquiſitely furniſhed ; and 


| there were among the Furniture ſeveral curious Piec 
of her own Work. | 


The Ground on the South-weſt Side of the Building 


has received many Alterations ſince the pulling down 
ol the //ater gallery (which ſtood before this handſome 
Front of the Houſe, and intercepted the Proſpect of it 


from the River). This Spot was then. laid out into 


ſmall Incloſures, ſurrounded with tall Hedges, to break 


the Violence of the Winds, and render them proper 


for the Reception of ſuch Exotic Plants in Summer, as 
were moved out of the Conſervatories during that Sea. 


ſon. In each of theſe Places is contrived a Baſon, 
which is conſtantly ſupplied with Water for the Sup- 

port of theſe Plants in dry Weather; and as theſe are - 
ſituated near the great Apartments, moſt of the Plants 


may be viewed from the Windows: and the lower 
Part of the Houſe, under the great Apartments, being 


contrived for a Green-houſe, the Plants need not be 
e | Carried 


„„ A TOUR tbo  Midds. 
carried far, when they are removed out of or into the 
Conſervatory 3 which was nay properly contrived by 
the Deſigners. 

At the - Weſt- end of this Spot was a large Hot-houſe, 
for the maintaining ſuch tender Exotic Plants, as re- 
quire Warmth to preſerve them in this Climate. Of 

all theſe Parts of Gardening Queen Mary was ſo very 

fond, that ſhe allowed an handſome Salary to Dr. 
Plukenett, a learned Botaniſt, for overlooking and regiſ- 
tering the curious Collection of Plants, which were 
then in that Garden ; but, fince the Death of that 
Queen, theſe things have been ſo much neglected, that 
very few of the moſt curious Plants are now in being 
there; which is much to be lamented ; for, however 
the Taſte for this Part of Gardening may have with 
Reaſon been neglected by private Perſons, yet, ſurely, 
at a Royal Palace, all theſe things ſhould be kept up in 
the utmoſt Magnificence, as an Encouragement to In- 
genuity, and tor the Honour of the Kingdom. This 
Taſte was, by Lewis XIV. of France, carried to a 
great Height; and had the Perſons employed by that 
Prince been ſo well acquainted with the Conſtruction 
of theſe Conſervatories, as many of the Engliſb are at 
this Day, we might have expected, in his Gardens, to 
have ſeen moſt of the curious Plants in the known 
Parts of the World. 

Here ſtand advanced, on two Pedeſtals of Stone, two 
Marble Vaſes, or Flower- pots, of exquifite Workman- 
ſhip; the one done by the famous Statuary Mr, 
Cibber, as Tam informed, and the other by a Foreigner. 
It is hard to ſay, which of the two is the beſt Perform- 
ance, though the doing of it was a kind of Trial of 
Skill between them; but it gives us room, without 
any Partiality, to . they were both Maſters of their 
Art. 

The Parterre on that Side deſcends from the Ter- 


race- walk by Steps; and on the Left a Terrace goes 
5 down 


. 


Middx. GREAT BaiTtiin. © $3. 


down the Water-fide, overlooking the Garden on the 
Eaſtward Front, and affords a fine Proſpect. 


This Part of the Garden was at firſt laid out in a 


Parterre of Scroll-work in Box, which was not only 


very coſtly at firſt making, but was alſo very expenſive 
in keeping conſtantly clipped ; which, together with 
the ill Scent, which frequently reached to the Royal 


Apartments, occaſioned its being demoliſhed, and the 
Ground diſpoſed into another Form. And if at the 
ſame time all the {horn ever-green Trees had been 
thrown out, and a finer Diſpoſition madeof the Ground, 
it would have much better correſponded with the noble 
Apartments which overlook it, than it does at preſent. 

On the North-ſide of the Houſe, where the Cha- 
pel, and ſome Part of the old Buildings, required to be 
covered from View, the Ground was laid out in a 


Wilderneſs, with a Labyrinth ſurrounded by high Eſ- 


palier Hedges ; and-this was, at that time, thought one 
of the fineſt diſpoſed Parts of the Garden. But as the 
whole Contrivance of the Plantations is in regular ſtrait 


Walks, to every Perſon of Taſte, it muſt be very far 
from affording any Pleaſure, ſince nothing can be more 


diſagreeable than to be immured between Hedges, ſo as 


to have the Eye confined to a ſtrait Walk, and the 

Beauty of the Trees growing in the Quarters intirely 
ſecluded from Sight + 9 
As this Wilderneſs lies oppoſite to Buſoy parł, there 


was deſigned a grand Entrance through it to the Pa- 
lace, fronting the Gates of the Park; where two large 


Piers were erected, to ſupport a magnificent Iron 


Gate, which was deſigned to have been put up there; 
but how it came to be left unfiniſhed, and the pitiful 


low Gates (which by no means correſpond with the 


Pillars) put in the Place, I could never learn. 
The Palace within is by much the nobleſt of any of 


the Royal Houſes, and the State- Apartments, and their 


Conveniences, are laid out with great Judgment, 


King 


256 4 TOUR hre Middx, 
King William brought into England, and plac'd here 
in a Gallery, built purpoſely for them, the famous Car. 
61 toons, as they are called; which are ſeven Pieces of 
1 ſuch Paintings as are not to be matched in Europe. It 
1 is reported, that the late French King offered 100,000 


1 Louis d'Ors for theſe Pictures. | 
| 1 There were, in all, 12 of theſe Drawings; two the 
14 King of France has, and two the King of Sardinia: 
the other was in the Poſſeſſion of a private Gentleman 
in England, who pledged it for a Sum of Money. 
And when the' Perſon who lent the Money found it 
was to be redeemed (which he was very unwilling it 
ſhould be), he damaged the Drawing very much ; ſo 
that the Gentleman brought his Action, and it was 
tried in /Ye/trin/ter-hail: in which Trial the Picture 
was produced; and I ſaw it. The Subject was Herod's 
. Cruelty ; and really the Cruelty of the Perſon ſued, to- 
wards the Picture, ſeems to be owing: to Principles 
equally diabolical, and, if poſſible, more inexcuſable, as 
to the Motive, than thoſe of Herod. DD 
The King brought a great many other fine Pieces to 
England; and from him the Love of fine Paintings ſo 
univerſally ſpread itſelf among the Nobility and Perſons 
of Figure all over the Kingdom, that it is incredible, 
what Collections have been made by Engliſb Gentle- 
men ſince that time; and how all Europe has been 
romaged, as we may ſay, for Pictures to bring over 
— -- | | | 
Queen Mary lived not to ſee this Palace completely 
\ finiſhed ; and, it is faid, King William deſigned to 
have made it more capacious and noble, had he 
lived. F W be 4 
After the Death of King William, Hampton-court 
ſeemed in a manner neglected. It % an Obſervation 
made by ſome, that FHampton-court has, ever ſince the 
Time of King Charles I. been favoured by every alter- 
nate Prince. King Charles I. delighting in Country 
Retirements, took great Pleaſure here; and, _ » 
„ ved, 


1 

4 x 

* 

— * 

＋ 

f 

1 

K 

* 

» 

5 
4 1 
i 
4 F 
2 
» 

1 

3 

5 x 
(+ 

4 
4 

ol 

L, 

| £ 
l i 
£ * { 
41 q 
1427 : 
XId 
11 F 
ſj N 

* * 
bi 5 : 
* * 

3 3 
2 x 
* *1 
. 8; 
x 
7 
ol 


Hants. GRTAT BRITAIN. 257 
lived, had purpoſed to improve it conſiderably; but it 
became at laſt one of his Priſons. f 5 
King Charles II. may well be faid to have a Diſlike 


to the Place, for the Treatment his Royal Father met 


with there; and particularly as Cromwel/ afterwards 


made it his Summer-Reſidence. He therefore choſe 


IVind/jor, and beſtowed a vaſt- Sum in beautifying the 
Caſtle there, which brought it to the Perfection we ſee 
it in at this Day, ſome few Alterations excepted, made 
in the Time of King William. | 

King James took but little Delight in retired Palaces, 
But King William fixed upon. Hampton- court, and im- 
proved it, as before mentioned. | 

Queen Anne, being taken up, for one Part of her 
Reign, in her kind Regards to the Prince her Spouſe, 
was obliged to conſult his Health, and reſide where 
that confined him; which, for the moſt Part, was at 


Kenſington, where he died: but her Majeſty always 


diſcovered her Delight in VMindſor, where the choſe the 
little Houſe, as it was called, oppoſite to the Caſtle, 


and frequently took the Air in her Chaiſe in the Parks 


and Foreſt, . - - | 
In the Reign of King George I. Hampton-court came 
into Requeſt, But his late Majeſty was but ſeldom 


there, 


I ought not to omit the Mention of the Battles of 
Alexander, wrought in fine Bruſſels Tapeſtry, and put 
up at this Palace a few Years ago; whichiare well 


worth the Obſervation of the Curious. 


From Hampton court, J directed my Courſe for a 
Journey into the South - weſt Part of England; and, to 
take up my Beginning where I concluded my laſt, I 


croſſed to Chertſey on the Thames, from whence I 


croſſed the Black Deſart of Bagſbot, in my Way to 
Hampſhire. 1 75 


I fell down towards Baſing /toke, which is ſituate in . 


the midſt of Woods, and rich fertile Paſtures: the 
. Coun- 


38 
: 
N [| 
* 
11 
7 * 
N =. 
8 1 
1 
. A ; 
4 1 
* $Y 1148 
1 | 
4+: W 157 
. [| 
TT + 9 
3.03 | 9 
3 + Et 
p : 14 
8 11 
18 „ 
1 i | 
4 141 
XY 1 
x * 1 
J 3 I 
$7 tl "3 
17 roy 
3 , L? 
. 0 7 * 7 
bs / = 
'B : i 
: . 
19 
3 5 3 
$ : 
N 17 
"Fs ,: 1 
y | } 
7 T 3 
. 
1 al 
is 24 8 [i 
4 t 8 
' 1 Ll 
14 
b + | 
ry : L 
: 1 
k x 
1 7 1 
*Þ 
+85 ; 
© T 
" oO * 
3% t 
FE 
1 YL 
8 
de”: 
2] 8 5 
| 91 
—— 
x if 1 
45 1 
5 8 q 
8 * 
1 3 
'Þ 4 vs ! 
$57 > oh 
14: WW 
-£ f 5 
1 4 2% 
* hs 
iÞ Þ 4 
iÞ £ ky 
. 5 
F 6 1 
| = & 
8, FS. 
1 * bp 
oY 
. N 
* 
} AY 
l 5 2 * 
ba. : 
Ye * 
+ 1 
pb: * 
«> ** 1 
y 1 
11 
5 4 1 
4 * * 
3 
1 
| * 
q " $ 
s : 
2 " 
1 | 
f 
- 11 
bo 2 b 
8 
+ i 
5 
* 
oy . 
1 
od * 
* i 4 
5 
* 
TP . 
LY £ 
be '' { 
f 
i 
»t F, 
* 
5 
1 
** a 
xy 
A 
by 
I 
4 5 
} be 
4 N 
N 
ITY 
340 + 
£ „ 
M$: 
— * . 
THE 
. 
1 
HY 
23 ' 
ES 
| | 
: 9 7 
4 « : 
14 
bl 
„ 3 
1 
* 


258 4 TOUR , Hants, 


Country round about is ſpread with the Houſes of the 


Nobility and Gentry. A little before we came to the 
Town, we paſſed by a Houſe built out of the Ruins, 
and on the Site, of Old Baſing-houſe, a famous For- 
treſs in the Time of the Civil Wars, belonging to 
the then Marquis of //inche/ter, Anceſtor of the Duke 


of Polton. | 


This Houſe, gariſon'd by a reſolute Band of old Sol- 


diers, under the Command of the Marquis, was a-great 
Curb to the Parliament-Party throughout that whele 
War; till, after a vigorous Defence, it was taken, and 
the brave Marquis in it, by Cromwell, who, in Revenge 
for the obſtinate Reſiſtance it made, put almoſt all the 
Gariſon to the Sword, and burnt down the noble Fa- 
bric to the Ground, which, he ſaid, was fitter for the 
Reſidence of an Emperor than a Subject. The preſent 


Houſe is in no-wiſe equal to the Magnificence which 
Fame gives to the antient Houſe ; whoſe Strength of 


Building was ſuch as to reſiſt the Battery of Cannon in 
ſeveral Attacks, It is incredible what Booty the Ga- 
riſon of this Place picked up, lying, as they did, juſt on 


the great Weſtern Road, where they intercepted the 


Carriers, plundered the Waggons, and ſuffered nothing 
to paſs, to the great Interruption of the Trade of the 
City of London, | — 
Baſing /ioke is a large and populous Town: it is a 
ayor-town, with a Recorder, ſeven Aldermen, ſeven 
capital Burgeſſes, and near the Church is a Free- ſchool. 


It has a good Market for Corn, eſpecially Barley, as 


there are a great many Maltſters there. Some few 


' Years ago, a Manufacture of making Druggets and 


Shalloons was ſet up here, and ſucceſsfully carried on, 
which employs a great Number of poor People. 
Near this Town a bloody Battle was tought in 871. 


between the Saxons and Danes, . 


From this Town the great Weſtern Road goes on to 
Fhitchurch, a mean Town, which however has a 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 259 
Market, is governed by a Mayor, and returns two 


Members to Parliament. 


Near this Town is a fine Seat of the Earl of Portf- 


mouth; to which belongs a very large Park, beautified 
with Wood and Water; and the irregularity of the 
Ground (it having many riſing Hills in it) renders the 


Proſpects very agreeable. - 


North-eaſt of hitehurch lies Kingſclere, a a pleaſant 


Market-town on the Oxford Road from Baſing ſtoke. 

It was antiently famous for having been the Seat of 

the Saxon Kings, and from thence takes its Name. 
But J had like to have forgot the famous Vindomia, 


or Silche/ter,, which is ſituated in Hants, on the Borders 
of Berkfhire, and noted for its Antiquity. 


Its Situation is high, hid with Wood. Many were 
the Roman Roads which met here, though now there 
is ſcarce any that leads to it; which is one Reaſon why 
it is ſo little known: another is, its Want of Inns for 
the Accommodation of Travelers ; for Aldermaſton, a 


pretty neat Village, beautifully ſituated, which is three 


Miles diſtant, is the neareit Town where Lodging is 
to be found, The Walls of this City are ſtanding, 


more or Jeſs perfect, quite round; perhaps the moſt 
intire in the Roman Empire, eſpecially: the North-fide, 


which is a moſt agreeable Sight. It is compoſed of 
Flint and Rag ſtone. I here was a broad Ditch quite 


round, now almoſt impaſſable, and full of Springs. 


Here- 5 there Roman Bricks are leſt in the Walls. 


IThough on the Outſide they are of a conſiderable 
Height, yet the Ground within is ſo raiſed, as nearly 


to be equal to the Top, and that covered quite round 
with Oaks, and other Timber- trees, of no mean Bulk, 
Conſtantius, the Son of Conflantine the Great, is ſaid to 
have built it, and ſowed Corn in the Track of the 
Walls, as an Omen of their Perpetuity. Now indeed 


the whole City is arable, and in the Fields Roman. 


Bricks, and other Rey are ſcattered, and _ 
dai * 


= 23 P 


E 


? 
7 
. 
1 
1 
| | 
| | 
1 
| |! 


” 2 Pa 8 
— — —2— * 2 
o _ q 


. - a 
> r eee ere ee Hae 1 EIS . — 
— = 
— 


260 A TOUR iro Hants, 
daily found. It has only one Farm-houſe, and a 

Church. The Reverend and Learned Mr. Betham, 
late Miniſter of this Place, is buried under the North 
Wall of the Chancel without-fide ; within is another 
Monument of a Perfon of Quality. They both were 
drowned in Fleet-ditck, A Spring rifes from under the 
Wall of the Church-yard. 

Five hundred Feet without the City, on the North- 
| eaſt Side, is a great Curioſity, which the Vulgar think 
was a Caſtle, but in reality an Amphitheatre, in- all 
reſpects like that of Dorcheſter. This noble Piece of 
Antiquity has from Time immemorial been a Vard for 
Cattle, and a Watering-pond ; fo that it is a Wonder 
their Trampling has not defaced it much more than it 
has. 

My Reſolution being to take in my way Wy I had 
paſſed by before, I was obliged to go off to the Left-. 
hand, to Alresford and Wincheſter. | 

Alresford was a flouriſhing Market-town, and tho” 
it had no great Trade, and very little, if any, Manu- 
factures, yet, what is very remarkable, there was no 
Collection made in the Town for the Poor, nor any 


low enough to take Alms of the Pariſh. 


But this happy Circumſtance, which fo diſtinguiſhed | 
Alresford from all her Neighbours, was _ to an 
End in 1710. when, by a ſudden and ſurpriſing Fire, 
the whole Town, with both the Church and Market- 
. Houſe, was reduced to an Heap of Rubbiſh ; and, ex- 
cept a few poor Huts at the remoteſt Ends of the Town, 
not an Houſe left ſtanding. This Town is fince very | 
| handſomely rebuilt, and the neighbouring Gentlemen 

contributed largely to the Relief of the | Hay eſpe- 


+ cially by mg: in Timber towards their build- 


ing. 
Here is a very large Pond, or Lake of Water, kept 
up to an Head by a ſtrong Battre d'eau, or Dam, 
which, it is ſaid, was made by the Romans ; and is 
Part of the great Reman rs which leads Ke. 
- | in- 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN, 10 
IVincheſter to Alton, and, as ſuppoſed, on to London ; 
though we no- where ſee any Remains of it, except be- 
tween ¶incheſter and Alton, and chiefly between this 
Town and the laſt- mentioned. | 4 15 
Near this Town, a little North-weſt, the Duke of 
Bolton has another Seat, which, though not large, is a 
handſome beautiful Palace, and the Gardens not only 
very exact, but finely ſituate, the Proſpect and Viſtas 
noble and great, and the Whole well kept. | 


From hence, at the End of ſeven Miles over the 


Downs, we come to the very antient City of Mincheſter, 
called-by the Romans YVente Belgarum, and in Britiſh, 
Caer Gwent, which ſignifies the white Town, from 
the chalky Hills near it. Not only the great Church, 
which is famous all over Europe, but even the whole 
City, has, at a Diſtance, a venerable and antient Face ; 


and yet here are many modern Buildings, and ſome 
very handſome; as the College Schools, with the Epiſ- 


copal Palace, built by Biſhop Morley, ſince the Civil 
Wars; the old Palace of the Biſhop having been ruin- 


ed by that known Church-Incendiary, Sir William 


aller, and his Crew of Plunderers ; who, if my In- 


formation is not wrong, deſtroyed more Monuments 


of the Dead, and defaced more Churches, than all the 


| Round-heads in England belide. : 


* 


The Shire-hall within the Caſtle was built like an 
old Chapel, with a Body ſupported by Pillars, and in 
it two Alles. Over the Court of Ni Prius, above the 
Judge's Seat, is fixed againſt the Wall King Arthur's 
Round table, with the Names of the Knights upon it. 

As to the Tale of this round Table, and King 


Arthur's 24 Knights, which Table, being one Piece 


of Wood, they ſtill. ſhew hanging up in the Town- 


hall, ſaid to be Part of the faid Caſtle, as a Piece of 
Antiquity of 1200 Years ſtanding, and has, as they 
pretend, the Names of the ſaid Knights in Saxon Cha- 
racters, and yet ſuch as no Man can read; there is no 
Ground to give the leaſt Credit to it; for it plainly ap- 


_ pears to be of a later Date, as our Camden obſerves. 
„ | The 


_ : 

« —_ IE a „ As TIER: Gr * — ß Eng Pra nes Nr R 

_ 1 6 4 8 r W * e 2 es ref Goat Vr 9 + "4 Meant ** : NR ST. x — . LEG * Ky wy 

pry : "Re? . II AAY 2 OS, $10 3 IOGear p 8 — __ a * —— CR = : 

f. . . . ̃ ̃ -M A AY DID O'P . 8 22 
e | ; 
oh ” 1 IT REI c — N . IP NEW > - = 0. N | U * * 2 7 e 4 1 Br R * N - ON I ee ee — Ws 
8 o » q; . 2 
r 4 


bury. 


26> _ 4 TOQUR:&r0 Hanis] 

This Church, and the Schools alſo, are accurately 
deſcribed by ſeveral Writers, eſpecially by the Monaſii. 
con, where their Antiquity and Original is fully ſet forth: 
the Outſide of the Church is plain. There is not (ex- 
cept one at the Weſt-end) either Statue, or Niche for 
Statue, to be ſeen on the Outſide. 

The North Front is moſt aner hid by an 
high Wall. 

The Tower is carried up but a very little Height 
above the Roof; ſeemingly not more than 25 Feet; 


and has no proper Finiſhing; but is covered in, as if 


the Building had been left of; which, very probably, 
might be the Caſe; for there is Strength enough be- 
low, to ſupport a Steeple higher than that of Sali/- 


When one enters at the Weſt Door, aka the mid- 
dle Aile, and takes a View of it, it has a very venera- 


dle and majeſtic Appearance. About 300 Feet from 


the Door, is a low Screen, which parts the Choir from 
the Nave, but does not intercept the View to the Eaſt- 
end; the Organ being fixed on one Side the Choir, 


under the middle Aile of the North Croſs, or TFran- 


ſept. 
The Vaulting of the Roof is Wanka. But, look- 


ing on each Side, one is offended with the maſly Pil- 


lars, whoſe Diameters are as much too thick for the 


Spaces of the Arches, as thoſe at Salisbury are too 


ſlender. 
Another great Deb is the Incloſure of the 


Tomb of William of Wickham, which, being very high, 
and erected between two of the Pillars of the Aile on 


the South-ſide, projects. conſiderably, on both Sides, 


beyond the Line of thoſe Pillars; and fo renders thoſe 
_ Viſtas irregular. 


The Entrance into the Choir i is by a noble Flight of 


Steps, the Whate Breadth of the middle Aile, The 


Screen 


Hants. GRTPAT BRITAIN. 263 
Screen is a fine Piece of ArchiteQute, of the Compoſite - 


Order. On each tide of the great Arch of the En- 
trance are two eceſſes, enriched with Entablatures 

and Compaſs Pediments: wherein are placed the Sta- 
tues of the Kings James and Charles the F irſt, finely 


caſt in Copper. 
This Screen was deſigned by FO Fones ; but, tho? 


exceeding beautiful, yet, I think, to join Roman with 


Gothic a is a 8 One would ima- 
gine, that Inigo's Pride would not deign to let bim give 
into Gothic Building; for in repairing Part of old 


| Paul's, he, as far as was practicable, Ramaniz d that 
Building ; though Sir Chri/topher //'ren, whoſe Name 


is very great, would perhaps have done otherwiſe, Sir 
Chriſſapher was not ſo ſtiff, as to lay down for a Rule, 
that every Edifice was to be deſpiſed, which was not 


| copied from the Buildings of Greece and Italy: himſelf 
has given noble Specimens, what the Force of Genius 


can do, beſides imitating. 
The Croſs, from North to South, is s quite ſhut out 
of the Choir by wooden Partxtions carried up a vaſt 


Height: this, which is the antienteſt Part of the 


Church, is by much the plaineſt; and the Vaulting 


being left unfiniſhed, all the Timbers of the Roof 


are expoſed to View. 
The Stile of Building in this Part i is greatly different 


from the Eaſt and Weſt Part: the Arches are turned 


ſemicircular, and the Pillars are of another Forin, and 
have a nearer Reſemblance of one of the five Orders : 


and this Kind of Building is what Sir Chriſtopher I/ren 
Gabe Building; and all Build- 

ings with peaked Arches, he ſays, ſhould properly be 
Called Saracen, and not Gothic, Buildings, the Saracens 
| being the Inventors of it; and Sir Chriſtopher, in his 


deſcribes to be the true 


Treatiſe concerning //e/tmin/ter- Abbey, gives Reaſons 


very concluſive for his Opinion, | 
The 1 in the Choir are of fine Gothic Wo is 


_—_— 


= = 
. AED o l > l Ont 2 . p £ CES gr Ta nn 2 
WO WIE on hand nr ter op or EIT? A ROD, 99, bom ——— — — — o , 
ee 1 
ny * a 2 = \ \ 4 N , * 74 e r = 


264 A TOUR tr © Hants 
manſhip: to which the Biſhop's Throne, erected at 
the Expence of Biſhop Jew, would have been a ay 


additional Ornament, had it been Gothic, and of a 
with the reſt of the Choir. 

The Stone Screen, where the high Altar is placed, | 
is an exceeding fine and tender Piece of Gothic Work: 5 


lece 


but, in the Angles of the Niches, where formerly were 


Images, the raiſed Panels have been chipt away, to 
make room for fixing a Parcel of ſorry Urns, or Vaſes, 
which diſgrace this fine Piece, and make it mere 


| Botchery. 


Having heard the Altar much praiſed, I viewed it | 


with Attention, | 
If by the Altar is meant the Wood-work ereQed 


by Biſhop Morley, I own, I faw nothing in that Piece | 


to be admired, It projects over the Communion-table 
like a Canopy, and is coved underneath to the Front, 


At the Extremity of the Front hangtwo large Feſtoons: 


they are gilt, as are likewiſe all the Carvings and 


Mouldings : but this Piece is rather mean than grand 
or ſtriking. The Badneſs of the painted Decorations | 


around the Commandments, and the Writings of them, 

are a Diſgrace to the Church; and really, upon the 

Whole, this Altar is not comparable to that in the BY 

great Church at Sz. Albans. | 
Within this Church are many things wary of Ob- 


ſervation. It was, for ſome Ages, the Burying-place of | 


many Engliſh, Saxon, and Norman Kings; whoſe Re. 


mains the impious Soldiers, in the Civil Wars, threw Wl 


againſt the painted Glaſs. The Reliques of ſome of Bf 
theſe, at the Repair of the Church, were collected by | 
Biſhop Fox; and, being put together into fix large ! 
wooden Cheſts, lin'd with Lead, were placed on the 
great Wall in the Choir, three on one Side, and three v 
on the other ; with an Account whoſe Bones are in ¶ t. 
each Cheſt; viz. Egbert, Adulphus, Edredus, Edmun- 
dus, Cantus, and thoſe of Queen Emma. The In- 
ſcriptions upon the firſt four are as follow, in antient 


—— 


Egbertus : 


Hants. Grrar BRITAIN, 2657 


I. 
Fzgbertus Kay obijt Anno [I $99" | 
Hic Ker Egbertus pauſat cum Rege Kenulpho, 
NO egregia munera uterque tulit, 


ced, II. 

ork: Adul ohus Rex obijt Cen <> 

vere Ringilhi, in ciſta ow / imul ofſa jacent & Adulphi 
„ to Hes fundator, hic beneſactor erat. 

aſes, III. + la 
nere 


| Edredus Rex obijt 955. 
Hoc pius in tumulo Rex Edredus requieſcit, © 


Qui has Britonum terras rexerat egregies 1 
IV. | peas 


Qed Reman Rex obijt 1 D. | 

'iece Vuem eat hec retinet Ed Hundum 22 hs Chri jt 
able Qui vivente patre regia ſæptra tulit. 

"ont, 


A great many Perſons of Rank are buried in this 
Church, beſides the Saxon Kings mentioned above: 


rand particularly, here lies, as they told us, under a grey 
tions Marble, 2 the firſt Chriſtian King of this Iſland, 
em, BW who died 180 Years after Chriſt; and, as is pretended, 

| the founded a Church where the Cathedral now ſtands. '. 


The Tomb ſtone of i lian Rufus is in the midſt of 
the Choir; his Bones are in a Cheſt of Wood, which 
ſtands on the Top of the Septum, which parts the 
Choir and the ſide Ailes. 


a A Tomb ftone, on which is this Inſcription; Bande | 
are 2/7 cor Nicolai, olim Wintonien. Episi. cujus corpus Lo 
e of Bi ap Waverly. 

d by A Monument with this lotion Intus eff ls 
large BE Richardi Willhelmi congue/foris filij & Beorniæ ducts," 

n the BY Biſhop Fox's Monument, and Biſhop Gardiner's, 
three BY with bis Effigies as a Skeleton on it: Biſhop Fox al. 


tered the Roof of the Choir, and was a great Benefac- 

tor to the Church ; he lies buried under his Chapel 

(which they call his Study), a little Room behind the 
0. 1, N Altar. 


0 RR = err 
1 — = 
.. Ds err * w . 
o Chas 


E ̃ V . ²˙ OH 7 
*. ; a 92 I —_— 
* " CN PI — rere & \ = 5 * — 
— * OR — = — — 3 . > Me del cas Joe 5 


266 A TOUR tre 


Hants. 
Altar, Over the Altar is this Inſcription ; O /acrum 
Convivium, in quo Chriſtus ſumitur ! The Root of ite 
e Choir, over the Altar, is beautified with the Hiſtory 
of the Paſſion repreſented in carved Work. 


In the Space behind the Choir are two ſtately Mo. 


numents, one for Cardinal Beaufort, Brother to Kin 
Henry IV. who founded the 


. 


above, Founder of New College in Oxford. | 
Of each of which Monuments and the Perſons, a 


The Monument of William of Wickham, mentioned 


few Particulars. N 
The Tomb of William of Wickham is very ſpacious, 
lofty, and magnificent. It is erected in a little Chapel 
in the Body of the Church. There are theſe Verſes 


about it: 


W ilhelmus dicus Wykeham facet hic nece victus; 
ſtius eccleſiae paacful, reparavit eamque. 


argus erat, dapifer; pzcbat hoc cum divite pauper: | 


Conſ:lus xariter regni furrat bene dexter. 
E unc docet iffe pium kundstio Collegiozum 2 
Pxonise ; 2-mum ſtat, Winten:arque ſecundum. 


| 3 ozatis, tumulum quocunque videtis, 


Pro tantis meritis ut fit-fibi vita pcrennis. 


That of Cardinal Beaufort, who was Brother of King 
Henry IV. was exceeding rich, and curiouſly wrought; 


and the Deſign is beautiful: but we are to obſerve, 


that, in the time of Henry VI. Gothic Architecture was 


brought to its greateſt Perfection. He is dreſſed in his | 
Cardinal's Robes, and Hat; and, if the Figure, which 


repreſents him, be like, he muſt have been a very 
comely Man. The Tomb of Biſhop /#ainfleet is on 


the other Side of the middle Aile, behind the high A- 


tar, direElly oppoſite to Heaufort's, and is built 5 
ÿů n;; 6 e that 


6 ſpital of St. Creſi; 1 
another for Biſhop Wainflete, Founder of Magdalen 
College in the fame Univerſity. . 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN, 267 


chat Model, with very little Variation: he is repreſent- 


ed lying at Length, with an Heart in his Hand. Mag- 
dalen College in Oxford, in Regard to the Memory of 


this Biſhop, keeps his Monument in Repair; and, a 


few Years ago, beautified it. Biſhop Fox's Monu- 
mentis very noble: nor is Biſhop Gardiner's much in- 
ferior to it; but the Populace, in Queen Elizabeth's 


time, to ſhew their Deteſtation of his Memory, maimed 
and defaced the Figure, which was made to repreſent 
him as lying in his Coffin. But, at this Diſtance of 


Time, he is allowed to have been, though not a good 
Man, yet one of the moſt learned and able Men of the 
Age he lived in. | „ 

It may not be amiſs to ſay a Word or two more of 
the famous William of I/ictham, who built the Body 
cf the Church; and alſo of Biſhop /ainfleet. S 

The former was a Courtier before a Biſhop; and 
tho' he had no large Share of Learning, he was a 
great Promoter of it : his natural Genius was much 
beyond his acquired Parts, and his Skill in Politics be- 
yond his Eccleſiaſtic Knowlege. He is faid to have 
put his Maſter, King Edward III. whoſe Miniſter and 
Lord High Chancellor he was, upon the two great 
Projects which made his Reign fo glorious; viz. 


W 1. Upon ſetting up his Claim to the Crown of France, 
| which brought on the War with France, in which that 


Prince was three times victorious in Battle. 2.:Upon 


W inſtituting the Order of the Garter ; in which he ob- 


tained the Honour for the Biſhops of Mincheſter to be 


always Prelates of the Order, as an Appendix to the 


Biſhoprick ; and he himſelf was the firſt : The Enfigns 


Jof that Honour are joined with his Epiſcopal Orna- 
ments, in the Robing of his Effigies on the Monument 


defcribed above. | 
Tothe great Honour of this Biſhop, there are, be- 
ſides New College, other Foundations of his, as much to 


his Fame as that of this Church; but particularly the 


8 Col- 


— — AY — re * 
28 —— 232 R * p > 1 
5 * 4 ?, „ D. 
8 RT — E z . 1 oy — A . * 
r 8 2. A rr n + 4 
8 —ͤö·ͤ 2 
* * * — * =_ 
. WH: 
8 28 r r Y 2 
x C ¹³·¹A— ea 8 
. ͤõbͤ0 w ]˙bl!l A « > 
r en 
. 


—ͤ—ꝙ — — A ee r 8 
< 1 3 , "Note 
4 ———— CR 
* " 


NE non INCISORS WERE 
a 0 S err er 
. r W 
mme 
0 5 3 — 
Ee —— ů — ů— 
$4 UBT eu os m 
* = 


— — . — 1 
— 2 ccc 
T ͤ—— Q ˙¹vͥ 
1 


268 A TOUR ro Hants: 
- College in this City, which is a truly noble Founda. 
tion. The Building conſiſts of two large Courts, in 
which are the Lodgings for the Maſters and 70 Scholars, 
and in the Centre a very elegant Chapel; beyond that, 
in the ſecond Court, are the Schools, with a large 
Cloiſter beyond them, and ſome Incloſures laid open 
for the Diverſion of the Scholars. There is alſo a 
great Hall, where the Scholars dine. In the Chapel. 
window belonging to the College, is good painted. 
Glaſs of Imagery. In the Middle of the Cloiſters is 
the Library, a ſtrong Stone Building, well contrived to 


Prevent Fire. | 


The Scholars have Exhibitions after a certain Time 
of Continuance here, if they pleaſe to ſtudy, in New 
College, Oxford, built; as I have obſerved, by the ſame 
noble Benefactor. _ | = 
This School has fully anſwered the End of the Foun. 
der, who was reſolved to erect an Houſe for making | 
the Ages to come more learned than thoſe that went | 
before; and many learned and great Men have been | 
educated here, 3355 1 | 
This Biſhop likewiſe repaired, at his own Expence, 
the Road from /Yinchefter to his Palace in Southwork. 
With regard to Biſhop ./Fainfleet, it is delivered 
down to us, as an undoubted Fact, that he propoſed to | 
the Heads of New College, to enlarge their Endowment | 
to double what it was before, provided the Members of 
that Body would pray for his Soul jointly with that of 
William of Wickham. But their Veneration for the 
Memory of their firſt Founder was fo great, that, upon 
conſidering the Propoſal, they judged, that the com- 
_ plying with it would be derogatory. to his Honour; 
and therefore refuſed this Offer. After this, Biſhop 
Il ainfleet endowed Magdalen College; whoſe annual | 


Revenues ariſing by that Endowment, and its Augmen- 
tations ſince, amount to a great Sum, A 
e 2 Biſhop 


{ 
unda- 
„ ia 
olars, 

that, 


large ä 
open 
ilſo a 


apel. 


inted. 


ers is 
ed to 


[ ime 
New 


ſame 


oun- 
king 


went 


been | 


nce, 
Ib, 
rered 


ed to | 


nent 


rs of 
at of 
the 
1pon 
oM- 
ur; 


hop 


nual | 


Hh 


hop 


8 Hants. 


 Grrar BrITAin. 269 
Here is alſo Biſhop Langton's Chapel of curious 


carved Wood- work, and therein his Tomb. 
Lord Waſton's Tomb, his Statue in Braſs on it; 


Biſbop Edington's; Dean Maſon's, who was allo a 


Knight. 
Behind the Altar, under a very fine Monument; lies 


the Earl of Portland, Lord High Treaſurer of England 
in the Reign of King Charles I. His Effigy is in 
Copper Armour, at full Length, with his Head raiſed 
on three Cuſhions of the ſame; and is a very n 
cent Work. _ 

The Monument of Dr. Malis, Biſhop of this See 
in the Reign of the Jate Queen Anne, is in the South 
Aile, alittle above Mietbam's: he is 1epreſented | in his 
Epiſcopal Habit, upon a Sarcophagus. It is a very 
handſome Deſign, and well executed. | 

In digging the Foundation. of an Houſe near the 
College, in a Stone Coffin, was found a Stone ſet in a 
Gold Ring, with this Inſcription in very odd Charac- 
ters, ſuppoſed to be about the ſixth Century, Domino 
Comite, fidele mea © i. e. The Lord van my Guide and 
faithful. Companion. 
Upon the Wall behind the Altar ſtood ſeveral Sta- 


tues of Saxon Kings and Biſhops, who had been buried 


in that Part of the Church, with theſe Inſcriptions un- 
der them. Kenedelſus Rex, S. Bitinus Epc. Egbertus 
Rex, Adulphus Rex, Eluredus Rex, flius eius, Edward; 


. dus Rex, ex, ſen, Kinewaldus Rex, Ethelſtanus Rex, filius 


us, SCA Maria, Dominus Jeſus, Edredus Rex, Ed- 
garus Rex, Emma Regina, Alwidus Epc. Ethelredus 
Rex, SCS Edwardus Rex, filius ejus, Samut N 
Hardecnutus Rex, filius ejus. 


1 Genes the mentianet Saxon Kings is this Di- 
ic | 


Corpora Sanforum font h hic in pace 2 eh 
Ex meritis guorum fulgent Miracula multa. 


N 3 Here 


— — — —— — o 
ä ops; od yin a A arr" Pu amr», 
— = R n 


— HE ra”) pon OY ES LS ARE Ir res noe > 1110 — 


* 
ogy _”—_—_ r — ⁵mm ͤ ·˙wm ͤ ] ⁰ rr er 
— Ir; 160 a N —— . 1 . * — — 
— 2 — 


* * * * put — — 2 

. Edo ai ie PLA + Seda Bias r — . 3 wy 5 — — C —— 

3 R CARD 4 * b N CT — — ; 15-46 * XA Ls 

= 10 * 222 * * 2 yy Bro ru 2 1 Q 7 
— —(— CE ee Od dn la ng fg te Ie tA SEE Won 5 
V PE 2 22 8 2 

* OT W — ꝶ——— —— — .od — MW yp — —— — „ — <_e— Ee 
3 A 8 T3" D iS ay * MEA. 1 8 — TP 4 4 wn * = 2 * 4 ata i 

= 8 3 1 07 8 -— . 2 4 1 r 2 1h N r 8 

2 1 n 2 2 
* 


— — 
9 e AS a 

** — £ n 

et E 

la * Gs 

E 


— 


3 
— » EE = r ,, e 
—_ a 


E . 
e e 
el N e 8 
— a 


270 . . A TOUR thro ame 


Here is likewiſe King Hardeknute s Tomb, whereon 
is this Diſtich: 


Wi jacet hic regni Sceptra tulit e 
Emmæ ac Cnutonis natus & ipſe fuit. 


On ibs Tomb-ſtone are theſe Verfes: 


Caper Etbelmari cujus nunc Cor tenet iftud 
axum, Parifiis morte datur tumulo. 


His Heart was ſaid to be found in an Ewer. 
On a Tomb-ſtone in the Choir is this Inſcription : 


Praſulis egregij pauſant hie membra Richardi 
Fociuns, cui ſummi gaudia ſunto poli. 


Hhice is alſo the Monument of William de Baſing, Prior 
of this Church. | 
At the Eaſt End of this Church is our Lady's Chapel 
( as it is. there called), in which they have their Morn- 
ing Six o'Clock Prayers. King Philip and Queen 
Mary were married here; where Queen Mary's Chair 
is ſtill preſerved. This Chapel was built by two 


Priors, Si//teed and Hunton ; there are half Rebus's 


for their Names carved on the Roof. 
On either Side of the Entrance into the Chair, are 
the Statues in Braſs of King James I. and King 


__ Charles l. 


Over the Door of the School ſtands a very good 
Statue of the Founder, made by Mr. Cibber, whoſe 
Workmanſhip are the two excellent Figures over 
Bethlehem: gate, in London. He was the F ather of the 
late Colley Cilber, Eſq; Poet- Laureat. 

The Clergy here To very elegantly in the Cloſe 


belonging to the Cathedral; where, beſides the Bi- 


fhop's Palace, mentioned above, are very good Houſes 
handſomely built, for the Prebendaries, Canons, and 


other Dine of this Church. The Deanty is a 
very 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 271 
very pleaſant Dwelling, the Gardens are large, and the 


River runs through them; but the Floods in Winter 


ſometimes much incommode them. 


as the City ſtands in a Vale on the Bank, and at 
the Conjunction of two ſmall Rivers, ſo the Country 
riſing every Way, but juſt as the Courſe of the Water 


zeps the Valley open, you muſt neceſſarily, as yon 


go out of the Gates, go up Hill every Way: but when 
once aſcended, you come to the moſt charming Plains, 
and moſt pleaſant Country of that Kind in England; 
which continues, with very ſmall Interſections of Ri- 


| vers and Valleys, for above 50 Miles, | | 
Here lived Con/tans, the Monk, who was made 


C2/ar, and afterwards Emperor, by his Father Con- 


= /antine; and who uſurped the Government in Oppo- 


ſition to Honorius. 8 
At the South: ſide of the Weſt Gate of this City, was 
antiently a Caſtle, in which, it is ſaid, the Saxon Kings 


kept their Court; which however is doubtful, and 


muſt be meant of the Veſt-Saxous only. This Cattle 
had been often beſieged ; particularly once by King 


Stephen, with his implacable Enemy the Empreſs Maud 


in it; and that ſo cloſely, that the Empreſs cauſed a 
Report of her Death to be ſpread ; and, being put into 
a Coffin, was carried out as a Corpſe, and ſo ſhe 
eſcaped '. / 1 3h | 

In the Place where this Caſtle ſtood, the late King 
Charles II. began a very noble Deſign'of a Royal Pa- 
lace, which, had he lived, and finiſhed it, would cer- 
tainly have made that Part of the Country the Reſort 
of the Quality and Gentry of all Parts of the Kingdom; 


for the Country hereabouts far exceeds that of Ner- 


market-heath for all kinds of Sport and Diverſion. 
The Foundation was laid March 23. 1683. (in the 


Digging for which they found a Pavement of Bricks 
and Coins of Conſtantine the Great, and others). 


There was particularly intended a large Cupola, 30 
Feet above the Roof, _— would have: been ſeen a 


- . » - 
— - — — — — edi 
— 8 - 2 8 wr wu * P 
nn. ee * eee CCC ˙² AA n l 
— " =_ - FE on . 8 1 y 
= " _— of: EL — 


great 


= - 
WS 


/ « 
5 7 
1 
[4 + 
= 
1 
. 
1 
1 
17 
b; 
4 
F * 
V 4 
© 4 
<S 4 
* 


— agar atds Fhcr" Our ——— 


—— — 
——— TOR 


222 4 TOUR th) Hants,| 


7 


great Wa ay to the Sea. The South-ſide is 216 Feet, 
and the Weſt 326; and the Shell, when it was diſ- 
continued, is faid to have coſt 2 55 oo for the Build- 


ing was ſo far proſecuted, that it was carried 10 to the 


Roof, and covered. 

The Centre of this Palace being exaQly i ina Line 
with the Centre of the Weſt-end of the Cathedral, the 
City was to have been Jaid open the Breadth of the 
Tranſept or Croſs of the Cathedral, from North to 
South, in a Street about 200 Feet broad; and on each 
Side were to have been built Houſes for the Nobility, 
and Perſons of Rank ; the Ground for which, and for 
the Parks, was actually procured. The Parks were to 
be near ten Miles in Circumference, and were to end 


Weft upon the open Downs, in View of Stec“. 


br —_ 

The principal F loor i is a noble: Range of Apartments, 
20 Feet high. 

This Houſe, with a Royal Revenue, was afterwards 
ſettled by Parliament, as an Appendage upon Prince 
George of Denmark for his Life, in caſe he had outlived 
the Queen : but his Royal Highneſs died before her 
Majeſty. And now all Hope of ſeeing this Deſign per- 


fected, or the Houſe finiſhed, is vaniſhed. And his : 


Fate Majeſty King George I. made a Preſent to the Duke 
of Bolton of the is Pillars of Italian Marble, which 
were to have ſupported its Stair-caſe; and were ſaid 
to be a Preſent to the King from the Great Duke of 
Tuſcany. At preſent, it is fitted up for a Prifon for the 
French, taken captive in the War now on foot be- 
tween the two Nations ; and contains no leſs than 1 60 
Rooms. 

There are ſeveral other public Edifices in \ this City, 
and in the Neighbourhood, which I have not Room 
to deſcribe; as the Hoſpitals, and Building adjoining 
near the Eaſt Gate. Towards the North is a Piece of 
an old Monaſtery undemoliſhed, and which is ſtill 
_—_ to the m—_—_—— being the Ne of 

ome 


- 


| Hants, 
ſome private Roman Catholic Gentlemen, where they 
have an Oratory, and, as they ſay, live ſtill according 
to the Rules of St. Benedict. This Building is called 
| Hide-houſe 3 and, as they live very uſefully, and to the 
higheſt Degree obliging, among their Neighbours, they 


* 


GREAT BriTain 273 


meet with no Obſtruction from any body, _ 
Beyond the River Itehin Eaſtward is an high Hill, 


called St. Giles's, from an Hoſpital whoſe Ruins only 
are now viſible ; and a Church- yard ſeeming to have 


been a Camp, beſides the Marks of Baſtions, and 
Works of Fortifications in the modern Stile. Here 


= /Valtheof, Earl of Northumberland and Huntingdon, 
vas beheaded by Order of King William I. whoſe 


Body was carried to Crowland, and ſaid to work 


Miracles. | 


Mincheſter is about a Mile and half within the Walls: 
it is a Place of no Trade, other than is naturally occa- 
ſioned by the Inhabitants of the City, and neighbour» 
ing Villages, one with another : here is no Manufac- 


ture, no Navigation ; there was indeed an Attempt to 


make the River navigable from Southampton, and it 
was once made practicable z but it never anſwer- 


ed the Expence, fo as to give Encouragement to the 


Undertakers to keep it up. | & 

Here is a great deal of good Company; and abun- 
dance of Gentry being in the Neighbourhood, it adds 
to the Sociableneſs of the Place: the Clergy alſo here, 


| are, generally ſpeaking, rich, and very numerous ; the 


Town is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and re- 


turns two Members to Parliament. 


The Hoſpital called of Sz. Croſs, on the South of 


| this City, at a Mile's Diſtance on the Road to South. 
| ampton, is worth Notice: it was founded by Biſhop 


Blois, and greatly enlarged and augmented by Cardinal 


| pea ; whoſe Statue is placed in a Niche over the 
Crate. 


The Church is in the Form of a Croſs, and 


has a large ſquare Tower. Every Traveler, that 
knocks at the Door of this Houſe, in his Way, and 


N 5 _ aſks 


274  ATOUR tro! Hang, 
aſks for it, claims the Relief of a Piece of white Bread, 
and a Cup of Beer; which Donation is continued to 
this Day. 7 Ei 

_ How the Revenues of this Hoſpital, which ſhould 


maintain the Maſter and 30 private Gentlemen, whom | 


they call Fellotus, but qught to call Brothers, are now re. 


duced: to maintain only 14, while the Mafter lives ina | 


Figure equal ta the beſt Gentleman in the County, 


would be well worth the Inquiry of a proper Viſitor, 


if ſuch can be named. It is a Subject that calls for 
 Animadverkon more than almoſt any other, when pub- 
lie Charities, deſigned for the Relief of the Poor, are 
_embezled by the Rich, and turned to the Support of 
Luxury and Pride. 

An Infirmary is eſtabliſhed lately in Mincheſter, by 
voluntary Subſcription, after the laudable Example ot 
thoſe. of St. Fames's Heſiminſler, and St. George's at 
Hdyde-Park Corner; and has met with great Succeſs, 
principally owing to the Zeal and Pains of the late 
Rev. Dr. Alured Clarke. I have not Room to ſay all 
that might be ſaid on this Head, and ſo muſt refer to 


the Account given by the Doctor, of the Riſe and Pro- 
greſs, Rules and Orders, of this excellent Inſtitution. 


'The City is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, fix Al- 
dermen and 12 Burgefles, and much inhabited by 
Clothiers.. 1 


Il made an Excurſion from IVinche/ter, to ſoe-the an- 


tient Town of Romſey, noted for its delightful & tuation, 
having all round it Woods, Cori -felds, Meadows, 
and Paſtures, The River, and Rivulets,, which are 
many, have a rapid Courſe, The Town was que- 
ſtionleſs Roman, and its Name declares, as much. 'T'be 
Church is a large noble Pile of Building, in Form of a 
Croſs, with ſemicircular Chapels in the upper Angles. 

The Building is in the ſame Tafte and Manner 


| with the oldeſt Part of JFinchefter Cathedral. It has 


lately been beautified ; but the Roof of the South Cros 
is decaycd, and, if not repaired, will ſhortly fall in. on 


e ww a a S 


e. 0 | 0e of = hom, BD 


Wilts. GrraTt BrITAIN 275 
the Outſide of the North Croſs are the Marks of ſome 
Cannon -balls, which, in the Civil Wars, were fred 
to batter down the Church; 3 bye they did no great | 
Damage to it. 


Another thing here worth Notice, i is, that, en the 
Leads of the Side-aile towards the Eaft, in a Corner. 


= where ſome Rubbiſh and Dirt lies, there grows a pretty 
large Apple tree, which bears a good Quantity of 


Fruit ; and is thought ſuch a Curioſity, that it is ſent 


about for Preſents. At the Weſt end is the Piece of an 


old Wall, probably belonging to * N m built 
here by King Edgar. 

Returning to Mincbeſter, we irucle up North-weft; 
and came to Stockbridge, a ſorry Borough-town, noted 
for its Corruption in electing Members of Parliament, 
two of which it returns ; and being a great Thorough- 


fare on the South-weſtern Road, it has many good 


Inns, and thoſe as well provided, as My on _ 


| Road, tho” it has no Market. 


The i ingenious Sir Richard Steel once. ene 
this Town in Parliament; and tho? he was powerfully 
oppoſed, yet carried his Election by a Stratagem, which 


9 made all the Women of bis Side: Having made a 


great Entertainment for the Burgeſſes and their Wives, 
and after having been very facetious among them, he 
took up a large Apple, and ſtuck it full of Guineas; 


and declared it the Prize of that Man, whoſe Wife 


ſhould be firſt brought to bed after that Day nine 
Months. This occaſioned a great deal of Mirth ; and 
what with the Entertainment, and with the Hopes ot 
— the Prize, the 00d Women prevailed on their 

uſbands to vote for Sir Richard, whom they to this 
Day commemorate; and, as it is ſaid once made a great 
Puſh to get a ſtanding Grder of the Corporation made, 
that no Man ſhould be received as a Candidate fop 


that Borough, who did not e nc wo ws 


—_ Terms, 


+ 


N e 


276 A TOUR #r# Wilts; 
Still riſing Northward, we arrived at Andover, a 
agen Market, and Borough town, and alſo noted 
for being a great Thoroughfare on the direct Weſtern 
Road, as well from Newbury to Salisbury, as from Lot: 
don to Taunton, and all the manufacturing Towns of 
Somerſeiſbire, whereby it is greatly enriched, and is a 
_ - thriving handſome, well-built, and populous Town. 
Here is an Hoſpital for ſix Men, built and endowed 


by Mr. Pollen, a Member for this Borough, and a 


Free ſchool founded in 1569. The Town is very 
healthy, and pleaſantly ſituated juſt on the Borders of 
thoſe Downs, which are commonly, though not pro- 

perly, called Sal:sbury-plains. * 
Near this Town is a Village called Weybill, where 
the open Down Country begins; and here, upon theſe Þ 
Downs, is the famous Weybill, where the greateſt Fair 


for Sheep in the Nation is kept; and principally of 


Ewes, for Store-ſheep for the Farmers of the Counties 
of Berks, Oxford, Bucks, Bedford, Hertford, Middleſex, 
— Surry, and Suſſex, who ſend for them to this 
a3 os 97 4 | ITT. 


From Andover we bent our Way towards Miliſbire, 
by Quarley hills, on the Weſt-fſide of which are the 
Remains of a great Fortification, conſiſting of two out- 
ward Trenches, and other Works of great Strength ; 


and then entering that County, and leaving Lugger- WM 


Hall, a ſmall Hamlet-town, noted only for returning 
two Members to Parliament, and for having been for- | 
merly the Calile of Grey Hrtzprers, on the North of 
us, we came to Ambreſbury, a very antient Town, 
Pretty large, ſtanding on the River Avon, and having 
ſeveral good Inns; but its Market is much decayed, 
and alma ſt diſcontinued. It is faid to have taken its 
Name from Ambrius, who, founded here a Monaſtery [ 
of Benedictines, long before the Coming in of the Saxons, | 
who deſtroyed it; or from Aurelius Ambroſe, a Britiſh 
Prince, who rebuilt it, and filled it with 300 Monks, 


Wilts. GREAT BRITAIN. - 27 


to pray for the Souls of thoſe noble Britons, who were 


ſlain by the Treachery of the perfidious Hengiſt the 


| Saxon, who maſſacred here in cold Blood. 300 of the 


antient Brit;/þ Nobility, whom he had invited, with 


their King Vortigern, to meet him there without Arms, 


to treat of a League of Amity, and rejoice together. 


The treacherous Saxon ſaved only the King, whom he 
obliged to give him near a Third of his Kingdom Eaſt- 


ward, before he would ſet him at Liberty, 
The Monaſtery at Ambreſbury was converted into a 
Nunnery ; and ee King Henry III's Queen, re- 
tired and died here: whoſe Example induced the Prin- 


ceſs Mary, n the Second's Daughter, and 


13 Noblemens Daughters, to take the Veil together in 
this Houſe. In the Wall of the Abbey we ſaw an old 
Grave-ſtone, ſuppoſed of Queen Guenever, King Ar- 
thur's Wife. 1 wp | 

Here is a Seat belonging to the Duke of Queenſberry, 


built by Inigo Jones, but not much to be admired. 


The preſent Duke has made great Improvements in his 


Gardens; having incloſed and planted a large ſteep 


Hill; at the Foot of which the River Avon very beau- 
tifully winds, as alſo through the greateſt Part of the 
Garden. => 888 


| On the Bridge, over this River, is built a Room af- 
ter the Manner of the Chineſe. | 


When the Whole of the Duke's Deſign is complet- 


ed, it will not be inferior to any of the fineſt Places in 
thoſe Parts. 6 


Tune ſtupendous Piece of Antiquity, called Stone 
henge, deſerves our particular Notice; and ] ſhall there- 
fore borrow from Dr. Stukely's Piece, intituled, Stone- 


henge, a Temple reſtored to the Britiſh Druids, the fol- 


lowing brief Account and Deſcription of it; referring 
to that elaborate Performance itſelf (which 

ſerves the Attention of the Curious) for a more ſatis- 
factory Account, and for the Doctor's Reaſons for his 
Hypotheſis, which, we think, he has made out with 


6-84 


RR 


well de- 


Lo * 
0 - - n 4 pon * bY a : — , 8 ep — G — 
maren ANGRY n * - * 8 ey 
bt eee, b n n „ ben e e ed; ; + wo 4 eee en 1 — 5 — e rr — — — * 
25 __ EO 7 SRO. 4 8 : . > © 8 
= [7 TEE os - — * > a, 9 . 3 — > 


48 . 


. \ = — . RM o \ 
r r ee eee ee ea EA EE ecerEOmpmcGTpE I ng res” b = . p 
f - . - : * p 
>» 1 . * — Tz — 0% - , — ” — e 
L has = : pou re ee 3 „ — 5 bs Ce * pt Doron e 1 — » 2 y — . a—_— 
5 . fee i ow * . 3 er — A As. AAS Per eye * — * * n * 
* , * 0 . ö 9 TROP On Ring $I REY r n 2 2 5 WR 
a > q : I e 7 n N 0 S ea 
# wes 7 6 * en 


278 4 TOUR thi) Wilts 


as much Certainty, as the Nature of the Subject will 


admit. ; 

The Wilthire-downs, or Sali/bury-plain, as this Gen- 
tleman obſerves, is one of the moſt delightful Spots in 
Britain; and Stone=henge has attracted the Admiration 
of all Ages. Mr. Camden himſelf ſays of it, That he 
was grieved, that the Founders of it could not be traced 
out: but Dr. Stukely has very happily made it more 
than probable, that it was a Temple of the Briti/h 
Druids, and the Chief (the Cathedral, as it may be 
called) of all their Temples in this Iſland. 
The Stones of which it was compoſed, are not facti- 
tious; for that would have been a greater Wonder, 
than to bring them together to the Place where they 


are ; but undoubtedly were brought 15 or 16 Miles | 


off, prodigious as they are, from thoſe called the Grey 
Metbers, near Abury, on Marlborough-downs, all the 
greater Stones, except the Altar, being of that Sort; 
for that, being deſigned to reſiſt Fire, is of a {lill hard- 
er kind: it is a Compoſition of Cryſtals of red, green, 
and white Colours, cemented by Nature with opake 
Granules, of flinty or tony Matter. The Stone at the 


Upper-end of the Cell, which is fallen down, and 


broken in half, the Doctor tells us, weighs above 40 
Tons, and would require above 140 Oxen to draw it; 
and yet is not the heavieſt of them. Judge then, what 


a ſtupendous Labour it was to bring together, ſo many 


Miles, ſuch a Number as were uſed here; and this has 
induced many inconſiderate People to imagine, that the 
Founders had an Art of making Stone, which has been 
loſt for many — — ä 

The preſent Name is Saxon, though the Work is, 
beyond all Compariſon, older, ſignifying an hanging 
Rod or Pole, i. e. a Gallows, from the hanging Parts, 
Architraves, or rather Impoſts ; and pendulous Rocks 
are ſtill, in Tor4/brre, called Henges. But the antient 
Name was molt probably the Ambres; for which our 


learned Author, to whom we refer, gives very ſatiſ- 


factory 


v” WW Sy ras YD 9 a * 


Wilts. SRTAT BRITAIN. 279 
factory Reaſons; and hence the adjacent Town of 


Anbreſbury, which I have taken notice of, has its 


755 Name. | 


Stone · benge ſtands not upon the Summit of an Hill, 
but near it: however, at half a Mile Diftance, the Ap- 

pearance is awful; but as you come up the Avenue, in 
the North - eaſt of it, which Side is moſt perfect, the 
Greatneſs of its Contour fills the Eye in an aſtoniſhing 


manner. It is incloſed in a circular Ditch, which hav- 


in paſſed, we aſcend 35 Yards before we came at the 
Work, The Stones are: chiflel'd, and far from rude, 
though not cut to that Preciſeneſs, as the Ruins in Old 


Rome ; and the Inſide of them had more Pains taken 
with them than the Outſide; for fo, as our Author 


obſerves, the polite Architects of the Eaſtern World 
were wont to do; not like our London Builders, who 


| carve every Moulding, and croud every Ornament 
they borrow from Books, on the Outſide of the public 
Structures, that they may the more commodzoufly gather 


the Duft and Smoke, 5 8 

When you enter the Building, whether on Foot or 
Horſeback, and caft your Eyes around upon the yawn» 
ing Ruins, you are ſtruck into a Reverie, which no one 
can deſcribe, and they only can be ſenſible of who 
feel it. Other Buildings fall by Piece- meal, but here 
a ſingle Stone is a Ruin. Vet is there as much unde · 
moliſhed, as enables us ſufficiently to recover its Form, 
when in its moſt perfect State. When we advance 
farther, the dark Part of the ponderous Impoſts over 
our Heads, the Chaſms of Sky between the Jambs of 
the Cell, the odd Conſtruction of the Whole, and 
Greatneſs of every Part, ſurprize. If you look upon 


the perfect Part, you fanſy intire Quarries mounted up 
into the Air; if upon the rude Havock below, you ſee, 


as it were, the Bowels of a Mountain turned Inſide 


out. | | 


The whole Work, being of a circular Form, is 
about 108 Feet in Diameter, from out to out. "oo 


28 *' A TOUR tri Wilt, 


Intention of the Founders was this : The whole Cir- 


cle was to conſiſt of 30 Stones, each Stone to be four * 
Cubits broad, each Interval two Cubits; 3o times four 
Cubits is twice 60: 30 times two Cubits is 60; fo 
that thrice 60 Cubits complete a Circle, whoſe Diame- 
ter is 60. A Stone being four Cubits broad, and two 
thick, is double the Interval, which is a Square of two 
Cubits. Change the Places between the Stones, and 


their Intervals, and it will make a good Ground-plot |} | 
for a circular Portico of Greet or Ryman Work; tho' 


theſe Bodies of Stone, which are in the Nature of Im- 
poſts or Cornices, never had, or were intended to have; 
any Mouldings upon them, like Greet or Roman 
Work : they are wrought perfectly plain, and ſuitable 
to the Stones that ſupport them; and the Chiſſeling of 
the upright Stones is only above-ground ; for the four 


or five F cet in Length below-ground is left in the ori- 
ginal natural Form. The upright Stones are made 


very judiciouſly to diminiſh a little every Way; fo 
"that at-top they are but - three Cubits and an half 
broad, and fo much nearer, as to ſuffer their Impoſts 
to meet a little over the Heads of the Uprights, both 


* 


are leſs liable to fall or ſwerve. | 


within- ſide and without; by which means the Uprights 


It is to be feared, ſome indiſcreet People have been 


digging about the great Entrance, with ridiculous 
Hopes of finding Treaſure; and ſo have looſened the 
chalky Foundation; for the upper Edge of the Impoſt 
overhangs no leſs than two Feet ſeven Inches, which is 
very conſiderable in an Height of 18. The whole 


Breadth at the Foundation is but two Feet and an half; 


and this noble Front is now chiefly kept up by 
the Maſonry of the Mortice, and Tenon of the Im- 
The Contrivance of the Founders in making Mor- 


tices 


This Cubit is the old Hebrew, Phanician, or Egyptian Cubit, 
'Joches four-fitths Eng lie Mealwe, 


© as ws wy tr Lu © Www, wWaww av R9vVXJ3k „ os _ 


2 TC — 2 


and what the Founders of Frone benge went by, and amounts to 20 


* „ ts of en. 


end on) oy Wow RX)_ﬀ > fwd wan; War 


= ON the Inſide. | 


4 


Wilts, GREAT BriTain. 281 
tices and Tenons between the upright Stones and the 


5 Impoſts, is admirable ; but ſo contrary to any Practice 


of the Romans, that it alone overſets their Claim to the 
Work. Theſe Tenons and Mortices of this outer Cir- 
cle are round, and fit one another very aptly,, They 
are ten Inches and one half in Diameter, and reſemble 
half an Egg, rather than an Hemiſphere; and ſo ef- 


| feQually keep both Uprights and Impoſls from Luxa- 
tion, that they n:uft have been thrown down with great 


Difficulty and Labour. The whole Height of Up- 
right and Impoſt is ten Cubits and an halt ; the Up- 
right, nine; the Impoſt over the grand Entrance is, in 
jts middle Length, 11 Feet 10 Inches, and ſo is larger 
than the reſt; and it is alſo a little broader, meaſuring 
Of the outer Circle of Stone henge, which, in its Per- 
fection, conſiſted of 60 Stones, 30 Uprights, and 30 
Impoſts, there are 17 Uprights left ſtanding, 11 of 
which remain continuous by the grand Entrance, five 
Impoſts upon them. One Upright, at the Back of the 


Temple, leans upon a Stone of the inner Circle. 


There are ſix more lying upon the Ground, whole, or 


in Pieces; ſo that 24 out of 30 are ſtill viſible at the 
Place. There is but one Impoſt more in its proper 


Place, and but two lying upon the Ground; fo that 22 
are carried off, Hence our Author infers, this Tem- 


| ple was not defaced, when Chriſtianity prevailed ; but 


that ſome rude Hands carried the Stones away for other 


| Uſes. So much for the larger Circle of Stones with 


Impoſts. | 17 
As to the leſſer Circle, which never had any Im- 


| poſts, it is ſomewhat more than eight Feet from the 


inſide of the outward one, and conſiſts of 40 leſſer 


-F Stones ; forming with the outward Circles, as it were, 
| circular Portico, a moſt beautiful Work, and of a 


pretty Effect; they are flat Parallelograms, as thoſe of 


the outer Circle; and their general and deſigned Pro- 


8 | WEE portion 


= 1 
OED 
DE ee EE e. 0 
r 


E. ere 


n — — 
ee eee, * 
= RE rr 
. 


. 
A 
— AV — 


ac vera otters a n 
eee 
. 


. — 
. 


—— 
S 7 
* N 


282 


re 
3224 — 3 
eee 629%: ee 
a 
ww 20 — * 


| balf of the upper Uprights. Theſe 


- A TOUR Fhro 


portion is two Cubits, or two and an half, as ſuitable 


Stones were found. They are a Cubit thick, and four 


and one half high, which is more than ſeven Feet; 
this was their ſtated Proportion, being every Way the 

Stones are of an 
harder Compoſition than the reſt, the better to reſiſt 
Violence, as they are leſſer; and they have ſufficient 
Faſtenings in the Ground, There are but 19 of the 


40 left; but 10 of them are ſtanding in /itu, five in one 


Place contiguous, three in another, two in another. 


The Walk between theſe two Circles, which is 300 : 
Feet in Circumference, is very noble, and very delight. 


ful. 


The Adytum, or Cell, into which we may ſuppoſe Þ 
none but the upper Order of Druids were to enter, is | 
compoſed of certain Compages of Stones, which our 
Author calls Trilithons, becauſe made each of two up- 
right Stones, with an Impoſt at- top, and there are ma- 
nifeſtly five of theſe remaining; three of which are 
intire, two are ruined, in fome meaſure; but the Stones 
remain in ſitu. It is a magnificent Niche, 27 Cubits | 
long, and as much broad, meaſuring in the wideſt 
Place. The Stones that compoſe it are really ftupen- Þ 


dous; their Height, Breadth, and Thickneſs, are enor- 


mous: and to ſee ſo many of them placed together, 


in a nice and critical Figure, with Exactneſs; to con- 


ider, as it were, not a Pillar of one Stone, but a whole 


Wall, a Side, an End of a Temple, of one Stone; to 
view them curiouſſy; creates ſuch a Motion in the 


Mind, as Words cannot expreſs. One very remark- 
able Particular in the Conſtitution of this Adytum has 
- eſcaped all Obſervers before our Author, which is this: 
As this Part is compoſed of T rilithons ſet two and two 
on each Side, and one right before, they riſe in Height 


and Beauty of the Stones, from the Lower-end of the 
Aaytum to the Upper-end: that is, the two hithermoſt 
Trilithons correſponding, or thoſe next'the grand En: 
trance, on the Right-hand, andon the Left, are actes 

= EE c 


Wilts, 


_—_— ee A— I 


2 +, of a, © we ev > kat 


Wilts. 


ed in Height by the two next in Order: and thoſe are 


corrode 
LNeſts in them. The next Trilithon on the Left is in- 
tire, compoſed of three moſt beautiful Stones. The 
Cornice, happening to be of a very durable Exgliſs 


GREAT BRITAIN. 283 


exceeded by that behind the Altar, in the Upper- end 
of this Choir; and their Heights reſpectively are 13 


Cubits, 14 Cubits, 15 Cubits. 


The Impoſts of theſe are all ofthe ſame Height, and 


ten Cubits may be ſuppoſed their Medium Meaſure in 
Length. The Artifice of the 'Tenons and Mortices of 
| theſe Trilithons, and their Impoſts, what Conformity 


they bear to that of the outer Circle, is exceedingly 


pretty, every thing being done very geometrically, and 
as would beſt anſwer every Purpoſe, from plain and 


ſimple Principles; and it is wonderful, that, in the 
Management of ſuch prodigious Stones as theſe are, 
fixed in the Ground, and ramm'd in like Poſts, there is 


not more Variation in the Height, Diſtance, &c. 


Of theſe greater Stones of the Adytum, as is obſerved 


| before, there are none wanting, being all on the Spot, 


ten Uprights, and five Cornices. The Trilithon firſt 
on the Left-hand is intire in /itu, but vaſtly decayed, 


2 N the Cornice, in which ſuch deep Holes are 
9 


that, in ſome Places, the Daws make their 


Marble, has not been much impaired by the Weather. 


Our Author took a Walk on the Top of it; but 
thought it a frightful Situation. The Trilithon of the 


Upper-end was an extraordinary Beauty; but proba» 


| bly, through the Indiſcretion of ſomebody digging be- 
= tween them and the Altar, the noble Impoſt is dif- 
W lodged from its airy Seat, and fallen upon the Altar, 
vubere its huge Bulk lies unfractured. The two Up- 


rights that ſupported it, are the moſt delicate Stones of 


: the whole Work. They were, our Author thinks, 
above 30 Feet long, and well chiſſel'd, finely taper'd, 


and proportioned in their Dimenſions, That South- 


ward is broken in two, lying upon the Altar: the 
other fill ſtands intire; but leans upon one of the 


Stones 


284 


Trilithon towards the Weſt is intire, except that ſome 
of the End of the Impoſt is fallen clean off, and all the 
Upper edge is very much diminiſhed by Time. The 


laſt Trilithon, on the Right- hand of the Entrance into | 
the Adytum, has ſuffered much. The outer Upright, 


being the Jamb of the Entrance, is ftill ſtanding ; the 
other Upright and Impoſt are both fallen forwards into 
the Adytum, and broken each into three Pieces, as 
ſuppoſed, from digging near it. That whieh is ſtand: 
ing, has a Cavity in it, in which two or three Perſons 
may fit warm from the Weather. 5 
Stone henge is compoſed of two Circles, and two 
Ovals, reſpectively concentric. The Stones that form 
theſe Ovals, riſe in Height, as nearer the Upper-end of 
the Adytum; and their mediate Meaſure is four Cubits 
and four Palms. They are of a much harder kind 
than the larger Stones in the leſſer Circle; the Found- 
ers no doubt intending, that their leſſer Bulk ſhould be 
compenſated by Solidity. Of theſe there are only fix 
remaining upright - the Stumps of two are left on the 
South-ſide by the Altar; one lies behind the Altar, 
dug up, or thrown down, by the Fall of the Upright 
there. One or two were probably thrown down by the 
Fall of the Upright of the firſt Trilithon on the Right- 
hand; a Stump of another remains by the Upright 
there ſtill tanding. . 
Ihe whole Number of Stones may be thus eomput- 
ed. The great Oval conſiſts of ten Uprights ; the 


inner, with the Altar, of 20; the great Circle, of 30; 


the inner of 40, which are 100 upright Stones ; five 
Impoſts of the great Oval ; 3o of the great Circle ; the 
two Stones on the Bank of the Area; the Stone lying 
within the Entrance of the Area, and that ſtanding with- 
out: there ſeems to be another lying on the Ground, 
by the Vallum of the Court, directly oppoſite to the 
Entrance of the Avenue: all added together, make juſt 

= LE 140 


AT OUR Wilt 
Stones of the inward Oval; the Root-end, or unhewn. 
Part of both, is raiſed ſomewhat above-ground, The 


Wilts. _ GrrarT BRITAIN. 285 
140 Stones, the Number of which Stone-henge, a whole 
Temple, is compoſed. Behold the Solution of the 


mighty Problem! the magical Spell, which has ſo long 
perplexed the Vuigar, is broken! They think it an 


z ominous thing to count the true Number of the Stones, 


and whoever does ſo, ſhall certainly die after it! 
As to the Altar, it 1s laid, toward the Upper-end of 
the Adytum, at preſent flat on the Ground, and ſqueezed 


into it, as it were, by the Weight of the Ruins upon it. 


It is a kind of blue coarſe Marble, ſuch as comes from 
Derlyſbire, and laid upon Tombs in our Churches and 


Church- yards. Our Author believes its Breadth is 


two Cubits three Palms; and that its firſt intended 
Length was ten Cubits, equal to the Breadth of the 
Trilithon, before which it lies. But it is very difficult 
to come at its true Length. It is 20 Inches thick, a 
juſt Cubit, and has been ſquared. It lies between the 
two Centres, that of the Compaſſes, and that of the 


String; leaving a convenient Space quite round it, no 


doubt as much as was neceſſary for this Miniſtration. 

The Heads of Oxen, Deer, and other Beaſts, have 
been found upon digging in and about Stone- henge, un- 
doubted Reliques of Sacrifices, together with Wood- 
aſhes. Mr. Camden ſays, Mens Bones have been found 
hereabouts; he means in the adjacent Barrows ; and 


ſuch our Author ſaw thrown out by the Rabbets, 


which have been brought hither of late Years; and, by 


their burrowing, threaten theſe noble Ruins, as the 


greedy Plough more and more invades the neighbour- 


ing Firn: ned Es 
ut eternally, as he obſerves, is to be lamented the 


Loſs of that Tablet of Tin, which was found at this 


Place in the time of Henry VIII. inſcribed with many 
Letters; but in ſo ſtrange a Character, that neither Sir 
Thomas Elliot, a learned Antiquary, nor Mr. Lilly, 
Firſt High Maſter of St. Paul's School, could make any 
thing out of it; and which, no doubt, was a Memorial 
of the Founders, written by the Druids; and, * it 
| OT Ps | cen 


286 A TOUR tro Wilt 


been oreſerved till now, would have been an invalua- 


ble Curiofity, 
In the Year 1635. as they were plowing by the Ber. 
rows about Nor manton diteb, they found ſo large 2 
Quantity of excellent Pewter, as, at à low Price, they 
ſold for five Pounds. There are ſeveral of theſe 
Ditches, being verry narrow, which run acroſs the 

Downs, which yu—_ are Boundaries of Hundreds, 
Pariſhes, &c. eſe Pewter Plates might, very poſfi- 


bly, have been Tablets, with Inſcriptions ; but, falling 


into ſuch rude Hands, they could no more diſcern the 
Writing, than interpret it. No doubt, ſays Dr. Stute. 
_ ty, this was ſome of the old Britiſb Stanmum, which 
the Tyrian Hercules, ſurnamed Melcarthus, firſt brought 
ex Caſſiteride —_— or Britain : which Hercules lived 
in Abraham's Time, or ſoon after. 

Mr. Mebb tells us, the Duke of Ducting bene dug 
about Stone-henge, perhaps much to the Prejudice of 
the Work. Mc. Webb alſo did the like, and found 

what he imagined was the Corner of a Thuribulum.. 


Mr. Hayward, late Owner of Stone-henge, likewiſe || 


dug about it, and found Heads of Oxen, and other 
Beaſts Bones, and nothing elſe. 


Dr. Stukely bimſelf, in 1723. dug on the Inſide of || 


the Altar, about the Middle, four Feet along the Edge 
of the Stone, ſix Feet forward towards the Middle of 
the Adytum: at a Foot deep he came to the ſolid 
Chalk, mixed with Flints, which had never been ſtirred, 
The Altar was exactly a Cubit thick, f. e. 20 Inches 
four-fifths, but broken in two or three Pieces by the 
ponderous Maſſes of the Impoſts, and one vpright 
Stone of that Trilithon, which ſtood at the Upper- end 
of the Haytum, being fallen upon it. Hence appears 
the Commodiouſneſs of the Foundation for this large 
Work ! They dug Holes in the ſolid Chalk, which 
would of itfelf keep up the Stones as firm, as if a Wall 
was built round them ; and no o doubt but they ramm d 


up 


d) 


2 NO > © of 


= tu TA 


E EU Sp nero Tm wy ³ aw We” = Rag WP ' 


'. kw we w Of © fr + 


| Wilts: GREAT BRITAIN. 287 


up the Interſtices with Flints. But he ſays, he had too 
much Regard to the Work, to ky e near the 
Stones. He took up an Ox's Tooth above-ground, 
without the Adytum, on the Right-hand of the lower- 
moſt Trilithon Northward. | £3 

The Time our Author aſſigns for the building of 
Stone henge, is not long after Camby/es's Invaſion of 


| Egypt ; when he committed ſuch horrid Outrages 


there, and made ſuch diſmal Havock with the Prieſts 
and Inhabitants in general, that they diſperſed them- 
ſelves to all Parts of the World; fome as far as the 


| Eaſt-Indies ; and ſome, it is not queſtioned, as far 


Weſtward, into Britain; and introduced ſome of their 
Learning, Arts, and Religion, among the Druids ; 
and perhaps had an Hand in this very Work, the only 
one where the Stones are chiſſel'd; all other Works 
of theirs being of rude Stones, untouched of the Tool, 
exactly after the Patriarchal and Jewiſh Mode, and 


therefore older than this: and this Conjecture is the 
more probable, becauſe, at the time mentioned, the 


Phoenician Trade was at its Height, which afforded a 
readier Conveyance hither. This was before the 
ſecond Temple at FJeruſalem was built; before the 


Crecians had any Hiſtory. 


Por further Particulars of this ſtupendous Work, 
and other curious Matters relating and adjacent to it 
(ſuch as its Antiquity before the time of the Belgæ, the 
Romans, the Saxons, and Danes; of the Manie; of 


Veſpaſian' s Camp at Ambreſbury ; the Introduction of 
= the Druids into Britain, which he puts about Abra- 
& ham's Time; its antient Name {the 4mbres]; the Wa- 

| ter-Vaſes of Stone-henge ; the Avenues to it; the Cur- 
| ſs); we muſt refer our Readers to the Work itſelf, 


having already exceeded the Bounds to which the 
Nature of our Deſign confines us. But this we may 
add, that doubtleſs they had ſome Method in former 
Days, in foreign Countries, as well as here, to move 
heavier Weights than we now find practicable. How 
elle did Solomon's Workmen build the. Battlement or 
„ additional 


288 5 4A TOUR thro Wilts: 


additional Wall, to ſupport the Precipice of Mount 
Moriab, on which the Temple was erected ; which 
was all built of Parian Marble, each Stone being 40 


Cubits long, 14 broad, and eight Cubits thick. And | 


ſo much for this celebrated Temple of Stone-henge. 


About ſix Miles North-weſt of this Place, at a ſmall | 
Village called Shrawton, near Longleat, the noble Seat | 


of Lord Meymouth, is a curious Piece of Sculpture in 


Alabaſter, which had been dug in one of the adjacent | 


Barrows on Salisbury Plain. It is of an oval Form, 
about two Feet in Length, and one in the broadeſt Part 
of the Diameter.-; In the Middle is repreſented a Wo- 


man, habited as a Queen, with her Globe, Scepter, 
Crown, and Mantle of State. In a Compartment 
over her Head are three Fi e evidently repreſenting | 


the three Perſons: of the Holy Trinity. Round the 
Sides are Angels intermixed with ſome of the Apoſtles, 
The exquiſite Workmanſhip of the Figure of the Wo- 
man (who ſeems intended for the Virgin Mary), the 
ſtrong as well as tender Expreſhon in her Features, 


and-the Elegance of her Drapery, ſhew it to be the | 


Work of a very ſkilful Hand. 

Me ſhall now proceed to give ſome Account of the 
famous Barrows on theſe Downs; and we ſhall borrow 
from the ſame learned Author the Following Curious 
Particulars relating to them. 

The Tops of all the Hills, or rather eaſ 7 Elevations, 
round - Stone-benge, are, in a manner, covered with 
| theſe Barrows, which make an agreeable Appearance, 
adorning the bare Downs with their Figures. I his 
Ring of Barrows, however, , reaches no farther, than 
till you loſe Sight of the Temple, as we now make no 


doubt to call Szone-henge, or thereabouts. Many, | 


from the great Number of theſe ſepulchral Tumuli 
here, injudiciouſly conclude, that there have been great 
Battles upon the Plain, and that the Slain are buried 
there; but ey are N e no other than Family Bury- 

ad ORE. ing: 


eg 


oO A _ ww A we A ms fu op mis 


| Wilts GREAT BriTaAin 289 


ing-places ſet near this Temps; for the ſame Reaſon as 
we bury in Church-yards, and conſecrated Grounds, 
We may readily count.50 at a time in Sight from the 
Place, eſpecially in the Evening, whenthe ſloping Rays 
of the Sun ſhine on the Ground beyond them. They 
are moſt of them of a very elegant Bell-like Form, and 
done with great Nicety ; in general they are always 
upon elevated Ground, and in Sight of the Temple, as 


| we have ſaid; for they all regard it, and are aſſuredly 
the ſingle Sepulchres of Kings and great Perſonages, 


buried, during a conſiderable Space of Time, and in 
Peace. There are many Groups of them together, as 
if Family Burial-places, and the Variety in them ſeems 


to indicate ſome Pre-eminence in the Perſons interred. 


Moſt of them have little Ditches around; in many is a 


circular Ditch, 60 Cubits in Diameter, with a very 


ſmall Tumulus in the Centre. Sixty, or even 100 Cu- 


bits, is a very common Diameter in the large Barrows. 
Often they are ſet in Rows, and equidiſtant, ſo as to 


produce a regular and pretty Appearance, and with 
ſome particular Regard to the Parts of the Temple, 


W the Avenues, or the Curſus. Upon every Range of 


Hills, quite round Szone- henge, are ſucceſlive Groups of 
Barrows for ſome Miles; and even that named K:ng- 


| larrow, by Lord Pembroke's Park Wall at Milton, 
which our Author calls the Tomb of Carvilius, is ſet 


within View of Szone-benge. - 5 5 
In 1722. the late Lord Pembroke opened -a Barrow, 
in order to find the Poſition of the Body obſerved in - 


thoſe early Days. He pitched upon one of the double 


Barrows, where two are incloſed in one Ditch. He 
made a Section from the Top to the Bottom; an intire 
Segment from Centre to Circumference. The Com- 
poſition was good Earth quite through, except a Coat 


of Chalk of about two Feet thick, covering it quite over, 


under the Turf. Hence it appears, that the Method 
of making the Barrows was; to dig up the Turf fora. 


| great Space round, till the Barrow was brought to its | 


Vor. JI. intended 


288 A TOUR fh Wilts | 
additional Wall, to: ſupport the Precipice of Mount 
Moriab, on which the 'Temple was erected ; which 
was all built of Parian Marble, each Stone being 40 
Cubits long, 14. broad, and eight Cubits thick. And 
ſo much for this celebrated Temple of Stone-henge. 
About ſix Miles North- weſt of this Place, at a ſmall. 
Village called Shrawton, near Longleat, the noble Seat 
of Lord Weymouth, is a curious Piece of Sculpture in 


Alabaſter, which had been dug in one of the adjacent MR 


Barrows on Salisbury Plain, It is of an oval Form, 
about two Feet in Length, and one in the broadeſt Part 
of the Diameter. In the Middle is repreſented a Wo- 
man, habited as a Queen, with her Globe, Scepter, 
Crown, and Mantle of State. In a Compartment 
over her Head are three Figures, evidently repreſenting 
the three Perſons: of the Holy Trinity, Round the 
Sides are Angels intermixed with ſome of the Apoſtles, 
The exquifite Workmanſhip of the Figure of the Wo- 
man (who ſeems intended for the Virgin Mary), the | 
ſtrong as well as tender Expreſſion in her Features, 
and the Elegance of her Drapery, ſhew it to be the 
Work of a very ſkilful Hand. Fg) 
Me ſhall now proceed to give ſome Account of the 
famous Barrows on theſe Downs; and we ſhall:-borrow 
from the ſame learned Author the following curious 
Particulars relating to them. - of 2 « I 
The Tops of all the Hills, or rather eaſy Elevations, 
round Stone-henge, are, in a manner, covered with 
theſe Barrows, which make an agreeable Appearance, 
adorning the bare Downs with their Figures. T his 
Ring of Barrows, however, , reaches no farther, than 
till you loſe Sight of the Temple, as we now make no 
doubt to call Stonehenge, or thereabouts. Many, 
from the great Number of theſe ſepulchral Tui | 
here, injudiciouſly conclude, that there have been great 
Battles upon the Plain, and that the Slain are buried 
there; but they are really no other than Family Bury- 
. FL. Rb 37 + ng 


 Wiltss GRTAT BRITAIN, 289 
4 ing-places ſet near this Templg, for the ſame Reaſon as 


we bury in Church-yards, and conſecrated Grounds, 

We may readily count 50 at a time in Sight from the 
Place, eſpecially in the Evening, whenthe ſloping Rays 
of the Sun ſhine on the Ground beyond them. They 
are moſt of them of a very elegant Bell-like Form, and 


done with great Nicety ; in general they are always 
| upon elevated Ground, and in Sight of the Temple, as 
we have ſaid; for they all regard it, and are aſſuredly 
the ſingle Sepulchres of Kings and great Perſonages, 
buried, during a conſiderable Space of Time, and in 


Peace. There are many Groups of them together, as 


if Family Burial- places, and the Variety in them ſeems 


to indicate ſome Pre-eminence in the Perſons interred. 


| Moſt of them have little Ditches around; in many is a 


circular Ditch, 60 Cubits in Diameter, with a very 


ſmall Tumulus in the Centre. Sixty, or even 100 Cu- 
| bits, is a very common Diameter in the large Barrows. 
| Often they are ſet in Rows, and equidiſtant, ſo as to 
produce a regular and pretty Appearance, and with 
| ſome particular Regard to the Parts of the Temple, 
the Avenues, or the Curſus. Upon every Range of 
Hills, quite round Szone- henge, are ſucceſſive Groups of 


Barrows for ſome Miles; and even that named King- 
tarrow, by Lord Pembroke's Park Wall at Wilton, 
which our Author calls the Tomb of Carvilius, is ſet 
within View of Szone-benge. 5 

In 1722. the late Lord Pembroke opened -a Barrow, 
in order to find the Poſition of the Body obſerved in . 


| thoſe early Days. He pitched upon one of the double 


Barrows, where two are incloſed in one Ditch, He 
made a Section from the Top to the Bottom; an intire 


| Segment from Centre to Circumference. The Com- 
| Poſition was good Earth quite through, except a Coat 


of Chalk of about two Feet thick, covering it quite over, 


| under the Turf. Hence it appears, that the Method 


of making the Barrows was, to dig up the Turf fox 


| great Space round, till the Barrow was brought to its 


Vor. I. 720i 


— wo Wk 
intended Bulk. Then, with the Chalk dug out of the 
environing Ditch, they powdered it all over. And the 
| Notion of Sanctity annexed to them, forbad People 
tramphng on them, till perfectly ſettled, and turfed 
over; whence the Neatneſs of their Form to this Day, | 
At the Top, or Centre, of this Barrow, not above 
three Feet under the Surface, my Lord found the | 
Skeleton of the Interred, perfect, of a reaſonable Size, 
the Head lying Northward towards Stone-henge. 
The Year following, by my Lord's Order, Dr. 
Stukely began upon another double Barrow. He began 
upon the leſſer, and made a large Cut on the Top from | 
Eaſt to Weſt. After the Turf, he came to the Layer 
of Chalk, as before; then fine Garden Mould. About 
three Feet below the Surface, a Layer of Flints, hu- 
mouring the Convexity of the Barrow, which are ga- 
thered trom the Surface of the Downs in ſome Places, 
eſpecially where it has been plowed. TT his, being 
about a Foot thick, reſted on a Layer of foft Mould, 
another Foot; in which was incloſed an Urn full of 
Bones. The Urn was of unbaked Clay, of a dark 
rediſh Colour, and crumbled into Pieces. It had been 
rudely wrought with ſmall Mouldings round the Verge, 
and other circular Channels on the Outſide, with ſeve- 
ral Indentions between, made with a pointed Tool. 
The Bones had been burnt, and crouded all together 
in a little Heap, not ſo much as a Hat-crown would 
contain ; the Collar-bone, and one Side of the Under- 
Jaw, remaining very intire. It appears to have been a 
Girl of about 14 Years old, by their Bulk, and the great 
Quantity of female Ornaments mixed with the Bones; 
as great Numbers of Glaſs Beads of all Sorts, and of 
divers Colours, moſt yellow, one black; many ſingle, 
many in long Pieces, notched between, ſo as to re- 
ſemble a String of Beads; and theſe were generally of 
a blue Colour. There were many of Amber, of all 
Shapes and Sizes, flat Squares, long Squares, round, 
oblong, little, and great ; likewiſe many of Ely . 
| TX Wing 


Wilts. 


different Shapes, Magnitude, and Colour; ſome little 


GREAT BRITAIN 291 


and white, many large and flattiſh, like a Button, 
others like a Pully; but all had Holes to run a String 
through, either through their Diameter or Sides : many 
of the Button-ſort ſeemed to have been covered with 


Metal, there being a Rim worked in them, wherein to 


turn the Edge of the Covering. One of theſe was co- 
vered with a thin Film of pure Gold. Theſe were 


= the young Lady's Ornaments, and had all undergone 


Fire; ſo that what would eaſily conſume, fell to- pieces, 


as ſoon as handled ; much of the Amber burat half 
through. This Perſon was an Heroine; for we found 
the Head of her Javelin in Braſs. At Bottom are two 


Holes for the Pin that faſtened it to the Staff; beſides, 
there was a ſharp Bodkin, round at one End, ſquare at 


the other, where it went into the Handle, Our Au- 
| _ thor preſerved whatever is permanent of theſe Trinkets ; 
but recompoſed the Aſhes of the illuſtrious Defunct, 
| and covered them with Eatth, leaving viſible Marks 


a-top of the Barrow having been opened (to diſſuade 


any other from again diſturbing them): and this was 


his Practice in all the reſt. | 
He then opened the next Barrow to it, incloſed in 


the ſame Ditch, which he ſuppoſed the Huſband or Fa- 
ther of this Lady. At 14 Inches deep, the Mould 


being mixed with Chalk, he came to the intire Skele- 
ton of a Man, the Skull and all the Bones exceedingly 
rotten and periſhed, through Length of Time: tho” 
this was a Barrow of the lateſt Sort, as he conjectured. 
The Body lay North and South, the Head to the 
North, as that Lord Pembrete opened. 


Next he went Weſtward to a Group of Barrows, 


whence Stone-henge bears Eaſt-north-eaſt. Here is a 
large Barrow ditched about, but of an antient Make, 


On that Side next Stone-henge are ten leſſer, ſmall, and, 


as it were, crouded together. South of the great one 
is another Barrow, larger than thoſe of the Group, but 


: A Os 4 8 
— — 


—— — —— 5 4 T 
- 3 K „ . 
IE ID Eo ez 
5 — re nn 5 
eee 12: eee 
1 ** , . 


202  ATOUR tro Wits 


ry * * X 8 
+ * 
1 
B ee 
y. n — 
n lo hour's 
. n 


as Vermilion ; ſome Flints burnt through; towards 

Bones. From this Place he counted 128 Barrows in 
Sight. . 1 

; Going from hence more Southerly, is a circular Diſh- 


like a Barrow reverſed, It is near a great Barrow, 


Section ten Feet each Way, three Feet broad over its 


the Tumulus; it was three Feet and an half, i. . 


not equalling the firſt : it ſhould ſeem, that a Man and 


his Wife were buried in the two larger, and that the 


Teſt were of their Children or Dependents. One of 
«the ſmall ones, 20 Cubits in Diameter, he cut through, 
with a Pit nine Feet in Diameter, to the Surface of the 
natural Chalk, in the Centre of the Barrow, where was 
a little Hole cut. A Child's Body, as it ſeems, had 
been burnt here, and covered up in that Hole; but, 
through Length of Time, conſumed. From three Feet 


deep he found much Wood-aſhes, ſoft, and black as 5 
Ink, ſome little Bits of an Urn, and black and red | 


Earth, very rotten ; ſome ſmall Lumps of Earth, red 


the Bottom, a great Quantity of Aſhes, and burnt 


like Cavity, 60 Cubits in Diameter, dug in the Chalk, 


the leaſt of the South-weſtern Group. This Cavity is 
ſeven Feet deep in the Middle, extremely well turned; 
and out of it, no doubt, the adjacent Barrow is dug, 
The Uſe of it ſeems to have been a Place for Sacri- 
ficing and Feaſting in Memory of the Dead, as was the 
antient Cuſtom. It is all overgrown with that pretty 
Shrub Erica vulgaris, then in Flower, and ſmelling 
like Honey. He made a large croſs Section in its 
Centre, upon the Cardinal Points, and found nothing 
but a Bit of red Earthen Pot. #7 

He then dug up one of thoſe he calls Druids Barrows, 
a ſmall Tumulus, incloſed in a large circular Ditch, 
Stone-henge bears hence North-eaſt. He made a crols 


Fd kn, * Fay emi. ac wo 


Centre. upon the Cardinal Points : at length he found 
a ſquariſh Hole cut in the ſolid Chalk in the Centre of 


two Cubits long, and near two Feet broad, i. e. one 8 
Cubit, pointing to Stone- henge directly. It was a Cubit bo 


and 


Wilts. GRTAT BRiTAin. 293 
and an half deep from the Surface. This was the 


Domus exilts Plutonia, covered with artifical Earth, not 
above a Foot thick from the Surface. In this little 
Grave he found all the burnt Bones of a Man, but no 
Signs of an Urn. The Bank of the circular Ditch is 
on the Outſide, and is 12 Cubits broad. The Ditch is 
ſix Cubits broad (the Druids Staff); the Area is 70 


| Cubits in Diameter. The Whole 100. 


He opened another of theſe of like Dimenſions, next 
to that Lord Pembroke firſt opened, South of Stone- 
henze; and found a burnt Body in an Hole in the 


| Chalk, as before. 


In ſome other Barrows he opened, were found large 


Z burnt Bones of Horſes and Dogs, together with human; 
| alſo of other Animals, as ſeemed of Fowl, Hares, Boars, 
Deer, Goats, or the like; and, in a great and very 


flat old-faſhioned Barrow, Weſt from Stone-benge, 


| among ſuch Matters, he found Bits of red and blue 
Marble, Chippings of the Stones of the Temple; ſo 


that probably the Interred was one of the Builders. 
Homer tells of Achilles ſlaying Horſes and Dogs at the 
Funeral of his Friend Patroclus. | | 

Lord Pembroke told the Doctor of a Braſs Sword dug 
up in a Barrow here; which was ſent to Oxford, In 
that very old Barrow near Little Ambreſbury, was 
found a very large Braſs Weapon, of 20 Pounds 


| Weight, like a Pole-ax, ſaid to be given to Colonel 


IVyndham. In the great long Barrow, fartheſt *North 


from Stone-henge, which our Author ſuppoſes to be an 


Archdruid's, was found one of thoſe Braſs Inſtruments 


| called Celts, 13 Inches long, which, he thinks, belonged 
to the Druids, wherewith they cut off the Miſleto. Mr. 
| Stallard of Ambreſbury gave it to Lord Burlington, 
It was repoſited in Sir Hans Shane's Cabinet, and moſt 
probably removed, with the other Rarities of that fa- 


mous Collector, to the Britih Meuſeum. They dug a 
Cell in a Barrow Eaft of Ambresbury, and it was inha- 
bited for ſome time: there they ſaw all the Bones of 


an Horſe. We find evidently, adds the Doctor, the'e 


O 


an- 


— 
1 
. 


hor ee ia 
view Jer a fr rae tr At r r 4 ** 
eee ES rad EG 7 . R er N 
0 r ar END T,. ĩ⅛˙ a Roea 
e, . S ˙ r e „ 
— a wore 4 * P 5 K 


8 e 
* ay ; 
2 — 157 8 
* 8 


204 4 TOUR to 
antient Nations had the Cuſtom of burning their dead 


or four Inches of the ſolid Rock of Chalk), a” be- 


Wilts, 


Bodies, probably before the Name of Reme. So Lacry 


matories we read of in Scripture, antienter than Gre 


or Reman Times, Pſalm]vi. 8. 
Since the time mentioned by the Door, there have 


been Pieces of Spears, and other Inſtruments of War, 


dug up in ſome of the Tumuli near Ambresbury.; which 


are in the Poſſeſſion of his Grace the Duke of Pucenſ. 
berry, who has already planted four of the largeſt Ty. | 
mult with Firs : and, fince he bought the Manor of | 


Stone-henge, has been preparing to embelliſh. all the 
others within the Manor with evergreen Trees, which 
will not only beautify the Country, but alſo become 


Land- marks for Travellers, who are often at a Loſs 


to find their Way over theſe large Plains, if they are 
not accuſtomed to the Roads. His Grace has alſo 


made Ridings over the Downs from Ambresbury, round 
by Store-henge, which are planted with Clumps of 


evergreen Trees, and are a great Beauty to thoſe open 


Downs, 
Salisbury Plains are certainly the moſt charming 5 
that can any-where be ſeen. The numerous Flocks 


of Sheep all round, which Way ſoever we turn, are a 


fine Sight: it 1s ordinary for theſe Flocks to contain 


from 3000 to 5000 each; and ſeveral private Farmers 


hereabouts have two or 1 ſuch Flocks. 


But it is more remarkable ſtill, how a great Part of 


theſe Downs comes, by a new Method of Huſbandry, | 
not only tobe made arable, but to bear plentiful. Crops 


of Wheat, though never known to our Anceſtors to be. 
capable of any ſuch thing ; nay, they would probably 


have laughed at any one, that had gone about to plow. || 


up the wild Downs and Hills, which they. thought only 
fit for Sheep-walks ; but Experience has made the pte- 


ſent Age more ſkilful in Huſbandry.: for by only fold. 


ing the Sheep upon thoſe Lands, after they are turned 
up with the Plough: (which generally goes within thite 


come 


F nnn 1 8 x 


* 
' 
Kt + «@% {OY s= 42 


Wilts. GREAT BRITAIN. 206 


come abundantly fruitful, and bear very good Wheat, 


| as well as Rye and Barley. This Huſbandry was in- 
| troduced at a time when Corn bore a very high Price, 


the Seaſons having proved ſo wet and cold for two or 
three Years, as to greatly damage the Corn in the low 


EZ Grounds, and where the Downs had been ploughed 
and ſown with Corn, it ſucceeded ſo well as to en- 

courage others to break up more of them: but 

as the Land is very ſhallow, being in few Places more 

than five Inches deep, above the Chalk or Flints; ſo in 

| two or three Years it was exhauſted, and ſcarce pro- 

| duced double the Quantity of Grain which was ſown 


upon it, therefore was not worth cultivating : and by 


| having deſtroyed the Sward of Graſs which was upon 


it before ploughing, the Land is now worth no- 

thing; ſo that what was at firſt ſuppoſed to be a great 

Improvement, proved the total Ruin of thoſe Eſtates. 
This plain open Country contains in Length from 


incbeſter to Salisbury 25 Miles, from thence to Der- 
| chefler 21 Miles, thence to Weymouth 6 Miles; fo 
that they lie near 50 Miles in Length; and in Breadth 
ks they reach alſo. in ſome Places from 35 to 40 Miles. 


"Thoſe who would make any practicable Gueſs at the 
Number of Sheep which uſually feed on the Downs, 


| may take it from a Calculation, made, as I was told, 
at Dorcheſter, that there were 600,000 Sheep fed with- 
in the Circumference of ſix Miles round that Town. 


As we paſſed this open plain Country, we ,ſaw the 


Ruins of a great many old Roman and Britiſh Camps, 


and other Remains of the antient Inhabitants of this 


| Kingdom, and of their Wars, Battles, Intrenchments, 
Encampments, Buildings, and other Fortifications, 
which are indeed very agreeable to a Traveller, that 


has read the Hiſtory of the Country. 


| Old Sarum, which is the next Place we come to, is 
as remarkable as any of theſe ; where is a double In- 


trenchment, with a deep Graff, or Ditch, to either of 


3 


5 N 
5 .Þ 
n 
n 
* 


— 


— 
rr 8 5 
PPP one. _ 8 ; b 
4 It IVA — * er n 2 1 12 — a 
; 1 4 "we 2 — wo 8 u- = eren e eee earned . n —Y n S* — 99 
- N 
1 1 N 1 — — $ M4 
= l ry „ - — 1 . — : * o . re > — 
o - \ 


296 4 TOUR tr Wits, 
them. It is ſaid, it was a Roman Station, and the 
antient So7 biodunum. It was deſerted in King Henry it © 
III's time, for want of Water, when the Inhabitants 
founded New Sarum. The old City is of an orbicular {8 £ 
Form, erected on one of the moſt elegant Deſigns ima. lt " 
inable. It was, firſt, a Fortreſs of the antient Britons, It ® 
he Proſpect of this Place is at preſent very auguſt, IM * 
and muſt have afforded a moſt noble Sight, when in 
Perfection. In the Angle to the North-weſt ſtood the f 
Cathedral, and Epiſcopal Palace. The City fil!s up 
the Summit of an high and ſteep Hill, near the Bottom t 
of which runs the River Avon. Here Synods, and 
Britiſh Parliaments, have formerly been held; and t 
hither the States of the Kingdom were ſummoned to b 
_ ſwear Fealty to William I. In this City was the Palace 
of the Britifh and Saxon Kings and of the Roman Em- 
perors. Near it is one Farm-houſe ; and that is all, 
which is left of this antient City: yet this is called the 
Borough of Old Sarum, and ſends two Members to Par- 
liament; who are choſen by the Proprietors of certain 
Lands. Mbom thoſe Members can juſtly ſay they re- 
= _ 2re/ent, would however be hard for them to anſwer. BW 
e NSarsury is a large, well - built, and pleaſant City: 
1 the Streets are all built at right Angles (as it is ſaid, 
| _ according to the Model of Old Babylon) : they are, ge- 
nerally, wide and ſpacious ;. and a fine clear Canal of 
Water, handſomely brick'd, runs through each. The 
Market- place is large, and exceedingly well furniſhed, 
be City lies at the Confluence of two Rivers, the 
Avon and the Wilh, each of them ſingly a conſiderable 
River, but very large, when joined together; and yet 
much larger, when they receive the Nadder, a third 
River, which joins them near Clarendon Park, about 
three Miles below the City ; when, with a deep Chan- 
nel, and a Current leſs rapid, they run down to Chri/t- 
Church, where they empty themſelves into the Sea. 
From that Town upwards, to within two Miles of 
Salisbury, they are made navigable ; but the * 


r ogra 


0 220 re v0O00oO . cz th, - 


«Y © 


Wilts. GREAT BRITAIN.9 297 
of the Stream would not permit to make them ſo up 
to the City. | OG | LD We „ 
Salisbury, and all the County of Wilts, are full of a 
great Variety of Manufactures; and thoſe too of the 
moſt conſiderable in England: as the Cloathing Trade, 
and that of Flannels, W and alſo ſeveral other 
| Sorts of Manufactures; of which in their Place. 

F Salisbury has, in particular, two remarkable Manu- 
factures that flouriſh in it, which employ the Poor all 
around; namely, fine Flannels, and Long Cloths for 
the Turky Trade, called Salisbury Whites, 

The Cloſe, adjacent to the Cathedral, in which live 
the Canons and Prebendaries, is ſo large and well- 
built, that it looks like a fine City of itſelf. 
The Cathedral Church was begun by Biſhop Poore 
(who alſo built Hernbam Bridge); the Work was con- 

tinued by Robert Bingham, and William of York; and 
finiſhed by Giles de Bridport, Biſhop of this See: all in 
the Space of 42 Years. It is built in the Figure of a 
Z Croſs. Above the Roof, which is 116 Feet to the Top, 
riſes the Tower and Spire, the fineſt and bigheſt in 
= England; being, from the Ground to the Top of the 
„MWeathercock, 135 Yards; and yet the Walls ſo ex- 
ceeding thin, that, at the Upper-part of the Spire, upon' 
a View made by the late Sir Chri/topher Wren, the 
Wall was found to be lefs than five Inches thick; upon 
which a Conſultation was had, whether the Spire, or 


he 
d. at leaſt the Upper-part of it, ſhould be taken down, it 
he being ſuppoſed to have received ſome Damage by the 


great Storm in the Year 1703. but it was reſolved in 
et the Negative; and Sir Chriſtopher ordered it to be 


rd IE firengthened with Bands of Iron Plates, which have 


ut effectually ſecured it; and I have heard ſome of the beſt 
n- erg ſay, it is ſtronger now, than when it was firſt 
ft. WWW.. | | | | | | 
A, The Tower has 16 Lights, four on each Side. Its 

of {Wy Ornaments are rich, and yet judiciouſly adapted to the 

th BW whole Body of the Building. But the Beauty of it is 
of i : 98 hurt 


298: ATOUR tro | Wilts, 


hurt by a thing very eaſily to be remedied; which is 


this: The Glaſs in the ſeveral Windows, being very, 


old, has contracted. ſuch a Ruſt, that it is ſcarcely to be 


diſtinguiſhed from the Stone Walls; conſequently, it | 
appears as if there were no Lights at all in the Tower, 
but only Receſſes in the Stone: whereas, were the 
Windaws.glazed with Squares, and kept clean (which 
might be done), they would be plainly viſible at a Di. 
ſtance ; and not only ſo, but from all the adjacent Hills, 

ou would ſee the Light quite through the Tower each 


Way ; which would have a very fine Effect. 


They tell us here long Stories of the great Art uſed | 
in laying the firſt Foundation of this Church, the 
Ground being marſhy and wet, occaſioned by the Chan- 


nels of the Rivers; that it was laid upon Piles, accord- 


ing to ſome; and upon Wool-packs, according to 
others: but this is not to be believed by thoſe. wo 
know, that the whole Country is one Rock of Chalk, 
even from the Top. of the higheſt Hills, to the Bottom 
of the deepeſt Rivers. And the Foundation of Wool- Þ 
packs is, no doubt, allegorical, and has reſpect to the 


Woollen Trade. A 1 

There are no Vaults in the Church, nor Cellars in 
the whole City, by reaſon of Springs.: very frequently 
the Water riſes up in the Graves, that are dug in the 
Church; and is ſometimes two Feet high in the Chap- 
ter houſe. Whether this is owing to Springs, or to 
penning up the River Avon, and the Currents in the 


Streets, is uncertain: but the Foundation of the Church 


muſt be greatly impaired, and, in time, ruined, by 
it. And, if it proceeds from the ooſing of Watet 
from the ſeveral adjacent Streams, I ſhould imagine, 


that digging a deep Trench round the Church-yard, M 


and taking off ſo much. of the Surface, as to make 4 
Declivity each Way to the Trench, would, at leaſt, 
keep the Church dry, eſpecially if the Water drain- 
ed into it were conſtantly thrown out by an En- 

2 | | s | | gine. 


mn „ ww pow ͤ— WW — — 


Ly 2 t By R2?vp* N 


c 


Builder of Salisbury Cathedral had been making Ex- 


perments, to ſee what he could do, rather than what he 
| ought to have done; for, it is plain, his Reaſon for 


building ſo ſlight, could not proceed from any Appre- 


henſion of the Foundation failing; becauſe, if ſo, he 
would not have thought of carrying up a Steeple ſuch 


2 vaſt Height. ' 
The North-weſt of the four Pillars, which ſupport 


the Steeple, having bent towards the Middle, was the 
| Reaſon, I ſuppoſe, of erecting the two lower Arches, 
interſecting the great Ailes of the Croſs from North to 
South, to preſerve the perpendicular Level of that, and 
| the other three Pillars, as much as poſſible. But this is 
done in the Gothic Manner, with ſo much Beauty, that, 
were there no need of them, one would ſcarcely wiſh 
FE - | CC them 


Wilts. GREAT BRITAIN. 299 


gine. And this would be an Expence very well be- 
ſtowed, did it contribute, in any Degree, to pieſerve 
the Building. | 

In the Gutſide of the Church there is a beautiful 
Simplicity and Elegance ; but the Weſt-end, though 
crouded with ornamental Work, is not well deſigned :- 
nor does the Church deſerve to be ſo much admired 
within as without: though its Inſide is certainly hurt 
by the paltry old Painting in and over the Choir, and 
ME the White-waſhing lately done, wherein they, very 
ſtupidly, have every where drawn black Lines, to imi- 
tate Joints of Stone. 3 
It is the Opinion of many, that this Building is light 
and ſlender to a Fault; as, on the contrary, the new 
Part of the Cathedral of Mincheſter is too heavy and 
crouded: for, tho' a Building be ſtrong, yet, if it have 
not the Appearance of Strength, it is as great a Defect 
inits Beauty, as being over clumſy. py 
Io give an Inſtance of this; HAM one view the 
Arcade round Covent-Garden, and the ruſtic Arcade of 

W the Front of the Roya!l-Exchange, and he will be con- 
W vinced, that Piers or Pillars may be too ſlender, as 
well as too thick. But one would imagine, that the” 


7 

4 

F 

4 

S 
- 
1 

5 

A 

} 
*% Z b 
= 
T9, 

* 5 

17 4 


© . ATOM. 


them away. How they let this Building into the main 
Pillars, and how they ventured to dig for a Foundation 


is worth-the Examination of Architects. 


ze Steeple, beſides theſe Arches, is likewiſe prop | 
by Stone Supports, carried every way diagonally croſs | 
the open Arcades, above the Arches of the Side- Ailes, 
and alſo croſs the Windows of the middle Aile ; and | 


ſeem to have been done about 200 Years ago. 


The ordinary Boaſt of this Building i is contained | in 


the following Verſes ; 


As many Days as in One Year there be, 
So many Windows in One Church we ſee : 
As many Marble Pillars there appear, 
As there are Hours throughout the fleeting Year : 
As many Gates, as Moons One Year do view 


Strange Tale to tell, yet not more Arrange than true ! 


” this be really ſo, and we are to ſuppoſe that the 
Deſigner had it in View when he formed his Plan, it 
was a Conſideration fo trifling and childiſh, that it calls 
For Cenſure rather than Approbation. Convenience for | 


the intended Purpoſe, Strength, and then Beauty, are 


the three things to be conſidered in all Buildings: and 


happy is his Genius, who ſucceeds in them all. 
Would any Perſon therefore (except a fantaſtical 


Monk) cramp and hurt his Plan, which unavoidably 


mult be the Caſe, for ſuch a ridiculous End as this ?— 
Surely, no: we ought rather to impute this Diſcovery 
to ſome cunning Obſerver, who has found out what 
the Architect never thought of. 

Tbe Organ in the Church is fixed over the Entrance 
of the Choir: it is very large, being 20 Feet broad, 
and 40 Feet high, to the Top of its Ornaments, I 
has 50 Stops, which are 18 more than what are in the 


Organ of St. Paul's: but the Sweetneſs of the Tone 
of St. Paul's Organ is far beyond that of Salisbury; 


tho” the laſt is a very good Inſtrument. 
The 


111 ID AR UL Tog PIEY 


ts. 


ain 


ion 


opt 
'ols | 
les, 
ind BY 


in 


Wits. GREAT BRITAIN. 301 
The Church has been lately repaired by the Contri- 
butions of the Biſhop and Prebendaries, ſet on foot by 
Biſhop Sherlock; who, it ſeems, thought that the Dig- 
nitaries ought to ſupport what ſupported them; and 
that all they got by the Church, was not deſigned 
merely to make or enrich their Families. Ro” 
Some of the Windows of the Church, which eſcaped | 
the Fury of the Zealots of 1641. are well painted. 
There are ſome very fine Monuments in this 
Church; particularly in that they call the Virgin 
Mary's Chapel, behind the Altar, is a noble Monument 


bor a late Duke and Ducheſs of Somerſet, with their 
Portraits at full Lenth. The late ingenious and excel- 


lent Ducheſs of Somerſet, of the Piercy Family, alſo 
her Daughter the Maichioneſs of Caermarthen, and a 


# ſecond Son of her Grace, both by Duke Charles Sey- 


mour, are likewiſe interred here; as he himſelf is. 
The Figure of one Bennet is here repreſented, who, 
endeavouring to imitate our Saviour in Faſting Forty 


Days and Forty Nights, carried his Point fo far, that, 
being reduced to a Skeleton, he fell a Victim to his 


8 and enthuſiaſtic Folly at the End of 17 
There are many antient Monuments in this Church; 

to wit, Biſhop Poore's, who firſt began the Building of 

it; Biſhop Bingbam's; William of York's; a Braſs 


Plate in the Wall for Dean Gourdon a Scot; Biſhop 


Audley's Tomb; Biſhop Salcot's; Biſhop Bridport's z 
Dr. Sydenham's ; a fair well wrought Monument of 


Free- ſtone for Sir Thomas Gorges and his Lady, 
adorned with Figures of the regular Solids. A, 


Tomb for the Lord Hungerford, who was hanged 
and degraded, and had a Toad put into his Coat 
of Arms; an Iron twifted Wire hangs up near 


his Tomb, ſignifying an Halter. The like for the 
Lord Stæurton, whoſe Tomb is alſo here on the other 
Ac of the Chapel of our Lady; a Monument 


of 
* 


— — ˙————— r 1 


322. A LOUR re. Wilts. 
of that Family, with ſix Holes on one Side and ſix on 
the other, alluding, as his Coat of Arms, to ſix Wells, 
three within his Park, and three without; the Lord 
Cheyney's Tomb; Biſhop carp; mien ; Sir I illiam 
Longſpeare's, Roſamond's Son by King Henry II.; a 
ſtately rich- Monument of the little Earl of 1 ; 
Dr. Wilton's, with a Rebus on it, Will and Tun; Biſhop 
Capon's; a Monument for Sir Richard Mompeſſon and 
his Lady, which is a gaudy one; Biſhop Jewell, content 
with a Grave-ſtone ; Biſhop Uvall; Biſhop Chet, 
were alſo. buried here: Here is likewiſe a Monu- 
ment to the beneficent Dr, Seth Ward, Biſhop of this 
See, who founded, amongſt other Benefactions (which. 
I ſhall take Notice of in Hertfordſbire), an handſome. 
College for the Widows of ten Miniſters, allowing to 
each 15 J. a Year; and which has been fince obliged 


to Dr. Gilbert, late Biſhop of this See, now Archbi- - 


ſhop 8 8 
The Cloiſter is 160 Feet ſquare, the inner Cloiſter 
30 Feet wide, with 10 Arches on each Side, the Top 
vaulted, and covered with Lead. Over the Eaſt Walk 
of the Cloiſter is a ſpacious Library; but not over-well. 
ſtocked with Books. The Chapter Houſe is Octagon, 
and of 50 Feet in Diameter; the Roof bearing all up- 
on one ſmall Marble Pillar in the Centre, which ſeems 
ſo feeble, that it is hardly to be imagined it can be a ſuf- 
ficient Support to it. It hath 52 Stalls in it for the 52. 
Prebendaries of this Church. KR | 
The Corporation of Sarum purchaſed a fine 
original Picture of Queen Anne, drawn by the cele- 
brated Dahl, and put it up in the Council- chamber of 
the City. This Picture formerly belonged to the So- 
ciety of Gentlemen (all Members of Parliament) 
known by the Name of The October Club, and was 

ſet up in the great Room belonging td the Bell Tavern 
in Neſtminſter; which then was the Sign of the Houſe 
where they uſed to meet, till the Death of that —_— 
AT: | Jerk 


; 
* 
9 


— 


w 


227 


$ 
, 


9 


3 


- 


[DJ vw Bio to 


e ARE cet I Ib 4 Ws ers 


| Wilts, GREAT BRITAIN. 303 
Niere are three other Churches, dedicated to St- 
Martin, St. 7 homas, and St. Edmund; ; and one other 


called Fiſhertown, from its Situation. 


= The Charter of Incorporation was granted to the 
7 City by King Henry III. who made it a County of it- 


ſelf: and it ſends two Members to Parliament. 
In 1736-7. an Act paſſed for the better Repairing 
and Paying the Highways, Streets, and Watercourſes, 


within this City; and for Enlightening the Streets, 
Lanes, and Paſſages; and better Regulating the 
nightly Watch. 
From. Salisbury I went to ſee the antient Houſe and. 
= Seat of Clarendon, which gives Title to the Earl of that 
Name. This Place ſhould be called Clorendon, from 


the memorable Roman Camp, half a Mile off the 


Park, near the Roman. Road, made or repaired by 


Conſtantius Chlorus, Father of Conſtantine. It is a beau- 
ful F ortification, of a round Form, upon a dry chalky 


. Hill. Within is a circular Ditch, ſuppoſed to be a 


leſs Sort of Camp for the Summer. The Park is a 


ſweet and beautiful Spot. Here King Fohbn built a 


Palace, where ſeveral Parliaments have been held. 


Part of the Fabric is {till left, though they have for 


many Years been pulling it down. The Mate- 


rials are chiefly Flint; and it was built upon the Side 
of an Hill, but no-way fortified, though it took up 


much Ground: This Palace is called the Manor; 
and from it lies a ſubterraneous Paſſage to the Queen's 
Manor. Between the Camp and the Park was a 
Roman Road, from 8 orbiodunum, or Old Larum, to 


Wincheſter. 


But this being a large County, and full of memo- 


table Branches of Antiquity and modern Curioſity, I 
made ſeveral little Excurſions from this beautiful Spot, | 


to view the Northern Parts of the County. 


I have mentioned, that this County is generally a vaſt 
continued Body of high chalky Hills, whoſe Tops 


ſpread themſelves into — and pleaſant Downs and 
Plains, 


304 4A TOUR to Wilt. 
Plains, upon which great Flocks of Sheep are fed, &c. 
But the Reader is deſired to obſerve; theſe Hills and 
Plains are moſt beautifully interſected, and cut through, 
by the Courſe of divers pleaſant and profitable Rivers ; 
along and near the Banks of which there always is a 
Chain of fruitful Meadows and rich . Paſtures, and 
thoſe interſperſed with a great many pleaſant Towns, 
Villages, and Houſes, and among them many of a con- 
ſiderable Magnitude ; ſo that, while you view the 
Downs, and think the Country wild and uninhabited, 
yet, when you deſcend into theſe Vales, you are ſur- 
| pred with the moſt pleaſant and fertile Spot in Exg- 
nd. 0 | | 
No leſs than four of theſe Rivers meet all together, 
at or near the City of Saliſbury, the Waters of three 
of which run through the Streets of the City: v:z. the 
Nadder, the Wilh, and the Avon. 1. The Nadder 
riſes near the End of the Blow-mill Courſe, and paſſes 
by Ghitmarhk, a pleaſant Village, noted for its Quarries 
of very good white Stone, which riſes in many Dimen- 
1 ſions; inſomuch that there is now a ſingle Stone lying 
1 % over the Mouth of the Quarry like an Architrave, full 
660 Feet long, 12 in Thickneſs, and perfectly without 
Flaw. 2. The Willy riſes about Narminſter; runs by 
Tarnbury, a vaſt Roman Camp (where ſome diſtinguiſh 
Veſpaſian's Name; a great ſemicircular Work at the 
Entrance; over againſt which, on the other Side the 
Willy, is another Camp); then running by Orebeſtra, 
remarkable for a kind of very long Gra(s, with which 
they fatten Hogs, it gives Name to /77;ton, and forms 
the Canal before the F ront of Milton Houſe ; and then 
joining the Nadder, runs through the Gardens at the 
End of the Avenue. 3. The Avon riſes from under 
a great Ridge of the Hills, which divide F/tfhire into 
the North and South, adorned with the Wanſdise. It 
- . paſſes Southward through a great Number of Villages W 


tio Ambresbury. al W 
= What 


Farm 


9 


. a oa Ahh. A140 Ou R8ÞBAwco ae - 


= 3 ©.,Q mz k_ aÞ> wo & oz 0 GO jan os hand 


— re 9 * 18 
" * 


Wilts. 


— — rr... 


GRTAT BRITAIN. 305 
What is moſt worth a Man of Curioſity's ſeeing in 


this County, is Wilton Houſe, It is ſituated in a plen-= 


ſant Vale, having Wilton on one Side (a little Town 
which returns two Members to Parliament), a ſpacious 


A - 


Park on the other. | 


The Building was begun in the Reign of Hen. VIII. 
The great Quadrangle was finiſhed in the time of Ed- 


ward VI. and the Porch was deſigned by Hans Holbein. 
The Hall-ſide, being burnt down ſome Years ago, was 
rebuilt by the late Thomas Earl of Conte Lord 


High Admiral of England, in a very noble and ſumptu- 


ous Manner. The Stair-caſe, which is very large, 
| was ordered, by the late Earl, to be painted in Claro 


obſcuro, by Van Riſquet. The other Parts, rebuilt by 
the firſt Philip Earl of Pembroke, were all deſigned by 


| the famous Inigo Jones, and finiſhed by him in the 


— 


Tear 1640. | 


The Canal before the Houſe lies parallel with the 
Road, and receives into it the whole River /7%!y, or at 
leaſt is able to do ſo: it may indeed be ſaid, that the 
River is made into a Canal. When we come into the 


| Court-yards before the Houſe, there are ſeveral Pieces 


of Antiquity to entertain the Curious ; as particularly: 
a noble Column of Porphyry, with a Marble Statue 


of Venus on the Top of it; which, as they told me, 


is 32 Feet high, and of excellent Workmanſhip, and 
that it came laſt from Candia, but formerly from 
. 7 | 1 E 

As the Earl of Pembroke above-mentioned was 2 
Nobleman of great Learning, and a Maſter in Anti- 
quity, he took Delight in collecting ſuch valuable Pieces 


of Painting and Sculpture, as made Vilton Houſe a 


perfect Muſeum, or Receptacle of Rarities: and we 
meet with ſeveral things there, which are to be found 


no- where elſe in the World. I ſhall particularize but 
afew; for a Volume might be employed in a full De- 
| ſcription of them; and indeed a Volume is actually 
g written on the Subject, 7 e 


The 


300 A TOUR tro Wild, v 
The Piece of our Saviour's waſhing his. Diſciples a 
Feet, which they ſhew you in one of the firſt Rooms Mt © 
you go into, is admirable. At the Foot of the great b 
Stair=cale is a Bacchus, as large as the Life, done in 
fine Peloponne/jan Marble, carrying a young Bacchus WR 
on his Arm, the young one eating Grapes, and ſhew. {MW 6 
ing by his Countenance he is pleaſed with the Taſte of. n 
them. One ought to ſtop every two Steps of this IM is 
Stair-caſe, as we go up, to contemplate the vaſt Variety. 

of Pictures that cover the Walls, and of ſome of the f. 


r 


D * ED * R 3 RT 
r ni pond on I gge ri) * 
ay 6 4 ad * * > — £4 _— 

5 6, > If, rr Fo 2 nY =” LL © . 


e er ä 
8 eee 
eee ee eee 


„% ĩ :: , 2 
r as, ee ak a EE R FE l 
6 * * ——— . N 


% 
by 
! 
e 
11 eS 
o 
* 


beit Maſters in Europe: and, yet this is but an Intro- o 
duction to what is beyond them. „ A&A 
The great Geometrical Stair caſe itſelf is deſerved. t. 

ly admired ; and was the Firſt of this Kind in Eng. WW 
land. | N | p 
It is univerſally acknowleged, that the Apartments ii 
called the Salon, and the great Dining- room, are the a 


nobleſt Pieces of Architecture, that have been hitherto 1 
produced: the firſt is a Cube of 30 Feet; the other is Nr 
a double Cube of 60 by 30; and both of them 30 Kt 
eet high. | RE | _.- 
When you are entered theſe grand Apartments, ſuch 
Variety ſtrikes upon you every way, that you. ſcarce 
know to which Hand to turn yourſelf firſt. On one 
Side you ſee ſeveral Rooms filled with Paintings, all ſo 
Curious, and various, that it is with ReluCtance you. 
leave them : and, looking another Way, you are called. 
off by a vaſt Collection of Buſts, and Pieces of the 
_ greateſt Antiquity of the Kind, both Gree# and Roman. 
In one End of the grand Room is the celebrated: 
Family-pifture by Vandyſe, 20 Feet long, and 12 Feet 
high, containing.13 Figures, as big as the Life; which, 
rather appear. as ſo many real Perſons, than. the Pro- 
duction of Art. | One PG 
The Picture over the Chimney is Prince Charles, 
and his Brothers the Dukes of York and Glouce/ter. 
And over the Doors, on each Side of the capital Pic- 
ture, are two admirable Portraits of King Charles 1 

| 1 — an 


— WS om 


— x 


. ¶ , , veer ey WE _\ 


F h AE EEE EA EE A CNY 


Wilts, GREAT BRITAIN. 307 
and his Queen. The other Pictures in this Room are 
of the Pembroke Family, drawn at full Length. All 
by Vandy#e, 
It was at this Houſe, that Sir Philip Sidney: wrote his 
Arcadia and in the Bottom Panels of the Wainſcot 
| of the Salon, ſeveral Incidents deſcribed in that Ro- 
& mancc are repreſented in Miniature : but the Painting 
is not well done. 
Alter this fine Range of Beauties is 505 we are far 
from being at an End of our Surprize: there are three 
or four Rooms {till upon the ſame Floor, filled with 
Wonder: nothing can be finer than the Pictures in 
them. 
In moſt of the Apartments are Marble Chimney- 
pieces of the moſt exquiſite Workmanſhip, all carved. 
its in /taly ; with many curious Statues, Baſſo- relievoes, 
he and Pictures of the moſt famous Maſters. The Leggio 
to in the Bowling-green (which has Pillars beautifully - 
is  ruſticated, and is enriched with Niches and Statues), 
30. the Grotte (the Front of which is curioufly carved with-. 
out, as it is all Marble within, and has black Pillars of 
ch the /onic Order, with Capitals of white Marble, and 
ce WW four fine Baſſo- relievos from Florence), the Stables, 
ne and other Offices, are all Beauties in their Kind, which. 
lv would tire Deſcription. 
us The Collechons of Head- pieces, Coats of Mail, and 
-d other Armour, for both Horſe. and Men, are ao a 
de Curioſity, They  ſhew, thoſe. of King Henry VIII. 
n Eduard VI. . of an Earl of Pembroke, nick named 
d WW Biack-Fack, which he wore, When be beſieged and. 
et took Boulogne in France, being the General who com- 
h manded in Chief under the King: they are very curi- 9 
» ous and emboſſed. Twelve other complete Suits of; - 
Armour, of extraordinary Workmanſhip, are; alſo: 2 
„ there; the reſt, being about 100, are only ſor common. 
. Horſemen | 
Tue Garden Front is juſtly eſteemed one of the beſt, 


| Pieces 


308 ATOUR tro Wits 
omg of the renowned [nigo Jones, and is 194 Feet i 
ong. 4 * 
The Gardens are on the South of the Houſe, and s 
extend themſelves beyond the River; a Branch of | © 
which runs through one Part of them. Over this v 
River was erected, by the Father of the preſent Earl, I c 
one of the moſt beautiful Bridges in England; on which 0 
is an open Colonnade of the Icnic Order. 'K 
After you have paſſed this Bridge, you aſcend a fine P 
ſloping Hill, the Top of which is ſet off by a wild Sort e 
of Plantation. | | i I 
On the Summit of this Hill his Lordſhip built a 
SUMMer-room ; and from hence you have a charming ! 
Proſpect of the City of Sarum and the North-ſide of 2 
its Cathedral. 7 ee | 51 91S H In 
And ſtill South of the Gardens is the great Park, 5 
which reaches beyond the Vale: the View opens to t! 
the great Down, which is properly called, by way of te 
Diſtinction, Salisbury-plain, and leads from the City Mt C 
of Salisbury to Shaſtsbury. Here alſo his Lordſhip had R 
an Hare warren, as it is called, though © improperly, Wt 7 
It has indeed been a Sanctuary for the Hares for mary Mt L 
Years ; but the Gentlemen complain, that it mars b. 
their Game; for that, as ſoon as they put up an Hare 
for their Sport, if it be any where within two or three 8. 
Miles, away ſhe runs for the Warren, and there is an I 4 


End of their Purſuit. On the other Hand, it makes Mt ft 
all the Country-men turn Poachers, and deſtroy the F 
Hares, by what Means they can. The Father of the at 
preſent Earl of Pembroke, who had a fine Taſte in Archi- br 
tecture, made a further Improvement with regard to a 
Proſpect, at this noble Houſe, throwing down the th 
Walls of the Garden, and making, inſtead them, WW © 
Haw-haw Walls, which afford a boundleſs View all H ne 
around the Country from every Quarter. P 
If his Lordſhip had proceeded with the Deſign, + 

| 


which, I was told, he once had Thoughts of proſecut- 


* 
— tüi ee . äiſ, . Ä ö * 
— AH n . =—— rr 


ing, that is, to erect a Stone henge in Miniature, as it 
was ſuppoſed to be in its Perfection, according to Dr. 


obſerved, overlooks the whole Country round, and on 
| which is an Equeſtrian Statue of the Emperor Mar- 


of Milton, and been the Admiration of Foreigners, as 
well as Natives: for who, that ſees that ſtupendous 
Piece of Antiquity in its Ruins, would not have been 
deſirous to behold it, as it was in its ſuppoſed flouriſh- 
ing State? | 


ton, and the fertile Valley at the Union of the Nadger 
and Wilh, is the noted Place called King-barrow, 

mentioned p. 289. This is certainly Celtic, ſays Dr. 
k, I Stately, and, with great Probability, the very Tomb of 
to that Carvilius, who attacked Cz/ar's Sea-camp in order 
of to divert his renowned Enemy from his cloſe Purſuit of 
ty Caſſibelan. This Prince is ſuppoſed to have kept his 
ad Royal Reſidence at Carvilium, now Milton, near which 


y. Place King Edgar's Queen ſpent the latter Part of her 


iy Lite, in a religious Retirement; and for that Purpoſe 
rs built an blouſe there. | „„ 

re About three Miles from Salisbury is Lengford, the 
e Seat of the Lord Viſcount Fo/#ftone, It is ſituated in 


n a pleaſant Valley; the Avon running through his Lord- 


25 MW ſhip's Garden, The Houſe, built in King James the 
e PFirſt's time, is in a triangular Form, withround Towers 
e at each Corner; in which are the Dining-room, Li- 
«= WW brary, and Chapel. The Rooms, though not large, 
o are very pleaſant, chearful, and elegantly decorated in 
e the modern Taſte; and, though richly furniſhed, yet 
„che Decorations of the Rooms, and the Furniture, do 

not appear over-gaudy ; a Fault one ſees in ſome other 
Places. The Gallery is very fine, and contains ſome 
& admirable Pictures of the greateſt Maſters. At each 
End of this Gallery hang two Landſchapes of Claud 


Wilts. GREAT BRITAIN. 309 
$tukely, on the Hill in his Garden, which, as I have 


cus Aurelianus, it would have added to the Curioſities 


Upon the higheſt Eminence, which overlooks 72 | 


Lorrain, 


{ 
4 
7 


e — > - r — x N : 
FLY —— ˙·1322 —ü—üä—— . E 


310 ATOUR He Wit 
Lorrain; the one a Riſing, the other a Setting Sun; 
which are eſteemed two of the beſt Pieces, now in th 
Kingdom, of that great Maſter. | 

he Pictures, Furniture, and Fitting up of this Gal. 
2 4 it is ſaid, coſt 10, ]. 
| ne triangular Form of this Houſe is ſo ſingular 
that there is but one more of the fame Form in Ex. 
tand; and which was built by the ſame Perſon, at about 
ix Miles Diſtance. - | 
Near Lord Feliſtone's, on the other Sicke Of the R. 
ver, are the Seats of Lord Fever/ham, of Sir Geri 
Vandeput, &c. which are ſo ſituated on the riſing Hills, 
as to command a Proſpect of the Meadows, throug . 
which'the River Avon ſerpentizes. 5 
"The Road from Hilton to Shaftesbury, called 21 K 
Ten Mile Courſe, is a fine Ridge of Downs, continue ſt 
upon the Southern Bank of the River Nadder, with | 9: 
ſweet Proſpect to the Right and Left all the Way oe 
the Downs, and the Country on both Sides. T C 
Grandfather of the preſent Earl of Pembroke placed BW 
a numbered Stone at every Mile. Between the fis it: 
and fixth Mile is a pretty large Camp, called Ch: 80 
bury, probably Reman, in the Decline of the Em- t! 
pire. At the End of this Courſe are three or ſou D 
Celtic Barrows. In this Hill is a Quarry of Stone, © 


= —<Y 2 x , d 


very full of Sea- ſhells. Not far off, in the Pariſh de 
Tisbury, near Narder Caſtle, is a great IntrenchmenE I 
in a Wood, which was probably a Britiſo Town nen fir 
the Nadder. . 
The Downs and Plains in this Part of England beins Iz 
ſo open, and the Surface ſo little ſubje& to Alteration vw 
there are more Remains of Antiquity to be ſeen upoi bi 
them, than in other Places; and, as they tell us, o Ir 
leſs than 53 antient Eneampments, or Fontification WW 
were in this one County: ſome of which are ven 
viſible, and are of different Forms, and erected by di- 50 
fcrent Nations; as Britiſb, Daniſh, Saxon, and Roman * 


Pal. 


Ee ] . ³ m —— eel n 


—— 
— — dane 


Wilts. GREAT BRITAIN, 311 

particularly at EO. down, Burywood, - Oldburgh-hill, 

| Cummer ford, Roundway-down, St. Aun's Hill, Bratton- 

$ ca/tle, Clay: hill, Stourton park, IF itecole-hall, Battle- 

Ja. b:ry, Scrathbury, Yanesbury, Frippsbury, Suthbury-hill, 

| /mbresbury, before deſcribed, Great - Bedwyn, Eaſterley, 

| Merdon, Aubery, Barbury-caſile, &c, At Aubery, or 

2M Aukbury, in particular, on the Eaft-ſide of the Avon, by 

bon Gr eat-Dornford, is a very large Camp, covering the 
| whole Top of an Hill. 


n the other Side of the Ri- 
Ri. ver, a little higher up, is Veſpaſian's Camp, called The 
alle. Near theſe are two other Camps; which ſeem 
lil Remains of YVeſpaſian's Victories, and intimate, that he 
web MY ſubdued the Country by Inches. : | 
North of theſe is Martin's. hall- Hill, a vaſt Stationary 
7% Roman Camp. On two Sides the Precipice is dreadfully 
W ſteep. The Earl of Liuchelſea has a Braſs Alexander 
hz Severus found here; on the Reverſe, Jupiter Fulminans, 
On the Weſt-fide, at-top of the Hill, without the i 
Te Camp, is a round Pit, of good Spring- water, always 
ace full to the Brim in the drieſt Summers (but never over- 
fi flowing); which, at thoſe Seaſons, is of the greateſt 
mM Service to the Country round ; and thouſands of Cat- 
Em. tle are every Day driven thither, from a conſiderable 
8 Diſtance, to drink. Pam informed, there is ſuch ano- 
ore. ther upon the Top of Chute- Hill, South-eaſt from hence, 
h «8 very high, and no other Water within ſome Miles of it. 
nen! : he Proſpet from Martin s-Hall- Hill is exceeding 
near me. | | EY = 0 
At Farls, not far from Clarendon Park, was the 
ein Birth-place of Sir Stephen Fox, and where the Town, 
on ſharing in his good Fortune, ſhews ſeveral Marks of 
pol bis Bounty; as particularly the building a new Church 
do from the Foundation, and getting an Act of Parlia- 
one ment paſſed for making it Parochial, it being but a 
ven Chapel of Eaſe before to an adjoining Pariſh : Sir Ste- 
d. ben alſo built and endowed an Alms-houſe here for 
nan x poor Women, with a Maſter, and a Free- ſchool. 
par- The Maſter is to be a Clergyman, and to officiate in 
| | the 


Patronage of the Earl of Pembroke ; and which is; 


the Weſt Part of Viliſbire in my Return, where ar 


time I went on to Langbro', a fine Seat of the late Lord 
Colerain. 6 | | 


From hence, in my Way to the Sea-ſide, I came u 


312 : "A I DUR Ps. Hann 


the Church; which, including the School, is a good 
Maintenance. 3 

| Fought not to omit mentioning the Tapeſtry Ma. 
nufacture at Z/7/ton ; which was carried on, under the! 


great Benefit to the Town; as it will be, if encouraoe 
as it deſerves, to the whole Kingdom. The Enzihl 
Genius for Improvement is well known : and the 
are already arrived to great Perfection in making] 
Tapeſtry, and Carpets of all Sorts  _ 

I am now to purſue my firſt Deſign, and ſhall take 


ſeveral things to be ſtill taken notice of. In the mea 


New- Fereſt, of which I have ſaid ſomething before, 


6 
with relation to the great Extent of Ground, which PA 
lies waſte, and had formerly a vaſt Quantity of large BF ©. 
Timber upon it. 5 8 8 
This Part of the Country is a laſting Monument of p. 
the Tyranny and Oppreſſion of William I. who la 
it open and waſte for a Foreſt, and fer Game; fo s. 
which Purpoſe he unpeopled the Country, pulled down , I, 
the Houſes, and the Churches, of ſeveral Pariſhes ani \W 
Towns, and of Abundance of Villages, turning the 1; 
r People out of their Habitations and Poſlefſſions, BF (- 
for the Sake of his Deer. The ſame Hiſtories likewit WF - 
record, that two of his own Sons, and particularly hi BW - | 
immediate Succeſſor William Rufus, loſt their Lives in e, 
this Foreſt; //ham Rufus being ſhot with an Arrow * 
directed at a Deer, which, glancing on a Tree, changed BY b. 
its Courſe, and, ſtriking the King full on the Brea, WF... 
killed him. And another Son, whilſt in hot Purſuit d / 
the Game, was caught up by the Boughs of a Tree, t 
and hanged like Abſalom. Theſe they relate as Tudg: pro 
ments: and they ſtill ſhew the Tree on which the 
; : | . 
„ 1 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 313 
Arrow glanced that ſlew Rufus. In King Charles II.“s 


| time, the Tree was ordered to be ſurrounded with a 


Pale, great Part of which is now fallen down: and 


whether the Tree they ſhew us, be really ſo old, or not, 


is to me a great Queſtion, the Fact being above 600 


LVears ago. | 


l cannot omit mentioning here a Propoſal made ſome 


Croſs- roads. 


Years ago to the Lord Treaſurer Godolphin, for repeo- 


@ pling this Foreſt ; which I can be more particular in *, 


than any other Man, becauſe I had the Honour to 
draw up the Scheme, and argue it before that noble 


Lord, and ſome others, who were principally concern- ' 
1 ed, at that time, in bringing Over, or rather providing 
for, when they were come over, the poor Inhabitants 
of the Palatinate; a thing in itſelf commendable, but, 
| as it was managed, made of no Benefit to England, 
and miſerable to thoſe poor People. . 
Some Perſons being ordered by the noble Lord above- 
W mentioned, to conſider of Meaſures how thoſe People 
ſhould be provided for, without Injury to the Public, 


New-FoREST in Hampſhire was ſingled out to-be the 


| Place for them. | | 


Here it was propoſed to draw a great ſquare Line, 


containing 4000 Acres of Land, marking out two large - 
Highways or Roads through the Centre, crofling both 
[Ways ; fo that there fhould be 1000 Acres in each 


Diviſion, excluſive of the Land contained in the ſaid 


Then to tingle out 20 Men, and their Families, who 
thould be recommended, as honeſt induſtrious People, 
expert in Huſbandry, or at leaſt capable of being in- 


Y #:ucted in it. T's each of theſe ſhould be parcelled, 


but in equal Diſtributions, 200 Acres of this Land; fo 


| that the whole 4000 Acres ſhould be diſtributed to the 
& {aid 20 Families; for which they ſhould have no Rent 
to pay, and be liable to no Taxes, but ſuch as would 


provide for their 6wa Sick or Poor, repairing their 


Vor. * own 


8 The Wiiter of this Part, was the fam ous Danicl d- F oe, 


314 A TOUR A _ Hans W 


own Roads, &c. This Exemption to continue for { 
20 Years, and then to pay each 50/7. a Year to the 
Crown, „„ 0 
To each of theſe Families it was propoſed to ad- 8 
vance 2001. in ready Money, as a Stock to ſet them to 
work, and to hire and pay Labourers to incloſe, clear, M ? 
and cure the Land ; which, it was ſuppoſed, the firſt 1 
Year, could not be ſo much to their Advantage, a | N 
following Years ; allowing them Timber out of the 8 
Foreſt to build themſelves Houſes and Barns, Shed; ſy 
and Offices, as they ſhould have Occaſion ; alſo for 
Carts, Waggons, Ploughs, Harrows, and the like ne. y 
ceſſary Implements. A ; gt 
| Theſe 20 Families would, by the Conſequence of | ©: 
their own Settlements, employ and maintain ſuch a A 
Proportion of others of their own People, that the th 
whole Number of Palatines would have been provided © 
for, had they been many more than they were ; and by 


that without being any Burden upon, or Injury to, the 
People of England ; on the contrary, they would have 
been an Advantage, and an Addition of Wealth and 
Strength, to the Nation, and to the Country, in parti. 
cular, where they ſhould be thus ſeated, 
Two Things would have been anſwered by the Ex- 
ecution of this Scheme ;- viz. 


1. That the annual Rent to be received for all thoſe 

Lands, after 20 Years, would abundantly pay the 
Public for the firſt Diſpurſes. 

2. More Money than would have done this, ws 
thrown away upon them here, to keep them in 
Suſpence, and afterwards ſtarve them; ſending 
them a begging all over the Nation, and ſhipping 

them off to periſh in other Countries. E 

The Spot, where the Deſign was laid out, was neat 

Li 27, in the Road from Romſey to Lymington: 
- whither now directed my Courſe, BF 
=: J £,ymingt 


| alluring you, that Iam, 


Hants. GREAT BRITAIN. 315 


Lymington is a little, but populous Sea - port, ſtanding 


oppolite to the //le Might, in the narrow Part of the 


Streight, through which Ships ſometimes paſs in fair 
Weather, called the Needles; and right againſt the 
antient Town of South- Yarmouth, in that Ile. This 
Town of Lymington is ehiefly noted for returning two 


Members to Parliament, and for making excellent 


Salt: from whence all theſe South Parts of England are 
ſupplied, as well by Water, as Land- carriage. : 

From hence are but few Towns on the Sea-coaſt 
Weſt ; though ſeveral conſiderable Rivers empty 


themſelves into the Sea: nor are there any Harbours 


ot dea · ports of Note, except Poe; which I ſhall take 
notice of in my next Letter. As for Chrift-church, 
though it ſtands at the Mouth of the Avon, which, 
as I have ſaid, comes down from Salisbury, and brings 
with it all the Waters of the South and Eaſt Parts of 

| 1/ilthhire, and receives alſo the Stour and Priddle, two 
= Dor/et/hire Rivers, which bring with them all the 
Waters of the North Part of Dorſetſbire, yet it is 2 


very inconſiderable poor Place, ſcarce worth ſeeing, 


although it returns two Members to Parliament. 


But here I will cloſe this my Fifth Letter, with 


tour Ss, &c. 


Bay LE N. 


316 A TOUR thro Dork 
Irre E R vi 


Containing a Deſcription of the County of Doksxr, 
Part of SOMERSETSHIRE, DEVONSHIRE, 
CornwaLL, Sc. 


[2 
EI 


FT N O W enter into the County of Dorſet; and 
firſt I rode North-weft into it, to ſee the antient 
Jovan of Vimburn, or Himburnminſler. The Churches“ 
hereabouts, as well as the neighbouring County of 
Hants, called Minſters, were built by the Saxon Kings 
on their Converſion to Chriſtianity. The Town ſtands! 
in a large extended fertile Vale, like a Meadow, with 
much Wood about it. The Rivers abound with 
Fiſh. Here was a Nunnery built in the Year 712. b) 
Cuthberga, Siſter to King Ina. The Church is a very) 
yur one, antient, and well-built, with a very firm, 
rong ſquare Tower, conſiderably high; but was, 
without doubt, much nobler, when on the Top of it 
ſtood a moſt exquilite Spire, finer, and taller, if Fame 
uy may be credited, than that of Salisbury; and, by We 
its Situation, in a plainer, flatter Country, viſible, no 
_ queſtion, much farther : but this moſt beautiful Orna- 
ment was blown down by a ſudden Tempeſt of Wind, 
as they tell us, in the Year 1022, „ 
In this Church are the Monuments of ſeveral noble 
Families, and of King Etheldred, who was ſlain in Ba- 
tle by the Danes. He was a Prince famed for Piet), 
and, according to the Zeal of thoſe Times, was eſteem BF 2 
ed a Martyr ; becauſe he died fighting for his Religion JM » 
and his Country, againſt the Pagan Danes. The In. ſe 
ſcription upon his Grave is preſerved, and has been] 
carefully repaired, ſo as eaſily to be read, and is 2 P. 


follows: | | 8 | 


ct, 


| Dorſet. GREAT BRITATN. 317 


In hoc loco quieſcit Corpus S. Etheldredi, Regis 
Weſt Saxonum, Martyris, qui Anno Dom. 
DeCCLAAII. æxiii. Aprilis, per Manus. 
Danorum Paganorum occubuit. | 

FDC. ; 
Here reſts the Body of St. Etheldred, King of the 
 W:/t Saxons, and Martyr, who fell by the Hands 

of the Pagan Danes, in the Year of our Lord 872, 

the 23d of April. 1 | 


Here alſo are the Monuments of the great Marchio- 


© nels of Exeter, Mother of Edward Courtney, Earl of 
Devonſhire, and laſt of the Family of  Courtneys, who 


enjoyed that Honour; as alſo of Jahn de Beaufort, 
Duke of Somerſet, and his Wife, Grandmother of Ring 


| + Henry VII. by her Daughter Margaret, Counteſs of 
= Richmond. | Rats: | 


This laſt Lady I mention, becauſe ſhe was Foun- 


= dreſs of a very fine Free-ſchool ; which has ſince been 


inlarged, and had a new Benefactreſs in Queen Eliza- 


= bath, who augmented the Stipend, and annexed it to 
the Foundation. The famous Cardinal Pool was Dean 
of this Church before his Exaltation. _ 


The Inhabitants of Vimburnminſter are numerous, 


but poor, and chiefly maintained by the Manufacture 
of knitting Stockens ; which employs great Part of the 
| County of Dorſet; of which this is the firſt Town 
| Eaſtwardts 3 aut . "i | 


IVimburn St. Giles's in this Neighbourhood, is 


a very handſome Seat belonging to the Earl of 
B | 


rom hence I went to Ringwood, upon the River 


| Avon, over a deep ſandy Moor, It is a large thriving 


Place, full of good new Brick Houſes, ſeated by the 
Side of a great watery Valley; the River dividing it- 
ſelf into ſeveral Streams, and frequently overflowing 
large Quantities of the Meadow. Here they teat 


pretty much in Leather, Stockens, Druggets, and nar- 


row Cloth, 
: F +. | South 


318 4 TOUR h Dorſt 
South of #imburn, over a ſandy, wild, and barren 
Country, we came to Pool, the moſt conſiderable Sea- 


port in this Part of England, and which returns two 


Members to Parliament. | 
This Place is noted for the beſt and biggeſt Oyſters, 
in all this Part of England; which the People of Pool 
pretend to be excellent for pickling; and they are 
barreled up here, and ſent not only to London, but to 
the ei Indies, and to Spain, Italy, and other Parts, 
It is obſerved, more Pearls are found in the Pool Oyl- 
ters, and larger, than in any others in England. 
The Entrance into the large Bay of Pool is narrow; 
it is made ſtill narrower by Brank/ey Iſland, which, 
lying in the very Mouth of the Paſlage, divides it into 
two, and where is an old Caſtle, called Brank/ey Caſtle, 


| built to defend the Entrance, but without Guns at | 


preſent, though we are at War with France. | 
Pool is a neat, compact, well-built Town, much in- 
creaſed within theſe few Years ; the Houſes are moftly 
built of Stone. The Pariſh-church is large, a Royal 
Peculiar. Here are a Town- houſe, Cuſtom houſe, 
a convenient -Quay, and public Warehouſes. The 


Bay furniſhes it with Fiſh in abundance of different : 


Kinds. There is a great Reſort to their Markets an 
Fairs; which will probably be much augmented, 
when the Turnpike-roads now making are completely 
finiſhed. The Inhabitants will alfo reap from thence 
a farther Benefit, by Perſons coming to bathe in the 


Salt- water, for which no Place can be more proper, | | 


as there is a ſufficient Depth at all times, and as, for the 

large Tract that it covers, it muſt be conſiderably 
ſtronger and warmer in its Reflux, than it otherwiſe 
would be... WE DT 

- The Mouth of the Harbour is about three Miles 

South from Poel; the Depth there at High-water is 
about 16 Feet; and when once Ships are in, they ride 

in any of the Branches of the Bay, as ſafely and com- 

modiouſſy as can be deſired. This capacious Haven 


lies in che Midſt between Purbeck and the 4e of 1 


H ighty 


Ce SEES . ˙² * as ” IJ oc: eo xd ao. - a. r Aw um 


r IEP —'Y 


a i. n = «ac 


ar Sw; anus ith an As. ol: a 


Ac. _w a _ woos 


to the Ha 


| Dorſet. GREAT BRITA FV 319 
igbt, and is faid to enjoy one Advantage over all 
| other Ports, perhaps in Britain, which is, that the Sea 
ebbs and flows four times in 24 Hours. Firſt, with 


2 South-eaſt and North-weſt Moon; and then by a 
South-and-by-eaſt, and a North-and-by-weſt Moon; 
which ſecond Flood is generally fuppoſed to arife from 


the Return oſ the Fore-Ebb, which coming from the S/ 
ſer Coaſt, between the Je Might and the Continent 
of Hampſhire, ſtrikes in here, as lying in its Way, 


The principal Branch of the foreign Commerce of 


its Inhabitants is the Newfoundland Fiſhery, to which 
they ſend every Spring, in time of Peace, upwards of 


70 Sail of Veſlels, from the Burden of 100 to 150 


Tons, laden with Proviſions, Nets, Cordage, Sail- 


cloth, and all Sorts of Wearing -apparel, with Variety 
of other Commodities, for the Conſumption of the In- 
habitants and their Servants. The ſmaller Veſſels 


| fiſh on the Banks, and make two or three Trips 
every Seaſon. Their Returns are in Cod, Oil, 
8. Skins, and Furs; and in Autumn they export 


their Fiſh to Spain, Italy, and Portugal. This is 
a Trade not more profitable to thoſe concerned, than 


E beneficial in general to the Kingdom, as it ſubſiſts a 
| prodigious Number of Hands, occaſions a great Export 
of our Commodities and Manufactures, and breeds ex- 


cellent Seamen. Beſides this, they employ ſome Ships 


in the Carolina Trade, for which Pool is very conveni- 


ently ſituated, lying directly in the Way to Holland 


and Hamburgh, the Port Charges, Labour in ſhipping 
and reſhipping their Rice, being but inſignificant, 


They ſend alſo two Veſſels annually to Guiney, and 
twice as many to the /2/t- Indies. Their Coaſt-trade 
to London and Newcaſtle is to a large Amount, by which 


they export great Quantities of Corn; and by their Re- 


turns ſupply the Conſumption of Blandford, Ringwood, 


| and many other adjacent Places. ere are in the 


whole, about 200 Veſſels of various Sizes belonging 
. In time of War they have hithert 

this is ſo exceedingly de- 

— _ trimenta: 


ſulfered extremely, and as 
„„ 


F = 
8 & — ts 
* 12% GEE TI 


"4 rr * 
ee e eee 


rs — n - n 1 
p bag — 7 — ot, near mane 
. 
. ” ky ”_ o 
PS ao ap td wat — Yootiare 50 — 
R > 


— — r 
1 


RR”, TOUR tro 


trimental to a Trade, which is ſo apparently ſervice. 


able to the Royal Navy, it deſerves Notice, and, in 


Confequence of that, no doubt, will obtain the moſt 


immediate Redreſs and effectual Protection. 
Pool is a Borough and County of itſelf, governed by 
a Mayor, GS. | 5 


* 


Marebam has been a Roman Town. There has. 
been a Caſtle by the Water - ſide, Weſt of the Bridge, 
built by King William I. perhaps upon the Roman. lt 


is an old Corporation, now decayed, the Sands obſtrvQ. 
ing the Paſſage of the Veſſels; yet returns two Mem- 


bers to Parliament. Here, they ſay, have been a 
Mint, and 17 Pariſh Churches; of which three only 
remain; and they ſupplied by one Miniſter. I ſaw a 


ruinous Religious Houſe, as I paſſed by the River 


Frome, Two Rocks about Corf-Ca/tle have an odd 


Appearance hence. 


The Tower of St. Mary's is its chief Ornament, : 


It had formerly a Wall and a ſtrong Caſtle, which 
have been long ſince demoliſhed. It conſiſts now only 


of two Streets, croſſing each other; and they but 
 meanly built. However, it has ſtill a Market, is go- 


verned by a Mayor, Sc. The chief Trade here is 
in Tobaccc-pipe Clay, \ 

South of /Fareham, and between the Bay I have 
mentioned and the Sea, lies a large Track of Land; 
which being ſurrounded 'by the Sea, except on one 


Side, is called an Iſland, though it is really more pro- 


perly a Peninſula. This Track of Land is better inha- 


| bited than the Sea: coaſt of the Weſt End of Dorſet- 


Hire generally is; and the Manufacture of Stockens is 
carried on there alſo, It is called the % Purbect, 
and is about 10 Miles long and 6 broad, and has in 
the Middle of it a large Market-town, called Corf; 
and, from the famous Caſtle there, the whole Town 
is now called Corf- Caſtle. It is governed by a Mayor, 


| Aldermen, &c, and returns two Members to Parlia- 


This 


Ct... - 


Dorſet, 


as... a SD H9 ec I, » DD, 


„„ os ww 8Q\>>5*rzzzA 


— 


Dorſet, GREAT BRITAIN. 321 
| This Part of the Country is eminent for vaſt Quar- 
ries of Stone, which is cut out flat, and uſed in Lon= 
don, in great Quantities, for paving Court-yards, 
Alleys, Avenues to Houſes, Kitchens, Foot-ways on 
the Sides of the High-ſtreets, and the like; and is 

very profitable to the Place, as alſo in the Number of 
Shipping employed in bringing. it to Londen. There 
| are ſeveral Rocks of very good Marble, only that the 
W Vcins in the Stone are not black and white, as the 
Italian, but grey, red, and other Colours. The beſt 
# Tobacco-pipe Clay is found within two Miles of Cor fa 
E Ca/?le, and likewiſe in Hanger/tone-bill, in the Neigh- 

| bourhood of Pool, fold at London for 30s. per Ton. 
= From hence to Wey mouth we rode in View of. the 
Sea. The Country is open, and, in ſome reſpects, 
pleaſant ; but not like the Northern Parts of the Coun- 
ty, which are all fine Carpet-ground, and the Herbage 


nt, ſo ſweet, that their Sheep are eſteemed the beſt in Eng- 
ich and, and their Wool extremely fine. © per 
ily BY from hence we turned up to Dorche/ter, the Coun- 
ut WW ty-town. It is regular and clean. The Hening- 
0- WW {rect enters it by the North of Hinterburn at i- 
is WW gate. This is, by the ignorant Country people, refer- 
red to the Work of the Devil, who, they ſay, caſt it 
ve vp in a Night's time. The Foundations of the an-. 
; dient Roman Wall appear quite round the Town; but 
ne Eaſt ward a Street is built upon it, and the Ditch filled 


up: it 1s. ſtill called The Walls; for that Way the 
& Town is ſwelled out into a confiderable Village with 
= a Church, and handſome Tower, named Fordington. 

There are three other Churches in the Town. On 
the South and Weſt ſide, without the Walls, an hand- 
ſome Walk of Trees is planted, looking pleaſantly into 
the Country; though, being common Sycamores, 
they are inconvenient by harbouring Flies. The 
Banks of the River Frome are ſteep; for the Town 
| ſtands on high Ground. Beyond the River are Mea- 

dows, and warm ſandy Lands; on this Side, the finz 
Fee 125 1 ; chalky: 


322 A TOUR tro Dorſet, 
chalky Downs, pleaſant for Riding, and profitable in 
excellent Grain. 'The Air muſt needs be wholeſome, 
the Climate warm, and a ſufficient Diſtance from the 
Sea. It was almoſt totally burnt down. in the Year 
1613. The Loſs in Houſes, Goods, &c. was com- 
Puted at 200, ooo l. It is governed by a Mayor, Al. 
dermen, Bailiffs, and capital Burgeſſes, and ſends two 
Members to Parliament. Its Market, which is very 0 
conſiderable, is on Saturday; and its chief Trade is in 
Rne Serges, Sheep, and Ale, which is much eſteemed, 
Here are a Town-hall, a Shire-hall, and County Gaol, 

. a famous Free-ſchool, and ſeveral Alms-houfes. In 
the Time of the Romans, it was one of their Winter 
Stations, was walled in, and had a Caftle, which were 

all demoliſhed afterwards by the Danes. The People 
of Fordington roſe in Arms, and prevented the Farmers 
from leveling a great Barrow, The late Rev. Mr, 
Nace, known for his Philoſophical Works, lived here, 
and poſſeſſed a great Quantity of Roman Coins, called 
here Dorn money, or King Dor's Muney. Near this 
Place is a Roman Camp, and a noble Roman Am- a 
phitheatre, which the Vulgar call Maumbury; but, 
have no Notion of its Purpoſe, though it is a common 

Excurſion for the Inhabitants; and the Terrace on 
the Top is a noted Place of Rendezvous, affording 
an agreeable circular Walk, a ProfpeCt of the Town, 
and wide Plains of Corn- fields all around. 

I'be Manor of Fordington or Forthington belongs to 
the Duchy of Cornwall. The common Highway, or 
public Road from London, the Town of Blandford, and 
other Places Eaſt of Dorſeiſbire, lie over Part of the 
ſaid Common or Moor, through a conſiderable Length. 
of Waters, ſubject to Floods in the time of heavy 

Rains, andthrough a Ford on the River Frome, which: 

is a very dangerous Paſſage both for Horſes and Car- 

_- riages, and, in times of Floods, utterly impaſſable. Sen- 

* fible of theſe Inconveniences, a public-ſpirited Lady, 
Mrs. Lora Piti, propoſed to obtain an Act of Parlia- 
g ä „„ ment 


per Groves of Trees for Cover for the Fowl. In 

open Lake, or broad Part, is a continual Aſſembly of 
Swans: here they live, feed, and breed; and the 
Number of them is ſuch, that, I believe, I did not fee 


Hemp Manufacture. 


Dorſet. GREAT BRITAIN, 327 
the 


ſo few as 7 or 8000. We ſaw ſeveral of them upon 
the Wing, very high in the Air; whence, we ſuppoſ- 


ed, they flew over the Riff of Beach, which parts the 
Lake from the Sea, to feed on the Shores. 


From this Decoy Weſt the Lake.narrows, and at 


juaſt almoſt cloſes, till the Beach joins the Shore; and 
ſoo Portland may be ſaid not to be an Iſland, but Part of 


the Continent. ©; . 
And now we came to Abbotſdury, a Town antiently 


famous for a great Monaſtery, and now eminent for 


nothing but its Ruins, | | 
From hence we went on to Bridport, a pretty large, 
but not well-built Corporation-town on the Sea-ſhore; 
it ſtands in a low dirty Soil, and conſiſts principally of 
two Streets. In one from Eaſt to Wet, is the great 
Weſtern Road, which is the chief Support of its Trade; 


and the other from North to South, in which ſtands the 
Church. Saturday is its Market-day. It is governed 


by two Bailiffs, a Recorder, &c. and ſends twe Mem- 
bers to Parliament, The adjacent Country was once 


famous for producing the beſt Hemp, and the Town 


for breeding the beſt Artiſts in Ropes, Cables, Nets, 
Sc. The Corporation has been ſince much reduced, 


which has been imputed to the choaking up of its 


Harbour, and to the Decay. of: their once flouriſhing: 


Here we ſaw. Boats all the Way.on the Shore fiſhing 


for Mackrel; which they take in the eaſieſt Manner 
imaginable, and in ſuch prodigious Plenty, that there 


has been a Watch ſet to prevent Farmers from dunging 
their Land with them, which, it was thought, might 


be apt to infect the Air. 


In the Year 1722. an AQ paſſed for reftoring and. : 
rebuilding the Haven and Piers of Bridport, in order 
: | ore 


25 : "4 TOU R thre : Dorlet, 

fore it was a Place of great Trade and Commerce; 
but, by reaſon of a general Sickneſs, which ſwept: away 
the greateſt Part of its moſt wealthy Inhabitants, and 
by other Accidents, the Haven became neglected, and 
choaked with Sands; the Piers fell to Ruin, and the 
Town, of confequence, to Decay; fo that there was 
no Security for Ships that happened to be driven by 
Streſs of Weather into the deep and dangerous Bay, 
wherein the ' Haven formerly was, which occafioned® 
frequent Shipwrecks, The Act therefore authorizcs 
the Bailiffs and Burgeſſes of Bridport, to levy certain 
Tolls and Duties on divers Merchandizes, &c. in order 
to reſtore the ſaid Piers and Harbour. 

From Bridport we came to Lyme, called Lyme Kori 
It is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, & c. and returns 
two Members to Parliament. 

In Leland's Time it was in a good Condition; but 
Camden ſpeaks ſlightly of its Harbour, and as ſerving. 
only for Fiſhing Barks. © The Trade, however, re- 
vived in the Reign of King James I. the Inhabitants 
ſtriking into a conſiderable Frade to Newfoundland, 

France, Spain, and the Streights. It muſt be ſaid, that 
Eyme- Regis has neither Creck or Bay, Road or River ; „ 
yet has an Harbour fo conſtructed, that the like is not 
to be found either in this Kingdom or any other; and 
feems to be of the Inhabitants c own Contrivance. 

The Materials for it were vaſt Rocks weighed up 
out of the Sea, with empty Caſks (at what Lime we 
know not) which Caſks being placed in a regular 
Order to a conſiderable Breadth, and carried out a great 
Way, ſome ſay 300 Yards, the Interſtices being filled 
up with Earth, high and thick Walls of Stone were built 

upon thoſe Rocks, f in the main Sea, and fo thick, that 
large Buildings (amongthem a handſome Cuſtom- houſe 
upon Pillars, with a Corn market under it, and Ware- 
houſes) have been erected thereon.. Oppoſite to this, 

but farther into the Sea, is another Wall of the fame 
Workmanſhip, which croſſes the End of the firſt, and 


= comes about wich a r Tail parallel to that, But the 
| 5 Point 


- & 2892 


© ae 


— — wo 
. 


e „ „ e 


point of the firſt or main Wall, is the Entrance into 
the Port, and the ſecond or oppoſite Wall breaking 
the Violence of the Sea from the Entrance; the Ships 


go into the Baſin, and, being defended from all Winds, 
ride there, as ſecure as in a Mill-pond or Wet docx. 


Thierſingular Work, which anſwers the Intention of 
a Pier, is called The Cobbe; and for keeping, it in con- 
{tant Repair. (which is done at the Expence of the 
Town, and proves ſometimes very chargeable) there 
are annually choſen two Cobbe-Wardens, * __ 

The unfortunate Duke of Monmouth, having with 
him a Frigate of 30 Guns, and two Merchant Ships, 


landed here June 11. 1685, Many of his Party were 


afterwards put to Death on the Spot, and their Limbs 
hung up in the Town, _ ES 


Lyme might be ſtrengthened by a Fort, but as the 


* 


Walls of the Cobbe are firm enough to carry what Guns 
they pleaſe to plant upon them, they did not ſeem to 
think it needful, eſpecially as the Shore is convenient 
for Batteries; they have therefore ſome Guns planted 


| in proper Places, for the Defence of the Cobbe and the 


Nevertheleſs it ſuffered by the French War in the 


Reign of Queen Anne; but is recovered ſince ; many 
handſome Stone Houſes have been lately built by Mer- 
chants reſiding there ; and it might be rendered. of 
much greater Importance than it is, if any new Manu- 
facture could be introduced in the Country hehind it ; 
which is certainly plentiful enough to admit not only 
of one, but of many Improvements. It is not, how- 
ever, unlikely, that if the Inhabitants of this Part re- 
curred to the very Arts, from which, according to the 


beſt Authorities, the Town derived its Exiſtence near 
1000 Years ago, that is, making Salt, it might very 


ſpeedily and effectually anſwer their Purpoſes, ſince by 
the Help of ſhallow Marſhes (into which the Sea- 


water being admitted, the Uſe of the Work could be 


eaſily performed by the Heat of the Sun, as is done on 
the oppolite Coaſt of France); as good Salt as any 


might 


Dorſet, GREAT BRITAIN. 329 


330 WE E” TOUR thre Dorſet. 


might be produced ; for which the Place ſeems to be 
exceedingly well ſituated, and to have very commodious 
Advantages, as their Concern in the Fiſhery would 


furniſh an immediate Market for all they could poſſibly 


« 


make. 
Before we leave Lyme- Regis, it may not be amiſs to 


mention, that, notwithſtanding modern as well as an- 


tient Writers ſpeak of the Conſtruction of this Port, as 


ſomething very ſingular and extraordinary, yet none 


have propoſed the Imitation of it, though there cannot 
a more pregnant Inſtance than this, of the Poſſibility 
of making (though it may be in a better Manner) 2 
Port upon almoſt ay. Part of our Coaſt, where the 
Conveniency of the Country required, .or the opening 
ſuch a Port ſhould appear the moſt probable Means of 
improving it; one or other of which Circumſtances, 
would turn ſuch Ports to the Advantage of moſt of the 
maritime Counties in this Iſland. After all, Lyme, 
. conſidering the Bignefs of it, may paſs for a Place of 


< 


Wealth. | 


Here we found the Merchants began to trade in the 


Pilchard Fiſhing, though not to ſo conſiderable a De- 
gree, as they do farther Weſt; the Pilchards ſeldom 
coming up ſo high Eaſtward as Portland, and not very 
often fo high as Lyme. 
I viſited from hence ſome of the Towns in the 
North-weſt Part of this Country; as Blandford (inthe 
Road between Salisbury and Dorcbęſter), an handſome 
well-built Town, pleaſantly ſeated in a Flexure of the 
River, before charming Meadows, and rich Lands. 
' Wodd thrives exceedingly here. Indeed this Country 
is a fine Variety of Downs, Woods, Lawns, Arable 
and Paſture Land, rich Valleys, and an excellent Air. 


The dry Eafterly Winds, the cold Northern, and the 


Weſtern 'Moiſture, are tempered by the warm South- 
ern ſaline Breezes, wafted hither from the Ocean, But 


Blandford is chiefly famous for making the fineſt 
Bone-lace in England; where they ſhewed me, in my 


firſt Viſit to it, ſome ſo exquiſitely fine, as I think I 


never 


5, Dt bai bh. gs | ye 


beans 


* 


y 
2 
e 
8 
1 


p OO) ow 


was 


Dorſet. GRTAT BRITAIN. 331 
never ſaw better in Flanders, France, or Italy; and 
which, they ſaid, they rated at above 301. Sterling a 


Yard, © L 
This was the State and the Trade of the Town, 


| when I was there in my firſt Journey: but June 4. 
1731. the whole Town, except 26 Houſes, was con- 
| ſumed by Fire, together with the Church. The Con- 


fternation of the People was ſo great, and the Fire fo 


| furious, that few-ſaved any Goods. 


An Act paſſed in 1732. for the better and more eaſy 


Rebuilding of this Town, and for determining Differ- 


ences touching Houſes and — burnt down or 
demoliſned therein; and, as ſeveral wiſe Regulations 
were made by it, Blandford now makes a much better 


Appearance than ever, 


It is governed by two Bailiffs, F ormerly it ſent two 


Members to Parliament; but it has loſt that Privilege. 


Antiently it was noted for the Manufacture of Band- 


ſttrings, as it is now for Straw- hats, as well as for 


Bone-laces. It is pleaſantly fituated on the Banks of 


the Stour ; and is ſurrounded with a great Number of 


| Gentlemens Seats, and has a good Market on Sa- 


turdays. | | 
From Blandford I took a Turn to view one of the 


| largeft and moſt ſtately Fabrics in the Kingdom: I 


mean the Houſe belonging to the Right Hon. George 


Dodington, Eſq;. It is ſituated in the Pariſh of Gun 
ville, four Miles from Blandford, and ſix from Shaftef= 


bury and Cranborn, The Houſe, Gardens, and Park, 
containing about eight Miles in Circumference, are 


now called Zaftbury. 


You approach this Houſe through a beautiful little 
Lawn; and, paſſing through the grand Arcade, on 


each Side of which the Offices are ranged, you land 


from a Flight of Steps of 11 Feet high, under a noble 


Doric Portico, crowned with a Pediment extending 62 
Feet, the Pillars whereof are 46 Feet high: from 
| whence you enter a moſt magnificent Hall, adorned 


with many Statues and Buſts, 
. 1 The 


= . OED — 

| . ane rr r———_ 

5 n 

r n 6 : l l 

— — — r „c — . —— pe, 

* * 2 5 | 6 

a — EN IIS TIN . y 4 _— b — — n A 9. * 
. Wo IN X 


333 4 TOUR thro Dorſet, 
The Salon is one of the fineſt Rooms in the King. | 
dom; and is. beautifully and richly decorated. Ay. 


one End of this Salon are three noble Apartments 
one hung with Crimſon Velvet, another with flowered 
Velvet; and the third with Satin ; all richly laced with 


| Gold. | At the other End are a Drawing-room and 


large Dining-room. The Marble Tables in theſe 
Rooms are exceedingly curious, and.of great Value: 
they were purchaſed, out of one of the Italian Palaces, | 
The main Body of the Houſe extends 144 Feet, and 
is 95 Feet in Depth; to which join the Arcades; 
which form the great Court, This Court is 160 Feet 
in Breadth, in the Clear; and its Depth, from the 
Houſe to the Entrance, is 210 Feet. The: Arcades 


are 10 Feet wide. The Offices, placed on each Side 


theſe Arcades, in the Centre of them, extend each 133 
Feet, and are in Depth 161 Feet. 'The inner Court 


of theſe Offices are 160 Feet by 80, inthe Clear, Be. 


1 theſe, other Buildings are carried in the ſame 
ine, 50 Feet each Way, and which form two other 


Courts; ſo that the whole Front of the Building and 


Offices extends 570 Feet. Theſe Buildings being of 


different Heights, and the beautiful Turrets at each 


Corner of the Houſe, with their Venetian Windows, 
riſing above all the reſt, give the whole Structure a very 


gi and Appearance. 


The Gardens, to make them equal with the Houſe, 
will require a great deal of Alteration; they being at 


firſt ill laid out. Water is here very much wanting, 
and more Plantations of Wood would greatly improve 
the Spot. 


A little Mile diſtant from Blandford, I viſited Mr. 
Portman's Cliff, as a Curioſity. It is a Hill planted in 
the modern Taſſe, which is a beautiful and ſimple Ir- 
regularity, with many ſtately Trees. The fine Turf 
and foft moſly. Walks, the eaſy Decline in ſome Places, 
and the ſteep Deſcent in others, render the whole de- 
5 5 lightful, 


— — 


„„ „ > at tube > 


. 60 by two Wr annually e 


Dorſet. GREAT BRITAIN, 333 
ligbtſul. It is already extended to a conſiderable Diſ- 


tance, and deſigned to be carried, in a ſemicircular 


Form, near two Miles towards Blandford, a View of 
which is preſented to the Eye. But what adds much 


| to the Charms of this Places i is the River Stour, which 
tuns in ſweet Meanders in the Valley below. Upon 


the whole, it is one of the molt ſuperd and pleaſing 


| Scenes of the Kind I ever ſaw. 


| Fhere is nothing remarkable in the Houſe. It is 
new-fronted, and makes an agreeable Figure. Mr. 
Portman has formed a Plan for g great Improvement, for 
which there is ſufficient Room, both as in the Order 
of the Out houſes and the Flantations. The whole 
Space, except the Cliff, bs. rude and undigeſted when I 
was there (Anno 175 
From Blandford J went Wet to Stourbridge, which, 


and the Country round, are employed in the Minu- 
facture of Stockens: it was once famous for making 


the fineſt, beſt, and higheſt-pric'd Knit Stockens in - 
England; but that Trade is much decayed by the In- 


creaſe of the Knitting-ftocken Engine, or Frame, 
which has deſtroyed the Hand Knitting-trade, ſor fine 


Stockens, through the whole Kingdom ; of which I 
{hall ſpeak in another Place. 

From hence I came to Shireburn, a wee and po- 
pulous Town, with one Collegiate or Conventual 
Church, a Free-{chool, and an Alms-houſe ; and it 
may juſtly boaſt to bave more Inhabitants in it, than 


any Town in Dor ſelſbire, though it is neither the 


County-town, nor ſends Members to Parliament. It 


was once a Biſhop's See; which was removed to 


Saliſbury, The Church is ſtill a Reverend Pile, and 
ſhews the Face of great Antiquity. © 
Shireburn flouriſhed by the Cloth- manufacture, 


which was once the main Support of Dorcheſter, but 


is now in a great Meaſure removed into Somer ſelſpire. 
It is divided into two Parts, both of which are- oo 


* * 
3 


{ EY Shafteſbury 


334 ATOUR tro Dorſet. 


Shaftesbury is alſo. on the Edge of this County, ad- M 
joining to WViliſbire, being 14 Miles from Salisbury, {0 
over that fine, Down or Carpet Ground, called Sa. 

bur plain. It is ſituated upon the Top of an high IM ©: 
Hill, and which cloſes the Plain or Downs, and whence K 
a new Scene is preſented ; viz. a Proſpect of Somerſet. 
ſhire and Wiltſhire, where it is all incloſed, and grown | 0 
with Woods, Foreſts, and planted Hedge: rows; the ;* 
Country rich, fertile, and populous ; the Towns and - 
Houſes ſtanding thick, and being large, and full of In. B 
habitants, and thoſe Inhabitants fully employed in the 5 
richeſt and moſt valuable Manufacture in the World ; | * 
 vz2, the Eugliſb Cloathing, as Whites, both for the i 
Home and Foreign Trade; on which I ſhall be more 1 
particular in my Return through the Weſt and North 
Parts of MiliſbireG. | | w 1 


Shaftesbury, a few Years ago, received ſome Im- 

provement from the Generoſity of a neighbouring 

Gentleman, and particularly in a fine Plantation oa | 

the Top of Par# bill, which he was ſo kind as to in- ; 

dulge the Inhabitants with for a Place of Walking and 

Diverſion z but attempting, on the Strength of his good a 
Offices to the Town, to recommend to them one 

Member of Parliament out of two, he met not with tbe 

grateful Return he might have expected, Violence IM | 

LN 

I 

| 

\ 

d 


having been done to the very Plantation he had fo ge- 
 nerouſly devoted to the Service and Pleaſure of the In- 
habitants. Es * 1 
Shaftesbury is a great Thoroughfare and Poſt Road, 
which cauſes it to be much frequented. It has three 
Churches. The Houſes are moſt of them built with | 
Free- ſtone. It has a very good Market on Saturdays, W | 
is governed by a Mayor, two Aldermen, &c. and ſends WW 
two Members to Parliament. 
We were very deſirous to viſit Stourion, the fine 
Seat of Mr. Hoare, The Road to it from Shaftesbury 
Henley and Narrow-lane, was not the moſt agree- 
able to us, who had ſo lately traveled over the ſweet 
Downs of Wiliſbire. The Diſtance is 1 10 
212 | | les; 


r 1 


Dorſet, SRREAT BRITAI v. 335 


Miles; but the Houſe being ſituated on a high Ground, 
ſoon preſents itſelf to View. Paſſing through Mere, 
we arrived at this delightful Seat, which is ſometimes 
called Stour- Head, from its being near the Head of the 


River Steur. 


This Houſe is built of Stone, pretty near a Square ; 


| not very large, yet the exterior Part has an Air of 
| Grandeur, which is heightened by the Eaftern Front, 


having a double Flight of Stone Steps, ſupported. by 


Balluſters. The Furniture and Diſpoſition of the 


Rooms appear comfortable, as well as grand and con- 
venient. | | 


The Salon has ſomething peculiarly pleaſing, hav- 


ing at once all the Charms of a grand Apartment, and 
all the Comfort of a ſmall one; for, though it is 60 
| Feet long, 30 broad, and 30 in Height, it has but one 


Door into it. It is adorned with eight capital Pic- 
tures. | ? 


The Florence Boxes placed on the Marble Tables in 

this Salon, deſerve Notice: they are ſet with many 

curious, and with ſome coſtly Oriental Stones. X 
In the Drawing-room is a Cabinet ſupported by a 


rich Frame or Pedeſtal, which was once the Caſe of 


an Organ, This Cabinet formerly belonged to Pope 
Sicrus V. 


The Effigies of this Pope and the Peretti 
Family, from whom one of his Nephews deſcended, 


are taken from the Life, and ſet in the Cabinet in 


round Receſſes, with Glaſſes before them, in order to 


| preſerve them. The laſt of this Family was a Nun, 


who left the Cabinet to a Convent in Rome, where Mr. 
Hoare made a Purchaſe of it. = 5 
In this and feveral other Apartments are many fine 
Paintings and Curioſities. The Library is well 
furniſhed. = 
The Lawn in the Weſt-front falls with an eaſy De- 


| Cline into a Valley, where ſtands the ſmall Village of 


Stourton, On the Brow of this Hill is a Walk of con- 
ſiderable Extent, of the ſofteft moſſy Turf, bordered 


on each Side by ſtately Scorch Firs, of Mr, Hoares oon 


1 planting 


4s ' A TOUR the Dorſet, 


planting near 30 Years ago. This noble broad Walk 


is terminated by an Obeliſk 120 Feet high, built on 


the higheſt Ground: It has a Mythra, or "Sun, of ſix 
Feet Diameter, in gilded Copper, at the Top. This 
Obeliſk is divided from the Garden by an Haw-hay, 
but the View of the Sheep feeding at the Foot of it, 
has as delightful an Effect, as if there was no ſuch 
Separation. 

Upon the ſame Brow of the Bil, below this 1 
Walk, are ſeveral irregular Walks of different 
Breadths leading into the Valley. Theſe are covered 
by En Trees, and receive the moſt heightened 
Charms by a very large Piece of Water at the Bottom, 


| * which is a pretty Boat. We made a Coaſting 


e on this little Ocean, in which we diſcovered 


N little Iſlands, which are either planted or cover- 


ed with Rocks, inhabited only by the feathered Kind. 


This Piece of Water is alſo rendered the more | 
agreeable by a light Wooden Bridge of one Arch: 


another of more Coſt and Beauty is intended to be 
built, to ſerve as a Communication with the oppoſite 


Side. 


After paſſing the Bridge, the Ground | is ſteep and 


Iſt, and covered with Wood. A narrow Path at 


the Bottom of it leads to the Grotto of the Nymph, 
which is formed in rude Rock-work almoſt level with 
the Water. Here is a Marble Baſon of | pure W ater, 


which is made Uſe of as a Cold Bath. In the interior 


Part of the Nich over the Baſon, is a Marble Statue of 
a ſleeping Nymph, to whom the Grotto is dedicated, 
She is een . with a li ght Garment, which hardly 
conceals her Limbs. At 10 Foot of this Bath is a 
Marble Slab with thefe Lines from Mr. Pope. 


7 Nymph. of the Grot, theſe facred Springs [ keep, 
And to the Murmur of theſe Waters ſleep : 
Stop, gentle Reader, lightly tread the Cave, 
Or drink 6 in n Silence, Ca mn 22 dae r 
8 7 rom 


_ 


— f3 


22 -, m3 


m6 OO M yy 


A 6 


Dorſet. GREAT BRITAIN, 337 

From the Grotto of the Nymph we proceeded to 
that adjoining, which is ſacred to the River God 
Stour, and to him inſcribed by ſome Latin Verſes. 


Here he fits in gloomy awful Males in a very natural 
Attitude, with one of his Legs in a Baſon of pure Wa- 


ter. This Grotto is formed in Rock- work, and arched 
with the ſame Materials, at the Foot of a fteep Hil 


The Statue is of Lead, = 
Advancing upon a more open and riſing Ground, 
under the Hill, is a Temple dedicated to Hereules. 
This is a Rotunda or Pantheon, calculated to receive 
in the Center a Pedeſtal of about three Feet high ; and 
the Figure of this Hero to be ſet upor. it, is about eight. 
It is a beautiful Piece of Marble-work, weighing about 
eight Tons, the 10 Years Labour of the ingenious 
Rysbrack.  .- „ | 
The Temple of Ceres is on the Side of the Water 
neareſt to the Village: it has a Portico ſupported by 
Columns. The Figure of the Goddeſs, with her pro- 


covered with Trees, which look venerably antient. 


per Emblems, fronts you as you open the Door. On 


each Side are two commodious Seats, which are made 
in Imitation of the Puluinaria, or little Beds, which 


were placed near the Altar at the Time of Sacrifice, 
and on which the Pagans were wont to lay the Images 


of their Gods in their Temples, 5 
Eight or ten Feet below, level with the Water, in 
a ſubtei raneous Grotto, is another Figure of the River 


God. © Here,” ſays a very worthy Writer, to whoſe 


accurate Obſervations I have been obliged, for helping 
= Recollections; in the Deſcription I have given of 
Mr. Hoare's Seat at Stourton, we ought to con- 


| © template not only what delights, but what does not 


* ſhock, In this delicious Abode, are no. Chineſe- 
© works; no Monſters of Imagination; no Devia- 


tions from Nature, under the fond Notion of Faßbion 


or Taſte : All is grand or ſimple, or a beautiful Mix- 
ture of bot. - - 
Tk ö a 


3 38 4A TOUR ths Somerſet. 
Mr. Heoare,' adds the ſame Gentleman (written 
in the Year 1755), has formed his Plan for extend. 
ing his Walks upon the Brow of the Hill, through 
« Nis Park for near five Miles, By this means he 
c will take in ſeveral of the delightful Views which 
Dorſetſbire, Wiliſbire, and Somerſetſhire afford. 
© Theſe Counties all meet in his Grounds, Part of 
Hampſbire is alſo to be ſeen, and contributes its 
Share to heigthen the Charms of this captivating 
Scene. | 1 


E C#% 


— RX9Vxzz - wy — 


* 3 


In my Return to my Weſtern Progreſs I paſſed ſome 
other little Parts of Some» ſeiſbire, as through Evil, of 
Yeovil, upon the River Jui; in going to which we 
deſcend a long ſteep Hill, called Babylon-hill ; but 

from what Original, I could find none of the Country- 
people able to inform me. 
- Northward, upon an high ſandy Hill, by the Bank 
of the River [vil, is a Roman Camp, called Che/terton; 
under which lies the Town of Sandy, the Saline of 
the Romans, where abundance of Roman and Britiſh 
Antiquities have been found, and great Quantities of 
Coins. b XN 5 
Tieovil is a Market · town of good Reſort, and ſome 
little Cloathing is carried on in and near it. Its main 
Manufacture at this time is Gloves. It deals alſo in 
Corn, Cheeſe, Hemp, and all Sorts of Proviſions. 
It cannot paſs my Obſervation here, that, when we 
are come this Length from London, the Dialect of the 
Engliſh Tongue, or the Country-way of expreſſing 
themſelves, is not eaſily underſtood. It is the ſame in 
many Parts of England beſides, but in none in ſo groſs 
a Degree as in this Part. As this Way of booriſh 
Speech is in Ireland called, The Brogue upon tht 
Tongue, fo here it is named Pouring, It is not poſſible 
to explain this fully by Writing, becauſe the Difference 
is not ſo much in the Orthography, as in the Tone 
d Accent; their abridging the Speech, Cham, for 1 


py, wp bay 


re fo 


T_T 


* 


— 


Somerſet. GREAT BRITAIN. 339 


am; Chil, for 1 will ; Don, for do on, or put on 3 and 


cannot omit a ſhort Story here on this Subject: 
Coming to a Relation's Houſe, who was a School- 
maſter at Martocł in Somerſet/hire, I went into his 
School to beg the Boys, or rather the Maſter, a Play - 


Def, for do off, or put off; and the like. 


day, as is uſual in ſuch Cafes. I obſerved one of the 


loweſt Scholars was reading his Leſſon to the Uſher in 
a Chapter in the Bible. I fat down by the Mafter, 


till the Boy had read it out, and obſerved the Boy 


read a little oddly in the Tone of the Country, which 


| made me the more attentive; becauſe, on Inquiry, I 


found that the Words were the ſame, and the Ortho- 
graphy the ſame, as in all our Bibles. I obſerved alſo 


the Boy read it out with his Eyes ſtill on the Book, 


and his Head, like a mere Boy, moving from Side to 
Side, as the Lines reach'd croſs the Colutnns of the 
Book: His Leſſon was in the Canticles of Solomon; the 


Words theſe : | 


* I have put off my Coat ; how ſhall I put it 


* on? I have waſhed my Feet; how ſhall I defil- 
| © thee” > 


The Boy read thus, with his Eyes, as I ſay, full 0 


the Text: 


© Chav a doffed my Coot ; how ſhall I don't | 
+ Chav a waſhed my Feet; how ſhall I moil em? 
How the dextrous Dunce could form his Mouth t 


| expreſs ſo readily the Words (which ſtood right printe« 
in the Book) in his Country Jargon, I could not but 
 aumire. 3 | | 


We likewiſe ſee their Jouring Speech even upon the! 
Monuments and Grave ſtones ; as for Example, 
ſome of the Church-yards of the City of Briſtol, I fav 


this Poetry after ſome other Lines—— 


And when that thay drft hear of Thick, 


Think of the Glaſs that runngth quick. 


4 | From 
_— 


io .. LTOUR tbe Dow 


| Deſcription of this large County; which may con. 
vey to the Reader ſome Idea of the Nature of the Soul, 
its Productions, and the Method of Improvement, az 
well as the Manufactures, and Merchandizes, on 8 

which the Trading Part of the Inhabitants ſubſiſt. F 


_— on Cornwall, viz, about Taviſtock, Brid. 


large Foreſt itſelf, conſiſts of a very coarſe, moory, or 
fenny Soil, very barren in its Nature; in ſome Place; 
productive of nothing but a dwarf Kind of Furze, of 


Ruſhes, or a coarſe, four Kind of Paſturage, which 


to Sheep, which in thoſe Parts are of a ſmall Kind, and 


willto any Purpoſe cure this Sterility, 
Lands, is by breeding Black Cattle, for which they av 


ſhire, and thereabouts, are bought up, and, in their T 


From Evil, or Yeovil, we came to Crootborn, thence 


to Chard, which immediately brought me into Devon. 


] 

( 

ERR l 

: ſhire, 7 
f 


It may not be unacceptable here to inſert a gener: 


To begin then: The Weſtern Part of the County 


deſlow, Oathampton, Holſiuorthy, Bideford, Great Tir 
rington, Chulmleigh, Chagford, Moreton, Hamſtead, 
and all round the Skirts of ' Dartmore, as well as that 


little or no Value. At other Places grow nothing but 


the Cattle will not feed upon; and therefore it dries 
up, and withers into a Sedge. The Soil here is gene. 
rally a ſtiff Clay, through which the Water cannot 
ſoak away: this renders it very unhealthy, eſpecial! 


very ſubject to the Rot, which (in wet Seaſons eſpecial- 

ly) deſtroys them in great Numbers: and what add 
to the Malady is, that neither the Induſtry of the Huſ- 
bandman (for which this County is e fas 
mous), nor any Compoſt that has yet been found out, 


The principal, and indeed the only profitable Re- Pp 
turn, that the Inhabitants can make out of thoſe IM 8 


very well adapted; for here are bred thoſe fine Oxen, in 
in great Numbets, which, by the Drovers of Somerſu. ef 


flati Feeding Lands, betwixt Pridgwater and he 
” (whic 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN. 3 


which I have ſeen almoſt covered with them), fatten- + 
ed fit for Smithfield Market, whither they drive, and 
ſell them to the Londoners, who have not ſo good Beef 
from any other Part of the Kingdom. 8 
The Konhenl Parts of the County are of a quite 
different Nature from the former; for theſe generally 
conſiſt of a dry healthy. Soil, eſpecially about /{ford- 


comb, Seuth Moulton, and all along the Brim of the 
* Foreſt of Exmore. Thoſe Downs are far from being 
a luxuriant Feeding, but are good Grazing for Sheep; 
and, being well dreſſed with Lime (which is brought 
| over hither by Water from Wales), Dung, Sand, and 


other Compoſt, manured by the indefatigable Labour 
of the Inhabitants, produce tolerable Crops of Corn. 


| I fay tolerable; for though they far exceed the Pro- 
ductions in Dorſet, Wilts, Hants, &c. (where Slug- 


iſhneſs ſo far prevails, as to leave Nature deſtitute of 
the leaſt human Aſſiſtance), the Fertility is by no 


| means comparable to that of the Ea/tern and Middle 


Parts of the County, in the former of which a rich 


Marl in ſome Parts, and a fertile ſandy Soil in others, 


and in the latter a fat, ſtrong Soil, of a deep red Colour, 
intermixed with Veins of different Kinds of Loam, 


| produce great Crops of Corn, and Peas, of the beſt 
| Kind, not to be excelled in the whole Iſland. Neither 


doth it fall behind in Meadow ground and Paſturage, 


| Clover, Eaver, and Trefoil Graſs, and Turneps ; as is 


evident to'a Perſon who goes through any of the Mar- 
kets, and beholds the fine well-fed Beef and Mutton 


| with which they are plentifully ſtored. 


About Tinmouth, Dartmouth, Totneſs, Modlury, | 


Plymouth, Aſhburton, and all the South Parts of the 
County (called the South-Hams), the Lands are ge- 
_ nerally of a different Kind from any of the former; 
in moſt Places very good for Arable and Paſture, but 


eſpecially for Cyder-fruits. A great Part of this large 


Track lies on a Stratum of Marble, which the Inha- 


Q 3 bitants 


342 4A TOUR rr Devon. 
bitants break up, and burn into Lime; and therewith 
dreſs their Lands, to their very great Improvement. 


Neither is this all the Advantage they make of thoſe 


Quarries; for in many of them is found Stone, which, 
for its Hardneſs, Soundneſs, and beautiful Veinings, 
rivals the beſt Italian Marbles, and falls very little, if 
any thing, ſhort of them in Luſtre. Great Quantities 
of this Stone are ſent to London, and other Places, 
where they are wrought up for the nobleſt Purpoſes. 
At other Places on this South Coaſt, are Quarries of 
Slate, for covering Houſes, and this likewiſe of the 
beſt Kind; which are not only fetched away by Land- 
carriage, to the Diſtance of 10, 12, and 16 Miles, 
dut great Quantities of them are ſent Coaſt- wiſe to all 
the Towns on the Hritiſb Shore; and exported to 
Holland, Flanders, and other Places beyond the Sea. 
The Reader will not, by this Deſcription, conclude, 
that the Lands in any Part of the County are all one 
and the ſame Kind. Downs, Fens, Rocks, and Wood- 
grounds, are interſperſed among the beſt Lands; as 


there are alſo ſome good Arable and Paſture, amongſt 


the moſt deſolate and barren; and whoever looks 
round him, in his own Situation, will know in what 
Zenſe to take this general Deſcription. 5 
On the Border of Dartmere, about two Miles from 
. ſing ton, ſtand two very high Rocks, called tber - 
Rocks ; from whence is a very extenſive View of Tor- 


bay, and the Country for ſeveral Miles round. About 


a Quarter of a Mile from the Rocks, among an Heap 


of large Stones, is one about eight Feet long, two 


broad, and three and an half thick, ſo equally poiſed, 

as to be moved up and down by the little Finger only. 
To proceed : 8 

At divers Places are found large Quantities of very 


good Oak-timber, as well as Aſh, Elm, Beech, &c. 


and ſuch of it as grows in Places, whence it can be 


conveyed, either by Land or Water carriage, to PH. 


mouth 


Megs Navy. 


ame Method of Living. This I take to be the princi- 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN. 343 
mouth Dock, are there ſerved in for the Uſe of his 

oppice wood is ſo very plenty, that although the 
Woollen Manufacturers take off great Quantities in ' 


Charcoal, and yet greater Quantities are expended in 


common Firing (there being no Coal raiſed in this ' 


| County), yet the Price is fo low, that the Lands, 
| where it thrives well, will not generally produce more 
| than 5s. per Acre (communibus Annis). The Lands 


in Devonſhire, ſave only the Foreſt of Dartmore, Hall. 


don hill, and ſome Heaths, Moors, and coarſe Downs, 
| of no very large Extent (which, for the moſt part, are 
not capable of Improvement, even by Devonſhire Huſ- 


bandry), are divided into ſmall Incloſures, and (in- 


| Places where many Shrubs will grow) by Quickſet- 


hedges, banked up four or five Feet high with Earth. 
And as the Incloſures are ſmall, fo are the Farms or 


| Tenements in theſe Parts, even to a very manifeſt In- ' 
| convenience : for the general Method here is, for 
Gentlemen to leaſe out the Tenements of their Ma- 


nors for 99 Years, determinable on three Lives; taking - 
Fines for ſuch Leaſes, and reſerving no more than 


about a Shilling in the Pound ofthe yearly Value. 


By this means, Men of ſmall Fortunes find an Op- 


| portunity to lay out the little Money they have, in 
what they call Purchaſing an Eſtate, which likewiſe 


ſerves for a Settlement upon a Wife, for the Money 


| ſhe brings. Hence a Family comes on, and craves a a 
| Maintenance out of a Farm of perhaps 20. a Year ; - 


waich ſurely can produce but a very poor one; where- 
as 2 or 300 J. ſunk in this Purchaſe, would have en- 
abled him to manage a Farm of 200/. a Year; out 
of which, by Induſtry and good Management, the Fa- - 


| mily might not only live in a more plentiful. manner, 
the Children be better educated, and inſtructed to un- 
derſtand the Buſineſs of the Farm, but Money like- 


wiſe laid up every Vear towards ſetting them out in the 


„ pal. 


I96> © By” TOUR thro . Devon. 


pal Cauſe of the Poverty and Hardſhip that appears in 
Country Places, and of the Difficulty of getting a good 
Tenant at Rack-rent, for any Farm whoſe Value ex- 
_ ceeds 1001. a Year. | 


[ ſhould have mentioned, that in my Way "WY 
_ Chard I paſſed through Axmin/ter, a pretty conſiderable 


 Market-town, and the firſt in the County of Devon. 
The great Weſtern Road to London goes through this 
'Town. Here my Curiolity led me to. go into the 
Church, and view the Monuments of the Saxen Princes 
(or rather the Biſhop of Sherburne, and two Dukes), 
Who were lain at the Battle of Brunaburgh in that 
Neighbourhood, fought by King Athelſtane with ſeven 


Danifb Princes; over whom he obtained the Victory, 


in a Field thence. called King's field to this Day. The 


Monuments of thoſe Saxon Worthies were under 
Arches in the Walls of the Church, two of which have 


deen lately filled up. 


Here, in Memory of the Victory, King Athel/lane 


founded a Minſter for ſeven Prieſts, which in After- 


ages were reduced to two; for whom a Portion of Land 


was allotted, called Prięſt.- aller, which, with the Par- 


nage, now belongs to two Prebendaries of the 


Church of York... N 


Ford- Abbey in this Neighbourhood, was heretofore a 


ftately Fabric, lofty, and very magnificent, adorned 
with curious Carving and Embelliſhments of the Ge 
thic Kind, ſome of whoſe Beauties ſtill remain, as may 
be * in a modern Print thereof, publiſhed by Mr, 
Buck. | 

Near Axmin/ter lies Kilmington, quaſi Kill-men-town, 
from the great Slaughter there made at the Battle be- 
ſore- mentioned; and Membury, i. e. Maimburgb, 


whither the Maimed in that Battle were ſent to be te- 


lieved; now famous for the beſt Devonſbire Cheeſe. 
The ſame Road L was before in, brought me from 
Axminſter to Honiton 5 5 = 


Pa 


it cannot be equalled in England. 


Devon. QCGREAT BRITAIN. 345 
This is a large and beautiful Market-town, very 
populous and well- built : it returns two Members to 
Parliament; and is fo very remarkably paved with 
ſmall Pebbles, that on both Sides the Way a little 
Channel is left ſhouldered up; fo that it holds a ſmall 
Stream of fine clear running Water, with a little ſquare 
Dipping-place left at every Door ; ſo that every Family 
in the Town has a clear clean - running Rivulet (as it 


may be called) juſt at their own Door. This was the 


Condition of Heniton when I was laſt there: but it was 
ſince, viz, in Augu/t 1747. unhappily altered, by a 
ſudden and dreadful Fire, which broke out in the 


Town on the 19th of July, about three in the Aſter- 


noon, and continued-raging till Four next Morning; 
whereby near three Quarters of the Town were re- 
duced to Aſhes, notwithſtanding the Conveniency of 
Water which I have mentioned at each Door : for the 
Calamity was fo ſudden, and the Flame ſo violent, 
augmented by a ſtrong Wind, that it extended itfelf 
ſeveral Ways at once; to the utter Ruin of many 
Hundreds of the poor laborious Inhabitants ; ſuch as 
Weavers, Combers, Cc. very few being able to ſave 
any Part of their Houſhold-furniture, or Working- 
tools, their only Means of Subſiſtence; beſides the 
great Loſs in Woollen, Linen, Mercery, and other 
Goods, to the Amount of ſeveral thouſands of 
Pounds. N 24, 1 | 
The Town, before this Calamity, was much em 
employed in Lace-making. | 
Here we ſee the firſt of the Serge · manufacture of De- 
donſbire; a Trade too great to be deſcribed. in Minia- 
ture. It takes up this whole County, which is the 
largeſt and moſt populous in England, Yorkſhire ex- 
cepted ; but Devonſhire is ſo full of great Towns, and 
thoſe Towns ſo full of People, and thoſe People fo uni- 
verfally employed in Trade and Manufactures, that 


* 


Q's „ 


346 -—4 TOUR tr Devon, 


Hanitan ſtands inthe beſt and pleaſanteſt Part of the 
whole County ; and I cannot but recommend it to. 


Gentlemen who travel this Road, that if they obſerve 
the Proſpect at Honiton for half a Mile, till they come 


down the Hill, and to the very Entrance into Honiton, 
the View of the Country is the moſt beautiſul Land- 


ſchape in the World ; and I do not remember the like- 


in any one Place in England. Tis obſervable, that 


the Market of this Town was kept originally on the. 
Sunday, till it was changed by Direction of King Jahn. 
On the Road from Hanitan they have a beautiful 
Proſpect almoſt all the Way to Exeter, which is 12 


Miles. 


On the Left hand of this Road lies the-'Town of 
St. Mary Ottery, ſo called, as ſome ſay, from the Ri- 

ver Otter, and that from the Otters formerly found. 

in it. This Town was given by King Edward the 


Confeſſor to the Church of St. Mary at Roan in Nor- 
mandy; but was afterwards bought by Grand!i/on, 


Biſhop of Zxeter ; who made of it a Quarter College 
ip 10 Edward III. and therein placed ſecular. Prieſts, 
with other Miniſters, to whom he gave the whole 
Manor, Pariſh, T'ythes, Fines, Spiritual Profits, &c. 


which amounted to 3047. 25. 10d. yearly. 


From hence we came to Exeter, the Capital of the 
County of Devon, a. City which hath often changed. 
its Name: for it was the Pen Caer, and Caer- Eſte of 
the Britons ; the Augu//a of the Romans; the Iſca of 
Ptolemy ; the Iſca-Damnoniorum of Antonine; the Ex- 


anceſter of the Saxons, which was afterwards abbreviat- 
ed to Eacęſter and Exeter. From the great. Number. 


of Monks there, it had for ſome time the Name of 
 Adonkton ; but at length, from that large River which 

waſhes its Walls, and bears the Name of Ex, it re- 
tains that of Exeter. It was firſt fortified with a Stone 


Wall (which ſtill remains intire) by King Athelſtane; 


and was for ſome time the Seat ef the st- Saron 


Kings, | 
VVV 


„ - . 7 


00 ˙ ONE] a 1 


han} 


27 Pfr $y py wc, wm, Ay 


1 


W 4 


Py — 


Devon. GREAT SRITAIN, 347 


That the Romans were here, is highly probable, 
among other Proofs, from their Coins, that have been 
dug up at divers Places: in particular, a Gold one'of 
Nero, at Exeter; one of Theodoſius, near Barnſtaple ; 
ſeveral Silver ones of Severus, and other Emperors ;- 
but eſpecially from a great Quantity of them dug up 
about 30 Years ſince at Exeter, within the Cloſe, to- 


gether with the Urn in which they were buried. 1 


ſaw a great Number of thoſe, ſome of which were of 


Silver; but the greateſt Part of them were a Mixture 


of Tin and Copper. They had the Impreſſion of Gor- 
dianus, Philippus, and other Emperors. 

King Athelſtane founded here a Monaſtery to St. 
Mary and St. Peter, for Monks of the Order of St. 


Benedict. The Chapel of St. Mary, now fitted up 


for a Library, and furniſhed with a pretty large Num- 
ber of Books - (which are but of little Uſe, becauſe pla- 
ced in a very confuſed Order), is the very Eaſtermoit 


Part of the Cathedral, and was, doubtleſs, the firſt ge- 


ginning of: that now handſome Fabric. King Ethel- 
dred founded alſo; within the Cloſe, an Houſe for 
Monks, and another for Nuns. Divers other Religi- 
ous Houſes, as the Priories of St. James, St. Nicbo'as, 
St. John Baptiſt, the Grey Friers, &c, ' were the 
Work of After ages. CO oo” 

The Walls are in tolerable Repair, and make a 
Walk round the City, with the Pleaſure of ſeeing a 
fine Country: on oppoſite Hills, full of Wood, rich 
Ground, Orchards, Villages, and Gentlemens Houſes. . 
The Beauty of the Place conſiſts of one long Street, 
called ZHigh-/treet, broad and ſtrait. The Houſes are 
of a very.old, but good Model, ſpacious, commodious, 
and not inelegant. This Street is full of Shops well 
furniſhed, and all forts of Trades look briſk. The 


People are induſtrious and courteous : the Fair Sex 


here are truly fair, as well as numerous ; their Com- 
plexion, and generally their Hair, of a fair Caſt; they 


are genteel, of eaſy Carriage, and good Mien, 
7 8 5 7 Q 6 * : There 


348 A TOUR thu Devon. 
There has been of late a vaſt Increaſe of Buildings 


within and without the City. The very Situation 
renders it clean, dry, and airy. The Soil thither from 
Honiton is rather ſandy than ſtony. In Dr. Muſgrave's 


Garden, an Head of the Empreſs Julia Domna, of a 


Coloſſean Size, was dug up. The Head - dreſs is ſuita- 


ble to thoſe Times; and neither the Manner nor 
Carving are deſpicable, though the Graver has not 
done it Juſtice. Tis the nobleſt Relique of Hritiſb 
Antiquity which we know of this Sort : *tis 21 Inches 
from the Top of the Attire to the Chin, and belonged 
to a Statue of 12 Feet Proportion, originally ſet upon 


ſame Temple or Palace. There is alſo an Inſcription 


of Camillus. Do re) | 
This County remarkably abounds with Perſons af- 


 fliRed with the Gout; which is attributed to the Cuſ- 


tom of marling the Lands with Lime, and the great 
Uſe of poor, ſweet Cyder, eſpecially among the 
meaner People. | 


In the Northern Aygle of the City, and higheſt 


Grounds ſtands Rugemont Caſtle, once the Reſidence 
of the Neſi Saxon Monarchs, afterwards of the Earls 
of Cornwall, It is of a ſquariſh Figure, not very large, 
environed with an high Wall, and deep Ditch. It has 
a Rampire of Earth parallel to the Top of the Wall, 
forming a Terrace, which overlooks the City and 
Country. Here are the Affize-houſe and a Chapel. 
The Bridge over the £x is of great Length, and 
has Houſes on both Sides, and at both Ends, with a 
conſiderable Vacancy in the Middle. In the Gui/d- 
hall are the Pictures of General Monct, and the Prin- 
_ ceſs Henrietta- Maria, the y- 
Charles I. who was born here. 


The Biſhop's See of this Weſtern Dioceſe hath had 
feyeral Removes ; for it was firſt at Bedmyn for the 
County of Cornwall, and ſince that at Taunton for 
this County. Afterwards both were joined, and placed 
at Creaiton, And laſtly, about the Year 1050. King 

ERS i 5 Edward 


geſt Daughter of King 


„ K . 


r . 


. bh. wat — hb. 4.4 _ — th 


— , , , , . . AS COD COS at 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN, 349 


Edward the Confeſſor, and his Queen Edyth, inthron- 
ed Leofricus (who had been three Years Biſhop of 
Crediton ) into the See of Exeter, in the following very 
ſolemn Manner: N | . 
On the South - ſide of the high Altar, in the Ca- 
thedral, were eredted (and are there ſtil} to be ſeen 
perfect, as when firſt made) three Seats, or Al- 
coves, adorned with Gothic Carvings, to the Height 
of about 25 Feet, which are ſupported with Braſs 
Pillars; in the Middle of theſe was the Biſhop in- 
ſtalled by the King and Queen. The Form of Words 
thus : | = ; | 


J Eynge Edward, taking Leefricke bye the Ryghte 
Vauade, and Edytye my Queene bye the Lefte, doe 
inſtalle hym the fyrſte and moſt famous WB -lchoppe of 
Exon, wythe a grate Deſyre of Aboundance of Bleſ⸗ 
{pages to ali ſuch as ſhall furder and encreaſe the ſame; 
but wythe a fearful and oxecrable Curſe on all ſuch as 
ſail diminiſh or take anye thynge from it. 


The Church may be faid to be upwards of 300 


Years in building; for Robert Warlewaſt, made Biſhop 


in 1150. built the Choir; Peter Quivil, who aſcended 
the Epiſcopal Throne in 1280. the Body of the 


Church; 7% Grandiſon, conſecrated in 1327. the 


two laſt Arches at the Weſt-end, and covered the 
whole Roof; and Peter Courtenay, then Biſhop of 
Exeter, aſterwards of / incbeſter, completed the North 


Tower in 148 5. and very remarkable it is to behold 


the Uniformity with which it was carried on; for 
nobody can diſcover the leaſt Incongruity in the Parts; 
ſo much is it like the Workmanſhip of one and the 
ſame Architect. F 5 

There are ſome antient Funeral Monuments in the 


Cathedral ; but firſt, let me take Notice of the Biſhop's 
Throne in the Choir, which, at the Diffolution of 


Epiſcopacy in King Charles I. 's time, was (as an uſeleſs 


thing) taken down; but, whether the Workmen em- 


ployed 


223 


350 _- TOUR tro Devon, 
ployed to do it were well affected to that Order, or elſe 
had private Inſtructions from ſomebody in Power, 
who foreſaw that it would ſome time or other be of 
Uſe again, certain it is, that a great deal of Care 
was taken of the Materials: for it is now replaced, and 
every Part of it as found, as when firſt made. The 
Gothic Carvings about the Canopy are at Jeaſt 69. 
Firet high, and a vaſt deal of good Workmanſhip (of 
that kind) is about it: it is, I believe, coeval with 
the See. 

Fhe Cathedral hath two Steeples, one at each End 
of the Croſs Building. At the Upper- end of the Lady's: 
Chapel, now converted into a Library, is a Monu- 
ment of Sir Peter Carew and hs Lady: There are 
other little Chapels, and in them ſeveral antient Mo- 
numents; to wit, Sir Gaven Carew's and his Lady's, 
[they were both poiſoned] ; Biſhop Stafford's rhe. 
was once Chancellor of England]; Mrs. Elizabeth' 
Barret's [an Hearſe cut in Marble]; Biſhop Cot- 
ton's; Sir John Gulburne's and his Lady's; Biſhop 

 Careys; Biſhop Branſcombe's; Biſhop Oldham's fin 
the Wall; he was : excommunicated] ; Biſhop Sta- 
pleton's, and one of his. Brothers, a ruf > Sit 
Thomas Speke's ; one of another Sir Peter Carew, who 
died at Roſs in Ireland; Mr. Harbiu's; Dean Lachs, 
his Efgies as naked, carved. in Stone [he was found 
dead in his Study]; Biſhop Maſbam's; and one of 
Courtney Earl of Devonſbire; another of Bobun Earl 
of Hereford ;. Biſhop Lacy's,, who built the Chapter- 
houſe ; and in the Wall of one of the Wings, a Monu- 

ment of Leofricus, the firſt Biſhop of Exeter; the Lord 
Chichefler's. So much for the ancient Monuments. 

| Biſhop Stapleton above-mentioned, was the pious: 
F eee Exeter College in Oxford; which wn in 
grateful Remembrance of their Beneſactor, a few Years : 

| ago repaired and. beautified his Monument; which, 
in Regard to ſome of the Carvings about it, excels any 
wing ever. ſaw of ſo old a Date in the Gothic way. 


. A % V ¼ ⁵Äaʃ. !.. ̃ lg. ˙¾˙ ». ̃«ÜͤLÜ!n!.̃ ũs ñ́ ;... ee ee I ee rene 


Lang” . — — —U— 


. =, 8 


ſeen; 3 


The Chapter. houſe i 1 different rom all that 1 have 


N 


ſeen; an Oblong, like a Chapel, handſom@f gilded on 
the T'op. A good Area about the Church. Fs 
The Altar-piece, done upwards of 100 Years ago, 
is a Repreſentation of the Inſide of the Church in Per- 
ſpective, an exquiſitely fine Piece of Painting, and 
(excepting only a little Injury. it received- from the- 
Swords of the Saints Militant in the Civil Wars) ex- 
ceedingly well preſerved. The fine painted Glaſs (of- 
which there is a great deal) underwent the Fury of. 
the ſame Reformers; who, after they had made for- 
cible Entry, and “ taken to themſelves this Houſe of 
« God in Poſſeſſion, under the Umbrage of an Or- 
dinance of. Parliament of the 28th of Augu/? 164 3. 
broke out the beſt of thoſe Paintings, and irretrievably 
ruined all the Scripture Hiſtory. therein repreſented : - 
neither. was their Rage confined to thoſe brittle Mate- 
terials ; for the carved Figures of the Patriarchs, Pro- 
phets, Kings, &c. of which there were a great many, 
became Objects of their furious Zeal. and Ignorance : - 
for there the maimed Bodies are now to be ſeen, ſome: 
without the Heads, others have loſt one or both Legs, 
or Arms, &c, all of them ſome way or other mangled. 
And having by this means taken away what they 
feared would draw them into Idolatry, they divided this 
Cathedral by a Partition-wall betwixt the Choir and 
the main Body of it, one of which Diviſions was made 
Uſſe of by an Independent, and the other by à Preſby- 
terian Congregat ion „ 

And now, that I am taking notice of the Decora · 
tions of this magnificent Piece of Antiquity, let me- 
| Juſt mention, that in one of its Towers is a very large 
Bell of about 60 hundred Weight; and in the other, a; 
fine Ring of-10 large ones. An Organ of very good 
Workmanſhip, and ſupported by a Tetraſtyle of beau- 
tiful Gothic Columns, ſtands where the before- mention- 
ed Partition-wall did. The largeſt Pipes in this In- 
ſtrument are of a great Length, and 15 Inches in 
Diameter; which is ſaid to be two Inches more than 
thoſe at U/m, which is ſo famedt or its Largeneſs. 


* 


The 


352 A TOUR tbo Devon, 


The well-finiſhed Alcove of wooden Work for the 


| Biſhop, and the Pulpit, and Pews of the Jike, in the 


Nave or Body of the Church, together with the neat 


Marble Font, and the two Suits of Hangings for the 


Choir, one of Tapeſtry and the other of Velvet, and 
the fine Suit of gilt Plate for the Communion-Service, 


are all that I ſhall further add about the grave and 


well-adapted Ornaments and Furniture of this 
Church. Mu FEA e 

To complete this Deſcription with a Circumſtance 
which, I think, ought by no means to be paſſed over: 
The Solemnity, | rot vn and affecting Harmony, 


with which the Service, and Muſic, vocal and inſtru- 
mental, is generally performed, by the Choral Vicars, | 


Organiſts, and Choriſters; and (which is well- worthy 
of Imitation *) the numerous Congregation, which, 


Winter and Summer, attend the daily Prayers at Six in 


the Morning; and their grave and pious Behaviour 


there; I ſay, all this together, renders this Cathedral a 
Glory to the Dioceſe, the Envy of other Choirs, and 


the Admiration of Strangers. | 

The late Reverend Dr. Alured Clarke, who was 
promoted to the Deanry of this Church, Anno 1745. 
was a great Benefactor to it, and, we may ſay, to the 
City and County, and, in them, to the Kingdom, in 
the Hoſpital he was the great Encourager of, which is 
called The Devon and Exeter Hoſpital; ſet up on the 
Model of the public Infirmaries in London and Mai- 
miner; one of the moſt laudable Charities that ever 
was ſet on foot. | | 


- His firft Work was to alter and repair the Deanry- | 


houſe; which his Predeceſſors had neglected ; and this 


* It is no uncomm-n Thing to ſee 500 People here in a Morning; 
which is at leaſt five times as many as uſually attend at Sr. Paul's, or 
any other Six v*clock Chapel I was ever at: and it is commendable, 
that the Reader doth not here curtail the Morning Service, by leaving 
out any Pait of it, as in other Places they do. Here are two Morning 

Lectures preached weekly 5 vig. Tueſday and Friday Mornings, | 


k 1 * 7 
+ s 3 <. 3 * 5 . 
$f +4 = St lth x 6 + 4 1 . „ F * 
wt 7 - * . , 5 
i 
o 
* 


_ Or” "oo 1 * @0TT SF Ss hd 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN, 333 

he completed within the firſt nine Months of his In- 

ſtalment, at the Expence of about Boo}. 5 
Before this was perfected, viz. in the Spring of 1741. 


he drew up and publiſhed the Propoſal for founding the 
Hoſpital aboveſaid, for Lodging, Dieting, and Curing, 


the dick and Lame Poor of the County and City, on 
the ſame Plan as thoſe I have mentioned, or rather on ' 
that of the Infirmary, which he had been the great Pro- 
moter of, at Winchęſier, for the Benefit of that City, 
and of the County of Hants. 
All Ranks and Parties of Men fell into the laudable 


Deſign. 


John Tuckfield, of Radden, Eſq: accommodated the 
Governors with a Plot of Ground, for the Erection, 


near Southernbay, at a very moderate Price, and gave 
1001. towards it. The Building contains upwards of 
300 Feet in Length. In digging the Ground for the 
Foundation, the Workmen tound a Roman Coin of 


Nervua, and another of Con/lantine. | 
The Charity-ſchools founded here by the pious Bi- 


ſhop Blackall, Anno 1709. the good Dean not only 


bountiſully ſubſcribed to, but preached a Sermon before 
a large Aſſembly of Governors and Contributors; and, 
after the Sermon, at a Court held for that Purpoſe, in- 


ſpected the Rules, inquired into the Cauſes of Com- 


plaint, and prevailed on the Governors to viſit the 
School oftener, and diligently endeavour to render that 


Charity as uſeful as poſſible. 


Beſides the antient Buildings of a public Nature, 
which I have mentioned in the City of Exeter, there 
are the Chapter-houſe, and Cloiſters, the Bifhop's Pa- 


Jace, the Houſes belonging to the Dean, the Chancel- 


lor, Treaſurer, and other Dignitaries of the Church; 
the Guilaball, the Walls, and Gates of the City, with 
thoſe of the Caſtle, and the Cloſe; the Hoſpital of St. 
John the Baptiſt, 20 Pariſh-churches within the City 
and Liberties thereof, the Bridge over the River Ex, 


a large and very handſome Conduit for Water, in the 


Centre 


D 


? 


3544 4 TOUR thu Devon. 


Centre of four principal Streets: to which may be 


added, ſome Chapels and Alms houſes, yet ſtanding, 
and the Ruins of divers others; which are Monuments 


of the Piety of their Founders, and the Impiety of thoſe * 
who neglect them. FEVER 


Modern Buildings of a public Nature this City hath 


not many to boaſt of: St. Paul's (one of the 20 


Churches before-mentioned), the Chancellor's Houſe, 
a very handſome and well-contrived Workhouſe for 


the Poor, three or four Meeting-houſes, a Quay for 


landing Goods, and a Cuſtom-houſe, include all tha 
have been erected within 40 Years paſt. DO 
This City returns two Members to Parliament: its 


Civil Government is by a Mayor, Aldermen, and 
Common: Council; a Recorder, Sheriff, four Bailiffs, 
a Chamberlain, and Town-clerk, who are attended by 
a Sword: bearer, who wears the Cap, and carries the 
Sword given by Henry VII. before them to Church, 
and on all public Proceſſions; four Serjeants at Mace, 
and as many Staff bearers; the former in Gowns, and 
the latter in Liveries, with Badges; and, which adds 
not a little to their Splendor, they keep a Band of four 
| Muſicians in conſtant Pay, \ i en” 
There are, moreover, 12 Companies of incorporat- 


ed Trades, who, on public Occaſions, and on.Gaudy- 
days, walk in the Mayor's Train, dreſſed in Gowns, 
each Company having a Bedel, in a laced Cloak, 


bearing the Enſigns of their ſeveral Profeſſions, to 
uſher then. The Inhabitants are well ſupplied with 


The River Ex was heretofore, in its main Stream, 


navigable to the Walls of the City: but, on a Differ- 


ence between the Mayor and the then Earl of Devon, 


on a very trifling Occaſion, viz. Which of their Pur- 
veyors ſhould be firſt ſerved with a Pot of Fiſh in the 
Market, that Earl revenged himſelf by choaking the 
Mouth of the River, and by making Weirs with 
Timber, Sand, &c, thereby intirely ruining the Navi- 


gation 


— 


D 42 


A mp, wy Fry ed 0 „ 2 80 


J. ͤꝓvvß . ²˙¹-nm̃ĩ·̃̃ͤĩww.l! ͤ »A¶ůðb³.. 88 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN. 


cation thereof farther up than Topſham. And ſo great 
were the Power and Obſtinacy of the Earl at that time, 
that, though the Citizens obtained a Decree in Equity 


for their Relief, it was never executed. 


To remove this Inconvenience, the Inhabitants | 
about 50 Years ſince, by Aid of an Act of Parliament, 


at a great Expence perfected a Work, which had been 
begun above 100 Years before. They cut a new 


Channel for the Water, croſs which they placed 
Sluices, or Fluod-gates : through the lowermoſt of 


thoſe Gates they let in the flowing Tide, the Ebb of 
which immediately ſhuts. the Gate, and that keeps up 
a Body of Water for about two Miles, ſufficient to 


carry up the Veſlels ſo far in their Way; at which 
Place another of thoſe Gates ſhuts, after the Veſſel is 
paſt it, by Capſterns there fixed for that Purpoſe. It 


muſt be conſidered, that the Floor of the Dyke is thus 
| far on a Level, and conſequently the Water of an 
equal Depth, without the Inconvenience of any Cur- 
rent, the lower Sluice being ſhut as before. '5Þ 

The whole Declivity, from the Quay at Exeter to 
the lowermoſt Flood-gate at Top/ham, which gives the 
River its Current, is about eight or ten Feet, all which 
is ſunk at once here, above this ſecond Sluice; and 


therefore, in order to bring up Ships over this Fall, it 


was neceſſary, that a third Flood- gate ſhould be added; 
which is accordingly done, at about 200 Feet from 


the former. And now, the Ship being between theſe 


two Flood - gates (the lower being kept ſhut), the up- 


permoſt of the two is opened, and by this means the 
Water between them raiſed to a Level with that of the 


Remainder of the Dyke above; and the Ship, by this 
Contrivance, floats freely over the riſing Ground; and 


thence on the freſh Water (for the Tide is of no far- 


ther Uſe) for about two Miles more, which brings her 


to the Head of the Works, where is another Flood - gate; 


and this ponds the whole River, ſo as to throw the 


waſte Water, over a ſtrong Stone Weir, into its natural 


Chanael, 


356 one Desen. 
Channel. The Water ſo kept back by this upper 
Sluice, and the Weir, makes a ſtagnant Pool above; 
and here the Veſſels lie at their Moorings, and unload 
at a Quay adjoining to the City Walls. 
Near the Mouth of the River Ex, on the Weſt 
Banks thereof, is Potoderham Caſtle, now, and for 
many Ages paſt, the Seat of a Family of Courtenays, 
Deſcendents from the Earls of Devon of that Name, 
This Seat, built in the manner of a Caſtle, was the 
Work of ſabe, the Daughter of Baldwin de Rivers, 
and Widow of William de Fortibus, in the Reign of 
King Henry III. | : | 
Halldoton is a pretty large, dry, healthy Common, of 
about ſeven Miles in Length, and about three in 
Breadth, which, though in itſelf a very flinty barren 
Soil, yet is its Situation ſo delightful, the open Pro- 
ſpect both by Sea and Land fo engaging, and the 
whole Circuit thereof fo adapted to rural Recreations, 
that the like Number of Gentlemens Seats, as lie round 
the Skirts thereof, within ſo little Compaſs of Ground, 
is not to he met with at any Place that I know of, 
except about London. 1 e 
Exeter is particularly famous for two things; which 
wee ſeldom find united in the fame Town; viz. That 
it is full of Gentry, and yet full of Trade and Manu- 
factures. ee e 
The Serge-market, held here every Week, is very 
well worth a Stranger's ſeeing; and, next to the Brigg 
Market at Leeds in Yorkfrrre, is the greateſt in Eng- 


land. The People aſſured me, that at this Market is 


generally fold from 60 to 70, 80, and ſometimes 
 100,0001. Value in Serges in a Week, 
The Ex, or Eft, is a very conſiderable River, and 
the principal in the whole County; and, by the Con- 
trivance we have mentioned, Ships of 150 Tons now 
come up to the City. 2 e PHY | 
Exeter drives a very great Correſpondence with 
Holland; as alſo directly to Portugal, Spain, and Itah; 
„ 5 5 _ Chipping 


\ 


SS ws 1 C2 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN. 357 


ſhipping off vaſt Quantities of their Woollen Manu- 


factures, eſpecially to Holland, the Dutch giving very 


large Commiſſions here for the buying of Serges, Per- 
petuanas, and ſuch Goods; which are made not only 


in and about Exeter, but at Crediton, Honiton, Culliton, 
St. Mary Ottery, Newton-bujhel, Aſhburton, and eſpe - 


cially at Tiverton, Culiumpton, Bampton, and all the 


North-eaſt Part of the County; which Part is, as it 
may be ſaid, fully employed, the People made rich, 
and the Poor well maintained by it. as 

On the North ſide of the Caſtle (and which was 


formerly its Counterſcarp) is a very beautiful Terrace- 


walk, bounded by a double Row of fine Elms, and ex- 


tended round one Quarter of the City: -viz. from the 
 Fojt-gate to the North gate. Thijs, for the Fineneſs 


of the Air, Length of the Wall, and the Landſchape 
in View, is not perhaps inferior to any thing of the kind 
in England. | | 


- 


I ſhall take the North Part of this County in my 


Return from Cornwall ;. but muſt now lean. to the 
South- coaſt ; for, in going on, we in reality go South- 
welt. | 3 5 8 

About 22 Miles from Exeter, and through Newton- 
luſbel, a large, but meanly- built Market- town, we go 
into the antient Town of Tetneſs, on the River Dart. 


It was formerly of great Note, and ſtill is a pretty good 
Town, and has ſome Trade ; but has more Gentle- 


men in it than Tradeſmen of Note ; they have a 
fine Stone Bridge here over the River; which, being 
within ſeven or eight Miles of the Sea, is large, and 


the Tide flows 10 or 12 Feet at the Bridge. Here 
we had the Diverſion of ſeeing them catch Fiſh, with 


the Aſſiſtance of a Dog; in this manner: On the 
South ſide of the River, and on a Slip, or narrow Cut 


or Channel made on purpoſe, ſtands a Corn - mill: the 
Mill-tail, or Floor for the Water below the Wheels, 


is wharfed up on either Side with Stone, above High- 
water Mark, and for above 20 or 30 Feet in Length 
„ A below 


* 
. 
* 9 
P n 2 
N * - 
at 55 p 5 
ae 1 FR . 0 


- WW A TOUR t7br# Devon, 
below it, on that Part of the River toward the Sea, At 
the End of this Wharfing is a Grating of Wood, the 
 Croſs-bars of which ſtand bearing inward, ſharp at the 

End, and pointing towards one another, as the Wires 

of a Mouſe-trap. ; = 

When the Tide flows up,. the Fiſh-can with Eaſe 
go in between the Points of theſe Croſs-bars ; but, the 
Mill being ſhut down, they can go no farther upwards; 
and, when the Water ebbs agains are left behind, 
not being able to paſs the Points of the Grating, 
which, like a Mouſe trap, keeps them in; ſo that 
they are left at the Bottom with about a Foot, ora 

Foot and half Water. We were carried hither at 

Low-water, where we ſaw about 50 or 60 ſmall Sal- 
mon, from 17 to 20 Inches long, which the Country- 

people called Salmon Peal; and to catch theſe, they 


throw in a Net on an Hoop, at the End of a Pole, 


the Pole going croſs the Hoop, which, in ſome Places, 


they call a Shove-net. The Net being fixed at one 


End of the Place, they put in a Dog (which is 


taught his Trade beforehand), at the other End, 


and he drives all the Fiſh into the Net; fo that 


only holding the Net till in its Place, the Man took 
up Two or Three-and-thirty Salmon Peal at the firſt 


time. | 
Of theſe we had fix for our Dinner, for which 
they aſked a Shilling only; but, for ſuch {ized Fiſh, 
and not ſo freſh, I have ſeen 65. 64. each given at a 
London Fiſh-market, whither they are ſometimes 
brought from Chicheſter by Land- carriage. They have 
alſo delicate FTrouts here. FE Sg 
This exceflive Plenty of good Fiſh (other Proviſions 
being cheap in proportion) makes the 'Town of Tet- 
- neſs a very good Place to live in; eſpecially for ſuch as 
have large Families, and but ſmall Eſtates; and many 
ſuch are ſaid to come into thoſe Parts on Purpoſe for 


60 


About 


OO — F 


TWP _ = a ' 


WE EP 


5 OV. o” FF W WW po OD DW. 


SP heeded gy wW 3 


Devon. 


o r ww wu oy 
» } 


SREAT BRITAI x. 359 
About ten Miles North of Totneſs lies Aßburton, a 
good Market-town, and T horoughtare from Exeter tu 


| Plymouth ; which ſends two Members to Parliament 


This is one of the four Stannary Towns for the 
County of Devon, and lies but a little Way in from 
the Foreſt of Dartmore. The principal Trade of thi 


Town, and indeed of all the Towns and Villages in 


the Country, is in the Woollen Manufacture. 
The three other Stannary Towns are Tavi/tock, 
Plympton, and Cha, ford, the laſt of which is a very 


poor inconſiderable Place; and neither that, nor 
Plympton, are capable of entertaining the Suitors, if the 


Lord Warden ſhould be ever inclined to adjourn the 
Court thither : yet both Taviſfock and Plympton ſend 


Members to Parliament. | 


And now, having mentioned this Court of Stannary, 


it may not be improper to give a further Deſcription 
_ of it. 49d | . 


By divers Charters granted to the Tinners by King 


Eduard I. Sc. the Court is to be held at Crockeren- 


Torr, a noted Hill and Rock in the Middle of the 
Foreſt, far diſtant from any Houſe : the Lord War- 
den of the Stannaries is the Judge of this Court, on 
whoſe Summons the Jurors appear, who are generally 
Gentlemen within the Juriſdiction. I had my Infor- 


mation from a Gentleman, who, if I miſtake not, told 


me, he had ſerved as a Juror; and that, when the 


Earl of Bath was Lord Warden, and held a Court 


there, he was attended by 300 Gentlemen well 
mounted, 5 „„ 

At this deſolate Place (where no Refreſhment is to be 
had, but what the Company bring with them, no Shelter 
from the Weather, nor any- thing to fit upon, but a 


Moor- ſtone Bench) the Court is called: but then the 


next Act of the Steward is to adjourn to one of the 


Stannary Towns (uſually Tæviſfoct), and the Com- 


pany immediately make the beſt of their Way thit' er. 


4 


260 _ 4 TOUR: vv Des. 
At this Court, in former times, when the «Tin. 


Mines in this County were in a flouriſhing State, a 
great deal of Buſineſs was diſpatched : the Price of 


the Tin was fixed, Differences in relation to the 
Works adjuſted, and Acts made for Regulation of 


every thing relating thereto. Several Preſentments of 
the Jurors are printed; and this Meeting is uſually 
called, The Parliament for the Stannaries ; the Place 
of Meeting in the Foreſt, The Parliament-houſe ; and 
the Preſentment of the Jurors, Acts of Parliament. 
The Abbey of 7 * the Priory at Plympton, 
and the Monaſtery at Buckland Monachorum, were very 
large Endowments; and their Site well eſtabliſhes the 


Obſervation I have ſeveral times before made, in re- 


lation to the Fertility of the Soil where thoſe Orders 


of- Men generally ſeated themſelves : An Obſervation 


; I have made rather to confirm that of other Writers, 


than as Matter of Wonder or Reflection: For would 


it not be ſtrange, if the Eccleſiaſtics ſhould not be as 

capable of chooſing for themſelves as other People:! 

or that they ſhould chooſe the worit, if they might have 

the beſt? «= | 

At Tavi//iack I ſaw ſome ſtately Remains of that 

grand Building; and, among other things, Part of the 
—— of the Arch of a Bridge over the 74%, 


ED which the Inhabitants call Guz/e-bridge, and relate the 


following Story; v:z. That one Childe, Owner of the 
Manor of Plym/tact, ma le his Will, and gave the ſaid 
Lands to the Church where his Body ſhould be buried; 

and that, afterwards, hunting in the Foreſt, he loſt bis 
Company, and his Way; and though, as his laſt Shift, 
he killed his Horſe, and got into the warm Belly of 
him, he at length died there with the Extremity of 
Cold. The Body, after ſome Search, was found by 
the Taviſtoc Men (who had, by ſome means, come 
to the Knowlege of his Will), and by them carried 
away toward their Abbey. The Pyymſtock Men, hear- 
ing thereof, lay in Ambuſh for them at a Bridge, 


4 1 where 


— 


an Uproar. 


Devon, GRTAT BRITAIN, 361 
where they apprehended they muſt paſs: but in this 
they were deceived ; for the Prieſts built a flight 
Bridge on Purpoſe, over which they carried the Corpſe; 
by which Stratagem they obtained the ſaid Land; 


and hence, ſays the Tradition, this is called Guile- 


bridge. | | NE | 
12 Totneſs we went ſtill South about ſeven Miles 
(all in View of the River) to Dartmouth, a Town of 
Note, ſeated at the Mouth of the River Dart, where 
it empties itſelf into the Sea, at a very narrow, but 
ſafe Entrance, The Opening into Dartmouth Har- 
bour is not broad, but the Channel deep enough for 
the biggeſt Ship in the Royal Navy: the Sides of the 
Entrance are high-mcunded with Rocks ; without 
which, juſt at the firſt Narrowing of the Paſſage, ſtands 
a good ſtrong Fort beyond a Platform of Guns, which 


commands the Port, : 


The narrow Entrance is not much above half- a 
Mile; and then it opens, and makes a Baſin, or Har- 
bour, able to receive 500 Sail of Ships, where they may 
ride with the greateſt Safety; and the Entrance may 
he chained up on Occaſion. I went out in a Boat o 
view this Entrance, and the Caſtle, or Fort, that com- 
mands it ; *and, coming back with the Tide of Flood, 
I obſerved ſome ſmall Fiſh to ſkip and play upon the 


Surface of the Water; upon which Iaſked, What Fiſh 


they were? Immediately one of the Rowers or Sea- 
men ſtarted up in the Boat, and throwing his Arms 


| abroad, as if he had been mad, cries out as loud as he 
| cculd bawl, A. Scool! A Scool The Word was 


taken on the Shore as haſtily, as it would have been 
on Land, if he had cried Fire ; and, by that time we 
reached the Quays, the Town was all in a kind of 

The Matter was, that a great S Hoa, or, as they call 
it, a Scaol of Pilchards, came ſwimming with the 
Tide directly out of the Sea into the Harbour, The 
Boat-owner lamented his being unprepared tor them; 

Vol. | R . : tor 


2 1 TOUR thro”. Devon, | 


for he ſaid, that if he could but have had a Day or two 
Warning, he might have taken 200 Ton of them zin 
ſhort, nobody was ready for them, except a ſmall 
Fiſhing boat or two ; one of which went into the 
= Middle of the Harbour, aud, at two or three Hawls, 
took about 40,000. 
It was obſerved, that beyond the Mouth of the Har- 

bour was a whole Army of Porpoiſes; ; which, it 
teems, purſued theſe Pilchards, and, it is probable, 
drove them into the Harbour. "The Sco2l drove up 
the River as high as Tomneſs Bridge, as we heard al- 
rerwards ; ſo that the Country- people, who had Boats 
and Nets, caught as many as they knew what to do 
with. 

Dartmouth returns two Members to Parliament. It 

is ſituated on the Weſt- ſide of this Baſin, or Harbour, 
in a kind of Semicircle, on the Aſcent of a ſteep Hull; 


- which, though large and populous, is but meanly built; 


= the Quay is large, and the Street before it ſpacious, 
lere live ſome very flouriſhing Merchants, who trade 
very profperoully, and to the molt conſiderable trading 
Ports in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Plantations; 

dut eſpecially to Newfoundland, and from thence to 
Spain and Jtaly, with Fiſh. They drive a good Trade 
alſo in their own Fiſhery of Pilchards, which is here- 
abouts carried on with the greateſt Number of Vel- 
ſels of any Port in the Weſt, except Falmonth. | 
The French burnt Bea in Richard J. 's time, 


and attempted it afterwards; but were bravely repulſ- 


ed, and chiefly by the Women, who tought deſperately, 
| and took Monſieur Caſtel their General, three Lords, 
and 23 Knights, Prifoners, and made a great Slaugh- 
ter among them beſides; but how this glorious Action 
fell to the Share of the Women, and whether the Men 
were inactive or-abſent, 1s not mentioned, 

_ Alittie to the Northward of this Town, and to the 
| Eaft of the Port, is Torbay, a very good Road for Ships, 


about 12 Miles in Circuit, though ſometimes, (eſpe- 


cially 


. FW@acocdtzgg.c yy =w 


A mma XA 3G £#t 


9 yy AA tr, wy ac. Ay 


PA ww 


59 — — — © (55 — 


rey 
= 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN. 363 


cially with a Southerly or South-eaſt Wind), Ships 


have been obliged to quit the Bay, and put out to Sea, 


or run into Dartmouth for Shelter. 

In the Bottom of this Bay is a beautiful, well built, 
and fine- ſituated Houſe, called Torr- Abbey, formerly 
a Religious Houſe. Veſpaſian is ſaid to have landed 
here, when he came to attack Arviragus King of Bri- 
tain, And here it was, that King William III enter- 
ed with a Fleet of 6000 Tranſports, and 50 Sail of 
Men of War, under the Conduct of Admiral Herbert, 
afterwards Lord Torrington. CE 

About three Miles to the Weſt of Dartmouth is a 
little Fiſhing-town, called Brixham, remarkable for a 
Spring of Water, that ebbs and flows very ſenſibly. 
From Dartmouth we went to Plympton, mentioned 
before as a poor Town, though it was formerly of 
great Account, and the Glory of the antient Earls 
of Devon; where are Tenures at this Day, called 


Caſtie- guard, for defending and repairing the Walls 


of the Caſtle ; which, however, is now in Ruins, 
From thence the Road lies to Pyymouth, Diſtance 
about fix Miles. : nw 
Plymouth is indeed a Town of Conſideration and Im- 
portance. The Situation of it is between two very 


large Inlets of the Sea, and in the Bottom of a large 


Sound, or Bay, which is encompaſſed on every Side 


with Hills, and the Shore generally ſteep and rocky; 


though the Anchorage is good, and it is pretty ſafe 
Riding. In the Entrance to this Bay lies a large and 
moſt dangerous Rock, which at High-water is cover- 
ed, but at Low-tide lies bare, where many a good 
Sbip has been loſt, when they have thought all their 
Dangers at an End. 

A dreadful Inſtance of this I have to give, fo lately as 
February 15, 1760. when in a dreadful Hurricane, 
that did great Miſchief both by Land and Sea, the 
Ramillies, a very fine Second-rate Man of War, Cap- 
tain Taylor Eommander, with 734 Men on board, 

| 2 Was 


364. A TOUR tro Devon. 
was loſt in it. Being embayed within the Bolt. Had, 
(which they had miſtaken for the Ram head, and ima- 
gined they were going into Plymouth Sound) and cloſe 
upon the Rocks, they let go their Anchor, and cut 
away all their Maſts, and rode ſafe till the Evening; 
when the Gale increaſed ſo much, that the Hull part- 
ed, and only one Midſhipman, and 25 Men, out of the 
whole Number, jumped off the Stern upon the Rocks, 
TCCCoCCTFTTTT 
Upon the Rock, which was called the E ddy/lone, 
from its Situation, the ingenious Mr. Winſtanle), 
whom I mentioned before, undertook to build a Light- 
houſe for the Direction of Sailors; and with great "Art 
and Expedition finiſhed it: which Work, conſidering 
its Height, the Magaitude of its Building, and the lit- 
tle Hold there was to faſten it to the Rock, ſtood to 
Admiration, and bore out many a bitter Storm. a 
Mr. Winſtanley often viſited, and frequently ſtrength- 
ened the Building by new Works; and was ſo confi- 
dent of its Firmneſs and Stability, that he uſually ſaid 
to thoſe who doubted its Standing in hard Weather, 
that he only deſired to. be in it, when a Storm ould 


| 
| 
| 
{ 
| 
; 
happen. 
c 
c 
8 


But, in the dreadful Tempeſt of New. 27. 170+ 
when he happened to be ſo unfortunate as to have his 
Wiſh, he would fain have been on Shore, making Sig- 
nals for Help; but no Boats durſt go off to him; and, 
in the Morning after the Storm, nothing was to be 
ſeen but the bare Rock, the Light-houſe being gone, 


in which Mr. IVinftanley, and all that were with him, ] 

periſhed : and a few Days after, a Merchant's Ship, f 
- — the Miuchelſea, homeward- bound from Virginia, f 
not knowing rhe Light-houſe was down, ran foul of j 
the Rock, and was Joſt with all her Lading, and mot a 
of her Men. There was another Light houſe built on 7 
the ſame Rock by the Corporation of Tr inity-Hoilſe; 8 
in purſuance of an Act of Parliament paſſed in the 1 


fifth of Queen 2 But December 2, 1755. ths 1 «< 
. took ; 


Devon. GREAT BRITAIN. 365 


took Fire, and all the Timber- work was burnt, but the 


Stone-work, 30 Feet high, and founded on the Rock, 


remained unhurt. Admiral Het, at Plymouth, ſeeing 
the Fire, ſent out a Boat, and brought off the two 


Men who had the Care of the Place. 

The Re-edification of this uſeful Work has been 
ſince executed under the Direction of Mr. Jobn Smea- 
ton, F. R. S. and is thought by the beſt Judges to be 
the completeſt Performance of its Kind in Europe. 

As Plymouth lies in the Bottom of this Sound, in the 


Centre between the two Waters, fo there lies againſt 


it, in the ſame Poſition, an Ifland which they call 
St. Nicolas; on which is a Caſtle that commands the 
Entrance into Ham Ouze, and indeed that alſo into 


Catwater in ſome Sort. On the Shore, over- -againſt 


this Iſland, is the Citadel of Plymouth, a ſmall, but re- 
gular F ortification, inacceſſible by Sea, but not exceed- 
ing ſtrong by Land; except that they ſay the Works are 


of a Stone as hard as Marble, and would not foon yield 
to the Batteries of an Enemy : but that is a Language 


our modern Engineers laugh at. It is furrounded with 
a deep Trench, out of which was dug the Stone that 
built the whole Citadel, which is about three Quarters 
of a Mile in Circumference, and has 300 great Guns 
on its Walls, which ſtand thickeſt towards the Sea. 


Several Guns are alſo planted on Part of the old F ort, | 


lying almoſt level with the Water; all which gives 
the createſt Security to the Ships in the Harbour. 

The Town returns two Members to Parliament. 
It ſtands above the Citadel, upon the ſame Rock, and 


lies ſloping on the Side of it, towards the Eaſt, the In- 
let of the Sea (which is called Cætwater, and is an 


Harbour capable of receiving any Number of Ships, 
and of any Size) waſhing the Faftern Shore of the 
Town, where they have a kind of natural Mole, 
or Haven, called Sutton Pool, from the antient Name 


of the Town; with a Quay, and all other Convenien- 


cies for bringing in Vellels for loading and unloading; 
R 1 | nor 


* 


- 
——ů — — end) * 
——— — — 
— 42 —— ane 9s, on * — > 
— II SIE IAC — e 
* rn c Q 1525. 


$ 
4 
| 
= 1 
4 
i 
by 1 
: : 
1 
4 4 
\ : * 
8 Nn 
— 


Fort on tae Brow of the Hill, called The Haw, which 


366 


nor is the Trade carried on here inconſiderable in 
itielf. - | 


* 


The other Inlet of the Sea, as I term it, is on the 


other Side of the Town, and is called Ham-Ouze, 
being the Mouth of the River Tamar, a conſiderable 
River, which parts the two Counties of Devon and 
Cornwall, Bere, the War with France making it 


neceflary, that the Ships of War ſhould have a Retreat 
nearer Hand than at Port/mouth, the late King William 


ordered a Wer-dock, with Yards, Dry-docks, 
Launches, and Conveniencies of all Kinds for building 


and repairing of Ships, to be built. "Theſe Wet and 
Dry-docks are about two Miles up the Ham Ouze; 


and, for the Neatneſs and Excellency of the Work, 
exceed all that were ever built of the kind, being hewn 


out of a Mine of Slate, and lined with Portland Stone. 


The Dry-dock is built after the Mould of a Firſt- rate 
Man of War; and the Wet- dock will contain five 


of the ſame Bigneſs. What followed theſe, as it were 


of courſe, was the building of Store-houſes and Ware- 
houſes for the Rigging, Sails, naval and military Stores, 


Sc. of ſuch Ships as may be appointed to be laid up 


there; with very handſome Houſes for the Commil- 


ſioner, Clerks, and Officers of all kinds uſual in the 


King's Yards, to dwell in. It is, in ſhort, now be- 


come as complete an Arſenal, or Yard, for building 


and fitting out Men of War, as any the Government 
are Maſters of; and perhaps much more convenient 
than ſome of them, though not ſo large : and this has 
ones a proportional Increaſe of Building to the 
OWN. | 


Plymouth, during the laſt Civil War, adhered to the 


Parliament, and, by an obſtinate Reſiſtance, did more 


Harm to the Royal Cauſe, than any other Town of 

the Weſt ; the King's Army being obliged to raiſe the = 

Siege, after Ying before the Place many Months. 
II 


King Charles 


well knowing its Importance, built a 


at 


& T QUE ( Devon: 


Reign, another Act paſſed, for making Compenſation to 
Fo a, Ka | 


Devon. GRTAT BRITAIN. . 367 
at once awes the Town, and is a Defence to the Har- 
bour. The Town is governed by a Mayor and Re- 


corder, who are Juſtices of the Peace and Quorum, 12 
Magiſtrates, three of whom are Juſtices, and 24 Com- 


mon- councilmen. | 


Here are two fine Churches, and two or three 
Meeting houſes for Diflenters, and French Refugees ; 
as alſo a Free-ſchool, and an Hoſpital for Blue-coat 
Boys. Z | 1 
Oppoſite to this Place, on the other Side Ham Ouze, 


is ſituated Mount Edgcumbe, the Seat of the Lord - 
Eagcuimbe, deemed one of the nobleſt ProſpeQs in Eng- 


ſand; overlooking at once the Sea, the Harbour, Ci- 


tadel, and Town of Plymouth,. and the County adja- 
cent for a great Way. 85 


A good Engliſbman cannot but be pleaſed with every 
Inſtance of the Attention paid by the Adminiſtration 


to the Safety and Improvement of our Places of 
Strength, and maritime Force in this Kingdom. 


Plymouth, Portſmouth, and Chatham, have particularly 


been great Objects of their Care, as we ſhall ſee in the 
Deſcription we have given of thoſe three famous 


Places, as well as others on the Sea-coaſts ; and of the 
proſperous Situation of the Royal Navy of England, 
which makes us the moſt reſpectable Nation in the 
World, with regard to our Marine. Much has been 


done by our former Princes in this Particular: But 
nothing in our own Times is neglected, that may con- 


tribute to ſo good an End. An Act paſſed in the 3ſt 


| Year of his Majeſty King George II. 's Reign; intitled, 


An Ae for veſting certain Meſſuages, Lands, Tene- 
ments, and Hereditaments, for the better ſecuring his 
Aajefly's Docks, Ships, and Stores, at Portſmouth, 


Chatham, and Plymouth, and for the better fortifying 


the Town of Portſmouth and Citadel of Plymouth, in 
Truſtees, for certain Uſes; and for other Purpoſes therein 


mentioned, And in 32d Year of his ſaid. late Majeſty's 


ä the 


"a68 A TOUR thro Cornw. 
the Proprietors of ſuch Lands and Hereditaments, as 


have been purchaſed for the Uſes mentioned in the former; 
to both which we refer our Reader. 


The Land declining when we "THEIR; the Coaſt of. 


Devonſhire to the South- weſt, the firſt Place we meet 
with on the Corn Shore is Bude- baven, in all the 
old Maps called Beedi haven; now not fo much as a 

Creek in the Cuſtom houſe Account, and barely ſo in 
Conception. of the common People, who ſometimes 
© ſhelter their Boats there. It was, in Ages paſt, no 
doubt, a much more uſeful Place; but as in many 
other Parts of Cornivall the Sea has encroached upon 


the Land, ſo here that Element has been driven out, 


as plainly appears from the marſhy* Grounds through 
which the River Bude runs, wa IVhaleſborough ; ; 
which Marſh was evidently the old Haven, It might 


not perhaps be found a thing impracticable, by cutting 


a Canal from the Tamar to the Place laſt mentioned, 


to bring ſuch a Body of Water into this diminiſhed - 


R ver, as would once more efteRually ſcour this 
Haven, which would prove of inexpreſſible Importance 
to the County, though the gaining it ſhould be attend- 
ed with large Expences ®, For this being once done, 
the little River Attery, and the Brook which falls into 
it, upon which Launce/ton is ſeated, being alſo made 
| navigable to the Tamar, which ſurely ! is very poſſible, 

that Capital of the County, which even now is a ſpa- 


cious and populous, though an inland Place, would 


bave a direct and commodious Correſpondence, both 
with the North and South Seas, or in other Words, 


both with the Briſtel and Britiſb Channels; whereas 


at preſent, it has no Communication with either. Be/- 
ca/ile, corruptly for Betreaux-caſle, is the next Creek, 
and of no greater Significance than the former. We 


* The Cut propoſed; if the Situation will allow it, would not ex- 


ceed three Miles, and before the Canal was begun, all the necetlary 
ms on the Sta-ſide * be W finiſhed, | 
may 


gs 20 BH wi. 


Cornw. GRTAT BRTITAINx. 369 
may ſay the ſame of Por tſich, the Creek that runs up 
to Carantack, and ſeveral others; none of which ſerve 


for any thing more conſiderable than Fiſhing- boats; 
owing all to the ſame Cauſes, the Sands filling them 


up, and the Soil choaking the Rutts that runintothem) 


ſo that they are gradually (though not irreparably} 
diminiſhed in Size and Strength. But as theſe were 
all once naturally better, ſo by the Aſſiſtance of Art, 
and with a moderate Charge, there is ſurely ſcarce any 


of them that may not be made Harbours again. 


Mr. Carew publiſhed, in the Reign of King 
James I. a very judicious Survey of this County, de- 


dicated to Sir Walter Raleigh. The Reader may 
there inform himſelf, in a particular manner, of its 


Natural Hiſtory, and the Produce, Cuſtoms, and 

Rarities with which it abounds, 5 
Among the natural Productions of Cornwall, ought 

not to be omitted their Slate, the beſt in Europe for 


covering of Houſes; the Moor- tone, which, by a very 


laborious Poliſhing (a Matter very lately attempted), 
equals in Beauty the Egyptian Granate. I take no 


notice of the Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, the 
Marble, Agat, Coral, and even Diamonds, which are 
here found, becauſe theſe have been obſerved by all, 


who mention the Productions of this Weſtern County; 
and, for the ſame Reaſon, ſhall omit the manner of 


their working their Mines, and refining the Ore. | 


Saltaſb ſeems to be the Ruins of a larger Place: it is 
governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, has many Pri- 
vileges, ſends Members to Parliament, has the ſole 
Oytter-fiſhing in the whole River, which is conſider- 


able. It has alſo Juriſdiction upon the River Tamar, 


down to the Mouth of the Port; ſo that they claim 
Anchorage of all ſmall Ships that enter the River. 
Their Coroner ſits upon all Bodies that are found 


drowned in the River. Here is a good Market; and 


it is very much benefited by the Increaſe of the Inha- 


| bitangs of Plymouth, as lying near the Dock at the 


R 5 Mouth 


—_— . #T&UR thro Cornw., 


Mouth of the Ham-Ouze; for thoſe People chooſe 
rather to go to Sa/ta/) to Market by Water, than to 


walk to Plymouth by Land, for their Proviſions : be- 
cauſe, firſt, as they go in the Town-boat, the ſame 


Boat brings home what they buy ; fo that it is much 
leſs Trouble: ſecondly, becauſe Proviſions are bought 
much cheaper at Saltaſb, than at Plymouth : and of 


late they have ſome Ships that uſe the Newfoundland 


Fiſhery. 
There is no other Town upon the Tamar till we 
come to Launcęſton, the County-town, which I ſhal] 
fake in my Return, except Kellington, a pretty good 
Market and Portreve-town, where is a good Market- 


houſe, and a neat Church, which, as well as the other 


Buildings in the Town, are in good Condition ; and 


which ſends Members to Parliament: fo I turned 


Weſt, keeping the South Shore of the County, to the 
Land's-end. ; 
From SaltafhT went to Leſtard, about ſeven Miles, 
This is a confiderable Town, well-built, has People 


of Faſhion in it, and a great Market: it is one of the 
five Stannary-towns for Cornwall; and was once ſtill 


more eminent, and had a good Caſtile, and a large 
Houſe, where the antient Dukes of Cornwall kept 


their Court: it alfo enjoyed ſeveral conſiderable Pri- 


| vileges, eſpecially by the Favour of the Black Prince, 
who, as Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall, re- 


ſided here; and in Return, they ſay, this Town, and 


the Country round it, raiſed a great Body of ſtout 


young Fellows, who entered into his Service, and fol- 
lowed his Fortunes in his Wars. But theſe Buildings 


are ſo decayed, that there are now ſcarce any of the 
Ruins of the Caſtle, or of the Prince's Court, remain- 

ing. Here was alſo antiently a Chapel, much reſorted 
to by Pilgrims in Popiſh times; and in the Town is 
a Fountain of very clear Water, to which many mira- 
culous Cures were attributec, 


— — — 82 


. 1 ww as as wt Was mw”... oa 


Corn w. GRNAT BriTain, 371 


It ſtill boaſts of its Guild, or Town hall, on which is 
a Turret, with a fine Clock ; a good F ree-ſchool, 
well-provided ; a fine Conduit in the Market-place ; 


an antient large Church, dedicated to St. Martin; 
and a large new built Meeting- -houſe for the Difſent- 


ers; which I name, becauſe they aſſured me there 
were but three more, and thoſe inconfiderable, in all 
the County of Cornwall; whereas, in Devonſhire, 
which is the next County, there are reckoned about 70, 
ſome of which are exceeding large. 

This Town is alſo remarkable for a great Trade in 


al Manufactures of Leather, ſuch as Boots, Shoes, 
Gloves, Purſes, Breeches, Oc. and ſome Spinning of 
late Vears is ſet up here, encouraged by the Woollen 


Manufacturers of Devonſbire. 

Between theſe two Towns of Saltaſh and Leſtard is 
the Borough of Str. Ger mans; which, as well as Lef- 
tard, ſends Members to Parliament. Tris now a Vit 
lage, decayed, and without any Market, but che largeſt 
Pariſh in the whole County; in the Rownds of which 
are contained 17 Villages, and the Town of Saizafh * 
among them; for Saltaſh Church, it feems, is but a 
Chapel of Eaſe to St. Germans. It has been antiently 
a Biſhop's See, which was tranſlated from Bodmyn 
hither, and afterwards from Sf. Germans to Crediton, 


then one of the beſt Towns in the County of Devon, 
and thence to Exeter. This Town takes its Name 


from St. German, biſhop of Auxerre in Hurgundy, 
who came over from France to preach againſt the 


Hereſy of Pelagius, which then began to ſpread in 


England, and took up his Reſidence here. The Ruins 
of the Epiſcopal Palace at Cuttenbect, a Mile and 
half from the Town, which afterwards dwindled into 
a Farm-houfe, are till viſible. & Gentleman, of the 
Name of Elliot, was lately a great Benefactor to this? 
Town, having endowed a public School here, e 


ed the Seſſions: houſe, and beauitited the Church; 


R 6 OT Sees 


372 A TOUR r'“ Corn. 
where he was buried, and has a fine Italian parti. 
coloured Marble Monument ereQted to his Memory, 
by his Widow. There is an Epiſcopal Chair in the 
Church, and ſeveral other Seats belonging to Canons, 
The Town ſtands on a riſing Ground, and is built in 
the Formofan Amphitheatre. 5 . 
In the Neighbourhood of theſe Towns are many 
pleaſant Seats of the Corn; Gentry, who are indeed 
very numerous, and ſociable, generous,” and kind 
Neighbours to one another; they uſually intermarry 
among themſelves ; from whence, they ſay, the Pio- 
verb, That all the Corniſh Gentlemen are Couſins. It 
is the very ſame in Wales; where the greateſt Com- 
pliment that one Gentleman can make to another of 
the ſame County, is to call him Couſin. There is a 
reat Conformity of Manners, Cuſtoms, and Uſages, 
between the Lelſß and Corniſh ; who are accounted 
of the fame Origin, and Deſcendents alfo of the an- 
tient Britons; and there is likewiſe a great Affinity 
between the old Corniſh and Welſb Languages. 
On the Hills North of Leſcard, and in the Way be- 
tween that Town and Launcgſlon, are many Tin 
Mines, and fome of the richeſt Veins of that Metal 
in the whole County; which, when caſt at the 
Bowling houſes into Blocks, are ſent to L rd to be 
coined. ; OD 
From Leſtard, in our Courſe Weſt, we are necel- 
ſarily carried to the Sea-coaft, becauſe of the River 
Fotoey, which empties itſelf into the Sea, at a large 
Mouth ; and bereby, this River riſing in the Middle 
of the Breadth of the County, and running South, and 
the River Camel riſing not far from it, and running 
North, with a like large Channel, the Land from Bod- 
myn to the Weſtern Part of the County is almoſt made 
- an Iſland, and in a manner cut off from the Eaſtern ; 
the Iithmus, or Neck of Land between, being not 
above 12 Miles over. _ | „ 3 
In the Pariſh of Sz. Cleer is a Piece of Antiquity, 
Which they call, 7p other Half/tone ; which _—_ 
i; e 


A 


7 
t 
Fo 


Cornw. GRTAT BriTain, 373 


deed two Stones fixed in the Ground; and, by Mor- 
tices in each, they ſeem to have been heretofore join- 
ed together. Both of them were curiouſly wrought 
by Diaper-work Carvings; but one of them hath an 
Inſcription in very antique Characters; as follows: 


Jon! 
E AT: 


— — 


. o 
20 C UTC | 
 P Ro CC] 
1 mM & 


| 4 


which ſeem to expreſs thus much Doniert Rogavit 
pro Anima; implying, that Dungarth or Doniert (King 
of Cornwall, who was drowned 4, D, 782.) gave this 


Land for the Good of his Soul. 


Not far diſtant is an Heap of large Stones, under 
which lies a great Stone, faſhioned like a Cheeſe, and 
ſeems to the Eye, as if it were preſſed into that Form, 


by the Weight that lies upon it ; and hence they call 
it HY/ring-cheeſe, or Cheeſe-wring. Theſe ſeem to be 


naturally ſo piled, in the Manner we ſee them, upon 


and not perpendicularly, 


one another, the leaſt at the Bottom; they lie aſkew, 


On the South-weſt from Leſtard, we come to Foy, 


or Fey, an antient Borough-town, and formerly 


very large and potent; for the Foyens, as they were 
then called, were able to fit out large Fleets, not only 
of Merchant-ſhips, but even of Men of War; and 
with theſe, not only fought with, but ſeveral times 
vanquiſhed and routed, the Squadron of the Cinque- 
port Men, who, in thoſe Days, were very powerful. 
Mr. Camden obſerves, that the Town of Fey quar- 
ters ſome Part of the Arms of every one of thoſe 


Cinque- 


m3 A TOUR vt Cornw, 
. Cinque-ports with its own; intimating, that it had, 
at ſeveral times, triumphed over them all : and indeed 
Foy was once ſo powerful, that it fitted out Fleets 
_ againſt the French, and took ſeveral of their Men of 
ar, when they were at Variance with England, en- 
riching their Town by the Spoil of their Enemies, 
Edward IV. favoured them much; and, becauſe 
the French threatened to come up their River with a 
powerful Navy to burn their Town, he cauſed two 
orts to be built at the public Charge for its Security, 
the Ruins of which are ſtill to be ſeen : but the ſame 
King Edward was ſome time after ſo diſguſted at the 
Townſmen, for officiouſly falling upon the French, 
after a Truce was proclaimed, that he effectually diſ- 
armed them, took away their whole Fleet, Ships, 
Tackle, Apparel, and Furniture: and, ſince that time, 
we do not read of any of their Naval Exploits, nor 
that they ever attempted to recover their Strength at 
Sea. However, Foy, at this Time, is a very fair 
Town ; it lies extended on the Weſt - ſide of the River, 
for above a Mile, the Buildings fair, and there are a 
great many flouriſhing Merchants in it, who have a 
greatShare inthe F AY eſpecially for Pilchards. 
In this Town is alſo a Coinage for the TIN, of which 
a great Quantity is dug up in the Country North and 
Weſt. "The Church is antient, and very fine; and 
the Town ſends two Members to Parliament. 
The River Fowey, which is very broad and deep 
here, was formerly navigable by Ships of good Bur- 
den, as high as the Borough-town of Leſtꝛoithiel, an 
antient, and once a flouriſhing, but . now a decayed 
Place; and, as to Trade and Navigation, quite deiti- 
| tute; which is occaſioned by the River being filled up 
With Sand, | 
' Leſtwithiel was called in the Britiſß time, Pen 
_ Uthel Coed, i. e. an high Place with Wood. It became 
ſince the antient Reſidence of the Dukes of — 
| | | > 


—- 


Cornw. GREAT BRITAIN. 375 
The Ruins of a Caſtle belonging to them are ſtill to be 
ſeen, on a riſing Ground, at a little Diſtance from 
the Town. The Church is an handſome Edifice; 
but the Steeple carries the Marks of the Civil Wars 
in the Reign of Charles L when the great Hall ang 

Exchequer of the ſaid Dukes of Cornwall were alſo 
uiterly defaced. Some fay this Town was formerly 
the County-town : and it ſtill retains ſeveral Advan- 
tuges, which ſupport its Figure: as, 1, That it is one 
of the Coinage or Stannary-towns. 2. The common 
Gaol for the whole Stannary is here, as are alſo the 
County- courts for Cornwall, 3. It has the Privilege 
of ſending two Members to Parliament. 

There is a mock Cavalcade kept up at this Town, 
which is very remarkable: the Particulars, as they are 
related by Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, 
take as follows: „„ 
Upon little Eafler Sunday, the Freeholders of 
this Town and Manor, by themſelves or their De- 
puties, did there aſſemble: amongſt whom one (as it 
fell to his Lot by Turn), bravely apparelled, gallantly 
mounted, with 2 Crown on his Head, a Scepter in 
his Hand, and a Sword borne before him, and duti- 
fully attended by all the reſt, alſo on Horſeback, rode 
through the principal Street to the Church: the 
Curate, in his beſt Beſeen, ſolemnly received him at 
the Church-yard Stile, and conducted him to hear 
Divine Service. After which, he repaired with the. 
ſame Pomp to an Houſe provided for that Purpoſe, 
made a Feaſt to his Attendants, kept the Table's 


and all other Rights due to the Eftate of a Prince : 
with which Dinner the Ceremony ended, and every 
Man returned Home again. The Pedigree of this 
Uſage is derived from fo many Deſcents of Ages, 
that the Cauſe and Author outreach Remembrance, 


« Howbeit, theſe Circumſtances afford a CONT 
mm 4 


„ „ „ „ „„ „„ „ „„ „„ SD „„ „ „ „ „ „„ 


End himſelf, and was ſerved with kneeling Aﬀay, _ 


376 A TOUR ro Cornw. 
that it ſhould betoken Royalties: appertaining to the 
Honour of Cornwall” _ 5 | 
Behind Foy, and nearer to the Coaſt, at the Mouth 
of a ſmall River, which ſome call Loe, though with- 
out any Authority, ſtand two Borough-towns oppoſite 
to one another, bearing the Name of Za Loe, and 
I/eft Lee. Theſe are both good trading Towns, and 
eſpecially for Fiſh; and, which is very particular, are. 
like eymouth and elcombe in Dorſet/hire, ſeparated 
only by the Creek, or River; and yet each of them 
ſends Members to Parliament. "Theſe Towns are 
f together by a very beautiful and ſtately Stone 
ridge, having 15 Arches. 5 | 
Eaſt Loe, was the antienter Corporation of the two; 
and, ſome Ages ago, the greater and more conſider- , 
able Town; but now, they tell us, Veſi Loe is the 
— richeſt, and has the moſt Ships belonging to it; but 
| has neither Church, nor Chapel, nor Meeting houſe, 
in it. Were they put together, they would make a - 
very handſome Sea port Town. | TEs | 
Paſſing from hence, and ferrying over Foy River, we 
come into a large Country, withqut many Towns of 
Note in it, but very well furniſhed with Gentlemens. 
' Seats, and a little higher up with Tin-works, - 
The Sea making ſeveral deep Bays here, they who 
travel by Land are obliged to go higher into the Coun- 
try, to paſs above the Water, eſpecially at Treward- 
retb· bay, which lies very broad, above ten Miles with- 
in the Country; which paſſing at Trewardreth, a 
Town of no great Note, though the Bay takes its 
Name from it, the next Inlet of the Sea is the famous 
Firth, or Inlet, called Falmouth- Haven. It is certainly, 
next to Milford Haven in South Wales, the faireſt and 
beſt Road for Shipping, that is in the whole Iſle of 
Britain; whether we conſider the Depth of Water 
for above 20 Miles within Land; the Safety of Riding, 
| ſheltered from all kind of Winds or Storms; the good 
8 VV Anchorage, 


. 


| " Us * 
Cornw. GREAT BRITAIN, 377 
Anchorage, and the many Creeks, all navigable, 
where the Ships may run in and be ſafe. 5 


There are ſix or ſeven very conſiderable Places upon 


this Haven, and the Rivers from it; viz. Grampound, 


 Tregony, Truro, Penryn, St. Mawes, Falmouth, and 


Pendennis. "The hve firſt of theſe ſend Members to 
Parliament; although the Town of Falmouth, as big 

as all of them together (Truro excepted), and richer 
than ten ſuch, ſends none. Indeed, till the ſixth of 


Edward V1. none but-Launce/ton, Leſkard, Leſiwithiel, 


Truro, Bodmyn, Hei/ton, and Boſſiney, ſent any. 

St, Mawes, and Pendennis, or Pen dinas (which 
ſignifies in the old Britiſb, the End or Head of a City), 
are twa Fortifications placed at the Points, or En- 


trance, of this Haven, oppoſite to one another, though 
not with a Communication or View. They are very, 


{ſtrong ; the former principally by Sea, having a good 


Platform of Guns, pointing athwart the Channel, and 


planted on a Level with the Water; but Pendennis 
_ Caſtle is ſtrong by Land, as well as by Water, is re- 
oularly fortified, has good Out-works, and generally 


2 ſtrong Gariſon; and each of them has a Governor. 
St. Mawes, otherwiſe called St. Mary's, has a Town 


annexed to the Caſtle, and is a Borough; but has 
neither Church, Chapel, Meeting houſe, Fair, nor 
Maker ²ͤ AAA a 09 e 
The Town of Falmouth is by much the richeſt 
and beſt trading Town in this County, though not ſo 
antient as its N eighbour-town of Truro; and indeed, 


is in ſome things obliged to acknowlege its Seniorityz _ 


and the Truro Men receive ſeveral Duties collected in 
Falmouth ; particularly Wharfage for the Merchan- 
dizes landed or ſhipped off: but the Town of Fal. 


mouth has gotten thè Trade, at leaſt the beſt Part of it, 


from the other, which is chiefly owing to the Situation; 
for, lying upon the Sea, but within the Entrance, 


Ships of the greateſt Burden come up to the very Quay; 


and the whole Royal Navy might ride fafely in the 


Road; 


x 
Kt 
. 

! 
y 


x 
- been nr — . l 
_— e e 2 
e 
ie 


— r 


= _— 5 
: ws > ow — - * 
5 „ ——ů— — 2 — — IN 


„an. 


378 A TOUR thx Cornw. 
Road; whereas the Town of Truro, lying far within, 
and at the Mouth of two freſ Rivers, is not navigable 
for Veſſels of above 150 Tons, or thereabouts ; the 
Trade at Truro being chiefly, if not altogether, for the 
Shipping off of Block TIx and Co ER Ore, the lat- 
ter being lately found in large Quantities in ſome of 
the Mountains between Truro and St. Michael's, and 
which is much improved ſince ſeveral Mills are erected 
at Bri/tcl, and other Parts, for the Manufactures of 
 Battery-ware, as it is called. 
Fralmoutb is well- built, has abundance of Shipping 
belonging to it, is full of rich Merchants, and has an 
increaſing Trade, becauſe of the ſetting up, of late 
Years, the Eng/i/b Packets between this Port and Li/- 
bon; which occaſions a new Commerce between Por- 


52 tugal and this Town, amounting to a very great Value. 
There are Packets alſo eſtabliſhed to the Groyne in 


Spain, and to the V Indies. 
It is true, Part of this Trade was . in a clan; 
deſtine Commerce carried on by the ſaid Packets at 
Liſbon; where, being the King's Ships, and claiming 
the Privilege of not. being ſearched or viſited by the 


Cuſtom-houſe Officers, they found Means to carry off 


great Quantities of Britiſß ManufaQtures, which they 

ſold on board to the Portugueſe Merchants, and they 
conveyed them on Shore, as it is ſuppoſed, without 
paying Cuſtom. 


But the Government there getting Intelligence of i it, 5 


and Complaint being made in England alſo, where it 
was found to be prejudicial to the fair Merchant, that 
Trade has been effectually ſtopped: but the Falmouth 
Merchants, having by this means gotten a Taſte of 
the Portugue/e Trade, have maintained it ever ſince 
in Ships of their own. Theſe Packets bring over vaſt 
Quantities of Gold in Specie, either in Moidores, or 
in Bars of Gold, on Account of the Merchants at 
London. 

The Cuſtom-houſe for all the Towns in this Port, - 


and the Head- Collector, i is eſtabliſhed at this Town ; 
where 


Cornw. GREAT BRTTAINV. 379 
where the Duties, including thoſe of the other Ports, 
are very conſiderable. Here is alſo a great Fiſher 
for Pilchards, and the Merchants of Falmouth have the 
chief Stroke in that gainful Trade. Se rg ELD 
The Country People round about uſed to call Fal- 
mouth, Penny come quick, and to tell this Story of the 
Occaſion. Within leſs than 40 Years of the Reſtora- 


tion, there was not ſo much as one Houſe where that 
flouriſhing Town now ſtands; but a certain Perſon 
building a little one, a Female Servant of one Mr. 


Pendaris, came and dwelt in jt ; upon which that 
Gentleman bid her brew a little Ale, and on ſuch a 
Day, he promiſed to come with ſome Gentlemen, and 
help her to ſome Money by drinking it up. She 
obeyed her Maſter's Orders; but in the mean time, a 
Dutch Veſſel came into the Harbour, and the Crew 
calling at the Houſe, drank out all the Ale. Mr. 
. Pendaaris came with his Friends at the Day appointed, 
and calling for ſome Drink, his Servant told him ſhe. 
had none. Her Maſter expoſtulating with her, ſhe 
told him what had paſſed, and ſaid, Truly, Maſter, 
the Penny came ſo quick, I could not deny them. 
Truro, though it gives Place to Falmouth, is however 
a conſiderable Town. It ſtands up the Water North- 
and-by-eaſt from Falmeuth, in the utmoſt extended 
Branch of the Haven, at the Conflux of two Rivers, 
which, though not of any long Courſe, have a very 
good Appearance for a Port, and make a large Wharf 
between them in the Front of the Town; and the 
Water here makes a good Port for ſmall Ships, tho” it 
be at the Influx, but not for Ships of Burden. There 
are at leaſt three Churches in it. 5 SN 
Tregony, or Tregenen (which in Britiſh ſignihes the | 
 Mouth-town), is a Borough-town upon the ſame 
Water, North-eaſt from Falmouth, diſtant about 16 
Miles from it, but is a Town of very little Trade; nor 
indeed have any of the Towns fo far within the Shore, 
(notwithſtanding the Benefit of the Water) _ _ | 
8 ſiderable 


380 A TOUR thro Cornw. 
ſiderable Trade, but what is carried on under the 
Merchants of Falmouth or Truro. 
Grampound, is a Market-town and Borough, about 
four Miles farther up the Water. This Place indeed 
has a Claim to Antiquity, and is an Appendix to the 
Duchy of Cornwall, of which it holds at a Fee-farm 
Rent, and pays to the King 104. 115. 1d. per Annum. 
It has no Pariſh- church, but only a Chapel of Eaſe to 
an adjacent Pariſh. Here are ſome Remains to be ſeen 
of a famous Coedfala, which, in the Britiſb, lignifies 
Felon-wood, granted, with all the Lands in it, to the 
Town, in King Edward IIl's Time. 

Penryn, another Borough-town, is up the ſame 


Branch of the Haven as Falmouth, but ſtands four 


Miles higher towards the Weſt, upon an Hill; yet 
Ships come to it of as great a Size, as can come to 
Truro. It is a very pleaſant agreeable Town, and for 
that Reaſon has many Merchants in it, who would 
perhaps otherwiſe live at Falmouth. T he chief Com- 
merce of theſe Towns, as to their Sea- affairs, is the 


Puchard and Newfoundland Fiſhing, which is very 


profitable to them all. It had formerly a Conventual 
Church, with a Chantry, and a Religious Houſe, a 
Cell to Kirton ; but they are all demoliſhed, and — 
the Ruins of them diſtinguiſhable enough to know one 
Part from another. The Sea embraces this Town 
on each Side. 

Penryn is exceedingly well itered; having Water 
running in wooden Pipes through the Streets, and at 
Intervals Ciſterns to receive it; and it is ſo contrived, 
that what overflows the Ciſtern, runs into another 
wooden Pipe; and fo interchangeably down the Hill 
the Town ſtands upon. Beſides this, almoſt every 
Houſe hath Spring-water, a Garden and an Orchard 
to itſelf, It is governed by a Mayor and 12 Alder- 
men, and returns two Members to Parliament. The 
Mayor of Penryn uſes to write himſelf ape of 


Falmouth. 
Quitting | 


eſpecially Pilchards: they pile them up on a Bed of 


Cornw. GREAT BRITATNV. 381 
Quitting Falmouth Haven, from Penryn Weſt, we 


came to Hel/ton, another Borough town, at about ſe- 


ven Miles Diſtance : it ſtands upon the little River 
Cober, Which however admits the Sea ſo into its Bo- 
ſom, as to make a tolerable good Harbour for Ships, a 
little below the Town. It is the fifrh Town allowed 
for the Coining Tin, and ſeveral of the Ships called 
Tin Ships are laden here. - . i 

Helſton is large and populous, and has four ſpacious 
Streets, an handſome Church, and a good Trade, Be- 
yond it is a Market-town, though of no Reſort for 
Trade, called arket- Few: it lies indeed on the Sea- 


tide, but has no Harbour or ſafe Road for Shipping. 


At Helford is a ſmall, but good Harbour, between 
Falmouth and this Port, where many times the Tin 
Ships go in to load for London; alſo here are a good 


Number of Fiſhing veſſels for the Pilchaid Trade, 
and abundance of ſkilful Fiſhermen. 


Pen ſance, in Britiſh Penſand, i. e. the Head, or 


End of the Sand, is the fartheſt Town of any Note 


Weſt, being 254 Miles from London, and within about 


ten Miles of the Promontory called the Land's end; 


ſo that this Promontory is from London 264 Miles, or 


thereabouts, This is a Market-town of good Buſineſs, 


well-built, and populous; has a good Trade, and a 
great many Ships belonging to it, notwithſtanding it is 
ſo remote. Here are alſo a great many good Fami- 
lies of Gentlemen, though in this utmoſt Angle of the 
Nation: and, which is yet more ſtrange, the Veins of 
Lead, Tin, and Copper Ore, are ſaid to be ſeen, even 


to the utmoſt Extent of Land, at Low-water Mark, 


and in the very Sea. So rich, ſo valuable a Treaſure is 
contained in theſe Parts of Great Britain, though they 


are ſuppoſed to be poor, becauſe fo remote from 
London, which is the Center of our Wealth. 


At Penſance I ſaw the Houſe in which they lay, 
(and the Manner in which they preſs) their Fiſh, 


great 


- Unlike thoſe of Stone 


| 385 ATO UR tr# - Cornw. 


great "4 and Breadth, to wit, as long and broad 
as the Houſe made for that Purpoſe will permit, 
and Breaſt high; then in the Wall behind, they have 
'a Hole into which they thruſt a Rafter or Poſt of 
Timber, (which reacheth croſs the Bed of Fifh) and 
on the other End of it hang one or two or more great 
Stones, of which they have many lying there, with a 
great Hook of Iron faſtened in them for that Purpoſe; 
of theſe Holes and Rafteis they have many all alon 
the Bed, which preſs down the — wherewith 
conceive the Bed of Fiſh is covered, and ſo preſs 
the Fiſh equally underneath the Bed, they have a Gut- 
ter to receive and convey the Oil which comes from 
the Fiſh into a Veſſel made on Purpoſe in the Ground 
at one End of the Houſe 
They have a pretty Quay made with a Pier of Stone, 
both at Penſance and St. Iues. 

Between Pen ſance and St. Burien, a Town 1165 | 
way between it and the Land's-end, ſtands a circular 
Temple of the Druids, conſiſting of 19 Stones, the 
Diſtance between each being 12 Feet, and a 20th in 
the Center, much ry mad than the reſt; and are not 

enge in WWiltfhire. The Pariſh 
where they ſtand is called Biſcard werne, from whence 
the antient and noble F amily of Boſcawen derives its 
Name. 

In Cleer Pariſh in this Courity, fix or eight Stones 
of prodigious Bigneſs likewiſe ſtand up in a Circle; a 
Monument of the like Nature. 

* Theſe are probably, as thoſe at Stone benge and Bu- 
rien, Remains of Druids Temples. 

And we ſhall mention in this Place, that at Stan- 


tondreio in Somerſetſbire, is another Temple of the ; 


Druids, called The Weddings. 
The Vaen- amber, near this Town of P enſance, was 

| alſo a very remaikable Stone, which, as Mr. Camden 
tells us, though it be of a vaſt Bignefs, yet we be 


moved with one Finger, n great 
Nn 


] 
5 
f 
z 
« 
| 


R a Aa 


La) 


Cornw. GREAT BRITAIN. 8 i 383 


Number of Men could not remove it from its Place. 
It was deſtroyed, as one of the ſame ſort was in Fife. 


- ſhire, Scotland, by one of Oliver's Governors: for thoſe 


Reformers had a Notion of theſe Works being of a 
ſuperſtitious Kind, | e 

Maen is a Britiſb Word for a great Stone: there is 
one of theſe Stones, as Dr. Stukely tells us, in Derby- 


Hire; and Mr. Toland acquaints us, that there are 5 
alſo ſuch in Ireland, as well as Wales he gives the 


following Account of this Piece of Antiquity. 
At a Place called Maen- an ber, ſays he, is an Heap 
of Stones, roundiſh, and of a vaſt Bulk; but ſo arti- 
ficially pitched on flat Stones, ſometimes more, 
ſometimes fewer in Number, that touching the 
great Stone lightly, it moves, and ſeems to totter, 
to the great Amazement of the Ignorant; but ftirs 
© not, at leaſt not ſenſibly, when one uſes his whole 
Strength. „„ 1 
Near Peuſance, but open to the Sea, is that Gulph 
they call Mount's- bay, named fo from an high Hill 
ſtanding in the Water, or rather a Rock, which they 
call St. Michael's Mount; the Seamen call it only The 
Corniſh Mount, It has been fortified, though the Situ- 


ation of it makes it fo difficult of Acceſs, that, like the . 


Baſs in Scotland, there needs no Fortification. Like 


the Baſs too, it was once made a Gaol for Priſoners of 


State; but now it is wholly neglected. At Penſance 
is a very good Road ſor Shipping, which makes their 
Town a Place of Reſort. . 

A little up in the Country towards the North- weſt 


5 is Godolchan; which, though an Hill, rather than a 


Town, gives Name to the antient and noble Family ef 


Go dolphin; and nearer on the Northern Coaſt is 


Ryalton, which gives the ſecond Title to the Ear! 


. Godolphin. This Place alſo is infinitely rich in Tin 
Mines. : ou | 


But I muſt not end this Account at the utmoſt Ex- 


tent of the Iſland of Great Britain Weſt, without 


taking 


384 A TOUR thro Cornv. 
taking ſome little Notice of thoſe kind of Excreſcences 
of the Iſland, the Rocks of Scilly, where many good 
Ships are almoſt continually daſhed in Pieces, and 
many brave Lives loſt, in Spite of the Marinei's beſt 
kill, or the Light-houſes and other Sea-marks beſt 
Notice. _ „ . 
Tbeſe Iſles, called in Latin, Silurum Inſulæ, lie 
about 30 Miles from the Land's-end, and are a Cluſter 
of ſmall Iſlands, to the Number, as ſome reckon, of 
145. Scilly was once the chief in Eſtimation. But 
St. Mary being the fruitfulleſt and largeſt, though but 
nine Miles about, has now the Pre eminence; and 
it has a very good Harbour, fortified with a Caſtle 
built by Queen Elizabeth. Theſe Ifles were con 
quered by Athelſlane, one of the Saxon Kings; and 
from his time they are deemed a Part of the County 
of Cornwall 5 = 5; | | 
Theſe Iſlands lie fo in the Middle between the two 
vaſt Openings of the North and South narrow Seas, 
or, as the Sailors call them, the Briſtol Channel, and 
The Channel (fo called by way of Eminence), that it 
Cannot, or perhaps never will be avoided, but that ſe- 
veral Ships in the Dark of the Night, and in Streſs of 
Weather, may, by being out in their. Reckonings, or 
by other-unavoidable Accidents, miſtake; and it they 
do, they are ſure, as the Sailors call it, to run Bump 
aſhore upon Scilh, where they find no Quarter among 
the Breakers, but are beat to Pieces, without any 
Poſſibility of Eſcape. Eo 1 5 1 
One can hardly mention the Rocks of Scilly, with- 
out letting fall a Tear to the Memory of Sir Cloude/ly 
Shovel, and all the gallant Spirits with him; who, in 
the Admiral's Ship, with three other Men of War, 
and all their Men, running upon theſe Rocks, right 
| afore the Wind, in a dark Night, were loſt, and not a 
Man faved, in his Return from a fruitleſs Expedition 
againſt Toulon. 5 5 . 
. They 


„ — 


 Cornw. GREAT BRITATN. 385 
They tell us of eleven Sail of Merchant ſhips home- 
wWward- bound, and richly laden from the Southward, 
who had the like Fate, in the ſame Place, a great many 
| Years ago; and that ſome of them coming from 
Spain, and having a great Quantity of Bullion, or Pieces 
of Eight on board, the Mpney frequently drives on 
Shore ſtill, and that in good. Quantities, eſpecially al- 


I This may be the Reaſon why, as we obſerved during __ ' 
Our ſhort Stay here, ſeveral Mornings after it had blown _ | 
ſomething hard in the Night, the Sands were covered 
with Country- people, running to and ſro to ſee if the 
Sea had caſt up any thing of Value. This the Seamen 
call going a. ſboring; and it ſeems they often find good 
Purchaſe. Sometimes alſo dead Bodies are caſt up 
here, the Conſequence of Shipwrecks among thoſe fatal 
Rocks and Iſlands; as alſo broken Pieces of Ships, 
Caſks, Cheſts, and almoſt every. thing that will float, 
or roll on Shore by the Surges of the Ses. 
Neor is it ſeldom that the ſavage Country. people ſcuffle 
and fight about the Right to What they find, and that 
in a deſperate manner; ſo that this Part of Cornwall 
may truly be ſaid to be inhabited by a fierce and raven- 
- ous People, like thoſe on the Coaſt of Suſſex; for they 
are ſo greedy and eager for Prey, that they are charged 
with ſtrange, bloody, and cruel Dealings, even ſome- 
times with one another; but eſpecially. with poor dif- 
treſſed Seamen, when they are forced on Shore by Tem- - 
. peſts, and ſeek Help for their Lives, and where they 
find the Rocks themſelves not more mercileſs than tage 
People who range about them for Prey. | 
Pere alſo, as a farther Teftimony of the immenſe 
' Riches which have been loſt at times upon this Coaſt, 
we found ſeveral Engineers and Projectors with Dive- 
ing Engines, attempting to recover what had been loſt, 
and that not always unſucceſsfully. . 
From the Tops of the Hills, on this Extremity of 
the Land, you may ſee out into what they call the Chops 
4 *Yot be TVT 


386 A TOUR ty Ovimy. 


of the Channel; which, as it is the greateſt Inlet of 


Commerce, and the moſt frequented by Merchant-ſhips 
of any Place in the World; ſo one ſeldom looks out to 


Sea · ward, but ſomething new preſents of Ships paſ- 


5 ſing, or repaſſing, either on the great or leſſer Channel. 


The Point of the M:in-Land, called the Lizard, 


which runs out to the Southward, and the other Pro- 


montory called the Lands end, make the two Angles, 


or Horns, as they are called, from whence tis ſuppoſed 
this Country received its firſt Name of Cornwall, or, as 


Mr. Camden ſays, Cornubia in the Latin, and in the 


Britiſh, Kerneu, as running out in two vaſtly extended 


Horns. 


T be Lizard Point is till more uſeful (though not ſo 


far Weſt), than the other, which is more properly called 


Fr 


De Lands end, being more frequently firſt diſcovered 
from the Sea; and is therefore the general Guide, and 

the Land which the Ships chooſe to make firſt; being 
then ſure, that they are paſt Scilly. n BOT 30 


Nature has fortified this Part of the Iſland of Britain 


in a ſtrange manner, and ſo as is worth a Travellei's 


— 


Obſervation. 


Firſt, there are the Iſlands of Scilly, and the Rocks 


about them; which are placed like Out- works to reſiſt 


the firſt Aſſaults of this nemy the Ocean, and fo break 


Water, and leflening the Weight of it? 4 5 


the Force of it; as the Piles or Stirlings (as they are 
called) are placed before the ſolid Stone- work of Len- 
don bridge, to fence off the Force, either of the Water 
or Ice, or any thing elſe that might be dangerous to 


x 


a 


Then chere are a vaſt Number of funk Rocks, beſides 


; ſuch as are viſible, and above Water ; which gradually 
lleſſen the Quantity of Water, that would otherwiſe lie 


with an infinite Weight and Force upon the Land. 


' Tis obſerved, that theſe Rocks lie under Water for a 


ö Thats or Points of Land; ſo breaking the Force of the 


3 
* 


89 n bd «xt 7 ut 


 Corny. GREAT BRTITAINx. 387 


Security. 


But beſides this, the whole Body of the Land, which 


. makes this Part of the Iſle of Britain, ſeems to be one 
ſolid Rock, as if it was formed by Nature to reſiſt the 


otherwiſe irreſiſtable Power of the Ocean. And in- 


deed, if one were to obſerve with what Fury the Sea 
comes on ſometimes againſt the Shore, eſpecially at the 


Lizard Point, where there are but few, if any, Out- 


works (as I call them) to reſiſt it; how high the Waves 
come forward, ſtorming on the Back of one another, 


particularly when the Wind blows o* ſea; one would 
wonder, that even the ſtrongeſt Rocks themſelves 


| ſhould be able to reſiſt and repel mern. Put, as Laid, * 


the Country ſeems to be one great Body of Stone, and 


prepared ſo on purpoſe. 


And yet, as if all this were not enough, Nature has 
provided another ſtrong Fence; and that is, that theſe 
vaſt Rocks are, in a manner, cemented together by the 
ſolid and weighty Ore of Tin and Copper, eſpecially 


the latter, which is plentifully ſound upon the very out- 


moſt Edge of the Land, and with which the Stones may 


be ſaid to be ſoldered together, left the Force of the Sea 


ſhould ſeparate and disjoint them, and, breaking in 
upon theſe Fortifications of the Iſland, deſtroy its chief 

This is certain, that there is a more-than ordinary 
Quantity of Tin, Copper, and Lead alſo, fixed by the 
Great Author of Nature in theſe very remote Angles ; 
ſo that the Ore is found upon the very Surface of the 
Rocks a good way into the Sea, and does not only lie, 
as it were, upon or between the Stones among the 


Earth, which in that Caſe might be waſhed from it by. 
the Sea; but is even blended or mixed in with the 


Stone themſelves, ſo that the Stones mult be ſplit into 
Pieces to come at it. By this Mixture the Rocks are 
made exceedingly weighty and ſolid, and thereby ſtill 
the more qualified to repel the Force of the Sea. 

Upon this remote Part of the Iſland we ſaw ſuch 


Numbers of that famous king of Crows, which is known 


02 | = 


388 - FL TOUR tro Cornw. 
by the Name of the Corniſb Chough : they are the ſame 
kind which are found in Switzerland among the Alps, 
and which Pliny pretended were peculiar to thoſe Moun- 
tains, and calls the Pyrrhocorax, The Body is black, 
the Legs, Feet, and Bill, of a Yellow, almoſt to a Red. 
I could not find, that it was affected for any good Qua- 
lity it had; nor is the Fleſh good to eat; for it feeds 
much on Fiſh and Carrion: it is counted little better 
than a Kite; for it is of a ravenous Nature, and is very 
miſchievous; it will ſteal and carry away any thing 
about the Houſe, that is not too heavy for it, tho* not 
fit for its Food; as Knives, Forks, Spoons, and Linen 
Cloths, or whatever it can fly away with; ſometimes, 
they ſay, it has ſtolen Bits of Firebrands, or lighted 
Candles, and lodged them in the Stacks of Corn, and 
- wy Thatch of Barns and Houſes, and ſet them on 
I might take up many Sheets in deſcribing the va- 
luable Curioſities of this little Cher/one/e, called The 
Land's end, in which lies an tmmenſe Treaſure, and 
many things worth Notice, befides thoſe to be found 
upon the Surface: but I am too near the End of this 
Letter. If I have Opportunity, I ſhall take Notice of 
ſome Part of what I omit here, in my Return by the 
Northern Shore of the County, as well as give a more 
particular Deſcription of the [les of Scilly than J have 
yet had an Opportunity to give, in the Method or 
Courſe I purſued. 125 - 


— 


1 


Entrance of the Briſtol and Britiſh Channels. They are 
. fix or ſeyen Leagues off Smith's Sound, wy Gr 


' Scilly, GREAT BRITAIN. 389 


1 „ r 


A more particular DESCRIPTION of ths 
SEFLEY ISLANDS: * 5 


6 UC H an Opportunity as I hoped-for has hap- 
) pened, and in this Letter I will perform my Pro- 


. miſe; a kind Friend having aſſiſted me in ſome of my 


Obſervations. ; 

The Sc/ly Iſlands, of which the moſt noted are 27 
in Number, lie, as I have ſaid, at about 30 Miles Dil- 
tance from Cornwall, and are thought formerly to have 
been joined to that Main Land by an Iſthmus, or Neck 


of Land, in Length of Time waſhed away by the Sea, in 


the ſame manner as Great Britain is ſuppoſed antiently 
to have been joined to France, and indeed there is ſtill 
a great Reſemblance between theſe Iſlands and Corn- 
wall, in their Culture, Plants, and otherProduce, their 
Tinnery, Fiſhery, &c. | e 
Theſe Iſlands were ealled by the antient Greets 
Heſperides and Caſſiterides, from their Weſtern Situa- 
tion, and their abounding with Tin. „The Dutch call 
them Sorlings; and in ſeveral of the Tower Records, 
and antient Manuſcripts, they are called Sully or 
Sulley, which is probably a Contraction from: inſulæ, 
as Iſle from Iſlands. 2 . | 
The Scilly Iles lie due Weſt from the Lizard Point, 
about 17 Leagues, and nearly Welt by South, from 
the Southermoſt, or old Land's-end next ount's-bay, 
ten Leagues; alſo W. S. W. from the middlemoſt or 
weſtermoſt Land's- end above nine Leagues, before the 


ſeen from the Land's-end in a clear Day, and at about 


by, 


S 3 


A TOUR tro © Scilly. 
and about 60 Fathom Water ; alſo from the North- 
ward at 60 Fathom, ouſy, ſandy Ground as far. 

Twenty-one or twenty two Leagues W. by N. and 
W. N. W. from Scully, is a Bank, on which there is 
but 50, 51, or 52 Fathom Water, but between this 
Bank and Scilly 60 Fathoms. . 1 

Beheld at a Diſtance, theſe Iſlands appear like ſo 
many high Banks in the Water, as Land uſually ap- 
pears off at Sea. But the Rocks about the Iſlands, 
eſpecially thoſe to the Weſtward, appear off at Sea 
ke old Caſtles and Churches, with the Seas alternative- 
Iv flying over them, in white Sheets, or Fleeces of that 
Element. _ 
Ae Names, Qualities, Sc. of thoſe Iſlands, whh | 
the Quantity of Land, in Acres, contained in each, may. 
be ſeen by the following Table. 


Fixe larger Ilan, inhabited * about 1400 People. 


Es Acres. 

1 Fe. Mary, — — — — 1520 

or Treſco, — — — — — 880 

3 St. Martin, — — — _ 7" "0 
,, ns 300 
8 Br. _ 88 330 
6 Sampſon, (One Fanily only) — _ 120 

Fam ſcattered Iſlands bearing Grafs. , 
7 St. Helm, — — — — 80 
5 Tean, — — — — 7 1 
9 White land, — — _ 50 
10 Annet, — — — _ 40 


Ten Eaſtern Illands ſtocked with Cates” and fit for 
| feeding Catte in Summer. | 5 


1 1 Great Arthur, — * 3 
x2 Great Ganilly, — HSE 1 
13 Great Gannick, — PW — 


14 Minewithen, 


WI Go, 


Silly. G1 REATr Bu RITAI v. 


1 3883 e Pub 3 
19 Little Arthur,. — 
17 Little Ganilly, —  —_ 
18 Little Gannick, — hin 
19 Ragged Ifland, — ua 


20 3 
Seven ſcattered Hands place about the tag. 


21 Mincarlo, 1 "IR WEE 
22 Gunhall, — — — 10 
24; Nargbuoithcel, — — „ 9 | 
24 White Hand, near ware — —_ {4 - 
25 Round 1 nd, — —— 321 its 
26 Scilly and, — ) $a ies Son $1 li 
bs N Hans, — —_,, o- 


Sum total, 42752 
| The Half, 21374 

Acres, at leaf, are tillable and improveable. 8 
VN. B. 1. the above, which are moſt noted, 


chere may be numbered about a Dozen very ſmall 
Iſlands bearing Graſs; and Rocks innumerable above 


Water. 

St. Mary's is the largeſt of the Scilly Iſlands, con- 
taining as many Houſes and Inhabitants as all the reſt. 
Its greateſt Length is about two Miles and a Half, 


middlemoſt Breadth almoſt one and a\ half, and may 
be reckoned betwixt nine and ten Miles in Dircum- 


ference. 
The Earth, or Soil, i is like that of Corals but hs, 


Air here is much wholſomer than the Air of that 
County, being ſo briſk and healthful, that Sickneſs is 
"_ ſeldom known among theſe Inhabitants. 


he Hills are rocky, riſing in ſome Places to a great 
Height, and are enriched with mineral Stores. The 


Vallies are fertile, and the Fields here, like thoſe in 
Carnwall, are incl with Stone Hedges, Allo the 


84 | healthy 


12 


* 


292 A4 TOUR h Scilly, 
healthy Plains and turfy Downs, in ſeveral Places of 
this Iſland, afford their Uſe and Pleaſure. The higheſt 
Land yields a Proſpect of Eagiand in à clear Buy and 
of Ships going out and returning at the Mouths of the 
Channels 2 ov is alſo Moraſs ground, in two Parts 
of this Ifland, called the Upper and Lower Moors, 
which ſupply the Cattle with Water in dry Seaſons. 
In the fer. of which, the fartheſt from Zugh-town, 
is a pretty large and deep Lake. 
About two Furlongs from Hugh totun, the Capital 
of Ft. Mary's, to the Eaſtwards is a curious ſandy Bay, 
called Pomelin, where the Beach, from the Mark of 
Flood to the Mark of Ebb, is covered with an exceed- 
ing fine writing Sand, and of which Ship- loads may be 
gathered at Low- water. On Account of its Plenty 
and Brightneſs, it is fetched by the Inhabitants for 
ſanding their Houſes in Hugb-toton, and other Parts of 
this Iſland ; and Preſents of it are made to many Parts 
of England, as a Curioſity, _ 
The greateſt Curioſities obſerved i in St. Mary's, are 
the Rocks of Peninnis, and à ſubterraneous Pala e 
nest them, whoſe Entrance is called Piper”s- hole: This | 
haſſsge is ſaid to communicate under Grouhd with' ths 4 
Idand of Treſco, as far as the North- welt Cliffs or. 
Hanks of it, where another Cavity is ſeen, that goes 
by the fame Name with the former. _ | 
„ Going in at the Orifice, at Peninnis Banks in Sr. 
Mary's, it is above a Man's Height, and of as much 
Space in its Breadth; but grows lower and narrower 
farther in. A little beyond which Entrance appear 
rocky Baſons, or Reſervoirs, continually running over 
wich freſh Water, deſcending, as it diftils from the 
Sides of the rocky Paſſage: By the Fall of Water heard, 
| farther in, it is probable there may be rocky De cen 8 
in the Paſſage: The Drippings from the Sides have 
t worn the Paſſage, as far as it can 2 Wen, inte ery. 
Various . Surfaces. hu BOO 


Scilly. GREAT Bri Tarn. 393 
St. Mary's Iſland is defended by a ſtrong Garriſon, 
ſituated upon the weſt Part of it, overlooking the Town 
and Iſthmus, and commanding the Country that Way 
and to the Sea, about the Batteries, of which there are 
feveral ſtrong ones, mounted with 64 Pieces of Can- 
non, ſofne of 18 Pounders. It alſo contains a Com- 
pany of Soldiers, a Maſter-gunner, and fix other Gun- 
ners, a Store-houſe, with Arms for arming 300 Iſland- 
ers, who are obliged to aſſiſt the Military Forces at 


the Approach of an Enemy; a Guard-houſe, Barracks, 


3 and ſtrong Gates: and, upon the Summit of 
the Hill, above a regular Aſcent, going from Hugh 
_ #own ſtands his Majeſty's Star- caſtle, with Ramparts 
and a Ditch about it. This Caſtle commands a Pro- 
ſpect of all the Iſlands and Seas about them; from 
whence, in a fair Day, are alſo beheld Ships paſſing to 
and fro, and England, as though riſing out of the Sea, at 
a Diftance. Here the King's Colours are hoifted, 
and appear conſpicuous aloft, for Ships to obſerve and 

obey coming in. The Right Hon. the Earl of Godol. 
Ppbin, who is alſo Proprietor, commands as Governor 
of all the Iflands; and a Lieutenant-Governor is here 
commiſſioned to act under his Lordſhip by his Majeſty, 
but not upon Eſtabliſhment. - The Captain of the 
Company commands in his Lordſhip's and the Lieu- 
tenant-Governor's Abſence, who never reſide there. 

About a Mile S. W. of the South-part of Sz. Mary's 
Garriſon, lies St. Agnes Iſland, otherwiſe called the 
 Light-houſe Ifland, upon which ſtands a very high and 
ſtrong Light-houſe, ſeen in the Night at a great Diſ- 
tance, by which Ships going out of, or coming into 
the two Channels, avoid falling in with the Rocks, 
lying thicker about this than any other of the Serlly 
Tflands. It is alſo of Uſe to all coaſting Veſſels 
croſſing the Channels. There is nothing particular. 
in the Soil of this Iſland, different from the reſt of the 
Uands, (being, in that 1 very much alike), * 


6 AaFOUR aw: Scilly, 
of the Dwellings, or Defcription of Places, except the 
Light-keeper's Habitation and Employment, a Church 
in Uſe for Devotion, and ſuch like. tu 

About three Miles and a Half northerly of the moſt 
Northern Part of St. Agnes's Iſland, or two Miles nor- 
therly from St. Mary's Key, lies the Iſland of Treſco, 
the capital Town of which is called the Dolphin, (pro- 
bdably from Gadolphin), conſiſting of a Church, and 
about Half a Score Stone - built Houſes, after the man- 
ner of thoſe built in St. Mary's Iſland. And near the 
Landing place of Treſco, in Sight of New Grimſby 
Harbour, ftands a Dwelling called Treſco- Palace. This 
formerly uſed to be a Houſe of Reſort for Maſters of 
1 Ships, and Strangers coming to this Iſland; but the 
1 Cuftom has ſome time been altered to a Houſe of bet- 
ter Accommodation, inhabited by Mr. Samuel Blythe, 
farther up the Ifland. Hereabouts are ſeveral ſcattered 
Stone- built Houſes inhabited by labouring People. 
About two Miles from the Northermoſt Part of St. 
Mary's, or one from the Eaftermoſt Part of Treſco, lies 
the Iſland of St. Martin; upon the Extremity of 
which, at the outermoſt Part, ſtands a Day-mark, next 
the coming in of Croto- ſaund, appearing at a Diſtance, 
as conſpicuous by Day, as the Light-houſe upon St. 
Agnes, but is not altogether ſo high and large. It is 
built with Rock-ſtone, equally round next the. Bot- 
tom, and tapering upwards. This ſerves to direct 
Veſſels crofling the Channels, or coming into Scilly. 

 _ » Almoſt Half a Mile from the Weſt-lide of Treſco 

Iſland, to the Weſtward of the Landing - place, lies the 

Ifland of Bryer, which is inhabited by ſeveral Families, 
ſome of a generous Diſpoſition, and Perſons of able 

Circumſtances. © F 

Samphir, and many Kinds of medicinal Herbs grow-ẽ 

here, as in ſeveral of the other Iſlandes. 
Tbe Number of People upon the Iſland of St. Mary 

are about 700, including Men, Women, and * 
5 ob . dren, 


dren, and about as many in the Iſlands of Treſco, St. 
Mariin, Bryer, St. Agnes, and Sampſon; in the laſt 
and ſmalleſt of which inhabited Iſlands, lives but one 
_— which goes to the Places of Worſhip in the 
other Iſlands ; here being no Opportunity of public 
8 nor of Communication, but by means of a 
The Men are loyal Subjects, endowed with much 


natural Strength of Body and Mind, giving Proofs of 


their Fortitude in bearing Fatigues and Hardſhips; are 
very good Seamen and Pilots ; and want only an Op- 
portunity of Education, to render themſelves more ufe- 
ful Subjects. „ e 
The Women are very dextrous in the Uſe of the 
Needle, and alſa in Talents of good Houſewifery ; nor 
do they want Beauty, and other engaging Qualities to 
recommend them. uh dre oo wen 
I have. already ſaid, that Sir Cloudeſiey Shovel was 
loſt near, theſe Ulands, in his Return from Toulon 
It was upon the Gion Rock, Oclaber 22, 170%, 
and not upon the Biſbop and Clerks,. as by ſome 
have been repreſented. It was thick foggy Weather, 
when the whole Fleet in Company, coming fas tley 
thought) near the Land, agreed to lie to in the After- 


noonz but Sir Cloudſſey, in the Aſſociation, ordering 
. Sail to be made, firſt ſtruck in the Night, and ſunk. 


immediately. Several Perſons of Diſtinction being on 

board at that time were loſt ; particularly the Lady 

ShovePs two Sons by her former Huſband, 8 

Narborough, with about 800 Men. The Eagle, Capt. 

Hancoch, Commander, underwent the ſame Fate. 
The Romney and Firebrand alſo ftruck and were loſt;, 
but the two Captains and 25 of their Men were ſaved. 

The other Men of War in Company eſcaped, by bav-- 
ing timely Notice. „„ Eno OS 


S 6 


P. 1 ze . Up 22. Fer Colcheſter, the Tela of the Ro- 
mans according to Mr. Salmon, e, Colcheſ- 
ter, the Colonia, or Etinukodunem of che 
8 Romans. 
v. 40. 85 Fer from Woodbridge, read to Wood: 
ri 
P. 217. L. 8 late Biſho _— 
A 226. L. 21. Read late N * 


* 
2 


2 * 74 


* 


Ambreſbury 276. The Duke 
of Queeniberry's Seat there 


5+] 277 
Andover „ 
Appledore 176 
Appledore come 2216 


Arun, River 195. In ewhat 
rioſpect advantageous i bid. 
© Famous for its Mullets ib. 
Arundel 194. An extraor- 

dinary Privilege belonging 


yo its Cale 195 


FIRST VOLUME, 


A Aſhburton 339 
Bbotſbury 327 Audley-Inn, Bi fgtorically de. 
Aldburgh 48 rib  * . * ans 
Aldermaſton . 259 Axminſter 344. A memora- 
Alresford 260. Burnt and le Victory there ibid. 
| re-edified ibid. 4 Roman = 4 
Road here ib, A Seat of B. 
the Duke of Bolton's in its | „ 
. Neighbourhood 261 Bacon, Sir Nicholas, his /ite- 
Alſham 70 rary Foundation 39 
Amt. 216 


Bagſhot- heath us Seats on 
Habe con- 


it, ibid. A 
. Cerning its Mutton 220 
Banſtead-downs , 244 
Barking, an Account of its 


and the neighbouring Coun- 


ty P | 
Barrows, the antient, /ome 
curious Particulars relating 


io them 288, 293 
Bafing: houſe, once a famous 
Fortreſs „ 
Baſingſtoke 257, 258 
. Battle 

6 


* i boy : g f 
P 2 l 2 
OI FAY. ERS q : 
3 F enen Me Io r n . b 8 — | 
1 Tow a = — 2 — 8 — — — - 
5 N * — wept 2s MEN > every - — 


Black- tail, an excellent Fi- 
ao” 


Blandford : 330. Famoui for 
* Bone-lace, ibid. Burnt and 


; re-edified : | 331 
Bleechingliy 237 
Blichburgh 5 
Bocking 116 


Boſom, Church of 75 
Botſdale s 
: Bow, its ManufaBery for 


| Porcelane 
Boxford 885 1 * 

Box-hill # 232 
Braintree 241, 116 
Bramber 193. 17 Caftle 
1 194 
Rrancuſto | "v3 
Brandon K 


Brankſey, and if 318 


Brentwood es 


Bridge, at Stanes, Als re- 
lating to it LS 


Bridges, Mr. bis Houſe de- 
* feribed „ « ol 


(UND E X. 


Battle-Abbey 1583 Bridport ox. 
uns the Tor own ibid.  Briththelmſton 192 
avord · caſtle, a royal Enter- Brixham, a nene | 
tainment there 149 there 363 
Beaulieu. OM —_ -- a0 
1 180 Poe 5 
Bevis, an Account of him 214 Bude- 3 368 
Bevis mount 213. Fieh Bungay 748 . 
improved by Lord Peter- Bures 37 
| borough . Burgh-caſtle 49 
Bildeffton 33 Burnhams, he Seven 71 
Billericay _ 21 Burnham-Overy ib. 
Bird's- neſt ren 145 Burwel, "memorable for ' a 
Black- heath 127 _ dreadful Accident 9% 
Blackney —- Bury St. Edmunds 33. 
Black Notley | 116 Account of its Abbey, 2 


A barbarous AN Midi 


there N 35 

Buſſelton 5 

Butley, en Ruins | 

there _ 46 

7 228 
C. 


Cambrid peſhire, fertile of 


Grain 86. Void of Manu- 


ä Facture. 87. Its Fens d- 
76, 


 ſeribed © 
Cimbiidge; e, of 66, 111 
Cambridge - caſtle 110 
Candy iſland - & 3 
Canterbury * 156 
Carews, their Wanfion bu 
deſeribed © 240 
Carifbrook.caſtle 215 
o ge 
Caſtle riſing 72 


St. Catharine's hill 224 
St. Catharine's Chapel 3b. 
Cattle, à commodious Method 


of 


of feeding them 51. 
great Number ſent annually 


from Scotland 60 
 —_ 70 
Cavendiſn 37 
Caxton * 5 
Chagford 


Chalk hills, the Rubbi * 
- them valuable 132 
Charing 155 
Charity, an excellent one 30 
Charleoen vo 
Charlton 129. A fine Houſe 
there 130. Noted for that 
vile Rout, Horn Fair 138 


Chatham 138. The Ar/enal + 


there deſcribed 1 39: The 
Government of the Work- 
yards 140. Extraordinary 
Expedition occaſionally uſed 


there 141. New Fortifi- 
cations there 142 
Chelmsford 21 
Chertſey „ 
Cheſilhurſt 133. Remarka- 
Ble fer Camden” 8 . 
ibid, 
© . Antiquities near 
115 
Chicheſter 197. 4 Roman 


Inſcription found there 198. 

Its Trade improved, ibid. 
A Fort, and a remarkable 
Church in the Road to it 


199 
| Chilmark, 4 Quar- 


1 304 
Chriſtchurch FI 
_ Clare 37 
Claremont 243 


Clarendon, Seat 27 the Ruins 


IN. Da E 
The 


. Corniſh. Chough 


Ti 
of a Camp and Palace nar 
* 303 
. 6 


Cleer (St.) 372. An 25 
tiquity there 37 3. Curioſi- 
ties near it ibid. and 382 

Clye 1590 

Coaſt, a v dangerous one 
deſcribed. 66. A dreadful 
Shipwreck thereow 68 

Cobham, Seats in the Neigh- 


bourhood of © 228 
Cobham-hall 149 
Coggeſhal A 
Coke 8 Jis atro- 

cious Villai c 
Colcheſter ug 4 
Colcheſter-water 77 8 


Colerain, Lord, his Seat 312 
Corf-caſtle 320 
388 
Cornwal, ame Account of it 
369. Whence its Name 
386. A4 Character of the 
Corniſh Gentry 372 
Cotman:Dean  _ 23x 


 Cowdry, belonging to Lord 


Montacute, de/eribed 196 


Cowes. 215 
Cranbrook. N. 177 'YF 
Criſp, Edward, affnated —_— 
5 3 

Cromere | bg 

Croydon - 240 

D. ; 

Dagenham- Breach 5 


Darcy, Sir Conyers, bis Seat 
226 
Darking 231. ts Market 


232 
« "Sy, 2 2. 5 

"+", 
4 ; 4 © a : l * : : 
* * Ah 


and Fair 


Dy 


1 N D E X. 


Dartford 134 


8 Dartmouth, its Harbour de- 


ſeribed 361. Brawvely de- 


fended by Women 362 
Deal 166, 168. ts Caſtle 

| 5 ibid. 

; am 40 
Deepden 232 
Na, | 176 
Deptford 123 


Devonſhire, a general De- 


ſcription of it 340, 343. E 


Abound with Manufac- 
tures 340, 345. And with 


| gonty © People, 348. I. 
Court of Stannary 359 5 
Doddington, Come, uit E/4; 


his Seat 31 
Dotchefter 321. 4 Roman 


eee near it 322. 


"The /jurrounding Downs 


excellent Paſture, abound- 
53-3 


ing with Sheep 
etſhire, ts natural Ex- 
cellencies | 330 
Dover 169. Tt; Cafth 170 
Its Cliffs, ibid. Curioſities 


in and about it 171 
Downham N 
Downs, the, 167. Dreadful 
E feds 5 Storm there ib. 
Dulwich- Wells 238 
| Danmow IT. gs ts | 
old Cuſſem beg. 
a ES 43 
Durdans, Lord North. and. 
Guild ford' Seat 242 
Dyke, the Devils 86 
Dyſert, late Lerd, his Houſe, 
246 
Kafthamflead Park 220 


Eaſtbury, the 2200 Feat * 


Mr. Doddi 331 
Eaſt-Loe 88 376 
Kiton. . a5 


Eddyſtone Light-houſe a 


Egham CauſAuay, Ads re- 


lating to it 221 
Eltham 133 
Ely, e of 82 


Ely, City of 83. Its Minſter 


ruinous, ibid. Reflection, 
thereon ibid, 
Encampments, Roman 310 


Epſom 241 
Ether 243 
_ Eſſex, be Three Hundreds, 
fatal to Wiwes "T1 
Efterbergholt 38 
Evelyn, Sir John, bis Seat 
 deferibed 236 
Exeter 346 & fe. 
ö 
N F. N 
Faith's, Sr. 70 
Fakenham \ 435. 


Falmouth, its illicit Trafick 
378. An odd Account of _ 
1. Rife 1 
Falmouth. haven 376. Con- 


Aderable Places on it 377 


Farlo + SY 
Farnham 217. The Caſtle 
an LEE opal Palace 


ibid, 
Fel tied 418 
Fetcham 226 


Feverſham 150. K. Stephen 
buried there 151. King 


James II. ſeized in the 
Port, ibid, Notoricus for 
Smuggling 7b. 

Feverſham, 


Feverſham, Lord, bis Seat 


E 310 
Folk ſtone 173 
Ford · abbey 344 
Fordington 


| the 32 
Forreſt, Epping, its Extent 
and Antiquity 24 
F owey, the River, 372, 374 


Fowey, the Town 373 
Fox lane, Mr. his Scat 226 
Fox, Sir Stephen, his 8 

ation. 
Framlingham ap 

G. 
Gad's-hill 137 
Gatton 237 
Germains, Sc. 397} 7 
Gillingham-caſtle 145 
Godalmin 3 * 
Godolchan ; 383 
Sodſtone : 237 


Goodwood, the Duke of Rich- 


 mond's Seat 196, 199 
Goſport - 209 
Grampound 380 
SGravel-Pits 1 
Graveſend 134. Regula- 


tions in respect of its Boats 
136. Cuſtoms in regard 
to the Departure of Ships 
From thence ibid. 


Greenwich 124 & /eq. 
Greſham 70 
Guilford 222. An Aceident 

223, A ſingular Road 


from thence 224. Other 
Ane Read: from it 224 & 


Ft 


NM. 

Foggy mk 4 + Renton 

| Cauſeway IEEE there" 
Hadley © 37 RE 
Haleſworth 47 
Haling 1 
Hall down _ 36 
Halnaker, belonging to the 

Counteſs of ah 200 
Halſted « YE" 
Ham 246 


Hampſhire, he State of the - 
Sea-coaſt, Weſt 315 

_ Hampton-court 252 

Harold, King, his Grave 


121 
s, Lord, his Seat 
1. 247. 
Harwick 7 a 
Haſtings 182 
Havant | 21x, 
_ Haverhill © 3 
Helens, S:. 216 
H elford 381 
Helſton ibid. 
Henault- foreſt 4, 24 


Hengiſt, e Saxon, an In- 


fance of his Ferſiqy 3 


Hickling 


| 70 
Hitcham, Sir Richard, his 


1 
334 


Foundations © 

Hoare, Mr. his Seat 
Hogmagog-Hills — 
Hokham 5 
Holmward | or Holmſdale 
We | 5 255 
Halt. = 

Holt, Sir John, the ufer. 


tton on bis Monument 355 5 
| Honed aon 


Part of it 153. The pre- 
| ſent State of its Manu- 
 Jaures ibid. Its Weight 
in Election: 154 
Kettſcotty Houſe. 155 
Kilmington 344 
Kingbarrow 289, 309 | 
EKingſclere | 259 
King' s ferry, the Fund for 
its Maintammance 147 
Kingſton, Surry . 242 
Knowl- houſe „ 


INDEX; 


Honedon * i 37 : tt 
Honiton 345. The Beauty VVV 
its Situation 346 Languard- Fort 20 
Horn- fair, its Origin 129 Land's end iſ 4 386 
Horſeheath hall 112 Lavenham 32 
HFlothfiele 177 Lavington- Creek W703 
IT Houghton, deſcribed 72. The Layton- ſtone 21 
Mferiptien on its Feunda- Leatherhead 13995 
tion Stone 73. A magnifi- Ledgate gy. 
cent E ntertainment there Leit -hill, bord! 4 b icicus 
35 „„ M., ©: 233 
Hoxne . Leoſtoff 53 
Hugh- town 392 Lenham N 155 
Hythe r94 Lead - 370 
5 5 Leſtwithiel 37 
E Letheringham 3 
Iekworth 3 Deer 39 Fi : i 
Ingatſtone 
lngatlione . 118 1 Earl 15 bi fur 
8 Inigo, cenſured 263 I inton . Rot = | 
pſwich 25. Mr. Fonne- tcham 80 
reau' Seat near it 29 iittlele | = 
8 +) 215· Once 6 Lizard Point : 386 | 
i * 5 ord,” the Seat of Lord 
Rn . L wy 95 309 
k on Low-Layton "8 
| E: : Ludoe's-Hole 218 
ee I 70 Lyme Regis 328 
Kent, a Cbaracter of 5 Lymington . | 315 


Lynn ts extenſive Nawiga- 
tion and Traffick 74 The 
Town amply deſcribed 76. 

A laudable Order relating 
to it 77. The Corporation's 
Flattery 78. Public Li- 


M. 


Maidſtone, its Produce and 
 Manafaftures 152. A 


Peculiar 


er 1 409 


—— Snot fd £4 £4 


> Wy tw 


| Peculi zr of the See of Can- 
terbury 154. Curioſities 
Found there 

| Malden 12 
Malden- water, how formed 


7. How far db 12 


Malden-hall 39 
Maningtree 25 
Mare worth caſtle 155 
Margate 160 

 Market-Jew 381 

Martin's-hall Hill, a Roman 

Camp and fine Preſpect 311 
Maryland-Point 2. 3 

Maws, Sz. 377 

Medway River. Its Oyfter 


Fiſhery 143. An excellent 


Harbour 144. Ad to 
| make it navigable 190 
Mielcomb-Regis 35 
 Melford | 32 
Membury 44 
_ Mendleſham "_ 
Merſey, its advantageous Si- 
tuation . 
Merſh Bd - 
Mile end 4 
Milton, famous for Oyſters 
149 
Mole, River 228 


Moore, Arthur, Eq; his 


Seat 226 
Morden. college 128 
More park 218 

Mount's bay 383 
Mutton, right Marſ 5 
+00 

| Naſe, the | 16 
38 


Needham 


INDEX 


ibid. 


Newenden „ 7 
New-foreſt 312. 4 75 
of peopling it 313. 
Newhaveen 192 
Newmarket, Reffections on 
the Races oh Laws for 


their Regulation, and fine 

Seats in its Neighbour- _ 
Boo 84 E /g. 
Newport 215 
Newtonbuſhel 357 
Neyland 31 


Nonſuch, once a Regal Pa- 


| lace, now a Farm gre 


Norfolk, its Populouſneſs 25 | 


Manufa@ures 54 
Nenn. -Foreland 16, 161 

orth-Waltham 70 
Norton | 38 


Norton, Richard, E/q; his. 
2 * 211. His Seat 


ibid. 

Norwich _ 

N _ F008 

By O. Ns 

Ockham, 2 King ; Stat 

_ - 

Old Sarum _- 295: 

Onſlow, Lord, his Seat 226 

Orford 4 
Orfordneſs 


Oſey, or Oſyth land 
Oyſters, Colcheſter, an Ac- 


count of few 8, 10- 
. 
Page, Sir GN his Seat 


mm WY 


* Pain- 


Ottery, Sr. Mary 6 | 9 


Parſons, Mr. his Seat, 236 


184 

Peckham, Gland Trevor's 

Seat there _ = $9 
Pendennis $97. 

Peninnis, Rocks of 392 

Penryn 380 

Penſance 381. Druid Tem- 


ples in its Neighbourhood 
382, Remarkable Stones 
near it | 
 - Petersfield 5 
Petworth 196. Lord Egre- 
mont Seat there ibid. 
Pevereil, Randolph, Accout 


of him and his Lady 
| Piper s-hole 392 
Pitt, Mrs. Lora, à noble In- 
Aance of ber Public . 
edneſi 322 
Plaiſtow „ 3 
Plymouth : 88 
Plympton 359, 363 


Pomelin- beach, covered auiih 
a curious writing Sand 392 
Pool 318 

Port 7 London, its Extent 
determine 
Port of Sandwich, its Ap- 
pendages 


| 17 
R_ 2 Ipſwich, zts s Append: 


% ; I 7 
| ee Ihe ef, 325 
Portcheſter- caitle 202 


Portman, Mr. his Clif 332 


Portmore, Lord, his Seat 244 
202 


Portſdown Hills 
6 Portſmouth, its Hawen, in- 


1 N D E x. 


'Painkhl Improvements there 
227 


5 Faſture, Foffil Trees in one 


ibid. 
418 


25 25 


16 


Ouyſter Fiſpery 
by cluding the. Docks and. 


Tard, elbe 202. The 
2 Condition and Government 
of. the Town 207. The 
_ of the Country, pi 
it 209 
Poultry, a Method of Supply 


ing London with warious 


Sorts +48 
Powderh am-caſile 356 
Purbeck, e of 320 


Purfleet, 4% for a Powder 
. Magazine there "AP 
Putney, Refledtions occaſioned 


by the Bowling - green 
Houſe there =_ 
Pyrford, a fine Scat 227 
Q 
a | 2216 
Quareley- hills 276 
Queenborough 148 
R. 
Ramſgate \ d62 
yd aa John, his Epitaph 
„ 
Raynham | 21 
Reepham 70 
Rendelſham, a valuable An- 
tiguity found there 46 
Richborough-caſtle 164. 
Antiquities there 165 
Richmond 248 
Ringwaod 317 
Riverhead 238 
Rocheſter, its Bridge, 138 


The Town and Cafile ibid. 
Its. Markets, Fairs, and 


143 


Roc Mo Lord, the burning 
i 


/ his Houſe, the Cauſe of 
1 irreparable Loſs 246 


1 249 

Romney 176. An Inunda- 
tion there ibid. 

Romney marſh, excellent 
Paſture „ 


Romſey 


274 
Roodings, The, why fo called + 


120; 
Rumford Bf "5 


Ruſſel, Admiral, his Seat 8 3 
Rye, it. * 178. The 
en State of the Town 

=", ba 

Rygate , 236 


8. 


Saffron- Walden 213 
Saliſbury 296, 297. Fine 


Monuments in it 301. The 


Cooper and Chapter-houſe 
302 

Saliſbury Plains 294 
Saltaſh 309 


Saltwood- caſtle, an Abbie: 
pi ſcopal Seat 175 


Sandfoot· caſtie 325 
Sandgate - caſtle 174 
Sandow, caſtle 169 
Sandwich 165 
„„ v 
Sanham 215 


Scilly, Racks of, 384. 4 


kind of natural Fortifica- 
tion 386. 
with Tin and Copper, he 
7 CT IS 
Scilly, Mandl of, a particu- 
lar Deſeripti on of them 


© 339-395 
| Seaford e 


IN D E X. 


Seckford, Thomas, bi Fa | 

rary Foundation: | 41_ 
'Sevenoaic „ 189 
Shafteſbury 334. An In. 


Impregnated 


_ of popular Ingrati- 


ibid. 


Shafteſbury, Lord, hit Place 


of Retirement 236, A 
Seat of Bis 317 
Sheen, Lord Palmerſton's 
Seat iber. 8 


Sheerneſs 145, 146 
Shepey iſle, its Produce 146 
Shireburne 333 
| Shoe-beacon a 
| Shooter's-hill, 128. Its Sail 
2d Produce 2 
Shoreham | 


K. 192 
Shovel, Sir Cloudeſly 165 | 


 Shrawton, Curio/ty at 288 C 
Silcheſter 259. Remains of” 
an Amphitheatre mear it 


260 
Sittingbourne 149. A Trea- 


ſure found in its Neigh- 


bourhood 159 


Snape 46 
ooo 4. 
Soleby | 


Somerſetſhire, a aun / 


its Dialect 338 


Southampton 210 2 eg. 


Southcote, Philip Eis Bis 


Seat | > ; 248 
South-Foreland +4 JF 


| Southwark © 25 


Southwould 


' South- Yarmouth 215 


Spee 8 
Spithedd 215 
; Squirties, a Gentleman' s Seat 
| 237 


Stanar 


. 


- ; Soft 
: 1 2 2 ? 5 OLE 1 * 1 ry RY . 2 4 
FFT EC Ee . AC Ds ISA q are 
1 N * * p 4 mo as, 
r ˙ . RE EC. 


PPP. / — 88 


| Stanar 
Stane-ſtreet 175 
( Stanſted Lescisbedagl- s 
. Seat © | 201 
- Steyning 5 
Stoke juxta Neyland 37 


Stokebridge, @ merry Stra- 


tagen of Sir Richard 
Steel's there 275 
Stone - henge 477 
Stoney-ſtreet 231 

Stour, River 3 416 

Stourbridge 333 


| Stourton, the Seat of M.. 


Hoare | 334 
Stow market 38 
Stratford 2,338 
Sturbridge Fair 89 &. ſeg. 
Sudbourne 46 
"Sudbury 31 
| * Suffolk, famous for. Turkies 
3 51 
| Suffolk, High, its Produce 

41 


- Suſſex, the maritime Part 


| agſcribed 183. The in- 


land Part produftive of 


oy  waſt Plenty of great Tim- 


Ber 190 
* Swallows, 1 Cir- 


relating to them 
5 f 5 O 


: Tavitock 359. I Abbey 
r 3560. Part of its Endow- 
ment guilefully 


+ ibid. 
5 833 BY 5 + 0h 
' Thames, River, its Banks 
: moſt nobly adorned 250 
* Thane? He: of, a oy 


3 its Inhabitants 
« K 7 - % ; _ * : $ 
* * Ly 1 2 s 


* N D E X. 
| __ 


obtained | 


160 


Thaxted WOES | 
Theobald Simon, an Ac- 
count of him 31 
Thetfo 31. 0 
Thorndon 118 
Thorney 82 
Fichaald -. 210 
Tilbury-Fort 0 
Torbay 32 
ö . Totnels, the manner of fb 

ing therg © "107 
Tregon x 379 
Trewardreth . Town "and 
Bay 376 
Trinity houſe 123 

AT. <1. 299 
Tunbridge 185 


Tunbridge-Wells 185, 186, 


"The Mun, of the Fo aters 


187 

IU. 
3 * . Bis 
Seat | i440 

- Ufford \ | 


45 
' Univerſity” of . Cambridge 


its Government 96. It 
Antiquity ibid. An Ac- 
count of its Colleges, 97 & 
5 Of its School; 103. . 
its Library 104. Late 
Benefactions of Books: A 
fine Statue ibid: A Pro- 
ee of Hiſtory 106 : 
A Provijion at Whitehall 
ibid.: A fine Statne of the 
Duke of Somerſet, late 


.- Chancellor ibid: & new © 


public Library 108 : Other 
Benefactions to the Uni- 

verſity 109. 4 Profeſſor: 
"Ship 


nn ” 


ſip of Natural Phi x 


{110 v 


128 bis Sepulchre 161 
Upnor-caſtle 21435 
Upton 155 1 g'7 


Waidfleet, Biſhop 268 


Walberſwick 44 
Walmer caſtle 169 
Walſinghhaam * 72 
Waltham abbeßx 9 | 
_ Walthamſtow  _ 
Walton, 41. eee | 


and wrought there 17. A 
noble Briage aſcribed 244 


Wandell,' River 241 

Wanſted 3 

Wanſted-houſe 121 
Warblington 211 

Wareham 320 


Waveney, River, a remark- 
able „ in its 
Courſe A fabulous 
Story re 5 to it 


Waverley-abbey, the Seat of 


Thomas Orby Hunter, 


Em —- £ 219 
Wells | | 70 
Weſterkam 237 * 
Weſtham 3 
Weſtloe -- 376 


| 5 Weybridge, the "Ora 


thereabouts * 24 


. es. 
15 Wey burn. Hope DR 
Weyhill 276 
Weymouth „ 
Whalebone | 4. 
Whitchurch * . 


* DRY” : ERS dt add ** 8 ** p . 
- : 9 9 n 3 K — * 
- < 2) 1 8 * N W 
N : IS WL — e FS, 
n = ONE ** £4 8 
* * e 3 2 
4 
* bY 4 1 — * 
* 1 2 
1 =. a 
FS (> t 
P35 % 
75 


| Whitgit, ArchbiſapjanBy- 
doaument fh]; 2240 

- Whitſtaple _ 160 
Wickham Market > | 45 
Wild-fowl, where bred in 


vat Numbeet 821 
William of Wickham, a 


hiflorical Character of bim ; 


- 267 
Wilton 304. 45 Account o 
Wilton Houſe 305. The 
' Road from Why to 


| Shafteſbury de/cribed 3 10. 
The Manufatture at Wil- 
ton | 312 


Wiltſhire, the Ss Face 


of it 303. Abounding with 


antique Remains, - 310 
Wimburn 316. 7 be Gran- 
deur of its Church, ibid. 
Remarkable Monuments in 
that Edifice 317 
Wimple- hall 111 
Winchelſea, O14 and New 


181. An expenſive Elec- 


tion for it 194 
Wincheſter 261. I, Ca- 
thedral deſcribed 262. The 


Altar-piece cenſured 204. 


Curious Monuments in > 
Church 265 & fg. A 

Account of the Calls 4 5 
Coo Saen e far 
the Clergy 270. "Its antient 
Caſtle 271. 
Palace ibid. Other public 


Eidifices in this City, and, © 
it: Neighbourhood 272, ; 
273: Reflections on a Mi-. 
application of Gharity 27 274 


Wingham 


7, 88 


| {x 7 * 1 
e N 88 1 , 0" 3 
* 1 n S n W Ira 8 na Rte o 
-S wad ES 4 2a SSS CE, 
1 s IL e 1 
OE R 55 : 


me os os Fer 


The Royal 


Winſtanly, + 


wirs. . commemioria- 
ted 115. His e Fate ti | mended 263. His Deferip- 


5 Wool, a Pocket of, its Signi- 


| © feeation 92 
. Woolwich, 131. 4 = 
mee F the Land between 
it and Gravelend 0 132 
Worſted | - 50 
. Wotton 236 


Wren, Lie Chrittoptier, com- 


=: "304 7, tion af the ns” > 
-Wiſbich | D Ai 82 830 n dis en 
> "Witham ” FINBIA. = n 
Wobourn- farm = Co 
2 Woelfleet, e. Bank. RY 
„ Waking ©: - 222 
Woodbourne, an A/af/in 35 de 6 I Fipu 5 
Woodbridge 40 and exten/ive Traffick 62. 
© Woodford 2, 3 © A Character of the lubabi- 


tant, 63. The Regularity 
: of its Structure G5. 
Civil Government ibid; It. 
dangerous Read for Ship- 


ping 66 £7 fe 7 - 
Yoevil 338. It Manufac- 
ture aud Trad. 1d. 


= | 


Tee -- 


. 
— - Rr Tre ty ug . ̃ . 


* 
o 
« 
* 
* 
4 ad 
IT 
o 
U 0 
” * 1 
f oq . g 
o 
” % 
» ” 
{ 
* 
* 
A 
i 
© . 
2 . 
5 / 
* E , 
1 . — 
F . 
f x 
' 
5 4 
' 
* * 
4 » 
* 
. 
— 
A 
— 
— * - 
« 
. « 
0 
, 5 
. 
< 
q 
- „ . 
* 
, - U 
* * 
* _ 
4 I 
* . 22 
* eg” 1 * 2 3 —— —— —— 
- . 
* E . — 
1 4 
' N « 
4 ry A 
—


==================== VOLUME BREAK ====================

TO      U      R 

Thro'  the  Whole  ISLAND  of 

GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Divided  into 

CIRCUITS   or  JOURNIES, 


Containing, 


I.  A  DESCRIPTION  of  the 
Principal  Cities   and  Towns, 
their  Situation,  Government, 
arid  Commerce. 

II.  The  Cuftoms,  Manners,  Ex- 
ercifes,   Diver/Ions,  and  Em- 
ployments, of  the  People. 

III.  The  Nature  andVirtue  of  the 
many  medicinal  Springs  with 
which  b  th  Parts  of  the  united 
Kingdom  abound-,  particularly 
thofe  of  Bath,  Tunbridge}  Bri- 
ftol,  Cheltenham,  Moff.it,  &c.' 

IV.  An   ample  Defcriptign    of 
London,  including  Weftmftifter 
and  Soutbtvark,  their  Bridges, 
Squares,  Hofpitals,  Churches, 

Interfperfed  witbUfeful  OBSERVATIONS. 

Particularly  fitted  for  the  Perufal  of  fuch  as  defire  to 

Travel  over  the  I  S  L  A  N  D. 


Palaces,  Markets, Schools,  Li- 
braries, Shipping  in  th^Tbames, 
and'Trade,  by  means  01  that 
noble  River,  &c, 

V.  The  Produce  and  Improve- 
ment of  the  Lands,  the  Trade 
and  Manufactures. 

VI.  TheSea  Ports  and  Fortifica- 
tions, the  Courfe  of  Rivers,  and 
the  Inland  Navigation, 

VII.  The  Public  Edifices,  Seat?, 
and  Palaces,  of  the  NOB  j  n  T  Y 

.    and  GENTRY. 

VIII.  The  Ifles  of  Wight,  Scilfy, 
Portland,    Jerfey,     Guernfey, 
and  the  *\hvcEitgli]h  a 

moft  Note. 


By  a  GENTLEMAN. 


The    SIXTH     EDITION. 

With  very  great  Additions,  Improvements,  and  C9rreftions  j    which 
bring  it  Hown  to  the  Year  1761. 

In  FOUR   VOLUMES. 

With  an  INDEX  to  each  Volume. 

__  _  VOL.      II.  _ 

LONDON:  ~ 

Printed  for  D.  BROWNE,  T.  Os  BORNE,  C.  HITCH  and 

L.  HAWES,  A.MILLAR,  J.BUCKLAND,    J.  RIVING- 

TON,  T.  LONGMAN,    T.  LOWNDS,    T.  CASLON,   and 

G.  KEARSLEY. 

IV/T  nr-r<  T  vr  ~ 


CONTENTS 


TO 


VOLUME    II. 


LETTER    I. 

Definition  of  the  North  Sbores  of  the 
Counties  ^'Cornwall  and  Devon,  and  fomt 
Parts  of  Somerfetfhire,  Wiitfhire,  Dorfet- 
Ihire,  Gloucefterfhire,  Buckinghamlhire,  and 
Berklhire.  Page  i 

LETTER    II. 

Defcription  of  the  City  of  London,  as  taking 
in  the  City  of  Weftminfter,  Borough  of  SoudPN, 
\vark,  and  the  Buildings  circumjacent.      (  87     » 

LETTER    III. 

A  Defcription  of  Part  of  Middlefex,  and  of  the 
whole  County  <?/ Hertford.  161 

LET- 


Lv  CONTENTS. 

LETTER    IV. 

A  Description  of  Part  of  Buckinghamfhire, 
Oxfordihire,  Wiltfhire,  and  Gloucefter- 
Ihire.  214 

LETTER    V. 

A  Description  of  Part  of  the  Counties  0/"Somer- 
let,  Gloucester,  Warwick,  Worcefter,  Here- 
ford, and  Mon  mouth.  285 

LETTER    VI. 

A  pcfcription  of  the  greateft  Part  of  the  Prin- 
cipality of  Wales.  346 

LETTER    VII. 

A  Defcription^  of  Part  of  Chefhire,  Shropfhire, 
Staffordfhire,  Warwickfhire,  Northampton- 
fhire,  Nottinghamlhire,  and  Leiceiterfhire. 


TOUR 

Through  the  ISLAND  of 

REAT  BRITAIN. 


VOL.     II. 


LETTER     I. 

Containing  ^DESCRIPTION  of  the  North 
Shores  of  the  Counties  of  Cornwall  and 
Devon,  and  fame  Parts  0/*SomerJ(etfliire, 
Wiltshire,  Dorfetfliire,  Gloucefterfhire, 
Buckinglurnfhire,  and  Berkdiire. 

SIR, 

NOW  turned  to  the  Eaft;  and  as,  when 
I  went  Weft,  I  kept  to  the  Southern 
Coaft  of  this  long  County  of  Cornwall, 
and  of  Devon/hire  likewife,  fo,  in  going 
Eaft,  I  (hall  keep  the  North  Shore. 
The  firft  Place  of  any  Note  we  came  to,  was  St. 
st  a  pretty  good  Town,  and  grown  rich  by  the 
VOL.  II.  B  Fiihini 


2  A  T  O  U  R  tiro  Cornw. 

Fifhing  Trade.  It  is  fituated  on  the  Weft-fide  of  a 
deep  Bay,  called  St.  Ives*bay,  from  the  Town.  This 
Bay  is  oppofite,  on  the  Land- fide,  to  Mount 's-bay, 
but  it  is  filled  up  with  Sands,  and  here  is  very  little 
Trade  in  any  thing  elfe  but  Cornijh  Slate. 

It  is  a  very  pleafantView  we  have  at  Modern -kills, 
and  the  Plain  by  them,  in  the  Way  from  the  Lands- 
end  to  St.  Ivts ;  where  we  have  a  Profpeft  of  the 
Ocean  at  the  Land's-md,  Welt ;  of  the  Brit'ifo Chan- 
nel at  Mount's  bay.  South  ;  and  the  Brijiol  Channel,  or 
Severn  Sea,  North.  Near  St.  Ives,  the  Land  between 
the  two  Bays,  being  not  above  four  or  five  Miles  over, 
is  an  Hill  fo  fituated,  that  upon  it  neither  of  the  two 
Seas  are  above  three  Miles  off,  and  very  plain  to  be 
feen  ;  and  fo  likewife,  in  a  clear  Day,  are  the  Iflands 
of  Scilly,  tho'  above  30  Miles  off.  6V.  Ives  is  a  Bo- 
rough-town, governed  by  a  Mayor  and  Aldermen, 
and  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Town  are  of  Opinion,  that 
their  Fifti  are  better  and  more  daintily  tafted  than 
thofe  taken  about  Penfance,  or  any-where  on  the 
other  fide  of  the  Country,  bccaufe  their's  lie  and  feed 
upon  the  Sand,  and  the  other's  on  Ooze  or  Mud. 

The  Country  from  hence  to  Padftow  is  both  fruitful 
and  pleafant,  and  feveral  Houfes  of  Gentlemen  are 
feen  as  we  pafs  ;  the  Sands  alfo  are  very  agreeable  to 
the  Eye,  and  to  travel  upon. 

The  Hills  are  fruitful  of  Tin,  Copper,  and  Lead, 
all  the  Way  on  our  Right-hand;  the  Product  of  which 
is  carried  all  to  the  other  Shore  :  fo  that  we  (hall  have 
little  to  fay  of  it  here.  The  chief  Bulir.efs  on  this 
Shore  is  the  Herring- fiftiing  :  the  Herrings  about  Octo- 
ber come  driving  up  the  Severn  Sea,  and  from  the 
Coaft  of  Ireland,  in  prodigious  Shoals,  and  beat  all 
upon  this  Coaft  as  high  as  Bldeford  and  BarnJiapU  in 
Devonjhire j  and  are  caught  in  great  Quantities  by  the 
Fiihermen,  chiefly  on  account  of  the  Merchants  of 


Cornvv.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  5 

Fa/mouth,    Foy,   Plymouth,    and  other  Ports  on  the 
South. 

St.  Michael's,  or  Mcdijhok,  a  mean  Portreve  Bo- 
rough,  tho'  it  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament,  is 
not  now  remarkable  j  but  was  of  great  Note  in  the 
Saxon  Time,  and  has  ftill  a  Market  weekly,  and  a 
pearly  Fair. 

We  then  came  to  St.  Columns,  a  little  Market- 

:own,  a  Lord  {hip  belonging  to  the  Arundeh  of  War- 

lourj  fo  called,  to  diftinguUh  them  from  the  JruaMr 

f  Trerice  in  this  County ;  which  Family,  efpoufmg 

the  King's  Side  in  the  Civil  Wars,  fuffered  much,  and 

was  ennobled  in  Charles  II. 's  Time.     The  //W*//r 

?amily  like  wife  fuffered  in  the  fame  Caufe.     St  Co- 

timbs  is  one  of  the  beft  Parfonages  in  Cornwall  I  the 

parly  Value  between  3  and  400 /. 

Near  this  Place  is  an  Hill,  which  has  a  Rampire  on 
he  bummit  of  it,  and  aCaufeway  leading  to  it.   'Tis 
an  old  Danijh  Camp,  and  called  Cajlellum  Danls. 

Padftow  is  a  large  Town,  and  {rands  on  a  very  good 
Harbour  for  fuch  Shipping  as  ufe  the  Irijh  Trade. 
The  Harbour  is  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Camel,  or 
Carnal^  which,  rifmg  ttCamelford,  runs  down  by  Bod- 
myn  toWadbndge,  a  little  Town,  where  a  lame'  Stone 
Bridge,  of  about  eight  Arches,  is  built,  bylhe  Con- 
tributions of  the  Country  Gentlemen,  at  the  Motion, 
ind  under  the  Diredtion,  of  one  Nicolas  Lovibond,  Vi- 
MQiWadbridgei  the  PafTage  over  the  River  before 
being  very  dangerous,  and  having  occafioned  the  Lofs 
rf  fome  Lives,  as  well  as  Goods. 

The  Paffage  from  this  Town  of  Pad/low  to  Ireland 
s  laid,  by  Writers,  to  be  no  more  than  24  Hours  - 
nuthis,  if  ever  done,  hath  been  fo  feldom,  that  it 
wght  not  to  be  mentioned  as  generally  the  Cafe;  for  I 
)e;!eve  not  one  in  24  Ships  makes  its  Voyage  in  fofew 
iours ;  and  that  they  are  oftener  five  or  fix  Days  in 
he  Pailage. 
Higher  within  the  Land  lies  the  Market  and  Bo- 


rough 


4  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Cornw. 

rough-town  of  Bodmyn,  formerly  one  of  the  Coining- 
towns  of  Tin,  till  it  loft  that  Privilege  to  Leftwithiel: 
however,  it  ftill  enjoys  feveral  Advantages,  belides  that 
of  returning  Members  to  Parliament,  fome  of  which 
are  Tokens  of  its  Antiquity.  It  is  pretty  large,  and 
{lands  between  two  Hills,  in  a  good  Air.  It  had  an- 
ciently feveral  Churches,  of  which  now  only  one  re- 
mains, which  belonged  to  the  Priory  :  and  is,  at  pre- 
fent,  the  Pa  rim  -church.  A  kind  of  Carnival  is  kept 
here  yearly,  in  July,  whither  great  Numbers  of  Peo- 
ple refort. 

There  is  nothing  very  remarkable  in  Bodmyn,  only 
a  very  large  and  handfome  Church,  with  a  Spire  Stee- 
ple ;  the  Churches  in  Cornwall,  for  the  moft  part, 
having  good  Tower  Steeples  of  Free-ftone. 

We  obferved  no  Parks  in  Cornwall.  Their  Fences 
are,  for  the  moft  part,  earthen  or  Stone  Walls  ;  often, 
inftead  of  a  Stile,  you  have  only  a  Gap  in  the  Wall, 
and  a  Grate  to  pafs  over,  after  the  Manner  of  College 
Grates,  only  ruder,  and  of  Wood  or  Stone. 

The  Coinage  towns  were,  in  Queen  Elizabeth's 
Time,  Four;  namely, 

Lcfkard,         7  5 
itbid)    J  \ 


Heljlon. 

Since  that,  in  King  James's  Time,  was  added  Pen- 
fance. 

Camelford  is  a  mean  but  ancient  Borough-town. 
Here  the  River  Camel  riks,  which  takes  its  Name  from 
the  Britijb  Word  Gam,  i.  e.  crooked.  It  has  not  either 
Church  or  Chapel  in  it,  nor  ever  had.  It  is  only  re- 
markable, befides  its  returning  Members  to  Parliament, 
for  two  great  Battles  which  were  fought  here;  one  be- 
tween King  Arthur  and  his  Nephew  Mordred  ;  and 
•'the  other  between  the  Britons  and  the  Saxons. 

The  Borough  of  BoJJiney^  otherwife  called  Trevena^ 
is  but  a  finall  Village.  It  is  famous  for  the  fplendij 
Ruins  of  an  impregnable  Cadle,built  on  the  Rock,whicii 

•  flood. 


Cornw.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  f 

ftood  partly  on  the  Continent,  and  partly  on  an  Ifland, 
joined  together  by  a  Draw-bridge.  TheCaftle  was  the 
Seat  of  the  Britijh  Princes,  and  fince  of  the  Dukes  of 
Cornwall:  and,  'tis  faid,  Arthur  was  born  here,  and 
died,  in  one  of  the  above- mentioned  Battles,  near 
Camelford.  This  Place  fends  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment >  as  does  the  next,  to  wit, 

Launcejlon^  which  is  a  Corruption  of  the  BritiJhWord 
Lanjluphadori)  i.e.  St.  Stephen's  Churcr  :  it  is  aMarket 
and  Borough-town,  pretty  neat,  and  isfituateon  a  riling 
Ground,  at  the  Extremity  of  the  County,  on  the  Bor- 
ders of  Devon/hire.  Great  Part  of  it  is  very  old,  rag- 
ged, and  decayed. 

When  Richard  Earl  of  Cornw  all  had  the  Govern- 
ment of  this  County,  this  was  a  Frontier- town,  well 
walled  about,  and  fortified  ;  and  had  alfo  a  noble 
Caftle,  which,  from  its  Strength,  was  called  Cajlle 
Terrible.  The  Inhabitants,  for  the  Defence  and  Re- 
pair of  it,  held  formerly  the  Land  here  by  Caftleguard. 

Not  far  from  hence  is  Hevgeftone  kill,  which  pro- 
duces a  great  Plenty  of  Cornijb  Diamonds  :  here  the 
Cornijh  Britons  joined  the  Danes,  to  drive  out  the  Sax- 
ens  from  Devon/hire  j  but  were  totally  defeated  by 
Egbert  in  831,  which,  'tis  conjectured,  gives  the 
Name  of  Hengift  to  this  Hill,  in  Commemoration  of 
their  firft  Leader. 

There  is  a  fine  Image  or  Figure  of  Mary  Magdalen^ 
upon  the  Tower  of  the  Church  at  Launcefton^to  which 
the  Papifts  fail  not  to  pay  Reverence-  as  they  pafs  by. 
There  is  no  Tin,  Copper,  or  Lead,  found  hereabouts, 
as  I  could  hear  ;  nor  any  Manufacture  in  the  Place. 
Here  are  many  Attorneys,  who  manage  Bulinefs  for 
the  reft  of  their  Fraternity  at  the  Aflizes.  As  to 
Trade,  it  has  not  much  to  boaft  of ;  and  yet  there 
are  People  enough  in  it  to  excufe  thofe  who  call  it  a 
populous  Place. 

Newport  is  a  little  Village  adjoining,  and  was  for- 
merly Part  of  Launccfton ;  and  yet  fends  two  Members 
B  3  to 


6  A  TOUR  thro  Cornw. 

to  Parliament :  and  indeed  there  are  no  lefs  than  44 
for  the  Country ;  and  the  Number  of  Ele£tors  is  fo 
fmall,  in  many  Places,  that  an  Admiuiftratlon,  of 
which  Side  foever  it  be,  as  to  Party,  has  ufually  a 
great  Reliance  on  the  Elections  in  this  County  every 
new  Parliament,  in  order  to  obtain  a  Majority  in  the 
Houfe  of  Commons  :  for  44  Members  from  Cornwa-l^ 
and  45  from  another  Part  of  the  Jfland,  who  generally 
go  one  Way,  r.iake  no  fmall  Figure  in  a  Queftion. 
And,  in  this  Cafe,  it  may  not  be  improperly  obferved, 
that  the  two  Extremities  of  the  Ifland,  let  the  other 
Parts  go  as  they  will,  are  generally  united  in  the  fame 
Way  of  Thinking,  or  at  leaft  of  Afting,  in  all  poli- 
tical Debates ;  and  are  likely  to  be  fo  in  all  Times  to 
come. 

There  is  a  long  Nook  of  the  Country  runs  North 
from  LaunceJloH)  called  the  Hundred  of  Stratton,  in 
•which  there  is  one  Market-town,  named  Stratton;  but 
it  has  nothing  in  or  about  it  wo/th  remarking  :  yet 
once  it  had,  in  Stow-boufe,  built  by  the  Earl  of  Bath^ 
in  the  Reign  of  King  Charles  II.  and,  as  to  its  Finifti- 
ings  within,  not  inferior  to  any  in  England.  The 
Situation  of  this  ftately  Palace  rendering  it  a  difagreea- 
ble  Habitation,  the  Owners  difpofed  of  the  Materials  j 
and  it  is  now  totally  demolished. 

Not  far  from  Bodmyn  is  to  be  feen  the  Set  of  monu- 
mental Stones,  called  The  Hurlers-,  which,  Dr.  Stukely 
fays,  are,  out  of  Doubt,  Remains  of  an  ancient  Druid 
Temple.  Probably  they  are  called  by  this  Name, 
from  the  Game  of  Hurling,  pra&ifed  in.thefe  Parts  ; 
the  Country-people  giving  them  that  for  want  of  a 
better  :  and  indeed  it  is  faid,  that  they  have  a  fuper- 
ftitious  Notion,  that  they  were  once  Men,  who  were 
transformed  into  Stones,  for  playing  at  this  Sport  on 
a  Sunday.  They  are  oblong,  rude,  unhewn  Stones, 
pitched  on  one  End  upon  the  ground.  Theyftand  on 
a  Down  in  three  Circles,  the  Centres  whereof  are  in 
a  right  Line,  the  middlemoft  Circle  being  the  greateih 

About 


Cornw.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  7 

About  Haifa  Mile  from  thefe,  on  the  Downs,  {lands 
a  Stone,  called  The  long  Stone,  more  than  two  Yards 
and  a  Half  high,  having  a  Crofs  on  both  Sides  of  it. 

Now  I  have  mentioned  the  Hurlers,  1  muft  take 
the  Opportunity  to  defcribe  the  Hurling- Match,  for 
which  the  Corni/h  Men  are  fo  particularly  famous,  ai;d 
which  is  one  of  their  principal  Recreations,  tho'  bar- 
barous enough.  A  Stiver  Ball  is  generally  the  Prize 
on  thefe  Occafions.  The  Match  is  made  in  different 
Manners  ;  for  fometimes  the  Challenge  is  by  20  or 
30  Men  on  a  Side,  and  no  others  are  to  interfere  ;  at 
other  Times,  when  a  great  Number  of  People  are  af- 
fembled  at  a  Wake,  or  Church  ale ,  the  Word  is  given 
out  That  Johns,  Wills,  GW^Toms,  ivilloppofe  all  other 
Names  ,  or,  at  other  times,  That  Eldeil  or  Seconds 
are  againfl  all  Younger  Sons :  and  fo  the  Ball  is  thrown 
up,  and  becomes  the  Property  of  that  Party  which 
carries  it  away  to  the  Goal  fet  for  that  Purpofe. 

But  another  kind  of  Hurling  is,  when  an  (Jut -ball, 
as  they  call  it,  is  thrown  up ;  and  thefe  Matches  are 
generally  made  by  two  or  more  neighbouring  Gentle- 
men, who,  at  a  Day  agreed  on,  bring  each  of  them 
the  Men  of  two,  three,  or  more  Parifhes  :  and  the 
Goals  are  then  fet,  perhaps,  four  or  five  Miles  diftant, 
at  fome  Gentlemens  Houfes,  Towns,  or  the  like  : 
and  here  nothing  is  faid  about  matching  in  Number, 
or  otherwife;  but  the  Ball  is  thrown  up,  and  a  bloody 
Skirmifn  generally  enfues.  NoBufoes,  Briars,  Bogs, 
Mud- pools,  Rivers,  or  any  other  Impediments,  hinder 
their  Courfe ;  nor  any  Frie>id{hip,  Relation,  or  for- 
mer Obligation,  in  the  leaft,  abates  their  Fury.  The 
Party  prevailing  generally  prefents  the  Ball  to  the  Gen- 
tleman who  brought  them  on  as  a  Trophy;  and  h*e, 
in  Return,  fets  open  his  Cellar-doors,  where  they 
wafh  away  the  Blood  from  their  Nofes,  and  apply  a 
Balfam  to  their  Bruifes. 

The  Wreftling  in  Cornwall  is,   indeed,    a  much 

more  manly  and  generous  Exercife ;  and  that  Clofure, 

B        '  which 


8  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Devon. 

tvhich  they  call  the  Cornijh  Hug,  has  made  them  emi- 
nent in  theWreftling  Rings  all  over  England ;  as  the 
Norfolk,  and  Suffolk  Men  are,  for  their  Dexterity  at 
the  Hand  and  toot,  and  throwing  up  the  Heels  of 
their  Adverfary,  without  taking  hold  of  him. 

Faffing  the  River  Tamar,  about  two  Miles  from 
Launcejion^  we  enter  the  great  County  of  Devon  \  and 
as  it  is  in  the  moft  wild  and  barren  Part  of  it,  and  where 
formerly  Tin  Mines  were  found,  tho'  now  they  are 
tither  quite  exhaufred,  or  not  to  be  worked  without 
more  Charge  than  Profit,  fo  we  muft  expert  it  a  little 
to  refemble  its  neighbour  County. 

The  River  Tamar  here  abounds  with  Salmon, 
which  are  fo  exceeding  fat  and  good,  that  they  are 
tfteemed  in  both  Counties  above  the  Fifh  of  the  fan.e 
Kind  found  in  other  Places ;  and  the  Quantity  is  fo 
great,  as  fupplies  the  Country  in  abundance.  This  is 
cccaiioned  by  the  Mouth  of  the  River  being  fo  very 
large,  and  the  Water  fo  deep  for  two  Leagues  before  it 
opens  into  Plymouth  Sound,  that  the  Fifh  have  a  fecure 
Retreat  in  the  fait  Water  for  their  Harbour  and  Shel- 
ter ;  and  from  thence  they  flioot  up  into  the  frelh  Wa- 
ter, in  vaft  Numbers,  to  caft  their  Spawn. 

We  ride  but  a  few  Miles  in  Devon/hire,  before  we 
find  a  different  Face,  in  feveral  refpecls :  As,  i.  More 
People  than  in  Cornwall :  2.  Larger  Towns  :  3.  The 
People  all  bufy,  and  in  full  Employ  upon  their  Manu- 
factures. 

tj  At  the  uppermofl  and  extreme  Part  of  the  County 
North -weft,  runs  a  Promontory  about  three  Miles 
into  the  Sea,  beyond  all  the  Land  on  tither  Side,  whe- 
ther of  Ddvonjbire  or  of  Cornwall:  The  Country- 
people  call  it  Hartland  Paint,  or  Hearty  Point,  from 
the  Town  of  Hartland,  which  ftands  juft  within  the 
Shore,  and  is  fituated  on  the  utmolt  Edge  of  the 
County  of  Devon.  ^  It  is  a  Market- town  of  good  Re- 
fort,  and  the  People  coming  confhntly  $p  it  out  of  Corn- 

wall. 


Devon.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  p 

wall,  the  Fifher- boats  of  BarnJ1aple>  Bideford^  and  the 
other  Towns  on  the  Coafts,  lying  often  under  the 
Lee,  as  they  call  it,  of  thefe  Rocks,  for  Shelter  from 
the  South-weft  or  South-eaft  Winds  ;  at  which  time 
the  Seamen  go  on  Shore  here,  and  fupply  themfelves  *" 
with  Provifions ;  nor  is  the  Town  unconcerned  in 
that  gainful  Fifhing-trade,  which  is  carried  on  for  the 
Herring  on  this  Coaft. 

From  this  Point  or  Promontory,  the  Land  falling 
away  for  fome  Miles,  makes  a  Gulph  or  Bay,  which 
reaching  to  the  Head-land,  or  Point  of  Barnjlaple 
Haven,  is  called,  from  thence,  Barnftaph  Bay  ;  fo 
that  thefe  two  trading  Towns  nave  but  one  Port  be- 
tween them.  They  were  formerly  inconiiderable 
Places :  At  prefent  they  are  very  great  and  thriving. 
The  Manufactures  of  the  large  Towns  behind  them, 
and  their  eafy  Paflage  by  the  Rivers  beforementioned, 
the  Fifheries  on  the  Coafts,  and  their  Correfpondence 
with  Ireland^  have  raifed  them  to  great  Wealth  and 
Credit.  Perhaps  their  Emulation  alfo  has  been  no 
Prejudice  to  either :  on  the  contrary,  if  we  confider 
the  great  Improvements  made  to  hinder  one  from 
clearly  flfrpaffing  the  other,  and  retaining  that  Supe- 
riority for  any  Length  of  Time,  we  cannot  but  ol>- 
ferve  that  it  has  been  highly  beneficial  to  both. 

Clovelly  is  a  fmall  Place,  dependent  as  a  Creek  upon 
Barnjlaple.  It  has  a  Pier  fupported  by  the  ancient 
Family  of  Cary,  to  whom  the  Place  belongs,  and 
might  be  made  of  far  more  Confequence  than  it  is, 
with  fome  Expence. 

The  Towns  of  Barnjlaple  and  Bideford,  the  firft 
the  moft  ancient,  and  returning  two  Members  to  Par- 
liament, the  other  the  moft  flourishing,  feem  fo  fafe, 
fo  eafy  in  their  Channel,  fo  equally  good  with  Regard 
to  Shipping,  and  fo  equi-diftant  from  the  Sea,  that 
neither  Town  complains  of  the  Bounty  of  the  Sea  to 
them,  or  their  Situation  by  Land  5  and  yet,  of  late 
v  B  5  Years, 


10  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Devon, 

Years,  the  Town  of  Bidefordhzs  flourifhed,  and  the 
Town  of  Barnftaple  rather  declined. 

Bideford,  anciently  written  By-the-Ford,  is  a  clean, 
well-built  Town  :  the  more  ancient  Street,  which 
lies  next  the  River,  is  very  pleafant,  where  is  the 
Bridge,  a  very  noble  Quay,  and  the  Cuftom-houfe  : 
It  is  alfo  very  well-built  and  populou?,  and  fronts  the 
River  for  above  three  Quarters  of  a  Mile:  But,  bcfides 
this,  there  is  a  new  fpacious  Street  which  runs  North 
and  South,  or  rather  North  weft  and  South-eaft,  a 
great  Length,  broad  as  the  Higb-jflreit  of  Exeter,  well 
built,  and  inhabited  by  confiderable  and  wealthy  Mer- 
chants, who  traffick  to  moft  Parts  of  the  World. 

The  Trade  of  Bid/ford,  as  well  as  of  all  the  Towns 
on  this  Coaft,  being  very  much  in  Fifh,  I  obferved 
that  feveral  Ships  were  employed  to  go  to  Liverpool, 
and  up  the  River  Merfey  to  Warrlngton^  to  fetch  the 
Rock- fait  which  is  found  in  that  County  to  Bldeford 
and  Barnftaphy  and  there  diflblve  it  into  Brine  in  the 
Sea-water,  joining  the  Strength  of  two  Bodies  in  one, 
and  then  boil  it  up  again  into  a  new  Salt,  as  the  Dutch 
do  that  of  the  French  and  Porttiguefe.  This  is  juft// 
called  Salt  upon  Salt,  and  with  this  they  cure  ttci'r 
Herrings. 

Here  is  a  very  fine  Stone  Bridge  over  the  Rh'cr, 
built  in  the  I4th  Century,  on  24  Gothic  Arches,  all 
uniform  and  regular,  and  very  good  Workmanfhip  of 
the  kind. 

As  Bideford  has  fo  fine  a  Bridge  over  the  Toivridge^ 
fo  Barnftaple  has  a  very  noble  one  over  the  Tawt  and 
tho*  not  longer,  is  counted  larger  and  ftronger  than 
the  other.  Thefe  two  rival  Towns  are  really  very 
confiderable;  both  of  them  have  a  large  Share  in  the 
7'rade  to  Ireland,  in  the  Herring-fimery,  and  in  a 
Trade  to  ihcBriti/b  Colonies  in  America  :  if  Bidcford 
cures  more  Fifh,  Barnjlaple  imports  more  Wine,  and 
other  Merchandizes;  they  are  both  eilablifhed  Ports 
for  landing  Wool  from  Ireland. 

If 


Devon.       GREAT*  BRITAIN.  n 

If  Eideford  has  a  greater  Number  of  Merchants, 
Earnflaple  has  a  greater  Commerce  within  Land,  by 
its  great  Market  for  Irljh  Wool  and  Yarn,  &c.  with 
the  Serge-markets  of  Tiverton  and  Exeter ,  which  carry 
on  a  Traffick  here  :  fo  that,  in  a  word,  Barnftaple, 
tho'  it  has  loft  Ground  to  Bidefordy  yet,  take  it  in  all 
its  Trade  completely,  is  full  as  confiderable  as  Bide- 
ford',  only,  that  perhaps  it  was  formerly  far  fuperior 
to  it,  arid  the  other  has  rifen  up  to  be  its  Match. 

Barnflaple  is  a  large,  well-built  Town,  feated  among 
the  Hills.  It  is  more  populous  than  Bideford,  butnoc 
better  built,  and  Hands  lower;  infomuch  that  at  High- 
water  in  Spring-tides  it  is,  in  a  manner,  furrounded 
with  Water.  The  Bridge  was  built  by  the  generous 
Benefaction  of  one  Stamford,  a  Citizen  and  Merchant 
of  London,  who,  it  feems,  was  not  a  Native  of  the 
Place;  but,  by  trading  here  to  his  Gain,  had  Kind- 
nefs  enough  for  the  Town,  to  confer  that  valuable 
Benefit  upon  it.  It  was  formerly  walled  in,  and  had 
a  Caftle  and  a  Priory.  'Tis  governed  by  a  Mayor 
and  24  BurgeiTes,  whereof  two  are  Aldermen.  It  has 
allo  an  High  Steward,  and  Recorder, 

The  Bridge  at  Bideford,  as  above,  was  likewife  a 
Gift  ;  but  was,  as  they  fay,  raifed  by  Collections 
among  the  Clergy,  by  Grant  of  Indulgences,  and  the, 
like  Church  Management :  however,  both  the  Towns 
are  infinitely  obliged  to  the  Benefactors ;  and  we  wifa 
no  worfe  Ufe  had  ever  been  made  of  Superftition. 

Behind  Bidefordy  as  we  come  from  Launcefton,  are 
feveral  good  Towns  (though  I  obferved  that  the 
Country  was  wild  and  barren),  as  Tav'fiock,  Toning- 
ton,  &c. 

Tavijtock  returns  two  Members  to  Parliament.  It  is 
fituated  on  the  Tavy,  among  Springs,  and  is  a  large 
Town,  pretty  well  built.  The  Abbot  of  this  Place 
fat  in  Parliament ;  built  a  Church  of  1 26  Yards  long, 
fpacious  Cloifters,  and  a  Chapter- houfe,  wich  36 
Stalls,  which  are  all  now  deftroyed. 

B-6  The 


ja  A  TOUR  thro         Devon. 

The  Town  of  Torrington  is  fituated  on  the  fame 
River  that  Bideford  ftands  upon.  It  has  a  large  fpa- 
cious  Church,  with  a  Library  in  it ;  and  was,  for 
fome  time,  the  Refidence  of  Margaret^  the  Mother 
of  Henry  VII. 

Another  Town  in  this  Part  of  the  Country  is  Oke- 
hamptoriy  vulgarly  Okington^  a  good  Market  and  Bo- 
rough-town, governed  by  eight  principal  BurgefTes, 
and  as  many  Afiiftants.  It  is  a  manufacturing  Town, 
as  all  the  Towns  this  Way  now  are,  and  pretty  rich  ; 
but  in  the  Records  of  Antiquity  it  appears  to  have 
been  much  more  confiderable  than  it  is  now,  having 
92  Knights  Fees  belonging  to  it.  This  Town  re- 
turns two  Members  to  Parliament, 

A  little  above  Barnjlaple,  N.  E.  upon  the  Coaft, 
{lands  a  noted  Market  and  Port- town,  called  llford- 
tomb)  a  Place  of  good  Trade,  populous,  and  rich. 

It  is  a  commodious  Haven,  from  its  natural  Advan- 
tages, but  for  its  greater  Security  a  Pier  was  long  ago 
built,  and  a  Light-houfe  erected,  which  were  of 
much  Service.  But  thefe  and  other  Conveniences 
were  entirely  made  at  the  Expence  of  the  Owner  of 
the  Soil;  and  indeed  mod  of  thefe  Weftern  Ports  were 
fupported  in  this  Manner.  As  for  Inftance,  that  of 
tfiatchetti  by  the  now  noble  Houfe  of  Wyndbam  \  that 
of  Minehead,  by  the  ancient  Family  of  Luttrel\  and 
this  of  which  we  are  fpeaking,  by  the  IfreySy  or  as  it 
is  alfo  written  IVray. 

s  Ilfordcomb  is  a  Corporation  and  a  Borough,  tho'  it 
does  not  now,  nor  ever  did,  fend  Members  to  Par- 
liament. It  confifts  chiefly  of  one  good  Street,  from 
the  Church  to  the  Sea -fide,  upwards  of  a  Mile  long, 
and  is  a  neat,  well-built,  populous,  and  thriving 
Place,  which  is  principally  owing  to  its  Pofition, 
landing  clofe  upon  the  Sea  ;  fo  that  Ships  can  run  in 
there,  when  it  would  be  dangerous  to  go  up  to  Elde- 
fordm  BarnftGple  ;  and  for  this  Reafon,  feveral  of  the 
Traders  in  the  la(t- mentioned  Town  do  a  great  deal 

of 


Devon.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  13 

of  their  Port  Bufinefs  here.  In  our  own  Times,  fome 
Difputes  anfing  about  the  cuftomary  Dues  paid  to 
the  Lord  of  the  Manor,  it  was  fonnd  neceflary  to  apply 
to  the  Legislature  for  fettling  thofe  Duties,  that  were 
now  become  requifite  for  maintaining  and  improving 
this  Haven,  which  was  accordingly  done  by  A£t  of 
Parliament,  made  Anno  1731.  By  this  falutary  Law, 
they  are  very  prudently,  as  well  as  clearly  fettled,  and 
made  payable  to  Sir  Boucbler  Wray,  his  Heirs  and 
Affigns,  being  Lord  of  the  Manor  of  Ilfordcomb.  And 
it  is  provided,  that  all  the  Money  raifed  by  them,  or 
recovered  for  Forfeitures  given  by  the  Aft,  fhall  be 
laid  out  in  repairing  and  fupporting  the  Pier,  Light- 
houfe,  Warp,  Warp-houfe,  Boats,  and  Harbour;  fo 
that  it  is  not  only  in  a  very  good  Condition,  the 
Quay  being  upwards  of  800  Feet  long,  but  a  fufR- 
cient  Fund  is  eftablifhed  for  its  conftant  Maintenance 
in  that  Condition. 

A  little  to  the  Eaftward  of  Ilfordcomb  lies  Comb 
Martin,  or,  according  to  the  Cuftom  of  this  County, 
as  it  is  fometimes  called,  Martin's  Comb,  fo  named 
from  its  ancient  Owners,  the  Martins-,  which  at  pre- 
fent  has  only  a  Cove  for  Boats,  but  is  very  capable  of 
being  improved.  Yet  it  is  chiefly  remarkable  for  a 
Lead  Mine,  difcovered  in  the  Reign  of  Edward  L 
and  out  of  the  Contents  of  which  confiderable  Quan- 
tities of  Silver  were  extracted  ;  but  by  Degrees,  or 
thro'  ill  Management,  it  was  in  no  very  long  Time 
exhaufted.  However,  in  the  Reign  of  Edward  III. 
it  was  again  wrought,  and  that  to  larger  Profit  than 
before.  In  feme  mort  Space  after  this,  through  the 
Civil  Wars  between  the  Houfes  of  York  and  Lancojler, 
thefe  Works  were  difcontinued,  but  revived  with 
Wronger  Hopes  in  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  by 
Sir  Bevis  Buhner,  a  fkilful  Engineer,  in  great  Credit 
with  that  Princefs.  Mr.  Bujhel^  who  valued  himfelf 
on  being  Servant  and  Pupil  to  the  famous  Lord  Bacon^ 
made  fome  Propofals  for  recovering  it  a  fourth  Timev 

a  link 


i 4  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Devon. 

a  little  before  the  Reftoration ;  and  towards  the  Clofe 
of  the  laft  Century  it  was  actually  opened,  with 
mighty  Expectations,  but  I  doubt  with  little  Effecl, 
becaufe  we  have  heard  nothing  of  it  fince. 

Leaving  the  Coaft  in  our  Journey  Southward,  we 
came  to  the  great  River  Ex  of  Ifca9  which  rifes  in 
the  Hills  on  the  North-fide  of  the  County,  and,  like 
the  Tamary  begins  within  four  or  five  Miles  of  the 
Severn  Sea.  The  Country  it  rifes  in  is  called  Exmore : 
Camdcn  fays  it  is  a  filthy,  barren  Ground  ;  and  indeed 
fo  it  is :  but  as  foon  as  the  Ex  comes  off  from  the 
Moors  and  hilly  Country,  and  defcends  into  the 
lower  Grounds,  we  found  an  Alteration  ;  for  then 
we  faw  Devon/hire  in  its  other  Countenance,  culti- 
vated, populous,  and  fruitful ;  and  continuing  fo  till 
we  came  to  Tiverton. 

Next  to  Exeter,  Tiverton  is  the  greateft  Manufac- 
turing Town  in  the  County;  and,  of  all  the  inland 
Towns,  is  like  wife  next  to  it  in  Wealth,  and  Num- 
ber of  People  :  it  ftands  on  the  River  Ex,  and  has 
ever  it  an  old  Stone  Bridge,  with  another  over  the 
little  River  Loman^  which  immediately  after  falls  into 
the/ix  juft  below  the  Town.  Antiquity  fays,  before 
thofe  Bridges  were  built,  there  were  two  Fords  here, 
One  thro'  each  River  ;  and  that  the  Town  was  from 
thence  called  Twyfordton,  that  is,  The  Town  upon  the 
two  Fords ,  and  fo,  by  abbreviating  the  Sounds,  Twy- 
forton^  then  Tiverton. 

This  Town  has  been  a  remarkable  Sufferer  by  Fire; 
for  in  the  Year  1598,  April  3.  it  was  confumed  on  a 
fudden;  Aug.  5  1612.  it  was  again  burnt  down  ;  and 
July  5.  1731.  another  dreadful  Fire  deftroyed  there 
200  of  the  bed  Houfes. 

An  A61  paused  on  .this  fad  Occafion,~vfc0l732.  for 
the  more  eafy  rebuilding  the  Town,  and  determining 
Differences  on  that  Account ;  and  it  enjoins,  that  the 
new-built  Houfes  fhall  be  covered  with  Lead,  Slate, 
or  Tile,  and  not  Thatch  $  that  perilous  Trades  fhall 

not 


Devon*       GREAT  BRITAIN'.  i* 

not  be  exercifed  in  public  Streets  ;  that  no  Stacks  of 
Hay,  Straw,  Corn,  &c.  fhall  be  erected  at  or  near 
the  public  Parts  of  the  Town  ;  that  Fire-Engines  may 
be  bought  by  the  Guardians  of  the  Poor;  that -the 
Houfes  may  be  demolifhed  to  ftop  any  future  Fire  j 
that  the  Streets  and  Pafiages  of  the  Town  may  be  en- 
larged, and  particular  Houfes  pulled  down  for  that 
Purpofe  ;  with  other  ufeful  Provifions. 

An  Act  alfo  pafled  Anno  1733,  for  making  a  Cha- 
pel, built  by  theSubfcription  of  the  Inhabitants  of  27- 
vertoti)  a  perpetual  Cure  ;  and  for  providing  a  Main- 
tenance for  the  Minifters  who  fhall  ofEciate  in  it  ; 
for,  as  the  Preamble  to  the  Ad  obferves,  the  Parifh . 
Church  was  not  near  capacious  enough  to  receive  the 
Inhabitants  of  the  Parifli.  The  late  Sir  tVilKant 
Wyndbam  was  a  great  Encourager  and  Promoter  of 
this  new  Chapel,  at  its  firftEredion. 

But  the  Beauty  of  Tiverton  is  the  Free-fchool,  at 
the  Eaft  Entrance  into  the  Town,  a  noble  Building, 
but  a  much  nobler  Foundation.  It  was  erecled  by 
one  Peter  Blundel,  a  Clothier,  and  a  Lover  of  Learn- 
ing ;  who  ufed  the  Saying  of  IFilliam  ofWickham  to  the 
King,  when  he  founded  the  Royal  School  at  IPin- 
cbefter;  viz.  *  That  if  he  was  not  himfelf  a  Scholar, 
*  he  would  be  the  Occafion  of  making  more  Scho- 
'  lars  than  any  Scholar  in  England-,'  to  which  End 
he  founded  this  School.  He  has  endowed  it  fo  libe- 
rally, that,  I  was  told,  the  Schoolmafter  has,  at  leaft, 
60  Pounds  per  Annum^  befides  a  very  good  Houfe  to 
live  in,  and  the  Advantage  of  Scholars  not  on  the 
Foundation  ;  and  that  the  Uflier  has  in  Proportion. 
To  this  the  generous  Founder  added  two  Fellowfhips 
and  two  Scholarfhips,  for  which  h-e  gave  the  Mainte- 
nance to  Sydney  College  in  Cambridge  ;  and  one  Fel- 
lowfhip  and  two  Scholarfhips  to  Baliol  College  in 
Oxford :  all  which  are  appointed  for  the  Scholars  bred 
up  in  this  School. 

As 


1 6  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Devon. 

As  this  is  the  chief  Nurfery  of  almoft  all  the  young 
Gentry  of  thefe  Weftern  Parts,  the  Profit  arifing  to 
the  Matter  from  Boarders,  and  the  liberal  Benefactions 
of  the  Parents,  added  to  the  Salary  before-mentioned, 
rendered  it  a  Preferment  fuitable  to  a  Man  of  the  beft 
Parts  and  Learning:  and  as  the  Truftees  are  Gentle- 
men of  great  Honour,  it  is  generally  difpofed  of  to  the 
moft  worthy  Candidate. 

The  great  Number  of  Gentlemens  Sons  fent  hither 
for  their  Education,  as  I  have  hinted,  is  no  fmall  Ad- 
vantange  to  the  Town  likewife  :  and  this,  joined  with 
the  brifk  Trade  carried  on  here,  renders  it  fo  flourifh- 
ing,  that  notwithftanding  the  Calamity  it  underwent 
by  the  Fire  In  1731.  which  almoft  totally  confumed  it, 
it  is  now  very  elegantly  rebuilt ;  and  carries  very  few 
other  Marks  of  this  Devaftation,  than  the  Magnifi- 
cence and  Beauty  of  the  new  Structures. 

As  this  is  a  manufacturing  Country,  we  found  the 
People  here  all  fully  employed,  and  very  few,  if  any 
out  of  Work.  Tiverton  returns  two  Members  to- 
Parliament. 

From  this  Town  there  is  little  belonging  to  Devon- 
Jb'ire  but  what  has  been  fpoken  of,  except  what  lies  in 
the  Road  to  Taunton,  which  we  took  next,  where  we 
meet  with  the  River  Columb,  which  rifes  alfo  in  the  ut- 
moft  Limits  of  the  County  towards  Somerfetjhire,  and 
gives  Name  to  fo  many  Towns  on  its  Banks,  that  it 
leaves  no  room  to  doubt  of  its  own  Name  being  right : 
fuch  are  Cclutnb- David's,  Vfcdu?nb>  Columbjiock^  and 
Columbian ;  the  laft  is  a  Market- town,  and  they  are  all 
full  of  Manufactures,  depending  much  on  the  Mafter- 
jnanufadlurers  of  Tiverton. 

Before  we  leave  Devonjhire,  it  will  not  be  amifs  to 
take  Notice  of  Lundy  Ifland,  which  is  Part  of  the 
County,  and,  tho'  50  Miles  from  Devonshire,  North  - 
weftward,  is  much  more  remote  from  any  other  Con- 
tinent. 'Tis  but  five  Miles  long,  and  two  broad  ; 
but  fo  furrounded  with  inacceflible  Rocks,  that  there 

is 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  17 

s  but  one  fmall  Entrance  into  it,  where  two  Men 
can  fcarce  go  abreaft.  Tho*  this  Ifland  lies  fo  far  in 
the  Sea,  it  has  the  Advantage  of  feveral  Springs  of 
Frefh  Water. 

The  Sou tbamS)  which  lie  between  Torbay  and  Ex- 
mouth,  are  particularly  famous  for  a  moft  vinous  and 
ftrong-bodied  Cyder,  that  fells  on  the  Spot  for  as 
much  as  moft  foreign  Wines.  To  the  various  Manu- 
factures of  Wool,  and  to  the  moft  valuable  Manufac- 
ture of  Flax,  and  that  of  Lace,  for  which  the  Inhabit- 
ants of  Devon  have  been  long  confpicuous,  they  have 
ately  added  that  of  Tapeftry  and  Carpets,  exquifitely 
beautiful  in  their  Kind  ;  and  tho'  hitherto  thofe  rich 
Pieces  of  Furniture  are  very  expenfive,  as  the  beft 
Manufactures  muft  be  when  introduced,  yet  they  bid 
fair,  in  due  Time,  for  a  general  Reception,  which 
will  enable  them  to  give  Bread  to  a  Multitude  of  Peo- 
ple of  both  Sexes,  and  of  all  Ages,  as  well  as  in  va- 
rious Ways.  Befides  this  and  their  Fifheries,  which 
are  confidcrable,  and  many  other  Articles,  the  People 
of  Devon/hire  have  great  Refources  in  their  Mines  of 
Iron,  Tin,  and  Lead,  which  laft  is  exceedingly  rich  in 
Silver. 

With  the  Town  of  Tiverton  we  leave  the  County 
of  Devon,  and,  entering  Somerfetjhire,  have  really  a 
View  of  a  different  Country  from  Devonshire:  for  at 
Wellington,  the  firft  Town  we  came  to  in  Somerfet- 
Jhire,  tho'  partly  employed  in  Manufa&aring  too,  we 
were  immediately  furrounded  with  Beggars,  to  fuch  a 
Degree,  that  we  had  fome  Difficulty  to  keep  them 
from  under  our  Horfes  Heels.  I  was  aftonifhed  at 
fuch  a  Sight,  in  a  Country  where  the  People  were  fo 
generally  full  of  Work  ;  for  in  Cornwall,  where  there 
are  hardly  any  Manufactures,  and  Abundance  of  Poor, 
we  never  found  any  like  this. 

Wellington  is  a  low  dirty  Place,  and  is  only  remark- 
able for  having  been  the  Place  of  Refidence  and  Bu- 
rial 


i8  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Somerf. 

rial  of  the  Lord  Chief  Juftice  Popbam^  in  the  Reigns 
of  Q.  Elizabeth  and  K.  James  I.  They  talk  much  of 
one  Salkeld,  who  was  converted  from  Popery  by  King 
James  I.  and  made  Minifter  of  this  Place.  He  called 
himfclf,  in  Compliment  to  the  King,  "The  Royal  Con- 
vert ;  who,  in  return,  complimented  him  with- the 
Title  of  the  Learned  Salkeld ;  which,  by  the  bye,  re- 
fledted  no  bad  Compliment  on  himfelf,  for  having 
converted  a  learned  Man. 

The  County  of  Somerfet  joins  to  theNorth-eaft  Part 
of  Devonshire,  and  takes  its  Name  from  the  Britifl) 
Word  Gladyr  Haf,  which  fignifies  Sum?ner- count' y\ 
and  fo  the  Ifaljh  call  it  in  their  Language  to  this  Day. 
I  touch'd  only  upon  one  Point  of  the  County  in  my 
laft,  as  I  went  Weftward.  The  whole  County  is 
worth  a  more  particular  Account  than  can  be  given 
within  the  Space  of  a  Letter. 

•  From  Wtllington  we  came  to  Taunton>  leaving 
Rlackdawn  Hills  on  our  Right,  and  Itmin/ier  behind 
them  Southward,  a  Market- town,  famed  for  its  very 
good  Church,  and  a  ftately  Monument  erected  in  it 
to  Nicolas  Wadbam,  and  Dorothy  his  Wife,  Founders 
of  Wadham  College,  Ox  on. 

Near  Taunton  lies  that  rich  Track  of  Ground,  vul- 
garly called  Taunt  on -Dean  ;  this  large,  wealthy,  and 
very  populous  Town,  takes  its  Name  from  the  River 
Tone,  whereon  it  is  fituated.  One  of  the  chief  Manu- 
facturers here  told  us,  that  there  was  at  that  time  fo 
good  a  Trade  in  the  Town,  that  they  had  uoo  Looms 
going  for  the  weaving  of  Sagathies,  Duroys,  and  fu*.h 
kind  of  Stuffs;  and  that  not  one  of  thofe  Looms 
wanted  Work.  He  added,  that  there  was  not  a  Child 
in  the  Town,  or  in  the  Villages  round  it,  of  above 
five  Years  old,  but,,  if  it  was  not  negle&ed  by  its  Ba- 
rents, and  untaught,  could  earn  its  own  Bread.  This 
was  what  I  never  met  with  in  any  other  Place  in  Eng- 
land, except  at  Cokbefter  in  E/ftx. 

The 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  19 

The  Election  of  Members  here,  is  by  thofe  whom 
.hey  call  Pot-Walloners,  that  is  to  fay,  every  Inha- 
>itant,  whether  Houfekeeper  or  Lodger,  who  drefles 
lis  own  Victuals :  to  make  out  which,'  feveral  In- 
mates or  Lodgers  will,  fome  little  Time  before  the 
Eledion,  bring  out  their  Pots,  and  make  Fires  in  the 
Street,  and  boil  their  Victuals  in  the  Sight  of  their 
Neighbours,  that  their  Votes  may  not  be  called  in 
Qu  eft  ion. 

There  are  two  large  Parifh-churches  in  Taunton^ 
and  two  or  three  Meeting-houfes,  one  of  which  is 
aid  to  be  the  largeft  in  the  County.  The  Inhabitants 
lave  been  noted  for Di {Tenters,  principally;  forTaunton 
was  always  counted  a  Seminary  for  fuch.  They  fuf- 
fered  much  in  the  Duke  of  Monmoutb's  Rebellion,  but 
paid  King  James  home  for  the  Cruelty  exercifed  by 
Jefferies  among  them  :  for  when  the  Prince  of  Orange 
arrived,  the  whole  Town  ran  in  to  him,  with  fo  uni- 
versal a  Joy,  that  it  was  thought,  if  he  had  wanted  it, 
he  might  have  raifed  a  little  Army  there,  and  in  the 
adjacent  Part  of  the  Country. 

There  is  a  kind  of  College,  or  Academy,  for  the 
Diilenters,  in  this  Town  ;  and  it  is  by  far  the  greateft 
Town  in  all  this  Part  of  the  Country. 

From  Taunton  we  went  North,  to  take  a  View  of 
the  Coaft.  Exmore^  of  which  mention  was  mare 
above,  where  the  River  Ex  rifes,  lies  in  the  Way, 
Part  of  it  in  this  County,  and  extending  to  the  Sea- 
fide  :  it  gives,  indeed,  but  a  melancholy  View,  being 
a  vaft  Track  of  barren  and  defolate  Lands ;  yet  on 
the  Coaft  there  are  fome  very  good  Sea-ports. 

Porkck,  on  the  utmoft  Extent  of  the  County,  has 
but  a  fmall  Harbour ;  nor  has  it  any  thing  of  Trade  ; 
tho'  heretofore  a  Town  of  fome  Note. 

But  Mincbead,  the  fafeft  Harbour  on  this  Side,  is 
a  fine  Port :  no  Ship  is  fo  big,  but  it  may  come  in  ; 
and  no  Weather  fo  bad,  but  the  Ships  are  fafe  when 
they  are  in :  and  they  told  me  that  in  the  great  Storm, 

Anw 


20  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Somerf. 

Anno  1703.  when  the  Ships  were  blown  on  Shore, 
wreck'd,  and  loft,  in  every  Harbour  of  the  Countyj 
they  fuftered  little  or  no  Damage  in  this. 

The  Trade  of  this  Town  lies  chiefly  with  Ireland,, 
and  this  was,  for  many  Years,  the  chief  Port  in  thefe 
Parts,   where  Wool  from  Ireland  was  allowed  to  be 
imported  ;  but  that  Liberty  is  fince  enlarged  to  feveral  i 
other  Ports,  by  AS  of  Parliament. 

The  Town  returns  two  Members  to  Parliament.  It 
is  well  built,  full  of  rich  Merchants,  and  has  fome 
Trade  alfo  to  Virginia,  and  the  Weft-Indies.  They 
correfpond  much  with  the  Merchants  of  BarnJIa- 
ple  and  Briftol,  in  their  foreign  Trade.  What  has 
greatly  contributed  to  the  Improvement  of  Minehead, 
was  an  Act  pafTed  in* the  1 2th  and  I3th  Year  of  King 
William  III,  which  was  continued  by  an  Act  of  the 
JOth  of  the  late  Queen  Anne,  for  recovering,  fecur- 
ing,  and  keeping  in  Repair,  the  Harbour  of  Minehead. 
And  in  the  Seflion  1737-8.  another  Aft  pafTed,  for 
further  continuing  the  Terms  and  Powers  of  the  two 
former  Ads,  for  the  bringing  to  Effect  the  fame  laud- 
able Purpofes :  in  Purfuance  of  which,  a  new  Head 
has  been  built,  the  Beach  cleared,  and  a  great  Pro- 
grefs  made  in  the  Piers,  and  defigned  Works. 

From  hence  the  Coaft  bears  back  Eaft  to  Waicbct, 
a  fmall  Port  of  late  Years,  tho'  formerly  much  more 
confiderable  ;  for  it  had  given  Place  to  Minehead,  tho* 
now  it  is  in.  a  much  better  Condition  than  it  us'd  to  be 
in  :  and  this  it  owes  to  two  Acts  of  Parliament  ;  one 
pafs'd  in  the  6th  Year  of  the  late  Queen  Anne,  forj 
repairing  of  its  Quay  and  Harbour  ;  and  the  other  in 
the  loth.  But  when  the  Works  defigned  were  near 
completed,  it  was  found,  that  the  Quay  was  bui'it 
much  too  low,  and  not  extended  to  a  fufficient  Length 
to  preferve  the  Town,  and  the  Ships  and  Veilels 
riding  in  the  Harbour,  from  the  Violence  of  the  Sea: 
whereupon  another  Act  pafled,  in  the  7th  of  King 
George  I.  for  continuing  the  Duties  laid  by  the  for- 
mer 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  21 

mer  Acls,  and  remedying  the  Inconveniences  before- 
mentioned. 

It  feems  to  me,  that  the  Town  of  Minehead  rofe 
>ut  of  the  Decay  of  the  Towns  of  Porlock  and  Wat- ' 
bet. 

On  this  Coaft  are  vaft  Quantities  of  Rock,  or  ra- 
her  Pebble,  which  the  Sea,  at  low  Water,  leaves 
uncovered  j  from  whence  the  neighbouring  Inhabitants 
etch  them  on  Shore  to  an  higher  Ground,  and  burn 
hem  into  Lime,  for  drefling  their  Land  ;  but  it  is 
more  efpecially  ufeful  in  Building ;  for  that  no  Ce- 
ment whatfoever  is  more  lafting  for  Jets  d*  Eaux, 
leads,  Piers,  and  other  Mafonry,  that  is  to  lie  under 
Water ;  in  which  Pofition  it  runs  up  to  a  Stone  as 
hard  as  Marble.  The  Cliff's  are  ftored  with  Alabafter, 
which,  by  the  Wafh  of  the  Sea,  falls  down,  and  is 
conveyed  from  hence  to  Erljlol^  and  other  Places  on 
his  Shore,  in  great  Plenty.  Neither  fliould  it  be 
Omitted,  that  the  Inhabitants  burn  great  Quantities 
of  Sea-weed,  to  fupply  the  Glafs-makers  at  tirijlol. 

Walking  on  the  Beach  near  Watchet,  I  difcovered 
imong  the  large  Gravel  great  Number  of  Stones, 
luted  in  Imitation  of  the  Shells  of  Fifhes  of  all  Kinds. 
Many  of  the  flat  kind  are  double,  and  curioufly  tallied 
one  in  another,  which  may,  by  a  violent  Stroke,  be 
eparated.  How  to  account  for  the  vaft  Variety  to  be 
'ound  here  of  this  Sport  of  Nature,  I  know  not :  fome 
have  feen  as  broad  as  a  Pewter-difh,  and  again  others 
no  bigger  than  a  Pepper-corn  ;  but  in  all  of  them  the 
•'lutings  are  regular  ;  fome  like  the  Efcalop,  in  Rays 
rom  a  Centre ;  others  like  the  Periwinkle,  in  fpiral 
-Tines :  in  thefe,  and  all  other  Forms,  they  lie  here 
n  great  Plenty. 

ghtantock  is  an  high  Down  in  the  Neighbourhood  ; 
rom  whence,  befides  the  two  little  Iflands  called  the 
Steep  Holms  and  the  Flat- Holms ^  and  an  extenfive 

evv  of  the  Channel,  I  had  a  fair  and  diftintt  Profpect 

the  IVelfi  Coaft,  for  many  Leagues  in  Length. 

From 


21  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Somerf. 

From  hence  the  winding  Shore  brings  us  to  Bridg- 
water  :  this  is  an  ancient  and  very  confiderable  Town 
and  Port.  It  frauds  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Par- 
rat ,  or  Perrot,  which  comes  from  the  South,  after 
having  received  the  River  Tone  from  the  Weft,  which 
is  made  navigable  up  to  within  a  few  Miles  of  Taunt  en 
by  a  very  fine  new  Channel,  cut  at  the  Expence  of  the 
People  of  Tauntori)  and  which,  by  the  Navigation  of 
it,  is  infinitely  advantageous  to  that  Town,  and  well 
worth  all  their  Expence  ;  firft,  by  bringing  up  Coals, 
which  are  brought  from  Swanfey  in  Wales  by  Sea  to 
Bridgwater,  and  thence  by  Barges  up  this  River  to 
Taunton  j  next,  for  bringing  all  heavy  Goods  and 
Merchandizes  from  Brijioly  fuch  as  Iron,  Lead,  Oil, 
Wine,  Hemp,  Flax,  Pitch,  Tar,  Grocery,  Dye- 
ftuffs,  and  the  like. 

This  Town  of  Eridgwater  fends  two  Members  to 
Parliament.  Jt  is  a  populous,  trading  Town,  well 
built,  and  as  well  inhabited ;  having  many  Families 
of  good  Faihion  dwelling  in  it,  beiides  Merchants. 
The  famous  Admiral  Blake,  who  under  the  Common- 
wealth fo  much  exalted  the  Glory  of  the  Englijb  ma- 
ritime Force,  was  a  Native  of  thjs  Town. 

This  Town  was  regularly  fortified  in  the  late  Civil 
Wars,  and  fuftained  more  than  one  Siege.  The  Si- 
tuation of  it  renders  it  eafy  to  be  fortified,  the  River 
and  Haven  taking  one  chief  Part  of  the  Circumference. 
Over  the  River  they  have  a  very  good  Bridge  of  Stone; 
and  the  Tide  rifes  here,  at  High-water,  near  fix  Fa- 
thoms, and  fometimes  flows,  in  with  fuch  Impetuofity, 
that  it  comes  two  Fathoms  deep  at  a  time  ;  and  when 
it  does  fo,  unawares,  it  often  occafions  great  Damage 
to  Ships,  driving  them  foul  of  one  another,  and  fre- . 
quently  overfets  chem.  This  fudden  Rage  of  the  Tide 
is  called  the  Boar,  and  is  frequent  in  all  the  Rivers  of 
this  Channel,  especially  in  the  Severn:  'tis  alfo  known 
in  the  North,  particularly  in  the  Trent  and  the  Oufe% 

at 


omerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  23 

their  Entrance  into  the  Number^  at  JB/7/70/,  and  in 
:veral  other  Places. 

There  is  in  Bri<!gwater9\)&&t%  a  very  large  Church, 

fine  Meeting  houfe,  in  which  it  is  remarkable,  that 
ley  have  an  advanced  Seat  for  the  Mayor  and  Alder- 
nen,  when  any  of  the  Magiftrates  (hall  be  of  their 
Communion,  as  fometimes  has  happened.  Here  alfo 
College,  or  private  Academy,  for  the  Diilenters 
o  breed  up  their  preaching  Youth. 

The  Earl  of  Egmont  is  building  a  fine  Seat  (Anno 
760)  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Brldgwatcr. 

From  Brldgwater  is  a  Road  to  Brijlol,  which  they 
all  the  Lower -way  \  iY^Upper-way^  which  is  the  more 
requented  Road,  being  over  Mendip  Hills.  This 
/ower-way  is  not  always  paflable,  being  fubjedt  to 
Bloods  and  dangerous  Inundations.  All  this  Part  of 
he  Country,  viz.  between  Bridgwater  and  the  Sea, 
nd  on  Northward  upon  the  Coatt,  lies  low,  and  is 
wholly  employed  in  feeding  of  black  Cattle,  which 
hey  bring  out  of  the  Weft  Part  of  Devon,  and  the 
leighbouring  Borders  of  Cornwall^  where  the  fineft 
are  bred  :  for  as  to  thofe  few  bred  in  thefe  low  Lands, 
hey  are  very  heavy,  fluggifh,  and  unfhapely  ;  and 
he  Beef  foft  and  fpongy,  fuch  as  they  feldom  or 
never  drive  to  London  Markets.  Indeed,  they  breed 

great  many  Colts;  but  then  they  too  muft  be  tranf- 
)lanted  very  young,  into  a  dry,  healthy  Soil ;  for  'tis 
/ery  difficult  to  find  an  Horfe  of  their  own  Breed 
it  for  any  thing  but  a  Drudge.  The  Moors,  or 
VI arm- grounds,  which  are  alfo  'employed  in  the  fame 
Way,  extend  themfelves  ifp  the  Rivers  Perrot  and 
rvi ,  into  the  Heart  of  the  County  j  of  which  in  its 

ace. 

Brent  Knowle  is  a  rifmg  Hill  in  the  fiat  Country, 
he  Midway  between  Bridgwater  and  Oxbridge ;  com- 
nands  a  Profpefl  over  the  Mouth  of  the  5^vr«,  and 
he  County  of  Monmoutb^  into  Glamor ganfbire^  Weff ; 
)ver  Mendip  Hills,  and  beyond  them.  North ;  a  full 

Profpea 


24  A  T  O  U  R  thro        Somerf. 

Profpecl  of  Wells  and  Glajlonbury,  and  far  beyond 
them,  Eaft ;  and  Bridgwater  and  Hants  towards  the 
South. 

This  low  Part,  between  Bridgwater  and  Brlftol^ 
fuffered  exceedingly  in  that  terrible  Inundation  of  the 
Sea,  which  was  occafioned  by  the  great  Storm,  Anno 
1 703.  and  the  Country-people  have  fet  up  Marks  upon 
their  Houfes  and  Trees,  with  this  Note  upon  them, 
Thus  high  the  Waters  came  In  the  great  Storm  ;  Thus ' 
far  the  great  Tide  flowed  up  in  the  lajl  'violent  Tempej!; 
and  the  like. 

In  one  Place  they  (hewed  us  where  a  Ship  was 
driven  upon  the  Shore,  feveral  hundred  Yards  from 
the  ordinary  High-water  Mark,  and  left  upon  dry 
Land. 

As  the  low  Part  is  thus  occupied  in   grazing  and 
feeding   Cattle,  fo  all  the  reft  of  this  large  extended  I 
County  is  employed   in   the  Woollen  Manufacture,  | 
and  in  the  beft  and  moft  profitable  Part  of  it,  viz. 

In  Taunton, 

The  Serges,  Druggets,  &f<r.  and  feveral  other  kinds 
of  Stuffs. 

In  Wells,  Shepton,  Glaftonbury,  &c. 
Knitting  of  Stockens,    principally  for  the  Spanijk 
Trade. 

In  Briftol,  and  many  Towns  on  that  Side9 
Druggets,  Cantaloons,  and  other  Stuffs. 

In  Froom,  Philips-Norton,  and  all  the  Country  lo-der- 

ing  upon  Wiltihire, 

F'meSpantJb  Medley  Cloths,  especially  on  thatPai 

of  the  County  from  wtvcaunton  and  Ulcer , 

Ttiinfter,    Bruton,    Caftlecary,  Tempk-ccmb^    down  t< 

(jillingham  and  Shaft/bury*  in  Dorjetjhire. 

Thefe  fine  Spani/h  Medley-cloths  are  the  mix'd  c 
lour'd  Cloths,  which  all  the  Perfonsof  Fafhion  ii 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  2f 

England  wear.   There  are  vaft  Quantities  of  thefe  ex- 
ported to  all  Parts  of  Europe  ;  and  it  is  fo  very  confi- 
derable  a  Trade,  and  of  fo  vaft  an  Advantage  to  Eng- 
land^ in  maintaining  and  fupporting  fo  many  poor 
Families,  and  making  fo  many  rich  ones,  that  it  is 
almoft  impoflible  to  give  a  juft  Defcription  of  it : 
the  above  Sketch,  however,  may  ferve  as  an  Introduo 
on  to  it.     But  I  fhall  add  a  little  more  concerning 
his  County  ;  and  upon  my  entering  into  the  North- 
^eft  and  Weft  Parts  of  Wiltshire ,  where  the  Centre 
f  this  Prodigy  of  a  Trade  is,  I  mall  fum  it  all  up  to- 
ether,  and  mew 'you  the  Extent  of  Land  which  it 
Breads  itfelf  upon  ;  and  then  give  you  fome  Idea,  as 
Well  of  the  vaft  Numbers  of  People  who  are  fuftained 
s  of  thofe  who  are  enriched  by  ih 

But  I  muft  iirft  go  back  a  little  while  into  Scmcr- 
reijbire :  The  Northern  Part  of  the  County  I  did  net 
•Hit  in  this  Journey,  which,  as  I  hinted  before,  is 
mly  a  Return  from  my  long  Travel  to  the  Laud's- 
nd :  in  omitting  this  Part,  I,  of  courfe,  leave  the  twa 
Cities  of  Brijhl  and  Bath,  and  that  high  Part  of  the 
"ounty  called  Mendip- hill,  to  my  next  Weftern 
ourney,  which  will  include  all  the  Counties  due 
Weft  from  London  :  for  thefe  now  fpoken  of,  though 
rtiinarily  called  the  Weft-country,  are  rather  South - 
weft  than  Weft. 

In  that  Part  of  the  Country  which  lies  Southward 
I  Taunton  and  Bridgwater,  is  Langport^  a  well  fre- 
quented Market-town,  on  the  River  Parr,  'which  is 
navigable  for  Barges  to  Brljlol^  and  occasions  a  good 
Trade  here.  Eels  are  exceeding  plentiful  and  cheap 
here. 

South  Petherton  is  a  Market-town  on  the  fame  River, 
famou?,  of  old,  for  the  Palace  of  King  Ina,  but  now 
of  no  other  Note  than  for  an  annual  Fair,  which  lafts 
ive  Days,  in  June. 

From  hence  you  come  to  Teovll^  which  I  have  al- 
•eady  mentioned,  in  Vol.  I, 
VoL.IL  C 


26  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Somerf. 

Ivdchefttr  is  a  Borough-town,  and,  as  its  Ruins 
(hew,  was  formerly  very  large ;  and  encompafled  with 
a  double  Wall,  and  had  four  Churches.  It  has  now 
a  geod  Bridge  over  the  Ively  and  fends  two  Members 
to  Parliament. 

Sojnerton  is  a  good  Market-town,  whence,  fome 
fay,  the  County  takes  its  Name.  It  was  anciently 
very  noted,  and  had  a  ftrong  Caftle,  in  which  John 
King  of  France  was  Prifoner.  Here  is  a  Fair  which 
is  held  between  Palm- Sunday  and  the  Middle  ef  June. 

Mlibourn  lies  on  the  Edge  of  Dorfetfm>e  :  it  is  very 
ancient,  and  returns  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

Camalct  is  a  noted  Place,  fituated  on  the  higheft 
Ground  in  this  County,  on  the  Edge  of  Dorfetjhire : 
its  vulgar  Name  is  Cadbury-caftle^  from  the  Village  of 
North  Cadbury,  wherein  it  ftands.  Hereabouts  rife 
the  Rivers  of  So?nerfetjhirey  which  run  into  the  Severn 
Sea  Weftwardj  and  that  \nDorfet .  which  goes  Eaft- 
ward,  thro'«SY«r;7W«/?/r,  into  the  Southern  Ocean.  It 
is  a  noble  Fortification  of  the  Romans,  The  ProfpecT; 
is  woo ^y,  and  very  pleafant ;  here- and- there  lofty  and 
fteep  Hillocks.  Roman  Coins,  in  great  Plenty,  have 
been  found  here,  and  in  all  the  Country  round.  The 
Entrance  is  guarded  with  fix  or  feven  Ditches,  On 
the  North  fide,  in  the  fourth  Ditch,  is  a  never- failing 
Spring,  called  King  Arthur'*  Well ;  over  it  they  have 
dug  up  fquare  Stones,  Door-jambs  with  Hinges,  and 
fay  there  are  fubterraneous  Vaults  thereabouts.  The. 
Church  and  Tower  of  Cadbury  is  fmall,  but  neatly 
built  of  Stone. 

At  Wincaunton*  an  Urn  was  lately  found  full  of  Ro- 
man Money  :  Half  a  Peck  of  the  fame  Coin  was  dif-. 
covered  in  enclofing  Ground,  towards  Beacon-ajb9  a 
little  above Sutton ;  as  zlfoPatera's,  a  Knife,  and  other 
Antiquities,  now  in  Lord  Winchelfea**  Cuilody  j  and 
at  Long -Leaf  i  in  Lord  Weymouth's  Library,  is  a  Piece 
of  Lead  weighing  50  Pounds,  one  Foot  nine  Inches 
long,  two  Inches  thick,  three  and  an  half  broad, 

which 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  27 

which  was  found  in  Lord  Fitzharding's  Grounds  near 
Bruton  in  Somerfet/htre,  in  digging  a  Hole  to  fet  a  Gate- 
poft  in,  with  a  legible  Infcription  upon  it,  but  I  could 
not  obtain  a  Copy  of  it. 

The  Road  from  hence  to  Glajlonbury  is  over  Rocks, 
and  Heads  of  Rivers ;  but  that  is  alleviated  by  the 
man^  natural  Curiofities  fuch  Places  afford. 

Kyneton  Village,  for  half  a  Mile  together,  is  natu- 
rally paved  with  one  fmooth  broad  Rock,  the  whole 
Length  of  the  Road  ;  fo  that  it  looks  like  Ice. 

Croffing  the  FoJJ'e  Road  at  Lytsford^  you  enter  a  flat 
moorifh  Country,  full  of  artificial  Cuts  and  Drains, 
he  Afcent  to  the  Terr,  which  overhangs  the  Town 
of  Glajlonbury ,  is  very  difficult.  Upon  a  narrowX^reft 
of  the  Torr,  which  is  much  the  higbeft,  the  Abbot 
built  a  Church  to  St.  Mkbael^  of  good  fquate  Stone. 
he  Tower  is  left,  tho'  ruinous,  and  is  an  excellent 
Sea  mark.  It  probably  coft  more  to  raife  the  Stone 
to  this  Height,  than  to  cre6l  the  Building.  Half  way 
up  is  a  Spring:  it  is  certainly  higher  than  any  Ground 
within  ten  Miles  of  the  Place.  In  the  tini'es  of  Su- 
perftition  this  great  Monafteiy  held  the  firft  Place  for 
Reputation  of  San&ity. 

The  Inhabitants  will  have  it,  that  King  Arthur  was 
buried  here  ;  and,  as  a  Proof  thereof,  that  his  Coffin 
had  been  found  in  this  Place;  and  alfo,  thatjofipb  of 
jlrimatbea  had  been  there,  and  that  when  he  'had  fixed 
his  Staff  in  the  Ground,  which  was  on  Gtiriftma$-day% 
it  immediately  took  Root,  budded,  put  forth  White- 
thorn-leaves, and  the  next  Day  was  in  full  Bloffom, 
white  as  a  Sheet ;  and  that  the  Plant  is  preserved,  and 
blows  every  Chrijtmas-day^  as  at  rlrft,  to  this  very 
time. 

I  believe  the  Miracle  amounts  to  this  j  viz.  That  a 
kind  of  White  thorn  grows  hereabouts,  which,  in  a 
mild  Winter,  puts  forth  ibrne  Blofibms  about  Chrijl- 
mas :  and  I  doubt  not,  but  fome  of  the  fame  kind  may 
be  found  at  other  Place?,  if  any  Obfervations  were  made 

C    2  of 


t8  A  T  O  U  R  -thro         Somwf. 

it.  But  this  Place  is  remarkable  for  many  other 
marvellous  Stories  recorded  by  the  Monks,  who  for- 
merly poilefled  it. 

As  to  the  Burial  of  King/f/Y&ar,  Mr.Camden  makes 
no  doubt  of  it ;  and  gives  us,  from  Giraldus  Ga?nbren- 
JiS)  an  Account  how  King  Henry  If.  caufed  Search  to 
be  made  for  his  Tomb  ;  and  before  the  Workmen 
had  dug  feven  Feet  deep,  they  came  to  a  great  Stone, 
having  a  Crofs  of  Lead  on  the  Infuie  of  it,  and  the 
iubfequent  Letters  or  Infcription  upon  it,  and  in  the 
following  rude  Character  ;  of  which  the  faid  Giroldus 
CanibrenjiS)  Mr.  Camden  (ays,  was  an  Eye  witnefs,  as 
veil  as  of  a  Coffin  of  hollowed  Oak,  which  they 
found  by  digging  nine  feet  deeper  than  the  Infcription; 
wherein  weredepofited  the  Bones  of  that  great  Prince. 
The  Infcription  is  as  follows : 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIW. 


But  to  leave  thefe  more  difputable  Points  for  Mat- 
ters of  greater  Certainty  :  it  is  not  doubted  but  King 
Ina  built  the  Church  of  Glaftonbury,  as  one  of  the  moft 
ancient,  fo  the  moft  wealthy  and  magnificent,  loaded 
with  Revenues  by  the  Saxon,  and  perhaps  the  Britijb 
Monarchs.  The  Abbot  lived  in  little  lefs  State  than 
the  Royal  Donors.  He  could  from  the  Torr  fee  a  vaft 
C  3  Track 


30  A  T  O  U  R  thro        Somerf. 

Track  of  this  rich  Land  in  his  own  Pofleffion,  and 
feven  Parks,  well  ftored  with  Deer,  belonging  to  the 
Monaftery.  "'Tis  walled  round,  and  embattled  like 
a  Town,  a  Mile  in  Compafs. 

When  I  was  laft  rtGlaftonbury,  there  were  magni- 
ficent Ruins;  but,  within  a  few  Yards,  a  Prefbytefian 
Tenant  had  made  more  barbarous  Havock  there,  than 
bad  been  fince  the  Diflblution  :  for  every  Week  a  Pil- 
lar, a  Buttrefs,  a  Window- jamb,  or  an  Angle  of  fine 
hewn  Stone,  was  fold  to  the  belt  Bidder.  And  they 
were  a&ually  Gripping  St.  Jofeplfs  Chapel  for  that 
Purpofe,  and  the  fquar'd  Stones  were  laid  up  by  Lots 
in  the  Abbot's  Kitchen.  The  reft  goes  to  paving 
Yards,  and  Stalls  for  Cattle,  or  to  the  Highway.  So 
much  Dread,  indeed,  have  the  People  here  of  Found- 
ers Curies,  that  they  are  afraid  to  make  ufe  of  the 
Materials  for  Dwelling-houfes ;  and  are  full  of  Sto- 
ries of  fad  Accidents  and  Judgments  that  have  fallen 
upon  fuch  as  have ;  but  venture  it  for  the  Highways, 
for  aTown-houfe,  and  even  for  Barns  and  Stables:  fo 
that,  as  one  obferves,  where  few  are  fo  hardy  as  to  ap- 
ply them  to  their  particular  or  perfonal  Ufe,  a  public 
Building  (hall  be  ereded,  where  all  come  in  for  their 
Snack. 

The  Abbot's  Lodging  was  a  fine  Stone  Building  ; 
but  could  not  content  the  juft-mentioned  Tenant, 
who  pufl'd  it  clown,  and  out  of  it  built  a  new  Houfe, 
adfurdly  fetting  up  the  Anns  and  Cognizance* of  the 
gre^it  Sa.\-cn  Kings  and  Princes,  who  were  Founders, 
and  of  the  Abbots,  over  his  own  Doors  and  Windows. 
Nothing  is  left  entire  but  the  Kitchen,  a  judicious 
Piece  or"  Architecture  5  but  Tradition  fays,  that  this  is 
but  a  modern  Building :  for  the  Story  goes,  That  Wki* 
ttngj  the  laft  Abbot,  being  dealt  with  by  Henry  VIII. 
and  his  Cormorants,  for  a  Surrender,  and  bravely  re- 
fuiing  to  join  in  the  Sacrilege,  that  Prince  proceeded  to 
Menaces,  and  told  him,  he  would  u  burn  his  Kitchen 
"  about  his  Ears."  To  which  he  returned  Anfwer, 

that 


Somerf,      GREAT  BRITAIN.  31 

that  "  he  would  build  fuch  an  one  as  all  the  Timber 
"  in  the  Foreft  mould  not  burn."  And  accordingly,  as 
'tis  faid,  built  this  in  Defiance,  which  is  all  of  firm 
Stone,  Walls  and  Roof,  having  nothing  combuftible 
in  it.  But  what  neither  Flattery  nor  Menaces  could 
effect,  Tyranny  and  Murder  brought  about :  for  the 
Abbot  was  hang'd  on  St.  Michael's  Tower,  juft  now 
mentioned,  on  the  Top  of  the  high  Hill  called  The 
Torr-y  thereby  accomplifhing  a  Prophecy  (as  theTownf- 
rnen  call  it,  but  rather  occafioning  a  Saying,  fince 
fpread  abroad),  that  A  Whiting  Jhould  fwim  over 
Glafionbury  Torr. 

The  Church  was  large  and  magnificent ;  the  Walls 
of  the  Choir  are  ftanding,  25  Fathoms  long,  and  12 
broad:  there  is  one  Jamb,  at  the  Eafl-end  of  the 
high  Altar,  left. 

Hereabouts  were  buried  King  Edgar >  snd  many  of 
the  Saxw  Monarcha,  whofe  Royal  A(hes  ought  to 
'••  «»•  protected  the  Whole. 

rwo  Pillars  of  the  great  Middle  Tower  are  left, 
next  the  Choir.  On  the  Noith-fide  is  St.  Mary's 
Chapel,  as  they  told  me  ;  the  Roof  beat  down  by 
Violence,  and  a  mean  wooden  one  in  its  Place, 
thatch'd  with  Stubble,  to  make  it  ferve  as  a  Stable : 
the  Manger  lies  upon  the  Altar  and  Nich  where  they 
put  the  Holy- water  ;  St.  Edgar's  Chapel  is  oppofite 
to  it ;  but  there  is  not  much  left  of  it  befides  the 
Foundations.  The  prefent  Work  is  44  Paces  long, 
-  and  36  wide  without :  molt  Part  of  the  Roof  is  want- 
ing. Two  little  Turrets  are  at  the  Corners  of  the 
Weft- end,  and  tv/o  more  at  the  Interval  of  four 
Windows  from  thence ;  which  feem  to  indicate  the 
Space  of  Ground  the  firfl  Chapel  was  built  on  :  the 
reft,  between  it  and  the  Church,  was  a  kind  of  Ante- 
chapel.  Underneath  was  a  Vault,  now  full  of  Wa- 
ter, the  Floor  of  the  Chapel  being  beaten  down  into 
it :  it  was  wrought  with  good  Stones. 

C  4  Here 


3.2  A  T  O  U  R  thro        Somerf. 

Here  was  a  capacious  Receptacle  of  the  Dead.  They 
have  taken  up  many  leaden  Coffins,  and  melted  them 
into  Ciflerns. 

The  Roof  of  the  Chapel  was  finely  arched  with 
Rib- work  of  Stone  :  the  Sides  of  the  Walls  are  full  of 
fmall  Pillars  of  Sujfex  Marble,  as  likewife  the  whole 
Church  >  which  was  a  mean  Way  of  ornamenting  in 
thofe  Times:  they  are  moftly  beaten  down.  Between 
them  the  Walls  are  painted  with  Pictures  of  Saints, 
as  Hill  vifible.  All  the  Walls  ar<T  overgrown  with 
Ivy,  which  is  the  only  thing  here  in  a  flourifhing 
Condition  j  every  thing  elfe  prefenting  a  moft  melan- 
choly,, tho'  venerable  Afpedi.  On  the  South-fide  of 
the  Cloifters  was  the  great  Hall. 

The  Townfmen  bought  the  Stones  of  the  Vaults 
underneath  to  build  a  forry  Market-houfe;  not  difcern- 
'.ng  the  Benefit  accruing  to  the  Town  from  the  great 
Concourfe  of  Strangers  purpofdy  to  fee  this  Abbey, 
which  is  now  its  greateft  Trade,  as  formerly  its  only 
Support :  for  'tis  in  a  moft  miferable  decaying  Condi- 
tion, as  wholly  cut  off  from  the  large  Revenues  fpcnt 
among  them. 

There  are  many  other  Foundations  of  the  Buildings 
left  in  the  great  Area ;  but,  in  the  prefent  Hands  will 
foon  be  rooted  up,  and  the  very  Footfteps  of  them  ef- 
faced, which  fo  many  Ages  had  been  creeling. 

1  he  Abbot's  Hall,  I  have  been  told,  was  curioufly 
wainfcoted  with  Oak,  and  painted  with  Coats  of  Arms 
in  every  Panel.  The  Mortar  of  thefe  Buildings  is 
very  good,  and  great  Rocks  of  the  Roof  of  the  Church 
lie  upon  the  Ground  ;  chiefly  confifting  of  Rubble- 
ftone  untouched  by  the  fanatical  Deftroyers,  who 
chiefly  work  on  the  hewn  Stone  of  the  Outfide,  till  a 
whole  Wail  falls,  when  undermined  a  little. 

Throughout  the  Town  are  the  tattered  Remains  of 
Doors,  Windows,  Bafes,  Capitals  of  Pillars,  &c. 
brought  from  the  Abbey,  and  put  into  every  poor 
Cottage. 

In 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  33 

In  the  Town  are  two  Churches ;  the  upper  an 
handfome  Fabric,  with  a  fine  Tower  of  good  Defign, 
adorned  wich  Figures  in  Niches.  The  George  Inn  is 
an  old  Stone  Building,  called  The  Abbot's  Inn9  where 
chiefly  the  Pilgrims  were  lodged,  who  came  ftrolling 
hither,  and  idling  their  Time  away  for  Sandity.  A 
Coat  of  Arms,  of  the  Kings  of  England,  fupported 
by  a  Lion  and  a  Bull,  is  over  the  Gate,  with  many 
CrofTes.  There  was  a  Bed  of  large  Timber,  with 
imbofs'd  gilt  Panels,  which  feemed  to  have  been  the 
Abbot's. 

In  the  Year  1751.  a  Difcovery  was  thought  to  be 
made  of  the  Salubrity  of  the  Waters  here,  which  oc- 
cafioned  fuch  a  Refort  hither,  that  there  were  not 
wanting  fanguine  People  who  hoped  from  thence  to 
fee  this  famous  Place  reftored  to  its  former  Confidera- 
tion.  '  The  Refort  to  Glajlonbury  on  this  Account 
(fays  a  Gentleman,  writing  to  his  Friend  on  the  Sub- 
ject, in  the  Year  abovefaid)  '  is  very  extraordinary, 

*  Some  of  the  Objecls  that  come  hither  for  Relief  are 

*  {hocking  beyond  Exprelfion ;  anil  the  Cures  that 
6  have  been  already  performed  by  thefe  Waters,  are 
c  amazing.     I  dare  fay,  that  within  one  Month  there 

*  have  been  near  20, 000  People  to  drink  the  Waters 
'  here.     The  chief  Refort   ufed  to  be  on  a  Sunday, 
'  which  was  owing  to  the  fuperftitious  Notion  of  a 

*  Man,  whofe  Recovery  from  an  Afthma  by  drinking 

*  thefe  Waters,  which  he  was  induced  toby  aDream", 

*  firft  brought  them  into  Requeft,     The  Inhabitants 
V  of  Glajlonbury  (adds  the  Gentleman)  are  extremely 
'.  induftrious  to  procure  Accommodations  for  all  who 
4  come  hither.     There  are  now  (fays  he)  no  lefs  than 

*  700  Lodgers  in  or  near  the  Town.    Strangers  meet 

*  with  kind  Treatment,  and  more  reafonable  Living 
4  than  one  would  imagine,  where  fuch  an  advantage- 
4  ous  Difcovery  has  been  made.     The  Waters  are 
'  very  agreeable  to  the  Tafte,  give  great  Spirits,  an4< 

C  5  «  create 


34  A  T  O  U  R  tiro        Someri; 

«  create  a  vaft  Appetite,  arid  are  certainly  a  great 

*  Antifcorbutic. 

'  The  Compofition  of  thefe  Waters  is  not  as  yet 

*  well  known  :  Many  Experiments  have  been  tried, 

*  and  they  arc  fuppofed  to  be  ftrongly  impregnated 
4  with  Steel,  Allom,  and  fome  other  Salts.  They  are 

*  not  Purgative,  unlefs  in  fome  Cafes;  they  operate 

"fly  by  Urine  and  Perfpiration.' 

Thefe  Waters  got  at  laft  into  Projectors  Hand?, 
and  i  am  afraid  are  found  hot  to  defer ve  the  extraor- 
dinary Character  given  of  their  falutary  Effects  ;  fince 
their  Reputation  is  over.  In  fhort,  Glnftonbury 
Waters  were  the  ghtickfiher  and  Tar-water  of  their 
Day. 

Four  Miles  from  Glaftonbury  lies  the  little  City  of 
>,  where  is  one  of  the  neateft  Cathedrals  in 
England ;  particularly,  the  Weft  Front  of  it,  which 
is  a  complete  Draught  of  Imagery,  as  well  as  very 
ancient.  It  was  built  (on  the  Site  of  the  old  one 
«unded  by  King  Ina)  by  Robert  de  Lewes  and  Joceline 
dc  Welles. 

The  Clofe,  or  Part  of  the  City  where  the  Biihop's 
Palace  is,  is  very  properly  called  fo ;  for  it  is  walled 
in,  and  locked  up  like  a  little  Fortification,  and  has  a 
Moat  round  it.  The  dignified  Clergy  live  in  the  In- 
fide  of  it,  and  the  Prebendaries  and  Canons  have  very 
agreeable  Dwellings.  Here  are  no  lefs  than  27  Pre- 
bendaries, and  19  Canons,  befides  a  Dean,  a  Chan- 
cellor, a  Precentor,  and  Three  Archdeacons;  a  Num- 
ber which  very  few  Cathedrals  in  England  have  befides. 
jBimop  Thomas  de  Bekyngton^  who  fat  here  in  1443. 
built  the  beautiful  Palace  gate,  and  12  ftately  Stone 
Houfes.  Bijfhop  Knight^  and  Dean  Wooltnan^  made  the 
fine  arch'd  Fabric  in  the  Market-place,  now  called  The 
Crofs. 

The  County  is  the  Diocefe,  which  was  inftituted  in 
909.  by  King  Edward  the  elder,  anJ  contains  388 

Parishes  5 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  jf 

Parifhes ;  and  the  Archdeaconries  are  of  Welh^  Bath, 
and  Taunt  on, 

The  City  lies  juft  at  the  Foot  of  the  Mountains 
called  Meiidip-bittf)  and  is  built  on  a  ftony  Founda- 
tion. Its  Manufacture  is  chiefly  of  Stockens,  as  has 
been  faid  :  'tis  well  built,  and  populous.  It  was,  at 
the  Requeft  of  Bi{hop  Welles  before-mentioned,  made 
a  free  Borough  by  King  Henry  II.  which  was  con- 
firmed by  King  John^  who  granted  it  other  Privileges, 
which  Queen  Elizabeth  ratified,  and  appointed  that  it 
fhould  be  governed  by  a  Mayor,  Recorder,  7  Alder- 
men, and  1 6  Common -councilmen.  The  Market- 
days  are  H'ednefday  and  Friday.  The  City  fends  two 
Members  to  Parliament. 

Near  this  City,  and  juft  under  the  Hills,  is  the  fa- 
mous Wokey-Hole^  the  chief  Curiofity  of  which  is 
irequently  found  in  all  fuch  fubterraneous  Caverns  ; 
that  the  Water,  dropping  from  the  Roof  of  the  Vault, 
petrefies,  and  hangs  in  long  Pieces  like  Icicles,  as  if  it- 
would,  in  time,  turn  into  a  Column  to  fupport  the 
Arch. 

Not  far  from  hence  is  Sedgmore^  a  watry  fplafhy 
Place,  famous  for  the  Defeat  of  the  Duke  of  Mon- 
mouth, 

Jn  the  low  Country,  on  the  other  Side  Mendip- 
hills,  lies  Cbcdder,  a  Village  pleafantly  fttuated  under 
the  very  Ridge  of  the  Mountains:  before  the  Village 
is  a  large  Green  or  Common,  on  which  ail  the  Cows 
belonging  to  the  Town  feed ;  the  Ground  is  exceeding 
rich,  and,  as  the  Inhabitants  are  Cowkeepers,  they 
take  care  to  maintain  the  Goodriefs  of  the  Soil,  by 
agreeing  to  lay  large  Quantities  of  Dung,  for  ma* 
Buring  and  enriching  the  Land. 

Several  Perfons  frequently  here  mix  their  Milk  to- 
gether, which  often  weighs  an  hundred  Weight,  force- 
times  more  ;  and  is  fo  excellent,  that  the  Cheefe  is 
eftcn  fold  from  6  </,  to  8  d.  per  Pound,  when  the 
C  6  Ctofnri 


3 6  A  TOUR  tiro        Somerf, 

Cbefoire  Cheefe  is  fold   but  from  two-pence  to  two- 
pence Halfpenny. 

Here  is  a  deep  frightful  Chafm  in  the  Mountain,  in 
the  Hollow  of  which  the  Road  goes  toward  Briftul  j 
-  and  out  of  the  fame  Hollow  fprings  a  little  Stream, 
which  is  fo  rapid,  that  it  is  faid  to  drive  12  Mills, 
within  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  of  the  Spring;  but  it  muft 
be  fuppofed  to  fetch  fome  winding  Reaches  in  the 
Way,  otherwife  there  would  not  be  Room  for  12 
Mills  to  ftand,  and  have  a  fufficient  Head  of  Water 
to  each,  within  fo  fmall  a  Space  of  Ground.  The 
Water  of  this  Spring  grows  quickly  into  a  River, 
which  runs  down  into  the  Marfh.es,  and  joins  ano- 
ther little  River  called  A'xe^  about  Axlrtdge^  and  thence 
into  the  Brijlol  Channel,  or  Severn  Sea. 

I  muft  now  turn  Eaft,  and  South-eaft ;  for  I  re- 
folved  not  to  go  up  the  Hills  of  Mendip  at  all,  this 
Journey,  leaving  that  Part  to  another  Tour. 

I  come  now  to  that  Part  of  the  County  which  joins 
to  Wiltjkirt,  which  I  referved,  in  particular,  to  this 
Place,  in  order  to  give  fome  Account  of  the  Broad- 
cloth Manufacture,  which  I  feveral  times  mentioned 
before,  arid  which  is  carried  on  here,  to  fuch  a  De- 
gree, as  to  deferve  a  Place  in  all  the  Defcriptions  or 
Hiftories  which  fh-all  be  given  of  this  Country. 

As  the  Eaft  and  South  Parts  of  Wiltjblre  are  all. 
hilly,  fpreading  themfelves  far  and  wide  in  Plains,  and 
graiTy  Downs,  for  breeding  and  feeding  vaft  Flocks  of 
.  Sheep  ;  and  as  the  Weft  and  North  Parts  of  Somer- 
fetjhire  are,  on  the  contrary,  low  and  marfhy,  or 
moorifh,  for  feeding  and  breeding  of  black  Cattle  and 
Horfes,  or  for  Lead  Mines,  fcfr.  fo  all  the  South- weft 
Part  of  Wiltjhiret  and  the  Eaft  Part  of  Somerfttjbirt* 
are  low  and  flat,  being  a  rich,  enclofed  Country,  full 
of  Rivers  and  Towns,  and  infinitely  populous;  info- 
much  that  fome  of  the  Market- towns  are  equal  to 
Cities  in  Bignefs,  and  fuperior  to  many  of  them  in 
Numbers  of  People,. 

This 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  37 

This  low  flat  Country  contains  Part  of  the  three 
Counties  of  Somerfet,  JFUts,  and  Gloucefler  ;  and  that 
the  Extent  of  it  may  be  the  eafier  underftood  by  thofe 
who  know  any  thing  of  the  Situation  of  the  Country, 
it  reaches  from  Cirencejler  in  the  North,  to  Sbireborn, 
on  the  Edge  of  Dorfet/hire,  South  ;  and  from  the 
Devizes  Eatt,  to  Briftol  Weft  ;  which  may  take  in 
about  50  Miles  in  Length,  where  longeftj  and  20  in 
Breadth,  where  narroweft. 

In  this  Extent  of  Country,  we  have  the  following 
Market-towns,  which  are  principally  employed  in  the 
Clothing  Trade,  that  is  to  fay,  in  that  Part  of  it 
which  I  am  now  fpeaking  of ;  namely,  fine  medley 
or  mix'd  Cloths,  fuch  as  are  ufually  worn  in  England 
by  the  better  Sort  of  People,  and  alfo  exported  in  great 
Quantities  to  Holland,  Hamburgh,  Sweden^  Denmark, 
Spain,  Italy,  &c.  The  principal  Clothing  Towns,  in 
this  Part  of  the  Country,  are  thefe  ; 

In  SOMERSETSHIRE.  Frame ,  Pemfird,  Philips  Nor- 
ton,  Bruton,  Shepton-Mallet,  Co/lie- Carey,  and 
Wincaunton. 

In  Wi  L  T  s  H I R  E .  Malm/bury,  Caftlecomb,  Cbippenbam^ 
Cain,   Devizes,    Bradford,    Ttubridge^ 
Warminfler,  and  Mere. 

7/7  DORSET  SHIRE.  GilUngbam,  Sbaftejbttry, 
Bere,  Sturminjhr,  and  Shireborn. 

In  GLOUCESTERSHIRE.  Cirencejler,  Tetbury^ 
field,  Mincing -Hampton,'  and  Fair  ford. 

Thefe  Towns,  as  they  ftand  thin,  and  at  confi- 
derable  Diftances/rom  one  another  (for,  except  the 
two  Towns  of  Bradford  and  Trubridge,  the  others 
ftand  at  an  unufual  Diftance),  are  interfperfed  with  a 
very  great  Number  of  Villages,  Hamlets,  and  fcat- 
tered  fioufes ;  in  which,  generally  fpeaking,  the  fpin- 
uing  Work  of  all  this  Manufacture  is  performed  by 


38  A  TOUR  thro         Somerf. 

the  poor  People  ;  the  Mafter-Clothiers,  who  gene- 
rally live  in  the  greater  Towns,  fending  out  the  Wool 
weekly  to  their  Houfes,  by  their  Servants  and  Horfes  j 
and,  at  the  fame  time,  bringing  back:  the  Yarn  that 
they  have  fpun  and  fmiflied,  which  then  is  fitted  for. 
the  Loom. 

The  increafmg  and  flourifhingCircumftances  of  this 
Trade  are  happily  vifihle,  by  the  great  Concourfe  of 
People  to,  and  Increafe  of  Buildings  and  Inhabitants 
in,  thefe  principal  Clothing  Towns,  where  this  Trade 
is  carried  on,  and  in  the  Wealth  of  the  Clothiers. 
The  Town  of  Frome^  or,  as  it  is  written  in  our  Maps, 
Frame  Selwood,  is  a  Specimen  of  this,  which  is  fopro- 
cligioufly  increafed  within  thefe  lait  30  or  40  Years, 
that  they  have  built  a  new  Church,  and  many  new 
Streets  of  Houfes  ;  and  thefe  Houfes  are  fo  full  of  In- 
habitants, that  Frorr.e  is  now  reckoned  to  have  more 
Tnhabitants  in  it  than  the  City  of  Bath,  and,  fome 
fay,  than  Salijbury.. 

Its  Trade  is  wholly  Clothing,  and  the  Cloths  they 
make  are,  generally  fpeaking,  all  conveyed  to  London^ 
where  Blackwell-hall  is  their  Market.  And  if  we  may 
believe  common  Fame,  there  are  above  10,000  People 
in  Frame  now,  more  than  lived  in  it  30  Years  ago  ; 
and  yet  it  was  a  coniid'erable  Town  then  *. 

*  Since  the  above  was  written,  the  Tfr.de  of  ;hi;  Town,  as  well  as 
of  the  other  Clothing  Towns,  has  received  fome  Check,  by  reafon  of 
the  Wars  which  have  difturb.-d  the  Repofe  of  Europe ;  and  the  Towns,  • 
cf  confequence,  are  lefs  flourishing  ;  and  it  muft  be  obfcrved,  that  the 
Improvements  which  the  Fiincb  have,  cf  Jate,  made  in  the  Clothing 
Trade,  threaten  lading  D;i<xura.:ement  to  this  ftaple  Branch  of  Br:ti{b. 
Manufacture  :  for  that  bufy  Nation  have  already  worm'd  us  out  of  a 
large  Part  cf  the  Levant  or  Turkey  Trade,  by  the  light  thin  Cloths 
•which  they  make  ;  and  which,  tho'  not  fj  gocd  as  c.urs,  yet  fuit  well 
the  Inhabitants  of  thjfe  hot  Climates,  and  can  be  afforded  cheaper. 
Endeavours,  lam  told,  are  making  in  To^jh:re}  sr.,}  other  Parts,  ro 
recover  this  Branch  of  Trade,  by  outvying  the  French  in  the  fame  fort 
of  Manufacture.  But  when  Trade  and  Mar.ufaclun-s  find  thtmfelves 
r»t  new  Channels,  it  is  not  eaiy  to  rtftore  them  t«  the  old,  And  the 
Frtntb  are  a  bufy,  active,  and  euterprifing  People, 

Th« 


Wilts.       GREAT  BRITAIN'.  3^ 

The  Devizes,  a  Borough-town,  is  a  large  and  im- 
portant Town,  and  full  of  wealthy  Clothiers ;  but 
fome  years  ago  it  run  pretty  much  into  the  Drugget- 
making  Trade  ;  a  Bufmefs,  which  made  fome  fnva» 
lion  upon  that  of  the  Broad-cloth  ;  great  Quantities  of 
Druggets  being  worn  in,  as  well  as  exported  from 
England^  inftead  of  Broad  -  cloth  :  but  not  fo  much 
now  as  they  ufed  to  be  :  and  this  was  much  the  fame, 
as  to  the  Trade ;  for  as  it  was  all  a  Woolen  Manu- 
facture, and  the  Druggets  might  properly  be  called 
Cloth,  tho'  narrow,  and  of  a  different  Make  j  fo  the 
Makers  are  all  called  Clothiers.  This  Town  fends 
two  Members  to  Parliaments. 

The  River  Avon,  a  noble  and  large  frefli  River,. 
branching  itfelf  into  many  Parts,  and  receiving  almoft 
all  the  Rivers  on  that  Side  of  the  Hills,  waters  this 
whole  fruitful  Vale  :  and  the  Water  of  this  River 
feems  particularly  qualified  for  dying  the  beft  Colour*, 
and  for  fulling  and  dreffing  the  Cloth  ;  fo  that  the 
Clothiers  generally  plant  themfelves  .upon  this  River, 
but  efpecially  the  Dyers ;  as  at  Trubridge  and  Brad- 
ford^ which  are  the  two  moft  eminent  Clothing- towns- 
in  that  Part  of  the  Vale  for  the  making  fine  Spanijb- 
Cloths,  and  for  the  niceft  Mixtures. 

From  thefe  Towns,  South  to  IVeflbury  and  War- 
mlnfter^  the  fame  Trade  continues,  and  the  fineft 
Medley  Spanijh  Cloths  are  made  in  this  Part.  They 
told  me  at  Bradford,  that  it  was  no  extraordinary 
Thing  to  haveClothiers  thereabout  worth  from  10,000 
to  3.0,000  /.  a  Man  ;  and  many  of  the  Gentry  in  thofe 
Counties  have  been  originally  raifed  from  this  truly 
noble  Manufacture. 

Notwithftanding  the  whole  Country  is  thus  bufy'd 
in  the  Broad-cloth  Manufacture,  I  muft  not  omit  to 
mention,  that  here  is  a  very  great  Application  to  ano- 
ther Branch  or  two  of  Trade  ;  viz.  the  (applying  the 
City  of  London  with  Provilions  :  tho*  it  is  true,  that 
the  general  Employment  of  the  People  in  all  this 

County 


40  J  T  O  U  R  tbro          Wilts. 

County  is  in  the  Woolen  Manufacture ;  vet,  as  the 
Spinning  is  generally  the  Work  of  the  Women  and 
Children,  and  the  Land  is  here  exceeding  rich  and  fer- 
tile; fo  it  cannot  be  fuppofed,  but  that  here  are  Farm- 
ers in  great  Numbers,  whofe  Bufinefs  it  is  to  culti- 
vate the  Land,  and  fupply  the  reft  of  the  Inhabitants 
with  Provifions  ;  and  this  they  <lo  fo  well,  that  not- 
withftanding  the  County  is  exceeding  populous,  yet 
Provifions  of  all  Sorts  are  cheap,  the  Quantity  very 
great,  and  a  confiderable  Overplus  fent  every  Day  to 
London. 

All  the  lower  Part  of  this  County,  and  alfo  of  Ghu- 
cefterjb'ire  adjoining,  is  full  of  large  feeding  Farms, 
which  we  call  Dairies  ;  and  the  Cheefe  they  make  is 
excellent,  and  is  eaten  newer  than  that  from  Chejhire. 
Of  this  a  vaft  Quantity  is  every  Week  fent  up  to  Lon- 
don, where,  tho'  it  is  called  GioucefteTJhire  Cheefe,  yet 
the  greateft  Part  of  it  comes  from  Wiltfwre ;  the 
Glcucefterftire  Cheefe  being  more  generally  carried  to 
Bri/iol  and  Bath,  where  a  very  great  Quantity  is  con- 
fumed,  as  well  by  the  Inhabitants  cf  thefe  two  popu- 
lous Cities,  as  in  Exportation  to  our  Weft-India  Colo- 
nies, and  other  Places  ;  whereas  this  PWtfoireCheefc 
is  carried  to  the  River  of  Thames,  which  runs  through 
Part  of  the  County,  by  Land  carriage,  and  fo  by 
Barges  to  London. 

Again,  in  the  Spring  of  the  Year,  they  make  a  vaft 
Quantity  of  that  we  call  Green  or  New  Cheefe,  which 
is  a  thin  and  very  foft  Cheefe,  refembling  Cream 
Cheefes,  but  fomewhat  thicker :  thefe  are  fo  generally 
liked  in  London,  that  all  the  low  rich  Lands  in  this 
County  are  hardly  enough  to  fupply  the  Market :  but 
then  this  holds  for  little  more  than  the  two  firft  Sum- 
mer Months  of  the  Year, 

Befides  this,  the  Farmers  in  Wilt/hire,  and  the  Part 
of  Gbucefte  Jhire  adjoining,  fend  great  Quantities  of 
Bacon  up  to  London,  which  is  efteemed  the  beft  Bacon 
\&  England^  Hampjhire  only  excepted,  This  Bacon 


iVilts.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  41 

raifed  here,  by  their  great  Dairies,  as  the  Hogs  are 
ed  with  the  vaft  Quantities  of  Whey,  and  fkimmed 
Milk,  which  the  Farmers  muft  otherwise  have  thrown 
way. 

But  this  is  not  all :  for  as  the  North  Part  of  Wilt- 

ffjire,  as  well  the  Downs   as  the  Vales,  border  upon 

be  River  Thames,  and  in  fome  Places  come  up  even 

to  the  Banks  of  it ;  fo  moft  of  that  Part  of  the  Coun- 

y  being  arable  Land,  they  fow  a  very  great  Quantity 

»f  Barley,  which  is  carried  to  the  Markets  at  Abing- 

!0«,  Farringdon,  and  fuch  Places  3  where  it  is  made 

nto  Malt,  and  carried  to  London.     This  employs  all 

be  H  il  1  -country  from  above  Malm/bury  to  Marlborougby 

nd  on  the  Side  of  the  Vale  of  IVbiteborfe,  as 'tis  called, 

which  is  in  Berkjbire^nd  the  Hills  adj  >ining;  a  Track: 

>f  fertile  Ground,  which  furnifhes  a  prodigious  Quan- 

ity  of  Barley. 

Thus  Wwjtoiti  helps  to  fupply  London  with  Cheefe, 
Bacon,  and  Malt,  three  very  confiderable  Articles, 
>efides  that  vaft  Manufacture  of  fine  Spanijh  Cloths, 
>f  which  I  have  faid  fo  much  j  and  1  may,  without 
Dartiality,  fay,  that  it  is  thereby  rendered  one  of  the 
moft  important  Counties  in  England  to  the  public 

ealch  of  the  Kingdom.     The  bare  Product  is  in 
tfelf  prodigioufly  great ;    the  Downs  are  an  inex- 
laufted  Storehoufe  of  Wool,  and  of  Corn  ;  and  the- 
/alley,  or  low  Part  of  it,  is  the  like  for  Cheefe  and 
Bacon. 

I  One  Thing  here  is  worth  while  to  mention,  for  the 
Obfervation  of  thofe  Counties  in  England,  where  they 
are  not  yet  arrived  to  that  Perfection  in  Hufbandry, 
as  in  this  County;  and  I  have  purpofely  referved  it  to 
this  Place:  arid  that  is,  the  Downs  or  Plains,  which 
tho'  generally  calFd  Sa'ifbury  Plain,  yet  extend  them- 
elves  into  the  Counties  of  Southampton^  Wilts,  and 
Dorfet,  were  formerly  wholly  taken  up  with  Sheep, 
as  being  thought  incapable  of  producing  Grain,  but 
now  are  made  to  yield  moft  plentiful  Crops,  by  fold- 
ing 


42  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Wills. 

ing  their  Sheep  upon  the  plowed  Lands,  removing- 
the  Fold  every  Night  to  a  frefh  Place,  till  the  whole 
Fallow  has  been  folded  on.  This  alone  has  made  thefe 
Lands,  which  in  themfelves  are  poor,  and,  in  fome 
Places,  fo  (hallow  as  that  the  Earth  is  not  fix  Inches 
deep  over  the  folid  Chalk,  able  to  bear  as  good  Wheat 
as  any  of  the  richer  Lands  in  the  Vales,  though  not 
altogether  in  fuch  great  Quantities:  and  were  it  not 
for  this  Improvement,  the  Produdi:  would  hardly  com- 
penfate  the  Ploughman's  Labour  j  for  many  of  thefe 
Lands  lie  up  fu:h  high  Hills,  and  remote  from  the 
Farmers  Houfes,  which  are  always  in  the  Valleys,  that 
it  would  he  very  difficult  to  carry  up  their  Dung  to 
manure  them. 

If  this  Way  o^"  folding  S*neep  upon  the  fallow  and 
plowed  Land  were  praclifed  in  fome  other  Parts  of 
Britain^  and  efpecially  in  Scotland,  it  would  effectually 
improve  the  waire  Lands,  which  now  are  uftlefs  and 
uncultivated,  and  turn  both  Sheep  and  Lands  to  a  better 
Account  than  was  ever  yet  known  among  them.  In 
Wihjhire  it  appears  to  be  fo,  very  fignifkantly  :  for  if 
a  Farmer  has  a  thoufand  Sheep,  and  no  Fallows  to 
fold  them  on,  his  Neighbours  will  give  him  ten  Shil- 
lings a  Night  for  every  Thoufand.  The  plowing  fo 
much  Land  on  the  Downs  may  be  attended  with  bad 
Confequences  hereafter  *,  though,  at  the  time  when 
thefe  Lands  were  broken  up,  it  might  produce  Profit: 
for  as  tbe  Surface  of  the  Ground  is  very  (hallow,  and 
generally  great  Beds  of  Flints  lie  immediately  under 
the  Turf;  fo  thefe  are  plowed  up,  and,  being  mixed 
with  the  fmall  Quantity  of  Earth,  the  Ground  appears 
to  be  nothing  but  a  Quarry  of  Flints.  And  as  thefe 
Grounds  are  foon  exhaufted,  by  Crops  of  Corn ;  when- 
ever any  Part  of  them  is  laid  down  again,  it  is  feveral 
Years  before  they  have  any  Grafs  upon  them,  and 
never  become  fo  good  a  Sward  as  before,  as  the  Inha- 
bitants themfelves  obferved.  What  encouraged  them 

*  See  Vol.  I,  p.  194,  195. 

to 


Wilts.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  45 

;o  break  up  Co  much  of  their  Downs,  was  the  great 
Price  which  Corn  bore,  for  fome  Years  ;  but,  fmce 
:hat  has  fallen,  the  Crops  have  barely  paid  their  Cul- 
:ure. 

In  many  Parts  of  thefe  Downs,  which  have  been 
plowed,  there  is  an  uncommon  Quantity  of  Thiftles, 
which  the  Farmers  never  deftroy,  from  a  Notion 
which  they  have  generally  entertained,  that  their  Sheep 
were  once  preferved,  in  an  hard  Winter,  by  feeding 
on  them. 

I  have  not  mentioned  the  Clothing  Towns  other 
than  as  they  contribute  to  that  Trade  ;  I  (hall  now 
proceed  to  fay  fomething  of  the  Towns  themfelves, 
except  thofe  in  G  Ion  cefter  fair  e,  of  which  I  fhall  fpeak 
in  my  next  Letter,  as  I  fall  down  Weflward. 


Sbepton-  Mallet^  Caflle  -Carey, 
ton,  lie  to  the  Southward  of  /%//;,  and  have  nothing 
remarkable  in  them,  except  the  laft,  which  lies  on  the 
River  Brews.  It  has  a  fair  Church,  a  good  Free- 
fchool,  a  (lately  Alms-  houfe,  and  the  Ruins  of  a  Pri- 
ory ;  and,  befide  the  Clothing  Trade,  is  famous  for 
Stockens. 

Frome  and  Phi  'lips-  Norton  lie  in  the  Eaft  Part  of  So- 
merfetjbire^  upon  the  Borders  of  Witts  ;  the  firft  is  near 
the  Foreft  of  Selwood,  and  I  have  already  mentioned 
it  ;  the  laft  is  a  good  Market  town,  and  has  two  an- 
nual Fairs,  one  reputed,  for  a  One-  day  Fair,  as  great 
as  any  in  England. 

Pemfcrd  is  a  fmall  Market-town,  and  lies  North. 
wed  toward  Brijld, 

Malm/bury^  a  Borough  -town,  is  a  very  ancient  one> 
and,  'tis  faid,  was  built  by  a  Britijh  Prince,  callecj 
Caer  Rladdon.  It  was  formerly  defended  by  Wallsy 
and  a  large  ftrong  Caftle,  which  was  raifed  afterward, 
to  inlarge  the  Abbey,  which  was  very  famous,  and 
the  greateft  in  Wiltjbirs  :  the  Abbot  fat  in  Parliament. 

Here 


44  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Wilts. 

Here  King  Atbelftane  was  buried,  and  they  ftill  fhew 
his  Tomb.  Vail  Piles  of  Buildings  were  pulled  down 
at  the  Diflblution  ;  but  the  Church  of  the  Abbey  was 
faved,  a  great  Part  of  which  ftill  remains,  and  is  ufed 
as  the  Parifh  church.  It  is  a  Corporation  governed  by 
a  Jujiiie^  who  is  an  annual  Magiftrate,  and  called  T/jg> 
Alderman.  It  has  a  good  Market  weekly.  The  Town 
is  neat,  and  lies  on  the  River  Avon.  \\  is  alfo  famous 
for  being  the  Birth  -place  of  //  illiam  o;  A'JalmJbury^  the 
Hiftorian  ;  and  of  that  great  Scholar,  Philofopfcer,  and 
Mathematician,  Hobbes,  &c.  It  fern.'.-  two  Members 
to  Parliament. 

Near  this  Town,  Southward,  on  :ne  fame  River, 
lies  the  Village  of  Dantfcy^  which,  tho  but  an  obfcuie 
Place,  has  given  Title  of  Honour  to  many  eminent 
Perfons,  and,  among  the  reft,  to  Henry  Danvers^ 
created  Barcn  of  this  Place  by  .Kin ;  "James  I.  tho'  by 
King  Charles  I.  made  Earl  of  Dan'y.  He  had  autm- 
guifhed  himfelf  in  Queen  Elizabeth^  Irijb  Wars,  w.«s 
as  good  as  he  was  great)  and  died  with  Glory  ; 
his  Brother  and  Heir,  having  fat,  ungratefully,  a  J 
on  that  very  King  who  made  his  Brother  Earl,  vv.-.s, 
at  the  Reftoration,  attainted  of  High  Tre^.fon,  and 
this  his  Manor  of  Dantfey  given  to  'James  then  Duke 
of  York;  who  fettled  it,  in  Dowry,  on  his  fecond 
Confort.  On  his  Abdication,  it  became  a  fecond 
time  forfeited  ;  and  King  IVilliam  conferred  it  on 
Charles  Lord  Mordaunt,  late  Earl  of  Peterborough  and 
Monmouth)  in  whofe  Family  it  fliil  remains.  But  as 
there  are  fome  other  Things  more  than  ordinarily 
particular,  relating  to  this  Manor,  I  fhall  inlarge  a  lit- 
tle upon  it. 

The  whole  Parifh  of  Dantfey  confiRs  of  this  Manor 
only  ;  and  not  a  Foot  of  Ground  in  it  belongs  to  any 
other  Perfon  :  it  is  altogether  Pafture,  and,  indeed, 
very  rich.  The  Inhabitants,  who  are  all  Tenants  of 
the  Manor,  make  excellent  Cheefe,  not  at  all  infe- 
rior to  that  of  Cheddery  which  is  the  only  Commo- 
dity 


Wilts.        GREAT  BRITAIN,  45" 

lity  in  the  Place ;  for  the  Jate  Lord  would  not  permit 
ihe  Grounds  to  be  plowed  up  :  and,  I  believe,  there 
s  not  an  Acre  of  arable  Land  in  the  Parifh,  tho'  the 
Fen  ants  have  ofFer'd  a  confiderable  Advance  of  Rent, 
br  Liberty  to  break  up  the  Ground  ;  which,  indeed, 
eems  to  want  it,  and  would  be  much  better'd  by  the 
Dlough  :  nor  would  his  Lordfhip,  for  fome  Years  be- 
bre  his  Death,  renew  a  Life  upon  it,  either  by  Leaf* 
>r  Copyhold,  except  as  many  of  the  laft  as  would  keep 
ip  the  Homage,  and  the  Rights  of  the  Manor  :  and 
he  Reafon  of  this  was,  not  only  to  get  a  clear  Rack- 
ent  Eftate  in  it,  but  to  prevent  the  Cheats  and  Impo- 
itions  which  the  Copyhold  Tenants  of  the  Manor  put 
ipon  their  Lord.  For  as  every  Widow  has  her  Life 
n  her  Hufband's  Copyhold  after  his  Death,  if  fhe  con- 
inues  fole  and  continent,  'tis  a  very  common  thing 
here  for  an  old  Man  on  his  Death-bed  to  marry  a 
oung  Woman,  who  privately  contracts  to  give  Part 
f  the  Profits  of  the  Copyhold,  or  fome  Confederation 
or  it,  to  the  Hufband's  Relations ;  and  not  feldom 
eleds,  for  a  Bedfellow  for  herfelf,  one  of  her  favourite 
i/Ien-fervants. 

The  Abufe  which  accrued  from  granting  Leafeson 

ves  is  this;  That  whereas  a  Perfon  takes  a  Leafe  for 
iree  Lives,  viz.  his  own,  his  Wife's,  and  his  Son 
fobn's  ;  to  defraud  the  Lord  of  the  Manor,  he  names 
11  his  Sons  John :  fo  that,  as  long  as  any  of  the  Sons 
ve,  John  in  the  Leafe  never  dies. 

By  thefe  Frauds,  the  Earl,  who  was  none  of  the 
eft  Oeconomifts,  and  lived  remote  from  this  Place, 
iffered  confiderably,  tho'  he  could  not  find  out  how; 
ut  frequently  complained,  That  his  Leflees,  and  his 
'op vhold- Widows,  were  very  long-lived  ;  and,  in  an 
umorous  Way,  uled  to  recommend  his  Manor  of 
lantfey  to  all  fuch  Purchafers  as  were  apprehenfive 
'dying. 

As  all  in  the  Parifli  were  his  Tenants,  and  had  an 
iterelt  in  the  Fraud,  they  combined  againft  him,  fo 

that 


46  A  T  O  U  R  tbri         Wilts. 

that  he  could  get  no  Intelligence  of  it ;  and  tho'  his 
Lordfhip  enjoyed  the  Manor  from  the  Time  of  the 
Revolution,  yet,  by  reafon  of  its  being  then  full- 
eftated,  that  is,  all  lett  out  upon  Lives  then  actually  fub- 
fifting,  and  continued  by  the  above-mentioned  Frauds, 
his  Lordfhip  received  no  great  Benefit  out  of  it  till 
fome  few  Years  before  his  Death  ;  when  he  came  to 
a  Refolution  not  to  renew,  tho',  when  all  the  Lives 
drop  in,  this  Manor  will,  at  a  Rack-rent,  amount  to, 
at  leaft,  3000 /.  a  Yezr. 

There  is  a  large  old  Manfion-houfe  here,  lying  juft 
on  the  River,  with  Gardens  formed  after  the  Manner 
of  thofe  at  Parfom- greeny  but  it  is  not  a  kindly  Place 
for  ripening  Fruit,  and  the  Grounds  lie  very  low  and 
fplafhy,  being  all  of  a  ftiff  Clay,  and  yet  very  good 
Paflure. 

Here  is  alfo  a  fine  Park,  well  timber'd,  but  without 
Deer. 

His  Lordfhip  had  once  a  Defign  to  improve  this 
Manfion-houfe  and  Eftate,  and  refided  here  in  1705. 
when  he  was  called  to  Court,  and  fent  to  command 
the  Queen's  Forces  in  Spain^  where  his  Condudr,  and 
great  Services  to  his  Country,  are  too  well  known,  to 
need  mentioning  here. 

Though  this  Place  is  often  overflowed  with  Water, 
yet  there  is  none  good,  either  for  Brewing  or  Waih- 
ing  ;  or  any  Spring  of  fweet  Water. 

Here  is  a  Spring  of  a  chalybeat  Kind,  which  would 
turn  to  good  Account,  were  it  not  in  fuch  a  drftant, 
and  an  almoft  inaccefTible  Part  of  the  Country,  occa- 
fioned  by  bad  Roads. 

Here  is  a  good  neat  Church,  with  one  of  the  beft- 
built,  high,  fquare  Towers,  1  ever  faw  ;  raifed  at  the 
Expence  of  one  of  the  Lords  of  Dantfey,  probably 
the  afore-mentioned  Henry,  who  lies  buried  here  un- 
der a  veiy  large  magnificent  Tomb.  Here  likewife 
is  interred  L  eutenant- General  Lewis  Mordaunt\  a 
Brother  if  the  late  LarL 

Cbim 


iVilts.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  47 

Chipptnham  is  a  corporate  good  Market- town,  like- 
vife  on  the  River  Avon,  over  which  it  has  a  Bridge  of 
[6  Arches.  It  was  famous  for  the  Refidence  and  Re- 
"ort  of  many  of  the  Weft-Saxm  Kings,  particularly 
Alfred.  Here  is  a  magnificent  Church.  This  Town 
fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

Bradford  is  a  Market-town,  and  has  a  Bridge  over 
•\zAvon.  Tis  well-built  of  Stone,  and  lies  on  the 
ide  of  an  Hill. 

Trubridge  is  an  ancient  Market-town,  and  had  for- 
merly a  Caftle  of  feven  Towers,  but  long  fince  de- 
royed.     The  Court  of  the  Duchy  of  Lanca/ier^  for 
lis  County,   is  annually  held  here. 

Wejlbury  is  a  little  Borough  Market  town,  but  was 
ormerly  of  great  Note ;  and  even  now  returns  two 
A  embers  to  Parliament.     Some  Quantities  of  Roman 
oins  have  been  found  here. 

IVarminJhr  is  noted  for  the  prodigious  Quantity  of 
^orn  which  is  fold  in  it  every  Market-day.  Upon 
te  Downs,  near  this  Town,  are  two  ancient  Camps, 
jppofed  to  be  Danijh. 

It  is  obfervable,  that  thefe  five  laft  Towns  belong'd 
nciently  to  the  Family  of  the  Hungerfords^  which,  in 
Cing  Edward  IV. 's  Reign,  came  by  Marriage  to  the 
^ord  Ha/iings  ;"who  being  executed  m  Richard  III. 's 
ime,  this  vaft  Eftate  was  given  by  that  King  to  John 
ward^  Duke  of  Norfolk^  firft  Earl  Marlhal  of  that 
family  in  England. 

Near  Warnrinjler  is  the  famous  toreft  of  Selwood+ 
called,  by  the  ancient  Britons^  Coedmaur,  i.  e.  Great- 
wood.  It  is  15  Miles  ift  Length,  and  very  thick  of 
|Wood. 

Mere^  which  in  the  old  Saxon  fignifies  B&&nfary,  ?,s 
his  Place  feems  to  be  on  the  Borders  of  Wilts^  Somer- 
fet,  and  Dorfet,  is  but  a  Village,  and  yet  gives  Name 
o  the  Hundred  where  it  ftands.  It  has  neither  Fair 
nor  Market  in  it)  but  it  had,  anciently,  a  Caiile.  Not 

far 


48  A  TO  U  R  tM          Wilts. 

far  from  this  Place  is  an  old  Danijh  Camp  called 
Whitejhole  hill. 

A  little  South-eaft  of  Mere  lies  Hindon,  a  fmall 
Borough  and  Market -town,  which  fends  two  Mem- 
bers to  Parliament. 

Feb.  12.  1755.  the  Seat  of  William  Beckford,  Efq; 
at  Fonthitt,  near  Hindon,  was  confumed  by  a  fudden ! 
Fire,  in  three  Hours  time,  and  moft  Part  of  the  rich 
Furni-ture,  with  the  fine  Organ,  faid  to  have  coft 
5000  I.  The  whole  Lofs  computed  at  30,000  /. 
only  6  of  which  were  infured. 

It  is  faid,  that  when  the  News  was  brought  to  this 
Gentleman,  whofe  Character  is  fingular,  he  faid  no- 
thing, but  took  out  his  Pocket  book,  and  being  afk- 
ed  his  Reafon  for  it,  he  anfwered,  with  a  philofophic 
Indifference,  "  I  am  reckoning  how  much  it  will 
"  coft  me  to  rebuild  my  Houfe." 

North-eaft  of  Hindon  Hands  Height/bury,  a  Town 
formerly  noted  for  an  Hofpital  j  and  (till  for  fending 
two  Members  to  Parliament. 

Lavington  is  alfo  a  little  more  North-eaft,  a  very 
indifferent  Market  town. 

The  Devizes,  where  we  entered  this  County,  is  ex- 
cellently fituated,  about  two  Miles  from  the  Bottom 
of  the  Hills,  which  keep  off  the  Eaftern  Winds,  and 
in  a  rich  Soil.  Under  the  Hill,  at  Runway,  is  an  ex- 
cellent Spring,  which  the  Inhabitants  had  not,  wheiv 
I  was  there  laft,  found  Means  to  convey  thither,  tho' 
it  runs  but  a  little  way  off  the  Town,  in  which  they 
want  a  Water,  It  is  a  very  large  old  Town,  con- 
flfting  chiefly  of  two  long  parallel  Streets,  the  Houfes 
mpftly  of  Timber,  but  of  a  very  good  Model.  The 
Inhabitants  value  themfelves  for  being  Tenants  to  the 
King,  and  for  one  of  the  beft  weekly  Markets  in 
England.  The  Caftle  was  originally  Roman,  judi- 
cioufly  feated  upon  a  natural  fortification;  but  in 
After-times  made,  in  a  manner,  impregnable  by  Ro- 
ger >  a  Bifhop  of  SQli/bttr$i  though  in  1/51.  the  Ma- 
terials ; 


Wilts.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  49 

terials  were  all  gone  ;  and  two  Windmills  have  been 
ere&ed  in  their  ftead.  Here  are  two  Churches.  The 
Choir  of  St.  Mary's  is  of  a  very  old  Model,  as  are 
the  Steeple,  Choir,  and  both  Wings  of  St.  John's,  to 
which  Additions  have  been  made,  and  new  wide 
Windows,  with  pointed  Arches,  in  the  room  of  the 
ancient,  narrow,  femicircular  ones. 

Jurtoutof  Town  is  a  pretty  Piain  called  the  Green^ 
with  another  handfome  Church  and  Steeple,  Suburbs 
to  the  old  Town.  Here  William  Cadby^  a  Gardener, 
dug  up  his  Collection  of  Gods,  which  he  carried  about 
for  a  Shew.  They  were  found  in  a  Garden,  in  a  Ca- 
vity, inclofed  with  Roman  Brick.  The  Venus  is  of 
an  excellent  Defign  ;  and  the  Veftal  Virgin^  as  they 
call  it,  a  Fragment  of  Corinthian  Brafs,  and  of  very 
curious  Workmanlhip.  Vulcan  is  as  lame  as  if  made 
at  a  Forge.  He  had  alfo  feveral  Coins  found  there- 
abouts, and  a  Brafs  Roman  Key,  which  my  Lord 
IVinchelfea  bought.  Roman  Antiquities  are  difcovered 
here  every  Day.  The  fame  Nobleman  has  a  Brafs 
Probus ;  on  the  Reverfe  Victoria  Germ,  v/ith  a  Tro- 
phy. A  great  Number  of  fuch  Reliques  is  to  be  met 
with  all  round  the  Country. 

Calne  is  a  little  Town,  fituate  on  a  ftony  Hill,  and 
very  ancient  ;  and  is  fuppofed  to  have  been  one  of  the 
Seats  of  the  Weft-Saxon  King*.  It  is  a  Borough  town, 
has  a  neat  Church,  and  a  good  weekly  Market.  A 
great  Parcel  of  Raman  Coins  were  dug  up  here  for- 
merly. Here  was,  likewife,  amiently  an  Hofpital  of 
Black  Canons. 

I  am  now  come  into  the  Road  to  Jltfarlborotigb. 
On  the  Downs,  about  tv/o  or  three  Miles  from  the 
Town,  are  abundance  Oi  Stones,  lying  [mattered  about 
the  Plain,  fome  whereof  are  very  large,  ami  appear 
to  be  of  the  fame  kind  with  thofe  of  Stone  bet>ge^  and 
fome  larger.  They  are  called  by  the  Country -people 
the  Grey  Wethers  ;  and  it  muffc  be  confided,  that  the--/ 
Icok  not  unlike  Sheep  {haggling;  upon  the  Downs,  on 

D  a  trw- 


50  A  TOUR  thro  Wilts. 

a  tranfient  and  diflant  View,  as  Travellers  pafs. 
Thefe  Grey  Wethers^  on  a  more  curious  Jnfpeciion, 
ate  found  to  be  a  fort  of  white  Marble,  and  lie  upon 
the  Surface  of  the  Ground  in  infinite  Numbers,  and 
of  all  Dimcnfions.  They  are  loofe,  detached  from 
any  Rock,  and,  as  Dr.  Stukcley  thinks,  lay  there  ever 
fmce  the  Creation;  being folid  Parts  thrown  out  to  the 
Surface  of  the  fluid  Globe,  when  its  Rotation  was  firft 
imprefkd. 

Mar!b;rcugb,  fa  called  from  its  Hills  of  Chalk,  which 
anciently  was  called  Marl.  It  is  the  Cimetia  (from 
Ken?t)  of  the  Romans  ;  but  from  the  Coming  of  the 
bv.rovs  to  theConqueft,  there  is  no  Mention  of  it.  It 
is  governed  by  a  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Burgeffes  ; 
is  wcl: -built,  and  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 
It  coniiiis  chiefly  of  one  broad  and  ftrait  Street.  To 
the  South  are  fome  Relics  of  a  Priory ;  the  Gate-hcufe 
ilill  remaining.  On  the  North,  the  Chapel  of  another 
Religious  Houfe  remains,  now  turned  into  a  Dwel- 
ling-houfe.  The  Seat  of  the  late  Earl  of  Hertford, 
afterwards  Duke  of  Somtrjet>  was  the  Site  of  the  Ro- 
man Cajbum\  for  there  they  find  Foundations,  and 
Roman  Coins  :  and  towards  the  River,  without  the 
Garden  -walls,  one  Angle  of  it  very  manifefily  remains; 
and  the  Rampart  and  Ditch  intire.  The  R.oad  going 
over  the  Ditch  cuts  it  off  from  the  prefent  Caftle. 
The  Ditch  is  (till  20  Feet  wide,  in  fome  Parts.  The 
Mount,  fo  much  noted,  was  the  Keep  of  the  Caftle; 
and  was  ma  le  into  a  pretty  fpiral  Walk,  on  the  Top 
of  which  is  an  octagonal  Summer- houfe,  from  whence 
you  have  a  pleafant  View  over  the  Town  and  Coun- 
try. This  Seat  is  newiy  converted  into  an  Inn  :  the 
Furniture  is  h-tt  wi*h  it  ;  arid,  together,  complete 
one  of  the  moft  magnificent  Houfes  of  Entertainment 
in  Europe  The  Town  has,  at  piefent,  a  pretty  good 
Shop- keeping  Trade,  but  not  much  of  the  manufac- 
turing Part.  The  R.ver  Rennet,  fome  Years  ago  made 
navigable  by  Act  of  Parliament,  rifes  juft  by  this 

Town  ; 


Wilts.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  5-1 

Town ;  from  whence  running  to  Hungerford  and 
Newbury,  it  becomes  a  large  Stream,  and,  paffing 
by  Reading^  runs  into  the  Thames  near  that  Town. 
This  River  is  famous  for  Crayfim  which  they  help 
Travellers  to  at  Newbury  j  but  they  feldom  want  for 
Price. 

At  Abury,  near  Marlbcrougb  Downs,  are  to  be 
feen  the  ftupendous  Remains  of  a  Druid  Temple ; 
being  a  Collection  of  monftrous  Stones,  of  the  like 
Nature  with  thofe  of  Stone-benge^  and  brought  toge- 
ther from  the  Downs  for  the  fame  religious  Purpoles, 
as  Dr.  Stukelcy  makes  no  Queftion. 

At  Radmington  in  Wtjtjhirt  have  been  found  nine 
Caves,  all  of  a  Row,  but  of  different  Dimenfions,  the 
Jeaft  of  them  four  Feet  wide,  fome  nine  or  ten  Feet 
long,  two  long  Stones  being  fee  upon  the  Sides,  and 
the  top  covered  with  broad  Stones.  Spurs,  Pieces  of 
Armour, and  the  like,  have  been  found  in  thefe  Caves; 
which  gives  Ground  to  believe,  that  they  were 
7\>mbs  of  fome  ancient  Warriors,  Romans^  Saxens3 
or  Danes. 

In  our  Way  from  Marllorough  to  Ncivlury,  we 
mounted  a  chalky  Hill  (of  which  fort  is  much  of  the 
Soil  of  fWts)t  on  the  top  of  which  we  entered  into  6V/- 
vernack  Foreft,  which  belonged  to  the  late  E^rl  pf 
Aiiefluryi  and  is  almoft  the  only  privileged  Ground  6f 
Hunting,  of  that  Denomination,  pofleiied  by  a  Sub- 
ject. It  is  in  Circumference  about  12  Miles,  plen- 
tifully ftocked  with  Deer  of  a  large  Stfce,  and  rendered 
very  pleafant  and  delightful  by  the  many  Walks  and 
Villas  lately  cut  and  levelled  through  the  fevcral  Cop- 
pices and  Woods  with  which  it  abounds.  Eight  of 
thefe  Viftas  meet  Ike  fo  many  Rays  of  a  Star,  in  a 
1'oint  near  the  M  ddle  of  the  Foreft,  where  hisLord- 
fhip  prepared  and  cleare.i  the  Ground  for  creeling  an 
OclagonTower,  whofe  Sides  were  to  be  correfper.clent 
to  the  Viftas;  through  one  of  which  we  have  a  View 
of  ihe  Seat,  at  about  two  Miles  DHiancc,  called  Tct~ 

D  2  \etibamy 


Wilts. 

tenham,  from  a  Park  of  that  Name,  in  which  it  is  fitu- 
ate,  contiguous  to  the  Foreft. 

It  is  a  frately  Edifice,  erected  on  the  fame  Spot  of 
Ground  where  flood  an  ancient  Palace,  deftroyed  by 
Fire,  of  the  Marquis  of  Hertford,  afterwards  Duke  of 
Somerfet,  fo  juftly  celebrated  for  his  fteady  Adherence 
and  powerful  Affifiance  to  the  Royal  Caufe,  during 
the  wholo  Courfe  of  the  Civil  War*,  from  whom  the 
Karl  of  AUefbury  wasdefcended,  by  his  Mother  the  Lady 
Elizabeth i  Sifter  and  Niece  to  the  two  laifc  Dukes  of 
Somerfct^  of  the  elder  Line. 

To  give  ycu  Come  Idea  of  the  Grandeur  and  Mag- 
nificence of  the  Strudure,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  ob- 
frrve,  that  it  was  begun,  carried  m,  and  finifhed, 
afier  the  Model,  and  under  the  Direction,  of  our  mo- 
dern fit-uvius9  the  late  Earl  of  Burlington,  who,  to 
the  Strength  an  !  Convenience  of  the  Englijh  Archi- 
tecture, has  added  the  Elegance  and  Politenefs  of  the 
//*//..  «Tafte. 

The  Houfe  has  four  Towers,  and  four  Fronts, 
each  of  thsm  diverfly  beautified  and  adorned  ;  to 
which  are  now  ad  Jed  four  Wings,  wherein  are  Rooms 
of  Slate,  a  noble  and  capacious  Room  for  a  Library, 
containing  a  judicious  and  large  Culledion  of  feveral 
thoufand  Books  in  all  Languages,  but  efpecially  the 
modern. 

The  Beauty  and  Del'ghtfulnefs  of  the  Building."  are 
much  augmented  by  the  la<ge  Canals,  the  fpacious  and 
well  planted  Walks  which  furrounj  it ;  one  of  which, 
kadlna  to  the  London  Road,  extends  two  Miles  in 
Length. 

About  the  fame  Diftance  from  hence  on  the  c-ppo- 
fite  Side,  '-ire  to  be  fern  the  Remains  of  a  large  Houfe, 
called  Wolf-  Hull,  the  Seat  ot  Sir  John  Seymour^  Father 
of  the  unfortunate  Protector  ;  of  which  no  more  is 
ftand'ing  than  fuffices  for  a  F.trrn-houfe.  Here  King 
Hevry  VIII.  as  Tra  liiioii  goes,  celebrated  his  Nup- 
tialb  wiih  the  L:..iy  y'.-.'.vt1  Seymour,  and  k-2pt  his  Wed- 
ding-j 


Wills.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  53 

ding  dinner  in  a  very  Jarge  Barn,  hung  with  Tapeftry 
on  the  Occaiion :  for  Confirmation  of  which  they  mew 
you,  in  the  Wails  thereof,  f  >me  Tenter- hooks,  with 
fmall  Pieces  of  Tapeftry  faflenM  to  them  :  and  between 
this  Place  and  Tottenham  there  is  a  Walk,  with  old 
Trees  on  each  Side,  itill  known  by  the  Name  of  King 
Harry's  Walk. 

From  hence,  continu'ng  our  Courfe  Eafterly,  we 
came  to  a  Borough  town,  called  Great  Bediv  >/,  which 
fends  two  Members  to  Parliament,  and  which  Dr. 
Stukeley  takes  to  be  the  Leacoinagus  of  Ravennas.  It  is 
an  old  Corporation,  and  gave  Birth  to  the  famous  Dr. 
T.  Willis,  the  Ornament  of  Englifo  Phyficians.  CajUe-. 
Cspfe,  half  a  Mile  from  the  Town  South-east,  was 
probably  the  Roman  Caftlf. ;  and  Plavifdikc  a  Camp  of 
that  People. 

The  Church  is  large  and  capacious,  in  which  are 
fome  ancient  Monuments  ;  particularly  one  of  a  Knight 
Templar^  called  Adam  of  Scott,' from  a  Manor  of  that 
Name  in  the  Pariili,  with  an  Infcription  not  legible, 
and  another  of  the  above  mentioned  Sir  Join  i(Vj;/.r.  r, 
Father  of  the  Protestor;  wherein  we  have  an  Account 
of  the  Names  of  all  his  Children,  with  their  fcveral 
Intermarriages  and  Deaths.  The  Church  is  very 
itrongly  built  with  Flint,  and  a  Cement  near  as  hard 
as  themfelves,  in  Form  of  a  Crofs ;  in  the  Centre  of 
which  is  eredled  an  high  Tower,  containing  a  good 
Ring  of  fix  mufical  Bells. 

Moving  hence  towards  the  North-eaft  a  little,  we 
crofied  the  much- famed  JVanfdyke^  a  Work  of  pro- 
digious Labour  and  Expcnce,  and  concluded,  by  mod 
Writers,  to  be  a  Boundary  of  one  of  the  Kingdoms  of 
the  Heptarchy^  probably  that  of  the  I'-'cft-SaxwS)  be- 
fore its  Inlargement  by  incroaching  on  other  King- 
doms. It  may  be  traced  from  near  the  £Y?//;,  all  over 
the  Downs,  to  this  Place,  where  it  turns  its  Courfe 
towards  the  Southern  Ccafts.  It  is  fuppofed,  by 

D  3  fume. 


54  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Wilts. 

fome,  to  derive   its  Name  from  Woden^  one  of  the 
Saxon  Deities. 

Soon  after  we  mounted  a  fmall  Hill,  of  eafy  Afcent, 
on  the  Summit  of  which  was  eroded,  as  Hiftorians 
inform  us,  a  fortified  Place,  the  Rendence  of  Ctffa^  a 
Viceroy  of  one  of  the  South -Sa:,on  Kings,  from 
vi  horn  it  derives  its  Denomination  of  Cbiflury,  OT 
alfo  built  Chicbe/ler  for  the  Refort  of 
People,  as  he  did  this  for  the  Repofe  of  himfelf. 
it  feems  to  have  been  ftrongly  fortified,  being  fur- 
rounded  with  a  double  Ditch  or  Moat,  of  confidera- 
b!e  Depth  and  Breadth,  and  full  of  Water  :  fmce 
which  time  there  has  been  a  religious  Houfe  here, 
the  Chapel  of  which  is  ftill  remaining,  but  perverted 
into  a  Barn. 

From  hence  we  returned  to  the  great  London  Road, 
and  foon  arrived  at  a  Village  called  Froxfield^  about 
ft'ven  Miles  from  Mariborougb  ;  in  which  is  an  hand- 
fome  and  well  endowed  Alms- houfe,  founded  by  Sarah 
Duchefs  Dowager  of  Somerfcty  Relict  of  John,  the 
J?.fl  Duke  of  the  ddtr  Branch  of  the  noble  Family  of 
,.'</'j,  Jefteir'ed  from  ihe  ^reat  Duke  of  Somerfety 
i'i- /lector  of  ti.e  King  and  Kingdom  during  the  fviino- 
rity  of  King  Edward  VI.  'I'his  Lady  bequeathed  by 
i.erWi:!  above  2: CO/,  for  the  Building  and  Furniture 
of  this  Alms  houfe,  and  cevifed  feveral  Manors,  Mef- 
fuages,  ar.d  Farms,  for  the  Maintenance  of  30  poor 
W;cows  net  havir.g  2O/.  per  dnn.  to  fubfift  upon  ;  one 
Half  of  which  r.re  Vvridov/s  of  Clergymen,  and  the 
o.her  of  Laya.cn  ;  giving  a  Preference  to  thofe  of  the 
lait  Sort,  who  live  on  the  Manors  fo  devifed  by  her. 
She  left  in  her  Will  particular  Directions  for  the  Fojrn, 
Dimenfions,  and  Site,  of  the  Structure ;  and  for  the 
Manner  of  electing,  ruling,  and  providing  for  the  Wi- 
dows; which  her  Executors,  efpecially  Sir  Itflliam 
Gregory,  who  chiefly  took  upon  him  the  Execution 
of  the  Truir,  punctually  obfeived. 

The 


Wilts.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  55 

The  Building  is  neat  and  ilromr,  in  the  Form  of  a 
Quadrangle,  having  one  Front,  and  a  Court  before 
it,  facing  the  Road.  It  contains  30  Ground  room--, 
and  as  many  Chambers,  one  of  each  Tort  hdn";  alNwed 
to  every  Widow  for  her  Apartment,  with  an  Area",  or 
Bed,  in  a  Garden,  on  theNoith  Part  of  ihe  I>ui!d;i>£r, 
hiclofed  with  a  Brick-wall. 

In  the  midil  of  the  Quadrangle  is  built  an  hand- 
fome  and  convenient  Chapel,  furuii'hed  with  a  C. 
munion-table,  Pulpit,  Dt(k,  Pews,  and  Books,  for 
the  Ufe  of  the  Widows  ;  vvhciein  the  Chaplain,  v 
Stipend  is  30 /.  per  Ann.  h  to  read  Prayers  every  D;-v, 
and  to  preach  on  Sundays  ;  and,  for  his  further  En- 
couragement, is  to  be  rrefented,  on  a  Vacancy,  to 
the  Reclcry  of  Kemijb^  in  the  fame  County,  v. 
the  Duchefs  has  appropriated  to  that  Ufe,  Be'i'Jes 
the  yearly  Penfion  in  Money,  which  is  now  abc  \\: 
eight  Guineas,  fhe  hath  alfo  ordered  a  Cloth  Gown, 
with  a  certain  Quantity  of  Wood  every  Winter,  to 
each  of  the  Widows :  and  when  the  Eftatea  which 
Cie  has  given  to  the  faid  Alms-houle  (many  of  which 
are  now  demifed  upon  Leafes  for  Lives)  (hail  fall  in, 
and  fhall  produce  a  clear  yeaily  Income  of  more  than 
400 /.  file  hath  appointed  additional  Lodgings  to  be 
built  for  the  Reception  of  20  .more  Widows,  who  are 
to  be  placed  on  the  fame  Eitabliihrnent,  elected,  and 
provided  for,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  30  former; 
and  then  all  the  Rents  and  Profits  of  the  faid  Eftates 
(the  Salary  for  the  Chaplain  and  a  Steward  being  fir  ft 
deducted)  fhall  be  dillributed,  in  equal  Shares  and 
Proportions,  among  the  50  Widows. 

The  Produce  of  all  the  Eltates  devifed  to  this,  and 
another  charitable  Ufe  which  I  (hall  mention  by-and- 
by,  upon  the  Determination  cf  the  Leafes  granted^ 
will,  according  to  the  beft  Information  I  could  get, 
amount  to  little  lefs  than  icco/.  per  Ann. 

The  fame  charitable  Lady,  in  order  to  make  Pro- 
vifion  for  the  helplefs  Youmr,  as  well  as  deftitute  Old, 

D  4  has 


56  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Berks. 

has  alfo  bequeathed  a  confiderable  yearly  Sum  for 
the  apprenticing  of  10  or  12  Children:  in  which  a 
Preference  is  to  be  given  to  fuch  as  were  born  in  her 
Manors. 

We  nextvi  filed  Hunger  ford  \nRerks,  a  little  Mark- 
et town,  fituate  in  a  moonfh  Place,  remarkable  only  for 
bung  a  great  Thoroughfare  to  Bath  and  Briftol\  and 
for  I'Jenty  of  Trout  and  Crayfifli.  It  is  governed  by  a 
~able,  who  is  chofen  annually,  and  for  the  Time 
being  is  Lord  of  the  Manor.  From  this  Town  the  an- 
cient Family  of  the  Barons  of  Hungerford  took  their 
Name  and  Title.  The  firft  of  the  Family  was  the  firft 
Speaker  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  in  51  Edw.  III. 
They  pcflefled  a  vail  Eftate  this  Way,  and  in  all  the 
neighbouring  Counties,  which  was  twice  forfeited,  for 
their  Attachment  to  the  Houfe  of  Lancajler.  This  vaft 
Eflate  fell,  by  a  Daughter,  to  the  famous  Lord  Ha/t- 
ings, who  was  executed  in  the  Reign  of  Richard \\l. 
w^en  John  Howard,  firft  Duke  of  Norfolk,  had  a 
Grant  of  it  from  that  Prince  ;  who  falling  with  his 
M«{ler  in  the  Battle  of  Bofwoi  tb -Field,  King  Henry 
VII.  reftored  it,  with  the  Honour,  to  a  younger  Branch 
of  the  Hungerfords,  who  had  joined  him,  and  {hared  in 
the  Glory  of  that  Victory.  But  one  of  his  Defcen- 
dents  fuffered  Death  for  Treafon,  31  Henry  VIII. 
tho'  Queen  Mary  reftored  them  again.  He  was  the 
Third  of  the  Family  who  died  for  Treafon  :  fuch  Vi- 
ciflitudes  attended  this  noble  Family,  and  their  great 
Eftate. 

John  of  Gaunt  granted  to  the  Town's -people  the 
Liberty  of  the  Royal  Fiftiing  within  certain  Bounds  in 
the  River,  and  confirmed  it  by  a  Can,  that  holds  about 
a  Quart,  which  is  fhewn  to  this  Day. 

We  purfued  the  great  Road,  and  arrived  at  New- 
bury,  fituate  in  a  moft  fruitful  Plain,  and  watered  by 
the  River  Rennet,  which  is  made  navigable  up  to  the 
Town,  which  carries  on  a  very  great  Trade  in  Malt, 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  57 

&c.  with  London.  It  is  governed  by  a  Mayor,  High- 
Steward,  Adermen,  and  Burgeffes.  The  Streets  are 
fpacious,  and  the  Market  place  large,  where  there  is 
great  Store  of  Corn  fold  ;  and  an  Hall,  for  the  Buflnefs 
of  the  Corporation,  ftands  in  it. 

Here  is  alfo  a  good  Charity-fchool,  for  40  Boys  ; 
endowed  with  65 /.  a  Year. 

Near  this  Town  was  a  double  Scene  of  Blood  ;  for 
here  were  two  obftinate  Battles,  fought  at  different 
times,  between  the  King's  Army  and  the  Parlia- 
ment's ;  King  Charles  being  prefent  at  them  both, 
and  both  were  fought  almoft  upon  the  fame  Spot  of 
Ground;  the  firft  on  the  2cth  of  September  1643. 
and  the  other  on  the  2yth  of  October  1644.  In  the 
firft  of  thefe  Battles  the  Succefs  was  doubtful,  and 
both  Sides  claimed  the  Advantage  :  in  the  laft,  the 
King's  Army  had  apparently  the  worft  of  it. 

Part  of  Newbury  is  alfo  known  by  the  Name  of 
Spinhum-lartits;  for  it  arofe  out  of  the  Ruins  of  an  old 
Town  called  Spine,  the  Remains  of  which  now  join 
to  Newbury  ;  in  refpeft  to  which  it  was  called  New 
Borough,  and,  for  Shortnefs,  Newbury.  It  is  noted, 
among  other  Things,  for  two  or  three  good  Inns, 
where  Travelers  are  well  accommodated. 

This  Town  of  Newbury  was  an  ancient  Clothing 
Town,  though  now  little  of  that  Bufmefs  remains 
to  it ;  but  it  ftills  reta'.ns  a  manufacturing  Genius, 
and  the  People  are  generally  employed  in  making 
Shalloon;  which,  though  it  be  ufed  only  for  the 
Lining  and  Infides  of  Mcns  Cloaths,  yet  it  becomes 
fo  generally  worn,  both  at  Home  and  Abroad,  that 
it  is  increafed  to  a  Manufacture  by  itfelf,  and  is  mere 
confiderab-le  than  any  fingle  Manufacture  of  Stuffs  in 
the  Nation.  This  employs  the  Town  of  Newbury^ 
as  alfo  Andover^  a  Town  I  have  already  defcribetf, 
Vol.  I.  and  many  others  in  different  Counties  of 
England. 

D  5  Here 


5 8  A  TOUR  thro          Berks. 

Here  began  the  Reformation,  as  Dr.  Twtffe  inti- 
mates, by  calling  his  Hearers  the  Firft-fruits  of  the  Go- 
fpd.  This  is  certain,  that  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII. 
here  was  a  Society  of  about  200  Perfons,  who  worfhip- 
ed  God  privately,  but  were  at  laft  betrayed  ;  when  140 
of  them  abjured,  and  fome  were  burnt :  among  whom 
was  Thomas  Man^  recorded  in  Fox1!  Afls  and  Monu- 
ments. 

Here  lived  the  famous  Jack  ofNewbury^  the  great- 
eft  Clothier  that  ever  was  in  England ;  having  ico 
Looms  at  Work  in  his  own  Houfe.  He  flourished  in 
the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII.  and  marched  at  the  Head 
of  ico  of  his  own  Men,  all  cloathed  in  an  Uniform, 
and  maintained  by  himfelf,  to  the  Battle  of  rlodden- 
Field)  where  he  behaved  well.  He  rebuilt  Part  of 
Newbuty  Church,  and  the  whole  Tower  of  it.  This 
is  one  of  the  two  Legatee  Towns  (as  they  were  called) 
in  the  Will  of  the  fsmou?  Mr.  Kenrick  ;  who,  beir.g 
the  Son  of  a  Clothier  of  Newbttry,  and  afterwards  a 
Merchant  in  London^  left  4000 1.  to  Newbury,  and 
7500  /.  to  Residing^  to  encourage  the  Clothing  Trade, 
and  to  fct  the  Poor  at  Work,  befuJes  other  valuable 
Gifts  to  the  Poor. 

This  Gentleman's  Will  is  to  be  feen  at  large  in 
S  tow's  Srtri'ty  of  London. 

What  Improvement  the  Towns  of  Ncwbtcy  and 
Re.idl/ig  have  made  of  thefe  great  Sums,  I  did  not 
inquire  into. 

Near  Newbury  the  late  Earl  of  Craven  built  a  very 
Itatety  Pile  of  Buildings,  for  his  own  Dwelling,  called 
Spine ;  but  iis  it  was  never  quite  finifhed,  fo  1  do  not 
underftand,  that  his  Lordfhip  ever  came  to  live  in  it : 
and  fome  Years  ago  it  was,  by  a  fudden  Fire,  burnt 
down  to  the  Ground.  It  was  reported,  that  that 
Lord  built  this  magnificent  Palace  (for  fuch  it  realiy 
was)  at  a  time  when  he  had  Hopes  of  marrying  Ma- 
dame Royile,  as  (he  was  then  called,  viz.  the  Queen 
of  Bohemia,  Sifter  to  King  Charles  I.  who,  then 
5  a  Wi- 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  5-9 

a  Widow,  lived  under  the  Shadow  of  the  Englijb 
Court ;  but  the  Ea.rl  being  fruftrated  in  that  View, 
went  no  farther  in  his  Building.  But  his  prefent 
Lordfhip  has  rebuilt  this  Houfe  ;  and,  tho'  not  in  ft) 
grand  a  manner  as  the  former,  it  is  very  com  mo* 
dious. 

Weftward,  a  little  out  of  our  Way,  we  vifited  the 
Ruins  of  the  Caftle  of  Donnlngton,  which  was  feated 
on  the  Brow  of  an  high  Hill,  waftied  by  the  little 
River  Lcimlourn  \  and  had  been  the  Seat  of  Sir  Geoffry 
Chaucer,  Father  of  Englifo  Poetry.  They  (hew  us  a 
Place  here,  where,  in  his  Days,  as  well  as  many  Years 
fince,  even  down  to  the  Memory  of  fome  of  the  In- 
habitants now  living,  flourifhed  a  great  Oak,  called 
Chaucer's  Oak,  where,  they  tell  you,  he  ufed  to  fit, 
and  compote  his  Poems. 

This  Cattle  was  garifoned  by  King  Charles  I.  and 
defended,  by  its  Governor  Sir  John  Boys,  againft  Ma- 
jor General  Mlddleton,  Colonel  Horton,  the  Earl  of 
Manchejiert  and  the  Earl  of  EJfix>  of  the  Parliament's 
Side.  ' 

We  went  forward  to  the  Town  of  Lambourn^  fo 
called  from  the  River  which  runs  down  and  falls  into 
the;jfl&A/rif,  near  Thatcbum.  There  are  two  Places  fo 
called,  and  diftinguiflied  by  the  Name  of  the  Upper 
and  Lower.  The  Lower  Lanibourn  is  the  large!},  and 
has  been  a  Market-town  everfince  the  Reign  of  King 
Henry  III.  The  River  Lamb'jurn  is  remarkable  for 
being  very  low  in  Winter,  and  high  in  Summer  :  it 
goes  off  about  Michaelmas  •  and  the  fooncr  it  goes, 
the  mere  plentiful,  fay  the  Inhabitants,  will  that  Yea? 
te. 

At  Ncwbury  we  quitted  the  high  Road,  and,  bein^ 
defirous  to  Ice  fometning  of  the  Noith  of  Berkjkirs^ 
we  flruck  up  to  IJKpt  which,  tho'  but  an  inconiider- 
able  little  Town,  yet  has  a  good  weekly  Market  fo* 
"Sheep. 

D  6  We 


(So  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Berks. 

WVpafll-d  North -welhvard  toWantoge,  the  Capital 
of  an  Hundred  fo  called,  a  Town  of  fome  Antiquit}', 
preily  good,  and  neat.  It  is  noted  for  being  the  Birth- 
place of  the  renowned  Kine  Alfred^  and  is  watered  by 
the  Oth.  On  Sinodun  Hill,  in  the  Time  of  the  7^0- 
manS)  was  a  ftrong  Caftle.  The  Plough  frequently, 
to  this  Day,  turns  up  Rstnan  Coins,  and  other  Anti- 
quities. 

From  Wantage  we  advanced  into  the  fine  and  fer- 
tile Vale  of  JVhltehorfet  which  extends  aim  oft  from 
Farringdon  to  Abingdw^  though  not  in  a  dire&Line. 
Looking  South  from  the  Vale,  we  fee  a  Trench  cut 
on  the  SiJe  of  an  high  green  Hill  in  the  Shape  of  an 
Horfe,  and  not  ill  done.  The  Trench  is  about  a 
Yard  deep,  and  filled  almoft  up  with  Chalk  ;  fo  that, 
at  a  Diftance,  you  fee  the  exact  Shape  of  a  white 
Horfe,  fo  large,  as  takes  up  near  an  Acre  of  Ground. 
From  this  Figure  ihe  Hill  is  called  ll'bitehorfe  Hi/I, 
and  the  Vale  below  takes  alfo  its  Name.  'Tis  faid  to 
be  done  in  order  to  commemorate  a  fjgnal  Victory  ; 
and  fome  give  it  to  the  Saxons^  whofe  Device  was, 
and  flill  is,  a  white  Horfe. 

Weftward  of  this  Vale  lies  dfobury,  betwixt  which 
and  Wantage  is  a  very  large  Camp  on  the  Brow  of  an 
Hill :  'tis  fingle-work'd,  and  of  a  quadrangular  Form, 
which  {hews  it  a  RomanWork. 

The  neighbouring  Parifh  to  this  Whitekorfe  have  a 
Cullcm  annually,  at  Midfummer^  to  go  and  weed  it, 
in  order  to  keep  it  in  Shape  and  Colour:  and,  when 
they  have  done  their  Work,  they  end  the  Day  inFeart- 
ing  and  Merriment. 

We  arrived  at  Farringdon^  noted  for  its  pleafant  Si- 
tuation on  an  Hill.  It  has  a  good  Market  weekly, 
and  is  very  neat  and  clean.  In  this  Place  may  be 
ieen  the  Ruins  of  a  Caftle,  built  by  Robert  Earl  of 
Glcucejler^  in  King  Stephen's  Reign  :  here  was  alfo 
a  Priory  cf  Ciflercian  Monks,  The  Church  is  large 
and  handfome* 

From 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  61 

From  hence  we  went  partly  by  the  Foreft  to  Abing- 
don,  an  handfome  well-built  Town,  where  the  Ailizes 
and  Seffions,  and  other  public  Meetings  of  the  County, 
are  fometimes  held.  Here  is  a  (lately  Market -h-u'e, 
built  on  high  Pillars.  It  is  of  molt  curious  Afhler 
Workmanlhip,  and  may  claim  the  Pre-eminence  of 
any  other  in  England.  Over  it  is  a  large  Hall  for  the 
Affize.  The  Town  confifts  of  feveral  well-paved 
Streets,  which  centre  in  an  open  and  fpacious  Place, 
where  the  Corn -market  is  kept.  They  make  great 
Quantities  of  Malt  here,  and  fend  it  by  Barges  to  Lon- 
don. Here  is  a  good  Free-fchool,  and  alfo  a  Charity- 
fchool,  founded  Anno  1563.  by  John  Royfe.  The  Cor- 
poration is  governed  by  a  Mayor,  two  Bailiffs,  and 
nine  Aldermen ;  and  returns  one  Member  only  to 
Parliament. 

It  is  an  antient  Town,  and  was  famed  for  Religious 
Houfes  in  the  Time  of  the  antient  Britons,  It  was 
alfo  famous  for  having  feveral  Synods  held  there,  and 
for  one  of  the  nobleft  Abbeys  in  the  Kingdom  ;  found- 
ed, as  it  is  faid,  by  Heane^  Nephew  to  CiJJa^  Father 
to  King  Ina.  Henry  I.  furnamed  B&auclerk^  was  edu- 
cated in  this  Monaftery.  Here  are  two  Churches, 
and  there  was  formerly  a  fine  Crofs,  which  was  de- 
ftroyed  in  the  late  Civil  Wars. 

We  next  came  to  Walllngford^  called,  by  the  an- 
tient Britons,  GwalHen,  \,  e.  Old  Fort ;  a  Place  of 
great  Figure,  as  well  in  their  Days,  and  of  the  Ro~ 
mam,  as  of  the  Saxons  and  Danes  ;  the  laft  of  whom 
deitroyed  it  in  ioc6.  but  it  was  foon  rebuilt,  and 
etteemed  a  Borough,  in  the  Co nf efforts  Time.  It  lizs 
been  defended  by  a  flrong  Caltle,  which  was  long 
fince  demolithed.  It  is  till  a  large  well  built  Town, 
has  a  good  Market  plac.e  and  Town  hall,  where  the 
Affixes  have  been  (umetimes  held,  and  a  Quarter- 
feilion  tor  the  Borough  always.  It  has  ftill  two 
Churches  ftaading,  but  one  was  very  much  damaged 
in  the  Civil  Wars,  when  two  Uhers  here  were  alto- 
gether 


6 1  J  TOUR  thro  Berks. 

gether  deftroyed.  It  has  two  weekly  Markets,  and  is 
governed  by  a  Mayor,  Burgefles,  &c.  and  returns  two 
Members  to  Parliament. 

Leland  records,  that  Richard  of  Wallingfcrd^  Ab- 
bot of  St.  Albany  was  born  here.  He  was  a  famous 
Mathematician,  and  the  Inventor  of  a  Clock  that 
fhewed  not  only  the  Courfe  of  the  Sun,  Moon, 
Fixed  Stars,  but  the  Ebbing  and  the  Flowing  of  the 
Sea. 

Here  we  crofTed  the  Thames  into  Oxford/hire  ;  and 
leaving  Watlrington,  a  little  inconfiderable  Market- 
town  on  the  Left,  we  fell  down  thro*  Nettlebed  (like- 
wife  a  Town  of  little  Note)  to  Henley  upon  Tha?nes^  a 
very  antient  Town,  the  Name  being  derived  from  the 
Briiijh  Word  Hen  lley,  i.  e.  Old  Place.  It  was  for- 
merly Part  of  the  Eftate  of  the  Barons  of  Hungerford^ 
mentioned  before.  It  is  now  a  Corporation  of  great 
Account,  governed  by  a  Warden,  BurgefTes,  and  other 
Officers.  It  has  a  confiderable  Corn  and  Malt-mar- 
ket. The  Inhabitants  are  moftly  M^ltirers,  Meal- 
men,  and  Bargemen  ;  who,  by  carrying  Corn  and 
Timber  to  London,  get  a  gainful  Lvmg,  and  enrich 
the  Neighbourhood.  It  has  a  good  Free  Grammar- 
fchool,  and  alto  a  Charity- fchool,  liberally  endowed, 
for  reaching,  cloathing,  and  apprenticing,  feveral  poor 
Children:  h.re  is  alfo  an  Alms  houfe,  but  meanly  en- 
dowed  ;  for  tho'  there  are  not  above  fix  or  feven  Per- 
fons  in  it,  they  have  but  Sixpence  apiece  weekly  for 
their  Allowance. 

We  return'd,  over  a  wooden  Bridge,  into  Berk- 
Jhlre  :  and  as  T'natckum,  l'/o  Ihamptan,  and  Theate^ 
which  Jie  between  Ncwbwy  atuS  Readh\^  are,  at 
prefent,  noted  on  y  fo  b  ing;  great  Thoroug  fare- 
towns,  an  j  full  of  inns,  we  went  no  frtrth«i  baci.  ihan 
Reading. 

Reading 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  6$ 

Reading  is  fo  called  from  the  Briti/h'Word  Rhedia, 
i.  e.  Fern,  which  formerly  grew  in  great  Quantity 
there.  It  is  a  very  large  and  wealthy  Town,  hand- 
fomely  built,  the  Inhabitants  rich,  and  driving  a  great 
Trade  :  the  Town  is  fituated  on  the  River  Kennet, 
but  fo  near  the  Thames,  that  the  largeft  Barges  which 
they  ufe  may  come  up  to  the  Town- bridge,  where 
they  have  Wharfs  to  load  and  unload  them.  Thtir 
chief  Trade  is  by  this  River- navigation  to  and  from 
London,  tho*  they  have  neceiTarily  a  great  Trade  into 
the  Country,  for  the  Confumption  of  the  Goods  which 
they  bring  by  their  Barges  from  London ;  and,  parti- 
cularly, Coals,  Salt,  Grocery- wares,  Tobacco,  Oils, 
and  all  heavy  Goods. 

Thjey  fend  from  hence  to  London,  by  thefe  Barges, 
great  Quantities  of  Malt  and  Meal  ;  and  thefe  are 
the  two  principal  Articles  of  their  Loadings.  Some  of 
thofe  Barges  are  fo  large,  that,  I  was  tolcT,  they  bring 
1000  or  1200  Quarters  of  Malt  at  a  time;  which, 
according  to  the  ordinary  Computation  of  Tonage  in 
the  Freight  of  other  Veffels,  is  from  ico  to  120 
Ton,  dead  Weight. 

They  alfo  fend  great  Quantities  of  Timber  from 
Reading  :  for  Berkfoire  being  a  well-wooded  Coun- 
ty, and  the  River  Thames  a  convenient  Conveyance 
for  the  Timber,  they  tranfport  the  largeft  and  faireft 
of  the  Timber  to  London ,  which  is  generally  bought 
by  the  Shipwrights  in  the  River,  for  the  building 
Merchant-Ships.  The  like  Trade  of  Timber  is  car- 
ried on  at  Henley  above  mentioned,  and  at  Maiden- 
head; of  which  in  its  Piace. 

Here  is  ftill  a  Remnant  of  the  Woollen  Manufac- 
ture, which  was  once  carried  on  in  this  Town  to  a 
very  confiderabfe  Degree  ;  and  Reading,  as  well  as 
New'ury.  has  enjoyed  the  above-mentioned  Legacies 
of  Mr  Kenrick,  to  fet  the  Poor  at  Work,  and  en- 
courage the  Clothing  Trades  v/a.  7500 /. 

Mr, 


64  A  TOUR  thro  Berk?. 

Mr.  Camden's  Continuator  fays,  there  were  once 
140  Mafter-Clothiers  in  this  one  Town  ;  but  now 
they  are  almoft  all  gone.  During  the  Civil  Wars  in 
England,  this  Town  was  ftrongly  fortified  ;  and  the 
Remains  of  the  Baftions,  and  other  Works,  are  ftill 
to  be  feen. 

There  are  three  Churches,  St.  Miry's,  St.  Lau- 
rence'S)  arid  St.  Giles's,  built  of  Flint,  and  fquare 
Stones,  in  the  quincunx  Faftiion,  with  high  Towers 
of  the  fame.  Archbiftiop  Laud  xvas  born  in  this 
Town :  his  Father  was  a  Clothier.  That  Prelate 
left  confiderable  Legacies  to  young  People  of  this 
Town,  of  both  Sexes. 

It  was  formerly  noted  for  a  very  famous  Abbey, 
and  other  religious  Foundations.  The  Parliament 
of  England  has  fometimes  been  held  in  the  Abbey.  It 
ftood  in  a  charming  Situation,  and  large  Ruins  of  it 
are  ftill  vifible,  built  of  Flint:  the  Wall <  which  re- 
main are  about  eight  Feet  thick,  though  the  Stone 
that  faced  them  is  gone.  What  is  left  is  fo  hard  ce- 
mented, that  the  Labour,  in  feparating  them,  would 
not  be  anfwered  by  their  Ufe.  There  are  many 
Remnants  of  arched  Vaults,  a  good  Height  above- 
g.ound,  whereon  ftood,  as  may  be  prefumed,  the 
Hall,  Lodgings,  &Y.  The  Abbey  Gate  houfe  is  yet 
pretty  intire. 

This  was  built  by  King  Henry},  on  an  old  Abbey, 
formerly  erected  by  a  Saxon  Lady.  That  Prince  was 
buried  in  it  with  his  Queen  ;  but  their  Monuments 
are  loft  in  the  Ruins  of  the  Place,  and  no- where  to 
be  found. 

There  was  a  famous  old  Caftle,  demolifhcd  bv  King 
Henry  II.  for  being  a  Place  of  Refuse  for  King  Ste< 
pben's  Party. 

The  Emprefs  Maud,  Daughter  of  Henry  I.  was  alfo 
buried  here;  but  her  Monument  is  alfo  loft. 

The  governing  Part  of  this  Corporation  confifts  of 
Mayor,  12  Aldermen,  12  EurgefTes,  and  other  Offi- 
cers 


From  Reading  I  went  to  Great  Markw  in 
inghamjbirti  which,  tho'  not  in  the  direft  Road,  yet 
lying  on  the  Banks  of  the  River  Thames,  is  proper 
enough  to  be  fpoken  of,  as  it  fends  two  Members  to 
Parliament,  and  is  particularly  worth  Notice  for  feve- 
ral  other  Things : 

i.  It  is  a  Town  of  very  great  Embarkation  on  the 
Tbanus,  not  fo  much  for  Manufactures  wrought  here 
(for  the  Trade  of  the  Town  is  chiefly  in,  j[3one-lace), 
but  for  Goods  brought  from  the  neighbouring  Towns ; 

very  great  Quantity  of  Malt  and  Meal,  particu- 
larly, 


66  A  TOUR  thro  Berks. 

larly,  being  brought  hither  from  High  lyickham, 
which  is  one  of  tne  greatefl  Corn  markets  on  this 
Side  of  England,  and  lies  on  the  Road  from  Londm 
to  Oxford. 

2.  Between  High  Wtckbam  and  Marhw  is  a  little 
River  called  the  Loddon,  on  which  are  a  great  many 
Corn-mills,  and  fome  Paper  mills  :   the  fir  ft  of  thefe 
grind  and  drefs  the  Wheat,  and  then  the  Meal  is  fent 
to  Mar low,  and  put  on  board  the  Barges  for  London  ; 
and   the   fecond  ma!;e  great  Quantities   of  ordinary 
Printing  paper. 

3.  On  the  Thames,  juft  by  the  Side  of  this  Town, 
though  on  the  other  Bank,  are  three  very  remarka- 
ble Mills,  called  the  Temple- mills,  or  the  Brafs- mills, 
for  making  Bifiam  Abbey  B*tteryicfrk>   as  they  call 
it,  viz.  Brafs  Kettles   and   Pans,    bV.  of  all  Soits. 
And  thefe  Works  were  attended  with  no  fmall  Sue- 
cefa,  till,  in  the  Year  1720.  they  made  a  Bubble  of 
it ;  and  then  it  ran  the  Fate  of  all  the  Bubbles  of  that 
time. 

4.  Next  to  thefe  are  two  Mills,   which   are  both 
Ct  £»  extraordinary  k.;r.d  ;  o,r,e,  fbr  making  of  Thim- 
bles ;  the  other,  for  prefiing  of  Oil  from   Rape  and 
Flax-feed  ;  both  which  turn  to  very  good  Account  to 
the  Proprietors. 

Hither  is  alfo  brought  down  a  vaft  Quant'ty  of 
Beech -wood,  which  grows  in  Buckir.gbemjhire  more 
plentifully  than  in  any  other  Part  of  England. 

At  Bijham  in  Berks,  over-againft  this  Town,  was 
formerly  an  Abbey  ;  and  the  Remains  of  it  are  fti'l  to 
be  feen.  The  Eftate  belonged  once  to  the  Knights 
Templars,  and  fmce  came  to  the  antient  Family  of 
Hobby,  whereof  SK  Wiilam  Hobby,  and  Sir  Edward 
Hobby,  are  noted  in  our  Hiltories  ;  the  latter  as  hav- 
ing been  employed  by  Queen  Eltzaietb  in  the  mof 
important  foreign  Negotiations,  as  a  learned  Mar 
and  great  Antiquary.  Their  Monuments,  with  thof 


erks.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  6j 

their  Ladies  and  Children,  are  in  the  little  Church 

Bijham,  and  well  worth  feeing.  The  Seat  of  the 
amily  is  now  in  Dorfetjbire  ;  but  hither  they  are 
inerally  all  brought,  when  they  die,  to  be  buried 
ith  their  Anceftors. 

A  little  higher,  on  the  fame  SiJe  of  the  River,  is 
lurley,  an  antient  Seat  of  the  late  Lord  Lovelace  ;  but 
1  the  Male  Branches  of  the  Family  being  extinct,  it 

me,  by  the  Daughter  and  Heirefs,  to  S'xHenryJokn- 
n,  of  Blackmail,  who  originally  was  only  a  bhip- 
tight,  or  JV1  after-builder,  at  the  great  Yard  and 

ock  there. 

From  hence  we  fell  with  the  Thames  into  Maiden- 
ad,  and  fo  came  into  the  London  Road  again.  It  is 
1  antient  Corporation  under  the  Government  of  an 
[fgh  Steward,  a  Mayor,  Steward,  and  10  Alder- 
ien  ;  out  of  which  they  annually  eleft  two  Bridge- 
Hifters  to  look  after  the  large  Timber  Bridge  which 
ere  crofTes  the  Thames,  for  the  Repair  of  which  the 
"own  has  three  Trees  annually  allowed  them  out  of 

indfor  Foreft.  The  Mayor  for  the  time  being  is 
lerk  of  the  Market,  and  Coroner ;  and  he,  and  rha 

rytifr  for  the  preceding  Year,  and  the  Steward,  are 

ftices  of  the  Peace  :  they  choofe  yearly  two  Mace- 
rearers.  It  is  faid  to  have  had  its  Name  from  an 
iead  worshipped  there  before  the  Reformation,  of 
ne  of  the  noco  Virgins,  that,  the  Legends  tell  us, 
-vere  martyred  with  St.  Urfula  :  yet  it  was  incorpo- 
ated,  in  the  26th  of  Edward  III.  by  the  Name  of 
The  Fraternity  or  Guild  of  the  Brothers  and  Sifters 
if  Maiden  hith.  The  Town  is  a  large  Thorough  - 
are,  with  many  good  Inns  in  it,  and  has  a  good 
Market  weekly  every  ffadnefday.  It  lies  in  two  Pa- 
rifhes :  one  Part  of  it  is  in  Bray,  famous  of  old  fof 
Us  conforming  Vicar  to  all  Changes  in  Church  and 
State  ;  the  other  in  Cookkam  :  and  the  Barge-pier  of 
the  Bridge  divides  Buckmgkamjkire  and  Berkjhire. 
The  public  Buildings  are,  the  Bridge,  and  the  Cor- 
poration- 


68  A  TOUR  thro          Bucks. 

poration- chapel;  the  Minifter  of  which  is  chofen  by 
the  Inhabitants,  and  is  not  fubject  to  Epifcopal  Vilit- 
ation. 

Not  far  from  Maidenhead,  at  Laurence 
a  confiderable  Roman  Fort.     It  ftooci  in  a  Held  now 
called  Weycock,  or  High- Rood ;  in  which 
have  been  frequently  plowed  up. 

As  foon  as  you  are  out  of  Maidenhead^  you  fee 
Cliefden,  where  George  Duke  of  Buckingham  began  a 
magnificent  and  delightful  Palace,  which  the  late 
Earl  of  Orkney,  to  whom  it  defcended  by  Marriage, 
afterwards  greatly  improved  and  finifhed.  It  had  the 
Honour  to  be  the  Summer  Retreat  of  his  late  Royal 
Highnefs  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales  ;  who  farther  ex- 
tended and  inlarged  both  Houfe  and  Gardens,  and 
made  them  moft  delightful,  infomuch,  that  in  every 
Part,  or  wherever  the  Eye  is  turned,  nothing  is  of- 
fered to  the  Sight  but  the  moft  agreeable  Avenues, 
Parteires,  fine  Lawns,  and  thefe  heightened  by  an 
extenfive  and  incomparable  YMewof  the  River  Thames^ 
and  a  moft  beautiful  and  well  cultivated  Country. 
The  Houfe  is  a  ftately  regular  Edifice,  and  the  Rooms 
fpacious  and  noble.  In  the  Grand  Chamber,  the 
Tapeftry  Hangings  reprefent  the  Battles  of  the  late 
Duke  of  Marlborougb,  wrought  to  great  Perfection, 
by  Order  of  the  late  Earl  of  Orkney,  who  was  him- 
felf  an  Officer  of  fuperior  Rank  in  thefe  glorious  Cam- 
paigns. On  the  Front  of  the  Houfe  is  raifed  a  moft 
noble  Terrace  or  Walk,  faid  to  be  higher  than  the 
Terrace  of  Wind/or  Caftle.  It  is  certain  the  Profpeft 
is  equal'ly  beautiful  and  extenfive. 

Lower  down  the  River,  not  far  from  Maldenkeaa 
Bridge,  is  a  fmall  Aight  or  Iflet  in  the  River,  formed 
by  the  late  Duke  of  Marlbv  ougb  ..into  a  beautiful 
Retirement  for  Pieafure  or  Fifhiru  ii  the  Summer- 
Seafon.  The  Buildings  upon  it  are  comaiouious,  are 
in  an  elegant  Tafte,  and  highly  finifhed, 

We 


•Sucks.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  69 

We  came  to  Slough,  a  Village  five  Miles  Eaft  of 
Maidenhead,  which  conftfts  almoft  intirely  of  Jnns. 
They  feem  to  vie  with  one  another,  and  'tis  wonder- 
ul  how  they  all  fubmt  ;  and  efpecially  as  they  are 
ppofed  by  the  two  famous  ones  of  the  Caftle  and 
VindndU\  a  little  Way  out  of  Slough,  which  are  much 
nore  delightfully  fituated,  and  have  better  Accommo- 
"ations. 

Here  we  left  the  Road,  and  turned  to  the  Right,  and 
ben  arrived  at  Eton,  where  is  one  of  the  fineit  Schools 
or  Grammar  Learning  in  Britain. 

The  Buildings,  except  the  great  School  room,  are 
intient ;  the  Chapel  Gothic  ;  but  all  has  been  repaired, 
it  a  great  Expence,  out  of  the  College- Stock,  within 
befc  tew  Years,  and  a  handfome  Library  built  for 
fche  Reception  of  Books. 

In  the  great  Court,  a  Copper  Statue  is  ere&ed  to 
the  Honour  of  the  Royal  Founder,  by  Dr.  Godolphin, 
jlate  Dean  of  St  Paul's,  and  Provoft  of  this  College ; 
and  the  Library  has  received  feveral  confiderable  Be- 
nefa&ior.s ;  particularly,  not  many  Years  ago,  the 
jfine  Collection  of  Richard  Topbam,  Efq;  formerly 
iKeeper  of  the  Records  in  the  Toiver,  which  was 
iprefented  to  it  by  the  late  excellent  Lord  Chief  Juf- 
jtice  Reeves,  and  Dr.  Mead,  his  Executors.  Before 
that,  a  Collection  of  Books,  valued  at  2coo  /.  was  left 
to  it  by  Dr.  Waddington,  late  Bifhop  of  Chichejler. 
Df  Godolfhin  aforefaid,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Reynolds,  and 
\Nicholfis  Man,  Efq;  were  alfo  Beneiaciors  to  this  Li- 
brary. 

The  Gardens,  which  extend  from  the  College  down 
almoft  to  the  Bank  of  the  Thames,  are  well  planted 
and  kept. 

Tnis  College  was  founJed,  Anno  1440,  by  King 
Henry  VI.  a  Prince  munificent  in  his  Gifts  for  the 
Encouragement  cf  Learning.  Witnefs,  befick-s  this 
noble  foundation,  that  of  King's  College  in  CV??;?- 
bridge,  to  which  the  Scholars  of  Eton  are,  annually 

removed ; 


7o  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Bucks 

removed  ;  and  which,  had  it  been  perfe&ed  as  th< 
King  defigned  it,  would  have  been  the  nobleft  Build 
ing  of  the  Kind  in  the  World.  But  his  Depofer  an< 
Succeffor,  King  Edward  IV.  took  feveral  Manor 
from  Eton  College  ;  and  beftowed  them  on  thei 
Neighbours  at  Windfor  ;  and  had  intended  to  havi 
taken  from  them  ftill  more,  had  not  the  celebrate* 
Jane  Shore  folicited  in  their  behalf. 

This  College  has  a  fettled  Revenue  of  about  5000^ 
per  Ann.  and  maintains  a  Provoft,  a  Vice  provoft 
who  is  alfo  a  Fellow,  fix  other  Fellows,  and  y< 
Scholars  on  the  Foundation,  befides  a  full  Choir  fo 
the  Chapel,  with  neceffary  Officers  and  Servants.  Th< 
School  is  divided  into  the  upper  and  lower,  and  eacl 
into  three  Gaffes  j  each  School  has  One  Matter,  am 
each  Mafter  four  Afliftants  or  U  fliers.  None  are  re 
ceivcd  into  the  upper  School,  till  they  can  make  Lati 
Verfes,  and  have  a  tolerable  Knowlege  of  the  Greek 
In  the  lower  School  the  Children  arc  received  ver; 
young,  and  are  initiated  into  all  School-learning.  Be 
fides  the  70  Scholars  upon  the  Foundation,  there  ar 
always  Abundance  of  Children,  generally  fpeaking,  o 
the  beft  Families,  and  of  Perfons  of  Diftinction  ;  wh< 
are  boarded  either  in  theHoufes  of  the  Townfmen,  o 
within  the  College. 

The  Number  of  Scholars  inftru&eci  here  ufed  to  b> 
from  4  to  500. 

The  Election  of  Scholars  for  the  Univerfity,  out  o 
this  School,  is  made  annually,  on  the  rirftTw^/^yii 
dugufl:  in  order  to  it,  three  Perfons  are  deputed,  fron 
King's  College  in  Cambridge  ;  viz.  the  Provoft  of  tha 
College,  and  one  fenior,  and  one  junior  Pofcr,  Fel 
lows  of  the  fame:  who,  being  joined  by  the  Provoft 
Vice  provoft,  and  Head-matter  of  Eton  College,  cal 
before  them  the  Scholars  of  the  upper  Gals,;  and 
examining  them  in  the  fever jl  Harts  of  their  Learn 
ing,  choofe  out  12  fuch  as  they  think  hell  qualified 
and  enter  them  in  a  Roll,  or  Lilt  for  the  Univerfity 

Thef 


Berks.         GREAT  BRITAIN,  71 

Thefe  Youths  arc  not  immediately  removed  from  the 
School,  but  muft  wait  till  Vacancies  ia\\  in  King's 
College  ;  and,  as  fuch  happen,  aiethen  taken  as  they 
itand  in  ^eniority  in  the  Roll  of  Election. 

Wn-<;  Scholar  from  Eton  comes  toKing's  College, 
Be  is  received  upon  the  Foundation,  and  purfues  his 
Studies  there  for  three  Years  :  after  which,  he  claims 
Fellowfnip,  unlefs  forfeited  by  Marriage,  accepting 
of  eccleiiaftical  Preferments,  6v.  according  to  the 
Terms  of  the  Statutes. 

The  Provoft  has  a  noble  Houfe  and  Gardens,  befidcs 
the  Ufe  of  the  College  Gardens,  at  his  Plcafure. 

I  am  now  come  to  IPindfor^  fo  called  from  its  wind- 
'ng  Banks,  or  Shore;  where  I  muft,  for  a  while,  tjuit 
he  Subject  of  Trade  and  Navigation  ;  in  order  to  de- 
er ibe  the  molt  beautiful  and  pleafantiy  fitua'.ed  Caille, 
md  Royal  Palace,  in  Great  Britain. 

William  the  Normin  was  the  firft  of  our  EngUJh 
Vlonarchs  who  diftinguiftied  Wind/or.  That  Prince, 
who  delighted  much  in  Hunting,  finding  it  a  Situa- 
tion proper  for  that  Purpofe,  and,  as  he  (kid  of  it,  a 
fuitable  Place  for  the  Entertainment  of  Kings,  agreed 
with  the  Abbot  of  Wejlminfter  for  an  Exchange,  and 
fo  took  Pofleflion  of  it.  He  built  a  Caftle  here,  and 
had  feveral  little  Lodges,  or  Hunting  houfes,  in  the 
Fared  adjoining;  and  frequently  lodged,  for  the  Con- 
teniency  of  his  ^port,  in  an  Houfe  which  the  Monks 
before  enjoyed,  near  or  in  the  Town  of  Windfor;  for 
the  Town  is  much  more  antient  than  the  prefer* t 
paftle,  and  was  an  eminent  Pafs  upon  the  Thames  in 
he  Reigns  of  the  Saxon  Kings. 

Henry  I.  rebuilt  and  fortified  it,  fummoning  all  his 
Mobility  to  attend  him  here,  at  Whitfuntide,  in  the 
oth  Year  of  his  Reign.  H»ere  Edivard  I.  had  four 
Children  born  by  his  Queen  E;eanor,  wi.o  took  great 
Delight  in  this  Situation  :  but  it  did  not  arrive  at  fur- 
her  Magnificence  till  the  Reign  of  King  £Wzcttf4? Ill . 

who, 


72  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Berks, 

who,  being  called  Edward  of  Windjor^  becaufe  there 
born,  and  taking  an  extreme  Liking  to  this  Place,  re- 
folved  to  fix  his  Summer- refidence  here ;  and,  accord- 
ingly, laid  out,  himfelf,  the  Plan  of  that  magnificent 
Palace,  which,  as  to  outward  Form  and  Building,  we 
now  fee  there :  for  whatever  has  been  done,  as  to  beau- 
tifying, altering,  or  amending,  the  Infide  and  Apart- 
ments, nothing  has  been  added  to  the  Building  itfelf, 
except  that  noble  Terrace  which  runs  under  the  North 
Front,  and  leads  to  the  Green  on  the  Park,  at  the  Eaft- 
fide  or  End  of  it,  along  which  the  fine  Lodgings,  and 
Royal  Apartments,  were  at  firft  built ;  all  the  North 
Part  being  then  taken  up  in  Rooms  of  State,  and  Halh 
for  public  Balls,  fcfr. 

The  Houfe  itfelf  was  indeed  a  Palace,  and  withoui 
any  Appearance  of  a  Fortification  j  but  when  th< 
Building  was  brought  on  to  the  Slope  of  the  Hill  or 
the  Town-fide,  the  King  added  Ditches,  Ramparts 
the  Round  Tower,  and  feveral  other  Places  o 
Strength  j  and  thence  it  was  called  a  Cattle. 

Such  a  Pride  did  this  great  King  take  in  being  tfo 
Founder  of  this  furrptuous  Building,  that  when  it  waj 
fuggefted  to  \*rRi&a&W\lKenn of  Wukbam  had  afiume<| 
the  Honour  of  it  to  himfelf,  it  had  like  to  have  coil 
William  all  his  Intereft  in  the  King's  Favour,  which  a 
that  time  was  very  great ;  but  the  Prelate  cleared  him 
felf,  by  difavow'jng  the  Charge  ;  urging,  that  all  h 
pretended  to  was  to  acknowlege,  that  the  Money  an-ij 
the  Reputation  he  had  gained  by  building  that  Caftlj 
for  the  King,  had  been  the  Making  of  him.  1  or) 
feems  he  had  caufed  thefe  Words, 

THIS    MADE    WlCKHAM, 

to  be  cut  in  Stone  in  the  inner  Wall  of  the  littijj 
Towei  ;  which  from  him  is,  to  this  Day,  called  Ww 
fbefter  fewer. 


Berks.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  73- 

William  of  Wickbam,  whom  I  have  mentioned,  in 
my  Account  of  Wincbefter^  Vol.  I.  was,  at  that  time, 
the  Architect  of  the  Court ;  and  fo  well  performed  his 
Part,  that  in  all  the  Decorations  and  Ornaments  which 
have  been  made  fince,  by  fucceeding  Princes,  they  have 
found  no  Occafion  to  add  to,  or  diminiih  any  thing, 
except  it  be  to  alter  fome  (mall  matters  at  the  En- 
trance to  the  great  Stair-cafe,  the  Kitchen,  and  Of- 
fices below-ftairs,  and  fuch  like  ;  but  the  great  North 
and  Eaft  Fronts,  the  Square  of  the  inner  Court,  the 
great  Gates  at  the  Entering  from  the  Town,  with  the  . 
Round  Tower,  and  the  Walls  annexed,  are  all  ftand- 
ing  in  the  very  Form  in  which  King  Edward  III,  left 
them. 

The  only  Addition  in  the  Infide,  is  a  fine  Equef- 
trian  Statue  of  King  Charles  II.  which  ftands  over  the 
great  Weil,  funk,  as  may  be  fuppofed,  in  the  firft 
Building,  for  the  Supply  of  the  Cattle  with  Water  ; 
and  in  which  was  an  Engine  for  railing  it,  notwith- 
ftanJing  the  great  Depth,  by  very  little  Labour  ;  the 
Contrivance  and  Performance  of  Sir  Samuel  Morland^ 
an  excellent  Mechanic  and  Mathematician. 

On  the  Outfide,  as  I  have  faid,  was  added  the 
Terrace-walk,  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  where  fhe  ufually 
walked  for  an  Hour  every  Day  before  her  Dinner,  if 
not  hindered  by  windy  Weather,  of  which  fhe  had  a 
peculiar  Diilike;  for  fhe  loved  to  walk  in  a  mild  calm. 
Rain,  with  an  Umbrella  over  her  Head. 

This  Terrace  is  a  truly  magnificent  Work :  for,  as 
it  is  raifed  on  a  fteep  Declivity  of  the  Hill,  it  was  ne- 
ceffarily  cut  down  a  very  great  Depth,  to  bring  the 
Foundation  to  a  Flat  equal  to  the  Breadth  which 
was  to  be  formed  above.  From  the  Foundation  it 
was  raifed  by  folid  Stone-work  of  a  vaft  Thicknefs, 
with  crofs  Walls  of  Stone,  for  banding  the  Front, 
and  preventing  any  Thruft  from  the  Weight  of  Earth 
within. 

Voi,  II.  E  This 


74  ^  T  O  U  R  thro  Berks. 

This  noble  Walk  is  covered  with  fine  Gravel,  and 
has  Cavities,  with  Drains,  to  carry  off  the  Water;  fo 
that  not  a  Drop  of  Rain  will  reft  on  the  Terrace,  but 
it  is  dry,  hard,  and  fit  to  walk  on,  immediately  after 
the  greateft  Showers.  The  Breadth  of  this  Walk  is 
very  fpacious  on  the  North-fide  ;  on  theEaft-fide  it  is 
narrower.  Neither  ^erfailles,  nor  any  of  the  Royal 
Palaces  in  France,  Naples*  or  Rome*  can  (hew  any 
thing  like  this.  The  Grand  Seignor's  Terrace,  en  the 
outer  Court  of  the  Seraglio  next  the  Sea,  is  what,  I 
think,  comes  the  neareft ;  and  yet  is  not  equal  to  it, 
if  I  may  believe  the  Account  of  thofe  who  have  feen 
both. 

At  the  End  of  this  Walk,  leading  into  the  Park, 
King  Charles  I.  built  a  Gate  ;  and  his  Son  Charles  II. 
adorned  this  auguft  Palace  with  a  well  ordered  Maga- 
zine of  Arms,  many  curious  Paintings,  and  other  Im- 
provements ;  which  were  continued  by  King  Jamts 
II.  and  William  III. 

The  Caftle  contains  two  fquare  Courts,  with  a 
Tower  between  them;  which  fome  diitinguilh  by  the 
Name  of  fo  many  Wards,  as  the  higher  Ward  is  the 
inner  fquare  Court,  the  middle  Ward  is  the  Tower, 
and  the  lower  Ward  is  the  outer  fquare  Court. 

At  the  North-eaft  Corner  of  this  Terrace,  where  it 
turns  South,  to  run  on  by  the  Eaft-fide  of  the  Caftle, 
are  Steps,  by  which  you  go  off  upon  the  Plain  of  the 
Park,  which  is  kept  fmooth  as  a  Carpet,  and  on  the 
Edge  of  which  the  Profpec!  of  the  Terrace  is  doubled 
by  a  Vifta,  South  over  the  Park,  anJ  quite  up  to  the 
great  Park,  and  towards  the  Foreft.  Here  alfo  is  a 
fmall  Seat,  that  will  not  contain  above  <  m  or  two, 
at  moft,  with  an  high  Back,  and  Cover  for  the  Head, 
which  being  fixed  on  a  Pin  of  Iron  or  Brafs,  thePer- 
fons  who  fit  in  ic  may  eafily  turn  it  from  the  Wind, 
however  it  may  blow,  and  enjoy  a  complete  Calm. 
This  is  faid  aifo  to  bj  Queen  Elizabeth's  invention,  to 

avoid 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  75- 

avoid  being  ruffled  with  the  Wind  $  and  it  affords  no 
efs  Shelter  from  the  Sun. 

From  this  lofty  Terrace  the  People  within  have  an 
Sgrefs  to  the  Park,  and  to  a  moft  beautiful  Walk, 
which  neither  King  Edward  III.  nor  his  Succefibrs, 
:or  fome  Hundreds  of  Years,  knew  any  thing  of:  all 
:heir  Profpeft  being  from  the  Windows  of  the 
Caftle. 

On  that  Side  of  the  Building  which  looks  out  upon 
he  Terrace,  are  all  the  Royal  Apartments  ;  thofe  of 
KLing  Edward  III.  which  were  on  the  Eaft-fide,  be- 
ng  now  allotted  to  great  Officers  of  State. 

You  mount  into  the  Royal  Apartments  by  feveral 
:>ack  Stairs,  -but  the  public  Way  is  up  a  fmall  Afcent 
a  Flat,  or  Half-pace,  where  are  two  Entries  of 
State  by  two  magnificent  Staircafes  ;  one  on  the 
Left-hand  to  the  Royal  Apartments,  and  the  other 
on  the  Right,  to  St.  George's  ball,  and  the  Royal 
Chapel. 

Before  the  Entrance  to  thefe,  on  either  Side,  you 
>afs  through  the  Guard -chambers,  where  you  fee  the 
Walls  furniflied  with  Arms,  and  the  King's  Yeomen 
of  the  Guard  keep  their  Station.  Thefe  Rooms 
ead  as  well  to  the  fine  Lodgings,  as  to  St.  George's* 
hail. 

In  the  Cieling  is  Britannia  on  a  Globe,  the  Indies 
offering  her  Riches,  and  Europe  preferring  her  with  a 
Crown,  furrounded  with  a  Circle  in  Form  of  a  Snake. 
Thefe  Chambers  are  -adorned  with  a  fine  Picture  of 
Prince  George  of  Denmark  on  Horfeback  over  the 
Chimney  in  one  of  them,  and  of  Charles  XII.  King  of 
Sweden  over  the  other.  There  are  alfo  the  admira- 
ble Pieces  of  Judith  and  Holofernes,  Mary  Magdalen^ 
the  Roman  Charity,  the  Murder  of  the  Innocents,  "Ju- 
piter and  Ledat  Fruit-pieces,  &c.  in  the  Dining-room ; 
Canopies  of  State,  which  exceed  Defcription,  ineftima- 
ble  Pictures,  in  the  Clofet,  and  little  Gallery  ;  with 
that  of  Englljh  Beauties,  which  alone,  fays  a  Connoif- 

E  2  feur 


76  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Berks. 

feur  in  Painting,  are  worth  a  Stranger's  coming  to 
England  to  fee. 

In  the  Royal  Lodgings  there  have  been  fo  many  Al- 
terations of  Furniture,  that  there  can  be  no  entering 
upon  a  particular  Defcription.  In  the  Chimney-piece 
of  one  of  thefe  Apartments,  is  a  Piece  of  Needle- work 
exquifitely  fine,  performed,  as  they  fay,  by  the  Queen 
of  Scots,  during  the  time  of  her  Confinement  in  Fo- 
theringay-caftle.  There  are  feveral  Family  Pictures  in 
the  Chimney- pieces,  and  .other  Parts  of  thefe  Lodg- 
ings, which  are  very  valuable. 

'Thefe  Rooms  look  all  out  North  towards  the  Ter- 
race, and  over  Part  of  the  fineft  and  richeit  Vale  in 
the  World  ;  which  along  the  Courfe  of  the  River 
Thames^  with  very  little  Interruption,  reaches  to,  and 
includes,  the  City  of  London  Eair,  and  the  City  of 
Oxfor d  Well  j  the  River,  with  a  beautiful  winding 
Stream,  gliding  gently  through  the  M;ddle  of  it,  and 
enriching,  by  its  Navigation,  both  the  Land  and  the 
People,  on  every  Side. 

It  may  be  proper  to  fay  fomething  of  the  Beauties 
and  Ornaments  of  St.  George  s-hall^  tho'  nothing  can 
be  faid  equal  to  what  the  Eye  may  be  Witnefs  to.  It 
is  very  wide  and  long,  and  was  originally  ufed  for  the 
Entertainment  of  the  Knights  of  the  Garter,  at  their 
InfTaliation.  It  is  furpriiing,  at  the  firft  Entrance,  to 
fee  at  the  Upper-end  the  Picture  of  King  1  William  on 
Horfe-back  ;  under  him  an  Afcent  with  Marble  Steps, 
a  Balluftrade,  and  an  Half- pace,  which  formerly  was 
a^ually  there,  with  room  for  a  Throne,  or  Chair  of 
State,  for  the  Sovereign  to  fit  on,  when  on  public 
Days  he  thought  fit  to  appear  in  Ceremony. 

Here  we  may  alfo  admire  the  Picture  of  Edward  the 
Black  Prince,  piefeming  the  Kings  of  Trance  and 
Scotland,  his  Prifoners,  to  his  Father  King  Edwardlll, 
fitting  on  a  Throne  :  nor  would  I  pafs  over  in  S.lence 
the  Reprefentation  of  the  Triumphs  of  King  Charles 
li .  over  Rebellion,  and  falfe  Patnotifm. 

At 


erks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  77 

At  the  Weft-end  of  the  Hall  is  the  Chapel  Royal, 
e  neateft   and   fineft  of  the  kind   in  England :  the 
arved  Work  is  beyond  any  that  can  be  feen  in  the 
Kingdom. 

After  we  had  fpent  fome  Hours  in  viewing  all  that 
as  curious  on  this  Side,  we  came  down  to  the  Dun- 
eon,  or  Round  Tower,  which  goes  up  a  long,  but  eafy, 
fcent  of  Steps,  and   is  very   high.     Here  we  were 
liged  to  deliver  up  our  Swords,  but  no  where  elfe  ; 
:hough  here  is  nothing  curious.     The  Governor's  or 
hble's  Lodgings  are   neatly  furnifhed,  bat  no- 
ife  extraordinary. 

From  this  Tower  you  fee  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  at 
ondon,  very  plainly. 

Coming  down  from  hence,  we  entered  into  the 
ther  Court,  where  are  the  great  Chapel  of  St.  George's, 
longing  to  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  and  the  Houfc 
College  for  the  Poor  Knights,  as  they  are  called,  24 
Number. 

I  might  go  back  here  to  the  Hiftory  of  the  Order 
the  Garter,  the  Inftitution  of  which  by  King  Ed- 
rd  III.  had  its  Original  here:  but  this  is  done  fo- 
lly by  other  Authors,  that  I  jQiall  only  mention,  That 
is  Order  was  not  founded  on  the  Countefs  of  Salif- 
wry's  Garter,  as  Polydore  Pirgil  aflerts ;  but  on  that 
artial  King's  own  Garter,  which  he  gave  as  theSig- 
al  at  the  glorious  Battle  of  Crejffi,  as  St.  George  was 
iven  for  the  Word  of  the  Day.     To  commemorate 
hich,  he  inftituted  this  Order. 
The  firft  Knights,  tho'  not  all  Noblemen,  were  how- 
er  Men  of  great  Characters  and  Stations,  either  in 
he  Army,  or  in  the  Civil  Adminiftration,  and  fuch  as 
he  Sovereign  did  not  think  it  below  him  to  make  his 
ompanions. 

The  lower  Court  of  the  Caftle,  altho'  not  fo  dif- 
inguifhed  by  Lodgings  and  Rooms  of  State,  is  never- 
.helefs  particularly  glorious  for  the  fine  Chapel  of  the 
Order,  a  moft  beautiful  and  magnificent  Work,  and 

E  3  which 


7 8  ^TOUR  thro  Berks. 

which  fhews  the  Greatnefs  not  only  of  the  Court  in 
thofe  Days,  but  the  Spirit  and  Genius  of  the  magna- 
nimous Founder.  The  Chapel  is  not  only  fine  with- 
in, but  the  Workmanfhip  without  is  extraordinary  : 
nothing  fo  antient  is  to  be  feen  fo  beautiful.  Kirig.s- 
Ccilfge  Chapel  at  Cambridge,  built  by  Henry  VI.  and 
Henry  VJi's  Chapel  in  Wejlminjier- Abbey,  are  fine 
Buildings  ;  but  they  are  modern,  compared  to  this, 
which  was  begun,  as  by  the  infcribed  Dates  upon  the 
Walls  appear,  in  the  Year  1337. 

The  Coats  of  Arms,  and  the  various  Imagery  and 
other  Ornaments,  both  infide  and  outfide,  not  only 
of  the  King,  but  of  feveral  of  the  firft  Knights  Com- 
panions, are  wonderfully  finished  ;  and  the  Work 
has  flood  out  againft  the  Injury  of  Time,  to  Admi- 
ration. 

'Tis  obfervable,  that  King  Edward  owns  this  Cha- 
•pcl  was  begun  by  his  Anceftors  ;  and  fome  think  it 
was  by  King  Edward  I.  and  that  he  himfelf  was  bap- 
tized in  it;  and  there  was  a  Caftle  built  \yyWtti\am\> 
As  to  the  Chapel,  which  was  then  called  a  Church, 
or  a  Convent,  King  Edward  III.  did  not  pull  down 
the  old  Building  entirely  ;  but  he  added  all  the  Choir 
to  the  firtt  Model,  and  feveral  other  proper  Parts  for 
the  Purpofes  intended  ;  as  Houfes  and  handfome 
Apartments  for  the  Canons,  Dignitaries,  and  other 
Perfons  belonging  to  the  Church,  which  are  generally 
iituated  on  the  North  Side  of  the  Square,  out  of  Sight, 
or  rather  fcreened  from  the  common  View  by  the 
Church  itfelf  j  which  Dwellings  are,  notwithftand- 
jng,  very  good,  and  well  accommodated  for  the  Per- 
ibns  who  are  Poileflbrs  of  them  :  then  the  King 
finiQied  it,  in  the  manner  we  now  fee  it.  As  for  the  old 
Caftle,  built  by  WiV.iam  I.  the  Kino;  pulled  it  down 
to  the  Foundation,  forming  a  new  Building  accord- 
ing to  the  prefent  Plan,  and  which  ftood,  as  above, 
to  the  time  of  King  Charles  II.  without  any  Altera- 
tion. 

The 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  79 

The  Eftablimment  for  this  Chapel  was  very  confi- 
derable,  by  the  Donation  of  divers  Subjects,  before  it 
was  fet  apart  to  be  the  Chapel  of  the  Order :  the  Duke 
of  Suffolk,  in  particular,  as  appears  in  Dugdalis  Mo- 
noftlcon,  gave  it  3000  Acres  of  Land,  19  Manors* 
170  MefTuages  and  Tofts,  and  feveral  Advowfons  of* 
Churches;  which,  with  other  Gifts  afterwards,  made 
the  Revenue  above  looo/.  a  Year,  which  was  a  pro- 
digious Sum,  as  Money  went  at  that  time. 

The  Chapel  is  paved  with  Marble,  and  the  Walls 
are  painted  with  the  Hiftories  of  the  New  Teftament. 
The  Altar-piece  reprefents  the  Inftitution  of  the  Eu- 
cbariit-,  and  the  Cieling  of  the  Chancel  is  illuminated 
with  a  View  of  our  Lord's  Afcenfion. 

In  the  Choir  are  the  Stalls  for  the  Knights  of  the 
Order,  with  a  Throne  for  the  Sovereign  :  alfo,  Stalls 
in  the  Middle  of  it,  for  18  Poor  Knights-Penfioners, 
who  live  in  their  Houfe,  or  Hofpital,  on  the  South- 
fide  of  the  Square  or  Court  in  which  the  Chapel  ftands. 
Thefe Knights-Penfioners  are  cloathed  in  a  red  Cloth- 
Cafibck,  and  a  purple  Mantle,  with  a  St.  George'sCrok 
on  the  Left  Shoulder  ;  and  are  obliged  to  go,  cloathed 
in  this  manner,  twice  a  Day  to  Church,  to  pray  for 
the  Sovereign  and  Km'ghts  of  the  moit  Noble  Order 
of  the  Garter. 

Here  are  to  be  feen  the  Banners  of  the  Knights 
who  now  enjoy  the  Honour  of  the  Garter  :  when 
they  die,  thofe  Banners  are  taken  down,  and  the  Coat 
of  Arms  of  the  deceafed  Knight  fet  up  in  the  Place 
allotted  for  thofe  Arms  over  the  fame  Stall :  fo  thofe 
Coats  of  Arms  are  a  living  Htftory,  or  rather  a  Record, 
of  all  the  Knights  that  ever  have  been  fince  the  firft 
Jnftitution  of  the  Order,  and  how  they  fucceededone 
another :  by  which  it  appears,  that  Kings,  Emperors, 
and  Sovereign  Princes,  have  not  thought  it  below 
them  to  accept  of  the  Honour  of  being  Knights  Com-, 
panions  of  the  Order ;  while,  at  the  fame  time,  it 
muft  be  noted,  to  the  Honour  of  the  EngUjh  Crown, 
E  4  that 


8o 


A  T  O  U  R  thro 


Berks. 


that  cur  Kings  have  never  thought  fit  to  accept  of 
any  of  their  Orders  abroad,  of  what  kind  foever : 
whereas  there  is  an  Account,  in  the  Regiftry  of  the 
Order,  that  there  are  reckoned  up  of  this  moft  noble 
Company, 


8  Emperorsof  Germany* 
3  Kings  of  Sweden. 

5  Kings  of  Denmark. 

2  Kings  of  PruJ/ta. 

3  Kings  of  Spain. 

6  Princes  of  Orange. 
5  Kings  of  France. 

4  Peers  of  France. 

A  K  i  n  g  of  Scotland,  befid  es 
Janus  VI. 

5  Kings  of  Portugal, 
A  King  of  Poland. 

2  Kings  of  Naples. 
A  King  of  Arragon. 

3  Infants  of  Portugal. 
A  Prince  of  Denmark. 


A  Bifhop  of  Ofnabrug. 
5  Princes  of  Lunenburg, 
An  Eleclor  of   Branden- 
burg. 

7  Electors  Palatine. 
2  Electors  of  Saxony. 

2  Dukes  of  Lonain^ 

3  Dukes  of  IVirtenberg. 
2  Dukes  of  Holfteln. 

2  Grandees  of  Spain. 
2  Dukes  d'  Urbtno. 
A  Duke  of  Savoy. 
A  Duke  of  Sare-Qotha* 
A  Prince  of  Heffe. 
A  Prince  of  Brunfwicky 
&C. 


Befides  thefe  foreign  Princes,  there  is  a  little  Galaxy 
of  Engiijb  Nobility,  the  Flower  of  fo  many  Courts, 
and  fo  many  Ages,  to  whofe  Families  the  Eniigns  of 
the  Order  have  been  an  Honour,  and  who  are  not  the 
leaft  Glory  it  lias  to  boaft  of. 

Several  Kings,  and  Perfons  of  high  Rank,  have 
been  buried  alfo  in  this  Chapel  :  as  King  Henry  VI. 
his  Rival  and  Succeflbr  King  Edward  IV.  Henry 
VIII.  his  Queen  Jane  Seymour^  King  Charles  I.  and 
a  Daughter  of  the  late  Queen  Anne.  Here  alfo  is  the 
Family  Burying- place  of  the  Dukes  of  Beaufort,  who 
are  a  natural  Branch  of  the  Royal  Family  of  Lan- 
cajler. 

There  are  alfo  feveral  Monuments  of  the  Nobility 
and  learned  Men  in  this  Chapel,  which  are  colle'fled 

and 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  81 

and  fet  down  in  the  larger  Hiftory  of  this  Caftle  and 
Chapel,  to  which  I  refer. 

Adjoining  to  the  Eaft  end  of  this  Chapel,  is  a  fair 
Edifice,  of  like  Building,  creeled  by  King  Henry  VII. 
for  a  Burial-place  for  himfelf,  and  his  SucceiTors, 
Kings  of  England;  but  this  Prince  afterwards  altering 
his  Purpofe,  began  the  more  noble  Edifice  at  Weft- 
jninfter,  and  this  Fabrick  remained  negledted  till  Car- 
dinal IVolfey  obtained  a  Grant  of  it  from  his  Royal 
Mailer  Hewy  VIII.  and  with  a  Profufion  of  Expence, 
unknown  to  former  Ages,  defigned  and  began  here 
a  moil  fumptuous  Monument  for  himfelf;  whence 
this  Building  obtained  the  Name  of  JPblfefs  Tomb- 
koufe,  and  by  the  Inattention  of  Hiftorians,  a  mif- 
taken  Opinion  prevails,  that  the  whole  Building  was 
at  firft  creeled  by  that  Cardinal.  This  Monument 
was  fo  glorious,  as  Lord  Bacon  obferves  in  his  Life  of 
King  Henry  VIII.  that  it  far  exceeded  that  of  King 
Henry  VII.  in  Weft  mm  ft  er  -Abbey  j  and  at  the  time  of 
the  Cardinal's  Difgrace,  the  Deiign  was  fo  far  exe- 
cuted, that  4250  Ducats  had  been  paid  to  the  Statu- 
ary, and  380  /.  Sterling  to  the  Gilder,  for  what  had 
been  in  Part  done.  But  fo  illufive  are  human  Pur- 
pofes,  that  the  Cardinal  dying  foon  after  his  Retire- 
ment from  Court,  was  privately  buried  at  Leicefler^ 
where  he  died  in  his  Way  to  London  in  Cuftody ;  and 
at  lad  (Anno  1646)  his  Monument  remaining  unfi- 
niftied,  became  the  Plunder  of  the  Factious,  and  the 
Statue  and  Figures  of  gilt  Copper  of  exquifite  Work- 
manfhip,  made  for  the  Ornament  of  the  Tomb,  fold 
to  help  to  carry  on  the  Civil  War  en  the  Parliament's 
Sicie  of  the'Queftion. 

King  James  If.  converted  this  Building  into  a  Cha- 
pel for  the  Service  of  Popery,  and  Mafs  was  publicly 
performed  here  ;  and  ^errio  the  famous  Painter,  who 
had  been  many  Years  employed  in  painting  the  Royal 
Apartments,  painted  this  Chapel  alfo.  Pity  it  is,  that 
thib  Building,  which  might  be  an  Ornament,  fhould 

E  5  .  be 


Sa  A  TOUR  thro          Berks. 

be  fufFered  to  run  to  Ruin,  and  ftand  the  Mark  of 
publick  Refentment,  for  being  once  employed  in  a 
Service  difagreeable  to  a  Proteftant  People  :  But  cer- 
tain it  is,  fmce  that  Prince's  Reign,  it  has  been  en- 
tirely negleded,  and  being  no  Appendage  to  the  Col- 
legiate Churcrr,  waits  the  Royal  Favour  to  retrieve  it 
from  the  Difgrace  of  its  prefent  Situation. 

This  Tomb-houfe  in  the  Year  1759.  fufFered  by 
high  Winds,  and  too  probably  will  not  be  many 
Years  able  to  refift  corroding  Time  and  tempeftuous 
Weather ;  given  up,  as  it  is,  and  long  has  been,  to 
Negle6t  and  Ruin. 

All  the  Ceremonies  obferved  here  in  the  Inftal- 
ment  of  the  Knights,  are  fo  perfectly  fet  down  in 
Mr.  jf/hmo!is  Hiftory  of  the  Order  of  the  Garter  >  that 
nothing  can  be  faid  but  what  muft  be  a  Copy  from 
him. 

As  the  upper  Court  and  Building  are  fronted  with 
the  fine  Terrace,  fo  the  lower  Court,  where  this  beau- 
tiful Chapel  ftands,  is  encbmpafled  with  a  very  high 
Wall,  which  goes  round  the  Weft  end  of  the  Court 
to  the  Gate  ;  and  looking  South,  leads  into  the  Town, 
as  the  Gate  of  the  upper  Court  looks  likewife  South- 
eaft  into  the  little  Park. 

The  Parks  about  fffndfor  are  very  agreeable  and 
fpacious  :  the  little  Park,  as  it  is  called,  is  above  3 
Miles  round,  the  great  one  14,  and  the  Foreft  above 
30.  The  firft  is  peculiar  to  the  Court,  the  others 
are  open  for  Riding,  Hunting,  and  taking  the  Air, 
for  any  Gentlemen  that  pleafe. 

The  Lodges  in  thofe  Parks  may  be  called  Palaces, 
were  they  not  eclipfed  by  the  Palace  itfelf.  They' 
have  been  beautified  by  the  noble  Perfons  to  whom 
the  Poft  of  Rangers  has  been  generally  affigned, 
who,  having  been  enriched  by  other  Advancements, 
Honours,  and  profitable  Employments,  thought  no- 
ihing  too  much  to  lay  out  to  adorn  their  Apartments 

in 


Berks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  83 

in  a  Place  wherein  it  was  fo  much  to  their  Honour, 
as  well  as  Convenience,  to  refide. 

The  Situation  of  W'mdfor  is  moft  pleafant  on  the 
Banks  of  the  Thames,  in  the  midft  of  delightful  Val- 
lies  ;  and  many  Gentlemen  of  Fortune  and  Family 
conftantly  reiide  in  the  Town  and  Neighbourhood.  I 
can  only  name  briefly  a  few : 

The  handfome  Houfe  and  pleafant  Gardens  of  the 
Duke  of  St.  Mans. 

Alfo  that  of  the  Duke  of  Roxburgh. 

Sir  Edward  Watyolis  Houfe. 

The  Seat  of  Mr.  Ayerscombe  on  Leonards-hill. 

A  neat  Edifice  built  by  the  late  Earl  of  Ranelagb 
at  Wingfield)  for  the  Education  of  24  Boys  and 
Girls. 

The  Houfe  of  Percy  Buckley  Efq; 

That  of  the  Lord  Harry  Beauderck. 

That  of  the  late  Colonel  Clayton. 

The  Great  Park,  which  lies  on  the  South  fide  of 
die  Town,  and  appears  by  a  moft  noble  Road  or 
long  Walk,  in  a  direct  Line  to  the  Top  of  a  delight- 
ful Hill,  at  the  Diftance  of  near  three  Miles.  This 
Road,  through  a  double  Plantation  of  Trees  on  each 
Side,  leads  to  the  Ranger  or  Keeper's  Lodge,  the 
Refidence  of  his  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land, who  has  greatly  improved  the  natural  Beauties 
of  this  Park,  and  by  large  Plantations  of  Trees,  ex- 
tenfive  Lawns,  new  Roads,  fpacious  Canals,  and 
Rivers  of  Water,  has  made  this  Villa*  one  of  the 
moft  delightful  and  princely  Habitations  that  can  be 
feen.  This  Park  is  14  Miles  in  Circumference,  and 
is  well  ftock'd  with  Deer  and  Variety  of  other  Game; 
many  foreign  Beafts  and  Birds  are  here  alfo  kept  by 
his  Royal  Highnefs,  who  daily  adds  to  the  Improve- 
ments already  made. 

The  new-ere<5ted  Building  on  Shrubs-bill,  over,  a 
beautiful  Verdure  and  young  Plantation  of  Trees,  is 
very  elegant,  and  promifes  in  a  fhort  time  the  moft 
E  6  delightful. 


84  ^TOUR//W          Berks. 

delightful  rural  Scene:  The  noble  Piece  of  Water  in 
the  Valley  underneath  was  effected  at  a  large  Ex- 
pence,  and  from  a  fmall  Stream  or  Current  of  Wa- 
ter, is  now  made  a  fpacious  River,  capable  to  carry 
Barges  and  Boats  of  Pleafure  with  Freedom  :  His 
Royal  Highnefs  has  alfo  erected  over  this  River  a 
Bridge  of  moft  curious  Architecture,  on  a  noble  and 
boldlPIan,  being  a  fmgle  Arch,  165  Feet  wide  :  This 
Piece  of  Water  is  a  great  Ornament  to  the  Park, 
and  terminates  in  a  Grotto,  and  large  Cafcade,  or 
Fall  of  Water ;  and  whilft  the  Beauties  of  Nature 
are  thus  aiTifled  by  Art,  what  may  not  be  expected 
in  a  few  Years  from  fuch  noble  and  extenfive  De- 
figns,  under  the  Guidance  of  a  munificent  and  Royal 
Intendant ! 

Neither  is  the  Attention  of  his  Royal  Highnefs 
confined  to  this  Park  only,  but  extends  in  like  man- 
ner to  the.  adjoining  Foreft,  that  Scene  of  rural  Di- 
yerfion,  and  Place  of  Refulcnce  of  the  Royal  Game. 

In  this  extenfive  Tract  of  Land  are  feveral  agreea- 
ble Towns  and  Villages,  of  which  Oakingham  and 
War  grave  are  ccnfiderable. 

O&k'wgham  is   a  pretty  large  and  well  frequented 
Market  town  on   Wednefdays.     It  has  three  Fairs, 
and  contains  feveral  Streets,  a  Fiee-fchool,  an  Hof- 
,  and  a  Market- houfe,  which  itands  in  the  Cen- 
tre.    It  is  governed  by  an  Alderman,  Recorder,  and 
Capital  Burgeftes  ;  and  is  chiefly  fupported  by  a  Ma- 
IUTQ  oi"  Cloth  and  Silk  Stockens. 
.-•• ''gi'ove,  though  now  much  neglected,  was  for- 
merly a  Market-town,  and  Part  of  the  PoflelTions  of 
Queen  Etama9  who  patted  the  fiery  Trial,  as  the  Or- 
deal of  the  Saxons  for  Female  Purity. 

Cranborne  lodge,  in  this  Neighbourhood,  belongs 
alfo  to  his  Royal  Highnefs,  as  Keeper  of  the  Foreir. 
This  Lodge  is  moft  pleafantly  fituated,  is  large  and 
well- built,  and  has  an  extenfive  Profpeft  over  a  fine 


Berks.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  8? 

Plain  and  Country,  which  commands  the  moft  beau- 
tiful Landfchape  or  Picture  of  Nature. 

As  for  the  Town  of  Windfor  it  has  belonged  to 
the  Crown  ever  fince  the  Conqueft.  It  contains  fe- 
veral  Streets,  fome  of  which  lie  about  the  Cattle ; 
but  the  principal  looks  Southward,  and  is  adorned 
with  very  good  private  Buildings,  and  an  handfome 
Town- hall,  built  in  the  Reign  of  King  Charles  II. 
It  arofe  out  of  the  Ruins  of  Old  Windfor^  which  de- 
cayed in  Proportion  as  the  new  one  advanced,  under 
Scite  of  the  Royal  Palace  and  Caftle.  It  was  confti- 
tuted  a  free  Borough  by  King  Edward  I.  with  many 
Privileges,  which  it  enjoys  at  prefent.  The  Corpo- 
ration confifts  of  a  Mayor,  two  Bailiffs,  and  28 
others,  chofen  out  of  the  Inhabitants  j  thirteen  of 
whom  are  called  Fellows  or  Benchers  of  the  Guild- 
hall-,  and  10  of  thefe  are  ftiled  Aldermen,  or  Chief 
Benchers,  out  of  whom  the  Mayor  and  Bailiffs  are 
chofen.  This  Town  returns  two  Members  to  Par- 
liament. Every  Saturday  it  has  a  Market,  and  two 
Fairs  in  the  Yeair. 

The  Parifli  Church  is  a  fpacious  antient  Building, 
fituated  in  the  High  Street  of  the  Town,  in  which 
alfo  is  erected  the  Guild-ball  or  Town-houfe,  a  neat 
regular  Edifice,  built  in  1686.  fupported  and  adorned 
with  Columns  and  Arches  of  Portland  Stone.  The 
Hall  is  a  handfome  large  Room,  well  adapted  for  the 
Meeting  of  the  Mayor  and  Corporation,  for  the  Buil- 
nefs  of  the  Borough. 

In  the  Year  1707.  the  Corporation,  out  of  a  fm- 
gular  Regard  to  Queen  Anne  (who  conftantly  made 

-ndfar  her  Summer  Refidence),  ere&ed  in  a  Niche, 
at  the  North-end  of  the  Town-houfe,  the  Statue  of 
that  Princefs,  vefted  in  her  Royal  Robes,  with  the 
Globe,  and  other  Enfigns  of  Regalia  :  and  under- 
neath, in  the  Freeze  of  the  Entablature  of  the  lefTer 
Columns  and  Arches,  is  the  following  Inscription,  in 
Letters  of  Gold ; 

Anno 


86  AT  OUR  thro  Berks, 

Anno  Regni  fui  VI°. 

Dom.  1707. 

Ante  tua,  Sculptor,  non  eft  imttalilh  ANNA  ; 

ANN^E  vis  fimilem  fculpere  ?  Sculps  Deam* 

S,  Chapman,  Pretore. 

And  in  a  like  Niche,  on  the  South-fide,  is  the 
Statue  of  her  Majefty's  Royal  Confort,  Prince  George 
of  Denmark,  in  a  Roman  military  Habit,  and  under- 
neath is  the  following  Infcription  : 

Sereniffimo  Principt 

GEORG1O  Principi  Danirc, 

Her ol  omni  fesculo  venerando, 

Chriftophorus  Wren,  Arm* 

Pofuit.    M.DCC.XIII, 

In  the  Area  underneath  this  Town-hall,  is  kept  a 
weekly  Market,  on  every  Saturday,  which  is  plenti- 
fully fupplied  with  Corn,  Meat,  Fifh,  and  all  other 
Provifions. 

Sunning- hi II,  Inglefield- Green,  OldWindfor,  Dai- 
cbet,  Cooper's  bill,  Ditton-Park,  Langley-Park,  Percy- 
Lodge,  Stcke~Green,  Farnbam,  Eajl  Burnbams,  Tap- 
ley,  and  other  Situations  equally  beautiful,  are  de- 
fervedly  celebrated,  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  this  de- 
lightful Palace. 

I  left  IVindjor,  and  ftruck  again  into  the  London 
Road  at  Colnbrook,  and  pafled  over  the  Heath,  and 
through'  the  Towns  of  Hounjlow,  Brentford,  Ham- 
merfmith,  and  Kenfington,  to  London. 

I  here  conclude  this  Letter,  with  alluring  you  that 
J  am,  Sir, 

ICour  humble  Servant. 
LET- 


London.    GREAT  BRITAIN.  87 


LETTER       II. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  tbe  City  of  LON- 
DON, as  taking  in  tbe  City  of  Weftminfler, 
Borough  of  Southwark,  and  tbe  Buildings 
circumjacent. 

SIR, 

T  ONDON,  as  a  City  only,  and  as  its  Walls  and 
\_j  Liberties  line  it  out,  might  be  viewed  in  a 
fmaller  Compafs  than  what  we  propofe  to  confider  it 
in  :  for,  when  I  fpeak  of  London^  in  the  modern  Ac- 
ceptation, I  take  in  all  that  vaft  Mafs  of  Buildings 
reaching  from  Elackwall  in  the  Eaft,  to  Tothlll-fields 
in  the  Weft  ;  and  extended,  in  an  unequal  Breadth, 
from  the  Bridge  or  River  in  the  South,  to  IJlington 
North  ;  and  from  Peterborough -houfe  on  the  Bank' 
fide  in  Weftmlnjler^  to  Cavendijh  fauare  ;  and  all  the 
new  Buildings  by  and  beyond  Grofvenor  and  Hanover 
Squares  to  the  Brentford  Road  one  way,  to  the  Afton 
Road  another;  a  Prodigy  of  Buildings,  that  nothing 
in  the  World  does,  or  ever  did,  furpafs,  except  old 
Rome  in  Trajan's  time,  when  the  Walls  of  that  City 
were  50  Miles  in  Compafs,  and  the  Number  of  In- 
habitants 6,800,000  Souls. 

London^  as  to  its  Figure,  muft  be  owned  to  be  very 
irregular,  as  it  is  ftretched  out  in  Buildings  juft  at  the 
Pleafure  of  every  Undertaker  of  them,  and  as  the 
Convenience  of  the  People  dire&s,  whether  for  Trade 
or  otherwife :  this  gives  it  a  very  confufed  Appear- 
ance, being  properly  neither  long  nor  broad,  round 
nor  Iquare  ;  whereas  the  City  of  Rome  was,  in  a 
manner,  round,  with  very  few  Irregularities  in  its 
Shape. 

One 


88  A  T  O  U  R  thro       London. 

One  fees  London,  including  the  Buildings  on  both 
Sides  the  Water,  in  fome  Places  three  Miles  broad,  as 
from  St.  George's  in  South-war^  to  Shoreditcb  in  A'Jid- 
dlefex  ;  or  two  Miles,  as  from  Peterborough  boufe  to 
Montague-boufe  ;  and  in  fome  Places  not  half  a  Mile, 
as  in  trapping  ;  and  lefs  in  Rotherhith. 

We  fee  feveral  Villages,  formerly  ftanding,  as  it 
were,  in  the  Country,  and  at  a  great  Difhnce,  now 
joined  to  the  Streets  by  continued  Buildings  ;  and 
more  making  hafte  to  meet  in  like  manner.  For  Ex- 
ample, 

1,  Deptford:  This  Town  was  formerly  reckoned  at 
leaft  two  Miles  from  Rotherhitk,  and   that  over  the 
Marfhes  too,  a  Place  unlikely  ever  to  be  inhabited  ; 
and  yet  now,  by  the  Increafe  of  Buildings  in  that 
Town  itfelf,  and  the  many  Streets  erected  uRotber- 
hlth,  and   by  the  Docks  and   Building-yards   on  the 
River- fide,  which  ftand  between  both,  the  Town  of 
Deptford,  and  the  Streets  of  Rotherhith,  are  in  a  man- 
ner j.oined,    and  the  Buildings  daily  increaiing ;  fo 
that  Deptford  may  be  reckoned  a  Part  of  the  great 
Mafs,  and  infinitely  full  of  People  alfo  :  and  were  the 
Town  of  Deptford  now  feparated,  and  rated  by  it- 
felf, I   believe  it  contains  more  People,  and  (lands 
upon  in  ore  Ground,  than  the  City  of  Wells. 

2.  The  Village  of  Iflington,  on  theNorth^fide  of  the 
City,  is  in  like  manner  joined  to  the  Streets  of  Lon- 
don.    And  the  fame  may  be  faid, 

3    Of -Mile  end,  on  the  Ealt  End  of  the  Town. 

4.  Newlngton-butts,  in  Sunyy  reaches  out  her  Hand 
North,  and  is  fo  joining  to  Southwark,  that  it  cannot 
now  be  properly  called  a  Town  by  itfelf,  but  a  kind 
of  Suburb  to  the  Borough  :  and  if,  as  once  was  talk- 
ed of,  St.  George's  fields  fhculd  be  built  into  Squares 
and  Streets,  Newijigton,  Lambeth,  and  the  Borough, 
would  mike  but  one  Soutbwark. 

That  Wefiminfter  is  in  a  fair  way  to  join  Hands 
with  Cbelfia,  as  St.  Giles's  is  with  Marybwe,  and 
Qr*Qt.RuJjil]ftrut  by  Montagus -bwfei  with  Totten- 
ham 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  89 

barn-court^  is  very  evident :  and  yet  all  thefe,  put  toge- 
ther," may  ftill  be  called  London.  Whither  will  this 
City  then  extend,  and  where  muft  a  Circumvallation- 
line  of  it  be  placed  ? 

I  have,  as  near  as  I  could,  caufed  a  Meafure  to  be 
taken  of  this  mighty  Body  ;  and,  for  the  Satisfaction 
of  your  Curiofity,  I  have  here  given  as  accurate  a  De- 
fcription  of  it  as  I  can  do  in  fo  narrow  a  Compafs,  or 
without  drawing  a  Plan  of  the  Places. 

As  I  am  forced,  in  many  Parts,  to  take  in  fome  un- 
built Ground  ;  fo  I  have,  on  the  other  hand,  been 
obliged  to  leave  a  great  many  whole  Streets  of  Build- 
ings out  of  my  Line  :  fo  that  I  have  really  not  ftretch- 
ed  my  Calculations,  to  make  it  feem  bigger  than  it 
is  $  nor  is  there  any  Occafion  for  it. 

A  LI  N  E  of  Meafurement,  drawn  about  all  tbe 
continued  Buildings  of  tbe  City  of  London, 
and  Parts  adjacent \  including  Weft  minder 
and  Southwark,  &c. 

N.  B.  I  fhall  fum  up  by  Figures,  i,  2,  3,  &c.  the 
Particulars  at  laft. 

The  Line  begins,  for  the  MIDDLESEX  Side  of  tbe 
BUILDINGS, 

I.  A  T  Peterborough-kouft,  the  fartheft  Houfe  Weft 
**^  upon  the  River  Thames,  and  runs  North-weft 
by  Weft  by  the  Marfhes  to  Totbill -fields  ;  and,  paffing 
by  the  Neat-boufes  and  Arnold's  Brewhoufe,  ends  at 
Cbe'fea  Road.  Meafured,  i  Mi'ey  6  Furlongs,  16 
Rods. 

2.  Then,  allowing  an  Interval  from  Buckingham", 
houfe  crofs  the  Park,  about  one  Furlong  and  half  to 
the  Corner  of  my  Lord  Godolphin's  Garden- wall,  the 
Line  goes  North  behind  the  Stable-yard  Buildings, 
and  behind  Park-place,  and  on  the  Park-wall  behind 
the  Buildings,  on  the  Weft-fide  of  St.  Jamtfs-Jlreet* 

to 


90  ^TOUR^/V       London. 

to  the  Corner  in  Soho,  or  Piccadilly  ;  then  crofting, 
the  Road,  goes  along  the  North- fide  of  the  Road 
Weft,  to  Hyde-park  Gate.  I  Mile,  2  Furlongs,  1 1 
Rods. 

3.  Then  the  Line  turns  North-eaft  by  Eaft,  anJ 
taking  in  the  new  and  noble  Buildings  and   Streets, 
called  May-fair,  holds  on  Eaft,  till  the  Streets,  form- 
ed out  of  Hyde-houfe  Garden,  caufe  it  to  turn  away- 
North,  a  Point  Weft  reaching  to  Tyburn- road,  a  lit- 
tle to  the  Eaft  of  the  great  Mother  Conduit  ;  then  it 
goes  North,    and,  crofling  the  Road,  takes  in  the 
Weft-fide  of  Cavendi/h  fquare,    and  the  Streets  ad- 
joining, and,  leaving  Marybone,  goes  away  Eaft,  till 
it   reaches  to  Hamjiead-road,    near  a  little   Village 
called   Tottenham  court,     2  Milts,    5    Furlongs,    20 
Rods, 

4.  From  Tottenham  court  the  Line  comes  in  a  little 
South,  to  meet  the  Bloowjbury  Buildings  ;  then  turn- 
ingEaft,runs  behind  Montagu  and  Southampton  Houfes 
to  the  North-eaft  Corner  of  Southampton- houfe  ;  then, 
crofling  the  Path,  meets  the  Buildings  called  tjhteens- 
fquare  ;    then   turning  North,    till   it   comes  to  the 
North-weft  Corner  of  the  Square ;    thence  it  goes 
away  Eaft,  behind  the  Buildings  on  the  North -fide  of 
Ormqndftreet,  till   it  comes  to  Lamb's  Conduit,     i 
Mile,   i  Furlong,   13  Rods. 

5.  Here  the  Line  turns  South,  and   indents  to  the 
Corner  of  Bedford  row ;  and  leaving  fome  few  Houfes, 
with  the  Cock- pit  anj  Bowling-green,  goes  on  the 
Back  of  Gray's- inn   Wall   to  Gray's  -inn  lane  ;  then 
turns  on  the  Outfide  of  the  Buildings,  which  are  on 
the  Weft- fide  of  Gray  s  inn  lane,  going  North  to  the 
Stones  End,  when  turning  Eaft,  it  paffes  to  the  New 
River  Bridge  without  Liquor -pond /treet;  fo  taking  in 
the  Cold-bath  and  the  Bear -garden,  but  leaving  out  *  Sir 

*  A  Jarge  Mafs  of  Buildings  has  been  erefted  fince  our  Author  drew 
this  Line,  confiding  of  many  Streets  and  Pillages,  the  whole  Co/d-batb- 
fields  being  built  upon,  quite  up  to  Sir  Jobn  Oldcajik's.  For  which 
the  Lineflioujd  now  be  drawn  on  the  Outfide  of  thefeBuiMinas. 

John: 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  91 

John  Oldcajlle's  and  the  Spaw,  goes  on  Eaft  by  the 
Ducking- pond  to  the  End  of  New  Bridewell ;  and 
crofling  the  Fair-field,  comes  info  the  IJlington  Road 
by  the  Diftiller's  Houfe,  formerly  Juitice  Fuller's* 
i  Mile,  2  Furlongs,  6  Rodi. 

6.  Here,  to  take  in   all  the  Buildings  which  join 
IJlington  to  the  Streets,"  the  Line  goes  North   on  the 
Eaft  fide  of  the  Road  to  the  Turk's- head  Alehoufe  j 
then  turning  North-weft,  pafles  to  the  New  River 

•  Houfe  ;  but  leaving  it  to  the  Weft,  pafles  by  Sadkrs- 
wells,  from  thence  to  Bufby's-houfe,  and  keeping  en 
the  Weft-fide  of  IJlington,  till  it  comes  oppofite  to 
Canbury  boufe  lane,  turns  into  the  Road,  and  pafles 
South  almoft  to  the  Lane  which  turns  Eaft  down  to 
the  lower  Street  j  but  then  turns  Eaft  without  the 
Houfes,  and  goes  go  the  Cvwketper't  in  the  lower 
Street  eroding  the  Road,  and  thro'  the  Cowkeeper's 
Yard  into  Frog-lane ;  then  turning  Weft  on  the  South, 
Side  of  the  Town,  juft  without  the  Buildings,  joins 
again  to  the  Buildings  on  the  Weft- fide  of  Wood's- 
clofe,  paffing  behind  the  Sheep-Market  Wall.  iMiles^ 
4  Furlongs,  39  Rods. 

7.  From  tFood"s-clofe  the  Line  goes   due  Eaft  to 
Mount-mill,  where,  leaving  feveral  Buildings  to  the 
North,  it  pafles  on,  croffing  all  the  Road   to  Brick- 
lane,  to  the  North-fide  of  the  great  new  Square  in 
Old-Jlreet,  and   taking  in  the  Pejibouje  Wall,  turns 
South   at  the  North -eaft  Corner  of  the  faid  Wall  to 
Old-Jlreet  Road  ;  then  going  away  Eaft  till  it  meets 
the  Buildings  near  Hoxton-fq.uare,  it  turns  North  to 
the  North-weft  Corner  of  the  Wall  of  AJk's  Hofpital  5 
then  floping  North- eaft,  it  pafles  by  Pimlico,  the  Cy- 
4er-kouje,  and    the  two  Walls   to  the  North -end  of 
Hoxton,  when  it  turns  Eaft,  and  inclofing  the  Gar- 
den walls,    comes  into  the  Ware  Road  juft  at  the 
King's-head  in  the  New  Buildings  by  the  Land  of  Pro- 
mife.     2  Miles,   1 6  Rods. 

8.  From  the  King  s- head  the  Line  turns  South,  run- 

ning 


c>2  A  TOUR  thro        London. 

ning  to  the  Stones  End  in  Sho'reditcb ;  then  turning 
Eaft,  it  takes  in  a  Burying- ground,  and  fome  Build- 
ings in  the  Hackney  Road,  when  Hoping  South-eaft  by 
South,  it  goes  away  by  the  Virginia -houfe  to  a  great 
Brewhoufe,  and  then  {till  more  Eaft  to  the  Back  of 
Wheehr-Jireet,  and  then  Eaft  by  South  to  Brick  lane ; 
crofling  which,  it  goes  away  Eaft  towards  Bethnal- 
green  ;  but  then  turning  (hort  South,  it  goes  towards 
.  White- chapel  Mount ;  but  being  intercepted  by  new 
Streets,  it  goes  quite  up  to  the  South-end  of  Dog-row 
at  Mile  end.  i  Mile,  6  Fur longs ,  iqRods. 

9.  From  the  Dog  row  the  Line  crofles  the  Road, 
and  takes  in  an  Hamlet  of  Houfes,  called  Stepney  j 
and  coming  back  Weft  to  the  Streets  End  at  White* 
chapel  Mill,  goes  away  South  by  the  Hog-boufes  into 
Church-lane^  and  to  Hag-fair :  when  turning  again 
Eaft,  it  continues  in  a  ftrait  Line  on  the  North- iide 
of  Ratcliff- highway  ^  till  it  comes  almoft  to  the  farther 
Glafs-houfes  ;  then  turning  North,  it  furrounds  Step- 
ney and  Stepney -caufway,  to  Mile-end  Road  j  then 
turning  Eaft  again,  and  afterwards  South,  comes 
back  to  the  new  Streets  on  the  North  fide  of  Limi~ 
hfufe,  and,  joining  the  Marfh,  comes  down  to  the 
Water-fide  at  the  Lower  Shipwright  Dock  in  Lime- 
boufe-hole.  3  Miles,  7  Furlongs,  I  Rod. 


The  Particulars  of  theMid- 
dlefex  Side,  put  together, 
are  as  follow;  viz. 


Miles  : 

Furl. 

Rods. 

.       I 

6 

16 

I 

2 

ii 

.      2 

5 

20 

.       I 

i 

'3 

.      I 

2 

6 

.      2 

4 

39 

.      2 

o 

16 

I 

6 

19 

•       3 

7 

i 

18 

4 

21 

N.B. 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  p3 

N.  B.  This  Line  leaves  out  all  the  North-fide  of 
Mile- end)  from  the  End  of  the  Dog-row  to  the 
"Jews  Burying-ground,  which  is  all  built ;  alfo 
all  the  North  Part  of  the  Dog-row,  and  all  Beth- 
rial-green  ;  alfo  all  Poplar  and  Blackwall,  which 
are  contiguous,  a  Trifle  of  Ground  excepted, 
and  very  populous.  Therefore  the  above  Places 
fhould  new  be  all  included  within  the  Line,  in 
order  to  give  a  juft  Idea  of  the  Extent  of  London 
at  prefent. 

For  the  Southwark  Side  of  the  Buildings,  the  Line  is 

as  follows  : 

TTAving  ended  the  Circumference  of  the  Middlesex 
•*--*•  Buildings  at  Limehoufe,  and  the  Street  extending 
towards  Poplar ,  the  Hamlets  of  Poplar  and  Elackwall^ 
tho'  very  near  contiguous  in  Buildings,  being  excluded, 
I  allow  an  Interval  of  two  Miles,  from  Poplar •,  crofs 
the  Ifle  of  Dogs,  and  over  the  Thames,  to  the  Lower 
Water-gate  at  Deptford  :  and  tho'  in  meafuring  the 
Circumference  of  all  Cities,  the  River,  where  any 
fuch  runs  thro'  Part  of  the  Buildings,  is  always  mea- 
fured  ;  yet,  that  I  may  not  be  faid  to  ftretch  the  Ex- 
tent of  the  Buildings  which  I  include  in  this  Account, 
I  omit  the  River  from  Limehoufe  to  Deptford  (where, 
if  included,  it  ought  to  commence),  and  begin  my 
Line  as  above. 

i.  From  the  faid  Water-gate  &\.  Deptford,  the  Line 
goes  Eaft  to  the  Corner  next  the  Thames,  where  the 
Shipwrights  Yard  now  is,  and  where  1  find  a  conti- 
nued Range  of  Buildings  begins  by  the  Side  of  a  little 
Creek  or  River,,  which  runs  into  the  Thames  there, 
and  reaches  quite  up  the  faid  River,  to  the  Bridge  in 
the  great  Kentljh  Road,  and  over  the  Street  there, 
taking  in  the  South-fide  of  the  Street  to  the  Welt- 
corner  of  the  Buildings  in  that  Street,  and  then  mea- 

luring 


«+  A  T  O  U  R  thro       London. 

Turing  down  on  the  Weft-fide  of  the  long  Street, 
which  runs  to  the  Thames  Side,  till  you  come  to  the 
new  Street  which  pafles  from  Deptford  to  Rotherbitb  ; 
then  turning  to  the  Left,  paffing  on  the  Back-fide  of 
the  King's-yard  to  Mr.  Evelyn's  Houfe,  including  the 
new  Church  of  Deptford,  and  all  the  new  Streets  or 
Buildings  made  on  the  Fields  Side,  which  are  very 
many,  this  amounts,  in  the  Whole,  to  3  Miles,  I 
Furlong,  16  Rods. 

2.  From  Mr.  Evelyn's  Garden-gate  the  Line  goes 
North-weft,  taking  in  all  the  new  Docks  and  Yards, 
the  Red-houfe,  and  feveral  large  Streets  of  Houfes, 
which  have  been  lately  built,  and  by  which  the  faid 
Town  of  Deptfotd  is  effe£tually  joined  to  the  Buildings, 
reaching  from  Cuckolds-point  Eaftward,  and  which 
are  carried  out,  as  if  Rotberbith  ftretched  forth  its 
Arm  to  embrace  Deptford',  then  for  fome  Length  Ro- 
therhitb  continues  narrow  till  you  come  to  Church - 
Jireet,  where  feveral  Streets  are  alfo  lately  built  South, 
and  others  parallel  with  the  Street,  till  gradually  the 
Buildings  thicken,  and  extend  farther  and  farther  to 
the  South,  and  South  by  E aft,  till.they  crofs  over  the 
Eaft-end  of  Horjlydown  to  Benwndfey  Church,  and 
thence  Eaft  to  the  Sign  of  the  World's -end,  over- 
againft  the  great  Fort,  being  the  Remains  of  the 
Fortifications  drawn  round  thefe  Parts  of  Southward 
in  the  Civil  Wars.  This  Extent  is,  by  Computa- 
tion, four  Miles;  but  being  meafured,  as  the  Streets 
indented,  the  Circuit  proved  ^  Miles,  6  Furlongs,  12 
Rods. 

6.  From  this  Fort  to  the  Corner  of  Leng-lane,  and 
thro'  Long  lane  to  the  Lock,  at  the  End  of  Kent-Jlreet^ 
is  I  t\'~ile,  7  Furlongs,  i  Rods. 

4.  From  the  Corner  of  Kent  ftreet  to  the  Town  of 
Newington-butts,  drawing  the  Line  behind  all  theBuild- 
ings  as  they  ftand,  and  round  the  faid  Village  of  Ncw- 
ington  to  the  Haberdashers  Alms-houfes,  and  thence  by 
the  Road  to  the  Windmill  at  Rlackman-jlreet^  is  3 
Miles,  2  Fur  longs  y  16  Rods. 

5,  From 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  95 

5.  From  the  Windmill  croffing  St.  George's  fields ^ 
on  .the  Back  of  the  Mint,  to  the  Fighting  Cocks, 
thence  to  the  Refloration  Gardens,  and  thence  on  the 
Outfide  of  all  the  Buildings  to  Lambeth-wells ,  and  on 
to  Vaux-hall  Bridge,  over-againft  the  other  Fort  of  the 
old  Fortifications,  being  juft  the  fame  Length  that 
thofe  old  Fortifications  extended,  tho'  infinitely  fuller 
of  Buildings.  This  laft  Circuit  meafures  3  Miles, 
5  Furlongs^  12  Rods. 

Miles.  Furl.  Rods. 


1     •    •    3 

The  Particulars  of  the 


Southwark  Side  *, 


T"         *         *          3 

5     -     -     3 


I7 
Middlefex     .     .     18 


Total     .     .     36 


16 

12 

2 

16 

12 


18 

21 


2     39 


Were  it  poflible  to  reduce  all  thefe  Bui  dings  to  a 

ompa&  Situation,  'tis  generally  thought,  that  the 

•hole  Body  fo  put  together,  allowing  the  necefTary 

Ground,  which  they  now  employ  for  the  feveral  Trades 

n  the  Out-parts  ;  fuch  as  the  Building-yards  by  the 

liver  for  Shipwrights,  Tanners  Yards,  Dyers,  Whit- 

ers,  («ft\  would  take  up  28  Miles  in  Circumference, 

ery  compactly  built. 

The  Gueffes  that  are  made  at  the  Number  of  In- 

abitanfs,  have  been  varioufly  formed  :  Mr.  Maitland 

n  his  Hiftory  of  London  (Anno  1739)  computes,  that 

•ithin  the  'Walls',  and  the  Bars,  as  I   may   fay,  it 

ontains  725,903  ;  but  Sir  J-Viiliam  Petty,  famous  for 

*  Tiie  Ti'wn  of  Greenwich,  which  may  indeed  be  f'.irfto  be  contigu- 
us  to  De'-tford,  mijtht  alfo  be  called  a  Put  of  the  M^/urement  ;  but 
omit  it,  as  I  have  the  Towns  of  Chelfea  and  KnigbtJb'iJge  on  the 
her  Side,  tho'  the  latter  adlaally  joins  the  Town  j  and  the  oth.r,  as 
lij  jten/ingten,  very  neariy, 

his 


ptf  A  TOUR  thro       London. 

his  Political  Arithmetic,  fuppofed  the  City,  at  his  laft 
Calculation,  to  contain  a  Million  of  People  ;  and  this 
he  judges  from  the  Number  of  Births  and  Burials  : 
but  he  muft  take  in  a  greater  Compafs  than  MrMait- 
hnd  to  make  up  this  Number.  And  according  to  this 
Rule,  as  well  by  what  is  well  known  of  the  Increafe 
of  the  faid  Births  and  Burials,  as  of  the  prodigious 
Increafe  of  Buildings,  it  may  be  very  reafonable  to, 
conclude  the  prefent  Number  of  Inhabitants,  within 
the  Circumference  I  have  mentioned  in  my  Line,  to 
amount  to  about  1,500,000  Souls. 

The  Government  of  this  great  City  is,  perhaps, 
the  beft  regulated  that  any  City  can  pretend  to  ;  and 
of  late  Years  it  boafts  of  feveral  new  Regulations,  as 
to  Beggars,  Lights,  Pavements,  &c.  which  turn  out 
greatly  to  its  Advantage. 

3  The  Government  of  this  City,  in  particular,  and 
abftracledly  confidered,  is  by  the  Lord  Mayor,  25 
other  Aldermen,  two  Sheriffs,  the  Recorder,  and 
Common  Council  ;  but  the  Jurifdiftion  of  thefe  is 
confined  to  that  Part  only  which  they  call  the  City, 
and  its  Liberties,  which  are  marked  out,  except  the 
Borough,  by  the  Walls  and  the  Bars,  as  they  arc 

Befides  this,  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of 
London  have  a  Right  Prefidial  in  Southward  and  hold 
frequent  Courts  at"  St.  Margarets-bill  in  the  Borough: 
they  are  alfo  Confervators  of  the  Bridge,  and  the  Bridge 
itfelf  is  their  particular  Jurifdiclion. 

The  Lord  Mayor,  fcrV.  are  Confervators  of  the  River 


Thames,  from  Stones  Bridge  in  Surry  and 

to  the  River  Medway  in  Kent,  and,  as  fome  infift,  up 

the  Medway  to  &*/;f/?<?r'  Bridge. 

•  The  Government  of  the  Out-  parts  is  by  Jultices  of 
the  Peace,  and  by  the  Sheriffs  of  London,  who  are  like- 
wife  Sheriffs  of  Middlesex  ;  and  the  Government  oi 
WifaMif  is  by  an  High  Bailiff,  constituted  by  the 
Dean  and  Chapter,  to  whom  the  Civil  Admimftration 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  97 

is  committed,  and  who  prefides  in  Elections  of  Parlia- 
ment for  the  City  of  Wejbninjler,  and  returns  the  Can- 
didates who  are  chafen.  N 

The  remaining  Part  of  Soutbwark  Side,  where  the 
City  Jurifdidion  does  not  obtain,  is  governed  alfo  by  a 
Bench  of  Juftices,  and  their  proper  fubftituted  Peace- 
officers,  excepting  out  of  this  the  Privileges  of  the 
Marflialfea,  or  of  the  Marjhal's  Court,  the  Pri- 
vilege of  the  Marftjal  of  the  King's  Bench,  and  the 
like. 

That  I  may  obferve  fome  Method  in  my  Defcrip- 
tion,  and  avoid  Repetitions,  I  will  divide  my  Subject 
into  the  following  Branches : 

I.  I  will  give  a  brief  Account  of  what  the  City  was" 
before  the  Fire,  and  how  improved  when  rebuilt, 
and  within  a  few  Years  after  it. 

II.  Of  the  prodigious  Increafe  of  Buildings  within  our 
own  Memory,  down  to  the  Year  1760. 

III.  Of  the  public  Offices,  and  City  Corporations. 

IV.  Of  the  moft  noted  Edifices,  Structures,  Squares, 
in  and  about  London,  and  of  its  famous  Bridges. 

V.  Of  the  principal  Hofpitals,  and  other  charitable  In- 
ftitutions  in  and  about  London. 

VI.  Of  the  Churches   of  London   and   Weftmlnfter^ 
Southwark,  &c. 

VII.  Of  St.  James's  Palace,  the  Parliament- houfe, 
Wejlminjhr-lmll,  &c. 

VIII.  Of  the  Statues,  and  other  public  Ornaments. 

IX.  Oi  the  Gates  of  London  and  Weflmtnfter. 

X.  Of  the  Markets  of  London^  &c. 

XI.  Of  the  public  Schools  and  Libraries,  of  the  Bri- 
tljb  Mufeum,  and  other  Eftablifliments  tending  to 
promote  Learning  and  Science. 

XII.  Of  the  Shipping  in  the  Thames,  and  the  Trade 
carried  on  by  means  of  that  noble  River. 

XIII.  Of  the  Manner  by  which  the  City  is  fupplied 
with  Water. 

VOL,  II.  F  XIV. 


r>8  A  T  O  U  R  thro        London, 

XIV.  Of  the  Chriftenings  and  Burials  in  London-,  the 
Importance  of  the  City  of  London  to  the  whole  King- 
dom ;  of  its  comparative  Proportion  to  the  public 
Expence;  and  the  difpropor donate  Number  of  Mem- 
bers it  returns. 

XV.  The  Benefit  to  the  Public  of  a  good  Underftand- 
ing  between  the  Court  and  City. 

To  begin  then  with  the  firft  : 

I.  A  brief  Account  of  what  tie  City  was  before 
the  Fire,  and  how  improved  when  rebuilt^  and 
within  a  few  Tear 3  after  it. 

TAKE  the  City,  and  its  adjacent  Buildings,  to 
Hand  as  defer ibed  by  Mr.  Stow,  or  by  any  other 
Author,  who  wrote  before  the  Fire  of  London;  and  the 
Difference  between  what  it  was  then,  and  what  it  is 
now,  may  be  obferved  thus : 

Before  the  Fire  of  London^  Anno  1666.  the  Build- 
ings looked  as  if  they  had  been  formed  to  make  one 
general  Bonfire,  whenever  Incendiaries  (hould  think 
fit  to  attempt  itj  for  the  Streets  were  not  only  nar- 
row, and  the  Houfes  all  built  with  Timber.,  Lath,  and 
Plafter ;  but  the  Manner  of  the  Building  in  thofe 
Days,  one  Story  projecting  out  beyond  another,  was 
fuch,  that  in  fome  narrow  Streets  the  Houfes  almoft 
touched  one  another  at  the  top  ;  infomuch  that  it 
often  happened,  that  if  an  Houfe  was  on  Fire,  the 
oppofite  Houfe  was  in  more  Danger,  according  as 
the  Wind  flood,  than  the  Houfss  adjoining  on  either 
Side. 

And  though  by  the  new  Buildings  after  the  Fire, 
much  Ground  was  given  up  to  enlarge  the  Streets  ; 
yet  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  the  old  Houfes  ftood  ge- 
nerally upon  more  Ground,  were  much  larger  upon 
the  Flat,  and  in  many  Places,  Gardens  ar.d  large 
Yards  about  them  :  fo  that  by  Computation  near 

4000 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  99 

4000  Houfes  ftandt  on  the  Ground  which  the  Fire 
left  defblate,  more  than  flood  on  the  fame  Ground 
before. 

All  thofe  Palaces  of  the  Nobility,  formerly  making 
a  moft  beautiful  Range  of  Buildings  fronting  theStrand, 
with  their  Gardens  reaching  to  the  Thames,  where 
they  had  their  particular.  Water-gates'  and  Stairs,  have 
received  the  like  Improvements  :  fuch  as  EJJex^  Arun- 
del^  Norfolk,  Salijbury,  Wcrcefter,  Exeter,  Hunger f or  d^ 
and  York  Houfes ;  the  Lord  Brock's,  Lord  Hatton^ 
and  Lord  Bafavitis  .Ploufes  in  Holborn^  in  the  Place 
of  which  are  now  fo  many  noble  Streets  and  Houfes 
creeled,  as  are  in  themfelres  equal  to  a  large  City : 
all  which  extend  from  the  Temple'  to  Northumberland- 
houfe ;  Somerjet'fouft)  and  the  Savoy,  only  interven- 
ing :  and*  the  latter  of  thefe  may  be  laid  to  be,  not  art 
Houfe,  but  a  little  Town  j  being  feparated  into  innu- 
merable Tenements. 

Such  was  the  State  of  London  before  the  Fire  5ni666, 
and  fo  prodigious  were  the  Improvements  made  in  it, 
within  the  Gourfe  of  a  few  Years  after  that  Difafter. 
But  what  are  thefe,  compared  to  what  has  been  done 
fmce,  within  our  own  Memory  ?  And  this  brings  me 
to  my  fecond  Article. 

II.  Of  the  prodigious  Increafe  of  Buildings^  with- 
in our  own  Memory  ,  down  to  the  Tear  1760. 

OT  to  enter  on  a  particular  Defcription  of  the 
Buildings,  I  (hall  only  take  Notice  of  the  Places 
where  fuch  Enlargements  are  made  :   As, 

i.  All  thofe  numberlefs  Ranges  of  Buildings,  call'd 
Spit al- fields ,  reaching  from  Spttal-yard  at  Northern 
Fallgate^  and  from  Artillery -lane  in  Bifncpfgate-fireet) 
with  all  the  new  Streets,  beginning  ttlfdxtw,  and  the 
Back  of  Shareditcb  Church,  North,  and  reaching  to 
Brick-lane,  and  to  the  End  of  Hartjfreety  on  the 
Way  to  Betbnal-green^  Euft  j  then  Hoping  away  quite 

F    2  £0 


joo  A  TOUR  thro       London. 

toWMte-cbapfl'SiQaA  South-eaft,  containing,  as  feme 
People  fay,  above  320  Acres  of  Ground,  which  are 
now  clofe  built,  and  inhabited  by  an  infinite  Number 
of  People. 

The  Lanes  were  deep,  dirty,  and  unfrequented  ; 
that  Part  now  called  Spitalfields- market  was  a  Field  of 
Grafs,  with  Cows  feeding  on  it,  fmce  the  Year  1670. 
The  Old  Artillery- ground  (where  the  Parliament  lifted 
their  firft  Soldiers  againft  the  King)  took  up  all  thofe 
long  Streets  leading  out  of  Artillery  lane  to  Spital-yard 
Back-gate ;  and  fo  on  to  the  End  of  Wheeler  Jlreet^ 
Brick-lane,  which  is  now  a  long  well-paved  Street, 
was  a  deep  dirty  Road,  frequented  chiefly  by  Carts 
fetching  Bricks  that  Way  into  IVhitecbapti  from  Brick- 
kilns on  thefe  Fields,  whence  it  had  its  Name. 

2.  On  the  more  Eaftern  Part  the  fame  Increafe  goes 
on  in  Proportion  j  namely,  all  Goodmans  fields^  and 
the  many  Streets  between  It  bitechapel  and  Rofemary- 
l-jne,  all  built  fmce  the  Year  1678.     Well-doJ'e,  now 
called  Marine. '-fquare,  all  the  hither  or  Weft-end  of 
Rat  cliff*  highway,  from  the  Corner  of  Gravel  lane  to 
the  Eaft-end  of  Eaji -S?nithfeld,  was  a  Road  over  the 
Fields  ;  likewife,  thofe  Buildings  now  called  Pirgima* 
ftreet\  and  all  the  Streets  on  the  Side  of  Ratcliff-high- 
ivay  to  Gravel-lane  above-named,  which  of  late  Years 
extends  fo  far,  that  the  End  of  Limehoufe  Hands   a 
Chance  to  be  foon  joined  to  the  Beginning  of  Pop- 
tor. 

3.  To  come  to  the  North- fide  of  the  Town,  and 
beginning  at  Sboreditch  Weft,  and  Hoxton-fqnare,  and 
Cbarles-fquare  adjoining,  thofe  were   all  open  Fields, 
from  Agnes  St.  Clare  to  Hoxton  Town,  till  the  Year 
1689,  or  thereabout.  Pitfidd-Jtreet  was  a  Bank,  part- 
ing two  Pafture -grounds  ;  and  A/k's  Hofpital  was  an- 
other open  Field.    Farther  Weft,  the  like  Addition  of 
Buildings   begins  at  the  Foot- way  by  the  Pefl-boufe^ 
and    includes    the  French   Hofpital, '  Old-ftreet    two 
Squares,  and  feveral  Streets,  extending  from  Brick- 
la  nt 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  101 

lane  to  Mount-mill^  and  the  Road  to  IJlingtw,  and 
from  that  Road,  ftill  Weft,  to  HTcod's-chfe,  and  to 
,  St.  John's  and  Clerkenwell\  all  which  Streets  and 
Squuves  are  built  fince  the  Years  1688.  and  1689. 
and  were  before  that,  and  fome  for  a  long  time  after, 
open  Fields  or  Gardens,  and  never  built  on  till  after 
that  time  j  and  moreover,  within  thefe  few  Years,  all 
thofe  open  Grounds,  called  Bunlnll- fields,  adjoining 
to  the  DiJJenters  Burying  ground  (nicknamed  from 
the  famous  Mr.  Baxter^  Saints  Reft^  alluding  to  the 
Title  of  a  Book  he  had  publilhed),  are  now  built  up- 
on, and  are  complete  Streets  of  Houfes  to  the  very 
Road,  and  generally  well  inhabited. 

From  hence  we  go  on  ftill  Weft,  and  beginning;  at 
Gray*s-innt  and  going  on  to  thofe  formerly  call'd  Red- 
lion  Fields,  and  Lamb's- conduit  Fields,  we  fee  there 
prodigious  Piles  of  Buildings  :  They  begin  at  Grey' s- 
inn-wall  towards  Red  lio.i  ftrcet,  from  whence,  in  a 
flrait  Line,  they  go  quite  to  Lamtfs- conduit  Fields 
North,  including  a  great  Range  of  Buildings  reaching 
to  Bedfvd  row  and  the  Cockpit  *  Eaft,  and  including 
Red  lion  piuare,  Great  and  Little  Qmwnd-Jlree.i*^ 
Jdmes  '  Queen's  fquart^  and  all  the  Streets  be- 
twee i  i are  and  Kings-gate  in  Holborn,  Thefe 

Piles  .»u  very  .^at,  and  the  Houfes  fp  large,  that 
abundance  of  Pertans  of  Rank  and  Quality  refide  in 
them. 

Farther  Weft,  in  the  fame  Line,  is  Southampton 
great  Square,  called  Bloomjbury,  with  Kingjlreet  on 
the  Eaft-fide  of  it,  and  all  the  nurnberlef  StreetsWeft 
of  the  Square  to  the  Market-place,  and  through 
Great  Rnjfil-ftreety  by  Montagu-houfe^  quite  into  the 
Hamftcad  Road  ;  all  which  Buildings,  except  South- 
hampton-loufe)  and  fome  of  the  Square,  have  been 
formed  from  the  open  Fields  fmce  the  Time  above- 
mentioned,  and  contain  feveral  Thoufands  of  Houfes. 

*  Where  this  ftoiJ,  and  where  the  Bmling-gnen  was  (both  men- 
tioned page  90)  is  a  magnificent  Pile  of  Buildinas  erefted, 

F  3  The 


102  A  T  O  U  R  thro        London. 

The  Increafe  of  the  Buildings  in  St.  Giles's  andS/. 
Martin's  in  the  Fields^  is  really  a  kind  of  Prodigy  ; 
comprifing  all  the  Buildings  North  of  Long-acre,  up  to 
the  Seven  Dials ;  all  the  Streets  from  Lei  cejltr- fields 
and  St.  Martin's -lane,  both  North  and  Weft  or  the 
JHay-rnsrket  and  Soho,  and  from  the  Hay-market  to  St. 
James's  ftreet  incluiive,  and  to  the  Park -wall  ;  then 
all  the  Buildings  on  the  North- fide  of  the  Street  calJ'd 
Piccadilly^  and  the  Road  to  Knigbtjbridge,  and  between 
that  and  the  South-fide  of  Tyburn  Road,  including  So- 
ho-fquare.  Golden  fquare,  Hanover -/quart,  the  two 
Bond-greets^  George *s-Jlreett  and  that  new  City  ftretch- 
ing  out  to  Tyburn  Road,  called  Grofvenor~fquare9  arid 
Cavendijh  fquare*  and  all  the  Streets  about  them  ; 
fome  Parts  of  which  will  be  briefly  mentioned  under 
the  Head  of  Squares. 

This  laft  Addition  is,  by  Calculation,  more  in  Bulk 
than  the  Cities  of  Brijiol^  Exeter ',  and  Tork9  if  they 
were  all  put  together  ;  all  which  Places  were,  a  few 
Years  ago,  mere  Fields  of  Grafs,  and  employed  only 
to  feed  Cattle. 

In  Spring  gardens^  near  Cbaring-crofs^  are  lately 
creeled  feveral  very  handfome  new  Buildings,  and 
a  neat  Chapel. 

The  new  Buildings  in  the  End  of  Broad  Jireet^  near 
Bijbopfgate^  formerly  called  Petty -France,  deferve  to  be 
mentioned  here.  ]t  is  in  every  one's  Memory,  what 
a  poor  and  decayed  Place  Petty  France  was  ;  but  now 
the  Spot  where  it  (toot!  is  called  New  Broad  Jlreet ,  and 
the  Buildings  are  the  mod  (lately  and  elegant  in  the 
City.  They  are  increafed  quite  into  Old  Bethlehem^ 
v/hich  coniifted  of  mean  and  ruinous  Houfes  ;  and 
there  may  be  faid  to  be  a  new  and  ft'ately  Town  of 
Buildings  erected  here. 

An  A61  of  Parliament  was  palled  in  the  Year  1755, 
intituled,  An  Aft  to  enable  the  Reverend  W.  Markham, 
and  T.  Salter,  Efq\  to  build  Houfes^  and  open  a  Square^ 
in  and  upon  a  certain  Piece  of  Ground  called  Dean's - 

Yard, 


London/   GREAT  BRITAIN.  103 

Yard,  Weflminfter,  and  feveral  Pieces  of  Ground 
contiguous  thereto  ;  and  a  confiderable  Progrefs  is  made 
in  it ;  but  at  prefent  the  Work  feems  at  a  Stand,  for 
Want  of  Money,  as  it  is  thought,  the  Undertaking 
being  large,  and  requiring  great  Sums  to  carry  it  into 
Effe£t. 

But  who  can  forbear  admiring  that  noble  Opening 
made  by  pulling  down  the  decay'd  Houfes  on  one  Side 
of  the  Way  from  Charing- croft,  between  the  two  Ci- 
ties, and  widening  the  narrow  Street  into  a  very  fpa- 
cious  one,  quite  to  the  Admiralty,  and  the  Advantages 
IVeJlmittfter  has  received  by  means  of  the  noble  Bridge 
creeled  over  the  Thames  in  New  Palace-yard,  to  the 
oppofite  Shore  in  Southwark,  and  the  ftately  Streets, 
ParRament-Jlreet,  George  ftreet,  Bridge-Jit  tet,  Abing~ 
ton-buildings,  &c.  with  feveral  others  ? 

.  The  Roads  on  each  Side  of  the  River,  North,  thro* 
Paddington  to  Ijiingion,  and  its  Adjacencies,  arid  South, 
over  St.  George9 s  Fields,  leading  to  Newington,  Cam- 
berwell,  Dulwich,  Streatkam,  Deptford^  Greenwich, 
WoQ'wicb,  &c.  are  in  admirable  Order. 

Piccadilly,  the  Houfes  of  which  overlook  the  beau- 
tiful Green  Park,  as  well  as  that  of  St.  James's,  bids 
fair  to  be  in  time  a  Street  of  Palaces ;  feveral  fine 
Houfes  of  Perfons  of  Condition  being  built  and  build » 
ing  there,  inftead  of  many  very  mean  ones  pulled 
down  to  give  room  for  them  ;  and  the  good  Xafte 
for  fo  happy  a  Situation  ftiil  increafing. 

Several  fine  new  Streets,  as  Hill -fir  eet,  Charles - 
Jlreet,  &c.  are  built  near  Berkeley  fquare  and  May- 
fair,  in  a  Place  which  Herds  and  Herds -men,  very  few 
Years  ago  only  inhabited.  But  now  the  Refidence  of 
many  of  the  firft  Gentry,  equally  fplendid  and  conve- 
nient. 

From  the  End  of  Piccadilly,  almoft  to  Kenfingtony 
on  the  Brompton  Side,  by  three  or  four  fine  Houfes 
already  built,  which  afford  noble  Profpe$s  over  Hyde- 
Park  to  Ham/had,  Highgate^  &c.  Northward,  we  may 
expect  that  in  time  that  whole  agreeable  Spot  will 
F  4  be 


io.f  ./4TOUR//W       London. 

be  built  into  Houfes  of  Gentry,  and  made  to  join 
the  Town  to  Kenfington  Palace  and  Gravel  Pits. 

It  would  be  endlefs  to  enumerate  the  other  new 
Buildings  in  and  about  this  great  City,  that  have  taken 
place  of  old  and  ruinous  Houfes  and  Streets.  See  the 
Article*  ^Churches,  Squares,  &c. 

III.  Of  the  Public  Offices,  and  City-Corporations. 

HTHE  EXCISE-OFFICE  is  kept  in  the  Old  Jewry, 
-^  in  a  very  large  Houfe,  formerly  the  Dwelling  of 
Sir  John  Frederick,  and  afterwards  of  Sir  John  Hern, 
very  confiderable  Merchants.  In  this  one  Office  is 
managed  an  immenfe  Weight  of  Bufinefs,  and  they 
have  in  Pay  feveral  Thoufands  of  Officers.  The  whole 
Kingdom  is  divided  by  them  into  proper  Diitri£ts,  and 
to  every  Diftrict  is  a  Collector,  a  Supervifor,  and  a  cer- 
tain Number  of  Gaugers,  called,  by  the  Vulgar,  Ex- 
eife-incn. 

Under  the  Management  of  this  Office  are  now 
brought  not  only  the  Excife  upon  Beer,  Ale,  and 
other  Liquors,  as  formerly  ;  but  alfo,  the  Duties  on 
Malt  and  Candles  ;  Hops,  Soap,  and  Leather  ;  Coffee, 
Tea,  and  Chocolate  ;  Starch,  Powder,  Spirituous  Li- 
quors. Likewife  the  new  Duties  upon  Coaches, 
Chaifes,  Plate,  Glafs,  tec.  all  which  are  managed  in 
feveral  Gaffes. 

The  POST- OFFICE  is  kept  in  Lombard -Jlreet,  in  a 
large  Houfe,  formerly  Sir  Robert  Miner's  j  and  is  un- 
der an  admirable  Management. 

The  Penny-pojt  is  a  Branch  of  it,  and  a  moft  ufeful 
Addition  to  Trade  and  Bufmefs  :  for  by  it  Letters  are 
delivered  at  the  remoteft  Corners  of  the  Town,  almoft 
as  foon  as  they  could  be  fent  by  a  Meilenger,  and  that 
from  four,  five,  fix,  to  eight  times  a  Day,  accord- 
ing as  the  Diftance  of  the  Place  makes  it  practicable: 
inlomuch  that  you  may  fend  a  Letter  homLimehoufe  in 
the  Eaft,  to  the  farther  Part  of  Wejhninjler,  for  a  Pea- 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  105 

ny,  feveral  times  in  the  fame  Day ;  and  to  the  neigh- 
bouring Villages,  as  Kenfington,  Hammerfmitb,  Chif- 
wlck,  he.  Weft  ward  ;  Newington,  IJlington,  Kentijb  - 
town,  Haniflead,  Holloway,  Higbgate,  &c.  Northward; 
to  Newington-butts,  Camberwell,  &c.  Southward  ;  and 
to  Stepney,  Poplar,  Bow,  Stratford,  Deptford,  Green- 
-wick,  &c.  Eaftward,  once  a  Day. 

Nor  are  you  tied  up  to  a  fingle  Piece  of  Paper,  as 
in  the  General  PrJI-office ;  but  any  Packet  under  a 
Pound- weight  goes  at  the  fame  Price. 

The  CUSTOM-HOUSE  comes  next  to  be  mention- 
ed. The  Long  Room  is  like  an  Exchange  every  Morn- 
ing, and  the  Croud  of  People  who  appear  there,  and 
the  Bufmefs  they  do,  is  not  to  be  explained  by  Words. 
The  whole  Building  is  very  convenient,  but  not  like 
what  it  might  or  ought  to  have  been  j  and  moreover, 
the  Quays  ^thereabouts  are  fo  thronged  and  crouded. 
that  they  are  much  too  little  for  the  Bufmefs  conti- 
nually carrying  on  there. 

Between  the  Horfe-guards  at  WbitthallvsA  Charing- 
crofs,  is  the  ADMIRALTY-OFFICE.  This  Office  is, 
perhaps,  of  the  moft  importance  of  any  of  the  public 
Paris  of  the  Adminiftration^  the  Royal  Navy  being  the 
Sinews  of  our  Strength. 

The  NAVY-OFFICE,  a  neat  and  convenient  Build- 
ing in  Crutched-friers,  and  the  VICTUALLING- OF- 
FICE on  Tower-bill,  near  Eaft-Smithfield,  both  which, 
had  we  room,  deferve  a  particular  Defcriplion,  are  but 
Branches  of  this  Adminiftration,  and  receive  their  Or- 
ders from  hence ;  as  do  likewife  the  Docks  snd  Yards 
theirs  from  the  Navy-office ;  the  whole  being  carried 
on  with  the  moft  exquiiite  Order  and  Difpatch. 

Though  his  MAJESTY  refides  all  the  Winter  at  St. 
James's,  yet  the  Bufmefs  of  the  Government  is  chiefly 
carried  on  at  the  Cockpit,  Whitehall ;  near  which  is 
a  magnificent  Building,  with  a  grand  Front  IbcV.ing 
to  the  Parade  in  St.  James's  Park,  for  the  TREASU- 
RY-OFFICE j  and,  it  being  a  fpadous  SuiuSture,  over 

F  5  that, 


ic6  A  TOUR  thro       London, 

re  formerly  was  kept  the  OFFICE  of  the 
of  State  for  Scotland,  now  abulifhed,  is  the 

Pi,  "  STATION    OFFICE. 

TheHorfe-guardswasaBuildingcommodiousenough 
as  ~a  Barrack  for  a  large  Detachment  of  the  Horfe- 
gu^rds,  who  ufed  to  keep  Foil  there  :  and  over  it  were 
Offices  belonging  to  the  Judge-advocate  for  holding 
Courts  Martial  for  Trial  of  Deferters  and  others,  ac- 
cording to  the  Articles  of  War.  But  this  Building, 
and  thefe  Offices,  are  now  pulled  down  :  and  new 
ones  are  erected,  which  are  very  large  and  commo- 
dious. 

A  new  Office  and  Houfe  is  lately  creeled,  adjoining 
to  the  Horfe-guards,  for  the  Paymafter-general  of  the 
Army. 

The  BANK  ufed  to  be  kept  in  Grocers-kail-,  but  is- 
now  removed  to  a  new  Edifice,  built  for  that  thriving 
Corporation  in  Tbreadneedle-Jlreet^  acjoining  to  Sf. 
Gbriftopher's  Church. 

The  EAST-INDIA-HOUSE,  fituated  where  formerly 
was  that  of  Sir  JPilliam  Craven,  was  rebuilt  in  the 
Year  1726.  It  is  very  convenient  within,  but,  with^ 
put,  makes  not  the  Appearance  that  is  worthy  of  the 
Company's  Trade  and  Figuie  in  the  World ;  its  Front 
being  not  extended  enough.  In  the  Back-part  towards 
Lmejlreef,  they  have  alfo  Warehoufes,  which  were 
rebuilt  in  a  handfome  manner  Anno  1 725. 

The  AFRICAN  COMPANY'S  HOUSE  is  in  the  fame 
Street. 

The  SOUTH-SEA  HOUSE  is  a  new  Structure,  fifu- 
ated  on  a  large  Spat  of  Ground  between  Broad Jlreet 
and  Tbreadneedle -Jlreet. 

The  YORK-BUILDINGS  COMPANY  have  their 
Office  in  ll'inchefter -Jlreet. 

Here  are  alfo  feveral  great  Offices  for  Societies  of 
INSURERS,  where  almofr.  ail  Hazards  maybe  infured. 
The  four  principal  are  called,  i.  Ike  Royal  Exchange 
Infurance,  kept  in  a  Part  of  the  Royal  Exchange.  2. 

The 


L©ndon.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  107 

The  Royal  Infurance^  kept  in  CornbilL  3.  The  Hand- 
In-hand  Fire-office^  kept  on  Snow-bill.  4.  The  Sun  Fire- 
office^  in  Threadneedle-ftreet. 

In  the  two  firft,  ail  Hazards  by  Sea  of  Ships  and 
Goods,  not  Lives,  are  infured  ;  as  alfo,  Houies  and 
Goods  are  infured  from  Fire. 

In  the  laft  two,  only  Houfes  and  Goods. 

In  all  wiiich  Offices  the  Premium  is  fo  fmall,  and  the* 
Recovery,  in  cafe  of  Lofs,  fo  eafy  and  certain,  that 
nothing  can  be  (hewn  like  it  in  the  World. 

There  are  alfo  Offices  of  INSURANCE  ON  LIVES, 
one  in  Serjeant's -inn,  Fleet-jheet,  the  Union  Fire-of- 
fice in  Gutter-lane,  the  Weftminfter  Fire-officey  and 
others,  which  manage  a  great  deal  of  Bufmefs  in  the 
fame  way. 

The  Offices  of  ORDNANCE,  and  the  MINT  for 
coining  Money,  are  kept  in  the  To^ver  of  London. 

IV.  Of  the  moft  noted  Edifices ',    Squares,  and.\ 
Public  Structures,  in  and  cioout  London,  and 
of  its  famous  Bridges. 

THAT  beautiful  Column,  called  the  Monument^ 
erected  at  the  Charge  of  the  City,  to  perpetuate 
th.c  Memory  of  the  fatal  Burning  of  the  Whole,  can- 
not be  mentioned  but  with  fotne  due  Refpecl  to  the 
Building  itfelf,  as  well  as  to  the  City.  It  is  202  Feet 
high,  and  exceeds  all  the  Obelifksand  Pillars  of  theAn- 
tents  :  there  is  a  Stair-cafe  in  the  Middle,  to  afcend  to 
the  Balcony,  which  is  about  30  Feet  fhort  of  the  top, 
and  whence  there  are  other  Steps  made,  even  to  look 
out  at  the  top  of  all,  which  is  faftu'oned  like  an  Urn, 
with  a  Blnze  ilTuing  from  it. 

The  Lord   Mayors  of  this  famous  Metropolis  have 

beeu   heretofore  obliged  to   content  themfelves  with 

relidmg.  in  forne  one  or  other  of  the  (lately  Halts  of 

the  City  Companies,  hired  for  that  Purpofe ;  an  In- 

F  6  convenience 


io8  A  TOUR  tiro       London, 

convenience  which  was  equally  unworthy  of  the 
Grandeur  of  the  great  Officer,  and  of  the  City  over 
which  he  prefided,  and  which  now  is  remedied  by  an 
Houfe,  vulgarly  called  the  MenJUn^bwfe^  built  in  the 
Place  where  Stocks-market  ufed  to  be  kept. 

The  Royal  Exchange  is  the  greateft  Burfe  in  the 
World:  'tis  feiti,  that  it  coft  above  8o,ooo/.  in  build- 
ing ;  and  yet  the  Intereft  of  the  Money  was  a  great, 
while  anfwered  by  the  Rent  made  of  the  Shops  and 
Vaults ;  but  as  now  the  Trade  that  ufed  to  be  carried 
on  there,  is  difperfed  in  other  Places,  it  cannot  be 
iuppofed  to  do  fo. 

The  College  of  Pbyficians  in  Warwick-lane  is  a  beau* 
trful  Structure,  of  Brick  and  Stone ;  but  built  in  a 
Place  where  all  its  Beauties  are,  in  a  manner,  bu- 
ried. 

The  Barber  Surgeons  Theatre,  in  Mmkwtll-fir.tet^ 
is  a  very  fine  Piece  of  Architecture,  admirably  difpofed 
for  Seeing  and  Hearing ;  the  Work  of  the  famous 
Inigo  Jones. 

In  the  Court  of  Afliftants  Room  is  a  capital  Picture 
of  Hans  Holbein^  in  which  is  the  Portrait  of  King 
Henry  VIII.  fitting  in  his  Chair,  delivering  the  Char- 
ter which  he  granted  to  the  Surgeons. 

This  Theatre,  on  the  late  Separation  of  the  Sur- 
geons Company  from  the  Barbers,  by  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment, with  the  Picture,  and  other  Valuables,  re- 
main to  the  Barbers :  and  the  Surgeons  have  creeled 
an  Hall  and  Theatre  in  the  Old  Bailey,  for  them- 
felves. 

The  Bridge  over  the  Thames  at  Weftminjler  is  a 
moft  noble  Structure.  The  Extent  of  this  Bridge  is 
1220  Feet,  the  Abutments  whereof,  at  each  End, 
are  113  Feet  each  ;  the  Middle  Arch  is  76  Feet  Dia- 
meter, and  its  two  Piers  are  each  17  Feet  thick  : 
every  other  Arch,  on  each  Side,  lefTens  4  Feet,  and 
the  Piers  I  Foot  each.  There  are  13  Arches  in  all : 
ft>  that  the  clear  Space  for  the  Water  is  820  Feet. 

The 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  ic<> 

The  Solids  of  the  12  Piers  contain  400  Feet,  befides 
the  two  Abutments ;  the  Breadth  for  Carriages  is 
30  Feet;  and  for  Foot  paflengers,  7  Feet  on  each  Side. 

7'he  firft  Pile  of  this  Bridge  was  driven  in  1738. 
and  the  Whole  was  finifhed,  and  ready  to  be  opened 
for  Ufe,  in  Autumn  1747.  when  it  was  difcovered, 
that  the  5th  Pier  from  I'Veftminfter  Side  was  finking  ; 
and  foon  after  Stones  fell  out  of  the  Arch  next  to  it. 
It  was  neceflary  therefore  to  take  off  the  Arches  that 
refted  on  the  Pier  ;  which  was  done  with  great  Care, 
by  replacing  Centres  under  them,  like  thofe  on  which 
they  were  turned.  The  linking  Pier  was  then  loaded 
with  12,000  Ton  of  Cannon  and  Leaden  Weights, 
in  order  to  link  and  fettle  it.  This,  and  the  Delibe- 
rations how  to  repair  the  Defect,  took  up  above  a 
a  Year:  But  in  the  Summer  of  1749.  Materials  be- 
ing ready,  it  was  intirely  finifhed  for  Ufe,  and  opened 
A7*v.  17.  1750.  at  Midnight.  The  Pier  that  had  fail- 
ed, was  freed  from  its  Burden  by  a  fecret  Arch  now 
not  to  be  feen. 

If  we  confider  its  Length,  its  Breadth,  the  Regularity 
of  the  Defign,  the  Beauty  of  the  Workmanftiip,  the 
great  inland  Navigation,  which  it  does  not  impede, 
the  Avenues  that  lead  to  it,  the  Provifion  made  for 
the  Defence  of  P^ilingers  againft  the  Weather  in 
their  Way  over  over  it,  the  Watch  of  12  Men  every 
Night  for  the  Security  of  their  Perfons,  and  the  beau- 
tiful globular  Lamps,  1 6  on  each  Side,  fufpended  on 
Irons  that  project:  inwards,  with  a  lofty  Sweep,  from 
the  top  of  each  Recefs,  and  on  the  Sides  of  the  Abut- 
ments, foftening  the  Horrors  of  the  Night,  and  dif- 
fufmg  a  ftar-like  Radiance,  not  only  over  the  circum- 
fluent Waters,  but  over  the  circumjacent  Lands,  and 
princely  Palaces;  all  thefe  Circumftances  may  well 
feem  to  give  this  Bridge  a  Superiority  over  moft  other 
Bridges  mentioned  in  Hiftory. 

Qftober  31.  1760.  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  Thomas  Cbltty^ 
Knt,  Lord -May  or3  accompanied  by  feveral  Aldermen 

and 


T  io  A  T  O  U  R  thro       London, 

and  Commoners,  of  the  Committee  for  the  New 
Bridge,  proceeded  in  State  to  Blackfryars,  and  there 
in  the  North  Abutments  his  Lordfhip  laid  the  firft 
Stone  of  the  intended  new  Bridge,  by  ftriking  the 
fame  with  a  Mallet,  the  Officers  laying  the  City 
Sword  and  Mace  thereon  at  the  fame  time,  in  the 
Sight  of  an  infinite  Number  of  Spectators. 

Several  Pieces  of  Gold,  Silver,  and  Copper  Coin 
of  his  Majefty  King  George  II.  were  placed  under  the 
Stone,  together  with  an  Infcription  in  Latin9  in  large 
Plates  of  pure  Tin,  engliih'd  thus : 

On  the  loft  Day  0/"  October,  in  the  Tear  1760. 
and  in  the  Beginning  of  the  rnofl  aufpicious  Reign  of 

GEORGE  the  Third, 
Sir  Thomas  Chitty,  Knight,  Lord- May  or  ^ 

laid  the  firjl  Stone  of  this  Bridge^ 

Undertaken  by  the  Common  Council  of  London, 

(amidjl  the  Ragt  of  an  extenfive  War) 

for  the  public  Accommodation^ 

and  Ornament  of  the  City : 

Robert  Mylne  being  the  Architect. 

And  that  there  might  remain  to  Poflerity 

a  Monument  of  this  City  s  AffeQion  to  the  Man 

who^  by  the  Strength  of  his  Genius, 

the  Steadixefs  of  his  Mind, 
and  a  certain  Kind  of  happy  Contagion  of  his 

Probity  and  Spirit^ 

(under  the  Divine  Favour^ 

find  fortunate  Aujpices  of  GEORGE  the  Second) 

recovered,  augmented^  and  fscured^ 

the  l5riti{h  Empire 

in  Afia,  Africa,  and  America, 

and  reftored  the  antient  Reputation 

and  Influence  cf 'his  Country 
amongjl  the  Nations  of  Europe  ; 

Tbe  Citizens  cf  London  have  unanimoujly  voted  this 

Bridge  to  be  infer i bed  with  the  Name  of 

WILLIAM    PITT. 

Putney 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  Hi 

Putney  or  Fulham  Bridge  I  (hall  take  notice  of  in 
its  Place.  A  Bridge  is  adtually  built  at  AVzt/,  near 
Brentford^  another  at  Hampton^  and  another  fine  one 
at  Walton  ;  all  within  a  very  few  Years  part  :  to  fay 
nothing  of  the  Benefits  this  great  Metropolis  will  de- 
rive from  the  Alterations  that  are  making  at  the  old 
Bridge,  which  are  in  great  Forwardnefs. 

'The  Mews  near  Charing  crofs>  where  the  King's 
Horfes  are  kept,  and  the  Coaches  of  State  fet  up,  is  a 
very  large  kind  of  Square  ;  but  the  Buildings  being  old, 
and  unworthy  of  the  Situation,  as  well  as  of  the  Ufe, 
are,  as  'tis  faid,  to  be  pulled  down.  The  principal 
Range  at  the  upper  End  is  already  finifhed  -3  and  when 
the  other  Parts  are  completed,  it  will  be  one  of  the 
fineft  Things,  ot  its  kind,  in  Europe. 

Car  It  on  boufe^  belonging  to  her  Royal  Highnefs  the 
Princefs  Dowager  of  Wales  \  Marlboromgh  houfe,  and 
Buckingham  houfe,  all  three  in  St.  James' s-park  ;  the 
late  Duke  of  Montagu' s^  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond's? 
in  the  Privy  garden  ;  Devonjhire-houfe^  and  the  Earl 
of  Bath's,  in  Piccadilly ;  the  Earl  of  Cbijfkrfi&v, 
overlooking  Hyde-Park  ;  Northumberland- houfe  in  thd 
Strand-,  Montagu-boufe  (now  the  Repofitory  of  the 
Curiofities  that  compofe  the  Britijh  Mufeum,  of  which 
more  amply  in  a  future  Article),  the  Duke  of  Bed- 
ford's '3  thofe  of  the  Duke  of  ^iieemberry,  Lord  Bate - 
man,  and  numberlefs  others  of  the  Nobility  and  firnV 
Gentry ;  together  with  the  noble  and  extenfive  Streets 
of  Buildings  about  Soha,  Bloomjbwy,  Grofvenor,  Ca- 
vendijh,  Berkeley^  and  Hanover-fquares,  with  thofe 
itately  Squares  themfelves  ;  St.  James's-fquare,  Red- 
1  lion-fquare,  Lmcolns  Inn- Fields ^  efpecially  as  it  has 
been  of  late  Years  altered  and  adorned  ;  the  newBuild- 
•  ings  about  Jockey-fields,  Bedford  row,  £h.<een's  -fquare, 
ar4  innumerable  other  Improvements  ;  would  take- 
up  too  much  of  my  room- to  particularize. 

But  yet  I  cannot  forbear  particularly  to  mention 
one  Beauty,  bec'aufe  it  is  an  Honour  to.  our  Country  ; 

and 


in  A  T O  U  R  thro       London. 

and  that  is  the  great  Piazza  in  Covert  -garden,  the 
nobleft  Square  in  Europe,  for  Grandeur  of  the  De- 
fign,  efpecially  with  the  Beauty  of  the  Eaft  Front  of 
that  elegant  Church,  the  only  Piece  the  Moderns  have 
yet  produced,  that  can  admit  of  a  juft  Comparifon 
with  the  Works  of  Antiquity  ;  where  a  majeftic  Sim- 
plicity commands  the  Approbation  of  the  Judicious. 
The  ruftic  Arcade  round  the  Square  is  of  an  excel- 
lent Competition,  above  which  is  a  grand  Story,  and 
an  Attic,  and  the  Windows  drcfled  with  a  regular 
Entablature. 

V.  Of  the  principal  Hffffitals,  and  other  Chari- 
table InftitutionSt  in  and  about  the  City  of 
London. 

O  City  in  the  World  can  {hew  the  like  Number 
of  private  and  public  Charities,  as  the  Cities  c»f 
London  and  Iffeftminjter. 

I  have  not  room  particularly  to  defcribe  them,  and 
mufl  therefore  content  myfelf  with  giving  little  more 
than  their  Names,  and  thofe  of  their  munificent  Found- 
ers; referring  to  thofe  larger  Works  where  more  am- 
ple Accounts  and  Defcriptions  may  be  expected. 

1.  Bethlehem  Hofpital  in  Moor f elds,  for  the  Re- 
ception of  Lunatics,  erected  at  the  Charge  of  the 
City,  Anno  1676. 

St.  Luke's  Hofpital,  erected  for  the  like  Purpofe, 
in  Upper  Moorfalds,  facing  the  former. 

2.  Bridewell  is  as  well  an  Houfe  of  Correction  as  an 
Hofpital :  it  was  formerly  the  King's  City  Palace,  but 
given  to  the  City  by  King  Edward  VI,  for  the  re- 
claiming of  idle  Perfons,  Vagrants,  &V.  and  for  bring- 
ing up  Lads  to  handicraft  BufmeiTes. 

There  are  two  other  Houfes  of  Correction,  called 
Bridtwells,  one  at  C/erAenweH,  for  Middlesex  \  the 
cither  in  Tttbill-ftMs,  for  tPe/imlnftcr. 

$  Cbrift'* 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  113 

3.  Chrift's-Htjfstali    originally  founded  by  King 
Edward  VI.  (at  the  Requeft  of  the  Lord  Mayor  and 
Aldermen  of  London,  and   of  the   pious  Martyr  Dr. 
Ridley ,  then  Bifliop  of  London)  for  entertaining,  edu- 
cating, nourifhing,  and   bringing  up  the  poor  Chil- 
dren of  the  Citizens  ;  fuch  as,  their  Parents  (or  Fa- 
thers, at  leaft)  being  dead,  have  no  other  way  of  Sup- 
port. 

This  noble  Charity  maintains  near  1000  poor  Chil- 
dren, who  have  Food,  CJoathing,  and  Induction, 
ufeful  and  fufficient  Learning,  and  an  excellent  good 
Difcipline  obferved  ;  and  at  the  proper  Aa;es  they  are 
put  out  to  Trades  fuitable  to  their  feveral  Genuifes  and 
Capacities:  and  others  are  taught  Mathematics,  Navi- 
gation, and  Arithmetic,  to  fit  them  for  private  and 
public  Service.  The  feeing  of  thefe  Children  at  Church 
on  a  Sunday  at  Cbrift-church,  and  at  Supper  on  Sunday 
Evening,  was  reckoned  2s  fine  a  Sight  as  any  in  Lon- 
don,  and  occafioned  a  conftant  Refort  of  People  of  all 
Ranks  ;  who  ufed  to  admire  the  Neatnefs  of  theirAp- 
pearance,  and  the  good  Management  of  the  Houfe.  De- 
pendent on  this  noble  Charity  is  alfo  an  Houfe  ^Hert- 
ford, where  Diet,  Schooling,  &c.  are  given  to  the 
younger  Boys. 

4.  St.   Bartholomew's   Hofpital    adjoins  to  Cbrtft's 
Hof'pital :  its  firft  Foundation  may  be  laid  to.be  owing 
to  K.\ng-Hfluy  VIII.  whofe  Statue  in  Stone,  very  well 
done,  is,  for  that  Reafon,  erected  in  the  Front,  over 
the   Entrance  in  I'/eft  Smitbfieldy  with  two  Cripples, 
no  mean  Pieces  of  Sculpture,  on  the  top  of  the  Pedi- 
ment over  his  Head.    This  Hofpltdl  has  received  very 
great  Additions  of  late  Years,  and  they  are  going  on 
building  ftili;  and  'tis  well   if  they  do  not  overdo  it; 
for  they  demoliili  their  Houfes,  and  reduce  their  Eftate* 
by  it ;  and  leave  it  upon  the  Generofity  of  future  Be- 
nefactors to  fupport  what  they  are  about. 

The  Lock  at  King/land^  and  that  in  Southwarky  be- 
long 


H4  ^  T  O  U  R  thro        London. 

long  to  St.  Bartholomew's  Hofpital,  and  are  ufed  for 
fuch  as  have  the  foul  Difeafe  only. 

Under  the  Care  of  this  Hofpital  there  generally  are 
upwards  of  5000  poor  Tick  and  lame  Perfons,  deftitute 
of  other  Relief. 

5.  St.  Thomas's  Hofpital  in  Soutbwark  is  alfo  a  no- 
ble Piece  of  Charity,  of  the  like  Nature  with  that  of 
St.  Bartholomew.     The  Church,  and  moft  of  the  Hof- 
pital, were  rebuilt  in  a  beautiful  manner,  from  the  Year 
1701.  to  1706.     It  was  founded  by  Edward  VI    and 
Infcriptions  are  fet  up  in  it  to  the  Honour  of  Mr.  Guy, 
Mr.  Frederick,  Sir  Robert  Clayton,  the  laft  of  whom 
has    his  Statue   there  ;    as  has   King;   Edward    VI. 
erected  by  Charles  Joy,  Efqj  late  Tieafurer  of  this 
Hofpital. 

6.  Gt/j's  Hofpitsl  is  fituated  very  near  St.  Thomas' s^ 
and  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  greauft  private  Charities 
that  was  ever  known.    Its  Founder,  ThwtUH  Guy,  was 
a  Bookfeller  in  Lombard  jire&t ;  lie   lived  to  fee  this 
Work  in  great  Forwardnefs,  and  at  his  Death,  Anno 
1724.  left  about  200,000 /.   to  finifh  and  endow  it. 
Mr.  Guy  actually  diveited  himfelf  of  80, coo/,  in  his 
Life  time  towards  his  Hofpital,  which  was  eftabliihed 
many  Years  before  his  Death,  tho'  fince,  by  his  Be- 
queft,  fo  greatly  enlarged.    His  Statue  is  eredted  in  the 
principal  Square. 

Tho'  this  Hofpital  is  faid  to  be  for  Incurables,  it  is 
not  for  fuch  as  are  abfolutely  fo  j  for  the  Founder  ufed 
to  fay,  That  he  would  not  have  his  Hofpital  made  an 
Alms-houfe. 

Over  and  above  the  200,000  /.  left  to  this  Hofpital, 
the  Founder  bequeathed  as  many  Legacies,  and  other 
Difpofitions,  as  were  computed  to  amount  to  near 
150,000  /.  more. 

7.  The  London  Workboufe,  as  it  is  called,  founded 
on  an  Aft  of  Parliament  parted  in   the  I3ih  Year  of 
King  Cbarks  II.  is  ihuaud  without  Bijhopfgatt^  and 

is 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  115 

is  an  Edifice  confuting  of  feveral  Work-rooms  and 
Lodging- rooms,  for  Vagrants  and  Parifh-children. 

They  have  an  handfome  Chapel  built  at  the  upper 
End  of  the  Yard  belonging  to  the  Houfe,  where  they 
^o  to  Prayers  twice  a  Day,  at  Seven  in  the  Morning, 
and  Seven  in  the  Evening.  On  Sundays  they  all  go 
to  St.  Helen 's,  in  Bifoopfgate-Jlreet^  where  they  have 
Seats. 

The  Charity-Schools  and  Workhoufes  fet  up  in  al- 
moft  every  Parifh  of  this  prodigious  City,  have  in  fome 
meafure  purfued  the  Defign  of  this  laudable  Work- 
houfe  ;  and  if  they  have  thereby  interfered  with  it,, 
and  taken  off  fome  Benefactions  that  otherwife  might 
have  flowed  into  that  Canal,  it  will  be  the  lefs  to  be 
regretted. 

8.  The  Hofpital  called  the  Charter -bwfe,  or  But- 
ton's Hofpital,  muft  be  recorded  to  be  the  greateft  and 
nobleit  Gift  that  ever  was  given  for  Charity,  by,  any 
one  Man,  public  or  private,  in  this  Nation,  fince  Hi- 
ftory  gives  us  any  Account  of  Things ;  except  we  give 
a  Preference  to  that  of  Mr.  Guy;  the  Revenue  of  Mr. 
Button's  Hofpital  being,  befides  the  Purchafe  of  th$. 
Place,  and  the  Building  of  the  Houfe,  and  other  Exr 
pences,  little  lefs  than  6000  /.  per  -'nn. 

The  Royal  Hofpitals  of  Greenwich  and  Ckelfea  are 
taken  notice  of  in  their  proper  'laces. 

The  Gr.eycoat &\iA  Greencoat  Hospital  in  fotbiUfields j 
'Emanuel-HoipitiiA  Wejlmlnjhr  ;  that  for  the  Poor  of 
the  French  Refugees,  near  IJllngton ;  the  Ironmongers 
Alms-houfes,  near  Shoreditch  ;  Alderman  y^'s  at 
Hoxton ;  thofe  itately  ones  of  the  Trinity  boufe  ;  the 
Vintners^  and  feveral  others,  in  the  Way  to  Mile  end \. 
as  alfo  that  handfome  on*,  lately  erected  by  the  Will 
of  Mr.  Francis  Bancroft^  a  Lord  Mayor's  Officer,  in 
the  fame  Road  ;  all  deierve  particular  Mention,  had  I 
Room  for  it. 

But  I  muft  a  little  enlarge  on  thofe  ufeful  Cha- 
rities, the  Two  Infirmaries,  one  in  'James* s-JlreetY 

treftmin/fer, 


ii6  A  TOUR  tkrd       London. 

Wefimlnfler,  and  the  other  at  Hyde  park  Corner -,  which 
have  given  Birth  to  the  like  laudable  Institutions  in 
other  Parts  of  the  Kingdom.  The  Defign  of  the:n  is, 
to  fupply  the  Places  of  the  Hofpitals  of  St.  Bartholo- 
mew and  St.  Thcrnas's  afore-mentioned  ;  where  the 
belt  Order  is  obferved,  the  beft  Medicines  di/penfed, 
and  the  beft  Affiftances  given,  as  well  by  Phyficians, 
as  Surgeons  and  Apothecaries,  lo  all  who  are  admit- 
ted into  thefe  Charities.  But  for  further  Satisfaction  I 
fhall  refer  to  the  Accounts  publifhed  by  each  every 
Year. 

In  Augujl  1632.  a  Corporation  was  creeled  for  the 
Relief  of  poor  Officers  Widows  belonging  to  the  Na- 
vy ;  which  allots  45  /.  per  Ann.  to  a  Captain's  Wi- 
dow; 30 /.  to  a  Lieutenant's;  and  20  /•  to  the  Wi- 
dows of  Boatfwains,  Gunners,  Carpenters,  Purfers, 
Surgeons,  Second  Mailer  of  a  Yadu,  or  Mafter  of 
a  Naval  Veflel,  warranted  by  the  Navy-board  ;  pro- 
vided the  annual  Incomes  of  their  real  and  perfonal 
Eftates  do  not  amount  to  the  aforefaid  yearly  Sums, 
To  this  Charity  all  Admirals,  Captains,  Lieutenants, 
and  Warrant-officers,  pay  3  d.  per  Pound  out  of 
their  Salaries ;  and  his  Majefty  King  George  II.  gra- 
cioufly  contributed  10,000 /.  as  a  Foundation  for  it. 

In  the  Year  1739,  a  mod  ufcful  and  long- wiuYd- for 
Charity  was  eftablifhed  by  Royal  Charter,  in  order  to 
found  an  Hofpital  for  the  Maintenance  and  Education 
of  expofed  and  deferted  young  Children,  otherwife 
called  Foundlings. 

Acts  of  Parliament  patted  for  confirming  and  en- 
larging  the  Powers  granted  by  this  Charter  ;  and  a 
very  neat  and  convenient  Hofpital,  with  a  Chapel,  is 
actually  built  for  this  good  Purpofe,  on  the  North-fide 
of  Ormond  ftreet. 

The  following  fliort  Hi  (lory  of  this  truly  national 
Charity,  as  it  may  be  called,  (hewing  the  Advantage 
which  may  be  reaped  from  it,  in  more  Inftances  than 
one,  and  all  of  the  higheft  Importance,  I  tranfcribe 

from 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  117 

from  the  Writings  of  an  excellent  Man,  whofe  Head, 
Heart,  and  Hand,  are  feen  in  every  Defign  and  Work 
that  is  promotive  cf  Virtue,  Charity,  and  univerfal 
Benevolence. 

*  It  is  now,  fays  he  (writing  on  this  Subject  in  th« 
Year  1756.),  c  fome  Years  lince  the  active,  intelli« 
*  gent,  and  benignant  Spirit,  which  prevailed  amongft 
many  good  and  great  Perfons,  erected  a  Foundling 
Hofpital.  But  as  the  Building,  fmall  and  limited 
as  it  is,  for  fo  noble  and  extenfive  a  Defign,  could 
not  be  erected  without  a  large  Sum,  and  as  that  de- 
pended on  private  Beneficence,  no  Provifion  was 
made  during  more  than  ten  Years,  for  upwards  of 
1400  Infants,  and  the  partial  Reception  of  a  few 
could  anfwer  no  Purpofe.  At  length  it  is  become 
truly  a  Foundling- Hofpital.  The  Legiflature  have 
it  under  their  Protection  j  the  Governors  and  Guar- 
dians were  ordered  to  open  their  Doors  to  all  In- 
fants under  a  certain  Age,  from  June  to  December 
1756.  and  for  Support  of  them  io,coo/.  were  then 
granted.  To  all  human  Appearance,  it  is  the  moft 
effectual  Method,  not  only  to  preferve  the  Lives  of 
thbfe  whofe  Parents  are  in  Sicknefs,  or  in  Poverty^ 
vicious,  or  devoid  of  the  Principles  of  Humanity  ; 
but  it  goes  a  great  way  farther,  and  may  at  length 
become  a  Means  of  relieving  us  from  a  Load,  near 
to  Egyptian  Bondage,  under  which  no  other  Nation 
groans.  An  exorbitant  Poor's  Kate^  in  a  Country 
abounding  with  Hospitals  of  every  kind,  and  fkilful 
in  the  Means  of  giving  Employment  to  almoft 
every  Perfon,  from  four  to  fouifcore,  is  abomina- 
ble/ 

4  This  Hofpital,  if  well  managed,  will  become  a 
very  profitable  Object  to  the  Public.  The  Boys, 
being  bred  up  hardy  and  active,  when  fent  early  to 
S^a,  will  become  the  completed  Mariners  ;  Huf- 
bantry  and  Manufactory  will  thrive  by  means  of 
t.iefe  Children,  who  might  other  wife  have  had  no 

*  Exiftence. 


nS  A  TOUR  thro        London. 

<  Exiftence.  The  Girls,  being  accuftomed  to  Regu- 
larity, the  Ufe  of  their  Needle,  and  the  Drudgery 
of  dsmcflic  Life,  will  fill  up  fome  of  the  moft  ufeful 
Offices  in  Families.  If  every  thing  that  is  bad  is 
kept  from  them,  and  every  thing  that  is  good,  and 
proper  to  their  Condition,  is  fet  before  their  Eyes, 
fpite  of  the  Perverfenefs  which  reigns  among  us, 
we  may  hope  to  fee  thefe  Children  fome  of  the 
moft  ufeful,  and  therefore  the  moft  valuable  Sub- 

The  Legiflature  was  fo  beneficent  as  to  allot  ftill 
more"  confiderable  Sums  for  the  Support  of  this  noble 
Charity,  in  the  Years  fucceeding  that  I  have  men- 
tioned. 

This  Bounty  enabled  the  Governors  of  the  Found- 
ling-Hofpital  to  enlarge  their  Plan.  Some  there  are 
who  feem  to  think  it  too  far  extended  j  and  it  cer- 
tainly is  a  very  capacious  one.  But  if,  as  the  worthy 
Gentleman  above  quoted  from  has  hinted,  it  would 
eafe  us  in  that  one  Article  of  the  Poor's  Rate,  how 
much  wouid  both  the  Public  and  the  Poor  be  benefited 
by  the  Alteration  ? 

From  March  25.  1741.  to  December  31.  1759.  the 
Number  of  Children  received  into  the  Foundling  Hof- 
pital is  14,994; 
Of  which  have  been  claimed  and  returned  to  7 

their  Parents  J 

Boys  apprenticed  to  Sea  Service  and  Agricul-  7        « 

ture  | 

Girls  apprenticed  out  74 

Alive  in  the  Country  5929  ") 

— Hofpital  in  London  155  I 

—  Hofpital  at  dckwcrth  113(     6293 

• Hofpital  at  Shrew  56  I 

—£ Hofpital  at  Aylejouiy  40 •* 

Died,  \.Q  December  $i.  1759.  8465 

-      T^( 


Condon.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  ii£ 

Of  thefe  Children  13,610  have  been  received  fince 
June  21.  1756. 

I  am  obliged  to  mention  ftill  more  briefly  the  fol- 
owing  excellent  Inftitutions  ;  fome  of  which  have 
:aken  Place  iince  our  hit  Edition  of  this  Work  ;  and 
jthers  or  them  were  omitted  in  it,  partly  becaufe  their 
iuccefs  was  doubtful  at  that  time. 

Thefe  are  as  follow  : 

1.  The  Corporation   for  Relief  of  Widows   and 
Children  of  Clergymen.   To  this  Charity  Dr.  Sherlock, 
Lord  Bifhop  of  London,  gave  iooo/. 

2.  London  Hofpital,    a   profperous  Institution,    at 
Rrft  carried  on  in  Goodman's -fields  ;  but  was  removed 
into  an  handfome  Building,  creeled  on  Purpofe  for  it, 


3.  The  Small -Pox  Hofpitals,  in  Cold-Batb  Fields 
u  at  Islington. 

4.  The  Britijh  Lying-in  Hofpital  for  married  Wo- 
en,  in  Erownlow-Jhcet,  Long-acre. 

5.  7'he  City  of  London  Lying-in  Hofpital  in  Al- 
rfgate  flreet. 

6.  St.  Luh's  Hcfpital  for  Lunatics,  inftituted  Anm 
_  I.  before- mentioned. 

7.  General  Lying-in  Hofpital,  in  Duke-ftreet^  Grof- 
nor-fquare. 

8.  1  he  Afylum,  on  the  Surry  Side  of  Wejlminfter- 
idge,  an  excellent  Cl'jarity,  intended  to  prevent  the 
uin  of  young  Creatures,  and  Orphans  of  the  other 

ex,  before  their  Manners   have  been  corrupted  by 
cious  Communication  with  fuch  Mifcreants  as  feek 
debauch  the  Innocent  and  the  Deftitute. 

9.  The  Magdalen -h  on fe  in  Goodman's -fields,  intend- 
d  to  reclaim   and   reform  fuch  unhappy  Wretches  as 
ad  not  efcaped   the  Snares   of  vile  Men,  and  were 
:ft  forlorn,  deftitute,  and,  too  often,  fo  diftempered, 

to  propagate  Vice,  Mifery,  and  Difeafe,  through 
HS  great  Metropolis, 

10.  The 


I  jo  A  TOUR  thro       London. 

ic.  The  Middkfcx  Hofpital  was  inftituted  in  //u- 
gujl  1745.  The  Founders  fixed  upon  Windmill  fir  eet 
in  Tottenbamcourt  Road  for  its  Situation,  on  account 
of  the  great  Diihnce  from  all  other  Hofpitals,  for  the 
Relief  of  the  numerous  Poor  of  St.  Giles's^  and  the 
neighbouring  Parifiies ;  their  charitable  Intentions 
were  fuccefsiul^anu  in  1747.  befides  Sick  and  Lame, 
poor  lying-in  .married  Women  were  admitted,  for 
which  Purpofe  the  Governors  then  added  a  newWard 
to  the  Hofpital. 

Since  the  firft  Institution,  only  down  to  Ckrijlmas 
1755.  1580  fick  and  lame  Patients,  and  1192  mar- 
ried Women,  have  been  admitted.  The  Number  of 
Out-patients  who  have  received  Advice,  Medicines, 
and  Relief,  amounts  to  feveral  Thoufands  more,  who 
have  reaped  the  Benefit  of  this  extenfive  and  laudable 
Charity. 

The  Concourfe  of  Patients  that  applied  for  Admit- 
tance into  this  Hofpital  obliged  the  Governors  to  open 
a  Subfcription  for  the  creeling  a  larger  and  more  com- 
modious Edifice  j  and  the  Beneficence  of  the  Nobili- 
ty, Gentry,  and  others,  foon  enabled  them  to  com- 
plete the  Centre  Building  of  the  intended  Plan.  In 
1755.  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Northumber- 
land, Prefident,  and  chief  Promoter  of  this  great  and 
good  Charity,  laid  the  firft  Stone,  in  Prefence  of  the 
Vice- Prefident  and  Governors,  amidft  the  Acclama- 
tions oi  Multitudes,  in  Marybone  Eields  near  Morti- 
mer freet^  where  this  Centre  is  creeled  j  and  the  Go- 
vernors make  no  doubt  of  completing  this  Plan  by 
the  further  Afliitance  they  have  great  Reafon  to  hope 
for  from  the  real  Ufefulnefs  of  their  Undertaking,  in 
fo  airy  and  healthful  a  Situation. 

To  this  Charity  the  late  Earl  of  Stamford  by  his 
Will  bequeathed  4000 1. 

I  can  only  name, 

ii.  Hofpitals  for  the  Uie  of  his  Majefty's  Land- 
Forces  in  England^  Germany ',  North -America,  &c. 

12.  Hof- 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  121 

12.  Hofpitals  for  French  Proteftants. 

13.  The  Elder  Brethren  of  the  Trinity -honfe^  con- 
fifting  of  31    Members;    a  mofi  ufeful  Inititution, 
with  Regard  to  maritime  Affairs,  Pilots,  &c. 

14.  Society  for  .promoting  Chrijiian  Knowlege.  See 
the  Article  of  Libraries. 

15.  Society  for  propagating  the  Gofpel  in  Foreign 
Parts.     See  the  fame  Article. 

1 6.  The  Britijb  Mttjeum.     See  the  fame  Article. 

17.  The  BritiJJ)  White- herring  Fifheiy,  incorpo- 
rated Oftober  1750. 

To  the  Accounts  annually  publifned  of  moft  of 
thefe  charitable  Inftitutions,  by  the  Governors  of 
them,  I  refer  the  Reader  for  more  ample  Satisfac- 
tion. 

I  will  now  only  further  obfcrve,  in  general,  That 
thofe  noble  Foundations,  added  to  innumerable  Alms- 
houfes,  which  are  to  be  feen  in  almoft  every  Part  of 
London^  make  it  certain,  that  there  is  no  City  in  the 
World  can  mew  the  like  Number  of  Charities  from 
private  Hands,  there  being  manyThoufancls  of  People 
maintained,  befides  the  Charities  of  Schooling  fyr 
Children,  and  the  Collections  made  at  the  annual 
Feafts  of  feveral  Kinds,  where  Money  is  given  for 
putting  out  Children  Apprentices,  &c.  a  great  Num- 
ber of  which  owe  their  Rife  to  the  Period  of  Time  in- 
cluded in  50  Years  paft  ;  fo  that  the  Papijts  have  no 
Reafon  to  boaft,  that  there  were  greater  Benefactions, 
and  Acts  of  Chanty,  to  the  Poor,  given  in  their  Days, 
than  in  our  Proteftant  Times.  And  this  is,  indeed, 
one  of  the  principal  Reafons  for  my  making  Mention 
of  it  in  this  Place;  for  let  any  particular  Age  be  fiu- 
2;led  out,  and  let  the  Charities  of  this  Age,  for  about 
50  Years  paft,  and  the  Sums  of  Money  beftowed  by 
Proteftants  in  this  Nation,  on  mere  Acts  of  Charity 
to  the  Poor,  not  reckoning  Gifts  to  the  Church,  be 
caft  up,  it  will  appear  they  are  greater,  by  far,  tiian  can 
VOL,  II.  G  be 


122  "./fTOU'RflW        London. 

be  found  in  England  in  any  the  like  Number  of  Years, 
take  the  Time  when  we  will. 

Nor  do  I  include  in  this,  the  Money  collected  by 
Briefs,  all  over  England,  uponCafualties  by  Fire,  tho* 
that  is  as  eminent  an  Act  of  Charity  as  any  can  be ; 
nor  the  Money  given  either  in  public  or  private,  for 
rebuilding  St.  Paul's  and  other  Churches,  demolifhed 
by  the  Fire  of  London,  or  the  Augmentation  of  poor 
Benefices  by  the  Bounty  of  Queen  Anne,  and  many 
other  fuch  Gifts.  But  there  is  ftill  a  Charity  to  be 
mentioned,  which  is  newly  fet  on  Foot,  that  may  be 
of  great  Confequence  to  this  Kingdom,  as  a  maritime 
Power  ;  which  I  fhall  now  take  Notice  of. 

Ample Provifion  having  been  made  for  Seamen  worn 
out  in  the  Royal  Service,  in  the  noble  Hofpital  of  Green- 
wich, and  fomething  of  the  like  Nature  being  much 
wanted  for  the  Relief  of  that  ferviceable  Body  of  Men, 
who  have  fpent  their  Labour,  and  loft  their  Limbs  and 
Lives,  in  that  of  the  Merchants,  as  well  as  of  their 
helplefs  Widows  and  Orphans,  an  Act  was  pafled  in 
the  Seffion  of  Parliament  Anno  1747.  intituled,  An 
Aft  for  the  Relief  and  Support  of  maimed  and  dl fabled 
Seamen,  and  the  Widows  and  Children  of  fmh  as  fia/l 
be  killed,  JJain,  or  drowned,  in  the  Merchants  Service  ; ' 
whereby  a  Corporation  is  eftablifhed,  of  feveral  confi- 
derable  Merchants,  by  the  Name  of  The  Prefident  and 
Governors  far  the  Relief  and  Support  of  fick,  maimed^ 
and  difahled  Sca?nen,  and  of  the  Widows  and  Children 
ff  fuch  as  Jhall  be  killed,  /lain,  or  drowned,  in  the  Mer- 
chants Service,  to  purchafe  Lands  for  the  Site  of  an 
Kofpita!,  and  to  relieve  all  proper  Objects  of  the  Cha- 
nty of  their  Countrymen,  on  producing  Certificates 
of  their  Merits  and  Sufferings.  Every  Perfon  contri- 
buting 50 /.  is,  tpfo  fafto,  a  Governor:  and  for  ef- 
fecting the  good  Ends  and  Purpofes  intended,  all  Sea- 
men ferving  on  board  the  Merchant-Ships  of  any  of 
his  Majefty's  Subjects  in  England^  are  to  pay  6d.  per 
Month,  in  order  to  be  intitled  to  the  Benefits  of  this 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  123 

Aft.  The  Merchant- Venturers  of  the  City  of  Briftol, 
and  the  Guild  or  Brotherhood  of  Matters,  Seamen  of 
the  Trinity  houfe  of  the  Town  and  Port  of  Kingston, 
upon  Hull>  are  included  within  the  Purpofes  of  this 
A&,  with  refpect  to  the  poor  Mariners  belonging  to 
each  of  thofe  Places.  Thofe  in  the  Service  of  theEq/?- 
Indla  Company,  only,  are  excluded  any  Benefit  from 
hence,  being  already  fufficiently  provided  for  by  their 
refpedive  M  afters. 

Here  fhould  I  hold  myfelf  inexcufable,  if  1  did  not 
take  Notice  of  certain  public-fpirited  Collections  of  a 
ftill  equally  beneficent,  but  more  political,  Nature, 
than  many  of  thefe  I  have  mentioned. 

The  G#//<^fo//-Subfcription,  as  it  is  called,  for  in- 
lifting  Men  at  five  Guineas  a  Head,  to  enter  into  his 
Majefty's  Service,  during  the  Continuance  only  of  the 
prefent  expenfive  War  5  the  Inlifted  not  to  be  fent 
abroad. 

A  like  Subfcription  was  fet  on'Foot,  and  has  been 
fuccefsfully  carried  on,  and  ftill  continues,  for  Wcjl- 
tninfter,  at  the  Premium  of  five  Guineas  each  Inlifter, 
and  on  the  fame  Conditions  of  not  being  holden  be- 
yond the  prefent  War,  nor  fent  out  of  the  Kingdom. 

Large  Sums  have  been  fubfcribed,  and  many  Men 
have  been  raifed,  for  both. 

A  Society  has  been  fet  on  Foot,  and  is  ftill  carrying 
on,  that  may  be  called  a  Society  of  Gratitude,  being 
for  the  Encouragement  of  the  Bfttr/h  Troops  in  Ger- 
many and  America,  who  have  fufFered  and  bled  for  our 
Safety  at  Home  j  alfo  for  making  a  Prefent  to  the  Wi- 
dows and  Orphans  of  fuch  as  have  died  in  Defence  of 
their  Country  ;  particularly  at  the  Battle  of  Tbonbau- 
fen,  <!j>uebeci  &c.  No  lefs  a  Sum  than  7406  /.  15  j. 
5  d.  has  been  raifed,  expended,  and  otherwife  ac- 
counted for,  down  to  May  31.  1760.  by  this  Sub- 
fcription. 

The  French  Minifters  of  State  having  left  fuch  of 
their  Matter's  Subjeds  as  were  Prifoners  in  England 

G  2  m 


ii4  A  TOUR  thro       London, 

in  a  manner  defHtute  and  unprovided  for,  a  generous 
and  truly  cbrijlian  Subfcription  was  fet  on  Foot,  for 
cloathing  and  other  wife  comforting  and  fupporting 
thofe  unhappy  Wretches :  Several  thoufand  Pounds 
were  raifcd  and  difperfed  on  this  noble  Charity. 

We  have  been  the  briefer,  in  order  to  give  our- 
felves  room  to  enlarge  a  little  more  in  the  Account  we 
have  to  mention  of  the  very  excellent  Inftitution,  called 
Tlje  MARINE  SOCIETY. 

In  order  to  make  an  Account  of  the  Views  of  this 
Society  generally  underftood,  it  is  neceflary  to  premifc, 
that  the  Officers  of  every  Ship  of  War,  which  car- 
ries 60  Guns  and  400  Men,  have  a  Right  to  carry 
30  Servants,  and  receive  their  Wages,  which  Wages 
are  coniidered  as  Part  of  the  Officers  Pay. 

Thefe  Servants  are  generally  Boys,  between  i3Years 
of  Age  and  18  j  for  when  they  are  at  or  near  their 
full  Growth,  as  they  can  then  rank  as  Seamen,  and 
receive  Pay  in  that?  Clafs,  it  is  not  to  be  fuppofed, 
they  will  be  content  to  enter  on  board  as  an  Officer's 
Servant,  for  fifty  Shillings  a- Year,  which  is  their  ftated 
Wages. 

The  Government,  therefore,  has  allowed  this  Num- 
ber of  Boys  to  Officers,  not  only  becaufe  they  are  ne- 
cefTary  in  the  Ship,  but  becaufe  by  this  means  every 
Ship  becomes  a  Nurfery  of  young  Seamen,  who  ac- 
quire Skill  and  Strength  together,  and  are  not  only 
able  but  expert  Sailors  before  they  arc  one-and-  twenty 
Years  of  Age. 

Thefe  Servants,  however,  it  has  been  found  very 
difficult  to  procure  ;  the  poor  Vagrants,  who  are  co- 
vered with  Filth  and  Rags,  and  fubfift  either  by  beg- 
ging or  by  pilfering,  had  no  immediate  Inducement, 
wretched  as  they  were,  to  enter  on  board  a  Ship, 
where  at  once  they  muft  renounce  their  Lounging 
and  Idlenefs  for  conftant  Activity  and  Labour  ;  and  if 
they  had  at  any  time  a  tranfient  Wifh  for  fuch  a 
Change  of  Situation,  they  did  not  know  how  to  apply 

to 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  125 

to  bring  it  about :  the  Officers  who  wanted  them  had 
neither~Time  nor  Opportunity  to  fearch  and  folicit 
them;  and  the  Gentlemen  who  refide  in  the  Country, 
though  they  might  be  inclined  to  render  the  Children 
of  their  Poor  thus  ferviceable  to  their  Country,  there 
being  no  Eftablifhment  to  which  they  could  apply, 
had  no  Means  of  putting  their  Intentions  into  Prac- 
tice. 

But  befides,  it  is  defirable  for  every  Ship  to  have 
its  Complement  of  Boys  ;  it  is  defirable,  in  Time  of 
War,  that  not  more  than  one  third  of  the  Number 
fhould  be  lefs  than  16  or  17,  becaufe  it  would  be  too 
long  before  thofe  that  are  younger  could  be  rated  as 
Seamen  ;  nor  can  they  create  a  quick  Succeffion  of 
Youth  into  the  Service  of  Officers  as  a  State  of  Qua- 
lification. It  mult  alfo  be  obferved,  that  the  Youth 
that  are  procured  lofe  feveral  Advantages  by  the  Diffi- 
culty of  procuring  others  ;  for  an  Officer,  when  he 
lofes  a  Servant,  lofes  the  Wages  of  fuch  Servant,  and 
he  will  naturally  be  unwilling  his  Servant  fhould  be 
ranked  as  a  Seaman,  when  he  knows  not  how  to  get 
another. 

The  View  of  this  Society,  therefore,  was  and  is  to 
encourage  the  induftrious  Poor  to  fend  their  Children 
to  Sea,  and  invite  the  Vagabond  and  Pilferer,  not  only 
Boys  and  Lads,  but  Men,  to  become  ufeful  to  the 
State,  by  the  following  Advantages  : 

I.  They  fhall  be  received  immediately  upon  Appli- 
cation, and  taken  care  of  in  a  proper  Place,  where 
they  will  be  accommodated  with  Fire  and  Beds,  and 
three  Meals  a  Day,  of  good  Bread  and  Broth,  and 
Roots  and  Meat,  till  they  are  fent  on  board. 

II.  If  any  that  offer  are  diftempered,  they  are  im- 
mediately put  under  proper  Methods  of  Cure,  and 
when  they  are  fent  on  board  they  are  completely  fitted 
out  with  Cloathing  and  Bedding. 

Thus  are  Men  and  Boys  {tripped  of  their  Rags, 

cured  of  their  Diftempers,  and  fent  clean  and  well 

G  3  cloathed, 


I26  A  T  O  U  R  thro      London. 

cloathed,  with  as  good  Bedding  and  Accommodation 
as  any  common  Seamen  on  board.  As  to  the  Lads, 
if  they  are  j6  or  17,  they  are  very  foon  qualified  to 
receive  Wages  as  Seamen  ;  and  as  to  the  Men,  the 
Diftindiion  between  Landmen  and  Seamen  on  board, 
which  ufed  to  create  Animofity,  and  fubjecl  the  Land- 
men  to  fome  Hardfhips,  is  loft,  as  they  are  no  longer 
known  by  their  Apparel. 

Thefe  Accommodations,  befides  that  they  are  an 
immediate  Inducement  to  Lr.ds  and  Men  to  enter,  are 
ib  necefTary  to  Health  and  Life,  that  for  Want  of  them 
many  have  miferably  perifhed,  who  might  otherwife 
have  been  of  Service  to  their  Country. 

The  Advantages  are  not  lefs  to  the  Community 
than  to  the  Individuals ;  for  it  procures  a  fpeedy  Sup- 
ply  of  ftout  Mariners,  in  the  room  of  thofe  who  in 
tbe  Profecution  of  a  War  muft  neceflarily  be  cut  off, 
at  the  fame  time  that  thofe  Evils  are  prevented  which 
the  idle  and  diflblute  Poor  of  the  rifmg  Generation 
would  produce,  if  they  had  continued  at  Home. 

To  obviate  any  ill  Confequence  that  might  arife 
from  this  Encouragement,  and  prevent  the  entering  of 
Children  and  Apprentices,  unknown  to  their  Matters 
and  Parents,  fuch  Mafter  or  Parent  as  miffes  an  Ap- 
prentice or  Child,  are  invited  to  fee  the  Boys  at  Mr. 
Fielding's,  where  they  attend  every  Tburfday,  from 
Nine  to  Eleven,  for  that  Purpofe,  or  at  the  Seamans- 
Office  over  the  Royal-Exchange,  where  the  Society 
meets  on  the  fame  Day,  and  fits  from  Eleven  till  Two, 
and  upon  producing  the  Indenture  of  an  Apprentice, 
or  reclaiming  a  Child,  they  will  be  immediately  dif- 
charged. 

Thefe  who  would  take  the  Advantages  offered  by 
this  Society,  are  to  apply  to  the  Society  at  their  Of- 
fice over  the  Change ',  to  Juftice  Fielding  in  Bow -ft reef, 
or  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  in  Princts-Jlreet9 
near  the  Bank* 

May 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  127 

.  May  7,  1756.  the  Treafurers  of  the  Marine- Society 
and  Mr.  Hamvay,  whofe  Heart  is  in  every  public- 
fpirited  and  charitable  Work,  waited  on  the  late  King, 
and  prefented  his  Majefty  with  two  little  Trads,  one 
indtled,  A  Letter  from  a  Member  of  the  Marine-So- 
ciety ;  the  other,  Motives  for  the  EftMJhment  of  the 
Marine- Society  ;  containing  an  Account  of  its  Infti- 
tution,  and  the  Progrefs  it  has  made.  His  Majeily 
received  them  very  gracioufly,  and  ordered  a  thoufand 
Pounds  to  be  paid  for  theUfe  of  the  Society.  A  no- 
bie  Inftance  of  that  good  Prince's  Readinefs  to  encou- 
rage every  Scheme  of  national  Advantage. 

His  prefent  Majefty  alfo,  then  Prince  of  Wales*  be- 
ing waited  on  in  like  Manner,  ordered  400 /.  to  be 
paid  ;  and  the  Princefs  Dowager  200 /.  for  the  fame 
Purpofe. 

Very  handfome  Subfcriptions  were  paid  into  the 
Hands  of  the  Managers  of  this  ufeful  Society,  for 
thefe  excellent  Purpofes,  by  Individuals,  befides  Cor- 
porations :  particularly,  500  /.  from  the  City  of  Lon- 
don \  from  the  Raft -India  Company  200  A  the  RuJJia 
Company  ioo/.  The  Stationers  Company,  the  Apo- 
thecaries, the  Clothworkers,  the  Grocers,  the  Mer- 
chant-Taylors, the  Sailers,  the  Fiihmongers,  the  Sad- 
lers,  the  Vintners,  and  other  Corporations,  fubfcribed 
ioo/. So  that  the  Amount  of  the  Subfcriptions  re- 
ceived from  the  Commencement  of  this  Inftitution  in 
'uly  1756.  to  July  3,  1760.  was  21,200  17  6 

xpences    in  cloathing   and   fitting  J 

out  5441  Men,  and  3989  Boys,  C  20,624   15     3 

came  to  3 


Balance  in  the  Treafurer's  Hands  576     2     3 

It  is  very  proper  to  tranfcribe  from  the  Manageis 
Accounts,  as  figned  by  their  Secretary,  and  publithed 
in  the  public  Papers,  the  following  Paragraphs : 

'  The  Public,  fay  they,  will  fee,  by  the  above  Ac- 
count, how  judiciouily  charitable  our  Fellow-Subjects 

G  4  are* 


128  ^ TOUR  AW       London. 

are;  how  Providence  ftill  befriends  the  Poor,  and  how 
acceptable  a  Work  this  mutt  needs  be  in  his  Sight, 
whofe  Mercies  are  over  all  his  Works. 

*  For  fome  Time  paft  this  Society  has  cloathcd 
weekly  only  ten  Men,  felected  from  thofe  in  the  moll 
filthy  Garments ;  but  fince  the  laft  Quarter,  the  Com- 
mittee have  refolved  not  to  cloath  any  more  Men, 
very  few  now  offering  whofe  Condition  is  not  chang- 
ed much  for  the  better. 

'  With  regard  to  Boys,  the  Object  is  ftill  the  fame; 
the  Demand  for  the  Ufe  of  the  King's  Ships  is  confi- 
derable,  and  the  Society  rejects  no  one,  who  is  of  fuffi- 
cient  Stature,  and  in  other  Refpe&s  proper.  It  is 
therefore  hoped  that  every  Friend  to  the  Poor,  and 
•.•very  zealous  Advocate  for  the  Marine  Force  of  thefe 
Kingdoms,  will  continue  to  lend  their  Afliftance  to 
tKis, Society,  to  (belter  the  Vagabond  and  Diftreffed. 
It  is  now  full  four  Years,  during  a  bloody  and  expen- 
live  War,  that  we  have  feen  Mifery  cut  down  as  faft 
as  it  grew,  and  the  moft  complicated  Wretchednefs, 
by  being  tranfplanted  into  a  proper  Soil,  inftantly  be- 
come profitable  to  the  Public,  and  this  without  any 
Public  Money. 

4  As  a  Proof  of  the  aclive  Zeal  and  Benignity  of  the 
Society,  they  keep  a  confront  Eye  to  the  making  Provi- 
fonfir  the  Boys,  who  mujl  be  discharged  from  en  board 
the  King's  Ships,  when  it  Jhall  pleafe  Divine  Providence 
to  terminate  the  prefent  Jf^ar  :  that  fuch  of  them  as  may 
be  in  Danger  of  Dejirufiion  be  Jlill  preserved,  and  the 
jinijbing  Stroke  given  to  their  Fortunes.  The  Society 
haveReafon  to  believe  that  the  Plan  they  have  digefted 
for  this  Purpofe  will  be  effectual ;  and  upon  this  Prin- 
ciple alfo  they  plead  the  Caufe  of  the  Poor,  with  the 
more  Confidence  and  with  the  more  Earneftnefs. 
They  alfo  fee  the  real  Benefit  of  their  Labours  :  they 
feel  not  only  for  the  prefent  but  alfo  for  the  future, 
and  cannot  but  flatter  themfelves  that  a  Defign,  fo  uni- 
verfally  approved,  witt  merit  the  Remembrance  of  their 

Fellow 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Fellow  Subje<5b.  The  late  Hon.  Charles  Stanhope,  in 
Addition  to  his  Generofity  when  living,  left  to  the  So- 
ciety a  Legacy  of  100  /.  It  was  the  firft  of  the  Kind  ; 
it  may  be  hoped  it  will  not  be  the  laft :  If  we  can 
preferve  the  Poor,  and  find  them  Employment,  Secu- 
rity will  neceflarily  follow  to  the  Richy  with  every 
other  national  Advantage. 

JOHN  STEPHENS,  Sec.* 

Subscriptions  are  ftill  carried  on  in  favour  of  fo  no- 
ble and  ufeful  an  Inftitution  ;  and  the  Stationers  Com- 
pany, and  many  worthy  Individuals  have  repeated  their 
fc.rmer  Contributions. 

VI.  Of  the  Churches  <?/ London,  Weftminfter, 
and  Southwark. 

THERE  are  within  the  Walls  of  London,  97  Pa- 
riihes;  without  the  Walls,  17  ;  the  Out  Parifhes 
in  Middlesex  and  Suny,  within  the  Bills  of  Mortality, 
22  ;  and  in  the  City  and  Liberty  of  l^cfminjler^  10  j 
in  all,  146.  We  ihall,  as  briefly  as  poflible,  touch 
upon  the  moft  remarkable  Churches. 

We  muft  obferve,  in  the  tirft  Place,  That  the 
Churches  in  London  are  rather  convenient  than  fine, 
not  adorned  with  Pomp  and  Pageantry,  as  in  Popijh 
Countries  j  but,  like  the  true  Proteitant  Plainnefs,have 
very  little  Ornament  either  within  or  without. 

But  the  moft  famous  of  all  the  Churches  in  the  City, 
and  of  all  the  Proteftant  Churches  in  the  World,  is 
the  Cathedral  of  St.  Paul ;  an  Edifice  exceedingly 
beautiful  and  magnificent,  with  the  feweft  Faults  of 
any  Building  of  the  like  Nature  and  Extent  ;  though 
its  Drefs  is  at  this  time  a  little  out  of  Faihion.  Some, 
who  would  be  thought  to  have  Skill  in  Architecture* 
are  pleafed  to  cenfure  it  for  its  Heavinefs ;  but  that 
Objection,  upon  due  Confideration,  will  appear  ill- 
founded. 

The  vaft  Extent  of  the  horizontal  Arch  of  the  Cu- 
pola, which  (upports  a  Stone  Lanthorn  near  70  Feet 
G  5  high, 


1 30  A  T  O  U  R  tbro       London. 

high,  may  well  account  for  the  Strength  of  the  Eight 
Piers  which  fupport  the  Whole  of  that  prodigious 
Weight.  And  though  common  Obfervers  aflert,  that 
thofe,  as  well  as  the  Piers  of  all  the  Arches  withiniide, 
are  too  thick  and  heavy,  yet,  whoever  knows  anything 
of  the  Rules  of  Architecture,  muft  allow  them  to  be 
as  (lender  astheStriclnefs  of  thofe  Rules  would  admit  of; 
for  the  Thicknefs  of  each  Pier  is  not  one  third  Part 
of  the  Void  of  each  Arch.  And  thole  which  fupport 
the  Dome,  when  compar'd  with  thofe  that  fupport  the 
Cupola  of  St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  come  out  to  be  but 
one  third  Part  of  the  Bignefs  of  the  latter,  the  one 
meafuring  240  Feet  in  Circumference,  the  other  not 
quite  80  ;  yet  the  Difference  in  the  Di  mentions  and 
Weight  of  the  two  Cupolas  is  nothing  in  Proportion 
to  that  of  the  Piers;  and,  upon  the  Whole,  St.  Paul's 
is  much  lefs  liable  to  the  Objection  of  being  heavy 
than  St.  Peters. 

Indeed  Gothic  Architecture,  which  is  more  familiar 
to  fome  PerfoYis  than  the  other,  admits  of  an  extrava- 
gant Airinefs  and  Lightnefs.  In  that  Sort  of  Building 
theDefigner  is  bound  down  to  no  Rules  of  Proportion 
but  what  his  own  Fancy  fuggefts  ;  whereas,  in  the 
other,  Dimenfions  fo  univerfatly  followed,  cannot  be 
deviated  from.  The  Height  of  every  Arch  hath  a  fixM 
Proportion  to  its  Breadth  ;  the  Doors,  Windows,  and 
their  Ornaments,  have  the  fame  ;  the  Intercolumna- 
tions,  and  their  Entablatures,  are  all  confined  to  certain 
.Admeafurements.  But  where  is  that  Exactnefs  ob- 
ferved  in  any  Gothic  Structure  ?  It  muft  be  allowed, 
there  are  fome  of  thofe  Buildings,  that,  in  the  Whole, 
look  very  auguft  and  venerable.  Yet,  let  any  one 
view  the  vai't  ButtrefTes  round  the  Outfide  of  Wejl- 
minfter- Abbey,  and  fee  what  a  Croud  of  Lines  and 
Breaks  they  occafion  in  the  Perfpective,  and  they  will 
then  eafiiy  account  for  the  Lightnefs  of  the  Infide  of 
that  Church  ;  for  thofe  Buttrefles,  by  extending  fo  far 
out,  fupport  the  whole  Structure,  more  than  its  Walls 
•r  Pillars.  This  is  mentioned  for  the  Sake  of  con; 

Ob- 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  131 

Obfervers  only  ;  for  to  the  Judicious  it  is  altogether 
unneceflary. 

Sir  Cbrijlopber  Wren  had  the  Satisfa&iori  to  find  his 
Work  approved  by  the  beft  M afters  in  Europe^  who 
allowed,  that  the  Church  of  St.  Peter's  ztRome^  which 
is  the  moft  ftupendous  Structure  in  the  World,  only 
exceeds  St.  Paul's  with  refpectto  its  hugeDimenfions, 
its  rich  mofaic  Work,  the  beautiful  Marble,  of  which 
both  its  Outfide  and  Infide  intirely  confift,  the  latter  in 
different  Colours,  its  Statues,  Paintings,  Gildings, 
Altars,  and  Oratories. 

Had  the  Infide  of  St.  PauFs  been  adorned  in  the  like 
profufe  and  pompous  Manner,  it  would  have  attracted 
the  Admiration  of  fuperficial  Critics  •,  fo  that  they  would 
never  have  been  able  to  difcover  the  Faults  which  they 
can  only  attribute  to  the  Plainnefs  of  its  Materials, 
But  Harmony,  Proportion,  and  Beauty,  are  the  fame, 
whether  the  Building  is  executed  in  Stone,  or  the  moft 
beautiful  Marble;  whether  the  Carvings  or  Mouldings 
be  gilt  or  not;  the  RecefTes  or  Panels  in  the  Walls  be 
curioufly  painted,  or  plain. 

In  the  Year  1707.  the  Houfe  of  Commons  had  it 
under  Confideration,  whether  the  Cupola  fhould  be 
covered  with  *  Copper  or  Lead;  and  upon  Enquiryinto 
which  was  moft  expedient,  and  leaft  expenfive,  it  ap- 
peared that  the  Covering  of  Lead  would  amount  to> 
about  170  Tons,  and  the  Expence  thereof,  including 
Workmanfhip,  was  eflimated  at  2500 /. 

The  Copper  Covering  was  computed  at  eleven 
Tons,  3?o  three  Quarters  and  odd  Pounds ;  and  the 
Expence  was  eftimated  at  3050 /.  Upon  which  the 
Houfe  fixed  upon  a  Copper  Covering. 

But  when  the  Bill,  which  had  a  Claufe  in  it  for 
that  Purpofe,  went  up  to  the  Lords,  their  Lordfhips 
left  out  the  Claufe  ;  upon  which  the  Commons  defircd 
a  Conference,  alleging,  that  Copper  was  preferable  to 
any  other  Covering,  as  well  in  refpeft  of  Duration  as 

*  This  is  an  au;ht:nc!c  Account,  of  the  Matter. 

G  6 


1 3 1  A  T  O  U  R  thro        London . 

Li^htneft;  for  that  Lead  being  fubje&  to  frequent  Re- 
pairs, the  necefiary  Scaffolding  for  that  Purpofe,  at  any 
one  time,  would  exceed  the  Difference  of  Charge 
between  that  and  Copper  :  Befides,  that  frequent  Scaf- 
folding would  very  much  prejudice  the  Building.  But 
the  Sefiions  clofing  the  fame  Day,  put  an  End  to  the 
Affair,  and  there  were  no  Conferences ;  tho'  the  pre- 
ceding Reafons  were  what  the  Commons  intended  to 
offer,  if  there  had  been  one. 

It  very  probably  was  upon  this  Occafion,  that  Sir 
Cbriftopker  is  faid  to  have  declared  his  Opinion,  when 
feme  Gentlemen  doubted  whether  the  Cupola  would 
bear  the  Leaden  Covering,  that  it  was  able  to  bear 
7000  Tons  more  than  what  is  now  upon  it;  and  that 
he  would  undertake  to  raife  a  Spire  of  Stone  upon  the 
Whole,  ico  Feet  higher  than  theCrofs  nowftands. 

The  Expence  of  this  magnificent  Structure,  as  it 
was  laid  before  the  Parliament  Anno  1711.  including 
the  Building  of  the  Chapter-houfe  near  it,  purchafing 
of  Property,  together  with  the  Eftimate  of  what  was 
jiecefiary  to  complete  the  Whole,  in  which  was  in- 
cluded a  Ring  of  12  Bells,  not  yet  put  up,  norcaft,  as 
alfo  the  Furniture  for  the  Choir,  amounted  to  8 10,3807. 
4* 

Thefe  Things,  that  were  not  fo  eafy  for  every  one 
to  know,  we  have  thought  it  neceflary  to  enlarge  upon. 
Our  Bounds  will  not  permit  us  to  fay  all  that  the  Sub- 
ject requires,  and  we  would  not  dwell  upon  Points 
which  every  one  knows,  or  may  eafily  inform  himfelf 
of  by  his  own  Obfcrvation,  or  from  other  Writers,  in 
relation  to  this  famous  Structure. 

But  one  Thing  it  will  be  requifite  to  obferve  fur- 
ther, which  every  one  cioes  not  know,  and  which 
therefore  I  fhail  mention. 

This  able  Architedt,  Sir  Cbrijiopber  Wren,  at  the 
firft  fetting  about  the  Church,  would  have  had  its  Si- 
tuation removed  a  little  to  the  Noith,  to  (land  juft  on 
the  Spot  of  Ground  which  is  taken  up  by  Pater -nofter 
Row,  and  the  Buildings  on  either  Side ;  To  that  the 

North- 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  153 

North  fide  of  the  Church  fhould  have  flood  open  to 
Newgate-ftreet^  and  the  South -fide  to  the  Ground  on 
which  the  Church  now  ftands. 

By  this  Situation,  the  Eaft-end  of  the  Church 
would  have  looked  directly  down  the  main  Street  of 
the  City,  Cbeapfide;  and  for  the  Weft- end,  Ludgate 
having  been  removed  a  little  North,  the  main  Street 
called  Ludgate-ftreet,  and  Liidgate-hiil,  would  only 
have  Hoped  a  little  W.  S.  W.  as  they  do  now  irregu- 
larly two  Ways,  one  within,  and  the  other  without 
the  Gate ;  and  all  the  Street  beyond  Fleet-bridge  would 
have  received  no  Alteration  at  all. 

By  this  Situation,  the  common  Thorough -fare  of 
the  City  would  have  been  removed  at  a  little  fur- 
ther Diftance  from  the  Work,  and  we  fhould  not  then 
have  been  obliged  to  walk  juft  under  the  very  Wall, 
as  we  do  now,  which  makes  the  Work  appear  out  of 
all  Perfpe&ive,  and  is  the  chief  Reafon  of  the  Objec- 
tions I  have  mentioned,  as  to  the  outfide  Appearance  ; 
whereas,  had  it  been  viewed  at  a  little  Diftance,  the 
Building  would  have  been  feen  infinitely  to  more  Ad- 
vantage. 

Hid  Sir  Chriftopher  been  allowed  this  Situation,  he 
would  then  alfo  have  had  more  room  for  the  Orna- 
ment of  the  Weft-end,  which,  tho'  a  moft  beautiful 
Work,  would  then  have  been  much  more  fo  ;  and  he 
would  have  added  a  circular  Piazza  to  it,  after  the 
Model  of  that  of  Rome,  but  much  more  magnificent; 
and  an  Obelifk  of  Marble  in  the  Centre  of  the  Circle, 
exceeding  any  thing  that  the  World  can  fliew  of  its 
Kind,  of  modern  Work. 

But  the  Circumftance  of  Things  hindered  this  noble 
Deiign  ;  and  the  City  being  almoft  rebuilt  before  he 
obtained  an  Order  and  Provifion  for  laying  the  Foun- 
dation, he  was  prefcribed  to  the  narrow  Spot  where  it 
now  ftands,  in  which  the  Building  however  magni- 
ficent in  itfelf,  ftands  with  great  Difadvantage  as  to  the 
PiofpsCi  of  it.  The  Inconveniences  of  this  were  fo 

apparent 


j  34  'A  T  O  U  R  thro       London. 

apparent  when  the  Church  was  finifh'd,  that  Leave  was 
at  length,  though  not  without  Difficulty,  obtained,  to 
pull  down  one  whole  Row  of  Houfes  on  the  North  fide 
of  the  Body  of  the  Church,  to  make  way  for  the  no- 
ble Baluftrade  of  caft  Iron,  raifed  upon  an  handfome 
Stone  Wall  of  above  a  Yard  high,  that  furrounds  the 
Church -yard;  and,  indeed,  to  admit  Light  into  the 
Church,  as  well  as  to  preferve  it  from  the  Danger  of 
Fire. 

That  admirable  Architect:  met  with  no  better  Suc- 
cefs  in  a  Plan  which  was  one  of  the  moft  beautiful 
that  could  enter  into  the  Mind  of  Man,  and  would 
have  made  this  City  the  nobleft  on  Earth  :  this  I  fhall 
relate  in  the  Words  of  a  curious  Author  ;  viz. 

«  The  Fire  of  London  furnifhed  the  moft  perfect 
<  Occafion  that  can  ever  happen  in  any  City,  to  re- 
«  build  it  with  Pomp  and  Regularity.  This  Sir  Chri- 
Jiopher  Jfren  forefaw  ;  and,  it  is  faid,  offered  a 
Scheme  which  would  have  made  it  the  Wonder  of 
the  World.  He  propofed  to  have  laid  out  one  large 
Street  from  Aldgate  to  Temple-Bar  ;  in  the  middle 
of  which  was  to  have  been  a  large  Square,  capable 
of  containing  the  new  Church  of  6V.  PrtWs,  with 
a  proper  Diftance  for  the  View  all  round  ;  whereby 
that  huge  Building  would  not  have  been  cooped  up, 
as  it  is  at  prefent,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  no-where 
to  be  feen  to  Advantage;  but  would  have  had  a  long 
and  ampls  Vifta  at  each  End,  to  have  reconciled  it 
to  a  proper  Point  of  View,  and  give  it  one  great 
Benefit,  which,  in  all  Probability,  it  mufl  now  want 
for  ever.  He  farther  propofed  to  rebuild  all  thePa- 
rifti  churches  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  be  feen  at  the 
End  of  every  V;fta  of  Houfes,  and  difperfed  in  futh 
Diftances  from  each  other,  as  to  appear  neither  too 
thick  nor  thin  in  Profpeft,  and  give  a  proper  I-j 
ening  to  the  whole  Bulk  of  the  City,  as  it  filled 
the  Land  (chape.  Laitly,  he  propofed  to  build  all 
the  Houfes  uniform,  and  fupported  on  a  Piazza,  ii<e 

4  that 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 

*  that  of  Covent-garden :  and  by  the  Water-fide,  from 

*  the  Bridge  to  the  Temple,  he  had  planned  a  long 
4  and  broad  Wharf,  or  Quay,  where  he  defigned  to 
4  have  ranged  all  the  Halls  that  belong  to  the  feveral 

*  Companies  of  the  City,  with  proper  \Yarehoufes  for 
4   Merchants  between,  to  vary  the  Edifices,  and  make 
4  it  at  once  one  of  the  moft  beautiful  and  moft  ufeful 
4  Ranges  of  Structure  in  the  World.     But  the  Hurry 

*  of  Re-building,  and  the  Difputes  of  Property,  pre- 
4  vented  this  glorious  Scheme  from  taking  Place.' 

When  this  great  Man  found  he  could  not  carry  this 
Point,  he  propofed  what  we  have  already  mentioned  ; 
but,  as  we  have  obferved,  with  as  little  Succefs  as  the 
above  grand  Scheme  ;  private  Property,  on  this  Oc- 
cafion,  as  it  does  on  moft  others,  getting  the  better 
both  of  public  Utility  and  public  Spirit. 

Of  the  other  Churches,  the  moft  remarkable  are 
Covent-garden  ;  the  Churches  of  St.  Mary  le  Bowy 
and  St.  Bride's ;  the  two  latter  for  having  the  fineft 
Steeples  in  the  World  ;  efpecially  Bow.  The  Infide 
of  the  Church  of  St.  Stephen  Wallbrook  is  admired  all 
over  Europe.  The  Contrivance  and  Beauty  of  other 
Churehes,  confidering  how  they  were  obliged,  un- 
avoidably, to  be  thruft  up  in  Corners,  and  odd  Angles, 
is  amazingly  fine. 

The  new  Churches  at  Lime-houfe,  Rat cliffe- high- 
way, Spital-fulds,  Old-flreet,  the  Strand,  Ormond- 
Jhcet,  Hanover  fquare,  the  Horfe  ferry,  St.  Mary 
IVoolnotb,  Bijbopfgate,  St.  Leonard  Sborcditch,  St. 
Catharine  Colcman,  St.  Martin  in  the  Fields,  St.  Giles, 
and  that  in  Bloom/bury,  I  can  only  mention.  But  the 
latter,  I  muft  oblerve,  was  the  firft  Building  wherein 
was  introduced  a  Portico  after  the  Manner  of  the  an- 
tient  Temples.  The  Body  of  the  Church  is  a  mafterly 
Performance ;  but  the  placing,  for  a  Weather-cock, 
the  Statue  of  a  Prince  famous  for  good  Senfe  and 
Steadinefs,  is  an  Abfurdity  peculiar  to  the  Church  of 

That 


136  ^  T  O  U  R  thro       London. 

That  incomparable  Piece,  called  The  Banqueting- 
boufe  at  Whitehall,  is  now  made  ufe  of  as  a  Chapel. 
It  was  defigned  by  Inigo  Jones,  as  one  Pavilion  of  the 
admirable  Model  he  gave  for  a  Palace.  And  if  this 
Specimen  has  juftly  commanded  the  Admiration  of 
Mankind,  what  would  the  finifhed  Piece  have  done. 
Here  is  Strength  and  Politenefs,  Ornament  with  Sim- 
plicity, and  Beauty  with  Majefty.  It  is  without  Dif- 
pute  one  of  the  nobleft  Structures  in  the  World.  The 
Cieling  is  an  adnvrable  Piece  of  Painting  by  Rubens. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  Britain  will  one  Day  have  the  Glory 
to  accomplish  it,  according  to  this  PJan,  and  then  it 
w  11  far  exceed  any  Palace  in  the  Univerfe. 

The  Abbey,  or  Collegiate  Church  of  IVeJlminJler, 
is  a  venerable  old  Pile  of  Building  ;  but  now  appears 
with  a  new  Face,  to  what  it  did  a  few  Years  ago  ; 
for  two  Towers  are  adually  finished  at  the  Weft-end. 
The  Beginning  of  a  fine  and  coilly  Spire  was  alfo  laid 
fome  time  ago,  near  the  Middle  of  the  Edifice  ;  but 
it  is  not  yet  proceeded  on.  The  Weft  Window,  be- 
tween thefe  Towers,  is  very  beautiful ;  and  the  Win- 
dow alfo  fronting  K'wgjlrett,  finifhed  in  the  Deanry 
of  the  late  Bifhop  Atterbury,  is  one  of  the  fineft  modern 
Performances  of  its  kind. 

The  Houfes  adjoining  to  the  North-fide  of  this 
venerable  Pile  are  pulled  down  ;  and  the  Building  is 
railed  in  with  Iron  Rails,  from  the  Projection  of  the 
North  Crofs.  And  it  is  hoped  that  fome  other  Houfes, 
which  join  to  King  Hen  y  VII. 's  Chapel,  and  may,  in 
cafe  of  accidental  Fire,  endanger  the  Whole,  will,  with 
all  convenient  Speed,  be  Hkewife  demoliihed.  We  may 
fay,  that  every  Individual  of  the  Community  has  an 
Intereft  in  a  public  Building;  and  it  were  Pity  that 
fuch  noble  Edifices,  through  private  Avarice  or  Con- 
venience, (hould  lie  at  the  Mercy  of  a  carelefs,  or 
perhaps  a  fottifh  Servant.  Some  of  the  Money  given 
by  Parliament,  in  feveral  Seflions,  to  adorn  and  repair 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  137 

the  Whole,  would  have  been  well  laid  out  to  purchafe 
fuch  Houfes,  as,  demolifhed,  would  tend  to  prefcrve 
the  Whole. 

This  Building,  however,  though  very  extenfive,  is 
far  lefs  elegant  than  feveral  other  Gothic  Structures  : 
Its  Outfide  can  never  be  made  beautiful  ;  and  within, 
it  is  extravagantly  out  of  Proportion,  with  regard  to 
the  Height  and  Breadth  of  the  middle  Nef  and  Side- 
Ailes.  The  high  Altar  withinfide  is  a  noble  Piece, 
and  had  a  wonderful  fine  Effect  from  the  Weft  Door, 
before  the  Organ,  erecSted  fome  few  Years  ago,  inter- 
cepted its  View, 

The  Towers  at  the  Weft- end,  which  I  have  juft 
mentioned,  as  they  ftand  fo  clofe  together,  are  not 
fufficiently  contracted  in  the  carrying  them  up.  The 
four  Pinacles  look  wretchedly,  when  viewed  in  a  dia- 
gonal Line.  The  Style  of  the  Building,  fo  far  as  is 
intire  new  Work,  is  a  fort  of  Medley,  neither  Gothic^ 
nor  any  thing  elfe  ;  and  is  exceflive  heavy.  And  as  fo 
many  beautiful  Structures  of  this  kind  are  to  be  feen, 
it  is  amazing,  that  any  Archited  fhould  be  above 
imitating  them. 

This  Abbey  is  the  Repofitory  of  the  deceafed  Eri- 
tljh  Kings  and  Nobility,  and  very  fine  Monuments  are 
feen  over  fome  of  the  Graves  of  our  antient  Sovereigns 
and  prime  Nobility. 

The  Monarchs  of  Great  Britain  are  likewife  al- 
ways crowned  here. 

The  Churches  in  Southward  are  as  follow  : 

1.  The  Church  of  St.  Mary,  vulgarly  called  St. 
MaryOvery,  and  St.  Saviour,  in  Southwark.     It  is  a 
venerable  Gothic  Pile  ;    having  three  Ailes  running 
from  Eaft  to  Weft,  and  a  Crofs-Aile  after  the  manner 
of  a  Cathedral. 

2.  The  Church  of  St.  George  Soutbwark  is  new- 
built,  but  with  a  mean  Steeple. 

3.  St.  Thomas's  is  a  neat  and  convenient  Edifice. 

4.  St.  Olavis  is  alfo  new-built. 

5.  St, 


i  j  8  ^  T  O  U  R  thro*       London . 

5.  St  John's,  vulgarly  called  Horjlsy-down  Church, 
is  one  of  the  50  new  ones. 

6.  The  Church  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen  Bermondfey 
is  a  neat  Struclure. 

7.  CbriJt-Cburch  is  new-built  j  as  is  alfo, 

8.  Rotherbitb-Church. 

VII.    Of  St.  James'/  Palace,  the  Parliament- 
Houfe,  Weftminfter-Hail,  fcfr. 

TH  E  Palace  of  St.  James's,  tho'  the  Winter  Re- 
ceptacle of  all  the  Pomp  and  Glory  of  this  King- 
dom, is  really  mean,  in  Companion  of  the  glorious 
Court  of  Great  Britain.  The  Splendor  of  the  Nobi- 
lity, the  Wealth  and  Greatnefs  of  the  Attendants,  the 
Oeconomy  of  the  Houfe,  and  the  real  Grandeur  of 
the  whole  Royal  Family,  outdo  all  the  Courts  of 
Europe ;  and  yet  this  Palace  comes  beneath  thofe  of 
the  moft  petty  Princes  in  it ;  altho'  there  cannot  be  in 
the  World  a  nobler  Situation  for  a  Royal  Palace  than 
Whitehall.  And  it  is  with  fome  Concern,  that  we 
iee  fo  fine  a  Spot  become  a  Sacrifice  to  private  Spirit, 
fo  much  of  it  being  given  away  to  particular  Families, 
as  makes  more  remote,  than  we  might  otherwife  ex- 
pect it  to  be,  the  Hope  we  might  juftly  have  enter- 
tained, of  feeing  a  Palace  built  there,  worthy  of  the 
Glory  of  our  Monarchs. 

Many  Plans  have  been  drawn  for  the  Rebuilding  of 
this  Palace  ;  but  the  moft  celebrated  Draughts  are 
thofe  of  Inigo  Jones,  and  may  be  feen  in  Mr.  Camp- 
bell's Pitruvius  Britannlcus,  and  Mr.  Kent's  Edition 
of  Jones's  Works.  The  laft  of  thefe,  if  executed, 
would,  for  Magnificence  and  Beauty,  tranfcend  even 
the  Temple  of  Solomon^  if  we  are  to  form  a  Judg- 
ment from  the  Plans  given  of  that  famous  Edifice. 
B*t'tis  a  quellion  whether  the  Expence  would  not  ex- 
ceed that  of  St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  which  coft  Forty 
Millions  of  Roman  Crowns. 

As 


.ondon.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  139 

As  the  Court  is  nowftated,  all  the  Offices  and  Places 
or  Bufinefs  are  fcattered  about,  here  and  there. 

The  Parliament  meets,  as  they  ufed  to  do  while 
he  Court  was  at  Weftjmnjler^  in  the  King's  old 
'alace  ;  nor  can  it  be  faid  but  the  Place  is  made  to- 
erably convenient  for  them.  The  Houfe  of  Commons 
meet  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Palace  at  Weftminfter,  dedi- 
:ated  to  St.  Stephen^  and  fitted  for  this  Purpofe  by 
hat  admirable  Architect  Sir  Chriftopber  Wren. 

The  Houfe  of  Lords  is  a  venerable  old  Apartment. 

Weftminfter-hall^  a  noble  Gothic  Building,  in  which 
ire  held  the  Courts  of  Juftice,  is  faid  to  be  the  largeft 
^oom  in  the  World,  being  220  Feet  long  long,  and 
ro  Feet  wide.  Here  is  held  the  Coronation-Feaft  of 
he  Kings  and  Queens  of  England',  alfo  the  Courts  of 
Chancery,  King's-Bench,  and  Common-Pleas  ;  and, 
ibove  Stairs,  that  of  the  Exchequer.  But  it  muft  be 
:onfefs'd,  that  it  makes  no  very  advantageous  Appear- 
r.ce  without,  refembling,  at  a  Diftance,  a  great  Barn, 
>f  300  Feet  long. 

Adjoining  to  the  Hall  are  kept  the  numerous  Offices 
>elonging  to  the  Exchequer  of  England,  fome  of  them 
?ery  dark  and  inconvenient,  and  fuch  as  to  a  Stranger 
would  afford  no  very  remote  Idea  (particularly  in  fome 
>f  the  Avenues  from  Office  to  Office)  of  the  difmal 
Vlanfions  to  which  Money-TranfacYions  are  thought 
)ften  to  bring  the  devoted  Subjects  of  Plutus, 

VIII.  Of  the  Statues ',  and  ether  public  Orm- 
mentSy  in  and  about  toe  Cities  of  London  and 
Weftminfter. 

HP  HIS  Article  we  infert  rather  for  the  fake  of  the 
Number  of  the  Statues,  &c.  than  their  Excel - 
ence ;  though  fome  of  them  muft  be  allowed  to  be 
valuable. 

The  Brafs  Statue  of  King  James  II.  in  the  Habit  of 
in  the  Privy-Garden  KlVhitt-kall,  is 

a  beau- 


140  A  T  O  U  R  thro        London. 

a  beautiful  one,  and  can  hardly  be  outdone  by  any 
modern  Performance  of  that  kind  in  Europe. 

A  fine  Brafs  Baft  of  King  Charles  I.  done  by  Pa- 
nini,  a  famous  Italian  Matter  of  Sculpture,  is  placed 
over  the  PafTage  at  the  upper  End  of  IVejlminJler-bdl, 
adjoining  to  the  Court  of  KingVBench,  which,  tho* 
little  obferved,  is  very  curious. 

The  Statue  in  Brafs  of  King  Charles  I.  on  Horfe- 
back,  at  Charing  -Grafs,  is  a  curious  Piece,  tho'  not 
perfect,  according  to  the  Notion  of  fome  Critics. 

At  St.  Paufs,  "the  Figures  of  the  Apoftles  and  Evan- 
gelijls,  on  the  Weft,  North,  and  South  Fronts  ;  and 
in  the  Middle  of  the  Area,  the  Statue  of  her  late  Ma- 
jefly  Queen  Anne,  at  full  Length,  crowned,  with  a 
Sceptre  in  one  Hand,  and  a  Globe  in  the  other,  round 
the  Pedeftal  of  which  are  the  Figures  of  Britannia^ 
France  (in  a  penfive  Attitude),  Ireland,  and  America  : 
St.  Paul,  with  a  Group  of  other  Figures  exprefling 
his  Converfion,  are  finely  done  in  Alto-Relievo,  over 
the  Door  in  the  Weft  Front. 

On  the  Front  of  the  Hall  of  the  College  of  Phyficians^ 
toward  the  Court,  is  a  Statue  of  King  Charles  II.  well 
cut  in  Stone.  On  the  Weft-fide  of  the  Theatre  is 
alfo  the  Statue  of  Sir  John  Cutler,  carved  in  Stone.  A 
fine  Bufto  of  Dr.  Harvey,  who  firft  difcovered  the 
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  is  alfo  erected  in  the  Front 
of  the  Hall,  at  the  Expence  of  the  late  Dr.  Richard 
Mead. 

In  the  Front  of  St.  Bartholomew's  Hofpital,  next 
Smitbfield,  which  is  a  very  handfome  Gate-way,  is  a 
Statue  of  King  Henry  VIII.  done  in  a  good  Tafte. 

In  Alderfgate,  King  'James  I.  on  Horfeback,  well 
carved  in  Alto-Relievo  :  alfo  the  Prophets  Samuel  and 
'Jeremiah.  But  the  Gate  is  now  wholly  taken  down. 

In  the  Royal  Exchange,  the  Statues  of  Edward  I. 

Edwardlll.  Henry  V.  Henry  VI.  Edward  IV.  Ed- 

wardV.  Henry  VII.  Henry  Vltt.  Edward VI.  Mary 

I.  Elizabeth.  James  I.  Charles  I.  Charles  II.  James 

J  J    II. 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  741 

II.  William  III.  and  Mary  IF.  dnne,  George  I.  and 
George  II.  Alfo  on  the  South -fide  are  two  fine  Sta- 
tues of  Charles  I.  and  Charles  II.  A  Statue  of  King 
Charles  II.  in  a  Roman  Habit,  in  the  Centre  of  the 
Area,  is  a  noble  Performance.  Alfo  a  Statue  of  Sir 
Thomas  Grcfoam  -,  and  now,  lately,  another  erected 
near  it,  in  Honour  of  Sir  John  Barnard,  one  of  the 
worthier!  and  ableftReprefentatives  that  ever  the  City 
of  London  fent  to  Parliament,  But  if  thefe  two  were 
the  fineft  in  the  World  (as  they  certainly  are  not)  the 
Place  where  they  are  fixed  would  conceal  their  Beau- 
ty, and  they  might  as  well  be  placed  in  a  Cellar. 

The  two  Figures  over  the  Gate  to  Bethlehem  Hofpi- 
tal,  one  reprefenting  a  Perfon  melancholy  mad,  the 
other  one  raving,  are  inimitable  Performances,  by  Mr. 
Cilber^  Father  of  the  late  Laureat. 

In  St.  Thomas's  Hofpital,  Southwark^  a  Statue  of  Sir 
Robert  Clayton^  in  Marble ;  another  in  Brafs  of  Ed- 
ward VI. 

In  Mr..  GZ//S  Hofpital,  a  Statue  in  Brafs  of  that 
Gentleman. 

A  good  Statue  of  Charles  II.  in  Brafs,  in  a  Ro- 
man Habit,  is  in  the  Quadrangle  before  Chelfea  Col- 
lege. 

In  the  public  Office  of  the  Bank  is  a  curious  Mar- 
ble Statue  of  Jf/illiam  III.  its  Royal  Founder,  with  an 
Infcription  to  his  Honour. 

The  noble  Collections  made  by  feveral  of  our  Eng- 
HJh  Nobility  and  Gentry,  from  abroad,  would  afford 
a  curious  Article  in  this  Place  ;  but  our  Defign  at 
prefent  is  to  give  an  Account  of  Things  as  they  are, 
in  and  about  this  great  City. 


IX. 


A  TOUR  thro        London, 


IX.   Of  the  Cafes  of  London  and  Weftmin- 
fter. 

THE  Gates  of  the  City  of  London  were  feven,  be- 
fides  Pofterns. 

Ludgate  was  a  Prifon  for  Debt,  for  Freemen  ol 
the  City  only.  It  is  now  taken  down,  in  order  to 
open  the  PafTage  for  the  Convenience  of  both  Ci- 
ties. 

Newgate  is  a  Prifon  for  Criminals,  both  in  London 
and  Middlefex,  and  for  Debtors  alfo  for  Midd'efe^ 
being  the  County  Gaol.  One  Day,  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
that  this  Prifon  will  be  removed  into  a  more  airy  Si- 
tuation,  and  remoter  from  fo  populous  a  City  as  Lon- 
don is,  which  hath  fuffered  fo  much  formerly  from 
Peftilences  ;  the  Diftempers  incident  to  Gaols  con- 
vincing us,  and,  as  has  been  experienced  in  a  re- 
cent Inftance,  that  proud  as  the  human  Creature 
generally  is  of  its  personal  Advantages,  there  are  not 
more  noxious,  and  even  infectious  Animals,  than  Man 
and  Woman  crouded  together,  and  debarred  from  the 
Benefits  of  Air  and  Exercife. 

Moorgate  is  a  beautiful  Gate-way,  the  Arch  being 
near  20  Feet  high,  which  was  done  to  give  room  for 
the  City  Train'd  Bands  to  go  thro'  to  the  Artillery. 
Ground^  where  they  mufter,  and  that  they  might  march 
with  their  Pikes  advanced  ;  for  then  they  had  Pikemen 
in  every  Regiment,  as  well  in  the  Army  as  in  the 
Militia,  which,  fince  that,  is  quite  left  off,  and  Bayo- 
nets more  ufefully  taken  into  their  Place. 

Cripplegate  was  very  old,  and  made  but  a  mean  Fi- 
gure ;  and  is  now  taken  down. 

&ijhepfgatft  though  newly  rebuilt,  yet  not  with  the 
leaft  Elegance,  is  alfo  taken  down. 

Alderfgate  and  Aldgate  made  handfome  Appear- 
ances :  But  are  now  (1761.)  both  taken  down  as  well 
as  Ludgate  t  Cripptegate,  and  Bijhopfgate. 

Temple- 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Temple-bar  is  the  only  Gate  which  is  erected  at  the 
Extent  of  the  City-Liberties  ;  and  this  was  occafioned 
by  fome  needful  Ceremonies, as  at  the  Proclaiming  any 
JCingor  Queen  of  England,  at  which  time  the  Gates 
are  fhut.  The  Herald  at  Arms  knocks  hard  at  the 
Door;  the  Sheriffs  of  the  City  call  back,  afking,  Who 
is  there  ?  Then  the  Herald  anfwers,  I  come  to  proclaim, 
&c.  according  to  the  Name  of  the  Prince  who  is  to 
fucceed  to  the  Crown,  and  repeating  the  Titles  of 
Great  Britain,  France,  and  Ireland,  &c.  at  which  the 
Sheriffs  open,  and  bid  them  welcome  ;  and  fo  they  go 
>n  to  the  Exchange,  where  they  make  the  laft  Pro- 
:lamation. 

There  was  formerly  another  Gate  belonging  to  the 
Jity  of  London,  called  the  Pojlern  Gate,  at  Tower- 
nil-,  but,  being  partly  demolished  by  Time,  it  is  now 
urned  into  private  Buildings. 

Wejlminjler  h»id  no  lefs  than  five  Gates,  and  all 
ivithin  a  fmall  Compafs  of  Ground  ;  as,  firft,  The 
noble  Gothic  Gate  at  Whitehall,  very  lately  taken 
jown,  though  long  left  ftanding  for  the  Beauty  of  its 
Workmanfliip  ;  fecondly,  a  Gate  a  little  farther, 
A'here  K'mg-{lreet  begins,  which  was  a  good  old  Struc- 
;ure,  and  pulled  down  a  few  Years  ago  to  inlarge  the 
-"afiage  ;  thirdly,  a  Gate  where  now  Umon-flrect  is, 
communicating  King-flreet  with  the  Ne^v  Palace  yard. 
This  has  been  feveral  Years  demolished  ;  fourthly,  a 
Gate  leading  from  New  Palace -yard  to  St.  Marga- 
's-lane ;  which  has  been  lately  pulled  down,  to  m- 
arge  that  Paffage  by  which  the  King  goes  to  theHoufe 
of  Lords  ;  fifthly,  the  Gate-boitfe,  near  the  Weft- end 
of  the  Abbey  ;  which  is  an  old  Building,  ufed  for  the 
public  Gaol  of  the  City  of  Wejlminjler  ;  which  I  wifn 
removed  to  Tothill  fields,  or  fome  more  airy  Situation, 
:or  the  Sake  of  the  Health  of  the  Inhabitants,  as  I 
lave  already  mentioned  of  Newgate. 
To  thefe  we  may  alfo  add,  the  Water-gate  at  Wejl- 
5  minjler. 


144  /  London. 

mlnjlsr,  in  New  Palace-yard,  near  which  the  noble 
Bridge  I  have  defcribed  is  erecled. 

X.  Of  the  Markets  of  London. 

AMONG  thefe,  that  of  Smitbfield  for  Cattle  is, 
without  queftion,  the  greateft  in  the  World  :  no 
Calculation  of  the  Numbers  of  H  >rfes,  Oxen,  Cows, 
Calves,  Sheep,  £sV.  can  be  made.    This  Market  is  held 
every  Monday  and  Friday. 

There  is  a!fo  a  great  Market,  or  rather  Fair,  for 
Horfes,  in  Smitbjield,  every  Friday  in  the  Afternoon, 
where  very  great  Numbers  of  Horfes,  and  thofe  of  the 
higheft  Price,  are  fold  weekly. 

The  Flefh-markets  are  Leaden-ball^  Honey-lane, 
Newgate,  the  Fleet  ^  Clare,  Sbadwcll,  Southward,  Wejl- 
minjler,  Spital  fields,  Wbitecbapel,  Brook,  Eloomjbury, 
Newport,  St.  Janus' s,  Carnaby,  Hunger  ford;  as  alfo 
another,  for  which  a  Patent  was  granted,  May  1740. 
to  be  held  on  Monday,  J¥ednsfday,  and  Friday,  week 
ly,  at  Brook  field  by  May  fair,  in  the  Parifh  of  St 
George  Hanvver  fquare,  for  Meat,  Herbage, 
That  of  lyeftmlnjier  is  newly  built  over  againft  th( 
Abbey. 

At  all  thefe  Markets,  a  Part  is  fet  by  for  a  Fijh 
market,  and  a  Part  for  an  Herb-market ;  notwith 
ftanding  which,  there  are  the  following  particular 
Fifh  and  Herb-markets;  viz. 

Fifh- markets  at  EllUnfgate,  FiMreet-Ull,  and  Old 
ftjb-jlreet. 

Herb-markets,  Covent- garden,  and,  fome  Years 
ago,  Stocks -market^  which  was  removed  to  Fleet  ditch, 
to  make  room  for  the  Manlion-houfo  for  the  Lord- 
Mayor. 

Stocks  market,  when  it  was  in  be'ms;,  was  the  moil 
confiderable  in  the  World,  for  all  forts  of  efculent 
Herbs. 

Ii 


London.    GREAT  BRITAIN. 

It  may  not  be  amifs  to  take  notice  here  of  a  com- 
mon received  Opinion  ;  viz.  that  the  Inhabitants  of 
moft  other  Nations  in  Europe  live  more  on  Herbs 
than  the  Englijh  *,  which  is  certainly  a  great  Mif- 
take ;  for,  if  any  Judgment  can  be  formed  from  the 
^Quantities  fold  in  the  public  Markets,  the  Englijb  con- 
fume  much  more  than  any  other  Country ;  for,  by 
comparing  the  Quantity  fold  in  one  Day  in  any  of  the 
Markets  abroad,  with  what  has  been  fold  in  Stocks - 
market  only,  it  has  been  found,  upon  near  Infpeclion 
for  a  Month,  in  the  beft  Time  of  the  Year,  that 
more  Garden-fluff  has  been  fold  in  one  Day,  than  in 
feven  of  the  greateft  Markets  in  Europe;  and  yet  there 
are  the  following  Market*  in  London  and  the  Suburbs, 
where  great  Quantities  are  fold  by  Wholefale  ;  viz. 
U/hitechape!9  Leaden-ball^  Honey-lane,  Newgate  m-.-.r- 
•ket,  Clare,  Cavent -garden^  Newport^  Bloomjbury^  Hun- 
gerfard,  and  the  Borough  in  Sot/thwart.  The  confiant 
Market-days  in  thefe  Markets  are  three  times  every 
Week  the  whole  Year;  but,  in  the  Summer- feafon, 
the  Gardeners  make  fix  Market-days  in  a  Week, 
whereby  the  Inhabitants  have  a  frefli  Supply  every 
Day  ;  a  Conveniency  which  none  of  the  Markets 
abroad  have. 

At  the  three  Cranes  are  alfo  Markets  for  Cherries, 
Apples,  and  other  Fruits. 

Meal -markets,  at  ghieenhilh,  Hunger ford^  Ditcbfide, 
and  li'hitecrtjs ftrcet. 

Hay- markets,  at  Whitechapel^  Smitbfe!d9  Sbtfb- 
ivark,  the  Haymarket-Jireet,  iP'eJhmnJler^  and  Eloomf- 
-bury. 

Leather- market,  at  Leaden-ball. 

*  The  Occaficn  of  this  Miftake  may  perhaps  he  owing  to  this,  that 
Foreigners  eat  not,  nor  can  afford  to  eat,  fuch  Quantities  of  Fldh  as 
the  Eng/'Jb  QQ  j  and  therefore  often  make  their  whole  Meal  on  Vege« 
tables,  Soup-maigres,  &c.  But  it  is  not  confidered,  that  the  middling 
Families  with  us  about  London  feldom  fit  down  without  Greens  for 
Sauce  to  their  Meat ;  by  which  means  they  devour  as  many  Greens  as 

e  others  generally  do, 

VOL.  II.  H  Hides 


I46  A  T  O  U  R  thro       London. 

Hides  and  Skins,  at  Leaden-ball^  and  Wood's-clofe. 

Coal  markets,  at  Rome-land,  and  Billinfgate. 

Bay-market,  at  Leaden-ball. 
,  Broad-cloth-market,  at  Blackwell-kall. 

The  laft  three  are,  without  Doubt,  the  greateft  in 

the  World  of  thofe  Kinds. There  are  moreover 

Multitudes  of  Coal-merchants,  who  have  Coal  wharfs, 
from  the  Hermitage  one  Way,  to  the  Horfe- ferry 
Wejlmlnjler  another,  which  may  be  deemed  fo  many 
Markets. 

The  great  Market  called  Leaden-hall  (of  which. a 
Spanifo  Ambaffador  laid,  There  was  as  much  Meat 
fold  in  it  in  one  Month,  as  would  fuffice  all  Spain  for 
'a  Year)  contains  three  large  Squares,  every  Square 
having  feveral  Outlets  into  divers  Streets,  and  all  into 
one  another.  The  fiift,  and  chief,  is  called,  the 
Beef -market.  In  this  Square,  every  J'/ednefday,  is 
kept  a  Market  for  raw  Hides,  tanned  Leather,  and 
Shoemakers  Tools  j  and  in  the  Warehoufes,  up  Stairs, 
on  the  Eaft  and  South- fides  of  the  Square,  is  the  great 
Market  for  Colchejhr  Bays. 

The  fecond  Square  is  divided  into  two  Oblongs  :  in 
the  firft  is  the  Fiih  market,  and  in  the  other  a  Market 
for  Country  Higglers,  who  bring  Pork,  Butter,  Eggs, 
Pigs,  Rabbets,  Fowls,  c5V. 

In  the  North  Part  of  the  Fifh- market,  the  Place  be- 
ing too  large  for  the  Fifhmongers  Ufe,  are  the  Stalls 
of  the  Town  Butchers  for  Mutton  and  Veal,  the  be(t 
and  largeft  of  which,  that  England  can  produce,  are  to 
be  bought  there ;  and  the  Eail  Part  is  a  Fleih-market 
for  Country  Butchers. 

The  third  and  laft  Square,  which  is  alfo  very  large, 
is  divided  into  three  Parts:  round  the  Circumference 
is  the  Butter-market,  with  all  the  Sorts  of  Higglery 
Goods,  as  before;  the  South  Part  is  the  Pomtiy- 
market,  and  the  Bacon- market;  and  the  Centre  is 
an  Herb-market.  And  there  have  been,  lately,  fiill 
moie  Conveniences  and  Additions  ma  e  to  this  pro- 

d^z  ous 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 

digious  Market,  which  we  have  not  room  to  particu- 
larize. 

All  the  other  Markets  follow  the  fame  Method,  in 
proportion  to  the  Room  they  have  for  it. 

There  are  two  Corn -markets,  viz.  Mark-lane  and 
^ueenbtth.  In  the  former  the  many  Departments  are 
conveniently  fet  off  in  a  new  Tafte  ;  and  hither  conies 
all  the  vail  Quantity  of  Corn  that  is  brought  into  the 
City  by  Sea,  from  the  Counties  which  lie  commodious 
for  that  Carriage;  and  here  Corn  may  be  faid  not  to 
be  fold  by  Horie- loads,  or  Cart-loads,  but  by  Ship- 
loads ;  and  except  the  Corn-chambers  and  Magazines 
in  Holland,  when  the  Fleets  come  in  from  Dantzlck 
and  England,  the  whole  World  cannot  equal  the 
Quantity  bought  and  fold  here  ;  for  no  Quantity  can 
be  wanted  either  for  Home  Confumption,  or  for  Fo- 
reign Exportation,  but  the  Corn  -factors,  who  are  the 
Managers  of  this  Market,  are  ready  to  fupply  it. 

Othiecnbitb  is  chiefly  for  Malt ;  the  Barley  of  which 
takes  up  the  Ground  of  fo  many  Hundred  thoufand 
Acres  of  Land  in  the  Counties  of  Surry,  Bucks,  Berks, 
Oxford,  Southampton,  and  Wilts,  and  is  called  Weft 
Country  Malt. 

It  is  true,  a  very  great  Quantity  of  Malt,  and  of 
other  Corn  too,  is  brought  to  fome  other  Places  on  the 
River,  and  fo1.'  there;  viz.  to  Milford-lane,  above  the 
Bridge,  and  the  Hermitage,  below  the  Bridge  ;  but 
this  is,  in  general,  a  Branch  of  the  Trade  of  the  other 
Places. 

It  muft  not  be  omitted,  that  Quetnbitb  is  alfo  a  very 
great  Market  for  Meal,  as  well  as  Malt,  and,  per- 
haps, the  greateft  in  England. 

The  Veflels  which  bring  this  Malt  and  Meal  to 
£>uegnbith  are  remarkable  for  Length,  and  the  Bur- 
den they  carry,  and  yet  the  little  Water  they  draw  ; 
for  fome  of  thofe  Barges  carry  above  ipoo  Quarters 
of  Malt  at  a  time,  as  1  have  before  remarked,  anJ  yet 
do  not  draw  two  Feet  of  Water;  and  IOGO  Quarters 

Hz  of 


148  A  T  O  U  R  thro        London. 

of  Malt  muft  be  granted  to  be,  at  leaft  100  Tons 
Burden  ;  and  fome  of thefe  large  Barges  come  as  far 
as  from  /ibington,  which  is  about  150  Miles  from  Lon- 
don, if  we  meafure  by  the  River. 

The  next  Market,  which  is  more  than  ordinary 
remarkable,  is  the  Coal-market  at  Bilinfgate.  This 
is  kept  every  Morning  on  the  broad  Place  juft  at  the 
Head  of  Eilllnf gate -dock,  and  the  Place  is  called  Rome- 
land:  from  what  old  forgotten  Original  it  has  that 
Name,  Hillory  is  filent.  I  need  not  (except  for  the 
fake  of  Strangers)  take  Notice,  that  the  City  of  Lon- 
don, and  Parts  adjacent,  as  alfo  all  the  South  of  Eng- 
land, are  fupplied  with  Coals,  called  therefore  Sca~ 
ctal,  from  Neivcajile  upon  Tine,  and  from  the  Coaft 
of  Durham  and  Northumberland*  This  Trade  is 
edeemed  the  great  Nurfery  of  our  Seamen.  I  fl-nll 
have  Occafion  to  fay  more  of  it  in  my  Account  of  the 
Northern  Parts  of  England.  The  Quantity  of  Coals, 
which,  one  Year  with  another,  are  burnt  and  con- 
fumed  in  and  about  t!  is  City,  is  fuppofed  to  be  about 
500,000  Chalders,  every  Chalder  containing  36  Bu- 
Ihels,  and  generally  weighing  3coo  Weight. 

Moft  of  thefe  Coals  are  bought  and  fold  on  this  little 
Spot  of  Rome-land ;  and  though  fometimes^  efpeciaily 
in  cafe  of  a  War,  or  of  contrary  Wind?,  a  Fleet  from 
500  to  700  Sail  of  Ships  comes  up  th  -  River  at  a 
time,  yet  they  never  want  a  Market.  The  Brokers  of 
thefe  Coals  are  called  Crimps -t  theVefiels  they  load  their 
Ships  with  at  Newcajlle,  Keek  ;  and  the  Ships  that 
bring  them,  Cats,  and  Plags,  or  Hag-boats,  Fl:-boats, 
and  the  like. 

It  muft  be  obferved,  that  as  the  City  of  London  oc- 
cafions  the  Confumption  of  fo  great  a  Quantity  of 
Corn  and  Coals,  fo  the  Meafurement  of  them  i 
dcr  the  Infpeclion  of  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Court  of 
Aldermen,  and  for  the  Direction  of  it,  there  is  al- 
lowed a  certain  Number  of  Corn-meters,  and  Coal- 
miters, 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 

meters,  whofe  Places  are  for  Life,  and  bring  them  in 
a  very  confiderable  Income. 

I  hey  have  abundance  of  poor  Men  employed  under 
them,  who  are  alfo  called  Meters,  and  are,  or  ought 
to  be,  Freemen  of  the  City. 

This  is,  indeed,  a  kind  of  Tax,  as  well  upon  the 
Coals  as  Corn  ;  but  the  Buyer  is  abundantly  recom- 
penfed,  by  being  afcertained  in  his  Meafure  j  for  the 
fv/orn  Meters  are  fo  placed  between  the  Buver  and  the 
Seller,  and  have  fo  many  Eyes  upon  them  (being  be- 
fides  Men  of  Character),  that  there  is  hardly  ever  any 
room  for  Complaint  on  this  Head. 

XL  Of  the  public  Schools  and  Libraries,  the 
Britiih  Mufeum,  and  other  Eft  abli foments, 
tending  to  promote  Learning  and  Science. 

'"TPHE  Royal-Society,  in  Crane- court.  Fleet -Jlrcct. 
•*•      The   Royal  Frcefchoil,  founded   by  Queen  Eli- 
zabeth, is  not  outdone  even  by  thofe  of  l^tnt- 
and  Eton,  for  the  excellent  Scholars  it  has  produced, 
and  is  in  a  very  flourifliir.g  Condition. 

St.  Paul's  School,  fouled  by  Dr.  Ca!et,  Dca;i  of 
St.  Paul's^  is  a  fair  Foundation  for  153  Boys,  to  be 
taught  gratis. 

Merchant -Taylors  School  was  founded  by  Sir  Thomas 
White,  Founder  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxen,  for  100 
SchoUrs  to  be  taught  gratis,  100  more  for  Half  a 
Crown,  and  another  100  for  five  Sh.llings  a  Quartf-r  ; 
and  has  46  Fellowfhips  eftablifhed  in  St.  John's  Col- 
lege, for  Scholars  elected  from  this  School. 

Another  excellent  School  was  founded  at  Mercers- 
chapel,  by  that  Company. 

To  fay  nothing  of  the  noble  Foundation  of  the  Cbctf- 
ter-bauj'e,  mentioned  before,  and  of  upwards  of  70 
Crwity-fchools,  upheld  by  the  benevolent  Contribu- 
tions of  charitable  Perfons  j  nor  of  the  Mathematical 

H  3  and 


1 50  A  T  O  U  R  thro        London. 

and  other  Schools  at  Ckrijl's  Hofpital;  nor  of  the 
Libraries  of  the  Temple  and  other  inns  of  Court,  that 
of  Ca  file-yard,  near  the  Mews,  &c. 

In  Redcrofs-Jireet,  near  Cripplegate,  an  handfome 
Building  was  ere&ed  An.  1727.  by  the4ate  Dr.  Da- 
me!  Williams,  a  Difienting  Teacher,  for  a  public  Li- 
brary for  the  Ufe  of  the  Difienting  Minifters  of  Lon- 
don. 

The  Profeffors  of  the  College  founded  by  Sir  Tho- 
mas Grejham,  in  Bijbopfgatt-ftrett)  1581.  who  read 
Le&ures  at  three  o'clock  every  Afternoon  during 
Term-time,  in  Divinity,  Aftronomy,  Geometry,  Rhe- 
tor ick,  Phyfic,  Mufic, 

The  Antiquary  Society,  incorporated  Nov.  2%  1751. 
Their  Anniverfary,  St.  George's  day  ;  Place  of  Meet- 
ing, Chancery-  lane. 

The  Society  for  promoting  Cbrtftian  Knowlege, 
l6.j8.  Hatt  en-Gar  den,  Holborn.  It  overfees  all  the 
Chanty  fchoolsjdiftributes religious  Books  and  Trails, 
and  fupports  the  Froteftant  Mifiion  in  the  E  aft -Indus, 
jointly  with  the  King  of  Denmark. 

The  Society  for  propagating  the  Gofpel  in  Foreign 
Parts,  incorporated  by  Charter  1701.  meets  at  St. 
Martins  Library,  near  the  Mews,  Channg-crofs, 
The  Members  are  Truftees  for  Godrington  College  in 
Cambridge.  The  Rev.  Dr.  Edward  Ymng  of  ff^ell- 
ivyn,  Hertford/hire^  generoufly  gave  1000  Guineas 
for  promoting  its  worthy  Ends. 

The  Library  at  Sion-College,  London-wall,  founded 
by  Thomas  White,  D.  D.  1623.  and  incorporated  by 
King  Charles  II. 

Society  for  the  Encouragement  of  Arts,  Manufac- 
tures, and  Commerce,  inftituted  1753.  A  moft  lauda- 
ble and  profperous  Inftitution, 

The  valuable  Collection,  called  the  Cotton  Library, 

is  fo  well  known,  that  we  (hall  only  further  mention 

the  great  Difafler  that  beftl  it  in  the  Year  1731.  when 

•  a  Fire  happened,  which  burnt  and  defaced   a  great 

Number 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  151 

Number  of  valuable  Manufcripts.  But  moft  happily 
it  was  difcovered  and  extihguifhed,  before  it  made  ia 
great  a  Deftru£Hor;  as  was  at  firft  apprehended. 

The  Eritijh  Mufeum^  which  condfts  of  Sir  flans 
Sloanis  famous  Colle&ion  of  Curiofities  and  Natural 
Produ&ions  ;  his  Library  of  printed  Books  ;  his  Ma- 
nufcripts; all  together  coding  him  more  than  50,000 /. 
which  he  directed  to  be  offered  to  the  Parliament  for 
20,0:0  /.  and  was  accepted  on  thefe  Terms :  The  Got- 
ten Library  being  joined  to  it,  the  Whole  required  ib 
much  room,  that  Montagu-houfe  in  Bloojnjbury^  a  very 
noble  and  roomy  Maniion,  was  purchafed,  as  a  fit  Re- 
pofitory  for  fo  valuable  a  Treafure.  Another  famous 
Library  of  printed  Books  and  MSS.  have  been  a!fo 
purchafed  by  the  Public,  and  added  to  the  above,  col- 
lected by  the  late  Earl  of  Oxford,  called  The  Harhian 
Library. 

The  Names  and  Numbers  of  the  feveral  Things 
contained  in  Sir  Ham  Shane's  Collection,  only,  are 
"  as  follow  : 

1.  The  Library,  which,  including  about  347  Vols. 
of  Drawings  and   illuminated  Books,  35:6  Vols.  of 
MSS.  together  with  the  Books  of  Prints,  coniifis  of 
about  50,000  Vols. 

2.  Medals. 

3.  Seals,  &£.  268. 

4.  Camea's,  Intaglia's,  c«f*.  about  700. 

5.  Precious  Stones,  Agates,  Jafpers,  (5V.  2256. 

6.  VeiTels,  &c.  of  Agates,  Jafpers,  fcfV.  542. 

7.  Cryttals,  Spars,  &c.   1864. 
S^Foffils,  Flints,  Stones,  c3V.  1275. 
9.  Metals,  Mineral  Ores,  c-ff.  2725. 
jo.   Earths,  Sands,  Salts,  &c.  1035. 

11.  Bitumens,  Sulphurs,  Ambers,  Ambergris,  (5V. 

399- 

12.  Pales,  Mic*,  388. 

13.  Teftacea,  or  Shells,  5848. 

14.  Corals,  Sponges,  cjff.  1421. 

H  4  15. 


152  ^  TOUR  AW       London, 

15.  Echini,  Echinites,  &c.  659. 

26.  Afteriae,  Trochi,  Entrochi,  &c.  241. 

37.  Crulracea,  or  Crabs,  &c.  368. 

18.  Stellse  marinre,  &c.  178. 

19.  Fifties,  and  their  Parts,  1555. 

20.  Birds,  and  their  Parts ;    Eggs,    and  Nefis  of 
different  Species,   1172. 

21.  Vipers,  Serpents,  &c.  521. 

22.  Quadrupedes,  &c.  1886. 

23.  Infers,  5439. 

-  24.  Humana,  as  calculi,  anatomical  Preparations, 
&c.  756. 

25.  Vegetables,  as  Seeds,  Gums,  Woods,  Roots, 
&'c.  12,506. 

26.  Hortus  ficcus,  or  Vols.  of  dry'd  Plants,  334. 

27.  Miscellaneous  Things,  natural,  &c.  2^3. 

28.  Pictures  and  Drawings,  &c»  fram'd,  301. 
29-  Mathematical  Inftrume«ts,  55. 

All  the  above  Particulars  are  entered  and  number- 
el,  with  fhort  Accounts  of  them,  and  References  of 
itveral  Writers,  who  have  hitherto  wrote  about  them 
ir-  38  Vols.  in  folio,  and  Eight  in  quarto. 

It  is  certain,  that  a  Treafure  like  to  this,  exclufive 
of  the  adding  the  King's  and  the  Harleian  Libraries, 
was  never  before  amaSed  together :  Nor  can  fuch  an 
cme  ever  be  compiled  again,  unlefs  fuch  another  al- 
mod  miraculous  Combination  of  Caufes,  fliould  ap- 
pear to  give  it  Origin  :  unlefs  Providence  again  fhould 
join  together  in  one  mortal  Being  fo  much  true 
Knowlege,'and  fo  great  Benevolence  ;  fuch  Talents, 
and  fuch  AiHuence  of  Fortune  ;  and  fhould  again  ex- 
tend the  Life  of  him,  who  was  poflefied  of  them,  al- 
moft  to  the  Age  of  a  Patriarch. 
^  The  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury,  the  Lord  High 
Chancellor,  and  the  Speaker  of  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons, have  the  Nomination  of  all  the  Officers,  Af- 
fiftants,  and  Servants,  in  the  Mufeum. 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  15-3 

Feb.  23,  1756.  A  Committee  of  the  Truflees  of 
the  Britljh  Mufeum  waited  on  the  Executors  of  the 
late  Colonel  Lethieidlier,  to  return  Thanks  for  the  va- 
luable Legacy  left  to  the  Public  by  that  Gentleman  ; 
being  a  fine  Mummy,  and  a  curious  Collection  of 
Egyptian  Antiquities.  On  this  Occafion,/V/£ Lethleul- 
//cr,  Efq;  Nephew  to  the  Colonel,  prefented  them 
with  feveral  Antiquities,  which  he  himfelf  had  col- 
Jecled,  during  his  Refidence  at  Grand  Cairo ,  and  as 
an  Addition  to  the  Cotton'ian  Library,  Mrs.  Maddox^ 
Relict  to  the  late  Mr.  Maddox^  Hiftoriographer  Royal, 
left  by  her  Will  her  Hufband's  large  and  valuable 
ColledHon  of  MSS.  which  had  engaged  his  Attention 
for  many  Years  ;  and  which  are  faid  to  afford  Mate- 
terials  for  a  complete  Hiftory  of  Tenures,  which  is 
much  wanted. 

His  Majefty,  in  the  Year  1757.  was  gracioufly 
plcafed  to  prefent  to  the  Briti/h  Mufeum,  that  fine 
Collection  of  Books  and  MSS.  commonly  known  by 
the  Name  of  "The  Kings  Library,  which  was  founded 
by  Henry,  Prince  of  IVales,  eldeft  Son  of  King  James 
I.  amounting  to  about  10,200,  and  the  Manufcripts 
to  about  1800 ;  which  till  the  Fire  that  happened  Oft. 
13,  1731.  were  kept  in  the  fame  Houfe  with  The  Cot- 
tan  Library  ;  on  which  Occafion  they  were  removed 
to  the  old  Dormitory  Wejlminfler^  and  now  to  the 
Mitfettm. 

Xlf.  Of  the  Shipping  in  the  Thames,  and  the 
Trade  carry9 d  on  by  means  of  that  noble  River. 

ITI  H  E  whole  River,  from  London-bridge  to  Black- 
•*•  wall,  is  one  great  Arfenal  :  nothing  in  the 
World  is  like  it.  The  great  Building-yards  at  'Scbe- 
da-ni  near  Amjlerdam  are  faid  to  outdo  it  in  the  Num- 
ber of  Ships  which  are  built  there  ;  and  they  teil  us, 
that  there  are  more  Ships  generally  feen  at  Arnfterddm% 
than  ia  the  Thames. 

H  5  I  will 


j^  A  T  O  U  R  .tiro        London. 

I  will  not  fay,  but  that  there  may  be  more  Vefkls 
built  at  Scbcdam,  and  the  Parts  adjacent,  than  in  the 
River  Thames  ;  but  then  it  muft  be  obferved, 

1.  That  the  Englijh  build   for  themfelves  princi- 
pally, the  Dutch  for  all  the  World. 

2.  That   almoft  all  the  Ships  the  Dutch  have  are 
built  there,  whereas  not  one  fifth  Part  of  our  Ship- 
ping is  built  in  the  Tbames. 

3.  That  we  fee  more  VefTels  in  lefs  Room  at  A  in- 
fer dam  \    but,    fetting  afide  their  Hoys,   Bilanders, 

and  Sellouts,  which  are  in  great  Numbers  always 
there,  being  Vcflels  peculiar  to  their  Inland  and  Coaft- 
ing  Navigation,  you  do  not  fee  more,  nor  near  fj 
many  Ships  of  Force  at  Amflffdam,  as  at  London. 

That  Part  of  the  River  Thames,  which  is  properly 
the  Harbour,  and  where  the  Ships  ufually  deliver,  or 
unload  the  Cargoes,  is  called  the  Pool;  and  begins  at 
the  Turning  of  the  River  out  of  Limehoufe  Reach  ^  and 
extends  to  the  Cujlom  -houfe  Quay.  In  this  Compafs 
I  have  had  the  Curiofity  to  count  the  Ships  as  well  as 
I  could,  en  paj/ant  j  and  have  found  above  2COO  Sail 
of  all  Sorts,  not  reckoning  Barges,  Lighters,  or  Plea- 
fure-boats,  and  Yachts  j  but  of  Vcflels  that  really  go 
to  Sea. 

It  is  true,  the  River,  or  Pool,  feemed  at  that  time 
to  be  pretty  full  of  Ships ;  as  alfo  that  1  included  the 
Ships  which  lay  in  Deptford  and  Elackwcll  Reaches, 
and  in  the  Wet  Docks ;  but  then  I  did  not  include 
the  Men  of  War  at  theKing's-yard,  and  at  the  Wet 
Dock  at  Deptfird,  which  were  not  a  few. 

In  the  River  there  are,  from  Battle  bridge,  on  the 
Southwark  Side  ;   and   the  Hermitage  bridge,  on  the 
City  Side  ;  reckoning  to  Blackwall,  incluiive  ; 
Several  Wet  Docks  for  laying  up  ^  Mer- 

Between  20  and  30  Dry  Docks  for  repairing  >  chant- 
Between  20  and  30  Yards  for  building          )  Ships. 
Including  the  Buildings  of  Lighters,  Hoys,  &c.  but 

excluding 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 

excluding  all  Boat-Builders,  Wherry-builders  j  and, 
above  Bridge,  Barge- builders. 

To  enter  into  any  Defcription  of  the  great  Maga- 
zines of  all  manner  of  Naval  Stores,  for  the  furnilh- 
ing  thofe  Builders,  would  be  endlefs. 

XIII.  Of  tbe  Manner  by  which  the  City  is  fup- 
ply'd  with  Water. 

O  City  in  the  World  is  fo  well  furniftied  with 
Water  as  London^  for  the  neceflary  Occafions 
there,  as  well  as  for  the  Extinguilhing  of  Fires,  when 
they  happen. 

1.  By  the  great  Convenience  of  Water,  which  be- 
ing every-where  laid  in  the  Streets  in  large  Timber 
Pipes,  as  well  from  the  Thames  as  the  New  River , 
thofe  Pipes  are  furnifhed  with  a  Fire-plug,  of  which 
the  Parish-Officers  have  the  Key  ;  and  when  opened, 
let  out,  not  a  Pipe,  but,  as  one  may  fay,   a  River  of 
WTater  into  the  Streets;  fo  that  making  but  a  Dam  in 
the  Channel,  the  whole  Street  is  immediately  under 
Water  to  fupply  the  Engines. 

2.  By  the  great  Number  of  admirable  Engines,  of 
which  almoft  every  Parifh  has  one,  and  fome  Halls 
alib,  and  feveral  private  Citizens,  have  them  of  their 
own  ;  fo  that  no  fooner  does  a  Fire  break  out,  but  the 
Houfe  is  immediately  furrounded  with  Engines,  and 
a  Flood  of  Water  poured  upon  it,  till  it  is  extinguifii- 
ed. 

3.  The  feveral  Infurance  Offices,  of  which  I  have 
fpoke  in  Article  III.  have  each  of  them  a  certain  Set 
of  Men,  whom  they  keep  in  conftant  Pay,  and  furnifh 
with  Tools  proper  for  their  Work,  and  to  whom  they 
give  Jack  Caps  of  Leather,  able  to  keep  them  from 

*  Hurt,  if  Brick  or  Timber,  or  any  thing  not  of  too 
great  a  Bulk,  fhould  fall  upon  them.  Thefe  Men, 
whom  they  call  Firemen,  make  it  their  Bufmefs  to  be 
ready  at  Call,  all  Hours,  to  aflift  in  cafe  of  Fire ; 

H  6  and 


London. 

and  it  muft  be  acknowleged,  they  are  very  dextrous, 
bold,  diligent,  and  fuccefsful. 

There  are  two  great  Engines  for  the  railing  the 
Thames  Water,  one  at  the  Bridge,  and  the  other  near 
Brokeri-wbdrf. 

However,  the  New  River,  which  is  brought  by  an 
artificial  Stream  from  Ware,  continues  to  Supply  the 
greater  Part  of  the  City.  Of  this  River  I  fhall  take 
farther  Notice  in  my  Defcription  of  Hertfordjhire^ 
where  it  takes  its  Rife. 

The  Che'fea  Waterworks,  as  they  are  called,  are 
alfo  of  no  fmall  Ufe  for  the  new  Buildings  at  that  End 
of  the  Town.  There  is  a  noble  Cut  (which  is  a  large, 
tho'  not  long,  River  of  itfelf)  from  th£{T&rfft*s  to  near 
Buckingham  Hoitfe  Garden- wall,  where  are  two  En* 
gines  which  work  by  Fire  alternately  for  railing  the 
Water  into  large  Iron  Pipes,  through  which  it  is  con- 
vevcd  to  a  great  Refervorr  of  Water  in  Hyde  par ky 
to  anfwer  the  above  Purpofe. 

Shadwell  Waterworks  fupply  the  Eaftern  Parts  be- 
yond the  Tower  j  and  there  are  lately  Waterworks  at 
Bow. 

Formerly  there  were  feveral  beautiful  Conduits  in 
London,  the  Water  of  which  was  very  fweet  and  good, 
and  brought  to  them  at  a  vaft  Expence  from  feveral 
diftant  Springs,  in  large  Leaden  Pipes :  fome  of  thefe 
were  rebuilt  fince  the  Fire ;  but  now  the  City  is  fa 
well  fupplied  with  Water,  that  they  are  either  quite 
demoliftied,  or  intirely  out  of  Ufe.  That  in  Cheaffide 
was  the  laft  pull'd  down  ;  and  a  Statue  propofed  to  be 
built  in  its  Place,  hi  Honour  of  the  great  King  JVi'dtam 
III.  and  it  muft  be  owned,  that  it  is  one  of  the  moft 
commodious  Places  for  fuch  a  Purpofe  in  the  whole 
City.  But  it  being  fet  on  Foot,  as  fome  thought,  by 
Party  on  one  Side,  was  rejected,  from  far  Icfs  Jauda- 
Lle  Motives,  by  Party  on  the  other. 

XIV.  Of 


ondon.     GREAT  BRITAIN. 


XIV.  Of  the  Chriftenings  and  Burials  in  Lon- 
don, &V.  Of  the  Importance  of  the  City  of 
London  to  the  whole  Kingdom.  Of  its  com- 
parative Proportion  to  the  public  Expence  of 
the  Kingdom^  and  the  difproportionate  Num- 
ber of  Members  it  returns  to  Parliament. 

LET  us  now  mention  fomething  briefly  in  relation 
to  the  yearly  Births  and  Burials  of  this  extended 
City  :  from  an  Account  of  which  Sir  William  Petty 
thought  he  might  make  fome  Calculations  of  the  Num- 
:   hers  of  the  Inhabitants.    And  I  (hall  only  take  Notice, 
\  that  whereas  the  general  Number  of  the  Burials  in  the 
\Year  1666.  and  farther  back,  were  from  17,000  to 
» 19,000  in  a  Year,  the  yearly  Bill  for  the  Year  1759. 
Amounted  as  follows : 

Vhriftened  —  —  —-  —  14,2.53 
TSuried  —  —  — -?  —  —  19,604 
Here  is  to  be  obferved,  that  the  Number  of  Burials 
exceeding  fo  much  the  Number  of  Births,  is,  becaufe 
as  it  is  not  the  Number  born,  but  the  Number  chri- 
ftened,  that  are  fet  down,  which  is  taken  from  the 
Parifli  Regifter  ;  fo  all  the  Children  of  Diflenters  of 
every  Sort,  Proteftant>  Poptfo^  and  Jewi/k^  are  omit- 
ted, alfo  all  the  Children  of  Foreigners,  French?  Dutch, 
&c.  which  are  baptised  in  their  own  Churches,  and  all 
the  Children  of  thofe  who  are  fo  poor,  that  they  can- 
not get  them  regiftred  :  fo  that  if  a  due  Eftimate  be 
made,  the  Births  may  be  well  fuppofsd  very  much  to 
exceed  the  Burials. 

London  returns  four  Members  to  Parliament,  Weft- 
minfter  two ;  thefe  fix,  with  two  for  the  County  of 
Middlefex^  make  eight,  is  all  that  this  exceeding  po- 
pulous County  returns,  although  every  fingle  Ward 
in  London  is  far  fuperior  to  molt  of  the  Boroughs  in 
England,  and  really  to  many  of  the  greater  Towns, 

that 


if 8  'A  TVO  U  R  thrf       London. 

that  are  reprefented  by  two  Members,  and  contributes 
infinitely  more  to  the  public  Charge  :  and,  indeed, 
one  may  afk,  What  are  the  greateft  Part  of  the  Bo- 
roughs in  the  County  of  Cornwall,  and  many  in  that 
of  Devon)  which  two  Counties  alone  return  70  Mem- 
bers, compared  to  20  populous  Villages  one  might 
name  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  London  ?  Some  of 
which,  no  doubt,  would  be  confidered,  were  a  new 
Repartition  of  this  kind  practicable,  and  many  of  thofe 
petty  Boroughs  be  obliged  to  give  them  up. 

The  following  Scheme,  tho'  calculated  before  the 
t//7/V#,and  confequently  before  the  45  Members,  which 
reprefent  North  Britain^  were  added  to  the  513,  re- 
turned for  England  and  Waks,  will  fet  this  Matter  ia 
a  ftill  clearer  Light. 


A  Scheme 


London.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  159 

A  SCHEME  of  the  Proportions  the  feveral  Counties 

in  England  paid  to  the  three  Shillings  A  I  D,   1699.  compared  with 
the  Number  of  Members  they  fend  to  Parliament. 

In  this  Scheme  the  Proportions  are  thus  confidared  ;  viz.  That  as  the 
whole  Kingdom  fends  513  Members  to  Parliament  j-fo  the  whole  Tax 
is  divided  into  513  equal  Parts. 

f  r.  Shews  the  Name  of  the  County. 
Column  •?  2.  How  many  Parts  cf  the  513  each  County  paid. 

C  3.  How  many  Members  of  the  513  each  County  fends. 


COUNTIES.        P.   M.          COUNTIES.         P.     M. 

B.-dford, 

7 

4 

Monmouth, 

3 

3 

B.rks, 

10 

9 

Norf)lk, 

22 

12 

Bucks, 

12 

T4 

Notthampton, 

12 

9 

Cim  bridge, 

9 

6 

*  Northumberland, 

4 

8 

Chefter, 

7 

4 

Nottingham, 

y 

8 

Cornwall, 

3 

14 

Oxon,                  , 

1C 

9 

Cumberland, 

j 

6 

Rutland, 

2, 

2 

)etbjr, 

6 

4 

Salop, 

7 

12 

Devon, 

21 

2& 

Somerfst, 

J9 

18 

Dorfet, 

9 

20 

*  Southampton, 

i4 

26 

Durham, 

3 

4 

Staftord, 

10 

EfTVxj 

24 

8 

Suffolk, 

20 

16 

Gloucester, 

12 

8 

Surry, 

18 

J4 

Hereford, 

5 

8 

Suflex, 

16 

23 

Hertford, 

ii 

6 

Warwick, 

10 

6 

Huntingdon, 

4 

4 

*  Weftmoreland, 

i 

4 

Kent, 

2i 

18 

*  Wilts, 

J3 

34 

*  Lancafter, 

5 

M 

Worcefler, 

9 

9 

Leicefter, 

9 

4 

*  York, 

24 

3° 

Lincoln, 

19 

12 

Wales, 

T  I 

24 

Middlefex, 

8c 

8 

All  England  and  Wales, 

SJ3 

S«"3 

Note,  That  the  Proportion  of  the  Six  Northern,  and  Five      P.      M. 

Wtftern  Counties,  marked  thus,  *,  are         .         .         .        103     216 

And  that  Middlefex  and  EJjex  are         ....         104       i& 

N.  B.  Cities  are  included  in  their  refpeclive  Counties. 

XV.  The  Benefit  to  the  Public  of  a  good  Under- 
ftanding  between  the  COURT  and  CITY. 

T7  A  V  I  N  G  fnewn  the  Grandeur  and  Importance 
A  A  of  this  great  Metropolis,  it  remains  only  to  ob- 
ferve,  How  neceffary  it  is  for  the  Good  pf  the  whole 
Kingdom,  that  there  fhould  be  a  right  Underftanding 
cultivated  between  the  Adminifttraion  and  that.  For, 

There 


i6o  A  T  O  U  R  thro       London. 

There  has  formerly  been  a  great  Emulation  between 
the  Court-end  of  the  Town,  and  the  City  \  and  it  was 
ferioufly  propofed  in  &  certain  Reign,  how  the  Court 
{hould  humble  the  City;  nor  was  it  an  impracticable 
Thing  at  that  time,  had  the  pernicious  Scheme  been 
carried  on.  Indeed  it  was  carried  further  than  confifted 
with  the  Prudence  of  a  good  Government,  or  of  a  wife 
People  ;  for  the  Court  envy'd  the  City's  Riches,  and  the 
Citizens  were  ever  jealous  of  the  Court's  Defigns.  The 
moft  fatal  Steps  the  Court  tools,  at  that  time  to  humble 
the  City,  were,  i.  The  (hutting  up  the  Exchequer  : 
And,  2.  The  bringing  a  £>uo  Warrants  againft  their 
Charter.  But  thefe  Things  can  but  be  touch'd  at  here. 
The  City  has  outlived  it  411 :  and  both  the  Attempts 
turned  to  theDifcredit  of  the  Party  who  pufhed  them  on. 
The  City  is,  indeed,  and  at  all  times  rhuft  be,  fo  ne- 
ceffary  to  the  Court,  that  no  prudent  Adminiftration 
will  ever  feek  Occafions  for  Mifunderftandingswith  it; 
but  will,  if  not  infatuated,  do  all  in  its  Power  to  en- 
courage and  increafe  the  Opulence  of  the  City,  which, 
upon  an}-  Emergency,  will  be  able  and  willing,  if  not 
difobliged,  to  fupport  the  Court,  and  furnifh  Means  to 
protect  the  Kingdom,  againft  either  Foreign  or  Do- 
meftic  Enemies. 

Here  at  the  Clofe  of  our  Account  of  this  famous 
Metropolis,  it  will  not  be  ami's  to  take  Notice  that 
anA6l  palled  in  theSeflions  of  Parliament  1759.  1760. 
intitled,  An  Aft  for  widening  certain  Streets,  Lanes, 
and  Pajfages,  within  the  City  of  London,  av.d  Liber- 
ties thereof  \  and  for  opening  certain  new  Streets  and 
Ways  within  the  fame  ;  and  for  other  Purpcfes  therein 
mentioned.  To  which  it  will  be  very  proper  to  attend 
in  the  next  Edition  of  this  Work ;  when  the  A& 
juft  mentioned  will  moft  probably  be  carried  into 
Execution. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  humble  Servant. 

» 

LET- 


Middx.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  161 


LETTER       III. 

Containing  a  Defcriplion  of  Part  of  MIDDLE- 
s  E  x  -,  and  of  tbe  whole  County  of  H  E  R  T- 
FOR  D. 

S  /  R, 

THE  Villages  round  Lohdsn  partake  of  the  Influ- 
ence of  London,  as  I  have  taken  notice  in  the 
Counties  of  Ejfex,  Kent,  and  Surry. 

Hackney  and  Bromley  are  the  firrV  Villages  which 
begin  the  County  of  Mtddlefexj  Eaft  j  for  Bow,  as 
reckoned  to  Stepney >  is  a  Part  of  the  great  Mafs.  This 
Town  of  Hackney  is  of  large  Extent,  containing  no 
lefs  than  twelve  Hamlets,  .or  feparate  Villages,  tho* 
fome  of  them  now  join  ;  viz. 


Church  Jlreet, 
Homerton^ 

Wyck  houfe^ 
Grove-Jireet) 

Clapton, 
Mare-/lreet9 
Mell-^reet, 
Cambridge  •  heath. 

Shackkwilly 
Dal/ion, 
Kingsland^ 
Newington. 

All  thefe,  tho'  fome  of  them  are  very  large  Villages, 
make  up  but  one  Parifli,  and  are,  within  a  few 
Years,  fo  increafed  in  Buildings,  and  fo  well  inhabited, 
that  there  is  no  Comparifon  to  be  made  between  their 
prefent  and  former  State  ;  every  feparate  Hamlef,  being 
increafed,  and  fome  of  them  more  than  trebly  bigger 
than  formerly  they  were. 

Hackney  is  fo  remarkable  for  the  Retreat  of  wealthy 
Citizens,  that  there  are,  at  this  time,  near  an  hundred 
Coaches  kept  in  it. 

Newington,  Tottenham,  Edmonton^  and  Endfield,  ftand 
all  in  a  Line  North  from  the  City.  The  Increafe  of 

Buildings 


1 6  2  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Middx. 

Buildings  is  fo  great  in  them  all,  that  they  feem,  to  a 
Traveller,  to  be  one  continued  Street ;  efpecially  Tot- 
tenham and  Edmonton ;  and  in  them  all,  the  new  Build- 
ings fo  far  exceed  the  old,  efpecially  in  their  Value, 
antl  the  Figure  of  the  Inhabitants,  that  the  P'afhion  of 
the  Town  is  quite  altered. 

At  Tottenham  we  fee  the  Remains  of  an  antient 
Building  called  .the  Crofs,  from  which  the  Town  takes 
the  Name  of  High-Croft. 

Hlghgate  and  Hamjtcad  are  next  on  the  North-fide. 
As  the  Country  does  not  extend  far  this  Way,  I  take 
no  notice  of  fmaller  Towns ;  nor  is  there  any  thing  of 
Note  but  Citizens  Houfes  for  feveral  Miles  ;  except 
the  Chace,  at  Endfeld^  which  was  indeed  a  beautiful 
Place,  when  King  James  I.  refided  at  Theobalds,  for 
the  Pleafure  of  his  Hunting;  and  was  then  very  full  of 
Deer,  and  all  forts  of  Game;  but  it  has  fuflered  feve- 
ral Depredations  fince  that,  and  particularly  in  the 
Times  of  Ufurpation,  when  it  was  ftript  both  of  Game 
and  Timber,  and  lett  put  in  Farms  to  Tenants  for  the 
Ufe  of  the  Public. 

After  the  Reftoration  it  was  laid  open  again  ;  Woods 
and  Groves  were  every-where  planted,  and  the  whole 
Chace  ftored  with  Deer :  but  it  is  not,  nor  perhaps 
ever  will  be,  what  it  was. 

Hamftead  is  rifen  from  a  little  Village,  aloicft  to  a 
City.  " 

The  Heath  extends  about  a  Mile  every  Way,  and 
affords  a  moft  beautiful  Profpe-5* ;  for  we  fee  here  Han- 
flip  Steeple  one  way,  which  is  within  eight  Miles  of 
Northampton.  N.  W.  to  Landown-hill  in  Effex^  another 
Way  Eaft,  at  leaft  66  Miles  from  ore  another.  The 
Profpedt  to  London,  and  beyond  it  to  Pan'iead  downs^ 
S.outh;  Shooters-bill)  South  eaft  ;  Red  bill,  South- 
weft,  and  lyindfor-caftle,  Weft  ;  is  alfo  uninterrupted. 
Indeed,  due  North,  we  fee  no  farther  than  to  Barnet^ 
which  is  not  above  fix  Miles  from  it. 

Eefides  the  Long  Room  at  Hamflead,  in  which  the 
Company  meet  publicly  on  a  Monday  Evening  to  play 

at 


Middx.       GREAT  BRITAIN".         -  163 

at  Cards,  &c.  the  Matter  of  that  built  an  Afiem- 
bly-room  60  Feet  long,  and  30  wide,  elegantly  de- 
corated. Every  one  who  does  not  finfcribe  pays  half 
a  Crown  for  Admittance.  Every  Gentleman  who 
fubfcribes  a  Guinea  for  the  Seafon,  has  a  Ticket  for 
bimfelf,  and  for  two  Ladies.  Gentlemen  and  Ladies, 
who  lodge  in  the  Town,  are  entertained  every  Sunday 
for  6  d,  each,  with  Tea  and  Coffee  ;  but  .with  no 
other  Amufemems,  but  v/hat  they  find  out  for  one 
another,  and  from  one  another. 

I  could  not  be  at  Hamjiead  without  making  an  Ex- 
curfion  to  Edgware^  a  little  Market-town,  on  the 
Road  to  St.  Albarfs ;  for  'tis  certain,  that  this  was  for- 
merly the  main  Road  from  London  to  St.Atbarfs,  being 
the  famous  high  Road  called  Watlingftreet^  which 
reached  from  London  to  Shrew/bury}  and  on  towards 
Waks, 

Near  this  Town,  the  late  Duke  of  Chamlois  built 
one  of  the  mod  magnificent  Palaces  in  England,  with 
a  Profufion  of  Expence,  and  fo  well  furnilhed  with- 
in, that  it  had  hardly  its  Equal  in  England.  The 
Plaftering  and  Gilding  were  done  by  the  famous  Pur- 
gottiy  an  Italian.  Tne  great  Salon  or  Hall  was  painted 
by  Paolucd.  The  Pillars  fupporting  the  Building 
were  all  of  Marble  :  the  great  Staircafe  was  ex- 
tremely fine  ;  and  the  Steps  were  all  of  Marble,  every 
Step  being  of  one  whole  Piece,  about  22  Feet  in 
Length. 

The  Avenue  was  fpacious  and  majeftic,  and  as  it 
gave  you  the  View  of  two  Front*,  join'd,  as  it  were, 
in  one,  the  Diftance  not  admitting  you  to  fee  the" 
Angle,  which  was  in  the  Centre  ;  fo  you  were  agree- 
ably drawn  in,  to  think  the  Front  of  the  Houfe  aimoii 
twice  as  large  as  it  was. 

And  yet,  when  you  came  nearer,  you  were  again 
furprifed,  by  feeing  the  winding  Paflage  opening,  as  it 
were,  a  new  Front  to  the  Eye,  of  near  120  Feet 
wide,  which  you  had  not  feea  before  j  fo  that  you 

were 


1 64  A  TOUR  tbro          Middx. 

were  loft  awhile  in  looking  near  at  hand  for  what  you 
fo  plainly  faw  a  great  Way  off. 

The  Gardens  were  well  defigned,  and  had  a  vaft 
Variety  in  them,  and  the  Canals  were  large  and  no- 
ble. 

The  Chapel  was  a  Singularity,  both  in  its  Building 
and  the  Beauty  of  its  Workmanmip  ;  and  the  late 
Duke,  at  one  time,  maintained  there  a  full  Choir, 
and  had  the  Worfhip  performed  with  the  beft  Muiic, 
after  the  Manner  of  the  Chapel  Royal. 

Sorry  I  am,  that  I  am  obliged  to  fay,  that  all  thefe 
Beauties  were,  inftead  of  are.  But  fuch  is  the  Fate  of 
fublunary  Things,  that  all  this  Grandeur  is  already  at 
an  End  !  The  furniture  and  Curiofities  have  been 
brought  to  public  Auction  ;  and  this  fuperb  Edifice  is 
quite  demolifhed.  The  fhorteft  Duration  that  perhaps 
ever  great  Houfe  had,  where  the  PofieiTor  fell  n.  t 
under  the  public  Cenfuce,  or  by  the  Malignity  of 
powerful  Enemies,  making  him  a  Sacrifice  to  the 
Paflions  of  a  Prince,  as  has  been  the  Cafe  in  lefs  happy 
Governments  than  the  Britifu.  .We  Ciail  not  enter 
into  the  Caufes  of  this  unhappy  Cataftrophe.  But  if 
\ve  did,  it  would  appear,  that  the  Great  Founder  w.is 
more  to  be  pitied,  and  even  admired,  than  blamed, 
having  flood  in  the  Gap  to  prevent,  as  he  hoped,  a 
more  general  Ruin  to  a  Society  which  he  was  at  the 
Head  of:  but  which  could  only  be  poftponed,  and  not 
prevented,  and  fwallowed  up  the  Fortune  of  one  of 
the  mod  munificent  and  princely-fpirited  Noblemen 
that  ever  adorned  this  Nation. 

The  Fields  between  London  and  this  Place  are  con- 
ftantly  kept  in  Grafs,  there  being  fcarce  any  arable 
Land  intervening  ;  and  it  is  chiefly  from  hence  that 
London  is  fupplied  with  Hay  ;  fo  that  it  is  no  uncom- 
mon thing,  to  fee  i  oo  Loads  of  Hay  go  up  to  London 
on  a  iMarket-day,  and  each  of  thefe  Teams  bring 
back  a  Load  of  Dung  for  drefling  the  Land  ;  which 
preserves  the  Ground  in  good  Heart >  as  it  is  termed  by 

the 


Middx.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  165 

the  Farmer ;  and  thereby  it  produces  conftantly  good 
Crops. 

Two  Miles  from  Edgware,  we  go  up  a  fmaller 
Afcent  by  the  greater  Road  ;  when  leaving  the  Street- 
way  on  the  Right,  we  enter  a  fpacious  Common  call- 
ed Bn/by  heath,  where  again  we  have  a  very  agree- 
able Profpec"r.     On  the  Right-hand,  we  have  in  View 
the  Town  of  St.  Atbans  ;  and  all  the  Spaces  between, 
and  farther  beyond  it,  look  like  a  Garden.     The  in- 
clofcd  Corn-fields    make   one    grand   Parterre  ;    the 
thick-planted  Hedge-rows  feem  like  a  Wildernefs  or 
Labyrinth;  the  Villages  interfperfed  look  like  fo  many 
feveral  noble  Seats  of  Gentlemen  at  a  Diftance.     In  a 
Word,  it  is  all  Nature,  and  yet  looks  like  Art.     On 
Left-hand  we  fee  the  Weft- end  of  London,  Weft- 
ft  tr- Abbey )   and   the   ParHarnent-houfe  ;    but  the 
iody  of  the  City  is  cut  off  by   the  Hill,  at  which 
"lamftead  intercepted  the  Sight  on  that  Side.     More 
the  South   we   have   Hampton- court,    and  S.  W. 
*/indfor,  and,  between  both,  thofe  beautiful  Parts  of 
Vliddlefex  and  Surry,  on   the  Banks  of  the  Thames, 
rhich   are  the   moft  agreeable  in  the  World.     But  I 
tuft  travel  no  farther  this  Way,  till  1  have  taken  a 
ourney   Weft    from    London^    and   feen    what    the 
Country  affords  that  Way. 

7'he  next  Towns  adjacent  to  London,  -are  Kenfing- 
n,  Chelfea,  Hamerfmiih,  Fulhnm,  Brentford,  IJle- 
orth,c[wictienh3?n,  &c.  ail  of  them  near,  oradjoin- 
ig  to,  the  River  Thames  ;  and  which,  by  the  Beauty 
f  their  Buildings,  make  good  the  North  Shore  of  the 
liver,  anfwerable  to  what  I  have  already  defcribed. 

But  here  I  ought  not  to  omit  mentioning  the 
bridge  from  Fulham  to  Putney,  crofs  the  Thames  j 
/hich  is  a  large  wooden  Fabric,  and  as  conve- 
lient,  by  its  many  angular  Indentings,  for  Foot-Paf- 
engers,  as  for  Horfes  and  Coaches.  A  Toll  is-  paid 

for 


166  A  TOUR  thro        Middx, 

for  every  one  that  paffes  it,  let  it  be  ever  fo  often  in  a 
Day;  and  the  Rate  pretty  much  the  fame  as  the  Ferry 
ufed  to  be.  But  as  the  Proprietors  are  faid  to  divii  e 
10  or  12 /.  per  Cent,  from  the  Profits  of  it,  'tis  pity, 
methinks,  that  Foot-Paflengers,  who  cannot  hurt  the 
Bridge,  (hould  pay  at  all,  at  leaft  more  than  once  a- 
Uay. 

Kenfington  cannot  be  named  without  mentioning 
the  King's  Palace  there  :  it  was  originally  an  old  Houfe 
cf  the  Earl  of  Nottingham^  of  whom  King  William 
bought  it,  and  then  inlarged  it  as  we  fee  ;  fome  of 
the  old  Building  ftill  remaining  in  the  Centre  of  the 
Houfe. 

The  Houfe  itfelf  fronts  to  the  Garden  three  Ways; 
the  Gardens  being  now  made  exceeding  fine,  and  in- 
larged to  fuch  a  Degree,' as  to  reach  quite  from,  the 
great  Road  in  Kenfmgton  Town,  to  the  Ad  on  Road 
North,  more  than  a  Mile,  beiides  a  great  Track  of 
Ground  out  of  Hyde-park.  The  noble  Rivulet  that  is 
lately  dug  in  Hyde-park,  and,  generally,  though  im- 
properly, called  The  Serpentine  River ,  looks  finely  from 
thefe  beautiful  Gardens,  and  is  a  great  Ornament  to 
them.  The  firft  Laying  out  of  thefe  Gardens  was  the 
Defign  of  the  late  Queen  Jl'fary  ;  who,  finding  the 
Air  agreed  with  the  King,  refolved  to  make  it  agtee- 
able  to  herftlf  too,  and  gave  the  firft  Orders  for  in- 
larging  them. 

Queen  Anne  improved  what  her  Sifter  begun,  and 
delighted  very  much  in  the  Place  ;  and  often  was 
pleafed  to  make  the Green-hcufe,  which  is  very  beau- 
tiful, her  Summer  Supper- houfe. 

And  her  late  Majefty  Queen  Caroline  completed  the 
Whole,  by  the  Additions  juft  now  mentioned. 

As  this  Palace  opens  to  the  Weft,  there  are  twoi 
great  Wings  built,  for  receiving  fuch  as  neceflanJy 
attend  the  Court,  and  a  large  Port-cocber  at  the  En- 
trance, with  a  Foliern,  and  a  Stone  Gallery,  on  the 

South 


Middx.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  167 

South-fide  of  the  Court,  which  leads  to  the  great  Stair- 
cafe. 

It  is  no  Wonder,  the  Court  being  fo  much  at  Ken- 
mgton^  that  that  Village  has  increafed  in  Buildings  ; 
and  indeed  it  abounds  with  handfome  Houfes,and  has 
a  pretty  Square.  Holland  Houfs  and  Cambdm- Houje9 
in  its  Neighbourhood,  are  fine  old  Seats. 

South  of  Ketifington  ftands  Cbelfea,  at  which  1  lace 
is  the  nobleft  Building,  and  one  of  the  beft  Founda- 
tions of  its  kind  in  the  World,  for  maimed  and  old 
Soldiers,  built  by  S:r  Cbrijhpher  J^ren.  It  is  a  fine 
Structure,  extremely  convenient,  and  worthy  of  the 
admirable  Archited  ;  lefs  magnificent  and  coftly,  in- 
deed, than  that  of  Greenwich  for  Seamen  :  but  had 
the  former  been  the  iVIodei  for  the  laUer,  the  Dif- 
ference in  the  Expence  would  have  provided  for  twice 
the  Number  of  iuperannuated  Sailors  :  and  were  the 
Salaries  and  Port  of  the  Officers  in  both  fo  reduced, 
as  the  Nature  and  Defign  of  an  Hufpital  require,  that 
is  to  fay,  were  the  principal  Officers  fuch  as  would  be 
rontented  to  live  as  Gentlemen  only,  and  not  as  Per- 
bns  of  high  Rank  and  Diftin6tion,  emulating,  as 
"ome  have  heretofore  done,  the  firft  Quality  in  the 
iCingdom,  Luxury  would  not  have  dared  to  (hew  its 
r-'ace  in  Walls  confecrated  to  Charity;  nor  would 
here  have  needed  fo  great  a  Part  of  the  Structure  to 
be  taken  up  in  Houfes  of  Officers,  fo;ne  oi".  them  re- 
embling  Palaces  more  than  what  they  are.  Plain  and 
neat,  methinks,  ihould  be  the  eifential  Characterises 
of  Houfes  thus  devoted  ;  and  thofe  who  would  not 
iave  been  fo  fatisfied,  {hould  not  either  have  fought  or 
accepted  of  the  Offices  ;  much  lefs  ihould  any  oi  tpcie 
Oflices  have  been  made  Sine-cures. 

At  Chelfea  alfo  is  the  Phyfic- garden  belonging  to 
the  Company  of  dfotbecaries  of  London ;  which  is  and 
long  has  been  in  a  very  flourifning  Condition,  under 
the  fkiiful  Management  of  the  ingenious  Mr.  Philip 
MJ;:sr,  F.  R,  S. 

Sir 


!  68  'A  T  O  U  R  tiro         Midck, 

Sir  £0for*  Walpok^  afterwards  Earl  of  Orford,  had 
&  fine  Houfe  at  Cbelfea*  adjoining,  in  a  manner,  to  the 
Royal  Hofpital.  It  was  adorned  with  noble  Pictures. 
But  the  Houfe,  having  been  fold  by  the  late  Ear),  is 
now  in  other  Hands. 

Near  the  faid  Hofpital  were,  till  within  thefe  few 
Years,  a  neat  and  beautiful  Houfe  and  Gardens,  built 
by  the  late  Earl  of  Ranelagh.  But  the  Gardens  and 
Out-buildings  have  been  quite  deftroyed,  and  the 
Grounds  fold  out  in  Parcels  to  Builders,  and  other  Pur- 
chafers. 

The  Manfion  is  now  turned  into  a  Breakfafring- 
Houfe,  and  dedicated  to  that  Luxury  \vhich  over- 
fpreads  the  Nation.  A  Rotonda,  as  I  may  call  it,  is 
e'recled  in  the  Gardens,  to  propagate  Sound  inftead  of 
Senfe,  and  to  feaft  the  Eyes  of  Belles  and  Beaux,  who 
croud  thither  to  become  Spe&acles  to  one  another,  for 
the  Benefit  of  the  Proprietors  of  the  Undertaking.  As 
to  the  Building  itfelf,  it  is  a  fine  Strudure,  and  one 
of  the  Jargeft  Rooms  in  the  World,  being  130  Feet 
Diameter.  A  ftanding  Monument  of  the  predominant 
Tafte  of  the  prefent  Age. 

Marybsne  Gardens,  Sadler's  Wells,  and  a  Variety  of 
fuch  fort  of  Houfes  of  Entertainment  about  IJllngton^ 
hardly  to  be  numbered,  and  all  boaftingof  their  Bands 
of  A4ufa9  befides  what  I  have  taken  Notice  of  in 
other  Plates,  are  Emanations,  as  I  may  call  them, 
from  the  two  grand  Seminaries  of  Luxury,  RANK- 
LAG  H  and  VA  u  x-  H  A  L  L  GARDENS}  at  both 
which  Places  a  Profusion  of  Expence  has  not  been 
fpared  to  invite  Perfons  of  both  Sexes  to  meet,  to  af- 
fift  in  and  promote  the  Propagation  of  thefe  Amufe- 
ments  ;  which,  under  the  Names  of  Breakfaft ing- 
Places,  Concerts,  Bulls,  Aflemblies,  fcfc,  have  over- 
run the  Kingdom  ;  and  which  equally  threaten  a 
general  Diffolution  of  Manners  and  a  DifTipation  of 
Fortune, 

The 


Middx.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  i6p 

The  ferious  Readers,  I  am  fure  (and  you,  Sir,  to 
whom  I  addrefs  thefe  -Letters,  calculated  for  the  pub- 
lic View),  who  wifti  the  lafting  Profperity  of  the  fa- 
mous Kingdom  which  [  am  defcribifig,  and  which* 
hitherto,  has  been  the  Envy  of  all  its  Neighbours, 
but  which  now  is  carrying  its  glorious  Liberty  into  a 
Licentioufnefs  as  enervating  to  the  Mind  as  to  the 
Body,  will  not  be  difpleafed  with  my  honeft  Warmth 
on  this  Occafion,  and  with  perufing  here  a  few  cur- 
fory,  but  not  unfeafonable,  Obfervations  on  a  Subject 
of  this  Importance. 

I  fhall  firft  take  notice,  that  the  Expences  of  the 
Public  are  very  high,  the  Debt  we  labour  under  is  very 
large,  and  our  Taxes,  how  neceffary  foever,  very 
heavy:  from  all  which  I  conclude,  that  INDUSTRY 
ought  to  be  as  much  encouraged  as  poflible,  and  that 
every  thing  capable  of  leflening  it  ought  to  be  the 
of  Cenfure. 


It  is  our  Indujhy  that  changed  the  Face  of  this 
Country  from  what  it  was,  and  proved  thereby  the 
Source  of  our  Liberty  and  Augmentation  of  our  Pro- 
perty. It  is  our  Induftry  that  is  the  Bafts  of  Domeftic 
and  Foreign  Trade,  and,  confequently,  the  fole  Foun- 
tain of  our  Riches.  In  fhort,  it  is  our  Induflry  that 
muft  maintain  us,  enable  us  to  do  Juftice  to  others, 
and  to  live  happily  ourfelves  ;  for  without  it  we  can  • 
do  neither. 

The  principal  and  genteeleft  public  Diverfions  were 
formerly  confined  to  the  Metropolis;  and  thofe  chiefly 
to  the  two  Theatres  ;  and  thefe  were  reforted  to  only 
in  the  Evening,  and  by  thofe  who  lived  at  a  Diflance, 
perhaps  but  once  a  Year. 

But  of  late,  fo  many  Inventions  are  darted  up  to 
defeat  this  great  Principle  of  our  Freedom  and  Feli- 
city, that  they  feem  loudly  to  demand  the  Notice  of 
the  Legiflature. 

In  the  It/Inter  *  Balls,  Concerts.  Operas,  Jjfembties9 
MafqucradeS)  Ridottos,  Routs,  Drums^  and  twenty 

VOL.  II.  I  other 


I7o  Middx. 

other  Diverfions,  to  the  very  Names  of  which  I  am  a 
-Stranger,  continually  folicit  People  to  be  equally  idle 
and  expenftve. 

In  the  Summer,  there  is  no  ffirring  at  any  Corner, 
without  meeting  with  Places  devoted  to  Amufement^ 
or,  in  plain  Englijh,  to  driving  away  all  Thoughts  of 
private  Oeconomy,  or  of  public  Spirit.  But  to  return  : 

There  is  an  incredible  Number  of  fine  Houfes  in  all 
thefe  Towns,  or  near  them ;  which  in  other  Places 
would  pafs  for  Palaces. 

Among  thefe  are  the  late  Lord  Peterborough's  at 
Par  fins  -green  ;  Lord  Pali  fax's  at  Bujhy-park  ;  Earl 
of  btr afford? $)  Earl  of  Shrewjbury\  the  late  Earl  of 
Uur!ington's9  the  late  Lord  ffUmtngtorfs,  all  at  Chif- 
-wlck  ;  the  late  Secretary  Jobnfon's>  at  Twickenham ; 
»nd  Multitudes  of  others. 

But  I  muft  not  pafs  over  fo  (lightly  the  noble  Seat 
of  the  late  Earl  of  Burlington,  at  Chifwick,  which' 
was  a  plain  ufeful  Houfe,  with  a  Number  of  good 
Offices  about  it :  but  as  a  Part  of  the  old  Houfe  was 
tleftroyed  fome  Years  ago  by  Fire,  his  Lordfhip  erett- 
ed  a  beautiful  Villa  near ;  which,  for  Elegance  of 
Tade,  furpafles  every  thing  of  its  kind  in  England^  if 
not  in  Europe.  The  Court  in  Front  of  the  Houfe  is 
of  a  proportionable  Size  to  the  Building,  which  is 
gravelled,  and  kept  always  very  neat.  On  each  Side 
are  Yew- hedges,  in  Panels,  with  Termini,  placed  at 
proper  Diftance ;  in  Front  of  which  are  planted  two 
Rows  of  Cedars  of  Libanus^  which  at  prefent  have  a 
fine  Efteft  to  the  Eye,  at  a  fmail  Diftance  from  the 
Houfe ;  for  the  dark  Shade  of  thefe  folemn  ever-green 
Trees  occafions  a  fine  Contraft  with  the  elegant  white 
Building  which  appears  between  them. 

The  Afcent  to  the  Houfe  is  by  a  noble  Flight  of 
Stone  Steps,  on  one  Side  of  which  is  the  Status  of 
Inigo  Jones,  and  on  the  other  that  of  Palladia.  The' 
Portico  is  fupported  by  fine  fluted  Pillars,  of  theC0ri»- 
tkian  Order  j  and  the  Cornice,  Frize,  and  Architrave,. 

.  .•  are 


Middx.      GREAT  BRITAIN,  171 

are  as  rich  as  poflible  ;  fo  that  the  Front  of  this  Build- 
ing ftrikes  every  Perfori  (though  not  a  nice  Judge  of 
Architecture)  with  uncommon  Pleafure. 

The  other  Front  towards  the  Garden  is  plainer  ; 
but  yet  is  very  bold  and  grand,  having  a  pleating 
Simplicity,  as  hath  alfo  the  Side-  front,  toward  the 
Serpentine  Riwr,  which  is  different  from  the  other 
two. 

The  Infide  of  the  Houfe  is  fmifhed  in  the  higheft 
Tafte,  the  Cielings  being  richly  gilt  and  painted  5 
and  the  Rooms  are  filled  with  admirable  Pictures.; 
and  though  the  Houfe  is  fmall,  yet  it  would  take  up 
more  Room  than  can  be  allowed  here,  to  defcribe  the 
particular  Beauties  of  it. 

The  Gardens  are  allb  laid  out  in  an  elegant  Tafte. 
When  you  defcend  from  the  Houfc,  you  enter  on  a 
Lawn  of  Grafs,  planted  with  Clumps  of  ever-greeri 
Trees,  between  which  are  two  Rows  of  large  Stone 
Vafes.  At  the  Ends  next  the  Houfe,  are  two  tine 
Wolves  in  Stone,  cut  by  Mr  Sceidmaker  ;  at  the  far- 
ther End  are  two  large  Lions  ;  and,  to  terminate  the 
View,  are  three  fine  antique  Statues,  which  were 
dug  up  in  Adrian's  Garden  at  R.ome,  with  Stone  Seats 
between  each  ;  and  on  the  Back  of  the  Statues  is  a 
cioie  Plantation  of  Ever-greens,  which  terminates  the 


On  the  Right-hand,  as  you  go  from  the,  Houfe* 
you  look  thro'  an  open  Grove  of  Forell  trees,  to  the 
Orangery  :  which  is  feparatecj  from  the  Lawn  by  a 
Faufice,  to  fecure  the  Orange  trees  from  being  in- 
jured by  Per  Ions  who  are  admitted  to  walk  in  ihe 
Garden  ;  fo  that  they  are  feen  as  perfectly  (and  \vhen 
the  Orange  trees  are  in  Flower,  the  Scent  is  diffufed 
over  the  whole  Lawn,  to  the  Houfe}  as  if  the  Trees 
were  placed  on  the  Lawn. 

On  the  Left-hand  you  have  an  eafy  Slope  of  Grafs 
down  to  the  Serpentine  River,  on  the  Side  of  which 
are  Clumps  of  Ever-greens,  which  make  agreeable 

I  2  Breaks 


1 7,2  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Middx. 

Breaks  to  the  Eye,  between  which  the  Water  is  feen ; 
and  at  the  farther  End  is  a  Peep  into  an  Inclofure, 
where  are  an  Obelifk  and  a  Roman  Temple,  with 
Grafs  Slopes,  and  a  circular  Piece  of  Water  in  the 
Middle. 

From  this  Lawn  you  are  led  to  the  Wildernefe, 
through  which  are  three  ftrait  Avenues,  terminated 
by  thTee  different  Buildings  ;  and  within  the  Quarters 
.are  Serpentine  Walks,  thro'  which  you  may  walk  near 
a  Mile  in  conftant  Shade. 

On  each  Side  the  Serpentine  River  are  Grafs 
Walks,  which  follow  the  Turns  of  the  River  ;  and 
on  the  Right-hand  of  the  River  is  a  Building,  which 
is  the  exad  Model  of  the  Portico  of  Covent  Garden 
Church  ;  and  on  the  Left  is  a  Wildernefs,  which  is 
laid  out  in  regular  Walks. 

Over  the  River,  in  the  middle  Part,  is  a  Palladlan 
Bridge  of  Wood. 

Next  the  Road,  hisLordfhip  raifed  a  Terrace  (with 
the  Earth  which  came  out  of  the  River),  from  whence 
you  have  a  Profpedt  of  the  adjacent  Country  ;  and 
when  the  Tide  is  up,  you  fee  the  Thames^  with  the 
Boats  and  Barges  paffing,  which  greatly  enlivens  the 
Profpcct.  In  a  Word,  there  is  more  Variety  in  thie 
Garden,  than  can  be  found  in  any  other  of  the  fame 
Size  in  England^  or  perhaps  in  Europe.  %. 

At  North-End,  near  Hamerjmitb,  are  the  hand- 
fome  Houfe  and  finely  difpofed  Gardens  of  the  Earl 
of  Hlljbsrougb,  in  Ireland,  fince  created  Earl  of  Har- 
?t>/VA,  in  England;  Sir  John  Stanley  y  a  Gentleman  of 
equal  Honour,  Politenefs,  Learning,  and  Beneficence, 
was  the  firft  Defigner  and  Improver  of  this  pretty 
Scat. 

I  have  now  traverfed  the  beft  Part  of  Middlefcx^  a 
County  made  rich,  pleafant,  and  populous,  by  the 
Neighbourhood  of  London.  The  Borders  of  the  Coun- ' 
ty  have  three  Market-towns,  Stanes,  Colnbrook,  and 
U  bridge;  the  laft  is  a  pleafant  large  Town,  full  of 


Middx.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  173. 

good  Inns  (as  the  others  are),  and  famous,  in  particu- 
lar, for  having  abundance  of  fine  Seats  of  Gentlemen, 
and  Perfons  of  Quality,  in  the  Neighbourhood.  I  fhould 
never  have  done,  were  I  to  pretend  to  defcribe,  tho* 
ever  fo  flightly,  the  large  Towns  on  both  Sides  the 
River ;  as 


.  Putney, 


'  Ifleworth, 


Lambeth^ 

Batter fea^ 

W'andfwtrthy          Mortliii'^ 

Brentford,  Afton, 

F.atingi 
And  others : 

All  crouded  and  furrounded  with  fine  Hcufes,  or  ra- 
ther Palaces,  of  the  Nobility,  Quality,  and  Gentry,  of 
England. 

But  I  fhould  be  guilty  of  a  great  Negleift,  if  I 
pa{Ted  by  that  equally  elegant  and  noble  Structure  call'ci 
(aunnsrjbury  •  houfe. 

It  is  fituated  near  Eating,  between  the  two  great 
Weftern  Roads,  and  (lands  on  an  Eminence,  the 
Ground  falling  gradually  from  it  to  the  Brentford 
Road  ;  fo  that  from  the  Portico  in  the  Pack-front  of 
the  Houfe  you  have  an  exceeding  fine  Profpe£t  of 
the  County  of  Surry^  the  River  Thames^  and  all  the 
Meadows  on  the  Borders  for  fome  Miles,  as  alfo,  in 
clear  Weather,  a  good  View  of  London.  This  Houfe 
was  built  by  Mr.  Ifireby  who  was  Son-in-law  to  the 
famous  Inigo  Jones  ;  and,  indeed,  the  Architecture 
fhews,  that  if  it  was  not  planned  by  that  celebrated 
Architect  himfelf,  it  was  defigned  by  fome  Scholar  of 
his ;  for  altho'  the  Building  is  as  plain  as  poflible,  yet 
there  is  a  Ample  Boldnefs  in  it,  which  graces  all  the 
Works  of  that  excellent  Artift,  rarely  to  be  found  in 
thofe  of  other  Architects. 

The  Apartments  in  the  Houfe  are  extremely  conve- 
nient, and  well  contrived.  The  Hall  is  large,  having 
Rows  of  Columns  on  each  Side.  From  thence  you  af- 
cend,  by  a  noble  Flight  of  Stairs,  to  a  Salon,  which  is 

13  a  dou- 


174  d  TOUR  thro  Hertf. 

a  double  Cube  of  25  Feet,  and  moft  elegantly  fur- 

Eifhed. 

From  this  Room  is  the  Entrance  to  the  Portico  on 
tve  Back-front  of  the  Houfe,  which  is  fupported  by 
Columns,  and  is  a  delightful  Place  to  fit  in,  during  the. 
.\fternoon,  in  the  Summer- feafon  ;  for,  as  it  faces  the 
Sjuth-eaft,  the  Sun  mines  on  it  no  longer  than  tw» 
ot  the  Clock ;  but,  extending  its  Beams  ever  the  Coun- 
try, which  is  open  to  the  View,  renders  the  Profpe& 
very  delightful. 

On  going  out  of  the  Houfe  into  the  Garden,  you 
afcend  a  noble  Terrace,  the  whole  Width  of  the  Gar- 
den, whence  you  have  a  fine  Survey  of  the  neighbour- 
ing Country,  and  on  which  you  may  walk  dry  imme- 
diately after  the  greateft  Rains.  From  this  Terrace- 
you  defcend  to  the  Garden  by  a  beautiful  Flight  of 
Stone  Steps,  the  upper  Part  of  which  is  concave,  with 
a  grand  Stone  Baluftrade  on  each  Side,  as  alfo  on  the 
Coping  of  the  Wall  the  Length  of  the  Houfe,  which 
rn-akcs  a  fine  Appearance  from  the  Road  :  but  the 
C-ardens  are  laid  out  too  plain,  having  the  Walls  in 
View  pn  every  Side. 

There  are  but  three  more  Market-towns  in  Mid- 
dlefex\  viz.  Brentford^  the  County- town,  Edgware, 
and  Enfield  ;  the  Neighbourhood  of  all  which  are 
adorned  with  Seats  of  the  Gentry,  many  of  which 
might  deferve  a  particular  Defcription,  had  I  room  to- 
give  it. 

And  now  I  enter  the  County  of  Hertford,  a  fruit- 
ful Soil,  as  it  is  managed  ;  for  'tis  certain,  it  is  more 
indebted,  for  its  Fertility,  to  the  Sagacity  and  Induftry 
of  the  Hufbandman,  than  to  Nature.  Rich  Meadows 
are  .feldom  found  here  ;  for  it  affords  not  any  large 
Rivers  :  the  Arable  hath  generally  too  much  Gravel^ 
or  too  much  Clay;  but  thefe  laft  cold  and  wet  Lands 
have  been  within  thefe  40  or  50  Years  greatly  im- 
proved, by  draining  off  the  Rain-water,  which  ftag- 

nated 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

nated  on  the  clayey  Surface,  as  in  a  Cup,  and  chill- 
ed the  Roots  of  the  Coin  j  an  Invention,  called  Bitfh- 
dr  aining. 

The  County  is  well  watered  for  the  Conveniency 
of  the  Inhabitants ;  tho'  the  Lea  was  the  only  naviga- 
ble Stream  in  it,  till  the  Year  1757.  when  an  A6t 
palled,  intitled,  An  Aft  for  making  the  River  Ivel, 
and  the  Branches  thereof*  navigable*  from  the  River 
Ouae  fit  Tempsford,  in  the  County ,  of  Bedford,  ta 
Shotling  Mill,  oiherwife  called  Burnt  Mill,  in  the  Pa- 
tijh  0/"Hitchin,  in  the  County  of  Hzrtfoi'd,  and  to  B'aclc 
Horfe  Mill,  in  the  Parijh  cf  Bygrave,  in  the  faid 

/-*  r*  r  T        .  r        j  7    .        .  /       p         .;  J    \T       .IT  r>     *  I 


But  this  County  affumes  the  Honour  of  giving  Rife  to 
feve.ral  Rivers  j  viz.  the  Parifli  of  Tring  to  the  Thames ^ 
which,  leaving  the  County  at  Putenhtim^  goes  by 
Ayltjbury  to  Thome*  and  thence  by  Wbeatley-bridge  to 
Dorchejter,  and  falls  into  the  Ifis.- 

The  County  may  be  divided  into  three  pretty  equal 
Parts,  by  two  great  Roads,  one  Fart  lying  between 
the  North  Road,  which  goes  thro'  Hertford  to  Nat- 
tingbam^  &c.  and  the  Borders  of  Gambridgejbire  Northv 
and  thofe  of  EJfix  Eaft.  Another  Part  lying  between 
that  Road  and  the  other,  which  leads  thro*  St.  Albarfs 
to  Coventry  and  Cbejler\  and  the  third  lying  between 
the  laft  Road,  and  the  Borders  of  Middlefex^  South, 
and  thofe  of  Bucks  Weft. 

I  (hall  begin  with  the  laft  at  Eaft- Barney  a  Tho- 
roughfare-town of  Note,  and  well  fupplied  with  Inns: 
it  lies  high  and  pleafant,  and:  was  formerly  frequented 
for  its  medicinal  Waters,  and  now  for  its  Swine-mar- 
ket. It  has  in  its  Neighbourhood  feveral  handfome 
Houfes  of  the  Londoners*  and  which  are  the  more 
pleafant  by  being  fo  near  the  Chace. 

Totteridge  is  near  it  alfo,  and  is  a  pleafant  Village. 
-It  is  fituated  on  a  fine  Eminence,  looking  to  the  North, 

I  4  over 


I7 6  .4  TOUR  //W          Hem: 

over  the  Sf.  Allan's  Road  into  the  Forefl ;  and  on  the 
South,  over  the  Edgviare  Road,  to  Harrow,  &c.  It 
is  very  clean,  and  has  feveral  very  good  Houfes  in  it. 
The  Road  from  Ham/lead^  here,  is  extremely  pleafant, 
and  fo  well  repaired,  that  in  the  word  Seafon  there  is 
icarce  any  Water  or  Dirt  remaining  in  it  ;  and  as  it 
lies  not  on  any  great  Road,  there  are  no  heavy  Car- 
riages paffing  that  Way ;  therefore  a  fmall  Expence 
annually,  well  laid  out,  will  always  keep  this  Ro#d  in 
excellent  Repair. 

Cheating- Barmt\\zs  a  little  North,  in  theSr.  Allan's 
Road  ;  and  is  remarkable  for  the  deciiive  Battle  fought 
shere  oi\Eajhr~day  1468.  between  the  Houfes  of  To/ k 
and  Lancajler^  in  which  the  great  Earl  of  Warwick^ 
ililed  Make-king^  was  killed,  with  many  of  the  prime 
Nobility,  and  ic,oooMen.  The  Place' fuppofed  to  be 
che  Field  of  Battle  is  a  green  Spot  near  Kicks  end,  be-' 
txveen  St.  Albarfs  and  Halfald  Roads,  a  little  before 
t'r.'y  meet.  And  here,  Anno  1740.  a  Stone  Column 
w.is  erected,  on  which  is  a  long  Infcription,  giving  a 
particular  Account  of  that  Battle.  The  Manor  is  in 
the  Property  of  the  Duke  of  Chandos.  An  handfome 
:Kow  of  fix  Alms- houfes,  for  fo  many  Widows,  found- 
ed by  James  Rawnfcroft,  Efqj  in  1672.  with  a  little 
Furniture  to  each,  is  in  the  Street.  Queen  Elizabeth 
built  a  Free-fchool-houfe  of  Brick  in  the  fame  Street, 
where  nine  Children  are  taught  gratis,  and  all  other 
Boys  at  five  Shillings  the  Quarter. 

About  two  iVIiles  N.  W.  from  hence,  on  the  Left- 
hand,  \\esDurbamst  formerly  the  Seat  of  the  Aujlins^ 
but  became  the  Property  of  the  late  Earl  of  Allemarlc^ 
who  purchafed  it  of  Sir  John  Aujlin>  and  greatly 
"beautified  it,  by  laying  molt  of  the  neighbouring 
Fields  belonging  to  the  Eftate  into  a  Park,  and  turn- 
ing and  repairing  of  the  Roads.  The  Houfe  ftands  on 
an  Eminence,  htuated  in  a  fmall  Valley,  furrounded 
with  pretty  high  Hills  at  a  little  Diftance,  fo  that  in  the 
Summer  Months  it  is  an  agreeable  Retirement :  but 

the 


Hertf,         GREAT  BRITAIN.  177 

the  Soil  all  around  it  being  a  itrong  Clay,  all  the  Rain 
which  falls  in  Winter  being  detained  on  the  Surface, 
renders  the  Situation  very  cold  and  moift.  Add  to  this 
the  want  of  good  Water  and  Timber  near  the  Houfe, 
except  the  young  Trees,  which  have  been  planted  by 
his  Lordfhip. 

Idleftrey  or  Elcjlre*  is  a  Village  on  the  Roman  Wat- 
ting-jlreet)  on  the  very  Edge  or  M.id£k{ex  ;  but  it  is 
chiefly  noted  for  its  Situation.,,  near Brockley-  bill,  by  Stan- 
more,  which  affords  a  lovely  View  crofs  MiddteJJue^ 
over  the  Thames^  into  Surry.  Near  this  is  Kendale 
Wood,  where  formerly  was  found  an  old  Flint- Walk 
fo  hard  as  not  to  yield  to  the  Strokes  of  the  Pick-ax  ; 
as  likewife  an  Oven.  Mr.-Philpot,  digging  his  Canal, 
and  Foundations  for  his  Buildings,  upon  the  Spot  of 
the  old  City  SueUaniacts^  found  many  Coins,  Urns,  and 
other  Antiquities.  They  have  a  Proverb  here,  relat- 
ing to  the  Antiquities  i 

No  Heart  can  thmk^  nor  Tongue  can  ie!!9 
What  lies' 'tween  Brockley- hill  and  Penny weL 

Pennywel  is  a  Parcel,  of  Clofes  acrofs  the  Valley  be- 
yond Bradley  -bill,  where  Foundations  are  difcernible, 
and  where,  they  fay,  has  been  a  City. 

About  two  Miles  farther  Well  lies  Watford^  a  Mar- 
ket town,  17  Miles  from  London^  upon  the  ColnCy, 
where  it  hath  two  Streams,  which  run  feparately  to 
Rickmtrfvurth\  Several  A-Ims-houfes  belong  to  this 
Town,  and  an  handibme  Free-fchool,  built  in  iyo4.. 
and  finifhed  1709.  by  Elizabeth  Fuller,  Widow;  and 
in  the  Church  are  feveral  handfome  Monuments.  The- 
Town  is  very  long,  having  but  one  Street,  which  is^ 
the  public,  and  fo  is  extremely  dirty  in  Winter  y.  and 
the  Waters  of  the  River,  at  the  Entrance. of  the-  Town.,, 
were  often  fo  much  fwellecl  by  floods,  as  to  be  un^ 
paflable.  But,  in  the  Year  1750.  at  the  Entrance  of: 
rd}  the  Road  was  raifed  by  a  voluntary  Subfcrici- 
i  5, 


378  A  TOUR  thro  Hertf. 

tion  ;  whereby  the  River  is  now  confined  within  its 
Bounds,  and  every  Difadvantage  formerly  experienced 
imiiely  removed. 

Cffj/toberry,  the  Seat  of  the  Earl  of  EJJeXy  is  ele- 
gant. The  Situation  is  the  beft  in  the  County,  upon 
a  dry  Spot,  within  a  Park  of  large  Extent:  the  Koufe 
is  built  in  Form  of  an  jxj  :  the  Middle  and  the  Eait 
Wing  is  modern,  and  in  good  Repair  ;  but  the  Weft 
Wing  is  very  old,  and  by  no  means  correfponding 
wish  the  other  Parts  of  the  Houfe.  The  Front  faces 
the  South  ealt,  and  Jooks  diiedly  on  the  Houfe  in 
Afore  Parky  on  which  the  late  Mr.  Stiles  expended 
great  Sums  of  Money,  and  which  has  a  noble  Afpect 
from  Cajjloierry  Hoiije.  In  the  Front  of  the  Houfe  is 
a  fine  dry  Lawn  of  Grafs,  which,  immediately  after 
<he  heavieft  Winter-Rains,  maybe  rode  or  walked  on^ 
as  on  the  drieft  Downs;  and  a  little  below  the  Houfe 
is  a  River,  which  winds  through  the  Park,  and  in  the 
ilriut  Seafons  conftantly  runs  with  a  fine  Stream,  af- 
fording great  Plenty  of  Trout,  Cray  fifh,  and  indeed 
moft  other  Kinds  of  Frefh-water  Fifh.  On  the  North 
fend  Eaft-fides  of  the  Houfe  are  large  Wood-walks, 
which  were  planted  by  the  famous  Le  Notre,  in  the 
Reign  of  Charles  II.  The  Woods  have  many  large 
Beech  and  Oak-trees  in  them  ;  but  the  principal 
Walks  are  planted  with  Lime-trees,  and  thefe  are 
nioft  of  them  too  narrow  for  their  Length,  and  too 
regular  for  the  modern  Tafte.  On  the  other  Side  of 
the  River,  the  Ground  rifes  to  a  confiderable  Height, 
which  affords  an  agreeable  Variety;  Part  of  which  be- 
ing covered  with  ftately  Woods,  appearing  at  a  proper 
Diilance  from  the  Front  of  the  Houfe,  have  a  fine 
Efled  to  the  Eye.  In  mort,  the  whole  Spot  (if  a  fmall 
Expence  were  beftowed  to  improve  and  put  it  more 
in  the  modern  TafteJ  would  be  one  of  the  fineft  Places 
near  London. 

Near  CaJJiobsrry  is  a  pleafant  Seat,  belonging  to  Lord 
Raymond^  called  Langleykury, 

Rick- 


Hertf.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  179 

Rickmerfworib  is  a  Market-town,  within  three  or 
four  Miles  Welt  of  Watford*  It  gave  Birth  to  Sir 
Thomas  White,  Merchant-Taylor  of  London,  who 
founded  Gloucefter-ball,  and  St.  John's  College  in  Ox- 
fo'  d.  Here  are  two  Alms-houfes,  one  for  four,  the 
other  for  five  Widows. 

We  vifited  in  this  Neighbourhood  More-Park,  with 
a  fine  Houfe  in  it,  of  the  late  Duke  of  A/lonmcutb, 
Handing  upon  the  Side  of  the  Hill,  facing  Cajjioberry^ 
on  the  other  Side  of  the  River.  It  has  been  allowed 
to  be  one  of  the  beft  Pieces  of  Brick- work  in  England. 
Sir  William  Temple  commends  the 'Garden  as  one  of 
the  beft  laid  out  in  the  Kingdom.  The  Duchcls  of 
Monmouth,  on  whom  it  was  fettled  by  Marriage,  fold 
it  in  1720.  to  Benjamin  He/kins  Stiles,  Efq;  who  built 
a  South  Front  of  Stone  with  Colonnades,  by  which 
an  Opening  was  made  thro'  the  Hill,  that  once  ob- 
ftrucled  its  View  toward  Uxbridte.  A  North  Front 
was  alfo  e/^ed,  and  the  Hill  towards  Watford  cut 
thro'  for  a  V75fta.  In  digging  this  Hill,  Veins  of  Sea- 
fand,  with  Mufiels  in  it,  were  found.  It  is  now  in 
the  Poilefiion  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  An- 
fin. 

Abbot  s-Lingley,  22  Miles  from  London,  fituated  about 
three  Miles  North  of  Cajjiobcrry,  in  a  good  A;r  and 
Soil,  is  remarkable  for  tne  Birth  of  a  Pope,  NlcoLs 
Braksfpear,  by  the  Title  of  Adrian  IV.  The  Empe- 
ror Frederic  held  his  Stirrup,  while  he  difmounted.  He 
was  choaked,  as  Tome  fay,  by  a  Fifli,  and,  as  others,, 
by  a  Quinfy  :  but  it  is  an  indelible  Stain  on  his  Memo- 
ry, that,  when  Sovereign  Pontiff,  he  (uttered  his  Mo- 
ther to  be  maintained  by  the  Alms  of;  the  Church  of 
Canterbury. 

We  proceeded  to  Kings- Langlfy,,  fo  called,  becnufe 
Henry  III.  built  himfelf  a  Houfe  here,  ot  which  the 
Ruins  ftill  exift;  and  here  was  born  and  buried  Ed- 
mund dt  Lang/ey,  Duke  of  York^  frfth  Son  of  Edward-. 
III.  his  Wife  I/abdj  youngeft  Daughter  of  Don  Pe- 

L  6-  dro$, 


1 80  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Hertf . 

droy  King  of  Caftlle^  was  alfo  buried  here ;  and  the 
Tomb  is  in  the  Church  of  this  Place. 

We  next  went  to  Hempfted^  a  little  farther  North, 
and  about  23  Miles  from  London^  a  Bailiwick  Corporate 
Town.  It  has  the  greateft  Corn-market  in  the  County, 
or  perhaps  in  England;  in  which  2O,ooo/.  a  Week  are 
frequently  returned  for  Meal  only.  Eleven  Pair  pf  Mills 
{land  within  four  Miles  of  the  Place,  which  bring  a 
great  Trade  to  it :  but  the  Road  is  by  this  means  fo 
continually  torn,  that  it  is  one  of  the  worft  Turnpikes 
about  London. 

A  little  North  of  Plempjicd  we  turned  Weft,  and 
came  to  Great  Harkhamjled^  about  24  computed  Miles 
from  London.  It  is  a  very  antient  Town,  which  for 
many  hundreds  of  Years  has  been  one  of  the  Manors 
of  the  Crown  j  whrch  granted  to  it  many  very  ample 
Privileges.  It  is  now  annexed  to  the  Dukedom  of 
Cornwall.  The  Caftle  and  Manor  are  at  prefentheld, 
by  Lcafe  from  the  Crown,  by  Edward  Carey,  Efq; 
which  was  obtained  by  his  Anceftors  of  Queen  Eliza- 
beth. 

Barkbamfted  has  evidently  been  a  Roman  Town  by 
the  Name  of  Durobriva  ;  and  probably  the  Caftle 
itands  upon  a  Roman  Foundation.  Roman  Coins  arc 
frequently  dug  up  there.  It  is  moft  pleafantly  environ- 
ed with  high  and  hard  Ground,  full  of  Hedge  rows, 
Paftures,  and  Arable,  tho'  fituated  upon  the  South-fide 
of  a  Marfh.  It  extends  itfelf  far  in  handfome  Build- 
ings, and  a  broad  Street.  In  the  Time  of  the  Hep- 
tare.  ;y,  it  was  the  Refidence  of  the  Kings  of  Mertla\ 
and  here  TF/^/m/,  King  of  Kent  and  Mercia,  in  the 
Year  697.  held  a  Parliament.  Here  alfo  King  Ina's 
Laws  were  publifhed. 

The  Caftle  was  judicioufiy  fet  on  the  North-fide  of 
the  Town,  on  dry  Ground,  among  Springs,  and  made 
exceedingly  ftrong  by  the  Saxons.  It  was  rebuilt  by 
Moreton,  Earl  of  Cornwall,  Brother  to  William  I.  and 
rated  for  Rebellion  in  his  Son's  Time,  and  fo,w  ith 

the 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  181 

the  Manor,  fell  to  the  Crown.  Henry  II.  kept  his 
Court  here,  and  granted  great  Privileges  to  the  Place. 
The  Cattle  was  afterwards  rebuilt,  as  it  is  thought, 
in  the  Reign  of  King  John;  for  the  Dauphin  of  France* 
in  Conjunction  with  the  Barons,  befieged  it,  and  the 
Defendants  furrendered  not  till  they  had  the  King's 
Orders  for  it. 

When  the  Cattle  was  demoliihed,a  large  Houfewas. 
built  out  of  its  Ruins,  which  is  beautifully  fituateck 
What  now  remains  of  it  is  but  the  third  Part,  and  the 
Back  of  the  great  Houfe ;  for  the  other  two  thirds 
were  dettroyed  by  Fire,  in  the  Reign  of  Charletl.  It 
was  in  K.  James's  Time  a  Nurfery  for  that  Prince's 
Children  ;  and  Prince  Henry  and  Prince  Charles  were 
bred  up  there.  In  the  Time  of  the  Grand  Rebellion,. 
Colonel  dxtel^  a  Parliament  Officer,  held  it.  It  is  now 
in  the  Pofleflion  of  the  Rcper  Family. 

The  Corporation  funk  in  the  War  between  the  King 
and  Parliament.  In  King  Charles  IPs  Time  an  At- 
tempt was  made  to  revive  the  Charter;  but  it  was  dropu 
This  Body  Politic  is  now  reduced  to  a  Skeleton,  like  the 
Cattle  ;  which  is  only  to  be  known  by  its  Moats  and 
Walls. 

The  Cattle  contains,  within  its  firft  Moat,  four  or 
five  Acres.  There  is  again  aD-iviiion  by  another  Moat. 
The  South  Part,  contifting  of  about  two  Acres,  is 
upon  a  Level  with  moft  of  the  outward  Walls  and 
Chimneys  remaining.  Towards  the  North,  acrofs  a 
Moat,  is  an  high  Hill,  or  Keep,  capable  of  defending 
itfelf  againft  the  former,  if  poflefled  by  an  Enemy.  The 
Traces  of  the  Bridge  of  Communication,  and  the  Moat 
dividing  thcfe  two  Places  of  Strength,  are  continued 
to  the  grand  one,  that  takes  in  the  whole  Site  of  the 
Fortification.  The  Remains  of  the  Bridge  for  Entrance 
from  the  Town  are  vifible,  anfwcring  exactly  to  the 
other,  as  the  North  of  the  firft  Area,  which  led  to  the 
Hills. 

In 


A  TOUR  thro  Hertf. 

In  this  Town  was  the  famous  Interview  between 
J^illiam-l.  and  the  £#£///&  Nobility,  in  his  March  to- 
wards London,  after  his  Vi&ory  over  Harold.  He  pa/Ted 
the  Thames  at  Wallingfordi  and  was  going  forward  to 
St.  Albany  when  the  flout  Abbot  Frederic,  flopped  his 
March,  by  Trees,  fc?V.  till  he  could  get  the  Englijh 
Nobility  together ;  and  then  he  made  him  fwear  to 
keep  inviolably  the  good  and  antlentLavvs  of  the  King- 
*  dom  ;  yet  he  took  away  all  their  Lands,  and  divided 
them  among  his- hungry  Normans-. 

This  Town  gives  Name  to  the  Deanry.  The 
Church  is  handfome,.  dedicated  to  St.  Peter;  it  has  had 
many  Chapels  anci  Oratories.  On  the  Pillars  of  the 
Church  are  the  eleven  Apoftles,  with  each  of  them  a 
Sentence  of  the  Creed,  and  St.  George  killing  a  Dra- 
gon, on  the  I2th.  Thefs  were  whued  over  by  the 
Zeal  of  the  late  Times,  and  are  not  many  Years  ago. 
eome  to  Light. 

The  Chapel  of  St.  John  is  ufed  only  by  the  Mailer, 
Ulhers,  and  Scholars  of  the  Free-fchool.  St.  Leonard's 
Hofpital  was  at  the  South-cart  End  of  the  High-ftreet, 
and  St.  y^wj's  Hofpital  'at  the  other  End.  The  free 
Grammar- ichool  was  built  by  Dean  Incent^  of  &i. 
Paul's.  It  is  a  handfome  brick,  Structure,  with  an 
Apartment  at  one  End  for  the  Matter,  at  the  other  for 
the  Ufher  and  Chantry- Clerk.  It  v/as  20  Years  in 
building. 

Tring,. which  is  28  computed  Miles  from  London^  is  a. 
fnall  Market- town,  ftanding  upon  the  Extremity  of 
Hertfordjhlre,  next  to  Budinghamjhir-e,  Ealt  of,  and 
near,  th  e  I  ken  ing  Jireet* 

It  is  very  antient,  and  was  formerly  a  Royal  Ma- 
nor; but  now  pofkfled  by  Mr.GV*1,  who  has  made  a 
Park  of  300  Acres,  of  which  Part  is  en  the  Chi'tern* 
In  it  is  a  beautiful  Wood  inclofed,  lying  clofe  to  the 
Ibming-ftreet.  Mr.  Gore  has  beautified  and  wainfcoted 
the  Church  in  a  moft  elegant  Manner,  and  gives'  20  h 
per  Annum  for  a  Charity -School.  The  Church  is  an 

hiiidfome 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

handfome  Pile  of  Bui!ding,  with  a  Ring  of  Six  BelJs> 
The  Chancel  was  wainfcoted  by  Sir  Richard  ^nd^rfon. 
It  is  decent  and  capacious,  and  worthy  of  a  Choir.  Both 
Church  and  Chancel  are  paved  with  Free-ftone;  the 
Pillars  are  painted ;  the  Pulpit  and  Sounding-board  are 
of  fine  Inlaid.- work;  and  an  handfome  Vefiry  is'under 
the  Belfry. 

Among  other  Monuments  is  a.  magnificent  one  for, 
Sir  William  Gora  and  his  Lady  ;  with  Infcriptions  to 
their  Honour. 

The  People  of  this  Place  rnuft  be  believed  to  be  highly, 
addicted  to  S'Jperftition,  if  we  form  our  Notions  of 
them  from  the  Barbarity  great  Numbers  of  them  ex- 
ercifed,  in  the  Month  of  April  175.1-.  thro'  the  Inftijra- 
fcion  of  a  Publican,  who  took  himfelfto  be  bewitched 
by  one  Ruth  Ojb.ourne^  and  her  Hufband,  two  poor 
Creatures  ;  whom,  after  various  Inftances  of  the  molt 
diabolical  Rage,  under  Pretence  of  the  exploded  Trial 
of  Ducking,  they  dragged  about  the  Length  of  two 
Miles,  and  threw  into  a  muddy  Stream;  thro'  which 
ill  Ufage  the  Woman  died,  and  for  which  one  Collins 
fuffered  Death. 

This  melancholy  Event,  however,  may  contribute 
to  demonftrate  the  V/ifdom  of  the  Legiflature  in  that 
Act  which  we  fhall,  in  our  Account  of  Lancajbire,  ob- 
ftrve  was  p/ifTed  ki  the  gth  Year  of  his  late  Majefty, 
in  order  to  prevent  ignorant  or  malicious  People  from 
wreaking  the  fad  Effedts  of  their  Superftition  or  Cruelty, 
on  their  innocent,  perhaps  helplefs,  and,  as  here,  de- 
crepit Neighbours,  the  true  Objecls  of  Humanity  and 
Charity,  not  of  lawlefs  Barbarity,  and  wild  Enthu- 
fiafrn. 

From  Tring,  I  pafTed  next  Eaftward,  and  came  to 
G adef den- Little  \  where  I  had  heard  was  a  fine  Pro- 
fpect,  and  I  wanted  not  Curiofity  to  fee  it.  This  Vill 
has  Cawky-^ood^^  Ivingo  Hills  on  the  North -weft, 
Aldbury  Cliffs  on  the  South  weft,  Dunftable  Downs  to 
the  North.  The  Profpect  I  mean  is  from  one  Part  of 

this 


!84  4  TOUR  thro  Hertf. 

this  Parifii,  to  which  a  Common  of  fine  Turf  leads 
under  the  Duke  of  Bridgwater's  fhady  Park  ;  and  a 
noble  one  it  is  of  three  Counties,  worthy  of  the  Pen- 
cil of  the  greateft  Artift  in  Landfchape. 

The  Variety  of  Woods,  Cliffs,  Arable  and  Paflure, 
are  charming;  but  one  mull  be  tempted  to  half  a  Mile's 
pleafant  Exercife  to  get  to  the  beautiful  Scene. 

Cawley-wood,  belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Bridge-wa- 
ter^ is  a  fmall  Covert,  a  Mi'e  from  hence,  at  the  top 
of  a  Hill,  in  Such,  one  of  the  greateft  Landmarks  in 
the  South  of  England^  which  overlooks  n  Counties. 
It  (lands  as  a  Monument  to  (hew,  notwithftanding  all 
the  modern  Improvements,  that  Nature  will  not  be 
outdone  by  Art. 

Now  I  am  on  this  Subject,  I  (hall  juft  mention 
Penley-lodgt)  for  a  delightful  Retirement  to  a  Man 
n  ho  wants  to  deceive  Life,  in  an  Habitation  which  has 
il  the  Charms  Nature  can  give.  There  is  behind  a. 
Iar2;e  Common  of  fine  Turf,  bounded  by  a  Wood  on 
the  Weft,  to  which  if  one  afcend  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile, 
he  has  a  View  of  ^fcripatn^tonjhire  and  Warwickjbire. 
From  the  Houfe,  a  femicircular  Profpecl  of  Bedford- 
jbire,  Midd'efftf^  and  Bitch  j  a  bended  one  towards 
Jvingo  and  Aldbury-  Cliff's  *  with  the  fliady  Woods  of" 
the  Dukes  of  Leeds  ana  Bridgwater  feeming  to  hang 
over  the  Rivulet  called  Buiborn. 

The  Manor  of  dldbury  lies  Nor.th-eafl  of  Tring,  and 
in  the  Way  to  Gadefden.  It  belongs  to  the  Duke  of 
Leeds,  whofe  Father  married  theHeirefs  of  the  Family 
of  Hyde;  and  fo  does  Mitnilorougl)  Hi// lie  in  the  Way 
from  dldbury  to  Little-Gadejdcn,  and  affords  an  hand- 
ibme  Profpecl. 

Ajhridge  (lands  near •  Aldbury ^ but  in  BUCKS,  an  antieht 
Manfion-houfe,  and  fine  Park,  belonging  to  the  Duke 
of  Bridgwater. 

Gadefden  is  famous  for  the  Birth  of  Join  de  Gadef- 
/<?«,  who  flourifhed  in  the  Beginning  or  the  I4th  Cen- 
tury \  tke  iirft  Englishman  who  was  a  Court  Phyiician, 

aid 


Herfcf.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

and  of  whofe  Slcill  Chaucer  makes  honourable  Mention 
la  his  Dottor  of  Phyjic,  prefixed  to  his  Canterbury. 
Tales  ;  tho'  Dr.  Freind^  from  Jsbu's  own  Books,  will 
not  allow  him  to  deferve  it.  There  are  feveral  Mo- 
numents in  the  Chancel  of  this  Church  of  the  Erldg- 
water  Family ;  whofe  finely  fituated  Seat  and  Park  at 
jljhtidge,  formerly  a  Royal  Houfe  of  Pleafure,  and 
where  Edward  I.  held  a  Parliament  in  the  igth  Year 
of  his  Rei'j;n,  is  in  this  Parifh,  but  in  the  County  of 
Plucks.  The  Duke  is  Lord  of  this  Manor,,  as  alfo  of 
that  of  Great- Gadefden* 

I  croll^d  over  a  Slip  (as  I  may  call  it)  of  Bucks^ 
which  runs  into  He>tforci/l}lrey  between  Aldbury  and 
Kenfwortb-Gresn^  which  lies  a  little  South  of  the  Road 
which  leads  from  St.  Allans  to  Dunjlable,  and  is  a  Si- 
tuation furprlingly  line,  about  half  a  Mile  in  Length* 
a  good  Turf,  and  level,  with  Wbipfnake  "J^'oods  on  the 
Back  of  it,  and  Rows  of  high  Trees  on  the  other  Side. 
Nothing  but  Sky  is  to  be  feen  from  it  one  Way;  and 
the  other  we  have  only  a  View  of  the  top  of  a  Grove, 
at  Market-Cell.  It  feems  to  claim  a  Preference  of 
every  Place  in  the  County  for  a  Cel! ;  yet  never  had 
one  on  it :  it  comes  very  little  Ihcrt  of  the  famous 
Guy's  Cliff,  near  TParwiik.  There  the  fhady  Grove, 
and  rolling  Stream  below  it,  make  a  beautiful  Scene 
for  Solitude  :  here  the  Woods  and  Trees  afford  Shads 
enough,  and  the  pure  circumambient  Ether,  with  no- 
thing in  View  but  the  tops  of  Trees,  would  make  an 
Hermit  think  himfelf  in  another  World. 

Here  I  came  into  the  Road,  and  fo  turned  South-eaft 
for  St.  ,/•£<?«'»,  &w>  Flamflead  Pariih,  where  is  a  well- 
built  and  delightful  Seat  of  SwThomasSaunders  Sebrighi,9 
Bart,  on  a  rifing  Ground  in  the  Middle  of  a  Park.  It 
is  called  Beecbwood-Mamr,  from  the  great  Number  of 
fine  Beech-trees  which  were  formerly  growing  here, 
fome  of  which  are  yet  remaining  on  the  Sides  of  the 
Park.  The  Soil  of  this  Park  is,  for  the  mod  Part, 
dry,  the  Surface  being  (hallow,  on  a  ftrong  or  chalky 

Bottom, 


jg6  JTOURftro'          "Hertf. 

Bottom,  which  renders  the  Turf  very  fine  and  fhort,, 
and  very  pleafant  for  the  Exercife  of  either  Riding  or 
Walking.  It  was  formerly  a  Nunnery  for  a  Priorefs 
and  ten  Nuns,  independent  of  any  other  Convent,  and 
then  called  St.  Giles  in  the  WcocL — A  very  ferious  In- 
fcription  in  FlamfteGd  Church,  on  a  Monument  of  one 
of  trie  Sounders  Family,  may  be  worth  tranfcribing,  as 
it  certainly  is  a  Piece  of  found  Doctrine,  in  which  every 
living  Man  may  find  an  Ufe. 

4  He  that  looks  hereon  may  confider  how  fleeting 
all  worldly  Comforts  are,  and  how  great  a  Vanity 
it  is  to  place  his  AiFt&ion  thereon*  Such  Things 
there  are  as  worldly  Comforts,  *cis  true  ;  but  they 
ought  to  be  looked  on  as  little  Streams ;  and  who- 
ever delights  in  them,  more  than  in  the  FOUNTAIN 
from  whence  they  proceed,  may  foon  find  them  dry 
and  vanilhed.  The  Truth  of  which  he  that  wrote 
this  hath  fenfibly  found  ;  and  wills  other?  to  place 
their  Afie&kms  chiefly  en  that  OBJECT  OF  LOVE, 
which  is  unchangeable,  and  is  the  Centre  of  all  true 
Joy  and  Felicity/ 

Purfuing  ftill  the  fame  Courfe  along  the  great  Roadv 
we  came  next  to  St.  jfltan's,  the  capital  Town  of 
Hertfordshire,  famous  for  deriving  its  Name  from 
the  Proto martyr  of  England^  who  fuffered  fo  early  as 
in  the  third  Century.  'Tis  governed  by  a  Mayor, 
ten  Burgeifrs,  a  Steward,  and  a  Chamberlain  j  and 
is  a  peculiar  Liberty  both  for  Ecclefiaftical  and  Civil 
Government ;  and  returns  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment. 

The  Town  rcfe  cut  of  the  Ruins  of  old  Verulam\  of 
which  fo  much  has  been  faid  by  Mr.  Camden,  and 
others,  that  we  refer  to  them  for  Particulars.  In  that 
great  Man's  Time,  the  Ruins  afforded  much  more  for 
the  Obfervation  of  the  Curious  than  now  ;  for  they  are 
fmce  dug  away,  for  mending  the  Highways.  The  firft 
'Jferulam  was  tiormed  and  taken  by  "Julius  Cafar.  And 
here  CaJJlbelan,  a  famous  Britijh  King,  then  kept  his 
*  Court 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN,  187 

Court.  The  fuft  Deftrudlion  of  the  Place  is  fuppofed 
to  have  been  by  Boadicea,  the  famous  Britifi  Queen, 
who  cut  off  70,000  Romans  in  one  Battle  ;  and  the 
fecond  (which  was  erected  on  the  Ruins  of  the  other) 
in  the  Wars  between  the  Britons  and  Saxons  ;  and  al- 
moft  infinite  ars  the  Numbers  of  Antiquities  here  dug 
up.  ^ 

The  Origin  of  St.  Allan's  was  owing  to  the  Mo- 
ri adery  built  by  Ojfa^  King  of  the  Msroians^  to  ihe 
Memory  of  St.  Man,  in  Expiation  of  his  barbarous 
Murder  of  Ethelbcrty  King  of  the  Eajl- Angles,  whom 
he  had  treacheroufly  inveigled  to  hisCourt,on  Pretence 
of  marrying  his  Daughter  ;  and  the  fame  Ojfa  it  was 
that  built  Hertford  Church,  and  dedicated"  it  to  St. 
Ethelbert,  and  made  a  Journey  to  Rome  as  further 
Penance,  where  he  was  abfolved,  tho'  he  kept  the  mur- 
dered Prince's  Dominions,  and  joined  them  to  hi& 
own. 

Of  all  the  Monafteries  in  England,  none  could  out- 
{bine  this.  Its  Revenue  was  great,  and  its  Privileges 
11  greater.  In  the  Royalties  it  had  from  its  Founder,, 
and  the  Efpifcopcil  Powers  from  the  Pope,  none  came 
up  to  it.  The  mitred  Abbot  had  Precedency  of  all  in, 
England,  and  was  fubject  to  no  Eccleiiaftical  Power, 
but  the  Pope  immediately  j  and  he  had  Epifcopal  Ju- 
rifdicYion  over  both  Clergy  and  Laity,  in  all  the  Lands 
belonging  to  his  Monaftery.'  From  firft  to  lalt  they 
were  41  in  Number,  and  many  of  the-m  Perfons  of, 
great  Accomplishments,  and  high  Birth  :  the  7Qth  of 
which,  though  not  high-born,  was  Cardinal  Ifolfey* 
The  laft  Abbot  was  Richard  Boreman,  who  at  the 
DiiTolution  quietly  furrendered  on  the  Royal  Com- 
mand, and  accepted  of  a  Penfion  for  Life  of  266  /.  1 3;*. 
and  4  d. 

Two  bloody  Battles  were  fought  near  this  Place 
between  the  Hbufes  of  York  and  Lancafter  :  the  firft 
^pon  the  23d  of  May  1455.  in  which  the  Yorkifts  got 
the  Day  ;  the  fscond  on  Sbrove-'Tuefday,  in  the  39th 

of. 


j8&  A  T  O  U  R  tbro-  Hertfl 

'of  /&«ry  VI.  when  the  martial  Queen  Margaret 
overcame  the  &/£///;,  who  had  then  the  King  in 
their  Power,  and  fought  under  the  San&ion  of  his 

But'we  muft  not  difmifs  this  Subje&,  without  giving 
Tome  brief  Particulars^  the  famous  Abbey- Church. 
XVe  have  before obferved,  that  it  was  founded  by  King: 
Ufa ;  but  it  has  been  rebuilt  in  Whole  or  Part  feveral 
tin." i.  The  Town  purchafed  it  at  the  Diflblution,  for 
400 /.  which  prevented  fo  noble  a  Fabric  being  pulled 
down,  and  torn  to  Pieces,  for  making  Money  of  the 
Materials  j  arid  it  is  made  a  Parifh-  Church  for  th& 
Borough.  1  he  High  Altar  is  a  curious  Piece  of  Gc- 
thic  Architecture. 

Within  the  North  Entrance  \*Qffa  on  his  Throne,- 
Underneath,  a  Latin  Inlcription,  which  may  be  thus 
read  in  Englijh : 

The  Founder  of  the  Church >  about  the  Tear  79.3* 

Whom  you  behold  ill  paint 'ed,  on  this  Throve 
Sublime -,  isas  once  for  Mercian  Offa  known. 

In  the  moft  Eaflern  Part  of  the  Church  flood  the 
Shrine  :  fix  Holes  remain  in  the  Pavement,  where  the 
Supporters  of  it  were  fixed.  The  Infcription  is  (till  to 
be  feen  : 

S,  ALBANUS  VEROLAMENSIS,  ANGLORUM 
PROTOMARTYR,   17  Junii  293. 

On  the  South  fide  of  the  Shrine,  in  the  Wall  of  the 
South  We,  is  Duke  HUMPHRY'S  Monument,  with 
the  Arms  of  France  and  England  quartered,  and  a  du- 
cal Coronet.  In  Niches  on  the  South-fide  are  17 
Kings ;  the  Niches  on  the  other  Side  have  none  re- 
maining. The  Infcription  on  the  Duke's  Monu- 
ment is  in  Lat'tUy  which  may  be  thus  englifhed  : 

Sacrec! 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Sacred  to  tb{  pious  Memory  of  an  excellent  Man. 

Interred  within  this  confecrated  Ground 
Lies  be,  whom  Henry  his  P rote 51  or  found, 
'Good Humphry,  Glo'fter'j  Duke,  who  ivell  could  fpy 
Fraud  coucti  d -within  the  blind  Impoflors  Eye  *. 
His  Country's  Light,  the  State's  revered  Support, 
Who  Peace,  and  rifing  Learning,  deign' d  to  court  j 
Whence  his  rich  Library,  at  Oxford  placd, 
Her  ample  Schools  with  facred  Influence  gracd  : 
Yet  fell  beneath  an  envious  Womaris  Wile, 
Both  to  herfelf,  her  King,  and  Kingdom,  vile  ; 
Who  jcarce  allow  V  his  Bones  this  Spot  of  Land : 
Tet,  fpite  of  Emy,  Jhall  his  Glory  ft  and. 

It  is  about  50  Years  ago,  that,  digging  for  a  Crave, 
the  Stairs,  leading  down  to  the  Vault  where  the  Body 
lies,  were  difcovered. 

In  the  Vault  is  a  leaden  Coffin,  with  the  Body  pre- 
ferved  by  the  Pickle  it  lies  in,  except  the  Legs,  from 
which  the  Flefh  is  wafted,  the  Pickle  of  that  End  be- 
ing dried  up.  On  the  Wall  at  the  Eaft-end  of  trre 
Vault  is  a  Crucifix  painted,  with  a  Cup  on  each  Side 
of  the  Head  ;  another  at  the  Side,  and  a  fourth  at  the 
Feet.  The  Vault  is  very  neat,  and  hath  no  offenfive 
Smell.  The  Coffin,  we  are  told,  had  an  Outfide  of 
Wood,  which  is  intirely  gone. 

The  Weft-end  of  the  Choir  hath  a  noble  Piece  of 
Gothic  Workmanship,  for  the  Ornament  of  the  High 
Altar.  Capt.  Poleha?npton,  about  50  Years  ago,  gave 
an  Altar-piece,  which  reprefents  the  laft  Supper. 

Many  curious  Medals  and  Coins  are  to  be  feen  in 
the  Church,  which  have  been  dug  out  of  the  Ruins  of 
eld  Verulam. 

This  noble  Fabric  hath  wanted  its  Abbot's  Zeals 
and  Purfe  too,  for  Repairs,  fince  it  hath  been  a  Pa- 

*  Alluding  to  a  pretended  miraculous  Cure  of  a  blind  Man,  d~t.-&ed 
ty  the  Duke, 

riih 


*9o  Hertfl 

rifh-Church.  The  Roof  was  preferved  by  Contribu- 
tion of  the  Nobility  and  Gentry  of  England y  many  of 
\vhofe  Arms  were  put  up  on  this  Occafion  ;  and  Mo- 
ney has  been  colle&ed  feveral  times  befides  for  its  Sup- 
port:  indeed  fuch  a  fine  Fabric  nvuft  too  often  ftand 
in  need  of  fuch  Helps,  as  there  is  no  fettled  Fund  to 
maintain  it. 

There  are  three  Churches  in  the  Town  at  prefent, 
•befides  the  Abbey- Church  j  viz.  St.  Michael's,  St.  Pt- 
ler's,  and  St.  Stephen's. 

There  were  alfo  formerly  belonging  to  this  Town 
St.  German's  Chapel,  St.  Mary  Magdalen  s  Chapel,  St. 
Julian's  Hofpital,  the  Hofpital  of  St.  Mary  des  Frees, 
the  Nunnery  of  Sopwell,  &c.  .But  they  are  all  demo- 
lifhed  and  fecularized.  There  was  alfo,  in  the  Town, 
the  Parifh- Church  of  Si.  Andrew,  but  that  had  dropped 
down  before  the  Diilolution. 

Near  this  Plsce  was  Scpivell  Nunnery,  v/hcre  they 
fay  King  Henry  was  married  to  Anne  of  Eden.  In 
the  Heart  of  the  adjoining  Corporation  flood  one  of 
Queen  Eleanor's  Croffes,  demolished  by  the  Inhabit- 
ants. 

In  the  Neighbourhood  of  St.  Man's  is  Gorbamlury\ 
where  is  a  Statue  of  King  HenryVlll.  with  other  things 
worthy  a  Traveller's  Curiofity.  It  is  now  the  Seat  of 
the  Lord  Vifcount  Grimjlon:  but  what  it  will  be  always 
moft  famous  for,  is,  that  the  Manor  was  the  paternal 
Kftate  of  that  Mirror  of  all  Ages,  and  Ornament  oi" 
his  Country,  for  Learning,  Francis  Bacon,  created  Lord 
Verulam^  and  Vifcount  of  St.Jlbans,  once  Lord  Chan- 
cellor of  England,  who  firft  revived  Experimental  Phi- 
lofophy;  of  whofe  Merits,  Rife,  and  Fall,  we  fhall  fay 
nothing,  but  refer  our  Readers  to  his  Life,  written  by 
the  ingenious  Mr.  Mallet.  Sir  Thomas  Meautys,  who 
had  been  the  Secretary  of  this  wonderful  Man,  and  to 
whom  he  conveyed  his  Ellate,  in  Gratitude,  ereded  a 
Monument  for  him  in  St.  Michael's  Church  in  this 
Town,  fitting  thoughtfully  in  an  Elbow- chair. 

The 


Hertf,        CREAT  BRITAIN. 

The  Monument  bears  this  Infcription  : 

Francifc.  Bacon,  Baro  de  Verulam,  Sti.  Albani  Ficect* 

Seu  not  tori  bus  ^Titulh, 
Scientiarum  Lwnen,  Facundice  Lex9 

Sic  fedehat. 

Qui,  pojlquam  omnia  Naturalis  Sapientits 
Et  Civilis  Arcana  evolvijfety 
Natures  Decretum  explevit, 

Compoiita  folvantur, 
An.  Donu  1626.  sEtat.  66. 

TantlViri  Mem.  Thomas  Meautys,  Super/?  it  is  Cultor$ 
Defunfli  Admirator. 

Thus  tranflated  : 

•Yancis  Bacon,  Baron  of  Verulam,  and  Vifcount  of  Sf. 
Alban'j  ;  or  by  bis  more  known  Titles^  The  Light  of 
thg  Sciences,  and  the  Law  of  Eloquence ;  was  thu? 
accujiomed-to  fit.  Who,  after  having  unravelled  all 
the  Myft cries  of  Nature  and  Civil  li^ifdom,  fulfilled 
the  Decree  of  Nature,  That  Things  joined  (houlci 
be  looied,  in  the  Tear  of  our  Lord  1626.  and  of  bit 
Age  66. 

"0  the  Memory  of  fo  great  a  Man,  this  was  eretled  ty 
Thomas  Meautys,  who  reverenced  him  while  living,' 
and  admires  him  dead* 

The  Manor  of  King/bury  was  fometirne  the  Refi- 
fence  of  the  Saxon  Monarchs,  v/hence  its  Name.  It» 
lad  a.Caftle,  which  was  kept  up  till  King  Stephens 
Time,  when  it  was  demolished,  and  the  Site  given  to 
he  Abbey. 

The  late  Duchefs  Dowager  of  Maryborough  had  a 
Jeat  here,  built  by  the  late  Duke  upon  the  River  /7^r-' 
,  which  runs  through  the  Garden  ;  and  who  alfo 
milt  handfome  Alms-houfes  at  the  Entrance  of  the 
Town. 

The 


102  ^TOUR//W          Hertf. 

The  following  remarkable Infcription  and  Character 
is  cut  upon  the  Pedeftal  of  a  fine  Statue  of  the  late 
Queen  Anne,  carved  by  the  noted  Mr.  Fyjbrack,  and 
creeled  at  St.  dtian's,  at  the  Expence  of  the  Duchefs, 
in  Gratitude  to  the  Memory  of  that  excellent  Princefs : 

*  /^VUEEN  4NNE  was  very  graceful  and  ma- 
<   V^.jellic  in  herPerfon  :  Religious  without  Affecla- 

*  tion.     She  always  meant  well.     She  had  no  falfe 
Ambition  ;  which  appeared  by  her  never  complain- 
ing at  King  JPtllMm's  being  preferred  to  the  Crown 
before  her,  when  it  was  taken  from  the  King  her 
Father,  for  following  'fuch  Counfels,  and  purfuing 
fuch  Meafures,  as  rendered  the  Revolution  neceflary. 
It  was  her  greateft  Affliction,  to  be  forced  to  ad: 
-againft  him,  even  for  Security.     Her  Journey  to 
Nottingham  was  never  concerted,  but  occasioned  by 
the  great  Confternation  fne  was  under  at  the  King's 
fudden  Return  from  Salt/bury. 

*  She  always  paid  the  greateft  Refpecl  to  King  Wil- 
liam and  Queen  Mary;  never  infifted  upon  any  one 
Circumftance  of  Grandeur,  more  than  what  was  efta- 
bliihed  in  her  Family  by  King  Charles  II.  tho',  after 
the  Revolution,  (he  was  preemptive  Heir  to  the 

*  Crown,  and,  after  the  Death  of  her  Sifter,  was  in 
«  the  Place  of  Prince  of  Wales* 

*  Upon  her  Acceflion  to  the  Throne,  the  Civil  Lift 
c  was  not  increafed.   The  late  Earl  ofGodolphtn,  Lord 

*  High  Treafurer  of  England,  often  faid,  that,  from 

*  Accidents  in  the  Cuftoms,  and  Lenity  in  the  Col- 
'  ledlion,  it  did  not  arife,  one  Year  with  another,  to 

*  more  than  500,000  /.  a  Year. 

*  She  had  no  Vanity  in  her  Expences,  nor  bought 

*  any  one  Jewel  in  the  whole  Time  of  her  Reign. 

4  She  paid  out  of  her  Civil  Lift  many  Penfions  grant- 

*  ed  in  former  Reigns,  which  have  fmce  been  thrown 

*  upon  the  Public. 

«  When 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  793 

4  When  aWar  was  neceflary  to  fecure  Europe  againft 

*  the  Power  of  France,  fhe  contributed,  in  one  Year, 
4  towards  the  War,  out  of  her  Civil  Lift,  ioo,coo  /. 

*  in  Eafe  of  her  Subje&s. 

4  She  granted  the  Revenue  arifing  from  the  F  eft 

*  Fruits,   to  augment  the  Provifions  of  the  poorer 

*  CJe-gy. 

'  She  never  refufed  her  private  Charity  to  proper 
4  Obje<3s. 

4  Till  a  few  Years  before  her  Death,  (he  never  had 

*  but  20,000  /.  a  Year  for  her  Privy-Purfe.     At  the 
4  latter  End  of  her  Reign,  it  did  not  exceed  26,000  /. 

*  a  Year  ;  which  was  much  to  her  Honour,'  bccaufe 

*  it  is  fubjeCt  to  no  Account.     And  as  to  her  Robes, 
4  it  will   appear  by  the  Records   in   the  Exchequer, 
4  that  in  mr:e  Years  (he  fpent  only  32,050  A  includ- 
'  ing  the  Coronation  Expence. 

4  She  was  extremely  well-  bred,  treated  her  chief  La- 
4  dies  and  Servants  as  if  they  had  been  her  Equals.  Her 
4  Behaviour  to  all  that  approached  her  was  decent,  and 
4  full  of  Dignity  ;  and  {hewed  Condefceniion,  without 
*•  Art  or  Meannefs. 

*  All  this  I  know  to  b<:  true. 
4  SARAH  MARLBOROUGH. 

4    M.DCC. XXXVIII.* 

At  Titlnauger  near  Cohiey  is  a  very  hand fome  Seat  of 
Sir  Henry  Pope  B'unt,  {landing  about  a  Quarter  of  a 
Mile  North  of  the  Road.  It  feems  to  be  very  large  ; 
and  the  Fields  and  iMeadows  about  it  make  it  very  piep- 
lant in  Summer. 

Having  thus  gone  over  the  firft  Parti  propofed  of  this 
Country,  which  lies  South  and  South- weft  of  St.A.'&an's 
Road,  I  (hall  now  bend  my  Courfe  North  eaft  towards 
Hertford^  and  from  thence  North- weft,  to  take  in  fuch 
Part  of  the  middle  Diviiion  as  lies  between  the  two  ca- 

VoL.li.  K.  pital 


,94  Hertf. 

pital  Roads  on  that  Side  of  Hertford ;  referving  that 
which  lies  Eaft  of  it  for  my  Return  towards  Lond:.n. 

The  next  Town  in  my  Way  is  Hatfidd,  \~  com- 
puted Miles  from  London  :  it  is  a  Market-town  ;  but 
much  more  famous  is  Hatfteld-houje,  which  lies  near 
it;  from  whence  K.  Edward  VI.  and  Queen  Elizabeth 
were  both  conduced  totheThrone,having  rcfided  here 
for  fome  time.  King  James  made  an  Exchange  of 
this  Manor  in  the  fourth  Year  of  his  Reign,  for  that 
of  Theobalds,  as  hereafter  mentioned,  \vith  Sir  Rcbeit 
Cecil,  afterwards  Earl  of  Salijbury^  who  built  this  mag- 
nificent Houfe,  and  made  the  Vineyard  in  the  Park, 
thro'  which  the  River  Lee  hath  its  Courfe,  adorning 
that  Garden.  The  Redory  of  Hatjield  is  eiteemed  one 
of  the  beft  in  England;  Winwich  in  Laricdjmre,  and 
another  in  Durham,  have  larger  Revenues  j  but  this 
has  a  better  Situation. 

Saitndridge,  which  lies  a  little  North  weft  of  Hat- 
•field^  deferves  to  be  mentioned,  as  it  gave  Tide  of 
±>aron  to  the  great  Duke  of  Marlborougb  ;  and  be- 
longed to  his  Dowager,  a  Defcendent  of  the  Family  of 
"Jennings,  of  this  Place.  But  one  thing  muit  be  ob- 
ferved  withal,  that,  when  I  was  there  laft,  the  Steeple 
lay  buried  in  its  own  Rubbifh,  as  it  had  done  for  40 
Years  together;  and  the  Beils  hung  in  the  Church  be- 
hind the  Door ;  and  this,  I  fuppofe,  continues  to  be 
its  prefent  State. 

North-Myms  ftands  a  little  Eaft  of  Calney,  and  is 
remarkable  for  having  in  irs  Neighbourhood  the  Seat 
of  the  fate  Sir  "Jsfepb  Jfkyll^  M after  of  the  Roil;-,  in 
Right  of  his  Lady,  who  was  Heir  to  her  late  Brother 
the  great  Lord  Sowers,  It  has  a  moft  delightful  Pro- 
fpe<5t.  The  Body  of  that  noble  Lord  lies  interred  in 
the  Chancel  of  the  Church  here,  without  ar>y  Infcrip- 
tion,  in  Allufion,  as  one  would  fuppofe,  to  his  Motto, 
Prodejje  quam  confpici.  This  Seat  is  now  the  Pro- 
perty of  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Leeds  (who  has  put 

a  great 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  195- 

a  great  Part  of  the  Houfe  and  Gardens  In  good  Re- 
pair), and  is  his  Retirement  from  London,  during  any 
fhort  Interval  that  may  happen  in  the  Sdlions  of  Par- 
liament. 

We  come  now  to  Hertford^  the  County  town,  20 
computed  Miles  from  London  ;  a  Corporation  govern- 
ed by  a  Mayor  and  Burgefies.  It  is  pleafantly  Tituated 
in  a  wholefome  Air,  and  a  dry  Vale,  having  a  good 
weekly  Market  well  ftored  with  Corn,  and  all  Sorts 
of  Provifions.  It  is  very  ar.tient,  and  is  bui't  in  the 
Form  of  a  Y,  with -a  Cattle  in  the  Middle  ofc  the  two 
Horns.  It  contains  feveral  Streets  and  Lanes,  well 
filled  with  handforne  new-built  Houfes.  In  Edward 
Ill's  Time,  it  had  petitioned  to  be  disburdened  of 
the  Expence  of  fending  two  Members  to  Parliament, 
on  Inability  to  pay  their  Reprefentatives  Wages  :  but 
21  Jac.  I.  they  petitioned  to  be  reftored  to  their  Right* 
and  fuccee-Jed. 

There  is  a  free  Grammar- fchool  for  the  Children  of 
this  Town,  ereited  by  Richard  Hale,,  Efq;  in  King 
James  I.'s  Reign.  The  Houfe,  being  rebuilt  a  few 
Years  ago,  is  a  very  good  one.  Of  the  five  Churches 
Hertford  once  had,  there  are  but  two  remaining,  viz. 
All  Saints  and  St.  Andrew's. 

The  River  Lee  was  once  navigable  for  Ships  as 
nigh  as  Hertford^  to  which  the  Danes  came  by  this 
River,  in  the  Reign  of  King  Alfred^  who  having 
blocked  them  up  in  the  Fortrefs,  which  they  haflily 
ere&ed  there,  deprived  them  of  their  Ships,  either  by 
damming  up  the  Stream,  fo  as  to  force  it  to  flow  over 
all  the  fiat  Country  adjacent,  as  fome  fay,  or  by  cut- 
ting three  new  Channels,  as  others  report.  But  in 
whatever  Way  it  was  done,  the  River  was  fpoiled, 
till  within  fomewhat  more  than  a  Century  pail,  when 
with  great  Labour  and  Expence  it  was  fo  far  repair- 
ed, and  the  Navigation  of  it  reftored,  that,  as  we  fee 
at  this  Day,  wim  equal  Conveniency  to  this  City, 
and  the  County  of  Hertford,  Barges  now  come  down 

K  2  from 


A  T  O  U  Pv  thro  Hertf. 

from  Ware,  with  Malt  and  Con^  into  the  Thames, 
and  return  again  laden  with  Coals. 

Near  Hertford  is  a  Seat  called  Ball,  of  the  late  Go- 
vernor Harrifonj  fituated  on  an  Hill,  which  commands 
a  Profpecl  of  the  Country  round  it ;  as  is  likewife,  in 
its  Neighbourhood,  a  Seat  of  the  darks.,  very  delight- 
fully fituated  alfo. 

Karl  Coivper  has  an  handfome  Seat  nrar  Hert'mg- 
fordbury,  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Hertford^  bu'h  by 
his  Father  the  great  Lord  Chancellor  of  that  Name  ; 
who  erected  in  the  Church-yard,  by  his  iVlother's  De- 
lire,  a 'fomb  for  her,  with  an  Infcription  to  he; 
nour. 

Welwyn  deferves  to  be  mentioned  for  its  Spaw,  the 
Virtues  of  which  of  late  Years  were  revived  and  made 
known  by  a  reverend  and  learned  Doclor,  whofe 
Wr, tings  have  done  Honour  to  his  Country;  and 
who,  on  Trial,  had  found  them  to  nave  the  fame 
Qualities  as  thofe-ol  Tunbrldge.  Tnis  was  found  out 
60  Years  ago  :  but  an  eminent  Phyfician  at  that  time, 
who  was  a  great  Patron  of  them,  dying,  they  were 
negle&ed  till  within  thefe  25  Years  pail. 

In  the  Year  I75f.  the  Ladies  round  the  Country, 
and  particularly  thofe  whofe  Seats  were  near  IVelwyn^ 
and  tHe  Gentlemen  of  Courfe,  agreed  to  eltabiiir,  a 
Breakfaft  meeting  at  Welwyn  ;  and  a  genteel-fpiritod 
Man  of  that  Town  (by  Trade  a  Tanner,  by  his  Man- 
ners and  Circumftanc.es  a  Gentleman)  accommodated 
the  Allembly  with  a  large  Barn  for  their  Dancing  and 
]V!ufic-room  ;  to  be  afcended  by  a  broad  Step  Ladder. 
Very  few  need  to  be  the  Conveniences,  with  regard  to 
Place  and  Elegance,  that  will  draw  together  young 
Perfons  of  both  Sexes,  for  the  Sake  of  neighbourly 
and  focial  Convention  ;  the  Refort  of  genteel  Com- 
pany to  the  Place  increafed  fo  much  on  the  appointed 
Days  in  the  Summer- feafon,  notwithstanding  the  Fra- 
grance of  the  Vats  and  Tan- pits  furrounding  the  Jf- 
fembly-roomy  that  the  Meeting  was  continued  in  it  for 

fome 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  lyy 

feme  Years.  But  very  lately,  the  Barn  (made  ele- 
gant by  the  Company  ufmg  it)  being  found  to  be  at 
too  great  a  Diiiance  from  the  Kettle,  as  I  may  call 
it,  in  which  the  Mineral  Water  bubbles  up,  to  ac- 
commodate the  Drinkers  of  it,  a  "neatifh,  plain,  and 
fimple  AfTembly-room,  over-againft  the  Spaw,  is  ap- 
propriated for  the  Breakfafl meetings,  Dancings,  &c. 

The  Manor  of  Gabions  lies  a  litde  North  of  Hert- 
ford^ and  will  be  for  ever  famous  on  occafioti  of  its 
being  the  Family-feat  of  the  great  Sir  Thomas  More^ 
Lord  Chancellor  of  England  in  the  Reign  of  Henry 
VIII.  which  defpotic  Monarch  took  off  his  Head,  for 
refufing  to  acknowlege  his  Supremacy.  It  was  when 
I  was  lafl  there  the  Property  of  Sir  "Jeremy  Sambroke, 
Bart,  fince  deceafed  :  who,  with  regard  to  the  Beauty  of 
its  Gardens,  fcrV.  had  made  the  PJ ace  one  of  the  moft 
remarkable  Curiofities  in  England. 

A  little  farther  North,  at  Wotton^  is  the  Manfion- 
houfe  ofiht-Bottbrti  finely  fainted  on  a  rifing  Ground, 
and  watered  with  Anal!  Streams,  which  fail  into  the 
Beane^  on  the  South  of  it.  Jt  (lands  in  a  Park  beau- 
tifully confiding  of  Hills  and  Flats,  and  efteemed  for 
as  good  Timber  as  the  Ifland  produces.  /About  50 
Years  fince,  one  Tree  was  fold  for  43  /.  Eighteen 
Horfes  were  had  to  draw  one  Part  of  it,  when  flit ; 
and  out  of  it  the  Cut- water  to  the  Royal  Sovereign  was 
made.  Another,  called  the  Walking-ftu^  might  fome 
X^ars  ago  have  been  fold  for  50  Guineas  ;  but  was 
decaying  when  I  was  there,  by  the  burrowing  of  Rab- 
bets under  it.  There  is  a  good  Free-fchool  in  this 
Village  for  poor  Children  ;  with  fome  of  whom  5 /. 
is  to  be  given  Aoprentice. 

Stevenage  is  28  computed  Miles  from  London,  and 
lies  North-weft  of  Hertford.  It  is  a  fmall  Market- 
town  :  the  Church  (lands  upon  an  Hill,  and  confilts 
of  a  Nave  and  two  Ailes,  and  the  Chancel  hath  a 
Chapel  on  each  Side.  In  the  Steeple  is  a  Ring  of  ilx 

K  3  Beils. 


198  A  TOUR  thro  Hertf. 

Bells.     K^re  is  a  good  Free-fchoo),  as  well  for  Petit 
as  Grammar  Scholars, 

Walkein  is  near  it,  Norrh-eaft,  on  the  River Beane. 
I  mention  it  on  account  of  the  poor  Jane  lyennan^ 
who  50  or  6.0  Years  ago  was  tried  for  a  Witch, 
the  laft,  we  hope,  that  ever  will  undergo  fuch  a  Trial 
in  England ;  the  old  Law  againft  Witches  being  re- 
pealed. Mr.  Juflice  Powell  got  a  Reprieve  for  the 
poor  Creature,  after  the  Jury  had  found  her  guilty, 
contrary  to  his  Directions.  She  lived  fcveral  Years 
afterwards  on  an  Allowance  from  the  Pa  ifh.  The 
deluded  Wretch  had  been  frightened  into  a  Confef- 
fion,  that  {he  was  a  Witch  ;  and  thereupon  was  com- 
mitted by  Sir  Henry  Cbau'ncey,  of  Yardlybury,  who 
would  fain  have  had  her  retract,  and  pacify  her  Accu- 
fers.  This  Gentleman  was  one  of  the  deprived  Judges 
of  "James  II.  but  it  is  faid  he  never  fat  as  Judge  but 
one  Day.  He  wrote  The  Antiquities  of  HERTFORD- 
SHIRE. 

It  is  reported  likewife,  that  another  Woman  being 
tried  before  Judge  Powell,  who,  among  other  things 
that  conftituted  her  a  Witch,  had  laid  to  her  Charge, 
Tlut  flie  could  fly  ;  Ay  !  faid  the  Judge  ;  And  is  this 
true?  Do  you  fay  you  can  fly  ?  Tes,  lean,  faid  ihe.-— 
So  you  may  if  you  will,  then,  replied  the  Judge  ;  / 
have  no  Law-  again/I  it.  And  at  the  Trial  of  Jan* 
Ifanman,  the  Court  being  full  of  fine  Ladies,  the  old 
Judge  very  gallantly  told  the  Jury,  c  They  muft  not 
'  look  out  for  Witches  among  the  Old  Women,  but 
1  among  the  Young.' 

I  pa/Ted  by  Benington  place,  late  the  Seat  of  the  an- 
tient  Family  of  the  Ctefars ;  but  a  few  Years  fince 
burnt  down.  There  was  formerly  aCaitle  there  ;  the 
Hill  on  which  it  flood  ftill  remains  deep  ditched. 

At  Siffivernes,  in  Cadicvte  Farifh,  in  the  Year  1  627. 
was  a  moft  prodigious  Walnut-tree,  covering  76  Poles 
of  Ground.  The  Weight  of  the  Boughs  at  laft  cleft 
the  Trunk  to  the  Ground.  Mr,  Pcnn,  then  Lord  of 

the 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  199 

the  Manor,  had  19  Loads  of  Planks  out  of  it ;  a  Gun- 
ftock- maker  at  London  had  as  much  as  coil  10  /.  Car- 
riage: there  were  30  JLoads  more  of  Roots  and  Branches. 
This  was  attefted  by  Edward  lyivgate,  before  a  neigh- 
bouring Juftice  of  Peace,  to  whom  Mr.-Penn  declared  ' 
he  had  been  offered  50  /.  for  the  Tree.  And  Jafper 
Docura,  of  the  Parifh,  attefted,  That,  when  he  was 
15  Years  old,  the  Compafa  of  both  his  Arms  would 
not  reach  it  at  eight  times. 

Hit  chin  is  a  Market- town,  lying  in  a  Bottom,  out 
of  any  great  Road,  diftant  from  London  30  computed 
Miles,  and  within  three  Miles  of  Bedfordjllre.  'Tis 
governed  by  a  Bailiff  and  four  Coniiables,  and  was 
formerly  famous  for  the  Staple  Commodities  of  this 
Kingdom.  The  Church  is  large,  dedicated  to  St. 
Mary.  It  confifts  of  the  Nave  and  two  Ailcs,  with 
two  Chapels  or  Chancels.  The  Steeple  has  a  Ring 
of  fix  Bells,  but  is  low,  and  difproportior.ate  to  the 
Chancel.  In  the  North-Aile  Window  are  Paintings 
of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  and  of  the  'Four  Car- 
dinal Virtues;  and,  in  the  next  North  Window,  the 
Beatitudes.  The  Front  hath  the  12  Apoftlcs  round 
it ;  but  they  have  been  Sufferers  from  the  booted  Saints 
of  Forty  one.  There  are  many  Monuments  in  it.  A 
good  Free-fchool,  and  other  charitable  Benefactions, 
have  been  added  to  the  Town. 

I  could  not  mifs  taking  notice  of  Hexton,  on  the 
North-weft  Edge  of  the  County,  next  Bedfordfoire. 
where  was  a  Battle  between  the  Danes  and  Saxons  t 
fome  Remains  of  which  are  vifible  between  this  Place 
and  Luton,  as  large  Burrows,  isfc.  Half  a  Mile  to  the 
South  of  this  Town  is  a  fortified  Piece  of  Ground, 
called  Ravenjborougb-cfiftle.  The  Camp  is  a  fort  of 
Oblong,  containing  about  16  Acres,  the  Fortifica- 
tion intire.  Nature  has  fo  well  (lengthened  it  that 
IODO  Men  may  defend  it  againft  a  great  Array  :  it 
is  encompafTed  with  a  Valley,  and  a  very  fteep  Hill, 
inacceiHbie  by  an  Army  any- where  but  at  the  Point  of 

K  4  En- 


2oo  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Hertf. 

Entrance,  which  is  by  a  gradual  Afcent  of  a  Quarter 
of  a  Mile. 

The  Eeryjlade^  an  Houfe  then  poflefled  by  y^« 
Cnj/f,  Efq;  though  low,  and  in  the  Dirt,  is  now  an 
agreeable  Summer  houfe  ;  which  it  owes  chiefly  to 
St.  Faith's  Well,  a  fine  Spring  at  Ravenfborottgh.  A 
mcory  Piece  of  Ground,  where  the  Spring  rifes,  is 
cut  into  Canals,  which  are  flocked  with  Trouts, 
many  of  them  22  Inches  long.  Thefe,  having  been 
ufed'to  take  their  Food  from  the  Mailer's  Hand,  out 
of  a  Bowl  with  a  long  Handle  to  it,  come  rolling  up 
to  the  Surface.  The  Bottom  is  white,  cither  from 
Chalk  or  Sand  ;  and  fo  tranfparent,  that  every  Fifh 
may  be  feen  that  comes  out  of  its  Hole.  To  pre- 
ferve  them  from  groping,  the  Banks  are  wharfed,  and 
in  fome  Places  fupported  with  Timber ;  fo  that  the 
Fiih  can  {belter  themfelves  underneath  ;  and  a  Man 
muft  have  his  Head  and  Shoulders  in  Water,  who 
ftoops  down  to  them.  From  hence  the  Water  feeds  a 
hrge  Canal  in  the  Garden,  ftored  with  Carp  and 
Tench;  and  there  might  be  made  Bafons  or  Canals  to 
any  Dirnenfions. 

Near  Hextan  is  a  fquare  Roman  Camp  upon  a  Pro- 
montory juft  big  enough  for  the  Purpofe,  and  under  it 
is  a  fine  Spring. 

Liliho  is  a  fine  Plat  of  Ground  upon  an  Hill,  where 
an  Horfe-race  is  kept.  It  lies  a  little  South  of  Hexton^ 
juft  by  the  Iken'mg. 

Near  Pirton  Church  has  been  a  Caftle  of  the  Saxons 
or  Normans t  with  a  Keep. 

I  proceeded  next  to  Baldock,  fitnated  on  the  Ikening- 
Jlreet^  as  it  leads  from  Dunjlable  to  Roy/Ion.  It  is  a 
large  Market-town,  29  computed  Miles  from  Lon- 
don. It  is  of  chief  Note  for  its  many  Malfters.  The 
Church  ftands  in  the  Middle  of  the  Town  j  it  is  an. 
handibme  high-built  Edifice,  with  a  Ring  o!  fix  good 
Bells.  It  has  three  Chancels,  but  the  two  outward 
are  rather  Chapels.  The  Ikemng-Jlrsct^  about  Bal- 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  201 

dock,  now  appears  but  like  a  Field-way.  Between 
Baldock  and  Ideford  it  goes  thro'  an  Entrenchment, 
confifting  of  the  Remains,  of  a  Britijh  Town,  now 
called  tilbury-hill,  hleford  retains  the  Name  of  the 
Street,  which  at  this  Place  pafles  a  Rivulet  with  a  Irrong 
Ford,  wanting  Reparation. 

This  Street,  quite  to  the  Thames  in  Qxfordflnre, 
goes  at  the  Bottom  of  a  continued  Ridge  of  Hills,  called 
the  Chiltern,  being  Chalk,  and  the  natural  and  civil 
Boundary  between  the  Couties  of  Hertford  and  Bed- 
ford, very  fteep  Northward. 

As  \helktning-jlreet  and  the/0/}  traverfed  the  King- 
dom from  South  weft  toNorth-eaft,  parallel  to  each 
other,  and  fFatling-Jlrtet  eroded  thefe  quite  the  con- 
trary Way  with  an  equal  Obliquitv,  the  Herman-firect 
palled  directly  North  and  South.  This  Word  is  8axony 
and  lignifies  a  Soldier  or  Warrior,  which  Name  is  ob- 
tained from  being  a  Military  Way. 

It  begins  at  Neiuhaven,  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River 
Oufe  m^Sufjex  ;  and  pafles  on  the  Weft-fide  of  that 
River,  thro'  Ridmil,  then  through  Lewes  by  hfeld\ 
after  which  it  feems  to  pafs  over  the  River  at  Sham- 
bridge^  and  fo  proceeds  to  Eaft-  Grinftead ;  but  is  loft 
in  palling  thro'  the  great  Woods.  Then  thro'Suny  it 
goes  by  Stane-Jlreet,  Croydon,  Stretham  ;  and  by  its 
pointing  we  may  conclude  was  originally  defigned  to 
pafs  the  Thames  at  the  Ferry  called  Stangate  by  Lam- 
beth, where  it  coincides  with  the  lr/atlmg-Jlreet.  There 
the  Road  went,  before  London  became  conli.lerable  : 
buts  fince  that  Period,  the  Traces  of  the  Roads  near 
that  Capital  have  grown  very  obfcure.  The  original 
Road  perhaps  pafTes  through  unfrequented  Ways  near 
Enjuld  and  Herman  Jlreet,  which  feems  from  thence 
to  have  borrowed  its  Name. 

On  theEaftern-fide  of  Enfeld-cbace  by  Eujh-hiii,  is 
a  circular  Britifo  Camp  upon  an  Eminence,  decline- 
ing  South- welt.  But  the  antient  Road  appeais  upon 
a  CommoA  on  this  Side  Hertford  by  Ball's  park \  ar;d 

K  5  |>afle* 


id  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Hertf. 

pafles  the  River  below  Hertford ;  then  goes  through 
Ware-park,  and  falls  into  the  prefent  Road  on  this 
Side  Eimtlngford,  and  fo  to  Royjlon,  where  it  crofles 
the  Jkemng-Jireet,  coming  from  Tring  thro'  Dun/table, 
going  into  Suffolk,  Thefe  are  the  principal  Places  upon 
the  two  Roads,  which  we  thought  fit  to  mention  to- 
gether. 

At  Baldack  I  crofted  the  North  Road,  and  got  into 
the  third  Divifion  I  propofed,  next  Cambridggjbtre  and 
Ejffex  ',  and  when  I  have  parted  thro'  it,  I  will  return 
back  again  South,  and  talce  a  View  of  fuch  Towns 
lying  on  the  Baft- fide  of  the  middle  Divifion  as  I  have 
not  been  at  already. 

In  the  Year  1724.  between  Caldecot  and  Henx- 
ivorthy  feveral  Roman  Antiquities  were  dug  up.  Work- 
men, digging  Gravel  for  the  Repair  of  the  great 
Northern  Road,  ftruck  upon  fome  earthen  VefFels, 
or  large  Urns,  full  of  Afhes,  and  burnt  Bones,  but 
rotten  ;  near  them  an  human  Skeleton,  with  the 
Head  towards  the  South- eaft,  the  Feet  North- weft. 
Several  Bodies  were  found  in  the  fame  Portion,  not 
above  a  Foot  under  the  Surface  of  the  Earth,  and 
with  Urns,  great  or  fmall,  near  them,  and  Patera's 
of  fine  red  Earth,  fome  with  the  linpreffion  of  the 
Maker  at  the  Bottom  ;  alfo  Glafs  Lacrymatories, 
Ampulla's,  a  Rrafs  Tribulus,  fix  fmall  Glafies,  two 
large  Beads  of  a  green  Colour,  and  other  Fragments. 

i  went  through  the  Village  of  djhwell,  which 
ftands  not  far  from  Caldecot,  on  the  Source  .of  the 
the  Borders  of  Cambridgejhire,  which  breaks 
out  of  a  Rock  here  from  many  Springs,  with  fuch 
Force  as  to  form  a  Stream  remarkably  clear,  but 
ib  cold,  that  it  gripes  Horfes  not  ufed  to  drink  it. 
The  Water  here  bubbles  out,  at  as  many  Places, 
and  as  abundantly,  and  in  juft  fuch  a  Bottom  un- 
der an  Hill,  as  doth  the  Ifis  or  Thames  in  Glou~ 
fi^re.  In  Domcjday  Book,  this  Village  is  called 
a  Borough,  having  14  BurgefTes,  and  a  Market  ;  an- 

tiently 


Hertf.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  203 

tiently  alfo  it  had  four  Fairs.  Mr.Camden  thinks 
the  Village  Roman ;  and  at  half  a  Mile  Diftance^ 
South  of  this  Source  of  the  Rhee,  is  a  Spot  of 
Ground  taken  in  by  a  Vallum^  and  generally  thought 
to  be  one  of  the  Caftra  Exphratorum  of  the  J£0- 
mans  ;  it  is  called  Arbury  Banks^  and  confifts  of  about 
12  Acres  ;  and  Roman  Coins  have  been  found  herej 
but  ftill  it  wants  feveral  Requifites  for  a  Roman 
Camp,  which  I  have  not  room  to  particularize. 
Aflnvell-field  affords  a  Stone  Quarry,  out  of  which  the 
Stones  of  moft  of  the  Churches  of  this  Side,  and  the 
neighbouring  Part  of  Bedford/hire,  having  been  dug. 
The  Church  has  an  handfome  Chancel,  three  large 
Ailes,  a  lofty  Tower  at  the  Weft  cn^,  u'ith  a  Ring 
of  fix  Bells,  and  a  Chapel  on  the  North-iide  the 
Chancel. 

I  now  come  to  Royfton9  fituateci  upon  the  u-tmoft 
Northern  Border  of  Hertfordfo'ire^  infomuch  that 
Part  of  it  is  in  Cambridgejhire,  33  computed  Miles 
frofn  London..  The  Fields  about  this  Town  have 
upon  almoft  every  Eminence  a  Barrow  $  and  they  lie 
very  thick  by  the  Ikemnr-ftreetj  Eaft  of  this  Tov/n. 
Here  was  an  Monaftery  founded  in  Honour  of  St.  Tho- 
mas a  Beckrt,  as  alfo  an  Hofpital,  both  fwajlowed  up 
in  the  DifTolution  of  Henry  VIII.  but  the  Priory- 
church  was  purchafed  by  the  Inhabitants,  and  made  a 
Parifh  Church  of.  It  confifts  of  a  Nave,  with  an  Aile 
on  each  Side,  and  a  Square  Tower  with  a  Ring  of  five 
Bells  in  it. 

The  Town  became  populous,  on  creeling  the  pre- 
fent  Poft-road  through  it,  which  before  ran.  along  the 
Herman- fir  set  ^  through  Barkivay  to  Bigglefwade.  It 
is  now  a  good  Town,  and  well  inhabited,  and  has  a 
great  Corn-market  on  Wednefdays^  and  is  full  of  good 
inns.  A  School- houfe  was  erected  here  by  Contribu- 
tion of  the  Town  and  Country,  Anno  17*6. 

Two  Miles  both  Ways  of  Royjhn  is  chalky  Soil  ; 

about  Pucker  idge  it  is  gravelly:  in  other  Places  adjoin- 

K  6  "  in* 


204  ^  TOUR  tbro  Hertf. 

ing  are  Camps,  and  Roman  Antiquities.  At  Had/lock 
is  "he  Skin  of  a  Danijh  King  nailed  upon  the  Church- 
doors,  as  reported. 

Royjhn  was  a  Roman  Town  before  Roifia  built  her 
religious  Houfe  here.  Roman  Coins  have  been  dug 
xi p  near  the  Spot.  There  feems  to  be  the  Stamp  of 
Roifia  s  Crofs  ftill  remaining  at  the  Corner  of  the  Inn, 
juit  where  the  two  Roads  meet.  The  Earl  of  Oxford, 
digging  Canals  at  Wimple,  when  he  had  that  Seat, 
found  many  Bodies,  and  rufty  Pieces  of  Iron,  the  Re- 
mains of  fome  Battle. 

And  now  I  bend  my  Courfe  Southward,  towards 
London. 

The  Church  of  Tfarfit&t,  which  lies  among  the 
Hills,  a  little  South  of  Royjlon,  is  obliged  to  Francis 
Lord  Bilhop  of  Ely,  once  Reclor  of  it,  who  paved 
the  Chancel  with  Free  ftone,  the  Area  of  the  Altar 
with  Marble;  wainfcoted  the  Walls,  made  it  into  the 
Form  of  a  Choir,  and  cieled  it  with  Fret-work.  'Tis 
a  Rectory  of  great  Value,  and  is  rated  in  the  Firft- 
fruits  Office  at  50 /.  a  Year.  Till  lately  was  at  Ther< 
field  Furniture  of  all  Sorts  for  the  Ufe  of  poor  Peoples 
Weddings,  fuch  as  was  at  Braughing ;  but  they  are 
now  loft,  or  converted  to  other  Ufes,  even  literally  to 
Plough  iba: es  and  Peas-hooks. 

Barkway  is  a  Market- town.  The  Church  flands 
in  the  Midft  of  it,  with  an  Aile  on  each  Side,  and  a 
Tower  with  five  Bells,  and  a  Turret  clock.  The 
Creation  of  the  World  is  painted  on  one  of  the  Win- 
dows. In  one  Pane  at  top  is  a  bodily  Reprefentaticn 
of  the  Deity,  as  a  Man  in  a  loofe  Robe,  down  to  his 
Feet,  with  the  Globe  before  him,  and  the  Motto  un- 
der, De  opere  primte  dm.  The  next  Pane  has  the 
fame,  with  Hands  expanded,  {landing  on  the  Firma- 
ment, in  the  Midft  of  the  Water ;  under  which,  De 
cpere  ftcunda  dlei.  The  third  has  the  fame  Figure, 
among  green  Trees  ajjd  Herbs  j  the  Legend  loft,  and 
three  other  Panes,  in  order,  under  thefe.  The  Paint- 
ing 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

ing  of  the  fourth  is  loft.  The  fifth  has  the  fame  Fi- 
gure, with  Birds  flying  about  it.  A  Piece  of  the 
fixth  remains,  where  Fowls  and  Beafts  are  brought 
to  ddam  to  be  named.  Another  Window,  in  the 
North  Aile,  has  St.  George  flaying  a  Dragon,  a  Bi- 
fhop,  &V 

The  Roman  Road,  called  Herman-ftreet,  pafTes  thro* 
the  Parifh  of  Amfty  ;  and  all  the  Way  upon  it  we  find 
Remains  of  Camps  and  Stations,  exactly  according  to 
the  Itinerary.  The  Caftle,  formerly  here,  was  faid 
to  be  built  by  Euftace  Earl  of  Bologne^  at  the  Com- 
mand of  William  I.  ;  and  it  is  not  improbable,  that 
there  were  fortifications  before.  It  conftfted  of  a 
Keep,  or  round  artificial  Hill,  yet  remaining,  with  a 
large  and  deep  FoiTe  about  it;  the  Mount,  probably, 
made  from  the  Ditch.  The  Barons,  in  King  John's 
Time,  made  another  Retrenchment  South  of  it,  which 
would  contain  a  Garifon  as  numerous  as  the  Caftle 
would  hold.  Henry  III.  obliged  Nicolas  de  Aveftic  to 
demolifh  the  additional  Fortification,  and  keep  up  only 
the  old  one. 

The  Church  was  built  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  III. 
as  is  faid,  out  of  the  Stones  of  the  demolished  Fortifi- 
cations made  additional  to  the  Caftle.  It  is  certainly 
very  old,  and  built"  with  a  low  Tower  in  the  Middle, 
and  two  Ailes.  The  Chancel,  perhaps^  was  rebuilt 
with  the  Materials  of  the  Keep,  being  of  later  Date. 
It  is  large  and  lofty,  and  hath  Stalls,  as  if  for  a 
Choir. 

Buntingford  is  the  next  Town  j  noted  for  being  a 

?reat  Thoroughfare.  It  is  28  computed  Miles  from 
,ondon,  and  owes  its  Being  as  a  Town  to  the  pre- 
fent  PonY  road  through  it  to  the  North.  The  firft 
Mention  of  it  is  in  the  Reign  of  Edward  III.  who 
gave  a  Market  and  a  Fair  to  it.  It  is  fituated  in  Lay- 
fton  Parifli  ;  but  has  a  Chapel  of  Brick,  built  by  Con- 
tribution for  the  Inhabitants  here.  Dr.  Seth  Ward, 
Bifliop  of  Salijbury^  who  died  Jan*  6.  1688.  built  a 

neat 


206  A  TOUR  thro9  Hertf. 

neat  Brick-houfe  near  the  Chapel,  for  four  poor  Men 
and  four  poor  Women,  who  had  lived  hand  Comely, 
and  came  to  Decay  thro' Misfortunes  ;  each  of  which 
has  two  Rooms  below,  and  two  above.  Bunting- 
ford  Free-fchool  owes  much  alfo  to  the  fame  Worthy- 
Prelate,  who  had  his  Education  in  it.  He  built, 
1683.  an  Hofpital  at  Salijbury,  for  ten  poor  Widows 
of  Clergymen  ;  was  a  Benefactor  to  Layflon  ;  gave  a 
good  Sum  of  Money  to  make  Salifiury  River  navi- 
gable ;  6co/.  to  be  laid  out  in  Land,  for  putting  out 
three  poor  Children  Apprentices,  tu*o  out  of  A^ 
and  one  out  of  Liyjion,  alternately.  In  fliort,  the 
good  Bifhop  feems  to  have  thought,  that  the 
he  reaped  from  the  Church,  ought  to  have  feme  other 
more  public  Defignation,  than  to  lift  out  of  Obfcurity 
a  private  Family. 

Eraugbing  lies  a  little  on  the  Eaft  of  the  Road, 
was  anciently,  next  toVerulamy  the  mod  confiderable 
Place  in  the  County,  and  is  thought  to  have  been  the 
Roman  Ctefromagum,  fituated  28  -?i  London, 

as  by  Antonlnms  Itinerary.  It  ftill  has  fom-e  Ruins  of 
its  antient  Eminence,  giving  Name  to  the  Deanry, 
and  tne  Hundred.  On  the  Well- fide  tiizHermGn-Jlreetj 
now  the  Road  to  Cambridge^  we  find  th«  Ruins  of  a 
Roman  Camp.  The  Church  is  an  handfome  Build- 
ing, and(hath  a  Ring  of  rive  good  Bells. 

Near  the  Church  yard  is  an  old  Houfe,  at  prefent 
inhabited  by  poor  Families,  which  was  given  with 
all  Sorts  of  Furniture  for  Weddings.  They  brought 
hither  their  Provilions,  and  had  a  large  Kitchen,  witli 
a  Caldron,  large  Spits  and  Dripping-pan ;  a  large  Room 
for  Merriment;  a  Lodging-room,  wuh  a  Brio 
and  good  Linen;  fome  of  which  Furniture  was  in  be- 
ing a  few  Years  ago. 

This  Provifion  was  alfo  ztTher field,  and  the  Kitchen 
Uteniils;  but,  as  I  have  obferved,  l.tely  loft. 

We  proceeded  through  Puckey'idge^  n  '.trie  Hamlet- 
town,  but  a  great  Thoroughfare,  Handing  on  the 

Herman* 


Hertf.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  207 

Herman-Jlrest^  where  are  feveral  good  Inns  for  Travel- 
ers; and  came  to  Standon^  a  fmall  Market- town.  The 
Church  hath  three  Ailes ;  the  Floor  of  the  Chancel  is 
(even  Steps  above  that  of  the  Church,  and  the  Altar 
three  Steps  above  the  Chancel -floor. 

Here  we  turned  fhort  to  the  Eaft,  to  vifit  Bijhop- 
Stortford,  lying  on  the  Borders  of  Effex,  27  Miles 
from  London.  William  I.  gave  this  Town  and  Caftle 
to  the  Bifhop  of  London^  whence  its  Preenomen  j  and 
King  "John,  feized  and  demolished  it,  for  the  Offence 
of  the  then  Bifhop,  who-  was  one  of  thofe  who  pub- 
limed  the  Pope's  Interdict  againft  the  Nation.  The 
Town,  in  the  fame  Reign,  was  incorporated,  and 
returned  Members  to  feven  fucceflive  Parliaments. 
The  BiQiop  was  reftored  by  the  fame  Prince,  and  Sa- 
tisfaction made  him  for  demolishing  the  Caftle.  The 
Hill  or  Keep  of  the  Caftle  is  artificial,  made  of  Earth 
carried  thither,  with  a  Bread-work  at  top,  of  Stones 
and  Mortar.  A  Bank  of  Earth  leads  from  it  through 
the  moory  Ground,  on  which  it  was  fituated,  to  the 
North-eaft.  There  is  a  large  Wall  from  the  top  of 
the  Hill  yet  remaining.  The  Bifhop's  Prifon  was  in  . 
being  in  Bifhop  Bonwr's  Time  ;  though  all  the  old 
Buildings  are  fmce  demolifhed.  But  the  Caftle-guard 
is  ftill  paid  by  feveral  Places  to  the  Bifhop,  befides 
other  Quit-rents. 

This  Town  is  large,  and  well-built  ;  it  is  a 
Thoroughfare  from  London  to  Cambridge^  Newmarket ', 
and  St.  Edmund/bury,  and  full  of  convenient  Inns.  It 
is  built  in  the  Form  of  a  Crofs,  having  four  Streets 
turned  to  the  Cardinal  Points  j  and  the  River  Stort  runs 
through  it. 

The  Church  dedicated  to  St.  Michael  is  lofty,  and 
ftands  on  high  Ground  ;  it  hath  a  fine  Ring  ot  eight 
Bells.  There  were  antiently  three  Guilds  and  a 
Chantry  founded  here.  In  the  Church  are  nine  Stalls 
on  a  Side  for  a  Choir.  On  the  North- fide  the  Church, 
is  a  Gallery  for  the  young  Gentlemen  of  the  Scho»l, 

built 


2o8  A  TOUJl  thro'  Hertf. 

built  by  Contribution;  upon  it  Sir  Jotin Hobarf*  Arms, 
who  was  educated  there,  and  a  great  Benefactor  to 
this  Work. 

At  the  Weft-end  is  another  Galle  y,  built  a  few 
Years  ago,  upon  which  is  an  Organ  ;  and  it  is  ob- 
fervable,  that  there  was  an  Organ  in  this  Church  fo 
long  ago  as  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  VII.  A  new  Font 
ftands  before  it,  with  a  Pavement  of  black  and  white 
Marble,  inclofed  with  Iron  Rails. 

There  are  a  great  Numher  of  Monuments  in  the 
Church,  particularly  one  in  the  N~rth  Aile,  for  feven 
Children  of  Edward  Maphefden,  who  died  of  the 
Small  pox,  with  a  Latin  Infer iption,  deploring  that 
heavy  Difpenfation. 

Several  Benefactions  are  beftowed  on  the  Poor 
of  this  Town,  particularly  two  Alms-houfes  in  Pot- 
ters Jlreet.  But  the  greateft  Ornament  of  the  Town 
is  the  Schoor,  built  about  50  Years  ago,  by  Contri- 
bution of  the  Gentlemen  of  Hertford/hire  and  EJfijc9 
at-  the  Requeft  of  Dr.  Thomas  Taoke,  late  Mailer,  who 
aifo  procured  feveral  Sums  for  completing  it,  from  the 
young  Gentlemen  educated  he.  e.  When  this  Gen- 
tleman engaged  in  it,  it  was  at  the  lowed  Ebb  of  Re- 
putation ;  but  he  raifed  it  to  a  great  Degree  of  Fame, 
and  coufiderably  increafed  the  Trade  of  the  Town-, 
by  the  beneficial  Concourfe  that  it  brought  thither. 
He  revived  the  annual  School-feaft,  and  charged  his 
own  Eftate  with  a  yearly  Prefent  to  the  Preacher  on 
that  Occafion.  He  died  May  4.  1721.  after  upwards 
of  30  Years  fuccefsful  and  diligent  Labours  here.  By 
his  Intereft  and  Care,  the  Gallery  in  the  Church,  for 
the  Ufe  of  the  School,  was  creeled.  He  gave  a  Cha- 
lice of  20 /.  Value  to  the  Church,  and  was  a  great 
Benefactor  to  the  School- library ;  which  is  a  very 
good  one,  and  was  firft  fet  on  Foot  by  the  Reverend 
Thomas  Leigh,  B.  D.  who  was  Vicar  of  the  Church 
Anno  1680. 

The 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  a  op 

The  School  ftands  in  the  High-ftreet,  with  the 
Weft- front  to  the  Church-yard,  confifting  of  three 
Rooms,  which,  with  the  Stair-cafe,  make  a  fquare 
Building;.  The  Grammar-fchool  takes  up  half  of  it, 
all  the  Kront  to  the  Street  j  the  other  two  are  the 
Library,  and  Writing-fchool.  Thefe  ftand  upon 
Arches,  under  which  are  a  Market  and  Shops,  which 
r;re  the  Property  of  the  Parifti ;  and  here  the  School 
was  built,  at  the  Defire  of  the  Inhabitants,  who  got 
by  it  a  Covering  for  their  Market,  and  at  the  fame 
time  an  Ornament  to  their  Town. 

Every  Gentleman  at  leaving  the  School  p'refents  a 
Book  to  the  Library. 

Hadham  Parva  ftands  a  little  North  of  BiJhop-Stort- 
ford^  and  is  of  chief  Note  for  being  the  Burying-place 
'of  the  Capels,  Earls  of  EJfix. 

The  Manor  of  Rye,  in  the  Parifll  of  Stanfled- 
Abbots,  is  famous  for  the  Plot,  called  thence  The  Rye* 
houfi  Plot,  faid  to  be  formed  for  afiaflinating  King 
Charles  II.  in  his  Return  from  'Newmarket ;  for  which 
feveral  Perfons  differed,  and,  among  the  reft,  the  Te- 
nant of  the  Place,  Rumball,  a  Man  of  a  daring  and  in- 
trepid Spirit. 

Honefdon,  feparated  from  EJJex  by  the  Start,  de» 
ferves  to  be  mentioned  for  three  Reafons ;  firft,  for 
its  noble  Situation  upon  a  gravelly  rifing  Ground,  over- 
looking the  Meadows  ;  2dly,  for  being  the  Reddened 
of  the  Children  of  King  Henry  VIII.  in  whofe  Hands 
it  was  then,  on  Account  of  its  good  Air,  and  Vicinity 
t  >  London  ;  and  3<ily,  for  the  Seat  of  Robert  Chejhr, 
Efq;  built  within  thefe  few  Years,  inclofed  with  a 
Park.  It  ftands  upon  a  beautiful  Hill,  overlooking  the 
Meadows,  the  River  Start,  and  Part  of  EJJex t  from 
the  back  Front ;  from  the  other,  it  hath  a  Profpeft 
over  great  Part  ef  Hertford/hire,  and  is  feen  homCbef- 
hunt  Common,  on  one  hand,  as  St.  Paul's  is  from  the 
other.  At  the  Entrance  of  the  Avenue  it  hath  a  large 
Bafm,  thro'  which  runs  a  fmall  Stream ;  and  there 


2io  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Hertf. 

is  a  graceful  Plantation  of  Trees,  with  Variety  of 
Slopes,  Udorned  with  Statues.  Tne  fame  Stream  af- 
terwards feeds  a  Canal. 

Jn  the  32d  Year  of  his  late  Majefty  King  George  II. 
an  Act  palled,  intitled,  An  Aft  for  making  the  River 
Stort  navigable  in  the  Counties  of  Hertford  and  EfTex, 
from  the  New  Bridge  in  the  Town  of  Bifliop  •  Stort- 
fcrd,  into  the  Riv&iiec,  neur  a  Place  culled  The  Rye, 
in  the  County  <j/He;tford. 

We  purfued  our  Way  directly  South,  and  came  to 
Sawbridgewortb)  or  Sabjwsrih.  A^iong  feveral  an- 
tient  Monuments  in  the  Church,  is  an  hanufome  one 
erected  to  the  Memory  of  General  Lumley,  Brother 
to  the  then  Earl  of  Scarborough^  with  an  Infcription, 
greatly  to  his  Honour,  as  follows  : 

c  Here,  lieth   the  Honourable  HENRY  LUMLEY, 

*  Efq;  only  Brother  to  Thomas  Earl  of  Scarborough  ; 
c  who  was   in  every  Battle,   and  at  every  Siege,   as 
'  Colonel,    Lieutenant- General,  or  General  of  the 
'  liorfe,  with  King  William,   or  the  Duke  of  Marl- 
'  borough^    in  twenty  Campaigns,    in  Ireland,  Flan- 

*  dersy    and    Germany  ;   where    he    was     honoured, 

*  efteemed,  and  beloved,  by  our  own  Army,  by  our 
4  Allies,  and  even  by  the  Enemies,   for  his  fingular 
«  Politenefs  and    Humanity,    as  well    as   for  all  his 
'  military  Virtues  and  Capacity.     He  fat  a  long  time 
4  in  Parliament,   always  zealous  for  the  Honour  of 

*  the  Crown,  and  for  the  Good  of  his  Country  ;  and 

*  knew  no  Party,   but  that  of  Truth,  Juftice,   and 

*  Honour.     He  died  Governor  of  the  We  of  Jerfey, 
«  the  1 8th  of  Qttober  1722.  in  the  63d   Year  of   nis 
4  Age.' 

The  Manor-houfe  of  Ptjholury^  in  Salfwortb  Pa- 
rifh,  deferves  to  be  mentioned  on  account  of  its  lofty 
Rooms  and  remarkable  Strength,  though  built  itr 
Queen  Elizabeths  Time.  It  is  fituated  on  a  clean 

Soil, 


Hertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  211 

Soil,  has  handfome  Avenues  to  it,  with  the  River 
Stort  behind,  which  communicates  with  the  Canals  in 
the  Gardens.  It  is  in  the  Pofieilion  of  the  Family  of 
Gardener. 

We  then  crofied  the  Country  dire£lly  Weft  to 
Ware,  fituated  20  Miles  from  London,  on  the  River 
Lee*  in  its  Courfe  from  Milfvd.  The  Town  {rands 
low,  upon  a  Level  with  the  River.  It  is  a  Place  of 
great  Trade  for  all  Sorts  of  Grain,  but  chiefly  IVJalt, 
which  is  conveyed  in  great  Quantities  to  London,  by 
the  River  Lee,  which  is  navigable  from  hence  ;  and 
tije  Barges  bring  Coals,  csV. 

It  confifts  of  one  principal  Street  a  Mile  long,  and 
other  back  Streets  and  Lanes.  t  At  an  Inn  in  this 
Town  is  the  famous  great  Bed,  which  is  12  Feet 
fquare. 

il'arg,  being  20  Miles  from  London,  is  the  fecond 
Poll-town  from  thence  on  the  Northern  Road.  The 
next  is  Roy/Ion j  13  Miles  farther.  Several  Alms- 
houfes,  and  a  Free-  fchool,  and  other  Charities,  belong 
to  this  Town. 

Thomas  Bydey  Efq;  Lord  of  the  Manor,  has  art 
Houfe  pleafantly  fituated  in  the  Park  here,  to  which 
is  an  Afcerit  of  every  Side  ;  alfo  a  Vineyard  newly 
planted.  One  late  Improvement,  befides  many  others, 
is  a  Cut  from  the  Rib,  which  by  that  means  turns 
that  Stream  thro'  the  Park  on  the  South-fide,  which  is 
a  fine  Nurfery  and  Protection  for  Trouts. 

In  the  North  Part  of  the  Town  was  fituated  the 
Priory,  now  in  the  PofTeflion  of  the  Family  of  Hadf- 
ky. 

At  Blake*  s-ware9  the  moft  Eaflern  Part  of  the  Pa- 
rifb,  is  a  Seat  of  William  Piummer,  Efq;  with  a 
Stream,  called  the  A  fa  on  the  Eaft  Front,  which 
feeds  a  Canal  and  a  Garden  by  the  River- fide.  The 
chief  Gardens  are  feen  from  the  Weftern  Front, 
which,  being  upon  a  Declivity,  afford  an  handfome 
Profpea  that  Way. 

A 


•a r 2  ^  T O U  R  rtW          Hertf. 

A  little  South  of  Ware  lies  Amwell,  a  Village  fa- 
mous for  giving  Rife  to  the  New  River  ;  which,  pro- 
ceeding in  a  direct  Courfe  by  the  Church,  receives  a 
Spring  which  flows  with  great  Abundance.  It  is  20 
Miles  from  London  ;  but  the  Courfe  of  the  River  is 
computed  at  36.  It  was  begun  by  Sir  Hugh  Middle- 
ten  ;  who  by  the  Afliftance  of  the  City  of  London,  and 
by  Aid  of  an  Ad  of  Parliament,  brought  it  to  Perfec- 
tion. 

The  yearly  Profit  of  the  River  has,  Tome  Years 
ago,  been  computed  at  30,000  /.  and  the  Expence  in 
fupporting,  and  keeping  it  up,  is  faid  to  amount  to 
half  the  "Profit.  'Twas  divided  originally  into  72 
Shares,  one  Moiety  whereof  belonged  to  private  Per- 
fons,  and  the  other  to  the  Crown  :  for  King  James 
I.  for  the  fake  of  his  Palace  ^Theoba'ds^  was  a  great 
Promoter  of  it.  The  Crown's  Moiety  is  fmce  come 
into  private  Hands  ;  who  however  have  no  Part  in 
the  Management  j  for  the  Corporation  confifts  of  29 
of  the  Proprietors  of  the  firft  36  Shares. 

This  River,  in  fa&,  draws  moft  of  its  Water  from 
the  Lee  i  which  being  the  Property  of  the  City  of 
London,  that  Corporation  oppofed  a  Bill  brought  into 
Parliament,  for  giving  farther  Powers  to  the  New  Ri- 
ver- Company  to  benefit  itfelf  by  the  Lee  River  :  but 
•theOppofition  availed  not,  and  in  the  Seilion  1738  9. 
the  Bill  paifed  into  a  Law. 

The  Governors  of  the  New  River  Company  agreed 
with  the  Proprietors  of  the  Lands  on  the  River  Lee, 
for  a  Cut  of  two  cubic  Feet  of  Water  from  the  faid 
River,  at  a  certain  Rate  ;  and,  after  the  Agreement, 
they  told  them  they  would  double  the  Price  'or  a  four- 
foot  Cut ;  which  the  Proprietors  agreed  to,  not  conii- 
dering  the  great Difproportions  of  the  two  Cuts.  And 
this  Cut  of  the  River  Lee  fupplies  the  largeft  Share  of 
the  New-River  Water. 

We  kept  alone;  the  great  Road,  through  Hoddef- 
don  { 'which  is  a  cor.fiderable  Market-town,  and  noted 

alfo 


Ilertf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  213 

alib  as  a  Thoroughfare),  till  we  came  to  Broxbourn^ 
which  lies  near  it  on  the  New  River  ;  a  fmall,  but 
pleafant  Village,  fltuated  on  a  rifing  Ground,  having 
pleafant  Meadows  down  to  the  River  Lee.  On  the 
Left-hand  of  the  Village  is  Broxbournbury>  the  Seat  of 
the  Lord  Monfon.  The  Houfe  is  large,  and  in  the 
old  Gothic  Stile,  and  fltuated  in  the  i\/Tidd!e  of  the 
Park  (which  has  been  planted  and  beai  tifkd  of  late). 
There  are  alfo  new  Offices  erected  at  a  little  Diftance 
from  the  Houfe,  in  a  Quadrangle,  on  the  fame  Plan 
with  the  K:ng's  Mews  at  Charing- crofs.  They  are 
placed  behind  a  large  Plantation  of  Trees,  fo  that 
they  do  not  appear  un'il  you  are  near  upon  them; 
yet  are  at  a  convenient  Diftance  from  the  Manfion- 
houfe. 

The  Manor  of  Theobalds  is  in  this  Neighbourhood, 
where  formerly  was  built  a  magnificent  Seat  by  Lord 
Treafurer  Burleigh^.  who  gave  it  his  younger  Son,  Sir 
Robert  Cecil;  and  he  exchanged  it  for  that  of /fo/- 
feld,  at  the  Defire  of  James  I  who  made  it  his  Sport- 
ing-feat; and  here  ended  hi?  Life.  From  this  Place 
Charles  I.  fet  out  to  ere£l  his  Standard  at  Nottingham. 
King  Charles  If.  made  a  Grant  of  it  to  George  Monck 
Duke  of  Albtmarle,  and  to  his  Male  I  flue  ;  which 

gave  it  to 
whofe  Grand- 
fon,  the  prefent  Duke,  it  dill  continues.  In  the  late 
Civil  Wars,  the  Palace  was  plundered  and  defaced  ; 
and  is  become  a  poor  Village,  from  a  Royal  Refi- 
ilence.  The  great  Paik,  which  was  intlofed  within 
-a  Wall  of  10  Miles  Compafs  by  King  James^  is  now 
converted  into  Farms.  The  Place  is  however  po- 
pulous, and  the  New  River  runs  juft  by.  and  fome- 
times  through,  the  Garden1;  of  the  Inhabitants.  In 
this  Neighbourhood  Richard  Cromwell,  the  abdicated 
Protedor,  pafied  the  lait  Part  of  his  Life,  in  a  very 
private  Mariner. 

Jy'ahham 


failing  in  his  Son  Chri/hpht-r,  King  Wi/Ham  b. 
IPilf'.atn  Bentinck  Karl  of  Portland,   in   vvhof 


-2 1 4  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Bucks. 

Waltbam  crofs  is  the  next,  and,  as  you  enter.Mid- 
dlefrx  by  the  North  Road,  the  laft  Place  in  Hertford- 
Jkire,  ftanding  juft  on  the  Edge  of  Mlddtefex*  It  is 
noted  for,  and  takes  its  Name  from,  the  Crofs,  built 
by  King  Edward  I.  in  Honour  of  his  belove^  Queen 
E'e:.nor,  whofe  Corpfe,  in  its  Way  from  Lincolnshire 
to  Wejlminjltr,  refled  here  ;  and  a  Crofs  was  built  at 
every  Stage  where  it  relied,  and  Char  ing- crofs  was  the 
laft.  That  Princefs's  Effigies  placed  round  the  Pillar, 
and  the  Arms  of  her  Royal  Confort,  as  well  as  her 
own,  viz  England^  Cajlile,  Lcony  and  roiffau^  are 
ilill  remaining,  tho'  much  defaced. 

And  thus  much  for  the  County  of  Hertford,  with 
which  I  conclude  myfelf,  Sir, 

Tours,  &c. 


L    E    T  .  T    E    R     IV. 

'Containing  a  Defcription  0/ BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, 
OXFORDSHIRE,  WILTSHIRE,  and  GLOU- 
CESTERSHIRE. 

SIR, 

I  Now  proceed  to  give  you  an  Account  of  my  next 
Journey  through  Part  of  BUCKS,   into  Oxfordjhire, 
and  fhall  touch  upon  fome  Parts  of  Wiltjkire,  of  which 
I  have  not  yet  taken  notice. 

On  thcRight-hand,  as  we  ride  from  London  to  Ux- 
brijgt}  >r  to  Colebrook,  we  fee  Harrow  ;  the  Church 
of  wi.icn  (landing  on  the  Summit  of  an  Hill,  and  hav- 
ing a  vtry  high  Spire,  they  tell  us.  King  Charles  II. 

ridiculing 


Bucks.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  215 

ridiculing  the  warm  Difputes  among  fome  critical 
F.cripturalifts  of  thofe  times,  concerning  the  Vifib'.e 
Church  of  Cb-ift  upon  Earth,  ufed  to  fay,  This  was 
it, 

From  Uxbridge  we  proceeded  on  the  Road  towards 
Oxford,  and  came  to  Beaconsfield,  a  frhall  Town  on 
the  Road  to  Oxford,  full  of  good  inns,  and  fituated  on 
a  dry  Hill,  famous  for  the  Refidence  of  Mr.  Edmund 
Waller^  eminent  for  his  poetical  Talents. 

Then  we  went  on  to  Wickham,  commonly  called 

High  or   Chipping  [/•']•:>  nib,    from  Coomb  ^    a  Britijh 

Word  for  Valley.     This  is  a  targe  Town,  conhfting 

of  one"   great  Street,  branching  out  into  divers  fmall 

}•  ones.  It  is  full  of  good  H^ufes  and  Inns,  being  a  great 

'  Thoroughfare  from  London  to  Oxford.     It  fends  two 

\  Members  to  Parliament. 

Not  far  from  -JVnkbc.nl  lies  Amcrftftan^  or  Sgmon- 
dejbam^  a  fmall  Market-town,  very  autient,  fituatcd 
:  in  theChi/tern,  a  Part  of  the  Country  abounding  with 
cnalky   Hills,    cove  ed  with  Woods   and   Groves   of 
j  Jieeches  ;  and  which  fends  Members  to  Parliament. 
j  A  little  beyond   it  you  £0  through  Chejham^  a   fmall 
j\Ki,ket-town  ;  and  like  wife  Wcndover^  a  mean,  dirty, 
j  tx^rporate  Town  ;  which  fends  two  Members  to  Par- 
,nt:  as  like  wife  does  Ailejbury,  which  is  thelargeft 
.  ..i  belt  Town  in  the  County. —It  ffan'ds  on  an  Hill  ; 
me  the  Country  round  it  is  low  and  dirty.     It  confuts 
*A~  feveral  large  Streets,  and  has  an  handfomely  built 
Market- houfe,   which  i,;ands  in  a  kind  of  Quadrangle. 
1  has  alfo  aTown-houfe,  where  the  Aflizes  and  ief- 
lons,  and  other  public  Meetings  of  the  County,  are 
icld.     Provifions  are  here  cheap  and  plentiful,  which 
s  owing  to  the  rich  Vale  adjoining.     It  was  a  llrong 
Town  in   the  Beginning  of  the  Saxons  Time,  and  a 
Manor  Royal   in    that  or"  William  I.  who  par-ceUM  it 
ut  under  this  odd  Tenure,  That  the  Tenants  fhould 
liter  or  Straw  for  the  Kin^s  Bedchambers  three 
ica  a  Year,  if  he  came  that  Way  To  often,  and  pro- 

vide 


2i<5  A  TOUR  thro  Buck: 

vide  him  three  Eels  in  Winter,  and  three  Greer 
Ge^fe  in  Summer  ;  which  would  be  hut  a  mean  Kr 
tertainment  at  Bed  and  Board  for  a  King  in  the 
Days. 

Many  of  the  Poor  here  are  employed  in  makin 
Lace  for  Edgings;  not  much  inferior  to  thofe  in  Pirn 
ders  :  but  it  is  fome  Pleafure  to  us  to  obferve,  that  th 
Eng'ijh  are  not  the  only  Nation  in  the  World,  whic 
admires  foreign  Manufactures  above  its  own  ;  fince 
French^  who  give  Fafhions  to  molt  Narions,  buy  an 
fell  the  fined  Laces  at  Parts  under  the  Name  of  DC? 
telles  £ Angletcrrt*  or  Englijb  Laces.  The  Englijb  L; 
dies  are  even  with  them  in  many  Inftances  ;  and  p^i 
ticulariy  in  refufuig  to  buy  very  rich  Silks,  if  they  a< 
not  called  French  ;  though  at  the  fame  time,  it  is  we 
known,  that  the  Looms  of  Spitaljields  outdo  any 
thofe  in  France. 

All  round  this  Town  is  a  large  Track  of  the  riche 
Land  in  England^  extended  for  many  Miles  alm< 
from  Ta?ne,  on  the  Edge  of  Oxford/hire^  to  Leighton 
Bedfordfbire,  and  is  called  from  this  veiy  Town,  Tl. 
Vale  of  Allefbury.  It  is  famous  for  fattening  Catt 
and  Sheep,  and  'tis  frequent  that  they  fell  a  Ram  he; 
for  breeding  for  ten  Pounds.  Here  it  was,  that,  cor 
verfing  with  fome  Gentlemen  who  underftood  Cour 
try- Affairs  (for  all  Gentlemen  hereabouts  are  Gr« 
fr.rs,  though  all  the  Graliers  are  not  Gentlemen 
they  (hewed  me  one  remarkable  inclofed  Field  ot  Pi 
fture  ground,  which  was  lett  for  1400 /.  per  dnniwi  t 
a  Graiicr  ;  and  I  knew  the  Tenant  very  well,  who 
Name  was  Houghton,  who  confirmed  the  Truth  < 
it. 

The  late  Duke  of  Wkarton  had  a  fine  Seat  at  Wit 
cbenden,  and  another  much  finer  nearer  Windfor^  call^ 
Ubourn. 

Near  this  Place  lies  Chilian^  famous  for  giving  Birj 
to  that  fteady  Patriot  the  Lord  Chief-  Juitice  C  on 
who  ilrenuoufly  oppofed  the  arbitrary  Meafures  of  II 

vyiq 


Bucks.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  217 

vying  Ship-money  without  the  Authority  of  Parlia- 
ment. 

South-weft  of  Aylefbury,  lies  the  Market- town  of 
Tame,  fituated  on  the  Side  of  a  Meadow,  and  aimed 
encompafled  with  Rivulets.  It  confifb  of  one  long 
broad  Street.  The  Church  is  large  and  fine,  in  Form 
of  a  Crofs  ;  near  which  are  the  Ruins  of  a  Priory-  A 
Pot  of  Roman  Coin  was  found  here  feveral  Years  fince. 

The  Thame  joins  the  other  Branch,  named  alfo  the 
Thames,  at  Dorckejhr  \i\OxfordJbire* 

In  this  Vale  of  Ayhjbury  flouriihed  the  great  and 
antient  Family  of  Hampden,  for  many  Ages,  in  the 
Enjoyment  of  very  large  Eftates. 

At  the  Confluence  of  the  Thame  and  -I/is  (lands  Dor- 
cbejter,  a  Town  of  Note  among  the  'antient  Romans, 
and  in  the  Year  634.  was  made  a  Biftiop's  See,  till  Re- 
migiusy  in  1094.  removed  it  to  Lincoln.  It  has  a  very 
large  Church,  and  a  fine  large  Stone  Bridge,  of  great 
Length  and  Antiquity. 

Eaft  viAylejbury  lies  7w'»0>0,  a  pleafant  Market- town 
fituated  among  Woods,  in  a  Nook,  or  kind  of  Penin- 
fula,  which  runs  in.  between  Bedfordjhire  and  Hert- 
ford/hire. 

We  pafled  forward  North-weft  through  Winjlow,  a 
fmall  Market-town,  to  Buckingham^  the  County-town, 
fituated  in  a  low,  fruitful  Ground,  furrounded  by  the 
Ouze  on  all  Sides  but  the  North.  It  is  governed  by  a 
Bailiff  and  Capital  BurgefTes.  The  Caftle  was  feated  in 
the  Middle  of  the  Town,  upon  a  great  Mount ;  but 
hardly  any  thing  even  of  its  Ruin  now  remains.  It 
divided  the  Town,  in  a  manner,  into  two  Parts  ;  the 
biggeft  to  the  North,  where  ftands  the  Town-hall ;  the 
Idler  to  the  Weftj  in  which  is  a  Church,  formerly 
noted  for  the  Shrine  of  St.  Rumbald.  The  Buildings  of 

VOL,  IL .  L  the 


2iS  A  TOUR  thro  Bucks, 

the  Town  are  old.  It  has  three  Scone  Bridges  over 
the  River  ;  and  befides  the  well-built  Church,  there  is 
a  Chapel  eredted  by  Archbifhop  Becket^  which  is  now 
ufed  for  a  Free-fchool  Several  Paper  mills  are  erected 
on  the  Ouzf.  The  County-gaol  and  Couit  are  kept 
here,  and,  by  virtue  of  a  late  A6t  of  Parliament,  the 
Affixes  are  held  in  it.  The  Town  fends  two  Mem- 
bers to  Parliament. 

It  would  have  been  inexcufable,  when  we  were  he- e, 
if  we  had  not  made  a  Vifit  to  Stow,  hard  by ;  a  Vil- 
lage made  defervedly  famous  by  the  noble  Gardens  of 
the  late  Lord  Vifcount  Cd-bam. 

We  enter  on  the  South-fide  of  the  Garden,  between 
two  fquare  Pavilions  of  the  Doric  Order,  the  Work 
of  Sir  John  Vanbrugb  ;  and  are  iiiruck  with  the  fur- 
pi  ifmg  Grandeur  and  Variety  of  the  Obje&s  that  pre- 
fent  themfelves  to  View,  of  which  1  iball  give  a  brief 
Account  in  Order,  as  we  p'afs  them. 

Firft,  then,  in  the  Middle  of  a  la-ge  Octagon  Piece 
of  Water,  (lands  an  Obelifk  of  near  70  Feet,  for  a 
Jet  d'  Eau  to  cafcade  from  the  top  of  it.  At  a  good 
I)iftance  we  behold  two  beautiful  Rivers,  which  join 
and  enter  the  Octagon  in  one  Stream.  Over  one  of 
the  Rivers  is  a  Palladian  Bridge,  which  is  an  agreeable 
Object.  A  Gothic  Building,  70  Feet  high,  prcfents 
itfelf  on  the  Summit  of  a  fine  Hill ;  dedicated  to  Li- 
be'ty. 

Here  we  have  likewife  a  View  of  the  South  Front  of 
the  Houfe,  up  an  Avenue  of  fiately  Trees  ;  but  have 
great  Objections  to  the  Narrowncfs  of  it :  however, 
ilnce  every  Tree  may  be  deemed  a  fort  of  Obehik  to 
the  Honour  of  the  noble  Planter,  it  makes  a  good  Ex- 
cufe  for  their  {landing  ;  and  the  rather,  as,  if  they 
v  ere  taken  away,  it  would  create  an  Evil,  which  could 
not  be  remedied  in  40  Years. 

As  the  Gothic  Building  is  en  the  Right-hand,  fo  on 
the  T.eft  appears  the  Egyptian  Pyramid,  dedicated  to 
the  Memory  of  Sir  John  Vanbrugb* 

Leaving 


Bucks.         GREAT  BRITAIN.          219 

Leaving  this  Point,  and  on  the  Left-hand  pafling 
by  three  Statues,  we  come  to  the  Cold- bath,  from 
whence  we  behold  a  'natural  Cafcade  falling  down 
from  the  before- mentioned  Octagon,  in  three  differ- 
ent Sheets  of  Water,  into  a  large  Lake.  One  of  the 
Sheets  glides  thro'  an  Arch,  or  Piece  of  Ruin,  which 
is  moftly  hid  by  a  Clump  of  Ever- greens. 

From  hence  we  proceed  to  the  Hermitage,  which  is 
agreeably  fituated  in  a  rifmgWood,  and  by  the  Side  of 
the  Lake;  and,  paffing  through  the  Wood,  we  came 
to  the  Statues  of  Cain  and  Abd,  fronting  the  Venerit 
Hortus,  a  very  neat  Structure,  defigned  by  Mr.  Kent, 
the  Jnfide  of  it  painted  by  Mr.  Sleter ;  and  on  ths  Fi  ize 
is  a  £afrYMotto,  alluding  to  the  Painting  in  the  Cave, 
which  may  be  thus  engliflied  : 

Let  him  Jove  MOW,  who  never  lov'd  before ; 
Let  him  who  ever  lovd,  now  love  the  more. 

Each  Way,  from  the  Entrance  of  the  Room,  is  an 
handfome  Colonnade,.,  leading  to  fquare  Tabernacles 
or  Pavilions.  Here  are  alfo  four  venerable  antique 
Buftoes,  of  Vefyafian^  Nero,  Cleopat  a,  and  Fa ujlina, 

Hence  to  the  Head  of  the  Lake  we  have  a  pleafant 
View  of  the  Cafcade;  and  from  hence  toGV^'s  Build- 
ing, or  the  Bclvidere^  which  is  placed  on  the  top  of 
the  Mount  (under  which  is  an  Ice-houfe),  is  a  noble 
Profpeft  of  the  Houfe,  the  Church,  the  EfTigies  of 
King  George  II.  and  Queen  Caroline  ;  the  Rjton  ia  ; 
the  Caftle  j  which  a  Farmer  now  inhabits,  and  was 
built  for  that  Purpofe ;  but,  on  account  of  its  being 
feated  on  the  Side  of  a  fine  rifing  Hill,  makes  a  beau- 
tiful Appearance,  as  well  from  hence,  as  from  many 
other  Places. 

In  the  Garden  is  likewife  the  Temple  of  Friendfbipy 
from  which  the  Pavilion  at  the  Entrance,  the  Cafcade, 
the  Lake,  one  of  the  Fields  that  is  inclofed  in  the  Gar- 
den, all  together  afford  a  Scene  truly  charming. 

L  2  From 


2  'io  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Bucks. 

From  hence  to  Boycoat  Buildings,  paffing  through  a 
pleafant  Wood  with  fever  al  agreeable  Profpe&s  into  the 
Country,  we  fee  on  our  Right-hand  a  noble  Terrace. 
One  of  the  Buildings  is  a  very  good  habitable  Houfe; 
the  other  {lands  on  a  fquare  Bottom  in  the  Garden  ;  and 
in  the  Infide  of  it  are  four  Statues  at  full  Length,  in 
Niches;  viz.  Cicero,  Fauftina,  Marcus  Aur  dim.,  and 
Livia.  The  Buildings  are  both  finifhed  with  pyrami- 
dal Tops,  by  Gibls.  Betwixt  them  is  a  very  hand- 
fome  Gateway,  which  is  the  fecond  Entrance  to  the 
Houfe,  from  which  leads  up  a  noble  Avenue  planted 
with  double  Lines  of  thriving  Trees. 

From  hence  to  the  Egyptian  Pyramid  mentioned  be- 
fore, which  is  60  Feet  high,  and  about  half-way  up, 
is  a  Latin  Inscription  in  very  large  Characters,  which 
may  be  thus  englifhed, 


Among  a  very  great  Number  of  Structures  in 
Gar  dens  i  defigned  by  Sir  JOHN  VANBR.UGH, 
Knight,  COB  HAM  thought  fa,  that  this  Pyramid 
Jhouid  be  J  acred  to  his  Memory. 

And  in  the  Infide  of  the  Building  is   a  Latin  In- 
fcription,  importing, 

Enough  you  ve  Juried,  quaff'  d  the  Bowl,  and  eat  : 
'"Tis  time,  at  leaji  'tis  Prudence,  to  retreat  j 
Left  Youth,  more  fitly  ft  oiickfome,   may  join 
1"o  pujb  you,  reeling  under  Loads  of  Wine* 

From  hence  going  along  a  fort  of  Fortification-  walk 
on  our  Left-hand,  the  Wood  on  the  other  Hand,  we 
enter  the  Field,  which  is  inclofed  in  a  military  Way, 
with  a  ftaked  Fence.  At  the  firit  Angle,  on  the  Middle 
of  the  Gravel-walk,  are  the  statues  of  Hercules  and 
Antxus.  Hence  we  proceed  to  St.  Auguftine's  Cave, 
which  is  a  Building  ot  Roots  of  Trees  and  Mofs  ;  and 
in  it  a  Straw  Couch,  with  three  Infcripti  ;ns  in  Monk- 
i(h  Latin  Verfe.  It  is  placed  in  a  natural  Wood,  and 
from  the  Oddnefs  of  the  Fabric,  and  the  agreeable  Sim- 

plicity 


Bucks.          GREAT  BRITAIN.          221 

plicity  which  is  round  it,  makes  a  very  entertaining 
Variety. 

Leaving  this  Place,  we  approach  a  Building  of  a  very 
different  Nature  —  the  Temple  of  Bacchus,  built  of 
Brick,  with  Paintings  inthelnfide  alluding  to  theName. 
Hence  we  have  a  fine  diftant  Profpect  toward  Aylejbury^ 
and  Wendover  Hills,  &c.  In  the  Garden  we  have  in 
full  View  the  Temple  of  Venus  :  and  between  the  two 
is  an  ObeHIk,  erected  to  the  Memory  of  a  Clergyman, 
with  this  Inscription  : 

To  the  Memory  of  ROBIN  COUCHER. 

We  proceeded  from  hence  to  the  Saxon  Temple, 
fituated  in  an  open  Grove,  about  which  the  feven 
Saxon  Deities,  preliding  over  the  feveral  D*»ys  of  the 
Week,  were  formerly  placed  in  Niches  ;  and  in  the 
Middle  of  them  ftands  an  Altar,  as  for  Sacrifice;  but 
thefe  have  been  fince  removed  to  the  Gothic  Temple. 

Our  Eye,  after  being  confined  in  the  Wood,  break- 
ing at  once  out  of  it,  we  are  furprifed  with  a  fine  open 

•Country  on  the  North  :  on  the  South,  theRotonda  ap- 
pears: on  the  Welt,  the  Boyccat  Buildings:  on  theEa'f, 
t  e  Equeflrian  Statue  of  King  Georgel.  which  ftands  in 
the  Front  of  the  Houfe.  Thefe  Objects  prefent  them- 
felves  from  Nelfon's  Seat,  which  is  an  oblong  fquare 

"Pvecefs  in  a  Clutrip  of  Ever  greens.  To  the  South-eafi 
is  a  View  of  the  Manfion  houfe. 

The  Offices  on  the  North  -fide  are  all  inclofed'within 
a  moft  elegant  Wall,  with  Niches,  and  grand  Gate- 
ways into  the  Offices  and  Gardens.  The  Houfe  and 
Offices,  if  perfected,  would  be  about  640  Feet  in 
Length,  fronting  North  and  South.  As  Ne/fon's  Seat 
lies  to  the  North  weft  from  the  Portico  of  the  Houfe, 
there  is  on  the  North- eaft  a  new  Baftion  built  to  an- 
fwer  it ;  and  fome  grand  Walks  by  the  Side  of  a  fine 
Lawn,  from  which  we  fee  numerous  Herds  of  Deer. 
A  Semicircle  of  fine  Timber  appears  at  fome  Miles 
Diftanee,  with  an  agreeable^Country<  between. 

L  3  The- 


222  A  T  O  U  R  ttro          Bucks. 

The  next  Object  of  View  is  a  Corinthian  Column, 
on  which  is  the  Scatus  of  his  late  Majefly,  with  this 
Infcription  : 

GEORGIO  AVGVSTO. 

Dido's  Cave  .is  the  next  Subject  of  our  Attention: 
this  is  a  Stone  Building,  in  a  Wood,  and  raifed  on  a 
foit  of  Amphitheatre,  with  an  Infcription,  that  maybe 
thus  rendered  : 

Repairing  to  the  fame  dark  Cave,  are  feen 
The  Trojan  Hero,  and  the  Tyrian  Qyccn. 

From  hence  we  advance  to  the  Rotonda,  which  is  a 
neat  airy  Building  by  Sir  "John  Vanbrugb.  The  Dome 
of  it  fuppprted  on  ten  Doric  Columns  ;  and  in  the 
Centre,  landing  on  a  circular  Pedefta),  a  fcnusof  Me- 
dids.  From  tins  Place  we  have  a  View  of  Part  of  the 
Oclagon  ;  the  Lake,  the  Fields,  and  feveral  of  the 
Buildings,  preferring themfelves  alternately  as  we  turn 
ourfelves  round. 

As  we  go  from  hence  to  the  late  Queen's  Statue,  by 
theSic'e  of  a  Canal,  we  are  delighted  with  an  Altera- 
tion of  his  Lcrdfhip's,  viz.  On  each  Side,  the  Ground 
is  broken,  and  planted  with  Clumps  of  various  Kinds 
of  Trees,  intermixt  with  Statues,  which  are  promif- 
cuoufly  placed.  Her  late  Majefty's  Effigies  is  creeled 
on  four  Ionic  Colums,  which  are  placed  on  a  large 
PeJeftal,  with  this  Infcription  in  golden  Letters,  in 
Latin  ; 

To  the  Honour,  Praife,  and  Virtue,  of  the  Divine 
CAROLINF. 

It  is  fituated  on  a  neat  Amphitheatre  of  Slopes,  with 
paftoral  Figures  each  way  irom  it.  Nature  and  Art 
here,  joining  together,  make  an  agreeable  Contrail. 

Next  we  are  led  into  the  Sleeping-parlour,  which  is 
a  fquare  Building  placed  in  a  Wood  with  Six  Walks 
centring  in  it.  Within,  are  painted  the  C&fars  Heads, 

with 


Bucks.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  223 

with  feveral  Feftons  of-  Fruit,  &c.     On  the  Prize  is 
a  Latin  Irifcription,  thus  importing, 

Since  all  things  are  uncertain,  indulge  thy f elf. 

Leaving  this  Place,  and  crofling  the  Avenue  before- 
mentioned,  from  the  Pavilions  we  come  to  \\izlFitch- 
houfe,  a  fquare  Building,  the  Infideof  which  is  painted, 
by  my  Lord's  Gentleman,  with  feveral  Devices  allud- 
ing to  the  Name. 

The  Temple  of  -Modern  Virtue^  in  Ruins,  fronts 
the  Temple  of  Antient  Virtue,  a  Rotondaof  the  Doric 
Order,  by  Mr.  Kent:  and  in  four  Niches,  {landing  at 
full  Lengths,  are  the  four  following  S'atues  j  viz. 

i.  EPAMINONDAS,  with  a  Latin  Infcription  over 
his  Head,  fignifying, 

From  wbofe  Valour,  Prwfoice,  and  Moderation,  the 
Republic  of  Thebes  received  bcth  Liberty  and  Em- 
pi*  e,  its  military,  chit,  and  ikmeftlc  Difc  ':pH;u  •> 
and)  with  hitn,  left  them. 

2.  LYCURGUS,  with  this  in  Latin. 

Who,  having  Invented  Laws  with  the  great  eft  II  'if- 
dom,  and  mofl  excellently  fenced  them  againft  all 
Corruption,  as  a  Father  of  his  Country,  injiitutcd 
for  his  Countrymen  the  prmeft  Liberty,  and  the 
foundejl  Morality,  which  endured  for  many  /fges, 
he  having,  together  with  Riches,  banijhed  Avarice y 
Luxury,  and  Lujl. 

3.  SOCRATES,  with  this  in  Latin  : 

Tfrlw,  being  innocent  in  a  moft  corrupt  State,  an  En- 
ccurager  of  the  Good,  a  Worft/iper  of  one  only 
GOD,  as  the  wifeft  of  Men,  reduced  Philofo- 
pby  from  ufelefs  Indolence  and  vain  Difputations, 
to  the  Duties  of  Life  and  the  Conveniences  of 
Society. 

L  4  4.  Ho- 


224  ^  T  O  U  R  thro  Bucks. 

4.  HOMERUS,  with  this  in  Latin: 
Who,  being  the  fir  ft  of  Poets,  as  be  ivas  the  great  eft  ^ 
the  Herald  of  Virtue,  andBeftower  of  Immortality  ^ 
known  to  all  Nations,  incites  all,  in  a  Divine  Poemy 
honourably  to  dare,  and  refolutely  to  fuffer. 

Over  one  Door  is  this  Infcription  in  Latin,  To  be 
dear  to  our  Country,  to  deferve  well  of  the  State,  to  be 
prnifed,  honoured,  and  beloved,  is  glorious  :  but  to  be 
feared,  and  hated,  is  matter  of  Ill-will,  detejlable^ 
bazardaus,  and  unfafe. 

Over  the  other  Door,  Maintain  'Jujlice  and  Reli- 
gion ;  which,  though  a  matter  of  great  Importance  to  our 
Parents  and  Friends,  is  JlilL  of  greater  Confequence 
with  regard  to  our  Country.  Through  fuch  a  Courfe  of 
Life  is  the  Road  to  Heaven,  and  the  JJJembly  of  thoje 
who  huve  lived  before-  us. 

Apollo  and  the  Nine  Mufes.~\  Here  we  crofs  the  Ser- 
prntine  River,  whence  we  pafs  into  the  Elyfian  Fields  ^ 
a  molt  delicious  Retreat,  in  which  is  placed, 

The  T  emple  of  ti\e.BrhiJh  Worthies.  This  Edifice 
is  difpofcd  into  Niches  filled  with  the  following 
Buftoes. 

POPE,  without  any  Infcription* 

Sir  THOMAS  GRESHAM,    with  this  Infcription, 

•Jfrbo,  by  the  honourable  Prof  ejfion  of  Merchant,  having 

tnricbed  himfelf,  and  his  Country,  for  carrying  on  the 

Commerce  of  the  florid,  built  //^-RoYAL'ExCHANGE. 


IGNATIUS  JONES,  Who,  to  adorn  his  Country,  in- 
troduced and  rivalled  the  Greek-  and  Ronun  Architecture. 

JOHN  MILTON,  H'hofe  fublime  and  unbounded 
Genius  equalled  a  Subject  that  carried  him  .  beyond  the 
Limits  of  this  World. 

WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE,  Whofe  excellent  .  Genius 
opened  to  him  the  whole  Heart,  of  Man,  all  the  Mines  of 
all  the  Stores  of  Nature;  and  gave  him  Power, 

beyond 


Bucks.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         225 

beyond  all  other-  Writers,  'to  move,  afanifn,  and  delight 
Mankind. 

JOHN  LOCKE,  Who  left  of  all  Philofophcrs  under- 
Jiood  the  Powers  of  the  Human  Mind,  the  Nature, 
End,  and  Bounds  of  Civil  Government  ;  and  with  equal 
Courage  and  Sagacity,  refuted  the  Jlavijh  Syftem  of 
ufurped  Authority  over  the  Rights,  the  Conferences,  or 
the  Reafon  of  Mankind, 

Sir  ISAAC  NEWTON,  JFhom  the  GOD  of  Naturs 
made  to  comprehend  his  Works ;  and  from  Jimple  Prin- 
ciples to  difcover  the  Laws  never  known  before,  and  to 
explain  the  Appearance,  never  under/load,  of  this  Jlu- 
pendous  Univerfe. 

Sir  FRANCIS  BACON,  Lord  VERUI.AM,  Who,  by 
the  Strength  and  Light  of  a  fuperior  Genius,  rejecting 
vain  Speculation,  and  fallacious  Theory,  taught  tr>  pur~ 
jue  Truth  and  improve  Philofophy  by  the  certain  Method 
of  Experiment. 

In  the  Niche  of  a  Pyramid  is   placed   a  Afsrcury, 

with  the fe  Words  fubfcYibed  : CAMPOS  DUCIT 

AD  ELYSIOS  ;  *'.  e.  Leads  to  th'  -Elyfian  Fields. 

And  below  this  Figure  is  fixed  a  Square  of  black 
Marble,  with  -fear  Lines  in  Latin,  which  may  be  thus 
tranflated  : 

Here  are  the 'Bands  who  for  their  Country  bled\ 
And  Bards  who  fe  pure  andfacredVerfe  is  read : 
Thofe  who,   ly  Arts  invented,  Hfe  im$.rovd\ 
And  by  their  Merits  made  their  meniries  lov  d. 

King  ALFRED,  The  mildeft,  jufteft,  mcjl  beneficent 
cf  Kings,  who  drove  out  the  Danes,  fecured  the  Seas, 
Jupported  Learning,  eftablifned  Juries,  crujhed  Cor- 
ruption, guarded  Liberty,  and  was  the  Founder  of  the 
Englifh'  Conftitution. 

EDWARD  Prince  of  WALES,  The  Terror  of  Eu- 
rope, and  Delight  ^England  ;  who preferved  unaltered, 

L  5  in 


2  1  6  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Bucks. 

in  the  Height  cf  Glory  and  Fortune,  bis  natural  Gentle- 
r.eis   and  Ado  deft  y. 

Queen  ELIZABETH,  Who  confounded  the  Projects 
and  dejlroycd  the  Power  that  threatened  to  opprefs  the 
Liberties  of  Europe  ;  took  off  the  Yoke  of  Ecclefiaflical 
Tyranny  \  reft  or  ed  Religion  from  the  Corruptions  of 
Popery  ;  and  ly  a  wife,  a  moderate,  and  a  popular  Go- 
vcrnmcr.t,  gave  Wealth,  Security,  and  Refpeft  to 
England, 

Kms;  WILLIAM  III.  Who  ly  bis  Virtue  and  Con- 
ftancy  "having  •  favcd  his  Country  from  a  foreign  Mafter, 
by  a  bold  and  generous  Enterprise,  preferred  the  Liberty 
i.nd  Religion  of  Great  Britain. 

Sir  WALTER  RALEGH,  A  valiant  Soldier,  and 
zn  able  Statefman  ;  who,  endeavouring  to  roufe  the 
Spirit  of  his  Mafter,  for  the  Honour  of  his  Country, 
agair.Jl  the  Ambition  of  Spain,  fell  a  Sacrifice  to  the 
Influence  of  that  Court,  whofe  Arms  he  had  vartquijhed, 
and  whofe  Defigns  he  oppofed. 

Sir  FRANCIS  DRAKE,  Wro,  through  many  Perils, 
wos  the  fir  ft  of  Britons  that  adventured  to  fail  round  the 
Cilobe,  and  carry  into  unknown  Seas  and  Nations  the 
Kncw!ege  and  Glory  of  the  Englifh  Name. 


JOHN  xHAMPDEN,  IPho  with  great  Spirit,  and 
forijiiminate  Abilities,  began  a  noble  Oppofaion  to  an  ar- 
bitrary Court,  in  Defence  of  the  Liberties  of  his  Country  \ 
j'upported  them  in  Parliament  ;  and  died  for  them  in  the 

t'leid. 

Sir  JOHN  BARNARD,  without  any  Infcripti  on. 

On  the  back  Side  of  this  Building  is  the  following 
Infeription  : 

To  the  Memory  of  Signer  FIDO, 
An  Italian  of  good  Extraction,  who  ca?ne  into  Eng- 
land, net  to  bite  u:y  like  moft  of  his  Countrymen  t  nt 

to 


Bucks.          GREAT  BRITAIN.         227 

to  gain  an  honeft  Livelihood.  He  hunted  not  after 
Fame ;  yet  acquired  it :  regardlefs  of  the  Praife  of  his 
Friends,  but  niojl  fenfible  of  their  Love.  Though  he 
lived  amongfl  the  Great,  be  neither  learnt  nor  flattered 
any  Vice-  He  was  no  Bigot,  nor  doubted  he  of  any  of 
the  XXXIX  Articles  :  And  if  to  follow  Nature,  and 
to  refpeff  the  Laws  of  Society,  be  Philofophy,  he  was  a 
perfeff  Philojopher ;  a  faithful  Friend.,  an  agreeable 
Companion,  a  loving  Hujband,  diflinguifoed  by  a  nu- 
merous Offspring,  all  which  he  lived  to  fee  take  good 
Courfes.  In  his  old  Age  be  retired  to  the  Houfe  of  a 
Clergyman  in  the  Country,  where  he  finijhed  his  earthly 
Race,  and  died  an  Honour  and  an  Example  to  the  whole 
Species.  Reader,  this  Stone  is  guiltlefs  of  Flattery  ;  for 
he,  to  whom  it  is  infer  ibed,  ivas  not  a  Man,  but  a 
GREYHOUND. 

The  SHELL  BRIDGE. 
The  CHINESE  HOUSE,  fituated,  after  the  Chinefe 
manner,  upon  a  large  Piece  of  Water  :  we  enter  it 
by  a  Bridge,  decorated  with  Chinefe  Vafes  :  It  is  a 
fquare  Building  with  four  Lattices,  and  covered  with 
Sail  Cloth,  The  Windows  and  Roof,  together  with 
its  cool  Situation  on  the  Lake,  afford  us  a  juft  Speci- 
men of  the  Manner  of  Living  in  a  hot  Country. 
Within  is  the  Figure  of  a  Chinefe  Lady  afleep.  The 
Outiide  of  the  Houfe  is  painted  in  the  Chinefe  Taite, 
by  Mr.  Sletcr :  The  Infide  in  India  Japan  Work. 

The  TEMPLE   of  CONTEMPLATION. 

The  GROTTO,  fituated  at  the  Head  of  the  Serpen-  - 
tine  River,  furnifhed  with  a  great  Number  of  Look- 
ing GlaiTes,  both  on  the  Waffs  and  Cieling,  fixed  in 
Frames  of  Plaifter-work,  {ruck  with  Shells  and  Flints ; 
It  has  a  marble  Statue  of  Venus  on  a  Pedeflal  adorned 
in  the  fame  Manner.  On  each  Side  is  a  Pavillion ; 
one  of  which  is  ornamented  with  Shells,  the  other 
with  broken  Flints  and  Pebbles. 

L  6  The 


228  A  TOUR  thro  Bucks. 

The  LADIES  TEMPLE,  fupported  by  Groin 
Arches,  with  Venetian  Windows.  The  Infide  is 
beautified  with  the  following  Paintings  by  Sleter:  On 
the  right  Side,  Ladies  employed  in  Needle  and  Shell- 
work  :  On  the  oppofite  Side,  Ladies  engaged  ia  Paint- 
ing and  Mufic. 

The- GRECIAN  TEMPLE;  a  Jarge  Pile  of  the 
Ionic  Order,  after  the  Manner  of  the  Temple  of 
Minerva  at  Athens. 

Captain  GRENVIELE'S  MONUMENT,  with  an  In- 
fcription  in  Latin,  which  may  be  thus  tranflated  : 

To  the  Son  of  his  Sifter,  THOMAS  GRENVILLE, 
who  Icing  Captain  of  one  of  his  Majejlys  fhips,  under 
the  Command  of  Admiral  Anfon,  [1747]  while  be  va- 
liantly fought  againjl  the  French,  and  was  mortally 
•wounded  in  the  Thigh,  declaring  in  his  lajl  Moments 
that  it  was  better  to  fuffer  than  to  be  tried  for  Cowardice, 
CoBHAM,  filled  at  once  with  Approbation  and  Regret, 
erected  this  roflrated  Column.  This  is,  alas  !  an  Ex- 
ample of  Courage  too  feldom  found,  from  whence  we  may 
learn  how  it  beccctnes  a  Commander  to  behave. 

A  Spacious  BASON  of  WATER,  defigned  for  the 
•Triumphal  Arch. 

A  FLUTED  COLUMN,  with  the  following  Infcrip- 
tions  :  On  one  Side,  To  preferve  the  Memory  of  her 
Hujband,  Ann,  Vif count cfs  Cobham,  caufed  this  Pillar 
to  be  ere  tied  in  the  Tear  1747. 

On  the  oppofite  Side,  a  Latin  Infcription,  which 
intimates  this  found  Le.fibn,  As  it  is  not  permitted  us  to 
live  long,  let  us  leave  Sojnething  behind  us  as  a  Tejlhnony 
of  our  having  lived. 

The  GOTHIC  TEMPLE,  with  this  Infcription : 
Je  rends  graces  aux  Dieux  de  «'  eftre  pas  Romain. 
That  is,  1'tbank  God  for  not  being  a  Roman. 

This 


.Bucks.          GREAT  BRITAIN.         129 

This  is  a  fpacious  Edifice  of  red  Stone,  terminated 
with  Towers  and  Pinacles,  feventy  Feet  high,  arcd 
placed  on  the  Summit  of  a  Hill.  The  Windows-are 
of  Glafs  curiouflyftained,  and  the  Infide  of  the  Dome 
is  chara&errftically  decorated  with  the  Arms  of  his 
Lordfhip's  Family,  from  their  Rife  to  the  prefent 
Time.  About  it  are  the  feven  Statues,  which,  as  we 
mentioned  above,  originally  furrounded  the  Saxon 
'Altar. 

The  PALLADIAN  BRIDGE,  adorned  , with  fe- 
veral  antique  Marble  Bultoes.  The  Roof,  •  on  the 
Side  facing  the  Water,  is  fupported  by  Ionic  Pillars. 
The  back  Wall  is  covered  with  a  fine  Piece  of  -Alto- 
Relievo,  which  reprefents  the  four  Quarters  of  the 
World  bringing  their  various  Produces  to  Britannia. 
Here  are  alfo  Paintings  of  Sir  Walter 'Raleigh,  with  a 
Map  of  Virginia  -,  and  of  Sir  William^Penn^  prefent- 
ing  the  Laws  of  Pennfylvania^  performed  by'3/eter. 

The  IMPERIAL  CLOSET;  a  fquare  Room,  in 
which  are  painted,  by  the  laft-meiitioned  Artift,  three 
of  the  worthieft  of  the  Roman  Emperors  j  each  of 
which  is  refpediively  diftinguiftied  by  a  memorable 
Saying  of  his  own  fixed  over  him. 

IMP.  TITUS  CffiS.  VESPATIAN. 
Diem  perdidi. i,  e.  /  have  loft  a  Day* 

IMP.  -N.  TRAJAN  C^S.  AU. 

Pro  me :  fi  mere  ary  in  me. i.  e.  Forme:  but  if 

1  deferve  /V,  againft  me. 

IMP.    MARCUS    AURELIUS 
C^SAR    .ANTONINUS. 

Ita  regnes  imperator,  ut  privatus  regi  te  veils. — -].  e. 
So  govern  when  a  King^  as  you  would  dejire  to  be  go- 
verned if  a  Subjeft. 

A 


230  A  T  O  U  R   thro  Bucks. 

A  GRAND  TERRAS  WALK  near  2000  Feet  long, 
which  leads  us  to, 

The  TEMPLE  of  FRIENDSHIP  ;  a  well  pro- 
portioned Structure  of  the  Doric  Order.  The  Emblem 
of  Friendfhip  above  the  Door,  thofe  of  Juftice  and 
Liberty,  with  the  reft  of  the  Decorations,  are  ele- 
gantly touched.  Britannia  is  feated  upon  the  Cieling  : 
On  one  Side  are  exhibited  the  Glory  of  her  Annals, 
the  Reigns  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Edward  III  j  on 
the  other  is  offered  the  Reign  of  — : —  which  (he 
covers  with  her  Mantle,  and  fcems  unwilling;  to  ac- 
cept. This  Painting  is  executed  by  Mr.  Slettr.  The 
Motto  of  this  Temple  is, 

jfmi&tiie  S. — i.  e.  Sacred  to  Friendfljip. 

Here  are  the  Bufts  of  the  late  Lord  and  his  illuf- 
trious  Friends,  viz.  Frederic  Prince  of  Wales ;  Earls 
of  Weflmoreland,  Chejierfield,  and  Marchmont ;  Lords 
Cobham,  Cower,  and  Bathurft ;  Richard  Grenyillt, 
William  Pitt)  and  George  Lyttelton,  Efqrs.  the  latter 
now  Lord  Lyttelton. 

The  PEBBLE  ALCOVE  is  a  neat  Recefs,  and 
very  artfully  embellished  with  Pebbles.  His  Lord- 
fhip's  Arms  are  performed  with  the  fame,  and  dif- 
played  in  proper  Colours. 

CONGREVE'S  MONUMENT  is  an  Urn,  which  with 
great  Art  exprefles  the  Genius  of  the  Man ;  and  at  the 
'Fop  of  it  is  placed  a  Monkey  beholding  himfelf  in  a 
Mirror,  and  under  him  a  Writing  in  Latin,  fignifying, 
That  Comedy  is  the  Imitation  cf  Life,  and  the  Glafs  of 
Fajhion. 

The  Poet's  Effigies,  lying  in  a  carelefs  Pofture,  has 
a  Latin  Inlcription,  which  may  be  thus  rendered^ 
In  the  Tear  1736.  COBHAM  eretted  this  poor  Confola- 
tion  for,  as  well  as  Monument  of,  his  Lofs  of  the 
piercing,  elegant,  polijhed  Wit,  and  cirui!i<zcd^  can  did  y 
rn-Jl  unaffected  Manners,  of  WILLIAM  CONGREVE. 

We 


Bucks.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         231 

We  are  now  very  near  the  Pavilions  j  and  in  going 
to  them,  walk  by  the  Side  of  the  River  and  Octagon, 
paffing,  on  our  Left- hand,  three  Satyr s,  and  a  dancing 
Jfttrius. 

I  have  now  gone  round,  and  given  you  a  faint  De- 
fcription  of  an  unparallelled  Chain  of  artificial  and 
natural  Beauty. 

His  Lordfhip's  Judgment  and  refined  Tafte  are 
not  lefs  confpicuous  in  his  Woods  and  Parks. 

The  Spectator,  whofe  Mind  is  capable  of  being 
moved  either  with  Grace  or  Majefty,  and  is  fufceptible 
either  of  the  noble  or  the  delicate  Paffions,  cannot, 
without  Reludance,  leave  a  Place  fo  properly  calcu- 
lated to  inform  the  Judgement,  and  intereft  the  Fancy, 
where  Art  appears  without  Affedlation,  and  Nature 
without  Extravagance. — And  thus  much  for  thefe 
famous  Gardens  at  Stow. 

Going  (till  farther  Northward  from  Buckingham^ 
we  come  to  the  following  Towns  : 

Stony  Stratford  is  remarkable  for  (binding  on  the 
Roman  Caufeway,  calling  Watling-flreet.  It  is  an 
antient  and  well-known  Thoroughfare- town,  in  the 
CheJIer  Road  from  London.  It  is  large,  and  well- built 
of  Stone,  has  two  Churches  in  it,  and  a  Crofs  creeled 
by  Edward  I.  to  the  Honour  of  his  Queen  Eleanor , 
and  has  a  good  Stone  Bridge  over  the  River.  The 
principal  Manufacture,  as  well  in  the  Neighbourhood 
as  in  the  Town,  is  Bone-lace. 

Newport- Pagnett  is  a  large,  well-built,  populous 
Town,  feated  on  the  River  Ouze,  over  which  it  has 
two  large  Stone  Bridges.  It  carries  on  a  great  Trade 
in  Bone-lace,  and  the  fame  Manufacture  employs  alfo 
the  neighbouring  Villages. 

Oulney  is  a  pretty  good  Town,  where  alfo  is  car- 
ried on  a  confiderable  Manufacture  of  Bone-lace.  It 
lies  on  the  Extremity  of  the  County, 

We 


232  -A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

We  then  fell  down,  back  again,  to  Rudingkam  ; 
and  following  the  great  Road  North-weft,  we  came 
sto  Erackley  in  NorthamptonJJnre^  fituate  on  the  River 
Ouze,  an  antient  large  corporate  Town,  in  which 
are  two  Parifh-Churches.  It  had  formerly -a  College, 
but  it  is  now  ufed  for  a  Free-fchool.  It  is. governed 
by  a  Mayor  and  Aldermen  ;  and  the  Market  was  once 

•  the  Staple  for  Wool  in  that  County.     This  Town 
fends  two  Members  to  Pariament. 

We  next  came  to  Banbury  in  Qxfordfiire,  on  the 
•River  Cbarwett.  It  is  a  large  Market-town,  under 
the  Government  of  a  Mayor  and  Aldermen.  It  has 
a  confiderable  Trade,  efpecially  in  Cheefe,  as  all  the 
Country  round  it  is  a  rich  feeding  Meadow- ground. 
This- Place  returns  one  Member  to  Parliament. 

On  the  Borders  of  this  County,  Weftward  from 
this  Town,  in  Warwlckjhire^  was  the  famous  Battle 
of  Edgebill,  fought  between  the  Forces  of  King 
Charles  I.  and  thofe  of  the  Parliament. 

Edge'till  lies  at  the  Weft- end  of  the  Vale  of  Red- 
borfe,  and  gives  a  moft  extenfive  Profpect.  It  is  fteep 
to  the  North,  and  on  the  top,  at  JVarmlington,  is  a 
ftrong  large  Entrenchment,  faid  to  be  -D<*w//fr,  but 
looks  more  like  Britijb. 

Weft  of  Edge -hill  fan  fc  •  Sbipton,  a  little  Town  in 

•  Gbuceflerjhire,  which  has  a  large  Market. 

rWe  rode  Southward  to  Deddington  in  Oxfordjhire^ 
a  large  Town,  with  a  very  fmall  Market.  It  is  go- 
verned by  a  BaihiF,  and  formerly  returned  Members 
to  Parliament. 

We  turned  a  little  Eaft,  and  came  to  Bicejier,  a 
ftraggling  indifferent  Town  ;  but  remarkable  for  hav- 
ing: had  once  a  famous  City  in  its  Neighbourhood, 
called  Atdcbefttr,  long  fmce.pafled  over  by  the  Plough  ; 
and  where  many  Roman  Coins/  Stones,  and  other  An- 
tiquities 


Oxf.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         233 

tiquities  are  found  ;  which  was  undoubtedly  the 
Maima  of  Ravennas.  Bicefter  is  famous  for  excellent 
Malt-liquor,  and  has  had  formerly  a  Religious  Houfe. 

I/lip  lying  directly  in  our  Way  to  Oxford,  we  pafTed 
through  it.  It  is  remarkable  for  the  Birth  of  Edward 
the  Confejfbr ;  and  that  Dr.  South,  as  well  as  other 
eminent  Divines,  were  Mafters  here.  There  are 
fome  Remains  of  an  antient  Palace  (till  left. 

From  hence  I  came  to  Oxford,  famous  for  feveral 
things,  but  chiefly  for  its  being  the  moft  flourifhing 
and  confiderable  Univerfity  in  the  World. 

There  has  been  a  long  Conteft  between  the  two 
Englljb  Umverfities,  about  the  Priority  of  their  Foun- 
dations, which  perhaps  will  never  be  decided,  and  is 
more  a  Schoolboy  than  a  manly  fubjecl:  of  Con- 
tention. 

It  is  out  of  Queftion,  that,  in  the  Largenefs  of  the 
Place,  the  Beauty  of  Situation,  the  Number  of  Inha- 
bitants, and  of  Scholars,  Oxford  has  the  Advantage. 
Yet  it  is  juft  to  fay  of  both,  that  Oxford  has  feveral 
things  as  an  Univerfity,  which  Camor-idge  has  not; 
and  Cambridge  has  feveral  things  in  it,  which:  cannot 
be  found  in  Oxford. 

I  fball  prefent  you,  Sir,  with  a  Lrfl  of  the  Colleges 
and  Halls,  in  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford,-  together  with 
a  brief  Hrftory  of  them;  bur  mutt  obferve,  that  as  it 
would  exceed  my  Limits  to  give  an  Account  of^  the 
particular  Benefactions  by  which  their  Revenues  and 
.'Buildings  are  fpiend idly  augmented,  I  fh&ll  only  men- 
tion fuch  of  thofe  Benefactions  as  have  been  conferred 
\virhin  lb  few  Years  back,  that  they- are  not  likely  to 
be  found  in  other  Writers, 

i.  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE 

TS  fituate  near  the  Eaft  Gate  of  the  City.  Tis  fo 
^  ancient,  that  we  are  left  in  the- Dark  as  to  the  time 
of  its.  Foundation.  That  it -was  in  being -before  the 

Year 


234  .4  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

Year  721.  is  certain;  but  how  much  fooner  is  net 
evident.  King  Alfred  could  not  be  fo  propeily  called 
the  Founder  of  this  Univerfity,  as  the  Refiorer,  after 
the  Danifo  Devaluations.  In  the  Year  1332.  this 
College  was  recovered  into  a  State  of  Liberty  and  In- 
dependency, by  a  Sum  of  Money,  which  If/illiam  of 
Durham  had  left  for  the  Maintenance  of  a  Society  cf 
Students  of  Oxford^  from  whom  it  was  fome  tim«: 
called  Durham  hall  \  and  by  other  Benefactions  it 
jncreafed  to  what  it  now  is.  It  has  a  Matter,  12 
Fellows,  1 7  Scholars,  2  Exhibitioners,  £sV. 

Before  the  very  noble  Bentfaclion  of  Dr.  Radclife, 
it  had  one  large,  beautiful  Quadrangle,  or  fquaie 
Court;  the  South-fide  of  which  is  divided  into  an 
handfome  Hall  and  Chapel.  In  a  Niche  before  the 
laid  Quadrangle  is  a  Statue  of  the  late  Queen  Anr,e\ 
and  in  a  Niche  on  the  Infide  of  the  new  Quadrangle, 
fmce  built,  is  that  of  Dr.  Raddift.\  but  not  extra- 
ordinary either  of  them.  The  Additions  to  this  Col- 
lege will  be  mentioned  in  the  Abftra&  we  {hall  by- 
and  by  give  of  Dr.  Radcli/i*  Will.  The  Vifitor  is 
the  King. 

2.  BALIOL  COLLEGE  ftands  in  the  North  Part 
of  the  Town,  in  the  Suburbs.  It  was  founded  by 
John  Baliot,  Father  to  the  King  of  Scots  of  that  Name, 
and  Devorguilla  his  Wife.  The  former  began  it  about 
the  Year  1262.  the  latter,  after  her  Hufband's  Death, 
completed  it,  and  gave  it  a  Body  of  Statutes,  which 
was  afterwards  inlarged  by  Philip  Someni.le,  a  great 
Benefactor  to  this  College;  but  that  Body  was  after- 
wards  laid  afide,  and  a  more  advantageous  one  fub- 
ftituted  in  its  Room,  Ann.  1507.  by  the  UK 
of  Wincbejler  and  Carlijle.  This  College  has  a  Mailer, 
12  Fellows,  13  Scholars,  and  18  Exhibitioners,  in- 
cluding 4  founded  by  John  Warner  Biihop  of  Rochejhry 
for  Scotjmen. 

It  has  one  large,  antient  Quadrangle,  on  the  North 
Side  of  which   is  the  Chapel,  and  the  Library,  fur- 

niflied 


Oxf.         GREAT   BRITAIN. 

niflied  with  a  very  noble  Collection  of  Books.  Sir 
Thomas  H'endy  gave  his  Study  to  it,  valued  at  J50C/. 
The  Vifitor  is  chofen  by  the  College. 

3  MERTON-COLLEGE,  fituate  on  the  South  fide 
of  the  City,  was  founded  by  W'alter  of  Merton,  Bifhop 
of  Roche/far,  Lord  High  Chancellor  of  England.  The 
Society  was  firft  planted  at  Maldern  in  Surry,  in  1264. 
and  he  transferred  it  to  Oxford,  Anno  1267.  The 
Founder  framed  his  Statutes  fo  admirably,  that  they 
were  propofed  as  a  Pattern  to  the  Founder  of  Peter- 
houfe,  Cambridge,  by  King  Henry  III.  This  College 
has  a  Warden,  24  Fellows,  14  Portioniiis,  or  Poit- 
Mafters,  and  2  Clerks. 

The  Chapel  is  the  Parish  Church  ofSt.JcbnBaptifi, 
and  as  fbch  will  be  defcribed  among  the  other  Churches 
of  this  City.  The  inner  large  Court  or  Quadrangle  of 
the  College  is  very  beautiful ;  it  has  a  well-furnifhed 
Library  and  a  fine  Garden.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Arch- 
biHiOp  of  Canterbury. 

4.  EXETER-COLLEGE  is  fituate  on  the  Weil-fide 
of  the  Schools,  in  the  North  Part  of  the  Town.     It 
was  founded  Anno   1316.    by  Walter  Stapledon  Biihop 
of  Exeter,  Privy  Counfellor  to  Edward  II.   and  Lord 
Treafurer  of  England^  and  named  Stapledon-  Inn  ;  and 
called  Exeter-Gol'ege  afterwards,  by  Edmund  Stafford 
Bifliop  of  Exeter^   who  was   a  Benefaclor  to  it.     It 
has  a  Redor,  23  Fellows,  I  Bible- Clerk,  and  3  Ex- 
hibitioners. 

It  is  one  large  Quadrangle,  now  made  regular  and 
uniform  by  the  new  Buildings,  to  which  the  moft 
Reverend  Dr.  Narciffus  Marjh,  Archbifhop  of  Armagh^ 
formerly  a  Fellow  of  it,  contributed  14007.  It  has  a 
very  noble  Front,  over  the  Gate  of  which  is  a  fplendid 
Tower.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop  of  Exeter. 

5.  ORIEL  COLLEGE,  fituate  on  the  South  fide  of 
the  Town,  was  at  firft  called  St.  Mary's -College,  and 
King's -College,  and  was  founded  Anno  1324.   by  Adam 
le  hro?ne^  Almoner  to  King   Edward  II.     His   Son 
Edward  III.  iniareing  the  Revenue  of  it  with  a  rich 

Mef- 


A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

Mcffuage,'  called  Le  Orlele,  it  took  the  Name  of  Oriel- 
College.  The  fame  Prince  annexed  to  it  for  a  Retiring- 
place,  in  cafe  of  Peftilence,  csV.  St.  Bartholomew's 
Hofyital 'near  Oxford.  It  has  a  Provott,  18  Fellows, 
and  14  Exhibitioners.  It  confifts  of  one  handfome 
regular  Quadrangle.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop  of 
Lincoln. 

6.  QuEEN's-CoLLEGE  is  fituate  near  the  Pariih- 
Church  of  St.  Peter's  mtbcEajL  It  was  founded 
Anno  13^0.  by  Robert  Eglesfield,  Chaplain  or  Con- 
fcfibr  to Pbilippa,  Confort  of  King  Edward  Hi.  in 
Honour  of  whom  he  called  it  Qtieerfs  College,  re- 
commending it  to  her  Royal  Patronage  and  Pro- 
tection, and  to  that  of  all  future  Queens  of  Eng- 
land. There  were  to  be  a  Provoft  and  12  Fellows, 
out  of  Regard  to  the  Number  of •Chrift  and-his  Apoftles, 
and  70  Scholars,  in  Allufion  to  the  Number  of  the  70 
Difciples;  but  he  died  before  his  Defcgn  was  com- 
pleted. The  Society  confifts  of  'a  Provoft,  16  Fel- 
lows, 16  Scholars,  2  Chaplains,  8  Taherders  (fo 
called  from  Tabtrdum,  a  (hort  Gown  which  thr 
merly  wore)  and  40  Exhibitioners. 

Sir  Jofepb  IViliiamfon  was  a  fpecial  Benefactor  to 
this  College  of  late  Times,  ns  Edward  III.  his  Queen, 
Archbifhop  GrindaU,  and  KingCbnrles  I  .-were  oefore; 
as  alfo  was  its  late  Provoft,  Dr.  William  Lancajhr,  ia 
whofe  Time1  were  begun  t'rrofe  noble  and  extenfive 
Buildings,  which  are  fo  juftly  admired  \  one  Side 
whereot  (in  which  are  t;;e  Library,  the  Provoft's,  and 
other  fpacious  and  (lately  Lodgings)  is  327  Feet  long, 
fupported  by  a  Piazza,  and  adorned  with  Statues,  £5 V. 
The  Library  is  long  and  lofty,  Very  magnificent  with- 
out, and  well  furnished  within.  The  new  Chaptl 
and  Hall,  lately  finiihed,  anfwer  the  other  Side  of 
the  College. 

On  the  24th  of  May  1733.  the  Right  Hon.  Arthur 
-Onflow,  Efq;  Speaker  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  and 
Chancellor  to  her  late  Majefty  Queen  Caroline,  tranf- 

mitted 


3xf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  237 

Tiitted  to  the  Provoft  iooo/.  from  her  Majefty,  as 
C^ueen  Confort,  and  Patronefs  thereof,  towards  finifii- 
ing  the  new  Building;  and  her  Majefty's  Statue  is 
ere6ted  there  under  a  kind  of  Temple,  fupported  by 
Pillars;  but  not  to  the  Advantage  which  the  Royal 
Munificence,  and  the  good  Intentions  of  the  College, 
cieferved. 

And  in  the  Year  1739.  Mr.  Afitchel  of  Richmond 
left  an  Eftate  of  7 DO/,  per  Annum  to  this  College,  the 
Income  whereof  was  to  fmifh  the  Eaft  End  of  its 
Buildings  on  the  Plan  laid  down  for  that  Purpofe,  and 
after  that  to  commence  a  Foundation  of  8  Fellows,  at 
50/.  per  Annum  each,  to  be  elected  from  the  whole 
Univeriity  ;  thofe  on  the  prefent  Foundation  to  be 
excluded.  The  Fellowfliips  to  be  vacated  after  10 
Years  Enjoyment ;  as  they  are  at  Wadbam^  Worafter, 
and  Pembroke  Colleges,  after  20  Years.  The  Vifitor 
of  this  College  is  the  Archbifhop  OF  York. 

7.  NEW-COLLEGE,  iltuate  on  the  Nortn-eaft  Part 
of  the  Town,  was  at  firft  called,  The  College  of  the 
Blejfed  Virgin  Mary  :  it  was  founded  Anno  1386.  by 
William  of  Wickham^  Bifliop  of  Wincbefler^  and  Lord 
High  Chancellor,  who  alfo  founded  the  College  at 
^It'inchefter.  It  has  a  Warden,  70  Fellows,  10  Chap- 
lains, 3  Clerks,  15  Chorifters,  ofe. 

Great  Additions  have  been  made  to  the  Beauty  and 
Buildings  of  this  College  :  befides  a  third  Story  that 
was  railed  upon  the  two  original  ones  of  the  ^reat 
Court,  at  the  Society's  Expence,  Anno  1674.  they  have 
inlarged  their  Buildings  towards  the  Garden,  with  two 
ftately  and  uniform  Wings,  extending  to  the  Garden  ; 
their  Chapel  is  magnificent,  folemn,  and  fplendid, 
with  an  Organ  and  Choir.  They  have  a  very  lofty 
Tower,  with  a  Ring  of  fine  Bells  ;  and  under  that 
and  the  Weft-end  of  the  Chapel,  a  very  handfome 
fquare  Cloifter,  and  a  little  Garden  within  it.  Their 
Library  is  well  furnifhed  with  Books  and  Manufcripts, 
and  their  great  Garden  laid  out  in  Form.  The  Front 

of 


23 8  A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

of  it  is  a  Range  of  Iron  Palifadoes,  and  a  Gate  of 
exquifite  Work  ;  and  at  the  South-end  they  have  a 
Bowling-green.  Their  Hall,  which  is  at  the  End  of 
the  Chapel,  anfwers  to  t'n'e  Magnificence  of  the  reft, 
The  Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop  of  Wincbejicr. 

In  the  Bui  fary  is  {hewn  theCrofier  of  the  Founder; 
one  of  the  nobleli  Curiofuies,  and  almoft  the  only  one 
of  its  kind,  now  remaining  in  this  Kingdom.  It  is 
nearly  ftven  Feet  in  Height,  is  of  S  Iver  gilt,  em- 
bellifhed  with  Variety  of  the  richeft  Gothic  Workman- 
fhip,  and  .charged  with  Figures  of  Angels,  and  the 
tutelar  Saints  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Wmchefler^ 
executed  with  an  Elegance  equal  to  that  of  a  more 
Trodern  Age.  It  is  finely  preferved,  and,  from  a 
Length  of  almoft  four  Hundred  Years,  has  loft  but 
litile  of  its  original  Splendor  and  Beauty. 

8.  LINCOLN  COLLEGE,  fituate  in  the  Middle  of 
the  City,  was  founded  in  the  Year  1427.  by  Richard 
Fleming,  Bithop  of  Lincoln ;  who  dving  before  it  w?s 
completed,  Thomas  de  Rotberham,  Bifhop  of  Lincoln, 
afterwards  Lord  High  Chancellor,  and  Archbifhop  of 
To  k,  finifhed  it  Anno  1475-  It  has  a  Re&or,  12 
Fellows,  6  Scholars,  12  Exhibitioners,  &c. 

It  has  two  fmall  antient  Quadrangles,  not  very  re- 
gular. The  Chapel  is  beautiful,  and  built  by  Arch- 
bilhop  H/illiams  \  the  \Vindows  arecurioufly  painted. 

Tne  Lord  Crew,  B  ftiop  of  Durham,  ordered  to 
take  place  from  Michaelmas  1717.  the  following  Be- 
r.efaftions  to  this  College  ;  viz.  I.  Tvver.ty  Pounds  a 
Year  to  the  Headfhip,  and  io/.  a  Year  t.^  each  of  the 
12  Fellowiliips  forever.  2.  'Fen  Pounds  per  Annum 
fjr  ever  to  the  Curates  of  tour  Churches  belonging  to 
this  College.  3.  He  maJe  up  the  Bible  clerk's  Office, 
and  8  ScholarChips,  which  were  before  very  mean, 
io/.  per  Annum  each  for  ever.  AnJ,  4.  Settled,  to 
commence  from  Lady  day  1718.  2o/.  per  /.nn.  each 
on  12  Exhibitioners  for  ever.  The  Vifitor  is  the 
Bifhop  of  Lincoln. 

9.  ALL- 


Dxf.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  239 

9.  ALL-SOULS  COLLEGE.    Its    Front   faces    the 

Iigh-ftreet  It  was  founded  by  Henry  Chlchlcy  Arch- 
>iihop  of  Canterbury,  for  offering  up  Prayers  for  all 
yvho  fell  in  the  War?  of  Henry  V.  in  France.  It  has 
Warden,  40  Fellows,  2  Chaplains,  9  Scholars,  3 
Jieiks,  6  Choriilers,  &c. 

Before  the  new  Buildings,  it  had  two  Courts,  the 
arg-r a  regular  and  ftately  Edifice.     The  Chapel  was 
ety  auguft  and  folemn  :  but  the  College  now  appears 
ith  a  new  Face. 

Colonel  Ckriftopker  GodrlnglQn,  Governor  of  the 
\ceiva-d  Ifiands*  bequeathed  tt>  this  College  IO,OOo/. 
>o  c/.  of  which  he  ordered  to  he  laid  out  in  building 
•Library,  and  the  other  4000/.  in  Books  for  it,  and 
equeathed  his  own  Library  to  it  befides.  This  Li- 
rary  is  20o  Feet  long  within  the  Walls,  32  Feet  and 
n  half  broad,  and  40  high  j  it  has  II  large  Windows 
o  the  South,  and  a  Window  of  17  Feet  wide  at  the 
[ait -end,  ;-.n  j  one  *t  the  Weft  of  the  fame  DiFnenfions. 
a  fine  Gothic  Strudure,  fo  built  in  Conformity  to 
Chapel.  Ag.iinft  the  Entrance,  in  a  Niche,  is 
be  Statue  of  the  Benefactor,  with  a  fuitable  Jnfcrip- 
o.n  to  his  Honour  ;  which  he  forbid  to  be  mentioned 
n  his  Monument;  on  which  is  only  cut  the  Word 
•ton. 

s  what  will  be   mentioned   by-and  by  of  the 
bncfaclions  of  Dr.  George  Clarke,  in  the  Abftrad  we 
llall  give  of  his  Will,  that  Gentleman   in  his  Life- 
me  adorned  the  Chape!  of  this  College  with  a  magni- 
cent   Mirble   Ahar- piece,    rich    Furnirure    for     the 
kHTVrumion.-ta.ble   of  crimfon  Velvet,  trimmed  with 
jfjld  lace  an-i  PVinge,   Books,  Candlerticks,   &c. 

Henry  Par  twin,  Efq;  alfo  placed  at  the  Eaft-end  a 
:loathed  Refunedion- piece,  paintec  bv  Sir  James 
Ihornbllt.  A  ad  the  Hon.  Doddington  Grevillc,  Efq; 
at  the  Expence  of  painting  finely  the  Cielmg- 
nece.  A<ui  there  are  other  additional  Ornaments, 
render  it  worthy  ihe  Attention  of  the  Curious. 

A 


24o  A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

A  very  handfome  Monument  was.  ere&ed  Anno 
1739.  in  the  Chapel  of  this  College,  with  an  Infcrip- 
tion  upon  it,  in  Honour  of  their  wonhy  Benefactor 
Dr.  Clarke  aforementioned.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Arch- 
bifhop  of  Canterbury. 

10.  MAGDALEN-COLLEGE,  fituate  without  the 
Eaft  gate  of  the  Town,  was  founded  1458.  by  Wil- 
liam- Patten,  alias  Walnfleet^  Biftiop  of  Wincbejler^ 
and  Lord  High  Chancellor.  It  has  a  Piefident,  40 
Fellows,  a  Schoolmafter,  30  Scholars  called  Demies^ 
anUfher,  three  public  Readers,  4  Chaplains,  8  Clerks, 
1 6  Chorfters;  an  Organift,  &c. 

The  new  Buildings  to  this  College,  which  form  a 
(lately  Quadrangle,  make  it  one  or.  the  fined  in  the 
Univerfity. 

It  had  before  two  Quadrangles,  the  innermofl  of 
which  is  regular,  coniiiting  of  a  Library  and  Lodg- 
ings, fupported  by  a  fpacious  Cioifter.  The  Chapel, 
and  the  great  Tower,  as  alfo  the  little  one  in  the 
Weft- end  of  the  inner  Quadrangle,  and  the  Hall,  were 
very  lofty  and  magnificent.  They  have  an  exceeding 
well-furnifhed  Library,  to  which  Colonel  Codringtcn 
gave  lo.cco/.  and  a  good  Collection  of  Books.  John 
(farner  Bifaopof  Rocbejier,  gave  alfo  icoo/.  towards 
it.  The  Water-walks^  as  they  are  called,  of  Magda- 
lenCollege,  make  the  College  highly  delightful  ;  they 
are  an  aimed  triangular  Gravel-walk,  fenced  with 
Hedges  and  Trees  on  both  Sides,  furrounded  on  every 
Part  with  a  running  Stream,  and  incloiing  a  large 
Meadow.  Their  Grove  is  alfo  a  fire  fpacious  Extent 
of  Ground,  planted  with  (lately  Vifta's  of  Trees,  one 
Part  of  which  is  laid  out  into  an  handfome  Bowling- 
green.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop  of  Itinchejhr. 

The  Roman  Catholics  beginning  to  re-efrabli(h  them- 
felves  in  England  in  the  Reign  of  King  James  II. 
made  a  Pufli  for  this  College  on  the  Vacancy  of  a 
Prefident, 

This 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  241 

This  Society,  from  repeated  Royal  Grants  con- 
firmed by  Parliament,  and  from  their  own  Statutes, 
had  an  undoubted  Right  of  chufing  their  own  Prefi- 
dents.  Bat  the  King,  by  virtue  of  his  Royal  Autho- 
rity and  difperifing  Power,  fent  a  mandatory  Letter  to 
chufe  one  Farmer  their  Prefident.  The  Fellows  made 
a  bold  Stand,  and  would  not ;  but  in  the  mqft  humble 
manner  prefented  a  Petition,  giving  their  Reafons 
why  they  could  not,  without  a  Breach  of  the  Statutes 
of  the  College  and  their  Oaths ;  and  proceeded  to  an 
Klettion  according  to  their  Statutes,  chufing  Dr. 
Hough,  afterwards  made  a  Bifhop  by  King  William. 
King  James  was  fo  pofitive  in  this  Affair,  hoping,  if 
he  carried  this  firft  Point,  to  get  the  better  of  all  the 
Colleges  in  England,  that  he  went  in  Perfon  to*  Ox- 
ford, and,  in  a  Paffion,  called  them  a  turbulent,  flub- 
born  College  ;  Get  you  gone,  faid  he,  Know  I  am  your 
King,  and  will  be  obeyed.  They  on  their  Knees 
pleaded  their  Statutes  and  Oaths :  And  this  was  the 
firft  noble  Stand  the  Church  of  England  made  for  Law 
and  Liberty ;  which  was  feconded  by  the  feven 
Bifhops  going  to  the  Tower,  rather  than  read  the  De-r 
claration  for  Liberty  of  Confcience,  which  was  de- 
figned  in  favour  of  the  Roman  Catholics. 

11.  BRAZEN-NOSE-COLLEGE   is  fituate   in    the 
Middle  of  the  Town,  where  flood  an  Hall  of  the 
fame  Name,  and  a  monftrous  Nofe.     It  was  founded 
by  William  Smyth  Bifhoji  of  Lincoln,   Counfellor  to 
Prince  Arthur,    and   by  Sir  Richard  Sutton,  Kt.     It 
was  begun  in  1 509.  and  finifhed  1522.    It  has  a  Prin- 
cipal, 20  Fellows,  30  Scholars,  4  Exhibitioners,  &c. 

It  confifts  of  two  very  handfome  Quadrangles ;  in 
the  lefler  of  which  are  the  Chapel  and  Library,  and 
under  them  a  wide  and  pleafant  Cloiflrr,  very  com- 
paclly  and  elegantly  built.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop 
of  Lincoln. 

12,  CORPUS-CHRISTI-COLLEGE     ftands    OH    the 

South- fide  of  the  Town.     It  was  founded  Anno  1516. 
VOL.  II.  M  by 


24.2  sl  TOUR  tiro  Oxf. 

by  Richard  Fox,  Bifliop  of  Winchejler,  Lord  Privy- 
Seal  to  the  Kings  Henry  VII.  and  VIII.  Hugh  Oid- 
ha?n  Bifhop  of  Exeter,  gave  6000  Marks  towards  the 
Building,  befides  Lands  towards  endowing  it.  It  has 
a  Prefident,  20  Fellows,  20  Scholars,  2  Chaplains, 
and  4  Exhibitioners. 

The  Structure  of  the  firil  Court  is  antient,  hut 
within-fide  very  regular  and  handfome.  The  Library 
contains  a  noble  Treafure  of  Books.  Their  Gardens,, 
though  frnall,  are  kept  very  neat.  But  the  moft 
fplendid  Part  of  this  College  is  the  (lately  Row  of 
Lodgings  ere&ed  a  few  Years  ago  by  their  late  Prefi- 
dent,  Dr.  Thomas  Turner,  who  moreover  gave  them 
his  numerous  and  valuable  Collection  of  Books.-  The 
Vifitor  is  the  Bifliop  of  Wiiub*fter. 

13.  CHRIST-CHURCH.  This  College  takes  up  a 
vaft  Extent  of  Ground,  and  flands  on  the  South  fide 
of  the  City.  It  was  begun  to  be  founded  Anno  1515. 
by  Cardinal  Wolfey  ;  but  on  his  Fall  coming  into  the 
King's  Hands,  and  thence  called  King's  College,  his 
Majefty,  that  he  might  not  feem  to  found  any  Part  of 
his  Fame  on  another's  Bottom,  calkd  it  Chriji-  Church, 
and  made  it  an  Epifcopal  See  Anno  154.1.  Afterwards, 
Anno  1543.  he  joined  to  it  Canterbury  College,  now 
called  Canterbury  Quadrangle,  and  Peckivater-Inn, 
row  called  Peckwater- Court.  However,  the  Buildings 
lay  very  incomplete  for  almoft  joo  Years  after,  when 
Dr.  Bryan  Duppa,  and  Dr.  Samuel  Fell,  Deans  of 
this  Houfe,  and  afterwards  Dr.  John  Fdl,  Bifhop  of 
Oxford,  Son  of  the  latter,-  at  different  time?,  by  the 
Help  of  many  generous  Benefactors,  brought  the 
Buildings  to  furprizing  Perfedtion. 

This  Foundation  is  numerous  and  magnificent,  for 
a  Dean,  8  Canons,  101  Students,  8  Chaplains,  8 
Singing- men,  8  Chorifters,  and  a  Teacher  of  Mufic 
for  them,  an  Organift,  a  Schoolmafter  and  Ufher,  40 
Grammar  fcholars,  a  Virgtr,  C5V.  There  is  alfo  an 
Hofpital  belonging  to  it  in  St.  Alafs  Parifh,  which 

has 


Oxf.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  243 

has  24  Poor.  In  the  {lately  Tower,  in  the  Front  of 
the  Gate,  hangs  the  great  Bell,  called  Tow ;  which 
was  removed  thither  out  of  the  Steeple  of  the  Cathe- 
dral, byBiihop  Fell.  It  is  7  Feet  and  an  Inch  Diameter, 
and  5  Feet  9  Inches  high  ;  and  weighs  near  17,000 
Pounds  Weight.  This  Bell  is  tolled  every  Night 
1 01  Strokes,  agreeable  to  the  Number  of  Students 
in  the  College,  to  give  Warning  for  fhutting  up  the 
Gates  in  the  Colleges  and  Halls  in  the  Univerfity. 

The  late  Dr.  Leey  by  his  lafl  Will,  coniigned  a 
Legacy  of  upwards  of  20,000 /.  for  the  Support  of 
feveral  new  and  ufeful  Imlitutions  in  the  College, 
which  will  befhortly  completed. 

The  Buildings  of  this  College  are  very  large,  auguft, 
and  fplendid.  The  great  Quadrangle  has  a  wide  and 
handfome  Terrace  round  it,  and  a  Fountain  in  the 
Middle.  Peckwater- Quadrangle  is  finely  rebuilt.  Can* 
tcrbury  and  the  Chaplains  Quadrangles  are  alfo  con- 
venient Edifices.  The  Cathedral  is  lofty,  but  no. 
elegant  Structure ;  the  Hall  and  Library  high  and 
fpacious  ;  and  the  latter  contains  a  noble  Collection  of 
Books,  to  which  Dean  dldricb  made  a  fine  Addition. 
It  is  impoffible,  in  my  narrow  Limits,  to  do  Juftice 
to  this  double  College,  which  is  an  Univerfity  of 
itfelf.  I  (hail  only  add,  that  Archbifhop//^^,  lately 
deceafed,  left  to  it  his  Library,  and  a  large  Cabinet  ot 
Medals,  computed  to  be  worth  between  8  and  io,coc/. 
betides  other  Bequcfh ;  and  that  the  College -walks 
are  become  the  general  Rendezvous  on  Sunday  Even- 
ings, fmce  the  fhutting  up  the  Gardens  of  St.  John 
KaptiJi's-Co'.legei  whither  they  ufed  to  go  before  1748. 
The  Vilitor  is  The  King. 

14.  TRINITY-COLLEGE  (lands  in  the  North 
Suburbs  of  the  Town,  where  once  flood  Durham- 
College,  founded  Anno  1350.  by  Thomas  Hatfieid 
Bifhop  of  Durham.  At  the  Diflblution  of  Abbeys,  it 
running  the  common  Fate,  Sir  Thomas  Pope^  of  Hen- 
fordjbire^  purchafed  it  of  throfe  who  had  a  Grant  of  it 
M  2  from 


244  A  T  °  u  R  thr°  Oxf- 

from  King  EdwardVl.  and  obtained  a  Royal  Licence 
to  turn  it  into  a  College;  which  accordingly  he  did 
*  Jjnno  1550.  by  this  Name.  It  has  a  Prefident,  12 
Fellows,  12  Scholars,  C5V. 

It  has  two  Quadrangles.  In  the  firft  are  the  Chapel, 
the  Hall,  and  the  Library.  The  Chapel  was  rebuilt 
Anno  1693.  and  the  Work  of  it,  both  within  and 
without,  is  wonderfully  elegant.  The  Altar-piece  is 
of  Cedar  inlaid;  the  Rails  and  Screen  of  Cedar,  and 
&11  adorned  with  exquifite  Carving.  The  Roof  is  en- 
riched with  Fretwork,  and  an  admirable  Piece  of 
Painting,  reprefenting  our  Saviour's  Afcenfion.  The 
Pavement,  from  the  Screen  to  the  Altar,  is  of  a  black 
and  white  Marble.  The  Gardens  on  the  Eaft-fide  of 
the  College  are  large,  and  well  laid  out,  containing 
about  three  Acres  of  Ground :  they  are  divided  into 
three  Parts :  the  firft,  which  we  enter  from  the  grand 
Quadrangle,  confifts  of  fine  Gravel-walks  and  Grafs- 
plats,  adorned  with  Ever  greens  ;  and  the  Walls  en- 
tirely covered  with  them,  as  thofe  in  other  College- 
gardens  generally  are.  Adjoining  to  this,  on  the 
South,  is  another  Garden,  with  fhady  Walks  of  Dutch 
Elms ;  and,  beyond,  a  Wildernefs,  adorned  with 
Fountains,  clofe  Arbours,  round  Stone-tables,  and 
other  Embelliftiments.  At  the  Entrance  and  End  of 
the  great  Walk  that  goes  through  them,  are  very 
noble  Iron-gates,  which  leave  a  Profped  open  to  the 
whole  Eaft  fide  of  the  College.  The  Vifitor  is  the 
Bifhop  of  Wincbefter. 

15.  ST.  JOHN  BAPTIST'S  COLLEGE  is  fituated 
in  the  North  Suburbs.  It  was  founded  Anno  1555.  by 
Sir  Thomas  Whlte^  Lord  Mayor  of  London^  in  the 
Place  where  flood,  before  the  Diflblution,  St.  Ber- 
nard's College,  built  by  Archbifhop  Cblcheley.  It  has 
at  prefent  a  Prefident,  50  Fellows,  2  Chaplains,  an 
Organift,  6  Singing  men,  C5V. 

It  has  two  fpacious  and  uniform  Quadrangles.  The 
inner  Court  was  built  by  ArchbUhep  Laud,  and  is 

rery 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  247 

very  elegant.  The  Eaft  and  Weft-fides  ofit  are  Tup- 
ported  by  noble  Piazzas,  in  the  Middle  of  which  are 
two  Portals  finely  fronted  with  Pillars  and  Carving.  In 
one  of  thefe  Fronts  ftands  a  curious  Brazen  Statue  of 
King  Charles  I.  and  in  the  other  of  his  Queen.  Their 
Chapel,  which  has  an  Organ  and  Choir  in  it,  is  very 
handfome.  The  Library  takes  up  the  Eaft  and  South- 
fides  of  the  new  Quadrangle,  and  is  well  ftored  with 
Books,  Manufcripts,  and  valuable  Curiofities.  The 
Hall  is  neat,  and  adorned  with  good  Pictures. 

The  Gardens  belonging  to  this  College  alfo  are  large 
and  well  laid  out :  in  the  firft,  the  Walks  are  planted 
with  Dutch  Elms,  and  the  Walls  covered  with  Ever- 
greens :  the  inward  Garden  has  every  thing  almoft 
that  can  render  fuch  a  Place  agreeable;  as  a  Terrace, 
a  Mount,Wildernefs,  and  well-contrived  Arbours; but, 
notwithftanding  this  is  much  more  admired  by  Strangers 
than  the  other,  the  outer  Garden  was  once  the  gene- 
ral Rendezvous  of  Gentlemen  and  Ladies  every  Sunday 
Evening  in  Summer.  Here  they  ufed  to  have  an  Op- 
portunity of  feeing  the  whole  Univerilty  together 
almoft;  but  they  are  now  deprived  of  that  Privilege, 
and  Chriji -Church  Walks  are  reforted  to,  as  we  have 
obferved. 

The  Hall  has  been  lately  fitted  up  in  the  modern 
Tafte,  with  great  Elegance.  The  Screen  is  of  Port- 
land Stone,  in  the  Ionic  Order  ;  and  the  Wainfcot,  in 
the  fame  Order,  is  remarkably  beautiful.  The  Roof 
and  Floor  are  proportionable  to  the  reft.  The  Chim- 
ney-piece is  magnificent,  of  variegated  Marble,  over 
which  is  a  Pidlure  of  St.  John  the  Bapti/i,  by  Titian. 
It  is  likewife  adorned  with  feveral  other  excellent 
Pieces  :  at  the  upper  End  is  a  Whole-length  Portrait 
of  the  Founder;  with  Archbifhop  Laud  on  the  Right, 
and  Archbifhop  Juxon  on  the  Left.  On  the  North 
and  South-fides  are  thofe  of  Bifliop  Mew,  Biihop 
Buckridge,  Sir  iVilliam  Paddy,  Knight,  and  of  other 
eminent  Men,  who  have  either  illuiirated  this  Society 
M  3  by 


246  A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

by  their  Learning,  or  enriched  it  by  their  Benefi- 
cence. 

On  one  Side  of  this  Room  is  a  fmgular  Curiofity ;  a 
marble  Urn,  containing  the  Heart  of  Dr.  Rai^llnfon^ 
enclofed  in  a  Silver  Veflel,  which  was"  placed  here"  ac- 
cording to  the  Direction  in  his  laft  Will. 

Tne  Benefactors  have  been  very  numerous,  and  no 
Jefs  confiderable.  Sir  William  Paddy,  Knight,  founded 
and  endowed  the  prefent  Choir,  that  originally  efta- 
blifhed  by  the  Founder  having  been  diilblved  by  the 
unanimous  Confent  of  the  Society  Anno  1557.  Arch- 
biihop  Laud  creeled  the  fecond  Court,  its  South  fide 
excepted.  Archbifhop  Juxon  gave  7000 /.  to  augment 
the  Fellowships;  Dr.  Hilmes^  formerly  Prefident, 
with  his  Lady,  gave  15,000 1.  for  improving  the  Sala- 
ries of  the  Officers,  and  other  Purpofes.  And  Dr. 
Rawlinfon  above-mentioned  has  lately  granted  the 
Reverfion  of  a  large  Eftate  in  Fee-Farm  Rents.  The 
College  has  likewife  largely  experienced  the  Benefi- 
cence of  many  others,  who  have  liberally  contributed 
towards  the  Improvement  of  its  Building  and  Re- 
venues. 

Dr.  Sherard,  formerly  Conful  at  Smyrna^  who  died 
Auguft  12.  1728.  left  his  Library  and  Curiofities, 
•which  are  very  valuable,  to  this  College,  beiides  an- 
other confiderable  Legacy.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop 
of  Wincbefler. 

1 6.  JESUS-COLLEGE  is  fituate  in  St.  Michael's 
Parifh.  It  was  begun,  Anno  i$ji.byHugbPfj(t9 
JProfefTor  of  Common-law  in  this  Univerfity,  Preben- 
dary of  Rochefter^  &c.  who  tiefrgned  it  particularly 
for  the  Benefit  of  his  Countrymen  of  Wales  ;  but  the 
Endowment  that  Gentleman  made  of  it  finking  into 
jiothing,  Queen  Elizabeth,  Anno  1589.  gave  another 
Charter  at  the  Society's  Requeft  ;  and  having  ililed 
herfelf  their  Foundrefs  in  the  firfr,  it  is  frequently  at- 
tributed to  her.  It  has  met  with  fo  many  generous 
Contributors,  that  it  is  in  a  flourifliing  State,  and  has 

a  Prin- 


OxfT          GREAT  BRITAIN.  247 

a  Principal,   19   Fellows,   18  Scholars,    21  Exhibi- 
tioners, •&£. 

It  has  two  large  handfome  Quadrangles,  the  inner- 
moft  very  regular  and  uniform.  The  Vifitor  is  the 
Earl  of  Pembroke'. 

In  the  Burfary  is  fhewn  a  magnificent  Piece  of 
Plate,  the  Gift  of  the  late  Sir  Wat  kin  William  Wynne  ; 
alfo  the  Statutes  of  the  College,  moft  exqiufitely 
written  on  Vellum,  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Parry  of  Ship/ion 
upon  Stour,  formerly  Fellow. 

17.  WADHAM- COLLEGE  ftands  in  the  North 
Skirts  of  the  Town.  Its  Founders  were  Nicola*  Wad- 
ham,  of  Mtrcfield  in  Siimerfet/hire,  Efq;  and  Dorothy 
his  Wife,  Daughter  of  Sir  William  Petre,  Knight, 
Privy-counfeilor  to  Queen  Elizabeth.  Pie  formed  the 
Defign,  and  died  ;  and  Ihe,  in  Compliance  with  his 
Death-bed  Requefl,  completed  it.  It  was  begun 
4nno  1609.  and  fmifhed  1613.  It  has  a  Warden,  15 
Fellows,  15  Scholars,  2  Chaplains,  2  Clerks,  16 
Exhibitioners,  &c 

This  College  has  one  large,  regular,  beautiful  Qua- 
drangle. The  Chapel  ftands  out  behind  the  Qua- 
drangle to  the  Eaft,  regularly  anfwering  to  the  Li- 
brary ;  and  its  Windows  are  finely  painted.  They 
have  a  large  Garden,  handfomely  laid  out.  The 
Vifitor  is  the  Bifhop  of  Bath  and  Wells. 

r8.  PEMBROKE  COLLEGE  is  fituateon  the  South- 
fide  of  the  Town.  It  was  formerly  an  Hall,  and  called 
Broadgate-hall.  It  was  made  a  College  by  the  Muni- 
ficence of  Thomas  Tefdalet  Efq;  and  Richard  Wight' 
wicke,  S.  T.  B.  with  the  Licence  of  King  James  I. 
Anno  1624.  The  Members  are  at  prefent  a  Mailer, 
14  Fellows,  -24  Scholars  and  Exhibitioners.  It  had 
its  Name  from  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  then  Chancellor. 

It  has  one  handfome  Quadrangle,  the  Front  of 
which  is  a  regular,  neat  Piece  of  Building.  A  plea- 
fant  Garden  alfo  belongs  to  it.  The  Vifitor  is  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Univerfity.. 

M   4  19* 


248  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Oxf. 

19.  WORCESTER-COLLEGE.   This  College  was 
lately  called  Gloucefter-hall:  After  the  Difiblution,  Sir 
^Thomas  White,    Lord -Mayor  of  London,   built  it,  for 
the  Purpofe  of  Education,  and  called  it  St.  ydm  Bap- 
lift-ball,  though  it  ftill  retained  the  Name  of  Glaucefier- 
halli  till   it  acquired  a  collegiate  Endowment  by  the 
Munificence  of  Sir  Thomas  Cookjey,  of  djhley  in  IVor* 
tejlerjkire. 

It  has  now  a  Provofr,  20  Fellows,  YJ  Scholars,  &c. 

The  Buildings  lately  added,  and  the  fine  Legacies 
left  it  by  Dr.  George  Clarke,  as  by  his  Will,  (of  which 
1  (hall  give  an  Abftraft  by- and  by)  will  ujve  this  Col- 
lege, which  had  been  in  no  very  good  Condition  for 
fame  time,  a  very  advantageous  Figure  in  theUniver- 
fity  ;  and  it  makes  a  very  ftately  and  fplendid  Appear- 
ance, by  the  Munificence  of  Mrs.  Eaton,  one  of  the 
'three  Coheirefles  of  Dr.  Birom  Eaton,  formerly  Prin- 
cipal of  this  College,  when  Glouce/hr-hall.  This 
Lady,  who  died  Oft.  2.  1740,  left  a  very  great  Eftate, 
partly  to  her  Relations,  and  partly  to  Ads  of  Muni- 
ficence;  fuch  as  the  Foundation  of  Fellowfhips  in 
Wo  cejler- College,  for  the  Support  of  which,  and  the 
erecting  a  Pile  of  Building  for  them,  an  Eftate  of 
70O/.  per  Annum  is  bequeathed.  The  Corpfe  of  this 
L-idy  was  honoured  by  the  Attendance  of  the  Vice- 
chancellor,  and  all  the  Heads  of  Houfes  in  the  Uni- 
verfity.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Chancellor  of  the  Uni- 
ve:fity. 

20.  HERTFORD-COLLEGE.    This  is   of  a  very 
late  Eredion  as  a  College  ;  for  it  was  but  in  September 
1740.   that  his  Majefty's  Royal  Charter  pafled  the 
Broad-Teal,  to  eredt  Hart  ball,  as  it  was  before  called, 
into  a  College;  to  confift  of  a  Piincipal,  as  before, 
four  fenior  and  eight  junior  Fellows  :  To  that,  at  laft, 
the  Reverend  Dr.  Richard  Newton ,  the  worthy  Prin- 
cipal, after  an  Oppofition  of  feveral  Years,  given  by 
Come  who  ought  to  have  affifted  his  generous  View, 
has  obtained  a  Point  which  lay  very  near  his  Heart; 

though 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

though  not  till  feveral  of  his  worthy  Friends  (who 
would  have  contributed  largely  to  its  Endowment, 
had  it  been  effected  in  their  time)  are  demifed,  which 
muft  neceflarily  be  a  great  Difadvantage  to  the  good 
Defign. 

This  College  {rands  in  the  Parifli  of  St.  Pefer's  in 
the  Eaft.  It  is  fuppofed  to  have  had  its  Name  of 
Hart-ball  from  the  firft  Syllable  of  Ellas  Hartford's 
Surname,  who  was  once  Owner  of  it.  Walter  Staple- 
don  Bilhop  of  Exeter,  having  bought  it,  converted  it, 
Anno  1314.  into  an  academical  Seminary,  by  the 
Name  of  Stapledon~ballt  and  endowed  it  with  Main- 
tenance for  12  Scholars,  which  he  removed  after- 
wards to  Exeter  College,  on  building  the  fame  ;  and 
then  this  Hall  refumed  its  own  Name.  It  has  a  Sti- 
pend or  Exhibition  belonging  to  it  of  more  than  16 /. 
per  Annum. 

It  confifts  of  one  Quadrangle,  not  very  regular;  and 
the  late  worthy  Principal  has  made  feveral  Additions 
to  it,,  and  had  projected  ftill  greater,  which  would 
have  taken  Place  long  ago,  but  for  the  Reafons  above 
given.  The  Vifitor  is  the  Chancellor  of  the  Uni- 
verfity. 

Thefe  are  the  20  Colleges  of  which  at  prefent  this 
famous  Univerfity  confifts.  There  are,  befides,  five 
Halls,  which  are  Places  unendowed,  though  not  defti- 
tute  of  Exhibitions.  The  Students  in  thefe  fubfift  at 
their  own  Charge,  are  under  the  Government  of  a 
Principal  and  Vice  principal,  and  pay  the  former  for 
their  Lodgings,  &c.  The  Principals  of  thefe  Hails 
are  nominated  by  the  Chancellor,  who  is  nominated 
by  ghteen's  College ',  except  the  Principals  of  Edmund- 
hall  The  Vifitor  of  the  Halls  is  the  Chancellor  of 
the  Univerfity. 

I  will  give  a  brief  Account  of  each  of  thefe  Halls:  and, 

i.  ALBAN-HALL  is  fituate  on  the  South-fide  of 
the  Town,  and  had  its  Name  from  Robert  St.  Allany 

M  5  once 


A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

once  Proprietor  of  the  Place.  It  became  academical 
about  the  Year  1230.  There  was  lately  no  more 
than  one  Member,  befides  the  Principal,  in  this  Houfe. 
The  Front  makes  but  a  tolerable  Appearance  j  but 
the  Inftde  falls  fhort  even- of  that. 

2.  EDMUND-HALL  is  fituate  in  the  Parift  of  St. 
Peter's  in  the  Eaft ;  and  has  its  Name  probably  from 
one  Edmund^  a  Citizen  of  Oxford,  Proprietor  of  the 
Place.  In  the  Year  1557  it  was  purchafed  by  J^JWH'J- 
College^  and  converted  to  its  prefect  Ufe,  containing, 
beiides  the  Principal,  about  20  Students. 

It  makes  one  Quadrangle  ;  on  the  Eaft  fide  of  which 
ffonds  a  very  neat  Chapel  and  Library,  built  fome 
Years  iince  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Stephen  Penton,  its 
Principal. 

3.  ST.  MARY  HALL  fituate  in  the  PariOi  of  St. 
Jllary,  has  its  Name  either  from  that  Church,  which, 
\vith  this  Hall,  came  to  belong  to  Grid- College,  by  a 
Grant  of  King  Edward  11.  Anno  1325,  or  from  Oriel" 
College^  heretofore  called  St.  Marys-Hall. 

It  confifts  of  one  Quadrangle,  not  very  regular.  Dr. 
John  Phidfon,  Principal,  built  here  hand  fome  Lodg- 
ings at  his  own  Expence.  There  are  about  30  Stu*- 
ticnts  in  it. 

4.  NEW-INN-HALL  is  fituate  in  the  North-weft 
Part  of  the  Town.     It  was  called  Trilleck-  Ha/1,  from 
two  Brothers,  Proprietors  of  it,   of  that  Name ;  one 
$i{hop  of  Hereford,  and  the  other  Bifhop  of  Rochefter. 
Afterwards   the   Founder  of  New-College  bought  it, 
and  gave  it  to  that  College,  Anno  1392.  and.  from 
that  time  it  was  called  New-lnn-Hall. 

The  Building  is  antient  and  irregular. 

5.  ST.   MARY-MAGDALEN-HALL,  fituate  near 
•Magdalen -College^   was   built    by   William   Wainfeet^ 

Bifhop  of  Wincbejicr^  Anno  1480.  for  a  Grammar- 
fchool;  but  it  having  room  for  academical  Students, 
near  40  of  which  there  are  at  prefent,  and  fome  Ad- 
ditions having  been  made  to  it,  it  became  an  acade- 
mical 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  251 

mical  Society.     It  enjoys  15  Exhibitions,  5  of  8 /. 
per  Annum ,  and  15  of  io/. 

The  Front  is  the  moft  confiderable  Part  of  it ;  but 
it  has  a  pretty  good  Library.  The  famous  Earl  of 
Clarendon  had  his  Education  here.. 

What  Additions  have  been  ma<Ie  to  fome  of  the 
Colleges,  by  means  of  the  Wills  of  Dr.  Ratcliffe  and 
Dr.  Clarke,  which  I  have  juft  referred  to,  will,  to 
avoid  Repetition  where  I  am  fo  prelTed  for  Room,  be 
beft  feen  in  Abftrads  of  the  faid  Wills,  which  may 
ferve  as  a  Supplement  to  the  foregoing  Account  of  the 
Colleges.  Dr.  Ratdiffis  is  to  the  following  Effect  : 

4  He  left  an  Eftablifhment  of  6co/.  per  Annum  for* 
**  two  young  Phyficians  to  travel,  to  be  enjoyed  by 

*  them  for  ten  Years  j    after   which,  or   in   cafe  of 
*•  Death,  others  were  to  fuccesd  them,  for  ever. 

'  The  Remainder  of  the  Eftate  charged  to  fecure 
4  this  annual  Sum,  he  left  to  Univerjity- College,  Oxon. 
4  for  purchafmg  perpetual  Advowfons  for  the  Mem- 

*  bers  of  the  fame. 

4  To  St.  Bartholomew's  Hofpital,  London^  he  left 
*•  500 /.  per  Ann,  for  ever,  towards  mending  their 

<  Diet,  ad  his  Willexpreiies  it  ;   and   ico/.  per  Ann. 
'  more  for  ever  for  buying  of  Linen. 

4   500 /.    to   build    the    Front   of  Univerjity -College 

*  anfwerable  to  what  was  before  built,  and  for  build— 

*  ing  the  Matter's  Lodgings   therein,  and  Chambers 
4-  for  his  two  travelling  Feliowr.. 

1  40, coo  A  'for  building  a  Library  in  Oxford,  and 

<  purchafmg  the  Houfes  between  St.  frjarys  and  the 

*  Schools  in  Cat-ftreet)  for  that  Purpore  ;  and,  when 
'   built,  he  bequeathed  150!.  per  Annum  to  the  Library  • 
*•  keeper,  nnd  ico/,    a  Year,  forever,  to  buy  Books 

*  for  the  fame.  This  Edifice  is  a  very  noble  one,  and 
'  a  great  Ornament  to  this  renowned  City- and  Uui- 
6  v-eriity. 

M  6  <  Hi; 


A  1 0  U  R  aW  Oxf. 

He  charged  all  his  real  and  perfonal  Eftate  with 

*  the  Payment  of  thefe  Benefactions,  and  other  large 

*  Family-Bequefts ;     ahd    willed,     that   the  Refidue 

*  'fhould  be  applied  to  fuch  charitable  Purpofes  as  his 

*  Executors  Ihould  think  beft:  And  alfo  willed, 

*  That  ico  /.  a  Year  for  ever  fhould  be  applied  to 

*  keep  in  Repair  the  faid  Library,  to  commence  Pay- 

*  ment  in  30  Years  after  his  Death. 

*  All  the  Livings  in  his  Gift,  he  willed  fhould  be 

*  bellowed  on  Members  of  Univerfity  College,  and,  if 

*  wanting  there,  to  Fellows  of  Lincoln- College. 

<  To  his  Executors,  who  were  William  Bromley^ 

*  Efq;  Sir  George  Beaumont^vft.  "Thomas  Sclater,  Efq; 

*  and   Anthony  Keck,   Efq;  all  fmce  deceafed,  he  left 
4  500 /.  each;  and  a  Power  of  nominating  two  Suc- 

*  ceflbrs  to  each  of  them,  as  they  refpe&ively  died.' 
His  Will  bears  Date  Sept.  the  i3th,  1714.  and  the 

Dr.  died  Nov.  i.  the  fame  Year. 

George  Clarke,  LL.  D.  was  feveral  Years  Repre- 
fentative  in  Parliament  for  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford, 
and  died  October  12.  1736.  Of  whofe  Will  take  the 
following  Abftract : 

*  He  bequeathed   to  the  Library- keeper  of  Wor- 
cejler 'College    io/.  per    Annum-,    and    to    a   young 
Gownfman,  to  attend  to  reach  down  Books,   5/. 

4  4000 /.  for  building  9  Chambers  at  Worcejler- 
College,  and  finifhing  the  Chapel  and  Hall  there ;  6 
of  thefe  Chambers  to  be  for  6  additional  Fellows 
of  that  College,  who  are  to  have  457.  each  per  Ann. 

4  the  other  three  to  be  for  fo  many  additional  Scholais, 

«  at  25  /.  per  Annum  each. 

4  50 /.  per  Ann.  to  be  laid  out  in  Books  for  the  faid 

*  College  Library. 

*  He  orders  his  Truftees,  as  foon  as  they  can,   to 
'  purchafe  the  Ground  adjoining  to  Worcejler -College + 
4  for  enlarging-its  Site  and  Conveniencies. 

*  To  the    Univerfity   he   gives  the   whole-length 

*  Pictures  of  King  William  and  Queen  Mary,  to  be 

*  hung 


Oxf.         GREAT  BRITAIN/  253 

4  hung  in  the  Gallery  over  the  Schools;  the  half- 

*  lengths  of  Lord  Chancellor  Clarendon,    and  his  Son 
.<  the  Earl  of  Rochejler*  to  be  hung  in  the  Delegates 
'  Room   at   the  Clarendon  Printing  boufe ;     and   an 

*  Original,  the  only  one  of  Dr.   John  Ratdiffe*  to 

*  be  hung  in  his  Library,  when  built. 

'   Alfohe  bequeaths  to  the  Univcrfity  all  his  Medals, 

*  and  feveral  other  valuable  Curiofities,  which  he  wills 

*  may  be  kept  in  the  Mufaum  Aftamleanum. 

*  To  the  IVcrceJler-  College  Library,  all  his  printed 
c  Books,    and  Prints,    and  fuch  Manufcripts,  as  his 

*  Truftees  (hall  think  fit;  alfo  to  the  fame,  all   the 
'  Defigns  of  Inigo  Jones  for  Whitehall*  which  he  takes 
4  Notice  are  very  valuable. 

'  To  the  fame  College  he  gives  a  large  two-ear'cl 

*  Silver  Cup,  double-gilr,  weighing  112  Ounces. 

*  To  the  Warden  and  College  of  All-Souls*  whereof 
c  he  was  Fellow,    all  the  Furniture  in  his  College- 

*  chamber,  and  all  that  in  the  Lodgings  he  had  built 

*  there,  with  his  Prints  therein,   and  Pictures  over 
c  the  Doors  and  Chimney-pieces,  the  Cieling-piece 

*  over  the  Stair-cafe,  Hercules  in  the  Garden,  and  St. 

*  Luke*   in  two  Columns,  to  be  ufed  in  the  Place  they 

*  now  are  by  the  faid  Warden,  and  his  Succefibrs. 

«  To  the  Ufe  of  the  Fellows  of  the  faid  College,  the 
'  Rooms  under  the  great  Dining-room,  the  great 

*  Dining-room  itfelf,  and  the  great  Bedchamber,  and 

*  Garrets  over  them. 

'  To  All-Sou's  College  he  bequeaths  alfo  his  4th 
c  Turn  of  prefenting  to  the  Vicarage  of  Yarnton^  for  the 
'  Benefit  of  fuch  of  its  Chaplains  as  have  but  a  {lender 

*  Provilion  ;  and  20 /.    among  the  College-fervants. 

'  An  Augmentation,  as  it  fhall  rife  out  of  one  of 
4  his  Kftates,  to  the  Allowance  of  the  two  Chaplains 

*  of  All- Souls,  whom   he  hopes  the  Society  will  ap- 

*  point  their  Librarians. 

*  To  §^teerf s-Gollege  he  gives  the  Heads  of  fix 

*  Queens  of  England*' 

Befides 


2S4  ATOURttrS  Oxf. 

Befides  the  Colleges  and  Halls  above-named,  there 
are  fome  public  Buildings  which  make  a  glorious  Ap- 
pearance. The  firft  and  greateft  of  all  is  the  Theatre, 
a  Building  not  to  be  equalled  by  any  thing  of  its  Kind 
and  Bignefs  in  the  World.  Sir  Chrijlopher  Wren  was 
the  Director  of  the  Work:.  Archbifhop  Sheldon  paid 
fcr  it,  and  gave  ic  to  the  Univerfity  :  there  is  a  world 
of  Decoration  in  the  Front  of  it,  and  more  beautiful 
Additions^  by  way  of  Ornament ;  and  the  infide 
Roof,  finely  painted  and  decorated,  is  never  enough 
to  be  a J  mired. 

Weftward  of  the  Theatre  flands  an  elegant  modern 
Edifice,  called  the  ASHMOLEAN  MUSEUM.  Its 
Front  towards  the  Street  is  about  60  Feet  in  Length. 
Its  grand  Portico  is  remarkably  well  finifhed  in  the- 
Corinthian  Order,  with  a  variety  of  characleriftical 
Kmbellimmer.ts.  It  was  erected  under  the  Conduct 
of  Sir  Cbfiflffpber  Wren^  at  the  Expence  of  the  Uni- 
verfitv,  Anno  1683.  and  about  the  fame  time  re- 
plenifhed  with  an  ample  ColJeclion  of  valuable  Curio- 
iities,  both  natural  and  artificial,  by  £/ias  /Ijhmole, 
Efq;  This  ufeful  and  entertaining  Repository  has 
fince  been  much  enriched  by  many  Benefactions,  par- 
ticularly by  Dr.  Woodward^  w.ho  fupplied  it  with  an> 
ineftimable  Series  of  FolTils. 

Some  of  its  Apartments  are  filled  with  the  curious 
Manufcripts  of  Mr.  AJbmole,  abovementioned,  and  S:r 
William  Dugdale  ;  as  likewife  with  the  whole  Library 
of  Antbeny.  Wood,  the  celebrated  Antiquarian.  In  the 
Room  on  the  Firft-floor,  Lectures  are  read  in  Experi- 
mental Philofophy.  Underneath  is  an  Flaboratory, 
for  Courfes  of  Chemiftry  and  Anatomy. 

The  BODLEIAN  Library  is  an  Ornament  of  itfelf 
worthy  of  thi>  famous  Univerfity,  I  have  not  room, 
for  its  Hiftory  at  large,  but  fhall  briefly  obferve,  that 
the  fiiffc  public  Library  in  Oxford  was  erected  in  Dur- 
ham Cdlcge,  now  Trinity,  by  Richard  Bifhop  of  Dur- 
bamy  Lord  Treafurcr  to  EdiuardJ.ll.  It  was  after  wards 

joined 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

j.oined  to  another,  founded  by  Cobbam  Bifhop  of  Win- 
chejhr,  and  both  inlarged  by  the  Bounty  of  Humphry; 
Dulce  of  Gloucejhr^  Founder  of  the  Divinity-fchools. 
But  thefe  Libraries  being  loft,  and  the  Books  em^ 
bezlcd,  and  the  Place  where  they  .were  depofited  quite 
ruinous,.  Sir  Tbonus  Badley.,  a  wealthy  and  learned 
Knight,  having,  at  a  vaft  Expence,  collected  Books 
and  Manufcripts  from  all  Parts  of  the  World,  placed 
them  in  the  old  Library-room  built  by.  the  good  Duks 
Humphry* 

This  great  Work  was  brought  to  EfTeci  the  8th> 
of  Nov.  1602,  and  has  continued  increafmg,  by  the 
Benefactions  of  great  and  learned  Men,  to  this  Day  -y. 
fuch  as  Archbifhop  Laud,  the  Earl  of  Pembroke^  Sir 
Tho.  Roe,  Oliver  Cromwell^  Selden,  Sir  W.  Digby,  Ge- 
neral Fairfax,  Dr.  Marshall,  Dr.  Barlow^  Dr.  Raw  - 
Unfitly  &c. 

Over  it  is  a  fpacious  Gallery,  adorned  with  Pictures 
of  Founders,  Benefa&ors,  &c.  and  with  the  antique 
Marbles^  which  were  the  learned  Part  of  the  inex- 
haultible  Collection  of  the  Earl  of  Arundd^  which 
have  been  illuftrated  with  the  accurate  Comments  of 
Selden  and  Prideaux.  Here  are  fome  of  the  moft  va^- 
luable  Greek  Monuments  now  in  the  World.  Over 
the  Porch,  upon  an  handfome  Pedeftal  of  black  Marble, 
ftands  the  Brafs  Effigies  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke^ 
their  noble  and  generous  Chancellor,  given  by  the 
late  Earl,  moulded  by  Rubens ;  alfo  a  very  large  Col- 
lection of  Greek^  Ro?nan^  Britijh,  Saxan,  Englijk,  and 
other  Coins,  prefented  by  Sir  T.  Roe,  and  other  Hands. 
And  that  indefatigable  and  learned  Collector  of  Books 
and  Manufcripts,  Dr.  Tanner,  Bidiop  of  St.  Jlfapb^ 
who  died  December  12,  1735.  bequeathed  the  moft 
curious  Part  of  his  fine  Colledtion  to  this  noble  Library. 

In  the  Year  1 740.  by  the  Death  of  M-rs.  Creiv^ 
Relict  of  George  Crew,  Efq;  an  Eftate  of  80 /.  per 
Annum  is  fallen  to  the  Head  Librarian's  Poft,  which 
before  was  very  inconsiderable,  though  it  required  a 

conftant 


a S6  A  T  O  U  R  thro*  Oxf. 

conftant  Refic'ence.  This  was  a  Legacy  of  the  late 
Right  Reverend  and  Right.  Honourable  Nathanael 
Lord  Crezu,  Bifhop  of  Durham^  who  was  a  great  Be- 
nefactor to  Lincoln  College^  as  I  have  mentioned. 

The  SCHOOLS  form  a  magnificent  Quadrangle. 
The  principal  Front  on  theOutfide  is  about  175  Feet 
in  Length  ;  in  the  Centre  of  which  is  a  noble  Tower, 
whofe  higheft  Apartments  are  appointed  for  aftrono- 
mical  Obfervations,  and  other  philofophical  Experi- 
ments. The  Infide  of  this  Part  mull  pleafe  every 
Lover  of  antient  Grandeur.  Three  Sides  of  the 
upper  Story  of  the  Quadrangle  are  one  entire  Room, 
called  the  Picture  Gallery.  This  is  chiefly  furnifhed 
with  valuable  Portraits  of  Founders  and  Benefactors, 
and  of  other  eminent  Men  ;  as  alfo  with  Cabinets  of 
Medals,  and  Cafes  of  Books.  It  was  wainfcotted  by 
the  Munificence  of  Dr.  Butler^  the  late  Prefident  of 
Magdalen-College,  and  the  late  Duke  of  'Beaufort. 
This  Room  is,  in  Reality,  a  Part  or  Continuation  of 
the  'Bodleian  Library.  -Under  it  are  the  Schools  of 
the  feveral  Sciences  j  in  one  of  which  are  placed  the 
Arunddian  Marbles  ;  and  in  another,  that  ineftimable 
Collection  of  Statues,  &c.  lately  presented  to  the  Uni- 
verfity  by  the  Countefs  of  Pomfret. 

The  new,  or  RADCLIVJAN  Library,  is  fituated 
in  the  Midft  of  an  ample  and  fuperb  Square,  formed 
by  St.  Mary's -Church^  the  Schools,  Brazen- Nofe9  and 
sfil-Souh- Colleges.  The  Building  ftands  on  Arcades, 
which,  circularly  difpofecl,  enclofe  a  fpacious  Dome 
in  the  Centre.  From  hence  we  pafs  by  a  well  exe- 
cuted flight  of  fpiral  fteps  into  the  Library  itfelf:  This 
Room,  which  is  a  complete  Pattern  of  Elegance  and 
Majefty,  rifes  into  a  capacious  Dome,  ornamented 
with  fine  Compartments  of  Stucco.  The  Pavement 
is  of  two  Colours,  and  made  of  a  peculiar  Species  of 
Stone  brought  from  Hart's  For  eft  in  Germany.  The 
Room  is  enclofed  by  a  circular  Series  of  Arches,  beau- 
tified with  Feftoons,  and  fupported  by  Pilafters  of  the 

Ionic 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  257 

Ionic  Order.  Behind  thefe  Arches  are  formed  two 
circular  Galleries,  above  and  below,  where  the  Books 
are  difpofed  in  elegant  Cabinets.  The-Compartments 
of  the  Cieling,  in  the  upper  Gallery,  are  finely  flue- 
coed.  Over  the  Door,  at  our  Entrance,  is  a  Statue 
of  the  Founder,  Dr.  Ratcliffe,  by  Ryjbracy  which  is 
moft  advantageoufly  viewed  from  the  Peint  oppofite 
to  it  in  the  lait- mentioned  Gallery.  In  a  Word,  the 
FiniGung  and  Decorations  of  this  Attic  Edifice,  are 
all  in  the  higheft  Tafte  imaginable. 

The  fiift  Stone  was  laid  May  17.  Anno  1737.  and 
the  Library  was  opened  April  13.  1745.  with  great 
Solemnity.  The  Librarian,  according  to  the  Founder's 
Appointment,  is  nominated  by  the  great  Officers  of 
State. 

The  late  Charles  Finer,  Efq;  by  his  Will,  dated 
Dec.  29.  1755.  left  about  1 2,000 /.  to  the  Chancel- 
lor, Matters,  and  Scholars  of  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford^ 
to  eftabliih  a  Profeilbrmip,  and  endow  fuch  Fellow- 
ihips  and  ScholarOiips  of  the  Common  Law  in  that 
Univerfity,  as  fhould  be  adequate  to  the  Produce  of 
his  Eftate.  This  is  the  firft  Inftitution  of  the  kind  in 
the  Kingdom;  and  in  confequence  of  the  Powers 
veiled  in  the  Univerfity  by  this  Will,  the  very  inge- 
nious and  learned  Dr.  Black/lone  was  appointed  Pro- 
feflbr,  with  a  Salary  of  200  /.  a  Year  ;  who  publifhed 
a  Difcourfe  on  the  Study  of  the  Law,  being  an  intro- 
cluclory  Lecture  to  the  Inftitution,  read  in  the  public 
Schools  Ofi.  25.  1758.  with  the  higheft  Reputation 
to  himfelf,  and  Honour  to  the  Inftitutor's  Scheme, 
and  by  Direction  of  the  Vice-Chancellor,  Heads  of 
Houfes,  and  ProcSlors. 

The  Univerfity  had  before,  to  wit,  in  July  1758. 
in  Convocation,  determined  to  found  a  Profeflbr(hip 
and  two  Scholarfhips,  in  Conformity  to  the  Will,  the 
Fellowfhip  being  referved  till  the  reverfionary  Part  of 
the  Bequeft  falls  in,  At  the  fame  time  the  Convoca- 
tion 


258  A  T  O  U  R  fEror  Oxf. 

tion  made  a  Statute  for  inrolling  the  late  Charles  Viner^ 
Efq;  among  the  public  Benefadtors  of  the  Univerfuyv 

Purfuant  to  the  Directions  of  Mr.  ffner's  Will,  the 
ProfefTcr  is  to  read  one  foJemn  public  Ledure  on  the 
La ;vs  of  England^  in  the  Englijh  Language,  in  every 
•academical  Term  ;  and  yearly  one  common  Courfe  of 
Lectures,  confiding  of  60,  at  lead,  on  the  Laws  of 
England,  in  Engllfl),  during  the  Univerfity  Term- 
time,  with  fuch  Intervals,  as  that  more  than  4  Lec- 
tures fhall  not  fall  within  a- Week.  Thefe  Lectures 
are  to  be  read  gratis  to  the  Scholars  of  Mr.  Diner's 
Foundation  ;  but  fuch  Gratuity  may  be  demanded  of 
other  Auditors,  as  (Hall  from  time  to  time  be  fettled 
by  the  Decree  of  Convocation.  The  Gratuity  now 
fettled  is  4  Guineas  foe  the  firfl  Courfe,  2.  for  the 
fecond,  but  nothing  for  any  further  Attendance. 

In  this  introductory  Lecture  Dr.  Black/lone  has 
fhewn  the  Utility  of  a  general  Acquaintance  with  the- 
municipal  Laws  of  the  Land,  to  Perfons  in  various 
Stations  of  Life ;  and  feme  Reflections  on  the  Pro- 
priety of  purfuing  this  Study  in  our  Univerfities.  See 
the  Difcourfe  itfelf. 

Other  curious  things  in  Oxford  are,  the  Clarendon 
Printing-houft)  the  Peyfic  Garden,  &c.  all  worthy  of 
a  particular  Defcription,  had  I  Room  to  give  it. 

The  Univerfity  is  governed  by  a  Chancellor,  chofen 
by  Scrutiny  or  Collection  of  Votes ;  he  is  generally 
one  of  the  firft  Noblemen  of  the  Kingdom. 

By  an  High  Steward,  chofen  by  the  Chancellor. 

By  a  Vice-Chancellor,  who  muft  be  one  of  the 
Heads  of  a  College,  recommended  to  the  Univerfity 
by  the  Chancellor. 

By  two  Procters,  chofen  annually,  by  turn,  out  of 
the  Colleges. 

The  other  Officers  are  the  public  Orator,  and  the 
Keeper  of  the  Archives,  Beadles,  Virorer,  c«JV. 

But  though  I  have  faidfo  much  ofthe  Un:verfity>  1 
rnuft  not  quite  forget  the  City.  Let  me  then  obferve, 

that 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

that  before  Baliol  College  they  fliew  the  Stone  in  the 
Street,  which  marks  the  Place  of  the  Martyrdom  o? 
Archbiftiop  Cranmer  and  Bifhop  Ridley,  then  upon 
the  Banks  of  the  Ditch,  without  the  City  Walls, 
which  went  along  where  the  Theatre  now  fiancis. 

Beyond  the  River,  flood  Ofncy-abl-ey,  founded  1 129, 
Upon  the  Bridge  is  a  Tower,  called  Frier  Bacon'j 
Study ,  from  that  famous  and  learned  Monk. 

Over  another  Bridge,  on  the  J/isy  we  went  to  fee 
Ruleigh- Abbey,  where  fome  Ruins  ftil!  remain,  turned 
to  a  common  Brewhoufe. 

Of  the  Cattle  remains  a  fquare  high  Tower,  by  the 
River-fide,  and  a  lofty  Mount,  or  Keep,,  walled  at 
Top,  with  a  Stair-cafe  going  downward. 

The  White  friers  was  a  Royal  Palace;  and  near  a 
Green  called  Beaumonds^  they  (hewed  us  the  Bottom 
of  a  Tower  upon  the  Spot  where  the  valiant  Richard 
I.  was  born* 

The  principal  Bridge*  are,  i.  Magdalen- bridge, 
over  the  Cberw.ell\  being  600  Feet  in  Length  and 
confining  of  20  Arches,  by  which  we  enter  the  Town 
horn.  London.  1.  High  bridge,  in  the  Weftern-  fuburb, 
over  the  I/is  \  confiding  of  three  Arches,  and  leading 
into  Glouce/hrfoire,  &c.  3.  Folly-bridge,  as  it  is  com- 
monly called,  in  the  Southern-fuburb,  on  the  fame 
River;,  over  which,  through  aGate  and  Tower  known 
by  the  Nam©  of  Frier  Bacon's  Stitdy,  is  the  ^bingdon 
Road,  which  leads  to  divers  Parts  of  Berl-Jhire,  &c. 
This  confifts  of  three  Arches,  and  is,  like  the  reft,  en- 
tirely built  with  Stone. 

The  City  of  Oxford,  with  its- Suburbs  and  Liberties, 
confifts  of  14  Panih- churches; 


I.  St.  Mary's*                     ~~) 
2.  Ail  Saints. 
3.  St.  Martin  s,w  Car  fax.  \ 
4.  St.dldatis,oi;St.ToIe's.  j*  < 
5.  St.  Ebb's. 
6.  St.  Peter's  in  tbeBailey.  | 
7.  St.  Michael's.                J 

"8.  St.  Mary,  Magdalen^ 
9.  St..  Peter  in  the  Eaft* 
,  10.  Holiwell. 
1  1.  St.  Giles's. 
12.  St.  Thomcrfs. 
13.  St.  John's. 
14.  St.  Clement's. 
Only 

2 <$o  A  TOUR  thrd  Oxf. 

Only  four  Churches  belonging  to  thefe  Parifhes  are 
worthy  Obfervation,  viz.  All  Saints,  St.  Peter's,  St. 
John's,  and  St.  Mary's. 

The  Church  of  All- Saints,  fituated  in  the  High- 
Jtreet,  is  an  elegant  modern  Structure;  much  in  the 
•Style  of  many  of  the  new  Churches  in  London.  It  is 
beautified,  both  within  and  without,  with  Corinthian 
Pilafters,  and  finifhed  with  an  Attic  Story  and  Balluf- 
trade.  There  is  no  Pillar  in  the  Church,  which  is 
72  Feet  long,  42  wide,  and  50  high.  The  Cieling, 
Altar,  Pulpit,  &c.  are  finely  executed.  The  SteepTe 
is  remarkable,  in  the  modern  manner.  Its  Architect 
was  Dr.  dldrich,  formerly  Dean  of  Chrift- church. 

The  Church  of  St.  Peter  in  the  Eaft,  {landing  near 
the  High-Jireet,  was  built  by  St.  Grymbald,  near  800 
Years  ago ;  and  is  reported  to  be  the  firft  Church  of 
Stone  that  appeared  in  this  Part  of  England,  It  was 
formerly  the  Univerfity  Church  ;  and  even  at  prcfent^ 
with  a  View  of  ascertaining  their  original  Claim,  the 
Univerfity  attend  their  Sermons  in  it  every  Sunday  in 
the  Afternoon  during  Lent.  The  Tower  and  Eaft- 
enci  are  curious  Pieces  of  Antiquity. 

The  Church  of  6V.  John,  (which  is  alfo  the  Chapel 
belonging  to  Merton  College,  as  has  been  already  men- 
tioned) is  an  auguft  Gothic  Edifice,  with  a  Tower,  in 
which  are  fix  Bells.  Its  Choir,  or  inner  Chapel,  is 
the  longed  of  any  in  the  Univerfity,  that  of  New 
College  excepted :  it  had  once  an  Organ,  yet  without 
any  regular  Inftitution  for  Choir- fervice,  before  the 
prefent  Stalls  and  Wainfcot  were  put  up.  There  is 
Ibmething  elegant  in  the  painted  Glafs  of  the  Eaft- 
window,  which  is  of  a  modern  Hand.  The  Ante- 
chape!  is  proportionably  fpacious,  and  was  originally 
much  larger  j  for  if  we  examine  the  Outfide  of  the 
Church,  towards  the  Weft,  we  may  perceive  the 
Arches  filled  up,  which  once  ftood  within,  and  made 
Part  of  the  Nave.  Near  the  Altar  are  the  Monuments 
of  Sir  Thomas  jWA-v,  and  Sir  Henry  Savilte.  On  the 

Right 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  261 

Right-hand  of  the  Choir-door,  is  that  of  the  late 
Warden,  Dr.  Wyntle^  and  his  Sifter,  which  is  prettily 
executed  ;  and  not  far  from  the  North-door  of  the 
Ante- chapel  is  a  Buft  and  Jnfcription  to  the  Memory 
of  Anthony  Wood.  This  Church,  as  we  are  informed 
by  Hearne,  was  built  in  the  Year  1424.  but  it  does 
not  appear  by  what  Benefactor. 

The  Church  of  St.  Mary,  in  which  the  public  Ser- 
mons of  the  Univerfity  are  preached  on  Sundays  and 
Holidays,  confifts  of  three  Ailes,  with  a  fpacious 
Choir  or  Chancel,  which  is  feparated  from  the  Nave 
by  an  Organ,  with  its  Gallery.  The  Pulpit  is  placed 
in  the  Centre  of  the  middle  Aile.  At  the  Weft- end 
of  the  fame  Aile  is  'fituated  the  Vice  chancellor's 
Throne,  at  the  Foot  of  which  are  feated  the  two 
Pro&ors.  The  Seats  which  defcend  on  either  Side, 
are  appointed  for  the  Doctors  and  Heads  of  Houfes  j 
and  thofe  beneath  for  the  young  Noblemen.  The 
Area  confifts  of  Benches  for  the  Mafters  of  Arts.  On 
the  Weft-end,  with  a  Return  to  the  North  and  South, 
are  Galleries  for  the  Under-graduates  and  Batchelors 
of  Arts.  The  Tower,  with  its  Spire,  is  a  noble  and 
beautiful  Fabric,  180  Feet  in  Height,  and  richly  or- 
namented with  Gothic  Workmanfhip.  It  contains  fix 
remarkably  large  Bells,  by  which  the  proper  Notice  is 
given  for  fcholaftic  Exercifes,  Convocations,  and  Con- 
gregations. 

Without  the  Town,  on  all  Hands,  are  to  be  feen 
the  Fortifications  ere&ed  in  the  late  Civil  Wars. 

As  to  the  City,  though  the  Colleges  make  up  two- 
thirds  of  it,  and  are  ftill  elbowing  for  more  Room,  yet 
'tis  large  and  regular  ;  the  Streets  are  fpacious,  clean, 
andftraitj  the  Place  pleafant  and  healthful;  the  in- 
habitants genteel  and  courteous;  and,  taking  it  all 
together,  and  including  the  Grandeur  and  Endow- 
ment of  the  Colleges,  their  Chapels,  Halls,  Libraries, 
Quadrangles,  Piazza's,  Gardens,  Walks,  Groves,  &c. 

k 


A  TOUR  fhro  Oxf. 

it   muft  be  confidered  as  the   belt  Ui.iverfity    in   the 
World. 

On  the  Left-hand,  on  the  other  Side  of  the  River, 
the  laft  Remains  of  God/low  Nunnery  are  (ituated 
among  the  fweet  Meadows.  Here  fair  RofambndhiA 
a  remarkably  fine  Tomb;  but  before  the  Diflblution 
fcarce  could  her  Ames  reft,  wbofe  Beauty  was  thought 
guilty^  as  one  fays,  even  after  Death. 

I  cannot  lewrfQxfwd  without  making  one  Obferv- 
ation,  with  regard  to  thofe  who  infift,  that  it  was 
to  the  Piety  of  the  Popifh  Times  that  we  owe  the  firft 
Inftitution  of  the  Univerfity  itfelf,  the  Foundation  and 
Endowment  of  the  particular  Colleges,  and  the  En- 
couragement arifmg  to  Learning  from  thence  :  all 
which  I  readily  grant:  but  would  have  them  remem- 
ber too,  that  though  thofe  Foundations  Rood,  as  they 
tell  us,  800  Years,  and  that  the  Reformation  as 
they  fay,  is  not  above  200  Years  (landing,  yet  Learn- 
ing has  more  increafed,  and  the  Univerftues  flourifhed 
more,  more  great  Scholars  been  produced,  greater 
Libraries  raifed,  and  more  fine  Buildings  been  ereded, 
m  thefe  200  Years,  than  in  the  800  Years  of  Popery  ; 
and  I  might  add,  as  many  great  Benefactions  have 
been  given,  notwithftanding  this  very  momentous 
Difference,  that  the  Proteitants  Gifts  are  merely  Acis 
of  Charity  to  the  World,  and  Acts  of  Bounty,  in 
Reverence  to  Learning,  and  learned  Men,  without 
the  grand  Incitement  of  the  State  of  their  own  Souls, 
and  thofe  of  their  Fathers,  which  were  to  be  prayed 
out  of  Purgatory,  and  get  a  ready  Admiffion  into 
Heaven, 

Oxford  was  made  an  Epifcopal  See  in  1541.  when 
Robett  King)  the  laft  Abbot  of  Ofney,  was  elected 
Biihop.  Here  are  two  Charity- fchools,  one  creeled 
by  the  Univerfity  for  54.  Boys,  the  other  by  the  City, 
for  fifty  Boys  and  Girls.  The  City  and  Univerfity 
fend  each  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

This 


Qxf.          G-REAT  B.RITA  .IN,  26"j 

This  Place  was  for  many  Years  advantaged  by  the 
Neighbourhood  of  the  Royal  Court,while  feveral  Kings 
of  England^  being  taken  witK  the  fine  Situation  of 
JVoodjlock)  made  their  Palace  there  the  Place  of  their 
Summer  Retreat. 

Dr.  Plott  allows  it  to  have  been  a  Royal  Houfe  ever 
fmce  King  Alfred \  and  a  Manufcript  in  the  Cotton 
Library  confirms  it  j  and  that  Henry  I.  was  not  the 
Founder  of  it,  but  only  rebuilt  it.  And  as  for  Henry 
JI.  who  kept  his  fair  Jlofamond  in  it,  he  made  only 
fome  Additions  to  it,  for  the  Entertainment  and  "Se- 
curity of  his  beautiful  Miftrefs.  Notwithstanding 
which,  the  Queen,  having  got  Accefs  to  her  in  the 
King's  Abfence,  as  Tradition  informs  us,  difpatched 
her  by  Poifon. 

When  I  was  firft  at  Wood/lock  fome  Years  ago,  I 
faw  Part  of  the  old  Palace,  and  the  famous  Labyrinth 
of  fair  Rofamond;  but  thefe  are  now  deftroyed.  Her 
Bathing-place,  or  Well^  as  it  is  called,  is  left ;  a  qua- 
drangular Receptacle  of  pure  Water,  immediately 
flowing  from  a  little  Spring  under  the  Hill,  over- 
fhadowed  with  Trees ;  near  which  are  fome  Ruins  of 
Walls  and  Arches.  King  Etbelred  called  a  Parlia- 
ment here.  It  has  been  a  Royal  Seat,  as  I  have  faid, 
from  moft  antient  Times.  Henry  I.  inclofed  the 
Park,  Acrofsthis  Valley  was  a  remarkably  fine  Echo, 
that  would  repeat  a  whole  Hexameter,  but  impaired 
by  the  Removal  of  thefe  Buildings.  A  {lately  Bridge, 
or  Rialto  rather,  now  leads  along  the  grand  Approach 
to  the  prefent  Caftle:,one  Arch  is  above  190  Feet 
Diameter;  a  Cafcade  of  Water  falls  from  a  Lake 
down  fooje  Stone  Steps  into  the  Canal  that  runs 
under  it. 

The  new  Palace  of  Blenheim  is  a  vail  and  magnifi- 
cent Pile  of  Building:  a  Royal  Gift  to  the  high  Merit 
of  ""John  Duke  of  Marlborougb. 

The  Roof  is  adorned  with  a  Stone  Baluflrade,  and 
a  good  Number  of  Statues. 

The 


264  A  TOUR  thro  Oxf. 

The  lofty  Hall  is  painted  by  Sir  James  Thornhillj 
and  the  Cieling  by  La  Guerre,  The  Rooms  are 
finely  enriched  with  Marble  Chimney-pieces  and  Fur- 
niture, but  more  by  the  incomparable  Paintings  and 
Hangings  ;  which  latter  reprefcnt  the  principal  Glories 
of  the  Duke's  Life.  Among  the  Pictures,  are  many 
of  Rubens's  beft  and  largeft  Pieces  ;  that  celebrated 
one  of  himfelf,  his  Wife  and'  Child,  among  others : 
Vandykes  King  Cb:irlcs  I.  upon  a  dun  Horfe,  of  great 
Value  ;  and  the  famous  Loves  of  the  Gods,  by  Titiany 
a  Prefent  from  the  King  of  Sardinia.  The  Gallery  is 
worthy  Admiration,  lined  with  Marble  Pilafiers,  and 
whole  Pillars  of  one  Piece,  fupportin^  a  moft  coftly 
and  curious  Entablature,  excellent  for  Matter  and 
Workmanlhip,  the  Window-frames  of  the  fame,  and 
a  Bafement  of  black  Marble  quite  round.  Before  it,  is 
ftretched  out  a  moft  agreeable  Profpecl  of  the  fine 
Woods  beyond  the  great  Valleys.  What  is  of  the 
moft  elegant  Tafte  in  the  whole  Houfe,  is  of  the  late 
Dachefs's  own  defigning.  The  Chapel  is  equal  to 
the  reft.  The  Garden  is  a  very  large  Plat  of  Ground, 
taken  out  of  the  Park,  and  may  ftill  be  faid  to  be  a 
Part  of  it,  well  contrived,  by  finking  the  outer  Wall 
into  a  Fofs,  to  give  a  View  quite  round,  and  take  cfF 
the  odious  Appearance  of  Confinement  and  Limitation 
to  the  Eye.  It  is  within  well  adorned  with  Walks, 
Greens,  Efpaliers,  and  Vifta's  to  divers  remarkable 
Objects,  that  offer  themfelves  in  the  circumjacent 
"  Country.  Over  the  Pediment  of  this  Front  of  the 
Houfe  is  a  curious  Marble  Bufto  of  Lewis  XIV. 
bigger  than  the  Life,  taken  from  the  Gate  of  the  Cita- 
del of  Tournay.  The  Orangery  is  a  pretty  Room. 
Near  the  Gate  of  the  Palace  is  the  Houfe  where  our 
famous  Chaucer  was  born. 

At  the  Entrance  into  the  Caftle  from  the  Town,  her 
Grace  has  creeled  a  noble  triumphal  Arch,  to  the 
Memory  of  the  Duke  ;  and  has  fet  up  a  vaft  Obelifk 
iu  the  principal  Avenue  of  the  Park,  whereon  is  in- 

fcribed 


6xf.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  265 

fcribed  the  beft  Account  of  the  Duke's  AcTions  and 
Character,  that  ever  was  penned  in  the  fame  Com- 
pafs ;  and  is  fuppofed  to  be  written  by  the  late  Lord 
Vifcount  B. 

The  Infcription  does  fo  much  Honour  to  the  Me- 
mory of  the  Duke,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  the  Eritijh 
Nation,  that  I  cannot  deny  to  myfelf  the  Pleafure  of 
tranfcribing  it  here,  as  follows  : 

The  Caftle  of  Blenheim  was  founded  by  Queen  ANNE,. 

In  the  Fourth  Year  of  her  Reign, 

In  the  Year  of  the  Chriftian  -^Era  1705. 

A  Monument  defigned  to  perpetuate  the  Memory  of  the 

Signal  Victory 

Obtained  over  the  French  and  Bavarians, 

Near  the  V Plage  of  Blenheim, 

On  the  Banks  of  the  Danube, 

By   JOHN   Duke   of  MARL  BOROUGH: 

The  Hero  not  only  of  this  Nation,  but  of  this  Age; 

Whofe  Glory  was  equal  in  iheCoUnci!  and  in  theField;. 

Who  by  Wifdom,  Juftice,  Candour,  and  Addrefs, 

Reconciled  various,  and  even  oppofite  Interefts  j 

Acquired  an  Influence 

Which  no  Rank,  no  Authority,  can  give, 

Nor  any  Force,  but  that  of  fuperior  Virtue; 

Became  the  fixed  important  Centre, 
Which  united,   in  one  common  Caufe, 

The  principal  States  of  Europe  \ 

Who  by  military  Knowlege,  and  irreliftible  Valour, 
In  a  long  Series  of  uninterrupted  Triumphs, 

•   Broke  the  Power  of   France, 
When  raifed  the  higheft,  when  exerted  the  rnoft; 

Kefcued  the  Empire  from  Defolation  ; 
AiTerted  and  confirmed  the  Liberties  of  Europe. 

Philip,  a  Grandfon  of  the  Heufe  of  France,  united  tn 

the  Interefts,  directed  by  the  Policy,  fupported  by  thr 

Arms  of  that  Crown,  was  placed  on  the  Throne  of 

Spain.     King  WILLIAM  III.   beheld  this  formi- 

VOL.  IL  N  dable 


266.  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Oxft 

dable  Union  of  two  great,  and  once  rival  Monar- 
chies. —  At  the  End  of  a  Life  fpent  in  defending  the 
Liberties  of  Europe,  he  faw  them  in  their  greateft 
Danger.  He  provided  for  their  Security  in  the  moft 
effedtual  Manner  —  He  took  the  Duke  of  MARL- 
BOROUGH  into  his  Service. 


Extraordinary      and      Plenipotentiary 
To  the  States-General  ut  the  United  Provinces. 

The  Duke  contracted  feveral  Alliances  before  the  Death 
of  King  WILLIAM.  He  confirmed  and  improved 
thefe.  He  contracted  others,  after  the  Acceffion  of 
Queen  ANNE  ;  and  reunited  the  Confederacy,  which 
had  been  diflblved  at  the  End  of  a  former  War,  in  a 
ftricler  and  firmer  League. 


o 


Captain  General  and  Commander  in  Chief 
Of  the  Forces  of  GREAT  BRITAIN, 

The  Duke  led  to  the  Field  the  Army  of  the  Allies.  He 
took  with  furprifing  Rapidity  ^enlo,  Rvremonde,  Ste- 
venfwaert,  and  Liege.  He  extended  and  fecured  the 
Frontiers  of  the  Dutch.  The  Enemies,  whom  he 
found  exulting  at  the  Gates  of  Nimeghen,  were  dri- 
ven to  feek  for  Shelter  behind  their  Lines.  He  forced 
Bonne,  Huy,  Limburgh,  in  another  Campaign.  He 
opened  the  Communication  of  the  Rhine,  as  well  as 
the  Maes.  He  added  all  the  Country  between  thefe 
Rivers  to  his  former  Conqueils.  The  Army  of 
France,  favoured  by  the  Defection  of  the  Elector  of 
Bavaria,  had  penetrated  into  the  Heart  of  the  Em- 
pire. This  mighty  Body  lay  expofed  to  immediate 
Ruin.  In  that  memorable  Crifis,  the  Duke  of 
MARLBOROUGH  led  his  Troops  with  unexampled 
Celerity,  Secrecy,  Order,  from  the  Ocean  to  the 
Danube.  He  faw  :  He  attacked  :  Nor  flopped,  but 
to  conquer  the  Enemy.  He  forced  the  Bavarians, 

fuftained 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  267 

fuftained  by  the  French^  in  their  ftrongLitrenchments 
at  Schcllenberg.  He  pafTed  the  Danube,  A  fecond 
Royal  Army,  competed  of  the  bed  Troops  of  France* 
was  fent  to  reinforce  the  firft.  That  of  the  Confe- 
derates was  divided.  With  one  Part  of  it  the  Siege 
of  Ingolftadt  was  carried  on.  With  the  other  the 
Duke  gave  Battle  to  the  united  Strength  of  France 
and  Bavaria.  On  the  2d  Day  of  Auguft  1704.  he 
gained  a  more  glorious  Victory  than  the  Hiitories  of 
any  Age  can  boaft.  The  Heaps  of  Slain  were  dread- 
ful Proofs  of  his  Valour.  A  Marfhal  of  France* 
whole  Legions  of  French^  his  Prifoners,  proclaimed 
his  Mercy.  Bavaria  was  fubdued,  Ratifkon,  Augf- 
bourg^  U/m,  Memlngbcn^  all  the  Ufurpations  of  the 
Enemy,  were  recovered.  The  Liberty  of  the  D'ut* 
the  Peace  of  the  Empire,  were  reftored.  From  the 
Danube^  the  Duke  turned  his  victorious  Arms  to- 
wards the  Rhine  and  the  Mofelle.  Landau,  Trevesy 
Traerbach,  were  taken.  In  the  Courfe  of  one  Cam- 
paign, the  very  Nature  of  the  War  was  changed. 
The  Invaders  of  other  States  were  reduced  to  defend 
their  own.  The  Frontier  of  France  was  expofed  in 
its  weakeft  Part  to  the  Efforts  of  the  Allies. 
That  he  might  improve  this  Advantage,  that  he  might 
pulh  the  Sum  6f  Things  to  a  fpeedy  Decifion,  the 
Duke  of  MARLBOROUGH  led  his  Troops  early  in 
the  following  Year  once  more  to  the  Mofellt.  They, 
whom  he  had  faved  a  few  Months  before,  negledted 
to  fecond  him  now.  They,  who  might  have  been 
his  Companions  in  Conqueft,  refufed  to  join  him. 
When  he  faw  the  generous  Defigns  he  had  formed, 
fruftrated  by  private  Intereit,  by  Pique,  by  Jealoufy, 
he  returned  with  Speed  to  the  Maes.  He  returned  ; 
and  Fortune  and  Viclory  returned  with  him.  Liege 
was  relieved  ;  Huy  retaken.  The  French^  who  had 
prefled  the  Army  of  the  States -General  with  fuperior 
Numbers,  retired  behind  Intrenchments,  which  they 
deemed  impregnable.  The  Duke  forced  thefe  In- 
N  2  trenchments. 


268  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Oxf. 

trenchments,  with  inconfiderable  Lofs,  on  the  yth 
Day  of  July  1 705.  He  defeated  a  great  Part  of  the 
Army  which  defended  them.  The  ;cft  efcaped  by 
a  precipitate  Retreat.  If  Advantages  proportionable 
to  this  Succefs  were  not  immediately  obtained,  let 
the  Failure  be  afcribed  to  that  Misfortune  which  at- 
tends mod  Confederacies  ;  a  Divifion  of  Opinions, 
where  one  alone  (hould  judge ;  a  Divifion  of  Power, 
where  one  alone  fhould  command.  The  Difappoint- 
ment  itfelf  did  Honour  to  the  Duke,  jt  became 
the  Wonder  of  Mankind  how  he  could  do  fo  much 
under  thofe  Reftraints,  which  had  hindered  him 
from  doing  more. 

Powers  more  abfolute  were  given  him  afterwards.  The 
Increafe  of  his  Powers  multiplied  his  Victories.  At 
the  Opening  of  the  next  Campaign,  when  all  his 
Army  was  not  yet  aflembled ;  when  it  was  hardly 
known  that  he  had  taken  the  Field  ;  the  Noife  of 
his  Triumphs  was  heard  over  Europe.  On  the  J2th 
of  May  1706.  he  attacked  the  French  at  Ramtllies. 
In  the  Space  of  two  Hours  the  whole  Army  was 
put  to  Flight.  The  Vigour  and  Conduct,  with  which 
he  improved  this  Succefs,  were  equal  to  thofe  where- 
with he  gained  it.  Louvain,  BruJJels,  Malines^ 
Lure^  Ghent)  Oudenard^  Antwerp,  Damme^  Bruges^ 
C our  tray  ^  furrendered.  Ojhnd,  Menin,  Dender- 
rjtfw/and  Aeth9  were  taken.  Brabant  and  1<  hinders 
were  recovered.  Places  which  had  refifted  thegreated 
Generals  for  Months,  for  Years ;  Provinces  difputed 
for  Ages  ;  were  the  Conquefts  of  a  Summer.  Nor 
was  th?  Duke  content  to  triumph  alone.  Solicitous 
for  the  general  Intereft,  his  Care  extended  to  the  re- 
moteft  Scenes  of  the  War.  He  chofe  to  leflen  his 
own  Army,  that  he  might  enable  the  Leaders  of 
other  Armies  to  conquer.  To  this  it  muft  be  af- 
fcribed  that  Turin  was  relieved  ;  the  Duke  of  Savoy 
reinftatedj  the  French  driven  with  Confufion  out  of 

fhcfe 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  265) 

Thefe  Victories  gaye  the  Confederates  an  Opportunity 
of  carrying  on  the  War  on  every  Side  into  the  Do- 
minions of  France.  But  (he  continued  to  enjoy  a 
kind  of  peaceable  Neutrality  in  Germany.  From  Italy 
(he  was  once  alarmed,  and  had  no  more  to  fear. 
The  intire  Reduction  of  his  Power,  whofe  Ambition 
had  caufed,  whofe  Strength  fupported,  the  War, 
feemed  reserved  for  him  alone,  who  had  fo  tri- 
umphantly begun  the  glorious  Work. 

The  Barrier  of  France  r  on  the  Side  of  the  Lew  Cotin- 
trieSj  had  been  forming  for  more  than  half  a  Cen- 
tury. What  Art,  Power,  Expence,  could  do,  had 
been  done  to  render  it  impenetrable.  Yet  here  fhe 
was  molt  expofed  ;  for  here  the  Duke  of  MARL- 
BOROUGH  threatened  to  attack  her. 

To  cover  what  they  had  gained  by  Surprize,  or  had 
been  yielded  to  them  by  Treachery,  the  French 
marched  to  the  Banks  of  the  Scheldt.  At  their 
Head  were  the  Princes  of  the  Blood,  and  their  moft 
fortunate  General  the  Duke  of  Pindofme,  Thus 
commanded,  thus  pofted,  they  hoped  to  check  the 
Victor  in  his  Courfe.  Vain  were  their  Hopes.  The 
Duke  of  MARYBOROUGH  patted  the  River  in  their 
Sight.  He  defeated  their  whole  Army.  The  Ap- 
proach of  Night  concealed,  the  Proximity  of  Ghent 
favoured,  their  Flight.  They  neglecled  nothing  to 
repair  their  Lofs,  to  defend  their  t  rentier.  New- 
Generals,  new  Armies,  appeared  in  the  Netherlands. 
All  contributed  to  inhance  the  Glory,  none  were  able 
to  retard  the  Progrefs,  of  the  confederate  Army. 

Lijlc9  the  Bulwark  of  this  Barrier,  was  befieged.  A 
numerous  Garrifon,  and  a  Marfhal  of  France,  de- 
fended the  Place.  Prince  EUGENE  of  Savoy  com- 
manded, the  Duke  of  MARLBOROUGH  covered 
and  fuftained  the  Siege.  The  Rivers  were  feized, 
and  the  Communication  with  Holland  interrupted. 
The  Duke  opened  new  Communications  with  great 
Labour,  and  much  greater  Art.  Through  Coun- 

N  3  tries 


170  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Oxf. 

tries  over-run  by  the  Enemy,  the  nece/Tary  Convoys 
arrived  in  Safety.  One  alone  was  attacked.  The 
Troops  which  attacked  it  were  beat.  The  Defence 
of  Lijle  was  animated  by  AfTurances  of  Relief. 

The  French  afTembled  all  their  Force.  They  marched 
towards  the  Town.  The  Duke  of  MARLBO- 
ROUGH  offered  them  Battle,  without  fufpending 
the  Siege.  They  abandoned  the  Enterprize.  They 
came  to  favc  the  Town.  They  were  Spectators  of 
its  Fall. 

From  this  Conquefl  the  Duke  haftened  to  others.  The 
Pofts  taken  by  the  Enemy  on  the  Scbetde  were  fur- 
prifed.  That  River  was  pafled  the  fecond  time,  and, 
notwithftanding  the  great  Preparations  made  to  pre- 
vent it,  without  Oppofition. 

BruJJeb)  befieged  by  the- Elector  of  Bavaria^  was  re- 
lieved. Ghent  furrendered  to  the  Duke  in  the  Middle 
of  a  Winter  remarkably  fevere.  An  Army,  little  in- 
ferior to  his  own,  marched  out  of  the  Place. 

As  foon  as  the  Seafon  of  the  Year  permitted  him  to 
open  another  Campaign,  the  Duke  befieged  and  took 
Tournay.  He  invefted  Mom.  Near  this  City,  the 
French  Army,  covered  by  thick  Woods,  defended 
by  noble  Inrrenchments,  waited  to  moled,  nor  pre- 
fumed  to  offer  Battle.  Even  this  was  not  attempted 
by  them  with  Impunity.  On  the  Jaft  Day  of  Auguft 
1709.  the  Duke  attacked  them  in  their  Camp.  All 
was  employed  ;  nothing  availed  againft  the  Refblu- 
tion  of  fuch  a  General,  againft  the  Fury  of  fuch 
Troops.  The  Battle  was  bloody.  The  Event  de- 
cifive.  The  Woods  were  pierced.  The  Fortifica- 
tions trampled  down.  The  Enemy  fled.  The  Town 
was  taken.  Doway^  Betbune^  Aire,  St.  Venant^ 
Bouckain,  underwent  the  fame  Fate  in  two  fuc- 
ceeding  Years.  Their  vigorous  Refiftance  could  not 
fave  them.  The  Army  of  France  durft  not  attempt 
to  relieve  them.  It  feemed  preferved  to  defend  the 
Capital  of  the  Monarchy. 

The 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  271 

The  Profpedl  of  this  extreme  Diftrefs  was  neither  di- 
ftant  nor  dubious.  The  Ft  cncb  acknowlcged  their 
Conqueror,  and  fued  for  Peace. 

Thefe  are  the  Aftionsof  the  lateDuke  of  MARLROROUGH, 

Performed  in  the  Compafs  of  a  few  Years, 

Sufficient  to  adorn  the  Annals  of  Ages. 

The  Admiration  of  other  Nations 

Will  be  conveyed  to  lateft  Pofterity, 

In  the  Hiftories  even  of  the  Enemies  of  BRITAIN. 

The  Senfe  which  the  Brit'ijh Nation  had 

Of  his  tranfcendent  iV!erit, 

Was  expreffed 

In  the  moft  folemn,moft  effectual, mdffdurableManner. 
The  Acls  of  Parliament  *  infcribed  on  this  Pillar 

Shall  ftand 
As  long  as  the  Britifn  Name  and  Language  laft, 

Illuflrious  Monuments 
Of  MARLBOROUGH'S  Glory, 

And 
Of  BRITAIN'S  Gratitude. 

At  Wocdflock  they  make  the  fine  Steel  Cha'ns  for 
Watches,  and  other  things  of  polilhed  Steel  j  and  fei.d 
two  Members  to  Parliament. 

From  Wood/lock  1  went  North- weft  to  Chipping  - 
Norton,  which  muft  have  been  once  a  Town  of  great 
Trade,  by  the  Number  of  Merchants,  as  they  are  called 
on  the  Braffes  over  their  Monuments;  and,  befideSjthe 
Name  Chipping  denotes  as  much.  There  are  Marks  of 
a  Gallic  by  the  Church  ;  and  Roman  Coins  are  fre- 
quently found  here.  The  Church  is  a  good  Building, 
and  after  a  curious  Model. 

Hence  we  rode  to  fee  Rowldrhb  Stones,  a  little 
Stone-benge,  being  a  Circle  of  great  Stones  (landing  up- 
right, fome  of  them  fiom  five  to  feven  Feet  high,  and 

*  Several  Recitals  of  Clauds  in  A£s  of  P  ilia  me/it,  made  to  do 
Hoaour  to  this  Commander,  aie  engraven  on  the  fame  fupcib  Pil'ar. 

N  4  p;  qbably 


272  A  TOUR  tbrd  Oxt; 

probably  the  fafligia  of  an  old  Britijb  Temple,  a^  that 
was  ;  and  Mr.  fifcnd  poiitively  aflsrts,  that  they 
were  fo. 

At  fl  idmerton  Parish  is  a  large  Camp  of  an  orbicular 
Form,  on  the  Summit  of  an  Hill,  which  is  doubly  in- 
trenched, and  able  to  contain  a  great  Army. 

When  I  was  at  Bnnbury^  I  ihould  have  mentioned 
Bloxbam^  which  lies  South  of  it;  where  is  a  fine 
Church,  the  Steeple  of  an  odd,  but  agreeable  Make. 

Near  Bhxkam  is  alfo  the  famous  Parifh  of  Bright - 
Wfll*  of  which  it  was  obferved,  that  there  had  not 
been  an  Alehoufe,  nor  a  Diflenter  from  the  Church, 
nor  any  Quarrel  among  the  Inhabitants  that  rofe  fo 
high  as  to  a  Suit  of  Law,  within  the  Memory  of  Man. 

But  they  could  not  fay  it  was  fo  ftill,  efpecially  as  to 
the  Alehoufe  Pait;  though  very  much  is  ftill  preferved 
as  to  the  Unity  and  good  Neighbourhood  cf  the  Pa- 
;i(i  loners,  and  their  Conformity  to  the  Church. 

Being  now  on  the  Side  of  War  void  fair  e^  as  is  faid 
before,  I  ftill  went  South;  and,  pafTing  by  the  Four 
Shire  Stones,  eieded  in  1741.  we  faw  where  the 
Counties  of  Oxford^  Warwick,  Worcefter,  and  Glou- 
icjltr^  join  four  together }  one  Side  of  this  Stone  front- 
ing each  County. 

Entering  Gloucejlerjlnre  here,  Weft  ward,  we  came, 
after  a  Mile's  Ride,  to  Mcretonbenmarfo^  a  fmall  Town, 
which  had  formerly  a  Market,  but  now  difcontinued  : 
it  Jies  on  the  great  Road  to  Worcefter.  And  the  famous 
Roman  Fofieway,  which,  coming  out  Q&Wdrwick/hire9 
enters  this  County  at  Lemington,  which  lies  North-eaft 
cf  this  Town,  ftrikes  thro'  it,  and  alfo  through  Stew 
and  North- Lech,  down  to  Cirenctftert  Southward. 

Hence  we  come  to  the  famous  Cotfwold-downSy  fo 
eminent  for  the  beft  of  Sheep,  and  fineft  Wool  in 
England :  Fame  tells  u?,  that  fome  of  thefe  Sheep  were 
fent  by  King  Richard  I.  into  Spain;  and  that  from 
hence  the  Breed  of  their  Sheep  was  raifed,  which  now 

produce 


Oxf.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         273 

produce  fo  fine  a  Wool,  that  we  are  obliged  to  fetch 
it  from  thence  at  a  great  Price,  for  making  our  fineft 
Broad-cloths. 

Upon  thefe  Downs  we  had  a  clear  View  of  the 
aforementioned  famous  Fofle,  which  evidently  crofles 
all  the  middle  Part  of  England,  and  is  to  be  feen  and 
known  (though  in  no  Place  plainer  than  here)  quite 
from  Bath  to  Warwick,  and  thence  to  Leiceftcr,  to 
Newark,  to  Lincoln,  and  on  to  Barton,  upon  the  Bank 
of  Humber. 

We  obferved  alfo  how  feveral  crofs  Roads,  as  anr 
tient  as  the  FoJJe,  joined  it,  or  branched  out  of  if; 
fome  of  which  the  People  have  by  antient  Ufage,  tho* 
,-onuptly,  called  alfo  Foffes :  for  Example, 

The  //ckman-Jlreet,  which  is  an  antient  Saxon  Road, 
leading  from  Buckhighamjbire  through  Oxfordflnre  to 
the  Fojj'e,  and  fo  to  Bath;  this  joins  the  Foffc  between 
Knrford  and  Cirenccfler.  Alfo  Grlmcfdyhe^  from  Or- 
Jtriijlrire,  JTattle  lank,  or  Aves  ditch,  from  the  fame, 
and  the  IVould-ivay,  called  alia  the  Foffe,  wofli»g 
from  Ghucejicr  to  Cirence/ler. 

Many  Seats  of  the  Nobility  are  to  be  found  in  Ox- 
•;y<}jh]re\  Gornlnry,  Lord  Clarendon's  \  Ditcbley,  Lord 
Lhibficid's  ;  Haythorp,  the  Earl  of  Shrew/bury's,  nc\v 
built  of  Stone,  very  beautifully. 

That  of  Lord  Litchfieldis  a  very  noble  one,  fituate 
about  the  Diftance  of  three  Miles' from  BLmbeim,  on 
the  North -weft.  It  is  built  of  hewn  Stone,  and  h;-  i  :\ 
beautiful  Southern  PVont,  with  two  corrcfpondent 
Wings,  commanding  a  mod  agreeable  and  extenfn-e 
Profpecfl,  in  which  the  magniiicent  Palace  of  j 
helm  has  the  principal  Eftcdt. 

'This  S?at  is  a  noble  Repofitory-  of  valuable  and 
mafleily  Portraits,  executed  by  the  moft  eminent 
Artilts  in  that  Specie?,  of  Pai-ntiiig  ;  Rubens,  Vandyke, 
Sir  Peter  Lely,  and  our  ingenious  Countryman  a?)3 
Kival  of  Vandjh)  Jehnjon.  As  a  Piece  of  Ar.hi- 
N  5 


274  ^  TOUR  thro'          Glouc. 

teclure,  it  is  inferior  to  none  for  the  Juflnefs  of  its 
Proportions,  and  the  convenient  Difpofition  of  its 
Apartments.  With  regard  to  Furniture  and  Decora- 
tions, it  is  fini(hed  with  Tafte  rather  than  with 
Splendor;  and  adorned  with  that  Elegance  which  re- 
iults  from  Simplicity. 

The  Lech,  the  Coln^  the  Churn,  and  the  I/is,  all 
rife  in  the  Cot/would  Hills,  and  joining  together,  make 
a  full  Stream  at  Lechlade  in  Glouce/ierjhire^  and  become 
one  River  there,  and  are  called  the  Thames^  which 
begins  there  to  be  navigable  ;  and  Barges  may  be  feen 
at  the  Quay,  taking  in  Goods  for  London :  which 
makes  Lechlade  very  populous.  Of  which  Town 
more  by-and-by. 

Stow  on  the  Would,  which  is  the  next  Town  we 
came  to,  is  but  indifferent  to  look  at ;  but  is,  or 
rather  has  been,  remarkable  for  its  two  annual  Fairs, 
famous  for  Hops,  Cheefe  and  Sheep,  of  which,  'tis 
faid,  that  above  20,000  are  generally  ibid  at  one  Fair. 
The  Parifh  is  very  large,  being  12  Miles  in  Compafs, 
and  confifts  of  Meadow,  Arable,  and  Pafture.  Here 
is  a  good  large  P.eclory- Church  (landing  on  a  Hill, 
with  an  high  Tower  on  the  South-fide  of  it,  which  is 
feen  a  great  Diftance  off.  Here  are  alfo  an  Hofpital, 
Alms  houfe,  and  Free  fchool,  all  well  endowed  ;  be- 
fides  other  Charities. 

North- Lech  is  alfo  a  Market-town,  governed  by  a 
Bailiff,  and  two  Conftables ;  and  is  named  from  the 
River  Lech,  which  runs  throngh  it.  Here  is  a  Vica- 
rage Church,  large  and  fpacious,  having  Ailes  on  each 
Side,  and  handfome  Windows,  with  a  large  Tower. 
Here  is  a  Grarnmar-fchool,  free  for  all  the  Boys  of 
the  Town,  endowed  with  80 /.  a  Year.  And  'tis 
faid,  that  the  Founder,  falling  afterwards  into  Mif- 
fortunes,  follicited  for  the  Maker's  Place  of  his  own 
School,  but  could  not  obtain  it  from  the  ingrateiul 
Truftees. 

Here 


Oxf.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  275 

Here  we  quitted  the  Roman  FoJJ'c,  and  went  Eaft- 
ward  to  J-.wford\n  Oxford/hire.  King  Henry  II.  yc-.ve 
this  Town  a  Charter,  Guihlam,  et  omnes  ccnjuetudiric<t 
quas  habent  llberi  burgevfes  de  Oxenford\  but  they  are 
almofl  all  now  loft:  however,  it  retains  fome  Marks 
of  a  Corporation  Hill,  being  governed  by  two  Bailiffs 
and  other  inferior  Officers.  It  is  famous  for  Saddles, 
and,  lying  near  the  Downs,  draws  great  Profit  from 
the  Horfe-races,  which  are  frequent  here.  At  this 
Place  was  convened  a  Synod  in  685.  againft  the  Error 
of  the  'Britijh  Churches  in  the  Obfervance  of  Eafter. 

•  At  Battle  edge,  near  this  Town,  Cittbred,  King 
of  the  Weft  Saxons,  beat  Ethelbald,  King  of  the 
Mercians,  in  a  pitched  Battle,  and  threw  off  his  Yoke. 
The  Inhabitants  celebrate  yearly,  on  Midfummer-  eve, 
a  kind  of  Feftival,  which,  they  fay,  commenced  in 
Honour  of  this  Battle.  It  was  here  the  learned  Dr. 
Heylln  (defcended  originally  from  an  antient  Family  in 
Wales)  was  born ;  and  the  famous  Speaker  Lenthal 
ha^  a  Seat,  and  died  here. 

Being  fo  near  Witney,  we  could  not  forbear  taking 
a  Ride  to  fee  a  Town  fo  noted  for  the  Manufactures 
of  Blanketing  and  Rugs,  which  thrive  here  in  a  moll 
extraordinary  Manner.  Here  are  at  work  150  Looms 
continually,  for  which  abow  3000  People,  from  eight 
Years  old  and  upwards,  are  daily  employed  in  Carding, 
Spinning,  &c.  and  confume  above  ico  Packs  of  Woo] 
weekly.  The  Blankets  are  ufually  ten  or  twelve 
Quarters  wide,  and  veiy  white,  which  fome  attribute 
to  the  abfierfive  nitrous  Waters  of  the  River  Windrufft, 
whtrewith  they  are  fcoured ;  but  others  believe  it  is 
owing  to  a  peculiar  way  of  loofe  Spinning  they  ufe 
here ;  and  others  again  are  of  Opinion,  that  it  pro- 
ceeds from  both.  But,  however  that  be,  this  Town 
has  ingrofled  the  whole  Trade  in  that  Commodity. 
They  likewife  make  here  the  Duff  eld  Stuffs,  a  Yard 
and  three  Quarters  wide,  which  are  carried  to  New- 
England  and  Virginia^  and  much  worn  even  here  in 
N  6  Winter, 


iy6  A  TOUR  thro  Glouc. 

Vv7 inter.  Here  are  likewife  a  great  many  Fellmongers, 
who,  having  drefled  and  ftained  their  Sheep-fkins, 
make  them  into  Jackets  and  Breeches,  and  fell  them 
at  Bampton;  from  whence  they  are  difperfeJ  all  over 
the  neighbouring  Counties.  Here  is  a  good  Free- 
fchool,  and  a  fine  Library  belonging  to  it. 

IPltnry  is  an  antient  Town,  and  was  of  good  Re- 
pute before  the  Norman  Invafion  ;  but  it  is  a  long,, 
draggling,  uncouth  Place,  though  full  of  Inhabit,  nts. 
'Twas  one  of  the  Manors  which  Alwinus  Bifhop  of 
WindiEftcr  gave  to  the  Church  of  St.  Switbln  there, 
r.n  Queen  Emma's  happily  palling  over  the  Fire 
Ordeal. 

At  dfial)  a  Village  on  the  Road  between  Em-ford 
and  'JFitney,  is  a  Barrow  which  ftands  very  high,  and 
is  fuppofed  to  be  the  Sepulchre  of  fome  Perfon  of 
great  Note. 

Southward  lies  T$amptont  on  the  Borders  of  the 
County  next  Berkjhire.  It  is  an  antient  Market- 
town,  likewife  in  Repute  before  the  Norman  Invafion: 
it  is  noted  for  the  greateft  Market  for  Fellinonger- wares 
in  England^  which  come  from  Wltney. 

Turning  here  Weft,  we  entered  GhuceflerJInre 
again,  and  came  to  Lecbladc,  which  lies  on  the  great 
Road  to  Gloucefter.  It  is  probable,  that  it  was  an- 
tiently  a  Roman  Town  upon  the  Thames  ;  for  a  very 
plain  Reman  Road  runs  from  hence  to  Cirencefler. 
Some  fay,  that  it  was  once  a  famous  Univcrfity  for 
teaching  Latin9  as  Creeklade  was  for  Greek. 

The  zntient  Building  lately  difcovered  by  digging 
In  a  Meadow  near  Lecblade  deferves  a  particular  Men- 
tion :  it  is  50  Feet  long,  40  broad,  and  4  high  ;  fup- 
ported  with  100  Brick  Pillars,  curioufly  inlaid  with 
Stones  of  divers  Colours,  of  Teilelaic  Work,  and 
fuppofed  to  be  4  Roman  Bath. 

Not  far  from  it  are  the  two  Towns  called  Barney 
fo  named  in  BritiJJ>9  from  the  Roman  Caufeways ;  fo 

Sarn 


Glouc.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  ijj 

Sarri)  in  that  antient  Language,  and  at  prefent,  im- 
ports a  paved  Way.  The  River  Lech  runs  through  it, 
and  difcharges  ittelf  into  the  Thames.  A  great  Num- 
ber of  Barges  go  from  hence  to  Lindon. 

From  Lechlack  we  proceeded  Welt  to  Falrford^  a 
fnall  Market-town,  thro'  which  runs  the  River  6Vw, 
which  has  two  large  Bridges  over  it.  A  great  many 
Medals  and  Urns  have  been  often  dug  up  here,  and 
there  are  feveral  Barrows  in  the  adjoining  Fields  the 
Monuments  of  the  Slain  interred  here. 

A  great  many  Charities  are  ftill  fubfifting  in  this 
Town  j  but  what  it  is  moft  noted  for,  is  its  Church, 
and  the  admirable  Painting  in  its  Windows :  of  which 
take  the  following  Defcription  and  Hiftory. 

John  Turn?,  a  Merchant  of  London^  purchafed  tbia 
Manor  of  King  Henry  VII.  (to  whom  it  defcended 
from  the  Btaiicbamfa  Earls  vi  Warwick)  ;  and  having 
taken  a  Prize- (hip  bound  for  Rome,  wherein  he  found 
a  great  Quantity  of  painted  Glafs,  he  brought  both 
the  Glafs  and  the  Workmen  into  England.  The 
Glafs  was  fuch  a  Curiofity,  that  Mr.  Tame  built  this 
Church  atFairferd  (dedicating  it  to  the  Virgin  Mary)  ; 
which  is  in  Length  125  Feet,  and  55  in  Breadth  ; 
and  has  three  Chancels,  a  good  Veftry,  and  a  noble 
Tower,  arifing  from  the  midft  of  it,  adorned  with 
Pinacles  ;  and  the  Windows  of  the  Church,  28  in 
Number,  he  caufed  to  be  glazed  with  this  invaluable 
Prize,  which  remains  intire  to  this  Day,  the  Admira- 
tion of  all  that  fee  it. 

Mts.  Farmer  (a  Daughter  of  the  Lord  Lemfler)  gave 
200 /.  to  be  laid  out  in  mending  and  wiring  the  Win- 
dows :  this  has  preferved  them  from  Accidents.  And,  in 
the  grand  Rebellion,  the  Impropriator  Mr.  O!dwortb9 
and  others  (to  their  great  Praife  be  it  remembred  !), 
took  down  the  Glafs,  and  fecured  it  in  fome  fecrec 
Place,  thereby  prefer ving  it  from  fanatic  Rage.  The 
Painting  was  the  Defign  of  Albert  Durer,  a  famous: 
Italian  Matter  j  and  the  Colouring  in  the  Drapery,  and 

fome 


a;  8  4  TOUR,  tiro          Glouc. 

fome  of  the  Figures,  are  To  well  performed,  that  Van- 
dyke affirmed,  the  Pencil  could  not  exceed  it. 

The  Subject  is  all  bcripture  Hiftory ;  viz.  The  Ser- 
pent tempting  Eve  ;  God  appearing  in  the  burning 
Bufh  to  Mofes^  when  a  Shepherd  ;  tiie  Angel  conduct- 
ing Jojhua  to  War  ;  Gideon's  Fleece  ;  the  Queen  of 
Sbeba's  Vifit  to  Solomon -t  King  David  judging  the 
Jmalekite  Regicide  ;  Samfon  flaying  the  P  bill/lines  t 
killing  the  Lion,  and  his  being  betrayed  by  Daiilah  ; 
Solomon's  Judgment  between  the  two  Harlots  ;  and  the 
Figures  of  the  1 2  major  Prophets. 

But  the  greateft  Part  is  taken  up  with  the  Stories 
of  the  NewTeftament:  The  Angel  appearing  to  Za- 
cbariasi  Jofiph  and  Mary  contracted;  the  V  filiation 
of  Mary  by  the  Angel,  and  her  vifiting  her  Coufm 
Elizabeth  ;  our  Saviour  born  in  a  Stable  ;  the  Shep- 
herds and  Magi  vifiting  him  there  ^  Herod  waiting 
the  Return  of  the  wife  Men  ;  Cbrijl  circumcifed  ;  the 
Purification  of  the  Holy  Virgin  ;  Simeon  with  our 
Saviour  in  his  Arms  ;  Jofepb's  Flight  into  Egypt  ; 
Herod  flaying  the  young  Children  of  Bethlehem  ;  the 
Aflumption  of  the  Virgin  ;  and  Jofepb  and  fhe  feek- 
ing  Jefus  at  the  Feafl ;  our  Saviour's  Transfiguration; 
Mary  anointing  his  Head  ;  the  Difciples  going  to 
embalm  him,  and  the  Angel  relating  to  them  his 
Refurreclion  ;  Cbrift's  Appearance  to  Mary  Magda- 
len ;  his  riding  to  Jerv.falem  on  an  Afs  ;  Zacch'eus^ 
and  the  People  ftrewir.g  Palm-branches,  and  Children 


Thieves,  the  Women  (landing  by,  and  the  Soldiers 
watching  him  ;  Jojeph  of  Arimatbta  begging  the  Bo- 
dy, and  receiving  it;  his  Burial  by  Nicodemus,  and 
others ;  the  Darknefs  at  the  Pafiion ;  and  Michael 
contending  with  the  Devil. 

CbriJF*  traveling  to  Emmaut,  and  his  Appearance 
to  the  Eleven,  and  afterwards  to  Thomas  -3  his  Dif- 

ciplei 


Glouc.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  279 

ciples  going  a  fifhing,  and  Chris's  appearing  to  them, 
with  the  breaking  of  the  Net,  and  broiling  of  the  Fim ; 
Chri/l's  Afcenlion  ;  and  the  Defcent  of  the  Holy  Ghoft 
in  cloven  Tongues. 

In  the  Weft  Window  is  the  Laft  Judgment,  cu- 
rioufly  defigned,  and  well  executed,  containing  a  vaft 
Number  of  Incidents  relating  thereto. 

In  the  reft  of  the  Windows  are  many  hiftorical 
Paflages,  that  happened  after  Cbri/t's  Afcenfion  ;  viz. 
The  1 2  Apoftles  at  large,  with  the  Article  of  the  Creed 
they  are  faid  to  be  feverally  the  Authors  of;  the  four 
Evangelilts,  as  writing  the  Gofpels  j  four  principal 
Fathers  of  the  Church  ;  viz.  St.  Jerom,  St.  Gregory, 
St.  Ambrofg)  and  St.  Auflin ;  the  Worthies  that  have 
preferved  the  Chriftian  Church,  in  four  Upper-win- 
dows of  the  middle  Aile  on  the  South- fide,  and  the 
Perfecutors  thereof  in  the  four  oppofite  Windows. 

A  curious  Traveler  will  be  highly  delighted  with 
this  noble  Work.  And  1  (hall  only  add,  That  John 
Tame,  Efq;  the  pious  and  worthy  Founder,  who  died 
in  the  Year  1500.  lies  buried  on  the  North-fide  of  the 
Church,  under  a  raifed  Marble  Monument. 

On  the  Churn,  one  of  the  Rivers  I  have  jufl  named, 
ftands  Cirencefler  (or  Ctcefler,  for  Brevity),  the  an- 
tient  Corinium  of  the  Romans,  and  faid  to  be  rebuilt 
by  CiJJa,  a  Viceroy  under  one  of  the  Saxon  Kings, 
a  great  and  populous  City  ;  then  inclofed  with  Wails, 
and  a  Ditch  of  vaft  Compafs,  which  may  be  traced 
quite  round.  Tne  Foundation  of  the  Wall  is  alfo 
very  vifible  in  molt  Places.  'A  good  Part  of  this  Cir- 
cuit is  now  Failure,  Corn-fields,  and  Gardens,  be- 
fides  the  Site  of  the  prefent  Town.  Antiquities  are  dug 
up  here  every  Day  ;  old  Foundations,  Houfes,  and 
Streets,  and  many  mofaic  Pavements,  with  Rings, 
Intaglia's,  and  Coins  innumerable,  efpecially  in  one 
great  Garden,  called  Lewis's  Grounds,  which  might 
have  been  the  Prtztorium,  or  General's  Quarters ; 
for  LlyS)  in  Britijh,  fignifies  a  Palace.  Large  Quan- 
tities 


A  TOUR  thro          Glouc. 

tities  of  carved  Stones  are  carried  off  yearly  in  Carts, 
to  mend  the  Highways,  befides  what  have  been  ufed 
in  Building.  A  fine  mofaic  Pavement  was  dug  up 
here  Anno  1 7?  3-  with  many  Coins.  One  Mr.  Richard 
BiJIxp  fome  Years  ago  dug  up  in  his  Garden  a  Vault 
16  Feet  long,  and  12  broad,  and  fupported  with  fquare 
Pillars  of  Roman  Brick,  three  Feet  and  an  half  high, 
on  which  was  a  ftrong  Floor  of  Terrace.  Near  it  are 
now  feveral  other  Vaults,  on  which  Cherry-trees  grow. 
Thefe  might  have  been  the  Foundation  of  a  Temple  ; 
for  in  the  fame  Place  they  found  feveral  Stones  of  the 
Shafts  of  Pillars  fix  Feet  long,  and  large  Stone  Bafes, 
with  Cornices  very  handfomely  moulded,  and  carved 
with  Modihons,  and  other  Ornaments,  which  are  now 
converted  into  Swine-trough?,  and  Pavements  before 
the  Door.  Capitals  of  thefe  Pillars  were  hkewife  found. 
A  mcfaic  Pavement  near  it,  and  intire,  is  now  the 
Floor  of  his  P;ivy, 

Half  a  Mile  Weft  of  the  Town,  on  the  North  - 
fide  of  the  Ftjjc  Road,  at  a  Place  called  Qyern^  olher 
Antiquities  are  to  be  feen  worth  an  Antiquary's  At- 
tention. 

Little  of  the  Abbey  is  now  left,  befides  two  old  and 
indifferent  Gate  houfes.  The  Church  is  a  very  hand- 
fome  Building;  the  Windows  are  full  of  painted  Glafs ; 
and  it  has  a  line  lofty  Tower.  Eaft  of  the  Town, 
about  a  Quarter  a  Mile,  is  Sta'bury  mount,  a  Barrow, 
where  Roman  Coins  have  been  dug  up.  Weft,  behind 
Lord  Bathurjl's  Garden,  isGrifmtiiuFs  ?/Munt9  of  which 
feveral  Fables  are  told. 

Cirencejter  is  dill  a  very  good  Town,  populous  and 
rich,  full  of  Clothiers,  and  driving  a  great  Trade  in 
Wool,  whirh  is  brought  from  the  Inland  Counties  of 
Leicejier^  Northampton^  and  Lincoln,  where  the  largeft 
Sheep  in  England  teed,  and  where  are  but  few  Manu- 
factures. The  vaft  Quantities  fold  here  are  almoft  in- 
credible. The  Wool  is  bought  up  here,  chicfl;  by 
the  Clothiers  of  Wilt/hire  and  Gtoucejitrjbirej  for  the 

Supply 


GIOUC.  G'REAT    B'RITAIN.  281 

Supply  of  that  great  Clothing- trade,  which  I  have 
mentioned  already  :  they  talk  of  5000  Packs  a  Year. 

The  Town  is  governed  by  two  High  Conltables. 
It  has  two  weekly  Markets  ;  one  on  Monday,  fin- 
Con!,- Cattle,  and  Provifions ;  and  on  Friday,  for 
Wool  chiefly.  It  has  alfo  five  Fairs,  three  for  all 
forts  of  Commodities,  and  two  for  Cloth  only  ;  and 
fends  two  Members  to  Parliament.  Here  is  a  fine 
large  bevitiful  Church  with  two  Ailes,  fupported  by 
Ifctong  i'iilars.  The  Chancel  is  handfomely  decorated, 
It  has  rive  Chupels  adjoining  to  it,  and  has  a  Tower 
very  neat  and  lofty,  witfi  an  excellent  Ring  of  Bells 
in  it.  The  Windows  fhew  fome  beautiful  Remains 
of  exquifite  painted  Giafs..  There  are  a  Free-fchool, 
and  divers  Hofpitals  and  Alms-houfes,  in  this  Parifh. 

The  Churn  runs  from  hence  down  Southward  to 
Creeklade  in  Wiitfolre^  which  is,  faid  to  have  been  an- 
tiently  a  very  noted  Place,  containing  i 300  Houfes,and 
that  an  Univerfity  was  here  founded  by  the  antient 
Btiton*9  for  teaching  Greek^  as  I  have  faid  before,  as 
Lecblade  was  for  Lathi;  which  Univerfitv  was  re- 
moved, as  they  pretend,  by  the  Saxons^.to  Oxon  :  but, 
I  doubt,  thefe  are  Monkifh  Accounts  ^  for  Creeklach* 
which  they  would  have  to  fignify  a  Greek  town,  is  a 
Corruption  of  the  Britifl)  Word'  Kerigg  gwlade^  \.  e. 
a  ftony  Country.  The  Churn  and  the  Rcy  fall,  here, 
into  the  TAmvi.  Here  is  a  good  Free-fchool  j  and  the 
Town  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

North- weft  of  Cirencejhry  upon  an  Hill,  fiands 
Sirotid,  a  little  Market-town,  noted  for  Clothing,  and 
particularly  for  dying  excellent  Scarlet.  The  Church 
is  90  Feet  long,  and  40  broad.  The  Chancel  is  33 
Feet  long,  and  1 6  wide.  At  the  Weft -end  rifes  an 
high  Spire  Steeple,  and  a  Tower  in  the  Middle. 

North  of  it  ftands  Paynfwicky  a  Market-town,  fitu- 
ate  in  the  wholfomeft  Air  in  Glouce/hrJJr.re,  on  the 
River  Stroud^  where  the  Clothing-trade  is  alfo  carried 

CIif 


282  ^TOUR//W         Giouc. 

on.  The  Church  is  a  Vicarage,  and  very  handfome, 
with  two  Chancels,  a  N.  Aile,  and  a  neat  Spire. 

Lower  to  the  Weft  of  Cirencejhr  ftands  Mnching- 
Hampton-,  fo  called,  becaufe  it  belonged  to  the  Mmch- 
&vNuns  at  Caen  in  Normandy.  Here  is  a  good  Rcclory- 
Church  worth  2OO/.  a  Year,  large,  in  the  Form  of  a 
Crofs,  with  Ailes  on  each  Side,  and  a  Tower  with  Bat- 
tlements rifing  in  the  Middle.  Jn  the  North  Aile  are 
a  great  many  Infcriptions  of  Benefactions.  And  in  the 
South  Aile  is  the  Statue  of  a  Man  lyina;  crofs  legg'd, 
with  a  Sword  and  Shield  by  him,  and  his  Wife  lying 
at  his  Feet. 

Then  we  came  to  Tdbury^  one  of  the  Clothing 
Towns  I  mentioned  j  a  considerable  Market-town, 
fituate  on  a  rifing  Ground,  in  an  healthy  Air.  'Tis 
well-built ;  has  a  large  Market- houfe  well  frequented 
for  Yarn ;  and  there  is  a  lelTer  Market-houfe,  for 
Cheefe,  Bacon,  and  other  Commodities.  'Tis  go- 
verned by  a  Bailiff,  and  at  the  End  of  the  Town  is  a 
long  Bridge,  whereof  one  half  is  in  Wiltjhire.  The 
Church  is  a  Vicarage,  worth  J20/.  a  Year:  't;s  a  good 
Building,  large  and  handfome,  in  *vhich  are  divers  Mo- 
numents. Hereare  a  Free-fchool,  and  an  Alms  houfe. 
It  had  formei  ly  a  Caftle  built  by  Dunwallo  Malmufius^ 
a  Britijh  Prince.  The  Town  feems  to  be  well  furn.fh- 
ed  with  every  thing  but  Water  ;  which  is  fo  fcarce, 
that  the  Inhabitants  are  obliged  to  buy  it  at  the  Rate 
fometimes  of  18  dt  for  an  Hogfhead.  In  the  Parifh 
rifes  the  River  Avon^  which  runs  thro'  Briflal^  and  af- 
terwards falls  into  the  Severn. 

A  little  to  the  North  of  this  Town  is  a  Meadow, 
called  Maudlin  Meadow,  becaufe,  as  I  was  told,  it 
belongs  to  Magdalen-College  in  Oxford.  Here  the  In- 
habitants fhewed  rne  the  Head  of  a  Spring,  which 
flowing  from  thence  runs  along  an  Hedge-trough  ; 
and  feme  tops  of  the  Wood,  that  grows  in  the  Hec!gj, 
rotting,  and  falling  into  this  Rill  of  Water,  are,  by 


Glouc.        GREAT  BRITAIN.          283 

it,  turned  into  Stone.  I  took  up  a  great  many  of 
them,  which  are  generally  in  the  Shape  of  the  Pipes 
(as  they  are  commojily  called),  which  the  Peruke- 
makers  curl  their  Hair  upon,  and  of  a  Tvhitifli,  ftony 
Subftance.  1  broke  divers  of  them,  and  in  the  Mid- 
dle found  generally  a  Stick  of  Wood,  fome  as  big 
as  a  Goofe  quill,  others  larger ;  fome  had  but  a  thin 
ftony  Cruft  about  them  ;  in  others  the  Stick  was  no 
bigger  than  a  large  Needle  :  again,  fome  had  no  Stick 
in  them,  but  only  an  Hole  thro'  them,  like  that  of  a 
Tobacco-pipe;  and  in  fome  others  I  could  perceive  no 
woody  Subftance,  nor  Hole  at  all,  but  the  Whole  was 
a  foft  kind  of  Stone.  Hence  I  guefs,  that  the  Sand, 
which  the  Water  brings  dowiTwith  it,  gathers  and 
crufts  about  thofe  Sticks;  and  that,  in  time,  the  Stick 
confurnes,  and  the  ftony  or  fandy  Subflance  fills  up 
and  fupplies  its  Place.  And  I  would  hence  recommend 
it  as  an  Inquiry,  Whether  thofe  other  Tranfmutations 
of  this  kind,  that  we  meet  with  in  the  Natural  Hiftory 
of  this  and  other  Nations,  be  not  brought  about  in  the 
like  manner. 

And  now  I  am  dipped  into  this  Work  of  Nature,  let 
me  digrefs  a  little,  and  take  notice  of  the  jfflrvteS)  or 
Star-ftones,  found  at  Laffmgton  in  this  County,  which 
have  that  peculiar  Quality  of  Motion  when  put  into 
Vinegar. — In  the  Fields,  near  Badmington,  are  found 
cylindrical  and  fpherical  Stones,  almoft  as  big  as  Can- 
non-balls ;  and  on  the  Hills  about  Widely  are  found 
Stones  of  the  fame  kind  with  thofe  I  found  about  Wat- 
cbet  in  Somerfetjhire,  refembling  all  kinds  of  Shell-fifh: 
thefe,  I  mutt  confefs,  are,  of  the  two,  more  aftonifh- 
ing,  becaufe  they  are  found  on  the  Hills  ;  for  if  they 
were,  as  Fracaftorius  conjectures,  Animals  ingendered 
in  the  Sea,  no  good  Account  of  their  being  here  found 
can  be  given,  unlefs  we  fuppofe  them  brought  hither 
by  the  general  Deluge. 

I'ftckwar,  a  fmall  Market-town,  but  a  very  antient 
Corporation,  governed  by  a  Mayor,  is  the  next.  The 

Church 


1 84  d  T  O  U  R  t£rf         Glouc, 

Church  is  a  large  Edifice,  with  two  Chancels.  The 
Tower  is  at  the  Weft  end,  and  is  high,  adorned  with 
Pinacles.  Here  is  a  Free  fchouL 

Chipping  Softlwylies  a  little  farther  in  the  Road,  an 
.aritient  Borough -town,  under  a  Mayor,  Aldermen, 
and  Burgefles.  As  it  is  a  great  Thoroughfare  to  Brifto!y 
it  is  full  of  good  Inns.  It  has  fevera!  Streets,  betides 
Lanes,  and  a  good  Market  ;  and  a  large  fpacious 
Church,  which,  however,  is  but  a  Chapel  of  Eafe  to 
Old  Sodbury.  Here  is  the  greateft  Chcefe-market  in 
England^  except  Aiherjhne  in  fParwhkjbirt, 

Here  we  dropped  the  Road,  and  fell  down  Southward,, 
diieclly  to  Marjhfeld,  another  of  the  Clothing-towns  I 
fpoke  of.  It  confifts  of  one  Street  of  old  Buildings, 
near  a  Mile  long.  It  has  a  Market,  and  drives  alfo  a 
great  Trade  in  Malt,  and  is  noted  for  good  Cakes.  It 
is  governed  by  a  Bailiff.  Here  is  a  good  Vicarage 
Church,  with  feveral  Monuments  and  Infcriptions  in 
the  Ailes,  and  the  Chancel.  Here  is  an  Alms  houfe 
well  endowed,  and  a  Chapel  to  it. 

We  eroded  the  great  Road  from  London  to  Briflol 
here,  as  at  Cirencejler  we  did  that  from  London  to 
Glcucefter;  and,  keeping  frill  the  Foffe  Way,  arrived 
at  Bath.  But  here  I  ihall  conclude  this  Letter,  and 
am,  Sir, 

Ywrs,  &c. 


LET- 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  185 

LETTER       V. 

'Containing  a  Defcription  of  Part  of  the  Counties 
of  SOMERSET,  GLOUCESTER,  WARWICK, 
WORCESTER,  HEREFORD,  andMox- 
MOUTH. 

.S  I  R, 

THE  Antiquity  of  the  City  of  Bath,  and  of  the 
famous  Baths  in  it,  muft  be  allowed  to  be  very 
great,  even  though  we  fhauld  doubt  of  what  is  infifted 
on  in  the  Infcription  under  the  Figure  of  King  Bla- 
dud^  placed  in  The  King's  Bath,  which  fays,  that  this 
Prince  (whom  Mr.  Camden  calls  Blayden^  or  Bidden 
Cloy tb9  i.  e.  Soothfayer)  found  out  the  Ufe  of  thefe 
Baths,  863  Years  befoie  our  Saviour's  Time. 

Bath  is  a  Spot  of  Ground,  which  our  Countrymen 
ought  to  efteem  as  a  particular  Favour  of  Heaven.  It 
lies  in  a  great  Valley,  furrounded  with  an  amphithea- 
trical  View  of  Hills;  and  its  Situation  on  the  Weft  fide 
of  the  Ifland  is  a  confiderable  Addition  to  its  Delights, 
as  being  the  lefs  liable  to  the  rude  Shocks  of  Teinpefts. 
But  the  Romans  were  induced  prudently,  by  the  ad- 
mirable hot  Springs,  to  make  a  Station  here,  which  they 
called  Camulodunum,  from  the  Mountain  on  the  South- 
iide  of  it,  dedicated  to  Canwlos,  the  Britijh  God  of 
War,  and  (till  bearing  his  Saxon  Name  of  Odin  ;  the 
Hill  being  ftyled  Odin's- Down> through  its  Summit,  for 
the  chief  part  goes  by  the  Name  of  the  Parifnes  among 
which  the  Land  is  divided.  The  Walls  are  almoft  in- 
tire,  and  perhaps  the  Work  of  the  Romans,  except  the 
upper  Part,  which  feems  repaired  with  the  Ruins  of 
Roman  Buildings  ;  for  the  Lewis-holes  are  ftill  left  in 
many  of  the  Stones,  and,  to  the  Shame  of  the  Re- 
pairers, 


286*  ^TOUR  thro          Somerf. 

pairers,  many  Roman  Infcriptions,  fome  fawn  acrofs, 
to  fit  the  Size  of  the  Place.  The  Level  of  the  City  is 
rifen  to  the  Top  of  the  firft  Walls,  through  the  Neg- 
ligence of  the  Magiftracy,  who,  in  this,  and  moil 
other  great  Towns,  connive  at  the  Servants  throwing 
Dirt  and  Afhes  into  the  Streets.  Thefe  Walls  inclofe 
but  a  fmall  Compafs,  of  a  pentagonal  Form.  There 
are  four  Gates  on  four  Sides,  and  a  Poftern  on  the 
other.  From  the  South- weft  Angle  have  been  an  ad- 
ditional Wall  and  Ditch  carried  out  to  the  River  ;  by 
which  (hort  Work,  the  Approach  of  an  Enemy  on 
two  Sides  is  intercepted,  unlefs  they  pafs  the  River. 
The  fmall  Compafs  of  the  City  has  made  the  Inhabit- 
ants croud  up  the  Streets  to  an  unfeemly  and  incon- 
venient Narrownefs.  It  is,  however,  handfomely  built, 
moftly  of  Stone. 

It  was  of  old  a  Refort  for  Cripples,  and  difeafed  Per- 
fons  ;  and  we  fee  the  Crutches  hang  up  at  the  feveral 
Baths,  as  the  Thank-offerings  of  thofe  who  came  hi- 
ther lame,  and  went  away  cured.  But  now  we  may 
fay  it  is  a  Refort  of  the  Sound,  as  well  as  the  Sick,  and 
a  Place  that  helps  the  Indolent,  and  the  Gay,  to  com- 
mit that  worft  of  Murders,  that  is  to  fay,  to  kill 
Time. 

To  fuch  it  is  indeed  a  conftant  Round  of  Diverfion. 
In  the  Morning,  the  young  Lady  is  brought  in  a  clofe 
Chair,  drefled  in  her  Bathing-cloaths,  totheCro/s-6atb. 
There  the  Mufic  plays  her  into  the  Bath,  and  the  Wo- 
men who  tend  her,  prefent  her  with  a  little  floating 
wooden  Difli,  like  a  Bafon  ;  into  which  the  Lady 
puts  an  Handkerchief  and  aNofegay,and  of  late  Years 
the  Snuff-box  and  Smelling-bottle  are  added.  She  then 
traverfes  the  Bath,  if  a  Novice,  with  a  Guide  ;  if 
otherwife,  by  herfelf  j  and  having  amufed  herfelf  near 
an  Hour,  calls  for  her  Chair,  and  returns  to  her 
Lodgings. 

The  reft  of  the  Diverfion  is  at  The  ROOMS,  as  they 
are  called  :  and  perhaps  Mr.  Leake^  who  keeps  one  of 

the 


)omerf.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  287 

he  fineft  Bookfellers  Shops  in  Europe •,  has  more  than  a 
Jhance  for  half  an  Hour  of  each  Perfon's  Company 
yjw-and-then,  and,  to  be  fure,  a  Subfcription,  which 
s  but  Five  Shillings  the  Seafon,  for  taking  home  what 
Book  you  pleaie  ;  but  Perfons  of  Quality  generally 
fubfcnbe  Gold ^ and  I  think  it  is  the  very  belt  Money 
laid  out  in  the  Place,  for  thofe  who  go  for  Pleafure 
[>r  Amufcment  only.  In  the  Afternoon  there  is  fre- 
quently a  Play,  though  the  Decorations  are  mean, 
and  indeed  the  Performances  too.  In  the  Evening, 
People  aflemble  at  the  great  Rooms ;  and  there  are 
Balls  twice  a  Week.  *Tis  alfo  the  Fafhion  of  the 
Place,  for  the  Company  to  go  every  Day  pretty  con- 
ftantly  to  hear  Divine  Service  at  the  Great  Church, 
and  at  St.  Mary's  Chapel  in  gtuten's-fquare,  where  are 
Prayers  twice  a-Day. 

'Tis  remarkable,  that,  for  many  Hundreds  of  Years, 
the  medicinal  Virtues  of  thefe  Waters  have  been  ufe- 
ful  to  the  difeafed  People,  by  Batheing  only  j  whereas, 
jof  late  Years,  they  are  found  to  be  no  lefs  healthful,  in 
srnany  Cafes,  taken  inwardly  ;  infomuch  that  more 
come  to  drink  than  to  bathe  ;  nor  are  the  Cures  they 

:rform  this  way  lefs  valuable  than  the  outward  Ap- 

ication. 

As  to  the  more  particular  Nature  and  Virtues  of  the 

Waters,  I  have  been  favoured,  by  an  eminent  Phyfi- 

an,  with  the  following  Account  of  them,  and  their 

Original. 

Of  BATH  Waters. 

'  The  Bath  Waters  certainly  owe  their  Original 
to  a  Mixture  and  Fermentation  of  two  different 
Sources,  diftilling  from  the  tops  of  two  different 
Mountains  (Claverton  and  Lanfdown) ,  meeting  in 
the  Valley  where  the  Town  (lands  ;  for  all  Hills  are 
Nefts  of  Metals  or  Minerals,  and  their  Bellies  are 
cavernous  and  hollow.  It  is  not  therefore  improba- 
ble, that  on  Claverton  Down  there  Ihould  lie  the 

«  ful- 


88  -A  T  G  UR  thro         -Somcrf. 

fulphureous  Matter,  which  muft  rife  by  Impregnation 
from  that  excellent  Stone  arifing  in  feveral  Parts  01 
the  Mountain,  which  hardens  in  the  Air,  and  grow- 
cafed  with  a  nitrous  Coat  by  Time,  and  cold  Wea- 
ther ;  and  is  fo  readily  cut  out  and  carved  into  the 
mcft  exquifite  Shapes.  This  is  the  Property  of  the 
worthy,  charitable,  and  pious  Ralph  Si  lien  t  Efq;  For 
all  Mineral  Waters  owe  their  Virtue  to  an  Impreg- 
nation of  Rain-water,  generated  from  the  Clouds, 
which  are  compretfed  in  their  Courfe  by  Mountains 
or  Eminences,  and  fall  on  the  refpedtive  included 
Mineral.  And  every  one  knows,  that  a  due  Mix- 
ture of  Sulphur,  and  Filings  of  Iron,  moiftened  with 
Water,  will  produce  any  Degree  of  Heat.  This  Stone 
therefore  muft  have  a  large  Quantity  of  fulphureous 
or  bituminous  Matter  in  its  Compofition,  as  will  be 
evident  to  a  Natural  Philofopher,  from  thefe  men- 
tioned Qualities.  Neither  is  it  improbable,  that  the 
ferruginous  or  iron-tin&ured  Water  takes  its  Rife 
from  LanfdowH;  the  Stcne  en  it  being  hard,  and. 
on  the  top,  flinty,  black,  and  acrimonious,  as  Iron 
Ore  is  known  to  be.  Thefe  two  Mountains,  thus 
tinged  by  Rain  Water  falling  from  the  proper 
Heights,  meet  in  fome  Caverns  in  the  Valley;  and, 
there  fermenting,  produce  that  hot,  milky,  foft,  fa- 
lutiferous  Beverage,  called  Bath  H'ater,  far  beyond 
any  hot  Mineral  Waters  for  its  Delicacy,  and  fup- 
portable,  though  comfortable,  Heat,  to  any  other 
fuch  Water  hitherto  difcovered  on  the  habitable 
Globe,  as  it  pofTefTes  that  Milkinefs,  Detergency, 
and  middling  Heat,  fo  friendly  adapted  to  weakened 
animal  Constitutions,  which  all  other  hot  Waters 
want  in  the  due  Degree  ;  either  being  too  hot,  or 
too  cold,  to  do  any  great  Good  in  Cafes  where  they 
are  proper.  The  VVaters  are  beneficial  in  almort 
all  chronical  Diftempers,  and  can  hurt  in  none,  ex- 
cept in  Hemorrhages,  Inflammations,  or  bad  Lungs, 
unlefs  they  be  over-dofed  in  Quantity,  or  too  high 

'  and 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  289 

*  and   too  hot  a  Regimen  be  joined  with  them  ;    for 
'  they  always  procure  a  great  Appetite,  and  good  Spi- 

*  rits,  if  cautioufly  managed  ;  but  if  high  Meats,  and 
'  frrong  Liquors,  be  indulged,  they  will  create  inflam- 

*  matory  Diforders.     However,  in  weak   Stomachs, 

*  decayed  Appetites,   Colics,    low  Spirits,   in  the  In- 
c  tervals  of  the  Fits  of  the  Gout  and  Stone,  in  Rheu- 
6  matifms,    Palfies,  Nervous  Diforders  ;    and,   in    a 
'  word,  all  thofe  called  the  cold  Difeafes  j    hut  moft 
c  eminently,  in  all   the  Diforders   of  the  chyliferous 
'  Tube,  or  the  Stomach  and  Belly  not  inflamed  ;  they 

*  are  more   kindly  and  beneficial  than  any  Medicine 
c  known  in  Nature;  and  introduce  a  natural  Warmth, 

*  and  a  new  internal  Heat,    into  decayed,  worn-out, 
6  fuperannuated  Constitutions  ;  and  if  a  light  Regimen, 
'due  Exercife,  and  good  Hours,  be  joined  with  them, 

*  they  would  truly  work  Wonders :  but,  by  the  Neg- 
«  left  of  thefe,  their  Efficacy  is  often  loll,  and  their 
4  Credit  brought  into  Queftion.' 

Great  Additions  have  been  made  to  the  Buildings 
within  thefe  few  Years,  and  are  (till  making. 

Without  the  Wails,  a  ilately  new  Square  is  erected, 
with  a  fine  Chapel ;  and  the  Middle  is  inclofed  by  Rails, 
and  handfomely  laid  out  within. 

In  the  Centre  is  a  lofty  Obelifk  70  Feet  high  from 
the  Foundation,  and  terminated  in  a  Point.  Level 
with  the  Eye  is  the  inclofed  Infcripdon,  in  Capitals : 

In  Memory  of  Honour  be/law*  d9  and  In  Gratitude 
for  Benefits  conferred  on  this  City,  by  his  Royal 
Highnefs  FREDERICK  Prince  of  WALES,  and 
bis  Royal  CONSORT,  in  the  Tear  1728.  this  Qbs- 
lljk  is  erefled,  by  Richard  Nafh,  Efji 

The  Tlethjlant  affords  a  fine  Opportunity  to  em- 
bellifli  and  give  a  noble  Look  to  the  Buildings  here, 
and  at  a  very  cheap  Rate. 

VOL.  II.  O  The 


A  T  O  U  R  thro         Somerf. 

The  Grove,  too,  near  the  Abbey  church,  now  called 
Orange- Jquare,  in  Compliment  to  the  late  Prince  of 
Orange,  has  feveral  handfome  new-built  Houfps  ;  and 
a  monumental  Stone  is  erected,  with  an  Inscription 
in  Honour  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  the  PJace  ; 
his  Hi-ghnefs  having  been  obliged  to  vifit  Bath  for  his 
Health,  juft  before  he  married  the  Princefs  Royal  of 
England,  and  received  great  Benefit  by  the  Waters. 
This  likewife  was  erected  by  the  famou-.  Mr.  Najh,  to 
\vhofe  good  Management  and  Behaviour,  Bath  is  greatly 
indebted  ;  every  one  fubmitting  with  Delight  to  the 
Regulations  he  impofcd  regarding  Decorum,  and  the 
good  Order  of  the  Place. 

The  Infcription  on  the  Stone  above  is  in  Latin, 
.which  may  be  thus  tranflated  : 

In  Memsry  of  the  happy  Reparation  of  the  Health  of 
the  Prince  of  ORANGE,  by  the  drinking  of  the 
Bath  Waters,  thro'  the  Favour  of  GOD,  and  to 
the  extreme  Joy  0/~  Britain,  1735. 

The  late  Marfhal  Wade,  when  one  of  the  Repre- 
fentatives  in  Parliament  for  this  City,  gave  a  fine  Al- 
tar-piece to  the  great  Church  there  :  he  was  alfo  at  the 
Charge  of  having  the  Picture  drawn  of  every  one  of 
his  Electors  (the  Members  of  the  Corporation),  and 
fet  up  round  the  Town- hall ;  and  his  own  too  he  fuf- 
fered  to  be  put  up  over  the  Entrance,  as  if  he  would 
make  good  that  Pafs,  and  keep  them  all  ioDuty.  At  the 
upper  End  of  the  Hall,  are  lately  fet  up  the  Pictures  of 
the  late  Prince  and  Augufla  Princefs  of  Wales^  a  Pre- 
le-nt  by  their  Royal  HighnefTes  to  the  Corporation,  who 
likewife  before  prefented  it  with  a  fine  large  wrought 
Silver  Cup  and  Waiter,  gilt. 

T\\t  Abbey  chnrch  is  a  venerable  Pile,  and  has  many 
Monuments  in  it.  But  the  principal  Front  is  almoft 
blafphemoufly  decorated,  if  it  may  be  called  decorated, 
with  the  Figures  of  God  the  Father,  and  Saints  and 
Angels,  the  Work  of  Superftitution. 

On 


Somerf.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  291 

On  the  South-fide  are  the  juftly  renowned  hot 
Springs,  collected  into  a  fquare  Area,  called  The  King's 
Bath. 

This  Water  is  admirably  grateful  to  the  Stomach. 
Tho'  you  drink  off  a  large  Pint  glafs,  it  is  To  far  from 
creating  an  Heavinefs  or  Naufea,  that  you  immediately 
perceive  yourfelf  more  alert. 

Behind  the  Southern  Wall  of  The  King's  Bath  is  a 
lefs  Square,  named  The  Queen's  Bath^  with  aTabernacle 
of  four  Pillars  in  the  midit.  This  is  of  more  temperate 
Warmth,  as  borrowing  its  Water  from  the  other. 

The  Hot  Bath  is  not  much  inferior  in  Heat  to  The 
King's  Bath  ;  it  is  a  fmall  Parallelogram  with  a  Stone 
Tabernacle  of  four  Pillars  in  the  midfr, 

The  Ciofs  Bath  near  it  is  triangular,  and  had  a 
Crofs  in  the  middle.  Hard  by  is  an  Hofpital,  built 
and  endowed  by  a  Prelate  of  this  See.  The  Water  in 
thefe  two  Places  rifes  near  the  Level  of  the  Streets. 

Within  thefe  few  Years,  by  a  Contribution,  a  cold 
Bath,  fcr  the  Benefit  of  the  Infirm,  was  made  at  a 
Spring  beyond  the  Bridge. 

The  greateft  Decency  is  obferved  here  by  both  Sexes, 
There  is  a  very  good  Conveniency  of  Chairs,  of 
which  there  are  great  Plenty,  and  very  genteel  cnes, 
to  go  to  any  Part  within  the  Wails,  and  even  to  the  , 
adjoining  Buildings  without,  for  6*/.  provided  the  Dif- 
tance  does  not  exceed  500  Yards ;  but  if  it  does,  the 
Fare  is  r  s.  and  for  this  the  Chairmen  are  obliged  to 
go  a  Mile. 

The  Accefs  to  the  Hills  about  Bath  grow  every  Day 
better,  by  the  Prudence  and  good  Management  of"  the 
Commifiioners  of  the  Turnpike  roads  ;  fo  that,  tho' 
few  People  cared  to  keep  Coaches  here  formerly,  yet 
the  Ufe  of  thofe  Machines  here  has  greatly  in  created'  of 
late  Years.  Before  the  firft  Turnpike- Ac.1  was  obtained, 
the  direct  Road  to  Lanfdown  was  fo  fteep,  that  Queen 
Anne  was  extremely  frighted  in  going  up:  her  Coach- 
man flopping  to  give  the  Horfes  Breath,  and  the  Coach 

O  2  waiitino- 


292  A  T  O  U  R  tM        Somerf. 

wanting  a  Dragftaff,  it  ran  back,  in  fpite  of  all  the 
Coachman's  Skill ;  the  Horfcs  not  being  brought  to 
ftrain  the  Harnefs  again,  or  pull  together,  for  a  good 
while,  and  the  Coach  putting  tue  Guards  behind  in 
Confufion  ;  at  laft,  fome  of  the  Servants,  fetting  their 
Heads  and  Shoulders  to  the  Wheels,  flopped  them  by 
mere  Force. 

The  General  Hofpital  in  this  City,  for  the  Recep- 
tion of  the  tick  Poor  all  over  the  Kingdom,  is  a  nob!e 
Defign.  The  firft  Stone  of  it  was  laid  the  6th  of  July 
1738.  It  is  ico  Feet  in  Front,  and  90  Feet  deep, 
and  capable  of  receiving  150  poor  Cripples. 

His  late  Majefty  King  Leorge  II.  Prince  Frederick^ 
the  Princefs-Do wager,  and  fome  of  the  Princefles, 
were  great  Promoters  of  this  Work  :  and,  among 
ether  Benefactors,  the  Widow  of  the  late  Mr.  Holding 
of  London,  and  Mr.  Allen  of  Prior- Park  near  Buthy 
were  the  chief:  the  former  giving  2000 /.  in  Money, 
and  Air.  Allen  permitting  the  Truftees  of  the  Charity 
to  fetch  from  his  Stone-yard  all  the  Wall-ftone, wrought 
Free-ftone,  Paving- fione,  and  Lime,  that  were  necef- 
fary  to  be  added  to  the  Stone  which  the  Buildings  that 
were  taken  down  produced,  to  complete  the  Mafbris- 
work  of  the  Hofpital,  befides  giving  a  very  large  Sum 
of  Money. 

The  Stone-yard  juft  mentioned  of  this  ^mz/becaufe 
gWMan,  who  may  be  ftyled  The  Genius  of  Bath,  is 
on  the  Banks  of  the  Avon.  In  it  is  wrought  the  Free- 
ftone  dug  from  the  Quarries  on  Comb-Down,  which 
is  another  Part  of  Odin' s-Down  purchased  by  him.  He 
has  likewife  a  Wharf  to  embark  the  fame  Stone  in  un- 
.  wrought  Blocks,  which  are  brought  down  from  the 
Quarry  by  an  admirable  Machine,  that  runs  upon  a 
Frame  ol  Timber,  of  about  a  Mile  and  an  half  in 
Length,  placed  partly  upon  Walls,  ai  d  partly  upon 
the  Ground,  like  .the  Waggon- ways  belonging  to  the 
Collieries  in  the  North  of  England.  T.  o  Horfes 
draw  one  of  thefe  Machines,  generally  loaded  with 

two 


Somerf.      GREAT  B'RITA.-*:.  2573 

two  or  three  Tons  of  Stone,  over  the  moll  eafy  Part 
of  the  Defcent  ;  but  afterwards  its  own  Velocity  car- 
ries it  down  the  reft,  and  with  fo  much  Precipita- 
tion, that  the  Man  who  guides  it  is  fometimes  ob- 
liged to  lock  every  Wheel -of  the  Carriage  to  flop  it; 
which  he  can  do  with  great  Eafe,  by  means  of  Bolts 
applied  to  the  Front-wheels,  and  Lavers  to  the  Back- 
wheels. 

The  Free-done  of  the  Hills  about  Bath  can  be  car- 
ried by  the  Avon  to  Brijlotl^  whence  it  may  be  tranf- 
ported  to  any  Part  of  England;  and  the  new  Works  of 
St.  Bartholomew's  Hofpital  in  London,  as  well  as  the 
Exchange  of  Briflol^  are  built  with  Stone  from  Mr. 
jjl!e*i's  Quarry. 

This  Gentleman  has  built  for  himftlf  a  very  magni- 
ficent Seat  ;  and  has  placed  it  alrnoft  at  the  top  of  the 
Side  of  the  Hill,  where  the  chief  Quarry,  from  whence 
the  new  Buildings  of  Bath  have  been  (applied  with 
Free-ftone,  is  fituated.  The  Seat  crowns  with  the 
greateft  Beauty  a  large  Court  on  the  North-fide  of  the 
Mountain,  antiently  dedicated  to  the  Briti/h  God  of 
War ;  and,  from  that  Dent  on  the  Afcent  of  the  Hill, 
a  Village  towards  the  lower  Part  of  it  was  denominated 
Wickomb,  in  which  there  is  a  good  Houfe  belonging 
to  Mr.  Bennet. 

Mr.  Aliens  Seat,  now  called  Prior- Park,  commands 
a  Profpe£i,  as  delightful  as  it  is  poflible  for  the  Imagi- 
nation to  conceive  ;  the  City  of  Bath  being  the  chief 
Object ;  and  towards  it  the  principal  Front  of  the 
Houfe  is  turned.  The  Seat  confifts  of  an  Houfe  in  the 
Centre,  two  Pavilions,  and  two  Wings  of  Offices, 
all  united  by  Arcades,  and  making  a  continued  curved 
Line  of  Building  of  above IOGO  Feet  in  Front,  of  which 
the  Houfe  takes  about  150  Feet,  and  is  of  the  Corin- 
thian Order,  elevated  upon  a  Ruftic  Bafcmcnt,  and 
crowned  with  a  Baluftrade  ;  the  Centre  advancing  for- 
ward, and  making  one  of  the  largeft  and  moft  correct 
he&aftvle  Porticoes  in  the  Kingdom.  The  Order  in- 

O  3  dudes 


294  A  TOUR  thro          Somerf. 

eludes  two  Stories,  and  the  Houfe  has  15  Windows  in 
the  Length  of  it.  The  Portico,  together  with  a  Co- 
rinthian Hall  in  the  principal  Story,  a  Chapel  on  the 
fame  Floor  of  the  Ionic  Order  fupporting  the  Ccrin- 
tbian,  and  a  Corinthian  Gallery  extending  over  the 
Hal!,  and  the  Rooms  on  each  Side  of  it,  all  finished 
with  Free-ilone,  are  the  Beauties  and  Curiofities  of 
the  Pile. 

The  Gardens  to  this  Seat  confift  of  two  Terraces, 
and  two  Slopes,  lying  Northward   before  the  Houfe, 
with  winding  Walks  made  through  a  little  Coppice 
opening  to  the  Weftward  of  thofe  Slopes  ;  but  all  thefe 
:ire  adorned  with  Vafes, and  other  Ornaments,  in  Stone- 
work: ;  and  the  Affluence  of  Water  is  fo  great,  that  it 
is  received  at  three  different  Places,  after  many  little 
agreeable  Falls,  at  the  Head  of  one  of  which  there  is 
a^Statue  of  Mofes  down  to  the  Knees,  in  an  Attitude 
expreflive  of  the  Admiiation  he  muft  have  been  in  af- 
ter linking  the  Rock,  and  feeing  the  Water  gufh  out 
of  it.     The  winding  Walks  were  made  with  great 
Labour ;  and,  tho'  no  broader  than  for  two  or  three 
to  walk  abreaft,  yet  in  fome  Places  they  appear  with 
little  Ciiffo  on  one  Side,  and  with  fmall  Precipices  on 
the  other.     Thefe  things  we  may  efteem  as  Beauties ; 
but  if  we  leave  them,  and  go  to  what  may  be  called 
the  greater  Part  of  the  Gardens,  I  mean  to  the  Rides 
whkh   are  made  thro'  the  adjoining  Lands,   the  real 
Beauties  of  Nature  will  appear  in  great  abundance  ; 
and  Mr.  y<%?» may  put  the  natural  Terrace  in  the  Brow 
of  the  Hill  above  his  Houfe  in  Competition  with  the 
greatelt  Work  that  ever  was  made  to  adorn  a  Seat ; 
and  on  that  Terrace  the  Statue  of  the  late  Marfhal 
Wade  is  placed  :  for  where  could  the  Figure  of  a  great 
Soldier  ft  and  fo  properly,  as  on  an  Hill  facred  to  the 
God  of  War  ? 

The  Tafte  of  this  Gentleman,  in  his  Gardening, 
&c.  is  fo  aptly  defcribed  by  the  late  Mrs.  Chandler^  of 
the  Place,  in  an  ingenious  Poem,  called.  The  Dcfcrip- 

lion 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  29; 

tion  of  BATH,  that  the  following  Quotation  from  it 
muft  be  acceptable  : 

Thy  Tajle  refind  appears  in  yonder  Wood, 

Not  Nature  tortur  d,  but  by  Art  improved  ; 

Where  cover'd  Walks  with  open  Vifta's  meet) 

Jn  Area  here,  and  there  a  fhady  Seat. 

A  thoufand  Sweets  in  mingled  Odours  flow 

From  blooming  Flow'rs,  which  on  the  Borders  groiu. 

In  numerous  Streams  the  murmring  Waters  thrill, 

Uniting  ell,  obedient  to  thy  Will ; 

Till,  by  thy  Art^  in  one  Canal  combind, 

"They  thro'  the  Wood  in  various  Mazes  'wind; 

From  thence  the  foaming  Waves  fall  rapid  doiun, 

In  bold  Cafcades,  and  lajfj  the  rugged  Stone. 

But)  here  their  Fury  loft,  the  calmer  Scene 

Delights,  the  j offer  Mufe,  and  Soul  fercnc  : 

An  ample  Balm,   Centre  of  the  Place, 

In  Lymph  tranf parent  holds  the  fcaly  Race  ; 

Jts  glajjy  Face,  ft  orn  ev'ry  Ruffe  free, 

Reftefls  the  Image  of  each  neighbouring  Tree  ; 

On  which  the  feather'd  Choir'j  melodious  Throng, 

By  Love  infpir'dy  unite  in  tuneful  Seng  ; 

Their  tuneful  Song  the  ccchoing  Woods  refoundy       1 

And  falling  Waters  add  a  jolemn  Sound :  ?• 

Sure  this  the  Mufes  haunt  j  'tis  hallow' d  Ground !  1 

Bath  has  been  confiderably  increafed  North  and 
Weil  ward  fmce  the  Publication  of  the  laft  Edition  of 
this  Work  (1753-)?  ^ut  f°  irregularly,  that  perhaps 
it  will  be  difficult  to  find  out  Names  for  the  new-in- 
habited Spots  of  Ground,  Bladud- Buildings^  which 
make  a  very  handfome  Row  with  two  Fronts,  at  the 
upper  End  of  Broad Jlree.t\  and  Gayjlreet>  a  large 
and  handfome  one,  leading  from  <j)uecrfs  fquare  to 
the  Circus,  as  it  is  to  be  called  ;  are  actually  built, 
and  finished  within  that  Space  of  Time.  The  two 
former,  and  the  Circus,  are  the  only  ones  confined  to 
Flans. 

O  4  One 


2c?6  A  T  O  U  R  thro        Somerf. 

One  third  of  this  draw  is  adually  finifhed  (1760.^. 
When  completed,  it  will  be,  perhaps,  one  of  the  mod 
elegant  Piles  in  Europe^  of  a  modern  Work  efpecially. 
It  is  to  be  circular,  with  three  Openings  or  Streets 
leading  into  it,  with  a  Bafm  in  the  middle,  fed  by 
two  or  three  fine  Springs  j  and  which  wiil  afford  a 
plentiful  Supply  of  \Vater  to  the  whole  Neighbour- 
hood. 

There  are  manyHoufes  built  in  a  Field  called  f^lne- 
yards,  juft  above  Bla duffs  Buildings^  which,  from  a 
Mixture  of  Brick  with  j&tfA-ftone,  is  at  prefent  called 
Harlequin  Raw ;  but  which,  when  the  whole  is  com- 
pleted, will  probably  receive  fome  other  Name.  The 
reft  towards  Lanftlmvn  is  a  Continuation  of  Behltere. 
Weft  ward,  a  Continuation  of  Kingfnmn  djh  -get  and 
Tyburn-road. 

A  confiderable  Bail  'ing  is  carrying  on  (/fug.  1760  ) 
on  the  Abbty-gfetni  by  ihe  Duke  of  K'mgstm,  on  the 
South- fide  of  the  Abbey  Church^  which  is  to  form  a 
Street;  one  Row  whereof  is,  however,  fo  clofely 
connected  with  the  Church,  as  to  obftrudr.  the  Light 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  Houfes  do  in  Ifadis  Paf- 
fage,  on  the  North-fide.  In  digging  to  lay  the  Foun- 
dation of  this  new  Street,  and  on  pulling  down  the 
Abh(y-Houfgfott\i*\  Purpofe,the  Workmen  difcovered 
a  very  valuable  Piece  of  Antiquity.  Under  the  Foun- 
dation of  the  faid  Abbey- Houj'e  (Anno  1755.)*  tneX 
fell  upon  fome  Cavities,  which  led  to  the  Remains  of 
very  noble  Roman  Baths  and  Sudatories,  conftru&ed 
upon  their  elegant  Plans,  with  Floors  fufpended  upon 
fquare  Brick  Pillars,  anJ  furrounded  with  tubulated 
Bricks,  for  the  equal  Conveyance  of  Heat  and  Vigour. 
Their  Dimenfions  were  very  large.  Hence  it  appears, 
that  the  Roman  Soldiery,  though  in  fo  remote  a  Sta- 
tion, entertained  higher  Ideas  of  the  Convenience, 
Elegance,  and  Ufe,  of  Baths,  than  the  fettled  and 
opulent  Inhabitants  of  Britain  have  ever  yet  propofed 
to  themfelves.  . 

The 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  297 

The  great  Improvements  of  the  Bath  Roads  have 
done  Credit  to  the  Gentlemen  active  in  that  kind  of 
Bufinefs  ;  for  they  are  at  this  time  (Aug.  1760.)  not 
only  fafe,  but  pleafant,  and  the  fame  good  Inclination 
prevails  as  far  WefKvard  as  the  Sea-fide  ;  and  if 
Minehead  is  found  to  be  a  convenient  Port  for  the 
People  of  Ireland^  as  a  noble  Lord  of  that  Kingdom- 
declares  it  is,  the  Journey  by  Land  on  this  Road  will 
be  a  fuffivient  Inducement  to  them  to  make  ufe  of  it ; 
and  this  is  the  Reafon  why  that  Lord  has  taken  fo 
much  Pains,  in  the  framing  and  procuring  the  taft 
Turnpike  A&,  which  lately  nafled,  infilled,  An  Aft 
to  explain,  arnend^  and  render  more  effectual,  the  Pow- 
ers granted  by  ftveral  Afts  of  Parliament  for  repairing 
feveral.  Roads  leading  to  the  City  of  Bath  ;  and  for 
amending  fever  a  I  other  Roads  near  the  faid  City. 

The  Earl  of  Egmont  is  now  building  a  noble  Houfe 
near  Erldgivater^  and  intends  to  purchafe  Land  in  the 
Neighbourhood  or  b'atb. 

With  refpe£t  to  the  Environs  of  Bath,  the  benefi- 
cent Mr.  Allen  has  been  very  generous  in  Divine  Land 
where  neceflary,  for  the  Enlargement  of  the  Roads  ; 
and  to  a  particular  Road,  which  pafTes  behind  his 
own  Houfe  from  the  London  to  the  Weftern  Road,  he 
has  given  a  large  Sum  of  Money. 

The  political  Government  of  Bath  is  in  the  Hands 
of  a  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Common  Council.  It  has 
two  Fairs,  which  are  held  Feb.  3.  and  on  the  Feftival 
of  St.  Peter  ;  and  it  fends  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment. 

At  Wakct^  many  Roman  Antiquities  have  been 
found.  Lord  Wincbelfea  has  an  Urn,  a  Patera,  ?.ncl 
other  things  taken  out  of  a  Stone  Coffin,  wherein  was 
a  Child's  Body,  half  a  Mile  off  the  Bath. 

When  one  is  upon  Lunfdown,  and  has   (by  a  wind- 
ing Roai)  paffed  all  the  Sleeps  and  Difficulties  of  the 
Afcent,  there  is  a  plain  and  pleafant  Country  for  many 
Miles  into  Gfoucefter/birey  and  two  fine  Houfes :  the 
O  5  one 


o98  A  T  O  U  R  rfw'         Somerf. 

one  built  by  Mr..B!aitbivait9  Secretary  at  War  in  the 
Rei2;n  of  Queen  Anne  ;  2nd  the  otner  is  called  Bad- 
mington,  a  Manfion  of  the  Duke  of  Beaufort. 

Nor  mud  we  forget  to  mention  the  handfome  Mo- 
nument eiecled,  by  Order  of  the  late  Lord  Lanfdoiun, 
to  the  Honour  of  Sir  BevU  Granvil'e,  his  Lordfhip's 
Anceftor,  with  an  Infcription  recording  the  Aclion  in 
which  he  fell.  It  is  built  on  the  Brow  of  Lanfdown- 
Hi'l)  on  the  very  Spot,  as  near  as  poffible,  where  that 
brave  Gentleman  was  killed,  in  the  Adion  between 
him  and  Sir  William  Waller^  in  the  Civil  Wars  j  of 
which  Lord  Clarendw^  and  others,  give  Account. 

Juft  below  it,  we  fee  Lilliput-  Ciijilc,  a  fmall  Place 
of  Retirement,  lately  made  by  Mr.  Jerry  Puree  ; 
beautiful  in  itfelf,  but  much  more  fo  in  refped  to  its 
Situation. 

We  come  in  fix  Miles  from  Bath  to  Cain/ham,  a 
Market-town,  famous  for  its  Abbey,  founded  by  Wile 
Ham  Earl  of  G.'ouce/hr,  about  the  Year  1170.  and 
granted  by  Edward  VI.  to  Thomas  Bridges^  Efq;  in 
the  Year  1553.  as  well  as  for  its  having  been  the 
Ivlanfion  or  capital  Seat  of  the  Cangi^  as  Camden  in- 
terprets the  Name.  The  Town  is  fituated  by  the  Side 
of  a  fmall  River,  that  runs  into  the  Avon^  and  extends 
to  the  Confluence  of  the  two  Streams.  It  is  built 
upon  a  Rock,  produdive  of  an  infinite  Number  of 
Foflils  in  the  Shape  of  Serpents,  coiled  up  like  a  Rope  ; 
and  credulous  People  formerly  believed,  that  they  were 
real  Serpents,  changed  into  Stones  by  one  Keira^  a  de- 
vout BritijJ)  Virgin,  from  whom  they  likewife  deno- 
minated the  Town. 

Ca.injbam,R.\vsr  is  noted  for  producing  Multitudes  of 
little  Eels  in  the  Spring  of  the  Year :  thefe  the  People 
catch,  when  they  are  about  two  Inches  long  ;  and, 
having  boiled  them,  they  make  them  into  fmall  Cakes, 
for  Sale.  Thefe  Elver-cakes  they  difpofe  of  at  Bath 
and  BrijtQl;  and,  when  they  are  fried,  and  eaten  with 
Butter,  nothing  is  more  delicious. 

The 


Somerf.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  299 

The  City  of  Erljlol  is  no  more  than  four  Miles 
from  this  Town  ;  and  is  the  greateft,  the  richeft,  and 
the  beft  Port  of  Trade  of  Great-Britain,  London  only 
excepted. 

Briftol  has  been  formerly  a  Place  of  Strength,  and 
had  a  Cattle,  in  which  King  Stephen  was  kept  Prifoner 
Tome  time  by  Maud  the  Emprefs.  It  was  befieged  in 
the  Civil  Wars,  and  made\i  good  Defence. 

The  Caftle,  built  by  Robert,  illegitimate  Son  of  King 
Henry  I.  who  befieged  King  Stephen  in  it,  flood  till  the 
Time  of  Oliver  Cromwell*  who  demolifhed  it. 

It  is  a  County- town,  and  one  of  King  Henry  the 
Eighth's  new  Bifhoprics. 

The  Merchants  of  this  City  have  not  only  the 
greateft  Trade,  but  they  trade  with  a  more  intire  In- 
dependency upon  London,  than  any  other  Town  in 
Britain.  And  'tis  evident  in  this  Particular;  viz.  That 
whatfoever  Exportations  they  make  to  any  Part  of  the 
World,  they  are  able  to  bring  the  full  Returns  back 
to  their  own  Port,  and  can  difpofe  of  them  there  ; 
which  is  not  the  Cafe  of  any  other  Port  in  England  ; 
where  they  are  often  obliged  either  to  (hip  Part  of 
the  Effects  in  the  Ports  abroad,  on  the  Ships  bound  to 
London  ;  or  to  confign  their  own  VefTels  to  London,  in 
order  both  to  get  Freight,  and  difpofe  of  their  Car- 
goes. 

But  the  Bftflol  Merchants,  as  they  have  a  very  great 
Trade  abroad,  fo  they  have  always  Buyers  at  home  for 
their  Returns,  and  fuch  Buyers,  that  no  Cargo  is  too 
big  for  them.  To  this  Purpofe,  the  Shopkeepers  in  . 
Brijlol^  who  in  general  are  Who!efale-men,  have  fo 
great  an  Inland-trade  among  all  the  Wcftern  Counties, 
that  they  maintain  Carriers,  juft  as  the  London  Tradef- 
men  do,  to  all  the  principal  Counties  and  Towns, 
from  Southampton  in  the  South,  even  to  the  Banks  of 
the  Trent,  North  5  altho'  they  have  no  navigable  River 
that  way. 

O  6  Add 


300  y^TOUR  thro'        Somerf. 

Add  to  this,  That,  as  well  by  Sea,  as  by  the  Navi- 
gation of  two  great  Rivers,  the  lfye  and  the  Severn, 
ihey  have  the  whole  Trade  of  South- Wales,  as  it  were, 
to  themfelves,  and  the  greateft  Part  of  that  of  North- 
Wales ;  and,  as  to  their  Trade  to  Ireland,  it  is  prodi- 
gioufly  increafed  iince  the  Revolution,  notwithstanding 
the  great  Trade  which  of  late  the  Merchants  of  Liver- 
pool alfo  drive  with  that  Kingdom. 

Tile  greateft  Inconveniences  of  Briftol  are  its  Situa- 
tion, its"  narrow  Streets,  and  the  Narrownefs  of  its 
River :  and  we  might  alfo  mention  another  Narroiv  ; 
that  is,  the  Minds  of  the  Generality  of  its  People ;  for 
the  Merchants  of  Bnjfol,  tho'  very  rich,  are  not  like 
the  Merchants  of  London  :  the  latter  may  be  faid  (as  of 
old  of  the  Merchants  of  Tyre)  to  vie  with  the  Princes 
of  the  Earth ;  whereas  the  tormer,  being  raifed  by  good 
Fortune,  and  Prizes  taken  in  the  Wars,  from  Matters 
of  Ships,  and  blunt  Tars,  have  imbibed  the  Manners 
of  thefe  rough  Gentlemen  fo  ftrongly,  that  they  tranf- 
Jiilt  it  to  their  Defendants,  only  with  a  little  more  of 
the  Sordid,  than  is  generally  to  be  found  among  the 
Britijh  Sailors ;  and  I  would  advife  the  rich  ones 
among  them,  if  they  would  be  a  little  more  polite  and 
generous  than  they  ufually  are,  to  travel,  but  not  out 
of  England  neither  ;  I  mean,  only  to  London  (that  is 
from  the  fecond  great  Trading-town  to  the  firft)'; 
and  they  will  fee  Examples  worth  their  Imitation,  as 
well  for  princely  Spirit,  as  upright  and  generous  Deal- 
ings. 

The  Corporation  being  very  referred  in  admitting 
Perfons  to  trade  in  their  Liberty,  who  are  not  Free- 
men, there  are  not  fo  many  new  Buildings,  and  Im- 
provements of  Streets,  &c.  at  Brljhl,  as  would  other- 
wife  be.  As  for  the  City  itfelf,  there  is  hardly  room 
to  fet  another  Houfe  in  it.  The  great  Square,  called 
Hhteens,  formerly  the  Mar  fa  where  the  Ground  was 
fubjecl:  to  Inundations,  is  now  fo  raifed,  that  it  is  free 
from  that  Inconvenience :  it  is  very  handfomcly  built 

and 


Somer£      GREAT  BRITAIN.  301 

and  inhabited,  and  a  fine  Equeftrian  Statue  of  King 
William  III.  erected  in  the  middle  of  it,  done  by  the 
famous  Ryfbrack. 

The  Quay  along  the  River  Frame  is  very  noble,  and 
well  filled  with  all  Sorts  of  Merchandize;  and  an  hand- 
fome  Row  of  Houfes  fronts  it.  The  whole  Quay  is 
reckoned  the  longeft  in  England.  » 

College-green  is  deemed  the  healthieft  Situation  in  the 
City. 

An  Aflembly-room  is  erected,  for  Entertainment 
and  Amufement  of  the  Gay,  as  at  other  confiderable 
Places  ;  for  Luxury  muft  always  follow  Riches.  It  is 
an  handfome  Building,  and  ftands  in  the  way  from  the 
City  to  the  Hot-well. 

The  old  Theatre  at  Stokes- croft  is  alfo  altered  into 
a  commodious  Room  for  an  Aflembly,  which  is  held 
every  Tuefday  during  the  Winter. 

There  were,  when  I  was  at  Brtftol9  no  lefs  than 
15  Glafs-houfes  in  it  ;  which  is  more  than  are  in  the 
City  of  London :  they  ufe,  indeed,  themfelves,  a  very 
great  Number  of  Glafs  Bottles,  which  they  fend  filled 
with  Beer,  Cyder,  and  Wine,  to  the  Weft- Indies  > 
much  more  than  goes  from  London  ;  alfo  vaft  Num- 
bers of  Bottles  are  now  ufed  for  fending  the  Waters 
of  St.  Vincent's  Rock,  not  only  all  over  England^  but, 
we  may  fay,  all  over  the  World. 

The  Hot  well-  Water- Spring  rifes  perpendicularly 
out  of  the  Rock  in  the  Hoping  muddy  Bank  of  the  Ri- 
ver Avon,  about  a  Mile  below  the  City  of  Brijlol,  be- 
tween high  and"  low  water  Mark,  where  the  River 
makes  its  Entrance  between  thofe  ftupendous  Cliffs  of 
Rocks,  which  feem  to  have  been  torn  afunder  by  the 
Violence  of  an  Earthquake,  or  the  general  Deluge, 
at  the  Foot  of  a  Cliff,  where  once  (rood  a  Chapel  de- 
dicated to  St.  Vincent^  from  which  the  Reck  and 
Well  take  their  Name. 

The  Water  was  originally  inclofed  in  a  Brick  Cif- 
tern.  Out  of  this  Ciftern  came  a  wooden  Pipe,  which 

emptied 


302  ^TO'UR  thro  Somerf. 

emptied  itfelf  into  a  little  Pond  beneath.  In  this  Pond 
People  wafhed  their  Sores. 

It  has  been  computed  to  difcharge  about 40  Gallons 
in  a  Minute. 

The  City  of  Briflol  in  1692.  raifed  a  Wall  of  Stone 
round  the  tf^ell,  higher  than  the  Tide  ever  rofe  ;  but 
the  Weight  of  fuch  a  Column  of  Water  had  well 
nigh  altered  the  Courfe  of  the  Spring.  In  1695.  the 
Merchant's  Company  granted  aBuilding-Leafe  to  cer- 
tain Proprietors,  who  recovered  the  Spring,  and  made 
a  Foundation  for  Pumps,  which  now  raife  the  Water 
up  30  Feet  high  in  the  Centre  of  a  Houfe  called  the 
Pump-Room  ;  whofe  thick  Wall  keeps  off  the  Tide 
from  the  Spring.  Yet,  in  fpite  of  all  the  Art  hither  o 
contrived,  it  is  found,  that  the  high  Tides,  as  well  as 
exceiTive  Rains,  do  mix  with  the  Spring,  and  foul  it, 
for  fome  Hours  after  the  Tide  is  funk:  At  which  time 
the  Water  in  the  Well  is  not  fufficient  to  counter-bal- 
lance  the  Weight  of  the  external  Tide ;  and  this  con- 
tinues till  the  River-water  is  all  pumped  out,  and  the 
Well- Water  recovers  its  priftine  Colour  and  Tempera- 
ment. How  this  happens  we  cannot  guefs,  unlefs  it 
be,  that  it  penetrates,  particularly  in  dry  Weather, 
through  fome  Cliffs  of  the  Rock.  The  Pumpers, 
however,  know  when  to  leave  off,  and  when  to  be- 
gin. 

The  Soil  near  the  Well  is,  for  the  moft  Part,  fruit- 
ful, with  a  conftant  Verdure  all  the  Year.  The  Tops 
of  the  HiKs,  called  Downs,  are  flat,  and  covered  with 
a  thin  dry  Turf,  upon  Lime  Stone,  producing  great 
Variety  of  Plants,  fuch  as  Heath,  Eyebrigbt,  wild 
Thyme i  Marjoram,  Maidenhair,  wild  Sage,  Gera- 
niums, &c.  which  breathe  forth  a  pleafant  QJour, 
and  affords  Pafture  for  Cows,  Horfes,  Sheep,  and 
Afles.  On  thefe  Downs  the  Company  exercife  them- 
felves  daily  in  riding  ;  from  whence  they  command 
the  beautiful  Profped  of  the  Ships  lying  at  Anchor  in 
Kingroad,  of  the  Briftol  Channel,  and  South- Wales9 

enjoying 


Somerf.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  303 

enjoying  at  the  fame  time  the  Benefit  of  the  Sea- Air, 
which  affords  a  conftant  Breeze,  even  in  the  hotteft 
Weather,  and  ftrengthens  and  refrefbes  the  Lungs. 

Provifions  of  all  Sorts  are  to  be  had  in  Plenty,  dur- 
ing the  Summer,  which  is  the  Seafon  allotted,  by 
Cuftom,  for  drinking  thefe  Waters.  Garden  Stuff  is 
early  and  excellent.  There  are  Lodgings  near  the 
Wells,  convenient  enough  for  fuch  as  are  real  Inva- 
lids :  there  are  magnificent  Lodgings  in  the  beautiful 
Village  of  Clifton^  on  the  top  of  the  Hill,  for  fuch  as 
have  Carriages,  and  whofe  Lungs  can  bear  a  keener 
Air. 

There  are  Balls  twice  a- Week,  and  Card-playing 
every  Night. 

The  River  is  (it  is  true)  muddy,  and  unfeemly  at 
low-  water ;  nor  do  Fifties,  of  any  Value,  care  to  in- 
habit fo  filthy  a  Stream.  But  this  is  amply  made  up 
by  the  conftant  VichTitudes  of  the  Tides,  which  pu- 
rify the  Air.  When  the  River  is  quite  full,  the  Tide 
is  fuppofed  to  rife  near  40  Feet,  the  common  Tides 
30:  and  when  the  Ships  are  carried  up-and-down, 
by  the  Tide,  palfing  and  repaffing  through  the  jVIea- 
dows  and  Trees,  the  Profped  is  indeed  inchanting  ; 
efpecially  when  the  Beholder  is  fo  fituated  as  to  fee  the 
Rigging  of  the  Ships,  and  not  the  Water. 

There  are  Turnpike-roads  all  around,  and  Variety 
of  agreeable  Rides  and  fine  Profpecls.  Some  Conve- 
niences are  flill  wanting  ;  the  Road  down  to  the 
Fountain  of  Health  is  far  from  being  commodious  ; 
there  is  a  fhaded  Parade  or  Walk  at  the  Wells  for  the 
Company,  though  not  large  enough.  The  common 
Road  is  either  very  dirty  or  very  dufty.  It  is  the  Duty 
of  the  Proprietors  to  remedy  thofe  Inconveniences, 
fays  the  Gentleman  to  whom  I  owe  this  Defcription  ; 
efpecially  as  their  Dividends  are  large  from  the  vaft 
Exportation  of  Water,  as  well  as  from  the  Tenants 
who  rent  the  Pump  and  the  Well  houfe.  • 

Th« 


304  ^  T  O  U  R  tbrtf        Somerf. 

The  following  curious  Account  of  the  Eriftol  Wa- 
ters I  am  indebted  for  to  the  fame  eminent  Phyfician, 
who  favoured  me  with  the  Account  of  the  Nature-  and 
Efficacy  of  the  Bath  and  Tunbrjdge  Waters  : 

'  The  Briflol  Waters,'  fays  he,  *  feem  only  a  natural 

*  Lime-water,  or  pure  Element  impregnated  with  a 

*  natural  unburnt  Ltme-ftone.  All  the  Hills  and  Moun- 

*  tains  round  that  Water  are  nothing  but  a  Quarry  of 

*  that  natural  unburnt  Lime-ftone,  which  is  daily  dug 

*  up  there  for  Building,  and  manifeftsitfelftotheSenfes. 
'  This  makes  thefe  Briftol  Waters  one  of  the  pureft, 

*  beft,  and  moft  falutary,  mere  aqueous  Elements  on 
'  the  Globe,  to  cool  all  overheated  Bowels,  and  to 

*  lefTen  all  preternatural  Difcharges.     But  the  fmall 

*  Milk-warmth  in  them,  when  immediately  pumped 

*  up,  upon  the  Well's  being  drained  of  the  Influx  of 

*  the  Tide,    {hews  there  is  fome  other  Principle  in 

*  them  befides  natural  Lime-done :   and  that  in  Na- 

*  ture  can  be  no  other  than  fome  weak  Impregnation  of 

*  Sulphur  with  Nitre  or  Sea-fair,  or  perhaps  a  flight 

*  Touch  of  Iron.     The  Stones  are  fome  redifli,  fome 
'  blackifti,  that  are  digged  out  of  the  Mountains  cir- 

*  cumjacent,    but  all  of  them   natural  Lime-ftone. 

*  Thefe  redifh  and  blackifh  Colours  in  the  Stones  ne- 

*  cefiarily  imply  Sulphur  and  Iron;  and  thefe   three 

*  Principles,  by  chemical  Precedes  and  Mixtures,  are 

*  difcovered  in  fome  fmall  Proportion  in  the  Waters. 

*  They  are  excellent  in  all  fcorbutic  and  nervous  Atro- 

*  phies,  in  Heclics,  weak  Lungs,  all  Inflammations 

*  in  whatever  Part,  all  preternatural  Evacuations ;  in 

*  (hort,  in  all  acrid  Juices,  and  vifcid  Blood  ;  being  a 

*  natural  fimple  Alkali ;  and  in  the  firft  Stages  of  a 

*  Phthijh  Pulmonwri ;  and   if  early   had  recourfe  to, 

*  and  long  continued,  under  a  low,  cooling,  nutri- 
<  tive  Regimen,  they  would  probably  ftop  the  Growth 

*  and  Caufes  of  moft  chronical  Diftempers.' 

A  little  farther  than  the  Wells,  are  a  fine  Dock", 
capable  of  containing  150  Ships,  and  a  Baling  but  the 

largeft 


Som-erf.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  305 

Jargeft  Ships  lie  moftly  at  Hung- Road,  four  Miles  be- 
low the  City. 

There  are  r/Parifhes  in  the  City,  and  19  Church- 
es, including  the  Cathedral,  and  the  Church  of  St. 
Mark. 

The  Cathedral  is  far  from  extraordinary. 

Several  of  the  Cfiurches  are  very  neat,  beatifully 
decorated,  and  worthy  a  Traveller's  Attention.  That 
of  St.  Mary  Raddiffe^  or  Reddiffe,  is  a  (lately  Edi- 
tice,  large  and  fpacious,  and  has  a  fine  Steeple  or 
Tower. 

In  it  is  an  antient  Monument  for  Mr.  Wiltam  Can- 
flings,  Burgefs  and  Merchant  of  Brijhl,  the  Founder 
of  the  Church,  and  a  great  Benefactor  otherwife  to  the 
City  of  Brlftol 

On  one  Part  of  the  Monument  is  a  Latin  Tnfcrip- 
tion,  full  of  Abbreviations  ;  and,  on  the  other  Side,  in 
Englifo)  an  Infcriplion  to  his  Praife. 

Here  is  alfo  an  Infcription  on  the  Monument  of  Sir 
W/llliam  Penn,  Knt.  Vice- Admiral  of  England^  the 
Father  of  the  great  William  Pcnn>  one  of  the  Heads 
of  the  Quakers,  who  was  a  Native  of  the  City  of 
Brijiol. 

The  Government  of  Briftol  is  admimftred  by  a 
Mayor  and  12  Aldermen,  of  which  the  Recorder  is 
always  one,  2  Sheriffs,  and  28  Common-council- 
men. 

A  great  Face  of  Serioufnefs  and  Religion  appears  at 
P>rlftol\  and  the  Magiftrates  are  laudably  ftri£t  in  ex- 
alting the  Obfervation  of  the  Sabbath,  confidering  the 
general  Diilolutenefs  that  has  broken  in  almoft  every- 
where elfe. 

For  one  thing  they  deferve  great  Commendation  ; 
and  that  is,  for  the  Neatnefs  obferved  in  keeping  their 
Churches,  and  the  Care  they  take  in  prefervmg  the 
Monuments  and  Infcriptions  of  thofe  buried  in  them. 
A  Practice  fcandaloufly  negleded  almoft  every- where 
eife  in  England^  and  even  at  Places  we  might  mention 

where 


3o6  A  T  O  U  R  tbro          Someif. 

where  Money  (another  fcandalous  Praftice)  is  exaded 
for  feeing  them.  This  Care  of  the  Monuments  of 
the  Dead  brings  many  Vifitors  to  their  Churches  of 
traveling  Strangers,  who  are  always  pleafed  with  it, 
and  make  Comparifons  in  its  Favour,.  'Tis  indeevi 
ftrange,  that  the  Heirs  and  Families  of  the  Deceafed 
fhould  not  think  themfelves  concerned  to  keep  up  the 
Monuments  of  their  Anceftors.  With  great  feeming. 
Piety,  and  at  a  large  Expence,  the  next  Heir,  or  the 
moft  obliged,  rears  a  Monument  to  the  Deceafed  ; 
and  it  is  dedicated,  too,  profefledly,  to  Pofterity.  In 
a  very  little  while,  the  Monument  is  covered  with 
Duft  and  Cobwebs,  and  the  Infcription  often  effaced. 
Common  Decency  fucceeds  not  to  this  Piety,  and  it 
becomes  a  Monument  of  the  Ingratitude  or  Neglect 
of  the  Survivors,  rather  than  an  Honour  to  the  De- 
ceafed. 

Methinks  Vanity  alone,  the  common  Inducement 
of  thefe  Erections,  (hould  infpire  another  Manner  of 
Acting.  1  cannot  account  for  it  any  other  Way,  but 
that,  from  the  Prince  to  the  Peafant,  as  a  Family  ge- 
nerally lies  together  in  one  Vault,  very  few  are  willing 
to  fee  or  think  of  their  Coffins ;  and  hence  it  is,  that 
fome  Men  often  look  upon  their  very  Heirs  as  Me* 
men  to  Mori's. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  that  this  City  is  fo  well  fup- 
plieJ  with  Coals,  that  though  they  are  all  brought  by 
Land-carriage,  yet  they  are  generally  laid  down  at 
the  Doors  of  the  Inhabitants,  at  7,  8,  or  9  s.  per 
Chaldron. 

The  Situation  of  the  City  is  low,  but  on  the  Side 
of  a  rifmg  Hill.  The  Ground  plat  of  it  is  faid  very 
much  to  refemble  that  of  old  Rome,  being  circular, 
with  a  fomething  greater  Diameter  one  Way  than  an- 
other, but  not  enough  to  make  it  oval ;  and  the  River 
cutting  off  one  frnall  Part,  as  it  were,  a  fixth,  or  lefs, 
from  the  reft, 

They 


Somerf.     GREAT  BRITAIN.  307 

They  draw  all  their  heavy  Goods  here  on  Sleds,  or 
Sledges,  which  they  call  Gee-hoes,  without  Wheels. 
This  kills  a  Multitude  of  Hoifes,  and  the  Pavement 
is  worn  fo  fmooth  by  them,  that  in  wet  Weather  the 
Streets  are  flippery,  fo  that  in  frofty  Weather  it  is 
dangerous  walking. 

The  noble  Charities  of  Mr.  Edward  Col/Ion,  a  wor- 
thy Merchant  of  Brljlol,  and  his  Foundations,  are  an 
Honour  to  the  Place,  and  to  the  Memory  of  that  ex- 
cellent Man  :  and  I  am  forry,  that  my  narrow  Limits 
will  not  permit  me  to  give  a  particular  Account  of 
them. 

But  I  ought  not  to  omit,  that  one  of  his  Charities 
only,  coft  him  25,000  /.  and  that  is  the  noble  Hofpi- 
tal  br  Alms- ho ufe  creeled  by  him,  in  the  Year  1691. 
upon  his  own  Ground,  on  St.  Michael's  Hill,  The 
Front  and  two  Sides  are  faced  with  Free  ilone:  it  c^n- 
tains  a  Chapel  neatly  adorned,  24.  Apart-. pnt,  and 
other  Conveniences,  for  12  Men,  and  12  Women. 
The  elder  Brother  receives  6  s.  anrreach  of  the  others 
3;.  weekly,  belides  an  Allowance  Tor  Coal,  &c.  To 
a  Clergyman  is  paid  the  Sum  of  10  /  yearly,  for  read- 
ing tne  Common  Prayer  twice  eveiy  Day,  except  when 
Prayers  are  read  in  St.  Michael**  Church,  at  which 
every  Member  of  this  Al.ns  Ixnife  is  to  attend. 

In  the  Year  1696.  he  aifo  pure  afed  a  Piece  of 
Ground  mTemple  /ireet,  and  built  at  his  own  Charge 
a  School  and  Dwelling  houfe,  for  a  /"after  to  inftrudt 
40  Boys,  in  Writing,  Arithmetic,  and  the  Church 
Catechifm.  The  Boys  are  like  wife  lo  be  cloathed. 

His  other  Charities  and  Bene ;aci;ons  were  without 
Number. 

On  St.  Peter's  Day,  June  29  1738.  was  opened, 
at  the  Mint,  an  Infirmary  for  this  (  ity,  for  the  Re- 
ception of  the  fick,  lame,  and  diflrefled  Poor,  after 
the  Example  of  thofe  m  London,  Wincbefter,  &c.  It 
is  St.  Peter's- Hofpital,  and  very  liberal  Contributions 
have  been  made  to  it  •>  and  particularly,  we  are  told, 

that 


3cS  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Somerf. 

that  John  Elbrid'ge^  Efq;  Comptroller  of  the  Cuftoms 
in  this  City,  who  died  February  1738  9.  with  many 
other  charitable  Donations,  bequeatned  5~oo/.  to  this 
Infirmary,  befides  endowing  a  Charity- fchool  on  6V. 
Michael's -Hi it)  which  he  built  feveral  Years  before 
his  Death,  for  educating  and  cloathing  a  certain  Num.' 
her  of  poor  Girls. 

Large  Pieces  of  Ground  having  been  cleared  for 
building  a  handfome  Exchange,  and  proper  Markers 
behind  it;  the  former  (which  is  called  The  Totzey)  to 
front  Northward  to  Corn-Jlreet,  and  the  latter  to  be 
entered  principally  from  High  fir  eet  ;  on  the  loth  of 
March  1740  I.  the  firfl  Stone  of  the  Work  was  laid 
by  the  Mayor,  with  great  Ceremony,  with  feveral 
Pieces  of  Gold  and  Silver  Coin  under  it,  and  a  Latin 
Infcription  on  the  Stone,  thus  engliflied, 

//;  the  Reign  of  G  EORGE  II.  Pious,  Profper- 
cut,  Augujl,  P rote ft or,  at  Home  and  Abroad  ^  of 
Liberty  and  Trade  ^  HENRY  COMBE,  Mayer, 
placed  the  firjl  Stone  of  this  Strufture,  eretted  by 
the  fates  of  the  Citizens^  and  at  the  public  Expencet 
A.D.  1740. 

This  Edifice  was  opened  with  greater  Ceremony  on 
the  23d  of  September  1743.  and  is  efteemed  the  com- 
pleteit  of  its  kind  in  Europe.  The  Architect  of  it 
having  given  the  Public  an  ample  Defcription  of  the 
Building,  illuftrated  with  the  Plans,  Elevations,  and 
Sedtions  of  it,  \ve  muft  refer  the  Reader  to  it  for  Par- 
ticulars; and  in  general  only  obferve,  that  the  Work, 
together  with  the  Purchr%fe  of  the  Ground,  and  old 
Buildings  deftroyed,  coft  theCorporation  near5C,cco/. 
A  Work,  which  the  whole  City  for  Ages  palt  endea- 
voured to  get  accomplilhed  ;  and,  when  perfected,  fo 
as  to  obtain  the  univerfal  Approbation  of  Strangers, 
the  Corporation  had  no  fooner  prefented  the  trading 
Part  of  the  City  with  the  free  Ufe  of  it,  than  the  Body 
of  the  People  {hewed  a  greater  Inclination  to  the 

common 


Glouc.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  305) 

common  Street  ;  where,  to  their  Reproach,  they  af- 
femble,  mixing  themfelves  with  the  Refufe  of  the 
City,  and  looking  like  fuch  as  dared  not  to  appear  in 
the  Exchange  among  the  moft  reputable  Merchants : 
they  ftood  expofed,  like  the  Bankrupts  expelled  from 
the  Exchanges  in  other  Countries  j  and  Foreigners, 
whofe  Curioiity  led  them  to  Briftol  to  view  the  Build- 
ing, often  took  them  to  be  fuch.  The  City  fends  two 
Members  to  Parliament. 

The  old  Library  in  King-Jireet  is  rebuilt  in  a  very 
handfome  Manner,  as  is  alfo  Merchant -Taylors- Hall  in 
Broad-jlrcet,  a  Freeftone  Building  near  70  Feet  long, 
and  Breadth  proportionable. 

The  Bridge  over  the  River  Avon  in  this  City  being 
very  antient,  and  out  of  Repair,  and,  by  reafon  of  the 
Buildings  ftanding  upon  it,  very  narrow,  inconve- 
nient, and  dangerous,  for  the  pafling  of  Waggons, 
Carts,  Coaches,  Horfes,  and  Cattle,  an  Ac~r.  palled  in 
the  Year  1 760.  intitled,  An  Att  for  rebuilding,  widen- 
ing, nnd  enlarging,  the  Bridge  oner  the  River  Avon,  in 
the  City  cf  Briftol,  and  eretting  a  temporary  Bridge  ad- 
joining, and  for  widening  the  Streets,  Lanes,  Way*, 
and  Pajjages,  leading  thereto  ;  and  for  building  another 
Bridge  over  fome  other  Part  cf  the  faid  River,  within 
the  faid  City,  if  necfjjary,  and  for  opening  proper  Ways 
and  Pajfages  thereto. 

From  hence  I  had  Thoughts  of  coafting  theMarfhes 
or  Border  of  Wales,  efpecially  South- Wales,  by  tracing 
the  Rivers  Wye  and  Lug,  in  Momnouthjhire  and  Here- 
ford/hire :  but  changed  my  Mind  on  occafion  of  the 
Danger  of  the  Ferries  over  the  Severn.  In  the  mean 
time,  I  refolved  to  follow  the  Courfe  of  this  famous 
River,  by  which  I  fhould  neceftarily  fee  the  richeft, 
moft  fertile,  and  moft  agreeable  Part  of  England^  the 
Banks  of  the  Tba?nes  only  excepted. 

From  Brtftoli  Weft,  you  enter  the  County  of 
Glcucefter  j  and,  keeping  the  Avon  in  View,  you  fee 

King 


310  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Giouc. 

King-Road,  where,  and  at  Hung-  Road,  the  Ships  ge- 
nerally take  their  Departure,  as  ours  at  London  do 
from  Grtovifetid+  and  where  they  notify  their  Arrival, 
as  ours  for  London  do  in  the  Downs.  The  one  lies 
within  the  Avon^  the  other  in  the  Severn  Sea.  Indeed 
great  Part  of  Briftol  is  in  the  Bounds  of  Glouccjlerjh'irc^ 
tho'  it  be  a  County  of  itfelf. 

From  hence,  going  away  a  little  North-weft,  we 
come  to  the  P/7/,  a  convenient  Road  for  Shipping,  and 
where  therefore  they  generally  run  back  for  Ireland^  or 
for  Wales. 

There  is  alfo,  a  little  farther,  a  dangerous  and  in- 
convenient Ferry  over  the  Severn,  to  the  Mouth  of 
the  J^ye-y  namely,  at  Auji  j  which  I  (hall  mention 
again  prefently. 

As  we  turn  North  towards  Glwcefttr%  we  lofe  the 
Sight  of  the  Avon,  and,  in  about  two  Miles,  ex- 
change it  for  an  open  View  of  the  Severn  Seay  which 
you  fee  on  the  Weft-  fide,  and  which  feems  as  broad 
as  the  Ocean  there  ;  except  that  there  are  two  fmall 
Iflands  in  it,  and  that  looking  N.  W.  you  difcern 
plainly  the  Coaft  of  South-Wales  ;  and  particularly,  ;i 
liule  nearer  hand,  the  Shore  of  Monmouthjkire.  Then, 
as  you  go  on,  the  Shores  begin  to  draw  towards  one 
another,  and  the  Coafts  to  lie  parallel ;  fo  that  the 
Severn  appears  to  be  a  plain  River,  or  an  JEftuarinm* 
fomewhat  like  the  fiumber^  or  as  the  Thames  is  at 
the  AW,  being  from  4  to  5  and  6  Miles  over ;  and 
is  indeed  a  moit  raging  and  furious  kind  of  Sea.  This 
is  occafioned  by  tliofe  violent  Tides  called  the  Bcre^ 
which  flow  here  fometimes  6  or  7  Feet  at  once,  roll- 
ing forward  like  a  mighty  Wave,  fo  that  the  Stern  of 
a  VefTel  (hall  on  a  fudden  be  lifted  up  6  or  7  Feet  up- 
on the  Water,  when  the  Head  of  it  is  faft  aground. 

After  coafting  the  Shore  about  four  Miles  farther, 

the  Road  being  by  the  low  Salt-marfhes  k-.pt  at  a  Di- 

ftance.  from  the  River,  we  came  to  A-JI  Ferry,  fo 

5  named 


Glouc.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  311 

named  from  a  little  dirty  Village  called  Aujl ;    near 
which  you  come  to  take  Boat. 

T'iis  Ferry  lands  you  at  fieacblyln  Monmoutbjhire ; 
'  fo  that  on  the  one  Side  it  is  called  Auft  PojJ'age^  and  on 
the  other  Side  Eeacbly  PaJJagc.  From  whence  you  go 
by  Land  two  little  Miles  to  Chepftow,  a  large  Port- 
town  on  the  River  Wye.  But  of  that  Port  I  ihall  fay 
more  in  its  Place. 

Here  is  a  good  neat  Chapel,  with  an  high  Tower 
at  the  Weft-end,  adorned  with  Pinacles. 

This  Place  is  memorable  from  a  Circumftance  in 

the  Reign  of  King  Edw.  I.  who,  being  here,  invited 

Lewellin  Prince  of  Wales,  who  was  on  the  other  Side, 

"  to  come  over  and  confer  with  him,  and  fettle  fome 

'  Matters  in  Difpute  between  them  ;   but  the  Prince  re- 

fufed,  and  the  King  thereupon  crofled  over  to  him, 

I  who,  in  a  Rapture  of  Generofity,  leaped  into  the  Wa- 

i  ter,  to  receive  the  King  in  his  Boat,  telling  him,  His 

Humility  had  conquered  his  Pride,   and  his  Wifdom 

i  triumphed  over  his  Folly* 

Thornbnry  is  a  Market-town,  and  hath  a  cuftomary 
Mayor,  and  12  Aldermen  ;  and  was  given  by  fFUHajn 
I.  to  the  famous  Fitz-J-lammon.  Here  are  the  Foun- 
dations of  a  large  Csftfo,  ciefigned,  but  never  finifhed, 
bv  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  in  King  Henry  VIII.'s 
Time.  Here  is  a  fpacious  Church,  built  Cathedral- 
wife  ;  it  has  fine  wide  Ailes,  and  three  Chancels,  with 
an  high  and  beautiful  Tower.  Here  are  a  Free  fchool, 
and  four  Alms-houfes. 

On  the  Right  lies  Wotton,  a  pretty  Market-town, 
governed  by  a  Mayor  elected  annually  at  the  Court- 
Leet.  'Tis  famous  for  its  Clothing- trade.  The 
Church,  which  is  a  Vicarage,  is  large,  and  hath  two 
wide  Ailes,  and  an  high  handfome  Tower,  adorned  with 
Battlements  and  Pinacles.  There  are  in  it  divers 
Tombs,  Monuments,  and  Infcriptions,  chiefly  for  the 
Family  of  Berkley.  Here  are  a  Free-fchool,  and  fome 
Charity-  houfes. 

Directly 


3i2  'A  TOUR  thro  Glouc. 

Dire&ly  North  of  this  Town  lies  Durjley,  a  good 
Clothing  and  Market-town,  governed  by  a  Bail-.fr", 
and  fourConftables;  and  has  been  formerly  noted  for 
{harp,  over-reaching  People  ;  from  whence  arofe  a 
proverbial  Saying  of  a  tricking  Man,  He  is  a  Man  of 
Dudley.  The  Church  is  good,  hath  two  Ailes,  and 
an  handfome  Spire. 

Turning  North-weft  we  came  to  Berkley,  a  noted 
Town,  fo  called  from  Berk,  a  Beech,  and  Leas, 
Pafture.  It  is  the  largeft  Parifh  in  the  County,  and 
confifts  of  rich  Meadow-gtounds  ;  and  above  30  Pa- 
rimes  depend  on  this  Manor,  for  which  a  Fee  farm 
Rent  was  paid,  in  King  Henry  IL's  f  ime,  of  500 /. 
17  s.  id.  which  (hews  the  vatt  Extent  and  Value  of 
this  Eftate.  It  belongs  to  the  prefent  Earl  of  Berkley, 
who  is  alfo  Baron  of  Durjley,  Adjoining  to  this  Town, 
is  the  ftrong  Caftle  of  Berkley,  a  magnificent,  though 
antique,  Building,  and  the  antient  Seat  of  this  noble 
Family,  from  whence  it  derives  its  Name  as  well  as 
Title,  ever  fince  the  Time  of  King  Henry  II.  who 
gave  it  to  Robert  Fitzharding,  who  afTumed  the  Name 
of  Berkley.  King  Edward  II.  of  England,  as  all  our 
Writers  agree,  was  murdered  in  this  Caftle  ;  as  King 
Richard  l\.  was  in  that  of  Pontefraft  in  Turk/hire  ; 
but  I  refer  to  our  Hiftories  for  thefe  horrid  Facts. 
They  (hew  the  Apartments,  where  they  fay  that  King 
was  a  Prifoner :  but  they  do  not  admit,  that  he  was 
killed  there.  The  Place  is  rather  antient,  than  pleafant 
or  heathful,  lying  low,  and  near  the  Water.  Here 
is  a  large,  fpacious  Church,  with  an  Aile  on  each 
Side,  and  a  Chapel  adjoining,  which  is  the  Burial- 
place  of  the  Family,  a  neat  Veftry,  and  a  ftrong  high 
Tower. 

On  the  Right  of  the  Road  is  Stanley,  a  little  Mar- 
ket-town, where  was  formerly  a  Priory,  the  Ruins 
whereof  ftill  appear.  The  Church  is  built  in  the  Form 
of  a  Crofs,  with  a  Tower  in  the  Middle. 

A  noble 


Giouc.       GREAT  BRITAIN,  313 

A  noble  Improvement  has  been  made  in  thefe 
Parts  ;  for  the  Earl  of  Berkley  has  rimmed  a  great 
Bulwark  at  Frampton  upon  Severn,  near  this  Place, 
called  Hock-Crib,  the  Defign  of  which  is  to  enforce 
the  River  Severn^  by  drt's-Point,  into  its  former 
Channel. 

From  Frampton  the  flowing  Tide  runs  in  a  {trait 
Line  for  about  four  Miles  in  Length  Weft  ward,  with, 
fuch  Rapidity,  that,  on  its  reaching  the  Foot  of  an 
Hill,  on  the  left  Side  of  the  antierit  Foreft  of  Deant 
and  turning  round  to  the  Northward,  it  gathers  into 
an  Head,  that  looks  like  an  high  Weir  acrofs  the 
River's  Breadth  ;  bearing  every  thing  before  it,  till  it 
comes  to  Newnham's  Nob;  a  natural  Bulwark,  which 
turns  the  Torrent  fo  to  the  Eaftward,  that,  when 
it  reaches  the  North  of  Frampton^  the  Land  between 
the  two  Parts  of  the  River  is  but  about  a  Mile  in 
Breadth. 

Newnbam  is  an  antient  Town-corporate,  the  Sword 
of  State  being  ftill  preferved  there,  which  King  John 
gave  them  with  their  Charter ;  and  the  Place  is  re- 
markable for  its  having  been  the  firft  Fortification  that 
was  raifed  on  the  other  Side  of  the  Severn  againft  the 
Weljb  ;  for  its  having  been  the  Manor  by  which  the 
great  Place  of  High  Conftable  of  England  was  held, 
down  to  the  Execution  of  Edward  Stafford  Duke  of 
Buckingham,  on  the  iyth  of  May  152-1.  and  for  its 
having  given  Rife  to  the  Art  of  making  Glafs  in  Eng- 
land \  the  Remains  of  the  firft  Glafs-houfes  that  were 
ereded  in  the  Kingdom  being  ftill  to  be  feen  here. 
The  Town  confiits  of  little  more  than  one  long 
Street  running  North  and  South,  and  built  upon  the 
high  Shore  of  the  Severn.  It  has  a  Vale  on  the  Back 
of  it,  and  is  defended  on  that  Side  with  a  great  Bank 
of  Earth,  which  makes  a  moft  agreeable  Terrace- 
walk. 

The  Foreft  of  Dean  once  contained  30,000  Acres 
of  Land,  being  20  Miles  lone,  and  fo  full  of  Wood, 

VOL.  II.  P  that 


3 14  A  TOUR  thro          Glouc. 

that  it  was  very  dangerous  to  travel  through  it.  Its 
Oak  was  famous  for  Shipping,  the  Glory  of  our  own, 
ami  fo  much  the  Envy  of  other  Nations,  that  the  fa- 
mous Spanijh  Armada  had  it  in  fpecial  Charge  to  burn 
it.  The  great  Number  of  Iron  Forges  near  it  has 
gieatly  lefTened,  though  not  confumed,  the  Wood, 
which  is  flill  preferved  with  much  Care.  It  is  fubje£t 
to  Foreft- Laws  i  and  the  Iron-Miners  have  here  a 
Court  alfo. 

From  hence  to  Gkucejler  we  fee  nothing  confider- 
able,  but  a  rich  Country,  and  a  fine  Rivsr,  but  nar- 
rower, as  you  go  Northward,  till,  a  little  before  we 
come  to  Gloucejler,  it  ceafes  to  be  navigable  by  Ships 
of  Burden,  but  continues  to  be  fo,  by  large  Barges, 
above  100  Miles  farther,  not  reckoning  the  Turnings 
and  Windings  of  the  River;  befides  that  it  receives 
feveral  large  and  navigable  Rivers. 

Gloucejler  (called  by  the  Britons,  Goer-glow,  i.  e. 
fine  City  ;  and,  in  Imitation  of  it,  Clevttm,  by  the 
Romans)  abounds  much  with  Croffes  and  Statues  of 
the  Kings  of  England,  and  has  an  handfome  Profpeft 
of  Steeples,  fome  without  a  Church  ;  for,  in  the  Ci- 
vil Wars,  when  it  held  out  vigorously  againft  King 
Charles  I.  and  was  then  very  ftrong,  it  fuftered  much ; 
for  its  ii  Churches  were  then  reduced  to  5,  and  all 
its  Walls  and  Works  were  demolifhed.  The  City 
is  tolerably  built ;  and  here  is  a  large  Stone  Bridge 
over  the  Severn,  the  firft  next  the  Sea.  Here  are  fe- 
veral Market-houfes  fupported  with  Pillars,  one  a 
very  old  one  of  Stone,  in  Gothic  Architecture,  an- 
tient  and  uncommon,  now  turned  into  a  Ciftern  for 
Water. 

They  go  on  very  fuccefsfully  in  pulling  down  the  old 
Houfes,  and  other  Buildings,  which  projected  into  the 
Streets,  and  were  become  not  only  very  unfightly,  but 
were  ObftrucHons  alfo  to  the  Trade  of  this  populous 
and  thriving  City,  purfuant  to  an  A&  pafled  for  that 
Purpofe  the  Seilion  of  Parliament  in  1749-50,  The 

old 


Glouc.        GR-EAT  BRITAIN.          315 

old  Crofs  which  flood  like  wife  juft  where  the  four 
great  Streets  meet  at  Right  Angles,  in  the  Centre  of 
the  Town,  and  which  was  adorned  with  the  Effigies  of 
feveral  of  the  Englijh  Monarchs,  being  defaced,  and 
decayed  by  Time,  is  taken  down  ;  and  in  its  ftead  is 
ere&ed  a  Statue  (made  by  Mr.  Cheer e  in  Piccadilly) 
of  Colonel  Selwyn,  Member  of  Parliament  for  that 
City;  who  has,  at  his  own  great  Expence,  made  a 
very  large,  noble  Refervoir  of  excellent  Water,  about 
half  a  Mile  off,  for  the  public  Ufe  :  The  faid  Water 
is  brought,  through  the  Trunk  of  the  faid  Statue,  into 
a  large  fquare  Bafon,  to  be  placed  juft  at  the  Feet  of 
the  Statue,  and  from  thence  runs  out  on  each  Side, 
into  four  Canals,  one  of  which  pafles  through  each  of 
the  four  great  Streets,  for  the  convenient  Supply  of  the 
Inhabitants. 

The  Figures  furrounding  the  above-mentioned 
Crofs  being  efteemed  curious  Pieces  of  Antiquity, 
particular  Draughts  have  been  taken  of  them  by  Mr. 
Rickets  of  Ghucejler,  purfuant  to  an  Order  from  the 
Society  of  Antiquaries  in  London,  to  whom  they  have 
been  fent,  that  they  may  be  preferved  to  the  lateft  Po- 
fterity. 

The  old  Proverb,  As  fure  as  God's  at  Gloucefter, 
certainly  alluded  to  the  great  Number  of  Churches 
and  religious  Foundations  here ;  for  you  can.  fcarce 
walk  palt  1.0  Doors,  but  fomewhat  of.  that  fort  oc- 
curs. 

The  Cathedral  is  an  old  venerable  Pile,  built  by  JI- 
dred,  Bifhop  of  Worcefter^  afterwards  Archbifhop  of 
York.  The  Weftern  Part  is  old  and  mean  j  but  from 
the  Tower,  which  is  very  handfome,  you  have  a  glo- 
rious Profped!  Eaftward,  thro'  the  Choir,  finely  vaulted 
at  top;  and  the  Ladies  Chapel  to  the  Eaft  Window, 
which  is  very  magnificent.  On  the  North-fide  lies 
the  unfortunate  King  Edward  II.  in  an  Alabafter 
Tomb.  Out  of  the  Abundance  of  pious  Offerings  to 
his  Remains,  the  Religious  built  this  Choir  j  and  the 

P  2  Votaries 


316  y^TOUR//W  GIouc. 

Votaries  to  his  Shrine,  for  fome  time  after  his  Death, 
could  hardly  find  room  in  the  Town. 

Before  the  High  Altar,  in  the  Middle  of  the  Church, 
lies  the  equally  unfortunate  Prince  Robert,  eldeft  Son 
of  William  T.  after  a  miferable  Life  for  many  Years 
before  his  Death.  But  his  Monument  remains,  and 
his  Bones  are  at  Reft  ;  which  is  more  than  can  be  faid 
of  the  Monument  of  his  younger  Brother  King  Henry 
I.  who,  as  the  fecond  Brother  William  Rufus  haid 
done,  robbed  him  of  his  Right  >  and  no  Traces  of  his 
Monument  are  left  at  Reading- Abbey,  where  he  was 
buried  with  his  Queen.  Duke  Robert  lies  in  a  wooden 
Tomb,  with  his  Coat  of  Arms  painted,  and  upon  it 
his  Effigies  in  Irijh  Oak,  crofs- legged  like  a  Jerufalem 
Knight.  The  famous  Strongbow,  who  fubdued  Ire- 
land,  lies  buried  in  the  Chapter-houfe. 

The  Cloifters  in  this  Cathedral  are  exquifitely  beau- 
tiful, in  the  Stile  of  the  Chapel  of  King's-  College^  Cam- 
bridge. There  are  large  Remains,  in  the  City,  of  Ab- 
beys of  Black  and  White  Friers.  A  Mile  or  two  dif- 
tant  is  Robin  Hood's  Hill,  as  it  is  called,  which  affords 
now  a  pleafant  Walk  for  the  Citizens. 

The  Inhabitants  boaft  much  of  the  Antiquity  of 
their  firft  Cathedral,  which  they  pretend  had  Biflaops 
and  Preachers  here  Anno  189.  the  firjl  Cathedral,  I 
fay ;  for  it  has  been,  as  reported,  thrice  deftroyed  by 
Fire. 

In  the  little  Ifle  of  Alney^  near  this  Town,  the  fa- 
mous fingle  Combat  was  fought  between  Edmund  Iron- 
fide  and  Canute  the  Dane,  for  the  whole  Kingdom,  in 
Sight  of  both  their  Armies. 

The  City  is  governed  by  a  Mayor,  12  Aldermen, 
and  fo  many  Common-councilmen,  as,  with  the 
Mayor  and  Aldermen,  exceed  not  the  Number  of  40, 
nor  are  fewer  than  30.  The  Aldermen  are  Juftices 
of  the  Peace  j  and  two  Sheriffs  are  annually  chofen 
from  them.  It  has  alfo  an  High- Steward  (who  is 
ufually  a  Nobleman),  a  Recorder,  and  a  Town-clerk. 

They 


Glouc.          GREAT  BRITAIN.         317 

They  are  allowed  the  higheft  Marks  of  magiftratical 
Honour,  Scarlet  Gowns,  the  Sword,  and  Cap  of 
Maintenance,  and  four  Sergeants  at  Mace.  Here 
are  12  Companies,  the  Mafters  whereof  attend  the 
Mayor  on  all  public  Occafions  in  their  Gowns,  and 
with  Streamers.  It  has  a  large  Quay  and  Wharf  on 
the  River  for  Trade,  and  a  Cuftom-houfe.  Here  is 
alfo  a  Town-hall,  for  the  Affixes,  and  public  Bufmefs, 
which  they  call  the  Booth-hall  j  and  great  Part  of  the 
Caftle  is  (till  ftanding. 

Gloucefler  was  made  a  Bifhoprick  by  King  Henry 
VIII.  who  erected  the  Abbey-church  into  a  Cathe- 
dral, with  a  Dean,  and  fix  Prebendaries. 

The  firftProteftant  Bifliop  of  this  Church  was  that 
truly  reverend  and  religious  Divine,  Dr.  John  Hooper, 
who  was  burnt  to  Death  in  the  Cemetery  of  his  own 
Cathedra),  in  the  Reign  of  Queen  Mary  I, 

The  Whifpering-place  in  this  Cathedral  formerly 
pafled  for  a  kind  of  Wonder  among  the  Vulgar  ;  but 
fince,  Experience  has  taught  the  eanly-comprehended 
Reafon  of  the  Thing  ;  and  there  is  now  the  like  in 
the  Church  of  St.  Paul,  London. 

Here  is  great  Provifion  for  the  Poor  by  Hofpitals  ; 
particularly  Bartholomew's  Hofpital  maintains  54  Men 
and  Women,  to  whom  belong  a  Minifter,  Phyfician, 
and  Surgeon.  And  Sir  Thomas  Rich,  Bart,  a  Native 
of  this  Place,  gave  6000 /.  by  Will,  for  a  Blue-coat 
Hofpital,  w herein  are  educated  20  poor  Boys  ;  and  10 
poor  Men  and  Women  are  maintained,  and  cloathed 
annually.  Befides  thefe,  and  three  more,  there  are 
many  Benefactions  to  encourage  young  Tradefmen, 
and  place  out  13oys  Apprentices.  And  they  have  lately 
erected  an  Infirmary  here,  after  the  laudable  Example 
of  that  of  Wincbejler^  &c. 

The  City  has,  in  antient  Times  as  well  as  later, 
given  the  Titles  of  Earl  and  Duke  to  feveral  of  the 
Royal  Family.  The  laft  Duke  was  Son  to  Queen 
Anne,  who  died  in  his  Minority. 

P  3  Here 


3 1 8  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Glouc. 

Here  are  four  Fairs  held  annually,  on  March  25. 
June  24.  Sept.  and  Nov.  1 7.  It  is  a  County  of  itfelf, 
and  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

From  Gkucefler  we  kept  Eaftward,  and  foon  came, 
to  Cheltenham^  a  Market-town,  where  is  ftill  a  pretty 
good  Trade  carried  on  in  Malt,  but  not  fo  confiderable 
as  formerly.  Here  is  a  good  Church  in  the  Form  of  a 
Crofs,  with  Ailes  on  each  Side,  and  a  Spire  rifing  in  the 
Middle,  noted  for  a  good  Ring  of  Bells.  But  what  is 
more  remarkable  is,  that  theMinitter  is  to  be  nominated 
by,  and  muft  be  a  Fellow  of,  Jefus  College,  Oxon  (tho' 
the  Vicarage  is  but  40 /.  a  Year),  but  approved  of  by 
the  Earl  of  Gain/borough,  and  he  cannot  hold  it  more 
than  fix  V^ears.  Here  are  a  Free-fchool,  an  Hofpital, 
and  fome  other  Charities. 

Cheltenham  Mineral  Waters  are  of  the  Scarborough 
Kind.  An  eminent  Phyfician  has  obliged  me  with 
the  following  Account  of  their  Nature  and  Qualities  : 
«  Thefe  Waters,*  he  obferves,  *  were  firft  found  out 
by  the  Flocks  of  all  the  neighbouring  Pigeons  going 
conftantly  thither  to  provoke  their  Appetites,  as  well 
as  to  quench  the  uncommon  Thirft  ofthefe  falacious 
Hirds.  I  have  been  informed,  fays  he,  by  a  Phyfi- 
cian of  Credit  and  Experience,  who  had  made  all 
the  common  Trials  on  them,  and  obferved  their  Ef- 
fects on  many  Perfons  of  various  Conftitutions,  and 
in  different  Diftempers,  who  had  drank  them,  That, 
on  Evaporation,  they  were  found  to  contain,  in  a 
Gallon,  eight  Drachms  of  nitrous  Salt,  with  two 
Drachms  of  an  alkalious  Earth  :  That  they  were 
compounded  of  a  large  Quantity  of  Nitre,  to  which 
they  owed  their  purgative  Virtue  ;  a  light  Sulphur, 
which  the  fetid  Dejections  manifefted  ;  and  a  vola- 
tile Steel,  difcoverable  by  a  tranfparent  blue  Colour, 
when  mixed  with  an  Infufion  of  Nut-galls.  Alka- 
lious Spirits  have  no  EffecT:  on  them  ;  but  they  fer- 
ment with  Acids.  He  further  adds,  That  there  might 
bs  found  fome  other  Materials  in  their  Compofition, 

*  perhaps,. 


Glouc.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  31511 

perhaps,  if  more  minutely  examined  and  tortured  '• 
but  that  thefe  mentioned  Principles  were  evident  and 
incontettable,  and  were  fufficient  to  account  for  all 
their  Effeds  and  Operation  ;  the  others  (if  there  be 
any)  being  of  little  Efficacy.  In  the  Operation, 
they  empty  the  Bowels  according  to  their  Dofe, 
but  gently,  mildly,  and  eafily,  without  Sicknefs, 
Naufea,  Gripes,  or  caufmg  great  Lownefs,  far  be- 
yond any  artificial  Purges  whatfoever.  They  give  a 
good  Appetite,  an  eafy  Digeftion,  and  quiet  Nights, 
in  all  nephritic  and  gouty  Cafes,  when  not  under  the 
Fit  ;  in  all  rheumatic,  fcrophulous,  fcorbutic,  or 
leprous  Cafes ;  but  efpecially  in  fpermatic,  urinary, 
or  haemorrhoidal  Cafes,  he  thinks  them  fovereign, 
and  not  to  be  matched.  In  a  word,  in  all  inflam- 
matory Cafes  of  whatever  Kind,  and  whatever  Part, 
he  thinks  them  one  of  the  moft  falutary  Means 
which  can  be  ufed.  Thofe  of  pietty  ftrong  Nerves, 
and  firm  ConRituiions,  bear  them  with  high  Spirits, 
great  Pleafure  and  Profit;  but  they,  do  not  at  all  fuit 
with  thofe  of  weak  Nerves,  paralytic,  hypochon- 
driac, or  hyfteric  Disorders,  er  thofe  who  are  fubje-£t 
to  any  kind  of  Fits,  Cramps,  or  Convulfions :  they 
ruffle  fuch  too  much,  as  generally  all  Purgatives  do. 
He  thinks  they  have  a  great  Affinity  to  the  Scarbo- 
rough Waters,  and  might  do  great  Cures  in  moft 
4  chronical  Diftempers,  if  Exercife,  and  a  proper  Re- 
*  gimen,  were  directed  with  them.' 

Following  the  Road  towards  Warwick  dire£tly,  we 
arrived  at  Wimbcomb^  a  fm-11  Market-town,  fituate  in 
a  Bottom,  in  the  midft  of  good  Pafture  and  Arable 
Lands,  but  of  no  great  Account.  ,  The  Church  is  .a 
good  Building,  hath  twoAiles,  a  large  Chancel,  and» 
ajofty  Tower  adorned  with  Battlements  and  Pinacles. 
It  is  remarkable,  that  it  is  a  Curacy  worth  no  more 
than  io/.  a  Year,  though  the  Impropriation  is  worth 
300  /.  annually.  Here  was  formerly  a  very  rich  Ab- 

P  4  bey, 


A  T  O  U  R  thro          Glouc, 

bey,  whereof  the  Abbot  was  mitred,  founded  by  Offa 
King  of  Mercia. 

Here  we  turned  from  the  Road,  and  flruck  N.  W. 
to  Tewkjbury,  encompafled  with  four  Rivers ;  the  Avon 
and  Carran  on  the  N.  the  Severn  on  the  W.  and  the 
Swyliate  on  the  S.  JTis  governed  by  two  Bailiffs,  and 
24  Burgefles ;  and  its  Neighbourhood  to  Cotfwold- 
Downs  makes  the  Clothing-trade  flourifh  here.  It  is  a 
large  and  populous  Town,  fituate  upon  the  Warwick- 
Jhire  River  Avon^  fo  called  to  diftinguifh  it  from  the 
Brijlol  Avon,  and  others.  The  Town  was  long  fa- 
mous for  its  Muftard- balls,  as  alfo  for  a  great  Manu- 
facture of  Stockens  j  as  are  alfo  Campden  in  this  Coun- 
ty, and  Perjhore  in  War cefter fair e. 

The  great  old  Church  at  Tewkjbury  may  be  called 
one  of  the  largeft  Churches  in  England,  that  is  not 
Collegiate  or  Cathedral.  It  is  very  high,  has  two  fpa- 
cious  Ailes,  a  ftatelyTower,  and  a  large  Chancel.  The 
Communion-table  is  one  intire  Marble  Stonej  near  14 
Feet  long,  and  3  and  an  half  broad. 

The  Town  is  famous  for  the  decifive  Battle  fouglit 
between  the  Houfcs  of  Lancajh.r  and  York,  in  the1 
lleign  of  King  Edward  IV.  of  the  latter  Houfe,  who 
was  Conqueror.  It  fends  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment. 

Glcucefterflrir*  muft  not  be  pafTed  over,  without 
fome  Account  of  a  pleafant  and  fruitful  Vale,  which 
crofies  Part  of  the  County,  from  Eaft  to  Weft,  on 
that  Side  of  the  Cotfiuo/d,  and  which  is  called  Stroud- 
water  ;  famous  not  only  for  the  fineft  Cloths,  but  for 
dyeing  thofe  Cloths  of  the  beautifuilefr  Scarlets,  as  I 
have  heretofore  mentioned.  Here  I  faw  two  Pieces  of 
Broad-cloth  made,  one  Scarlet,  the  other  Crimfon  in 
Grain,  which  were  fent  as  Prefents,  the  one  to  King 
George  I.  while  Eiedlor,  and  the  other  to  his  late  Ma- 
jefty,  which  were  very  gracioufly  accepted.  The  Cloth 
was  Valued  at  45^.  per  Yard,  and  was  well  worth  it ; 

fojr 


Wore.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  321" 

for  nothing  fo  rich  of  that  Kind  had  ever  been  made 
in  England,  as  I  was  informed. 

The  Clothiers  lie  all  aleng  the  Banks  of  this  River, 
for  near  20  Miles,  and  in  the  Town  of  Stroud,  w  uch 
lies  in  the  Middle  of  it,  as  alfo  at  Paynfwlck.  This 
River  makes  its  Way  to  the  Severn,  about  five  Miles 
below  Gloucejler. 

An  Adi  of  Parliament  having  parted  in  the  3d  Year 
of  his  late  Majefty's  Reign,  intitled,  An  .4ft  for  mak- 
ing navigable  the  River  S croud  water  from  the  River  Se- 
vern, at  or  near  Framiload,  to  WaSlbridge,  near  the 
Town  of  Stroud  ;  but  nothing  having  been  clone  in  it, 
another  A<St  was  pafied  in  the  Year  1759  to  amend 
and  explain  the  former,  and  to  enable  new  Undertak- 
ers to  carry  its  good  Purpofes  into  Execution. 

As  Tewkjbury.\\e&  on  the  Borders  of  Worceflerjhire,, 
we  foon  entered  that  County,  and  came  to  Upton,  an 
antient  Market- town  of  fome  Note  upon  the  Severn^ 
over  which  it  has  a  good  Bridge.  Roman  Coins  arc 
frequently  dug  up  here. 

On  the  Left,  Weftward  of  this  Town,  and  which 
part  this  County  from  that  of  Hereford^  are  Malvcrn 
Hills,  which  cenfift  of  large  Mountains,  prodigioufly 
high  and  lofty,  gradually  rifing  one  above  another  for 
about  feven  Miles  together.  On  thefe  Hills  are  t\vn> 
Villages,  called  Great  Malvern  and  Little  Malvrrn^  at 
the  Diftance  of  about  t-.vo  Miles  from  each  other,  each 
having  had  formerly  an  Abbey  of  Benedictines^  the  lafi 
lying  in  a  difmal  Cavity  between  the  Hills.  On  the 
very  top  of  thefe  Hills  may  be  feen  the  Ruins  of  a 
prodigious  Ditch,  which  Gilbert  Earl  of  Gloucefier 
dug,  to  feparate  his  PoiieHions  from  thofe  of  the 
Church  of  Hereford.  On  thefe  Hills  are  two  medi- 
cinal Springs,  called  Holy  1  Veils :  one  is  good -for  the 
Eyes,  and  putrid,  fetid  Livers  ;  and  the  other  for 
Cancers.- 

P  From 


3  22  A  T  O  U  R  tM         Warw> 

From  Upton  we  traveled  N.  E.  and  came  to  Per- 
J])ore,  which  lies  on  the  low  London  Road  to  Wor- 
csjier :  it  is  faid  to  be  fo  called  from  the  great  Number 
of  Pear-trees,  which  thrive  plentifully  here.  It  is  a 
pleafant  Market-town  lying  on  the  Avon,  and  famous 
for  the  Stocken- trade. 

Eaftward  of  this  Town  ftands  Evejham,  a  Borough- 
town,  fituated  on  a  gentle  Afcent  from  the  fame  River, 
over  which  it  hath  a  Bridge  of  feven  liately  Arches. 
It  is  an  antient  Mayor-town,  and  has  the  Privilege  to 
try  Felons.  It  is  memorable  for  the  decifive  Battle, 
wherein  Simon  Montfort  and  the  Barons  were  defeated 
by  Prince  Edward,  afterwards  King  Edward  I.  who 
thereby  releafed  his  Father  out  of  Captivity,  Here  are 
two  Churches,  with  fmall  Spire  Steeples ;  but  neither 
of  them  has  any  Bells,  which  have  been  removed  to  a 
famous  Tower  built  by  Abbot  Lltchfield,  which  ftands 
near  thefe  Churches.  This  Borough  returns  two 
Members  to  Parliament. 

All  around  this  Town  lies  that  fruitful  and  plentiful 
Country,  called  from  this  Place,  The  Pale  of  Evejham, 
which  runs  all  along  the  Banks  of  the  Avon,  from 
Tcwkjbury  to  Perjhore,  and  to  Stratford  upon  Avon  t  in 
the  South  Part  of  Warwickjblre  j  which  River  is  fo 
far  navigable. 

The  Pariih-church  of  Stratford  is  very  old.  In  it 
\ve  faw  the  Monument  of  the  inimitable  Shakefpeare, 
whofe  dramatic  Performances  fet  him  at  the  Head  of 
the  Briti/k  Theatre,  and  will  make  him  renowned  to 
the  End  of  Time.  His  Bufto  is  in  the  Wall  on  the 
North-fide  of  the  Church,  and  a  flat  Grave-ftone  co- 
vers the  Body,  in  the  Aile  juft  under  him ;  on  which 
Grave-ftone  thefe  Lines  are  written  : 

Good  Friend,  for  Jefus'  fake,  forbear 
To  move  the  Dujl  that  reflet  here. 
Bleft  be  the  Man  that  fpares  thefe  St ones',. 
And  curft  fa  he.  thqt  moves  my  BQW  ! 

There 


Wore.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  325 

There  is  another  Monument  on  the  South-fide  of 
the  Church  next  the  Chancel,  no  lefs  curious.  One 
of  the  Infcriptions  (for  there  are  three  more,  in  He- 
Greek,  and  Latin)  is  as  follows  : 


Here  born,  here  //t>V,  here  dy  V,  and  buryd 

Lieth  Richard  Mill,  thrice  Bailiff  of  this  Borough: 

Two  Matrons  of  good  Fa?ne  he  marry'  d  in  God's  Fear  :  ' 
And  now  released  in  Joy,  he  rejh  from  worldly  Sorrow,. 

Over  the  Avon  at  Stratford  is  built  a  fair  Stone 
Bridge  of  14  Arches,  with  a  long  Caufeway  at  the 
Weft-  end  of  it,  walled  on  both  Sides. 

The  Navigation  of  this  River  Avon  is  an  exceeding 
Advantage  to  all  this  Part  of  the  County,  and  alfo 
to  the  Commerce  of  the  City  of  Br'iftol.  For  by  this 
River  they  drive  a  very  great  Trade  for  Sugar,  Oil, 
Wine,  Tobacco,  Iron,  Lead,  and,  in  a  Word,  all 
heavy  Goods,  which  are  ufually  carried  by  Water  al- 
moft  as  far  as  Warwick  ;  and,  in  return,  the  Corn, 
and  efpecially  Cheefe,  are  carried  back  from  Goucefter- 
Jbireand  IVarwickfinre  to  Brijlol\  for  Gloucester  Cheefe 
is  excellent  of  the  kind,  and  this  County  drives  a  great 
Trade  in  it. 

This  Vale  extending  itfelf  in  Warwick/hire^  and  un- 
der the  Ridge  of  little  Mountains,  called  Edge-bill,  is 
there  called  The  Pale  of  Red-borfe.  All  the  Grounds,  , 
put  together,  make  a  moft  pleafant  Corn  Country, 
efpecially  remarkable  for  the  Goodnefs  of  the  Air,  and 
Fertility  of  the  Soil. 

Not  far  from  Stratford^  on  the  Borders  of  the  County 
of  Worcefter*  is  Alcefter,  a  Market-town,  much  fre- 
quented by  Dealers  in  Corn  :  it  is  of  great  Antiquity  : 
as  appears  by  old  Foundations  of  Buildings  made  ofRo- 
man  Brick,  and  Gold,  Silver,  and  Brafs  Coins  found  i 
here.  The  old  Roman  Way,  called  Ikening-Jlrett^  pafles 
through  the  Town, 

P  6-          ,       From: 


3  24  y?TOURi'/W          Wore. 

From  Tewkjbury.  North,  it  is  12  Miles  to  Worce- 
Jter,  along  the  Banks  of  the  Severn,  where  I  was  de- 
lighted with  the  ttedge-rows,  lined  all  the  Way  with 
Api-le  a'id  Pear-trees,  full  of  Fruit,  and  thofe  fo  com- 
mon, that  any  Paflenger  ,  as  they  travel  the  Road, 
may  gather  and  eat  what  they  pleafe.  Here  alfo,  as 
well  as  in  Gloucefterjhire,  you  meet  with  Cyder  in  the 
Public-  houfes,  fold  as  Beer  and  Ale  are  in  other  Parts 
of  England,  and  as  cheap. 

We  faw  at  a  Diftance,  in  a  moft  agreeable  Situa- 
tion, the  Seat  of  the  Packingtons,  Baronets  of  an  an- 
tiertt  Family. 

On  the  other  Side  of  the  Severn,  at  JFhitley  court, 
five  Miles  from  Bewdly,  and  feven  from  Worcefter^  the 
Lord  /Vtyhas  a  Seat,  fituate  in  a  large  Park. 

Worcejhr,  the  Branovium  of  the  Romans,  feems  to 
have  been  built  by  them  to  curb  the  Silures  on  the  other 
Side  of  the  Severn ;  and  in  Imitation  of  the  Roman 
Name  tlie  Britons  called  it  Caer  Wrangon.  It  is  fitu- 
ated  in  a  Valley  on  the  Severn,  which,  though  gene- 
rally rapid  elfewhere,  glides  on  here  very  gently.  This 
City  was  burnt  in  1041.  by  King  Hardicanute,  the  In- 
habitants having  killed  his  Tax-gatherers.  In  1080. 
Roger  de  Montgomery  Earl  of  Shrew/bury  burnt  the 
Suburbs,  and  attacked  the  City ;  but  the  Citizens  de- 
fended themfelves  with  fo  much  Gallantry,  that  they 
sepulfed  their  Enemies  with  a  terrible  Slaughter.  In 
.1113.  it  was  aloioft  deftroyed  by  an  accidental  Fire, 
the  Caftle  intirely  confumed,  and  the  Roof  of  the 
Cathedral  damaged.  In  1202.  it  was  again  burnt. 
It  has  fuffered  in  all  the  Civil  Wars ;  but  the  Weights 
by  which  it  has  been  prefTed,  have  only  conduced  to 
bend  it  into  Form,  and  raife  it,  like  the  Palm-tree, 
to  its  prefent  Beauty  and  Statelinefs :  for  it  is  a  large, 
populous,  well  built  City,  and  the  befl  paved  in  Eng- 
land. The  Foregate- ftreet  is  the  moft  regular  that 
can  be  feen  out  of  London.  The  Guild-hall  is  a  fine 
Bwikiing ;  but  the  Statues  on  the  Outfide  difgrace  it. 

There 


Wore.          GREAT  BRITAIN, 

There  is  a  good  old  Stone  Bridge  over  the  Severn^ 
which  {lands  exceeding  high  from  the  Surface  of  the 
Water,  and  has  a  Tower  upon  it,  faid  to  be  built  by 
the  Romans.  But  as  the  Stream  of  the  Severn  is  con- 
tracted here  by  the  Buildings  on  either  Side,  there  is 
evident  Occafion  fometimes  for  the  Height  of  the 
Bridge,  the  Waters  rifing  to  an  incredible  Degree  ir* 
the  Winter-time. 

The  Cominandery  here,  formerly  belonging  to  Sf*. 
"John's  of  Jerufaletn-)  is  a  fine  old  Houfe  of  Timber,, 
in  the  Form  of  a  Court.  The  Hall,  roofed  with  Irijh 
Oak,  makes  one  Side  of  it,  built  for  the  Reception  of 
Pilgrims.  The  Windows  are  adorned  with  Imagery, 
and  Coats  Armorial  of  ftained  Glafs.  It  (lands  juft 
without  the  South  Gate  of  the  City  in  the  London 
Road,  where  the  Heat  of  the  famous  Battle  happened 
between  King  Charles  II.  and  Oliver  Cromwell',  and. 
they  frequently  find  Bones  of  the  Slain,  in  digging  in 
the  Garden.  Above  in  the  Park  is  to  be  feen  a  great 
Work  of  four  Baftions,  called  The  Royal  Mount,. 
whence  a  Vallum  and  Ditch  runs  bot  i  Ways  to  en- 
compafs  this  Side  of  the  City.  H-eie,  'tis  probable,. 
»he  Storm  began,  when  the  Royalitts  were  driven  back 
into  the  City  with  g  eat  Slaughter  ;  and  the  King  ef- 
caped  being  made  a  Prifoner  in  the  narrow  Street  at 
this  Gate,  by  a  loaded  Cart  of  Hay  purpofely  over- 
thrown, which  gave  him  Time  to  retire  at  the  oppo- 
fite  Gate  to  Bofcobel,  or  While  Ladies. 

A  Mile  and  halt  above  the  South  Gate,  on  the  top- 
of  the  Hill,  is  the  celebrated  Perrywood,  where  Crom- 
well's Army  lay,  and  which  affords  a  fine  Profpedfc 
over  the  County. 

Worcefter  was  made  an.  Epifcopal  See  by  Etbelred, 
King  of  the  Mercians,  who  founded  t-e  Cathedral  ; 
which  was  again  built  by  St.  Wulftan^  B.fhop  of  the 
Diocele,  about  1084.  but  enlarged  and  improv  <\  by  his 
Succeflbrs  ;  though  the  Body  of  it  makes  no  extraor- 
dinary Appearance  oa  the  Outfide.  Tue  Tuwer  is 

low, 


j2<f  .4  TOUR  thro  Wore. 

low,  without  any  Spire,  only  four  very  fmall  Pinacles 
on  the  Corners ;  and  yet  it  has  fome  little  Beauty  in 
it,  more  than  the  Church  itfelf.  The  upper  Part  has 
fome  Images  in  it,  but  decayed  by  Time.  Safe/us, 
the  firft  Bimop,  was  confecrated  in  680.  In  it  is  bu- 
ried the  once  reftlefs  King  John  ;  not  where  his  Mo- 
nument now  ftands,  which  is  in  the  Choir  before  the 
High  Altar  ;  but  under  a  little  Stone  before  the  Altar 
of  the  Eaftermoft  Wall  of  the  Church.  On  each 
Side  of  him,  on  the  Ground,  lie  the  Effigies  of  the 
two  Bimops,  his  chief  Saints,  IVulftan  and  Ofwald, 
from  whofe  Neighbourhood  he  hoped  to  be  fafe. 
The  Image  of  the  King  probably  lay  here  alfo  upon 
the  Ground,  now  elevated  upon  a  Tomb  in  the  faid 
Choir. 

On  the  South-fide  of  the  High  Altar  is  a  large'and 
handfome  Stone  Chapel,  over  the  Monument  of  Prince 
Arthur i  eldeft  Son  of  Henry  VII.  who  died  at  Ludlow, 
as  hisTomb-ftone  fpecifies,  Annoi^Qi.  and  whofe  Re- 
lid  Catharine,  Infanta  of  Spain,  his  Brother  Henry 
VIII.  marrying,  after  20  Years  Wedlock,  was  divorced 
from,  to  make  Way  for  Anna  Bolen.  The  Choir  of 
this  Chapel  is  exquifite  Workman(hip  ;  but  it  fuffered 
much  in  the  Civil  Wars. 

Here  is  alfo,  among  other  noted  Monuments,  one 
for  that  famous  Countefs  of  Salifbury,  who,  dancing 
before  Edwardlll.  in  his  great  Hall  at  Windfor,  drop- 
ped her  Garter;  which  the  King  taking  up,  honoured 
it  fo  much  (as  the  idle  Story  goes)  as  to  make  it  the 
denominating  Enfign  of  the  moft  Noble  Order  of  the- 
Garter :  but  this  I  have  refuted  under  my  Account  of 
Windfor :  tho',  that  the  Countefs  did  drop  her  Gar- 
ter, is  FacT: ;  and  the  King  might  gallantly,  to  filence 
the  Jefts  and  Railleries  of  the  Court,  wear  it  during 
the  Entertainment,  inftead  of  his  Garter  of  the  Order. 
But  the  Motto  was  given  in  Allufion  to  the  Order  of 
Knighthood,  and  not  of  the  Garter. 

TLtx 


Wore.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  3-27 

The  Monument  is  fine,  and  there  is  this  remarka- 
ble in  it,  That  there  are  feveral  Angels  cut  in  Stone 
about  it,  ftrewing  Garters  over  the  Tomb. 

There  are  feveral  other  antient  Monuments  in  this 
Church. 

The  Cloifters  are  very  perfect,  and  the  Chaptei> 
houfe  is  large,  fupported,  as  to  its  arched  Roof,  by 
one  umbilical  Pillar.  'Tis  now  become  a  Library, 
is  well  furni(hed,and  has  many  antient  Manufcripts. 

There  is  a  large  old  Gate-houfe  {landing,  and  near 
it  the  Caftle,  with  a  very  high  artificial  Mount  or  Keep, 
nigh  the  River. 

The  Bridge  I  have  mentioned  has  fix  Arches,  and 
the  Banks  of  the  Severn  look  very  beautiful  on  each 
Side,  being  enriched  with  pleafant  Meadows. 

This  City  is  governed  by  a  Mayor  and  fix  Aldermen. 
It  has  two  Chamberlains,  a  Recorder,  a  Town-clerk, 
two  Coroners,  a  Sword-bearer,  four  Sergeants  at 
Mace,  and  a  Sheriff;  being,  like  Ghucefter,  a  County 
of  itfelf,  divided  into  feven  Wards,  in  which  are  12 
Parifh-  churches. 

The  Inhabitants  are  generally  efteemed  rich,  being 
full  of  Bufmefs,  occafioned  chiefly  by  the  Clothing- 
trade,  of  which  the  City  and  the  County  round  carry 
on  a  great  Share,  as  well  for  the  Turky  as  the  Home- 
trade.  The  Number  of  Hands  which  it  employs  in  this 
Town,  and  adjoining  Villages,  in  Spinning,  Carding, 
Rowing,  Fulling,  Weaving,  &c.  is  almoft  incredible. 
One  Part  of  this  Town  is  wholly  pofTefTed  by  Weljb 
People,  who  fpeak  their  own  Language,  and  are  em- 
ployed in  this  Manufacture.  So  that  this  City,  which 
was  formerly  fo  great  a  Grievance  to  the  great  ones 
of  that  Principality,  now  adminifters  Subfiftence  to  a 
vafi  Number  of  the  meaner  ones. 

It  is  adorned  by  a  capacious  and  beautiful  Struc- 
ture, called  The  public  Work-koufe  ;  in  which  Chil- 
dren of  both  Sexes  are  trained  up  to  the  Knowlege  of 
Trade,  and  the  Practice  of  Religion  and  Virtue  ;  by 

whofe 


5a8  A  T  O  U  R  thrd  Wore. 

whofe  Labour  alfo  the  Aged   and  Decrepit   are  fup- 
ported. 

Oppofite  to  this  Work-houfe,  Robert  Berkley,  of 
Spetcbley,  Efq;  creeled  a  fine  Hofpital  for  12  pour 
Men,  and  gave  2000  /.  to  build  it,  and  4000  L  to  en- 
dow it. 

Here  are,  befides,  three  Grammar-fchools,  and 
feven  Alms-houfes,  all  liberally  endowed  ;  and  10 
Parifli-churvhes.  St.  Nicolas'?,  Church,  in  this  City, 
has  been  lately  rebuilt,  and  is  a  neat  and  commodious 
Edifice. 

The  Church  of  All  Saints,  in  this  Town,  being  in 
fo  ruinous  a  Condition,  that  Part  of  it  a&ually  fell 
down,  and  the  reft  being  ready  to  fall,  an  Ad  pafled, 
8efT.  1737-8.  for  taking  down  and  rebuilding  the 
fame. 

The  Market-days  are  Wcdncfday,  Friday,  and  Sa- 
turday. Every  Saturday  is  kept  a  very  confiderable 
Hop- market.  The  Fairs  are  held  on  the  Saturday 
before  Palm- Sunday,  the  Afiumption  of  the  Bit-fled 
Virgin,  and  her  Nativity.  Wor<:ejlcrfei\&§  two  Mem- 
bers to  Parliament. 

From  Worcejler  I  made  fome  Excursions,  to  vifit 
the  Towns  and  Country  Northward  ;  and  firft  came  to- 
Droitwick,  a  corporate  Bailiwick  and  Borough  town, 
which  has  four  Churches,  and  is  pretty  wealthy.  'Tis 
famous  for  excellent  white  Salt,  which  is  made  here 
from  the  Summer  to  the  Winter  Solftice  ;  not  but  they 
may  mane  Salt  here  all  the  Year  long,  hut  they  fear  to 
over  flock  t'-e  Market.  It  appears,  by  Docmjday  book^ 
they  made  Salt  here  before  the  Conqueft.  I  he  Salt  ' 
Spring.'  are  very  good,  and  productive  of  Plenty  of  Brine, 
The  Town  lies  on  the  River  Sahuarp,  and  fends  two 
Members  io  Parliament. 

Proceidii.g  diredilyon,  in  the  Road,  we  arrived  at 
Srcomjgrove,  a  large  Bailiwi'  k-town,  likewife  on  the 
River  Salwarp,  where  the  Clothing-trade  is  pretty 
brifkly  carried  on.  It  is  the  Centre  of  four  Roads : 


Wore.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

One  leads  to  Coventry  and  Leicefter;  another  to  War- 
wick, and  fo  to  London  ,  a  third  to  Worcejhr ;  and  the 
fourth  to  Shrew/bury. 

Between  Worcejter  and  Spetcbley  was  St.  Ofwald's. 
Hofpital,  demolifhed  in  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth. 
But  Dr.  Felly  Bifliop  of  Oxford,  after  the  Reftoration, 
recovered  much  of  the  Pofleffion,  and  erected  a  fair  and 
large  Hofpital,  which  comfortably  maintains  12  poor 
Men. 

Kiddermnfler  is  a  Town  in  this  County  of  Worcejler^ 
very  confiderable  for  its  woollen  Trade,  particularly  the 
Weaving  of  what  they  call  Linfey-woolfey,  in  which 
the  Inhabitants  are  almofi  wholly  employed.  It  is  a 
large,  but  yet  compact  and  populous,  Town,  fituated 
on  the  Stoury  and  governed  by  a  Bailiff,  12  capital 
Burgefles,25Cornmon-councilmen,£3V.  In  itsCnurch 
is  a  crofs-legged  Monument  of  Sir  Thomas  Aftan. 

Stourbridge  is  alfo  fituated  upon  the  River  Stour,  over 
which  it  has  a  very  good  Bridge  ;  whence  its  Name. 
This  Town  deals  greatly  in  Glafs  Manufacture,  and 
n  Iron-works  of  all  Sorts ;  and  is  much  improved  of 
ate  Years,  both  in  Houfes  and  Inhabitants.  MSwin- 
ford,  near  Stourbridge,  is  a  noble  Hofpital  for  60 
Boys,  erected  by  the  firft  Founder  of  the  noble  Fa- 
mily of  Foley,  which  deferves  the  Attention  of  a  Tra- 
veler, and  the  Praife  of  all  Men.  At  Stourbridge 
alfo  fine  Stone  Pots  are  made  for  Glafs-makers  to 
melt  their  Metal  in,  alfo  Crucibles,  &c.  the  Clay,  of 
which  thefe  things  are  made,  being  almoft  peculiar  to- 
the  Place. 

Near  this  Town  is  Hagky-Park,  the  Seat  of  Lord 
Lyttelton,  who  has  lately  new-built  it,  on  its  former 
beautiful  Spot  of  Ground,  which  has  as  great  Variety 
of  Hills,  Valleys,  and  Wood,  as  can  be  imagined  in 
fuch  a  Space  of  Ground  j  fo  that  it  may  be  efteemed 
one  of  the  fined  Seats  in  this  County. 

A  little  below  Worcefter^  Weftward,  the  Severn 
•receives  a  River  of  a  long  deep  Courfe,  which  com.?s 

from 


4  TOUR  thro  Salop. 

from  Shropjhire,  called  the  Teme,  on  which  ftands  a 
fmail  Market-town,  called  Tenbury,  but  of  little  Note. 
J  parted  this  River  formerly  in  my  Way  to  Ludlow,  at 
Broadway i  a  little  Village  ;  but  now  I  went  by  the 
Way  of  Bewd  ey,  on  the  Side  of  Skropfiire. 

In  this  Courfe  we  faw  two  fine  Seats  not  very  far 
from  the  Severn  ;  viz.  the  Lord  Poieys,  and  the  Earl 
of  Bradford's  ;  as  we  did  before  a  delicious  Houfe,  be- 
longing to  the  Lord  Conway.  Indeed  this  Part  of  the 
County,  and  all  the  County  of  Salop,  is  filled  with  fine 
Seats  of  the  Nobility  and  Gentry,  which  we  have  noc 
room  to  defer i be.  But  although  the  Number  of  Seats 
is  not  diminished  in  thefe  two  Counties,  yet  many  of 
the  Parks  have  been  laid  open,  and  converted  into 
Farms ;  whereby  the  Owners  have  greatly  enlarged 
their  Eftates,  efpecially  where  the  Land  was  good. 
The  Number  of  inclofed  Parks  in  Salop,  fome  Years 
ago,  was  upwards  of  an  hundred. 

Bewdley,  or  Beau- lieu,  i.  e.  fine  Place,  fa  id  to  be 
fo  called  from  its  pleafant  and  delightful  Situation  upon 
the  Side  of  an  Hill  declining  to  the  Severn,  is  a  fmail 
Borough  and  Bailiff  Market-town,  well  fupplied  with 
Corn,  Malt,  Leather,  and  Caps,  which  the  Dutch  Sea- 
men buy,  called  Monmoutb  Caps,  and  noted  for  the 
Palace  which  King  Henry  VII.  built  here  for  his  Son 
Prince  Arthur*  called  Tickenbatt.  It  had  a  very  fine 
Park  about  it,  which,  with  the  Houfe,  was  deftroyed 
by  the  Enthufiafts  in  the  Civil  War.  The  Town  fends 
one  Member  to  Parliament. 

A  Mile  off  is  Ribsford,  the  Seat  of  Earl  Powis, 
pleafantly  furrounded  with  Woods. 

The  Ends  of  the  Hills  towards  the  Rivers  are  gene- 
rally Rocks :  and  Eluckjlon-hill  has  an  Hermitage  cut 
out  of  it,  with  a  Chapel,  and  feveral  Apartments.  Near. 
it  is  a  pretty  Rock  upon  the  Edge  of  the  Water,  co« 
vered  with  Oaks,  and  many  curious  Plants. 

Not 


Salop.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  531 

Nor  far  from  Cherbury-Park  is  the  Parifh  of  Rocb+ 
where  the  famous  Auguflin/*  Oak  ftood,  fo  called  from 
a  Conference  held  under  it  by  Augujline,  and  theJSr/- 
tljb  Bifhops,  about  the  Celebration  of  Eafter^  and 
preaching  God's  Word,  and  adminiftring  Baptifm  after 
the  Rites  of  the  Church  of  Ro?ne,  which  the  Britljb 
Bifliops  refufed. 

I  thought  once  to  have  returned  to  Worcefter,  and 
fo  proceeded  to  Hereford faire,  and  down  to  Monmouth, 
and  fo  round  to  the  Coaft  of  Wales.  But  being  defi- 
rous  to  take  in,  firft,  the  South  Part  of  Shrcpjbire^  I 
followed  the  Severn  up  North,  and  came  to  Bridgnorth, 
a  very  antient  and  noted  Borough-town,  faid  to  be  built 
by  Queen  Mtbelfleda^  in  the  Time  of  the  Heptarchy. 
The  Charter  given  by  King  John  mentions  a  former 
by  King  Henry  II.  It  has  endured  feveral  Sieges,  in 
one  of  which  Hubert  de  St.  Clare  voluntarily  received 
an  Arrow  in  his  Breaft,  which  was  leveled  at  his  So- 
vereign King  Henry  II.  It  was  alrnoft  dcftroyed  by 
Fire,  in  its  Defence  againft  Sir  Lewis  Kirke,  an  Officer 
in  the  Parliamentarian  Army.  Upon  the  Weft  Bank 
of  the  Severn  are  the  Remains  of  an  ancient  and  mag- 
nificent Convent  of  Francifcans^  under  which  are  fe- 
veral Caverns,  running  a  great  Length. 

Bridgnorth  confifts  of  two  Towns,  the  High  and 
the  Low,  which  are  feparated  by  the  Severn,  but  unit- 
ed by  a  fair  Stone  Bridge  of  feven  Arches,  which  hath 
a  Gate  and  Gate-houfe.  The  Situation  is  pleafant5 
the  Air  healthy,  the  Profpe6t  delightful,  and  commo- 
dious for  Trade.  It  hath  been  fortified  with  Walls, 
and  a  Caftle  built  by  Robert  de  Bekfme,  which  are 
now  in  Ruins ;  and  the  Area  in  the  laft  is  converted 
to  a  fine  Bowling-green.  The  Streets  are  well  paved. 
Part  of  the  Cowgate-ftreet  is  a  Rock  rifing  perpendicu- 
larly, where  are  feveral  Tenements,  which  have  an 
agreeable,  tho*  grotefque  Appearance.  It  is  governed 
by  two  Bailiffs,  24  Aldermen,  and  other  inferior  Of- 
ficers. It  is  noted  for  good  Gun- makers,  and  for  its 

Stocken 


33 a  ^TOUR  thro  Salop, 

Stocken  Manufacture.  It  has  a  well  replenished  Mar- 
ket, and  five  Fairs  annually,  two  whereof  hold  three 
Days,  which  are  much  reforted  to,  am!  abound  with 
Horfes,  Black  Cattle,  Sneep,  Butter,  Cheefe,  Bacon, 
Lineh-cloti.,  a  -i  Hops  in  great  Plenty.  Here  are  two 
Churches,  St.  Mary  Magdalen's^  made  a  free  Chapel, 
and  exempted  from  epifcopal  Jutifdidion  by  King 
John ;  and  St.  Leonard's,  which  was  burnt  in  the 
Civil  Commotions  in  the  Reign  of  King  Clwrles\r 
and  lately  lebuilt  by  the  Inhabitants ;  but  the  College, 
which  met  with  the  fame  Fate,  was  never  reftored  ; 
and  though  the  Parifhes  are  large,  and  the  Town  po- 
pulous, they  are  very  indifferently  endowed,  and  fo  is 
the  Free-fchool.  There  is  an  IK  Tow  Way  cut  thro* 
the  Rock,  leading  from  the  high  Town  to  the  Bridge, 
of  the  Dc-pth  of  20  Feet,  in  fome  Parts  of  u ;  and 
likewife  m-ny  Vaults  and  Dwellings  are  hewn  out  of 
the  Rock.  The  Town  fends  two  Members  to  Par- 
liament. 

From  hence  we  advanced  in  the  direct  Road  to 
Shrew/bury^  and  came  to  Great  Wenl&ck>  an  antient 
incorporate  Town,  governed  by  a  Bailiff  and  BurgefTesj 
which  returns  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

Leaving  Shrew/bury  for  my  Obfervation  at  my  Re- 
turn from  Wales  thro'  Cbejbire,  we  turned  fhort  here, 
and  fell  down  Southward  to  Ludlow,  famed  more  for 
its  Beauty  than  Antiquity ;  for,  it  feems,  the  Caftle, 
which  wasfo  truly  magnificent,  was  built  by  Roger  de 
Montgomery  in  William  the  Norman's  Time. 

But  before  I  fpeak  more  of  this  Caftle,  I  fliall  ob- 
ferve,  that  on  the  Extremity  of  this  County,  in  a  kind 
of  Promontory,  which  runs  in  between  Montgomery- 
/hire  and  Radnor/hire,  upon  the  <?/«*,  lies 

Bifoops-CaJlle,  a  fmall  Market,  Bailiwick,  and  Bo- 
rough town,  which  fends  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment :  and  not  very  far  from  it,  juft  at  the  Entrance 
into •  Montgomtryfbire^  is  a  noted  Place  called  Bijhopf- 
where  is  an  Acre  of  Ground,  furrounded  with 

aa 


Salop.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  335 

an  Intrenchment.  The  Clun  meets  the  Teme  at  Lud- 
low,  and  both,  united,  run  to  Clelury,  a  fmall  Town 
on  the  Borders  of  Jf/orcejhrjhire ,  where  it  falls,  as  I 
mentioned  before,  into  the  Severn. 

The  Caftle  of  Ludlow  fhews  plainly  in  its  Decay, 
what  it  was  in  its  flourilhing  Eftate :  it  is  the  Palace 
of  the  Prince  of  Wa/est  in  Right  of  his  Principality. 

Its  Situation  is  indeed  beautiful  ;  there  is  a  moft 
fpacious  Plain  or  Lawn  in  its  Front,  which  formerly 
continued  near  two  Miles  ;  but  much  of  it  is  now  in- 
clofed.  The  Country  round  it  is  exceeding  pleafant, 
fertile,  populous,  and  the  Soil  rich;  nothing  can  be 
added  by  Nature,  to  make  it  a  Place  fit  for  a  Royal 
Palace.  It  is  built  in  the  North-weft  Angle  of  the 
Town  upon  a  Rock,  commanding  a  delightful  Profpe<£fc 
Northward  ;  and  on  the  Weft  is  (haded  by  a  lofty 
Hill,  and  wafhed  by  the  River.  The  Battlements  are 
of  great  Height  and  Thicknefs,  with  Towers  at  con- 
venient Diftances.  That  Half  which  is  within  the 
Walls  of  the  Town  is  fecured  with  a  deep  Ditch  ;  the 
other  is  founded  on  a  folid  Rock.  A  Chapel  here 
has  abundance  of  Coats  of  Arms  upon  the  Panels,  as 
as  has  the  Hall,  together  with  Lances,  Spears,  Fire- 
locks, and  old  Armour. 

It  will  be  no  Wonder,  that  this  noble  Caftle  is  in 
the  very  Perfection  of  Decay,  when  we  acquaint  our 
Readers,  that  the  prefent  Inhabitants  live  upon  the 
Sale  of  the  ancient  Materials.  All  the  fine  Courts, 
the  Royal  Apartments,  Halls,  and  Rooms  of  State,  lie 
open,  abandoned,  and  fome  of  them  falling  down; 
for  iince  the  Courts  of  the  Prefident  and  Marches  are 
taken  away,  here  is  nothing  that  requires  the  Attend- 
ance of  any  public  Perfons  ;  fo  that  Time,  the  great 
Devourer  of  the  Works  of  Men,  begins  to  eat  into  the 
very  Stone  Walls,  and  to  fpread  the  Face  of  Ruin 
upon  the  whole  Fabric.  Over  feveral  of  the  Stable- 
doors  are  the  Arms  of  Queen  &ti%ftbeth,  the  Earls  of 
Pembroke,  &c. 

The 


A  T  °  u  R  tM         Sal°P' 

The  Town  of  Ludlow  is  likewife  fortified  with 
Walls,  through  which  are  feven  Gates.  It  is  well- 
built,  and  a  Place  of  good  Trade;  but  is  not  the 
better  for  the  ruinous  Mate  of  the  Caftle,  and  the 
abolifhing  of  the  Court  held  tnere  for  the  Marches.  It 
ftands  on  the  Edge  of  the  two  Counties,  Shropfhire 
and  Worceflerjhire*  but  is  itfelf  in  the  firft. 

On  the  Souih-fide  of  the  Town  runs  the  Teme,  over 
which  is  a  good  Bridge.  The  River  has  fevtral  Dams 
acrofs  it,  in  the  Nature  of  Cataracls,  whereby  abun- 
dance of  M  ills  are  turned ;  and  great  is  the  Roar  of  the 
Superfluous  Waters. 

Ludlow  has  a  very  good  Church,  with  an  handfome 
Tower,  and  a  pleafant  Ring  of  fix  Bells.  The  Win- 
dows are  full  of  painted  Glafs,  pretty  intire. 

There  are  fome  old  Monuments  of  the  Lords  Prefi- 
dents,  &c.  and  an  Infcription  upon  the  North-wall  of 
the  Choir,  relating  to  Prince  Arthur^  elder  Brother  to 
King  Henry  VIII.  who  died  here  ;  and  in  this  Spot  his 
Bowels  were  depofited.  It  is  faid,  That  his  Heart  was 
taken  up  fome  time  ago  in  a  leaden  Box. 

In  the  Eaftern  Angle  of  the  Choir  is  a  Clofet,  an- 
tiently  called  The  Godhoufe,  where  the  Prlefls  fecured 
their  confecrated  Utenfils.  The  Window  is  flrongly 
barred  on  the  Outfide.  The  Church  is  dedicated  to 
St.  Laurence:  and  in  the  Market-place  is  a  Cittern  or 
Conduit,  en  the  Top  of  which  is  a  long  Stone  Crofs, 
bearing  a  Nich,  in  which  is  the  Image  of  that  Saint. 

Weft  of  the  Church  was  a  College,  now  converted 
into  a  private  Houfe.  There  was  a  rich  Priory  out  of 
the  Town,  on  the  North-fide  of  which  are  but  few 
Ruins  to  be  feen,  except  a  fmall  Church,  which  for- 
merly belonged  to  it.  The  Welch  call  this  Town  Llys 
Twyfoe^  i.  e.  The  Prince's  Court.  Mr.  Cambden  calls 
the  River  Teme  the  Temd,  and  another  River,  which 
joins  itjuftat  this  Town,  the  Curve-,  whence  the  rich 
flat  Country  below  the  Town  is  called  Corvefdale.  It 
is  governed  by  2  Bailiffs,  1 2  Aldermen,  a  Recorder, 

25 


Heref.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

I  25  Common:council-men,  and  other  inferior  Officers ; 

r  and  has  the  particular  Privilege  of  trying  and  executing 

i  Criminals.    It  has  an  Alms-houfe  for  30  poor  People  ; 

I  and  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

King  Henry  VIII.  eftablifhed  here  the  Court  of  the 
Preiident  and  Council  of  the  Marches,  before  men- 
tioned ;  and  all  Caufes  of  Nifi  Prius,  or  of  Civil 
Right,  were  tried  here,  before  the  Lord  Prefident  ar.d 
Council ;  but  this  Court,  being  grown  a  great  Griev- 
ance to  the  Public,  was  intirely  taken  away  by  Adi  of 

J.  Parliament,   in  the  firft  Year  of  King  William  and 

I  Queen  Mary, 

From  Ludlow  we  took  our  Courfe  ftill  due  South  to 

Lemfter^  or  Leominjler,  a  large  Market-town  on  the 

River  Lug,  over  which  it  hath  feveral  Bridges.     'Tis 

i  governed  by  a  Bailiff,  and  returns  two  Members  to 

Parliament.     The  Church,  whkh  is  large,  has  been 

pin  a  manner  rebuilt,  and  is  now  very  beautiful.    This 

Town  is  noted  for  its  fine  Wool,  and  the  beft  Wheat, 

iand  confequently  the  fineft  Bread ;  and  alfo  for  the  beft 

8 Barley  ;  whence  Lemper  Bread  and  Weakly  Ale^  are 

i:  become  a  proverbial  Saying. 

It  is  a  Town  of  brifk  Trade  in  Wool,  Hat- making, 
'Leather,  &c.  and  lies  in  a  Valley  exceedingly  luxuriant. 
•Three  Rivers  of  a  very  fwift  Current  go  through  the 
;the  Town,  befides  others  very  near.    The  Inhabitants 
'make  great  Ufe  of  thefe  by  Mills,  and  other  Machi- 
nery, in  the  various  Branches  of  their  Trade.    On  the 
!i  North-fide  of  the  Church  was  a  confiderable  Priory, 
i.two  Aiies  of  which  belong  now  to  the  Church,  and 
two  others  of  more  lightfome  Work  have  been  added. 
:  The  Mayor  has  a  long  black  Rod  to  walk  with,  tipped 
-with  Silver.     There  are  fome  poor  Remains  of  the 
iPriory,  chiefly  a  little  Chapel,  which  probably  be- 
rlonged  to  the  Prior's  Family.     Underneath  it  runs  a 
pretty  Rivulet,  which   ufed  to  grind  his  Corn,  now 
converted  to  a  Fulling-mill.    Near  it  are  very  large 

Ponds 


336  A  T  O  U  R  thro         Heref. 

Ponds  for  Fifli,  which  ufed  to  furnifti  the  Monks  on 
failing  Days.  There  was  a  fine  Gatehoufe,  pulled 
down  not  long  ago,  near  the  Ambry  or  Almry-Clofc^ 
where  they  gave  their  Scraps  away  to  the  Poor. 

AtLemfter  there  is  an  Alms-houfe,  founded  by  the 
Widow  of  a  Man  who  gave  away  the  beft  Part  of  his 
Effecls  in  his  Life-time.  In  aNich  over  the  Entrance 
is  his  Figure,  holding  up  an  Hatchet,  with  thefe 
Words  under : 

Let  him  that  gives  his  Goods  before  he  is  dead) 
Take  this  Hatchet,  and  cut  off  his  Head. 


Pembridge,  Weolly^  and  Kyneton,  lie  South-weft  of 
Lemjler^  and  form  in  their  Situation  a  kind  of  Triangle. 
They  are  all  Market- towns,  and  the  firft  is  pretty 
confiderable  for  the  Clothing-trade;  the  fecond  for 
Ale,  and  for  fending  two  Members  to  Parliament ; 
but  the  third  for  nothing  that  I  know  of. 

The  Country  on  the  Right,  as  we  came  from  Lud- 
loW)  is  very  fruitful  and  pleafant,  and  is  called  the 
Hundred  of  Wigmore^  from  which  the  Earl  of  Oxford 
takes  the  Title  of  Baron.  Here  we  faw  the  two  an- 
tient  Caftles  of  Brampton- Brian,  and  Wigmore,  both 
belonging  to  the  late  Earl's  Grandfather,  Sir  Edward 
Harley.  Brampton  is  a  ftately  Pile,  but  not  kept  in 
full  Repair.  The  Parks  are  fine,  and  full  of  large 
Timber. 

We  are  now  on  the  Borders  of  Wales^  properly  fo 
called ;  for  from  the  Windows  of  Brampton  Caftle, 
you  have  a  fair  ProfpecT:  into  the  County  of  Radnor^ 
which  is,  as  it  were,  under  its  Walls;  nay,  even 
this  whole  County  of  Hereford  was  a  Part  of  Wales^ 
and  fo  deemed  for  many  Ages.  The  People  of  this 
County  alfo  boaft,  that  they  were  a  Part  of  the  antient 
SilurcS)  who  for  fo  many  Ages  withftood  the  Roman 
Arms,  arid  could  never  be  entirely  conquered.  They 
are  a  diligent  and  laborious  People,  chiefly  addided  tc 

Huf- 


Heref.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  337 

Hufbandry;  and  they  boaft,  that  they  have  the  fined 
Wool,  the  beft  Hops,  and  the  richefr  Cyder,  in  all 
Britain ;  and  poffibly  with  fome  Reafon  ;  for  the  Wool 
about  Leominjier^  and  in  the  Hundred  of  Wigmore^ 
iand'the  Golden  Vale,  as  it  is  called  lor  its  Richnefs,  on 
the  Banks  of  the  River  Dore  (all  in  this  County),  is 
as  fine  as  any  in  England^  the  South -doivn  Wool  not 
excepted.  As  for  Hops,  they  plant  abundance  all 
over  this  County,  and  they  are  very  good.  Cyder  is 
the  common  Drink  of  the  County,  and  fo  very  good 
and  cheap,  that  we  never  found  fault,  though  we 
could  get  no  other  Drink  for  20  Miles  together.  Great 
Quantities  of  this  Cyder  are  fent  to  London,  even  by 
Land-carriage,  though  fo  very  remote;  which  is  an 
Evidence  in  its  Favour  beyond  Contradiction. 

One  would  hardly  expect  fo  pleafant  and  fruitful  a 
Country  as  this,  fo  near  the  barren  Mountains  of 
Wales ;  but  'tis  certain,  that  not  any  of  our  Southern 
Counties,  the  Neighbourhood  of  London  excepted, 
come  up  to  the  Fertility  of  this  County. 

From  Lemper  it  is  ten  Miles  to  Hereford^  the  chief 
City,  not  of  this  County  only,  but  of  all  the  Counties 
Weft  of  the  Severn.  In  the  Time  of  the  Civil  Wars 
it  was  very  iirong,  and,  being  well  fortified,  and  as 
well  defended,  fupportcd  a  tedious  and  fevere  Siege; 
lor,  beficles  the  Parliament's  Forces,  who  could  never 
reduce  it,  the  Scots  Army  was  called  to  the  Work, 
who  laid  before  it  till  they  laid  above  4000  of  their 
Bones  there;  and  at  latt  it  was  rather  furrendered  by 
the  fatal  Ifiue  of  the  War,  than  by  the  Attacks  of  the 
Refiegers. 

It  had  before  this  fix  Pa  rim -churches;  but  two  of 
them  weredemoiifhcd  at  that  time.  It  has  an  Hofpital 
liberally  endowed  for  1 2  poor  People. 

The  City  of  Merfford  probably  fprung  from  the 

Ruins  of  the  Roman  Ariconlu.m^  now  Kevcbe/fer^  three 

Miles  off,  higher  up   the  River  /7^r,  but  not  very 

near  it,  which  may  be  a  Reafon  for  its  Decay. 

VOL,  II.  Q.  Kencbejler 


33-8  ^  TOUR  /&•<»•.        Heref. 

Kencbejhr  (lands  upon  a  little  Brook,  called  the  7«r, 
which  thence  encompafling  the  Walls  of  Hereford^ 
falls  into  the  lf$e. 

Arcbenfield  feenis  to  retain  the  Name  of  Ariconlum. 
Nothing  remains  of  its  Splendor,  but  a  Piece  of  a 
Temple  probably,  with  a  Nich,  which  is  five  Feet 
high,  and  three  broad  within,  built  of  Brick,  Stone, 
and  indiflbluble  Mortar.  There  are  many  large 
Foundations  near  it.  A  very  fine  Mofaic  Floor,  a 
few  Years  ago,  was  found  intire,  which  was  foon  torn 
to  Pieces  by  the  ignorant  Country-  people.  A  Bath 
was  here  found  by  Sir  John  Hojkins^  about  feven  Feet 
fquare,  the  Pipes  of  Lead  intire  :  thofe  of  Brick  were 
a  Foot  long,  three  Inches  fquare,  ^et  artificially  into 
one  another  j  over  thefe,  I  fuppofe,  was  a  Pavement. 

This,  as  Dr.  Stukely  obfervcs,  is  an  excellent  In- 
vention for  heating  a  Room,  and  might  well  be  intro- 
duced among  us  in  Winter-time. 

In  another  Place  is  an  Hollow,  where  burnt  Wheat 
has  been  taken  up.  All  around  the  City  you  may  eafily 
trace  the  Walls,  fome  Stones  being  left  evcry-where, 
though  over-grown  by  Hedges  and  Timber-trees.  The 
Situation  of  the  Place  is  a  gentle  Eminence  of  a  fquarifh 
Form;  the  Earth  black  and  rich,  overgrown  with 
Brambles,  Oak-trees,  full  of  Stones,  Foundations,  and 
Cavities,  where  they  have  been  digging,  and  found 
many  Coins,  fcf<r.  Colonel  D  ant  fey  has  paved  a  Cellar 
with  fquare  Bricks  dug  up  here.  The  late  Earl  of 
Conlngjby  adorned  the  Floor  of  his  Evidence-room 
with  them. 

This  City  is  overlooked  and  {heltered  towards  the 
North  with  a  prodigious  Mountain  of  fteep  Afcent ;  on 
the  Top  Hands  a  van:  Camp,  with  Works  altogether 
inacceflible,  which  is  called  Credon-hil.  At  the  l-uni- 
mit,  you.  are  prefented  with  an  extenlive  Profpedr,  as 
far  as  $t.  Michael's  Mount  in  Monmoutbjhire ;  crowned 
with  two  tops,  and  of  confiderable  Refort  among 
Zealots  of  the  Rmijb  Perfuafion,  who  believe  this 

holy 


Heref.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  339 

holy  Hill  was  fent  thither  by  St.  Paine  out  of  Ireland, 
and  that  it  works  Wonders  in  feveral  Cafes. 

On  the  other  Side,  is  the  vaft  l^ack  Mountain, 
which  feparates  Brecknock/hire  from  this  County.  The 
Town  underneath  appears  like  a  little  Copfe.  Dinder- 
•  bill,  whereon  is  a  Roman  Camp,  ftands  on  the  con- 
trary Bank  of  the  Wye. 

Upon  the  Lug  are  Sutton-walls,  another  va#  Roman 
Camp  upon  an  Hill  overlooking  a  beautiful  Vale, 
which  was  the  Regal  Refidence  of  the  powerful  King 
Offa  ;  but  chiefly  remarkable  for  the  Murder  of  young 
King  Etbelbertj  whom  he  allured  thither  under  Pretext 
of  courting  his  Daughter,  and  who  was  buried  in  the 
neighbouring  Church  of  Maraen,  fituate  in  a  Marfli 
by  the  River-fide.  Hence  his  Body  was  afterwards 
conveyed  to  Hereford,  and  enfhrined  ;  but  the  parti- 
cular Place  cannot  be  found,  his  Monument  being  de- 
ftroyed  by  the  Welch  under  a  rebellious  Earl  of  Mer-cte^ 
who  alfo  plundered  the  City,  and  robbed  the  Eccle- 
fiaftics. 

In  the  North  Wing  of  the  Cathedral  of  Hereford^ 
is  the  Shrine,  where  the  Body  of  Cantilupe,  the  great 
Miracle- monger  in  the  Weft  of  England,  was  depo- 
fited  ;  which  Wing  was  built  by  himfelf,  and  on  the 
Wall  his  Picture  is  painted.  All  round  are  the  Marks 
of  Hooks,  where  the  Banners,  Lamps,  Reliques,  and 
the  like  Prefents  were  hung  up.  And  the  Riches  of 
this  Place  were  doubtlefs  very  coniiderable  ;  for  it  is 
well  guarded  againft  the  Aflaults  of  Thieves.  The 
Shrine  is  of  Stone,  carved  round  with  Knights  in 
Armour. 

The  Church,  built  by  Bifiiop  Atheljlan,  is  very  old 
and  {lately.  The  Spire  is  not  high,  but  handfome  ; 
and  there  is  a  fine  Tower  at  the  Weft-end.  The  Roof, 
Ailes,  and  Chapel,  have  been  added  to  the  more 
antient  Part  by  fucceftive  Bifhops,  as  alfo  the  Towers, 
Cloifters,  csV.  The  Choir,  though  plain,  is  handfome; 
i  and  there  is  a  very  good  Organ.  Adjoining  to  the 

Q  2  Church 


340  A  TOUR  tbro  Heref. 

Church  is  aCollege  for  12  Vicars,  and  the  Chorifters, 
\vho  lead  an  academical  Life. 

The  Chapter- houfe,  which  was  very  beautiful, 
was  deftroyed  in  the  Civil  Wars.  About  four  Win- 
dows are  left  ftanding ;  and  the  Springings  of  the  Stone 
Arches  between  are  of  fine  Ribwcrlc, 'which  compofed 
the  Roof,  of  that  fort  of  Architecture,  wherewith 
Kiii^s-College- Chapel  was  built.  Two  Windows 
were  pulled  down  by  Bifhop  Biffe,  which  he  ufed  in 
jiew  fitting- up  the  Epifcopal  Palace.  Under  the 
Windows,  in  every  Compartment,  was  painted  a 
King,  Bifhop,  Saint,  Virgin,  or  the  like;  fome  of 
which  were  diftincl  enough,  though  fo  long  expofed 
to  the  Weather. 

Here  are  a  great  Number  of  Monuments  of  Bifhops, 
and  many  valuable  Brafies  and  Tombs. 

Between  the  Cathedral  and  Palace  is  a  moft  venerable 
Pile,  built  and  roofed  with  Stone,  confifling  of  two 
Chapels,  one  above  the  other;  the  upper  dedicated  to 
St.  Magdalen  ;  the  lower,  which  is  fome  Steps  under- 
ground, to  St.  Catharine. 

The  Government  of  the  City  is  adminiftered  by  a 
Mayor,  Recorder,  and  Common-council.  There 
are  alfo  peculiar  Piivileges  for  Companies,  who  have 
feparate  Hall?,  and  Power  of  making  By  laws  for  the 
Benefit  of  their  Trade.  Here  are  two  great  Fairs 
held  on  Wednefday  after  Eajler-day^  and  on  the  2cth 
of  March  ;  an  extraordinary  Market  on  Fridays  for 
Cattle,  befides  thofe  on  fridnefilays  and  Saturdays, 
The  City  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament. 

The  Caftle  was  a  noble  Work,  built  by  one  of  the 
Ethvardfc.beforc  the  Reign  of  William  I.  frrongly  walled 
and  ditched.  There  is  a  very  lofty  artificial  Keep, 
having  a  Well  faced  with  good  Stone  :  and  by  the 
Side  of  the  Ditch  a  Spring  confecrated  to  St.  Etbelbert, 
with  an  old  Stone  Arch. 

Without  the  Walls  are  the  Ruins  of  Black  Friers 
Monaftcry,  and  a  pretty  Stone  Crofs  intire ;  round 

which 


Heref.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  341 

which  the  Cloifters  were  originally  built,  as  now  the 
Cloifters  of  the  Cathedral  inclofe  another  fuch.  Th« 
Croiles  were  in  the  Nature  of  a  Pulpifr,  whence  a 
Monk  preached  to  the  People  in  the  open  Air,  as  now 
praclifed  in  the  Cloifters  of  fome  Colleges  in  the  Uni- 
verfities  once  a  Year. 

The  neighbouring  Hill,  called  Brynmaur^  or  The 
great  /////,  makes  amends  for  the  Tediuufnefs  of 
climbing  it,  by  the  Pleafure  we  receive  from  its 
woody  Creft,  and  extenfive  ProfpetSh 

At  the  City  of  Hereford  we  could  not  but  inqwire 
into  the  Ttuth  of  the  Story  fo  famous,  that  the  late 
T3i(hop  Gibfon  has  mentioned  it  in  his  ContinudlJon 
of  Camdm^  of  the  removing  the  two  great  Scones 
near  Sutton;  which  the  People  confirmed  to  us.  Ths 
Story  is  thus : 

Between  Button  and  Hereford,  in  a  common  Mea- 
dow called  the  IVerglns^  were  placed  two  large  Stones 
fora  Water-mark;  one  ereded  upright,  and  the; 
other  laid  athwvt.  In  the  Civil  Wars,  about  the 
Year  1652.  they  removed  to  about  twelve-icore  Paces 
Diftance,  and  nobody  knew  how ;  which  gave  occa- 
fion  to  a  vulgar  Notion,  that  they  were  carried  thither 
by  the  Devil.  When  they  were  fet  in  their  Places 
again,  one  of  them  required  nine  Yoke  of  Oxen  to 
draw  it. 

Lidbury  lies  Eaftward  of  Herefor J,  near  the  South- 
End  of  the  Malvern  Hills.  It  is  a  fine  well-built 
Market- town,  innate  in  rich  clayey  Grounds,  and 
much  inhabited  by  Clothiers.  Here  is  an  Hofpital  for 
the  Poor,  well  endowed. 

Not  far  from  Lidbury ^  is  Colwal ;  near  which,  upon 
the  Wafte,  as  a  Countryman  was  digging  a  Ditch 
about  his  Cottage,  he  found  a  Crown  or  Coronet  of 
Gold,  with  Gems  fet  deep  in  it.  It  was  of  a  Size 
large  enough  to  be  drawn  over  the  Arm  with  the 
Sleeve.  The  Stones  of  it  are  faid  to  have  been  fo 
valuable,  as  to  be  fold  by  a  Jeweller  for  j  500  /. 

Q,  3  Hereford 


A  TOUR  thro  Heref. 

'  Hereford^  though  a  large  and  populous  City,  may 
yet  be  faid  to  be  old,  mean- built,  and  very  dirty, 
lying  low,  and  on  the  Bank  of  the  Wye^  which  fome- 
times  incommodes  them  very  much,  by  the  violent 
Freflies  that  come  down  from  the  Mountains  of 
Wales  \  for  all  the  Rivers  of  this  County,  except  the 
Dlffnn-Doe^  come  out- of  Wales. 

One  thing  remarkable  is,  that  the  College  ftill  re- 
tains  its  Foundation- laws,  and  the  Refidentiaries  are 
obliged  to  Celibacy ;  but  otherwife,  they  live  a  very 
happy,  eafy,  and  plentiful  Life;  being  furnifhed  upon 
oot  of  the  Foundation,  befides  their  Ecclefiattical 
Stipends. 

In  the  Beginning  of  the  Year  1738.  they  began  to 
pull  down  the  old  Gothic  Chapel  belonging  to  the 
Bifliop's  Palace  at  Hereford^  in  order  to  erecl:  a  Pile 
in  a  politer  Tafle,  for  the  public  Seivice.  The  de- 
moliihed  Chapel  was  faid  to  be  as  old  as  the  Norman 
Invafion. 

Between  Leominfter  and  this  City  is  another  Hamp- 
ton-Court;,  the  Seat  of  the  late  Earl  of  Coning/by* 
That  Lord  was,  from  an  Irijh  Peer,  made  an  Englijh 
one,  by  Kin*  George  I.  And  having  no  Son,  his 
Daughter  was  created  by  the  fame  Prince,  in  the 
Life-time  of  her  Father,  Baronefs  and  Vifcountef* 
Coningjbyi  of  Hampton-Court ,  in  order  that  her  De- 
fcendants  might  be  intitled  to  a  Peerage.  She  married 
Sir  Michael  Newton,  Bart,  and  a  Knight  of  the  Bath. 
This  is  a  fine  Seat,  built  by  Henry  Bolingbroke  Duke 
of  Lanuijhr^  afterwards  King  Henry  IV.  in  the  Form 
of  a  Caftle,  fituate  in  a  Valley  upon  a  rapid  River, 
under  Coverture  of  Brynmaur.  The  Gardens  are 
very  pleafant,  terminated  by  vaft  Woods  covering  all 
the  Hoping  Side  of  the  Hill.  There  is  a  plentiful  Sup- 
ply of  Water  on  all  Sides  of  the  Houfe,  for  Foun- 
tains, Bafins,  and  Canals.  Within,  are  excellent 
Pidures  of  the  Earl's  Anceftors  and  others,  by  Hollen^ 
Dobfony  Vandyke^  Sir  P.  Lely^  &c.  an  Original  of 

the 


Heref.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

the  Founder  King  Henry  IV.  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  the 
Duchefs  of  Port/mouth^  &c. 

The  Windows  of  the  Charjel  are  well  painted :  there1 
are  fome  Statues  of  the  Coningfbies. 

Here  are  two  new  Stone  Stair-cafes,  after  a  geo- 
metrical Method.  The  Record-room  is  on  the  Top 
of  a  Tower  arched  with  Stone,  paved  with  Roman 
Brick,  and  has  an  Iron  Door.  From  the  top  of  the 
Houfe  goes  a  Stair-cafe,  which,  they  fay,  has  a  fun - 
terraneous  Conveyance  into  Brynmaur  Wood. 

The  Park  is  very  fine,  eight  Miles  in  Circum- 
ference, and  contains  about  1200  Head  of  Deer, 
There  are  extenftve  Profpe£ts,  on  one  Side  reaching' 
into  Wtltjhlre^  on  the  other  over  the  Welth  Moun- 
tains; Lawns,  Groves,  Canals,  Hills,  and  Plains. 
There  is  a  Pool  three  Quarters  of  a  Mile  long,  very 
broad,  and  inclofcd  between  two  great  Woods.  The 
Dam  which  forms  it,  and  is  made  over  a  Valley, 
coft  8oo/.  and  was  finished  in  a  Fortnight  by  200 
Hands.  A  new  River  is  cut  quite  through  the  Park, 
the  Channel  of  which,  for  a  long  Way  together,  is 
hewn  out:  of  the  Rock.  This  ferves  to  enrich  vafl 
Tracls  of  LanJ,  which  before  were  barren.  Here 
alfo  are  new  Gardens  and  Canals  laid  out,  and  new 
Plantations  of  Timber  in  proper  Places. 

Warrens,  Decoys,  Sheep-walks,  Paftures  for  Cattle, 
&c.  fupply  the  Houfe  with  all  Sorts  of  Conveniencies 
and  Neceilaries,  without  having  recourfe  to  a  Market. 

Weft  ward  of  Hereford^  the  Golden  Vale  before - 
mentioned  extends  itfeJf  along  the  River  Dore,  which 
runs  through  the  Midfl  of  it,  and  is  called  by  the 
Britons  Duffrln  Dore :  it  is  called  the  Golden  Vale^ 
from  its  pleafant  Fertility  in  the  Spring,  when  it  is 
covered  over  with  a  yellow  Livery  of  Flowers.  It  is 
encompafled  with  Hills,  which  are  crowned  with 
Woods. 

From  Hereford^  upon  a  very  fine  Stone- caufeway 
of  near  a  Mile  long,  made  within  a  few  Years 

Q.4 


344  ^TOUR/&V         Mbnm. 

we  came  to  Rofs,  famous  for  Cyder,  a  great  Manu- 
facture of  Iron-ware,  and  its  Trade  on  the  River 
Wye.  It  is  a  fine  old  Town,  and  has  a  handfome 
Church  in  it. 

From  hence  we  came  at  about  eight  Miles  more 
into  Momnouth/bire^  formerly  a  IVelJh^  but  now  an 
Englifo  County,  and  to  the  Town  of  Monmcuth.  It 
is  a  Place  of  great  Antiquity,  and  is  fair,  large,  and 
well-built,  fituate  at  the  Conflux  of  the  IVye  and 
MunwM)  whence  the  Town  has  its  Name;  it  ftands 
in  the  Angle  where  the  Rivers  join,  and  has  a  Bridge 
over  each  River,  and  a  third  over  the  River  Trotby^ 
which  comes  in  juft  below  the  other. 

This  Town  returns  two  Reprefentatives  to  Parlia- 
ment i  it  {hews  Marks  of  great  Antiquity ;  and,  by 
the  Remains  of  Walls,  Lines,  Curtins,  and  Baftions, 
that  it  has  been  very  ftrong;  and,  by  its  Situation,  that 
it  may  be  made  fo  again.  It  is  a  Borough  town,  go- 
verned by  a  Mayor,  2  Bailiffs,  15  Common- council- 
men,  and  a  Town-Clerk.  It  has  a  very  confiderable 
Corn-market.  It  was  famed  for  the  Strength  of  the 
Cafile  in  the  Time  of  William  I.  and  is  the  Birth- 
place of  our  renowned  King  Henry  V.  Conqueror  of 
France  ;  and  likewife  of  one  of  our  antieat  Hiftorians, 
Jeoffry  of  Monmouth,  a  fabulous  Writer.  At  prefent 
it  io  not  very  fioijrifhing ;  yet  it  drives  a  confiderabls 
Trade  with  the  City  of  Erijhl^  by  the  Navigation  of 
th3  If  ye. 

This.  River,  having;  received  two  large  Streams, 
the  Mnnn^;  and  the  ?;•*%,  becomes  a  noble  River; 
and  with  a  oecp  Channel  and  a  full  Current,  hurries 
away  tow.rJs  the  Sea,  curbing  alfo  Veflels  of  a  con- 
ftder-'.  :n  hereabouts. 

Near  tllonmwth,  the  Duke  of  Beaufort  has  a  fine 
Seat,  called  Troy  houfi. 

Lower  down  upon  the  Wye^  in  this  Shire,  ftands 
i)  the  Sea- port  for  all  the  Towns  feated  on 

this 


Monm.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  345 

this  River,  and  the  Lug,  and  where  their  Commerce 
feems  to  center.  Hither  Ships  of  good  Burden  may 
come  up,  and  the  Tide  runs  with  the  fame  impetuous 
Current  as  at  Briftol j  the  Flood  riling  ordinarily  from 
fix  Fathom  to  fix  and  an  half  at  Cbepjiow  Bridge, 
which  is  a  very  noble  one,  though  buiit  of  Timber, 
and  no  lefs  than  70  Feet  high  from  the  Surface  of  the 
Water,  when  the  Tide  is  out.  And  that  this  was  not 
a  needlefs  Height,  was  evident,  in  "January  1738. 
when  the  Water  rofe  at  the  Bri  !ge  upwards  of  70 
Feet,  and  very  much  damaged  it :  One  Man  loft 
above  130  Head  of  Cattle,  which,  with  other  Da- 
mages it  diJ  there,  and  in  the  adjacent  Places,  were 
computed  at  7  or  8000 /.  Ckepftowhzs  a  weTl  fre- 
quented Market,  efpecially  for  Corn.  The  Bridge, 
as  half  of  it  is  in  Gloucc/hrflAre^  is  maintained  at  the 
Expfnce  of  both  Coun'ijs. 

The  Inhabitants  of  Cb  pficiy->  being,  remarkably 
active  and  induftrious,  draw  to  themfelves  a  large 
Share  of  Trade  from  the  neighbouring  Counties, 
which  abound  in.  Corn  and  Provifions,  and  have  a 
great  Intercourfe,  by  the  Diiiribution  and  Exportation, 
of  what  they  thus  receive,  with  Gloucefter  and 
BriftoL 

Two  Miles  from  this  Town  is  the  famous  Pa;" 
over  the  Severn*  on  this  ^ide  called  Bcacb'ty,  an.!  on 
the  other  //«/?,  as  I   have   mentioned  before.     Here 
•Offa's  Dyke  oegins,  and,  palling  through  Radnor flnre> 
extends  itu.it  up  to  7  and  fo  to  the  River  Deey 

which  parts  T/Palcs  from  Chffmre. 

We  turned  Northwards,    and   arrived  ar 
vcnny,  a  laige,  weil-bui'u,  and  well- inhabited  M 
town,  (hunted  at  the  Mouth  of  th,  .,  running 

It   carries  on  a  o  Trade  in 

Flannels,  which   the  Countr  .re"  at 

Home,  and  bring   hither  to  fell.      It   K  '  ho- 

fare  from  the  Wellcrn  Parts  of  Wala 
and  B*ih  by  Cbeftft&W}  and  to  Glwy'hr  by  , 

Q.  5  aai 


346  A  TOUR  tbr<f         Wales. 

and  fo  crofling  the  River  through  Col  ford,  and  the 
Foreft  of  Dean. 

The  Fuel  in  this  County  is  Pit-coal,  and  is  very 
cheap,  infomuch  that  they  fell  an  Horfe-load  for  two- 
pence, at  the  Pit-mouth ;  and  'tis  common  in  the 
meaneft  Cot  to  fee  a  good  Fire. 

Great  Quantities  of  Corn  are  exported  out  of  this 
County  ;  and  'tis  frequent,  that  the  Brijlol  Merchants 
fend  their  Ships  hither  to  load  for  Portugal^  and  other 
foreign  Countries.  And  indeed  it  is  noted  for  pro- 
ducing as  good  Wheat  and  other  Grain,  as  any 
County  in  the  Kingdom  ;  and  yet  it  is  very  fui  prizing, 
that  Lands  here  never  fell  for  more  than  20  or  2r 
Years  Purchafe.  The  current  Language  of  the  County 
is  Weljh  among  the  Vulgar  j  but  the  Gentlemen  fpeak 
Mngltjb  generally. 

As  I  am  now  juft  upon  entering  Wales,  I  will  con* 
elude  this  Letter  with  afluring  you,  that  I  am,  Sir, 

Tours,  &c, 


LETTER     VI. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  greateft  Part  of 
the  Principality  of  WALES. 

SIR, 

1  Thought  I  fhould  not  pay  the  Principality  the  Rev 
fpe&  it  fo  well  deferves,  if  I  did  not  begin  a  Letter 
with  the  Defcription  of  it ;  it  being  the  Country  of 
that  biave  People  who  had  an  original  Right  to  the 
whole  Ifland,  and  made  fo  noble  a  Stand  in  Defence 
of  their  Liberties  and  Independency  -}  and,  at  laft, 

rather* 


Wales.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  347 

rather  than  fubmit  to  a  foreign  Yoke,  chofe  to  be  free 
in  this  remote  and  almoft  inacceffible  Patt  of  it. 

But  here  let  me  premife,  that  Wales  is  reprefented 
in  'the  Briti/h  Parliament  by  24  Members.  The 
Counties  and  Towns  which  return  them  will  be  par- 
ticularized in  the  general  Lift,-  which  I  fhall  prefent" 
you  with  at  the  End  of  my  Tour  through  this  Southern 
Part  of  the  Ifland  (a). 

The  two  firft  Counties  wh:ch  border  Wefl  upon 
M<.nmQuth]hire,  are  Brecknock  and  Glamorgan,  and 
are  very  mountainous  on  the  Eaft-fide,  which  gives  a 
Traveller  a  terrible  Apprehenfion  of  the  Country  he 
is  this  Way  entering  into,  and  an  Expectation  of 
meeting  with  nothing  that  is  agreeable  5  but  he  is  not 
long  before  he  is  undeceived,  and  finds  the  Reward 
of  his  Trouble.  In  that  Part  of  jMonmouthJhire 
\vhwrh  joins  the  two  Counties,  begins  the  Rifmg  of 
the  Hills,  Kyrton- Beacon,  TumberUiv*  Blorcmb^  Pen- 
vailt  and  Skirrid.in,  are  fome  of  the  Names  of  thefe 
horrid 'Mountains,  and  are  all  in  this  Shire ;  and  I , 
could  not  but  fancy  myfelf  in  View  of  Mount  Brennus^  , 
Little  Barnard,  and  Great  Barnard,  among  the  d/ps. 

We  now  entered  Sonth-Wahs\  which  contains  the  • 
Shires  of  Glamirvan,  Breckho(k3J^adnor^Caermart 
Pembroke,  and  Cardigan. 

Brecknockjbire  is  a  mere  'nland  County,  as  Ra (bur- 
is ;  the  Englljh  jeftingly  (and  I  think  not  very  im- 
properly) call  it  Break  neck •  /hire :  'tis  mountainous  to  • 
an  Extremity,  except  on  the  Side  of  Radnor,  where  it 
is  fomething  more  low  and  level,  It  is  well  watered 
by  tne  Wye  and  the  Ufk.  U;>'>n  th?  latte.-  itands  the 
Town  of  Brecknock,  the  Capital  of  ihe  County,  well- 
built,  and  theAilizes  are  kept  in  it.  It  is  very  antient; 
and,  indeed,  to  mention  it  here  once  for  all,  there 
sue  more  Tokens  oi  Antiquity  to  be  Teen  every- where  = 

(a)  Ste  at  tl'-e  Ctnclujion  of  Vol.  Ill, 


S4g  A  T  O  U  R  tiro'         Wales. 

in  iVales,  than  in  any  Part  whatever  of  England^  ex- 
cept the  Counties  of  Cumberland  and  Northumberland. 
Here  we  faw  Brecknock-mere,  a  large  or  long  Lake  of 
Water,  two  or  three  Miles  over  :  of  which  they  have 
a  great  many  Fables  not  worth  relating :  the  beft  of 
them  is,  that  a  certain  River,  called  Lhew.ni^  runs 
through  it,  and  keeps  its  Colour  in  Mid  channel,  dif- 
tinguiihed  from  the  Water  of  the  Lake  ;  and,  as  they 
fay,  never  mingles  with  it-  They  take  abundance 
of  good  Fifli  in  this  Lake  ;  fo  that,  like  the  River 
Tbeljl  in  Hungary,  they  fay,  it  is  two-thirds  Water 
and  one  third  Fifh.  The  Country- people  affirm,  that 
once  a  City  ftootl  here ;  but  that,  by  the  Judgment 
of  Heaven  for  the  Sins  of  its  Inhabitants,  it  fu:«kinto_ 
the  Earth,  and  the  Water  rofe  up  in  the  Place  of  it. 
I  obferve  the  fame  Story  is  mentioned  by  Mr.  Canulcn^ 
with  fome  Difference  in  the  Particulars  :  I  believe  my 
Share  of  it ;  but  'tis  remarkable,  that  Mr.  Camden^ 
having  loft  the  old  City  Loventium^  mentioned  by 
Ptolemy  to  be  hereabouts,  is  willing  to  account  for  it 
by  this  odd  Story. 

It  was  among  the  Mountains  of  this  County  that 
the  famous  Glen  dower  fheltpred  himfelf ;  and,  taking 
Arms  on  the  depofing  of  Richard  II.  proclaimed  him- 
felf Prince  of  Wales :  they  (hew  us  fevtral  little  Re- 
fuges of  his  in  the  Mountains,  whither  he  retreated  j 
and  from  when  e,  again,  he  made  fuch  bold  Excur- 
fions  into  England^  as  to  have  put  Henry  IV.  to  very 
great  i  Mfficulties. 

1  There  has  been  lately  a  Society  hftituted  in  Breck- 
mchjblr^  for  Purpofes  fo  rational  in  themfclves,  fo 
laudable,  becaufe  fopublic-fpirited,  in  their  Intention, 
that  I  cannot  eafily  find  Words  to  tettify  the  Satif- 
faclion  their  Eftabliftiment  has  given  me  (fays  an  in- 

fenious  Author),  as. I  make  not  any  Dc-ubt  of  their 
uccefs,  or,  inconfequence  of  that,  of  oner  Societies 
«  rifing  gradually  up,  in  all  the  different  Counties 
«  with  like  Views.  It  is  formed  on  a  Plan,  that  at  on:e 

preferves 


Wales.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  349 

*  preferves  Equality,  and   excites  Emulation  amongit 

<  its  Members :  all  of  whom  prefide  in  their  Turns, 

*  and  contribute  to  the  Expence  employed  in  the  Ad- 

<  vancement  of  the  general  Intereft.     Their  Views 

*  are,  to  encourage  Agriculture  in  all  its  Branches; 
4  to  introduce  the  Linen  and  extend  the  Woollen 

<  Manufacture  ;  amend  Roads,  and  make  new  ones : 
«  and,  in  a  Word,  to  cherifh  and  fupportlnduHry  of 
'  every  kind.     If  we  confider  this  in  one  Light  (pro- 

*  ceeds  the  Author)  it  is  not  only  a  well  judged,  but 
«  a  moft  extenfive  Charity,    reaching  not-  fun  ply  to 

<  the  prefent  Generation,  but  to  lateft  Pofterity :  if 

*  viewed  in  another,  it  is  a  moft  perfecl  Academy, 

*  where,  by  a  Communication  of  their  feparate  Lights, 

*  the  whole  Body  gradually  acquires   a  Treafure  of 

*  folid  and  practical  Science.     At  the  fame  time  it 

*  may,  and  indeed  it  ought  to  be  regarded  as  an  ad- 

*  mirahle  Improvement  of  general  Policy,  calculated 

*  to  advance  the  Welfare  of  the  Community.     Look 
4  upon  it   any  way,  confider  it  in"  what  Light  you 

*  will,  on  the  firlt  Appearance,  and  clofeil  Intp,;6tion, 
«  it  isftill  prudent,  ufeful,  and  amiable.     It  holds  out 

*  Encouragement  and  ! 'retention  to  the  Poor;  it  re- 

*  wards  Affit-uity  and  Application  in   the  Active ;  it 

*  vifioly  promotes  the  Increafe  and  Extenfion  of  Pro- 

*  perty  by  the   fureft  Means;  it  provides   for  the  In- 

*  ftruclfion  even  of  the  moft  Learned,  by  bringing  every 
4  profitable  Propofal  to  the  Teft  of  Experiment,  which 

*  can  alone  fe>  ure  Certainty;   and    it   guards  fuch*as 
4  are  lefs  knowing  from  injuring  themfelves  by  im- 

*  proper  Puffuit^,  thro'  the  Fiemiums  they  give  upon 

*  fuch  Metho  s  of  improving  as  they  know  may  be 
«  earned  on  to  Profit.' 

Though  Breckwckjbtre  be  fo  mountainous,  Provi- 
fions  are  exceeding  plentiful,  and  alfo  very  good,  all 
over  the  County  ;  nor  are  thefe  Mountains  ufelefs, 
even  to  the  City  of  London^  as  J  i>ave  noted  of  «<ther 
Couuties;  for  from  hence  they  fend  yearly  ^reat 

Herds 


^  TOUR  thro         Wales. 

Herds  of  Black  Cattle  to  England,  and   which  are 
known  to  fill  our  Fairs  and  Markets,  even  that  of 


The  yellow  Mountains  of  Radfiorjbire  are  the  fame, 
and  their  Prod  u&  of  Cattle  is  the  fame  ;  nor  did  I 
meet  with  any  thing  worth  noticing,  except  Monu- 
ments of  Antiquity.  The  Stories  of  f'ortigern,  and 
Roger  of  Mortimer,  are  in  every  old  Woman's  Mouth 
here.  Here  is  a  great  Cataradi  or  Waterfall  of  the 
River  Wye*  at  a  Place  called  Rahjadr-  Gwy  in  Welch  ^ 
which  fignifies  the  Cataract  or  Water-fall  of  the  Wye  ; 
but  we  did  not  go  to  fee  it,  by  reafon  there  was  a  great 
Flood  out  at  that  time,  which  made  the  way  danger- 
ous. There  teemed  to  us  a  kind  of  Defart  too,  on 
that  Side,  which  is  fcarce  pafiable  by  Strangers  ;  fd 
we  made  it  our  Norrh  Boundary  for  this  Part  of  our 
Journey. 

We  ihall  only  add',  That  Radnor  is  the  Shire  town, 
and  hath  a  Caftle  ;  that  Preftelgne  in  Radnor  fhii*e  is 
a  well-built  Town,  and  the  Ailizes  are  held  there, 


Entering  Glamor  ganjhire.  from   "Radnor  and 

)  we  beheld  filonuchdenny-  hill  on  our  Left,  and  the 
Black  Mountains  on  the  Right,  and  all.  a  Ridge  of 
horrid  Rocks  and  Precipices  between,  over  which,  if 
we  had  not  had  good  Guides,  we  fhould  never  have 
found  our  Way;  and  indeed  we  began  to  repent  our 
Guriofity,  in  going  out  of  the  common  Road,  as  not 
having  met  with  any  thing  vyonh  the  Trouble;  and 
the  Country  h;  ki  .  'o  lull  of  Honor,  we  thought  to 
have  given  over  th<r  Er.uerpr.:ze,  and  have  left  Wale* 
out  of  our  Circu  t  u  rr-T  a  Day  and  a  Night  en- 
gaging tlius  with  \<  cits  and  Mountains,  ov:r  Guide 
br  u-nt  MS  down  nto  a  nmff  agreeable  Vale,  opening 
to  the  S  trh,  and  a  pleafant  River  running  through 
it,  called  trie  ^  aaffe  \  and  following  its  Coun'c,  we 
cam?  to  a  .famous  .Spring  of  warm  Water, 


Wales.      GREAT  BRITAIN. 


?,  and  rifing  up  in  a  dry  Shole  under  the 
Northern  Bank  of  the  River.  Four  Miles  further  w& 
nafled  through  the  antient  City  of  Laridaff\  and  in 
the  Evening  arrived  at  Cardiff,  a  IVelJh  Mile  be- 
yond it. 

Landaffin  Glamor ganfmre  is  the  Seat  of  the  Epifco* 
pal  See,  and  a  City  ;  but  fo  frnaii,  that  it  has  not  a 
Market ;  but  Caerdiff,  which  is  lower  on  the  River, 
is  the  Port  and  Town  of  Trade  ;  and  has  a  very  good 
Harbour  opening  into  the  Severn  Sea. 

The  Cathedral  is  a  neat  Building,  but  very  antient. 
They  boaft  that  this  Church  was  an  Houfe  of  religious 
Worfhip  many  Years  before  any  other  was  founded 
in  the  Ifland ;  and  that  the  Chriftian  Religion  flourifhed 
in  its  primitive  Purity,  from  the  Year  186.  till  the 
Pelagian  Herefy  overfpread  this  Country  ;  which  being.' 
afterwards  rooted  out,  they  placed  St.  Dobr ictus,  a$ 
the  firft  Bifliop,  in  this  Town  of  Landaff^  then  called  • 
Launton,  The  Bifhop  of  Landaff  haid  formerly  the' 
Title  of  Archbifhop :  the  three  firit  Bifliops  were  after*- 
wards  fainted  for  their  eminent  Holinefs  of  Life,  and  I 
the  Miracles  they  are  faid  to  have  wrought.  'Tis  ob- 
iervable  the  Cathedral  was  antiently  but  20  Feet  long 
and*  I  o  broad,  and  had  neither  Steeple  nor  Beils ;  nor 
had  they  any  other  Cathedral  from  the  Year  386.  to  the 
Year  1107.  when  Bifhop  Urban  built  the  prefent 
Church,  with  fome  Houfes  for  the  Clergy  adjoining, 
in  the  Nature  of  a  Cloifter. 

.Though  the  Church  is  antient,  yet  the  Building  is 
good,  and  the  Choir  neat,  and  pretty  well  kept. 

The  South  Part  of  Glamorganshire  is  pleafant,  agree- 
able, and  very  populous,  infomuch  that  it  is  calle.d 
The  Garden  of  Wales.  Its  Soil  is  fertile  and  rich, 
and  the  low  Grounds  are  fo  well  covered  with  Grafs, 
and  (locked  with  Cattle,  that  they  fupply  the  City  of 
Briftol  with  Butter  in  great  Quantities,  faked  and  bar- 
reled up,  juft  as  Suffolk  does  the  City  of  London, 

Catrphyll 


y?  TOUR  AW          Wales. 

. Cable  in  Glamorgan/hire  is  one  of  the 
nobleft  Pieces  of  Ruins  in  the  whole  Ifland.  It  was 
Jarger  than  any  Caftle  in  England^  that  of  IVindfor  ex- 
cepted  j  and,  from  what  remains  of  it,  was  as  beautiful 
in  its  Architecture,  as  it  is  remarkable  in  its  Ruins ; 
among  which  a  round  Tower,  fplit  in  the  MiddJe, 
and  one  half  fallen  quite  down,  the  other  Half  leaning 
fo  as  to  over-hang  its  Bafis  more  than  nine  Feet,  is  as 
great  a  Curiofity  as  the  celebrated  leaning  Tower  of 
Pifa  in  Italy. 

Neatb  is  a  Port  where  the  Coal-trade  is  pretty  con- 
fiderable,  though  it  (lands  up  within  Land. 

Swanzy  is  alfo  a  Sea  port,  and  a  very  coniiderable 
Town  for  Trade,  with  a  very  good  Harbour.  Here 
is  alfo  a  great  Trade  for  Coals  and  Culm,  whi.h 
they  export  to  all  the  Towns  of  Somerfet^  Devon>  and 
Cornwall)  and  even  to  Ireland \  fo  that  fo;ne  times  may 
be  feen  an  hundred  Sail  of  Ships  at  a  time  loading 
Coals  here;  which  greatly  enriches  the  County,  and 
particularly  this  Town:  it  ilands  on  the  River  Twye, 
or  Taw.  It  is  a  Member  of  the  Port  of  Caerdiff^  and 
has  fome  Creeks  belonging  to  it.  'Tis  very  remark- 
able, that  moft  of  the  Rivers  in  this  Country  chime 
upon  the  Letters  T  and  1~,  as  Taaf,  Tawy^  Tuy,  Towy, 

fm 

There  are  lately  mineral  Waters  found  out  at 
Swanzy,  which  are  reported  to  be  of  great  Efficacy 
in  Fluxes  and  Haemorrhages  of  all  Sorts.  Confump- 
tions,  if  not  too  far  gone,  Diabetes,  Palfies,  R 
matifms,  Drepfies,  and  other  Dlftempers,  are  laid  to 
fall  before  tnefe  Styptic  and  ReftoratiVje  Waters.  Tiiey 
may  certain'}1  have  very  good  Effedts  in  many  difficult 
Cafes  ;  but  it  is  Joinsf  an  Injury  to  the  Reputation  of 
any  Medicine  in  the  World,  to  make  it  a  Catbolicon3 
and  good  for  evciy  ll 

Kynfis-CaJiie  is  now  ihe  Seat  and  Eftate  of  the  Lord 

Adatt/th  vvho  lias  here  aK>  a  very  noble  Income  from 

the  Collieries ;  which  formerly  denominated  S;r  Ed- 

4  ward 


Wales.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  35-5 

ward  Manfel^  one  of  the  richefl  Commoners  in  Wales. 
The  Family  was  ennobled  by  her  late  Majefty  Queen 
Anne. 

In  this  Neighbourhood,  near  Margan  Mynydd^  we 
faw  the  famous  Monument  mentioned  by  Mr.  Comdex* 
on  an  Hill,  with  the  Infcription,  which  the  Vulgar 
are  To  terrified  at,  that  nobody  cares  to  read  it ;  tor 
they  have  a  Tradition  from  Father  to  Son,  that  who- 
ever ventures  to  read  it  will  die  within  a  Month.  We 
did  notfcruple  the  Adventure;  but  when  we  came  to 
try,  the  Letters  were  fo  defaced  by  Time,  that  we 
were  effectually  fecured  from  the  Danger;  the  Infcrip- 
tion not  being  any  thing  near  fo  legible,  as  it  feems  it 
was  in  Mr.  Camden's  Time. 

The  Stone  Piilar  is  about  four  or  five  Feet  high,  and 
one  Foot  thick,  {landing  on  the  Top  of  this  Hill : 
there  are  feveral  other  fuch  Monuments  in  Radnorjhire, 
and  other  Counties  in  Waks>  as  likewife  in  Scotland. 

Having  thus  touched  on  what  is  moft  curious  on  this 
Coaft,  we  patted  through  the  Land  oi  Gciure^  and 
going  ftill  Weil,  we  came  to  Caermartben,  or  Kaer- 
Fyrdkin,  as  the  Welch  call  it,  the  Capital  of  the  County 
of  Raermardbin. 

This  is  an  antient  and  a  very  handfome  Town,  plea- 
fantly  fituated  on  the  River  T.o-wy^  which  is  navigable 
up  to  the  Town,  for  VuTels  of  a  moderate  Burden, 
and  over  which  is  a  lar^e  Bridge.  It  is  juftly  efteemed 
the  politeft  i  lace  in  South-Wales,  and  is  at  the  fame 
time  celebrated  for  In d miry  and  Attention  to  Trade. 
The  Town  is  well-built  and  populous  ;  it  is  lately 
much  increafeJ,  and  ftill  increasing  ;  and  the  Country 
round  it  is  the  moft  fruitful  of  any  Part  of  Wales ^  and 
continues  to  be  fo  through  all  the  Middle  of  the  County, 
and  a  great  way  into  trie  next  ;  nor  is  this  County  fo 
mountainous  and  wild  as  the  reft  of  this  Part  of  Wales: 
but  it  abounds  in  Corn,  and  in  fine  flourilhing  Mea- 
dows, 


3  54  -A  T  O  U  R  thrf         Wales. 

dows,  as  good  as  moft  in  Britain ;  and  in  which  are 
fed  a  very  great  Number  of  good  Cattle. 

The  Chancery  and  Exchequer,  for  the  South  Part 
of  the  Principality,  were  ufually  kept  at  this  Town, 
till  the  Jurifdiclion  of  the  Court  ani  Marches  of 
Wales  w<*s  taken  away.  This  Town  was  alfo  famous 
for  the  Birth  of  tiie  old  Brltijh  Prophet,  Merlin^  of 
whom  fo  many  things  are  fabled,  and  who  flourifhed 
in  the  Year  480-.  and  here  alfo  the  old  Britons  often 
kept  th.eir  Parliaments,  or  Aflemblies  of  their  wife 
Men,  and  made  their  Laws.  The  Town  was  forti- 
fied in  former  Times,  but  the  Walls  are  not  to  be  feen 
now,  and  fcarcely  the  Ruins  of  them. 

We  are  affured  by  Speed,  that,  in  the  County  of 
Gaermartben,  there  are  no  lefs  than  28  Rivers  and 
Rivulets  worthy  of  Notice. 

Here  we  favv,  near  Klly  Maen  Lkuyd,  on  a  great 
Mountain,  a  Circle  of  mighty  Stones,  very  much  like 
Stone  benge  in  Wiltshire,  or  rather  like  the  RoUricb 
Stones  in  Oxford/hire-*  and  though  the  People  call  it 
Bruarth  Arthur,  or  King  Arthur's  Throne,  we  fee  no 
Reafon  to  believe  that  it  had  any  Relation  to  him. 

The  next  County,  Weft,  is  Pembroke/hire,  the- 
mod  extreme  Part  of  Wales  on  this  Side.  It  is  a  rich, 
fertile,  and  plentiful  Country,  lying  on  the  Sea-coaft, 
where  it  has  the  Benefit  of  Mil  ford -Haven,  one  of 
the  greateft  and  beft  Ports  of  Britain.  Mr.  Camden 
fays,  it  contains  16  Creeks,  5  great  Bays,  and  I3> 
good  Roads,  for  Shipping,  all  diibnguifhed  as  fuch  by 
their  Names. 

This  Place  is  alfo  made  particularly  famous  for  the 
Landing  of  the  Earl  of  Richmond,  afterwards  King; 
Henry  VII. 

The  County  of  Pembroke  abounds,  particularly,  in 
that  Sort  of  Coal"  called  Stone-Coal^  the  fmall  Pieces 
©f  which  are  ftiled  Culm,  which  is  very  uferul  \n  dry- 
Ifig .Malt,  and  is  the  cheapeft  and  beft  Firing  in  the 

World 


Wales.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  35-5* 

World  for  Hot-houfes  and  Garden-ftoves,  burning 
long  with  a  bright  red  Colour,  and  very  little  Flame 
orSmoak;  affording,  at  the  fame  time,  a  ftrong  and 
equal  Heat. 

There  is  alfo,  near  Newport,  a  good  Quantity  of 
Slate. 

In  the  Sea-cliffs  about  Mi  If  or  d-  Ha  ven  appear  Veins 
of  Copper  Ore,  of  grey  and  purple,  which  are  com- 
monly very  rich,  and  alfo  of  the  yellow  or  ful- 
pliuieous  Kind.  Lime-ftone  is  in  fuch  Plenty,  that 
the  Inhabitants  ufe  great  Quantities  of  it  in  the  Im- 
provement of  their  arable  Land,  which  produces 
Wheat,  Barley,  Oats,  and  Rye,  fo  that  they  export 
about  25  Quarters  yearly,  and  pofiibly  as  many  Chal- 
drons of  Coals. 

At  Mi  if  or  d- Haven  there  are  excellent  Oyfters, 
which  are  exported  to  Holland  and  o'ther  Places, 

Before  we  quitted  the  Coafr,  we  favv  Tienbtgb,  the 
moft  agreeable  Town  on  all  the  Sea-coaft  of  South - 
Wales,  except  Pembroke ;  being  a  very  good  Road  for 
Shipping,  and  well  frequented.  It  is  feated  on  a 
Promontory,  which  extends  into  what  is  commonly 
called  the  Severn-Sea^  and  was  formerly  (lengthened 
with  a  Caftle  belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  \  from 
whence  Earl  Jfifper^  and  his  Nephew  Henry  Eart  of 
Richmond,  afterwards  Henry  VII.  made  their  Efcape 
beyond  the  Seas,  in  the  Reign  of  Edivard  IV.  with 
fome  Difficulty.  It  was  then,  and  continued  for  many 
Years  after,  a  very  confiderable  Place;  having  a  good 
Harbour,  defended  by  a  Pier,  and  a  large  Share  of 
foreign  Commerce.  It  was  indebted  for  its  Rife  to  its 
Fiihery,  which  was  exceedingly  beneficial ;  and  is  from 
thence  flyled,  in  the  old  Britijh  Language,  Dimbifo  y 
Pifgod,  which  implies  as  much.  As  the  People  grew 
wealthy,  they  came  to  contemn  this  laborious  and 
dangerous  Occupation ;  fo  that,  in  che  laft  Century, 
the  Place  on  which  they  caught  great  Quantities  of 
Cod,  Hake,  Ling,  Conger,  and  Bream,  was  no 

loogec 


A  T  O  U  R  thro          Wales. 

longer  known;  the  Name  of  it  only,  viz.  Wills* 
Mar  fa  being  preferved  by  Tradition.  The  Port  is 
but  fmall;  the  Road,  which  bears  the  Name  of  the 
Town,  is  good  ;  but  if  a  proper  Sea-mark  was  placed 
on  Jfaolhoitfe- Rocks,  which  are  covered  at  high  Water, 
the  Road  between  the  main  Land  and  the  Ille  of 
Cattey,  called  by  the  Natives,  Tnis  Pyr,  i.  e.  Pyrrhus's 
I/land,  might  be  equally  fafe  and  commodious  for 
Men  of  War.  Some  Thoufand  Chaldrons  of  Coals 
and  Culm  are  annually  fhipped  from  hence.  On  the 
Shore  there  are  very  large  Quantities  of  Iron-ftone, 
and  Plenty  of  black.  Marble;  of  which  StackpociHoufey 
or  Stackpsol  Court,  the  Seat  of  John  Campbel,  of  Col- 
der* is  entirely  built. 

From  Tenbigh  the  Land,  bearing  far  into  the  Sea, 
makes  a  Promontory,  called  St.  Coven's  Head,  or 
Point.  But  as  we  found  nothing  of  Moment  there, 
we  eroded  over  the  Mhmus  to  Pembroke,  which  fhuids 
on  the  Eaft  Shore  of  the  great  Haven  of  Mi  if  or  cL 

This  is  the  largeft  and  ncheft,  and  at  this  Time  the 
moft  flourifhing  Town  of  South  Wales,  except  Caer- 
martben.  Here  are  a  great  many  Gentlemen  and 
Merchants,  and  fome  of  the  latter  are  Men  of  good 
Bufmefs;  and  they  told  us  there  were  near  200 
Sail  of  Ships  belonging  to  the  Town,  fmall  and  great. 
Pembroke,  the  County-town,  is  well  built,  has  two 
Parishes,  and  two  fine  Bridges  over  the  River  Creek. 
It  has  a  Cuftom  houfe  and  proper  Officers.  It  is  go- 
verned by  a  Mayor  and  Sub-officers ;  has  an  excellent 
weekly  Market  on  Saturdays.  It  was  formerly  a  Place 
of  Strength,  fortified  with  a  Wall,  which  had  three 
Gates  and  feveral  Towers,  and  with  a  Caftle  erected 
on  a  Rock;  which  are  all  now  gone  to  Decay. 

It  has  been  long  expected,  that  a  public  Dock 
would  be  eftabliihed  in  Mi', ford- Haven-,  and  in  the 
Year  1757.  a  Petition  of  feveral  Merchants  of  London 
was  prefented  to  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  fctting 
forth,  *  That  this  Harbour  is  a  fafe  and  commodious 

«  one 


Wales.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  375- 

*  one,    and   capable  of  receiving,  at  all  Times,  the 
whole  Royal  Navy  and  Trade  of  Great  Britain-, 
and  is  moil  conveniently  fituated  for  the  Refort  and 
Security  of  Merchant-fhips,  when  they  cannot  enter 
into  the  Engli/h  Channel,  and  for  the  fending  and 
relieving  of  Cruizers,    from  time  to   time,    upon 
proper  Stations  in  the  Ocean  ;  and  for  the  immediate 
repairing,  and  refitting  fuch  Cruizers,  in  cafe  of  Da- 
mage: That  Ships  may  proceed  from  the  faid  Har- 
bour into  the  Ocean,  arid  return  from  thence  with 
almoft  any  Wind,  by  taking  a  proper  Advantage  of 
the  ftrong  Currents,  and  in  a  great  deal  lefs  Time  • 
than  what  is   ufually   employed   in  failing  with  the 
moft  favourable  Wind  from  Portsmouth  to  theLand's- 
End\  That  the  faid  Harbour  may,  in  a  very  fhort 
Time,    at  a  moderate  Expence,  be  rendered   de- 
fenfible  Snd   fecure  againft   any  Attack  :    That  a 
Dock-yard    might  be    eftablifhed    there,    and   any 
Number  of  Ships,  and   of  any  Rate,  rebuilt,  ca- 
reened, repaired,  and  fitted  for  Sea,  with  the  greateft 
Convenience   and   Expedition ;    and  that  Plenty  ©f 
proper  Materials    for    the   Conftruclion   of   Ships 
abounds  in  the  adjacent  Counties.     And  therefore 
praying  the  Houfe  to  make  fuch  Provifion  relative 
thereto,  as  its  Nature  and  Importance  may  appear 
to  require.' 

This  Petition  was  referred  to  a  Committee ;  and, 
upon  the  Report,  an  Addrefs  was  refolved  to  his  Ma- 
jefty,  to  appoint  a  Survey  of  the  faid  Harbour.  It 
was  accordingly  furveyed  in  November  1757,  by  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Bajiide^  Director  of  Engineers. 

In  the  fucceeding  Seffion  of  Parliament,  the  Report, 
Plans,  and  Eftimates  for  fortifying  Milford-Haven^  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Bqftidey  were  referred  to  a  Com- 
mittee ;  and  the  Sum  of  their  Report  was,  '  That  it 
6  had  been  proved,  upon  the  fulleft  concurring  Evi- 

*  dence,  that  the  Entrance  into  the  Harbour  of  Mil- 
4  fsrd  is  attended  with  no  natural  Difadvantage  or  ex- 

'  traordinary 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  Wales, 

traordinary  Difficulty  ;  That  the  Mouth  of  the 
Harbour  is  incapable,  from  the  Width  and  Form 
of  it,  of  being  effectually  fortified  at  any  Expence  : 
That  the  River  of  Nailand  is  capable  of  being  fe- 
cured  againft  the  Paflage  of  any  Enemy  :  That  the 
Road  from  the  Mouth  of  the  Harbour  is  in  Diftance 
about  eight  Miles,  and  in  all  jefpecls  a  fafe  Road 
for  Ships  of  any  Size:  That  Ships  of  any  Size  may  fail 
from  the  Mouth  to  Nailand  in  one  Tide,  and  can 
get  from  thence  to  Sea  again,  with  any  Wind,  in 
another :  That  above  Nailand  there  is  a  fafe  lying 
for  the  Trade  and  whole  Navy  of  Great-Britain; 
Ships  having  there  from  eight  to  ten  Fathom  at  low 
Water,  and  a  full  Security  againft  every  Inconve- 
nience and  Danger :  That  the  fortifying  the  Paflage 
between  Nailand^  Patercburch,  and  Weft  Lanion 
Points,  would  be  nearly  as  great  an  Advantage  to 
the  Trade  and  Navy  of  Great  Britain,  as  the  for- 
tifying the  Mouth,  would  have  been :  That  if  it 
ftiould  be  thought  proper  hereafter  to  eftablifh  a  Yard 
and  Docks  for  the  building  and  equipping  Fleets  at 
Milford,  no  Place  can,  from  the  Nature,  Situation, 
Soil,  and  a  general  Concurrence  of  all  neceflary 
local  Circumltances,  be  more  fitted  for  fuch  a  De- 
fign, 

*  And  that,  if  a  proper  Ufe  were  at  length  made  of 
this  moft  valuable,  though  fo  long  neglected  Har- 
bour, the  diftrefsful  Delays  too  often  embarrafling 
and  difappointing  this  Nation  in  her  naval  Opera- 
tions, might  be  in  a  great  Meafure  happily  re- 
moved, to  the  infinite  Relief  and  Enlargement  of 
this  Kingdom  in  the  Means  of  improving  its  naval 
Force,  the  neceflary  Progrefs  and  free  Exertion  of 
which  is  now  fo  unhappily  and  fo  frequently  ic- 
itrained  and  fruftrated  by  the  want  of  a  Harbour, 
fituated  as  Milford  Haven  is,  and  framed  by  Na- 
ture with  the  fame  local  Advantages.' 

Upon 


Wales.      GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Upon  this  Report  io,ooo/.  was  granted  towards 
carrying  on  the  Works  for  fortifying  and  fecuring  the 
Harbour  of  Milford,  and  an  A6t  patted  for  that  Purpofe. 

But  we  are  forry  that  we  cannot  as  yet  congratulate 
the  Public  upon  the  Completion  of  this  great  national 


That  Part  ©f  the  County  lying  beyond  the  Haven, 
and  watered  by  two  Rivers,  is  inhabited  by  the  De- 
fcendents  of  thofe  Flemings,  who  were  permitted  to 
fettle  there  by  Henry  I.  when  the  Sea  had  overflowed 
their  native  Country.  The  Welch  call  it  Little  Eng- 
landbeyond  Wales ;  the  Inhabitants  moftly  fpeaking  the 
Englijh  Tongue. 

We  are  now  to  pafs  round  Milf or d- Haven,  in  or- 
der to  enter  St.  Bride's  Bay,  into  which  Ships  are  often 
forced  by  Strefs  of  Weather,  and  where  they  might 
meet  with  more  Safety,  if  fome  fmall  Sums  were  pro- 
perly laid  out,  in  perfecting  what  Nature  has  begun, 
and  profecuted  pretty  far  too,  in  feveral  Places.  A 
good  Pier,  carried  out  a  fufficient  Diftance  from  the 
Promontory  called  Burrow- Head,  would  make  Gold- 
ir>p  Road  very  fafe,  in  between  three  and  four  Fathom 
Water.  To  the  North  weft  lies  Sohacb-Bay,  which 
might  be  converted  into  an  excellent  Harbour  for  fmall 
VefTels,  though  now  dangerous,  hardly  known,  and 
of  little  Ufe.  The  placing  Sea-mat  ks  on  thofe  hitherto 
terrible  Rocks  the  Horfe  and  Horje/hoe,  would  make 
the  PaiTage  fafe  through  Ra?nfey- Sound  ;  and  polBbly 
all  thefe  Advantages  might  be  procured  for  lefs  than 
iooo/.  Thefe  would  not  only  prove  a  great  Benefit 
to  Navigation,  and  remove  the  Reproaches  caft  in  ge- 
neral on  this  Coaft,  but  be  likewife  very  ferviceable  to 
the  adjacent  Country,  where  Coal  Mines  adually  are, 
and  Lead  and  Copper  Mines  may  and  would  be 
wrought,  if  thefe  Harbours  were  in  betfer  Order;  to 
fay  nothing  of  what  might  probably  arife  from  taking 
i  Seals,  Porpoifes,  &c.  which  are  here  in  Abundance  ; 
and,  not  to  dwell  on  another  obvious  Topic,  that  this 

whole 
3 


36o  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Wales. 

whole  Bay  lies  in  the  Bofom  of  a  Country  which  has 
Plenty  of  Provifions,  and  where  the  People  are  natu- 
rally inclined  enough  to  Induftry,  if  Induftry  would 
produce  any  thing;  which  is  the  very  End  that,  by 
thefe  Emendations,  would  be  certainly  attained. 

Cridack- Roady  lying  to  the  Eaft  of  Cardigan  IJIand, 
is  tolerable  for  fmall  Veflels,  with  a  good  Outlet; 
which  is  the  Reafon  it  has  been  fometimes  frequented 
in  time  of  War  by  French  Privateers.  A  fmall  Pier 
at  Crtdach,  might  make  a  fafe  Port  for  Veflels  em- 
ployed in  the  Herring  Filhery.  The  Coaft  is  very  foul, 
and  confequently  dangerous,  along  the  Shore  of  Me- 
riomtbjbire,  as  high  as  Sarn  Badng^  or  Patrick's 
Caufeway^  which  is  a  Ledge  of  Rocks,  very  narrow 
and  fteep ;  and  being  many  Years  ill  laid  down  in 
the  Charts,  occafioned  many  Wrecks.  This  feems 
to  countenance  the  Tradition  of  the  Natives,  that  all 
this  Bay  was  formerly  Land,  and  was  denominated 
Cantreff  Gw aelod,  but  was  fwallowed  by  the  Sea  in 
the  Beginning  of  the  fixth  Century. 

About  two  Leagues  to  the  North-eaft  of  this  Ledge 
of  Rocks  commences  that  famous  Road,  held  inferior 
to  none  in  Britain,  called  St.  Tudwals^  from  an  Ifland 
on  which  are  the  Remains  of  an  old  Chapel,  dedicated 
to  that  Saint.  This  Road,  corruptly  called  Stulwflls9 
in  an  antient  Author  ftiled  the  fair  and  plea j ant  Stud- 
dais,  is  in  reality  a  very  extraordinary  and  commo- 
dious Place,  fo  extenlive  as  to  hold  any  Number  of 
Ships,  well  defended  by  the  high  Lands  of  Carnarvcn- 
Jhire  on  one  Side,  and  by  Tnys  Tudwall  and  a  fmaller 
Ifland  from  the  Sea  on  the  other ;  the  Water  deep, 
and  the  Outlet  eafy.  By  running  a  Pier  of  Stone 
from  Penrkyn  Du  Point  to  the  Northward,  a  good 
dry  Harbour  might  be  made  for  fmall  Vefiels ;  and 
thene  are  Veins  of  Lead  and  Copper  Ore  on  trje  adja-  |j 
cent  Coaft. 

Keiriad,  Merdaron,  and  Portborim  Roads,  lie  on 
the  adjacent  Coaft,  and  afford  nothing  remarkable. 

Porthdinlley*  P 


Wales.         GREAT  BRITAIN.         361 

Portbdinllyen  and  Ncvyn,  are  two  fmall  Ports  defend- 
ed by  Piers,  which  are  ufeful  for  covering  fuch  Veflels 
as  are  employed  in  the  Herring-rimery.  There  is  little 
room  to  doubt,  that  if  Commerce  once  flourifhed,  and 
the  Inhabitants  grew  wealthy,  it  would  be  found  vety 
practicable  to  help  the  Defeats  of  Nature  by  Art,  fo  as 
to  render  feveral  of  thefe  Havens  capable  of  receiving 
Ships  of  Burthen. 

Haver  ford -weft)  a  Borough -town  and  County  of 
itfelf,  is  commodioufly  fituated  on  the  Side  of  a  Hill,  on 
a  Creek  of  Milf or  d- haven,  over  which  it  has  a  grand 
Stone  Bridge.  It  is  ftrong,  well-built,  clean,  and 
populous,  contains  three  Parifh  churches,  and  the  Af- 
fizes  are  held,  and  Gaol  kept  there.  It  has  a  great 
Trade,  and  many  Veflels  are  employed  in  it.  The 
two  weekly  Markets,  held  on  Tuefday  and  Satura.-iy^ 
are  very  confiderable,  both  for  Cattle  and  Provisions. 
The  Government  is  by  a  Mayor,  Sheriff,  Common- 
council,  and  Juflices  of  the  Peace ;  it  enjoys  many 
Privileges  and  Immunities,  and  near  it  are  a  Number 
of  Gentlemen's  Seats,  which  contribute  to  the  Agree- 
ablenefs  of  its  Situation. 

From  Haverfordto  St.  David's,  the  Country  begins 
to  look  dry,  barren,  and  mountainous. 

St.  David's  is  now  a  Bi(hop?s  See  only,  but  was  for- 
merly an  Archbimop's,  which  was  transferred  to  Dole 
in  Britany,  where  it  ftill  remains. 

The  venerable  Afpecl:  of  this  Cathedral  Church 
jfliews,  that  it  has  been  a  beautiful  Building.  The 
Weft-end  or  Body  of  the  Church  is  tolerable;  the  Choir 
is  kept  neat ;  the  South  Aile  without  the  Choir,  and 
the  Virgin  Mary's,  Chapel,  which  makes  the  Eaft-end 
of  the  Church,  are  in  a  manner  demolished,  and  the 
Roofs  of  both  fallen  in. 

There   have  been  a   great  many  eminent  Perfons 

bury'd  here,  befides  fuch  whofe  Monuments  are  defaced 

by  Time.     Here  is  St.  David's  Monument,  to  whom 

the  Church  is  dedicated,  the  Monument  of  the  Earl  of 

R 


A  T  O  U  R  tiro          Wales. 

Richmond,  as  alfo  of  the  famous  Owen  "Tudor :  here  are 
alfo  four  antient  Monuments  of  Knights-Templars, 
known  by  their  Figures  lying  crofs- legged  ;  but  their 
Names  arc  not  known;  and  there  are  fix  feveral  Mo- 
numents ofBifhops,  whoprefided  over  this  Church,  be- 
fides  St.  David. 

This  Saint,  they  tell  us,  was  Uncle  to  Kingj/r//j«r; 
that  he  lived  to  14.6  Years  of  Age,  being  born  in  the 
Year  496.  and  died  642.  that  he  was  Bifhop  of  this 
Church  65  Years,  that  he  built  12  Monafteries,  and 
performed  abundance  of  Miracles. 

There  was  a  very  handfome  Houfe  for  the  Bifhop, 
'with  a  College,  all  built  in  a  Clofe  by  themfelves;  but 
they  are  now  in  Ruins. 

Here,  the  Weather  being  clear,  we  had  a  full  View 
of  Ireland*  though  at  a  very  great  Diflance.  The  Land 
here  is  called  St.  David's- Head. 

From  hence  we  turned  North,  keeping  the  Sea  in 
our  Weft  Profpect,  and  a  rugged  mountainous  Coun- 
try on  the  Eaft,  where  the  Hills  even  darkened  the  Air 
with  their  Height.  As  we  went  on,  we  pafled  by 
Newport^  on  the  River  Nevern9  a  Town  having  a 
good'Harbour,  arid  a  good  Trade  with  Ireland. 

Here  we  left  Pembrokeshire,  and  after  about  22  Miles 
came  to  Cardigan^  a  well-inhabited  Town,  on  the 
River  Tyvyy  over  which  it  has  a  fair  Stone  Bridge:  It 
is  a  noble  Paver,  and  famous  for  its  Plenty  of  the  beft 
and  largeft  Salmon  in  Britain. 

The  Country-people  told  us,  that  they  had  formerly 
Beavers  here,  which  bred  in  the  Lakes  among  the 
Mountains,  and,  coming  down  the  Stream  of  Tivy9 
cleftroyed  the  young  Fry  of  Salmon ;  and  therefore  the 
Country-people  deftroyed  them.  We  thought  they 
only  meant  the  Otter,  till  I  found  afterwards,  that  Mr. 
Camden  mentions  alfo,  that  there  had  been  Beavers 
feea  here  formerly. 

The 


Wales.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  363 

The  Town  of  Cardigan  was  once  poffe/Ted  by  the 
great  Robert  /'itz-  Stephen^  who  was  the  firft  Briton 
that  ever  attempted  the  Conqueft  of  Ireland  j  and  had 
fuch  Succefs,  with  an  Handful  of  Men,  as  afterwards 
gave  the  Englljh  a  Footing  there,  which  they  never 
quitted,  till  they  quite  reduced  the  Country,  and  made 
it,  as  it  were,  a  Province,to  England. 

The  Town  of  Cardigan  is  large,  populous,  has  a 
fair  Church,  and  is  wailed  about,  and  fortified  with  a 
Caflle ;  but  that  Part  is  now  not  much  minded.  It 
has  a  good  Trade  with  Ireland,  and  is  enriched  very 
much,  as  is  all  this  Part  of  the  Country,  by  the  famous 
Lead-Mines,  formerly  difcovered  by  Sir  Carbery  Price, 
which  are  the  greateft,  and  perhaps  the  richeft  in  Eng- 
land', and  particularly  as  they  require  fo  little  Labour 
and  Charge  to  tome  at  the  Ore,  which  in  many  Places 
lies  within  a  Fathom  or  two  of  the  Surface*,  and  in 
fome  even  bare  to  the  very  Top.  There  are  alfo  Sil- 
ver-Mines in  this  County. 

Going  North  from  the  Tyuy,  about  25  Miles,  we 
cfcrne  to  Aberyft-with*  that  is  to  fay,  the  Town  at  the 
Mouth  of  the  River  Yftwitb.  •  It  is  a  populous,  but  a 
dark,  fmoaky  Place  ;  and  we  fanfied  the  People  looked 
as  if  they  had  lived  continually  in  Coal  or  Lead- Mines. 
Pk>wever,  they  are  rich  ;  but  have  no  Coal-pits. 

The  County  of  Cardigan  is  in  no- wife  comparable 
to  either  of  thofe  Weljh  Counties  which  we  have  already 
palled  through,  there  being  a  great  deal  of  barren 
Land  in  it.  However,  it  is  fo  full  of  Cattie,  that  it  is 
faid  to  be  the  Nurfery,  or  Breeding  place,  for  the  whole 
Kingdom  of  England^  South  of  Trent :  but  this  is  not  .a 
Proof  of  its  Fertility  ;  for  though  the  Feeding  of  Cat- 
tle indeed  requires  a  rich  Soil,  the  Breeding  them  does 
not,  the  Mountains  and  Moors  being  as  proper  for  that 
Purpofe  as  richer  Land. 

Now  we  entered  North  Wales  j  only  I  fhould  add, 
.that,  as  we  pa/Ted,  we  had  a  Sight  of  the  famous  Plym- 
B.  2  lymon  Hill. 


364 


A  TOUR  thro  Wales. 


lymon-Hill,  out  of  the  Eaft- fide  of  which  rife  the  Severn 
and  the  Wye\  and  out  of  the  Weft- fide  of  it  the  Ryd- 
dal  and  the  Tjlwlth.  This  Mountain  is  exceeding 
high  :  but  Snoiuden  in  Catrnerven/hire  is  by  much  the 
higheft  in  Wales^  or  any  other  Part  of  Great  Britain; 
having  an  unbounded  Profpecl  over  the  JJle  of  Man 
into  Scotland  and  Ireland,  an:i  over  the  Welch  Moun- 
tains into  England.  This  Profpe£l  is  only  to  be  feen 
about  Simpelj  and  then  not  often;  many  having  fa- 
tigued themfelves  in  getting  to  the  top,  and  returned 
disappointed  by  the  Fogs  reading  below.  Nor  is  the 
Country,  for  twenty  Miles  round  it,  any  thing  but  a 
continued  Ridge  of  Mountains :  fo  that  for  a  few  Days 
we  feemed  to  be  converting  in  the  upper  Regions  ;  for 
we  were  often  above  the  Clouds  a  great  way;  and  the 
Names  of  fome  of  thefe  Hills  feemed  as  barbarous  to 
us  who  fpoke  no  Weljh,  as  the  Hills  themfelves.  ' 

Faffing  thefe  Mountains  North,  we  entered  Nortb- 
Wales^  which  contains  the  Counties  of  Montgomery, 
Merioneth,  Caernarvon^  Denbigh,  and  Flint  Shires, 
and  the  Ifle  of  Anglefea. 

In  paffing  Montgomery/Jure ,  we  were  fo  tired  with 
Hills  and  Mountains,  that  we  wifhed  heartily  we  had 
Jkept  clofe  to  the  Sea  fhore  ;  but  we  had  not  much 
mended  the  matter,  if  we  had,  as  I  underfiood  after- 
wards. The  River  Severn  is  the  principal  Beauty  of 
this  County,  which  rifing  out  of  the  Piyniymcn  Moun- 
tain, as  I  have  faid,  receives  in  afnort  Courfe  fo  many 
other  Rivers  into  its  Bofom,  that  it  becomes  navigable 
before  it  gets  out  of  the  County,  at  f lei/}}- Pool,  on  the 
Edge  of  Shropfoire. 

Montgomery  is  a  fafhionable  Place,  and  has  many  fair 
Dwellings  in  it,  and  fome  very  good  Families. 

The  Vales  and  Meadows  upon  the  Banks  of  the  Se- 
vern are  exceedingly  ornamental  and  profitable;  and  it 
is  faid,  that  the  Water  of  the  Severn^  like  that  of  the 
AV/V,  when  it  overflows,  impregnates  the  Valleys  by 
the  Slime  it  leaves  behind  it :  all  the  Country  is  very 

fruitful, 


Wales.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  365* 

fruitful,  where  ever  this  River  runs.  The  Town  of 
Montgomery  lies  not  far  from  this  River,  on  the  outer 
Edge  of  the  County,  next  to  Herefordjhire.  This  was, 
it  feems,  a  great  Frontier  Town  in  the  Wars  between 
the  Engtijh  and  Weljh^  and  was  beautified  and  fortified 
by  King  Henry  III.  but  it  is  not  now  fo  very  confider- 
able,  though  a  good  Town  ftill,  pleafantly  fituated, 
and  has  aCaflle. 

This  County  has  been  long  noted  for  an  excellent 
Breed  of  IVtlJb  Horfes,  which,  though  not  very  large, 
are  exceeding  valuable,  and  much  efteemed  all  over 
England.  All  the  North  and  Weft  Part  of  the  County 
is  mountainous  and  ftony.  We  faw  a  great  many  old 
Monuments  in  this  County,  and  Roman  Camps  where- 
ever  we  came  ;  and  efpecially,  if  we  met  any  Perfons 
curious  in  fuch  things,  we  found  they  had  many  Ra- 
man Coins. 

Merlonethjb'ire,  or  Merionycl/hire,  1'es  Weft  from 
Montgomeryshire  on  the  Irijh  Sea,  or  rather  the  Ocean ; 
for  St.  George's  Channel  does  not  begin  till  farther 
North;  and  it  is  extended  on  the  Coaft  for  near  35 
Miles  in  Length,  all  ftill  mountainous  and  craggy. 
The  principal  River  is  the  Tovy^  which  rifes  among  The 
unpayable  Mountains,  which  range  along  the  Center 
of  this  Part  of  Wales^  and  which  we  look  at  with  Afto- 
nifhment,  for  their  prodigious  Height.  Some  of  the 
Hills  have  particular  Names,  but  otherwife  we  call 
them  all,  The  Black  Mountains  ;  and  they  well  deferve 
the  Name.  Some  think  'tis  from  the  unpayable 
Mountains  of  this  County,  that  we  have  an  old  Say- 
ing, That  the  Devil  lives  in  the  Middle  of  Wales? 
though  I  know  there  is  another  Meaning  given  to  it : 
in  a  word,  Mr.  Camden  calls  thefe  Parts,  The  Alps  of 
Wales. 

There  are  but  few  large  Towns  in  all  this  Part ;  nor 

is  it  very  populous  ;  much  of  it  being  fcarce  habitable ; 

but  'tis  faid,  there  are  more  Sheep  in  it,  than  in  ail  the 

R  3  reft 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  Wales, 

reft  of  Waits*  On  the  Sea  fhore,  hoxvaver,  we  faw 
Harlelgh)  or  Ha rlecb-  Cajlle,  which  is  ftill  a  Garrifon, 
and  kept  for  the  Guard  of  the  Coaft ;  but  it  is  of  no 
other  Strength,  than  what  its  Situation  gives  it. 

In  the  Middle  of  thefe  vaft  Mountains  (and  forming 
a  very  large  Lake  ;  viz.  near  its  firft  Sources)  rifes  the 
River  Des^  of  which  I  fhall  fpeak  again  in  its  proper 
Place. 

The  thorough  Improvement  of  the  Dee  has  been 
long  expected,  fever al  Laws  have  been  pafled  to  en- 
courage,  and  alfo  to  facilitate,  the  Endeavours  of  the 
Undertakers  ;  and  there  is  at  prefent  good  Reafon  to 
hope,  that,  as  it  is  now  carried  on,  it  will,  in  time,  be 
crowned  with  Succefs. 

Here,  among  almoft  innumerable  Summits,  and 
rifmg  Peaks  of  namelefs  Hills,  we  faw  the  famous  Ka- 
der-IdrickS)  which,  fome  are  of  Opinion,  is  the  higheft 
Mountain  in  Britain ;  another,  called  Raravaur ; 
another,  called  Mowywynda  ;  and  ftill  every  Hill  we 
faw  we  thought  higher  than  all  that  ever  we  had  feen 
before* 

We  inquired  here  after  that  fl range  Phenomenon, 
which  was  not  only  feen,  but  fatally  experienced,  by 
the  Country  round  this  Place  ;  namely  of  a  livid  Fire, 
coming  off  from  the  Sea,  and  fetting  on  fire  Houfes, 
Barns,  Stacks  of  Hay  and  Corn,  and  poifoning  the 
Herbage  in  the  Field  ;  of  which  there  is  a  full  Account 
given  in  the  Phihfophical  Tranfaflions  .*  and  as  we  had 
it  confirmed  by  the  general  Voice  of  the  People,  I  (hall 
take  notice,  That  the  TrGnfoflions  particularly  obfeive, 
that  the  Edipies  -of  the  Sun  in  Aries  have  been  verjr 
fatal  to  this  Place  ;  and  that  the  Years  1542.  and  1567. 
when  the  Sun  was  eclipfed  in  that  Sign,  it  fuflVred  very 
much  by  Fire  ;  aed  after  the  latter  Eclipff  of  the  two, 
the  Fire  fpread  fo  far,  that  abcve  200  Houfes  in  the 
Town  and  Suburbs  of  Caernarvon^  were  confumed. 
This  mountainous  Country  runs  away  North  thro* 
e,  and  almoft  through  Cacrnarvoufoiret 

where 


Wales.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  367 

where  Snswden-bill^  of  a  monftrous  Height,  according; 
to  its  Name,  had  Snow  on  the  Top  in  the  Beginning 
of  June;  but  it  does  not  continue  the  Year  round,  as 
Tome  have  afTerted. 

Thefe  unpayable  Heights  were  doubtlefs  the  Refuge 
of  the  Britons,  when,  in  their  continual  Wars  with 
the  Romans  and  Saxons,  they  were  overpowered. 

That  Side  of  the  County  of  Caernarvon,  which  bor- 
ders on  the  Sea,  is  not  fo  mountainous,  and  is  both* 
more  fertile,  and  more  populous.  The  principal  Place 
in  this  Part  is  Caernarvon,  a  good  Town,  with  aCaftle 
built  by  Edward  I.  to  curb  and  reduce  the  wild  People 
of  the  Mountains,  and  fecure  the  PafTage  into  Anglefea* 
That  Prince  alfo  kept  his  Court  often  here  j  and  here 
his  Son  and  Succeffbr,  Edwardll.  was  born,  who  was 
therefore  called  Edward  of  Caernarvon.  This  Edward 
was  the  firft  of  the  Sons  of  the  Kings  of  England  vefted 
with  the  Title  of  Prince  of  Wales :  and  here  were  kept 
the  Chancery  and  Exchequer  of  the  Princes  of  Wales 
for  the  North  Part  of  the  Principality,  as  it  was  at 
Catrm&rthen  for  the  South  Part.  It  is  a  fmall,  but 
ftrong Town,  clean  and  well-built;  and,  confidering 
the  Place,  the  People  are  very  courteous  and  obliging 
to  Strangers.  It  is  feated  on  the  Firth  or  Inlet  called 
Meneu,  parting  the  Ifle  of  Anglefea,  or  Mona,  from 
the  main  Land  ;  and  here  is  a  Ferry  over  to  the  Ifland, 
called  Abermenay-Ferry  :  and  from  thence  a  direct 
Road  to  Holyhead,  whithes  we  went  for  no  other  Pur- 
pofe  than  to  have  another  View  of  Ireland  ;  though 
we  were  difappointed,  the  Weather  being  bad  and 
ftormy. 

Whoever  travels  critically  over  thefe  Mountains  of 
South- fFaUs  and  Merioneth/hire^  will  think  Stone-hengt 
in  Wiltjhire^  and  Rollricb  Stones  in  Oxford/hire,  no 
more  Wonders,  feeing  there  are  fo  many  fuch  in  thefe 
Provinces,  that  they  are  not  thought  ftrange  at  all ; 
nor  is  it  doubted,  but  they  were  generally  Monuments 
®f  the  Dead  j  as  alfo  are  the  fingle  Stones  ofimmenfe 
R  4  .Bulk, 


363  .4  TOUR   thro  Wales. 

Bulk,  of  which  we  faw  fo  many,  that  we  gave  over  re- 
marking them.  Somemeafured  from  feven,  eight,  to 
ten,  and  one  16  Feet  high,  being  a  whole  Stone,  but 
fo  large,  that  the  moll  of  the  Wonder  is,  where  they 
were  found,  and  how  dragged  to  the  Place  ;  fmce,  be- 
fides  the  fleep  Afcents  to  fome  of  the  Hills  on  which 
they  ftand,  it  would  he  hardly  poflible  to  move  fome 
of  them  now  with  50  Yoke  of  Oxen.  And  yet  a  great 
many  of  thefe  Stones  are  found  confufedly  lying  one 
upon  another  on  the  utmoft  Summit  or  Top  of  the 
Clyder^  and  other  Hills  in  Merioneth  or  Caernarvon- 
Jbire\  to  which  it  is  next  to  impoflible  that  all  the 
Power  of  Art,  and  Strength  cf  Man  and  Beaft,  could 
carry  them  ;  and  the  Vulgar  make  no  Difficulty  of 
frying,  The  Devil  fet  them  up  there. 

One  of  thefe  monumental  Stones  is  to  be  fcen  a  little 
Way  from  Harleigb  Co/lie :  it  is  a  large  Stone  lying 
flat,  fupported  by  three  other  Stones  at  three  of  the  four 
Angles,  though  the  Stone  is  rather  oval  than  fquare;  it 
is  almoft  ii  Feet  long,  the  Breadth  unequal  ;  but  in 
fome  Places  it  is  from  ieven  to  eight  Feet  broad,  and 
it  may  be  fuppofed  has  been  both  longer  and  broader  ; 
'tis  in  fome  Places  about  two  Feet  thick,  but  in  others 
'tis  worn  almoft  to  an  Edge  by  Time.  The  three 
Stones  that  fupport  it  are  about  20  Inches  fquare ;  'tis 
fuppofed  there  have  been  four,  two  of  which,  that  fup- 
port the  thickefl  End,  are  near  eight  Feet  high,  the 
other  not  above  three  Feet,  being  fuppofed  to  be  fet- 
tled in  the  Ground,  fo  that  the  Stone  lies  Hoping,  like 
the  Roof  of  a  Barn.  There  is  another  of  thefe  to  be 
feen  in  the  Ifle  of  Anglefca ;  the  flat  Stone  is  much 
larger  and  thicker  than  this ;  but  we  did  riot  go  to  fee 
it.  There  are  alfo  two  Circles  of  Stones  in  that  Ifland, 
fuch  as  Stone-kehge,  but  larger. 

This  is  a  particular  kind  of  Monument,  and  there- 
fore I  took  notice  of  it;  but  the  others  are  generally 
fingle  Stones  of  vaft  Magnitude,  fet  up  on  one  End, 
Column  wife,  which,  being  fo  very  large,  are  likely 

to 


Wales.          GREAT  BRITAIN.         369 

to  remain  till  the  End  of  Time  :  but  are  generally 
without  any  Infcription,  or  regular  Shape,  or  any  Mark 
to  intimate  for  whom,  or  for  what,  they  were  placed, 

Thefe  Mountains  are  indeed  fo  like  the  Alps,  that, 
except  the  Language  of  the  People,  one  could  hardly 
avoid  thinking  he  is  paffing  from  Grenoble  to  Sufs,  or 
rather  through  the  Country  of  the  Grifons.  The 
Lakes  alfb,  which  are  fo  numerous  here,  make  the 
Similitude  the  greater:  nor  are  the  Fables  which  the 
Country-people  tell  of  thofe  Lakes  much  unlike  the 
Stories  which  we  meet  with  among  the  Switzers,  of 
the  famous  Lakes  in  their  Country.  Mr.  Camderfs 
Con  tin  u:  tor  teJls  us  of  50  or  60  Lakes  \n  Caernarvon- 
Jhirc  only.  We  did  not  count  them  ;  but  I  believe, 
if  we  had,  we  fhould  have  found  them  to  be  more, 
rather  than  lefs. 

Here  we  meet  with  the  Char-fifh,  the  fame  Kind 
which  we  faw  in  Lancajki^e^  and  alfo  in  the  Lakes  of 
Switzerland,  and  no-where  elfe,  that  I  have  heard  of, 
in  Europe.  The  Wtljh  call  it  the  Torgoch. 

In  a  large  Lake  in  this  County,  called  by  the  In- 
habitants Lbyn-Tegid^  there  is  a  Fifh  taken  called 
Gwiniady  or  frefti- water  Whiting,  which  is  not  found 
in  any  other  Water  in  Britain,  but  is  alfo  common  in 
the  Lake  of  Geneva  and  fome  others  in  Switzerland. 
This  Filh  greatly  refembles  a  Whiting  in  its  outward 
Appearance,  but  the  Infuie  is  more  like  an  Herring. 
The  River  Dee>  which  rifes  above  this  Lake,  runs  thro' 
it  ;  yet,  it  is  very  remarkable,  none  of  thefe  Fifh  are 
ever  found  in  the  River;  and,  on  the  contrary,  neither 
Trout  nor  Salmon  are  ever  feen  in  this  Lake  j  yet  the 
River  on  both  Sides  abounds  with  them. 

There  is  nothing  of  Note  to  be  feen  in  the  Tile  of 
Angltftqi  but  the  Town  and  the  Cattle  of  Befiumaris^ 
Witch  was  alfo  built  by  King  E'lward  I.  and  called 
Beau  maijb)  or  \.\\zfne  Plain  -t  for  here  the  Country  is 
very  level  aud  plain,  and  tha  Land  is  fruitful  and  plea.- 
R  5 


370  A  TOUR  thro  Wales, 

fant.  The  Caftle  was  very  large,  as  may  be  feen  by 
its  Remains ;  and  that  it  was  firong,  the  Situation  will 
tell  alfo ;  but  it  is  now  of  no  Ufe. 

As  we  went  to  Holyhead,  by  the  South  Part  of  the 
Iflancl  from  Newborough^  and  came  back  through  the 
Middle  by  Beaumaris,  we  faw  the  whole  Extent  of  it; 
and  indeed  it  is  a  much  pleafanter  Country  than  any  Part 
of  North  Wales  that  we  had  yet  feen  ;  and  particularly 
is  very  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Cattle. 

Here  we  croffed  the  Sir  eight  of  Meneit  again,  and 
came  to  Bangor,  at  the  Place  where  K\ngE(kvardl. 
intended  to  have  built  a  great  Stone  Bridge  :  but  tho* 
the  King  was  very  pofitive  in  his  Defign  for  a  great 
while,  yet  he  was  prevailed  with  at  laft  to  decline  it; 
poffibly  on  account  of  the  Expence. 

Bangor  is  a  l^own  rioted  for  its  Antiquity.  It  is  a 
Biihop's  See,  but  has  an  old,  mean-looking,  and  al- 
moft  defpicable,  Cathedral  Church. 

This  Church  boafts  of  being  one  of  the  moft  antient 
in  Britain,  the  People  fay,  the  moft  antient ;  and  that 
St.  Dat.iel  (to  whom  it  is  dedicated)  was  firft  Bifhop 
here,  in  the  Year  512.  They  allow  that  thePagans, 
perhaps  of  Anglejea,  ruined  the  Church,  and  poffefled 
the  Bifhoprick  after  it  was  built,  for  above  100  Years ; 
ftor  is  there  any  Account  of  it  from  the  Year  512.  to 
1009.  After  this,  the  Bimoprick  was  again  ruined  by 
one  of  its  own  Bifhops,  whofe  Name  was  Bulkeky,  he, 
as  the  frJonafticon  fays,  not  only  fold  the  Revenues,  but 
even  the  very  Bells  ;  for  which  Sacrilege,  it  is  fcid,  he 
wasflruck  blind. 

It  is  certainly  at  prefent  no  rich  Bifhoprick  ;  yet  the 
Bifhops  are  generally  allowed  to  hold  fome  other  good 
Benefice  in  (Jommendam  j  and  the  Preferment  feems  to 
be  a  grateful  Introduction  to  the  Clergy,  as  the  Bifhops 
are  generally  tranflated  from  hence  to  a  more  profitable 
See. 

From 


Wa/es.        G'REAT  BRITAIN.          37 1 

From  Bangor  we  went  North  (keeping  the  Sea  on 
our  Left-hand)  to  Conway.  This  is  the  pooreft,  but 
pleafanteft  Town  in  all  this  County  for  the  Bignefs  of 
it:  it  is  feated  on  the  Bank  of  a  fine  River,  which  is 
not  only  pleafant  and  beautiful,  but  is  a  nuble  Harbour 
fat  Ships,  had  they  any  Occafion  for  them  there :  the 
Stream  is  deep  and  fafe,  and  the  River  as  broad  as  the 
Thames  at  Deptford:  it  only  wants  a  Trade  fuitabje  to 
fo  good  a  Port  ;  for  at  infinitely  outdoes  Cbejier^  and 
Liverpool  too. 

In  this  Pafiage,  we  went  over  the  famous  Precipice 
called  Penmaen  ?naur^  which  I  think  Fame  has  made 
abundantly  more  frightful  than  it  is  j  for  though  the 
Rock  is  indeed  very  high,  and,  if  any  one  fhould  fall 
from  it,  he  would  be  dafhed  in  Pieces,  yet,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  no  Danger  of  it,  a  Range  of  Stones  being 
raifed  all  the  Way,  on  the  Edge  of  the  Precipice,  to 
fecure  Paflengers :  thofe  who  have  been  at  the  Hill  or 
Pals  of  Rnterkln  in  Scotland,  know  very  well  the  Dan- 
ger there  is  much  greater  than  here  ;  and  the  frequent 
Lofs  of  Lives,  both  of  Man  and  Horfe,  will  teftify  the 
fame. 

We  have  but  little  remarkable  in  the  Road  from 
Conway  to  Holywell^  but  Crags  and  Rocks  ail  along  the 
North  Shore  of  Denbigh,  till  we  came  to  Denbigh, 
the  County- town,  in  which  is  a  Caftle,  formerly  of 
great  Strength,  but  now  in  Ruins,  From  the  Walls  is 
a  very  good  Profpedt  of  the  Vale  and  Sea.  Here  is 
a  good  Free  Gram  mar- fchool  for  twenty  Boys  well 
endowed. 

From  hence  we  made  an  Excurfion  to  Rutkin,  a  neat 
and  pleafant  Town*  fituate  on  the  Banks  of  the  River 
CAwyd^  about  five  Miles  South- eaft  of  Denbigh. 
The  Caftle  was  formerly  of  great  Strength,  but  is  now 
in  Ruins.  Here  is  a  good  Corn-market  on  Mondaysy 
Frte-fcbool  is  a  handfome  Building,  and  was  well 
•  >•  6 


A  TOUR  thro  Wales. 


endowed  by  Gabriel  Goodman,  Dean  of 
bom  at  i  lanhychan  near  this  Town. 

The  Town  is  large  and  populous,  and  has  a  pood 
Trade  carried  on  by  Tanners  and  Glovers,  This 
Town  bears  fomething  in  its  Countenance  of  its 
Neighbourhood  to  England  ;  but  that  which  was  moft 
fbrprifing,  after  fuch  a  tircfome  and  fatiguing  Journey 
over  the  inhofpitable  Mountains  of  Mtrionttb  and 
£aemaruort/hirt,  was,  that,  defcending  now  from  the 
Hills,  we  came  into  a  moft  pleafant,  fruitful,  populous, 
and  delicious  Vale,  called  the  Vale  of  Ckvyd,  from  the 
River  of  the  fame  Name,  full  of  Villages  and  Towns, 
the  Fields  fhining  with  Corn,  juft  ready  for  the  Reap- 
ers, the  Meadows  green  and  flowery,  and  a  fine 
River,  of  a  mild  and  gentle  Stream,  running  through 
it:  nor  is  it  a  fmall  or  cafual  Intermiffion,  but  we  had 
a  Profpecl  of  the  Country  open  before  us  for  above  20 
Miles  in  Length,  and  from  five  to  feven  Miles  in 
Breadth,  all  fmiling  with'  the  fame  kind  of  Complexion; 
which  made  us  think  ourfelves  in  England  again,  by 
the  agreeable  Change  of  Climate. 


In  this  pleafant  Vale,  turning  North  from 
and  following  the  Stream  of  the  River,  we  came  to  St. 
Jfapk,  in  Ftintflire,  a  fmall  City,  with  a  very  good 
Cathedral  Church  covered  with  Shingles  or  Tiles  ; 
but  yet  here  is  efteemed  a  ftately  Fabrick.  The  C  ty 
is  ill-built  arid  poor,  although  the  Country  is  fo  rich 
and  preafant  all  round  it,  and  tho'  the  Bifhoprick  is  of 
good  Value.  There  are  fome'old  Monuments  in  this 
Church  ;  but  none  of  any  Note  ;  nor  could  we  read 
the  Weffh  'nfcriptions. 

From  hence  we  came  to  Holywell  :  the  Story  of  it 
is,  that,  the  pious  Virgin  St.  Winifrid  being  ravifhed 
and  murdered,  this  healing  Water  fprung  out  of  her 
Body  when  buried.  The  Romanics  believe  it,  as  is 
evident,  from  their  thronging  hither  to  receive  Benefit 
from  the  healing  Virtue  of  the  Water,  which  they  do 

not 


Wales.        GREAT  BRITAIN.          373 

not  hope  for  as  medicinal,  but  as  miraculous ;  and 
think  it  heals  them  by  virtue  of  the  Interceffion  and 
Influence  of  St.  Winifrid. 

The  Chapel  dedicated  to  this  holy  Virgin  is  cut  out 
of  a  folid  Rock,  and  Numbers  of  Pilgrims  refort  to  it, 
with  great  Devotion.  The  Water  gufhesout  into  a 
great  Stream,  and  the  Place  where  it  breaks  out,  is 
f'jrmed  like  a  Bafm  or  Ciftern,  in  which  they  bathe. 
I  tafted  the  Water:  but  could  not  diftinguifh  it  from 
common  Water.  It  is  a  moft  copious  Spring.  I 
have  not  any  where  feen  fo  much  Water  rii'e  out  of 
the  Earth,  in  fo  fmall  a  Compafs.  Over  it  is  an  hand- 
fome  Stone  Building,  and  by  it  the  Chapel,  where  lie 
continually  a  great  Number  of  poor,  lame,  impotent 
People,  more  I  believe  to  have  their  Poverty  relieved, 
than  to  be  cured  of  their  Maladies.  The  Water  is  in- 
tenfely  cold,  and  indeed  there  is  no  great  Miracle  in 
that  Point,  confidering  the  Rocks  it  flows  from,  where 
it  is  impregnated  by  divers  Minerals ;  the  Virtue  of 
which,  and  not  of  the  Saint,  I  fuppofe,  works  the 
greateft  Part  c  f  the  Cures,  that  may  be  thought  to  be 
effeaed  there. 

There  is  a  neat  well-built  Town  near  the  Well, 
which  has  a  great  Market  every  Fridiy^  which  may 
indeed  be  faid  to  have  rifen  from  the  Confluence  of 
People  ti.ither;  for  almoft  all  the  Houfes  are  either 
Public  houfes,  or  let  into  Lodgings;  and  the  Priefls 
who  attend  here,  and  are  very  numerous,  appear  in 
Difguife  :  fometimes  they  are  Phyficians,  fometimes 
Surgeons,  fometimes  Gentlemen,  and  fometimes  Pa- 
tients, or  any  thing  as  Occafion  prefents.  Nobody 
takes  Notice  of  them,  as  to  their  Religion,  tho'  they 
are  well  known,  no  not  the  Roman- catholics  them- 
felves  ;  but  in  private  they  have  their  proper  Oratories 
in  certain  Places,  whither  the  Votaries  refort;  and 
good  Manners  have  prevailed  fofar,  that  no  Proteftant, 
kt  him  know  what  he  will,  takes  Notice  of  it,  or  in- 
quires whither  one  goes,  or  has  been  gone. 

The 


Wales. 

The  principal  Towns  in  Flint/hire^  are,  i.  Flint  ^ 
the  Shire-town,  but  fo  final],  that  it  has  not  a  Market. 
2.  St.  dfapb)  before-  mentioned.  3.  Caerwys,  the 
chief  Market-  town  of  the  County. 

From  hence  we  pafied  by  Flint  -Caftle^  a,  known 
Place,  but  o,f  no  Confequence  now  ;  and  direclly  to 
Wrexham^  deemed  the  largeftTown  in  North-Wales^ 
having  heard  much  of  a  fine  Church  there  ;  but  we 
were  greatly  difappointed.  There  is  indeed  a  very 
large  Tower  or  Steeple,  as  fome  call  it,  adorned  with 
Imagery  ;  but  far  from  fine  :  the  Work  is  mean,  the 
Statues  without  any  Fancy  or  Spirit  ;  and  as  the  Stone 
is  of  a  reddifh,  crumbling  Kind,  like  the  Cathedral  at 
Cbejler,  Time  has  made  it  look  grofs  and  rough. 

There  are  a  great  many  antient  Monuments  in  this 
Church,  and  in  the  Churchyard  alfo  ;  but  none  of 
Note;  and  almoft  all  the  Inscriptions  are  in  Wtljh. 
The  Church  is  large  j  but  they  muft  be  much  miftaken, 
who  tell  us  it  is  one  of  the  fineft  in  Britain  ;  for  it 
falls  (hort  in  that  refpeft,  even  of  thofe  Churches 
which  are  as  old  as  itfelf. 

This  Town  is  large,  well-built,  and  populous  ;  and 
feefidesthe  Church,  there  aretwo  large  Meeting  hnufes, 
in  one  of  which,  we  were  told,  they  preach  in  Wtljb 
one  Part  of  the  Day,  and  in  Eng/ifi\he  other.  Here 
is  a  great  Market  for  Flannel,  which  the  Faclors  buy 
up  of  the  poor  Weljh  People,  who  manufacture  it  ;  and 
the«ce  it  is  fent  to  London  j  and  is  a  confiderable  Ma- 
nufadure  through  all  this  Part  of  the  Country,  by 
which  the  Poor  are  very  profitably  employed. 


We  could  not  omit  feeing  the  once  famous 
which  Ma'mfbury  confounds  with  theepifcopal  Bangor  ; 
and  were  pleafed  to  fee  there  a  fine  St(  ne  Bridge  over 
the  Dee.  This  was  onc^  a  City,  and  the  Monaftery 
was  fo  famous,  that  in  the  Time  of  the  Britijb  Kings 

it 


Wales.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

it  was  faid  to  contain  2400  Monks,  w*.io  in  their  Turns 
(viz.  loo  each  Hour  of  the  24)  reading  Prayers  and 
fmging  Pfalms  continually,  Divine  Service  was  per- 
formed Day  and  Night  without  Intermiflion.  But  now 
not  fo  much  as  the  Ruins  are  to  be  feen  :  arfti  as  all 
the  People  in  the  little  Village,  that  takes  Place  of  it, 
fpoke  Weljk)  we  could  find  nobody  that  could  give  us 
any  Intelligence.  So  effe&ually  had  Time  erafed  th« 
very  Foundations  of  the  Place. 

This  is  faid  to  be  theBirth-placeofthat  Arch-heretic 
Pelaglus,  who  from  hence  began  to  broach  his  hereti- 
cal Opinions,  which  afterwards  fo  terribly  overfpread 
the  Church.  Camden  obferves,  that  this  Bangor  is 
iituated  in  the  County  of  Flint. 

But  before  I  have  entirely  done  with  the  Principality, 
give  me  leave  to  obferve  briefly  a  few  things  with  re- 
lation to  this  Journey,  and  the  Gentlemen  of  Wales. 

Tho'  this  Journey,  and  efpecially  over  fuch  mon- 
ftrous  Hills  and  Precipices  as  thofe  in  Merioneth  and 
feme  other  Shires,  was  a  little  heavy  to  UF,  yet  were  we 
well  fupported  through  it ;  for  we  generally  found  their 
Provifions  very  good  and  cheap,  and  pretty  good  Ac- 
commodations in  the  Inns. 

The  Weljh  Gentlemen  are  hofpitable  ;  and  the  Peo- 
ple in  general  obliging  and  converfable,  efpecially  to 
Strangers.  When  we  let  them  know  we  traveled 
merely  in  Curiofity  to  view  the  Country,  their  Civility 
was  heightened  to  fuch  a  Degree,  that  nothing  could 
be  more  friendly ;  and  they  were  willing  to  tell  us 
every  thing  that  belonged  to  their  Country,  and  to  {hew 
us  all  that  we  defired  to  fee. 

They  value  themfelves  much  upon  their  antient  He- 
roes, as  Caraftacus,  Owen  ap  Tudor,  Prince  Lewellin\ 
and  particularly  upon  the  Antiquity  of  their  Families  ; 
and  laugh  at  a  Pedigree  that  cannot  be  traced  higher 
than  William  J.  It  muft  be  owned,  that  the  Gentle- 
men juitly  claim  a  very  antient  Defcent,  and  have  pre- 
ferved  their  Families  intire  for  jnany  Ages.  They  re- 
ceive 


37<$  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Chefh. 

ceive  you  well  ir.ro  their  Houfes,  treat  you  handfomely, 
are  very  generous ;  and,  indeed,  nothing  is  wanting 
within-doors  ;  and,  what  is  more,  they  have  generally 
very  good  Eftates  to  fupport  their  Hofpitality  ;  but  they 
are  very  jealous  of  Affronts,  and  foon  provoked  to 
Anger,  which  is  feldom  allayed  without  Satisfaction  ; 
and  then  they  become  as  foon  reconciled  again. 

I  will  put  an  End  to  this  Letter,  with  alluring  you, 
that  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER      VII. 

Containing  a  Defcrtption  of  Part  of  CHESHIRE, 
SHROPSHIRE,  STAFFORDSHIRE,  WARWICK- 
SHIRE, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE,  NOTTING- 
HAMSHIRE, and  LEICESTERSHIRE. 

SIR, 

I  Continued  at  Chefler  for  fome  time,  except  that  I 
made  two  or  three  Excurfions  into  the  neighbour- 
ing Country,  and  particularly  into  that  Part  oi  Shrop- 
fnire  which  I  had  not  viewed  as  I  went ;  as  alfo  into 
the  North  and  North- weft  Parts  of  Che/hire.  But  I 
fiiould  firft  acquaint  you,  that  Malpast  through  which 
I  came  from  Wales^  is  fituate  on  an  high  Hill,  and 
was  formerly  ftrengthened  by  a  Cafrle,  whLh  is  now 
in  Ruins.  The  Church  is  a  irately  Building,  and 
ftands  on  the  moft  eminent  Part  of  the  Town  :  it  has 
two  Rectors,  who  do  Duty  alternately.  The  Town 
confiftsof  three  Streets,  and  is  well  paved  j  has  a  good 
Market,  a  GrammaT-fchool,  and  an  Hofpital. 

The  firft  Trip  I  made,  was  into  the  Cejlrica  Cherfo- 
nefusy  as  I  think  we  may  properly  call  it :  it  is  bounded 
by  the  two  great  Firths,  or  Arms  of  the  Sea,  the  one 

called 


Chefli.        GREAT  BRITAIN.          377 

called  the  Mouth  of  the  Dec,  and  the  other  of  the  two 
Rivers  Merfey  and  Weaver,  which  form  it  into  a  Pen- 
infula.  It  is  about  16  Miles  long,  6  or  7  over,  and 
has  not  one  Market-town  in  it,  though  it  is  exceed- 
ing rich  and  fertile  ;  occafioned  poflibly  by  the  Neigh- 
bourhood of  two  fuch  great  Towns  as  Ckefler  and  Li- 
verpool. 

,  Going  down  from  Chejler,  by  the  Rhoodee,  as  they 
call  it,  that  is,  the  Marmes  of  the  River  Dee,  and 
coafting  the  River  after  it  is  grown  broader  than  the 
Marfhes,  the  firft  Place  of  any  Note  which  we  come 
to  is  NeJJon,  where,  in  the  late  Irijh  War,  moft  of  the 
Troops  embarked  for  that  Kingdom  :  from  hence 
the  Veflels  go  away  to  Higblake,  where  they  ride  fafe 
in  their  Way,  as  the  Ships  from  London  lie  in  the 
Downs,  till  the  Wind  prefents  for  their  refpe&ive  Voy- 
ages. 

The  River  Dee,  after  a  Courfe  of  between  50  and 
60  Miles,  falls  into  St.  Georges  Channel,  16  Miles 
below  the  City  of  Chejler.  This  River  at  its  Mouth 
is  1 6  Miles  broad  3  and  would  afford  Chejler  a  noted 
Port,  if  it  was  not  for  the  Bar  at  the  Entrance,  which 
renders  it  difficult  :  Chejler,  however,  beyond  all 
doubt,  is  a  fair  old  City ;  and  from  its  Communica- 
tion with  a  very  fertile  Country  behind  it,  and  its  In- 
tercourfe  with  Ireland  and  Wales,  maintains  a  very 
considerable  Trade  j  which,  if  the  laudable  Endea- 
vours ufed  for  improving  the  Navigation  of  the  Dee 
fucceed,  muft  be  much  augmented ;  but  is  at  all  Events 
in  no  Danger  of  decreafmg. 

Chejler  was  a  Colony  of  the  Romans  ;  and  many  An- 
tiquities have  been  found  in  it:  nay,  it  is  evident  from 
the  Infcription  of  feveral  Altars  and  Coins  found  in 
,  and  about  this  City,  with   the  Names  and   Titles  of 
Juiius  Agruola,  &c.  that  the  Legio  XX.  called  Vic- 
trix,  was  here  quartered.  The  Wall,  which  furrounds 
the  City,  is  two  Miles  in  Circumference,  affording  a 
delightful  Walk  round,  and  (aid  to  be  built  by  the  no- 
ble 


378  A  TOUR  thro          Chefli. 

bJe  Mercian  Lady  Edelfleda,  in  the  Year  9(58.  It  has 
nine  Churches,  including  the  Cathedral,  which  is  a 
Pile  venerable  for  Antiquity,  but  in  no  extraordinary 
Condition.  There  are  Shadows  of  many  Pictures  on 
the  Wall,  but  defaced.  At  the  Weft- end,  in  Niches, 
are  fome  Images  of  the  Earls  Palatine  of  Cbefler.  The 
adjoining  Abbey  is  quite  ruined.  The  Walls  round  the 
City  are  kept  in  good  Repair,  at  the  Charge  of  the 
Corporation,  and  afford  a  plcafant,  airy  Walk.  The 
Exchange  is  a  neat  Building,  fupported  by  Columns 
13  Feet  high,  of  one  Stone  each.  Over  it  is  the  Ci- 
ty-hall, a  well  contrived  Court  of  Judicature.  The 
Caftle  was  formerly  the  Palace,  where  the  Earls  af- 
fsmbled  their  Parliaments,  and  enacled  Laws  independ- 
ent of  the  Kings  of  England^  determining  all  Caufes 
themfelves.  It  has  always  a  Garrifon  kept  in  it.  The 
Piazzas,  or  Rcivs,  as  they  call  them,  do  not,  in  nny 
Opinion,  add  any  thing  to  the  Beauty  of  the  City  ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  ferve  to  make  it  look  both  old 
and  indifferent.  Thefe  Roivs  are  certain  long  Galle- 
ries, up  one  Pair  of  Stairs,  which  run  along  the  Side 
of  the  Streets,  before  all  the  Houfes,  though  joined  to 
them  ;  and,  as  is  pretended,  they  are  to  keep  the  Peo- 
ple dry  in  walking  along.  This  they  do  indeed  effec- 
tually ;  but  then  they  take  away  all  the  View  of  the 
Houfes  from  the  Street ;  nor  can  a  Stranger,  in  his 
Riding  thro*  Ckejler^  fee  any  Shops  in  the  City  :  be- 
fides,.they  make  the  Shops  themfelves  dark  ;  and  the 
Way  in  them  is  dark,  dirty,  and  uneven.  Chefler  fends 
two  Members  to  Parliament. 

The  beft  Ornament  of  the  City  is,  that  the  Streets 
are  broad  and  fair,  and  run  through  the  whole  City  in 
ftrait  Lines,  croffmg  in  the  Middle  of  it,  as  at  Chi- 
chejler.  The  Walls  afford  a  pleafant  Walk,  as  1  have 
Taid,  round  the  City,  and  within  the  Battlements,  from 
whence  you  may  fee  the  circumjacent  Country,  and 
particularly  on  the  Side  of  the  Rhoodee,  which  is  a  fine 
Urge  low  Green,  on  the  Bank  of  the  Dee,  which  in 

Winter 


Chelh.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  379 

Winter  is  often  under  Water  by  the  Inundations  of  the 
River.  Beyond  t\\zRhoodee  maybe  feen  from  the  Walls 
of  Chefter  the  County  of  Flint*  and  the  Mountains  of 
Wales. 

The  Caftle  is  a  good  firm  Building,  and  ftrong, 
tho*  not  fortified  with  many  Outworks.  'Tis  faid  this 
Caftle  was  built,  or  at  leaft  repaired,  by  Hugh  Lupus* 
the  famous  Earl  of  Cbefter,  Nephew  to  William  I.  as 
was  alfo  the  Church ;  the  Body  of  whom  was,  in  the 
Year  1523.  difcovered,  as  is  fuppofed,  in  an  old  ruin- 
ous Building,  called,  The  Chapter-houfe. 

It  was  firft  wrapped  in  Leather,  and  then  inclofed  in 
a  Stone  Coffin.  The  Skull  and  all  the  Bones  .were 
very  frefh,  and  in  their  proper  Pofition  ;  and,  what  is 
more  remarkable,  the  String  which  tied  the  Ankles 
together  was  whole  and  intire,  altho'  it  was  then  up- 
wards of  650  Years  fmce  the  Interment. 

Cbejhr  is  but  a  modern  Bilhoprick,  being  fo  made 
in  the  Year  1541.  when  King  Henry  VIII.  divided  it 
from  Licbfield.  They  tell  us,  that  King  Edgar,  who 
conquered  all  this  Part  of  Britain,  and  was  rowed  up 
the  Dee,  in  his  Royal  Barge,  by  feven,  or,  as  fome 
fay,  eight,  Kings,  himfelf  fleering  the  Helm,  founded 
the  great  Church,  which  Lupus  finiftied  and  endowed. 

Here  is  a  noble  Stone-  Bridge  over  the  Dee,  very  high 
and  ftrong-built ;  and  'tis  needful  it  (hould  be  fo ;  for 
the  Dee  is  a  moft  furious  Stream  at  fome  Seafons,  and 
brings  a  vaft  Weight  of  Water  with  it  from  the  Moun- 
tains of  Wales. 

Cbefter  has  long  given  Tide  of  Earl  to  the  Prince  of 
Wales. 

It  was  formerly  an  Harbour  for  Shipping  ;  but  the 
Sea  long  ago  withdrew  itfelf ;  and  the  River  Dee  was 
fo  choaked  up,  that  Vefiels  of  Burden  could  not  come 
within  fome  Miles  of  it ;  fo  that  an  A6t  of  Parlia- 
ment pafled  in  the  Year  1732.  for  rendering  it  navi- 
gable. And,  in  purfuance  thereof,  the  Undertakers 
raifed  a  Sum  of  4/5830  /.  which  they  have  expended 

in 


3 So  A  TOUR  thro          .Chefh. 

in  cutting  and  perfe&ing  a  new  Channel  for  the  Ri- 
ver, of  near  10  Miles  in  Length,  and  in  making  pro- 
per Dams  and  Sluices,  into  which  they  have  turned 
the  River ;  fo  that  it  is  actually  navigable  at  this  time 
for  Ships  and  Veflels  of  conliderable  Burden  to  the 
Quay,  or  Key,  of  Cbefter,  where  they  load  and  un- 
load Goods  and  Merchandizes.  This  Succefs  encou- 
raged the  Undertakes  to  apply  to  Parliament  ( 1 740- 1 , ) 
for  further  Powers  to  complete  the  fame,  and  for  unit- 
ing the  faid  Undertakers  into  a  Company  for  that 
laudable  Purpofe. 

This  County,  tho'  fo  remote  from  London,  is  one 
of  thofe  which  contributes  much  to  its  Support,  as  well 
as  to  that  of  feveral  other  Parts  of  England^  by  its  ex- 
cellent Cheefe,  which  they  make  here  in  fuch  Quanti- 
ties, that,  as  I  am  told  from  very  good  Authority,  the 
City  of  London alone  takes  off  14,000  Tons  every  Year  j 
befides  vail  Quantities  which  are  fent  to  Brijhlz\\&  Tork\ 
and  alfo  to  Scotland  and  Ireland  ;  fo  that  the  Quantity 
of  Cheefe  made  here  muft  be  prodigioufly  great.  In- 
deed the  whole  County  is  employecf  in  it,  and  Part  of 
its  Neighbourhood  too  ;  for  tho*  it  goes  by  the  Name 
of  Chejhire  Cheefe^  yet  great  Quantities  are  made  in 
fuch  Parts  of  Sbropjhire^  Staffordjbire,  and  Lancajhire> 
as  border  upon  Chejhire. 

This  Soil  is  extraordinarily  good,  and  the  Grafs  has 
a  peculiar  Richnefs  in  it,  which  difpofes  the  Kine  to 
give  a  great  Quantity  of  very  fweet  and  good  Milk  ; 
and  this  Cheefe  M  anufaclure  increafes  every  Day,  raifes 
the  Value  of  the  Lands,  and  encourages  the  Farmers 
to  keep  van:  Stocks  of  Cows ;  which  of  themfelves 
contribute  to  improve  and  enrich  the  Land. 

While  we  were  ftationed,  as  I  may  fay,  at  Chefter, 
I  made  a  Trip  to  feveral  Places  round  it  ;  and  parti- 
cularly to  the  fine  old  Seat  of  the  Earl  of  JVarrington^ 
and  the  fpacious  Foreft  of  Delamere,  which  gives  Ti- 
tle of  Baron  to  that  noble  Family.  They  fay  here  was 
formerly  an  old  City,  now  called  the  Chamber  on  the 


Chefh.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  381 

For  eft  i  probably  feme  Fort  or  Camp  to  fecure  the 
Road.  From  he/ice  is  To  fine  a  Prcfpect  of  the  Welflj 
Mountains,  that  I  never  before  beheld  fuch  a  noble 
Scene  of  Nature.  This  Foreft  is  noted  for  great  Plenty 
of  Red  and  Fallow  Deer,  and  is  a  great  Relief,  for 
Fifh,  Fowl,  and  Turf,  to  the  neighbouring  Towns, 
whereof  there  are  a  great  many  fmall  ones  about  this 
Foreft,  and  through  the  upper  Part  of  it  the  Weaver 
takes  its  Courfe.  The  chief  Town  hereabout  is  Frod- 
jham.  In  the  yth  Year  of  the  Reign  of  King  George 
J.  an  Act  pafled,  in  titled,  An  Aft  for  making  the  Ri- 
ver Weaver  navigable fromFrodftizm- Bridge  to  Winf- 
ford-Bridge  in  the  County  of  Cheiter ;  which  had,  in 
fome  Meafure,  its  intended  Effect  :  But  a  large  Debt 
being  contracted  in  the  Execution  of  it,  and  there  be- 
ing feveral  Defects  in  the  Act,  which  required  to  be 
iupplied,  in  order  to  complete  the  Work,  another  Act 
pa{Ted  in  the  Year  1760.  to  amend  the  former,  and  for 
the  more  effectual  preferving  and  improving  the  Navi- 
gation of  the  faid  River;  to  be  in  Force  25  Years  ; 
it  is  not  doubted  but  the  ufeful  Defign  will  be  fully 
anfwered  by  it, 

Frodjham  was  formerly  noted  for  its  Caflle,  the  Seat^ 
of  the  Family  of  the  Savages^  which  however  is  but  a* 
mean  Market-Town.     Near  this  Place  is  alfo  the  fa- 
mous Seat  of  Rock-Savage,  built  on  the  Afcent  of  an 
Hill  belonging  to  the  fame  Family,  whereof  the  laft 
was  the  late  Earl  Rivers. 

On  the  South-fide  of  the  Park  ftands  Beeflon  Caftle, 
upon  an  Hill  environed  with  Mountains,  and  yet  over- 
looks almoft  the  whole  County.  It  is  very  ftrong,  co- 
vers a  great  Extent  of  Ground,  and  is  adorned  with 
many  Towers.  It  gives  Name  to  an  antient  Family 
in  this  County. 

From  Chefter  we  kept  directly  on  Eaft  to  Middle- 
wicb9  a  large  Market- town,  with  a  fpacious  Church, 
but  chiefly  noted  for  making  Salt  3  where  are  two  ex- 
cellent Biine-feeths. 

We 


3 82  A  TOUR  thro  Chefh. 

We  followed  the  Weaver  dire£Uy  North  to  North- 
ivich,  alfo  famous  for  Bi  ne  fprings,  anil  where  I  favv 
the  manner  of  m«k-  ll  'I  'he  Brine  -Pit,  or  Salt- 

Spring,    is        •  ,>.  the  River;  thence  they 

pi".  .  i.ith  i*  by  Troughs  conveyed 

•     . :  e  it  ib  evaporated  by  boiling.  The 
cruiltaliizing,  r'Jls  to  the  Bottom,  and 
Luke-  it  out  by  wooden  Scummei?,  und  put  it  in 
i   ails,  ».r  Wicker  BJkcts    of  a  conic  Form,  and  fet 
it  in  a  warm  Room  behind  the  Furnace,  to  drain  and 
dry.     The  Salt  is  very   white.     I  did  not  enquire, 
whether  they  made  ufe  of  Ox's  Blood,  as  they  do  who 
make  Salt  of  Sea-water.     The  Duty  it  brings  is  very 
coniiderable. 

Within  thefe  70  Years,  on  the  South -fide  of  the 
Town,  they  difcovered  a  great  many  Mines  of  Rock- 
falt,  which  they  continually  dig  up,  and  fend  in  great 
Lumps  to  the  maritime  Ports,  where  it  is  diftolved, 
and  made  into  eating  Salt.  We  were  let  down  by  a 
Bucket  150  Feet  deep  to  the  Bottom  of  the  Salt-quar- 
ry, a  moft  pleafant  fubterraneous  Profpecl,  looking  like 
a  Cathedral  fupported  by  Rows  of  Pillars,  its  Roof  of 
CryftaJ,  all  of  the  fame  Rock,  tranfparent  and  glitter- 
ing from  the  numerous  Candles  of  the  Workmen,  la- 
bouring with  their  Steel  Pick-axes  in  digging^  away. 
This  Rock- work  extends  to  feveral  Acres. 

At  Lawtan-yeates  they  bore  60  Yards  deep  for  the 
Salt-fpring  ;  at  Haffal  47  ;  at  IVbeelock  18  \  .about 
Middlewtcb  lefs  ;  at  Nortbwicb  it  riles  to  open  Day; 
which  feems  to  intimate,  that  the  Salt-fpring  runs  be- 
tween Layers  of  the  Earth  in  an  horizontal  Line.  Up- 
on Boring,  it  rifes  with  great  Impetuofity,  fo  that  the 
Workmen  have  fcarce  time  to  get  out  of  the  Wells. 
This  is  all  along  the  Side  of  a  Brook  that  comes  from 
a  remarkable  Hill  called  Mawcop,  upon  the  Edge  of 
Stafford/hire  ;  fo  that  the  Ground  rifes  above  the  true 
Level  in  the  mentioned  Proportion. 

From 


Chefti.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  383 

From  Nortbvuicb  we  traveled  North- eaft,  and  came 
to  KnuUford)  a  good  Town,  and  finely  fituated.  A 
Brook  runs  thro'  it,  and  divides  it  into  two.  It  has 
a  Market  and  Town-houfe,  and  a  pretty  good  paro- 
chial Church. 

Altringbam  and  Stffckport,  two  Market-towns,  lie 
higher  up  Northward,  the  firft  near,  and  the  other 
upon,  the  Borders  of  Lancajhire. 

Stockport  is  fituate  on  the  River  Merfey,  and  is  a 
very  large  and  handfome  Town,  inhabited  by  a  great 
Number  of  Gentry,  and  well  filled  with  Warehoufe- 
men,  who  carry  on  the  Check,  Mohair,  Button,  and 
Hat  Manufactories.  'Tis  here  the  raw  Silk  is  chiefly 
thrown  and  prepared  for  the  Spitalfields-  Weavers,  by 
Engines,  the  Buildings  of  which  are  of  a  prodigious 
Bulk,  one  of  them  containing  above  45,000  Move- 
ments, which  fill  the  fpacious  Rooms  up  to  the  fifth 
Story,  and  are  all  put  in  motion  by  one  Wheel,  which 
joes  by  Water. 

The  Church  is  a  venerable  Pile,  built  of  Red  Rock, 
and  within  much  beautified  by  feme  Monuments  of  a 
rich  and  worthy  Family  of  the  Name  of  Wriglt. 
The  R.e£tory  is  a  noble  Edifice,  to  which  are  annexed 
Tythes  worth  800 /.  per  Jjnnum  ;  the  Presentation  of 
which  is  in  the  Gift  of  a  Defcendant  of  the  Earls  of 
Surry ;  viz.  Sir  George  Warren^  who  relides  in  the 
Town,  and  lately  married  Mifs*.&vi/,  an  Heirefs, 
pofTeiTed  of  260, ooo /.  Here  is  likewife  a  neat  Free 
Grammar-fchool  (where  the  brave  A  Imiral  Saundert 
received  his  Education),  and  a  large  Market  on  Fri- 
days,  remarkable  for  the  vaft  Quantities  of  Cheefe 
from  hence  brought  up  for  Exportation.  The  an- 
nual Fairs  are  on  the  4th  and  2$th  of  March,  the  ]  ft 
.of  May,  the  23d  and  24th  Days  of  Oftvbert  new 
Style. 

At  this  Place  Poverty  is  not  much  felt,  except  by 
thofe  who  are  idle,  for  all  Perfons  capable  of  tying 
Knots  may  fend  Work  in  the  Silk  Mills,  which  em- 
ploy 


384  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Chefii. 

ploy  near  1000  Perfons,  and  where  Children  of  fix 
Years  old  are  taught  to  earn  one  Shilling  per  Week, 
and  receive  more,  as  they  grow  capable  of  deferving 
it. 

The  Bridge  over  the  River  Merfey  was  blown  up,  to 
prevent  the  Retreat  of  the  Rebels  in  1745.  fo  that  the 
King's  Forces,  in  Purfuit  of  them,  were  obliged  to 
ford  it  up  to  their  Middles ;  and  the  Soldiers  Wives 
did  the  fame. 

I  referve  to  another  Place  the  Account  of  the  Rife, 
Progrefs,  and  Extinction  of  that  Rebellion. 

Maccksfeld  is  fituate  by  the  River  Batten,  in  the 
Foreft  of  the  fame  Name,  a  Town  of  great  Antiqui- 
ty, and  very  fair  and  fpacious.  'Tis  under  the  Go- 
vernment of  a  Mayor,  and  enjoys  many  particular 
Privileges  by  virtue  of  the  Court  and  Liberties  of  the 
Foreft.  It  has  a  good  Church,  and  a  College  ad- 
joining to  it,  in  which  are  buried  a  great  many  of 
the  Family  of  the  Savages  :  and  here  is  alfo  a  good 
Free-fchool,  and  a  thriving  Manufacture  for  Mohair 
Buttons. 

From  hence  we  turned  about,  and  came  South-weft 
to  Congleton^  near  the  Borders  of  Stafford/hire,  The 
Middle  cf  this  Town  is  watered  by  the  little  Brook 
Howly  ;  the  Eaft-fide  by  the  Daning  Schow  ;  and  the 
North  by  the  Dan.  Altho',  in  Confideration  of  its 
Populoufnefs  and  Trade  (Part  of  which  is  in  Gloves 
and  Mohair  Buttons),  it  is  governed  by  a  Mayor  and 
fix  Aldermen,  yet  it  has  only  one  Chapel  in  it,  and  that 
intirely  of  Wood,  excepting  the  Choir,  and  a  little 
Tower.  It  has  a  very  plentiful  Market ;  and  is  well 
watered,  as  I  have  obferved,  on  all  Sides. 

AFter  paffing  the  Bollen,  we  fee  on  every  Side  in  the 
large  Foreft  of  Macclesfeld  the  Pits  where  they  dig 
Turf  in  Squares,  like  Bricks;  and  in  thefePits  nothing 
is  more  common  than  to  fee  Fir-trees  buried  from  10 
to  20  Feet  deep,  which  the  Men  who  work  here,  dig 
up  for  various  Ufes  i  but  chiefly  for  Splinters,  which 

arc 


Chefh.      GREAT  BRITAIN.  3$? 

are  very  refinous,  and  when  lighted  ferve  the  Poor  for 
Candles. 

I  proceeded  to  the  Aiarket- town  of  Sandbacb^  which 
is  delightfully  fituated  on  a  Branch  of  the  Weaver.  It 
has  a  fair  Church,  and  in  the  Market-place  ftand  two 
CrofTes  of  Stone,  with  the  Hiftory  of  CbriJFs  Paifion 
engraven  on  them.  The  Ale  here  is  defervedly  famed. 

From  Sandbach  we  went  on  Southward,  and  came  to 
the  great  London  Road  to  Namptwich,  which  (rands  up- 
on it.  This  Town  is  well-built,  and  the  Streets  look 
fair,  having  a  great  many  Gentlemens  Houfes  in  them. 
The  Church  is  a  noble  Edifice  in  the  Form  of  a  Crofs, 
with  the  Steeple  rifing  from  the  Middle;  but  the  Main- 
tenance of  the  Minifter  is  mean  and  pit  ful.  The  In- 
habitants are  rich,  and  carry  on  a  good  Trade  in  moft 
Sorts  of  Commodities,  but  principally  in  making  Salt 
and  Cheefe,  the  latter  exceeding  all  that  is  made  in  the 
County,  as  the  Soil  this  Way  is  efteemed  the  beft,  and, 
as  'tis  fa  id,  was  called  by  King  Edward  I.  The  Vale 
Royal. 

Thus  having  made  my  Circuit  round  the  County, 
I  fhall  go  from  hence  South  to  Wbltcburcb  in  Sbrop- 
Jbire.  But  I  muft  firft  note  three  things  of  Cbefoire  : 
I.  That  there  is  no  Part  of  England  where  there  are 
equal  Numbers  of  Gentry,  of  fuch  antient  Extraction  : 
Mr.  Camden  is  very  particular  in  their  Names  andDe- 
fcents,  to  whom  therefore  I  refer.  2.  That  it  is  a 
County  Palatine^  and  has  been  fo  for  many  Ages  ; 
and  its  Government  is  diftincl  from  any  other,  and 
very  particular;  it  is  adminiftred  by  a  Chamberlain,  a 
Judge  Special,  who  is  called  Chief  Jujlice  of  Cbejler^ 
a  Puifny  Judge,  three  Serjeants  at  Law,  a  Sheriff,  an 
Efcheator,  and  all  proper  and  ufual  fubordinate  Offi- 
cers ;  and  the  Jurifdiclion  of  all  thefe  Offices  is  kept 
up  and  preferved  very  ftriclly.  3.  That  there  are 
many  Ports  in  the  County,  but  of  no  great  Extent  j 
amongft  the  moft  diftinguifhed  are,  Bagmeer,  Ccmber- 
Oakbangcr-mser^  and  Pick-meer,  Thefe  are 

VOL.  II.  S  fmgular 


3  86  ATOUR.t/jro  Salop. 

fingular  in  three  Refpecls  ;  that  a  River,  or  at  leaft  a 
Rivulet,  runs  out  of  each  of"  them  ;  that  they  are  plen- 
tifully ftorsd  with  excellent  Fifh;  and  that  their  Banks 
fupply  the  richeft  Failure. 

The  firft  Town  we  came  to  in  Shrop/hire,  called 
Wkitcburcb,  is  a  pleafant,  large,  and  populous  Town, 
and  has  a  very  good  Church,  in  which  is  the  Monu- 
ment of  the  great  John  Talbot,  firft  Earl  of  Sbrewjbu* 
ry,  who  was  called  in  his  Time  the  Englijh  ACHIL- 
LES, and  who  was  fo  renowned  in  the  Wars  in  France, 
that  no  Man  in  that  Kingdom  dared  to  encounter  him 
fingle-handed.  He  had  engraven  on  one  Side  of  his 
Sword,  in  rude  Latin,  Sum  Talboti ;  and  on  the  Re- 
verfe,  Pro  vincere  inimicos  meos.  His  Epitaph  is  as 
follows,  in  Capital  Letters : 

Orate  pro  Amma  Prtsnobilis  Domini^  Domini  Johan- 
nis  Talbott,  quondam  Comitis  Salopiae,  Dotnini 
Talbott,  Domini  Furnivall,  L>omini  Verdon,  Do- 
mini  Strange  de  Blackmere,  &  Marefchalli  Fran- 
cise,  qui  oliit  in  Bella  apud  Burdews  Vll.  Julii 

M.CCCC.LIII. 

IVlnt  church  has  a  good  Market,  and  a  great  many 
Gentry  near  it,  whereof  fome  are  Roman- catholics. 
They  tell  us,  that  this  Town,  when  King  Charles  I. 
removed  his  Standard  from  Nottingham  to  Shrewsbury, 
raifed  a  whole  Regiment  for  his  Service. 

From  hence  we  turned  South,  and  pafling  by  Wem, 
the  Title  given  by  King  James  II.  to  his  Lord  Chan- 
cellor Jefferies,  thence  we  came  to  Elfmere,  which 
gives  Title  of  Baron  to  the  Duke  of  Br'idgwater,  and 
is  famous  for  a  great  Lake  or  Mere,  which  gives  the 
Town  its  Name,  and  which  the  People  pretend  has  in 
fome  Places  no  Bottom.  This  is  remarkable  for  good 
Fifh. 

Clofe  by  the  Side  of  this  Mere  is  an  antient  Seat  of 
the  Kynajlws ;  the  Houfe  appears  to  be  very  old,  and 

ftands 


Salop.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  387 

Hands  low;  but  the  Park  is  a  very  fine  one,  having  the 
greateft  Quantity  of"  the  largeft  Elm-trees  perhaps  to 
be  feen  in  any  Part  of  England ;  and,  fome  few  Years 
lince,  it  was  as  well  flocked  with  Oaks  ;  but  as  I  was 
informed  by  a  neighbouringGentleman,  there  had  been 
8000  /,  worth  of  Timber  fold  out  of  it  not  many  Years 
before. 

And  farther  on,  Weft,  on  the  Confines  of  Denbigh - 
jlrire,  ftands  Ofwe/hy^  a  Bailiwick  Market- town,  for- 
merly famous  for  the  Sale  of  Weljh  Cottons  and  Flan- 
nels, but  now  only  for  the  laft  3  and  of  thefe  there  are 
not  many  at  prefent  exported  ;  fo  that  there  is  fcarce 
any  Trade  in  the  Town;  nor  is  there  one  tolerable 
Houfe  to  entertain  Travelers,  fo  that  we  were  obliged 
to  feek  for  better  Quarters.  The  Town  is  inclofed 
with  a  Wall,  and  a  Ditch,  and  fortified  with  aCaftle  ; 
and  has  a  good  Church  without  the  Gate,  covered 
with  Lead.  From  hence  we  came  the  fame  Night  to 
Sbrervjlury. 

Shrewjbury  is  fuppofed  to  have  been  built  out  of  the 
Ruins  of  the  antient£/m0«/tf///.  In  the  Reign  of  Wil- 
liam I.  Roger  Earl  of  Montgomery  built  a  Caftle  here, 
on  the  North-fide,  and  a  ftately  Abbey,  called  St. 
Giles's,  or  The  Holy  Crofs,  at  the  Eaft-ertd  (of  great 
Note  for  being  the  Repofitory  of  St.Winifrid's  Body), 
fome  Ruins  of  which  are  ftill  to  be  feen.  Sbrewjbury  is 
a  beautiful,  large,  pleafant,  populous,  and  rich  Town; 
full  of  Gentry,  and  of  Trade  too  ;  for  here  is  a  greac 
Manufacture,  as  well  of  Flannel,  as  of  white  Broad- 
cloth, which  enriches  all  the  Country  round  it. 

The  Severn  in  part  furrounds  this  Town  ;  fo  that  it 
makes  the  Form  of  an  Horfe-flioe.  Over  it  are  two  fine 
Stone  Bridges,  upon  one  of  which  is  built  a  very  noble 
Gate,  and,  over  the  Arch  of  the  Gate,  the  Statue  of 
the  great  L/ewfllin,  the  Idol  of  the  Wetjh^  and  their 
laft  Prince  of  Wales ;  this  being  the  Place  where  the 
antient  Princes  of  Pcivis-land,  or  North- Wales  >  kept 
their  Refidence, 

S  2  This 


4  TOUR,  thro  Salop. 

This  is  really  a  Town  of  Gaiety,  fomething  like 
Bury  in  Suffolk,  or  Durham  in  the  North,  but  much 
bigger  than  either  of  them,  or  indeed  than  both  to- 
gether. 

Over  the  Market- houfe  is  kept  a  kind  of  Hall  for 
the  Manufactures,  which  are  fold  here  weekly  in  very 
great  Quantities :  they  fpeak  all  Englijh  in  the  Town, 
but  on  a  Market-day  you  v/ould  think  you  were  in 
Welet. 

Here  is  the  largeft  Market,  the  greateft  Plenty  of 
good  Provifions,  and  the  cheapeft,  that  is  to  be  met 
with  in  all  the  Weftern  Part  of  England.  The  Severn 
fupplies  them  here  with  excellent  Salmon ;  but  'tis  alfo 
brought  in  great  Plenty  from  the  Dee,  which  is  not  far 
off",  and  abounds  with  a  very  good  Kind,  and  gene- 
rally larger  than  in  the  Severn.  As  an  Example  of 
the  Cheapnefs  of  Provifions,  we  paid  here,  in  a  public 
Inn,  but  a  Groat  a-Night  for  Hay,  and  Six-pence  a- 
Peck  for  Oats,  for  our  Horfes,  which  is  cheaper  than 
we  found  it  in  the  cheapeft  Part  of  the  North  of  Eng- 
land; all  our  other  Provifions  were  in  Proportion  ;  and 
there  is  no  doubt  but  the  Cheapnefs  of  Provifions, 
joined  to  the  Pleafantnefs  and  Healthinefs  of  the  Place, 
draws  a  great  many  Families  hither,  who  love  to  live 
within  the  Compafsof  their  Eftates. 

The  Market-days  are  Wednefday  and  Saturday  ;  be- 
fides  a  great  Market  on  Thurfdays,  folely  for  the  Traf- 
fick  of  Welfh  Cloth,  carried  on  by  the  Company  of 
Drapers  of  this  Town  ;  and  fix  annual  Fairs,  held 
June  22.  Aug.  I.  Sept.  21.  Dec.  I.  Wednefday  after 
Eajler  Week,  and  Wednefday  before  Whitfuntide. 

Mr.  Camden  calls  it  a  City :  and  'tis  indeed  equal  to 
feveral  good  Cities  in  England,  and  fuperior  to  fome. 
Near  this  Place  was  fought  the  bloody  Battle  between 
Henry  Hotfpur  and  Henry  IV.  King  of  England,  in 
which  the  former  was  killed,  and  all  his  Army  over- 
thrown. The  Place  is  called  Battle  field  to  this 
Day. 

Here 


Salop.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  389 

Here  are  five  Churches,  two  of  them  with  lofty 
Spires.  St.  Chad's  and  St.  Mary's  are  faid  to  have  been 
antiently  collegiate.  There  are  abundance  of  antique 
Monuments  in  them  all,  which  I  have  not  room  to 
mention. 

•  Ail  the  Parifhes,  except  St.  Mary's,  which  is  a 
Royal  Peculiar,  are  in  the  Diocefe  of  Li  ch field  and  Co- 
ventry. The  Town  was  incorporated  by  King//<?«ryl. 
and  the  Government  of  it' is  placed  in  a  Mayor,  Re- 
corder, Steward,  24  Aldermen,  and  48  Common- 
councilmen ;  and  it  returns  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment. 

King  Charles  II.  would  have  made  Shrew/bury  a 
City,  but  they  chofe  rather  to  remain  a  Corporati  n, 
as  they  are,  valuing  themielves  upon  this  Town  be- 
ing, as  they  faid,  the  firft  in  England  j  for  which  they 
were  called  the  prr.ud  Salopians. 

This  Town  will  for  ever  be  distinguished  for  the  Re- 
cepcion  it  gave  to  King  Charles  I.  who,  after  fetting 
up  his  Standard  at  Nottingham^  and  finding  no  Encou- 
ragement there,  removed  to  Shrewjbury^  being  invited 
by  the  Gentry  of  the  Town  and  Country  round  j  where 
he  was  received  with  fuch  a  general  AfFe&ion,  and 
hearty  Zeal,  that  his  Majefty  recovered  himfelf  from 
the  Difcouragement  of  his  firfiStep  ztNettittgbam,  and 
raifed  and  completed  a  ftrong  Army  in  lefs  Time  than 
could  be  i'-nagined;  infomuch  that,  to  the  Surprize  of 
the  Parliament,  and  indeed  of  all  the  World,  he  was 
in  the  Field  before  them,  and  advanced  upon  them  fo> 
faft,  that  he  met  them  two-thirds  onward  of  his  Way 
to  London,  and  gave  them  Battle  at  Edgehill  near  Ban- 
bury. 

But  the  Fate  of  the  War  turning  afterwards  againft 
the  King,  the  Weight  of  it  fell  heavy  upon  this  Town, 
and  almoft  ruined  it. 

Indeed  they  are  now  fully  recovered,  and  it  is  one  of 
the  moft  flourifhing  Towns  in  England.  The  Walls 
and  Gates  are  yet  landing,  but  ufelefs ;  and  the  old 

S  3  Cattle 


jpo  A  TOUR  thro  Salop. 

Caftle  is  gone  to  Ruin,  as  is  the  Cafe  of  almoft  all  the 
old  Caftles  in  England, 

It  mould  not  be  forgotten,  that,  notwithstanding 
the  Healthinefs  of  the  Place,  here  broke  out  h'rft  that 
unaccountable  Plague,  called,  The  Sweating  Sichiefs, 
Anno  1551.  which  fpread  itfelf  thro'  the  whole  King- 
dom, and  afterwards  into  feveral  foreign  Nations. 

Here  is  a  good  Free-fchool,  the  moft  confiderable  in 
this  Part  of  England ;  founded  by  King  Edward  VI. 
and  endowed  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  with  a  very  fuffi- 
cient  Maintenance  for  a  Chief  or  Head -matter,  and 
three  Under-mafters  or  Umers.  The  Buildings, 
which  are  of  Stone,  are  very  fpacious,  particularly 
the  Library,  which  has  a  great  many  Books  in  it. 
The  School-matters  have  alfo  very  handfome  Houfes 
to  dwell  in  ;  fo  that  the  Whole  has  the  Face  of  a 
College. 

Here  I  was  fhewn  a  very  viGble  and  remarkable  Ap- 
pearance of  the  great  ancient  Road  called  WatRng- 
jlrett)  which  comes  from  London  to  this  Town,  and 
goes  on  from  hence  to  the  utmoft  Coaft  of  Wales.  Re- 
mains of  a  Stone  Bridge  are  to  be  fcen  in  the  Bottom 
of  the  River,  when  the  Water  is  low.  This  Road  is 
raifed  a  good  Height  above  the  Soil,  and  fo  (trait,  that 
upon  an  Eminence  you  may  fee  it  10  or  15  Miles  be- 
fore you,  and  as  much  behind,  over  many  Hill-tops 
anfwering  one  the  other  as  a  Vifta  of  Trees. 

We  lodged  at  an  Inn  called  Iv e fey  bank ^  on  the 
Borders  between  Stafford/hire  and  Sbrop/hire.  About 
a  Mile  off,  in  a  large  Wood,  ftands  Bofcobel-boufe,  or 
White-  Ladies^  as  fome  call  it,  where  thePendrils  lived, 
who  preferved  King  Charles  If.  after  Worcefter  Battle, 
and  famous  for  the  Royal  Oak.  The  Grand-daugh- 
ter of  that  William  Feudal  {till  lived  in  the  Houfe, 
when  I  was  there.  The  Floor  of  the  Garret,  which  is 
a  Popiih  Chapel  (formerly  a  Nunnery  in  PofTeffion  of 
the  Family  of  Ce&ftyL  being  matted,  prevents  any 
Sufpicion  of  a  little  Cavity  with  a  Trap-door  over 

the 


Salop.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  391 

the  Stair-cafe,  where  the  King  was  hid.  His  Bed  was 
artfully  placed  behind  fome  Wainfcot,  and  fliut  up 
very  clofe.  A  Defcendent  of  the  Cookfeys  ftill  keeps 
the  Gloves  and  Garters  which  his  Majefty  left  behind 
him. 

The  faid  Chapel  is  fliil  {landing,  and  has  fome  paint- 
ed Saints  upon  the  Wall  at  one  End. 

A  Bow-fhot  from  the  Houfe,  juft  by  an  Horfe-track 
paffing  through  the  Woo'd,  flood  the  Royal  Oak,  into 
which  the  King  and  Colonel  Carlos  climbed,  by  means 
of  the  Hen-rooft  Ladder,  when  they  thought  it  no 
longer  fa!e  to  flay  in  the  Houfe,  the  Family  reaching 
them  Victuals  with  the  Nut  hook.  It  happened,  as 
the  People  related  it  to  us,  that  whilft  the  King  and 
the  Colonel  were  in  the  Tree,  a  Party  of  the  Ene- 
my's Plorfe  (fer.t  to  fearch  the  Houfe),  came  whittling 
and  talking  along  this  Road  ;  and,  when  they  were 
juft  under  the  Tree,  an  Owl  flew  out  of  a  neighbour- 
ing Tree,  and  hovered  along  the  Ground,  as  if  her 
Wings  were  broken,  which  the  Soldiers  merrily  pur- 
fued. 

The  Tree  is  now  inclofed  within  a  Brick  Wall,  the 
Infide  whereof  is  covered  with  Laurel,  of  which  we 
may  fay,  as  Ovid  did  of  that  of  the  Auguftan  Palace. 
— Mediamque  tuebere  quercurn,  For  the  Oak  is  in  the 
Middle,  almoft  cut  away  by  Travelers,  whofe  Curio- 
fity  leads  them  to  fee  it.  Clofe  by  the  Side  grows  a 
young  thriving  Plant  from  one  of  its  Acorns. 

After  the  Reftoration,  the  King,  reviewing  the 
Place  (no  doubt,  with  very  different  Emotions  from 
what  he  had  when  he  was  in  it),  gathered  fome  of  the 
Acorns,  and  fet  them  in  St.  James's  Park  or  Garden, 
and  ufed  to  water  them  hirnfelf.  If  we  may  judge  of 
the  Value  the  King  put  upon  his  Prefervation,  and 
Royal  Perfon,  it  WAS  worth  200  /.  per  Annum  ;  and 
one  fhould  think  a  King,  if  worth  any  thing,  worth, 
that ;  for  fo  much  he  gave  to  Pendril^  and  it  now  re- 
mains in  the  Family.  Over  the  Door  of  the  Inclo- 

S  4  fure 


A  TOUR  thro  Salop. 

Cure  is  a  Latin  Infcription  cut  in  Marble ;  which  may 
be  thus  translated  : 

Bafil  and  Jane  Fitzherbert  recommended  to  Pojlerity 
this  mo/i  fortunate  Tree,  which  the  All  gracious 
and  All-mighty  God,  by  whom  Kings  reign,  or- 
'  dained  here  to  grow,  to  be  the  Afylum  of  the  mojl 
Potent  Prince  King  Charles  //.  and  have  begirt 
it  with  a  Wall)  as  well  in  perpetual  Reme?nbrance 
of  fo  great  an  Event ,  as  a  I'eftimony  of  their  firm 
Allegiance  to  Kings. 

—  The  Oak  belov'd  by  Jove. 

Ten  Miles  South-eaft  of  Shreivjbury  ftands  Great 
Wenlock,  a  good  Market-town,  mentioned  before. 

The  noted  IVreken -bill  ftands  higher  up,  North  of  it, 
between  the  Watling-Jlreet  and  the  Severn,  within  a 
:\iile  of  Wroxeter,  the  famous  Roman  Station.  It  af- 
cends  gradually  from  a  pleafant  level  Ground,  ftrikes 
out  a  pretty  great  Length,  and  is  well  adorned  with 
Trees,  'Tis  the  higheft  Ground  in  the  County,  and 
gives  a  fine  Profpeft  all  around  it. 

North  of  this,  about  eight  Miles  Diftance,  is  a  fine 
Seat  belonging  to  Sir  Rowland  Hill,  Bart.  The  Houfe, 
which  is  built  in  a  very  good  Tafte,  ftanding  low,  is 
not  feen  from  the  Road  j  but  the  Hill,  which  ftands 
above  the  Houfe,  and  fronts  the  JFreken,  is  made  very 
beautiful,  by  cutting  away  the  Rocks,  and  forming  them 
into  Bullions,  and  regular  Gothic  Buildings,  with  the 
fame  Stone ;  and  here  is  a  fine  Vineyard  planted  in 
Terraces,  which  overlooks  the  Country  beyond  Shrew f- 
bury,  in  which  the  Grapes  generally  ripen  as  foon  as  in 
molt  Parts  of  England ;  which  is  owing  to  its  Situa- 
tion, it  being  defended  on  every  Side,  and  opens  only 
to  the  South. 

Following  the  Watllng-Jlreet,  North,  we  came  to 
a  fmall  Market  town  called  Wellington^  of  very  little 
Note ;  and  ftill  keeping  the  Street,  we  arrived  at  New- 
port on  the  Borders  of  Stafford/hire,  a  little  Market- 
town, 


Staff.,        GREAT  BRITAIN.  393 

town,  where  is  one  of  the  nobleft  Foundations  for  a 
School  in  the  whole  Kingdom,  endowed  by  one  Adams , 
an  Haberdaftier  of  London^  to  the  Value  of  7000  /. 
The  School  is  70  Feet  long,  22  wide,  and  the  fame 
in  Height,  a  Library,  an  Houfe  for  both  the  Matter 
and  Ufher,  6o/.  a  Year  to  the  firft,  and  3O/.  to  the 
other  ;  and  a  Garden  to  each  Houfe  of  an  Acre,  and 
two  Acres  for  the  Boys  to  play  in.  Near  it  he  has 
likewife  built  an  Alms-houfe,  and  gave  55O/.  towards 
building  the  Town-houfe.  Over  the  School-door  is 
this  Diftich  : 

Scripjijii  haredem  patriam,  tibi  qius  dedit  ortum : 
Scriberis  ergo  tuts  jure  pater  patrits* 

That  is, 

Thy  Country  Is  thy  Heir :  and  therefore  we 
Jujlly  ejleem  thy  Country's  Parent  "Thee. 

Between  this  Town  and  Drayton,  a  fmall  Market- 
town,  higher  up  Northward,  and  likewife  on  the  Bor- 
ders of  Stafford/hire,  is  B&rebeatb,  famous  for  a  Battle 
fought  between  the  Houfes  of  Tork  and  Lancafter, 
wherein  Nevil  Earl  of  Salt/bury  for  the  former,  with 
5000  Men  only,  beat  Lord  Dudley  with  10,000  Men, 
after  a  moil  bloody  Engagement. 

Entering  Stafford/hire^  we  quitted  the  faid  Street- 
way^  a  little  to  the  Left,  to  fee  Stafford,  the  County- 
town,  and  the  moft  confiderable,  except  Lichfield,  in 
the  County.  In  the  Way,  we  pafTed  thro'  a  fmall, 
but  antientTown,  called  Penkrlge,  vulgarly  Pankrage9 
probably  the  Pennocruclum  of  the  Romans ^  where 
happened  to  be  a  Fair.  We  were  furprized  to  fee  the 
prodigious  Number  of  the  fmeft  and  moft  beautiful 
Horfes  that  can  any- where  be  feen,  brought  hither  from 
Yorkjhire,  the  Bifhoprick  of  Durham^  and  all  the 
Horie-breeding  Counties  in  England:  we  were  told 
there  were  not  lefs  than  an  hundred  Jockeys  or  Horfe- 

S  5  koperv 


394  A  TOUR  thro  Staff. 

kopers,  as  they  call  them  there,  from  London,  to  buy 
Horfes  for  Sale.  Alfo  an  incredible  Number  of  Gentle- 
men attended  with  their  Grooms,  to  buy  Hunters,  and 
good  Road-horfes.  In  a  word,  I  believe  I  may  mark 
it  for  the  greateft  Horfe-fair  in  the  World,  for  Horfes 
of  Value,  and  efpecially  thofe  we  call  Saddle-hoi fes ; 
tho'  there  were  great  Numbers  of  fine  large  Stone- 
horfes  for  Coach  and  Draught  too. 

From  hence  we  came  in  two  Hours  eafy  Riding  to 
Stafford,  on  the  River  Sow.  'Tis  an  antient  Town, 
and  gives  Name  to  the  County.  It  is  neat  and  well- 
built,  and  pleafantly  feated  in  low  Grounds ;  and  is 
lately  much  increafed,  and  grown  rich  by  the  Cloth- 
ing-trade. It  is  governed  by  a  Mayor,  and  other  in- 
ferior Officers,  confifts  of  two  Parifties,  and  returns 
two  Members  to  Parliament.  This  Town  retains  the 
antient  Cuftom  of  Borough  Englijh ;  which  is,  that 
the  youngeft  Sons  inherit  the  Lands  of  their  Fathers 
within  the  Town.  It  is  adorned  with  two  Churches; 
one  of  which  is  very  large  and  fpacious  ;  and  a  Free- 
fchool :  the  Streets  are  clean,  and  well-paved  ;  the 
Buildings  of  Stone  and  Slate  ;  and  fome  of  the  Struc- 
tures are  very  modiih  and  beautiful.  Its  Market-place 
is  large  and  uniform  ;  in  which  ftands  the  Shire-hall, 
where  the  Affizes  for  the  County  are  held.  Klngjchn 
made  it  a  Corporation,  and  Edward  VI.  confirmed 
and  enlarged  the  Charter.  About  a  Mile  and  half  out 
of  the  Town,  upon  an  Hill,  we  faw  the  Ruins  of  an 
antient  Caftie,  belonging  heretofore  to  the  Barons  of 
Stafford ;  but  it  was  demolifhed  in  the  Civil  Wars. 
This  Hill  affords  a  moft  pleafant  ProfpecT:  of  the  Town, 
and  adjacent  Country. 

We  tarried  here  a  few  Days,  in  order  to  vifit  the 
Towns  lying  on  each  Side  of  it  with  more  Attention 
and  Convenience. 

Ecdejhall\\s&  North-weft  of  Stafford,  and  is  a  pret- 
ty Marked-town,  noted  for  Pedlary- wares :  and  an 

handfome 


Staff.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  395 

handfome  little  Market-town,  with  good  Inns  in  it, 
calJed  Stone,  lies  upon  the  Trent ;  and  all  the  Coun- 
try hereabouts  yields  delightful  Views  of  this  noble 
River.  At  Shirby-ivicb  is  a  large  Salt-well,  and  a 
fine  Country. 

Ncwcaftle  under  Line  ftands  ftill  fartherNorth,  upon 
a  Branch  of  the  Trent.  'Tis  governed  by  a  Mayor, 
twx>  Juftices,  two  Bailiffs,  and  Common-council, 
holds  Pleas  under  40  s.  and  returns  two  Members  to 
Parliament.  The  Streets  are  large,  broad,  and  paved. 
The  Clothing-trade  flourifhes  here,  and  the  Town  is 
furrounded  with  Coal-pits,  which  yield  Coal  in  con- 
fiderable  Quantities.  It  has  an  handfome  Mar- 
ket place.  The  New  Caftle,  whence  the  Town  was 
denominated,  is  now  leveled.  About  three  Miles 
from  the  Town  Is  a  Manufacture  of  Earthen- ware, 
which  imitates  brown  China,  and  makes  curious  black 
Tea-pots,  £sV.  refembling  Japan,  being  neatly  figured 
and  gilt.  The  Coals  here  are  cut  out  in  Slices,  and 
fhine  with  all  the  various  Colours  of  a  Peacock's  Tail, 
and  therefore  are  called  Peacock-coals. 

The  principal  Manufacture  in  this  Town  at  prefent 
is  Hat- making;  there  being  an  incorporated  Company 
here  by  the  Name  of  Felt-makers. 

Dr.  Plot,  as  an  Inftance  of  the  Growth  of  Stones, 
mentions,  that  near  this  Place  was  found  a  Stone,  with 
a  Man's  Skull,  Teeth  and  all,  inclofed  in  it.  And 
here  is  an  excellent  Device  for  the  Taming  of  Shrews: 
they  put  a  Bridle  into  the  Scold's  Mouth,  which  de- 
prives her  of  the  Power  of  Speech,  by  which  (he  is  led 
about  the  Town,  and  expofed  to  public  Shame,  till  {he 
promifes  Amendment. 

Near  this  Town  is  the  greateft  Quantity  of  Stone- 
ware made  of  any  Part  of  England.  I  was  allured  by 
a  Nobleman  who  lived  in  that  Neighbourhood,  that 
they  ufually  exported  203OOO/.  worth  of  that  Manu- 
facture every  Year. 

S  6  About 


3£<J  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Staff. 

About  three  Miles  South-eaft  of  Newcajlk  is  the 
little  Town  of  Trentbam,  fo  called  from  the  River 
Trent,  which  rifes  there. 

At  this  Place  is  the  noble  Seat  of  Earl  Gower,  which 
is  efteemed  the  fineft  Place  in  this  County  :  the  Houfe 
is  modern,  and  built  on  the  Plan  of  Buckingham- botife, 
in  St.  James's  Park.  It  is  fituated  clofe  to  the  Church, 
which  renders  the  Entrance  to  the  Houfe  very  incon- 
venient, the  Church  and  Churchyard  being  in  Front. 

The  Park  is  very  beautiful,  and  has  two  large  Pieces 
of  Water  in  it;  and  the  Hills,  which  rife  immediately 
from  the  Water,  are  finely  covered  with  Wood  ;  which 
has  a  noble  Effect  as  you  pafs  ahng  the  Road  to 
Newcaftle.  The  Park  is  walled  round,  and  from  the 
high  Ground  in  it,  you  have  an  extenfive  View  of  the 
Country  every  way. 

Betky,  a  little  Market-town,  lies  North-weft  of 
Newcajile,  upon  the  Borders  of  Chejbirt. 

Breewoodis  a  pretty  Market- town,  lying  South- weft 
of  Stafferd.  And,  due  South,  (lands 

Woiverbampton,  a  very  antient  Town,  fituate  on  an 
Hill,  which  is  well-built,  paved,  and  inhabited.  Here 
the  Trade  of  Lock-making  is  carried  on  to  great  Per- 
fection ;  as  is  alfo  every  other  Manufacture  in  Brafs 
and  Iron  ;  and  the  Goods  are  exported  all  over  Europe: 
but  the  Town  does  not  increafe  in  its  Buildings  like 
that  of  Birmingham,  the  Land,  for  the  chief  Part,  being 
the  Property  of  the  Church,  and  confequently  the  Te- 
nure not  fuch  as  to  encourage  People  to  lay  out  their 
Money  upon  it.  The  Church,  which  is  Collegiate, 
was  founded  by  a  Widow  Lady,  named  IVulfnena,  in 
the  Year  996.  and  King  Edward  VI.  granted  it,  toge- 
ther with  feven  Prebends  thereunto  belonging,  to  John 
Dudley,  Duke  of  Northumberland,  in  the  Year  1553. 
In  it  are  feveral  old  Monuments,  and  a  Brafs  Statue  of 
Sir  Richard  Levefon,  who  engaged  the  Spaniards,  under 
Sir  Francis  Drake.  The  Pulpit  is  old,  and  of  Stone; 
and  in  the  Church- yard  is  a  very  old  Stone  Crofs. 

From 


Staff.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

From  the  Hill,  on  which  the  Town  is  fituated,  run 
four  weak  Springs  of  different  Qualities,  which  is  the 
only  Water  they  have  to  fupply  this  large  and  popu- 
lous Town. 

The  Market  for  Iron-work  is  held  weekly.  Some 
of  it  is  made  in  the  Town ;  but  the  chief  Part  is  brought 
to  the  Market  by  the  Farmers  for  feveral  Miles  round 
it:  for  in  this  Country  every  Farm  has  one  Forge,  or 
more ;  fo  that  the  Farmers  carry  on  two  very  different 
Bufmefles ;  working  at  their  Forges  as  Smiths,  when 
they  are  not  employed  in  the  Fields  as  Farmers :  and 
all  they  work  they  bring  to  Market,  where  the  great 
Tradesmen  buy  it  up,  and  fend  it  to  London. 

In  the  Hamlet  of  Wednesfield^  near  two  Miles  dif- 
tant  from  Wolverhampton>  a  new  Chapel  was  creeled* 
by  virtue  of  an  A&  of  Parliament  palled  in  the  Seffion 
of  1746.  for  the  better  .Convenience  of  the  Inhabitants 
attending  Divine  Service,  the  Road  between  thefe  two 
Places  being  very  deep  and  dirty  in  the  Winter- feafon; 
and  the  Chaplain  or  Curate  is  to  be  nominated  by  Mrs. 
Martha  Gougb^  Widow,  a  principal  Contributor  to 
this  pious  Work,  or  her  Heirs. 

In  the  Year  1755.  an  Ac~t  pafTed  for  building  a  new 
Chapel  in  this  Town,  the  Preamble  of  which  recites. 
That  Wofaerhampton  is  a  large  and  populous  trading 
Place,  and  has  but  one  Church  in  it,  which  is  not  fuf- 
ficient  to  contain  the  Inhabitants  profefling  the  Doc- 
trine of  the  Church  of  England  \  and  that  the  Church- 
yard is  fo  fmall,  that  there  is  not  Room  for  the  decent 
Interment  of  fuch  of  the  Inhabitants  as  die  there ; 
which  occafions  the  dead  Bodies  of  many  Perfons  to 
be  carried,  at  a  confiderable  Expence,  to  other  Places, 
to  be  interred : 

That  Subfcriptions  have  been  fet  on  Foot,  and 
Money  raifed  for  thofe  Purpofes  ;  but  not  fufficient  to 
raife  a  Fabrick  large  enough  to  contain  the  Number 
of  People  that  will  refort  to  it : 

That 


398 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  Staff. 

That  the  Right  Hon.  Henry  Earl  of  Stamford,  being 
defirous  of  promoting  fo  pious  a  Defign,  is  willing  to 
contribute  the  Sum  of  iooo/.  towards  the  building 
fuch  Chapel,  on  Condition  that  he  and  his  Heirs  for 
ever  (hall  be  invefted  with  the  Right  of  Nomination 
and  Prefentation  of  their  Minifter  to  perform  divine 
Service  in  it  : 

That  feveral  Joint-owners  or  Proprietors,  (in  the 
A£t  named)  of  certain  Clofes  or  Parcels  of  Land 
therein  defcribed,  have  voluntarily  offered  to  furnifh 
Land  for  this  Purpofe,  and  for  making  a  Cemetery  or 
Church-yard,  and  proper  Roads  or  Avenues  thereto  : 

But  that  the  fame  cannot  be  carried  into  Effect,  fo 
as  to  anfwer  the  intended  Purpofe,  without  the  Aid  of 
an  A6t  of  Parliament  :  Therefore,  &c.  fee  the  Adi. 

Walfal)  Eaft  of  Wolverhampton^  is  ar  good,  pleafant 
Corporate-town,  governed  by  a  Mayor,  and  fituate  on 
the  top  of  an  Hill.  This  Place  is  famous  for  Iron- 
mines  and  Iron-  works,  fuch  as  Spurs,  Bridle-bits,  Stir- 
rups, Buckles,  £sV.  in  which  there  is  a  confiderable 
Trade  carried  on. 

Wrottejley  deferves  to  be  mentioned,  as  it  is  eminent 
for  the  Remains  of  fome  Eritijb  or  other  Antiquity  (to 
fpeak  of  it  in  the  Words  of  the  Right  Reverend  Con- 
tinuator  of  Camden\  whether  Fortification  or  City. 

My  Author,  fays  he,  inclines  to  the  latter,  becaufe  of 
the  feveral  Partitions,  like  Streets,  running  divers  ways, 
which  are  within  the  Limits  of  it  ;  as  alfo  the  large 
Hinges  which  have  been  found  here,  and  fome  of  the 
Stones  fquared.  The  Whole  contains  in  Circuit  about 
three  or  four  Miles;  and  Stones  of  a  vaft  Bignefs  have 
been  found  thereabouts.  It  is  remarkable,  that  one  of 
thefe  made  100  Loads  ;  another,  after  ten  Loads  hewn 
off,  required  36  Yoke  of  Oxen  to  draw  it,  and  made 
a  great  Ciftern  in  a  Malt  houfe  here  at  IFrotteJley  ; 
which,  though  left  very  thick  both  at  Bottom  and  Sides, 
wets  37  Strikes  of  Bailey  at  a  time. 

5  Upon 


Staff.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          399 

Upon  the  Extremity  of  the  Country,  South,  juft  on 
the  Borders  of  Worcefterjhire,  is  fituate  upon  an  high 
Mountain,  the  famous  antient  Caftle  of  Dudley^  a 
Building  of  great  Extent,  with  Trenches  about  it  cut 
out  of  a  Rock,  and  hath  an  high  Tower  upon  it,  on 
the  South-fide.  It  was  built  by  Dodo  a  Saxon,  in  700. 
Great  Part  of  it  is  in  Ruins,  and  the  reft  converted 
into  a  noble  Seat,  where  the  Lord  /F<Wrefides.  The 
Caftle  over-tops  all  the  Trees  that  furround  it,  and  has 
a  moft  extenfive  Profpecl:  over  five  Shires,  and  into 
Part  of  Wales.  In  the  Hall  of  this  Caftle  is -a  Table  all 
of  one  intire  Plank,  which,  before  it  was  fitted  up 
there,  was  25  Yards  long,  and  one  Yard  in  Breadth  j 
but,  being  too  long  for  the  Hall,  feven  Yards  and  nine 
Inches  of  it  were  cut  off,  and  made  a  Table  for  the 
Hall  of  a  neighbouring  Gentleman. 

The  Town  of  Dudley  lies  near  it,  but  in  Wcrcefier- 
Jhire  ;  and  is  only  remarkable  for  being  in  a  different 
County  from  the  Caftle. 

The  People  in  this  County  have  been  more  particu- 
larly famous  than  any  other  for  good  Footmanfhip;  and 
there  have  been,  and  ftill  are,  among  them  ibme  of  the 
fleeteft  Runners  in  England ;  which  muft  be  owing  to 
their  exercifing  themfelves  in  it  from  their  Childhood  ; 
for  running  Foot-races  feems  to  be  the  general  Sport  or 
Diverfion  of  the  Country. 

Near  Stafford  we  faw  Ingeftre,  where  the  late  Wai' 
tcr  Chetwynd,  Efq;  built,  or  rather  rebuilt,  a  very  fine 
Church  at  his  own  Charge,  and  where  the  late  Lord 
Vifcount  Cbetwynd  has,  with  a  Profufion  of  Expence, 
laid  out  the  fineft  Park  and  Gardens  that  are  in  thi« 
Part  of"  England. 

About  a  Mile  from  this  Place  is  Shuckborough-Manor9 
the  Seat  of  Thomas  Anfon^  Efq;  elder  Brother  to  Lord 
Anfon.  The  Houfe  ftands  near  the  Trent,  and  the 
Gardens,  which  are  laid  out  in  a  fine  Tafte,  are  fitu- 
ated  on  the  Banks  of  the  River.  There  are  fome 
Ruins  built  with  large  Stones,  which  the  prefent  Poffef- 

ftr 


4oo  4  TOUR  tiro'  Staff 

for  found  on  the  Spot ;  and  which  have  a  very  good 
Effect. 

At  the  Bottom  of  the  Garden,  in  the  public  Road, 
is  a  large  (landing  Water,  which  in  Winter,  and  after 
great  Rains,  is  impaflable :  over  it  is  a  Stone  Bridge  of 
39  Arches,  for  Horfe  and  Foot  PafTengers  i  but  it  is  too 
narrow  for  Wheel-carriages. 

I  am  now  at  the  utmoft  Extent  of  my  propofed  Li- 
mits for  this  Circuit ;  for  Ingeftre  Parks  reach  to  the 
very  Banks  of  the  Trent.  So  I  turned  to  the  Right, 
and,  intending  for  Licbfield,  in  the  Way  we  faw 
Beaudefert,  a  famous  old  Seat,  faid  to  be  built  by  Hugh 
Lupus,  Earl  of  Cbejler.  The  Name  indeed  intimates 
it  to  be  of  Norman  or  French  Original ;  at  prefent  it  is 
in  the  noble  Family  of  Paget,  Earl  tfUxbridge,  who 
is  ftill  Baron  of  Beaudefert.  The  Park  is  veiy  fine, 
and  its  Sitaation  exceeding  pleafant;  but  the  Houfe  is 
antient.  -  In  the  Park  is  a  famous  Piece  of  Antiquity  ; 
viz.  a  large  Camp  or  Fortification,  furrounded  with  a 
double  Trench,  very  large  and  deep. 

On  the  Left  of  the  Road  is  On/ley,  the  Seat  of  Sir 
fVilliam  OuJIey.  The  Houfe  is  antient,  and  fituated 
low  among  the  Marfhes,with  the  River  running  at  the 
Back  of  the  Houfe.  The  Park  is  on  a  rifing  Ground 
on  the  Right-hand  of  the  Road  j  fo  is  feparated  from 
the  Houfes  and  Gardens. 

From  hence  it  is  about  12  Miles  to  the  City  of 
Lichfeld,  the  principal,  next  to  Chefter,  of  all  the 
North- weft  Part  of  England ,  nor  indeed  is  there  any 
other,  but  this  and  Coventry,  in  the  whole  Road  from 
London  to  Carlijle,  which  is  on  the  Edge  of  Scot- 
land. 

At  Rugely,  which  is  an  handfome,  but  fmall  well- 
built  Town,  finely  fituated  near  the  Trent,  we  came 
into  the  great  Lancashire  and  Che/hire  Road,  or  the 
North- weii  Road  from  London^  which,  paffing  through 
Lichfield,  from  Harrington- bridge  in  Chejhire,  falls  into 
)  mentioned  before,  about  three  Miles 

South- 


Staff.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  401 

iSouth*eaft  from  the  Town,  and  crofles  another  antient 
Caufeway  or  Road,  called  hknild-flreet,  about  a  Mile 
out  of  the  City  ;  fo  that  Lichfdd  lies,  as  it  were,  at 
the  joining  of  all  thofe  great  Roads. 

But,  inftead  of  going  dire&ly  to  Lichfield,  we  ftruck 
out  of  the  Road,  and  went  North-eaft  to  Bromley,  a 
pretty  Village ;  and  from  thence  Eaft  to  Tutbury  on 
the  Skirts  of  Derbyjhire:  it  is  a  fmall  Town,  with  a 
Caftle  in  it. 

Some  Miles  Southward  ftands  Burton  uporfTrent, 
where  the  Clothing- trade  is  carried  on  with  great  Ad- 
vantage. It  is  famous  for  its  noble  Bridge  over  the 
Trent,  confiftingof  36  Arches,  and  of  the  Length  of 
503  Yards,  built  probably  by  William  de  la  Waul^  in 
K.  Henry  III.'s  Time  (whofe  Arms  are  ilill  to  be  feen 
in  the  Church),  of  Free-ftone  cut  and  fquared. 

Here  are  ftill  the  Remains  of  an  Abbey  of  the  Bene- 
ditt'ims*  whofe  Abbot  was  mitred,  and  fat  in  Parlia- 
ment. In  it  was  buried  Modwena,  a  Virgin  of  emi- 
nent Sanclity,  who  gave  Name  to  a  Well  in  the  Pariih, 
whofe  Water  is  faid  to  cure  feveral  Difeafes.  Tburf- 
day  is  the  Market-day  ;  and  a  Fair  is  annually  held 
on  Afcenfion-day* 

From  hence  we  returned  South-weft  to  Lichfield> 
which  is  a  fine,  neat,  well-built,  and  pretty  large 
City.  It  rofe  from  the  Ruins  of  the  Roman  Etocetum^ 
a  Mile  off,  now  called  Cbejterfield-wally  from  fome 
Reliques  of  its  Fortifications.  There  is  a  kind  of  flow, 
fluggifli  Lough,  or  Water,  which  runs,  or  rather  glides 
heavily  through  it,  and  fo  on  for  four  or  five  Miles  far- 
ther into  the  Trent ;  but  takes  a  fwifter  Motion  as  foon 
as  it  is  out  of  the  Town.  This  Water  parts  the  City 
into  two :  one  Part  is  called  the  Town,  and  the  other 
the  Clofe ;  in  the  firft  is  the  Market-place,  a  fine 
School,  and  a  very  hand  fome  Hofpital  dedicated  to 
St.  Jobn^  well  endowed.  This  Part  is  much  the 
largcft,  and  moft  populous :  but  the  other  is  the  faireft, 
has  the  beft  Buildings  in  it,  and,  among  the  reft,  the 

Cathedral 


4G2  A  TOUR  thrd  Staff. 

Cathedral  Church,  one  of  the  fineft  and  mofl  beautiful 
in  England. 

There  are  two  fine  Caufeways,  which  join  the  City 
and  the  Clofe,  with  Sluices  to  let  the  Water  pafs ;  but 
thofe  were  cut  through  in  the  inteftine  Wars  in  Eng- 
land-, and  the  Clofe,  which  is  walled  about,  and  was 
then  fortified  for  the  King,  was  very  ftrong,  and  flood 
out  feveral  Attacks  againft  Cromwell's  Men  ;  but  was 
at  laft  taken  by  Storm,  not  without  great  Lofs  of  Blood 
on  both  Sides, 

There  are  in  the  Clofe,  befides  the  Houfes  of  the 
Clergy  Refidentiaries,  a  great  many  well  built  and 
well  inhabited  Houfes  ;  which  made  Lichpeld  a  Place 
of  good  Company,  above  all  the  Towns  in  this  or  the 
neighbouring  Counties  of  ffarwickjhire  or  Derbyfliire. 

The  See  is  very  antient,  and  was  once  archiepifco- 
pal,  made  fo  by  king  Offa  \  and  Eadutpb  the  Arch- 
bifhop  was  :Vetro poli tan  of  all  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Mercians  and  Eaji-  Singles  \  but  it  did  not  hold  it  j  then 
it  fuffered  another  Diminution,  by  having  the  See  of 
Chefter  taken  away,  which  was  once  Part  of  this. 

They  told  us  here  a  long  Story  of  St  Chad,  former- 
ly Bifhop  of  this  Church,  and  how  he  lived  an  Eremi- 
tical Life  here,  by  the  Spring  near  Stow  Church,  in  a 
little  Hovel  or  Cell.  But  the  Biftiops,  fince  that  Time 
fare  better,  and  make  fhift  with  a  very  fine  Palace  in 
the  Ci'ofet  and  the  Refidentiaries  live  in  proportion  to 
them. 

They  have  another  Story  at  Licbfield ;  namely,  that 
a  thoufand  poor  People,  being  inltrucled  in  the  Chri- 
flian  Faith  by  the  Care  of  Offa  King  of  the  Mercians^ 
were  all  martyred  here  in  one  Field  by  the  Pagans:  and 
that  in  the  field  where  they  were  fo  mur-iered,  King 
Ofwy  of  Northumberland  caufed  a  great  Church  to  be 
built  ;  and  from  thence  the  City  bears  for  its  Device, 
an  open  Field,  with  mangled  Carcafes  lying  difperfed 
about  it,  as  if  murdered,  and  left  imburied. 

The 


Staff.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  403 

The  Church,  which  was  rebuilt  by  Bifhop  Roger  de 
Clinton  in  1 148.  for  the  Elegancy  and  Regularity  of  the 
Building,  may  be  efteemed  one  of  the  molt  complete 
in  England.  The  Weft- end  is  richly  decorated  with 
the  Statues  of  all  the  Kings  who  reigned  in  Jerufalemy 
from  David  to  the  Captivity.  But  it  is  too  flat,  and 
wants  Projection,  or,  as  Architects  call  it,  Relief,  to 
give  it  Boldnefs.  The  two  Towers  are  much  too  low 
for  their  Breadth,  and  look  very  heavy  for  want  of 
- Windows,  efpecially  where  the  Bells  hang.  The  cir- 
cular Staircafes  projecting  o£tagonally  at  one^Vngle 
only  of  each,  without  any  of  the  other  three  Angles  an- 
iwering,  is  a  great  Irregularity.  But  the  Spires  above 
them  are  carried  up  in  an  exceeding  beautiful  Tafte, 
much  beyond  any  other  Gothic  Spires  that  1  have  feen. 
The  middle  Tower  and  Spire  of  this  Church  are 
higher  than  thofe  at  the  Weft-end,  and  are  equally 
beautiful. 

The  Spire  defigned  for  the  micl'lc  of  iPtft*d*Jlvr 
Abbev,  was  to  be"  in  Imitation  of  the  middle  Spire  of 
this  Church. 

The  great  Window  over  the  middle  Door  is  very 
large,  and  its  Pediment  finely  adorned,  a  large  Crofs 
Jimfhing  the  top  of  it. 

The  Imagery  and  carved  Work  on  the  Front,  as 
above,  fuffcred  'much  in  1641.  and  they  told  us,  the 
Crofs  over  the  Weft  Window  was  frequently  fhot  at 
by  the  rude  Soldiers ;  but  that  they  could  not  ftioot  it 
down. 

The  Saints  of  thofe  Davs  alfo  intirely  ruined  all  the 
Ornaments  of  the  Inficle,  with  the  Brafs  Infcriptions, 
Tombs,  &c.  It  is  built  in  the  midft  of  a  Bog  for  Se- 
curity, and  held  out  feme  fierce  Attacks  for  King 
Charles  I.  and  what  the  Outfide  fuffered,  has  been  very 
well  repaired  fince  the  Restoration,  as  well  by  the  fa- 
mous Bifhop  Hackety  as  by  the  Bounty  of  feveral  noble 
and  generous  Benefactors. 

The 


404  A  TOUR  thro  Staff. 

The  MonalTicon  makes  mention  of  a  Shrine  being 
given  here  for  St.  Chad,  or  St.  Gedda,  which  coft 
200,000  /.  but  I  conceive  that  to  fmcll  as  much  of  the 
Legend,  ;i>  the  Miracles  of  St.  Chad  himfclf  ;  fince 
fuch  a  Gift  at  that  time  muft  be  equal  to  two  Millions 
of"  our  Money. 

The  City  is  a  County  of  itfelf,  with  a  JurifdicYmn 
extending  10  or  12  Miles  round  ;  which  Circuit  the 
Sheriff  rides  every  Year  on  Sept.  8.  It  is  governed  by 
two  Bailiffs,  a  Sheriff,  24  Burjidl!  s,  a  Recorder,  fcfr. 
anil  fends  two  Manlvrs  to  Parliament. 

Anticnt  Camps  are  found  in  ihc  Neighbourhood  of 


Frooi  Licbfield  we  came  to  Tamwtrtk,  a  fine  j 
fant  trading  Town.  en>  IK»  r  for  good  Ale,  and  good 
Company,  of  the  middling  Sort  ;  and  alfo  for  a  fine 
Chaniy  of  the  to  •><•  opulent  Book'clK-r,  Mr.  GW  who 
built  and  endowoi  the  noble  Hofpit.il  in  South  i 
called  by  his  Name.  The  Town  ftands  on  the  River 
Tame,  which  runs  through  it,  and  divides  it  into  two 
Parts,  one  Part  whereof  is  in  this  County,  and  the  other 
in  frarwidybtrt.  It  is  a  Bailiwick  Town,  and  a 
Place  of  good  Account,  though  it  has  been  much 
more  conriderable.  Hf-re  was  antiently  a  Palace  of  the 
Mercian  Kings,  and  there  is  ftill  remaining  a  fquare 
Trench,  called  The  King's  Dyke.  This  'I  own  was 
given  by  If^illlam  I.  to  the  Marmyons,  who  built  the 
Cattle  here,  and  were  hereditary  Champions  of  Eng- 
land, from  whom  that  Office  defcended  to  the  Dymokts 
of  Lincolnfiirc.  This  Town  returns  two  Members  to 
Parliament. 

The  following  Account  of  a  Witch  Elm,  in  Sir/AW- 
ter  Bagot's  Park  in  Stajfordfiirt,  -icferves  Notice. 

Two  Men  were  five  Days  telling  it. 

It  meafured  40  Yards  in  Length,  when  felled. 

The  Stool  was  1  5  Yards  two  Feet  over. 

14  Load  were  broken  in  the  Fall. 

41  Load  in  the  top. 

There 


Warw.         GREAT  BRITAIN.         405- 

There  were  made  out  of  it  80  Pair  of  Naves ;  and 
8660  Feet  of  Boards  and  Flanks. 

Jt  coft  10 1.  17  s.  fa  wing. 

The  whole  Subftance  was  conceived  to  be  97  Tons; 
and  was  felled  in  1674. 

From  Tamwortb  we  came  to  Sutton-Colefeld,  a  little 
Town,  fituated  in  an  excellent  Air,  and  among  pleafant 
Woods,  though  but  in  a  barren  Soil ;  and  then  we 
came  into  the  great  Road  again  at  Colfjhitt'm  Jf^anvick- 
Jhire,  a  fmali,  but  handfome  Market-town,  noted,  as  a 
thoroughfare  Town,  for  good  Inns.  It  is  fituated  by 
the  River  CW!r,  and  on  fo  high  an  Hill,  that  the  Spire  of 
the  Church  is  feen  at  a  great  Diftance  every  Way. 

In  the  Valley  below  this  Town  is  the  Park  and  Seat 
of  the  Family  of  the  Digbys.  The  Houfe  is  antient, 
and  the  Situation  low,  which  renders  it  bad  in  Winter; 
but  in  Summer  it  is  very  pleafant,  having  the  fine  Ri- 
ver ferpentizing  through  the  Park,  and  the  Verdure 
continuing  all  the  Summer,  when  moft  other  Grounds 
around  it  are  burnt  up  ;  and  adorned  with  very  agree- 
able Woods. 

In  our  Way  from  hence  to  Coventry ,  we  pafled  by  a 
Seat  of  the  late  Earl  of  Aileftury,  about  a  Mile  from, 
Meridan.  The  Houfe  ftands  on  the  South- fide  of  the 
Road,  and  the  Park  on  the  North-fide.  A  large  Arch 
is  turned  over  the  Road,  wide  enough  for  a  Wheel- 
carriage  to  pafs  over,  in  order  to  have  a  Communica- 
tion between  the  Houfe  and  Park,  without  going  thro* 
the  Road.  The  Houfe  is  modern,  and  appears  from 
the  Road  to  be  built  in  a  good  Tafte;  but  its  low 
Situation  muft  deprive  it  of  any  extraordinary  Pro- 
fpect. 

We  next  came  to  Coventry,  the  Sifter  City  to  Lick" 
feld^  anJ  joined  in  the  Title  of  See,  which  was  for 
fome  little  time  feated  here,  but  afterwards  returned  to 

Coventry 


406  A  T  O  U  R  thro          Warw. 

Coventry  is  a  City  of  large  Extent,  and  populous, 
fituated  near  the  Middle  of 'England.  It  drives  a  great 
Trade:  the  Manufacture  of  Tammies  is  their  chief 
Employ,  and  next  to  that,  weaving  of  Ribbands  of  the 
meaneft  kind,  chiefly  black.  The  Buildings  are  old, 
and  in  fome  Places  much  decayed  ;  the  Timber-built 
Houfes  projedl:  forwards  into  the  Street  towards  one 
another,  infomuch  that  in  the  narrow  Streets  they  al- 
moft  touch  at  the  top  ;  a  Method  of  Building  former- 
ly much  pradifed  in  London. 

Edward  IV.  for  its  Attachment  to  King  Henry  VI, 
againft  himfelf,  took  the  Sword  from  the  Mayor,  and 
disfranchifed  the  City,  which  redeemed  its  Charter  at 
the  Price  of  500  Merks  ;  but  he  was  fo  well  reconcil- 
ed, that  in  four  Years  afterwards  he  kept  St.  George 's 
Feaft  there,  and  Hood  Godfather  to  the  Mayor's  Child, 
Its  prefent  Charter  was  granted  by  King  "James  I. 
'  It  was  formerly  well  walled  and  very  rtrong  ;  but 
King  Charles  II.  after  his  Reftoration,  ordered  it  to  be 
difrnantled,  becaufe  it  hejd  out  againft  his  Royal  Fa- 
ther;  and  fo  the  Walls,  which  were  three  Miles  in 
Compafs,  with  26  Towers,  were  demoliftied,  and  only 
the  Gates  left  (landing,  which  are  1 2  ;  all  very  noble 
and  beautiful ;  at  one  of  which  hangs  a  Shield-bone  of 
a  Wild  Boar,  much  bigger  than  that  of  an  Ox  ;  faid 
to  have  been  flam  by  the  famous  GwyEarl  of  tf^arwifk^ 
after  he  had  with  his  Snout  turned-up  the  Pond,  which 
is  now  called  Swarfs-well  Pool,  but  more  antiently 
Swings-well. 

The  Princes  of  Wales  have  a  large  Park  and  Domain 
here;  but  very  ill  kept,  the  Park  being  ufed  for  Horfe- 
Races. 

In  the  Time  of  Edward  the  Confeffor,  this  City  was 
in  the  PofTeflion  of  the  Earl  of  Cbefter,  who  gave  a 
great  Part  of  it  to  the  Monks  j  and  it  was  afterwards 
annexed  to  the  Earldom,  now  Dukedom  of  Corn- 
wall, 

This 


Warw.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  407 

This  City  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament.  It  is 
a  County  incorporate  of  itfelf,  and  includes  19  Villages 
and  Hamlets  within  its  Limits.  It  holds  Pleas,  and 
is  governed  by  a  Mayor,  10  Aldermen,  and  Sub-oin- 
cers  ;  but  it  had  only  tv/o  Parifli-Churches,  that  of  the 
Holy-Trinity,  and  the  Church  of  St.  Michael,  which 
were  unable  to  hold  half  the  Inhabitants,  till  the  Year 
1734.  when  an  A&  pafled  for  making  the  Church  of 
Bablack  in  Coventry  a  Parifti- Church  ;  for  appointing  a 
Dittricl:  or  Parifti  thereto  ;  and  for  enabling  the  M  after 
and  Uftier  of  the  free  Grammer-fchool  within  the  faid 
City,  to  be  the  Reclor  and  Ledturer  of  the  faid  Parifh- 
Church,  for  all  time  to  come.  This  is  called  in  the 
Aa  the  Pariih  of  St.  John  the  Bapti/}  in  the  City  of 
Coventry. 

Though  it  has  but  thefe  three  Churches  and  Pa- 
riOies,  it  has  four  Steeples  ;  there  being  at  the  South* 
end  of  the  Town,  a  tall  Spire  by  itfclf,  the  only  Re- 
mains of  a  Church  that  belonged  to  a  Monaftery  of 
Grey- Friars. 

The  Roads  are  kept  well  paved  to  it  for  a  Mile 
round. 

Here  is  a  good  Free  fchool,  founded  by  John  Hales, 
Efq;  by  the  Name  of  the  School  of  King  Henry  VIII. 
the  ..alter  of  which  is  to  be,  for  the  future,  the  Mini- 
fter  of  the  new  Parifh-Church  I  have.juft  mentioned. 
It  has  a  good  Library.  Here  is  alfo  an  Hofpital  for 
the  Poor. 

In  the  Church  of  St.  Michael^  which  is  a  fine  Fabric 
of  Gothic  Architecture,  is  a  curious  Piece  of  Painting, 
lately  eredted  for  an  Altar-piece ;  by  fome  thought 
more  to  referable  thofe  that  are  feen  in  Popifh  Churches 
abroad,  than  the  true  Proteftant  Simplicity.  But  here 
is  no  Cathedral,  as  fome  have  reported  ;  neither  is  the 
Great  Church,  fo  called,  either  Collegiate  or  Conven- 
tual ;  but  only  a  Monaftery  or  Priory. 

Yet  this  City  contended  a  great  while  for  this  Ho- 
nour, but  could  not  carry  it.  In  King  Henry  VIIPs. 

Time, 


4o8  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Warw. 

Time,  the  Priory  being  diflblved,  the  Church,  which 
they  would  have  called  a  Cathedral,  was  reduced  to  a 
private  Parifti  Church,  and  continues  fo  to  this  Day  : 
It  is  alfo  an  A  chdeaconry. 

The  Spire  of  the  great  Church  is,  however,  very 
beautiful,  and  100  Yards  high.  The  two  Churches 
above-named  are  in  the  fame  Yard. 

Here  was  a  rich  Convent,  deftroyed  by  the  Danes  in 
I Oi 6.  from  whence  the  City  is  fuppofed  to  take  its 
Name,  but  afterwards  rebuilt  by  Leofrick^  Earl  of 
Mercia. 

A  Parliament  was  held  here  in  theReignof  Hen.Vl. 
called  Parliamentum  Indoftorum,  or  The  Unlearned 
Parliament^  becaufethe  Lawyers  were  excluded  ;  and 
another  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  VI.  called  by  the 
Yorkifts,  Parliamentum  Diabolicum,  or  The  Devil's 
Parliament,  from  the  Attainder  of  Richard  Duke  of 
York,  and  of  his  Son  the  Earl  of  March,  (afterwards 
Edward  IV.)  and  the  Earls  of  Salijbury  and  War- 
wick, and  their  Adherent?. 

The  Water  of  the  River  Sherburn,  on  which  the 
City  ftands,  is  pecular  for  its  blue  Die  j  whence  Co- 
ventry Blues  became  famous. 

The  Crofs  is  a  fine  Gothic  Work,  the  ftatelieft  in  the 
Kingdom,  60  Feet  high  ;  and  in  Niches  are  the  Statues 
of  feveral  of  the  Englijb  Kings,  in  curious  Gothic  Sculp- 
ture, as  big  as  the  Life.  It  was  built  in  Henry  V Ill's. 
Reign,  by  Sir  IFilliam  Holies,  Lord  Mayor  of  London, 
and  was  repaired  and  beautified  in  the  Year  1667.  But 
it  now  wants  another  Repair:  for  it  is  in  a  very  bad 
Condition  ;  moft  of  the  Figures  are  broken  and  de- 
faced, and  no  Care  taken  to  prevent  their  total  De- 
ftruclion. 

The  Town-houfeis  worth  feeing;  the  Windows  of 
it  are  painted  fGlafs,  reprefenting  fome  of  the  old 
Kings,  Earls,  CSV.  who  have  been  Benefactors  to  the 
Town. 

And 


Warw.         GREAT  BRITAIN.          409 

And  a  Copy  of  Latin  Verfes  is  there  to  be  read,  in 
Praife  of  their  Royal  Benefactors,  in  which  are  named 
the  Edwards^  the  Henries,  the  Black  Prince,  Queen 
Elizabeth^  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  and  the  great 
Earl  of  Leicejler,  Queen  Elizabeth's  Favourite. 

Wednefday  and  Friday  are  the  Market-days. 

Earl  Leofrlcky  above-mentioned,  who  died  the  I3th 
of  Edward  the  Confejfor^  feems  to  have  been  the  firft 
•Lord  of  this  Town ;  and  there  is  a  Story  concerning 
him,  handed  down  by  Tradition,  and  firmly  believed 
here, which  wemuftnot  omit,  and  is  as  follows:  That 
this  Earl,  having  heavily  taxed  the  Citizens  for  fome 
Offence  they  had  given  him,  his  Lady  Godiva,  Daugh- 
ter of  Thorald^  a  Sheriff  of  Lincoln/hire^  earneftly  im- 
portuned him  to  remit  the  Taxes,  and  to  free  the 
Citizens  from  all  fervile  Tenures ;  but  could  not  pre- 
vail with  him,  unlefs  fhe  would  confent  to  ride  naked 
thro'  the  molt  frequented  Part  of  the  City ;  a  Condition 
which  he  was  fure,  as  he  thought,  her  Modefty  would 
never  comply  with  :  but,  in  Companion  to  the  City,  the 
Tradition  fays,  that,  after  having  ordered  all  the  Doors 
and  Windows  to  be  {hut,  upon  Pain  of  Death,  fhe  rode 
thro'  the  Streets  on  Horfe-back,  naked,  with  her  di- 
(hevelled  Hair  about  her,  which  was  fo  long,  that  it 
covered  all  her  Body  but  her  Legs.  Camden  (ays,  that 
Nobody  looked  after  her;  yet  the  Story  goes,  that  a 
poor  Taylor  peeped  out  of  his  Window,  and  was 
thereupon  (truck  blind.  Be  this  as  it  will,  his  Figure 
is  put  up  in  the  fame  Window,  of  the  High  ftreet,  to 
this  Day.  Upon  Godiva's  riding  naked  as  above, 
Earl  Leo  frith  remitted  the  Taxes  he  had  impofed  on. 
the  Citizens :  in  Memory  of  which,  they  fet  up  his 
Picture  and  her's  in  the  Windows  of  Trinity  Chut  chy 
with  this  Infcription  : 

/  Leofrick,/flr  the  Love  ofthee9 
Do  fet  Coventry  Toll-free. 

VOL.  II.  T  And 


4io  A  T  O  U  R  thro'          Warw. 

And  tbey  have  an  annual  Proceflion  or  Cavalcade,  on 
the  great  Fair- day,  the  Friday  after  Trinity  Sunday , 
reprefenting  Godiva  fo  riding  thro'  the  Town  ;  and  it 
is  ufual  for  the  Warwickjhire  Gentlemen,  at  their  an- 
nual Feaft,  to  reprefent  her  in  the  fame  manner,  with 
Guy  Earl  of  Warwick  on  Horfeback,  arm'd  Cap  a-pie, 
before  the  Cavalcade. 

Birmingham  is  a  very  populous  Town,  and  full  of 
Iron  Manufactories,  efpecially  of  the  frnaller  Sorts  j  in 
which  the  Inhabitants  fo  greatly  excel,  that  their 
Works  are  carried  to  all  Parts  of  the  World  in  great 
Quantities.  It  was  a  Lordfhip  before  the  Norman 
Conqueft:  which  Denomination  it  flill  retains,  being 
govermd  by  two  Conftables ;  but  is  of  late  Years 
greatly  improved  and  enlarged  by  many  new  Buildings, 
both  public  and  private  ;  particularly  a  Church  built 
by  virtue  of  an  Ad:  of  Parliament,  pafled  in  the  ;th 
Year  of  Queen  Anne^  which  is  dedicated  to  St.  Philip  ; 
a  Charity  (chool,  whenin  are  maintained  and  taught 
upwards  of  50  Boys  and  Girls ;  and  a  free  Gramrrar-. 
fchool,  founded,  an  h.uidfomely  endowed,  by  King 
Edward,  VI.  n(  w  rebuilt  in  a  ftately  and  commodious 
Form.  This  Town  is  on  the  Borders  of  the  County, 
iituated  on  the  S;de  of  an  Hill ;  and  has  a  moft  plenti- 
ful Market  ev  ry  Thurfday  and  two  annual  Fairs,  one 
on  Afcenfon-day,  and  tne  other  at  Michaelmas. 

We  could  by  no  means  pafs  .he  Town  ol  Warwick^ 
the  DiHance  too  being  but  about  fix  Miles  from  Co- 
ventry and  a>ery  pleafant  Way  on  the  Bar.ks  of  the 
River  Avon :  't-s  lamous  for  being  the  Rdidence  of 
Guy  Earl  of  Wai  w:ck^  of  whom  Tradition  has  given  us 
many  fabulous  Accounts.  He  flourifhed  in  the  Reign 
ti  Athclftant,  and  deri.  ei  the  Fate  of  the  Kingdom  by 
Compadt,  in  fingle  Combat  with  Colbrondthe  Dane,  a 
Man  of  gigantic  Stature,  whom  he  flew.  They  {hew 
us  here  his  Cattle,  his  Helmet,  his  Sword,  and  tell 
abundance  of  things  of  him,  which  have  feme  Appc-ar- 
aucc  of  Hiftory,  though  notmuth  Authority  to  fupport 

them. 


Warw.         GREAT  BRITAIN.         411 

them.  TheCaftle,  they  tell  us,  was  built  before  our 
Saviour's  Time,  and  has  been  a  Place  of  great  Con- 
fideration  ever  fmce. 

Warwick  is  really  a  fine  Town,  pfeafantly  fituated 
on  the  Bank  of  the  Avon^  over  which  is  a  large  and 
flately  Bridge,  the  Avon  being  now  grown  a  pretty 
large  River.  Warwick  has  fuffered  much  from  all 
Quarters.  It  \yas  once  deftroyed  by  the  Pifls  ai  d 
Scots  ;  after  which,  the  famous  Garaftacus  (who  at 
the  Head  of  the  Silures  oppofed  the  Romans  fo  long), 
rebuilt  it,  erecting  there  alfo  a  Palace  for  him  (elf.  Then 
the  Romans  under  -Oftorius,  and  after  them  the  Saxons, 
greatly  damaged  it  -,  and  Jaftly,  the  ravaging  Dams 
ruined  it. 

Though  it  was  a  Corporation  by  Prefcription,  yet  it 
took  a  Charter  from  Philip  and  -Mary,  and  afterwards 
from  James  I.  and  is  now  governed  by  a  Bailiff,  and  12 
Burgefies.  It  has  an  handfome  ftone-built  Market- 
houfe,  upheld  by  Pillars  5  and  here  is  a  good  Free- 
fchool,  and  a  well-endowed  Hofpital  for  decayed  Gen- 
tlemen. Though  it  has  been  accounted  an  handfome 
well-built  Town,  yet  the  Face  of  it  is  now  quite  altered 
and  improved  ;  for  having  been  almoft  wholly  reduced 
to  an  Heap  of  Rubbifh,  by  a  terrible  Fire,  which  hap- 
pened the  5th  Day  of  September  1694,  by  the  mere  Ac-. 
cident  of  a  Spark  being  blown  from  a  Stick,  as  it  was 
carried  acrofs  a  Lane,  to  the  Damage  of  96,000  /.  it 
was  rebuilt  by  A£t  of  Parliament,  and  that  in  fo  noble 
and  beautiful  a  manner,  that  few  Towns  in  England 
make  fo  fine  an  Appearance. 

The  Church  and  lofty  Tower  are  new-  built,  except 
the  Eaft-end,  which  is  old,  and  very  good  Work. 
There  are  many  fine  Brafs  Monuments  of  the  Earls  of 
Warwick^  and  others ;  alfo  one  of  the  Earl  of  Efex, 
Queen  Elizabeth's  unhappy  Favourite;  and  many  Cha- 
pels and  Confeflionaries.  In  the  Chapter-houfe  on  the 
North-fide,  is  a  Tomb  of  the  Lord  Brook.  The  Caftle 
{lands  upon  the  River  Avon,  on  a  folid  Rock,  from 
T  2  \vhofe 


4i2  A  TOUR  thro  Warw. 

whofe  Bowels  that  and  the  whole  Town  may  be 
faid  to  have  been  dug.  The  Terrace  of  the  Caftle 
overlooks  a  beautiful  Country  ;  one  fees  the  Avon 
running  at  the  Foot  of  the  Precipice,  from  above 
50  Feet  perpendicular  Height;  for  the  folid  Rock, 
from  the  River  on  which  it  ftands,  is  40  Feet  high  ; 
but  on  the  North-fide  it  is  even  with  the  Town. 
The  Building  is  old,  but  has  been  often  repaired  and 
beautified ;  and  'tis  now  a  very  agreeable  Structure, 
both  within  and  without.  The  Apartments  are  very 
nicely  contrived,  and  the  Communication  of  the  re- 
moteft  Parts  of  the  Building,  one  with  another,  is  fo 
well  preferved  by  Galleries,  and  by  the  great  Hall, 
which  is  very  magnificent,  that  one  finds  no  Irregula- 
rity in  the  whole  Building,  notwithftanding  its  antient 
Plan,  as  it  was  a  Caftle  built  for  Strength,  rather  than 
a  Palace  to  dwell  in  for  Pleafure. 

A  Stone  Bridge,  with  a  dozen  Arches,  is  at  the 
Caftle;  acrofs  is  a  ftone-work  Dam,  where  the 
Water  falls  over  it  as  a  Cafcade,  under  the  Caftle 
Wall.  It  is  fenced  with  a  deep  Mound,  and  ftror-g 
embattled  double  Walls,  and  lofty  Towers.  On  one 
Side  the  Area  is  a  very  high  Mount.  There  are  good 
Apartments  and  Lodgings  next  the  River,  the  Refi- 
dence  of  Earl  Brooke,  lately  cieated  Earl  of  Warwick. 
The  Priory,  on  the  North  eaft  of  the  Town,  over- 
looks a  pleafant  woody  Vale.  There  are  a  great  many 
curious  original  Pictures  in  the  Caftle,  by  Vandyke, 
and  other  good  Hands,  of  Kings,  Queens,  and  other 
noble  Perfonages,  both  Englijh  and  foreign. 

Wednefday  and  Saturday  are  the  Market-days  ;  and 
it  holds  fix  h  airs,  which  are,  the  firft  Saturday  in  Lent) 
May  day,  Mldfummcr-day,  St.  Bartholomew's,  Michael- 
mas, and  6V.  Simon  and  St.  Jvdt.  It  fends  two  Mem- 
bers to  Parliament. 

A  Mile  GUI  of  the  Town,  on  the  Side  of  an  Hill,  is 
a  pretty  retired  Cell,  called  Guy-  Cliff,  fuppofed  to 
have  been  the  Hermitage  to  which  that  Hero  retired 

after 


Northamp.  GREAT   BRITAIN.         413 

after  his  martial  Exploits.  In  an  old  Chapel  is  Guy's 
Statue,  eight  Feet  high.  The  Fence  of  the  Court  is 
intire  Rock,  in  which  are  cut  Stables  and  Outhoufes. 

While  I  was  ft  aliened,  as  I  may  fay,  at  Wariuui:, 
I  took  a  Turn  about  the  Country,  to  view  fuch  PJaces 
of  Note  as  lay  fometimes  out  of  my  intended  Route. 
And  firft,  paffing  a  Rivulet,  I  came  to  the  antient 
Trtpontium^  placed  in  a  pleafant  little  Valley,  the  Sides 
of  which  are  pretty  fteep.  The  Road  on  the  oppo- 
fite  Hill  looks  perfectly  like  a  Perfpeclive  fcene  at  the^ 
Theatre.  This  is  a  Roman  Station,  rightly  placed  at 
Dvvebridge  apon  the  Avon,  running  by  Rugby  to 
Warwick.  The  Stream  here  divides  into  two,  with  a 
Bridge  over  each.  Upon  one  is  a  (hort  Infcription  in 
Stone,  fhewing  the  three  Counties  which  repair  it. 

Near  this  Place,  at  Legers-djbby  in  Northamptonshire, 
has  been  an  old  Town,  as  they  fay,  deiiroyed  by  the 
Danes.  Catejly,  who  hatched  the  Powder- plot,  owned 
the  Town.  \ 

We  went  on  to  Dawntry,  a  confide r able  Market- 
town,  governed  by  a  Mayor,  Aldermen,  Steward,  and 
12  Freemen.  It  lies  on  the  gre  t  Road  to  Gbefter,  and 
is  confequently  a  great  Thoroughfare,  and  well  fur- 
nifhed  with  good  Inns  j  for  it  lubfiits  chitfly  by  the 
great  Concourie  of  Travellers  that  pafs  that  way'.  It 
lies  aifo  on  the  eld  Watling-Jlreet  way.  The  Road 
was  turned  to  pafs  through  the  Town,  and  runs  on  to 
Dunfmore- heath,  where  it  crofles  the  Foffe,  and  one 
Branch  goes  on  to  Coventry,  and  the  other  joins  the 
Foffe,  and  goes  on  to  a  Place  called  High-crofs,  where 
it  falls  into  the  old  Watling-Jlreet^  and  both  meet  again 
near  Lichfield. 

It  is  a  moft  pleafant  Curiofiiy  to  obferve  the  Courfe 

of  thefe  old  famous  Highways,  the  Icknild  Way,  the 

Watling-ftreet,  and   the  FoJ/e ;  in  which  one  fees  fo 

lively  a  Reprefentation  of  the  antient  Britljh^  Roman, 

T  3  and 


4 14  -rf  T  O  U  R  thro     Northarmp. 

and  Saxon  Governments,  that  one  cannot   hdp  re- 
calling thofe  Times  to  the  Imagination. 

From  Daventry  we  went  a  little  out  of  the  Road, 
to  fee  a  great  Camp  called  Burrow-hill,  upon  the 
North  end  of  an  Eminence,  covered  over  with  Fern 
and  Gofs.  Here  ufed  to  be  kept  an  Horfe-race. 
They  fay  this  was  a  Danijh  Camp,  and  every  thing 
hereabouts  is  attributed  to  the  Dams,  becaufe  of  the 
neighbouring  Daventry,  which  they  fuppofe  to  have 
been  built  by  them.  The  Road  hereabouts  too  be- 
ing overgrown  with  Dane- weed,  they  fanfy  it  fprung 
from  the  Blood  of  the  Danes^  flain  in  Battle ;  and 
that  if,  upon  a  certain.  Day  in  the  Year,  you  cut  it,  it 
bleeds. 

Originally,  it  feems  to  have  been  Roman^  but  per- 
haps new-modelled  by  the  Danes. 

In  NortonTown  Road  a Cornu  Ammonh  lies  neglect- 
ed, too  big  to  bring  away. 

At  Wee  don  is  (hewn  the  Site  of  King  JVolfhtrc\ 
Palace;  the  Sawn  Kings  of  this  Province  reliding  here. 

The  Pa  (lures  called  the  dflxs  are  the  Roman  Camp. 
St.  Werberg,  Daughter  of  King  Wclfbere,  and  Abbefs 
to  the  Nunnery  in  this  Place,  had  here  a  Chapel. 
Abundance  of  very  fine  Stone,  and  many  Roman 
Coins  have  been  dug  up.  Wecdon  now  certains  two- 
Parties,  and  has  been  a  Market-town. 

Old  Stretford  (lands  on  the  oppofite  Side  of  the  Ouzo- 
ro  Stony -Stretford.  In  the  Fields  thereabouts  are 
found  many  Rojnan  Coins. 

A  little  North  of  the  Horfe-Jh&g  Inn  (rood  Queen 
Eleanor's  Crofs,  which  was  pulled  down  in  the  Civil 
.Wars. 

To  the  Weft  of  Stretford  ftands  Wbaddon-ball* 
upon  very  high  Ground,  affording  a  beautiful  Prof- 
peel.  This  iManor  formerly  belonged  to  the  Lords 
Grey-\  one  of  whom,  a  Kaight  of  the  Garter,  is 
buried  in  the  Church.  Here  is.  the  original  Picture  cf 
the  Progenitor  of  the  prefent  PofiefTor, 

with, 


Northamp.  GREAT  BRITAINY.          415- 

with  many  of  his  MSS.  Letters,  Confutations,  Lec- 
tures, and  other  Works,  unpublifhed.  The  Poets 
SpM/er^  and  the  Duke  of  Bucks^  honoured  this  Place 
with  their  Refidence,  Still  higher  (lands  Stukelry. 
The  Church  is  very  intire,  though  built  before  the 
Norman  Irivafion,  in  the  plain  antient  Manner. 

1  now  come  to  Northampton^  an  antient  Borough- 
town,  incorporated  by  King  Henry  II.  and  confirmed 
by  King  James  I.  Several  Parliaments  have  been  held 
here,  on  account  of  its  healthful  and  agreeable  Situa- 
tion, befides  its  being  the  handfomeft  Town  in  thir, 
Part  of  England;  but  here,  as  ^Warwick,  the  Beauty 
of  it  is  owing  to  its  Difafter;  for  it  was  fo  effecTiually 
burnt  down,  Sept.  20.  1675.  that  very  few  Houfes 
.  were  left  ftanding.  '"Pis  now  finely  rebuilt  with  Brick 
and  Stone,  and  the  Streets  made  fpacious  and  wide. 
It  has  two-  Hofpitals,  and  a  Charity- fchool  well  en- 
dowed. The  Market  place  is  fquare  and  fpacious; 
the  AiTize-houfe  is  built  after  the  Corinthian  Order. 
Here  are  four  Parifh- churches,  All-Saints.,  St.  Giles's^ 
St.  Sepulchre' S,  and  St.  Peter's.  All  Saints  or  M- 
Hallows  Church,  is  a  pretty  Edifice,  with  a  Cupola, 
and  a  noble  Portico  before  it,  of  eight  lofty  Ionic  Co- 
lumns. Upon  the  Baluftrade  is  a  Statue  of  King 
Charles  II.  It  is  fituated  on  the  North- weft  of  the 
River  Nyne*  over  which  there  are  two  handfome 
Bridges,  and  is  walled  in;  and  on  the  Weft  fide  are 
the  Remains  of  an  old  Caftle,  upon  an  Eminence. 
5Tis  governed  by  a  Mayor,  two  Bailiffs,  a  Recorder, 
&c.  and  fends  two  Members  to  Parliament.  All- 
Saints  Church  before- mentioned  is  a  nobl«*Stru£ture, 
and  {lands  in  a  Centre  where  four  large  noble  Streets 
terminate.  The  public  Buildings  are  efteemed  the 
fineft  that  can  be  feen  in  any  County-town  in  Eng- 
land,  being  all  new-built. 

The  great  Inn  called  the  George^  at  the  Corner  of 
the  High-ftreet,  looks  more  like  a  Palace  than  an 
Inn,  and  colt  above  2000  /.  building ;  and  fo  generous 

T  4  was 


4i 6  ./4TQUR//W    Northamp. 

was  the  Owner,  that,  as  we  are  told,  when  he  had 
built  it,  he  gave  it  to  the  Poor  of  the  Town. 

This  is  counted  the  Centre  of  all  the  Horfe-  markets 
and  Horfe  fairs  in  England,  there  being  here  no  lefs 
than  feven  Fairs  in  a  Year.  And  indeed  Northampton 
is  reckoned  the  Navel  of  England.  Here  they  buy 
Horfes  of  all  Sorts,  as  well  for  the  Saddle  as  for 
the  Coach  and  Cart ;  and  hither  all  the  Jockeys  from 
London  refort  to  purchafe  Horfes. 

Near  Northampton  is  the  antient  Royal  Houfe  of 
Holmcby,  which  was  formerly  in  great  Efteern,  and 
by  its  Situation  is  capable  of  being  made  a  truly  Royal 
Palace.  The  Houfe  and  Eftate  was  purchafed  by  the 
lateDuchefs  of  Marlborough^  and  is  at  prefent  pofieffed 
by  a  Farmer,  who  has  pulled  down  Part  of  the  Out- 
houfes,  and  converted  the  remaining  Part  into  Barns, 
Stables,  bV. 

A  little  Way  off  of  Northampton  is  Nafely^  where 
the  bloody  and  fatal  Battle  was  fought  between  the 
Pvoyalifts  ami  Parliamentarians,  upon  a  f.ne  F 
\vi;ere  at  prefent  Hands  a  Windmill;  and  on  it  are  the 
Jvlarks  of  feveral  great  Holes,  where  the  Slain  were 
buried  j  and  near  this  is  Guild/borough^  fo  named  from 
a  Roman  Camp,  of  a  fquare  Form,  and  a  deep  Ditch 
called  The  Burrows. 

Tawfefter  is  a  confiderable  Town  between  two  Ri- 
vulets, which  encompafs  it  almoft  round.  It  is  an 
handfome  Place^  well  provided  for  the  Reception  of 
Travelers.  It  is  of  large  Extent,  and  very  populous  : 
and  having  but  one  Parifh  Church,  which  is  two 
Miles  diftant  from  the  Hamlet  of  Althorpe  and  Fox- 
coate,  in  which  there  was  a  Chapel  of  Eafe,  but  of- 
ficiated in  only  once  a  Month,  by  the  Vicar  of  Tow- 
cefter,  though  'tis  computed  there  are  400  Souls  in 
the  faid  Hamlet,  who  in  the  Winter- time  could  not 
attend  Divine  Service  at  Towcejler ;  and  feveral  Be- 
nefactions having  been  given,  in  cafe  the  faid  Hamlet 
ihould  be  ereded  into  a  Parifh  5  for  all  thefe  Reafons, 
*  an 


Northamp.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          417 

an  Act  pa/fed,  1747.  for  making  the  Chapel  in  the 
Hamlet  of  Altborpe  and  Fo  coate  a  Parifh  Church,  and 
for  appointing  a  Diftridfc  or  Farifh  thereto;  and,  ac- 
cording to  the  Condition  of  one  of  the  Benefactions, 
enabling  the  Mailer  of  the  free  Grammar-fchool, 
within  the  faid  Hamlet,  to  be  Vicar  of  the  new  Parifli- 
Church. 

Towcefter  is  a  pretty  Town,  of  Roman  Antiquity  ; 
through  which,  in  a  ftrait  Line,  runs  the  Wailing'  • 
Jlreet.  The  Inhabitants  of  all  Ages  are  here  employed 
in  a  filken  Manufacture,  and  Lace- making.  The 
Town  confi'-s  of  one  long  Street,  and  is  almoft  in* 
tirely  encompafled  with  Water. 

The  Seat  of  the  Earl  of  Pomfret,  near  Towcefter+ 
is  a  ftately  Building,  and  ftands  pleafantly,  amidil-  good 
Plantations  of  Wood,  Vifta's,  and  fine  Profpecl?.  In 
the  grand  View  to  the  back  Front,  beyond  the  Gar- 
den, is  a  large  and  long  Canal;  and  juft  below  the 
Gardens,  the  Meadows,  which  are  of  great  Extent, 
lie  open  to  the  View  of  the  Houfe ;  and  the  River  fer- 
pentizing  through  thefe,  gives  a  great  Beauty  to  the*' 
Seat.  Several  curious  Pidures  are  in  the  Houfe.  But 
what  was  the  principal  Glory  of  this  Seat,  was  the 
vaft  Number  of  Greek  and  Roman  Marbles,  Statues, 
Builo's,  Bas-reliefs,  Urns,  Altars,  &'c.  Part  of  the 
invaluable  Collection  of  the  great  Earl  of  Arundel^ 
which  were  lately  prefented  by  the  Countefs-Dowager 
of  Pomfret  to  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford^  as  before- 
mentioned.  The  Hall  is  a  fine  lofty  Room,  and  the 
great  Stairs  are  painted  in  Frefco  by  Sir  James  Thorn- 
hill. 

The  Houfe  late  the  Earl  of  SunderlanePs,  at  Althorpe-^ 
has  within  thefe  few  Years  changed  its  Face  much  to 
Advantage.  This  antient  Seat  was  rebuilt,  with  great 
Improvement,  by  Robert  Earl  of  Sunderland^  Great 
Grandfather  to  the  prefent  Duke  of  Martborough  ;  and 
is  particularly  noted  for  a  magnificent  Gallery,  fur- 
ntthed-witb  a  large  Collection  of  curious  Paintings,  by 

T  5,  the 


4 1 8  A  T  O  U  R  thro     Northamp . 

the  beft  Hands.  And*  in  the  Apartments  below-ftair* 
is  a  ftiH  more  valuable  one,  ef  moft  of  the  greateft 
Matters  in  Europe.  So  that  there  are  very  few  Col- 
lections of  Figures  in  England  better  worth  the  Curi- 
ofity  of  a  1  ravel  ler  than  this. 

The  Park;  is  laid  out  and  planted  after  the  manner 
of  that  at  Greenwich^  and  was  defigned  by  Le  Notre,. 
the  fame  Perfon  who  planted  St  James's  Park,  and 
Cajjiobe'ry^  a&alfo  feveral  othtr  Parks  and  Gardens  in 
England. 

There  is  a  noble  Piece  of  Water  here,  on  which 
is  lately  built  a,  fine  Vefltl,  completely  equipped;  as 
his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Bedford  has  alfo  at  his  Seat  at 
Wobum  -Abbey.  There  are  like  wife  on  this  Stream  a 
fine  Venetian  Gondola,  Canoes,  &c.  But  the  Water 
is  too  near  the  Houfe,  and  occafions  fo  great  a  Damp,, 
that  fome  of  the  Pictures  in  the  Gallery  are  mildewed 
by  it. 

At  a  convenient  Diftance  from  the  Houfe  is  lately 
built  an  handfome  Square  of  Offices ;  and  near  thefe 
is  a  large  Kitchen- garden,  finely  walled  and  planted, 
in  which  is  an  handfome  Building  for  the  Refidence 
of  the  Gardener,  which  is  a  Model,  of  an  Italian 
Villa. 

From  hence  we  went  North  towards  Harbor  ougb,. 
and  in  the  Way,,  in  the  midft  of  deep  difmal  Roads, 
the  dirtieft  and  worit  in  all  that  Part  of  the  Country, 
we  faw  Boughton^  the  noble  Seat  of  the  late  Duke  of 
Montagu^  an  Houfe  built  by  the  firft  Duke,  very 
much  after,  the  Model  of  the  Palace  of  Verf allies ;  the 
treble  Wings  projecting,  and  expanded,  forming  a. 
Court  OT  Space  wider  and  wider,  in  proper  Stades, 
anfwerable  to  the  Wings,  the  Body  of  the  Houfe- 
clofing  the  whole  View. 

The  Hall. is  a  very  noble  Room;,  on  the  Cieling  is 
a  Convocation  oi  the  Gods,  admirably  painted,  as  are 
many  Suits  of  Rooms,  Stair-cafes,  Galleries,  fcfc. 
the  great  Numbei  of.  Portraits  and  other, 

curious 


Northamp.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         419 

curious  Pictures.  The  Gardens  contain  90  Acres, 
adorned  with  Statues,  Flower- pots,  Urns  of  Marble 
and  Metal,  tmny  very  large  Bafons,  with  Variety  of 
Fountains  playing,  Aviaries,  Refervoirs,  Fim  ponds, 
Canals,  \Vildernefles,  Terraces,  &c.  The  Cafcade. 
is  very  fine,  and  a  whole  River,  running  through  the 
Length  of  the  Gardens,  is  diverfified  moft  agreeably 
to  complete  its  Beauty. 

The  Park  is  walled  round  with  Brick,  and  fo  finely 
planted  with  Tree-,  and  .  in  fuch  an  excellent  Order,: 
that  I  faw  nothing  more  beautiful,  even  in  Italy  itfelf, 
except  that  the  Walks  of  Trees  were  not  Orange,, 
Lemon,  and  Citron,  as  they  are  in  Naples,  the 
dbruzzo,  and  other  Southern  Parts  of  Italy. 

A  Mile  off  is  Gedd>ngton,  where,  in  a  Trivium,. 
ftancls  one  of  the  Stone  CrofTes,  built  by  King  Ed- 
ward I.  in  Memory  of  his  Queen  Eleanor.  Thefe: 
are  (aid  to  be  the  Places  where  the  Corpfe  of  that 
Frincefs  refted,  and  Crofles  were  e reded;  Lincoln^. 
Newark,  Leicejter^  Geddington^  Northampton,  Stony' 
Stretford^  Dun/table,  St.  Albans,  l'Fakbamy  Chiapftdtv 
Charing  croft. 

On  Willougbly  Side  of  the  Road  is  an  Hillock, 
called  Crojs-bill,  where  the  Country  people  obferve  an 
anniverfary  Feftival.  Ifrilloughby  Brook  plays  in  de- 
lightful Meanders  along  a  Valley  between  Corn-fields,, 
with  a  moderate  Water,  unlefs  raifed  by  Rains.  Here 
feveral  Brafs  and  Silver  Coins  have  been  found,  and 
fome  of  Gold.  The  People  have  a  Notion  of  great 
Riches  being. hid  under-ground ;  and  there  is  a  vulgar 
Report,  that  under  one  Balk  or  Merey  that  is,  Divi- 
iion,  between  the  plowed  Fields,  there  is  as  much 
Money  as  would  purchafe  the  whole  Lordihip ;  but 
they  dare  not  dig,  they  pretend,  for  fear  of  Spirits, 
Mufaic  Pavements,  Coins,  Pot-hooks,  Fire-fhovels,. 
&c,  have  been  alfo  found. 

In  Willougbby  Town  is  an  hantlfome  Crofs  of  one: 
Stone,  five  Yards  long.     The  Parliament-foldiershad. 

T  6.  tied: 


420  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Leic; 

tied  Ropes  about  it  to  pull  it  down;  but  the  Vicar 
quenched  their  Zeal  with  feme  ftrong  Beer,  after 
having  harangued  them  concerning  its  Innocence. 

At  Coffington,  near  the  River  H'rek^  is  a  vaft  Bar- 
rowf  35°  Feet  l°ng»  *  20  broad,  40  high,  or  near 
it,  very  handfornely  worked  up  on  the  Sides,  and  very 
fleep.  It  is  called  Shipley-hill,  from  a  great  Captain 
of  that  Name,  who,  they  fay,  was  here  buried.  On 
the  Top  are  feveral  oblong  doubled  Trenches  cut  in 
the  Turf,  where  the  Lads  and  LafTes  of  the  adjacent 
Villages  meet  on  Rafter-  Mo nday,  to  recreate  them- 
felves  with  Cakes  and  Ale. 

At  Erdborough  is  a  flrong  Roman  Camp,  Soo  Feet 
long,  of  a  delightful  Profpedt.  Near  it  is  a  petrifying 
Spring. 

But  I  muft  not  omit,  as  I  had  like  to  have  done, 
the  Town  of  ffiellingborougb  in  the  County  of  North- 
ampton. 

It  was  a  larger  well-built,  and  well- inhabited 
Town,  with  a  fine  Church  and  Free  fchool.  A 
dreadful  Fire,  which  happened  herein  July  1738.  has 
made  the  Town  ftill  more  beautiful,  though  the  Oc- 
cafion  was  too  melancholy  to  be  wifhed  for.  It  began 
at  a  Dyer's  Houfe  in  the  Town,  about  two  in  the 
Afternoon,  and  in  the  Space  of  fix  Hours  confumed 
near  220  Hcufes,  befides  Outhoufes,  Barns,  Stables, 
&c.  amounting  in  the  Whole  to  upwards  of  800, 
moiily  in  the  South  and  Eaft  Parts  of  the  Town. 

From  Bngbfon  we  went  on  to  Karborottgk,  a  good 
Market-town  and  great  Thoroughfare,  intending  to  go 
forward  to  Leicejler-,  but  Curiofity  turned  us  Weft  a 
little,  to  fee  an  old  Town  called  Lutterworth,  famous 
for  being  the  Birth-place  of  John  Wickliffe,  the  firft 
Preacher  of  the  Reformation  in  England^  whofe  Dif- 
ciples  were  afterwards  called  Lollards. 

The  Church  was  lately  beautified,  and  paved  with 
a  cofily  Pavement  of  chequered  Stone;  and  the  Pews 


are 


Leic.          GREAT  BRITAIN-.  42? 

are  new,  and  every  thing,  both  in  Church  and  Chan- 
cel, of  thick  Oak- planks,  fix-fquare,  except  the 
Pulpit,  which  is  preserved  on  account  of  its  being 
Wit&fft*. 

Being  thus  got  a  little  out  of  our  Way,  we  turned 
Weft  into  the  Walling-Jlreet  Way,  at  High  crofsr 
where  the  Fojfe  croffes  it,  and  which,  I  fuppofe,  oc- 
cafioned  the  Name,  leaving  Rugby  in  Watwickjhtrt^ 
a  fmall  Town,  noted  only  for  a  great  Number  of 
Butchers,  on  the  South-weft  of  us.  At  this  Crofs 
we  feemed  to  be  in  the  Centre,  and  on  the  higheft 
Ground  in  England;  for  from  hence  Rivers  run 
every  Way.  The  FcJJe  went  a-crofs  the  Backfide  of 
our  Inn,  and  fo  towards  Bath.  Here  are  divers 
Roman  Antiquities :  its  antient  Appellation  was  Be- 
nonis.  The  late  Earl  of  Denbigh  (whofe  Seat  is  near 
this  Road),  and  the  Gentlemen  in  the  Neighbour- 
ho  d,  erected  here  a  Crofs  of  an  handfome  Defign, 
but  of  mouldering  Stone,  through  the  Deceit  of  the. 
Architedt.  It  confifts  of  four  Do.ru  Columns,  re- 
garding the  four  Roads,  with  a  gilded  Globe  and 
Crofs  at  top,  upon  a  Sun  dial.  On  two  Sides,  be- 
tween the  four  Tufcan  Pillars,  which  compofe  a  fort 
of  Pedaftal,  are  Latin  Infcriptions,  which  may  be 
thus  tranflated  : 

The  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen,  Ornaments  of  the  neigh- 
bouring Counties  of  Warwick  and  Leicefter,  at  the 
Inftances  of  the  Rignt  Honourable  Bafil  Earl  of 
Denbigh,  have  caufed  this  Pillar  to  be  erefted,  in 
grateful  as  well  as  perpetual  Remembrance  of  PEACE 
at  laji  rejlored  by  her  Majejiy  £>ueen  Anne,  in  the 
Year  of  our  Lord  1712. 

On  the  other  Si  'e. 

If,  Traveller,  you  fe arch  for  the  Foot/I eps  of  the  an~ 
tient  Romans,  here  you  may  behold  tbtm*  For  here 

their 


4. 2  4  ^  TOUR,  thro*  Leic. 

Church  is  large  and  handfome,  and  'tis  noted  for  four 
good  Horfe-fairs  in  the  Year. 

The  Earl  of  Stamfard  has  a  good  old  Hunting- feat 
on  this  Side  of  the  Country,  cJled  Bradgate*  and  a 
fine  Hark  at  Grooby  ;  but  they  were  too  imu.-h  nut  of 
our  way;  fo  we  came  on  through  a  fine  Foreft  to 
Leicefter. 

Leicejier  is  an  antient,  large,  and  populous  Town, 
containing  five  Panlhes ;  'tis  the  Capital  of  the 
County  of  that  Name,  and  ftands  on  the  River  Soar, 
which  rifes  not  far  from  High  crofs,  jutt  mentioned: 
it  is  a  Borough  and  Corporation- town,  whereof  the 
chief  Magiflrate  is  a  Mayor,  who  is  aflifted  by  a  Re- 
corder, Aldermen,  and  Common-council.  This 
Town  fends  two  Reprefentatives  to  Parliament. 
Here  are  three  Markets  week'y,  well  fupplied  with 
Provifions.  A  coafiderable  Manufacture  is  carried 
on  here,  and  in  feveral  of  the  Market  towns  around, 
for  weaving  of  Stockens  by  Frames  ;  and  one  would 
fcarce  think  it  poffible  fo  frnall  an  Article  of  Trade 
could  emj  loy  fuch  Multitudes  of  People  as  it  does  ; 
for  the  whole  County  feems  to  -be  bufied  in  it :  as 
al!b  Nottingham  and  Derby ;  of  which  hereafter. 

There  are  fome  good  old  Seats  in  this  County,  with 
their  Parks ;  the  molt  remarkable  is  that  of  Hajiings.- 
Earl  of  Huntingdon.  Tne  Earl  Ferrer's  Scat  at 
Stanton  Harold  is  as  large  as  a  little  Town,  and  the 
Gar, lens  adorned  with  Statues.  At  his  Gate  is  what 
may  be  called  a  late  built  Church,  a  very  curious 
Structure  of  ftjuare  Stone  ;  of  the  Founder  whereof, 
an  Infcription  on  t>.e  Front  gives  this  Account: 

In  the  Tear  1653, 
When  all  things  Jacred  throughout  the, Nation 

Were  either  demolijhed  or  prophaned^ 

Sir  RoK-.t   Shi; ley,     Bart,  founded  this   Church: 

H/hoje  Jlngular  Praife  it  ;'*,  to  hnve  done 

Zkt  i/e/t  Things  in  the  worji  of  Times. 

Ths 


Leic,       GREAT  BRITAIN. 

The  County  of  Lelcefler  is  in  part  alfo  taken  up  in 
Country  Bufmefs,  more  particularly  in  breeding  and 
feeding  Cattle.  Mod  of  the  Gentlemen  are  Graiiers  ; 
'tis  not  an  uncommon  thing  for  Grafters  here  to  rent 
Farms  from  500  /.  to  2000  /.  a  Year. 

The  Sheep  bred  in  this  County  and  Lincoln/hire, 
which  adjoins  to  it,  are,  without  Cornparifon,  the 
largeft,  and  bear  not  only  the  greateft  Weight  of 
Flefti  on  their  Bones,  but  alfo  the  greateft  Fleeces  of 
Wool  on  their  Backs,  of  any  Sheep  in  England :  and 
hence  it  is,  that  thefe  Counties  become  vaft  Maga- 
zines of  Wool  for  the  reft  of  the  Nation  :  Nor  is  the 
Wool  lefs  fine  becaufe  of  the  great  Quantity  ;  but  as 
it  is  the  longeft  Staple^  as  the  Clothiers  call  it,  fo  it  is 
the  fineft  Wool  in  the  Ifland,  fome  few  Places  ex- 
cepted;  fuch  as  Leominfter  in  Hereford/hire^  the 
South  Downs  in  Suffex,  &c.  where  the  Quantity 
is  fmall  and  infignincant,  compared  to  this  Part  of 
the  Country ;  for  the  Sheep  breeding  Country  reaches 
from  the  River  rinker^  on  the  Border  of  Warwick* 
Jbire,  to  the  Hnmbert  at  the  fartheit  End  of  Lin- 
coln/hire, which  is  near  100  Miles  in  Length ;  and 
from  the  Bank  of  Trent,  in  Lincolnshire  and  Leicefter- 
fmre,  to  the  Bank  of  Oufe,  bordering  on  Bucks,  Bed- 
ford^ Cambridge,  and  Huntingdon  Shires,  above  60 
Miles  in  Breadth. 

Thefe  are  the  Funds  of  Sheep  which  furnifh  the 
City  of  London  with  their  large  Mutton,  in  fuch  pro- 
digious Quantities.  There  are  indeed  a  few  Sheep 
of  a  large  Breed,  which  are  brought  up  from  Romney 
Marjh)  and  the  adjoining  low  Grounds  in  Kent  and 
Sujfex  j  but  they  are  few,  and  indeed  fcarce  worth 
naming,  compared  to  what  are  produced  in  thefe 
Counties. 

The  Horfes  bred  here  are  the  largeft  in  England^ 
being  generally  the  great  black  Coach  and  Dray- 
horfes  ;  of  which  fo  great  a  Number  are  continually 
fent  up  to  London^  that  one  would  think  fo  little  a 

Spot 


4i6  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Leic. 

Spot  as  thi?  of  Lticeftet'Jbirt  could  not  produce  fo 
many.  But  the  adjoin  .ng  Counties  of  Northampton 
and  Bedford  have  of  late  come  into  the  fame  Bufinefs. 
The  chief  Supply,  however,  is  from  this  County, 
from  whence  the  other  Counties  rather  buy  them,  and 
feed  them  up  as  Jockeys  and  Chapmen,  than  breed 
them  up  from  their  Beginning. 

In  the  South-  weft  Part  of  the  County  rife  four 
considerable  fecond-rate  Rivers,  which  run  every  one 
a  direcUy  contrary  Courfe,.  in  a  moft  remarkable 
Manner. 

i.  Thcjfvcn9  which  runs  by  Rugby,  and  goes  away 
to  Warwick  South  -weft. 

Of  this  River  the  Poet  elegantly  fmgs  ; 


Yet  rolling  hvoujj  ill  maintains  its  Stream, 
Swelled  ivitb  the  Glories  of  the  Roman  Name. 
Strange  Pow'r  of  Fate  !  unfhaken  Moles  mujl  wafley 
While  Things  that  ever  move,  for  ever  laft, 

2.  The  Soar^  which  runs  by  Lehejlery   and  goes 
away  to  the  Trent  y  North-  weft. 

3.  The  Anker  ^  which  runs   by  Nun-Eaton^    and 
go>es  away  to  Atberjlan^  North,  and   fo  on  to  Tam- 
wortb,  Weft. 

4.  The  Wettand,  which  runs  by  Harborwgb^  and 
goes  away  to  Stamford,  North-  eaft. 

I  ought  not  to  omit  obferving,  that  as  the  Town  of 
Lelcejler  was  formerly  very  ftrong  and  well  fortified, 
being  advantageouily  (ituated  for  that  Purpafe,  the 
River  covering  it  half-way  about,  fo  it  was  again  for- 
tified in  the  great  Civil  War  5  and,  being  garrifoned 
by  the  Parliament  Forces,  was  afiaulted  by  the 
Royalifts,  who,  after  an  obftinate  Defence,  took  it 
Sword  in  Hand,  which  occafioned  a  terrible  Slaughter. 

They  prefcrve  here  a  moft  remarkable  Relique  of 
Antiquity,  being  a  Piece  of  Mofaic  Work  at  the 

Bottom 


Leic.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  4,27* 

Bottom  of  a  Cellar;  'tis  the  Story  of  Aftem^  and 
his  being  killed  by  his  own  Hounds,  wrought  as  a 
Pavement,  in  a  moft  exquifite  Manner  ;  the  Stones 
are  only  of  two  Colours,  white  arid  brown,  and  very 
fmall. 

The  Caftle  here,  before  it  was  difmantled,  was  a 
prodigious  Building.  It  was  the  Court  of  the  great 
Henry  Duke  of  Lancafter^  who  added  to  it  26  Acres 
of  Ground  ;  which  he  inclofed  with  a  very  ftrong 
Wall  of  fquare  Stone,  18  Feet  high,  and  called  it 
his  Novum  opus,  vulgarly  now,  The  Newark*  where 
the  beft  Houfes  in  or  near  Leicefter  are,  and  do  (till 
continue,  extraparochial.  The  Hall  and  Kitchen  of 
this  Place  remain  ftill  intire,  as  TefHmonies  of  the- 
Grandeur  of  the  Whole ;  the  former  being  fo  lofty 
and  fpacious,  that  the  Courts  of  Juftice,.  which  iiv 
Aflize-time  are  held  there,  are  at  fuch  a  Diftance,  as. 
to  give  no  Difturbance  to  one  another.  There  are 
feveral  Gateways  to  enter  this  Palace;  and  that  which, 
faces  the  Eaft  has  an  Arch  that  is  deemed  a  curious 
Piece  of  Architecture  ;  over  which  in  the  Tower  is 
kept  the  Magazine  for  the  Militia  of  the  County. 

Above  a  Mile  from  Leiceft.er  was  a,  fmall  Pool,  fa- 
mous from  Antiq.uity  for  the  healing  of  all  Leprous 
Humours,  and  for  performing  miraculous  Cures  in 
Green-wounds,  after  the  Battle  of  Bofwortb ;  info- 
much,  that  one  Judd,  an  Apothecary  there,  had 
fuch  an  Opinion  of  its  Virtues,  that  he  built  upon  it 
at  a  great  Expence,  making  convenient  Apartments 
for  Travellers,  and  divided  it  into  many  Partitions,, 
fujting  the  Condition  of  the  Patients,  as  well  their 
Quality  as  their  different  Diftempers.  But  on  the 
Deceafe  of  Mr.  Judd  it  has  been  demolifhed,  and  a 
*  Houfe  built  at  Lelcejler  of  the  Materials,  Some  were 
of  Opinion,  that,  by  the  clearing  and  bricking  of  it 
up,  that  the  Virtue,  that  lay  in  the  Marl  which  was 
taken  away,  was  Ipft,  and  fo  it  became  of  no  Ufe. 

Beneath. 


428  ^TOUR  tbro9  Leic. 

Beneath  this  Caftle  was  a  very  fair  Collegiate 
Hofpitai,  in  the  Church  whereof  Henry  Earl  of  Lan- 
cafler,  and  Henry  his  Son,  the  firft  Duke  of  it,  were 
buried :  the  Hofpital  was  built  by  the  Duke  in  his  old 
Age,  and  appropriated  for  the  Maintenance  of  100 
poor  People,  in  which  alfo  he  placed  a  Dean  and  12 
Canons,  with  as  many  Vicars,  and  other  Minifters, 
and  ten  able  Women  to  ferve  and  affift  the  Poor  and 
Weak.  This,  with  divine  Service  therein,  doth  in 
fome  meafure  ftill  fubfift  by  certain  Stipends  paid  out 
of  the  Duchy  of  Lancafttr*  Another  Hofpital  built 
by  Sir  William  WigJIon,  in  the  Reis;n  of  King  Henry 
VIII.  is  in  a  very  flourifhing  Condition  there. 

Lcice/lcr  is  the  Rata;  Coritanorum  of  the  Romans. 
The  Trace  of  the  Roman  Wall  is  difcoverable  without 
Difficulty,  efpecially  in  the  Gardens  about  Senvy-gaie> 
with  a  Ditch,  which  is  very  vifible.  This  was  re- 
paired  by  Edeljleda^  a  noble  Saxon  Lady,  in  the  Year 
914.  The  old  Work,  called  yewry  wW/,  is  compofed 
of  Ragftone  and  Roman  Brick. 

Not  far  off  is  a  Place  culled  Htly  huts,  where 
Abundance  of  Bones  of  Oxen  have  been  dug  up, 
which  were  the  Remains  of  the  Roman  Sacrifices. 

At  Leicefter  many  Roman  Coins  were  found  ;  a  Pot 
full  of  them  was  dug  up  at  the  Entrance  into  JPhite- 
friers.  There  are  alfo  mai.y  great  Foundations.  At 
St.  Mary  de  Pree's  Abbey  a  Body  was  dug  up,  fup- 
pofed  to  be  Cardinal  Wolfe^s* 

Since  its  Diflblution  it  has  been  made  a  Dwelling- 
houfe,  which  has  nothing  left  but  the  naked  \\V;is ; 
and  the  Spot  of  the  Abbey  is  turned  into  a  Garden. 
The  only  thing  worth  feeing  in  it  is,  a  pleafant  Ter- 
race-walk, fupported  by  an  embattled  Wall,  with 
Lunets  hanging  over  the  Rivei ,  and  (haded  with  Trees. 

In  the  Time  of  the  \axons,  St.  Margaret's  Church 
was  an  Epifcopal  See,  and  was  very  fine.  Here,  fay 
fome,  King  Richard  III.  was  buried. 

Half 


Leic.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  429 

Half  a  Mile  Southward  from  Leicefler,  upon  the 
Edge  of  the  Meadows,  is  a  long  Ditch,  called  Raw- 
dikes  ;  on  the  Banks  of  which,  according  to  Tradition, 
King  Charles  I.  ftood  to  behold  the  Storming  of  the 
Town.  That  Prince  lay  at  the  Vicarage- houfe  at 
Elflon. 

South  eaft  of  Leicejler  lies  Billefden,  a  Market-town 
of  no  Note:  and  further  South  ftill  is  Hallaton,  an- 
other Town  noted  for  its  Poverty,  in  the  midft  of  a 
rich  Soil. 

The  Foffe-ivay  leads  from  hence  through  the  North- 
weft  Part  of  this  County  ;  but,  entering  Nottingham- 
Jblre,  it  inclines  North  eaft,  through  the  Vale  of  Eel- 
<voir,  or,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  of  Bever,  to  Newark. 
In  all  this  long  Track  we  pafs  through  a  rich  and  fer- 
tile Country,  having  in  our  Coaft  North- eaft ward  the 
noble  River  Trent,  for  20  Miles  together,  often  in  our 
View. 

But  fome  Miles  North  of  Leicefter  the  River  Wrtk* 
which  comes  from  the  North-eaft,  and  the  Soar, 
which  runs  North-weft,  form  a  kind  of  Y  ;  the  Soar9 
from  Leicejler  Southward,  making  the  Tail.  In  the 
Courfe  laft-  mentioned,  we  pafied  through  Montforrel 
and  Loughborough)  both  Market  towns,  lying  on  the 
Foffff)  which  runs  nearly  parallel  with  the  Soar,  and 
makes  one  Side  of  the  Y.  The  firft  is  fituate  under  a 

freat  Eminence,  and  has  a  good  Stone  bridge  over  the 
oar ;  and  the  other  is  feated  among  rich  Meadow- 
ground,  and  is  a  fine  agreeable  Town.  And  on  the 
Wrtki  which  makes  the  other  Side  of  the  Y,  ftands 
Melton  Mowbray,  a  large,  well-built,  contiderabie 
Market- town,  fituate  in  a  fertil^Soi!  almoft  furrounded 
with  a  little  River  cal'ed  the  Eye,  over  which  it  has 
two  fine  Bridges;  and  alfo  IF'aibam  on  the  Ifyuld 
(i.  e.  on  the.  Downs),  which  is  but  a  mean  Market- 
town. 

Near  Loughborougk  is  the  Seat  of  the  Earl  of  Hunt- 
ingdon, mentioned  above,  adorned  with  Wood  and 
3  Water* 


4jo  ^  T  O  U  R  thro  Nott. 

Water.  The  Houfe  is  old,  and  not  fo  well  fituated 
as  could  be  wifhed  ;  but  the  Park  is  efteemed  one  of 
the  moft  beautiful  in  this  County:  and  the  Seat  is 
from  it  called  Donnington-Park* 


{landing  within  Lincoln/hire^  but  on 
the  Edge  of  Leicejlerj/bire,  is  a  truly  noble  Situation, 
though  upon  a  very  high  Precipice  ;  'tis  the  antient 
Seat  of  the  Dukes  of  Rutland  ;  a  Family  rifen,  by 
juft  Degrees,  to  an  immenfe  Height  both  of  Honour 
and  Wealth.  I  fhall  mention  the  Houfe  again  in  my 
Return  out  of  Lincolnjbir*. 

Bingham  in  Nottinghamjhire  lying  in  our  Way  to 
Newark,  we  patted  through  it.  It  is  a  fmall  Market- 
town  ;  but  is  noted  for  a  Parfonage  of  great  Value. 

At  Newark  one  can  hardly  fee,  without  Regret,  the 
Ruins  of  that  famous  Caftle,  which,  through  all  the 
great  Civil  War,  kept  a  ftrong  Ganifon  for  the  King 
to  the  laft,  and  fo  cut  off  the  greateft  Pafs  into  the 
North;.  nor  was  it  ever  taken,  "till  the  King,  prefled 
by  the  Calamity  of  his  Affairs,  put  himfelf  into  the 
Hands  of  the  Scots  Army,  which  lay  before  it,  and 
then  commanded  the  Governor  to  deliver  it  up  ;  after 
which  it  was  demolifhed,  that  the  great  Road  might 
lie  open  and  free  :  there  are,  however,  noble  Remains 
of  it  ftillj  the  Walls  towards  the  River  being  very 
high  and  ftrong. 

The  Caftle  was  built  here  by  Alexander  Bifhop  of 
Lincoln,  in  the  Reign  of  King  Stephen. 

This  Town  was  certainly  ratfed  from  the  neigh- 
bouring  Roman  Cities,  and  has  been  walled  about 
with  their  Remains.  The  Northern  Gate  is  com- 
pofed  of  Stones  feemingly  of  a  Roman  Cut;  and  per- 
haps they  had  a  Town  here;  for  many  Antiquities  are 
found  about  it.  Here  are  two  fine  Stone  Crofles.  A 
Gentleman,  digging  to  plant  feme  Trees  in  the  Foffi 
Road-fide,  diicovered  four  Urns  in  a  ftrait  Line,  and 

at 


Nott.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  431 

at  equal  Diftances,  in  one  of  which  was  a  Brafs  Lare^ 
or  Houfhold  god,  an  Inch  and  half  long;  but  much 
con  fumed  by  Kuft. 

Newark  is  a  very  handfome  well -built  Town,  fituate 
on  the  Trent)  under  the  Government  of  a  Mayor,  and 
12  Aldermen.  The  Market-place  is  a  noble  Square, 
and  the  Church  is  large  and  fpacipus,  with  a  curious 
Spire ;  which,  were  not  Grantbam  fo  near,  might 
pafs  for  the  fineft  and  higheft  in  all  this  1  art  of  Eng- 
land. The  Trent  divides  itfelf  here,  and  makes  an 
Ifland,  and  the  Bridges  lead  juft  to  the  Foot  of  the 
Caftle-wall ;  fo  that  while  this  Place  was  in  the  Hands 
of  any  Party,  as  I  have  before  hinted,  there  was  no 
Traveling  but  by  their  Leave;  but  all  the  Traveling 
into  the  North  at  that  Time  was  by  Nottingham 
Bridge.  Newark  returns  two  Members  to  Parlia- 
ment. 

/  am,  Sir,  Tour's,  &c» 


INDEX 


T  O    T  H  E 


SECOND  VOLUME. 


A 


A. 

Bbot  of  Glaftonbury, 
his  extraordinary  State 


and  Riches 
Abbots  Langley 
Aberdaron  Road 
Abergavenny 
Abermenay  Ferry 
Aberyflwith 
Abingdon 
A  bury 
Ackman-ftreet 


29,33 
179 
360 

345 

367 

363 
6i 

51 

273 


Afton,  Sir  Thomas,  his  Mo- 
nument 329 

Adams,  Mr.  his  noble  Foun- 
dation 393 

Adrian  IV.  a  Pope,  his  Birth- 
plare  1 79 

Ailefbury,  Earl  of,  his  Seat, 
405 

Ailefbury  215.  Character  of 
the  adjacent  Country  2 1  6 

St.  Albans,  Duke  of,  his 
Seat  83 

St.    Albans,     its 


Grandeur  of  its  Monaftery, 
its  Abbot's  Privileges,  the 
Church  defer ihed  187-190 
Alceiter  323 

Aldbury  84.     A  mojt  beau- 
teous Slip   of  Land  near  it 
185 

Aldchefter  232 

Aldely,  figured  Stcnes  found 

in  its  Neighbourhood    283 

Aldred,    Founder  of  Glou- 

ceiler  Cathedral  3 1  ^ 

Alfred  King  47,  60 

Allen  R.   Efq;  his  Seat    293 

Alney,  IJle  of,  a  memorable 

Combat  there  3 1 6 

Althorpe  416 

Akringham  383 

AmerSarii,    or   Agmoude- 

fham  215 

Amfty,  Antiquities  bere   205 

Amwell,   the  Source  of  the 

New  River  212 

Anderfon,  Sir  Richii  d   183 

Anglefea,  IJle  of  369 

Anne,  S^ueen,  Charafter  192 

6  Anfoa 


INDEX, 


Anfon,  lord,  bis  Seat     179 
Anfon    Thomas,    Efq\    his 

Seat  399 

Antiquities,  Roman       202 
Arbury-Banks  203 

Archenfield,  Antiquities  there 
338 
Arthur  King,   4.     His  Well 

26.    His  Burial  place  27. 

The  Infcription  on  bis  fup- 

pofed  Coffin  29 

P.  Arthur     326,  330,  334 
Art's  Point  3 1 3 

St.  Afaph  372 

Aihbury  60 

Afhby  de  la  Zouch         423 
Afhridge  184 

Aihwell  202 

Amwell.field  203 

Aftal  276 

Aftroites,  or  Star-ftones  283 
Athelftane,  King,  where  bu- 
ried 44 
Athelftane,   "Bijhop         389 
Atherfton                       422 
Audley,  Lord                  393 
Auguftine'j  Oak,  famous  for 
a  Conference  held  under  it 

33* 

Auil,  an  inconvenient  Ferry, 

310,   311 

Avon.  River  39.  Its  Source 
282.  The  Advantages  a  • 
rijtngfrom  its  Navigation 

323 
Axe,  Rivtr  36 

Ayerfcombe,  Mr.  83 

B. 

Bacon,  Lord,  his  paternal 
Ejlate  190.  The  Infcrip- 


tion on  bis  Monument  191 
Badmington  5 1  Globular 

Stones  found  near  it  283. 

Duke  oj  Beaufort'/  Seat,  fa 

named  298 

Bagot,  Sir  Walter,  a.  Witch- 

Elm  in  his  Park  404 
Baldock  200 

Bampton  276 

Banbury  232 

Bangor  370.  Its  defpicable 

Cathedral,  ibid.    Once  the 

Place  of  a  famous  Mona- 

fary  374 

Barkhamftead-Caftle      180 
Barkway,  the  Church  Win- 
dows   ridicutoujly  painted 
204 

Barnftaple,    Town,    Haven, 

and  Bay  9.  Compared  vaith 

Bideford  ibid  &feq. 

Baftide,  Col.  357 

Bath  285,  297 

Battle-edge  275 

Beachly-Paflage  3 1 1 

Beaconsfield,  the  Rejtdence  of 

the  Poet  Waller  2 1 5 

Beaufort,  Duke  of,  his  Seat, 

344 
Beaumans  369 

Beaudefert  400 

Beechwood- Manor,  vchyfo~ 

called  185 

Beefton-Caftle  381 

Bccket,  Archbif/yop  21  8 

Beckford,  William,  Efo  his 

Scat  burnt  down  ;  his  phi- 

lojophical    Indifference    on 

the  Nevus  48 

Bekyngton,  Thomas  de  34 

Belvoif-Caflle  430 

Bening- 


INDEX. 


Benington  Place  198 

Bensford  43 

Berkley  312 

Berkley,  Earl  of,  bis  Seat 
312.  A  noble  Improvement 
of  his  Lord/hip's  3  I  3 

Berkley,  Robert,  Efq;  his 
Hoj'pital  328 

Beryflade,  an  agreeable  Sum- 
mer-houfe  200 
Betley  396 
Bewdley                          330 
Bicefter                           232 
Bideford    9.     The  Condition 
and  Trade  of  the  Town  IO. 
Compared  with  Barnftaple 
ibid.    Its  Bridge  built  from 
Ecdsfiaflical   Benefactions 
i  [ 

Billefden  429 

Bingham  430 

Birmingham  410 

BiOiam  66 

Bifhops-Caftle  332 

Bifhops-Mott  ib. 

Bifliop  •  Stortford  207.     A 
Scholajlic Endowment  there 
197 

Black-Mountains  365 

Blackfton-Hill  330 

Blaithwait,  Mr.  his  Seat  298 
Blake's- Ware  211 

Blenheim-Houfe  263.  d 
Panegyrical  Infiripticn  to 
the  Memory  of  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough  265 — 271 
Bloreheath,  famous  for  a 
Battle  393 

Bloxham  372 

JBlundel,  Peter,  founder  of 
Tiverton  ^cbool  15 


Blunt,  Sir  Henry  Pop3,  /•/* 
Scat  193 

Boadicea  1^7 

The  Boar,  what       22,  310 
Bodmyn  4 

Borough  Englifh  391 

Bofcobel-Houfe  390 

Bofliney  4 

Bofworth-field  423 

Botelers,  their  Manjton,  and 
fine  Park  197 

Boughton  418 

Brackley  23  z 

Bradford  39,  47 

Bradford,  Earl  of  y  bit  Seat, 

330 

Brad  gate  424 

Brampton  Brian  336 

Braughing,    a    matrimonial 

Endowment  there,         206 
Bray  67 

Brecknock  347 

Brecknock-mere,  Stones  con- 

cerning  it  348 

Brecknock  (hire,  a  Char  after 

,ofit  347.    A  laudable  So- 

cii  ty  injlituted  there     348 
Breewood  6 

Brentford 
Brent-Knowle 
St.  Bride  V 
Bridge,  <a/  Wcilminfter  108. 

At  Putney  i  65 

Bridgenorth  331 

Bridgwater  22.  A  Character 

of  the  neighbouring  Coun- 

try 23 

Bridgwater,  Duke  rf,  his  fine 

Parks  ,85 

Bright  well  Parift),  Its  Singu- 

larities 272 

Briitol 


1  74 
23 


INDEX. 


D. 


St.  Daniel  370 

Dantfey  44.     Frauds  in  the 

leafeng  of  it  45 

Danvers,  Henry,  44.     His 

Brother  s    Ingratitude     to 

Charles  I.  ibid. 

Daventry  413 

S.  David,  an  Account  of  him 

362 

St.  David's  361.  Its  Ca- 
thedral ibid. 
Deane,  Foreji  313 
Deddington  232 
Dee,  River,  345,  366,  377, 

379 

Denbigh  371 

Deptford  88 

Devizes  39,  48 

Devonfhire,  Part  of  it  de- 
feribed  8 

Digby'j,  their  Seat  405 
Dinder-hill,  a  Roman  Camp 

339 

Ditchley  273 

Donnington-caftle  59 

Donnington.park  430 
Dorcheiter  217 

Drayton  393 

Droitwich  328 

Dudley  399 

Durhams,  Earl  of  Albe- 

rnarle\?  Seat  176 

Durfley,  a  bad  Character  cf 

its  Inhabitants  312 


E. 


Eafl  Barnet 


'75 


Ecclefhall  394. 

Echo,  a  remarkable  one  263, 
Edgar  31,  379 

Edge-hill  232,  323 

Edgware  163 

Edmonton  161 

Edward,  the  Confe/or  34. 
The  Place  of  his  Nativity 

233 

Elbridge,    John,    Efq;    his 
charitable  Ben> fagions  308 
Eleanor,  Queen        71,  214 
Elizabeth,  Queen,  made  the 
Terrace   at  Wind  for  74. 
Her  Free-fchool  1 76.    En- 
dows one  390 
El  (mere  386 
Enfield  161 
Enfield  chace                 162 
Enterkin,  a  dangerous  Pafs 
371 

Erdborough,  a  Roman  Camp 
there  420 

Ethelbert  187.  TreacherouJJy 
murdered  339 

Ethelred  325 

Ethelwolf  65 

Eton,  a  truly  royal  Founda- 
tion 69 
Evefham  322 
Ex,  River  14 
Exmore  19 
Eye,  River  42 j 

F. 

Fairford,  Antiquities  dug  up 
there,  a  Defcription  of  its 
Church,  and  the  fine  Win- 
dows of  it  277,  278 

Farringdon  60 

Fell, 


INDEX. 


Fell,  $ijhop  of  Oxford,  re- 
Jlores  St.  Ofwald'^  Hofpi- 
tal  329 

Ferrers,  Earl  of,  his  Seat 
424 

Fitz-  Stephen,  Robert,  intro- 
duced the  Engliih  into  Ire- 
land 363 

Flemings,  fettled  in  Wales 

359 

Flat-Holms  21 

Flint  374 

Flintfhire  ibid. 

Flint-  caille  ibid. 

Foley,  Lord,  hit  Seat     324 
Fonthill  48 

Foreft  o/Delamere        380 
Foreil  of  Macclesfield,  fa. 
terraneous  Threes  there  384 
FofTe-way,    the    great  Ro- 
man, ifs  Courfe  273,413, 
429 

Four  Shire-Stones  272 

Frampton  313 

Frederick,  Allot  of  St.  Al- 

bans,  his  noble  Refolution 

182 

Frodmam  381 

Frome  38,  43 

Froxfield  54 

Fuller,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  her 
Almi-houfes  177 

G. 

Gadefden  184 

Gadefden-Little  183 

Gadefden,  John  de        184 
Garter,  an  idle  Tradition  re- 
lating to  that  mile  Ord  r 
refuted  326 

Geddington  419 


Gilbert,  £W</Gloucefter, 

his  Ditch  3  2  I 

St.  Giles  in  the  Wood   i  86 

Glamorgan(hire350.  Called 

the  Garden  of  Wales    3  5 1 

Glartonbury,    a  Defcription 

of  its  Ruins  30.     Its  falu- 

brious  Waters  33 

Glendower,/V/»tt  of  Wales 

348 

Gloucefter  3 1 4.  Ifjvtneratr/i 
Cathedral  315.      Its  civil 
Polity  316.  When  made  an 
Epifcopal    See     317.     Its 
charitable  Foundations  ib. 
Gobions,    once   the  Seat  of 
Sir  Thomas  More      197 
Godiva,  Lady,  her  Anniver- 
fary  409 

Godolphin,Z)r.  a  "Benefactor 
to  Eton  69 

Godftow-  Nunnery  262 

Golden- Vale          337,  343 
Goldtop-road  359 

Goodman,  Gabriel,  his  En- 
dowment 372 
Gore;  Mr.  bis  fine  Park  1 82 
Gorhambury,    thg  Seat  of 
Lord  Grimfton  190 
Go  ugh,  Martha,    her  Cha- 
rity                              397 
Gower,  Earl,  his  Seat     396 
Gowre,  Land  of            353 
Granville,    Sir    Bevil,    his 
Monument                      298 
Great  Barkhamfted         i  So 
Great  Bedwin  53 
Great  Malvern               321 
Great  Marlow                  65 
Great  Wenlock     332,  392 
Grey  Wethers,  what      49 
Grif- 


INDEX. 


Grifmund's-Mount        280 
Guildfborough  416 

Gunnerfbury  houfe        173 
Guy,Earlof  Warwick  410, 
412 
The  Gwiniad  369 

H. 

Haclrney  161 

Had  ham  Parva  209 

Hadfley,  a  Seat  of  that  Fa- 
mily 2 1 1 
Hadftock,  a  Curiojity  there 

204 

Hagley-park  329 

Hale,     Richard,    erefit   a 

Grammar -fchool  195 

Hales,  John,    Efq-t  Founder 

of  a  School  407 

Hallaton  429 

Hampton-court  342 

Hamftead  162.     Its  AJJem- 

lly-room  1 63 

Hamftead-heath  162 

Harborough  420 

Harleigh  -  caftle  366.     An 

antient  Monument  near  it 

368 

Harley,   Sir  Edward,   his 

tivo  Seats  336 

Harrifon,  Governor,  his  Seat 

196 

Marrow  214 

Hartland  8 

Harwich,  Earl  of,  his  Seat 

172 
Haflall  382 

194 


Hatfield 
Hatfield-  houfe 
Haverford-weft 
Havifdike 


361 
53 


Hay  thorp  273 

Heane  61 

Heightfbury  48 

Hempfted  1 80 

Hengciton-hill  5 

HenJy  upon  Thames  62 
Herefordfhire,  ///  Character 

itf 

Hereford  337 — 342.  A  Pro- 
digy in  its  Neighbourhood 

341 

Herman-ftreet       201,  205 
Hertfordfhire,  generally  de- 
fer ibed  1 7  4 
Hertford  195 
Hexton                           199 
High  crofs,  Antiquities  and 
Infcriptions  there          421 
Highgate  162 
Highlake                        3-^7 
High -\Vkkham  66 
Hill,    Richard,    his  Monu- 
ment                            323 
Hill,  Sir  Rowland,  his  Seat 

392 

Hindon  48 

Hinkley  422 

Hitchin  199 

Hobbes,  Mr.  44 

Hobby,  Sir  William,  and 

Sir  Edward  66 

Hock  Crib  3 1 3 

Hoddefdon  212 

Holmeby-houfe  416 

Holywell  371,  372 

Holy-bones  428 

Holy- wells  321 

Honefdon,  the  Rejidence  cf 

Henry  VIII/^V  Children 
209 

Horfeftioe-Rocks  359 
Howard 


INDEX. 


Ho  ward,  John,  Duke  ^Nor- 
folk 47,  56 
Humphrey,  Duke,  his  Mo- 
nument 1 8  8 
Hungerford  in  Berks       56 
Hungerfordj-Ftf/tf/Ty  47,  56 
Hung-road                      310 
Huntingdon,    Earl  of,    bis 
Seat                     424,  429 
Hurlers,  Stones  fo  called      6 
Hurling  Match  7 
Hurley,  the  Seat  of  the  late 
Lord  Lovelace              67 
Hufbandry,    an   ufeful  Ob- 
fervation  in  th'it  Way  41 

i. 

Jack  of  Newbury  58 

Icleford  201 

Jdleftrey  177 

Jekyll,  Sir  Jofeph,  his  Seat, 

now    the  Property  of  the 

Duke  of  Leeds  194 

Ikemld  itreet         401,  413 

Ikening  itreet  182,200,201 

Jlfordcomb  12 

In  a,    King,  his   Palace  2$. 

.Baz/a'jGlaflonbury  Church 

29.  and  one  at  Wells  34. 

The  Place  where  his  Lanvs 

iv ere  pub  lifted  1 80 

Incent,  Dean,  his  Frce-fchool 

182 

Ingeflre  399 

Inglefield  65 

John  of  Gaunt  56 

Johnfon  Sir  Henry          67 
Jofeph  of  Arimathea,  a  Tra- 
dition concerning  him      27 
Ifabel,  Dutchefs  of  York  1 79 


Ifis,  River  I  J$. 


Its  Source 

274 
88 


Iflington 

Iflip  51*  233 

Ivel,  River*  Aft  to  make  it 

navigable  1  7  5 

Ivelchefter  26 

St.  Ives  i  .  The  neighbouring 

Country  defcribed  2 

Ivingo  217 

K. 

Kader-Idricks  366 

Keiriad-road  360- 

Kenchefter  338 

,  Kendale-vvood,    Antiquities 

found  there  1  77 

Ken  net,  River,  50,  56,  63, 

65 
Kenrick,  Mr.  his  noble  Le- 

gacies 58,  63 

Kenfington  166 

Kidderminfter  329 

King-road  310 

Kingfbury  191 

Kings-Langley  179 

Knight,  Bijbop  34 

Knutsford  383 

Kynaflons,  their  Seat  3§(> 
Kyneton,  in  Somerfetfhire 

27.  In  Hereford  fhire  336 
Kynfig-caftle  352 

L. 

Lambourn  59 

Lambourn,  River  59 

Landaff,  its  Cathedral,  and 

jirft  Eijhops  351 

Langleybury  178 

..Langlej, 


INDEX. 


Langley,  Edmund  de,  Duke 

of  York  179 

Langport  25 

Laffington,    figured    Stones 

there  283 

Launcefton  4 

Laurence. Waltham         68 

Lavington  48 

Lawton-yeats  382 

Lech,  River  274,  277 

Lechlade  274.     A  Roman 

Bath  near  it  276 

Lee,   "River    175,  195, -2 12 

Legers-afhby  413 

Leicefterfhire,    its    Produce 

425.     Rivers  rifing  in  it 

426 

Leicefter        424,426,428 

Leigh,  the  Rev.  Thomas,  a 

Benejafior  208 

Lemfter  335 

Leonards  hill  83 

Lichfield  401.     A  fuppofed 

Martyrdom  there  402.    Its 

Cathedral  403.     Its  civil 

Government 

Lidbury 

Liliho 

Lilliput-caftle 

Litchfield,    Lord,    Ms  Seat 
273 

Little  Malvern 
Loddon,  River 
LONDON,    ///   prodigious 
Extent  87,  88.     An  Ac- 
count of  its  Circumference, 
taking  in  fame  of  the  Vil- 
lages which  join  to  it  89 — 

95.  Number  of  its  Inha- 
bitants ;    its    Government 

96.  What  it  vjas  former- 


404 
341 

200 
298 


321 

66 


ly,  and  its  great  Increaf* 
98—  1 04.  The  public  Of- 
Jfffj,  noted  Edifces,Squarest 
and  other  public  Structures 
in  and  about  it  \  04 —  1 1  2 
Of  its  Hofpitals,  and  other 
charitable  Inftiiutions  112 

—  128.     Of  its  Churches, 
particularly  of  St.  Paul'/ 

I29--I38.  O/St.  James'j 
Palace,  the  Parliament' 
houfe,  and  Weftminfter- 
hall,  138,  139.  Of  the 
Statues  and  other  public 
O-naments  in  and  about  it , 
of  its  Gates,  and  Markets 
1 39 — 1 49.  Of  its  public 
Schools,  the  Britifti  Mu- 
feunty  and  other  Ejlablijb- 
tnents  tending  to  promots 
Learning  and  Science  1 49 

—  153.     Of  its  Shipping, 
Commerce,  and  other  Par- 
ticulars,  Sec.  &c.   153— 

1 60 

Loughborough  429 

Lower- way  23.  Suffered™ 

the  great  Storm  ibid. 

Ludlow  332 — 335 

Lug,  River  325,  339 

Lumley,  Henry,  Efq;  his 

monumental  Inscription  2 1  o 
Lundy,  I/land  16 

Lupus,  Hugh,  Founder  of 

the  Cathedral  and  Cajlle  of 

Chefter  379 

Lutterworth,  Wicklifte  born 

there  420 

Lyteford  27 

Lyttelton,  Lord,  his  Seat 


MacclesfieH 


329 

fie 


INDEX. 


M. 


Macclesfield  384 

Maidenhead  67 

Malmfbury  43 

Malmufius,  Dunwallo,  a 
Britifh  Prince  .282 

Malpas  376 

Malvern-hills  .       321 

Man,  Nicholas,  Efq;      69 
Margan-Mynydd,  a  famous 
Monument  near  if         3  5.3 
Marlboro  ugh  50 

Mariborough-downs        49 
Marlborough,    Duke  of,    a 
beautiful  Seat  of  his     68 
Marlborough,  Sarah,    Du~ 
chefs  Dowager  of,  her  Seat 
and  Alms- houfes  at  St.  Al- 
ban's  191.  tier  Character 
of^  Anne  192 

Marfhfield  284 

Maudlin- meadow,   a  petri- 
fying Spring  there        282 
Mawcop  382 

Meaty s,  Sir  Thomas     190 
Melron-Mowbray  429 

Meneu,  Inlet  367 

Mere  47 

Mereval  423 

Merionethfhke,  Its  Qualities 
365.  Ant  lent  Monuments 
there  367.  Its  Lakes  and 
Mountains  369 

Merlin,  the  Place  of  his 
Birth  354 

Merfey,  River  377 

St.  Michael'/  3 

St.  Michael'/  Church  upon 
the  Torr  2.7 


St.    Michael'/    Mount,    <* 

Place  of  Superjtitian    338 

MiddletonjS/V  Hugh,  a  moft 

meritorious  Projeftor    2 1  2- 

Middlewich  381 

Milbourn  26 

Mil  ford  3  5  4.      Noted  for  its 

commodious    Haven,    ibid. 

Aft  for  fortifying  andfe- 

curing  //.  359 

Minching-Hampton       282. 

Minehead  19,  20 

Monmouth  344 

Monmouthlhire,  a  Character 

347 

Monfon,  Lord,  his  Seat  z  I  3 

Montagu,  Duke  of,  his  Seat 

418 

Montgomery  364 

Montgomeryshire,  a  Cha- 
r after  of  it  364 

Montforrel  429 

Monuchdenny-hill         350 
Mordaunt,  Lord  44 

Mordaunt,  Lieutenant-Gene- 
ral  Lewis  46- 

More- park,  Duke  of  Mon- 
mouth'/ Houfe  theret  now* 
Lord  A  n  fon'/  179 

Moreton,  Earl  of  Corn  wall 
1 80 

Mortonhenmarfh  272 

Morland,  -Sir  Samuel      73 
Mowywynda  366 

Muniborough-hill          184 


N. 


Namptwich 

Nafeby 

Neath 


416 

3?2 
Neffon 


INDEX. 


Neflbn  377 

Netlebed  62 

Nevern,  River  362 

Nevil,  Ear I  of Salifbury  393 
Nevyn,  Port  361 

Newark  430 

Newbury  56.  Famous  far 

two  Battles  57 

Nevvcaftle  under  Line  395 
Newington  161 

Newington-butts  88 

'Newnham  313.  A  noble 

For,:Ji  mar  it  ibid. 

NewnhamVNob  313 
Newport  5,  362,  392 

Nevvport-Pagnell  23 1 

New  &\\zr,fome  Account  of 

it  212 

Northampton  415 

North-End  172 

North-Lech  -274 

North  Myms  194 

North  with  famous forBrinf- 
fi>ri><gs  381 

Nun-Eaton  422 

O. 

Oakingham  84 

Och,  River  60 
K.  Offa  188,339,402 

Offa V  Dyke  345 

Okehampton  12 

Old  Stratford  414 

Ofney,  Abbey  259 

St.  Ofwald  326.  His  Ho/pi. 

tal  329 

Ofweftry  387 

Onlney  231 

Oufley,   Sir  William,    hit 


Oxford-City   259. 
made  epifcopal 


When 
262 
Ac- 
count of  its  Colleges  and 
Halls,  and  the  many  noble 
Benefactions  thereto  233 
—258  O/'  ///  Govern- 
ment 258.  Has  Jiourijhcd 
mojl  fince  the  Reformation 
262 

P. 

Packingtons,  their  Seat  324 
Padflow 

Paget,  Lord,    Earl  oj  Ux- 
bridge,  his  Seat          400 
Par  rat,  Rivfr  22 

Patrick'^  Caufeway          360 
St.   Paul's    Church  dtfcribed 

129,  fcf  y<y. 

Paynfwick  281 

Peacock-coals  395 

Pelagius  375 

Pern  bridge  336 

Pembroke  356 

Pembrokcfhire^  a  Character 

of  it  354 

Pendrils,    the,  famous   jor 
Jhtltering  Charles  II.  390 
for  its  Horfe- 

393 

184 
371 

177 

22 

325 
322 


fair 
Penley-Lodge 
Penmaen-Maur 
Penn,  Mr. 
Pennywell 
Perrot,  River 
Perry  wood 
Perfhore 


Sfat 


400 


Phenomenon,  fi  veryjirange 

366 

Philips- 


INDEX. 


Philips-Norton  43 

Phyfic-Garden  at  Chelfea 

"167 

Pill,  a  convenient  Road  for 

Ships  3 1  o 

Pifhobury,  a  Manor- houfe  of 

/£<?  Gardeners  210 

Plummer,  William,  Efq; 

his  Seat  2 1 1 

Plymlymon-hill  364 

Polehampton,  Capt.  189 
Polefworth  423 

Pom  fret,  Earl  of,  his  Seat 

4'7 

Popham,  Chief  Jnjlice  \  8 
Porlock  i  g 

Porthorion-JRW  360 

Porthdinlleyn-/V/  361 
Portland,  Duke  of,  a  Seat  of 

his  2 1 3 

Pot  Walloners  19 

Powell,  Mr.  Juftice,  his  good 

Setife,   good  Nature,    and 

Pleafantry  198 

Powis,  Earl of \  his  Seat  330 
Prefteigne  350 

Price,  Sir  Carbery  363 

Prior-park,  the  Seat  of  R. 

Allen,  Efq',  293 

Puckeridge  206 


Quantock 
Quern 


21 

280 


R. 


Radnor  350 

Radnormire  350 

Ramiey  found  359 

Ranelagh,  late  Earl  of  83 


Ranelagh-houfe   168.     Re- 
flexions   occajtoned  ly  the 
Diverjions    at    that   and 
other  fitch  Places  ib.&feq. 
Raravaur  366 

Ravenfborough-caftle     199 
Ravenfcroft,  James,  Efo  his 
Alms-boufes  176 

Raw-dikes  429 

Reading  63 .     Its  Trade  and 
Manufactures  ibid.  &  feq* 
Reformation  of  Religion,  in 
England,  began  at  New- 
bury  58 

Rey,  River  281 

Reynolds,  Mr.  69 

Rhee,  River,  its  Source  202 
Rhoodee  377,  378 

Ribsford  330 

Rich,  Sir  Thomas,  his  cha- 
ritable Donation  317 
Rickmerfworth  179 
Rivers,  Earl,  his  Seat  381 
Robert,  Prince  316 
Robin  Hood's-hill  316 
Roch  ;  331 
Roifia  204 
Roper  Family,  their  Seat  1 8 1 
Rofs  344 
Rowldrich  Stones  271 
Roxburgh,  Duke  of,  his  Seat 

83 

Royfe,  John,  his  Charity  Oi 
Roylton  203 

Rugby  421 

Rugely  400 

Ruleigh-abbcy  259 

Rumbald,  St.  217 

Rumball  209 

Runway,  Spring  48 

Ruthin  371 

Rutland,  D.  of,  his  Scat  430 
Rye 


INDEX. 


Rye,  in  Hertfordfhire,  fa- 

'nous  for  a  fuftofed  Plot 

209 

s. 

Salifbury,  Countefs  oft    her 

Monument  326 

Salkeld,  the  Royal  Convert 

18 

Sambroke,  Sir  Jeremy,  bis 

Improvements  1 97 

Sandbach  385 

Sarn-Badrig  360 

Sarney  276 

Savernack  Foreft  51 

Saundridge  194 

Savvbridgeworth  210 

Sebrlghc,  Sir  Thomas  Saun- 

ders,  bis  Seat   185.     An 

Infcription   anf  one   of  the 

"Family  Monuments        1 86 

Sedgmore  35 

Selwcod  Forefl  47 

Severn  River  310,  313,329, 

355'  364,  387 

Seymour,  .Queen  Jane      52 

Seymour,  S/rJohn          52 

Shakefpeare,  bis  Monument 

322 

Shepton-Mailet  43 

Shipley-hill  420 

Shipton  232 

Shirby  wich  395 

ShrevVfbury  387.  A  d-d- 
Jive  Battle  near  it  388. 
Its  Loyalty  tc  Charles  I. 
ih.  The  Sivtativg  Sicknefs 
tb  ;r  90 

Shrevvil)ury,  Lord,  his   Seat 

273 
Shrubbb  hill,      an     elegant 


Building  thereon  83 

Shuckborough-manor    399 
Siffivernes  ig8 

Simpel  364 

Sinodun-hill  60 

Slough  69 

Snowdon-hill        364,  367 
Soar,  River  429 

Solvatch-bay  359 

Somerfetfliire,  its  Etymology 
1 8.    Its  Manufactures  24. 
That  of  Broad-doth  car- 
ried on  in  the  Parts  bor- 
dering   on  Wiltfhire    36. 
The  Caufe  of  this  Manu- 
faflure's  Decay  3  8  (Note) 
Somerfet,  Duchefs  Dowager 
cft  her  Alms'boufe         54 
Somerton  26 

Sopwell  Nunnery  190 

Southams  17 

South  Petherton  25 

Spine«WSpinham-lands  57 
Stackpool-houfe  356 

Stafford  394 

Stafford  (hire,  the  People  ge- 
nerally  very  fleet  399 

Stamford,  Earl  of, 'his  Hunt- 
ing Seat  and  Park        424 
Stamford,  a   London  Mer- 
chant, buildi  a  Bridge  at 
Barnftable  1 1 

Standon  207 

Stanley  312 

Stanley,  Sir  John  172 

Stanton-Harold  424 

Starbury-Mount  280 

Steep- Holms  21 

Stevenage  1 97 

Siockport  383 

Stones,     a   Proof  of    their 
Lrovjtb  3  9 

Ston- 


INDEX. 


Stony- Stratford  231 

'    Stone  395 

Stones,  curious  283 

Stort,  River,  Aft  to  make  it 

navigable  2 1  © 

Stourbridge  329 

Stow  on  the  Would  274 
Stow  Gardens  218—231 
Stratford  upon  Avon  322 
Stratford,  Mr.  his  Seat  423 
Stratton  6 

Strongbow,  his  Tomb  316 
Stroud  281 

Stroud  water,  famous  for  the 
fneji  Scarlet  Cloths  320. 

A3  to  make  it  navigable 

321 

Stukeley  415 

Suffolk,  Duke  of  79 

Sunderland,  late  Earl  of,  his 

Seat  41 7 

Superftition,  a  tragical  In- 

fiance  of  it  183 

Sutton-Colefield  404 

Sutton-  walls,  a  RomanCflw^ 

-   339 

Svvanzy  352.  Its  Mineral 
Waters  ibid. 

T. 

Taaffe-well  351 

Table,  a  very  large  one  399 
Talbot,    John,    a   moft  re- 
nowned Warrior  386 
Tamar  River  8 
Tame                               21 7 
Tame,  John,  a  Merchant  of 
.London,      builds    a  fine 
Church  277.      Is  buried  in 
it   ^                                  279 
Tamworth                     404 


Taviftock 
Taunton 
Taunton-Dean 
Taw  River 


1  1 
18 

ibid 
10 

330,  334 
Temple,  Earl,  his  Seat  218* 
Temple-mills  66 

Tenbigh  35^ 

Tenbury  330 

Tetbury  282 

Tewkfbury  320 

Thames   River    175.      Its 

Source  274 

Tbatchum  62 

Theale  62 

Theobalds,  once  the  Seat  of 

King  James  I.   162.     Its 

Revolutions  213 

Therfield,  its  Church  obliged 

to  a  Bijhop  of  Ely        204 
Thornbury  31  ' 

Tidmerton  Parijh,    an  old 

Camp  272 

Tiverton  14 

Tone  River  22 

Tooke,   Dr.  Thomas,    his 

BenefaSlions  208 

Tophara,  Richard,  Efa  his 

Legacy  to  Eton  69 

'The  Torgoch  369 

Torr,  the  Hi  II  27 

Torrington  \  z 

Tottenham  161,  162 

Tottenham,  a  Seat  of  Lord 

Ailfbury's  51,  52 

Totteridge  17^ 

Tovy  River  365 

Towcefter  416 

Towridge  River  10 

Trees,  remarkable  ones    197 
198,  404 

Trent  River  •      396 

Trent  ham 


INDEX. 


Trentham 

Tring  .  1   2 

Tripontium,  a  Roman  Sta 


ton 

Troy-houfe 
Trubridge 
St.  Tudwal'j  Road 
Tutbury 
Tvvyford 
Tyvy 


U. 


Ufcolumb 
Upper  Way 
Upton 


A  1  3 
344 
39,  47 
360 
401 
65 
363 


1  6 
23 
321 


Uxbridge,  Earl  ofy  his  Seat 
400 

V. 

\n\tof  Eve/ham  322 

Vale  of  Red  -horfe  323 
Valeo/White-horfe  41,  63 
Verulam,  OldandNcw  186 

W. 

Wadbridge  3 

Waddington,  Dr.  bis  Legacy 

to  Eton  69 

Wadley,  a  Curicjity  near  it 

6; 

Walcot,  Antiquities  there 
297 

Wales,  a  genera!  Account  of 
it  346.  ^  CbaraStr  of 
the  (  \entlemen  of  that  Prin- 
cipality 375 

Walkcrn  198 

Wallingford  61 


Wallingford,  Richard  of,  a 

famous  Mathematician  62 
Walpole,  Sir  Edward,    bis 

Seat  83 

Walfal  398 

Waltham  crofs  214 

Waltham  on  the  Would  429 
Wanfdyke  53 

Wantage  60 

Ward,  Lord,  bis  Seat     399 
Ward,  Dr.  Seth,  Bifiop  of 

Saliibury,  bis  Benefaftions 
205 

Ware  2 1 1 

Wargrave  84 

Warminfter  47 

Warmlington  232 

Warrington,    Earl  of,    bis 

Seat  380 

Warwick  410 — 413 

Warwick,  Earl  of,  bis  Seat 

412 

Watch et  20.    Curious  Stones 

found  on  its  "Beach  21,  283 
Watford  177 

Wathington  62 

Watling-ftreet,     a   Roman 

#^201,  231,390,  413, 
422 

Weaver  River       377,  381 
Web,  M*-.  173 

Wedmsfield  397 

Weedon,     antitnt    Remains 

th-re  414 

Welles,  Bi/.op  Joceline   de 

34>  35 
Wellingborough  420 

We! Hi  '4 -on  17,  302 

Wells  34 

We Kv y  n ,  it s ' Spaw          1 9  5 
Wem  386 

Wendover 


I    N    D    E 


386 

his' 

179 


Wendover  215 

Wenman,  Jane,  a  fuppofed 
Witch  198 

Weobly  336 

Weftbury  47 

Whaddon-hall  414 

Wharton,  late  Duke  of,  his 
Seat  2 1 6 

Wheelock  3^2 

Whitchurch 
White,    Sir  Thomas, 

Foundations 

Whitehorfe-hill  60.  A  Cuf- 
tom  relating  to  it         ibid. 
Whitefhole-hill  48 

Whitley-court  324 

Wickham,  High,  or  Chip- 
ping 2If 
Wickwar                        283 
K.  Wightred  1 80 
Wigmore,  Cajile  of       336 
••           •'  —  Hundred  of  ibid. 
Wilbury-hill                   201 
William  0/"  Malm/bury    44 
William  of  Wickham,  bis 
equivocal  Infcription       72 
Willoughby    Brook,     Anti- 
quities found  there       419 
Willoughby,    the  Town,   a 
Croft   refcued    there  from 
Roundheads                  419 
Wiltmire,     its  Manufacture 
36.     Other    Branches  of 


Trade  carried  on  there    3  9 
Wimple  204 

Wincaunton,        Antiquities 
there  26—^3 

Winchcomb    _  3*9 

Windrufli  Riytr  275 

Windfor    71,     85.      Cile. 
brated  Seats,  and  Places  in 
its  Neighbourhood  82,   86 
Windfor-caflle         71—82 
Windfor-lodge,/^  llejidenee 
cf  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land ;  and  its  Park      83 
Wingfield  83 

St.  Winifrid          372,  373 
Win  flow  217 

Witney  275 

Wokey-hole  35 

Wolf-hall  53 

Wolverhampton  396 

Woodftock  2.63,  271 

Woolhampton  62 

Wool  man,  Dean  34 

Worcefter  324 — 328 

Wotton.  197,  31 1 

Wrek  River  429 

Wreken-hili  392 

Wrexham  374 

Wrottefley,  antient  Veftiges 
there     '  '398 

Sf.  Wulftan,  325 

Wye  River    jn,  3^4,36^. 


END  of  VOL.  IL 


uu 


DA  Defoe,  Daniel 

620         A  tour  thro1  the  whole 

D32  island  of  Great  Britain 

1761  6th  ed. 

v.2 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


==================== VOLUME BREAK ====================

ITT 07 


Thro' the Whole ISLAND of 


E BRITAIN. 


Divided into 


CIRcUITS or JoURNIES. 
Containing, 


1. A „ of the 
rincipal Cities and Towns, 
their Situation, Government, 
and Commerce. 
II. The Cuſtoms, Manners, Ex- 
_ erciſes, Diverſions, and Em- 
plwoy ments of the People. 
VI, The Nature and Virtue of the 
many Medicinal Springs with 
which both Parts of the united 
Kingdom abound ; particularly 
thoſe of Bath, Tunbridge, Bri- 
Aol, Cheltenham, Meffat, &c. 
IV. An ample Deſcription of 
London, including Weſtminſter 
and Southwark, their Bridges, 
Squares, Hoſpitals, Churches, 


o 


Interſperſed with Uſe ful OBSERVATIONS. 


Particularly fitted for the Peruſal of ſuch as deſire to 8. f 
Travel over the ISLAND. 55 


e 


| 


—_— 


, 


* 


Palaces, Markets, Schools, Li- 
braries, Shipping in the Tamer, 
and Trade, by means of that 
noble River, e. 

V. The Produce and Improve 


ment of the Lands, the Trade 


and Manufactures. 


Vl. The Sea Ports and Porte 


tions, the Courſe of Rivers, and 
the Inland Navigation. 
VII. The Public Edifices, Seats, 
and Palaces of the Non1L1TY 
and GENTRY, 


vill. The Illes of Wight, Scilly, 


Portland, Ferſey, Guernſe 
and the other E ng liſh and Score 
1% Iſles of moiſt Note. 


— 


IF 


i 
D- 


By 4 GENTLEMAN. 


2 — 


* 


2 


The SIXTH EDITION. 
With wy great Additions, Improvements, and CorreCtions ; which | 
bring it down to the Ed of the Year 196r. | 


In FouR VoLUMEs>. 


With an INDEX to each Volume. 


0 L. 


III. 


G. KEA RST. 


E NG Ns 

Printed for D. Baowne, T. O8R0RNE, C. Hiren and 
L., Hawss, A. MiLLas, J. B cKLAND,, þ: Rivenc- 

TON, 8. CRowokn and CS. W. JounsToN, 1 
man, T. Low pss, 6. Law and C. 

1762. | ; i 


oN 
T. CAsLok, 


© 
* 
% * 
bt * 
— 
= 
py 
x 
. 
— 
* k K 4 1 
« 
* 1 
* 
1 
„ 
* 
* 
* 7 
* * 
* 
> + 1 
* D -. 8 
* 
\ $ 
: % * * 6 
\ 
- 
< 
4 < 
q 
.” 
P 
f 
(OT 2 
* 
* . 
* 
> ; ” 7 * 
4 x 
* 
1 
» Þ 
& *% 
* 


5 oy 
VOLUME III. 
LETTER I. 


4 Deſcription of the Counties of Lincoln, 
Rutland, ne Huntingdon, and 


1 Bedford, | Page 1 


A E 7; ＋ E R II. 

Deſeription of Part of Nottinghamſhire, of 
| Derbyſhire, and Part of Yorkſhire, 56 
LE TEFR UW. 
Deſcription of Part of tbe Weſt Riding of 
Yorkſhire, and of all the North and Eaſp 


8 Ridings, the Biſhoprick of Durham, and the 
County of Northumberland, = ol 


L E T- 


"=o CO NT E N TS. 


. . 4 

4 Deſerip tion of . the Counties of Lancade 2 

Weſtmorland, and Cumberland, _— 7 
"LETTER Y.. 7 


: 4 brief Account of the Nes of Jerſey, Ouernſeyſ 
Alderney, and Sarke, 5 Dn 


LETTER VI. 


Containing ſeveral curious Particulars, 2 
mental to the 2 9 3019 


4 


Through the 121 LAND of 


. E BRITAIN. 


8 


V O L. III. 
3 LETTER I. 
= Containing aDESCRIPTION of the Coun- 
ties LinNcoLN, RUTLAND, NogRTH- 


AMPTON, HunTINGDON, and BE D- 
FORD. | 


om. 


4 R, 
ee ROM Newark, Ain keeping the 22 


VE Way, which lies as ſtrait as a Line can 
mark it out, we went on to Lincoln, hav- 
ing a View of the great Church called the 
| Minſter all the Way before us, the River 
Trent on the Left, and the Downs called Lincoln- 
Heath on the Right, 
Vor, III. B Tn 


Moa Linc. 
. Lincoln is an antient City, governed by a Mayor, 
. Aldermen, Sc. and returns two Members to Pailia- 
ment. It is fo full of the Ruins of Monaſteries, and 
Religious Houſes, that the very Barns, Stables, Out- 
Houſes, and, as they ſhewed me, even ſome of the 
 Hoy-ſtyes, are built with Stone. Walls, and arched | 
Windows and Doors. Here are 13 Churches, but | 
the meaneſt to look on that are any-where to be | 
ſeen, The Cathedral indeed, and the Ruins of the 
old Caſtle, are venerable Pieces of Antiquity, <1 
' Lincoln was a Colony of the Romans, and by them | 
named Lindum Colonia; which very eaſily falls into 
the preſent abbreviated Appellation, Lincoln. From 
its bold and noble Situation upon an high Hill, it | 
ſeems a Collection of five Cities. For, 1 
I. Below the Hill, and Weſtward of the City, the 
River throws itſelf into a great Pool, called Swan po, 
from the Multitude of Swans upon it. All around 
this Place the Ground is moory, and full of Bogs and 
Iſlets; and the Place is now called Carham, i. e. a 
| Dwelling upon the Car, or Fen. Here was the Bri- 
zh City in the moſt early Times, which they uſed as 
A Faftnck for themſelves and Cattle in Times of Diſ- 
treſs. From this Carham is a pleaſant View of the 1 
Weſt Front of the Cathedral. 3 
2. The Romans, pleaſed with this Eminence, placed 
their City upon it, which they firſt built in the Form 
of a large Square, the e Wall being ſufficient- 
ly fecured by the Precipice. Quite round the other 
three Sides they carried a deep Trench, which {till 
remains, except on the South-eaſt Angle. This City 
was divided into four equal Parts by two croſs Streets. 
The two Southern Quarters were taken up, one by 
the Caſtle, the other by the Church, which Remigius 
built. But when Biſnop Alexander projected a a Struc- 1 
ture of much larger Dimenſions, the Incloſure was 
carried beyond the Eaſtern Bounds of the City, and ah 2 


new Wall built farcher that Ys as at 1 with 
| Battle. | 


„ 2% a. £6. ant: oe Goo iS 


Sr 


S 


mo S 2 


* % % -—- * w 


a 0 


* 2 0 2 


— — 
w— 0 


| Linc. 
| Battlements and Towers. The Noxth Roman Gate of 


GREAT BRIT AN. 3 


this Part of the City ſtill remains intire, called New- 


port Gate, and the nobleſt Remnant of this Sort ia 
Britain. It is a vaſt Semicircle of Stones laid toge- 


ther without Mortar, and cemented only by their 
wedge-like Shape. This magnificent Arch is 16 Feet 


Diameter, the Stones four Feet thick at Bottom. 
From this Gate Eaſtward ſome Part of the old Reman 
Wall is to be ſeen, made of Stone and very ſtrong 


Mortar. The Weſt Gate towards the Gallows was 
pulled down within Memory. That on the South 


Side ſtill ſhews one Jamb from between the Houſes, 
and two or three Stones of the ſame Make as the 


former: the reſt has been pulled down by Mr. Hough-- 


; ton. On the Eaſt Side one Poſtern is viſible, and big 
| enough for a Bed to ſtand in. By Newport Gate is 


another large and curious Piece of Roman Workman- 


9 ſhip, called the Mint-wall, This is ſtill 16 Feet high, 


and above 40 Feet long, compoſed cf Brick and 


Stone, laid alternate 


ly. 2 bg 
omans, Coden this City well ſituated for, 
Navigation, added another to it as big as the former. 


3. The R 


W This they did Southward upon the Declivity of the 
Hill, and ſo made it parallel with the other; and the 
moſt Southern Side lay upon the River. Eaſt ward, the 


Ditch without is turned into a broad Street, called 


7 | The Beaſt-market, and there below Claſtgate a great 


Part of the old Reman Wall is left, made of Stone. 


it One Piece of it is now 80 Feet long, and 18 high. 


A little of it lower down is 12 Feet long, and as 
much high. Between that Gate upwards, and the 


old City-wall, by the Gree/tone-/tarrs, the old Ditch, 
= called /Yeredyke, is to be ſeen. To the Weſt the 
== Ditch and Foundation of the Wall are itil left, tho? 
many times repaired and demoliſhed in the frequent 
ieges this Town has ſuſtained, eſpecially in the Wars 
of the Empreſs Maud, At Bottom of it, towards 

Er i 3 2 | tie 


EF Yes PRAC Toe rn WR AR Hey Cas ec 


* lie 
much known in her Hiſtory. 


City, Northward above the Hill, was called Newport, | 


into chat Place. 


of he firſt City was turned into a Caſtle by King 


new Cut called Sinſ/-dyke on the South and Eaft Side A 


Nichol pool. 


clined, it ſeems of late to revive, and I rade and Ma- 


Time of King Henry VIII. The great Bow- win- 5 
dow, through — he paſſed to the Scaffold, was 


the Water, is a round T ower, called Lucy-tower, 


4. Another great Addition to the Length of this 


or the New City, 500 Paces long. T is probably | 


Was done in the Time of the Saxon Kings. It lies 23 


on both Sides the Herman-/treet, and was fenced with 
a Wall and Ditch hewn out of the Rock. At the 
two farther Corners were round Towers, and a Gate, 
the Foundations of which remain. There were ſeve- 
ral Churches, and religious Houſes, in this Place. It 
was chiefly inhabited by Jews, who had ſettled here 
in great Numbers, and grown rich by Trade. There 
is a Well ſtill named Grantham's-well, from a Child 
they impiouſly crucified, as was ſaid, and threw it 


After the Norman Conqueſt, who a great Part j 


ln they added the: left Intake fl 
Southward in the Angle of the J/itham, and made a 


for its Security. It is obſervable, that the Normans 
could not well pronounce Lincoln, but vitiated it to 
Nichol, as we find it written in ſome old Authors : 
and, to this Day, a Part of the Sꝛban. pou: is called 


a n 8 1 =_ n 


Tho”, fince thoſe Times, the City has much 3 ; 


nufactures begin to flouriſh, 1 
In this laſt Part of Lincoin, on both Sides the Ro- 2 
man Road, were many of that People's funeral Mo- 
numents ; ſome of which they now dig up. There 
is an Inſcription of that Sort behind the Houſe where 
the Lord Huſſey was beheaded for Rebellion, in the 8 


lately taken down. It ftands over-againſt another 
Stone Building, of an * — which was thei 
Palace 


38 e 
5 


Line. GREAT BRITAIN. 2 


Palace of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancafter, who 
lived here in Royal State, and had the Privilege of 


| Coining. His Arms are here carved in Stone. Over- 


againſt the Caſtle, Weſtward, is an Intrenchment 


made by King Stephen, 


"The Situation of the City, from what I have ſaid, 


= muſt appear very particular; one Part is on the flat, 
and in a Bottom, ſo that the Mitbam, a little River, 

that runs through the Town, flows ſometimes into the 
Street: the other Part lies upon the top: of an high 


Hill, where the Cathedral ſtands; and the very ſteep- 


5 eſt Part of the Aſcent of the Hill is the beſt Part of the 
City for Trade and Buſineſs. 


Nothing is more troubleſome than the Communi- 


1d cation of the upper and lower Town; the Street is ſo 


ſteep and ſo ſtrait, that the Coaches and Horſes are 
obliged to fetch a Compaſs another Way, as well on 


one hand as on the other. 


The River Witham is arched over, ſo that you ſee 


nothing of it as you gs through the main Street; but 
it makes a large Lake on the Weſt Side, and has a 
Canal, called the Ze: dice, by which it has a Com- 


munication with the Trent, whereby the Navigation 
of that River is made uſeful for Trade to the City. 


J This River muft have run into the Humber, had it 
not been broken off in the Middle by that great Val- 
= ley under Lincoln, and turned into the Salt-marſhes, 


Hence it is that the Stone upon this Weſtern Cliff is 
full of Sea-ſhells. For the Shell-fiſh, when by the 


reſtleſs Motion of the Waters in the univerſal Deluge, 
they were carried into the midland Places, were hin- 


dered, by the Weight of their Shells, from regaining 


. their original Stations; and thus were confined within 


the growing Stone. As a Teſtimony of which the 
Skeleton of a Crocodile, or ſome ſuch Animal, in- 
cloſed in a broad flat Stone, was ſent to the Royal So- 


diety from theſe Parts, by Dr. S:ukely, from whom we 


borrow this Obſeryation, _ | 
e "3 There 


r aw Linc. 
There are very good Buildings in the upper City, 
and ſeveral Families of Gentlemen have Houſes there, 

beſides thoſe of the Prebendaries and other Clergy be- 
longing to the Cathedral. | ee, a} i. 5 
The Cathedral is a magnificent Fabric, and is re- 
puted the largeſt in Extent of any Cathedral in Fng- 
land, except York, But there are in it many obvious 

Blemiſhes, which I ſhall particularly take notice of, 
in comparing it hereafter with Jer Minſter. The 
Situation is infinitely to its Advantage, as it ſtands. F 
upon an high Hill, and is ſeen into five or fix Counties. 
It has a double Croſs or 'Franſept. The Weſt End 
receives a great Addition to its Breadth, by reaſon of 
two Chapels on each Side of the Side-Ailes ; but the 

two Towers and Spires are very mean, though not for 
want of Height. e N 

This Cathedral has many Bells; and particularly 
the Northern Tower is filled up, as one may ſay, with 
the fineſt great Bell in England, which is called Tom f 
Lincoln; being probably conſecrated to Thomas Becket, 
Archbiſhop of Canterbury. — As loud as Tom of Linceln 
is a Phrafe. It weighs 4 Tons, 1894 Pounds, and 
will hold 424 Gallons Ale- meaſure; the Circumference 


18 22 Feet 8 Inches. | 3 X 
The Middle or Road Tower is the higheſt in the 
Kinedom ; and, when the Spire was ſtanding on it, it 
muſt, in proportion to the Height of the Tower, have 
exceeded that of old Sz. Paul's, which was 520 Feet. 
The Monks were fo proud of this Structure, that they 
would have it, that the Devil looked upon it with an 
envious Eye; whence the Phraſe of a Man who looks 
invidious and malignant, He looks as the Devil over 
Lincoln. At preſent there are only four very ordinary 
Pinacles, one at each Corner. It has two great Gate- 
houſes or Entrances from the Weſt, The lower Part 
of the Fromt, and of the two Towers, are of Remi- 
giui's Building, and is eaſily diſcoverable by the _ S 


Linc. GREAT BIT AAN. » 
Jour of the Stones, and by the Manner of Architecture: 


4 


but Alexander built the Additions upon it, as likewiſe 


the Body of the Cathedral, the'Choir, and Se. Mary's 
Tower, which once had a very lofty Spire. St. Hugh 


- | the Burgundian built the Eaſt Era, or St. Mary's 


Chapel (where he had a Shrine), and the date 
houſe, which is cieled with a beautiful Stone Roof, 


and one Pillar in the Middle. 
The Cloiſters and the Library are fine; and the 


9 latter is well furniſhed with printed Books and Manu- 
scripts. 


Two Catharine-whee) Windows, as they are term- 


= ed, at the Ends of the larger Tranſept, are nnen, 


; ; Gne for Bullion-work, and painted Glaſs. 


Here are great Numbers of antique Braſſe and 


Monuments. 


South of the Church, upon the very Brow: of the 


All, is the Biſhop's Palace, built by Robert de Cheſney, 
77 who gave two great Bells. Biſhop Beck'and other Suc- 


ceſſors improved it into a Magnificence equal to the 


Cathedral. It ſtands juſt South of the Roman Wall. 
It had many large Bow-windows of curious Work- 


manſhip, looking over the lower City into Nottingbam- 


Lire. The Kitchen had ſeven Chimneys. The Hall 


was ſtately. The Gate-houſe remains intire with 


the Arms of the Founders. This Palace was ruined 


1 in the Time of the Civil Wars; but might be rebuilt 
= with no very great Expence. The Church and 
XZ Dioceſe are both very large; but the Revenue of the 


Biſhoprick is now only about 1, 500 l. per Annum, tho? 


it was formerly immenſely great, as may be ſeen by the 
== Aonaſticon, in which is an aſtoniſhin 4 Account of the 
Wealth of the Place. | - 
= The Church, as it is the Seat of the Biſhopriele, is 

not ſo antient as ſome others; the See being removed, 

ſince the Norman Invaſion, from Dorcheſter, a little 

Town in Oxford/bire, on the River Thames, not far 
—_= from Tame, of which I have cs Vol. II. > 217. 


B4 but 


; 8 


AT OUR thro Line. | 
but the City is truly antient, and the Ruins of it tell us 


| 
as much. = 
Mr. Camden ſays, that the valiant King Vartimer | 
died here, and was buried | in the n of the great = | 
Monaſtery. = . 
It is certain, as I have obſerved, that William l. = 
built the Caſtle, to curb the potent Sies ; and the 
Ruins ſhew, that it was a moſt magnificent Work, i 
well fortified, and capable of receiving a Numerous = . 
Garifon. 3 « 


The Biſhoprick of Lincoln at that time contained all 
| that now is compriſed in the Dioceſes of E ly, Peter- 
borough, and Oxford, beſides what is now its own ; i : 
and it is ſtill the largeſt Dioceſe in Eng/and ; containing 
the ſeveral Counties of Lincoln, Leice/ter, Huntingdon, 1 
Bedford, Bucks, and Part of that of Hertford; and in 
them 1, 255 Pariſhes, whereof 577 are Impropriations; 
and there are in theſe Bounds fix Archdeacons, viz. i 
Lincoln, Leiceſter, Beyer a, Buckingham, Stow, and _ 
Huntingdon, - 
Here was the famous Battle fou ht Latina the 2 
Friends of the Empreſs Maud, Mother to King i 
Henry II. and King Stephen, in which that magnani- 
mous Prince was overthrown, and taken Priſoner, 2 
Lincoln ſtands in a rich, pleaſant, and agreeable 
Country; for, on the North, and South-eaſt, the 


8 


— 
— 


Al 

noble Plain, called Lincoln-Heath, extends itſelf, like 8 

the Plain about Saliſbury, for above 50 Miles; vis. ir 

from Sleeferd and 4ncafter South, to the Bank of the Ec 

Humber North, though not with a Breadth equal to . 
the Length; for the Plain is hardly any- where above Wl 
three or x har Miles broad, E 

On the Weſt Side of this Plain, the ip Waters 


make a pleaſant and rich Valley, running from New- MR 
ark to Gainſburgh, thence to Burton, and fo into the . 

* Gainſburgh hath' a large and fine Market, and is WM 
dad Sourllhing ſor T and Buſineſs, which hath 2 
increaſed 


Line. GR NEAT BRITAIN, 9 
| increaſed of late Years, to the Detriment of Be/ton and 


= Hull. 5 | | 7 
The Body of the Pariſh-church of this Place had 


been under a general Decay, and the Walls, Arches, . 


and Pillars, ſo ſhaken and declined from their proper 
Z Poſition, that it was judged incapable of Repair. An 
= Aa of Parliament therefore paſled in 1735 for pull- 
ing down and rebuilding it. It is famous for the 
Danes having landed here, when they came up the 
Trent. | | | 


_ Paſſing the Trent by a Ferry, you land in the Iſle 


4 | of Axholm, which is environed by the Trent, the Idle, 
and the Dun. 8 : 


7 Z:ntleborough, in Nottinghamſhire, is the Agelocum, . 
or Segelocum, of the Romans, a ſmall Village, three 
Miles above Gainſburgb, juſt upon the Edge of the 
Water, in a Nook. It ſeems only to have been en- 


vironed with a Ditch, and was of a ſquare Form. 
The Water ran quite round it; for to the Weſt, 
= where Mhite' i- bridge is, a watry Valley hems it in; 
ſo that it was ſufficiently ſtrong. The Church ſtands 
upon the higheſt Ground. The Trent has waſhed 
away Part of the Eaſtern Side of the Town. Founda- 
tions and Pavements are vifible in the Bank. Here, 
an Urn, with the Coin of Domitian, was found; and. 
ereat Numbers of Coins have been taken up in plow- 
ing and digging, which they called Sine-penies, be- 
cCauſe thoſe Creatures ſometimes root them up, and the 
Inhabitauts take little care to preſerve them. 5 
On the Eaſt Side of the Trent, in Lincolnſbire, has 
een a Camp. 3 

== By Tilbridge-lane, upon the Top of the Heath, is a 
= Spring, which, according to the vulgar. Report, 
EDows and ebbs with the Trent, though at five. Miles. 
Piſtance. The. like is ſaid of ſeveral others here- - 


bout. | 
be | R 5. : | 5 Ten 


1 A TOUR thro Linc. 
Tien Miles from Lincoln Northward is Spittle, all 
— Way to which Place are Military Stones. Tis 
pleaſant riding, being wholly Champaign or 
Helen. Of theſe Stones, I believe, ſome are Roman, 
others later Croſſes to ſupply their Place. This was, 
no doubt, a Manſien, becauſe hard by a little Beck 
runs through it. Here is an Hoſpital, ſaid to be 
founded in the Vear 1308. There are great Founda- 
tions all around, ſome of which perhaps are Roman. 
At preſent the Village conſiſts of two Farm-houſes, a 
Chapel, an Inn, and a — Upon the "By 2» 
ter is this Inſcription : - , E | 
Hacee dumus dat, amat, punit, conſervat, honorat, 

© Equitiam, Pactm, crrmina, jura, bonos. 1620. 
This Court dbes Right, loves Peate, preſerves the x 
Laws, 1 
Detects the wrong, rewards the righteous Canſe. 


Half a Mile Eaſt of the preſent Vi ntringham, food 7 
the old Reman Town, now a Common, bounded by 
the Marſhes upon the Humber. * 
The prefent Wintringbam is a dirty poor Place, = 
but ſtill a Corporation; and the Mayor is choſen only FE 
out of one Street next the old Town, where was 2 F | 
Chapel. The Bell of it now hangs in a wooden 
Frame dy the Pillory. 
As the Middle of the Country i is all hilly, and the | 
Weſt Side low, ſo the Eaſt Side is the richeſt, motif 1 


fruitful, and beſt cultivated, of any County in England 

fo far from London, One Part is all Fen or Marſh 

Grounds, and extends itſelf South to the Iſle of 51 

And here it is that ſo vaſt a Quantity of Sheep are | 

fed, as makes this County and that of Leice/ter an inex- F 

-” hauſtible Fund of Wool, for all the —— 8 
Counties in E youu as before obſerved, 1 

| Then } . 


Linc. GREAT Britain. 11 
There are ſome good Towns on the Sea - coaſt; 


H but I include not Barton, which ſtands on the Humber, 


as one of them, being a ſtraggling mean Town, noted 
for nothing but an ill- favoured dangerous Paſſage, or 


Perry, over the Humber to Hull; where, in an open 


Boat, in which we had about 15 Horſes, and 10 
or 12 Cows, mingled with about 17 or 18 Paſ- 
ſengers, we were about four Hours toſſed about on 


„ 


n. the Humber, before we could get into the Harbour at 


Well may the Humber take its Name from the Noiſe 

it makes; for, in an high Wind, it is incredibly great 
and terrible, like the Craſh and Daſhing together of 

= ohips, | >» e 
3 FPaſling over phitton Brook; a Roman Road goes 
directly to Audborough, by that People called 4quis. 
Their Camp is now called Counteſs-cloſe, from-a'Coun- 
teis of Warwick, who, they ſay, lived there; at leaſt, 

= owned the Eſtate. The Roman Caſtle is ſquare, 300 
Feet each Side, very conveniently placed in the North- 


1 | weſt Angle of Lincolnſhire, as a Watch tower over all 


Nottinghamſhire and Yorkfhire, - The Church is of 


2B good Stone, and has a ſquare Tower; but the Choir 
is ruinous, and ſeparated from the reſt of the Church 
by a wooden Partition. Here are numerous Re- 


1 rv gp of the Deluge, as Sea-ſhells, ſubterraneous Trees, 
5 In a fquare Plot, called The Green, is a round Laby- 


=X rinth, named Julian's Bower, probably from the war- 


=X like Games in Uſe among the Reman. and Britiſb 
1 Youth, called Ludi Trojan, and ſaid by V. irgt-to' be 
= ficlt introduced into Italy by falus the Son of Aneas. 
And the Boys, to this Day, divert themſelves with 
running in it one after another, and eluding their Play- 


fellows by their intricate Mazes. It ſeems that our 
Tournaments, fo much in Faſhion till Queen Eliza- 


1 beth's Time, are Remp inders er of theſe antzent Diver- 
= dons, | 
RS Burton 


ard the Houſes are pleaſantly intermixed with Trees. 
There are alſo two Churches, one of which is fo low 
in reſpect of the Precipice under which it ſtands, 


that a Perſon may almoſt leap from thence upon. the - 


Steeple. 


At Par! ow | is a Brix ane, vulgarly called:a a 


Caſtle. 


A little Baie hence is TTernten College, a —— 5 
Abbey founded by William le Gros, Earl of Albemarle, 
in the Year 1139. The Gate-houſe is very perfect, 


being a vaſt Tower or Caſtle of great Strength, both 


for: Offence and Defence. Before it is a large Dich, 
acroſs which is laid a Bridge with Walls on each 
Hand, and Arches which ſupport a broad Battlement, = 
to keep off the Enemy. Before it are two round 


Towers. There was a Portcullis at the great Gate, 


and behind it another Gate of Oak. Over the Gate 
are three old clumfy Statues in the ordinary Niches ; 
a Woman ſeeming a Queen, or the Virgin Mary; to 
the Right a Man with a Lamb, probably St. 7 
Baptiſt; and to the Left a Biſhop, or Abbot, with a 

Croſier. Upon taking down an old Wall, they found i 
2 Man, with a Candleftick, Table, and Bok, who 

was ſuppoſed to have been immured. The whole Mo- 1 
naſtery was encompaſſed by a deep Ditch, and high 
Rampart, to ſecure the e from Robbers, be- 


cauſe near the Sea. 


A Mile Eaſt of Thornton are the Ruins of another 1 | 


great Caſtle, called Ke/zngholme. 


In Gofwel Pariſh, 22 is Bur hum, as | £ 
Chapel, which belonged to the en, now a 


Farm · houſe. 


In the ſame Pariſh, near the Humber, | is V ere- W 4 


which belonged to the antient Family of that Name. 


The Land hereabouts is good, and well Ws, 5 


and many _—_ Coins are bound. | 
T wo 


A TOUR h Line fl 
Burton makes a pretty Proſpect, has ſeveral Mills, 


"TY _ IS 8 


PS fend bac faped wn, Sy Wi, ,., cot ot ud oa 


Linc. GREAT BRITAIN. 13 
Two Miles Weſt of Thornton are the Ruins of a. 
great Roman Camp, called Yarborough, which ſurveys 
the whole Hundred denominated from it. Mr. How-. 
en of Kennington, which is hard. by, has Pecks of Ro- 
= man Coins found here. td cates 
= Grimsbylies alſo on the Humber, but lower down 
towards the Ocean, It is a Mayor-town and Sea- 
port; but its Harbour is not very ſafe for Ships to ride 
in, as appeared at the Time of the great Storm in 
170g. when all the Ships in that Road were driven 
i, from their Anchors, and moſt of them loſt. It is one 
of the oldeſt Corporations in the Kingdom; and having 
» WE formerly a large good Port, the Inhabitants held it in 
Fee. farm, on the annual Rent of 50 1. which, in thoſe 
Days, was far from being a contemptible Sum. In the 
Reign of Edward III. it made a great Figure among 
the Northern Parts, and furniſhed eleven Ships to that 
Monarch. But, ſince that Time, the Port, through. 
want of Care, or, more probably, thro' want of Abi- 
lity in the Inhabitants to diſburſe the Sum neceſſary 
co preſerve it, is quite choaked up. However, there is 
= till a pretty good Road before this Town, which has 
ſaved it from ſinking to the Degree that other Places 
have done. Here is a very large ſumptuous. Church, 
be Town returns two Members to Parliament. 
= We took the Round of the Sea-coaſt from hence, 
- EE oouthward, all the Way to Bo/ton, and paſſed through . 
ME Salifleet, Burgh, and Wainfleet, beſides ſeveral Villages 
== lying on the Sea-ſide. The two firſt are but incon- 
ſiderable Market-towns ; but FYainfleet is a well-com- 
 Epacted Town, and neat, though ſituated in the Fens. 
Dis noted for a fine Free- ſehool, and giving an Addi- 
tion to the Name of the Founder of it, who was called 
illiam of Wainfleet, afterwards Biſhop of Wincheſter, 
and who founded alſo Mincheſier College. 50 | 
== The River Witbam croſſes the County from Lincoln 
to Hoſton, where it diſembegues. — 


Between 


3 


„„ <TOUR n  Linc| 


Between this River and the Sea-coaſt North-eaſt, 


are the ſeveral inland Towns of Bolingbroke, famous A 
for giving Birth and Title to King Henry IV. Spilsby, 
Hornca/ile, and Tatterſal, on the South. About the 
Middle of this Diviſion made by the //itham, lie Stan- 
ton, Market-raſen, Louth, and Binbrote; and higher 
up Northward, ſtand K:rton, Glandford, Brigo, and 


Caſter. 


quented Market. 


Spilsby is a pretty good Town, and has a well fre- 6 | 


Hernegſile is almoſt ſurrounded with Water, and 1 
is a large well - built Town: but the reſt are inconſider- 
able, except Louth and Caſter; the firſt has two 
weekly conſiderable Markets, and is famous for a fine | 


Spire. Steeple, as high as that of Grantham. 


Caſter | is the antient Durobrives, through Dornford I | 


retains ſomewhat of the old Name, v 1 80 the Herman- 
f 


Areet eroſs d the River by a Bridge of Braſs, according 
to the Vulgar. At :Che/terton is a large Tract of 


+ 


Ground, called The Cafile-field, with a Ditch and Nam, 3 


part around it. The Roman Road runs directly thro! | 
it, and ſtill retains its high Ridge. Beyond the River 
it extends for ſome Space upon the Meadow along the Þ 
Bank, then forms an Angle, and proceeds full North, | 
Cafter is above half a Mile from it, upon the Hill. 


A Part of the Foundation of the Wall of the old Re. ll 2 


man Camp is viſible in the Street to the North-weſt 
Corner of the Church, -under_ the Wall of the Houſe 
where the Minifter lives. It may be known by the 


great Strength of the Mortar, built of the white Slab-i 4 | 


ſtone of the Country, Underneath this lay the City; 


for below the Church · yard the Ground! is full of Foun- 9 | | 


dations and Moſaics. 


1 


In the Boot Alehouſe Cellar is a Piece of Pavement | 
as are many at Mr. /Z7ight's, and in a Garden an in- 


tire one; beſides. great Numbers of Roman Coins, in 
the Poſſeſſion of Monſ. Baillardeau, In the pore 


F ields 


5 


21 


c. Line. GREAT BRITAIN. 17 

it, Fields between the Town and the River, towards 

us Fordereen, is a Tract which runs quite through, where- 

% on Corn grows very ſcantily. This is nothing but a 

he Road laid with a deep Bed of Gravel, though the ſuper- 

n BF titious Country-people believe it was curſed by the 

aer BE Lady Kyneburg, the Abbeſs who built a religious 

nd BE Houſe, which ſtood Eaſtward of the Church, and 
ſome Part of which ſtill remains. This Meadow is 

re- BY called Norman-gate (or, more properly, Dorman- gate) 
Field, from the Town, whoſe Foundations are found 

nd all about this Place; and alſo innumerable Coins, 

er- called Dorman pence. Part of this is. Berry/tead, where 

wo BZ Antiquities are daily dug up. Mill. feld ſtands higher | 
ne BE toward Peterborough, where Moſaic Pavements, Oc. l 
are found, and ſeems to have been a little Citadel be- 

rd longing to the Fown. | © 
Part of the Church is an antique Building, but new- 

ng 


= modelld. Upon the Stone over the Choir-door is a 

curious Inſcription, importing that the Church was 
conſecrated on the r7th of April 1114. The Steeple 

BT ftands in the Middle of the Church. The Tower is 
2 fine Piece of antient Architecture, with ſemicircular; - 
= Arches. The ſquare Well by the Porch is Roman, 
ZZ furrounded with hewn Stone; and, tho' it ſtands on an 
l. Hill, the Water is very high. At the Eaſt-end of the 
&o- BY Church is a very old Croſs. K 3 
= A little higher up the River, near Jansford Bridge, 


uſe 2 Gold Brizih Coin was found, which was in the 
the Poſleflion of Mr. Maurice Fahnſon, an eminent Coun- 
ab- fellor. e JE ECHO” 
The Fen Country begins about Vainfleet, which 
an- BZ is within 20 Miles of Grimsby, and extends itſelf to the 
lle of E/ South, and to the Grounds oppoſite to Lynn · 
nt; Kegis in Norfolk Eaſt. e Sr. 
in- This Part is indeed very properly called Holland; for 
2 ie is a flat, level, and often drowned Country, like the 


Province of the fame Name in the Low Countries; inſo- 
lds much that the very Ditches are navigable, and the Peo- 
5 EE ple 


BE 


%% AF<FTOUR ww; Dic 
gle paſs from Town to Town in Boats, as they do 
Tu Here we had the uncouth Muſic of the Bittern, | 
a Bird formerly counted ominous and preſaging, and 
wiich, as ſame fay, thruſts its Bill into a Reed, and 
others, into a Bog, and then gives the dull, heavy 5 
Groan or Sound, like a Sigh ; which is ſo loud, that 
it is heard two on chree Miles Diſtance, as ſome 1 
People ſay. = 
Here we firſt ſaw Boſton, 4. Sen port Town, at the = 
Mouth of the H/itham. : 
Te Tower of che Church is ſeen plainly 40 Miles 
round this level Country, and farther by Sea. "The 
Octagon Lantern on the Top'is very banal, and 
admirable for the Thinneſs of the Stone- work. 5 
The following is a Tranſlation of the Design 3 
of this fine Edifice, under an accurate Draught 7 
liſhed by Dr. W. Stukely.  _ ; 
In the Year of our Lord 1300. teh Third of Ed. 1 

«. ward Il. two Days after the Feſtival of St. John the 
© Baptift, the Foundations of the Tower of Befton. 
were laid, upon a Stratum of intire Clay, nine Feet 
beneath the Bed of the Mitham, which flows near it; 
the firſt Stone being laid by the Lady Margery Tilney, 
who contributed five Pounds of Engliſb Mone) to- 
ward the Promotion of the ſacred Work. Mr. Fobn 
Trueſdale, Vicar, and Richard Stephenſon, Merchant, 
beſtowed each the like Sum. From ſo ſmall Ex- 
pences this noble Structure advanced to fo elevated 
an. Height, namely, 300 Feet, and 365 Steps to the 
top. Whither when with much Difficulty of Breath- 
ing you are aſcended, your Eyes wilbbe delighted to ex- 
patiate over the ſurrou ding Plain of Holland in Lin. 
. colnſhire, whieh may rival the molt pleaſant Garden, 
and abounds every-where with the-neateſt Churches; 
6. a: well as over ha gious Piles, and innumerable Ab- 
6. beys, ſeparated big an incredible Diſtance ; and fat 
and wide even over the Occan. In like manner the 


6 Lower. itſelf gives a flattering Proſ * from far, by 
0 its 


ES 


c. Line. GREAT BRITAIN, = 4 
do its deluſive Stature, to Mariners and Travellers; be- 
n, ing compacted with the utmoſt Elegance, and uncer- 
nd WE © tain whether more to be admired for the Beauty or 
nd BY © Slenderneſs of the Work. The Height of this 
vy LXſ Church is equal to its Length; but it is much more 
at „ antient than high, being dedicated to St. Botolph, 
ne Patron of Mariners. In the Width it is 200 Feet. 
Iilt is ſupported by 12 Pillars, worthily admired for 
ne their tall and taper Form. The Roof within is arch- 
ed with Beams of /r:/4 Oak and Timber, and adorn- 
es ed with Gilding, Engraving, and various Paintings 
10 throughout. What could not antient Piety per- 
form!“ | 8 8 


Thus far Dr. Stukely. 


d- 5 Mariners find this Tower particularly uſeful to guide 
them into this Port, and even into the Mouth of the 


2. River Ouſe; for, in clear Weather, tis ſeen quite out 
12 Mat Sea to the Entrance of thoſe Channels which the 


call Lynn. Deeps, and Bo/ton- Deeps, which are as dif: 
ficult Places as moſt upon the Eaſtern Shore of Britain, 
his is particularly taken notice of in an Act paſſed in 
the Reign of the late Queen Anne, for enabling AI. 

rents to be made for Repairing and keeping in Repair 
his Church : in the Preamble to which it is deſcribed, 
ss it deſerves, as an antient, well-built Fabric; that the 
Tower thereof is very high, and an uſeful Sea- mark; 
and that, it being ſituate near the Haven, a great 
pum is neceſſarily yearly to be raiſed, to preſerve 


2 8 0 . s 
- it from a violent, conſtantly ebbing and flowing 
Water. 3 2 22 75 


XZ There was a prodigious Clock- bell, which could be 
heard ſix or ſeven Miles round: it had many old Verſes 
Pound it; but, Anno 1710. was knocked in Pieces, 
nd the Inſcription not talen. i 

Twenty Yards from the Foundation of this Tower 
uns the rapid Witham, thro? a wooden Bridge. 0 


- 8 A TOUR thro Linc. i 1 
This Town abounded with religious Houſes, whoſe 
- Lands King Henry VIII. gave to the Town. 
Queen Mary I. was a great Benefactreſs likewiſe to 
| bt, and gave = Ha Lands called Frection Lands, to . 
a Vicar, Lecturer, and two School-mafters. - 

The Church is reckoned the largeſt Pariſh- church 
without Croſs-Ailes, i in the Univerfe. 

The Town is large, populous, and well- built, ful 
of Merchants, and bas a good Share of foreign Trade, 
as well as Lynn, Tis built on both Sides of the Rwerf 
Hitham, It is a Gorporation, governed by a Ma. o 
and 12 Aldermen, and returns two Members to Par- 
liament. It has two Markets weekly, and a commo- 
dious Haven. Here is held one of thoſe annual Fairs 
which preſerve the antient -Title of a Mart; whereof J 3 
I-remember only four in England of any conſiderable 
Note, viz. Lynn, Gainsburgb, Beverley, and e 1 1 
Its Trade of late Years has not increaſed.” 2 

Eaſt of Beſton was a Chapel called Hiptoft, and i in 61 
the Town a Church dedicated to St. John, but both I 
demoliſhed. Queen Elixabeth gave the Corporation 1 
a Court of Admiralty over all the Sea · coaſts here · = 
abouts. ; 33 x CS 

The ng this Place is all Fen and' Mart 1 
Grounds ; the Land is very rich, and feeds prodigiou 
Numbers of large Sheep, and alſo Oxen of the largeſt I 
Size, the beſt of which are driven to London Market? 
and from this Part, as alſo from the Downs or Heat L bY 
above-mentioned, comes, as I have before noted, 18 
= great Part of the Wool, known, as a creditable Diſtine 3 


tion, becauſe of its Fineneſs, by the Name of Lincol 


Sire Wool; which is ſent in great Quantities into No 
folk and Suffolk, for the Manufacturers of thoſe Cov 
ties, and indeed to ſeveral other of the Trading Cou 
ties in E NA land. 8 1 

Theſe Fens are very conſiderable for their Extent ” 
for they reach in Length, in ſome Places, 50 Miles 
and in Breadth above 30: and, as they are ſo level wo 1 

| t er 


- 


ic Linc. GREAT BRITAIN. 19 
oſe here is no Interruption to the Sight, any WO, of 
extraordinary Height is ſeen a Jong Way, For Ex- 
to mple, Boſlon Steeple is ſeen upon Lincoln Heath, near 
pay o Miles; Pelerborougb and Ely Minſters are ſeen al- 
rot throughout the whole Level; fo are the Spires of 
ch yen, Fhittleſea, and Crowland, ſeen at a very great 
> itance, which adds ſome Beauty to the Country. 
full From Beſton we came on thro? the Fer 3 to 
de, Molbech, a little Market town, and ſo on to Spalding. 
ver hich is another Sea- port in the Level, but ſtanding 
ar within the Land, on the River Welland, which al- 
noſt incloſes it. Here was nothing very remarkable 
Jo be ſeen as to Antiquity, but the Ruins of an old 
Nonaſtery, of which the Monaſticon gives a particular 
eo Deſcription. There is a Bridge over the Welland, and 
eſſels of about 50 or bo Tons may come up to the 
oun; and that is ſufficient for the Trade of Spald- 
ig, which is chiefly in Corn and Coal. 
Fhe Town of Spalding is not large, but pretty well- 
Puillt, and well inhabited, and is an handſome Market- 
own; but, for the Healthineſs or Pleaſantneſs of it, 
bave no more to ſay, than that I was very glad 
hen I got out of it, as well as out of the reſt of the 
en Country; for 'tis an horrid Air for a Stranger to 
Preathe in. - 8 < 
We muſt not paſs by Crowland, another Place of 


be Monks of Crowland: were eminent in Hiſtory; 
end a great many Stories are told of the Devils of 
Crowland alſo, and what Converſation they had with 
the Monks; which Tales are more out of Credit now 

Fhan they were formerly. | * 15 
== The Abbey was founded 1000 Years ago, by Athel- 
92 King of Mercia, in the Midft of Bogs and Thorns, 
n Honour of his. Chaplain Gathlac, who choſe this 
= lace to mortify in. The Foundation is laid on Piles 
f Wood, feveral of which have been found in tearing 
; up. 


ww.  ATOURiavw';' uns 


up the Ruins of the Eaftern Part of the Church: for 


what remains is only Part of the Weſt-end, and of tha 

only one Corner in tolerable Repair, which is at pre-| 
ſent their Pariſh-church. In the Middle of the Croll 
ſtood once a lofty Tower, and in it was a remarkably 
fine Ring of Bells; the firſt, as is ſaid, in the County. 
The Roof, which was of trifb Oak finely carved and} 


gilt, fell down about 50 Years 855 and Pieces of it are 
uſe, People at Pleaſure 


to be found in almoſt every Ho 
dig up the monumental Stones for private Ule, andff 
what are left in the Pavement are covered over with 
Shrubs. It was made a Garriſon in the Civil War 
and the Soldiers deſtroyed the painted Glaſs in it. Al 
the Eaſtern Part of the Body of the Church is entirely 
raſed to the Foundation. The ' monaitic Building, 
Cloifters, Hall, Abbot's Lodgings, are abſolutely de. 
moliſhed. In the North-weſt Corner of the Churcii 
ſtands a ſtrong Tower, with a very obtuſe Spire, and 
a pleaſant Ring of ſmall Bells. Over the Weſt Gate 
are the Images of divers Kings, Abbots, &c. among 
the reſt, Guthlac, with a Whip and Kaite, his a 
Symbols. 
Not far from the Abbey is the * of a lt 
Stone Cottage, called Anchor church houſe, where was 
2 Chapel, in which St. Guth.ac was buried, and when 
he lived an Hermit. 
_ Over-againſt the Weſt-end of the Abbey is the | 


mous triangular Bridge, hardly to be equalled in Bri 3 8 


tain, if in Europe. It being too ſeep tor Horſes and 
Carriages to go over, they paſs under it, *T'is formetÞ 


on three Segments of a Circle, meeting in a Point; - 
and each Baſe, they ſay, ſtands in a different County“ 4 | 


Here meet the Rivers Nyne and Welland; ſo that the 


Bridge, being fixed at the very Point where they join, 


ſtands upon a. Center in the Middle of the united 
Waters; and then parting into two Bridges, land 


The Form of this Bridge may be ſeen among Meſcurs Buck's View Wi 


be Caſtles, &c. in — 


youſſ 


DC. 
for 
hat 
re- 
rok 
bly 
N. 
and 
are 
ure 
indi 
thi 
78, : | 
All 
2 
de- 
nd 
ate 
N28 


anc; G . . is 

vou one to the Right on Thorney, and one to the Left 
pon Holland. On one Side tits an Image of King 
/thelbaid, Founder of Crowland- Abbey, with a Crown 

Heur: on his Head, and a Globe in his Hand. 

It is truly obſerved by Camden, that in Holland, in 

Lincolnſhire, and generally in all the Fen Countries, 
he Churches are fair, and built of Stone, though the 

Country thereabouts, for many Miles, ſcarce affords a 


Pebble. | | 


The Hiftory of draining theſe Fens, by a Set of 
Gentlemen, called the Aauenturers; the feveral Laws 


for ſecuring and preſerving the Banks, and dividing the 


Lands; how they were, by the extraordinary Conflux 
ff Waters from all the Inland Counties of England, 
frequently overflowed, and ſometimes lay under Wa- 
ter moſt Part of the Vear; how all the Waters in this 
Part of England, which do not run into the Thames, 
the Trent, or the Severn, fall together into theſe low 
Grounds, and empty themſelves into the Sea by thoſe 


Drains, as through a Sink ; and how, by the Skill of 
By theſe Adventurers, and at a prodigious 


xpence, they 


have cut new Channels, and even whole Rivers, with 
particular Drains from one River to another, to carry 
off the great Flux of Waters, when Floods or Freſhes 
come down either on one Side or on the other; and 
how, notwithſtanding all that Hands could do, or Art 
© WE contrive, ſometimes the Waters do {li]! prevail, the 
Banks break, and whole Levels are overflowed toge- 
WE ther; all this, and uch more that might be ſaid on 
ſo copious a Subject, though it would be very uſeful to 
BY Dave it fully and geographically deſcribed, yet it would 
take up fo much Room, that I cannot think of enter- 
"WW ing any facthei into it, than juſt to mention, That an 
Ad of Parliament lately paſſed, to enable the Adven- 
turers, Owners, and Proprietors of the taxable Lands, 


and the Owners and Proprietors of th? free Lands in 


Deeping Fen, Pinchbeck, and Spalding South Fen, Therl- 


by Fen, Burn South Fen, and Croyiand Fen, &c inthe 
| 5 - County 


22 A TOUR mw Line 
County of Lincoln, containing in the Whole abou 
30,000 Acres, to raiſe a competent Sum for the effec. 
tual Draining and future Preſervation of the ſaid Feng 
according to their Agreement in that Behalf, datelff 
February 23. 1737- and to carry the ſaid Agreemen I 
into Execution, 
We ſhall only obſerve further, that the late Sir "Fol 
 Theathcote, Bart. made ſo good a Progreſs in draininf 
366 Acres of the Ther/by Fen Paſtures, belonging ul 
him, that he was particularly exempted from paying == 
toward the Sums levied upon others by this Act. 
Theſe: Fens of Lincolnſhire are of the ſame Kind 
with, and contiguous to, thoſe already mentioned in th z 
Iſte of Eq, in the Counties of Cambridge and Huntins 
don; and here, as well as there, we ſee prodigiou ff 
Numbers of Cattle, which are fed up to an extraordi 
nary Size by the Richneſs of the Soi. TT 

+ Here are alſo an infinite Number of Wild- Fo- 
ſuch as Duck and Mallard, Teal and Wigeon, Brand 
Geeſe, Wild-Geeſe, Cc. F or the Taking of the fou 
firſt Kinds, here are a great many Decoys, from all which | 
the vaſt Number of Fowls they take are ſent up ta 
London. 5 
The Accounts which the Country people give 8 
the Numbers they ſometimes take, are ſuch, that on 
ſcarce dares report it from them. But this I can ſay, off 
my certain Knowlege, that ſome of theſe Decoys 2 
of ſo large an Extent, and take ſuch great Numbers of 
Fow!], that they are lett from 100 J. to 3, 4, and 50% 
a Year Rent. 5 
The Art of riding the Fouls, and efpecially off 
breeding up a Set of Creatures, called Decoy- Ducks, u. 
entice and then betray their Fellow-Ducks into th; 
ſeveral Decoys, is very ingenious ; and, though it i 
not very eaſy to deſcribe it, I will give it in as feu 
Wards as I can. | IF 
The Decoy- Ducks are hatched and bel up in the 1 
Decoy- Ponds ; in which are certain Places where the 


0 _ | 


inc. GREAT BRITAIN. . $8 


nc 
ore conſtantly fed; and, being made tame, they are 
8 Wiſcd to come to the Decoy-Man's Hand for their 
A | ; ood. f 355 SE k - 2 * 4 
* When they fly abroad, it is not known whither they 


o; dut ſome conjecure they fly quite over into Hol- 
and and Germany ; where they meet with others of 
heir own Kind, and, ſorting with them, they, by ſome 


110 Hart unknown to us, draw together a vaſt Number of 
ne Fowls, and, in a word, 4:dzap them from their 


Wown Country; for, being once brought out of their 
BB nowlege, they follow the Decoys)” as a Dog follows 
the Sportſman; and *tis frequent to ſee theſe ſubtle 
EC reatures return with a vaſt Flight of Fowls along 


„ich them, after they have been abſent ſeveral Weeks 
4 When they have brought them over, the firſt thing 


they do is to ſettle with them in the Ponds, to which 
the Decoy-Ducks belong. Here they chatter and 
eabble to them in their own Language, as if they were 
eelling them, that here they ſhould ſoon ſee how well 
they ſhould live. _ 4550 

== When the Decoy-Men perceive they are come, and 
hat they are gathering and increaling, they go ſecretly 
to the Pond's Side, under the Cover which they have 


1 make with Reeds, ſo that they cannot be ſeen; where 
" they throw over the Reeds Handfuls of Corn, in ſuch 
a challow Places as the Decoy- Ducks are uſually fed, 
4 and whither they are ſure to come for it, and to bring 


their new Gueſts with them for their Entertainment. 

W This they do for two or three Days together, and 

no Harm follows to the poor Strangers: till throwing 

Win this Bait one time in an open wide Place, another 
time in another wide Place, the third time it is thrown 

in a narrower Place, where the Trees, which hang 
orer the Water and the Banks, ſtand cloſer together; 

and then in another yet narrower, where the ſaid Trees , 


— ——— — — — — - —— 


1 are over-head like an Arbour, tho' at a good Height 
i from the Water. e 
m | To 2 Here 


— . ] . —˙»‚¾? comer 


4 . A TOUR #470): Line 
Here the Boughs are ſo artfully ene, that a lar an 
Net is ſpread near the Tops of the Trees, among Po 
Branches, and faſtened to Hoops, which reach from to 
Side to Side. This is ſo high, and ſo wide, and the 
Room is ſo much below, and the Water ſo open, tha 
the Fowls do not perceive the Net above them. 
Here the Decoy-Man, keeping unſeen behind the 
Hedges of Reeds, which are made perfectly cloſe, goal 
forward, throwing Corn over the Reeds into the Wa. - 
ter. The Decoy-Ducks greedily fall upon it, and NM 
calling their foreign Gueſts, ſeem to tell them, That 
now they may find how wel! the Ducks live in 
England; fo inviting, or rather wheedling them for- 
ward, till by d they are all gotten under the Arch 
or Sweep of the Net which is on the Trees, and 
which by degrees, imperceptibly to them, decline 
lower and lower, and alſo narrower and narrower, till 
at the farther End it comes to a Point like a Purſe, tho 
this farther End is quite out of Sight, and perhaps two 
or three hundred Yards from the Fl Entrance. - 
When the whole Flight of Ducks are thus greediji 
following the Decoys, and feeding plentifully as the 
go, and the Decoy-Man ſees they are all ſo far within 
the Arch of the Net as not to be able to eſcape, on al 
ſudden a Dog, which till then keeps cloſe by him, and 
which is perfectly taught his Buſineſs, ruſhes from be.. 
bind the Reeds, and jumps into the Water, ſwimming 
directly after the Ducks, and barks as he ſwims. | 
Immediately the frighted Ducks riſe upon the Wing 
to make their Eſcape, but are beaten, down again by 
the arched Net, which is over their Heads, Being 
then forced into the Water, they neceſſarily ſwim for- 
ward, for fear of the Dog; and thus they croud on, till 
by degrees the Net growing lower and narrower, the 
are hurried to the very farther End, where another 
- Decoy-Man ftands ready to receive them, and who 
takes them out alive with his Hands. = 
As for the Traitors that drew the poor Ducks into 
this Snare, they are taught to riſe but a little Way ; 
| | and 


V 


inc. GREAT BRITA W. 25 


0. . 
and fo not reaching to the Net, they fly back to the 
a Ponds, and make their Eſcape; or elſe, being uſed 
to the Decoy-Man, they go to him fearleſs, and are 
bel taken out as the reſt ; but, inſtead of being killed 


Wwith them, are ſtroked, made much of, and put into- 
Ha little Pond juſt by him, and plentifully fed for their 


hen Services. | Ws 

e There are many Particulars in the managing and 

2. raining theſe Levels, throwing off the Water by 
Mills and Engines, and cultivating the Grounds in 


In unuſual Manner, which would be very uſeful to 
Wc deſcribed ; but the needful Brevity of this Work 
ill not admit of it: yet ſomething of it may be 


M 
ch ouched upon, „ 5 
nd 1. That here are ſome wonderful Engines for 
1088 throwing up Water, and ſuch as are not to be 
til ſeen any- where elſe ; whereof one in particular 
ol threw up (as they aſſured us) 1200 Tons of 
woll Water in half an Hour, and goes by Wind- 
= Sails, 12 Wings or Sails to a Mill, 
ir 2. Here are the greateſt Improvements by Plant- 
en ing of Hemp, that, I think, are to be ſeen in 
hills England; particularly on the Norfolk and Cam- 
n af bridge Sides of the Fens, as about //7/bech, Wells, 
ini and ſeveral other Places, where we ſaw many 
be. hundred Acres of Ground bearing great Crops 
ing of Hemp. e 4 


2 | 2, Here is a particular Trade carried on with Len- 
don, which is no- where elſe practiſed in the whole 


ng 
7 Eingdom, that I have met with, or heard of, 
inge 2. For carrying Fiſh alive by Land-Carriage. 
for- This they do by carrying great Buts filled with 
tg Water in Waggons, as the Carriers draw other 
pe Goods. * The Buts have a little ſquare Flap, in- 
hei ftead of a Bung, about 10, 12, or 14 Inches 
hof ſquare, which, being opened, gives Air to the 
0 Fiſh: and every Night, when they come to the - 
nt 1nn, they draw off the Water, and let more 


or. III. 


tt. 


3 


26 4 TOUR try Hunt. 


freſh and ſweet Water run into them again, 


Ip pittliſey and Ramſey Meres are two Lakes in 


Huntingdonſbire, made by the River Nyne, which runs 
through them ; the firſt is between five and fix Mile 


long, and three Miles broad, and is indeed full of ex- 


cellent Fiſh for this Trade. 


The Herman-/ireet goes in a trait Line thro” great 
and little Szutely, antiently written Styvec/e, which 
Name it acquired from its Ai, clay Soil. In Great 
Stukely Church is a Font of a very antique Make, 
The Her man treet, after this, becomes notorious by 
the Name of Stangate Near Stilton ſome Parts ap- 
pear ſtill paved with Stone, which ſtrengthens the 
Conjecture, that the Name Stangate was given ith 
from thence. It traverſes great Woods between the 
Iwo Saltrie, where was a religious Foundation off 
Simon Silvanect, the ſecond Earl of Huntingdon and 
Northampton ; among the Ruins of which lie buried 
| Robert Brus, Lord of Anandale in Scotland, and o 
Cleveland in England, with [/abel his Conſort, fron 
whom the Scots Branch of our Royal Family is de-. 
ſcended. Near the Road Side Roman Urns have been 


dug u P · | 


_- Half a Mile out of the Road was the Seat of Su 
| Robert Cotton, the learned Friend of the great Camden 
Where he had a choice Collection of Roman Inſcrip- 
tions from all Parts of the Kingdom. The Houſe wa 
built in a magaificent Manner, of hewn Stone; bu 


now lies in diſmal Ruins. By it is a beautiful Church, 


with a Tower; and in the Windows is fine painteli# 
Glaſs. From thoſe Wouds above-mentioned, youſſ 


In theſe Carriages they chiefly carry T'ench and 
Pike, Perch and Eels, but eſpecially the two 
former, of which here are ſome of the largeſt 


yd „ , az view „ Fo % A ©. 


„ 


ee „ . 2 


Eye commands the whole Level of che Fens, particu 


larly Whittleſey-mere, where the Gentry have 7 : 
8 Veſlelh 


ar 


Northamp. GREAT BRITAIN, 27 
Veſſels to fail in for Pleaſure. Sir Robert Cotton, dig- 
ging the Foundation of an Houſe on the Hill whence 
you enjoy th.s Proſpect, found the Skeleton of a Fiſh, 
12 Feet long 5 ED | 
A little to the Right lies Ramſey, famed for a rich 
Abbey; little of which is now left, but a Part of the 
old Gatehouſe. In the Yard I ſaw a neglected Statue 
of the Founder Amn, who was called Aiderman of 
i England, and was Couſin to King Edgar, and 
Son of Duke Athelftan, ſurnamed Half King, This 
is one of the moſt antient. Pieces of Engliſb Sculpture 
BW which we know of. The Keys and ragged Staff in 
his Hand denote his Office. The Abbey was dedi- 
| cated to St. Dunſtan of Canterbury, and St. Ofwald of 
York, and was a rich Foundation, and at the Diſſo- 
WE lution valued at 1716 7. per Annum, for the Mainte- 
nance of 60 Monks. In the Year 1721. a great 
Quantity of Roman Coins were found at Ramſey z 
which were. believed to be hid there by the Monks, 
e upon ſome Inroad of the Danes. 1 

= At every Mile from Grantham to Stangate are 
Stones ſet up by Mr. Boulter, which he deſigned to 
have carried on to London, for the general Benefit, 
All the Country between Huntingdon River and 
Peterborougb River, is Clay, Sand, and Gravel; but 
beyond that, to the Humber, Stone. ASS 
= At Gunworth Ferry over Peterborough River is a 
Bridge, a few Years ago erected, where Boats pay 
Toll. The People of Peterborough were a good while 
i averſe from having their River made navigable, out 
of an abſurd Notion that it would ſpoil their Trade; 
but they begin to be better informed, or, as I may 
We ſay, to have more Wit, on the Progreſs made in that 
Navigation, which I ſhall mention more particularly 
We by-and-by, when I come to Oundle, | 


From the Fens, longing to be delivered from F ogs 
and ſtagnate Air, and Water of the Colour of brewed 


. ̃ ͤPl— r — — - 


9 
[ 
: 
| 
| 
; 
| 
: 
| 
| 
| 


28 OATOUR thro Northamp. 
Ale, like the Rivers of the Peat, we firſt ſet Foot on 


dry Land, as I called it, at Peterborough. 
But, before we enter it, we muſt not omit to taxe 


ſome Notice of Foderingbay Caſtle, ſituate on a |} 
Branch of the Me, famous for the Impriſonment 
and Decollation of the unfortunate Mary Queen of 


Scots. It ſeems to have been very ſtrong, and it .had 


a high Mount or Keep, environed with a deep Ditch, 
*Tis moſtly demoliſhed, and all the Materials carried 
off; ſome ſay it was deſtroyed by Order of King 
Zames I. in Revenge of his Mother's Sufferings. 

hey pretended to hew me here the Ruins of the 
Hall where that Princeſs was beheaded. It was the 
Seat of Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, whoſe 
Body was buried in the Collegiate Church here; a 


very neat Building, founded by Edward Duke of 


York, likewiſe interred here. The Chancel, in which 


they were buried, was intirely demoliſhed at the Sup- 


reſſion; but theſe Monuments were reſtored by, 
Queen Elizabetb. The Church Windows. are filled 
with handſome painted Glaſs, ſaved by a Sum of Mo- 
ney to the Soldiery in the Civil War, and repreſent St. 
Denys, St. Guthlac, Archbiſhop Scrope, &c, : 
Peterborough is a City of great Antiquity, ſeated in 


+ the Eaftern Angle of Northamptonſbire, on the River 
Nye; and is the leaſt in England; for Bath, Wells, . 


Eh, and Carliſle, are all much bigger; yet Peterle, 
rough is no contemptible Place. Here are ſome good 


Houſes, an handſome Market-place, and the Streets 
are fair and well-built ; but the Glory of Peterborough. Wi 


is the Cathedral, which is in Length, from Eaft to 
Weſt, 160 Yards, in. Breadth 34, and the Height of 
the higheſt Spire 62 Yards and a Foot; truly fine and 
beautitul, and the nobleſt Piece of Gothic Building 
in England; but it appears to be more modern than 
the Story of raiſing this Pile implies, which was 
completed in 664. It wants only, to make it com- 
plete, a fine Tower Steeple, and Spire on the top of 


it. 


Northamp. GRTAT BRITAI W 29 
it. It was incorporated by King Henry VIII. in 


1541. and its antient Monaſtery converted into the 


Cathedral. Its Juriſdiction extends over 32 Towns 
and Hamlets, in all which Places the Civil Magiſtrates, 


appointed by the Royal Commiſſion, are veſted with 


| the ſame Power as Judges of Aſſize; and hold in this 
City their Quarterly Seſſions of Oyer and Terminer, 
c. A Mayor, Alderman, and Recorder, are the 
chief Magiſtrates here, and it ſends two Members to 
Parliament. 


In this Church was buried the Body of the unhap- 


Es py Mary Queen of Scots above mentioned; but it was 
W afterwards removed by King James I. her Son, into 
| Yeſtmin/ter- Abbey, where a Monument is erected for 
her, in King Heury VIIch's Chapel; tho? ſome do not 
| tick to tell us, that tho' the Monument was' erected, 


the Body was never removed. 


Here alſo lies interred Catherine of Spain, another 


To unhappy Queen, and the divorced Wife of King 


Henry VIII. and Mother to Queen Mary I. Her Mo- 


W nument is not very magnificent, but far from mean. 
Here is an old decayed Monument of Biſhop Fulfer, 
the Founder of the Church; but this Church has fo 
often been burnt and demoliſhed ſince that Time, 

that it is doubtful whether the Monument be authen- 

tic or not. | 2 | 

In the Cathedral is the Figure of one Scarlet, a Sex- 
ton, who buried the above- named two Queens, one 
W 50 Years after the other, and under it the following 
W Inſcription : 2 5 . | 


You [ee old Scarlet's Picture fland on high; 
But at your Feet there doth his Body lie. 
He did interr two Queens within this Place, 


And this Town's Houſbolders in his Life's Space 


Twice over; but at length his own Turn came 


= Another Man for him ſhould do the ſame. 
He died at 95 Years old, 


Cs Tte 


_— A TOUR hr Linc, 
The Chapel here, called St. Mary's, is a very cu- 
rious Building, tho' now not in Uſe. The Choir has 
been often repaired and beautified, and is now very 
fine ; but the Weſt End, or great Gate, is a Prodigy 
for Beauty and Variety. This Church, when a Mo- 
naſtery, was remarkable for its great Revenues. 
In the Year 1720. at Thorp, the Seat of Sir Francis | 
St. John, by Peterborough, a Mofaic Pavement was 
found. This was undoubtedly a Villa of ſome Roman 
of Diſtintion. In the Garden are ſome fine antique 
Marble Statues, which ſuffer more from the Weather 
than from Age. In the Middle is a Livia of a Co- 
loſſean Proportion: in the four Quarters, Diana, Am- 
phion, an Orator, and a Gladiator: upon the Terrace, 
an admirable Hercules killing the Hydra in the 
Court, two Equeſtrian Figures in Copper, King Henry i 
IV. of France, and Don Feb of Aufiria, Over moſt 
of the Doors of the Houſe, are placed Buſtoes of Ba/- Ml 
fianus, Caracalla, and others, "Theſe Antiquities were 
of the Arundel Collection. 133 | 


„ 10 © = M4 


— 
˖— 


ww Kere. & © my 


As great Part of Lincolnſbire, which is a vaſtly 
extended County, remained yet unſeen by me, I was 
obliged to turn North from Peterberough, and take a 
View of the Fens again, tho' we kept them at. ſome 
Diſtance too, Here we paſſed the Welland at Mar- 
het- Deeping, an old, ill- built, and dirty Town. Then 
we went thro' Bourn * to Follingbam, near which we 
ſaw two Pieces of decayed Magnificence; one was the 
old demoliſhed Monaſtery of Sempringbam, the Seat of 
the Gz/bertine Nuns, famous for Auſterity, and the 
other was the antient Houſe of the Lord Clinton, 
Queen Elizabeth's Admiral, where that great and no- 
ble Perſon once lived in the utmoſt Splendor, The 
Houſe, though in full Decay, ſhews what it has been; 
and the Plaſter of the Cielings and Walls in ſome 


— — 


0 
TY 
i% 
23 
ts 
19 
&s 
'3 
rs 
. 
i 
* 
94 
: 
F 
- 
1 
j 
44 
* 
7 
in 
? 
P 
J 
4 
x 
2 
! 
1 
2 
{+ 
14 
5 
75 
p 
{i 
$5 
17 
n 


8 — 
4 3 


—— 
— 
. 


W „ > wo Al 


* Famous for the Inauguration of, Edmund Kipg of the Eaft- Ang lu. 8 
5 Rooms 


— — —— —— <rs > wes 
. err ER ISNT rr 
5 


Fa 


Linc. GREAT BRITAIN, 31 
Rooms is ſo fine, ſo ſirm, and ſo intire, that they 
break it off in large Flakes, and it will bear Writing 
Jon with a Pencil or Steel Pen, like the Leaves of a 
Table-Book. This Sort of Plaſter 1 have not ſeen 
any- where ſo prodigiouſly fine, except in the Palace of 
| Noneſuch in Surry, near E pſom, before it was demo- 
liſhed. 

From hence we croſſed Part of the great Heath 
mentioned before, and came into the high Road 
again at Anci/ter, a ſmall, but antient Reman Village, 


called Crococaluna. It is full of Remnants of Anti- 


quity; a ſuffi-ient Teſtimony of which may be de- 
duced rom the Traffick which the Town's people 
| have tor many Years carried on with the Sale of them. 
After a Shower the Schoolboys and Shepherds look 
for them on the Declivities, and never return empty 


1 banded. 


The Town conſiſts of one Street, running North 


and South along the Road. There is a Spring at botn 


, Ends of the Town, which, no doubt, was the Reaſon 
for the Romans pitching it at this Place; for there is no 


I; more Water from hence to Lincoln. 


On the Weſt Side of the Town is a Road, formerly 


| i deſigned for the Convenience of thoſe who traveled 


waen the Gates were ſhut, In the Church-yard are 


two Priefts cut in Stone. 


This muſt have been a populous Place, from the 
large Quarries about it, and the Rock lying a very 
little Way beneath the Surface. 3 
From Ancaſter we came to Grantham, fe mous for 
a very fine Church, and its Spire Steeple. The ge- 
nerai Notion, that this Steeple ſtands leaning, is cer- 


S tainly a vulgar Error: I had no Inſtrument indeed to 


try it by; but, according to the ſtricteſt Obſervation, 


WF 1 could not perceive it, or any thing like it; and am 
W much of Opinion with the Poet: 


*Tis Height makes Grantham Steeple ſeem awry. 
| E 2X | The 


=. 4 TOUR thro. Line. i 
The Steeple is 82 Yards high; which is ſix Yards 
higher than that of Sz. Bride's in London. | | 
What disfigures the Tower very much is, that the 
Stair-caſe in one Corner is an. Octagonal Projection 


on the Outſide, and there are no Projections on the ry 
other three Corners to anſwerit. 
The Church is large and handſome, and the Organ 7 
is finely ornamented, and has a double Front. = 


The Charnel-houſe, or Bone-houſe, belonging to 
this Church, is a large ornamented Building; where N 
may be ſeen near 1500 Skulls, bleached white by the p 
Air; all piled up very exactly in Rows one above an - 


other. Bo 7 | 
The chief Magiſtrate here is an Alderman, afliſted . 
by 12 Juſtices. This is a neat, pleaſant, well-built, of 


and populous Town, has a good Market, and the 
Inhabitants are ſaid to have a good Trade, and to Þ 
be generally rich. It returns two Members to Parlia- 
ment, | | | | © 
It was certainly a Roman Town; and Remains of 
a Caſtle have formerly been dug up there. Here were Wi ; 
many Religious Houſes : Ruins of ſome of which ſtill WF. 
remain. In one juſt by the Market-place, is a very 


pretty little Chapel or Oratory, adorned with Imagery. WW I 
Here is a good Free- ſchool, erected by Richard Fox, ; 
Biſhop of incheſter; where Sir aac Newton re- x 
_ ceived the firſt Principles of Literature, under the fa- 3 
mous William Malter, then Schoolmaſter. This 
Town, lying on the great Northern Road, is famous, ; 


as well as Stamford, for abundance of good Inns, ſome 
of them fit to entertain Perſons of the higheſt Quality, 
and their Retinues; and it is a great Advantage to the WW, 
Place. 5 = . = KL 


5 


Within a Mile of Grantham, in a delightful Valley, 
ſtands Belton, a late. built Houſe belonging to the Fa- 
mily of Brownlow, Lord Viſcount Tyrconnel.in Ireland, Wl 
one of the moſt regular and beautiful Seats in this. 
Country; adorned with curious Gardens, as > 2 

EP 


Line. GREAT BRITAIN. Hoy 
Park. But I ſhould not omit to take ſome Notice, 
W before I quit Lincolnſbire, of the Duke of Ancaſter's 
pleaſant Seat at Grimſiborpe. It is an handſome and 
commodious Houſe : the Park is large and beautiful ; 
the Lawn there, whereon is an annual Horſe-race, is 
delightful. In the Middle of the Park ſtood Yaudy- 
= by, founded Anno 1147. ſome ſmall. Ruins of 
which are ſtill to be ſeen. 
From an Hill about a Mile beyond n 
= North-weſt, being on the ur York Road, we had a 
Proſpect again into the Vale of Bever, or Belvoir, 


_— mentioned near the End of Vol. IT. which ſpreads it- 
4 ſelf into three Counties, to wit, Lincoln, Leiceſter, 
t. and Nottinghamſhire : alſo here we had a diſtant View 
e of Belvoir Caſtle, which, 'tis ſuppoſed, took its Name 


from its Situation, from whence there is ſo fine a 


into Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, and Leicgſterſbires. 
The Caſtle or Palate (for ſuch it now is) of Belvoir, 
is the Seat of the noble Family of Zaxners, Dukes of 
Wand, who have alſo a very large Eftate, equal to 
the Demeſnes of ſome Sovereign Princes; in parti- 
W cular, within View of the Caſtle, ro the Amount of 
W 30 Manors; extending itſelf into Lincoln, Leiceſter, 
8 Nottingham, and - Derby/hires, far and wide, and in 
which Eſtate they have an immenſe ſubterranean- 
W | reaſure, never to be exhauſted ; I mean the Lead- 
W mines and Coal-pits; of which I ſhall ſay more in 
their Place. | 
In the fine Gallery of this noble Seat are very an- 
tient and modern Family and other Pictures, particu- 
ally the original one of King Charles I. as he fat at 
his Tryal. 
At Botteſworth in Loicefter re, but on the Edge of 
£1 Lincolnſhire, we viſited the Fombs of the Manners ö 
noble Family, which are worth ſeeing. 
= The other Towns which lie on the South-weſt of 
che //itham i in this County, not already mentioned, 


are, 
2 3 : Ro. I, Bec 


— 


Proſpect over the Country, that you ſee from the Hill 


r — — — — — — 


34 ATOUR wo Ru 


1. Brckingham, an inconſiderable little Place, hing 


North of Grantham. 


2. Dunnington, a good Market town, noted for 
large Quantities of Hemp and Hemp-ſeed. | 

| S eford, ſituate in a Valley, on a little River, 
which | is ſo rapid, that its Streams never freeze. 1: 
has a good Market, and a long, ſquare. e . 
facing thres Streets. : 


ig South were from hence we entered Rui. 
landſbire, remarkable for being the leaſt County in 
England; having but two Market- towns in it, vin. 
Otebam and Uppingham. 85 
Oteham ſtands in the rich Valley of Catmoſs. It has. 
a Caſtle, in which the Aſſizes are held, an Hoſpital 8 
for the Poor, and a Free-ſchool: for the Education of i 
Youth. *Tis a Cuſtom in this Town, that, when a. 
Nobleman comes within its Precins, he is obliged: MW 
to pay Homage of a Shoe from one of his Horles, or 
to commute for it in Money. 5 
Uppingham is a new well built Town, finding on 
an Hill; and has alſo an Hoſpital and Free- ſchool. 
This County, though ſo ſmall, is famous for abun- 
dance of fine Seats of Gentlemen, and ſome of the 
firſt Rank; as, particularly, the Earls of Gazn/borough 
and MWinchelſca. The late Earl of Nottingham, at a 
very great Expence, rebuilt the antient Seat of Bur- 
lieigb on the Hill, near Okeham, and on the Edge of 
the Vale of Catmaſs. It would take up too much of 
my Room to deſcribe, as I ought, this noble Houſe, | 
with its curious Paintings, fine Library, and delightful 
Garden. I can only obſerve, that though there may 
be ſome ſumptuous Palaces in England (which 
abounds with ſo many fine ones)-that excel in this or 
that Particular; I do not know an Houſe in Britain 
_ excels all the reſt in ſo many Particulars. 


Rutl. GREAT BRITAIN. 35 


l.. | 
ing At Lyndon in this little County, are depoſited the 
| Remains of the learned Mr. Milliam Fhifton, with” ' _ 
for che following Memorial of him: 
lere lies the Body of the Reverend Mr, William: 
er, & J/hi/lon, M. A. ſome time Proteſſor of the Mathe- 
nn © maiicks in the Univerſity of Cambridge; who was 


born Dec. 9, 1667. and died Aug. 22. 1 7 52. in 
© the 8 5th Year of his Age. 

= < Endued with an excellent Genius, indefatigable 
in Labour and Study, he became learned in Divinity, 
W © antient Hiſtory, Chronology, Philology, and Ma- 
W © thematics, 

© Fertile in Sentiment, copious in Language, ſkilful. 


12s. to convey Inſtruction, he introduced the Newtonzan: 
tal © Philoſophy, then buried in the deep Receſſes of 
of © Geometry, into public Knowlege; and thereby diſ- 
2 played the wonderful Works of God. 

More deſirous to diſcover his Will, he applied 


or © himſelf chiefly to the Examination and Study of the: 
WE © holy Scripture. Reſolved to practiſe it, he ſaeri- 
on © ficed great worldly Advantages, and greater Ex- 
« pectations, that he might preſerve the Teſtimony 

1- WE © of a good Conſcience, 
ie if Firmly perſuaded of the Truth BY Importance of 
Revealed Religion, he exerted his utmoſt Abilities 
a © to enforce the Evidence, to explain the Doctrine, 
-. and to promote the Practice, of Chriſtianity; wor- 
f WH © ſhiping, with the moſt profound Submiſſton and 


Adoration, the ſupreme Majeſty of One God and 
Father of all, through the Interceſſion and Media- 
tion of our Lord Chriſt Jeſus, by the Grace and In- 
"fluence of the Holy Spirit; and teſtifying the Since - 
rity of his Profethon by. the due Obedience of an 
holy Life. - 
Strictly tenacious of his kitegrity, equally fervent 
in Piety and Charity, ardent to promote the Glory 
of God, and the Good of Mankind, zealous in the 


W © Purſuir of Truth, and Practice of Virtue, he perſe · 
GC. 6: as verſed. a 


a R A aA M K aA 6A aa 


36 AT OUR thro Line. 
vered, with Faith and Patience, ſtedfaſt and un- 
< moveable, always abounding in the Work of the 
Lord, thro” many Trials, and much Fribulation, 
to the End of his Courſe, full of Days, and ripe v 
for Paradiſe, in a. firm Aſſurance of a joyful- Reſur- 
rection to everlaſting Life and Happineſs. | 
© Remember, Reader, whoever thou art, if thou 
<. canſt not attain to the Meaſure of his Learning and 
<© Knowlege, that it is in thy Power to equal him in] 
6 Piety, Probity, Holineſs, and other Chriſtian 
< Graces; and that thou may'ſt thereby obtain, to- 
< gether with him, through the Mercies of God and 
<. Merits of Chriſt, an everlaſting Crown of Glory. 


2 


e 


From Burley we came to St. Martins, and thence 
proceeded to Stamford. This Town is placed in a 
kind of an Angle of the County of Lincoln, juſt upon 
the Edge of three Counties, viz. Lincoln, Northampton, i 
and Rutland. It boaſts of its Antiquity ;, and indeed 
has evident, Marks of having been a very great Place 
in- former Days, | F 


Hiſtory tells us it was burnt. by the Danes above 
1500 Years ago, being then a flouriſhing City: it 
was alſo an Univerſity, and here are ſtil] the Remains 
of two Colleges, one called Flac#hall, and the other 
Brazen Noſe; on the Gate whereof is a great Brazen 
NMoſe, and a Ring through it, like that at Oxford; WE 
nor could it take this from Oxford, but Oxford from 
that, which is as old as Edward III. at the leaſt ; for 
that at Oxford was not built before Henry VII. But 
the famous Camps, and Military Ways, which {til} 8 
appear at and near this Town, are a. more viſible. 
Teſtimony. of its having been a very antient Town, 
and that it was conſiderable in the Roman Times. 
It is now a very fair, well- built, and wealthy 
Town, conſiſting of ſix Pariſhes, including that of S:- 
. Martin. in Stamford-baron ; that is to ſay, in that 
Part of the Town which ſtands over the Rooks 4 
. 85 | which; 


A rn „— 2 


Line. GREAT BRITAIN. 37 
which, though it is not a Part of the Town, eritically 
W ſpcaking, being not in the Liberty, and in another 
County, yet it is all called Stamford, and is rated 
with it in the Taxes. | 8 
= The Government of this Town is by a Mayor, 12 
W Aldermen, and 24 Burgeſſes. It returns two Mem- 
bers to Parliament, 9 | 
= They boaſt in this Town of great Privileges, eſpe- 
cially to the Mayor; ſuch as being freed from the 
WE Sheriff's Juriſdiction, and from being impanelled on 
W Juries out of the Town; to have the Return of all 
ME Writs, to be freed from all Lords Lieutenants, and 
W trom their Muſters, and for having the Militia of the 
= Town commanded by their own Officers, the Mayor 
being the King's Lord Lieutenant, and immediately 
a under his Majeſty's Command, and to be eſteemed: 
We (within the Liberties and Juriſdiction: of the Town) 
W the Second Man in the Kingdom; and the Grant 
| of thoſe Privileges concludes thus: U? ab antique uſa. 
= crunt; * As of antient Time they had been accuf- 
* tomed:* ſo that this Charter, which was granted 
by Edward IV. Anno 1461. ſeems to be only a Con- 
W firmation. of former Privileges, not a Grant of new 
ones. e | 
= There is afine Stone Bridge over the River Welland, 
of five Arches, and the Town hall is in the upper Part 
W of the Gate, upon or at the End of the Bridge, which 
W is a very handſome Building. Here are two conſtant 
= Weekly Markets, three Annual Fairs, and a great. 
Mid-lent Mart; but the latter is not now ſo conſider- 
able as it is reported to have been formerly. 
| In the Church of Sr. Martin in Stamford-baron, is 
a very noble Monument of William Cecil Lord Bur- 
eigb, who lies buried there in a large Vault juſt under 
it; and oppoſite to it, on the North-ſide, is a more 
KS antient (but handſome) Monument, though not ſo 
magnificent as the former, in Memory of Richard 
„Cel, Eſq; and Jane his Wife, the Father and Mother 


4 TOUR thro Northamy, 


of the ſaid famous Lord Burleigh; alſo a more mo- 


dern Monument for the great Earl, who re-edified 


the Houſe; and for his Counteſs, a Siſter of a late 
Duke of Bun this is a finiſhed Piece; 'tis all 
of the fineſt Marble, and made at Florence and ſent 
over. The ſaid Earl died on his Return from Rome, 
at . near Parts, Hog. 29. 70 


But the Beauty of Stam 1 is the Neighbourhood 
of the noble Palace of the Earl of Exeter, called Bur. 
leigh kouſe, built by the ſaid Lord Burleigh, Lord 
High Treaſurer to Queen Eliza'eth. 

This Houſe is ſituated in Northamptonſhire ; it is 
built all of Free- ſtone, looks more like a Town than 
an Houſe, at which Avenue ſoever you come to it; 
the Towers and the Pinacles ſo high, and placed at 
ſuch a Diſtance from one another, look like ſo many 


diſtant Pariſh-churches in a great Town; and a large 


Stone Spire over the Clock in the Centre, looks like 
the Cathedral, or chief Church of the Town. 

The Kane ſtands on an Eminence, which riſes 
from the North Entrance of the Park, coming from 


Stamford: on the other Side, vix. South and Weit, 


the Country lies on a Level with the Houſe, and is a 


fine Plain, with Poſts, and other Marks for Horſe- 


races. As the Entrance looks towards the flat, low 
Grounds of Lincolnſhire, it gives the Houſe a moſt ex- 
traordinary Prutpect into the Ferns, fo that you may 


fee tron thence nzar 30 Mules, without any thing to 


intercept the Sight. 

As you mount che Hill, you come to a fine Eſpla- 
nade, beiore the great Gate, or firſt Entrance of the 
Huufe ; where i: a ſmall, but very. handſome Semi- 
circle, take, in with an Iron Baluſtrade: the Front 


is a very gra. d aud beautiful Deſign, conſidering that the 


antient A. bifdtute was but newly introduced at that 
time: the Projections are well proportioncd, and bold, 
From the Semicircle above: named, rifing a * Steps, 

you 


p. Northamp. GRRAT BRITAIN. 39 
0. ¶ you enter a moſt noble Hall, but made infinitely more 
ed noble by the invaluable Paintings, with which it is. 
ate BW fo filled, that there is not room to place any thing be- 
all WS tween them. ED „ 7 
nt John Earl of Exeter had a great Genius for Painting; 
12, and Architecture, and a ſuperior Judgment in both, 
as every Part of this noble Structure will teſtify; for 
he changed the whole Face of the Building, pulled 
od down great Part of the Front next the Garden, and 
r-. turned the old Gothic Windows into thoſe ſpacious 
rd Saſhes which are now ſeen there; and though the 
Founder, who had alſo an exquiſite Taſte (as the 
1 Manner of Building then was), had: fo well ordered 
an the Situation and Avenues of the whole Fabric, that: 
t; nothing was wanting of that Kind, and had alſo con- 
at WF trived the Houſe itſelf in a moſt magnificent manner, 
ny the Rooms ſpacious, - the Cielings lofty, and the De- 
ge corations juſt; yet the ſaid Earl ohn found room for: 
de BY Alterations, infinitely to the Advantage of the Whole; 
Jas particularly, a noble Stair-caſe, which leads to a 
es WW Range of ſpacious Rooms of State; but ſome of them 


m. were not hniſhed when I was there. on 

t, As the noble Lord above-mentioned loved Paintings, 
a ſo he had infinite Advantages in procuring them; for 
he not only traveled three times into tay, and ſtaid 
every time a conſiderable while at Florence; but his 
x- WE princely Deportment, and fine Accompliſhments, pro- 


cured him the perſonal Eſteem of the Great Duke, 

who aſſiſted him in the Purchaſe of many excellent: 

Pieces, and likewiſe preſented him with ſeveral others 
Jof great Value. 1 

Ss Among the reſt, there is, in the great Hall, his. 
 Lordſhip's Picture on Horſeback, done by the Great: 


it Duke's principal Painter, at his Highneſs's Charge, 
e and given to his Lordſhip, as a- Mark of ſpecial Fa- 
it WY vour : there is alſo a fine Piece of Seneca bleeding 
d. BY to Death in the warm Bath, and dictating his laſt 
„ Morals to. his Scholars; a Piece ſo excellent, that IL. 


40 4 TOUR thro Northamy. 


have been told, the late King of France offered the 
Earl 6000 Piſtoles for it. | © 
The Stair-caſe, the Cielings of all the fine Lodg. 
ings, the Chapel, the Hall, the late Earl's Cloſet, 
are all finely painted by the celebrated VARRIO, 


whom the Earl kept 12 Years in his Family, wholly 


employed in them, and allowed him an quipage, 


2 Table, and Servants, and a conſiderable Penſion. - 
The Garden is far from being in a beautiful or 
good Tafte; neither is the Park fo fine as that of 


_ Woburn, and ſeveral others: there is a Chearfulneſ; 
wanting both in the Park and Garden, 


By the Park Wall, or, as ſome think, through the 


Park, adjoining to Burleigh houſe, paſſed an old Ro- 


man Highway, beginning at Caſter, a little Village - 
near Stamford, where the Roman Way ſeems: to be 


continued ; but which was antiently the Roman Sta- 


tion, or Colony, Durobrivis, as I have ſaid. This 
whole Town takes in three Squares of full 300 Feet 
each, two of which are allotted to the Caſtle; the 
third is an Area lying to the Eaſt before it, between 


the Caſtle and the Hill, which is {till the Market- 


place. From under the Caſtle-walls, almoſt quite 
round, riſe many quick Springs; but of theſe the 
Syfer Spring is the moſt noted, having now four Fluxes 


of Water from between the Joints of great Stones, 


laid flat like a Wall, and joined together with Lead, 
probably by the Romans, being under their Wall. It 
is very pleaſantly overſhaded with Trees. Its Name 


is Saxon, and ſignifies pure, which Appellation it well 
deſerves. The Roman Way is {till to be ſeen, and is 
now called the Forty-foot. Way, paſſing from Gun- 

worth: Ferry (and Peterborough) to Stamford. This, 
as the Antiquaries are of Opinion,. was the great Road. 


into the North, which is fince turned from Ftilton into 
| Huntingdonſhire, to Wandſworth or Wandsford, where 
is a very good Bridge over tte River Nyne; which, 


coming down from Northamp.oen, as I have.obſerved 


OE already, 


Northamp. GRTAT BRI TAIN. 41 
he already, paſſed thence by Peterborough, and ſo into 
the Fen Country. But I am of - Opinion, neither 
this nor //andsford was the antient Northern Road 


8 Wuſcd by the Romans; for tis evident, that the great 
„Nonman Cauſeway is (till ſeen on the Left. hand of that 
) 


„Road, and paſſing the Nyze at a Place called Jater- 
ion, went directly to Stamford, and paſſed the 


. Melland, juit above that Town, but not in the Place 
FO where the Bridge ſtands now; and this. Roman Way 


W:s {till to be ſeen, both on the South and the North- 
Wide of the /Yelland, ſtretching itſelf on to Brig- Caſter- 
Won, a little Town upon the River Guafh, about two. 
Miles beyond Stamford; which was, as all Writers 
agree, another Roman Station, and was called Gua- 


poſed alſo to take its Name; whence it went on to 
Ponton, another very conſiderable Colony, and fo to 
Newarz, where it croſſed the Foſſe. | | 
= Hence the Road goes by Stretton; then leaves, a 
little on the Left-hand, Co/fterworth, highly memo- 
able for being the Birth-place of the great Philoſopher 
Sir //aac Newton, TE. | | 
This Forty foot Way then muſt be a Croſs- road 
from Ca/ter, and by that from the Fen Country, ſo 
leading into the great Highway at Stamford: as like- 
WE wiſe another Croſs-road went out of the ſaid great 
Road at Ponton, a Village of Antiquity near Grantham, 
to the town of Ancaſter, where a Roman Cohort was 
ſtationed, and thence joined the Feſſe again at Lincoln. 
| Near this Village of Caſter lives Earl Fitzwillams. 
His Lordſhip ſome Years ago built a fine Stone Bridge 
over the River Nyne, near Gunworth, where formerly 
was the Ferry, as has been mentioned. 
= As we paſs by Burleigh-park Wall, on the great 
Road, we ſee on the Weſt-ſide, not above a Mile 
Wfrom it, another Houſe, built by the ſame Lord Bur- 
eigb, and which might paſs for a very noble Seat, 
| ö EL | | e 


W/m by the Antients, from whence the River is ſu - 


were not Burleigh by. This is called Matborp, and 


Drum, or any Noiſe at all. No doubt, it is owing, 
if there be any thing in it, to the Paſſage of the Water 


Monuments of the Founder Febn de Drayton, of the 


: Drayton-houſe, who in a manner intirely ne bu 
this antient Seat. 3 


Saturdays. It has a fair Church, a Free- ſchool, aui u 
the Banks of it, vis. Northampton, Wellingborough, 1 


of the 


either for Trade or Buildings; though it has probably 8 


42 A TOUR thro Northamy, 


ſtands juſt on the great Roman Way, mentioned {Ma 
above: this is the Houſe of which the old Earl is re- 
ported to have ſaid, he built it to remove to, and to by 
out of the Duji while Burleigh-houſe was ſweeping, 
From hence we went to Oundle, being told, that 
the famous Drum was to be heard at that time in the 
Well; but though we ſaw the Well, we heard no 


and Air, Here are two long Stone Bridges. Loroid 
Church, on the Side of an Hill, is very fine. The 


Peres, and Staffords Earls of Miliſtire, &c. are to be | 
ſeen here: as is that of the late Ducheſs of Norfall, 
who, after her Divorce, married Sir ohn Germayn, of i 


© 


Oundle is almoſt ſurrounded by the River, over] 
which it has two handſome Stone Bridges. It is 2 
neat uniform-built Town, and has a good Market on BW 


an Alms houſe, | e = 
The Mus has a Range of eminent Towns along 


Higham-ferrers, . Thrapfton, Oundle, Foderingbo, 
A e and Peterborough, all in this County. Some 
e I have already mentioned, | , 

Higham ferrers is a ſmall, neat, and healthful Wh 
Mayor-town, pleaſantly ſeated on a riſing Ground; 
an antient Borough, and returns two Members to 
Parliament. Here is a great antient Stone-building, M 
which they call the College; alſo a Free-ſchool and 
an Alms-houſe. 

Thrapſtone is delightfully ſituated in a fine Valley, 
and ſurrounded with a rich Soil, and well watered. 
It has a fine Bridge over the Nye ; but is not eminent 


> eat. er 


nov ik 


GREAT BRITAIN. 43 


unt. 


Pow changed its Face, by virtue of an Act paſſed for 


aking the Nyne navigable; which had ſo good an 


Effect, that, when I was laſt there, the 17th of No- 


ember 1737. on that very Day Boats were brought 


Wo to Thrap/ton, for the firſt time, which occaſioned 


much Joy in the Town, 


Here alſo is a beautiful Range of Meadows and 
Paſtures, perhaps not to be equalled in England, for 


ength. They ſtretch, uninterrupted, from Peter- 


WW orough to Northampton, which is near 30 Miles in 
ength, and in ſome Places are near two Miles in 
WBreadth ; the Land rich, the Graſs fine, and the 
Cattle which feed on them hardly to be numbered. 


North-weſt of this River lies Kettering, an hand- 


Wome, well-frequented Town, upon a riſing Ground; 
Ind beyond that again is Rothwell, a pretty good: 
Market- town. . | 


From Oundle- we traveled North- eaſt to Yaxley in 


Huntingdonſbire, a little Town, tolerably well built. 
WThe Church has a neat lofty Spire. In our Way 
{hither we croſſed the J/atling-/ireet, At Overton, 
now. called Cherry-Orton, a Village near Gunworth. - 
Ferry, is an old Manſion-houſe, formerly belonging 
co a very antient and almoſt forgotten Family of great. 
Men, called Lovetoft. On the other Side of the River 
is the fine Houſe I mentioned, p. 30. belonging to Sir 
Francis St. John, Bart. which affords a very beauti- 
W ful Proſpect to Travellers, as they paſs from the Hill 
beyond Stilton to Nandsford- bridge. This Wandsford: 
has obtained an idle Addition to its Name, from a: 


Story firmly believed by the Country- people; viz.. 


That a great Flood coming haſtily down the River 
8 2, in Hay-making-time, a Country Fellow, having 
taken up his Lodging on a Cock of Hay in the Mea- 
dow, was driven, on the Hay, down the Stream, in the 


Night, while he was faſt aſleep, towards /Fi/bech in, 


the Vent; when being wakened, he was ſeen and; 


10 
; 
112 
ti 
fie 


44 AT OUR thro Hunt. 
taken up by ſome Fiſhermen, almoſt in the open Sea; 
and being aſked, Where he lived? he anſwered, 4 
Wandsford in England. And we ſaw, at the great 
Inn by the South-end of the Bridge, the Sign of a 
Man floating on a Cock of Hay, and over him writ- 
ten, /Yandsford in England. 3 is 
_ _ Falling down Southward we come to Stilton, a 

Town famous for Cheeſe, which is called our Eng; 
Parmeſan, and is brought to Table fo full of Mites or N 
Maggots, that they uſe a Spoon to eat them. We 


came into the Roman Way at Sti/ton, which comes = 
from Cafter, mentioned p. 14. and runs all the way m 
to Huntingdon; which we followed through Sautery- ¶ the 
lane, a deep Deſcent between the two Hills, in which 8 
is Stangate hole, noted for being the greateſt Robbing- 10 
place in all this Part of the Country, and ſo came to 28 


Huntingdon, anciently called Hunter's- dune, the 
County-town, fituated on a riſing Ground on the eh. 
North-ſide of the Ouſe. It is a great Theroughfare tn. 
on the Northern Road, is full of very good Inns, and 
is a ſtrong Paſs upon the Ouſe, and, in the Civil 
Wars, it was eſteemed ſo by both Parties. It was of 
given by King Stephen to David King of Scots, as an Wp. 
Augmentation to his Eſtate z and taken away by King 
Henry II. However, the Scotiſb Kings always claim- W 
ed it. 

It is a Mayor-town, and had antiently 15 Churches, 
of later Days but four, and, in the Civil Wars, they th 
were reduced to two. The Cauſe of its Decay, at 


firſt, is ſaid to be owing to a Court Minion, who pro- * 
cured the Paſſage of the Ouſeæ to be ſtopped, which vr 
had been navigable to the Town. The ſaid River is WW 
now made navigable for ſmaller Veſlels to Bedford. at 


Huntingdon returns two Members to Parliament. 

The Witches of Warbois, in this County, have 8. 
made ſo much Noiſe, that I ſhall juſt mention the 

fatal End of a Man, his Wife, and Daughter, who Wc 
were all three hanged for torturing the Children. of a 
oo = Gentleman 


Hunt. GREAT BRITAIN. 45 


Gentleman in the Pariſh: the Hiſtory of it is kept in 


Queen's College Library in Cambridge; and one of 
their Fellows preaches yearly at Huntingdon on that 
Occcaſion. The Children being ſick, their Urine 


was ſent to Maſter Dr. Dorrington at Cambridge, who 


ſent a Medicine againſt Worms, That prevailing 
I nothing, the Doctor, upon ſecond Thoughts, pro- 


nounced the Symptoms were from Witchcraft, It was 


not long before a proper Family was ſufpected : the 


Woman and her Daughter were frequently ſeat for, 
and kept with the Children, and the Diſeaſe remitted 
upon the Sight of them ; but chiefly upon a Confeſſion, 


and a Sort of Petition added to it. To this Effect was 


the Girl's: As am a Mitch, and a greater Witch than 
my M ther, ſo I deſire, that the Pains. fhall go off” from 


this Child. Theſe Confeſſions were the chief Point 
Jagainſt the Priſoners, which they had been prevailed. 
upon to repeat by the Standers by, who had obſerved 


the Children relieved upon it, as they imagined. - And 


[thus three unhappy Perſons were ſacrificed to Igno- 
rance and Superſtition, | . 


Here are the moſt beautiful Moaowes on the Banks 


of the River Ouſe, that I think are to be ſeen in any 
Part of England; which, in the Summer Seaſon, are 
covered with innumerable Herds of Cattle and Flocks 


of Sheep. | | 
This Town is one Jong continued Street, pretty 
well built, eſpecially from the Ground-plat, where 


the Caſtle food. Here was born Oliver Crom- 


well, of genteel and worthy Parents. The Houle is 


new built, but the Room in which he was born is 


preſerved in its firſt State. It has a good Market- 


place; but the Free-ſtone Bridge, or Bridges rather, 


and Cauſeway over the Ouſe, are a great Ornament 


as well as Benefit to the Place. Here is a good public 


School, | 


Between Godmancbeſter, or Gormancheſter (a Roman 
Camp), and Huntingdon, is a wooden Bridge, erefted © 


over 


4 


46 A TOUR thro Hunt, 
over a Rivulet, upon Principles of Gratitude and pub: 
lic Charity, with this Inſcription : | 


RoBeR us Coox, emergens aquis, hoc viatoribus 
_* Sarum D. D. 1636. 


That is, 


RoBeRT Cook, having eſcaped the Danger of 
Drowning, ONE this 5 the Uſe of Trav 
lers, 1636. 


On the Weſt⸗ ſide of the . and in View « of | 
the plain lower Side of the Country, is a noble, tho 
antient Seat of the Earl of Sandwich, called Hinchin. 
hroke-hsuſe; the Gardens are fine, and well kept; the 
Situation ſeems a little obſcured by the Town of Hun. 
rtingdon. In the ſame Place we ſaw Bugden, a ſmall 
| Village, in which is a very pleaſant, though antient, 
Palace of the Biſhops of Lincoln; the Houſe and Gar- 
den are ſurrounded by a large and deep Moat of 

Water. The Chapel is pretty, though ſmall. There 
is an Orgain painted againſt the Wall, in a ſeeming || 
Organ-loft, and fo properly placed, and well painted, 
that we at firſt believed it really to be one. 

Erith is a large Town, but without a Market. 

St. Ives is a pretty neat Market-town, but is lef- 
ſened, and ſuffered greatly by Fire. Here Cromwell, 


after he had prodigally waſted his paternal Eftate, W -- 


rented a Farm, before he was elected Burgeſs for 
Cambridge. 

The Village of Hinchinbroke, which gives the Title 
of Viſcount to the eldeſt Son of the Earl of Sandwich, 


lies ata ſmall Diſtance from Huntingdon, and a little 


Way South-weſt ſtands the Town of Kimbelton, and 


that moſt nobly ſituated and pleaſant Seat of the Duke of 


 Manthefter, Kimbalton Caſtle, where no Pains or Coſt 
have been ſpared to a b the . beautiful Situa- 
; tion 


Bedf. GREAT BRITAIN. 47 
tion in Miah with the Works and Ornaments of 


Art. - 
Kimbolton Town is the Kiniubantum of the Romans, 


Here Queen Catharine, after ſhe was divorced, reſided 


for ſome time. 


At Ai/we//on, in this Count , are two Springs, one 
of freſh Water, good for dim Eyes; the other brackiſh, 
of Uſe for curing o! Scabs, Leproſy, &c. 

From Huntingdon we came to St. Neots on the 


Ouſe, over which is a good Stone Bridge. The Church 
is ſtrong and well-built, and the Steeple manifeſts the 


Skill of the Artiſt much to his Advantage. The Town 
takes its Name from Neotus, a learned and pious Man, 


who was interred here ; from whom likewiſe St. 


Neots in Cornwall takes its Name, where he for ſome 
time reſided. Hither Coals are brought by Water, 
and conveyed by Land around the Cons 


Here we Aon Bedfordſhire, and came to Bud. | 


ford, the chief Town; for. it has no City i in it, tho” 


this Town is larger and more populous than ſeveral 


| Cities in England. It is one of the ſeven Counties, 


whic'", they ſay, lie together, and have not one City 
among them; namely, Huntingdon, Bedford, Bucks 


Berks, Hertford, Eſſex, and Suffolk. 


It is divided into two SON ll the River Ouſe, 
which, entering it between Brayfield and Turrey, aſter 


as many Windings as meafure 90 Miles, leaves this 


County again at Sf Neots, and paſſes into the fenny 


Parts of Huntingdonſhire, 


This County is remarkable for ſeveral curious and 
ſcarce Plants; eſpecially the Woad, which, if it be 
good, is commonly worth 18 f. per Ton. The an- 
tient Britons, by painting themſelves with this Plant, 
uled to ſtrike Terror into their Enemies; who, tho' 
not afraid of meeting Men caſed in complete Armour, 
could x not ac tut tand tne Shock of theſe naked Bar- 

bariansz 


Men Bedf 
bariansz as was the Caſe in the firſt Invaſion of this 
Iſland by Cæſar. | 5 
Territa quæſſtis oſtendit terga Britannis. Lucan, | 
When Cæſar reach'd the warlike Britons Shore, 
Trembling he fled the Foes he ſought before. 


It is remarkable, that though a great Part of this 
County, viz. the two whole Hundreds of Stodden and 
Bedford, lie on the North of the Ouſe, yet there is but 
one Market-town in all that Side of the Ouſe, beſides 
Bedford. . 

It is alſo remarkable, that though the O#/e, by a 

long and winding Courſe, cuts thro' the County, ſo 
as to make above 70 Miles between Oulney and St. 

Nets, not above 20 by Land, yet in all that Courſe it 
received only the little River Ivel, which fell into it a 

little above Tempsferd, till very lately, viz. in the Year 

1758. when an Act paſſed, intitled, An A& for making 
the River Ivel, and the Branches thereof, navigable, 

rom the River Ouſe, at Tempsford, in the County 0 
Bedford, to Shotling-mill, othertoiſe called Burnt- mill, 
in the Pariſh of Hitchin in the County of Hertford ; 
and to Black-horſe-mill in the Pariſb of Bygrave in the 

aid County of Hertford ; and to the South and North- 
| Bridges, in the Town of >hefford, in the ſaid County of 
Bedford. A Navigation carried on with ſuch Diſpatch 
and Succeſs, that in leſs than three Years time, v2, 
in the latter End of the Year 17060. it was completed 
to and through Biggleſtwade for Boats of 15 Tons, 
and there is not the leaſt Doubt of its being ſoon per- 
fected; which, when done, will be of the greateſt 
Utility to the Public, by the Conveyance of Coals, 
Iron, Deals, and other Merchandize to, and the Ex- 
portation of Corn from, the inland Counties. : 
Tempsford, above-mentioned, is noted for a Camp, 
in which the Danes took up Winter-quarters, when 
they mined the ſtrong Fort of Sandy, about four Miles 
5 . more 


his 


| Bedf. GREAT BRITAIN. © 49 


more Southward, by ſome ſuppoſed to have been built 
by the Romans, and the very Saline of Ptolemy, This 
is certain, that, in the Grounds now occupied by 
Gardeners, there have been many Urns, and great 
Numbers of Roman Coins formerly dug up, and ſuch- 
lice Curioſities are ſtill ſometimes found by the Coun- 


. 


| try-people. 


Adjoining to Tempsford, on the Eaſt, is the little 


Village of Everdon, noted for the Birth of the learned 
and eminent ohn Tiptoft, Earl of Worceſter, and 


Lord High Conſtable of England under Edward IV. 
and of Sy/ve/ter de Everdon, Biſhop of Carliſſe in the 
Reign of Henry III. 

Bedford is a large, populous, thriving, pleaſant, 
and, well-built Mayor-town; it has five Pariſh 
Churches, a very fine Stone Bridge over the Ouſe, and 
the High- ſtreet, eſpecially, is very handſome and well- 
built: here is alſo a fair Market- place; but it is much 
improved lately in new Buildings. Tue River hath 
alſo been made navigable, and runs through the Town. 
It had formerly a Caſtile, and now, where it ſtood, is 
one of the moſt beautiful Bowling- greens in the King- 
dom. It has two Hoſpitals for Lazars, and another 
for eight poor People. Here is a Free-ſchool well 
endowed, and a Charity-fchool for 40 Children; and 


| 2 the Town is not hpon any of the great Roads 


in England, yet it is full of good Inns, which afford 
elegant Entertainment; fo? here is the beſt Market 
for. all Sorts of Proviſions that is to be ſeen in any 
Country Town in ali theſe Parts of England; and 
the Reaſon of it is, that, though it is ſo far from Len- 
don, yet the Higglers or Carriers great Quantities 


bu 
of Proviſions here for tne London Markers Here alſo 
is a very good Trade down the River to Lynn; and it 
returns two Members to Parliament. 

Here likewiſe is a great Corn- market, and vaſt 
Quantities of Grain are bought here, and carried down 
by 5 ge 28 and Barges to Lynn, where it is again 
E 


ſhipped, 


renn  - Bair 


ſhipped, and carried by Sea to Holland. The Soil 
| hereabouts is exceeding rich and fertile, and particu- 
larly produces great Quantities of the beſt Wheat in 
England, which is carried by Waggons from hence, 
and from the North Part of the County, 20 Miles be- 
yond this, to the Markets of Hitchin and Hertfard, 
and bought again there, and ground and carried in the 
Meal (till by Land) to London. 


Indeed the whole Product of this County may be 
ſaid to be Wheat and Malt for London ; for here are 


very few Manufactures, except thoſe of Straw Hats 
and Bone-lace ; of which by itſelf. 

Potton lies on the Borders of Cambridgeſhire ; it is a 
Market-town ; but of little Note. 


About two Miles South of Potton is the Pariſh of 


Sutton, the chief Seat, and a Lordſhip, of the Bur. 
goy nes. 

South-weſt of Potton ſtands Bigglaſiwade, a pleaſant]y 
ſituated Place on the Jve!, and furniſhed with a great 


Number of good Inns for accommodating. Travelers 


between London and York ; it is one of the; greateſt 
Markets in England for Barley. Still more Southward 
lies 


N Shefferd, between two Rivulets ; | over each of 
Which is a Bridge. 


Weſt of tnis Place ſtands Ampthill, a pretty Town, 
delightfully ſituated between two Hills. Near it is a 
large Park, with a great Manſion houſe in it, which 
King Charles II. gave to the noble Family of Bruce, 
Earls of Ayleſbury, who had their Title of Viſcount 
from this Town; notwithſtanding which, and that 
they were always Hereditary Stewards of the Manor 


of Ampthill, yet the late Earl of Ayleſbury fold his 
whole Eſtate here to his Grace the Duke of Bedford. 


Here is a School endowed for teaching 13 poor 
Children, and an Hoſpital with good Allowance for 
10 poor Men, founded by Dir, 9 late Principal 
of 1 


Near 


If 


| |! 


We. ren dS. i GE I MR. ES es. at Bo 


Bedf. GREAT BRITAIN. $1 
Near to this Town, towards the South eaſt, lies 
Mei, the Seat of the Noble Houſe of Grey, late 
Dukes of Kent; the Heireſs of which (the Marchioneſs 
de Grey) is married to Philip Lord Koy/ton, nn Son 


of the Earl of Hardwicke. 


At Mreſt allo is an Hermitage, on which are in- 
ſcribed the following beautiful and moral Lines, writt:n 


by a Gueſt of the noble Owner: 


Stranger, or Gueſt, whom e'er this hallow'd Grove | 
Shall chance receive, where ſweet Contentment dwells, 
Bring here no Heart that with Ambition ſwells, 

With Av'rice pines, or burns with lawleſs Love. 


Vice-tainted Souls will all in vain remove | 
To ſylvan Shades, and Hermits peaceful Cells; 
In vain will ſeek Retirement's lenient Spells, 


Or hope that Bliſs, which only good Men prove, 


If Heav'n born Truth, and ſacred Virtue's Lore, 
Which chear, adorn, and dignify the Mind, 
Are conſtant Inmates of thy honeft Breaſt ; 


If, unrepining at thy Neighbour's Store, 


"Thou count'ſt, as thine, the Good of all Mankind, 
Then, welcome, ſhare the friendly Groves of Ve. 


To the Northward is Houghton- -park and Houghton- 
congue/t, ſo called from the antient Family of the 
Conquejts. Here is a Free- ſchool of good Reputa- 


tion, in the Gift of Sidney Suſſex College in Cambridge. 


Near to this Place are two Common Fields, known 
by the Name of the Great and Little Danes Fields, * 


remarkable for ſeveral large Fits of about 15 Feet 


Diameter. 

Queen Catharine, after ſhe was roo choſe: 
this Town as one of her Retiring-places, F arther 
South- weſt is 

Moburn, noted for having Plenty of Fullers Bund 


near it; and likewiſe another Kind of Earth, which 


petrifies Wood into Stone. Tais Town, having 
| N D 2 been 


52 A TOUR thro Bedf, 
been almoſt demoliſhed by a terrible Fire, which hap- 
pened a few Years ago, is now rebuilt, and makes no 
mean Appearance, It belongs almoſt all of it to his 
Grace the Duke of Bedford, who finiſhed, in Fe, 
1737. a fine and commodious Market-place here, 
T his Place is famous for Jockey-Caps. 
The Duke's Houſe, called Waburn- Abbey, is ; juſt 
by the Town, a good old Houſe, and exceedingly 
pleaſant by its Situation, which is in a fine large Park, 
walled round. The Duke had once deſigned to have 
pulled down the old Houſe, and to rebuild it in a mag- 
nificent manner; but laid aſide that Reſolution, and 
only repaired it. There are many noble Rooms in it, 
and particularly a curious long Gallery, furniſhed 
with a great Variety of fine Pictures, chiefly of the 
Ruſſel Family: and at the other End of the Houſe is 
a noble Library, well ſtocked with Books, and fitted 
up in an elegant Tafte. The Wainſcoting of this 
noble Apartment is ſtrewed, as one may ſay, with 
- gilded Stars, which have a pretty Effect among the 
Pictures. A Room has been laid into this Gallery at 
one End, where a good Billiard-table is placed, 
| Before the Houſe is a very large Baſon of Water, 
farroanded with a fine broad Gravel-walk, which is 
* bounded with Poſts and Iron Chains. On the Water Þþ 
is a beautiful Yacht, of between 30 and 40 Tons 
Burden, elegantly carved and gilt, and completely 
rigged, and mounts 10 Guns, which are fired on Oc- 
cation of Entertainments, Sc. given on board her by 
his Grace. There is alſo an elegant Boat, with a 
fine Awning over it; a Wherry of the common Shape, 
and a Skiff, which are very neat, and make a beauti- 
ful Appearance on this noble Baſon of Water. 
The Park is fine and large, as I have ſaid; but its 
oreat Beauty conſiſts in the tall Woods, of which there 
are upwards of 500 Acres; and his Grace is now 
planting every Year vaſt Quantities of Trees; and 


the Hills of this Park, which were covered with Head 
| an 


Bedf. GREAT BRITAIN. 53 


and Broom, are many of them planted with Firr- trees, 


whereby the black, diſagreeable Proſpect, is altered to 
a perpetual Verdure; and * this means the Duke 


will furniſh a Supply of this Timber to his Succeſſor, 


ſufficient for half the County. 

On the North - ſide of the Park his Grace has made 
a Plantation of Ever-greens, near two Miles long, 
with a fine Riding thro* them; where, in the Depth 
of Winter, he can ride in Shelter, and through a per- 
petual Verdure. At the End of this Plantation is a 
noble Piece of Water, with an Ifland in the Middle, 
upon which is a Chineſe Building, where, in Summer, 
his Grace often dines with his Company; and, on 
one Side of this Water, the Hills, which riſe to a 
conſiderable Height, are planted with Ever-greens, 
theatrically, which has a noble Effect when viewed 


from the Building. 


There is alſo another very commodious thing in 
this Park, which is rarely to be found in others; that 


is, a great Number of gravel Roads through the 


Woods, whereby a Perſon may either walk or ride to 
every Part of the Park, in the wetteſt Time, without 
meeting the leaſt Dirt. ff 

Near Woburn is Battleſden, the Seat of Thomas 


Page, Eſq; abounding with many Beauties, and ſtill 


daily improving, by additional Works in a fine Taſte. 
Dunftaple, more commonly writ Dun/table, is 


ſeated on an Hill, in a chalky Ground, in the County 


of Bedford. It conſiſts of four principal Streets, an- 
ſwering to the four Quarters of the World. It is well 


inhabited, and furniſhed with many good Inns, for the 


Accommodation of Travelers. In che Centre ſtood 
one of Queen Eleanor's beautiful Croſſes, which was 


| demoliſhed by the Parliament Soldiers. The Situation 


of this Place being high, and no running Water _. 
near, they are forced to draw it up from deep Wells, 
by means of great Wheels; and they have four large 


Ponds to receive the Rain-water, which, as a Mark 


24 of 


54 dei 
the holding Quality of the Soil, are never dry, though 
they have no other Supply. They have ſometimes 
dug 24 Fathoms deep, in Search of Springs, to no 
Purpoſe. 

_ Kingſbury, once a Royal Seat, over- againſt the 
Church, is now a Farm-houſe. The Church is com- 
poſed of many Pieces tacked together, as it were, 
ſome of which are very old. It was Part of the Priory ; 
and Archbiſhop Cranmer was the laſt Prior, who here 
pronounced the Sentence of Divorce againſt Queen 
Catharine. © 

In the Reign of King Henry VII. Dr. Smith, Biſhop 
of Lincoln, ordered William 727 {/worth to be burnt here 
for denying the Pope's Supremacy, with this remark- 
able Circumſtance of Cruelty, that his own Daughter 
was compelled to ſet Fire to the Faggots. 

The Gentlemen of Bedfordſhire lately came to a 
laudable Reſolution of levelling the Chalk-hill near 
this Town, for the Benefit of "the Road, which, in 
a Freſt, or after a Shower of Rain, uled- to be ſo 
flippery, that neither Men or Horſe could keep their 
Feet, which often occaſioned great Damage to both; 
to prevent which for the future, they employed a Num- 
ber of Hands to lower it. 
Dunſbable ſtands on the Reman Watling -/lreet, juſt 
where it is croſſed by /c&n1ld-/treet. * Here have been 
Roman Coins frequently: found ; and on the Deſcent 
of Chiltern. hills, not far from the Town, is a large 
round Area of nine Acres, ſurrounded with a deep 
Ditch and Rampire, called Mardin-bour. It was 
| burnt by the Danes, and rebuilt by Henry I. to repreſs ' 
. -a vaſt Number of Robbers which infeſted the Country 

thereabouts; and it t takes its Name from Dunning, 
one of the Thieves; and, from Dunningceſtaple, it is 

now, by Contraction, called Dunſtable. _ 
Tuddington is the next Market- town, due North of 
Dun/iable, It is a ſmall Place, and has three annual 
Fairs. | 4 55 | Ty 
On 


Bedf. GREAT BriTaAin. 355 
On the Borders of Buckinghamſhire ſtands Leighton, 


famous for a great Cattle and Horſe- fair. 
_ Luton-How, about five Miles South eaſt of Dun- 


able, is the Seat of Sir Fohn Napier, Bart. 


South-eaſt of Dun/lable, on the Edge of Hertford- 


ſhire, lies Luton, a pretty little Town, ſeated ver 


pleaſantly among Hills, and noted for a good Market 
and Market- place. 

The Middle Part of the County i is well ſtored with 
Wood, which affords a great deal of Game. 8 

Through the whole South Part of this County, as 
far as the Borders of Buckinghamſhire and Hertford- 
ſvire, the People are taken up with the Manufacture 
of Bone-lace, in which they are wonderfully increaſed. 


and improved. 


Alſo the n of Straw-work, eſpecially 
Straw Hats, ſpreads itſelf from Herifordſbire into this 
County, and is greatly increaſed within a few Years 


paſt, 


Having thus viewed this County in its moſt con- 
ſiderable Towns, we came from Dun/table to St. 
Albans, where we ſaw the handſome Alms houſes 
built and endowed by the Marlborough F _ ; and 


& 0 returned to Lenden. 


Yuurs, &Cc. 


56 A TOUR r R. Trent. 
n 


Cantainiag a Deſcription of Part of NoTTinG- 


HAMSHIRE, of DERBYSHIRE, and Part of 


YORKSHIRE, 


IX, 


Circuits, which complete the Southern Part of 


II. Shan finiſhed the Account of my ſeveral 
: 


itain, I am now to begin this Circuit from the 


River Trent, and to confine my Obſervations to the 
Country which is called by ſome North by Trent. 
The River Trent is deemed by antient Writers, as 


the fourth capital River in England, the other three 


being the Thames, the Severn, and the Humber. 
Though the 7rent is not the largeſt, yet it may be 


"ſaid to un the longeſt Courſe, and riſes nearer to the 


Weſt fide of the Illand than any of the others; it is 
alſo the largeſt, and of the longeſt Courſe of any River 


in Englind, which does not empty its Waters imme 


„nate into the Sea; for the Trent runs into the 


Humber, and fo loſes its Name before it reaches the 


Ocean. 


It riſes in the Highlands of Staffordſhire, called the 


Moorlands, receiving from the Edge of Cheſbire, and 


towards Lancaſbire, a great many (ſome ſay 30, and 


that thence it had its Name, for Trente, in French, is 
30) little Rivulets into it, very near its Head; ſo that 
it ſoon becomes one large River, and comes down 


from the Hills with a violent Current into the flat N 


Country, where, being increaſed by ſeveral little 
Rivers, it carries a deeper Channel and a ſtiller Cur- 
rent; and, having given its Name to Trentbam, a 


ſmall Market town in the ſame . it goes on to 


Stone, 


83 a. 8 St Ln # 1% 


R. Trent, GREAT BRITAIN. 37; 
Stone, a conſiderable Town on the great Road to Vet 
Cheſter. 5 5 

One Branch of the Trent riſes within a Quarter of 

A2 Mile of the Dane, from a Moor adjoining to a ſittle 
Ridge of Hills, called Molecop- Hill, near Congleton, 
within 22 Miles of the Iriſb Sea. As the Dane runs 
f into the Yeaver, and both into that Arm of the Sea 
which the Mer ſee makes from Frodſham to Liverpool 

and Hyle-lake; and the Trent runs into the Humber, 
which opens into the great German Ocean; theſe 

| Rivers may be ſaid to cut the Iſland a-croſs in the 

| BB Middle. + b 
f BE lis true, the Northern Part is much larger than 
the Southern, now Scotland is united; otherwiſe the 
| Country South by Trent, including Wales, is by far 
the largeſt, as well as the richeſt and moſt populous, 
occaſioned chiefly by the Commerce of the City of 

London. As for the Towns of Briſtol, Exeter, Lynn, 
| Norwich, Yarmouth, &c. which are large and very 
- populous, and carry on a prodigious Trade, as well 

in Merchandize as Manufacture, we ſhall find them 

pretty near equaled by the Towns of Liverpool, Hull, 

Leeds, Newcaſtle, and Mancheſter, and the Cities of 

Edinburgh and Glaſgow, 3 

The Trent runs a Courſe of near 200 Miles, thro' 
the four Counties of Stafford, Derby, Nottingham, 
and Lixcoln. It receives, beſides leſſer Waters, the 
large Rivers of the Sowe from the Weſt-ſide of the 

County, and from the Town of Stafford; the Tame 

from Birmingham and Tamworth ; the Soar from Lei- 
| ce/ter; and the Dove and Derwent, two furioully rapid 

Streams, from the Peat of Derby; the Idle, a gentle 
_ navigable Stream, from Retford and Nottinghamſbire; 
with Part of the Witbam, called the £o/Je-dike, from 
Lincoln, alſo navigable; and, the greateſt of them 
all, the Don, from Doncaſter, Rotherham, and Shef- 
field, after a long and rapid 8 through the Moors 


1 
4 
4 
} 
5 


& A TOUR Hh Nottingh. 
of Stanecreſs, on the Edge of Derby, and the Weſt 
Riding of Yorkfbtre, : | 1 = 


The Trent is navigable by Ships of good Burden as 
high as Gatn/borough, which is near 40 Miles from 
the Humber, by the River. The Barges, without the 
Help of Locks or Stops, go as high as Nottingham; 
and farther by the Help of Art, to Burton upon this 
River in Stafford/hire, The Stream is full, the Cha- 
nel deep and ſafe, and the Tide flows up to Gainſbo- 
rough, and in Spring-tides to Newark. The Naviga- 
tion, by theſe Advantages, is a great Support ta the 
Trade of thoſe Counties which border upon it, eſpe- 
cially the Cheeſe Trade from Cheſhire and Warwick- 
hire, which have otherwiſe no Navigation but from 


the Parts about V Cheſter to London; whereas, by 


this River, it is brought by Water to Hull, and from 
thence to all the South and North Coaſts on the Eaſt- 
ſide of Britain. ; LEN 
The only Towns of Note ſtanding upon the North 
Shore of Trent, are Nottingham and Burton. 

The Counties North of Trent are Yor#/hire, which 
may, not improperly, be called three Counties, as it 
is divided into three Ridings, each equal to ſome 
large Counties; Lancaſhire, which is very large; 
Derbyſhire, and Nottinghamſhire, which are more 
Southerly. I ſhall begin with theſe two, and take 


them together, 


Beginning at the Mouth of Trent, the firſt Town 


of Note is Nottingham, the Capital of that Shire, and 


the moſt conſiderable of all that Part of England. The 
County is ſmall, but like the Pea#, full of Wonders. 
1. Tis remarkable for its Situation, being bounded. 
intirely by four Counties, and thoſe towards the four 
Cardinal Points, a Circumſtance peculiar to this 
County only. Fn 5 
2. For its Soil, which on the South Part is the richeſt 
and moſt fruitful, and in the North Part the moſt er 


ings not to be named. 5 ; 
It is ſituated on the ſteep Aſcent of an Hill or Rock, 


Nottingh. GREAT BRITAIN. 59 
and waſte, even almoſt to Barrenneſs, of any Part of 
England within many Miles of it. | 

3. For the fine Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen, 
eſpecially thoſe of the Dukes of Norfolt, Portland, 


x 


Kingſton, Newcaſtle, Lord Middleton, Lord Robert 


Sutton, and ſeveral others. 


Nottingham is one of the moſt pleaſant and beautiful 
Towns in England, from its Situation, were its Build- 


overlooking a fine Range of Meadows of great Extent; 


E alittle Rivulet running on the North-fide of them, 


almoſt cloſe to the Town; and the noble River Trent, 
parallel with both, on the South-ſide of the Meadows. 
Over the Trent is a ſtately Stone Bridge of 19 Arches, 
where the River is very large and deep, having re- 
ceived the Addition] of the . the Derwent, the 


|. ſrwaſh, and the Soar, three of them great Rivers of 


themſelves, which fall into it after its paſſing by Burton 
in Staffordſhire, mentioned before. | "vs 

The Rock whereon the Town ftands is of a ſandy 
Kind, and ſo ſoft, that it is hewed into Vaults and 
Cellars, and yet ſo firm as to ſupport the Roofs of 
theſe Cellars, two or three under one another. The 
dtairs which lead to theſe Vaults are cut out of the 
Rock, two or three Stories deep, to 80 Steps ſome- 


times; and theſe Cellars are well ſtocked with excel- 


tent Ale, of which the Inhabitants are very liberal 
among their Acquaintance, as ſome in our Company 
experienced, | 0 5 
The Hill or Rock was called of old the Dolorous 
Hill, or Golgatha, becauſe of a great Slaughter of the 
antient Britons there by King Humber, a piratical 


Northern Monarch; who, being afterwards drowned 


between Hull and Burton, gave Name, as tis ſaid, 
to that Arm of the Sea which is now called the Hum- 


ber, and receives the Trent, and almoſt all the great 


D 6 Rivess 


60 A TOUR A Nottingh. 
Rivers of Yor4/rre, into it; tho* others derive the 
Name from the dreadful Noiſe of its Waves. 
They tell us, that thefe Caves and Cellats ſerved 
the People for a Retreat from their Enemies ; and that 
from thence the Town firſt took its Name, which was 


 Snottengaham, ſignifying hollow Vaults in a Rock, 


Speluncarum Domus; and, as Mr, Camden obſerves, 
the Britiſp Word was Tui-ogo-bauc, which ſignifies the 
lame as the Latin, an Houſe of Dens, or ſecret Caves 
to hide in. 5 5 | 
Beſides the delightful Situation of Nottingham to- 


Wards the River, it is equally pleaſant to the Land- ſide, 


towards the Foreſt on the North of the Town ; where 
is a fine Plain for an Horſe- courſe, and where Races 
are run once a Year. 8 

At the Weſt End of the Town is a very ſteep Hill, 
and at the South of it a Cliff, which falls in a Precipice 
down to the River. On this Hill ſtood a Caſt le, of fo 
great Antiquity, that the Time of its firſt Erection 
could never be traced. The firſt Account we read of 


it is, that there was a Tower here which the Danes 


obſtinately defended againſt King Alfred, and his 
Brother Athelred., 25 | 85 
Upon: the ſame Situation William I. or, as others, 
with greater Probability, maintain, Villiam Peverell, 
his natural Son, built another Caſtle ; which was af⸗ 
terwards repaired, or rather rebuilt, by Edward IV. 
who added fine Apartments to it; which Richard III. 
His Brother, till farther inlarged ; whereby it became 
in time very conſiderable, and ſo ſtrong, that nothing 
could reduce it but Famine. Tis certain it has not 
undergone the ordinary Fate of other fortified Places, 
to be often taken and retaken; for it was never ſtormed. 
Once, indeed, it was taken by Surprize in the Barons 
Wars, by Robert Earl Ferrers, who alſo plundered 
the Town, or City, as it was then called. 
The People here tell us of one of the Davids, 
King of Scotland, being kept Priſoner in it; _ that 
x | | ger 


The Duke of Nerocgſtle (1760) made a Preſent of 


Nottingh, GREAT BRITAIN, 61 


Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, was hid in a Vault 
under ground, which they call Mortimer s- hole, whence 


he was taken and hanged for Treaſon. 
This Report has ſome Foundation in Hiſtory; but 


is ſo obſcured by vulgar Tradition, that it led Mr. 
Camden firſt into ſome Miſtakes in his Narration, and 
| afterwards into a Diſbelief of it. Mortimer, with the 


=_ the Biſhop of Lincoln, and others, being poſ- 
ſelſed of the Caſtle, could have no Reaſon to hide him- 


ſelf under-ground : but it was by this private Paſſage, 


which goes by Steps through the Rock up to the Keep, 
that Sir William Montacute, with others, 5 Edw. III. 


found Means, in the dead of the Night, to ſeize him; 


and, ſending him up to the Tower of London, he was 


there beheaded. * | 


The Caſtle was granted by King James I. to Francis 


Farl of Rutland; and King Charles I. made it remark- 
able by erecting there his Royal Standard, Anno 1642. 
dut he ſoon quitted it, and the Parliament kept Poſſeſ- 


ſion of it till the End of the War, when it was or- 


dered to be demoliſhed. Some Parts of it, however, 


were ſtanding at the Reſtoration, when George Villiers, 
Duke of Buckingham, whoſe Mother was the ſole 
Heireſs of the foreſaid Earl of Rutland, ſold it to Wil. 


| liam Cavendiſh, Marquis of Newcaſile. He, in 1674. 
cleared the Foundations of the old Tower, a ſmall 
Part excepted, and founded the noble Structure which 


is now ſtanding, _ | 

The Caſtle, built on an high perpendicular Rock, 
as I have hinted, ſeems to have been modelled after 
ſome of the Draughts of Inigo Jones. There are 
many good Pictures in it; and it commands a noble 
Proſpect. The South ſide of the Rock is altogether 


inacceſſible, and vaſt ſubterraneous Grottoes are cut 


underneath; and a winding Stair-caſe, quite to the 
Bottom, ends in Mortimer's- hole, above-mentioned. 


this 


62 4 TOUR Hr VNottingh. 
this fine Caſtle to the Earl of Lincoln, his Grace's 
Nephew. 
St. Mary's Church is a fine, lightſome Gothic Build- 
ing, with a deep Peal of ſix Bells; but the great 
Tower makes a mean Appearance. The Butchers 
Shambles is an old Edifice, built for a Granary. 

They ſhewed us the Gardens of Count Tallard, 
who, in his Confinement here, after having been 

taken Priſoner by the renowned Duke of Marlborough, 
at the glorious Battle of Blenheim, amuſed himſelf 
with making a ſmall, but beautiful Parterre, after the 
French Taſte, which happens not to be the reigning 
one with us at preſent. 

An handſome 'Town-houſe, upon Piazzas, has been 
erected within theſe few Years, for the tranſacting the 
Bufineſs of the Corporation, Not many Years ago, 
the Hall where the Aſſizes were held gave ſuch a 
Crack, that the People were exceedingly frighted, and 
all ran out of it, leaving Mr. Juſtice Pow:s upon the 
Bench, calling out after them, Ii there nobody will 
take Care of the Fudge? for he was ſo aged and infirm, 
that he could hardly walk. But, finding himſelf neg- 
lected, he made ſhift to deſcend from the Bench, 
and hobble out at the Door, where he denounced 
Vengeance againſt the Town, which, with a very 
ſeaſonable Piece of Juſtice, he fined, for nd to 
keep the Hall in Repair. 

The Town has been at a great 88 in making 
the Trent navigable here for Veſſels or Barges of Bur- 
den, by which all their heavy and bulky Goods are 
brought from the Humber, and even from Hull; ſuch 
as Iron, Block- tin, Salt, Grocery, Dyers Wares, | 
Wine, Oil, Tar, Hemp, Flax, &c. and the ſame 
Veſſels bring down Lead, Coal, Wood, and Corn; 
as alſo Cheeſe in great Quantities from War wickſhire 
and Staffora/hire, as I have already mentioned, Hops 
are now 2 in this Neighbourhood. fs 


"8 


21 ne Er 


Nottingh. GREAT BRITAIN. - 63 

The chief Manufacture carried on here is Frame- 
work-knitting of Stockens, the ſame as at Leiceſter, 
and ſome Glaſs, and Earthen- ware. The latter is 
much increaſed by the Conſumption of Tea-pots, 
Cups, &c. ſince the Increaſe of Tea-drinking, as the 
Glas houſes, I think, are of late rather decreaſed. A 
Proof, one would think; that the Luxury of the Males - 
is leſs predominant than that of the Females ; or rather, 


as ſome would fay, that the Men are brought over by 

the Ladies to join with them in the Love of the Tea- 
table; and indeed the latter ſeems pretty much the 
Caſe; whether it be owing to Gallantry and Com- 


plaiſance, or to Effeminacy and Indolence, let thoſe 
concerned in the Obſervation anſwer. 
As they brew very good Liquor here, ſo they make 


the beſt Malt (and more of it) of any Town in this 


Part of England, and ſend it by Land- carriage to Der- 
by, thro' all the Peat, as far as MHanchęſter, and to other 


Towns in Lancaſhire, Cheſhire, and even into Yorkſhire 


itſelf; for which Purpoſe all the low Lands of this 


County, and eſpecially on the Banks of the Trent, are 


made to yield prodigious Crops of Barley. 

'The Conner of Nottingham is in a Mayor, 
Recorder, ſix Aldermen, two Coroners, two Sheriffs, 
two Chamberlains, and 24 Common-counci), whereof 
ſix are called Juniors. Here they hold a Court of 
Pleas, They have two Sergeants at Mace, and an- 
other Officer, which they call a Bill-bearer, and two 
more called Pinders, one for the Fields, and the other 


for the Meadows. The firſt is alſo the Town Wood- 


ward, and attends the Foreſt-Courts ; for this 'Town 
is within the Juriſdiction of the F oreſt ; and it returns 
two Members to Parliament. 

I might enter into a long Bes of all the 
modern Buildings lately erected at Nottingham, but 


that would be too great a Taſk; only I muſt take 


notice of the Houſe of Mr. Planters, which is juſtly 


to ve admired for its elegant Front; 1 obſerve in 


3 3 


* ee s 


W 


n — 


2 OE * 
LY — ů ON 
* n 
GU hPa te —— — Pi. 
” 


64 A TOUR thro Notting. 


general, that as the Caſtle has oftener been the Reſi- 
dence of Kings and Queens than any other Place fo 


far diſtant from London, ſo the Town has more Gentle- 
mens Houſes than any other of its Bigneſs in Britain, 
One may eaſily gueſs Nottingham to have been an 


antient Town of the Britons. As ſoon as they had 
proper Tools, they fell to Work upon the Rocks, 
which every-where offer themſelves ſo commodiouſly 
to make Houſes in. The Church is like thoſe in the 
Rocks of Bethlehem, in the Holy Land. The Altar is 


natural Rock, and there have been Paintings on the 
Wall, a Steeple (where, perhaps, was a Bell) and 
regular Pillars. The River here winding about makes 
a Fortification to it; for it comes to both Ends of the 
Cliff, leaving a Plain before the Middle. The Way 


to it was by Gates cut out of the Rock, and with an 
oblique Entrance for more Safety, 


| . Between this and the Caſtle is an Hermitage of the 
like Workmanſhip. „ | 
Clifton, in this Neighbourhood, is a good Seat, 


with pretty Gardens, and a noble Profpe& ; and in 


the Church are many old Braſſes of the Clifton Fa- 


mily. 


three Terraces. The Leveling of the Ground on 


each of theſe, fo as to make them into ſo many flat 


Parterres, was attended with a great Expence, and is 
a Proof that the Deſigner had very little Tafte; for, 
had the natural Slope of the Hill been preſerved, the 
whole Surface might have been viewed either from 


the Top or Bottom, which is now cut off by the 

"Terraces, one of which can only be ſeen at any one 
Point of View. N LS Gt - 

On the top of the Hill has been lately built an hand- 


ſome Room, which is oppoſite to the Caſtle at Vor- 
t:ngham, and commands a fine View of that and the 


adjoining Meadows, with the Trent ſerpentizing thro' 
5 5 them, 


As this Houſe is ſituated on the Side of a Hill, ſo 
the Gardens, which were above the Houſe, riſe in 


AAA 


9 


1 ee r YT WW 


„5 


2 

7 

ö 
1 


— == ww . 8 . 


| Nottingh. GREAT BRITAIN. 65 
them, which renders the Proſpe& very delightful. The 


Plantations about this Seat, which, were made by the 


late Sir Gervas Clifton, deſerve to be mentioned, as 


an Example for other Gentlemen; ſince, by a very 
inconſiderable Expence, they may greatly beautify and 
increaſe the Value of their Eſtates. 


% 


Three Miles from Nottingham is Wollaton- hall, the 
Seat of Lord Middleton, and the nobleſt Building in 


this County. 1 N | | 
The Park, incloſed within a Brick Wall, is much 


| finer than the great Park adjoining to the Caſtile of 
Nettingham, being much better planted with Timber; 
whereas that at Nottingham was all cut down, and 

ſequeſtred in the late Wars. a | 


There is a pretty Summer-houfſe, paneled and cieled 
with Looking-glaſs, which produces a pleaſant Effect. 
Underneath is a Water-houſe, with groteſque Work 
of Shells, Sc. The Hall, at the firſt Entrance into 


the Houſe, is ſo high, that a Man on Horſeback might 


exerciſe a Pike in it. | 
The late Sir Thomas Parkyns, of Bunny Park in 


| this County, fo noted for his Athletic Exerciſes, par- 


ticularly for the Art of Wreſtling, of which he wrote 


| a Treatiſe, lies buried in Bunny Chancel, under a 
Marble Monument, on which is repreſented the ſturdy 
| Baronet in a wreſtling Poſture, old Time with his 


Sithe mowing him down, as if nothing elſe could 


| ſubdue him. He had cauſed a Stone Coffin to be de- 
| polited for himſelf in the Family- Vault for Years be- 
| | fore he died, | 


Theſe Verſes are inſcribed on his Monument: 
em modo ſtraviſti longo in certamine, Tempus, 
Hic recubat Britonum clarus in orbe pugil, _ 


5 Jam primum flratos præter te vicerat omnes: 


De te etiam victor, quando reſurget, erit. 


» N Po Wbich 


F 
} 
i} 

4 
i 
j 

9 

1 

1 

* 

4 


by * the firſt Archbiſhop of Yor#, about the 


66 | A TOUR thro” oningh 


Which may be thus tranſlated : 


Here lies, O Time, the Vidtim of thy Hand, 

The nobleſt Boxer on the Britiſh Strand : 
His nervous Arm each bold Oppoſer quell'd, 

In Feats of Strength by none but he excell'd: 

Till, ſpringing up, at the laft Trumpet's Call, 

He conquers thee, who wilt have conguer d al. 


The Facelt.of S is an Addition ts Nettins- 
ham for the Pleaſure it affords of Hunting. There 
are allo ſome fine Parks and noble Houſes in it, as 
Ielbeck, the late Lady Oxford's, now the Duke of 


; Portland's; and Thoreſby, the noble Seat of the Pierre. 


ponts, Dukes of Kingston, which lies at the fartheſt 


age of the Foreſt. 


The Park at Helbeck is nobly wooded ; and there 
are in it ſome of the largeſt and oldeſt Trees that are 
to be found in the County. 

But the Foreſt of SHirꝛbood is now given up, in 2 
manner, to Waſte : even the Woods, which formerly 
made it famous for Thieves, are deſtroyed; fo that 
Rebin Hood would now hardly find Shelter there for a 
Week ; nor is there any Store of Deer, worth men- 


| tioning, now left. 


From this Foreſt I went purpoſely out of my in- 


| tended Way, to take a View of the Conan Church 


of Southwell, 

Southwell is a Market-town in Nettinghamſhire; 
its Church is both Parochial and Collegiate; which, 
I think, is the Caſe of no other in Exgland, except 
Ripon in Yorkſhire, To it belong 16 Prebendaries or 
Canons, fix Vicars Choral, an Organiſt, fix ſinging 
Men, fix Choriſters, beſides ſix Boys, who attend as 
Probationers, a Regiſter to the Chapter, a Treaſurer, 
an Auditor, a Virger, &c, 

This Church is generall ſuppoſed to be founded 


Year 


.. O97” os; oo Co a a? a 


| Nottingh. GREAT BRITAIN, —. 


Year 630. It was ſurrendered to the King, 32d 
Henry VIII. and was actually in the King's Poſſeſſion, 
until by Act of Parliament, 35th Henry VIII. it was 
re- founded, and reſtored to its antient Privilege, and 
incorporated by the Name of The Chapter of the Col- 


| legiate Church of the Bleſſed Mary, the Virgin of 
| Southwell, 1 


Queen Elizabeth confirmed its Privileges; as did 


| afterwards, on a Tryal at Law, King James I. 


The Chapter have a peculiar Juriſdiction, and there 
are 28 Pariſhes ſubject to it, to moſt of which they 
have the Right of Preſentation ; beſides ſome others 
in Lincolnſbire and Yorkſhire, This Juriſdiction is ex- 


erciſed by a Commiſſary, or Vicar. General, choſen 


by the Chapter out of their Body, who holds Viſita- 
tions, &c. twice a Year, And, beſides theſe, there 
are two Synods yearly, at which all the County of 


Nottingham pay their Attendance ; and a certain 


Number of the Prebendaries, and others of the con- 
ſiderable Clergy, are appointed Commiſſioners by a 
Commiſſion granted by the Archbiſhop of York, to 


| preſide at the Synods. 


The Civil Government of the Juriſdiction of South- 
well is diſtin from the County at large. It is called 
the Sote of Southwell cum Scrooby, which is another 
Town in this County. There are about 20 Towns 
ſubject to this Juriſdiction. | 

The Cu/tos Rotulorum, and the Juſtices of the Peace, 


| are nominated by the Archbiſhop of York, and conſti- 


tuted by a Commiſlion under the Great Seal of Eng- 
land, who hold their Seſſion both at Seuthwel! and 
Scrooby, and perform all other Juſticiary Acts diſtinet 
from the County. . | | 

The Church is a ftrong plain Gathic Building; it 


bas no painted Figures in the Glaſs Work, nor Images, 


nor ſo much as a Nich capable of placing an Image 


ia. And from hence it has been conjectured, that it 


was 


68 4 TOUR e Nottingh, 


was probably built before Image · wol ſhip was praQtiſed 


among Chriſtians. 
On Monday the 5th of November 1711. about ten 
o'Clock at Night, the top of the Ball on one of the 
South Spires of this Church was fired by Lightning; 
Which, backed by a furious Wind, that drove it almoſt 
directly on the Body of the Church, in a few Hours 
| burnt down the Spire and Roof, melted the Bells, and 
ſpared nothing which was combuſtible, except the 
other Spire, till it came to the Choir, where, after it 
had conſumed the Organs, it was by ſingular Provi- 
dence ſtopt and extinguiſhed. The Damage was com- 
puted at near 40001, be ER | 
The Church is built in Form of a Croſs ; a great 
Tower in the Middle, in which are eight Bells, and 
two Spires at the Weſt End. There is an handſome 
Chapter-houſe on the North Side of the Choir. _ 
The Length of the Church from Eaſt to Weſt is 
306 Feet, the Length of the croſs-Aile from North to 
g is 121 Feet; the Breadth of the Church is 59 

cet. 855 55 


There are no very remarkable Monuments in this | 


Church, except one of Archbiſhop Sands, which is 
within the Communion Rails, and is a fair Tomb of 
Alabaſter, with his Effigies lying on it at full Length, 

with a fine Inſcription upon it in Latin, greatly to bis 
Honour. OE a | 

Here was formerly a Palace belonging to the Arch- 
biſhop of Yor4, which ſtood on the South Side of the 
Church, the Ruins of which ſtill remain; by which 
it appears to have been a large and ſtately Building. 
It was demoliſhed in the Time of the Civil Wars. 
The Church eſcaped the Fury of thoſe Times, by the 
good Offices of one Edward Cludd, Eſq; one of the 
Parliament. Side, who lived at Norwood, in the Pariſh 
of Southwell, in an Houſe belonging to the Archbi- 
ſhop. Here was no leſs than three Parks belonging 


to the Archbiſhop, which, though diſparked, ſtill re- 
| tain 


* ww CÞ 4s 


Ws * tw OY CD 


— 3% 


Nottingh. GREAT BRITAIN, 69 
tain the Name; one of which is Norwood Park, in 
which is a good Houſe, which has been very m—_ 
inlarged and beautified by Mr. Burton, a Deſcendent 
of the above Edward Cludd, Eſq; who lives in it ſome 


Part of the Year. 


There is a Freeſchool aeining to the Church, un- 
der the Care of the Chapter, where the Choriſters are 
taught gratis, and other Boys belonging to the Town. 
The Maſter is choſen by the Chapter, and is to be 


.approved by the Archbiſhop of York. 


There are alſo two Fellowſhips and two Scholar- 


: ſhips in St. John s College in Cambridge, founded by 


Dr. Keton, Canon of Saliſbury, in the 22d Year of 
King Henry VIII. to be choſen by the Maſter and 


Fellows of the ſaid College out of ſuch as have been 


Choriſters of the Church of Southwell. 
From Southwell I turned to the Left to Neu/ted, to 


| viſit the Seat of the very antient Family of the By- 


rons, It was a ſmall Priory founded by King Henry 
II. and given by King Henry VIII, to Sir Fohn By 
ren; one of which Name having ſignalized himſelf 
very remarkably in favour of King Charles I. was cre- 


ated a Baron; which Honour {till continues in the 


Family. Near this Place is the Head of the litile Ri- 


ver Lynn. 


Wie came next to Ainſley, which Town gave Name 


| to a Family that were poſſeſſed of it from the Nor- 
man Invaſion to the Time of King _ VI. from 


whence are deſcended the Earls of Angle/ey - but, for 


want of Heirs Male, it came then by Marriage into 
the Family of the Chaworths, who have a good Seat 


here, well wooded, and wRemws with beautiful Fiſh- 
ons, | 
: We then turaed again on the Right to Mansfield, 
which lies in the Foreſt, a large well-built Market- 
town, noted now for its Trade in Malt, and for hav- 
ing been formerly the Place to which the Kings of 
England uſed to retire for the Pleaſure of Hunting 

ne 


— 


r 


tze Foreſt of Shirwoed; inſomuch that a Manor was pe 


held in this County by Henry Fauconberg for ſhoeing WW T 
the King's Horſe, whenever he came to Mani of 
_ 
0 From hence we kept ſtill to the right North-eaſt, to 
and came to Tuxford in the Clays, an ordinary, dirty th 
Market town on the great Road to T, and of no of 
other Note, than for being ſituated in a my; clayey ne 
Country. Lt 
We kept the Road North to EAI. -Retford, ſo called he 


| as it lies on the Eaſt Side of the River Idle. It is an in 


antient Bailiwick town, and noted for an Exemption w. 
of all Tolls and foreign Services, and ſends two Mem- Wl ic 
bers to Parliament. It holds Pleas without Limita- 6 
tion of Sums, and enjoys many other valuable Privi- Fi 
leges and Immunities. It has a Steward, who is ge- eit 
nerally a Perſon of Quality. | BY 
Weft- Retford is fo called from its Situation in regard | or 
to the other, though they ſeem to be but one Town, Pa 
the Ile only dividing them. This is famous for a fine 
-Hoſpital, founded by Dr. Dorrel in 1666. and fince 1 
incorporated. It has a Maſter, 10 Brethren, a Stew- WW fec 
ard, and a Nurſe; and they have a Garden and Or- WW 


chars divided into 10 Shares. ha 


Chaworth is a Village Juſt by, noted for a fine no 


Rectory of 200 l. a Year. 


Higher up ſtands Blith, a Market-town, dos are il Cl: 
a very large good Church, and ſome old Ruins of a De. 
Caſtle and Priory. | Fiat 

We then fell down Southward, and viſited the Il ex 
noble Seats of the Duke of Kingſton at Thoreſby (in- the 
tirely burnt down a few Years ago, and not yet re- pre 
built); of the Duke of Portland at Melbech, mention- IM Ki 
ed above; and of the late Marquis of Halifax, but 
now of Sir George Savil, at Rufford, or Rugford Ab- 5 
bey, all very magnificent Structures, tho” -antient ; Pa 
eſpecially that at Melbech, which is beautified with IM to 


large . fine Aparments, and good Gardens; 
Parti- 


12 
A ; 


= ol fo. IC © ws 


-__ po we 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN. 71 


particularly the Park, which is well ſtocked with large 
Timber of the fineſt Kind, and with great Numbers 
of Deer. | . „„ 
Hard by Welbeckh, near the Head of the River Ry- 
ton, in Workſop Manor, the ſometime ſtately Seat of 
the noble Family of Talbot, deſcended by a long Line 
of Anceſtors from another Family illuſtrious, though 


not ennobled, of Lovetofts; one of whom, being 


Lord of this Place, under the Normans, built a Priory 


here; and John, the Second Earl of Shrewſbury, be- 


ing ſlain at the Battle of Northampton, 38 Henry VI. 
was buried in it; which, afterwards, at the Diſſolu- 
tion of the Monafteries, was ſettled on Francis, his 
Great-Grandſon. This Houſe (though in its antient 


Figure) is not outdone by any of the beſt and great- 


eſt in the County. It now belongs to the Duke of 
N:r/alk, who has, for ſome Years, been laying out 
great Sums of Money in planting and beautifying the 


Park. 


Here is a good Market town alſo, of the Name of 
[/5rk/op, where are the Ruins of a Monaſtery to be 


ſeen in the Meadows on the Eaſt Side of it, and the 
MWeſt End of the Church, which is ſtill ſtanding, and 


has two beautiful and fair Towers. This Place is 


noted for Liquorice and Malt. 


Near this Place is a Seat belonging to Sir Robert 
Ciifton, called Charlton; it was built for an Hunting- 
Seat; but as the late Poſſeſſor, Sir Gervas Clifton, 


bound the Soil about it very proper for Plantations, he 
extended them to a conſiderable Diſtance, and filled 


them with a great Variety of Trees, which are in as 
proſperous Condition as any of the ſame Age in the 
Kingdom. 9 | | 


From hence leaving Nottinghamſhire, the Weſt 
Part of Which abounds with Lead and Coal, we came 


to Pa/ſever in Derbyſhire, which ſtands on a riſing 


Ground, and has a Caſtle, and is the Property of the 
; . 3 5 | Puke 


— . —— 
1 0 — ahi ow ——— ů 74A 2 A — 
n Ke 0 F * — oo — 1 : 
os co tre. Shs Sag 1 N 1 . 
* * — 1 — wes, * Tg d TONES = 9 = e 8 Ie; PB CL Ke N . TEE \ 
K PERK ont — W x : a : . a r ee 2 . 9 * Ve RY — — K 5 th 1 1 
. 3 LA ACHE as. * . — - br nts Pit TT e — 1 3 ue 2 a er IR EE EoebL- — = = 1 
— ————— ̃ . * —— OY AI Ont 4 Ca On ons AAA EEE ry —M „„ A ²˙ !( ERR 92 Fabatqaalſaoas — | — 
- a bY FP ar CDRS te oi ale eee * fr OG — a gp pegs — a — RING x — .. ͤ—]K11é01 e — * = 
b; 9 you : —. ” — e n K — — — a672 4s pe — eng OF STEEN apr . : J Ng Se = 
8 5 reſt” WM 4 — © = nk AIDE $94 eo 2 re = Pc ar 1 * : IRON" 
— er- ee WO rr ae * mw . a 8 5 
: * 5 2 1 6s 2 " S — 0.0 s — - — . « "i 
y al — . 9 ay — 5 Ame " 8 — — — 
, > 8 * . 
9 * « 


„ aro Derb, 

Duke of Netocaſtle. It is noted for making fine To. 

bacco-pipes. Its Market is on Friday, : 8 
From hence we intended to paſs directly to Derby; 


8 but, being informed that the Moors, by reaſon of the 


Rocks and Bogs which render the Roads difficult and 
hazardous, were too dangerous to travel over, we 
left them on the Weſt of us; and paſſing thro' Mans. 


field in Nottinghamſhire, and Alfreton, a ſmall Mar- 


ket-town within the Skirts of Derbyſhire, we arrived 


at Derby, the County-town. But tho' we avoided the 


Moors, yet we had ſome Reaſon to complain of the 
Roads, which we took from the North of Notting. 
hamfhire, where we were informed, that if we. had 


come directly from Nottingham to this Town, and 
kept the Midway between the Trent on the Left and 


the Mountains on the Right, we ſhould have found 
the 12 Miles which lie between them, as agreeable, 


with reſpect to the Situation of the Country, the Soil, 
and the well planting of it, as any of the ſame Length 
in England. | 


The Town of Derby is ſituate on the Weſt Bank 
of the Derwent, over which it has a fine Stone 


Bridge, well-built, but antient, and a Chapel upon 
the Bridge, now converted into a Dwelling-houſe. 


The River has lately been made navigable into the 
Trent. It is a fine, beautiful, and pleaſant Town, 


and has more Families of Gentlemen in it, than is 
uſual in Towns ſo remote from London; perhaps the 


more, becauſe the Peai, which takes up the larger 
Part of the County, is ſo inhoſpitable, rugged, and 


wild a Place, that the Gentry chooſe to reſide at 
Derby, rather than upon their Eſtates, as they do 


* 


_ elſewhere. | ö 


Here is a Curioſity of a very extraordinary Nature, 


and the only.one of the Kind in England: I mean 


thoſe Mills on the Derwent, which work the three 
capital Italian Engines for making Organzine ot 
Thron Silk, which, before theſe Mills were ered 
| 5 6 | ed, 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN. - 73 
ed, was purchaſed by the Engliſß Merchants with 


| ready Money in Italy; by which Invention one Hand 


will twiſt as much Silk, as before could be done by 
fifty, and that in a much truer and better Manner. 
This Engine contains 26,586 Wheels, and 97,746 


Movements, which work 73,726 Yards of Silk- 
| thread, every time the Water-wheel goes round, 


which is three times in one Minute, and 318,504,960 
Yards in one Day and Night. One Water-wheel 


gives Motion to all the reſt of the Wheels and Move- 


ments, of which any one may be ftopt ſeparately, _ 
One Fire- engine, likewiſe, conveys warm Air to every 


individual Part of the Machine, and the whole Work 


is governed by one Regulator. The Houſe which 
contains this Engine is of a vaſt Bulk, and five or ſix 
Stories high. | „„ 
A Patent paſſed 5 George I. to ſecure to Sir 700. 
mas Lombe the ſole rout of this Invention for 14 


Fears; but the requiſite Buildings and Engines, and 
the inſtructing of proper Perſons to work them, took 
| up ſo mach Time, and when all was completed, the 


King of Sardima prohibiting the Importation of the 
Raw Silk made by the ſaid Engines into his Do vi- 
nions, all which rendered the Undertaking expenſive 

and difficult, and the Term of 14 Years being near 


* 


elapſed, without any fig Benefit accruing from the 


uſeful Invention, Sir Tha, applied for a Conſidera- 
tion from the Public; and the Parliament according- 
ly, to preſerve ſo uſeful an Undertaking tor the Bene- 
of the Kingdom in general, allotted 14,0097. to be 
pa d to Sir Thamas, on Cond tion that he ſhould allow 
a perfect Model to be taken of his new-invented En- 


gines, in order to ſecure and perpetuate the Art of 


making the ſame. 1 he Preamble to this Act ſets 
forth, That Sir Thomas Lombe did, with the utmoſt- 
Difficulty and Hazard, and at a very great Expence, 
diſcover the Art of making and working the three ca- 
pital Engines made uſe of by the Italians to make their 

Vol. Uh W Organzine 


£ 
| 


2 

1 

1 

a i 
* a 
| 
{ 


e 


— — —- 


. 
r 


— pas en fo = W's + why - IR . — 

—̃ TION * 2 EE; 

l 3 EPo Ales tae dT Meh — FHF — 
E OR SE NOIR "a "yu" * ah ts = * W 
(ISIS WO dr pee FRE — IT als — 4 


n 
— 


+ IG nn, 
x 2 


. — — — 
r 


2 — 
Fe * CHAP e 
— — — 


74 „ OUR thro Derb. 


Organzine Silk, and did introduce thoſe Arts and In · 


ventions into this Kingdom. 
Derby, as I have ſaid, is a Town of Gentry, ra. 


ther than Trade; yet it is. populous, well- built, has 


five Pariſhes, a large Market place, a beautiful Town- 
houſe of Free-ſtone, and very handſome Streets, But 


the Entrance into it every Way is ſo choaked up with 


Dirt and Mire, that it is no ſmall Matter of Reprod 


to the Inhabitants. 


In the Church of Al! Saints, the Body of which has 
been lately rebuilt in an elegant Taſte, is the Burial- 
place of the noble Cavendiſb Family; and an Hoſpital 
cloſe by the Church, built by gne of that Family for 


eight poor Men, and four Women. 


"This Church is remarkable for the Architecture of 


is beautiful Gothic Tower, 178 Feet high; and for 


the Elegance of its Ornaments, as well as Height, and 
is not to be equalled 1 in this, or in any of the adjacent 


Counties. 


According to an Inſcription in this Church, the 
Steeple was erected about Queen Mary's Reign, atthe 


| Charge of the Maidens and Bachelors of the Town; 
on which Account, whenever a Maiden, a Native of 
the Town, was married, the Bells uſed to be rung 


by Bachelors. How long the Cuſtom laſted, I have 
not read; but I do not find it is now continued, This 
Union of the Maidens and Bachelors to build a Stee- 
ple, reminds me of a Bell caſt by a like Contribution 
upon which was this Device: 


Materiem Juvenes, Formam tribuere Puellæ. 


This curious IVark to Men its Grandeur owes : 
But beauteous Moman did its Form compoſe. 


The Government of this Town is in a Mayor, 


7 High Steward, 9 Aldermen, a Recorder, 14 Brothers, 
14 Capital Burgeſles „and a Town clerk. What Trade 


thete 


FE 


Or, 


IS, 


ade 


eke 


Ale. 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN, 77 
there is in the Town is chiefly in good Malt and good 


This was a Royal Borough in the Time of Edward 
the Confeſſor. It has received divers great Privileges ; 


' viz. to keep a Court of Record on Tueſday every Fort- 


night, a Quarterly Seſſion, and two Courts Leet an- 
nually. It takes Toll; but pays none throughout 
England, on remitting one Half to the Duchy of Lan- 


r a by Charter from Henry T. and H. It en two 


Members-to Parliament, 
Derby was the Extent of the Rebels Progreſi in the 


| Year 1745. and it muſt be owned, was a very alarm 


ing one. But as an Account of all that relates to that 
Rebellion will be given in a Letter by itſelf, at the 
End of Vol. IV. I ſhall take little or no notice of it, 
either here or elſewhere in #ng/and. ; 

A Mile-below Derby, upon the Derwent, ſtood the 
old Roman Derventio, now Little Chefter.. Remains 
of the old Walls, Vaults, Wells, Roman Coins, Aque- 
ducts, human Bones, Braſs Rings, and other Marks 
of Antiquity, have been from time to time diſcovered 
and dug up. Ihe River being. too rapid for a Ford, 
a Bridge was antiently there, the Foundation of which 


with a Staff they can ſtill feel. 


A little farther” North is Horreſton Caſtle, whoſe 
Ruins on an hoary Rock are ſcarce diſcernible, 

It is obſervable, that as the Trent bounds the 
County of Derby South, ſo the Dove and the Fr waſh 
make the Bounds Eaſt and Weſt, and the De: ꝛbent 
runs through the Centre, all of them beginning and 
ending their Courſe in the ſame County; for they riſe 
in the Peak, and end in the Trent, The Derwent is 
remarkable for its Brownneſs, the Dove for its blue 
Tranſparency, from whence it probably took its 


Name. It is endued with ſuch a peculiar F ecundity, 


ſuppoſed to ariſe-from a Bed of Lime, through which 


it paſſes, that it has often been compared to the River 


* us, 


- E 2 | * 


2. * * * 2 8 * * r 
IT BITS > . EE rent 4 8 " 8: < 2 . — — — = 
r — 7 a vs fone * r rn IP WE - n « —_— \ 2 
r ** * — . ons, at. ee > $5.4) 2 n . l f 7 
e . ͤ ——— — — 45. eb Shs wy Eo . III Dre 2 - wk 0 OR OR n 2 8 * = > Im 
- PFF ˙ de en ein — . => od eye, RO OE 3 D 
: a * Os CPP REI — — ——— — hk HEAR 7-4 » f — 8 r 
— — * rr eee : * 
- r 


76 | FO UR tro | Staff 


It is not leſs ſwift in its Operations than effectual; 


for, by haſty Rains which fall from the Hill, it ſome- 


times ſt:ays over the Meadows, and, having impreg. 


nated them, in 12 Hours time retices into its Bed 
again, | | | | 

t was in one of theſe temporary Inundations I ſaw 
it, when having gone from Derby to Utoxeter, the 
Etocetum of the Antients, I paſſed it with Difficulty 


do ſee that Town, ſituated on its Weſtern Bank; and 
 Afhdbourn, nine Miles farther up, ſituated on the con- 


trary Bank. 3 . 
The Middle of the Stream at Utoxeter divides the 


Counties of Derby and Stafford: and here we paſs the 
River by an handſome Stone Bridge, with two Mere. 


Stones upon it. The Town is commoply called Ut- 


 cefter :-it is very large, and built upon a delicious 
8 of an eaſy Aſcent ; very fruitful, and 


overlooking a Track of fine rich Meadow- grounds: 


but the Houſes are very ordinarily built: the Streets, 


however, are exceeding broad, well paved, and neatly 


kept. The Market place is large and commodious, 


and of a triangular Form, with a noble Croſs in the 
Centre, whoſe Baſe conſiſts of 24 Steps. Three 
Streets iſſue from the Angles of this open Area, and 


the Market extends a contiderable Way into each ef 


them; wherein all Sorts of Kine, beſides Butter, 
Cheeſe, Corn, and other Proviſions, are expoſed to 
Sale every /Yedneſday. The Town is ſurrounded witi 
Iron Forges ; and ſeveral conſiderable Ironmongers 
live in it, carrying on a great Trade in that Manu- 
facture. SEM TY 5 
Beyond Derby, along the Ictning Way, is Burian 
upon Trent, where is a Bridge of 34 Arches, contain 
ing 515 Yards, or 1545 Feet ; all built with Free- 
ſtrone, cut and ſquared. Here was an old Abbey, out 


of whoſe Ruins they have, within theſe few Yeats, 
| built a new Church. 


In 


S lt. _ 


— — 


Derb. GRE Ar B RI TAIN. 77 ; 


nificent and grand Manner. From hence we kept 


Diſtance its ſhocking Roar; and ſo came to Quarn, 


mounting the Hills 2 for four or five. Miles, 


abounding with all neceſſary Proviſions: and, as for 


town; tho? there is no great Trade carried on in it, 


— 


In our Way to the High Peak we paſſed a Seat of 
Lord Scar/dale's, now rebuilding (1761,) in a mag- 


the Derwent on our Right hand, which having over- —_—_ 
flowed its Banks, by the Acceſſion of Floads pour MW 
ing down from the Pea# His, rendered it ſo fright- 
ful, that we contented ourſelves with hearing at a 


or Quarenden, a little, ragged, but noted Village, 
where is a famous Chalybeat Spring, to which abun - 
dance of People refort in the Seaſon to drink the 
Water; as likewiſe a Cold Bath. There are alſo 
ſeveral other Mineral Waters in this Part of the 
Country, an hot Bath at Matloct, and another at 
Buxton; of which in their Pla:es. Beſides theſe, there 
are hot Springs in ſeveral Parts. which run waſte into 
the Ditches and Brooks, and are taken no notice of, 
but remote among the Mountains, and out of the 
Way of common Reſort. | 
We foun1 the Wells at Quarn or Quarenden pretty 
full of Company, the Waters good and phyſical, but 
wretched Lodging and Entertainment. 
From Qaarenden we advanced due North, and, 


we ſoon had a moſt diſmal View of the black Moun- 
tains of the Peak; however, as they were at a Dif. 
tance, and a good Town. lay on our Left, called 
Wſ1tkfworth, we turned thither for Refreſhment. Here 
we found verified what I had often heard before, that 
however dreary the Hills might appear, the V ales were 
every- where fruitful and delightful to the Eye, alſo. : 
well- inhabited, and having in them good Market-towns, 1 


3 ” r 
= Wann - * Na > ; = 2 — y * n rx 
Wen one Zora gud « - } - % 1 5 
y 7 5 3 r Oy 1% N re . 1 "y . — * p po RN * 1 A 8 
. i . — N * 2 > : D « 8 i 8 n — NT RR 
* dy of S347 hy? » S847 4 don ve * 4 1 EA Ob cal, LLC LI; 9 ö * 5 - od 
l , | EY, EET. . Le 7 . 1 1 MER EE Ter 5 ory 5 | x . = x 
21 - N 8 : ? T RI do : es EEG GEES Ln T NA 85. 3 
1 — — DRIES 9 X * * NN * f 8 cre you D. * £ * Fug 
Bed 3 e ee 2 0 N 6 x N WY" a 2 We 83 7 hs LIES. 
— » fi 


. wont mapa cs 
I * fe 
oat 5 K 


2 — - > —_— 
8 enen, 
O * SO 3 
- <-> Tom 3 


the Ale, the farther we went Northward, the better it 


ſeemed to be. "I . | 
IVirkfworth is a large well-frequented Market- 


but what relates to the Lead-works. N | 
Re — 4 SY 


78 A TOUR thro Derb, 
The Peatrills, as they are called, are a rude booriſh 
kind of People; but bold, daring, and even deſperate 
in their Search into the Bowels of the Earth: for 
which Reaſon they are oſten employed by our Engi- 
neers in the Wars to carry on the Sap, e they lay 
Siege to ſtrong fortified Places. 


The Barmoot Court, kept at Wirkfworth, to judge 


Controverſies 3 Miners, and adjuſt ſubterra- 
nean Quarrels and Diſputes, is very remarkable. It 
conſiſts of a Maſter and 24 Jurors, who, when any 


Perſon has found 'a Vein of Ore in another's Land 
(except it be in Orchards or Gardens), aſſign two 


Meres of Ground in a Pipe (as they term it) and a 
Flat, the former being 29 Yards long, and the . 


14 Yards ſquare, appointing to the Finder one Mere, 
and the other to the Owner of the Land, half at each 


End of the Finder's; and moreover, chin Fees and 


Perquiſites for the Paſſage of Carts, the Uſe of Tim- 


ber, and the like. This Court not only preſcribe 
Rules to the Miners, and limits their wr mens in 
the Works under- ground, but is Judgs of all their 
little Quarrels above. 

The Produce of the Mines in this Hundred is very 


conſiderable : the King claims the 13th Penny Duty, 


for which they compound at the Rate of 1000 J. a 
Year; nay, I have been informed, that the Tythe of 


F/irkfworih alone has been worth to the Incumbent. 


yearly that Sum. 
Not far from hence lies e which gives 


Title of Marquis to the eldeſt Son of the Duke of 


Devenfarre. 
Near WWirkfworth, and upon the very Edge of Der- 
went, is a Village called Matlocł, where, as | ſaid, 


are ſeveral warm Springs. One of theſe is ſecured | by 


a Stone Wall on every Side, by which the Water is 
brought to rife to a due Height; and if it is too high, 


there is a Sluice to let it out as low as you pleaſe. 


| It has an Houſe built over it, and Room within the 


Building | 


Ing out F the laſt mentioned Road to f 
near Roweſley Bridge, in the County of Derby. 


ſlippery 
neath, the Bottom of which you can hardly diſcover 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN. 79 


Building to walk round the Bath, and ſo go by Steps 
down gradually into it. The Water i is but juſt Milk- 
warm, fo that it is no leſs pleaſant to go into, than 


ſanative. 


This Bath would be much more frequented hit 


it is, if a ſad, ſtony, mountainous Road, which leads 


to it, and no gobd Accommodation when you are 
there, did not hinder ; for from the Bath you are to 


croſs over the Meadows, and then aſcend a Derby- 
ſhire Hill, before you meet with an Houle of Refreth- 


ment. 
But ſome of theſe event may pofſibly be. 


in a Way of being remedied, by an Act paſſed in the 
Year 1760. intitled, An AQ 'for repairing and widen- 


ing the Road from the Turnpite Road, near the Weſt 


End of the Town of Cheltertield, to Matlock Bridge; 
and alſo the Road leading out of the ſaid Road, over 
Darley Bridge, to Croſs Green; and al, d; the Road lead- 

Turnpike Road 


At preſent, for ſome Miles before you come to Hat. 

lick, you paſs over barren Moors, in perpetual Danger 
of ſlipping into Coal-pits and Lead: - mines, or ride be 
Miles together on the Edge of a ſteep Hill on ſolid 
Rock, or looſe. Stones, with a Valley under- 


with your Eye. Inſtead of Trees and Hedges, they 


fenceꝰ in their poor Land for Arable, with Walls made 


of looſe Stones, picked from under their Feet. The 
extended Sides of the Mountains are generally pow- 
dered over, as it were, with Rocks, Streams of Wa- 
ter dribbling down every- where, and ſometimes on 
Cataracts diverſify the romantic Scene, 

The Lovers Walk here, as it is called, ſeems deed 


calculated by its Shadineſs for the Reſort of {ighing 
Nym pho and Swaine, and ie much frequented by 


very genteel Company. 


At the Smelting-mills they melt down the Lead 
Ore, and run it into a Mold, whence. it becomes 
E 5 | Ko. 


F 


Pigs, as they call them. The Bellows are kept in 


continual Motion by running Water. We were 
complimented to be let down 200 Vards deep into the 


Mines, if we pleaſed. Over againſt this warm Bath, 


and on the Eaſt Side of the Derwent, we came to a 
monſtrous Parcel of gigantic Rocks, ſeemingly piled 
on one another, called the Torr. A few Inhabitants 
in little Cottages truſted themſelves at the Bottom, 
under fo ruinous a Shelter. I took the Pains on 


Hands and Knees to clamber near the 'Fop, and en- 


ter'd an Hermit's Cell hewn in the Rock, with a moſt 
dreary Proſpect before it. On one End are a Crucifix 
and a little Nich, where I ſuppoſe the Anchorite 


placed his Saint. Over-againſt it, about half a Mile 
off, is ſuch another Cliff, but by the Care of a Gen- 


tleman who lived underneath, Mr. Aſbe, is hewn out 
of the Rock an eaſy Aſcent by Steps, and there are 
' abundance of Alcoves, Grots, Summer-houſes, Cel- 

lars, Pinacles, Dials, Baluſtrades, Urns, &c. all of the 


ſame Materials. And by the Help of Earth carried 


up to the Top, there are fine Graſs Walks, with 
Greens planted along them upon this hanging Ter. 
race; whence you have a-fine View over many a 
craggy Mountain. 


A little on the other Side of Wirkfworth begins a 
long Plain, called Braſſington Moor, which reaches 


from Braſſington to Buxton, full 12 Miles: from 
Wirkſworth it is not quite ſo much. The Peak Peo- 
ple, who are mighty fond of raiſing the Admiration 

of Strangers, told us here of another high Mountain, 


| Where a Giant was buried, which they called the Gi- 


ant's Tomb. Gp 3 | | | 
We rode up the Hill, which ſeemed to be round, 
with a Precipice almoſt on every Side of it. While 
we were in quelt of the Tomb of the Dead, we found 
„ Rukh alluvucu a pu, IIabliation ror a Woman 
and her Children. We entered into their Manſion, 
divided by a Curtain into. its ſeveral Offices, and a 
Funnel work'd through the Top to carry the Smcke 
| | Te, out, 


SO 0 — 2 828 — 


— = 


a ad "Bd 


4 a. Atm oo 


— — 


d D 2 


9 VS © *# BW po” ws oO — 2 


Lafety. 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN. . 81 
out, where the celebrated Tombſtone was. Her Huſ- 
band, ſhe ſaid, was a Miner, who, if he had good 
Luck, could earn his five-pence, and ſhe could alſo _ 


earn her three-pence a Day, were it not for the Care 
of ſo many Children; but, ſhe bleſſed God, they 


lived very comfortably, An Inftance of that happy 


Contentment oftener met with in Habitations like 
this, than in gilded Palaces! | 0 
We went next, by the Direction of the good Wo- 


man, to a Valley on the Side of a riſing Hill, where 
were ſeveral Grooves (for ſo they calle the Mouth of 


the Shaft, or Pit, by which they go down into a Lead- 
mene). As we were ſtanding ill to look at one of 
them, admiring how ſmall they were, and ſcarce be- 
heving' a poor Man, who told us they went down 
thoſe narrow Holes to a great Depth in the Earth, we. 
were ſurpriſed with ſeeing an Hand, and then an Arm, 
and quickly after an Head, thrull up out of the very 
Groove we were looking at. *1 25 
Immediately we rode cloſer up to the Place, where 


we law the poor Wretch working and heaving him- 


ſelf up gradually, as we thought, with Difficulty ; 


but when he ſhewed us that it was by ſetting his Feet 


and Eldows upon Pieces of Wood fixt croſs the Angles 


of the Groove lke a Ladder, we found the Difficulty 


was not much, and that if the Groove had been larger, 
he could not go up and down with ſo much Eaſe of 


Thoſe who would have a more perſect Idea of cheſe 


Grooves, need only ſee the ſquare Wells in the 


Church of St. Paul, by which the Workmen go 
down from the Top of the Church into the very 
Vaults under it, to place the Leaden Pipes, which 
— carry the Rain Water from the Flat of 

> the Roof to the Common- ſewer. They 
} have ſmall Iron Bars placed croſs the 


7 


n 


Toe 3 | Angles for the Men to ſet their Feet oa 
Whew 


„ 


in the manner 1 repreſented. 
Es Rö 


* 


= Acros; Dit 


When this fubterranean Creature was come quite 


out, with all his Furniture about him, he afforded us 


new Matter of Wonder, which ſatisfied our Curioſi- 
ty without venturing down ourfelves. For the Man 
was a moſt uncouth Spectacle ;z he was cloathed all 
in Leather, had a Cap of the fame without Brims, 
ſome Tools in a little Baſket which he drew up with 
bin, not one of the Names of which we could un- 
derſtand, but by the Help of an Interpreter. Nor 


indeed could we underſtand any of the Man's Diſ. 


courſe, fo as to make out a whole Sentence, and 


yet he was pretty free of his Tongue too. He was 


lean as a Skeleton, pale as a Corpſe, his Hair and 
Beard a deep black; what little Fleſh he had, was 


lank, and, as we thought, ſomething of the Colour 


of the Lead itſelf. + Beſides his Baſket of Fools, he 
brought up with him about three Quarters of an 


hundred Weight of Ore, which was no ſmall Load, 


confidering the Manner of his coming up; and it was 
this which occaſioned that Heaving and Strdggling at 
his firſt Appearance; and it ſeems he was at Work 


| 60 Fathom deep, but that there were five Men of 


his Party, two of whom were 11 Fathoms, and the 
other three 15 Fathoms deeper. The Man ſeemed 


to regret, that he was not at Work with theſe three; 


for they have a Way out at the Side of the Hill, 


without coming up ſo 1 as he was obliged to do. 


We chen looked on the Ore, and got the poor Man's 
Leave to bring every one a ſmall Piece of it away 
with us, for which we gave hint two Pieces of better 
"Metal. 8 +4 . 

From hence entering upon Braſſington Moor, juſt 
now mentioned, we had eight Miles ſmooth Green 
Riding to Buxton Bath, which they call One of the 


* 


ſeven Wonders of the Peak, compriſed in that noted 
Verſe of Mr. Holes, Fo, . 


* 


Derb· GREAT BRI TAIN. 83 


22 4. Mons, Barathrum, binus Fans, Antraque - 


Vina. : 


Houſe, Mountain, Wee 409 Fountains, and two 
Caves. 


This Place has * Advantages beyond what tie 
City of Bath can pretend to. Here is an open and 


healthy Country, a Variety of fine Views to enter- 


tain the Curious, and a beautiful Down for the Ladies 
to take the Air in, much more agreeable than the cloſe 
City of Bath, which is very deficient it this Parti- 


cula  .... 
The Water of the Hot - well is nothing near ſo hot 


© the Waters at Bath. Hereabout are very many 
0 


t Springs, and ſome cold ones near them; but not 
. any fo near each other, that you might have put your 
Thumb into one, and your Finger into another at the 
ſame time, as has been reported, Underneath the Earth 
nothing but Lime-ftene. Here is a Well called St. 


Ame s of Buxten, a warm Spring, which drank of, is 


" fancied to Cure all Diſeaſes. Out of a Hill near 1 
ton, called Axe-£dge, ſpring four Rivers, which run 
four contrary Ways; wiz. 1 — South, Dane, Weſt, 
| Guwayt, North, and Ve, Eaſt. 6 

A to the medicinal e of the Waters at Ham 


tan, bear what Dr. Leigh ſays of their Virtues, and 


the Manner of their Operation, in his Natura! Hi/ts- 
ry of Lancaſhire, ard of the Peak, His Words are as 
follow : 

„The Waters are e ſulphureous and ſaline, yet not 
« fetid, but very palatable, becauſe the Sulphur is not 
C e with any vitriolic Particles, or but very fe vy 
* ſaline 3 it tinges not Silver, nor is it purgative, be- 


© caule its ſaline Particles are diſpenſed in ſuch ſmall 


+ Proportions. 


« It drank, they create a good Appetite, open Ob- 


6 Ae, and no doubt, if mixed with the Oer. 


121 
3. = * 
Th 
= 
"34 
4 
145 
.* bY 
= 
7 
1 
Fi 
* 19 
1 
3 
{4 „ 
kt. 
1 
07> i 
[FS 
17 — 
$ N24 * 
1: 
A. | ; 
$5! 5 
"TH" 
14 
* 
1 
4 
lth 5 
S743 
3 * 
0 > 
4 1 
* 
A 
[ J 
by 
| | 5 
1 
: th 
bo 
2 
1 
7 
t 
2 
* 
54 


84. 0 U R thro Derb. 
beat Waters that are there alſo, may anſwer all the 
© Intentions of the Bath Waters in Somerſet/hire, and 
that of St. Vincent's too at Briſtol, ſo noted for cur- 
ing the Diabetes, of which J have ſeen ſeveral In- 


bloody Urines, of which I ſaw a moſt noted Inſtance 
at Liverpoole, N | 
© This Bath is of a temperate Heat, and, without 


a „ «a Ka 


brought to any Degree of Heat; but, I think, in 
its own natural Heat, it may in general be ſaid to 
be more agreeable to the Conſtitution 3 and where 
the hot Baths cannot be ſafely uſed, this may. This 
laſt Summer I ſaw remarkable Inſtances of its Ef- 


could not go before without the Help of Crutches, 
who came from thence to Manchefler on Foot with- 
our them, diftant from Buxton full 16 Northern 
Miles.“ | 55 18. 25 
The Village where the principal Springs are, is 
called Buxton, though there are ſeveral of them ; for 
they rife unregarded in the Banks of the Incloſures, 
and on the Sides of the Hill, ſo that their Number 
is hardly known, 185 5 
The Duke of Devonſbire, Lord of the Village, has 
built a large and convenient Houſe for the Recep- 


JJ 6 SO NAh 6 


tion of Strangers. The Bath-room is arched over- 


bead, and the Whole made handſome, convenient, 
and delightful. This Collection of tepid Waters, 


exceeding clear, will receive 20 People at a time to 
walk and fwim in. The Temper of the Water is 


equal to new Milk, or Blood warm, procuring a mo- 


derate Perſpiration. Its Effect is remarkable for giv- 


ing that gentle Relaxation of the Solids, which takes 
off the Wearineſs and Fatigue of a Journey, and re- 


| Freſhes inſtantly. *Tis phyſically uſeful in many 


Caſes, and may be indulged in more, than the Hot- 


bachs of Svmerſelſbire, which frequently do Harm thro” 
A. 1 impru- 


ſtances in theſe Parts; and likewiſe for curing of 


queſtion, by a eee Halitus, might be 


ſeas in ſcorbutic Rheumatiſms in Perſons that 


kb 


b +a wy as pw 


Perb. GREAT BRITAIN. 85 


imprudent Uſe. Such an one as this naturally is, was 


aimed at by the ſumptuous Bagnios of the Roman Em- 


perors. & | 

Fir Thomas Delves, who received a Cure here, 
gave the Pump, and a pretty Stone Alcove over 
the Drinking-ſpring in the Yard, The Water may 


be raiſed at pleaſure to * aro We found in' 


one of the Rooms theſe Verſes written upon the 
Wall by a Phyſician who formerly frequented the 
Place : ks 1 N | 


Corpore debilior Grani ſe proluit undis : | 
uerit aquas Aponi, quem febris atra necat : 
Ut penitus renem purget ; cur Pſaulia tant, 
Nil, que Lucine gaudia, Calderiz ? 
Sola mihi Buxtona placet : Buxtona Britannis 
_ UndeGrani, Aponus, Pſaulia, Calderiæ. 


Which may be thus tranſlated : 


In Gran's fam'd Baths the feeble Patient laves ; 


Whom diſmal Fevers ſeize, in Apon's Waves. 
At Pſaulia ſhall a Purge ſo dear be bought? 

For teeming Throes Calderiæ far be ' ſought ? 
When here at Buxton (Britain's Choice) appear 
* Gran, Apon, Plaulia, and Calderiæ, near. 


As to the Antiquity of theſe Baths, though there is 


not a King Bladud to teſtify for them, as for thoſe at 
Bath in Somerſetſhire, yet the learned Author above- 


mentioned obſerves, * That it is certain they were 
© eminent in the Time of the Romans: Lucan and 
others acquaint us, that they were extraordinary 


| © hot, Sc. and the High road, called the Roman 


© Bath-gate, as Mr. Camden ſays, farther confirms it. 
Fut it is eſpecially evident from a Roman Wall ce- 
* mented with red Roman Plaſter, cloſe by St. Anne's 


* Places abroad noted for the Virtue of their Waters. | 


— 


r A 5 E ” , 
3 F 5 n Ne. Li pov , * 
2 N . e n 
b By 8 Exe r 
' 8 CAS n c 
In K TS N 12 - : 4 2 
17 o ns 4 *** a 


x 2 8 ks . 
4 - 2 . 8 " 2 n » 7 * ſe! - . — 0 * r * £ r 
. * * O Ty —— CG hoe #1 IR * e od "Ic _ ee, 3 2 ops: — N 5 o 
LN * / n 1 * - 9 7 n — — a * 5 . . A 0 - L. 5 
3 ern; . . „ J a - A 1 8 * 5 3 5 p 1 i — 5 n a 4 * 
ops, Yep R LO U Cs LU TA LE We na A ES ode 0 "IL N 7 * c x a r R. N. Pb N 0 5 — OO a 
2 7 ö 1 8 „ 2 L 82 8 7 the. * * Y 2 x4 d x 0 4 2 * 
o 3 bow r 23 WIT. (92 . 7 2 " Is © A 8 1 r 0 5 * 35 [LIE p — 2 q . — e 290. Fe 1934, - _— OT 12 2 2 N n 4 28 nth — 54 6 - A 2 4 
4 - I. D h 3 ' ** * 2 R Gon N r g eee e N 3 F > aA ok. N 448 * . . c — rann 
— » * F — o ty N 8 8 MO e - Mr ad ad Ek 8 . 2 — 7 A 2 &. 5 . 8 4 * 75 (oa * x A 8 8 . 
* RR 8 8 1 - GW > q NES INE TART oa VAL r eee ee e 2230) OH TUES REY AN R 2 *4 A TY * Sa by F " WR ICI, 2 ? a ew 2 bY ee * Slave: ©" Led ve — Fe - * 
e N «vos ———— tive +2 *. ee a : 8 A 5 - 4 2 — if 6 N * 5 e. n 
* bay vet "ator bc, nov orgs oh rr! kao r tt * 1 „ 5. 33 1 I IO 2 * 1 La K 50 * ITT? ED er re 5 n 2 r 1 1 n b 3 7:4). AE LEN 
> 7 2 0 CREE "oP 8 r = ID en e rr 2 2 PD EY 8 x "<3 AA INI 4; Cen Th 8 rn ve = 
f 


*% 


8  ATOUR wu Derb. 
ell, where we may ſee the Ruins of the antient 


Bath, its Dimenſions and Length.” 
The Queen of Scots took her Leave of this Place 


with a Diftich of Julius Ceſar, ſomewhat altered, 
which is ſtill ſhewn, written with a Diamond on a 
Pane of Glals, as the laſt Claflical We of Anti- 


quity : 


Buxtona, que calide celebrabere nomina hmphe, 
Forte mibi poſthac non adeunda, vale. | 


Buxton, whoſe Fame thy Baths ſhall ever tell, 
Thom I perhaps ſhall fee no more, farewel. 


About half a Mile off is that ſtupendous Cavern, 
called Poole's- hole, at the Foot of a great Mountain, 
and deemed the Second Wonder of the Peak. The 
Entrance is ſo low and narrow, that you mult ſtoop 
to get in; but immediately it dilates into a wide and 


lofty Concavity, which reaches above a Quarter of a 
Mile end-wiſe, and farther, as they ſay. Some old 
Women with lighted Candles are Guides in this dark. 


Way. Water drops every-where from the Roof, and 


incruſts all the Stones with long Cryſtals and F luors, | 


whence a Thouſand imaginary Figures are ſhewn you 


by the Name of Lions, Fonts, Lanterns, Organs, 
Flitch of Bacon, &c, At length you come to the 


Queen of Scots Pillar, as the Boundary of moſt Peo- 
ples Curioſity, It was ſo named by that unhappy 


Princeſs, when ſhe viſited this Place: nor needed 


ſhe any other Monument ; for, by this Incident, ſhe 


may be ſaid to have erected one to her Memory, 


which will probably laſt as long as the Works of Na- 
ture; tho' every one almoſt that comes hither, car- 
ries away a Piece of it, in \'emory of the Princeſs, 
or the Place. It is a clear bright Stone-like Alabaſter, 
or rather like that kind of Spar, which is found about 
Lead; and conſidering the Country where it grows, 


is s probably n of that Sort. : 


A Stream 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN. 8 
A Stream of Water runs along the Middle, among 
the falling Rocks, with an hideous Noiſe, re- ecchoed 
from all Sides of the horrid Concave. On the Left- 
hand is a fort of Chamber, where they ſay Poole, a 
famous Robber, lived, and whoſe Kitchen, as well as 
Bedchamber, they ſhew you, after you have crept 
10 Yards on all Fours. e 
The moſt ſurpriſing Thing you meet with in it, is 
the extraordinary Height of the Arch, which, how- 
ever, is far from what a late Author has magnified it 
to, a Quarter of a Mile perpendicular. Dr. Leigh 


ſpends ſome Pime in admiring the ſpangled Roof. ; 


Cotton and Flol bes are exceeding witty upon it. Dr. 
Leigh calls it Fret-work, Organ, and Choir-works, 


The whole Matter is this: The Rock being every- 
where moiſt and dps, iro of the Drops are fal- 


ling, and. others are pendent in the Roof. Now, as 
you have Guides before you and behind, carrying every 
one a Candle, the Light of the Candles, reflected by 
the globular Drops of Water, dazles your Eyes like 
te Dew in a Sun-ſhine Morning; whereas, were any 
Part of the Arch of this Vault to be feen by a etear 
Light, all this Beauty would diſappear. 


Let any Perſon, therefore, who goes into Poole's 


hole, and has a mind to make the Experiment, take 
a long Pole in his Hand, with a Cloth tied to the End 
of it, and wipe the Drops of Water-away, he will at 
once extingutſh all thoſe Glories. Then let him wait 


till other Drops emerge, and he will find the Stars and 


Spangles glittering as before. FR, 
4s to the ſeveral Stones, called Cotton's Stone, Hay- 
eock's Stone, Poole's Chair, Flitch of Bacon, and the 
like, they do not enough reſemble what they are ſaid 
to repreſent, to be the Foundation of even a poetic 
Metamorphoſis. | . 


The petrifying Water, indeed, might have exer- 


ciſed Ovid's Fancy; for you ſee Drops pendent like 
Icicles, or riling up like Pyramids, and hardening in- 


2 | t 


- 7 " 4 - . 4 25 £ 
rr OED _ * G WS 2 
N PREY 8 n N 2 , = n , ” 
WW «et ann l 9 * Fenner 7 hy A . 
r . n r n OT EE NN DD oa e AS, 17 et 2, bY N N . N 


1 o 
% \ 
* 5 
E 
REY 
555. 
* 
f4- 

G 
7 - 
Be. 
4 -- 
ri.” 

4 wy 
vin 

Z. 

— 

. 3540 

4% 

£94. 
Ht 
4” 

CIF id 
- 

g N 1 

J : 

I 
” 
"= 
N 4+ 85 
7 5 
21 
þ = 
> 2 
4 4 
Fs 
* = 
: " 
-# J 
41S 
. * 
1 
F. 

30 gra 
BA 
1 

« [ 4 5 4 
WS x 

Mts 

£2" ih 

8 

| 7 

; 7. 
9 

1133 
2 

ö . a 8. 
Ss 

* 19 

11 

ft |. 
1 
11989 

a © 4nd 
1 
. - 
1 8 
$$ 
. 

I > 
6% 

\ 

1 £6 
4G 
» af 

» 5 

A * 
11 
n 7 
Þ- i 

q | 7 
a 5 
V+ 

I EL, 

( K-21 

F 7 Wl 

RSS 

7 TE. 4 
2 7 
1 

ID 
37 $4 
I? : 
4 
ASL 
7 
«bd 1 
9 x 
1 
4 
E 
Ko 
x & 
” WM 
7 o 
oy 
i: \ 
0 
7 
Pd F 
Me 
+ Bi 
wo 4 
SY 
7 
Pl * 
LY 
#4 
* V 
Br 
1 
1 
1 
22 . 
"© 
* 4 
59 A 
1 22 
% 
3 
N 
of $4. 
I 1 
41 
7 J 
Re 
> Ag 
3, i 
Y — F- 
2 3 
SF: 
2 
3 
F 
2 
2. 
4 
1 
3 
IS 
—_ 7 
14 
4 
3 
18 
70 
+ 
T * 
. 
= Y 
Yo 7 
* 
4 5 
3 
48 
# {| 
Mc: 
7 
4 
, 4. 
4 
o*; , 
7 
! 5 
+ 7% 
0 
i 
= 
: 8h 
1 
s 1 
23 1 
? h 
# 
T i 


| 4 oy 


1 OUR thro Derb. 
to Stone, Juſt the Reverſe of what the Poet deſcribes 
of Stones being ſoftened into Men. | 


The Third Wonder of the Peat is Mam Ton, 1 


as the Word in the Mountain Jargon, or rather in 


the Britiſh, ſignifies, the Mother Rock (for Mam is 
the Britiſh Word for Mother), upon a Suggeſtion 


that the ſoft crumbling Earth which falls from its 
Summit produces ſeveral other Mountains below, 
without being in the leaſt diminiſhed itſelf. The 
whole of the Wonder is this: On the South Side of 


this Hill is a Precipice, very ſteep from the top to 


the bottom ; and the Subſtance being of a crumbling 
| looſe Earth, mingled with little Stones, is continu- 
ally falling down in ſmall Quantities, as the heavy 
Rains looſen and waſh it off, or as Froſts and Thaws 
operate upon it. Now the great Hill, which is thick, 
as well as high, parts with this looſe Stuff, without 
being ſenſibly diminiſhed ; ſo the bottom, into which 
it falls, being narrow, is more eaſily perceived to 
fwell. Here then is the pretended Wonder, That 


the little Heap below ſhould grow up into an Hill, 4 
without any Decreaſe of the great Hill, as it ſhould * 


 Teem, notwithſtanding ſo much has fallen from it. 
But the Fact is certainly otherwiſe, though not per- 


_ ceivable. | . . 
I was informed, that on the top of this Mountain 
is an antient Roman Camp, encompaſſed with a dou- 


ble Trench; whereabouts are ſometimes found Ro- 


man Medals. | 


The Fill hes on e New Side of the Road) from 


Buxton to Ca/tleton, at which Place you come to the 
Fourth much famed Wonder, ſtiled The Devil's Ar/e 
In the Peak. The {hort Account of it is this: On 


the ſteep Side of a Mountain is a large Opening, al- 


moſt in the Form of an old Gothic Arch, from its 
Centre, only that the Entrance is horizontal, It is 
upwards of 30 Feet perpendicular, and twice as much 


| broad 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIN, 89 
broad at the Bottom at leaſt, and wider, it is ſaid, 
than any artificial Rock now to be ſeen. 7 7 
It continues thus wide but a little Way, yet far 
enough to have ſeveral ſmall Cottages built on either 
Side of it within the Entrance, like a little Town in 
a Vault. On the Left Side, as it were, of the Street, 


is a running Stream of Water... . . 
As you 70 on, the Roof deſcends gradually, and 


is then ſo far from having Houſes, that a Man can- 


not ſtand upright in it, tho' in the Water; but ſtoop- 
ing for a little Way, and paſſing over (in a kind of 


| Bathing-tub, wherein you lie extended) the ſame. 


Stream of Water which croſſes the Cave, you find 
more Room over your Head. But, going a little far- 
ther, you come to a third Water, which croſſes your 
way; and: the Rock ſtooping, as it were, down al- 
moſt to the Surface of the Water, puts an End to the 
Traveler's Search. | 

But when we read in Scripture, that the Caves of 
Adullam and Macpelah received David and his Troop 


yo 400 Men, and what Travelers relate of a Cave in 
the Apennine Mountains, near Florence, large enough 


to contain an Army; and when we know, that there 
are many others in the Alps, and the Hills of Dau- 
pine and Savoy, and other Parts of the World; this 
ſurely can be thought no Wonder, unleſs we credit 


 Gervaiſe of Tilbury, who tells us of a Shepherd that 


ventured into the third River in this Specus or Cave, 
and being either. carried over it, or down the Stream, 
he knew not whither, ſaw a beautiful heavenly Coun- 
try beyond it, with a ſpacious Plain, watered with 
many clear Rivers, pleaſant Brooks, and ſeveral Lakes 
of ſtanding Water. To | 
Caſtieton takes its Name from the Caſtle near it, 
which is a very antient Building, and ſo ſituated as to 
be only one Way acceſſible, being erected on an high 
ſteep Rock; and the Way dat goes to it is ſo full of 
OL IE", 55 IT winings 


1 


9o 4 TOUR Deth, 


Twinings und Turnings, that it is two. Mlles from 
"the bottom to , 7 iii hs 
Not far off is a little Village called Burgh, fre- 
quented by the Remans, on account of the Baths, as 

__ evidently by a Cauſeway leading from hence 

— — —— ) Bot ad ef). at 
The Fifth Wonder is called Tideſwell, or Il eeden- 
«bell, a Spring which, according to ſome Writers, 


ebbs and flows: as the Sea does, The Baſin, or Re- 


ceiver for the Water, is about three Feet ſquare; the 
Water ſeems to have ſome other Receiver within the 
Rock, which, when it fills by the Force of the ori- 
ginal Stream, the Air being contracted, or pent in, 


forces the Water out with a bubbling Noiſe, and fo | 


fills the Receiver without; but when the Force is 
ſpent within, then it ſtops till the Place is filled again; 
and, in the mean time, the Water Without runs off, 
till the Quantity within ſwells again, and then the 
ſame Cauſe produces the ſame Effect. So that this 
Oceanet, as Mr. Cotton calls it, which has been the 


Subjeſt of ſeveral Philoſophic Inquiries, is owing, 
wholly to the Figure of the Place, and is only a mere 


Accident in Nature; and if any Perſon were to dig 


into the narrow Cavities, and give Vent to the Air, 
which is pent up within, they would ſoon ſee Tide 


well turned into an ordinary Stream. EE, 
This Spring lies near the little Market-town of 
Tiddeſiball, wherein are a very good Church, and a 
r 5 . 

So much for the Five fictitiaus Wonders: I come 
now to the Two real Wonders, Elden Hole, and the 
Duke of Deven/hire's fine Houſe at Chatſworth ; the 


one natural, the other artificial. 


In the Middle of a plain open-Field, gently de- 


ſcending to the South, is this frightful Chaſm in the 


Earth, or rather in the Rock, called Elden Hole. 


T be Mouth of it is about 20 Feet over one Way, and 
59 or 60 the other, deſcending down perpendicular 
| e . 


ig 


Shaw * * 


does but look into this frightful Hole z and ſo I ſhall 


-» 


E 


to the Earth: how deep could never yet be diſcovered, 
notwithſtanding ſeveral Attempts have been made to 


find its Bottom. Mr. Cotton ſays, he let down 800 


Fathom of Line, which is 1600 Yards, near a Vile 
perpendicular. wy 3 

The Author has poetically enough deſcribed the 
Noiſe tbe huge maſſy Stones make, which the Coun- 
try people often throw down here. The Hiſſing of 
Spears and Arrows is ſeldom omitted in Poetry to de- 
ſcribe the Terror they bring: he has here improved a 
ſimilar Noiſe into a Mark of Fear. | : 

When one's turn'd off, it, as it parts the Air, 
A kind of Sighing makes ; as if it were 

Capable of the trembling Paſſion Fear; 

Till the firſt Hit ftrikes the aſtaniſh'd Far, 

Like Thunder under-ground : thenee it invades 
With louder Thunder thoſe Tartarean Shades, _ 
Which groan forth Horror, at each pond'rous Strake 

Th unnat'ral Iſſue gives the Parent Rock : | 


k Wit, as it jirikes, the Sound by Turns we note, 


When nearer, flat; ſharper, when more remote: 
When, after falling long, it ſeems to hiſs, 


Like the old Serpent in the dark Abyſs, 

They tell a diſmal Story here of a Traveler, who 
inquiring bin TT Caſtleton, or to Buxton, in a 
dark Night, two Villains offered to guide him; but, 


| intending to rob him, led him to the Edge of this 


Gulph, and either thruſt him in, or made him believe 
there was a little Gull of Water, and bade him take a 
large Step, which he did into this Abyſs, and into that 
of Eternity at the ſame time. One of the Villains, 
being hanged at 'Derby ſome Years after for ſome 
other Roguery, confeſſed this diabolical Action at the 
Gallows. _ | £ 3 

It raiſes an Horror in the Imagination, when one 


leave 


92 A TOUR ts Dal 


leave it with the Words of the forementioned Author, 
who, ſuppoſing it one of the Entrances to the infernal 
World, ſays, 3] 1 


For he, who landing on the Brink of Hell, 
Can carry it ſo unconcern'd and well, 7855 
As ta betray no Fear, is certainly 

A better Chriſtian, or a worſe, than J. 


come now to the magnificent Seat of the Duke of 


Devonſhire, called Chatſworth ag oil 2 | 
This glorious Fabric may be ſaid to have had two 
or three different Founders, who have all improved 
upon one another, in the Completion of. this great 
Tekin. - hos 
| The Houſe was begun on a much narrower Plan 
than it now takes up, by Sir William Cavendiſb of 
Cavendiſh in Suffo/k, who, by Marriage with the 
Counteſs Dowager of Shrewſbury, became intitled to 
a noble Fortune in this County, So Pers 


Sir William died, after having done little more than 


building one End of the Fabric, and laying out the 
Plan of the Whole. But his Lady finiſhed it in the 
magnificent Manner in which it appeared, when it 
was firſt ranked among the Wonders of the Peat. 
And, if it then deſerved to be fo ranked, how much 
more does it now, with the additional Improvements 
made by the firſt Duke of Devonſhire 
One thing is obſervable, That the very Diſadvan- 
tages of Situation contribute to the Beauty of the Place, 
and, by the moſt exquiſite Management, are made 
ſubſervient to the Builder's Deſign. On the Eaſt Side, 


not far diſtant, riſes a prodigious high Mountain, which 


is ſo thick planted with beautiful Trees, that you only 
fee a riſing Wood gradually aſcending, as if the Trees 
crouded one above the other to admire the ſtately Pile 
| before them. Rn» 
1. i „„ Upon 


8 


— 


r 


Than, from the Mountains, Strangers with Delig 


| Derb. GREAT BRITAIN. i 


Upon the top of this Mountain they dig Mill- 
ſtones ; and here begins a vaſt extended Moor, which, 
for 15 or 16 Miles together due North, has neither 
Hedge, Houſe, or Tree, but a waſte and houling Wil- 
derneſs, over which, when Strangers travel, it is im- 


poflible to find their way without Guides. 


Nothing can be more ſurpriſing of its Kind to a 


Traveler, who comes from the North, when, after 


a tedious Progreſs thro' ſuch a diſmal Deſert, on a ſud- 
den the Guide brings him to this Precipice, where he 
looks down from a comfortleſs, barren, and, as he 


thought, endleſs Moor, into the moſt delightful Val- 


ley, and ſees 'a beautiful Place, adorn'd with fine Gar- 


dens. If Contraries illuſtrate each other, here they : 


are ſeen in the ſtrongeſt Oppoſition. 


The Surprize that is occafioned in a Traveler, de- 


ſcending from ſuch a rocky and barren Mountain, 


and from ſuch a dreary Wilderneſs, at once upon fo 
glorious a Palace, gave Occaſion to the following 


ines: 


Dualiter in mediis, quam non ſperaverat, urbem 
Attonitus Venetami navita cernit aquis; | 
Sic improviſo emergens e montibus invis : 
Attolit ſeſe Devoniana domus. | 2 
Tranſlated by Mr. Cibber, late Poet-Laureat, as fol-- 
fows : „„ 1 5 
Not Sailors view, with more aftomſh'd Eyes, 
On open Seas Venetian Tow'rs ariſe, 


See unexpetied Chatſworth charm the Sight. 5 


It is really ſurpriſing to think what a Genius it muſt 
be, that ſhould lay out ſo great a Deſign in ſuch a 
Place, where the Mountains intercept the Clouds, and 


threaten, were Earthquakes frequent here, to bury 


whole 


5 
Ds 


T Derb. 
whole Towns, and, what ſeems equal to a Town, 
this Houſe, in their Ruins. 
On the Plain, which extends from the top of this 
Mountain, is a large Body of Water, which takes up 


near 30 Acres, and, from the Aſcents round it, re. 


ceives, as into a Ciſtern, all the Water that falls; 
which, through Pipes, ſupplies the Caſcades, Water- 
works, Ponds, and Canals, in the Gardens. 


Before the Weſt Front of the Houſe, which is the 


moſt beautiful, and where the firſt Foundreſs built a 
very auguſt Portal, runs the River Derwent, which, 
though not many Miles here from its Source, yet is a 
rapid River, when, by haſty Rains, or the melting 
of Snows, the Hills pour down their Waters into its 
Channel; for the Current, by reaſon of its many con- 
tracted Paſſages among the Rocks (Pieces of which, 
of an incredible Bulk, come ſometimes rolling down 
its Stream), on the leaſt Motion of its Waters above 
their ordinary Height, roars like the Breaches on the 
Shores of the Sea. | - 5 


_ Over this River is a ſtately Stone Bridge, with an 


antient Tower upon it, and in an Iſland in the River 


an antient Fabric all of Stone, and built like a Caſtle; 


which are the Works of the aforeſaid Foundreſs, and 
ſhew-the Greatneſs of the original Deſign ; but are all, 


except the Bridge, eclipſed, as it were, by the modern 


- Glories of the Edifice. | | 2 
The Front to the Garden is a regular Piece of Ar- 


chitecture. The Frize under the Cornice has the 


Motto of the Family under it in gilt Letters, ſo large 
as to take up the whole Front, though the Words are 
only theſe two, CavenDo T'vTvs; which is no leſs 


applicable, to the Situation of the Houſe than to. the 


* 


Name of the Family. 7 ; | 

The Saſhes of the Second Story, we are told, are 
; —4 bigh, of poliſhed Looking-glaſs, each Glaſs 
tw 


Feet wide; and the Wood-work double- gilt. 


Under 


4 


Derb. GREAT BRITA TF. 955 

Under this Front lie the Gardens exquiſitely fine; 
and, to make a clear Viſta or Proſpect beyond into 
the fat Country, towards Hardwick, another Seat of 
the fame Owner, the Duke (to whom thoſe things, 
which ot!.ers thought impoſkble, were practicable) 
removed a great — that ſtood in the Ws | 
and which interrupted the Proſpect. 

In the uſual Approach to this noble Fabric, it pre- 
ſents itſelf thus: Firſt, the River, which, in calm 
Weather, glides gently by; then a venerable Walk of 
Trees, where the famous Hobbes uſed often to contem- 


plate ; a noble Piece of Iron- work Gates and Baluſters, 


expoſe the Front of the Houſe and Court, terminated 


at the Corners next the Road with two large Stone 
Pedeſtals of Artic Work, (curiouſly adorned with Tro- 


phies of War, and Utenſils of all the Sciences in Baſſo 
Relievo, This Part of the Building is Jonic, the 
Whole being a Square of a fingle Order, but every 


| Side of a different Model: a'Court in the Mid- 


dle, with a Piazza of Doric Columns of one Stone 


each, overlaid with prodigious Architrayes. The 


done is of an excellent Sort, veined like Marble, hewn 
out of the neighbouring Quarries, and tumbled down 
the adjacent Bill. In he Anti- room to the Hall are 


flat Stones of 14 Feet ſquare, laid upon the Heads of 
four Pillars, and fo throughout. In the Hall-ſtairs, 
the Landing - ſteps are of the ſame Dimenſions; the 


Doors, Chimneys, Window- caſes, © Stairs, &c. all of 


Marble; the Cielings and Walls of all the Apart- 


ments charged with rare Painting of Farr, and other 
famous Hands; the Bath- room all of Marble, curiouſly 


wrought. 


The Chapel! is a moſt mri Place; the Altar- 
end and Floor, Marble; the Seats and Gallery, Ce- 
dar; the reſt of the Wall and Cieling, painted. 

The Gardens abound-with Green-houſes, Summer- 


houſes, Walks, Wilderneſſes, Orangeries, with all the 
| proper Furniture of Statues, Urns, Greens, Oc. with 


Canals, 


* * my 
e ud es 8 5 = — IAIY \ 
1 A* — — eee ee * EN EET - » —— 

a - bo 1 Nel a Py 9 * — — 0 $ * = 
* — 5 > by . 7 2 2. A N : hg: FER 2 
ar 


Gre fe 
. 
3 9 SONG. 207 2 x " N — R 
8 — / r — 5 OP . : 
: 1 Fo OA 1 5 2 ; — OP PIEREIENY — . 8 
g AR 2 g . . bas "ey 4 : * n bo "JEN" * Pye” —— 
„ . - 9 = a: s a * 2 - we , n = 9 = D an . 1 
4 — — s j ; 241 N — FA 3 5 5 2 O EDO OR I EOS _ 
> i tore Log * 7 * Fra . . 7 a of — s ag; 9 4 bo, — 
J o — 25 — 1 . rn ee — „ N 2 1 
n a 8 , — — a 1 
. r 1 2 "20 


$0 
N 3 - 


IVE My RT I rg P 
» 1 
CTT 
— e 8 
Nr 
A - PR << 


— 


„ nin o 


Canals, Baſons, and Waterworks, of various Forms 
and Contrivances; as Sea - horſes, Drakes, Dolphins, 


and other Fountains, that throw up the Water. 


An artificial Willow-tree of Copper ſpouts dropping 
Water from every Leaf. A wonderful Caſcade, 
where from a neat Houſe of Stone, like a Temple, out 
of the Mouths of Beaſts, Pipes, Urns, &c. a whole 
River deſcends, the Slope of an Hill a Quarter of a 


Mile in Length, over Steps, with a terrible Noiſe, and 


broken Appearance, till it is loſt under-ground. Be- 
yond the Garden, upon the Hills, is a Park, and that 
overlooked by a very high and rocky Mountain. Here 


are ſome Statues, and other Antiquities, 


I ſhould never have done, were I to ſay all that 
might be ſaid of this auguſt Palace. But two hiſtorical 
Circumſtances in its Honour muſt not be forgotten, 


viz. That Mary Queen of Scots, whom we had oc- 
cCaſion to mentien as a Viſitant of the Peat, was for 
17 Yeats in Cuſtody in this Houſe, under the Care of 
the celebrated Foundreſs of it. In Memory of this 
Royal Captive, the new Lodgings, that are built inſſead 
of the old, are {til} called the Queen of Scots Apart. 
ment. Happy for her could ſhe have been allowed to 
have paid the ſame fine Compliment to the Owner o 
it, which the Count de Tallard did, and is our other 


hiſtorical Circumſtance, when he had been entertained 
for a few Days by the late Duke of Devonſbire Ii hen 


I return, ſaid he, into my own Country, and reckon up tht 
Days of my Captivity, 1 ſhall leave out thoſe I ſpent at 
. Chatſworth. . + | 


1 


Mr. Cody Cibber, mentioned before, equally noted 


for the Number and Decency of his Dramatic Pieces, 


particularly for the Play of the Careleſs Hrſband, one 


of the genteeleſt Comedies in the Eng/iſh Language, 2 


alſo for his inimitable Action on the Stage, left upon 


the Walls of the Bowling-green Houſe a Memoran- 
dum of his having viſited this ſuperb Palace; and hu- 


manely deplored the Fate of this unfortunate Queen, in 


in 


% 


— | 


Detb. GREAT BRITAIN. . 97 


an bandes Compliment upon this princely Edifices 
in the following Lines: 3 : 


l ben Scotland's 88 her native Realm expel['d, 
In antient Chatſworth was a Captive held, 

Had there the Pile to ſuch new Charms arriv/d, 

Happier the Captive, than the Queen, had liv' d. 
What Tears, in Pity of | her Fate, could riſe, 
That found the F. gl tive in Paradiſe * 


— 


Theſe Lines were afterwards 3 into Latin by 


Mr. Mattan e, as follow: 


Civilem ae Sevtie Regina ramultum 
Fe ertur in antiqua bac clauſa fuiſſe domo. 
Hance ft vicliſſet. qualis nunc quantaque, vellet 
Erxilium regnis prepoſuiſſe ſuis. 
Te profugam, O Regina, neſas plorare fuiſet, 
Felix meta fuge cut earner oo erat. 


Twill cloſe all 1 bave to ſay of this famous Palace, 


as I may call it, with the following brie! Extract from 


the Letter of an ingenious Gentleman to his Friend: 
This Place, ſays he, exceeds all the high Ideas 
and Deſcriptions that were ever given me of it, 


The Houſe yields ts nothing in Europe; it is pro- 


« digiouſly great in every Part. I never ſaw ſuch a 


Number of fine Rooms; but the Situation ſur- 


* paſſes all, Nature has laid herſelf out in amazin 
Variety of Greatneſs and Proſpects; a fine River 
* below, with fine Banks, ſome naked and rocky, 
© cthers declining and woody, many -{mooth, and 

© proper for walking; large Groves and F iſbponds, | 

© and. Canals between the River and the Houſe, 
* which riſes proudly upon ſeveral Terraces, and has 


© behind it a great Lawn, intermixed with Planta- 
| Vor. I.. F N _ © Lyons 


1 . * 
«de Apr. 7 „ 
— —. wy ies oe WY 
n 


Yeh, Af ods <4 * 


9. — 
1 2 
34: 1: 
f 75 
4 S 
N. 4 
vs  *"KE 
$ } 4 
- _ - 
+ 
: 2 2 0 
7 1 
4 
2 3 
2 5 
; 3 = 
1 : E + $ 
/ H 1 
22 5 4 
i 55 * 
5 2 bu 7 
1 
2 
1 1 
1 
4 : ® ; 
. „ 7 
3 1 
& 2 
; 5 
: 28+ : 1 
: © ; 
: 
: 2 
} $ 
: & 1 
8 4 t 
7 * 
1 1 
5 > 8; 
> £4 Fe, 1 
- C 
=_ 
F 8 1 
: + FM 
G 1 
2 Fx 2 
; os 
. 2 1 F 
127388 3 
F 
n 7 1 
1 3 
=; 2: 
RE 
: 2 
3 4 8 y 
& ; 
. "4 ei Ot x 
of . = 
* 1 3 * 
EIS % 
4 . 2 1 
4 p 
N 
L- Ws a 
81 
7 +. 48) 
8 5 <4 $ 
1 : 
* 2 : 
* 4 1 [1 4 
5 75 
S 1 
3 _— 4 . 8 
r 
*. . 
2 4 = 4 
FE £ - 
4 1 
£ > 
< 2 
* I! , 
4 1 8 
1 
5 x 
* 1 x 
* 5 no 
$% g 5 
1 . =>. L $ 
3 
. 8 1 
ro [ 
TS . 
> RE:-: p 
\ . 7-2 
5 « HW 
WEN 5 
. . = 7 
7 
2 
23 33 WM 
- SSH 
Y * \ 
*. BF 
1 J 
„ 
: * 
3 4 
S105 
= 4 
7 1 
. : l 
* $ * 
1 . 2. 2 
4 18 
ny x h 
»E > 
- 3 
2 
> 
* a 
; # EL ö 
, * 33 
f 7 TR 
* 5 * 
7 . 
F 
2 js 5 


1 . : 2 7 + . N . 
N x n y r Ra an nga * 
. e e cee e b . 0 any! Go AL ce 
med che eee 9 N ot 8 Bc, ane 0 ONS 
- Ss * 
| 2 0 * , 


1» 1 
e Ne 
— 


8 ATR Dec 
« tions and long Walks, all riſing one above an- 
c other, at firſt gently, afterwards over vaſt Preci- 
© pices, to the Top of an high Mountain, which 
was all covered upon the Brows with high Trees, 
two or three Miles on either Side; then breaks 
into a thouſand Vales, and green Hills; then, re- 
ſuming its former Height and Bulk, proceeds again 
a mighty Mountain, covered with Rocks and Heath, 
its Sides in many Places adorned with Wood ; the 
Whole yielding a moſt extenſive Proſpect of many 
Miles. Every body has heard of the great Cal- 
cade.“ | | TAL | 
There are likewiſe other Curioſities in the Peat, 
which I need but juſt mention; as the tottering Stones 
* at Byrch- Over, ſtanding upon an hard Rock, one of 
them ſaid to be four Vards high, 12 round, and yet 
reſts upon a Point ſo equally poiſed, that it may be 
moved with a Finger; the Roman Cauſeway, called 
Batb gate; the ſeveral Minerals found in the Hills, 
and in the Lead Mines, as Black Lead, Stibium, or 
Antimony, and Cryſtall. a 
Bateroell is the beſt Town in the North-weſt Side 
of the Peal . it lies on the Banks of the ye, and has 
a good Market: the Pariſh is exempt from Epiſcopal 
Juriſdiction. Near this the Duke of Rutland had a 
very noble Palace, called Haddon, now entirely unin- 
Bi! habited. It was antiently the Seat of the Vernon, 
13 ſome of whom were Members of Parliament for this 
* County as early as Edward III. Sir George Vernon, 
in Queen Elizabeth's Time, was ftiled King of the 
Peak; and his Daughter being married to Thomas, the 
Son of the firſt Earl of Rutland, it came into the Fa- 
mily of Manners. « e e 
Tiddeſiuell, or Tideſwal, eight Miles N. W. of 
Bakewell, is an indifferent Town, with a fair Church 
and a Free- ſchool, and has a Market on un. 


a as 


+ 


Derb. GREAT BRITAIV 99 
The extended Angle of this County, which runs a 
great Way North. weſt by Chapel in the Frith (which 
was formerly a Market town), and which they call 
High Peak, is perhaps the moſt deſolate, wild, and 
abandoned Country in Great Britain. The Mountains 
of the Peak, of which I have been ſpeaking, ſeem to 
be bur the Beginning of Wonders to this Part of the 
Country; the tops of whoſe Hills ſeem to be as much 
above the Clouds, as the Clouds are above the ordi- _ 
nary Hills. WER . 8 2 
Nor is this all; the Countenance of theſe Moun- 
| tains is ſuch, that they have no Bounds to them but the 
Sea; they run on in a continued Ridge from one to an- 
other, even to the Highlands in Scotland; ſo that they 
may be ſaid to divide Britain as the Appennine Moun- 
tains divide Itahy. Thus joining to Blachſtone- age, 
they divide Yorkfhire from Lancaſbire; and going on 
North, divide the Biſhoprick of Durham from 2 
moreland, and ſo on. All the Rivers in the North of 
England take their Riſe from them; thoſe on the 
Eaſt Side run into the German Ocean, thoſe on the 
Weſt Side into the 4r7/þ e for inſtance, the Dave and 
the Derwent riſe both at the South End of them, and 


come away South to the Trent; but all the Rivers af- Ses 


terwards run, as above, Eaſt or Weſt; and firſt, the 
Mer ſee riſes on the Welt Side, and the Dun on the 
Eaſt; the firſt runs to Warrington, and into the Sea at 
Liverpoole, the other to Doncaſter, and into the Sea at 
Humber. I ſhall confirm this Obſervation as Igo on; 
for to give an Account of Rivers is the beſt Guide to 
the Geography of a Country. But to return to my 
Frogreſ 1 05 ot Fel nbd OE LTY 
We went next to Che/terfield, an handſome popu- 
lous Town, ſituate between Rivulets, on the South 
Side of an Hill, North-eaſt from Chat/worth, well- 
built and well-inhabited, notwithſtanding it ſtands in 
the Extremity of this rocky Country; Br, being on 
the North Side of the Country next to Torkhire, it 
0 „„ ©” leads 


10 HA TOUR thy York 


leads into the Hundred of Scarſdale, which is a rich 


fertile Part of the Country, though ſurrounded with 
barren Moors and Mountains ; for ſuch the Name 
Scarſdale ſignifies. It is a Mayor-town of great Anti- 

quity, and was made a free m_ by King Jobn. 

It is now a Place of conſiderable Merchandize, and 
Dealings in Lead, Grocery, Merceiy, Malting of Bar. 
ley, Tanning, Stockens, Blankets, Bedding, Sc. in 


which they have great Intercourſe to and with York. 


ſhire, Nottinghamſhire, Lincolnſhire, Leiceſterſhire, and 
London; alſo to and with the Towns and Places of 
Bakewell, Tiddefwell, Wirkſworth, Aſhbourne, the 
| Peake, and Welt of Derbyſhire ; with Che/ter, Man- 
cheſter, Liverpeole, &c, It has a fair Church. The 
Spire of its Steeple, being Timber covered with Lead, 
is warped all awry. It has a new large Market-place, 
which is well ſupplied with Lead, and with the Com- 

modities above-mentioned, JET. Þ 
The Free-ſchool in this Town is reckoned the moſt 
conſiderable of any in the North of England, and ſends 
great Numbers of Students to the Univerſities, particu: 
larly to Cambridge. „ | 

| Dronfuld is a ſmall Market-town, noted only for its 
high Situation, juſt on the Edge of the Peak. 


We are now entered into the County of York, which 
is of larger Extent than any two Counties in England 


joined together, being in Compaſs 360 Miles. Its 


Figure is a large Square, and is adequate to the Duke- 
dom of Virtemburgb in Germany, and contains more 
Ground than all the Seven United Provinces, I was 
at firſt puzzled which 1 * to direct my Courſe in this 
large County; but at Jaſt reſolved to ſtrike thro? the 
Middle of it, and along the North- eaſt Part of the 
Meſt Riding, up as far as Ripon, 15 
- | This great County is divided into three Ridings, 
Neoerth, Faſt, and Weſt Riding. This laſt, which [ 
cheote to ſpeak of, is much ther largeſt and moſt popu- 


lous, 


lous, and contains the g eateſt Number of Towns, as 


well as the moſt conſiderable, and likewiſe the beſt- 
Manufactures, and conſequently the greateſt Share of 


Riches. 


. Sheffield, | ſituated on a riſin Ground, i is the firſt 
Town we came to from Derbyſbire. It is famous for 


Wbittle- making, Cutlery-wares, and Iron- work; and 
there are a great many good Iron Mines about i it, and 
ſome of Alum. The Town is very antient, and has 
been always. conſiderable, tho' no Corporation; and 
| that it was noted, in Chaucer's SO for the fame 
19855 appears by thoſe Lines of his : | 


— 4 Miller 
With. a rizzled Band, and * Noſe, 
And a Sheffield Whittle i in his Hoſe. 


The Town is . and large, but the Streets 


are narrow; the Houſes are built with Stone, but 


look dark and black, by the continued Smoke of the 
Forges, which are always at Work. Here were ſet 


up che firſt Mills for turning Grind- ſtones in Fan 


land, 


The Pariſh-church is large and Sa in the F orm : 


of a Croſs ; and has a fine high Spire. 

| Sheffield is reputed to excel Birmingham in S 
wares and Files; and Birmingbam is allowed to out- 

do Sheffield in Is Hinges, Nails, and poliſhed 

Steel. | 

The Cutlers here are incorporated by the Stile of 


The Cutlers of Hallamſhire, and have many Privileges. 


They are ſaid to be 600 in Number, and are called 
Maſter- cutlers; each of whom gives a particular Stamp 
to his Wares. The Corporation chooſe a Maſter and 


other Officers yearly; and it is judged, that no leſs than 


40, ooo are employed in the Iron- trade in Sheffield, 
and the adj n Tract of Land called Hallamſbire. 


777 


G 
r * 


1 
6 3 Y $3 
ER £ 
1 + 
1 2 
pl 
* 
— "Ip : 
, * ? 
£M+ 
133 
7 
8 
. fe 
V5, 
. 
1 
1 4 
5 
[th | 
2 
\S Ft 
. & 
i $55. 7 
= 1 
= 2 
3 . 
L Es : 
* I» ” of 
; Ht 
is F-:+ 
804 . L 
©. 7 
„ 
FF 
"3 +:M 
> 2 — o 
TEES - 
13.2 
= va 4 * Pi 
. 2 * 
SW. 
1 
4 = 
'F | 
i FS 
Fae | 
£ N + ! 1 
£43 ©. 
'1 
WF: : 
4 *. ” ; 
- Y 
; 45 8 
$ 5 1. 
11 
3, £40 
Roe : 
7 28 
FF '' 
1 „ 
3 
' © x4 : 
3 
y a * 
1 
4 * 
1 
N ; Y 
15 
3 


8 
£ MS 4. 
15 
E 

To 


7. We 
12 FORE 
eg Spill tn ate 
+ Sie 


* T 1 
N r 1 r * e N HS en 9 2 . 
e ee 18 25 r N p af e 1 nnn, a _ 
Ag es Ss ed ee aw „ e e Le? NT! TT En 
— 5 1 5 5 3 : e cn We e e N e 2 5 
N * k * . * 9 3 o + 
; ES, PE 8 : * 2220 e 
K War 4 * , _ 4 e — — nn 


w2 oe ne Vorkſh. 
From hence it will be judged, that the faid Pariſh. 
church, the only one in this populous Town, was not 


able to contain one half of the People of Shefield, 


which induced one Mr. Robert Downes, Goldſmith, 
of this Town, to contribute a large Sum, and to pro- 
cure other Sums by Contributions, for ereCting a 


Chapel of Eaſe; and accordingly he got Leave, Annes 


F719. from Sir William Dawes, Archbiſhop of York, 
to proceed in fo good a Work; and built an handſome 
and ftately Structure on a Piece of Ground called 
Shaw-cloſe, purchaſed by the ſaid Mr. Downes, who 


alſo ſettled to the Value of 30 J. a Year for ever ona 


Preacher, to be elected and nominated by him, his 
"arons and Allipns, : - - Wl Pe $47 19g 
But tho? the Building was thus finiſhed, and Mr, 
Downes had actually nominated to it his Nephew 
Tofeph Downes, yet the Nomination being conteſted 


by the Patrons. of the Vicarage of Sheffeld, and the 


Vicar alſo, it remained unconſecrated till the Year 


1739. when the contending Parties, coming to an 


Agreement, an Act of Parliament paſſed, confirming 


the ſame; and it is now conſecrated by the Name of 


The Chapel of St. Paul in the Town of Sheffield. 


© Formerly here was a fine Caſtſe, With a noble 


Manſion-houſe, the Seat of the Dukes of Norfolk; 
but it is now decayed, though the Manor remains ſtill 
in the Family. oder We £20k 


In the great Church, in this Fown, are ſeveral 


very antient Monuments of the Family of Talbots, 


- Earls of Shretuſbury, who once had great Poſſeſſions 


in this and the next County. | | 
In particular, George Earl of Shrewſbury, who died 
in 1538. George, his Grandſon, under whofe Care 
the Queen of Scots was here in Cuſtody for 16 Years, 


who died in 1590. and Gillert his Son, who founded 


the ſtately Hoſpital in this Town, all lie buried here. 
The Gift of this Hoſpital is perpetuated in the fol- 
lowing Inſcription: | TS 1 
| 


Yo! 


* 


L Yorkſh. a GREAT BRITAIN. 103 


The + Hoſpital of the Right 8 Sind 
Earl of Shrewſbury, erected and ſettled by the 
Right Honourable HENRY Earl of Norwich, 
Earl Marſpal of England, great Grandſon of the 
ſaid Earl, in purſuance of bus laſt 1 and Te- 
an Anno 167 3. 


Here is a fine Engine for raiſing Water to ſupply 
the Town. Here is alſo a very large and ftrong 


Bridge « over the Dun, as there is another at Rotherham, 


a Market-town fix Miles lower. Of late ſeveral Acts 
of Parliament have paſſed to make this River further 
navigable to different Places, which has greatly in- 
creaſed. the Trade of theſe Parts. - 

- The Remains of the Roman Foitification between 


Sheffield and Rotherham are ſtill to be ſeen, and pro- 


bably will continue to the End of Time. 


Here is alſo the famous French, by ſome called 


Devil's Bank, by others Danes Bank: which is ſaid. 


to run five. Miles in Length, and in ſome Places 1 


called Kemp Bank, in others Temple's Bank. 


Rotherham is the next Market- town Noith- caſt of 
Sheffield, It is noted for its fine Stone Bridge over 
the Dun, which is bere increaſed by the River Rother; 


from whence the Town, no doubt, took its Name. 
The Church is built in the Form of a Cathedral, 


and is a fair Stone Building, with an nee Spire | 


Steeple; 


From Avelurdeve we went to gane a gn Seat 


of the Earl of Scarborough; which, conſidering the 
beautiful Lawn before the Houſe, and the Extent of 


the adjoining Woods, remarkable for the Improve - 


ments of Art, as well as for the Bigneſs and flouriſh - 
ing State of the Trees, may vie with moſt _ in 


reſpect to Situation. 
' Afterwards we ſtruck into a Bye- road. which 


RE us to the Ruins of Rach or Rack- Abbey, hay 
F 4 * 


W A 
e 


IO Tue Cody re Fray 3ro fb e TSS eo geo . * MY” ak = 8 ; - — : : 
1 * Fi 2 - Us YL * > A k "Te 2 = Ha 444 p4 "i * E * Wy. * DA a N had, bt * 7 * web e 4 4 q * > 
, £ . : h 3 3 Ne n N we + EOS + ka er r 3 
* 0 * uh. 4b — TOES 12 2 . 55 . 0 Fx 7 % e 7 
" T0 A 8 © . 7 8 "wt; s 4 ir «ig 
. 8 2 Md NG PSF nee Tp S vs 0 5 


2» 
e Win 
A 
20-50% 882 * 

* £2 2 


88 . Le EY, TA EY I 
Au” 2 
P 8 —— . 
. ee — b n po Je 
ROLL ASI wont eas, e ring, Pas 
3 8 2 N us 2 ak” 4 N 
e 256-6 ETON" 


8 . 2 D 
CIAD ” i a 
2 +. *+ 10 
T7 n » 
V0 


R 


. TOUR thro Yorkſh, 


by a ſteep woody Cliff towards the South, and by 
large Rocks towards the North and North-eaſt: the 


North and South- weſt Sides of theſe Ruins are bounded Bb 
by two large Woods: the Circumference of that on 
the South-weſt, called Kings- Hood, is about a Mile 


and half, and of that on the North- weſt, called (as I 
ſuppoſe from a large Farm on one Side of it) Grange- 
ZYaod, is about four or five Miles. To the Eaſt is a 
large Bed of Water, which is the Collection of a Rivu- 
tet that runs amongſt the Ruins: the Banks of each 
Side this Water are ſteep, and charmingly cloathed 


with Trees of various Sorts, interſperſed with ſeveral 
pecping Rocks and Ruins: under one of the Rocks is 
the Mouth of a Cavern, which, I was told, had for- 


merly a Communication under-ground with a Mo- 
naſtery in Trickhill-Cafele, about two Miles diſtant; 
but that now the Paſſage is ſtopped by the falling in of 


the Earth: ſeveral traditional Stories are almoſt uni- 
verſally told, and believed by the Inhabitants here- 


abouts, of ridiculous Pranks which have been played 
by ſeveral Goblins and Ghoſts in this Cave, and about 


this Abbey; and, I can aſſure you, we were not a 


little entertained with the honeſt Simplicity of the 


credulous Relaters. One Side of the Nef of the Build- | 


ing, from North to South, under the middle Tower, 
and ſome old Pillars and Arches, are all that are now 
left, except ſeveral ſmall: Fragments, which are diſ- 


perſed for above half a Mile round, great Part having 
deen carried away, from time to time, to repair ad- 
jacent Churches, or build Gentlemens Seats, though 


Care was taken, dy the late Earl of Scarborough, to 


preſerve what remains. Theſe Ruins, among which 


large Trees are now grown up, and the contiguous 
Borders, make a Picture inexpreſſibly charming, eſpe- 


- cially when viewed with the Lights and Shadows they 


receive from a Weſtern Sun ; and its recluſe Situation, 
{till from every Noiſe, except the Murmur of a limpid 
Rivulet, together with the Fragments of ſepulchral 

| ED = Monuments, 


* , . 


Lorkſn. GREAT BRITAIN, 105 
Monuments, and the gloomy Shades of thoſe venerable 


Greens, Ivy and Yew, which creep up, and luxu- 
riantly branch out, and mix with the beautiful White- 


| neſs of the Rocks, give ſuch a Solemnity to this Scene, 


as demands a ſerious Reverence 'from the Beholder, 
and inſpires a contemplative Melancholy, oftentimes 
pleaſing as well as proper to indulge. | 


| The Stone of which this Abbey was built, was dug 


cout of the famous Quarry near adjoining, and ſo well 
| known to Maſons by the Name of Roch- Abbey-/tone, 
which for Whiteneſs and Beauty is not to be equaled. 


Another thing pn of Notice in this Neighbour- 


hood, is the Tower and Spire of the Church of Laugh- 
ton, which, for Delicacy and Juſtneſs of Proportion, 
is not excelled by any other Gothic Piece of the kind. 
How it happened, that ſo elegant and ornamental a 
Structure, ſuperior by far to all others round it, was 
beſtowed upon a Village church, is matter of ſome 
Wonder. | | 4. 

The Building ſtands upon a very high Hill, which 
appears at a Diſtance like that at arrow in the County 
of Middleſex, The Height of the Steeple to the 
Weather-cock is 195 Feet, and by its Situation the 
moſt conſpicuous, every way, of any perhaps in the 

Kingdom, being ſeen from many Places 40, 50, and 
bo Miles, It has a peculiar Beauty, when viewed in 


the diagonal Line, the Pinacles at the Corners of the 


Tower being joined by Arches to the Spire, as are 
others above them, which break. its Outlines, and' 
give, at the ſame time, a beautiful Diminution; but 
Time will not permit it to ſtand much longer without 
conſiderable Repairs. VVV 
The Duke of Leeds, whoſe Seat at Kiveton is at 
about three Miles Diſtance, has cut a Viſta through 


the Woods of his Park, to take this Steeple into his 


View. | | 


About three Miles from Laughton we ſaw the ſaid” 
Seat of Kiveton; It is an elegant Houſe, and the Apart-- 
_ : . ments 


"4 N 2 
, err 


2 


ny , 
n 
. 
* 5 1 
? - i 
4. 
5.8 
i 'F 
14 7 
q } 6 
A. oy - 
& * 
11 
2 3 ? 
* oo 2 - 
| = 5; 
2 22 
: + 
Fx £10 
2-3 
. 
2 8 
5 
c 8 | 
; þ d 
8 -; MW; 
E.7 1 
85 11 
Iz 
8 14 4 4 
: * = = 7 
. 
4 : 'L 
1 
; 72 £4 
1 * 
2 
8 
| - 
+ $2 
3 
1 
11 
3 1 
: 12 
* 4 
2? £3 
£ 27 
5 
= & = +» 
r is 25 1 
. 
* I . 
5 ———_— = 
1 70 
1 
127 . 
ö 1 
8 1 
{ MX 4! 
SS 
: EE 2 
= TS 4 
> ; 7 8 
2 ; 8 
72 1 « 
* I 
4 N 
FF | 
. 3 
7 14 . 
— P 22 5 
4 8 
£2 $725) 
* . 5 
1 
0 1 
" 1 
* 5 *F 
\ by HY 
< 2 
9 b 1 
_ 
k 4 Be 4 
1 + 
. 4 
. 2 ; 
17 
133 
1 
} Brin 
5 þ 
: ** 7 
5 i : 
: . 
F 
4 : By 2 
$7 35 
1 = + 
3 . 3 
93 4 + 7 
# 5 
{BE 
: 95 
. e x 
F T1 3 1 
* 11 
4 [4 2 = 
= L bo 
3 * 
j F# = 6 
1 
0 
= 
8 * 
OR - 
5 
F 1 
. 
BY 
2 — 9 
„ 
To : 
3 
9 ot : 
4 >=” 4 
2 1 7 
1 
* 7 $, 
78 3 
* 
. 4 


188 4 TOUR D York. 


ments and Offices are diſpoſed with great Conveniency. 
The Situation is in a wholeſome Air, and commands 
fine Proſpects. Here are pleaſant Gardehs, a beautiful 
Park, and a fine Canal. 5 

We omitted viſiting many other Places in theſe 


Parts, which, had Time allowed, would have anſwered 


the Trouble of riding uneven Roads, which are tire. 


ſome hereabouts ; and haſtened to reach Tic&hill, which 
is a ſmall Market-town, and very antient. 

lere is a large old Caſtle, which is ſurrounded 
with a broad and deep Moat, and a Wall about five 
Feet high; and on the North-eaſt Side is an huge 


Mount, with a round Tower on the top of it. About 


the Centre of the Space, within the Walls, is a Houſe, 
which, from its great Numbef of Apartments, and the 


Paintings of Saints and Crucifixes on the Walls, ap- 


pears to have been a religious Houſe. This Place 
was antiently of ſuch Dignity, that all the Manors 


round about it, belonging to it, were ſtiled, The Ho- 


nour of Tickhill, The Church in this Town is a very 
large and handſome Building. | ny us 


Traveling about three Miles Eaft from hence, we | 


came to Bautre, Part of which ſtands in Yorkſhire, and 
the other Part in Nottinghamſhire: it is a Town 


bleſſed with two great Conveniencies, which contri- 
bute to its Support, and make it a very well-frequented 


Place. 8 . | 
I. That it ſtands upon the great Poſt-road from 
London to Scotland; which makes it full of good Inns 
and Houſes of Entertainment. 

22. That the little, but pleaſant, River [dls runs 


by it, which, contrary to the Import of its Name, is 


a full and guzck, though not rapid and unſafe Stream, 
with a deep Channel, which carries Lighters and flat- 
bottomed Veſſels into the Trent, that comes within 
ſeven Miles of it, to a Place called Srockwwith, from 
thence to Burton, and from thence, if the Weather 

= ie 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 107 
be fair, to Hull; if not, tis ſufficient. to go to Stack- 
with, where Veſlels of 200 Tons Burden may come 
up laden to the Town, 

By this Navigation Bautre belek the Centre of 
all the Exportation of this Part of the Country, eſpe- 
cially for heavy. Goods, which are brought down 
hither from all the adjacent Countries, ſuch as Lead, 
Mill-ſtones, and Grind-ſtones, from Derby/hire ; 
wrought Iron and 'edged Tools of all Sorts, from the 
Forges at>Sheffield,. and from the adjacent Country 
called Hallamfhire, 

From hence to Doncaſter is a pleaſant Road, that 
never wants Repair, which is ſomething extraordinary 
in any Part of this lower Side of the Country. 

Doncaſter (ſo called from the River on which it 
ſtands, and the Caftle, which is now ruined) is a 
large, ſpacious Town, and exceeding populous, go- 
verned by a Mayor, and carrying on a great Manu- 
facture, principally for Stockens, Gloves, and knit 


Waiſtcoats ; and as it ſtands upon the great Northern 


Poſt-road, is full of good Inns. There' is a remark- 
able old Column called a Croſs, at the End of the 
Town, with a Norman Inſcription upon it. ; 

Here we ſaw the firſt Remains of the great Roman 
Highway, which, though we could not perceive be- 
fore, were eminent and remarkable juſt at the Entrance 
into the Town, and ſoon after. appeared in many 
Places. Here are alſo two ſtrong Stone Bridges over 
the Dun, beſides a long Cauſeway beyond them, the 
Waters of the River being dangerous to Paſſengers, 
when they {well over its Banks, as is ſometimes the 
Caſe. 

The Town is now i prodigiouſl improved | in Build- 
ings. 


It has but one Church, which is large, and its 


Tower of admirable Work. There is a remarkable 


Bw on one Robert r, a famous Man of Don- 
F 6 cler, 


ern mae 


caſter, who gave a r called Reſin ngton W cd, to 
the Poor: | 


Howe, Howe, who's here? 
L, Robin, of Doncaſtere, 
And Margaret my Fere. 

Dat I ſpent, that I had; 

That 1 gave, that 1 have 3 ; 

That I left, that I loſt. 

„ 2 i. 150% 

Doth Keb Byrks, who in this 7 orld did reign 
* Years and ſeven, but liv'd not ane. 


Here lies alſo, under a plain Grave-ſtone in the 


Ch, the . of one Thomas Ellis, memorable 


for having been five times Mayor of the Town, for 


founding an Hoſpital there, called St. Thomas's the 
Apoſtle, and endowing it plentifully. 

We ought not to forget, that the celebrated Sailor, 
Sir Martin Forbiſher, was born in this Town. He 
was the firſt Engliſbman, who (in the Reign of Queen 
Elizabeth) diſcovered the North Paſſage to China and 
Cathai, and found ſome Streights, which he called 
after his own Name, and a Foreland after the Queen's. 


At his firſt Voyage, ſome of the Company brought 
back ſome black Stones, out of which the Refiners, 


it is ſaid, extracted Gold; which encouraged him to 
load his Ship with them afterwards: but they were then 
ſound to be fit for nothing, but to mend the High- 


ways. He ſignalized himſelf againſt the Spani/h Ar- 
mada; and received his Death-wound by a Shot at 
Breſt in Britanye the Surgeon, having extracted the 


Bullet, left the Wadding behind; by which means 
the Wound mortified, and he died as ſoon as he had 
brought back the Fleet to Plymouth. 

At Aſceron, five Miles from Doncaſter, an ſeven 
from Pontefract, there is a Sulphur Spring, which is 


now incloſed, and falls into a fine Baſon. It riſes 
within a 328 Vards of a Pool; the Soll on one Side of 
which 


5 


Yo 
wh 
-lyir 
and 
we 


dro 
bor 
anc 
inv 
Br 
the 
Br 


* 


Yorkſh: GREAT BRTTAIN. 109 
which is Lime-ſtone, and on the other a white Clay, 
lying upon a white Sand. This Pool is never dry, 
and never overflows. The Virtues of the Waters. 
were firſt diſcovered by Farriers and Farmers, who 
drove their Horſes and Cattle thither in the moſt ſtub- 
bornzMaladies, and this with all imaginable Succeſs 
and theſe Waters are now famous for curing the moſt 
inveterate ſtrumous Sores by Bathing. 

We proceeded to Coningſborougb Caſtle, called in 
Britiſh, Caer Conan, ſituate on a Rock, where Mat- 
thew of Weſtminſter ſays, That Aurelius Ambraſius, a 
Britiſh Prince, vanquiſhed Hengiſi, the Saxon Gene- 
ral, and took him Priſoner; where, in Revenge of 
his barbarous Murder of the Britiſb Nobility in cold 

\ Blood, near Stonehenge in Wiliſbire, he cut off his 
Head. e e | | 

Before the Gate is an Agger, faid to be the Burying- 
place of Hengi/t, It is not only famous for its Anti- 
quity, but its Situation alſo, upon a pleaſant Aſcent, 
having in its Neighbourhood fix large Market-towns, 
120 Villages, many large Woods of Oak, ſome con- 
taining 100 Acres, and others beautifully cut through 
into Walks, fix Iron Furnaces, many Mines of Coal 
and Iron, Quarries of Stone for building, 9 large 
Stone Bridges, 40 Water-mills, 6 Seats of Noblemen, 
60 of Gentlemen, 15 Parks, and 2 navigable Rivers. 
Upon the Dun alſo, a little Way from Coning/borough, 
is a Place called Temple-borough, a Roman Fortifica- 
tion, of which the North- eaſt Corner is waſhed away 

by the River. The Area is about 200 Paces long, be- 
ſides the Agger; and on the Outſide of it. is a large 
Trench, 37 Paces deep; on the other Side of it is 
another Trench, covered with large Trees. Ly 
From Coningſborough we turned Weſt to HYentworth, 
on purpoſe to ſee the old Seat of the Zentworths, who 
have flouriſhed here ever fince the Norman Invaſion, 
and been poſſeſſed of the Eſtate of Moodbouſe from the 
Time of Henry III. It was rebuilt in a moſt elegant 

| N | Manner 


2 
43s 
+. 
kT 
Y "| 
. 
2 . 
1 
5 
4 
» 74 
n 
3 
r 
24 
Pi 
£ 4 * 
5 
4 
I 5 . 
I 
? * 1 
: J 4 
1 
1 
1 4-5 
472 
þ EIFS 
F* Ul 
+ YE 
8 5 ; 
2 2 3 
. 3 
2 7 
” z * 
1 3-4 
« 4 
1 
1 
: FT BF: 
5 = 
$7 q 
N } 
7 WH 
Eb; gl 
vi LI 
F 4 - 
1 
* ＋ * 
p 6s 15 
5 = 2 
2 855 7 
4 57 * 
"4 Po 
4 4 > 
-S 
n 
F . % 
111 IE : 
8% _ i 
TT: 
M5 2 if 
ns . 
8 5 
HE o 
#4 
5 4 
414 
. 
1 0 
3 
# 2 
28 
$7 Y EX 
N FR © 1 
2 
5 


n 
8 1 2 * & * - 8 
a oe „ Nee apa N 2 : þ 5 4 
N ; nn . — n . —— 5 55 ” 
4 
— 


7 1 5 7 N r 4 oe 2 r e Nee 20 8 « RO Wot © ** N pg Re * r * = 
Og Re Os 8 eee k EC e #2 n r FD x ß TE 9G AR 
2 * » . 5 2 Pute 2 « wad (aA _ Cob 
I : ws OTE FINE OT * 4 - 


\ 
1 Dre r 2 b rr. er n ogy n — 8 pt e r —— rr — 
3 or: 0 — 8 , IS 2. . — 9 3 "> 3 5 rr 8 N - 1 
: RY 
PEP , N 12 . 2 n — g . n, 2 po 
FA 557 Cn Kon, - a 2 od Bo ants Cs 


- gr Woe 
OOO 
a . 
U 8 8 
By . * ** 


ST GH Ira 8 Haas 3 
text As — e "a 


und, we. 


* 
da my 22 « r — * 
8 1 fm ob =; 2 — — — 
_— * — * — — IE 2 * 
. I IEN TO 
2 — . SO, — p — > 3 
2 2 - RP — he II 5 oy NEON A bn * 
xt >, n 2 . 3 — 65 * — 7 bt 
Re eee re D » 6 5 5 2 — 
2 3 n bo vert _— 
wy * — —ä—ůͤͤ —ꝰ os 0099 was. — * 
1 — ds * R 


2 
— 
— 


Ly Wy WI 
T N 2 2 
* — 8 
— ———— 
—— As. 
x RET" 


r 
. 


. 


is brought by a Canal of 300 Yards into the Lake, 


110 ATOUR tr Yorklh 


Manner by the late Marquis of Rockingham, and is 
now called JYentworth-houſe, Among the ſeveral 


noble Perſons of this Family who 'have reſided here, 


was Thomas Wentworth, Earl of e e beheaded 


in the Time of King Charles I. whoſe Body lies buried 


in this Church. His Honours were extin& in his Son; 


but his Seat is ſtil] in the Poſſeſſion of the Ma: quis of 
Rockingham, his Great Great Grandſon, who has 
made ſuch Improvements to it, that it is inferior to 


few in Great Britain. It is ſituated on the Side of an 


Hil, defended from the North and Weſt, but opens 


to the South and Eaſt, towards which Quarters it com- 
mands a very extenſive Proſpect over a rich and beau- 
tiful Country, belonging to the Family. 


The Gardens are large, and adorned with Obeliſks, 


Statues, c. having a Green-houſe and Bathing- 
room. On one Side there is an uninterrupted View 
into the Park and Neighbourhood. Here are two 
Beauties rarely to be met with any where elſe, a Grove 
of old Fir-trees, and a Mount of above 100 Feet 
high, perpendicularly meaſured, which the Marquis 
has been at a great Expence to raiſe: at the top of 


this Mount is erected a Summer-houſe, which com- 


mands a very extenſive and finely diverſified Proſpect. 
The Circumference of the Park is about eight Miles, 
and is beautified with Fiſh- ponds, Woods of Tim— 


ber of an uncommon Size, and Plantations innnumer- 


able. The Turf is of a fine Verdure, and the Soil 
Rudy. „„ 


The Houſe, with the Additions, will extend 200 
Vards in Front, and is built in Imitation of Wanſtead 


in E/ex, the Seat of Earl Tilney. And an Improve- 
ment has been added to the Park and Fiſh-ponds ; 


one whereof, conſiſting of 14 Acres of Ground, re- 
ceives a ſmall Brook, which, being conducted through 


a winding Cut, for 600 Yards, falling down fix Steps, 


and 


Yorkſh. GRTAT BRITAIN. 211 


and ſo affords a pretty Proſpect of Water for near a 
Mile together. | | f 
From hence we went to ſee the antient Stainborough, 
now called Y/entworth-Ca/tle,” a fine Seat belonging to 
the Earl of Strafford: the late Earl built the Houſe 
here, which has an exceeding noble Front, and adorned 
it with large Plantations, fine Water-works, and 


Gardens; to which, if we add the Viſta's, Walks, 


and Woods, which are large and numerous, it may 
vie with moſt Seats in Great Britain for Elegance. 


We ſet forward, and came to Barneſley, a little 


Market: town, well-built of Stone, where a Manu- 
facture of Iron and Steel-work flouriſhes. It has a 
ſmoaky Aſpect, and is called Black- Barnefley ; but 
whether on that Account, or from the Moors, which 
look all black, like Bagfhot-heath, I know not, 


After we had paſſed theſe Moors, we came, thro* | 


a rich, pleaſant, and populous Country, to Wakefield. 


Wakefield is a large Town, ſituate upon the River 


Calder, There is an handſome Stone Bridge over the 
River, upon which ſtands a Chapel, erected by King 


Edward IV. in Memory of his Father Richard Duke 


of Yor#, who was lain near this Place. The Chapel 
is 10 Yards long, and ſix broad; and though very 


much defaced by Time, appears to have been wrought 


in a curious manner. A little above the Bridge is a 
Waſh, or Dam, over which the Water rolling, forms 
an admirable Caſcade of a great Lengtn. 
This Town conſiſts of three great Streets, which 
meet in a Centre near the Church, where might be 
formed a very ſpacious Market-place ; but, by reaſon 
of the great Number of Inhabitants, it is fo crouded 
with Buildings, that there is only a ſmall Area round 


the Market- eroſs, which is a very elegant Building, 


being an open Colonnade of the Doric Order, ſup- 
porting a Dome, to which you aſeend by an open cir- 
cular Pair of Stairs, in the Centre of the Building, 


This brings you to a Room, which receives Light 


from 


— 


7 = — 0 " 1 . 0 4 _ 1 
4 r Lute e . 4 * 1 Aa" 9 * ok ht * | nnd Ca A AIST * * 1 5 S e CREE EIS VIS ni] wh PAL h 425 rene FT . + 4 p - 
— A 1 2 15 0 2 a 5 A 4 * X 1 4 
— — A . 2. IN 5 bes P . _ - — . 3 _ 
88 þ : f 9 22 - ” — — — VENT * 5 ; > N 5 2 5 : 
n R r 1 ö 2 o re 8 5 7 r 8. 2 * X GT VI 3 * * PROSE, OI TOE pull 2s Ear 3 n 
— p Y —— n enn E ve ee To ena; $1095 * 0 n * 3 q N wy OK © « „„ 2 2 0 N e Shs 5 * e 
2 F 5 P 1 r BC CI LS > IE D 1 ; i by We TS , wt © 1 BG | 
- . 8 bee . 13 TORS N m7 * "IE ILY yu Elbe n= 34. ar 2 5 San en * 4 NA 1 
0 e * SS MR $4 3 1 * eu! 0 r 1 2 2 . N 1 * . N ai, 5 . 7 Wb oe * 2 
r DD — Bes r — - rr * - * 2 Wr eee o W e r — — pe I cait 5 erma_ge? — — — 
_ ah * * hike e 1 - * PR — — mung LEY . n A RR; * 1 * — „ » —_ wc 


** erer 8 
” > 9 oaryas X R 
RS SS LS... res 
nf * e — - * 
* x 45% OY *% HS 366 1 3 Nies 
I 4 3 \ * mn dt” Ss S901 
w te the ra Beebe wet pore 


7 - 

nou. wy 
— 
my? 


5 — _— OO eh. oy ep = N 5 a * U . 5g oo . N —— S 85 r — ge —— 
A SI 4 eee * n . 2208s. PL — ere — D rr . = 
= r 2 2 77 N W — 1 a . * . 1 4 4 2 x 92 — 2 g „ * 9 
a Ce ne I EO es It 2 CN .... ˙mmQ—ſqſm 8 883 I ens N —_ * — bo — Nays \ 
S . . rr Ho IG PRES oO We et LEES 2 th 7 r — — — 
= * n u A.. hl rl ee RS Gene 3 . — = pcs a PF ANT, TILES * pr ROE. e n 2 _— 2 2 N —— ———— 
= 5 — * * — — —— — ns Maes — 2 — 2 - — — — 3 * 2 * 2 
n * d "Ss. —— a r 1 - — — 2 . 1 — 22 
r 5 : ; OE Ps OP 2 - * — - ** 
2 ; e — 4 1 0 > — * n 2 4 a — —— H— — —— 
ul * 


- 4 6: A BLIG S 5 
* bt, - — 

N 5 * n = 

S eee 
2 r 
fs Wa Fa WIDE ron ² ATI CAP ABA Sao 

* 1 * — — — 
8 —— —— — - — 2 
. x» os 2 oo a * 


r ——— 
. PTR 
2 IE — 
D eee 
— 
— Toms einen 
Ke =. 
” 


upon the Spot where the Duke of 
rately, and refuling to yield, though ſurrounded with: 


— 


1 1 A TOUR thre Vorkſh. 


from a Turret on the top, and may be called the 


Town- hall; for here they tranſact all their public 


Buſineſss. 


The Church is a very large and lofty Gethic Build. 


ing, the Body of which was repaired in the Year 1724. 
but the Spire (which is one of the higheſt in the County) 


remains in the ſame State it was. 
From the Bridge you have an agreeable View to 


the South-eaſt, where, by the Side of the River, riſes 
a Hill, covered with Wood, at about a Mile Diſtance. 


This joins to an open Moor or Common, called Heath- 

moor, upon which are ſeveral Gentlemens Seats, very 

pleaſantly ſituated. | 2 | 
South, between Wateßeld and a Village called San- 


dal, they ſhewed us a ſmall triangular Piece of Ground, 
which was fenced off by itſelf ;. and on. which, before 


the late Civil War, ſtood a large 9 Croſs, juſt 
York, fighting deſpe- 


Enemies, was killed. But though Religion has ſuf- 


ſered the Croſs to fall, the Chapel I mentioned on the- 
Bridge at Wakefield, the other Monument of this 


Battle, is ſtill preſerved. It is now uſed as a Ware: 
houſe for Goods, Some ſay there are more People 


here, than in the City of York, and yet it is no Cor- 
poration- town. | 


I cannot here paſs by my former Obſervation, that 


all the great Rivers take their Beginning in the Moun- 
| tains of Blackſ/tane- Edge and High- Peak, which, as 


] have ſaid, part the Counties of Lancaſter and Yor, 


and that theſe Rivers all. take their Courſe due Eaſt. 


The Dun is the firſt; the ſecond is the Calder, now 


becoming a very large River at Jatejfie/d; and the 


Aire is the next, which riſes at the Foot of the Moun- 


tain Penigent, on the Edge of Lancaſhire, of which it 
is vulgarly ſaid : 4 : 


Pendle-Hill and Penigent © 
Are the 6 Hills between Scotland and Tren o 
RES A8 


N 


L 


| Yorkſh. GREAT BRIAN. M5 
As the Calder runs by Halifax, Huthersfield, and 
through Yakefield ; ſo the Aire runs by Skipton, Brad- 
rd, and thro” Leeds; and then both join a little above 
Caſtle - Bradford Bridge, and in an united Stream form 
that Navigation from this trading Part of Yor#/hire to 
Hull, which is of ſo much Advantage to the whole 
County. 1 1 
From Waleſield we went to ſee the antient Town 
of Pontefract, but rode five or ſix Miles out of our 
Way over Barnſdale, in order to ſee the great Roman 
Cauſeway, which runs acroſs this Moor, from Don- 
caſter to Caſtleforth, and which I ſhall preſently be 
more particular upon. In Pontefract, and the Caſtle, 
much Blood has been ſpilt, in different Ages. Here 
Henry, the great Earl of Lancaſter, who was Lord of- 
the Caſtle, and whoſe Anceſtors bad beautified, en- 
larged, and fortified it, was beheaded by his Nephew, 
King Edward II. with three or four more of the 
Engliſb Barons. Here Richard II. was murdered, and, 
if Hiſtory may be credited, in a moſt cruel manner: 
and here Anthony Earl Rivers, and Sir Richard Gray, 
the former Uncle, and the other Brother- in law to 
King Edward V. were beheaded by King Richard III. 
In the Civil Wars, a ſmall Party of brave Fellows 
took this Caſtle by Surprize for the King, and deſpe- 
rately defended it to the laſt Extremity; but, being at 
length obliged to yield, five of them attempted to break 
through the Befiegers Camp, three of whomperiſhed 
in the Attempt. : 
The Town is large, and well-built, but. much 
ſmaller than it has been, "The Caſtle is ſo demoliſhed, 
to the very Foundation, though built on a firm Rock, 
that there is little or nothing of the Walls remaining, 
Pontefra&'is a Corporation by Preſcription, and the 
Mayor and 12 Aldermen are always Juſtices of the 
Peace; and it ſends two Members. to. Parliament. Tis 
laid, that antiently none could be arreſted at the 
Market-croſs, called Ofwald's Crols ; and u free Way 
| 98 | leading 


114 A TOUR thro VPorkſh. 
leading to the Croſs, with about two Yards around it, 
was kept unpaved in Memory of that Privilege. But 
in the Year 1735. the old Croſs was pulled down, 
and an — * Dome, ſupported by a Colonnade of 


Doric Pillars (the Charge whereof was defrayed by a 
Legacy left by one Dupere, an [nhabitant of the Town) 


was erected for that Purpoſe. 
Tube Caſtle muſt have been a noble Pile. A round 
Tower, yet ſtanding, is intire, in or near which, the 
Tradition is, King Richard II. was murdered. Ad- 


joining to this Tower are Winding-ſtairs, which de- 


ſcend into ſeveral Vaults and ſubterraneous Paſlages. 


The Pariſh-church, which ſtands near the Caſtle, 


= and was prodigiouſly large, received ſo much Damage 
in the Civil Wars, that no more than the Shell is now 
left ſtandi 
the Form of a Croſs, with a Tower in the Middle, 
which is in good Proportion, and was formerly 
crown'd with a magnificent Lantern, enriched with 
carved Work ; but it received ſuch Damage from a 
Cannon-Shot, during the Siege of the Caſtle *, that it 
was ſoon after blown down; and, upon the Sutrender 
of the Caſtle, the Parliament (by Reſolution of the 
Houſe, of the 27th of March 1649.) granted 10001. 
to be raiſed by Sale of the Materials of the ſaid Caftle, 

to the Town of We e towards the Repairing of 
their Place of public Worſhip, and re-edifying an Ha- 
bitation for a Miniſter. Part of this Grant might be 
applied in erecting a plain Octagon Building upon the 


Tower, which finiſkes the whole, in a manner not 


diſagreeable, though far inferior to the former. In the 


North- weſt Corner of this Tower, are two circular 


Flights of Stairs, winding about the ſame Centre, 
with ſeparate Entrances below, and diſtinct Landings 
above. The Inhabitants of the Town ſtill continue 
to 3 in this r but Divine Service 1s 

0 performed 


* Metficnrs Bock have publiſhed a Print of this famous Caſtle, from 
2 Drawing taken during the Siege. | 


ng. It is an handſome Gothic Building, in 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIN. 115 
performed in a Chapel adjoining to the nnen 
which is very ſpacious. 

At the Bottom of the Market- place ſtands the 
Town-hall. 

From Perry- bridge; within a Mile of Ponte ral, 
extends a large Stone Cauſeway, about a Mile in 
Length, to a Village called Brotherton, whither Mar- 
garet, Wife of King Edward I. was forced to retire 


as ſhe was hunting, and was delivered of a Son, call- 


ed from the Village Thomas of Brotherton. This Son 
was afterwards made Earl of Norfo/t, and Marſhal 
of England. Not far from the Church is a Piece of 
Ground of 20 Acres, ſurrounded with. a French and 
a Wall, where, as Tradition informs us, ſtood the 
Houſe in which the Queen was delivered; and the 
Tenants are obliged by Fenure to keep it ſurrounded 
with a Wall of Stone. 

A little to the South of this Village, the great Road 


divides into two Parts: one goes on to the Right to 
_ Tori, and the other, thro' Aberforth and Watherby, to 


Scotland... 
Caſtleforth is a Villeo within three Miles of Pon- 


tefract, and ſtands near the Confluence of the Ri- 
vers Aire and Calder, It was formerly a Place of 


great Conſideration, inſomuch that ſome Authors 
8 it a City. There has been uy "yp 2 Roman 
Coin. | 

We had the Curioſity to trace the great Roman 
Highway from this Place to Aberforth, a ſmall Mar- 
ket-town, noted only for its Pn Manufacture. The 
Cauſeway in many Places is intirely perfect, although 
undoubtedly a Wok of 15 or 1600 Years old: and, 


in other Places where it is broken up, the Courſes ap- 


pear to be of different Materials; the Bottom is Clay 


or Earth, upon that is Chalk, then Gravel, upon the 
Gravel is Stone, and then Gravel upon that, This 


Cauſeway runs in a direct Line from Doncaſter to Ca- 
AION where it makes an Angle, and runs in ano- 


ther 


116 A TOUR r Vorkſh. 
ther direct Line to Aber forth, Tadcaſter, and York. It 
is very eaſy to trace its Courſe over Moors and open 


Grounds, which have not been cultivated; but there 
are few or no Remains upon the incloſed Lands. There 


is no doubt but that the Romans had Communications 


between all their Stations in this Country, by Roads 
of this kind: and though, perhaps, by reaſon of the 
Dampneſs of our Climate, and a Neglect of repairing 
them after the Romans left the Iſland, they are not 
now to be compared with the noble Remains of the 
Appian and Flaminian Ways in Ita; yet in ſeveral 


Places they appear to be aſtoniſhing Monuments of 


Roman Induſtry, and ſhew how well thoſe People then 
reconciled the Grand with the Uſeful. . As I have ſaid 
ſo much of theſe Roads in this Place, I ſhall not here- 
after trouble you with Accounts of the other Traces 


of them, which I expect to meet with in my Journies 


thro” this County, 


From Aberforth we turned Weſt, and went to Leeds, 


which is a large, wealthy, and populous Town, ſtand- 
ing on the North Side of the River Aire, with great 


Suburbs on the South Side, and both joined by a ſtately. 


Stone Bridge, ſo large, and ſo wide, that formerly the 
Cloth-market was kept upon it; and therefore the Re- 
freſhment given the Clothiers by the Inn-keepers (be- 
ing a Pot of Ale, a Noggim of Pottage, and a Trencher 
of boil'd or roaſt Beef, for Two pence) is called the 
Brigg- ſhat to this Day. Sd ee 


The Increaſe of the Manufactures, and of the 


Trade, ſoon made the Market too great to be con - 
fined to the Brigg; ſo that it was removed to the 
High ſtreet, beginning from the Bridge, and running 


up North almoſt to the Market-houſe, where the 


ordinary Market for Proviſions begins; which alſo 
is the greateſt of its kind in all the North of Eng- 
tand, © „ ; 


But by Length of Time, and by the great Num- 


ber of Waggons, Carts, and Wheel-carriages, almoſt 


continually 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIN. 117 
continually paſſing on this Bridge, it was fallen into De- 
cay, and required a ſpeedy Repair; and by the Nar- 
rowneſs of the Road over, occaſioned by the Build- 
ings, and other Incroachments, made or ſet up at 
both Ends and Abutments of the Bridge, the Way or 
Paſſage over the ſame was greatly confined and ob- 

| ſtructed, and became not only dangerous to Paſlengers 

on Foot and on Horſeback, but alſo greatly prejudi- 
cial to the Trade and Commerce of Leeds; to remedy 
theſe and other Inconveniences, an ACt pafled in the 
Year 1760. for raiſing Money for the finiſhng and 
completing the Repair of the Bridge ; and for the pur- 
chaſing and taking down the Houſes and Buildings 
which ſtraighten and obſtruct the Paſſage to and over 
it 


r 1 . 
. FR 


— 6 a — 
r * * — 
—— r 5 


— 2 


But the Cloth- market at Leeds is chiefly to be ad- 
mired, as a Prodigy of its Kind, and perhaps not to 
be equalled in the World. The Market for Serges 
at Exeter is indeed a wonderful Thing, and the Mo- 
ney returned very great; but it is there only once a 
Week, whereas here it is every Tueſday and Satur- 

_ Early in the Morning, Treſſels are placed in two 

Rows in the Street, ſometimes two Rows on a Side, 

croſs which Boards are laid, which make a kind of tem- + 
porary Counter on either Side, from one End of tze 
Street to the other. e . N 14 

The Clothiers come early in the Morning with their 
Cloth ; and, as few bring more than one Piece, the 

Market-days being ſo frequent, they go into the Inns * 
and Public- houſes with it, and there ſet it down. 
At about Six o'Clock in the Summer, and about 
Seven in the Winter, the Clothiers being all come 
by that Time, the Market Bell at the old Chapel by 

the Bridge rings; upon which it would ſurprize a 
Stranger, to ſee in how few Minutes, without Hurry, 
Noiſe, or the leaſt Diſor ler, the wivle Market is 

Bled, and all the Buzrds uf on che Treflels covered 

Er nn, With 


2 ** 2 * 7 . . Z 
: ; : r 88 288 
Ta „ 4 . 9 te ea oats. A . * . A : « * 
P PPP N * Wy r * — EIT " — 2 oy 2 
n * ee — — n g — 1 — s 


3 
Phe =o" 


* wy 
2 D 


o 
. N. 
Wet 
a 4 
48:7 
ry 
{3 
: 
2:9 
* $3.5 
1 
77 
+ 
195 
x4 
11 
82) 
5 
T5; 
145 
EN | 
1 . 
18:8 
$34 
£4'S 
SB F< 
4 : J 1 
1 
534 
£87 4 
vu * Q 
k . 
6 5 » 
4 
5 123 
1 7 
$4.45 
485-77 
368 
: | 
. 
1 
11 F 
1 
1 
3; 8 
1 
9 
- 
* K 5 
BW i} 4 
7 
{$737 5 
1 
1 
11 
1 
N 
9 
44 
19037 
5 MES + p 
1 
8} 
=_ . 4 
3 N : 
825 15 
n 15 
1 ö 
H! : 
- my "yr 
4 1.3 
4 . 9 
k att) ; 
«044 
| I 
Fr. 3 
. 
1 
1 
155 
By 
1925 
1 3 
1 
44 
42 
2 
43 * 
*. 
1 
1:7 
1 
C ! ? 
N.. 
WE 
oi} 68 
1 
1 
i ; 
15 } 


| 

— 

nel 

3 — 

e 

— 4 was 

— 

. 1 


118 A TOUR tr# Vorkſh. 
with Cloth, as eloſe to one another as the Pieces can 
lie longways, each Proprietor ſtanding behind his own 
Piece, who form a' Mercantile Regiment, as it were, 
drawn up in a double Line, in as great Order as a 
Military one. is e 
As ſoon as the Bell has ceaſed ringing, the Factors 
and Buyers of all Sorts enter the Market, and walk 
up and down between the Rows, as their Occaſions 


direct. Some of them have their foreign Letters of Or- 


ders, with Patterns ſealed on them, in their Hands; the 
Colours of which they match, by holding them to the 
-Cloths they think they agree to. When they have 


pitched upon their Cloth, they lean over to the Clothier, 
and, by a Whiſper, in the feweſt Words imaginable, 


the Price is ſtated ; one aſks, the other bids ; and they 
agree or difagree in a Moment. e 

The Reaſon of this prudent Silence is owing to the 
Clothiers ſtanding ſo near to one another; for it is not 
reaſonable, that one Trader ſhould know another's 
Traffick. e . 5 


If a Merchant has bidden a Clothier a Price, and he 
will not take it, he may go after him to his Houſe, 


and tell him he has conſidered of it, and is willing to 
let him have it; but they are not to make any new 


Agreement for it, ſo as to remove the Market from 


the Street to the Merchant's Houſe. — 
The Buyers generally walk up and down twice on 


each Side of the Rows, and in little more than an 


Hour all the Buſineſs is done. In leſs than half an 
Hour you will perceive the Cloth begin 'to move 
off, the Clothier taking it up upon his Shoulder to 


carry it to the Merchant's Houſe, At about half an 
Hour after Eight the Market Bell rings again, upon 
which the Buyers immediately diſappear, the Cloth 
is all ſold ; or if any remains, it is carried back in- 
to the Inn. By Nine o'Clock the Boards and Treſ- 


ſels are removed, and the Streets left at Liberty for 
the Market- people of other Profeſſions, the Li- 
Ds | | 5 nen- 


* 


- | 

Yorkſh GREAT BRITAIN. 119 
nendrapers, Shoemakers, Hard-waremen, and the 
like. 
Thus you fon 10 or W warth * Cloth, and 
' ſometimes much more, bought and ſold in little more 
than an Hour, the Laws of the Market being the 
moſt ſtrictly obſerved that I ever ſaw in any Market 
in E ngland. 

If it be aſked, Hou all theſe Goods at this Place, 
at Wakefield, and at Halifax, are vended and diſpoſed 
of ? I would obſerve, 

Firſt, That there is an — to ſup- 
ply which ſeveral conſiderable Traders in 3 go 
with Droves of Pack horſes, loaden with thoſe Goods, 
to all the Fairs and Market- towns almoſt over the 
whole Iſland, not to ſell by Retale, but to the Shops 
by Wholeſale; giving large Credit. Tis ordinary 
for one of theſe Men to carry a thouſand Pounds 
worth of Cloth with him at a time; and, having 
ſold that, to ſend his Horſes back tor as mark more; 
and this very often in a Summer; for they travel 
chiefly at that Seaſon, becauſe of the Badneſs of the 
Roads. 

There are others, who have Commiſſions from Lon- 
don to buy, or who give Commiſſions to Factors and 
Warehouſe-keepers in London to ſell for them, who 
not only ſupply all the Shop-keepers and Wholeſale 
Men in London, but fell alſo very great Quantities to 
the Merchants, as well for Exportation to the Engliſh 
Colonies in America, which take off great Quantities 
of the coarſe Goods, eſpecially New England, New 
York, Virginia, &c. as allo to the Ruſſia Merchants, 
who ſend exceeding great Quantities to Peter/burg, 
Riga, Dantzick, Narva, Sweden, and Pomerania; 
though of late the Manufactures of this Kind ſet up in 
 Pryſjia, and other Northern Parts of Germany, inter- 
fere a little with them. 

The third Sorts are ſuch as receive „ 
ſrom abroad, to buy Cloth for the Merchants chiefly 
in 


1 5 1 
— oy 
— em an pe OO * 
— vane. wh wang dty 
4 


— 


120 A TOUR tro Yorkſh, 
in Hamburg, and in Zolland, &c. Theſe are not 
only many in Number, but ſome of them very con. 
ſiderable in their Dealings, and correſpond with the 
fartheſt Provinces in Germany. een 
On account of this Trade it was, that the Rivers 
Aire and Calder were made navigable, under the Di- 
rection of Alderman Pickering, the celebrated Author 
of the Marrow of Mathematics, and performed at the 
Expence of ſeveral private Merchants, without callin 
in the Aſſiſtance of the Nobility and Gentry. By this 
means a Communication was opened from Leeds and 
TVakefield to York and Hull; fo that all the-Woolen 
Manufactures now exported are carried by Water to 
Hull, and there ſhipped for Holland, Bremen, Ham— 


burg, and the Baltic. And, encouraged by the Suc- 


ceſs of this Act, in the Seſſion of Farliament Inno 
1740. an Act paſſed for continuing the Navigation of 
the River Calder from FY/akefield to Ealand and Hali- 


- Fax; and another paſſed in 1757. for further extending 


the Navigation of the ſaid River; and ſeveral! other 
Acts have paſſed for mending of Highways around all 


theſe Parts, to Halifax, Ealand, Doncaſter, York, &c. 


There is another Trade in this Part of the Coun- 
try, become very confiderable ſince the opening the 
above Navigation, which is the Carriage of Coals 
down from Wakefield and Leeds; at both which Places 


they have inexhauſtible Stores. Theſe are carried quite 
down into the Ouſe, and then either go up that River 


to York, or down to the Humber, where the Trent and 
Ouſe meet together, and which in a few Miles falls 


into the Sea. In this Paſſage abundance of large Towns 


are ſupplied with Coal, with this Advantage too, that, 
whereas the Newca/{le Coals pay four Shillings per 


Chaldron Duty to the Public, theſe, being only Ki: 


'ver-borne Coal, are exempted, and pay nothing: fo 


that the City of York, which ſtrenuouſly oppoſed the 


frſt Navigation of theſe Rivers, in this Particular, as 


well as in many others, daily experience; the Benefit 
it. | ET: 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 121 
I need not add, that, by the ſame Navigation, all 
heavy Goods imported at Hull are brought up theſe 
Rivers, as well as Goods brought from London, and 
other Parts of the Kingdom, ſuch as Cheeſe, Lead, 
Iron, Salt, Sugars, Tobacco, Fruit, Spice, Hops, 
Oil, Wine, Brandy, Spirits, and the like. 7 

The Antiquity, of Leeds is very great, being men- 
tioned by Venerable Bede ; but it was not incorpo-- 
rated till 2 Car. I. when Sir John Savile (afterwards 


Lord Savile) was made the firſt honorary Alderman ; 


in Memory of whom the Arms of the Town are ad- 


orned with his Supporters, and thoſe very ſuitable, 


being the two Athenian Birds, ſacred to that Goddeſs 
who was deemed the Patroneſs of Spinning and Weav- 
ing, as well as Arts in general. 8 

At the Weſt End of the Town formerly ſtood a 
Caſtle, wherein King Richard II. was impriſoned 


before he was carried to Pontefract. And on the 


Site thereof now ſtands the antient Manor-houſe, 
with the Park, c. lately belonging to Mr. Richard 
Sykes. Here are two magnificent Halls, both built 
about the Year 1714. one for White Cloths, ſup- 
ported by Pillars and Arches, which form a Qua- 
drangle like the Royal Exchange, with an handſome 
Cupola, and Bell on the Top, to give Notice when 
the Market for theſe Sorts of Goods begins. The 
bother is the Guild or Moot Hall, the Front of which 
is built likewiſe on Arches, with ruſtic Coins and 
Tabling; wheie, in a Nich, is placed a fine Statue of 
Queen Ann. „ | | 

Here are three Churches. St. Peter's, the Pariſh- 


church, is built in the Form of a Croſs, with a 


Tower riſing from the Middle, with eight Bells in 
it. In the Cieling is the Giving of the Law, finely 
painted in Freſco by Parmentier, who voluntarily 


pave this Specimen of his Art, in Gratitude for the 


Encouragement he had met with here. St. Foln's 


was built in 1634. at the ſole Expence of Mr. Har- 
V . 


. — 1 " 
. 
1 5 * Fd : F 
* 10 P —— — TTT 8 * R 2 — 5 - 0 - * bn Ws . - - 7 1 . \ 
on Ts rr « 8 * 5 « 1 5 : A p 0 . 1 5 
XI. LN Wy 5 e r 8 1 * * " 3 . 1 F 1 5 * rn a SAT * Nen > Py «>; reg: — — 1 a n den £5; e 1 8 N= wg, $5 — — — — — n — — — - 
0 ne 25s r fl * 5 0 A 2 = v 2. 5 * 3 ; ; - — a p . 5 Gems > £ rr op py Y 1 - — 
\ "3 «aft 18 arent ry; uh oe e my" 4 9 * nn * * r r *7 4 eee 8 n n — —— — OY r preg ay I Inge = nn Gs dear ů—— rea: — — 3 —— — 1 — ret er na 232 * 
© NE. PL TIA, G ” . 9 3 0; 1 N ; Lt 3 —_— g p . I _ 8 . . g by 
4 = * 
— a 
o 4 * » „ * , 2 _ - " — 8 * un 4 N 7 San * 2 — r —— 


122 AT OUR tro Yorkh. 
ion, who likewiſe built the Alms-houſes adjoining, 
a Free- ſchool, a Market- croſs, and the Street called 


New-ſtreet, the Rents of which he appropriated to pi- 


ous Uſes. 


The'third Church was built a few Years ago; and 
is an elegant Structure, with a Spire- Steeple, and dedi- 


cated to the Holy Trinity. 


From Leeds we advanced Northward, and came to 


Harwood, a pretty little Town, where is a coſtly Stone 


Bridge of four Arches over the River ¶ Here, which 
runs in a Bed of Stone, and looks as clear as Rock- 


water: Here are the Ruins of a ſtrong Caſtle. The 
Church is remarkable for ſeveral things: particularly 
for the Interment of Sir William Gaſcoigne, who had 
the Courage to commit Prince Henry, afterwards King 
Henry V. to the King's Bench, for affronting him 


while he was in the Seat of Juſtice; letting him know, 


that, tho* the Son might bear the Image of the King's 
Perſon, the Judge bore that of his Authority. and 
which Act the in, when he came to be King, 
with a true Greatneſs of Sou, not only forgave, but 
commended, 


'The Plenty of Stone in the North js, no doubt, 
the Reaſon why there are ſo many noble Bridges in 


that Part of England; infomuch that I. don't remem- 


ber to have ſeen one of Timber from the Trent to the 


Tweed. 

We travelled along the Il ber fe into the Dale, that 
takes its Name from the River, which reaches from 
York about 20 Miles, enlivened almoſt all the Way 
wich Gentlemens Seats at a little Diſtance from each 


other; and left Otiiey on the South Side of the River, 


a ſmall Market- town, no otherwiſe of Note than for 
its Situation, which is under a large craggy Cliff. 
If Yorkſhire owed us any Pleaſure for- the Fatigues 
of a former Day, it was abundantly made up to Us 
here ; for I cannot but think this one of the moſt de- 


: lightful Parts of * and I have met with Tra- 


- yellers 


anc 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRTTALIN. 123 
vellers who have compared it with the Plain of Pa- 
lermo itſelf. Nor ought you to be ſurprized to hear 
ſome Parts of the North compared with Italy. The 
Teſtimony of Biſhop Ton/tall is well known, who, in 
his Progreſs to Yor# with King Henry VIII. in the 
Year 1548. declared, that the Country North of 

Doncaſter, and South of Haſletuood, was the richeſt. 
he had found in his Travels through Europe. It 
would be endleſs to mention all the. Seats we paſſed; 

but the Motto, at leaſt, of Mr. 13bet/on's at Denton, 
will naturally engage the Spesen of 0 Tra- 


veller: 


Qrop NEC Tovis IRA, NEC IGNIS, NEC POTERIT 
FERRUM. 


Which nor the Force of Lightning can annoy, 
Nor Fire, nr deſolating Sor, deſiroy. 


The Houſe, it ſeems, TEE once to Lord Fair- 
fax, General of the Parliament Forces, and was 
about to be demoliſhed by Prince Rupert; but was 
happily ſaved by the Sight of a Picture of one of the 
General's ' worthy Anceſtors, It was aſterwards 
burnt down by Accident, and rebuilt by the preſent 
Poſleflor ; and now, after the Rage of War, and 
LO of Fi ire, in a poetical Rant, dehes them 

oth 

Knareſborough, 1 among Foreigners by the 
Name of the York/bire Spaw, is a Market town: it 
ſtands upon the River Md; and ſends two Members 
to Parliament. In and about the Town, and at Zar- 
rogate, a ſmall Village two Miles diſtant, are no leſs 
than four different Mineral Waters: two of the 
Springs are the moſt valuable Rarities of the kind in 
England. 

The firſt | is the Sweet Spaw, or à Vitriolic Water, 
It was diſcovered by one Mr. Siingſby, Anno 1630. 


and all Fhyficians n it to be a very fove- 
reign 


— 


—— 8 
— — 
9 — 1 — 4 4 v4 \ 
2 A + . Gn SE Rog "es 
. 
23 —— 


3 — * * — 
2 — —* 
** £ X AHoans — CIT 0 {+ 
rr ee es A Ae ee 
1 o 6 — 
* 7 4 k 
r . A 35617 
— rn y Re F 
ß 
— 3 + Daz e- A ms en. Fo 
* 7 — 
— 8 7 83 


r 


2 


— A — , 2 8 2 2 
| — 2 wy l =_ wr; = 
"_ ee A 1 i” 5 — 
7 2 * * a tan 
2 — — 5 - — — . ALS Ie OL SE” 
5 a 2 — FREY 
. — r 1 — 0 
2 WG. — TY . — 1 ; . bro la 
_ 4 - 2 — ag 3 ——— Lo aye. 5 
* A . rn r N y * ve — 
, 5 29 5 . xy - #6) cas M 
: OE ET nant ns res” os. i n N — 
I — — * a 
K —— ETSY — — 
- X 2 . — EE — E 
< * . 2. >; E 
2 Wee e 


124 


d. 


reign Medicine in ſeveral particular Diſtempers; par- 


ticularly Dr. Leigh, in his Natural Hiſtory of Lanca- 


Hire. | 


The other is the Stinking Spaw, or, according to 
the Learned, the Sulphur Well. This Water is clear 


as Cryſtal, but ſo fetid and nauſeous to the Smell, 


that many are obliged to hold their Noſes when they 
drink it; yet it is a valuable Medicine in Scorbutic, 


Hypochondriac, and eſpecially in Hydropic Diſtem- 
EE | wb | 
The People formerly, for many Years, only drank 


theſe Waters, but they now make uſe of them as a 
Cold Bath; and in this manner they muſt neceſſarily 
be good for Rheumatic Pains, Paralytic Numbneſles, 


and many other Diſtempers. | 
Harrogate is frequented by great Numbers of Peo- 


ple of Faſhion, during the Summer Seaſon, though it 


muſt not pretend to vie with Scarborough. 


We went down a very ſteep Hill from the Town : 
to the River, and croſſed it upon a Stone Bridge of 


two Arches. Near one End of the Bridge we ſaw a 


Cell, which had been dug out of a ſolid Rock, and 


is called St. Robert's Chapel. The River is ſhallow ; 


but the Stream, which is rapid, is interrupted in its 


Courſe by ſeveral large Stones, which occaſions a very 
agreeeble Murmuring. We walked along the Side 


of the River, till we came to the A ws, Spring, 


or, as it is more commonly called here, the Dropping 
Well. This Spring, as we were informed, riſes about 
two Miles diſtant, and runs moſt Part of the Way un- 
der-ground to this Place. The Water falls from 2 
Rock, which is about 16 or 17 Feet high; and, as 


it bends in a circular Projection from the Bottom to 
the Top, in ſuch a manner as that its Brow hangs 
over about four or five Feet, the Water does not run 
down the Side, but drops very faſt from 30 or 40 


Places at the top, into a Baſon which it has hollowed 


in the Ground; and every Drop creates a mulical 


kind 


ArTOUR ti Yorkth 


Vorkſn. GREAT BRITAIN, 125 
kind of Tinkling; which is probably, in a great de- 


gree, owing to the Concavity of the Rock. We ſaw 


ſeveral Pieces of Moſs which were petrified by this 
Water; and Tradition tells us, that, near this Rock, 
the famous Mother Shipton was born. We ſpent ſeve- 
ral Hours hereabouts ; and were at laſt obliged, by 
the coming on of the Night, to leave, with Reluc- 
tance, a Place where Nature has elegantly diſpoſed 
every 1 ſhe could beſtow, to form a chearful 
and pleaſing Scene. Whilſt we walked under a Shade 
of ſpreading Trees, and were entertained with the 
dribbling of the Water from the Rock, and the Rip- 
Ting of the River, we ſaw the venerable Ruins of a 


large Caſtle, and a charming Intermixture of Rocks 


and Trees on the oppoſite Hill. Above it, Part of 
the Tower of Knareſborough Church made its Appear- 


ance ; and, through the Trees, we had ſeveral broken 


Views of the Town. From the Dropping Well Sir 
Henry Slingſiy has planted Walks along the River- 
fide ; and, as the River circles very much, we had 
every 10 or 20 Yards a new Point of View, which, 
tho* compoſed of the fame Objects, was ſurpriſingly 
diverſified and varied. | 


At Ripon are two good Stone Bridges, one of which 


bas, I think, 13 Arches, or more, over the Eure, 
and is a very ſtately one. There is another over 
the ſame River at Boroughbridge, four Miles lower 
than Ripon, which has indeed but four or five Arches; 
but then theſe Arches are near 40 Feet wide, and one 
of the middlemoſt much more, and are high in pro- 


portion; the Ends of the Bridge are likewiſe continued 


by high Cauſeways, built of Stone, to keep the Wa- 
ter in its Courſe, which however ſometimes overflows 


them. 


From theſe Bridges, as well as that above - men- 
tioned at Harwood, it may be obſerved, that, how- 
ever low theſe Waters are in the Summer, they are 


high and furious enough in the Winter; and yet the 
% a 


. n Wann OI ey, 2 6b n r ee n m X —ůů— — 1 —— — 1 
bs —— ——— —— W — rib —— «k ren 1 r * * n i — ek”, © Se I PF SE x 
2 * r n 2 £ 
. 
" — — — neree - — — D P 


4 
? 
7 
* 


: 8 
$ * 
140 
1 
11277 
: 
. 
iT 
£19 
118 
14 
' 
; 2 
} N 
ſ y 
| } 
: - 
{ ; 
3 
6 
U 
—_— 
is 
'; 
$ 27 
; Fa 
1 
. 1 
{3 
1 
8 
: v3 
15 
r 
- "= 
= 
© By 
85 7 
' 
- 
17 
. 
: 4 
11 72 
o 
Bs . 
1 
0 
8 
ws 
B 
4 > 
1 1 
1&5 BW 
- 
_ 
+ 
117 1 G 
7 
1 
3 
| 
* 8 
* 
1 
'$ 
3 
7 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
5 1 
Y 
% 
'F 


River Aire, though its Source is in the ſame Ridge of 


Mountains as the other, is gentle and mild in its 
Stream, whereas the others are raging and furious. 
The only Reaſons I can give for it, are, that this 
River runs in a thouſand Windings and Turnings 


more than any other in theſe Parts; inſomuch that, 


as Camden expreſſes it, near its Head in Craven it 
ſeems doubtful whether it ſhould run forward to the 
Sea, or return to its Spring; and from. S{rpton to 
Gargrave it is obſerved to be paſted over eight times 
within the Compaſs of three Miles. The next Rea- 


ſon is, that, after it has deſcended from the Moun- 


tains, it has a deeper Channel. 
Ripon, the Iſurium of the Romans, is a very neat, 


pleaſant, well-built Town: it is an antient Corpora- 


tion, and ſends two Members to Parliament, It has 
not only an agreeable Situation on a riſing Ground be- 


tween two Rivers, but the Buildings are good likewiſe; 
particularly the Market-place, which is accounted 


the fineſt and moſt beautiful Square of its Kind in 


n 


In the Middle of it ſtands a curious Obeliſk, erected 


by the late Mr. Aiſſabie, whoſe Seat at Studley is about 


a Mile diſtant. The Town is governed by a Mayor 
and Aldermen. _ „„ os 5 
lere is a large Collegiate Church; and, tho' but 
a Deanry in the Dioceſe of York, yet it is a very 


handſome, antient, and venerable Pile, and ſhews 


itſelf a great way in the Country. Mr. Camden ſays, 
Ri pon owes its Greatneſs to Religion. And that here 


was a famous Monaſtery built by /Yilfrid, Archbiſhop 


of York, in the firſt Ages of Chriſtianity, in this Iſland, 
is certain; but this pious Gift of the Biſhop was loſt 


- ſome Years after; for the Danes, over-running Yore- 


hire, rifled and burnt it to the Ground, together with 


the whole Town of Ripon. It afterwards flouriſhed 


again as a Monaſtery : but that, with the reſt, being 
| a | | given 


k.., ty ef Fry 


> 


Ins ons rnd fon cy oy wo. 


Yorkſh. , GREAT BRITAIN. 27 


given up in the Reign of King Henry VIII. the Churc h 


only was preſerved. 
While it was a Monaſtery, here Was a famous 


| Sanctuary, a thing much abuſed in foreign Countries. 
This Privilege was, it ſeems, granted to the Church 


of Ripon by King Athelſtan, and whoever broke the 
Kights of e which he extended a Mile around 
the Church, were to forfeit Life and Eſtate; ſo that, 
in ſhort, not the Church only, but the whole Town, 
and a Circle of two Miles Diameter, was a Refuge for 
all that fled to it, where ny lived 3 and out of the 
Reach of Law. 

Annexed to this Monaſtery was an Hoſpital, the 
Purpoſes of which are very remarkable, and would be 
worthy of Imitation in our Days of Proteſtant Cha- 
rity. The Houfe was called the Hoſpital of St. Mary 
Magdalen, where, according to the Foundation, were 
to be maintained two Chaplains, to perform Divine 
Service; and if any begging Clergyman, or other 
needy Perſon, ſhould happen to travel or ſtray out of 


his Way, and call at the ſaid Hoſpital, he ſhould be 


relieved there for one Night only, with Food and a 
Bed, and ſo be gone in the Morning; and every poor 
Perſon that came craving. an Alms on St. Zary Mag- 


dalen's Day yearly, ſhould have one Loaf, Value an 
| Halfpeny (when Corn was at the Price of five Shil- 


lings per Quarter), and one Herring. 

- os alſo recorded, that one Branch of this Ho- 
ſpital was given to a Society of Religious Siſters, to 
maintain a Chaplain to perform Divine Service, and 
to keep all the Lepers born and bred in Hipſcbire; 


but the Siſters being in time removed, a Brotherhood 


was eſtabliſhed in their ſtead, which "ood for a 
while; and after that a Maſterſhip. At length all, 


except the Church, was demoliſhed together, and the | 


Houſe. with the Monaſtery ſuppreſſed. _ 
The Church is an antient Gothic Building, firm, 


ſtrong, and plain; ; no Imagery of Statues to be ſeen 
G 4 about 


— 2 
F © AIRS. roo opt 
. 


rr 
8 — . 5 a e - Tins II 2 mpegs 


. 
— 
—— — — ——————— In A 
. Ay _ o : 1 x ry > aw 
F gn . oo; A 'E « — 
* + - — 44 = a as A wh — * = PF 
® 4 


.. ³˙·1—³w̃ ——ʃ 2 ae ta 
3 


8 — AA 
*7 by 444. , * 
. 


— 2 
F 4 = = 
$07) Ouran — — . 4 ww FILE: 6 — 0 
PPP — 5 war 
rr 4 — * — 8 — 


hy 


— 4 

— Tory. ruth —— . 
. ee ec 
Eee — 2 


— —— - — 
ym 8 - — . Ne 
g : _—_— 
A 2 A 
— — — . 
1 mR — 


* ws 
I EY %% 1-4 a+ tes W44< ind 2 
— BI CIT, Ot Ine K *.- As » Ae tees —— 
r — , \ 
1 2 2 * ke * S 2 Ks 2 r Sow « 8 
— — 2 FEE . year K —K— 
2 of — e 
TTT 
— — — RY, — — m7] 2 * - - — - * 
— Þ="» 4 5X 28 — 3 — Re mats Pr LS = 006% 
* mY — —— 4} = — rr $55 
* . 2 N 
0 | L POP od pens eng 


— — — ———— — — 406 — — _ 
FUF A ANGELIC ALA YN Etnies. 


2 NA FOUR wv Yorkſh. 
about it ; there are three Towers, on which formerly 
were Spires. 5 . 
The whole Revenues were ſeized by King Henry 
VIII. ſo that little or nothing remained for an offi- 
ciating Clergyman. But King James I. having the 
Caſe repreſented to him by his Queen, was pleaſed 
to found and endow in this Church one Dean, and 
ſeven Prebendaries, beſides Petit-canons, Singing- 
men, and Choriſters, of his own Royal Bounty and 
Benevolence, under the Juriſdiction of the Archbiſhop 


of York. | OT 7 | 
But I muſt not leave Ripon without mentioning &.. 
Winifrid's Needle, a Place famous in antient Times, 
being a narrow Hole in a cloſe vaulted Room under- 
ground, in which Womens Chaſtity was tried; and, 
if chaſte, they paſſed through; but, if otherwiſe, the 
Whim was, they could not. | 

In the Church-yard of this Minſter lies a plain Mo- 
nument, or Graveſtone, over the Remains of a gene- 
rous Soul, who gave 2000/. to pious Uſes, and yet 


has no other Epitaph than the following : Bs 


Hic jacet Zacharias Jepſon, cujus Etas ſuit 49. 
Per paucos annos tantum vixit. 


Here lies Zachary Jepſon, whoſe Age was 49 Years : 
A very ſhort Period for ſo worthy a Perſon... 


We ſpent a conſiderable Part of a Day in the cele- 
brated Park, or rather Garden, belonging to Mr. 
Aiſtable, which is viſited by all the curious, and ad- 
mired as a Wonder, not only with regard to the va- 


rious Beauties which Nature has ſo Iaviſſily beſtowed, 


but thoſe of Art and Cultivation, wherewith it is fo 


liberally adorned: the latter exhibit a noble Specimen 


of that exquiſite fine Taſte for Architecture and Gar- 
dening, in which the then Owner was allowed to ex- 


cel. The Temples and Loggio's, built in many de- 


lightful Receſſes, may vie with the beſt Models of the 
| | Antients; 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 129 


Antients; and the wide- extended Plantations are ju” 


diciouſly varied, as the Objects of the Landſchape de- 


come new. In one Part, the Hills gradually aſcends 
with Tufts of Shade interſperſed over the — : 
in another, they precipitately riſe, with Rocks pro- 
jeckting from their rough Sides, and tall Woods cover- 
ing their Brows. Above theſe, a beautiful Gothic 
(but unconfecrated) Tower lifts up its Head; and 
| below, the Skirts of the Cliffs are watered by a River 
which wanders in one Place with a filent Current, 
and in another falls down in Caſcades : an eaſy Emi- 
nence commands a Proſpect of the Town and Min- 
ſter of Ripon, with a large Extent of Country be- 


yond ; and the ſtately Ruins of Fountains-Abbey are 


ſeen from another, beſides Gentlemens Seats in the 


Centre of many Views. The fine Turf of the Park 


is conſtantly cleared of Weeds, and equal Care is' 
taken to preſerve the beft Trees from Decay: thro* 
the whole Scene of Variety, the Improvements are 
adapted to follow the luxuriant Fancy of Nature, and 


humour her different Propenſities. You ſee her decked 


out and enriched, where Neceſſity or Propriety be- 
ſpeak ſuch Indulgence ; but in the Simplicity of her 
own Dreſs, where Ornament would disfigure her beau- 
tiful Attire. | 5 Cad 
The late Biſhop of Namur (Abbot Strictland) when 
he reſided in England in the Year 1734. took a Jour- 
ney from London to Studley, with Intention to tranſ- 
plant ſome of the Beauties of this Place, as near as 
might be, in the Diſpoſition of his Plantations, adjoin- 


ing to a magnificent Palace he was then about to build | 


at his epiſcopal Reſidenee. | 

A Mile from Rypon, or leſs, is a ſtately Seat, called 
Newbie, built ſome Years ſince by Sir Z#dward Blac- 
ket, The Park is extended to the Bank of the River 


Eure, and is ſometimes in part laid under Water by 


that River; which, coming down from the Weſtern 


Mountains through-a marly, 8 Sol}; frucifies the 


5 Cartb, 


6 
. 
” 2 


, — — 
330 - —— — __ 
P 


130 A TOUR thr! VLorkſh. 
Earth, they ſay, as the River Nile does the Egyptian 
Fields about Grand Cara 
As Sir Edward ſpared no Coſt in the Building, 
and Sir Chri/topher Mren laid out the Deſign, as well 
as choſe the Situation, I ſhall only ſay, that nothing 
can be added to the one or the other. The Build- 
ing is of Brick, the Avenues to it are very fine, and 
the Gardens not only well laid out, but well planted, 
and as well kept: but, for want of fine Gravel, the 
Walks cannot ſhew. themſelves, as they would, 
were they in the Southern Part of England. The 
Houſe has a fine Proſpect over the Country, almoſt 
to Jerk, with the River in View moſt of the Way; 
and it has a very noble Appearance to the great North 
Road, which lies at Boroughbriage,. within two Miles 


ER: 1 . 

At Boroughbridge we viewed the three Stones called 1 
the Devil's Bolts, or Arrows, by the Vulgar, and about 2 
which they have a Legend. They are tall and flen- in 
der, four-ſquare, of a pyramidal Figure, but not very 8 
ſharp at the top. They ſeem to be factitious Stones; 7 
but yet endure the Weather exceeding well, and pro- V 
bably may ſtand there till Dooms day. 1 fi 
About a Mile hence, at a Place called A/dburgh, (a is 
ſmall Village now, but of old a good Reman Town, and tþ 
as yet a Borough, which ſends two Members to Parlia- 1 
ment) we gathered among the People divers antient Ro- N 
man Coins, both Braſs and Silver, which are frequently * 
found in the plowed Fields, and about the Streets a 
there. Thoſe Pieces that have radiate Crowns on the t 
Heads of the Effigies, they call Saracens Heads, all 4 
the reſt 4/dburgh Half-pennies.  _- | 9 
As you begin to come into the North- Riding (for 75 
the Eure parts the Męſi- Riding from it), you find your- => 
ſelf in a Place noted in the North of England for the t 
beſt and largeſt Oxen, and the fineſt galloping Horſes, 1 
bred either for the light Saddle, for the Race, or the x 

Chace, for Running or Hunting. Sir Edward was 

a Grazier, and took ſuch Delight in breeding and 

| A feeding 


Vorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 
feeding lar 85 e Black Cattle, that he had two or three 
times an Ox out of his Park led about the Country 


for a Sight, and ſhewed as far as Newca/ile, and even 


to Scotland, for the largeſt Bullock in England; and 


very ſeldom, if ever, was he over- matched. | 
From the Town of Ripon, the North Road, and 
the Roman Way alſo, which comes from Caltleferd- 
bridge, parting at Aberforth, leads away from the 
Town of Bedal, in the North-Riding, and in a ſtrait 
Line called Leeming- lane, leaving Richmond about two 
Miles on the Weſt, goes on to Prers-bridge, on the 
River Tees, which are the utmoſt Limits of this vaſt 


County of York, - 
But, as I — at my entering into this .- Rid- 


ig to go no farther than Ripon, which ſtands on the 
0 


Northern Boundary of it, I muft ſtop here, and like- 
wife make it the Boundary, as well of this Journey 
ag'of this Letter, ſince I find it impracticable to take 
a Survey of this large, populous, and wealthy Diviſion 
in one Journey, without wandering to and fro, up 
and down, backward and forward, on purpoſe, which 

would be exceedingly fatiguing and uneaſy; and, as I 
was reſolved to make as perfect Obſervation as I pol- 
ſibly could, of every thing that I found remarkable 
in my Way, and eſpecially of the Manufactures of 
the Country, which J account as well worthy a Tra- 
veller's Notice, as the Curioſities and Wonders of 
Nature, and the moſt reſined Operations of the libe- 
ral Arts and Sciences; I have therefore concluded up- 


on another Journey into theſe Parts, and to enter by _ 


the Way of Lancaſhire, and to coaſt it along the Weſt 
and North-weſt Sides of the. Country, up to ) the River 
Tees, and the Southern Side of the Biſhoprick of Dur- 


ham; and from thence ſtrike down South into the 


| Centre of the County, and ſo take a Trip Eaſt into 
the Heart of the North-Riding, to ſee the Towns that 
lie that Way; and then return Weſt into Jerk, and 


palling thence South-caſt, take in ſuch. Towns as Rand 
G 6 on 


131 


* 8 ö * * * 1 
" N 8 A y OD — n 
* 
ee ' wh N 
5 e eee e ky ts, Ps £ 3 
* . 
, 


132. A TOUR thu Yorkh. 
on the Eaſt Side of the - Riding, till I arrive at the 
Fall of the Trent into the Humber; and crofling that 
River, view the Towns in the Za/t-Riding; and, laſt- 
ly, follow the Sea-coaſt all the Way up into Durham, 


which will. complete my Tour through the whole 


County. I am, Sir, 
Your humble Servant, 


— „ 


E 


* 


Containing a Deſcription of Part of the Wesr- 


RipinG of LoRRKSHIRE, and of all the Nox rn 


and EasT-Ripincs, the Biſhoprick of Dox- 
HAM, and the County of NOR THUMBER- 
8 | 


: 


"© FRI 8 
N Ccording to what I propoſed in my laſt, I am 


now going to enter the eee, of York» 


Tire, from the Eaſt Side of Lancaſhire, I muſt pre- 
miſe, that all this Part of the County is ſo conſidera- 


ble for its Trade, that the Poſt-maſter General has 


thought fit to eſtabliſh a Croſs-poſt through all the 
Weſtern Part of Exgland into it, to maintain the 


Correſpondence of Merchants and Men of Buſineſs, 
of which all this Side of the Iſland is full. This 
Crofs-poſt begins at Plymouth, in the South-weſt Part 
of England, and, leaving the great Weſtern Poſt-road 
of Exeter behind, comes away North to Taunton, 
Bridgwater, and Briftal ; from thence goes on thro' 
all the great Cities and Towns up the Severn, ſuch as 


 Glouce/ter, Morcgſter, Bridgnorth, and Shrewftury, 
„ 5 . thence 


K „ K 1 21» 


Lance. GREAT BRITAINx. 133 
thence by Meſt-Cheſter to Liverpool and Warrington; 
from whence it turns my Eaſt, and paſſes to Man- 
cheſter, Bury, Rochdale, Halifax, Leeds, and York, and 
ends at Hull. | „„ Wo 
By this means the Merchants at Hull have imme- 
_ diate Advice of their Ships which go out of the Chan- 
nel, and come in, by their Letters from Plymouth, as 
_ readily as the Merchants of London, and without the 
Charge of double Poſtage. The Shopkeepers and Ma- 
nufacturets can correſpond with their Dealers at Man- 
cheſter, Liverpool, and Briſtol, nay, even with Ireland 
directly, without the tedious Interruption of ſending 
their Letters about by London. 


I followed this Poſt- road from Liverpool to Bury, 


both manufacturing Towns in Lancaſhire, and the laſt 


very conſiderable for a ſort of coarſe Goods, called 
 Half-thicks and Kerſies. The Market for them is very 
great, though the I' own is ſituated fo remote, ſo out 
of the Way, and at the very Foot of the Mountains, 
that it would otherwiſe be but little frequented. 
 Rechaale, farther on in our Way to Blackſtone Edge, 
is a good Market-town, and is of late very much im- 
proved in the Woollen Manufacture, as are alſo the 
Villages in its Neighbourhood. ﬀ_"_ 
Neere, for our great Encouragement, though it was 
but about the Middle of Augu/?, and, in ſome Places, 


the Harveſt hardly got in, we ſaw the Mountains 


Covered with Snow, and felt the Cold very acute 

and piercing; but we found, as in all thoſe Northern 
Countries, the People had an happy Way of mix- 
ing the Warm and the Cold together ; for the Store 
of good Ale, which flows plentifully in the moſt 
mountainous Part of this Country, ſeems abundantly 
to make up for all the Inclemencies of the Seaſon, or 
Difficulties of Travelling, adding alſo the Plenty of 
Coals for Firing, of which all thoſe Hilk are full. 


— 2 — ö́ñ get ne 1 th : 4 0 


We 


_ 3 
3 „ P ⁵˙— T + ET IP AAR ons" A 


- ; * 
N. 2 
I 2 FFP * zine + — 3 
Ly 
* 


e 1 » « - £ * 
_ a 2 , S : 
N F is eee A” HR ae LO INES . _—— 2 hy PRI At ww 
g N 8 7s 


1 134 1 N OU R thro” Yorkſh. 


We mounted the Hills, fortified with a little of this. 
Precaution, early in the Morning; and, though the 


Snow, which had fallen in the Night, lay a little up- 
on the Ground, yet we thought it was not much; 
and the Morning being calm and clear, we had no 
Apprehenſion of an uneaſy Paſſage; nor did the Peo- 
p'e at Rochdale, who kindly directed us the Way, and 
even offered to guide us over the firſt Mountains, ap- 
prehend any Difficulty for us; ſo we complimented 


ourſelves out of their Aſſiſtance, which we afterwards 


very much wanted... _ IH 
For though the Sun ſhone when we came out of the 


Town of Rochdale, yet when we began to mount the. 


Hills about a Mile from it, we found the Wind rife ; 
and the higher we went, the more it increaſed upon 
us; by which J ſoon perceived, that it had blown be- 
fore, and perhaps all Night, upon the Hills, though 
it was calm below. And fo we were obliged, in a moſt 


diſcouraging manner, to travel thro trackleſs Drifts of 


Snow; and, it continuing ſnowing too in aur Faces, 
over Blackſione Edge, we knew not whether we were 


wrong or right, till we perceived ſome Land-marks, 


that the honeſt Rochdale Men had told us of, which 

gave us great Comfort. 5 ut 
But, after we had paſſed this diſmal Edge, it was 

our conſtant Labour, as ſoon as we were at the Top 


of an Hill, to come down it again on the other Side, 


and then another Hill aroſe. I do not remember, that 


there was one Bottom that had any conſiderable 


Breadth of plain Ground in it, but always a Brook in 
the Valley, running from thoſe Gulls and Deeps be- 
tween the Hills ; and it was obfervable, that they al- 
ways croſſed our Way in the Bottoms from the Right- 
hand to the Left, the Reaſon of which you ſhall ſee 
W ein oy 
From Blackftone Edge to Halifax is eight Miles; 
and all the Way, except from Sowerby to Haliſax, is 


thus 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRTTAIV. 137 


thus up Hill and down ; fo that, I ſuppoſe, we 
mounted up to the Clouds, and deſcended to the Wa- 


ter- level, about eight times in that little Part of the 


Journey. | - | 1 

But now. I muſt obſerve to you, that after we paſſ- 
ed the ſecond Hill, and were come dome into the 
Valley again, and fo ſtill the nearer we came to 


Halifax, we found the Houſes thicker, and the Vil- 
lages greater, in every Bottom; and not only fo, 


but the Sides of the Hills, which were very ſteep 


every Way, were ſpread with Houſes ; for the Land 
being divided into- ſmall Incloſures, from. two Acres. 


to {ix or ſeven each, ſeldom more, every three or 
| four Pieces of Land had an Houſe belonging to 
them. | | 


In ſhort, after we had mounted the third Hill, we- 
found the Country one continued Village, tho” every 


Way mountainous, hardly an Houſe ftanding out of a 
Speaking-diſtance from another; and, as the Day 
cleared up, we could ſee at every Houſe a Tenter, 
and on almoſt every Tenter a Piece of Cloth, Kerſie, 
or Shalloon ; which are the three Articles of this 
Country's Labour. | 8 | 

In the Courſe of our Road among the Houſes, we 


| found at every one of them a little Rill or Gutter of 


running Water; if the Houſe was above the Road, 
it came from it, and croſſed the Way to run to another; 
if the Houſe was below us, it crofled us from ſome 
other diſtant Houſe above it; and at every conſiderable 


Houſe was a Manufactory; which not being able to 


be carried on without Water, theſe little Streams were 

ſo parted and guided by Gutters or Pipes, that not one 

of the Houſes wanted its neceſſary Appendage of a 
Rivulet. RE 5 1 


Again, as the Dying-houſes, Scouring- ſhops, and 


Places where they uſe this Water, emit it tinged with 


the Drugs of the Dying-vat, and with the Oil, the 
V Soap, 


136 4A TOUR thy Yorkh, 
Soap, the Tallow, and other Ingredients uſed by the 
Clothiers in Dreſſing and Scouring, &c. the Lands 


thro* which it paſſes, which otherwiſe would be ex- 


ceeding barren, are enriched by it to a Degree beyond 
Imagination. | | | 
Then, as every Clothier muſt neceſſarily keep one 
Horſe, atleaſt, to fetch home his Wool and his Pro- 
viſions from the Market, to carry his Yarn to the 
Spinners, his Manufacture to the Fulling-mill, and, 
when finiſhed, to the Market to be ſold, and the like; 
ſo every one generally keeps a Cow or two for his Fa- 
mily. By this means, the ſmall Pieces of incloſed 
Land about each Houſe are occupied ; and, by being 
thus fed, are ſtil] farther improved from the D 
the Cattle. As for Corn, they ſcarce ſow enough to 
feed their Poultry. | 15 h 
Such, it ſeems, has been the Bounty of Nature 
to this Country, that two Things eſſential to Life, 
and more particularly to the Buſineſs followed here, 


are found in it, and in ſuch a Situation as is not 


to be met with in any Part of England, if. in the 
World beſide; I mean, Coals, and running Water on 


the Tops of the higheſt Hills. I doubt not but there 


are both Springs and Coals lower in theſe Hills ;. but 


were they to fetch them thence, it is probable the 


Pits would be too full of Water: *tis eaſy, how- 

ever, to fetch them. from the upper Pits, the Horſes 
going light up, and coming down loaden. This 

lace, then, ſeems to have been deſigned by Provi- 
dence for the very Purpoſes to which it is now allot- 
ted, ſor carrying on a Manufacture, which can no- 
where be ſo eaſily ſupplied with the Conveniences ne- 
ceflary for it. Nor is. the Induſtry of the People want- 
ing to ſecond theſe Advantages. Though we met few 
People without Doors, yet within we ſaw the Houſes 
full of luſty Fellows, ſome at the Dye-vat, ſome at 


the Loom, others dreſſing the Cloths; the Women 


and 


ung of 


vorkſn. GREAT BriTAin 137 
and Children carding, or ſpinning; all employed 
from the youngeſt to the oldeſt; ſcarce any thing 
above four Years old, but its Hands were ſufficient 
for its own Support. - Not a Beggar to be ſeen, nor 


an idle Perſon, except here and there in an Alms- 


houſe, built for thoſe that are antient, and paſt work- 
ing. The People in general live long; they enjoy a 


good Air; and under ſuch Circumſtances hard Labour 


is naturally attended with the Bleſſing of Health, if 
not Riches. ö 


From this Account, you'll eaſily imagine, that ſome 


of theſe remote Parts of the North are the moſt popu- 
| lous Places of Great Britain, London and its Neigh- 


| bourhood excepted. © od | 
We have all this while been in the Pariſh of Ha- 


lifax ; and, before I come to the Town, I muſt add 


a Word or two of the River Calder, to complete the 
Deſcription of the Country I paſſed thro'. As I ſaid 
before, that all the Rills of Water which we croſſed, 


one at leaſt in every Bottom, went away to the Left 


or North Side of us, as we went Eaſtward, I am to 
add, that, following thoſe little Brooks with our Eye, 


we could obſerve, that, at ſome, Diſtance to the 
Left, there appeared a Jarger Valley than the reſt, into 
which not only all the Brooks which we paſled emp- 


| tied themſelves, but abundance more from the hollow 


deep Bottoms among the Hills on the North Sid be- 
yond it, which emptied this Way South, as thoſe on 


our Side run that Way North. And at the next Vil- | 


lage, called Sorby, or Sowerby, we paſſed a conſidera- 


ble River, (formed from thoſe Brooks, and the melted 
dnows) over a ſtately Stone Bridge of ſeveral great 


| Arches. And this was he main River Calder, which 
I mentioned at Yakefield, where it begins to be navi- 
gable, and which, without any Spring, may be called 
the Head fit!! 86 44.16 
The ſame Obſervation will hold on moſt of the 


| great Rivers in the North; there being hardly any 
| : | . 


— 


138 4 TOUR tro Yorkhh, 
that have their Beginning in any public Springs or 
Lakes, as the Rivers in the South of England gene- 
rally have; which is the Caſe particularly of the 
Derwent and the Dun from the High Peak, and the 
Hills of the ſame Range more South of the Edge; 
of the Aire, the M here, the Sale, the Eure, the 
Ma, the Tees, all in the ſame County of Tor; and 
the ere, the Tyne, the Cockett, the Till, and the 
- Tweed, farther North; and even the Forth, the Tay, 
the Clyde, the Ma, in Scotland; and the Merſee, the 
Kibble, the Rocke, and the Lune, the Meſi Calder, 901 


— rn POET 


— err — 
NN 


. ̃ —— TT EI PINY 
” 1 Cr. 


8 - - 
F 


— — 
.. AS Rt Ob ro rs Baa 


— 2 „ — ——— ů ů ů 
* 1 


1 
ES. 
: = A 
- 
; * 
* % 
1 
1 
5 
$8 
7" 
7 7 
LEE 
1 
WK: 
* 8 
Wi 1 
8 132 
13 
117 
11 
1 5 
2D 545 
3 14 
1 
* 
1 


the Lowther, and the Eden, on the other Side of wit 
theſe Mountains, in Lancaſhire, Meſtmore land, and up! 
Cumberland. RT I 8 25 | ma 
Having thus accounted for them all at once, I ſhall Q 

only mention them now as they come in my Way; are 

for you will obſerve, I croſſed one or other of them 0 

i at every conſiderable Town, all the Rivers, as well in for 
England as in Scotland, North of this Place, running Vi 
from the middle of the Country where theſe Moun- Ro 
tains riſe, either Eaſt into the German, or Welt into Ar 

the Iriſb Sea. None of them run like the Severn, or Pe 

the e, or the Rivers in Sauth Wales, or the Exe in 40 
Devon, or the Avon in Wilts, or the Arun in Suſſex, Ott 

and others, North and South. But I return to my v. 
Journey, | e Ee, mi 
Heving paſſed the Calder at Sowerby Bridge, I now be 

came to the Town of Hilifax, the moſt populous WM «+, 
Pariſh or Vicarage in England; for it is but one, tho the 
12 Miles in Diameter ; but it has 12 or 13 Chapels GH 


of Eaſe, beſides about 16 Meeting-houſes, which 10 
they call alſo Chapels, being conformable in Faſhion BF pl 


to them, having Bells and Burying-grounds to moſt WF m. 
of them; not reckoning thoſe of the Puaters into the ky 
Number. ; | 4 

In the Lear 1443. there were but 30 Houſes in up 
it; but in the next Century it was much increaſed: hg 
far Hiſtory tells us, that Queen Elizabeth being k 


petitioned 


— 


Yorkſh. GRTAT BRITAIN, 3 139 


petitioned by the Inhabitants of Halifax, to grant 
them ſome Privileges, they ſet forth, as an Inſtance 
of their Loyalty, that no leſs than 12,000 young 
Men went out armed from, this' one Pariſh, and, at 
her Majeity's Call, joined her Troops to fight the 
Popiſh Army, then in Rebellion under the Earl of 
IW:ftmorlana. 

If they then were ſo populous, what. mult they be 
now their Trade is fo vaſtly enlarged by the great 
Demand of Kerſeys for cloathing the Armies abroad? 
Some maintain, that it is increaſed a fourth at leaſt 
within theſe 60 Years, from their having entered 
upon a Manufacture of Shalloons, which were never 
made in theſe Parts before, at leaſt not in any 
Quantities ; and it is computed, that 100, ooo Pieces 
are worked up in this Pariſn only; and yet they do 
not make much fewer Kerſeys than they did before; 
for I was aſſured, that there was one Dealer in the 
Vicarage, who rated; by Commiſſion, . for 60,000 J. 
2 Tear in Kerſeys only; to Holland and Hamburgh. 
And of late Yea s it is ſtill more increaſed, by the 
People of a neighbouring Part driving away about 
4000 Frifh Manufacturers, who, with about 2000 
others accompanying them, ſettled there. As the 
Vicarage is thus far extended, and fo populous, what 
muſt the Market be, which ſupplies this vaſt Num- 
ber of Inhabitants? And yet theſe are all brought 
from other Parts of the Country. For, as to Corn, 
they ſow little, and they feed very few Oxen or 
Sheep 3 and as they are ſurrounded with large ma- 
nufacturing Towns on every Side, all of them em- 
ployed, like themſelves, in the Clothing Trade, they 


muſt neceſſarily have their Proviſions from other more 


diſtant Parts. 

The Conſequence then is plain: their Corn comes 
up in great Quantities out of Lincoln and Notting- 
hamſhire, and the Eaſt-Riding; the Black Cattle from 
thence, and from Lancaſbire; Shezp and Mutton from 

the 


of * C * 
hw — 7 2,4. "Ft ne 29 * K 
Dn r 3 8 * r . 
= Tr EE Re Genre . SM: 
Cee ² a te he an Lo A Een ES A nat 
— 1 vs a. - hb WW - 5 Ts on oy 1a N 4 
. ä e520 CIOS: -- ** 
3 ere . x 
— > Hh 2 * * 
=o ** 2 1 7 : 15 r 8 p 6 
4 . \ \ — 


rr 
—— Panty — 

e r et hr 

r 


Sr 9 an — 204 4 Av <p RR wad * 2659 e ane of 9 yy * 8 n 8 . ow 
„rr n i Be A ts” gg br anos > FX wy ———= RENO = = ? nm hes — 3 
— ** — — I PT ID 8 o 2 F [2 
1 2 gates ru - l a = 4 > — 2 * 
- - EE d . 
c r r 3 
1 hy 7g ES, - — N eee . 75 r — — — 
e — 2 C T 2 Eg £ <4 
TY 1 * . "0 : ? 9 2 Do Ee IT — 
i «a oy 
* 


* — ———U— 
- C wo 42225 — es rage! 2 © 4 \ - \ — 
p wes ee to WE a ws * 1 $ 8 
r * Sg _ \ = — — ar . — 1 _ * ie . l 6 - - \ 
'« N — — coupe — — 2 * 1 
* DL — +41 nee ae . 32 ce K * = 
ee 4 ons 2 4 — kx ow 2 22 ER OTIS Or Lay ec. | 
I ITY OT # — pre; > 1 - r. eee — — 4 2 pry 5 * 
: ©. dans OUT PRI "3s py . Er * — — ri : 7 292ͤ 
2 fo WP — —— — — =_ : N 
_ ov oo. "I 7 "Sg 294 — * * po 4 * 4 ps - 
: 77. d SAI. n * α 1 2 5 * 
72 N 0 : 
= & re) pe „ Pw * I * 5 — 4 =X? 
n > = — 3 e oo * a 3 I — 
” — 4 — 7 
"4 * 4 
bo * 


140 role thro Yorkſh, 


the adjacent Counties every Way ; Butter from the 
Eaft and North- Ridings ; and Cheeſe out of Cheſbire 
and Varwickſbire. . : 
The Markets, in the Months of September and 
October are prodigioufly thronged ; that being the 
Time when the Clothiers buy up as many Oxen 


as will ſerve their Family for the whole Year, which 


they uſed to drive home, kill, ſalt, and hang up 


in the Smoke to dry, This was heretofore their 


common Diet ; but now they live more upon freſh 
Meats, 555 
Tbus one trading manufacturing Part of the Coun- 
try, in a barren Soil, gives and receives Support from 
all the Countries round it. 1 
There is nothing extraordinary in the Town itſelf; 


but the Multitude of People who reſort to it on a 


Market-day, as well to ſell their Manufactures, as 


to buy Proviſions, is prodigious: in this reſpect no 
Places equal it in all the North Part of England, ex- 


cept Leeds and Wakefield. | | nh 

The Church is old, but ſtately and venerable, and 
has in it many extraordinary Monuments, but moſt 
of them of great Antiquity. Here is 'a very good 


Hoſpital, and a Work-houſe of an antient Eſtabliſh- 
ment; and there are feveral Charities of like Sort, in 
different Parts of the Pariſh, 5 
Halifax gave Birth to John of Halifax, or de Sacre 
Boſco, the chief Mathematician of his Age, who was 


buried at the public Expence of the Univerſity of 
Paris; and to the late Archbiſhop T7tſon, the Mo- 


del of true rational Preaching ; tho' a new Sed, lately 
ſprung up, called Methadiſts, with great Pretences to - 


Meekneſs, and intolerable Conceit and Vanity, at pre- 


ſent ſeek publicly to depreciate the Memory and Works 


of that truly great Man. 


The Courſe of Juſtice antiently made uſe of here 
to prevent the ſtealing of Cloth, is very remarkable. 


Modern 


purely, or at leaſt principally, for ſuch Thieves as 
were detected in ſtealing Cloth from the Tenters : 
and it ſeems very reaſonable to think it was fo, be- 
cauſe of the Conditions of the Trial. The following 
is a brief Account of it: | 
The Woolen Manufacture was erected here about 
the Year 1480. when King Henry VII. cauſed an Act 
to paſs prohibiting the Exportation of unwroughtWool, 
and to encourage foreign Manufacturers to ſettle in 
England; ſeveral of whom, coming over, eſtabliſhed 


different Manufactures of Cloths in different Parts of + 


the Kingdom, as that of Bays at Colche/ter, Says at 
Sudbury, Broad-cloth in Milis, and other Counties 
and the Trade of Kerſeys and narrow Cloth at this 
Place, and other adjacent Towns. And as, at the 


Time when this Trade began, nothing was more fre- 


quent than for young Workmen to leave their Cloths 
out all Night upon Tenters, which gave an Opportu- 
nity for the idle Fellows to ſteal them, a ſevere Law 
was made againſt ſtealing Cloth, which gave the Power 
of Life and Death into the Hands of the Magiſtrates 


of Halifax, But this Law was extended to no other 


Crime; and the Conditions of it, as I have ſaid, inti- 


mate as much: for the Power was not given to the 


Magiſtrates to give Sentence, unleſs in one of theſe 
three plain Caſes : - : 


1. Hand-napping ; that is, when the Criminal was 


taken in the very Fact. 5 
23. Back-bearing ; that is, when the Cloth was 
found upon him. i N 

3. Tongue-confeſſing ; which needs no Explanation. 
The Fact likewiſe was to be committed within 
the Liberties or Precincts of the Foreſt of Hardwick ; 


and the Value of the Goods ſtolen was to be above 


_ thirteen Pence Halfpenny. W 
as hen 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIN, 141 
Modern Authors pretend to ſay, it was for all Sorts 
of Felons ; but I am well aſſured, it was firſt erected 


42 4 TOUR tw. Yolh i x 
When the Criminal was taken, he was brought 
before the Magiſtrates.of the Lown; and they judged, MF L 
ſentenced, and executed the Offender, or cleared 
him, within ſo many Days; I think it was three el 
Market Days. If the Offence was committed out 
of the Vicarage, but within the Bounds of the Foreſt, tl 
then there were Frithbourgers alſo to judge of the 0 
Fact, who were to be ſummoned out of the Foreft- 
Balders, as they are called, who were to hold of 
that Frith, that is, of the Foreſt. If they acquitted b. 
him of the Fact, he was immediately diſcharged; if '* 
they condemned him, nobody could reprieve him but = 
the Town. The Country- people were, it ſeems, ſo p 
terrified at the Severity of this Proceeding, that hence F 
came that Proverbial Litany, which was uſed all over 1 „ 
Yorkferre © | ” 4 


From Hell, Hull, and Halifax, SSL 0 
Good Lord, deliver us. r a 


Hull was included in this Petition, on account of * 
their rigid Diſcipline to Beggars; for they whipt out Þ 
the foreign Poor, and ſet their own to work. ÞK © 
The Manner of Execution was very remarkable, at 
by an Axe drawn up by a Pulley, and faſtened with  « 
a Pin to the Side of a Wooden Engine z which when H 
pulled out, the Axe fell ſwiftly down, and did its Of- 
hce. ; 5 : | ; | 5 Non | ; 
The Engine is now gone; but the Baſis on which 
it ſtood ſtil] remains, being a ſquare Foundation of 
Stone, to which you go up by Steps. The Engine was 
removed, as we were told, in the Year 1620. during 
the Reign of K. James I. | 


# # wn. cs "wy 8 — 7 — . 
". a << — T 1d —— — At — * 2 8 9 
- 4 * % PI . * if Roar LP * *. 60 l 8 2 , 9 I] DM 5 TY 8 g PR 
— U 8 4+ „„ — «aw * * L 7 l z n N X . l RY 
— P_ Mo e's; 1 * = 1 eee 8 De ! N 33 — — Frets, © K — 2 10 22 — 222 — wree — 8 i — 
3 1 r 8 » . 8— — "ae =_ Tu RE. 5 
* g +.» * b r 2 8 5 — * — = - > — 80 a \ 
- Wed . e « 5 a i \ \ p 2 — — ; e . 
_ . ee 2 2 2 1 — ri 8 bs : - _ — os aig ap pO l/s ys, i — * Fo Wet.» » PP — 15 wi ad m_y —— - « * — — — 
8 8 7 "en TORS, 2 > $4 Bu +, Acre. ap 2 22 p A q = Tint (WS ee. nr 4 Pegs” - 3 4 Fane, 7 — 8 F 5 r —— hy * . * of < q jp l —_Y 
. boon Se 2 N 4 — — A pre — n — . —— ws r <I> ACT =. 8. a r DE —_ 85 . pe IS - . = % 8 2 = 2 : ; n 4 r <4 N 
rg * * I £ = 228 Wh W 7 Fat GOES 2 . % * 0 IR D n CR ra; 122 - a 9 1 ER a * 4 — — 1 — nd * W. . 
* 5 N RED Foe” * e 2 * 3 2 rr . — =p ge ANCIENT TI For Eg 4.0 SN weld ON" L | 7ST rr r 
rr : x l SET, boy we: — — 7 8 — 4 ont hots A. p - ta a on . 2 Err 
— i 2 — — — . . — 224 TOR Lo ores fargh - 2 = = —_—— — —_ \ 
> —_——— 7 — 8 r n ee 2 EIN [PRO "I . — = 8 . = p * — _ Fes * 
7 7 4 Ke A — . — 1 > 12 rr rare, erer ern. 00S try pb 2 24 : 1 — ” _ 
4 — ä * - $50 2 4 2 . 
— ' FA 1 3 - ; _ *** * 2 0 
14 . , - 0 2 PEST: | . b p & 44 eee o_ r . hd 1 —— —— 0x — 1 * — * 
. n PR * 1 a * . ira 3 r 2 oe 36 2 * 0 4 n K* * Z 
" , 5 N a q . NN 2 e — — 
4 \ 
* U 


— 4 * — 
2 22 ——— —— N — CO — n 25 2 = 
— IA - — — j oro _ HI Fog 1 — r 


In the Reign of the ſame Prince, the Earl of 
Morton, Regent of Scotland, paſſing through Hali- 
fax, and, ſeeing one of theſe Executions, cauſed a | y 
Model to be taken, and carried into his — fr 
| | | | ſys 


£ * FE * 
3 > Mee xgfer ans 
— 8 
K 2 4 —— 
Are 
— h) 00 — — — a 
. — 
— 2 — —— 
- 


— rh — pt 
—— — 


— 4 
— —— 
*—— 

- 


bh . * 44 „„ 
r Gy OD — — 
6. 2 7 1 
TTT 
9ꝶ6 c „. — #4 > &@ * 
eee n Wo n 


try, where it is made uſe of at this Day. But that 


Lord's on Head was the firſt that was cut off with 


it; and it being many Years before that happened, 
the Engine got the Name of the Maiden, before it 


was handſelled by the Execution of the Earl; and | 


this it retains, though it has cut off many an Head 
ſince. = 


WM - The Ways to Halifax uſed to be exceedingly bad, 


and, except at the Weſt Entrance, almoſt inacceſſi- 
ple; but of late Years they have been much mended; 
and ſeveral Acts of Parliament have paſſed very lately, 
which will greatly increaſe the Conveniences of the 
People thereabouts, as well as improve its Commerce 
and Communication all around it, to Lancaſter, as 
well as to Leeds, Doncaſter, and all the great trading 

Towns, even to the City of York itfetf, 

South-eaſt from Halifax is Kirkley, a ſmall Village, 
ſituated on the Calder, near which is the Monument 
of the famous Robin Hood ; and upon the Moor, his 


Butts, two little Hills ſo called, about a Quarter of a 


Mile aſunder. I have now traced this Hero from the 
Foreſt of Shirwood, the Scene of his Exploits, to his 
Grave. I before doubted whether there ever was ſuch 
an one; but Epitaphs, as great Lyars as they are, I 
ſuppoſe, are Evidence that ſuch a Man once exiſted. 
His is as follows: OT EATS bs 


Here undernead diſſaid Stean 
Lais Robert Earl of Huntingtun. 
Nea arcir ver az hie ja geud, 
An Pipl kauld im Robin Heud 3 
Lick Utlawsz hi an is Men 
Vil England never ſee agen. 


1 Near this Place is a little Town, called Birffall, 


where they make Broad Cloth, fo called in Diſtinction 
from Kerſeys and Druggets, and the like ; though the 


Cloths in this Country are called Narrow, when they 
OT Og 


are 


"Y 
. 
} 
g 
45 8 
A 
1 
- i 
N } 
2 
#=Y 
: 
: 
$ * 
8 
3 
f 
F 


AQ 
1 4 
"$4 
. x 
* i 
\ | 
* 

4 


$4 4\ 
«| 
7 n 
N | 
1 
% 
* 
19 
9 
* 
4 
Fo 
. 
! F 
* 
* «, 
* 75 
.% #1 
« 4 
. 
4 1 
1 1 
Nn 
197 
1 
7 387 
1 1 
2 
_ 
4 
bl F 
28 
i. 833 
« 4 4 
n 
Nu : 
33h 3” 
5 LY 
439 E 
4311 F 
of 7 AY 
bi 5 
? 
1 1 
43? 5. 
T2 
$54 2 
N 3 
: . 5 4 
I = 
£2: - . 
4. * 
N wh 
1. 
* 8 
, . 
S. 
\ 3 
73 33 
4 
1; mie 
7 19 
TS 
g 
T 
F 75 
1 
* 1 
A 
— Ln P, 
„ 
1 
r 
5 
80 1 1 17 
$ hy 9 «0 8 
7 Ls [1 
2. 5 "7% * 
N Ry 
1 
. 
43 „ 
* 478 . 
4 by 146 
* 74 4 
11 1 * 
Fe 
boy N 2 1 8 
Led WY : 
ILAN i 
1 461 : q 
N 11 N {3 
8 5 * F 
Nin 
i 
nr 0 
3 4 i 15 1 
18 0 
NI ; 
j 
18 
1 
7 1 * 
1 
3 N 2 8 
— 10 * ; 
141 1. 
18 In 2 a 
x 1 
p 45s 8 
BY 2 1a . 
. vt; 4 
as „ 
T2123 
F. T 
4 rf Ws 
»2 i 
r 
0 x 
in 
17 1 
2 5 . — 
7 F? 
. 41 i © 
x 9 
LY by ot 
125 * 
i 
DS ih 
17. F 1 
23 * 
* | 
15%? 
1 Nt ia 
in 
7 1 1 
3 3 $5718 
4: E 
hy "3 
„ 
x 1 
£27 
D 
* 1% 
+ £87 
9 * 
9 3 Hy] 
. 3 
2 2 
* 1y 
8 
b 7 
Jo 19 
. is 
*7 508 * . J 
r 
_ 
11H 
14 
1 7K 
WEL 


— — 
. 


F575 — v oc - 
„„ ͤ en PE NIN 
— == — 


— 


— 8 n 


. .- 5th o 


— — * 
. 
R r 
WT ae. * 
Rory 
7 


A — . 
— — * 5 N 
— 2 2 a 
= hogs 9 += ee Is tr eh n * ** — whey, — 
5 —— —— ee r 4 8 — * — — 
F A * * — — — ae4 &-* 8 F . — 4 — . ps ge 
v . = . — Brom — 5 . 5 — e e, 
; Se r att A I _ Ms 8 3 
r Sr Ne 
5 — — n 


every Tueſday. 


OI — 
e — V9 
— — — . 
n 3 
— Wile 2 % 1 


—ů— 
N OY IEC — 
—— : 


2 
— - 
— — <nIE 

E — 
n 
. — 


144 AT OUR tw York; 
are ſpoken of in London, and compared with the 
Broad Cloths made in Wilts, Glouce/ter, Somerſet, and 


Devonſhire. | 


This Town is famed for Dying, and there is made 


here a ſort of Cloth in Imitation of Glouce/ter Whites, 
which, though they may not be ſo fine, yet their Co. 


lours are as good. | 
From hence to Leeds, and every way round, the 
Inhabitants appear exceedingly buſy and diligent : the 


Houſes are not ſcattered and diſperſed, as in the Pariſh 
of Halifax, but crouded up in large Villages, and 


thronged with People. . 

A few Miles South-eaſt of Halifax is Huthersfield, 
upon the Calder, which is the firſt noted Town it 
eomes to. This Town is one of the fave, where that 
vaſt Clothing Trade, which I have already mentioned, 
is carried on. They have a Market here for Kerſeys 

While I am ſpeaking of their Manufactures, I muſt 
not forget that very eſſential one, called Yorifhire Ale, 
which indeed is in its Perfection in all this Part of the 
County. But I cannot paſs over Huthersfield, without 


taking Notice of its old Neighbour, Almondbury, a fa- 


mous Town in the Time of the Romans, and called 
Campodunum ; but tis now a Village only, Mr. Cam- 


den calls it a Royal Town; and ſays, it had a Cathe- 


dral Church in it, dedicated to St. Alban, from whom 


it was called Allanbury, whence its preſent Name. 


The Ruins of a Stone Caſtle and Rampire are ſtill to 
De-lean near it. 7 „„ 
The River Calder having been made navigable to 

Wakefield, and great Benefit ariſing from it: an Ad 


paſſed Anno 1741. to make it farther navigable, to 
the Towns of Ealand and Halifax; which muſt be 


of inexpreſſible Service to thoſe populous and improving 


Places, and all the Villages and Towns adjacent. 


And the rather, as there have paſſed other Acts to 
mend the Road from Selby to Leeds, Bradford, and 
Sn. | Halifax, 


—- 


Vorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 145 
Halifax, and from Zaland to Leeds, which had been 
torn in Pieces by the heavy Carriages paſling to and 
fro in the carrying on the vaſt extended Trade of thoſe 
Parts. ff.. EY el op 
"0 The firſt Town we came to from Halifax, was 

| Bradford. It has a Market; but is of no other Note 
than having given Birth to Dr. Sharp, the good Arch- 
biſhop of York. | 5 

We ſoon entered Craven, which is. a very hilly and 
craggy Country, as the Name ſignifies; for Craven 
comes from the Britiſb Word Craig, a Rock. 

We proceeded farther North- weſt, and arrived at 
Skipton, a good well- built Town, encompatied with 
Hills on every Side. The Market is well frequented 
and ſupplied. Here is a large handſome Church, and 
a good Grammar ſchool; to which one Mr. Peiyt, 
who had been Principal of Bernard's Inn, London, 
gave a conſiderable Parcel of Books, and likewiſe 
erected a good Library in the Church. We were 
agreeably ſurpriſed to find fo handſome a Town, and 
ſuch good Accommodations, in ſo mountainous a 
Country. 85 8 CF 
This is an healthy Country, however, and the In- 
habitants live to a great Age: a Father and Son giving 
Evidence at the Aſſizes at York, it appeared the firſt 
was 140, and the Son 100 Years old. 


Here the Road turns North- weſt, which brought us 
to a Place called Settle, a much better Town than we 
expected in ſuch a Country, It lies on the Road to 
Lancaſter, at the Foot of the Mountains which part 
that County from York/hire, upon the River Ribble. 
And a little lower, upon the ſame River, on the 
Borders of Lancaſhire, ſtands Gr/borne; but has 
nothing remarkable in it. „„ 
Looking forwards, to the North-weſt of us, we 
ſaw nothing but high Mountains, which had a terrible 
Aſpect, and men b than any in Monmouthſbire 
or Der! y/hire, eſpecially Penigent Hill, which Camden 
Vol. II. a a derives 


Ns AI. FRA. — — —— ů ———ͤ 2 NLA q ——— 4 09, 4 


\ 


146 A T OUR hr VLVorkſh. 
derives from the Britiſpb Word Pengwin, i. e. White. 
Head, from the Snow lying upon it: fo that, having 

no manner of Inclination to encounter them, merely 
for the ſake of ſeeing only a few Villages, and a Parcel 
of wild People, we turned hort Nofth- eaſt, and came 
to the great Road leading Northward to Richmond, at 
a Village called Burnſall, noted for the Birth of Sir 
William Craven, an Alderman of London, who was a 
ow” Founder and Builder of Churches, Bridges, 
Cauſeways, and other public Edifices in this Country. 
Having paſſed thro' ſome other inconſiderable Vil. 
lages, we entered Midalebam, a little Market-town on 
the River Eure, and the North Riding of Yorihire 
together; and ſo, leaving Maſbam, another inconſi. 
derable Market- town, which lay upon the ſame River, 
to the South- eaſt of us, we paſſed along to Bedal, which 
is likewiſe of no great Note, ſaving that the Living 
is worth 500 J. a Year, and that we meet here again 
the Roman Cauſeway, which leads up through Nich. 
mond to Barnardcaſtle in the Biſhoprick of Durham, 
and is called Leeming-lane for 20 Miles together. We 
put ourſelves upon this Way, and were not long before 
we arrived at Richmond. Ei 

Though I met with nothing elſe within the Town 

of Bedal worth obſerving, yet the Country round it, 

as indeed the whole County, is more or leſs full of 
Jockies, and Deaters in Horſes; and the Breed in | 
this, and the next County, is ſo well known, that tho“ 
the Pedigree of them is not preſerved for a Succethon 

of Ages, as tis ſaid they do in Arabia, yet are their 
Stallions denominated by certain Names, that never 
fail to advance the Price of a Horſe according to the | 
Reputation of the Sire he comes of. 

And indeed, let Foreigners boaſt what they will of 
Barbs and Turkiſh Horſes, or of the Spaniſb Jennets 
from Cor doua, for which 5001. apiece have been given, 

I believe that ſome of the Gallopers of this County, 
and of the Biſhoprick of Durham, which joins "RE 


Vorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN, 147 


will out-do, for Speed and Strength, the ſwifteſt Horſe 


that was ever bred in Turky or Barbary, take both 


Advantages together. For though the Barb-may beat 
Yorkſhire for a Mile Courſe, Yorkt/hire ſhall diſtance 


bim at the End of four Miles; the Barb ſhall carry 


the Day with ſeven and an half, but T9ri/faire with 12 


and 14 Stone, In a Word, Yor#/bire ſhall carry the 
Man, and the Barb a Feather. But they are univer- 
ſally allowed to be the beſt Hunting and Road Horſes 
in the World; and are bought up by Foreigners on 


that Account, | | 
As this Part of the Country is ſo-much employed in 
Horſes, the young Fellows are bred up in the Stable, 
and make excellent Grooms. 
Beſides their Fame for Horſes, they have the Repu» 
tation alſo of being good Graſiers over this whole 


- Country, and produce a large, noble Breed of Oxen, 
as may be-ſeen at Northallerten Fairs, where incredible 
Numbers of them are brought eight times every Year, 


and brought Southward as tar as the Fens in Lincelu- 
ſhire, and the J/le of Ely, where they are fed up to 
the Grofineſs of Fat we ſee in London Markets, The 


Market theſe North Country Cattle are generally 
brought to, is at Sz, Ives, a Town between Hunting- 
aon and Cambridge, upon the River Ohe. 0 


Richmond is fo called from its Situation upon a Hill 


or Mount, fruitful, tho' the Country about it is rocky 
and barren; and it gives the Name of R ichmondſhire to 
the Diſtrict it is in, as another, Eaſt of this, is called 


Allertonſhire :- the former is in the Dioceſe of Chefter, 


and the latter in that of Durham. | 


This Town, in the Time of Richard IT. was an- 
nexed to the Duchy of Lancaſter, and ſo ſtill continues. 


Earl Edwin built a Caſtle here, the Tower of which 
is fill ſtanding; as is alſo the Steeple of the old Priory. 


It is a Borough, governed by a Mayor, Sc. and 


holds Pleas in all kinds of Action; has a good Market- _ 
place, and three Gates, which lead to three different 


H 2 Suburbs, 


* 


148 A TOUR tho Yorkh.. 
Suburbs. It is well-built, - all of Stone, and ſome 
Houſes of Free ſtone; and ſends two Members to Par- 
lament, -  _ . : „„ 
We were told, that in 1732. Mr. JFharton of Net. 
caſtle, Agent to his Grace the late Duke of Richmond, 
by ordering ſeveral Places here to be dug very deep, 
diſcovered the Draw- bridge and Moat belonging to 
Richmond Caſtle, which were of very curious Work- 
manihip,  '  - 1 5 9 
Here thrives a kind of Manufactory of knit Yarn 
Stockens for Servants, and ordinary People. Every 
Family is employed that way, both great and ſmall; 
and here you may buy the ſmallett ſized Stockens for 
Children at 1s. 64. the Dozen Pair, ſometimes leſs, 
This Trade extends itſelf into /Ye/tmorland, or rather 
from JYe/tmorland hither; for, at Kendal, Kirkly- 
Stephen, and ſuch other Places in that County as bor- 
der upon Yor#fhire, the chief Manufacture of Yarn 
Stockens 1s carried on, which is indeed a very con- 
ſiderable one, and of late greatly increaſed. . 5 
We made ſome Excurſions from this Town into the 
Country round it, and followed the River Swale Weſt, 
which runs under the Wall of the Caſtle of Richmond, 
and, by reaſon of Rocks, which intercept its Paſlage, 
forms here a natural Cataract. This River, though 
not extraordinary large, is noted for giving Name to 
the Lands through which it runs for ſome Length, 
called Stbale Dale, and to an antient Family of that 
Name; the lait of whom was Sir Solomon Swale, Bart. 
who wrote himſelf of Swale- Hall, in Stwuale-Dale, by 
the River Swaie, This Gentleman became unfor— 
tunate, and was ſupplanted by a Perſon not long fince | 
dead, who was a Clerk in the Exchequer-office; and, 
obſerving ti.is Family held their Eftate of the Crown, 
and that they had omitted to renew for many Years, . | 
procured a Grant from the Crown-of this Eſtate for 
Himſelf. A great many Law-ſuits enſued, but to no 
other Effect than to increaſe the Misfortunes of this 
8 | Gentleman, 


8 > 
47 F 
5 x 
0% 
2 4 
FE + 

$2 

. WE ix 
F 

L 
1 
4 
1 
#9 
- 
? 
= ST 
0 

bs {4 i 
4 
l 

1 
* 
1 28 
25 X? 
4 
79 554 
þ f 
43 3 
} 
74 
. 
RK 1 
% 
7 
i 
717 
18115 
* \ ot 
C 
TS : 
$8, FER 
14 
a 
ei 
N. 
Ji» 
4 
7 + $4 
1 
; 
1 
1 9 
1% 
4 
1 
H 
3 
+ 
1.85 
3 
* 
* 
4 
1 
A 
* 
1 4 
3 bl 
1 
5 
3 
oy 
1 
1 
[ : 
1 F2 
1 
7 
. Fd 
— 
— 
— 
> 
© 
OY 
3 
I 5 
14 J 

414 

453 
Fi 
bay * 

0 
>, ; 
55 
| $1 
x 
ah [ 
73 1 


SAS." PEI wa x 


7 8 0 
* *. 
„ 
8 Ces. . 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 149 


Gentleman, who died a Priſoner in the Fleet; but, I 
think, not till his Adverfary had firſt made away with 


himſelf. 


Swale-Dale is a low, pleaſant, and rich Valley, 
abounding with Graſs, but very bare of Wood; tho” 
here is a Place juſt by called Swale-Dale Foreſi it 


E might have been ſo antiently, but there are hardly 
| Trees enough in it now to denominate it a Foreſt. 


Not far from this Foreſt lies Wenſely-Dale, a very 
rich and fruitful Valley, well covered with delicate 


green Graſs, and ſtocked with vaſt Herds of Cattle; 
and, in ſome Places, produces Lead-ore. The Eure 


runs thro? the Midſt of it, and riſes in the Weſtern 
Mountains, very near the Source of the Swale, which, 
as it were, leaps into it from a Precipice at Myton. 
Both theſe Rivers are plentifully ſtocked with Fith ; 
and the Faure has Cray- fiſh in it. 


Baut let me ftop in this Place, to take Notice of one 
of the greateſt Rarities that England ever produced; I 


mean Henry Fenkins, whoſe remarkable great Age de- 
ſerves our particular Notice : He was born in the Year 
1500. and died in 1670. being then 169 Years of Age. 
There are no Regiſters of ſo long a Date; and therefore 
his Age muſt be gueſſed at by other Circumſtances, 


either from his own Account, or the probable Evi- 
dences of others. Which are theſe: 


Virſt, Being demanded by a Gentlewoman, who 
was Curious to know, as exactly as poſſible, how old 
he was, What Kings he remembered ; he anſwered, 
after a little Pauſe, * That he thought himſelf about 


1462 or 163 Vears old; and that he could remember 


* Plowden (meaning Flodden) Field, fought againſt 


© the Scots, in King Henry VIII's Reign.” She then 


aſked him; Was the King himſelf there? He re- 


Plied, © No; he was in France, and the Earl of Surry 


* was General.” She then aſked him, How old he 


© was then?” He ſaid, About 12 Years old.“ That. 


iq. + 


23 50 FA TOUR W Yorkh. 
Battle was fought September 19. 1513. King Henry 
being then at Tournay. 

Secondly, There were four or five of the ſame Pariſh, 
at that Time, of 100 Years old, or very near it, who 
all declared, That they never knew him any other 
than an elder] Man; and that he told them he was 
Butler to — ,ord Coniers. The laſt of that Name 
died witho tINue 3 & 4 Phi/tp and Mary I. An. Don, 
1557. And he a the Abbot of Fountains, 
before the Diſſolution in King Henry VIII's Time. 
Thirdly, He went often to the Aſſizes on Foot; 
nn was uſed as a Witneſs in other Courts, whoſe Re- 
cords ſpeak largely of his Age. In the Chancery he 
was ſworn, to the Remembrance of above 140 Years; 
and as much, often, at York Aſſizes. In the King's 
Remembrancer's Offce in the Exchequer, a Record faith, 
That Henry Jentyns, Labourer, aged 157 Years, 
depoſed, as a Witneſs, in 1665. and, to confirm 
his Age, divers antient Men, who were Witneſſes, 
{wore that he was a very old Man when -y firſt 
knew him.” 

He was, for the laſt Century of his Life, a Fiſher- 
man, and uſed to wade and ſwim in the Rivers even 
after he was an hundred Years old, and lived upon 
very coarſe Diet. In ſome of his laſt Years, being 

unable to work at his Trade, he went a begging to 
en Houſes, who uſed to relieve him chear- 
fully, as a great Curioſity. And his great Age was 
the more to be credited, becauſe he could neither 
write nor read; and ſo what he reported was from 
Strength of Memory. Two Vears before his Death, 
| he was able to bind Sneaves after the Reapers, and had 
his Sight and Hearing to the laſt. 

The next Excurhon we made was up to the Banks 
of the Tees, through Gilling, Eggleſton, and Bowes, 
now ordinary Towns, or rather Villages ; though the 
firſt had, formerly, a great Caſtle; which in the 


Time of Willa I. and long afterwards, was the _— 
0 


c 
C 
6 
= 
C 


... ns. A Is 


juſt by it. 


Durham. GREAT BRITAIN, 151 


of the Lords of that Country; whereas Richmond, 
which has ſince, riſen out of the Ruins of Gilling, was 
but a Fort, and in Subordination to it. by 
Eggleſton is famous for, Marble, which they dig 
out of, the Rocks there, and employs a great many 
Hands. 3 885 
Hotoes ſtands upon the Military Roman Way, and 
has been, therefore, doubtleſs, a Place of great Note. 
In this Part of Richmondibire, and up Northward, 


are no leſs than three Foreſts; viz. Applegarth Foreſt, 


New Foreſt, and Stainmore Foreſt; and all theſe a 
Track of Ground of no great-Extent. Not far off is, 
beſides, the Foreſt of Szbale- Dale, before mentioned. 

The Tees is famous for Salmon, and is a rapid 


River, and ſometimes ſwells up ſo ſuddenly, that a 


Man, in paſſing, the Ford, in the Road to Darlington, 
on Foot, while:the Water was low, and hardly up to 
his K.nees, was overtaken, as he was going over, by 


a, ſudden Swell of the Stream, and carried off and 


droiyn'd. The People this way talk much of an 
antient City they had formerly hereabout. The An- 
tiquaries agree, there, was one called by the Romans 
Cataractonium, but differ as to its Situation; but, I 
think, Mr. Salman has placed it moſt probably upon 


the Confluences of the Tees and Greta, at a Place 
Called Merton; where indeed the Remains of it are 


very viſible; and alſo about Greta-bridge, which is 


We croſſed the River, and entered Barnardcaſile, 


which lies on the, North-ſide of it, and conſequently 
within the Biſhoprick of Durham. It was built by 
Bernard Baliol, Great Grand-father of John Baliol 


King of Scotland, and is an antient, well-built Town, 


but not large. The, Caſtle has been formerly a noble 
and large Building, and now gives Title to Lord Ber- 
nard. It is built upon an high Rock, not unlike that 


ef Edinburgh; on one Side guarded by the River Tees, 


H 4 = and 


Ta A — £ TOUR av Yorkſh, 
and with the Town, moſt pleaſantly ſituated, afford- 
ing a fine Proſpect from the Market-place over the 
River, along the Biſhoprick of Durham, Here they 
bave an excellent Art of dreſſing their Hides into 
Leather, out of which they make the beſt Bridles, 
Reins, and Belts; as at Ripon they were wont to fur- 
niſh you with the beſt of Spurs and Stirrups. 
The Manufacture for Stockens continues thus far, 
and flouriſhes here, and at Martobod, and other little 
Villages on the Borders of Durham; but the Jockey- 
n. extends much farther. 


0 this Part of the Biſhoprick wats this 
Town ftands, on the Eaſt, and Lancaſter on the 
Weft, a mountainous Track "of York/htre runs, like a 
Promontory, up Northward a great way, Hill upon 
Hill, Cliffs, Rocks, and terrible Precipices, aſtoniſh- 
ing to behold. This rugged Part of the Country is 
called Starmore-hilis, which are deſolate and ſolitary, 
excepting one Inn, for the Entertainment of ſuch as 
may be hardy enough to go among them. As for us, 
we did not think it worth our While. But here are, 
it ſeems, abundance of the Frolicks of Nature in 
Stone, which exactly reſemble Serpents, and other 
various Forme. 

Here we paſs by a Piece of Antiquity, the Remainder 
of a Stone Croſs, being the Boundary of Męſimorland 
and Yerk/hire; and called Rear Croſs 3 i. e. Royal 
Croſs; which Hector Boetius ſays, was ſet for a Boun- 

dary between England and Scotland, when William I. 
gave Cumberland to the Scots, upon Condition that 
they ſhould hold it of him by Fealty, and attempt 
; * againſt the Crown of England 

A little Diſtance from this Place are the Remains 
of Ramparts, which the Roman military Road palles. 
through; and which belonged to a ſmall Roman Fort 
of a ſquare Form, now called Maiden Caftle,, We 
next paſſed thro two nada Villages, each of _—_ 

7 | a 


Durham. GREAT BRITAIN. 133 
had the Remains of an antient Caſtle; but one at 
Bowes is curiouſly ſituated, and pretty perfect. 

Over this mountainous Track of Yor#fhire we have 
an almoſt perfect View of the Roman Cauſeway for 
a long way together. | | 5 


The Weſt-fide of the Biſhoprick being very moun- 
tainous too, and correſponding with that of Stanmore, 
we turned North-eaſt, to viſit a ſmall Market-town, 
but a little way off, called Sta:nthorp ; but being of no 
other Note than having a ſtately Tomb in the Church 
to the Memory of one of the Nevils, and his two 
Wives, we paſſed on to Raby Caſile, which ſtands 
juſt by it, the antient Seat of that Family. _ 

We came next to Piers- bridge, to which the Roman 
Cauſeway leads, or, as they call it, Leeming-lane. 
Here have been many remarkable Remains of Anti- 
quity dug up, and particularly an old Altar-piece. 
We thought to have returned by this Bridge into Tor- 
ire; but were deſirous to take in Darlington firſt, and 
paſs over the Tees there. | 

Darlington is remarkable for its dirty Situation; for 
a beautiful Church, with an high Spire riſing up in 

the Midſt of it; and for a good long Stone Bridge, 
over very little or no Water. It is a large, conſiderable 
Market-town, of great Reſort, and well ſupplied. 
The Market-place is large and convenient. It is noted 
for the Linen Manufacture, as the Water of the Stern, 
on which it is lituated, is exceeding good for Bleach- 
ing, inſomueh that Linen has been ſent hither from 
Scotland to bleach ; but it particularly excels in Huck- 
abacks of ten Quarters wide, which are made no- 

Where elſe in England; and of which, as well as 

other Linen Cloth, it ſends up large Quantities to 
London. | e 

At Oxehall, near this Town, we faw the famous 
Hell-kettles ; which are three deep Pits full of Water; 
which have occaſioned many fabulous Stories among 

| 3 . 


154 A T OUR Hr Vorkſh. 
the Country-people, and divers Conjectures among the 
Learned; but they ſeem to be nothing elſe but old 
Coal-pits (and yet there is no Coal near them now) 
filled by the Water of the Tees, through ſome ſubter- 
raneous Paſſage, as, tis ſaid, Biſhop Tunſtall experi- 
enced, by marking a Gooſe, and putting her into one 
of the Pits; which he found next Day in the Tees, 
Others ſay they were occaſioned by an Earthquake, 
which is recorded in the Chronicle of Tinmouih for the 
Vear 1179. when an Earthquake happened. | 


We paſſed on Eaſt, and came to Yarum Bridge, 
where we re- croſſed the Tees. It is a very good and 
well- built Bridge. The Town is incorporated, and 
but ſmall, lying near the Influx of the little River 
Levan into the Tees, It has ſeen much better Days; 
but, however, of late Years, it is a little recovered, 
and carries a pretty Trade, by Water, for Lead, Corn, 
and Butter, with London. 5 | 

Stokeſley is alſo but a ſmall Market-town, and ftands 
near the Source of the ſame River, a few Miles Eaſt 
of Tarum, inland. | . 

From hence we proceeded South · weſt to Northaller- 
ton, which lies in a little Track of rich and fruitful 
Ground, called Allertonſbire, and watered by the 
River T. It is a corporate Town, conſiſting of 
one Street about half a Mile long, well-built, with a 
good Market; and is noted for having the greateſt 
Beaſt-fair in England. It fends two Members to Par- 
Lament, ; „ 
Here was a bloody Battle fought, in King Stephen's 
Time, between David King of Scotland and Arch- 
biſhop Thur/tan, who was Lieutenant in theſe Parts 
for King Stephen, which was called, The Battle of th? 
Standard; which, it feems, never uſed to be erected 
but when the Kingdom was in imminent Danger. 
The Biſhop prevailed, and routed the Scots, though 
Henry, King David's Son, kept the Field of 1 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 155 


with a Band of hardy Soldiers, after the Bulk of the 
Army was fled, with their King aſter them; and 
fought 3 till he was overpowered, and obliged 
to follow his Father. TOTO e 
From hence we advanced ſtill South, and paſſed 
through Thir/e, a corporate Town, which has but an 
ordinary Market (but however fends two Members to 
Parliament), to Alaborougb and Boroughbridge, which 
lie about four Miles from Ripon upon the River Eure. 
Theſe are two Borough-towns, each ſending two 
Members to Parliament; which is a Circumſtance 
peculiar to this Place and to VHeymouth and Melcomb in 
 Dorſethhire. © 2 | RY | 
Borough brigg, os Bridge, feems to be the modern 
Town riſen up out of Aldi orough, the very Names im- 
porting as much, the one being Borough at tbe Bridge, 
and the other Cid Borough, that was before it. All - 
the Antiquaries are agreed in this, who place on the 
Side of Aldborough, or Old Berough, an antient City, 
and Roman Colony, called {ſurium Brigantium. At 
preſent there is not ſo much as the Ryms of a City to 
be ſeen above ground. But the Coins, Urns, Vaults, 


Pavements, and the like, frequently dug up there, 


give Evidence to the Thing; and ſome of them are 
fo very remarkable, that I cannot chooſe but to refer 
you to Mr. Camden, and his Continuator, for farther 
Satisfaction: only adding to what they have obſerved, 
that a curious Piece of Antiquity was diſcovered a few 
Years ago; which is a Moſaic Pavement of a different 
Form and Beauty, brought to light in digging the 
Foundation of an Houſe, and which is now about two 
Feet from the Level of the Street, | 5 
At the Door of the College is another teſſellated 
Pavement of a different Form from the other; and 
though not above three Yards from it, it is a Foot 
nearer the Surface of the Street. The former is com- 
poſed of white and black Squares, With a Barger of 
e 1 H 6 | red; 


. ³˙¹mmm ü 


—  — 


E el 4 _ * 
NN 8 4 ; EE no ww Kg 
* » 
n v aac Ae OE FR T5 e910 PC IT : 
wt 48" — — 1 - Gans > $5" n 0 "4 — . 


— yy ei} Gat 


+ wy : 4 
W 9 2 ＋ 


* 
A ² CC ee ee Ee de 
G . 


2 


of. 


A4 roun tho” - Yorkth: 


red; but the Stones of this are leſler Squares, and are 


"I white, yellow, red, and blue. 


Not long ſince, more Pavements of this kind were 
diſcovered on an Eminence called Borough-hill; as 
alſo the Foundations of a conſiderable Building; two 
Cafes of Pillars of ſome regular Order; large Stones 
of the grit Kind, with Joints for Cramping ; ; ſacrificing 
Veſſels; Flews for Conveyance of Smoke, or warm 
Air; Bones and Horns of Beaſts, moſtly Stags ; an 
Ivory Needle; and a Copper Roman Stylus: from all 
which it may reaſonably be ſuppoſed, that a Temple 
formerly ſtood in this Place. 

I have before ſpoken of the three pyramidal Stones 
near this Place, vulgarly called the Devil's Arrows ; 
(ſee p. 130.) but for a more particular Account of 
them, and other remarkable Monuments of Antiquity 
at Aldborough and in its Neighbourhood, I ſhall refer 
the curious Reader to Mr. Drake's Eboracum, 
where he will find them largely and e treated 


Boroughbridge, the lateſt built of the two Towns * 
er mentioned, is undoubtedly very old; for here, 
in the Barons Wars, was a Battle; and on this Bridge 


the great Humphry de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, was 


killed by a Soldier, who lay concealed under the 
Bridge, and wounded him, by thruſting a Spear or 
Spike, thro” a Chink, into his Body, as he was paſling 
over it. From whence we may conclude, with Mr. 
Camden, that it was a Timber Bridge ous and not 
built of Stone, as it is now. | 

At Boroughoridge the Battle was fought between 
King Edward II. and his Barons, who were defeated; 
and after enſued the bloody Execution at Pontefract, | 
of the Earl of Lancaſter, and others of the Barons, 28 
t mentioned when I ſpokeof Pontefract. 

"Theſe two Borough-towns lying near the Centre of 
this vaſt County, and on the Skirts of the No h and 


Weſt * and there "os a great many Towns 


about 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIN, 157 
about the Middle of the firſt, that we could not more 
conveniently viſit than from hence; we therefore 
ſtruck away Eaſt, and North- eaſt, through the Towns 
of Hovingham, Rydell, Helmeſley, and Kir ꝶby-Moore- 
Side; which is ſo called becauſe it lies on the Side of 
Blackamoore. But they were far from anſwering our 
Trouble of going ſo much out of the Way (excepting 
that Helmeſley ſeemed to be tolerably well-built with 
Stone, and the Houſes covered with Slate), the two 
firſt having hardly a Market, But the Situation of 
Rydell is pleaſant, being in a fine fruitful Vale, wherein 
are 23 Pariſh-churches. 

We then turned South-eaft, and came to Pickering, 
a pretty large, well-built Town, which has a well- _ 
furniſhed Market, and belongs to the Duchy of Lan- 
caſter, having Juriſdiction over ſeveral neighbouring 
Villages, and is called, The Honour of Pickering, It 
has formerly been a fortified Place, as appears by the 
Ruins of a Caſtle, which lie upon an Hill. | 

It is ſituate on the Weſt-ſide of a wild hilly Country, 
and a Foreſt which is within the Liberty of the Town, 
and called Pickering Fore/t; which we did not care t6 
traverſe over, and ſo paſſed South-weſt down to Mal- 
ton on the Derwent. | | 3 
This Town is divided into two Parts, by the River, 
wjhich are called Old and New Malton. The Old is 


che Camalodunum of the Romans, and was burnt by 


 Thurſlan, Archbiſhop of York, in King Stephens 
Cauſe, againſt Euſſace, the Lord of it, who had be- 
trayed Part of this Country into the Hands of the 
Scots; but Euftace, being afterwards received into 


Favour, rebuilt it, and it has been ever ſince called 


New Malton, Here has been a famous Abbey, and 
the Church of it is ſtill ſtanding, but very ruinous, 

though the Caſtle is quite demoliſhed. ” + 
Ihe Town is well-built and inhabited, and has two 
well-ſupplied weekly Markets, which are held by 
Preſcription; for it is not incorporated. It is the beſt 
| 5 | Market 


es:  ANRFHATOUR ares Yarkhh; 
Market in the County for Horſes, Cattle, and Pro- 
viſions; and is noted for Utenſils in Huſbandry, It 
has likewiſe three handfome Pariſh-churches, -and a 
good Stone Bridge over the Derwent ; and ſends two 
Members to Parliament. Near this Town is a Well, 
whole Water is faid to have the ſame Virtue as that 
of Scarborough. _ PET cos 
Mee ſet out from hence, and for ſome Miles coaſted 
along the Banks of Derwent towards York, taking 
Hlinderſtill in our Way, where the late Earl of Car- 
{i/e built the magnificent Seat of Ca/ilz- Hiward, upon 
the Spot of Ground where the old Caftle ſtood, in the 
middle of a Wood. : 5 
Hut ] muſt not omit that, on the South - ſide of the 
Derwent, we ſaw Auldly, a little Village, where, tis 
ſaid, ſtood, in the Roman Times, a City called Der- 
wentis, where a Company named Derventienſes was 
ſtationed. TT . | „ 
The Derwent is a River very full of Water, and 
overflows its Banks, and all the neighbouring Mca- 
dows, always after Rain, It is likewiſe well ſtocked 
with Fiſh, and runs between the Eaſt and North 
Ridings. | „ 1 
Me are now entering the great City of York, the 
boracum of the Romans, and of ſuch Account in 
their Time, that no lefs. than three Military Ways 
paſſed through it; and it was not only a Roman 
Colony, but the Seat of ſome of the Emperors, 
and principal Generals, particularly of Severus, and 
Conflantius Cblorus, the Father of Con/tantine the 
Great. | 5 
In our Approach to it we diſcoyered many viſible 
Marks of Antiquity, not reducible to Deſcription; 
and though Time and isfortunes have ſo deeply ef- 
faced all Traces of its once glorious Splendor, yet 
ſome Remains of Majeſty are flill to be ſeen there, 
' . eſpecially as we viewed it from a riſing Hill at ſome 


ſmall Diſtance on the Londen Road; nay, after we 


him, 


- CO CTY VP W „„ aig. 


only the latter; the other is imperfect. £ 


Yorkſh., GREAT BrITAlin. 159 
were within the Walls, and had Leiſure to look about, 


we found ourſelves not diſappointed in the Idea we 
had before conceived of it; and every Traveler, who 


-" js inquiſitive in the Search of Antiquities or Curioſities, 


will be tempted to make ſome Stay at Tor; there 
being a great Variety of each to detain and amuſe 
Among the former I ſhall only mention the Arch at | 
Micklegate-bar, and the multangular Tower and 


Wall, near a Place called the M:ini-yard, both built 


in the Time of the Romans. But whether the Statues 
now proftrate on the Wall of St. Laurence Church- 
yard, be Roman or Saxon, is hard to determine; cer- 


tain it is, that the ſepulchral Monument of the Stand- 


ard-bearer to the ninth Legion of the Roman Army 
was dug up near 1icilzgate ; and in other Parts of the 


City have been found many Roman Altars, Inſcrip- | 


tions, Urns, Coins, and the like. 
In digging the Foundation of a large Houſe in 


 Mibklegate above-mentioned, the Workmen went 


much below any former Foundation that could be ob- 


ſerved on this Spot; and at the Depth of 10 Feet 
came to a Stone, which, upon taking it up, appeared 


to have Figures on it, but miſerably defaced. This 


Drawing, ſays Dr, Stukely, is a Sculpture of Mithras, 


ſacrificing a Bull. He has on the Perſian Mantle, 
called Candys, and the Phrygian Bonnet, called Tiara, 


He repreſents. the Archimagus, performing the great 
annual Sacrifice at the Spring Equinox, according to 


the patriarchal Uſage. 

Theſe Ceremonies to Mithras were generally cele- 
brated in the Cave of a Rock : therefore this Sculpture 
was found fo deep in the Earth, | 

There is commonly a Figure on each Side of him, 


| habited in the ſame manner, ſtanding croſs- legged: 


the one holds a Torch up, the other down. Her- is 


Underneath 


3 e 9 ; 
„ 


165 A TOUR thu Vorkſh. 
| Underneath is the Figure of an Horſe, intimating 
the Sun's Courſe: for, in the time when the old pa- 
= triarchal Cuſtoms became profane, and deſecrated into 
. Iaolatry, they made Mithras to be Apollo, or the Sun. 
. Whence thel: Sculptures had a Number of Symbols, 
F relating to the ſolar Circuit of the Year through the 
12 zodiacal Conſtellations. The two Figures attend- 
, ing on the Archimagus are inferior Officers to him, 
There is a Myſtery in their ſtanding croſs-legged, like 
our Effigies of Croiſaders in Churches; and it means 
4 the ſame thing: for the Croſs was one Part of the 
4 | Mithraic Ceremonies. Theſe two, by the different 
5 Attitude of their Torches, repreſent Day and Night, 
= as Mithras repreſents the Sun. The ” Airway imper- 
\'Y / ſectly drawn, at the Tail of the Horfe, may be a 
WW. Sedus, twiſted round with a Snake; which means 
„ the Vitality imparted to all things by the ſolar Power. 
oy The other Figures are officiating Prieſts, dreſſed in 
F a ſymbolic manner, to intimate the Sun's Influence, 
1 and annual Motion. 
The Romans became extremely fond of the Mi- 
Wl. AZthraic Ceremonies: whence this Sculpture was placed 
in the Imperial City of Tor. There is an Image of 
Ji Mithras at Cheſter, and no doubt many more in Bri- 
_ | _ tain, 
Ih St. Ferom, in his Epiſtle to Leta, writes; A few 
Fears ago, your Couſin Gracchus, a Perſon of Pa- 
© trician Gvatity, when he was Prefect of the City, 
© deſtroyed, broke, and burnt, the Cave of Mithras.” 
This was at Rome, about the Year 378. Not long 
after, we may well imagine, the Roman Prefect of 
e followed his Example, and demoliſhed the ſub- 
terranean Temple in Micklegate; where this Sculpture 
of him was found, 
I do not include the Ruins of Abbeys, Churches, 
and Caſtles, now to be ſeen in this Place, among the 
A quities of it, becauſe they are but of late Dite; 
compared wich the antient Remains of the Roman 


Skill 


MEER '; FITS „„ IN att, abr i een 4 5 Ro, „„ ET ALI ART Ch), 


Vorkſn. GREAT BRITAIN. 161 
Skill and Grandeur, and becauſe they would take up 
more Time and Room than the Nature of my Work 
will allow. | x | : 
| The City of Yor4 is ſurrounded by a ſtrong Wall, 
kept in good Repair, in which are four Gates, and 
five Poſterns. It is a County of itſelf, extending over 
all the Wapentake, called Ainſiy, and is governed by 

Ja Mayor, who is ſtyled Lord, as at London, a Re- 
| corder, 12 Aldermen, in Commiſſion of the Peace, 


© 5word-bearer, and Common Sergeant: and the Mayor 
and Aldermen have Confervation of the Rivers Ouſe, 
Humber, Il here, Derwent, Air, and Dun, within 
certain Limits of each. | | i cos 
The City of Yor#, in the Reign of Edward III. was 
looked upon as a Sea-port, and furniſhed one Veſſel 
to his great Fleet, with nine Men; and though it is 
not conlidered in that light now, yet I preſume it has 
WT {till as good a Title, ſince Veſſels of the Burden of 


70 Tons come up the Ouſe, from the Humber to this 
City, in conſequence of many good Laws, and ſome 


of them very late ones, for preſerving the Navigation 
Hof this River; which, as the Preambles of the old 
W tatutes recite, has been often in very great Danger 


ing of Fiſh; and it is to be hoped, and indeed hardly 


private Views. | =; 

This City has uſually given Title to the ſecond 
Prince of the Blood Royal; his Highneſs Prince Ed- 

ward, ſecond Son of his late Royal Highneſs the 


1760. 


Privilege of taking their Places in the Houſe of Com- 
| 1 8 3 mons 


— 
— —— 


2 Sheriffs, 24 Prime Common council Men, 8 Cham 
berlains, 72 Common- council Men, a Towns clerk, 


of being totally ruined, by Contrivances for the catch- 
to be doubted, the Intereſt of the whole County being 


concerned in the Preſervation of that Stream, that the 
public Advantage will ever take place, as it ought, of 


Pence of Wales, was created Duke of York Anno 


The two Citizens they return to Parliament have a 


162 A TOUR thro" Porkſh. 
mons, next the Citizens of London, upon what is 
called the Privy. Counſellors Bench. oh 
The Situation of York is in a Plain on bath Sides, 
the River Ouſe. It was formerly very. populous, and 
had a great Trade; but has declined ſince the Refor- 
mation, and the Diſuſe of the Court of Preſident of 
the North. In Henry the Vth's Time there were 41 
Pariſhes, 17 Chapels, 16 Hoſpitals, and 9 Abbeys, 
beſides the Cathedral; but now there. are only 23 
Churches in Uſe. ' EE 5 | 
The preſent Support of the City is. chiefly owing to 
the Gentry, who make it their Winter Reſidence, ag - 
there is great Plenty of Proviſions of all kinds to fur- 
niſn an elegant Table at a moderate Expence ; ſo that 
the Altar, which was found there, with a Roman In- 
_ ſcription, is applicable to the preſent. Circumſtances 
of the Place, Dis. DeapvsQvaE HosPiTALIBYSs, 
And as. the Inhabitants. abound with the Conveniencies 
of Life, they likewiſe partake of its Diverſions, there 
being Plays, Aſſemblies, Mufic-Meetings, or ſome 
Entertainments, every Night in the Week. 
I The public Edifices which moſt deſerve Mention, 
I ſhall now take Notice of; and firſt of the Bridge 
over the Ouſe. It. conſiſts of five. Arches: the Di- 
ameter of the middle. Arch, which. was the largeſt in 
the Kingdom, before that at Blenheim Houſe was 
built, is 81 Feet, and: its Height 5x. The Reaſon it 
was built ſo wide, was on occaſion of an Accident 
which once happened to it, when, upon a ſudden _ 
"Thaw, which. occaſioned a great Flood, a.prodigious 
Weight of Ice drove down two Arches of the old 
Bridge, by which 12 Houſes were demoliſhed, and 
ſeveral Perſons drowned. RK 
The great Council:chamber. for this City, near 
which the Records are kept, as alſo the Exchequer 
and Courts of the Sheriffs, and, beneath them, the twe 
City Prifons for Debtors and Felons, are all upon this 
Bridge. . on 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIN. 153 

The. Caſtle, which ſtands at the Confluence of the 
Oufe and the Foſſe, was built by William I. Anno 1069. 
and tho” the Face it now wears, and the Uſe: made of 
tit, are ſo different from that which was the primitive 

State of this Fortreſs, yet, in its preſent Diſguiſe, it 
brought to my Memory the tragical Scene of Blood- 
| ſhed perpetrated within its Walls, upon the 11th of 
March 1189. which being to be met with in very few. 
Hiſtorians, I ſhall give a brief Account of it. 

The Jetos, from their: fixſt- Introduction into Eng- 
land, growing immenſely rich by Traffick, never failed 
to become the Object of Envy and: Hatred, both to 
Prince and People, and the ſlighteſt Pretences were 
always eagerly laid hold of, to plunder them; ſo that, 
on every new Acceſſion or Turn of Affairs, they were 
forced to compound for their Safety by large Preſents 
to the int & | „ ö 

At the Acceſſion of Richard I. though that Prince 
gave them no Diſturbance, yet he iſſued out an Order, 
that no ew ſhould be preſent at the Ceremony of his. 
Coronation, either at Church, or at Dinner. 

However, the chief of the Vetus, from all Parts, 
being ſummoned to London by their Brethren there, 
in order to agree upon a rich Gift to the new King, 
to obtain his Favour and Protection, many of them, 
notwithſtanding the Injunction, had the Curiolity to 
ſee the Ceremony; and being diſcovered among the 
Croud by the Guards, they were beat, abuſed, and 


EH ſome of them killed. - 


The People hereupon, being poſſeſſed with a Notion, 
that the King had given Orders that the Jews ſhould 
be deſtroyed, began a Maſlacre of them in Landon, 
and plundered and burnt their Houſes, and in them 
many of their Wives and Children. JE 

And tho' the King immediately ordered a Procla- 
mation to ſtop theſe Proceedings, yet the Example at 
London was followed at Norwich, Lynn, and Stamford, 
and with ſtill greater Fury at York, n; 

| | | | | the 


164 A TOUR tro Yotrk(ſh, 
the King, at his Deparfure to the Hoh Land, left 
Orders for the Protection of the Fews, and the Puniſh- 
ment of ſuch as ſhould moleſt them ; for, being in- 
flamed by a wicked Prieſt, certain bloody Wretches, 
Who had reſolved upon the Deſtruction of the eus, 
and to enrich themſelves with their Pillage, ſer Fire to 
a Part of the City of Yori; and while the Citizens 
were buſy in extinguiſhing the Flames, broke into the 
Houſe of a principal Few, who had been murdered at 
London, and whoſe Wife had ſtrengthened it for her 
Defence; and, murdering the whole Family, and all 
who had taken Refuge there, burnt the Houſe to the 
Ground. ED 
The Jetos hereupon, in the utmoſt Terror, got 
Leave to convey all their Wealth into the Calle, and 
obtained Shelter there for their own Perſons, and for 
their Wives and Children, except ſome few, who 
were ſacrificed to the Rage of the Populace ; who 
— all the Houſes of the Jews throughout the 
ity. 5 
| R unluckily happened, that the Governor of the 
Caſtle having Buſineſs in the Town, the poor Jes, 
being afraid he went out to agree upon delivering 
them up to their Enemies, refuſed him Admittance 
into it; which incenſing him, he applied to the High 
Sheriff, who, raiſing the Poſſe Comitatus, beſieged 
the Caſtle, and reduced the Fews to ſo great Ex- 
tremity, that, being refuſed Mercy, though they of- 
fered to buy it at the Expence of immenſe Sums, they 
took the dreadful Advice of one of their Rabbies, come 
lately among them from abroad; and firſt having 
burnt all their rich Goods, and ſo damnified even their 
Plate, that their barbarous Enemies could not be 
much the better for their Spoils, they ſet Fire to all 
the Towers of the Caſtle, Ind fell each Man to cut- 


ting of the Throats of his own Family, till they had 


deſtroyed all who came into this dreadful ie of 
: 1 | the © 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 165 
their Rabbi's, who, in the laſt Place, followed the 
Advice he had given. | | . 
In the mean time, the Fire of the Caſtle in- 
creaſing, a Number of unhappy Fews, who would 
not come into this bloody Action (in vain endeavouring 
to extinguiſh it), from the Walls beſought the Mercy 
of the Beſiegers, acquainting them with what had 
happened; and threw over the dead Bodies of their 
Brethren, in Confirmation of the Truth of what they 
ſaid; and, offering to become Chriſtians, had Hopes 
given them of their Lives: but no ſooner did their 
mercileſs Enemies gain Admittance, than the 
butchered every one of the Jews, calling aloud for 
Baptiſm, in hopes of eſcaping their worſe than Pa- 
ganiſb Cruelty: n 85 
Not fatisfied with this, the barbarous Robbers and 
Murderers ran next to the Cathedral, where were de- 
poſited the Bonds and other Securities of the Money 
owing to the Fews by the Chr:/77ans, broke open the 
_ Cheſts, and deſtroyed them all. | 
There were 500 Men who took Shelter in the 
Caftle, beſides Women and Children. S0 that the 
whole Number of Jews thus miſerably ſlaughtered, 
muſt be between 1000 and 1500, beſides thoſe who 
were maſſacred in the City, 
We muſt do this Juſtice to the King, who was then 
in the Holy Land, that, as ſoon as he heard of this 
unparalleled Villainy, he was highly incenſed, and 
ſent Orders to the Biſhop of Fly, his Chancellor and 
Regent, to go down in Perſon to York, and execute 
ſtrict Juſtice, without Favour or Affection, on all Of- 
tenders. "The Biſhop came to the City, but the chief 
Author of the Riot had fled to Scotland. However, 
the Citizens were laid under a large Fine, and the 
Sheriff and Governor of the Caſtle were removed from 
their Places, and committed to Priſon ; and the Soldiers 
concerned in the Fray were puniſhed, and turned * | 
| . . 0 


2 = 


1 166 A TOUR hre Vorkſh. 
=! of Service; but not one Man, either then or after. 
10 wards, was executed for the unheard- of Barbarity. 


| The Strength of this Caſtle has been often - expe- 

| rienced in Times of War, and become famous in 

Hiſtory, upon account of [ſeveral memorable Events. 

We hope for the future there will never be Occaſion 

| to make any other Uſe of it than to the ſame neceſſary 

1 Purpoſe to which it is now converted, namely a Priſon; 

| ſ but a Priſon the moſt ſtately and complete of any in 

| 


the Kingdom, if not in Zarzpe. The preſent Edifice 


FI was erected in the Year 1701. In the left Wing of 
WM the Building is a handſome Chapel, neatly adorned 
8 with ſuitable Furniture, and an Allewance of 40 J. a 
Year is ſettled upon a Miniſter, for performing Divine 
4 Service, and Preaching to the Priſoners weekly ; and 
| - ſuch of the Debtors as attend at Sermons, are allowed 
each a large Loaf of fine Bread. The Juſtices of the 
Peace take great Care, that the Gaol ſhall be kept as 
neat within-ſide-as it is noble without. The Felons are 
allowed Straw, and their Beds are now raiſed from the 
Ground: and there is an Infirmary apart from the 
common Priſon, to which the Sick are conveyed, and 
2 Surgeon has an appointed Salary to attend them. 
The Caſtle- yard is larger than the Areas of the 
Fleet or King's-Bench in London; and the Situation is 
ſo high, pleaſant, and airy, that tis ſurpriſing any 
Priſoners ſhould remove themſelves by Habeas Corpus 
to either of thoſe Priſons, unleſs it be with a View of 
_ purchaſing the Liberty of the Rules, becauſe here they 
are never permitted to go without the Walls. Strangers, 
who viſit the Infide of it, ſeldom depart without 
making a trifling Purchaſe of ſome of the ſmall Ma- 
nufactures the Prifoners work up for their Subſiflence. 
The next Building we come to is the Aſſembly- 
room, for the Entertainment of the Nobility and 
Gentry, who reſide at York during the Races. It was 
_ "deſigned by the Earl of Burlington. That Part which 
is the Egyptian Hall, taken from a Draught of Pat 


e T — 
en s - — - —— * 
We eee, ER 8: 1 22 _ 
TY 6 Nn. 4 ot 8 0 N Ge — oc "IE 
eee . 2 2 7 8 ; * um OPS 7" 290" a 
F F es IN OY "7 2 EPA 2 Y 


. A Kats: » (6 
BURN of II can os a 


N oe bor, err peice 
2 r wa, bu LI Wo > = 


2 2 2 
n 
— E ˙ — — —— — ͤꝓ— 
— — — —— 
9 d : 


via.” er 
us oe. 25 


ladio, 


/ 0 OT. S979 


. ©- > 


Yorkſh GREAT BRITAIN.® 167 


adio, is in Length 123 Feet, 40 broad, and rather 


more in Height. This Hall communicates with the 
common Ball- room, in Length 66 Feet, in Height 
and Breadth 22, beſides other Rooms for Cards and 


Tea; all richly decorated, and illuminated with mag- 


nificent Luſtres. The Front to the Street is an ex- 
ceeding fine Piece of Architecture; but the Egyptian 
Hall, if you except the Banquetting- room at //þ1te- 
hall, may undoubtedly dajm the Preference of any 


other Room in the Kingdom, if not in Europe. The 


Expence of this Edifice, amounting to ſeveral thouſand 
Pounds, was defrayed by Sabſcriptions, chiefy among 
the Nobility and Gentry of the County, who con- 
tributed, fome 50 J. and none leſs than 25/, _ 
The King's Palace lies on the North-ſide of the 
River Ouſe, and has a gradual Aſcent from the River, 


but was almoſt demoliſhed in the Civil Wars: The 


Ruins of St. Mary's Abbey join the Palace. This is 
by much the beſt Situation in Town, and affords a 
good Proſpect; and at half a Mile's Diſtance is ſeen 
the Hill where Severus the Roman Emperor was 
buried. | | 

In the Year 1728. a very handſome Manſion- houſe 
was erected for the Lord- Mayor: the Baſement is a 
Ruſtic Arcade, which ſupports an Jonic Order, with 
a Pediment in it. There is a large Room the Length 
of the Front, 49 Feet by 29, ſo that this City has had 
the Honour to ſet a Precedent for the City of London 
to copy after, 5 N 

The Guildhall is a Building very well deſerving 


Notice, as likewiſe are ſeveral other public Edifices, 
which are equally uſeful and ornamental to this antient 


City. 5 a | 
But what exceeds all others in it, is the Cathedral 


Church, which for Magnificence of Structure chal - 


lenges the Pre eminence to all other Gothic Churches, 
not only in this Kingdom, but throughout Europe, if 


I may rely upon the Opinion of 2 Gentleman, with 


whom 


„ 


as 4 TOUR tb! Fork. 
whom ] viewed it, and who had ſeen the Churches at 
 Otraſbeurg, Milan. and Notre Dame in Paris. 
Ibe City of Lincoln indeed contends with this of 
York for a Preference to its Cathedral; and as this is 
a Point in which both Cities are very tenacious, I will 
diſtinguiſh the Particulars wherein each of them have 
the Advantage over the other, as I promiſed in Page 6, 
of this Volume. 55 9 
In the firſt Place then, Lincoln Cathedral has greatly 
the Advantage of Yor# in the Height of its Situation; 
and by different Accounts given by ſeveral Authors, of 
the Dimenſions of both Churches, it appears Lincoln 
_ exceeds York in Length, from Eaſt to Weſt, either 14, 
Cr 11, or 3 Feet and an half: in the middle Croſs or 
Tranſept from North to South, five Feet; in the out- 
ward Breadth of the Weſt End, by the Addition of 
two Chapels, as at Sr. Paul's, London, 53 Feet; in 
the Height of the Weſt Towers and Spires, 72 Feet; 
_ the middle Tower, including the Pinacles, 75 
Feet. 1 | 5 
York exceeds Lincoln in the Breadth of its middle 
Nef, and Side Ailes, within- ſide, 26 Feet; in the 
Height of the middle Nef to its Canopy, 17 Feet; 
and in the inſide Height of the middle Lantern, 64 
ee, -. 
The Breadth of the Weſt- end of Lincoln will not 
the leaſt avail in this Diſpute, as it has ſo many egre- 
ious Defects, not to ſay Abſurdities. The two 
— are crouded together, inſtead of being placed 
at the Extremities of the Front, which by that means 
would bave had an Appearance much more grand, 
They riſe up above the Body of the Church, as if be- 
hind a Screen, without the leaft Affinity to any Part 
of the Building below. Theſe Ornaments are but 
mean, and the Leaden Spires upon them ſtill meaner. 
The whole Front, extending in a ſtrait Line, wants 
Boldne(s when viewed at ſome Diſtance ; and there 1s 
ſuch an Expanſion of ſolid Wall, without Windows, 


O1 


in 
beet; 


8 


iddle- 
1 the 
Veet; 


1, 04 


I not 
egre- 
two 
llaced 
neans 
rand. 
if be⸗ 
y Part 
re but 
eaner. 
wants 
here is 
COWS» 

or 


Vorkſn. GREAT BRITA INV. 
or any ſort of Aperture, as gives an Heavineſs through- 


169 


out, The cloiſtered Work, or Niches for Images, 


which is the chief ornamental Part of Gothic Structures, 


is diſpoſed with a ſhameful Diſregard to every thing 


like Deſign: in one Place, crouded with needleſs Pro- 


fuſion; in another, wanted to fill up, where now 
there is nothing but a naked and dead Space; and in 
the Ornaments the Fancy is ſo irregularly varied, that 
all kind of Connexion and Harmony is deſtroyed, fo 
that the Building, to Appearance, has the ſame Effect, 
as if it were Pieces of different Structures patched up 
together, | % Oo 155 

The Plan of the Church is very irregular; the 
middle Tranſept from North to South having no Ayles 


on the Weſt-ſide to anſwer thoſe on the Eaſt. The 


under Tranſept, or double Croſs, can never be con- 
ſidered as a beautiful Addition, eſpecially ſince this, 
and the Eaſtern Parts beyond, are ſurrounded with 
Chapels and Veſtries erected without Uniformity, and 
the Windows of the Church are meanly ſmall, crouded, 
and out of Proportion. e 5 
Tis to be obſerved, there is a great Reſemblance 
between the Ground-plat of Lincoln, and that of Can- 
terbury; and the one was certainly built after the 


| Model of the other. 


The only Defe& objected to York, is, that the 
middle Tower or Lantern wants Height, and that the 
Croſs or Tranſept, from North to South, is built in a 


different Stile and Manner from the reſt of the Ca- 


thedral. Both theſe muſt be admitted to be Faults 3 
but, by the way, the middle Lantern is as lofty as 
the celebrated Towers of Canterbury- and G louceſter, 


excluſive of their Pinacles, though not ſufficiently 
bigh in Proportion to its Breadth, being 70 Feet ſquare, 


or to the Height of the Church. They have a Tra- 
dition in this City, that a wooden Spire was once in- 
tended to have been raiſed upon this Tower; which 
in that Cafe would have exceeded the Height of Saliſ- 
Vor, HE. EF bury 


. a n TIES . 


on 
<9 e 
P nes. Y 


_- ſhews an incxpreſlible Grandeur: this F ront contains 


| 
| 
| 


wo 4 TOUR thro Yorkſh, 


bury Steeple, as the preſent Battlements are higher by 


ſix Feet, and of a larger en than the peotert 1 ower 
at Saliſbury. 


I am not ſorry this Project failed, becauſe 1 
obvious all wooden Spires have a moſt wretched 


Aſpect. 


The only Amendment that can be made, would 


be to pull down the Bell-turret at one Corner, and to 
| raiſe the Battlements about 20 Feet, piercing them 


through with proper Ornaments; ant carry four 
Pinacles above them, about 20 Feet more. 
However, this Building has two remarkable Beau- 
ties, not to be found in any other Gothic Edifice; 
which are, that the Height and Breadth of the Nef 


and Side Ailes of the Church, and of all the Arches 


and Windows, come very near, if not agree with, the 
Dimenſions laid down by the eſtabliſned Rules of Re. 
man Architecture; that the Span of the Roof, from Eaſt 
to Weſt, riſes very near equal to the modern Propor- 
tion; the exceſſive Height of the Roofs being the chief 


| Blemiſhes in moſt Cathedrals, as may be ſeen at Lincoln, 
Saliſbury, Weſiminſter, and particularly Finche/ter. 


The Plan of the whole Church is uniform, as well 
as the Superſtructure, eſpecially from Eaſt to Weſt: 
the Windows are of a Size and Diſtance proper to the 
Magnitude of the Structure, and are admirable for 


their Workmarſhip; neither is it crouded and in- 
cumbered on the Outſide by its Buttreſſes, but every 


Part is enriched. with Ornaments, which receive an 
additional Beauty from the Colour of the Stone, as it 
retains almoſt its original Whiteneſs. 

Thus far what J have ſaid of this Building in ge- 


neral was neceſſary, in comparing it with Lincoln. I 


Wil now take ſome Notice of its ſeveral Parts di- 


ſtctly, both withinſide and without, beginning firſt 
a the Outſide. | 


The Weſft-end, which: is 124 Feet in Breadth, 


two 


3 


Yorkſh., GREAT BRITAIN, 17 


uniform Towers, diminiſhed by ſeveral Contractions, 


all cloiſtered ' for Imagery, and enriched with other 
Ornaments. In the South Tower hangs a deep Peal 
of 12 Bells, the Tenor weighing-59 hundred Weight. 
Between theſe Towers, over the principal Entrance 


into the Church, is a large Window, whoſe Tracery 


in Maſons Work is of a Figure ſo beautiful, that it is 
not equalled any-where. The ſeveral Windows in 
the Towers are large, and their Tracery and Orna- 


ments well fanſied. 


The South Entrance is aſcended by ſeveral Courſes 
of Steps, and Tradition aſſures us, there was once as 
great an Aſcent to the Weſt Door. Here a remarkable 
Spiral Tutret is erected on the middle of the Pediment, 


and called the Fiddlers Turret, from an Image of a 


Fiddler on the top. Over the Door is a Dial both 
Horary and Solar, on each Side of which two Images 


uſed to ſtrike the Quarters on two Bells; but this, 


ſince a new Clock has been put up, is diſcontinued. 
In viewing the Building from this Part Eaſtward, 
we eaſily diſcerned it to de much newer than that 
Weſtward, tho' conformable to it. | 
The Eaſt Front is exceeding noble, and has the 
fineſt Window in the World. | 
The North Side is the ſame as the South: only a 
Wall is built to prevent Night- walkers, and other diſ- 
orderly Perſons, from neſting and intriguing in the 
obſcure Corners of the Buttreſſes. edn, 
The Lantern” Steeple, of which I have ſpoken al- 
ready, is ornamented in a fine Tafte, wanting nothing 


dit a better finiſhing at the top: It has eight Windows, 


two on each Side, te give Light within; theſe Win- 


dows, from top to bottom, are 45 Feet high. 


We now entered the Inſide, at the Weſt Door, 
opening into the middle Nef of the Church, under 


the largeſt Gothic Arch in Europe, which binds and 


ſupports the two Towers. The Nef is the moſt 
ſpacious of any in Europe, except St, Peter's at Rome; 
I 2 | it 


0 
* m 
— — ———ͤů — — — 


_ A a FI "= P ay 
— — — — : 
—— — * * 
3 env Bs Wi eras et 


PR — 
ms , 5 
* —ꝓ—— 2 — 2 — 2 — ra — 
9288 ——— 
4 


. A TOUR tro Yorkſh, 
it exceeds the Dimenſions of the Nef of St. Paul's 
Cathedral 4 Feet 6 Inches in Width, and 11 Feet in 
Height; and that of Veſiminſter- Abbey 16 Feet 6 
Inches in Breadth ; but its Height is two Feet leſs, 
This is an Inſtance of what I took Notice of before, 
with regard to the Juſtneſs of the Proportion of York 
Cathedral; and at the ſame time ſhews the Extrava- 
ance of that of Vęſiminſter-Abley, in this Particular, 
he Canopy at top is enriched with curious Knots of 
Carving. EE 2 "I 
From thence we proceeded under the Middle Lan- 
tern, to a Stone Screen, that parts the Choir from the 
Body of the Church, adorned with curious Workman- 
ſhip, among which ae placed the Statues of the 
Brilih Kings, from William I. to Henry VI. | 
Over Ge e into the Choir ſtands the Organ, 
having a double Front; it had before been removed 
from thence by King Charles I. to one Side, oppoſite 
to the Biſhop's Throne. The Reaſon his Majeſty 
gave for doing it was, That it ſpoiled the Proſpect of 
the fine Eaſt Windows from the Body of the Church, 
The Choir is adorned with antient Wood-work 
_ carved, and ſet up with Cluſters of knotted Pinacles 
of different Heights. The Aſcent from the Body of 
the Church, through the Choir to the Altar, is by a 
Gradation of 16 Steps. The Altar has lately received 
a conſiderable Improvement as to its Situation, and 
the whole Church in its Beauty, by taking away a 
large wooden Screen, which almoſt obſtructed the 
View of the Eaſt Window. By this Means it was 
carried one Arch farther back, to a Stone Screen of 
excellent Gothic Architecture; which now not only 
ſhews a Beauty in itſelf, before hid, but opens a View 
to one of the nobleſt Lights in the World, both for 
Maſonry and Glazing ; which is the afore-mentioned 
Eaft Window. PD 2 OE Eo 
This Window is 30 Feet nine Inches broad, and 
75 Feet high: the upper part is a Piece of fine Tra- 


cer), 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIN. 173 
cery, but, in my Opinion, not ſo beautiful as that at 
the Weſt End. Below the Tracery are 117 Par- 
titions, wherein is repreſented, in fine painted Glaſs, 
moſt of the Hiſtory of the Bible. This Window was 

glazed in 1405. bs one Jobn Thornton, Glazier, of 
Coventry; who received, for his own Work, 4s. a 
Week; and contracted to finiſh the Whole in three 
Years. + © | | | 

In a circular Window, at the South End of the 
Church, is another fine Piece of Maſonry, in the 
Form of a Wheel, called The Marigold Window, 
from its painted Glaſs, which reſembles the Colour 
of that Flower, The North End has five noble 
Lights; each conſtitute one large Window, and reach 
almoſt from Top to Bottom. There is a Tradition, 
that five Maiden Siſters were at the Expence of theſe 
Lights, The Painting of the Glaſs repreſents a kind 
of Embroidery, or moſaic Needle work; which might 
perhaps give Occaſion to the Story, | 

I ought not to omit mentioning, that all the Win- 
dows of the Church, except one or two, are adorned 


| with painted Glaſs, repreſenting the Sacred Hiſtory, 


and the Portraitures of eminent Perſons. This Paint- 
ing was preſerved at the Time of the Civil Wars, by 
the Lord Fairfax, General of the Parliament's Army, 
who, at the Requeſt of the Gentry and Citizens of 
' York, placed a Guard of Soldiers about the Church 
for that F . „ | 
The Body of the Church was not long ago new- 
paved, according to a Plan drawn by that ingenious. 
Architect Mr. Kent, under the Direction of the Earl 
of Burlington: The Figure is moſaic, and properly - 
adapted to a Gothic Building. | TN 
The Monuments in this Church are numerous, 
many of them antient, and ſeveral of them magnificent. 
Alfter taking this View of the Cathedral, we were 
conducted into the Chapter-houſe; a Building which, 
for a Gothic Piece, diſdains to allow an Equal in the 


e 


7 2 * 
RY 
\ AS Ao I» 
my — 


: n . 
eee 


p \ < ' a Py 
. . 0 . n N 
— 5 " * = — — 3 Ad \ 
«gy * _—— Et n — btnate WIRE — * 3 Ne « 
tans 5 © nts £ n this, 5 4 « ew — . $5.4 r ” 
6 rn OM IEG I OFF x 17 — oY * 
e u e wa N K R 8 ob; IO * ; prone . e 
„56 2 : nets I rn 33 ck hays e r 5 
ö . 25 : . * oy Ly =" at ; * „ R 7 N * 


* 42 
; 23 l s 
* 4 
* — . EEE 
2 2 


— vga 
eee a, 
3 


- — 
. . ˙ QQ ²˙ r I ry AO Or . 10 0 - W 
0 , "OY 2 


174 4 TOUR tro. Vorkff. 


Univerſe, and well deſerves the Encomium beſtowed 
upon it, as is ſaid, by a great Traveler, in an old 


| Monkiſh Verſe inſcribed on the Wall, in Golden 


Letters, as follows: 
Ut roſa pblos phlorum, fic eff domus iſta damorum. | 


As ſhines the Roſe above all meaner Flow'rs, 
So above common Piles this Building tors. 


Tis an Octagon of 63 Feet Diameter. The Height 
to the middle Knot of the Roof is 67 Feet ten Inches, 
unſupported by any Pillars, and intirely dependent 
upon one Pin geometrically placed in the Centre, 
'The whole Roof has been richly painted, and the 
Enots of carved Work gilt; but is now defaced and 
ſullied by Time. Over the Roof is a Spire of Pimber- 
work, covered with Lead, admired as a maſterly 


Piece of Work in the Carpenters Art. The eight * 
Squares of the Octagon have each a Window beauti- 
fully adorned, and embelliſhed with painted Glaſs. 

The next Place we ſaw was the Veſtry-room ; its 


Dimenſions 44 Feet by 22: wherein are kept ſeveral 
Antiquities, particularly the famous Horn fo called, 
made of an Elephant's Tooth; which is indeed the 
greateſt Piece of Antiquity the Church can exhibit, 
and to which they ought to pay an high Veneration, 
on Account of the Benefit they reap from the Act that 
it witneſſed to. The Account Camden gives of it, is, 
That Ulphus the Son of Toraldus, who governed in 


the Weſt Parts of Deira, by reaſon of a Difference 


< likely to happen betwixt his eldeſt Son and his 
« youngeſt, about his Lordſhip, when he was dead, 


_ <. preſently took this Courſe : Without Delay, he went 


« to Nork, and taking the Horn, wherein he was 


«© wont to drink, with him, he filled it with Wine; 
and, kneeling before the Altar, beſtowed upon God, 


< and the blelſed St. Peter, all bis Lands.” 


3 


| Yorkſh. | GREAT BRITAIxN. 


Ah thus: 


= Revenues, 
at length recovered it: And the Dean and Chapter re- 


275 


The Lands are {till called de Terra Ulphi, The 


Horn was imagined to have been quite Joſt ; but 
Thum Lord Fairfax was the Occaſion of its being 
preſerved. Where it had lain, or where he got it, is 
uncertain; but, ſtripped of its Golden Ornaments, 
it was reſtored by his Succeſſor. It has been new de- 
corated, and a Latin Inſcription put upon it, in Eng- 


* 


Ulphus, Prince of the i Part of Deira, formerly 
dedicated this Horn, together with all his Lands and 
Being loft or /folen, Henry Lord Fairfax 


paired it, in the Year 1675. 


I will now conclude my Account of this noble Pile 
of Building, with the Character given of it (as Mr. 
Camden informs us) by Aneas Sylvius, afterwards 
Pope Pius II. lt is, ſays he, famous for its Mag- 


* nificence and Workmanſhip, all the World over, 


* but eſpecially for a fine lightſome Chapel, with 
* ſhining Walls, and ſmall thin waſted Pillars quite 


round.“ | 


The South Side of the Church is enriched by a Li- 


brary, to which Archbiſhop Matthews's Widow was 


a great Benefactreſs. A Biſhop was her Father, and 
an Archbiſhop her Father-in-Law ; ſhe had four Bi- 
tops for her Brethren, and an Archbiſhop for her ſe- 
cond Huſband. 5 

In the Archbiſhop's Regiſter and Prerogative Office, 


is a noble Repoſitory of antient Eecleſiaſtic .ecords, 


bearing Date 93 Years earlier than any at Lambeth or 
Canterbury, „ | | 
Having ſaid ſo much of this famous Cathedral, it 


will not be amiſs to inſert, in this Place, a compa- 
Tative Account of the ſeveral Cathedral Churches in 


England and Wales, and of divers other remarkable 


Churches and Chapels, | 1 
BI ons 


LENGTH 


] | | BREADTH: 
From Eaſt to Of theTranſept]Of the Nave and 
1 - Weſt. from N. to 8. Side Ailes. 
; FCC Do. 
St. Albans — — 350 2172 = *** 
St, Aſaph —— — 179 - — 180 - = . 
Bangor —— — f214 2 = 95 10 DD 
Bath — 210 fl 3 
Beverley —— — [334 4 - [167 6 « [64 3 
Briſtol — r ; Ew 173 — - 
Cambr. King's Coll, Ch [289g = » — - 41 10 
| | 3 I;4up. Tran 51. ED, 
Canterbury —— 3 le Ta: © / 
Carliſle —— — j:19 - - 724 8 
Cheſter — W Op: — 180 >. - 5 
Chicheſter — 401 8 - . 4 833 
St. David's ql | 200 130 © — 72 - 3 
Dorcheſter Cathedr. Oxf. 189 J) ͤͤũ᷑ ÿ iii 
Durham — 411 170 i 8 
Fly — — 518 a, > 132 a 8 76 a pe: 
-St. Mary's Ch, N, Side 100 . - = — 50 | * o 
Exeter — — 390 RS Ko. - = "re 
Glouceſter —— — 1420 - » 144 84 - 
Hereford —— —— [370 - - as - 08 - 
Landaff — — 263 6 » VV 
Litchfield —— — #12 - 5 | 15 — * ; 721 3 
4 | 498 within _ upp. Tran OD De 2 | 
Lincoln Ns ; 539 without [224 low. Trani. 2 W. Front 8 
ME 437 within = [192 upp. Tran. „ HS 4 
4 +nother Account 519 without 227 low. Tranl. 168 . Front 
London, St. Paul's 500 - - 248 125 W. bY 
Norwich — — 400 : 178 5 * | 71 Es _ 
Oxford —— — 150 - = =" es Oy an 
1 1479 - „ 
Peterborough pts 8 10 203 = « 2 1. 6 W. 3 L 
Rocheſter — 05 - » [22 =: = 65 5 . 
Selby — 300 8 OS 
Saliſbury — — 478 = 210 © 2 oy - - 
Southwell — 306 = =» I21 - =» 59 
Tewkeſbury — jo - - [120 - +» 8 
Wells . ; — „„ 8 | 67 - * 
Weſtminſter, St. Peter 8 390 2 © 189 — 2 . a 75 2 PY 
-- K. Henry VII's Ch.j 99 - + ES im 6 
Wincheſter— 491 3 8 
»- Lady 's Chapel —1 54 > 345 186 5 457 | 
Worceſter —— — 13944 i126 ©. = [74 - 
5 : 5 ö 10 = 
— — 6 2 . 4 140 W. Front 


HEIGHT of the 


* 
'* 3 [2 


21101 He 


A & ” — 1 


Nave from the Area] Middle Towers, | Weſt Towers, or 
to the Canopy, | Lanterns,orSpires. Spires. Church. 
ft. in. R., . NR. ih 
65 > - 144 - - - - - 6 : 
60 — 8 — | - — 
3 bo =» - | - - 5 
. — - 36A. - - 8 
67 | - - - 1366 - = - | | 
73 — "= wo " kava 128 — - 5 
$0. % » 8 » 0 ts th * 1 WO 
5 4 130 within too N. W. Tower 6 
235 without = 130 S. W. Spire 6 
71 o — 123 — — — _- 8 = 
73 K 1 " A 8 * 5 
| 6 
br 6 > 260 = - os 9 - 
2K ON OO : A 3 
F = P | I 24 '3 
162 within EO 
. 4 223 without 7 8 $ 
. : 5 150 within ä TE 
an 4 182 without $ 266 „ 5 
< 8 : F 25 ; x , Tower Y | 
4 , = | Ts en I 2 S. Tower T 130 | 25 
66 222 - =» | - OS - 8 
604 a 240 — - 130 — - ED 
65 — - 1 5 2 ROS N. W. Tower | 
"4 _ W. Tower 5 
66 — 8 Rs 4 7 | 3 „ 10 
"Sr 5 24 6 wit ny 5 Saks | 
3 4 288 without F 250 | N 
8 1 = 124 within þ ; _ : 
03 3 288 without 7 2 | K 
3 = 349 — - 208 1 „ 
323277 AA 
416 den | | 5 5 
57 in another „ — Js 7 
4-5-2 136 within 86 4 x. w. Sp. OS. 
a 150 without 55 2 5 0 N Ty” 
EE oa 16 » -= | e 
N - * =» 130 hb Fo - * — | 8 
„c ob RO 
E ” - 30 * »* 8 62 — 8 
67 55 12 160 - = 730 - - 4 2 Ry 4 
101 — * 228 Fa * o — - . 6 4 
54 a > = - — Ch. wi = 8 . 
MW et 
** or 87 — 162 — - T 5 oh 8 
99 in one Part 192 within 7 193 
| 202 in another 234 without 
96 in one Part 188 within 196 J 


17%: AR Yak 
| i The Church of Al. Saints in the Pavement in Tor“ 
= is a beautiful old Church, with a Gothic Steeple of ex- 
[4 - quite Workmanſhip. Up on the Tower is a fine 
F | L. antern (with Pinacles of a 3 Height), not 
18 much unlike that of Boon in Lincolnſhire, | 
11 | St. Margaret's Church has one of the moſt extra- 
ordinary Porches I ever faw. It is a moſt ſumptuous 
| and elaborate Piece of Gothic Architecture, with our 
Saviour on the Croſs on the Top of it; but what 
| ſeems ſtill more ſurpriſin ng is, that they ſay it did not 
originally. belong to the Church,. but was brought hi- 
ther from the aolved Hoſpital of SH Nzcatas, 

St. Mary's in Ca/tle-gate is aUmired for a pyramidal 
Steeple ; as Chriſts Church is for a very fine modern 
one. 

In the Month of Auguſt 1738..a Subſcription was 
of ſet on Foot for an 3 in this City, like thoſe 
1 begun at Londen, Hincheſter, &c. which we have 
11 mentigned. And this excellent Charity has found 
4 much Encouragement and Support here. 


„ The City of Vork ſtands upon more Ground, per- 
WW | haps, than any in England, except Loudon and Ner- 

7 ich; but then the Buildings are not ſo cloſe as at 
Briſtol or Durham, nor is it ſo, populous as either 

1 - Briſtol or Norwich. But as Yer# is full of Gentry, Þ 
wa | |! and Perſons of Diſtinction, ſo they have Houſes pro- 
i | portioned to their Quality, which makes the City liz 
„ ſo far extended on both Sides of the River. 

While we were here, we took one Day's Time to 
fee the fatal Field, called Marſton- moor, where Prince 

| Rupert, a third time, by his Exceſs of Valour, and 

| Defect of Conduct, loſt the Royal Army, and had 3 
Victory wreſted out of his Hands, after he had all the 
Advantage he could deſire. ; 
ji I made an Excurſion to the Earl of Carliſte's Seat, 
. called Caſile- Howard, and the late Earl of Burlington 
1 Lang boruugh in the E — ; 
[ Carli/* if 


here, 


Forkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 
Carliſle-houſe, or Caſile- Howard, is in the Middle 
of a Wood, which is as great a Wonder in its Kind, 
as Mr. Aifabie's Park. The Houſe is of a vaſt Ex- 
tent; and tho' it makes a fine Appearance at a Di- 


ſtance, yet will. it not bear a critical Examination of 
There goes a: 


the Architecture, when viewed near. 
Story, That the Architect was ſo ſenſible of his Er- 


rors in one of the Fronts, that he would fain have 
perſuaded the late Earl of Carliſie to pull it down 


again. The Whole being then not near finiſhed. 


The late Earl of Burlington's is an o01d-built Houſe, 
moſt advantageouſly ſituated on a riſing Ground, with 
a noble Proſpect, as well towards the Flumber, as towards 


the Noulds. , | 
| paſſed likewiſe thro' the Foreſt of Galtres, a little 


North of the City. It is in ſome Places very thick of 


Trees, and in others very mooriſh and boggy : it for- 


merly extended to the very Gates of the City, but nov 


tis much leſſened ; and ſeveral confiderable Villages 
are built in it. 5 — 


Having mentioned ſo many Foreſts, you'll un- 
doubtedly conelude, there is no want of Firing in 
this County, I'is very true; for here is not only 
Wood enough, but Coal too; which is a very, great 


Comfort to the Poor, againſt the Inclemency of this 
cold Northern Climate, which indeed has very great 
need of Firing. LE 


At Hambletom dotun are the Races, where the King's 
Plate of an hundred Guineas is run for once a Vear, 
by Five-Vears-olds; a Gift no- where better beſtowed: 
that on that County, which is ſo famous for breeding 
of Horſes for the reſt of the Kingdom. N 

From York we entered again into the Meſt- Riding, 


and, travelling due Weſt, we came to Wetberby, up- 
on the River here, which we omitted to take in 


our Couife as we paſſed by this River, in our former: 


Journey, being then. more out of our Way than 


179 


I: 6 Metberly 


Mr. Camden gives an Account of; but ſo very much 


* 


180 4 TOUR thu Vorkſh. 


Wetherby is a well-built Town, agreeably ſituated 


upon the fine River /Yherfe, or II har e, over which 


it has a noble Bridge; above which the River forms 
a beautiful Caſcade, by falling in a grand Sheet of 
Water over an high Dam, erected for the Conveni- 


ency of the Mills, where they not ——_—_—_— Corn, 
-but preſs great Quantities of Oil from 


ape-ſeed, and 
raſp Logwood for the Uſe of the Clothiers and Dyers 
in the Manufacturing Parts of the Country. Here is 
an exceeding good Corn-Market ; and as the Town 
lies upon the great North Road from London to Edin- 
burgh, *tis full of good Inns for the Accommodation 


of Travellers. 


Near the Road from Wetherby to Aber forth, is a 
noble Seat, built by the late Lord Bzngley ; but now 
in the Poſſeſſion of George Fox Lane, Eſq; who mar- 


ried the Daughter and Heireſs of the ſaid Lord Bingli). 


"This beautiful Seat has the Advantage of a moſt agree- 


able Situation in a fine Country, over which it com- 


mands a very extenſive Proſpect, embelliſhed with a 


diſtinct View of the magnificent Cathedral at Yer“ 
from the Hall-Door. The Gardens are curious and 
large, with great Numbers of delightful Viſta's cut 
through the adjacent Woods, which are adorned with 


Variety of Water- works, Statues, and Temples ; ſo 


that Nature and Art ſeem to vie with each other for 


the Preference, 1 | . 
Some Miles farther to the South-eaſt ſtands Tad- 
ea/ter, upon the South Side of the River Herfe, 


where the Road from Cheſter, and that from Cam - 


bridge to York, meet; and is conſequently well pro- 
vided for the Reception of Travellers. But it had no- 
thing that we could ſee to teſtify the Antiquity it boaſts 
of, but ſome old Reman Coins, which our Landlord 
the Poſt-maſter thewed us; among which was one of 
Domitian, of the ſame Kind, I believe, as that which 


defaced with Age, that we could read but D O, and 


2G 


Yorkſh, GREAT BRITAIV. 192 
A, at a Diſtance. Here is the Hoſpital and School 


{ill remaining, founded by Dr. Oglethorp, Biſhop of 


Carliſie, who, for want of a Proteſtant Archbiſhop, 
ſet the Crown on the Head of Queen Elizabeth; but 


ſhe afterwards, notwithſtanding that Circumſtance, 
deprived him. 5 ̃ 

Here alſo we ſaw. plainly the Roman Cauſeway, 
which I have before mentioned p. 115. and a ſtately 


: Stone Bridge over the Fherfe, 


Mr. Camden gives us a Diſtich of a learned Paſſenger 


upon this River, and the old Bridge at Tadcafter, I 


ſuppoſe he paſſed it in a dry Summer, 
Nil, Tadcaſter, habes muſis vel carmine dignum, 
Præter magnifice ftructum fine flumine pontem. 
| In Engliſo thus: 


Nought, Tad caſter, can thee to Fame bequeath, 
But a proud Bridge with ne er a Stream beneath. 


5 But I can aſſure you to the contrary of this; for 


though, when I travelled this Way, it was about the 
Middle of June, I found the River pretty full. 

On this Road we paſſed over Tototon, that famous 
Field, where a moſt cruel and bloody Battle was 
tought between the two Houſes of Lancaſter and 
York, in the Reign of Edward IV. I call it moſt 
cruel and bloody, becauſe the Animoſity of the Par- 


ties was ſo great, that though they were Countrymen 


and Neighbours, nay, as Hiſtory ſays, Relations (for 
here Fathers killed their Sons, and Sons their Fathers), 


for ſome time they fought with ſuch Obſtinacy and 


Rancour, that they gave no Quarter. *Tis certain 


ſuch Numbers were never lain in one Battle in Eng- 


land, ſince that fought between King Harold and Mil. 


liam the Norman at Battle in Suſſex ; for in this fell in 


| torious, 


the Whole 36,000 Men, and the Yorki/ts proved vie- 


Tra- 


—— 3 4 


on . * 


1 


_ — — —— — * 5 . 
, — — — my r - fn. > vr LE Rs Sa . 8 > OO = * = _ — 2 8 : * * 1 
— = _ . - x . — 5 - a | — 2 7 0 — 0 P * Res 8 7 1 8 * — = W — a - - . 
n, ere e eee ern en 2 7 Derne w wy www >. 25+ 77. ryan ga thr roo» roo nc he — — * ts 6 "N04 203% 9 1 r Te FX OE an tg Fer ia ' * ns or r wade: Coe Re A i es Wy mf Cramer mo fn oe fb 93 
—— 1 : n q oY Le ee r 9 3 * _— , > p - by p * * C. 12, on 3 5 * 1 > ys On * F gan wp 5. He 6, 
2 22 D . c $4 aT N Q n Fe . : 2 22 * 5 of” os * * of we $ - wy 75 h 8 EY — : 0 £ * . W W =p") * 
. 2 a : 2 at os l % . 5 A ORR 


L bar at + 3 — c TER 72 . „ 4 * . 8 4s rede ” VERA AI NPESITRNTLS 
5 — "2 - hon gm — 5 * * BS WR TR Ys AY EINE 20 
War rer EIN . 2 nn rern ITY 4% e n —— 
_ 2a Wet Ir Re Wed og Pens blog 7 wy - . q ee eee ee * wht, n 77 


rn 
— — D 


"SM 3 5 
PTT 
1 N * Were 7 pa 
8 Cy 9 A — 
bad gets 2 ar rn en CIR 
£ Lb a 
8 


W 


182 4 TOUR th? Yorkſh; 
Tradition guided us to the very Spot; but there 


remain no viſible Marks of the Action. The Plough. 
men indeed ſay, that ſometimes they turn up Arrow- 


| | heads, Spear-heads, broken Javelins, Helmets, and: 


the like. : 
Farther South ſtill, or rather South-eaſt, on the 


Road to Doncaſter, tends Sherbourn, a pretty good 
Ton, famous for a well-endowed Hoſpital, erected 
by one Hungate a Proteſtant, for the Maintenance at 
Bed, Board, and Cloathing, &c. of Children from 

till ! 5 Vears old; when, according to their Genius 
and Capacity, ſome are ſent to the Univerſity, or ap- 
prenticed out to Trades; for which there is a Provi- 
fion, which, including the Maintenance of the Hoſpi- 
tal, amounts to 250 J. a Year, A noble and well- 
choſen Piece of Charity ! 

The Church is large, arched, and well carved at 
the top. It was once an Abbey- -church. Near it is 
a Free-ſchool, founded by King Edward VI. and well. 

endowed, The Stipend is 60 J. a Year. 

We turned Eaſt to Selly, ſituate on the South Side 
of the Ouſe, a ſmall Market-town, but very well 
inhabited, and is famous for giving. Birth to our 
Henry * His Father, Villiam I. built an Abbey 
here. 

We then fell directly down South, and came to 
Snaith upon the Aire; which is but an inconſiderable 
Town ; but, like Selby, has a pretty good Trade, I 
ſhould: have mentioned, that ſeveral Merchants Jive 
 atSe/by, and that the Ouſe is navigable up to the Town: 

for large Veſſels, and has a good Share of Trade that 

Way 
We fell down {till wer South; to Thorn, on hs 


River Dun, an indifferent Fon, of no other Note 


than its Situation within the Marſhes; which is called 
Marſbland TYand ; for it is encompaſſed by the Daz, 
the Aire, the Oꝛuiſe, and another little River, which 


Parts it from the Ile of Axhoim, on the Edge of Lin- 
nen 


Yorkih. Onrar BRITAIN. 183 
colnſbire, ſpoken of before, ſo that theſe two River 


Iſlands are contiguous. 
Being now come to the Banks of the Ouſe, near 
the Influx. of the Trent into the Humber, I ſhall, after 


reminding you, that I have now accompliſhed another: 


Part of the Propofition in my laſt Letter, croſs over 
the Ouſæ to Horden. 
Howgden lies on the Ouſe North, in the Eaft- Ri- 


ding of Yorkſhire, It is a pretty large Town, and is. 


ſubject to great Inundations from the River, occa- 
fioned by the Freſhes. which come down from the 
Moulds and has been fo, it ſeems, ever ſince 1390. 


when a Biſhop of Durham built a very tall Steeple to 


the Church, that, in cafe of a ſudden Inundation, the 
People might ſave themſelves in it. And there have 
been, within theſe few Years, ſeveral Commiſſions. 
for repairing the Banks. 

The Fair, or Mart, held here for eight Days to- 


gether, is very conſiderable for Inland Trade, and 


Kreril Wholefale Fradeſmen come to it feen Lon- 
don. But the Town is more famous for the Birth or 
Reſidence of one of our antient Hiſtorians, Reger of 


Hoveden, or Howden, a Monk of this Abbey. Mr. 


Camden's Continuator is miſtaken in ſaying this Town 
ſtands upon the Derwent; for it is above three Miles. 
South-eaſt of it; tho' the Dertuens was made naviga- 
dle, purſuant to Act of Parliament, 1 Anne, to the- 
Ouſe. 
The Biſhop * Durham has a Temporal JuriddiQiog: 
in this Part of the County, which is called Hor 
den/hire, 

I found nothing in this low Part of the Country: 


but a wonderful Conflux of great Rivers, all pours 


ing down into the Humber, which, receiving the Aire, 


the Ouſe, the Dun, and the Tres; becomes rather a. 


Sea than a River. 


I obſerved, that the Middle of this Diviſion of 


Porkhire is very thin of Towns and People, being 
over- 


* 
r ae ar IE 
* — = p00 EI iS; hg ? 
8 a 8 


CC ( ae $7 OT ber roy 
13" FRI 8 Ng 
Won 1 EGS III 8 
PPP fp ro tpometcon 
k 
P A 
_ od; 70 1 % 2 


: , 0 n 9 : - 95 9 2 n " . 7 : 
, . f e 8 CN OD EF 2 { n 5 2 l \ KY * — ws . * * , 
Eros » ; - : 4 . — * : vv. r e VS In + Re CI v - 
n : 7 8. n 5 . A e : a 4 Lo eo ee IN TS 1 r - ws 234 1 ? n — Den 2 
. \. oa g CE EO ESA TAE. EZ ot ASST Re 7% PETRA =" "6 9s . 1 5.8 - 7 e e 2 * 5 : — ad a - 
IA cy 22; —— * 1 p 3 * _ 8 0 ö n 8 OI — ro. — 
2 1 5 * 9 * 3 a 5 as. a J — 3 24 — — weFEL, — 4 ' - 4 1 nod 2 8 ” LEST ot by * > = 4 * 4 
— 3 FRO "Ig : 5 me WII *** s üg 3 * en - ON ek : e, r 4 
0 8 29 1 8 3 2 K 0 — 


- 1 4 — e e 89 D c 4 . 1 , cs r — 
n [ET NS r S * K's y - - 3 See £ r . * _—_ N * — 
.... . ̃ —ꝛ—k—!— ĩ ĩ˖—＋i A ů ²˙ A ˙ en rene FEE ᷣͤ 0G . 
8 ele . 1 0s — FOR ” 4 , 2 * 3 7 
— Wer = . 0 D 
8 2 1 uh £ 
— 


C 
, es 2 _— i Os e & I. A a 
TC —— ap As ie ap 3 RON 
* 
5 


of 7 — n on, 
„TTT 


8 N 
D r, πν . 


eee. 
2 — v4 


2 ** +> oi. WS, 22 55 2 2 > 5 K ren e 

— — 4 + 8 e 3 / 2 

— 3s. aha Da Bey... — 2 r 3 8 — ” 1 * 

— aa bet 2 "R599 . 88 nde nnr 
x . * 4 4 — 


n r 
EI ogy 2 


* a — . — he IR . 
Mo WW get N 2 9 * NN mn 3 
A Gb * r N 


r r 


lei — 
2 33-260 n . _ 
4 8 * d " 


N 
. e — . 
NA — 


8 
— 


— 
. 
1 2 i 
Pa + 
- — a 


g A 
r 8 
n 
2 Ln of ans FR 
5 q Ts; mum m nat 5 
ey a> = me OB. > 
th. 704, BS- "3" $5 TE A ICs 
_ » 


— 
e 


— 


184 A TOUR thre Vorkſh. 


overſpread with Houlds, which are Plains and Down 


| like thoſe of Sali/dury, which feed great Numbers of 


Sheep, Black Cattle, and Horſes, and produce Corn, 
The Northern Part, eſpecially, is more mountainous, 
which makes Part of the North-Riding, But the Eaſt 


and Weſt Parts are populous and rich, and full of 


Towns, the one lying on the Sea- coaſt, and the other 
upon the River Derwent, as above. The Sea - coaſt, 
or South-eaſt Side, is called Hol/derneſs. 


From hence we travelled North-eaſt up to Weighten, | 
a ſmall, but antient Market-town, ſeated on the Banks 


of a little River called Foulneſs. Here are ſome Roman 
as well as Britiſh Antiquities. = 


On the North-weſt of Weigbton towards the Der-- | 
event, ſtands the Market-town of Pock/ington, which 


we were told was ſo inconſiderable, that it would not 


be worth our while to go ſo much out of our way to 


ſee it. So keeping on Eaſt under the /oulds, we 


arrived at Beverley, which is ſituate juſt at the Foot 


of them, about a Mile from the River Hull. It is a 


large, populous, corporate, and Borough Town, un- 
der the Government of a Mayor, 12 Aldermen, Cc. 


It takes its Name from the great Number of Beavers, 


with which that River abounded. It had formerly a 


conſiderable Trade, by means of a Creek, or Cut, 
commonly called Beverley-beck, of old made from the 
Town to the River Hull, which runs into the Hum 


ber, for the Paſſage of Ships and Boats, Keels, Wher- 


ries, Hoys, &c. to and from the ſaid Town; and as 
it had likewiſe divers Staiths, or Landing places ad- 
joining to the ſaid Beech, for the Lading and Unlade- 
ing of all ſorts of Merchandize, the Town was wont 


to receive no ſmall Advantage from this Cut or River, 
But there being no ſettled Fund for keeping it open, 


and cleanſing it, and the Expence of ng it being 
beyond the Ability of the Corporation, the ſaid Beck 


was, in time, choaked yp, and the Staiths grew 
out of Repair; whence an Act paſſed, Auno 4 7. 


„„ wa... 3 


. r w= 0» 


Vorkſh. GRTAT BRITAIN. 185 


for Cleanſing, Deepening, and Widening the Creek, 
and for Repairing the Staiths, and for Mending the 


Road leading from the ſaid Cut to the Town; and 


at the ſame time providing for the Cleanſing of the 
Town itſelf: all which has had a very good Effect; 


for before, the Creek lying in the lower Part of the 
Town, the Filth, Dirt, and Soil, of the Town was 
| waſhed into it, which very much contributed to choak 


it up. 

Beverley is the chief Town of the Ea/?-Rriding, 
and began to be of great Note from the Time that 
Jehn of Beverley, Archbiſhop of York, the firſt 
Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and Preceptor to Ve- 


| nerable Bede, built a Monaſtery here, and afterwards 
| retired into it himſelf, where he died, A. D. 721. 


King Athelſtan, having made a Vow at the Altar of 


St. Han before he proceeded againſt the Scots, in 
his Return, A. D. 930. inſtituted a new College of 
Secular Canons, and granted. to the Town many Im- 


munities; particularly, to the Freemen of it, an 


| Exemption from all manner of Tolls, which was af- 
terwards confirmed by King Henry I. and by all o 
| moſt of the Kings and Queens of this Realm to this 


Time, as the Mayor's Certificate exprefles it ; which 


| he gives to ſuch Freemen as apply for it, in the Form. 
K following 5 we | 


Villa de Beverley in Cem Ebor. G 


7 To all Perſons to whom theſe Preſents ſhall 
© come, A. B. Eſq; Mayor of the aforeſaid 
© Town of Beverley, ſendeth greeting. 


; K NOW ye, That King Athel/tan, of famous 


* Memory, did grant, and alſo King Henry 


| © the Firſt did grant and confirm, to the Men of the 
| © ſaid Town ot Beverley, and aſterwards to them, by 
* the Name of the Governors, or Keepers, and Bur- 


« gelles 


PL nt A r TIGER N = -— 
n awe I eee 
044 * FS e eee e 
E 2 
8 — N e 


1 
r 


ne an 7 Oo a ee ls TE eee dee CCCFPP OT nth * Rue he ERR 55 my * mrs ES wo, 
- 8 10 F * n 5 * th, . 4 hs * A " . . = — No > 
- P , , 8 ö ene . N b : h 5 by: ; þ l 3» Fo ih tne > - Bare © hes ge ein Be 2 
TRIS \ y OR San iS r 4 . "A 2 , OE E : * r 81 993. Ws en AT . N 8 5 11 4 f 2 e , a. 5 * 
, n n » —_ ON * oh 0 ; Pods v : l 8 2 — * g 1 7 "On . 2 ; 
CIO, * ar 9 S Shs ot Lots» « Lan N 10 bn ele LED 2 — — hey 4 — 3 3 n pg N ng rea eee 5 
. 8 ieee rr eee eee eee eee Ee n ET ————— — 
bY 


os ; 6: N + d 2 : N * ' 1 N 1. "= N : y 4 9 - . n + * op — — — , FLY pb A 6 Nd * M23 RR 
So <p Kd 8 . A e 1 = 2 IR TOR j re 22 4 ; l . 3 2 8 — —— , = — 8 * — . ot CEL SY Moe ho. n * 5 n 
8 e "0 8 ar 8 N r 3 wr. e r = ont ue ales — CCC * 8 : 5%) . . Ga ark 0 * 2 
3 + 3 - 8 rol 1 _ Land ee 5 Ras 1 er + 3 N r e Wann; a. 7 e W9 3 45 — £50 ky a Pr ES AA 13 JUN _ $4 
— 2 rn „ 550 ra N mv a al het Pg n = K N boy MAY 2 1 * 1 p _ 7 ET Ears — on gh tn A ede 4 — 2 py * , ee & . Nr — — _ 
ac 12 #4. odd. - _—_— tr wes ba, 2H *3,* er e N E * 


2 pe, . * . — 5 x Y De pe 01 LIAR. nee ware Cone 
. ** e ** « 8 n e r — 8 — i 5 

r "rr ESO LAI WY Eh got th — e. 8 a v5 LE Is — 8 — At: 3 8 25 * n - py a. we s * 
34 y — - - o £3 * of * n © OY TREE FR on Et, > act YRS, A + Is 


NET ING 
ma 


. 
ä 


7 
N 


EI 


186 A TOUR-Zto Yorkfh. 
© pefles of Beverley, an Exemption of all manner of 

< Impoſts, Toll, Tallage, Stallage, Tunnage, Laſt. 
© ape, Pickage, Wharfage, and of and from all and 
every the like Exactions, Payments, and Duties, 
throughout and in all Places whatſoever, by Sea and 
Land, within all their Dominions of England and 
Wales, Which ſaid Grants were confirmed by 
all or moſt of the ſucceeding Kings and Queens, 

to the Time of Queen Elizabeth, who confirmed 
the ſame to them by the Name of the Mayor, 
Governors, and Burgeſſes, of Beverley, with 
ſeveral Grants, which have been alſo confirmed 

by all or moſt of the Kings and Queens of 'this 
Realm, till this Time; as by many and ſundry 
Charters, under their Great Seals, more at large 
may appear. Theſe are therefore to certify, that 

C. D. is a Burgeſs of the ſaid Town of Bever, ! 
and is therefore diſcharged of and from all and every ! 
the ſaid Exactions, Payments, and Duties. In Te- 
© ſtimony whereof the ſaid Mayor hath hereunto ſub- 
< ſcribed his Name, and cauſed the Common-Seal of 
© the ſaid Town, uſed in this behalf, to be affixed, 
this —— Day, &f 


aa Sb Saad ld SSuMAs 


up its flouriſhing Condition, notwithſtanding it is 
only eight Miles from ſo powerful a Rival as Hull. 4 * 
| has all the Advantages, indeed, of a good Situation, WW hi 
to invite Gentlemen to refide in it; and, being thc 


a 
a 
a 
By theſe, and the like Privileges, the Town kee n 
- 


neareſt Town of Note to the Centre of this Riding, MW bu 
the Seffions are always held here, in a ſpacious and de 
beautiful Hall, which has a public Garden and Walks, 2 
not inferior to any of their kind in England. In th 
Hall-garth, as it is called, is an handſome Regiſter ! 
office for Deeds and Wills within this Diviſion ; which ©" 
is the only County in England, beſides Middliſe, Ot 
which has ſuch a Regiſtry, | 4 jo 
1 | nm 


Vork ſh. GREAT BRI TAI N. . 187 


Ppzis Town returns two Members to Parliament, 
and bas two weekly Markets; one on MWedneſdays, 


for Cattle; the other on Saturdays, for Corn. The 
Market-place is as large as moſt, having a beautiful 
Croſs, ſupported by eight Free- ſtone Columns, of one 


intire Stone each, erected at the Charge of Sir Charles 
| Hitham, and Sir Michael Marten; upon which was 
this Inſcription: , : | 


Hxc SED ES LaPiDEA FREED-STOOLE DICI- 
TVR, i. e. PACIS CATHEDRA 3 AD QVAM REUS 


| FVGIENDO PERVENIENS  OMNIMODAM HABET 


SECYRITATEM, 
3 That is, 
This Stone Seat is called Freed-Stoole, or Chair of 


Peace; to which if any Criminal flee, he ſhall have 
full Protection. 


The common Gaol a few Years ago was re-edified 


at a conſiderable Expence, the Windows well ſaſhed ; 
and, as if Works of Piety 
adapted to this Place, there are feven Alms-houſes in. 
| the Town, and Legacies left for two more; beſides. 
| a Work-houſe, which coſt 7007. It has a Free-ſchool, 


were more peculiarly 


to the Scholars of which are appropriated two Fellow- 


| ſhips at St. John's College in Cambridge, and nine Ex- 


Here were formerly four Churches, | now only two, 


but the largeſt and fineſt Parochial ones in the King- 
dom; viz, the late Collegiate Church of St. John the 
| Evangeli/t, ſtill called the Minſter, and St. Mary's. 


St, Mary's is the principal Church, built Cathedral- | 


| Wiſe, In the Year 1528. their Steeple fell in the 
time of Divine Service, and beat down Part of the 
Church, and flew and wounded divers Men, Women, 


and Children. "Theſe Words were cut in Wood about 


| one of the uppermoſt Seats in the Church: _— 


CD CCC ——— — 


— 


3 


188 4 TOUR to Yorkh 
= for the Soules of the Men, Women, and Children, &e. 
„ When this Church was re-edified, one Creſſand, who 
nk hath a Monument there, built two Pillars and an half, 
which is recorded by an Inſcription as follows: 

XLAND AND His WIFF MADE THESE TO Pit. 
Loks AND AN HALFE, Here are divers Stories re- 
= _ preſented in Picture on the Roof, as particularly the 
a Legend of St. Catharine.” There is an old Inſcription 
on the Roof of the North-Aile. Tt 


Mayn in thy Lyffeng lowfe God abown all Thing; 
And ever thynk of the Begynning what ſhall cowme f 
the Ending, | | 


„ A, fg an o__d nt | cs _ vx tt. mn ww oo Tc 3 


The Minſter being very ruinous, Mr. Moyſer, 
Member of Parliament for Beverley, in the Veat 
1708, procured a Brief for the Repair of it; and, by 
It: his ſole Solicitation among his Friends and Acquaint- 
11 ance, raiſed 1,500/, to which he and his Family 
| © Contributed very largely. This Sum, with 800 J. the 
Produce of the Brief, being put out in the Funds, 
| was conſiderably augmented by the Riſe of the South. 
| Sea Stock in the Year 1720. which enabled him to 
complete his pious Deſign in a moſt beautiful Man- 
ner in his Life-time ; as he had the ſole Management 
| and Direction both of the Money, and of the Appl. 
1 cation of it, being aſſiſted by the Advice of the noted 
Architect Nicolas Hawkſmore, Eſq; His Majeſty, 
King George I. encouraged 'this Work, not only by 
a liberal Donation 'of Money, but of Stone likewile, 
from the diſſolved Monaſtery of St. Mary's in York. 
Sir Michael M harton gave in his Life - time 590 l. and 
by Will 4000 J. as a perpetual Fund towards keeping 
2030 Repair. 1 5 
The Choir is paved with Marble of four different 
Colours, Lozenge-wiſe, appearing cubical to the 
Eye Over the Altar is a large and magnificent 
wooden Arch curiouſly engraven, ſtanding upon py 
| ut 


\ 4 = 6. I3 my my 


pry en be of oo bo ot mo de 


— 


\ 


+ | Yorkſh. GREAT BrITAin, 189 
gauted Columns of the Corinthian Order. The Eaſt 
BW Window is of painted Glaſs, collected out of the ſe- 
ho veral Windows about the Church ; but fo artfully 
| joined, that they make throughout one regular and in- 
| tire Figure. The Screen between the Choir and the 
Nef was rebuilt of Roch- Abbey Stone in the Gothic 
* Stile, and is deſervedly eſteemed one of the chief Or- 
X4 naments of the Church. The Body of the Church is 
| paved with the faid Stone, intermixed with black 
| Marble. The Pulpit, Reading-deſk, and Cover of 
E the Font, are of excellent Workmanſhip : the Galle- 
| ries are beautifully finiſhed, ſupported by Columns 
7 of the Doric Order. But not the leaſt ſurpriſing 
thing in this Pile, is the North End Wall of the great 
| Croſs-Aile, which hung over four Feet; and was 
{ ſcrewed up to its proper Perpendicular by the inge- 
ny nious Contrivance of Mr. Thornton of York, Joiner, 
Ke made practicable by a Gentleman of Beverley, and ap- 
Nl proved of by Mr. Hawkeſmore. The admirable Ma- 
dine for this Purpoſe was engraved by Mr. Fourdri- 
% ner, and printed for the Benefit of his Widow itt the 
. Fear 1739. | Ih | +: $4 
| On the 13th of September, Anno 1664. upon open- 


n. ing a Grave, they met with a Vault of ſquare Free- 
em ſtone 15 Feet long, and two Feet broad: within it 
i. vas a Sheet of Lead four Feet long, and in that the 
ted Aſhes, and fix Beads (whereof three crumbled to 
W. Duſt with a Touch; of the three remaining, two 
4 F were ſuppoſed to be Cornelian) with three great Braſs 
10 Pins, and four large Iron Nails. Upon the Sheet 
„ boy sa leaden Plate, with this Inſcription, in Capital 
wp Letters : 

I | Anno ab Incarnatione Domini MCLXXXVIII. com- 
ent buſta fuit hec Eeclejia in menſe Septembri, in 
the ſequentt notre poſt Felt um Sancti Matthei apoſtoli. 
ent Et in anno MCXCV1I. ſexto idus Martii, fatta 


gu fjlnit ingquiſitia religuiarum Beati Foannis in bie 


ted | I : | | luca; 


A - 
7 


3 R E 3 


—— 


| 
| 


I, —— I 


= 1 q 
— tate n 64 oof HATED 1 * 


„ — — — 
2 A rr: - > 


, rent nel; fe” tor — edi tes - 9 — a 
; * 


e e TCO 
« 
« 0 « 
i 4 
Fa 
5 


10 ATOUR thy Yorkhh, 


laco; et inventa unt hec aſſa in orientali parte 


fepalebri, et hic recondita ; et pulvis cements mixtus 
ibidem inventus eft, et reconditus. 


Thus tranſlated : 


In the Year of our Lord's Incarnation 1188. in 
September, the Night after the Feſtival of St. 


Matthew the Apoſtle, this Church was con- 


ſumed RR ; and in the Year 1197. on the 


oth of March, Search was made for the Reliques 
of St. John in this Place; and theſe Bones were 
found in the Eaſtern Part of the Sepulchre, and 
here again depoſited ; a Mixture of Duſt and 
Mortar was alſo found in the ſame Place, and 
again depoſited. | 


Over this lay a Box of Lead about ſeven Inches 


Jong, fix broad, and five deep, wherein were ſeveral 


Pieces of Bones mixed with a little Duſt, and yield- 
ing a ſweet Smell. All theſe things were carefully re- 
interred in the Middle-Aile of the 

with this Inſcription i in Capital Letters: 


Reliquiz eadem effoſſce, et ibidem compoſite, Arab 
lateritio dignabantur XXVI. die menſis Marti 
Anno Domini MDC Xx xVI. guando, v. teſſellatum 
Hccleſiæ I pavimentum primo fait inſtaura- 
TUM, 


Tb engliſhed : 


The ſame Reliques which were dug up, and re- 


placed, were adorned with an Arch of Brick- 

work, on the 26th Day of March 1726. vis 

when the teſſellated Pavement of this Church 
was firſt repaired. 


Over it, directly upon the Roof, is an Inferiptiny 
to Mew where the Reliques are interred, 


In 


ody of the Minſter, 


' 0% Aa o® Da , «4 -wos . 


— 
3 = — 


| 5 applied ſolely to the Repair of the Fabric. 


—————— Br As —— —— k— gC 


— moon bn 
— — 


vorkſñ. GREAT BRITAIN. 191 


In this Church are ſeveral Monuments of the 
Piercies Earls of Northumberland, who have added a 
little Chapel to the Choir. On the Right Side of the 
Altar-place ſtands the Freed-ſtool, mentioned above, 


made of one intire Stone, ard ſaid to have been re- 
| moved from Dunbar in Scatland, with a Well of Wa- 


ter behind it. At the upper End of the Body of the 


Church, next the Choir, hangs an antient Table with 
| the Picture of St. John the Evangeliſt (from whom the 
| Church is named), and of King Athelſtan, the Foun- 
der of it, and between them this Diſtich: . 


Als 2 make I thee, 
As Heart can wiſh, or Egh can ſee. 
King Charles I. coming into the Church, and read- 


| ing theſe Verſes, is reported to have added, 


Even fo free be. | 
In the Body of. the Church of St. Jahn ſtands an 


| antient Monument, which they call Te Virgins 
Tomb; becauſe two Virgins, Siſters, lay buried there, 
| who gave the Town a Piece of Land, into which 


any Freeman may put three Milch Kine from Lady- 


day to Michaelmas. At the lower End of the Bo- 


| of the Church, ſtands a fine large Font of Agat - 
| ſtone, | | | 


The Mayor and Aldermen being Truſtees for the 


| Revenues granted for the Support of the Minſter by 
King Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, the greateſt 


Part of thoſe Revenues was applied towards defraying 


| the Expences of the Pariſh of St. Mary's, and of the 
Corporation; ſo that not a fourth Part of the Income 
was laid out in the Repair of the Minſter; which 
occaſtoned its running to Decay. This Miſapplica- 
ky Mr. Mayſer put a Stop to; and now the whole 


Revenue, raiſed by him from 150. to 200 J. per An. 


The 


192 ” A TOUR thro 


Yorkſh, 

The principal Trade of Beverley is making Malt, 
Oatmeal, and tann'd Leather ; but the poor People 
moſtly ſupport themſelves by working Bone-lace, 
which of late has met with particular Encouragement, 
the Children being maintained at School to learn to 


read, and to work this Sort of Lace. The Cloathing. 
trade was formerly followed in this Town ; but Le. 


land tells us, that even in his Time it was very much 


decayed. 


They have ſeveral Fairs, but one more eſpecially 


remarkable, called the Mart, beginning about nine 
Days before Aſcenſion- day, and kept in a Street leading 
to the Minſter Garth, called Londoners-/treet ; for the 


Londoners bring down their Wares, and furniſh the 


Country Tradeſmen by Wholeſale, 


About a Mile from Beverley to the Eaſt, in a Paſ- 


ture belonging to the Town, is a kind of Spato, tho 


they ſay it cannot be judged by the Taſte, whether it 
comes from any Mineral, or not; yet taken inwardly, 


it is a great Drier, and, bathed in, dries Scorbutic i 
Scurf, and all Sorts of Scabs; and alſo very much helps 


againſt the King's Evil. = = 
From Beverley I came to Hull (properly called 
Kingston upon Hull); Diſtance Eight Miles. If you 
would have an Idea of Hamburgh, Dantzich, Rot- 


terdam, or any of the ſecond Cities abroad, which 


are famed for their Commerce, you may viſit this 


Town. It is not indeed fo large as thoſe ; but, in 
proportion to the Dimenſions of it, I believe more 
Buſineſs is done in Hull, than in any Town in Eu- 
rope. Liverpoole, of late Years, comes very near it; 
but it has not the Advantage of a London Trade, 


which Hull has. | x 
In the War, ended by the Peace of Utrecht, the 


Fleets from Hull to Londen were frequently 100 Sail; 


ſometimes, including the other Creeks in the Humber, 
160 Sail at a time; and to Holland their Trade was 


Men 


ſo conſiderable, that the Dutch always employed two 


© 


Men of War to convoy the Merchant-men to and 


' from Hull, and thoſe were as many as they ſent to 
| London. „ | | 

: | Ina Word, all the Trade at Leeds, Wakefield, and 
s Halifax, of which I have ſpoken ſo particularly, is 


and Nottinghamſhire, from Bautry Wharf; the Butter 
of the Ealt and North-riding brought down the Ou/e 
to 77+; the Cheeſe down the Trent from Stafford, 


! Counties adjacent ; are ſhipped off here. 
So again, they ſupply all theſe Counties with fo- 
5 | reign Goods, for which they trade to all Parts of the 
5 known World; nor have the Merchants of any Port 
in Britain greater Credit, or a fairer Character, than 
. tde Merchants of Hull, as well for the Juſtice of theit 
„Dealings, as the Greatneſs of their Subſtance. From 


Norway, and the Baltic, Dantzick, Riga, Narva, and 
Peterſburgh, they make large Returns in Iron, Cop- 
per, Hemp, Flax, Canvas, Muſcouy Linen and Yarn, 
and other Things; for all which they get Vent in the 
Country in prodigious Quantities. They have alſo a 
great Importation of Wine, Linen, Oil, Fruit, Ec. 


Tobacco and Sugars from the Meſi-Indies, they chiefly 
manage by the Way of London. @ But, beſides all 
this, their Export of Corn to Holland, France, Spain, 
Hamburg, Peterſburg, Sweden, &c. exceeds all of the 


excepted, x | | 

| Their Shipping is a great Article, in which they 
exceed all the Towns and Ports in that Coaſt, except 

Tarmouth, ſaving that their Shipping contifts chiefly 

in ſmaller Veſſels than the Coal-trade is ſupplied with, 


are employed in their foreign Trade. 

| The Town is ſituated at the Mouth of the River 
Hull, where it falls into the Humber] and where the 
Vor. III. - 2 Humber 


— — wy AT 


Ne or ne I <4 WS : 
eee on eee eee eB, 
e *. Ne —5 r 
2 a — au — 


vorkſh. | GREAT BRITAIN. 193 


negotiated here. All the Lead Trade of Derbyſbire 


Warwick, and Cheſhire; and the Corn, from all the 


trom Holland, France, and Spain. The Trade of- 


Kind that is or can be at any Port in England, London 


tho' they have a great many large Veſſels roo, which 


CREE on N 
— 
— * * 

8 


— — 2 


TOES = * 
— r brd — 
FCC 


* 
— . 
K 


eee - 
* 
> > x 3 1 
s | — — ; = 6 * — 
- 2 n n . r . „% e N 8 
: 2 e 7 . tre My Oy; n n r GRE Irs E A 
RT SO TUPIOES "P1202, PO AEN en 0, = D . _— — ops ip — 
. wewatngs = DR > tree wn agrees porn 91 999d np DOE IIIIrrnns > nin ns In I IA) > rs toes — p — " o _ * 


— 
Sr n 

1 
— - Y 8 ET Ws * 
n — * 
r NED 8 ; 
F oo ongas ale a6 bs i en, 


1 RS one. SO 8 
— —_— - x! 
p mY 
— 8 * 8 
” " 2" 2 a $75 W 
ry es af" 7 oo, ne Bee * 
„ at - 


n 


101 
Humber open 

Side of the Lowa lies upon the Sea, the other upon 

the Land. This makes the Situation naturally very 


15 into the German Ocean - fo that one 


ſtrong ; and, were there Occaſion, it is capable of 


being made impregnable, by reaſon of the low Grounds 


The Advantages of this Bituntion ſtruck King Ed. 


ward I. as he was riding a- hunting, after his Return 


from the Defeat of the Scots in the Year 1296. Up- 
on which he immediately granted feveral Privileges 
and Immunities to thoſe who would build and ſettle 

here, erected a Manor- hall himſelf, and fitted up an 
__ Harbour, from whence it received the Name of 

King's. torun. It held out againſt King Charles l. 
who went in Perſon to demand it, when Sir John 
Hotham told his Majeſty, He kept it for the Par- 
liament againſt him.“ Yet both the Hothams, viz, 
Father and Son, loſt their Heads by 
liament. „ 4 

King Charles II. on Occaſion of the frequent Dutch 
Wars in his Reign, had once refolved to appoint a 
Station for a Squadron of Men of War here, with 


* 
bo 


' a Yard and Dock for building Ships; and, on this Oc- 


caſion, reſolved to make the Place ſtrong in propor- 
tion to what thoſe Affairs required: upon which a 
large Citadel was marked out on the other Side of the 
River; but it was not proceeded witn. 
The Town is exceeding cloſe built, and populous, 
even to-an Inconvenience, having really no room to 
extend itſelf by Buildings, There are but two Churches, 
Trinity, and St, Mary's; the former is very large 
(but the Pillars femarkably ſmall), in which is a fine 
Altar- piece by Parmentier ; the latter is thought to 
have been once larger than it is, King Henry VII. 
uſed it as his Chapel-Royal, and with the ſame Free- 


dom ; for this Defender of the Faith, and Protector 


of the Church, pulled down the Steeple, becauſe it 
ſtood oppoſite to the Palace where he reſided. The 
| ED, NE Inbabitants 


41 T OUR thro © Yorkfh, 


that very Par- 


vorkſn. GREAT BRITITALIN. 195 

Inhabitants afterwards built it up again at their own 
Expence. | ER; £7, 

They ſhew us till, in their Town-hall, the Figure 
of a Northern Fiſherman, ſuppoſed to be of Green- 
| land, He was taken up at Sea in a Leathern Boat, 
wich he fat in; and was covered with Skins, which 
=_ ic, together about his Waiſt, ſo that the Boat could 
not take in Water, and he could not fank. The Crea- 
ture would neither feed; nor ſpeak; and died of Hun- 
ger and Sulkineſs in three Days. 


They have a very handſome Exchange here, where 
the Merchants from foreign Countries, and others 
| from different Parts of the Kingdom, meet, as at 
London. The Buſineſs ariſing from the Navigation 
| of all the great Rivers which fall into the Humber, 
is tranſacted here. There is alſo a fine Free-ſchool, 
founded by John Alcock, Biſhop of FPorce/ter, after- 
wards of ZH, who was born at Beverley, but Choſe to 
| extend his Liberalities to this Place. Over the School 
is the Merchants Hall. | 

But the Trinity-Houſe here is the Glory of the 
Town. It is a Corporation of itſelf, compoſed of a 
| Society of Merchants, It was begun by voluntary 
| Contribution for Relief of diſtreſſed and aged Seamen, 
and their Wives and Widows ; but was afterwards 
| Improved by the Government, and incorporated. They 
have a good Revenue, which increaſes every Day by 

Charities __ oo 

| They maintain 30 Siſters now actually in the 

Houſe, Widows of Seamen. They have a Govern» 

ment by 12 Elder Brethren, and ſix Aſſiſtants. Out 

fine of the 12 they choofe annually two Wardens (but the 
it to whole 18 vote in electing them), and two Stewards, 
III. Theſe have a Power to decide. Diſputes between Ma- 
re: ſters of Ships and their Crews, in Matters relating to 
ector Sea Affairs; and with this Limitation, that their Judg- 
fe ment be not contrary to the Laws of the Land; but 
Te Wo great Deference is paid to it, that in Trials at Law 
e | 2 In 


186 4A TOUR t*ro# Yorkh. 

R in ſuch Affairs, they are often called to give their 
Opinions. | 5 7 

A Greenland Fiſhery, ſet up in this Town, went on 
with Succeſs for a while, but it decayed in the Time 
of the Dutch Wars; and the Houſe built by the Green. 
land Merchants is now turned into Granaries for 
Corn, and Warehouſes for other Goods. 

The old Hoſpital, called Gop's Hovse, ſtands 
near it, with a Chapel ; both which were pulled down 
in the Civil Wars 1643. but were rebuilt in 1673. 
and the Arms of the de /a Poles, being found amor 
the Ruins, were placed over the Door of the Hoſpita), 
with this Inſcription: 16 ” 


Deo ET PAyPERIBVS POSVIT 
Mi1CHAEL DE LA POLE, 1384. 


= Michael de la Pole Ae this to God, and to the 
N Poor, in the Year 1384. 


This Michael was the Son of WMilliam de la Pole, 
ſometime a Merchant at Ravenſpurn, formerly a 
flouriſhing Town of Trade at the Mouth of the 
Humber; but being removed to this new Town of 
Kingston, in the Time of Edward III. gave that King 
a magnificent Entertainment, when, in the ſixth Ver 
of his Reign, he came to take a View of the Place; 
upon which our Merchant was knighted. The King WM 
afterwards, going into Flanders againſt the French, 
met Sir Milliam at Antwerp, where he ſupplied him l 
with ſeveral Thouſands of Pounds, and even mott- 
gaged his Eſtate for his Royal Maſter's Uſe. Such b 
Services could not go unrewarded from ſo generous, d 
and ſo ſucceſsful a Prince. He made him Knight Ban- 
neret in the Field, ſettled on him and his Heirs Lands MF 1 
at Kingston to the Value of 500 Marks a Year, and up- 
on his Return into England, increaſed them to 2 


Yorkſh, Gn Rar BriTain. 197 


and Advanced him in time to be Chief Baron of the 


- Exchequer. TE | 

Sir William died about 1356. after he had begun 
2 Monaſtery here for the Carthuſians. His Son, Sir 
Michael, who, 6 Richard II. was made Lord Chan- 


cellor, not only finiſhed it, but founded likewiſe the 


- Hoſpital called GoD's HousE, above-mentioned. He 
built moreover a ſtately Palace, called the Duke of 
$,/2/4's, which Honour he obtained in Right of his 
Wife Elizabeth, eldeſt Daughter of Sir Fohn Wing - 
feld, who married the Heireſs of Gilbert Granville, 
Earl of Suffolk, But the Happineſs of him, and his 
Family, being now arrived to the Height, ſet in Miſ- 
fortunes ; for in the Year 1388. he was impeached 
of High "Treaſon, and fled for his Life into France, 
where he died. William de la Pole was Prime Mi- 
niſter to King Henry VI. and ſuſpected to be too fa- 
miliar with his Heroic Queen, He was impeached 
by the Commons, Auno 1450. and baniſhed ; but his 


Head was ſtruck off by the Management of his Ene- 
mies, as ſoon as he ſet his Foot on the French 
Shore. 1 


Jahn de la Pole married the Siſter of King Ed- 
ward IV. and ſo became allied to the Royal Blood, 
and, by that means, expoſed to various Misfortunes; 

and the famous Cardinal Pole, who flouriſhed in the 
Reign of Queen Mary I. deſcended from that Mar- 
nage. „ 
Here are alſo a great many other Hoſpitals, and 
likewiſ: a Work-houte, and a good Free- ſchool. 

Tho' this Town, and a ſmall. adjacent Territory, 

be generally reckoned in Yor#/bire, yet tis really a 

diſtinct Liberty and. County of itſelf, governed by a 


Mayor, a Sheriff, 12 Aldermen, &c. and ſends two 


Members to Parliament. The Corporation has two 
Swords, one a Preſent from King Richard II. and the 


other from King Henry VIII. one of which is, on 
and public Occaſions, carried before the Mayor, and a 


= Cap 


— > OS a a 2.6 rt 8 
CT ON Es 


p SLA G = ** e 
— 31 — 5 gt ——— ä — : N 
r R * an —— p paris * Ig * 
CCC Th * N 2 Ne N s 6 W 
— 2 * ae * (on 3 po * 5 


e 9 ny 2 
TOY, opt; 
1 r 
4 


08 2 TOUR ro Yorkſh, 
Cap of Maintenance, and Oar of Lignum-vite, as 
Enſigns of Honour, the laſt being alſo a Badge of his | 
Admiralty within the Limits of the Humber. 

On the further Side of the River Hull ſtand three 
Forts; one called, The North Blockhouſe ; the middle. 
moſt, The Caſtle; and the third, The South Blockhouſe; 
all three garriſoned with Soldiers, and built of Brick: 
De South Blockhouſe, which commands the Humber, 

is in beſt Repair. By . 

The Town of Hull was, it is ſaid, in old time, 2 
ſmall Village, called Vile, till the Merchants, leav- 

ing the Spurne or Sprun, which is the utmoſt Point 
of Fiolderneſs, upon the Sea, becauſe the Sea daily 
- encroached upon their Town there, came and ſeated 
_themſelves here, 20 Miles higher up the Humber: Then 
came Hull to its Growth and Riches. There is an old 
daying: + | 


When Dighton is pulPd down 
Hull ſhall become a great Town. 8 


Dighton was a Village cloſe by the Town, pulled 
down in the Civil Wars. OY 
Farther Eaſt from Hull is a little pleaſant Corporate 
and Mayor-town, called Heydon; tis handſome, 
well built, and hath a little Haven from the Sea, 
which increaſes daily, It returns two Members to 
Parliament. . 
The Sea incroaches much upon the Land on all the 
Shore about this Town; and 'tis ſaid, that many large 
Fields, as well as Towns, which were formerly known 
to have been there, are waſh'd away and loft. 
Hiſtory tells us, that a Town called Rawen/burgh WM 
ſtood ſomewhere this way; and 'tis memorable for 
Baliol King of Scotland having ſet out thence to re- 
cover his Kingdom againſt Bruce, and alſo for the 


Landing of Henry IV. when Duke of Hereford, and 
the Reception he met with there from the Englißb 


Nobility 


Vorkſn. GREAT BRITAIN. 199 
Nobility, againſt Richard II. and yet there are 
no Veltigia or Traces of this Town to be now met 

with. 

The e a long Promontory thruſting out 
jnto the dea, and making the North Point of Humber, 
is very remarkable. But I leave that till I come to 
the Deſcription of the Sea-coaſts. I can only re- 
mark, that there is nothing worth Obſervation upon 
this Side for above 30 Miles together, not a Port, nor 

a Gentleman's Seat, not a Town of any Note, ex- 
cept Patrington, which is a very antient corporate 
Town, and very pleaſantly ſeated within the Pro- 
montory, and had likewiſe formerly a good Harbour: 
on one Side it looks into the Humber, and on the 
other, over ſweet delicious green Fields, which ren- 
ders its Situation very agreeable. It is ſuppoſed to 
be the Prætorium of Ptolemy. - The Roman Way 
from the Pits Wall ends here, as indeed it . 
hardly go farther, unleſs it ſhould extend to Kelx- 
fey, a little Village ſtanding at the Head of the Pro- 
montory. 

Spur nhead is likewiſe ſuppoſed to be the Occelhum 

of Piolemy, derived from the Britiſb Word Yehell, 

which ſignifies an hich lace. On the Eaſt: ſide of 
this Promoatory, on the German Sea, the Villages 
lie very thick; but I met with nothing of Note till we 
came up to Hornſey, which is almoſt ſurrounded with 

a little Arm of the Sea. The Steeple here is a notable 

Sea- mark, but is much fallen to Ruin. Here was a 

| whole Street waſhed away by the Sea; as, *tis ſaid, a 

Village called Hide was, a little to the North, as well 

as many other Villages on this Coaſt. 

North-weſt of Hornſey, ſome Diſtance ſrom the 8 Sea, 
ſtands Kilham, a Market-town | in the Woulds, but of 
no Note. 

We come next to Bures or Bridlington, a large 


Market -town, ſituate on a Creek of the Sea. It is a 
K 4 Place 


1 * N rt n . AY AER ORE OT Ss a a IE] * 80 0 2— 2 * * e W . , CL SALE EY r 
wo uo i we - ——— . Peg nt Oo en yy wes: Dr OT, 9s EIT 
8 Rs : P nor Ee . nr ers ths . 232 IE ny „ ag pee tr apr : "I 
- * — <A n * oP — — —— oo —ͤ — — —— —ů — — — 5 1 — 7» - dy — — r A — 4 * * 
- =o 6 
—ů— nag. — 4 — TI — 5 — 2 Em 1 — I" myth re wi — — —— 1 — — by * * 5 0 
ü e . ee r np — , —— 4 * — 4 a * * N n . 
: 7 , 
. * — 
1 
\ ” 
. 
4 


IE Rint IRE tht a . 
—— — 2 - ——————— aae en 
. T 2 
(> ng get. Y 


- ab a Ara enn . 
5 * A — © _ q of he £ Ir ra IRE. LW 
awake R Jo at, * * * „* 
5 * bv p 8 * 
4 . > ER, 
r ᷑ > ,,,. ]—§%«⏑.n. . ̃ EU .,, eee 


Art yarn 


6— eat . 
. ' 


. TOU R NERY Vorkſh. 


Place of good Trade, and has a ſafe Harbour for Sbips, 


and a good Quay to load and unload them. It is much 


frequented by the Colliers. The Harbour is made ſtill 
better, and yet improving, by virtue of ſeveral Ads 


of Parliament paſſed for Repair of its Piers, the laſt of 


which, enforcing the former, and ſupplying Defects, 


was in 1723. 
In Conſequence of theſe Grants, Burlington is be- 


come much more conſiderable, has a Cuſtom-houſe, 
and a proper Appointment of Officers, is regarded as 
2 Member of the Port of Hull; and, in Conjunction 
with that, has contributed not a little to the Improve- 


ment of Land in the Zo/f-Riding. 


Near Burlington ſtands Flamborough-head, a little 
Promontory, which bends into the Sea, and forms 


the Bay of Burlington, It takes its Name from Flam, 
a Britiſb Word for a Fire-light ; and not far from 


this Promontory is a very large Ditch, which ſome of 
the antient Earls of Heo/derneſs threw up as a Boun- 
dary to their Juriſdiction and ſtate. It is call'd Earls 


Dyke. 


it * loſt the "rivilegs of its Market, if it ever had 
an 

At Jabber fer: a little Village, a ſmall Way from 
the Sea, the famous River Derwent takes its Riſe, and 
makes its Way Welt, inſtead of —_— into the Sea 
here. And here I take leave of the aft 


the /Zoulds, which are high Grounds, barren and 


. mooriſh ; but are however well-ſtock'd with Sheep: 


yet the Eaſtern Part upon the Sea is fruitful and plea- 


ſant, which, as well as the Southern Part, produces 
all Sort of Grain and Graſs, But then, if you take 


it in its Trade and Traffick, it excels both che other 


Ridin 8. 
2 er 


* 
: 5 
* * 
8 


8 ſtands next, but is ſo inconſiderable, that 


iding, which 


is no- wiſe fo fruitful as the other two Ridings, by 
reaſon that the middle Part of it is over-run with 


DU 


i refer to them. 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN, 201 
Scarborough is the firſt Town we come to upon the 
Coaſt in the North-Riding : it is a Borough Baili- 


wick Town, the Situation of which is perfectly ro- 
mantic; bending in the Form of a Creſcent to the 


main Ocean, of which you have almoſt an unbounded 
Proſpect from all Parts, it being built on a ſteep 
Rock, and the Declivity of a lofty Hill, on the Top 
of which ſtood an antient Caſtle, founded by William 
e Groſs, in the Time of King Stephen, and repaired 
and enlarged afterwards by King Henry II. but de- 


moliſhed in the late Civil Wars. The Summit of this 


Hill contains no lefs than 18 or 20 Acres of Mea- 


dow- ground. The Town is populous, almoſt encom- 


paſſed by the Sea, and walled where it joins not to the 


Caſtle, or is more ſtrongly defended by the Sea. It 


has one of the beſt Harbours in the Kingdom, 
eſpecially ſince the Paſſing of an Act of Parliament, 


Anno 1732. to enlarge its Piers and Harbour, by 


which they have gained ſix Feet Depth of Water, 
which enables the Harbour to receive Veſſels of 
greater Burden than it could do before. And it is 
the beſt Place, between Newca/tle and the Humbet, 
capable of receiving in Diſtreſs of Weather Ships 
_—_ from the Eaftern Seas along our Northern 
gat... „ 
The Spato Waters (whoſe admirable Virtues yearly 


| occaſion a great Concourſe of the Nobility and Gentry 
of the Kingdom) were firſt diſcovered by Mrs. Fer- 


row, about 150 Years ago, then an Inhabitant of the 
Place. x + RT 

They are reckoned Cathartic and Diuretic, much 
in their Nature like thoſe of Pyrmont in Germany; 


and are apparently tinged with a Collection of Mineral 
| oalts, as a Vitriol, Alum, Iron, and perhaps Sulphur 


but being deemed of the ſame Nature as thoſe of 
Cheltenham in Gleuce/terſhire, deſcribed Vol, II. p. 318. 


X 5 Gears 


; * 
n ; 2 e ot ba > * Wirth) RR — ; . — . * ane, 
8 r n > n — So - EWING inert. Bee K. da 8 1 . — x 
1 *. 
6 BC _ ar 4 9 2 n d 4 CC 4 8 — - ur be 1 ! 1 ä rode aees a a 
ws 1 5 NN TE.) 8 8 "IF 72 n e 2s 7 LESTER ah, Woh 3 2 - * J 8 3 * Ne * 
79 r Deer d or grad ä 4 8 ne Z „r » nene ee 1 A — ens — - 
— — 3 „ — 0 ——— rarn — 1 — 1 Pp — SE 6. ood na n \ OF : \ . 
3 : 


be 4 2 eee. * * n r " 
_ 8 1 n en irs ea * 1 55 * * rd 6 on TY Ls GENTE WW 
$226 her er ON PO COVE CCC r 
5 e. > r rr eee rn 
8 7 „ 3 —— r 75 7 « 
ET INT e e ES I TT Cade 


3 

Codes I 
e 

——_— 


o. 
Wo; N. Fas 4 
„ 16A + gr ic tow = 
— #- 0 4 10 Ae — > 4 wy 
B A a — 


. . ² . V RC PG I A PO REI IE 


357 


2. 
pen; 


eee eee 
* Cd, 9 I 
* gt r . 1 1 8 5 
ao 8 yy * < + 6h . hy * 8 — 
. * —— — 
* * oy — 


— 
— 


202 4 TOUR e Yorkſh, 

Scarborough may be ſaideven to rival the Bath itſelf, 
and, on ſeveral Accounts, is more eligible and inviting 
to Strangers. It is well for Bath, that its Seaſons in- 
terfere not with theirs; for it is frequented chiefly 1 in 
the hot Months of the Summer. | 

There are many new Buildings i in it; end more go- 
ing forward, ſo that there is now good Accommoda- i 
tion for great Numbers even of the higheſt Quality; 
and they have Aſſemblies, and public "Ball in long 
Rooms built on Purpoſe, 

The unfortunate Accident that happened i in Decem- 

ber 1737. whereby this famous Spato had like to have 
been loſt, deſerves to be mentioned here. Take then 
the Account as follows: 
The Spato, as to its Situation, lay South from the 
Town, on the Sands, and: fronting the Sea to the Eaſt, 
under an high Cliff on the Back of it, Weſt ; the top 
of the Cliff being above the High-water Level, 54 
Yards; and all about a Quarter of a Mile from the 
Town, 

The Staith or W narf adjoining to the Spaw-houſe, 
was a large Body of In, bound by "Timbers, and 
was a Fence againſt the Sea, for.the Security of the 
_ Houſe : it was 76 Feet long, and 14 Feet high, and 
in Weight by Computation 2463 Tons. The Houle 
and Buildings were upon a Level with the Staith ; at 

the North End of which, and near adjoining to it, 
upon a ſmall Rife above the level Sands, and at the 
Foot of the Stairs that lead up to the top of the faid 
Staith, and to the Houſe, were the Spawo Wells. 

'On Fedneſday, December 28, in the Morning, a 
great Crack was heard from the Cellar of the Spaw 
Houſe ; and, upon Search, the Cellar was found rent; 
but, at the time, no fender Notice was taken of it. 

The Night following, another Crack was heard; 
and in the Morning the Inhabitants were ſurpriſed to 
fee the ſtrange Poſture it ſtood in, and got ſeveral Gen- 
tlemen to view it, who, being of Opinion the _ 

| Cy 


r 


Places, and forced forward to the Sea 


Yorkſh. - GREAT BRITAIN. 


| 203 
could not ſtand long, adviſed them to get out their 
Goods; but they ſtill continued in it. 
On Thur ſday following, between two and three i 

the Afternoon, another Crack was heard, and the 
Top of the Cliff behind it rent 224 Vards in Length, 
and 36 in Breadth, and was all in Motion, ſlowly 


. 


deſcending 


Level with the main Land, but. ſunk near 17 Yards 
perpendicular. The Sides of the Cliff neareſt the Spaw 
ſtood as before, but were rent and broken in many 


when ſunk, lay upon a Level, and the Cattle next 
Morning were fill feeding on it, the main Land be- 


ing as a Wall on the Weſt, and ſome Part of the Side 


of the Cliff as a Wall to the Eaſt ; but the Whole, to 


View, gave ſuch a confuſed ProſpeR, as could hardly 
be deſcribed. | 


The Rent of the top of the Cliff aforeſaid, from 
the main Land, was 224 Yards. The Rent continued 
from each End, down the Side of the Cliff, to the 
Sands, was meaſured on the Sands from one End te 
the other, 168 Yards ; to wit, 143 South of the 


Staith and Spaww Wells, and 100 to the North of the 
path. ; | | | 


As the Ground ſunk, the Earth, or Sand, on 
which. the People uſed to walk under tne Cliff, roſe 


upwards out of its natural Poſition, for above 100 


Yards in Length, on each Side of the Staith, North 
and South; and was in ſome Places fix, and in others 
ſeven Yards above its former Level. The Spaw 


Wells rofe with it; but as ſoon as it began to riſe, 
the Water at the Spaw Well ceas'd running, and was 
gone. 28 5 1 
The Ground thus riſen was 26 Yarcs broad; the 
| Staith, which was computed at 2463 Tons, roſe in- 
tire and whole, 12 Feet * tnau us formes Poſi- 
5s 8 6 


ton 


; and ſo continued tilt dark. The Ground - 
thus rent contained about an Acre of Paſture-Jand, 
and had Cattle then feeding upon it, and was on a 


The Ground, 


1 
— 


n 


* 


ae 


ebe a4 rue 
3 e 
Wenn e . 
2 * 22 r 4 co 
TS . by Ip 
gat WH 14 AI ee Gay 


7 
1 


* 
2 


1 
WIE 


nee 


> RR 
h k 1 e 4 TO OC TICS) 9 
* n 3 — * * *. ö 
2 D 2 1 N * Ar. ee". 0 PPP VL 7-0 3 3 — x - > 
TI 7 IA r een og BP BD 
l . * ana R — E ny 1 Loy e whe 8 
ee D eee N- Nee 
7 — 1. 3444 


POLY 45 emihtovaure n be Ps is « * me” 


” 
7 x} 9 by n W N 8 5. 0-04 ANTE. 12 . * , - 7 dads 9 . | 
ITO 4 Ke * 6 Pw Fe 4 * Te n W a ek 4 * 0 wb. e d f 28 8 PL g 
PPP r 4 — 8 4 . l h n 1 EW 8 — - re 
% ——UU—U—— — ns w * 
22 aer 
5 8 3 on 1 = 
n r 
— * 2 


1 Ar We eee e 
r 


204 4 TOUR tho Yorkſh 
tion (but rent a little in the Front), and was forced 
forwards towards the Sea, 20 Yards. | 
The moſt reaſonable Account then given * this 
Phznomenon, and the Occaſion of the DeſtruQtion of 
the Staith, and Spaw Houſe, and the Loſs for ſome 
time of che Spaw Spring, is as follows: 8 
When this Staith, or Wharf, was lately rebuilt it 
being thrown down by the Violence of the Sea), Mr, 
Fincent, Engineer for the building of the new Pier at 
Scarborough, was deſired to rebuild this Staith at the 
Spaw; and, digging a Trench to lay the Foundation 
thereof, with great Difficulty cleared it of Water; 
and, when he had done it, could, at ſeveral Parts 
thereof, very eaſily thruſt his Stick or Cane up to the 
Handle; from whence it is concluded, that all the 
Earth under the Staith was of a porous, ſpongy, 
ſwampy Nature, and was much the fame below the 
Foundation of the Spaw Houſe, and all under the 
Sides of the Cliff, adjoining, as well North as South. 
Allowing this to be Fact, the ſolid Earth, ſinking 
on the Top of the Cliff, as afore- mentioned (which 
was of fo vaſt a Weight, as by Computation to amount 
to 261,300 Tons), preſſing gradually upon and into 
the ſwampey, boggy Earth beneath it, would of 
courſe, and did, raiſe the Earth and Sands, as before 
Noticed, and ſo effected the Miſchief we have parti- 


5 cularized. 


But, very luckily for the Town, fiir. a diligent 


Search, and clearing away the Ruins, as we may ſay, þ 


they found again the Sparw Spring; and, on Trial, 
had the Pleaſure to find the Water rather bettered 
than impaired by the Diſaſter, And now the whole i is 
in a more flouriſhing Condition than ever. | 
The Town of Scarborough is an antient Corpora- 
tion ; ſends two Members to Parliament; and is re- 
garded, in its commercial Capacity, as a Member of 
the Port of Hull; but with a Cuſtom-houfe, and pro- 
per Officers in the Town. Robin Hood s. Bay lies 

| F | between 


al, 


ed 


en 


between this Place and J/hithy z and here is a com- 
modious Fiſhery, good Anchoring in fix or eight 


Yorkſh. GREAT BRITAIN. 205 


Fathom of Water, and the Land high; ſo that it 
might be very ſerviceable to Navigation, if it was not 
unfortunately quite open to the Eaſt Wind ; by which 


Ships ſeeking Refuge here might be expoſed to great 


Danger. | | 

At Scarborough is ſuch Plenty of all Sorts of Fiſh, 
that I have hardly ſeen the like. To deſcribe the Her- 
ring, the Cod, the Whiting, is only to repeat what is 


faid in other Places, and what we ſhall have Occaſion 


to repeat, more than once, now we begin to go far 
North, 5 5 
Wie travelled a long Way from Scarborough, before 
we came to the next Market-town, which is 7/h:tby, 
ſituated at the Influx of the little River V into the 
Sea. It has an excellent Harbour, and a good Trade 
by Sea, and is ſaid to have above 200 Ships belonging 


to it. Here are built a great Number of Ships for the 


Coal-trade. It hath a good Cuſtom-houſe. The 


Market is well furniſhed, and ſupplied with all Sorts 

of Proviftions. | | LE 
The Harbour and Piers being ſomewhat decayed, 

they were repaired by virtue of two Acts of Parliament, 


in the firſt and ſeventh Years of Queen Anne; and in 


1733. an Act paſled to preſerve, continue, and keep 
the faid Piers in Repair for ever. 

By means of theſe ſeveral Acts of Parliament, the 
Piers of //hitby have been rebuilt and completed; but 


yet for ſome Years paſt the Entrance into the Port has 


| been rendered narrow and difficult, by reaſon of a 
Bank of Sand, which. has been gathering about the 
Head of the Weſt Pier, inſomuch that it was likely to 


choak up the Harbour; nor could this Inconvenience 
be redreſſed, in the Opinion of the beſt Judges, but 


by lengthening and extending the Welt Pier, and its 
Head, about 100 Yards farther into the Sea. For 
this Reaſon another AR paſſed in the Eighth of King 


 Gerrge | 


$, 55 
1271 $ 
4 * 1 
= 
. 
2 4 : 
\ 4 - nn 5 
. } 
7 1 
7 4 z 
i 
RAS! 
1 
£44 
1 
1B LIT 
wh 4 £ 5 
n 1 4 
. 
1 
48 : s 
"3 'F 
SK { 
Aft ; 
WF ig 
+418 
© + I'S 2 
5 Iz 
"TIE ; 
KS 
: 1 
77 = 7 
* 
4 E: 
1 1 ; 
'# a : 
; 
{ ; . 
1 
' 3B 
H } 4 
18 
+ 4.38 
8 2 A. 
4 © 
A . F 
7 t1 
4 . 
A 4 
1 
4 L 
-# 7H 
1 
22 * 
5 5 
9 N g 
"LF 4 
5 1 
*.: 
1141 ö 
477M 
1 
1 
« + 
4 * N 
b : 
pO 
i | {3 1 
1 
8 1 
3 1 ; 
, 1 
* 
4 
£2 
f 1:4 : 
- 
t _ 
2 EE 
g 14 ; 
7 . 
„ ih 
4 
4:1 
b is 
b wer 3 
'S 3 : 
1 1 
+» is 6 
* 1 
5 
198 * 
? py 
* bs th 
7 3 4 
. 1 
e a 
be * 3 
1 
PF; 
| 
> | A y 
1 1 
11 
1 
129 
1 
1 
1 
. 
242 
© [Fi i 
1 8 
N 7 | 
5 1 
£ 1 
1 lf 
j 
: [! 
- 1 
1 5 ff 
: 
"4 j ; 
+ | 
iI $ ; C 
: ©. . 
7 4 fi 
2 4 it 
= 
4 W 
: J : 
1 . 
1559 
» 


- 
— 


ws DQATOUR to Yaldy 


George II, for lengthening the Weſt Pier, and for i im» 
proving the Harbour. 

At the Foot of ſome Rocks, at this Town, hag 
been found Stones naturally as round as 2 Bullet, 
which, when broken, ſtony Serpents are found in 
them, for the moſt part headleſs, looked upon as a 
Luſus Nature ; but more-reaſonably as the Effects of 


| the univerſal Deluge. Theſe Rocks are at the Eaſt 


Side of the Harbour, nearly perpendicular, and about 
180 Feet above the Level of the Sea. 

At high Water the Foot of theſe Cliffs is waſhed 
by the Waves; at low Water the Sea retires, and 


leaves a dry Shore of a conſiderable Breadth. The 


Shore here is very little ſandy : It is an hard, ſmooth, 


flat Rock, called by the Inhabitants the Saur; and is, 


in a manner, overſpread with looſe, ragged, large 
Stones, ſcattered about in great Diſorder and Con- 
fuſion. 

A lonely Walk a theſe Cliffs cannot fail of af- 
fording an agreeable Amuſement to a philoſophic and 
contemplative Mind. The foaming, Waves thundering 
at your Feet, the lofty Precipices over your Head, 
and the Ruins of a World, the manifeſt Veſtigia of 


the Deluge, before your Eyes, conſpire to form 2 


Scene ſolemin, grand, and awful, and to diſpoſe the 
Mind to a ſerious Meditation on the Omnipotence of 


the Creator of the World, and the mighty _—_ 


and ſtupendous Revdlutions, | which this Globe of 


Earth has certainly undergone. 


This Place was antiently called Streenſhall, pe 


_ Ofwy-King of Northumberland held a Council here, 


in 663. to determine the Controverſy between thoſe 
who kept Ea/ter after the Brit! manner, and thoſe 
who kept it after the Roman manner, which Auguſline 
the Monk had lately introduced. After the Patty for 
the firſt had ſpoken, the other anſwering, inſiſted they 
kept Eaſter atter the manner of St. Peter, on whom 
Chriſt promiſed to build his Church, and who had the 

f Keys 


Vorkſn. GREAT BRITAINS. 207 
Keys of Heaven. Upon which the King aſked, If it 


was true, that Chriſt had ſpoken ſo to St. Peter? 


E Which the adverſe Party allowing, the King ſwore a 
great Oath, That he would not diſoblige this Porter 


of Heaven, left, When he came to the Gates, he 
ſhould remember him: and ſo eſtabliſhed the Celebra- 


tion of Eaſter after the Roman manner. | 
Near this Place are ſome Alum-mines, lately be- 
longing to her Grace the Ducheſs of Bucks, in which 
is carried on a conſiderable Frade. 

Their Saturday's Market at Vhittle, which is re- 
markably well ſupplied, circulates many thoufand 
Pounds annually amongft their Neighbours. There is 
upon the River, at Ruſtuarp, a fmall Diſtance above 
the Town, one of. the largeſt and moſt commodious 
3olting-mills in the Kingdom. As Fiſhing was the 
original Support of the Place, ſo there is ſtill abun- 
dance of Fiſh caught, and, excluſive of what is cured, 


| their Panjer-men diſpoſe of great Quantities. of freſh 
_ Fiſh through all the Places round about, to near an 
hundred, Miles Diſtance. Their Coaſt- trade in Time 
of Peace is very large; they export Butter, Fiſh, 


Hams, 'Tallow, Alum, &c. About 6000 Barrels of 
this Butter comes yearly to London, and 500 Barrels 


of Fiſh to the ſame Market. On the other hand, 
they import 1000 Ton of Lime from Scarborough, 
and many thouſand Chaldron of Coals for the Uſe of 


the Alum-works, &c. beſides a Multitude of uſeful 
and neceſſaty Commodities from thence; ſending 
hither uſually between 40 and 50 Veſſels a Year. 
They have, in common with the reſt of the Ports 
upon the Coaſt, a conſiderable Share in the Coal» 
trade, and in Time of War are generally much con- 
_ cerned in letting out their Shipping for the Tranſport 
Service. e e 

Their foreign Commerce is daily increaftng ; and 
fo extenſive, that it reaches to almoſt all Parts of 
Europe, They fend between 20 and 30 large Ships 

8 | annually, 


* — — — 


r 
3 
7 
8 
: o 
3 
EE: - 
0 
7 
SI 
52 

1 
4 5 ry 

+ 1 

13 
4 51 
1 

_ 
— 2 2 
SW 

Is t, 
: ; 

$4 

K 

En 
1 
2 

g 755 

* 

7 

1 

7 1 
oo 
ij 

2 5 
3; l 
"B33 
1 
S 7 
3 

% 

"3A 
# 1 1 
1 

$ 

* 9 
N. 
TY... + 
' && 4 
1 
1 
1 
1 

= 3 

* 1 

$8 + 

"$7 F 

Y — 7 
* 

93 7 

„ 

12 

1 * 
7 

4 
1 
1 i 

1 

1 1 

4 
114 2 
Cab 
1 
* 
1 

'S 4 — 
278 
3: 
$38] 

# 03 

EM 8 
TI? 
55 

440 % 
#128 
* 
5 
El; 

** 28! 
£85 
"03 
"$33 

p : 

118 

- 1 12 * 
by: 

e | 

þ TH 
74 
21 
75 
02 Wo 
23.00 
£67 

*: 

$17. 4 
'- 180 
3% 4 
F 
* ” 

} 


— 


208 _ A TOUR thro Yorkfh. 
' annually, properly laden, into the Baltic, excluſive 
of a Ship ſent alſo to Archangel in Ruſſia, on account 
of the Merchants of Londen; ꝙ or 10 Veſſels almoſt _- 
conſtantly paſſing between this Place and Holland; 5 or 
6 ſail yearly up the Mediterranean, which frequently 
proceed to the Levant, with at leaſt. 120 Tons of 
Salt-fiſh, amongſt other Products of this County; 
about the fame Number to the Northern Colonies, 
They have of late had fome Intercourſe with the 
Leeward-1/lands, and have been pretty ſucceſsful in 
the Whale Fiſhery. What they import chiefly are, 
Rice, Salt, Iron, Timber, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Tur- 
pentine, and other bulky Commodities for their Ship- 
building. They have three Inſurance Companies, 
excluſive of private Agreements among Merchants 
and Owners of Ships, to indemnify each other from 
Lofles by Sea, Fire, or War; which have excellent 
Effects, and keep up a Spirit of Induſtry and Enter- 
prize, by ſecuring Individuals from being undone by 
any bold Undertaking ; which is a Point of inexpreſ- 
- fible Conſequence to a Place like this, as it connects 
the whole Community in the fame Intereſt ; and, 
which is every-where a Blefling, contributes to the 
raiſing many competent Fortunes, inſtead of' a few 
eat ones. | 3 
There are Spaw Waters at Thitby, which have had 
great Reputation. Several curious and antique Coins 
have been dug up in that Neighbourhood; and a Mo- 
naſtery was founded here by St. Hilda, about the Year 
650. and, being deſtroyed by the Danes, was after- 
Wards rebuilt: the Ruins of which (very conſiderable) 
are ſtill to be ſeen, and are very uſeful as a Sea-mark, 
The Houſes are ftrong and convenient; the Number 
of Inhabitants about goco : Induſtty, Frugality, and 
a univerſal Paſſion for what regards their Marine, are 
their diſtinguiſhing Characteriſtics. Ship- building is 
their principal ManufaQture, for which they have at' 
preſent three capacious Dry-docks, which at Spring- 
295 | 5 Ex; . tices 


t r -F 


19 


5 


Vorkſn. GREAT BRITAIN. 209 


tides will receive Ships of 500 Tons Burden; and 
the Shipwrights have Thoughts of adding two more. 

In the Month of November 1710. ſuch a dreadful 
Storm happened here, that the Damage to the Shipping, 
Sc. was computed at 40,000 /. | 

Here the Coaſt inclines North-weſt, and we fol- 
lowed it till we came to Gz/borough, a Market-town, 
pretty well built, a little way from the Sea, upon a 
mall nameleſs River, It is a fine and delicious Si- 
tuation, endued with ſuch a graceful Variety, and 
ſuch Advantages of Nature, as render it moſt delight- 
fully pleaſant: a fine Scene of Verdure overſpreads 
all the Grounds about it, which are decked with Plenty 
of Field-flowers almoſt all the Year round. Some 
compare it to Puteoli in [taly, but allow that it exceeds 


it in Healthineſs. It ſtands high, and would have 


been incommoded with cold Breezes (as it ſtands ſo _ 
Northerly), from the Sea, but that ſome Hills conve- 


| niently interfere, ſo as to qualify the Cold. 
The Behaviour of the Inhabitants too participates 


of the Pleaſantneſs of the Place; for they are courteous, 


| well-bred, and obliging, and very neat and cleanly iu 
their Houſes. ant” | 
| Here ere likewiſe ſome Alum-mines, but not fo 


conſiderable and eaſily wrought as thoſe of Mhithy, 


| which has taken off a great Part of that Trade from 


bene 
This pleaſant Town is the laſt on the Eaſt ſide 
towards the Sea, in this North. riding, in our way to 


Durham. It made ſo delightful an Impreſſion on my 


Mind, that 1 left the whole County in general, but 
this Place, and truly pleaſurable Country about it, in 


| particular, with Re 


ret. | 
And thus have f accompliſhed the third and laſt 


Pert of my Propoſition, with reſpect to my Circuit 


through this large and far-· extended County: and tho“ 


I have been not a little circumſtantial in my Account 


of it, yet there are many curious Matters that {till re- 
| main 


_ 8 ” = Z 
DR 0 2 N oy 4 N n a 0 — - Pe ein 
Apes * 4 8 * A my — 
os n » hy en ee than - = 0 7 5 r= > weed b. CA BF" 
6 aha e _— — ev ruin ve _— „ 22 E o  Wogn7  o OS 
— I N RY #4 Cab, nt we . \ 
* 7 1 # W566 N 
* N 9 Wen * o hy 5 
* * n — * 
rr * be . . _ 
* 
5 * 1 T *. 


* * — "OM : * 
932 — — — 
PPP 


4 
= 

| 

Fr. 

* 

is 

8 71 

4 

9 

4 

uh 

+ "4 

7 

: 

+» 8 

2 
: 


engręſſed the whole 


210 _ ATOUR h Durham. 
main untoucked, and could not be brought within the | 
Compafſs of an epiſtolary Correſpondence. | 


But as I have given you only a Deſcription of the 


County above- ground, take the following Memo- 


randums of the Treat which are contained in its 
Bowels; to wit, Alum, Jet, or Black Amber, Cop- 


peras, Marble, Pit- coal, 15 8 Iron, Copper, Lime- 
ſtone, and Kelp. : 


The firſt Market-town we come to in the Biſho prick 
of Durham, on the Eaſt-ſide, is Stoctton, — lies 


on the North-ſide of the Tees. It has riſen, at the 


Expence of Yarum, from a poor pitiful Village, with 
Clay Walls and Straw Covering to the Houſes, to a 


well- built Corporate Town, of great Reſort and Buſi- 
neſs, governed by a Mayor, Ge. Tei is famous for its 


Ale, and a good Trade, which it carries on in Lead 


and Butter, by the Tees, with London, which formerly 
was altogether at Jarum; and it may have greater 
Trade, when either their own Wealth, or the At- 
tention of the Public, ſhall enable its Inhabitants to 


correct the Rapidity of the Current, which makes the 
Entrance of the Harbour hazardous, that otherwiſe 


would be very good. But Stockton lying nearer the 


Sea, and conſequent! more convenient, has almoſt 
Trade to itſelf. _ 
Redcliffe makes one Side of the Bay, as the Pro- 


montory on which Hartlepool ſtands does the other, the 


River Tees running with a rapid Tide into the German 
Ocean between them. 

Hartlepodl is a famous Corporate Mayor-town, and 
ſeated on a little Promontory which juts out into the 
Sea, with which it is encompaſſed on all Sides, except 
the Weſt. The Market was much more conſider- 
able formerly than now; and its chief Subſiſtence 
riſes only from its good Harbour, which frequently re- 
ceives the Coal-fleet from nano ates in bad Weather. | 


In 


wo ES a ae oe. ie EET nt. 


Durham. GREAT BRITAIN. 211 
In the Reign of Edward III. Hartlepool furniſned 


five Ships, and thoſe large ones, at leaſt for thoſe 
Times, to their Monarch's Navy. It is the next 


Town in Rank, in the Biſhoprick of Durham, to the 


City of the ſame Denomination. If we conſider it in 
a commercial Light, it. is reputed a Member to the 
opulent Port of Newca/?/e, without having any Creek 
belonging to it. „„ ono 5 

We turned from hence to the Left, North-weſt; 


and came to Durham next, which is to be ſeen at a 


great Diſtance, with a fine champaign Country on 
every Side. It is a fine City, pretty large, compact, 


vell- contrived, and well ſituated, pleaſant, and healthy, 


fortified with Walls, and ſurrounded almoſt with the 
River Wear. In the South Part, near where the River 
winds itſelf back again, ſtands the Cathedral Church, 
which is a plain but ſtrong Building, adorned with an 
high Tower, which riſes from the midſt of it, and two 
Spires at the Weſt End. There is a fair Cloiſter yet 
remaining, and a Number of handſome Stone build- 
ings, which belong to the Dean and Prebengaries. 
In the Heart of the Town, almoſt in the Middle, be- 


tween two Stone Bridges (each of which conſiſts of 


many Arches), ſtands the Caſtle. From which, North- 
ward, is the Market-place, and St. Nicholas's Church, 
from whence, for a good way, ſhoot out Suburbs to 
the North-eaſt, within a Winding of the River, as do 
others on both Sides, beyond the River, which leads 
to the Bridges; and each Suburb has its particular 
Church: there being ſix in all, beſides the Cathedral. 
The whole City r a kind of oval Form) ſtands 
upon very irregular Ground, ſo that you aſcend and 


deſcend very frequently. The Biſhop's Palace, all 
that he hath in Town, is the Caſtle, where alſo the 


Afizes are held. The Biſhop entertains the Judges, 
being himſelf the only Sheriff for the County. Dur- 


am has but one weekly Market; nevertheleſs all 


Sorts of Proviſions, as well as other Neceſſaries for 
the 


212 A TOUR hr Durham. 
. the Conveniencies of Life, are very cheap, as well as 
good. It is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, Re- 
corder, and Sherifts. | Et 
The Antiquity of this Town is not to be boaſted of: 
fince the Building of it was owing to the Monks of 
Landisfarne being diſquieted by the Danes in their 
Wars with the Engliſb; and, wandering up and down 
with the Religious of St. Cuthbert, they were at laſt 
admoniſhed by an Oracle, as they tell us, to ſettle 
here. This was about the Year 995. The Cathe- 
dral was erected out of the Offerings which were made 
by the ſuperſtitious Multitude at the Shrine of the 
abovenamed St. Cuthbert. And yet, notwithſtanding 
the Reſidence of ſo many dignified Proteſtant Clergy, | 
tis ſaid, there are ftill great Numbers of Roman Ca- 
tholics in this City. | * 
I need not tell you, that the Biſhop of Durham is 
a Temporal Prince; that he keeps a Court of Equity, 
and alſo Courts of Juſtice in ordinary Cauſes, within 
himſelf. He is ſtiled Earl of Sandberg, and takes 
Place as Biſhop immediately after the Biſhop of Lon- 
don. As the Country about Reme is called St. Peter's 
Patrimony, ſo that about Durham is called St. Cuth- 
bert's, to whom the Church is dedicated. David 
King of Scots laying all waſte with Fire and Sword, 
while King Edward III. was at Calais, Zouch, the 
valiant Biſhop, fought the Scots at Nevil's Croſs, 
where they were cut in Pieces, and their King taken 
Priſoner. He was the ſixth Biſhop of Landisfarne, or 
Holy Land, from whence the See was removed 
hither. | 1 
The Biſhoprick is eſteemed one of the beſt in Eng- 
land; and the Prebends, and other Church Livings in 
the Gift of. the Biſhop, are the richeſt in the King- 
om. They told me there, that the Biſhop had 13 
Livings in his Gift, from goal. to 800 J. a Year; 
and the Living of the little Town of Sedgfield, a few 
Miles South of the City, is faid to be worth ”_ a 
NE en | Tei 


2 080 2 TW 4 |S Ws A. LW boca M Rb... 


Durham. GREAT BRrITAIn. 213 


| Year, beſides the ſmall Tythes, which maintain a 


Curate, or might do ſo. 


This Church is very rich: they have excellent 
Muſic. The old Veſtments, which the Clergy be- 


fore the Reformation wore, are till uſed on Sundays 


and other Holy-days, by the Refidents, They are 


ſo rich with Embroidery, and emboſſed Work of 
Silver, as mult needs make it uneaſy for the Wearers 
to ſuſtain. In this Cathedral lies the Body of the ve- 


| able Bi 8 


One of the old Biſhops of Durham purchaſed, for 2 
round Sum of Money, all the Rights of the Palatinate, 
and other Juriſdiction in this County, from King 


Richard I. and, by his laſt Will, left them to the 


ſucceeding Biſhops. But King Henry VIII, by Act 
of Parliament, greatly abridged the Temporal Power 


and Juriſdiction of this Biſhoprick ; and King Eduard 


VI. (or rather his Uncle Somer/et) by Act of Parlia- 
ment diſſolved the Biſhoprick entirely; but it was re- 
ſtored by Queen Mary. Neither City or County ever 
ſent Members to the Houſe of Commons, till the Va- 
cancy of the See, by the Death of Biſhop Ceſins, Anno 
1672, and ſinee they return each of them two, which 
is all that the County ſend. oY 


We took a Trip from Durham, South-weft, to ſee 


| Biſhop's Aukland, which is a Market-town, pleaſantly 
ſeated upon an Hill, in a very ou Air, having the 


fine River Mear ſurrounding one Side of it, over which 


is a noble Stone-Bridge, built by Walter Shirlow, ; 


Biſhop of Durham, about the Year 1400. But what 


is moſt remarkable here, is the antient, fair-built 
Palace belonging to the Biſhops of this rich See, with 


Turrets, magnificently repaited by Antony Bec: After 
which, a great Part of it was pulled down in the grand 
Rebellion, by Sir Arthur Haſlerig, who built himſelf a 
Houſe out of the Materials. At the Reſtoration, 
Biſhop Ceſins, not fo intent upon raiſing a Family as 


ſome Biſhops have been, pulled down the new Houſe, 


and 


n rr 
a 3 
1 5 * rn —— IDES 
2 oy! Hs N 
r 
8 2 
1 


— 


j 
rote; Cora n N wat r — — en ANTS Wy hv 222 — —— — 5 —— — plans — . — * _ —— —— — — — 
- 2 
by N o - * = — wh Ne U * . 
* & * 7 x B N - ; 1. 7 VOTE * n * * ren 1 - _— 1 * = by 5 l 
Wh — n * hr 408 af 7 q p % * 4 2 7 x 7 W 
; | ' : a N er * 1 Me age * p — & 3% * " END 2 n 
07 * 8 PF ao Ayn ni theme te 7} 2" ets WOO IEORA Ayes exp. c; 13% ug * n D , # +; 3 2 l . 
Ed $30 2 mad, ” 22 1 N 3 9 2 US r — — . e LINN n — WI * 0 8 n a art — ie. 2 l — 8 238 8 = 0 l 
ee, * __ | a =D os OS | 8 n * Os n 8 nnr c ge woes Er n, 8 
1 . 2 e of py 5. © = 5 3 LT 3 5 * „ e INE Bal _— - o 4. 5 G en * * = ($4 = ns Sp * >a 8 0, 5 
1 8 bo EF oy 9 — 5 * * ** - 8 


r „ r — 
e ee e 


79 —˖ nods 
N 3 


2 


** r 
r 


a de WES 8 ? my: 
93 — 3 Ne 
N. 4 wem „ 
2 
e eee eee 


= X 
* 2 
e 
* * . 5 7 
n 
n - 44's 


214 AT OUR Durham. 
and built a large Apartment to what remained of the 

old one, joining the whole to a magnificent Chapel of 

his own erecting, in which he lies buried. What re- 


mained unfiniſhed, hath been carried on, after his 
laudable Example, by ſome of his Succeſſors, as well 
for the Ornament as Convenience of the Fabric, I 
ſaw many fine Pieces of Painting here; and ſeveral of 
the Rooms are nobly furniſhed. ng 

Here we turned Weſt, and, following the Wear, 
paſſed through Wolſingham, a little Town of no Note, 


to Stanhope, a little Town alfo, which had once a 


Market; but tis now diſcontinued. It is only noted 
for a good Park, which lies near it, where King 
Edward III. befieging the Scots in the Camp, had 
like to have been ſurpriſed in his Fent by one Douglaſs, 
an adventurous Scet, had not the King's Chaplain de- 
fended him with the Loſs of his own Life. 

Theſe Weſtern Parts of the County, all to the upper 
Part of it, are yery hilly and mountainous, and the 
Fields near them look naked and barren; but the 

Iron Mines they produce within their Bowels make 
ample Amends for the Barrenneſs of the Surface. 

We returned from theſe inhoſpitable Parts to Dur- 
ham; from whence we kept the common Road to 
| Cheſter in the Street, an old, dirty, thoroughfare Town, 

void of all Remains of the Greatneſs which Antiquaries 
ſay was to be ſeen there, when it was a Roman Co- 
lony. Here is a Stone Bridge, but inſtead of riding 
over it, we rode under it, through one of the Arches, 
the Stream not being over the Horſes Hoofs ; yet, on 
Inquiry, we found that ſometimes they have Uſe 
enough for it. _ : 5 

Lumley-Caftle, belonging to the Earl of Scarborough, 
is juſt on the other Side of the Road, as you paſs be- 
tween. Dzrham and Cheſter, pleaſantly ſeated in a fine 
Park, near the Eaſt Bank of the River Wear. 

It is a large ſquare Building, with Towers at each 
Corner, having a large Court- yard in the Middle. It 

TS PRE Is contains 


o 


* 


Durham. GREAT BRITAIN. 215 


contains a great Number of ſpacious antique as well 
as modern- built Rooms; and the Paintings are curious 
and valuable; many of which repreſent ſeveral of the 


Anceſtors of the noble Family for ſome hundred Years 


paſt, in the Habits of the Times. 
They tell us that King James I. lodged in this 
Caſtle, at his Entrance into England to take Poſſeſſion 
of the Throne; and ſeeing a fine Picture of the an- 
tient Pedigree of the Family, which carried it very far 
beyond what his Majeſty thought credible, turned this 
good Jeſt upon it to the Biſhop of Durham, who 
bewed it to him, That indeed he did not know before, 
that Adam's Surname was Lumley. = 
What is very remarkable in the Situation of this 
noble Seat, is, that you are obliged to be ferried over 


the River Wear, which is very broad here, before you 


can get to it. A Perſon has a little Houſe in the 


| Fark, by the Banks of the River, which he rents at 
| Six Pounds a Year; and he and his Wife make it 


their Buſineſs to ferry Perſons over for a Halfpenny. 
The Park, beſides the Pleaſantnefs of it, has this 
much more valuable Circumſtance to recommend it, 


| that it is full of excellent Veins of the beſt Coal in the 


County; for the Lumley Coals are known for their 
Goodneſs at London, as well as there. This, with a 


| ſometimes navigable River juſt at hand, by which the 


Coals are carried down to Sunderland to the Ships, 


makes Lumley Park an inexhauſtible Treaſure to the 
Family. 5 


Here we turned from the Road, and croſſing the 
Mar followed it Eaſt to Sunderland, a Corporate Sea- 


port Town in the County Palatine of Durham, 


It is a well-built, thriving, and populous Town, 


inhabited by many rich Merchants and Tradeſmen : 


its Port or Haven is capable of containing many Hun- 


dred Sail of Ships at one time; from which are loaded 

and ſent great Numbers of Ships with Coals, Salt, 

| Glaſs, and other Merchandizes, as well to 1 
aces 


7 


eee Durham. 


Places within this Realm, as to foreign Parts; which 
Trade makes it a fine Nurſery of Seamen. But as 


the Port or Haven was capable of great Improvement, 


an Act paſſed in the third Year of the Reign of his 


_ Majeſty King George I. intituled, An Act for the Pre. 


' ſervation and Improvement of the River Wear, and 

the Port and Haven of Sunderland; which was to be 

in Force for the Term of 21 Years. : 
The Power granted to the Commiſſioners named in 


this Act not being ſufficient, another Act paſſed in the 


13th Year of the Reign of his ſaid late Majeſty, which 


gave them additional Powers, by virtue of which, 


they erected on the South-ſide of the River, at a very 
great Charge, a Pier and Quay, at or near the Mouth 
of the River, and made a great Progreſs in the 
Opening, Cleanfing, Scouring, and Improving of the 
— - * „% 9 FR D 
In order the more effectually to perform the in- 
tended good Service, they deſigned to have lengthened 
the new erected Pier, and alſo to have built a Pier, 
Quay, Wall, or Jettee, on the North- ſide, and to 


have made other Works near the Mouth of the Haven: 


but the Money ariſing from the Duties laid by the for- 
mer Act, not being ſufficient to make ſuch additional 
Works within the Term for which the Act was 

ranted ; and the Mouth of the Harbour, for want of 
ſuch Works, being ſtill choaked up by Sand brought 
into the Haven by the Sea, and allo by means of 
great Banks of Sand, Gravel, Rubbiſh, and other 
groſs Matter brought down by Land Floods ; and allo 


by throwing Ballaſt, Coal: aſhes, Rubbiſh, and ſuch. 
like, into the River or Port; and by the irregular and 


low Building, and want of Repairing of Wharts, 
Staiths, and Quays; but more eſpecially for want of 
ſuch intended. Piers, or Walls, or Jettees, at the 
Mouth of the Haven, to ſecure and cleanſe the fame; 
ſo that the Depth of Water at the Mouth was not fut- 
ficient for London Ships and Veſſels to come into, ot 
| 1 . bY 


90 out of it at all times: To remedy all thefe Incon- 


veniencies, an Act paſſed in the 20th Year of his late 


Majeſty's Reign, for the better Preſervation and Im- 


provement of the ſaid River Wear and Part and Haven 


of Sunderland, impowering Commiſſioners to remove 


all Sand, Shoals, and other Obſtructions and Impedi- 


ments, between Biddick-ford' and New-bridge, and 
effectually to make the ſaid River navigable to carry 
Boats, Keels, and Veſſels, of the Burthen at that 


Time uſed upon the ſaid River, before the 24th Day 


of June 1759. But at the Expiration of this Term, 
though the Port and Haven were very much improved, 


nothing was done towards making the River navigable” 


higher up than Biddict-ford's And as it would be of 
very great public Utility to make it navigable quite' 
up to Durham, another Act paſſed in the Year 1759. 
intituled, An At for making and completing the Navi- 
cation of the River Wear, from and including Biddick- 
ford 70 the City of Durham, and for other Purpoſes 
therein mentioned. | BAT 


Certain Clauſes in the faid Act of the 2cth of his 


late Majeſty's Reign, being repealed by the laſt-men- 


tioned, an Act was made in the ſame Year 1759, en- 


forcing other Clauſes that were unexecuted in the Act 


of the 20th above- mentioned, bearing this Title, An 


Ad for continuing, amending, and rendering more ef- 


feetual, jo much of an Ae made in the 20th Year of his 


preſent Majeſty's Reign [intitled, An Aa, &c.] as re- 


lates to the Port and Haven e, Sunderland, and the 
River Wear, between Biddick-ford and the ſaid Port 
and Haven, 1 5 | 24 
Sunderland is a Peninſula, almoſt furrounded by the 
dea. It has a very fine Church; and its late Rector, 
the Reverend and worthy Mr. Daniel Newceme, was 
the principal Architect in the building of it. This 
Gentleman ſpent the greateſt Part of his Income in 
deautifying and adorning it. He began by building a 


Dome, adjoining to the Eaſt-end, into which he re- 


Vol. III. 5 L moved 


—— 
_ 


wr FLAY — — Pw * S Arn 
PPP CN EI 
5 OO DO Sa gr eee - 5 : 
* 5 ES r e 2444 „ 7 \ 
n - TT. , 3 8 OST - - x5 l 


218 A TOUR Hr Durham. 
moved the Altar, placing it under a Canopy of inlaid 
Work, ſupported in Front by two fluted Pillars of the 
Corinthian Order, with proper Capitals. His Bene- 
volence and Charity were equally extenſive to all who 
were proper Objects' of them, and he delighted in 


dying, very much lamented, on 5 Fan. 1738. | 
Witt! The Ealtern-ſide of the County, along the Sea- 
Wh coaſt, and indeed the Southern-fide, along the Banks 
Wil. of the Tees, is very fertile and delightful, thick of 
8 little Towns and Villages, which are very populous ; 
.\I'4 and as the Mountains on the Weſt produce Iron 
oy Mines, this Side is full of thoſe of Coals, which lie 
|| ſo very near the Surface of the Ground, that the Cart- 
_ wheelspreſs.into them. © 0 

14 And indeed, from Durham, the Road to Nerocafle 
gives a View of the inexhauſted Store of Coals and 


digging of Coals; and from hence not London only, 
but all the South Part of England, is continually ſup- 


digious Fleets of Ships which come conſtantly in with 
Coals, we are apt to wonder how it is poſſible for 
them to be ſupplied, and that they do not bring the 
whole Coal Country away; yet, when in this Country 


Fg 


Coals, which are dug up at every Pit, and how many 
of thoſe Pits there are, we are filled with equal 
Wonder to conſider where the People ſhould live who 


conſume them. - 
There belong about 200 Sail of Ships to the Ship- 


are moſtly employed in the Coal and Coaſt trade, the 
Number of People in this Town, and in the adjacent 
Hamlets of Biſhop wearmouth, the Salt-pans, Mont- 


20,000 3 yet this great Harbour of Sunderland is no 
. © 1 more 


Wi doing Good. This worthy Man, however, lived nct 
1 to ſee his new Works, to the Church quite completed, 


Coal-pits, which employ near 30, ooo Perſons in 


plied. And though at London, when we ſee the pro- 


we ſee the prodigious Heaps, I might ſay Mountains of 


5 owners of Sunderland, excluſive of Small- craft, which 


wearmouth, and the North Shore, are computed at 


TREO LE. a ew Wy ay 4 


Durham. GREAT BRITAINV. 219 


more than a Member to the Port of Newcaſtle, as well 
as Hartlepool. _ ES FH oy | 
Sunderland is pretty well-built, moſtly with Brick - 


% 8 


or Stone: The principal Street is of a great Length, 
pl as well as good Breadth, parallel to which runs an- 
5 other, but narrower; befides a great Number of 
> others. Thoſe that are delighted with Marine Proſ- 

| pets, may here ſee 20 or 30 Sail of Ships come in 

8 with the flowing Tide, from the coaſting and foreign 
0 Ports; 15 or 20 going out on their reſpective Voyages; 
of and 30 or 40 Sail at anchor in the Road, taking in 
'3 the Remainder of their Cargoes. A Bathing-houſe, 
on like thoſe at Scarborough, has been built, and if the 
ie Gentry would encourage the Place, more Conve- | 
re niencies of the ſame kind would probably be made. 

It may alſo be obſerved, that a Taſte for Politeneſs 
Ile and Elegancy has been introduced into the Town, 
nd and a conſiderable Progreſs made in it of late Years. 
in. But in ſhort, ſince the Fair Sex have let themſelves © 
ly, looſe to Gadding, and freed themſelves from the Cares 
p. of domeſtic Life, domeſtic Life muſt increaſe every- 
OT where, whatever becomes of every other Excellence 
itn W which uſed to diſtinguiſh them. Happy will it be, if 
for the dear, Racket-loving Creatures find their Healths 
the increaſe with their Appetites for Pleaſure and Riot. 
WJ But let us ſpare thoſe who have no Mercy on them- 
sf (elves. 1 ö 
any Thus writes a Gentleman of the Place to his 
qual Friend, in the Year 1755. of the then improving 
who State of this flouriſhing Port and Town: | 
1 We have a very fine Pier, which affords a plea- 
hip! ant Walk, as well as Shelter for the Ships; it is 
hich * ſaid to have coſt about 19,0007. We are now at. 
the . Work in deepening and taking up Part of the Rock 
cent 1 in the South Channel; which, when completed, is 
en © expected to be of conſiderable Advantage to 
xd Trade. „ 
s NO | 


L'2 An 


755 
1 8 


40 U R PEE Durham, 
An Account of the Ships that cleared Corflwiſe at Sun. 
derland in the Year WS 


© In the firſt Quarter = - . 370 Sail. 


© Inghe ſecond - = M - 1297 
* In e third - - I 144 


2 In the fourth, ending at Chriſtmas 17 54 471 


— i 


Seal - - 3582 


38 To 3 add 120 Sal of Ships 10 forei ign parts 
(the exact Number I have not, but perhaps it is 
more), and it makes upwards of 3700 that loaded 
at this Port laſt Year. Where ſhall we find a Pa- 
rallel ? It is ſaid there were vended here, in the 
two laſt Quarters of the ſame Year, upwards of 
- 100,000 Chaldrons of Coals. 

VN. B. Some of thoſe alſo might deliver over Sea, 
as well as thoſe mentioned foreign, although they 
might clear Coaſtwiſe; ſuch things happen ſome- 
© times. 

In the Summer Seaſon there are alſo about 10,000 


GG M A A aA @ 


Tons of Lime and Lime-flones carried from this 


River, in ſmall Sloops of about 20 or 30 Tons, 

which are not included in the above Numbers.” | 
If ſuch was the flouriſhing Condition of Sunderland 

in the Year 1755. what may it not be, going on with 


its Improve ments, and with the Advantages it will re- 


ceive from the laſt· mentioned AQ, paſſed in the Year 


1759.? 
2 * the Mouth of the Tyne, which parts Durham 


from Northumberland, ſtands the Village of Sheals, 
the Station of the Sea-coal Fleets, where there have 


been ſome Marks of Roman Antiquity, diſcovered not 
many Years ſince, _ 

Yarrow, noted for the Mid plage of the venerable 
Bede, ſtands a little higher upon the ſame River; and 
upon the* ſame Side of the Tyne ſtands Gates: head, or 


Goats-head, Capræ Cahus, as it was antiently = 
the 


. Northumb. GrraT BRITAIN. 221 
ic | the Receptacle of the Coal pit Men, juſt over=againſt 


Newca/ile; and is ſuppoſed of old to have been Part 
* of it, though divided by the River, over which there 
is a ſtately Stone Bridge, with an Iron Gate in the 
Middle; which ſerves as a Boundary between the 
ithoprick and the County of Northumberland. 
The Air in this Bifhoprick is pretty cold and 
piercing; and *tis well for the Poor that Nature has 
ſupplied them ſo abundantly with Fuel for Firing ; 


ts and indeed all other Proviſions and Neceſſaries are 
18 very cheap here. It ſeems as if the whole County 
0 had been originally approptiated to Religion and War; 
RY for it is full of the Ruins of Religious Houſes and 
Ne | Caſtles. , | | (=, | 
of | | | 

We are now entering into the large and extenſive 
25 County of Northumberland, which for many Ages was 
cf the Bone of Contention, and Seat of War, between 
og England and Scotland. 

Tinmouth, or Tine mouth - Caſile, and the Monaſtery 
00 of Tinmouth, though in Decay, challenge the Atten- 
his tion of Travellers, and look tolerable in Ruin, It 
ns, ſtands upon a high Promontory which overlooks the 

| Sea; yet it has a Bar of Sand at the Mouth of it, on 
nd | which there is not above two Fathoms at low 
3th Water, and above three and an half at high, which 
IT” renders it difficult and dangerous at the Entrance; 
25 eſpecially as there alſo lie near it certain Rocks, 
| which increaſe and add not a little to the Inconve- 
Wy nience. It is true, the Trinity-houſe of Newca/?lz 
als, maintains two Light-houſes for the Direction of Veſ- 
ave ſels, and the Seamen are ſo expert, that ſometimes 
not ſeveral hundred Ships that lie waiting for a Wind, un- 
le moor, and ſail over the Bar without the leaſt ill Acci- 
ab A dent. But notwithſtanding, it would be an inexpreſ- 
0 ſible Advantage, if, thro' the Exertion of Art, La- 
: 1 bour, and Expence, theſe Impediments could either 
7 wholly, or in Part be removed. Since I was laſt at 


Li 3 Tinmouth, 


8 
* pi: 


ure Verbund 


Tismouth, ſome Improvements and Advantages are 
likely to have been given to its Works; ſince a Gentle. 
man, my Friend, writes to me in a Letter dated 
March 14. 1758. We have with us, at preſent, one 
« Mr. S. an 3 belonging to the Board of Ord- 
© nance, having Orders to repair the old Works at 
© Tinmouth Caſtle, build Barracks for 1000 Men, and 
to erect new Batteries towards the Sea, in order to 
defend and be a Safeguard to the Ships when at 
Anchor in the Road.” | 
Newcaſt'e \ is a large and exceeding populous Town, 
under the Government of a Mayor, Aidermen, Re- 
corder, Oc. and is fituate between the Wall of Severus 
and the 7yne, which becomes here a fine, deep, and 
noble River, inſomuch that Ships of a middling Bur- 
den may come ſafely up to the very Town, though 
the large Colliery-ſhips are ſtationed at Sheols. Ir is 
fo ſecure an Haven, that Ships or Veſſels are in no 
Danger, either from Storms or Shallows, when they 
have paſſed Tinmouth Bar, and are in it. | 
How the Trinity houſe was 'ereQted Clifford's Fort, 
Anno 1672, which effectually commands all Veliel 
that enter the River. a 
The Town may be conſidered as divided into two 
Parts, whereof Gateſhead, before ſpoken of on Durham 
Side, is one. They are both joined by the Bridge, 
which conſiſts of ſeven Arches, as large, at leaſt, as 
thoſe of London Bridge, and." ſupport a Street of 
Houſes, as that, till lately, did. 
The Situation of the Town. 1s dar cunaven on the 
North Bank of the River. The Streets upon the 
Aſcent are exceeding fteep: the Houſes are built 


moſtly of Stone; ſome are of Timber, the reſt of 


Brick. 8 

Through this Town, as I have a went 
Part of that Wall which ran along from Sea to Sea, 
and was built by the Remans to defend the Britons 


(after they 1. drawn off all their choſen Youtd 5 


K „ 


are 
le- 
ted 


ne 


at 
und 


vent 


Sea, 


120485 
h to 


fill 


Northumb. GREAT BRITAIN, 223 


fill their Armies) againſt the violent Incurſions of the 


Pids. At Pandon- Gate, one of the Turrets of that 
Wall, as it is believed, ſtill remains. It ſeems indeed 


different, both in Faſhion and Maſonry, from the 
reſt, and to carry with it the Marks of great Anti- 


quity- 
This Town was formerly called Monk Cheſter ; 


which it held to about the Time of the Norman Inva- 


ſion; and obtained the Name of Newca/tle, from the 
Caſtle built there by Robert, eldeſt Son of William J. 
in order to keep off the Scots; ; 21p51 the Tyne was added 


to diſtinguiſh it from Newcaſtle under Line, in Re 


erdſhire, 

The Liberty of the Town, as it is a Canet 
extends no farther than the Gate upon the Biidge; 
which, ſome Years ſince, was the Preſervation of it, 
by topping a terrible Fire, which otherwiſe had, per- 
haps, burnt the whole Street of Houſes on the City 
Side of the Bridge, as it did thoſe beyond it. On the 


 FEalt-fide of this Gate the Arms of the Biſhop of 


Dur ham are carved, as thoſe of the Town of News- 
caſtle are on the Weſt: ſide, 

| There is allo a very noble Exchange here; and the 
Wail of the Town runs parallel from it with the 


River, leaving a ſpacious Piece of Ground before it 


between the Water and the Wall; which being well 
wharfed up, and faced with Free: ſtone, makes the 


longeſt and largeſt Quay for landing and lading Goods, 
that is to be ſeen in England, except that at Yarmouth 
in Norfolk, it being much longer than that at B. el. 


Here is a large Hoſpital built by Contribution of the 
Keel-men, by way of Friendly Society, for the 


Maintenance of the Poor of their Fraternity, and 


which, had it not met with Diſcouragements from 
thoſe Who ought rather to have aſſiſted ſo good a 
Work, might have been a noble Proviſion for that 


numerous and laborious People. The Keel-men are 
_ thoſe who manage the Lighters, which they call 


L 4 | Reels, 


224 4 T OUR ro Northumb. 
Keels, by which the Coals are taken from the Staiths 
or Wharfs, and carried on board the Ships at Shea!s 
to load them for London. 

About the Cloſe of laſt S it was computed 
that the Trade of Newcaſtle had doubled in 50 Years, 
as it was certainly doubled, even at that Period, to 
what it was at the Demiſe of Queen Elizabeth; arid 
we have very g good Grounds to believe, that it is now | 
double, -in = reſpects, that is, in the Tonnage of 
Ships, Number of Seamen, and Amount of its Trade, 
to what it was in the Beginning of this Century. We 
will add, 'that this is, as indeed it always has been, 
one of the molt reſpectable and beſt- governed Corpo- 
rations in Britain; to which, ina great Meaſure, its 
conſtant and remarkable Flow of Proſperity may be 
aſcribed. 

Here are ſeveral large public Bui lings alſo; par- 
ticularly an Houſe of State for the Mayor of the 
Town (for the Time being) to remove to, and dwell 
in, during his Mayoralty, with all neceſſary Officers 
and Attendants, at the Town's Expence, with an an- 
nual Allowance of Goo. and the Corporation Eſtate 
is held to be of the Value of gooo!. a Year. 

Here is an Hall for the Surgeons to. meet in, where 
they have two Skeletons of human Bodies, one a 
Man, and the other a Woman, and ſome other 
Rarities. 

In the Year 1741. the Rev. Dr. Rebert Tomlinſon, 
Rector of /Yhictham in the County of Durham, and 
Prebendary of St. Parl's, gave to this Corporation 2 
valuable 8 of Books, conſiſting of upwards 
of booo Volumes; and allo ſettled a Rent-charge of 

five Pounds per Annum for ever, for buying new Books. 

And Sir Valter Blacket, Bart. one of their Repte- 
ſentatives in Parliament, has, at his own Expence, 

built an handſome Fabric for the Reception of thoſe 

Books, and ſettled in Mortmain a Rent-charge of 251, 

per Annum for ever, for a Librarian. 7 

C 


a 


Northumb. GRTAT BRITAIN. 225 


The ſame worthy Gentleman having, in Ohober 
1753. informed the Mayor, Aldermen, and Com- 
mon- council, of the Intention of Thomas Dowidſon, 


Eſq; of Ferry: hill, and his Siſters, to found an Hoſ- 


pital for the maintaining of fix poor Maiden Women, 
the Expence 6f which would be 1200 J. and at the 
fame Time, that he himſelf would contribute the like 
Sum for the maintaining of fix poor Men; the Cor- 
poration came to a Reſolution to be at the Charge of 
Building, and to apply the Intereft of the above Sums 
for the Maintenance of the twelve poor Perſons above- 
mentioned. 

The Town is defended by an exceeding Kranz 
Wall, wherein are ſeven Gates, and as many Turrets, 
and divers Caſemates Bomb proof. The Caſtle, tho” 
old and ruinous, overlooks the whole Town, The 


worſt is, that the Situation of the Town being on the 
Declivity of two high Hills, as I have intimated, and 
the Buildings being very cloſe and old, render it in- 


commodious, to which the Smoke of the Coals con- 
tributes not a little; and conſequently excludes ſuch 
who ſeek a Reſidence of Pleaſure; but then as the 
River, which runs between the two Hills, makes it a 
Place of great Trade and Buſineſs, that Inconvenience 
is abundantly recompenſed. 

They have two Articles of Trade here, which are 


| particularly owing to the Coals, viz. Glaſs-houſes and 


dalt-pans ; the firſt are in the Town; the Taſt are at 
Sheals, ſeven Miles below it; but their Coals are 
brought ch'efly from the Town. Prodigious are the 
Quantities of Coals which thoſe Salt- works conſume ; 3 
and the Fires make ſuch a Smoke, that we ſaw it 
aicend in huge Clouds over the Hills, four Mites before 
we came to Durham, which is at leaſt 16 Miles from 
the Place. In ſhort, the Town is almoſt ſurrounded 
with Coal-pits; and Londen is reckoned to take off 


upwards of 600,000 Chaldrons N at 36 Buſhels | 


to the Chaldron. 
L 5 _ Here 


285 9 2 — 
- pr ROY 


n 


— PP 
einen e Os 


enn 


N e e 


* 
1 
7% 
4 5 
i 
— A 5. 
15 
Fo 
* 

0 bs 
1 
vo 
1 
Uh: 
54. 

N he 

0 

| 112 

: $2 

gs 

8 1 
. 

5 * - 

808 

£4 +: 
3 

a 77 

: | 

[Ba 

A 7 

4,888 
$1; + 
25 


226 A TOUR thro Northumb. 
lere I met with a Remark which was quite new to 
me, and will be fo, I ſuppoſe, to many others. You 
well know, we receive at London every Year a great 

uantity of Salmon, pickled or cured, and ſent up 
in the Pickle in Kits or Tubs, which we call New- 
caſtle Salmon. In conſequence of this, when I came 
to Newca/tle, I expected to ſee great Plenty of Salmon 
there; but was ſurpriſed to find it, on the contrary, ſo 
ſcarce, that a good large Salmon was not to be had 
under five or fix Shillings. Upon Inquiry I learnt, 


| that really this Salmon, which we call Newca/?le Sal- 


mon, is taken as far off as the Tweed, which is near 
50 Miles farther, and is brought by Land on Horſes to 
Sheals, where it is cured, pickled, and ſent to London, 
as above; ſo that it is more properly Berwick Salmon, 
than Newca/!le. 

There is but one Parochial Church, called St. Ni- | 
colas, built by St. David, King of Scotland; but ſeve- 
ral Chapels, as large as Churches. Here are like wiſe 
ſome Meeting-houſes, and a great many - well-en- 
dowed Charity-ſchools. St. Nicolas's Church ſtands - 
on the top of an high Hill; its Steeple is lofty, and of 
curious Architecture. There is a great Deſcent from 
it; and a Stream of Water, in time of Drought, 
runs down from a noble Conduit, which ſtands far up 
in the Town; and is of great Uſe to the Inhabitants 
near it. 

The Town is not | only enriched by the Coal- trade, 
but there are alſo very conſiderable Merchants in it, 
who carry on Traffick to divers Parts of the World, 
eſpecially to Holland, Hamburgh, Norway, aud the 
Baltic. 

They build Ships VIE to Perſection, as to Strength 
and Firmneſs, and to bear the Sea, as the Coal trade 
requires. This gives an Addition to the Merchants 
Bufineſs, it requiring a Supply of all yore of Naval 
eaves, to fit out thoſe Ships. | 


Here 


Northumb. GREAT BRTITAIN. 227 
Here is alſo a conſiderable Manufacture of Hard- 


ware, or Wrought Iron, of late Years erected, after 


the manner of Sheffield; which is very helpful for 
employing the Poor, of which the Town has always 
a prodigious Number. 

This Town was taken and plundered by the Scots | 
in the Beginning of the Civil Wars Anno 1641. and 
here it was (to their eternal Reproach be it remem- 
bered) that the Scots perhidiouſly fold their King for 


2c l. in hand, and Security for 20001. more, after 


he had in Confidence intruſted himſelf in their Hands, 


and without any Conditions made for him: a Tranſ- 


action equally ceteſtable_ with that of cutting off his 
Head; or more, if poſſible, as thoſe who did the laſt 
were his avow'd and implacable Enemies, whereas the 
others received him as his Friends and Protectors; and 


as, if the Scots had not delivered him up, his Enemies 


would not have had him in their Power. 
The Town was formerly fortify'd with a great 
Caſtle, the Walls of which are ſtill ſtanding. It en- 


joys great Privileges by the Favour of Queen Eliza- 


beth ; and, being one of thoſe which are called County- 


| towns, governs itſelf independently of the Lord Licug 


tenant. It returns two Members to Parliament. 

At a ſmall Diſtance from Tinmouth, Northward, 
ſtands Cullercoats, a Place otherwiſe of no great Di- 
ſtinction, but worthy Remembrance in this reſpec, 
that it is a very commodious little Port, of artificial 
Conſtruction, or, as the common People ſtile it, an 
Harbour made by Hand. It is dry at Low- water 


Mark and difficult at the Entrance; but it ſerves only 


for Coals and Salt belonging to the Works of parti- 
cular Perſons, at whoſe Expence it was conſtructed, 


Seaſon Sluice was originally of the ſame kind. Sir 


Ralph Delaval, an able Admiral of the laſt Age, was 
continually contriving new Improvements, in the Ex. 
erciſe of which he never heſitated. at Expence; and, 


amongſt the reſt, made this Port on his own Pl an, 
| L . and 


228 AT OUR thro Nothin, 


and entirely at his own Charge, for the Benefit of his 
Tenants and Self immediately, 'but without excluding 
others who choſe to uſe it. In the Conſtruction of 
this ſmall Harbour he found enough to exerciſe his 
Skill and Patience; the Stone-pier which covered it 
from the North-eaft Wind being carried away by the 
Sea more than once; and when he had overcome this 
Difficulty by uſing Timber as well as Stone, he felt a 
new Inconvenience, by his Port's filling up with Mud 
and Sand, though a pretty ſharp Rill ran through it, 
which had fo hollowed the Rock as to produce that 
very Baſon which Sir Rp would convert into an 
Haven. In order to remove, this Miſch ef, he placed 
a new-ſtrong Sluice with Flood gates upon his Brook; 
and theſe being ſhut by the coming in of the Tide, 
the Back- water collected itſelf into a Body, and 
forcing a Paſſage at the E bb, carried all before it, and 
twice in 24 Hours ſcoured the Bed of the Haven clean. 
King Charles II. who had a great Turn to Matters 
of this kind, made him Collector and Surveyor of 
Bis own Port, and it ſtill bears his Name, being ſome · 
times called Seaſon ſiuice, but commonly, Seaſon- De- 
laval; though ſtrictly that is the Name of the Town 
to which this little Port belongs, and is a Gate to 
Netucaſtle. It admits ſmaller Veſſels, yet larger Veſ- 
ſels may lie ſafe and receive their Lading in the Road, 
which renders it very commodious. 

At the Diſtance of a League to the North of Seaſon 
Delaval, lies Blith Nook, at the Mouth of a ſmall 
River. Here is a Quay and ſome other Conveniences ; 

though at low Water the Sea, at the Opening of the 
Creek, may be ſafely paſſed on Horſeback. This, as 
well as thoſe before deſcribed, derives its Origin from 
the Coal-trade, having ſome Advantage from its Situ— 

ation, which brought it firſt to be regarded, and has 
ſince preferved it in Eſteem. We find the Name in 
ſome of our old Maps; but from comparing all Cir- 
cumſtances, it ſeems probable that it was very little 
| + conlidercdy 


Northumb. GREAT BRI TA IN. 229 


conſidered, or thoſe Works raiſed, till about the time 
of the Reſtoration. In the Space of 50 Years from 
thence, the Veſſels loading there were not numerous 
enough to attract Notice; about ten Years after, or 
a little more, they became at teaft double, tho' there 
was no Village at the Place, nor any tolerable Town 
near it. In 1728 it feems to have doubled again, 
fince 207 Veſſels were that Year entered in the Cuſ- 
tom houſe Books, as coming from this Place, and 
things have been improving ever ſince. It is looked 
upon as a Creek to the Port of Newca/tle, 
Weſt from Newcaſtle lies the Bailiwick town of 
Hexham (the Axelodunum of the Romans}, a Paſs up- 
on the Tyne, famous, or rather infamous, for having 
the firſt Blood drawn near it in the Civil War; and 
where a Detachment of Engliſb, though advamageoully 
poſted, were fcandalouſly defeated by the Scots, who 


gained the Paſs, fought through the River, and killed 


about 4000 Men, the teſt bafely running away ; after 


which, the Town of 'Newrat'e was as Salih ſeized | 


upon, without ſtriking a Stroke. 


The _— about this Town is vulgarty called | 


Hexhamhire. was formerly the -Seat of a Biſhop, 


now annexed to that of Durham. Its Cathedral was 


ſtately, before the Scots ruined the greateſt Part of it 
in one of their Incurſions. On the other Side of the 
Tyne rom Hexhamhire, you fee an Houſe very beau- 


tifully fituated, called Bzfront; and within two Miles 


of Hexham is a fine Houſe built by the late unfortunate 
Earl of Derwentwater, called Drl/ion. 

Northumberland is a long coaſting County, lying 
chiefly on the Sea to the Eaſt, and bounded by the 
Mountains of Stainmore on the Weſt, which are in 
ſome Places acceſſible, but in many others unpaſſable. 

Here is abundant Buſineſs for an Antiquary; every 
Place ſhews you ruined Caſtles, Roman Altars, Inſcrip- 
tions, Monuments of Battles, of Heroes killed, Ar- 
mies Tote, the like. 


Norpetb, 


. 0 
IR 


1 
£ 
z 
6 
i 
* 
. 
* 
i 
| i 
z 
. 
1 4 
* 
4 
$ +1 
: 1 
17 
5 
i. 
; 
1 
3 
5 
5 5 
32 
2 
4 * 
153 
1 * 
5 
, 
71 
3 
bas 
* 
20 
55 

ö 48 2 
5 
* 

FT] 

q 

* 
1 

15 

74 

1. 

1 

75 

+ 

85 

4 

11 

N 

7 

1 * 

3 

1 

; 3 
r 

F 5-0 

. 
I 

: E 

n $5 

72 5 

RM: 
* 
ho © 

VB 
SE + 
"0 
bi 
1 
F-, 

; 1 
* 
i 
50 
37 
8 

» 2 
ry 

: bt: 

IIS 

7 5 

1 
7 

. 1 Ls 

| & 

| do 
"8 

* . 
E 

5 

. Gf 
7.31 

9 KT 

; 74 2 

Rl pt. 
N 1 
Lot 
BY: -- 24 
ved 
8 

. * 

38 
2 * 

1 
8 
E + 
3: WE 
1 
N 
HB 
n. 

oy Wo 
1 
« F 
Ko «% 
% £4 
Eo. 

KW 

N 
1 

* 3 8 

1 

1 
1 . 
9 
ng < 
. 
1 


2 neren 
e. 2 
<< rene 
— — & Lone 
— fo 
7 7 3h 5 
& n 


230 AT OUR He Northumh, 
. Morpeth, about 14 Miles from Newca/tle, is a 
pretty neat and long Market-town, and has in it 
many good Houſes for accommodating Travellers, Its 
Caſtle, curſorily mentioned above, was vaſtly fro 
and large; but now it is almoſt intirely demoliſhed. 
The Town is ſeated on the Northern Bank of the 
River Wentſbeck ; the Church on the Southern; near 
which, on a ſhady Hill, was the Caſtle. Here is 
plenty of Fiſh to be had, and on our Right we have 
a conſtant Proſpect of the Sea. The Town ſends 
two Members to Parliament. 
The next Place I came to, was a ſmall Village 
called Felton- Bridge, ſituated on a ſmall but pleaſant 
River, called Cocket, which abounds with Trout, and 
empties itſelf into the Sea, oppoſite to an Iſland to 
which it gives Name; and is ſaid to yield Sea coal in 
great Quantities. We had this little Iſland in View 
about four Miles diſtant from the Coaſt, 5 
I taſted the Beer here; but it was extremely bad, 
being brew'd with Wormwood inſtead of Hops. The 
common Breakfaſting hereabouts is Haſty-Pudden, 
made of Oatmeal and Water boiled to a Paſte, which 
ſome eat with Beer, Nutmeg, and Sugar; others with 
Milk, which makes it more tolerable. The Bread is 
very bad and black. Oatcakes are in Requeſt here. 
Eight Miles farther is Alnwzct, the County-town of 
Northumberland. It is ſituated on the North-fide of a 
Hill, near the River Alu, over which is a Stone- 
bridge, at the Diſtance of about 34 Miles North from 
Newcaſtle. It is a Poſt-town, and famous for being 
near the Spot where many Battles were fought between 
the Earls of Northumberland and the Scots Kings. 
The Town is populous, and in.general well built; 
It has a large Town- houſe, where the Quarter ſeſſions 
and County-courts are held, and Members of Pariia- 
ment elected; the Aſſizes (probably for the Conve- 
nience of the Judges) are held at Verocaſtle. It has 
alſo a ſpacious Square, in which a Market is held 
| | : ES every 


Northumb. GREAT BR1FAIN. 231 
every Saturday, a Fair for the Sale of Black -· cattle 


once a Fortnight, and five general Fairs in the Vear; 
one, called Lucy fair, a Week before Chriſtmas; 


another, called Palm- fair, a Week before Eaſter; 
the third on the firſt of May O. S8. the fourth on the 


23d of Fuly, and the fifth on Michaelmas-day. Tt 
appears to have been formerly a fortified Town, by 


the Veſtiges of a Wall ftill viſible in many Parts, and 
three Gates, which remain almoſt entire. It is go- 


verned by four Chamberlains, who are choſen once 


in two Years out of a Common-council conſiſting of 


24. and defended, or rather ornamented on the 
Northern ſide, by a ſtately old Gothic Caſtle, which 


has ever been the Seat of the noble Family of Percy 
Earls of Northumberland. As the Audits for the Re- 


ceipts of Rent twice a Year have been generally held 


at this Caſtle, it has been always kept in tolerable 


Repair; and is now repairing and beautifying by the 


preſent Earl of Northumberland; who is alſo making 
very conſiderable Alterations upon a moſt elegant 
Plan, with a View to reſide in it ſome Part of the Sum- 


mer Seaſon, 3 a 
About ſeven Miles South-eaſt of Alnwick ſtands 


Warkworth, a pleaſant Village, ſituate on a riſing 


Ground on the South-ſide of the River Cocket, over 


which there is alſo a Stone Bridge. At the South end 


of the Village, which is the higheſt Part of it, ſtands 


an old Caſtle, whence there is a very beautiful and 
extenſive Proſpect: it commands the Country, for 


many Miles, to the Weſt, the Sea at about the Dif- 
tance of a Mile to the Eaſt, and a ſmall Iſland, about 
three Miles from the Shore, oppoſite to the Mouth 


of the River, called Cocke? Iland. Upon this Ifland, 
which was lately purchaſed by the Earl of Northumber- 


land, are the Remains of a large old Building, which 
has been long uninhabited, except by the People that 
in the Summer Seaſon go over thither from Hauxley, 


to burn the Ware into Kelp, who take Shelter in it 
- Ky | | When 


Wr q n 
—_— 9 K mee TR PER 8 * PR — "on 
*— ͤ — ¶ 0s ; 2 — 1 boy 1 
rn — — — — — r S 2 Na. et 1 Bros 25, 222222 2 r „* 4 ” 
s ED » 2 : . 1 — n "2h \ : 22 2 2 — __ 0 
. — CONE IN 2 RIES — 1212 y * v >. * bh - * s \ = + 1 


N . 


. 
nnn 


—— — 0 Q 1 q 
— Re CO Woes} EL 8 5 3 —— : ; — EEEEITIIEN 5 4 
9 17 ne 1 a — NN — pe, N. * ar * eee * " * ed LEES 2 ; — — * 
"Mg vr W 7M 8 mm" PP 2 reed n tp n Wray ot yg FT re tt en 1 7 — 2 — — — 8 * 
2 — —. B 9 - 0 — ITS 3 G ? # 3 p — * b A — . = — — * 
n ” —— — 2 ä — —ů—ů—ů U — . ar Cpt hate . 3 2 "of — * "= —— r = 6 oY Jas, von, naive > „„ 4 * — —— -—»«- pit 
$a * 8 — — 2 - — — r. — 1 b er 5 —— err 4 5 2 r Dr nen * * 4 * y 
2 * 1 1 wm * v N 8 8 Lo n p r => ER Oo ITEEY . — 3 e — 8 bak. ou + ee — 1 way So edge IG Te * N n Dr eee eee ba ate 
rn * 1 . _ q * n * 2 AE * . Ro» i 7. E rw = * r y 12. 4 r — _— 2 hy 3 hs 4 n > G7 2 #45 R dee — rh 4 hy 
= =P * PG erg MCs 24s. W 8 N 8 Dr. 99 2 * Dy A « I.E * 8 „ * * r A A * Te W * ol N * 2 
* * * . EIT f Rego oat wa relies; - = * SG o n ph, g - '® , wo , ey * * px _ = 5 1 2 25 E 2 . 5 . 5 * . n 5 b TIT DYE PLOT 2 n n r 5 
"2, 2 2 5 n Cs an 3 7 225+. ah * . 2 Ger 2 r 1 neee 4 N 1 EF . FE 2 0 Re 5 r e wy BILE Ba IM — —. 2 2 /'4 ; * „ 
> * * Mac — 7 _ bs i . ah * — 8 8 >» wx RITES 4 32 wht % - 1 e 8 3 — £ N 8 I 5 1 D 4 0 . . F A 0 * Ke" 
2 ; r * —_ W 5 PR Ke. —— er . \ fy vis — a At ho ogra = "ISDN ab Nag + Dr . rere — a rn th Cl Ye RT PAP. 22M , 22 r * 5 
"A opt 7 —_ Tg %. — 2. 4 2 Ke FF , Sem 1 ye R Deere — rr | — 5 ee Aa hs xt 2 h l 


282 A TOUR He Northumb. 
when the Weather happens tobe rainy or tempeſtuous, 
There is alſo in this Iſland a Rabbet-warren ; but 
neither Wild fowl nor Coal-mines. 

I/arkworth gives Title to the eldeſt Son of the 
| Earl of Northumberland. 

About a Mile beyond Wortwerth, up the River, 
is a remarkable Cave, called the Hermitage. It is 
fituated cloſe by the River's fide, and is cut into the 
folie Rock. The Roof is arched, and the Sides are 
decorated with Pillars in the Gothic Taſte. It is di- 
vided into two Apartments of the ſame Dimenſions, 
one of which ſeems to have been a Lodging room, 
and the other a Chapel. At the Eaſt end of the 
Chapel is an Altar, with a Croſs cut in the Wall 
above it; and in the Window the Figure of a Woman 
in a recumbent Poſture at full Length. At one End 
of this Figure is another, which ſeems 'to be weeping 
over it; and at the other End'is a Bull's Head. 
About two Miles and an half North of /Parkworth 
ſtands Alemouth, a Sea port, whence laige Quantities 
of Corn are annually ſhipped ; and about three Miles 
North-weſt, on the Banks of the n, is Hull- Abbey, 
which was alſo lately purchaſed by the Earl of North- 
umberland. Here are ſtill to be ſeen the Remains of 
ſeveral Chapeis, and a ſquare Tower of neat Work- 
manſhip. - 

About ten Statute Miles Weſt of A. mwick, on the 
River Aln, ſtands EHington, a Seat of Lord Ravenſ- 
worth, where the Fainihy uſually reſides during ſome 
Months of the ſporting Seaſon. 

About four Miles E it of Alnwick Hande I 
the Seat of Sir Henry Grey, Bart The Situation of 
this Seat is extremely pleaſant, having a fine Proſpect 
of the Sea to the Eaſt, and of the Country to the 
South, and being well ſheltered to the North by Na- 
ture and Art. 

About two Miles North 5 Howick, on the Banks 


of the Mis ſtands Dunſcantorough Caſtle, now in 
Ruins. 


Northumb. GREAT BRITAIN. 233 
b. Ruins. This Place is the Property of the Earl of 


us. | Tankerville. 


ut About 12 Miles North-weſt of Alnwick ſtands 
Chillingham Caſtle, a Seat of Lord Tankerville, It is 
he Ua large old Building, of a quadrangular Form; in 
good Repair, and well furniſhed. he 
er, Belonging to Chilling ham Caſtle is a large Park, 
18 where there is great Plenty of Deer, and a kind of 
the wild Cattle, which are all white except their Ears and 
are the Tips of their Horns, which are brown, and their 
di- Mouths, which are black; they are extremely fierce, 
NS, and will ſcarce ſuffer any thing to approach them, 
m, except in hard Winters, when they are-ſubcued by 
the WF Hunger, and then they will ſuffer the Keeper of the 
all Park to feed them. As ſoon as they can procure their 
Jan own Food they become furious and wild as before; ſo 
nd. that when any of them are to be killed, the Keeper is 
ing Wl obliged to ſhoot them; and the Fleſh is indeed excel- 
lent Beef. | | | | 
rth At a ſmall Diſtance Weſt from Chillingbam ſtands 
ties Maoler, where a Market is held every Thur/day, and 
les a Faif ance s rr . 
ey, Eaſt from J//ler, about 10 Miles on the Poſt- 
th- road, and North from Ainwrick about 15 Miles, ſtands 
of Belford, a Poſt town, where a M :rket is held weekly 
1K- on 7 veſdays, and a Fair once a Tear, 
About five Miles further Eaſt is the Town of Balm- 
the borough; where there are the Remains of a Caſtle, 


„ WE fituated on a very ſteep Rock that is waſhed by the 
me Sea. | | | 3 
= About five Miles to the North-eaft of this Place, is 
ck, the largeſt of a Cluſter of Iſlands called Farrn Iſlands, 
of the reft being little more than ſcattered Rocks, utterly 
ect deſolate. On this Iſland are ſtill to be ſeen the Re- 
the mains of an old Building, fomething reſembling that 
Na- on Cocſtet. and; but there is no fort of Light-houſe 
or Inhabitants. The Iſland is let by the Proprietors 
nks to People who live in a Place called Monts-Hoſe, 2 
| | 8 


* 


234. A TOUR thro Northumb. 
the oppoſite Coaſt; who get a very comfortable Suh. 
ſiſtence by taking and ſelling the Eggs and Feathers 
of the Sea Fowls that frequent it: the Number and 
Variety of theſe Birds is ſo great, that a particular 
Deſcription of them would almoſt fill a Volume; and 
the different kinds of Eggs, ſome of which are found 
on the naked Rock, and others in Holes like Rabbet- 
burrows, are fo curious and entertaining, that, in 
the Breeding ſeaſon, many People are continually 
going over to ſee them. 5 | 
Holy [land lies not above a Mile and half from the 
Land, and at low Water is ſeparated only by a Sand, 
upon which we ſaw many Country- people ride over 
to the Iſland, and back again. It was formerly known 
by the Name of Lindisfarne, before it took that of 
Holy Iſland, from its being made a Retiring; place for 
Biſhops, Monks, &s. who, to wean themfelves from 
the World, took Sanctuary here. The Britons are 
| ſaid to have called it Inis Medicante, which, as Bed: 
fays, is twice Iſle, and twice Continent, in one Day; 
being encompafled with Water at every Flow, and 
dry at every Ebb; whereupon he calls it, very aptly, 
a Semi-Iſle. The Weſt Part is narrow, and lett 
wholly to the Rabbets ; which is joined to the Eaft 
Part, where it is much broader, by a very ſmall Slip 
nr Land. --  -: . 
We had Cheviot Hills fo plain in View, when! 
was in theſe Parts, that we could net but inquiie of 
the Inhabitants every-where, whether they had heard 
of the Fight at Chevy Chace they not only told us 
they had heard of it, but had all the Account of it at 
their Finger's End; whereupon, taking a Guide at 
Mooler, a ſmall Town, lying, as it were, under the 
Hills, he led us on toward the top of the Hill ; for, by 
the way, although there are many Hills and Reaching 
for many Miles, which bear the Name of Chevit 
Hills, yet there is one of them a great deal higher 
than the reſt, which, at a Diſtance, looks _ the 
8 1 | Hh 


Northumb. GREAT BRITAIN. 235 
pico- Tener ite in the Canaries, and is ſo high, that it 
is plainly ſeen from the Ro/emary-Top in the North- 


Riding of Yorkſhire, which is near 60 Miles off. 
We were preparing to clamber up this Hill on Foot, 


when our Guide told us, he would find a Way for us 
to get up on Horſeback. He then very artfully led us 


round to a Part of the Hill, where, in the Winter- 
ſeaſon, great Streams of Water come pouring down 
from it in ſeveral: Chanels, which were pretty broad, 


and over-grown on each S'de with Alder-trees, fo 


cloſe and thick, that we rode under them as in an 
Arbour, In one of the Chanels we mounted the Hill, 
as Be ſiegers approach a fortified Town, by Trenches, 
and were got a great way up, before we were well/ 
aware of it; for we were already fo far advanced, 
that we could ſee ſome of the Hills, which before we 
thought very high, lying under us, as if they were a 
Part of the Plain below. As we mounted higher, we 
found the Hill ſteeper than at firſt; and our Horſes 
being very much fatigued, we alighted, and proceeded 
on Foot. When we had gained the top, we were 
agrecably ſurpriſed to fee a ſmooth and pleaſant Plain 
half a Mile in Diameter, with a large Pond in the 
middle of it; for we had a Notion, when at Bottom, 


that the Hill narrow'd to a Point, and that when we 


came to the top, we ſhould be as upon a Pinacle, 
with a Precipice every way round us. | 
Ihe Day, to our great Satisfaction, happened to 


be very calm, and fo clear, that we, could plainly ſee 
the Smoke of the Salt-pans at SHeals, at the Mouth of 


the Tyne, which was about 40 Miles South from this. 
We ſaw likewiſe ſeveral Hills, which our Guide told 
us were in England, and others in the Welt of Scot- 
land, the Names of which I have forgot. Eaſtward 
we ſaw Berwick, and to the North the Hills called 
Sutra Hills, which are in Sight of Edinburgh, In 
mort, we had a ſurpriſing View of the united Rhg- 
doms; and though all the Country round us Jooked 

| very 


236 = 4 TOUR thro Northumb. 


very well, yet, it muſt be owned, the Scots Side ſeemed 
the vieaſanteſt. 


datished with this P:ofpeR, and 'not thinking our 


Time or Pains ill beſtow'ed, we came down the Hill 
by the ſame Route we went up. Our Guide after— 


wards carried us to a fingle Houſe, called //ooler. 


Haugh-head, a much better Inn than we expected ty 
meet with thereabouts. 

At this Inn, we enquired after the Particulars of the 
famous Story of Chevy Chace, and found that the 
People had the following Notion of it: That it was an 
Inroad of the Earl of Deuglas into England, in order 
to ravage, burn, and plunder the Country, as was 
uſual in thoſe Days: That Piercy Earl of Northumber- 
land, marched with his Friends and Followers to meet 
the Scots. Both Paities encountered at the Foot of 
Cbeviot Fills, and a bloody Battle enſued, wherein 

both Earls were ſlain, deſperately fighting at the Head 
of their Troops; and ſo many fell on both Sides, that 
it could not be determined which had the Victory. 

They thewed us the Place where this Battle was 
fought, which, if their Tradition does not deceive 
them, is on the Side of the Hill near the Road, Itis 
ſaid, the Scots were moſtly Horſe, and therefore the 
Engliſh Archers placed themſelves on the Side of a 
ſteep Aſcent, that they might not be broken in upon 
by them. The Spots of Ground where the two Earls 
are ſaid to have fallen, are diſtinguiſhed by two Stones 
to this Day. The Fight the Scots called the Batile 


of Otterburn, and make a very ſamous Story of it to 


the Honour of their Nation. 
About ſix or ſeven Miles from hence we Gs the 


ever- memorable Flodden- - field, where James IV. King 


of Scotland, invading England with a great Army, 
when Henry VIII. was engaged abroad in the Siege 
of Tournay, was met by the gallant Earl of Surry, 
lih PR after a blood y Battle, the Scots were totally 

defeated, 


Northumb. GREAT BRITAINV. 237 


geleated, and their King, fighting valiantly at the 


Head of his Nobility, was ſlain. 

The River Till, which aur Hiſtorians call a deep 
and ſwift River, where many of the Scots were 
drowned in. their Flight, ſeemed to me every where 
paſſable \ with gfeat Eaſe ; but perhaps it might at that 
time be ſwelled by ſome ſudden Rain, which the 
Hiſtorians ought to have taken Notice of. 


I muſt not quit Northumberland without remarking, 


that the Nat-ves of this County, of the antient origi- 


nal Race or Families, are diſtinguiſhed by a Shibbeleth 
upon their Tongues in pronouncing the Letter R, 


which they cannot utter without an hollow j jarring in 
the Throat, by which they are as plainly Known, as 
2 Foreigner is in pronouncing the Th: this they call 
the Northumberland R, or Marle; and the Natives 


value themſelves upon that Imperfection, becauſe, 


| forſooth, it ſhews the Autiquity of their Blood. 
From hence lay a Road into Scotland, by the Town 


of Kelſo, which I afterwards paſſed through ; but at 
preſent inclining to ſee Berwick upon Tweed, we 
turned to the Weſt, and viſited that old Frontier, 


where is a fine Bridge over the Tweed, built by Queen 


Elizabeth, a noble, ſtately Work, conſiſting of 15 


| Arches, and] joining, as may be ſaid, the twa King- 


doms, The chief Trade I found here was in Corn 


and Salmon. 


Berwick is pleaſantly ſituated on the South- fide of. 


an eaſy Declivity, on the Scotch Coaſt of the River 
Tweed, about half a Mile diftant from its Conflux 


with the Sea; is regularly fortified with Flanks, 


Baſtions, and a Ditch on the North and Eaſt, and on- 
the South and Weſt with high Walls, well buile and 


planted with Cannon, to which the River ſerves as a 


Moat: 


The Houſes in penal are well-built, 2nd the- 
| Town- houſe: is an handſome Edifice, with a lofty 


Turret, in which i is a Ring of eight Bells, and a fine 


| Clock | 


err eee n n wx £ F 
8 reer, —— ** ERP — 5 — 4 wid) vs nb be N e 
— . v IE "= 4 8 


— nee 

— "AS 9 * —— _ 

- N * 0 a. 8 , wr Sz Le 8 9 8 K N 

C ; ee — gia, v4 b gs + OD US Iran” ng II i I 1 pegs 
Be bes r e „ e eee F e . 8 — n ee 
q 5 2 3 mer (EY 5 eggs 8 N 0 2 
„„ eee ee e eee e e e e eee : Ham — 


n 
GS Ing 
yg 


* 5 D . 
8 e 
. ee 
WY e le 
5 rf 7 


2 38 A TOUR #thr# Northumb. 
Clock that repeats the Quarters, and has four Dials 
on each Side the Square. | 

The Church, built by the Protector Cami, is 2 
neat Building, but has neither Spire nor Bells. The 
Bridge erect is 947 Feet long, conſiſting of 15 Arches, 

and not inelegantly built. 
The Barracks form a large regular Square, and 
will contain two Regiments of Fe oot with great Con- 
venience. 

The Town is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, 
Town-clerk, and four Bailiffs. There is a Fair 
once a Year, and a Market every Saturday; which 
is ſaid to be as well ſupplied as any in Britain. 

Some Corn. and Eggs are ſhipped from this Place 
for London and other Ports; but the principal Trade 
conſiſts of the Salmon which is taken in the Tweed, 
and reckoned the beſt in the Kingdom; great Quan- 
tities of this Fiſh, being pickled, are put up in Veſſels 
called Kitts, by Perſons who ſubſiſt wholly -by that 
Employment, and are called Salmon Coopers, and 
then ſhipped off to London. | 

Conſiderable Quantities of the ſmaller Fiſh are alſo 
ſent to London alive, in Veſſels called Smacks, which 
are built for that Purpoſe, having a Well in the 
middle bored full of Holes, for the free Paſſage of 
the Sea Water, in which the Fiſh are conveyed with- 
out Injury. | 

. Theſe Veſlels are alſo reckoned very ſafe for Paſ- 
ſengers, as they will lie nearer the Wind, and bear 

| heavier Seas than any other. 

At Berwick the beſt Salmon may be bought for 
a Penny a Pound, during the Months of June and 
July; but, at ſome other Parts of the Vear, it bears a 
conſiderable Price. | 

I am now on the Borders of Scotland, and muſt call 
to mind, that I have not yet gone over the Weſtern 


Coaſt of E 3 5 VIZ, en, We mor land, | 
and Cumberland. - 


d Io * 1 
l l — 4 v7; Ae” . „e E 
1 — FRI . E 2 — 2 

T Ro * 1 * W 625„ Sa 
— BIC! * 2 n : 
ren Mr 8 + 0 ——— 1 
W e nn Py uu * we * 4 2250 
_— r rw 
— wy x — ” P ** 


. * — _ a ; 
I _— Pr — - 
% a . r 1 5 
8 e ee r 
. II OS. PIP 

note eee er Ta: 5 

I Fours e _ 5 
— 


— 


5 m " * ; - 

. r 4 * + a - 
K rr n 
be n 


— 
— 


e 


DN 4 © ts THE 
a Shapes,” > n 
oo . 
* * cw b . 
10 * Fo * 
eee 


rn 


— * r 5 


1 
1 
g 
| 
5 
1 i 
k 24» 
* x0 
v5 
1 
+ 2 
+ 
+ 
3 * 
1 
i%Þ 
$ 1 "IE: 
23 2 * 
be 1 
5 1 Te , 
\ \ 
4 


Since 


als Since I entered upon the. View of theſe Northern 


Counties, I have many times regretted, that my 
limits obliged me often to decline the delightful View 


he of Antiquity, of which there is ſo great and ſo ſur- 
&, priſing a Variety every Day diſcovered; for the re- 
ligious, as well as military Remains of the Briten, 
ind Romans, Saxons, and Normans, like Wounds haſtily © 
\n. bealed up, appear preſently, when the Callus, which 
was ſpread over them, is removed; and though the 
er, Earth has defaced the Figures and Inſcriptions upon 
ir moſt of thoſe Curioſities, yet they are beautiful, even 
ich WE in their Ruins; for the venerable Face of Antiquity 
has ſomething ſo pleaſing, ſo ſurpriſing, fo ſatisfactory 
ace in it, eſpecially to thoſe who have, with any Atten- 
ade ton, read the Hiſtories of paſt Ages, that I Know 
ed, nothing which renders Traveling more pleaſant and 
an- more agreeable. 5 „„ „ 
Tels t may be expected, that I ſhould mention ſome- 
hat thing of the Progreſs and Motions of the Rebels, as 
and well as of the King's Army, in the ſeveral Towns 


WF that were the Scenes of Action on either Side, or thro*- 
allo MW which the Armies paſſed, in the Courſe of the unna- 
0 tural and unprovoked Rebellion of 1745. but, as 1 
the have elſewhere . hinted, I ſhall reſerve this Subject, to 
> of avoid Frolixity and Confuſion, to the latter End of 
ith- my Work *, when I ſhall come to deſcribe the Places 

where the Flame firſt broke out. 


of. The Deſcription of the other three Counties will be 
\car the Subject of my next Letter, Mean time, I am, 
. S1 

and ph 353 ; 

8 A - | Your maſt humble Servant, 
call | : Ds 
lern | | : See Vol. IV. Letter vi, c 5 


78 S Be * 
HG 2 2 2 Cab 
8 IO TEE NETS eee * 


52 — 41. 
— FI 
e ATED eee 
ed WOE - . i _— 
— — 


+446 - © 
RL oe oi rope omen K 8 — 
n 3323 , 7 Þ 


e eee — . ery TRE Ce er 
FFC 


eee. 


K -—_ 0 
. 


e £ 
n 


— 


240 ATOUR to ane. 


rn 


Containing a DESCRIPTION of the Counties of 
LANCASTER, WESTMORLAND, and Cuy- 
BERLAND. _ 8 8 
. R, : | : | 

" Entered Lancaſbire at the remoteſt Weſtern Point 


of that County, having been at Meſt- Cheſter upon 
a particular Occation, and from thence ferried over 


from the Cęflrian Cherſoneſus, as I have already called 
it, to Liverpoole. Phis narrow Slip of Land, rich, 


fertile, and full of Inhabitants, tho' formerly, as Au- 
thors ſay, a mere waſte and deſolate Foreſt, is called 
Mirall, or-by ſome Mirehall. Here is a Ferry over 
the Merſee, which, at full Sea, is more than two 
Miles over. You land on the flat Shore on the other 


Side, and muſt be content to ride thro' the Water for 
ſome Length, not on Horſeback, but on the Shoulders 


of ſome Lancaſbire Clown, who comes Knee deep to 


the Boat's Side to truſs you up; and then runs away 


more nimble than one deſires to ride, unleſs his Trot 
were eaſie. N > 

Li verpoole is one of the Wonders of Britain, be- 
cauſe of its prodigious Increaſe of Trade and Build- 
ings, within the Compals of a very few Years ; rival- 


ing Briſtol in the Trade to 7 irginia, and the Engliſ 
Colonies in America. They trade alſo round the whole 


Iſland, ſend Ships to Norway, to Hamburgh, to the 
Baltic, as alſo to Holland and Flanders; ſo that they 
are almoſt become, like the Londoners, univerſal Mer- 
chants, .. - 5 ; 
| The Trade of Liverpoole conſiſts not only in Mer- 
chandizing and Correſpondencies beyond Seas; _ as 


1c, 8 


ont 
pon 
JVer 


ted | 


ich, 
Au- 
led 
over 
two 
ther 
r for 
ders 
p 0 
WA 
Trot 


be⸗ 
uild- 


ival- 


wiſh 


zhole 
the 
they 
Mer- 


Mer 
ut as 


they 


Lanc. 
they import almoſt all Kinds of foreign Goods, they 


is ſupplied from thence. | 


GREAT BRITAIN. 241 
have conſequently a great Inland Trade, and a great 
Correſpondence with Ireland and Scotland for Conſump- 
tion of their Goods, exactly as it is with Briſſol; and 
they really divide the Trade with Briſſol upon very re- 


markable Equalities. 


Briſtol lies upon the 1riſh Sea; ſo does Liverpoole: 
Briſtol trades chiefly to the South and Weſt Parts of 
Ireland, from Dublin in the Eaſt to Galway Weſt; 


| Liverpoole has all the Trade of the Eaſt Shore and the 


North, from the Harbour of Dublin to Londonderry : . 
Briſtol has the Trade of South Wales ; Liverpoole great 
Part of the Trade of North Wales: Briftol has the 


| South-weſt Counties of England, and ſome North of 


it, as high as Bridgnorth, and perhaps to Shrewſbury ; 
Liverpoole has all the Northern Counties; and a large 
Conſumption of Goods in Cheſbire and Staffordfhire 


% 


Ireland is alſo ſhared between both; and for the 


Northern Coaſt of it, if the Liverpool Men have not 


the whole Fiſhery, or, at leaſt, in Company with the 
Merchants of Londonderry, the Fault is their own. 
The Situation of Liverpoole is very advantageous to- 
wards 8 Commerck, and extending it into 


the Northern Inland Counties of England, particularly 
into Cheſhire and Staffordſhire, by the new Navigation 


of the Rivers Merſee, the Weaver, and the Dane. B 
the laſt, the Merchants come ſo near the Trent wit 
their Goods, that they make no Difficulty to carry 
them by Land to Burton, and from thence correſpond 
quite through the Kingdom, even to Hull; and they 
begin to be very ſenſible of the Profit of ſuch a Com- 
merce. | VVV 

It is ſome Advantage to the growing Commerce of 


this Town, that the Freemen of it are, in conſe- 


quence of that Freedom, fiee alſo of Brifel; as they 
are of the Corporations of hes as and Wexford in 
the Kingdom of Ireland. Not that theſe Corporation 

Vol. III. "- x1 Privileges 


242 I TOUR & Lane. 
Privileges are of any great Value to Liverpoole in its 
foreign Trade; but, in particular Caſes, it may be 
ſome Advantage, as in Town-Duties, in admitting 
_ to ſet up Trades in thoſe Corporations, and the 
—_ N 
Before the End of this laſt Century it was comput. 
ed, and with great Probability, that Liverpoole was 
poſſeſſed of ten times the Commerce it had at the Be. 
ginning: At the very Entrance of the preſent Cen- 
tury, Lrverpoole was held to be the third Sea-port in 
England; was ſuppoſed to have augmented in Com- 
merce greatly in the next 20 Years; and we can af. 
firm from good Authority, that in Point of Ships, Sea- 
men, and the public Revenue, this Port has doubled 
ſince that Time. The principal internal Cauſes | 
which, as I have been informed, have contributed to 
the quick Growth of Commerce here, which in other 
Places riſes ſo ſlowly, were theſe : The Traders of 
this Place have been remarkable for Frugality in Ma- 
nagement, which enables them to do every thing upon 
the cheapeſt Terms, and to ſell at the loweſt Prices, 
They admit all Degrees of People, even their own 
Servants, to employ the ſmalleſt Stock in Trade, by 
which they become intereſted in the Event, and ate 
the ſooner in a Condition to ſet up for themſelves, 
Laſtly, they have ſhewn ſurpriſing Spirit in Works of 
large Expence, for the Improvement of the Town and 
Port; and, in a Word, whatever may contribute to 
the public Intereſt, _ 25 
The Situation of Liverpoole being on the North 
Bank of the River, with the Diſadvantage of a flat 
Shore, the Merchants were laid under great Difficul- 
ties in their Buſineſs; for tho'ꝰ the Harbour was good, 
and the Ships rode well in the Offing, yet they were 
obliged to ride there as in a Road, rather than an Har. 
bour. Here was no Mole or Haven to bring in their 
Ships, and lay them up (as the Seamen call it) forthe 
Winter, nor any Quay for the delivering their Goods, 


anc. 
n its 
iy be 
tting 
] the 


Nput- 
Was 
e Be- 
Cen- 
yt in 
Com- 
an at- 
„ Sea- 
zubled 


_auſes | 


ted to 
other 
ers of 


n Ma- 
7 upon 
Prices. 
ir own 
de, by 
nd are 
\{elves. 
orks of 
wn and 


ute to. 


North 
f a flat 
)ifficul- 
8 good, 
I were 
an Har- 
in theit 
) forthe 
Goods, 

45 


Lanc. 


Sea- ports. Upon this, the Inhabitants and Mer- 


chants, by the Aid of an Act of Parliament, paſſed in 
the eighth Year of the Reign of the late Queen Anne, 


which was prolonged by another, paſſed in the third 
Year of his Majeſty King George I. made a large Ba- 


fin, or Wet-dock, at the Eaſt End of the Town, 


where at very great Charge, the Place conſidered, they 
have brought the Tide from the 14 Oh to flow up 
by an Opening, that looks to the South, and the 


Ships go in North; ſo that the Town ſhelters it from 
the Weſterly and Northerly Winds, the Hills from 
the Eaſterly, and the Ships lie as in a Mill. pond, 
with the utmoſt Safety and Convenience. As this 
is ſo great a Benefit to the Town, the like of which 
is not to be ſeen in any Place of England, for the 
Merchants Service, London excepted, it is well worth 


the Imitation of 'other trading Places in Britain, 
which for want of ſuch a Convenience, loſe their 
Trade; for indeed the Inhabitants of Liverpoole ſuf- 


| fered not a little for want of it in the great Storm, An- 
| 141703. This Dock is capable of holding -100" Sail 
| of Ships. „„ 


But tho' theſe new Works have been of ſuch Ad- 


vantage to this flourifhing Town, yet ſom' thing more 


appeared wanting to crown the Work; for, it ſeems, 


the Entrance into the Dock or Baſin, from the open 


Harbour, was ſo ſtreight, that Ships and Veſſels lying 


in the Dock were often hindered from getting out to 


Sea; and thoſe without the Dock, in the open Har- 
bour, were frequently forced aſhore and loſt. To 
remedy this Inconvenience, an Act paſſed, Anno 1738. 
for enlarging the ſaid Entrance, and for erecting a 


Pier in the open Harbour, on the North and South 


Sides of the ſaid Entrance. And as the Lives of divers 
Perſons were endangered and loſt, and Goods often 


run and ſmuggled, for want of keeping proper and 


ufficient Lights in the Night-time, about the ſaid 
2 | M2. Wett- 


GREAT BRITAIN. 243 
as at Brifto!, Bidiford, Newcaſtle, Hull, and other 


4 
, 
1 
+8: 
, 
1 
85 
Ar. 
2) 
N 
* 
F by 
; 
45 
. 
7 
£ 


DIA Os. oo —_ -v>2 


| . 3 OL EY 
. Up x 2.1 rae <2 8 — — — 0 „„ * 8 4 „ e — 00-0 : g Fog 
r tn Ie: wm an es pare ropes on bi. D l e 2 r r A 
— e — es DE. 1 . f > En © Et IR 8 e 1 en RODE eee * b . i 5 wee ht > APR; TAs 07795 : 
3 « * - * 4 Dee wo gs 4 e e 2 att RR + — 8 N Dd oor ronte; Pig Ange of ET, te $5 5 8 D Nan 6 
» 1 pA g 1 r KCTS. l rien RI gs * r * r = re hs * 1 T " 4 1 Y 2 5 : n 
rr . ROAEES — — oo - 3 3 | * ; i 8 7 e b 
2 — e 8 Nen * * LES 8 n FOE *- 92 - — Wc, : IG ws CO Long : 4 by 2 K GY «fv , ** Ser n £ dns tems = : 
— q 0 > l 5 Sa \ hs r 9 + rr ky . 6 . of q 
2 TW — > > 5 — *. 224 by . l 


_ 
- - 
02 


EI 

e —— ieneI. ot 

— b — a — 
42 3 


W 


— TI 
— . — . ISS Org 
. * * 
eee eee 
— dt. _ a 
= 1 


n IF 
— {I 8 
0 — 2 

= +5 


— 
8 [x 


5 
= — 
— — r gs 
** "I I a en 81 
— 2a bd i og RT de: 2 
— — r 


3 „ We 
2 n 
T — 
= 8 


: 2 


CCC 
Wet- dock or Baſin, the fame Act impowers the 
Corporation to ſet up ſuch a Number of Lamps to 
enligaten the Dock, as they ſha!l think requiſite: 
all which muſt be of the higheſt Benetit to this fine 
Town, and a great Furtherance of its Trade and Na- 
vigation. EO _ 

he Cuſtom-houſe adjoining to the Dock is alſo the 
Work of but a few Years paſt, ani is not only a com- 
modious, but an elegant Piece of Building. 5 
Liverpoole had formerly but one Church, dedicated 
to our Lady and St. Nzcelas, and that dependent on 
the Pariſh of Walton; but upon the Increaſe of Inha- 
bitants, and of new Buildings, in ſo ext: aordinary a 
manner, an Act of Parliament paſſed in the tenth 
Year of King William III. enabling the Corporation 
to build and endow a new one. and to make Liver. 
pocle independent of Walton. Anno 1704. the Church 
of St. Peter's on the Eaſt-ſide of the Town, which 
had been built at the Charge of the Pariſh to which it 
was appropriated, was conſecrated. But this being 
ſtill not ſufficient for this flouriſhing Town, her Ma- 
jeſty Queen Anne, in the third Year of her Reign, 
granted to the Corporation for 50 Years a Leaſe of 
the Site of Liverpoole Caſtle, which had long lain in 
Ruins, whereon to ere a third Church, and other 
Edifices, under the yearly Rent of 64. 135. 4 d. to- 
_ gether with Liberty to uſe the Materials of the old 
| Caſtle for that Purpoſe. And his late Majeſty King 
_ © George I. by Act of Parliament, was pleaſed to make 
over to the Corporation for ever, on a Reſerve of the 
ſame annual Rent, the ſaid Site of the old Caſtle; 
/, whereon the Inhabitants erected the ſaid third Church, 
and, in Honour to that Prince, dedicated it to dt. 
George. It was finiſhed in the Year 17 34. from the 
Revenues ariling from the Corporation- Lands, and the 
Duty on Merchandize, which are eſtimated at 2000 


per Ann. Theſe Churches are very handſome and ca- | 
pacious Buildings, That on the North of the Tomy. 


has 


anc. 


the 
8 to 
ite: 
fine 


Na- 


ſo the 
COm - 


cated 
at on 
Inha- 
ary a 
tenth 
ration 


[ 1ver- | 


hucch 
which 
ich it 
being 
r Ma- 
Reign, 
ale of 
ain in 
other 
d. to- 
he old 
7 King 
» make 
of the 
vaſile ; 
urch, 
t to of, 
om the 
and the 
t 200k, 


and ca- 
> Tow! 
has 


Lanc. GREAT BRITAIN. 245 
has in it a fine Font of Marble, placed in the Body of 
the Church, ſurrounded with a beautiful Iron Palifa- 
do; the Gift of the late Mr. Heyſbam, a Merchant of 
London, but conſiderably concerned in Trade on this 
Side, and for many Years Member of Parliament for 
Lancaſter. There is a beautiful Tower to this Church, 
and a new Ring of eight Bells. I ons 

The Town-houſe is a fine modern Building, ſtand-- 
ing all upon Pillars of Free-ſtone ; the Place under it 
is their T ofſey, or Exchange, for the Meeting of their 


Merchants; but they begin to want more Room, and 


talk of enlarging it, or removing the Exchange to the 
other Part of the Town, where the Ships and Mer- 
chants Buſineſs is nearer at hand. 5 
Here is alſo a good Free- ſchool, well endowed, and 
likewiſe a very noble Charity-ſchool, which was built, 
and is ſupported, by the generous Contributions of the 
Inhabitants, for 50 Boys and 12 Girls, who are main- 


| tained with Cloaths, Meat, and Lodging, and have 


proper Education beſtowed upon them. | 

Here are alſo ſeveral Alms-houſes for the Support 
of Sailors Widows, and other old and indigent Peo- 
ple: and fince the Year 1730. a Wo k-houſe for 
the Poor has alſo been erected, which, by good Ma- 
nagement, has reduced the Poors Rate from two 
dhillings in the Pound to Ten-pence ; and they made 
no Doubt, when I was there laſt, that in a Year or 
two it would be brought under Six-pence in the 
Pound, oo 

It is a Corporate Town, governed by a Mayor 
and Aldermen ; and ſends two Members to Parlia- 
ment. "The Harbour is defended on the South Side 
by a Caftle, and the Weſt by a Tower on the River 
Mer ſee. | TP | 

In a Word, there is no Town in England, except 
London, that can equal Liverpoole for the Fineneſs of 
the Streets, and Beauty of the Buildings. Many of 


the Houſes are built of Free-ſtone, and completely 


M2: fauiſhed ; 


rington. 


246 A TOUR r Lane, 
finiſhed; and all the reſt (of the new Part I mean) of 


Brick, as handſomely built as London itſelf. 


Formerly Liverpoole was but indifferently ſupplied 


with freſh Water; but they have been for many Years 


well accommodated in that reſpect, by virtue of an 
Act of Parliament paſſed for that Purpoſe, in the 
eighth Year of the Reign of her late Majeſty Queen 
Anne. 2 „ el = 
I ſhall only add, that ſome of the Streets are named 
from their Relation to the Family of the Mores of 
Blank-hall, formerly chief Lords and Owners of the 
greateſt Part of Liverpoole, and who firſt began to 
beautify and adorn it with fine Stone Buildings, 
From hence the Merſee opening into the [ri/þ Sea, 
we could fee the great and famous Road of Hile. 
Late, remarkable for the Shipping off, or rather Ren- 
dezvous of the Army and Fleet under King William, 


for the Conqueſt of Ireland, Anna 1689. for here the 


Men of War rode as our Ships do in the Downs, till 
the Tranſports came to them from Cheſter, and this 


I *Fown. 


Going Eaſt, we paſſed through Preſcot, a large 
Market-town, but thinly inhabited; and came to ar- 
This is a large old-built Market-town, upon the 
River Merſee, over which is erected a ſtately Stone 
Bridge, which is the only Bridge of Communication 
for the whole County with that of Cheſter. It is on 
the great Road from London leading to Carliſle and 
Scotland, and, in caſe of War, has always been 


_ eſteemed a'Paſs of the utmoſt Importance. It was 
found to be fo upon ſeveral Occaſions in the Time of 


the Civil War; and had the Rebel Scots advanced 


thus far in the Pre/fon Affair in 1715. ſo as to have 


made themſelves Maſters of it, it would have proved 
ſo again. Of this Earl Cholmondeley was well aſſured, 
when the Pretender came into England in the Year 
1745. and, as Lord Lieutenant of Cheſbire, in order 


˖0 


London twice a- Week by the Stages. 


Lance. GREAT BRITAIN, 247 


to ſtop the Progreſs of the Rebels, he cauſed this 
Bridge to be pulled down, which in all Probability 
ſaved the rich Town of /Farrington from being plun- 
dered by the Highlanders, who, on receiving. Intel- 


ligence of what had been done, altered their Route, 
and got into Cheſhire by the way of Mancheſter. 


Ilarrington is a large and fair Market town, having 


in it many Houſes, built in modern Taſte, it gave 
Title of Earl. to. the late George Booth, who having no 
Male Heir, has lately left a prodigious large Eſtate to 


his Daughter, now the Counteſs of Stamford. The. 


Town contains two Churches, with a Diſſenting and 
a Romiſb Chapel, beſides Meeting-houſes for Quakers, 


Anabaptiſts, and Methodiſts, who leave the beaten 


Track, and preach up a new Road to'Salvation. To 
theſe Buildings may be added one not yet finiſhed, v2z. 
an Academy for the Improvement of Youth, and pre- 
paring them. for Trade and Merchandize. The River 
Merſes runs cloſe by the Side of this Town, and parts 
Cheſhire from Lancaſhire, in its Courſe to Liverpoole, 
where it enters the Sea, Near to Warrrington are 


caught great Quantities of fine Salmon and Smelts, 


uncommonly large, which in the Spring are ſent to 
By Wears 
and Locks this River is made navigable up to Man- 
cheſter, to and from which Place much Merchandize 
is carried in Barges of about thirty Tons Burthen. On 
its Banks are {ar "6, Gunpowder-mills, Oil- 


mills, Iron Forges, and Slitting-mills. In the Town 


of Warrington, and Villages around it, Sail- cloth for 


the Royal Navy is made, to the Amount of about 


50,000 J. per Annum; in which, and other coarſe 


Linens, *tis computed that the Warehouſe- men of 
this Town employ 10,000 Perſons, Here are Cop- 


per-works, Sugar-houſes, and Glaſs- houſes, which 
furniſh the Induſtrious with the Means of living com- 
fortably. Pins are here made, and Malt, remarkable 
tor furniſhing the Country with good Ale. Two Fairs 

Os = for 


r 
e 


n 


r 


n 


N. ng =o 22 A 2. 
me 
COOLS DO Ono ER HE Eb eee 
Re Et rows OCALA BAL EY HOWE,» 
" wt, _— — l 


4 
= 
28 | 
4 : 
* 
Bl C 
A > 
118 
£ 8 
1 
A 2 
1 
a XÞ 
£7 
+& 4 
F. 
283 
1 
22 2 
12 
I * 
7 
18 K 
* 5 
LS 4 
n 
RP 
ho Wo 
A} 7 
8 
* A 
3 
4 
* 
8 , 
BJ + 
8 
1 
* 
1 
3 , 
- oo a 
7 | 
= 
TR 2 
4} 
* 
2 
1 2 
wy. 8 
* 
v 8 
= 4 
- -£ 
3 of 
; 
b þ 
J..- 4] 
Ts 
* 
1 
* 
E. 
2 
b # A 
Pp 
25 
. 388 
kJ 
7 - 
* 
2 
2 
> 
7 
2 
bh 
1 
25 
5 
+ > 
$ 
"i 
4 
- 
bs 
"2s; 
1 
* 
12 
4 
& 


bu ; * c 4 g 
vu 5 , 22 by D - A * . * 1 
SD Tee 7 2 — hy eee 4g 2 22 — — — p 5 1 9 _ — CE for” Wy} r . o m"_—_ N 4 1 
. — po IJ —:: · . 2 224, OS Fat wrt NOR — 50 e eee a 
8 - p k : a 
* « A — oy > - = 3 -- * 2 rg * * — 7 
i eta * ; , a r r o ent 2 — So Rn 
* 7 2 2 5 bs Y - 2 -4 wan” > . 1 1 Na -2 « - . . 2 : 
. 8 — n 2 woo — * 8 a * . - ITS * we 5 
— be rr 6 0 men Rr S's _» - - > * a £ £ x 
4 2 — * CEE IS bas Sep ad *- 5 a9t}” OA, oe OE ITN) — 2 n * * " \ 
p * 
. 
„ 
* 
* 4 ” 
* 
; 


6 8 
* 
re 
" 


AF - rr 
* e Manik 
. nn 
— —— 2 —— 
bn FE . 


248 A TOUR thro Lane, 
for all ſorts of Cattle, Woolen ManufaQlures, Ec. are 
annually held, the one beginning on the 18th of Fuly, 
and the other on St. Andrew's Day. The chief Mar- 
ket is on H/ednefday, and abounds with Corn, Cheeſe, 
and Potatoes, which are here ſold in great Quantities 
for Exportation. Thomas Patten, Eſq; the Proprietor 
of the Copper-works, has built at the End of the 
Town, in an elegant Taſte, a ſtately Dwelling-houſe, 
the Foundation of which is made with the Pros of 
Copper. . 3 
Near the Town is a Village called J:nwick, the 
Rectory of which is in the Gift of the Earl Derh, 


and yields about 1500 J. per Annum to the Poſſeſſor, 
now Dr, Stanley, 


From hence, on the Road to Mancheſter, we paſſed 
the great Bog or Waſte, called Chat-moſs, the firſt of 
that Kind that we ſaw in England, from any of the 


South Parts hither. It extends on the Left-Side of 


the Road for five or ſix Miles Eaſt and Wet, and they 
told us it was, in ſome Places, ſeven or eight Miles 


from North to South. "There are many of theſe Mofles 


in this County: Take this for a Deſcription of all the 


reſt. 


The Surface, at a Diſtance, looks black and dirty, 


and is indeed frightful to think of; for it will bear 


neither Horſe nor Man, unleſs in an exceeding dry 
Seaſon, and then ſo as not to be traveled over with 


© NID | 


The Surface ſeems to be a Collection of the ſmal] 
Roots of innumerable Vegetables matted together, 
interwoven fo thick, as well the larger Roots as the 
ſmaller Fibres, that it makes a Subſtance hard enough 
to cut out into Turf or Peat, which, in ſome Places, 
= * pile up in the Sun, and dry for their 

uel. „ IO 

Under the Moſs, or rather in the very Body of it, 
and not here only, but in ſeveral like Places (perhaps 
in all of them), thoſe antient Fur-trees are re 

= | which, 


Lanc. GREAT BRITAIN. 249 
which are ſo unaccountable, that much Learning has 
been ſhewn to very little Purpoſe on this Subject; 


for, after all, whatever has been ſaid, muſt be mere 


Conjecture, 5 | 


. 
„ 


From hence we came on to Mancheſter, one of the 


greateſt, if not really the greateſt mere Village in Eng- 
land. It is neither a Town, City, nor Corporation, 
nor ſends Members to Parliament; but is a Manor, 
with Courts Leet and Baron. The higheſt Magiſtrate 
is a Conſtable, or Headborough; and yet it has a Col- 


legiate Church, takes up a large Space of Ground, and, 


including the Suburbs, or that Part of the Town on 
the other Side of the Bridge, it is ſaid to contain above 
50,000 People. „„ + 
Here, as at Liverpoole, the Town is extended in a 
ſurpriſing Manner ; many new-built Streets are added, 
as alſo a new Church, dedicated to St. Inne; by which 
means the Town is almoſt double to what it was ſome 
Fears ago. Neither York, Lincoln, Chefler, Saliſbury, 
Winchefter, Worceſter, Glouceſter, nor Norwich itſelf, 
can come up to it; and for leſſer Cities, two or three 


put together would not equal it, ſuch as Peterborvugh, 


Eh, Carlifle, Wells, Litchfield, &. 5 
There is a Face of great Seriouſneſs, and even of 


Devotion, kept up at Mancheſter, with Regard eſpe- 


cially to the Obſervation of the Sabbath Day. God 
continue to the Inhabitants of this noble Town their 


Proſperity for the Example they ſer in uch a Shandy-. 


Age as this! 4 3 7 

The Town boaſts of four extraordinary Founda- 
tions, a College, an Hoſpital, a Free- ſchool, and a 
Library, all well ſupported. 


| - The College was the Charity of Thomas Wit, Lord 


Delawar, who, being but the Cadet ot the Family, 
was bred a Scholar, took Orders, and became Rector 
of the Pariſh, which he enjoyed many Years : but, by 


the Deceaſe of his elder Brother without Heirs, ſuc- 


cceding to his Honours and Eſtate, he founded the 


M's College 


4 4 
L 
U 
1 
M$ 
} 
T4 
22 = 
} 4 
n = : 
7 "765 
„ 
A * 
> % 
4 
z » 


1 
; 
| 
| 


on 

; 1 

IS 
** 1 
11 

— 

1 


— 


pet 2 2 2 2 3 2 
— n —" — * * * 
r —. — 2 wt = — 


: + 
1 
&Q * 
1 7 53 
: $ 
J 
% $53) 
1 
£ TS 
4 ns] 
T; £6049 
188 
: * 
1 
9198 
x: 8 
1 * 
1. A 
7 'Þ 
84 
* > nf 
- . 
> 3 
F x 
1 
. 
x 4 1 
* * P 
41Y 
* * 
1 
3 
bly - CS 
! 0" 
3 
\ 1 
* * 
Bis - 
Es © 
2 > WG 
i 
1 
o 7 3 
— 2 
4. 
-. af 
Wb 
1 
* Bs 
SY 
4 
N by 
. 
* a 
$4 3 
1 
1 1 
« 4 
LY 
74 
1 
h 
1 
1 
K 
4a 
A* 
2 
3 1 
55 


1, 5 
S Ar rr eo 


— 7 
5 =_ 4 l 
4 
i 3 nl as 4 8 33 
— — — * * 5 Plant? * up * . «LA 5 Pa — 
5 0 ” oy — . * N 4 * . hs x ne 8 nous nnn * 3" 
ye % Ms = S< N — * * 4 1 * 33 * 8 2. 4 F r by pa * 
— . . 2 bn - : r e 28 7 773 — on yo <7 — oo 6 . 3 2 — n 2 5 4 — 5 8 1 

1 = ” * ih 1 - * 2 0 1 N my - FEW 4 — - . * n ——, — 5 

0 Wd a —— — *" ep EW nfs 42> "Eh W — path . A . - 5 1 as x97 mo” Mon be Os _—_— 2 bo 1 A . yy tl 

* 1 : i ra * * * : q * 7 bs, r N Rab eee * A. 

— . TTT eee r n * n 
- phe 3 — AY 2 O — . 932% 3 bs Sa ofa 2 3 
"Is 3 V ” . FA — n l * * 

K 2 2 0g - 


— - — Ten 
— . 
* 4 
<a" 7, —_—— — 
- — — 


250 AT O UR thro. Lane, ©. 
College i in the Year 1421. The Pope, in Conſidera- 


tion that the Family was likely to be extinct, is faid to 
have allowed him to marry, on his performing fo be. 


neficial a Penance, It was dedicated to the Virgin 
Mary, and the two Patron Saints of France and Ex- 
land, St. Denys and St. George. 

This Foundation eſcaping the general Ruin, under 
Henry VIII. was diſſolved 1547. in the firſt Year of 
King Edward VI. After this, it was refounded by 
Queen _ ; and then anew by Queen Elizabeth, 
Anno 1578. by the Name of Chriſ's Church in Man- 
chejter ; and aft of all it was refounded by King 
Charles I. Anno 1636. conſiſting then of one Warden, 
four Fellows, two Chaplains, four Singing men, and 
four Choriſters ; he incorporating them, as they were 
by Queen Elizabeth, by the Name of the Wardens 
id Fellows of Chi it's Church in Mancheſter, the 


Statutes ſor the ſame being drawn up by minim 


Laud. : 

The Viſitor. of the Collegiate Church is the Biſhop 
of Cbeſter; and his Majeſty King George I. having 
made Dr. Perloe Biſhop ol Cheer: who at the ſame 
time was Warden of the Church, the Viſitatorial Power 


and the Wardenſhip being incompatible, an Act paſſed 
Anne 1729. impowering his Mijefty to be the Viſitor, 


whenſoever the Warden of Mancheſter happens to be 
Biſhop of Cheer. 
The Hoſpital was founded by Humphrey Chetham, 


Eq; and incorporated by King Charles II. deſigned 
dy the ſaid bountiful Beben hr for the Maintenance 


of 40 poor Boys out of the Town and Pariſh of Man- 
cheſter, and ſome other neighbouring Pariſhes; but it 
is enlarged ſince to the Number of 60, by the Go- 
vernors of the Hoſpital, who have improved the Re- 


venues of it. 


The ſaid Founder alfo creed a very fair abs ſpa- 
cious Library, which is furniſhed with a competent 
anneal * choice and * OY and daily 1 iz creaſ· 

ing, 


Lanc. GREAT BRITAIN. 
ing, with the Income of 116 J. per Aun. ſettled to buy 


Books for ever, and to afford a competent Salary for 


a Library-keeper. There is alſo a large School for the 


Hoſpital-boys, where they are daily inftruQed, and 
taught to read and write. 


The public School was founded, 4. D. 1 51 9. by 
Hugh Oldham, D. D. Biſhop of re- ; and the 


— left by him are, of late, very much in- 


creaſed, and the School has been ſuitably oy 


from them. 


Befides theſe public Benefactions and Endowments: 
there have been ſeveral. other conſiderable Sums of 
Money, and annual Revenues, left and bequeathed to 


the Poor of the ſaid Town, who are thereby, with 


the Kindneſs and Charity of the preſent Inhabitants, 
competently provided tor, without ſtarving at Home, 
or being forced to ſeek Relief Abroad, 

A tor the Antiquity of the Place, it is the Man- 
cunium of the Romans ; and what is now called Knock- 
caſtle, was the Site of the Roman Ca/trum. Many 
Antiquities have been found here. The Foundation 
of the Cattle. wall and Ditch till remain in Ca/tle- 

eld as ſometime called. 

The new Church I have mentioned, 


about the Year 1723. by voluntary Sub'criptions : the 


Choir is Alcove-faſhion, and the Pilaſters painted for 


Lapis Lazu i Colour. The old Church is very large, 


and has three Rows of neat Pillars. 
But ſuch was the Increaſe of Buildings, and Inha- | 
bitants employed in Trade and Commerce at Man- 


cheſter, that in a very few Years it became much more 
populous than when the Jaſt Act was made; fo that 
the ſaid two Churches could not contain the Inhabit-- 
ants of the ſaid Town, proſeſſing the DoErine of the 
Church of England: it was thought neceſſary there- 
fore, that one 3 Church ſhould be erected in ſome 
convenient Flace within the faid Town. Accordingly, 


an Act paſſed in the Year 17 53 intitled, An ei for. 
M 


5 uilding 


251 


was finiſhed 


Vids — — — 


— 


he 


— 


” 
ECL oa ain SYS; __ 0 at. * - Pr 
oa . ² nh a eo —_ 9 .... d ˙ A ²˙ ! 
— NN n * wu . r 8 e, 2 
_ 2 jj2%FF.üüü ˙ àꝛA peo Tg Lie ; . CS IM. 
* — + as — 

. 

— 


* eas 
— 9m: 5 
N 
. a 


— 


* 
n 
: 


Dr ut 


bY: 
173 
8 
q 
1 
. 
Ts 
* 
** 
2 
q 1 
; 
3&4 
l 
1 
1 
- 
1 
0 
& 
A" 
+ 84 
5 


— 
7 


Ki 
$5 
* 
* 
77 "2 
14 8 
1 
1 
1 
5 
5 L. 
3 y 
5 77 
5 
> [3 
* : 5 
; by 
4 * 
* 
iy 4 
5-6 
a 3 
FY -| 
Ws | 
194 
3 
x 3 
. WI 
1 
N 
by : + m8 
_ 
© . 
£ : al 
1784 
FEST 
4 
1 
WY + 
{ * 
2 * 
I. n 
[ 3 
LS 
4 wa 
: 3.4; Þ 
SS. 
7.8 
8 
3 
#1 
FEY | 
by = 
- 
N 9 
. 148 
Ay = 
: 1 
2 . 
7 
>| l 
* 
2 
[ 
« 
* N 
$I; © 
K-33 4 
3 
1 : 
.. 
3 
TE 
8 
* 2-8 
Broth * 
oY 
2 
1 
$35 
OY 
1 
8-H 
*: 
1 
5+: 
#24 1 
WE: 
EM 
3 
I-41 
+; 3. 
6 4; WM 
* 
2 
1 
1 } 
127 
„ 
$ V's 
ö FY 
5% +400] 
i [ 
$22 
R 
E. fl 
* 90 
be +. 
AEST. 
6% 
n 
1 
83 
1 
7 I On 
7: 
4 
1 
= 
57 
i 
i 
'F 
773 
+ 
5 
wy 
[2 
42 
2H 
i 
[1 


1 
1 
Wo 
e 
= - 
£2 
* 
. 
| 
} 
l 
AS 


252 ATOUR thro Lanc. 


Building a New Church within the Town of Mancheſ. | | 


ter, in the County Palatine of Lancaſter. 


They have Looms that work 24 Laces at a time, 
an Invention they borrowed from the Dutch. For 
the Space of three Miles upwards, they have no leſs 
than bo Water-mills. The Town ftands chiefly on 


aà Rock, at the Confluence of the Rivers Iræ and Jr. 


ell, over the latter of which it has a large Bridge; 
and acroſs the River Irwell, the large Town, as it 
may be ſtiled, is named Salthorp, or, as ſome call it, 
A 5 e 
The Antiquity of the Manufacture is, indeed, 
worth taking notice of, which, tho* we cannot trace 
it by Hiſtory, we have Reaſon to believe began ſome- 
thing earlier than the Woollen Manufactures in other 
Parts of England; becauſe the Cotton itſelf might 
come from the Mediterranean, and be known by 
Correſpondents in thoſe Countries, when that of Wool 
was not puſhed at, becauſe our Neighbours wrought 
the Goods; and though they bought the Wool from 


England, yet we did not want the Goods : whereas, 


without making the Cotton Goods at Home, our 
People could not have them at all; and that Neceſſi- 
ty, which is the Mother of Invention, might put them 
upon this; and, without ſuch Neceſſity, Ignorance and 
Poverty prevented the other. 
 Hanchefter, for the Induſtry of its Inhabitants, is 
often compared by Travellers to the moſt induftrious 
Towns of Holland; the ſmalleſt Children being all 
employed, and earning their Bread. Beſides the Cot- 
ton Manufactures, they deal in Buttons, Fillettings, 
Checks, and all Kinds of Small Wares, as they are 
called ; vaſt Quantities of which they export abroad, 


to the Veſt Indies particularly. 


The River Irwell runs cloſe by Manchefler, and 
receives the little River 7r4 juſt above on the North 


and North-eaſt Side. There is a very firm, but an- 


tient Stone Bridge over the /rwell, which is built ex- 
Fi | ä 


4 


increaſing, 


Lanc. GREAT BRITAIN. 


et coming from the mountainous Part of the Coun - 
try, ſwells ſometimes ſo ſuddenly, that in one Night's- 
time they told me the Waters would frequently riſe 


four or five Vards, and the next Day fall as haſtily as 


they roſe. 75 | 
About eight Miles from Mancheſter, North-weſt, 


lies Bolton. It is, and has been long, eſteemed the 


great Staple of Fuſtians. We ſaw nothing remarka- 


ble in it, but that the Cotton Manufacture reached 


o 


hither, tho' the Place did not, like Manchęſter, ſeem 
Here the old Earl of Derby was beheaded, Oct. 15. 
i651. for proclaiming King Charles II. 5 

We turned Eaſt, and came to Bury, a ſmall Mar- 
ket- town on the River Roch, which is the utmoſt 
Bound of the Cotton Manufacture, which flouriſhes ſo 
well at AZanchefler, &c. 


nufacture of coarſe Sorts, called Half-thicks and Ker- 


fes, begins, which employs this, and all the Villages 


about it. | 8 
From thence we went to Rochdale, a Market town 


of good Traffick, a larger and more populous Town 


than Bury; it lies under the Hills called Blackfone- 


Edge; which having mentioned, at my Entrance 


this Way into Yorkſhire, I muſt now go back again to 
the Sea-coaſt ; for I took my Courſe that Way up to 


' Prefton and Lancaſter in this Journey, having traveled 


thus far from Liverpoole, in my former Journey to 
Halifax, &c. 


Coln, which lie juſt under the Mountains; and like- 


wiſe Blackburn and Clithero, a little Weſt of them: all 
which being merely Market-towns, and of no other 
Note, I ſhall ſay no more of them, other than that 


Ciithero ſtands upon the Ribble, and is the moſt con- 
| e | ſiderable 


253 
ceeding high, becauſe this River, though not great, 


And here the Woolen Ma- 


But muſt firſt obſerve, that there are 
on this Eaſtern Side of the County, Northward of 
| Rochdale, the Towns of Haſlington, Burnley, and 


(ne SER 


r 


Wa Ag SER oe at eee Ae on oO» 
. 2 of ng : e eee e ee e OE 
. j 5 
Fon CSI —_— 


— 
— 


= HA TOU R Aro! Labs 


fiderable, ſending two Members to Parliament ; and 


that at Coln and Burnley have been diſcovered a great 


many Roman Coins. 


I take //7gan firſt, in my Way back to the Sea- 


coaſt : it lies on the high Poſt-road to Lanca/ter, 


This Town has a good Market, and is noted for its 


Manufacture in Coverlets, Rugs, Blankets, and other 
Sort of Bedding Furniture; and likewiſe for Pit-coal, 
and Iron-work. It is 20 meaſured Miles from Man- 
chefler. We are now in a Country where the Roads 


at paved with ſmall Pebbles, ſo that we both walk 


and ride upon this Pavement, which is generally about 
a Yard and halt broad. But the middle Road, where 


Carriages are obliged to go, is very bad. This Town 


returns two Members to Parliament. Tt is neat and 
well-built. 


Between Wigan and Bolton, particularly on the Eſ- 


tate of Sir Roger Bradſbaigb, Bart. is found great Plenty 
of what they call Cane! or Candl. Cal, the like of which 
is not to be ſeen perhaps in the World. By putting a 
lighted Candle to them, they ate preſently in a Flame, 
and yet hold Fire as long as any Coals whatever, and 
burn more or leſs as they are placed in the Grate flat 


or edgewiſe. They are ſmooth and flrek, when the 


Pieces part from one another,” and will poliſh like 
Alabaſter. A Lady may take them up in a Cambrick 
Handkerchief, and they will not ſoil it, tho' they are 
as black as the deepeſt Jet. They make many cu ious 


Toys of them, as >nuff boxes, Nutmeg- boxes, Cen- 
dleſticks, Salts, &c. but it ſo hardens when dug, and 


brought into the Air, that it cannot be worked into 


theſe Toys but on or near the Spot. This Coal is the 


moſt pleaſant and agreeable Fuel that can be found; 
but it is ſo remote from London, that the Carriage 
makes it too dear for common Uſe. We ſaw ſome 
of this Sort of Coal at Harrington too; but all from 
the ſame Fits . | 


1 muſt 


. * 
— 
8 


PVC 
OT 8 >* 


uU 
* 
. 
NAGA. ack os bd 
n 


Lanc- GREAT BRITAINNV. 257 
I muſt not paſs over the Burning-Well, as it is call- 
ed, near Wigan; the Account of which take in the 
Words of Mr. Camden's Continuato : 7 50 
Within a Mile and an half of Vigan is a Well, 
© which does not appear to be à Spring, but rather 
© Rain-water, at firſt Sight. There is nothing about 
« it that ſeems extraordinary; but, upon emptying 
© it, there preſently breaks out a ſulphureous Va- 
© pour, which makes the Water bubble up as if it 
\ 3 © boiled; a Candle being put to it, it preſently. takes 
Fire, and burns like Brandy; the Flame in a calm 
« Seaſon will continue a whole Day; by the Heat 
© whereof they can boil, Eggs, Meat, &c. though the 
© Water itſelf be cold. By the Bubbling the Water 
does not increaſe, but is only kept in Motion by the 
« ſudden Halitus of the Vapours breaking out. The 
BW © fame Water, taken out of the Well, will not burn; 
7 © as neither the Mud upon which the Halitus has 
] Heat” e 5347 C9 LO | 
Dt. Leigh, in his Natural Hiſtory of Lancaſhire, 
not only deſcribes it, but accounts very judiciouſſy for 


FF 


— — * 
— r 


1 
. Pg 
1 
. 
17 
4 
1 
1 
1 
8 . 
« ih 
ny 1 
$*? 


— TT. = 2 = 
f 


7 

" thing itſelf, and by it for the Warmth of all hot 

2 On the ſame Road, a little South, ſtands Newton, 

0 which bad once a Market, but is now diſuſed; tho! 

c it returns two Members to Parliament. It is noted for 

t a very eminent Charity ſchool, founded in 1907. by 

$ one Hornby, a Yeoman of the ſame Place. The poorer 

- "WH Sort of Children are taught to read, write, and caſt - 


£ Accounts, and have Dinners every School day beſides, 
0 There are alſo ten Boys and ten Girls, who lodge in 
e an Hoſpital contiguous to the Schooh where they are 
; provided with all other Neceſſar es till 14 Years old. 
e The Fund for this Charity was 20001. a large Sum 
e for a Yeoman to give! ITED 5 
n From hence we paſſed to Ormſtirt Weſt, towards 
the Sea coaſt. It is a Market town that his a good 
i WW inland Trade; yet is in a leſs flouriſhing —_— 
N ZE, | an 


e 


5. 
- +. 


nes A4 TOUR tu: lane. 


than any of the reſt. Nothing could bid fairer to im. 


prove it, ſays an ingenious Gentleman, than open- 
ing a Port upon ſome little Bay of the Sea in the midſt 
of the Coaſt between the Rivers Ribb/e and Merſee, 
and making a good Road from thence to Ormſtirt 
which, with all the adjacent Diſtrict, would ſoon feel 
the Benefit of ſuch an Indulgence ; and either by the 
Invention of new, to which this would be the greateſt 
Encouragement, or the Extenſion of old Manufac. 


+ tures, largely repay the neceſſary Diſburſements, to 


whatever they might amount, that ſuch .a Work 
would require. This would complete the Felicity of 
that Part of the Country, which, in its prefent Con- 


dition, is wonderfully rich r e in Compa- 
5 „ 


riſon of what it was in former Times. 


We ſaw nothing remarkable at Ormſtiri, but the 


Monuments of ſome of the antient Family of the Stan- 
leys, before they were ennobled. And here they ſtill 

continue to bury the Family, whoſe Seat is called La- 
tham, not far from this. 8 to which belongs a 
large Eſtate, and a fine Parx. Latham: houſe is noted 
for having been gallantly defended in the Civil Wars 
by a Woman, the Lady Charlotte, Counteſs of Derly, 
who held it to the laſt Extremity againſt the Parlia- 
ment-Forces, which could never reduce her to capi- 


tulate; but kept the Place gloriouſly, till ſhe was re- 


lieved by Prince Rupert. It was, however, ruined in 
a ſecond Siege; and is fold out of the Family, and was 
in Poſſeſſion of the late Sir Thomas Bootle, Knt. who 


was building a magnificent Houſe there, when I Was 


on the Spot. 


Fernby, a Village, lies near the Son Gde.- in the 


marſhy Grounds, where they dig Turf, that ſerves 


both for Fire and Candle. Theſe marſhy Grounds ex- 


tend a great Way North, beyond Eccleſton, and almoſt 

up to Preſton. On the Edge of it Eaſtward is Mar- 
ton Mere, which has been very large; but much of it 
7 now drained, N V 


* * 
 & £2 3 4 8 4 : & 7) <- þ 1 
1 8 Ecclaſten 
« 4.5 : . . 


— — > + om, eo. fb. B ²˙ Q os. EL 78 


„ x t * * 


> C0 


„ oe» © 0 


Lance. GREAT BRITAIN, 257 
Eccleſton is a Market-town,. where nothing remark- 
able is to be ſeen : nor at Charley, a Town which lies 


a little North- eaſt of it. | 

Preſton ſtands next, a corporate Mayor Town, 
having three weekly Markets, well ſupplied and fre- 
quented. It is a large fine Town, ſituated on the 
Ribble : it is pretty full of People, but not like Liver- 


prole or Manchęſter; for we now come beyond the 


trading Part of the County. It received its firſt 
Charter from King Henry II. But though there is no 


% 


Manufacture, the Town, being honoured with the 
Court of Chancery, and the Officers of Juſtice for 
Lancaſter, is full of Gentlemen, Attorneys, Proctors, - 
and Notaries, the Proceſs of Law being here of a 
different Nature from that in other Places, by reaſon - 


that it is a Duchy and County Palatine, and has par- 


ticular Privileges of its own. It ſends two Members to 


Parliament. The People are gay here, tho' not per- 
haps the richer for that; but it has, on this Account, 
obtained the Name of Proud Preſton, 


The deciſive. Blow that was given here to the Re- 


bellion in 1715. is too well known to be mentioned 
in this Place. e | 


The great Street is filled with good Houſes, and is 
very broad. The Houſe of the preſent Earl of Derby 


makes a noble Apperance to the Street; and in gene- 
ral the Houſes are very well built. To this Town 


the Gentry reſort in Winter for many Miles round; 


and here are, during that Seaſon, Aſſemblies, Balls, 
Cc. in the ſame manner as at York, „ 
The Approach of this Town from the London Road 


is very narrow, and the Hollow Way, which is up- | 


wards of a Mile in Length from the Bridge to the 
Town, renders it almoſt impracticable to be forced, 


were the Paſs of the Bridge, and this Hollow Way, 


defended by Art, in any Proportion to the natural 


dtrength of them; and yet, in both the late Rebel- 


lions, this Place was not diſputed by the Rebels * 


n 


1 
* 4 * 
"Xx 5 ” ne * irn 
WAR a ABS cr — e com ny ; $M. dt ie eres att: SO. ee Se 22 — n J 

al . . = 1 2 — - * 4 
8 „ _ k 5 — — — A : 

. b ye l — —2 . — > 

ho 2 08 e D 1 * Fe =o N 

n 


ro nt 


eee 3 ** 
ee ee eee e 
e 
7 2 1 2 7 


— 


f 
* 
1415 
7 54.8 
n 
819 
1 
1 
W/E 
yt 1 
$ 7% 
3 
1 1 
L. 
* 4 
2 74 
* 
4 4 
i 
- 14 
7 
1 
. 
1 
£ 


© 


. SH 

ans _AOTOUR mr Lane, 
the leaſt Courage; for it has. been aſſerted by ſeveral 
military Gentlemen, who have well conſidered the 
Situation of this Town, that 500 Men, properly diſ- 
poſed, would defend it againſt ooo. 

The Fords through the River Ribble, between this 

Townſhip, and that of Penwortham, being, by reaſon 
of great Freſhes and Tides, become very dangerous to 
Paſſengers, and ſeveral Perſons having loſt their Lives 
in endeavouring to paſs them; an Act was paſſed in 
the Seſſion of 1750-1. for Building a Bridge over that 
River, between the/Townſhips of reſton and Penwor— 
tham, near a Place called the Fiſh-houſe, in the County 
Palatine of Lancaſter. N 
Not far from Prefion is Ribblecheſter, commonly 
called Ribcheſter, ſuppoſed to be the Rigodunum of the 
Antients ; a Town which, in its flouriſhing State, was 
{aid to be the richeſt in Chriſtendom. So many Pieces 
of Antiquity have been dug up in its Neighbourhood, 
that it was moſt probably a Place of great Importance 
among the antient Romans. ok 5 
Between the Ribble, and a little River ſome Miles 
South of Lancaſter, the Land elbows out, in the Form 
of a Semicircle, into the Sea; and this Tract they 
call the Field lands, in which is a fmall Market- town, 
called Kirkbam ; only remarkable for a good Free- 
ſchool, which has three Maſters. | 

. Poulton is another Market-town in the ſame Tract, 
very convenient in its Situation for Trade, being near 

the Mouth of the River Hire. We followed the 


Poſt-road, and paſſed through Gar/tang, which ftands | 
upon it, about Midway between Preſton and Lancaſter, 


and is of no other Note than having a Market; and 
ſo leaving Wireſdale Foreſt on our Right, we arrived 


Lancaſter, the County-Town, fituate near the 
Mouth of the River Lone, or Lune. The Town 1s 
 antient, neat, and handſome 3 but its Port is _ 
| 22 585 ed, 


1 


een 


Lane. GREAT BrITAIn. 259 


ed, and incapable of receiving Ships of any conſidera- 


ble Burden. The Bridge has five Arches, and is hand- 


ſome and ſtrong ; but here is little or no Trade, and 


few People. Of late there is an handſome Square of 


neat Buildings near the Caſtile ; which is well inhabit- 
ed, and ſtands very airy and pleaſant ; having a fine 
Proſpect of the adjoining Meadows and the River on 
one Side; and on the other, the Port. 


The Caſtle of Lancaſter is now the County-Gaol, 


and the Aſſizes are held in it. The Town has only | 


one Pariſh-church, which is fair and ſpacious. 
Upon the Top of the Caſtle, at one Corner, is a 
ſquare Tower, called John of Gaunt's Chair; from 


| whence we have a charming Proſpect of the adjacent 


Country, and the Courſe of the River Lone; but more 
eſpecially towards the Sea, where you have an exten- 
ſive View even to the /e of Man. „ 
Lancaſter was incorporated by King John; and 
was burnt by the Scots, in a ſudden Inroad in the 


by 1322. which was in the Reign of King Edward 


It is governed by a Mayor, Sc. to whom Ediu. III. 
granted the Privilege, That Pleas and Seſſions in the 
County ſhould be held no-where but at Lancaſter. 


It is the Longovicum of the Romans, who have had a 


Station here. On the ſteepeſt Side of the Hill below 


| the Church hangs a Piece of a Roman Wall called 


Mery wall, derived, as Camden thinks, from the Bri- 
ti Word Caerwirdd, a green City, from the Verdure 


of the Hills. Lancaſter ſends two Members to Par- 


Hanen t! 4 | | | 
As we came along the Sea- ſide, we obſerved a Kind 
and Wings black. | 55 8 
The Editors of this preſent Edition have been fa- 
voured with the following curious Deſcription of an 
extraordinary Cave in theſe Parts; with a Copy of 


of ſtrange Crows, whoſe Bodies are blue, and Heads 


which 


1 


%  ATOUR ro Late. 
which we ſhall oblige our Readers. The ingenious 


Writer dates from Lancaſter, Auguſt 26. 1760. 


K K „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „„ „ „„ „ „ „ 


© Laſt Sunday, ſays he, I viſited a Cavern, about 
ſive Miles from hence, near the Road to K:rby-Lon/- 
dale, called Dunald Mill. Hole, a Curioſity I think 


inferior to none of the Kind in Derbyſbire, which I 
have alſo ſeen. It is on the Middle of a large Com- 


mon, and we are led to it by a Brook, near as big 
as the New River; which, after turning a Corn- 
Mill juſt at the Entrance of the Cave, runs in at its 
Mouth by ſeveral beautiful Caſcades, continuing its 
Courſe two Miles under a Jarge Mountain, and at 
laſt makes its Appearance again near Carnford, a 
Village in the Road to Kenda!. The Entrance of 
this ſubterraneous Channel has ſomething moſt plea- 
ſingly horrible in it ; from the Mill at the Top you 


deſcend for about ten Yards perpendicular, by Means 


of Chinks in the Rocks, and Shrubs of Trees ; the 


Road is then almoſt parallel to the Horizon, leading 
to the Right, a little winding, till you have ſome 
hundreds of Yards thick of Rocks and Mineral, 


above you. In this manner we proceeded, ſome- 


times through Vaults ſo capacious, we could not ſee 


either Roof or Sides; and ſometimes on all Four, 
from its Narrownelſs, ſtill following the Brook, which 
entertained us with a Sort of Harmony well ſuiting 
the Place; for the different Height of its Falls were 
as ſo many Keys of Muſic, which all being con- 


veyed to us by the amazing Echo, greatly added to 
the majeſtic Horror which ſurrounded us. In our 
Return we were more particular in our Obſerya- 
tions. The beautiful Lakes (formed by the Brook, 
in the hollow Parts of the Cavern) realize the fabu- 


lous Styx; and the murmuring Falls from one Rock 


to another, broke the Rays of our Candles, ſo as to 
form the moſt romantic Vibrations and Appearances 
upon the variegated. Roof. The Sides too are not 
© leſs remarkable for fine colouring ; the Damps, the 
— „ 6 creeping 


Co Ho -— 


. USE nk a ME LW 


Lane. GREAT BRITAIN. -— .267 


« creeping Vegetables, and the Seams in the Marble, 
and Limeſtone Parts of the Rocks, make as many 
* Tints as are ſeen in the Rainbow, and are covered 
+ with a perpetual Varniſh from the juſt weeping 
Springs that trickle from the Roof. The Curiou 


© in Grottos, Caſcades, &c, might here obtain a juſt | 


« Taſte of Nature. When we arrived at the Mouth, 


and once more hailed all-chearing Day-light, I could 
not but admire the uncouth Manner, in which Na- 


© ture has thrown together thoſe huge Rocks, which 


© compoſe the Arch ever the Entrance; but, as if 
| © conſcious of its Rudeneſs, ſhe has clothed it with 


Trees and Shrubs of the moſt various and beauti- 


© ful Verdure, which bend downwards, and with 
their Leaves cover all the rugged Parts of the Rock. 
As I never met with an Account of this Place in 
© any Author, I therefore think it the greater Curioſi- 
© ty; but its obſcure Situation I take to be the Rea- 


© ſon.” | 
Not far from Lancaſter, at the Foot of an high Hill, 


called Warton Crag (on the Top of which is a Bea- 


con), ſtands an agreeable little obſcure Town named 
Warton, upon the Side of a Lake, where is a good 


 Grammar-ſchool, with Accommodations, and a Li- 
brary for the Benefit of the Maſters ; which, together 


with an Hoſpital for fix poor Men, was founded and 
endowed by Dr. Hutton, then Biſhop of Durham, in 


1594. who was afterwards tranſlated to Vr; which 


certainly muſt have been then a See of very great Va- 
lue, to have induced him to quit Durham for it, not- 
withſtanding its being an Archbiſhoprick, and the 
Title of Grace annexed to its Prelate. Here is alſo a 


very neat- built Church. 


Higher up North, towards the Extremity of the 


County, next JY:ftmerland, is Hornby Caſtle, upon 


the River Lon; which is an excellent Building, the 
Seat of the Lords of Monteagle, a Branch of the 
Stanleys, and ſince of the Parkers, one of whom, 


marrying 


+ 
4 
5 
3: 
1 + 
> * i 
3. ; 
» N 
5 
ES 
2 
* 
7 . 
+ 
LS 
"3" 
1 : 
1 4 
2-3! 
7 at 
3 
1 
4] * 
12 117 
ny: 
* i: 
7) #37 
1 $$ 
* 
2 48 
1 
1. 
Ly 
* 
[ ; 1 
* 1 
1 75 4 
Th A 
1 
8 
- 
Rs -Þ 
1 555 
. 
7 < 
1224348 
n 
4 F 
BY 
3 
24 


# Þ of Fi 
be 
"+" 4 BJ 
1 

3. 
1 Þ 
7 
9 
* 
1 j 
7 f 
Pl 
4 4 
(Tg 
R. 
1 
1 
+ By 
N 
* 
$* * 


i262 A OR _ La 
marrying into that Family, had, in King James I. 
Time, the ſame Title conferred upon him ; and 
it was this Nobleman who diſcovered the Powder. 
plot. o 


Tunis is now in the Poſſeſfon of Mr. Chartres, 


Heir to the late Colonel Chartres, who left his Eſtate 
to his ſecond Grandſon. The Caſtle is built on the 
Summit of the Hill, and the Ground falls away ſo 
ſuddenly on every Side, that there is not the leaſt 
Flat about the Building. 


Tais Part of the County ſeemed very ſtrange and 


diſmal to us (nothing but Mountains in View, and 
Stone Walls for Hedges; ſour Oat-cakes for Bread, 
or Clapt-bread, as it is called), after coming from the 
South Side, which is fo rich and fertile, that it i 
noted for ſhewing the largeſt Breed of Cows and 
Oxen in the Kingdom, whoſe Bulk as well as Horns 
are of ſuch a Magnitude as is very aſtoniſhing ; be- 
ſides their fine ſpotted Deer, which are ſaid to be pe- 
culiar to that Part of the County. - | 


They burn Turf in this County, which made us | 


ſmell a Town at a great Diſtance. _ 

Here, among the Mountains, our Curioſity was 
frequently moved to inquire what high Hill this was, 
or that; and we ſoon were ſaluted with that old Veiſe 
in Camden ; | - a 


Ingleborough, Pendle hill, and Penigent, 
Are the higheſt Hills between Scotland and Trent. 


Indeed they were all, in my Judgment, of a ſtupen- 


dous Height; but in a Country all mountainous, and 
full of high Hills, it was not eaſy for a Traveler to 
judge which was the higheſt, * 
As theſe Hills were lofty, fo they had an Aſpect of 
Terror. Here were no rich pleaſant Valleys between 
them, as among the 7 5 ; no Lead Mines and Veins 
of rich Ore, as in the Peat ; no Coal-pits, as bp” 
| g 


OS ww © ic. mw oa Po om 


z 


3 


Hills about Halifax; but all barren * wild, and of 


no Uſe either to Man or Beaſt. 


But what renders theſe Hills the more e is, 


when great Rains fall in the Winter, the Water 


brings down ſuch Quantities of large Pebbles, as to 


| fill the lower Grounds with them, where they lie in 


the hollow Places many Feet deep. I was informed 
by a Gentleman who has a fine Park near Inglebo- 


- rough- Hill, that he has known upwards of a thouſand 


Loads of theſe Pebbles brought down in one Night; 
the Noiſe of which is frequently heard at the Diſtance 


of eight or ten Miles. 


Indeed here were formerly, as far back as the Fine 
of Queen Elizabeth, ſome Copper Mines, and they 


wrought them to good Advantage; but whether the 
| Vein of Ore failed, or what elſe was the Reaſon, 
I know not, but _ are all given over long ſince, - 


and this Part of the 
all. | 

Weſt of Hornby Caſtle is a conſiderable TraQt of 
Ground, which is Part of this County, and runs 
North, parallel with the Weſt Side of Maſimorland, 
and the Eaft Side of Cumberland, and on the South 


ountry viele little or nothing at 


it runs out in a Promontory into the Sea it is called 


Fourneſs, We paſſed over the Sands into it, which 


are very dangerous, and unpaſlable without Guides, 
who are kept here for that Purpoſe, at the Expence 


of the Government. It contains, beſides Villages, 
four Market-towns, called Cartmel, Dalton, Ulver/- 
ton and Howſhead ; but of no great Note. It is very 
mountainous, and full of Lakes or Meres ; the largeſt 
is Vinander Vers, which makes the utmoſt Northern 


| Bound of this Tract of Ground, as of this Shire. It 


is famous for producing the Charfiſh, ſeldom found, 
unleſs it be at Ulles-water, bordering on //: Amor land, 
and in North Wales, as I have mentioned before. It 
1s a curious Fiſh, and, as a Dainty, is potted, and ſent 
far and near by way of Preſent. It muſt needs be. a 


Lanc. GREAT BRITAIN. 263 


— EEE — " . 
P 1 
N 

— 


n 
* 


r 
. 1 


— - — — 


j 
? 


„ 

93 

2 

9 

1 

. 

2 n 

4 

$ 2: 4 

4 

- £1 : 

13 

. 1 

0 13 

7 

8 

© ; [4 

* 2 

* 

£ ee 

5 4 
* 
bs 

3 
* 
EM i 
4 
71 
4 
72 
1 
«3 * 

.Þ F 
#1 
4 4 

3 
N 
IT | 
I 
421. 

an 

1 

n 

i 

1 

1 7 

i 

= Ki 

"15 
$54 7 
1 
275 EL 

3 

. 

8 7 

2 it 

"LH 

ini 

1 

1 

CAS 

N 1 
** 

, . 

8 
5 
1 

1 9 
75 74 
EE + 
"2% 
W7 
58 

w vt. 
"= 1 
+. 3 I 
= 
4+ 
# . 
ny 
1 
- 3% 
£2 : 

ny! , 

77 
f 1 
n 
1744 
BY 
1 
346 Þ 
1+, 33 
*. 8 
9 
a5 
15S & 
4 A | 
* f 
2-9" MY 
* 
WIE Ir 
9 
, $f * 11 
3 
23S! 7 
. 
: I# £ 
* > ] 
7 1 x 
J. 14 
1 
: 1 * 
* * 
1 

* + * 

1 

1 ji 

3:34 4 

r 

ER] : 

OL 

WT: 2 

7 1 4 
1 

: 4 

's | C GY 

. * 7 1 
$7; 

1 

1 

« C > 7 

' J 

1. 

1 if 
> 
17 i 
45 & 

1 
4 


— — OP 
. — 
1 


22 


9 ns - 
Kere 
1 h t * I x Ivy Ger 

— c 


TS 


on 97 


- * 4 * * * — 
1 J - l Fur 
TTY ” E 


264 4 TOUR thr” a6 


great Rarity, ſince the Quantity they take, even here, 


is but ſmall. Mr. Camden's Continuator calls it very 

happily the Golden Alpine Trout. This Mere is 18 Miles 
in Circumſerence, 10 in Length, and 2 in Diameter; 
and the Bottom is paved, as it were, with one conti- 
nued Rock. | | 9 85 TED 


Between Hornby Caſtle and Ki Aly. Lonſdale, at a 


ſmall Diſtance from the public Road, ſtands Overbo. 
rough, the Seat of Robert Fenwick, Eſq; which was a 


famous Station of Antoninus called Bremetonacum. The | 


Military Way is ſtil] to be traced from Ribche/ter, the 
Rigodunum or Coccium of the Antients, to Bremetona. 
cum, or Querborough. The Houſe is built of Stone, and 
has a regular handſome Front to the Road from Lon 


don. The Park is incloſed with a Stone Wall; and | 


there are ſome noble Plantations made by the Poſſeſ. 
for, which are in as flouriſhing a Condition as any in 
, N 
Lancaſhire, as has been ſaid, is a County Palatine; 
and its principal Town was wont to give Title of 
Duke to a Branch of the Royal F im ; and till 
the two Roſes, the White and Red, were united in 
the Marriage of Henry VII. of the Lancafer Line, 
with Elizabeth, Heireſs of the Houſe of Vorl, theſe 


two Branches of the Royal Family, by their different 


Pretenſions to the Crown, gave Occaſion to the 
Wars and Conſuſions which for many Years made 
England a Scene of Blood and Deſolation. "Three 
ſucceſſive Princes, Henry IV. V. and VI. were of the 
Lancaſter Line; and the latter loſt his Crown and 


Life, as did his princely Son, to Edward LV. of the 
Houſe of York, whoſe two Sons being murdered by 
f 


their Uncle Richard III. and he himſelf killed at By: 


worth- Field, the Lancafler Line was again reſtored in 
Henry VII. 1 - 

| Lancaſhire Witches are pleaſantly ſaid, and not un- 
deſervedly, to allude to the Beauty of the Women in 
this County; but in the times of Superſtition, and even 


fince the Reformation, it had a more ſerious Relation 
V — *. 


— 


— a C 8 


King 
Intit! 


\ 


„ Lance. GREAT BRITAI WV. 265 
e, to the general Belief, that there were ſuch unhappy 
y Creatures, who ſold themſelves to the Devil, to be en- 


es abled to do Miſchief for a time; a Belief that obtain- 


io 3 15 = 5 ſuffered. 

. n this Occaſion it may not be amiſs t 
oa in this Place, the Act that nailed in the on of King 
© | George II. which has reſcued thoſe miſerable Women 
2 who, by the Ignorance and Superſtition of the ruſtic 
he MW Rabble, were ſtiled Witches, from the Terror of a 
he Law, which, tho' in ſome ſort looked upon as obſo- 
1. lete, was nevertheleſs in Force againſt them, and had 
nd given too much Occaſion (till within theſe few Years 
" paſt, that the Trial and Acquittal of Jane Wenman, 
nd WA! have mentioned in * another Place, diſcouraged 
ef. MW the wild Fury and ſuperſtitious Ignorance of the Vul- 


in ear) for perſecuting poor Wretches, whoſe Age and 
: Infirmities, as well as deplorable Poverty, were enough, 


ne: one would have thought, to intitle them to Pity, ra- 
ther than to the barbarous Uſage they 8 2 — 10 
meet with. | TT 
This Act repeals the Statute made in the Firſt Year 
of the Reign of King James I. +, intitled, An gel 
gain Conjuration, Witchcraft, and dealing with 
evil and wicked Spirits; and alſo repeals an Act 
- the Parliament of Scotland, anent MWitebcraſts, 
And here I may be allowed to give a Caution to 
many of my fair Readers, as well as to the lower 
Clas of Fortune-caſters, by Coffee-grounds, &c. 
For, by this Act, Perſons pretending to tell Fortunes 
and to diſcover loſt or ſtolen Goods, by virtue of 
any occult Art or Science, ſhall be impriſoned a Year ; 
and, once every Quarter of that Year, be pillory'd ; 


- 


: "Tis well known, that this A j f 
en IN i Kine's 0 ys wn, that this Act was paſſed in Compliment to th 

| Nine ni f ; 8 | S 
even W intirieq E 48 Witches ; and te the Book he wrote, 


; ed much in this particular County, and for which many 


reren 


Vi ̃ «˙W»W w — rey rs 


1 — . — 5 1 
eee, F 
* * * = — ———— 


ation I VoI. III. N | ad 


. — Sr ren es — 


n 


or at ny —— 


_— — — — 


. f , * warn — 2 Nn e 8 9 ns > . 
* £ - 6 * * g ” 1 0 * N 8 8 
* OY ; N 9 . * en N * ee . = 224 9 * F S n eos e e = „ RAO 8 NN 1 . r P 8 1. — 
e Gy IR AE Bree 3 22 8 * "A * X — be — 5 £ W.. 8 __ [7 2 — — * 2 5 ”—_ * wee. "os LETS apt” whos * e r > - - _ 06" hw Sor At re, FS * 1 * 
933 „% 1 — — actor EDEN — ——— * * r . » . > ws eee l * RSS — 8 — ene Wr : 2 e HL Na 2 n * 4 n + : ren. d 5 0 * 
— 2 5 —— © Web * a 4 2 * 3 8 IG. aa ER mo. pon hv 8 A — l <4 — . a; onal = Z \ : a 

* r _ oats” bo A HL bm + 9 > Wt deb. 4 8 822 2 "2 T _- poyge et — 9 —— — — = A my <a wang. 5 >< pron . - y 8 Fakes . q —— — 

* 4 8 8 4 i * ev 4 + 0 * n re 2 * . — 2 = W ey: 1 229 (RY 0 rt ne — I __ _ 
5 7 * bh - - — 8 he 
— mm * | 


. — 
CIT 23 = 
* 9323 r 


—— — 


. 
& 


to 8 9 np — ———— * 9 * en e 5 7 4 * 8 

— — - L * r renner CE q p * 3 n 1c £2887 . * _ 

. 4 28 8 Mas rae 1 4 Sa * nn 2 p ys = 
Ge ae ANTS] IVA, paying 2 R er + — 4 1 Y X - — 
72 : 9 e . . orroro s " PE En. — rar „„ — — 
*. — —— ͤ 2 4%%7§V—³•md aw 3 3 r fe 8 r l a 5 1 C 4 SY —— — 

p oy «© Et RE rs x 2 1 ” 5 40 ” . 
8 * ar e eee ee 4 — bo . 
— . — * 


— LY © "A £ q_< — 2 
2 e maar” g 
=, >> M_—_— 
1 ” 4 . 
A — 4 - 
5 e eee eee 6 F N 1 N N Y Y 8 £ 9 . cr 
ÞZ yn Ay: 5 7777 a ly cn ol Le Te 0902/95" iO ge, 2 * * e * _ 7 ; : * 8 2 
8 — — n. r 2 of A \ a 
- * eee rn — Cor - 
AE Race __ " * + L 2 5 DEE * . D 
- — 12 — ns * 4 » * 
. — ͤ —[E—ä 2122 — adams * * 


266 A TOUR thr Weſtmorl. 
and obliged to find Security for their good Behaviour, 
at the Pleaſure of the Court in which Conviction ſhall - 
paſs. And here let me be further indulged to obſerve, 
that certain married Ladies, who may incur the Pe. 
nalty of this Act, may be {till worſe off than Maidens, 
becauſe perhaps their Huſbands can, the leaſt of all 
others, be expected to be bound for their requiſite good 
Behaviour. | 

There are not above 60 Pariſhes in this extenſive 
County : conſequently many of them are very large; 
and there are above 120 Chapels of Eaſe, 1 no leſs 
than 16 of which are in one Parith, 


TI now entered // Atmorland, a County eminent 
only for being the Wilde moſt barren, and fright- 
ful, of an that I have paſſed over in England, or in 
I * The Weſt Side, which borders on Cumber- 
land, is indeed bounded by a Chain of almoſt unpaſſi- 
ble Mountains, which, in the Language of the Coun- 
try, are called Fells; and theſe are called Fourneſs 
Fells, from the Promontory mentioned p. 263. and ; 
an Abbey built alſo in antient Times, called Four- 
neſs. The whole County is divided into the Barony h 
of Kendal, which is very mountainous, and in the : 
Dioceſe of Cheer; and the Barony of JFe/?morland, g 
a large champaign Country, in the Diocele of Car- p 
a. 

4 muſt be owned, 6 that here are ſome a 
very pleaſant manufacturing Towns, and conſequent]y 
popu:ous. * 

The ManufaQures in which the People are employ- 0 
ed, are chiefly Woollen Cloths, eſpecially at Kirkby- 
Lonſdale, and Kendal. | 

Kendal is a rich and populous Town, eſteemed the 
Beauty of the County, has a Free-ſchool well endow'd, 
and drives a great Trade in Woollen Cloth, Cottons, 
Druggets, Serges, Hats, and Stockens, FOR 

| ve 


Weſtmorl. Great Barra. —- 40% 


Over the River Ken, whereon Kendal ſtands, are 
two Bridges of Stone, and another of Wood. At 


ſome ſmall Diſtance from the laſt, are to be ſeen the 


Ruins of a Caſtle, which was the Birth. place of Ca- 


tharine Parr, the fixth Wife of Henry VIII. The 
Church is fair and ſpacious, and there are two Chapels 


of Eaſe to it. Near the Church- yard ſtands a fair pub- 
lic School, whence a certain Number of Scholars are 
elected to Queen - College Oxon. 


Kendal conſiſts of ſeveral Streets neatly paved; one 
of which is very long, and has a Bridge in the Middle. 


It has a very plentiful Market for all Kinds of Provi- 
ſions, and Woollen Yarn, which the Girls bring in 
large Bundles under their Arms to fell, Oppoſite the 


Town, on the Eaſt Side of the River, upon a Mount, 
{land the Ruins of an old Caſtle, which was formerly 


of Conſequence. The Ken is a fine River, running 


about one half of the Town in a Valley, with a tony 
Channel, abounding with Trout and Salmon, The 


Dyers and Tanners have their Habitations on the Banks 


of it. 


Lonſdale, or Kir t by. Lonſdale, i is a large Town, and © 


has a good Trade in Cloth: It has a fair Church, and 
a hne Church-yard ; from which, and from its Walls, 
and ſrom the Banks of the River, we havea very hne 
Proſpe&t of the Mountains at a vaſt Diſtance, and of 
the veautiful Courle of the River Lone, in a Vailey far 
beneath us. 

[n this Condip are many noble Stone Bridges, built 


upon Rocks of à vaſt Height; but the moſt noted is 


that as we enter Airkby- Lonſdale. 


Theſe Rivers are quite different from thoſe in the 


Southern Parts of England; for the Country being 
mountainous, there is always a vaſt Stream (eaſily, in 
many Places, fordable), and through the whole Courſe 
filled with prodigious Rock-ſtones : the Sides are alſo 
generally lined with firm Rock ; which Obſtructions 
ocecaſion frequent Cataracts or Water-falls, On this 

N 2 5 River 


[1 
þ 
» 
y 1 
. 
— 
* 
3 
5 
* 
| i 
1 
bY. 
3 
BE. 
as = 
* 
Fer 
7 
q 
Wc 4. 
iS ©; 
34 
. 
1 
= 
13 
3 
"Be Ply 
2 $77 
LF 
* 4 
WH 
5 
- 1 
- 
. 
7-7 
IK) 
"0 
My 
* 
1 
1 
3 
13 
3 
ay 
RY 
4 
Th : 
* 
1 
. (7 
WS .. © 
* * 12 
* 
S' "2! 
T8 
ET 
4120 
be} 
Dy 2] 
* 
4 
Fa Y 
* * 
1 + 4 
4 Þ 


— . e Ä 
8 
eee eee 


1 ge e . 5 
. 2 
— D _ — — 2 
reren 8 , 
* 8 
5 by Bond <> - - 1 es ypc — 
* 3 he + -wx++- ogy, env oe 


"= A TOUR tbr Weſtmorl. 


River, near Kendal, are two ſuch, where the Water 
tumbles down with an hideous Noiſe ; one at a little 


Village called Levens, another more Southward, near 
Betham. From theſe the neighbouring Inhabitants 
form Prognoſtications of the Weather ; for when the 
Northern one ſounds clear, they promiſe themſelves 
fair Weather; but when the Southern, they expect 
Rain or Miſts. Where there are none of theſe Cata- 
rafts or Water-falls, there are very noiſy Riplings, 


which afford an Amuſement not diſagreeable to a con- 


templative Traveller. 5 

- The Meadows, which are extended from Kirkby. 
Lonſdale to Lancaſter, are very fertile, and filled with 
Cattle; and the River is well ſtored with Salmon, 
Trout, Sc. fo that Proviſions of all Sorts are very 
cheap: which has induced ſome Families of ſmall 
Fortunes to ſettle in AK:rkby- Lonſdale. At the Mar- 
ket-croſs there, the Pretender, in the Year 275 5. was 
firſt proclaimed. 
In one of my Tours into theſe Parts, I was forced 
to paſs croſs the Country from Carliſle to Newcaſtle 


upon Tyne; in doing which I was obliged to procure 


a Guide, ' directing my Courſe to Kirkby Stephen, over 
exceeding high Mountains; deſcending! now-and-then 
into Valleys; the Deſcent ſo ſteep, that I could not 
but be apprehenſive for my Neck, This was the 


ſtrangeſt Journey I ever made in England. I often 


thought, Mountain riſing on Mountain, that I mult 
ſoon approach the Alps To ſay the leaſt, never was 
any County ſo like the Highlands of Scotlands ; ; for it 
is very rare to ſee an Houſe. Stone Walls for Hedges: 
that whenever we deſcended, we were ſure of meeting 
the moſt curious River I had ever ſeen, called the 
Lune, which is very rapid, and full of Cataracts. We 
travel along-ſide this River, in the Valley, for a Mile 
or more; then we croſs over upon Stone Bridges, built 
upon Rocks; then we aſcend again anot ins Mountain; 
whence | we ſurvey its beautiful ſerpentine Courſe; and 
N 
rl: -1 


- 


* 
- ; Boſn 
— 


Weſtmorl. GREAT BRITAIN. 269 
deſcending into another Valley, there we are ſure to 


meet it again. 


The Upper, or Norchern Part of the County has 
two manufacturing Towns, called Kirkby- Stephen, 
and Appleby : The laſt is the Capital of the County, 


| has a Free- ſchool and Hoſpital, and is the only 


Town in the County that ſends Members to Parlia- 


ment. 


Kirkby Stephen is ſituated on the Weſt Bank of the 
River Eden, which takes its Riſe from Hughſtat 
Mountain, about fix Miles higher up, on the Skirts 
of Yorkſhire, near the Source of the Swale and the 
Rother. This Mountain is falſely called Hutton Mor- 
del in moſt Maps, and indeed, none of theſe deſolate 
Places have been laid down with any tolerable Degree 
of Exactneſs. 

The whole Village conſiſts of one ſingle Street, in- 
differently built, which lies nearly North and South, 


opening on Hellec Mountain at one Extremity, and 


IVildbore at the other. There was once a fine Mar- 
ket-place, 70 Yards wide, and near 100 long, but by 
ſome ſtrange Inattention to public Utility, Houſes 
have been ſuffered to be built on it, and others after- 
wards to be built before them. The Market is on 
Monday, and as the Stocken Manufacture ſupplies the 


principal Trade, this Traffic is the firſt at the Mar- 


ket; it generally begins about ſix, and is over about 
eight in the Morning. Tho? the Situation of K:rkby- 


Stephen is under bleak and barren Mountains, yet the 


Communication they have with many of their own 


Dales, and with Yorkfbire, along the River- heads, af- 


fords a pretty conſiderable Market; an Advantage 
which Brough, near Stanmore, has now loft, for want 


of ſuch ConneRion. 


Three Fairs are alſo held at this place, one on the 


firſt 7. hurſday after Mhitſuntide, chiefly to ſupply new 
married Perſons with Houſhold Goods and Furniture; 


Nai. another 


— its. — — mige 
2 _ mts = * " is n 2 
S rere e 2 - rages n 
r 5 — oe Ap ws - E 1 „ 
= a * l 8 > fea 2 bl — 
WO TR 5 * da 
— . n = ny abs et 75 N 2 3 N 4 2 
* . o Fame,» , _ "4 4 
7 — N er p r * 


e. 


NSS — ode 
.; 3 — of Set 2 
— ——— — * 
abit Ls -- + 589 2 8 


— 
_ 


8 a 
8 


r 
ee ee 
_—  — — —— 

mo — — 


er e 
. 
299 
rr 2 
—— 


= 
— ye 


at the Welt. end of the ene of good een 


270 — TOUR thro Weſtmorl 


another on the 18th of Q&eber, for Cattle; and the 


third, which is much ſuperior to the other two, on 


the Monday preceding Faſtens Even (or Shrove 7. ueſ- 
day), called every-where in the North Collap Monday, 


from an immemorial Cuſtom there, of dining that 


Day on Eggs and Collops. 

The Town has no Magiſtrate but a 8988 
The River Eden, which below Carliſie becomes the 

Pontem indignatus Araxes of Virgil, admits here of all 

Varieties of Bridges, even of ſtepping Stones; and as 

the whole Town, or rather whole County, is one Bed 

of Lime: ſtone, we may obſerve amazing Varieties in 


| the Cradle of the River, wrought by Time and the 


conſtant Force of a rapid Current. 
The Church of K:riby-Stephen is bow, and the 
Porch looks but like an Hole into an Hermit's Cell; 


the Steeple is ſquare, about 18 Yards high, and has 


four Bells of a conſiderable Size, but not well propor- 
tioned to each other; the oldeſt bears Date 1631. and 


the neweſt, which is alſo much the largeſt, 1749; the 


1 that newefram'd them when this was put 
, having made his Bargain for the old Frame, it 
1 that as he was throwing down the laſt 


Piece, a great Nail, which he had not perceived, 
caught. hold of his Cloaths, and the Piece of Timber, 
being heavy, drew him after it from a Window 8 


Yards high, and daſhed his Brains out againſt ſome of 
the Pieces he had thrown out before : An Accident for 
which he was the more pitied, as it happened on a 
Saturday-night, when the Man had juſt completed his 
Job, and was in haſte to return with the Money to his 


Wife and F amily at Appleby, 


The Steeple is built on ; = 985 vo Rock, and there 


is a new geometrical Staircaſe turned round a cylin- 


drical Column, which leads into a decent Gallery 


{hi : 
* In 


Weſtmorl. GRTAT BRITAI N. 271 


In the Eaſt- end near the Chancel, adjoining to the 


South Wall, is the Burying Place of the Muſgrave 
Family; the Inſcription runs round the Stone. 


Near the Middle, betwixt this and the Cemetery of 
the Lharton Family, is the Effizy in Stone of the fa- 
mous Andrew Herclay, Earl of Carlifle, who was be- 
headed by Edward II. upon Pretence of having be- 


 trayed the Egli Army at By/and Abbey near York, 
into the Hands of Bruce, King of Scots; Edward 


himſelf eſcaped with great Difficulty, and is ſaid to 
have attainted this Nobleman, only to transfer the Ig- 
nominy of his own Miſconduct to another. The Fi- 
gure lies at Length, with the Head ſupported en a 
Kind of Urn or Helmet, for it is much broken and 
disſigured, and the Feet on a Lion, without any In- 
ſcription, Tradition only having preſerved the Name; 
and his Caſtle in this Neighbourhood, though now in 


Ruins, being ſtill called Herclay Caſtle. To this Eſ- 
tate the My/orave Family muſt have ſucceeded. ſoon 


a ter, as their Leaſe is between 2 and 300 Years old, 
and I think the Battle of Byland Abbey is generally 


hxed to 1326. by the Scotch Annals. 


In an Alle railed off near this Monument, Noh. 


ward, is the Vault of the Family of Morton; ; which 


Title is now extinct, thro' the Miſconduct of the late 
Duke of that Name, remarkable for his great Abili- 
ties, however miſapplied. There are ſome Monu- 


ments, but the Inſcription of one at the Eaſt-end was 


broken off; however, by the Help of a Friend, I 


joined the Pieces, and found the Whole as follows: 


Round the Rim on the Side Edge at top, the Let- 
ters raiſed (with an _— at large of himſelf and. his 
two Ladies) 


Thomas hats jacet hic et utraque conjuns 
Elinora ſuum hinc habet Anna locum, 

En tibi terra tuum carnes ac ofa reſumem 

Coles animas tu Deus alme tuum. 


N4 


272 A TOUR reo Weſtmorl. 
5 On the Eaſt End underneath: 


Gens Whartonus genus dat honores dextera vifrix 
In Scotos, Stapletona domus mihi guam dedit uxor 
Elionora jacet ter bina prole parentem 
Binam adimut teneris, binam juvenilibus annis 
Fata mihi dat, nominavi bina ſuperſies 

Anna ſecunda uxor celebri eft de gente Salopium. 


The Reader will eaſily diſcover the Puerility of the 


Performance, as well with Reſpect to the Language as | 


the Poetry ; but ſuch as it is, it ſhould be preſerved ; 
for a few Years more will render it quite illegible on 
Oo = 
This Inſcription has no Date; but the Perſon whom 
3t commemorates is known to have been Governor of 


Carliſle in the 33d of Henry VIII. to have beaten the 


Scots with a very few Men the Year following, in 
Conjunction with Sir William Muſgrave, and to have 
taken Dumfries, for which Services he was made Ba- 
ron of Mharton. He died Anno 1568, in the tenth 
Year of Queen Elizabeth. „ EL 

This Family, and that of the Muſgraves, were ce- 
lebrated Defenders of the Northern Borders for many 
Years before the Scotch Succeſſion. The Hharton's 
Family liberally endowed K:r#iby- Stephen with a Free- 
ſchool, but the Salary is ſequeſtered by the Purchaſer 


of the Family Eſtate, till the Truſtees admit the Choice 


of a Maſter, | 
| There is alſo an Aile and Vault of the Daſſton Fa- 
mily, but without any Effigies, Inſcription, Date, or 
Character. - | DS os _ 

The Indiſpoſition of one of my Friends confining 
me a Day extraordinary at K:rkby-Stephen, gave me 


the Opportunity of being more particular on it, than [ 


was able to be on many more notable ones. 
C'ifton is a Village remarkable for a ſmart Action, 

in the Rebellion of 1745. between the King's * 

> N | under 


5 


| Weſtmorl. Grrat BRTTAIN. 273 


under the Command of his Royal Highneſs the Duke 


of Cumberland, and the Rebels; in which the latter 


were driven out of their advantageous Poſts. 
Near the River Louther is a Spring, which ebbs and 
flows ſeveral times in a Day. 

In the Neighbourhood of this River is a Row of py⸗ 
ramidal Stones, eight or nine Feet high, pitched di- 
rectly in a Row for a Mile together, and placed ak 


equal Diſtances from each other. 


When we entered at the South Part of this County, 
began indeed to think of Merionelihſbire, and the 
Mountains of Snowden in North Males, ſeeing nothing 


round me in many Places, but unpaſſable Hills, 


whoſe tops, covered with Snow, ſeemed to tell us, 
all the pleaſant Part of England was at an End; the 
reat Winander Mere extending, itſelf like a Sea, on 


the Weſt-ſide, from North Br idge on the South, 


where it contracts itſelf again into a River, up to 
Greſemere North, and is the Boundary of the County, 
as I have ſaid, on that Side; and the Engliſb Apen- 


nines, as Mr. Cumdin calls the Mountains of York- 


Hare North Riding, lie like a Wall of Braſs on the 
other; and indeed in the moſt literal Senſe they are 
ſo: for it is the Opinion of the moſt {kilful and 
knowing People in the Country, that they are full 
of inexhauſtible Mines of Copper, which is.converti- 
ble into Braſs, and a Quantity of Gold in them alſo: - 
nay, of late Years, they worked at ſome Copper- 
mines here; but the Ore lies ſo deep, and is fo hard 
to come at, that they did not ſeem to go chearfully 
on. | 
But notwithſtanding the terrible Aſpect of the 
Hills, when we had paſſed by Kendal, and deſcended 
from the frightful Nieser the flat Country begur 
to ſhew itſelf ; and we ſoon found the North. and 
North-eaſt Part of the County to be pleaſant, rieh, 
fruitful, and, if compared to the other Part, may be 
faid to be populous, The * Eden, the. laſt _— 

5 ” of 


ORE 8 D 
n be — 
1 9— EY 
255 Der. 3 
. . — 


tag 6 ˙²˙ . OO OI oof nr no ee es 
<a" 1 » _ q 5 
8 CSU IL: Wr. r 
7 1 3 Wenn 
. PI - 52. 4 r 
4 - — C n G 
De 2 — TN p 


274 A TOUR tbr Weſtmorl. 


of England on this Side, as the Tyne is on the other, 
riſes in this Part out of the Side of a prodigious high 
Mountain, called Afowill Hill, or WWildbore Fell, 
which you pleaſe ; after which, it runs thro” the Mid- 
dle of the Vale, which, as I ſaid before, is a very 
- agreeable and pleaſant Country, or, perhaps, ſeems to 
be fo the more, in Compariſon with the horrid Height 


and nnen! of the Eaſtern and Southern Parts. 


An ACt paſſed ſome Years ago to make this River na- 
vigable, in wkich the neighbouring Country find great 
Advantage. 

In the Vale, and on the Banks of this River, ſtands 
Appleby, or Apully, the Abalaba of the Antients, once 
a flouriſhing City, now a ſcattering, decayed, and half- 
demoliſhed Town, the fatal Effects of the antient In- 
roads of the 8 who uſed to make frequent Incur- 
ftons on this County, and became ſeveral times Ma- 
ſters of this Town, and at length burnt it to the 
Ground ; a Blow it has not yet recovered. 

There are not many Seats of tlie Nobility in this 
Part, though ſeveral antient Families receive their 
Names from hence, as Stric#/and from the Lands of 
Strickland, Wharton (now extinct) from JVharten- 
ball, Louther from the River Louther, N. arcop of Mar- 
225 Langda's of Langdala, ee from Muſgr ave 


; "B91 under Stanmore, or Market- Brough, eight 
Miles Eaſt of Ayppleby, is a ſmall Town, divided into 


two Parts, the Upper or Church- Brough, on Account 


of the Church's ſtanding there, where alſo is a fine 


Caſtle; and the Lower, called alſo Adartet- Brough, 
from its having the Market in it, which is held on 
Thurſday, and is pretty conſiderable. 

Tze Roman Highway, which I have ſo often men- 
tioned, and which, in my laſt Letter, I left at £eem- 
ing lane and Peers-bridge in the North-Riding of York, 
enters this County from Rear-creſs, or Reę croſs, upon 


Stanmore, and, croſſing it almoſt due Eaſt and Welt, 
goes 


Cumberl. 
_ trom Perith, 


but now the great Road leads to the Left-han 
rith; in going to which, we firſt paſs the Eden at a 


or Head. 


GRTAT BRTTAIN. 275 
goes through Applely, paſſing the Eden a little North 
at an antient 


doniacum, where was a large and ſtately Stone N ge; 


very good Stone Bridge, called Louther e and 
then the Elnot over another. 


Perith, or Penrith, called by the Romans Verteræ, 


is deemed the ſecond Tom! in the County of Cumber- 


land for Wealth and Trade, It is large, and well- 
built, with a very good Market for all Sorts of Com- 
modities and Cattle. The Market- houſe is convenient 


and ſpacious, the Church large and noble. The Welt 
Side was defended with a Royal Caſtle, which in the 


Reign of Heury VI. was repaired out of the Ruins 
of Iaburg, a Daniſh Temple hard by; which is it- 
ſelf now in Ruins. In the Market- place is a large 
Edifice of Timber, in the Nature of a Market- houſe, 


on many Parts of which is the Device of the Earls 


of Warwick ; to wit, a Bear climbing up a ragged 


Staff, The Town | is built of Red Stone, whence its 


Name Penrith ; which in Britiſb ſignifies a Red Hill 
In the Church-yard we ſaw two Pillars 
14 or 15 Feet aſunder, and the loweſt of them 12 
Feet high, though they ſeem equal. 
told us, that they were the Monument of Sir Oven 
Cz/ar ; but there is no Inſcription upon them. This 


Sic Owen, they tell us, was a Champion of mighty 
Strength, and of gigantic Stature: | 
tainly was, if, as they affirm, he was as tall as one 

of the Columns, and could touch both Pillars with 


his Hands at the ſame time. They relate no other 
great Actions of him, but that he killed Robbers, 
and deftroyed wild Boars in the Foreſt of Engle 
Weed, 


On the North Side of the Veſtry of this Church 


13 crecteds in the Wall, an antient ſquare Stone, with 


N 6 a Me- 


oman Station called Bro- 


to . | 


'Fhe People 


and fo he cer- 


PI ens — „ r14- - 
— e e 25 


- = 
mm ” 
8 — — 1 bo = 
ORGY” "RESIN; 2 Nr e — 
uo | = . qo 8 ; —— E 
1 2 .... ͤ ͤ — ge Yr YO 8 FP 
— 4] 2 8 . Aha * e A FILED 1 . 3 
S 4 C — ** * 3 


2 


— 


— — 


= 2 — oat . # OS 
oa — al . —.— 

5 n 
= . 9 


2 
94 
nm! 
wi + $ 
| 21 4 
ty 
£1 
q 
: &: 
. 
© > Ki 
LE 
1 
a 
5. 4 
28 
1 
4. 
1 
i 
G 1 7 5 4 
LE 
22 © 
HR; 
my 
was f ; 
5 
998 
+ FR 32 
1 
31H 3> F 
| 53 — : 
12 
1337 
R 5 9 
8 
4 4 
5 
1 
IEF 
118.61 

K N 

8 i 

3; 5 

Ji 

1 
o * } 
8 N 
ti. $ 

2 =} U 
7 * 
1 4 1 4 
i 1 { 
1 A; Ny 
13 
I P 
1 
* = z 
a , x 
po Ss 
2 ; 
ö 95 4 * 1 
4 N 
1 2 
| * { 

'd i 

\P os 
EDS: - 

8 

* 

11 
1 N 
7 = j 
y.1 / I 

1 
„* 
_ 

CALC 
5 35, 

1 
1 

_—y 
3 7 5 
3 4 
12 * 4 
Jets, 

" 

gn q 
5 6 4 
3 
3 8 
= 
o 

_ 

85 2 q 
8 z 
*% +. ' 

4 7 
1 . 
1 
1 
: q 
—_ „ 
22.4 8 
* * 
* 
r 
No } 

3 

15 2 

5 5 

. 
$8 r 
9 . 
Von - 
wy 

Ll _y \ 

ek 1 
bs ** þ. 

at 3 

atk 4 

* #3 , 

ftp 

2 T$.4 

S 

" CL 
r 

17 7:08 
= 20 
.. EF 
Ry 
2x 
4 h 
Ac $3 
8 
. 3 
il © 1.83 
> 17 

61 

2 5 +4 
#73. : 
. 414 
* 
1 
5 


R GT 
pd 3 8 
eee e 


n 
D 
——— — 


8 
. 78 
N 
a” 


Miles, and cauſed it to be paliſado'd, Anno 123. Se 


276 A TOUR 7 Cumberl. 
a Memorial; intimating, that in the Vear 1598. there 
was a dreadful Plague in thoſe Parts, of which there 
died in Kendal, 2500 Perſons; in Penrith, 2266; in 
Richmond, 2200; in Carliſle, 1196. 1 
y this Account it ſhould ſeem, that every one of 
thoſe Towns had ſeparately more People than the 
City of Carliſie, or elſe. the Diſtemper was not ſo 
peſtilential there; and that Xendal, which is the 
only manufacturing Town of them, was the moſt po- 
pulous. e N F 
Th's Town was unhappily poſſeſſed by a Party of 
Scots Highland Rebels in 1715. when they made that 


deſperate Puſh into England, which ended at Pręſton. 


In the Moor, or Heath, on the North Part of this 
Town, the Militia of the County, making a brave 
Appearance, and infinitely out- numbering the High- 
tanders, were drawn up; yet, with their «ual Bra- 
very, they ran away as ſoon as the Scots began to ad- 
vance to charge them, and never fired a Gun, leav- 
ing the Town at their Mercy. However, to do Jul- 
tice to the Rebels, they offered no-Injury to the Town, 
only quartered in it one Night, took what Arms and 


Ammunition they could find, and advanced towards 


Kendal. | 
From hence, in one Stage, thro” a Country full of 
Caſtles (for almoſt every Gentleman's Houſe is a 
Caſtle), we came to Carlifle, the Frontier Place and 
Key of England on the Weſt Sea, as Berwick upon 
Tweed is on the Eaſt. From below this Town the fa- 
mous Piels Wall began, which croſſed the whole Iſland 
to Newca/tle upon Tyne, which was built upon. the fol- 


lowing Occaſion : 


When the Romans. ſettled here by Force of Arms, 
they were always harraſſed by the Picis, on the Side 
of Scotland. To ſtop their Inroads, the Emperor 
Adrian Cauſed a Wall of Earth to be built, extend- 
ing from the German to the Iriſb Sea, the Space of 80 


Urs 


„ . nw HY OW w 


it of Brick, or Stone, in 430. but it was not Jong be- 


2 R a a aA aA M aA a 


Nor did he deſiſt from his Enquiries, when the 


K GG „ „ „ 4 „„ „ „„ 6 


a a 


England, beginning about three Miles more Eaſt- 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN. 277 
verus the Emperor built it of Stone, with Turrets 
from Mile to Mile, and kept a Gariſon therein. But 
the Picts nevertheleſs, broke in thro' this Wall more 
than once. At laſt, Ætius, a Roman General, rebuilt 


fore it was pulled down by the P:#s. And here it 
will not be amiſs to give ſome Account of this famous 
Wall, fram the Vallum Romanum of * Warburton, 
Eſq; Jately publiſhed, 

This Gentleman, in the Year 1715. cauſed 2 
Survey and Plan to be made of this antient Roman 
Wall and military Way, to ſhew the Neceſſity of 
rendering it paſſable for Troops and Artillery, 8 
the Eaſtern to the Weſtern Sea; but the Rebellion, 
which had drawn his Attention to this Subject, be- 
ing ſoon after ſuppreſſed, the Reparation of the Way 
was neglected, till it was again wanted in 1745. 
Upon the Suppreſſion of che Rebellion which then 
happened, the Work was undertaken, an Act of 
Parliament having paſſed for that Purpoſe, and Mr. 
Warburton was, among others, appointed to ſuper 
intend the Execution, 


principal View for which they were begun was diſ- 
appointed, but extended his Survey thro' the whole 
County of Northumberland, and diſcovered almoſt 
every Day ſome Remains of Cities, Caſtles, Camps, 
or other military Antiquities, that had been till then 
unknown among us. The Parts called The Waſtes 
appeared never to have been trodden by any human 
Foot ſince the Ruin of the Buildings and Streets, 
which he could eaſily trace by the F one tho 
they were covered with Graſs. | 

© An Account of theſe Diſcoveries he has now pub- 
liſhed, with Repreſentations of the Roman Inſcrip- 
tians and Sculptures. 

There are two Walls which croſs the North of 


© ward 


1 
22 
1 

A+ 

x 
E 4 3 

* 4 [1 
5 

at 

3 =o N 5 
. 

+ 1 

\ 4 
9 
+ 4 

+ 3, 4 

© * +117 B 
Bs 2308 : 
3 | * 
i ; 

= 
1 
Al 1 I; 1 
4 : 
4 
© v2 
3 
13 
| 1 * 
y 

* 

. 25 

3 4 
, 
"= * bl 
. 1 g 
+ 0 
181 
114 1 
ON 7 . 
>a - þ 
| i 
4 1 
FI Be fo 

+ 5: 
5 1 +l 
* 

7 8 


TEE: 
6 r 7 
4 N 8 -= 
Ns 14 
BL 
8 
9 
N 1 
> NOT 
! 
AT 
N Fr 

EAR 
LY 
1. 
N 4 
F o 
: 


2X43 3 


1 = n 1 * 8 9 bo 2 rr — = - þ = WF 4 ©; 1 
3 . & wo of us I 413 * 8 Ta — — £01 95 4 1 8 - r r 4 _ — — WR o S 
- _ e —— eee 777 T 3 n cries 8 2 83 D 
— 2 — * 2 (HER [OE i= RD ns CIO ae Td beet WIR 0c 2 — Sy,» , —"— LED 1 r * - 
oy = 4 = = te 9 = = _— - 4 oY 9 J bo 7 = _ > (IV 2 1 7. 2 8 n = * 
— n 1 F > ti Eh: th eee” ALE Lo Ge N * 1 K 4 4 ey 74 . TIPS Oy WW", An ED r by 
N A NK ed 2 EL Ire ee he 5 8 8 ? « r 3 1 : K 8 
ws a beg In Aer — ts t. N >] ed N 7 da — q rags — 2 ——— w \ r = * 575 Sage oor ar l — : = hy 
r £ LJ * er A gp. of 1 4 ere fry gr N nr au r ee Wes : 9 R ww — 2 TRE g * 
We ew P * ) r * ade r oy S AA eee, e err Cr 2 — 7 Ati — ——— — — 
* N : rc 1 _ " — _ — OLDO_L $3,994 * — * — 
* * —— 4 . * 2 p 


RM A A A A 6 


K a a 


* 


78 A TOUR tro Cumberl. 


ward than Newcaflle, and extending ten Miles far- 
ther Weſt than Carliſie, at the Diſtance of near ſe- 
venty Miles. One of theſe Walls is of Turf, called 
Hadrian's Vallum; the other of Stone, called the 
Wall of Severus, and were both intended to keep 
out the P:#7s or Scots, for which Purpoſe Julius 


Agricola had before carried a Series of Forts or Sta- 


tions croſs the Country in the ſame Direction, and of 


equal Extent. 


Hadrian's Fence conſiſts of a Bank, or Wall, 

the Brink of a Ditch, another Bank, at the Diſtance 
of about five Paces within 5 called the South Bank, 
and a third, nearly the ſame Diſtance beyond the 
Ditch, to the North. Theſe four Works are every 
where parallel to each other, and probably formed 


a military Way from the Port of the old Stationary 


Fence to another. 
« To Severus's Wall, which is of Stone, belongs 
the paved military Way, which is now repairing : 


It is on the South Side of the Wall, but not in all 


Parts parallel to it. On the North of this Wall is 
a large Ditch, but no Appearance of a Bank, tho' 


the Ground is in ſome Places raiſed by the Caſtle | 


thrown out of it, and a little reſembles a Glacis. 
« Caſtles were placed upon this Wall at unequal 
Diſtances, which however, except two or three at 
the Eaſt End, are all leſs than a Mile. The Buildings 
appear to have been Squares of 66 Feet, of which 
the Wall itſelf forms the North Side. The Space 
between theſe Caſtles was equally divided by four 
Watch-towers, each of which appears to have been 
about four Yards ſquare at the Bottom; and, as the 
Centinels in theſe Towers were within Call of each 
other, a Communication might eaſily be continued 
along the whole Line, without the Help of Speak- 
ing-trumpets, or ſubtertaneous Pipes, Con'rivances 
which have been framed in times of groſs Igno- 
rance; and as Men are generally credulous of 

6 "FO 


4 


K „„ A „„ 


„ KR * 


o 
- 


64 


o 


The original Dimenſions of the Walls, Ditches, 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN. 2 79 


c 


nued nearly in a ſtrait Line from Station to Station; 


about eight Feet thick, and twelve | high, and that 


nearly equal in all Parts that remain intire, except 


Wonders, in proportion as the time when they are 
ſaid to have happened is remote, this Method of 
Communication appears to have been believed b 

almoſt every Writer on the Subject, particularly by 
Echard. | 
© There were alſo upon this Wall 18 large Forts 
or Stations; the mean Diſtance between theſe would 
be about four Miles, but they are placed much 
nearer to each other in the Middle, and towards 
tne Extremity of the Wall, than on the other 
Parts, 

The Wall generally runs along the Ridge of the 
higher Ground, the Deſcent being to the Enemy 
on the North ; and to preſerve this Advantage it is 
frequently carried out, and brought back, in an An- 
gle. Hadrian's Vallum, on the contrary, is conti- 


and the paved military Way, where the Wall paſſes 
along the Brink of a Precipice, or runs into Angles, 
is carried ſo as to keep the Level, and, as much as 
poſſible, the Line. 

It does not appear that there were any Gates in 
this Wall, or Paſſes thro? it, except juſt in the Sta- 
tions, and where it is crofled by the great military 
Way, from South to North. 


Banks, and military Ways, cannot now be certain] 
known; but Hadrian's J/all is thought to have been 


of Severus in Thickneſs meaſures ſeven Feet, being 


at Kirkland's on the Solway Firth, where it is in- 
creaſed. to nine Feet, for a , Reaſon, becauſe 
at full Sea the Water has certainly flowed up to it. 
The Breadth of the military Way mult have been 
about three Roman Paces and an half, as it now 

meaſures near 70 oo ect. | 
 Hadrian's 


-_ 2 EY Ce "LT C K e . r PF (ns — = = — 3 3 1 Pu . 125 » 2 2 
3 2 3 —K—2B•5ß „„ = E 0 8 „n _— TL - 22 8 2 5 r r wy l I 0 q p * eee a 4 TC — 
r 2 — D pes) 23525 —— — 5 2 2222 — — 2 1 J = 25 = 1 1 — — 2 4 nne . n er 52 rn 
SF" p . „„ — e INE 6 l G * „ = PR 9 . JEL) _ - 2 n 0 6 bs GS: OT a g ” 2 
ARE RTE r 8 — 7 ⏑ — r Lok 7 def oa ——_ == * — „ . e 4 . 5 = 1 r 1 « 1 ry LOOP 2 pa 2 ap 2 W err 
= fe 3 7 r S 9 Fes 8 8 AO 9 AS Yam oY : - —_ wy ant der 8 = Aer ths * 7 8 5 7 5 n. 
V n _ a 3 K Wen n n . 1 e * * _ boys rt, | er AIG a * . 9 * . SSIS: © Geog arr, of ng ot Se BANS F o Ak =D EINE $ett = Ry ET or 
— 1 a wr - - = - n 3 Py ) rb Labret 8 "> . — to 41 (A at IND a n > — " ITO . . OT ICEOT COOL e SPL att EE? J A ö 
Gr — * * 6— wie Ge Reorder - " , " n 
? "= 0 A N 9 2 F ro enn EET 0 ” 
8: 5 


_— LEES 
OOTY 


_ =. =_ 


CET) 
FA IST In, 3 
— — COT IIA 
* „ 


AN AAR „ „ „ „ „„ 2A 


280 AT OUR Fhro' Cumberl. 

Hadrian's Ditch meaſures nine Feet deep and ele- 

© yen Feet over, which appears to have been its ori- 
© ginal Dimenſions, and Sever us's Ditch is every-where 
c wider and deeper. The Diſtance between the two 
Walls is ſometimes ſcarcely a Chain, and ſometimes 
© more than fifty; and the Diſtance between Severus's 
Wall and the military Way is generally between 
© two and three Chains, ſometimes ſix, and between 


„ the two Forts Welt of Shewen Sheels it is fifteen. 


The Materials of which theſe Walls are con- 
© ſtruted may be certainly known by their Remains: 
« Hadrian's is of Earth, which in ſome Places is 


| © mixed with Stone, but is no-where ſtrengthened by 


Timber. Severus's is of Freeſtone, and where the 
« Foundation was not good, it is built on Piles of 


Oak; the Interſtices between the two Faces of this 
Wall is filled with broad thin Stones, placed not 
4 perpendicularly, but obliquely on their Edges ; the 


Aa 


running Mortar or Cement was then poured out 
upon them, which by its great Strength and Tena- 
city bound the whole together, and made it firm as a 
Rock. But though theſe Materials are fufficiently 
known, it is not eaſy to gueſs where they were pro- 
cured, for many Parts. of the Walls are at a great 
Diſtance from any Quarry of Freeſtone; and tho 
Stone of another kind was within Reach, yet it 
does not appear to have been any-where uſed. It 
will alſo be difficult to conceive how the Romans 
could carry on ſuch a Work in the Face of an Ene- 
my, except it be ſuppoſed, that it was not then the 
Bounds of their Conqueſt, but that they poſſeſſed 
great Part of the Country farther North. 

Of the preſent State of theſe Walls it will be ſuf- 
c ficient to ſay, that in ſome Places that of Hadrian 
© cannot be traced without Difficulty, tho' in others 


© it continues firm, and its Weight and Breadth are 
© conſiderable, In ſome Parts of the Wall of Severus 


the 


- 
= —— 


e . EH.  T = OS 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN 281 


« the original regular Courſes are remaining; in ſome 


« the Stones remain upon the Spot, tho? not in a re- 
« oular Diſpoſition ; in others the Rubbiſh is high and 


« diſtint, though covered with Earth and Graſs, and 
frequently the Veſtiges are extremely faint and ob- 
© ſcure.? Ps 


But, before I go on to ſpeak of Carliſſe, J muſt re- 


turn to the Sea-coaſt, which, in this Northern Coun- 


ty, is more remarkable than that of Lancaſhire, tho“ 


the other is extended much farther in Length; for here 
are ſome Towns of good Trade; whereas in Lanca- 
ſhire, Liverpoole excepted, there is nothing of Trade 
to be ſeen upon the Coaſt. | | f 


The firſt Place I ſhall mention is Ravenglaſs, in the 


South End of the County, which runs between Four- 
neſs and the Sea. Tis a well-built Sea port, and Mar- 
ket· town, upon the River EV; and on each Side of it 
run down to the Sea, two ſmall Rivers, which, toge- 
ther with the Sea, make a good Harbour for Ships, 
and ſurround three Parts of the Town, which occa- 


ſions a pretty good Trade to it. 


The Cape or Head-land of St. Bees (derived from 


| St. Bega, an Iriſb Female Saint) ſtill preſerves its 


Name, ” | 
In the Town is a very good Freeſchool, founded 
by Archbiſhop Grindal, who was born here. It was 
very well endowed by him, and the Charity much in- 


creaſed by the late Dr. Lamplugh Archbiſhop of Yor#,. 
Dr, Smith Biſhop of Carlifle, Sir Fohn Louther, and 


others. | | 
The Library annexed to this Foundation is very 
valuable, and ſtill increaſing by Gifts almoſt daily ad- 
ded to it. Tho' the Parith is vaſtly large, the Vicar- 
age is poorly endo wee. e 
Near St. Bees ſtands a little Market-town, called 


Egremont, noted only for its antient Caftle and Barons, 
and for loſing their Privilege of returning Members. 


It 


8 


rere eee - 
rent BS e td = ” 
b 3 „ eee 52 
. PT \ 


— On 
4 * 25 


1 


fo” 
— 
— 
— _ 
3 .. Is Cereb at — 1 
— —ͤ— — enpoots erp - e : C ad 12 8 5 , 
L „ W = 


n ay — 
es: 
we 


a : 5 Wn, Pr 
. 8 2 — 00 — —— 8 ä Le 
. N " . 9 q * is boo ark 6 a OT N M \ l 
ESE 2 LN: ES, n Ne Fer 3 
i . 2 We. 


MA 


* 
oh 
oF, 
2 5 
| 
1 25 
N 
is 
- | 


nie ek 
wy 


i 
1 
* : 
* 
1 
4 
; 
. 


4 
3 
a 
S, 
F 
= 
4 
_— 
3 
{ + 
\ q 
- - 
| i 
2 
4 
2 
1 
3 1 
it} 
* 
#1 
"0 


TFyndham. 


282 .4 TOUR bro Cumbetl, 
It now gives Title of Earl to the noble F amily of 


Under this Shore, higher up North, and near the 


Cape, is the Town of Whitehaven, grown up, by the 
Encouragement of the Louther Family, from a ſmall 


Place, to be very conſiderable by the Coal Trade, 
which is ſo much increaſed of late, that it is the moſt 
eminent Port in England for it, next Newca/?le ; for 
the City of Dublin, and all the Towns of Ireland on 
that Coaſt, and ſome Parts of Scotland, and the Ile 
of Man, are principally ſupplied from hence. is 
frequent in time of War, or upon Occaſion of cross 


Winds, to have 200 Sail of Ships at a time go from | 


this Place to Dublin loaden with Coals. And the late 


Sir James Louther, particularly, was ſaid ta have ſent 
from hence to Ireland, annually, as many Coals as 


brought him in near 20,000 J. a Year. | 
This Increaſe of Shipping has led them on to Mer- 
chandizing; but the Town is only of few Years ſtand- 
ing in Trade: for Mr. Camden does not ſo much as 
oY the Place, and bis Continuator ſays very little 
O01 it. 5 | EET | | 

And indeed the Town muſt be allowed to owe its 
flouriſhing Condition principally to two Acts of Par- 


liament, one of the 7th, the other of the 11th, of 


Queen Anne, by virtue of which the Harbour was ſo 
conſiderably deepened and improved, and ſuch. ſtrong 


and ſubſtantial Moles and Bulwarks ere&ed, that 


Ships, which before were liable to be driven and caſt 
away on the Rocks and Shoals on that Coaſt, could 


lie in Safety; and be ſecure from the Violence of the | 


Sea. The happy Succeſs of theſe Works encouraged 


the Town to apply to Parliament for Powers ſtill far- 


ther to improve the good Deſign, that ſo, by enlarging 
the Moles and Works, and extending them to Low- 
water Mark, ſuch Depth might be obtained, that the 
largeſt Ships belonging to the Town might ſail in and 
out of the Harbour at Neap-Tides, and that wm 

„„ hips 


r a5 T !).... K 0... 


SD 2 


. 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN. a 


Ships frequenting theſe Seas might fail in at Half- 
flood. And accordingly an Act paſſed for this lauda- 


ble Purpoſe, in the Seſſion 1739-40. The ſame Act 


provides likewiſe for the Repair of the Roads about 


and leading to /Yhitebaven, which were become ruin- 
' ous and bad, by the great Uſe made of them ſince 


the Improvements in the Harbour; for before that 


time they were very narrow, and ſeldom made uſe of 


by Carts and Wheel-carriages. All theſe Advantages 
and Increaſe of Trade have occaſioned a new Church 
to be lately built at Vhitebaven. -Here is likewiſe a 
good Trade for Salt. 5 

Il hitebaven, in ſhort, 1s a large, regular, well built 
Town, about one third bigger than the City of Car- 
ile, but containing three times the Number of Inha- 
bitants, Theſe Inhabitants are all perfectly well 
lodged, all embarked in profitable Employments, of 
one kind or other; ſo that they are in a continual 
Scene of unaffected Induſtry, and carry on their Af- 
fairs with great Diſpatch, and yet without Hurry or 
Confuſion. They have a plentiful and commodious 
Market, ſupplied by and ſupplying both Neceſſaries 


and Conveniences to a very extenſive Neighbour- 


hood. The Country round about, and eſpecially to- 
ward St. Bees, is admirably cultivated, and ſtrewed 


with neat and pleaſant Houſes. In regard to the 


Port, which has a Cuſtom-houſe, and a proper Ap- 


pointment of Officers, it is now, in Conſequence of 
the Acts before-mentioned, well ſecured by numer- 
ous and coſtly Works, and has every Convenience 


that its Situation will permit. Large Ships lie tole- 
Tavly ſafe in the Road; and in bad Weather can 


either run into the Port at Half-flood, or ſhelter 


themſelves under the Promontory of St. Bees, which is 


at two Leagues Diſtance. ” 


The Coal in the Mines near this Place has ſeve- 


ral times been ſet on Fire by the fulminating Damps, 


and has continued burning for many Months, until 


large 


1 , Fong os | RELA PREY: 0 . * 


5 ; v8 
1 r PR ALOE —_— - <a hoe radon — > 
eee eee eee, eee. 
-3 * 323 — p n 4 
6 — — . means 
„„ nr mr —— „ 5 — ls" of 


— 


£ 
105 
1 
"Ibis 
45 
1 
: 
Teh 
. 
N 1 
boy 
it 4 
*1 T' 
2 « 
1 
2 
"44 
$64 8. 
44 > 
4% 3 
128 
1 
FA 2 
. . 
EFF 
2 $ 
87 
52 1 
1 
11 
4 
1 
at * 
1 
38 
N 
1 
1 
1 
ETE 
©. 
32; 
* 148 
4 
4 
1 7 
4 . 
; » 
” ! 
W. aa 
BY © on 
13 ol 
1 |. 
V5 BY 
18 5 
TE 
3 * 1K 
5 * 
111 
410 
„ 
; N 
1 4 
5 
1 
p * 
! 
1 
I 
175 
yh 
A t 
#2- . 
4 þ 
4 7 
1 
1 
[2 1 
1 
. 
1 
L 
"LY 
* 4 
1 
1 7 


oe ' Cumbert. 
large Streams of Water were conducted into the 
Mines, and ſuffered to fill thoſe Parts where the Coa] 
was on Fire. By ſuch Fires many Collieries have 
deen entirely deſtroyed, and ſome of them the Fire 
has continued burning for many Ages. But more 
Mines have been ruined by Inundations. Great Care 
and Art is uſed to keep thoſe deep and extenſive Works 
continually ventilated with freſh Air, which afford a 
conſtant Supply of the vital Fluid, and expel Damps 


and other noxious Exhalations. 

In order to deſcribe theſe Wonders of Nature, the 
Reader may ſuppoſe, that he has entered the Mines 
at an Opening at the Bottom of an Hill, and has al. 
ready paſſed thro” a long Adit hewn in the Rock, and 
arched over with Brick, which is the principal Road 
into them for Men and for Horſes ; and which, by a 


. ſteep Deſcent, leads down to the loweſt Vein of Coal. 


Being arrived at the Coal, he may ſuppoſe himſelf il] 
to deſcend, by Ways leſs ſteep, till, after a Journe 
of a Mile and an half, he arrives at the bib 
Part of the Mine. The greateſt Part of this Defcent 
is thro ſpacious Galleries, which continually interſeR 


other Galleries, all the Coal being cut away, except 


large Pillars, which in deep Parts of the Mine are three 


Vards high, and about twelve Vards ſquare at the Baſe; 


ſuch great Strength being there required to ſupport the 
ponderous Roof. 1 | 

Thoſe who deſcend into theſe Mines, find them 
moſt cloſe and ſultry in the middle Parts, that are moſt 
remote from the Pits and Adits, and perceive them 
to grow cooler, the nearer they approach to thoſe Pits 
and Adits that are ſunk to the deepeſt Parts of the 
Mines ; down which Pits large Streams of freſh Air 
are made to deſcend, and up which the Water is drawn 
out, by means of Fire-engines. 85 

Theſe Mines are ſunk to the Depth of 130 Fa- 


thoms, and are extended under the Sea to Places 
where there is above them ſufficient Depth of Water 


for 


he 


for Ships of large Burthen. "Theſe are the deepeſt 
Coal-mines that have hitherto been wrought, and 


perhaps, the Miners have not in any other Part of the 


Globe penetrated to ſo great a Depth below the Sur- 


face of the Sea; the very Mines in Hungary, Peru, 


&c. being ſituated in mountainous Countries, where 
the Surface of the Earth is elevated to a great Height 
above the Level of the Ocean. - 5 
They were firſt wrought for foreign Conſumption, 
by Sir John Louther, who by the Encouragement he 
ave to Tradeſmen and Artificers to come and ſettle 


at Mhitehaven, may be eſteemed the Founder of that 


Town. It is computed that this Gentleman and his 


Son, Sir James Louther, who purſued the ſame Plan, 
expended in one of theſe Mines, only in the Compaſs 


of a Century, upwards of half a Million Sterling. 
A little higher to the North is AZore/dy, where tis 
ſuppoſed has been a Roman Fort, there appearing a 


great many Ruins of Fortifications along the Sea-coaſt, 


and other Antiquities. DS pus 

About ten Miles North-eaſt from Hhitehaven lies 
Cocter mouth, between two Hills, upon the little Riyer 
Cocker, juſt where it falls into the Derwent ; and is 


almoſt encompaſſed by the two Rivers. The former 


runs thro” it, and is joined again by two Bridges. It 
is a Town of good Trade, and well-built ; and ſends 
two Members to Parliament. It has a Caſtle on one 
Hill, and a fair Church on the other. It is about 12 
Miles from the Sea, and Veſſels of good Burden may 
ſecurely come up to it; tho' ſome ſay, that no Veſſel 
can get above Y/orkington, of which Place we ſhall 


preſently ſpeak further. The Derwent is famous for 


its ſpringing out of thoſe Hills called Derwent Fells, 
where the antient Copper-mines were found in 
Queen Elizabeth's Time, and in which, it was ſaid, 
there was a large Quantity of Gold. But they are 
diſcontinued fince, ſome ſay, becauſe Gold being found 
among the Ore, the Queen claimed the Royalty, and 


ſo 


cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN. - 285 


a — ee” bs” War 22 oy *-i# + 


1 | 
1 
- 
i 
. 1 
1 bw 
0 
3 th, 
| 1 
in 
14 
tit 
$85 
«472 
* * 
£4 © 
it. 
7 
at 
* LE, 4 
4 
1; 
1 
1 
11 
1 y 
438 
FEY i 
1 44 
f 435 
45. 
M9 « 
ed, 
Wk 
4 wi + 
11 
8 Th 
'T 1 
1 - 
1 
[ 14 
N 
2 
. 
. 
i 
1 4 + 
$7 7 
1 
1 
14 
: 5 
Es, 2! 
K 
309M: 
WE) 
4 
14 
4 4 
311 
LS. 
1 * 
31 
131 
917 
- k | 
1 k 
, 
* 1 
| 
IM 
Y By 
7 
1 
* 
£ . 
N f H 
N : 
is 
LAS 2 
i 
© #5! 


# 
1 
1 1 
1 ; 
3803 3 
WV; 
: FT i\ 
1 


; FF , 
* ; 
i} 3 
1 * f 
7.4 
| . 
| Ss. 
8 
: j « 
In 
44 1 
4 
+; 
1 
19 
pF 
71 1 


I — 


286 A TOUR thre Cumber, il ( 
fo nobody would work them: but this is rather a Rea- 

ſon why they ſhould have applied to the Search with 
more V igour ; therefore the more probable Cauſe is, M 7 
that the Charge of working them was too great for the 


Profits. 9 5 | | 
A little South-eaſt of Cockermouth ſtands Keſwick; ! 
a {mall Market-town, in Decay, inhabited chiefly by 
Miners, who have their Smelting-houſes here, there g 
being near this Place Mines of Black-lead, which turn ( 
to very good Account, and I think are the only Mines 
of the kind in Britain. 3 h 
Here we ſaw S4iddaw, which is there reported to be I © 
the higheſt Hill in England. It ſeems the higher, be- a 
cauſe it is not ſurrounded with other Mountains, like | I © 
molt of thoſe in other Counties, as at Cheviot, Peni- : 
gent, and other Places. From the Top of Siiddaw, a 
one ſees plainly into Scotland, quite into Dumſrieshire, 
and farther. _ 7 ' | y 
The Earl of Egremont is chief Lord of Cockermouth, : 
by Deſcent from the antient Family of the Piercies, N 


Earls of Northumberland. 1 
The Caſtles and great Houſes of this Eſtate fall to I * 
Ruin, as indeed all the Caſtles in this County do; for 


the two Kingdoms being now united, Strong-holds are 4 
of no more Uſe here, than in any other Part of the MW * 
Kingdom. The Caſtles in Cumberland now belong to l 
the Earl of Egremont, and thoſe in Northumberland to 4 
the Earl of Northumberland, „ y 

The Derwent is noted for Trout, and alſo for very 2 


0d Salmon; which from /Yorkington, a Fiſhing-town WF , 
at the Mouth of this River, they carry freſh as they 1 
take them, up to London, upon Horſes, which, chang- 
ing often, go Night and Day without Intermiſſion, WF , 
and, as they ſay, out-go the Poſt, ſo that the Fiſh Þ, 
come very ſweet and good to London, where the ex- 
traordinary Price they yield, from 25. 6 d. to 45. fir 
Pound, pays very well for the Carriage, They do the 
lame from Carliſſe. „„ 

 Feriy 


\ 


\ 


Cumbetl. GREAT BRITAIN. 5 287 


zrby, now a conſiderable Market- town, ſtands 

North-eaſt of Cockermouth, It is ſuppoſed to be the 
Arbeia of the Antients, | 

From the Mouth of the Derwent to that of the El- 


en is ſuppoſed to have been fortified by the Romans, 
to prevent the Landing of the Scots and IJriſb, who in- 


feſted theſe Coaſts; for here have been ſeveral Ruins 
of Fortifications diſcovered, and fome of them ſince 


Camden's Time. At Elienborough, *tis ſaid, the firſt 


Cohort of Dalmatians was gariſon'd, where are great 
Remains of Fortifications ſtill to be ſeen, old Vaults 
opened, Altars, Stones, and Statues, with Inſcriptions 
dug up, on them. And at Migton, a ſmall Market- 
town, farther North to the Foreſt of Allerdale, are ſe- 
veral Altars pitch'd, which they ſay were brought from 
Ellenborough, and old Carliſle. | 
It is proper in this Place to take notice of the proſ- 
perous Way the Harbour of Ellenfoot is now in; a 
Harbour very little known, and which even wanted a 
Name till within theſe few Years paſt. In the 22d 
Year of the Reign of his late Majeſty King George II. 
an Act paſled, intitled, An Act for Repairing, Enlarge- 
ing, and Preſerving, the Harbour of Ellenfoot, in the 
County of Cumberland; to commence and take Effect 


from and after the 25th Day of March 1749. and to 


continue for the Term of 21 Years; by means whereof 
the ſaid Harbour was greatly enlarged and improved: 


inſomuch, that tho” at the time of paſſing the ſaid Act, 


there was only one Farm-houſe ſtanding and built 
near the Harbour, yet under the Encouragement given 
by the ſaid Act, a great Number of Houſes, Ware- 
bouſes, and Buildings, had, in a few Years, been 
erected, adjoining or near to the faid Harbour, on 


both Sides the River Ellen, and a great many trading 


Perfons had been encouraged to ſettle there, and ſe- 
veral uſeful Manufactures were introduced and exer- 


ciſed, and a conſiderable Trade and Commerce in 


iron, Potters Ware, Glaſs, Cordage, and Fiſh, — 
1 :: 


= 
1 
_ 
1343 
42 28 
. 
12 
"a 
* | 
= 
FE 
254. 
1 
2 
Fl 
15. 
Wy 
IF 
TS 
75 
1 44 
16.1 
4 
N 
* 
N 
o - Þ 
DF 

4 
N f 
'}} 
FF 
* 

«1 
5 
_ 
on 
3 
1 
* 
s 
1 
— 

t 
[HET 
* 
1 4 

ah 
_ 
* 
1 5 
8 

; 
—_ 

o 
= 
o -{ 
4 
== 

1 
q 5 
— 4 
108: 

37 
Fe 1% 
CL 

= 
« Þ» 
* 3 
- 1 
_ 

* 

* 

+ 

1 


cath) an, 


— 


— — — — = = 
— b 


Fas 
* 9 Dr 


= 4 „ 
— Hite f EW A 
— 9 ang rv. Ce ea. 14 Ada 5 
8 K P oy 
e * — nh: q 2 


CT „„ „ „ „ 
N.. POTION 
—— — OY TOE WO IR 
* 
— "on —— — 


- > — —— 9 er 3. 4 2 
N —_— TY \ 


— 
„ oe. AAS. i 
— — . 
— ot To rogers 
7 
Wo vg 


288 A T OUR hr Cumberl. 
other Wares and Merchandize, ſettled in the ſaid 
Place. All theſe and other Advantages and Improve- 
ments were amply ſet forth in the Preamble to another 
Act of Parliament, which paſſed in the Year 1756, 
intitled, An Act for Enlarging the Term and Powers 
granted by an Af paſſed in the 22d Year of his preſent 
Aajefly, For Repairing, MY and Preſerving, 
the Harbour of Ellenfoot in the County of Cumberland. 
In this laſt Act the Harbour is declared © to be a Place 
© lawful for the Landing, Diſcharging, Loading, and 
© Shipping, of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandize, 
© and to be within the Limits of the Port of J/h:te- 
haven, and a Member of the Port of Carliſle, to all 
Intents and Purpoſes whatſoever ; and that the ſeve- 
ral Houſes and Buildings now erected and built, 
and to be erected and built, contiguous, near, or 
adjoining to the ſaid Harbour, on either Side of the 
ſaid River Ellen, ſhall from henceforth, ſays the 
AR, be called, known, or diſtinguiſhed, together 
with the ſaid Harbour, by the Denomination of 
Aary- Port, in all Grants, Pleadings, Courts, and 
Places whatſoever.” F 
Type Act itſelf mentions, greatly to the Honour of 
Humphrey Senhouſe, the Owner and Proprietor of 
Lands and Grounds on both Sides the River Ellen, his 
Public - ſpiritedneſs on this laudable Occaſion, and 
Readineſs to appropriate Lands on both Sides the Ri- 
ver, that ſo the Bound, Limits, and Extent of the 
Harbour ſhould be ſettled and aſcertained. See the 
. . 5 | 
In Whitfield Park, on the Borders of this County, 
they ſhew you an Hawthorn Tree, againſt which the 
Heads of a Stag and a Dog were formerly nailed up, in 
Memory of a famous Chaſe. It ſeems the Dog (not 
a Greyhound, as Mr. Camden's Continuator calls it, 
but a ſtanch Buckhound) ſingly chaſed a Stag from 
this Park, as far as the Red Kirk in Scotland, which, 
they ſay, is 60 Miles at leaſt, and back again o the 
185 ame 


R „ K K „ M A 4 „ „ 


2 — —— — — > —_— 


—— 


NR 
W 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN, 289 
fame Place; where, being both ſpent, the Stag, ex- 
erting his laſt Force, leaped the Park Pales, and died 
on the Inſide 3 the Hound, attempting to leap after 
him, had not Strength enough to get over, but fell 
back, and died on the Outſide juſt oppoſite. The 
Heads of both were nailed upon the Tree, and under- 
neath this Diſtich on them, The Hound's Name; it 
ſeems, was Hercules : ran a1 


» 
5 Hercules 117d Hart-a-Greeſe, 1 
And Hart- a-. Greſe fill d Hercules. 


3 Km Ss 
s 


mow OG 


5 : 
l Weſt of the Hawthorn Tree, and upon the old 
BB Roman Way, is the famous Column, called the Coun- 
%s Pillar, the beſt and moſt beautiful Piece of its 
* BW Kind in Britain. It is a fine Column of Free- ſtone, 
curiouſly wrought and enchaſed, and in ſome Places 


: painted, | It has an Obeliſk on the T op, ſeveral Coats 
1 of Arms, and other Ornaments, in proper Places all 


Joer it, with Dials alſo on every Side, and a Braſs 
4 I Plate with the following Inſcription, in Capital Let». 
ters: 5 1 
i Pilar was ereeted Anno 1656, by the Right Lis. 
5 nourable ANN E Counteſs. Dowager of Pembroke, 


— 2 2 


0 Fen = — — r - 
N - oh >» Lv rr 8 —— — 4 
a f 3 1 — * — 5 — — — — — — ꝙ＋— —-— — —ů 2 2001 > — Av he 
3 — e 88 . 1 5 —— en — —— — n r ocrabneo eh 2: ares, ods — {x6 A Lela Nr r [FE _ * 
ͤĩ573⁵d'u ts td dF es tbo : . 5 * 8 ENS 86 1% IIS Fad” Gag Tyne fi oor - * N= 


* 2 " - 8 — = eng ing" > — 2 2 = 
5 + — : K - L r 8 — D — ? - ; 2 — 
5 - —— + ==. — = ** > S ; ” — = R 9 if nk 8 RS * 25 r 2 = 
. 1 3 — ; r 2 8 — nh be ERS ee 9 . , 8 2 8 5 — 
0 5 - a C 2 — — Ws 1 _ RU 25 EDD 1 _— 
1 — — — — _— — —— — — — oY LEY 
as — po — 1 —— . err — * — er — - IT CNET => — AD. . = _— _— \ 
my ” 437 4 Fe 8 . — — — 2 A _ * 8 2 — = „ . — 1 — 4 > 24 — — Py * . 
* N 8 — * 9 PA — _ = band 
l \ — N 4 n l l * — 
1 * - 1 8 8 5 8 — * A N 5 33 oY —— 1 


0 and ſole Heir of the Right Honourable George Earl: + 

4 | of Cumberland, &c. for a Memorial of her laſt | 

| : Parting in this Place with her good and pious Mo- 
i ther, the Right Honourable Margaret Counteſs Datw- | 
* ager of Cumberland, the ſecond of April 1616. in 1 


Memory whereof ſbe alſo left an Annuity of. Four 
5 Pounds, to be la to the Poor within the Pa- 
4 iſh of Brougham, every Second Day of April for ever, 
upon the Stone Table hereby, . 


n 
* * "—_— < 
8 — e — 
ot jo pthes \ 


= — —— — _ 
— — 


ty This Counteſs of Fan had a noble Eſtate in 


* 
- * 
* 
0. <4 
ums 2 OW. 
000 Dog ot Dag  - — SO 833 * rr — 
VTCPPFPPFFPC—T—PP—PPPPPPPPPP—— eg Tir ann 
tho — 


q chis County, and a great many fine old Seats, all which 
» ſue repaired and beautified, and dwelt ſometimes at | 
E Vol. III. 8 | O *© > us | 


** 
„O» 
af re * 


. 2 . -. — —— 
PPC . 


290 A TOUR thro Cumberl. 


one, and ſometimes at another, for the Benefit of her 


Tenants, and of the Poor, whom ſhe always made de- 


ſirous of her Preſence, conſtantly relieving them by 


her Bounty and Hoſpitality. But thoſe Eſtates are, ſince 


that Time, ry into other Families, particularly into 
that of the 
IVeftmerland, © | 

This Lady was of the Family of Cl:iord ; ſhe had 


no leſs than four Caſtles in this County, of which 
Pendragon Caltle was the chief, which is a fine Build- 


ing to this Day RL | 
We .did not' go into the Grotto on the Bank of 
the River Eden, of which Mention is made by Cam- 


den's Continuator, the People informing us, that the 
Paſſage was blocked up with Earth : ſo I muſt be' 


content with telling you, that it ſeems to have been 
a Lurking-place for Robbers, in old Time. A Place 
of Strength it could not be; for its Security ſeems to 
have conſiſted ſolely in its Privacy. It had certainly 
been worth ſeeing, had it been paſſable. The Entry 
is long and dark, but whether ftrait or crooked, I 
cannot ſay. The Iron Gates leading to it are gone, 
nor is there any Sign of them, or what they were 
hung to. | La 1 

Higher up on the Eden, the Eaſt Side of the Coun- 
ty, is Kirk-Ofwald, an indifferent Market-town, that 
has nothing of Note; and Brampton ſtands N. E. of 

Carliſſe, on the River 7tching, about a Mile beyond 
the Picts Wall, which has likewiſe nothing worth re- 
marking, ſaving an Hoſpital built by the Lady Carliſie, 
Grandmother to the preſent Earl, for fix poor Men, 
and as many Women. i 


At Burgh upon the Sands, a little Diſtance from 


Carliſle, is the Monument of our victorious Prince 
Edward I. who having ſo far ſubdued the Scots, as to 
bring away the ſacred Stone at Scone Abbey, whereon 
their Kings uſed to be crowned, died here in his 
Camp, on his March againſt them, like a true 8 
| | 5 ; 8 ler 


„ 


Larl of Thanet, who has great Eſtates in 


Fav 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAI W 291 


dier, guarding his Frontiers with his lateſt Breath. In 


Memory of him there was afterwards erected a fair 


ſquare Pillar nine Yards and an half high, with theſe 
_ Inſcriptions on three Sides: 85 . 1 


On the Weſt Side: 


| Memoriæ æternæ EDVARDI I. Regis Angliæ longe da- 
riſſimi, qui in belli apparatu contra Scotos occupatus, 


hic ix caſtris obiit 7 Julii, A. D. 1307. 


To the immortal Memory of Edward I. the far moſt 
illuſtrious King of England; who, being ſurpriſed 
in his Preparations for War againſt the Scots, died 


here in the Field, Fly 7. 1307. 
On the South Side: 


Nebiliffmus Princeps HRNRICUS HowaRD, Dur 
Norfolciæ, Comes Mareſchal. Anglia, Comes Arund. 


Sc. EDVARDO |. Rege Angliæ oriundus. 


The moſt noble Prince Henry Howard, Duke of 
. Norfolk, Earl Marſhal of England, Earl of Arun- 


del, &c. deſcended from Edward I. King of Eng- 
land, | | | et, 
. On the North Side: 
JonaxxES Aclionsy, J. C. F. 
| Beneath, RS, 
Tno. LANGSTONE fecit, 1685, 


Carliſie, the Lugovallum, or rather Brovoniacum of 


the Romans, is ſituated exceedingly pleaſant by the 
Pits Wall, and guarded by three Rivers; by the 
Eden on the North, by the Peterel on the Eaſt, and 
on the Weſt. by the Caude. It is a Place of great 
Antiquity, being firſt built by an antient Britiſh Prince 


named Luel, and from him called Caer Luel, i. e. 


Lus Town, to which it retains an Afinity of Sound 
O 2 to 


1 © iz; 2 — rr LEE Es 2 "6 Wo BAI 
1 . 3 = Yo - 
— 423 — ——— ——5 — — — 
: 8 —— — — ̃ —— 1 8 FVV = - 
— — nn IS _ FFF 1 


. 1 * n 
err. rer r 
* rr 


e 


* . 4 
14 
=o 

p 4 
9 
7 
6 
11 
i ni * 
The 2 
I | 
* 5 
ye 
WS © 
11 

; 11 
T4 

” F} 

4 +. 
4 1. 
Py Lc 
— 18 
1 
1er 
13 
1 
75 05 
Py © i 
e 
1 
ik 
1 
1 
1, 
4 
By Li 
% 
* 
1 

p 13 
N= 
+. 
6 

11 D 
1 
1 
1 
ib 
1 
, 
b 
$ 

- $ 
14 
13 

1 
1 1 
4 
3 
1 
N 
| 
2 g 
1 £ 
* * t 
1165 
1 7 1 
ll 2 
: 
11 1 


TER + 


Towns ; been taken, retaken, burnt, and deſtroyed, 


ſeveral times by the Scots, Danes, and Norwegians ; 


and lay once in its Ruins for near 200 Years, till il. 
liam Rufus rebuilt it, who ſent a Colony of Southern 
Engliſhmen to it, and who is faid likewiſe to have 
built the Caſtle, Henry I. dignified it with an Epiſ- 


copal See, and fortified it as a proper Barrier agzinſt 


the Scots, The City ſends two Members to Parlia- 
= 1 | 


The Cathedral Church is a-venerable old Pile, but 
ſeems to have been built at two different times, or, 
as it were, rebuilt, the upper Part being much more 
modern than the lower ; and ſaid to be built by King 


Henry VIII. A great Part of it was built by St. Da- 


vid, King of Scotland, who held this County, together 


with Weęſimorland and Northumberland, in Vaſſalage 


from the Crown of England. He, and many of his 


Succeſſors, were great Benefactors to it, and nomi- 


nated ſeveral of the Biſhops ; but almoſt the whole 


Nave, or Weſt Part of it, was demoliſhed by the Scots 


in the Civil Wars. There is another Church, called 


St. Cuthbert's. 


King Henry VIII. fortified this City againſt the Scots, 
and built an additional Caſtle to it on the Eaſt Side, 


which Caniden calls a Citadel. On the Northweſt is. 
2 Gariſon. The City has three Gates, and the Walls 
round it are ſo thick, that three Men may walk abreaſt 


on them within the Parapet. Over the Eden is a Bridge 
which ſoon, lets you into Scotland, the Limits not be- 


ing above fix Miles off; for the South Part of it on 
this Side comes at leaſt 50 Miles farther into England 


than at Berwick. 


Carliſie is a wealthy and populous Place, and the 
Houſes are well- built, but it is not large. Here flou- 


riſhes a good Trade in Fuſtians. What happen'd here 
in the Rebellion of 1745. when it was taken by the 
Rebels, and retaken by his Royal Highneſs the oo 

: „„ : Ol 


292 A TOUR bro Cumberl. 
to this Day. It has ſuffered the Fate of moſt Frontier 


FS r 5 oa o-.. 


ww a mo 


* CY 


8 et © DP os 5 we W 


that Rebellion, are now quite completed. 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN. 293 
of Cumberland, J ſhall take notice of, in an Article by 
itſelf, at the latter End of my Tour through Scotland, 


where the Flame firſt broke out, and where it was 
happily extinguiſhed ; only obſerving here, that the 
Fortifications, which had received ſome Damage in 


2 


In the Month of October 1752. the Workmen eni- 


ployed in making the military Road to Carle, found 
a great Number of curious Roman Coins and Medals 
in the old Wall near Haddon, They had been depoſit- 


ed in wooden Boxes, which were almoſt decay'd; yet 
ſeveral of the Medals were as freſh and fair as if but 
newly ſtruck. Some of them are made of Silver, but 
the moſt Part of Copper, and a Mixture. of a coarſer 


Metal. They are thought to be as valuable a Col- 
lection as has been diſcovered for fome Centuries 


paſt, : 


I made a Trip, when I was in theſe Parts, to Par- 


ton, in this County, which I the rather mention, be- 


cauſe of the Improvements made in its Harbour of 
late Years, by virtue of Acts of Parliament for that 
- Purpoſe. JJ. 
For in the fourth and fifth of the late Queen Anne, 
an Act paſſed for enlarging the Piers and Harbour of 


that Town; but by the Negligence and Death of 
Truſtees, the Works intended by the Act were not 
carried to Effect. This proving a great Diſappointment 
to the Inhabitants, who had built Houſes on a Proſpect 
of a conſiderable Trade in Exportation of Coals, and 


other Commodities f the County; in the Year 1724. 


another Act paſſed for rebuilding the ſaid Piers and 
Harbour. In conſequence of this Act, the Pier was 
rebuilt, and the Harbour made capable of receiving 
ſeveral ſmall Ships; and a Trade for Coals to Ireland 


and other Parts commenced. This gave Encourage- 


ment for another Act, which paſſed Anno 1732. to en- 


large the Term for 21 Years after the Expiration of 


the former, in order to make the Harbour ſtill more 
= complete, 


eee eee e eee eee 


4 : 
. WI none wetted RE III» rey * — N Ro TI RY 2 r * p 
— ” bn wm . cb AS The. Zim 


o 
" 
= . — 222 2 
n . —_— 
... A Tn CS 
4X 600 r N. 
2 F le FE WW Wo * 


Ir 
n 


Fen nag . IE RES 
. ˙ u ͤ³rEuMl!! I > 


— —— 


- 
5 — — . — r — — —— nn — — — , 
rr oe ER Sn Fit ett; DE atm 2 I OE Eon i ooo — 7 7j j—%7—7—ꝗ«]ꝙ«:t;:t 2 cc a Eu 
- — —— ee — ͤ —— . TTT EFA 
3 2 * 1 — 5 e - 4 * — ——— — 


* — inert oo 


— RT YR — ——— . . Tos 9 Dt eb 2 on EE 


OCR TRIPS 3 75 4 


e ee ys, hp ap pa e won ves; > 


CE. oa fo 


ET 


— 2— a. 
—— —x 
Bent by 
— — 
er 

* Is 


— - 
- CY aA 
8 
— — —— 
. 
nw by ns if age 


1 14 


rr 4 Ag — om”, is 453" AR 
= D ag Dm 2 n AAS _ 

- l = n oder — | b . : 1 * 8 : | 

\ * CN 2 TS „ <9-,5% 1 3 — COLIN ICI FTI r 382 8 

= RITES g — Ea. 5 r ee e el . A — — 
2 — Pl 922 455555454546 (nn) n 2 * Lag <6 Ee | N * a 

- I'= aa x 4 ot N n ng why ON ee , err 3 
/ bo * — „ 8 * ts le A DD 5 * n 
= 6 * by * 
« A * 5 5 5.2 1 — * n 2 - — 
8 2 - ver — ” 2 1 en N . 
— * ve' - 


- W — COTE TAS 
WP 4. of, —_ CEE NENT TIO 
FIT =_ CEA = 8 n I oe Ry” __ 
Seng, in A ee Ore re ne mo tn, r 9 
— amen toi \ ries. PRE — W. = 
4 8 4 * - 
q Ld 33 48 W 


—— — 
* COLOR 
en, wr - - 
r 
P 
; * - 


$ 


— — 
3 


* 
—— 2 to —— wage — * * 1 
r Lan err. _— abpeevr arte are + acer gp 
- - 


294 A TOUR bro Cumberl. 


_. complete, for the Reception of Ships of Fader Burden, 


and to enlarge the River, cleanſe the Harbour, and to 
bring into it a ſmall Brook, called Mareſiy bect, which 


runs near it. 


In this Northern County are more noted Roman 


Antiquities found, than almoſt in any other, It has 
a Lake called Ulles-water, noted for producing the ex- 


cellent Fiſh called Char, almoſt peculiar to it, and to 
Finander-mere. Mry. noſe, one of its higheſt Hills, is 
remarkable for its three Shire Stones, a Foot Diſtance 


each, one in Cumberland, one in Vęſimorland, and the 
third in Lancaſbire. „„ | 


Near Saleld in this County is a Trophy Gee 
vulgarly called Long Meg and her Daughters, conſiſt- 


ing of 77 Stones; Long Meg 15 Feet above Ground, | 
and the reſt but 10. | 


This having been a Frontier County, the antient 


| Houſes of the Nobility and Gentry are built for the 


moſt part Caſtle-wiſe, and are called Caſtles. Thus 


Grey. loc Caſtle and Drumbough Caſtle belong to the 


Duke of Norfolk; Cockermouth Caſtle to the Earl cf 


Egremont; Naworth Caſtle to the Earl of Carliſſe; 
Dacre Caftle to the late Earl of SH; Corby Caſtle, 
Mr. Howard's. And here I muſt be a little more 
particular on the laft, which deſerves the Obſervation 


of the Curious, Corby Caſtle is ſituated about four 
Miles S. E. of Carliſle, and is the Seat of the ſaid Mr. 
Howard, a Deſcendant from the Duke of Norfolt's 
Family. The Building is of Stone, neat, but plain. 
The Entrance to this Houſe is by a large ſquare Court- 
yard, On the Right hand are the Gardens, and on 
the Left Offices for the Servants, and Stabling for 


HFHorſes. It is plentifully watered by Springs in ſeveral 
large Reſervoirs made about the Houſe, which ftands 
on the Precipice of an high Rock, which is in the 

Back- part about 100 Feet high. In this Rock is cut 

a regular Pair of Stairs of about ſix Feet wide, with all 
their Ornaments down to the Bottom. As you deſcend 


theſe 


Cumberl. GRA BniTary. _ 205 


theſe Stairs, you paſs by ſeveral Rooms hewn out of 
the Rock, of about. 16 Feet ſquare, which have no 
other Furnitute than Tables and Seats made out of 
the Stone. At the bottom of thoſe Stairs you, aſcend 


another Pair about 10 Feet high, which leads to a Ter- 


race made in Form of a Semicircle, by the Side of 
which runs the River Eden, having a Pair of Stairs to 
take Water at. The Terrace preſents a fine View 


of another Part of the Rock, of equal-Height with the 


former; from the top of which is placed a Caſcade, fo 
wonderfully curious, that I know nothing like it. It 
is at leaſt 100 Feet high, and the Water is broken by 


the pointed Ridges of the Rock into ſo many various 
Shapes, and the Springs fly about you in ſo delightfully 


rude a manner, as to entertain you with a great In- 


ſtance of the Power of Art in embelliſhing Nature, 


which is further heightened by a natural Caſcade (ef- 
fected by this artificial one), of which you have a 
diſtinct Proſpect, when you arrive at the Landing- 


| ſtairs. 


From hence you have another View, of half A 
Mile long, of is River on the Right hand, and an 
hanging Gow of Trees, juſt as Nature has placed 
them, on the Left. As you paſs along a Gravel- 
walk, you ſee ſeveral Figures placed there for Orna- 


ment; at the End of the Walk is a ſmall Banqueting= 
room, with a Portico in the Front, facing this Walk: 
it is called Tempe altera, In this River is a Weir, 
well ſtocked with Salmon and other Fiſh. On the 
other Side of the River, over-againſt the Houſe, are 


the Remains of an old Caſtle, which is called WWeatherat- 
Tower, under which is an Hermit's Cave. : 


But before I leave Cumberland, let me take Notice | 
of the natural Rock called Chr: iNenbury- Craig“. It 


by Bury, in the Saxon Language, ſignifies Manfion, or Mam : and 


perhaps the Converts to Chriſtianity in the North might aſſemble here, 


in order to conceal themſelves: Whence the Name gn. | 


O 4 . is 


. 
5 
231 A 
<q 
7 
(URS 
"nu 8 
\ 2: 
7 rf ; 
1 +: 
. 
5 
2 
. 
* 8 
7 5 * 
FT f 
4B: 2 
= 21 Bs 
* 
( * Yu 
N 4 \ 
3 Et} 
Q oy * 
R 2 
1 
12 5 
2 „ 
2 „ 7 4 
F . 
i, ay 
K 467 
3 * 
* 
Fo 
LF 
: * 
ok ; 
* 
my 
TY 
By 


the Mountain to the Craig. 


296 . R thro Cumberl. 


is ſituated at the top of a Mountain, very difficult of 
Acceſs, at which I had more than once looked through 
my Teleſcope, ſrom a Place 23 Miles diſtant from it. 
This View at length ſo much excited my Curioſity, 
that I determined to gratify it by a nearer Examination; 


however, as it was early in the Spring when I firſt 
formed this. Reſolution, and as the Ways are ſcarce 


paſſable even in Summer, I employed myſelf in other 


Excurſions till the Beginning of Auguſt, and then ſet 


out on my Expedition, | 
J took a Guide with me to Beuca/tle, a Pariſh on 


the Northward Extremity of Cumberland, in which 


there is neither Town nor Village, but a few- wretched 
Huts only, which, are widely ſcattered on a deſolate 
Country. After a. Journey of 20 Miles, fometimes 
wading an Hour together in Water up to the Horſes 
Girths, though the Bottom was tolerably ſound, we 
came to the Church. At a ſmall Diſtance I diſcovered 
an Hedg&alchouſe; which I knew muſt ſe:ve me for 
an Inn; but when I entered it, I was not more diſ- 
guſted with the Dirt and Darkneſs of the Room into 


which I was introduced (the Floor of bare Earth, and 
the Bed leſs eligible than clean Straw) than I was with 


the noiſy Mirth of ſome Boors, who had been drink- 
ing till they were quite fuddled: however, as I knew 
it was bootleſs to complain, I appeared, as well as ! 


could, to be content, that I might not diſpleaſe my 


Hoſt. The Clergyman, indeed, was fo obliging, 
as to offer me his Room at the Parſonage; but, as [ 
was unwilling to give Trouble, I declined it. 

In the Evening I acquainted my Hoſt with the In- 


tent of my Journey, and at my Requeſt he procured 


me another Guide, who undertook to conduct me up 


* 


When I roſe at four o' Clock the next Morning, 


'T found him ready, The Weather was extremely 
bright and ſerene, which greatly favoured my Purpole, 


and after we had proceeded about two Miles, we came 
| | | | : R to 


. Cumberl. GRTAT BRITA 297 
f to a Place where there were a few more Hovels, 


h called the Flat, After ſome Talk with my Guide, I 

diſcovered that he was very diffident of the Succeſs of 
, our Expedition, and of his own Ability to procure me 
ö Safe- conduct; and therefore, as we were now within 


Sight of the Precipices, I hired a Boy that kept Sheep 


t 

C upon them to walk with us, at leaſt as far as we could: 

K uſe our Horſes. By his Direction we came into a 

, Hollow, through which the River Line runs, among 
innumerable Precipices; in this Hollow we were 

obliged to croſs the Water often, to avoid the Falls; 
and going ſometimes on one Side, and ſometimes on 
the other, we made about a Mile of Winding-way, 
and at length came into a kind of Plain, one Side of 
which was bounded by the Declivity ef the Mountain, 
which we then began to aſcend; ſoon after we had 
reached that Part which was level with the Baſe of 


2 ũÜww ] ð m -- . ]˙¹ mA — 


which, as Milton ſays, was neither Sea nor good dry 
Land; here we were obliged to diſmount, and having 
| tied our Horſes by the Bridles we proceeded on Foot; 
| to tye them was indeed an unneceſſary Precaution, for: 
| the poor Creatures, by an inſtinctive Sagacity, were 
as ſenſible of their Danger as we, and ſtood motion- 
leſs where we left them. | $2: 
We now walked above a Mile and an half over a 
Tract of Ground full of Holes, filled with a boggy 
Subſtance, which in this Country is called Moſs; 


way under our Feet, or leſt ſome Cloud, being ſtopped. 

by the Rocks, ſhould bury us in a Fog, and not only 
diſappoint my. Curioſity, but prevent the Recovery of 
our Horfes : however, we ftill' went forward, and 
came to a Place that was covered with Moſs of an- 

other kind. . | 

I!his lay. above the, Ground, in litle Heaps about a 
Foot. over, called Hf, which were full of Holes, 
like an Honeycomb; the long irregular Strides which 
„ Q.5 we- 


the Craig, we found ourſelves environed with a Syrtes, 


Wen 
ee e eee 


we were here in perpetual Terror, left. it ſhould give 


% 
r e We ne e 


— 


— . _ n 
BY STO e , e 42 wn. . — RK 
* * — . on — 7 on — n 4 bn 1 


8 
- — 


7 * — * 1 < * 2 
1 nay * — — — — 
: = | - - — xo 8 
6 . 1 ES. — 2 — — — wes 3 0 
: — R — — oe — Re min r "i" e Bo : 1 2 5 
2 9 41 £ 8 * . 1 . — rs 7 * CAGES = — ho 1 Rc. EG e 2 1 va — n — — 
. PP Rem Y ” N 2 . — 
2 - 8 — eps — — * * MD 
Y . _ — . 7 — 7 a r — — — r T . -..-. 35 — 
* 2 - 2 * Þ wr! 1 7 J f TY — „ — A n „ an - — 22 $ is 
9 2 Fn N * — Pre] 
* 8 "m © * 


reer r 
CO es OO 0-FE BR...” ICAL. > 
Dee et 

* 


CE —— I . * — 


8 *, 8 0 


An — 


r 


he ne 05 : CCC 
. f/ Acc 
FA — 
— 


ab 


——Ex. 
— =_ 
FA ASA NE LT Lara ns —ů — * 


"fu AN 6 


and the Rocks are upon its Summit. In the calmeſ 


29898 AT OUR thr! Cumbert, 
we were obliged to take to avoid theſe Haſſocks, made 
this Part of my Journey extremely fatiguing. When 
we came within about a Quarter of a Mile of the 


| Baſe of the Rocks, we entered all on a ſudden upon 


the fineſt Graſs-plat that Nature can produce; the 
Aſcent over this Green is very gradual, and it has the 


Appearance of a fine artificial Slope. The Rocks, upon 


a near View, appear very rude and romantic; they 
are broken by innumerable Fiſſures, that go quite 


from top to bottom, in a perpendicular Direction; 


molt of them are from 10 to 15 Yards high; it is not 
difficult to walk on the top of them, nor, in many 
Places, to ſtep from one to another; ſome of them, 
however, project conſiderably over the Side of the 


Mountain, and upon theſe it would be dangerous to 


ſtand. They cover about three Acres of Ground, 
and bear ſome Reſemblance to Stonehenge, particularly 
in the Difficulty of numbering them, which I at- 


tempted ſeveral times, but could never produce the 


fame Sum. . . e 
To the Caves amongſt theſe Rocks the Moſs- 


. troopers formerly retreated for Security; and of late 


Years one 44:ic#lebrow, and a favourite Miſtreſs, took 


up their Abode here for two or three Seaſons. 


It has at preſent no Inhabitants but Wild- cats, of 
which there are many, the largeſt I ever ſaw. | 
In our Deſcent, notwithſtanding the Skill of the 
Guides, we came a full Mile Weſt of our Horſes, 
which, after a long Search, we at laſt found by the 
Help of my Compaſs : they ſtood trembling by one 
another, and had not ftirred a Step, either in Search 
of Food or Freedom. We led them down the Brow ; 
and thus ended the Adventure of Chrifenbury- Craig, 


which at a Diſtance has all the Appearance of one of 


thoſe inchanted Caſtles that are deſcribed in the heroic 


Romances of the middle Ages. 


The Mountain is on the Skirts of Northumberland, 
Day 


„„ c 903 CI 


ww 1 


Cumberl. GREAT BRTTATN. 9 
Day there is a ſurprizing Draught of bleak Air into 
Northumberland Waſtes, which are the moſt ſnocking 


Deſarts that I ever ſaw in Britain, | 
If the Rottenneſs of the Soil on which theſe Rocks 
ſtand be conſidered, perhaps it will not be thought an 


improbable Conjecture, that the whole Summit of 
the Mountain was once of the ſame Height of the 


Rocks, but that the Wind and Rains having by De- 


grees waſhed and driven the ſofter Parts down from 
the Stone, then were formed into a Bog below, and 


the Rock left naked above. | Fo 
The rocky Part itſelf appears, however, to waſte, 


the Interſtices being filled with a white Sand, which | 


is carried away in Drifts, and great Quantities of 
which are found in all the neighbouring Places, whence: 


it is carried to Market and ſold, for» ſharpening. 
Scythes, and ſuch: like things, for which it is much 


better than any other. | . 

The Way from all the Trading- towns on the Coaſt: 
of Cumberland, to Scotland, is croſs the Selway Firth, 
at Bowneſs, This Water is repreſented in our Maps 
as a large Arm of the Sea, but it is eaſily fordable by 
thoſe who are acquainted with the Bottom z. it is not, 
however, always fordable in the ſame Place, the 
Sands being continually ſhifting; nor indeed can it be 


always ſafely forded when the Shallows are known, 5 


becauſe the Sands, in ſome Places, are only a Stratum 
lying over a {tiff Marle, which not being hard enough. 
to ſupport the Weight of the Paſſenger, nor ſoft 
enough to ſwallow him at once, gives way by De- 
grees; and though by his utmoſt Efforts he cannot: 
eſcape, but ſinks deeper and deeper at every Struggle, 
et it will be ſometimes more than. a Quarter of an 
our before he is buried to the Chin, and then, after 
beating the Surface with his Arms extended, the laſt: 
ineffectual Attempt for Life, the Quag at once ſuff; 


Cates him, and. buries the Body... 1 
me The 


0 
**: ws * ——_— p 9 8 
P e EEO LOCA Agro ers „ „ee e r MA» 
5 . 8 — * — 2 — Sony " 
— — — 


—_— 
— 4 
Wr 5 , 
— ; © < 
> =... — — 


* 
n > 
2 2 


— . LE PN EE ISITO 


LY 2 W LE. 
r 


— 
— 
2 


a4 r . N — — — 
wy , - * 2 — © 0. xx =5 
— —— _ — rene ann f N : 2 
. — A p—_— — — Re AR ee «D'S, TL SENG + AS r 8 2 i 4 van 7 
n eee A 4&r "ras tar ent rx 2 1 * . 2 3 2 2 — b Y — r Err . * JET 
* oe AS —— Mae Fe are ES I N S c 5 SO =_ 
p 2 . "Paphos 2 , — = . w 5 0 = —— 2 — Ran . — — — 
. a l * — — 4 $ — Z 7 og e * Fr . 
- —— com . * 


— ä —— WESLEY 
P. Ä RR ae A Rats. an + 


2 yrs — 


e eee e 
© WEIS = — — — 22 — 
en IN: eee r 


u 82 wet . 
n 


* 
E 


30 AT OUR thro” Cumbert. 
The Place of theſe Quickſands, which are ſome- 
times 30 Vards in Extent, is alſo continually changing, 
ſo that the moſt ſkilful Guide cannot always avoid 
them; the beſt way to eſcape is to put Spurs to the 
Horſe, and ride full-ſpeed, as ſoon as the Ground is 
firſt perceived to have a tremulous Motion under-foot; 
for the time which the ſame Spot ſuſtains the Weight 
of the Horſe is then ſo very ſhort, that the Sand does. 
not give way ſoon enough to prevent the Force of his 
next Spring. It ts alſo adviſable never to go over this. 
Place alone, nor for the Company to keep cloſe to- 
gether, for if they do, all may be ſurprized at once, 
and conſequently all wilkperiſh for want of Help; but 
if one only finds himſelf finking, the reft may afford 
him Aſſiſtance: the uſual Method is to tread him out, 
which is tfus performed; a Layer of Straw or Bruſh- 
wood muſt be laid round him, or if nothing better is 
at hand, a Great-coat or two; upon this ſome Perſon 
muſt tread nimbly, either in a Circle or backward and 
forward, and the Ground being preſſed by the Weight, 
will gradually ſqueeze up the finking Perſon till he can 
get on the artificial Stratum, and both muſt then run 
for their Eivess © | 
Buchanan, and the Scots Monks, who have men- 
tioned theſe Quickſands, greatly exaggerate the Pan- 
ger; for when the Water is ſo low as that the Sands 
ate uncovered, they become ſo firm and hard, that no 
Danger can happen in paſſing them; and at other 
times fo much Caution is now uſed, that a Life is 
ER ũ . ne 7, 
It often happens, two things, equally dangerous, 
are not equally the. Objects of Dread, and ſo it is 
here; for, while the utmoſt Vigilance is uſed with 
reſpe& to the Sands, ſufficient Care is not.taken in 
reſpect to the Fide. "The Wind here is generally at 
Weſt, and when it happens to concur with a Spring 
Flow, the Water drives in with ſuch Rapidity over 


this level Coaſt that no Horſe can out- run it, * 5 
| | | ; Ide. 


- 


. 4 
4 4 
* 


* 


* 


Cumberl. GREAT BRITAIN. * 801 


Tide ſtill gains upon the Rider, and at length Maſhes. 


For- 


him away. Many Perſons of good Family a 


tune have been thus loſt by their Impatience, which, 

perhaps without any reaſonable Motive, hurried them. 
over the Sands while the Tide was coming in, upon 
a groundleſs Preſumption that it would not flow faſt 


enough to deſtroy them, when they might have been. 
in perfect Safety by waiting a few Hours for the 


Ebb. | 


Bowneſs is a mean Village, ſituated on a Promon- 
tory, on which ts alſo a Reman Fort, called Tuno- 


celum, which overlooks the Bay. The Inhabitants 


are all Fiſhermen ; and their manner of taking Salmon 
is ſomewhat uncommon, as it 1s adapted to their pe- 
culiar Situation on a level Shore, which is ſoon covered: 


and ſoon left dry, for a great Extent, at the Flux and 


Re- flux of the Tide. 


The Tide brings in large Quantities of this Fah, 
which, when it ebbs, are ſeen in Shoals upon the 


Sands, juſt below the Surface of the Water, and 
ſometimes ſcarce covered; at this Time the Coaſt is 
crowded with Fiſhermen, each — Staff of Aſh. 
about 14 Feet long, armed at the End with three 


barbed Spikes, very like the Trident which Painters 
and Statuaries have given to Neptune, as the Symbol, 


of his Dominion. This Weapon they call a Leeſter, 
and as ſoon as the Fiſh are to be ſeen, they dart it at 


them, with ſuch Strength and Dexterity as ſcarce ever 
do miſs their Mark, or fail of diſabling the Fiſh they 


ſtrike from getting back to Sea. | 
Salmon, at their Markets, fells from three Half- 
pence to T'wo-pence per Pound; but the People 


have ſo little Notion of drefling it to Advantage, that 
they-throw away the Livers, and eat the Fiſh without 
having ſo much as a little melted Butter for Sauce. If 


any remain unſold after the Market is over, they cut it 
to Pieces and ſalt it, putting it up cloſe in a Pot or 


earthen Veffel, to be eaten as Winter Proviſion, with. 


- - 
2m, —_— — 


*+ ” 
e . . mw " "wh 
— * 7 — — 1 36; 1 
— C TX. — ws 3 — ee aa ů . 5 — n * — — ho 2 F - A A Pp Foy W — - — — 
— p 394 2 — — © - - 8 - L — II 1 — — 2 ˙“-wÄ — — CREE * — 2 ; 
233 1 — 8 — eos — 3 | TER 2 = — 
. D = mT MI. Hd. 3 5% 1 8 —— e — 
5 } 2 n 5 5 N SB ain — — .... 3 1 9 bes > Marry A A . A In Ie nas nr 2 2 7 
L . __ n 3 33 - \ 
< ——————— 5 


—— 
- *, 


. - — n — ei02 talk 1 Y 8 
Far. £ ___ — > IN — 
2 g — — - a — — 
— CERES, - 4 — n : - — 8 * — 1 . 
2 ry I „ — — q 5 n yes — ves — — * ͤ 2 * 
4 Ws: — 8 — * 2 4 by 7 p 1 
Aa + mY — — wet — RT \ 


P ne, II, * 


2 —— te 
— _ 
— — — — 


„ 


| Potatoes or Parſnips. The Salmon that is prepared in 


this manner is exceeding ſalt; and if it is made toler- 
ably freſh by ſoaking it in Water, it loſes all the Fla- 

vour that would diſtinguiſh it from Salt-fiſh of any 
other kind. ; 3 Ca 
But they have a better way of preſerving this Fiſh, 


by making it into what they call Kipper this is done 


by dividing it in the Middle from Head to Tail, and 
drying it ſlowly before a Fire. | 

Thus prepared, it will keep. its fine Flavour a long 
de little inferior to freſh Salmon. 2 
As the great Extent of Shoal on this Coaſt conſiſts 


time, and, if ſkilfully managed by a good Cook, will 


of Sand, which takes a new Figure almoſt every 


Tide, there are frequently large Hollows or Pools left, 


of very ſhallow Water, after the Tide has left the 
Other Parts quite dry; and it often happens that the 


| Shoals of Salmon brought in by the Flow are followed 
by Porpoiſes, ſome of which ſeldom fail of being leſt 


in theſe Pools at turn of the Tide, Theſe, of which 


there will ſometimes. be 20 in one Pool, are imme- 
diately attacked and. ſurrounded by the Fiſhermen; 
the Battle, which is often obſtinate and long before 
the Porpoiſes are killed, affords much Diverſion to a 


- Spectator. This Fiſh is cut to Pieces, and its Fleſh, | 


which very much reſembles Pork, affords a great 
Quantity of Oil, which turns to good Account, tho” 
the intolerable Stink produced by their Method of ex- 
tracting it would ſcarce be borne for any Profit, by 
thoſe who had not from their Infancy been uſed to 
 fmell it, and worn off their Diſguſt by long Habit. 

Beſides Salmon and Porpoiſes, the Fiſhers take 
Flukes and Herrings in great Numbers. The Flukes, 


| after they are ſalted, are threadled on. a String, and 


hung up in the Chimney to dry, and are deemed but 
forry Food by the poor People. The Herrings, of 
which 15 were ſold for a Penny when I was there, are 
falted, being at firſt only ſprinkled, and. left 2 

00 5 | 1 8 lays 


* 


o x Wwe 
4 


jerſey. GREAT Ri pony 303 
Days to drain and purify, and then ſalted down in 


Barrels or earthen Veſſels for Winter Store; when; 
they are eaten either boiled or broiled, without Sauce, 


and without having been. ſo much as dipped in Water 


to waſh off the Brine. 
There is but little Winter Fiſh in. theſe Parts, and 
18 Shell-fiſh except Oyſters and Cockles. 
Cumberland gives Title of Duke to his Royal High- 


neſs Prince William, his late Majeſty's Son; as it did 


before to his Royal Highneſs George Prince of Den- 
mark, Conſort of the late Queen Anne: 

Weſtward of Lancaſbire and Cumberland lies the 2 
of Man; of which I ſhall take Notice among the 
Weltern Illes of Scotland. I am, Sir, 


Nur moſt nn Servant. 


L * ＋ R V. 


assist a brief Account of the 72 of 


IJERSR, Senn, Annen and 
SARKE. 


8 > 
HAT nothing may be wanting to. e this 


Work, I ſhall briefly in this Place touch upon 


the Iſles of Jerſ⸗ y, Guernſey, Alderney, and Sarke, 


which are the only Remains of the Dukedom of Nen. 
mandy now in Poſſeſſion of the Engliſh Crown. And 
rſt for Jerſey. | 


Various Names ks been affixed to this Iſland: in 


the Time of the Romans it was named Cz/area, pro- 


uy from the Dictator, who ſubdued ſeveral Nations 


nh. 


[4 
1 
TH 
i 
71 
t 
Pr 
1 
1. 
: 
© 
1 
i! 
| 
. 
15 
. 
1 
3 
17 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Wt ! 
IF 
8 
1 
A. 
us 
= 
Bl | + 
5 
"+ 
14 
y 
F< 
: 
1 
TM [1 
£ 1 
5 
* is 
x F 
3.0 
BY = 
: 
; 
1 
5 
: 
fa 
1 
'F 
px. 
B 
: 
14 
+] 
i 
3 
J 
8! > 
* * 
7 4%! 
j 
& 
> 1 
1 
1 
1 Z 
+0 
ö j 
19 
18 
* 
» + 
F 
* 
* 
LF 
1 
. 
1 
4 
A} 
| 
& 
IE 
Vs 
TY 
$f 
F 
bs © 
14 
F 
* 
* 


— — —U cos none tn 


— — — op rnnes 


. — * , 
WOE oe — . — n 
— 123 2 —— - rr. 
— — — I x — = _ W Re _—_ F N 
T wn r 1 «$a, A We " * "TT 2 * s - - g - 
... — ES ERA RRC IU TS. ce CDS a 


304. = TOUR ro Jerſey, | 
along this Tract: which Conjecture is confirmed by 
the preſent Name of one of its Forts, which is Le Fort 
de Czſar. In the North of the Iſland, at Roſel, is an 
Intrenchment preſerving the Name of La petite Ceja- 
re. That the Romans were here, is plain from the 
Remains of an antient Camp near the Manor of Di. 
lament ; as alſo from Coins which have been found in 
different Parts of the Iſland, particularly one of Com. 
modus, and two of Probus and Poſthumus, all in the 
Pariſh of Sr. Oden. Its modern Appellation is no 
more than a Corruption of its old one, Fer being a 
Contraction of Cæſar, and Ey fignifying Iſland, q. d. 
Cæſar's Iſland. Augia was a Name ſtill elder than the 
Time when the Romans were acquainted with the 
Place; and ſuppoſed to be the original one. 

The Ifland has ſuſtained feveral Revolutions: J. By 
Rollo, Duke of Normandy. 2. By the French. 3. By 
the Normans reſtored. 4. By the uniting of it to the 
Crown of England. The Inhabitants behaved very 
valiantly in. Defence of Charles I. and his Son Charles 
II. but were at laſt reduced by the irrefiſtible Power 
of the Engliſb Parliament, although they are ſup- 

| poſed to have been the laſt who amy the Fate 
of the Times, by a Capitulation equally advantageous 
and honourable. - 1 1 Wn. 
Ferſey is computed to be 49 10/ N. Latitude, and 
20 20/ W. Longitude from the Meridian of London. 
Its Length is 12 Miles; its utmoſt Breadth between | 
6 and 7. Its North Side, from its lofty Cliffs, is 0 
or 50 Fathoms perpendicular from the Sea; whicti 
renders it inacceflible that Way; but the South is 
much lower, and almoſt level with the Water, Its 
Form ſeems to ſome to reſemble a Wedge, or a rect- 
angular Triangle. | 280 185 
| The higher Lands are diverſified by gritty and gra- 
velly, ſtony and rocky, fine and ſweet Mould.; the 
lower by heavy, deep, and rich Soil. All Kinds of 
Foreſt and Fruit - trees, Shrubs, Roots, ä and 
| | 855 1 155 | | | bs, 


J%;;;ĩ²1d᷑ FF” 7. 


BY 


Jerſey. GREAT. BRITAIN,® 305 
Herbs, flouriſh here, with Pulſe and Corn, tho' their 
Wheat is ſmaller than Engliſb. Es 

The Decay of Tillage (ſo evident in this Iſle) is 
owing to three Cauſes: 1. The Increaſe of the Stocken 
Manufacture; which naturally inclined the People to 


light the more Jaborious Employment of Agriculture. 


2. The Improvement of Navigation, and Foreign 


Traffick, which had the ſame Effect. 3. The Culture 


of Cyder, by converting the Arable Lands into Or- 
chards for that Purpoſe ; which Commodity is the or- 
dinary Drink of the Inhabitants, who are now over- 
ſtocked with it; ſo that there is Hope of their return- 
ing to the Plough, and to their former Induſtry. 


4. The Increaſe of Incloſures and Highways; of the 
latter whereof here are three Sorts ; the firſt called 


Le Chemin du Roy, or, The King's High-way, 16 


Feet in Breadth ; the ſecond, Le Chemin de huit Pieds, 
or, The eight - foot Way, which with its Sides makes 


up 12 Feet; and the third, Le Chemin de quatre Pieds, 
or, The four- foot Way, for Horſe-Carriages. 1 5 
On the Rocks about the Iſland, Sea-weed grows 
plentifully, which is an Equivalent for the Deficiency: - 
of other things ufeful in Huſbandry, and is the com- 
mon Manure of the Land in Fer/ey. nl 
Here is Plenty of good Water, from the inex- 
hauſtible Stores of Springs guſhing from the numerous 
Strata of Rocks every- where conſpicuous, Meat alſo, 


and Butter, are equally good and ſweet here, though 


the Cattle are inferior in Size to thoſe elſewhere. ' 
The Ewes of this Iſle had four Horns, but the 

Rams fix, in Camden's Time, though rarely now to 

be ſeen. Fow! of all Kinds are here in great Quanti- 


ties. But none of the volatile Tribe exceed in Beauty 


the Jerſey Partridge, having the bright Eyes natural 
to that a red Legs, and variegated Feathers. The 


Fleſh however is not much preferable to that of the 
common Partridge. N edits 


This 


306 . A TOUR mo N Jerſey. 


caught by Handfuls. The young 
take great Delight, during the warm Summer Nights, 


This IfJand abounds with Fiſh, the Species of which 
we may range thus: 1. Rough-coated Fiſh, ſuch as 
Rouſſes, Haus, c. the coarſett of all. 2. Shell and 


Rock-fiſh, among which is the Ormer, ſuppoſed pe- 
culiar to theſe Parts, and deriving its Name, which is 
French, from its Refemblance to an human Ear. The 


Inſide of the Shell is made uſe of in inlaid Works, 
as Mother of Pearl, to the bright Colour of which it 
approaches. There is no Under-ſhel! ; but the Fiſh 


adheres to the Rock with its Back, and is a folid Maſs 
of white Pulp, very grateful to the Taſte, which it 


regales like the Fleſh of Land-Animals. In great 
Spring- tides, at Low- water Mark, it is found. 3. Flat- 


fiſh, as Rays, Thornbacks, Soles, Plaice, large 
Turbots, Cc. 4. Scale-fiſh. Of theſe, one Draught | 


of Baſe has equalled a Cart-load. Beſides which, 
here is the Mullet, red and grey, the Vrac, or Sea- 


carp, and the Bar, an exquiſite Fiſh, ſometimes two 


Feet in Length. Other Fiſh here are, which for 
their Singularity we cannot paſs by in Silence. 


The Gronnard is ſo called from its grunting Noiſe, 
| when taken. Its Head is almoſt as big as the Body, 
and its Colour is a deep Scarlet, eſembliag Biood. 

The Langen (or Little Lance, from its Shape) is 
never found in the Water, but in ſome moving Sand- 


bank deſerted by the Sea; when the Sand being moved 


with an Iron Hook, the Fiſh ſpring up, and are 
Men and Maids 


in this Sport; which is rendered eaſy to them by the 


 Glittering of the Prey above the Sand. This they 


term aller au Langon. It is prepared as an Anchovy, 


and, well-dreſſed, gives an agreeable Reliſh. 


Another odd Fiſh is the Sirene, which is furniſhed 


with Teats like a Woman's. 3 
The ugly, but harmleſs, and perhaps wholeſome 
Animal the Toad, abounds here, as do innoxious 


Creatures 


. 


0 Ye — 2 $3 


e 


PII EY 


jj AAA. be SS SI. 


* 


Jerſey. GREAT BRITAIN, 307 
Creatures of the Serpentine Kind, particularly Lizards, 


which gaze on Paſſengers, as they lie baſking in the 


Sun. But the worſt of the reptile Kind are Moles, 


- which damage the Corn and Graſs, though they com- 
penſate that Difference by affording a freer Paſſage to 


the Rain thro” their Latibula, | 
The Climate here is in general wholſome; though 


as Luxury has gained Ground, Diſeaſes unknown 
to former Ages have been its conſtant Attendants: fo 
that it cannot now boaſt of that Character given it 


by Camden, That here was no Roo far the Phy- 
fictans, „ 

The Rocks are vaſt and terrible; the Tides rapid 
and ſtrong; as an Evidence of which, here is no till 
Water at any time, as in other Paits of the Briti/h: 
Channel. . 5 


The whole Iſland conſiſts of 12 Pariſhes, which 


are divided into Vintaines, from the 20 Houſes which 
formerly, as is ſaid, conſtituted each Pariſh ; tho now 


ſome Pariſhes vaſtly exceed that Number. Cueillettes 


is the Name for theſe Diviſions in the Pariſh of St. 
Ouen done. | | 


But to be more particular: 1. The Parifti juſt 
mentioned contains ſix Cueillettes, namely, De Vin- 


' theles, des Millis, de Leoville, des Grontes, Grande 


Cueillette, and Petite Cueillette. The Signeur de 
St. Oden has a large Pond in the Weſt of the Iſland, 
containing about 20 Acres of Land, wherein are 
Carp of ſo extraordinary a Size, as ſcarce to be equal - 
led in Europe; fame of them being four Feet four 


Inches in Length. Part of the great Bay of St. Ouen 


had been a rich Vale, which was ſwallowed up by 


the Sea. 


2. St. Peter contains ſix Vintaines; which are, Des 
Anguerres, du Coin Varin, du Doet, de St, Nicolas, 
de la Valle, and Grande Vintaine, © | 


3. In St. Brelade are four Vintaines; called Des 


Juenves, de la Moye, au Coin, and de Noirmont. N 


308 A TOUR thu ]jerſey. 
this Pariſh ſtands the Town of St. Aubin, the ſecond 
ef the Iſland; and from it the Bay adjoining derives 


its Name; which eontiſts of white Sand, level and 


firm; and thence the Traveling from this Town to 
St. Helier, the Capital, is rendered ſmooth and eaſy, 
And as the Church is at a Diſtance, and intercepted 
by a bleak Hill, the Inhabitants, who are in plentiful 
Circumſtances, were building, when I was there, 
a convenient Chapel, by way of Contribution. The 
Port, which is the beſt and moſt frequented in 7er/ey, 
has a ſtrong Pier carried into the Sea, which receives 
and affords a ſafe Harbour for Ships. Here a Sixth- 


rate juſt floats at dead Neap, and a Ship of 200 Tons 


at all times. At Half-flood a Veflel of 130 Tons 


may find Entrance, Larger Ships indeed, -and-Men | 


of War, muſt remain in the Road, where is good An- 


chorage. The Pier joins to the Fort of St. Aubin, 
which renders the Place very defenſible. Theſe Ad- 


vantages have brought hither many Merchants and 
Maſters of Ships: and every Monday is held what is 
improperly called a Market; for it is rather an Ex- 
change, where Merchants and others meet for tranf- 
acting Affairs of Navigation and Traffick. The 
_ Houſes are moſtly new. | ; 


4. St. Mary has two Vintaines, Du Nord, and du 


Sud. In this Pariſh was diſcovered a Spring ſtrongly 
impregnated with a purging Mineral ; the Water of 


which was approved of by Dr. Charleton, an eminent 


_ Engliſh Phyſician. | ns, 
5. St. Laurence contains four Vintaines; vis Du 
Coin Motier, du Coin Tourgis, du Coin lis Haſtains, 
and de la/allee, 8 . . 
6. St. John has three Vintaines; which are, Du 
Nord, du Doet, de Herupe. In this Pariſh is an Hill 
called Mont mado, whereon is a rich Quarry of ex- 
cellent Stone, capable of being cut into regular 
Squares, like Portland Stone. \ 8 


7. In 


Jerſey, GRTAT BRITAIN, 309 
7. In Trinity are five Vintaines; namely, De la 
Ville & PEveſque, du Rondin, de Roſel, des Augris, 
and de la Croizerie, 15 3, 
8. St. Helier comprehends four Vintaines; which 


are, Du Mont a Þ Abbee, du Mont au Pretre, du 


Mont Cochon, and de la Ville. The Situation of Sz. 
Helier is pleaſant as well as commodious, having on 
the South-weſt the Sea, with a full Proſpect of El:za- 
beth Cattle, and of the Road for Ships. To the North 
are Hills, which are an excellent Defence againſt the 
Cold; and at their Feet a Flat of Meadows, en- 
livened by a pure Stream, which from thence enters 
the Street, and even the Houſes; ſo that the Water 
is eaſily brought up by Buckets, let down through a 
Trap-door, or from the Reſervoirs of Wells and 
Pumps. Another huge Hill projects, in a manner, 
over the Town; and being a Common, affords to 
the Cattle Herbage, and to Cn and Ladies an 


agreeable Walk, with the Advantage of an extenſive 


Proſpect. The uſual Name of this Hill is Le Mont 
de la Ville. The unfortunate Duke of Somerſet, Pro- 


tector of the King and Kingdom, had probably in- 


tended to protect himſelf from the Malice of his Ene- 
mies, by building a new Town here, as he did a 


| Citadel at Alderney; both which Deſigns became 


abortive by his Death. In St. Helier, at preſent, 
are about 400 Houſes, difpoſed into divers wide and 
well-paved Streets.. La Cohue Royale, or the Seat of 
Juſtice, ſtands in a large Quadrangle, on each Side 
of which are handſome Structures. Here is held 
every Saturday a Market, or rather a Fair, whither _ 
People flock from all Parts of the Iſland to enjoy their 
Friends, or tranſact Buſineſs. In the "Town live few 
landed Gentlemen, but many Shopkeepers, Artificers, | 
and Retailers of Liquor. Scarce any thing is want- 
ing to the Uſes of Neceflity or Convenience. 
Halle, la Boucherie, or the Shambles, is a large Room 
incloſed, ſp that the Sight and Smell of Carcaſes do 
| | | not 


thouſand Pairs are made weekly i in the Wand, 


310 A TOUR tro Jerſey, 
not here annoy the Eyes and Noſtrils of People, as 
they do in moſt Country Towns. The Number of 


Inhabitants, excluſive of ſome Hundreds in- the out 


Vintaines, who are Pariſhioners, though not Lownſ- 
men, is ſupoſed to amount to 2000. And the Church, 


though very capacious by the Acceſſion of Galleries, 
when I was there, was crowded with them. 


9. St. Saviour has fix Vintaines, of the following : 


Denominations: De Maufant, de Saus la Hogue, 
des Pigneaux, de ſous I Egliſe, de la Grande Longue- 
ville, and de la Petite Longueville. 


10. Under St. Martin are comprehended theſe five 


Vintaines : De Roſel, de la Quierube, de foks q Eeliſe, 


Adu Fief du Roy, and de Faldoit. 
II. Gronville compriſes four Vintaines ; De la Rue, 


des Marais, de Longueville, and de la Roque. 
12. In St. Clement are three Vintaines; by Name, 


Du Mont Roguier, de Samariz, and Grande Vintaine. 
In the Canal called Samariz are great Numbers 
| - Carp and Eel, the only freſh Water Fiſh in the 
Hand, 

The Cmueillettes and Vintather are in all 52, The 


Buildings are all of Stone, as may well be ſuppoſed, 
in a Country which is nothing but. an huge Rock, 


covered with Strata of Earth. The common Sort 5 
Rag-ſtone. The Stone on Mount-madse, mentioned 
before, is of a reddiſh White, the whiter the better, 


of a fine Grain, and may be wrought almoſt as ſleek 
as poliſhed Marble. The Churches and fineſt Edifices 


are covered with blue Slate ; the ordinary Houſes are 


thatched with long Wheat-ſtraw. _ 
The principal Trade is that to Newfoundland, 


whither, in the Year 1732. were ſent 27 Ships, from 
thence to proceed to the Mediter rancan, in order to 
diſpoſe of their Fiſh. Another Branch of Trade is 

that of knit Hoſe, or Stockens, which are every Satur- 


day fold at St. Helter, to the Merchants and many 


Tis 


8 


t 


* w Hs 


A WS FT. WD... » 


w» * WW Www = ww 


Jerſey, GREAT BrITain, 311 


The Language, as you may gueſs from the Names 
of Places, is French, tho' obſolete, and thence to be 
eſteemed barbarous. This Remark, however, is not 
to be extended to their Religious Worſhip, Judica- 
tures, or even the Converſation of the more polite, in 
all which the pure French is uſed. Though this is 


the original Language, yet one may obſerve a pretty 


good Smattering of Engliſb, even among the lower 


Claſs of People, owing to the Intermixture of the 


Soldiers in the Garriſon at Sf, Helier; in the Church 
of which Town Prayers are alternately in French and 
Engliſh, FE | 
The chief Officer, who repreſents the King's Per- 
ſon, is the Governor. „ 5 
Harliſton Tower was ſo called from Sir Richard 
Harliſton, Governor of the Iſland: in the Time of 
King Henry VII. who built it in Mont Orgueil Caſtle. 
The great Sir Malter Raleigh bore this high Office, 
to which his Name does Honour. f . 
Mount Orgueil is of ſo great Antiquity, that no 
Record ſubſiſts old enough to determine its Origin. 
'Tis at preſent ſlighted, and in a ruinous Condition; 
and what it was formerly, Elizabeth Caſtle now is, 
equal to any Fortreſs within the Britiſb Dominions. 
It is named Le Chateau de '1/let, or ſimply £Z 1/ker, 
from its Situation on a ſmall Iſland. In Circuit it is 
little leſs than a Mile. In 1551. all the Bells in er- 
ſez, excepting one to each Church, were fold towards 
defraying the Expence of the Building. In 1586. the 
Upper Ward was erected, which is properly Queen 
Elizabeth's Caſtle, every Houſe in the Iſland furniſhing 


four Days Work. The Lower Ward is King Charles 


L's Caſtle; and was begun in 1626. During the 
Civil War Charles Fort was added; and in 16065. the 
French threatening the Place, the Green was incloled 
within a Wall. 1 


The Fort of St. Aubin is of good. Uſe towards 


clearing the Road, and for a Safeguard to Ships within 
the 
N 3 5 


| 


312 A TOUR thro | Jerſey, 


the Pier, which it ſecures by its Cannon planted on 


the Baſtionsz though in antient Times it was no 


' more than a great Tower on a Rock, thence named 
La Tour. _ | OY 

There are five well-diſciplined Regiments of Mi- 
litia on the Iſland, which are reviewed every 29th of 
May, the Anniverſary of the Reſtoration. 


The Civil Government is adminiſtred by a Bailly, 


_ aſſiſted by 12 Jurats. 5 
Nere are divers Monuments of the Druidical Super- 

ftitions, which are flat Rag-ſtones, of vaſt Size and 
Weight, raiſed three or four Feet from the Ground, 
and ſuſtained by others of leſs Bulk. Theſe the Na- 


tives call Poguelays; and are the Altars on which 


Sacrifices, often human, were immolated, parti- 
cularly in the Pariſh of Sz. Helier, three of them 
_ contiguous to each other; and on the Summit of a 
Place called Le Rouge Bouillon, another; beſides one 
on St. Helier's Hill. Another larger, near Mont- 
' Orgueil Caſtle; and near Ro/el-haven, on a Cliff 
named Le Couperon, an Antiquity ſeeming to be a 
little Temple of theirs. At a Place called To Landes 
Pallot, in the Pariſh of St. Saviour, was a Rocking- 
None, like that I ſhall mention in Scotland, deſtroyed 
by the Cromwellians ; erected by the Druids, probably 
to awe the People into a Belief of their Miracles. 
This alſo bas been demoliſhed. . Ep ol 
Here are alſo Monuments of the Popiſh Superſtition; 


two more particularly; The firſt called La Chapelle de 


notre Dame des Pas, from the Bleſſed Virgin, who is 
ſaid to have left the Print of her Steps on the very 
Spot of the Rock whereon the Chapel is erected, and 


this too after her Body was mouldered into Duſt. The 


ſecond is termed Hoguelie, a Chapel over a Tomb, 
built, according to Tradition, by the diſconſolate 
Widow of the Seigneur de Hambie, a Norman, who 
fell by Treachery in this Iſland, and whoſe Loſs was 


ſo afflicting to his Lady, that ſhe erected it on purpoſe . 
r . "+ 


66 


7. | Jerſey. GREAT BRITAIN. 313 
n to have the melancholy Pleafure of ſeeing the Place 
o where her Lord's Corpſe was interred, from her Win- 
d dow in Nor mandy; and to procure his Soul the Benefit 
8 of Maſſes. Afterwards one Mabon, who had been 
** on a Pilgrimage to Feruſalem, took a Fancy to lengthen 
pf the Chapel towards the Eaſt, and to hollow a Place 
under the Altar, in order to repreſent our-Lord's 


„ Sepulchre. This Place was made the chief Seat of 
the Popiſh Deluſion. 15 
i Notwithſtanding the prevailing Terrors of the 


id Papal Empire in the Days of Queen Mary, the Ma- 
giſtrates of Fer/ey had the Courage to put to Death 
Richard. Averty, a Prieſt, and furious Profecutor of the 
h married Clergy, for murdering his Baſtard Child, 
4 which he effected without the Mother's Knowlege. 


m The Mace, borne before the Bailly and Magiſtrates, 
2 at the Convention of the States, &c. has this Inſcrip- 
' If tion: | 

t- | 

i F Tali haud omnes dignatur honore, 

es e CAROLUS Secundus, Magnæ Britanniæ, Franciz, 
g- “ & Hiberniz Rex ſereniſſimus, affectum regium 
ed © erga inſulam de JERSEY (in qua bis habuit re- 
ly « ceptum, dum cxteris ditionibus excluderetur) 
'S, “ hocce monumento vere regio poſteris conſecra- 
. © tum voluit: juſſitque ut deinceps Balivis præfe- 
13 ratur, in perpetuam memoriam fidei tum auguſ- 
de e tiſſimo parenti CAROLO I. tum ſuæ majeſtati, 
is © ſxvientibus bellis civilibus, ſervatæ a viris clariſ- 


ry « ſimis Philippo & Georgio de Carteret, equitibus 
ad b auratis hujus inſulæ Baliv. & Reg. Prefect.” 


b, BY Of which this is the Tranſlation : 


ho Not all are with ſuch Honour gracd. 


Cars the Second, the moſt Serene King of 
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, hath refolyed 
Vor. III. P that 


"$128 © ATOUR thro eerſey. 

the Pier, which it ſecures by its Cannon planted on 
the Baſtionsz though in antient Times it was no 
more than a great Tower on a Rock, thence named 


T e 
There are five well-diſciplined Regiments of Mi- 


litia on the Iſland, which are reviewed every 29th of 
May, the Anniverſary of the Reſtoration. 


The Civil Government is adminiſtred by a Bailly, 


aſſiſted by 12 Jurats. 


Here are divers Monuments of the Druidical | Super- 


ſlitions, which are flat Rag- ſtones, of vaſt Size and | 


Weight, raiſed three or four Feet from the Ground, 
and ſuſtained by others of leſs Bulk. Theſe the Na- 
tives call Poguelays; and are the Altars on which 
Sacrifices, often human, were immolated, parti- 


_ cularly in the Pariſh of Sz. Helier, three of them 
- contiguous to each other; and on the Summit of a 


Place called Le Rouge Bouillon, another; beſides one 
on St. Helier's Hill. Another larger, near Mont- 


Orgueil Caſtle; and near Roeſel- haven, on a Cliff 
named Le Couperon, an Antiquity ſeeming to be a 

little Temple of theirs. At a Place called Les Landes 
Pallet, in the Pariſt, of St, Saviour, was a Rocking- 


None, like that I ſhall mention in Scotland, deſtroyed 
by the Cromwellians ; erected by the Druids, probably 


to awe the People into a Belief of their Miracles. 


This alſo bas been demoliſhed. | 


Here are alſo Monuments of the Popiſb Superflition; 
two more particularly; The firſt called La Chapelle de 


nitre Dame des Pas, from the Bleſſed Virgin, who is 


ſaid to have left the Print of her Steps on the very 


Spot of the Rock whereon the Chapel is erected, and 
this too after her Body was mouldered into Duſt. The 
ſecond is termed Hoguelie, a Chapel over a Tomb, 
built, according to Tradition, by the diſconſolate 
Widow of the Seigneur de Hambie, a Norman, who 
fell by Treachery in this Iſland, and whoſe Loſs was 


ſo afflicting to his Lady, that ſhe erected it on purpoſe 


to 


ec 


* 


to have the melancholy Pleafure of ſeeing the Place 


| where her Lord's Corpſe was interred, from her Win- 


dow in Normandy; and to procure his Soul the Benefit 
of Maſſes. Afterwards one Mabon, who had been 


on a Pilgrimage to Jeruſalem, took a Fancy to lengthen = 


the Chapel towards the Eaſt, and to hollow a Place 
under the Altar, in order to repreſent our-Lord's 
Sepulchre, Ibis Place was made the chief Seat of 


the Popiſh Deluſion. * IP + 


Notwithſtanding the prevailing Terrors of the 
Papal Empire in the Days of Queen Mary, the Ma- 


giſtrates of Jerſey had the Courage to put to Death 
Richard Averty, a Prieſt, and furious Proſecutor of the 


married Clergy, for murdering his Baſtard Child, 
which he effected without the Mother's Knowlege. 
The Mace, borne before the Bailly and Magiſtrates, 
at the Convention of the States, &c. has this Inſcrip- 
tion : 2 . 


—=—Tali haud omnes dignatur honore. 


« CAR OLus Secundus, Magnæ Britanniæ, Franciz, 
& Hiberniz Rex ſereniſſimus, affectum regium 
& erga inſulam de JERSEY (in qua bis habuit re- 
“ ceptum, dum cæteris ditionibus excluderetur) 
6 hocce monumento vere regio poſteris conſecra- 
e tum voluit: juſſitque ut deinceps Balivis præfe- 
ratur, in perpetuam memoriam fidei tum auguſ- 
tiſſimo parenti CaroLo I. tum ſuz majeſfati, 
© ſævientibus bellis civilibus, ſervatæ a viris clariſ- 
« ſimis Philippo & Georgio de Carteret, equitibus 
e auratis hujus inſulæ Baliv. & Reg. Prefect,” 


Of which this is the Tranſlation : 


Net all are with ſuch Honour grad, 


© CHARLES the Second, the moſt Serene King of 
* Great Britain, France, and Ireland, hath refolyed 
Vol. III. P 


« that 


314 A TOUR tro Guernſey. 
that his Royal Favour towards the Ile of IERSEx 
(in which he twice met with a Place of Refuge, 
while he was excluded from the reſt of his Nomi- 

e nions) ſhould be conſecrated to Pofterity by this 


& truly Royal Monument; and commanded, that 
% thenceforward it ſhould be borne before the Bail- 


lies, in perpetual Memory of the Loyalty preſerved 
both to bis moſt Auguſt Father CHARLEs I. and 
e to his Majeſty, during the Rage of the Civil Wars, 


by the moſt excellent Men Sir Philip and Sir 
« George de Carteret, Knights, Baillies and Chief 


„ Governors of this Ifland,” 


St. Magloire, the Apoſtle of Fer/ey, lies buried in 

a little Chapel near a Free- ſchool, corruptly called from 

him L'Ecole de St. Magloire, and founded, with ano— 

ther named St. Anaftaſe, by King Henry VII. who 
ranted a Charter for that uſeful Purpoſe. | 


This Place gives Title of Earl to the noble F amily 


of Villiers. 


II. The next Ifle I am to ſpeak of is GukRNs kv, 
the antient Name of which was Sarnia, From Jerſey 


it is diſtant 20 Miles to the North-weft ; yet equals 
Not that Iſland, either in point of Fruitfulneſs or Ex- 


tent of Territory; for it has but 10 Pariſhes. This 
Advantage, however, it enjoys above Jerſey, that here 


no venomous Creatures can ſubſiſt. It is alſo naturally 


better fortified from Invaſion, by craggy Rocks and Pre- 
cipices. On the contrary, its Situation, compared with 


that of Jerſey, renders this inferior; for whereas the 
North of Jerſey is much higher than the South, as we 


have ſaid, the South Side of Guernſey is high, and the 


North low ; which produces a double Obliquity of the 
Sun and Land; and hence the Difference in the Soil 
and Air of each. Notwithſtanding this they both agree 
as to their Original, their Productions, and the Civil, 
Military, and Eccleſiaſtical Government. Among 
the circumjacent Rocks is found the tharp and hard 


ry as r A Ts 


| 
| 
ö 
be 
* 


il, 


18 
rd 


Iſles, 


Guernſey. GREAT BRITAIN. 315 


Stone Smyris or Emeril, and uſed by Glaziers for 
cutting Glaſs, as well as by Jewelers for poliſhing their 
Work. 

In Trade it is ſuperior to its Nei ghbour Zerſey, by 
having a more convenient Port at irs Eaſtern Extrc- 
mity, "adjoining to the South; where the Shore re- 
tirivg inwards, in the Form of a Creſcent, makes the 
Place capable of holding large Veſſels. The Founda- 
tion of its Pier was laid in the Beginning of Edward 


I's Reign, by prodigious Stones, heaped on cach 


other to a conſiderable Height, and regularly cemented, 
The Shipping here is not only ſafe, and may be 
brought cloſe up to the Town, which I ſhall prefently 
mention; but the Pier itſelf is adorned with large 


ſmooth Flags, and guarded by Parapets ; ſo that 


being of ſufficient Length and Breadth, it is uſed as 


the Chief Place for Rendezvouſes on Parties of Plea- 


ſure by the faſhionable People of the Town, as well 
as for its noble Proſpect over the Sea, and adjacent 


On the Right- ſide of the Port ſtands Cornet Caſile, | 
which at high Tides is ſurrounded by the Sea, Sir 


Leonard Chamberlan, who was Governor of Guernſey 


in Mary I.'s Time, and his Succeſſor, Sir Thomas 
Leighton, improved it with Fortifications. In the Year 
1672, the Governor, Lord Viſcount Hatton, loſt his 


Lady, and himſelf eſcaped with great Difficulty, from 
' 2 prodigious Storm of Lightning, which, catching 


the Powder-ſtore, blew up the lofty Tower with the 
Standard; ſo that the Caftle muſt have formerly made 


a much more grand Appearance than at preſent. 


However, what it wants in Beauty, it makes up in 
real Uſefulneſs ; for it has the Command of the Town 
and Harbour; and its Situation alone renders it ſtrong, 
being divided from the Land by an Arm of the Sea 
about 600 Yards wide, except in great Spring-tides, 
when it is not fordable. 
Oa the r too is a mean 1 old Caſtle, 
2 2 The 


316 or Alderney. 


The only Town is called St. Peter's, has a free 
"Trade, and a Market; is well ſtored: with Imple— 
ments of War, and conſiſts of one long ſtreet, which 
is narrow, being confined between the es and the i im- 


pending Hills. The Market is always h ſup- . 


plied with Fiſh. 


To the North, joins a Peninſula named Le Val, 


Where once was a Priory. And 

To the Weſt, near the Sea, is a Lake, a Mile and 
an half in Circumference, ſtocked with Fiſh, eſpecially 
a kind of Carp of extraordinary Size, and delicious 
to the Taſte, 

In Guernſey are eight Miniſters to its ten Pariſhes, 
four of them being united. I now proceed to mention 
(tho' very briefly) an Iſle dependent on the Govern- 


ment of Guernſey, This is, 


III. Lenny, ſuppoſed by Camden to be the Arica 


of Antoninus; by others the Ebedia or Evedia of P. 

Diaconus, Tt is ſituated about a League and an half 
trom Cape la Hogue in Normandy ; is in Circumference 
about Eight Miles; and contains one Church, with a 
Town, in which are about 200 Houſes, which lodge 
to the Number of-1000 Inhabitants. The Soil is good 
for Paſture or Arable: and I was ſhewn one Field here 
of about 500 Acres, which, as I was told, had not 
once lain fallow for 100 Years before. Their Manure 
is Sea- weed, called Vraic, of which I have before taken 


notice. The Land lies high; and to the South i is an 


Harbour, admitting only (mall Veſſels. 


The Streight which divides this Iſle from We 
termed, Le Ras de Blanchart, or, The Race of Alder- 
ney, is eme a dangerous Paſſage in ſtormy Weather, 


when the Winds happen to encounter with the ſtrong 
Currents. In calm Seafons it is very ſafe, and the 
largeſt Ships may ride here with Eaſe. Nay, in 
1692-3, Part of the French Fleet eſcaped this way, 
after the Blow oy had met un at la Hogue. 


- ee 


Sarke, GREAT BRITAIN. 3775 
Admiral Balchen, a brave and excellent Officer, 


was loſt in a violent Storm off Alderney, between the 
Ith and 5th of October 1744. in the Victory, a fine 


Firſt rate Man of War, of 110 Braſs Guns, with 
upwards of -1000 Men, every one of whom periſhed, 
together with more than 50 Gentlemen, Volunteers, 


and the Admiral's Son, a Youth making his firſt 


Voyage. 


IV. SARKE, which, as well as Mderney, is de- 
pendent on the Government of Guernſey, is no more 


than two Miles in Length, and is ſituated in the midſt 
of all the other Iflands, and guarded with ſteep Rocks. 
Tts Corn is excellent, the Land very high, which, to- 


_ gether with its Situation, renders it one of the ſtrongeſt 
Places in the World. Its Water'is very good. For- 


merly here was no Way for Draughts and Carriages 
from the Sea, till Philip de Carteret, Seigneur de St. 


Ozen (who had a Grant of the Iſland from Queen 


Elizabeth, and in whoſe Deſcendant the Property is 


_ veſted), cauſed one to be cut through the impending 
Cliff, which for ſome Space is carried on in ſubterra- 
nean Darkneſs, till it emerges within the Iſland, and 


is fortified with Cannon, 'and by a Gate, In the 


Reign of Edward III. was ſtanding the Convent of 
St, Magloire, with a Penſion from the Exchequer, 


where that holy Perſon is ſaid to have reſided. 

The Ifland fell into the Hands of the French, but 
in the Reign of Queen Mary I. was recovered : and 
the Inhabitants have ever ſince enjoyed the mild In- 


fluence of the Britiſhb Government, equally approving _ 


of their preſent happy Condition, and deteſting the 
Fetters of French Slavery. Their Number amounts 


to about 300; and one Miniſter performs their divine 
Offices. Thus, having completed what I promiſed, 


I reſt from my Four ; and am, Sir, —_ 
N Your moſt. humble Servant. 


F 2 x LE T- 


— 5 1 N yang en r n * * TREES 2 8 W 7 r 2 , q 2 E 5 I 

i= 8 x rr ? p _ LY” - N a en 

oa. — — — OTA; — — I 1 * We: — * 3 . — 

FFF — erangngt ——— rp Ne nom gan TO ASSAY roots . 2s 4 
— Ba 8 — p —_ Warn - * 


{7 
70 
1 
1 

343 

1 

1 
8 

1 


8 > — 
rr — 


— e a —— — ag 
—— — „ — 9— tf oo 


— 


318 4 TOUR thro 


r 


Conlaining ſeveral curious Particulars, ſuptle- 


mental to the preceding Letters. 


. 


AVING now deſcribed the Southern Part of 
this famous Iſland, together with the Iſlands of 


| 7 erſey, Guernſey, Alderney, and Sarke, I ſhall, before 


enter upon the Northern, called Scotland, preſent. 
you with ſome ſelect Particulars, that are neceſſary to 
embelliſh the Whole. And firſt, I ſhall give you, in 


Alphabetical Order, a conciſe Account of the Num- 


ber of Pariſhes, Market-towns, principal Rivers, &c, 
in each County of England and Wales; which I could 


not do in the Courſe of my Tour, traveling, as I did, 


out of one County into another, as my Inclination or 
Curioſity led me, 


BEDFORDSHIRE.) Circumference 73 Miles, con- 


tains 124 Pariſhes, and 4 Market towns; the Shire- 
town, Bedford principal Rivers, Ouſe and vel. 


BERKSHIRE.] Circumference 140 Miles, contains 
140 Pariſhes, and 12 Market-towns ; Town of moſt 


Note, Reading : chief Rivers, Thames and Kennet, 


BUCKiNGHAMSHIRE.] Circumference 138 Miles, 
contains 185 Pariſhes, and 15 Market- towns; Shire- 
town, Buckingham: chief Rivers, Tame, Ouſe, and 


Coln. 


CAMBRIDCGCESHIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, 


contains 163 Pariſhes, and 8 Market- towns; Shire- 
town, Cambridge: principal Rivers, Ouſe and Cam. 


CHESHIRE.) - 


SGW Baran: a 
CHFSHIRE.] Circumference 112 Miles, contains 


71 Pariſhes, and 13 Market-towns; chief, Che/ter © _ 
principal Rivers, Dee and F/eaver. 


CoRNWALL.] Circumference 230 Miles, contains 
171 Pariſhes, and 27 Towns; chief Town, Laun- 
ce/lon : principal Rivers, Tamer, Camel, and Fake. 

CUMBERLAND.] Circumference, 168 Miles, con- 
tains 58 Pariſhes, and 15 Towns; chief, Carliſſe: 
principal River, Eden. e 
_ DERBYSHIRE. ] Circumference, 130 Miles, con- 
tains 106 Pariſhes, and 9g Towns; Shire-town, Derby: 
principal Rivers, Trent and Derwent. | 

DEVONSHIRE.] Circumference 200 Miles, con- 


tains 394 Pariſhes, and 32 Towns, chief, Exeter : 


Rivers, Tamer, Turrige, Ex, Tau, and Dart. 


DonskTSHIRE. ] Circumference 150 Miles, con- 


tains. 248 Pariſhes, 19 Towns; Shite- town, Dor- 
cheſter: Rivers, Stowre, Frome, ke. 
URHAM.] Circumference 107 Miles, contains 


118 Pariſhes, and 6 Towns; chief, Durham: Ri- 


vers, Tyne, Wear, Derwent, Tees. 8 
Ess Ex.] Circumference 146 Miles, contains 415 
Pariſhes, and 21 Towns; chief Town, W 


Rivers, Thames, Stowre, Coln, Chelmer, Lea, Crouch, 


Roding. , 


_ GLovcesTERSHIRE.] Circumference 138 Miles, 


contains 280 Pariſhes, and 26 Towns; chief, Glau- 
ce/ter + Rivers, Severn, Wye, Stroud, 1/is, Avon. 


_ HanrTs.] Circumference 100 Miles, contains 253 
Pariſhes, and 16 Towns; Shire-towns, Southampton 
and Y/inchefter : Rivers, Stowre, Avon, Itching, &c. 


le of Wight, belonging to this County, is 60 
Miles in Circumference, contains 36 Pariſhes, and 


3 Towns, 


HEREFORDSHIRE.) Circumference 102 Miles, 


contains 175 Pariſhes, and 8 Towns ; chief, Hereford : 
Rivers, Wye, Arrow, Lug, Frome, 


PT. Her T- 


7 


Oy 


8 r — 
. 
FF 4 * 3 6 = 


— — — —— 


8 —— 2 
** I II on. pu 


nth 2 
„ 


— ' — — 
3 —————— =. ww 


— ER 


P 
. 


, — . Ns ogy 
va, 


es roar no mngreriny " : 2 


— 


. 
— 8 — 
— 0 l 


Ws. _= 
Cs IF INE. 


20 4 TOUR ihbv 

HERTFORDSHIRE. ] Circumference 130 Miles, - 
contains 120 Pariſhes, and 18 Towns; chief, Hert- 
ford : Rivers, Culm, Lea. | 

HUNTINGDONSHIRE.] Circumference 67 Miles, 
contains 97 Pariſhes, and 6 Towns; chief, Hunt- 
ingdon : Rivers, Ouſe, &c. 

KENT.] Circumference, 162 Miles, contains 408 
Pariſhes, and 30 Towns; chief, Canterbury: Rivers, 
Thames, Medway, Stoꝛore, Darent, &c. 
LANCASHIxB.] Circumference 170 Miles, con- 
tains 60 Pariſhes, and 26 Towns; chief, Lanca/ter : 
Rivers, Merſey, Ribble, Lune, Irk, {rwel. | 

LEICESTERSHIRE. ] Circumference 96 Miles, con- 
tains 200 Pariſhes, and 12 Towns; chief, 3 
Rivers, Soare, Reet, Swift. 

 LincoLNnsHIRE.] Circumference 180 Miles, con- 
tains 630 Pariſhes, and 35 Towns ; chief, Lincoln: 
Rivers, Welland, Trent, Humber, Nen, IVytham. 
MiIpDpLESEx, Circumference. 81 Miles, contains 
- 3 Pariſhes, and 4 Towns ; ; chief, London: Rivers, 
Thames, Colne. 

MonmouTHSHIRE.] Circumference 80 Miles, 
contains 127 Pariſhes, and 7 Towns; chief, Mon- 
mouth. e Rivers, Monoto, Wye, Uſe, Rumney. | 
' NorFoLx.] Circumference 140 Miles, contains 
G60 - Pariſhes, and 31 Towns; chief, Norwich: 
Rivers, Ouſe, I/aveney, Yare, Frin, 

NoRTHAMPTONSHIRE. ] Circumference 120Miles, 
contains 326 Pariſhes, and 11 Towns; chief, North- 
anpton Rivers, Melland, Nen, Ouſe. 
NoRTHUMBERLAND. ] Circumference, 155 Miles, 
contains 46 Pariſhes, and 11 Towns; chief, New- | 

caftle.: Rivers, Tweed, Tyne. 
| *NoTTINGHAMSHIRE. ] Circumference 90 Miles, 
contains 168 Pariſhes, and 9 Towns; chief, Netting- | 
ham : Rivers, Trent, Idle, &c. | 

OxFoRD8HIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, con- 
tains 280 — and 15 Towns; chief, Oxford : 
GT Rivers, 


GREAT BRITAIN, _ 426i 


Ren Thames, Tame, 1hs, Charwell, i ndruſb, 
Evenload. 

RUTLANDSHIRE.] Circumference 40 Miles, con- 
tains 48 Pariſhes, and 2 Towns; chief, Oatham - 
Rivers, Welland, Maſb. 

SHROPSHIRE. ] Circumference 134 Miles, con- 
tains 170 Pariſhes, and 15 Towns; chief Shrew/dury : 
Rivers, Severn, Culm, Rea, Roden, Teme, Tern. 

SOMERSETSHIRE.] Circumference 150 Miles, 
contains 385 Pariſhes, and 30 Towns; chief, Briſtol: 
Rivers, Severn, Avon, Frome, Parret, Torr, Tone. 

STAFFORDSHIRE.] Circumference 141 Miles, 
contains 150 Pariſhes, and 18 Towns; chief, Staf- 


ford: Rivers, Trent, Churnet, Dove, Blithe, Line, 


Tean, Sow, Pink, Mani fold. 

SUFFOLK, | Circumference 165 Miles, contains 
575 Pariſhes, and 30 Towns; chief, /p/wich : Rivers, 
Stowre, Breton, Deben, Blithe, I. wot &c. | 

SURRY.] Circumference 112 Miles, contains 140 
Pariſhes,. and 9 Towns; chief, Southwark e Rivers, 
Thames, Mole. 

Suss Ex.] Circumference 158. Miles, contains 312 
Pariſhes, and 16 Towns; chief, n Rivers, 
Arun, &c. 

WARWICKSHIRE. ] Circumference 110 Miles, 


contains 158 Pariſhes, and 17 Towns; chief, C= 
ventry : Rivers, Avon, &c. 


WESTMORLAND.] Circumference 110 M iles, cc con- 


tains 26 Pariſhes, and 8 Towns; chief, Kendal © 


Rivers, Eden, Can, Eamon, Lune, &c, 


W1LTSHIRE.] Circumference. 128 Miles, contains | 
304 Pariſhes, and 24 Towns; chief, Saliſbury e 


Rivers, Severn, Avon, Team, &Cc. 


W ORCESTERSHIRE. F Circumference 130. Miles, 
contains 152 Pariſhes, and 11 Towns; chief, Mor 


cler: Rivers, Severn, Avon, Team, &c. 
YoRKSHiRE.] Circumference 360 Miles.z. con- 
tains 563 Pariſhes, and 49 Towns; chief, Vork = 


P CY N Rivers,, 


. Aa 


ApS er eee e P ͤ T — - 88 2 
—_ r 3 I 2 IT RN 4 


N n ” dn. Þ Lo * 
RE OD —— — — Ins aha — r * — * * 
r 22. —— RE — — ——.— — — . — „* 
2 = — we — — 52 
— — -n — — —— — . — SI — a wo T2 — re — — — - — 
— heres dane. 


322 'A TOUR bro 
Rivers, Tees, and Humber, which receives into it Aire, 
Calder, Dun, Derwent, Mad, . Swale, Eur e, 
and har fe.” 


In WALES are the following Counties: ; 


AxGLESEY.] Circumference 60 Miles, contains 
74 Pariſhes, and 2 Towns; chief, Beaumaris: River, 
Alenia. 

BRECK NOCKSHIRE.] Citcuniferebce 106 Miles, 
contains 61 Parithes, and 4 Towns; chief, Brecknack: 
Rivers, Hodney, Huſt. 

CAERMARTHENSHIRE,] | Ciramfertnce, . 
Miles, contains 87 Pariſhes, and 8 Towns ; chief, 
Caermarthen : River, Towy. | 

CAERNARVONSHIRE. ] Circumference 95 Miles, 
contains 68 Pariſhes, and 6 Towns; chief, Caer- 

nar von. 

CaRDIOANSHIRE.] Circumference 94 Mites, con- 
tains 77 Pariſhes, and 4 Towns; chief, Cardigan: 

River Zyevye, 

DN RTICHSHIRR.] Gireaniferdnke 116 Miles, con- 
tains 57 Pariſhes, and 4 Towns; chief, Denbigb. 
FLINTSHIRE.] Circumference 40 Miles, contains 

7 Pariſhes, and 3 Towns; ; chief, Flint: River, 

2E 

WL mand ] Citonithfirence 112 Miles, 
contains 118 Pariſhes, and 9. Towns ; chief Landaff. 

MERIONETHSHIRE.] ircumference 108 Miles, 

| contains 37 Pariſhes, and 3 Towns; chief, Harlech. 

+ MoNnNTGOMERYSHIRE. | Circumference 94 Miles, 

contains 47 Pariſhes, and 6 Towns ; chief, Mont- 

gomery. 

PEMBROKESHIRE. 7 Circumference 93 Miles, con- 

tains 45 Pariſhes, and 9 Towns ; chief, Pembroke. 

RADNORSHIRE. ] Circumference go Miles, con- 

tains 52 Pariſhes, and 4 Towns; chief, Radnor. 


 - 


ZN 


GREAT BRITAIN, 


„ 


And now, Sir, I will here preſent you with ſuch a 


| Liſt of the Engliſh Peerage, as, by omitting the Chriſ- 


tian Names of the Noblemen who compoſe it, will be 
ſubject to no other FluQuations, than by the Extinc- 
tion of Families, and new Creations; viz. | 


His Royal Highneſs the Dux of York 
His Royal Highneſs the DUKE of Cumberland 


 Pambroke. © 


| 


> D'OKR's:- 
Names Titles | 
Howard MNerfolk 
Seymour Sommer ſet 
Fitzroy Cleveland 
Lenox Richmond 
Fitzroy Grafton 
Somerſet Beaufort 
Beauclerk Sf. Albans 
Pawlet Bolton 
Oſborne Leeds 
Ruſſel Bedford 
Cavendiſh Devonſhire 
Spencer Marlborough 
Manners AQRutland 
Bertie Ancaſter 
Pierrepoint Kingston 
Pelh” Holles Newca/?le 
Bentinck Portland 
Montagu Mancheſter 
Brydges Chandos 
Sackville Dorſet 
Egerton Bridgewater 
| MarRrqQuis. 
Wentworth Rockingham. 
HAR L8 
Talbot Shrewſbury 
Staney,  Derly © 
Haſtings Huntingdon: 
Herbe: t 


EARLS. | 
Names Titles: 
Clinton Lincoln 
Howard Suffolk 
[Cecil Saliſbury 
Cecil FFxeter- 
Compton Northampton 
Fielding Denbigh _ 
Fane Weſtmorland! 
Mordaunt Peterb, &c. 
Grey Stamford 
Finch - incbelſea 
Stanhope Cheſter field- © 
Tufton Thanet 
Montagu . Sandwich» 
-|[Capelt © xx . 
Montagu: Cardigan. , 
Howard Carlifle 
[Scot Doncaſter + 
Cooper. . Shaftſburys 
Les Lichfield © 
Berkeley Berkeley © 
Bertie Abingdon 
Noel ; Gainſborough: 
D'Arcy Holderneſs- 
Hickman Plymouth 
Howard Stafford. 
Lumley:  - Scarborough. 
Newport HBradfud. 
\Zuleftein. Rochford 


324 


.4 TOUR tro 


nt . 
Nunn, Titles Names, Titles 
Keppel Albemarle Herbert Powis 
Coventry Coventry Percy Northumberl, 
Villiers Jerſey Wyndham Egremont 
Poulett Peulitt Grenville Temple 
Godolphin Godolphin Harcourt Harcourt 
Cholmonde- Chelmondeley Cohivay Hertford 
ley han North Guildford 
Harley Qxford, &c. |Cornwallis Cornwallis 
Shirley Ferrers Yorke Hardwicke 
Wentworth Strafford |Vane Darlington 
Legge Dartmouth |Belaſyſe Fauconberg 
Paget Uxbridge Fox Ilcheſter 
Bennet Tankerville Weſt  Delawarr 
Finch Aylesford Talbot Talbot 
Hervey Bri/jtol | WVSS$COUNTS.: 
Carteret Granville |Devereux Hereford 
Montagu Haliſarx- Brown Montacute 
Felverton 2 Fiennes Cay and Scale 
Cowper Cowper Townſhend Town/hend 
Stanhope Stanhope | Thynne Meymouth 
Sherard Farborough Hatton Hatton 
Parker Macclesfield St. John HBolingbrole 
Fermor Pomfret |Boſcawen Falmouth 
Graham Graham \Byng Torrington 
Ker MWakefield Fitzgerald Leinfter 
Waldegrave Waldegrave Bouverie Foliſtone 
Aſhburnham Ahpburnham Spencer Spencer 
Howard FE fingham BARON s. 
Walpole Orford Nevill! Abergavenny 
Stanhope Harrington Touchett Audley | 
Pulteney Bath Barrett Dacre 
Wallop Poriſmouih Murray Strange 
Greville Brooke Stourton Stourton _ 
Gower Gower Verney MHilloughlyB. 
Hobart Bucks Noel MPFentworth 
Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam |Willoughby of Parham 


Cary 


GREAT BRITAIN. 


BARON s. | 
__ Names. Tities 
Cary Hunſdon 
St. John de of Bletſoe 
Petre Petre 
Arundel! d' of Hardour 
Bligh Cliſton 
Dormer Dormer 
Roper Teynham 
Maynard Adaynard 
Leigh Leigh 
Byron Byron 
Ward Ward » 
Langdale. 0 Langdale 
Berkeley ds of Stretton 
Booth Delamere 
Arundell d' of Trerice 
Craven Craven 
Clifford Cliford 
Boyle Boyle 
Hara e. My 
Willoughby Middleton 
Frevor Trevor 
Maſham Maſbam 
Foley 8 
Bathurſt Batburſt 
Onſlow Onfow 
Marſham Romney 
Cadogan Cadogan 
Moreton Ducie 
_ King” | 
Monſon Monſon 
Bromley Montfort 
Howe  Cheaworth 
Edgcumbe Hagcumbe 
S\ Sandys Sangys 
Brudenell Bruce 
Forteſcue Forteſcue 


| 


325 


BARON s. 
Names Titles 
Anſon Auſ on 
Liddel Ravenſworth 

Duncombe Feverſbam 
Archer Archer 
Ponſonby Ponſonbß 
Beaune . ·˙/ 
Villiers Hyde 
Walpole Walpole 
Murray Mansfield 
Hill Harwich 
Lyttelton Lyttelton: 
[Henley Henley. 
Petty Fycomb. 
Watſon Sondes 
Dodington Melcombe.- R.. 
Robinſon Grantham 
Groſvenor - Groſvenor 
Curzon Scar/dale 
Irby Boſton 
PEARSE | 
[Campbell Marchioneſs: 
Grey - 
Coningſby Counteſs of 
£7 Coningſby 
Schulem-- Counteſs of 
buigh  FLalſmgham 
| Walmoden Counteſs of 
Yarmouth 
Compton Lady Ferrers 
Tufton Baroneſs of 
Clifford 
Smith Baroneſs 
Dudley 
Piercy Baroneſs 
| Piercy 


Wilſon 


Around 


Frans s. PIA ei. 
Names Titles Names Titles 
Wilſon Baroneſs [Stewart Baroneſs 
Perners Aww 

Legge Stawell 3 Stewart 


Nene two Archbifhiopricks; and 24 4 Biſhopricks; 
the Bildops net are Lords of Parliament. 


The Archbiſhopricks a are CanTerBURY and York, 
The Biſhopricks, 


| "OW Roche ier Chicheſter Oxford 
Durham Herford Sarum St. Aſaph 
IWinchefter Litchfield & St. Davids Norwich 
Forceſler Coventry Ely Bangor 
Bath and Exeter Carlifte Briſtal 
Mels Peterborough * n 
Linceln Cheer 7D 


The _ of Man i is not a Lord of Parliament. 


And that you may have at one View, as it were, 
all that eſſentially concerns the Southern Part of this 


noble Ifland, I will ſubjoin the following 


LI A of the Engliſh Shires, Cities, and Bo- 
roughs, which — Members to Parliament. 8 


BEDFORDSHIRE 4. Cheaping Wicomb 
Bedford 1 Ayleſbury 
BBRKSHIRE 9. ] Agmondeſham. 
New Windſor | Wendover 
Reading [Great Marlow 
Wallingfodd {CAMBRIDGESHIRE 6. 
Abingdon, 1. |. " Univerfity - 
Bucks, County 14. Ton of Camb. _ 
5 * LORE P 


GREAT * 


| 


44: 


CHESHIRE 
Cheſter 
CORN WALL 
Launceſton 
Leſkard 
Leſtwithiel 
Truro © 
Bodmyn 
Helſton 
Saltaſh 
Camelford 
Weſtlow 
Grampound 
Eaftlow . 
Penryn 
Tregony 
Boffiney 
St. Ives 
Fovwey 
St. Germans 
St. Michael 
Newport 
St. Mams 
Kellington 
CUMBERLAND 
Carliſle 
| Cockermouth 
DerBYSHIRE, 


Derby Town 


DEyoNs: RE 
Exeter 
Totneſs 
Plymouth 
Oaxkhampton 
Barnſtaple 

Plympton 
Honiton 


4 


20. 


| DoRSETSHIRE 


| 


DuRHAM County 


[KEN County 


| 
GLOUCESTERSHIRE 


Taviſtock 
Aſhburton 
Dartmouth 
Beeralſton 


Tiverton 
20. 


Pool 

Dorcheſter 

Lyme Regis 
Weymouth and 
Melcomb Regis 
Bridport | 
Shaftſbury 
Wareham _ 
Corf caſtle 


City of Durham 
EssEx County 
Colcheſter 
Malden 
Harwich _ . 
8. 
Glouceſter 5 
_ Cirenceſter 
Tewkſbury 
HEREFORDSHIRE 
Hereford - 
Leominſter 
Weobly 
HERTFORDSHIRE 
St. Albans 
Hertford 
HUNTINGDONSHIRE 4. 
Huntingdon 


8. 
6. 


| 10. 
Canterbury | 


Rocheſter | 
| | Maid- 


328 
Maidſtone 
Queenborough _ 

ers County 
Lancaſter 
Preſton 
Newton. 
Wyean 
—— nnd 
| Liverpoole 
LEICESTERSHIRE 
Leiceſter 
LiNCOLNSHIRE 
Lincoln 
Boſton. 
Great Grimſby 
Stamford | 
| Grantham: 
MiDppLESEX 
London, 4. 
N Weſtminſter 
MooNMOUTHSHIRE 
8 Monmouth, 1. 
- NoRFOLK, 
Norwich- 
Lynn Regis 
Great Yarmouth. 
Thetford Ly. 
Caſtle-Rifing- | 
NoRTHAMPTONSH, 
Peterborough 
Northampton 
Brackley 
| Higham-Ferrers, 1. 
NoR THUMBERLAND. 
Newcaſtle n Tyne 
Morpeth: © 
Berwick 


I4. 


- : 1 


Pm 


12. 


8. 


AS 


1 
— 
1 


* 
1 
—— 
* 
8 


12.4 


'F 


A TOUR ro 


NoTTINGHAMSHIRE 8. 
Nottingham 
Eaſt Retford 
Newark 
OXFORDSHIRE 
Univerſity 
Oxford 9 
Woodſtock 
Banbury, 1. 
RUTLAND County 

SALOP County 

Shrewſbury 

Bridgnorth 

Ludlow 

Wenlockk © 

Biſhop's Caſtle 

SOMERSETSHIRE 18. 
| Briſtol: | 
Bath 
Wells 
Taunton 
Bridgwater: 
Minehead 
Ivelcheſter. 
Milburn Port 
SOUTHAMPTON Co. 
Wincheſter 
Southampton 

Portſmouth: 

' Yarmouth. 
Petersfield. 
Newport. 
Stockbridge. 

Newtown: -. . * 
Chriſt-church. 
Lymington 
Whitchurch 
Andover 


125 


2. 


N 


OT AF* 


GREAT BRITAIN. 


. STAFPORDSHIRE 
Lichfield 
Stafford 
Newcalile 
Tamworth 
SurrolLk County 
Ipſwich 
Dunwich 
Orford 
Alborough 
Sudbury 
. Eye 
Bury 
SURRY County 
Quilford 
Southwark 
Blechingly 
Ryegate 
SGatton 
Haſlemere- - 
SUSSEX 67 
Chicheſter 
Horſham 
Midhurſt 
Lewes 
Shoreham 
Bramber 
Steyning 


Eaſt Grinſtead | 


Arundel 
WARWICESHIRE 
Coventry 

Warwick 
WESTMORLAND 
Apulby 
WILTSHIRE. 


New Sarum 
Wilton 


10. 


16. 


6. 


34. 


Downton 
Hindon 
Heyteſbury 

Weſtbury 

15 Calne 

Devizes 

Chippenham 

Malmſbury 

Crichlade 


Lurgerſhall 
Old Sarum _ 
Wotton- Baſſet 


14. | Marlborough 
Tot WORCESTERSHIRE | 


Worceſter 
Droitwych 
Eveſham 
Bewdlev, r. 


| YORKSHIRE | 
20. 


Vork 


Knareſborough 
Scarborough 
Rippon 
Richmond 
Heydon 


Malton 

_ Thirſke 
Aldborough 

Beverley 
Northallerton 
Pontefract 
Cinque PoRTS 
Haſtings 


Dover 


Sandwich 


Great Bedwin 


329 


9 


30. 


Kingſton on Hull 


Boroughbridge 


16. 


Hythe 


eee eee ee AER," 
r 


330 4 TOUR, &c. 


Hythe CARDIOGANSHIRE 8 
Romney _ Cardigan 
Rye [DENBIGHSHIRE 
Winchelſea Denbigh 
Seaferd | FLINTSHIRE 
WALES 24. Flint 
One for each of the follew- GLAMORGANSHIRE 
ing Counties and Toꝛons. Cardifte - 
ANGLESEY County MERIONETHSHIRE 
Beaumaris MonTGOMERYSHIRE 
BRECONSHIRE | Montgomery 
Brecon {PEMBROKESHIRE 
CAERMARTHENSHIRE | Haverford Weft 
Caermarthen Pembroke 
CAERNARVONSHIRR |RADNORSHIRE 
Caernarvon Radnor 


| Total — 1 75 83 GM 513 
— — Scotiſb, as will be ſeen in 
| its Placo = — 3 45 


Renee ee 


The Whole of the Briti/h Repreſentatives — 558 


UG ww 


E 


Balaba 1 - 274 
Aberforth tic 


Adrian, or Hadrian, Empe- 


ror,276. An Kremer of his 
Mall 277 & ſeq. 
Adventurers, Gent/-men 21 


8 Etius, a Roman General 


277 
Agat fone; a large Font of 
| POET 5; 
Agelocum 5 
Ailwelton 47 


Ainlley 69 
Aire, River 112, 113, 115, 


120, 126, 182 


Aiflabie, M.. his Seat and 


Obeliſt 126. Park 128 


St. Albans, Alms- houſes there 


55 


| Alcock, Biſhop oC 


Aldborough 130, 155 
Alderman /all England 27 


Alderney, and 316 
Alemouth * „„ 


THIRD. VOLUME. 


a 


Alexander, A 2, 7 


Alfreton 72 
Allerdale Foreſt 287 
Allertonſnire 154 
Almondbury 144 
Alne, River | 230 
Alnwick 230 
Alum Mines 207, 209 
Alwyn, his Status 27 
Ampthill > 50 
Ancaiter 31, 41 
Ancaſter, Duke of, his Seat 
33 


Angleſey, Earls of, whence 

deſeended 69 
Appleby, or Apulby 269 
Applegarth Foreft 3 


Aquis 11 
Arbeia 287 
Arch, the largeſt Gothic is 
Europe | 171 
— 316 
Aſhbourn "On 
Aſhe, Mr. Heaus an Aſcent to 
the Torr 80 


Aſkeron Sulphar Spring 108 


Aſſembly ; 


Aſſembly R 166 


Athelbald, King 19. His 
Image _ © | 21. 
Athelſtan, King 127, 185, 
191 

St. Ain 308 
Auguſtine, the Monk 206 
Aukborough BJ 
Auldby 158 
Aurelius Ambroſius puts 
Hengiſt 79 Deatb 109 
Axe Edge . 
Axelodunum 5 "Mg 


Axholm, 1/e 
Ayleſbury, Earl of 50 


B 


Bakewell - 5 85 98 
Baliol, Bernard 151 


Baliol, John, King of Scot- 
land 


Baimborough. 283 
Balſover = ol. 
Barmoot Court 78 
Barnardcaſtle - 151 
Barneſley | 111 
Barnſdale 113 
Barrow " 


Barton Ferry 
Sen «ig a Roman Ca 


98 
Battle | between Fmpre/sMaud 
and King Stephen 8 


| el of the Standard 154 


— 2 Boroughbridge156 
at Towton 1 
Battleſden OE Ok 53 
Bautre 106 
Beck, Bi 7 
Veckingham TO. 34 


ibid. 


of Northampton 71 


Bede 213, 220 
B.dford 47, 49 
Bedford, Due of 50. His 


Houje © G2 
E adfordſhire, ei bout 4 City 


47 
80. Bees, Cape of 281, 283 


St. Bega : 00 I 
Belford 233 
Belton- houſe 5 
Belvoir 33 


Berwick upon Tweed 237 


Betham, a Cataract 268 


Beucaſtle 296 
Beverley 184. Peck ibid. 


Beverley, John, Archbiſbop 


of York, Fenerable Bede 


Preceptor 1 
Biddickford 217 
Bifront- houſe 229 
Biggleſwade 48, 50 
Binbrooke 14 
Bingley, /ate Lord, bis Seat 

180 
Birmingham exceeds Shef- 

field 107 

Birſtall 143 


Biſhops-Auckland 213. 
. Biſhop- Wearmouth 218 


Bittern, a Bird 16 
Blackamoore. - | 157 
Blackburn 253 
Blacket, Sir Walter, Bart. 

224 


Blacket, Sir Edward 129 


Blackhall College 36 
Blackſtone, Edge 99, 134, 

253 
Blitn 70 
Blith-Nook © 228 


» CA — han Fong 


EY &Y BY &Y BY by bY 5g Fo od &5 HH) =o ood by Frd ops bet ord hed bed bes 


Boat, 


frac find tat rod bas 


So £5 


6 
8 
P 
1s 
2 
'y | 
T- 
3 

1 2 
3 
2 
3 
7 
8 
6 
A 
45 
4 
5 
„ 
9 
0 
4 
f 
5 
5 
3 
2. 
8 
5 
7 
8 
, 
J } 
4 
, 
3 
5 


1 N D E & * 


| Boat, a Leathern 195 
_ Bolingbroke W__ 


Bolton 7 es 


Bullock, largeſt i ia England 


1341 


Bunny- park 65 


Burgh, a Village iz, go 
Burgh upon the Sands 290 
Burgoynes, their Seat 0 


Bootle, Sir Thomas 256 Burkham = 
Boroughbridge 125, 30, Burleigh Houſe | 38 
155, 156 Burleigh on the Hill 34 
Borough hill 156 Burlington, or Bridlington 
Boſton 16 199 
Poſton Deeps | 17 Burlington, Earl of 166, 
Sz. Botolph, Patron of Ma- 173. His Seat 179 
riners 17 Burning Well 3 3 \- 
Botteſworth _ 33 Burnley 253 
Boulter's Mile flones 27 Burnfal | 146 
Bourne 30 Burton iz Lincolnſhire 8, 12 
Bowes Se” 151 Burton upon Trent 76 
Bownels 299, zo Burton, Mr. bis Houſe 69 
Bradford g rec Pur - 253 
Bradſhaigh, Sir Roger 254 Buxton Bath 77, 83. Ii 
Brampton 290 Antiquity | 85 
Braſſington Moor Bo, 82 Byrch- over 98 
Bray field 47 Byrk, Robert, his Epitaph 
Brazen-noſe College at St. 107, 108 
Martin” s 36 Byron Family 69 
$7, Brelade 307 Byron, Sir John 12 
Bremetonacum 264 8 8 
Bridge, a triangular 20. In- ; PAP 
ſcription ou one 46 | = 
Brigg- ſhott, what 116 Cæſar, Sir Owen, @ Cham- 
Brigs 14 pion — + 8 
Brig- Caſterton r 3 
Brotherton | a 115 Calder, River 11 1, 112, 
Brough | 274 113, 115, 120, 137, 144 
Brovoniacum 275, 291 Camalodunum 187 
Brownlow Family 32 Campodunum 144 
Brus, Robert, F. J of the Candle Coal 254 
Scotiſh Branch of the Roy: Carham | 10} 
al Family 26 Carliſle City 276, 291 
Bugden, a V. illage 46 Carliſle Hou/e 1:79 


Carliſle, Counteſs 290 
Carliſle, Earl of, his Seats 


158, 179, 294 
Carnford 


| Carnford | 260 


Carps of extraerdingry Sie 
| 307. 
Cartmel = 
Caſter 14, 40, 41, 44 
Caftleforth „ 
Caſtle- Howard 158, 179 
n 89 
Cataractonium 151 
St. Catharine 188 


Catharine / Spain 29, 47,5 U 
Cathedral of York 167 & 
ſe 
Cathedrals FL England bs, 
Wales 176, 197 
Caude, River 291 
Cavendiſh Family, their Bu- 
rial. place 74 
Cavendiſh, William 61 
Cavendiſh, Sir William 92 


Cecil, Lord Burleigh, his 
noble Monument 37 
Cell, an Hermit's, hexwn i in a 
Rock | 80 
Ceſtrian Cherſoneſus 246 
Chace, a famous 288 


Chapel in the Frith 99 
Chapter. Houſe at York has 


10 E cual | 173 
Char- filh, or Golden Alpine 
— © £62; 204: 
Die ͤ 3 
Charlton at 
Charnel- Houſe az Gran- 
tham ; 32 
Chartres, Mr. © 252 
_ Chat-moſs 248 
Chatſworth houſe 92 
Chaucer he Poet 101 
Chaworth Family - 69 


 Chaworth Village 70 


1 N. 


Cherry-Orton 43 
Cheſney, Robert dle 7 
Cheſter, Little oe 
Cheller in the Street 214. 
Cheſterfield = 99 
Cheſterton . 
Chetham, Humphrey, Ee 

| 250 


Cheviot-hills 234 
Chevy Chace, and Fight 


234, 230 | 


Chillingham Calle 233 


Chiltern- hills : mY 
Cholmondeley, Earl of 246 


Chriſtenbury Craig 296 & 


1 bo 
Cibber, Poet 1 93, 96 


St, Clement's 310 
Clifford Family 20 
Clifford's Fort 222 
Clifton, Alion at, in 1745 
273 
Clifton Seat 64 


Clifton, Sir Gervas 6 5771 
Clifton, Sir Robert, his Seat 


. "FX 
Clinton, Admiral 30 
Clithero 9 


5 
Cludd, Edward, Ef; 68 


 Coal-trade 218 & eq. 282 


Coccium 264 
Cocket River . 
Cocket Hand 231 
Cockermouth 285 


Cockermouth Cafile 1 | 


Coln 253 
Colfterworth. he Birth- place 
of Sir I ſaac Newton 41 


Coningiborough Caftie 109 
Conſtantius Chlorus, En- 


. | 158 


* 


r ez AMSi*A ©X% — 5 


Corby 


F on 


„ — 


— 


(ny — fon 2 — ng 


F cit. co tf: T' ]ð¶Và:! “““ 


Dane, River 


I... 
). 
2 
4 
3 
þ 
'q 
l 
) 
= 
3 
2 
ly 
ö 
. 
14 
4 
3 
2 
a ; 
9 
8 
4 


Corby Caftle © © 294 
Coſins, Biſcop 1 


Cotton, S:. Robert 206 
| Countelſs's Pillar 289 


Counties evithout one City in 
them 7 
Counties of England and 
Wales, their Circumfer- 


"ence, Pariſhes, Towns, &C. 


318—322 

Cows and Oxen, the largeſt, 
where | 202 
Cranmer, Archbiſhop 84 
Craven 145 


Craven, Sir William, his 


Birth-place 146 
Crococalana 1 
Crocodile, a Sheleton of one 


5 
Cromwell, Oliver, 45, 46, 
238 


Croſs Paſt into Yorkſhire 132 
Croſland' Monument 188 


Crowland 19, 20 
Crows, with blue Bodies and 
black Wings 22859 
Cullercoats 227 
Cumberland given to the 
Scots 152 
St. Cuthbert 81'S 
D. 
Dacre Caſtle 294 
Dalſton Family Wo: 
Dalton 263 


57, 241 
Danes, awhere they _— 9 
Darlington 


2 8 53 
David, K. of Scotland, & 


212, 220, * 


I NDS. 


Davidſon, Thomas, Ejj; 


22 

Debs, 81 William, 1 

biſhop of York 102 
Delveal, Sir Ralph 227 
Delawar, Lord "249 ©: 
Delves, Sir Thomas 84 
Denton 123 
Derby 2& I 


74 
Derby, Charlotte, Counteſs, 


defends Latham Houſe 256 


Derby, Hare of, Fu a 6g 


: 253 

. Derventio- _ 75 
Derventis 8 158 
Der wentwater, late Harl of 


LT 


Derwent River 57, 59, 72, 


75» 77, 94s 8 200, 
285, 286, 287 


Derwent Fells an 
Device of the Earls of War- 
„„ 275 


Devil Jools over Lincoln, 4 


Proverb, awhence derived 
6 


Devil's Aube 130, 156 


Devil's- Arſe iu the Peak 88 


Devil's oV Dane's Bank 103 
Devonſhire, Duke of 84. 


His Seat | 92 
Dighton | 198. 
| Dilſton Houſe 229 


Diſtich pow 2he River 
Wherfe 181 
Leia een tao Pictures 


—— Of A Stag and Heil 


289 
| Diviaity, firft Doctor 5 a 
_ Ozfard:®  - . 185 


Dias 


I 


Dolorous Hill, or Golgotha 


59 

Domitian, Roman a of 
that Prince 9, 180 
Doncaſter 107, 113, "th, 


123 
Dore an Pence 15 
Dornford LW 
Dorrel, *Dedor. 70 


Dorrington, Dr. maintains 


Witchcraft 45 
Dove River. 57, 59, 75, 99 
Doug!ss, ſain in Battle 

— 6 
Downes, Mr. 402 
Drake, Arr.. 156 
Dronfield 100 
Dropping-Well 124 
Drumbouꝑh Calis 


294 
Ducks, aui ld, how: decoyed 22 


Dan, or Don River 57, 99, 


103, 107, 109, 182 


Danald Mill Hole, a Cavern 

, | = | | LY, 2 60 4 
Dunnington a 
Dunſtable 53, 54 


Dunſtanborough Ca/t/e 232 


Dupere, his Legacy 114 


211— 213 
14, 40 


Durham 
Durobrivis 


8 


Farth detrifie . . 4 5¹ 


Eaſter eftab/iſoed after the 
Roman manner 20 
| Faſt Retford 7 
Fbodia, or Eyodia 316 
Eboracum 158 
Eccleſton 257 
Eden River 209, 270, 273 


Edward I. his Monument 


and Inſcription 291 ©; 

Edwin, Earl | 147 5 
Eggleſton | 151 
Egremont 281 


Egremont, Earl of 286, 294 


Egyptian Ha/l 166 
Elden Hole, a frightſul Chafm 

0 

Eleanor, Dueen b 3 
Ellen River 7 
Ellenborough 287 


Ellenfoot Harbour, As in 


i#ts Favour 


fone res 
Elnot | 275 


Emeril, or -Smyris, where 


found "SEE 


| Engines for throwing up a- 
1 ar - 


Engines for making Thrown 


Silk 72 
Erefion Lands 18 
Erith | 46 *. 
Eſhington 4 232 
Eſk = ii | 205, 281 
Etocetum | 76 
Everdon Village 49 


OO, Silveſter de, Bi- 


49 
133 by a Father, and 


Son, of great Age 145 
Eure, River 125,130, 149 
Euſtace I'S 
6 Exeter, Earl of, his Palace 


38 


» 


F airfax, Lord Gn 123, 
7 
__ Fain 


287, 288 
Ellis, Thomas, his Grave- 


- 1 ht ; "py * * r i * 


Bay. 


Fes Country 
Fenwick, Robert, E/%/; 264 
Fernby, a Village 256 


r om ð¾ . A od + 


Manor for ſvoeing the 
King's Horſe 70 


h F ells, or Mountains, in Weſt - 


morland = 266 
Felton - bridge . 
15, 18, 22 


Ferrow, Mrs. di/covers Scar- 
- borough Spaw 201 
Ferrers, Robert, Ear! 60 


Ferrybridge e 
Field Lands 258 
Fiſh, brought alive to Lon- 

don | 2 
Fitzwilliams, Earl 41 

Flamborough-head 200 
Flodden-field 236 
F oderinghay Caftle 28 
Folkingham - 30 


Forbiſher, Sir Martin, the 


celebrated Sailor 108 


Fortune-tellers, how to be 


Puniſhed ¼ 1 
Forty: foot ay 40, 41 
Foſs River 163 
Fols Date | 5 
Foulneſs, River 184 
Fountains- 4bbey 129 
Fourneſs 263 


Fox, Richard, Bigop f 
Wincheſter _ 32 
Fox Lane, George, Eg: 264 
Freed-ſtool 187, 191 
Fullers Earth, where 51 


| G. 

Gainſborough, Earl 72 bis 
Yo 34 

Gainſburgh | 
Vol. III. 


Hadrian. 
Halifax, Marguis of 
E: 'Q 


Fairn andi | 233 
Fauconberg, Henry, holds a 


Galtres Foreſt 179 
Garitang „ 
Gaſcoigne, Sir William 122 


Gateſhead . 220 


Gaunt, John of, Duke of 
Lancaſter 2 5 
Gervaiſe of Tilbury 89 


Giants Tomb „ 
Gilbertine Nuns 30 
Gilling 150 
Giſborne 145 


Giſborough 20g. Con pared 
to Puteoli in Italy ibid. 
God's Houſe, an Hypital 


I 
Godmanchefter -- 75 
Grange O - 104 
Grantham "IS 
 Grantham's Well — YL 
Gray, Sir Richard 113 
Greſemer $743 - 
Greta | n 
Grey, Sir Henry 232 
Grey ſtock Caftle . 294 
Grimſby _ . 
Grimſthorpe . 
Grindall, ue . 
Gronnard 306 
Gronville Pariſh . 


Groove, the Mouth of a way. 
or Pit | 


SSG . —- ge | 
Guaſh River 41 
Guernſey Hand 314 


Gunworth Ferry 27,41, 4 
St. Guthlac, Chaplain to 
King Achelbald 19, 20, 28 


H. y 
98, 293 


* . 
See Adrian. 


5 


Halifax 


1A N 
Halifax, the moſt populous 


Hengiſt the Saxon General 


and and Trent 112, 262 
208 


246 


St. Hilda .. 
Hile-lake - 


Hill, 2e bightft i in England | 


_ Pariſh in England 135 286 
Dn 2143 Hinchingbroke-houſe 46 
Halifax, John e 140 Hinderſkill „ ol 
Hallamſhire, Cutlers of 101 Hiptoft "0 
Hambleton-down 179 Hobbes 82, 87, 95 
Hardwick, a Seat 95 Holbech "m0. 
Harliſton, Sir Richard 311 Holderneſs — 48 
Harrogate 123, 124 Holland 22 Lincolnſhire 
Harriſon, M.. "IMC IS, 21 
Hartington 78 Holy Hand * "274 
Hartlepool 210 Homage cu/{omary at Oke- 
Harweod . 12%, 125 ham 34 
Haſlerig, Sir 8 213 Horn, made of an El-phant's 
Heſlewood 1 Tooth "294 
Haſlington 253 Hornby, a Yom 255 
Hauxley 231 Hornby Cal, Scat of the 
Hawkſmore, Nicolas, 57 Monteagle Family 261 
188 Horn. gaſlle 3 
Heath moor 112 Hornſey | 199 
Heachcote, Sir John, 22 Horrefion-caltle 75 
Helbec Mountain 269 Horles, the bet for the Sad. 
Kt. Helier 308, 309 dle, where 130, 146 
Hell Keteles - 153 Hotham, Sir John 1914 
Helmeſley 157 Hotham, Sir Charles 187 


Hoveden, Roger of 183 


| vanguiſbed 109 Houghton r Fact 
el Andrew, Earl of ton Conqueſt 51 
A 271 Hovinghaam 157 
Hereford, Earl 66, killed 125 Howard, Mr. bis Seat 294 
Herman · ſtreet 14, 26 Howden 183 
Hermitage, a Cave 232 Howick 232 
Hexham 229 Hou ſhead 263 
Heydon 198 S. Hu oh the Burgundian * 1 
Hey ſnam, Mr. bis Benefac- Hoghitat Mountain 269 
tion 245 Hull Abbey 5 232 
Hide, 2 Pillage 199 Hull River 184, 193 
Higham ferrers 42 Humber, 4 Northern King 
Higheſt Hi/ls between Scot- / 59 


Humber River 5 8, 11, 57, 


59, 62, 99, 120, 193 
Hungate, 


Idle, River 
Jenkins, Henry, e 


1 


II ungate, Founder of” an Ho- | i 89, 190. Ower * Ho- 
fpital | 182  ſpital 196. Upon the 

Hunmanby 200 Counteſs', Pillar 289. On 

Huntingdon — 44 a Mace f 


4 
Huſſey, the Rebel Lord 4 
Huthersfieid 


14144 
Hutton, Dr. Biſhop of Dur- 


ham | 261 


Flutton-Morvell 269 


- 


. James IV. King of Scotland 
| $30 


Ibbetſon, Mr. his Seat 1 23 
57,70, 100 


Age 149 
oo Zachary, bis Epi- 
tapb 128 
Jerby . 
Jerſey land 303 


Jews, cruciß 4 Child 4. 
Are barbarouſly maſſacred 
103 & /eg. 

agi granted to the 
Freemen of Beverley 185 
Ingleborough-hill 262 
Inigo Jones — 
Inis Medicante 234 


nſcription wpon a Seffion- 


houſe 10. Upon a Sexton 
vho buried two Queens 
29. Upon Godmancheſter- 
bridge 46. On an Her- 
mitare at Wreſt 51. On 
Sir Thomas Parkyns 65. 
On a Bell 74. Upon Shef- 


Feld Haſpital 103. —_ 


an Altar 162. In the 


Chapter. houſe at Vork 174. 
Upon Beverley Cre 187. 
I Beverley Mnfter 188, 


St. John the Evangeliſt 191 
John de Sacro Boſco, he 


Mathematician, «where 


born 2 po 


John / Peverley, Archbi- 

op of York 185 
John / Gaunt's Chair 259 
Se. John, Sir Francis, Jig 


Seat — $0; 48 
St. John's Pariſb 308 
Jonſon, Counſellor 15 
Irk, River 25 2 
Irwaſn + 70 GY Py 
Irwell, River 252 
Iſurium | 220 
Iſurium Brigantium 155 
Itching, River 290 
Ivel, River © 50 
Sz. Ives 46, 147 
parade Bower 54 

K. 


SPY or Lighters 223, 224 
Kelingholm Ca/le 12 


 Kelnfey | 199 
Ken, River © 267 
Kendal, Barony of 266 
Kendal peaks $66 
Kent, late Dukes of, their 
r Fl 
Kent, Mr. | 173 
Keſwick 8 286 
Keton, Dr. 69 
Kettering 3 
Kilham. 199 
Kimbolton Caflle 45 


Kingſbury | I. 
King of the Praak 98 


Kin glos, Duke of, his Seat 


66, 70 
 Kingfton upon Hull 192 
King's wood 104 


K iniubantum 47 
Kipper, preſerved Fiſo 302 
Kirkby Lonſdale 267 
Kirkby-Mooreſide 157 
Kirkby- Stephen 268, 269 


Kirkham 258 
r 143 
Kirk. Oſwald I 
Xirton 14. 
Wiveton - 1035 
Knareſborough 123, 125 
Knock Cale 251 
*. ey 15 
| L. 

Lamplugh, Dr. 5 cites 
Vork 281 
Lancaſhire Witches 264 
Lancaſter | "60 
Lancaſter, Henry, Ear/ 55 
beheaded 113, 156 
Kanon 306 
1 ane ſborough 178 
Langdale 274 
Latham, Sea? of the Stanley 
Family 256 
Laud, Archbi/bep 250 
Laughton Szeeple 105 
St. Laurence „ 
Leathern Boat 1 
Lebberſton 200 
Leeds, Duke of 105 
Lecds 116. 1ts Clothmar ket 
117 


Leeming- 3 146,153,274 
Leigh, Or. 8 3, 87,124, 255 
Leighton | 06 
Levan, Riuer 154 


EM 


Levens, à Cataract 268 
Lightning, its diructive 
Efefs upon Southwell 


.» Church © 68 
Lincoln 2. By the Normans 
called N col 4. Uts Sh 


tuation 8 


Lincoln Cathedral 6. Has 
the Advantage of that of 


York 168 
Lincoln Diocęſe the largeſt i 5 

England 
Lincoln Heath I, : 
Lindisfarne, or Landisfarne 

Le | 234 
Lindum Colonia 7 
Litany, a Proverbial 142 
Little-Cheſter 75 
Littleborough 9 
Liverpoole 240 


Lombe, Sir Thomas 73 
Lone, or Lune Riwer 258, 
261,267, 208 


Long Meg and her Daugh- 
ters | 294 
Longovicum TN |: Fo 
Lonſdale 267 
Lovetoft Family 44 3 
Louth 14 
Louther Famih, as lence their 
Names 274 


Louther, River 273, 274 


Louther, Sir James 282,285 


Louther, Sir John 281, 285 
Lowick Church, and Monu- 


ments there 442 
Ludi Trojani 11 
Luel, a Britiſh Prince 291 
Lugovallum 201 
Lumley Caſtle 214 
Luton 85 
Luton bow 51 


% TOE IS LO UE LI SI, EM 


KG od Pc 


My —7 


Ct tt 


Ir; ũ Y ] ̃⅛ ˙ 'm... PD ꝗ Ä ⁰¹miA ⸗hů ] ê« !!!,! ²· ]³ð AT ²ꝛ¹-u ²⅛ 5m ¾ Ae arcs, Ed 


L N. D EX; 


Lyndon | 35 Marygold Window 173 
Lynn-deeps 17 Maſham 146 
Lynn, 5 its Han 69 Maſſacre of the Jews 103 
_ Matlock, Hot batb 77 

M. Maud, Empreſo 3, 3 

Maburg 275 Matthews s, Archbiſhop, Wi- 
Maiden, an Engine of Exe- dow, her Benefaction 175 
cution 143 Merſee, River 57, 99, 240, 


Maiden Cale 152 
Malton, Old and New 157 


Mam Tor i the Peak 88 
Mancheſter 240 
Mancheſter, Duke of, his 


Sad” 46 
1 281 

| Manners Family , 98 

. Mansfield x bo 

Manſion houſe ar York 167 

March, Earl , 61 


Mardin: bour 


| 54 
Margaret, Wife of King Ed- 


ward I. falls in 2 


while hunting 115 
Market-Brough 274 
Market-Deeping 30 
Market-Raſen 


14 
Marlborough, Dale of 62 


Marſhland, Hane 782 


Marſton- moor 775 
St. Martin's 36. Is Priwi- 
leges : 37 
t. Martian 310 
Marton-Mere 1 
Marts, Four Fairs in Eng- 
land /o called 18 
Marwcod 152 
Mary Queen of Scots 28, 29. 


Takes Leave of her Pillar 
86. I in Cuſtosy 96, 102 


St. Mary | 398 


St. Mary Madgalen's Haſpi- 
tal „ 


243, 245, 240 


Merton PLD 151 
Methodiſts 140 
Middleton, Lord, his Seat 65 
Middleham 146 
Mills for making Thrown 
Silk 72 
Mithras | 159 
Molecop- hill 38 
Monk cheſter "REY - 


Monk wearmouth 218 
Monks. Houſe -_ . 233 
Monks F Landisfarne 212 


Montacute, Sir William 61 


Monteagle Family 261 


More Family 2246 
Moreſby 285 
Morpeth 230 


Mortimer, Roger 61 
Mortimer's hole ibid. 
Morton, Earl of, the firſt 

executed by a Maiden 143 


Motto of the Devonſhire Fa- 
mily 94 
| Mowyll hilt 274 


Moyſer, Mr. 188, 191 
Mufgrave Family 271, 272 


Myton 149 
Napier, Sir John, his Seat 
| | . 
Naworth Caſtle - 294 
St. Neots „ 
Q 3 Neuſted 


Nenſted | 
Newark 38 8, 41 
Neu vie, Sir Ed. Blacket's 


1 


Seat | 129 
Newcaſtle 222. Whence ſo 
called 223.0 aimon, where 
ta en Fi 226 
Newcaſtle, the preſent Duke 
of 67. Thelate Date of 71 
Newcomb, Rev. Mr. 217 
New- Foreſt 151 
Newton 1 
Newton, Sir Iſaac, | where 
born 41. Where he re- 

* ceived his firſt Principles 
Bf Learning . =. ih 
Norfolk, Duke of 71. His 
Seats 102, 294 
Northallerton i254; FR 
North Pæſſage to China 108 
Northumberland, Earls of 
: | 230, & 5 0 
| Northumberland, R, 5 


N Harle Pi 
Norwood 68 
Nottingham 58 
Nottingham, Earl 8 34 
7 am Caſtle 60 

55 i . 8 
Nyne, River 20, 28, 42, 43. 
. 
Oeccellum 1 199 
Oglethorp, Dr. Biſhop of 
r wo 
Okeham 
Oldham, Dr. E ugh, Bip 
of Exeter "WEL 
Orgueil, Mount 311 
Ormer 306 
Ormſkirk 


: N 


wad 


7 Dc! E x 


Oſwy, King of Northum- 


berland 206 
Ottley 122 
St. Oven 307 
Overborough 264 
Overton 43 
Oulney _ 48 
Quudle, Vell 42 


Ouſe, River 17, 44» 45,47. 
48, 49, 120, 198 | 


F. 

1 age, Tho. E/q; his 5 53 
Parkers Family; 261 
Parkyns, Sir Thomas, the 
noted Wreſtler ' 65 
Parliament, a, Li/t of Places 
returning Members to 326 
Parmentier, his fine Paint- 
| r 4A 1 
Parmeſan, Engli 5 44 
Parr, Catharine, Queen, her 


Birib- place 267 
Parton "Rr 293 
Partridge, exceeding beauti- 

Au © == 
Patrington 
. firſt auth, / 

Yor 


St. Paul's, old, its Height " 
Peak of en 7 73. 


W F1 

Peak weiten 777. 

Peakrills, ad we 548 
Peerage of England 323 
Pembroke, Gounte/5 Dowwa-. 
ger e 289 
Pendle hill! 112, 262 
Pendragon Caſle 290 


Penigent Mountain 112, 14 8 „ 
1 DE 202 
Peploe, 


= 
2 
75 
4 
. = 
8 
2 


" 
* 


2 


Peploe, Dr. Biſhop of Cheſter 


250 
Perith, or Penrith : ory 
Pererborough 28, 


11. Ca- 
tbedral += e 


Peterel, River "© "OL 
Petrify ing Spring. 124. 
Petyt, Mr. his Benefaction 
145 


Pickering, Alderman wry 
Pickering 


Picts Wall 199, 276, & 15 


Piercies, £ar/s of Northum- 


berland 191, 236, 286 
Piers. bridge 153, 274 
Plague zz 1598. = 


Platter, exceeding fine 


Plumtre, Mr. his Houſe ; 


Pocklington 14564 
Poles, an Account of that 

Family 196. 197 
Pontefraet, E: own and Caſtle 

11 

Rente a Colony © x 
Poole's- hole in ho Peak 86 
Potton (HO 


Poulton — 8 


Powder-Plot, by whom diſ- 


covered | 262 
Powis, Fudge, threatens the 
Torn of Nottingham 62 


Prætorium 199 
Preſcot 246 
Preſton 257. Rebels defeat 


ed there in 1715 ibid. 


| Pretender proclaimed i in 1715 
208 


N 
| chin, or Ol 77 
Qeickſands, very dangerous 
eee, Joo 


I Ni DIF 


- R. 
R, - the Nena 
Shibboleth 237 
Raby Caſtle ' 2 EY 


Raleigh, Sir Walter 311 
Ramſey Mere, or Lake 26 


Ramſey Abbey 27 
Ravenglaſs 2281 
Raveniburgh 198 
 Ravenſworth, Lord 232 
Rear Cr,; 1352, 274 
Redcliffe 210 
Regiſter- offices, only #200 iu 
- England 18356 
Remigius > wt 
Ribble, River 145, 253, 
| 256, 258 
Ribblecheſter, « or Ribcheſter 
258 
Richmond 13247 * 
Rigodunum 258 
Ripon __ » 226 
River-borne Coal 120 


Rivers in Yorkſhire, 138 
Rivers, , Antony," 1 57 


123 

Robert, elaeſi Son to the 

Conqueror 223 

St. Robert's Chapel 124 

Robin Hood 66. His Mo- 
nument, &c. 143 


Robin Hood' Bay 204 


Roch, or Rock- Abbey 103 
Roch River 253 
Rochdale 133, 253 
Rockingham, Marguis of; 
his Seat 109 
Rollo, Duke of Normandy 
304 
Roman Highway 107, 113, 
. 115, 131, 274 
Roſel . OS ONE -- 
| | Roles, 


I N D E X. 


; 0" White and Red, unt- 


ted | 264 
Roſſington m- 108 
Rother, River 103 
Rotherham 2 „ e 
Rothwell f 1 
Roy ſton, Ls | 51 


Rufford, or Rogford 70 


KRupert, Prince 123, 256 
Ruſwarp River 207 
Rutland, Duke of, his Seats 

f 33, 98 

Rutland, Francis, Earl of 01. 
Rutlandſhire 34 
8 


Ryton, River . 


8. 
Sacred $, tone, "rs from. 


Scotland, by _ Ed- 
ward J. 290 
Saline 49 
Salkeld 294 
Salt-pans 2218 


Saltfleet 13 


Salthorp, or Salford 252 


Saltries, the tas 26 
Sandal i 
Sandbeck 103 


Sandberg, Earl of 212 


Sands, Archbiſhop, his 6 
8 


nu men. 


Savile, Sry John 121 


Le. Saviour's Pariſb . 


Sautery lane 
* 201. 7, The Di | 


- = 


afier that Ryans 75 the 
Spaw 202 


Scarborough, Earl of 103, 


104, 214 | 


Scarlet, the Sexton, * bu- 
ried tauo Queens 29 


Scarſdale | 100 


Scarſdale, Lora, his Seat 77 
Scotiſh Branch of the Royal 

Family, its Deſcent 26 
Scots perfidioufly fell their 
OF” 1 227 
Fray, 2 | | 67 
Sculpture, one of the Aa. 

antient Picces in England 


27 
Seaſon - Sluice, or Delaval 
227, 228 
gedgfield 51% 38 
Segelocum 9 
Sel bY, King Henry I * 
Nees 8 182 
Sempringham 30 


Seneca, his valuable Picture 


Senhouſe, Humphrey 233 
Settle = 145 
Severus, the Roman Empe- 

ror 158. His Mali _ 


Sharp, Dr. Archbiſhop 75 
York, his Birtb- place 


Sandwich, Earl of, his Seat | 145 
A 4 Sheals 220. 224, 225 
Sandy, For: 4388 Sheffield 101. Repured 10 
Sarke, Hand | 317 excel Bum ingham ibid. 
Sarnia 314 Shefford 30 
Savil, Sir Geo. Bis Seat 70 Sherbourn 8 182 


Shi . Mother, where born 
| 125 

Shires, Cities, and Boroughs, 
in England, 


- 


* 


returning 


1 CORY OOO ES ONES WP VS — 75 . 


I 


IN D E X. 


Aetubers to Parliament 


326 
Shirlow, Biſhop 213 
Shirwood Fires 66, 70 


Shrewſbury, Earls of 71, 


102 


Silvanect, Simon, Far! of 


Huntingdon and North- 
ampton 20 
Sirene, an oad Fiſh 306 
Skern, Rier 153 
 Skiddaw, the higheft Hill in 


England 286 
Skipt tor 145 
Sleford 34 
Slingſby, M.. 470 covers a Ui- 

triolic Water 123 

_ Slingſby, S Henry 125 


Smelting-mills _ 79 
Smith, Dr. Bi/hep of Carliſle 
281 
Smith, Dr. Biſhop of Lin- 
| coln, his Cruelty 54 
 Smyris, or. Emeril, where 


Spurn, or Spurnhead, a Pro- 


montory 198, 199 
Stainborough TH 
Stainmore Foreſt 151 

Hills 229 
Stainthorp 153 
Stamford 32, 36 
Stangate 2} 26 
Stangate-hole 44 
Stanhope 76 Wh 
Stanley Family 25 
Stanmore. Hills 152, 274 
Stanton I FB 
Stilton 44. 
Stockton „ BIO 
Stockwith 106 
Stokeſley 154 


Stone, full of — 5 
Stone, Mr. 50 
Stony Serpents 206 
Strafford, Thomas Went- 

worth, Earl of 110 


Strafford, Earl of, 4 his ow 
1 


129 


Swale, | 


found 315 Streenſhall 206 
Snath 182 Stretton 41 
Snottengaham 60 Strickland, Abbot, late Biſhop 

_ Soar, River 57, 59 of Namur 8 
Soke of Southwell cum Strickland 274 
 "gcroange) vi.) 67 Studley, Mr. Aillabie's Seat | 
Solway Firth - 299 126 
Somerſet, Duke of 309 Stukely, Great and Little 
Southwell 66 26 
Sowe, River 57 Stukely, De. Wi © 2k 
Sowerby 137 Sunderland 215, 219 
Spalding 19 Surry, Earl ef 236 
at Scarborough | 201 Sullex, /ate Earl of, his 12 
: 5 
Spilſby - Þ Satton Pariſh, 4 — bis 90 
Spittle 10 Swale Dale 149, 151 
Spring ebbs and flows 9 Swale, River 148, 149 


Tea-drinking "increaſes the 
 Barthen-aware Manufac- 
ture 63 

Tees, River 151, 210, 218 


Temple borough 109 
Tempsſord 48 
Terra Ulphi 175 
Thanet, Earl e 290 
Thirſk „ 1 
Thoreſby 66,70 
Thorn 182 
 Thorney © 21 
Thornton, John, Glazier, 
17 
Thornton, Mr. of York 
18 
Thornton College © 12 


Thorp, Seat of Sir Francis 

St. John 30, 43 
Thrapſton 42 

Thrown Silk made by Mills 


73 
| Thurflan, drbbifpo York 
Tickhill 


. | Tide, a very rapid one 300 
Tiddeſwell . 


Tideſwell, a Spring 


50, 98 


„ 
104, 106 


90 


E 


Swale, Sir Solomon 148 Till, River 236 
Swan-pool Mi Tillotſon, Archbiſhap, his 
Swine penies | 9 „ 55 240 
Sy fer Spring 40 Tillſworth, William, burnt 
* Mr. Richard 121 l 
. Slemouth 220 

| Y. Tijptoft, John de, Earl of 
T adcafter 5 180 Worceſter 19 
Talbot Family 71,102 Tom of Lincoln 6 
Tallard, Count 62 Tomlinſon, Dr. Robert, hi, 
Tame, Rider 57 Benefattion 224 
Tankerville, Farlof 233 Tonſtall, Bifzop 123 
'Tatterſall 14 Torr, @ Pile of Rocks 80 


Tower, the * in all 


„England 6 
Towton Fieldfamous for a 
cruel Battle there 181 


Trench, called Devil's Bark | 


Trent, River 5. 8 5 0 : 
59, 62, 72, 75, 10 5 
Tresa 
Trinity Pari m 
Trinity-houſe at Hull 195 
Tuddington 54 
Tunocelum 300 
Tunſtall, Bis 154 
Tweed, River. 122 
Turrey . 3 
Tuxford in the Clay 70 
Tyne, River 220, 229 


Tyrconnel, Lorxes 32 5 


F 
Vallum Romanum 277 
Vario, a dene an. 


4. 
Vaudy Abbey | = + YO 
Vere-court - | 12 
Vernon, Sir 8 98 
Verters bes 275 


IN D E X. 


; Villiers, George, Duke > 


Buckingham - 


Vincent, Mr. 204 
Virgins Tomb i": TN 
Vortimer, King 8 
_ U. 

| Une; Water 294 
Ulphus 175 
Ulverſton | 263 
Uppingham 


34 
Utoxeter, er Utecſter 76 


| 2 - | : W. ä 7 
_ Wainfleet | 13 
Wakefield 111, 141 


Walker, William, Schoo/- 


maſter ta Sir Haac New- 
ton 32 
Walton 244 


Wansford in England 40. 


M hence ſo called 43 
Warbois, on Hitches, AG re- 


pealed 44, 45 
Warburton, John, Ei; 277 
Warcop _ #74: 

| Warkworth „ 
Warrington 246 
Warton : - a0 

| Warton-crag ibid. 
Water Neuton 41 
Watling ſtreet 43, 54 
Wathorp-houſe 42 


Wear, River 211, 214, 216, 


217 


Weatheral Tower 5 


Weaver, River Tx 241 
Weedenwell, a i 9o 
Weighton — 184 
Welbeck 66, 70 


Welland, River 19, 20, 30 


5 


Wenſely. dale e 2 


Wentſbeck „ 
Wentworth, an old Seat 109. 
The Caſtle 111 


Weredyke 


- Welt, Thomas, Lord Dela 


war 249 


Weſtmorland, n „ | 


Weſtmorland, Fart of, "os 


Rebellion 139 
Weſt Retford' /' 70 
"Wetherby: - 45:44 79 


| Wharton Family 271, 272 
Wharton, Sir Michael 187, 

— 188 
Wharton, Mr. diſcovers a 


curious Draw-bridge and 


Moat 8 148 
Wherfe, River 122, 179, 
180, 181. 
Whiſton, Mr. his Epitaph 35 
Whitby 205 
Whitehaven - 282 
Whitefield Park 2:8 


Whittle, Market at 207 
Whittleſea Mere, or Lake 26 


Wigan 254 
Wigton — 27 
Wike 198 
Wild- bore 260, 274 
St. Wilfrid, Archbiſbop . 
Vork vl 125 


St. Wilfrid's N-edle 38 - - 


William le Gros 12, 201 
William of Wainfleet - 1 * 
Winander Mere 263, 273, 


294 

Winchelſea, Earl of, bis 
Seat . 
Winwickk . 2348 


a I 
X "ERCEN 
8 8 2 
] 8 
pF LEE, 
1 
5 ag. 
4 Fs . 
1 a 
- WE 
Z 3 
þ | % { 
F He 
2 L. 
7 N 
* 
1 * ” A 
* — 5 
RX 
me 
* > N 
* 2 5 
( 
wt 
51 
9 — N 
338 
N 
2 
EX 
{ 12 1 * 
1 3s 
? 4 l 
: . 
5 
> LY 
* 


Wirall, or Wirehall 240 
Wire, River 25 
Wireſdale, Foreſt id. 


Wirkſworth 


80 77 
Witchcraft, Ad o/ ag, 
: "206 
Witham, River 5 1 3, 17 
Woad, a Plant Wo 
Woburn e 1 


repealed 


Woburn Town _ Sh 
Wollaton hall 65 
Wolſingham 214 

Woodhouſe 109 

Wooler 233, 234 

Workington 285, 286 

Workſop Manor "a7 

Town ibid. 


Woulds, or Plains and Downs 
| 183, 184, 200 


Wreſt 51 
Wren, Sir Chriſtopher 130 


Wry-noſe Hail! 294 
Wolfer, Bi/bop | 29 
Wye, River e 

Wyndham Family 282 

bern River 154 


/ 


INDEX 


* Wintringham 5» 4g 


. 
Yarborough, a RomanCanp 


13 
Yarrow, Fon Bede 3 


Bi:th-place 220 
Yarum oy 
Yaxley 9755 43 
Vork | 180 — 171 
Yorkſhire, its Extent +100, 
Compared with the Plain 
of Palermo, and ſome 
Parts of Italy 122, 123 
York, Duke of 111, II killed | 
112 

York, Edmund, of Langley, 
and Edward, Dukes of 
— „ 
Vork Caſtle, the moſt Nately 


' Priſon in Europe 166 
York Cathedral, its Charac- 
ter 167. Exceeds Lincoln 
| 1 
| Yorkſhire Ale 144 
Zourhs a Bike, defeats the 
Scots 212 
d IF 
$- w 36 
e 


[5 | © EFD . vor. II. 


'S 
5 


— 


Ax


==================== VOLUME BREAK ====================

TOUR 

Thro'  the  Whole  ISLAND  of 

GREAT  BRITAIN, 

Divided  into 

CIRCUITS   or  Jo  URN  IE  s,. 

Containing, 


Ji^A  DESCRIPTION  r.f  the 
Pnnci  al  ..ities  and  Towns, 
the:  Sit'uarion,  Government, 
ard  Oimmerce. 

II.  The  Ctii"roin:>,  Manners,  Ex- 
ert, ii.-s     Divrthons,   and    Em- 
ployments of.  the  People. 

III.  The  Nature  and  Virtue  of  the 
many  Medicinal  Springs  with 
which  both  Parts  of  the  united 
Kingdom  abound  ;  particularly 
thofeor" £utb,  Tunbrijge,  En- 
flol,  Cheltenham,  Mo/at,  &c. 

IV.  An    ampie    Defcription    of 
London,  including    Weftminfler 
and  bouthwark,  their  Biidg.es, 
Squares,  HJpitals,   Churches, 


Palaces,  Markets,  Schools,  LI- 
l  rariesr,  Shipping  in  \hzThamfS) 
and  Trade,  by  means  of  that 
noble  River,  &c. 

V.  The    Produce  and  Improve- 
ment of  the  Lands,  the  Trade" 
and  Manufactures. 

VI.  The  Sea  Ports  and  Fortifica- 
tions, the  Cnurfe  of  Rivers,  and* 
the  Inland  Navigation. 

VII.  The  Public  Edifices,  Seats, 
and  Palaces  of  the  NOBILITY" 
and  GENTRY. 

VIII.  The  Ifies  of  Wight,  Sdllyt 
Portland,    Jtrfey,    GWw/Vy, 
and  i  he  other  Erg/ijb  and  Scot' 
ijh  Ifles  of  moll  Note. 


Interfperfed  with  Ufeful  OBSERVATIONS. 

Particularly  fitted  for  the  Perufal  of  fuch  as  defire  to 
Travel  over  the  ISLAND. 

By  a  G E NT L E MA N.    -:  ^ 

The     SIXTH     EDITION. 

With   very   great  Additions,  Improvements,   and  Coirs&ions  j   which 
bring    it  down    to  the    Year    1761. 

In  FOUR  VOLUMES. 

With  an  INDEX  to  each  Volume. 
V  0-L.     IV. 

LONDON  : 

Printed  for  D*  BROWNE,  T.  OS-BORNE,  C.  HITCH  and; 
L.  HA \VE-S,  A.  MILLAR,  J.  BUCKLANJ>,  J.  RIVING 
TDK,  T.  LONGMAN,  T.  LOWNDS,  T.  CASLON, 
G,  KEARSLEY.     

M.DCC.LXJ. 


I 


CONTENTS 

T    O 

VOLUME 


LETTER    I. 


yd  General  Description  of  North  Britain,  Page 


1>E  T  T  E  R    II. 

A  Defcription  of  the  Merfe,  the  fwo  Lothians^ 
of  Edinburgh,  Leith,  &c.  58 

LETTER    III; 

A  Defcription  of  the  following  Shires'  and 
tfowns;  viz.  Annan,  Dumfries,  Galloway,  Air, 
Renfrew,  Glafgow,  Stirling,  Linlithgow, 
Clidfdale,  Tweedale,  Roxborough,  &c*  113 

LETTER    IV. 

rA  Defcription  of  the  ancient  Caledonia,  or 
Northern  Part  of  Scotland  j  and  particularly 

of 


iv         CONTENT  S. 

ef  the  Shires  and  'Towns  of  Fife,  St.  Andrews, 
Perth,  Dumblain,  Alloway,  Culrofs,  Scone, 
Angus,  Dundee,  Montrofe,  Aberdeen,  Bu- 
chan,  Murray,  Elgin,  Invernefs,  and  tht 
Highlands,  &c.  162 

LETTER    V. 

A  brief  Pefcription  of  tie  Scotifli  IJles,  loth 
Weflern  and  Northern .  282 

LETTER     VI, 

A  brief  and  accurate  Account  of  tie  Rife,  Pro- 
grifS)  and  Extin^im^  of  the  Rebellion  raifed? 
in  Scotland  in  the  Tear  \  745.  together  witfr> 
a  Lift  of  the  Scocifh  Peerage,  and  of  the  Shires 
and  Burghs  that  are  privileged  to  return 
Members  to  the  Britifti  Parliament.  334, 


TOUR 

Through  that  PART  of 

GREAT    BRITAIN 

CALLED 

SCOTLAND. 

VOL.     IV. 

LETTER     I. 

Containing  a  General  DESCRIPTION  of 
N  o  R  T  H  -  B  R I  T  A  i  N  ,  in  the  Particulars 
hereundermentioned. 

SIR, 

HAT  I  may  avoid  Repetitions  in  my 
TOUR  through  the  Northern  Part  of  this 
famous  Ifland,  I  (hall  begin  with  the  fol- 

__  lowing  Particulars  : 

I.  I  (hall  give  a  brief  Geographical  Account  of 

Scotland* 
VOL.  IV.  B  II.  Of 


a  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

II.  Of  its  Lakes  and  Rivers. 

III.  Of  its  Fisheries,  including  that  for  Pearls. 

IV.  Of  the  Cattle,  Fowls,  &c. 

V.  Of  its  Manufactures  of  Linen  and  Woolen. 

VI.  Of  the  Grain  and  Pulfe  it  produces. 

VII.  Of  its  Mountains,  Woods,  &c. 

VIII.  Of  its  Fountains,  Springs,  Medicinal  Wa- 
ters, &c. 

IX.  Of  precious  Stones,  &c.  found  there. 

X.  Of  the  Cuiloms,  Language,  Manners,  &c.  of 
the  People. 

XI.  Of  the  Religion  and  Ecclefiaftical  Government 
of  Scotland. 

XII.  Of  the  Order  of  the  Tbtftle. 

XIII.  Of  the  Civil  Government  of  Scotland. 

XIV.  A  fhort  View  of  the  A&s  of  Parliament  fmce 
the  Union^  that  have  made  any  Alteration  in  the 
Laws  of  Scotland. 

XV.  Some  brief  Obfervations  on  the  Whole;    and 
the  Divifion  of  Scotland  into  Shires,  &c  *. 

Of  all  which  as  fuccin&ly  as  potfible.     And, 

I.  A  brief  Geographical  Account  of  Scotland. 

r 'COT LA  ND  is  bounded  on  the  South  by  the 
***  Irijh  Sea  and  England^  from  which  it  is  divided 
by  Solway  Firtb^  and  the  Rivers  EJk  and  Kekfop ;  on 
the  Weft  Border,  by  the  Cheviot  Hills  in  the  Middle 
Marches  ;  and  by  the  lower  Parts  of  the  Tweed,  on  the 
Eaft  Border.  On  the  Eaft  it  is  bounded  by  the  German 
Sea  ;  and  on  the  North  by  the  Deutaledonian  Sea  j  and 
on  the  Weft,  by  the  great  Weftern  Ocean. 

*  The  Account  of  the  Rife,  Pr«grefs,  and  Suppreflion,  of  the  unnatu- 
ral Rebellion  in  1745.  's  referred  to  the  End  of  this  Volume  ;  in  order  to 
avoid  ProJixity,  and  the  Confufion  that  muft  have  followed,  had  the 
Motions  of  the  Royal  Army,  and  the  Rebels,  been  attended  to  in  the 
Ttiwns  they  patted  through, 

Its 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  $ 

Its  greateft  Length  from  Dung/by  bead,  or  John  of 
Grofs-boufe  in  Catthnefs,  to  the  ^fc/#//  of  Galloway  to- 
wards Ireland,  is  no  more  than  about  215  Scots  Miles ; 
but  if  we  reckon  directly  North  from  Dumfries,  or  the 
faid  Mull  rf  Galloway,  to  the  utmoft  Parts  of  Caithnefi9 
or  Stratbnavern,  the  Length  will  not  be  fo  much  ;  ana 
lefs  {till,  if  we  reckon  from  Berwick  to  ekher  of  thefe 
Places. 

Its  Breadth,  from  the  Point  of  Ard-na-  mu^chan  near 
the  Ifle  of  Mull,  about  the  middle  Part  of  Scotland  in 
the  Weft,  to  Bucbannefs  in  the  Eaft  Parts,  towards  the 
North,  is  about  140  Scots  Miles ;  but  the  Sea  running 
up  into  the  Land,  or  the  Land  thrufVmg  out  into 
the  Sea  in  many  Places,  makes  the  Breadth  of  it 
every- where  elfe  very  various  and  difproportionable ; 
for  in  the  South  Parts  it  is  feldom  100  Miles  over,  and 
in  the  North  Parts,  beyond  Invernefs,  not  fo  many  ; 
fo  that  there  is  no  Houfe  above  40  or  45  Miles  from 
fait  Water. 

Befides  the  main  Land,  there  are  about  300  Iflands, 
fomeof  them  very  confiderable,  which  may  be  dittin- 
guifhed  into  feveral  Clafles :  the  Weftern  Ifland  seal  led 
Hebrides,  or  &bud<Z)  by  Latin  Authors ;  the  Orcades^ 
or  Orkney  Iflands;  the  Iflands  of  Shetland)  or  Zetland', 
and  fome  few  in  the  Firth  of  Forth. 

The  whole  Country  abounds  in  Lakes  and  Rivers, 
many  whereof,  running  into  Creeks  and  Arms  of  the 
Sea  (which  in  feveral  Places  are  very  wide  and  deep), 
afford  great  and  commodious  Opportunities  for  Fifhing 
and  Shipping  :  but  it  is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  the 
Land  is  neither  cultivated,  nor  the  Fifhing  and  Snipping 
carried  on  and  improved.,  to  fo  much  Advantage  as 
might  be  expecled. 

Though  the  Soil  is  not  generally  fo  level  and  fruitful 
as  that  of  England,  yet  the  South  Parts  of  Scotland 
are  far  mote  pleafant  than,  and  preferable  to,  the  North 
Parts  of  England^  and  there  are  every- where  all 
Things  neceflary  for  human  Life  j  and  not  only  fi:ffi- 
B  2  cient 


4  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

cient  for  the  Inhabitants,  but  alfo  to  export,  and  ex- 
change for  fuch  foreign  Commodities  as  the  People 
want,  and  to  return  configurable  Sums. 

II.   Of  the  moft  remarkable  Lakes  and  Rivers 
in  Scotland. 

FCOTLdND  or  North-Britain^  has  received 
*~*  from  the  bountiful  Hand  of  Providence,  a  very  co- 
pious Diftribution  of  Waters,  and  thofe  too  very  hap- 
pily difpofed  for  the  Ufe  and  Benefit  of  its  Inhabitant?, 
infomuch  that  it  may  be  with  Truth  affirmed,  that 
there  is  fcarce  any  confiderable  Part  of  it  fo  fituated,  as 
not  to  have  its  Share  of  thefe  Bleflings.  Springs  of  clear 
and  wholefome  Wate'r  are  every-where  in  Plenty,  not 
only  on  the  Sides,  but  even  on  the  Tops  of  many  of 
the  Mountains,  and  fometimes  alfo  on  the  bare  Rocks, 
as  in  thelfland  of  Bafs  in  the  jF/r/£  of  Forth.  Thefe 
Springs  in  their  Defcent  fwell  into  pleafant  Rills,  and 
by  Degrees  into  Brooks,  or  Burns,  which  ftraying 
every-where  through  the  Fields,  cither  are,  or  might 
be,  eafily  rendered  Inflrurnents  of  Fertility.  Thefe 
again,  in  their  Progrefs,  augmenting  their  Streams,  be- 
come at  length  no  contemptible  Rivers,  which  acimf* 
nifter  to  all  the  Purpofes  of  domeftic  Oeconomy. 
Many  of  thefe  meeting  with  hollow  Places  in  their 
PalTage,  expand  themfelves  into  Lochs,  till  finding  a 
proper  Channel,  they  refume  their  Form  of  Rivers, 
and,  as  the  Nature  of  the  Soil  directs,  fometimes  ex- 
pand themfelves  again  and  again,  or  continue  their 
Progrefs  in  the  fame  Form  to  the  Sea. 

The  moft  remarkable  Lakes  in  Scotland  are  Locbtay^ 
and  Locbnefs,  and  Locblevin ;  which  all  fend  forth  Ri- 
vers of  the  fame  Name  with  themfelves :  Locblomond^ 
which  fends  forth  the  River  of  Lomond  j  and  Locbiern^ 
which  fends  the  River  lern.  It  is  obferved,  that 
Lodmefi,  Locbtay^  and  Lochierny  feldom  freeze. 

Locbmyrton 


ScotL         GREAT  BRITAIN.  y 

Locbtnyrton  in  Galloway  is  another,  and  remarkable 
for  this,  that  one  Part  of  it  generally  freezes  in  the 
Winter-feafon,  and  the  other  Part  feldom  does. 

There  is  a  Loch  in  Straitherracb^  in  the  Lands  of 
the  late  Lord  Lovat,  which  never  freezes,  however  fe~ 
vere  the  Froft  be,  i\\\  February,  and  then,  in  one 
Night's  time,  it  freezes  all  over ;  and  if  the  Froft  con- 
tinue two  Nights,  the  Ice  grows  very  thick.  There  is 
a  Lake  of  the  fame  Nature  called  Lochmonar^  in  the  late 
Earl  of  Cromertiis  Lands  in  the  North  ;  and  there  is 
another  Lake  in  StraglaJJ^  at  a  Place  called  Glencanich^ 
in  an  high  Ground  betwixt  the  tops  of  two  Mountains, 
the  Middle  of  which  Lake  is  always  frozen  throughout 
the  Summer,  notwithstanding  the  ftrong  Reflexions  of 
the  Sun- beams  from  the  Mountains,  which  melt  the 
Ice  at  the  Sides  of  the  Lake.  The  Ground  round  the 
Lake  has  a  conftant  Verdure,  as  if  there  were  a  perpe- 
tual Spring;  and  Cattle  grow  fooner  fat  by  that  Grafs 
than  any-where  elfe  :  and  this  is  fo  much  the  more  re- 
markable, that  there  are  feveral  other  Lakes  in  the 
Neighbourhood,  of  as  high  a  Situation,  wherein  no 
fuch  thing  is  feen. 

Loch  Sunart  in  Argylefhire  is  24.  Miles  in  Extent, 
having  an  Ifland  at  the  Mouth ,  which  divides  it  into  two 
narrow  Channels;  tho'  upon  this  Ifland  it  opens  again, 
fo  as  to  become  upwards  of  an  Engiijh  Mile  in  Breadth. 
To  the  South  of  this,  at  a  fmall  Diftance  from  Dun- 
faffage->  then  a  Royal  Cattle,  lies  a  fmall,  fafe,  and 
commodious  Port,  called  Oban  Bay,  covered  by  the 
Ifland  of  Kerrera,  which  is  in  Length  about  three  Mile?, 
by  which  it  is  effectually  defended  from  Weft  Winds, 
as  it  is  in  like  manner  fecured,  by  high  Lands  on  the 
Continent,  from  all  other  Winds.  On  the  North  Side 
of  this  Bay  there  are  n,  on  the  South  26,  in  the 
Middle  about  20  Fathom  Water.  Add  to  all  this, 
that  the  whole  Sound  is,,  in  effe6t,  an  Harbour,  or  at 
leaft  a  commodious  Road,  with  20  Fathom  Water,  and 
good  Anchorage  almofi:  every- where.  There  are  be- 
B  3  fides, 


6  vf  TOUR  AW  Scot!. 

fides,  two  Havens  in  the  Me,  one  from  its  Shape  called 
The  HorJe-Jboe^  the  other  drdintraive ;  with  two  fair 
Outlets,  one  to  the  North-eaft,  the  other  to  the  South- 
weft,  fo  that  Vefiels  may  enter  and  depart  without  In- 
conveniency  or  Danger.  The  Situation  of  this  Place, 
in  the  very  Track  of  Ships  bound  to  and  from  the 
Northern  Parts  of  Europe,  feems  to  demand  Attention  5 
snd  upon  this  Account,  as  I  have  been  informed.  Ap- 
plication has  been  lately  made  with  Succefs  for  eita- 
birthing  a  Cuilorn-Houfe  at  the  little  Town  of  Oban^ 
which  ftands  immediately  upon  it  ;  and  this  will  un- 
doubtedly be  not  only  ufeful  to  the  Town,  and  fer- 
viceable  to  the  Country,  but  beneficial  alfo,  in  many 
Refpecls,  to  the  Navigation  of  the  North-weft  Side  of 
Britain  in  general.  Circumftances  which,  in  an  Age 
like  this,  when  the  Emoluments  arifing  to  the  Public 
from  bringing  a  Country  into  Cultivation,  introducing 
Trade,  and  thereby  augmenting  the  Number  and  Sub- 
ihince  or"  the  People  who  inhabit  it,  are  fowell  under- 
ftood,  muft  have  their  Weight. 

In  the  Front  of  our  Ifland  to  the  North,  lies  Loch 
Eribol  in  Stratbnavern^  which  runs  fo/ne  Miles  into  the 
Land,  and  thereby  affords,  whenever  the  Inhabitants 
/hall  have  any  Commerce,  a  commodious  and  capa- 
cious Haven. 

In  LinlitbgGwJhire  is  a  Lake  called  Lockout  Lough, 
from  whence  a  Stream  runs  under  a  neighbouring 
Mountain,  the  Murmur  of  which  is  heard  among  the 
Stones ;  and  after  it  has  run  thus  under  ground  for 
about  two  hundred  Paces,  it  ifiues  with  great  Force 
from  a  Fountain  about  three  Feet  broad,  and  forms  a 
Stream  which  turns  a  Water-mill. 

For  the  Conveniency  of  Trade  and  Fifhing,  there 
are  fo  many  Inlets  of  the  Sea,  that  there  is  fcarce  any 
Part  of  North  Britain  above  40  Miles  diftant  from 
fome  Bay,  Creek,  or  Arm  of  the  Ocean  ^  arid  thefe 
afford  many  Harbours,  feveral  of  them  very  good,  and 

capable 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  7 

capable  of  receiving  Men  of  War,  and  Ships  of  the 
greateft  Burden. 

Other  Lochs  or  Lakes  we  {hall  take  Notice  of  in 
their  refpeclive  Places.  The  following  are  the  prin- 
cipal RIVERS  in  North  Britain. 

The  FORTH  is  one  of  the  mod  noble  and  commo- 
dious Rivers  in  Scotland,  and,  as  a  very  ingenious 
Writer  obferves,  would  indeed  merit  that  Appella- 
tion in  any  Country.  It  takes  its  Rife  near  the  Bottom 
of  Leimon-HillS)  and  running  from  Well  to  Eaft,  re- 
ceives in  its  Paflage  many  confiderabie  Streams,  deriv- 
ing their  Waters  from  the  Eminences  in  the  midland 
Counties  of  North  Britain. 

The  River  CLYDE  rifes  out  of  Tinto  /////,  near 
a  Place  called  Arrick-ftone,  on  the  Confines  of  the  two 
Shires  of  Peebles  and  Lanerk.  It  runs  at  firft  North- 
weft  ward,  till  being  joined  by  another  Stream,  it  pafles 
by  Graufurd)  and  runs  almoft  direclly  North,  through 
the  famous  Moor  of  the  fame  Name,  antiently  re- 
nowned for  producing  no  defpicable  Quantities  of 
Gold  Dull  an  J  Lapis  Lazuli,  as  it  dill  is  for  the  rich 
Mines  or  Lead,  belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Hopton.  Af- 
ter traveling  this  Moor,  the  River  declines  Eaftward, 
and  fetching  a  confiderabie  Compafs,  turns  again  to 
the  North-weft ;  when  receiving  a  large  Supply  6f 
Water  from  the  River  DOUGLAS,  it  comes  to  Lanerk^ 
a  Ro  al  Burgh  ;  and  here  there  is  a  Bridge  over  it,  of 
fuch  Convenience  to  the  adjacent  Counties,  that  Tolls 
were  granted  for  its  Support  upwards  of  50  Years  ago, 
which,  by  repeated  A£ts  of  Parliament,  are  ftill  fubfift- 
ing.  The  Clyde  then  leaving  Hamilton  at  a  fmall  Dif- 
tance,  about  which  there  is  as  good  Oak  Timber  as 
any  in  thelfland,  proceeds  to  Glaj'gow,  which  it  reaches 
after  traverfing  about  50  Miles  from  its  Source.  Here, 
being  become  both  broad  and  deep,  it  continues  its 
Progrefs,  dividing  the  Shires  of  Renfrew  and  Dunbar- 
tOK',  and  having  paffed  the  Town  of  Renfrew,  and 
B  4  foon 


8  A  J  O  U  R  tbri  Scotl. 

foon  after  received  the  two  Rivers  of  the  Name  of 
Cart,  it  moves  majeftically  on,  till  it  abforbs  alfo 
the  River  Levin^  ifluing  from  Loch-Lomond-,  and  thus 
iwelled  with  fubfidiary  Streams,  having  patted  New 
Port  GlafgoWi  and  Greenocb^  and  wafhed  a  Part  of 
Argylejhire^  its  joins  its  Waters  to  thofe  of  the  Sea,  after 
a  Courfe  of  70  Miles. 

FORTH  and  CLYDE,  if  joined  by  a  Canal,-  near  the 
Place  where  the  Romans  formerly  built  their  Wall  of 
about  30  Miles  long,  to  defend  their  Province  from  the 
Scots  and  Piffs,  would  open  a  Communication  betwixt 
the  Eaft  and  Weft  Seas,  to  the  great  Advancement  of 
the  Commerce  of  the  whole  Ifland.  There  was  much 
Talk  of  it  about  the  Time  of  the  Union.  As  to  the 
Practicability  of  making  fuch  a  Canal,  there  can  be  very 
Jittle,  if  any,  Doubt  about  it.  The  Space  of  Ground 
intervening  is  not  above  20  Miles  j  and  a  moft  com- 
modious Communication  by  Water  might  be  rwade  for 
as  many  thoufand  Pounds;  for  much  lefs,  as  fome 
have  computed  :  it  is  therefore  a  Matter  that  well  de- 
ferves  to  be  kept  in  Memory. 

What  Means  of  Improvement  of  our  own  Country, 
as  well  in  Europe  as  America^  have  we  fquandered 
away  in  the  laft  40  or  50  Years,  to  aggrandize  a 
Power,  that  has  forgot  all  the  Benefits  {he  has  received 
from  us,  and  is  unnaturally,  as  well  as  ungratefully, 
joined  with  our  implacable  Enemies  the  French^  againft 
her  Supporters,  who  have  been  for  many  Campaigns 
fo  expenfive  in  her  Favour,  that  the  Coft  of  any  one 
cf  thofe  beftowed  upon  ourfelves  in  improving  our  na- 
tural Advantages,  as  well  in  South  as  North  Britain^ 
Ireland,  and  our  Colonies,  as  would  have  made  this 
Kingdom  the  nobleft  Empire  on  Earth,  without  need- 
ing Allies  or  foreign  Support. 

The  TAY  is  indifputably  the  largeft  River  in  Scot" 
land.  It  rifes  in  Braidalbin  on  the  Frontiers  of  Lot «, 
and,  augmented  by  feveral  Waters  in  its  Paflage,  is  na- 
vigable to  Perth.  The  Firth  of  Tty  is  not  indeed  fo 

lar^e 


Scot!. 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 


f  I  large  or  fo  commodious  as  that  of  Forth  ;  but  from 
Buttonnefs  to  Perth  it  is  not  lefs  than  4.0  Miles  ;  and 
the  Whole  may  be,  without  any  great  Impropriety, 
ftiled  a  Harbour  ;  which  has  Fife  on  one  Side,  and 
the  Shires  of  Perth  and  Angus  on  the  other,  very  fertile 
and  pleafant  Countries  both,  furnifliing  various  Com- 
modities and  Manufactures;  Corn,  Coal,  and  Lead, 
may  be  reckoned  among  the  former;  Shalloons  and 
other  Woolen  Stuffs,  Thread,  Linen,  and  Salt,  among 
the  latter,  to  which  we  may  add  Fifh,  which  is  a 
very  profitable  Article. 

The  River  of  SouTH-EsK  rifes  amongft  the  Moun- 
tains in  the  North  of  Angus  \  and  running  direclly 
South  many  Miles,  it  makes  an  Angle  near  the  Seat  of 
the  Earl  of  Airly ^  and  direcls  itsCourfe  Eaftward,  fall- 
ing at  length  into  the  German  Ocean,  a  little  below 
Montrofe, 

The  River  DEE,  rifes  out  of  Loch- Dee,  which  lies 
at  the  Foot  of  the  Hills  that  divide  the  Shire  of  Aire 
from  Galloway ,  and  after  running  many  Miles  in  a  Ser- 
pentine Courfe,  and  receiving  the  Waters  of  the  great 
River  KEN,  declining  more  to  the  South-eaft,  falls  at 
length  into  the  German  Sea,  with  a  very  copious  Stream; 
on  "the  Eaft-fide  of  which  ftands  the  Town  of  Kircud- 
bright.  It  is  a  clear,  iharp  Stream,  gradually  aug- 
mented by  many  Brooks  and  Rivulets,  and  celebrated 
from  all  Antiquity  for  breeding  great  Quantities  of  ex- 
cellent Salmon. 

The  River  DON  rifes  fome  Miles  further  to  the 
North,  and  declining  to  the  North- eaft,  falls,  as  well  as 
the  Dee9  into  the  German  Ocean,  as  I  have  faid.  Both 
thefc  Rivers  have  Bridges  over  them,  at  no  great  Dif- 
tance  from  the  Fall;  that  over  the  Dee  confifts  of  feven 
Arches,  and  is  efteemed  a  magnificent  Work ;  that 
over  the  Don  is  only  of  a  Tingle  Arch,  fuftained  on 
each  Side  by  a  Rock,  and  is  a  moft  noble  and  furprizing 
Piece  of  Workman/hip. 

B  5  The 


10  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

The  River  DEVON,  or  DOVERN,  rifes  not  many 
Miles  North  from  the  Don,  and  running  through 
Strath- bogie  in  a  winding  Courfe,  declining  however 
conftantiy  to  the  North-eaft  till  it  reaches  the  Town 
of  Strath  bogie ,  and  then  runs  for  a  few  Miles  directly 
North,  turns  afterwards  due  Eaft,  at  length  turns  again 
to  the  North  ;  and  pafling  many  Miles  on  one  Side  of 
a  beautiful  Country,  which  from  thence  derives  the 
Name  of  Strath- devon,  bending  a  little  to  the  Weft, 
falls  at  length  into  that  Part  of  the  German  Ocean 
which  is  filled  Murray-Firth. 

The  SPEY  is  a  River  of  as  long  a  Courfe  as  moil  in 
North  Britain.  It  rifes  in  the  Mountains  of  Badenoch, 
in  the  Heart  of  the  Shire  of  Invernefs.  Its  Wateis 
quickly  fpread  themfelves  to  fuch  an  Extent,  as  to  be- 
come a  frnall  Lake,  called  Locb-Spey,  from  which,  re^- 
fuming  the  Form  of  a  River,  it  proceeds  feveral  Miles 
South-eaft ;  then,  fetching  a  Compafs,  its  turns  North- 
eaftj  and  in  that  Diredibn  runs  many  Miles  till  it 
reaches  Ruthven ;  from  whence  digreffing  more  to  the 
Eaft,  and  receiving  many  Rivulets  by  the  way,  it  rolls 
on  with  a  fapid  Stream  to  Rothes ;  and  from. thence 
"directing  its  Courfe  Northwards,  falls  into  the  Firth  of 
Murray,,  at  a  Place  called  Garmach,  or  Garmouthy 
which  is  a  Creek  of  no  great  Importance,  frequented 
only  by  fmall  Vcflels.  There  are  very  fine,  Woods 
on  the  Banks  of  this  River,  throughout  the  greateft 
Parts  of  its  Courfe,  the  Value  of  which  would  be  much 
increafed,  if  the  Navigation  of  the  Spey  could  be  ren- 
dered more  practicable  than  it  is. 

The  LOSSY  rifes  not  many  Miles  above  the  Royal 
Burgh  of  Elgin,  in  the  pleafant  and  plentiful  Country 
of  Murray^  and  falls  into  Murray- Firth  a  few  Miles  be- 
low it,  at  a  Place  called  Lofty-mouth)  or  New-Port- 
Elgin. 

The  River  of  FIN  DOR  N  rifes  in  the  Hills  of  Mon- 
tkrdty,  where  its  Waters  quickly  fpread  into  a  Lake; 

pafling 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  ir 

pafling  out  of  which,  and   running  South-weft,  they 
fbon  form  a  larger,  which  is  called  Locb-Moy,  where- 
in is  a  confiderable  liland,   upon  which  ftands  Mcy- 
Hally  the  Seat  of  Mackmiojh.    IfTuing  from  thence  it 
takes  a  wide  Compafs,  and  paffing  by  Canbrugh)  thro* 
which  runs  the  great  Military  Road  to  Invernefs,  turns 
gradually  to  the  North- cart,  becoming  the  Boundary  of 
the  two  Shires    into  which  Murray   is  divided  ;  viz. 
Elgin  and    Nairn.      After  receiving    many    fmaller 
Streams,  croffing  the  Wood  of  Tornaway,  belonging  to 
the  Earl  of  Murray,  and  running  at  a  fmall  Diftance 
from  the  antient  Town  of  Forres9  declining  a  little  to 
the  North- weft,  it  falls  into  a  Bafon,  which  receives- 
Jikewife  a  leiTer  River  that  runs  thro*  Forres^  and  two 
other  little  Streams,  which  make  all  together  a  better 
Harbour  than  any  of  the  former,  though  dry  when  the 
Tide  is  out,  and  with  a  Bar  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River, 
which,  however,  is  lefs  apt  to  (hift,  and  of  Confequence 
the  Harbour  is  fafer  than   moft  of  the  reft.     Not  far 
from  this  Bay  ftood  antiently  the  rich  and  famous  Ab- 
bey of  Kinlofs. 

The  River  NAIRN  alfo  falls  into  Murray -Firth. 
This  Firth^  according  to  Ptolemy^  was  the  Mjluarium 
Varans.  At  the  Bottom  of  it,  and  on  the  South- 
Bank  of  the  River  Neffe,  ftands  the  Town  of  Inver- 
nefsy  fometimes,  as  antient  Writers  affirm,,  the  Refi- 
dence  of  the  Kings  of  Scotland. 

The  River  NESSE  is  about  four  Miles  long,  with  a 
fair  Stone-bridge  over  it  at  Inverness  of  feven  Arches, 
On  the  North  eaft  Coaft  of  Scotland  we  meet  with 
feveral  Rivers  of  no  inconfiderable  Courfe,  which, 
however,  are  not  of  any  great  Service  in  Point  of  Na- 
vigation. The  River  BEAULIEU  abforbs  the  Water 
of  five  Lakes,  runs  many  Miles,  and  then  falls  into  the 
Loch  of  the  fame  Name.  Both  River  and  Loch  de- 
rive their  Appellation  from  a  {lately  Abbey  of  Cijler- 
tian  Monks,  founded  by  John  Lord  Bijfci,  plentifully 
endowed,  and  which  was  fo  called  from  the  remarka- 
B  6  e 


12  /JTOUR//W  Scot!. 

ble  Plcafantnefs  of  its  Situation,.  Some  are  of  Opi- 
nion, that  the  Romans  penetrated  thus  far,  and  little,  if 
at  all,  further ;  and  to  them  attribute  a  great  Part  of 
ihefe  Remains  which  have  been  difcovered  at  Low- 
water  ;  whence  it  is  very  probably  conjectured,  that  . 
what  was  now  a  Loch,  was  once  dry  and  habitable,, 
The  Cairns  or  huge  Heaps  of  Stones  that  are  feen  un- 
der Water,  are  moft  likely  to  be  Danijh ;  but  the 
Urns  found  likewife,  feem  Monuments  of  the  Romans 
having  had  here,  at  leaft,  a  temporary  Fortrefs. 
There  is  abundance  of  fine  Timber,  though  chiefly 
Fir,  on  the  Banks  of  this  River ;  but  the  Falls  are  fo 
many,  as  to  prevent  its  being  brought  to  an  advan- 
tageous Market. 

The  River  CONNELL  is  fwelled  by  the  Water  of  no 
Jefs  than  fix  Lakes,  and  rolls  with  a  copious  Stream 
into  Crornertie- Firth,  pafling  by  Dingwall,  an  old 
Royal  Burgh,  near  its  Fall,  and  on  the  South-fide,  at 
th?  Mouth  of  the  Firth,  {lands  Cromertie.  OF  the 
River  little  or  nothing  is  to  be  faid,  except  that  it  is 
famous  for  producing  Pearls  :  But  the  Firth  is  one  of 
the  fineft  Harbours  in  this  Ifland ;  and  by  antient 
Geographers  therefore  juftly  ftiled  Portus  Salutis  : 
Narrow  indeed  at  its  Entrance,  but  very  fafe  within, 
two  Miles  broad,  and  15  long;  notwithitanding 
which,  it  is,  in  a  great  meafure,  without  Ships  and 
without  Trade. 

There  is  a  large  River  runs  out  of  Lochjhim,  in  the 
County  of  Sutherland,  which  Loch  is  12  or  15  Miles 
long,  and  which  River  empties  its  Waters  into  the 
Firth  of  Dornok  or  Tayne,  Royal  Burghs,  or  antient 
Corporations  both  ;  the  latter  ftandtng  on  the  South, 
the  former  on  the  North-fide  of  the  Firth. 

A  few  Miles  further  North,  the  River  VYNES  falls 
into  Murray  Firth,  and,  a  little  beyond  that,  the 
River  HELMSDALE  forms  a  fmall  Creek  at  its  Mouth, 
which  is  the  laft  dependent  on  the  Port  of  Invernefs. 

All 


Scotl.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  13 

All  thefe  Rivers  abound  with  Fifh  ;  and  the  Peo- 
ple are  very  induftrious  in  making  the  beft  Ufe  they  can 
of  the  feveral  Inlets  along  the  Coaft,  and  of  the  few 
and  thofe  fmall  Veflels,  they  have.  Yet  furely  they 
might  be  put  into  a  way  of  doing  fomething  better  for 
themfelves,  and  of  becoming  thereby  of  more  Confe- 
quence  to  the  Community  by  a  little  Encouragement, 
confidering  that  they  have  immenfe  Quarries  of  white 
Marble,  Corn,  Salt,  Salmon, Beef,  Wool,  Hides  of  va- 
riousKinds,and  Tallow,  to  fay  nothing  of  Silver,  Lead, 
Copper,  and  Iron  Mines,  that  are  known  to  be  in  the 
Counties  behind  them,  or  of  the  Report  that  Gold  is 
found  in  fome  of  the  Streams  of  Dourneffe  ;  and  yet, 
perhaps,  if  thefe  Countries  were  at  a  much  greater  Dif- 
tance,  we  might  be  inclined  to  vifit  and  fearch  them 
more  ftri&ly. 

On  the  Coaft  of  Caithnefs^  are  alfo  feveral  Rivers, 
that,  running  an  Eaft  Courfe,  fall  into  the  Firth^  and 
amongft  thefe,  the  moft  diftinguifhable  is  that,  at  the 
Mouth  of  which  Hands  the  Burgh  of  Weick^  and  from 
which  we  fometimes  find  it  ftiled  the  Shire  of  Wrick. 

The  River  THURSO  in  Caitbnefs,  runs  about  20 
Miles,  and  then  falls  into  a  Bay,  upon  which  ftands 
the  Town  of  Thurfo,.  where  are  a  Cuftom  houfe,  a 
fmall  Port,  a  few  Veflels,  and  a  little  Trade. 

Weft  from  hence  runs  the  River  of  FORS,  at  the 
Mouth  of  which  is  alfo  a  little  Town  of  the  fame 
Name. 

In  the  County  of  Strathnavern,  the  firft  Stream  of 
Confequence  we  meet  with  is  the  River  STRATHY, 
which  runs  out  of  a  Loch  of  the  fame  Denomination, 
and,  after  a  Courfe  of  between  20  and  30  Miles,  falls 
into  a  little  Creek,  which  is  called  Stratby-Bay. 
ARMSDALE  River,  a  large  Stream,  but  of  a  much 
fhorter  Courfe,  is  the  next ;  and  to  the  Weft  of  this, 
lies  the  Water  of  NAVERN,  flowing  from  a  Loch  of 
the  fame  Name,  the  greatefl  Body  of  Water  in  this 

Countys 


14  A  TOUR  tbrf  Scotl. 

County,  and  from  which  it  derives  the  Appellation  of 
STRATHNAVERN. 

Befides  thefe,  there  are  two  other  Rivers  running  out . 
of  the  Lakes  Loyal  and    Dournefs,  and   many   noble 
Bays  and   large  Inlets  of  the  Sea ;  which  might   be 
made  of  Benefit  to  the  Inhabitants,  and  to  Commerce 
and  Navigation. 

The  River  IRWIN  rifes  on  the  Border  of  the  Shire 
of  Lanerk ;  and  running  a  North- weft  Courfe  for 
about  23  Miles,  makes  the  Boundary  of  what  was 
called  the  Bailiwick  of  Cunningham.  As  it  falls  into 
the  Sea,  it  meets  with  another  confiderable  River  from 
the  South-weft  5  and  by  the  Junction  of  both  thefe 
Waters  is  formed  a  convenient  Harbour,  upon  which 
ftands  the  antient  Royal  Burgh  of  Irwin. 

The  River  AIRE  rifes  on  the  Edge  of  Lanerkjhlre^ 
and  running  through  the  County  of  its  own  Name  in  a 
Weft  Courfe,  near  20  Miles,  in  which  Space  it  receives 
many  auxiliary  Streams,  falls  at  length  into  what  is 
commonly  called  the  Firth  of  Clyde. 

The  River  BLAINOCH  rifes  amongft  the  Moun- 
tains which  divide  the  Shire  of  Alre  from  the  County 
of  Galloway ^  and  running  a  South- eaft  Courfe  joor  12 
Miles,  turns  then  almoft  directly  Eaft,  and  receiving 
in  its  PaiTage  two  other  pretty  large  Streams,  falls  into 
the  Sea  at  Wigton^  where  it  meets  alfo  with  the  Waters 
of  the  River  CREE,  and  the  Opening  of  the  Shore  be- 
tween them  conftitutes  what  is  called  Wigton-Bay. 

The  River  NETHE,  NID,  or  NITHES  rifes  in  the 
South  Part  of  the  Shire  of  Aire^  and  running  in  a 
winding,  butconftantly  in  a  South-eaft  Courfe,  receives 
in  its  Paflage  feveral  Rivers,  the  principal  among 
which  are  the  SCAR  and  the  KAIRN,  falls  atlaft,  with 
a  very  full  Tide,  into  the  Sea,  fome  Miles  below  the 
Town  of  Dumfries. 

The  River  ANNAN  has  its  Source  at  Arrick-Jlone^. 
near  thofe  of  the  CLYDE  and  the  TWEED.  It  is  very 
remarkable,  that  though  thefe  three  Rivers  rife  as  it 

were 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  iy 

were  together,  they  run  into  different  Seas ;  the  Tweed 
into  the  German  Ocean,  the  Clyde  into  the  Irljb  Sea, 
and  the  Annan  into  the  Solway  Firth,  after  pafiing 
through  the  Stewartry  of  Annandales  to  which  it  gives 
Name,  and  a  little  below  the  Town  of  Annan. 

The  ESK  is  the  laft  River  that  runs  into  the  Solway 
Firth. 

Thus  much  for  the  moft  remarkable  Lakes  and 
Rivers  in  North  Britain. 

III.  Of  the  Fijheries  in  Scotland,  including  that 
of  Pearls. 

HP  H  E  Salmon-fifhery  is  particularly  the  Boaft  and 
-*•    Delight  of  the  Scots ;  infomuch  that  for  it  they 
too  much  neglect  all  the  reft. 

Their  SALMON  are  accounted  the  beft  in  Europe  ; 
and  though  their  Barrels  be  a  Third  lefs  than  thofe  of 
Berwick^  yet  they  have  yielded  10  Livres  more  per 
Barrel,  in  France ;  partly  becaufe  of  their  Goodnefs, 
and  partly  becaufe  better  cured,  wherein  the  Magi- 
ftrates  and  Town-council  of  Aberdeen  take  a  very 
particular  Care.  Salmon  abound  not  only  in  the 
navigable  Rivers  of  Scotland,  but  in  thofe  which 
are  lefs,  in  moft  Parts  of  the  Kingdom  ;  and  they 
valued  them  fo  much  formerly,  that  in  feveral  of 
their  old  A&s  of  Parliament  they  forbad  felling  them 
to  England,  except  for  Gold.  Clyde  abounds  with 
Salmon,  for  which  the  Town  of  Renfrew  has  been 
famous;  and  Bi(hop  LeJJey,  in  his  Defcription  of 
Scotland,  fays,  They  ufed,  in  his  Time,  to  employ 
60  VefTels  in  Fifhing  moft  of  Spring  and  Summer ;  but 
it  is  much  fhort  of  Aberdeen,  where  the  fame  Author 
fays,  The  Rivers  Dee  and  Don  exceed  all  thofe  of  the 
Kingdom  for  Number  and  Goodnefs  of  Salmon  :  for 
which  he  ailigns  this  Reafon,  That  they  delight  in 
clear  Streams,  which  occalions  the  Rivers  in  Scotland 

to 


1 6  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!, 

to  abound  more  with  Salmon  than  thofe  of  other 
Countries,  where  the  Rivers  are  more  muddy.  The 
other  Places,  moft  remarkable  for  Salmon  riming  in 
Scotland,  are  in  the  Dovern  or  Devern  at  Bamf,  the 
Rivers  Nefs,  Nairn,  Findorn,  Lojfy,  and  Spey,  in 
Murray :  the  latter  abounds  with  Salmon  for  60 
Miles  together.  Lochlomond  in  Lenox  is  remarkable 
for  Salmon  of  an  excellent  Tafte  ;  Lochou  in  Argyle^ 
the  like :  and  there  is  good  Salmon-fifhing  in  the 
Rivers  Lough  and  Spenie  in  Lochaber^  in  the  Bay  of 
Cromertie,  near  Dingwal Caftle,  and  in  the  Rivers  T.ay 
and  Tweed,  and  other  fmaller  Rivers  in  the  bordering 
Counties.  They  have  marl'd  or  fpeckled  Salmon  in 
Harries,  North-vift)  and  Benbecula.  And  in  the  hie 
of  Sky,  there  are  no  lefs  than  30  Rivers  all  abounding 
with  Salmon. 

As  to  their  COD-FISHING,  Mr.  Sprue!  (an  eminent 
Scots  Merchant,  who  laid  an  Account  of  the  Product 
of  the  Kingdom  for  Trade  before  their  Parliament  an- 
tecedent to  the  Union]  fays,  he  was  informed  by  a 
Yarmouth  Man,  who  ufed  to  buy  thofe  Fifh  and  Salt  on 
the  &:0fr  Coaft,  that  he  has  fometimes  got  4000  cured 
Fifh  in  a  Voyage,  at  i  d.  or  2  d.  apiece,  and  retailed 
them  again  from  1 8 d.  to  is.  6d.  apiece  •,  which 
{hews  what  vaft  Advantage  might  be  made  of  thrs 
Trade,  fmce  the  Scots  Cod  are  reckoned  as  good  or 
better  than  thofe  of  Newfound/and.  And  what  con- 
tributes much  to  the  Cheapnefs  of  this  and  the  Herring- 
fiftiery  in  Scotland,  is,  that  they  are  caught  with  fewer 
Hands,  and  Veflels  of  far  lefs  Expence,  than  Doggers, 
which  muft  be  well  manned  and  ftrong,  becaufe 
obliged  to  lie  at  Sea ;  whereas  the  Scots  catch  thofe 
Fifh  in  their  own  Creeks,  Bays,  and  Harbours,  where 
few  Hands,  and  open  VelTels,  are  for  the  moft  Part 
fufficient,  becaufe  they  are  feldom  expofed  to  any 
Danger  by  Storms,  being  always  near  the  Shore,  and 
laid  up  at  Night. 

HERRINGS 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  17 

HERRINGS  abound  on  all  the  Coafts  of  the  King- 
dom, but  efpecially  in  the  Weflern  Ifles,  which  are 
reckoned  the  beft  and  fatteft,  though  not  fo  large  as 
thofe  taken  on  the  Eaftern  and  Northern  Coafts.  The 
Scots  Herring- fifhing  is  accounted  the  beft  in  the 
World,  and  the  Dutch  have  got  a  great  Part  of  their 
Wealth  by  it. 

A  Fifhery  was  attempted  in  the  Ifles  by  King 
Charles  I.  in  Conjunction  with  fome  Merchants;  and  a 
Magazine  was  creeled  for  that  Ufe  in  Hermctra,  one  of 
the  Harries  Iflands,  and  another  in  the  Ifle  of  Vackfay\ 
but  the  unhappy  Civil  War  coming  on,  it  was  not 
profecuted.  It  was  renewed  by  King  Charles  II.  and 
fucceeded  well  for  a  time  :  the  Fifti  they  caught  were 
accounted  the  beft  in  Europe,  and  yielded  a  Price  ac- 
cordingly ;  but  the  King  withdrawing  his  Money  af- 
terwards, to  fupply  his  prefling  Occalions,  the  Mer- 
chants were  difpleafed  at  it,  and  differing  among 
themfelves,  did  alfo  withdraw  theirs  ;  which  ruined 
the  Defign. 

Some  Dutch  Families  fettled  in  the  Village  of 
Stornway^  in  the  Ifle  of  Lewis,  foon  after  that  Prince's 
Reftoration  ;  and  fo-  much  improved  the  Inhabitants 
in  the  Fifhing  Trade,  during  the  fmall  Time  of  their 
Abode  there,  that  they  ftill  exceed  all  thofe  of  the 
neighbouring  Ifles  and  Continent;  they  brought  the 
Natives  a  great  deal  of  Money  likewife,  for  their  Sea 
and  Land-Fowl :  but  King  Charles  II,  being  prevailed 
on  to  fend  away  the  Dutch,  it  was  a  great  Lofs  to  the 
Country. 

Herrings  are  fometimes  bought  in  the  Ifles  for  6</, 
per  Barrel ;  and  when  cured,  and  fent  abroad,  yield 
from  25  to  401.  per  Barrel ;  and  fometimes  36000 
Barrels  of  white  Herrings  have  been  exported  to  Francs 
from  Clyde  in  a  Seafon,  befides  what  were  exported 
from  Dunbar,  and  other  Parts  of  the  Kingdom,  to 
France,  and  other  Nations;  which  may  ferve  as  a 
Specimen  to  (hew  how  capable  that  Trade  is  of  Im- 
provement, 


i8  A  TOUR  thro  ScotL 

provement,  efpecially  confidering  the  Situation  of  the 
Weft  of  Scotia nd  and  the  Ifies,  from  whence  they  may 
be  a  Month  fooner  at  Market  with  them,  than  from 
any  Part  of  England  and  Holland;  and,  with  the  Ad- 
vantage of  taking  and  curing  them  cheaper  and  fooner 
than  the  Dutch  can  poffibly  do,  confidering  how  far 
they  have  to  (ail  backward  and  forward,  what  Rifques 
they  run  at  Sea,  and  what  Numbers  of  Tenders  they 
are  obliged  to  fend  to  and  again  betwixt  their  own- 
Country,  and  their  Doggers,  with  Provifions,  Salt,  &c. 
they  might  foon  be  outdone  in  that  profitable  Trade  by 
the  inhabitants  of  G?  eat  Britain^  who  may  lie  afhore 
at  Night,  and  land  their  Fifh  as  foon  as  caught,  with- 
out any  Danger  from  Tempefts  or  Enemies ;  many 
of  thofe  Bays  where  Herrings  abound,  being  very  fafe 
for  Ships  to  ride  in. 

The  Herring  fifliery  in  tfie  Jty/f&lafts  annually  about 
two  Months,  and  is  or  might  be  of  great  Service.  They 
commonly  employ  there  about  800  Boats,  and  in  them 
at  leaft  between  5  and  6000  Men  and  Boys,  It  is  com- 
puted that  about  40,000  Barrels  are  caught  and  cured 
in  a  Seafon.  Thefe,  though  lean,  are  very  firm,  found 
Fifh,  came  formerly  to  a  good  Market  in  Sweden^ 
and  are  ftill  fold  with  confiderable  Profit  in  the  Cana- 
ries, the  Weftern  Iflands,  and  in  feveral  Parts  of 
America.  About  one  Sixth  of  thefe  Herrings  may  be 
fpent  at  Home,  and  the  Value  of  what  is  exported  is 
modeftly  computed  at  20,000 /. 

The  manner  in  which  this  Fifhery  is  carried  on? 
renders  it  exceedingly  beneficial  to  the  Country.  The 
Boats  belong  partly  to  the  Fiihermen,  who  employ  the 
reft  of  the  Year  in  catching  of  White  Fi(h  ;  but  the 
greateft  Part  are  commonly  the  Property  of  Ship-Car- 
penters, and  other  Perfons  on  Shore,  who  build  and 
equip  them  in  the  Way  of  Adventurers. 

An  Adventure  of  this  Kind  is  called  a  Drove,  and  is 
thus  managed :  Two  or  three  Fiftiermen  afTociate  five 
or  fix  Landmen,  for  there  are  commonly  eight  or  nine 

to 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  19 

Men  to  a  Boat.  Each  Fifherman  has  a  Net  of  his 
own,  the  reft  are  taken  up  of  the  Netmakers,  who  by 
this  Means  enter  likewife  into  the  Adventure.  A 
Perfon  is  appointed  in  the  Nature  of  a  Purfer,  who 
lays  in  Provifions  and  other  NecefTaries,  and  receives 
the  Money  for  which  the  Fifh  is  fold.  When  the 
Seafon  is  over,  the  Account  is  made  up,  and  all  the  Ex- 
pences  being  firft  difcharged,  what  remains  is  divided 
into  eight  or  nine  Shares,  or,  as  they  call  them.  Deals. 
The  Proprietor  of  the  Boat  draws  one  Deal ;  every 
Fifherman  Half  a  Deal;  every  Landman,  who  has 
never  been  in  the  Trade  before,  a  Quarter- Deal.  Thus 
all  Parties  are  interefted  in  Profit  and  Lofs ;  and  by  this 
Fifhery  it  is  plain,  that  feveral  thoufand  good  Seamen 
are  made  every  Year,  who  work  the  other  ten  Months 
as  Labourers,  Farmers  Servants,  or  Artificers  *.  It  is 
befides  a  Fund  ofBufmefs  for  Ship-Carpenters, Coopers, 
Spinners  of  Twine,  Net- makers,  and  pther  Me- 
chanicks  for  the  better  Part  of  the  Year.  It  is  to 
be  regretted,  that  a  Fiftiery,  fo  ufeful  to  the  Country, 
(liould  be  under  any  Difcouragements  >  and  yet  feme 
there  are.  The  worthy  Gentleman  from  whom  we 
borrow  this  Account,  proceeds  to  enumerate  fome  of 
thefe  Difcouragements. 

Whales  in  abundance  frequent  the  Iflands  of  Flad- 
den,  Orkney,  and  Lewis  :  114  ran  afhore  on  the  Ifland 
of  Orkney  *\.  one  time,  in  the  Year  1691. 

Cod^  Tufa,  and  Ling,  are  caught  in  vaft  Plenty  upon 
all  their  Coaiis. 

Haddocks,  Sturgeon,  Turbiit,  Trduts,  Perch,  Pike^ 
Scate,  Greybeard,  Mackerel,  Keeling,  Whiting,  Sea- 
urchin,  Cat-fjh,  Cockpadle,  Lyths,  Springs,  Soles, 
Flukes,  Gar  vie,  Eels,  are  alfo  caught  on  the  Scotijh 
Coafts  in  great  Plenty,  for  Home-confumption. 

Otters, 

*  Over  all  the  Coaft  where  Servants  hire  themfelves  to  PJaces,  they 
WmmonJy  baigain  to  have  the  Drave  free. 


20  A  TOUR  thro  Scot).  | 

Otters,  whofe  Skins  are  ufeful  for  Muffss  &c.  are 
very  numerous  in  the  Ifles. 

Shell-fifli  of  all  Sorts,  as  Lobflers,  Crabs,  Oyfters,  are 
alfo  found  in  vaft  Quantities  in  the  Wefternlflands,  ; 
the  latter  fo  large,  that  they  muft  be  cut  in  three  or 
four  Pieces,  to  be  eaten. 

Cockles,  Mufcles,  Limpets,  Wilks,  Scallops,  and 
Spouts,  are  caft  by  the  Tide  in  fuch  Numbers  on  the 
Ifles,  that  the  People  cannot  confume  them. 

PEARL  being  the  Product  of  Fiflb,  it  is  proper  to 
difcourfe  of  the  Scots  Pearl  here.  Mr.  Spruel,  the 
Merchant  abovementioned,  who  understood  the  Pearl- 
trade  beftof  any  Man  in  that  Kingdom,  having  dealt 
in  it  above  40  Years,  fays,  He  has  fometimes  given 
100  Rixdollars,  which  is  near  25  /.  for  One  Scots  Pearl;  | 
and  that  he  had  Scats  Pearl  as  fine,  clear,  and  more 
tranfparent,  than  any  Oriental  Pearl.  Though  the 
latter  be  more  eafil-y  matched,  becaufe  they  are  all  of  a 
yellow  Water,  yet  Foreigners  covet  Scots  Pearl.  The 
more  Wrinkles  there  are  in  a  Pearl-fhell,  the  better 
Sign  it  is  of  the  Age  and  Goodnefs  of  a  Pearl ;  for  the 
fnrooth  Shells  are  young  and  barren  :  therefore  he  pro- 
pofed,  that  a  Law  fhould  be  made  to  forbid  the  Fifh- 
ing  of  young  Pearl  ;  for  the  longer  they  ftay  in  the 
Water,  the  more  valuable  they  are  :  fo  that  he  would 
have  no  Shells  taken  up  lefs  than  four  Inches  in  Lengthy 
or  two  or  three  in  Breadth  ;  and  that  none  fhall  be  al- 
lowed to  offer  any  Pearl  to  be  fold,  that  weighs  lefs 
than  five  Grains;  which  is  as  reafonable  as  Laws  to 
prevent  the  taking  of  the  young  Fry  of  Salmon,  fince 
Pearkareofmuch  more  Value.  And  that  they  might 
have  time  to  grow  and  increafe,  he  propofes,  That 
Pearl- filhing  fhould  be  forbid,  except  once  in  ten 
Years  at  leaft  ;  becaufe  he  has  been  forry  to  fee  fome 
thoufands  of  young  Pearls  offered  to  Sale,  that  were  of 
no  manner  of  Value  ;  whereas,  had  they  -lain  in  the 
Waters  their  due  time,  they  might  have  been  worth 
from  four  to  fifty  Crowns  apiece. 

Pearl 


ScotL  GREAT  BRITAIN.          21 

Pearl  is  found  in  moft  Places  of  the  Nation  where 
Salmon  are  taken  ;  and  once  in  20  Years,  he  fays, 
there  is  a  great  Pearl-fifhing  in  Scotland.  This  does 
not  hinder,  but  that  Pearl-f hells  of  the  Size  he  pro- 
pofes,  or  larger,  may  be  tsken  up  at  any  time  when 
found  ;  and  theie  are  probably  to  be  had  among  the 
unfrequented  Ides. 

Particular  Places  where  Pearls  abound,  are  the  Ri- 
vers in  the  Ifle  of  £fy,  where  they  are  frequently  found 
in  black  Muflels,  efpecially  in  the  Rivers  Kilmartin  and 
Ord,  where  Pearls  have  lately  been  found  of  20 /.  per 
Piece  ;  and  in  a  frefti- Water  Lake  near  the  South-fide 
of  Locbeinardftad.  In  that  fame  Ifland  there  are  alfo 
Muflels  that  breed  Pearl. 

Though  the  fmall  Pearl  be  not  To  ufeful  for  Orna- 
ment, yet  they  may  be  of  very  good  Ufe  in  Phyfic, 
and  make  a  fine  Article  in  the  Apothecaries  Bills, 
being  reputed  the  chief  of  all  Cordials,  and  very  good 
againft  the  Plague,  violent  and  pieftilential  Fevers, 
Fluxes,  Heart-burning,  Giddinefsof  the  Head,  Trem- 
bling of  the  Heart,  &c.  which  is  fufficient  to  (hew, 
that  the  Pearl- fifhery  well  deferves  Encouragement, 
fmce  we  may  be  fupplied  with  it  much  cheaper  at 
Home,  than  from  the  Indies. 

IV. "  Of  the  Cattle,    Horfes,    Fowls,    &c.    of 
Scotland. 

TH  E  Country  abounds  in  Flocks  of  Sheep,  and 
Herds  of  Cattle;  which  are  generally  black,  ex- 
cept in  Corn-foils,  where  they  feldom  breed  or  keep 
any  more  than  are  neceflary  for  the  Plough  or  the 
Pail.  But  it  is  obfervable,  that  fuch  as  are  bred  in  the 
Corn-countries,  are  much  larger  than  thofe  bred  in 
other  Parts,  and  equal  in  Size  to  thofe  bred  in  fome 
Parts  of  England^  even  where  the  Land  feems  to  be 
better, 

In 


22  yZTOUR  thro  Scotl. 

In  general,  their  Sheep  and  Cattle  are  much  fmaller 
than  thofe  of  England,  efpecially  in  Pafture-lands ;  yet 
are  they  of  a  far  Tweeter  and  more  delicious  Tafte. 
The  Highlanders  bring  great  Numbers  of  them  yearly 
into  the  Lowlands,  where  fome  are  fatted  ;  but  the 
Balk  of  them,  and  alfo  many  of  thofe  bred  in  the 
Lowlands,  are  fent  into  divers  Parts  of  England,  efpe- 
cially to  6*.  Faith's  near  Norwich,  where  they  turn 
out  to  good  Account ;  as  I  have  obferved  in  its  Place. 

They  have  alfo  very  many  Hogs,  and  an  incredible 
Number  of  Goats,  particularly  in  the  North,  and  High- 
lands ;  the  latter  they  eat  themfelves,  but  the  former 
they  for  the  molt  part  pickle  and  export,  as  they  like- 
wife  do  vaft  Quantities  of  fait  Beef. 

In  the  Southern  Counties  there  are  no  Deer,  except 
in  Gentlemens  Parks  j  but  every  where  elfe  they  are 
in  great  Plenty. 

They  breed'  great  Numbers  of  Horfes,  efpecially  in 
Galloway  and  the  Highlands  ;  frnall  indeed,  but  ca- 
pable of  great  Fatigue  ;  efpecially  if  we  confider,  that 
they  are  not  only  more  proper  for  the  Saudle,  and 
other  Ufes  in  that  Country,  which,  being  hilly,  will 
not  admit,  in  many  Places,  of  Teams  and  Carriages  ; 
but  are  more  hardy  than  Horfes  of  a  larger  Size,  and 
will  thrive  upon  what  would  ftarve^great  Horfes.  Ne- 
verthelefs,  in  many  Places  of  the  Lowlands,  they  can 
breed  Horfes  fit  for  War,  Coach,  or  Carriage. 

Scotland  has  not  only  Plenty  of  domeftic  Fowl,  fuch 
as  are  common  to  other  Countries,  but  many  that  are 
peculiar  to  themfelves,  efpecially  in  the  lilands,  where 
they  are  in  fuch  Multitudes,  that  the  Inhabitants  can 
neither  confume  nor  vend  half  of  them ;  but  their 
Trade  for  them  ftill  increafes,  as  it  has  done  fince  the 
Union. 

Their  Fowl  and  Eggs  afford  a  large  Fund  of  Trade 
for  Food,  and  their  Feathers  for  Bedding,  and  otherUfes: 
their  Fat  is  made  ufe  of  by  the  Inhabitants,  not  only  in 

many 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  23 

many  Cafes  where  Oil  is  neceflary,  but  likewife  for 
Phyfic. 

V.    Of  the   Linen  and  Woolen  ManufaRurts 
of  Scotland. 

FL  AX  abounds  in  Scotland,  fo  that,  befides  what 
they  confume  themfelves,  they  export  great  Quan- 
tities of  Linen,  brown  and  whitened  ;  which  is  one  of 
the  greateft  Manufactures  of  the  Kingdom,  and,  if 
<luly  regulated  and  encouraged,  as  it  is  more  and  more 
fmce  the  Union,  might  fave  a  great  deal  of  Money  in 
the  liland,  befides  what  it  might  bring  into  it ;  for  the 
Scots  have  much  improved  their  Linen  Manufacture  of 
late;  and,  befides  fine  Linen,  make  very  good  Holland, 
Cambrick,  Mujlins  plain  and  ftriped,  Calicoes,  Da- 
tnajks,  Ticking  for  Beds,  &c.  white  and  dyed  Threads, 
Laces,  Tape,  &c. 

Mr.  Spruel  (in  his  Account  current  betwixt  Scotland 
4nd  England)  fays,  He  has  known,  out  of  a  Pound  of 
Flax  of  Scots  Growth,  which  coft  but  \id.  fix  Spangles 
of  fine  Yarn  fpun,  which  was  fold  at  Glafgow  at 
about  45.  %d.  -per  Spangle  ;  which  made  the  Product  of 
that  1 2  d.  to  the  Spinners  28  s.  and,  made  into  fine 
Muflirs,  that  fame  Pound  of  Flax  amounted  to  10  or 
12  Dollars,  which  is  2 /.  16*.  8  d.  or  2/.i6s.  the 
Charges  of  Weaving  and  Whitening  deducted.  He 
adds,  That,  from  one  Pound  of  Scots  Flax,  Lace- 
makers  have  made  Lace  to  the  Value  of  8  /.  Sterling; 
which  is  fuflcient  to  fhew  how  much  the  Linen  Ma- 
nufacture may  be  improved  there,  and  how  many  poor 
Women,  who  are  not  capable  of  employing  them- 
felves otherwife,  may  get  a  Livelihood  by  it,  and  what 
Money  it  may  bring  into  the  Nation. 

Their  HEMP  is  alfo  capable  of  being  improved,  not 
only  to  fave  Money  in  the  Ifland,  which  is  exported 
for  Canvas,  Sailcloth,  &c.  but  alfo  to  export,  and  to 
make  Nets  for  their  Fifhery,  and  other  Ufes. 

The 


24  -A  T  O  U  R  tiro  Scotl. 

The  numerous  and  large  Flocks  of  Sheep  they  have 
in  Scotland,  produce  abundance  of  WOOL,  from  whence 
come  Manufactures  of  feveral  Sorts  ;  as  Broad-cloth, 
Coarfe  or  Houjewifes  cloth,  Fingrims,  Serges,  Bays, 
Crapes,  Temrnin,  Glafgow  Plaids,  Worfted-Camblets,  , 
and  other  Stuffs,  and  Stockens,  for  Home-confumption 
and  Export;  befides  their  Tallow  and  Skins.  Their 
Wool  is  not  fo  fine  as  that  of  England,  by  reafon  the 
Country  is  almoft  every  where  deftitute  of  all  manner 
of  Shelter  for  their  Sheep  during  the  Winter,  which  is 
often  very  fevere  ;  yet  they  have  brought  their  Broad- 
cloth lately  to  a  great  Perfection,  but  can  never  equal 
England  in  that  Part  of  Woolen  Manufacture  :  never- 
thelefs  it  is  very  proper  for  Serges,  Bays,  Cambists^ 
Shaloons,  and  other  Stuffs ;  and  by  due  Regulation  is 
capable  of  great  Improvement  for  a  foreign  Trade. 
They  are  very  expert  in  making  Stuffs ;  and  for 
Plaids,  I  {hall  obferve  by-and-by,  they  exceed  all  the 
WorW. 

An  Inflance  of  what  great  Improvement  may  be 
made 'of  their  Wool,  we  have  from  Mr.  Spmel  (in 
his  Account  current)  -,  viz.  That  they  make  fuch  fine 
Worfled  Stockens  at  Aberdeen,  that  they  yield  10,  15, 
20,  and  30  s,  a  Pair  for  Womens  Stockens ;  which 
{hews,  that  they  are  capable  of  making  Stockens  at 
lower  Rates,  efpecially  confidering  that  they  have 
Store  of  very  good  Wool  brought  thither  from  the. 
Highlands  and  Ifles ;  which,  becaufe  fold  at  the  Crofs 
of  Aberdeen^  is  commonly  called  Crofs- Wool.  The 
moft  remarkable  Places  befides  in  Scotland,  for  good 
Wool,  are  Galloway  and  Tweedale ;  from  which  great 
Improvement  might  be  made  in  Bays,  Serges^  and 
Shaloons. 

The  Scots  Plaids  are  a  Manufacture,  in  which,  as  I 
have  faid,  they  exceed  all  Nations,  both  as  to  Colour 
and  Finenefs.  They  have  of  late  been  pretty  much 
fancied  in  England,  for  Beds,  Hangings,  Window- 
curtains,  and  Night-gowns^  for  both  Sexes ;  fo  that 

Attempts 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  25- 

Attempts  have  been  made  at  Norwich  to  imitate  them  ; 
but  they  fall  much  fhort  of  the  Scots  in  Colour,  Fine- 
nefs,  and  Workmanfhip,  as  is  evident  at  firft  Sight. 
Tireir  greateft  Trade  for  their  Woolen  Manufactures, 
and  other  Commodities,  has  for  many  Years  been 
with  the  United  Netherlands^  where  they  have  a  Con- 
fervator^  who  ferves  both  for  a  Conful  and  Envoy,  to 
take  care  of  the  Affairs  of  their  Trade,  being  Part  of 
the  antient  Privileges  they  enjoyed  by  Treaties  with 
the  Dukes  of  Burgundy  and  others,  when  Sovereigns 
of  the  Netherlands.  From  this  Trade  the  Towns  of 
Rotterdam  and  Ter-veer  have  acquired  confiderable 
Wealth  ;  in  Return  for  which,  the  Scots  have  been  al- 
ways well  efteemed  in  thole  Provinces ;  and  the  States 
allow  them  Churches,  and  Maintenance  for  their 
Minifters. 

VI.  Of  the  Grain  and  Pulfe  <?/ Scotland. 

THE  WHEAT  of  Scotland  is  fa  excellent,  that 
Jofeph  Scaligcr^  who  had  been  in  the  Country, 
fays,  No  Bread  in  Europe  is  comparable  to  what  is 
made  of  it,  for  Whitenefs,  Lightnefs,  and  eafy  Di- 
geftion  ;  and  I  found  what  he  fays  of  it  to  be  ftr icily 
true.  It  abounds  moil  in  the  Merfc^  Lothian,  Gavrie9 
&c.  where  they  have  not  only  enough  for  their  own 
Confumption,  but  for  Exportation. 

OATS  are  the  molt  univerfal  Grain  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  exceed  thofe  in  England,  for  all  Ufes.  They 
thrive  very  well  every-where,  and  are  produced  in  fuch 
Quantities,  as  afford  a  confiderable  Fund  for  Export, 
both  in  Grain  and  Meal,  and  make  very  good  Bread 
aid  Drink. 

PEAS  they  have  in  great  Plenty,  both  for  their  own 
Confumption  and  for  Exportation  ;  and  they  are  fo 
good  of  the  Kind,  that  the  labouring  Kufbandmen 
make  good  nourifhing  Bread  of  them. 

BEANS  they  have  alfo  in  great  Plenty  for  their  own 
TJfe,  and  for  Export. 

VOL.  IV.  C  BARLEY 


26  A  T  O  U  R  thro  ScotL 

BARLEY  grows  likewife  very  well  in  Scotland-,  but 
they  fow  more  of  that  fort  they  call  Eear^  which  has 
four  Rows  of  Grain  upon  an  Ear;  whereas  other 
Barley  has  but  two  :  of  this  they  make  good  Bread,, 
Broth,  Ale  *  and  Beer^  and  export  great  Quantities. 

RYE  grows  alfo  very  well  in  Scotland,  and  makes 
good  Bread  ;  but  they  do  not  cultivate  it  near  fo  much 
as  they  do  the  Grain  above-mentioned. 

VII.   Of  the  Mountains,  Wood^  Timber  *  Sec.  of 
Scotland. 

TH  E  moft  remarkable  Mountains  of  Scotland  are 
the  Grampian  Mountains,  which  run  from  Eaft 
to  Weft,  from  near  Aberdeen  to  Cowoll  in  Argylejblre^ 
almoft  the  whole  Breadth  of  the  Kingdom,  famous  for 
the  Battle  fought  on  them  betwixt  the  Romans  and  the 
antient  Scots  and  Caledonians^  under  the  Conduct  of 
Galgacus,  as  we  find  in  Tacitus.  The  next  moft  re- 
markable Chain  of  Mountains  are  thofe  of  Latnmer- 
moor9  which  run  from  the  Eaftern  Coaft  in  the  Merfe 
a  great  way  Weft.  Next  to  thefe  are  Pentland  Hills,  • 
which  run  through  Lothian,  and  join  the  Mountains 
of  Tiveedale ;  and  thefe  again  are  joined  by  others, 
which  run  through  the  whole  Breadth  of  the  Ifland. 
Other  remarkable  Mountains  are  thofe  called  Cheviot 
Hills,  in  the  Border  betwixt  the  two  Kingdoms  ; 
Drumbendeilaw  and  North  Beriuick'aw^  both  in  Eaft- 
Lothlan  ;  Arthurs-feat  in  Mid- Lothian  ;  Cairnapple 
in  Weft- Lothian  ;  Tentock  in  Clydfdale\  Brainnwre  in 
Argyle  ;  the  Ocbel  Mountains  in  fgr  thjhire  ;  the  Low- 
mands  and  Largo/aw  in  Fife;  in  Argus,  Dundt'e!6wt 
and  Part  of  the  Grampians;  in  Catthnefs,  Ord\  and 
in  the  Orkney  Iflands,  the  Mountains  of  Hoy, 

There  are  many  large  Woods  of  OAK  in  Scotland^ 
which  afford  Materials  for  Building  and  Shipping^  and 
for  the  Hufband  man's  Ufe  -,    and- the  Country  is  very 
i.TiproveaMe  this  way,  if  Planting  were  more  encou- 
rage 3: 


Scot!.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  27 

J"a£ed  :  however,  they  have  at  prefent  not  only  fuch  as 
are  fit  for  the  Ufes  above-mentioned,  but  alfb  for  Pipe- 
Jlaves  and  Barrels ;  and  their  Bark  is  of  Ufe  to  the 
Tanners,  great  Quantities  of  which  are  annually  ex- 
ported to  Ireland,  and  elfewhere.  They  have  likewife 
ASH- TREES,  ELMS,  and  others,  fit  for  Building,  and 
other  dome/lie  Ufes  ;  and  great  Forefts  of  FIR,  which 
afford  JV/Jaterials  for  Building  and  Shipping  ;  and  might, 
with  due  Care,  afford  Pitch  and  Tar  without  being  ob- 
liged to  bring  fuch  large  Quantities  from  the  Northern 
Countries,  as  is  ufually  done  by  the  Inhabitants  of 
Britain. 

There  were  formerly  many  large  Woods  in  Scot- 
land%  among  which  the  Foreft  of  Caledonia  was  fa- 
mous; but  there  are  now  not  the  leaft  Traces  of  it 
left. 

The  Woods  are  more  rare  than  formerly  in  the 
Southern  Parts  of  the  Kingdom  ;  of  which  rhe  moft 
remarkable  now  left  are  thofc  of  Hamilton^  Caler.dar, 
and  Tonvood:  but  in  the^  North,  tfpecially  in  Perth- 
ftire,  Locbaber,  Badenoch^,  and  Mar^  there  are  many 
Foreils,  fome  of  them  20,  and  fome  30  Miles  in 
Length. 

They  have  abundance  of  Fruit  trees  of  all  Sorts  in 
their  Gardens  and  Orchards,  and  might,  by  Improve- 
ment*, not  only  have  lufKcient  to  uitord  them  Fruit 
for  Kome-ccnfumption,  but  alfo  Cyder  for  their  owa 
Drinking,  and  iixport. 

VIII.    Of  the  Medicinal   Water s^    Fountains^ 
tyrings^  &c. 

THE   more  reirarkablc  Medicinal  Fountains  in 
Scotland  are  Moffat  JVelis^  which  fpring  from 
the  Top  of  a  Rock  near  the  Town  of  that  Name  in 
Annandale.     The  Wells  are  two   in  Number,   near 
one  another ;   the  higher  Well  runs  through  whitifh 
and  cryftalline  Stones,  and  the  lower  through  bia:ic 
C  2  ones, 


28  ^  TOUR  thro'  Scotl. 

ones,  refembling  Marcafites  of  Antimony.  The 
Smell  of  the  Water  is  like  that  of  Gunpowder,  and 
it  dyes  Silver  of  a  black  Colour.  To  the  Stories  of  the 
upper  Well  grows  a  Matter  refembling  {linking  Sul->  - 
phur  of  Antimony,  of  a  yellowifh  red  Colour ;  the 
Stones  of  the  lower  Well  are  of  the  Colour  of  Anti- 
mony, and  fome  of  them  contain  a  metallic  Matter, 
that  fparkles  like  Antimony.  Where  the  Stream  of 
the  lower  Well  runs  down  into  a  neighbouring  Brook, 
there  flicks  to  the  Rock  a  whitifh  Salt,  and  perhaps  a 
nitrous  Matter,  which  has  the  diuretic  Virtue  of  the 
Water.  Thofe  Waters  alfo  purge  by  Stool  and  Vo- 
mit, and  are  very  good  againft  Colic  and  Nephritic 
Pains,  becaufe  they  powerfully  remove  the  Obftruc- 
tions  of  the  Bowels.  They  are  outwardly  applied  to 
Ulcers,  and  againft  Pains  in  the  Joints.  They  are 
fingularly  ferviceable  in  all  Kinds  of  Colics  ;  but  are 
not  to  be  meddled  with  by  Perfons  who  have  Coughs, 
diftempered  Lungs,  or  hectical  Heats,  &c.  They  are 
ftrongeft  in  their  Operation  in  the  drieft  Seafon  of  the 
Summer  and  Autumn,  but  are  not  fo  good  in  a  rainy, 
cr  in  the  Winter-feafon. 

Mabons  Well,  near  St.  Mabon's  Church,  has  the 
fame  Virtue,  but  does  not  operate  fo  flrongly  ;  and 
there  is  a  Well  of  the  fame  Nature  difcovered  not 
many  Years  ago  at  Hallyards,  within  fix  Miles  of 
Edinburgh. 

Montr  of e  Spaw  is  of  a  whitifh  Colour,  foft  Tafte, 
and  difcovers  but  little  of  the  Mineral.  It  is  very  diu- 
retic, and,  if  drank  in  a  fufficient  Quantity,  purgative. 
Jt  relieves  Pains  in  the  Stomach,  Weakneffes  of  all 
Kinds,  the  Strangury,  Gravel,  Stone ;  Scurvies  even 
in  the  worft  Condition ;  Spitting  of  Blood. 

Peterbead  Spring,  in  the  Shire  vi  Aberdeen,  cele- 
brated as  a  Vitriolic  Water  in  the  laft  Century,  by 
Dr.  Af^r^^Profeflbr  of  Medicine  in  that  ancient  Uni- 
verfity.  The  Waters  are  pretty  much  of  the  fame 
Natuie  with  thofe  of 

The 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  29 

The  Spring  of  Aberlrotbock  in  the  County  of 
Angus  \  which  are  apparently  impregnated  with  Steel. 
This  Water  has  a  brifk  fpirituous  Tafte  at  the  Well  ; 
yet  tolerably  bears  Carriage  to  fame  Diftance.  It  re- 
lieves in  gravelly  and  fcorbutic  Cafes ;  removes  Aci- 
dity in  the  Stomach  :  but  its  greateft  Virtue  is  in 
nervous  Cafes,  and  broken  Conftitutions. 

The  Dunfe  Spaw  in  the  Merje.  It  appears,  upon 
a  ftricl:  Examination,  to  be  a  very  pure  chalybeate 
Spring,  but,  notwithftanding  the  Simplicity  of  its 
Contents,  of  very  powerful  Virtue  when  drank  on  the 
Spot.  The  Scum,  that  fettles  on  the  Surface,  has 
been  applied  with  Succefs  to  weak  Eyes.  The  Water 
taken  under  proper  Directions,  to.  the  Amount  of  two 
Quarts  in  24  Hours,  removes  Flatulencies  in  the  Sto- 
mach ;  cures  Indigeflion  ;  frees  Children  from  the 
Worms;  ftrengthens  the  Bowels  ;  and  is  of  Angular 
Service  in  the  Scurvy,  and  alfo  in  fcrophulous  Cafes. 
In  nervous  and  even  in  fpafmodic  Cafes  there  are  In- 
ftances  of  its  Efficacy  ;  and  of  its  curing  Palfies  even 
in  old  People  :  the  Credit,  therefore,  of  this  Spring 
may  be  confidered  as  thoroughly  eftablifhedr  See  Dr. 
Hume's  EfTay  on  the  Virtues  of  thefe  Waters,  Edin- 
burgh, 1751,  8vo. 

Glendy  Spaw  rifes  at  a  fmall  Diftance  from  the 
famous  Kairn^  on  the  Top  of  the  Grampian  Hills^  in 
a  Bog,  with  Mofs  round  about,  and  no  Rock  near  it. 
It  mounts  up  in  Bubbles,  as  if  boiling,  through  the 
Mofs,  which  is  loaded  with  Ochre.  Thefe  Waters 
may  be  drank  with  little  or  no  Preparation,  and  are 
ferviceable  in  removing  gravelly  Complaints,  in  moft 
Scurvies,  and  cutaneous  Diftempers ;  and  particularly 
beneficial  in  nervous  Cafes,  and  in  a  general  bad 
Habit  of  Body. 

Kincardine  Spaw  is  a  pure  Chalybeate,  and  has  very 
near  the  fame  Properties  with  the  Spaw  of  Aber- 
brotbock, 

C  *  At 


30  A  T  O  U  R  tiro  Scotl. 

At  Kingharne  a  very  clear  and  cold  Water  flows 
from  the  Clefts  of  a  Rock,  which  quickly  pafles 
through  the  Body;  is  of  excellent  Ufe  for  recovering 
a  loft  Appetite,  and  againft  the  Gravel  and  Stone ;  it 
is  outwardly  applied  to  watery  and  itching  Eyes,  and 
againlt  Rednefs  and  Pimples  in  the  Face.  The  fa- 
mous Dr.  P.  Anderfon  wrote  upon  its  Ufefulnefs, 
There  flows  alfo  from  the  fame  Rock  a  whitifh  vifcid 
[Liquor,  which  is  an  excellent  Cofmetic. 

Arthrey  Well,  two  Miles  North  of  Stirling^  flows 
from  a  Mountain  ;  where  is  a  Copper  Mine,  with 
fome  Mixture  of  Gold  and  Silver  :  the  Water  is  very 
cold,  and,  being  tinctured  with  the  Minerals  it  flows 
through,  is  of  Ufe  againft  outward  Difiempers. 

In  Glenelg)  at  a  Place  called  Achignigle,  is  a  Stream 
which  turns  Holly  into  a  greenim  Stone,  of  which  they 
make  Moulds  for  cafting  Mufquet  bullets,  and  Melt- 
ing pots  for  melting  Brafs,  and  other  Metals,  and 
Whirls  for  Womens  Spindles. 

There  is  a  petrifying  Fountain,  near  the  Caftle  of 
Slaine^  in  the  Shire  of  Buckan,  the  Vv*ater  of  which, 
dropping  from  a  natural  Cave,  prefently  turns  into  Py- 
ramids of  Stones,  which  are  brittle,  and  make  good 
Li<ne. 

There  is  another  in  Hamilton  Wood,  the  Stones 
made  by  which  refemble  petrified  Mofs. 

At  a  very  fmall  Diftance  Weft  from  Aberdeen  fprings 
Aberdeen  Spaw  ;  the  Virtues  of  which,  in  many  Chro- 
nic Diftempers,  have  been  celebrated  by  Dr.  William 
Barclay,  Profefibr  of  Phyfic  in  that  Univerfity.  - 

At  a  fmall  Diftance  from  Cortachie^  the  Earl  of 
Airlrfs  Seat  on  the  River  of  South- E/k,  arifes  a  Steel 
Water,  at  the  Foot  of  a  Hill,  amongft  rocky  Stones, 
that  fparkle  like  Marcafites  when  they  are  broken. 
Thefe  Waters  refemble  in  a  great  meafure,  and 
have  much  the  fame  Virtue  as,  thofe  of  Aberbrothock* 
and  are  both  drank  with  the  greateft  Succefs  imme- 
lately  after  the  ceafing  of  the  Spring  Rains  $  that  is, 

in 


Scot!.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  31 

in  the  Months  of  May  and  June,  or,  before  thofe  of 
the  Autumn,  in  the  Months  of  Auguft  and  September. 

In  the  Year  1748  a  very  valuable  Mineral  Spring 
was  difcoveied,  on  the  Har&f&ll  Mountains,  three 
Miles  diftant  from  Moffat ;  known  to  cure  hot  tet- 
terous  Eruptions,  obitinate  Ulcers,  Bloody  Flux, 
Bloody  Urine,  Spitting  of  Blood,  Rheumatic  Pains, 
and  Weaknefles  of  every  Kind,  more  efpecially  thofe 
arifing  from  long  Illneiies.  But,  what  mufl  appear 
very  Angular,  and  the  Belief  of  which  nothing  but  the 
Evidence  of  Fails  could  fupport,  thefe  Waters  have 
done  molt  furprifing  Cures  in  Consumptions  of  the 
Lungs  in  a  very  fhort  Time  :  and  what  renders  the 
Hartfill  Spaw  ft  ill  more  valuable,  its  Waters  bear 
Carriage  as  well,  if  not  better,  than  any  of  like  Virtue; 
and  may  be  drank,  with  very  near  the  fame  Advan- 
tage, at  any  Diftance,  as  upon  the  Spot.  See  Mfditai 
EJpiys  and  Obfervations^  Vol  II.  P.  15. 

St.  Katberinis  Well  in  Lothian,  at  a  fmall  Diftance 
from  Edinburgh^  has  been  long  remarkable  for  an  Oil 
of  a  black  Colour,  and  pleafant  Smell,  floating  on  the 
Top  of  the  Waters;  which  has  been  ufed  medici- 
nally, with  great  Succefs,  for  old  Aches,  and  wander- 
ing Pains. 

At  Monckton^  near  Edinburgh,  is  a  Well,  called  The 
routing  Well  \  becaufe  of  the  Noife  it  makes  before 
Tempefts,  from  the  Part  of  the  WTell  which  looks  to- 
wards that  Quarter  of  the  Sky,  from  whence  the 
Tempeft  is  to  blow. 

There  is  another  on  the  Weft- fide  of  Campfey  Hills, 
which  divides  Stirling/hire  from  Lenox;  whofe  Water 
makes  People  drunk. 

IX.    Of  Precious  Stones,    and  other  valuable 
Commodities. 

TH  E  following  valuable  Commodities,  arid  Pre- 
cious Stones,  are  faid  to  be  found  in  different 
Parts  of  Scotland. 

C  4  Coral 


32  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Coral  and  Coralline,  in  the  Ifles  of  .Lraw,  £§y,  and 
Jura. 

Amber gr if e,  on  the  Coafts  of  the  Iflands  Bernera, 
South- vi/i,  Bintire,  and  Orkney. 

Marcafites,  Lapis  Ceraunlus,  Lapis  Heftlcus,  Agat 
of  different  Sizes  and  Colours  ;  all  in  the  Ifle  of  Sky. 

Cry/la^  in  the  Ifles  of  Sky,  Arran,  and  St.  Kilda. 

Fullers  Earth,  in  the  Ifle  of  Sky. 

Fine  Shells^  which  pafs  in  Africa  for  Money,  in  the 
liles. 

Load/lone  in  the  Ifle  of  Cannay. 

Sperma  6V//,  on  the  Coafts  of  Orkney,  and  other 
Ifles. 

Mines  of  Gold,  in  Crawford  Moor.  Alfo  Azure, 
in  the  Reign  of  James  IV. 

Silver  Mines,  three  Miles  South  of  Linlitkgow,  in 
the  Reign  of  James  VI. 

Copper^  in  Aiythty^  near  Sttirlwf* 

Lead)  in  Clydfdale^  of  which  the  Earl  of  Hopton 
makes  good  Account. 

Lead  and  Tin  in  Orkney. 

Jrony  at  Dunfermling  in  F//>. 

Corf./,  in  Lothian^  Fife,  &c. 

Fret-fane^  Slate,  Llme-ftone^  Marble,  in  great 
Plenty,  all  over  the  Country. 

And  Sir  Robert  Sibbalds  aflerts,  that  they  have  alfo 
Diamonds,  Rubies ^  Carbuncles ^  Hyacinths^  Jafpers^  Cor- 
nelians, AmethyftS)  &c.  to  whom  I  refer  you  for  farther 
Satisfaction  on  this  Head. — But  moft  of  thefe  are 
greater  Rarities  in  this  Age,  than  they  feem  to  have 
been  in  the  former. 

X.    Of  the  Cuftomst  Manners^  Language^  &c, 
of  the  Scots. 

TH  E  Scots  are  divided  into  HIGHLANDERS,  who 
call   themfelves  the  antient  Scots}    and   into 
LOWLANDERS,  who  are  a  Mixture  of  ancient  Scots, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  33 

Pifts,    Britons,   French,    Englijh,    Danes,    Germans  » 
Hungarians,  and  others. 

Buchanan  defcribes  the  Cuftoms  of  the  Highlanders 
graphically  thus  :  '  In  their  Diet,  Apparel,  and  Houf- 

*  hold -furniture,    they  follow  the  Parfimony   of  the 

*  Antients ;    they  provide  their  Diet  by  Firfiing  and 
1  Hunting,  and  boil  their  Flefh  in  the  Paunch  or  Skin 

*  of  a  Bead.     While  they  hunt,  they  eat  it  raw,  after 

*  having  fqueezed   out  the  Blood.     Their  Drink  is 

*  the  Broth  of  boiled  Meat,  or  Whey  :    they  keep  it 
'  fome  Years,  and  drink  it  plentifully  in  their  Enter- 

*  tainments ;    but  mod  of  them  drink  Water.     Their 

*  Bread  is  of  Oats  and  Barley,  the  only  Grain  pro- 

*  duced  in  their  Country,  which  they  prepare  very  art- 

*  fully  :    they  eat  a  little  of  it  in  the  IVIorning,  and, 

*  contenting  themfelves  with  that,  hunt,  or  go  about 

*  their  Bufmefs,  without  eating  any  more  till  Night. 

*  They  delight  mod  in  Cloaths  of  feveral  Colours, 

*  efpecially  wiped  ;    the  Colours  they  affe-St  mod,  are 

*  purple  and  blue.     Their  Ancedors,   as   do  molt  of 

*  them  ftill,  made  ufe  of  Plaids  very  much  variegated; 

*  but  now  they  make  them  rather  of  dark  Colours,  re- 
c  fembling  that  of  the  Crops  of  Heath,  that  they  may 

*  not  be  difcovered,  while  they  lie  in  the  Heaths  wail- 
4  ing  for  their  Game.     Being  rather  wrapped  up  than 
4  covered  with  thofe  Plaids,  they  endure  all  the  Ri- 

*  gours  of  the  Seafons,  and   fometimes  fieep  covered 
4  all  over  with  Snow.' 

Here  let  me  obferve,  that  in  my  Tour  through  thefe 
Parts,  when  I  have  been  forced  by  the  Weather  to 
retreat  for  Shelter  into  their  Huts,  I  have  feen  their 
Children,  feveral  fometimes  in  an  Hut,  full  of  the 
Small-pox,  and,  at  their  Height,  they  have  been  walk- 
ing and  lying  in  the  Wet  and  Dirt,  the  Rain  at  the 
fame  Time  beating  violently  through  the  Thatch  2 
yet  they  feemed  hearty,  drinking  Whey  and  Butter- 
milk, and  generally  do  very  well. 

C  5  Bucmn^n 


34  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Buchanan  proceeds ; 

«  At  home  they  lie  upon  the  Ground,  having  under 
«  tVem  Fern  or  Heath  (Covered  with  a  Sheet  or  Blan- 
«  ket)  ;  the  latter  laid  with  the  Roots  undermoft,  fo  as 
«  it  is  almoft  equal  to  Feathers  for  Softoefs,  but  mu'ch 
«  more  healthful  5    for  the  Quality  of  Heath  being  to 
*  draw  out  fuperfluous  Humours,  when  they  lie  down 
weary  and  faint  upon  it  at  Night,  they  rife  frefh  and 
vigorous  in  the  Morning.     They  aftect  this  hard 
way  of  keeping;  and  if  at  any  time  they  come  into 
other  Places  of  the  Country,  where  there  is  better 
Accommodation,    they  pull  the  Coverings   off  the 
Bed,  and   lie  down   upon  them,  wrapped   in  their 
Plaids,  left  they  fhould  be  fpoiled  by  this  barbarous 
Effeminacy,  as  they  call  it.' 
The.Acl:  that  paffed  in  the  Seffion  of  1745  6,  on 
the  Suppreffion  of  the  Rebellion,  for  obliging  them  to 
alter  a  Drefs,  which  creates  a  Diftinclion,  that  is  im- 
politic to  be  kept  up  in  a  Kingdom,  where  the  whole 
People  are  to  be  confidered  as  one,  will  be  the  harder 
of  Digetlion,  as  the  Highlanders  have  Time  imme- 
morial to  plead  for  this  Drefs,   and  believe  it  to  be 
attended  with   all  thofe  Advantages  to  Health,    &V. 
And  this  has  been  found  true  ;   the  Legiflature,  by  an 
A£t  parted  SeiT.   1746-7,  having  given  further  Time 
for  their  Compliance  with  the  former  Acl.  The  good 
End  propofed  in  civilizing  thefe  People,   and  in  obli- 
ging them  to  fubmit  to  the  Cuftoms  and  Manners  of 
the  reft  of  their  Fellow-fubjecls  in  the  fame  Parts  of 
the  United  Kingdom,   are  Confiderations  that  ought 
and  muft  predominate.     And  the  unnatural  Rebellion, 
which  fo  large  a  Part  of  thefe  People  joined  in,  gives 
the  greater  Reafons  for  it,  and  for  their  Compliance. 
But  fo  fond  are  the  moft  barbarous  People  of  their 
antient  Cuftoms,    that  we  all  remember  to  have  read, 
that  it  raifed  Commotions  in  Ire'and,  when  the  Eng- 
lijb  retrained  that  People  from  making  their  Cattle 

draw 


Scot!.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  3.5 

<!raw  with,  their  Tails  fattened  to  their  Ploughs  and 

Carriages. 

Our  Camden  fpeaks  of  the  Highlanders  as  follows  : 
*  Thefe  Parts   are   inhabited   by   a   People  uncivi- 

*  lized,    warlike,   and    very   mifchtevous,    commonly 

*  called  Highland- men  ;  who,  being  the  true  Race  of 

*  the  antient  Scots,  fpeak  Irijh,   and  call  themfelves 
'*  /llbin-nicb   (in    Braidalbin)  ;    a  People  that  are   of 

firm  and  compad  Bodies,  of  great  Strength,  fwift  of 
Foot,  high-mirfded,  inured  to  Exercifes  of  War,  or 
rather  Robbery,  and  defperately  bent  upon  Revenge. 
They  wear,  after  the  Manner  of  the  Irijh,  ftriped 
Mantles  .Plaids)  of  various  Colours,  with  their  Hair 
thick  and  long  ;  living  by  Hunting,  Fiihirig,  and 
Stealing.  In  War,  their  Armour  was  formerly  an 
Head-piece  and  a  Coat  of  Mail  ;  and  their  Arms  a 
Bow,  barbed  Arrows,  and  a  broad  Back  fword  ;' 
[but  later  a  broad  Sword,  a  Durk  and  Piftol  at  their 
Girdle,  and  a  Target  at  their  ShoulJer:}-  c  and  being 

*  divided  into  Families,  which  they  call  Clans,   what 
«  with  Plundering  and  Murdering,  they  commit  fuch 

*  barbarous   Outrages,   that  their  favage  Cruelty  hath 

*  nia'-le  the  Law  neceflary,  which  enatSis,  That  if  one 

*  of  any  Clan  hath  committed  a  Trefpafe,  the  reft  (hall 

*  repair  the  Damage  ;    or  whoever  of  them  is  taken 

*  (ball  fuffer  Death/ 

The  LOWLANDERS  partake  much  of  the  Temper 
of  the  People,  of  whom  we  have  mentioned  them  tu 
be  compofed,  but  moft  refemble  the  French,  occafioned 
by  -he  long  League  betwixt  the  two  Nations,  the?r 
mu-ual  Commerce,  frequent  Intermarriages,  and  Cuf- 
tom  of  travelling  into  France  to  ftudy  the  Law,  and 
Bother  Sciences,  and  by  their  affediing  to  ferve  in  the 
French  armies.  But,  fmce  the  Union  of  the  Crown?, 
the  Englijh  Cuftoms,  and  Way  of  Living,  have  o^- 
taincd  much  in  the  Lowlands,  where  the  En- 
Tongue  has  -"been  -their  natural  Language  for  2 
feoo  Years ,  but  Hill  retains  more  antieiu  S&xan  i.nl 
C  6  fr. 


3 6  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

French.  This  being  extraordinary,  and  perhaps  fin- 
gular,  that  a  foreign  Language  fhould  prevail  in  a 
Country  altogether  independent  of  England*  and  where 
the  Inhabitants  are  of  another  Lineage,  and  maintained 
fuch  fierce  and  long  Wars  to  preferve  their  diftin& 
Sovereignty;  the  £<:0///&  Antiquaries  and'Hiftorians 
give  the  following  Reafons  for  it : 

1.  The  frequent  Saxon  Auxiliaries  fent  to  afTift  the 
P/J?j  againft  the  Scots,  which  occafioned  many  of  thofe 
Saxons  to  fettle  in  the  Lowlands-  of  Scotland,  then  pof- 
feifed  by  the  Pifts. 

2.  The  laft  confiderable  Effort  made  by  the  Pifts, 
in  Conjunction  with  the  Englt/h,    to  recover  their 
Country  agatnft  Donald  V.  of  Scotland ;  who,  after  he 
had  defeated   the  Englijb  and  Pifts  upon  the  River 
Jfdd,  in  Tiviotdale,  neglecting  to  improve  his  Vic- 
tory, was  afterwards  furprifed  by  them  near  Berwick, 
and  taken  Prifoner  after  a  great  Slaughter  of  his  Men. 
Upon  this  Succefs,  the  Englijh,  under  the  Conduct  of 
Oftreth  and  Ella*  poffefTed  themfelves  of  the  Country 
as  far  as  Dumbarton,  without  reftoring  the  Pi£fs\  the 
major  Part  of  which  retired  to  Denmark  and  Norway 9 
and  the  Remainder  were  cut  off  by  the  Englijb,  to 
prevent  their  calling  in  Foreigners.     Thus  the  Eng- 
KJh  continued  in  PofleiEon  of  that  Part  of  the  Country, 
from  the  Year  858,   till  about  the  Year  875,   when 
King  Gregory  the  Great   of  Scotland  recovered   the 
Country  ;  and  the  Stoti/h  Proprietors  the  PofTeilion  of 
their  Eftates ;    but  willingly  entertained  the  Englijh 
Commonalty  and  Hufbandmen,  who  were  as  defirous 
to  ftay,  their  own  Country  being,  at  that  Time,  in- 
fefted   by  the  Danes;    and  they  rather  chofe  to  be 
under  the  Dominion  of  the  Scots,  who  were  Chriftians, 
than  under  that  of  the  Danes,  who  were  Pagans. 

3.  Great  Numbers  of  the  Englijh  came  into  Scot- 
land to  affift  King  Malcolm  III.  againft  the  Ufurper 
Macbeth,  whom  he  rewarded,  after  his  Viaory,  with 
PoflefTions  in  Scotland, 

4.  A 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  37 

4.  A  great  many  EngUJh  came  to  Scotland^  after 
the  Norman  Conqueft,  with  Edgar  Atbeling^  and  his 
Sifter  Margaret^  who  was  afterwards  married  to  King 
Malcolm  above-mentioned  ;  which  makes  the  Reafons 
of  the  Scots  Hiftorians  for  the  prevailing  of  the  Englijb 
Language  in  the  Lowlands  of  Scetland,  very  probable. 

It  has  been  gaining  Ground  upon  the  old  Scots  Lan- 
guage ever  fince,  which  is  now  confined  to  the  High- 
lands, and  the  Ifles,  where  moft  of  thofe  of  Note  do 
alfo  underftand  Englijb:  though,  about  ico  Years 
ago,  the  old  People  in  Galloway  generally  underftood 
the  Erfe  or  antient  Scots  Language,  which  is  now,  in 
a  manner,  quite  worn  out. 

XL     Of   the  Religion  and  Ecclefiaftical  Go- 
vernment of  Scotland. 

TH  E  Eftablijbed  Religion  of  Scotland,  fince  the 
Revolution,  and  confirmed  by  the  Aci  of  Union9 
is  what  is  called  The  Prejbyterian  j  being  a  Church 
Government  by  Paftors^  Teachers,  Elders,  and  Dea- 
cons. Before  the  Revolution,  the  Church  was  go- 
verned by  Bifhops ;  but  they,  not  at  all  relifhing  the 
new  Settlement,  were  abolifhed. 

The  Ecclefiaftical  Courts,  as  they  now  ftand,  arc 
Four;  viz. 

1.  The  Kirk-SeJJion,  confiding  of  the  Minifter, 
Elders,  and  Deacons,  in  each  Parifh,   who  confider 
the  Affairs   of  the   Pariifh   as    a  Religious   Society. 
They  judge  in  all  Matters  of  lefler  Scandals,  can  fuf- 
pend  from  the  Communion,    and   regulate  all  Parti- 
culars relating  to  public  Worftiip,  and  the  Poor. 

2.  The  Preftytery^  which  confifts  of  the  Minifter, 
and  one  Elder,  from.  5  to  10,  12  or  more  neighbour- 
ing Parifhes,  who  chufe  one  of  thefe  Minifters  to  be 
Pr2efes  or  Moderator.     Here  are  tried  Appeals  from 
the  Kirk-feffions ;    and  here  they  infpecl:  into  the  Be- 
haviour of  the  Minifters  and  Elders  -within  their  re- 


A  T  O  U  R  tM          ScotL 

Bounds.  They  fupply  vacant  Parifiies,  or- 
dain Paftors,  examine  and  licenfe  Schoolmafters,  and 
young  Students,  for  probationary  Preachers ;  and 
judge  when,  or  on  whom,  to  inflict  the  greater  Excom- 
munication. 

3.  The  Provincial  Synod:   This  is  compofed  of  al] 
the  Members   of  feveral   adjacent    Prefbyteries.      It 
meets  twice  a  Year  at  fome  principal  Place  within  its 
Bounds  ;  and  is  opened  by  a  Serm©n.    Their  Bufmefs 
is,  to  receive  Correfpondents  from  the  neighbouring 
Synods,  who  are  a  Check  upon  one  another  ;    to  de- 
termine Appeals  from  the  Prejbyteries  in  their  Di ft ri<5t; 
to   inquire  into   and    cenfure  the  Behaviour  of  the 
Prefbyteries  themfelves.     They  likewife  have  Power 
to  tranfport  or  remove  a  Minifter  from  one  Place  to 
another  ;   which  often  accafions   great  Difturbance. 
Hence  lie  Appeals,  however,  to, 

4.  The  General  Affembly,  the  higheft  Ecclefiaftical 
Court  in  the^Kingdom,  which  meets  yearly  in  the 
Month  of  May,  and   fits  about  10  Days.      A  Lord 
CommilTioner,  who  is  always  a  Nobleman  of  the  iirft 
Quality,  prefides  here,  as  a  Reprefentative  of  the 
JCing's  Perfon.      All  the  Members  of  this  are   an- 
nually elected  ;  and  the  Moderator  of  the  laft  Year's 
.AfTembly  opens  the  new  Seflions  with  a  Sermon. 

The  fame  Difcipline,  as  to  the  main  of  the  feveral 
Forms  and  Proceedings,  was  obferved  in  the  Epifcopal 
Times,  only  they  had  no  Lay-Elders :  the  Bifhop,  or 
his  Deputy,  being  a  Minifter,  or  Mmifters,  within-the 
Bounds,  prefided  in  all  Prelbyteries  and  Dicrefan  Sy- 
nods, as  the  Archbifhop  of  St.  Andrews  did  in  the 
National  or  General  Aflemblies.  For  it  inuft  be  ob- 
ferved, that  Epifcopacy  in  Scotland  differed  from 
Epifcopacy  in  England ;  for  here  it  was  as  low  as  -the 
, Nature  of  an  Epifcopal  Church  could  admit :  the 
Bifhops  werey/w^  quibus  non^  they  had  no  Lay-chan- 
cellors, but  did  all  Things  Pre/bytenrum  Confilh. 

The 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN.  39 

The  Number  of  Churches  in  Scotland,  fince  the  Re-  - 
formation,  is  much  lefs  than  it  was  before.  However, 
there  are  none  now  of  peculiar  or  exempt  Jurifdiclion. 
They  are  about  950,  befide  fome  few  Chapels,  which 
make  up  68  Prefbyteries,  included  in  13  Provincial 
Synods,  wnich  were  formerly  divided  into  two  Pro- 
vinces, and  two  Archbifhops  and  12  Bifhops,  as 
follow : 

1.  The  Archbifhoprick  of  ST.  ANDREW'S  contained 
all  Fife,  Part  of  Perth/hire,  Angus,  and  Mernls. 

2.  The  Bifhoprick  of  EDINBURGH  contained  the 
Three  Lothians  (fome  few  Parifhes  excepted),  Stirling- 
/hire  and  the  Merfe. 

3.  DUNKELD  contained  the  North  Parts  of  Perth- 
Jbire,  and  fome  Parts  of  Angus  and  Lothian. 

4.  DUMBLANE    contained   the  Weft   and  South 
Parts  of  Perthjhire. 

5.  BREECHIN  contained  Part  of  Angus  and  Mer- 
m$. 

6.  ABERDEEN  contained   all   Aberdeen/hire,    and 
Part  of  Bamf. 

7.  MURRAY  contained  Murray^  Nairn,  Part  of 
Bamff,  and  Invernefs. 

8.  Ross  contained  the  Shires  of  Rofs,  Cromertie^ 
and  Part  of  Invernefs. 

9.  CAITHNESS  contained  Caitbnefey    Sutherland, 
and  Sirathnavern. 

10.  ORKNEY  contained  all  Orkney  and  Zetland. 

1 1.  The  Archbifhoprick  of  GLASGOW,  which  was 
very   extenfive,    contained   the  Shires  of  Ctydfdale, 
Dunlarton^  Renfrew^  Air,  Dumfries,  Peeblesy  Sflkirk, 
-and'  Roxburgh. 

12.  The  Bifhoprick  of  GALLOWAY  contained  the 
Shire  of  Wigion,   and  Stewartry  of  Kircudbright. 

13.  The  ISLES,  contained  Arran,  BuU,  Curnbra-^ 
-and  almoft  all  the  Hebrides,  or  Weftern  Ijles. 

14.  ARGYLE  contained  ail  the  Shire  of  Argyll  Lo- 
tbaber,  and  fome  few  of  the  Ifas* 

Tlie 


4o  '^TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

The  13  PROVINCIAL  SYNODS,  into  which  Scot- 
land is  at  prefent  divided,  are, 

1.  LOTHIAN  and  TWEEDALE,  conftfting  of  feven 
Prefbyterics ;     viz.   Edinburgh,    Linlithgow,    Biggar, 
Peebles,  Dalkeitb,  Haddington,  and  Dumbar. 

2.  MERSE  and  TIVIOTDALE,    confifting  of  fix 
Prelbyteries ;    viz*  Bunfe,  Ghirfide,  Kclfo,  Jedburgh, 
Selkirk,  Erjilton. 

3.  DUMFRIES  confifts  of  four  Prefbyteries  ;    viz. 
Middlebee,  Locbmaban,  Pentpont,  and  Dumfries. 

4.  GALLOWAY  confifts  of  three  Prefbyteries;  viz. 
Wigton,  Stranrawer,  and  Kircudbrigkt. 

5.  GLASGOW  and  AIR  confift  of  feven  Prefbyteries ; 
viz.  Air,  lrvin>  Pal  fay,  Hamilton,  Lanerk,  Glafgow, 
Dumbarton. 

6.  ARGYLE  and  AIR  confift  of  five  Prefbyteries ; 
Viz,  Denoon,  Campbeltcn,  Itinerary,  Kilrnolr,  Sky. 

7.  PERTH  and  STIRLING  contain  five  Prefbyteries; 
viz.    Dunk  eld,   Perth,   Dumllane,   Stirling,   Auchte- 
rarder. 

8.  FIFE  contains  four  Prefbyteries;  viz.  Dunferm- 
ling,  Kirkaldy,  St.  Andrews,  Cowpar. 

9.  ANGUS  and  MERNIS  contain  fix  Prefbyteries ; 
viz.  Melgle,  Dundee,  Forfar,  Brcecbin,  Alerbrotbock^ 
Fordun. 

10.  ABERDEEN  confifts  of  eight  Prefbyteries ;  viz. 
Kincardin,  Aberdeen,  Alford%  Garioch,  Deer,  Turreff, 
For  dice,  Elian. 

11.  MURRAY  confifts  of  fix  Prefbyteries;    viz. 
Strathbogie,  Elgin,  Forres,  Invernefi,  Abernethy,  Aber- 
lower. 

12  Ross  confifts  of  four  Prefbyteries,  viz.  Clxi- 
nonry,  Tain,  Dlngwal,  Dornocb. 

13.  ORKNEY  confifts  of  three  Prefbyteries;  viz. 
Caithnefs,  Orkney,  Zetland. 

The  Law  of  Scotland  has  provided  againft  Plura- 
lities -9  and  throughout  the  whole  Country  there  are 

no 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  41 

no  Benefices  worth  lefs  than  50  /.  per  Ann.  Sterling  j 
which,  in  that  Country,  is  a  good  Maintenance ;  nor 
any  that  exceed  150  /.  per  Ann. 

In  the  lyth  Year  of  his  prefent  Majefty's  Reign,  an 
A&  was  made,  whereby  Miriifters  in  Scotland  taxed 
themfelves,  in  order  to  raife,  by  annual  Rates,  out  of 
their  Stipends,  a  Fund  for  Support  of  the  Widows  and 
Children  of  the  Eftabli&ed  Clergy  of  Scotland-,  by 
which  the  Relict  of  each  Minifter  is  to  be  allowed  an 
Annuity,  and  his  Child  or  Children  a  certain  Sum,  in 
proportion  to  the  Rate  he  annually  paid. 

XII.    Oftbe  Order  of  the  Thittle,  or  St.  An- 
drew, in  Scotland. 

TH  E  Order  of  St.  Andrew^  or  the  Tbiftle^  by 
reafon  of  its  great  Antiquity,  and  memorable 
Institution,  is,  upon  all  Occasions,  called,  The  mofl 
Antient  and  mofl  Nolle  Order  of  the  Thijlle,  being 
founded,  as  all  the  Scots  Hiftorians  afTert,  by  Acbaius, 
the  651)1  King  of  Scotland^  after  a  fignal  Vi&ory  ob- 
tained over  the  Saxons,  Anno  819,  and  dedicated  to 
St.  Andrew,  the  Patron  or  tutelar  Saint  of  Scotland. 

This  Order  came  at  length  to  fhine  forth  in  fuller 
Splendor  in  the  Reign  of  King  James  V.  who  was 
himfelf  a  fplendid  and  magnificent  Prince.  He  caufed 
the  Collar  of  the  Order  to  be  compofed  of  two  an- 
tient  Badges  or  Symbols  of  the  Scots  and  Pitts  ;  viz. 
the  ThijHe,  and  Sprigs  of  Rue  ;  but  about  the  Time 
of  the  Reformation  it  fell  into  Defuetude,  and  was 
then  rarely  ufed  by  the  Knights ;  being  fo  very  zealous 
for  the  Reformed  Religion,  that  they  left  their  Order, 
where  they  laid  down  their  Popery;  and  it  was  never 
after  reaflumed,  till  the  Reign  of  King  James  VII. 
who,  for  the  better  regulating  of  the  Order  in  all  its 
Proceedings,  figned  a  Body  of  the  Statutes,  and  ap- 
pointed the  Knights  Brethren  to  wear  the  Image  of 
Andrew  upon  a  blue  watered  Tabby  Ribband;  and 

Hkewife 


42  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

likewife  named  the  Royal  Chapel,  or  Abbey  Church 
tf  Holy-rood-boufe,  to  be  the  Chapel  of  the  Order  (the 
old  Church  of  St.  Andrew's  being  ruined  at  the  Re- 
formation) ;  for  which  End  it  was  put  in  excellent 
Repair,  but  was  diverted  of  all  its  beautiful  Orna-  t 
ments  by  a  furious  Rabble  at  the  late  Revolution. 

Her  late  Majefty  Queen  Anne  was  pleafed  to  revive 
the  faid  Order  upon  the  3ift  of  December,  1703.  and 
figned  a  Body  of  Statutes,  wherein  the  Colour  of  the 
Ribband  was  changed  from  Blue  to  Green,  to  make  a 
Diftin&ion  between  this  Order,  and  that  of  the  Gar- 
ter :  all  which  Statutes  the  late  King  George  I.  was 
pleafed  to  confirm,  with  fome  additional  ones,  among 
which  was  that  of  adding  Rays  of  Glory  to  furround 
the  whole  Figure  of  St.  Andrew,  which  hangs  at  the 
Collar.  And  though,  from  the  Time  of  the  Reform- 
ation, both  Elections  and  Inftalments  had  been  dif- 
penfed  with,  his  Majefty  was  pleafed  to  order,  that  for 
the  future  Chapters  for  Election  (hall  be  held  in  the 
Royal  Prefence ;  to  which  End  he  commanded  the 
great  Wardrobe  to  provide  the  Knights  Brethren,  and 
Officers  of  the  Order,  with  fuch  Mantles,  as  are  ap- 
pointed by  the  Statutes  of  the  Order. 

XIII.  Of  the  Civil  Government  of  Scotland. 

X.  'TpH  E  College  of  Juftice,  commonly  called,  Tie 
•*•  SeJJion^  confifts  of  a  Prefident,  and  Fourteen 
fixed  Senators,  or  Judges,  called  Ordinary  Lords  of 
Seffien,  and  two  Extraordinary  Lords ;  and  they  have 
feven  Clerks  of  Seffion,  and  fix  other  inferior  Officers. 
Before  this  Court  all  Civil  Caufes  are  tried  at  {rated 
Times,  which  they  determine  by  A£ts  of  Parliament, 
and  the  Cuftom  of  the  Nation ;  and,  where  thefe  are 
defective,  they  decide  according  to  the  Imperial  and 
Civil  Law,  not  according  to  the  Rigour  of  the  Letter, 
bat  according  to  Equity  and  Juftice.  There  lies  na 

Appeal 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  43 

Appeal  from  this  Court,  but  to  the  Parliament ;  and 
the  Prefence  of  nine  Judges  is  required  to  make  their 
Decrees  valid.  The  Parliament  has  full  Power  to  af- 
firm or  reverfe,  with  Cofts  not  exceeding  200 /. 
Sterling. 

This  Court  has  diflributive  Juftjce  only,  both  in 
Law  and  Equity ;  but  no  Authority  as  to  Life  or 
Limb,  unlefs  for  fome  Faults  competent  to  themfelves. 
Since  the  Union,  Lords  of  Seffion  are  appointed  a 
Committee  for  Planting  of  Churches,  and  Valuation 
of  Tythes. 

2.  The  Jufliciary,  commonly  called  The  Jujlice  or 
Criminal  Court,  confifts  of  five  Lords  of  the  Seffion, 
and  the  Juftice-General  and   Juitice-Clerk.      They 
try  all   Crimes.     All  Profecutions   in  this  Court  are 
raifed  by  the  King's  Advocate  ;  and  the  greateft  Trai- 
tor is,  here,  allowed  Advocates  to  plead  for  him. 

3.  The  Cvurt  of  Exchequer  was  eftablifhed  in  pur- 
fuance  of  the  ASl  of  Union^  in  the  fixth  Year  of  Queen 
Anne ;  and  has  the  fame  Power,  Authority,  Privilege, 
and  JurifdiiSUon  over  the  Revenue  of  Scotland^  as  the 
Court  of  Exchequer  in  England  has  over  the  Revenues 
there.     The  Judges  have  alfo  the  Power  of  paffing 
Signatures,   Gifts,  and  Tutories,   C5<r.     The  Court 
confifts  of  a  Chief,   and  four  other  Barons  ;  and  it  has 
two  Remembrancers,  a  Clerk  of  the  Pipe,  Attornies, 
Auditors,  and  other  Officers. 

The  Officers  of  State  are, 

1.  The  Keeper  of  the  Seal,  and  his  Officers. 

2.  The  Lord  Privy  Seal,  and  his  Officers. 

3.  Lord  Clerk  Regifter,  and  his  Officers. 

4.  Lord  Advocate. 

The  Faculty  of  Advocates  enjoy  many  and  great  Pri- 
vileges with  the  reft  of  the  College  of  Juftice ;  and 
have  a  Dean,  a  Treafurer,  Clerk,  Curator,  and  other 
Officers. 

Writers  of  the  Signet  are  thofe,  who  fubfcribe  all 
Writs  and  Sumraonfes  that  pafs  the  Signet  5  and  they, 

as 


44  ATOZJRtbro*  Scotl. 

a<  well  as  the  Advocates,  are  capable  of  being  made 
Ordinary  Lords. 

Befides  the  above  National  Judges,  every  particular 
County  or  Shire  has  a  chief  Magistrate,  or  his  Depute, 
Ordinary  Judge  in  all  Cafes  Civil  and  Criminal  ;  but 
an  Appeal  lies' from  this  Magiftrate,  in  mod  Cafes,  to 
the  i-eflian  and  Court  of  Jufticiary. 

The  Sheriff  is,  in  Effect,  the  fupreme  Juftice  of 
Peace,  to  whom  the  Law  principally  intrufts  the  fe- 
curing  the  Quiet  and  Tranquillity  of  the  Part  of  the 
Kingdom  of  which  he  is  Sheriff.  King  James  VI. 
and  King  Charles  I.  bought  in  fome,  and  defigned  to 
buy  in  all  the  reft,  of  thefe  heretable  Sheriffalties  ;  but 
moft  of  them  yet  remain  in  the  great  Families  of  the 
Kingdom. 

Bailiffs,  Stewards,  and  Conftables,  in  their  refpec- 
tive  Diftricls,  have  the  faave  Liberty  as  Sheriffs  in  their 
Shires. 

There  are  three  Sorts  of  Burghs;  viz.  Burghs 
Royal,  Burghs  of  Regality,  and  Burghs  of  Barony ; 
every  one  whereof  is  a  Corporation,  and  holds  Courts, 
though  only  the  Royal  Burghs  fend  Members  to  Par-, 
liament. 

The  Royal  Burghs  are  one  intire  Body,  governed 
by,  and  accountable  to,  one  general  Court,  called,  T/x 
Convention  of  Btirroivs^  which  is  annually  held  gene- 
rally at  Edinburgh^  and  has  Cognizance  of  all  Matters 
relating  to  the  Trade  and  Intereft  of  all  the  Burghs  in 
general. 

Regalities  are  Feus  granted  by  the  King  to  fome  par- 
ticular Subjecls,  whofe  Authority  and  Jurifdiclion  are 
very  large  and  extenfive,  both  in  Civil  and  Criminal 
Cafes  ;  and  the  Lord,  or  his  Baillie,  has  not  only  the 
Power  of  Furca  &f  Foffa,  Pit  and  Gallows,  but  a 
Jurifdi&ion  with  the  Magiftrate  in  Civilibus.  But 
thefe  Regalities  will  be,  in  all  Probability,  abolifhed  by 
Confent  of  the  Proprietors  of  them,  by  virtue  of  an 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  45 

A£t  made  20  Gco.  II.  for  that  very  Purpofe  5  and 
which  I  fhall  mention  in  the  next  Article. 

As  to  Burghs  of  Barony,  every  one  that  holds  a  Ba- 
rony of  the  Crown,  has  a  Court  wherein  leiTer  Caufes, 
both  Civil  and  Criminal,  are  tried,  &c. 

The  Commiffarlot  Courts  are  a  kind  of  Ecclefiailical 
Courts.  The  CommifTaries  of  Edinburgh^  who  are 
four,  particularly  try  Caufes  of  Matrimony  and  Adul~ 
tery,  in  order  to  a  plenary  Divorce,  not  only  a  toro  & 
?nenfa,  but  even  a  vlnculo  matrlmonn  j  fo  that  the  in- 
nocent Party  may  marry,  as  if  the  offending  Party 
were  naturally  dead. 

The  Court  of  Admiralty  is  a  fupreme  Court,  in  all 
the  Caufes  competent  to  its  own  Jurifdidtion  ;  and  the 
Lord  High  Admiral  is  the  King's  Lieutenant  and 
Juftice-  General  upon  the  Seas,  and  in  all  Ports,  Har- 
bours, and  Creeks  of  the  fame,  and  upon  frefh-water 
and  navigable  Rivers  below  the  firft  Bridge,  or  within 
Flood-mark.  And  no  Appeal  lies,  to  the  Court  of 
SefTion  for  Maritime  Matters.  All  Maritime  Caufes, 
Crimes,  Faults,  Trefpafles,  Quarrels,  &c.  are  triable 
before  the  Lord  Admiral's  Judge  (for  he  himfelf  never 
judges  in  Perfon)  by  the  Civil  Law,  and  Cuftoms  of 
Scotland.  Neverthelefs,  there  are  fome  particular  Ju- 
rifdictions  of  Admiralty  hereditary  in  fome  great  Fa- 
milies 5  as  the  Duke  ofjfrgyk,  who  is  Admiral  of  the 
Wejlern  Ijles  ;  the  Earl  of  Sutherland,  of  the  Shire  of 
that  Name  3  the  Earl  of  Morton,  of  Orkney  and  Zet- 
land, &c.  And  fuch  Men  of  War  as  come  up  the 
Firth  of  Forth,  for  guarding  and  fecuring  the  Coafts, 
receive  Orders  from  the  Lord  Provoft  of  Edinburgh. 

By  the  6th  of  Queen  Anne,  Juftices  of  Peace  are 
eftablimed  in  Scotland^  with  the  fame  Authority  as 
thofe  in  England. 


XIV.  A 


46  'A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scot!. 

XIV.  AJhort  View  of  the  Atts  of  Parliament  of 
Great  Britain,  that  have  made  any  Alteration 
in  the  Laws  of  Scotland,  from  the  Union  of 
the  two  Kingdoms ^  Anno  1707. 

TTNIO  N  of  the  two  Kingdoms}  By  5  A.  R.  cap.  8, 
*•<  it  was  Ena&ed,  that  the  Kingdoms  of  England 
and  Scotland  fhould  be  united  into  one  Kingdom,  by 
the  Name  of  Great  Britain,  to  commence  on  the  firft 
of  May  1707. 

Parliament'}  That  the  faid  united  Kingdom  (hould 
be  reprefented  by  one  Parliament. 

SucceJJion  of  the  Oration}  That  the  Succeffion  of  the 
Crown  be  fettled  in  the  Proteftant  Branches  of  the 
Houfe  of  Hanover,  as  it  ftands  limited  in  England. 

Land  Tax}  That  when  i,99/>763/.  8*.  6d.^ 
fhall  be  raifed  in  England  by  a  Land-Tax,  the  Quota 
for  Scotland  fhould  be  48,000  /.  as  the  Quota  of  that 
Kingdom  ;  Scotland  not  to  be  charged  with  any  Du- 
ties laid  on  by  tfye  Parliament  of  England  before  the 
Union. 

Coin,  Weights,  and  Meafures}  to  be  the  fame  as  in 
England. 

Trade,  Cuftoms,  and  Excife}  The  Subjects  of  the 
united  Kingdom  mail  have  free  Trade  to  all  Places 
belonging  to  either.  To  be  regulated,  as  in  England^ 
throughout  the  united  Kingdom. 

29  Geo  2.  c,  12.  A  Method  is  prefcribcd  for  grant- 
ing Licences  to  retail  Ale,  &c. 

Civil  Government}  The  Courts  of  Seflion,  or  Col- 
lege of  Jufticc,  the  Courts  of  Judiciary,  and  the  in- 
ferior Courts  of.  Scotland,  to  remain  as  they  are  ;  and 
no  Caufe  in  Scotland  to  be  cognizable  in  the  Courts  of 
Wejlminjler. 

20  Geo.  II.  cap.  43.  Regulations  of  the  Sheriff's 
Court. 

Offenders 


Scott.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  47 

Offenders  h  Dittay]  8  A.  cap.  15.  The  Method  of 
taking  up  Offenders  by  Dittay,  and  exhibiting  Inform- 
ations by  the  Strefs  of  the  Portous  Roll,  abolifhed. 

%  A.' cap.  15.  Informations  in  order  to  make  up 
Dittays  concerning  Crimes  to  be  tried  in  the  Circuits 
in  Scotland^  to  be  by  Prefentments  made  by  the  Juftices 
at  their  Quarter- Seflions,  or  upon  Information  taken 
by  them  for  Stewards,  Bailiffs  of  Regalities,  &c. 

20  Geo.  If.  cap.  43.    Ad  vocation  of  Caufes  under 
I2/.  Value  difcarged. 

Superiors,  Vajjals^  dif arming  Highlanders. 

I  Gee.  I.  cap.  20.  An  A6t  for  encouraging  all  Supe- 
riors, Vaffals,  Landlords,  and  Tenants*  who  continue 
Joyal  to  King  George. 

By  25  Geo.  II.  cap.  41.  the  Crown  is  enabled  to 
purchafe  Superiorities  in  Scotland. 

Vajfah  Attendance']  i  Geo.  I.  cap.  54.  injoins,  That 
the  perfonal  Service  and  Attendance,  which  was  wont 
to  be  paid  to  the  Heads  of  Clans,  and  Owners  of 
Eftates,  at  the  Pleafure  of  fuch  Chiefs,  under  the 
Names  of  perfonal  Attendance,  Hotting,  Hunting, 
Watching,  and  Warding,  fliall  be,  for  the  future,  paid 
in  Money,  annually  ;  and  the  faid  perfonal  Service, 
&c.  (hall  be  utterly  annulled. 

This  A&  was  further  enforced  in  the  fame  Reign, 
ii  Geo.  I.  cap.  26.  on  the  Non  obfervance  of  the  for- 
mer, by  many  of  the  contemptuous  Highlanders. 

21  Geo.  II.  cap.  33.  Encouragement  to  VaiTals  con- 
tinuing dutiful. 

Highlanders  di farmed']  I  Geo.  I.  cap.  54.  An  Acl: 
for  more  effectual  fecuring  the  Peace  of  the  High- 
lands in  Scotland;  which  ena&s,  That  no  Perfon 
within  the  faid  Highlands  fhall  ufe  or  bear  Broad- 
fwords  or  Target,  Poynard,  Wingar,  or  Durk,  Side- 
piftol  or  Gun,  or  any  warlike  Weapons,  in  the  p^iclds, 
or  in  the  Way  to  or  from  any  Church,  Market,  Fair, 
Burial,  Huntings,  Meetings,  &c.  However,  not  to 

extend 


48  ^  T  O  U  R  thro9  Scotl. 

extend  to  Noblemen,  Officers  of  Juftice,  or  Com- 
moners, having  yearly  400  /.  Scots^  or  who  are  other- 
wife  qualified  to  vote  at  Ele&ions  for  Parliament- men  ; 
allowing  to  every  fuch  Commoner,  two  Firelocks, 
two  Pair  of  Piftols,  and  two  Swords ;  and  that  the 
Magiftrates  of  the  Royal  Burghs  may  keep  Arms  in 
Magazines. 

Two  other,  19  Geo.  II.  cap.  39.  and  21  Geo.  II. 
cap.  34.  For  difanning  the  Highlands. 

26  Geo.  II.  cap.  22.  Stirlingjhire  included. 

19,  20,  and  2i  Geo.  II.  No  Perfons,  but  Soldiers 
in  the  Army,  are  to  wear  Highland  Cloaths,  that  is  to 
fay,  thePlaid,  Philbeg,  or  little  Kilt,  Troufe,  Shoulder- 
belt,  or  any  Part  of  the  Highland  Garb. 

Equivalent. 

I  Geo.  I.  cap.  27.  Commiffioners  are  appointed  to 
ftate  the  Debts  due  to  Scotland^  by  way  of  Equivalent. 
Alfo, 

5  Geo.  I.  cap.  20.  An  A6t  for  fettling  certain  yearly 
Funds,  payable  out  of  the  Revenues  in  Scotland^  and 
other  Ufes  mentioned  in  the  Treaty  of  Union  ;  and  to 
difcharge  the  Equivalents  claimed  on  Behalf  of  Scot- 
land; and  for  obviating  future  Difputes  concerning  it. 
N.  B.  This  Equivalent  was  ftated  by  the  Union  A&9 
at  398, 085 /.  10  J. 

The  faid  Fund  to  be  payable  out  of  the  Excife  and 
Cuftoms  of  Scotland;  the  Charges  of  the  Civil  Lift 
there  being  firft  paid. 

If  the  Produce  of  the  Excife,  &c.  (hall  be  de- 
ficient, to  be  made  good  out  of  the  Revenues  of 
Scotland. 

Proprietors  of  Debts  incorporated]  The  King  i in- 
powered  to  incorporate  the  Proprietors  of  248, 550 /. 
9*.  od,?9  on  whom  the  above- faid  Annuities  are 
fettled  :  the  faid  Sum  to  be  the  Joint- Stock  of  the 
Company,  and  every  one  to  have  a  Share  in  the  An- 
nuity in  proportion  to  his  Debt, 

4  Ekclions 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  49 

Elections  of  Peers  and  Commoners. 

Sixteen  Peers  of  Scotland  to  be  chofen  out  of  the 
Scots  Peerage,  to  fit  and  vote  in  the  Houfe  of  Lords  ; 
and  forty-five  Reprefentatives  of  Scotland^  in  the  Houfe 
of  Commons  of  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain ; 
thirty  for-  the  Shires,  bV.  and  fifteen  for  the  Royal 
Burghs. 

12  //.  cap.  6.  No  Perfon,  who  has  purchafed  an 
Eftate,  in  tided  to  cleft,  or  be  elected,  a  Member  of 
Parliament,  till  after  a  Year's  Pofleffion. 

Anno  1734.  An  Aft  for  better  regulating  the 
Election  of  Members  to  ferve  in  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons for  Scotland',  and  for  incapacitating  the  Judges 
of  the  Court  of  Judiciary,  and  Barons  of  the  Ex- 
chequer there,  to  be  clcfted,  or  to  fit  anJ  vote  as 
Members  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons. 

6  A .  cap.  23.  An  Adi  requiring  the  Election  of 
fixteen  Peers.  By  the  fame  Aft,^ Peers  of  Scotland 
are  to  be  tried  as  EngK/h  Peers  are,  for  Treafon  or 
Felony. 

1 6  Geo.  II.    An  Aft   to   explain   and   amend   the 
Laws  touching  Elections  for  Scotland,  and  to  reftrain 
the  Partiality,  and  regulate  the  Conduct,  of  Returning 
'  Officers. 

Scots  Cuftoms  and  Privileges  in  Statu  quo. 
Royal  Burghs]    Their  Rights  and  Privileges  to  re- 
main intire. 

Regalia  and  Records']  Of  Scotland  to  remain  there. 

Alterations  in  Scots  Cuftoms^  &c. 
Great  Seal}    Only  one  to  be  made  for  the  united 
Kingdom,  different  from  the  Great  Seal  ufed  in  either. 
Another  Seal  for  Scotland  to   be  uled   in  Matters  of 
rivate  Right. 

Privy  Council]    By  6  A.  cap.  6.    After  the  fir  ft  of 
1 708.  there  fhall  be  but  one  Privy  Council  for 
the  united  Kingdom* 

VOL.  JV.  D  Exchequer] 


50  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scot], 

Exchequer"]  6  A.  cap.  26.  An  A&  for  creeling  a 
Court  of  Exchequer  in  Scotland^  after  the  Model  of 
that  in  England.  Jurors  to  have  5  /.  per  Ann.  Four 
Terms  annually  for  the  Court  of  Exchequer.  Writs 
of  Error  there  to  be  returnable  in  the  Parliament  of 
Great  Britain. 

Malt- Aft]  1 1  6V  I.  cap.  8.  The  Duties  on  Malt 
in  Scotland,  fettled  3^.  the  Bufhel  5  being  half  the 
Duty,  paid  in  England. 

Church -Government,  Toleration,  &c. 

The  Prcfbyterian  Church-Government  to  remain 
eftablimed  in  Scotland.  The  Church  of  England  to 
remain  eftablifhed  in  England. 

ro  A.  cap.  7.  It  fhall  be  lawful  for  thofe  of  the 
JEpifcopal  Communion  in  Scotland  to  aflemble  for 
divine  Worfhip  to  be  performed  by  Paftors  ordained 
by  Proteftant  Bifhops  without  Disturbance,  except  in 
Paiifli-Churches. 

Such  Paftors  to  exhibit  their  Orders  at  the  Quarter- 
Seffions  of  the  Peace,  and  the  fame  to  be  regiftred, 
paying  one  Shilling. 

Such  Parfons  may  baptize  and  marry  9  provided  the 
Chriftenings  be  regiftred,  and  Banns  three  Times. pub- 
liftied  in  the  Epifcopal  Congregations. 

One  hundred  Pounds  Penalty  for  -difturbing  fuch 
Congregations. 

19  Geo.ll.  No  Pailor  or  Minifter  of  fuch  Com- 
munion fliall  officiate,  unlefs  they  firft  take  the 
Oaths,  and  pray  for  the  King  and  Royal  Family  by 
Name. 

Excommunication']  No  Pain  or  Forfeiture  to  be  in- 
cuired  by  any  Perfon  on  any  Excommunication  by 
the  Church- judicatories  in  Scotland.  Minifters  to* 
psay  for  the  Royal  Family. 

Patrons']  10  A.  cap.  12.  Patrons  of  Churches,  C3V, 
reftored  to  their  Right  of  Prefentation. 

Pafifls  and  Nonjurors,  to  regi/ler]  9  GV0, 1.  cap,  24. 

An 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  jr 

An  Act  to  oblige  Papifts  and  Nonjurors  to  regider 
their  Eftates  in  Scotland. 

10  Geo.  I.  cap.  10.  An  AcT:  to  explain  the  faid  Ac"l, 
to  "oblige  Papifts  to  regifter  their  Eftates. 

Civil  Government. 

Sheriffs]  21  Geo.  II.  cap.  19.  -Sheriffs-depute,  &c. 
not  to  be  Officers  to  any  Subject. 

28  Geo.  II.  «?/>.  7.  For  15  Years,  to. hold  their 
Offices  fo  long  as  his  Majeity  {hall  appoint,  after- 
wards ad  vitam  aut  culpam. 

^jujlices  of  Peace]  A  fufficient  Number  to  be  i;i 
•Scotland,  who,  befides  the  Powers  fuch  Juftices  now 
•have  there,  (hall  have  the  fame  Authority  as  Juftices 
of  Peace  in  England, 

Circuit  Courts]  In  Scotland  to  be  held  but  twice  a 
Year. 

Another,  8  yf.  cap.  15.  None  obliged  to  attend 
Lords  of  Judiciary  in  their  Circuits,  but  the  Sheriff, 
and  his  Officers. 

And  10  A.  cap.  23.    Another  for  appointing  Cir- 
cuit-Courts to  be  held  only  in  y^n'/and  May. 
20  Geo.  II.  cap.  43.    Of  the  Ci-rcuit  Courts. 
Chrijlmas  Vacation]    10  A.  cap.  13.  The  Yule  Va- 
cance  reftored. 

i  Geo.  I.  cap.  28.  An  A&  to  take  away  the  Yule 
Vacance,  or  Chfiftmas  Vacation. 

3  Geo.  II.  cap.  32.  The  Judges  of  the  Court  of 
Seffion  are  impowered  to  adjourn  their  Seffions  ;  fo 
that  they  may  ftill  have  a  Yule  Vacance,  or  Chrtftm'as 
Vacation,  if  they  fee  fit. 

Lords  of  SeJJion]  loGco.  L  cop.  19.  An  Act  to  ex- 
plain the  Law  concerning  the  Trial  and  Admiffion  of 
Lords  of  Seffion  in  Scotland. 

Oaths]  6  A.  cap.  14.  An  Aft  requiring  the  Abju- 
ration-Oath to  be  taken  by  all  Officers  in  Scotland. 

D  2  Another, 


52  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Another,  8  A.  cop.  14.  requiring  the  Oaths  to  be 
taken  by  all  Officers  in  Scotland. 

Another,  5  Gen.  \.  cap.iq.  To  make  the  former 
more  erTedtual,  and  to  caufe  the  Oaths  to  be  taken  by 
Minifters  and  Preachers  in  Scotland. 

20  Geo.  II.  An  AcT:  was  made  to  give  Relief  to 
Perfons  in  Scotland,  whofe  Title  Deeds  and  Writings 
were  destroyed,  or  carried  off,  by  the  Rebels  in  the 
late  Rebellion  1745. 

20  Geo.  II.  cap.  43.  Directions  for  Officers  poynd- 
ing  Goods. 

By  20  Geo.  II.  cap.  51.  Heirs  of  Tailzie,  &c.  are 
impowered  to  fell  to  the  Crown. 

Prifcns]  20  Geo.  II.  cap.  43.  Regulations  of  Prt- 
fons  in  Scotland. 

By  21  Geo.  II.  cap.  19.  his  Majefh's  Forts  are 
made  lawful  Prifons. . 

By  another  Aft,  20  Geo.  II.  all  Heretable  Jurif- 
didiions  of  Judiciary  Regalities,  Heretable  Baillieries, 
and  Conftabularies,  Stewartries,  SherirYfhips,  and  De- 
puty- Sheriffihips,  in  the  PofTeffiori  of  Subjects,  are 
taken  away  from  the  faid  Subjects,  and  refk>red<to  the 
Crown  ;  and  Provifion  is  made  for  the  more  effectual 
Adminiftration  of  Juftice  in  Scotland. 

Another  Act  was  made,  20  Geo.  II.  whereby  the 
Tenure  of  Wardholding  in  Scotland  is  taken  away,  and 
converted  into  Blanch  and  Feu-holdings,  the  Cafual- 
ties  of  Single  and  Life-rent.  Efcheats  incurred  by 
Horning  and  Denuntiation,  in  Civil  Caufes,  are  alfo 
taken  away,  and  VafTals  are  difcharged  of  their  At- 
tendance at  Head- Courts  :  and  the  Services  of  Tenants 
are  afcertained,  and  Heirs  of  Tailzie  are  allowed  to 
fell  Lands  to  the  Crown. 

By  another  Aft,  21  Geo.  II.  cap.  19.  the  Method 
of  taking  Evidence  in  Writing,  in  Cafes  not  capital,  is 
taken  away. 

By  2 1  Geo.  II.  cap.  33.  the  Evidence  of  Offenders 
is  admitted  in  Trials  for  Theft  of  Cattle, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN,  53 

Treafen,  and  other  Crimes. 

7  A.  cap.  21.  High -Treafon,  and  Mifprifion  of 
Treafon,  to  be  deemed  the  fame  in  Scotland  as  in 
England  -,  and  the  Crown  impowered  to  grant  Com- 
miffions  of  Oyer  and  Terminer  to  try  the  fame  in 
Scotland. 

Jurors']  Jurors  at  fuch  Trials  to  have  Eftates  at 
Forty  Shillings  per  Annum  each. 

Treafon^  Indiftments,  and  Preferments']  After  the 
Decea'e  of  the  Pretender,  and  three  Years  after  the 
Hanover  Succeffion  (hail  take  place,  no  Attainder  for 
Treafon  (hall  disinherit  the  Heir. — And  then  a  Copy  of 
the  Indictment  for  Treafon,  and  a  Lift  of  the  Wit- 
nefl'es  to  prove  it,  and  the  Names  of  the  Jury  with 
thefe  Additions,  (hall  be  delivered  to  the  Party  in- 
di&ed  ten  Days  before  the  Trial. 

But,  by  an  Acl  ly  Geo.  Jl.  the  fird- mentioned  Pro- 
vifioa  is  not  to  take  place,  till  the  Deaths  of  the  Sons 
of  the  Pretender. 

igGeo.  II.  cap.  2$.  Sufpecled  Perfons  in  Scotland 
may  be  fummoned  to  appear  at  Edinburgh. 

21  Geo.  II.  cap.  19.  For  Trials  of  High-treafon,  &c. 
committed  in  the  Highlands. 

22  Geo.  II.  cap.  48.    Directions  for  Proceedings  to 
Outlawry  for  High-treafon. 

Capital  Crimes']  Theft  of  landed  Men,  Murder 
under  Truft,  wilful  Fire-raifing,  firing  Colehughs, 
and  Afiaflination,  to  be  no  longer  Treafon  in  Scotland, 
but  Capital  Offences,  and  punifhed  as  fuch. 

Bail]  Enaded,  That  double  Bail  be  Uken  in  Cri- 
minal  Cafes. 

Forfeited  Eftates']  The  Act  relating  to  the  forfeited 
Eft ates,  Anno  1715,  appropriates  20,000 /.  out  of  the 
faid  Eftates,  for  making  a  capital  Stock  for  creeling 
Schools  in  the  Highlands,  after  other  Ufes  and  De- 
figrrments,  appointed  by  the  faid  Aft,  arc  complied 
With. 

D  3  By, 


54  y?  T  O  U  R  tiro  Scot), 

By  25  Geo.1l.  cap.  41.  Forfeited  Eftates  in  &:<?*- 
land  are  annexed  to  the  Crown  unalienably.  Seft.  14. 
The  Pvents  of  forfeited  Eftates  in  Scotland  are  to  be 
applied  to  the  improving  the  Highlands. 

Capital  and  Corporal  Punijhments. 
Not  to  be  executed  to  the  South   of  the  Firth, 
within  30  Days  after  Sentence  ;   nor  any  North  of  the 
Firth,  within  kfs  than  40  Days  after  Sentence. 

Lord  Lieutenant,  &c.  impowered  by  this  Act  to 
fummon  the  Glans  to  deliver  in  their  Arms. 

3(7*0.11.  cap.  32.  An  Act  for  enabling  the  Judges 
of  the  Court  of  Seflion  in  Scotland  to  adjourn  the  faid 
Court,  arid  to  limit  the  Time  for  the  Execution  of 
Sentences  importing  Corporal  Punilhments  in  that 
Kingdom. 

Further  enacted,  That  it  fhall  be  lawful  for  the 
Magiftrates,  and  Courts  of  Judicature,  to  put  in  Exe- 
cution any  Sentence  importing  Corporal  Punifhment,. 
refs  than  Death  or  Difmembring,  in  any  Part  of  Scot.- 
iand,  South  of  the  Firth^  within  eight  Days  after  it  is 
pronounced  ;  and^  to  the  Northward  of  the  Firtby 
within  ten  Days  after  it  is  pronounced. 

And  the  Judges  of  the  Court  of  Jufticiary,  or  any  of 
them,  are  authorized,  upen  Application  to  them,  to 
delay  Execution,  if  they  think  proper,  for  30  Days  ; 
to  the  end  Application  may  be  made  for  Relief  againft 
any  hard  or  unjuft  Sentence. 

Trade  and  Manufaftures. 

Linen  Manufacture}  10  A.  cap.  21.  An  Ac!  foe 
jegulating  the  making  of  Linen-cloth. 

Another,  12  A.  cap.  20.  for  regulating  the  Linen 
Manufactures. 

And  13  -Geo.1.  An  Acl  for  regulating  the  Linen 
and  Hempen  Manufactures  of  Scotland,  which  gives 
great  Encouragement  to  that  improving  Branch. 

ffloolm  Manufaftories]  6  Geo.1.  cap.  13.  An  Act 
for  regulating  the  Woolen  Manufa&ories  in  Scotland. 

10  Geo.  It 


Scot!.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  5-5 

10  Geo.  I.  cap.  13.  An  A£t  to  explain  and  amend 
the  A£t  for  regulating  Woolen  Manufactories  in  Scot- 
land. 

F(/beries  and  Manufactories']  The  annual  Sum  of 
2000  /.  to  be  applied  to  the  Encouragement  of  the 
Fifhery,  and  other  Manufactories  in  Scotland,  the  faid 
Annuities  to  be  in  lieu  of  all  Equivalents  claimed  by 
Scotland. 

1 3  Geo.  I.  cap.  26.  An  Act  for  encouraging  the 
Fifheries,  and  other  Manufactories  and  Improvements 
in  Scotland ;  impowering  his  Majefty  to  fettle  a  Plan 
for  improving  the  fame. 

Naval  Stores']  2  Geo.  IT. .cap.  32.  An  Act  to  en-^ 
courage  the  Importation  of  Mails,  Yards,  and  Bow- 
fprits,  from  Scotland. 

Highways']  5  Geo.  I.  cap.  30.  An  A£  for  making 
the  Laws  more  effectual  for  repairing  Highways, 
Bridges,  and  Ferries,  in  Scotland)  in  the  fame  manner 
as  in  England. 

By  an  Act  15  and  16  Geo  II.  an  additional  Duty 
was  laid  on  Foreign  Cambricks  for  feven  Years,  in 
order  to  allow  a  Bounty  upon  certain  Species  of  Bri- 
tijh  and  Irijb  Linens. 

By  another  A6t  iSGeo.H.  an  additional  Bounty 
was  allowed  on  the  Exportation  of  the  faid  Linens. 

XV.  Brief  Obfervations  on  the  preceding  Four- 
teen Articles  ;  with  the  Divifwn  of  Scotland 
into  Shires^  &c. 

"CR  O  M  the  foregoing  Particulars  you  will  perceive, 
•*•  Sir,  that  this  Part  of  the  united  Kingdom  is  far 
from  being  fo  inconfiderable  a  Country  as  fome  would 
have  it  thought,  who  give  themfelves  the  Licence  of 
making  National  Re fleciions ;  an  ungenerous  Vice, 
to  which  the  Englijk  are  but  too  much  addicted,  as 
well  with  regard  to  this,  as  a  neighbouring  Kingdom^ 
and  a  ftill  nearer  Principality.  You  will  obferve,  that 
D  4  there 


56  A  T  O  U  R  thra  Scotl. 

there  are  but  few  things  wanting  to  make  Scotland  as 
populous,  and  as  full  of  Trade,  Shipping,  and  Wealth, 
in  proportion,  as  moft,  if  not  the  beft,  Counties  in 
England..  Thofe  few  things,  indeed,  are  very  difficult, 
if  not  impoflible,  to  be  obtained,  as  things  ftand  ;  par- 
ticularly, 

j.  A  Change  in-  the  Difpofition  of  the  common 
People,  from  a  Defire  of  Traveling  Abroad,  to 
an  induflrious  and  diligent  Application  to  Labour 
at  Home. 

2,  Stock  and  Subftance  to  encourage  that  Appli- 
cation.    Sloth  is  not  a  Difeafe  of  the  Nation. 
The  Scots  are  as  diligent,  as  induftrious,  as  apt 
for  Labour  and  Bufmefs,   and  as  capable  of  it, 
when  they  are  Abroad,  as  any  People  in  the 
World  ;  and  why  mould  they  not  be  fo  at  Home,? 
No  doubt  they  would,  if  they  had  fuitable  En- 
couragement. 

3,  Great  Alterations  in  th«ir  Method  of  Huiban- 
dry,  by  which  their  Lands  would  be  improved, 
and  the  Produce  thereof  turn  to  better  Account  ; 
of  all  which  fomething  fhall  be  faid  in  my  Pra- 
grefs  through  the  Country,  as  Occafion  offers. 

4.  If  VafTalages,  Servitude,  and  other  Bas-Tenures, 
or  Holdings  of  Lands,  were  legally  altered,   and 
the  Superiors  obliged  by  Law  to  fell,  or  accept 
of  a  valuable  Confideration  for,   their  Feus  and 

,  Superiorities  *. 

5.  If  they  were  more  accuftomed  to  Leafes  for 
Years  or  Lives,,  fuch  Tenants  and  Leafeholders 
would  be  better  enabled  and  encouraged  to  im- 
prove the  Ground,  than  otherwife  they  are,  or 
can  be. 


*  This  is  nearly  effcfted  by  virtue  of  the  Aft  lately  faffed  for  that 
Purpofe. 

la 


Scott         GREAT  BRITAIN.  57 

In  the  mean  time,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew  what 
Scotland  really  is,  and  what  it  might  be,  if  thofe  En- 
gagements were  fulfilled,  which  weie  promifed  to  them 
before  the  Union  ;  fuch  as  erecting  Manufactures 
under  EnfcKJb  Direction,  embarking  Stocks  from  Eng- 
land to  carry  on  Trade,  employing  Hands  to  cut  down 
their  Northern  Woods,  and  to  bring  the  Fir-Timber 
and  Deals  to  England,  of  which  Scotland  is  able  to 
furnifh  a  great  Quantity ;  and,  laflly,  encouraging, 
their  Fifhery,  &c. 

But,  leaving  its  Manufactures  and  Wants  to  the 
Confideration  of  thofe  in  whofe  Power  it  is  to  promote 
and  fupply  them,  I  fhall  haften  to  conclude  this 
Letter;  but  firft  fhall  give  you  an  Account  of  the 
prefent  Divifion  of  this  Part  of  the  united  Kingdom  • 
into  Counties,  &"c. 

Scotland  then  is  divided  into  31  Shires  or  Counties, . 
and  two  Stewartries  ;  which  I  lhall  give,  as  follows, 
in  Alphabetical  Order,  though,  from  the  Nature  of  my 
Work,  I  cannot  obferve  that  Method  in  my  future 
Letters, 


Shires  of 


1.  Aberdeen 

2.  J!ir 


3.  ^ 

4.  Bamff 

5.  Berwick 

6.  Bute 

7.  Caitbnefs 

8.  Clackmannan 

9.  Cromertie 

10.  Dumbarton 

11.  Dumfries  ^    with   the 
Stewartry  o>i  drinandate 

12.  Edinburgh,    or  Mid- 
Lothian 

33,  Elgin- 

D 


74- 

15.  Porfar^  or 

1 6.  Hadington 

17.  Invernefs 
'18.  Kincardine 

19.  Kinrofs 

20.  Lanerk 

21.  Linlithgow,  or  Wefl- 
Lothian 

22.  Nairn 

23.  Peebles^  or  Twsedah 
24;   Perth 

25.  Renfrew 

26.  Rofs 

27.  Roxburgh 

28.  Stlkir* 


5 8  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

28..  Selkirk  I  30.  Sutherland 

29.  Stirling  \  31   Wtgton. 

The  Ste  war  tries  of  Kircudbrigbi  and  Orkney. 

And  now,  Sir,  having  pemi fed  thefe  general  Things^ 
which  will  fave  me  much  Repetition  in  my  following 
Letters,  I  will  conclude  this  with  diluting  you,  that 
I  am 

Tour  humble  Servant. 


LETTER      H. 

Containing  a  DESCRIPTION  of  the  MERSE, 
the  Two  LOTHIANS,  of  EDINBURGH, 
LEITH,  &c. 

SIR, 

I  Am  juft  now  entered  Scotland  by  the  ordinary 
Way  of  Berwick,  which  Hands  on  the  North-fide 
of  the  River  Tweed,  and  :has  a  Bridge  by  which  it 4s 
joined  to  Northumberland.  I  fliall  add,  a  few  Particu- 
lars to  the  Account  I  gave  of  it  in  the  preceding  Vo- 
lume. Berwick  was  originally  a  Scots  Town,  and  is 
to  this  Day  no  Part  of '  England  \  but  has  divers  diftincl: 
Cuiloms  and  Privileges,  and  is  mentioned  in  all  Sta- 
tutes and  Proclamations  as  a  Place  or  Liberty  of  itfelf, 
dlftincl:  from  England  and  Wales.  It  was  formerly  the 
chief  Town  of  the  Merfe,  which  to  this  Day  is  called 
the  Shire  of  Berwick.  It  has  but  one  Church,  which 
is  under  the  Jurifdi&ion  of  the  Bifliop,  and  in  the 
Gift  of  the  Deari  and  Chapter,  of  Durham, 

At 


'Scot!.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  59 

At  a  Dlilance,  it  Teemed  to  be  a  more  delightful 
Place  than  I  found  it  when  on  the  Spot.  The  Bridge 
is  flately,  confifting  of  15  Arches,  over  the  noted  River 
Tweed-,  which,  at  high  Water,  appears  to  be  a  noble 
River;  but  is  near  dry  at  low  Water,  juft  by  the 
Bridge.  The  Houfes  are  tolerable  for  fo  far  North  ; 
and  the  Fortifications  are  good,  efpecially  on  the  Scots 
Side  :  it  has  Fofies,  which  are  broad,  and  full  of  Water, 
conveyed  into  them  by  an  Aqueduct  of  curious  Con- 
trivance. It  had  once  a  very  ftrong  Caftle  ;  but  of 
late  it  has  been  demolished,  and  feveral  confiderable 
Edifices  are  built  with  the  Stones. 

A  fine  Barrack  to  eafe  the  Inhabitants  from  quarter- 
ing of  Soldiers  hath  been  built  here,  confifting  of  a 
fquare  fpacious  Court  of  Free-ftone  :  At  the  upper 
End  is  the  Magazine;  on  each  Side  the  Soldiers 
Apartments,  in  the  Angles,  thofe  of  the  Officers ;  and 
'at  the  Entry  the  Court  cle  Guard.  Thefe  are  the  firft 
Barracks  creeled  in  Great  Britain  ;  and  it  would  be  a 
great  Eafe  to  the  Inhabitants  in  moft  confiderable 
Towns,  if  they  had  them  every  where ;  and  who 
knows,  now  that  a  {landing  Force  has  been  for  fo 
many  Years  introduced,  what  may  come  to  pafs,  par- 
ticularly in  fortified  and  garrifon  Places  ?  A  very  fine 
Houfe  with  good  Gardens,  belong  to  the  Governor; 
who  is  always  a  confiderable  Perfon  in  the  Army. 

The  Situation  of  this  Town  carries  it  a  good  Way 
into  the  Sea  ;  fo  that  the  Tweed,  and  that,  almoft  inr 
circle  it,  and  make  it  a  Peninfula.  It  returns  two 
Members  to  Parliament,  and  is  a  Town  and  County 
of  itfelf ;  it  is  large  and  populous ;  and  carries  on  a 
great  Trade  in  Corn  and  Salmon,  with  the  latter  of 
which  the  Tweed  abounds.  It  was  always  a  Bone  of 
Contention  between  the  two  Nations,  whenever  they 
were  at  Variance,  and  fometimes  in  the  Pofieffion  of 
the  one,  fometimes  of  the  other.  Sir  Tbs?nas  Stanley 
took  it  from  the  Scots  in  the  Reign  of  King  Ediu.  IV. 
.and  the  Engtifh  fortified^  fo  ftrcwgly,  that  all  tin 
D  6 


60  A  T  O  U  R  thrd  Scotf, 

tempts  of  the  Scots  to  reduce  it  afterwards  were  in- 
effectual. 

As  foon  as  we  get  out  of  the  Town,  we  enter  on 
Scots  Ground,  though,  in  times  of  War,  it  ufed  to 
be  Part  of  what  was  called  Debatable  Land,  and  on 
that  Account  but  thinly  inhabited  ;  for  the  Borderers 
of  each  Kingdom  often  made  Inroads  on  one  another, 
notwithftanding  that  a  great  Number  of  Men,  at  an 
incredible  Trouble  and  Expence,  kept  Watch  every 
Night ;  befides  which,  there  were  Watch-towers  all 
along  the  Borders  at  proper  Diftances,  and  feveral 
Laws  relating  to  the  Borders  made  by  Commilfioners 
from  both  Kingdoms. 

The  fir  ft  thing  we  obferved,  was  the  Sea  on  the 
Right-hand,  and  the  River  Tweed,  which  fetches  a 
Reach  Northward,  on  the  Left.  The  Land  between 
lies  fo  high,  that  in  ftormy  Weather  it  is  very  bleak 
and  unpleafant,  having  little  or  no  Shelter :  however, 
the  Land,  compared  to  what  we  left  in  Northumber* 
land,  or  what  we  foon  found  farther  in  Scotland  is 
good. 

The  firft  Town  in  Scotland  is  Mordington^  a  poor 
forty  Village ;  yet  gives  the  Title  of  Lord  to  a  Branch, 
ef  the  noble  Family  of  Douglas. 

When  we  entered  upon  the  Scotijh  Borders,  the  firfl 
Town  we  came  to  is  almoft  as  perfectly  Scots,  as  if 
you  were  100  Miles  North  of  Edinburgh ;  and  there 
is  very  little  Appearance  of  any  thing  Englijh  there, 
either  in  Cuftoms,  Habits,  Ufages  of  the  People,  or 
in  their  way  of  Living,  Eating^  or  Behaviour:  nor 
are  there  many  Englijh  Families  to  be  found  among 
them. 

On  the  contrary^  you  have  in  England  abundance 
of  foots  Men,  Scots  Cuftoms,  Words,  Habits,  and 
Ufages ;  nay,  even  the  Buildings  in  the  Towns  and 
Villages  all  over  Northumberland  imitate  the  Scots  j 
witnefs  their  building  their  Houfes  with  the  Stairs 
going  up  to  the  fccwid  Story  on  the  Outfideofthe 


Scot!.       GREAT  BRITAIN.  fri 

Houfe,  that  one  Family  may  live  below,  and  another 
above,  without  going  in  at  the  fame  Door  (which  rs 
the  Scots  way  of  Living)  j  as  you  may  fee  in  Alnwick^ 
Wlrkworth^  and  feveral  other  Towns;  witnefs  alfo 
their  fetting  their  Corn  in  great  Numbers  of  fmall 
Stacks  without- doors,  not  making  ufe  of  Barns,  but 
only  a  particular  Building,  which  they  call  a  Barn* 
though  no  more  than  a  Threfhing-floor,  into  which 
they  rake  one  of  thefe  fmall  Stacks  at  a  time,  and  threfli 
k  out. 

About  three  Miles  farther  Eaft  is  a  fmall  Harbour-, 
with  a  Town  called  dymouthj  where  a  Fort  was.  for- 
merly railed  to  curb  the  Garrifon  of  Berwick.  This 
Town  gave  Title  of  Baron  to  the  late  Duke  of 
Marlborougb ;  but  the  Patent  being  granted  only  to 
him,  and  the  Heirs  Male  of  his  own  Body,  the  Honour 
extinguiflied  with  him.  It  affords  a  good  Harbour  for 
Fifliing-vefTels.  In  Queen  Elizabeth's  time,  the 
French  held  it,  and  fortified  it,  as  it  was  the  firft  Port 
in  Scotland  they  could  fafely  land  their  Supplies  at,  for 
the  Queen-mother  ;  but  they  were  obliged  to  quk 
that,  and  the  Kingdom,  fome  time  after,  by  a  Treaty, 
Queen  Elizabeth  fupporting  the  Reformers  againft 
her. 

Claret  I  found  here  in  great  Plenty,  and  very  cheap, 
and  the  beft  of  Fifh  in  abundance  :  but  the  Cookery 
was  fo  riafty,  as  alfo  the  Women,  and  the  Towns  (as 
is  too  generally  the  Cafe  throughout  North  Britain)  fo 
ftinking  with  human  Ordure,  that  it  was  impoffible 
to  avoid  loathing  fuch  Jakes's,  as  I  found  myfeif 
among, 

From  this  Bridge  we  enter  upon  a  moft  defolate, 
and,  in  Winters,  frightful  Moor  for  Travelers,  efpecia!^ 
ly  Strangers,  called  Coldingham-Moor,  upon  which,  for 
about  eight  Miles,  you  hardly  fee  an  Hedge,  or  a  Tree; , 
and  I  met  with  but  one  Houfe  all  the  Way,  and  that 
jiQt  an  Houfe  gf  Entertainment, 


62  /?  TOUR  /£ro'  Scotl. 

Coldingbam,  whence  this  Moor  derives  its  Name, 
was  an  old  Monaftery,  built  by  Edgar ',  King  of  Scot- 
land, about  the  Year  nco.  and  famous  for  its  Lady 
Abbefs  Elba,  of  whom  they  tell  us  the  following 
Story. 

This  Lady  was  the  Daughter  of  Edelfred,  King  of 
Northumberland ;  and,  when  her  Father  was  taken 
Prifoner  by  the  Pagan  Mercians,  fhe  got  into  a  Boat  in 
the  Humber,  with  three  other  Women ;  who,  by  their 
own  Prayers  only,  were  miraculoufly  preferved,  and 
carried  as  far  as  Scotland,  where,  under  a  Promontory, 
they  were  driven  on  Shore  by  a  Storm,  and  their  Boat 
dafhed  in  Pieces. 

When  they  got  afliore,  they  laboured  with  their 
Hands,  and  made  themfelves  a  little  Hut  to  lodge  in  ; 
they  continued  their  religious  Way  of  Living,  and  the 
Country- people  fuftained  them  with  Food;  till  at 
length,  acquiring  a  great  Character  by  their  Sanclity 
and  Aufterity,  they  were  addrefTed  to,  far  and  near,  far 
their  Prayers ;  and,  by  the  Charity  of  the  People,  got 
enough  to  build  a  Religious  Houfe  at  Coldingbam. 

Here,  as  Fame  fays,  when  the  cruel  Danes  came 
on  Shore,  the  religious  Lady  (who,  it  feems,  was 
very  beautiful  too  !)  cut"  off  her  Nofe,  and  upper  Lip, 
and  made  all  her  Nuns  do  the  fame,  in  order  to  pre- 
ferve  their  ChafHty.  Whereupon  the  barbarous  Danes9 
enraged  at  their  Zeal,  fired  their  Nunnery,  and  burat 
them  all  alive.  From  this  Lady,  who,  it  is  faid,  w:*:i 
"fainted  for  thefe  Sufferings,  the  Promontory,  where  fhe 
landed,  is  to  this  Day  called  St.  Ebbe's-Head,  and  vul- 
garly, by  our  Sailors,  St.  Tabbed,  There  was  once, 
upon  the  Point  of  this  Promontory,  a  ftrong  Fort, 
called  Faft-caftle,  belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Hume  -3  but 
it  has  been  fome  time  demoliflied. 

A  little  to  the  North -weft  is  the  Town  and  Caflle 
of  Duns,  remarkable  for  the  Birth  of  John  Duns  Scotus, 
Anno  1274.  fome  cf-  whofe  Family  were  then  in 
Being  there,  Duns  Swtus  was  a  Friar  Minor,  and  the 

greateft 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          6$ 

greateft  Scholar  of  his  Age.  Scaliger  fays,  there  was 
nothing  his  Genius  was  not  capable  of.  But  his  chief 
Study  was  in  Points  more  nice  than  neceflary,  where- 
upon he  was  called  Dotfor  Subtilis.  His  Followers, 
called  Scotifts,  were  great  Oppofers  of  the  Thomifts^ 
another  Set  of  Scholaftics,  fo  named  from  Thomas 
Aquinas.  He  ftudied  at  Oxford  and  Paris  j  and  died 
of  an  Apoplexy  at  Cologne.  After  Berwick  was  taken 
by  the  Englijh,  the  Sheriff- Court  was  kept  here,  which 
was  but  lately  removed  to  a  Market- town,  called 
Greenloiv ;  which  is  alfo  a  Royal  Burgh,  and  the  prin-  , 
cipal  in  the  Shire,  belonging  the  Earl  of  March- 
mont. 

Duns  was  alfo  remarkable  for  the  Encampment  of 
the  Scotijh  Army,  under  General  LeJIy,  aflembled  to 
oppofe  King  Charles  I.  when  he  came  to  the  Englijb 
Borders  with  an  Army,  to  perfuade  that  Kingdom  to 
Obedience.  It  has  the  beft  weekly  Marked  for  Cattle 
in  Scotland,  and  is  a  Place  of  the  beft  Trade  in  this 
County. 

Coldjlream  is  alfo  a  Market- town,  in  this  County  of 
Merfe^  where  was  antiently  an  Abbey.  In  the  Year 
1703.  An  Acl:  pafled  for  Repairing  and  Widening  the' 
Road  from  Deanburn-bridge,  through  Greenlow,  and 
Part  of  the  Jedburgh  Road,  by  Lauder,  in  the  Shire  of 
Berwick,  to  Cornhill  in  the  County  <?/* Durham  ;  and 
for  building  a  Bridge  over  the  Tweed,  near  Coldftream. 

Ecdei  alfo  is  a  Market- to  wn :  and  Erjilton  is  noted  for 
the  Birth-place  of  the  rhyming  Poet  Lermouth^  fo  much 
admired  by  the  vulgar  -Scots.  Hume  was  formerly  the 
Refidence  of  the  Earls  of  that  Name,  which  they  de- 
rived from  the  Town  ;  and  they  had  a  ftrong  Caftle 
there,  nowdemolifhed. 

The  inconfiderate  Vanity  of  the  antient  Scotijh 
Gentry  and  Nobility,  of  deriving  their  Names  from 
the  Places  of  their  Refidence,  had  this  Inconvenience 
attending  it,  that,  in  a  few  Generations,  it  loft  the  old 
Name  of  the  Family  from  wher.cs  the  Changelings  de- 

ic  ended, 


<?4  'A  TOUR  thrf  Scot!. 

fcended.  Thus  the  Dunbars  and  Humes,  originally  the 
fame,  came  to  bethought  two  diftinft  ones.  In  like 
manner,  the  Gordons,  Swintons,  PJdpaths,  Nifbets,  and 
the  Spotfwoods,  as  fome  fay,  though  all  of  the  fame 
Original,  muft  have  loft  the  Knowlege  of  it,  had  it 
not  been  for  Tradition,  or  the  Armorial  Bearings  of 
the  feveral  Families,  which  befpeak  them  to  be  of  the 
fame  Lineage.  This  Hint  may  ferve,  once  for  all,  as  to 
thofe  Families  called  of  that  Ilk ;  *',  e.  whofe  Surname 
and  paternal  Eftate  are  the  fame,  and  are  generally 
efteemed  antient  and  honourable. 

The  County  of  Merfe,  or  March,  formerly  gave 
Title  of  Earls  of  March  to  the  Family  of  Dunbar,  who, 
according  to  Camden,  derived  their  Origin  from  the 
famous  Gpfptitritkj  Earl  of  Northumberland,  who 
retired  into  Scotland  on  the  Ncrman  Conqueft,  and 
was  honoured  with  the  Earldom  of  March,  and  Caftle 
of  Dunbar,  by  the  then  King  Malcolm  Canmore,  whence 
his  Pofterity  took  the  Name ;  wtyle  another  Branch, 
being  poffefled  of  the  Barony  of  Hume,  aflumed  that 
for  their  Surname,  which  they  ftill  retain.  George  de 
Dunbar  being  profcribed  in  the  Reign  of  James  I.  of 
Scotland,  the  Title  of  Earl  of  March  was  conferred  on 
the  Duke  of  Albany,  then  one  of  the  Family  of  Stewart 
and  Lenox-,  which  being  extinct,  King  William  III. 
conferred  it  on  William  Douglas,  Brother  to  the  Duke 
of  §>ueenjberry. 

Having  pafled  over  Coktingham-Moor,  called  alfo 
Lamber-Moov,  the  Lowlands  of  Eajl-Lothian  fhew 
themfelves  from  the  Top  of  a  fteep  Hill,  and  give  a 
Profpecl  of  a  fruitful  and  pleafant  Country.  As  foon 
as  we  come  down  the  Hill,  there  is  a  Village,  called 
Cockburnfpath,  or  Cobberfpath,  where  Nature  forms  a 
very  fteep  and  difficult  Pafs,  and  where  i ceo  Men,- 
well-armed,  and  doing  their  Duty,  could  keep  out  a 
great  Army,  if  thsre  were  Occafion  for  it. 

The  next  Shire  is  that  of  Raft- Lothian  ;  and  the  firft 
Houfe.  9f  any  Note  we  met  with  in  it,  was  that  of 

D  ungla.fi) 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  6£ 

Dunglafs,  the  Seat  of  Sir  James  Hall.  Dunglafs  is  a 
fmall  Village,  of  the  fame  Clafs  of  Filthinefs  and 
Aiifery,  as  thofe  rfAyton,  Plymouth,  &c. 

But  here  we  began  to  fee,  that  Scotland  is  not  na- 
turally fo  barren,  as  feme  People  reprefcnt  it;  but 
might  be  made  equal  even  to  the  richeft,  moft  fruitful, 
moft  pleafant,  and  be  ft  improved  Part  of  England^  ii: 
the  Scots  had  the  fame  Methods  of  doing  it,  and  were 
as  good  Hufbandmen,  as  the  Englijh;  and  this  might 
eafily  be  brought  to  pafs,  would  the  Gentry  fet  about 
it. 

The  Truth  is,  the  Soil  hereabouts  is  very  good,  and 
the  Sea-ware,  as  they  call  the  Weeds  which  the  Sea 
cafes  up,  abundantly  fupplies  the  Defeft  of  Marl,  Chalk, 
or  Lime-ftone  ;  for  by  laying  this  continually  on  the 
Land,  they  plow  every  Year,  without  letting  it  lie 
fallow,  as  we  do  ;  and  I  found  they  had  as  much  Corn, 
as  our  Ploughmen  exprefs  it,  as  could  ft  and  upon  the 
Ground. 

The  next  Town  of  Note  is  Dunbar,  a  Royal  Burgh, 
which,  in  Scotland,  is  much  the  fame  with  what  we 
call  a  Corporation  in  England-,  and  fends  Members  to 
Parliament  in  like  Manner ;  only,  in  Scotland,  thefe 
Burghs  have  fome  particular  Privileges  feparate  to 
themfelves  ;  as  that,  for  Example,  of  hold  ing  a  Sort  of 
Parliament,  called  a  Convention  of  Burghs,  a  Me- 
thod taken  from  the  Union  of  the  Hans  Towns  in 
the  North,  in  which  they  meet  and  concert  Meafures 
for  the  public  Good  of  the  Towns,  and  of  their  Trade, 
and  make  By-laws,  or  Ac~ts  and  Declarations,  which 
bind  the  whole  Body.  Nor  have  they  loft  this  Privi- 
lege, by  the  Union  with  England,  but  it  is  preferved 
intire,  and  is  now  many  ways  more  advantageous  to 
them  than  it  was  before,  as  their  Trade  is  more  con- 
fiderable  than  before. 

This  Town  of  Dunbar  is  an  handfome,  well-built 
Town,  fituated  in  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Firth  on 
the  South-fide  towards  the  German  Ocean.  The 

Houfes^ 


66  A  TOUR  tM  Scotf. 

Houfes,  as  in  moft  of  the  principal  Towns,  al!  built 
.with  Stone,  and  covered  with  Slate.  It  hath  been, 
fenced  in  with  a  ilrong  Stone  Wall  ;  but  that  is  now 
decayed.  On  the  oppofite  Side  of  the  Haven  appear 
the  Ruins  of  a  Cattle,  almoft  covered  with  the  Sea  at 
Flood -tide,  which  formerly  was  remarkably  ftror.g.^ 
and  was  the  Seat  of  the  Earls  of  Marcb^  t  after  wards 
filled  Earls  of  D unbar  ;  a  Fortrefs' often  won  by  the 
Englijh,  and  as  often  recovered  by  the  Scots ;  but  de- 
.molifhed  in  the  Year  1656.  by  Order  of  the  Common- 
wealth, to  prevent  its  being  a  Retreat  for  the&oyaliils, 
then  called.  Rebels. 

Dunbar  is  a  very  confiderable  Port,  and  of  great 
Advantage  to  all  Ships  in  the  River,  in  cafe  of  Strefs  of 
Weather  ;  but  yet  its  Entrance  was  fo  difficult  by 
fteep  Rocks,  in'the  Mouth  of  the  Harbour,  that  the 
Corporation  had  exhaufted  itfelf  by  endeavouring  to 
cut  through  them  ;  and,  being  unable  to  proceed  far- 
ther in  it,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  Town-houfe  and 
School  of  the  Town  being  run  to  Decay,  and  the 
Town  itfelf  deftitute  of  frefli  Water ;  to  anfwer  all 
thefe  good  Purpofes,  they  procured  an  Acl:  to  pafs,  in 
the  Year  1718.  intituled,  An  A £1  for  laying  a  Duty  of 
TVJ*  Perns;  Sects,  or  One  Sixth  Part  of  a  Peny,  upon 
every  Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer  that  Jhall  be  fold  within  the 
Town  ^Dunbar,  for  improving  and  preferring  the 
Harbour^  and  repairing  the  Tcwn-houfe,  and  building  a 
School^  and  other  public  Buildings  there -9  and  for  fupply- 
ing  the f aid  Toivn  with  f reft)  Water. 

This  Duty  has  been  of  great  Service  to  the  Town, 
and  has  enabled  them  to  make  a  grest  Progrefs  in  the 
intended  Improvements  :  but  the  principal  Works, 
which  were  to  dig  up  Part  of  a  Rock  at  the  Bottom  of 
the  Harbour,  to  carry  out  the  great  Pier  to  the  Rock 
called  The  Beacon  Rock>  to  cut  the  Slope  of  the  Ifland 
down  to  a  Perpendicular,  and  to  fuppry  the  Town 
with  frefh  Water,  remaining  undone  i  and  the  A61  ex- 
piring 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN..  67 

piring  in  the  Year  1738.  the  fame  was  continued  for 
25  Years  longer,  by  an  Acl:  palled  10  Geo.  II. 

They  had  here  a  great  Herring- fifbery,  which  has- 
decayed  very  much  of  late  Years  ;  and  they  cure  Her- 
rings here,  as  they  do  at  Yarmouth  in  Norfolk,  though 
-I  cannot  fay  they  cure  them  fo  well,  nor  are  they  fo  fit 
lor  keeping  and  fending  on  long  Voyages.  The  Her- 
rings themfelves  may  indeed  make  a  little  Difference; 
being  gencially  larger,  and  fatter  than  thofe  of  Tar- 
moittb ;  which  makes  it  more  difficult  to  cure  them 
fo  as  to  keep  in  an  hot  Climate,  and  on  a  long  Voyage.. 
Some  public-fpirited  Perfons  have  (et  up  Whale-fiming 
here,  with  Succefs.  But  from  the  Commencement  of 
the  piefent  War,  Dunbar  has  differed  in  common  with 
other  Harbours  on  this  Side  the  Ifland.  It  continues 
neverthelefs,  in  a  flourishing,  though  not  in  the  fame 
flourifhing  State,  and  has  five  Creeks  dependent  upon 
it,  in  the  Cuftom-Houfe  Accounts.  This  Place,  if  the 
Port  was  once  improved  as  far  as  it  is  capable,  fo  as  to 
receive  more  Ships,  and  thofe  of  larger  Burthen,  and 
that  Allowance  to  maintain  thofe  Improvements  which 
they  now  enjoy  continued  for  a  further  Term,  would, 
from'the  Convenience  of  its  Situation,  and  the  induftrious 
Temper  of  the  People  in  the  Country  about  it,  be- 
come, in  all  Probability,  much  more  confiderable  than 
we  now  find  it.  Here  was  formerly  a  ftrong  Caftle, 
which  was  demolifhed  by  A6t  of  Parliament  during  the 
Minority  of  King  James  VI. 

Between  the  Town  and  the  great  Road  ftands  a 
pleafant  and  agreeable  Seat  of  the  Duke  of  Roxburgh^ 
called  Bretxmouth.  It  confifts  of, a  Body  and  two. 
Wings,  and  a  fine  paved  Court  between  the  Wings, 
with  a  good  Avenue  coming  up  to  it,  and  a  fpacious 
Parterre  adorned  with  Statues  behind  it ;  the  Whole  in 
the  Middle  of  a  fine  Park,  prodigioully  planted  with 
Trees  in  great  Thickets  between  it  and  the  Sea  j  for 
the  Gentlemen  of  Scotland  are  now  fet  upon  planting 
Foi  eft-  trees,  as  well  for  Ornament  as  Profit. 

A  little. 


68  A  TOUR  tbro'  Scot!. 

A  little  farther,  is  the  Caftle  ofTenningbam,  a  noble 
©Id  Seat  of  the  Earls  of  Haddington,  of  late  Years 
greatly  improved.  Many  Millions  of  Trees  are 
planted  in  a  fandy  Down,  or  Links^  as  they  call  them 
here,  between  the  Houfe  and  the  Sea,  which  are  very 
thriving. 

On  the  South-- weft  Side  of  Dunbar^  under  the 
Mountains,  near  a  Place  called  Dun-hill,  is  the  Field 
where  the  Battle  Vvas  fought  between  Oliver  Cromwell 
and  General  Le/Jy,  Commander  of  the  Scots  Army, 
where  the  defperate  Few  (for  Cromwell's  Army  was 
not  above  8coo  Men)  defeated  and  totally  overthrew 
the  great  Army  of  the  other  Side,  killed  6oco  of  them, 
and  took  10,000  Prifoners,  to  the  Surprize  of  the 
World. 

Here  we  turned  out  of  the  Way,  to  fee  the  Marquis 
of  Tweedale's  fine  Park  at  Yefter->  or  Zejhr;  in  the  Cen- 
ter of  which  ftands  a  very  noble  Houfe,  but  in  a  too 
low  Situation. 

The  Earl  of  Twetdalt^  in  the  Reign  of  K.  CharlesII. 
having  feen  the  Plans  of  Greemvicb  and  St.  James's 
Parks,  was  fo  pleafed  with  them,  that,  as  foon  as  he 
went  down  into  Scotland,  he  laid  out  the  Plan  and  De- 
fign  of  all  thofe  noble  Walks  and  Forefts  of  Trees, 
which  he  planted  here.  A  Gentleman,  whole  Judge- 
ment I  can  depend  upon,  told  me,  that  if  ever  thofe 
Trees  came  to  be  worth  but  Six-pence  apiece,  they 
would  be  of  more  Value  than  the  Fee-fimple  of  the 
whole  paternal  Eftate  of  the  Family.  Nor  is  this  un- 
Irkely,  if  it  be  true,  that  his  Lordmip,  and  his  imme- 
diate Succeflbr,  planted  above  6000  Acres  of  Land  with 
Fir-trees ;  and  where- ever  any  of  them  failed,  they 
were  constantly  renewed  the  next  Year. 

The  Park  itfelf  is  faid  to  be  eight  Miles  round,  and 
exceeds,  in  many  refpedls,  (particularly  as  to  Walling 
and  Planting)  Richmond  Park  in  Surry :  but  the  Plan- 
tation of  Fir  is  not  confined  to  this  Eftate  ;  for  the  Fa- 
mily has  another  Seat  rt.Pinkey>  near  Muffelburgivrh&v 

the 


Scotl.       .     GREAT  BRITAIN.  69 

the  fame  Lord  planted  alfo  a  great  Number  of  Trees, 
as  his  Succeflbrs  have  likewife  done  at  another  Seat, 
which  they  have  in  Fifi->  near  Slbcrdour. 

As  this  Planting  is  a  great  Encouragement  to  the 
Nobility  of  Scotland  to  improve  their  Eftates  by  the 
fame  Method,  fo  we  find  abundance  of  Gentlemen 
follow  the  Example;  infomuch, that  you  hardly  fee  an 
Houfe  of  Note,  efpecially  in  the  South  Parts  of  this 
Country,  but  is  adorned  with  Groves  and  Walks  of 
P'ir-trees  about  it  ;  by  which  we  may  reafonably  -ex- 
pect, that  in  a  little  time  Scotland  will  have  no  need  to 
fend  to  Norway  for  Timber  and  Deal,  but  will  have 
fufnctent  of  her  own,  and,  perhaps,  be  able  to  furnifh 
England  too  with  confiderable  Quantities. 

This  noble  Palace  ftands  about  half  a  Mile  from  the 
Park  gate,  to  which  you  go  by  a  paved  Coach-way 
through  a  Thicket.  It  is  of  Free-ftone,  curioufly 
wrought,  of  120  Feet  in  Front,  and  60  Feet  deep, 
and  on  each  Side  of  the  Fore-front  are  two  Pavilions  or 
Wings.  The  Offices  under  Ground  are  very  noble, 
and  vaulted  with  paved  Galleries  of  Communication. 
You  enter  the  Body  of  the  Houfe  up  fix  or  eight  Steps 
into  a  large  Hall  36  Feet  high,  and  behind  it  a  Salon 
from  the  Garden  of  the  fame  Height  ;  and  at  top  is  a 
Gallery  for,  Mufick,  which  opens  into  both,  exactly  as 
at  Blenheim  Houfe  near  Wood/lock.  The  Rooms  of 
State,  which  run  on  each  Side  of  this  Salon  fronting  the 
Garden,  are  very  ftately,  and  of  an  exact  Symmetry  ; 
and  thofe  from  the  Hall  have  no  Communication  with 
the  Apartments  in  the  two  Parlours.  A  mathematical 
Stone  Stair-cafe  leads  you  up  to  the  Apartments  above, 
oalluftraded  with  Iron. 

.  The  Parterres  and  Garden  behind  the  Houfe  is  very 
Ipacious,  nfing  up  by  an  eafy  Afcent  into  the  Park.  A 
handfome  Bafon  is  in  the  Middle  of  the  Parterre,  with 
a  Jet  d' Eau,  with  four  good  Statues,  one  at  each 
Corner.  There  are  abundance  of  Ever-greens,  and 
Green  Slopes  regularly  difplayed  j  and  to  the  Weft  of 

the 


7o  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

the  Garden,  on  an  artificialiMount,  is  a  pleafantSum- 
mer-houfe.  At  the  upper  End  of  the  Garden,-  fronting 
the  Salon,  are  a  Pair  of  Iron  Gates,  which  open  into  the 
Park.  The  Green-houfe  joins  the>  Pavilion  to  the 
Weft,  as  does  a  Laundry  to  the  Eaft.  There  is  a 
pretty  rapid  Stream  runs  by  the  Houfe,  and  by  its 
ruftling  through  the  Trees  as  it  runs  through  the 
Park,  makes  the  Whole  very  rural.  There  is  a  pretty 
Bowling-green  by  this  River  Side,  and  the  Stables, 
Hen-houfe,  and  Coach- houfes,  are  at  a  Diftance  in 
the  Park,  as  is  the  Cuftom,  in  all  The  great  Houfes  I 
have  yet  feen  in  Scotland.  Every  Nobleman's  Houfe 
hath  what  they  call  the  Mains,  where  their  Land-  , 
labourers,  Grooms,  and  every  body  belonging  to  the 
Stable  and  Poultry,  refide. 

About  two  little  Miles  from  Tefter,  I  arrived  at 
Lethington,  the  antient  Seat  of  the  Maitlanch  Earls  of 
Lauderdale.  It  is  an  old  Tower,  full  of  good  Con- 
veniencies,  and  one  good  Apartment  made  by  the 
Duke  of  Lauderdakln  the  Reign  of  Charles  II.  who 
alfo  inclofed  the  Park  with  a  Stone  Wall.  There  are 
fome  beautiful  Avenues  in  this  Park,  and  a  great  .deal 
of  Planting  round  the  Houfe. 

From  the  Town,  ofDunbarto  Edinburgh,  the  Coun- 
try may  be  reckoned  as  fruitful,  pleafant,  and  rich,  as 
any  in  Scotland,  or,  indeed,  as  moft  in  England.  The 
Sea  is  on  the  Right-hand  at  a  moderate  Diftance,  and 
the  Hills  on  the  Left,  farther  off,  which  are  habitable, 
and  feed  large  Flocks  of  Sheep,  and  have  many  ©pen 
Roads  leading  over  them-  from  Edinburgh,  and  other 
Parts,  towards  England. 

The  moft  material  thing  this  Country  wants,  is 
more  inclofed  Paftures,  by  which  the  Farmers  would 
be  enabled  to  keep  a  fufficient  Stock  of  Cattle  well 
foddered  in  the  Winter;  and  thereby  not  only  be 
furniftied  with  Store  of  Butter,  Cheefe,  and  Beef,  for 
the  Market,  but  likewife,  by  the  Dung  of  the  Beafts, 
enrich  their  Soil>  according  to  the  unanfwerable 

Maxim 


Scot!.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  71 

Maxim  in  Grafmgr  That  Stock  upon  Land  improves 
Land. 

Two  other  Articles  would  increafe  and  enrich  thent^ 
which  they  feldom  or  never  praciife  : 

1.  Folding  their  Sheep  within  move  a  lie  Kurds. 

2.  Fallowing  their  plowed  Land. 

The  firft  would  fatten  the  Ground,  and  the  latter 
deftroy  the  Weeds  ;  which  would  be  of  great  Service 
to  the  Land  at  a  Diftance  from  the  Sea,  where  they 
have  not  the  Benefit  of  Sea- weed. 

But  at  prefent,  for  want  of  Inclofures,  they  have  n» 
Winter  Provifion  for  Black  Cactle  ;  and  therefore  the 
Farmers  have  no  Dairies,  no  Butter  or  Cheefe,  in  any 
Quantity,  and  no  Heaps  of  Dung  in  their  Yards,  to 
return  upon  the  Land  for  its  Improvement.  Thus  a 
good  Soil  is  impbverifhed  for  want  of  Hufbandry, 

From  D unbar  we  pafs  another  River  Tyne,  which, 
to  diftinguifh  it  from  the  two  Tynes  in  Northumberland, 
I  ihallcall  Scots  Tyne,  though  not  fo  diftinguiihed  here. 
It  rifes  in  the  Hills  near  Tejler^  and,  watering  Part  of 
the  fine  and  pleafant  Vale  1  mentioned  before,  runs  by 
HaddingUn,  a  Royal  Burgh,  and   an  eld,  half-ruined 
Town,  with  the  Remains  of  an  old  Nunnery.     It  was 
formerly  large,  handfome,  and  well-built,  and  reckon- 
ed very  ftrong ;  for,  befides  the  -Walls  of  Stone,  which 
were  in  thofe  Times  efteemed  very   good,  the  Englijh 
fortified   it  with  Lines  and  Baitions.     Four  of  which 
latter  were  very  large,  as  may  be  feen  by  what  remains 
f  of  them  to  this  Day.     It  had  alfo  a  large  Ditch,  and 
was   fo  ftrong,  that  the   Englijht  commanded  by  Sir 
'George  Wilford,  defended  it   againft  a  great  Army   of 
French  and  Scotst  though   his   Garifon  was  almo"ft  all 
fwept  away  by  the  Plague,  till   he  was  relieved  from 
I  England,  when    he  quitted   it,   after  demolifhing  the 
f  Fortifications. 

They  have  a  good  Stone  Bridge  here  over  the  Tyne9 

though  the  River  is  but  fmall.    The  Church  was  large, 

but  has  fuffered  in  the  Pvuin  of  the  reft,  and  but  Part 

5  of 


7*  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

of  it  is  repaired,  though  big  enough  for  the  Number  of 
Inhabitants.  There  are  in  it  Tome  Monuments  re- 
maining of  the  Dukes  of  Lauderdale,  and  other  Malt- 
lands^  antient  Lords  of  this  Pzrt  of  the  Country  ;  but 
as  the  Choir  of  this  Church  is  open  and  defaced,  they 
have  fuffered  with  the  reft.  There  are,  however,  fome 
good  Houfes  here,  and  the  Streets  are  well  paved, 
The  Poft-houfe  is  the  beft  Inn  I  have  feen  in  Scotland \ 
and  inferior  to  none  I  have  feen  on  the  London 
Road. 

In  and  about  this  Place  I  faw  fomething  of  a  A4a- 
nufa£ture,  and  a  Face  of  Induftry,  which  was  thefirft 
I  had  hitherto  feen  theleaft  Appearance  of  in  Scotland; 
particularly,  here  was  a  Woolen  Manufacture,  creeled 
by  a  Company  or  Corporation  for  making  Broad-cloth, 
which  they  call  Engli/b  Cloth  ;  and  as  they  had  Eng- 
lljh  Workmen,  and  Englifh  Wool,  they  really  made  it 
very  good  ;  but  I  cannot  fay  they  could  bring  it  fo 
cheap  to  the  Market,  as  they  do  in  England.  This 
was  the  Reafon,  that  though,  before  the  late  Union, 
the  Englijh  Cloth  being  prohibited  upon  fevere  Penal- 
ties, their  own  Cloth  fupplied  them  very  well  ;  yet,  as 
foon  as  the  Union  was  made,  by  which  the  Englift 
Trade  was  opened,  the  Clothiers  from  Worcejier, 
Gloucefler^  Wilts^  Somerfet,  and  Devonjhire,  brought  in 
their  Goods,  and,  underfelling  the  Scots,  thofe  Manu- 
factures were  not  able  to  ftand  it.  However,  the  Peo- 
pie  turn  their  Hands  to  other  things,  are  ftill  employed 
in  Spinning,  Dying,  Weaving,  6v.  and  carry  on  a 
good  deal  of  that  Sort  of  Bufinefs. 

On  the  North-fide  of  the  Mouth  of  the  Forth  ftand 
the  Remains  of  Tantailon  Caftle,  infamous  in  the  Scots 
Hiftory,  for  being  the  Seat  of  Rebellion  in  the  Reign 
of  Kirig  James  V .  Hence  came  the  odd  P^ancy  among 
the  Soldiers,  That  the  Drums  beating  the  Scots  March, 
which  was  invented  by  the  King's  Soldiers  when  they 
tii  againft  the  Earl  of  Angus ,  who  held  out  this 

Caftle 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  73 

Caftle  againil  him,  fay,  Ding  down  cl'antal!on.     But  it 
is  now  no  more  a  Fortrefs,  being  intirely  demolifhed. 

Over-againft  this,  in  the  Mouth  of  the  fame  River, 
ftands  a  Keep  Rock,  called  the  Baft,  inacceflible  on  all 
Sides,  except  by  one  narrow  Pafiage,  Jt  was  formerly 
flightly  fortified,  rather  to  prevent  its  being  made  a 
Retreat  for  Pirates  and  Thieves,  than  for  any  Ufe  it 
could  be  of  to  command  the  Sea  j  for  the  Entrance  of 
the  Forth  is  fo  wide,  that  Ships  can  go  in  and  out, 
without  the  leaft  Danger  of  being  hurt  by  any  thing, 
that  could  be  offered  from  the  Bafs. 

In  the  Times  of  the  late  King  Charles  II.  and  his 
Brother  King  "James  VII.  it  was  made  a  State  Prifon, 
where  the  Wellern  People,  called  in  thofe  Days  Ca- 
merowans,  were  confined,  for  being  in  Arms  againft 
the  King.  And  after  the  Revolution  a  defperateCrew 
of  People  got  PoileiJion  of  it ;  and  having  a  large  Boat 
which  they  hoifted  up  upon  the  Rock,  or  let  down,  at 
Pleafure,  committed  feveral  Piracies,  took  a  great  many 
Vefiels;  and  held  out  the  I  aft  of  any  Place  in  Great 
Britain  for  King  "James :  but  their  Boat  being  ac  lalt 
either  feized  or  loft,  and  not  being  feafonably  fupplied 
with  Provisions  from  France,  as  they  ufed  to  be,  they 
were  obliged  to  furrender. 

The  Sslan  Gcefe  are  the  principal  Inhabitants  of  this 
I/land,  a  Fowl  rare  as  to  its  Kind  ;  for  they  are  net 
found  any-where  in  Britain^  that  I  can  learn,  except 
here,  in  fome  of  (he  lefTer  I/lands  in  the  Orcades,  an-J 
in  the  Ifland  of  Ailzye,  in  the  Mouih  of  the  Clyde. 
They  come  as  certainly  at  their  Seafon,  as  the  Swallows 
or  Woodcocks,  with  this  Difference  (if  what  the  Peo- 
ple there  tell  us  may  be  depended  on),  that  they  ge- 
nerally come  exactly  to  the  very  fame  Day  of  the 
Month. 

They  feed  moftly  on  Herrings  ;  and  therefore  it  is 
obferveiJ,  they  come  juft  before,  or  with  them,  and  c;o 
away  with  them  likewife, \though  it  id  evident,  tbiy 
do  not  follow  them  3  for  they  go  all  away  to  die  North, 

VOL.  IV.  £  Lu 


74  A  T  O  U  R  tbrf  Scoti. 

but  whither,  is  not  known.  As  they  live  on  Fim,  fo 
their  Flefh  has  the  Tafte  of  Fifh,  which,  together  with 
their  being  fo  exceeding  fat,  makes  them,  in  my  Opi- 
nion, a  very  coarfe  Dim,  rank,  ill-relifhed,  and  foon 
cloys  the  Stomach.  But  here  they  are  looked  upon  as 
a  Dainty. 

It  is  a  large  Fowl,  rather  bigger  than  an  ordinary 
Goofe.  It  is  web-footed,  but  its  Bill  is  pointed  like  a 
Crane  or  Heron,  only  much  thicker,  and  not  above 
five  Inches  long.  When  they  are  coming,  they  fend 
fome  before  to  fix  their  Manfion,  which,  for  that 
Reafon,  are  called  Scouts.  The  Inhabitants  are  care- 
ful not  to  difturb  them,  till  they  have  built  their  Nefts, 
and  then  they  are  not  to  be  frightened  by  any  Noife 
whatfoever.  They  lay  but  one  Egg  at  a  time,  which 
they  fo  dextroufly  fix  by  one  End  to  a  Point  of  the 
Rock,  in  the  Middle  of  the  Neft,  that  if  it  be  pulled  off, 
it  is  difficult  to  fix  it  fo  any  more.  They  hatch  it  by 
holding  it  faft  under  one  Foot,  and  feldom  leave  it,  till 
it  be  hatched.  The  Fifh  caught  by  the  old  ones  often 
ferv.e  the  Inhabitants  for  Food,  and  the  Sticks  they 
bring  to  make  their  Nefts,  fupply  them  with  Fewel. 
They  make  great  Profit  both  of  the  Flem  and  Fea- 
thers of  their  Young  ones,  which  are  taken  from  their 
Nefts,  b)  one  let  down  the  Rock  with  a  Rope.  When 
young,  they  are  of  an  Aih  colour  j  but  when  old, 
white. 

At  the  Top  of  the  Rock  is  a  frefli-water  Spring,  with 
a  fmall  Warren  for  Rabbets  ;  but  the  Bottom  of  it  is 
almoft  worn  through  by  the  Tide.  It  was  formerly 
the  PofTeffion,  and  fometimes  the  Seat,  of  the  antient 
Family  of  Lander  ^  who  a  long  time  refufed  to  fell  it, 
though  often  folicited  to  it  by  feveral  Kings.  King 
Barnes  VI.  told  the  then  Laird,  He  would  give  him 
whatever  he  plea  fed  to  ajk  for  it;  whereby  that  Gentle- 
man had  a  fine  Opportunity  of  making  a  good  Bargain.: 
but  after  he  had  told  his  Majefty,  That  he  would  fell 
it  upon  thefe  Terms,  and  the  King  defiring  to  know 

what 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  75 

what  he  would  afk,  he  anfwered,  Tour  Majejly  mujl 
een  refign  it  to  me ;  for  I'll  have  the  aid  Craig  (i.  e* 
Rock)  back  again.  However,  the  Family,  atlaft,  com- 
ing to  Decay,  it  was  purchased  by  King  Charles  II. 

From  hence,  keeping  the  Shore  of  the  Forth,  due 
Weft,  we  find  a  Range  of  large  and  populous  Villages 
all  along  the  Coaft,  almoft  as  far  as  Leith. 

All  this  Part  of  the  Country  is  delightfully  fpread 
with  the  Seats  of  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  ;  as  the 
Duke  of  Roxburgh's  near  Dunbar,  the  Earl  of  Had- 
dingtoun's  at  Tinningham,  both  already  defcribed,  the 
Lord  Beilhaven's  at  Beilhaven,  and  that  of  the  Family 
of  Dalrymple  Earl  of  Stair,  Who  have  fine  Seats  at  the 
Burgh  of  North  Berwick,  (wliere  is  a  fmall,  but  pretty 
good  Market),  Hales,  and  in  the  Neighbourhood  of 
this  Place. 

The  Houfe  and  Eftate  of  Dlrleton,  now  in  the  Fa- 
mily of  Nijbit,  is  pleafantly  feated  in  this  Part  of  the 
Country;  as  are  Clerkington  and  Ormiftoun,  thriving 
little  Towns,  belonging  to  the  Family  of  Cockburn  ; 
round  which  they  have  an  handfome  Eftate,  fo  well 
planted  and  improved,  that  I  do  not  remember  to  have 
ever  feen  a  more  beautiful  Spot  of  Ground.  They 
have  alfo  a  pretty  good  Seat  here ;  but  when  I  faw  it, 
it  was  much  out  of  Repair. 

I  muft  here  add  the  antient  and  noble  Houfes  of 
Seton  and  Winion,  both  Palaces  (for  fo  they  deferve  to 
be  called)  of  the  late  Earl  of  Winton,  who  did  fo  many 
weak  and  raih  Things  in  the  Affair  of  the  Rebellion 
in  1715.  They  are  now  in  a  State  of  Ruin,  as  is  the 
Eftate  on  which  they  ftand  ;  which,  for  its  Value,  is 
as  fine  as  any  in  Scotland,  lying  all  contiguous  with 
itfelf,  and  valued  at  almoft  5000 /.  Sterling/w  Annum\ 
but,  all  being  under  Forfeiture,  it  was  fold  to  the  Turk- 
Buildings  Company.  The  fine  Gates,  and  Stone 
Wall,  were  demolilhed  by  the  Government,  after  it 
had  been  made  a  Garrifon  by  the  Highlanders,  who 
from  hence  began  their  hair-braiu'd  March  to  Eng- 
E  2  lanjf 


7 6  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!, 

kind,  which  Expedition  ended  at  Prefton.  The  Name 
Seton  was  given  the  Family  from  the  Term  Set-on, 
which  one  of  the  Anceftors  of  it  ufed  to  the  Soldiers  he 
commanded,  when  entering  upon  an  Engagement. 
They  were  reckoned  a  very  gallant  Eamily ;  and  no 
true  Scotfman  can  well  omit  telling  the  memorable 
Story,  'I  hat  in  the  Year  1332.  when  Edward  IL 
came  before  Berwick,  where  Sir  Alexander  Seton  was 
then  Governor,  he  fummoned  him  to  furrender,  and 
threatened  to  hang  his  two  Sons,  whom  he  had!  among 
his  Hoftages,  if  he  delayed.  Accordingly  a  Gallows 
was  creeled  near  the  Town- Wall,  and  the  young  Men 
were  led  forth.  Tendernefs  for  his  Children  began  to 
move  the  Governor,  when  his  Lady  (of  the  Name  of 
Cheyne)  came  and  told  him,  He  and  /he  were  both  young 
enough  to  have  mote  Children  ;  but  if  he  furrender  ed,  he 
could  never  recover  his  Honour.  Upon  this,  he  refufed, 
and  the  Tyrant  cruelly  murdered  the  young  Gentle- 
men ;  but  the  Lady  was  rewarded  with  two  Sons  af- 
terwards. 

The  Towns  upon  this  Coaft,  as  I  faid,  ftand  very 
thick  ;  and  there  are  two  or  three  Articles  of  Trade 
which  render  them  more  populous,  and  more  conhder- 
able,  than  they  would  other  wife  be. 

1.  There  are  great  Quantities  of  White  Fifh  taken 
.and  cured  all  along  this  Coaft;   and  I  obferved,  that 
they  were  very  well  cured,  merchantable,  and  fit  for 
Exportation. 

2.  There  is  great  Plenty  of  Coal  in  the  Hills,  fo 
near  the  Sea,  that  the  Carriage  is  eafy,  a  great  deal  of 
which'  is  carried   to  Edinburgh,   and    other  Towns 
thereabouts. 

3.  They1  make  very  good  Salt  at  almoft   all  the 
Towns  upon  the  Shore  ;  as  at  Set  on,  Cockenny,  Pref- 
ton  pans,  and  feveral  other  Places.    They  have  a  great 
Trade  for  this  Salt  to   Norway,  Hamburgh,  Bremen, 
the   Baltic,  and   even  Holland;  and  the  Number  of 
Ships  loaded  with  it  here  yearly  is  very  considerable. 

4.  They 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  77 

4.  They  take  great  Quantities  of  Oyflers  here  alfo, 
with  which  they  not  only  fuppiy  the  City  of  Edinburgh^ 
but  carry  abundance  of  them  in  large  open  Boats, called 
Cobles,  as  far  as  Newcastle  upon  Tyne;  from  whence 
they  generally  bring  back  Glafs  Bottles. 

At  feveral  of  thefe  Villages  are  little  Moles  and 
Harbours,  or  Piers,  built  up  at  a  confiderable  Expence, 
for  fecuring  the  Ships  that  come  to  load  Salt,  and  other 
Goods  ;  as  at  North  Berwick^  Aberlady,  Preflon^  Prcf- 
ton-pans^  (which  is  alfo  noted  for  good  Malt-LiquorJ, 
Cockennyy  Port-feton^  &c. 

Near  Prejlon~pans,  fo  called  from  the  Salt-pans 
there,  was  fought  (if  it  may  be  faid  to  be  fought, 
whereone  Side  hardly  flood  its  Ground)  the  unhappy 
Battle  between  the  King's  Forces,  under  the  Command 
of  Sir  John  Cope^  and  the  Rebels,  in  October  1745. 

The  Country  hereabouts  is  both  plealant  and  popu- 
lous, and  full  of  Gentlemens  Houfes  ;  among  which 
is  Salton,  belonging  to  the  Lord  ^-fujlice  Clerk. 

We  came  next  to  Mujfelburgp^  an  antient  Burgh  of 
Regality,  In  this  Town  are  many  Hands  employed 
in  the  Woolen  Manufacture,  efpecially  in  coarfe  Stuffs 
for  the  Ufe  of  the  Poor;  and  they  have  continued  many 
Years  fuccefsfully  this  Branch  of  Trade  without  any 
Rival. 

A  little  Weft  from  this  lies  Fi/her-raw,  fo  called 
from  a  very  large  Row  of  Houfes  moftly  inhabited  by 
Fifliermen,  who  were  formerly  more  numerous  here 
than  at  prefent;  for  the  Mattel-Trade,  which  was  of 
old  reckoned  very  valuable,  is  now  given  over  ;  and 
their  chief  Biifmefs,  at  prefent,  confifts  in  catching 
Cods,  Haddocks,  Whitings,  and  fome  few  Shell-fifh. 

More  to  the  South  are" two  fmall  Villages,  called 
NfWrbiggtng,  and  God-fpeed  all\  but  they  are  fo  nearly 
joined  to  Mujfelburgh  and  Fljher-raw^  that  a  Stranger 
would  take  them  to  be  all  one  continued  Town.  Ne- 
verthelefs,  they  have  not  had  a  Church  fince  the  Re- 
formation, but  are  only  a  Part  of  the  Parifh  of  /«- 
E  3  verefky 


78  A  TOUR  tiro 

verejk,  an  adjoining  Village,  fo  called,  becaufe  it  ftands 
on  the  River  EJk,  which,  though  it  be  fometimes  fo  full 
of  Water  as  to  overflow  its  Banks,  yet,  being  rapid, 
it  is  not  made  navigable. 

Naftinefs  here  feems  to  be  delighted  in,  as  in  other 
Places,  which  I  have  obferved  upon.  The  Women, 
as  if  they  could  truft  to  Sex  merely,  for  Recommenda- 
tion to  the  Men,  have  dirty  Clouts  tied  round  their 
Heads,  failing  about  their  Shoulders,  and  peep  out  of 
Pieces  of  boarded  Windows,  juft  big  enough  for  their 
Heads. 

The  Ale  here  is  cheap,  being  but  a  Penny  a  Chop' 
ing-)  for  now  the  Word  ^uart  is  left  off;  and  a  Pint 
is  called  a  Mutcbkln.  Their  Butter  is  loathfome  both 
to  Eye  and  Tafte,  which  they  always  turn  into  Oil, 
when  they  ufe  it :  the  Sailors  are  far  cleanlier  Cooks 
than  the  Women.  In  fhort,  the  Filthinefs  of  their 
Food  makes  one  in  Danger  of  a  Surfeit,  while  their 
dirty  Beds  caufe  one  to  apprehend  the  Mulic  called  the 
Si-ots  Fiddle.  , 

The  Village  of  Inverefk  enjoys  fo  good  an  Air,  that 
the  eminent  Dr.  Pitcairn  called  it  the  Montpelier  of 
Scotland.  It  is  very  full  of  People,  and  there  are  feve- 
jral  very  handfome  Houfes  and  Gardens  in  it,  which 
invite  the  Citizens  of  Edinburgh  to  take  Lodgings  here 
in  the  Summer,  as  the  Londoners  do  at  Kenfington- 
gravel  pits,  Hamftead,  Hackney -,  and  Hlghgate. 

But  the  Glory  and  Beauty  of  this  Parifh  is  Pinkey, 
which  formerly  belonged  to  Set  on,  Earl  of  Dumfcrm- 
llng^  but  now  to  the  Marquis  of  Tweedale^  who  ufually 
refided  here,  before  his  Houfe  at  Tejler  was  riniflied  ; 
which,  though  it  be  the  moft  magnificent  Building,  yet 
is  not  fo  agreeably  fituated  as  Plnkey^  which  ftands  near 
the  Sea,  juft  as  we  enter  into  Muflelburgk. 

In  the  Court  before  the  Houfe  is  a  large  Stone  Well, 
covered  with  an  Imperial  Crown  of  Stone,  fupported 
by  Pillars  of  the  Ionic  Order.  The  great  Hall  on  the 
Right,  as  you  enter,  is  adorned  with  Views  of  the 

great 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          79 

great  Cities  of  Italy.  ;  and  in  a  Drawing-room  adjoin- 
ing to  it,  is  a  Billiard-table.  The  great  Stair- cafe  on 
the  Left  is  baluftraded  with  Iron,  and  crouded  with 
Piaures. 

The  firft  Apartment  confifls  of  a  Dining  room, 
Drawing-room,  and  Bed-chamber,  all  very  fpacious,, 
curioufly  wainfcoted  with  Oak,  and  hung  with  the 
Seafons  in  Tapeftry,  of  the  fmall  Figures,  and  beft 
Sort :  the  Bed  is  of  crimfon  Velvet,  in  an  Alcove, 
neatly  fupported  with  Pillars.  The  Chimneys  are  of 
Marble,  and  above  that  of  the  Dining-room  is  painted 
the  fined  Infide  of  a  Church  that  is  any  where  to  be 
feen. 

The  great  Gallery  is  very  long  and  fpacious,  the 
Cieling  whereof  is  full  of  Latin  Infcriptions,  fuitable 
to  the  feveral  Paintings.  Here  are  a  Family  Picture 
of  the  Lord  Seton,  with  his  four  Sons  and  Daughters, 
by  Hans  Holbein  ;  Mr.  Henderfon,  the  Covenanter,  by 
Vandyke ;  the  whole  Length  of  King  Charles  I.  and 
his  Chancellor,  the  Earl  of  Dunfermline,  in  his  Robes, 
by  the  fame  Hand.  The  firit  Earl  of  Tiueedale^  with 
his  eight  Sons  and  feven  Daughters,  all  in  one  Piclure, 
as  big  as  the  Life,  takes  up  almoft  one  End  of  the 
Room.  There  are  fine  Altar-pieces,  Paffion- pieces, 
and  others  of  that  Kind,  which  were  faved  from 
Plunder  out  of  Monafteries  at  the  Reformation.  Here 
is  likewife  a  good  Picture  of  the  Earl  of  Strafford^  and 
another  of  the  Duke  of  Lauderdale  (who  married  his 
only  Child  to  the  Heir  of  this  Family),  with  great 
Numbers  of  Family  Pictures  of  the  Hays  and  Setons. 
There  is  alfo  well  preferved  the  genealogical  Tree  of 
the  Family,  from  the  Year  970  to  this  Time ;  viz. 
the  Hay*)  Gijfards^  and  Frafers.  But  many  of  the 
Pictures  have  been  carried  to  Tefler. 

The  Parterre  behind  the  Houfe  is  very  large,  and 

nobly  adorned  with  Ever- greens  ;  and  on  each  Side  of 

it  fpacious  Gardens.     The  whole  ftands  in  a  Park 

above  three  Miles  in  Circumference,  well  planted  with 

£4  an 


So  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Sco 

an  incredible  Number  of  Fir-trees,  and  walled  round 
with  Stone.  I  confefs,  if  I  had  been  Owner  of 
Pinkey^  I  (hould  hardly  have  built  Yefter ;  for  Pinkey 
'flands  nobly,  and  has  a  comrrandingProfpecl,  not  only 
over  the  adjacent  Country,  but  alfo  of  the  Coaft  of 
Fife9  over  the  Sea,  at  nine  Miles  Diftance  :  whereas 
Yefter*  as  I  have  faid,  lies  in  a  Bottom,  and  all  its 
Views  are  bounded  within  itfelf.  Yefter,  it  is  true,  is 
the  antiecit  Seat  of  the  Family,  whofe  Title  to  Pinkey 
is  but  late,  and  (fome  fay)  was  precarious. 

Near  this  Place  was  fought  a  Battle  by  Edward 
Stynwur,  Duke  of  Sa-nerfet^  when  he  came  to  force  the 
Scots  into  the  Marriage  of  their  young  Queen  Mary 
with  his  Nephew  King  Edward  VI.  which  was, 
doubtlefs,  a  very  coarfe  Way  of  Wooing.  Here  was 
a  great  Slaughter  of  the  Sco.ts :  but  though  the  Englljh 
won  the  Battle,  yet  they  loft  their  Prize  ;  for  the 
young  Queen  was  privately  embarked,  carried  to 
Prance,  and  afterwards  married  to  the  Dauphin,  who 
became  King;  Francis  II. 

The  Englijh  call  this  the  Battle  of  Mujfilburgh  -y 
but  fome  Beats  Gentlemen  riding  cut  with  us,  to  (hew 
;  us  the  Place  where  the  AcTion  was  begun  and  endeH, 
we  all  agreed,  that  the  Scots  are  in  the  right,  v/ho- call- 
it  the  Battle  of  Pinkey. 

Adjoining  to  the  Seat  of  Pinkey,  is  a  grand  Machine 
wrought  by  Water,  for  pumping  Warer  out  of  the 
Coal-mines  ;  of  which  there  are  great  Numbers  here- 
abouts, and  almoft  in  every  Part  of  Lothian.  They 
;i)fo  make  vaft  Quantities  of  white  Salt  in  this  Shire  ; 
*ml  it  produces  great  Plenty  of  Lime  itone.  In  the 
Re;gn  of  James  I.  a  Mine  was  fojind  in  it,  out  of 
which  they  got  a  great  deal  of  Silver. 

Loth} an  and  Stirlingfinre  lie  very  comnmdioufiy 
along  fide  the  Fortb9  for  exporting  their  Coals,  called 
Scots  Coal,  to  different  Ports  of  the  Kingdom. 

I  now  approached  the  capital  City  of  Edinburgh  j 
but  mult  fay  a  Word  or  two  of  its  Situation,  before  I- 

enter 


M, 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  §i 

enter  it.  Standing  then,  at  a  fmall  Diftance,  and 
taking  a  View  of  it  from  the  Eaft,  you  have  really  but 
a  very  confufed  Idea  of  the  City,  becaufe  the  Situation 
being  in  Length  from  Eaft  to  Weft,  and  the  Breadth 
ill-proportioned  to  it,  you  view  it  under  the  greateft 
Difadvantage  poffible;  whereas,  if  you  turn  a  little  to 
the  Right-hand  towards  Leith9  you  have  a  very  hand- 
fbme  Profpedt  of  it  ;  and  from  the  South  you  fee  it  to 
yet  more  Advantage,  becaufe  it  is  increafed  on  that 
Side  with  new  Streets. 

At  the  Extremity  of  the  Eaft-end  of  the  City  {lands 
the  Palace  of  Holy-  rood  houje  ;  leaving  which,  a  little 
to  the  Left,  you  come  through  a  populous  Suburb  to 
the  Entrance,  called  the  Water-port.  From  hence, 
turning  Weft,  the  Street  goes  on,  in  a  ftrait  Line, 
through  the  whole  City,  to  the  Caftle.  It  is  above  a 
Mile  in  Length  j  and  is,  perhaps,  the  largeft,  longeft, 
and  fineft  Street,  for  Buildings,  and  Number  of  Inha- 
bitants, in  the  World. 

•  From  the  Palace-door,  which  Hands  on  a  Level  wiih 
the  loweft  of  the  plain  Country,  the  Street  begins  to 
Eicend  very  gradually,  being  no-  where  fteep  ;  but  this 
Afcent  being  continued  for  fo  long  a  Way,  it  is  eafy  to 
imagine,  that  the  farther  Part  muft  n?cefTarily  be.  very 
high  j  for  the  Caftle,  which  ftands,  as  it  were,  at  the 
Extremity,  Weft,  as  the  Palace  docs  Eaft,  makes,  on 
all  the  Three  Sides  (that  only  excepted  which  joins  it 
to  the  City),  a  very  fteep  and  frightful  Precipice. 

Together  with  this  continued  Afcent,  you  are  to 
fuppofe  the  Edge  or  Top  of  the  Afcent  Ib  narrow,  that 
the  Street,  and  the  Row  of  Houfes  on  each  Side,  take 
up  the  whole  Breadth  ;  fo  that,  which  way  foever  you 
turn,  you  go  down  Hill  immediately;  which  is  fo 
fteep,  that  it  is  very  troublefome  to  thofe,  who  have 
not  very  good  Lungs,  to  walk  in  thofe  Side-  lanes, 
which  they  call  Wynds.  By  this  Defcription  you  will 
perceive,  that  the  City  ftands  upon  the  narrow  Riclgc- 


cf  a  long  afcendin^  Mountain. 


8a  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

On  the  North-fide  of  the  City,  towards  the  Weft- 
end  of  it,  where  the  Caftle  ftands,  is  a  Lough  or  Lake 
of  Water,  which  has  a  fmall  Brook  that  runs  through 
it ;  fo  that  it  cannot  be  faid  to  be  quite  ftanding. 
There  was  formerly  another  Lake  on  the  South-fide 
of  it,  which,  being  now  filled  up,  is  built  into  a  Street, 
though  fo  much  lower  than  the  high  Street,  that,  as  I 
faid  before,  the  Lanes  between  them  are  very  fteep. 

The  Town  is  fo  antient,  that  no  Hiftory  has  re- 
corded when,  by  whom,  or  on  what  Occafion,  it  was 
built;  yet  it  feems  moft  natural  to  conclude,  that  fuch 
a  Situation  could  not  be  chofen,  but  for  a  Retreat 
from  the  Outrages  and  Attempts  of  the  Britons, 
Saxons,  Danes,  or  other  Enemies;  for,  having  an  im- 
pregnable Caftle  at  the  Weft-end,  and  a  Lake  on  either 
Side,  the  Inhabitants  had  nothing  to  defend,  but 
the  Entrance  at  the  Eaft-end,  which  it  was  eafy  to 
fortify. 

If  this  was  not  the  Reafon  for  chufing  the  Situation, 
what  fhould  have  hindered  them  from  building  the 
City  in  a  pleafant,  delightful  Valley,  with  the  Sea 
flowing  up  to  one  Side,  and  a  River  running  through 
the  Middle  of  it  ?  fuch  as  that  Space  of  Ground,  be- 
tween it  and  the  Sea,  where  the  Town  of  Leith  ftands. 
There  they  would  have  had  a  noble,  pieafant,  and 
jnoft  ufeful  Situation,  a  very  fine  Harbour  for  their 
Trade,  a  good  Road  in  the  Forth  for  their  Ships  of 
Burden ;  a  pleafant  River,  which,  with  fmall  Art  and 
Charge,  might  have  been  fo  drawn  round  the  City,  as 
to  have  filled  its  Ditches,  and  made  its  Fortifications- 
almoft  impregnable,  as  the  French  did,  when  they  for- 
tified Leith.  Or,  had  they  gone  to  the  South-fide  of 
the  City,  and  extended  it  towards  Libertoun  and  Good- 
trees,  they  had  found  a  Plain  large  enough  to  have 
contained  another  London,  watered  on  the  South-part 
with  a  pleafant  Brook,  capable,  by  the  Help  of  Pipes, 
to  have  conveyed  Water  into  every  Street  and  Houfe. 

A  great 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  83 

A  great  Part  of  this  convenient  Space  for  building 
a  noble  City  has  been  made  the  Property  of  the  Cor- 
poration ;  and  the  Magiftrates  for  the  Time  being 
have  always  refufed  to  fuffer  any  Houfes  to  be  built 
upon  it,  becaufe  the  old  City  would  then  be  foon  de- 
ferted,  to  the  great  Lofs  cf  all  the  Proprietors  of  the 
Buildings  there,  many  of  whom  it  would  totally 
ruin. 

Thefe  things  they  did  not  forefee,  or  not  underftand 
in  thofe  Days ;  but,  regarding  immediate  Safety,  fixed 
on  the  Hill,  as  a  fure  Strength,  formed  by  Nature, 
ready  at  their  Hand.  By  this  means  the  City  lies 
under  fuch  Inconveniencies,  as  are  made  a  Subjecl  of 
Reproach  by  fome,  as  if  the  People  delighted  in  Stench 
and  Naftinefs ;  whereas,  were  any  other  People  to 
live  under  the  fame  Unhappinefs  of  a  rocky  and  moun- 
tainous Situation,  a  Throng  of  Buildings  from  8  to  12 
Stories  high,  a  Difficulty  of  obtaining  Water  (that 
little  they  have,  being  to  be  carried  up  to  the  upper- 
moft  Apartments),  we  fhould  find  a  London,  or  a 
Brlflol)  as  dirty  as  Edinburgh^  and,  perhaps,  lefs  able 
to  make  their  Dwelling  tolerable,  at  lead  in  fo  narrow 
a  Compafs  v  for,  though  many  Cities  have  more 
People  in  them,  yet,  I  believe,  there  is  none  in  the 
World,  where  fo  many  People  live  in  fo  little  Room. 

But,  although  I  have  made  thefe  Excufes  for  the 
Naftinefs  of  this  Place,  *  yet  cannot  the  Fa&  be 
denied.  In  a  Morning,  earlier  than  feven  o'Clock,: 
before  the  human  Excrements  are  fwept  away  from 
the  Doors,  it  ftinks  intolerably  :  for,  after  Ten  at 
Night,  you  run  a  great  Rifque,  if  you  walk  the  Streets,. 
of  having  Chamber-pots  of  Ordure  thrown  upon  your 
Head  :  and  it  founds  very  oddly  in  the  Ears  of  a> 
Stranger,  to- hear  all  Paflers-by  cry  out,  as  loud  as  to* 

*  At  Bath,  where  they  are  afraid  of  digging  Vaults  or  Privies,  left- 
they  fhould  damage  the  Springs  which  fupport  them,  they  are  not  To* 
execrably  rally,  as  our  Author  lure,  and  in-other  Eiaces,  dsfcntss  cur 
Brethren, 


84  'A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scot!. 

be  heard  to  the  uppermoft  Stories  of  the  Houfes,  which 
are  generally  fix  or  feven  high  in  the  Front  of  the 
High  ftreet,  Hoad  yare  Hoand ;  that  is,  Hold  your 
Hand,  and  throw  not,  till  I  am  paffed. 

Every  Sraircafe  is  called  a  Turnpike  or  Land,  with 
the  Addition  of  Come  Name  to  diftinguifh  it  from  an- 
other. The  Families  of  the  beft  Rank  have  generally 
but  one  Floor,  fome  only  half  a  Floor,  and  others  lefs. 
The  Gentry  take  the  fir  it,  iecond,  or  third  ;  the  Mid- 
dling; and  Poor  mount  higher. 

When  you  afcend  their  Staircafes,  which  are  all  of 
Stone,  the  fir  ft  Thing  on  every  Landing  prefented  to 
View,  are  human  Excrements,  fo  thick  laid,  that  it  is 
difficult  to  pafs  them  without  treading  in  them.  They 
keep  Clofe-ftools,  which  they  call  Boxes,  in  their  Bed- 
rooms ;  and  thefe  they  empty  out  of  the  Windows  in 
the  Night. 

The  Women  here  are  many  of  them  very  hand- 
fome;  generally  light-hair'd,  and  fair,  but  freckled. 
They  are  much  more  induftrious  than  the  Men,  taking 
laudable  Pride  in  having  moft  Part  of  what  they  wear 
the  Produ6t  of  their  own  Hands.  They  are  great  Ad- 
mirers of  white  Thread  Stockens  (a  Famron  the  Eng* 
tifl)  Ladies  are  come  into),  and  fcruple  not  to  mew- 
that  they  are,  as  they  walk  ;  nor  are  the  Women  of 
either  the  North  or  South  Part  of  Britain,  half  fo  (hy 
as  they  ufed  to  be  in  this  Particular  :  their  monftrous 
Hoops  have  made  them,  we  may  very  well  fay  (harm. 
as  it  may  found),  above  Shame.  But  this  may  be 
faid  in  Praife  of  the  Scoti/h  Women,  which  cannot  of 
the  Englijh,  that  their  white  Stbckens  are  generally 
their  own  Work.  It  is  indeed  a  very  great  Rarity  to 
fee  a  Scottjh  Woman  fit  idle  ;  nay?  over  the  Tea- 
table,  that  expenfive  .Timc-wafter  in  England,  they 
are  generally  at  work,  either  upon  the  Thread  which 
makes  them  Linen  or  Plaids,  or  elfe  knitting  them- 
felves  Stockens  or  Gloves  5  which  they  do  to  great 

From 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  £5 

From  the  principal  Street  are  many  Wyncs,  or 
narrow  Turnings,  and  it  is  not  eafy  for  a  Stranger  to 
find  his  Way  to  any  one  of  the  Dwellings,  which  in 
thefe  Wynds  are,  as  it  were,  piled  one  upon  another. 
But  there  is  in  Edinburgh  a  very  ufeful  kind  of  Black- 
guard called  Caiudyf,  who  attend  at  Taverns,  Coffee- 
houfes,  and  other  public  Places,  to  go  on  Errands,  and 
know  every  body  of  any  Note  in  the  Town.  Thefe 
Boys,  though  they  are  in  Rags,  and  lie  every  Night 
upon  the  Stairs,  or  in  the  Streets,  are  yet  confiderably 
trufted,  and  have  feldom  proved  unfaithful.  They  are 
.fubjecT:  to  a  kind  of  Captain,  OF  Magiftrate,  called  the 
Conftable  of  the  Cawdies,  who  punifhes  any  Neglect 
or  Mifiemeanor  generally  by  Fine  of  Ale  or  Brandy, 
but  fometimes  corporally.  Moft  of  them  are  com- 
monly acute,  and  execute  whatever  Employment  is 
affigned  them  with  great  Speed  and  Addrefs.  It  is 
faid,  that  a  Judge  formerly  abandoned  tv/o  of  his  Sons 
to  this  Way  of  Life  for  a  Time,  believing  they  would 
acquire  that  Vigilance  and  Acutenefs,  which  could  no 
otherwife  be  taught  them,  and  which  would  be  of 
great  Ufe  in  an  higher  Station. 

Having  thus  confidered  the  City  in  its  outward  Ap- 
pearance, and  in  its  Situation,  I  muft  next  look  into  its 
Infide,  where  we  fha1!  find  it  (notwithftanding  all  its 
Difadvantages)  a  large,  populous,  rich,  and  even 
Royal  City. 

From  the  Palace-gate  Weftward,  the  Street  is  called 
the  Canongate,  where  the  Canons  of  the  Abbey  for- 
merly refided  ;  which  is  a  kind  of  Suburb  by  itfelf,  as 
Southwark  is  to  London.  In  this  Part  of  the  Street, 
though  otherwife  not  fo  well  inhabited  as  the  City  it- 
felf, are  feveral  very  magnificent  Houfes  of  the  No- 
bility, built  for  their  Town-refidence  when  the  Court 
was  here.  Of  thefe  the  Duke  of  §hieenjberry\  the 
Earl  of  IFtnton's,  the  Duke  of  Roxburgh's,  the  Earl 
cf  Panmiires,  and  the  Earl  of  Murray' 's,  are  the  chief: 
the  fir  ft  and  laft  are  very  large  and  princely  Buildings, 

all 


96  ATOURfhro*  Scot!.. 

all  of  Free-ftone,  large  in  Front,  and  have  good  Gar- 
dens behind  them. 

At  the  Upper  or  Weft- end  of  this  Street,  where  it 
joins  to  the  City,  is  a  Gate,  which  parts  the  City  from 
the  Suburb,  but  does  not  difcontinue  the  Street,  which 
widens,  and  is  more  fpacious,  when  you  arelthrough 
the  Gate,  than  before.  This  is  the  famous  Netber- 
bow  Port9  whofe  Doors  were  like  to  have  been  taken 
away  by  the  Parliament,  when  the  Affair  of  Captain 
Porteous  was  under  their  Confideration,  as  I  fliall 
mention  more  particularly  by-and-by. 

Juft  at  this  Gate,  on  the  Outfide,  are  two  Streets,, 
one  of  which  is  called  St.  Mary,  Wynd^  and  the  other 
Leith  Wynd:  the  firft  leads  out  of  the  City,  South, 
into  .  the  great  Road  for  England^  by  the  way  of 
Kelfo  ;  and  at  the  Foot  of  it  is  a  Gate  turning  Weft- 
ward  into  the  low  Street,  called  the  Cowgate,  becaufe 
the  Cattle  are  often  driven  through  it  to  and  from  the 
great  Market-place:  the  other  leads  North  into  » 
Suburb  called  the  Calton ;  from  whence  there  is  a  very 
handfome  Gravel -walk,  20  Feet  broad,  continued  to 
the  Town  of  Leitb^  which  is  kept  in  good  Repair  at 
the  public  Charge,  and  no  Horfes  fuffered  to  come 
upon  it. 

We  now  enter  the  City  at  the  Nether-low  Por^ 
and  have  an  open  View  up  the  high  Street.  It  muft 
not  be  expecled  I  fhould  defcribe  all  the  Buildings  of 
the  City  ;  I  mail  therefore  touch  upon  fome  few,  and 
go  on.  The  firft  of  any  Note  is  a  fine  Houfe,  on  the 
South- fide  of  the  Street,  a  little  within  the  Gate,  be- 
longing to  the  Marquis  of  Tweedale^  with  a  Plantation* 
of  Lime-trees  behind  it,  the  Place  not  allowing  Room 
for  a  large  Garden  :  adjoining  to  this  are  very  good 
Buildings,  which,,  if  fet  out  in  handfome  Streets, 
would  adorn  a  noble  City  ;  but  being  crouded  together 
in  narrow  Wynds  and  Alleys,,  deferve  no  Notice. 

A  little  farther,  on  the  fame  Side,  is  the  Irons 
Kirk  i  arid  near  it,  in  the  Middle,  of  the  Street,,  flands 

the 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN.  87 

the  Guard-houfe,  where  two  Companies  of  difciplined 
Men,  cloathed  and  armed  like  Grenadiers,  at  the 
Charge  of  the  Town,  do  Duty  every  Night,  and  keep; 
the  public  Peace  of  the  City. 

About  Mid -way  between  the  Nether-bow  and  the 
Caftle,  is  the  great  Church,  which,  before  the  Re- 
formation, was  Collegiate,  and  dedicated  to  St.  Giles  ;j 
but  it  was  afterwards  divided  into  feveral  Preaching- 
places,  and  Diftricls  of  the  City  were  allotted  to  them,, 
fo  as  to  be  parochial.  When  King  Charles  I.  creeled 
a  new  Biftioprick  at  Edinburgh^  which  before  that 
time  was  in  the  Diocefe  of  St.  Andrews^  it  was  made 
a  Cathedral,  and  the  Dean  was  Forenoon  Minifter  of 
that  Part  of  it  called  the  New  Kirk>  which  is  the 
Choir,  Chancel,,  or  Eaftern  Part.  In  it  is  a  Gallery 
for  the  King,  or  his  Commiffioner.  Here  alfo  the 
Magiftrates  aflemble,  and  the  Judges  in  their  Habits,, 
in  time  of  Seilion.  In  a  large  Chapel,  on  the  South- 
weft  Part  of  this  Church,  the  General  AfTembly  hold 
their  Seffions,  as  does  alfo  the  Commiffion  of  the 
Aflembly,  in  the  Interval  between  the  General 
Meetings. 

The  great  Crofs  under  the  Tower  is  called  the  Old 
Kirk ;  and  the  Front  or  Weft- part  of  the  great  Church 
is  divided  into  two  Parts:  that  on  the  South  is  called 
the  Tolbootb  Kirk,  and  that  on  the  North  Haddo's. 
Hole^  from  the  Laird  of  Haddo  (Grandfather  to  the 
prefent  Earl  of  Aberdeen)^  who,  being  a  great  Royalift 
and  Anti-covenanter,  was  kept  Prisoner  in  a  Vault 
there,  till  he  was  beheaded.. 

The  Steeple  in  the  Middle  is  very  high,  and  of  good 
Architecture  ;  the  Summit  of  it  refembles  an  Imperial 
Crown.  Here  they  have  a  Set  of  Bells,  which  are  not 
rung  out  as  in  England,  (for  that  Way  of  Ringing  is- 
not  known  in  this  Country),  but  are  played  upon  by 
the  Hand  with  Keys,  like  an  Harpfichord,  the  Perfon 
playing  having  great  Leather  Covers  to  his  Fifts,  by 
which  he  is  able  to  ftrike  with  the  more  Force.  They 

play 


88  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl, 

lay  all  manner  of  Tunes  very  mufically,  and  the 
Town  gives  a  Man  a  yearly  Salary  for  playing  upon 
them  from  twelve  to  one  every  Day,  Sundays  and 
Holidays  excepted. 

On  the  South-fide  of  this  Church  (formerly  the 
Church-yard)  i§  a  Square  of  very  fine  Buildings, 
called  the  Parliament-Clofe,  the  Weft  and  South-fides 
of  which  are  moftly  taken  up  with  the  Parliament- 
houfe,  the  feveral  Courts  of  Juftice,  the  Council  - 
chamber,  the  Exchequer,  the  public  Regifters;  the 
Court  for  the  Royal  Boroughs  to  afiemble  in,  the 
Lawyers  Library,  the  Poft-office,  &c.  The  great 
Church  makes  up  the  North-fide  of  the  Square,  and 
the  Eaft  and  Part  of  the  South-fide  is  built  into  private 
Dwellings  very  ftately,  lofty,  and  ftrong,  being  feven 
Stories  high  to  the  Front  of  the  Square;  and  the  Hill 
they  ftand  on  having  a  very  fteep  Defcent,  fome  of 
them  are  no  lefs  than  14  Stories  high  backwards.  In 
the  Middle  of  this  Square  is  an  Equeftrian  Siatue  of 
King  Charles  II.  which  is  reckoned  very  fine. 

The  Parliament- houfe  is  a  (lately,  convenient,  and 
large  Structure.  Over  its  Entrance  are  the  Arms  of 
Scot/and  well  cut,  with  Mercy  and  Truth  on  each 
Side  for  Supporters  ;  and  this  Infcription,  Stant  his 
fellcla  regna\  importing,  that  thefe  Virtues  make 
Kingdoms  happy.  And  under  the  Arms  was  this 
Motto,  Unto  Uniomim  ;  relating  not  only  to  the  Union 
of  the  two  Crowns,  but  fignifying  that  their  Advice 
was  necelfary  to  the  Maintenance  of  it.  The  Room 
for  the  Meeting  of  the  Parliament  had,  on  that  Oc- 
cafion,  an  high  Throne  for  the  Sovereign,  or  the 
Commifiioner,  with  Benches  on  each  Side  for  the  No- 
bility and  Bifhops,  and  Forms  conveniently  placed  in 
the  Middle,  for  the  Commoners.  Without  the  Area, 
was  a  Pulpit  for  Sermons  to  the  Parliament,  on  par- 
ticular Occafions  ;  and  behind  the  Pulpit  a  large  Par- 
tition for  others,  befides  the  Members,  to  hear  the 
Sermons,  and  Debates  of  ths  Houfe,  when  they 

thought 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  89 

thought  fit  to  allow  it.  This  Building,  in  fome  mea- 
fure,  refembles  Wejiminfter-kall^  and,  though  not  quite 
fo  large,  has  a  much  more  curious  Roof.  In  the 
South  or  Upper-end  one  of  the  Ordinary  Judges  fits 
every  Week  in  Seflion-time,  to  hear  Caufes  in  the 
firft  Inftance  j  but  when  the  Parliament  fits,  that 
Court  is  removed  to  another  Part  of  the  Hall.  At  the 
Weft-  end  of  it  are  kept  the  Sheriff  and  Commiflary 
Courts.  Near  the  North  end  is  the  Town  Council- 
houfe  or  Guild  ball,  and  over  it  is  the  Judiciary  or 
Criminal  Court.  At  the  South  eaft  Part  of  the  Par- 
liament- houfe,  is  a  Door  from  what  they  call  the 
Quter-boufe  (where  the  Lord  Ordinary  fits)  into  the 
Inner  ',  where  fit  the  other  14  Judges,  or  Lords  of'Sef- 
fion  ;  which  is  the  fupreme  Civil  Judicature  of  Scotland', 
over  which  are  Apartments  for  the  Lords  of  Exchequer. 
In  May  1752,  a  fine  Marble  Statue  of  Duncan 
Forbe^  Eiq;  late  Lord  Prefident  of  the  Court  of  Seflion, 
was  fet  up  in  the  Outer  Parliament-houfe.  His  great 
Merits,  Loyalty,  and  Abilities,  are  too  well  known, 
to  need  Encomiums  here.  He  is  reprefented  fitting  in 
his  Robes,  Papers  in  his  Left-hand,  leaning  upon  the 
Chair,  the  other  extended.  The  following  Infcrip- 
lion  is  placed  below  it  in  gilt  Letters  : 

DVNCANO  FORBES  DE  CVLLODEN, 

IN  CIVILIBYS  CvRIJE  PR^FECTI, 
INTEGERRIMO, 

ClVI  OPTIMO, 

VlRTVTIS     VlRO, 

FACVLTAS  JVRIDICA  LIBENS  POSVIT, 

ANNO  POST  OBITVM  QVINTO. 

C.  N.  M,DCC,LII. 


EflgKJbed  : 

To  Duncan  Forbes  c/'Culloden,  Prefident  of  the  Su- 
preme Civil  Court)  a  moft  upright  Judge,  a  mofl 
valuable  Citizen  >  a  Man  of  unbkmijhed  Virtue  ,  the. 

Faculty, 


A  TOUR  thro"  Scot!. 

Faculty  of  Advocates  with  Pleafure  creeled  this* 
Monument,  in  the  fifth  Tear  after  his  Deceafe^ 
A.  D.  1752. 

In  the  Lower-part,  under  the  Parliament-houfe,  is  a 
noble  Library  of  Books  and  MSS.  belonging  to  the 
College  of  Juftice,  or  Gentlemen  of  the  Law. 

The  great  Opening  into  the  high  Street  being  the 
only  Pafiage  into  it  for  Coaches,  is  at  the  North-eaft 
Corner,  a  little  from  which  is  the  Market  crofs,  where 
all  their  Proclamations  and  public  A6ls  are  read  and 
publifhed  by  Heralds,  and  Sound  of  Trumpet.  Here 
is  the  great  Parade,  where  Gentlemen  meet  for  Bufmefs 
or  News,  as  at  the  Exchange,  every  Day  from  eleven 
to  one. 

Near  the  Weft-end  of  the  great  Church  ftands  the 
Tolbooth^  or  common  Prifon,  as  well  for  Criminals  as 
for  Debtors.  It  was  formerly  the  Place  of  Refidence 
for  the  Provoft  of  St.  G/V«'s,  as  moft  of  the  adjacent 
Houfes  were  for  the  Canons  and  Chorifters  of  that 
Church. 

The  great  Church,  and  this  Prifon,  both  Handing 
in  the  Middle  of  the  Street,  the  Breadth  and  Beauty  of 
it  is  for  fome  Space  interrupted  ;  but,  thofe  Buildings 
paft,  the  Street  opens  again  to  its  former  Breadth,  and 
is  now  called  the  Lawn  market >  from  the  Linen-market 
being  kept  there.  This  Part  of  the  Street  extends 
Weft  to  a  narrower  one,  which  leads  to  the  Cajtle- 
hill.  At  the  upper  end  of  it  is  a  Stone  Building  ap- 
propriated to  feveral  public  Offices  of  lefler  Value,, 
called  the  Weigh-houfe ;  for  below  Stairs  are  Ware- 
houfes,  with  public  Weights  and  Scales  for  weighing 
heavy  Goods. 

Here  the  Street  parts  into  two,  one  of  which  leads 
to  the  Co/tle-hill,  as  already  noticed  ;  and  the  other 
turns  South-weft,  and,  defcending  gradually,  leads  to 
the  Grafs -market,  a  Place  very  like  Smith f  eld  in  every 
refped,  where  is  kept  a  weekly  Market  for  Black 

Cattle* 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  91 

Cattle,  Sheep,  Horfes,  fcfc.  This  Street,  which  is 
called  the  Weft-bow^  is  inhabited  moftly  by  Whole- 
fale  Dealers  in  Iron,  Pitch,  Tar,  Oil,  Hemp,  Flax, 
Linfeed,  Drugs,  Woads,  and  fuch-like  heavy  Goods. 
This  City  hath  feven  Gates,  or  Ports,  as  they  are 
here  called,  viz. 

1.  The  Nether-bow  Port  :  This  is  the  chief  Gate  ; 
it  was  magnificently  built  in  1606,  and  adorned  with 
Towers  on  both  Sides,  and  a  fine  Spire  a- top.     This 
is  the  Entrance  from  the  Palace,  and  the  principal 
Suburb  called  the  Canon-gate. 

2.  The  Cow-gate  Port^  at  the  Eaft-end,  likewife 
gives  Entrance  to  the  Street  of  that  Name,  leading  to 
the  Abbey  by  a  Backway. 

3.  The  Potter-row  Portt  gives  Entrance  to  the 
Suburb  fo  called,  and  leads  to.  Dalkeitb,  Kelfo,  &c. 
Southward. 

4.  The  Society  Port,  fo  called  from  the  Society  of 
Brewers,  who  had  a  great  fquare  Court  near  it,  now 
built  into  an  handfome  fquare,  after  the  Engli/b  man- 
ner. 

5.  The  Weft  Port,  the  only  Gate  at  the  Weft-end 
of  the  City,  which  leads  through  a  large  Suburb  to 
Glafgow,  Stirling^  Queens -ferry,  and  from  thence  to 
the  Weft  and  North  Highlands. 

6.  The  New  Port,  at  the  Eaft-end  of  the  Lake, 
leading  Northward  towards  a  Village  called  Mouter's 
Hill  and  Lelth. 

7.  The  College-kirk  Pert,  leading  alfo  to  Leith. 
The  Markets  here  are  very  well  fupplied  with  all 

the  Neceffaries  of  Life,  and  are  moftly  kept  in  diftincl 
Market-places  walled  in,  and  referved  for  the  parti- 
cular Things  they  are  appointed  for;  fuch  as, 


1.  The  Meal  Market. 

2.  The  Flefli  Market. 

3.  The  Poultry  Market. 


4.  The  Fifh  Market. 

5.  The  Corn  Market. 

6.  The  Leather  Market. 


9  2  A  T  O  U  R  thro  ScotL 

Befides  thefe,  is  a  Weekly  Market  for  all  Sorts  of 
Woolen  Manufactures,  and  Linen  Cloth,  kept  in  that 
Part  of  the  high  Street  called  the  Lawn  Market.,, 
juft  now  mentioned.  In  the  fame  Street,  below  the 
Crofs,  is  an  Herb  and  Fruit  Market  kept  every  Morn- 
ing, which  abates  before  Noon,  fo  that  it  is  no  In- 
cumbrance.  The  Market  for  Black  Cattle,  Sheep, 
Hoifes,  and  Grafs,  is  kept  in  that  Lrge  Space  of 
Ground  within  the  Weft  Porty  called  the  Grafs 
Market. 

On  the  South  fide  of  the  City,  towards  the  Eaft- 
end,  {lands  a  large  Building,  erected  at  the  Charge  of 
the  Surgeons  and  Apothecaries  of  this  City,  in  which 
is  their  great  Hall,  hung  round  with  the  Pi&ures  of  all 
the  eminent  Surgeons  of  this  Place,  that  have  flourifh- 
ed  fince  this  Building  was  founded.  Here  they  have 
alfo  a  Theatre  for  DilTecVions,  and  a  Chamber  of 
Rarities,  in  which  are  feveral  Skeletons  of  uncommon 
Creatures,  a  Mummy,  and  many  other  Curiofities. 

Near  the  Potter-row  Port  ftands  the  College,  or 
Univerfity.  It  confifts  of  three  Courts,  two  lower, 
and  one  higher,  equal  to  the  other  two.  Thefe 
Courts  are  encompafled  with  neat  Buildings  for  the 
Ufe  of  fuch  Students  as  pleafe  to  lodge  in  them ;  for 
they  do  not  live  in  common,  nor  are  they  obliged  to 
refide,  but  only  to  attend  their  Clafles  at  certain 
Hours.  There  is  an  high  Tower  over  the  great  Gate, 
looking  to  the  City. 

The  Public  Schools  are  large  and  commodious : 
there  are  Accommodations  for  Students,  handfome 
Dwellings  for  the  ProfeiFors,  and  fine  Gardens  for 
their  Recreation.  It  was  founded  in  1580,  by  King 
James  VI.  upon  a  Petition  from  the  City  to  grant 
them  a  Charter  with  the  Privilege  of  an  Univerfity; 
but  the  Foundation  was  not  perfected  till  1582.  The 
Perfons  eftablifhed  by  the  Foundation  were,  a  Prin- 
cipal or  Primate,  a  ProfefTor  of  Divinity,  four  Regents 
or  Mailers  of  Philofophy,  and  a  ProfefTor  of  Philology 

called 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  93 

called  Prof.  Humaniorum  Literarum,  or  Regent  of 
Humanity.  In  1640,  the  Town  added  a  ProfeiTor  of 
Mathematics  :  to  which  have  been  lately  added  Pro- 
feflbrs  of  Ecclefiaftical  Hiftory,  Civil  Law,  Theoretical 
and  Practical  Medicine,  Chymiftry,  C5V.  The  Dig- 
nity of  Chancellor  and  Vice-chancellor  of  the  Uni- 
verfity  is  in  the  Lord  Provoft  and  Town-council. 

They  have  a  good  Library,  which  was  founded  by 
Clement  Little^  one  of  the  Commiflaries  of  Edinburgh; 
fince  which  it  is  much  increafed  by  Donations  from  the 
Citizens,  Perfons  of  .Quality,  and  others,  who  had  the  r 
Education  there.  The  Library  is  neatly  kept,  well 
furnifhed  with  Books  put  in  very  good  Order,  cloifter- 
ed  with  Wire  Doors,  which  none  but  the  Keeper  can 
open,  which  is  more  commodious,  and  lefs  encum- 
bering, than  Multitudes  of  Chains,  commonly  ufed  in 
other  Libraries.  The  Books  given  by  the  grand  Be- 
nefactors are  kept  in  dillindt  Apartments,  and  the 
Donor's  Name  over  them  in  Letters  of  Gold. 

Over  the  Books  hang  the  Pictures  of  feveral  Princes, 
and  of  the  moft  eminent  Reformers  at  Home  and 
Abroad  ;  and  near  them  is  kept  the  Skull  of  the 

v<us  Buchanan^  very  intlre,  and  fo  thin,  that  the 
Light  may  be  feen  through  it.  It  was  depofitcd  there 
by  Mr.  Mamfon^  formerly  Principal  of  the  Univerfity, 
who  procured  it  to  be  taken  out  of  his  Grave,  and 
faitened  fome  Latin  Verfes  to  it  in  his  Commendation. 
The  Original  of  the  Bohemian  Proteft  againft  the 
Council  of  Conftance^  for  burning  'John  Hus  and  Je- 
r owe  rf  Prague,  dnno  1417,  is  there,  with  105  Seals 
of  Bohemian  and  Moravian  Grandees  annexed  to  it. 
It  was  procured  by  a  Scots  Gentleman  in  his  Travels, 
and  given  to  the  Univerfity. 

At  'the  farther  End  of  the  Library,  is  a  Staircafe, 
which  leads  to  the  higher  and  lower  Common  Halls, 
where  they  hold  their  Commencements  and  College- 
Entertainments.  In  this  Plac*  are  feveral  Mans, 
Globes,  Books,  and  Rarities ;  and,  among  others,  a 

crooked 


94  A  TOUR  tbro  Scot! 

crooked  Horn,  cut  out  of  a  Woman's  Head  when 
50  Years  old,  and  who  lived  12  Years  after  it.  It  is 
feveral  Inches  long,  and  was  taken  out  of  her  Head  by 
a  Surgeon  Anno  1671.  Here  alfo  are  Le&ures  read, 
Exercifes  performed,  and  Apartments  for  the  Profeflor 
of  Divinity  to  teach  his  Pupils  in,  and  for  a  felecl  Li- 
brary proper  for  Divines. 

In  this  higher  Common  Hall,  which  is  a  very  fpa- 
cious  Room,  are  placed  fuch  Books  as  have  been 
bought  by,  or  given  to  the  College,  fmce  the  Library 
below  was  full ;  and  in  the  South-end  of  it  is  a 
curious  and  noble  Mufeum,  collected  by  the  very 
eminent  Sir  Andrew  Balfour.  It  contains  a  vaft 
Treafure  of  Curiofities  of  Art  and  Nature,  domeftic 
and  foreign,  from  almoft  all  Parts  of  the  World  j  and 
is  greatly  valued  by  the  Virtuofi,  containing  fome 
Rarities  that  are  not  to  be  found,  either  in  thofe  of 
the  Royal  Society  at  London^  or  the  AJhmokan  at  Oxford. 
Sir  Robert  Sibbald,  having  a  Mind  to  engraft  his  Name 
and  Merit  on  that  of  the  celebrated  Balfour^  made  a 
Prefent  of  a  great  Number  of  Shells,  and  other  Curi- 
ofities, to  the  College,  on  Condition  the  Magiftrates 
would  print  the  Account  of  it,  called,  Auftarium  Mu- 
fei  Ealfouriam  e  Mufeo  Sibbaldiano  j  to  which  I  refer 
the  Reader. 

Eaftward  from  the  College  is  the  High-fchool,  well 
endowed,  and  with  proper  Apartments  for  one  Matter 
and  four  Ufhers,  who  teach  Youth  Grammar  and 
Rhetoric. 

In  Gray's-dofe^  near  the  Cowgate  Port^  is  the  Mint- 
houfe,  in  a  large  Court,  with  neat  and  convenient 
Buildings,  and  other  Accommodations  for  the  Mailer, 
Officers,  and  Workmen.  It  is  now  difufed  for  that 
Purpofe  ;  and  is  a  San&uary,  or  a  Place  of  Privilege. 

At  a  fmall  Diftance  from  the  College  are  two  neat 
Hofpitals,  with  pretty  Gardens  to  each  of  them  ;  and 
a  little  farther  is  the  Church-yard  of  the  Francljcans^ 
or  Grey-frifrs,  the  common  Burial-place  for  the  whole 

City 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  9^ 

City  within  the  Walls,  where  are  a  great  many 
curious  Monuments.  It  contains  about  two  Acres  of 
Ground. 

Adjoining  to  it  is  Herlct's  Hofpital,  a  large  and 
{lately  Building,  the  moft  magnificent  of  its  Kind  in 
the  World,  adorned  with  a  confecrated  Chapel,  large 
Walks,  delightful  Greens,  and  pleafant  Gardens.  It 
was  built  by  the  Reverend  Dr.  Rakanquat,  to  whom 
George  Heriot,  Jeweller  to  King  James  VI.  left  near 
17,000  Pounds,  to  be  difpofed  of  in  pious  Ufes,  which 
that  worthy  Dean  did,  by  building  and  endowing  this 
Houfe,  and  giving  Statutes  to  it,  which  he  ordered 
ihould  be  unalterable.  'Tis  a  Nurfery  for  an  inde- 
finite Number  of  the  Sons  of  Freemen,  who  are  main- 
tained, cloathed,  and  educated  in  ufeful  Learning,  till 
they  are  fit  for  Apprenticeship,  or  to  go  to  the  Uni- 
verfity,  where  they  are  allowed  handfome  Salaries  and 
Exhibitions. 

On  the  South-fide  of  the  City,  in  the  way  to  Leitb9 
is  a  beautiful  Collegiate  Church,  built  by  Queen  Mary 
of  Guelders,  Queen  to  King  James  II.  of  Scotland,  and 
decicated  to  the  Holy  Trinity,  but  now  parochial, 
though  nothing  but  the  Church  Part  was  ever  finimed, 

Near  it  is  S-t.  Thomas's  Hofyital;  wherein  old  de- 
cayed Citizens,  and  their  Widows,  are  very  decently 
provided  for,  and  allowed  a  Chaplain. 

Over-againft  it  is  Bridewell,  or  the  Houfe  of  Cor- 
re<Stion,  in  which  diflolute  People  undergo  Difcipline, 
and  are  kept  to  hard  Labour.  An  Apartment  is  in  it 
for  lunatic  and  diftraded  Perfons. 

Of  late  Years,  Mrs.  Hare  left  a  noble  Benefaclion 
for  a  new  Hofpital  for  Female  Orphans  of  decayed 
Freemen,  which  created  a  laudable  Emulation  in  many 
others,  whofe  united  Contributions  have  raifed  another 
for  the  fame  good  Purpofe. 

An  Infirmary,  called  the  Royal  Infirmary,  after  the 

Example  of  thofe  in  London,  Winchejhr,  &c.  is  erected 

at  Edinburgh^  by  the  liberal  Contribution   of  many 

6  well- 


96  ^TOURA&ro*  Scotl. 

well-difpofed  Perfons.  There  was  fo  general  a  Good- 
will to  the  Work,  that  the  like  Spirit  had  hardly  ever 
been  known  any-where.  The  Proprietors  of  feveral 
Stone-Quarries  made  Prefents  of  Stone  to  it ;  others 
of  Lime ;  Merchants  contributed  Timber ;  the  Wrights 
and  Mafons  were  not  wanting  in  their  Contributions ; 
the  neighbouring  Farmers  agreed  to  carry  Materials 
gratis  ;  the  Journeymen  Mafoiis  contributed  their  La- 
bour for  a  certain  Quantity  of  hewn  Stones  ;  and,  as 
this  Undertaking  is  for  the  Relief  of  the  difeafed,  lame, 
and  maimed  Poor,  even  the  Day-labourers  would  not 
be  exempted,  but  conditioned  to  work  a  Day  in  a 
Month  gratis  to  the  Eredion.  The  Ladies  too  con- 
tributed in  their  own  way  to  it;  for  they  appointed  an 
Affembly  for  the  Benefit  of  the  Work;  and,  it  being 
well  attended,  every  one  contributed  bountifully  to  it. 
It  has  met  with  no  fmall  Encouragement  from  the 
Nobility  and  Gentry  ;  and  his  Majefty  was  pleafed  to 
give  ioo/.  towards  it :  fo  that  it  is  really  a  noble 
Work. 

The  Phyficians  were  incorporated  in  1682  by  King 
Charles  II.  and  have  their  College  near  the  Nether-  bow 
in  the  Fountain -clofe.  They  are  c'efervedly  efteemed 
learned  and  able,  and  give  not  place  to  the  Phyficians 
of  any  Country. 

On  the  North-fide  of  the  City  is  a  neat  Phyfic- 
garden,  containing  fome  thoufands  of  Exotic  Plants 
and  Simples. 

The  City  is  governed  by  a  Lord  Provoft,  whofe 
Qilice  is  much  the  fame  with  that  of  the  Lord  Mayor 
of  London;  four  Bailiffs,  who,  befides  the  Power  of 
Aldermen  in  the  Government  of  this  City,  have  that 
of  Sheriffs,  and  a  Common- Council,  ordinarily  con- 
fiding of  25  Perfons,  but  extraordinarily  of  38.  All 
thefe  are  ciiofen  annually,  and  the  Provofr,  Dean  of 
Guild,  and  Treafurer,  are  to  be  Merchants  ;  or  if 
any  Tradefman  be  chofen,  he  muft  quit  his  Trade,  and 
noi  return  to  it  without  Leave  of  the  Magiitrates  and 

Town- 


Scot!.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  97 

Town- Council ;  and  he  muft  alfo  be  a  Year  or  two 
a  Member  of  the  Common-Council.  No  one  is  to 
continue  in  the  Council  above  two  Years  at  a  time, 
except  he  be  a  Member  of  it  by  virtue  of  a  fuperior 
Office.  The  Bailiffs  are  to  be  chofen  indifferently 
out  of  12  Candidates  propofed,  and  none  is  to  be 
elecled  Deacon  out  of  any  of  the  14  incorporated 
Trades,  except  he  has  been  Mailer  of  his  Trade  two 
Years  at  leaft ;  and  muft  not  continue  Deacon  above 
two  Years  at  a  time.  The  14  incorporated  Trades 
are :  ' 

Surgeons.  Taylors. 

Goldfmiths.  Bakers. 

Skinners.  Butchers. 

Farriers.  Cordwainers. 

Hammermen.  Weavers. 

Wrights.  Wakers,  i.  e.  Fullers. 

Mafons.  Bonnet-makers, 

The  Magistrates  are  chofen  annually  upon  the  Tuef- 
day  next  after  Michaelmas- day ',  by  38  Ele&ors,  where- 
of 20  are  to  be  Merchants  and  Tradefmen,  who  are 
to  chufe  fuch  as  in  their  Confcience  they  think  belt 
qualified  ;  and  thefe  Magiftrates,  and  the  Town- 
Council,  have  the  Admin iftration  of  the  Government, 
except  in  fome  referved  Cafes  ;  fuch  as  the  Election  of 
Magiftrates,  Dean  of  Guild  and  Treafurer,  and  fet- 
ting  of  Feus  or  Leafes,  giving  Boundaries  and  Places, 
and  other  public  Matters  ;  in  which  Cafes  they  are 
to  confult  the  14  Deacons  of  Trades. 

None  of  the  Merchants  or  Traders  are  to  have  any 
particular  Conventions,  or  make  any  By-laws  among 
themfelves  without  Confent  of  the  Magiftrates  and 
Town -Council,  except  to  chufe  their  own  Deacons 
at  the  appointed  Time,  t6  make  Perfons  free  of  their 
Trade,  or  to  try  their  Work  ;  and  one  of  the  Com- 
rniffioners  for  Parliament  was  always  to  be  chofen  out 
of  the  Tradefmen,  and  another  out  of  the  Merchants. 

Vol.  IV,  F  The 


98  A  T  O  U  R  thro  5cotl. 

The  Auditors  of  Accompts  are  to  be  chofen  out  of  an 
equal  Number  of  both.  The  Lord  Provoft,  Dean  of 
Guild,  and  Treafurer,  are  not  to  continue  longer  than 
two  Years  at  a  Time  ;  and  the  Bailiff  muft  be  one 
Year  a  Bailiff,  one  Year  Old  Bailiff,  and  one  Year 
free  of  Office.  Before  the  Union,  the  Lord  Provoft 
for  the  Time  being  was  always  one  of  the  Privy- 
Council. 

The  Trained  Bands  of  the  City  confift  of  16  Com- 
panies ;  befides  which,  they  have  a  Handing  Company 
of  Town  Guards. 

And  here  it  will  be  proper  to  take  notice  of  the 
notorious  Riot  committed  in  this  City  on  the  yth  of 
Sept.  1736,  in  relation  to  Captain  Porteous,  which 
made  fo  much  Noife,  and  brought,  down  upon  this 
famous  City  the  Refentment  of  the  Legiflature  of 
Great  Britain. 

The  Cafe  was  this :  One  Andrew  Wilfon  was  con- 
demned for  a  Robbery  of  the  public  Money,  com- 
mitted on  the  Highway;  and,  on  Wednesday  the  I4th 
of  dpril  1736,  the  Day  appointed  for  his  Execution, 
•  the  Magiftrates,  being  Epprehenfive  that  a  Refcue 
would  be  attempted,  ordered  Capt.  John  Portents^  at 
the  Head  of  a  Detachment  of  the  City- Guard,  to  at- 
tend the  Execution,  and  Powder  and  Ball  were  deli- 
vered to  them  for  that  Purpofe.  While  Wilfon  was 
hanging,  the  Populace  infifted  that  he  fhould  be  cut 
down  before  the  ufual  Time,  and,  being  refufed,  at- 
tempted to  do  it  by  Force;  and,  meeting  Opposition 
from  the  Captain  and  his  Guard,  they  outrageoufly 
pelted  them  with  Stones,  and  hurt  feveral  of  the  De- 
tachment. Hereupon  the  Captain  ordered  them-  (as 
he  was  accufed,  but  which  he  denied)  to  fire  ;  and, 
'  upon  the  Mob  continuing  their  Itifults,  and  the  Cap- 
tain's Men  firing  over  their  Heads  to  intimidate  them, 
the  Captain  ordered  them  to  level  their  Pieces,  and 
fired  himfelf,  both  which  however  he  denied  ;  and  by 
that  means  fix  Perfons  were  mortally  wounded,  and  14 

others 


•Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  99 

others  very  defperately  maimed  and  hurt.  Hereupon 
the  Captain  was  brought  to  his  Trial,  and,  on  a  very 
folemn  Hearing,  was  found  guilty  of  firing  a  Gun 
himfelf,  and  ordering  his  Men  to  fire  ;  and  fo  was 
condemned  to  be  hanged  upon  a  Gibbet,  on  the  8th 
of  Sept.  1736.  The  Captain  drew  up  a  Petition  to 
her  late  Majefty,  then  Regent  of  the  Kingdom,  in  the 
Abfenc«  of  the  King  ;  and  infifted  on  his  Innocence, 
praying  for  Mercy  ;  and,  great  Application  having 
been  made  to  her  Majefty  for  changing  the  Sentence 
to  Tranfportation,  a  Reprieve  for  fix  Weeks  was 
granted  :  which  arriving,  on  the  2d  of  September,  at 
Edinburgh^  occafioned  the  moft  extraordinary  Riot 
that  ever  was  known,  or  heard  of^  all  Circumftances 
confidered,  except  that  at  York  againft  the  Jruny  men- 
tioned in  its  Place. 

For,  on  the  jth  of  September,  the  Night  before  the 
Captain  was  to  be  executed,  had  he  not  been  re- 
prieved, about  10  at, Night,  fome  Men  by  Surprize 
entered  the  City,  and  feized  all  the  Fire-arms,  Battle- 
axes,  and  Drums  belonging  to  the  City-Guard. 

The  Mob  hereupon,  in  a  few  Minutes,  locked  and 
fecured  all  the  City-Gates,  and,  with  Drums  beating 
an  Alarm,  attempted  with  Hammers,  and  other  in  - 
itruments,  to  force  open,  the  [Tolbooth]  Prifon-door : 
but  failing,  they  defperately  fee  fire  to  it,  and  burnt  it. 
When  they  entered  the  Prifon,  they  made  the  Under- 
keeper  open  the  double  Locks  of  the  Apartment  where 
the  Captain  was.  He  begged  in  vain  to  be  fpared  till 
the  Afternoon  ;  and  making  fome  Refinance,  they 
dragged  him  down  Stairs  by  his  Legs,  and  hurried  him 
away.  This  was  about  1 1  at  Night,  ,and  they 
marched  out  with  Lights  before  them.  In  their  Way 
to  the  Grafs-Market,  pairing  by  a  Barber's  Sign-pofr, 
fome  called  out  to  hang  him  up  there ;  but  it  was 
refolved  to  hang  him  where  the  Murders,  for  wh  ci 
he  was  condemned,  were  committed.  So  they  pro- 
ceeded to  the  Place  where,  oa  Executions,  the  Gil- 
F  2  lews 


ioo  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

lows  ufed  to  be  fixed  ;  where  they  kept  him  above  a 
Quarter  of  an  Hour,  till  they  opened  a  Shop,  and 
brought  out  a  Rope,  one  End  of  which  they  threw 
over  a  Sign-poft  about  20  Feet  high.  He  defired 
fome  Time  to  prepare  for  Death  ;  but  was  anfwered, 
They  would  allow  him  no  more  than  thofe  had,  who 
were  {hot.  They  then  pulled  him  up  in  the  Drefs  in 
which  they  found  him;  viz.  a  Night-gown  and  Cap  : 
His  Hands  not  being  tied,  he  fixed  them  between  his 
Neck  and  the  Rope,  whereupon  one  with  a  Battle- ax 
flruck  at  his  Hands.  They  then  let  him  down,  and 
he  having  on  two  Shirts,  they  wrapt  one  of  them 
about  his  Face,  and  tied  his  Arms  with  hfs  Night- 
gown, and  then  pulled  him  up  again,  where  he' hung 
till  Day-light  next  Morning;  when  he  was  cut 
down,  and  carried  to  the  Grey-friers  Church.  Upon 
infpeding  his  Body,  it  appeared  his  Left-fhoulder  was 
wounded,  his  Back  difcoloured,  and  his  Neck  broken. 
He  denied  his  giving  Orders  to  fire,  with  his  laft 
Breath, 

It  was  obferved,  that  this  Mob  was  under  a  firicler 
Concert,  and  better  Conduct,  than  ufual  ;  for,  march- 
ing along  to  the  Execution,  the  unhappy  Man  ob- 
ferving  a  Gentleman  of  his  Acquaintance,  he  gave 
him  a  Purfe  of  23  Guineas,  which  he  defired  might  be 
delivered  to  his  Brother ;  which  they  offered  not  to 
obftruft.  They  left  indeed  the  Prifon  doors  open, 
whereby  feveral  Prifoners  efcaped  ;  but  after  they  had 
perpetrated  the  unprecedented  Fa6t,  they  left  the 
Arms  and  Drums  at  the  Place  of  Execution,  where 
they  were  found  next  Morning.  Moreover,  during 
the  Tumult,  Parties  of  armed  Men,  with  Drums,  pa- 
trolled in  the  different  Streets,  to  prevent  any  Surprize 
from  the  King's  Forces  quartered  in  the  Suburbs. 
The  Magistrates,  attended  with  feveral  of  the  Bur- 
geffes,  attempted,  as  was  faid,  to  difperfe  the  Mob  ; 
but  were  pelted  with  Stones.,  and  threatened  with 
Fire-arms,  if  they  did  not  retire.  After  the  Execution 

was 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.       101 

was  over,  they  went  to  the  Lord  ProvofPs  Houfe  ^ 
and,  telling  him  they  were  fatisfied,  departed,  without 
offering  any  other  Violence.  Nay,  it  is  faid,  that,  to 
do  the  A6t  with  more  Decency,  having  no  Clergy- 
man, they  ordered  two  of  the  gravelt  among  them  to 
exhort  the  unhappy  Man,  as  they  carried  him  to 
Execution. 

The  Boldnefs,  Secrecy,  and  Condudl  of  this  Enter- 
prize,  was  the  moft  extraordinary  Inftance  of  its  kind 
that  ever  was  known ;  and  the  Keeper  declaring,  that 
though  the  Perfons  who  firft  entered,  and  demanded 
the  Keys,  wore  Leather  Aprons,  they  were  other  wife 
well  drefied,  it  made  fome  imagine,  that  Perfons  above 
the  vulgar  Rank  had  an  Hand  in  it. 

Be  this  as  it  would,  the  Jnfult  on  the  Sovereign  Au- 
thority was  too  fiagrant  to  be  overlooked.  Procla- 
mations, with  Rewards  of  200  /.  Sterling,  were  ifTued 
for  apprehending  the  Rioters ;  and  when  the  Par- 
liament met,  vigorous  Meafures  were  taken  in  the 
Affair.  The  Lord  Provoft,  Alexander  Wilfon  by 
Name,  was  ordered  up  to  London  in  Cuftody  ;  the 
Magiftrates  were  ordered  up  alfo,  to  attend  the  Houfe 
of  Lords  at  London  ;  and  finally,  an  Act  of  Parliament 
was  pafled,  to  difable  the  faid  Alexander  Wilfon  from 
holding  or  enjoying  any  Office  of  Magiftracy  in  Edin- 
burgh, or  Great  Britain ;  a  new  Provcft  was  in- 
joined  to  be  chofen,  and  a  Fine  of  2000  /.  levied  on 
the  City  of  Edinburgh  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Widow  of 
Captain  Porteous^  as  Punifhments  for  their  refpe&ive 
RemiflhefTes  in  not  endeavouring  to  prevent  this  Infulfc 
on  Sovereignty,  and  all  lawful  Authority. 

This  A6t,  however,  pafled  not  without  great  De- 
bates ;  and  as  fome  thought  it  impoflible  to  prevent  a 
Defign  fo  well  concerted,  and  fo  fuddenly  and  boldly 
executed,  they  were  of  Opinion,  that  the  City  of 
Edinburgh  was  treated  with  too  much  Severity.  But, 
after  all,  it  could  not  be  expected  but  that  the  Legif- 
F  3  lature 


loz  A  TOUR  tbro  Scotf. 

lature  fhould  fhew  the  higeft  Indignation  ^gaiaft  fo 
infolent  a  Riot. 

This  A&  was  pafled  in  the  loth  Year  of  his  Ma<- 
Jefty,  and  in  the  fame  Year  was  alfo  pafled  another, 
for  the  more  effe&ual  bringing  to  Juftice  any  Perfons 
concerned  in  this  flrange  Attempt ;  in  which  Fugitives, 
not  furrendering  were  made  liable  to  Death  ;  the 
Concealing  of  thofe  who  fhould  be  declared  Fugitives 
•was  alfo  made  Death.  This  A£t  was  to  be  read  before 
Morning  Sermon  in  every  Church  of  Scotland^  every 
Sunday  for  a  Year:  Impeachers  were -to  be  encou- 
raged, and  difcharged  ;  Informers  rewarded  with  20O/. 
Sterling  for  every  Perfon  they  fhould  convi£t>  and  be 
admitted  Witnefles. 

But  fo  fecretly  was  this  dark  Affair  managed,  that  I 
don't  remember  any-body  has  fuffered  on  the  Account ; 
and  the  Reading  of  the  Acl  was  but  indifferently  di- 
gefted  by  many  in  that  Kingdom. 

Great  Seventy  was  intended ;  fuch  as  the  impri- 
foning,  as  well  as  difqualifying  the  Lord  Provoft  for  a, 
Year ;  the  aboli/hing  the  Town-guard  of  the  City  of 
Edinburgh,  and  the  taking  away  the  Gates  of  the 
Nether- bow.  Port^  and  keeping  open  the  fame.  But 
the  City  of  Edinburgh  was  happily  faved  from  this 
P;fgrace. 

The.  Churches  in  this  populous  City  and  Suburb*, 
are  12,  including  the  Chapel  of  the  Cattle;   the  Mir- 
nifters  about  20  ;  befides  three  Chapels. 
The  12  Churches  are  : 

j.  The  Csnon- gate  Kirk. 

2.  The  Collegiate,  or  College  Kirk. 

3.  The  Trone  Kirk,  or  Chrift's  Kirk, 

4.  The  New  Kirk.         -) 

5.  The  Old  Kirk.  /All  thefe  are  Parts  of  the 

6.  The  Tolbooth  Kirk,  f   Cathedral  of  St.  Giles's*. 

#.  The  Lady  r^AKirk^ 

9,  10.  Th? 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  103 

9.  1 0.  The  Grey-friers  Kirk,  now  divided  into  two* 

jr.  The  Weft  Kirk,  or  St.  CutUerSs. 

12.  The  .Chapel  of  the  Caftle. 

There  are  alfo  about  20  Meeting-houfes  of  the 
Epifcopal  Party;  for  though  Preibytery  be  the  efta- 
bliihed  Religion  of  Scotland  fince  the  Revolution,  yet  a 
great  Number  of  the  People  of  all  Ranks  are  not  of 
that  Profeftion,  efpecially  in  the  Northern  Parts. 

The  Churches  are  always  very  full ;  for  the  People 
in  this  Country  do  not  wander  about  on  the  Sabbath- 
days,,  as  in  England.  They  have  alfo  one  very  good 
Cuftom  as  to  their  Behaviour  in  Church,  which  I  wifti 
was  pra&ifed  in  England:  if  any  Perfon  comes  in 
after  Divine  Service  is  begun,  he  takes  no  notice  of 
any  body,  nor  any  body  oT  him  ;  whereas  the  Englljb 
make  Bows  and  Cringes,  even  in  the  Middle  of 
Prayers.  Not  that  the  Scots  want  Manners  j  for  they 
fhe\y  them  more  properly  after  the  Sermon  is  done,  and 
the  Bleffing  given,  when  they  all  look  round  upon 
their  Friends,  efpecially  to  Perfons  of  Diftinclion,  ar,=l 
make  their  Civilities  aa  courteoufly  as  their  Southern 
Neighbours. 

The  City  is  encom pafled  with  a  kind  of  Roman 
Wall  on  every  Side,  except  the  North,  where  it  is 
fecured  by  a  Lake. 

The  Caftle  only,  and  the  Palace,  remain  to  be  men- 
tioned. The  firft  is  ftrong  both  by  Situation  and  Art, 
but  far  from  being  impregnable,  as  has  been  expe- 
rienced more  than  once.  It  was  formerly  called  the 
'Maiden  Caftle,  becaufe  the  Piftijb  Kings  kept  their 
Daughters  in  it.  Still  more  antiently  it  was  called 
Alatum  Cojlrum,  or  the  Winged  Co/lie,  perhaps  from 
its  Form,  and  {landing  on  fo  high  an  Hill,  as  it  were 
in  the  Air.  It  is  fituated  at  the  Weft- end  of  the 
City,  'as  we  have  faid,  where  the  Rock  rifes  to  an 
high  and  large  Summit.  'Tis  inaccefiible  on  the 
South,  Weft,  and  North.  The  Entrance  is  from  the 
Town,  where  the  Rock  is  alfo  very  high  -,  and  is  de- 
F  fended 


104  4  TOUR  thro  ScotL 

fended  by  a  round  Battery",  and  an  Out-work  at  the 
Foot  of  it.  In  the  Cattle  is  a  Royal  Palace  of  hewn 
Stone,  where  are  kept  the  Regalia,  and  chief  Records 
of  State,  as  alfo  the  Magazine  for  the  Arms  and  Am- 
munition of  the  Public. 

A  Chapel  is  alfo  in  it  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Garrifon ';. 
and  it  is  furnifhed  with  Water  by  two  Wells  in  the 
Rock.  From  the  Caftle  is  a  delightful  Profpecl  over 
the  City  and  neighbouring  Country,  and  to  the  River 
of  Forth,  from  whence  it  is  faluted  by  fuch  Men  of 
War  as  come  to  Anchor  in  Leiih  Road.  The  Go- 
vernor is  always  a  Perfon  of  prime  Quality,  and  Ge- 
neral of  the  Forces. 

The  Governor,  Lieutenant- Governor,  Fort-Major, 
and  fome  other  Officers,  have  very  good  Apartments ; 
and  there  are  deep  Vaults  in  the  Rock,  which,  they 
fay,  are  Bomb-proof. 

The  Palace,  called  Holy-rood-boufe^  is  a  very  hand- 
fome  Building.  The  Entrance  is  majeftic,  and  over 
the  Gate  is  a  large  Apartment,  which  the  Duke  of 
Hamilton  claims  as  Hereditary  Keeper  of  the  Palace.. 
Within  this  is  a  large  irregular  Court,  where  are 
Coach- houfes  and  Stables,  which,  I  think,  are  very 
improperly  placed  here  ;  for  if  they  had  flood  farther 
off,  either  in  the  Park,  or  without  the  Out- gate,  and 
a  Barrack,  or  Guard-houfe,  like  the  Horfe-guards  at 
Wtntehall)  built  in  their  ilead,  it  would  have  been 
much  more  becoming  a  Royal  Palace. 

This  may  be  called  the  EJturial  of  Scotland,  being 
both  a  Royal  Palace,  and  an  Abbey,  founded  by  King 
David  I.  for  Canons  Regular  of  St.  Aujlin^  who 
named  it  Holy-rood-boufe*  The  Entrance  from  the 
great  outer  Court,  already  defcribed,  is  adorned  with 
Pillars  of  hewn  Stone,  under  a  Cupola  in  the  Form  of 
an  Imperial  Crown,  baluftraded  on  each  Side  a-top. 
The  Fore- part  has  two  Wings,  on  each  of  which  are 
two  Turrets;  that  towards  the  North  was  built  by 
V",  whofe  Name  it  bears  in  Letters  of 

Gold  s 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  105. 

Gold  ;  and  that  towards  the  South  (ap  well  as  all  the 
reft)  by  King  Charles  II.  whereof  Sir  William  Brttce 
was  Architect.  The  inner  Court  is  very  ftately,  all 
of  Free-ftbne  well  hewed,  with  Piazzas  round  it,  from 
which  are  Entries  into  the  feveral  Apartments,  truly 
royal  and  magnificent ;  but,  above  all,  the  Long- 
Gallery  is  very  remarkable,  being  adorned  with  the 
Pictures  of  all  the  Scots  Kings  from  Fergus  I.  to 
James  VII.  inclufive,  by  mafterly  Hands.  Thofe 
Kings  who  were  eminent,  and  all  the  Race  of  Stuarts% 
are  in  full  Length  ;  the  others  are  but  Buftoes. 

You  turn  to  the  Right  to  the  Royal  Apartments,  as 
at  St.  James's;  and  the  Stair-cafe  and  Guardroom,' 
run  exactly  as  there,  but  far  more  lofty  and  magni- 
ficent. Duke  Hamilton's  Apartment  (as  Hereditaiy 
Keeper)  is  in  the  double  Tower  to  the  North,  and 
the  great  Council-Chamber  in  the  Tower  to  the  South. 
The  Earl  of  Perth,  when  Chancellor,  in  the  late  King 
Jkmefs  Reign,  converted  this  noble  Room  into  a 
ropifh  Chapel,  and  his  Apartment  behind  it  was  the 
Jefuits  School,  which,  being  demolished  by  the  Mob 
at  the  Revolution,  has  been  neglected  ever  fince.  The 
Chimney-pieces  are  all  of  Marble,  and  the  Apart- 
ments two  Pair  of  Stairs  for  the  Officers  of  State  are 
very  well  kept,  being  lent  to  feveral  of  the  Nobility, 
who  now  live  in  them. 

Behind  this  Palace,  the  Conventual  Church  makes 
a  V/ing  to  the  North  ;  and  Eaflward  from  it  is  St; 
Annfs-yard)  which  was  defigned  to  be  branched  out 
into  Gravel- walks,  adorned  with  Statues  ;  but  the  Re- 
volution coming  on,  attended  with  a  long  and  expen- 
five  War,  and  afterwards  the  Union  with  England^ 
prevented  its  being  put  in  Execution. 

The  Church  is  very  high  to  the  Roof,  and  the  Pil- 
lars are  as  exquifite  as  thofe  of  St.  George's  Chapel  at 
Windfor*.  Iris  an  an  dent,  very  reverend1,  but  decline- 
ing  Fabric,  and  ufed  only  as  a  Burial-place  forPerfons- 
»f  Quality,  Iu  it  King  James  VI.  was  crowned  by 
F  5  Biihop 


io6  'A  T  O  U  R  tlrf  ScotL 

Bifhop  Hepburn,  affiiled  by  'John  Knox>  as  was  King 
Charles  I.  by  Archbifhop  Spotfwood. 

King  James  VII.  began  to  erect  a  magnificent 
Throne  here  for  the  Sovereign,  and  12  Stalls  for  the 
12  Knights  Companions  of  the  moft  noble  and  an- 
tient  Order  of  St.  Andrew,  or  the  Thiftle,  which  he 
had  revived  after  a  long  Difufe.  The  fineft  Carvers 
and  Matters  in  Europe  were  employed  in  it.  But  at 
the  Revolution  the  Rabble  demolifhed  all,  and,  ran- 
facking  every  Corner,  fell  upon  a  Vault  quite  filled 
up,  fo  as  not  to  be  known  what  it  certainly  was,  ia 
\vhich  were  found  the  Bodies  of  King  Jajnes  V.  and 
Magdalene  cf  Valo'is^  his  firft  Queen,  together  with, 
IbordDarnley's,  all  embalmed,  and  preferved  in  Pickle; 
whereby  the  Malice  of  Buchanan,  and  others,  to 
blacken  Queen  Mary's  Memory,  was  difcovered  ;  for 
flie  gave  her  Hufband  a  Royal  Funeral,  fuitable  to 
his  high  Dignity,  and  did  not  carry  him  by  Porters  pri- 
vately to  a  common  Burial-place,  as  that  Author  had 
afierted  *. 

The  adjoining  Park  is  about  four  Miles  in-.Circum* 
ference  ;  but,  which  is  very  odd,  there  is  neither  Deer' 
nor  Tree  in  it,  though  it  affords  good  Pafture  for  Cat- 
tle. There  is  a  very  high  and  craggy  Rock  in  it,  near 
half  a  Mile  to  the  top,  called  Arthur's  Seat^  from  Ar~ 
tbur  the  Britijb  King,  who,  they  fay,  ufed  to  view  the 
adjacent  Country  from  thence. 

This  Palace,  or  Abbey,  and  Park,  is  a  San&uary  for 
Debtors;  and  no  one,  but  by  afpecial  Warrant  from 
the  Lords  of  Seffion  (which  there  are  few  Examples  of- 
their  granting),  can  arreft  any  Man,  who  has  entered 
his  Name  in  an  Office  kept  there  for  that  Purpofe. 

It  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve,  that  according  to 
feveral  A£s  of  Parliament,  divers  great  public  Works 
have  been  undertaken^  and  moftly  brought  to  Perfec- 
tion, for  the  Benefit  of  the  City  of  Edinburgh,  and 

Town 

*  Lord  Damlty  was  feven  Eeet  eight  Inches  in  Stature ;  a  very 
Peonage  once!: 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  107 

Town  of  Leitby  and  their  Vicinities,  within  thefefew 
Years  paft,  by  Benefit  partly  of  the  eafy  Scottjb  Tax 
of  two  Pennies  Scots  on  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale  and 
Beer  fold  in  the  faid  City;  and  partly  of  the  Difcon- 
tinuance  of  what  they  called  the  Petty  port  Cujlotm- 
there  :  fome  of  which  Woiks  are  as  follow  : 

The  Magiftratefhave,  at  agreatExpence,  collected 
the  Springs,  and  renewed  the  Pipes,  which  convey 
Water  to  the  Town ;  rebuilt  the  Fountains  in  the 
High-ftreet;  enlarged  the  Harbour  of  Leitb,  and 
deepened  its  Channel ;  have  built  feveral  hundred  Feet 
of  Quay  there  in  a  very  fufficient  manner ;  have  built 
two  new  Churches ;  have  paved,  at  a  great  Expence, 
with  Caufey-ftone,  the  whole  High-ftreets  and  Way 
leading  to  their  City;  have  made  a  good  Highway 
from  Edinburgh  to  Leitb  ;  have  built  a  large  Work- 
houfe  for  the  Poor,  to  be  employed  in  Manufactures, 
and  endowed  the  fame  with  300  /.  per  Annum ;  alfo 
have  fettled  Salaries  on  the  Law-ProfefTor  at  Edinburgh^ 
and  Stipends  onthe  Minifters  of  the  two  new  Churches  j 
have  rebuilt  the  City  Walls ;  and  taken  Meafures  for 
paying  their  old  Debts,  as  well  as  thofe  incurred  on 
account  of  the  Rebellion  in  1715. 

They  further  propofed  alfo,  by  means-  of  this  Fund? 
to  narrow  the  noxious  Lake  on  the  North-fide  of  the 
Gity,  commonly  called  the  North- Loch^  into  a  Canal 
of  running  Water;  to  ereft  a  Street  of  Communication 
to  the  Fields,  on  the  North- fide  of  the  City  ;  to  build  a 
proper  Hall  for  the  Court  of  Justiciary,  and  an  Edifice 
for  the  public  Records ;  to  eftablifn  a  Salary  to  a  Pro- 
feiTor  of  Civil  Hiftory,  and  Greek  and  Roman  Antiqui- 
ties ;  another  to  a  Profefior  of  Scots  Law,  and  other 
public-fpirited  Purpofes.  And  all  this  is  provided  for 
and  eftablifhed  by  an  Adi,  which  palled  9  Gtorgel* 
Jnn&  1722.  confirming  and  continuing  a  Scotijh  Adt  of 
Pailiament  in  1693.  and  an  Act  of  3  George;!,  to 
which  -Aft  of  o  George  I.  we- refer  the  Reader, 

£  6  IflwII 


Scott. 


108 

I  fhall  juft  ftop  to  mention  an  odd  Circumftance,, 
that  was  of  fatal  Confequence  to  the  poor  Dogs  about 
Edinburgh  and  Leith,  in  the  Month  of  jfpril  1738. 
A  mad  Bull-bitch  having  bitten  many  Dogs  in  thcFleJb- 
market,  to  prevent  the  bad  Confequences  that  might 
follow,  the  Magistrates  of  Edinburgh  iffued  a  Proclama- 
tion, ordering  all  the  Dogs  in  that  Incorporation  to  be 
forthwith  put  to  Death,  under  Penalty  of  5  /.  Sterling, 
and  Imprifonment  to  the  Owners  for  12  Calendar 
Months ;  and  to  prohibit  all  Perfons  from  keeping^ 
Dogs  for  30  Days  from  that  Time :  and  the  Magi- 
Iforates  of  Leith  joining  in  the  Order,  nothing  was  to  be. 
feen  for  feveral  Days,  but  chafing,  hacking,  flafhing, 
hanging,  and  drowning  of  Dogs ;  and  great  Lamenta- 
tions were  heard  from  divers,  for  the  Lofs  of  their  fa- 
vourite Puppies ;  for  with  fuch  Zeal  was  this  Order  ex- 
ecuted, that  the  Ladies  had  enough  to  do  to  preferve 
any  of  their  Lap-dogs ;.  and,  as  it  was,  many  Gentle- 
men got  rid  by  it  of  formidable  Rivals. 

The  following  odd  Accident  happened  at  Edinburgh^. 
inSeptember  1740.  A  Soldier  belonging  to  the  Regi- 
ment in  the  Cannon- gate,  went  to  the  King's  Park  on  a 
Sheep-ftealing  Expedition,  where  he  unluckily  happen- 
ed to  engage  with  a  large  headftrong  Ram,  near  one 
'of  the  Precipices  at  Arthur's  Seat,  mentioned  above, 
xvhich  pulhed  him  headlong  from  the  Top  of  the  Rock, 
fo  that  they  both  fell  down  together,  and  had  their  Necks . 
broke.  The  unhappy  Fellow  was  found  next  Morn- 
ing with  an  Handful  of  the  Ram's  Wool  clenched  in 
hisFift. 

Hawthornden,  four  Miles  Southward  from  Edin- 
lurgh,  is  celebrated  for  its  Caves  hewn  out. of  the.. 
Rock;  and* 

Rcjlln  for  an  antient  Chapel  of  exquifite  Workman- 
fhip.  It  is  the  only  thing  of  its  kind  that  efcaped  the 
Fury  of  the  firfl  Reformers.  It  is  a  Gothic  Building, 
on  the  Outfide,  each  Etuttrefs  being  adorned]  with 
Statues,  as  big  as  the  Life,  in  the  Niches,  a,nd  of  each 


•Scott.        GREAT  BRITAIN..          10$ 

Side  of  the  Windows,  which  are  very  fpacious.  This 
Chapel  lies  in  Midf  Lothian^  four  Miles  from  Edin- 
burgh. The  Foundation  was  laid  in  1.440.  by  William 
St.  Glair )  Prince  of  Orkney^  Duke  of  Holdenbourg;  &c*. 
It  is  remakable  in  all  chis  Work,  that  there  are  not 
two  Cuts  of  one  Sort.  The  moft  curious  Part  of  this 
Building  is.  the  Vault  of  the  Choir,  and  that  which  is 
called  the  Princefs's  Pillar.  This  Chapel  was  poflefs'd 
by  a  Provoft,  and  feven  Canons  Regular,  who  were 
endowed  with  feveral  confiderable  Revenues,  through 
the  Liberality  of  the  Lords  of  Rofiln. 

Here  lies  buried  George  Earl  of  Caithnefi,  who  lived 
about  the  Beginning  of  the  Reformation ;  Alexander 
Earl  of  Sutherland^  Great  Grandfon  of  K\t\g  Robert  de 
Bruce  \  the  Earls  ofOrfey,  and  nine  Barons  of  Rofiln. 
The  laft  lay  in  a  Vault  fo  dry,  that  their  Bodies  have 
been  found  entire,  after  fourfcore  Years,  and  as  frefh. 
as  when  they  were  firft  buried. 

This  Place  is  remarkable,  according  to  Bucbanan>, 
LeJJey^  and  other  Scotch  Hiftorians,  for  three  Viclories , 
obtained  over  the  Qnglijh  in  one  Day,,  in  the  Neigh- 
bourhood, by  John,Carminy  Governor  of  the  King- 
dom, and  John^  as  others  fay,  Simon  Frajer^  with  8oco, 
Men,  over  three  Bodies  of  the  Englljh^  confiding  of 
10,000  each,  the  latter  End  of 'February  1302, 

We  next  vifited  Leith,  the  Sea-port  of  Edinburgh^. 
which  is  a  large  and  populous  Town,  or  rather  two 
Towns ;  for  the  River  or  Harbour  parts  them  :  but 
they  are  joined  by  a  {lately  Stone  Bridge  of  one  large 
Arch,  to  which  Ships  of  Burthen  may  come,  and,  at. 
High- water,  lay  their  Sides  clofe  to  the  Shore. 

Here  is  a  very  fine  Quay,  well  wharfed   up  with, 
Stone,  and  fenced  with  Piles,  able  to  difcharge  much . 
more  Bufinefs  than  the  Place  can  fupply,  though  the 
Trade  is  far  from  being  inconfiderable.  .At  the  Mouth 
of  the  Harbour  is  a  very  long  and  well-built  Pier,  or 
Head, .which  runs  out  beyond  the  Land  a  great  way, 

defends  the  Entrance  into  the  Harbour  from  being 

filled 


'A  TOUR  tBrf  Scott 

filled  up  with  Sand,  as  it  would  other  wife  be,  when  the 
Wind  blows  hard  at  North-eaft.  There  are  alfo 
Ranges  of  Piles,  or  Break-waters,  as  the  Seamen  call 
them,  on  the  other  Side  of  the  Harbour,  all  which  are 
kept  in  good  Repair  ;  and,  by  this  means,  the  Harbour 
is  preferved,  and  kept  open,  in  fpiteofaflatShore,  and 
a  large  Swell  of  the  Sea. 

On  the  other  Side  of  the  Bridge  are  the  Remains  of 
a  ftrong  Caftle,  built  by  Oliver  Cromwell,  to  command 
the  Port,  which  is  not  yet  fo  far  demolifhed,  but  that  a 
little  Expence  would  reftore  it.  Here  the  Rebel 
Highlanders,  in  171.5.  nrade  a  bold  Stop,  and  took 
Pofleffion  of  it  for  one  Night;  bat  not  finding  their 
Friends  in  the  City  in  any  Condition  to  join  them, 
and  the  Troops  preparing  to  attack  them,  they  quitted 
it  in  the  Night,  and  marched  off  to  the  Earl  'of  IVin- 
frftVHoufe,  as  I  have  already  related. 

This  Town  was  once  very  ftrong  ;  for  the  French: 
held  it  for  fome  Years  againft  the  Reformers,  but  were 
at  laft  driven  out  by  an  Army  which  Queen  Elizabeth 
ft-nt  from  England  to  afiift  the  Proteftants.  It  is  under 
the  Jurifdi&ion  of  the  Magittrates  of  Edinburgh,  and  i*. 
governed  by  a  Bailiff  under  them.  Near  the  Water  at 
Leith  is  a  good  Copper- mine. 

At  Lehb  the  Forth  is  feven  Miles  over,  and  holds 
that  Breadth  for  five  or  fix  Miles ;  but  is  narrower  a 
little  beyond  Cramond>  and  at  Quetn's -firry,  is  reduced 
to  two  Mtfes  in  Breadth. 

Queens-ferry'^  a  fmall  Fifhing-Town  fituated  clofe 
by  the  Forth  Shore,  fuppoled  to  be  fo  called  from  St,. 
Margaret,  Queen  to  King  Malcolm  Canmore,  who  ufed 
to  ferry  over  here  as  the  Ihorteft  PafTage  to  Dumferm- 
ling,  where  (he  refided  much,  and  laid  the  Foundation, 
of  a .  Monaftery. 

In  the  Middle  of  the  Forth,  juft  oppofite  to  this  Vil- 
^  is  a  fmall  Ifland,  with  the  Remains  of  an  antient 
Caftle  upon  it.  Here  is  a  fine  flat  Corn  Country  along 
the  Banks  of  the  Eorth^^i  which-  we  have  a  conftant. 

V.iev/.- 


ScotL       GREAT  BRITAIN. 

View  on  the  Right ;  but  on  the  other  Side,  to 
Fifefbire*  we  fee  a  vaft  Ridge  of  Mountains. 

After  leaving  Leitb we  have  a  beautiful  Profpeft  of 
the  City  and  Caftle  of  Edinburgh  on  our  Left,  in  which 
the  whole  City  appears  not  unlike  an  huge  Caftle,  by 
reafon  of  the  Height  of  its  Houfes. 

At  Gramwid^  juft  mentioned,  and  in  the  Lands  of 
Ingle/town,  as  well  as  at  other  Places  in  this  County,, 
Roman  Antiquities  have  been  found  :  particularly,  near 
the  former  Place  were  dug  up  two  Stones,  late  in  Sir 
Robert  Sibbald's  Yard  at  Edinburgh,  upon  one  of  which, 
is  a  Laurel  Crown,  and  on  the  other  a  Roman  Securis; 
they  are  fuppofed  to  have  been  Part  of  a  Pillar  creeled 
in  Domitiaris  Time,  when  Agricda  was  in  thefe  Parts, 
Near  this  Place,  in  the  Beginning  of  December  1740.. 
a  Whale  between  50  and  60  Feet  in  Length,  and  16, 
in  Depth,  was  caft  on  Shore  ;  whofe  Mate  afterwards, 
tumbling  about  above  the  Ferry,  was  heard  to  make  an. 
hideous  Moan,  as  is  fuppofed,  for  its  Lofs. 

Between  Edinburgh  and  this  Town  the  Country  is 
thronged  with  the  Seats  of  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen; 
among  which  the  Marquis  of  Annandale  has  a  very- 
pretty  one,  with  a  fine  Garden  inclofed  with  a  Brick. 
Wall,  a  thing  hardly  to  be  feen  any-where  elfe  in< 
Scotland  ;  the  want  of  which  is  the  Reafon  why  the- 
Wall-fruit  doth  not  thrive  fo  well  as  it  would  other- 
wife  do;  for  the  Stone  does  not  hold  the  Warmth  of 
the  Sun,  after  it  is  gone,  as  the  Bricks  do. 

But  the  Beauty  of  this  Part  of  the  Country  is  Hop- 
ion  Houfe,  built  upon  a  delightful  Plain,  on  the  Bank 
of  the  River.  It  was  originally  a  Square;  but  there 
are  two  Wings  lately  joined  to  it,  which  add  greatly  to 
the  Beauty  of  the  Building.  The  Situation  is  fo  ex- 
tremely good,  and  gives  fo  elegant  a  Profpecl:  as  well' 
to  the  Sea  as  to  the  Land,  that  nothing  can  be  finer.. 
It  is  exquifitely  finifhed  both  within  and  without ;  and 
there  arafome  Pieces  of  curiousr Painting  in  it,  befides 

a  great 


'*  i  z  rA  T  O  U  R  tiro  ScotlV 

a  great  Number  of  Family  Pi&ures.  The  Stables  and 
Riding-place  are  by  far  thefineft  and  moft  magnificent 
in  Scotland. 

From  hence  the  Forth  widens  again,  and  foon  after 
is  three  or  four  Miles  wide,  and  makes  a  fafe  and  deep 
P*oad^  with  good  Anchor- ground,  where,  if  there  were 
a  Trade  to  anfwer  it,  a  thoufand  Sail  of  Ships  of  any 
Burthen  might  fafely  ride. 

On  the  South-more,  upon  a  narrow  Point  of  Land 
running  into  the  Water,  ftands  Blacknefs,  Caftle, 
wherein  State-Prifoners  were  confined  in  former  times, 
efpecially  fuch  as  were  taken  up  for  religious  Diffe- 
rences ;  many  of  whom  miferably  perifhed  here,  either 
by  the  Unhealthinefs  of  the  Place,  want  of  Convenien- 
cies,  or  fomething  worfe.  This  Caftle  might  be  of" 
Ufe,  if  the  Harbour  were  more  frequented  ;  but  as  it 
is  not  much  fo,  there  feems  to  be  no  Occafion  for  it  at 
prefent; 

Farther  Weft  is  Burrowftounnefs,  a  long  Town^ 
confiftingonly  of  one  ftraggling  Street,  which  is  extend- 
ed along  the  Shore,  clofe  to  the  Water.  It  has  been, 
and  ftill  is,  a  Town  of  the  greateft  Trade  to  Holland' 
and  France  of  any  in  Scotland,  except  Lelth ;  but  it 
fufFers  very  much  of  late  by  the  Dutc&T-nAe  being 
carried  on  fo  much  by.  Way  of  England.  However,  if 
the  Glajgow,  Merchants  would  fettle  a  Trade  to  Hoi- 
land  and  and  Hamburgh -..in  the  Forth^y  bringing  their, 
foreign  Goods  by  Land  to  Altiwey^ttiA  exporting 
them  from  thence,  as  they  propofed  fome  time  ago,  'tis 
very  likely  the  Burrowftounnifi  Men  will  come  into 
Bufinefs  again ;  for  as,  they  have  the  moft  Shipping, 
fo  they  are  the  beft  Seamen  in  the  Forth)  and  are  very 
good  Pilots  foi  the  Coaft  of  Holland,  the  Baltic,  and 
the  Coaft  of  Norway. 

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Town  obtained  an  Acl  in  . 
the  1 7th  Year  of  King  George  II.  talay  a  Duty  of  two 
Penies  Scots  on  each  Pint  of  Ale  fold  in  it,  in  order  to 
Money  to  repair  and  maintain  their  Harbour* 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         113 

But  it  is  time  to  put  an  End  to  this  Letter,  which  I 
do,  by  afluring  you,  that  I  am,  Sir, 

Tour  mo/l  bumlle  Servant. 

As  a  Poft-fcript  to  this  Letter,  I  will  add  the  fol- 
lowing Poftfcript  to  a  Letter  written  to  me  from 
a  Friend,  dated  Edinburgh,  September  3.  1754. 

A  Contract  being  entered  into  by  fome  Gentle- 
men from  England,  with  Mr.  Scot  of  Mihnny^  to 
dig  for  Copper  at  Lympboy^  in  his  Grounds,  about 
fix  Miles  Weft  of  Edinburgh,  upon  paying  him 
one  tenth  Part  of  the  Profits  ;  they  have  begun 
to  work,  and  the  Mine  already  turns  out  to  Ad- 
vantage. 


LETTER      III. 

Con  faming  a  D  E  s  c  R  r  p  T  i  a  N  of  tie  following 
Shires  and  Towns;  viz.  Annan,  Dumfries*. 
Galloway,  Air,  Renfrew,  Glafgow,  Stirling* 
Linlithgow,  Clidfdale,  Tweedale,  Roxbo- 
rough,  &c* 

SIR, 

AS  I  entered  the  Eaft-fide  of  Scotland  at  Berwick 
upon  Tweed,  and  have  carried  on  my  Account 
through  the  Lothians,  fo,  having  traveled  over  the  Weft 
Part  at  another  Journey,  when  I  went  from  England 
by  a  different  Roada  I  ihajl  here  give  you  the  Particu- 
lars of  that* 

Pafling; 


H4  'A  TOUR  thro*  Scotl. 

Faffing  the  River  £/£,  or  (as  it  is  commonly  called) 
the  So/way  Firth,  beyond  Car/iJIe,  we  entered  Scotland 
on  the  Side  of  Dumfriesjhlre.  The  Divifion  of  this 
County  into  Efedale,  Nithfdale,  and  Annandale,  is  but 
the  ordinary  marking  out  the  Rivers  Eft*  Annan  and 
yith9  as  I  obferved  of  the  Rivers  Thefdale,  Tyndals^ 
Swaledale,  and  others,  in  the  North  of  England;  for 
the  whole  Province  makes  but  one  Shire  5  vfa.  that  of 
Dumfries. 

The  firft  Place  of  Note  we  came  to  in  Scotland  was 
Annan,  the  chief  Town  of  Annandale,  which,  being  a 
Sea-port,  and,  having  a  good  Harbour, r  was  once  a 
Town  of  pretty  good  Trade  ;  but  it  was  often  taken 
by  the  Englijh,  who,  at  laft,  burnt  it  to  the  Ground,  in 
the  Reign  of  King  Edward  VI.  from  which  it  never  • 
recovered.  Here  was  a  good  Saimon-Fifhery,  and  a 
Trade  to  Ireland  by  the  IJle  of  Alan  ;  but  moil  of  the 
Merchants,  and  Men  of  Subftance,  being  removed  to 
Dumfries,  the  Town  continues,  to  aH  Appearance,  in 
a  State  of  irrevocable  Decay. 

The  Town  and  Caftle  of  Lccbmalen  is  a  Royal 
Burgh,  as  well  as  Annan.  Three  Parts  of  it  are 
(unrounded  by  Lakes,  which  afford  excellent  Fifh  ; 
and  one  particularly,  which  is  found  no- where  elfe. 
The  Caftle,  as  well  as  that  of  Annan,  is  now  tie- 
Blolifhed. 

Moffat,  a  fmall  Town,  on  the  River  Annan,  is  re- 
markable for  its  medicinal  Springs,  as  I  have  mention- 
ed before,  p.  27. 

The  Town  of  Rivol  deferves-  to  be  mentioned,  on 
account  of  a  very  good  Salt  made  out  of  a  particular 
Sand  there,  which  they  gather  up  and  boil. 

From  Annan,  keeping  the  Sea  as  clofe  as  we  could 
to  the  Left,,  we  went  on  due  Weft  to  Dumfries,  a  Sea- 
port Town  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Nid,  or  Nith% 
which  gives  Name  to  the  thire  Divifion  of  the  County, 
called  Nitbfdale  \  but  this  Town  is  the  Capital  of  the 
whole  Shire,  and  indeed  of  all  the  South-weft  Part  of; 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  it£ 

Scotland.  Here,  as  in  Tome  few  other  Ports  on  this 
Side  of  the  Ifland,  the  Benefits  of  Commerce,  obtained 
to  this  Country  by  the  Union,  appear  much  more  vifible 
than  on  the  Eaft-fide. 

Dumfries  was  always  a  good  Town,  with  large 
Streets,  and  full  of  reputable  and  wealthy  Merchants* 
who  trade  into  foreign  Parts,  and  employ  a  confidera- 
ble  Number  of  Ships,  efpecially  fmce  they  have  em- 
barked in  Trade  to  England^  and  the  Englljh  Planta- 
tions. This  Town  is  alfo  advantageoufly  fituated  for 
an  Increafe  of  Commerce  on  the  River  N.id9  or  Nitb ; 
for,  though  it  ftands  near  two  Leagues  from  the  Sea, 
yet  the  Tide  flows  up  to  the  Town,  and  Ships  of  Bur-- 
den  come  clofe  up  to  the  Quay  ;  and,  about  four  Miles, 
below  it,  the  largeft  Merchant-fhips  in  Britain  may 
ride  in  Safety. 

Over  the  River  Nitb  is  a  very  fine  Stone  Bridge, 
at  this  Place,  with  nine  Arches,  and  fo  broad,  that  two 
Coaches  may  go  abreaft  on  it.  Here  they  have  alfo  an 
Exchange  for  the  Merchants,  an  handfome  Church,, 
a  Tolbooth  or  Prifon,  and  a  Town-hall  for  the  Ufe  of 
the  Magiftrates.  They  had  formerly  a  Woolen  Ma-, 
nufaclure  here  ;  but  the  Union  has,  in  great  meafure, 
iupprefled  thefe  Things  in  Scotland^  the  Englijb  fupply- 
ing  them  much  better  and  cheaper :  yet,  at  the  fame 
time,  it  muft  be  obferved,  that  the  Scotshave  more  than 
an  Equivalent  by  an  open  Trade  to  England^  and  all 
the  Englijh  Plantations. 

The  Caftle  in  this  Town  is  very  old  ;  yet  is  fiill 
pretty  good  and  ftrong.  This  Caftle,  as  well  as  that 
at  Carlayrokj)  near  the  Mouth  of  the  River,  which  has 
been  a  very  magnificent  Structure,  belonged  formerly 
to  the  antient  Family  of  the  Maxwells^  Earls  of  Niihf- 
dale-y  the  only  remaining  Part  of  which,  being  un- 
happily embarked  in  the  Rebellion  of  1715.  and  taken 
in  Arms  at  Preflon  in  Lancajkire^  mad?  his  Efcape  out; 
'  of  the  Tower,  and  never  was  retaken. 


ii 6  A  TOUR  tiro  Scotl. 

The  Inhabitants  of  the  Town  of  Durafries  exerted 
themfelves  in  a  diftinguifhing  manner  for  the  prefent 
Eftablifhment,  in  the  Year  1715.  fortified  the  Town 
at  a  great  Expence,  and  provided  themfelves  with  Arms 
»nd  Ammunition.  This  involving  them  in  a  large 
Debt,  an  Aft  palled,  Anno  1716.  for  laying  a  Duty  of 
two  Penies  Sects  upon  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer 
fold  within  the  Town,  and  its  Privileges,  for  paying 
the  faid  Debts,  and  for  building  a  new  Church,  the 
other  being  not  capacious  enough  to  hold  the  Inhabit- 
ants ;  and  alfo  to  make  a  convenient  Harbour  there, 
for  the  Prefervation  of  Ships,  and  Improvement  of 
Trade. 

This  Adi:  enabled  them  to  make  fome  Progrefs  in 
the  defigned  Projections  ;  but  the  Town  having  been 
forced  to  rebuild  Part  of  ttmrold  Church,  the  Council- 
houfe,  and  Prifon,  which  were  become  ruinous,  they 
were  rendered  unable  to  proceed  in  the  moft  ufefui 
Parts  of  their  Undertaking  ;  and,  as  the  A61  expired 
in  the  icth  of  King  George  II.  they  procured  the  fame 
to  be  continued  in  that  Seflion  for  25  Years  longer;  and 
alfo  an  additional  Duty  on  the  Tonage  of  Shipping,, 
and  on  Goods  imported  arid  exported  into,  and  out  of» 
the  Port  of  Dumfries. 

There  are  many  confiderable  Woods  in  this  Coun- 
ty, the  chief  of  which  is  Ho'y-wood)  where  was  an  Ab- 
bey, which  gave  Surname  to  the  famous  Allrologer 
Johannes,  de  Sacro  Bcfcoy  or  Holy -wood.  Drumlan- 
rig  alfo*  the  noble  Palace  of  the  Duke  of  ^ueenf- 
berry*  is  remarkable  for  its  Wood  of  Oak.  fix  Miles 
long. 

At  this  Town  the  River  Nith  parts  the  Stewartry  of 
Galloway,  and  the  Shire  of  Dumfries  ;  and  in  the  Mid- 
dle of  the  Bridge  over  it  is  a  Gate,  which  is  the  Limit 
between  them.  This  Neighbourhood  of  Galloway^ 
which  is  a  great  and  rich  Province,  promotes  the 
Trade  of  this  Place  very  much, 

We 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  117 

We  could  not  pafs  Dumfries^  without  going  out  of 
our  Way  to  fee  the  Caftle  of  Drumtanrig,  the  fine  Pa- 
lace of  the  Duke  of  £>ueenfberry,}\&.  mentioned,  which 
ftands  at  12  Miles  Dirtance,  upon  the  fame  River. 
The  Vale  on  either  Side  is  pleafant,  and  tolerably  good  ; 
but  when  thefe  rapid  Rivers  overflow  their  Banks,  they 
do  not,  like  M/<?,  or  even  like  the  'Thames^  and  other 
Southern  Streams,  fatten  and  enrich  the  the  Soil  j  but, 
on  the  contrary,  they  lodge  fo  much  Sand  and  Splinters 
of  Stone  upon  the  Surface  of  the  Earth,  and  among 
the  Roots  of  the  Grafs,  that  it  fpoils  and.  beggars  it ; 
nay,  the  Water  is  fometimes  hurried  on  with  fuch 
Force,  that  it  wafhes  the  beft  Part  of  the  Earth  away, 
where  the  Soil  is  light. 

Drumlanrig  is  like  a  fine  Picture  in  a  dirty  Grotto, 
or  an  Equeftrian  Statue  fet  up  in  a  IBarn.  It  is  envi- 
roned with  Mountains,  which  have  the  wildeft  and 
moft  hideous  Afpecl  of  any  in  all  the  South  Part  of 
Scotland. . 

We  were  not  fo  much  furprized  with  the  Height  of 
the  Mountains,  and  the  Barrennefs  of  the  Country  be- 
yond them,  as  with  the  Manners  of  the  People,  who 
are  not  fo  polifhed  here,  as  in  other  Parts  of  Scotland. 
But  what  was  moft  wonderful,  was,  to  fee  fo  glorious 
a  Palace,  with  fuch  fine  Gardens,  and  every  thing 
about  it  fo  truly  magnificent,  Handing  in  a  wild  and 
mountainous  Country,  where  nothing  but  what  was 
defolate  and  difmal  could  be  expected.  However, 
the  Situation,  like^at  of  Cbatfworth  in  Derby/hire  is 
certainly  a  Foil  to the  Buildings,  and  fets  them  off  with 
greater  Advantage. 

If  you  come  to  the  Palace  by  the  Road,  which  leads 
to  it  from  Edinburgh^  you  pafs  the  River  Nith^  which 
is  there  both  broad  and  deep,  over  a  ftately  Stone 
Bridge,  creeled  by  the  noble  Founder  of  the  Caftle, 
and  Builder  of  the  Houfe,  the  firft  Duke  of  $>ueenf- 
\lerry. 

The 


ii S  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

The  Building  is  four-fquare,  with  Roundels  on  the  ; 
inner  Angles  of  the  Court,  in  every  one  of  which  is  a| 
Stair-cafe,  and  a  kind  of  Tower  on  the  top.    It  ftands j 
on  the  Summit  of  a  rifmg  Ground,  which  is  beautifully 
laid  out  in  Slopes  and  Terraces.    At  the  Extent  of  the 
Gardens  are  Pavilions  and  Banqueting- houfes,  exactly 
anfwering  to  one  another ;  and  the  Greens,  Efpalier 
and  Hedges,  are  in  great  Perfection. 

The  Apartments  are  fine,  and  richly  furnifhed.  T 
Gallery  is  rilled,  from  one  End  to  the  other,  with  Fa- 
mily Pictures  of  the  Duke's  Anceftors,  moft  of  them 
at  full  Length,  and   in   their  Robes  of  State,   or  of 
Office.  William,  the  firft  of  the  Family,  was  a  younget 
Son  of  James  Earl  of  Douglas,  who  got  the  Baron  j 
of  Drumlanrig  by  a  Deed  from  his  Father,  as  his  Por/ 
tion,  in  the  time  of  King  Robert  III.     He  was  after- 
wards fent  Embaflador   to  England  to  ranfom  Kins 
James  I.  who  was  detained  there.    In  the  Year  170$ 
the  late  Duke  of  ^ueenfberry  was  created  Duke  of  Do 
•uer,  as  alfo  Marquis  of  Beverley,  and  Baron  of  Ripon 
in  England, 

The  next  Trip  we  made  was  to  Galloioay,  fo  calle 
from  the  Gauls,  from  whom  the  antient  Inhabitant 
<lefcended.  It  is  divided  into  two  different  Diftrids 
that  towards  the  Weft  is  called  the  Shire  of  IVigton 
and  the  other  towards  the  Eaft  (which,  as  I  faid  be 
fore,  begins  at  the  Middle  of  the  Bridge  of  Dumfries) 
is  called  the  Stewartry  of  Kircudbrigbt,  of  which  th< 
Maxwells,  Earls  of  Nitbfdale,  were  Heretable  Stew- 
ards. The  Country  hereabouts  feems  one  continuec 
Heath,  proper  for  grazing  fmall  Cattle,  which  are  ge 
nerally  fold  in  England 5  and  where-ever  you  perceiv< 
a  Grove  of  Trees,  you  may  depend  upon  it,  there  is  i 
Laird's  Houfe  near  it,  which  are  moftly  old  Towers  o 
Stone,  ftrongly  built,  to  prevent  a  Surprize  from  In 
roads  which  were  frequent  between  the  two  Nations 
before  the  Death  of  Queen  Elizabeth. 

3  The 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

The  firft  Town  of  Note  on  the  Coaft  is  Kircud- 
bright.  Though  its  Situation  is  extremely  convenient 
for  carrying  on  a  very  advantageous  Commerce,  we 
faw  nothing  but  an  Harbour  without  Ships,  a  Port 
without  Trade,  and  a  Fifhery  without  Nets.  This  is 
owing  partly  to  the  Poverty,  and  partly  to  the  Difpofi- 
tion,  of  the  Inhabitants,  who  are  indeed  a  fober,  grave, 
religious  Sort  of  People,  but  have  no  Notion  of  acquir- 
ing Wealth  by  Trade ;  for  they  ftriclly  obey  .the  Scrip- 
tures in  the  very  Letter  of  the  Text,  by  being  content 
with  fuck  Things  as  they  have.  The  River  Dce^  which 
enters  the  Sea  here,  and  forms  the  Harbour,  comes  out 
of  the  Mountains  near  Carrlck^  and  isfo  full  of  Turn- 
ings and  Meanders,  that,  though  it  is  not  above  70 
Miles  in  a  Line,  it  runs  near  200  Miles  in  itsCourfe. 

The  County  of  Galloway  lies  due  Weft  from  Dum- 
fries 5  and  as  that  Part  of  it  they  call  the  Upper  Gal- 
loway runs  out  farther  into  the  Irijk  Seas  than  the  reft, 
all  that  Bay  on  the  South-fide  may  be  reckoned  Part  of 
Solway  Firth,  as  all  on  the  North-fide  is  called  the 
Firth  of  Clyde,  though  near  50  Miles  from  the  River 
itfelf. 

The  Weftern  Galloway,  or  the  Shire  of  Wigton,  runs 
out  with  a  Peninfula  fo  far  into  the  Sea,  that,  from  the 
utmoft  Shores,  you  fee  the  Coaft  of  Ireland,  as  plain 
as  you  fee  Calais  from  Dover. 

Port  Patrick^  which  is  the  ordinary  Place  for  the 
Ferry  or  Paflage  to  B  elf  aft,  and  other  Ports  in  Ireland, 
has  a  tolerable  good  Harbour,  and  a  fafe  Road  ;  but 
there  is  very  little  Uie  for  it  at  prefent ;  the  Packet- 
boat,  and  a  few  Fifhing-vefiels,  when  I  was  there, 
were  the  Sum  of  its  Navigation. 

Upon  an  Hill  near  the  Town  we  plainly  faw  Ire- 
land to  the  South-weft,  the  Coaft  of  Cumberland,  and 
the  IJle  of  Man^  to  the  South-eaft,  and  the  IJle  cf  Ha, 
and  the  JMullof  Kintyre,  to  the  North-weft. 

A  we  palled  into  the  Peninfula,  we  flopt  at  Stratira* 
fittute  on  the  Ntrth  fide  of  the  Ifthmts,  which 

is 


120  'A  T  O  U  R  tM  Scotl. 

is  formed  by  two  Arms  of  the  Sea  ;  one  on  the  North- 
fide,  called  Lock-Rian;  and  the  other  on  the  South 
called  the  Bay  of  Glenluce.  Upon  the  former  of  thefe 
Bays,  (for  fuch  they  both  are)  ftands  this  Town. 
It  is  a  Royal  Burgh,  which  has  a  moft  convenient  Poll- 1 
tion,  in  refpeft  to  the  great  Body  of  Water  it  com-  j 
mands,  and  to  the  Country  lying  round  on  every  Side  ; 
fo  that  from  the  latter  it  derives  a  reafonable  Share  of 
domeftic  Trade ;  and  fome  foreignCommerce,  as  alfo  a 
fmall  Intercourfe  with  our  North  American  Colonies 
from  the  former.  Port  Patrick, ]\\&  now  mentioned, 
ftanding  at  a  little  Diftance  to  the  Weft,  immediate- 
ly on  the  Sea,  is  a  Member  of  this,  with  eight  Creeks 
belonging  to  it ;  and  exclufive  of  thefe,  there  are  two, 
which  immediately  depend  on  Stranrawer  with  a  Cuf- 
tom-houfe,  and  a  proper  Eftablifhment,  and  fome  Of- 
ficers alfo  for  the  Receipt  of  the  Revenue  arifing  from 
Salt.  The  Peninfula  before  defcribed,  on  which  are 
Port  Patrick,  and  all  its  Creeks,  may  be  from  its 
Northern  Horn,  which  is  called  Fairland  Point,  to  the 
Mullvt  Galloway,  in  its  Southern  Extremity,  about  30 
Englijh  Miles  in  Length,  and  from  three  to  fix  in 
Breadth,  containing  in  the  Whole  90  fquare  Miles  at 
leaft.  In  the  old  Language  of  the  Natives,  it  was 
called  the  Rinnes  of  Galloway ;  and  though  no  way 
extraordinary  in  refpeft  to  Soil,  being  hilly  rather  than 
mountainous,  yet  is  not  deficient  in  Grain,  abounds  in 
Grafs,  and,  confequently,  in  Sheep  and  Black  Cattle. 
But  if  any  Manufactures  were  introduced  here,  as 
there  is  room  for  many,  and  raw  Materials  for  feveral, 
the  Excellence  of  its  Situation,  (which  is  alike  favour- 
able for  Fifhing,  Coailing,  and  foreign  Commerce) 
would  quickly  appear,  and  render  this  Diftrift,  which 
is  equal  in  Size  to  Jerfey  and  Guernfey,  not  inferior  to 
them  in  Cultivation,  Produce,  or  Number  of  People; 
to  accomplifh  which  falutary  Change,  there  are  no 
other  Inftruments  requifite  than  Induftry  and  Perfeve- 

rance  5 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN.  121 

ranee  ;  for  were  thefe  once  perfect,  Experience  and 
Emulation  would  quickly  efted  the  reft. 
.  Six  Miles  South  of  Wigton  lies  Whitbern^  the  an- 
tient  Candida  Cafa^  a  Royal  Burgh,  but  very  poor,  efpe- 
cially  fince  the  Diflblution  of  the  Priory.  In  this  Town 
was  the  Seat  of  the  Bifhop  of  Galloway ',  which  was 
founded  by  St.  Nmian  upwards  of  1200  Years  ago. 

But  though  the  People  of  Galloway^  efpecialiy  on 
the  Sea-coaft,  are  much  to  blame  for  not  falling  into 
Commerce,  Navigation,  &c.  yet  they  are  not  quite 
idle  ;  for  they  are  great  Cultivators  of  the  Earth,  and 
Breeders  of  Cattle,  of  which  they  fend  above  50,000 
Head  every  Year  to  England.  Befides,  they  have  the 
belt  Breed  of  ftrong,  low,  punch  Horfes  in  Hritain^  if 
not  in  Europe^  which  are  from  thence  called  Galloways. 
Thefe  Horfes,  which  are  very  much  bought  up  in 
England^  are  remarkable  for  being  good  natural  Pacers, 
ftrong,  eafy  Goers,  harJy,  gentle,  well- broken,  and, 
above  all,  not  apt  to  tire. 

Proceeding  from  Lower  Galloway  hither,  we  had 
like  to  have  been  driven  down  the  Stream  of  a  River, 
though  a  Countryman  went  before  for  our  Guide  ;  for 
the  Water  fwelled  upon  us  as  we  pafil-d,  and  the 
Stream  was  very  ftrong,  fo  that  we  were  obliged  to 
turn  our  Horfes  Heads  to  the  Current,  and  doping, 
over,  edged  near  the  Shore  by  degrees  ;  whereas,  if 
our  Horfes  had  ftood  direclly-crofs  the  Stream,  they 
could  not  have  kept  their  Feet.  The  Inhabitants  fol- 
low Fulling,  as  well  in  the  Sea,  as  in  the  Rivers  and 
Loughs,  which  lie  eveiy-where  under  the  Hills ;  in 
which,  about  September^  they  catch  an  incredible  Num- 
ber of  excellent  Eels ;  by  which  they  are  no  lefs  Gain- 
ers, than  by  their  little  Horfes. 

This  Part  of  the  Country  is  very  mountainous,  and 
fome  of  the  Hills  prodigioufly  high  ;  but  they  were  all 
covered  with  Sheep,  and  other  Cattle,  the  Gentlemen 
hereabouts  being  thegreateft  Sheep-mailers  (for  fo  they 

VOL,  IV.  G  call 


122  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

call  themfelves),  and  the  greateft  Breeders  of  Black 
Cattle  and  HorfeSj  in  Scotland. 

We  now  entered  the  Shire  of  Alr^  full  North  from 
the  Mull)  or  North -point  of  Galloway  :  and  as  we, 
before,  coafted  the  South  Bay,  or  Firth  of"  Solway^ 
which  parts  England  from  Scotland,  Co  now  we  coafted 
the  Firth  of  Clyde  ^  which,  for  near  60  Miles,  lies  on 
the  Weft  fide  of  the  Shore,  (binding  away  North-eaft 
from  the  Point  of  the  Mull.  This  Shire  is  divided 
into  three  great  Bailleries  ;  viz.  Carried,  Ky!ey  and 
Cunningham. 

Carrick  is  a  more  fruitful  and  better  cultivated 
Country  than  Galloway^  and  not  fo  mountainous  ; 
but  it  does  not  fo  much  abound  in  Cattle,  efpecially 
Sheep  and  Horfes.  Though  there  is  no  considerable 
Port  in  this  Part  of  the  Country,  yet  the  People  begin 
to  trade  here  ;  and  thofe  who  live  towards  the  Coaft 
are  great  Fifhermen,  and  are  employed  by  the  Mer- 
chants of  Glafgow,  and  other  Places,  to  catch  Herrings 
for  them.  May-hole  is  the  chief  Town  ;  but,  though 
it  ftands  on  the  Coaft,  it  has  no  Harbour,  and  is  poor 
and  decayed.  The  Market  is  pretty  good,  becaufe 
there  are  many  Gentlemen  in  the  Neighbourhood,  and 
the  Coaft  near  it  full  of  People  ;  but  the  Houfes  are 
mean,  low,  and  very  coarfe.  The  Family  of  Kennedy^ 
Earls  of  CaJJtls^  are,  or  were.  Lords  of  great  Part  of  the 
Country,  and  have  a  good  antient  Scat;  but  we  did 
not  go  to  fee  it. 

Coming  to  the  North  Bounds  of  Carrlck^  we  pafled 
the  River  Dun*  over  a  Bridge  of  one  Arch,  confifting 
of  90  Feet  ;  which  is  much  larger  than  the  Rialto  at 
Venice,  or  the  middle  Arch  of  the  great  Bridge  ztYork. 
We  found  many  large  ones  in  this  Country,  though,  I 
think,  none  fo  large  as  this,  except  at  Glafgow  and  Stir- 
ling. This  Bridge  led  us  into  the  County  of  Kyle,  the 
fecond  Divifion  of  the  Shi-e  of  Air.  Here  I  obferved, 
that,  contrary  to  our  Expectation,  we  found,  the  far- 
ther 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  123 

ther  North  we  traveled,   the  Country  was  the  finer, 
better,  and  richer. 

Kyle  is  more  populous  than  Carrick ;  and  the  Soil 
being  better  here,  and  the  Country  more  plain  and 
level,  on  the  Banks  of  the  River  are  abundance  of 
Gentlemens  Seats,  tho'  moft  of  them  are  built  Caftle- 
wife,  becaufe  of  Enemies.  But  that  Fear  being  now 
over,  they  begin  to  plant  and  inclofe  after  the  Manner 
of  England. 

The  Scots  Writers  tell  us  a  long  Story  of  a  great 
Battle  in  this  Country,  between  Coitus,  or  Kyius^  a 
Britijh  King,  and  their  Fergus  I.  where  the  former 
was  killed,  and  from  thence  the  Country  took  his 
Name.  Many  Monuments  of  this  Battle  are  ftill  to 
be  feen  here.  The  Place  where  it  was  fought,  is  called 
Coil-field  \  a  Church  near  it  is  called  Coil- town  Kirk. 
The  River,  near  which  it  was  won,  and  which  falls 
into  the  River  Air^  four  Miles  above  the  Town  of  Air, 
is-called  Coll ;  a  Lake  not  far  from  it,  near  which  the 
Scots  encamped,  is  called  Lake  Fergus.  A  Trumpet 
refembling  a  crooked  Horn,  which  has  aveiyfhiill 
Sound,  was  digged  up  in  the  Field  of  Battle,  and  is  ftill 
kept  in  the  Laird  of  Capringtons  Houfe,  called  Coil- 
field,  and  made  ufe  of  to  call  his  Servants  and  Work- 
men together.  Here,  or,  as  fome  fay,  at  Largis  in 
the  Bay  of  Clyde  9  was  another  bloody  Battle  in  the 
Year  1263.  between  King  Alexander  III.  of  Scotland, 
and  Acho  King  of  Norway,  who  came  to  the  Poit  of 
Air  with  a  great  Fleet  of  Ships,  and  20,000  Men, 
who,  after  ravaging  theCouncry,  was  routed,  and  loft 
his  Army,  and  140  Ships.  At  this  lalt  Battle,  an  Irijh 
Gentleman,  of  the  Name  of  Mackenzie,  behaved  fo 
well,  that  King  Alexander  gave  him  the  Lands  of  Kin- 
tai^  which  continued  in  the  PofTeflion  of  the  Earl  of 
Seafirtb,  his  Succeilor,  till  the  late  Earl  taking  Part 
with  the  Pretender,  his  Eftate  became  forfeited.  From 
this  brave  Irijhman  are  defcended  the  numerous  Name 
tf  Mackenzie* 

G  2  Over 


124  A  TOUR  tbro  Scotl. 

Over  the  River  Air  is  a  Bridge  of  four  Arches, 
near  the  new  Town  ;  and  South  of  the  Bridge  ftands 
the  old  Town  of  Air  or  Erigena,  famous  for  its  Anti- 
quity and  Privileges.  It  has  a  very  large  Jurifdidlion 
of  near  64  Miles,  reaching  from  the  Mouth  of  Clyde  to 
the  Borders  of  Galloway.  It  ftands  on  a  fandy  Plain, 
but  has  pleafam  green  Fields  two  Miles  South  and 
North  of  it.  In  the  Fields  betwixt  the  Mouth  of  the 
River  Dun  and  Air^  ftands  a  very  beautiful  Church. 
The  Town  has  a  very  good  Harbour  in  the  River,  and 
lies  conveniently  for  Trade  :  and  it  is  eafy  to  fee,  that 
it  has  been  much  larger  than  it  is  at  prefent.  It  is 
now  like  an  old  Beauty,  and  {hews  the  Ruins  of  a  good 
Face,  but  is  ftill  decaying  every  Day  ;  and  from  hav- 
ing been  the  fifth  beft  Town  in  Scotland,  as  the  Townf- 
men  fay,  it  is  now  the  fifth  worft  ;  which  is  owing  to 
the  Decay  of  its  Trade  :  fo  true  it  is,  that  Commerce 
is  the  Life  of  Cities,  of  Nations,  and  even  of  King- 
doms. What  was  the  Reafon  of  the  Decay  of  Trade 
in  this  Place,  is  not  eafy  to  determine,  the  People 
themfelves  being  either  unwilling  or  unable  to  tell. 
Here,  over  the  River  Irwin,  which  divides  Air  from 
Cunningham,  is  a  good  Bridge  of  four  Arches.  Air  is 
noted  for  the  treacherous  Murder  of  many  Noble- 
men and  Gentlemen  by  the  Englijb  in  WaUatt* 
Time;  when  they  were  called  together  during  a 
Truce,  (after  Edward  I.  had  over-run  the  Country), 
on  Pretence  of  holding  a  Court  of  Juftice ;  and  were 
treacheroufly  hatrged  one  after  another,  as  they  en- 
tered the  King's  large  Barns,  where  the  Court  was 
held. 

This  was  as  feverely,  as  juftly,  revenged  by  Wal- 
lace, with  whom,  as  Warden  of  Scotland,  they  had 
made  the  Truce,  and  whom  they  endeavoured  to 
entice  thither  by  their  Charter  of  Peace,  as  they  had 
done  a  great  many  others  of  Quality.  But  he,  having 
Notice  of  what  had  pafled,  furprifed  them  that  very 
Night  in  their  Jollity,"  rejoicing  that  they  had,  as  they 

thought, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.          125- 

thought,  by  thefe  treacherous  Murders,  fecured  Scot- 
land for  ever;  and  having  fet  Guards  round  the 
Barns,  that  none  fhould  efcape,  he  burnt  all  the  Eng- 
lijh  in  them.  The  Ruins  of  thofe  Barns  are  ftill  fhewn 
here. 

Oliver  Cromwell  built  a  Citadel  at  /fir,  well  forti- 
fy'd  with  a  FolTe,  and  a  Stone  Wall.  At  the-  Refto-. 
ration  it  was  dernolifhed  ;  and  at  prefent  only  fome 
Houfes,  and  Angles  of  the  Ramparts,  areftanding. 

Two  Miles  North  of  Air  Town  ftands  Kincafe  ; 
which,  has  been,  from  Time  immemorial,  a  Place  of 
Retirement  for  leprous  Perfons. 

From  Alr^  keeping  ftill  North,  we  came  to  Irvin9 
upon  a  River  of  the  fame  Name.  Here  they  have  a 
Port,  which  formerly  was  in  much  better  Condition 
than  it  has  been  for  fome  Years  part,  the  Harbour  be- 
ing fo  much  decayed  by  Length  of  Time,  and  other 
Accidents,  that  the  Trade  of  the  Town  began  to  de- 
cay ;  for  the  Water  not  being  confined  to  its  proper 
Channel,  the  Harbour  became  fo  choaked  up  with 
Sand-banks,  that  it  was  of  little  Ufe  to  what  it  had  been  ; 
fothat  Ships  of  very  fmall  Burden  were  frequently  fhut 
up  for  feveral  Months  in  the  River,  before  they  could 
fail  out  to  Sea.  At  the  fame  time,  the  Town-houfe, 
Church,  Streets,  and  other  public  Works,  as  the  com- 
mon Gaol,  and  one  of  the  Arches  of  the  Bridge,  were 
each  in  a  ruinous  Condition  :  all  which  occaiioned  an 
Acl  of  Parliament  to  pafs  in  the  Ninth  of  K.  George  II. 
for  laying  a  Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots  upon  every  Sects- 
Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer  fold  in  the  Town  of  Irvirit  and  its 
Liberties  ;  and  a  Duty  of  a  Peny  Sterling  upon  every 
Ton  of  Coals  (hipped  off  for  Tranfportation.  But 
thus  much  muft  be  faid,  that  notwithstanding  the  de- 
clining Condition  of  its  Harbour,  before  this  Aclfpafled, 
it  carried  on  a  greater  Trade  than  moft  of  the  Ports 
between  Air  and  Dumfries.  Their  chief  Trade  is  in 
Scots  Coal,  which  they  export  in  great  Quantities  to 
G  3  Ireland-^ 


jfTOUR  tbro9  ScotK 

Ireland-,  for  the  neighbouring  Hills  abound  with  this 
Commodity.  Irvin  is  the  Capital  of  that  Divifion  of 
the  Shire  of  /*>,  which  they  call  Cunningham  ;  and  is 
really  within  the  i  irth  of  Clyde,  though  not  adually 
within  the  River  itfelf.  The  Name  of  Cunningham 
fignifies  The  King's  Habitation,  from  the  Beauty  of  its 
Situation. 

As  it  has  more  Trade  than  the  other  Ports  I  have 
been  fpeaking  of,  fo  it  is  better  built.  Here  are  twa 
handfome  Strrets,  a  good  Quay,  and  a  capacious  Har- 
bour. The  Country  is  rich  and  fruitful,  filled  with 
Gentlemens  Scats,  and  well-built Houfes;  and  where- 
ever  you  turn  your  Eye,  you  fee  nothing  but  beautiful 
Inclofures,  pleafant  Failures,  and  Grafs-grounds,  fo 
that  we  tl  ought  ourfelvcs  in  England  again.  It  is  fa;d, 
this  incjofing  the  Ground  was  owing  to  the  Englijh 
Soldiers,  who  were  placed  here  and  in  Kyle  by  Oliver 
Ci  cmwell  (for  at  Air  he  built  a  Citadel,  as  I  have  faid); 
thefe  promoted  and  encouraged  the  People  to  inclofe 
and  improve  their  Lands,  and  inftru6ted  them  in  the 
.IT  anner  of  Hufbandry  pradifed-in  England^  which  they 
have  not  forgot  to  this  Day. 

A  little  from  Irvin  flood  Kilmarnock  Caftie,  the  Seat 
of  the  Family  of  the  Boyds^  late  Earls  of  Kilmarnock, 
,  which,  on  the  i5th  of  March  1738-9.  was  intirely 
eonfumed,  with  the  Furniture,  and  a  curious  Collection 
of  Books  and  MSS.  nothing  being  faved  but  the  Char- 
ter- cbeft.  On  the  other  Side  is  the  Caftie  of  Egling- 
1ony  the  Seat  of  the  antient  Family  of  the  Afontgomerien^ 
Earls  of  Eglington.  On  the  North-eaft  Borders  of  this 
Country,  where  it  joins  to  Cfydfdale^  is  the  Caftie  of 
London^  the  noble  and  beautiful  Seat  of  the  Earl  of 
London. 

Upon  the  Bay  of  Clyde  (lands  the  Town  of  Largis^ 
famous  for  the  Defeat  of  the  .Norwegians  .by  King 
Alexander  III.  of  Scotland,  which,  fome  give  to  Kyle,  as 
we  have  faid  above, 

Kilmaertj;      ^ 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          127 

Kiimaen,  in  the  fame  County,  is  the  Seat  of  the 
noble  and  antient  Family  of  Cunningham,  Earls  of 
Glencairn.  Camden  fays,  that  the  Family  derives  its 
Original  from  one  of  that  Name  concerned  in  the 
Murder  of  Thomas  a  Beiket,  who  fled  into  Scotland  on 
that  Account,  and  therefore  bear  an  Epifcopal  Pall  in 
their  Arms ;  but  it  is  plain,  from  their  Motto,  Over9 
Fork)  over,  that  it  is  Fork,  and  not  an  Epifcopal  Pall ; 
and  the  Family,  no  doubt,  is  of  a  much  higher  and 
nobler  Original. 

In  the  Sea  lies  Lady  IJle,  where  is  great  Plenty  of 
Rabbets  and  Fowl,  but  no  Inhabitants. 

With  the  Divifion  of  Cunningham  I  quitted  the  Shire 
Q{  Air,  which  is,  without  Exception,  one  of  the  plea- 
fanteit  Counties  in  Scotland. 

Joining  to  it  North,  and  bordering  on  the  Clyde  itfelf, 
lies  the  Barony  of  Renfrew,  which  was  the  antient  pa- 
ternal Eftate  of  the  Stuarts,  before  they  fucceeded  to 
the  Crown  of  Scotland  j  and  his  Royal  Highnefs  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  among  other  Titles,  is  ftyled  Baron 
of  Renfrew.  It  is  a  pleafant>  rich,  and  populous 
Country  ;  ?.nd  though  the  Soil  is  not  thought  to  be  fa 
good  as  in  Cunningham,  yet  that  is  abundantly  recom- 
penfed  by  the  Neighbourhood  of  Glafgow  and  the  Clyde> 
and  the  great  Commerce  of  both. 

The  ancient  Channel  of  the  Clyde,  into  which  the 
Tide  flows,  furnifhes  it  with  a  ve  y  convenient  Har- 
bour, called  Puddock  ;  and,  by  Spring- tides,  Veflels  of 
tolerable  Burthen  are  brought  up  to  the  Bridge.  The 
Inhabitants  addicl  themfelves  pretty  much  to  the  Irijh 
Trade  ;  and  having  the  Benefit  of  a  public  Ferry,  draw 
no  fmall  Advantage  from  being  the  Centre  of  Corre- 
fpondence  between  the  Counties  on  both  Sides  of  the 
tirth. 

We  kept  our  Route  from  Irvln  along  the  Coafr,  as 

near  as  we  could ;  fo  that  we  faw  all  the  Firth  of  the 

Clyde,  and  the  very  Opening  itfelf,  which  is  juft  at  the 

Weft  Corner  of  this  County.     There  are  Ibme  Vil- 

G  4  lages 


1 28  A  T  O  U  R  thro  ScotL 

lages  and  Fifhing- towns  within  the  Mouth  of  this  Ri- 
ver, which  have  good  Bufineff, 

The  firft  Town  of  Note  is  called  Greenock^  which 
feems  not  to  be  an  antient  Place,  but  to  be  grown  up 
in  later  Years,  by  being  a  good  Road  for  Ships  to  ride 
in,  that  come  into  and  go  out  of  Glafgow,  as  Ships  for 
London  do  in  the  Downs.  The  Town  is  well-builtj 
has  many  rich  trading  Families  in  it,  and  a  Caftle  to 
command  the  Road.  It  is  the  chief  Place  in  the  Weft 
of  Scotland  for  the  Herring- Fifliing  ;  and  the  Mer- 
chants of  Glafgotu,  who  are  concerned  in  it,  employ 
their  Veflels  for  catching  and  curing  the  Fifh,  and  for 
carrying  them  abroad  to  Market  afterwards  j  and  their 
being  ready  on  all  Hands  to  go  to  Sea,  makes  them 
o  ten  leave  the  Care  of  their  own  Ships  to  the  Greenock 
Men,  who  are  good  Seamen,  and  excellent  Pilots  for 
thofe  difficult  Seas. 

At  the  Weft-end  of  a  Bay  on  the  Firth  is  a  fmall 
Town,  called  Gowrock,  where  are  a  noted  Road  and 
Harbour  lately  fitted  up.  » 

Pat/ley  ^  a  very  thriving  Place,. which  is  increafmg  in 
Buildings  every  Day,  alfo  (lands  in  this  County  on  the 
River  Cart;  and,  tho*  no  Borough,  is  larger  than  Ren- 
frew. It  was  formerly  noted  for  its  noble  Abbey  of 
the  Order  of  Cluny\  the  Monks  of  which  wrote  a 
Chronicle,  called,  The  Black  Book  of  Paijiey.  The  Ab- 
bey and  Church,  with  fair  Gardens  and  Orchards,  and 
a  little  Park  for  fallow  Deer,  are  all  inclofed  with  a 
Stone  Wall  about  a  Mile  in  Circuit.  The  Water  of 
the  River  Whitwrt,  upon  which  Pai/Iey  (rands,  is- 
ccmmended  for  its  Extent  and  for  the  Pearls  fre- 
qremly  found  thereabouts,  and  three  Miles  above. 
They  commonly  fifh  for  them  in  Summer-time,  and 
meet  with  them  in  a  Shell- fifh  larger  than  an  ordinary 
Muflel,  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Water.  It  lies  on  the 
Weft-fide  of  Clyde  y  over-againft  Glafgow.  The  Re- 
mains of  the  Abbey  are  ftill  to  be  feen,  and  the  Town 
bears  the  Marks  of  having  been  fortified.  At  the 

Weft- 


ScotL         GREAT  BRITAIN.  12^ 

Weft- end  of  it  are  the  Remains  of  a  large  Roman 
Camp  and  Pr&torium,  which  fome  fuppofe  to  be  vault- 
ed underneath,  becaufe  the  Ground,  when  trod  upon, 
founds  hollow.  Here  it  was  Mary  Queen  of  Scots 
was  defeated  by  her  rebellious  Subje&s  under  the  Ba- 
fbrd  Earl  of  Murray ^  from  whence  (he  took  Refuge 
in  England^  and  was  there  moft  in-bofpitably  imprifon- 
ed  for  feveral  Years,  and  at  laft  beheaded.  In  the 
Lands  of  Newyards,  near  Paijley,  on  an  high  Ground, 
is  a  Fountain  noted  for  ebbing  and  flowing  with  the 
Tide. 

The  Country  between  Paijley  and  Glafgow,  on  the 
Bank  of  Clyde,  I  take  to  be  one  of  the  moft  agreeable 
Places  in  Scotland,  for  its  Situation,  Fertility,  Healthi- 
nefs,  and  for  the  Benefits  it  receives  from  the  Neigh- 
bourhood ofGtafgow,  and  the  Sea. 

The  great  Church  of  Glafgow,  and  that  noble  Street 
of  Paljky,  are  about  600  Years  old,  and  are  authentic 
Proofs  of  the  Power  and  Riches  of  the  Church  in  thofe 
Days,  which  was  able,  in  times  of  Poverty  and  Rude- 
nefs,  to  erect  a  Variety  of  noble  Piles,  the  Expence  of 
any  one  of  which  would  fenfibly  diftrefs  the  Whole  of 
this  Part  of  the  United  Kingdom,  in  its  now  flourilb- 
ing  State,  to  fmifh. 

I  am  now  come  to  the  Bank  of  Clyde  ;  but  my  Me- 
thod here,  as  in  England,  furbids  my  wandsring  North, 
till  I  have  given  you  a  full  View  of  the  South.  The 
Clyde  and  the  Forth  may  be  faid  to  crofs  Scotland \\zve t 
their  two  Firths  not  being  above  20  Miles  diftant  from 
one  another,  which,  if  joined,  would  divide  it  very  near 
in  the  Center. 

Nor  can  I  refrain  mentioning  over  again  (fee  p.  8.) 
how  eafy  a  Work  it  would  be  to  make  a  Navigation 
from  the  Forth  to  the  Clyde  ^  joining  the  two  Seas,  as 
the  King  of  France  has  done  in  a  Place  five  hundred 
times  more  difficult,  namely,  from  Tkouloufeto  Nar- 
bonne  ;  and  as  the  late  Czar  of  Mufcovy,  Peter,  juilly 
iurnamed  The  Great,,  did  in  feveral  Places  of  infinitely 
G  5  grcatw 


130  A  T  O  U  R  thro  ScotL 

greater  Difficulty  and  Expence.     What  an  Advantage 
in  Commerce  would  this  be !  It  would  eftablifh  a 
Trade  between  Ireland  and  the  Merchants  of   Glaf- 
goWy  and  open  a  Communication  between  the  Weft- 
coaft  of  Scotland,  and  the  Eaft  of  England,  even  to 
London  j  nay,  feveral  Ports  of  England  on  the  Irijh 
Sea,  from  Liverpool  Northward,  would  all  trade  with 
London  by  fuch  a  Canal.     It  would  take  up  a  Volume 
to  lay  down  the  feveral  Advantages  that  would  imme- 
diately accrue  from  fuch  a  Navigation,  and  in  particu- 
lar in  Times  of  War ;  but  it  muft  lie  till  Pofterity,  by 
the  rifing  Greatnefs  of  their  Commerce,  fhall  not  only 
ieel  the  Want  of  it,  but  find  themfelves  inclinable,  as 
well  as  able,  to  effe&  it. 

Glafgow  is  the  Emporium  of  the  Weft  of  Scotland, 
feeing,  for  its  Commerce  and  Riches,  the  fecond  in 
this  Northern  Part  of  Great  Britain.  It  is  a  large, 
ilately,  and  well-built  City ^  ftandingon  a  Pkin,  in  a 
manner  four-fquare;  and  the  four  principal  Streets  are 
the  faireft  for  Breadth,  and  the  fineft  built,  that  I  have 
ever  feen  in  one  City  together.  The  Houfes  are  all  of 
Stone,  and  generally  uniform  in  Height,  as  well  as  in 
Front.  The  lower  Stories,  for  the  moft  part,  ftand  on 
vaft  fquare  Doric  Colurrins,  with  the  Arches,  which 
open  into  the  Shops,  adding  to  the  Strength,  as  well 
3s  Beauty,  of  the  Building.  In  a  word,  'tis  one  of  the 
cleanlieft,  moft  beautiful,  and  beft-built  Cities  in  Great 
Britain. 

It  ftands  on  the  Side  of  an  Hill,  floping  to  the  River; 
only  that  Part  next  the  River,  for  near  one  third  of  the 
City,  is  flat,  and  by  this  means  expofed  to  the  Water, 
upon  any  extraordinary  Flood  :  it  is  fituated  upon  the 
Eaft  Bank  01  the  Clyde  ^  which  is  not  navigable  to  the 
Town  but  uv  fmall  Veflels.  Its  Port  therefore  is 
Natiprt-GlajgQWi  which  ftands  near  the  Clyde's 
Mouth,  and  is  an  Harbour  for  Ships  of  the  greateft 
Burden.  ?  ;e  it  is  on  a  good  Wharf  or  Quay  the 
Merchant  load  and  unload,  Thtir  Cuftom-houfe  is 

alfo 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  j?T 

alfo  here,  and  their  Ships  are  here  repaired,  laid  ip, 
and  fitted  out,  either  here  or  at  Greenock^  where  Work 
is  well  done,  and  Labour  cheap. 

The  City  is  joined  to  the  Suburbs  on  the  Weft 
Bank  of  the  Clyde^  by  an  handfome  Bridge.  And 
it  is  proper  to  obferve,  that  in  the  Year  1/59.  an  Aft 
pafled,  intituled,  An  Aft  for  improving  the  Navigation 
of  the  River  Clyde,  to  the  City  of  Glafgow,  and  for 
building  a  Bridge  crofs  the  faid  River ,  from  the  J aid 
City,  to  the  Pillage  of  Gorbells.  The  Preamble  fets 
forth,  that  the  River  Clyde,  from  Dumbuck  to  the 
Bridge  of  Glafgow^  is  fo  very  (hallow  in  feveral  Parts, 
that  Boats,  Lighters,  Barges,  or  other  Vefleis,  cannot 
pafs  to  and  from  the  City  of  Glafgow^  except  it  be  in 
the  Time  of  Flood  or  High- water  at  Spring-tides ;  and 
that  if  the  fame  was  cleanfed  and  deepened,  and  the 
Navigation  thereof  made  more  commodious,  by  a  Lock 
or  Dam  over  the  fame,  it  would  be  a  great  Advantage 
to  the  Trade  and  Ma/iufaclures  of  the  faid  City  and 
Parts  adjacent,  and  to  the  Public  in  general. 

The  Adi:  takes  notice,  that  the  Bridge  of  Glafgow^ 
leading  to  the  Village  called  Gorbells^  is  fo  narrow  and 
inconvenient,  that  there  is  not  Room  for  one  Carriage 
to  pafs  another,  and,  by  reafon  of  its  Weaknefs  and 
Infumciency,  no  heavy  Carriages  are  permitted  to  pafs- 
over  it ;  Power  is  therefore  given  to  the  Magiftrates 
.and  Council  of  Glafgoiv,  to  erecl  a  Bridge  of  Stone  at 
or  near  to  the  Place  where  the  faid  Bridge  is  creeled,  and 
to  be  30  Feet  broad,  and  fufficient  for  Wheel-carriages 
of  all  Kinds  to  pafs  and  repafs  over  the  fame,  whereby 
the  PaOage  to  the  faid  City  will  be  rendered  much 
more  fa-fe  and  eafy.  See  the  Adt  itfelf. 

Where  the  four  principal  Streets  meet,  the  CrofTing 
makes  a  very  fpacious  Market-place,  as  may  be  eafily 
imagined,  fince  the  Streets  are  fo  large.  In  the  Cen- 
ter Itands  the  Crofs.  The  Houfes  in  thefe  Streets  are 
all  built  upon  one  Model,  with  Piazzas  under  them, 
faced  with  Aihler  Stone,  and  well  faihed.  As  we 
G  6  come 


132  ^TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

come  down  the  Hill  from  the  North-gate  to  this  Place, 
the  Tolbooth  and  Guild-hall  make  the  North-welt 
Angle,  or  Right-hand  Corner  of  the  Street,  which  is 
new  rebuilt  in  a  very  magnificent  Manner.  Here  the 
Town-council  fit,  and  the  Magiftrates  try  fuch  Caufes 
as  come  within  their  Cognizance,  and  do  all  their 
other  public  Bufinefs :  fo  that,  as  will  be  eafily  con- 
ceived, the  Tolbooth  ftands  in  the  very  Centre  of  the 
City.  It  is  a  noble  Structure  of  hewn  Stone,  with  a 
very  lofty  Tower,  and  melodious  hourly  Chimes.  All 
thefe  four  principal  Streets  are  adorned  with  ieveral 
public  Buildings. 

But  the  chief  Ornament  of  this  City  is  the  College 
or  Univerfity,  a  molt  magnificent  and  ftately  Fabric, 
confiftine;  of  feveral  Courts.  The  Front  to  the  City  is 
of  hewn  Stone,  and  excellent  Architecture.  Its  Pre- 
cincts were  lately  enlarged  by  fome  Acres  of  Ground 
purchafed  for  it  by  public  Money;  and  it  is  feparated 
from  the  reft  of  the  City  by  a  very  high  Wall. 

It  owes  its  Ere&ion  to  Archbifhop  Turnbull^  and 
was*  legally  founded  by  King:  James  II.  in  1453.  bv 
virtue  of  a  Bull  from  Pope  Nicolas  V.  granting  it  all 
the  Privileges,  Liberties,  Honours,  Immunities,  and 
Exemptions,  given  by  the  Apoftolical  See  to  the  Col- 
lege of  Bononia>  in  Italy,  for  teaching  Univerfal  Learn- 
ing. They  are  enabled  by  the  Munificence  of  a  gene- 
rous Benefaction,  to  fend  Exhibitioners  to  the  Univer- 
fity of  Oxford.  A  Re&or,  a  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  a 
Principal  or  Warden,  who  was  to  teach  Theology, 
three  Philofophy-ProfefFors  were  eftablifhed  by  thefirft 
Foundation  ;  and  afterwards  fome  Clergymen  taught 
the  Civil  and  Canon  Law  there. 

In  1577.  King  James  VI.  eftabliflied  a  Principal, 
three  Profeflbrs  of  Philofophy,  four  Burfars,  a  Steward 
to  furnifh  their  Table,  a  Servant  for  the  Principal,  a 
Janitor  to  look  after  the  Gate,  and  a  Cook. 

The  Family  of  Hamilton  gave  fome  of  the  Ground 
on  which  the  College  ftands,  with  an  adjacent  Field. 

Kings, 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN, 

Kings,  Parliaments,  the  City  of  Glafgow,  feveral  of 
the  Archbifhops,  and  many  particular  Perfons,  have 
been  Benefactors  to  it. 

In  1662.  the  Earl  of  Dundonald  gave  iooo/.  Ster- 
ling to  it,  for  the  Maintenance  of  poor  Scholars.  The 
great  Buchanan ,  and  the  famous  Cameron,  had,  among 
other  eminent  Men,  their  Education  here. 

Several  fine  Roman  Stones,  digged  up  in  the  latter 
End  of  1740.  near  Kirkintllloch^  with  very  curious  ln- 
fcriptions,  have  been  removed  to  this  Univerfity,. 
where  before  was  a  good  Collection  of  Pieces  of  Anti- 
quity, chiefly  founJ  near  the  fame  Place. 

In  the  higher  Part  of  the  City  ftands  the  great 
Church,  formerly  Cathedral  and  Metropolitan,  dedi- 
cated to  St.  MuvgOj  who  was  Bifhop  here,  about  the 
Year  560.  It  is  a  magnificent  and  ftately  Edifice, 
and  furprizes  the  Beholders  with  its  ftupendous  Big- 
nefs,  and  the  Workmanfhip  of  the  Artifan.  The 
feveral  Rows  of  Pillars,  and  the  exceeding  high  Spire 
which  rifes  from  a  fquare  Tower  in  the  Middle  of  the 
Crofs,  {hew  a  wonderful  Piece  of  Architecture.  It  is 
now  divided  into  feveral  Preaching  Places,  one  above 
the  other. 

Near  the  Church  ftands  a  ruinous  Caftle,  formerly 
the  Refidence  of  the  Archbifhop,  who  was  legal  Lord 
or  Superior  of  the  City,  which  ftands  on  his  Ground, 
and  from  whom  it  received  its  firft  Charter,  and  many- 
Privileges.  It  is  encompafled  with  an  exceeding  high. 
Wall  of  hewn  Stone,  and  has  a  fine  Profped  into  the 
City. 

The  Duke  of  Montrofe  has  fo  great  an  Intereft  here, 
and  in  the  Country  round,  that  he  is,  in  a  Civil  Senfe, 
Governor  of  this  City,  as  he  is  legally  of  their  Univer- 
fity,  and  much  beloved  in  thefe  Patts. 

Glafgow  is  a  City  of  Bufmefs,  and  has  the  Face  of 
Foreign  as  well  as  Domeftic  Trade  ;  nay,  I  may  fay, 
'tis  the  only  City  in  Scotland,  at  this  Time,  that  appa- 
rently increafes  in  both.  The  Union  has,  indeed, 
anfwered  its  End  to  them,  more  than  to  any  other  Pa  t 

of 


1 34  dTOURtbro  Scotl. 

of  the  Kingdom,  their  Trade  being  new  formed  by  it 5 
for  as  the  Union  opened  the  Door  to  the  Scots  into 
our  American  Colonies,  the  Glafgow  Merchants  pre- 
fently  embraced  the  Opportunity  ;  and  though,  at  its 
firft  concerting,  the  Rabble  of  this  City  made  a  for- 
midable Attempt  to  prevent  it,  yet  afterwards  they 
knew  better,  when  they  found  the  great  Increafe  of 
their  Trade  by  it ;  for  they  now  fend  near  50  Sail  of 
Ships  every  Year  to  Virginia,  New-England,  and  other 
Englljb  Colonies  in  America. 

But  if  this  City  could  have  a  Communication  with 
the  Firth  of  Forth,  fo  as  to  fend  their  Tobacco  and 
Sugar  by  Water  to  Alloway  below  Stirling,  as  they 
might  from  thence  again  to  London,  Holland,  Ham- 
burgh, and  the  Baltic,  they  would  very  probably  in  a 
few  Years  double  their  Trade. 

The  Share  they  have  in  the  Herring- Fifhery  is  very 
confiderable  j  and  they  cure  the  Herrings  fo  well,  and 
fo  much  better  than  they  are  done  in  any  other  Part  of 
Great  Britain^  that  a  Glafgow  Herring  is  efteemed  as 
good  as  a  Dutch  one. 

I  have  no  room  to  enlarge  upon  the  Home  Trade  of 
this  City,  which  is  very  confiderable  in  many  Things, 
I  fhall  therefore  touch  at  fome  few  Particulars. 

1.  Here  are  two    very   handfome,  Sugar-baking 
Houfes  carried  on  by  fkilful  Perfons,  with  large  Stocks, 
and    to  very  great  Perfection.      Here  is  likewife    a 
large  Diftillery,  for  dialling  Spirits  from  the  Melafles 
drawn  from  Sugars,  by  which  they  enjoyed  a  vaft  Ad- 
vantage for  a  time,  by  a  referved  Article  in  the  Union, 
freeing  them  from  Englljb  Duties. 

2.  Here  is  a  Manufacture  of  Plaiding,  a  Stuff  crofs- 
ftriped  with  yellow,  red,  and  other  Mixtures,  for  the 
Plaids  or  Veils  worn  by  the  Women  in  Scotland. 

3.  Here  is  a   Manufacture  of  Mufiins,  which  they 
make  fo  good  and  fine,  that  great  Quantities  of  them 
are  fent  into  England^  and  to  the  :,>/  jb  Plantations, 
where  they  fell  at  a  good  Price.     They  are  generally 

6  ilripedj 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

fkiped,  and  are  very  muchufed  for  Aprons  by  the 
Ladies,  and  fometimes  in  Head-cloaths  by  the  meaner 
Sort  of.  Englishwomen* 

4.  Here  is  alfo  a  Linen  Manufacture  ;  but  as  that  is 
in  common  with  all  Parts  of  Scotland^  which  improve 
in  it  daily,  I  will  not  infift  upon  it,  as  a  Peculiar  here, 
though  they  make  a  very  great  Quantity  of  it,  and  fend 
it  to  the  Plantations,  as  their  principal  Merchandize, 
Nor  are  the  Scots  without  a  Supply  of  Goods  for  fort- 
ing  their  Cargoes  to  the  Englljh  Colonies,  without 
fending  to  England  for  them  ;  and  it  is  necefTary  to 
mention  it  here,  becaufe  it  has  been  objected  by  feme, 
that  the  Scots  could  not  fend  a  fortable  Cargo  to  Ame- 
rica,  without  buying  from  England;  which,  coming 
through  many  Hands,  and  by  a  long  Carriage,  muft 
confequently  be  fo  dear,  that  the  Englijb  Merchants 
could  under-fell  them. 

It  is  very  probable  indeed,  that  fome  things  cannot 
be  had  here  fo  well  as  from  England^  fo  as  to  make  out 
fuch  a  fortable  Cargo  as  the  Virginia  Merchants  in 
London  fhip  off,  whofe  Entries  at  the  Cuftom-houfe 
confift  fometimes  of  200  Particulars,  as  Tin,  Turnery, 
Milanery,  Upholftery,  Cutlery,  and  other  Crooked-lans 
Wares  ;  in  fbort,  fomewhat  of  every  thing,  either 
for  Wearing  or  Houfe-furniture,  building  Houfes  or 
Ships. 

But  though  the  Scots  cannot  do  all  this,  we  may 
reckon  up  what  they  can  furnifh,  which  they  have  not 
only  in  fufficient  Quantities,  but  fome  in  greater  Per- 
fection than  in  England  itfelf. 

1.  They  have  Woolen  Manufaclures  of  their  own, 
fuch  as   Stirling  Serges,    Mufftlburgb  Stuffs,  Aberdeen 
Stockens,  Edinburgh  Shalloons,  Blankets,  fcfr. 

2.  The  Trade  with  England  being  open*  they  have 
now  all    the  Manclefter,  Sheffield,   and    Birmingham 
Wares,    and    likr-  -fe    the    Cloths,    Kerfeys,  Half- 
thicks,   Duffels,  of    cens,  and  cuarfe   Manufactures 
of  the  North  -of  xngMrui,  brought  as  cheap  or  cheaper 

to 


i $6  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scot!.. 

to  them  by  Borfe-packs,  as  they  are  carried  to  London* 
it  being  a  lefs  Diftance. 

3.  They  have  Linens  of  moft  Kinds,  efpecially  Dia- 
pers and  Table-linen,  Damafks,  and  many  other  Sorts 
not  known  in  England,  and  cheaper  than  there,  be- 
caufe  made  at  their  own  Doors, 

4.  What  Linens  they  want  from  Holland  or  Ham- 
lurgh,  they  import  from  thence,  as  cheap  as  the  Englijh 
can  do;  and  for  Muflins,  their  own  are  very  acceptable, 
and  cheaper  than  in  England. 

5.  Gloves  they  make  better  and  cheaper  than  in 
England-,  for  they  fend  great  Quantities  thither. 

6.  Another  Article,  which  is  very  eonfiderable  here, 
is,   Servants,    whom   they  can  tranfport  in   greater 
Plenty,  and  upon  better  Terms,  than  the  Engli/h,  with- 
out the  fcandalous  Art  of  Kidnapping,  Wheedling, 
Betraying,  and  the  like ;    for  the  poor  People  offer 
themfelves  faft  enough,  and  think  it  their  Advantage,  as 
it  certainly  is,  to  ferve  out  their  Times  foberly  in  the 
foreign  Plantations,  and  then  become  diligent  Planters 
for  themfelves  j  which  is  a  much  wifer  Courfe,  than 
to  turn  Thieves,  and  then  be  tranfported  to  fave  them 
from  the  Gallows.     This  may  be  given  as  a  Reafon, 
and,  I  believe,  it  is  the  only  one,  \vhy  fo  many  more 
of  the  Scots  Servants,  who  go  over  to  Virginia,  fettle 
and  thrive  there,   than  of  the  Englijh ;    which  is  fo 
certainly  true,  that  if  it  holds  on  for  many  Years  more, 
Virginia  may  be  rather  called  a  Scots  than  an  Englijh 
Plantation. 

I  might  mention  many  other  Particulars ;  but  thefe 
are  fuffident  to  fhew,  that  the  Scots  Merchants  are  not 
at  a  Lofs,  how  to  make  up  fortable  Cargoes  to-  fend  to 
the  Plantations  ;  and  that,  if  we  can  outdo  them  in 
fome  Things,  they  are  able  to  outdo  us  in  others.  If 
they  are  under  any  Difadvamages  in  the  Trade  I  am 
fpeaking  of,  it  is,  that  they  may  not,  perhaps,  havefo 
ea,.  a  vtnt  and  Confumption  for  the  Goods  they 
bring  back,  as  the  Englijh  have  at  London,  Brijlol,  or 

Liverpool  i 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  137 

Liverpool ;  for  which  Reafon,  they  have  lately  fet  up  a 
Wharf  at  Alkway  in  the  Forth,  whence  they  fend 
their  Tobacco  and  Sugars  thither  by  Land- carriage, 
and  fhip  them  off  from  thence  for  Holland,  Hamburgh* 
or  London,  as  the  Market  offers ;  and  indeed  they 
carry  on  a  profitable  Trade  with  England  in  Tobacco, 
from  the  Difference  of  Duty,  6fV. 

Now,  though  the  carrying  their  Tobacco  and 
Sugars  feveral  Miles  over  Land  may  be  fome  Difad- 
vantage  5  yet  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  calculated, 
how  much  fooner  the  Voyage  is  made  from  Glafgoinr 
to  the  Capes  of  Virginia,  than  from  London,  the  Dif- 
ference will  be  made  up  in  the  Freight,  and  in  the 
Expence  of  the  Ships,  efpecially  in  time  of  War,  when 
the  Channel  is  thronged  with  Privateers,  and  the  Ships 
wait  to  go  in  Fleets  for  fear  of  Enemies ;  for  the 
Glafgow  VefTels  are  no  fooner  out  of  the  Firth  of 
Clyde,  but  they  ftretch  away  to  the  North -weft,  are 
out  of  the  Road  of  the  Privateers  immediately,  and 
are  often  at  the  Capes  of  Virginia  before  the  London 
Ships  get  clear  of  the  Channel.  Nay,  even  in  Times 
ot:  Peace,  they  mufl  always  be  allowed,  one  time  withr 
another,  at  leaft  14  or  20  Days  Difference  in  the 
Voyage,  both  going  out  and  coming  in,  which,  taken 
together,  is  a  Month  or  fix  Weeks  in  the  whole 
Voyage;  and,  confidering  Wear  and  Tear,  Victuals 
and  Wages,  this  makes  a  confiderable  Difference  in 
the  Trade. 

One  thing  ftiil  I  rnuft  take  notice  of,  before  I  quit 
Glafgow.  I  have  mentioned,  more  than  once,  the 
Duties  laid  on  Ale  and  Beer  fold  in  divers  Towns  in 
Scotland,  for  the  Benefit  and  public  Emolument  of  the 
faid  Towns  ;  but  have  here  to  take  notice  of  the  like 
Duty  laid  for  a  different  Purpofe,  that  is  to  fay,  for  a 
Punishment.  The  Cafe  was  this : 

When  the  Malt-duty  was  extended,  for  the  firft 
Time  to  Scotland,  it  occafioned  much  murmuring; 
and  particularly  Danid  Campbell,  Efqj  who  lived  at 


138  4TOVR.  thro  Scotl. 

Glafgow,  and  was  Member  for  that  Town,  having 
given  his  Vote  for  it  in  Parliament,  the  Populace  rofe, 
entered  his  Houfe,  deftroyed  all  his  Goods  and  Fur- 
niture, and  committed  other  Atfs  of  Violence  and 
Outrage. 

This  the  Legiflature  refenting,  as  a  Defiance  of 
lawful  Authority,  an  A&  pafled,  in  the  I2th  of  King 
George  1.  1723,  to  take  from  the  Town  ofGlafgoui 
the  Benefits  of  an  A&  before  pafled,  for  laying  a  Duty 
of  two  Pennies  Scots  on  every  Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer 
brewed  for  Sale  in  the  faid  City,  and  its  Privileges,; 
and  vefting  it  for  the  Remainder  of  the  Term,  which 
was  for  13  Years  to  come,  in  his  Majefty,  to  be  put 
under  the  Commiffioners  of  Excife,  in  order  to  raife 
the  Sum  of  6080 /.  for  fatisfying  the  Damages  and 
Lofles  fuftained  by  Mr.  Campbell  in  the  faid  Riot ;  but 
it  provided,  that,  when  the  faid  Sum  was  paid,  the 
Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots  was  to  return,  for  the  Re- 
mainder of  the  Term,  to  the  Magistrates,  for  the  Pur- 
pofes  for  which  they  were  originally  granted.  This 
occafioned  no  good  Blood,  it  may  be  believed,  be- 
tween the  City  and  Mr.  Campbell ;  but  yet,  this  was 
not  the  laft  Time  this  City  had  the  Honour  to  be  re- 
prefented  in  Parliament  by  the  fame  Gentleman,  as  it 
is  joined  with  the  Burghs  of  Renfrew,  Ruglen,  and 
Dunbarton ! — So  placable,  and  fo  forgiving,  are  the 
generous  Scotijk  Nation  j  or,  at  leaft,  fo  little  Title 
has  the  City  of  Glafgow  in  particular  to  the  National 
Motto  of  Scotland  !  Nor  did  this  good  Behaviour  turn 
out  to  the  Difadvantage  of  the  City  j  for,  in  the  gth  of 
George  II.  a  new  Adt  pafled,  continuing  the  former 
A&  for  25  Years  longer,  and  extending  it  to  the  Vil- 
lages of  Gorbells  and  Part  Glafgow>  both  which  Places 
were  in  the  Jurifdiclion  of  the  City,  and  reaped  all 
their  Advantages  from  its  Neighbourhood  ;  the  latter 
cfpecially,  at  which  the  People  of  Glafgow  had  built, 
and  conltantly  maintained,  a  very  commodious  Har- 
bour, and  yet  were  neither  of  them  in  the  former  A<£t 

Here 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Here  is  a  Cuftom-houfe,  which  is  a  handfome  Build- 
ing, and  has  a  fair  Eftablifhment  of  Officers,  and  the 
Jurifdidion  of  the  whole  Firth  and  River  on  both 
Sides. 

A  Society  has  been  lately  erected  at  Glafgow,  under 
the  Name  of  The  Glajgow  Charitable  Marine  Society  ; 
the  End  of  which  is  to  provide  for  fuch  Seamen  as 
(hall  become  old  or  difkbled  in  the  Service  of  the 
Merchants  of  that  City,  and  alfo  to  afford  Relief  for 
their  poor  Widows  and  Children. 

From  Glafgow  I  went  eight  Miles  Southward  to* 
Hamilton^  a  Town  pleafant  and  well-built,  the  Church 
of  which  is  the  Burying-place  of  the  Noble  Family  of 
Hamilton.  But  it  is  chiefly  noted  for  its  fine  Palace, 
the  Seat  of  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  premier  Peer  of 
Scotland^  and  nearly  related  to  the  Royal  Family  of  the 
Stuarts.  The  Houfe  at  prefent  is  large,  though  Part 
of  the  Defign  was  unfiniihed  when  I  was  there.  It 
has  a  fair  Front,  with  two  Wings,  and  two  more  are 
laid  out  in  the  Ichnography  of  the  Building,  which 
were  not  then  begun,  The  great  Court -yard  before 
the  Houfe  is  fpacious,  and  was  to  be  baluftraded  with- 
Iron,  between  Pillars  of  Stone,  as  that  of  Dalkeith  is  j, 
and  behind  it  is  a  noble  Parterre,  adorned  with  Sta- 
tues ;  and,  lower,  fpacious  Bounds  for  a  Canal  and 
Full- ponds,  with  large  Gardens  on  each  Side. 

The  Front  is  very  magnificent,  all  of  white  Free- 
ftone,  with  regular  Ornaments  according  to  the  Rules 
of  Art.  The  Wings  are  very  deep.  The  -Apart- 
ments are  truly  noble,  and  more  fit  for  the  Court  of  a 
Prince,  than  the  Houfe  of  a  Subject.  The  Piclures» 
the  Furniture,  and  other  Decorations,  are  exquifitely 
fine,  and  fuitable  to  the  Dignity  of  the  PoflefTors. 

The  Situation  of  the  Houfe  has  all  the  Advantage 
imaginable ;  for  it  ftands  in  a  plain  Country,  near 
enough  to  the  Banks  of  Clyde  to  enjoy  the  Profpeft  of 
its  Stream,  and  yet  far  enough  from  it  to  be  out  of  the 
Reach  of  its  Torrents  and  Floods. 

The 


140  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scott. 

The  Offices  of  this  Palace  join  the  Town.  Ad- 
joining to  the  great  Park  is  a  very  romantic  Garden, 
called  Baronchuh,  which  confifts  of  feven  hanging 
Terras-walks,  down  to  a  River-fide,  with  a  wild 
Wood  full  of  Birds  on  the  oppofite  Side  of  the  River. 
In  fome  of  thefe  Walks  are  Banquetting-houfes,  with 
Walks  and  Grottoes,  and  all  of  them  rilled  with  large 
Evergreens, 

The  great  Park  is  about  feven  Miles  in  Circum- 
ference, and  noted  for  its  fine  Oaks  and  Firs  j  and 
the  fmall  River  Avon  runs  through  it.  It  is  walled 
round  with  Stone,  and  well-ftocked  with  Deer.  The- 
lefTer  Park  is  rather  a  great  Inclofure,  than  a  Park  ; 
though  this,  as  well  as  the  other,  is  extremely  well 
planted  with  Trees.  The  Gardens  are  finely  defigned  j 
but  I  cannot  fay  they  are  fo  well  finifhed  and  kept  as 
thofe  at  Drumlanrig. 

Rughn  is  another  Town  in  this  County,  "which 
gives  Title  of  Earl  to  a  Branch  of  the  Family  of  Ha- 
milton. 

Here  are  alfo  the  Town  and  Caftls  of  Douglas^  which 
gives  Title  and  Surname  to  the  Dukes  of  Douglas ;  of 
which  Family  more  anon. 

Crawford-  Lindfey,  in  this  County,  gives  Title  alfo 
to  the  fearl  of  Crawford^  who  claims  Precedency  as 
firft  Earl. 

In  Crawford-Moor^.  Gold  has  been  found  in  the 
Sand  of  the  Brooks  after  Rain,  and  that  in  pretty 
large  Pieces;  and  they  have  dug:  up  Lapis  Lazuli 
there.  The  Remains  of  z  Roman  Caufeway  are  to  be 
feen  in  this  County,  from  one  End  to  the  other. 

We  then  turned  to  the  Left  for  Stirlingjhlre^  and, 
after  palling  the  Clyde^  came  to  Kilfytb,  a  good  plain 
Country  Burgh,  tolerably  well  built,  but  not  large, 
near  which  the  Marquis  of  Montrofe  gave  a  great 
Overthrow  to  the  Covenanters  in  the  Civil  Wars. 
Here,  upon  a  particular  Occafion,  we  went  to  fee 
Calendar- Houf e>  the  Seat  of  the  unhappy  Earl  of  Kil- 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

tnarnock)  Commander  of  the  Rebel  Buffers  in  1745. 
It  is  an  old  Building,  that  had  been  fome  time  in  De- 
cay ;  but  has  on  the  Back  of  it,  upon  an  Hill,  a  fine 
Wood  of  Firs.  In  the  Front  is  a  vaft  Space  of  level 
Ground,  the  Forth  keeping  its  Courfe  in  the  Middle  ; 
and  the  great  Number  of  Gentlemens  Seats  on  either 
Side  the  Banks  of  the  Forth  yields  a  noble  Profpeft 
from  hence.  Thefe  Houfes  are  of  white  Stone,  the 
Roofs  covered  with  blue  Slate,  which  make  an  agree- 
able Glittering  when  the  Sun  (bines  upon  them. 

The  Town  of  Falkirk  is  about  a  Mile  from  Calen- 
dar- Houfe  ;  but  has  nothing  remarkable  in  it,  except 
the  other  old  decayed  Houfe  of  the  Earl  of  Calendar. 

I  fhall  fay  nothing  of  the  Battle  that  was  fought  in 
1745,  at  Falkirk,  between  the  King's  Forces  and  the 
Rebels,  referring  myfelf  to  the  latter  End  of  this  my 
Northern  Tour,  for  a  particular  Account  of  the  Rife, 
Progrefs,  and  Extinction,  of  that  unnatural  and  un- 
provoked Rebellion.  Falkirk  is  a  Burgh  or  Barony, 
fituated  on  a  rifing  Ground.  A  notable  Battle  was 
fought  here  between  King  Edwardl.  and  the  Scots. 

T'or-J-p'ood  is  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  this  Town. 
It  chiefly  confifts  of  Firs  and  Beech.  It  was  thought 
the  Rebels  would  have  made  a  Stand  here,  when  his 
Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  marched  to  the  Relief  ©f 
Stirling  Cajfle,  then  befseged  by  them.  The  Town 
of  Stirling^  nine  Miles  off,  being  built,  like  Edinburgh^ 
on  an  Hill,  makes  a  fine  Appearance  from  hence. 

About  Falkirk  we  plainly  faw  the  Remains  of  the 
antient  Work,  which  they  call  Severus's  Wall,  rfdfi- 
en's  Wall,  or  Graham's  Dyke  (for  it  is  known  by  all 
thefe  Names)  ;  built  by  the  Romans  crofs  this  narrow 
Part  of  the  Country,  and  fortified  with  Redoubts  and 
Stations  to  defend  the  South  Country  from  the  Incur- 
fions  of  the  Pifts,  Irijh,  and  other  wild  Nations,  in  the 
Highlands.  This  Wall  reached  from  Dunbriton  Firth 
(fo  they  called  the  Firth  of  Clyde)  to  the  Forth,  and 
was  feveral  Times  repaired,  till  the  Dedrudion  of  the 


^  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl, 

Roman  Empire  in  Britain^  with  which  it  perifhed.  Yet 
neither  this,  while  it  flood,  nor  the  ftronger  one  at 
Newcaftle^  called  Severus's  Wall,  could  fo  well  pre- 
ferve  the  Country  from  the  Invafion  of  Pifts  zn&Sc*ts9 
but  the  Romans  were  often  obliged  to  fend  powerful 
Succours  to  the  Relief  of  the  diftrefTed  Britons.  Cam- 
den  thinks,  that  this  Wall  was  built  by  Antoninus  Pius9 
who,  being  adopted  by  Adrian^  aflumed  his  Name. 
Be  this  as  it  will,  it  is  certain,  th|pin  all  the  Scotifo 
Hiftories,  it  is  called  Graham  's  Dyke.  I  have  already, 
in  Vol.  III.  given  the  Account  of  this  famous  Wail, 
from  the  lately  publifhed  Work  of  John  Warburton^ 
Efq;  intitled  Vallum  Romanum  ;  to  which  I  refer. 

There  were  along  the  Wall  great  and  noble  Forts, 
flrorjgly  intrenched,  and,  though  within  the  Wall, 
able  to  receive  a  whole  Army  together.  The  Forts 
which  remained  in  Mr.  Font's  Time,  who  traced 
them  all  *,  were  thefe  ;  one  at  Langtoun,  a  Mile  Eaft 
of  Falkirk  ;  one  juft  at  Rouintree  Burnkead  ;  one  at 
Wefter-Gowden^  about  St.  Helen's  Chapel  ;  one  at  the 
Croykill'y  a  very  great  one  at  the  Top  of  the  Banbill  ; 
one  at  Atcb'indeevy\  one  at  Kirkintilloch,  or  Kaerpen- 
collocb  ;  one  at  Eafl-Calder  ;  one  at  Hilltoun-Calder  ; 
one  at  Balmudy  ;  one  at  Simerflone^  and  over  Kifoin 
River,  and  Carejloun  ;  one  at  Atermynit  ;  one  at  Bal- 
caflle^  over-againft  Banbill  \  one  at  Kaellybe^  over- 
againft  Croykill^  one  at  the  Rock-hill^  over-againft  the 
Weft-wood-^  a  large  one  at  Bankyir^  over-againft  Caftle- 
Cairy  ;  one  at  Dumbafe.  In  the  Ruins  of  that  at 
Bankyir  was  found  a  large  Iron  Shovel,  or  fome  In- 
ftrurnent  refembling  it,  fo  weighty  that  it  could  hardly 
be  lifted  by  one  Man.  At  the  fame  Fort  alfo  were 
difcovered  feveral  Sepulchres  covered  with  large  rough 
Stones  ;  and  at  Dun-Chroe  Cbyr,  by  Mony-Abroch, 
were  formerly  large  Buildings,  The  Length  of  the 
Wall  was  36  ?cots  Miles,  beginning  between  t^ueens- 


*  See  that  Gentleman's  Defcription,  in  Dr,  dbfon's  Tranflation  «f 
'    Britannia^ 

(trry 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  145 

ferry  and  Abercorn ;  it  ranged  along  Weft  by  the 
Grange  and  Kineil,  or  Innerevingy  fo  on  to  Falkirk  ; 
from  whence  it  proceeded  direclly  to  the  Foreft  of 
Cumernald\  next,  it  ran  to  the  great  Fort  at  the 
Banhill,  where  have  been  found  feveral  Stones,  fome 
with  Pictures  engraven  upon  them,  and  with  Infcrip- 
tions :  from  whence  it  went  to  the  Peel  of  Kirkin- 
tlllocb)  the  greateft  Fort  of  all ;  and  fo  Weftward  to 
Dumbarton^  with  a  great  Ditch  upon  the  North-fide 
of  the  Wall  all  along.  It  had  alfo  many  fquare  For- 
tifications in  form  of  Roman  Camps. 

The  Lowlands  between  the  Sea  and  high  Country 
are  generally  narrow.  Near  the  Coaft  are  many  little 
Hills  which  overlook  the  Sea,  and  difcover  Towns  at 
aDiftance,  which  renders  the  Profpe&  very  pleafant  on 
that  Side  ;  and  there  is  fomething  ftriking  in  the  large 
rugged  romantic  Mountains  on  the  other. 

But  the  Towns  which  feem  large  and  fair 
in  the  diftant  Profpecl,  like  almoft  every  thing  elfe, 
lofe  their  Beauty  in  proportion  as  they  are  ap- 
proached ;  a  Meannefs  is  foon  difcovered,  which  (hews 
the  Condition  of  the  Inhabitants ;  all  the  Outlkirts, 
which  increafed  the  Extent  of  them  while  they  were 
remote,  are  found  to  be  nothing  more  than  the  Ruins 
of  little  Floufes,  which  have  been  deferted  by  the 
Inhabitants;  for  when  thefe  Houfes  begin  to  decay, 
they  do  not  often  repair  them,  but,  taking  out  the 
Timber,  let  the  Walls  remain,  and  build  anew  upon 
another  Spot.  The  fifhing  Towns  in  particular  are 
extremely  difagreeable,  as  the  Haddocks  and  Whitings, 
which  hang  upon  Lines  to  dry  along  the  Sides  of  the 
Houfes,  from  one  End  to  the  other,  fill  the  Air  with 
an  intolerable  Stink.  It  does  not  however  appear 
from  this  Nufancc,  that  the  Inhabitants  fuffer  in  their 
Health  ;  for  trie  >'^;ldren  are  more  numerous  than  in 
the  inland  T  -\v;\>,  _,.:;],  though  they  are  half  naked, 
yet  they  are  iicfh- coloured,  healthy,  and  flrong. 

From 


144  A  TOUR  thro  Scot). 

From  KHfytb)  we  mounted  the  flills,  black  and 
frightful  as  they  were,  to  find  the  Road  over  the 
Moors  and  Mountains  to  Stirling ;  and,  being  directed 
by  Guides,  we  came  to  the  River  Carron.  The 
Channel  of  a  River  appeared  indeed,  and  looked  as  if 
it  had  been  cut  out  by  Art  through  horrid  Precipices, 
to  mark  out  a  Courfe  for  the  Water  ;  but  yet  not  a 
Drop  was  at  that  Time  to  be  feen.  Great  Stones, 
fquare,  and  formed  as  if  cut  out  by  Hand,  of  a  prodi- 
gious Size,  lay  fcattered  in  a  confufed  manner  in  the 
very  Courfe  of  the  River,  which,  as  we  were  told,  the 
Fury  of  the  Waters,  at  other  times,  had  hurried  down 
from  the  Mountains.  If  fo,  they  muft  have  been 
fome  Ages  upon  their  Journey  down  the  Stream  :  for 
it  is  not  probable,  that  a  Flood  often  comes  with  a 
Force  fufficient  to  move  fuch  Stones  as  thefe,  unlefs  a 
great  Quantity  of  Ice,  as  well  as  Water,  comes  down 
upon  them  together.  But,  in  all  Probability,  they  are 
not  driven  down  by  the  Force  of  the  Water  at  all ; 
but  are  Roman  Monuments ;  of  which  more  by- 
and-by. 

Here  we  pafled  another  Bridge  of  one  Arch,  not 
quite  fo  large  as  that  we  favv  in  Galloway,  but  very 
like  it.  It  is  finely  built  of  Free-ftone ;  but  the  Shores 
being  flat,  it  rifes  fo-  high,  that  it  is  not  every  Head 
can  bear  to  ride  over  it.  But  there  was  a  Necefiity  of 
building  it  with  one  Arch  only  ;  far  no  Piers  in  the 
Middle  of  the  Channel  could  have  borne  the  Shock  of 
the  great  Stones,  which  fometimes  come  down  this 
Stream. 

From  hence,  defcending  on  the  North  fide,  we  had 
a  View  of  the  Firth  of  Forth  on  our  Right,  and  of 
the  Caflle  of  Stirling  on  our  Left.  In  going  to  the 
latter,  we  pafled  the  Water  of  Bannockburn^  famous  in 
the  Scots  Hiftory  for  the  great  Battle  fought  here  be- 
tween King  Robert  de  Bruce^  and  the  Englifo  Army 
commanded  by  King  Edward  II.  in  Perfon  ;  in  which 
the  Englffi  were  utterly  overthrown,  and  that  with  fo 

terrible 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  145 

terrible  a  Slaughter,  that  though  it  was  the  greatefl 
Army  that  ever  marched  from  England  into  Scotland^ 
very  few  efcaped,  and  the  King  with  much  ado  faved 
himfelf  by  Flight.  How  he  could  fave  himfelf  by  a 
little  Boat  (as  Mr,  Camden  fays)  I  cannot  underftand, 
there  being  no  River  nearr  that  had  any  Boats  in  ir, 
but  the  Forth  j  and  then  the  King  muft  have  fled 
North,  whereas  he  certainly  fled  to  England  with  all 
the  Speed  he  could.  He  might,  indeed,  have  made 
life  of  a  Boat  to  pafs  the  Tweed ;  but  that  was  at  leafl 
50  Miles  from  the  Field  of  Battle. 

Whether  the  Scots  magnify  this  Viclory  or  net,  is 
not  my  Bufmefs  to  inquire.  'Tis  certain  that  the 
EngUJb  Army  was  totally  overthrown  here  ;  for  they 
loft  50,000  Men,  among  whom  were  abundance  of 
their  Nobility  and  Gentry. 

This  Place  is  alfo  remarkable  for  the  execrable  Mur- 
der of  King  James  III,  whofe  young  Son  was  by  fome 
difcontented  Nobles  worked  up  to  this  impious  Deed. 
But  when  his  Underitanding  ripened,  he  faw  the 
A6tion  in  its  proper  Light,  and  was  fo  greatly  affecled 
by  it,  that  he  did  Penance  for  it  ever  after,  by  conftantly 
wearing  an  Iron  Chain  near  his  Fleih. 

Stirling  was  our  next  Stage,  an  antient  Town,  and 
an  important  Pafs,  which,  together  with  D  unbar  t  on  ^  is 
the  Defence  of  the  Lowlands  againft  the  Highland;,- ; 
for,  as  one  very  properly  faid,  Dunbarton  is  the  Lock 
of  the  Highlands,  and  Stirling-Gajlle  keeps  the  Key. 
The  Town  is  fituated,  as  I  have  obferved,  exactly  as 
Edinburgh^  on  the  Ridge  of  an  Hill,  Hoping  down  on 
both  Sides,  and  the  Street  gradually  afcending  from 
the  Eaft  to  the  Caftle,  which  is  at  the  Weft- end.  It 
is  large  and  well  built,  and,  though  it  is  antient,  yet 
the  Buildings  are  not  unlike  thofe  of  Edinburgh. 

The  Church  is  alfo  a  very  fpacious  Building,  but 
not  Collegiate.  It  ftands  in  the  upper  Part  of  the 
Town,  towards  the  End,  is  of  good  Architecture,  and 
adorned  with  a  Igfty  Tower.  There  wus  formerly  a 

VOL,  IV.  H  Church, 


I46  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Church,'  or  rather  a  Collegiate  Chapel,  in  the  Caftle, 
and  likewife  a  private  Chapel,  or  Oratory,  in  the 
Palace,  for  the  Royal  Family ;  but  they  have  been 
long  difufed. 

Joining  to  the  Church,  on  the  Top  of  the  Hill,  is  a 
very  neat  Hofpital  for  decayed  Merchants,  after  the 
Manner  of  that  at  Dundee.  It  was  founded  by  James 
Cowen,  Merchant,  and  very  richly  endowed.  His 
Statue,  as  big  as  the  Life,  is  at  the  Top  of  the  Gate, 
with  an  Infcription  from  the  25th  of  St.  Matthew,  the 
35th  Verfe.  And  in  the  Garden  of  this  Hofpital  is  a 
pleafant  Bowling-green,  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Gentlemen 
and  Merchants. 

The  Caftle  is  not  fo  very  difficult  of  Accefs  as  that 
at  Edinburgh^  but  is  efteemed  equally  ftrong ;  for  the 
Works  are  able  to  mount  more  Cannon,  and  there  is 
a  Battery  that  commands  the  Bridge,  which  is  of  the 
utmoftpmportance,  and  feems  to  have  been  the  main 
End  and  Purpofe  for  which  it  was  creeled.  The  Walls, 
and  all  the  Outworks,  are  fofirm,  that  they  feem  in  as 
good  Condition  as  if  they  had  been  lately  built. 

The  Rebels,  in  the  Year  1745,  found  this  Caftle 
too  ftrong  for  them,  as  will  be  obferved  in  another 
Place.  It  was  defended  by  that  gallant  old  Officer 
Lord  Elakeney.  The  Batteries  they  had  raifed 
were  all  beaten  down  by  the  Caftle  Guns  as  faft  as 
creeled,  which  did  great  Execution  among  their  Men 
likewife;  and,  on  his  Royal  Highnefs's  marching  to 
its  Relief,  they  abandoned  their  Works  and  Cannon 
with  the  utmoft  Precipitation,  firft  blowing  up  their 
Powder- Magazine  in  the  Church  of  St.  Niman>  a 
little  Village  juft  by,  in  which  they  were  thought  to 
have  6000  lb.  Weight  of  Powder. 

I  vifited  the  Caftle,  and  went  over  the  noble  Mo- 
numents of  the  amazing  Grandeur  of  the  Scotijk 
Kings,  that  are  crumbling  into  Duft.  Here  is  a  fire 
Palace  built  by  King  James  V.  and  a  Parliament- 
houfe  fuperior  to  that  viWeftminfter* 

The 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

The  Palace  and  Royal  Apartments  are  all  in  Decay* 
and  likely  to  continue  fo.  This  is  at  prefent  alfo  the 
Fate  of  the  Palaces  of  Linlithgow,  Falkland,  Dunferm- 
ling,  and  all  the  other  Royal  Houfes  in  Scotland,  Holy- 
rood  houfe  at  Edinburgh  excepted. 

In  the  Park  adjoining  to  the  Caftle  were  formerly 
large  Gardens.  The  Figure  of  the  Walls  and  Grafs- 
plats  is  ftill  plainly  to  be  feen. 

The  Park  here  is  large  and  walled  about,  as  moft  of 
the  Parks  in  Scotland  are ;  but  there  is  little  or  no 
Wood  in  it.  The  Earls  of  Mar,  of  the  Name  of 
Erfkine,  who  claimed  to  be  Hereditary  Keepers  of  the 
King's  Children,  and  of  this  Caftle,  had  an  Houfe  at 
the  upper  End  of  the  Town,  very  finely  fituated  for 
Profpect,  but  not  for  Security,  being  too  near  the 
Caftle ;  for  were  the  Caftle  ever  to  fuffer  a  clofe  Siege, 
and  be  vigoroufly  defended,  this  Houfe  would  run  a 
great  Rifque  of  being  demolifhed  on  one  Side  or  other: 
befides,  this  Nearnefs  to  the  Caftle  makes  the  Site 
more  confufed  to  the  Eye. 

From  a  pretty  little  Flower-garden  upon  one  of  the 
Baftions  on  the  North-fide  of  the  Caftle,  we  had  a 
moft  agreeable  Profpecl:  over  the  Valley,  and  of  the 
Meanders,  Turnings,  or  Reaches  of  the  River  Forth, 
which  are  extremely  beautiful.  They  are  fo  fpacious, 
and  return  fo  near  themfelves  with  fo  regular  and 
exact  a  Sweep,  that,  I  believe,  the  like  to  it  is  not  to 
be  feen  in  Britain,  and,  perhaps,  not  in  Europe,  efpe- 
cially  in  fo  large  a  River.  The  Seine,  indeed,  be- 
tween Paris  and  Roan,  fetches  a  Sweep  fomething 
like  thefe,  and  fome  Miles  longer;  but  then  it  is  but 
one  :  whereas  here  are  three  double  Reaches,  which 
make  fix  Returns  together,  and  each  of  them  above 
three  Scots  Miles  in  Length:  and  as  the  Bows  are 
almoft  equal  for  Breadth,  as  the  Reaches  are  for 
Length,  it  makes  the  Figure  complete.  It  is  a  truly 
admirable  Sight,  and  continues  from  a  little  below  the 
great  Bridge  at  Stirling  to  Alkway,  the  Seat  of  the 
H  2  Earls 


i48  4  TOUR  tbnf  Seotl. 

Earls  of  Mar.  The  Form  of  this  Winding  may  be 
conceived  by  the  Length  of  the  Way ;  for  it  is  24 
Miles  from  Stirling  to  Alloway  by  Water,  and  hardly 
four  Miles  by  Land. 

One  would  think  thefe  large  Windings  of  the  Stream 
would  very  much  check  the  Tide  ;  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, we  found  the  Tide  of  Flood  make  up  very  ftrong 
under  Stirling-bridge,  though  it  does  not  flow  above 
feven  or  eight  Miles  farther ;  for  the  Stream  grows 
narrow  apace,  and  the  rapid  Current  of  all  Rivers  in 
this  Country  checks  the  Tide,  when  it  comes  into 
narrow  Limits.  The  fame  is  the  Cafe  in  the  Tyne  at 
Newctiftle*  and  the  Tweed  at  Berwick ;  in  both  of 
•which,  though  the  Tide  flows  as  ftrong  in  at  the 
Mouth  of  thefe  Rivers  as  in  this,  yet  the  Navigation 
goes  not  near  fo  far  up. 

The  Bridge  at  Stirling  has  only  four  Arches ;  but 
they  are  very  large,  and  the  Channel  widens  confider- 
ably  below  it,  At  Alloway  it  is  above  a  Mile  broad, 
and  deep  enough  for  Ships  of  any  Burden  ;  fo  that  the 
Glafgow  Merchants  are  certainly  in  the  Right  to  fettle 
Warehoufes  there,  and  fhip  off  their  Goods  for  the 
Eaftern  Countries. 

I  was  very  curious  to  inquire  into  the  Courfe  of 
this  River,  as  I  had  before  into  that  of  the  Clyde^  to 
fee  if  there  was  a  Poflibility  of  uniting  their  Waters 
for  an  inland  Navigation  ;  becaufe  I  had  obferved, 
that  the  Charts  and  Plans  of  the  Country  brought 
them  almoft  to  meet.  But  when  I  came  to  furvey 
the  Ground  exaclly,  I  found  the  Map-makers  greatly 
rniflaken  ;  and  that  they  had  not  only  given  the  Situ- 
ation and  Courfes  of  the  Rivers  wrong,  but  the  Dif- 
tances  alfo.  However,  upon  the  whole,  I  faw  plainly, 
that,  notwithstanding  feveral  Circumftances  which 
might  obftru<St  it,  and  caufe  the  Workmen  to  fetch 
Come  winding  Turns  out  of  the  Way,  yet  a  Canal 
of  about  1 8  Miles  would  fairly  join  the  Rivers,  and 
make  a  clear  Navigation  from  the  Irijh  to  the  German 

Sea; 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  749 

Sea  ;  and  that  th^s  could  be  done  without  any  com'i- 
derable  ObftrufHoft:  for  they  would  not  have  Oo 
cafion  for  above  four  Sluices  in  the  whole  Way, 
and  thofe  only  to  head  a  Bafon,  or  Receptacle,  to 
contain  a  Fluih  of  Water,  to  pufli  on  the  VefTels 
either  Way,  as  Occafion  required. 

How  eafy  fuch  a  Work  would  be,  and  how  advan- 
tageous, not  to  Scotland  only,  but  even  to  England 
and  Ireland,  the  Thing  itfelf  will  explain  at  firft  Sight. 
]  could  enter  upon  particular  Defcriptior.s  of  the 
Work,  and  anfwer  all  the  Obje6tions  raifeti  from  the 
great  Quantity  of  Waters  in  the  Winter,  and  the 
Force  and  Fury  of  their  Streams  :  but  I  have  no  room 
for  it  here;  befides,  I  have  touched  upon  this  Subject 
twice  before. 

There  is  a  very  confiderable  Manufacture  at  Stirling 
for  Serges  or  Shalloons,  which  they  make  and  dye 
very  well;  nor  has  the  Englijb  Manufacture  for 
Shalloons  broken  in  fo  much  upon  them,  as  it  was  ap- 
prehended it  would.  This  Manufacture  is  a  great 
Support  to  the  poor  People  that  are  employed  in  it,. 
who  are  thereby  enabled  to  live  very  comfortably. 

We  had  here  a  very  line  Profped  both  Ea(i  and 
Weft  :  Eaftward  we  could  plainly  fee  the  CaClle  of 
Edinburgh,  and  the  Hill,  called  Arthur's  Seat,  in  the 
Royal  Park  at  Holy-rood-houfe ,  and  Weftward  we 
could  fee  Dunbarton  Caftle.  To  the  Northward  we 
faw  Dumblain,  and  the  Field  of  Battle,  called  Sheriff- 
rnuir,  between  it  and  Stirling. 

But  our  Bufmefs  was  not  to  the  North  yet;  for, 
having  a  Part  of  the  Border  to  view,  we  went  from 
Stirling  to  the  South-eaft,  over  feme  of  the  fame  Hills 
we  patted  at  our  coming  hither,  that  we  might  leave 
nothing  behind  to  oblige  us  to  come  this  way  again. 
The  Duke  of  Argyle  has  a  fmall  Houfe  here,  which 
the  Family  call  the  Lowland  Houfe,  to  diftinguifo  it 
from  the  many  Seats  that  noble  Family  is  pofTelTed  of 
in  the  Highlands.  The  Seat  formerly  belonged  to  the 
H  3  -Earls 


I  jo  'A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Earls  of  Stirling.     The  County  round  it,  South  of  the 
Forth)  is  called  Stir  ling/hire,  or  Strfcelingjhirt. 

Stirling  was  one  of  the  Boundaries  of  the  Roman, 
Empire  in  Britain,  as  appears  by  the  Infcription  on  a 
Stone  below  the  Caftle,  towards  the  Bridge,  importing, 
that  one  of  the  Wings  of  their  Army  kept  Guard 
there.  On  the  Right  of  the  Town  ftood  the  noble 
Abbey  of  Cambujkennetb.  The  River  Carron  is  fa- 
mous for  fome  Roman  Monuments,  particularly  two 
little  Hills,  called  by  the  Vulgar  Dunipace,  i.  e.  Hills 
of  Peace;  and,  two  Miles  lower,  is  a  round  Edifice 
of  Stone,  which,  by  the  Defcription,  refembles  what 
the  Romans  called  the  Temple  of  'Terminus.  But 
Buchanan  thinks,  they  were  rather  Monuments  of 
ibme  great  Actions  performed  here. 

From  Stirling  we  went  diredly  to  Linlithgow,  a 
large  Town,  well  built,  with  a  ftately  Town-houfe, 
but  moft  famous  for  the  noble  Palace  of  the  Kings  of 
Scotland,  which  is  the  leaft  decayed  of  all  the  reft, 
that  of  Holy-  rood  excepted  :  for  King  James  VI.  re- 
paired, or  rather  rebuilt  it ;  and  his  two  Sons,  Prince 
Henry^  and  Prince  Charles  (afterwards  King  of  Eng- 
land) had  Apartments  here,  which  a  Traveler  may 
eafily  diftinguifh  by  the  different  Coats  of  Arms, 
«fpecially  over  thofe  called  The  Prince's  Lodgings. 

This  Pala.jp  {lands  on  a  rifing  Ground,  which  runs 
into  the  Lak<;,4n  Form  of  an  Amphitheatre,  and  has  a 
Defcent  refembling  Terrace-walks.  There  are  two 
Towers  at  each  Corner  of  the  Court,  with  Apartments, 
and  a  curious  Fountain  in  the  Middle,  adorned  with- 
feveral  fine  Statues,  from  whence  the  Water  rifes  to  a 
good  Height.  A  noble  Park  alfo  belongs  to  it. 

The  Church  of  St.  Michael  makes  a  Part  of  this 
Building,  and  is  a  Wing  on  the  Right-hand  of  the  firft 
Court,  as  the  proper  Offices  make  the  Left.  The 
Inner-court  is  very  large  and  elegant  for  the  Tafte  of 
the  Times.  In  the  Middle  of  this  is  the  large  Fountain 

"I  have 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        151 

I  have  mentioned,  which  ftill  fhews  the  Remains  of 
fome  good  Carving,  and  other  Ornaments. 

Here  King  James  V,  reftored  the  Order  of  the 
Knights  of  Sf.  Andrew,  and  creeled  a  Throne  and 
Stalls  for  them  in  St.  Michael's  Church,  making  it  the 
Chapel  of  the  Order.  He  was  likewife  the  firft  who 
ordered  the  ThiJIle  to  be  added  to  the  Badge  of  the 
Order;  and  the  Motto,  viz.  Nemo  me  impune  laceffit, 
which  is  worn  about  it  in  the  Royal  Arms,  was  of  his 
Invention.  This  Prince  feems  to  have  been  very 
much  honoured  in  the  World  ;  for  he  wore  the  Badges 
of  three  Orders  befides  his  own ;  viz.  That  of  the 
Garter,  conferred  upon  him  by  his  Uncle,  the  King 
of  England-,  that  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  by  the 
Emperor,  then  King  of  Spain  ;  that  of  St.  Michael, 
by  the  King  of  France. 

In  his  Time  the  Green  Ribband  was  worn  by  the 
Knights  Companions  of  this  Order  ;  but  King  -fames 
VII.  changed  it  to  the  Blue,  like  that  of  the  Knights 
of  the  Garter  in  England.  After  the  Union,  Queen 
Anne,  the  Sovereign  of  both,  to  diftinguifh  them, 
reftored  the  Green  Ribband,  and  intended  to  have 
called  a  Chapter  of  the  Order,  to  bring  it  once  more 
to  its  full  Luftre  ;  but  was  prevented  by  Death. 

In  this  Town,  the  Earl  of  Murray,  Lord  Regent, 
was  murdered*  with  a  Mufquet-bullet  (hot  by  one 
Hamilton.  The  Earl  was  a  natural  Son  of  King 
James  V.  and,  afpiring  to  the  Crown,  joined  with  the 
Reformers,  having  firft  got  the  Revenues  of  the  Con- 
vents of  St.  Andrews  and  Pittenweem,  whereof  he  was 
Abbot,  or  Prior,  fecured  to  him  and  his  Heirs.  His 
Ambition  and  Intrigues  were  the  chief  Caufe  of  almoft 
all  the  Troubles  of  Queen  Mary's  Reign. 

At  Linlitbgow  is  a  great  Linen  Manufacture,  as 
there  is  at  Glafgow  ;  and  the  Water  of  the  Lake  here 
is  efteemed  fo  extraordinary  for  Bleaching  or  Whiten- 
ing of  Linen  Cloth,  that  a  vaft  deal  of  it  is  brought 
hither  from  other  Parts  of  the  Country  for  that 
H  4  Purpofe, 


ip  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Purpofe.  This  Lake  is  fituate  on  the  North -fide  of 
the  Town,  and  between  it  and  the  Palace  are  Terrace- 
walks,  which  are  fo  beautiful,  that  a  more  delightful 
Place  can  fcarce  be  feen. 

In  the  Year  1722,  an  Acl  pafled  for  laying  two 
Perries  Scots  on  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer  {old  in 
Linlitbgow,  and  its  Liberties,  in  order  to  repair  the 
public  Buildings,  which  were  run  to  Decay,  fuch  as 
the  Church  and  Town  houfe,  C5V.  to  fupply  fuch 
Parts  of  the  Town  with  frefh  Water  as  want  it ;  to 
pave  and  amend  the  Streets,  and  alfo  the  Avenues 
within  a  Mile  round  the  Town  ;  for  difcharging  the 
Town-Debts,  and  other  necefiary  Purpofes.  Great 
Progrefs  was  made  in  thefe  laudable  Undertakings  by 
virtue  of  this  Ad  ;  but  the  End  being  not  fufficiently 
attained,  nor  likely  to  be,  at  the  Expiration  of  the 
Ac\  thefe  Duties  were  farther  continued  for  21  Years 
more,  by  an  A6t  which  paffed  in  the  Year  1733. 

Forficben,  formerly  the  Refidence  of  the  Knights  of 
Malta ,  is  two  Miles  South- weft  from  Linlitbgow. 

Near  a  Place  called  Kips,  South  from  this  Town,  is 
an  antient  Chapel  or  Altar  of  great  unpolilhed  Stones, 
leaning  fo  as  to  fupport  one  another.  The  Vulgar 
call  them  Arthur's  Oven  ;  but  the  Learned  think  them 
to  be  a  Temple  of  Terminus  built  by  the  Romans  ;  and 
others  (till  there  are,  who  conjecture  them  to  be  a 
Temple  of  the  Celts  or  Druids.  Near  this  Chapel  or 
Altar  is  a  Circle  of  great  Stones,  and  on  two  adjacent 
Hills  are  the  Remains  of  old  Camps,  with  great  Heaps 
of  Stones,  and  antient  Graves,  which  fome  think 
Roman  Works. 

About  four  Miles  North  from  Linlitbgow  lies  the 
Caftle  of  Abercorn^  fuppofed  to  be  the  Kebenurnig  of 
B«fc,  where  began  the  Roman  Wall,  thought  to  be 
founded  by  Severus. 

From  Linlitbgow  we  turned  to  the  Right,  and  fol- 
lowing the  Clyde  upwards,  from  a  little  above  Hamilton, 
where  we  were  before,  we  came  into  the  Shire  of 

Clydfdale. 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  153 

Clydfdale.  This  Tra&  has  fome  Remains  of  Roman 
Antiquity;  for  from  Errlck-jlone  to  Mauls  Mitre^ 
which  borders  upon  the  Shire  of  Renfreiu,  are  evident 
Footfteps  of  a  Roman  Caufeway  for  feveraV  Miles 
together;  and  there  is  a  Tradition,  that  another 
Roman  Street  went  from  Lanerk  to  the  Roman  Camp 
near  Falkirk. 

Lanerk  is  the  Capital  of  this  County,  but  is  no 
extraordinary  Town ;     its  Bridge,  however,  is  very 
remarkable.     It  was  built  at  a  vaft  Expence   by  the 
Inhabitants :  but  the  violent  Current  of  the  Water  ren- 
dering the  keeping  it  in  Repair  too  chargeable  for  the 
Town  to  fupport,   and    making  it  require  frequent 
Reparations,  an  A61  of  the  Scotijh  Parliament  palled, 
Anno  1703,    impowering  them  to  collect  Tolls  for 
Pontage,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  fame.     This  A& 
was  in  Force  for  19  Years,  and  there  was  fo  much 
Reafon  for  it,  and  the  Bridge  was  of  fo  great  Ufe  to 
trie  Country,  that  though  the  Duties  expired  in  the 
Year  1722,  yet  the  Rates  were  voluntary   paid  for 
many  Years  ;   till,  certain  Difputes  arifmg  with  fome 
felfifh  Perfon,  who  wanted  to  reap  the  Fruits  of  other 
People's   Labours   for  nothing,  an  Act  was   pafled, 
in  the    loth   of  King  George  II.    for  enabling   the 
Magiftrates  to  repair  and  maintain  fo  ufeful  a  Work. 
This  ^61  is  to  continue  in  Force  for  31  Years,  and  is 
fo  reafonable,  that  perhaps  it  will  be  perpetuated,  if 
required:    for  the  Rates  are  only  6d.   Sterling  for 
every  Coach  or  Chariot,  drawn  by  four  or  more  Horfes  ; 
2  d.  for  every  Cart  or  Wheel-carriage  ;    i  d.  for  every 
Sledge  or  Horfe  loaded  or  unloaded;  two  thirds  of  a 
Penny  for  every  Ox,   Cow,   or  Bull ;   one-fixth  of  a 
Penny  for  every  Calf,  Hog,  Sheep,  or  Lamb  ;    and 
the  fame  for  every  Foot-Paflenger ;    who  muft  be  a 
worfe  Beaft  than  any  I  have  named,  to  grudge  it  for  fo 
great  a  Convenience :    Whether  it  has  or  not,  I  am 
not  able  at  prefent  to  fay. 

H  5  A  little 


[£54  ^fTOUR  tbrf          Scot*., 

A  little  below  this  Town  the  River  Douglas  falls 
into  the  Cfyat,  and  gives  the  Name  of  Douglajdale  to 
the  Lands  near  it.  In  a  Vale  near  this  River  flood  a 
very  old  Caftle,  which  had  been  the  paternal  Seat  of 
the  great  Family  of  Douglas  for  above  a  thoufand 
Years  j  but,  by  the  frequent  Additions  to  the  Build- 
Ing,  it  was  become  fuch  a  wild  irregular  Mafs,  that, 
at  a  Diftance,  it  feemed  rather  like  a  Town  than  a 
fmgle  Fabric,  though  the  Apartments  were  very 
noble. 

December  u,  1758,  This  ancient  Caftle  was  burnt 
down  by  an  accidental  Fire  ;  which  began  in  a  Room 
where  no  body  flept,  and  was  got  to  fo  great  a  Head 
before  it  was  difcovered,  that  it  was  altogether  im- 
pofiible  to  prevent  its  Progrefs.  The  Family  was 
alarmed  about  three  in  the  Morning,  at  which  Time 
the  Fire  was  fo  violent,  that  they  had  little  more  than 
Time  to  fave  their  Lives ;  fo  that  moft  of  the  valuable 
Furniture  of  the  Houfe,  Paintings,  Papers,  &c.  were 
deftroyed. 

The  complete  Hiftory  of  this  Family  of  Douglas 
would  take  up  a  Volume  by  itfelf,  as  it  actually  has  in 
a  late  Work,  where  the  Heroes  of  the  Name  are  fully 
fet  forth,  and  all  the  illuftrious  Actions  they  have  been 
concerned  in.  I  fhall  only  obferve,  that  there  are  no 
Jefs  than  feven  Branches  of  this  Family  in  the  Peerage 
of  Great  Britain  ;  namely,  the  Duke  of  Douglas,  who 
is  Chief  of  the  Name,  the  Duke  of  ^ueenjberry  and 
Dover,  the  Earls  of  Morton ,  Dunbartony  and  March, 
and  the  Lords  Mordington  and  Forfar,  the  latter  of 
whom  was  unhappily  killed  at  the  Fight  near  Dum- 
llain,  againft  the  Pretender. 

The  Country  abounds  with  Coals,  Peat,  and  Lime- 
ftone ;  but  what  turns  to  the  greatest  Profit,  are  the 
Lead -mines  belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Hopton  ;  not  far 
from  which  (after  Rains)  the  Country-people  find 
Pieces  of  Gold,  fome  of  which  are  of  a  confiderable 
Bignefs,  This  is  thought  to  be  what  Camden  calls 

Crawford- 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  ij^ 

Craw  ford- Moor,  where  Lapis  Lazuli  is  daily  dug  up 
with  litle  Trouble,  as  I  have  faid. 

Here  we  left  the  1  aft- mentioned  wild  Place  on  the 
Right,  and  went  Weftward  into  the  Shire  of  Peebles. 
The  firft  Town  we  came  to  of  any  Note  was  Feeble  st 
which  ftands  on  the  Bank  of  the  Tweed,  and  is  the 
Capital  of  the  County.  The  Town  is  fmall,  and 
but  indifferently  built  or  inhabited  :  yet  there  are  fome 
good  Houfes  in  it.  It  was  formerly  remarkable  for 
three  Churches,  three  Gates,  three  Streets,  and  three 
Bridges,  of  which  that  over  Tweed  has  five  Arches. 

The  Country  hereabouts  is  very  hilly ;  but  thofe 
Hills  are  covered  with  Sheep,  which  are  a  principal 
Part  of  the  Eftates  of  the  Gentry.  A  large  Quantity 
of  them  are  fent  into  England,  to  the  great  Damage  of 
the  Poor,  who  are  thereby  deprived  of  the  Advantage 
of  manufacturing  their  Wool.  They  ufed  formerly  to 
export  it  to  France;  but,  by  the  Ad  of  Union,  the 
Exportation  of  it  was  prohibited,  upon  the  fevereft 
Penalties  ;  and,  to  make  the  Gentlemen  of  the  South- 
ern Counties  Amends  for  this  Lofs,  a  great  Sum  of 
Money  was  at  that  Time  granted  them  as  an  Equi- 
valent, as  I  have  mentioned  before,  to  encourage  them 
to  fet  the  Poor  to  work. 

This  County  of  Tiueedale  has  two  remarkable  Lakes 
in  it :  the  one,  called  Weft-water  Lake,  abounds  fo 
with  Eels  and  other  Fifh,  about  Augujl,  that,  during 
a  Weft-wind,  they  come  out  in  fuch  Shoals  into  a 
fmall  River  which  runs  from  the  Lake,  that,  we  were 
told,  they  are  ready  to  overthrow  the  People  who  go 
in  to  catch  them.  The  other  is  Locbgenen  Lake,  upon 
Genen-bill,  which  falls  into  Annandale  from  a  Precipice 
of  250  Feet  high,  where  many  times  the  Fifh  are 
killed  by  the  Fall  of  the  Water. 

The  Frajers  were  Anceftors  by  Marriage  to  the 

Family  of  Tweedale  ;  and  of  this  Name  was  that  great 

Captain,   who  contributed  fo  much  to  the  Vidory 

which  the  Scots  obtained  in  one  Day  over  three  Englijh 

H  6  Armies 


,56  ^TOUR^W  Scotl. 

Armies   at  Rcfbin,    1301,  during    Wallace's  'Admi- 
niftration. 

Merlin  is  faid  to  be  buried  in  the  Church-yard  of 
Drumelzier,  in  this  County;  and,  according  to  an 
old  Prophecy,  That  the  Kingdoms  Jhould  be  united,  when 
Tweed  and  Paufel  met  at  his  Grave,  t^ey  fay,  that  it 
happened  fo  by  an  Inundation,  when  King  James  VI. 
came  to  the  Crown  of  England,  Anno  1603,  the  only 
time,  before  or  fince,  it  ever  did  fo. 

Some  Remains  of  Antiquity  are  vifible  in  this 
County.  The  Place  called  Randal's  Trench  feems  to 
have  been  a  Roman  Camp,  and  a  Caufeway  leads  from 
it  half  a  Mile  together  to  the  Town  of  Lyne. 

In  this  County  are  two  very  lively  Monuments  of 
the  Vanity  of  human  Glory.  The  firft  is  the  Founda- 
tion of  a  prodigious  Building  (more  like  a  Royal 
Palace,  than  the  Seat  of  a  private  Nobleman)  begun 
by  the  Earl  of  Morton,  whofe  Head  was  no  fooner  cut 
off,  than  his  Defign  periflied  ;  for  it  has  never  fmce 
been  carried  on. 

The  other  is  the  Palace  of  Traquair,  built  and 
finifhed  by  the  late  Earl  of  Traquair,  for  fome  Years 
Lord  High  Treafurer  of  Scotland,  and  a  Perfon  in  the 
higheft  Pofts  both  of  Honour  and  Profit  in  the  King- 
dom, who  yet  loft  all  by  the  Fatality  of  the  Times ; 
for,  growing  into  univerfal  Diflike  by  his  Conduct 
under  Charles  I.  he  funk  into  the  moftabjedt  Condition 
of  human  Life,  even  to  want  Bread,  and  to  take  Alms ; 
and  died  in  thofe  miferable  Circumftances  about  a 
Year  before  the  Reftoration.  The  Houfe  is  noble, 
the  Defign  great,  and  well  fmiftied ;  but  the  Owner 
was  foon  turned  out  of  it  by  his  Enemies,  who  thought 
the  fparing  of  his  Life  an  A&  of  great  Mercy. 

Bifhop  Burnet  reprefents  this  Earl  as  a  very  mean- 
fpirited  Man,  and  one  that  fuffered  himfelf  to  be  made 
fo  vile  a  Tool  in  other  Peoples  Mifchiefs,  that  he  fell 
unpitted,  'Tis  remarkable,  that  he  was  defpifed 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

even  by  the  Party  which  he  had  ferved,  and  but  too 
faithfully  adhered  to. 

Here  we  faw  the  Ruins  of  the  once  famous 
Abbey  of  Melrofs,  the  Greatnefs  of  which  may  be  a 
little  guefied  at  by  the  vaft  Extent  of  its  Remains. 
One  may  ftill  diftinguifh  many  noble  Parts  of  the 
Monaftery,  particularly  the  great  Church  or  Chapel, 
as  large  as  fome  Cathedrals,  the  Choir  of  which  is 
vifible,  and  140  Feet  in  Length,  befides  what  may 
have  been  pulled  down  at  the  Eaft-end.  By  the 
Thicknefs  of  the  Foundations,  there  muft  have  been  a 
large  and  ftrong  Tower,  or  Steeple,  in  the  Centre  of 
the  Church.  There  are  likewile  feveral  Fragments  of 
the  Houfe  itfelf :  and  the  Court,  and  other  Buildings, 
are  fo  vifible,  that  'tis  eafy  to  know  it  was  a  moft  mag- 
nificent  Place  in  its  Day. 

Following  the  Courfe  of  the  Tweed,  we  paffed  by 
abundance  ofantient  Seats  of  Gentlemen,  whofe  Pof- 
feflions  are  large  in  this  Country  ;  fuch  as  that  of  the 
Family  of  Douglas,  of  whom  one  is  called  Douglas  of 
Cavers,  who  is  Hereditary  Sheriff  of  the  County,  and 
who  fhews  the  Standard  of  the  brave  Lord  Douglas^ 
who  was  killed  at  the  Battle  of  Otterburn,  falfly,  as  the 
Scots  fay,  called  Cheviot  Chace,  juft  as  he  had  gained 
the  Victory  j  as  alfo  the  Mace  of  Iron  he  fought 
with. 

The  Country,  South-eaft  from  Tweedale,  is  called 
Tiviotdale,  or  the  Shire  of  Roxburgh:  in  which  are 
fome  Footfteps  of  Roman  Encampments ;  and  a  Mi- 
litary Way  runs  from  Ho-unarn  to  Tweed,  called  The 
Roman  Caufeway,  and,  vulgarly,  The  rugged  Cauje- 
ivay. 

The  Town  and  Caftle  of  Roxburgh  are  both  now 
demoliflied.  They  were  famous  in  the  Hiftory  of 
both  Nations,  during  their  mutual  Wars,  when  the 
Town  was  frequently  taken  and  retaken,  and  in  the 
Siege  of  which  King  James  II,  of  Scotland  was  killed 
by  the  burfting  of  a  Gun. 

Jedburgh 


A  T  O  U  R  tM  Scot!. 

Jedburgb  is  a  Royal  Burgh,  on  the  River  Jed.  It 
was  one  of  thofe  Towns  that  fuffered  in  the  Rebellion 
in  1715,  and,  being  befides  in  Debt,  and  its  Revenue 
too  fmali  to  anfwer  its  Outgoings  ;  and  it  being  well 
lituated  for  manufacturing  coarfe  Wool ;  but  greatly 
fuffering  for  want  of  frefh  Water;  and  its  public 
Buildings,  Bridges,  Streets*  and  Works,  greatly  out  of 
Repair ;  for  thefe  Reafons,  and  alfo  to  enable  the 
Inhabitants  to  erect  Workhoufes,  &c.  for  the  Manu- 
facture aforefaid,  an  Act  pafled,  1720,  impofing  a 
Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots  upon  every  Pint  of  Scots 
Ale,  &£.  to  be  vended  within  the  faid  Town,  and  its 
Liberties ;  and  it  now  reaps  the  good  Effects  of  it. 

The  Duke  of  Roxburgh  has  a  great  Eft  ate.  His 
Grace's  Houfe,  called  Fleurs,  has  been  finely  embel- 
lifhed  of  late  Years,  and  is  a  noble  Seat ;  and  the 
Country  about  it,  which  was  formerly  wild  and  rugged, 
is  now  greatly  improved  and  cultivated  ;  and  fine 
Plantations  of  Trees  and  Viftas  furround  the  Houfe. 

From  hence  we  came  to  Kelfo,  an  handfome 
Market-town  upon  the  Bank  of  the  Tweed,  which, 
being  fo  near  the  Englijh  Border,  and  having  one  of 
the  great  Roads  from  Edinburgh  to  Newcaftle  lying 
through  it  ( which  is  a  nearer  Way  by  far  than  by  that 
through  Berwick J,  is  a  confiderable  Thoroughfare  to 
England.  They  wanted  but  a  good  Bridge  over  the 
Tweed,  when  I  was  there,  and  long  after  they  had 
only  a  Ferry  juft  at  the  Town,  and  a  good  Ford 
through  the  River  a  little  below  it.  But,  in  the  Year 
1759,  an  Act  palled,  intitled,  An  Aff  for  laying  a 
Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots,  or  one  Sixth -part  of  a  Penny 
Sterling^  upon  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale,  Porter,  or  Beer9 
which  Jhall  be  brewed  for  Sale,  brought  into^  tapped?  or 
fold)  within  the  Town  of  Kelfo,  in  the  Shire  of  Rox- 
burgh, for  finijhing  a  Bridge  crofs  the  Rivsr  Tweed, 
end  for  other  Purpofes  therein  mentioned. 

Here  are  the  Ruins  of  an  aniient  Monaftery,  found- 
ed by  King  Davidy   for  the  Cijlertian  Monks,  an 

Order 


ScotL         GREAT  BRITAIN.  15^ 

Order  inftituted  about  the  Year  1000  in  Burgundy 
It  has  been  very  large,  and  Part  of  it  now  ferves  for 
the  Parifh  Church. 

The  Country  about  Kelfo  is  very  pleafant  and  fruit- 
ful, on  both  Sides  the  Tweed.  The  River  here  does 
not  part  England,  from  Scotland ;  but  you  are  upon 
Sfats  Ground  for  four  Miles,  or  thereabouts,  on  the 
South- nde  of  the  Tweed-,  and,  the  farther  Weft,  the 
more  the  Tweed  lies  within  the  Limits  of  the  Country. 

From  Kelfo  we  went  North,  where  we  patted  thro* 
Lauderd&le^  a  long  Valley  on  both  Sides  of  the  little 
River  auder,  from  whence  the  Family  of  Maltland^ 
firft  Earls,  then  Dukes,  and  now  Earls  again,  took 
their  Title. 

The  Country  is  good  here,  and  fenced  with  Hills  on 
both  Sides.  The  River  Louder  runs  through  it,, 
keeping  its  Courfe  due  North. 

The  Town  of  Laud*r  is  a  Royal  Burgh,  the  Seat 
of  the  Commiflariot;  and  very  pleafantly  fituated. 
'Tis  remarkable  for  the  Execution  done  upon  the 
Minions  of  King  'James  III.  by  the  Scots  Nobility,, 
who,  headed  by  the  Earl  of  Angus,  took  them  out  of 
the  Court,  and  hanged  them  over  Lander  bridge.  The 
Seat  of  the  noble  Family  of  Maitland,  Earls  of  Lau- 
derdahy  is  called  Lauderfort :  it  is  a  {lately  Houfe, 
about  the  Middle  of  the  Valley,  on  the  River,  but  not 
large. 

We  kept  the  great  Road  over  an  high  Ridge  of 
Mountains,  from  whence  we  had  a  plain  View  of 
Mid-Lotbjan.  One  of  thefe  Mountains  is  called 
Soutra-Hilli  and  belongs  to  a  Branch  of  the  Family  of 
Maitland^  the  elder  Brother  of  which  Houfe  was  a 
Perfon  of  great  Merit,  and  raifed  himfetf  by  his  per- 
fonal  Accomplishments  to  the  higheft  Pofts  in  the 
Army. 

I  could  not  pafs  this  Way  to  Edinburgh  without 

going  off  a  little  to  the  Right,   to   fee  two  very  fine 

Scats.     One  of  them  is  an  old  Abbey,  belonging  to 

6  the 


160  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

the  Marquis  of  Lothian  (of  the  antient  Name  of  Ker) 
a  younger  Branch  of  the  Houfe  of  Roxburgh,  at 
NewbQttle\  whofe  Predecefibr,  Mark  Ker^  being 
Abbot  of  it,  turned  Proteftant,  and  got  it  fettled  on 
him,  and  his  Heirs.  'Tis  an  old  Building,  but  finely 
fituated  among  the  moft  agreeable  Walks  and  Rows  of 
Trees,  all  full  grown  ;  and  contains  one  of  the  bed 
chofen  Collections  of  Pictures,  Statues,  and  Bufts,  in 
Scotland. 

About  a  Mile  from  hence  is  the  Duke  tf  Bucdeugh' $ 
Houfe  at  Dalkeith,  without  Exception  the  fineft  and 
largeft  new-built  Houfe  in  Scotland.  It  was  built  by 
the  late  Duchefs,  Relic!:  of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth^  on 
the  Ground  where  the  old  Caftle  of  Dalkeitb  flood, 
which  was  the  Eftate  of  the  great  Earl  of  Morton^ 
Regent  of  Scotland^  who  was  beheaded,  under  King 
James  VI.  by  an  Engine  he  himfelf  had  introduced 
into  this  Country,  as  I  have  mentioned,  at  Halifax, 
in  Vol.  III.  He  fuffered  for  being  accefiary  to,  and 
acquainted  with  the  barbarous  Defign  of,  the  Lord 
Darnle/s  Murder. 

This  Palace  ftands  on  a  riling  Ground  on  the  Edge 
of  the  River  North-EJk^  from  whence  it  overlooks  the 
Plain,  with  a  Majefty  like  that  of  Windfor  on  the 
Bank  of  the  Thames^  making  fome  Allowance  for  the 
Difference  of  the  two  Rivers.  The  Park  is  very  large, 
and  beautified  with  Waterworks,  Jets  d'Eau,  and  a 
Canal. 

The  Infide  of  this  magnificent  Palace  is  anfwerable 
to  the  Grandeur  of  the  Family,  being  very  richly  fur- 
nifhed,-  and  adorned  with  many  fine  Paintings,  efpe- 
cially  of  the  Ladies  of  the  Englijb  Court,  and  fome, 
Royal  Originals. 

Juft  beyond  the  Park  is  Dalkeith,  a  pretty  large 
Market-town,  and  the  more  confiderable  for  being  fo 
near  Edinburgh  •>  for  great  Quantities  of  ProVifions  are 
brought  hither  from  the  Southern  Countries,  which 
are  fold  here,  and  afterwards  fent  to  that  City. 

The' 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

The  3oth  of  May?  1760,  the  Foundation-ftone  of  a 
new  School-  Room  was  laid  at  Dalkeitk.  It  will  be  a 
very  fpacious  Hall,  worthy  of  the  Generofity  of  his 
Grace  the  Duke  of  Buccleugh^  and  of  the  Honourable 
Charles  Townjhend^  Efq;  the  firft  Promoter  and  Encou- 
rager.  of  fo  ufeful  a  Work.  The  Length  of  the 
Building  is  47  Feet,  the  Breadth  25,  and  the  Height 
from  the  Floor  15  Feet. 

I  will  conclude  this  Letter  with  the  following  In- 
fcription  on  the  Tombftone  of  one  Margaret  Scatt^ 
who  died  in  the  Town  of  Dalkeith>  February  9, 

1738. 


)  Pajfenger^  until  my  Life  you  read: 
The  Living  may  get  Knowlege  by  the  Dead. 
Five  times  five  Tears  I  liv'd  a  Virgin's  Life  : 
Ten  times  five  Years  I  was  a  virtuous  Wife: 
Ten  times  five  Tears  I  liv'd  a  Widow  chafte^ 
Now,   weary  d  of  this  mortal  Life,  I  reft. 
Between  my  Cradle  and  my  Grave  have  been 
Eight  mighty  Kings  $f  Scotland,  and  a  Queen, 
Four  times  five  Tears  the  Commonwealth  1  faw  j 
Ten  times  the  Subjects  rofe  againfl  the  Law. 
Twice  did  I  fee  old  Prelacy  puiTd  down  ; 
And  twice  the  Cloak  was  bumbled  by  the  Gown. 
An  End  <?/"Stuarts  Race  I  faw  :   Nay,  more  ! 
My  native  Country  fold  for  EnglifhOrtf. 
Such  Deflations  in  my  Life  have  been, 
I  have  an  End  of  all  PerfecHon  feen, 


I  am,  Sir, 
Yours,  &V. 

LETTER 


Scotl. 


LETTER      IV. 

Containing  a  DESCRIPTION  of  the  antieni 
Caledonia,  or  Northern  Part  of  Scotland  ; 
and  particularly  of  the  Shires  and  T'owns  of 
Fife,  St.  Andrews,  Perth,  Dumblain,  Al- 
loway,  Culrofs,  Scone,  Angus,  Dundee, 
Montrofe,  Aberdeen,  Buchan,  Murray, 
Elgin,  Invernefs,  and  the  Highlands, 


SIR, 

T  AM  now  to  enter  the  true  and  real  Caledonia  ;  for 
•*•  that  Part  of  the  Country  on  the  North  of  the  Firth 
of  Forth  is  alone  called  by  that  Name,  and  was 
antiently  known  by  no  other. 

I  crofied  the  River  at  £)ueemferry,  feven  Miles 
Weft  of  Edinburgh,  into  the  Shire  of  Fife  ;  and,  as 
the  moft  considerable  Places  in  this  County  are  on  the 
Sea-fide,  or  near  it,  I  directed  my  Journey  Eaft  along 
the  Coaft.  The  firft  Place  we  came  to,  was  the 
Burgh  of  Innerkeitbin,  an  antient  walled  Town,  with 
a  fpacious  Harbour  opening  from  the  Eaft  into  the 
River,  which  has  been  lately  much  neglected  for 
want  of  Trade.  The  Town,  however,  is  large,  and 
Hill  populous. 

I  cannot  pafs  over  a  tragical  Story,  which  happened 
in  this  Town  in  the  Reign  of  the  late  Queen  Anne\ 
The  Mafter  of  Burleigb  (fo  the  eldeft  Son  of  a  Lord 
or  Vifcount  is  called,  while  the  Father  is  living)  fell 
in  Love  with  a  young  Woman  in  his  Father's  Family  ; 
but  could  not  prevail  with  her  either  to  mairy  him,  or 
to  facrifice  her  Virtue  to  him  ;  which  being  known, 
ihe  was  fent  away,  and  he  perfuaded  to  travel.  How- 

ever, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  163 

ever,  before  his  Departure,  he  declared  fhe  fhould  be 
his  Wife  at  his  Return  ;  and  if  any  one  elfe  fliould 
marry  her  in  his  Abfence,  he  would  murder  him. 
This  patted  without  much  Notice,  and  the  young 
Woman  was  foon  after  married  to  a  Schoolmafter  in 
this  Town. 

The  Gentleman  returned,  and,  underftanding  who 
was  her  Hufband,  went  to  his  Houfe  at  Noon-day, 
pulled  out  a  Piftol,  and  (hot  him  dead  on  the  Spot, 
making  his  Efcape  unmolefted. 

But  a  Proclamation  being  afterwards  iflued,  with  a 
Reward  of  200  I,  for  apprehending  him,  he  was  at 
laft  taken,  and  tried  at  Edinburgh  by  the  Lords  of  the 
Judiciary,  and  condemned  to  have  his  Head  cut  off. 
Great  Interceffion  was  made  to  the  Queen  for  his 
Pardon  ;  which  proving  ineffectual,  he  found  means 
to  make  his  Efcape  out  of  the  Tolbooth  of  Edinburgh^ 
difguifed  in  his  Sifter's  Cloaths,  the  Night  before  he 
was  to  have  been  executed. 

After  that,  he  appeared  in  the  Rebellion  of  1715* 
and  was  in  the  Battle  of  Dumblaln^  or  Sheriffmuir ; 
but  again  efcaped  with  his  Life,  though  his  Eftate, 
which  was  but  (mall,  was  forfeited  among  the  reft. 

Near  Innerkeitbin,  a  little  within  the  Land,  ftands 
the  antient  Town  of  Dunfermline^  which  is  now  in  a 
very  ruinous  State.  For,  i.  Here  is  a  decayed  Mona- 
ftery,  which  before  the  Reformation  was  very  large, 
but  then  demolished,  faving  a  Part,  which  was  turned 
into  a  parochial  Church  ;  and  even  that  is  now  de- 
cayed, and  with  it  the  Monuments  of  feveral  Kings 
and  Queens  of  Scotland-,  particularly  that  of  Mal- 
colm III.  who  founded  the  Monaftery. 

2.  Here  is  a  decayed  Court,  or  Royal  Palace,  of 
the  Kings  of  Scotland  ;  but  by  whom  built,  is  uncertain. 
Almoft  all  King  James  the  Sixth's  Children  were  bom 
in  it,  particularly  King  Charles  I.  and  the  Princefs 
Elizabeth,  afterwards  Queen  of  Bohemia  ;  and  his 
Queen  made  this  Place  her  particular  Refidence,,  and 

hud 


'A  TOUR  thro'  Scotl. 
had  it  fettled  upon  her  by  way  of  Jointure.  Here  fhe 
built  herfelf  an  Apartment,  over  the  Arch  of  the  great 
Gate,  for  her  particular  Retirement,  having  a  Gallery 
reaching  from  it  to  the  Royal  Lodgings.  All  is  now 
ruinous. 

3.  Here  is  a  decayed  Town,  the  natural  Confe- 
quence  of  the  Decay  of  the  Palace.  The  Treatment 
King  Charlesll.  met  with  here  from  the  Covenanters, 
was  fufficient  to  make  him  take  a  Difguft  at  the 
Place. 

The  Church  has  flill  a  venerable  Face,  and  at  a 
Diftance  feems  a  mighty  Pile,  the  Building  being  once 
vaftly  large.  What  is  left  appears  too  heavy  for  the 
prefent  Dimenfions.  The  Church  itfelf  is  faid  to  be 
as  long  as  the  Cathedral  of  Car/i/Ie,  defigned  by  the 
Model  of  that  of  Glafgow,  but  I  rather  think  that  at 
Glafgow  was  defigned  by  the  Model  of  this  at  Dun- 
fermline  ;  for  it  feems  the  moft  antient. 

The  People  are  poor,  but  would  be  poorer,  if  they 
had  not  the  Manufacture  of  Linen  for  their  Support, 
the  Diaper  and  better  Sort  of  Linen  trade  being 
carried  on  here,  and  in  the  neighbouring  Towns,  with 
more  Hands  than  ordinary.  The  Marquis  of  Tweedale 
has  a  great  Efiate  in  thefe  Parts,  and  is  Hereditary 
Chamberlain  or  Keeper  of  the  Royal  Houfe. 

The  Rocking  Stone,  near  Balvalrd  in  Fife  was  a 
remarkable  Curiofity.  It  was  broken  by  Oliver  Crom- 
well's Soldiers,  and  then  it  was  difcovered,  that  its 
Motion  was  performed  by  an  egg-fhaped  Extuberance 
in  the  Middle  of  the  under  Surface  of  the  upper  Stone, 
which  was  inferted  in  a  Cavity  in  the  Surface  of  the 
lower  Stone.  As  the  lower  Stone  was  flat,  the  upper 
was  globular;  and  not  only  a  juft  Proportion  in  the 
Motion  was  calculated  from  the  Weight  of  the  Stone, 
and  the  Widenefs  of  the  Cavity,  as  well  as  the  o^al 
Figure  of  the  inferted  Prominence  ;  but  the  vaft  Bulk 
of  the  upper  Stone  abfolutely  concealed  the  Mechanifm 
of  the  Motion ;  and,  the  better  ftill  to  impofe  on  the 

Vulgar, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  165 

Vulgar,  there  were  two  or  three  furrounding  flat  Stones, 
though  that  only  in  the  middle  was  concerned  in  the 
Feat.  By  this  pretended  Miracle  they  condemned  of 
Perjury,  or  acquitted,  as  their  Intereft  or  Affection 
led  them;  and  often  brought  Criminals  to  confefs  what 
could  be  no  other  way  extorted  from  them. 

From  hence  turning  Eaft  are  many  Seats  of  private 
Gentlemen,  and  fome  of  Noblemen,  particularly  one 
belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  at  Aberdour,  which 
fronts  the  Forth  to  the  South  j  and  the  Grounds  be- 
longing to  it  reach  down  to  the  Shore. 

From  this  Part  of  the  Forth,  to  the  Mouth  of  Inner - 
keitbin  Harbour,  is  a  very  good  Road  for  Ships,  the 
Water  being  deep,  and  the  Ground  good  ;  but  the 
Weftern  Part,  which  they  call  St.  Margaret's  Bay,  is 
a  fteep  Shore,  and  rocky,  there  being  20  Fathom  Wa- 
ter within  a  Ship's  Length  of  the  Rocks.  So  that  if  a 
South  eaft  Wind  blows  hard,  itfmay  be  dangerous  ride- 
ing  in  it :  but  this  Wind  blows  fb  feldom,  that  the 
Ships  often  venture  it. 

He  that  will  view  the  County  of  Fife,  which  is 
wedged  in  by  the  Forth  and  the  Tay,  and  {hoots  out 
far  into  the  Eaft,  muft,  as  I  faid  before,  go  round  the 
Coaft ;  and  yet  there  are  fix  Places  of  Note  in  the 
Middle  of  the  County,  which  are  fuperior  to  all  the 
reft,  and  muft  not  be  omitted  ;  Kinrcfs,  Lejly,  Falk- 
land, Melvil,  Balgony,  and  Cowpar ;  the  laft  a  Town, 
the  others  great  Houfes ;  and  one,  viz  Falkland,  a 
Royal  Palace,  and  once  the  moft  in  Requeft  of  all  the 
Royal  Houfes  in  Scotland, 

The  two  Sides  that  ftill  ftand  in  the  inner  Square, 
fhew  a  beautiful  Piece  of  Architecture.  It  confifts  of 
two  Stories,  with  Rows  of  round  Marble  Pillars  of  the 
Corinthian  Order,  fet  in  Sockets  of  Stone  between 
every  Window  ;  of  each  Side  of  the  Window,  a  3uft 
in -Bafib- Relievo  of  the  Emperors  and  Emprefles,  and 
at  the  Top  of  each  Pillar  a  -Statue  as  big  as  the  Life. 
There  are  22  Bufts  and  1 2  Pillars  ftill  remaining.  The 

other 


1 66  A :TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

other  two  Parts  of  the  Quadrangle  were  burnt  down 
by  Oliver  Cromwell's  Army.  You  enter  this  Palace 
by  two  ftately  Towers,  and  on  the  Right  is  a  Chapel, 
ftill  well  preferved,  with  Statues  as  big  as  the  Life  in 
the  Niches  on  the  Outfide.  Here  were  ffxacious  Gar- 
dens, with  a  Park,  well  planted  with  Oak,  and  well 
ftocked  With  Deer,  paled  round  for  eight  Miles  ;  but 
the  Oaks  were  all  cut  down  by  Cromwell,  to  build  his 
Citadel  at  Perth,  and  the  Barracks ;  the  Park  he 
ploughed  up,  and  only  here  and  there  fome  of  the  Pales 
left. 

The  Town  of  Falkland  is  clean,  not  unlike  Wood- 
Jlotk  in  Oxfordjbire*  It  is  a  Borough -Corporate,  of 
which  the  King  is  always  Provoft ;  and  they  chufe 
Aldermen  out  of  their  own  Council.  It  is  fitu- 
ated  on  the  North-Eaft  Foot  of  Lomond  Hill,  which 
is  an  Englijh  Mile  to  the  Top,  covered  with  the  fineft 
Paflurage  for  Sheep,  from  whence  is  a  very  extenfive 
Profpeft. 

An  Englijb  Reader  will  be  furprifed  to  hear  of  fuch 
Numbers  of  Palaces ;  but,  however  mean  our  Thoughts 
may  be  of  the  Scots  Court  in  antient  Times,  their 
Kings  had  more  fine  Palaces  than  moft  Princes  in 
Europe  ;  for  in  the  Time  of  King  James  IV.  they  had 
all  in  good  Repair,  and  in  Ufe,  the  feveral  Royal  Pa- 
laces of  Holy-rood-honfe,  and  the  Caftle  at  Edinburgh^ 
*the  Royal  Palace  in  the  Caftle  at  Stirling^  Linlitbgow, 
Dunfermline^  Falkland,  Sconey  the  Caftles  of  Dunbar- 
ton>  Blacknef$<>  and  Invernefs. 

I  omit  lefler  Seats  and  Hunting-houfes,  of  which 
King  James  V.  had  feveral ;  and  the  feveral  Palaces  of 
Earl  Morton,  and  others, -which  were  forfeited  into  the 
King's  Hands. 

The  South  Coaft  of  the  County  of  Fife  abounds 
with  Towns ;  and  the  following  thirteen  are  Royal 
Burghs;  viz.  Innerkeithin,  Eruntijland^  Kingborn,K'irk- 
aldy^  Dyfarty  Pittenweem,  Anftruiber  Wejler^  Jnjlru- 
ther  E after )  Kilrirwy^  Gra'ily  $t*  Andrew s^  all  on  the 

Coaft; 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.          167 

Coaft ;  Dunfermline  and  Cowpar,  in  the  Midft  of  the 
County.  It  contains  alfo  thefe  other  Towns  of  Note, 
viz.  Tory  bur  n>  Abtrdour^  the  two  JVe?nysys^  Levinf- 
moutby  Elyy  St.  Monarfs>  and  Newburgh  on  the  Toy  : 
and  it  has  in  it  four  Prefbyteries  ;  viz.  at  Cowpar^ 
St.  Andrews,  Kirkaldy,  and  Dunfirmline. 

The  Shire  itfelf  takes  it  Name  from  Fyfus,  furnamed 
Duffus,  to  whom  it  was  granted  by  King  Kenneth  II. 
for  his  Valour  againft  the  Pifts,  about  the  Year  840. 
His  Pofterity  were  firft  called  Thanes  of  Fife,  and  af- 
terwards Earls,  by  Malcolm  II.  about  the  Year  1057. 
and  endowed  with  greater  Privileges  than  any  other 
Earls  of  the  Kingdom,  becaufe  of  their  extraordinary 
Services  ;  a  famous  Monument  of  which  was  that 
called  Clan  Macduf's  Crofs,  on  the  public  Road  to 
Abtrnethy^  to  which  if  any  within  the  ninth  Degree  to 
the  great  Macduff,  who  was  the  chief  Inftrument  of 
fubduingthe  Tyrant  Macbeth,  ihould  have  recourfe  in 
cafe  of  Manflaughter,  he  was  to  be  pardoned  on  pay- 
ing a  frriall  Number  of  Cattle.  This  Monument  had 
an  Infcription  importing  thofe  Privileges,  now  worn 
out ;  and  was  in  fuch  antiquated  Terms,  mixed  with 
Macaronic  or  half  Latin  Words,  that  few  Men  now 
living  would  have  been  able  to  make  it  out. 

From  this  Macduff^  the  Families  of  Douglas,  We- 
myS)  and  the  Clan  Chattan,  are  faid  to  be  defcended. 
The  Earl  ofRotbesis  Hereditary  Sheriff  of  Fife. 

Having  feen  Aberdour^  I  took  a  Turn,  at  a  Friend's 
Invitation,  to  Le/Iy;  but  by  the  Way  ftopt  at  Kinrofs, 
where  we  had  a  View  of  two  Things  worth  noting  : 
Firft i  The  famous  Lake  or  Lough,  called  Lough 
Le-ven^  in  an  Ifland  of  which  ftands  the  Caftle,  where 
Queen  Mary^  commonly  known  in  England  by  the 
Name  of  Queen  of  Scots,  was  confined  by  the  then  Re- 
formers, being  firft  compelled  to  quit  her  Favourite 
Betkwell,  and  afterwards  her  Crown  ;  but  from  which 
(he  found  Means  to  make  her  Efcape,  though,  as  it 
proved,  Out  of  {be  Frying-pan  into  the  Fire. 

1  H05 


1 68  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

The  Lough  itfelf  is  worth  feeing ;  'tis  very  large, 
being  above  ten  Miles  in  Circumference,  in  fome 
Places  deep,  and  famous  for  Fifli.  Formerly  it  had 
good  Salmon,  but  now  chiefly  Trouts,  Perch,  Pikes, 
&c.  Out  of  it  flows  the  River  Leven,  which  runs 
from  thence  to  Lejly. 

At  the  Weft-end  of  the  Lake  (the  Gardens  reach- 
ing down  to  the  very  Water's  Edge)  ftands  the  moft 
beautiful  and  regular  Piece  of  Architecture  (for  a  pri- 
vate Gentleman's  Seat)  in  Scotland;  I  mean  the  Houfe 
of  Kinrojs,  belonging  to  Sir  John  Hope  Bruce,  Bart. 
The  Town,  which  has  a  very  good  Market,  and  a 
Street  tolerably  well-built,  lies  at  a  little  Diftance 
from  the  Houfe,  fo  as  not  to  obtrude  upon  its  Privacy, 
and  yet  fo  as  to  be  ready  to  wait  upon  its  Call.  'Tis 
all  Beauty ;  the  Stone  is  white  and  fine,  the  Order  re- 
gular, the  Contrivance  elegant,  the  Workmanfhip 
exquuite. 

Sir  William  Bruce,  the  Surveyor- General  of  the 
Works,  the  Wren  of  North  Britain,  was  the  Founder, 
as  well  as  Architect,  of  this  Houfe.  That  Gentleman 
has  left  many  noble  Monuments  of  his  admirable  Skill 
and  Tafte  in  thofe  Parts  ;  fuch  as  the  Palace  of  Holy- 
rood  at  Edinburgh ;  the  Houfe  of  Rothes,  and  this  at 
Kinrofs,  befides  feveral  others. 

The  Situation  of  this  Houfe  of  Kinrofs  would  be  dif- 
liked  by  fome  for  its  being  fo  very  near  the  Water; 
infomuch  that  fometimes,  when  the  Lake  is  fwelled 
by  Winter  Rains  and  melted  Snows,  it  reaches  to  the 
very  Gardens  ;  but  as  the  Country  round  is  dry,  free 
from  ftagnated  Bogs,  and  unhealthy  Marfties,  this  is 
of  very  little  Inconvenience,  if  any.  Sir  William 
planted  Numbers  of  Fir-trees  upon  the  Land  round 
his  Houfe,  which  the  next  Poffeflbr,  Sir  John  Hope 
Bruce, •^^  as  careful  to  improve  as  his  Grandfather 
was  to  p^ant.  Pofteiity  will  find  the  Advantage  of 
this  Tafie,  which,  if  it  fpreads  as  it  has  begun,  will  in 
time  make  Scotland  a  fecond  Norway  for  Fir  j  for  the 

Lowlands, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  169 

Lowlands,  as  well  as  the  Highlands,  will  be  overfprea<* 
with  Timber. 

From  Kinrofe  I  came  to  Lejly^  where  I  had  a  full 
View  of  the  Palace  of  the  Earl  of  Rotbes,  built  in  the 
Reign  of  King  Charles  II.  by  the  faid  Sir  William 
Bruce. 

Here  it  was  that  our  King  James  II.  when  Duke  of 
York,  lodged,  moft  Part  of  the  Time,  when  he  was 
obliged  by  his  Brother  to  retire  into  Scotland ;  and 
his  Apartments  are  ftill  called  the  Duke  of  York's 
Lodgings. 

The  Magnificence  of  the  Infideof  this  Houfe  is  un- 
ufually  great ;  but  what  is  very  particular,  is  the  long 
Gallery,  which  is  the  full  Length  of  cne  Side  of  the 
Building,  and  is  filled  with  Paintings,  but  efpeciallr 
(as  that  is  at  Drttmlanrig)  of  the  great  Anceftors  of 
the  Houfe  of  Rothesoi  Lcfy,  at  full  Lengths,  and  in 
their  Robes  of  Office. 

The  Rooms  of  State  at  Kinrofs  are  well  fupplied 
with  valuable  Pictures,  many  of  which  are  of  Princes, 
&c.  but  moft,  if  not  all  the  full  Lengths  in  this  Gallery 
of  RotbeS)  are  of  the  family,  and  the  immediate  An- 
ceftors, of  the  prefent  Earl,  rnoit  of  them  having  been 
Peers,  and  poffeiTed  of  the  greateft  Places  of  Truft  in 
Scotland,  from  the  Year  1320.  to  1725.  fo  that  we 
may  imagine  there  may  well  be  enough  to  furnilh  a 
Gallery. 

Though  the  Houfe  is  magnificent,  I  cannot  fay  the 
Situation  of  it  is  fo  advantageous  as  that  of  fome  other 
Seats  ;  for  it  has  no  extraordinary  Profpect  from  the 
grand  To  am,  though  it  ftands  on  the  Banks  of  the 
Leven,  juft  where  another  (mailer  River  joins  it. 

The  Park  on  the  South-fide  is  very  beautiful,  fix 
Miles  in  Circumference,  walled  round,  and  diverfified 
with  little  Woods  of  Fir-trees,  which  have  Viftas  reach- 
ing through  them  up  to  the  Houfe.  The  Gardens  ars 
at  the  Eaft-end  of  the  Houfe,  well  deligned  and  plant- 
ed, extending  to  the  Angle  where  the  two  Rivers 

VOL.  IV.  I  meet; 


f;o  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

meet ;  fo  that  they  are  watered  on  the  North  and  Eaft- 
fide,  and  on  the  South  are  parted  with  a  Wall  from  the 
Park,  the  Weft- end  of  them  beginning  from  the 
Houfe. 

The  Town  of  LeJIy  (feated  at  a  fmall  Diftance 
Weft  from  the  Houfe,  or  a  little  North-weft)  has  a 
good  Market,  but  is,  in  no  other  refpecl,  confiderable. 
The  Houfe  aforefaid  is  the  principal  Glory  of  the 
Place. 

From  Leflyvre  turned  South  to  the  Coaft,  and  came 
to  Bruntijland)  fituated  in  the  Middle  of  the  North-fide 
of  the  River  Forth,  juft  oppofite  to  Lehb  ;  fo  that  we 
have  from  hence  a  fair  Profpeft  as  well  of  the  Road  of 
Leitb,  as  of  the  City  and  Caftle  of  Edinburgh.  Here 
is  a  very  commodious  Harbour,  which  has  no  Bar,  but 
enters,  as  if  it  had  been  made  by  Hand,  into  the  Cen- 
ter of  the  Town  ;  fo  that  the  Ships  lie  with  their 
Broadfides  to  the  very  Houfes  ;  and  it  is  the  common 
Port  of  Safety  to  all  Ships  that  happen  to  be  forced  up  the 
Firth  by  Storms,  or  contrary  Winds  :  and  Ships  trad- 
ing on  the  Coaft  frequently  winter  here.  The  Water 
is  commonly  1 8,  and,  at  Spring-tides,  26  Feet  deep 
within  the  Harbour  j  fo  that  it  is  capable  of  receiving 
and  careening  the  largeft  Men  of  War.  The  Town 
is  adorned  a-lfo  with  a  beautiful  Church,  and  has  a 
large  Town-houfe  and  Gaol.  But  the  Harbour  hav- 
ing fuffered  much  by  Time  and  by  Storms,  and  the 
Church,  Town-houfe,  and  Gaol,  becoming  ruinous ; 
an  Ad  pafled,  Anno  1719.  for  laying  a  Duty  of  two 
Penies  Scots  upon  every  Scats  Pint  of  Beer,  &c.  fold 
within  the  Town  and  Liberties,  for  increafmg  the  Re- 
venues, :reftoring  the  Harbour,  and  repairing  the  pub- 
lic Structures  above-mentioned.  Thefe  Duties  were 
further  continued  for  31  Years,  by  an  A£t  20  Geo.  II. 

Here  is  a  Manufacture  of  Linen,  as  there  is  upon  all 
the  Coaft  of  Fife,  and  efpecially  for  Green-cloth,  as  it 
is  called,  which  has  been  feveral  Years  in  great  Der 

mand 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIV.  171 

mand  in  England  for  Printing  or  Painting,  in  the 
room  of  Callicoes,  which  are  prohibited  there. 

Next  to  Burntijland)  upon  the  fame  Coaft,  is  King- 
born,  noted  for  its  Thread  Manufacture,  which  the 
Women  chiefly  carry  on;  the  Men  being  generally 
Seamen  upon  all  this  Coaft,  as  high  as  the  Queen*/- 
Ferry. 

Great  Numbers  of  Porpoifes  are  feen  almoft  con- 
ftantly  in  this  Firth,  which  the  Men  make  a  Practice  of 
[hooting,  and  then  bring  on  Shore,  and  boil  their  Fat 
into  Train-oil,  as  they  do  that  of  Whales,  and  feveraj 
other  great  Fifh,  which  they  fometimes  meet  with, 
thereabouts.  But  the  Firth  affords  a  much  more  re^- 
gular  Fifhing- trade  lower  down  ;  of  which  in  its 
Place. 

The  Ferry  from  Leitb  to  the  Shore  of  Fife  is  fixed 
in  Kingborn,  which  is  of  confiderable  Advantage  to  it ; 
though  fometimes  the  Boats,  by  S.trefs  of  Weather,  are 
driven  into  Bruntijland.  Many  of  the  Inhabitants  lett 
out  Horfes,  and  are  called  Hirers  :  they  are  known  all 
over  Scotland,  as*  are  their  Skippers  or  Ferrymen,  for 
their  Impudence  and  Impofitions.  The  Method  of 
riding  Poft  in  this  Country  is,  You  have  an  Horfe  for 
yourfelf,  and  a  Man  runs  on  Foot  before  you  for  a 
Guide,  and  tCK.carry  the  Horfe  back  again  j  for  both 
which  you  pay  only  two  Pence  a  Mile.  Some  of  thefe 
Fellows  will  hold  running  ;or  a  whole  Day,  as  fail  as 
you  can  well  ride:  a  Dram  of  Whifky  always  quickens 
their  Pace. 

Eaft  of  this  Town  is  Kirkaldy,  a  larger,  more  popu- 
lous, and  better^built  Town,  than  the  other,  and, 
indeed,  than  any  oil  this  Coaft.  It  confifts  chiefly  or' 
one  Street,  running  along  the  Shore  from  Eaft  to  Weft 
a  full  Mile,  very  well-built.  It  has  fome  confiderable 
Merchants  -in  it,  in  the  moft  extenfive  Senfe  of  the 
Word,  befides  others  that  deal  largely  in  Corn,  ex- 
porting great  Quantities  of  it  both  to  England  and 
I  2  Holland* 


A  TOUR  thro'  Scot!, 

Holland.  Oihers,  again,  trade  in  Linen  to  England  ; 
who  in  Return  bring  back  all  needful  Supplies  of  fo- 
reign Manufactures. 

The  Harbour  of  this  Town  being  in  a  ruinous  Con- 
dition, an  A&  was  made  15  Geo.  II.  for  raifing  Mo- 
ney, by  a  Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots,  to  repair  the 
fame. 

Here  are  feveral  Coal-pits,  not  only  in  the  Neigh* 
bourhood,  but  even  clofe  to  the  very  Sea,  at  the 
Weft-end  of  the  Town,  and  where,  one  would  think, 
the  Tide  fhould  make  it  impoflible  to  work  them. 
At  the  Eaft-end  of  the  Town  is  a  convenient  Yard  for 
Building  and  Repairing  of  Ships  ;  and,  farther  on,  fe- 
veral Salt-pans,  for  boiling  and  making  Salt. 

Dyfert  boafts,  as  I  faid,  of  being  a  Royal  Burgh  ; 
but,  notwkhftanding,  it  is  a  very  decaying  Corpora- 
tion :  the  only  Support  of  it  is,  that  the  Lord  Dyfert, 
the  Landlord,  has  a  good  Salt-work  here,  and,  in  the 
Lands  adjoining,  an  excellent  Vein  of  Scotch  Coal  ; 
both  which  are  eaftly  put  on  Ship-board  at  a  fmall 
Wharf  adjoining.  Thrs,  I  think,  is  the  whole  Trade 
of  the  Town,  except  what  arifes  from  a  few  Nail- 
makers  and  Hard-ware  Workers. 

We  came  next  to  a  Village  called  the  Wefter-Wwys* 
belonging  to  the  Earl  of  IPemys,  whofe  Houfe  ftands 
a  little  farther  Eaft,  on  the  Top  of  an  high  Cliff,  with 
its  Front  looking  down  upon  the  Sea.  At  the  Weft- 
end  of  this  Cliff  is  a  fmall  Plain,  once  a  Bowling- 
green,  where  the  late  Earl,  being  Admiral,  had  fome 
fmall  Field  Pieces  planted,  to  anfwer  Salutes.  Be- 
hind the  Houfe  is  a  fmall  and  irregular  Court-yard, 
with  two  Wings  of  Building,  being  Offices  to  the 
Houfe  on  one  Side,  and  Stables  on  the  other.  Gardens 
there  are  none,  only  a  large  well-planted  Orchard,  be- 
tween which  and  the  Houfe,  the  Road  goes  on  to 
E after-  Wemys. 

From  thence,  you  come  to  another  Village,  called 
?,  inhabited  by  Fifhermen,  who  are  employed 

wholly 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  175 

in  catching  frefh  Fifh  every  Day  in  the  Forth* 
and  carrying  them  to  Leitb  and  Edinburgh  Markets. 
The  Buildings  are  but  a  miferable  Row  of  Cottages  5 
yet  ther.-  is  fcarce  a  poor  Man  in  it :  but  they  are  in 
general  Ib  very  clownifh,  that  to  be  of  the  College  of 
Buckhav. ;;,  is  become  a  Proverb. 

Here  we  Taw  the  Shore  of  the  Sea  covered  with 
Shrimps,  like  a  thin  Snow  ;  and  as  you  rode  among 
them,  they  would  rife  like  a  kind  of  Duft,  and  hep 
like  Grafhoppers,  being  feared  by  the  Footing  of  the 
Horfe. 

The  Fishermen  of  this  Town  have  a  great  many- 
Boats  of  all  Sizes,  which  lie  upon  the  Beach  umigged, 
ready  to  be  fitted  out  every  Year  for  the  Herring  Sea* 
fon,  in  which  they  have  a  very  great  Share. 

Beyond  this  is  the  Ely,  a  little  Town,  but  a  very 
fafe  and  good  Harbour,  firmly  built  of  Stone,  almoft 
like  the  Cobb  at  Lime,  though  not  projecling  into  the 
Sea  fo  much  as  that.  It  ftands  a  little  on  the  Weft- 
iide  of  the  Mouth  of  the  Leven  ;  the  Salmon  of 
which  River  are  efteemed  the  bed  in  this  Part  of 
Scotland. 

To  this  Town  the  Earl  of  Wemys  brings  his  Coal, 
which  he  digs  about  two  Miles  off,  on  the  Banks  of 
the  River  Leven  ;  as  alfo  what  Salt  he  can  make. 
The  Coal- works  are  greatly  prejudiced  by  the  break- 
ing in  of  the  Water,  notwithstanding  the  immenfe 
Charges  they  have  been  at  to  prevent  that  Inconveni- 
ence. 

The  People,  who  work  in  the  Coal  Mines  in  this 
Country,  partly  from  their  Poverty  and  hard  Labour, 
and  partly  from  the  black  Hue  which  they  get  from  the 
Coal,  make  a  frightful  Appearance. 

From  hence  we  have  feveral  fmall  Towns  on  the 
Coaft,  as  Crlel  or  Crail,  Anjlruther  or  AnJler+2&  it  is 
ufually  called,  alfo  the  Port  of  Pittenweem  ;  thefe  are 
all  Royal  Burghs. 

I  3 


*  T  O  U  R  thro  Seotl. 

Phienweem  is  a  Port  and  Harbour  very  conveniently 
iltuated  near  the  Mouth  of  the  Forth,  in  the  Shire  of 
Fife ;  and  great  Quantities  of  Herring,  Cod,  and  other 
Fifh,  are  taken  here,  But  it  has  had  two  great  Diffi- 
culties to  encounter  with ;  one,  the  low  Situation  of 
the  7\>wn,  clofe  to  the  Harbour,  by  which  means  the 
Inhabitants  were  at  a  great  and  conftant  Expence 
beyond  their  Ability,  to  maintain  a  Pier,  and  other 
Works,  to  defend  both  the  Shipping,  and  its  Peo- 
ple :  the  other,  that  the  Entrance  was  very  narrow 
and  difficult,  and  feveral  Rocks  lay  in  the  Way  of  the 
Shipping,  which  was  a  great  Hindrance  to  its  Trade 
and  Commerce.  But  in  the  Year  1719.  an  A&pafied 
for  laying  a  Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots  upon  every  Scots 
Pint  of  Ale,  &c.  fold  within  the  Town,  and  its  Li- 
berties, for  remedying  thefe  Inconveniencies. 

Over-againft  this  Shore,  and  in  the  Mouth  of  the 
)  oopofite  to  the  Ifle  of  the  Bafs^  lies  the  Ifle  of 
^  known  to  Mariners  by  a  Light- houfe  upon  it. 
The  only  conftant  Inhabitant  is  fate  to  be  the  Man 
maintained  there  by  the  Government  to  take  Care  of 
the  Fire  in  the  Light-houfe.  It  was  famous  in  former 
Times  for  barren  Women  going  to  St.  Adrian*  $  Shrine 
there. 

Here  the  French  Fleet  lay  with  fome  AfTurance,  with 
^Pretender  on  board,  in  1708.  when  the  Englijh 
Squadron  approaching,  the  Four  o'Clock  Gun  gave 
the  Alarm  ;  upon  which  they  immediately  weighed, 
got  under  bail,  and  made  the  beft  of  their  Way,  the 
Englijh  in  vain  pur fuing  them. 

The  Shore  of  the  Firth  or  Frith  ends  here,  and  the 
MJluarium  or  Mouth  opening,  the  Land  of  Fife  falls 
off  to  the  North,  making  a  Promontory  of  Land  which 
the  Seamen  call  Fifenefs,  looking  Eaft  on  the  German 
Ocean  ;  after  which  the  Coaft  trends  away  Noith, 
and  the  firft  Town  you  come  to  is  St.  Andrews^  an  an- 
tient  and  once  fiourifhing  City,  the  Metropolis  of  all 
Scotland,  and  the  Seat  of  the  firft  Univerfity,  and,  be- 
fore 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  175 

fore  the  Revolution,  an  Archbifhop's  See.  At  this 
time  it  is  a  moft  auguft  Monument  of  the  Splendor  of 
the  Scot  s  Epifcopal  Church  in  former  times  :  and  a  moft 
awful  Heap  of  Ruins. 

It  is  remarkable  for  a  fine  Situation,  furrounded  with 
extentive  Corn-fields,  abounding  in  excellent  Wheat 
and  Barley,  and  the  pleafant  Downs,  called  the  Links^ 
lying  on  the  Sea-fide  towards  the  North.  The  famous 
Phyfician  Cardan  efteemed  it  the  healthieft  Town  he 
ever  lived  in,  having  Occafion  to  experience  it  fome 
Months,  when  he  came  over  from  Italy  ^  at  the  Reque'ft 
of  the  Pope,  to  prefcribeto  Archbifliop  John  Hamilton^ 
when  he  recovered  of  a  Confumption.  And,  twenty 
Years  before,  it  had  the  Approbation  of  the  moft  emi- 
nent Phyiicians  of  the  Country;  when  an  Houfe  was 
.fitted  up  here  for  the  Reception  of  Magdalen,  Daughter 
of  Francis  King  of  Prance,  who  married  'James  V. 
King  of  Scotland,  in  1537.  but  that  Lady  died  ihortly 
after"  her  Arrival  at  Holy-rood  -boufe  in  Edinburgh^  and 
never  reached  St.  Andrews. 

The  Town  of   old  confided   of  four  large  S; 
lying  from  Eaft  to  Weft,  almoft  parallel  to  one  another. 
The  Northernmoft  of  the  four,   called 


though  formerly  the  principal,  is  now  totally  mined, 
not  fo  much  as  one  Houfe  remaining.  The  other 
three  by  their  Regularity  do  not  feem  to  have  been  a 
fortuitous  Concourfe  of  Houfes,  as  moft  of  the  other 
Towns  of  this  Country  do  ;  all  of  them  terminating 
Eaftward  at  the  Cathedral,  which  look  upon  each  other, 
and  feem  to  lament  their  decaying  Condition.  For 
though  the  Town  was  heretofore  about  two  Miles  in 
Circumference,  there  remain  now  hardly  1000  Houfes  ; 
and  of  thofe  near  200  are  become  ruinous,  and  not 
habitable.  The  Number  of  Inhabitants  ftill  amounts 
to  above  4000  ;  but  many  of  them  have  nothing  to  do, 
there  being  neither  Trade  nor  Manufactures  in  the 
Place  ;  though  at  the  fame  time  it  has  an  Harbour, 
but  capable  only  of  fraall  Veffels.  Near  the  Town 
I  4  *» 


176  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

is  Plenty  of  Free- (tone,  of  which  all  the  Houfes  are 
built. 

Before  the  Reformation,  this  .City  was  crowded  both 
on  account  of  Trade  and  Religion,  Pilgrims  coming 
hither  in  great  Numbers  to  viiit  the  Relics  of  St.  An- 
drew, faid  to  be  brought  over  by  St.  Regului,  about  the 
End  of  the  fourth  Century,  from  Patras  in  Greece^ 
where  that  Apoftle  fufFered  Martyrdom.  Here  were 
three  religious  Houfes,  a  Francifcan,  Dominican,  and 
Auguftlne  Priory,  the  laft  founded  by  Robert  Bifliop  of 
&'/.  Andrews,  who  died  1 139.  and  was  eftablifhed  upon 
fome  of  the  Revenues  formerly  belonging  to  the  an- 
tient  Culdees  of  this  Place.  James  Stuart,  afterwards 
Earl  of  Murray,  and  Regent  of  Scotland,  was,  in  his 
younger  Days,  Prior  of  it.  This  Monailery  was  more 
like  the  magnificent  Palace  of  a  Prince,  than  a  Con- 
vent of  Monks  profeffing  Poverty,  as  appears  flill  by 
its  Ruins,  and  particularly  by  the  Wall  that  encom- 
pafTed  it  of  fine  hewn  Stone,  with  many  Battlements 
and  Turrets. 

Here  is  now  only  one  Parifh- Church,  that  of  the 
Holy  Trinity,  remaining;  but  there  are  two  others, 
which  are  rather  Chapels,  one  to  St.  Salvator's  Col- 
lege; of  which,  however,  no  Ufe  is  made,  it  having 
no  Endowment,  and  the  Provoft  of  that  College  being 
often  a  Layman,  even  in  a  Prefbyterian  Senfe.  The 
other  is  the  Chapel  belonging  to  St  Leonard's  College, 
the  Provoft  whereof  muft  be  a  Minifter. 

The  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  is  an  antient  and 
{lately  Edifice,  built  with  fine  Free-ftone  in  Form  of  a 
Crofs,  and  has  at  the  Weft- end  an  handfome  Spire  in 
good  Repair.  In  it  is  a  fine  Monument  of  Archbifhop 
Sharpe,  who  was  aflaflinated  upon  a  Moor,  as  he  was 
coming  Home  in  his  Coach.  It  was  creeled  by  the 
Archbifhop's  Son,  Sir  William  Sharpe,  Bart,  who,  to 
fecure  it  from  the  Fate  he  feared  it  might  be  liable  to, 
mortified  6000  Merks  to  the  City  of  St.  Andrews  t:> 
keep  it  in  coallant  Repair  \  which  has  had  its  intended 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  177 

Effect ;  for  the  Magiftrates  are  very  careful  of  it,  and 
would  be  very  fevere  upon  any  who  fhould  attempt  to 
deface  it. 

On  the  North  fide  of  the  Town  was  the  old  Caftle, 
of  which  now  nothing  is  remaining  but  the  Walls, 
built  by  Roger  Bifhop  of  St.  Anareivs,  who  died  120?.. 
being  the  fecond  Son  of  Robert  de  Bellomont,  Earl  of 
Leicefter^  and  Chancellor  of  Scotland.  It  was  repaired 
by  Cardinal  Bethun^  and  Archbifhop  Hamilton  ;  the 
former  of  whom  procured  George  ii  ijbart  to  be  burnt 
herein  the  Parade,  while  from  his  Window  he  glutted 
his  Eyes  with  fo  horrid  a  Spectacle;  but  was  himfelf 
aftet  wards  ailaffinated,  1546.  in  the  fame  Place;  to 
revenge  whofe  Death,  the  Queen  Regent  permitted  it 
lo  be  attacked  by  the  French^  from  whom  it  fuftered 
greatly.  But  at  the  Reformation  it  fuffered  more,  and 
its  Ruin  has  been  completed  fince  the  Revolution. 

To  the  Eaft  of  the  Caftle  are  the  Ruins  of  the  ftately 
Cathedral,  founded  by  Bifhop  y?>  «0/^,  who  died  1 163, 
and  fmifheJ  by  Bifhop  Lambertoun^  who  died  1328* 
It  was  in  Length  from  Eaft  to  Weft  370  Feet,  and  the 
Crofs  from  South-to  North  180  ;  its  Breadth  65,  and 
its  Height  I  QO  Feet  ;  though  fome  draw  another  kind 
of  khnography,  anJ  make  it  feven  Feet  longer,  ancf 
two  broader,  "than  St.  Peter's  at  Rome ;  and  for  the 
Height,  as  well  as  the  Beauty  of  its  Pillars,  and  the 
Symmetry  and  Proportion  of  the  Whole3  it  was  one  of 
the  beft  Gothic  Structures  in  the  World.. 

It  was  fometimes  called  Kill-ri-monty  from  the 
Church  built  by  Hergufl  King  of  the  Pitts,  in  the 
fourth  Century ;  but  the  Name  of  St.  Andrews  has 
prevailed  for  many  Ages.  The  Cathedral  was  near 
demolifhed  at  the  Reformation  ;  but  was  repaired,  in 
Tome  Meafure,  by  the  fucceeding-  Archbiihops ;  but 
fince  the  Revolution,  it  has  been  intirely  ia  Ruins,  as 
we  now  fee  it. 

Near  the  Ruins  of  the  Cathedral,  are  flill  remaining 

the  Walls  of  ths  moft  antient  ChapeLof 'St.  Rule,  with 

1  5  the 


178  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

the  great  fquare  Spire  ftill  very  intire.  It  is  in  Height 
105  Feet,  and  made  of  fuch  large  and  durable  Stones, 
that  though  it  was  built  fo  many  Ages  ago,  yet  fo  little 
has  it  fuffered  by  the  Injuries  of  the  Weather,  that  a 
fmall  Sum  would  fave  it  from  falling  for  many  Ages 
to  come  :  and  as  this  probably  is  one  of  the  moft  an- 
tient  Monuments  of  Chriftianityin  Great  Britain,  it  is 
Pity  it  fhould  go  to  Ruin  for  want  of  a  fuitable  Repa- 
ration. This,  befides,  would  be  the  moft  proper 
Chapel  and  Chapter-houfe  for  the  Knights  of  the  moft 
antient  Order  of  the  Tbiflle,  fince  under  the  Patronage 
of  the  Apoftle  St.  Andrew -,  (whofe  Relics  were  preferved 
at  this  Place)  that  Order  of  Knighthood  had  its  Rife 
and  Foundation ;  and  by  King  James  VII.'s  Letters 
Patent  reviving  and  reftoring  this  noble  Order,  which 
were  dated  at  Windfor  the  26th  of  May  1 687.  it  appears 
the  Knights  of  the  Thiftle,  or  St.  Andrew,  formerly 
held  their  Chapters  in  the  great  Church  of  St.  Andrew; 
which  being  demolifhed,  his  faid  Majefty  ordered  them 
for  the  future  to  be  kept  at  the  Chapel  Royal  of  Holj- 
rood-boufs. 

Th:s  City  is  famous  particularly  for  its  Univerfity, 
confiding  of  Three  Colleges,  founded  by  Henry  Ward- 
L&W)  Bi{hop  of  Si.  Andrews,  in  the  Year  1412.  It 
obtained  very  ample  Privileges  and  Immuaitks  from 
Pope  Bwedift  XIII.  which  Were  afterwards  confirmed 
to  them  by  King  James  I.  of  Scotland,  and  by  fever al 
other  fucceeding  Kings.  During  Epifcopacy,  the 
Archbilhops  were  Chancellors  of  it.  The  Reclor 
is  chofen  yearly,  and  by  the  Statutes  ought  to  be 
one  of  the  Principals  of  the  three  Colleges  here-, 
called  St.  Salvator's,  St.  Leonard's, and  and  the  New- 
College. 

St.  Salvador's  College  was  founded  by  James  Kennedy 
Bifhopof  Andrews,  Anno  1448.  who  erected  the  Edi- 
fice, furniihed  it  with  coftly  Ornaments,  and  endowed 
it  with  fufficient  Revenues  for  a  Dodor,  a  Bachelor, 
and  a  Licentiate,  of  Divinity,  four  Profeflbrs  of  Philo- 

fophy, 


Scot).         GREAT  BRITAIN.  17,9 

ioplry,  and  eight  poor  Scholars.  The  Earl  of  Cajfils 
fettled  a  Maintenance  fora  Profeffor  of  Philofophy.  It 
has  a  good  Library,  founded  by  Dr.  Sheen.  The  Edi- 
fice itfelf  is  a  {lately  Pile  of  fine  hewn  Stone,  has  a 
large  vaulted  Chapel  covered  with  Free-ftone,  and  ova- 
it  is  a  very  lofty  Spire.  The  common  Hall  and 
Schools  are  vaftly  large  j  and  the  Cloiflers  and  private 
Lodgings  for  Matters  and  Scholars  have  been  very 
magnificent  and  convenient ;  but  the  Fabric  is  of  late 
become  very  much  out  of  Repair  ;  nor  is  the  College 
Revenue  able  to  fupport  it. 

St.  Leonard's  College  was  founded  by  John  Hep- 
burne,  Prior  of  &/.  Andrew^  in  the  Reign  of  King 
James  V.  with  Salaries  for  a  Principal  or  Warden, 
tour  Profeflbrs  of  Philofophy,  and  eight  poor  Scholars., 
A  Profeflor  of  Philology  was  added  by  Sir  John  Scot>  of 
Scots-tarvetyWith  a  liberal  Salary.  Pie  alfo  augmented 
the  Library  very  confidecably  ;  and  Sir  John  Wedder- 
tiuniy.  at  his  Death,  left  a  great  Collection  of  Books 
to  it.  Fin-dun's  MS.  of  the  Scatljb  Hiftory  is  ia  thig 
Library. 

By  an  A&  made  20  Gco.  II.  thefe  two  Colleges 
were  united,  in  purfance  of  an  Agreement  they  had 
made  for  that  Purpofe. 

The  New  College  was  founded  by  Archbiihop  Bt- 
ihunti  Uncle  to  the  Cardinal  of  that  Name,  with  En- 
dowments for  a  Principal  and  ProfefTor  of  Divinity* 
and  fome  Students  in  the  (lime  Faculty  ;  for  no  Philo- 
fophy is  taught  in  this  College. 

The  laft  two  Colleges,  having  a  better  Revenue  to> 
fupport  them  than  that  of  St.  Salvetor^  are  in  much 
better  Repair.  In  the  latter,  Km^  Charles  I.  held  a. 
Parliament,  in  a  large  f^acious  Room  able  to  feat  400 
Perfons  in  regular  Order  ;  and  it  (till  ictains  the  Name 
of  the  Parliajnent-room* 

-A  Profeffor   of  Matbematicks  v/as  of  late  Tear* 
added  to  this  Univerfky ;  as  was  alfo,  not  lon^  iin 
a  ProfdTor  Q£  Mcd-ixuae,  with  an  haaxllbme   'r 


i  So  .rfTOURfW  Scotl. 

ment  by  his  Grace  James,  late  Duke  of  Chandos; 
whom  the  Univerfity,  upon  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of 
Shbcl,  in  Gratitude,  chofe  to  be  their  Chancellor  ; 
which  Office  is  during  Life ;  and  to  that  alone,  and 
that  of  his  Vice- Chancellor,  belongs  the  Conferring  of 
all  Univerfity  Degrees.  It  would  be  for  the  Honour 
of  the  Univerfity,  and  of  the  others  in  North  Britain^ 
that  they  were  lefs  liberal  in  conferring  them,  than 
they  too  frequently  are. 

Mr.  James  Gregory,  ProfefTor  of  Mathematics  in  this 
Univerfity,  famous  for  his  Knowlege  in  that  Sience, 
has  erected,  in  the  College-Gardens,  a  commodious 
Obfervatory,  and  furniihed  it  with  good  Mathematical 
Instruments. 

It  has  produced  many  learned  Men;  among  others, 
the  famous  Lord  Napier ,  who  invented  the  Logarithms, 
Sir  Robert  Murray,  Sir  Andrew  Balfour,  and  the  great 
Lawyer  Sir  George  Mackenzie. 

The  Harbour  here  has  fuffered  fo  much  by  the  En- 
croachments of  the  Sea,  that  I  fear  it  will  never  be  fuf- 
fkiently  repaired.  The  Pier  is  founded  upon  a  Rock 
of  Free-flone,  in  Length  about  400  Feet ;  but  this 
Rock  extends  itfelf  into  the  Sea  500  Feet  farther,  on 
the  Point  of  which  ftands  a  Beacon  ;  and  the  great 
Rolling  of  the  Sea,  breaking  over  the  Rock,  between 
the  Pier-end  and  this  Beacon,  makes  the  Harbour  very 
dangerous.  In  the  Year  1728.  it  was  propofed  to  be 
repaired,  and  the  Pier  carried  as  far  as  the  Beacon, 
and  a  Brief  was  granted  for  that  Purpofe :  but  the  Col- 
leclions  were  too  fmall  to  make  any  great  Advance. 

By  all  we  have  faid,  it  will  appear,  that  this  antient 
City,  and  its  Univerfity  too,  are  in  a  very  declining 
State.  The  Archbifliop's  3~at,  and  Ecclefiaftical 
Courts  kept  there,  beiide  the  great  Refort  of  Pilgrims 
to  the  Convents,  brought  great  Bufmefs  thither;  which 
being  now  difufed,  and  one  new  College  creeled  at 
Edinburgh,  and  another  at  Aberdeen,  contribute  much 
to  ihe  Decay  of  both.  The  City  enjoys  ftill  forne 

Privileges 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  181 

Privileges  by  the  original  Charter  yet  extant,  whereby 
it  was  incorporated  by  King  David,  Anno  1153. 

The  reviving  the  Luftre  of  this  once  fplendid  City ; 
recovering  to  its  former  Utility  this  once  commodious 
Haven,  and  thereby  reftoring  to  its  antient  Profperity 
the  happily  feated  Peninfula  of  Fife,  fays  a  very  ingeni- 
ous   Author,  would    be  a  noble  Teftimony  or  the 
Wifdom  and  public  Spirit  of  the  prefent  Generation. 
This,  though  fo  long  neglecled,  proceeds  he,  is  very 
practicable,  with  a  Irnall  Degree  of  Attention,  and 
without  demanding  any  large  Expence.     The  Coun- 
try about  it  abounds  in  Grain,  as  alfo  in  Coals  and  Salt; 
fo  that  Provifions  being  plenty,   Labour  is  of  Courfe 
cheap.     There   are  likewife  in    its   Neighbourhood 
great  Flocks  of  Sheep,  producing  large  Quantities  of 
Wool,  which  is  of  fuch  a  Staple,  as  may  be  eafily  fpun 
and  wove  into  a  Sort  of  light  Stuff,   refembling  the 
Etamines  of  Rheims,  Amiens,  Mans,  Lude,  Nogent  le 
Rotru,  and  other  Places  in  France,  which  are  ufed  for 
the  Nuns  Veils,  the  cloathing  the  fecular  Clergy  in 
moft  Popifh  Countries,  and  many  other  Purpofes  ;  or 
the  Stamctes  of  the  Low  Countries ,  not  much  unlike 
them,  but  of  all  Colours,  and  of  which  there  is  in  the 
Levant  a   great  Confumption ;  which  Manufactures 
might,  without  Difficulty,  he  brought  to,  and  eftablifhed 
in  St.  Andrews,  where  there  are  fpare  Hands  enough  to 
be  employed.     The  Port,   though  fallen  into  fo  low 
and  deplorable  a  Condition,  ftill  retains  a  Capacity  of 
being  made  full  as  good,  or  better  than  ever  it  was,  by 
removing  thofe  Heaps  of  Sand  which  entirely  choak 
the  Bafon  ;  repairing  the  Breaches  made  in  the  old 
Works  ;  and,  which  is  moft  material,  by  running  a 
Stone  Pier  as  far  as  the  Beacon,  which  would  hinder 
Veflels  from  being  driven  on  the  Rocks  at  the  En- 
trance, and  enable  them  to  ride    fafe   in  the  Har- 
bour.    The  Beach,  continues  the  fame  Gentleman, 
is  as  proper  as  any  for  drying  Cod  and  other  Fiih  in 
the  beft  Method  5  and  if  the  Port,  become  in  a  man- 
ner 


1 82  ^TOUR^/V  Scotl. 

ner  ufelefs*  was  once  put  into  a  proper  State,  with  thefe 
Additions,  the  Herring  Fifhery,  now  no  longer  carried 
on,  (as  requiring  better  VefTels  than  at  prefent  belong 
to  the  Place)  would  be  very  foon  retrieved.     If  one  of 
the  decayed  Edifices  was  converted  into  what  in  South 
Britain  is  called  a  Trinity  Houfe>  of  which  Captains  of 
Men  of  War  coming  thither  occafionally,  and  expe- 
perienced  Matters  of  Ships  in  any  of  the  Ports  on  the 
Coaft,  might  be  Members,  with  a  Power  to  examine 
and  fwear  Pilots,  and  to  infpe&the  other  Harbour?,  ca 
this  Side   North  Britain,  and  the  Management  of  the 
Fisheries,  reporting  annually  their  Obfervations  to  the 
Truftees,  it  would  be  of  Service  to  the  Place,  and  at 
the  fame  time  a  Benefit  to  the  Public.     If  under  their 
View  alfo  a  College  or  School  for  inftru&ing  Youth  in 
Aftronomy,  Cofmography,  Geography,   Natural  Hi- 
ftory,  the  paft  and  prefent  State  of  Commerce,  with 
the  Theory  of  Navigation  in  all  its  Branches,  were 
added  to  the  Univerfity,  for  both  which  Foundations 
the  City  is  admirably  feated,  all  thefe  defirable  Ends 
would  befpeedily  attained.     As   the  Bay  of  St.  dn- 
drewSy  from  Fifenefsto  Red-Head,  is  24  Miles  in  Ex<r 
tent,  and  Ships  in  great  Danger  from  the  Wind  at 
Eaftor  North-Eaft,  the  reftoring  this,  which  is  the  only 
Haven  of  any  Size  in  that  Space,   would  be  of  general 
Ufe  to  the  Trade  of  this  Pait  of  Britain.     At  prefent 
it  is  confidered  as  a  Creek  to  Anjtrutber^  which  is  itfelf 
no  more  than  a  Member  of  the  Port  of  Kirkaldy. 

From  St.  Andrews  we  proceeded  on  to  two  very 
agreeable  Seats  belonging  to  the  prefent  Earl  of  Le- 
vm\  one  called  Mehil>  and  the  other  Balgony.  Mel-vil 
is  a  regular  and  beautiful  Building,  after  the  Model  of 
Sir  John  Bruce  $  Houfe  at  Kinrofs,  defcribed  before. 
Balgony  is  an  antient  Seat,  formerly  belonging  to  the 
Family  of  Lejly  ;  and  if  not  built,  was  enlarged  and  re- 
paired, fey  General  Alexander  Lejly,  noted  for  his  Ser- 
vices m  Germany^  under  Guflavus  Adolpbusy  King  of 

Sweden  $ 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  183 

Sweden ;  and  at  laft,  againft  our  King  Charles  I.  and 
his  Son. 

The  River  Leven  runs  hard  by  the  Walls  of  the 
Houfe,  and  makes  the  Situation  very  pleafant.  The 
Park  is  large,  but  not  well  planted  ;  at  leaft,  the  Trees 
do  not  thrive. 

From  hence  we  went  North  to  Cowpar^  the  Shire- 
town,  moft  pleafantly  fituated  in  a  Valley,  upon  the 
Banks  of  the  River  Edm.  It  is  furrounded  with  tall 
Trees,  which  gives  it  a  fine  Appearance  at  a  Diftance. 
I  turned  to  the  North-eaft  Part  of  the  Country,  to  fee 
the  Ruins  of  the  famous  Monaftery  of  Bahnennoch^  of 
which  Mr.  Camden  takes  Notice ;  but  faw  nothing 
worth  Obfervation,  the  very  Ruins  being  almoft  eaten 
up  by  Time.  The  Monaftery  was  founded  by  Queen 
Ermengred,  Wife  of  King  William  of  Scotland. 

Here  we  came  to  thevBank  of  another  Firth ,  called 
the  Fir-tb  ofTay,  which,  opening  to  a  large  Breadth  at 
its  Entrance,  as  the  Firth  of  Edinburgh  does,  draws  in 
afterwards,  as  that  does  at  the  ^tieen^-ferry^  and  makes 
a  Ferry  over  at  the  Breadth  of  two  Miles  to  the  Town 
of  Dundee  -9  and  then  the  Firth  widening  again  juft  as 
that  of  the  Forth  does  alfo,  continues  its  Breadth  from 
four  to  fix  Miles,  till  it  comes  almoft  to  Perth,  as  the 
other  does  to  Stirling. 

This  River  Tay  is,  without  Exception,  as  I  obferved 
before,  the  largeft  River  in  Scotland,  though  not  of  the 
Jongeft  Courfe  ;  for  it  riles  out  of  the  Mountains,  near 
the  Edge  of  Argylejhire  ;  and  running  firft  North  into 
the  DittruSt  of  Eraidalbin,  there  receiving  many  other 
Rivers,  fpreads  itfelf  into  a  large  Lake  called  Lough 
Toy,  extending  near  40  Miles  in  Length ;  and,traverf- 
ing  the  very  Heart  of  Scotland,  comes  into  the  Sea  near 
this  Place.  Now,  as  I  defign  to  keep  in  this  Part  of 
my  Work  to  the  Eaft  Coaft  of  of  the  Country,  I  muft 
for  the  prefent  quit  the  Tay,  keeping  a  little  on  the 
hither  Side  of  it,  and  go  back  to  that  Part  of  the 
Country  which  lies  to  the  South  and  Eaft 


184  yfTOURAfoV  Scotl. 

ton  or  Lenoxjhlre  ;  fo  drawing  an  imaginary  Line  from 
Stirling-bridge,  due  North,  through  the  Heart  of  the 
Country,  to  Invernefs^  which  I  take  to  lie  almoft  du$ 
North  and  South. 

In  this  Courfe  I  moved  from  the  Ferry  mentioned 
above,  to  Perth,  lying  upon  the  fame  Tay,  but  on  the 
hither  Bank.  It  was  formerly  called  John/ion,  or  St. 

John's  Town,  from  an  old  Church  dedicated  to  the 
vangelift  St.  John,  which  is  ftill  remaining,  and  fo- 
big  as  to  make  two  Parochial  Churches,  and  can  ferve 
the  whole  Town  for  their  public  Worship. 

Perth  is  the  fecond  Town  of  Scotland  for  Dignity. 
Near  it  flood  antiently  the  Town  of  Berth,  which  be- 
ing overflowed  by  an  Inundation  of  the  Tay,  occafioned 
the  Building  of  this,  where  it  now  ftands. 

The  chief  Bufmefs  of  this  Town  at  prefent  is  the 
tinen  Manufacture  ;  which  is  fo  conn'derable  hete, 
that  all  the  neighbouring  Country  is  employed  in  it, 
and  it  is  the  Wealth  of  the  whole  Place.  The  Tay 
is  navigable  up  to  the  Town  for  Ships  of  good  Burden; 
and  here  they  (hip  off  vaft  Quantities  of  Linen  for 
England. 

in  the  Heat  of  the  War  between  the  Eruces  and 
Balhkj,  the  EngKJh  fortified  Perth  with  good  Bul- 
warks ;  the  greateft  Part  of  which  the  Scots  afterwards 
clemolifhed.  It  is  fituated  in  an  Hollow;  but  is  ne- 
verthelefs  a1  neat  little  Cky,  pleafantly  feated  between 
iwo  green  Plains,  which  they  call  The  Indes,  and  ferve 
for  bleaching  their  Linen  Cloth.  It  has  three  very 
long  Streets,  and  many  crofs  ones,  with  an  old  Wall 
in  Ruins  furrOunding  every  Side,  but  that  bordered  by 
the  River. 

The  high  Country  behind  it  affords  plentiful  Pa- 
fture  to  Sheep  and  Black  Cattle ;  and  the  Lowlands 
produce  abundance  of  Corn.  When  the  Fir  Woods, 
which  are  ve  y  tegu'arly  planted  about  Diinkil,  come 
to  be  felled,  and  the  other  Improvements  that  have  been 

made 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  185 

made  of  late  Years,  (hall  alfo  be  made  known  by  their 
Effects,  the  Exports  from  Perth  will  be  mofe  con- 
"fiderable. 

The  Salmon  taken  here,  and  all  over  the  Toy,  are 
extremely  good,  and  the  Quantity  prodigious.  They 
carry  them  to  Edinburgh^  and  to  all  the  Towns  where 
they  have  no  Salmon,  and  barrel  up  great  Quantities 
for  Exportation  :  the  Merchants  of  this  Town  have 
alfo  a  confiderable  Trade  to  the  Baltic  and  Norway. 

This  Town  was  for  fome  time  the  Seat  of  the  Re- 
bellion in  1715.  but,  by  a  peculiar  Felicity,  the  Townf- 
men  gol  fo  much  Money  by  both  Parties,  that  they 
have  ever  fmce  been  enriched  by  it,  as  appears  not  only 
from  particular  Families,  but  from  the  public  and  pri- 
vate Buildings  which  they  have  raifed  fmce  that  time  ; 
particularly  a  new  Tolboothot  Town-ball, 

The  Linen  Trade,  which  we  have  mentioned  be- 
fore, has  mightily  increafed  fmce  the  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment in  England,  for  fuppreffing  the  Ufe  of  printed 
Calicoes  ;  in  the  room  of  which  Scotch  and  Irijh  Linens 
have  been  bought  and  printed  in  England:  fo  that  the 
Worfted  and  Silk  Weavers  in  London  feem  to  have  had 
very  little  Benefit  by  the  Act 

At  Ardock  in  Perth/hire  are  the  Remains  of  a  Roman 
Camp  ;  and  near  Perth  is  a  Roman  Way,  where  feve- 
ral  Medals,  fepulchral  Urns,  and  other  Monuments  of 
Antiquity,  have  been  found. 

From  Perth  I  went  South  to  that  Part  which  they 
called  Clackmanan,  a  fmall  Shire  furrounded  by  thofe 
of  Perth  and  Stirling,  lying  Weft  from  Dunfermline* 
and  extending  itfelf  towards  Stirling  and  Dumblain^ 
none  of  which  Part  I  had  gone  over  before. 

North-eaftward  from  Perth  to  Brechen  lies  a  Vale 
which  they  call  Strathmere*  efteemed  the  molt  fruitful 
in  Corn  of  all  that  Part  of  the  Country:  here  are  a 
great  many  Gentlemens  Seats,  though  on  the  North- 
iide  of  the  7*y,  particularly  the  noble  Palace  of  Glames^ 

the 


1 86  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

the  Hereditary  Seat  of  the  Family  of  Lyon,  Earls  of 
Strathmore. 

It  is  one  of  the  fined  old-built  Palaces  in  Scotland^ 
and  by  far  the  largeft.  When  you  fee  it  at  a  Diftance , 
it  is  fo  full  of  Turrets,  and  lofty  Buildings,  Spires,  and 
Towers,  fome  plain,  others  fhining  with  gilded  Tops, 
that  it  looks  not  like  a  Town,  but  a  City ;  and  the  Ap- 
pearances feen  through  the  long  Viftas  of  the  Park  are 
fo  different,  that  you  would  not  think  it  the  fame  Houfe 
any  two  ways  together. 

The  great  Avenue  is  a  full  Half-mile,  planted  on 
either  Side  with  feveral  Rows  of  Trees.  When  you 
come  to  the  outer  Gate,  you  are  furprifed  with  the 
Beauty  and  Variety  of  the  Statues  and  Bufts,  fome  of 
Stone,  fome  of  Brafs,  fome  gilded,  fome  plain.  The 
Statues  in  Brafs  are  four,  one  of  King  'James  VI.  one 
of  King  Charles  I.  booted  and  fpurred,  as  if  going  to 
take  Horfe  at  the  Head  of  "his  Army  ;  one  of  King 
Charles  II.  habited  like  that  in  the  Royal  Exchange > 
London;  and  one  of  King  James  VII.  after  the  Pattern 
of  that  which  is  at  Whitehall. 

From  hence  I  came  away  South-weft,  and,  croffing 
the  Tay  below  Perth ,  but  above  Dundee,  came  at  lait 
to  Dumblain,  a  Town  pleafantly  fituated,  on  the  Banks 
of  the  River  Allan ;  but  without  any  Sort  of  Trade.  It 
was  made  a  Bifhoprick  by  King  David  I.  and  the 
Ruins  of  the  Bifhops  and  Canons  Houfes  are  ftill  to  be 
feen  ;  as  alfo  are  thofe  of  a  Church  of  excellent  Work- 
manmip.  But  within  our  own  Memory  it  was  made 
famous  by  the  Battle  fought  between  the  Army  of  King 
George  I.  under  the  Command  of  the  Duke  of  Argyle^ 
and  the  Pretender'?,  Forces  under  the  Earl  of  Mar^  on 
Sheriff-muir^  between  this  Place  and  Stirling.  We 
took  a  full  View  of  the  Field  of  Battle,  and  could  not 
but  reflect  with  Surprize,  that  a  Rabble  of  Highlanders 
appearing  in  Rebellion,  armed  in  Hafte,  and  headed  by 
a  Perfon  of  no  Experience  in  War,  fhould  come  fo 
near  to  the  overthrowing  an  Army  of  regular  difciplin- 

ed 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        187 

e*d  Troops,  and  led  on  by  experienced  Officers,  and  fo 
great  a  General. 

From  hence  I  proceeded  on  in  Sight  of  Stirling^ 
bridge  ;  but,  leaving  it  on  the  Right-hand,  turned  away 
Eaft  to  Allowaji  where  the  late  Earl  of  Mar  had  a 
noble  Seat,  and  where  the  Navigation  of  the  Firth  of 
Forth  begins.  This  is,  as  I  hinted  before,  within  four 
Miles  of  Stirling  by  Land,  and  fcarcely  within  24  by 
Water,  occafipned  by  thofe  uncommon  Meanders  and 
Reaches  in  the  River,  which  give  fo  beautiful  a  Pro- 
fpecl:  from  the  Caftle  of  Stirling. 

This  fine  Seat  was  formerly  called  the  Caftle  of  Alh* 
way ;  but  is  now  fo  completely  modernized,  that  no 
Appearance  of  a  Caftle  remains. 

The  Gardens  of  Alkway  Houfe  are  by  much  the 
fineft  in  Scotland,  and  not  outdone  by  any  in  England^ 
confuting  of  about  40  Acres  of  Ground  ;  and  the  ad- 
joining Wood,  which  is  adapted  to  the  Houfe  in 
Avenues  and  Viftas,  above  three  times  as  much. 

Here  is  an  Harbour  where  Ships  of  Burden  fafely 
ride.  The  Glafgow  Merchants  have  creeled  Ware- 
houfes,  to  which  they  bring  their  Tobacco  and  Sugars 
by  Land,  and  then  (hip  them  for  Holland  or  Ham- 
Iurgb9  or  the  Baltic ,  or  England,  as  they  find  the 
Market. 

The  High-ftreet  of  Alkway  reaches  down  to  this 
Harbour,  and  is  a  very  fpacious  well-built  Street,  with 
Rows  of  Trees  finely  planted  all  the  Way.  Here  are 
feveral  Teftimonies  of  the  Goodnefs  of  their  Trade,  as 
particularly  a  large  Deal-yard,  or  Place  for  laying  up  all 
Stores  of  Norway  Goods  ;  which  mews  that  they  have 
a  Commerce  thither.  They  have  large  Warehoufes  of 
naval  Stores  ;  fuch  as  Pitch,  Tar,  Hemp,  Flax,  two 
Sawing-mills  for  cutting  or  flitting  of  Deals  ;  and  a 
Rope-walk,  for  making  all  Sorts  of  Ropes  and  Cables 
for  rigging  and  fitting  Ships ;  with  feveral  other  things; 
which  convinces  us  they  are  no  Strangers  to  other 
Trades,  as  well  by  Sea  as  Land. 

Eaft 


A  T  O  U  R  thro 


Scotl. 


Eaft  from  Alhway,  is  a  fmall  County,  called  Clack- 
mananjhire,  from  the  Head  Burgh,  and  is  Part  of  Fife. 
The  Country  is  plain,  the  Soil  fertile  ;  mofi  of  it  pro- 
per for  Pafture ;  and  what  lies  belcw  the  Orcbll-bilk9 
producing  Corn  very  well.  But  the  Shire  is  chiefly 
known  for  yielding  the  beflttf  Coal,  and  the  greatelt 
Quantity  of  it,  of  arw  Part  of  Scotland ;  fo  that  it  is 
carried,  not  only  to  Edinburgh,  but  alfo  to  England, 
Holland,  and  France.  But  while  the  Freight  from 
Scotland  is  fo  dear,  and  the  Tax  in  England  fo  heavy, 
the  Price  of  thefe  Coals  mult  always  be  fohigh  at/.0/z- 
don,  as  will  not  fail  to  reftrain  the  Confumpnon. 

On  this  Shore  of  the  Firth,  farther  down,  ftandsthe 
neat  and  agreeable  Town  of  Culrsfs,  lying  in  Length 
by  the  Water- fide,  like  Kirkaldy,  being  likevvife  a 
trading  Town,  as  Trade  muft  be  underftood  in  Scot" 
land.  Here  is  a  pretty  Market,  a  plentiful  Country 
behind  it,  and  the  navigable  Firth  before  it.  The  Coal, 
the  Linen  Manufacture,  and  Plenty  of  Corn,  will  al- 
ways keep  fomething  of  Trade  alive  upon  the  whole 
Coaft. 

The  Ruins  of  the  Abbey  of  Culrofs  took  my  Atten- 
tion, Part  of  which  is  turned  into  a  Stable.  The  Re- 
mains of  Gentlemens  Seats,  of  long  (landing,  occur 
every  where,  in  the  Erection  of  which  Houfes,  the 
Builders  (hewed,  that  they  ftudied  Duration  preferably 
to  Conveniency.  As  I  pafled,  1  was  continually  com- 
paring paft  times  with  the  prefent,  in  the  former  of 
which  the  Grandeur  of  the  Prince,  and  the  Splendor 
of  the  few  noble  Families  were  fuppcrted  at  the  Ex- 
pence  of  the  People  in  general,  who  (the  Clergy  ex- 
cepted)  laboured  under  the  loweft  Degree  of  Poverty, 
Slavery  and  Ignorance,  whereas  now,  our  Traffickers 
enjoy  the  Fruits  of  their  own  Labour  and  Induftry. 

Here  is  a  very  noble  Seat  belonging  to  the  Braces, 
Earls  of  Kincardine,  and  is  well  worth  a  Traveler's 
Notice  ;  and  indeed  thefe  Inftances  of  Magnificence 

are 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  189 

are  fo  frequent  in  Scotland,  that  were  we  to  dwell  upon 
each  of  them,  fuchofour  Readers  as  know  nothing  of 
Scotland^  would  be  apt  to  think  we  were  too  partial  in 
its  Favour.  But  it  is  certain,  that  no  Gentry  or  No- 
bility in  the  World  formerly  exceeded  the  Scots  in 
noble  Houfes,  and  all  manner  of  Magnificence  ;  as 
their  Families,  for  Antiquity  of  Defcent,  hardly  have 
any  Equals  in  any  one  Country  on  Earth. 

Culrofs  is  a  Royal  Burgh  in  the  Shire  of  Perth,  but 
in  the  Confines  of  Fife,  famous  for  a  Branch  of  the  Iron 
Manufacture  in  making  Girdles,  i.  e.  broad  round 
Plates,  on  which  they  bake  their  oaten  Cakes.  They 
told  me  of  Mines  of  Copper,  and  of  Lead,  lately  dif- 
covered  in  Fife,  and  of  Silver  alfo  ;  but  I  could  not 
learn,  that  any  of  them  w^re  actually  wrought.  It  is, 
however,  not  improbable,  but  that  there  are  fuch 
Mines  ;  and  particularly  the  two  Lomonds,  which  are 
remarkable  Mountains  in  this  Shire,  feem  to  promife 
Metal  in  their  Bowels,  if  they  were  thoroughly  fearch- 
ed.  They  rife  up  like  two  Sugar-loaves  in  the  middle 
of  a  plain  Country,  not  far  from  Falkland,  and  give  a 
View  of  thzFirthtf  Edinburgh  §sud\,  and  the  Firth  of 
Tay  North,  and  are  fetn  from  Edinburgh  very  plain. 
Having  made  this  little  Excuriion  to  the  South  from 
Perth,  you  may  fuppofe  me  now  returned  Northward 
again  ;  and  we  proceeded  to  Scone,  where  almoft  alf 
the  Kings  of  Scotland  were  crowned,  fmce  the  Subduc- 
tion  of  the  PicJs. 

The  celebrated  Wooden  Chair,  with  the  Stone  in 
it,  was  brought  away  from  hence,  as  is  well  known, 
by  the  victorious  King  Edward  I.  and  placed  in  IVefl- 
min  ft  er- Abbey  ^  where  it  now  is ;  but  the  Scotijh  Royal 
Blood  fucceeding  to  the  Rnglijh  Crown,  in  the  Perform 
of  King  James  I.  of  England,  and  VI.  of  Scotland, 
verify 'd  the  following  prophetic  Diftich,  though  at  the 
time  it  was  accounted  no  fmall  Lofs  and  Difgrace  to 
the  Kingdom.  The  Lines  were  thefe  : 

Ni 


A  T  O  U  R  thro 

Ni  fallat  Fatum,  Scoti,  qilocunque  locatum 
Invenient  Lapidvn,  regnare  tenentur  Ibidem. 

Thus  tranflated  by  the  Scots: 

Vnkfs  old  Prophets  fail,  and  Wizards  Wit  decay  ^ 
Where-?  er  this  Stone  is  found)  the.  Scots  ft>a  II  reign  for , 

It  is  faid  to  have  been  firft  dignified  by  K.  Kenneth, 
who,  having  fought  a  bloody  Battle  here  with  the 
PiftS)  in  which  he  gave  them  a  great  Overthrow,  fat 
down  to  reft  himfelf  upon  this  Stone,  after  he  had  been 
tired  with  the  Slaughter  of  the  Enemy ;  upon  which 
his  Nobles  came  round  him  to  congratulate  his  Succefs ; 
and,  in  Honour  to  his  Value,  crowned  him  with  a 
Garland  of  Vidory ;  from  whence  he  dedicated  the 
Stone  to  the  Coronation  of  all  the  future  Kings  of  Scot- 
landy  hoping  from  this  Omen,  that  they  fhould,  like 
him,  be  victorious  over  all  their  Enemies. 

But  the  better  Sort  of  Scots  Hiftorians  fay,  their 
Kings  brought  it  from  Ireland  into  I-Colm-Kitt  in  the 
Ifles,  and  from  thence  to  Scone  or  Scoony  when  they  had 
fubdued  the  Pitts. 

The  Palace  ofScoon,  though  antient,  is  not  fo  much 
decayed  as  fome  of  thofe  I  have  already  fpoken  of;  and 
the  Pretender,  Anno  1715.  found  it  very  well  in  Repair 
for  his  Ufe.  Here  he  lived  and  kept  his  Court,  in  all 
the  State  and  Appearance  of  a  Sovereign.  He  iflued 
Proclamations,  created  feveral  Lords,  Knights,  and 
Bimops  ;  and  Preparations  were  made  for  crowning 
him  :  but  as  he  had  never,  from  his  Landing,  gone  into 
any  Proteftant  Church,  though  Epifcopal,  as  many  of 
his  Adherents  expe&ed,  but  conftantly  performed  his 
Devotions  with  his  Priefts  after  the  Romiih  Way  5  fo 
he  manifefted  fuch  an  invincible  Reluclance  to  com- 
pfy:  with  the  ufual  Form  of  the  Coronation-Oath,  that 
the  Ceremony,  for  which  fome  of  the  Popifh  Ladies 

had 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

had  even  pawned  their  Jewels,  was  put  off.  An  Evi- 
dence, that  the  Honefty  of  the  Man  overcame  the  Po- 
licy of  the  Prince;  and  the  greater,  as  the  Pope  could 
have  given  him  a  Difpenfation,  at  Pleafure,  to  juftify 
any  Breach  of  the  Oath  :  —  But  this  was  fuch  a 
Warning  to  Proteftants  of  what  they  had  to  truft  to, 
fhould  he  have  fucceeded,  that  it  deferves  to  be  had  in 
perpetual  Remembrance.  His  Mock -Royalty  con- 
tinued but  20  Days ;  he  being  then  obliged  to  quit  the 
Kingdom,  by  the  Advance  of  the  Royal  Army. 

The  Gallery  in  this  Palace  is  the  longeft  in  Scot- 
land. The  Cieling  is  painted  ;  but  the  Painting  is 
very  old. 

The  Building  is  large,  the  Front  being  above  200 
Feet;  it  has  two  extraordinary  fine  fquare  Court?, 
befides  others,  which  contain  the  Offices,  Outhoufes, 
&c.  The  Royal  Apartments  are  fpacious  and  large  ; 
but  the  whole  Building  is  intirely  after  the  antient 
Manner. 

From  S.coon  to  Dunkeld\%  fo  little  a  Way,  that  we 
could  not  help  vifiting  it,  being  the  Place  where  a 
Skirmiih  was  fought  between  the  Forces  of  K.  William^ 
after  the  Revolution,  and  fome  of  the  Vifcountof  Dun- 
dee's Men,  who  purfued  the  King's  Forces,  as  they 
were  obliged  to  retire  from  Gillicranky^  after  Lord 
Dundee  himfelf  had  been  killed  there. 

In  one  of  my  Excurfions,  I  went  from  Perth  to 
Dunkeld')  and  never  in  any  Journey  had  I  a  more  agree- 
able Variety  under  my  Eye.  We  went  over  the  Hill, 
as  they  call  it ;  but  it  ought  to  be  faid  Hills;  or  rather 
Mountains,  as  we  fhould  deem  them  in  England. 
No  fooner  had  we  got  over  one,  but  another  higher 
prefented  itfelf  for  our  next  Labour.  Between,  and 
upon  the  Declivity  of  thefe  Hills,  we  had  Fir- woods 
all  regularly  planted  :  as  foon  as  we  defcended  from  an 
Hill,  we  were  fure  to  meet  with  an  agreeable  River, 
which  we  heard  before  we  faw  it,  the  Water  tumul- 

tuoufly, 


19*  A  T  O  U  R  thro'          Scotl. 

tuoufly,  as  I  may  fay,  rolling  over  large  Rock-Stones, 
lying  in  every  Part,  many  of  them  above  the  Water  : 
the  Sides  of  the  Bank  being  frequently  lined  with  the 
fame  rocky  Subftance,  gives  a  fwift  Motion  to  the 
Water.  Thefe  craggy  Stones  lie  fo  thick  in  fome 
Places,  as  to  feem  to  threaten  a  Stoppage  to  the 
Stream ;  but  a  larger  Quantity  of  Water  being  collect- 
ed by  them,  it  forces  its  Way  with  a  violent  Current ; 
and,  making  natural  Cafcades,  fills  a  Perfon,  difpofed 
to  Contemplation,  with  agreeable  Senfations. 

Dunkeldis  the  chief  Market-town  of  the  Highlands, 
and  fuppofed  to  have  been  formerly  the  chief  Town  of 
Caledonia.  It  is  fituated  on  the  North-  fide  of  the  Tayy 
at  the  Foot  of  the  Grampian- Hills.  King  David  made 
it  an  Epifcopal  See. 

We  did  not  fee  it  till  we  came  juft  upon  it :  it  then 
appeared  to  be  a  very  neat  and  agreeable  Place  ;  but  in- 
clofed  with  very  high  Mountains  on  every  Side,  hav- 
ing the  forementioned  beautiful  River  Tay  winding  al- 
moft  round  it ;  and  is  very  broad,  fo  that  we  are  obliged 
to  be  ferry'd  over,  to  get  into  the  Town.  Here 
are  two  Ferries  for  this  Purpofe,  at  different  Ends  of 
the  Town,  where  are  Boats  for  Men  and  Horfe  always 
in  Readinefs ;  at  either  of  which  Places  the  River  is 
exceeding  deep,  and  the  Water  looks  quite  black  at  a 
Diftance. 

The  Duke  of  Atlol  has  a  noble  Seat  in  this  Town  : 
here  was  alfo  formerly  a  beautiful  and  magnificent  Ca- 
thedral Church,  dedicated  to  St.  Columba,  the  Sear  of 
a  Bifhop,  whofe  Chapter  or  Prebendaries  were  Guldees^ 
or  Black  Monks  ;  but  they  were  difiblved  at  the  Re- 
formation, and  moft  Part  of  the  Church  is  now  in 
Ruins.  There  is,  at  prefent,  a  moft  remarkable  Crack 
all  up,  and  through  the  Building  of  the  Steeple,  which 
is  of  Stone,  and  which,  in  Painting,  would  make  a 
moft  entertaining  Landfchape.  The  Duke's  Houfe, 
and  this  Church,  makes  the  greateft  Part  of  the  Town.. 

Tha 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  193 

The  Gardens  here,  belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Atbol^ 
are  all  of  Nature's  forming.  You  have  here  Variety 
of  Mounts  and  Flats,  adorned  with  Statues,  and  a  neat 
Green-houfe  ;  as  alfo  an  handfome  Stove,  with  many 
curious  Plants  in  it,  fuch  as  Pine- apples,  Torch- thirties, 
Oranges,  Lemons,  csV.  and  feveral  curious  Coffee- 
trees,  that  thrive  vaftl'y  well.  The  Highland  Houfes 
hereabouts  are  very  oddly  built,  and  look  moft  mifera- 
ble  and  defolate,  they  being  compofed  of  Clods  of 
Peat,  Stones,  and  Broom.  As  to  Chimneys,  they  are 
little  acquainted  with  them;  there  is  fometimesa  little 
Hole  left  open  in  the  Top,  for  the  Smoke  to  go  out  ; 
other  times  it  is  in  the  End ;  and  moft  frequently  the 
Door  performs  this  Office*  Nay,  what  is  more  odd, 
in  coming  into  this  Town,  I  faw  in  one  Houfe  a 
Chimney  made  of  a  Cart-wheel,  and  out  of  the  Hollov/ 
for  the  Axle  paffed  the  Smoke. 

As  to  their  Way  of  Living  it  is  as  odd,  being  chiefly 
on  Oatmeal,  boiled  up.  tn  various  Forms,  with  Water, 
like  Hafty-Pudden  ;  we  ufed  to  mix  it  with  Milk  or 
Ale.  Their  Bread  is  Oatmeal  and  Water  made  into 
trfin  Cakes.  Their  Method  of  making  thefe  Bannocks 
or  Oatcakes  is  by  kneading  the  Oatmeal  with  Water 
to  a  Pafte,  then  flatting  it  with  the  Hand  (by  the  Helen 
of  dry  Meal)  to  lefs  (nan  Half  an  Inch  thicknefs :  it  \9 
laid  dry  upon  a  Girdle-Iron,  to  bake  over  the  Fire* 
The  Girdle-Iron  here  is  a  thin  Iron  Plate,  of  different 
Sizes  ;  but^  for  ordinary  Ufe,  it  is  about  two  Feet  in 
Diameter  ;  this  is  fupported  by  a  Trevet  with  three 
Legs,  and  it  is  fet  upon  the  Hearth,  and  a  Fire  is  made 
underneath,  as  Occafion  (hail  require  ;  they  are  alfo 
frequently  turned,  till  fufficiently  baked.  In  the  Bi- 
fhoprick  of  Durham  they  have  thefe  Plates ;  which 
are  hung  upon  a  Trammel,  by  means  of  a  Girdle- 
handle.  When  Oatmeal  is  dear,  they  make  them  of 
JBarleymeal,  and  Ale  inftead  of  Water,  which  in  every 
thing  is  performed  after  the  fame  manner ;  and  by 
fome  are  more  efteemed  than  the  others  (with  Oat- 
VoL.IV.  K  meal); 


j94  A  TOUR  thro*  So 

meal) ;  they  thinking  it  not  fo  hot  for  the  Blood. 
l^hefe  Cakes  are  made  and  kept  in  Quantities  by  the 
better  Sort  ;  and  for  Tea,  we  had  them  warmed  before 
the  Fire,  \yhich  is  foon  done,  and  then  buttered  ;  and 
fo  they  are  agreeable  enough. 

The  common  People  have  generally  two  Apart- 
ments in  their  Houfes,  by  means  of  a  flight  Partition  ; 
one  End  they  lie  in  themfelves,  having  a  Fire  in  the 
Middle;  and  Chaff  of  Corn  or  Heather  is  their  Bed; 
the  other  End  is  for  their  Oxen,  Calves,  &c.  which  are 
exceeding  fmall  ;  a  full-grown  Ox  is  feldom  bigger 
than  one  of  our  Calves  of  a  Year  old.  The  Smell  of 
the  Cattle's  Dung  (which  is  generally  very  thick  about 
the  Houfe),  and  their  Peat  Fire,  I  believe,  keeps  them 
in  Health,  butjrcot  free  from  the  Itch,  which  is  as  com- 
mon as  their  Oatmeal ;  and  even  their  better  Sort  of 
People  are  rarely  free  from  this  Malady,  which  they 
feldom  mind  to  cure  any  other  way  than  by  their  dumb 
Mufic. 

In  turning  out  of  the  Road,  about  a  Mile  from  Dun- 
keld,  upon  the  River  J/mand,  which  is  a  Branch  of  the 
Tay,  there  is  the  moft  wonderful  Cafcade  that  ever  I 
faw;  I  believe  it  is  near  30  Yards  high.  It  is  called 
'The  Rumbling  Brig,  from  the  furprifing  NoiTe  it 
makes.  Clofe  by  it  are  two  Pvocks  over  the  River, 
which  meet  together,  and  form  a  natural  Bridge :  to 
make  the  PafFage  over  it  the  eafier,  the  Country- peo- 
ple who  live  near  it,  have  covered  it  with  Sticks  and 
Clods  of  Peat,  it  being  the  only  Bridge  they  have  over 
this  River,  When  you  ftand  upon  it,  the  Fall  of  Wa- 
ter is  fo  great,  that  though  it  is  fo  many  Yards  below 
you,  yet  it  will  wet  you  all  over,  the  Water  afcending 
from  this  bottomlefs  River  (for  they  fay  it  has  been 
plumbed,  but  a  Bottom  never  found)  like  Smoke  and 
Rain  mixed. 

About  14  Miles  from  hence  is  the  famous  Pafs  of 
Gilb cranky,  noted  for  the  Fight  between  the  Vifcount 

Dundee^ 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  jp^ 

Dundee^  and  King  William's  Forces.  The  Mountains 
in  its  Neighbourhood,  on  every  Side,  feem  to  penetrate 
the  Skies.  It  is  fituated  at  the  Foot  of  a  vaft  Moun- 
tain, and  is  near  a  Mile  in  Length.  The  River  Timel 
divides  it  from  Mountains  ftill  higher,  covered  with 
Woods.  The  Road  is  narrow  and  dangerous,  the 
River  lying  in  a  vaft  Hollow  running  clofe  to  it.  From 
thefe  woody  Mountains  flow  Streams  of  the  pureft 
Water.  The  Views  and  Profpecls  around  this  Pafs 
are  truly  wonderful  for  their  Variety. 

Upon  the  River  lay  lies  Errol,  the  Seat  of  the  Earl 
of  that  Name,  chief  of  the  antient  Family  of  Hay,  who 
derive  their  Origin  from  a  famous  Peafant,  who  in  the 
.Reign  of  Kenneth  III.  being  at  Plough  with  his  two 
Sons,  and  perceiving  the  Scots  flying  before  the  Danes, 
he  and  his  two  Sons  ftopt  their  Flight,  renewed  the 
Battle,  and  gained  the  Vidory  ;  for  which  they  had 
the  Lands  of  Errol  beftowed  upon  them ;  and  the 
Family  Arms  are  three  bloody  Shields,  fupported  'by 
two  naked  Men  with  Yokes,  in  Remembrance  of  this 
famous  Victory  ;  the  Father  and  two  Sons  having 
no  other  Weapons  when  they  put  themfelves  at  the 
Head  of  the  flying  Scots,  but  the  Yokes  they  took 
from  their  Ploughs.  Of  this  Family  are,  befides  the 
Earls  of  Errol,  the  Marquis  of  Tweedale,  the  Earl  of 
Klnnoul,  &c. 

But  our  determined  Route  lay  up  the  Eaftern  Shore, 
and  through  the  Shires  adjacent  on  that  Side,  as  parti- 
cularly Angus )  Mearns,  Marr,  Aberdeen,  Buchan,  and 
fo,  as  I  laid  it  out  before,  to  Inverness. 

Mr.  Camden  tells  us,  That  the  Firth  of  Tay  was  the 
utmoft  Boundary  of  the  Roman  Empire  in  Britain  : 
That  Julius  Agricola,  the  beft  of  Generals,  under  Do- 
mitian,  the  worft  of  Emperors,  though  he  pierced  far- 
ther, and  traverfed  by  Land  into  the  Heart  of  the  / 
lands,  yet  feeing  no  End  of  a  barbarous  Country,  and 
no  Advantage  by  the  Conqueft  of  it,  withdrew,  agid 
K  2  here 


I95  ATOU&tbri     _      Scotl. 

here  fixed  the  Roman  Eagles  ;  that  he  frequently  har- 
railed  the  Pitts  by  Excurfions  and  Inroads,  but  always 
returned  to  his  Poft  here,  making  the  Tay  his  Fron-. 
tier. 

But  our  EngHJh  Ceefars  have  outgone  the  Romans  ; 
for  Edward  I.  as  is  faid  before,  patted  the  Tay>  and 
rifled  the  Abbey  at  Scoon  ;  and,  if  we  may  believe  Hif- 
tory,  penetrated  into  the  remoteft  Parts,  which,  how- 
ever, I  take  to  be  only  the  remoteft  Parts  of  what  was 
then  known  to  the  Engllfl)  $  for  as  to  the  Highlands, 
the  Mountains  of  Loquhabar^  Rofs,  Murray^  Suther- 
land^ and  Caithr.efs,  we  read  nothing  of  them.  From 
thefe  Retreats  the  Scots  always  returned,  Antatus  like, 
with  double  Strength  after  every  Defeat ;  till,  in  the 
next  Reign,  they  overthrew  his  Succeflor  Edward  II. 
at  Bannockburn,  and  drove  the  EngHJh  out  of  the  whole 
Country,  following  them  over  Tweed  into  England^ 
and  ravaging  the  Counties  of  Northumberland  and 
Cumberland. 

Oliver  Cromwell  indeed  (accord ing  to  the  Motto  of 
a  noble  Houfe  in  Scotland,  RODE  THROUGH)  pene- 
trated to  the  remoteft  Part  of  the  Ifland  ;  and  that  he 
might  even  literally  rule  it  with  a  Rod  of  Iron,  built 
Citadels  and  Forts  in  all  the  Angles  and  Extremes, 
where  he  found  it  needful  to  place  his  ftationary  Le- 
gions, juft  as  the  Romans  did  $  as  at  Litth^  at  St.  An- 
drews^ at  Invernef$y  Perth,  Alr^  and  feveral  other 
Places  We  have  fince  feen  the  Forces  of  King 
George  I.  making  the  fame  Route,  nay,  ferrying  over 
into  the  Weftern  and  North-weftern  Iflands;  here 
ag;ain  imitating  the  Prudence  of  the  old  Romans^  who 
employed  their  Soldiery  in  amending  Roads,  and  mak- 
ing Caufeways  over  Mountains,  that  were  before 
thought  inacceffible. 

Where  Armies  have  marched,  there  is  room  enough, 
no  doubt,  for  Travelers.  With  this  Afturance  there- 
for e3  we  chearfully  croiTcd  the  Tay. 

We 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  .          197 

We  \&Strathern,  with  the  little  Country  of  Men- 
tilth,  for  our  Return  ;  and  went  down  into  Angus  to 
Dundee,  a  pleafant,  large,  populous  City,  which,  as  it 
ftands  well  for  Trade,  has  as  large  a  Share  of  it,  as 
moil  Towns  in  Scotland,  and  that  as  well  Foreign  as 
Domeftic. 

It  is  exceeding  populous,  full  of  Irately  Houfes,  and 
large  handfome  Streets  ;  particularly  four  very  good 
ones,  with  a  large  Market-place  in  the  Middle,  the 
larger!  and  faireft  in  Scotland,  except  that  of  Aber- 
deen* 

The  Inhabitants  have  a  very  large  Correfpondence 
with  England,  and  fhip  off  a  great  deal  of  Linen 
thither;  and  a  great  Quantity  of  Corn  is  fent  from 
hence  to  England,  as  well  as  to  Holland.  They  have 
likewife  a  good  Share  of  the  Norway  Trade  ;  and  as 
they  are  concerned  in  the  Herring  Fifhery,  they  confe- 
quently  have  fome  Eaft  Country  Trade;  viz.  to 
Dantzick,  Koningfberg,  Riga,  &c.  They  fend  Ships 
alfo  to  Sweden,  and  import  Iron,  Copper,  Tar,  Pitch, 
Deals,  fcrV.  from  the  feveral  trading  Ports  of  that 
Kingdom. 

The  Country  behind  them,  called  the  Carfe,  or  the 
Carfe  ofGowry,  with  the  Vale  mentioned  above  of 
Stratbmore^   abounds    in    Corn,  which   the  Port   of 
Dundee  (hips  off  in   large  Quantities,  when  a  Crop 
allows  it,  to  the  great  Advantage  of  the  Gentlemen 
as  well  as  Farmers;  for   as  the  Gentlemen  receive  all 
their  Rents  in  Kind,  they  would  find   a  great  DifH-  > 
culty  fometimes  to   difpofe  of  it,   if  the  Merch 
here  did  not  fhip  it  off,  either  for  London  or  Amfier- 
dam. 

The  Town  of  Dundee  {lands  at  a  little  Diftance 
from  the  Tay  j  but  they  are  joined  by  a  Caufeway  or 
Walk,  well  paved  with  fiat  Free  {tone,  fuch  as  the 
Side-ways  in  Gheapftde  and  Cornkill;  and  Rows  of 
Trees  are  planted  on  either  Side  of  the  Walk,  which 
make  it  very  agreeable.  On  one  Part  of  this  Walk 
K  3  are 


198  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

are  very  good  Warehoufes  for  Merchandizes,  efpe- 
cially  for  heavy  Goods ;  and  alfo  Granaries  for  Corn, 
of  which  fometimes  they  have  a  vaft  Quantity  laid  up 
here  ;  and  thefe,  being  near  the  Harbour,  are  conve- 
nient, as  well  for  the  Houfing  of  Goods,  when  landed, 
as  for  the  eafy  (hipping  off  what  lies  for  Export- 
ation. 

They  are  famous  here  for  their  Thread-Manu- 
faciure. 

^he  Harbour  of  Dundee  was  formerly  very  good 
and  fafe  ;  but  of  late  Years  it  became  fo  ruinous,  and 
chocked  up  with  Sand,  that  it  would  not  contain,  as 
antlently,  Ships  of  Burden,  except  at  the  higheft 
Tides  j  and  its  Piers  were  fo  out  of  Repair,  that  Ships 
could  not  lie  in  it  with  Safety.  At  the  fame  time  the 
Tolbooth  and  public  Gaol  were  fo  much  decayed,  that 
they  were  obliged  to  be  pulled  down  ;  and  the  Town, 
being  in  Debt  befides,  could  not  rebuild  the  fame. 
Wherefore,  to  anfwer  all  thefe  good  Purpofes,  and  to 
pave  the  Streets,  difcharge  their  Debts,  and  provide 
Salaries  for  Schoolmafters  toinftruft  their  Children,  an 
Ac):  pafled,  Anno  J73r,  for  continuing  the  Duties 
impofed  by  a  former  A6t,  then  near  expired,  of  two 
Pennies  Scots  upon  every  Pint  of  Ale  and  Beer  'fold 
within  the  Town,  and  its  Privileges,  for  25  Years 
longer. 

By  another  AcVao  Gen.  II.  the  faid  Duties  were 
further  continued  for  25  Years,  for  the  aforefaid  Pur- 
pofes, and  for  converting  the  Hofpital  of  the  faid  Town 
int  a  Wcrkhoufe.  \ 

Dundee  was  ftormed  and  plundered  of  great  Riches, 
by  Cromwell^  and  the  Engtijk  Army. 

The  great  Church  was  formerly  Collegiate,  and  a 
very  large  Building;  but  Part  of  it  was  demciifhed  in 
the  Civil  War:  the  Remainder  is  at  prefent  divided 
into  three  Churches. 

They  have  alfo  a  Meeting-houfe  or  two  for  the 
Epifcopal  Worfhip ;  for  you  are  to  take  it  once  for 

all, 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  199 

all,  that,  North  of  Tay,  there  were  far  more  of  the 
Epifcopal  Perfuafion  than  in  the  South  ;  and  the  farther 
North,  the  more  fo.  The  Ad  patted  fince  the  Re- 
bellion in  1745,  viz.  19  Geo.  II.  obliging  the  Minifters 
of  this  Perfuaiion  to  qualify  themfelves  according  to 
the  Terms  of  it,  will  probably,  in  a  Courfe  of  Years, 
make  a  Difference  for  the  better. 

The  Tower  upon  the  great  Church  here  is  an 
handfome  fquare  Building,  large,  antient,  and  very 
high ;  and  is  a  good  Ornament  to  the  City :  it  re- 
fembles  the  great  Tower  upon  the  Cathedral  of  Canter- 
bury, but  is  not  quite  fo  high.  There  is  a  fine  and 
well- endowed  Bofpital  for  decayed  Townfmen  of 
Dundee,  where  they  are  well  taken  care  of,  and  pro- 
vided for. 

It  was  the  Birth-place  of  Pleftor  Boetius,  the  Scots 
Hiftorian  ;  a  Man  famous  in  his  Time,  and  whofe 
Work  was  antiently  more  in  Efteem  than  of  late.  It 
gave  the  Title  of  Vifcount  to  Graham  of  Clovers,  who 
commanded  the  Forces  that  appeared  for  the  late  King 
James  at  the  Revolution,  and  was  killed  at  the  Battle 
of  Gillicranky. 

Near  to  Dundee,  in  the  Mouth  of  the  River,  lies 
Brcckty-craig,  noted  now  for  a  noble  Salmon- fiihery 
in  its  Neighbourhood.  It  was  formerly  fortified,  and 
defended  by  a  Garrifon  of  Englljb  for  many  Months 
together. 

It  is  20  Scots  Miles  from  Dundee  to  Montrofe,  the 
Way  pleafant,  the  Country  fruitful,and  filled  withGen- 
tlemens  Houfes.  Among  thefe  is  the  noble  Palace  of 
Panmure,  forfeited  in  the  Rebellion  of  1715,  by  the 
unfortunate  Earl  of  that  Name,  who  was  wounded  in 
the  Fight  near  Dumblain.  The  Surname  of  the  Fa- 
mily is  Maul\  and  Maulfburgh,  a  fmall  Town  near 
Montr  of e,  is  called  from  it. 

The  Town  and  Port  of  Montrofe,  L  e.  the  Town  of 

Rofes,  was  our  next  Stage,  (landing  upon  the  Eaftmpft 

Shore  of  Angu^  open  to  the  German  or  the  Caledonian 

K  4  Ocean, 


200  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Ocean,  and  at  the  Mouth  of  the  little  River  of  South- 
fjk,  which  makes  the  Harbour. 

In  the  Year  1745,  a  French  Ship  of  20  Guns  was 
ftranded  in  this  Harbour.  It  brought  Men  and  Stores 
to  thofe  concerned  in  that  Rebellion.  The  Men  were 
Lord  John  Drummond's;  who  were  faved. 

This  Town  is  well  fituated  for  Trade,  and  has  a 
,-good  Harbour,  and  the  Inhabitants  always  carried  on 
an  advantageous  Trade  with  Norway.  But  as  it  was 
Hill  capable  of  great  Improvements,  were  a  Dock  to 
be  made  for  the  Conveniency  of  Shipping,  and  if 
good  frefh  Water  could  be  procured  for  it,  of  which  it 
flood  in  very  great  Want;  and  the  two  Hills  that  de- 
fend the  Town  againft  Inundations,  having  alfo  fuf- 
fered  by  Tempefts ;  the  Corporation  procured  an  A6r, 
sinno  1719,  for  laying  a  Duty  of  two  Pennies  Scots 
upon  every  Pint  of  Ale,  &?<:.  fold  within  the  Town, 
and  its  Privileges,  for  effecting  thefe  good  Purpofes, 

The  Town  is  adorned  with  fine  Buildings,  and  has 
an  Hofpital  for  the  poorer  Inhabitants.  It  confifts  of 
one  long  Street,  and  another  fhorter,  at  the  End  of  it. 
The  Street  is  broad  and  well-paved  ;  and  here  is  a 
pretty  good  Kirk.  It  gives  Title  of  Duke,  as  it  did 
formerly  of  Earl  and  Marquis,  to  the  Chief  of  the 
ancient  and  noble  Family  of  Graham. 

The  French  Fleet  firft  made  Land  at  this  Port,  when 
they  had  the  Pretender  on  board,  m  the  Reign  of 
Queen  Anne,  having  over- fhot  the  Mouth  of  the  Firth 
fo  far,  whither  they  at  nrft  defigned  ;  but  this  Miftake, 
which  fome  thought  a  Misfortune,  was  certainly  a 
Deliverance  to  them  ;  for  as  on  one  hand  it  gave 
Time  to  the  EngUJh  Fleet  to  come  up  with  them 
before  they  could  enter  the  Firth,  fo  it  left  them  time 
and  room  alfo  to  make  their  Efcape;  which,  if  they 
had  gone  up  the  Firth,  they  could  not  have  done,  but 
muft  inevitably  have  been  burnt  and  deftroyed,  or  taken, 
by  the  Britijh  Fleet  under  Sir  George  Byng,  which  was 
Superior  to  them  in  Force.  He  landed  on  the  22d  of 

December^ 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  201 

December,  1715,  with  about  100  Gentlemen  and 
Officers,  and  a  confiderable  Sum  of  Money.  The 
Epifcopal  Clergy  addreffed  him,  and  fo  did  the  Magif- 
trates  j  and,  next  Day,  the  Earls  of  Mar  and  Marjhal 
went  from  Perth  to  meet  him.  On  the  6th  of  Janu- 
ary following,  he  made  his  public  Entry  into  Dundee^ 
with  about  300  Men  on  Horfeback  ;  as  he  did  on  the 
9th  into  Perth.  But  I  have  already  taken  notice  of 
his  fhort- lived  Royalty. 

The  Royal  Burgh  of  Aberbrothock  on  this  Coaft, 
befides  being  famous  for  the  ftately  Ruins  of  the 
greateft  Abbey  in  Scotland^  deferves  to  be  mentioned 
for  its  convenient  Situation  for  Trade  ;  which  induced, 
fbme  Years  fmce,  the  Inhabitants  to  lay  the  Founda- 
tion of  a  new  Harbour,  the  old  one  being  fo  decayed, 
that  it  was  hazardous  even  for  fmall  Veftels  to  fail  into 
it.  But  the  Work  exceeding  their  Abilities,  they 
procured  Contributions  towards  fo  good  a  Defign  ; 
but  ftillj  all  proving  fhort  of  what  was  requifite  to 
complete  the  Work,  and  the  Town  having  run  itfelf 
into  Debt  by  what  it  had  done,  and  at  the  fame  time 
the  public  Streets  and  Caufeways,  as  well  as  the 
Town-houfe  and  Gaol,  being  in  a  very  ruinous  Con- 
dition, they  procured  an  Act  to  pafs  in  the  nth  of 
King  George  II.  for  laying  a  Duty  of  two  Penies  Scots- 
upon  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer  fold  within  the 
Town  and  Liberties,  which  commenced  in  May  1738, 
and  was  to  continue  for  25  Years,  for  bringing  to 
Effect  thefe  good  Purpofes.  And  we  may  fay,  that  of 
late  fo  many  of  thefe  Acts  have  patted,  that  Scotland 
will  in  a  few  Years,  if  harraffed  by  no  inteftine  Broils, 
and  continuing  in  Peace,  make  a  better  Figure  than  it 
has  done  for  Centuries  paft. 

The  Abbey  was  formerly  endowed  with  great  Re- 
venues by  King  William  I,  of  Scotland,  who  was  buried 
here  under  a  ftately  Monument :  he  confecrated  it  to 
St.  7/;0;«tf£  of  Canterbury.  Here  alfo  is  a  famous  Mi- 
neral Water*  much  frequented  for  its  Virtues  in  cur  ing 
K  5 


202  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Divers  Difeafes.  It  is  a  very  neat,  but  fmall  Town, 
and  pleafantly  fituated.  Its  chief  Manufacture  is 
Thread  ;  and  here  are  feveral  J/lills  for  winding  it,  of 
curious  Contrivance,  refembiing  thofe  at  Derby.  The 
Thread  made  here  pafles  for  Dundee  Thread,  the  moft 
noted  in  Scotland. 

In  the  inner  Parts  of  the  Shire,  to  the  Weft  ward,  is 
For  far  the  County-town,  and  Brechln^  formerly  a 
Bimop's  See,  made  fo  by  King-DrfwW,  and  where  fome 
Part  of  a  fmall  Cathedral  is  ftill  Handing.  Its 
Caftle,  which  belonged  to  the  Earl  of  Panmure^  is 
fituated  exactly  like  Warwick  Caflle  in  England^  and 
is  very  well  kept,  with  Terrace- walks  cut  out  of  the 
Rock  down  to  the  River.  This  Palace  has  a  greater 
Air  of  Grandeur  than  Panmure^  and  belongs  now  to 
the  Tork  Buildings  Company. 

Brechin  is  feated  upon  the  River  South- eft,  over 
•which  it  has  a  ftately  Bridge  of  two  Arches,  and  is 
confiderable  for  its  Salmon  and  Catde  Markets.  It  is 
alfo  memorable  for  a  great  Victory  obtained  here  over 
the  Danes,  by  the  Chief  of  the  Family  of  Keith,  Earl 
Marjhal)  who,  having  killed  their  General,  was  ad- 
vanced to  great  Honours  by  Malcolm  II.  There  was 
an  high  Stone  ere£ed  over  the  Grave  of  the  Danijh 
General,  which  is  ftill  called  Gamut's  Crofs,  from  his 
Name ;  and  at  ten  Miles  Diftance  is  another  Crofs, 
over  the  Grave  of  another  eminent  Danljb  Warrior ; 
and  both  of  them  have  antique  Letters  and  Pictures 
upon  them. 

From  Montr  ofe  the  Shore  lies  due  North  to  Aber- 
deen :  in  the  Way  is  the  Caftle  of  Dunnoter,  once  a 
ftrong  Fortification  upon  an  high  Precipice  of  a  Rock. 
The  Earl  Marjhal,  of  the  Name  of  Ktith,  was  Lord 
of  this  Caftle,  as  alfo  of  a  good  Houfe  near  it,  and  a 

freatEftate:  which  was  forfeited,  by  his  joining  the 
arlof  Afor  in  the  Rebellion  of  1715.     His  Lordfhip, 
making  his  Efcape,  went  into  the  Service  of  Spain. 
His  Brother,  going  into  the  Service  of  Ruffia,  made 

fuch 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.          203 

fuch  a  Figure  there,  that  he  was  deemed  one  of 
the  beft  Generals  in  Europe  \  and,  entring  into  the 
King  of  PruJ/ia's  Service,  was  preferred  to  the  firft 
Military  Honour,  that  of  Velt  Marefchal,  and  fell  in 
it,  to  the  inexpreffible  Regret  and  Lofs  of  his  Royal 
Matter. 

Dunnoter  Caftle  is  now  demolifhed.  It  is  fituated 
in  the  Shire  of  Kincardin,  called  the  Merns.  The 
County  is  noted  for  its  Timber,  having  in  it  upwards 
of  five  Millions  of  Fir-trees,  betides  vaft  Numbers  of 
other  Kinds,  planted  within  thefe  80  Years  by  the 
Gentry,  at  and  about  their  Seats,  and  which  they  are 
yearly  adding  to,  and  improving.  Kincardin  was 
formerly  the  County-town  ;  but  that  Advantage  now, 
by  Statute,  belongs  to  Stonekive,  a  fmall  Sea-port 
Town,  lying  quite  in  an  Hollow,  fo  that  we  did  not 
fee  it  till  we  were  ready  to  enter  it. 

Innerbervy,  on  the  Coaft,  was  made  a  Royal  Burgh 
by  King  Alexander  III. 

Paldykirk,  fo  called  from  Palladlus,  firft  Bifnop  of 
the  Scots,  is  noted  for  its  annual  three  Days  Fair :  the 
principal  Commodity  brought  to  it  is  coarfe  Cloth, 
which  is  commonly  tranfported  to  the  Netherlands. 
Thefe  Towns,  being  fituated  by  the  Sea-fide,  and 
having  generally  a  little  River  or  Inlet  of  the  Sea  to 
water  them,  cannot  fail  of  affording  pleafant  Habi- 
tations. Moft  of  the  little  Villages  about  them  fun- 
port  themfelves  by  Fiming  and  Smuggling. 

On  the  Lands  of  Arbuthie  and  Redeloak,  are  fome 
Trenches  to  be  feen,  caft  up  by  the  Danes  at  one  of 
their  Invafions  :  and  round  the  Hill  of  Urie  is  a  deep 
Ditch,  where  the  Scots  encamped. 

Fordun  lies  alfo  in  this  County,  famous  in  antient 
Times  for  the  Reliques  of  the  aforefaid  St.  Palladium. 
It  is  alfo  noted  for  being  the  Surname  of  'John  Fordun^ 
the  Scots  Hiftorian,  Author  of  the  Book  called  the 
Scots  Chronicon>  to  which  all  fucceeding  Hiftorians 
of  this  Nation  have  been  much  obliged, 

K  6  Tte 


ac/4  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

The  Earl  Marfbal  was  Hereditary  Sheriff  of  this 
County. 

From  Stoneb'tve  to  Aberdeen  is  12  fhort  Miles. 
Within  four  or  five  Miles  of  that  City,  we  have  a  very 
bad  Country,  the  Land  producing  nothing  but  Peat, 
even  to  the  very  .City  :  but  the  Road  is  paved,  or,  in 
bad  Weather,  it  would  be  impafTable. 

About  a  Mile  before  we  enter  Aberdeen,  we  have  a 
ftately  Bridge  of  Stone,  confifting  of  feven  Arches, 
over  the  Dee,  built  by  Bifhop  Gawin  Dunbar,  which 
leads  into  the  Shire  of '-Aberdeen. 

We  then  travel  along  the  Banks  of  this  River,  and 
have  a  fine  Profpecl  of  New  Aberdeen,  fituated  almoft 
clofeto  the  Sea- fide.  When  we  entered  this  Town, 
it  was  with  Difficuly  we  found  a  public  Houfe,  which 
they  call  Change- houfes ;  there  being  but  one  Sign  in 
the  whole  Place  to  notify  fuch  an  Houfe,  though  there 
are  many  of  them  in  it. 

It  ftands  at  the  Mouth  of  two  Rivers,  and  is  divided 
into  two  Towns  or  Cities,  one  called  the  New,  the 
other  the  Old  Aberdeen,  about  a  Mile  diftantfrom  each 
other  ;  one  fituate  on  the  River  Don,  the  other  on  the 
River  Dee,  from  whence  they  are  more  properly 
called  Aberdon  and  Aberdeen. 

Aberdon,  or  the  Old  Town,  lies  a  Mile  Northward 
from  Aberdeen,  or  the  New  Town,  which  is  fometimes 
called  Bon-accord  from  its  Motto.  It  is  fituated  in 
the  Mouth  of  the  River  Don,  which  is  remarkable  for 
the  Multititude  of  Salmon  and  Perch  taken  in  it. 
Over  the  River  Dan  is  a  Bridge  only  of  a  fingle  Arch, 
fuftained  on  each  Side  by  a  Rock,  and  is  a  moft  noble 
and  furprifing  Piece  of  Workmanfhip. 

Old  Aberdeen  was  formerly  the  Bifho'p's  Seat,  and 
has  a  Cathedral,  commonly  called  St.  Macbar's,  a 
large  and  ftately  Structure,  which  was  antiently  much 
more  magnificent :  it  fuffered  greatly  at  the  Time  of 
the  Reformation,  and  more  fmce  the  Revolution. 

The 


gcotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.       205 

The  chief  Ornament  of  this  Town  is  the  King'* 
College,  on  the  South- fide  of  it;  a  neat  and  ftately 
Structure. 

The  Church  and  Steeple  are  built  of  hewn  Stone, 
and  the  Summit  of  the  latter  refembles  an  Imperial 
Crown.  The  Windows  of  the  Church  were  formerly 
efleemed  for  their  Paintings  ;  and  fomething  of  their 
Splendor  ftill  remains.  In  the  Steeple  are  two  Bells 
of  extraordinary  Bignefs,  befides  others. 

Clofe  to  the  Church  is  a  Library,  well  furniflied 
with  Books. 

This  College  was  founded  by  Bifhop  Elphlnjlon^  in 
the  Year  1500,  and  the  greateft  Part  built  by  him  ; 
but  King  James  IV.  taking  the  Patronage  upon  him, 
it  was  called  The  King's  College.  The  Bull  for  it  was 
procured  from  Pope  Alexander  VI.  in  1510,  endowing 
it  with  as  ample  Privileges  as  thofe  of  Paris  and 
Bwonia. 

There  are  in  this  College  a  Principal,  a  Sub- 
Principal,  who  is  alfo  one  of  the  Regents,  three  other 
Regents,  Profeflbrs  of  Philofophy,  a  Profeflbr  of  Hu- 
manity or  Philology,  a  Profeflbr  of  Divinity,  a  Doctor 
of  Phyfic,  a  Profeflbr  of  the  Oriental  Tongues,  a 
Profeflbr  of  the  Civil  Law,  and  a  Profeflbr  of  the  May- 
themajics.  Dr.  Frafer  has  lately  been  a  great  Bene- 
factor to  it. 

New  Aberdeen  is  about  a  Mile  diftant,  as  we  have 
faid,  from  the  0/J,  fituated  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River 
Dee.  It  is  the  County-town,  and  by  Confequence  the 
Seat  of  the  Sheriffs  Courts.  It  exceeds  all  the  Cities  in 
the  North  of  Scotland  for  Largenefs,  Extent,  and 
Beauty.  It  ftands  in  a  wholfome  Air,  has  a  great 
Revenue  from  its  Salmon-fifhery,  and  the  Inhabitants 
are  generally  very  courteous.  It  ftands  upon  three 
Hills,  the  main  Part  upon  the  higheft  ;  and  the  Skirts 
of  it  extend  into  the  Plain.  The  Houfes  are  neatly 
built,  are  generally  four  Stories  high,  or  more,  and 
have  for  the  moft  Part  Gardens  and  Orchards  belong- 
ing 


206  A  T  O  U  R  thro'  Scofl. 

ing  to  them;  which  makes  the  City  pleafant  and 
healthful,  and  the  Profpeft  of  it  beautiful  at  a  Diftance. 

From  a  round  Hill,  at  the  Weft-end  of  the  City, 
flow  two  Springs,  one  of  clear  Water,  and  another 
with  Water  which,  in  Tafte  and  Quality,  comes  very 
near  the  Spa  in  Germany:  Dr.  William  Barclay  wrote 
a  Treatife  concerning  it. 

In  the  High-ftreet  is  a  Church  built  of  Free-ftone, 
and  good  Architecture. 

In  this  City  ftands  the  Marjhal  College,  founded  by 
George  Earl  Marjhal,  in  the  Year  1593,  to  which  the 
City  has  added  many  Buildings  at  their  own  Charge. 

In  this  College,  which  is  a  diftincl  Univerfity  of 
itfelf,  are  a  Principal,  four  ProfefTors  of  Philofophy,  a 
Profeflbr  of  Divinity,  and  a  Profeflbr  of  Mathematics  ; 
and  there  is  lately  added  a  Profeflbr  of  Phyfic.  It  has 
a  good  Library,  which  was  founded  by  the  City,  en- 
larged by  the  Gifts  of  feveral  learned  Men,  and  fur- 
nifhed  with  Mathematical  Inftruments. 

In  this  City  is  alfo  a  Grammar-fchool,  founded  by. 
Dr.  Dune,  having  one  M after,  and  three  Ufhers, 
There  is  alfo  a  Mufic-fchool. 

The  Church,  called  St.  Nicholas's,  is  an  handfome 
Edifice  of  Free-ftone,  with  a  lofty  Steeple,  refembling 
a  Pyramid :  it  was  formerly  divided  Jnto  three 
Churches.  The  Body  of  this  Church  is  adorned  with 
a  Tower,  and  a  Steeple  with  Pinacles. 

Here  is  alfo  a  Prifon  and  a  Work-houfe  belonging 
to  the  Town,  likewife  an  Alms-houfe,  and  three  Hof- 
pitals ;  and  near  the  Harbour  ftands  the  Cuftom-houfe. 
The  Market  place  is  .beautiful  and  fpacious,  and  the 
Streets  adjoining  are  very  handfome,  and  moft  of  the 
Houfes  are  built  of  Stone,  four  Stories  higS  with 
handfome  Safh-windows,  and  are  well-furnifhed  with- 
in ;  the  Citizens  here  being  as  gay,  as  genteel,  and 
perhaps  as  .rich,  as  in  any  City  in  Scotland. 

The  Bridge  at  Old  Aberdeen,  over  the  Don,  confifts 
of  one  ittimenfe  Arch  $f  Stone,  fprung  from  two 

Rock*, 


Scotl,         GREAT  BRITAIN.  207 

Rocks,  one  on  each  Side,  which  ferve  as  a  Butment  to 
the  Arch  ;  fo  that  it  may  be  faid  to  have  a  Foundation 
coeval  with  Nature,  and  which  will  laft  as  long.  The 
other  Bridge  is  upon  the  River  Dee,  a  Mile  to  the 
Weft  of  New  Aberdeen ;  and  has  feven  ftately  Arches, 
as  I  have  already  mentioned.  The  Streets  are  paved 
with  a  Sort  of  Flint  and  Pebbles. 

The  People  of  Aberdeen^  and  iudeed  ofalmoftall 
this  County,  are  generally  of  theEpifcopal  Perfuafion  ; 
fo  that,  were  it  not  for  the  legal  Eftablimment,  the 
Prefbyterian  Preachers  would  have  but  few  Hearers, 
and  {lender  Incomes:  almoft  every  Parifli  has  a 
Meeting-houfe,  where  the  Liturgy  is  read  :  at  Aberdeen 
and  Peterhead  they  have  beautiful  Chapels,  and  even 
Organs. 

The  Air  of  this  County,  to  thofe  who  were  born  in 
a  warmer,  feems  cold  :  but  is  in  itfelf  healthful  and 
temperate.  The  Winter  is  milder  than  can  be  ex- 
pected from  fuch  a  Climate ;  which  feems  a  Wonder 
to  Danes,  Poles,  and  Pruffians,  when  they  come  into 
this  Country,  and  confider  that,  with  them,  during  the 
Winter,  there  is  nothing  but  perpetual  Froft  and 
Snow.  The  Soil  in  general  is  not  unfruitful,  if  duly 
cultivated  ;  it  produces  Wheat,  Rye,  Barley,  Oats  in 
abundance,  Peafe  and  Beans ;  nor  do  they  want  Roots 
and  Herbs  for  Food  and  Phyfic ;  and  foreign  Plants 
grow  very  well  there,  as  daily  Experience  teftifies. 
The  mountainous  Part  of  the  County  affords  very 
good  Pafturage,  and  the  other  as  good  Corn. 

The  adjoining  Sea  not  only  furnifhes  them  with 
Plenty  of  Fifh,  but  reproaches  them  with  their  Ne- 
gligence, when  they  fee  the  Dutch  Fleets  continually 
fiming  on  the  Coaits,  from  whence  they  reap  great 
Gain  ;  but  'tis  the  Humour  of  the  Inhabitants  to  apply 
themfelves  to  the  Salmon-fifhing,  and  to  neglect  that 
of  all  other  Sorts. 

The  Quantity  of  Salmon  and  Perches,  taken  in 
both  Rivers,  is  a  kind  of  Prodigy.  The  Proprietors  are 

united 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scot!. 

united  into  a  Company,  there  being  fo  many  Shares, 
of  which  no  Perfon  can  enjoy  above  one  at  a  Time. 
The  Profits  are  very  confiderable,  the  Salmon  being 
fent  abroad  into  different  Parts  of  the  World,  particu- 
larly into  England^  France^  the  Baltic,  and  feveral 
other  Places. 

The  Salmon,  a  Fifh  unknown  to  Pliny  (unlefs  it 
were  the  Efox  of  the  Rhine),  as  it  is  to  this  Day  in  all 
Parts  of  Italy,  breed  in  Autumn,  in  little  Rivers,  and 
moftly  in  Shallows,  where  they  cover  their  Spawn 
with  Sand  ;  at  which  Time  they  are  fo  very  poor  and 
lean,  that  they  are  fcarce  any  thing  but  Bones.  Of 
that  Spawn,  in  the  Spring  following,  comes  a  Fry  of 
fmall  Fifli,  which,  making  to  the  Sea,  in  a  little  time 
grow  to  their  full  Bignefs ;  and  then  making  back 
again  to  the  Rivers  they  were  bred  in,  ftruggle  againft 
the  Force  of  the  Stream  ;  and,  whenever  any  Height 
obftrucls  their  Paflage,  they  will  with  a  Jerk  of  their 
Tail  (cum  Saltu,  from  falio,  to  leap,  whence  probably 
they  have  .the  Name  of  Salmons)  whip  over,  to  the 
Amazement  of  the  Spectators.  In  thefe  Rivers  they 
keep  themfelves  till  they  breed,  during  which  time 
there  is  a  Law  againft  taking  them ;  which  is  .from 
Sept.  8.  to  Dec.  I. 

The  Herring-fifhing  is  a  common  Bleffing  to  all 
this  Shore  of  Scotland,  and  is  like  the  Indies  at  their 
Door,  were  it  properly  ufed  by  the  Scots  in  general : 
but  I  muft  oblerve,  that  by  this,  however,  the  Mer- 
chants of  Aberdeen  are  able  to  carry  on  a  Trade  to 
Dantzick  and  Koningfberg,  Riga  and  Narva,  Wybourgb 
and  Stockholm. 

They  have  alfo  a  very  good  Manufacture  of  Linen, 
and  likewife  of  Worfted  Stockens,  which  they  fend  to 
England  in  great  Quantities,  and  of  which  they  make 
fome  fo  fine,  that  I  have  feen  them  fold  for  14,  2C» 
and  30  Shillings  a  Pair.  They  alfo  fend  them  over 
to  Holland,  and  into  the  North  and  Eaft  Seas,  in  large 
Quantities :  yet  the  poor  Creatures  who  knit  them,  if 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  205; 

they  get  two  Pence  a  Day,  think  they  make  great 
Earnings. 

They  have  alfo  a  particular  Export  here  of  Pork, 
pickled  and  packed  up  in  Barrels,  which  they  fell 
chiefly  to  the  Dutch  for  the  victualing  their  Eajl  India 
Ships,  and  their  Men  of  War ;  the  Aberdeen  Pork 
having  the  Reputation  of  being  the  befl  cured,  for 
keeping  on  very  long  Voyages,  of  any  in  Europe. 

They  export  alfo  Corn  and  Meal  ;  but  they  gene- 
rally bring  it  from  the  Firth  of  Murray,  or  Cromertie^ 
the  Cornv  coming  from  about  Invernefs>  where  they 
have  great  Quantities. 

In  a  Word,  the  People  of  Aberdeen  are  univerfal 
Merchants,  fo  far  as  the  Trade  of  the  Northern  Part 
of  the  World  will  extend  ;  and  it  may  be  efteemed  the 
third  City  in  Scotland,  that  is,  the  next  after  Edinburgh 
and  Glafgow. 

Here  is  great  Plenty  of  a  Sea-weed  called  Dulfe^ 
which  the  Poor  pick  off  the  Rocks,  and  fell  about  the 
Town  every  Day.  It  is  eaten  fometimes  by  itfelf, 
and  fometimes  with  Vinegar. 

This  Shire  contains  in  it  Mar^  with  its  Appurte- 
nances, Birfe,  Glentaner^  Glenmuick,  Strathdee^  Strath- 
don^  Braes  of  Mar  and  Cromar^  moft  Part  of  Buchan^ 
Formartin^  Garioch,  and  Strathbogy, 

The  latter  is  a  large  ^nd  antient  Barony ;  it  was 
creeled  into  an  Earldom  by  King  James  VI.  in  fa- 
vour of  the  Chief  of  the  noble  and  antient  F'^iily  of 
Gordon,  whom  he  afterwards  created  Marquis  of 
Huntley.  Strathbogy  is  very  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Paf- 
turage,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  fine  Linen-yarn 
fpun  by  the  Women  there,  and  fold  to  the  Mer- 
chant. 

It  is  moftly  inhabited  by  Gordons,  VafTals  to  the 
Duke  of  Gordon,  who  has  a  magnificent  Caftle  here, 
called  Strathbogy^  from  the  Name  of  the  County. 
There  were  of  this  Name,  befides  the  Duke,  the  Earls 
©f  Sutherland,  Abwn>  Aberdeen,  and  late  Vifcount  of 

Kenmure  i 


210  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Kenmure;  likewife  a  great  many  Gentlemen  of  Note 
in  other  Parts  of  the  Kingdom. 

The  Village  of  Strathbogy  is  mean  and  fmall  ;  yet 
it  had  a  Nonjuring  Meeting-houfe  when  I  was  there, 
and  a  Kirk  and  Tolbooth.  The  fmall  Trade  they 
have  is  in  Linen-cloth,  which  is  chiefly  carried  on  by 
an  Irljhman,  who  brought  this  Manufacture  to  great 
Perfection  there.  At  a  fmall  Diftance  from  this  Town 
is  Huntley-Caftle,  which  gives  Title  to  the  Marquifes 
of  that  Name,  of  great  Antiquity;  but  in  Ruins.  Some 
of  its  Apartments  are  intire,  and  there  are  to  be  feen 
very  antient  Hiftory- Paintings  on  their  CiHings. 

A  fmall  Diftance  from  this  Caftle  is  a  large  Stone 
Building,  which  belonged  to  Hamilton,  the  Rebel- 
Governor  of  Carlijle^  in  1745?  and  where  he  dwelt 
before  he  entered  into  the  Rebellion.  This  Town 
and  Caftle  ftand  in  a  vaft  Plain,  and  the  Mountains 
round  them  are  fo  regular,  that  one  would  think  Art, 
and  not  Nature,  had  placed  them  there. 

Stratbbogy  is  a  very  proper  Name  for  this  Village, 
the  Ground  all  around  it  being  Marfhes  and  Bogs. 
The  River  Deveron  runs  round  one  Side  of  the  Town  ; 
the  Bogie  furrounds  the  other,  and  joins  the  Deveron  $ 
and  both  abound  with  Trouts. 

About  four  Miles  from  Strathbogy^  I  pafled  .by  a 
Seat  of  the  Laird  of  Braco,  called  Rothy  Mays. 

About  a  Mile  farther,  on  the  fame  Side,  and  upon 
a  more  rifing  Ground,  is  an  antient  Houfe,  the  Seat 
of  one  Abernethy^  called  Laird  of  Main.  I  thought  it 
the  pleafanteft  Situation  I  had  ever  beheld  ;  for  hence 
you  have  a  full  View  of  the  ferpentine  Windings  of  the 
charming  River  Deveron. 

In  Aberdeenjbire  are  Quarries  of  fpotted  Marble  and 
Slate  ;  and  Pearls  are  found  in  their  Rivers,  of  a  large 
Size,  and  fine  Colour. 

There  was  formerly  a  Mint  2^  Aberdeen^  as  appears 
by  feveral  Pieces  of  Coin,  with  the  Aberdea  upon 
them,  kept  in  the  Clofets  of  the  Curious. 

Other 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  211 

Other  Towns  in  this  County  are  ; 

1.  Kintore,  a  Royal  Burgh  on  the  Don,  which  gives 
the  Title  of  Earl  to  a  Branch  of  the  Family  of  Keith. 

2.  Peterhead^  with  a  good  Harbour. 

3.  Itinerary^  made  a  Royal  Burgh  by  King  Robert 
Bruce,  in  Memory  of  a  Victory  he   obtained   there. 
It  is  a  fmall  Town,  but  very  pleafantly  fituated  upon 
the  River  Don  ;    and   flickered   with  Trees  on  every 
Side. 

Here  the  Duke  of  A r gyle  has  built  a  ftately  Palace, 
on  purpofe  to  indicate  what,  in  fo  advantageous  a  Si- 
tuation, Poflerity  may  do  for  enlarging  and  embellim- 
ing  the  Town,  when  Induftry  (hall  have  improved  the 
Country  round  about ;  and  the  Inhabitants,  from  its 
Produce  and  its  Fifhery,  for  which  it  is  already  very 
juftly  famous,  have  made  it,  what  Nature  feems  to  have 
defigned  it,  the  Centre  of  the  Commerce  of  the 
Weftern  Coaft,  and  of  the  Ifles. 

The  Town  of  Aberdeen  had  fuffered  much  by  the 
public  Commotions  in  Scotland,  after  the  Revolution 
took  place  ;  fo  that  an  A£t  for  laying  the  Duty  of 
two  Pennies  Scots  on  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale  and  Beer 
fold  within  the  Town,  &c.  had  been  impofed  by  the 

.  Scotijh  Parliament  in  1695,  and  continued  by  the  fame 
in  1707,  for  enabling  them  to  difcharge  the  Debts 
incurred  on  that  Occafion.  And  the  laft  Ad  being 
near  expired,  and  Debts  ftill  remaining  unpaid,  an  A6t 
pafled,  17315  for  continuing  the  faid  Duties,  for  25 
Years  more,  for  the  following  good  Purpofes  ;  viz. 
for  paying  off  the  remaining  Debts  of  the  Town  ;  for 
building  a  new  Pier  on  the  North- fide  of  the  Harbour  ; 
for  repairing  the  old  Pier  on  the  South-fide,  which  was 

"  very  much  funk  and  decayed  ;  for  repairing  the  great 
Church,  called  the  Old  Church,  which  was  in  a  very 
decayed  Condition  ;  for  rebuilding  the  Town  houle, 
which  was  alfo  in  a  very  bad  State  j  and  for  main- 
taining and  carrying  on  other  public  Works  for  the 
Benefit  of  the  Town. 

From 


From  Aberdeen  the  Coaft  goes  on  to  a  Point  o^ 
Land,  which  is  the  fartheft  North-eafl  Part  of  Bri- 
tairi)  and  is  called  by  the  Sailors  Bucbannefs^  being  in 
the  Shire  or  County  of  Buchan^  Part  of  which  belongs 
to  Aberdeen/hire.  It  was  to  this  Point  the  French 
Squadron,  with  the  Pretender  on  board,  in  the  Reign 
of  Queen  Anne^  kept  their  Flight  in  Sight  of  the  Shore, 
being  thus  far  purfued  by  Sir  George  Byng  with  the 
Englijk  Fleet;  but  from  hence  they  fteered  away 
North-eaft,  as  if  for  the  Nonvay  Coaft  3  when  the 
Englljh  Admiral,  feeing  no  Probability  of  coming  up 
with  them,  gave  over  the  Chace ;  but  they  altered 
their  Courfe  in  the  Night,  flood  away  South,  and 
came  back  to  Dunkirk^  whence  they  fet  out. 
p:  On  the  South-fide  of  the  Water  of  Eugie  ftands 
Peter  head,  with  a  Road,  which  will  hold  100  Sail  of 
Ships ;  and  at  this  Place  it  is  High-water,  when  the 
Moon  is  directly  South.  In  many  Places  of  this  Shire 
are  great  Stones  placed  circularly,  one  of  the  largeft 
in  the  Middle  towards  the  South,  which  have  the  Air 
of  Places  of  Worfhip  in  the  Ages  of  Heathenifm. 

The  dropping  Cave  of  Slanes  is  very  remarkable ; 
of  the  petrified  Subftance  whereof  is  made  excellent 
Lime. 

In  the  Month  of  Oftober,  1752,  as  fome  Quarriers 
were  digging  for  Lime-ftone,  near  Colliftown  in  the 
Parifh  of  S/anes,  they  difcoyered  a  Cave  of  the  fame 
Nature,  but  a  more  curious  Form,  and  eafisr  of  Ac- 
cefs,  than  the  famous  dropping  Cave  above  mentioned. 
The  Stone  is  very  white,  and  hangs  down  in  a  great 
Number  of  final]  Tubes,  refembling  Icicles,  over  a 
Bafon  of  Water  three  Feet  deep,  and  about  four  in  Dia- 
meter. The  Cave  at  Bottom  is  near  circular,  is  fix 
Feet  broad,  and  10  in  Height.  On  the  Left-hand  of 
the  Bafon  is  an  Afcent,  which  looks  like  the  Entrance 
into  another  Cave.  Upon  the  Right-hand  is  a  Row 
of  petrified  Pillars,  which,  when  cleared  away,  will 

(hew 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  213 

fhew  the  true  Dimenfions,  and  entertaining  Variety  of 
this  Difcovery. 

This  County,  however  remote,  is  full  of  Nobility 
and  Gentry,  and  their  Seats  are  feen  even  to  the  ex- 
tremeft  Shores:  the  Family  of  Frafcr  carries  its  Name 
to  Fraferburgb,  in  the  very  Northermoft  Point  of  the 
Country.  Erjkines,  Earls  of  Mar,  had  their  Family- 
feat  at  Kildrummy,  in  the.  County  of  Mart  a  little 
South  of  this  Part  of  the  County,  where  the  late  un- 
happy Earl  firfl  fet  up  his  Standard  for  the  Pretender. 
The  Hays,  Earls  of  Errol,  are  in  Bucban  ;  and  the 
Family  of  Forbes  Lord  Forbes,  and  Forbes  late  Lord 
Pitjligo,  are  ftill  farther,  and  the  latter  on  the  very 
Shore  of  the  Caledonian  Ocean.  The  Gordons  and 
Keiths  are  very  numerous  alfo  in  thefe  Parts. 

Mr.  Camden  relates,  that  on  the  Coaft  of  this 
Country  a  great  Piece  of  Amber  was  driven  on  Shore 
by  the  Sea,  as  big  (to  ufe  his  own  Words)  as  an  Horfe. 
1  (hall  add  nothing  to  the  Story,  becaufe  it  is  hard  to 
give  Credit  to  it  j  for  I  could  not  learn  from  the  Inha- 
bitants, that  they  ever  faw  any  more  of  it. 

I  ought  not  to  omit  Innerury,  belonging  to  Gariocb 
in  Aberdeenji  ire,  being  the  Scotf/nan's  Boaft  ;  for  here 
Robert  Bruce,  though  fick,  and  carried  in  an  Horfe- 
litter,  defeated  John  Cumins,  and  thofe  who  adhered 
to  him,  in  Favour  of  Edivardl.  of  England,  who  held 
Scotland  in  Subjection.  This  was  the  fir  ft  Victory 
King  Robert  obtained,  and  laid  the  Foundation  of  the 
Overthrow  of  the  Englifo  Ufurpation  in  Scotland. 
Near  the  fame  Place  alfo,  in  1411,  Alexa nder  Stuart, 
Earl  of  Mar,  defeated  Donald  of  the  Ifles,  in  the 
bloody  Battle  of  the  Harloiv. 

From  hence  the  Eaft  Shore  of  Scotland  being  at  an 
End,  the  Land  trends  away  due  Weft  ;  and,  the  Shire 
of  "Bamff  beginning,  you  fee  the  Towns  of  Bamff, 
Elgin,  Fraferbitrgb,  and  the  famous  Monaftery  of 
Kinkjsy  where  the  murdered  Body  of  King  Z)^  was 

after 


A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

after  many  Years  dug  up,  and  difcovered  to  be  his  by 
various  Tokens. 

The  Shire  of  Bamff'defeives  fome  Notice  for  the 
following  Particulars ;  for  that  in  it  is  fituated  Sir  at  h- 
yla,  which  drives  a  great  Trade  in  Lime,  and  fat 
Cattle  :  and  it  abounds  fo  with  Lime-ftone,  that  they 
build  their  Houfes  with  it.  They  carry  on  a  Trade 
in  fine  Linen,  alfo,  by  means  of  their  weekly  Markets 
at  Keith,  a  neighbouring  Village,  which  has  nothing 
remarkable,  but  an  exceeding  high  and  fteep  Stone 
Bridge,  of  one  Arch,  over  a  plea'ant  Branch  of  the 
River  Deveron  ;  clofe  to  which  I  faw  a  mighty  Rock- 
ftone,  which  makes  Part  of  the  Foundation  of  this 
Bridge.  It  was  on  a  Sunday  when  I  parted  by  here ; 
and  flopped  at  the  Poft-houfe  for  Refrefhment,  but 
could  have  nothing  but  an  Egg  or  two,  with  fome 
Wine,  or  thick  Scots  Ale  ;  it  being  a  Cuftqm,  thro' 
many  Parts  of  Scot/and,  to  eat  only  an  Egg.  if  any 
thing,  for  Dinner,  and  to  have  an  hot  Supper;  for 
their  feeming  Stri6tnefs  in  Religion  will  not  let  them 
do  any  Labour,  even  fo  much  as  drefling  a  Dinner 
for  themfelves  or  Travelers,  although  they  have  Fowls 
and  other  Meat  in  their  Houfe,  till  Night,  when  Sun- 
day is  over. 

Upon  the  Banks  of  the  Spcy,  which  runs  thro*  this 
County,  lies  the  Beg  oj  Gicbt,  now  called  Gordon- 
Ca/ile,  the  nobleft  Palace  in  the  North,  being  the  Duke 
of  Gordon's  chief  Seat,  adorned  with  pleafant  Gardens, 
a  great  Park,  and  fine  Canal,  with  an  agreeable  Foun- 
tain and  Statues.  The  Caftle  appears  fo  large,  that  it 
looks  more  like  a  Town  than  a  Nobleman's  Seat. 
The  Duke  is  Proprietor  of  this  Part  of  the  County. 
Stratbave  is  the  paternal  Inheritance  of  his  Family: 
and  his  Grace  has  a  fine  Eftate,  and  other  Seats  here- 
abouts. The  late  Duke  had  a  little  embroiled  him- 
felf  with  the  Affairs  of  1715,  and  his  Son,  then  Mar- 
quis of  Huntky,  (till  more ;  but  got  ofT  without  a  For- 
feiture, I  y  his  Prudence  and  good  Fortune. 

Th; 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  215 

The  Spey  is  a  noble  River,  abounding  with  Salmon* 
and  other  fine  Fiffa.  Here  it  was  expected  the  Rebels 
in  1745  would  have  made  a  Stand  againft  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  and  difputed  the  PalTage  with  him,  as  I 
fhall  take  notice  in  another  Place. 

The  Town  of  Cullen,  an  antient  Royal  Burgh, 
{lands  in  the  Shire  of  Eamff.  It  is  chiefly  noted  for  its 
fruitful  Soil,  and  Salmon-fiming  ;  for,  having  no  Port, 
it  has  little  Trade,  except  for  its  Corn  and  Salmon.  At 
the  Entrance  of  this  Town  is  a  noble  Seat  of  the  Earl 
of  Finlatcr ;  which  was  plundered  by  the  Rebels  in 
1745. 

Forcabus  is  a  Town  lying  in  the  Hollow,  clofe  to 
the  Banks  of  the  Spcy,  and  chiefly  confifts  of  one 
Street,  a  Mile  long;  in  the  Middle  of  which  is  a 
Tolbooth  lately  ereded ;  but  generally  the  Houfes  are 
mean  and  fcattering  ;  the  chief  Ornament  of  all  thefe 
Parts  being  Gordon-  Cajlle^  mentioned  above. 

The  Shire  itfelf  takes  Name  from  Bamff^  a  Burgh 
Royal,  feated  at  the  Mouth  of  Doverne,  or  Deveron^  in 
the  Boyne^  where  the  Sheriff  holds  his  Courts.  In  it 
are  the  Ruins  of  an  old  Caftle ;  near  which  is  the 
Abbey  of  Decr>  formerly  belonging  to  the  Cijlerclan 
Monks,  and  founded  by  William  Cumint  Earl  of 
Bucbjn.  In  Eelveme  is  found  the  Stone  of  which 
Alum  is  made;  and  in  the  County  of  Boyne  great 
Quarries  of  fpotted  Marble  have  been  difcovered. 

Before  we  can  enter  the  Town  of  Banff,  we  are 
obliged  to  ford  the  D  ever  on,  which  is  a  very  broad 
River.  On  its  Banks  we  have  a  fine  Profpecl  of  the 
Town  :  adjoining  to  which,  is  a  £rand  modern 
Building  of  the  Laird  of  Bracos.  I  thought  it  was 
the  fineft  Piece  of  Architecture  I  had  feen  in  Scotland; 
but,  what  is  a  great  Misfortune,  the  Infule  is  not 
finifhed,  fo  that  nobody  lives  in  it;  which  was  occa- 
fioned  by  a  Law  fuit  be'tween  the  Laird  of  Brnco  and 
his  Architecl:,  about  a  Crack  in  the  Building;  but  the 
Architect  getting,  the  Caufe,  fo  grieved  Laird  Braco9 
6  that 


216  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

that  he  abandoned  this  noble  Pile,  and  lives  amongffc 
the  Mountains  near  Strathbogy^  quite  a  reclufe  Place, 
and  diftant  from  Company.  This  Building  at  Bamff 
is  very  high,  fquare,  and  full  of  Columns  of  nobLs 
Architecture  on  every  Side ;  it  has  alfo  Towers  at 
every  Corner,  and  others  in  the  Middle.  It  grieved 
me  to  fee  fo  noble  a  Piece  of  Work  neglecled.  The 
.River  Deveron  runs  clofe  by  the  intended  Gardens ; 
and  upon  it  are  fome  fmall  Tflands,  where  he  has  built 
agreeable  Summer-houfes,  &c.  Ba?nff  is  a  neat 
Town,  confiding  of  two  long  Streets,  and  feveral 
fhort  ones  ;  there  are  alfo  fome  neat  Buildings  in 
it,  and  two  fmall  Harbours  for  Shipping ;  but  large 
VefTels  cannot  come  near  them.  After  leaving  Batnj}\ 
we  have  fine  Views,  traveling  along  the  Sea-coaft,  of 
the  rifing  Mountains  near  the  Firth  of  Cromertie,  but 
at  a  vaft  Diftance. 

Port  Soya  is  a  neat  Village,  fix  Miles  from  Bamff, 
the  Sea  coming  into  the  Town  ;  confequently  it  af- 
fords plenty  of  Fifh,  as  its  numerous  black  Rocks  do 
vaft  Quantities  of  Dulfe,  and  other  Sea  weeds,  which 
we  diverted  ourfelves  with  gathering  and  eating. 

Buchan  is  Part  in  Aberdeenjhire,  Part  in  the  Shire 
of  Bamff:  one  of  its  principal  Towns  is  Fraferburgb^ 
and  Peterbead  is  another.  The  latter  is  a  good  Mar- 
ket-town, with  a  Port,  and  fmall  Harbour,  with  two 
little  Piers  for  Fifhing ;  but,  being  fo  near  Aberdeen , 
has  not  thofe  Advantages,  that  might  be  otherwife 
probably  given  to  it ;  fo  that  at  Low- water  it  is  all 
dry,  and  the  fmalleft  Ships  lie  aground  in  it. 

The  Lord  Saltoun  built  (in  the  Year  1738)  at  Fra-. 
ferburgb9  an  excellent  new  Pier  and  Bulwark,  all  of 
Free-ftone;  which  renders  that  Harbour  as  fafe  and 
commodious  as  any  on  the  Eaft  Ccaft;  fo  that  30 
Ships  may  winter  there  at  once,  wii'h  great  Safety : 
the  Water  at  full  Sea  is  18  or  20  Feet. 

From  the  Point  of  Land,  called  Bucbannefs,  the 
Ships  begin  their  Accounts  for  their  feveral  Voyages; 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  217 

what  they  call  their  Departure  :  as  in  England  they  do 
from  Wintertonnefs,  on  the  North  eaft  Part  of  Norfolk, 
and  from  the  Downs  for  the  Voyages  to  the  South- 
ward. 

From  Fifinefi,  which  is  the  Northermoft  Point,  on 
the  Mouth  of  Edinburgh  Firth,  being  the  Southermoft 
Land  of  Fife,  to  this  Point  of  Buchanntfs,  the  Land 
lies  almoit  due  North  and  South,  and  the  Shore  is  the 
Eaftermoft  Land  of  Scotland.  The  Dirtance  between 
them  is  33  Leagues,  i  Mile,  which  is  juft-ico  Miles  ; 
though  the  Mariners  fay,  that,  meafuring  by  the  Sea, 
it  is  but  28  ;  and  from  Winicrtonnefs,  near  Yarmouth  ^ 
to  this  Point  called  Buchannefs,  is  juft  300  Miles. 

The  River  or  Firth  of  Tay  opens  into  the  Sea,  about 
four  Leagues  North  from  Fifemfe ;  and  as  there  is  a 
Light- houfe  on  the  Ifle  of  May,  as  I  have  faid  before, 
in  the  Mouth  of  the  Firth  of  Forth  at  Edinburgh,  a 
little  South  of  this  Point,  called  Fifenefs ;  there  are 
like  wife  two  Light- houfes  at  the  Entrance  of  the  Firth 
of  Tay,  for  the  Dire&ion  of  the  Sailors,  when  they  are 
bound  into  that  River,  and  particularly  for  their  avoid- 
ing the  two  Sands,  which  lie  off  from  the  South- fide 
of  the  Entrance. 

Buchannefi  is  generally  alfo  the  fir  ft  Land  of  Great 
Britain,  which  the  Ships  make  in  their  Voyages  home 
from  Archangel  in  Ruffia,  or  from  their  Whale -fiflbing 
Voyages  to  Greenland  and  Spits- bergen  in  the  North 
Seas :  and  near  this  Point,  at  Pitjligo,  a  great  Ship  was 
caft  away  in  Queeji  Elizabeth''*,  Time,  bound  home 
from  Archangel,  having  on  board  the  ruff  AmbaiTad*  r 
fent  by  the  Great  Duke  of  Mitfcovy  to  any  of  the 
Chriftiati  Princes  of  Europe,  he  being  commiu'oueo1 
to  treat  with  Queen  Elizabeth  for  a  League  of  Peace 
and  Commerce.  He  likewife  loft  a  moft  valuable 
Prcfent,  defigned  for  the  Queen,  of  lich  and  coiiiy 
Furs,  in  thofe  Days  reputed  ineftimable.  The  Am- 
bafiador  was  happily  ft,ved,  and  brought  on  Shore,  by. 

VOL.  IV,  L  the 


MS  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!, 

the  People  of  Pitjllgo  j  but  the  Ship  and  all  the  Goods 
were  loft. 

From  this  Point  of  Eafterly  Land,  all  that  great 
.Bay,  or  Inlet  of  the  Sea,  reaching  quite  to  the  North 
of  Scotland,  is  called  Murray  Firth  ;  and  the  Norther- 
moft  Point  is  Dungfttyhead*  which  is  the  North- eaft 
Point  of  Caithnefs,  and  opens  to  Pentland  Firtb.  By 
Pent/and  Firtb  you  are  to  underftand  the  Paflage  of 
the  Sea  beyond  Caithnefs,  between  Scotland  and  the 
Ifles  of  Orkney.  What  is  called  Murray  Firth,  is  not, 
like  many  others,  the  Mouth  of  a  River,  as  that  of 
Edinburgh  or  Tay9  but  is  an  open  Bay  in  the  Sea,  as 
the  Bay  of  Bifcay,  or  the  Gulph  of  Mexico,  are  ;  and 
reaches,  as  I  have  faid,  from  Peterheadto  Dungfbyheady 
oppofite  to  the  Orkneys,  the  Diftance  of  79  Miles  ; 
but  it  is  almoft  twice  as  far  by  Land,  becaufe  of  the 
Depth  of  that  Bay,  which  obliges  us  to  travel  from 
Pitjligo  Welt,  ne.ar  70  Miles,  till  we  come  to  Inver- 
nej's. 

This  County  of  Buchan  is  more  to  be  taken  notice 
of  from  what  is  to  be  feen  on  the  Sea-fhore  than  in  the 
Land  j  for  the  Country  is  mountainous,  and  in  fome 
Places  not  very  fertile ;  but  as  we  coafted  along  Weft, 
we  came  into  a  much  better  Country,  particularly  the 
Shires  of  Ramff,  which  I  have  already  mentioned, 
Elgin,  and  the  County  of  Murray,  from  whence  the 
Bay  Ijuft  now  defcribed  is  called  Murray  Firth. 

Murray  is  a  pleafant  Country,  the  Soil  fruitful,  wa- 
tered with  fine  Rivers,  and  full  of  good  Towns,  and 
Gentlemens  Seats,  more  than  could  be  expected  in  fo 
remote  a  Part  of  the  Kingdom. 

This  Country  is  a  Plain  for  between  2O  and  30 
Miles  together,  and  the  Soil  is  by  that  means  rendered 
more  fruitful  and  rich,  and  the  Temperature  of  the 
Air  more  foftened,  than  in  other  Parts  of  Scotland ; 
infomuch  that  the  Harveft  here,  and  in  the  Vale  of 
Strathbogy^  and  all  the  Country  to  Invernefs,  is  ob- 
feived  to  be  more  early  than  in  Northumberland,  nay, 

than 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          2i0 

than  in  Derby/hire^  and  even  fome  Parts  of  the  more 
Southerly  Counties  in  England ;  as  particularly  in  the 
Eaft  of  Kent  and  Suffex.  As  a  Confirmation  of  this, 
I  affirm,  that  I  have  feen  the  new  Wheat  of  this 
Country,  and  Invernefs,  brought  to  Market  to  Edin- 
burgh^ before  the  Wheat  at  Edinburgh  has  been  fit  to 
reap ;  and  yet  the  Harveft  about  Edinburgh  is  thought 
to  be  as  forward  as  in  moft  Parts  even  of  England 
itfelf.  In  a  Word,  it  is  ufual  in  Murray,  and  the 
Country  about  it,  to  begin  with  their  Harveft  in  the 
Month  of  July  ;  and  it  is  not  very  unufual  to  have  new 
Corn  fully  ripe,  and  threfhed  out,  {hipped  off,  and 
brought  to  Edinburgh  to  Sale,  within  the  Month  of 
Auguft. 

The  common  Drink  in  thefe  Parts  is  Ale,  and 
fometimes  Beer  ;  and  they  have  good  French  Wine 
very  cheap,  as  I  and  my  Company  experienced ;  but 
the  Inhabitants  prefer  Aqua  Vitee  of  their  own  ex- 
trading  from  Ale-dregs  and  Spices,  to  much  richer 
Wines  than  the  French:  of  this  they  drink  plentifully 
themfelves,  and  are  very  liberal  of  it  to  their  Friends. 
And  a  Bottle  of  this  Liquor,  and  fome  Cheefe,  will 
make  a  Murray  Man  undertake  the'  longeft  Winter 
Journies,  without  wiftiing  for  any  other  Provifion. 

This  County  is  divided  into  two  Shires :  the  greater, 
called  the  Shire  of  Elgin ;  the  other,  the  Shire  of 
Nairn. 

The  Town  of  Nairn  lies  on  the  Mouth  of  the 
River  of  that  Name;  along  which  ftand  the  Seats  or 

man:;  ?ertott&  of  Quality. 

Nairn  is  a  Royal  Burgh,  and  a  Sea- port  Town. 
We  enter  the  Town  over  a  noble  Stone  Bridge  of  one 
Arch.  The  Port  is  capable  of  receiving  fmall  Vef- 
fels  ;  and,  though  there  are  very  fine  Woods  in  the 
Neighbourhood,  yet  they  turn  to  lefs  Profit  than  couki 
be  wiflied  ;  and  therefore  here,  if  any  whfere  in  this, 
liland,  Furnaces  might  with  Propriety  be  fet  up  fc£ 
melting  the"  Iron  Ores,  of  which  there .'fsfui  to  be  no, 
L  2 


a  20  ^  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

inconfiderable  Quantities  within  a  reafonable  Diflance; 
and,  by  this  means,  even  the  Loppings  of  thefe  Woods 
v/ould  be  rendered  of  more  Value,  than  the  Woods 
tbemfelves  are,  as  things  now  ftand. 

Eight  Miles  from  Nairn^  and  four  from  Invernefs, 
is  Culloden-Moor,  which  takes  its  Name  from  the  Seat 
of  the  late  Lord  Prefident  Forbes,  who  was  fo  a&ive 
in  the  fuppreffing  of  the  Rebellion  in  1745,  and  which 
will  be  for  ever  memorable  on  account  of  the  utter 
Defeat  of  the  Rebel  Army  there,  which  put  an  End  to 
it:  as  will  be  mentioned  in  its  Place. 

Near  the  Caftle  of  Caddel  or  Odder,  on  that  River, 
is  a  Vein  of  Free-ftone,  and  many  Signs  of  Copper. 

Tarnaway  Cattle,  on  the  River  Findorn,  in  this 
County,  is  an  old  Caftle  and  Seat  belonging  to  the 
Earls  of  Murray. 

A  little  lower  on  the  other  Side,  (lands  the  Burgh 
of  Forrefs  ;  and  lower,  formerly,  flood  the  noble  Ab- 
bey of  Kinlofs,  before  mentioned. 

At  and  about  Forrefs  are  good  Roads,  and  fine 
Profpe&s,  efpecially  over  the  Sea,  with  the  Shipping 
in  Flndorn  Harbour,  a  fmall  Sea- port,  four  Miles 
diftant  from  Forrefs.  This  Burgh  of  Forrefs  is  plea- 
fantly  fituated  at  the  End  of  feveral  Ridges  of  Moun- 
tains, and  is  made  up  of  one  long  Street,  with  a  Kirk 
and  Tolbooth,  and  the  Ruins  of  an  old  Caftle,  in 
which,  'tis  faid,  the  Kings  of  Scotland  ufed  to  refide. 
Here  are  Gardens  to  every  Houfe,  very  agreeably  fitu- 
ated, and  much  regarded  by  the  Inhabitants. 

Juft  before  we  entered  this  Town,  on  our  Right- 
hand,  we  were  prefented  with  the  Sight  of  a  flat  fquare 
Pillar  of  Stone,  which  rifes  about  23  Feet  in  Height 
above-ground,  and  is,  as  the  Inhabitants  of  Forrefs 
informed  me,  no  lefs  than  12  or  15  Feet  below,  fo 
that  the  whole  Height  muft  be  about  35  Feet,  and  its 
Breadth  near  five  ;  it  is  all  one  intire  Stone  :  great 
Variety  of  hieroglyphic  Figures,  in  Low  Relieve,  are 
carved  thereon  5  fome  of  which  are  ftill  difiin&  aid 

vifiblij 


; 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  221 

vifible;  but  the  Injury  of  the  Weather  has  obfcuml 
thofe  towards  the  upper  Part.  What  the  Import  or 
Signification  is,  I  could  hear  of  none  that  could  inform 
me.  The  Whole  above-ground  is  divided  into  feven 
Compartments,  the  loweft  of  wh4ch  is  almoft  hid  by 
fome  Steps,  or  Supports,  lately  made  to  fecure  it  from 
falling,  at  the  Expence  of  the  Countefs  of  Murray. 
The  fecond  contains  fundry  Figures,  but  moft  of  them 
defaced.  In  the  third  are  feveral  of  a  monftrous 
Form,  refembling  four-footed  Beads  with  human 
Heads,  and  others  of  Men  (landing  by  them.  In  the 
fourth  Divifion,  are  fix  or  feven  Enfigns  or  Standards, 
with  fome  Figures,  holding  obfcure  Weapons  in  their 
Hands.  The  fifth  and  fixth  Divifions  are  filled  with 
the  like  Figures ;  and  in  the  uppermoft  of  all  have  been 
others,  which  are  now  in  a  great  meafure  dtfaced.  On 
the  reverie  Side  of  this  Stone  is  the  Figure  of  a  Crofs ; 
beneath  which  are  two  human  Figures,  of  a  very  dif- 
proportionable  and  Gothic  Form ;  and  indeed  the 
whole  Monument,  as  to  its  Sculpture,  is  executed  in  a 
rude  and  barbarous  Tafte  :  on  its  Edges  are  continued 
Flourimes.  The  Inhabitants  here  told  us.  it  was 
erected  as  a  Monument  of  a  Danijh  King  ;  fome  fav, 
flain  in  Battle  here ;  others,  that  he  died  at  Sea,  and 
was  brought  hither,  and  buried;  others,. that  it  was 
for  a  Scotch  King,  &c.  But  Camden  tells  us  it  was 
erected  as  a  Monument  of  a  Victory  obtained  by  King 
Malcolm  Mac- Kenneth  over  SwenoK'mg  of  Denmark. 

In  this  rich  County,  on  the  River  LoJJie^  which  rifes 
a  few  Miles  above  it,  and  empties  itfelf  into  the  Sea,  a 
few  Miles  below  it,  lies  Elgln^  formerly  a  Bifliop's 
See*  It  is  fituated  in  a  very  fruitful  Soil,  tho'  fome- 
what  fandy.  The  ufual  Place  of  Refidence  of  the 
Bifhop  was  at  the  Caftle  of  Spynie,  within  a  Mile  of 
the  Town,  a  very  noble  Seat,  with  fine  Gardens  and 
Woods. 

But  though  the  Town  of  Elgin  has  Reafon  to  be 

proud  of  its  Situation,  it  was  not  very  rich  in  its  Re- 

L  3  venues  j. 


222,  ^TOUR/W  Scotl. 

venues  ;  for  it  had  long  laboured  under  heavy  and 
burdenfome  Debts;  which,  being  increafed  by  the 
Rebellion  in  1715,  put  a  Stop  to  divers  of  its  new 
public  Works,  and  made  feveral  others  run  into  De- 
cay. At  the  fame  time  the  River  LoJJls  having  very 
insufficient  Banks,  the  Channel  of  it  became  choaked 
with  Sand,  which  made  it  fubjecl  to  overflow;  and, 
moreover,  the  Harbour  of  Lojjle  itfelf,  which  may  be 
called  the  Port  of  Elgin^  lying  not  far  from  it,  became 
ruinous  and  decayed,  to  the  great  Prejudice  of  Perfons 
trading  in  the  Murray  Firth,  as  well  as  to  the  Town. 
For  all  thefe  Reafons,  and  in  order  to  enlarge  and  im- 
prove, as  well  as  repair,  the  faid  Harbour  of  LoJJie,  an 
Acl  pafled  in  the  Year  1721,  laying  a  Duty  of  two 
Pennies  Scots  on  every  Scots  Pint  of  Ale  or  Beer,  that 
fbould  be  vended  within  the  faid  Town,  and  its  Liber- 
ties y  fo  that  it  bids  fair  to  make  as  flourifhing  a  Figure 
as  it  has  done  for  Centuries  pair. 

Elgin  is  a  Royal  Burgh.  It  confifts  of  one  very 
long  Street,  and  feveral  fhorter,  having  a  neat  Church 
in  the  Middle.  The  Houfes  are  almoft  all  built  upon 
Arches,  which,  with  their  intermediate  Pillars,  form 
agreeable  Piazzas,  and  ferve  to  defend  the  Inhabitants 
horn  the  Eifecls  of  Rain,  Wind,  or  Sun.  It  is  alfo 
j;oted  for  the  Ruins  of  one  of  the  moft  ftately  Cathe- 
dral Churches  in  the  Kingdom  j  moft  of  the  End- 
walls  are  ftill  remaining,  and  many  noble  Pillars  ; 
which  {hews  its  former  Greatnefs  :  as  at  the  other  End 
of  the  Town  are  the  Ruins  of  an  antient  Caftie,  ftill 
viilble,  though  demolifhed  in  the  DanityWzis.  Thefe 
Ruins  are  upon  a  large  Mount;  ubon  which  you 
have  a  fine  Profpecl  all  over  the  Town,  and  of  the 
adjacent  Country,  even  to  the  Sea,  and  the  winding 
Courfe  of  the  River  LoJJie^  which  furrounds  this  Town 
at  a  fmall  Diftance  ;  and  which  is  famous  for  Salmon, 
there  being  annually  pickled  a^d  exported  from  80  to 
100  Lafts,  all  taken  in  a  few  Months  in  the  Summer, 
and  in  a  Space  of  one  Mile,  at  a  Village  called  Ger- 

mach. 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  225 

mach.  The  River  abounds  with  Fifh  to  the  very 
Head,  which  are  taken  either  with  hooked  Tridents 
by  Day,  or  Wicker- bafkets,  or  little  Boats,  covered 
with  Hide?,  by  Night.  None  but  the  Natives,  who 
are  ufed  to  them,  will  venture  into  thefe  Boats. 

Above  Elgin,  Fcrrefs,  and  Nairn,  lies  that  Part  of 
the  Country,  called  The  Brae  of  Murray,  no  way 
comparable  to  the  lower  Part  for  Fruitfulnefs ;  and 
beyond  this  are  Mountains,  Woods,  and  green  Val- 
leys ;  particularly  Stratbtrin,  well  inhabited,  and 
abounding  with  little  Towns  and  Villages,  and  Strath^ 
nairn,  a  {till  better  Soil,  and  poffefTed  by  feveral  Gen- 
tlemen. Stratbeiin  alfo  abounds  with  Lakes,  Moun- 
tains, and  Streams. 

In  this  County  lies  Ltcfanby,  with  an  Ifland,  where 
the  Laird  of  Macklntojb  had  his  Seat.  This  Tribe 
is  called  Clan  Cbattan  -3  and  are  numerous  in  this 
County. 

But  to  fay  a  few  Words  more  of  Elgin ^  before  we 
leave  this  County  :  Gentlemen  of  all  Parties  and  Opi- 
nions, as  if  this  Town  was  the  Court  for  this  Part  of 
the  Ifian;!,  leave  their  Highland  Habitations  in  the 
Winter,  and  come  to  live  at  Elgin,  with  veiy  engaging 
Freedom  ;  fo  that  it  is  a  Place  of  greater  Refort  than 
could  be  imagined,  at  the  Diftance  of  450  meafured 
Miles  from  London,  and  more,  if  we  go  by  iLdbi- 
burgh. 

This  rich  Country  continues  with  very  little  Inter- 
miffion,  till  we  come  to  Strathnaiwi,  or  the  Valley  of 
Nairn,  where  it  extends  a  little  farther  in  Breadth 
towards  the  Mountains,  and  is  not  inferior  to  the  other 
in  Fruitfulnefs.  From  the  Weftern  Part  of  this 
County  you  may  obferve,  that  the  Land  goes  away 
again  to  the  North  ;  and,  as  if  you  were  to  enter  into 
another  Ifland  beyond  Britain,  you  find  a  large  Lake 
or  Inlet  from  the  Sea  of  Murray,  going  on  Weft,  as 
if  it  were  to  cut  through  the  Ifland  ;  for  we  could  fee 
no  End  of  it,  nor  could  fome  of  the  Country- people 
L  4  tell 


224  J  TOUR  (tiro  Scotf, 

tell  us  how  far  it  reached,  but  that  it  went  beyond 
LoJjabar  :  fo  that  we  thought,  till  our  iVl  aps,  and  fur-. 
rher  Inquifition  informed  us,  it  had  joined  the  Weftern 
Ocean. 

After  we  had  traveled  about  12  Miles,  and  de- 
fcended  from  a  rifing  Ground,  upon  which  we  then 
were,  we  perceived  the  Lake  contracted  in  one  parti- 
cular Place  to  the  ordinary  Size  of  a  River,  as  if  de- 
iigned  by  Nature  to  give  Paflage  to  the  Inhabitants  to 
converfe  with  the  Northern  Part  >  and  then  it  opened 
again  to  its  former  Breadth,  and  continued  in  the 
Form  of  a  large  Lake,  as  before,  for  many  more 
Miles  than  we  could  fee ;  being  in  the  Whole,  ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Camden^  23  Miles  long  ;  but  if  it  be 
taken  on  both  Sides  the  Pafs,  'tis  above  35  Miles  in 
Length. 

This  Situation  muft  neceflarily  make  the  narrow 
Part  a  moft  important  Pafs,  from  the  moft  Southerly 
Parts  of  Scotland  to  the  Northern  Countries  which  are 
beyond  it.  We  have  been  told,  the  Romans  never 
conquered  thus  far,  and  the  Conquefts  of  Oliver  Crom- 
well have  been  much  magnified  on  this  Account ;  but 
jf  what  Mr.  Camden  records,  and  is  confirmed  by 
other  Accounts  from  Men  of  Learning  and  Obferva- 
tion,  be  true,  this  muft  be  a  Miftake ;  for  we  are  told, 
that  near  Bean-Caftle^  in  the  County  of  Nairn,  there 
was  found,  in  the  Year  1406,  a  fine  Marble  Veflel 
curioufly  carved,  which  was  full  of  Roman  Coins  of 
ieveral  Sorts ;  alfo/everal  old  Forts  or  Mounts  have 
been  feen  here,  which,  by  their  Remains,  evidently 
ihewed  themfelves  to  be  Roman. 

I  now  entered  the  Shire  of  Invernefs,  abounding 
with  large  Woods  of  Fir  and  Oak,  and  having  in  it 
fome  Iron  Mines.  It  contains  Badenocb^  Lo.cb  fiber  ^ 
the  South  and  Weft  Parts  of  Roffe.  and  the  I  fie  of 

o  * 

oxy. 

In  the  narrow  Pafs  mentioned  above,  over  the  Lake, 
ftands  the  Town  and  Fortrefs  of  Invernefs,  that  is,  a 

a  Town 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  225 

Town  on  the  inner  Bank  of  the  River  Nefs.  The 
Situation  of  it  (as  I  have  faid  before)  intimates  that  it 
is  a  Place  of  Strength  ;  and  accordingly  it  has  a  Calile, 
founded  in  antient  Times,  to  command  the  Pafs  :  and 
fome  Authors  write,  that  it  was  antiently  a  Royal 
Houfe  for  the  Kings  of  Scotland.  Be  that  as  it  will, 
Oliver  Cromivell thought  it  a  Place  of  fuch  Importance, 
that  he  built  a  ftrong  Citadel  here,  and  kept  a  flated 
Garrifon  always  in  it,  and  fometimes  more  than  a 
Garrifon  ;  finding  it  needful  to  have  a  large  Body  of 
his  old  veteran  Troops  ported  here  to  preferve  the 
Peace  of  the  Country,  and  keep  the  Highlanders  in 
Awe,  which  they  did  effectually  all  his  Time.  The 
Fort  or  Ci'adel  built  by  Oliver  Cromwell  was  a  large 
Pentagon  :  it  was  fituated  clofe  to  the  Entrance  of  the 
River  Nefs  into  the  Murray  Firth ;  but  is  now  intirely 
in  Ruins,  nothing  but  Banks  of  Earth  or  Ditches  re- 
maining. 

It  is  obfcrved,  that,  at  the  End  of  thofe  troublefome 
Days,  when  the  Troops  on  all  Sides  came  to  be  dif- 
banded,  and  the  Men  difperfed,  abundance  of  Englijh' 
Soldiers  fettled  in  this  fruitful  Part  of  the  Country  ; 

from  whence  it  received  two  Advantages  : 

1.  They  learnt  the  Art  of  Hu (ban dry  in  full  Per- 
fection, which  they  did  not  underftand  before  ;  which, 
with  the  Help  of  a  rich  Soil,  has  rendered  this  Part  of 
the  Country  more  fruitful  than  the  reft  of  Scotland  to 
this  Day.     And  to  this  it  is  in  fome  meafure  owing,, 
that  the  Harveft  is  fo  early,  and  the.  Corn  fo  good,  as 
is  obferved  above. 

2.  As  Cromwell's  Soldiers  initiated  them  thus  into 
the  Arts  and  Induftry  of  the  Hufbandman,  fo  they  left 
them  the  Englijh  Accent  upon  their  Tongues,  which 
they  likewife  preferve  to  this  Day  ;  for  they  fpeak  per- 
fect Englijhj   even   much   better  than    in    the   moil 
Southerly  Provinces  of  Scotland;    nay,  forne  will  fey, 
as  well  as  at  London  itfelf.  And  indeed  their  Tongue  is; 
not  only  dngttcfaed,  but  their  Palates  too  j  thdr  Way 

L  5,  oi 


226  4  TOUR  thro'  Scotl. 

of  Eating  and  Cookery,  Drefs  and  Behaviour,  is  pretty 
much  according  to  the  Southern  Mode. 

Invernefs  is  one  of  the  Royal  Boroughs  of  Scotland, 
and,  jointly  with  Nairn,  Forrejs,  and  Chaunery^  fends 
a  Member  to  Parliament. 

The  Town  has  a  military  Governor,  and  the  Cor- 
poration a  Provoft  and  four  Bailiffs,  which  differ  but 
tittle  from  our  Mayor  and  Aldermen.  There  is,  be- 
fides,  a  Dean  of  Guild,  who  prefides  in  Matters  of 
Trade  ;  and  other  Borough  Officers,  as  ufual  in  Cor- 
porate Towns. 

Invernefs  is  not  only  the  County-town  of  the  Shire 
of  that  Name,  but  it  is  deemed  the  Capital  of  the 
Highlands ;  and,  as  fuch,  Ifhall  expatiate  upon  it,  and 
upon  the  Cuftonis  and  Ufages  of  the  Highlanders  in 
general.  Yet  the  Natives  of  Invernefs  do  not  call 
themfelves  Highlanders,  becaufe  they  fpeak  Engii/h. 
This  Rule  of  Denomination  they  borrow  from  the 
Kirk,  which,  in  all  its  A6ts  and  Ordinances,  diftin- 
guifhes  the  Lowlands  from  the  Highlands^  not  by  the 
Situation,  but  by  the  Language  of  the  Inhabitants. 

But  though  the  Inhabitants  of  Invernefs  fpeak  Eng- 
lijhy  yet  there  are  fcarce  any  who  do  not  underftand 
the  Erfe  or  Irift>,  which  is  abfolutely  neceffary  to  carry 
en  their  Dealings  with  the  neighbouring  People  ;  for, 
within  lefs  than  a  Mile  of  the  Town,  there  are  few 
who  fpeak  EngHJb  at  all,  except  the  Gentry,  who 
fpeak  it  in  the  remoteil  Parts. 

The  Town  confifts  chiefly  of  four  Streets,  three  of 
which  concur  at  the  Crofs  $  but  the  fourth  is  fome- 
what  irregular. 

The  Caftle  ftands  upon  an  Hill,  which,  though  not 
large,  is  very  fteep ;  it  joins  to  the  Town  on  the 
South- fide,  is  of  an  irregular  Figure,  and  built  with 
unhewn  Stone.  It  was  completely  repaired,  to  ferve 
as  Part  of  the  Citadel  of  Fort  George^  of  which  the 
Foundation  ftone  was  laid  in  1726. 

The 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN.  227 

The  Caftle  is  hereditarily  kept  by  the  Dukes  of 
Gordon.  It  was  formerly  a  Royal  Palace,  where 
Mary^  the  Mother  of  James  I.  refuled,  when  {he 
thought  it  her  Intereft  to  oblige  the  Highlanders  ;  bur, 
before  it  was  repaired,  it  confifted  only  of  fix  Lodging- 
rooms,  the  Offices  below,  and  the  Gallery  above. 
The  Gallery  is  taken  down,  and,  each  of  the  Rooms 
being  divided  into  two,  there  are  now  12  Apartments 
for  Officers.  The  Defcent  of  the  Caftle-hill  to  the 
River  Nefs  is  loofe  Gravel,  and  very  fteep,  and  the 
Buildings  on  that  Side  reach  quite  to  the  Edge.  While 
it  was  repairing,  the  Workmen  had  cut  away  fome 
Part  of  the  Foot  of  the  Declivity,  to  make  the  Paifage 
between  the  Slope  and  the  Water  fomewhat  wider ; 
'upon  which  the  Gravel  immediately  began  to  run,  and 
the  Caftle  in  a  few  Hours  muft  have  followed  the 
Foundation  upon  which  it  (rood,  if  the  Town  Mafons 
and  Soldiers  had  not  initantly  run  up  a  dry  Wall  at 
the  Foot  of  the  Hill;  and  happy  it  was  for  them  that 
Stones  in  that  Country  are  every  where  at  hand. 

At  the  Foot  of  this  Hill  is  a  Bridge  near  80  Yards- 
over,  confifting  of  feven  Arches  well  built  with  Stone,, 
and  maintained  by  the  Toll  of  a  Bodle,  or  the  Sixth- 
part  of  a  Penny,  for  each  Foot  Paflenger  with  Goods,, 
and  a  Penny  for  each  loaded  Horfe :  but  fuch  is  the 
Indigence  of  thefe  People,  that  even  the  Women  wade 
over  with  heavy  Loads  at  the  Hazard  of  their  Lives,, 
the  Stones  on  which  they  ftep  being  made  ilippery  by 
the  Sulphur,  and  the  Water,  when  lowed,  up  to  their 
Middle,  becaufe  they  cannot  afford  to  pay  the  Toll- 
By  the  Side  of  this  River,  and  indeed  all  over ' Scotland* 
are  to  be  feen  Numbers  of  Women  with  their  Coats- 
tucked  up,  ftamping  in  Tubs  upon  Linen,  to  wafli  it,, 
and,  in  this  Place,  not  in  Summer  only,  but  in  the- 
Depth  of  Winter;  for  the  River  never  freezes,  bur,. 
on  the  contrary,  will  dififolve  the  Icicles  which,  hang; 
at  the  Feet  of  Horfes  that  have  paffed  through  other, 
Waters.. 

k  6>  The; 


aaS  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!, 

The  Town-ball  is  a  plain  Building  of  Rubble,  and 
tnere  is  one  Room  in  it  where  the  Magiftrates  meet 
upon  the  Town  bufmefs,  which  would  be  tolerable, 
but  that  the  Walls  are  rough,  not  being  fo  much  as 
plaiftered,  and  the  Furniture  only  a  Table,  and  fome 
wretched  Chairs,  all  of  them  immoderately  dirty. 

The  Market- crofs  is  the  Exchange  for  Merchants 
and  other  Traders,  who  are  frequently  interrupted  in 
their  Negotiations  by  Horfes  and  Carts. 

Near  the  extreme  Part  of  the  Town,  towards  the 
North,  are  two  Churches,  one  for  the  Englijh,  and 
the  other  for  the  Irijh  Tongue :  both  are  execrably 
filthy,  and  much  out  of  Repair.  At  fome  Diftance 
from  the  Churches  is  the  Church  yard,  where,  as  is 
ufual  in  Scotland,  the  Monuments  (many  of  which  are 
well  executed,  and  coftly)  are  placed  againft  the 
Wall  which  inclofes  it ;  for  thefe  Pieces  of  Sculpture, 
if  they  were  fet  up  in  the  Church,  would,  as  Orna- 
ments, be  deemed  rank  Popery. 

The  Houfes  of  this  Town  are  fo  differently  model- 
led, that  they  cannot  be  comprehended  in  any  general 
Defcription  ;  they  are,  however,  moitly  low,  becaufe 
the  Town  is  expofed  to  fudden  and  impetuous  Quits 
of  Wind,  which  rufh  upon  it  through  the  Openings 
of  the  adjacent  Mountains.  The  Back- part,  or  one 
End  of  the  Houfe,  is  generally  turned  towards  the 
Street,  and  there  is  a  fhort  Alley  which  leads  into  a 
kind  of  Yard,  from  whence  the  Stairs  afcend  that  lead 
to  the  firft  Floor;  for  the  Ground-floor  is  generally  a 
kind  of  Shop  or  Warehoufe,  and  has  no  Communi- 
cation with  the  reft  of  the  Building. 

The  Walls  are  built  of  Stones  that  greatly  differ 
both  in  Size  and  Shape ;  many  of  them  are  Pebbles, 
and,  being  almoft  round,  there  muit  neceflarily  be 
large  Gaps  between,  which  en  the  Outfide  they  fill 
up,  by  driving  in  flat  Stones  of  a  fmaller  Size,  and 
afterwards  face  the  Work  all  over  with  Mortar  thrown 
againft  it'with  a  Trowel,  which  they  call  barling. 

On 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  229* 

On  the  Infide  the  Chafms  remain,  and  harbour  an 
incredible  Number  of  Rats,  which  are  faid,  in  time  of 
Scarcity,  to  creep  into  the  matted  Manes  and  Tails  of 
the  Horfes,  in  order  to  be  tranfported  into  other 
Quarters.  Before  the  Union  the  Houfes  were  neither 
faihed  nor  flated,  and,  to  this  Day,  the  Cieling  of  one 
Room  is  nothing  more  than  the  identical  Boards  which 
fsrve  for  the  Floor  of  another  ;  of  .the  fame  kind  are 
the  Partitions  between  Rooms  on  the  fame  Floor,  fa 
that,  as  the  Planks  dry,  there  is  a  Chink  between  each, 
through  which  it  is  eafy  to  fee  all  that  pafles  :  but  this 
is  not  all,  for  the  Floors  are  full  of  Holes  about  an 
Inch  Diameter.  One  of  thefe  Holes  is  bored  in  each 
Plank,  atfome  Diftance  from  the  End,  when  they  are 
taken  from  the  Saw-mill ;  and  through  thefe  Holes- 
they  put  a  Cord,  or,  as  they  call  it,  a  Woodiey  to  keep 
them  flat  to  the  Sides  of  the  Horfes  which  drag  them 
to  the  Place  where  they  are  to  be  ufed,  with  the  Corner 
of  the  other  End  on  the  Ground. 

Thefe  Holes  indeed  are  filled  up  with  Pegs,  when 
they  are  firft  laid  ;  but,  as  the  Wood  fhrinks,  the  Hole 
becomes  wider,  and  the  Peg  lefs,  till  it  drops  out,  and  is- 
feldom  afterwards  reftored.  The  Windows  that  re- 
main unfafhed  have  two  Shutters  for  the  lower  Half, 
and  the  upper  Half  only  is  glazed  ;  fo  that  when  it  is 
necellary  to  keep  out  the  Weather,  nothing  can  be  feen 
in  the  Street.  This  Manner  of  conftru&ing  their 
Windows  is  not  altogether  the  Effe6t  of  Penury  or 
Parfimony  ;  for,  in  the  Clan  Quarrels,  many  were 
fhot  from  the  oppofiteSide  of  the  Way,  who  were  dif- 
covered  fitting  in  their  Chambers  through  the  Glafs. 
But  though  it  was  begun  by  Danger,  it  was  continued 
merely  by  Habit ;  for  thefe  Quarrels  have  not  of  late 
been  carried  to  fuch  Excefs. 

Such  are  the  Houfes  in  the  principal  Streets  of  /«- 
vernefs  :  thofe  of  the  middling  Sort  are  yet  lower,  and 
have  generally  a  clofe  wooden  Stair- cafe  before  the 
Front,  which  is  lighted  by  fmall  round,  or  oval -Holes, 


230  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

juft  big  enough  for  the  Head  to  come  through  ;  and  in 
Summer,  or  when  any  thing  in  the  Street  excites  the 
Curiofity  of  thofe  without,  they  look  like  fo  many 
People  with  their  Heads  in  the  Pillory.  The  extreme 
Parts  of  the  Town  confift  of  wretched  Hovels  faced 
and  covered  with  Turf,  with  a  bottomlefs  Tub  or 
Bafket  in  the  Roof  for  a  Chimney. 

Some  of  the  Houfes  are  marked  on  theOutiide,  over 
the  uppermoft  Window,  with  the  firft  Letters  of  the 
Owner's  Name,  and  that  of  his  Wife  if  he  be  a  married 
Man  ;  for  the  Woman  writes  her  Maiden  Name  after 
Marriage,  and  if  (he  be  a  Widow,  who  has  had  feveral 
Hufbands,  and  does  not  chufe  her  Maiden  Name,  fhe 
is  at  liberty  to  take  that  of  either  of  her  deceafed 
Hufbands,  which  (he  likes  beft. 

As  in  London  many  petty  Retailers  dignify  their 
Shops  with  the  Title  of  Warehoufe,  fo  the  People 
beyond  the  Tweed  aggrandize  many  Things,  in  Imi- 
tation of  their  antient  Allies  the  French. 

A  pedling  Shopkeeper  who  fells  a  Penny-worth  of 
Thread,  is  called  a  Merchant;  the  Perfon,  who  is 
fent  to  buy  that  Thread,  has  received  a  Commiffion  ; 
and  bringing  it  the  Sender,  is  making  a  Report.  A 
Bill  to  fignify  there  is  a  fingle  Room  to  let,  is  called  a 
Placard ;  the  Doors  are  called  Parts  ;  an  Inclofure  of 
two  Acres  is  a  Park ;  and  the  Wife  of  a  Laird  of 
15/.  a  Year,  is  a  Lady. 

An  Ale-houfe  is  called  a  Change,  and  the  Perfon 
who  keeps  it,  a  Gentleman ;  nor  is  it  uncommon  to 
fee  a  Lord  difmount  from  his  Horfe,  and,  folding  one 
of  thefe  Gentlemen  in  his  Arms,  make  him  as  many 
Compliments  as  if  he  were  a  Brother  Peer.  And  the 
Reafon  is,  the  Ale-houfe  Keeper  is  generally  of  as 
good  a  Family  as  any  in  Scotland,  and  perhaps  has 
taken  his  Degree  as  Mafter  of  Arts  at  the  Univerfity. 

But,  whatever  be  the  Affe&ation  of  thefe  People, 
they  appear  to  be  extremely  wretched.  The  Women 
and  Maid-fervants  are  feen  in  the  Streets  of  Invernefs9 

in 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  231 

in  the  fevereft  Froft,  without  either  Stockens  or  Shoes,, 
and  here  and  there  a  Man  dragging  along  a  half- 
ftarved  Horfe,  fcarce  bigger  than  an  Afs,  in  a  Cart 
about  the  Size  of  a  Wheel- barrow  ;  the  Load  is  often 
not  more  than  might  be  carried  under  his  Arm,  but  he 
muft  not  degrade  himfelf  by  bearing  a  Burden,  though 
perhaps  his  Wife  is  ftooping  under  twice  the  Weight  ^ 
for  the  Women  carry  Fifh,  and  other  heavy  Loads,  as 
the  Pedlars  carry  their  Packs. 

Some  of  thefe  Carters  have  Ropes  for  Halters  and 
Harnefs  made  of  the  Manes  and  Tails  of  their  Horfes, 
which  are  (horn  in  the  Spring  for  that  Purpofe ;  but, 
in  general,  they  make  ufe  of  birchen  Twigs,  twifted  and 
knotted  together,  and  it  is  from  thefe  Bands  that  they 
have  learned  to  call  all  Ropes  hoodies. 

The  Collar  and  Crupper  are  of  plaited  Straw,  and, 
to  fave  the  Horfe' s  Back,  they  put  a  few  old  Rags  under 
the  Cart-faddle.  The  Beafts  are  never  either  drefled 
or  fhod,  and  it  is  with  great  Difficulty  that  they  keep 
their  Footing,  when  the  Carter  has  occafion  to  turn 
the  Carriage,  which  he  does  by  taking  it  up,  and 
carrying  it  quite  round. 

The  Wheels  are  made  of  three  Pieces  of  Plank 
pinned  together  at  the  Edge,  like  the  Head  of  a 
Butter- firkin ;  the  Axle-tree  goes  round  with  the 
Wheels,  which,  when  they  are  new,  are  about  a  Foot,, 
or  a  Foot  and  an  half  Diameter,  but  are  foon  worn 
very  fmall,  and,  as  Part  of  the  Circumference  is  with 
the  Grain,  and  Part  againft  it,  they  wear  unequally, 
and  in  a  little  time  become  rather  angular  than  round. 

The  Traveller  will  always  find,  that  the  Cattle  and 
the  Carts  diminim  in  their  Size  as  he  goes  Northward, 
and  that  the  Sheep  are  not  only  gradually  lefs,  but  that 
their  Wool  is  coarfer  and  coarfer,  till  at  laft,  upon  a 
tranfient  View,  it  would  be  miftaken  for  Hair. 

In  Summer,  when  the  Horfe  has  done  his  Work, 

the  Driver  attends  him  while  he  grazes  by  the  Sides  of 

the  Road  and  the  Edges  of  the  Corn-field,  holding 

6  him 


23 1  ^TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

him  all  the  while  by  an  Halter,  left  he  (hould  en- 
croach, for  there  are  no  Inclofures ;  and  in  Winter 
many  of  them  are  famifhed  to  Death,  and,  before  they 
die,  may  be  feen,  from  Day  to  Day,  crawling  along, 
hanging  down  their  Heads,  and  reeling  with  Weak- 
nefs,  till  they  drop. 

Hay  indeed  is,  even  in  the  Lowlands^  a  fcarce  Com- 
modity ;  for,  as  foon  as  the  Grafs  is  cut  down,  they 
bring  it  to  Town  green  for  Sale  ;  and,  at  Edinburgh^ 
the  Place  allotted  for  this  Traffick  is  called  the  Grafs- 
market. 

In  this  Place  there  are  held  every  Year  five  Fairs ; 
but  it  is  impoffible  to  conceive  greater  Poverty  and 
Wretchednefs,  than  appear  among  the  People  who 
keep  thefe  Fairs. 

Thofe  who  bring  a  fmall  Roll  of  Linen,  or  a  Piece 
of  coarfe  Plaiding  under  their  Arms,  are  the  moft  con- 
fiderable  Dealers :  the  reft  bring  perhaps  two  Cheefesr 
each  of  which  weighs  about  two  or  three  Pounds  ;  a 
Kid,  which-  at  the  higheft  Price  is  fold  for  8  d.  a  fmalL 
Quantity  of  Butter  in  fomething  that  looks  like  a 
Bladder,  and  is  fometimes  fet  down  upon  the  Dirt  in 
the  Street  5  three  or  four  Goat-fkins;  a  Piece  of 
Wood  for  an  Axle-tree  to  one  of  the  little  Carts,  ot 
fome  other  Trifle  of  yet  lefs  Value.  The  Money 
which  they  receive  is  not,  however,  carried  home,  but 
generally  laid  out  in  an  horn  or  wooden  Spoon,  a 
Knife,  or  a  Platter,  and  fometimes  in  a  large  Onion  or 
a  Carrot,  which  are  Dainties  not  to  be  procured  in 
their  own  Part  of  the  Country,  and  which  they  fre- 
quently eat  raw  upon  the  Spot,  without  Salt  or 
Bread. 

The  Gentlemen,  Magiftrates,  Merchants,  and  Shop- 
keepers, are  drefled  after  the  Englijh  Manner^  and 
make  a  tolerable  Appearance.  The  Undrefs  of  the 
Ladies  is  a  Plaid,  two  Breadths  wide,  and  three  Yards 
long,  which,  being  brought  over  the  Head,  may  either 
hide  or  difcover  the  Face  atPleafure:  it  reaches  to 

the 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  233 

the  Waift  behind  ;  one  Corner  falls  as  low  as  the 
Ancle  on  one  Side,  and  the  other  Part  hangs  down  in 
Folds  on  the  oppoiite  Arm. 

The  Female  Servants  are  quite  uncovered  to  the 
Mid-leg,  and,  when  they  go  abroad,  wear  a  Blanket 
over  their  Heads,  which  is  made  Part  of  their  Bedding 
at  Night.  The  working  Tradefmen  are  indolent,  and 
indeed  have  little  Excitement  to  Induftry;  for  if  a 
Bolt  be  wanting  to  a  Door,  the  Owner  fupplies  it 
himfelf  with  one  of  Wood,  and  a  thoufand  Shifts  are 
ufed,  rather  than  employ  the  Carpenter  or  Smith. 
The  Fifhermen  indeed  are  inexcufable,  for  they  might 
fell  much  more  than  they  do ;  but  fo  long  as  any 
Money  remains  of  the  iaft  Marketing,  they  will  not 
provide  for  the  next. 

At  low  Ebb,  when  their  Boats  lie  off  at  a  confi- 
derable  Diftance  from  the  Shore,  the  Women  tuck 
up  their  Coats  to  an  indecent  Height,  and  wade  to  the 
Veflels,  where  they  receive  their  Load  of  Fifh  for 
Sale  ;  and  when  they  have  landed  the  whole  Cargo, 
they  take  the  Fifhermen  upon  their  Backs,  and  carry 
them  on  Shore  in  the  fame  manner. 

There  is,  however,  among  thefe  poor  People,  a 
Senfe  of  their  Dignity  as  human  Beings  ;  for,  though 
they  cannot  decorate  their  Hovels  with  any  of  the 
little  Ornaments  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  Dwellings 
of  fome  of  our  meaneft  Cottagers,  yet  they  difdain  to 
perform  any  fervile  Office  ;  and  an  Englijh  Gentle- 
man, who  kept  a  Pack  of  Hounds,  could  not  prevail 
upon  any  of  them  to  take  them  to  Sea,  and  dip  them 
in  Salt  water,  when  he  fufpecled  they  had  the  Mange, 
though  he  offered  more  than  they  could  get  by  a  whole 
Freight  of  Fifh. 

There  are  Salmon  and  Trout  in  Abundance;  alfo 
Hares,  Partridge,  Grouft,  Plover,  Duck,  Mallard, 
Woodcock,  and  Snipes  ;  but,  after  Chr'tftmas^  no 
Mutton  is  to  be  procured  till  Auguft^  nor  any  Beef  till 
Sfptttiiber^  and  then  they  may  be  bought  fcr  a  Penny 

a  Pound* 


234.  ^  T  O  U  R  thro  ScotL 

a  Pound.  A  Fowl,  which  they  call  a  Hen^  may  be 
purchafed  for  two  Pence ;  and  there  is  great  Plenty  of 
Roots  and  Greens. 

Swine  are  feldom  feen  about  the  Highlands ;  but 
Pork  is  very  common  in  the  low  Countries,  and  in 
particular  at  Aberdeen^  where  great  Quantities,  as  has 
been  faid,  are  pickled,  and  fold  to  other  Parts  for 
Winter  Previfion. 

French  Claret  is  to  be  had  in  great  Perfection  all 
over  Scotland,  except  in  the  Heart  of  the  Highlands^ 
and  fometimes  even  there  ;  but  the  Number  of  Englijij 
have  of  late  raifed  the  Price  from  I  s.  ^.d.  to  "is.  a 
Bottle.  French  Brandy  is  alfo  to  be  purchafed  for 
four  Shillings  a  Gallon,  and  Lemons  are  feldom 
wanting. 

In  this  Place  are  fix  Minifters ;  three  to  the  Engliflj, 
and  three  to  the  Irijh  Church,  who  have  each  of  them 
joo/.  per  Annum^  none  having  more  than  that  Sti- 
pend, nor  any  lefs  than  50  /.  Their  Manner  of 
preaching  is  with  a  Whine,  which  they  call  the  Sough ; 
and,  as  they  pray  extempore,  they  are  often  betrayed 
into  ridiculous  Abfurdities.  They  do  net  drink  fo 
much  as  a  Dram,  without  faying  a  long  Grace  over  it  j 
and  one  pf  them  was  fufpended  for  riding  on  horfeback 
on  the  &?££tf//vJ:hough  it  was  occafioned  by  his  not 
being  able  to  pafs  a  Ford  on  Saturday  Evening,  in  his 
Way  to  the  Kirk. 

By  the  general  Tenor  of  their  Preaching,  and  their 
Proceedings  as  a  Synod,  a  Stranger  would  be  inclined 
to  think,  that  they  held  nothing  to  be  a  Sin  but  Forni- 
cation, nor  a  Virtue  but  keeping  the  Sabbath.  The 
moft  zealous  Vigilance  is  continually  ufed  to  difcover 
all  Breaches  of  Chaftity,  not  only  in  the  North,  but  in 
all  Parts  of  Scotland  ;  fo  that,  at  Edinburgh,  the  City- 
guard  has  befet  a  Houfe  a  whole  Night,  upon  Informa- 
tion that  a  Man  and  Woman  went  in  there,  though  in 
the  Day-time  ;  and,  in  the  Highlands,  there  are  a  Set 
of  Fellows,  who,  if  they  fee  two  Perfons  of  different 

Sexes 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        235 

Sexes  walk  out  to  take  the  Air,  make  it  their  Bufwiefs 
to  dog  them  from  Place  to  Place,  iiill  keeping  them- 
ielves  concealed,  and,  if  they  fee  any  Familiarity,  will 
march  up,  and  demand  Money  ;  upon  a  Refufal  of 
which  they  will  inform,  and,  if  they  confirm  their  In- 
formation by  an  Oath,  the  Parties  muft  either  quit  the 
Country,  or  do  public  Penance. 

Each  Church  has  but  one  Bell  to  give  notice  of 
Divine  Service,  but  the  Mufic- bells  produce  fine  Har- 
mony ;  they  are  play'd  every  Day  from  n  to  12 
upon  Keys,  like  an  Organ,  and  are  heard  all  over  the 
Town. 

In  their  Marriages,  they  do  not  ufe  the  Ring,  as  in 
England;  but  the  Bride,  if  (he  is  of  the  middle  Clafs, 
is  conducted  to  Church  by  two  Men  who  take  her 
under  the  Arms,  and  hurry  the  poor  unwilling  Crea- 
ture along  the  Streets,  as  a  Pickpocket  is  dragged  to  an 
Horfe-pond  in  London,  having  been  attended  the 
Evening  before  by  the  Bride-maids,  who  with  great 
Ceremony  wafh  her  Feet. 

When  a  Servant  Maid  has  behaved  well  in  a  Place, 
her  Maffer  and  Mlnrefs  frequently  make  what  they 
call  a  Penny-wedding  for  her  when  fhe  marries.  They 
provide  a  Dinner  and  Supper,  and  invite  all  their  Re- 
lations and  Friends  ;  and  in  the  Evening,  when  there 
is  Mufic  and  Dancing,  the  Bride  muft  go  round  the 
Room,  and  falute  alt  the  Men,  during  which  Cere- 
mony, every  Perfon  in  the  Company  puts  Money  into 
a  Difli  according  to  their  Inclination  and  Ability  ;  and 
by  this  Means  the  new-married  Couple  often  procure 
a  Sum  fufficient  to  begin  the  World  with  very  com- 
fortably for  Perfons  in  their  Condition. 

The  Moment  a  Child  is  born,  it  is  plunged  into 
cold  Water,  though  it  Jhould  be  neceflary  firft  to  break 
the  Ice.  At  the  Crrriftening,  the  Father  holds  it  up 
before  the  Pulpit,  and  receives  a  long  extemporary 
Admonition  concerning  its  Education. 

The 


A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

The  People  are  invited  to  ordinary  Burials,  by  a 
Man  who  goes  about  with  a  Bell,  and,  at  certain  Sta- 
tions, declares  aloud  the  Death  of  the  Party,  the 
Name,  arid  Place  of  Abode ;  this  Bell  is  alfo  tinkled 
before  the  Funeral  Proceffion.  To  the  Burial  of 
Perfons  of  higher  Rank  an  Invitation  is  ufually  given 
by  a  printed  Letter  figned  by  the  neareft  Relation  ; 
but  fometimes  it  is  general  by  Beat  of  Drum. 

The  Company,  which  is  always  numerous,  meet 
in  the  Street  at  the  Door  of  the  Houfe  ;  a  convenient 
Number  of  whom  (Strangers  are  always  the  firft)  are 
then  invited  into  a  Room,  where  there  are  Pyramids  of 
Cake  and  Sweet-meats,  to  which  fome  Dimes,  with 
Pipes  and  Tobacco,  are  added,  merely  becaufe  it  is  an 
old  Cuftom ;  for  it  is  rare  to  fee  any  Smoaking  in 
Scotland. 

Each  of  the  neareft  Relations  prefent  Wine  to  every 
Individual  of  the  Company,  and,  as  it  is  expected  the 
Gueft,  when  he  has  accepted  the  Favour  of  one, 
fhould  not  refufe  it  to  any  of  the  reft,  he  is  in  danger 
of  drinking  more  than  he  can  conveniently  carry. 
When  one  Set  has  been  thus  treated,  others  are  intro- 
duced, and,  when  all  have  had  their  Turn,  they  ac- 
company the  Corpfe  to  the  Grave,  where  it  generally 
arrives  about  Noon.  The  Minifter  is  always  parti- 
cularly invited,  though  he  performs  no  Kind  of  Service 
over  the  Dead,  of  whatever  Fortune  or  Rank.  Part 
of  the  Company  is  feleded  to  return  to  the  Houfe, 
where  Wine  is  filled  as  faft  as  it  can  be  drank,  till 
there  is  fcarce  a  fober  Perfon  amongft  them.  In  the 
end,  however,  fome  Sweet-meats  are  put  into  their 
Hats,  or  thruft  into  their  Pockets,  with  which  they 
afterwards  compliment  the  Women  of  their  Acquaint- 
ance. This  Ceremony  they  call  the  Dradgy>  which 
perhaps  is  a  Corruption  of  Dirge. 

No  Fees  are  paid  to  the  Minifter  or  Parifh,  for 
either  Chriftening,  Marrying,  or  Burying. 

Within 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN.  237 

Within  a  Mile  of  Invernefs  the  Highlands  begin  to 
rife  on  the  North- weft ;  but,  towards  fome  other 
Points,  there  are  five  or  fix  Miles  of  what  the  Natives 
call  a  flat  Country. 

Somewhat  to  the  North-eaft  are  the  Ruins  of  the 
Fort  built  by  Cromwell^  which  commanded  the 
Town,  the  Mouth  of  the  River,  and  Part  of  the  flat 
Country  on  the  Land-fide.  The  Rampart  is  not  an 
unpleafant  Summer's  Walk. 

About  a  Mile  Weft  is  a  very  regular  Hill,  rifing 
out  of  a  perfect  Flat,  which  the  Natives  call  Tomah- 
curach :  it  is  about  400  Yards  long,  and  150  broad,  at 
the  Bafe  :  it  looks  almoft  like  a  Thames  Wherry,  with 
the  Keel  upwards  ;  and  the  Inhabitants,  who  ifor  that 
Reafon  (ometimes  call  it  Noah's  Ark^  fuppofe  it  to  be 
the  perpetual  Haunt  of  Fairies  and  Witches. 

The  greateft  Ornament  in  all  the  adjacent  Country 
is  an  Ifland,  diftant  about  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  ;  it  is 
about  600  Yards  long,  furrounded  by  two  Branches  of 
the  NefS)  and  well  planted  with  Trees.  To  this 
Place  the  Magiftrates  conduct  the  Judges,  when  they 
are  upon  their  Circuit,  in  the  Beginning  of  May^  and 
entertain  them  with  Salmon,  which  is  boiled  the 
Moment  it  is  taken  out  of  the  Crtdves^  and  fet  upon  a 
Bank  of  Turf  furrounded  by  Seats  of  the  fame  ;  and 
the  Heart  of  the  Fifti  lies  upon  a  Plate  in  view,  and 
keeps  in  a  panting  Motion  during  the  Repaft. 

Not  far  from  the  Town,  large  Moor-ftones,  fome 
of  them  10  Feet  high,  are  fet  up  in  regular  Circles,  one 
within  another :  how  long  they  have  been  there 
ranged,  or  for  what  Purpofe,  cannot  now  be  certainly 
known  ;  but,  if  Tradition  is  to  be  believed,  they  were 
fet  up  by  the  Romans^  either  for  Temples  in  which 
they  facrificed  to  their  Gods,  or  Tribunals  for  the 
Trials  of  criminal  Soldiers.' 

At  the  Diftance  of  about  two  Miles  is  Culloden- 
boufe^  a  large  Stone-building,  with  good  Gardens  and  a 
Park.  This  Place  was  befieged  by  the  Rebels  in  1715, 

when 


238  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

when  the  Laird  was  abfent  in  Parliament;  but  the 
Lady  held  it  out  againft  them,  and  obliged  them  to 
raife  the  Siege. 

At  about  the  fame  Diftance  from  the  Town,  oil 
the  contrary  Side,  is  another  large  old  Building,  which 
belonged  to  the  Lord  Advocate  or  Attorney  general ; 
and  near  it  a  moft  romantic  Wood,  diverfified  with 
great  Heights  and  Hollows,  with  Springs  of  Water  in- 
terfperfed,  that  fall  in  numerous  Cafcades,  and  wind 
out  among  the  Brufh  wood  below, 

By  the  fmall  Proportion  of  arable  Land  in  thefe 
Parts  to  the  Rocks  and  Heaths,  the  moft  plentiful 
Year  fcarce  produces  fufficient  to  feed  the  Inhabitants; 
and  confequently,  in  an  un'avourable  Seafon,  they 
fuffer  extreme  Diftrefs. 

In  Locbaber^  which,  though  bordering  upon  the 
Weftern  Ocean,  is  yet  within  the  Shire  of  Invernefs^ 
ftands  Fort  William^  fo  named  from  King  William^ 
in  whofe  Reign  it  was  built,  principally  as  a  Check 
upon  the  Camerons.,  a  Clan  which  at  that  Time  was 
greatly  addicted  to  Plunder  and  Rebellion. 

It  ftands  in  a  very  rocky  and  barren  Country,  at 
the  Foot  of  a  Mountain  called  Benevis,  and  one  Face 
of  the  Fortification  is  wafhed  by  a  navigable  Arm  of 
the  Sea  ;  on  the  Land-fide  it  is  almoft  furrounded 
with  Rivers,  which,  though  not  broad,  are  rendered 
impaflable  by  their  Depth  and  Rapidity.  There  is 
alfo  a  Town  called  Maryburgh  after  the  Queen,  which 
v/as  originally  intended  as  a  Sutlery  to  the  Garrifon, 
and  afterwards  creeled  into  a  Barony  in  favour  of  the 
Governor  of  the  Fort.  The  Houfes  are  all,  by  fpecial 
Appointment,  built  of  Timber  and  Turf,  that  they 
may  be  eafily  and  fuddenly  burnt  by  the  Com- 
mandant, when  in  danger  of  be9ormng  a  Lodgement 
for  an  Enemy. 

Fort  William')  in  a  Word,  is  fo  fituated,  that,  tho* 
indeed  it  may  be  blocked  up  by  Land,  and  diftrefled 
by  a  Siege,  yet  as  it  is  open  to  the  Sea,  it  may  con- 

itaiuly 


ScotL         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

ftantly  receive  Supplies  by  Shipping.  The  Rebels  in 
1745  laid  liege  to  it;  but  were  obliged  to  abandon 
their  Enterprize. 

Near  to  the  Foot  of  the  Bridge,  at  Invernefs,  upon 
a  pleafant  Hill,  clofe  by  the  River-fide,  was  fituated 
Fort-George^  which  was  a  great  Ornament  to  the 
Town,  before  the  Rebels,  in  1746,  blew  it  up.  It 
was  not  indeed  a  Place  of  fuch  great  Strength,  as  it 
was  a  beautiful  Barrack.  Their  chief  Engineer,  who 
laid  the  Train,  was  mounted  up  into  the  Air  by  the 
Blaft,  and  killed  :  he  had  a  Dog  which  was  blown  up 
at  the  fame  time,  a  great  Height,  and  thrown  almoft 
over  the  River;  but,  being  not  fo  mifchievous  an  one 
as  his  Mafter,  efcaped  with  Life,  though  lamed. 

Invernefs  has  been  of  late  Years  much^4*ftf)roved, 
and  is  ftill  farther  improving  ;  for,  in  the  fear  1718, 
an  Acl  patted,  for  laying  a  Duty  of  a  Sixth  of  a  Penny 
Sterling  on  every  Pint  of  Ale,  &c.  fold  within  ths 
Town  and  its  Privileges,  for  building  a  Church,  and 
making  an  Harbour  there.  The  Preamble  to  the  Acl; 
gives  a  Defcription  of  the  Place,  and  the  Reafons  of 
applying  for  it;  and  is  to  the  following  Effect: : 

That  the  Town  of  Iwvernefs  is  fituate  near  the  Sea, 
and,  very  capable  of  Improvements  in  its  Trade  and 
Commerce  ;  and,  having  but  a  very  fmall  public  Re- 
venue, incumbered  with  Debts,  and  thofe  increafed  by 
the  Expence  the  Inhabitants  were  at  in  oppofing  the 
Rebellion  of  1715,  and  the  Church  of  the  laid  Town, 
befide,  being  ruinous,  was  not  large  enough  to  contain 
the  Inhabitants  ;  for  the  effecting  of  thefe  good  Pur- 
pofes,  the  faid  Acl:  was  pafied. 

This  Acl  was  to  be  in  Force  for  19  Years  only  ; 
and  the  firft  five  Years  it  produced  fo  well,  that  the 
Magiftrates  of  Itruernefs  entered  upon  a  Defign  greatly 
to  enlarge  and  improve  their  Harbour ;  in  order  to 
which,  they  purchafed  Grounds,  rented  Quarries, 
built  Boats  for  tranfporting  Stone,  deepened  their 
Harbour,  erected  Bulwarks  and  Quays  j  fo  that  it  was 

made 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  ScotL 

made  much  more  commodious  than  ever:-  but,  the 
next  13  Years,  the  Produce  of  the  Duties  was  lef- 
fened,  occafioned  by  the  exceffiveUfe  of  run  Tea  and 
Brandy,  which  People  could  buy  fo  cheap,  that  the 
Confumption  of  Beer  and  Ale  was  greatly  leflened  ; 
and  they,  having  run  much  behind  hand,  were  forced 
to  apply  for  a  further  Continuation  of  the  A& ;  and 
accordingly,  in  the  I  ith  Year  of  King  George  II.  an 
A&  pa!Ted  for* continuing  the  fame  for  21  Years  more, 
for  paying  the  Debts  contracted,  and  effecting  the 
other  good  Purpofes  I  have  mentioned. 

We  have  here  at  Invernefs  a.  quite  Highland  Pro- 
fpe&j  and  more  efpecially  as  we  look  towards  Fort" 
Auguftus  ^for  here  we  fee  nothing  but  irregular  Moun- 
tains ari^f  alleys.  Here  is  a  great  Salmon- fifhery  up 
the  River '  jN7!?/}  5  four  of  the  Heads  of  the  Town  go 
Partners,  and  one  of  them  was  no,  lefs  than  a  Baron, 
The  Fifhermen  who  drag  the  Nets  to  catch  the  Sal- 
mon, are  a  Sort  of  amphibious  Creatures,  being  almoft 
always  up  to  their  Knees  in  the  Water  in  drawing 
their  Nets ;  they  alfo  make  ufe  of  little  flat- bottomed 
Boats  for  this  Purpofe,  and  Harpoons,  by  which  means 
they  kill  great  Numbers  in  wooden  Sorts  of  Cages 
(built  in  the  Water),  where  the  Fifh  run  in  with  the 
Stream,  but  cannot  get  back  again.  The  Fi(h  thus 
caught  are  nothing  near  fo  good  as  thofe  caught  with 
the  Drag-net,  where  they  kill  them  immediately,  by 
linking  them  on  the  Head  with  a  Stone,  and  fo  hinder 
their  fluttering  in  the  Water,  which  fpends  their  Fat ; 
for  thofe  caught  with  the  Net,  if  d reded  foon  after, 
are  found,  when  boiled,  all  over  veined  with  an  hard 
fuety  kind  of  Subftance,  and  eat  quite  firm  (and  caller^ 
as  the  People  here  call  it,  or  in  Perfection)  ;  but  if 
kept  a  Day  or  Night  before  drefled,  this  Fat  is  all  left, 
and  the  Kifh  eats  quite  flabby  and  foff, 

I  made  it  my  Requeft  to  a  Friend,  in  my  Tour, 
dnno  1747,  into  thefe  Parts,  who  was  obliged  to  g:> 
with  a  Detachment  of  the  Kino's  Forces  from 


ScotL  GREAT  BRITAIN.         241 

nefs  to  the  late  demolished  Fort  Augujlus,  and  to  Fort 
William^  and  other  ftrong  Pafles  in  the  Highlands 
(and  who  favoured  me  with  many  of  the  preceding 
Obfervations  on  the  Cuftoms  and  Ufages  of  the  People 
in  thefe  Parts),  to  give  me  an  Account  of  what  he 
obferved  remarkable,  fuitable  to  my  Defign.  He  ob- 
liged me  accordingly ;  and,  from  his  Account,  I 
tranfcribewhat  follows  : 

After  two  Months  Stay  at  Invernefs^  I  fet  out  for 
Fort  Augiijltis ;  in  coming  to  which  Place,  I  travel 
along  the  Banks  of  the  River  Nefs  four  Miles,  till  I 
come  to  Locbnefs ;  from  whence  the  River  runs,  and 
difcharges  itfelf  into  the  Murray  Firth  at  Invcrnefs. 
Locbnefs  is  a  mod  remarkable  and  beautiful  Loch,  24 
Miles  long,  and  2  broad,  in  fome  Places.  When  we 
are  come  to  the  Head  of  the  Loch,  the  Profpeft  is  mofl 
charming  ;  we  look  ttrait  along  the  Lock,  and,  lofmg 
our  Sight  in  the  Water,  on  each  Side  the  Loch,  is  a 
Ridge  of  fnoft  terrible  barren  woody  Mountains,  which, 
give  great  Surprize  to  a  Stranger.  We  travel  from  the 
Head  of  this  great  Pool,  along  the  Banks  (which  make 
the  Foot  of  thefe  Mountains),  for  near  12  Miles,  and 
through  a  Road  made  with  the  greateft  Difficulty,  by 
blowing  up  monftrous  Rocks,  which  in  many  Places 
hang  {looping  over  PaiTengers,  and  higher  than  Houfes, 
fo  that  'tis  a  little  frightful  to  pafs  by  them.  We  find 
many  of  thefe  dreadful  Pafles,  with  Water  dripping 
out  from  every  Part  of  the  fractured  Rock.  Thefe, 
are  intermixed  with  Woods  of  Oak,  Birch,  white 
Poplars,  and  Nut-trees,  with  Springs  of  Water,  and 
many  curious  Plants,  peculiar  to  thofe  mountainous 
Places.  We  then  came  to  a  fmall  and  pitiful  Houfe 
of  Entertainment  (yet  the  only  one  on  the  Road), 
called  the  General's  Hut  ;  becaufe  General  Wade 
lived  there,  when  he  commanded  the  Forces  in  making 
thefe  moft  furprifing  and  ufeful  Roads  through  the 
Highlands  of  Scotland. 

VOL,  IV.  M  Before 


A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Befare  we  came  to  this  Place,  we  had  a  View,  on 
the  other  Side  this  Loch,  of  the  Ruins  of  the  famous 
Caftle  of  Urqubart^  formerly  confifting  of  feven  great 
Towers,  faid  to  be  built  by  the  Cumins,  and  demo- 
lifhed  by  King  Edward  I.  about  four  Miles  to  ihe 
Weftward  of  which  Caftle,  on  the  Top  of  a  very  hi^h 
Hill,  two  Miles  perpendicular,  is  a  Lake  of  cold  frefh 
Water,  about  30  Fathom  in  Length,  and  fix  in 
Breadth  ;  no  Stream  running  to  it,  or  from  it.  It 
could  never  yet  be  fathomed  ;  and  at  all  Seafons  of  the 
Year  it  is  equally  full,  and  never  freezes. 

After  we  leave  the  General's  Hut,  we  are  fur- 
prifed  by  a  Parcel  of  almoit  naked  Boys  and  Girls, 
coming,  upon  Sight  of  us,  down  fome  craggy  Rocks 
of  a  Mountain,  to  fell  us  Chortle-berries^  or  the  Vac- 
cinia nigra  of  Virgil^  which  they  gather  in  almoft 
every  Part  of  thefe  Mountains  in  prodigious  Quan- 
tities. They  fold  to  every  one  of  us  near  a  Mutcnkin 
for  a  Baubee  (i.  e.  a  Pint  for  an  Half-peny)  ;  and  they 
chiefly  live  on  the  Fruit,  when  they  are  gathering  them 
on  the  Mountains.  By  means  of  the  great  Stain  they 
give,  their  Mouths  and  Hands  are  dyed  in  a  frightful 
manner.  Thefe  are  agreeable  Fruit  to  the  Tafte,  and 
are  accounted  very  dtringent  by  the  Country-people  ; 
but  the  Aftringency  lies  all  in  die  black  Skin,  and  not 
in  the  Pulp  :  the  King's  Soldiers  ate  them  for  the 
Bloody-flux,  when  encamped  at  Fort  Augustus  in 

*745* 

After  a  little  Way  riding  from  this  Hut,  we  are 
prefented,  on  our  Right,  with  a  moft  remarkable  Cata- 
ract, or  Fall  of  Water,  more  than  20  Yards  high  :  it 
being  a  fmall  River,  obftrucled  by  vaft  Rocks  on  the 
Edge  of  a  Mountain,  and  fo  lets  itfelf  into  the  Loch, 
at  the  Foot  of  this  Mountain. 

We  leave  the  Loch  hereabouts  on  our  Right,  and 
travel  over  continued  Mountains,  covered  with  Woods 
and  Rocks,  and  fee  Lcchnefs  no  more,  till  we  come  to 
Fort  Auguflus  3  but  pafs  by  feveral  fmaller  Lochs,  that 

are 


ScotL  GREAT  BRITAIN.          243 

are  feparated  from  the  grand  one  by  vaft  Mountains ; 
we  alfo  meet  with  feveral  (mail  Rivers  (abounding 
more  with  Rocks  than  Water),  which,  together  with, 
the  Woods  and  high  Mountains,  give  great  Variety 
and  Entertainment  to  a  contemplative  Traveler. 

Laftly,  when  we  have  afcended  the  higheft  Moun- 
tains, and  juft  going  to  defcend,  we  are  moft  fuddenly 
and  agreeably  furprifed  with  a  Valley,  and   the  Loch- 
end,  clofe  to  which  was  a  grand  Building  (but  now  in 
Ruins)  called  Fort  Auguftus  ;  and  within  two  or  three 
Stones- throw,  upon  a  more  rifing  Ground,  is  another 
large  Building,  which  was  called  the   Old  Barracks^ 
burnt  by  the  Rebels.     The  Town  of  Kiliwbimen  is 
only  a  few  earthen  miferable  Huts,   thatched  with 
Heath  or  Heather,  and  is  fituatedjnear  the  Old  Bar- 
racks.    Juft  by  here,  and  at  the  End  of  the  Loch,  in  a 
very  large  Hollow,  or  Sort  of  Amphitheatre  (being 
chiefly  furrounded  with  Hills),    is  placed  our  Camp, 
having  a  River  winding  through,  and  emptying  itfelf 
into  the  Loch  ;  but  the  Water  is  of  a  brown  Colour, 
as  it  is  in  the  Loch  itfelf ;  it  purges  Perfons  not  ufed  to 
drink  it ;  but,  among  the  Natives,  it  is  accounted  the 
bell  of  Water,  as  is  alfo  the  River  Nefs,  at  Invernefi  : 
but  our  Soldiers  always  complained  of  its  giving  them 
the  Flux,  with  which  Diftemper  we  had  great  Num- 
bers afflicted  here.     Several  curious  People  told  me, 
that  this  Loch  (any  more  than  the  River  Nefs)  never 
freezes.     They  alfo  informed  me,   that 'it  abounded 
much  in  Sulphur,  and  was  the  lighteft  Water  in  Scot- 
land.    The  Road  from  hence  to  Fort  William  is  30 
Miles,  quite  in  a  Valley,  as  it  is  from  Invernefs  to  this 
Place,  and  full  of  Lochs  all  the  Way,  from  Sea  to  Sea, 
Eaft  and  Weft.  This  Valley  is  fuppofecf  to  be  near  2O 
Feet  lower  than  the  ^ea  ;  and  there  is  not  above  eight 
Miles  of  the  Way  fr  >m  Jnvernefs  to  Fort  William,  but 
what  is  either  Lo.  h;,  or  Rivers. 
Thus  far  my  Friend. 

M  2  To 


244  A  TOUR  tiro  Scotl. 

To  whofe  Account  it  will  be  proper  to  add  the 
following  brief  Hiftory  of  the  great  Work  performed 
by  the  late  General  Wade,  in  relation  to  the  new-made 
Roads  into  and  through  the  Highlands  of  Scotland, 
which  have  fo  much  altered,  and  will  more  and  more 
alter  for  the  better,  the  Face  of  this  Part  of  the  united 
Kingdom. 

Jn  the  Year  1724.,  General  ffiade,  by  Commiflion 
from  his  Majefty  King  George  I.  proceeded  to  the 
Highlands,  to  inform  himfelf  of  fome  Irregularities 
then  complained  of.  Thefe  Highlands,  as  has  been 
before  obferved,  are  more  than  one  Half  of  Scotland, 
compofed  of  Mountains,  which  rife  one  above  ano- 
ther, and  extend  from  Dunbarton,  near  the  Mouth  of 
the  Clydfy  to  the  North-part  of  the  Ifland,  above  200 
Miles  in  Length,  and  from  50  to  more  than  100  in 
Breadth.  The  little  V  allies  between  are  divided  from 
one  another  by  barren  Rocks,  Bogs,  and  Precipices. 
Hence  the  Highlanders,  being  much  hindered  from 
Commeice  and  Acquaintance  with  the  more  cultivated 
Part  of  the  Country,  were  likely  to  continue  for  ever 
attached  to  their  antient  barbarous  Cuftoms  and  Man- 
ners, unlefs  fome  Expedient  were  found  to  introduce 
Trade  and  Incuftry  among  them. 

The  General  travelled  over  the  moft  difficult  and 
dangerous  PafTages  of  the  Mountains,  and  in  his  Pro- 
greis  projected  the  bold  Undertaking  of  making  fmooth 
and  fpacious.  Roads  in  that  Heap  of  Confuiion.  In 
1726  he  began  the  Work,  which  he  completed  in 
1737  ;  employing  therein  only  500  of  the  Soldiers 
quartered  in  Scotland,  in  the  Summer  Seafon,  under 
Officers  properly  appointed.  Thefe  Roads  are  all  now 
fit  for  Wheel-carriages,  or  a  Train  of  Artillery,  being 
about  250  Miles  in  Length,  and  from  20  to  24  Feet 
in  Breadth,  including  Aqueducts  and  Side-drains,  that 
preferve  them  from  the  Injuries  of  violent  Rains,  fo 
frequent  among  the  Mountains.  Where  the  Hills  per- 
mit, they  run  in  Right-lines,  notwithftanding  the 

Rocks 


Scot!.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  245 

Rocks  and  Bogs  which  often  interpofed.  The  huge 
Stones,  raifed  out  of  the  Ground  by  Engines,  are  let 
up  by  the  Road's  Side,  and  ferve  as  Guides  in  deep 
Snows ;  and  at  every  five  meafured  Miles  are  Pillars 
to  inform  the  Traveller  how  far  he  has  proceeded. 
The  Roads  enter  the  Mountains  at  two  different  Parts 
of  the  Low-country  ;  one  at  CrieJ\  14  Miles  North 
of  Stirling^  where  the  Romans  left  off  their  Works, 
yet  vifible  ;  and  the  other  at  Dunkeld,  10  Miles  North 
of  Perth.  The  firft,  85  Miles  in  Length,  leads  to 
Fort  AuguftuS)  at  the  Weft- end  of  Lochnefs^  and  pro- 
ceeds to  Glenoimond,  where  the  Hollow  is  fo  narrow, 
and  the  Mountains  on  each  Side  fo  high,  that  the  Sun 
is  feen  but  two  or  three  Hours  in  the  longeft  Day. 

In  this  Vale  was  difcovered,  upon  the  Removal  of  a 
Rock,  a  Roman  Urn,  with  Afhes  and  Bones. 

From  Glenalmond  the  Road  continues  to  Abberfaldy\ 
where,  by  a  Bridge,  it  crofles  the  River  Tay,  on  to  Dal- 
nachardock,  and  there  falls  in  with  the  Road  which 
enters  the  Hills  of  Dunkeld^  and  thence  over  the  Hills 
of  Drummochter  to  Dalwkiney,  where  it  branches  into> 
two ;  one  to  the  North-weft,  through  Garva  Moor^ 
and  over  the  Coriarack  Mountains  to  Fort  Auguftus-9 
the  other  due  North  to  the  Barracks  of  Ruthven  and 
Invernefs.  Fort  Augujlus  ftands  in  the  very  Centre  of 
the  Highlands,  half-way  between  Fort  William  on.  tha 
Weft-coaft,  and  Fort  George  at  Invernefs  on  the  Eaft> 
coaft  ;  and  the  Road  pafles  by  the  Sides  of  the  Lakes, 
NefS)  Oik)  and  Lochy,  which  divide  the  Northern  from 
the  Southern  Highlands.  From  Invernefs  to  Fort 
William  is  60  meafured  Miles,  good  Part  cut  through 
folid  Rock,  but  now  the  moft  beautiful  Road  in  the 
Kingdom,  and  promotes  a  Trade  from  Ireland  to  the 
Eaft  and  North  of  Scotland. 

It  would  be  needlefs  to  enumerate  the  various  Dif- 
ficulties that  occurred  in  the  making  of  thefe  Roads $. 
therefore  I  fhall  mention  but  two  or  three, 

M  3  When 


246  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

When  the  Miners  blafted  with  Gun-powder  the 
black  Rock  on  the  Side  of  Lochnefs,  they  were  obliged 
to  hang  by  Ropes  till  they  bored  into  it.  This  Lake 
is  in  itfelf  a  Cuiiofity,  being  a  beautiful  natural  Canal, 
21  Miles  in  Length,  with  the  Rocks  and  Mountains 
rifing  from  the  Water's  Edge.  It  lies  in  a  dired  Line, 
being  above  a  Mile  in  Length,  130  Fathom  deep,  and 
was  never  known  to  freeze.  For  the  Space  of  12 
Miles,  along  the  Side  of  the  Lake,  the  Road  forms  an 
agreeable  Terrafs,  from  whence  the  Lake  is  feen  to 
either  End,  and  along  the  three  Lakes,  Nefs,  O/V/£,  and 
Locby,  in  feveral  Places,  the  Road  is  fe&ured  from  the 
Precipices  by  Walls  two  or  three  Feet  high. 

The  Later -finhy  Road  runs  along  the  Side  of  Locby 
for  nine  Miles  together,  on  Rocks  which  project  over 
the  Water  formerly  impafTable,  and  brought  to  their 
prefent  Evennefs  chiefly  by  the  Force  of  Gun-powder. 

The  Road  over  the  Ceriarack  Mountain,  which  is 
above  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  in  perpendicular  Height,  is 
carried  on,  upon  the  South  Declivity,  by  17  Windings, 
each  about  70  or  80  Yards  in  Length,  and  all  fup- 
ported  on  the  Lower-fide,  and  at  the  Turnings,  with 
Stone  Walls  of  10  and  15  Feet  high  ;  by  which  the 
Afcent  is  eafier  for  Wheel-carriages,  than  that  of 
Highgate*  The  Pafs  of  Sxvgtwgb,  on  the  North- 
fide  of  this  Mountain,  is  a  deep  Bottom  between  two 
fteep  Hills  exceeding  high,  joined  by  two  dry  Arches, 
and  a  Wall  of  Supportment. 

There  are  40  Stone  Bridges  built  upon  thefe  Roads ; 
the  moft  confiderable  are  thofe  of  Gary  and  Tumble,  of 
fingular  Arches,  upwards  of  50  Feet  Space,  over  rapid 
Rivers,  wh-ch  in  Time  of  Floods  roll  down  Stones  of 
Jiionftrous  Size  ;  thofe  of  Feicklaw  and  Ferrlgig^  over 
a  great  Torrent  which  forms  the  famous  Cafcade  of 
Fyers,  within  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  of  Locbnefs  ;  thefe 
are  both  raifed  on  fmgle  Arches,  each  upwards  of  40 
Feet  Span  ;  St.  George's  Bridge,  at  Garva  Moor^  over 
the  River  Spey9  which  has  two  Arches,  of  40  Feet 

each : 


ScotL         GREAT  BRITAIN.  247 

each  :  the  Pier  refts  upon  an  Ifland,  in  the  Midft  of 
the  River,  and  the  whole  Length  of  the  Bridge  is 
about  150  Feet  ;  the  high  Bridge  over  the  River 
Spaytr,  which  runs  at  the  Foot  of  two  very  fteep 
Hills  over  furprifing  Rocks,  where,  at  the  loweft,  the 
Water  is  18  Feet  deep,  and  in  Floods  rifes  to  near 
50  j  it  has  three  Arches,  the  middlemoft  near  50  Feet 
Span,  founded  upon  Rocks :  from  the  Top  to  the 
ufual  Level  of  the  River,  is  70  Feet ;  the  other  Arches 
are  30  Feet  each,  upon  dry  Ground,  at  low  Water. 
The  Road  defcends  a  great  Way  down  in  Traverfes 
from  each  Side  of  the  River,  and  the  Bridge  is  200 
Feet  in  Length,  over  a  Chafm  frightful  to  behold. 
Laftly,  Tay  Bridge,  the  only  one  upon  the  River  Tay  : 
this  is  built  of  Free-ftone,  and  the  Work  extremely 
well  executed  \  it  confiih  of  five  Arches ;  the  Middle 
one  is  60  Feet  Span;  the  Piers  are  founded  upon  Piles, 
and  bound  with  ftrong  Frames  of  Oak.  The  whole 
Length  is  370  Feet,  and,  in  the  Opinion  of  good 
Judges,  is  a  mod  beautiful  and  ufeful  Stru&ure.  It 
has  this  Infcription  :. 

Mirare 

Vlam  hanc  Militarem 

"Ultra  Romanes  Terminos 

M.  Pajjuum  CCL  hac  iliac  extenfam, 

Tefquis  et  Paludlbus  infultantem, 

Per  Rufyes  Montefque 

Et  indignanti  Tavo, 
Ut   cernis,    inftratam : 
Opus  hoc  arduum  fua 
Et  decennali   Milltum   Opera^ 
Anno  &r&  Cbriftlarue  1733,  per  fecit  G.  WADE,. 
Copiarum  in  Scotia  Prafettus. 
Ecce  quantum  valeant 
Georgii  Secundi  Aufplda. 

M  4  In 


24S  .^TOUR/W          Scot!. 

In  Englijh  thus : 

Behold  with  Wonder  this  Military  Way,  extended,  by 
various  PaJJ'es,  250  Miles  beyond  the  Roman  Limits-., 
triumphing  over  Fens  and  Morajjes ;  levelled  through 
Rocks  and  Mountains  ;  and  carried  on  as  you  now  fee 
it,  in  Spite  of  the  River  Tay.  This  arduous  Work^ 
G.  WADE,  Commander  of  the  Forces  in  Scotland, 
brought  to  Perfection,  by  his  great  'Judgment  and  ' 
IO  Tears  Labour  of  his  Soldiers,  in  the  Tear  of  our 
Lord  1733.  Of  fuch  mighty  Efficacy  are  the  Royal 
Aujpices  of  George  II. 

The  Eafe  and  Convenience  of  thefe  Roads  has  in- 
duced feveral  of  the  Highland  Gentlemen  to  make 
good  Ways,  at  their  own  Expence,  from  their  Homes 
to  the  main  Road  ;  and  where  there  were  nothing  but 
Turf- huts  for  100  Miles  together,  there  are  now,  at 
10  or  12  Miles  Diftance  from  each  other,  Houfes  of 
Stone  and  Lime  for  the  Accommodation  of  Tra- 
vellers. The  Englijh  Drovers,  who  ufed  to  attend  the 
Fairs  of  Cattle  on  the  Borders  of  the  Highlands,  now 
go  into  the  Heart  of  the  Country ;  and  the  Soldiers, 
who  were  many  of  them  Hufbandmen,  taught  the 
Inhabitants  a  better  Manner  of  tilling  their  Ground  ; 
and  many  other  Advantages  have  accrued  to  the  High- 
landers, and  the  Kingdom  in  general. 

This  Work,  though  fo  ftupendous  and  beneficial  as 
might  have  well  added  Luftre  to  the  Roman  Name, 
was  effected  by  a  Handful  of  Men,  comparatively 
fpeaking,  and  at  a  fmall  Expence.  Thefe  Men,  who 
were  Soldiers,  were  commanded  by  their  proper 
Officers,  and  received  6  d.  a  Day  over  and  above  their 
Pay;  a  Corporal  had  8^.  a  Serjeant  i  s.  and  a  Sub- 
altern 25.  6<J.  With  the  fame  Encouragement  much 
might  be  done  in  South  Britain,  where  a  Thoufandth- 
part  of  the  Labour  is  hardly  wanting  to  make  the 
Roads  complete ;  and  the  Example  here  exhibited  is 
a  Demonftration,  beyond  a  Poflibility  of  Contra- 
diction, 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

dicTion,  of  what  might  be  effe&ed,   were  the  fame 
Means  made  ufe  of  under  the  like  Direction. 

When  we  are  over  the  Bridge  of  Invernefs,  we  enter 
that  which  we  truly  call  the  North  of  Scotland,  and' 
others  the  North  Highlands  ;  in  which  are  feveraL 
diftincl  Shires,  but  cannot  call  for  a  particular  De- 
fcription,  be  ajjfe  they  are  all  one  undiftinguilhed- 
Range  of  Mountains  and  Woods,  overfpread  with  vaft 
and  almoft  uninhabited  Rocks  and  Steeps,  filled  with 
Deer  innumerable  of  various  Kinds;  among  which; 
are  fome  of  thole  the  Antients  calle  1  Harts  and  Roe" 
bucks,  vyith  overgrown  Stags  and  H  nds  of  the  Red- 
deer  Kind  ;  whofe  Flefti  eats  extiemely  welL 

Before  I  defcnbe,  in  my  own  Way,  this  frightfuf 
Country,  it  is  fit  to  obferve,  that  Scotland  may  be  di- 
vided into  four  Diftr;6ts,  which  1  have  not  feeu  any  of 
our  Geographers  do  before  me  ;  yet,  I  believe,  may 
not  be  an  improper  Meafurerrent  for  fuch  as  would* 
form  a  juft  Idea  of  the  Whole  in  their  Minds: 

1.  The  South-land,  or  that  Part  of  Scotland  South 
©f  the  River  Tay,  drawing  a  Line  from  the  Tay,  about 
Perth,  to  Lochlomond,  and  down  to  Dunbarton^  and 
the  B<mkof  CV*. 

2.  The  Middle,  or  Midland,  being  all  the  Country 
from  the  Tay  and   the  Loughlomond,    North  to  the 
Lake  of  Nefs  and  Aber,  including  a  long  Slope  to  the 
South,  taking  in  the  Weftern  Highland  of  Argyle  and; 
Lorn>  and  the  Ifles  of  Ijla  and  Jura* 

3.  The  Northland,   being  all  the  Country  beyond4 
jfnvfrnefsj  and  the  Laugh  <  r  River  Ncfs,  North,  draw- 
ing the  Line  over   the  narrow  Space  of  Glengaty,  be- 
tween the  Nefs  and  Aber^  and  bounded  by  them  botte 
from  the  Eaftern  to  the  WeRern  Sea. 

4.  The  IflandS)  being  all  the  Weftern  and  Northern 
Iflands,  the  Hebrides,  Sky,  Orkneys,  and  other  Ifles  ot? 

M  5  According 


250  A  T  O  U  R  thro 

According  to*  this  Defcription,  having  pafled  the 
Bridge  over  the  River  Nefs^  I  am  now  entered  on  the 
third  Divifion  of  Scotland,  called  the  Northland.  Here 
are  not  only  the  heft  Hawks  of  all  Kinds,  but  Eagles 
in  great  Numbers,  which  prey  upon  the  young  Fawns 
when  they  fall  firft,  and  upon  Wild-fowl,  with  which 
this  Part  of  the  Country  abounds. 

The  Rivers  and  Lakes  alfo  in  this  Country  are  fo 
prodigioufly  full  of  Salmon',  that  it  is  hardly  credible 
what  Quantities  are  taken  in  the  Sfeyy  the  Nairn^  the 
Nefs,  and  other  Rivers  hereabout. 

The  feveral  Counties  beyond  the  Nefs,  are,  Rofst 
Sutherland^  Strathnavern,  Caithnefi-  and,  beyond  thofe, 
the  lilands  of  Orkney  and  Shetland. 

Sutherland  is  called  the  i:hire  of  Dornoch,  from  the 
chief  Town  of  the  Province,  called  Dornoch,  a  Royal 
Burgh,  noted  for  a  Caftle  belonging  to  the  Earl  of 
Sutherland  \  for  its  Cathedral  Church  for  the  Diocefe 
of  GaitbtiffS)  which  once  was  Part  of  this  Shire,  and 
for  its  four  arnual  Fairs.  It  has  three  lerrarkable 
ForeOs,  befides  abundance  of  other  Woods,  which  af- 
ford pltafant  Hunting  .and  Fowling.  One  Sort  of 
Bird  is  peculiar  to  this  Country,  called  Knug,  which 
refembles  a  Parrot,  and  digs  its  Neft  in  the  Trunks  of 
Oak,  with  its  Beiik.  There  are  about  60  Lakes  in, 
this  County:  the  greateft  is  Locbftin^  14  Miles  in 
Length  ;  in  many  of  them  are  lilands,  very  pleafant 
for  Summer  Habitations.  In  the  Ifle  cf  Brora  the 
Earl  of  Sutherland  has  an  H<  ufe,  which  he  makes  ufe 
cf  when  he  comes  to  hunt  Deer,  which  abound  in  it  ; 
and  in  fume  of  the  Lake  and  Rivers  cf  thi*  Crunty,. 
as  well  as  in  the  Rivets  of  Aberdeen  and  Rofs,  are- 
found  Pearls  of  great  Value.  In  (hort,  this  Shire  fo 
abounds  with  Lakes,  Rivers,  and  Bays,  that  there  is 
fcarce  a  Farm  in  the  wheie  County,  but  is  wafhed 
cither  with  frefh  or  fait  Water,  fo  that  the  Inhabitants 
have  Store  of  Fifh  and  Fowl.  The  Bear  or  B;g  in 
this  County  is  reckoned  excellent.  It  has  alfo  Silver 

Mines, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  251 

Mines,  and  excellent  Iron  Mines,  Coal  Mines,  and 
Quarries  of  Free-ftone,  but  much  neglected.  It  has 
many  coremodious  Harbours  for  Ships  to  export  its 
Commodities  ;  which  are  Cod,  Salmon,  fait  Beef, 
Wool,  Skins.  Hides,  Tallow  Butter,  Cheefe,  &c. 
The  Bays  and  Coafts  alfo  abound  with  Seals,  have 
fometi>nes  Whales,  and  Shell  fifh  of  all  Sorts.. 

Trie  Earl  of  Sutherland  has  a  Caftle  beyond  /;> 
•vernefs,  called  Dunrobln^  fituate  on  the  Eaftern  Shore- 
In  the  Gardens  of  this  Seat,  though  fo  Northerly,  Saf- 
fron grows  very  we  1,  and  comes  to  Maturity. 

Strath  .aver n  is  P.irt  of  Sutherland,  and  derives  its 
Name  from  Strath^  a  Valley,  fituated  on  the  River 
Navern^  which  runs  through  it.  The  Country  is 
mountainous,  and  formerly  was  noted  for  breeding 
greater  Numbers  of  ravenous  Wolves  than  any  other 
in  Scotland.  The  Bays  and  Rivers  are  full  of  Fifh  ; 
it  is  very  woody,  and  many  Lakes  are  in  the  Valleys. 
There  are  feveral  Monuments  in  it  of  Victories  gained 
over  the  Dane* ,  particularly  one  at  Enbo>  which  is  a 
Stone  Crofs,  faid  to  be  over  a  Danijb  King*  The  In- 
habitants are  great  Hunters,  and  defpife  thofe  who  are 
not;  fo  that  Venifon  with  them  is  a  common  Difh. 
The  Situation  of  the  Country  not  admitting  of  Towns, 
the  Inhabitants  live  up  and  down  in  frnall  Villages. 
On  the  Northern  Coaft  of  this  County  are  feveral" 
Iflands.  Of  the  many  Lakes,  Lochnavern  and  Lofbyoi 
are  the  iargeft,  and  the  latter  affords  an  Ifland  which  is 
inhabited  in  the  Summer  time.  Bcrwe  and  Tong  are 
the  Places  of  mod  Note  ;  the  latter  the  principal  Seat: 
©f  the  Lord  Rea9  Chief  of  the  Mackays^  who  is  the 
principal  Proprietor  of  Strathnawrn ;  but  holds  it  of* 
the  Earl  of  Sutherland^  to  whole  elu'eft  Son  it  gives  the- 
Title  of  Lord.  The  Family  Name  of  the  Earls  of 
Sutherland- 1*  Sutherland^  to  the  Heirefs  of  which  a  Son- 
of  the  Fioufe  of  Gordon  married,  from  whom  the  prefenfc 
Earl  is  defcended.  They  have  a  long  time  claimed! 
Precedency,  a*  the  firil  Earls  (A  the. Kingdom  j  andt, 
M  6-  irt; 


Jn  order  to  recover  it,  have  reaflumed  their  former 
Name.  They  have  great  Royalties,  and  all  the  Gen- 
tlemen of  Sutherland  hold  of  them.  Lord  Duffus  is 
defcended  of  this  Family.  The  County  has  feveial 
Mountains  of  white  Marble,  as  we  were  told. 

Nor  in  of  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Nefs9  is  the  fa- 
mous Cromertie  Bay,  or  Cromertie  Firth,  noted  for 
being  the  fineft  Harbour,  with  the  leaft  Bufmefs  per- 
haps, of  any  in  Britain.  It  is  15  Miles  long,  and  in 
many  Places  two  Miles  broad  ;  and,  like  Milford 
Haven  in  IVales,  is  able  to  receive  the  Royal  Navy  of 
Great  Britain,  both  to  go  out  and  come  in  with  Safe- 
ty:  but,  fo/  want  of  Trade,  this  noble  Harbour,  which, 
by  Geographers  and  Mariners,  is  called  Port  us  Salutisy 
or  the  Harbour  of  Safety,  is  become  almoft  uielefs. 

The  Shire  of  Cromertie  is  denominated  from  a  Royal 
Burgh,  (landing  upon  the  Firth  of  Cromertie.  The 
Waters  of  Carron  are  celebrated  for  the  Pearls  found 
in  them.  Of  great  Part  of  this  County  the  late  Ear! 
of  Cromertie  was  Proprietor.  The  Straths,  or  Valleys 
upon  the  Water  fide  abound  with  Woods  :  particu- 
larly, upon  the  Hills  is  great  Store  of  all  forts  of  Game; 
alfo  near  dlferig,  upon  the  Waters  of  Braan,  and  oa 
the  Carron,  are  great  Woods  of  Fir. 

Caithnefs  is  divided  from  Sutherland  by  the  Moun- 
tain Ord,  and  a  Trait  of  Mountains  running  from  it  as- 
far  as  Knock  fin. 

Some  People  tell  us,  they  have  Lead,  Copper,  and 
Iron,  in  this  Part  of  Scotland ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  be- 
lieve it ;  but  it  feems  referved  for  a  future  and  more 
induftrious  Age  to  fearch  into  it.  Should  a  Time 
come,  when  thefe  hidden  Treafures  of  the  Earth  {hall 
be  difcovered  and  improved,  this  Part  of  Scotland  would 
be  no  longer  efteemed  poor  ;  for  fuch  a  Production 
would  foon  change  the  Face  of  Things,  bring  Wealth 
and  Commerce  to  it,  fill  the  Harbours  with  Ships,  the 
Towns  with  People,  and,  by  confumingthe  Provifions, 
cccafion  the  Soil  to  be  cultivated*  the  Fifli  cured,  the 

Cattle 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Cattle  con  fumed  at  Home,  and  thereby  diffufeProfperi- 
ty  all  around  them. 

Our  Writers  have  reprefented  the  Inhabitants  here 
wild  and  barbarous  :  they  were  fo  formerly,  perhaps ; 
but  we  fee  the  Mackenzie*,  Macleods,  Sutherland*,  M^ 
Leans  ^  McDonalds,  Gordons,  McKays,  Macpherfonsj 
M.'-lntojbes,  and  others  fprung  from  thence,  equally  ac- 
complifhed  for  the  Court  or  Camp. 

It  muft  be  owned,  here  are  but  few  Towns ;  the 
People  live,  difperfed  in  Clans,  under  a  kind  of  Vant- 
age, fubmitting  to  their  Lords  as  their  lawful  Mon- 
archs,  and  many  of  them  acknowlege  no  other;  tho* 
this  too  is  in  a  manner  got  over,  and  the  Clans  are  lefs 
dependent  on  their  Chiefs,  than  they  ufed  to  be,  by 
virtue  of  an  A6t  of  Parliament  made  for  that  Purpofe. 

Their  Employment  is  chiefly  Hunting,  for  their 
Food  ;  though  they  alfo  breed  large  Quantities  of  Black 
Cattle,  with  which  they  pay  their  Lairds,  or  Leaders, 
the  Rent  of  the  Lands.  Thefe  Cattle  are  drtven  an- 
nually to  England  to  be  fold,  and  are  bought  up  chiefly 
in  the  Counties  of  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  and  EJJex  j  as  I 
have  mentioned  in  feveral  Places  in  my  Tour. 

There  are  many  little  Towns  and  Villages,  befules 
Gentlemens  Scats,  in  Caitbnefs,  as  far  North  as  it  is: 
but  the  People  are  more  addicted  to  good  Living  with- 
in-doors,  than  to  fhewy  Edifices,  or  fine  Seats.  The 
belt  Houfe  in  it  is  Caftle  Sinclair ;  fo  called  from  the 
Name  of  Lord  Sinclair,  whofe  Seat  it  is  ;  and  they 
have  feveralot1  er  Caftles  in  the  County.  The  Lord 
Sinclair,  of  Raven/heugk  in  Fife,  is  Chief  of  the  Name. 
His  Anceftors  formerly  pofTefled  Orkney  and  Shetland^ 
and  were  allied  to  the  Royal  Family  of  Denmark.  But 
one  of  the  Family  (Squandered  away  ms  Eita.te,  and, 
amon£  the  relrr  thefe  lilands  j  and  got  for  it  the  in- 
gjoripus  Title  of  William  the  Wajler.  The  chief 
Town  and  Royal  Burgh  in  Caitbnejs  \s  Wick,  m  Wei <:by 
whence  it  is  called  the  Shire  of  Weicb.  This  iWn 
lies  conveniently  for  Trade ;  and  has  a  good  Harbour 

for 


254  ^f  T  O  U  R  tiro  Scot!. 

for  Ships  on  the  Eaftern  CoafK  It  is  the  Refidenceof 
the  Sheriff,  or  his  Officer. 

Thurfo)  another  Town  with  a  good  Harbour,  lies 
alfo  en  the  Northern  Coaft.  in  a  little  Bay.  Weft 
from  hence  IUM  the  River  of  Fo  J,  st  the  Mouth  of 
which  there  is  .alfo  a  little  Town  of  the  fame  Name.. 
The  Ides  of  Orkney  and  Shetland?  I  refer  to  the  Ac- 
court  of  the  Ifles. 

An<!  I  (h  ill  oi>ferve,  once  for  all,  that  I  am  the  more 
particular  in  my  Defcriptionof  thefe  Northern  Parts  of 
Scotland,  becaufe  ihey  art  Jeaft  known,  and  lefs  valued 
anc' efteemed,  than  they  deferve. 

This  Country  is  furrounded  wifh  the  Sea,  and  thofe 
two  great  Inlets  of  Water,  mentioned  above,  called 
the  Nefs.  and  Aber :  fo  that  it  forms  a  Peninfu?a,  by. 
means  of  that  fmali  Neck  of  Land  of  about  Eight 
Miles  long,  which  Mr.  Camden  calls  the  Garrow  or 
Gkngar  rough?  others  Glengary.  Were  it  not  for  this, 
the  whole  Divifion  of  the  Northland  would  be  a  diftincl; 
Ifland,  feparated  from  all  the  reft  of  Great  Britain,  as 
effectually  as  the  Orkneys?  or  the  Sky,?  are  fron* 
this. 

That  .Part  which  lies  to  the  Eaft,  is  open  to  the 
Sea,  without  Cover  i  the  Weft  and  the  North  are, 
in  a  manr  er,  furrounded  with  Out  works^  as  a  De- 
fence to  break  off  the  raging  Ocean  from  the  North  ; 
for  the  Wcftern  Iflards  on  one  Side,  and  the  Ork- 
neys on  the  other,  lie  as  fo  many  advanced  Fortifica- 
tions, or  Redoubts,  to  combat  that  Enemy  at  a  Di£- 
tance. 

From  Dunrobin  Caftle  you  have  nothing  of  Note 
offers  itfelf,  either  by  Sea  or  Land,  but  an  extended 
Shore,  lying  North  and  South,  without  Towns,  and 
without  Harbours  ;  and  as  there  are  none  of  the  for- 
mer to  be  found,  fo  none  of  the  latter  are  necek- 
fary. 

The  Land  thus  extended  lies  Noith  and  Sru  h  to 
Dung/by  head?  which  is  the  utnicft  Extent  of  it,  on  the 

Eaft 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  255- 

Eaft- fide  of  Britain  North,  and  is  diftant  from  Cro- 
mertie  18  Leagues  North.  From  this  Point  of  Dingfiy 
or  Dungfby  bead,  as  I  obferved  before  of  Buchan  and 
Winterton,  the  Sailors  take  their  Diftances,  and  keep 
their  Accounts  in  their  going  farther  North  ;  e.  g. 

From  this  Point  of  Dungjby-head  to  the  Fair-ifle, 
or  Faro,  which  is  the  firft  of  Shetland^  or  the  lafi  of 
the  Orkneys  (call  it  which  you  will  ;  for  it  lies  between 
both),  is  25  Leagues,  or  75  Miles. 

From  the  fame  DungJby-headtoSumbitrgh  head,  that 
is,  to  Shetland^  is  32  Leagues,  or  96  Miles,  and  to 
Lerwick  Fort  in  Shetland  j  10  Miles. 

Thus,  from  Buchannejs  to  &umburgh-bead  in  Shetland} 
is  47  Leagues. 

And  from  Wintertonnefs  near  Yarmouth  on  the  Coaft 
of  Norfolk,  to  Buchannejs,  on  the  Coaft  of  Aberdeen,  is 
juft  100  Leagues.  So  from  WinUrtm  to  Shetland  are 
147  Leagues,  or  431  M  les. 

J  am  now  to  obferve,  t!  at  we  are  here  at  the  ex- 
trerneft  Point  of  the  Ifl'.md  of  Great  Britain',  and  that 
he;e  the  Land  bears  away  Weft,  leaving  a  large 
Streight,  or  Sea,  which  they  call  Pifttand  or  Pent/and* 
Firth,  and  which  divides  between  the  Ifland  of  Great 
Britain,  and  the  Ifles  of  the  Orkneys ;  a  Paftage  broad 
and  fair;  for  it  is  not  lefs  than  five  Leagues  over,  and 
has  a  fufficient  Depth  of  Water  for  Ships  to  fail  in  : 
but  the  Tides  are  fo  fierce,  fo  uncertain,  and  the 
Gufties  and  fudden  Squalls  of  Wind  fo  frequent,  that 
very  few  Merchant  (hips  rare  to  venture  through  it; 
and  the  Dutch  Eaft  India  Ships,  which  come  North 
about  (as  it  is  called)  in  their  Return  from  India,  keep 
all  farther  off,  and1  choofe  to  come  by  lair  if  e,  in  the 
Paflage  between  the  Iflands  of  Orkney  and  Shetland-^ 
whither  they  generally  fend  their  Men  of  War  to  meet* 
thtm,  being  lure  of  not  miffing  them  in  fo  narrow  a 
Paflage. 

But  the  PaFage  here  is  much  b-oader,  be'ng  at  Icaft 
lime  Leagues  horn  Noah  Randjha,  the  fartheft  liland 

of 


A  TOUR  thro  ScotL 

of  the  Orkneys,  to  Fair-ijle,  and  five  more  from  Fair- 
ijle  to  Shetland ;  fo  that  it  is  14  Leagues  clear  opea 
Sea  between  the  Orkneys  and  Shetland,  with  only  a 
{mall  Ifland  in  the  Way,  which  has  nothing  dangerous 
about  it. 

In  the  PaflTage  between  the  Land's-end  of  Britain^ 
and  the  Orkneys,  is  a  fmall  Ifland,  which  our  Mariners 
call  Stroma,  Mr.  Camden,  and  others,  Sowna ;  and  is 
much  fpoken  of,  as  dangerous  for  Ships  :  but  I  fee  no> 
room  to  record  any  thing  of  that  kind,  any  more  than 
the  Report,  that  it  is  haunted  by  Witches  and  Spirits,, 
which  draw  Ships  on  Shore  to  their  Misfortune. 

At  Dungjby-kead  is  the  moft  Northerly  Land  of 
Great  Britain  ;  where,  in  the  Month  of  June,  after  a 
clear  Day,  we  could  fee  to  read  the  fmalleft  Print,  and 
to  write  diftin&ly,  all  Night  long,  without  the  Help  of 
Candle. 

No  Wonder  the  antient  Mariners,  be  they  Phcent- 
cian,  or  Carthaginian,  who  knew  nothing  of  the  Mo- 
tion of  the  heavenly  Bodies,  when  they  were  driven 
thus  far,  were  furprifed  to  find  they  had  loft  the  fteady 
Rotation  of  Day  and  Night,  which,  they  thought,  had 
fpread  over  the  whole  Globe.  They  imagined  the 
Elyfian  Fields  muft  lie  this  Way,  when  they  found 
they  were  come  already  to  the  Realm  of  everlaftlng. 
Day. 

From  hence  Weft,  we  go  along  the  Shore  of  the 
Firtb,  which  they  call  Pentland,  where  is  the  famous 
Houfe  called  John  a  Grot's.  We  fet  our  Horfes  Feet 
into  the  Sea,  on  the  moft  Northerly  Land,  as  the  Peo- 
ple fay,  of  Britain,  though,  I  think,  Dungfty-head  is  as 
far  North.  It  is  certain,  however,  the  Difference  is 
but  very  fmall,  being  either  of  them  in  the  Latitude  of 
59°  10'  North,  and  Shetland  reaching  above  two  De- 
grees farther.  Tht  Dominions  of  Great-  1'ritain  are  ex- 
tended from  the  lfleof#^£#f,  ntheLathude  of5iDe- 
grees,  to  the  Ifles  of  Unfta  in  Shetland,  in  the  Latitude 
of  61  Degrees  30  Minutes,  being  10  Degrees  or  full: 

6,co 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  257 

600  Miles  in  Length  ;  which  Ifland  of  £/«/?,  or  Unfta, 
being  the  moft  remote  of  the  Ifles  of  Shetland  to  the 
North-eaft,  lies  167  Leagues  from  Wintertonnefs  in 
Norfolk. 

Here  we  found,  however  mountainous  and  wild  the 
Country  appeared,  the  People  extremely  well  furnifhed 
with  Provifions,  efpecially  four  Sorts,  in  great  Plenty  ; 
two  of  them  fufficient  for  a  common  Table,  the  other 
two,  the  Splendor  of  the  greateft: 

1.  Very  good  Bread,  as  well  Oat- bread  as  Wheat, 
though  the  laft  not  fo  cheap  as  the  firft. 

2.  Venifon  exceeding  plentiful,  and  at  all  Seafons, 
young  or  old  ;  which  they  kill  with  their  Guns,  where- 
ever  they  find  it;  for^ there  is  no  Reftraint ;  on  which 
Account  all  the  Highlanders  have  Fire-Arms,  and  be- 
come excellent  Markfmen. 

3.  Salmon  in  fuch  Plenty  as  is  fcarce  credible,  and 
confequently  fo  cheap,  that  to  thofe  who  have  any  Sub- 
fiance  to  buy  with,   it  is  not  worth  giving  themfelves 
any  Trouble  to  catch  it.     This   they  eat  frefh  in  the 
Seafon,  and  at  other  times  cured  by  being  dried  in  the 
Sun,  and  fo  preferved  all  the  Year. 

4.  They  have  no  Want  of  Cows  and  Sheep  ;  but 
the  latter  are  fo  wild,  that  fometimes,   were  they  not 
naturally  ufed  to  flock  together,  they  would  be  much 
harder  to  kill  than  the  Deer. 

From  hence  to  the  Weft  Point  of  the  Paflage  to 
Orkney  is  near  20  Miles,  which  may  be  called  the  End 
of  the  Ifland  of  Britain,  which  faces  diredly  to  the 
North  Pole;  fo  that  the  Tail  of  the  Great  Bear  is  feen 
juft  over  your  Head.  The  Day  is  here,  in  Summer, 
(aid  to  be  18  Hours  long,  the  Sun  remaining  folong 
above  the  Horizon  ;  and  when  he  is  fet,  he  makes  fo 
fmall  an  Arch  of  a  Circle  below  the  Horizon,  that  it 
is  much  above  a  Twilight  all  the  Night ;  but  it  muft 
be  remembered,  that  the  dark  Nights  take  in  Win- 
ter their  Turn,  and  are  protracted  to  as  great  a  De- 

Yet 


258  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Yet  it  is  obfcrvable  here,  that  they  have  more  tem- 
perate Winters,  generally  (peaking,  than  we  have  in 
the  moft  Southerly  Part  of  thelfluiid  ;  and  particularly, 
the  Water  in  fome  of  the  Rivers,  as  in  the  Nefs,  for 
Example,  never  freezes  (as  I  have  before  obferved)  ; 
which  is  accounted  for  from  the  Nearnefs  of  the  Sea> 
which,  filling  the  Air  with.falt  Vapours,  fheaths,  as  it 
were,  the  acute  Particles  of  the  Cold. 

For  the  fame  Reafon  the  Snows  are  not  fo  deep,  nor 
do  they  lie  fo  long  upon  the  Ground,  as  in  other  Places. 
The  Summits  indeed  of  the  high  Hills,  whither  thefe 
Vapours  cannot  reach,  are  continually  covered  with 
Snow,  and  perhaps  have  been  fo  for  many  Ages. 

On  the  moft  inland  Parts  of  this  Country,  efpecially 
in  the  Shire  of  Rofs^  they  have  vaft  Woods  of  Fir- 
trees  for  15  or  20  Miles  in  Length,  not  planted  by 
Mens  Hands,  as  I  have  defcribed  in  the  Southern  Part 
of  Scotland  ;  but  as  they  came  out  of  the  Hands  of 
Nature,  and  nouriftied  by  her  Handmaid,  Time.  If  we 
may  believe  the  Inhabitants,  they  are  large  enough  to 
make  Marts  for  the  biggeft  Ships;  and  yet  are  of  no 
Service,  merely  for  want  of  the  Convenience  of  Water- 
carriage  to  bring  them  away.  But  mechinks,  rather 
than  they  (hould  remain  an  ufelefs  Burden  to  the  Earth, 
they  nrght  be  cut  down  and  burnt;  from  whence 
might  be  drawn  vatt  Quantities  of  Pitch,  Tar,  Refin, 
Turpentine,  &c.  which  is  of  eafier  Carriage,  and 
would  well  anfwer  the  Trouble.  Indeed  an  Attempt 
has  been  made  of  this  kind  for  Pot-a(h  ;  but  it  did  not 
fucceed,  rather  through  the  Fault  of  the  Undertakers 
at  London^  than  any  thing  elfe. 

And  now  leaving  the  Northern  Profpedr,  we  pafs 
the  oppofite  Point  Weft  from  Dungjby  head,  and  which 
the  People  call  Faro-bead^  though  Mr.  Carnden  cal's 
thefe  two  Points  by  two  different  Names:  the  E,»ft 
Point,  or  Dungjby  head^  he  calls  Virvedrum  Promon- 
torium  ;  the  Weit  Point,  or  Faro-beady  he  calls  Sar- 
vedrum  Pro?nontorium» 

Frora 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  25-9 

From  hence  the  vaft  Weftern  Atlantic  Ocean  ap- 
pears ;  for  which  the  Geographers  have  not  agreed 
upon  a  Name,  there  being  no  Country  to  derive  it 
from. 

And  now  we  were  to  turn  our  Faces  South ;  for  as 
to  the  Iflands  of  this^Sea,  which  make  the  fourth  Di- 
vifion  of  Scotland,  as  I  mentioned  before,  I  (hall  take 
notice  of  them  under  one  Head,  in  the  Conclufion  of 
my  Tour. 

In  our  Attempt  to  come  down  to  the  Southward  by 
the  Coaft  of  Tayne,  and  the  Shire  of  Rofs>  wefhould 
have  been  extremely  difappointed,  and  perhaps  have 
been  obliged  to  get  a  Ship  or  Bark,  to  have  carried  us 
round  the  Ifle  of  Sky  into  Locbaber^  had  it  not  been  for 
the  extraordinary  Courtefy  of  fome  of  the  Gentlemen 
of  the  Country. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  unexpe&edly  met  here  fome 
Englljbmen^  who  were  employed  by  Merchants  in  the 
South,  to^-take  and  cure  a  large  Quantity  of  White- 
fifh,  and  afterwards  of  Herrings,  on  account  of  Trade. 
Here  we  had  not  only  the  Civility  of  their  AiTiftance 
and  Accommodation  in  our  Journey,  but  the  Pleafure 
of  feeing  what  Progrefs  they  made  in  their  Under- 
taking. 

As  for  Herrings,  the  Quantity  of  'bem  was  proJi- 
gious.  The  Shoal  was  beginning  to  come,  when  we 
firft  came  to  the  Head  of  Portland-  Firth  ;  and  in  a 
Fortnight's  time  the  Body  of  their  numberiefs  Shoals 
began  to  appear ;  but,  before  we  left  the  Coaft,  you 
would  have  ventured  to  fay  of  the  Sea,  as  they  do  of 
the  River  Tibifcus,  or  Thsefff,  in  Hungary,  that  it  was 
one-third  Water,  and  two-thirds  Fifh.  The  Opera- 
tion of  taking  them  could  hardly  be  called  Fifhing  ;  for 
they  did  little  more  than  dip  for  them  into  the  Water, 
and  take  them  up.  I  make  no  Scruple  to  fay,  that,  if 
there  had  been  10,000  Ships  to  have  loaded  with  them, 
they  might  all  have  been  filled.  The  Fifh  did  not 
feem  to  ftay,  but  patted  on  the  South,  that  they  might 

fupply 


160  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

fupply  other  Parts,  and  make  way  alfo  for  thofe  innu- 
merable Shoals,  which  were  to  come  after. 

Had  the  Quantity  of  White-fifh  been  any  way  pro- 
portioned to  the  Herrings,  there  would,  no  doubt,  have 
been  fuch  Encouragement  to  the  Merchants,  that  they 
would  never  have  given  it  over ;  but  they  found  it 
would  not  fully  anfwer :  not  but  that  there  were  great 
Quantities  of  Cod,  and  the  Fifh  were  fizeable  and 
good  j  but,  as  they  are  taken  with  Hook  and  Line, 
they  could  not  with  any  Difpatch  get  a  fufficient  Load- 
ing, or  lay  up  enough  in  large  Quantities  in  the  Seafon. 

The  Bay  of  Tayne  is  unfafe  for  Ships,  runs  a  great 
Way  up  into  the  Country,  divides  Rofs  from  Suther- 
land, and  ends  at  the  Promontory  of  Tar  bat.  We 
found  the  Town  of  Tayne,  and  fome  other  Villages, 
tolerably  well  inhabited,  and  fome  Trade  alfo,  occa- 
fioned  principally  by  the  Communication  with  the 
Weftern  Iflands,  and  alfo  by  the  Herring  fifhing,  the 
JFifliing- boats  from  other  Parts  often  putting  into  thofe 
Ports  :  for  all  their  Coaft  is  full  of  Loughs  and  Rivers, 
and  other  Openings,  which  make  very  good  Harbours 
for  Shipping  ;  and,  what  is  remarkable,  fome  of  thofe 
Loughs  are  infinitely  full  of  Herrings,  even  where,  as 
they  tell  us,  they  have  no  Communication  with  the 
Sea ;  fo  that  they  muft  have,  in  all  Probability,  been 
put  into  them  alive  by  fome  particular  Hands,  and  have 
multiplied  there,  as  we  find  at  this  time,  if  they  have 
notforne  Communications  with  the  Sea,  which  are  not 
difcovered  to  the  Inhabitants. 

We  could  underftand  no  more  of  what  the  People 
commonly  faid  on  this  Side,  than  if  we  had  been  in 
Morocco  ;  all  the  Remedy  we  hsd  was,  that  we  found 
moft  of  the  Gentlemen  (poke  French,  and  fome  few 
broad  Scrtijb.  It  was  indeed,  upon  other  Accounts, 
much  for  our  Convenience  to  make  the  common  Peo- 
ple believe  we  were  French. 

Should  we  go  about  here  to  give  you  an  Account  of 
the  Religion  of  the  People  in  this  Country,  it  would  be 
an  unpleafant  Work,  and  perhaps  fcarce  gain  Credit. 

You 


Scotl.          GREAT   BRITAIN.          261 

You  would  hardly  believe,  that  in  a  Chriftianlfland,  as 
this  is  faid  to  be,  there  (hould  be  People,  who  know  fo 
little  of  the  ChrifHan  Religion,  as  not  to  diftinguifti 
Sunday  from  a  common  Day  of  Labour,  or  the  Wor- 
fliip  of  God  from  an  ordinary  Meeting  for  Converfa- 
tion.  I  am  unwilling  to  record  fo  ungrateful  a  Truth, 
which  may  in  time  find  Redrefs  ;  but  I  cannot  but  fay, 
that  his  Majefty's  Gift  of  iooo/.  paid  annually  to  the 
Aflembly  of  Scotland,  for  fending  Minifters  or  Miilion- 
aries  for  the  propagating  Chriftian  Knowlege  in  the 
Highlands,  is  certainly  one  of  the  moft  needful  Chari- 
ties that  could  have  been  thought  of,  and  truly  worthy 
of  fo  great  a  Prince  ;  and,  if  prudently  applied,  as  there 
is  Reafon  to  believe  it  is,  may  in  time  difpel  that 
Cloud  of  Ignorance,  that  has  fo  far  overfpread  this  un- 
happy Part  of  the  Country.  The  People  have  the 
Bible  in  their  own  Language,  the  Erfe  ;  and  the  Mif- 
fionaries  are  obliged  to  preach  to  them,  and  examine 
and  catechize  their  Children,  in  the  Erfe  Language  ; 
fo  that  we  are  not  to  defpair  of  having  this  Country  as 
well  inflru6ted  in  time,  as  other  Parts  of  Britain. 

The  Shire  of  Tayne^  with  the  little  Shire  rfCromertle^ 
and  Part  of  the  Shire  of  Invernefs,  comprehends  the 
whole  Country  called  Rofs.  The  firft  Tra£t  towards 
the  South-weit,  in  the  County  of  Rofs^  is  Kintail,  fe- 
parated  from  the  Ifle  of  Sky  by  a  narrow  Firth.  Next 
is  a  little  Trad,  called  Gknelgj  the  paternal  Eftate  of 
the  late  Earl  of  Seaforth,  whofe  chief  Seat  is  called 
Caftle  Tlendoven^  lying  in  an  Ifland  of  the  above- 
mentioned  Firth.  Farther  North,  on  the  fame  Coaft, 
lies  Locheiv,  with  thick  Woods,  where  Iron  was  for- 
merly made.  A  little  farther  North,  Locbbrim  runs 
into  this  County,  and  is  remarkable  for  its  noble  an- 
nual Fiftiery  of  Herrings. 

The  peninfula  which  lies  betwixt  the  Bay  of  Cro- 
mertie  and  Murray  is  called  Ardmeanach^  upon  the 
Shore  of  which  ftands  the  Town  called  The  Chanonry 
of  Rcfs,  formerly  a  Biihop's  See,  It  is  pleafantiy 

fituated 


262  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scot!. 

fituated  in  a  Valley,  betwixt  fruitful  Hills.  It  had 
once  a  ftately  Cathedral  and  Caftle,  where  the  Biihop 
dwelt.  Here  the  late  Earl  of  Seaforth  had  a  noble 
Houfe. 

Beaulieu,  formerly  a  pleafant  and  rich  Abbey,  lies 
near  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Farrar,  and  was  poflefled 
by  the  late  Lord  Lovat,  before  he  forfeited  by  his  Re- 
bellion. The  late  Earl  of  Ssafcrth  had  near  it  a 
Caflle,  called  Kildun.  There  are  other  Seats  of  an- 
tient  Families  in  this  County ;  and  indeed  many 
throughout  the  Northern  Part  of  the  United  Kingdom, 
which,  would  my  Compafs  allow  me  to  defcribe,  or 
but  to  mention,  would  enable  you  to  form  an  Idea 
of  the  numerous  Families  of  Gentry,  which  Scotland 
produces. 

On  the  Weft  is  the  Ifle  of  Sky,  lying  from  the 
Weft- north- weft,  to  the  Eaft-fouth  eaft,  and  bearing 
upon  the  main  Land,  only  feparated  by  a  narrow 
Streight  of  Water;  fomething  like  as  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  is  feparated  from  the  County  of  Southampton. 
We  left  this  on  our  Right,  and  croiling  the  Mountains, 
cnme,  with  as  little  Stay  as  we  could,  to  the  Loughs 
called  Lochyoly  and  Lochlochyy  which  run  through  that 
large  Country  called  Lochaber^  that  is,  over  the  Lochs, 
and  which  fome  affedi  to  call  the  River  Aber,  or  Abre^ 
i,  e.  .the  Water  which,  as  I  faid  above,  aflifts,  with 
Louglmefs,  or  Locbnefs,  to  feparate  the  North  Land  of 
Scotland  from  the  middle  Part. 

This  is  a  long  and  narrow  Inlet  of  the  Sea,  in 
Length  above  24  Miles,  the  Depth  unknown :  which, 
opening  from  the  Irijh  Sea  South-  weft,  meets  the 
River  Abre^  or,  as  the  Sccls  much  more  properly  ex- 
p-refc  it,  the  Water  of  Abre ;  for  it  is  rather  a  large 
Lake,  or  Loch,  than  a  River;  and  receives  innumera- 
ble fmall  Rivers  into  it.  It  rifes  in  the  Mountains  of 
A*/},  or  ofGlcngary^  within  five  or  fix  Mile^  from  the 
Shore  of  Locbnefs,  or  the  Water  of  Nefs,  which  is  a 
long  and  narrow  Lake  like  itielf ;  ami  ^s  the  Nefs  runs 

away 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  263 

away  Eaft  to  Invcrnefs,  and  fo  into  the  great  Gulpli 
calle-J  Murray  Firth,  fo  the  /fire,  bccoi  .  i;;.r  prefcntly 
a  LocbfOt  Lake,  always  goes  away  more  to  -he  S  >uth- 
ward,  and  Hoping  South-welt,  ruiib  into  ..be  irifi  Seas, 
as  above. 

Lockaler  is  50  Miles  in  a  flrait  Lii.c  rrom  Inver- 
hchy  to  InvernejS)  and  is  one  of  the  mo'*  barren  Coun- 
tries in  Not  tb  Britain  j  though  the  Peop'e  have  Wood, 
Goats,  and  Deer,  in  Plenty.  G lento  ic  almoft  the 
only  Town  in  it ;  it  is  noted  for  the  \  arb,  icus  <;nd  in- 
human Maflacre  perpetrated  ihere  by  King  William' & 
Soldiers,  quaitered  in  thofe  Parts,  and  who  cut  off 
Men,  Women,  and  Children,  without  Mercy.  A 
Maflacre  that  made  a  great  Noife,  and  wis  un.vcrfally 
detefted  ;  and  whac  made  it  ftilj  the  n.oie  odious,  was, 
that  the  Commander  in  that  bloody  Work  found 
Fiiends  enough  to  fcreen  him  from  the  Inquiry  that 
•was  attempted  to  be  made  into  the  horrid  Fa6i,  in  order 
to  find  out  who  gave  him  his  Orders  for  it. 

Locbaber  is  noted  in  Hiftory  for  Banco,  its  gallant 
Thane,  about  the  Year  1050.  who  was  murdered  by 
the  Tyrant  Macleth,  becaufe  of  a  Prophecy,  That  his 
Pojlerity  Jhould  enjoy  the  Crown  for  a  long  Series  of 
Years:  which  accordingly  happened  ;  for  his  Son, 
flying  into  Wales^  married  the  Prince  of  North  Wales'* 
Daughter ;  by  whom  he  had  Walter,  afterwards 
Steward  of  Scotland  j  from  whom  thte  Royal  Family  of 
Stuart  was  defcended.  It  was  on  this  Story,  that  our 
celebrated  Skakefpeare  founded  his  Tragedy  called 
Mackbetb. 

On  this  Water  of  dbre9]u&  at  the  Entrance  of  the 
Loch,  was  antiently  a  Fort  built  to  curb  the  Highland* 
ers,  on  either  Side,  called  Inverlochy^  now  Caflle  Wil- 
liam before- mentioned. 

From  Inverlocby  to    Locbriefs,  is   the  famous 
pnade  by  General  Wade^  as  defcribed  p.  244. 

To  defend  this  Road  from  the  Rage  ci  the  High" 

•  landers,  and,  at  the  f?me  time  to  keep  them  in  Awe, 

4  the 


264  yZTOUR^™  Scotl. 

the  General  built  a  regular  Fortification,  called  Fort 
AuguftuS)  which,  as  has  been  fa  id,  was  taken  andde- 
molifhed  by  the  Rebels  in  1745. 

At  this  Place  we  take  our  Leave  of  the  third  Divi- 
fion,  which  I  call  the  North -land  of  Scot  land. 

We  have  nothing  now  remaining  for  a  full  Survey 
of  Scotland,  but  the  Weftern  Part  of  the  middle  Divi- 
fion  of  it ;  and  this,  though  a  large  Country,  yet  af- 
fords not  an  equal  Variety  with  the  Eaitern  Part  of  the 
fame  Divifion. 

To  traverfe  the  Remainder  of  this  Country,  I  muft 
b:gin  upon  the  Upper  Tay^  as  we  may  juftly  call  it, 
•where  1  left  off,  when  I  turned  away  Eaft ;  and  here 
we  have,  in  efpecial  manner,  .the  Countries  of  Bade- 
nachi  Atbol,  and  Bratdalbin :  this  is  an  hilly  Countrjr 
properly;  but  as  it  is  watered  by  the  Tay^  and  many 
other  pleafant  Rivers,  which  fall  into  it,  there  are  fe- 
veral  fruitful  Valleys  interfperfed  among  the  Hills  ;  nor 
are  even  the  Highlands  themfelves,  or  the  Highlanders 
the  Inhabitants,  any  thing  fo  wild,  untaught,  or  un- 
traclable,  as  we  have  been  made  to  believe ;  and  as  are 
to  be  found  in  the  North-land  Divifion,  that  is  to  fay, 
in  Stratbnavern,  Rofs^  Tayne^  &c. 

The  Duke  of  Atbol  is  Lord,  I  had  almoft  faid  King, 
of  this  Country  ;  and  has  the  greateft  Number  of 
Vafials  of  any  Nobleman  in  this,  or^any  Part  of  Scot' 
laud. 

The  Ute  Duke  was  always  an  Oppofer  of  the 
Union  in  the  Parliament  holden  at  Edinburgh,  for  paf- 
fcng  it  into  an  Act ;  but  he  did  not  carry  his  Oppofitioa 
to  an  Height  of  Tumult  and  Rebellion. 

The  Duke  had  feveral  fine  Seats  in  this  Country; 
as  firft  at  Dunkeld,  upon  the  Tay^  which  I  mentioned 
"before ;  another  at  Huntingtour,  in  the  Strathern,  or 
Valley  of  Ern,  where  the  Duke  has  a  fine  Park,  and 
great  Store  of  Deer.  This  may  be  called  his  Hunting* 
ieat,  whither  he  fometimes  retires  for  Sport. 

He 


Scot!.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  265 

He  has  another  Seat  at  the  Caftle  of  £/#/>,  farther 
North,  and  beyond  the  Tay^  on  the  Edge  of  Braid-slbin^ 
upon  the  Banks  of  a  clear  and  fine  River,  which  falls 
into  the  Tay  a  few  Miles  lower.  By  means  of  Sluices 
this  River  is  formed  into  a  Pond,  quite  in  ths  Front 
of  the  Houfe,  which  is  fix  Stories  high,  and  a  Prifbn  in 
Appearance  ;  having  the  Windows  covered  with  Iron 
Bars ;  its  Walls  five  Feet  thick.  It  has  vaft  high 
Mountains  on  every  Side  ;  but  at  a  great  Dirtance  from 
the  Houfe.  The  Gardens  are  not  fo  curious  as  at  the 
Duke's  Houfe  at  Dunkeld  ;  but  here  are  Statues, 
which  the  other  has  not ;  to  wit,  an  Hercules^  a  Diana , 
Bacchus^  and  a  Temple  of  Fame,  filled  on  every  Side 
with  Buftoes  of  the  antient  Philofophers  and  Poets ; 
that  of  the  Duke  himfelf  bting  placed  in  the  Middle  in 
Lead  gilt.  He  has  alfo  Englijb  Cattle,  which  thrive 
well.  The  Town  confifts  only  of  a  few  Peat  houfes, 
except  the  Minifter's  Houfe,  one  pretty  good  Change^ 
as  it  is  called,  or  Public-houfe,  and  a  poor  old  Kirk, 
the  Pews  all  broken  down,  Doors  open,  full  of  Dirt : 
the  Minifter,  however,  preaches  in  it  once  a  Week, 
in  the  Erje  Tongue.  Mile-itones  are  ere&ed  to  this 
Houfe  from  Dunkeld^  which  is  about  20  Miles. 

The  Country  of  Eraidalbin  has  not  fo  much  as  a 
fingle  Village  in  it  of  ten  Houfes  ;  yet,  from  its 
Latin  Name  Albania,  has  often  given  the  Title  of 
Duke  to  fome  of  the  Royal  Family  :  it  is  feated  very 
near  the  Centre  of  Scotland  ;  and  is  alleged  to  be 
thehigheft  Ground  in  it;  for  that  the  Pavers,  which 
rife  here,  are  faid  to  run  every  Way  from  this  Part, 
fome  into  the  Eaftern,  and  fome  into  the  Weflcrn 
Seas. 

The  Grampian  Mountains  here  are  faid  to  cut  thro* 
Scotland.  As  the  Country  is  rough  and  uncultivated, 
the  Inhabitants  are  an  hardy  Race  of  Men,  who  make 
excellent  Soldiers,  when  they  are  lifted  abroad  in  regu- 
lar and  difciplined  Troops ,  and  I  muft  add,  that  they 
are  much  civilized  to^what  they  were  formerly,  Thefa 

VOL.  IV.  N  Mountains 


26<?  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

Mountains  abound  with  Flocks  of  Black  Cattle,  Sheep, 
Horfes,  and  Goats.  The  Beef  and  Mutton  are  of  a 
delicious  Tafte,  and  the  Wool  is  valued  for  its 
Whitenefs  and  Softnefs. 

The  Duke  of  Athol,  tho'  he  had  not  (till  of  late)  an 
Eftate  equal  to  fome  of  the  Nobility,  yet  was  Matter 
of  more  of  the  Superiorities,  as  they  are  called  here, 
than  many  of  thofe  who  had  twice  his  Eftate. 

The  Pomp  and  Grandeur  in  which  this  noble  Perfon 
lives,  is  not  to  be  imitated  in  Great  Britain  ;  for  he  is 
ferved  like  a  Prince,  and  maintains  a  greater  Equipage 
and  Retinue,  than  five  times  his  Eftate  would  fupport 
in  another  Country. 

The  Duke  has  alfo  another  Seat  in  Stratbern,  which 
is  called  Tullibardm,  and  which  gives  Title  of  Marquis 
to  the  eldeft  Son  of  the  Houfe  of  dtbol.  At  the 
Lower- part  of  this  Country  the  River  Ern  falls  into 
the  Tay-t  and  greatly  increafes  its  Waters.  This  River 
rifes  far  Weft,  on  the  Frontiers  of  the  Weftern  High- 
lands near  Glengyl,  and,  running  thro*  that  pleafant 
Country  called  Stratbern,  falls  into  the  Tay,  below 
St.  Johnjhn. 

The  prefent  Duke  is  the  only  Peer,  that  I  know  of, 
that  is  fo  by  Statute,  rather  than  Patent :  for  his  elder 
Brother,  the  late  Marquis  of  Tullibardin^  being  attaint- 
ed for  his  Adherence  to  the  Pretender ',  the  Title 
would  of  courfe  have  failed,  but  that  (together  with 
the  Eftate)  it  was  fettled  by  Aft  of  Parliament  on  the 
fecond  Brother,  who  is  alfo  Lord  of,  or  King  in,  the 
Ifle  of  Man^  and  alfo  Lord  Strange  of  Knocking,  to  both 
which  he  fucceeded  by  the  Death  of  his  Coufin  'James 
late  Earl  of  Derby. 

Soon  after  the  Ern  (hoots  forth  from  the  Mountains, 
it  fpreads  itfelf  into  a  Loch,  as  moft  of  thofe  Rivers  do, 
called  Lochern  ;  and  then  runs  by  Dupplin  Caftle,  the 
Seat  of  the  Earl  of  Kitinoul^  whofe  eldeft  Son  is  thence 
called  Lord  Dupplin.  The  late  Earl  of  Kinnoul, 
when  Lord  Dupplin^  married  the  Daughter  of  the  Earl 

of 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  267 

of  Oxford,  when  Lord  High-Treafurer  of  England; 
and  was,  on  that  Occafion,  made  a  Peer  of  Great 
Britain^  by  the  Title  of  Lord  Hay  of  Pedwarden.  His 
Eftate  here  is  a  very  good  one  ;  but  not  attended  with 
VafTals  and  Superiorities,  as,  I  obferveJ,  the  Duke  of 
Atbd\  is.  The  feveral  Owners  of  this  Seat,  having 
been  pretty  much  ufed  to  refide  in  it,  have  adorned  it 
at  feveral  times,  each  according  to  his  particular  Genius. 
It  has  lately  received  a  new  Decoration,  two  Wings 
being  added  for  Offices,  as  well  as  Ornament. 

The  old  Building  isfpacious,  the  Rooms  large,  and 
Cielings  lofty,  filled  with  Furniture  fuitable  to  its  out- 
ward Magnificence,  particularly  with  abundance  of  fine 
Paintings,  fome  of  the  Royal  Family,  among  which  is 
one  of  King  Ckarles\,  with  a  Letter  in  his  Hand,  held 
out  to  his  Son  the  Duke  of  York,  afterwards  King 
James  Vil.  which,  they  faid,  he  was  to  have  carried  to 
France.  There  is  alfo  a  Statue  in  Brafs  of  the  fame 
King  on  'Horfeback  ;  a  Picture  of  Oliver  CromwelL 
another  of  General  Monck,  both  from  the  Life.  There 
is  alfo  a  whole  Length  of  that  Earl  of  Kinnoul^  who 
was  Lord  Chancellor  of  Scotland^  in  the  Reign  of  King 
James  VI.  and  King  Charles  L  with  fever al  other 
rieces  of  Italian  Matters  of  great  Value. 

Dupplin  Caftle  is  remarKable  alfo  for  the  greateft 
Defeat  the  Scots  ever  received  from  the  Englt/h,  in  the 
Reign  of  Edward  Baliol,  whom  the  Englifl)  carne  to 
ailiit.  In  this  Battle  80  of  the  Family  of  Lindfay 
perifhed,  and  of  the  Family  of  Hay  fo  many,  that  the 
Name  had  been  extinguiflied ,  hadjnot  the  Chief  left  his 
Lady  with  Child. 

The  prefent  Earl  of  Kinnoul,  when  Lord  Dupplin 9 
that  is  to  fay,  in  the  Life-time  of  his  Father,  made  a 
great  Figure  in  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  being  gene- 
rally chofen  to  reprefent  the  Univerfity  of  Cambridge^ 
for  hisKnowlege  and  Abilities  in  the  Affairs  of  Parlia- 
ment, and  was  remarkable  for  his  benevolent  Difpofi- 
tbn,  and  Readinefs  to  do  Good  to  every  worthy  iMan, 
N  2  \V"ho 


Scot!. 

who  had  the  Honour  of  knowing  him.  His  Lordfhip 
was  his  Majefly's  Ambaflador  Extraordinary  at  the 
Court  of  Portugal. 

From  this  Place  we  went  to  Brechin  in  Angus*  for- 
merly mentioned,  an  antientTown,  with  a  Caltle  finely 
.fituated  :  but  the  Grandeur  of  it  is  loft  ;  the  Family  of 
Panmure,  to  whom  it  belonged  chiefly,  having  forfeit- 
ed it  in  the  Rebellion  in  1 7 1 5. 

Here  I  (hall  mention  the  Catarad  near  Blair  Drum-' 
mond  on  the  Keith,  which  empties  itfelf  into  the  Tay9 
which  makes  fo  great  a  Noife  among  the  Rocks,  that 
it  {tuns  thofe  who  come  near  it. 

We  were  now,  after  a  long  Mountain-ramble,  come 
down  to  the  Lowlands,  and  into  a  pleafant  and  agree- 
able Country ;  but  as  we  had  yet  another  Journey  to 
take  Weitward,  we  had  a  like  Profpecl:  of  a  rude  and 
wild  Part  of  Scotland to  go  through. 

The  Highlands  of  Scotland  may  be  divided  into  two 
Parts,  the  Weft  Highlands  and  the  North  Highlands  : 
the  latter  I  have  fpoken  of  at  large,  containing  the 
Countries  of  Athol,  Lochaber,  Badenoch,  Strathfpey, 
Invermjs,  Rofs,  Sutherland,  and  Strathnavern,  together 
with  the  Ifles  of  Sky,  Lewis,  &c. 

The  Weft  Highlands  contain  the  Shires  or  Counties 
of  Dunbritton  or  Dunbarton,  alias  Lenox,  Bute,  and 
Jrgyle,  which  laft  contains  the  Diftricls  of  Cowal, 
Knapdale,  Lorn,  and  Cantyre ;  the  Ifles  of  Mull,  Jura, 
IJla,  &c. 

Braidalbin  is  fometimes  reckoned  a  Part  of  the 
North,  and  fometimes  of  the  Weft  Highlands. 

On  the  Banks  of  the  River  Ern  lies  a  very  pleafant 
Vale,  which  continues  from  the  Tay,  quite  up  to  the 
Highlands,  called  by  Claudian,  Glacialis  lerne ;  but 
now,  according  to  the  Ufage  of  Scotland,  Stratbern, 
or  the  Vale  of  Ern.  It  is  an  agreeable  Country  ;  has 
many  Gentlemens  Seats  on  both  Sides  the  River  ;  but 
being  near  the  Highlands,  has  often  fuftered  by  Depre- 
dations informer  times. 

In 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

In  it  are  many  Roman  Camps;  particularly  one  at 
Ardoch-,  befides  a  Roman  Highway,  towards  Perth. 
Several  Roman  Medals  have  alfo  been  found  there,  and 
of  late  two  Tabula  curioufly  enamelled  with  a  Sepul- 
chral Stone.  The  Ocbil-hiKf^  which  run-  along  the 
South  Parts  of  Perth/hire^  abound  with  Metals  and 
Minerals  ;  particularly  they  find  good  Copper,  and 
Lapis  Calammai  is  j  and  at  Glenlion^  they  meet  witli 
Lead.  Here  is  great  Want  "of  Coal  ,  but  their  ex- 
cellent Feat,  and  abundance  of  Wood,  fupply  that 
Defea. 

The  Family  of  Montrofe,  whofe  Chief  was  faeri- 
ficed  for  the  Royal  Caufe  in  the  Great  Rebellion,  had 
a  ftrong  Caftle  here,  called  Kincardin,  which  was  de- 
moliihed  in  thofe  Wars,  and  is  not  rebuilt.  The 
Caftle  of  Drummond^  iituated  on  the  Banks  <>f  the  Ern9 
is  almoft  in  the  fame  Condition,  being  defeat  d  l>y  its 
Ow  er?.  The  two  late  E.irls  of  Perth,  Father  and 
Grandfather  of  th-  lair,  Karl,  were  Vrced  into  Ex  ic 
for  adher  nq;  to  Me  late  KIIIL;  'James  It  an  i  .he  '  ve~ 
tender.  K.ng  'J'awes  ha  ;  n-  urr.-i  in  fu-.h  Elf -'em, 
that  he  not  only  made  him  a  Ou  c  and  [Ca-^lu  <.,\  the 
Garter,  but  Governor  to  he  Preter.dcr 

The  Weftern  Highlands,  pro.>eHy  <">  called,  are  the 
only  remaining  Part  of  Scotland^  which  as  yet  I  have 
not  touched  upon. 

It  is  hard  to  fay,  whether  the  Northern  or  Weftern 
Highlanders  make  the  beft  Soldiers.  It  is  certain,  they 
both  of  them  are  defrauded  of  an  Honour  due  to  them, 
when  we  attribute  ieveral  gallant  Atchievements  to 
the  Irijh  Battalions  Abroad,  which  were  performed 
by  the  Scots.  Thus  in  particular  it  is  faid,  the  Irijh- 
Troops  beat  the  Germans  out  of  Cremona^  after  they 
had  got  Pofleffion  of  the  Town,  and  had  taken  the 
French  General,  the  Marfhal  Villeroy^  Prifoner :  That 
the  Irijh  Battalions  in  the  Spanijh  Service  behaved 
gallantly  in  Sicily  ;  and  fo  on  many  extraordinary  Oc- 
cafions.  Now,  though  it  is  true,  that  the  Scots  came 
N  3  originally 


270  A  T  O  U  R  tbr<f  Scotl. 

originally  from  Ireland,  yet  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that 
thefe  Soldiers  were  moft  of  them  Scots  Highlanders  ; 
"who,  on  all  .Occafions,  go  over  into  France,  and  lift 
among  the  Irljb  Troops  ;  nay,  in  the  late  Wars,  it 
has  been  obferved,  that  whole  Regiments  of  High- 
landers have  been  raifed  for  the  Service ;  who,  when 
they  were  got  Abroad,  would  take  the  firft  Opportu- 
nity to  defert,  and  go  over  to  the  French^  and  fo  lift  in 
the)  Irljb  Battalions,  their  original  Countrymen,  and 
who  itill  fppak  the  fame  Language.  But  in  the  pre- 
fent  War,  our  Adminiftration  have  had  the  Addrefs  ta 
employ  whole  Regiments  of  thefe  brave  People,  to 
much  better  and  more  loyal  and  truly  Britijh  Pur- 
pofes. 

Leaving  the  Country  about  Brecbin,  and  the  Love- 
lex  ds  of  Strathem,  we  went  away  Weft  ;  but  were 
prefently  interrupted  by  a  vaft  inland  Sea,  rather  than 
a  Lake,  called  Locblomond.  It  is  indeed  a  Sea,  and 
locked  like  it  from  the  Hills  from  whence  we  firft  de- 
fcried  it.  It  contains  30  I/lands,  three  of  which  have 
Churches,  and  feveral  of  the  reft  are  inhabited.  The 
chief  is  Incbmuritt,  about  two  Miles  and  an  Half  in 
Length,  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Grafs,  and  abounds  with 
Deer  j  which  the  Scotijh  Kings  were  accuftomed  t® 
hunt  there.  The  others  moft  remarkable  are,  Na- 
dyiel,  fo  called  from  the  old  Caftle  in  it;  Inchdavanar^ 
noted  for  Broom,  abundance  of  wild  Berries,  pleafant 
Habitations,  Gardens,  and  Fruit  Trees;  Inchennaugan^ 
noted  for  Birch-trees  and  Corn-fields  ;  Inchnoltiigj 
noted  for  Yew-trees,  which  grow  nowhere  elfe  in 
thefe.  Iflands  ;  and  Rouglajh^  where  the  Laird  of  Mac- 

•-H  has  an  handfome-  Seat  on   the  Eaft  fide  of  the 
Lake.     Kilmaronoch,   a  fine  Seat,  once  belonging  to 

[{arls  of  Cajfils,  but  now  to  the  Earl  of  Dundonald. 
Jjuchan  Caftle,  and  feveral  others. 

This  Lake,  or  Loch,  is  one  of  the  largeft  in  Scotland, 

-  more  than  20  Miles  long,  and  generally  eight 

•;s  in  Breadth  j    though,    at  the  North  End  of 

it, 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  271 

it,  not  near  fo  broad.  It  receives  many  Rivers  into 
it,  but  empties  itfeif  into  the  Firth  of  Clyde,  at  one 
Mouth. 

This  Lake  abounds  with  Fifli  of  feveral  Sorts,  par- 
ticularly a  Sort  called  Poans^  and  by  fome  Pollocks^ 
peculiar  to  it ;  a  kind  of  Eel,  very  delicious  to  eat. 
This  gave  Occafion  to  the  Miftake  of  Authors,  who 
faid  this  Lake  had  Fi(h  without  Fins.  So  the  Beams 
fattened  together  in  fome  Places  of  the  Lake,  by  the 
Inhabitants,  and  covered  with  Turf,  for  them  to 
have  Recouife  to  in  time  of  War,  and  to  move  from 
Part  to  Part,  gave  Rife  to  the  Fable  of  floating  Iflands 
here. 

In  the  Beginning  of  November  1755.  Locblomond^  in 
the  Neighbourhood  of  Dunbarton,  rofe  on  a  fu<lden, 
in  a  pei feel:  Calm,  to  a  moft  unufual  Height;  the 
Waters  forcing  their  Way  overconfiderable  Traces  of 
Ground,  where  they  had  never  been  feen  in  the  Me- 
mory of  Man  j  and  again,  in  a  Moment  or  tw^.  re- 
tiring with  as  much  Violence  to  as  unufual  ,\n  Ebb  j 
and  thus  ebbing  and  flowing  for  fome  Hourt  togci 
till  at  laft,  they  gradually  retired  to  their  ordina  y  Li- 
mits, leaving  Boats  40  Yards  from  them  on  cry 
Ground,  and  fome  of  them  on  the  top  of  a  Pier  tnres 
or  four  Feet  perpendicular,  above  any  Height  to  which 
the  Waters  had  ever  been  known  to  rife.  Nothing 
uncommon  was  felt  or  heard  upon  Land  ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  a  remarkable  Calm  was  over  all  the  Coun- 
try round. 

The  famous  Grampian  Mountains  begin  near  this 
Lake,  and  run  Northward  towards  Aberdeen. 

The  County  of  Lenox^  on  which  this  Lake  lies,  is 
in  Length  about  24  Miles,  and  in  Breadth  about  20. 
The  lower  Part  is  very  fertile  in  Corn  ;  the  higher  is 
hilly,  moorifh,  and  more  fit  for  Pafture,  It  is  the  pa- 
ternal Eftate  and  Property  of  the  Stuarts^  and  extends 
itfeif  from  both  Sides  the  Levin;  which  is  the  River 
that  (as  I  faid  before)  enters  the  Lochlomond  into  the 
N  4  Clydi. 


272  A  T  O  UR   thro  Scotl. 

Clyde.  On  this  Side,  Eaftward,  Lenox  joins  to  Jfe- 
fr/V£,  which  is  Part  of  Perth/hire  ,  and  runs  up  for  feme 
length  on  the  Eaft-fide  of  the  Loch  ;  and  on  the 
Weft-  fide  it  extends  to  the  Edge  of  the  Locbhtng  ; 
and  a  great  Way  North,  almoft  to  the  Mountains  of 
Lochaber. 

All  oifr  Writers  of  the  Defcription  of  Lenox  enlarge 
upon  its  Family  of  Stuarts,  as  proceeding  from  the 
Royal  Line  of  Scotland-,  and,  in  fome  refpe£t,  the 
Royal  Line  may  be  faid  to  proceed  from  this  Houfe; 
Henry  Lord  Darnley,  eldeft  Son  of  Matthew  Earl  of 
Lenox,  having  been  married  to  Queen  Mary,  by 
whom  he  was  Father  of  King  James  the  Sixth  and 


From  this  Earl  Matthew,  defcended  Charles  Duke 
of  Lenox  and  Richmond,  who  dying  without  I  flue,  in 
1672.  the  Eftate  and  Honour  devolved  to  K.  Charles  If. 
as  Heir  at  Law  ;  which  he  conferred  on  his  natural 
Son  by  the  Duchefs  of  Portfm&uth,  and  to  whom  he 
gave  the  Surname  of  Lenox  ;  from  whom  is  defcended 
trje  piefent  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lenox. 

The  Buchanans,  among  many  iliuftrious  Names,  are 
originally  of  this  Country  ;  whence  the  famous  George 
Bu.kanan,  one  of  the  greateft  Ornaments  of  his  Age  for 
aJi  polite  Learning,  and  not  hitherto  equaled  by  any 
Poet  or  Hiftorian  fince  his  Time,  for  fmooth  and  ele- 
gant Lotin.  But  his  excefiive  Byas  for  the  Earl  of 
^Murray,  and  his  inveterate  Prejudice  againft  the  un- 
fortunate Queen  Mary,  have  quite  loft  him  the  Title 
of  Impartiality  5  infomuch  that  his  Hiftory  of  Scotland 
was  condemned  by  Acl  of  Parliament,  when  firft  pub- 
lifned,  Anno  1582.  Whence  Sir  George  Mackenzie 
took  occafion  to  fay,  He  was  both  Dents  &  Dedecus 
Patria,  the  Grace  and  Difgrace  of  his  Country. 

Dunbarton  is  the  County-  town  of  Lenoxjhire.  It 
was  once  confiderable  for  its  Trade,  which  is  now 
much  decayed  ;  but  is  ftill  remarkable  for  its  Caftle, 
cne  of  the  ftrongeft  by  Nature  in  Europe  j  being  fe- 

cured 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  273 

cured  by  the  River  on  one  Side,  the  Firth  of  Clyde  on 
the  other,  by  an  impaiTabJe  Morafs  on  the  third,  and 
the  Fourth  is  a  Precipice :  of  this  Caflle  the  Earl  of 
Hay  is  Governor. 

The  Roman  Wall,  which  begins  at  Abercorn,  runs 
through  this  County,  and  ends  at  Kilpatrick  on  Clyde  ^ 
a  Regality  of  the  Lord  Blantyris. 

We  now  entered  the  large  and  extended  Country  of 
Argyle,  or  the  Weftern  Iflands,  commonly  called  The 
Shire  of  Inverary^  from  the  principal  Town,  where  the 
Duke  of  Argyle  has  his  Refidence.  It  comprehends, 
as  I  have  faid,  Argylejhire,  Knapdak,Caval,  Kintyre,, 
and  Lorn,  with  the  Weftern  Ifles  of  Coll,  lllcallimkil, 
Jjlar  Jura,  Lifmore,  Mull,  Tereff,  and  Ulft.  It  is. 
1 20  Miles  long,  and  40  broad.  It  joins  to  Perth- 
/hire  on  the  Eaft,  to  Lochaber  on  the  North-cad,  to 
the  Ifles  on  the  North- weft,  and  to  the/r//?>  Sea  on  the- 
South. 

Kintyre.  is  a  Peninfula,    which  runs  30  Miles  out 
into  the  Irijh  Sea,  and  is  no  more  than  13,  fome  fay/ 
1.6,    Miles  from    Ireland.      Campbell-town,    made  a 
Royal  Burgh  by  King  ffflliam,  with  a  fafe  Harbour 
for  Ships,  lies  in  this  County,     Camden  fays,  the  Peo- 
ple of,  this  Part  formerly  made  Excurfions  into  Ireland^. 
and  poflcfled  themfelves  of  the  Provinces  of  G///Z&  an,d. 
Rowle, 

Knapdale  joins  to  Kintyre  on  the  North  by  a  nar*- 
row  Neck  of  Land,    fcarce   a  Mile  over,  through-* 
which  the  People  of  the  Country  draw   their  fmal! 
Veflels,  to  avoid  failing  round  Kintyre,     It   abounds; 
with  Lakes  and  Bays,    feveral  of  which  contain  Iflandsv 
and  Caftles  :,and  the  Soil  is  generally  fitter  for  Paflur- 
age  than  Cultivation  ;  yet  it  produces  Cprn  in  great; 
Plenty, 

Lorn  is  the.pleafanteft  and  moft  fruitful'Partof  'the- 
Shire  of  Argyle.     The  Caftle  of  Dunflafnage  ftands  inj 
this  County,   formerly  a  Royal  Seat,  where  feveral  of 
She  antient  Kings  are  buried..   The.  Family  ol\  6V, 
N 


174  A  TOUR  thro9  Scotl. 

bell  was  made  Earls  by  King  James  II.  of  Scotland. 
They  were  a  long  time  Lords  Juftices  General  of 
the  Kingdom  ;  but  furrendered  that  Office  to  King 
Charles  I.  on  a  valuable  Equivalent ;  befides  having 
the  Jurifdi&ion  of  Argyleznd.  the  Ifles ;  and  are  ft  ill 
Great  Matters  of  the  King's  Houfbold  in  Scotland. 
They  derive  their  Surname  from  the  Caftle  of  Camp' 
lell  \  and,  according  to  Camden^  their  Pedigree  from 
the  antient  Kings  of  Argyle^  by  a  long  Series  of  Ance- 
ftors.  The  Earl  of  London^  the  Earl  of  Braidalbin9 
and  other  great  Men,  are  of  this  Family. 

The  whole  Shire  of  Argyle,  taking  in  the  above 
Parts,  has  feven  Bays  of  the  Sea  entering  into  it,  called, 
by  the  Inhabitants,  Lochs ;  the  chief  is  Lochfyn,  fa- 
mous for  the  Number  and  Goodnefs  of  its  Herrings: 
it  is  faid  to  be  about  40  Miles  in  Length,  and  at  the 
narroweft  Place  about  four  in  Breadth.  Lochew  ac- 
cqrding  to  Bifhop  Le/fy9  is  almoft  as  large  as  Loch- 
lomond^  and  contains  12  Ifiands;  in  one  of  which  is 
the  Caftle  of  Enconel,  in  another,  that  of  Gkurqubarty 
and,  where  it  enters  the  Sea,  abounds  with  Salmon. 
The  Sea-coaft  of  Argyle^  or  as  far  as  Lochfyn>  abounds 
with  high  Rocks,  and  black  Mountains  covered  with 
Heath,  which  afford  Pafturage  for  Black  Cattle  and 
Deer.  The  Black  Cattle  run  for  the  moft  Part  wild, 
but  are  excellent  Meat;  and  their  Fat,  when  boiled, 
does  not  congeal,  as  others,  but  continues  for  fome 
Days  like  Oil.  The  Inhabitants  make  great  Profit 
of  them  by  felling  them  to  the  Lowlanders. 

From  the  MuHot  Kintyre  you  fee  Ireland  very  plain, 
it  being  not  above  15  or  16  Miles  from  the  Point  of 
Land,  which  they  call  the  Mull^  to  the  Fair -Foreland^ 
on  the  Coaft  of  Co/rain,  on  the  North  of  Ireland. 

As  I  have  given  Accounts  of  feveral  public  Chan- 
ties, and  other  laudable  Inftitutions,  in  the  Southern.' 
Parts  of  Britain,  it  would  be  inexcufable  not  to  men. 
tion  the  Society  in  Scotland  for  propagating  Chriftian 
Knowlege  in  the  Highlands^  it  being  one  of  thewor- 

thieft 


Scot!.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  275 

tihieft  Defigns  of  the  prefent  Age,  as  we  have  hinted> 
p.  261.  and  as  it  will  comprife  a  Defcription  of  the 
faid  Highlands^  and  of  the  Scots  Iflands,  we  cannot  in- 
fert  it  in  a  more  proper  Place.  It  is  comprehended  in 
a  Letter,  written  'June  1739.  from  a  Gentleman,  who 
is  a  great  Encourager  of  this  noble  Inftitution,  to  his 
Friend  ;  and  is  as  follows : 

c  The  Extent  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  is  much 

*  greater  than  has  commonly  been  imagined'':  From 

*  the  Mull  of  Kintyre  to  Faro- head  in  Strathnavern  is 
«  more  than  200  Miles  in  a  {trait  Line  from  South  to 

*  North  ;  and  from  Faro-bead  to  John  o'Grcfs  Houfe,. 
«  is  above  60  Miles  along  the  North  and  Northern 

*  Coaft  of  the  Continent.  Befides,  there  is  a  vaft  Num- 
4  ber  of  inhabited  Iflands,  of  which  fome  are  both  large 

and  populous  :  for  Inftance  ;  Jura  is  24  Miles  longj. 
IJla  16;  Mull  24  i  Sky  48;  Long-ijland,  compre- 
hending Bara>  Southuift)  Northuift,  and  Lewis  ;  100 
and  many  others,  from  two  to  twelve  Miles  in. 
Length.  The  Ifles  of  Orkney  and  Zetland  are  to  be 
confidered  by  themfelves ;  for  to  Orkney  alone  be- 
long 33  inhabited  Iflands,  one  of  which  is  24  Miles,, 
and  another  12,  in  Length.  In  Zetland  there  are 
about  30  inhabited  Iflands,  fome  of  which  are  fix, 
others  feven  Miles  long.  Majiy  of  thefe  Iflands  lie 
at  confiderable  Diftances  from  the  Continent,  and' 
from  one  another,  and  are  in  Extent  about  one  half; 
«•  of  Scotland. 

*  In  this  large  Track   of  Country  Ignorance  and 

*  Superftition  greatly  prevail  :  in   fome    Places,    the 
c  Remains  even  of  Paganifm  are  ftill  to  be  found ;, 
c  and  in  many  others,  the  Reformation  from  Popery 

*  has  never  yet  obtained.     The  Parifaes  where  Mini— 
c  Hers  are  fettled,  are  commonly  of  very  great  Extent,, 

*  fome  30,  40, .50  Miles  long  ;  and  ^et.eraily  divi 

*•  by  impaflable  Mountains  and  LJU.CS  ;  f<>    H,t  rr-oit 

*•  of  the  Inhabitants,  being;  deftuute  of  all  Means  of* 

N.  & 


A  T  O  U  R  thro'  Scot!. 

Knowlege,  and  without  any  Schools  to  educate 
theirChildren,  are  intirely  ignorant  of  the  Principles 
of  Religion  and  Virtue  ;  live  in  Idlenefs  and  Pover- 
ty; have  no  Notion  of  Induftry,  or  Senfe  of  Liberty ; 
are  fubjecl:  to  the  Command  of  their  Popifh  difarrec- 
ted  Chieftains  ;  who  have  always  oppofed  the  pro- 
pagating Chriftian  Knowlege,  and  the  Englijk 
Tongue,  that  they  might  with  lefs  Difficulty  keep 
their  miferable  Vaflals  in  a  flavifh  Dependence. 
The  poorer  Sort  have  only  the  Irijh  Tongue,  and 
little  Correfpondence  with  the  civilized  Parts  of  the 
Nation;  and  only  come  among  them  to  pillage  the 
more  induftrious  Inhabitants.  They  are  brought 
up  in  Principles  of  Tyranny  and  arbitrary  Govern- 
ment; depend  upon  foreign  Papifts,  as  their  main 
Support,  and  the  native  Irijh^  as  their  beft  Corre- 
fpondents  and  Allies.  This  has  been  the  Source  of 
all  the  Rebellions  and  Infurreclions  in  that  Country 
fmcethe  Revolution. 

*  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  naturally  of  a  quick 
Genius,  of  great  bodily  Strength,  inured  to  Hardfhip. 
Their  Country  is  commodioufly  fituated  for  the 
nobleft  Fifhery  in  the  World  ;  of  which  our  Neigh- 
bours have  made  immenfe  Profit.  They  have 
Mines  and  Woods,  and  great  Quantity  of  Black 
Cattle,  and  vaft  Tracts  of  improveable  Land  ; 
which  lie  wafte  for  want  of  Induftry  in  the  People, 
and  not  confidering  the  Advantage  of  their  Situation. 
They  are  a  numerous  and  prolific  People;  and,  if 
reformed  in  their  Principles  and  Manners,  and  ufe- 
fully  employed,  might  be  made  a  confiderable  Ac- 
ceffion  of  Power  and  Wealth  to  Great  Britain. 
Some  Clans  of  Highlanders,  well  inftru£tcd  in  the 
Arts  of  War,  and  well  affecled  to  the  Government, 
would  make  as  able  and  formidable  a  Body  for  their 
Country's  Defence,  as  Great  Britain,  or  Switzer- 
land, or  any  Part  of  Europe,  aie  able  to  produce. 

*  In 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        277 

'  In  the  Year  lyoi.fome  Gentlemen  of  Edinburgh 
'  fi  ft  conftdered  of  proper  Methods  for  civilizir  g  and 
c  reforming  them  ;  and  agreed,  that  the  Setting;  up 

*  of  Schools  in  different  and  convenient  Places,  for  the 

*  inftrucling  of  their  Youth   in  the  Englijh  Tongue, 

*  and   Principles  of  the  Chriftian  Religion,  and  difpof- 

*  ing  them  to  Virtue  and  Induftry,  would  be  the  moft 
'  likely  and  effectual  Means.     They  joined  in  a  vo- 
'  luntary  Subfcnption  among  themfelves,  and  engaged 
'  as  many  others  in  it  as  they  could  ;  which  laid  the 
'  firft  Foundation  of  this  great  and  public   Defign. 
4  They  foon  found  the  Work  too  heavy  a  Burden  for 

*  a  few  private  Hands,  and  made  Application  to  her 
c  lateMajefty  Queen  Anne,  who  was  gracioufly  pleaf- 

*  ed  to  approve  and  recommend  the  fame  by  her  Royal 
'  Proclamation,    in  the  Year   1708.   and   in    1709. 

*  granted  her  Letters  Patent,  conftituting  and  appoint- 

*  ing  a  certain  Number  of  the  Subfcribers  to  be  a  So- 
c  ciety,  or  Body  Politic,    by  the  Name  of  The  Society 
c  in  Scotland  for   propagating  Chriftian  Knowlege  in 
4  the  Highlands  and  IJlandS)  &c.  with   full  Powers  to 

*  receive   Donations  of  Money,  &c.  and  to  purchafe 
c  Lands,  &V.  not  exceeding  2000  /.  a  Year ;  and  with 
4  the  Profits  and  yearly  Intereft  of  the  fame  to  erecT: 

*  and  maintain  Schools ;  with  many  other  Privileges 
«  and  Regulations.     The  Lords  of  Seflion,  or  Judges 

*  in  Scotland,  according  to  her  Majefty's  CommifTion, 

*  nominated  82  Subfcribers  to  be  the  firft  Members  of 

*  the  Society  ;  all  of  them  Perfons  of  the  beft  and  moft 

*  diftinguimed  Characters  ;  who,  at  their  firft  General 

*  Meeting,  chofe  a  Prefident,  a  Treafurer,  a  Secretary, 

*  and  other  Officers.     They  alfo  chofe  a  Committee 

*  of  Fifteen,  who  meet  every  Month,  or  oftener,  as 
c  they  have  occafion.     There  is  a  General  Meeting 
4  of  the  whole  Society  every  three  Months,  when  they 
*•  aflume  new  Members,  make  general  Regulations, 

*  give   Orders  to  the  Committee,    and  receive  their 
«  Accounts.    All  Proceedings,  both  -of  the  Committee, 

4  and 


27g  /fTOUR^  Scotl. 

*  and  of  the  General  Meeting,  are  recorded  in  diftincl: 
Books;  which  are  always  open  to  the  Examination 
of  every  Contributor.  The  Names  of  the  Contri- 
butors are  kept  in  a  diftincl:  Regifter,  with  an  Ac- 
count of  the  feveral  Benefactions. 
«  In  the  Year  1710.  they  began  to  fettle  Schools  in, 
fuch  Places,  as  had  never  been  reformed  from  Hea- 
thenifm :  and  their  capital  Stock  having  yearly  in- 
creafed  by  the  liberal  Contributions  of  many  Perfons 
of  all  Ranks  in  Great  Britain,  and  amounting  to 
above  1 0,000  /.  moft  of  which  is  laid  out  upon  good 
Security,  they  have  increafed  their  Schools  in  Propor- 
tion. Their  Number  at  prefent  is  about  100,  where 
above  4000  are  taught  gratis,  to  read,  write,  Arith- 
metic, and  Pfalmody.  Many  of  the  poorer  Scholars 
have  a  weekly  Allowance  for  their  Maintenance,  and 
Cloaths  and  Books  provided  for  them.  Great  Care 
is  taken,  that  the  Schoolmafters  are  Men  of  Probity, 
Capacity,  and  well  affe&ed  to  the  Government ;  ani 
they  are  obliged,  befides  the  teaching  the  Children 
in  the  Schools,  to  icftru6l  thofe  in  the  Principles  of 
Religion,  who  are  too  old  to  come  to  School,  and  at 
too  great  a  Diftance  from  the  Church.  Many  Po- 
pifh  Parents  have  at  length  permitted  their  Children 
to  be  inflru&ed. 

*  This  Society  has  appointed  Perfons  of  Character 
and  Confideration  to  be  Vifitors  of  their  Schools^ 
and  to  examine  the  Conduct  and  Diligence  of  the 
Schoolmafters,  and  the  Proficiency  of  the  Scholars, 
and  to  tranfmit  Accounts  to  them  at  Edinburgh.  All 
pofiible  Care  is  taken  to  manage  the  Money  to  the 
beft  Advantage,  not  a  Farthing  being  diverted  to  any- 
other  Purpofe  ;  and  all  the  principal  Officers  of  the 
Society  ferve  gratis.  The  Succefs  of  the  Undertak- 
ing has  anfwered  all  the  Pains  and  Expence  of  the 
Society.  There  appears  a  great  Difpofition  in  the 
rifing  Generation  to  be  inftrucled  :  many  have  learn- 
ed to  read  the  Scriptures,  and  attend  Divine  Service,. 

fr  u*. 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN. 

'  in  Englijh,  where  formerly  the  Iri/h  Tongue  was 
only  underftood.  Several  of  the  Scholars  are  capa- 
ble'of  affifting  the  Matters  ;  and  fome  of  them  being 
Matters  of  the  Society's  Schools.  Many  of  them 
have  attained  to  fuch  Degrees  of  Knowlege,  as  to 
be  admitted  to  the  Celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 
The  Face  of  Reformation  and  Virtue  begins  to  ap- 

*  pear  every-where  ^  and  there  is  Realon  to  appre- 

<  hend,  that,  in  a  few  Years,  Ignorance,  Popery,  and' 

*  the  Irijh  Language,  will  be  utterly  extirpated  ;  and,. 

<  in  their  ftead,  Virtue,  Loyalty,  and  Induftry,  will  take 
«  place. 

'  Neverthelefs,  the  prefent  Fund  is  far  from  being 
c  fufficient  to  the  Vaftnefs  of  the  Defign,  as  appears 
6  from  the  Report  of  the  Commiffioners  appointed  by 

*  his  late  Majefty  King  George  I.   Anno  1716.  to  in- 

*  quire  into  the  State  of  the  Highlands  and  Iflands  of 
«  Scotland,  in  purfuance  of  an  AcT:  of  Parliament  of 

*  the  preceding  Seffion ;  who  gave  it  as  their  Opinion* 

*  that  no  Method  was  fo  likely  to  reduce  thefe  Coun- 

*  tries  to  a  State  of  Peace  among   themfelves,  and 
'  hearty  Subjection  to   the  prefent  Government,  as- 
«  that  of  eftablilhing  Schools  among  them  :  and  thatr 
«  over  and  above  the  prefent  Number,  150  more  were 
-*  abfolutely  necefTary   to  render  the  Defign  fully  ef- 

<  feftual. 

«  This  Report  had  fo  good  an  EfFedl,  that  it  was- 
'  enaded  (Anno  4  Georgii)  in  the  Aft  for  vefting  the 

*  forfeited  Eftates  in  Truitees,  &c.     That  a  Sum  not 

*  exceeding  20,000 /.  fhaJl   be  appropriated  towards 
4  making  a  capital  Stock,  for  a  yearly  Intereft  or  In^ 

*  come,  out  of  the  Moneys  which  (hall  arife  by  Sale  of 

<  the  faid  Eftates,  which  are  in  Scotland,  towards  ereft- 

*  ing  and  maintaining  Schools  in  the  Highlands,  &c. 

<  And   in  the  A 61  (6  Georgii)  for  laying  a  Duty  on 

*  wrought  Plate,  there  is   a  Provifo,  That  nothing 

<  therein  fhall  invalidate  the  faid  Provifion  for  Schools 
f  in  the  Highlands^  &c.   But,  nctwithftanding  this 

*  charitable 


to     our 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  281 

c  and  for  the  raiftngof  Hemp  and  Flax  for  the  Linen 
c  Manufadlure,  which  is  now  fo  greatly  improved  in 

*  that  Country.     This  is  the  diftincr  State  of  the  Cafe, 

*  in  all  the  Circumftances  and  Steps  of  it. 

*  As  this  Undertaking  is  not  the  Work  of  a  Party 
4  or  Faction,  but  the  common  Caufe  of  Christianity, 

*  and  an  Attempt  to  civilize  vaft  Numbers  of  People, 
4  near  half  a    Million,   and  make  them  ufeful  to  So- 
4  cicty,  who  have  been  in  a  great  meafure  ufelefs,  and 

*  in  fome  Circumftances  very  hurtful  to   it ;  it  is  ap- 
(  prehended,  That  the  Wealthy  and  Well-difpofed, 
6  who  have  an  heaity  Zeal  for  the  Honour  of  God, 

*  and  the  Good  of  the  Souls  of  Men,  a  true  Love  for 

*  their  Country,   and   the    public  Welfare,  or  a  due 
'   Concern  for  the  Proteitant  Religion,   and   the  pre- 
4  fent  happv  Eftablifhment,  cannot  eafily  find  any  In- 
4  fiance  of  Ufefulnefs  more  likely  to  turn  to  Account, 

*  or  capable  of  anfvvering  more  noble  and   extenfive 

*  Purpofes  of  Good.' 

Thus  far  tins  Gentleman. 

I  have  before  mentioned,  that  his  late  Majefty 
gave  i coo/,  per  Annum  towards  this  noble  Defign. 

I  {hall  conclude  this  Letter  with  a/luring  you,  that 
I  am,  &£. 


L  ET  T  E  R 


282,  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 


LETTER      V. 

Containing  a  Brief  DESCRIPTION   of  the 
Ifle  of  Man,  and  of  the  ScotHh  IJles>  both 

Weftern  and  Northern. 

SIR, 

IS  H  A  L  L  now  prefent  you  with  as  brief  and  ac- 
curate an  Account,  as  I  can  give,  of  the  Iflands  of 
moft  confiderable  Note,  lying  adjacent,  *or  belonging 
to  this  Northern  Part  of  the  Ifland  of  Great  Britain  5 
beginning,  firft,  with 

tte  Weftern  IJles  of  Scotland. 

I"TT  HE  SE  lilands  lie  in  the  Deucaledonlan  Sea,  and 
-*•  were  called,  by  fome,  Hebrides.  The  moil 
Southern  of  them  is  the  Ifle  of  MAN;  which,  for 
feveral  Generations,  has  belonged  to  families,  who 
have  been  Homagers  to  the  Crown  of  England  for  it. 
When  it  became  intirely  fubje&  to  the  EngUJh,  it 
kept  a  diftindl  Biftiop  of  its  own  ;  whofe  Succeflbrs 
continued  the  Title  of  Epifcopi  Sodorenfes,  as  well  as 
added  that  of  Mannenfes,  as  if  they  had  been  Bifhops 
of  the  Ifles  alfo,  whole  Cathedral  was  at  Sodor  ;  and, 
as  many  of  the  Towns  therein  are  called  by  Scots 
Names,  fo  at  prefent  it  belongs  to  a  Scots  Peer,  James 
Duke  of  dtbcl ;  who  fucceeded  to  this  Ifle,  as  Heir  at 
Law  to  his  Coufm  JamesEatl  of  Derby. 

The  Ifle  of  MAN  is  an  Afylum  for  all  Crimes  com- 
mitted out  of  the  Ifland,  but  they  muft  take  Care  to  do 
nothing  againft  the  Laws  there,  which  are  ftriclly  put 
in  Execution,  Nothing  pays  Cuftom  here.  Befides 
the  Towns  of  Ca/iktown,  Douglas ^  and  Ramfey,  there 

are 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          283 

are  1 7  Country  Parimes.  The  Language  is  a  broken 
Danijh.  Their  Judge  or  Civil  Governor  is  the  Duke 
of  dthol's  Lieutenant,  who  refides  at  Caftletown  :  He 
calls  a  Court  at  Pleafure,  and  is  inverted  with  the  fame 
Power  as  if  the  Duke  himfelf  were  there.  The  Laws 
and  Statutes  are  faid,  by  the  Lord  Chief  Juftice  Ctte, 
to  be  the  beft  that  can  be  found  any  where. 

The  tfland  is  about  30  Miles  long,  and  10  broad, 
and  is  very  mountainous.  Their  Provifions  are  good; 
their  Houies  very  fmall.  The  Town  of  Douglas 
is  well  built  of  Free-ftone,  and  pretty  populous  ;  its 
Harbour  well  defended  by  a  Fort,  as  is  alfo  Cafile- 
town,  Pool,  and  Ramfay,  The  People  have  many 
pv'od  Qualities ;  they  are  generally  charitable  to  the 
Poor,  aiid  hofpitable  to  Strangers.  In  their  Habit  and 
Manner  of  living  they  imitate  the  Englifo. 

There -are  not  many  Quarries  of  good  Stone:  one 
there  is  near  Cojlh-tcwn,  which  yields  a  tolerable  good 
Black  Marble,  lit  for  Tomb -Hones,  and  paving  of 
Churches  ;  of  which  fome  Quantities  have  or  late  been 
fent  to  London  for  thofe  Ufes.  Here  are  al(o  good 
Rocks  of  Lime-done,  which  being  burnt  with  Peat  or 
Coal,  is  become  a  great  Improvement  of  the  barren 
Lands  :  and  many  Quarries  of  a  blue,  thin,  light  Slate, 
one  of  the  beft  Coverings  for  Houfes,  of  which  good 
Quantities  are  exported  :  feveral  Mines  of  Lead,  Cop- 
per, and  Iron,  fome  of  diem  have  been  wrought  to  good 
tage,  particularly  the  Lead  ;  of  which  Ore  many 
hundred  Tuns  of  late  have  been  fmelted  and  ex- 
ported. 

Cojlle-town^  (called  fo  from  a  very  antient,  but 
yet  intire  beautiful  Caftle,  built  of  a  coarfe,  but  for 
ever  durable  Marble)  is  the  firft  Town  of  the  Ifland. 
This  Caftle  is  faid  to  have  been  built  by  Guttred% 
King  of  Man^  about  the  Year  960,  and  it  is  very  pro- 
bable, on  many  Accounts,  too  long  to  mention  here. 

Douglas  is  much  the  richeft  Town,  and  the  beft 
Market,  The  Harbour  is  the  fofeft  in  the  Ifland,  the 

Ships 


284          A  T  °  u  R  tbr°          Scotl- 

Ships  lying  in  it  as  quiet  as  in  a  Dock  or  Bafin.  In 
this  Town  are  excellent  Vaults  or  Cellars  for  Mer- 
chants Goods.  Oats  is  the  common  Bread  of  this 
Country,  made  into  thin  Cakes. 

The  Commodities  of  this  Ifland,  are  Black  Cattle, 
(of  which  600,  by  the  A&  of  Navigation,  may  be 
imported  yearly  into  England},  Lambs  Wool,  fine  and 
coarfe  Linen,  and  coarfe  Woollen  Cloth,  Hides, 
Skins,  Honey,  and  Tallow. 

There  is  a  fmall  Ifland  called  the  CALF  OF  MAST, 
about  three  Miles  in  Circumference,  feparated  from  the' 
South  of  Man  by  a  Channel  of  two  Furlongs  This 
little  Ifland  is  well  ftored  with  Rabbets,  an'--  at  one 
Time  of  the  Year  with  Puffins,  which  breed  in  the 
Rabbet-holes. 

Buchanan  fays,  the  Ifle  of  BUTE  is  eight  Miles 
long,  and  four  broad  ;  Bifhop  Lejiy,  that  it  is  ten  Miles 
long.  It  is  fruiiful  .n  Corn  and  Paftmage.  It  has 
a  Royal  Burgh,  called  Rothfiy^  with  an  antient  Cattle. 
From  this  the  Royal  Family  of  Stuart  is  fuppofeii  to 
derive  its  Origin  :  and  Duke  of  Roth/ay  is  now  one 
of  the  Titles  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  It  has  another 
Caftle,  called  the  Caftle  of  Kermes,  and  four  Churches. 
This  Ifland  lies  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Clyde,  eight  Miles 
Weft  from  Arran\  and  is  remarkable  for  its  Herring- 
fifhing.  The  Ifle  of  Bute  gives  Title  of  Earl  to  a 
Branch  of  the  noble  Family  of  Hamilton,  who  is  the 
chief  Proprietor,  and  heretable  Coroner  of  the  Ifland, 
and  has  a  Seat  at  Rofa ;  as  Callartlne  has  at  Kermes, 
and  Stuart  of  Afcog  another.  Queen  Mary,  before 
fhe  married  Lord  Darnley,  conferred  upon  him  the 
Title  of  Duke  of  Rothfay.  Near  Bute  are  two  fmall 
Iflands,  called  Great  and  Little  Cumbrays,  the  Proper- 
ty of  the  Earl  of  Glafgow. 

The  Ifle  of  ARRAN,  which  with  Bute  makes  up  one 
Sheriffdom,  lies  alfo  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Clyde,  24 
Miles  in  Length,  and  near  16  broad  j  fruitful  in  Com 
ana1  Pafturage.  It  is  very  well  inhabited  on  the  Coaft, 

and 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  285 

and  is  a  fafe  and  good  Harbour,  covered  by  Lamlajh9 
or  the  Holy-JJle.  It  has  two  Churches,  and  feveral 
Caftles,  of  which  that  of  Brodich  is  the  ftrongeft  and 
moft  noted,  and  is  the  Residence  of  the  Hamilton  Fa^ 
miiy,  when  in  thefe  Parts  ;  who  alfo  have  a  Foreft 
here,  containing  about  400  Head  of  Deer  :  and  the 
Ifland  gives  Title  of  Earl  to  the  Duke  of  that  Name. 
The  liland  has  feveral  Rivers  in  it,  which  abound  with 
Salmon,  as  the  Sea  about  it  does  with  Herrings,  Cod, 
and  Whitings. 

The  People  are  Proteftants,  fpeak  the  Irijh  Lan- 
guage, and  are  flill  compoied  of  feveral  Tribes,  or 
Clans.  The  molt  antient  are  Mac  Lewis,  of  French 
Extraction,  in  Englijh  named  Fullerton^  and  Lairds  of 
Kirk  Michael^  where  they  refide. 

Thefe  two  Iflands  are  furrounded  with  a  tumultuous 
and  dangerous  Sea,  efpecially  in  an  hard  South-weft 
Wind  ;  which  brings  the  Sea  rolling  in  upon  them  in 
a  frightful  manner.  But  the  above  Harbour  of  Lam- 
lajb  ftands  them  in  great  (lead  in  this  Cafe. 

Near  the  Ifle  of  Arran  is  FLADA,  a  fmall  Ifland, 
which  abounds  with  Rabbets. 

South- weft  from  Bute  lies  MERNOCH,  about  a  Mile 
long,  and  half  a  Mile  broad,  fruitful  in  Corn. 

Now  we  are  upon  thefe  Weftern  Coafts,  1  (hall 
mention,  that,  in  the  Month  of  Auguft  1740.  an  At- 
tempt was  made  by  Diving,  to  come  at  one  of  the 
largeft  Ships  of  the  Spantjb  Armada^  ftranded  in  1588. 
on  thefe  Coafts.  Another  was  dived  for  fome  Years 
ago ;  but  the  Sand  being  loofe,  it  turned  to  little  or  no 
Account.  The  other,  which  was  loft  near  Portln- 
crofs,  was  begun  to  be  fearched  after  by  Sir  Archibald 
Grant)  and  Captain  Roe,  in  Augujl  1740.  and  the  fol- 
lowing was  the  Account  that  was  tranfmitted  to  us ; 
which  we  the  rather  infert,  as  it  gives  fome  Notion  of 
the  Operation  by  the  Diving-engine. 

The  Country-people  had  preferved,  by  Tradition, 
ihe  Spot  pretty  near  where  (he  funk,  and  gave  them 

all 


a§6  A  TOUR  tM  Scctl. 

all  the  Information  they  were  able  :  immediately  the 
Divers  went  to  Work,  and  fwept  for  her;  which  they 
do  thus :  They  have  a  long  Line,  which  they  fink 
with  Leads  ,  one  End  of  the  Rope  is  fixed  to  one 
Boat,  and  the  other  End  to  another  ;  they  row ;  and 
whatever  interrupts  them,  the  Diver  goes  down  to 
make  a  Difcovery.  They  foon  happened  on  the  Place 
where  the  Ship  lay,  which  is  fcarce  a  Quarter  of  a 
Mile  from  the  Shore,  in  ten  Fathom  and  a  Foot 
Water.  Captain  Roe  immediately  went  down,  and 
found  the  Veflel  to  be  very  in  tire,  to  have  a  great 
Number  of  Guns  on  board,  but  to  be  full  of  Sand. 
The  firft  thing  he  fixed  upon  was  a  Cannon,  which 
lay  upon  the  Sand  at  the  Head  of  the  Ship :  to  this  he 
fixed  his  Tongs,  which  are  made  of  ftrong  Bars  of 
Iron ;  they  are  open,  when  they  are  let  down,  and 
have  Teeth,  which  join  into  one  another.  As  foon 
as  they  are  fixed  upon  any  thing,  he  gives  the  Signal, 
when  they  are  made  to  (hut ;  arjd  the  heavier  the  Sub- 
ject, the  clofer  they  hold.  The  Cannon  was  drawn 
up  with  a  good  deal  of  Difficulty  :  it  meafures  full  nine 
Feet,  is  of  Brafs,  greeniuVcoloured,  but  nothing  the 
worfe.  On  the  Breach  there  is  a  Rofe^  with  an  E  on 
the  one  Side,  and  an  R  on  the  other,  with  this  Infcrip- 
tion,  Richard  and  John  Philips,  Brethren,  made  this 
Piece^  Anno  1584,  But  we  may  be  allowed  to  obferve, 
That  by  the  E.  R.  on  the  Cannon,  which  denotes 
Mtiz.  Regina,  and  the  Rofe^  as  alfo  the  Englijb  Infcrip- 
tion  of  the  Makers,  it  fhould  feem  to  us,  that  it  could 
not  belong  to  the  Armada ;  but  rather  to  fome  Englljh 
Ship,  that  might  have  been  caft  away  there.  Ten  of 
thefe  Brafs  Cannon,  and  ten  Iron  ones,  have  been  fince 
carried  into  Dublin  ;  and  they  hope  to  recover  60  out 
of  this  Ship.  The  Guns  were  all  charged,  and  the 
Metal  of  fome,  by  ly ing  fo  long  under  Water,  moulders 
away  like  Clay. 

Several  People  have  fcraped  the  Iron  Guns,  which 
are  as  mouldy  as  Bricks  $  and,  by  keeping  the  Metal 

fome 


ScotL          GREAT  BRITAIN.  287 

fome  time  in  their  Hands,  it  grows  fo  hot,  that  they 
are  not  able  to  bear  it  -9  but  when  vit  is  expofed  two 
or  three  Hours  in  open  Air,  it  lofes  all  its  burning  Qua- 
lity. This  is  accounted  for  in  the  following  manner; 
'viz. 

Dr.  Tournefirt,  a  French  Phyfician,  in  his  Voyage  to 
tie  Levant^  Parti,  fays,  It  is  certain,  that  the  Filings 
of  Iron,  fteeped  in  common  Water,  will  grow  confider- 
ably  warm,  and  much  more  fo  in  Sea-water.  And,  if 
you  mingle  therewith  fome  Sulphur  powdered,  you 
will  really  fee  this  Mixture  burn. 

Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  in  his  Optics, p.  354.  fays:  That 
even  the  grofs  Budy  of  Sulphur,  powdered  with  an 
equal  Weight  of  Iron  Filings,  and  a  little  Water, 
made  into  a  Pafte,  a£ts  upon  the  Iron  ;  and  in  five 
or  fix  Hours  grows  too  hot  to  be  touched,  and  emits 
a  Flame. 

Now  it  is  certain,  that  caft  Iron  contains  a  great 
<kal  f  Bitumen,  or  Sulphur,  in  its  Competition  ; 
and  that  Iron  in  its  fenfible  Quality  effects  Heat,  • 
and  cannot  be  perceived  without  the  Admilfion  of 
Air ;  which  is  the  Reafon  why  the  Scrapings  fhould 
grow  hot,  although  the  Guns  are  actually  cold  to  the 
Touch. 

AILS  A,  or  IJlefay,  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Clyde,  Is 
a  ftcep  Rock,  fomething  refembling  the  Bafs  in  the 
Mouth  of  Forth,  being  inacceilible  in  all  Places,  but 
only  by  one  Pafs,  and  not  inhabited,  except  at  one 
time  of  the  Year ;  when  a  great  Fleet  of  Veflels 
go  thither  to  fifh  for  Cod.  It  abounds  with  Va- 
riety of  Sea- fowl,  efpecially  Solan  Geefe,  and  has 
Multitudes  of  Rabbets.  It  belongs  to  the  Earl  of 
Caffil,  who  receives,  by  the  Produce  of  Hogs,  Fowl, 
Down,  and  Fifh,  about  100  Merks  Scats  yearly  from 
hence. 

Near  the  Ifle  of  Bute  lie  two  Iflands,  called  CUM- 
BRA,  the  Greater  and  Lejfer ;  the  firft  is  about  a 
Mile  in  Length,  has  a  Church  in  it,  and  a  Well,  the 

Waters 


t88  4  TOUR  thro  ScotL 

Waters  of  which  are  reckoned,  by  the  Natives, 
good  againft  all  Difeafes  :  the  other  Ifland  is  lefs  ; 
-and  both  belong  to  Montgomery  of  Skelmerly  ;  the 
larger  is  fruitful  in  Corn,  and  the  fmailer  abounds, 
with  Deer. 

About  a  Mile  from  the  Promontory  of  Kintyre  lies 
A  VON  A,  which  fignifies  a  goad  Harbour.  The  Danes 
came  hither  with  their,  Fleets,  when  they  were  Ma- 
fters  of  the  Ifles. 

The  next  remarkable  Ifland  is  GJGAIA,  four  Miles 
from  Kintyre,  fix  Miles  in  Length,  and  a  Mile  and 
an  half  in  Breadth.  The  Inhabitants  are  Proteftants. 
There  is  a  Church  in  this  Ifland,  and  a  Sepulchre  for 
the  Mac  Nttis*  the  Proprietors  of  it.  Corkir^  which 
dyes  a  Crimfon  Colour,  and  Croftll^  which  dyes  a  Phila- 
mort,  grow  upon  the  Stones  here.  The  Soil  is  good 
for  Pafture  and  Arable.  They  have  alfo  a  Medicinal 
Well,  which  they  efteem  a  Catholicon. 

A  Quarter  of  a  Mile  South  lies  CARY,  about  a 
Mile  in  Compafs,  has  good  Pafturage,  and  abounds 
with  Rabbets.  It  belongs  to  the.  Family  of  Mac- 
alifter. 

JURA  lies  12  Miles  from  Gigaia^  is  20  Miles  long, 
and  fix  or  feven  broad ;  it  belongs  to  the  Duke  of 
Argjle^  and  makes  Part  of  the  Shire  of  that  Name. 
This  is  very  barren,  but  reckoned  one  of  the  wholfomeft 
Places  in  Scotland:  here  Women  feldom  die  in  Child- 
bed ;  and  one  Macraln  died  in  the  Reign  of  King 
Cbarlesli.  who  had  been  1 80  Cbnfimafs  in  one  Houfe. 
It  abounds  with  many  Deer,  has  good  Pafturage  for 
other  Cattle,  has  many  good  Springs,  and  one  good 
againil  Naufeournefs  .of  the  Stomach,  and  the  Stone. 
Here  are -two  very  high  Mountains,  called  The  Paps  of 
JURA  j  which  are  noted  Sea-marks  for  a  very  great 
Way.  From  March  to  September  the  Air  is  perfectly 
pure.  There  are  very  good  Salmon  in  the  Rivers  of 
Jus  Ifland.  They  have  one  Church  here,  called  AVA 

harn. 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  28^ 

learn.     The  Inhabitants,  who   fpeak  Iri/h9  and  wear 
the  Plaid  and  Bonnet,  are  Proteftants. 

Two  Miles  from- Jura  lies  SCARBA,  four  Miles 
long,  and  one  broad  ;  noted  for  its  extraordinary  Tides, 
and  the  Longevity  of  its  Inhabitants  3  one  of  whom,  a 
Woman,  lived  140  Years. 

Near  to  thefe  lie  many  Iflands  of  lefs  Note,  which  I 
have  not  room  to  name. 

LISMORE,  or  Lijfimore,  the  Seat  of  the  Bifhop  of 
Argyle,  who,  from  thence,  was  called  Epifcopus  Lif- 
morenfis,  is  about  eight  Miles  long,  and  two  broad,  and 
lies  Eaftward  from  Mull  in  the  Mouth  of  Loch  yo!9 
which  goes  up  to  Innerlocby  in  Locbaber. 

BERNERA,  formerly  a  Sancluary  in  Popiflb  times, 
has  a  noble  Wood  of  Yew.  In  this  lile,  which  is  five 
Miles  in  Circumference,  and  lies  about  two  Leagues  to 
the  South  of  Harries^  is  a  Frefh-water  Lake,  called 
Locbbruifti  where  many  Land  and  Sea-fowl  build. 

South-weft  from  Jura  lies  ILA,  24  Miles  long,  in 
fome  Places  eight,  and  in  others  16  broad.  It  abounds 
with  Corn  and  Cattle,  has  Store  of  Deer,  and  Lead- 
mines,  with  Lime-ftone  in  vail  Quantities.  It  has  fe- 
veral  Rivers,  that  abound  with  Salmon,  and  other  Fifh 
of  feveral  Sorts.  In  the  Center  of  it  lies  Locbfnlagan^ 
three  Miles  in  Circumference.  It  abounds  with  Sal- 
mon, Trouts,  and  Eels,  and  has  an  Ifland  in  it;  where 
Macdonal&i  King  of  the  Ifles,  had  his  Refidence,  and 
made  it  the  Seat  of  his  Government :  the  Ruins  of 
whofe  Court  are  flill  to  be  feen  here.  There  are  fe- 
veral Frefh- water  Lakes  in  this  Ifland,  with  Forts  upon 
them.  It  has  alfo  a  Medicinal  Well,  much  frequent- 
ed by  the  Natives  for  all  Difeafes.  There  are  fev.ral 
Caves  herej  one  of  them  capable  of  holding  200 
Men.  The  Country  is  indifferently  fruitful.  It  lies 
lower  than  Jura  j  confequently  is  wetter,  and  lefs 
wholefome.  The  Inhabitants  are  Protefrants.  Tie  e 
are  four  Churches  and  a  Chapel  in  this  Ifland,  the  moft 
remarkable  of  which  is  St.  Columbuis  Church  It 

VOL,  IV,  O  gnes 


A  TOUR,  thro  Scot!. 

gives  the  Title  of  Earl  to  the  prefent  Duke  of 
Argyle  ;  but  Campbell  of  Colder  is  the  chief  Pro- 
prietor. 

There  are  many  fmall  Iflands  about  this,  which  we 
cannot  mention. 

Two  Leagues  North-weft  from  Ha  lies  COLONSA, 
feparated  from  Oranfa  only  by  Ti  e  of  Flood.  It  is 
four  Miles  in  Length,  and  a  Mile  broad  ;  not  fo 
fruitful  as  the  other.  There  is  one  Church,  befides 
two  ruinous  Chapels,  in  this  Ifle;  forne  Kreih-  water 
Lakes  abounding  with  Trouts ;  and  feveral  Forts. 
The  Proprietor  is  the  Duke  of  Argyle^  and  the  Inhabi- 
tants Proteitants. 

ORANSA  is  four  Miles  in  Circumference,  and  fruit- 
ful in  Corn  and  Grafs.  It  has  alfo  a  Church  and  a 
Chapel,  and  had  formerly  a  Monaftery  dedicated  to 
St.  Columbus.  The  Proprietor  is  Macduff. 

Farther  Weft  lies  the  fmall  Ifle  of  LfowHiRTY. 
The  Natives  have  a  Tradition,  that  Pygmies  once 
lived  here.  The  Duke  of  Argyle  is  Proprietor. 

North-eaft  from  Ila  lies  the  Ifle  of  MULL,  24 
Miles  in  Length,  and  near  as  much  in  Breadth.  It 
lies  in  the  Sh  re  of  Argyle.  The  Air  is  temperate, 
cold,  and  moift,  but  qualified  by  frefh  Breezes  from 
the  Mountains.  The  Natives,  when  the  Seafon  is 
rnoift,  take  a  large  Dofe  of  Aqua-vita  for  a  Correc- 
tive, and  chew  a  Piece  of  Charmel-root,  when  they 
intend  to  be  merry,  to  prevent  Drunkennefs.  This 
Ifland  in  general  affords  good  Paflurage  for  Cattle  of 
all  Sorts.  They  have  a  great  many  Deer,  and  abound 
with  Wild  fowl,  and  very  fine  Hawks.  Their  Horfes 
are  little,  but  very  fprightly  ;  their  Black  Cattle  ex- 
cellent Meat.  Their  Corn  is  Barley  and  Oats.  It 
'  formerly  abounded  with  Wood,  but  moil  of.it  is  now 
cut.  The  Heaths,  befides  Pafturage  for  Cattle,  af- 
ford good  Fuel  for  the  Natives.  The  Bay  of  Du- 
art^  on  the  Weft-fide,  is  a  good  Anchoring-place. 
Upon  this  ftands  the  Caftle  of  Duart^  the  Seat  of  the 

Head 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  291 

Head  of  the  antient  Family  of  Maclean*  who  were  the 
chief  Proprietors  of  this  Ifland  ;  but,  Sir  John  Mac* 
lean  having  forfeited,  it  is  now  poiTeifed  by  the  Duke 
of  Argyle.  There  are  two  other  Caftles,  and  feveral 
Anchoring-places  about  this  Ifland.  It  has  feveral  Ri- 
vers, which  afford  Salmon,  and  abound  with  blaclc 
Muffels,  which  breed  Pearl.  There  are  alfo  fome 
frefli-water  Lakes  in  it;  which  afford  Trcut,  Eels,  &c+ 
Divers  Jefler  Ifles  lie  about  it,  and  in  its  Bays  ;  feve- 
rnl  of  which  are  very  fruitful,  and  fome  impregnable* 
The  Bay  called  Lochlcffan  abounds  with  Herrings  and 
Shell-fifti.  The  Inhabitants  of  this  Ifle  profefs  Pro- 
tefta&tifm,  and  have  two  Parifh-Churches,  befides  fe- 
ver^! ruinous  Places,  formerly  ufed  for  Devotion.  In 
the  Sound  or  Bay  of  Mull,  betwixt  this  Ifle  and  Locba- 
ber,  a  great  Ship,  called  the  Florida,  belonging  to  the 
Spanift)  Armada,  was  loft  in  the  Year  1588.  Per- 
fons  from  feveral  Places  have  often  dived  for  her,  and 
found  good  Account  in  the  Guns,  and  other  valuable 
J£ffe6ts  they  have  got  out  of  her. 

Near  this  lies  the  Ifland  of  ST  COLUMBUS,  two 
TvLles  in  Length,  and  about  a  Mile  broad.  It  abounds 
in  all  things  produced  in  this  Climate  ;  was  noted  for 
antient  Monuments,  and  particularly  as  being  the  Re- 
fidence  of  St.  Columbus,  famous  for  his  Difciplinfi  and 
Sanctity.  It  had  two  Monafteries,  one  foi  Men,  and 
another  for  Women,  befides  feveral  Chapels  endowed 
by  the  Kings  of  Scotland,  and  of  the  Ifles.  It  is  called 
in  the  Irijh  Language,  /  colm  kil ;  fome  call  it  lona. 
It  contains  now  about  30  poor  Families.  The  BilLops 
of  the  Ifles  had  formerly  their  Seat  here.  This  Ifland 
is  famous  in  Hiftoiy  for  being  a  Seminary  of  Efcle* 
fiafHcs,  and,  in  a  manner,  the  Mother  Chur  h  c  f  ^.11 
the  Dominions  of  the  S<-ots  and  Pifts :  and,  though *the 
Abbot  was  only  a  P  efbyter,  yet  all  the  Clergy  of  the 
Province,  and  Bifhops  themfelves,  were  Subject  to  h  m, 
as  is  mentioned  by  Bede.  The  Church  dedicated  to 
St.  Mary  is  intirely  demolifhed,  and  overgrown  with 
0  2  Grafs 


a<,2  '4  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

Grafs  and  Weeds ;  nor  is  there  any  regular  Place  of 
Worfhip  in  the  whole  Ifland.  Here  the  Vicar  of  So- 
rabee,  as  Dean  of  the  Ifles,  ufed  three  or  four  times  a 
Year  to  catechize  and  p  each  to  the  People.  The 
old  Monaftery,  or  College  of  Monks,  was  a  Place  of 
great  San&ity  and  Privilege  ;  of  which  temporal  Pri- 
vileges the  Abbot  was  Superior,  and  in  many  things 
exempt  from  the  Bifhop,  being  fubjecl;  only  to  the  Pope, 
or  his  Delegates. 

Six  Miles  Weft  from  this  Ifland  lies  TYRE-TY, 
eight  Miles  long,  and  three  broad.  It  is  reckoned  to 
be  the  molt  plentiful  of  all  the  Iflands  in  the  Neceflaries 
of  human  Life,  abounding  with  Com,  Cattle,  Fifh, 
and  Fowl.  Here  is  a  frefh-water  Lake,  with  an  Ifland, 
and  an  old  Caftle  in  it,  and  an  Harbour  for  Long- 
boats, which  are  ufed  in  that  Country.  It  formerly  be- 
longed to  the  Family  of  Maclean^  but  now  belongs  to 
the  Duke  of  Argyle.  There  is  one  Church  in  this 
Ifland,  called  Scrali,  whereof  th€  Dean  of  the  Ifles  was 
Minifter.  The  People  are  Pioteftants:  they  are  not 
very  healthy,  as  the  Country  lies  low. 

Near  this  are  two  Iflands,  called  KERNIBERG,  fo 
ftrong  by  Nature,  that  a  little  Art  would  make  them 
impregnable. 

About  hajf  a  League  to  the  North-eafl  lies  the 
Ifland  of  COLL,  ten  Miles  long,  and  two  broad,  and 
is  very  fruitful.  It  has  feveral  Rivulets,  which  afford 
Salmon,  and  a  frefh-water  Lake,  that  has  Trouts  and 
Eels.  The  Proprietor  is  a  Branch  of  the  Family  of 
Maclean,  The  Inhabitants  are  Proteftants  :  they 
have  a  Notion  here,  that  Tyre-ty  breeds  more  Women 
than  Men,  and  Coll  more  Men  than  Women  ;  fo  that 
they  may  people  each  other  without  the  Affiftance  of 
their  Neighbours,  The  Coafts  of  this  Ifland  abound 
with  larger  Cod  and  Ling,  than  are  to  be  found 
on  the  Coafts  of  the  neighbouring  Ifles  and  Con- 
tinent. 

4  North 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  293 

North  from  this  lies  the  Ifle  of  Rum,  fix  Miles 
long,  and  four  broad.  It  is  mountainous  and  heathy, 
but  the  Coaft  is  arable  and  fruitful.  It  is  but  thinly  in- 
habited ;  and  the  Sea-fowl  lay  their  Eggs  in  fuch 
Quantities,  that,  in  the  Spring,  any  one  may  gather 
what  Number  he  pleafes.  The  Rivulets  of  this  Ifland 
afford  Salmon  ;  and  there  is  Plenty  of  Land  and 
Sea-fowl,  efpecially  thofe  called  Puffins:  there  are 
alfo  abundance  of  Deer  in  the  Mountains.  The  Pro- 
prietor is  Maclean  of  C<?//,  and  the  Inhabitants  are  Pro- 
teftants. 

Half  a  Mile  from  Rum  lies  CANNEY,  two  Miles 
long,  and  one  Mile  broad,  furrounded  with  an  high 
Rock ;  but  plentiful  in  Corn  and  Grafs  ;  and  the 
Coafts  abound  with  Cod  and  Ling.  In  the  North-end 
there  is  a  Rock  of  Loadftone,  as  fome  think,  bccaufe 
it  diforders  the  Needle  of  the  Compafs,  when  any 
Ships  come  near  it.  It  has  one  Church  ;  and  good 
Anchorage  on  the  North-eaft.  The  Proprietor  is  one 
of  the  Macdonalds^  and  the  Inhabitants  Papifts. 

MUCK  lies  South-weft  of  Rum>  is  about  four  Miles 
in  Circumference,  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Grafs,  furrounded 
with  Rocks,  and  noted  for  good  Hawks. 

EGG  lies  not  far  from  Colt,  is  three  Miles  in  Length, 
and  a  Mile  and  an  half  in  Breadth,  and  the  Whole 
pretty  good  for  Pafturage  and  Cultivation.  On  the 
South-end  of  it  is  a  Mountain,  and  on  the  Top  of  that 
an  high  Rock,  of  about  150  Paces  in  Circumference, 
with  a  Frefh- water  Pool  in  the  Middle  of  it :  there  is 
only  one  Pafs  up  to  it  ;  fo  that  it  is  a  natural  Fort. 
On  the  South -weft  Side  of  the  Ifle  is  a  Cave,  capable 
of  containing  fome  Hundreds  of  People  ;  and  there  are 
feveral  Medicinal  Wells  in  this  Ifland.  The  Proprie- 
tors are  fome  of  the  Macdonalds  :  the  Inhabitants  bi- 
gotted  Papifts. 

North  from  this  lies  SKY,  42  Miles  long,  and  in 

fome  Places  20,  in  others  30  Miles  broad.     It  is  fepa.- 

rated  from  the  Shire  of  Invernefs,  to  which  it  belongs, 

03  by 


Scot!. 

by  a  Firth  fo  narrow,  that  a  Man  may  eafily  call  from 
one  Side  to  the  other.  It  is  navigable  by  the  largeft 
Ships  of -War.  The  Current  there  is  fo  violent,  that 
no  Veflel  is  able  to  fail  againft  it,  though  the  Wind 
proves  ever  fo  fair;  fo  that  the  Tide  muft  always  be 
obferved.  The  Way  of  ferrying  Cows  in  the  narrow 
Ferry,  called  the  Kyle*  where  the  Tide  is  very  rapid,  is 
thus :  They  tie  a  Withe  about  the  Cow's  Lower -ja.y, 
and  bind  five  of  them  together  ;  after  which,  a  Man 
in  the  End  of  a  Boat  holds  the  Withe  that  ties  the  fore- 
mofr,  and  rows  over,  carrying,  in  the  Space  of  a  few 
Hours,  at  Low- water,  3  or  400  Cows.  The  Country 
is  populous,  the  People  handfome,  and  very  healthy, 
Almoft  all  the  Inhabitants  of  Sky  are  Proteftants :  none 
of  them  poflefs  any  Land.  It  is  very  high  Ground,  as 
well  on  the  Coaft,  as  up  in  the  Country,  where  are 
feven  lofty  Mountains,  which  .lie  near  one  another,  al- 
moft  in  the  Centre  of  the  Ifland.  It  has  a  great  deal 
of  arable  Land,  which  yields  a  good  Increafe  j  fo 
that  they  fupply  the  neighbouring  Continent  with 
Barley  and  Oats.  It  has  many  excellent  Bays  and 
Harbours  for  the  Conveniency  of  Fifhing,  and  other 
Trade,  and  about  30  Rivers,  which  afford  Sal- 
iron. 

ST.  COLUMBUS'S  Lake  has  an  Ifland,  and  a  Chapel 
in  it.-  Moft  of  the  Bays  abound  with  Herrings  all  the 
Summer  ;  the  Natives  dry  and  preferve  them  with 
Salt  for  eight  Months,  without  any  other  Art  than 
taking  out  their  Guts,  tying  a  Rufh  about  their  Neck?, 
and  hanging  them  up  by  Pair  upon  a  Rope  of  Heath, 
acrofs  the  Houfe.  Cod,  Ling,  Mackrel,  Haddock, 
Whiting,  Turbot,  fcfY.  abound  on  this  Coaft  ;  as  do 
Oyfters.  and  all  Sorts  of  Shell-fifti.  There  are  many 
krge  Caves  in  this  Ifland,  from  the  Roof  of  fame  of 
which  drops  a  Water,  which  petrifies  into  a  white 
limv  Subftance  :  one  of  them  in  S/ate,  called  the 
Golden  Cave,  is  faid  to  be  feven  Miles  long.  There 

are 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  295* 

are  abundance  of  old  Forts  on  the  Coafl,  which  feem 
to  have  been  erected  by  the  Danes ',  they  ftand  on 
rifling  Grounds,  and  To  near  one  another,  that,  by  a 
Beacon  fired  on  any  one  of  them,  the  Notice  of  any 
approaching  Danger  by  Invafion  was  immediately 
fpread  through  the  whole  Tfland.  There  are  alfo  fe- 
veral  little  Houfes  of  Stone  built  under-ground,  for  hid- 
ing People,  and  their  Goods,  in  time  of  War  ;  and 
others  above'-ground,  capable  only  of  holding  one  Per- 
fon,  which  feem  to  have  been  defigned  for  Contempla- 
tion. There  are  feveral  of  the  Druids  Houfes  yet  in- 
tire  in  the  Ifle  of  <$,£>>,  ana  in  fome  other  Ifles.  The 
Vulgar  in  the  Ifiands  ilill  {hew  a  great  RefpecT:  for 
thefe  Houfes  ;  and  never  come  to  the  antient  facrjfic- 
ing  Cams,  but  they  walk  three  times  round  them  from 
Eaft  to  Weft,  according  to  the  Courfe  of  the  Sun. 
The  Cattle  here  are  Horfes,  Cows,  Sheep,  Goats,  and 
Hogs  ;  the  Cows  frequently  feed  on  the  Sea-weed, 
and  obferve  the  Tide  of  Ebb  for  that  End,  as  exaclly 
as  any  Man  can  do.  This  Ifiand  abounds  with  Land 
and  Water- 'owl  of  many  Sorts;  and  among  others 
they  have  Hawks  and  Eagles.  Some  Part  of  it  be- 
longs to  Sir  Alexander  Macdmald^  fome  of  whofe  An- 
ceftors  were  called  Kings  of  the  Ifles  ;  the  middle 
Parts  belong  to  Mackinnon  of  that  Ilk,  and  the  North- 
weft  Parts  Mong  to  Madeod\  all  three  Chiefs  of  their 
feveral  Clans. 

SOT  A  BRTTIL  lies  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  South  of 
Sty.  is  five  Miles  in  Circumference,  full  of  Bogs,  and 
fitter  for  Pa'.lurage  than  Cultivation,  On  the  Weft- 
fide  it  is  covered  with  Wood.  The  Cuafts  of  this 
Ifland  abound  with  Cod  and  Ling. 

On  the  North  fide  of  Sty  lies  SCALPA,  five  Miles- 
in  Circumference.  It  has  Wood  in  feveral  Parts  of 
it,  and  is  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Grafs. 

A  little  farther  North  lies  RAARSAY,  feven   Miles 

long,  and  three  broad.     It  has  much  Wood,  and  is 

fitter  for  Pafture  than    Cultivation.     On    tfe  Eaft- 

04  fiJe 


A  T  O  U  R  tbrf  Scotl. 

fide  of  it  is  a  Spring,  which  runs  down  from  a  Rock, 
and  petrifies  into  a  fine  white  Lime,  of  which  it  yields 
great  Quantities.  Here  is  alfo  a  Quarry  of  good 
Stone.  On  the  Weft-fide  are  Abundance  of  Caves, 
where  People  lodge,  who  go  thither  in  Summer  upon 
the  A  ccoun t  of  fifn  ing  or  grazing  of  Cattle.  There  are 
feveral  Forts  in  this  liland,  fome  of  which  are  naturally 
very  ftrcng.  The  Proprietor  is  a  Cadet  of  the  Family 
of  Macleod^  and  is  as  much  refpecled  by  the  Inhabi- 
tants, as  if  he  were  a  Prince. 

A  Quarter  of  a  Mile  farther  North,  lies  RONA, 
three  Miles  in  Length.  It  is  fruitful  in  Pafturage ;  and 
the  Rocks  about  it  are  of  Heclic  Stone. 

ALSVIG  lies  on  the  North- weft  Corner  of  Sfy9  is 
two  Miles  in  Circumference,  fruitful  in  Corn  and 
Graf?,  and  noted  for  the  vaft  Shoals  of  Herrings  about 
it,  which  fometimes  entangle  the  Fifhing- boats. 

FLADDA,  two  Leagues  diftant,  is  but  two  Miles 
in  Compafs,  but  much  noted  for  its  Fifhing  of  all  Sorts, 
and  for  large  Whales,  which  purfue  the  Fifh  on  the 
Coaft  of  it.  The  Sea-fowl,  called  Coulternebs^  are 
very  numerous  here ;  and  a  great  Flock  of  Plovers 
come  hither  from  Sky9  in  the  Beginning  of  September^ 
and  return  again  in  April.  There  are  feveral  Rocks 
about  this  Ifland,  particularly  one,  called  The  Round 
Table,  about  half  a  Mile  in  Circumference,  with  a 
Erefh- water  Spring,  which  makes  an  impregnable 
Fort,  there  being  only  one  Way  to  climb  up  to  it,  by 
one  Man  at  a  time.  The  Natives  of  Sky,  and  the 
neighbouring  Iflands,  have  a  peculiar  Way  of  curing 
the  Diftempers  which  are  incident  to  them,  by  Simples 
of  their  own  Product,  wherein  they  are  fuccefsful  to  a 
Miracle  :  they  have  alfo  feveral  Medicinal  Wells. 

Sixty  Mile^South-weft  from  Sky\\Q  nine  Iflands, the 
chief  of  which  is  VATERSA,  which,  befides  many 
other  Conveniences,  has  a  large  Harbour,  capable 
of  the  largeft  Ships,  where,  at  ftated  times,  great 
Numbers  of  Fiihermen  meet  from  the  neighbouring 
Countries. 

Two 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  297 

Two  Miles  from  Vaterfa  lies  BARRA,  feven  Miles 
long,  and  three  broad,  called  fo  from  St.  Z?#r,  the  tute- 
lar Saint.  It  is  fruitful  in  Corn,  and  noted  for  its  Cod- 
fifning.  The  Sea  enters  this  I  (land  at  a  .fmall  Channel,, 
and  a'terwards  enlarges  itfelf  into  a  round  Bay,  irv 
•which  is  an  I  (land,  with  a  very  ftrong  Caftle.  It  has 
a  good  Harbour  on  the  North- eaft  Side,  where  is  Plenty 
of  Fiih  ;  and  the  R.ivulets  on  the  Eaft-fide  abound 
with  Salmon 

About  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  South  from  Earra  lies- 
KISMUL,  the  Seat  of  Mac  Neil  -f  Barra,  which  is 
encompafled  with  a  Stone  Wall  to  Stories  high  5. 
within  which  there  is  a  Tower,  a  Hall,  a  agazine, 
and  other  Hou'es.  Tney  have  a  Church  in  this  Iflandr 
and  a  Chaprl,  where  the  M.ic  Neils  are  buried.  /  The 
Nattvt-s  are  i'apiils,  and  generally  very  .gnorait  and 
fuperfhti^us, 

H?"e  are  feveral  other  lefs  -Iflands  belonging  to 
Mac  Neii  -,  fome  of  t  em  fruitful  enough  in  Corn  and 
Grar*,  others  left  for  Pafturage,  and  fome  of  them  re- 
maikable  for  fifhing  of  Ling  and  Cod.  The  Inhabi-. 
tarns  are  very  healthy  and  hofpitable  :  they  have 
abundance  of  Sea-fowl  \  and,  when  they  kill  any  of 
the  n  for  Ufe,  they  fait  them  with  the  Afhes  of  burnt 
Sed ware,  which  preferves  them  from  Putrefaction. 
&lac  Neil  holds  his  Lands  of  Sir  Alexander  R4acdinald 
of  Slute,  to  whom  he  pays  40 /.  Scots  per  Annurn^  and. 
an  Hawk,  if  required  -,  and  is  obliged  to  furnifh  him 
with  a  certain  Number  of  Men  on  extraordinary  Oc- 
cafions. 

sBetwixt  Harra  and  Uifl  lie  14   fmall  Iflands,  not 
very  confideral  le. 

A    little   North   of  fiarra  lies  Soura-uisT,  21 
Miles  I-- ng,  in-  fome  Places  three,  and  ^  others  1 
Miles  broad.     The  Eift  fide  is  inountainous,  Intt  the: 
Weft    plain-  and   arable      The  Ifland   abounds  witJu. 
Freih-water  Lakes,  which  have   Plenty  ©f   JK 

particularly  Treats  and  Eels*    In  feveia' 
O  5 


25)8  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

them  are  Iflands  with  Forts.  There  is  one  Lake  three 
Miles  long,  into  which  the  Sea  has  made  its  way, 
though  the  People  did  all  they  could  to  hinder  it, 
The  Inhabitants  are  healthy  :  one  Man  lately  lived 
130  Years,  and  retained  his  Underftandmg.  The 
Ir'ijh  Tongue-is  here  fpoken  in  great  Perfection.  The 
Macdonalds^  defcended  from  the  antient  Kings  of 
thefe  Iflands,  are  Proprietors,  and  with  the  Inhabit- 
ants profefs  the  Popifh  Religion.  The  Soil  is  general- 
ly Tandy,  but  yields  a  good  Produce  of  Barley,  Oats, 
and  Rye.  Ambergris  is  fometimes  found  upon  the 
Coaft. 

Betwixt  this  Ifland  and  Northuijl,  two  Miles  North,' 
lies  BENBECULA.  The  Ground  is  all  plain  and 
Tandy  betwixt  them,  except  two  little  Channels,  about 
Knee-deep  at  a  Tide  of  Ebb  ;  but  the  Whole  is  na- 
vigable by  Boats  at  a  Tide  of  Flood  ;  and  there  lie  fe- 
veral  fmall  IfLnds  on  the  Eaft  of  thefe  Channels. 
Benbecula  is  three  Miles  long,  and  three  broad.  It  has  a 
JBay  on  the  Eaft- fide  for  fmall  VefFels,  where  Herrings 
are  fometimes  taken.  The  Eaft  Part  of  this  Ifland  is 
arable:  it  has  feveral  Frefh- water  Lakes  well  ftored 
with  Fifli  and  Fowl,  and  fome  fmall  Forts  upon  the 
Iflands  in  thofe  Lukes.  The  Natives  are  Papifts,  and 
the  Proprietor  is  one  of  the  Macdonalds. 

A  little  North  of  this  Ifland  lies  NORTH- UIST,  be- 
longing to  to  Sir  Alexander  MacdQnald^  nine  Miles 
long,  and  about  30  in  Circumference.  It  is  fitter  for 
Pafturage  than  Cultivation  on  the  Eaft  Part,  where  it 
is  mountainous  ;  but  the  Weft-fide  is  plain  and  arable, 
and  where  it  is  not  plowed,  is  covered  with  Clover, 
Daify,  and  Variety  of  other  Plants,  very  pleafant  to  the 
Sight,  and  of  a  fragrant  Smell  ;  and  affords  good  Pa- 
fturag£.  The  Grain  here  is  Barley,  Oats,  and  Rye, 
which  yields  from  ten  to  30  fold  ;  and  there  is  no 
doubt,  but  Wheat  would  grow  here  very  well.  This 
liland  has  feveral  Bays  on  the  Eaft-fide,  where 
Ships  may  ride  5  the.  chief  of  which  are  Loch  eport> 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN-. 

Loch  rona,  and  Locb-maddes\  the  latter  is  capable  of 
containing  Hundreds  of  VefFels  of  the  largeft  Size :  400 
Veflels  have  been  laden  with  Herrings  there  in  a  Sea- 
Ton.  Cod,  Lin^,  and  all  Sorts  of  Fifh  that  frequent  the 
the  Weflern  Seas,  are  to  be  found  here.  There  is  a 
fmall  Ifland  in  this  Bay,  upon  which  a  Magazine  was- 
erected  for  carrying  on  a  Fishery  in  the  Reign  of  King 
Charles  I.  There  is  fuch  a  Number  of  Frefh-water 
Lakes  in  this  Ifland,  as  can  hardly  be  believed  ;  they 
are  generally  well  ftored  with  Trouts  and  Eels,  and, 
which  is  more  ft  range,  with  Cod,  Ling,  and  other  Sea- 
fifh,  brought  in  to  them  by  the  Spring- tides.  Thefe 
Lakes  have  many  fmall  Iflands,  which  abound  with  Va- 
riety of  Land  and  Sea  fowl  ;  and  fome  of  them  have 
Iflands,  with  Forts:  it  has  alfo  feveral  Rivers,  which 
afford  Salmon,  and  fome  of  them  fpeckled,  with  large 
Scales.  The  Inhabitants  are  Proteitants, 

There  are  feveral  other  lefs  Ifiands,  which  He  on: 
both  Sides  of  North-uiji^  the  moil  remarkable  of  which 
is  Ecu? MIL,  on  (he  Weft,  a  Rock  about  a  Quarter 
of  a  Mile  in  Circumference,  noted  for  its  Seal-fifhing, ' 
about  the  End  QtOflober>  where  320  were  once  taken 
at  a  time. 

Three  Leagues  and  an  half  farther  Weft  lie  nine  or 
ten  more  Rocks,  which  abound  with  Sea-fowl,  and 
great-Numbers  of  Seals,  x 

A.  little  farther  North  lies  '  BORER  A,  four  Milts- 
round:  it  has  a  Frefti-  water  Lake,  well  ftored  with 
Jarge  Eels.  This  Ifland  affords  the  largefc  and  beft 
Sort  of  Duife.  It  is  poilslled  by  ibe  Family  of 
MacUan. 

Half  a  League  South  from  this  lies  LINGAY,  which 
furnifhes  the  neighbouring  ifiamls  with  Peat  tor  Fuel. 
It  has  abundance  of  Black  Cattle,  that  make  excellent 
Meat  ;  the  Natives  fait  it  in  the  Hides,  which,  they 
fay,  preferves  it,  and  makes  it  talie  better,  than 
when  kited  in  Ca&s.  'I "his  Jiland  abounds  alfo  - 

O  6  B«r 


-co  A  T  O  U  R  thro9  Scotl. 

«_> 

Deer,  £ea  and  Land-'owl  of  all  Sorts ;  among  the 
reft,  with  Hawks,  Eagles,  and  Swans.  The  In- 
habitants of  South  and  JV0/  th  uift  are  generally  well- 
proportioned  and  healthy,  and  many  of  them  live  to 
a  great  Age  :  they  are  very  hofpitable  and  kind  to> 
Strangers. 

The  Ifle  of  LEWES  derives  it  Name  from  the  hijb 
Word  Lfog,  fignifying  a  Lake,  with  which  this -Ifland 
abounds :  it  is  by  the  Inlanders  commonly  called  The 
Long  lj, and.  It  is  near  ico  Miles  from  North  to 
South,  and  from  13  to  14  in  Breadth.  It  is  reckoned 
Part  of  the  .-hire  of  Rofs  •,  but  the  Ifle  of  Lewes,  properly 
fo  called,  is  but  36  Miles  in  Length,  and  10  or  12 
bread;  and  belonged  to  the  Ute  Earl  of  Seafortb.  It 
reaches  from  the  North  of  Pvwlmg-htad  to  the  South 
of  Hafncfs.  The  Southern  Pan;  is  named  HARRIES, 
The  Air  is  temperateh  cold  and  moift,  and  the  Na- 
tives commonly  ufe  a  Dofe  oi  Ufquebaugh  for  a  Cor- 
rective. The  Ifland  is  healthy,  efpecially  in  the  Mid- 
dle, from  South  and  North  :  it  is  arable  on  the  Weft- 
fide  for  about  16  Miles  on  the  Coaft  ;  and  is  likewife 
plain  and  arable  in  feveral  Places  in  the  Eaft.  It  is 
fruitful  in  Corn,  and  yields  a  good  Intreafe;  theif 
common  Grain  is  Barley,  pats,  and  Rye  ;  and  they 
have  alfo  Flax  and  Hemp.  There  are  feveral  con- 
venie  t  Bays  and  Harkot/rs  here,  particularly  Loch" 
J1ornv;,y,  on  the  Eaft-fide,  in  the  Middle  of  the  Ifland ; 
the  Btrkin  Ifland,  (even  Miles  Southward  ;  Lochcolm- 
kil.  three  Miles  farther  South  ;  Lochfefort  and  Lcch- 
carfaay,  24.  Miles  South-  weft.  Tru^  Ba.y  is  remarkable 
for  great  Numbers  of  Cod,  Ling,  and  Whales,  which 
frequent  it;  and  all  the  Bays  and  Coafts  aboun  with 
Cod,  Ling,  Herring,  and  ail  other  Sorts  of  Pifli  taken 
in  the  Weftern  Seas,  befides  plenty  of  Shell-fifti  of  all 
Sorts,  in  fuchvaft  Numbers,  that  the  Inhabitants  are 
not  able  to  confume  them  Coral  and  Pearl-foells  are 
alfo  found  in  the  Bays  and  Coafb.  There  are  feveral 

extraordinary 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN,  301 

extraordinary  Springs  and  Fountains  in  this  Tfland  > 
and  abundance  of  Caves  on  the  Coafts,  which  Otters, 
Seals,  and  Fowl,  frequent  in  great  Numbers.  That 
Obelifk  (if  I  may  call  it  fo)  in  the  Parifh  of  Barvas'm 
the  liland  of  Lewes^  called  The  Thrvjhel Jlone •,  is  very- 
remarkable  ;  being  not  only  above  20  Feet  high,  but 
likewife  almoft  as  much  in  Breadth,  which  no  other 
comes  near.  The  Dun^  or  Fortification,  built  on  art 
Eminence  in  St.  Ki/daj  which  is  an  old  Fort,  is  about 
1 8  Leagues  diftant  from  Nortb-ui/t,  and  20  from  the 
Middle  of  Lewes  or  Harries^  to  be  feen  only  in  a  very 
fair  Day,  like  a  bluifh  Mift  ;  but  a  large  Fire  theie 
would  be  as  vifible  at  Night,  as  the  afcending  Smoke 
by  Day.  In  this  fmall  Ifle  (where  are  many  fuch' 
Dttns),  North  of  the  Village  of  Brago^  is  a  round  Fort, 
compofed  of  huge  Stones,  three  Stories  high  ;  that  is, 
it  has  three  hollow  Paflages  one  over  another,  withir* 
a  prodigious  thick  Wall  quite  round  the  Fort,  with 
many  Windows  and  Stairs. 

Here  alfo,  at  the  Village  of  Claffemlfs^  is  a  Druidlcal 
Temple  extremely  remarkable.  The  Circle  confifta 
of  12  Obel.flcs,  about  feven  Feet  high  each,  and  diftant 
from  each  other  fix  Feet.  In  the  Centre  ftands  a 
Stone  13  Feet  high,  in  the  perfect  Shape  of  the  Rud- 
der of  a  Ship.  Direclly  South  from  the  Circle  ftand 
four  Obeli fks  running  out  in.  a  Line,  another  fuch 
Line  due  Eaft,  and  a  third  to  the  Weft  ;  the  Number 
and  Diftances  of  thefe  Stone  being  in  tbefe  Wings  tha 
fame :  fo  that  this  Temple,  the  moft  intire  that  can  be, 
is  at  the  fame  time  both  round  and  winged.  But  to 
the  North  reach  (by  way  of  Avenue  two  {Irait 
Ranges  of  Obelifks  of  the  fame  Bignefs  and  Diftances 
with  thofe  of  the  Circle;  yet  th-  Range-  themfelves 
are  e:ght  Feet  diftani  e^ch,  comifting  of  19  Stones,  the 
39*:h  being  in  the  Entrance  of  the  Avenue.  This 
Temple"  ftands  aftTonomically,  denoting  the  ?2  Si^ns 
of  the  Zodiac,  and  th«M  r  'sincipal  Wirtd3,fubdivide3 
each  into  four  othe>s :  by  which,  and  the  19  Stones  on 

each 


Scotl. 

each  Side  the  Avenue,  reprefenting  the  Cycle  of  19 
Years,  it  appears  to  have  been  dedicated  principally  to 
the  Sun,  but  fubordinately  to  theSeafons,  and  the  Ele- 
ments; particularly  to  the  Sea,  and  the  Winds,  as  is 
manifeft  by  the  Rudder  in  the  Middle. 

This  Ifland  abounds  with  Cows,  Horfes,  Sheep, 
Goats,  and  Hogs  ;  the  Black  Cattle  are  fmall,  but 
very  prolific,  and  prove  excellent  Meat ;  the  Horfes 
are  likewife  fmaller  than  on  the  Continent,  but  as 
ferviceable  for  all  domeftic  Ufes,  and  live  very  hard, 
having  little  to  feed  upon  in  the  Spring  but  Sea-ware. 
The  Inhabitants  are  well-proportioned,  and  in  general 
healthy  and  ftrong,  and  of  a  fanguine  Complexion  j 
they  *are  very  quick  of  Apprehenfion,  and  Lovers  of 
Poefy  and  Muiic  :  they  are  dextrous  in  Swimming, 
Vaulting,  and  Archery,  and  make  ftout  able  Sea-  , 
men. 

In  a  little  Ifland  near  the  greater  one  of  Lewes,  was 
a  Couple  of  Eagles,  which  would  never  fuller  any 
other  of  the  Kind  to  continue  in  the  Place  :  driving 
away  their  own  young  ones,  as  foon  as  they  were  able 
to  fly.  The  Natives  faid,  That  thofe  Eagles  were  fo 
careful  of  their  Habitation,  that  they  never  killed  any 
Sheep  or  Lamb  in  the  Ifland,  though  the  Bones  of 
Lambs,  Fawns,  and  Wild-fowl,  were  frequently  found 
in  and  about  their  Nefts ;  fo  that  they  made  their 
Purchafe  in  the  oppofite  Iflands,  the  neareft  of  which 
is  a  League  diftanr. 

There  are  many  other  lefs  Iflands,  which  lie  round 
this ;  the  chief  of  which  are,  GRAVE,  in  the  Mouth 
of  Locbcarhay^  an  high  Rock,  half  a  Mile  in  Com- 

?afs,  affording  good  Pailurage,  and  naturally  a  ftrong 
Wt :  the  two  BERNERA'S,  one  two  Miles,  and  the 
other  four  Mifcs  long,  and  four  Miles  broad  j    both 
fruitful  in  Corn  and  Grafs. 

Near  Carhay-bay  lie  four  fmall  Iflands,  which  be- 
long to  the  Inhabitants  of  Lewes>  who  go  thither 
every  Summer,  and  bring  from  thence  great  Store  of 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        503 

Fowls,  Eggs,  Down,  Feathers,  and  Quills :  one  of 
them  is  called  the  ISLAND  OF  PYGMIES,  becaufe 
many  little  Bones,  refembling  thofe  of  Men,  are  dig- 
ged out  of  the  Ground  there. 

Twenty  Leagues  from  the  Point  ofNefs  in  Lew es  lies 
RONA,  a  Mile  long,  and  half  a  Mile  broad.  It  has  an 
Kill  on  the  Weft  Part,  which  makes  it  vifible  from 
Lewes  in  the  Summer-time.  It  was  inhabited  by 
about  five  Families,  who  had  the  Ifland,  and  the 
Fiftiery  about  it,  divided  among  them,  and  were  very 
exact  and  nice  in  their  Properties ;  and,  when  their 
Number  increafed,  the  Supernumeraries  were  fent  to 
their  Landlord  in  Lewes,  who  once  a  Year  fends  the 
Minifter  of  his  Parifh,  and  a  Servant,  to  vifit  them, 
and  bring  his  Rents,  which  are  paid  in  Barley-meal 
fewed  up  in  Skins,  Sea  fowl,  and  fome  Fi-fh,  C5r. 
They  have  a  Chapel  dedicated  to  St.  Ronan,  in  which 
they  repeat  the  Lord's  Prayer,  Creed,  and  Ten  Com- 
mandments, every  LordVday.  Buchanan  fays,  that 
the  Inhabitants  were,  in  his  Opinion,  the  only  People 
in  the  World  who  never  wanted  any  thing,  and  were 
fatisfied  with  theirCondition,  having  Plenty  of  all  that 
they  defired ;  being  equally  ignorant  of  Luxury  and 
Avarice,  and  polieiling,  through  their  Freedom  from 
Vices,  that  Innocence  and  Tranquillity  of  Mind,  to 
which  others  can  fcarcely  attain  by  great  Labour,  and 
with  the  Help  of  the  bed  Infuu&ions.  Mr.  Martin 
affirms,  in  his  Defcription  of  the  Weftern  IJlands^  that 
antient  Race  of  poor  People  was  all  deftro\  ed  about 
40  Years  before  in  the  following  Manner :  firft,  a 
Swarm  of  Rats,  none  knows  how,  came  into  the 
Ifland,  and  eat  up  all  their  Corn :  in  the  next  Place, 
fome  Seamen  landed,  and  robbed  them  of  what  Pro- 
vifions  they  had  left.  By  this  means  they  all  died  be- 
fore the  ufual  Time  of  the  Arrival  of  the  Boat  from 
Lewes  ;  upon  which  another  Colony  was  fent  thither. 
Four  Leagues  Ea'i  from  Rova  lies  SOULISKER,  a 
Rock3  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  in  Circumference,  which 

abounds 


'A  TOUR  thro*  ScotL 

abounds  with  vaft  Numbers  of  Sea-fowl,  particularly 
Solan  Geefe.  On  this  Rock  there  builds  one  Fowl, 
not  found  elfewhere,  called  Colk  j  it  is  lefs  than  a 
Goofe,  -and  all  covered  with  Down,  but  of  different 
Colours,  which  it  cafts  when  it  hatches;  it  has  a 
Tuft  on  its  Head  refembling  that  of  a  Peacock,  and  a 
Train  longer  that  of  an  Houfe-cock.  There  were 
formerly  24  Churchs  in  Lewes  and  Harries,  and  the 
Iflands  belonging  to  them  ;  but,  to  our  Shame  may  it 
be  faid,  asPapifts  were  profecuted  or  difcouraged,  Pro- 
fanenefs  gained  Ground  of  Superftition,  and  one  fort 
of  Ignorance  fuccee<led  another ;  for,  few  or  no  M>- 
nifters  being  fent  with  fuitable  Provifion  and  E<,cou- 
ragement,  Places  of  religious  Worfhip  became  ruineu?,, 
and  the  Service  of  God,  and  the  Edifi  ation  of  the 
People,  very  much  neglected  ;  fo  that  feveral  Pa>ifiies 
in  the  Highlands  and  Ifles,  at  prefent,  are  20,  30,  <<r 
near  40  Miles  long,  and  very. often  without  any  Mi-, 
nifter  at  all. 

That  Part  which  is  called  HARRIES,  produces  the 
fame  Sorts  of  Corn,  but  with  a  greater  Increafe  than 
Lew-es.  The  Weft- fide  is  for  the  moft  Part  arable  on 
the  Coaft.  It  has  a  noble  Harbour  called  Scalpa,  a 
Mile  and  an  half  long,  and  a  Mile  broad  ;  and  there 
are  two  other  Harbours  within  three  Leagues  of  it, 
which  abound  with  Oyfters,  anJ  other  Shell-fifru 
They  have  excellent  Springs  here,  feme  of  which  are- 
medicinal  j  one  particularly  near  Marvag  is  good  for 
reftoring  a  loft  Appetite  ;  and  one  near  Borve,  good 
againft  the  Colic  and  Gravel.  There  are  feveral 
Caves  on  the  Mountains,  and  on  each  Side  of  the 
Codft,  and  in  the  Middle  of  an  high  Rock,  capable  of 
holding  50  Men  5  which  has  two  Wells,  and  but  a 
narrow  Pufs  to  it  by  climbing  up  the  Rock;  fo  that  in 
time  of  War  it  is  an  impregnable  Fort.  There  are 
like  wife  feveral  antient  Forts  in  this  Ifland.  The 
HiiU  and  Mountains  abound  with  Deer}- which  none 
are  allowed  to  hunt  without  Leave  from  Madeod  the 

Proprietor 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.          305 

Proprietor.  Metricfoi  a  four-footed  Creature,  about 
the  Size  of  a  large  Cat,  are  pretty  numerous  here ; 
their  Skins  are  very  fine,  of  a  brown  Colour,  and  make 
good  Fur  ;  and,  it  is  faid,  the  Dung  of  this  Animal 
yields  a  Scent' like  Mulk.  There  are  abundance  of 
Otters  and  Seals  here,  great  Plenty  of  Land  and  Sea- 
Fowl,  and,  .among  others,  Eagles,  and  very  good 
Hawks.  The  Inhabitants  both  of  Lewes  and  Harries 
are  Proteftants. 

There  are  other  Iflands  of  fmall  Extent  belonging 
to  the  Harries,  the  chief  of  which  are — BERNERA, 
two  Leagues  to  the  South  :  it  is  five  Miles  in  Circum- 
ference, very  fruitful  in  Barley  and  Rye,  and  yields 
fometirnes  from  20  to  30  Fold.  There  are  two  Cha- 
pels in  this  Ifland. 

Half  a  League  from  thence  to  the  Weft  ward  lies 
PABBAY,  three  Miles  in  Circumference,  and  fruitful 
in  Corn  and  Grafs :  it  has  alfo  two  Chapels. 

Half  a  League  to  the  North  lies  SELLAY,  a  Mile  in 
Circumference ;  it  yields  extraordinary  Pafture  for 
Sheep,  which  it  fattens,  very  foon,  and  thofe  bred 
there  have  very  large  Horns. 

TARANSAY,  a  League  farther  North,  is  three 
Miles  round,  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Grafs,  and  yields 
much  yellow  Talc* 

There  are  feveral  other  Ifhnds  in  the  Neighbour- 
hood, of  two  or  three  Miles  in  Circumference  each> 
all  tolerably  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Pafturage;  partcu- 
larly  HERMATRA,  where  a  Magazine  fur  the  Fifliery 
was.eredted  in  the  Reign  of  KingCZwr/w  I. 

Eighteen  Leagues  Weft  from  Noitbuijl^  and  2Q 
from  Hurries^  lies  the  Ifland  called  ST,  KILDA,  or 
HIRTA.  As  this  Hlrta  is  the  moft  North-weft,  fo 
Dow  Hirta  is  the  moft  South-weft,  of  all  the  Scots 
Iflands.  The  firft,  properly  called  St.  Kilda^  is  two 
Miles  long,  and  one  broad,  faced  round  with  a  fteep 
Rock,  except  at  the  Bay  on  the  South-eaft,  where  Vef- 
fels  enter.  The  Land  rifes  high  in  the  Middle,  and 

there 


3  erf  ^4  TOUR  thro*  Scotl. 

there  are  feveral  Fountains  of  good  Water  on  each 
Side  the  liland.  Their  Grain  is  Oats  and  Barley,  the 
latter  accounted  the  largeft  in  the  Weftern  Ides.  The 
Inhabitants  are  about  200  in  Number,  very  well  pro- 
portioned, and  comely  :  they  are  Proteftants,  and  very 
zealous,  according  to  their  Knowlege,  which  is  but 
fmalJ  for  want  of  Inftru&ion.  They  are  very  regular 
andjuft  in  their  Converfation,  and  Strangers  to  Luxury 
and  Excels,  being  ignorant  of  the  Ufe  of  Money. 
They  have  a  Chapel,  where  they  aflemble  on  the 
Lor<i's-day,  to  hear  the  Lord's  Prayer,  Creed,  and 
ten  Commandments,  and  neither  work  themfelves, 
nor  will  allow  any  Stranger  to  work,  en  that  Day.  It 
belongs  to  the  Laird  of  Madeod,  the  Chief  of  that  an- 
tient  Clan,  who  commonly  makes  fome  Cadet  of  his 
Family  Steward  of  this  Illand,  to  receive  his  Rents, 
which  are  paid  in  Fifli,  Fowl,  Feathers,  Wool,  But- 
ter, Cheefe,* Cattle,  and  Corn:  and  the  Steward's 
Deputy  is,  in  his  Abfence,  the  chief  Man  of  thelfland  ; 
and  generally,  except  when  a  Minifter  is  fent  thither 
from  Harries,  baptizes  and  marries.  They  have  an 
Altar  and  Crucifix  in  their  Chapel,  which  have  con- 
tinued there  fmce  the  Time  of  Popery;  and,  though 
they  pay  no  Worfhip  to  the  Crucifix,  yet  they  fwear 
decifive  Oaths,  by  laying  their  Hands  upon  it,  and 
take  the  Marriage-oath  in  the  fame  manner.  Not 
long  ago  an  illiterate  Fellow,  one  of  the  Natives,  im- 
pofed  upon  their  Ignorance,  by  pretending  that  St. 
John  the  Baptift,  and  the  Virgin  Mary,  had  appeared 
to  him,  and  taught  him  Sermons,  Prayers,  and  Hymns ; 
the  latter,  he  alleged,  were  effectual  to  fecure  Women 
againft  Mifcairiage  -,  and  his  Price  for  teaching  them 
was  a  Sheep.  He  told  them  of  a  little  Hill,  where 
St.  John  and  the  Virgin  appeared  to  him  ;  and  made 
them  believe,  that,  if  any  of  their  Black  Cattle,  or 
Sheep,  came  near  to  tafte  the  Grafs  of  that  Hill,  they 
muft  immediately  be  killed  and  eaten  ;  and  it  was  ne- 
ceflary,  that  he  himfelf  fhould  always  partake  of  the 

Treat. 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  307 

Treat.  He  was  oi  (covered  at  laft  by  his  lewd  At- 
tempts upon  feveral  Women ;  and  being,  by  A'lac- 
lead's  Order,  tranfported  from  thence  to  Harries^  he 
ma;e  public  ConfefEon  of  his  Impofture  in  feveral 
Churches,  and  fcemed  to  be  very  penitent ;  but  was 
not  allowed  to  return  any  more.  Their  Houfes  are 
low,  built  of  Stone,  -and  a  Cement  of  dry  Earth,  and 
covered  with  Turf,  thatched  over  with  Straw.  They 
make  their  Beds  in  the  Walls  of  their  Houfes,  and  lie 
commonly  on  Straw,  though  they  have  great  Plenty  of 
Feathers  and  Down.  They  live  altogether  in  a  little 
Village,  on  the  Eaft-fide  of  the  Jfiand,  in  good  Hsr- 
mony ;  are  very  exaft  and  nice  in  their  feveral  Pro- 
perties, and  allow  nolncroachment  upon  one  another ; 
nor  will  they  admit  of  it  from  their  Landlord,  or  his 
Steward ;  but  pay  exaclly  what  they  agree  on.  The 
Ifland  is  naturally  flrong,  and,  with  a  little  Art,  might 
be  made  impregnable.  There  is  an  old  Fort  at  the 
South-end  of  the  Bay. 

In  the  Ifland  of  St.  Kiida  is  the  Houfe  of  a  Druidef^ 
built  all  of  Stone,  without  Lime,  Mortar,  or  Earth, 
to  cement  it:  it  is  alfo  arched,  and  of  a  conic  Figure, 
but  open  at  the  Top,  and  a  Fire- place  in  the  Middle 
of  the  Floor.  It  cannot  contain  above  nine  Perfons, 
to  fit  eafy  by  each  other.  From  the  Side  of  the  Wall 
go  off  three  low  Vaults,  feparated  from  each  other  by 
Pillars,  and  capable  of  containing  five  Perfons  apiece. 

Juft  fuch  another  Houfe  in  all  refpeifo,  but  much 
la-ger,  and  grown  over  with  a  green  Sod  on. the  Out- 
fide,  is  in  :.orera,  an  Ifle  adjacent  to  St.  Kilda,  which 
Was  the  Habitation  of  a  Druid. 

T;'C7  have  two  other  Ifland  s,  which  belong  to  them; 
one  called  SOA,  about  half  a  Mile  from  the  Weft- 
fide  of  St.  Kilda.  a  Mile  in  Circumference,  and  very 
high  and  fteep  all  round. 

The  other  is  called  BORERA,  lies  about  two  Miles 
North  of -St.  Kilda  >  is  about  a  Mile  in  Circumference, 
and  moft  of  it  furrounded  with  an  high  Rock.  All 

three 


A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

three  afford  good  Pafturage,  and  abound  with  prodi- 
gious Numbers  of  Sea-fowl  from  March  till  September. 
They  have  Solan  Geefe  in  fuch  Numbers,  that  they 
keep  about  20,000  annually  in  little  Stone  Houfes., 
built  on  purpofe  for  them,  and  for  preferring  their 
other  Fowl,  Eggs,  &c.  The  latter  they  preferve 
forne  Months  in  the  Aflies  of  Peat,  and  they  preferve 
their  Fowl  without  Salt.  They  eat  the  Solan  Geefe- 
eggs  raw,  and  fay  they  are  good  Pe&orals,  They 
have  another  Bird  here,  called  Fulmar^  about  the  Size 
of  a  Moor-hen  ;  it  picks  its  Food  out  of  live  Whales, 
and  other  Fifties.  When  any  one  approaches  them, 
they  fpout  out  pure  Oil  from  their  Bills,  which  the 
Natives  have  a  way  to  catch,  when  they  furprife  the 
Fowl  j  and  make  ufe  of  it  for  their  Lamps,  and  like- 
wife  as  a  Remedy  againft  Rheumatic  Pains,  Aches, 
and  other  DiPcempers :  it  ferves  them  alfo  for  Vomits 
and  Purges,  for  Swellings  or  Strains,  and  difcufling  of 
Tumours ;  in  all  which  Cafes,  they  fay,  it  is  very 
fuccefsful.  Both  Sexes  have  a  Genius  for  Poefy,  are 
very  hofpitable  to  Strangers,  and  charitable  to  their 
own  Poor ;  for  whofe  Maintenance  they  all  contri- 
bute in  proportion.  They  have  but  one  Boat  be- 
longing to  the  Ifland,  in  which  every  Man  has  a  Share 
proportionable  to  the  Rent  he  pays.  The  Men  are 
generally  ftrong,  ftout  Rowers,  and  will  tug  a  long 
time  at  the  Oar  without  Intermiflion.  They  ufe  no 
Compafs,  but  take  their  Meafure  from  the  Sun,  Moon, 
or  Stars,  and  chiefly  from  the  Courfes  of  the  Flocks 
of  the  Sea  fowl,  becaufe  they  know  very  well  to  what 
Rocks  or  Iflands  the/  refort.  They  are  excellent  at 
climbing  of  Rocks,  being  accuftomed  to  it  from  their 
Infancy,  in  order  to  catch  the  Fowl  which  build  on 
them.  They  have  two  Ropes,  which  belong  to  them 
in  common,  for  climbing  the  Rocks  ;  they  are  24. 
Fathoms  in  Length  each,  and  covered  with  Cows 
Hides  faked,  to  prevent  their  being  cut  by  the  Rocks. 
The  Men  climb  by  turns,  and  bring  home  fomc  Thou- 

fands 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.          309 

fands  of  Eggs  and  Fowls  at  a  time.  They  alfo  make 
Gins  of  Horfe-hair,  for  catching  the  Fowl  :  yet  fome- 
times  they  lofe  their  Lives  by  climbing.  The  richeft 
Man  in  the  Ifland  has  not  above  8  Cows,  80  Sheep, 
and  two  or  three  Horfes.  They  have  no  Money, 
but  barter  with  one  another  for  what  they  want. 

Mr.  Martin,  to  whom  I  am  obliged  for  moft  of 
thefe  Particulars  relating  to  the  Iflands  (for  it  cannot 
be  fuppofed,  I  could  think  of  entering  every  one  of 
them  in  Perfon),  gives  an  Account  of  that  called  the 
SECOND  SIGHT  5  which,  he  fays,  is  a  Reprefentation, 
by  Way  of  Vifion,  of  fomething  to  come,  and  makes 
fuch  a  ftrong  Impreflion  upon  the  Seers,  that  they 
cannot  fee  or  think  of  any  thing  elfe,  while  the  Vifion 
lafts  ;  and  they  appear  chearful  or  other  wife,  accord- 
ing to  the  Nature  of  the  Object  reprefented  :  they  ufe 
no  previous  Means  to  attain  it,  and  to  moft  of  them  it 
is  very  troublefome.  The  Inftances  of  the  Truth  of 
this  Second  Sight,  as  it  is  called,  are  fo  many,  and  fo 
frequent,  that  it  can  fcarcely  be  difputed  :  it  is  cer- 
tainly a  ftrange  Illuficn  :  but  I  (hall  not  venture  to 
give  my  Opinion  about  it  ;  only  obferving,  with 
others,  that  this  Faculty  decays  in  proportion  as 
Chriftianity  increafes  among  them,  and  as  they  im* 
prove  in  Knowlege.  Some  of  the  People,  to  whom 
thofe  Vifions  have  been  frequent,  have  learned  by  Ex- 
perience, as  I  was  told,  to  determine  the  Time,  when 
the  Things  reprefented  (hall  come  to  pafs.  The  Rev. 
Mr.  John  Frafer,  a  late  Dean  of  the  Ifles,  has 
written  a  fmall  Treatife  upon  this  Subject,  called 


I  (hall  conclude  this  Defcription  of  the  Weftern 
Iflands  with  an  Extract  from  Mr.  Toland's  Specimen 
of  the  Htftory  of  the  Druids;  where  he  treats  in  ge- 
neral of  the  Properties  of  all  thefe  Ifles,  whither,  it 
feems,  he  had  intended  to  have  travelled,  in  order  to« 
perfe6t  his  Hiftory,  and  refcue,  many  valuable  Piece? 
&f  Antiquity  frgm  Oblivion* 


3ro  A  TOUR  tbrt .          Scotl. 

'  It  is  certain,  fays  that  Gentleman,  no  Country 

<  abounds  more  with  the  NecelTaries   of  Life,   and  at 
«  lefs  Labour  or  Charge,  than  the  Hebrides.     In   th<i 

<  firft  Place,  there  is  known  to  be,  in  tbofe  Ifland?,  a 

<  prodigious  Plenty  of  Flefo  and  Fi(h.      Their  Cattle 
«  of  all^  Sorts  (as  Cows,  Sheep,  Goats,  and  Hogs)  are 
*  exceeding  numerous  and  prolific;    fmall  indeed   of 

<  Size   (as  are  likewife  their  Horfes)  but  of  a  fweet 

<  and  delicious  Tafte  ;  fo  are  their  Deer,  which  freely 
«  range  in  Herds  on  the  Mountains.     No  Place  can 
«  compare  with  this,  for  Tame  and  Wild  fowl,  there 

<  being  of  the  latter  no-where  in  the  World  a  greater 
«  Diverfity,  many  Sorts  of  them  extremely  beautiful, 
«  and  rare,  or  utterly  unknown,  elfe where.     The  like 
«  may  be   faid   of  their  various  amphibious  Animals. 

*  Nurnberlefs  are  their  Fountains  and  Springs,  Rivu- 
6  lets,   Rivers,  and  Lakes,    very  wholibme  in  their 

*  Waters,  and  every-where  fuperabouncling  with  Fifh, 

*  efpecially  the  moft  delicate,  as  Trout  and  Salmon  : 
c  nor  is  it  by  Herrings  alone,  that  all  Europe  knows  no 
«  Seas  to  be  better  ftored,  nor  with  more  Kinds,  from 
«  the  Shrimp  to  the  Whale ;    as  no  Harbours  or  Bays 

*  are  fuperior,  whether  Regard  be  had  to  Number  or 
<  Commodioufnefs.     Add  to  this  their  Variety  of  ex- 
'  cellent  Roots  and  Plants,  particularly  thofe  of  ma- 
c  rine  Growth,  every  one  of  them  ferving  for  Food  or 

*  Phyfic.      Their   Pastures  are  fo  kindly,  that  they 

*  might  live  on  Milk  alone,  with  that  inconceivable 

*  Quantity  of  Eggs  they  yearly  gather  off  the  defart 
c  Rocks  and  Iflets.     Bread  is  plentiful  enough.     The 

*  Ground  is  generally  allowed  to  be  much  richer,  than, 
on  the  Scot'ijh  Continent,  fome  Parts*  whereof  are  not 
fel-'om  fupplied  hence  with  Corn. 

4  Lewes  is  very  fruitful  ;  and,  though  Barley,  Oats, 
and  Rye,  be  the  only  Grain  fown  there  at  prefent., 
yet  the  Ground  both  in  that,  and  moft  of  the  other 
Iflands,  is  fit  to  bear  Wheat,  and  confequently  Le- 
gumes of  ail  Sorts.  It  is  truly  amazing  they  have 

4  any 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  311 

*  any  Crop  at  all,  confidering  how  unfkilful  they  are  in 
c  Agriculture,  how  defHtute  of  the  proper  Inftruments 
4  to  till  the  Ground,  and  that  they  fcarce  ufe  any  other 

*  Manure  but  Sea- wreck  or  Tangles.     From  the  Ig- 
6  norance  of  the  Inhabitants  in  thefe  refpe&s,  as  alfo 

*  in  Planting,  Inclofmg,  and  Draining,   many  fruitful 

*  Spots  lie  uncultivated :   but  they  are  abundantly  fup- 
«  plied  with  choice  Eatables,  and  the  moft  nourifhing 
«  Shell  fifh. 

*  In  Eernera,  near  Harries,  the  Produce  of  Barley 
e  is  many  times  from  20  to  30  fold.  In  Harries  and 
e  Seuthuift  one  Barley- grain  fometimes  produces  from 

*  7  to  14  Ears,  as  in  Northuifl  from  10  to  30  fold  in 
4  a  plentiful  Year.     At  Corcbattan  in  Sky  the  Increafe 

*  amounted  once  to  35.     If  the  Ground  be  laid  down 
for  fome  Time,  it  gives  a  good  Crop  without  Dung- 
ing, fome  Fields  not  having  been  dunged  in  40 
Years.     A  fmall  Traft  of  Ground,  at  Skerrybreck, 
in  the  faid  Ifle  of  Sky>  had  yielded  100  fold.     With 
regard  to  their  Paftures.  nothing  is  more  common, 
than  for  an  Ewe  to  have  two  Lambs  at  a  time.     Be- 
fides  the  ordinary  Rent  a  Tenant  paid,  it  was  a 
Cuftom  in  the  Iflands,  if  any  of  his  Cows,  or  Sheep, 
brought  two  young  ones  at  a  time,  one  of  them  was 
to  go  to  the  Landlord  ;    who,  on  his  Part,  was  ob- 
liged, if  any  of  his  Tenants  Wives  bore  Twins,  to 

A  take  one  of  them  into  his  own  Family.     Even  the 
c  wild  Goats  on  the  Mountains  (for  fucn  there  are  in 

*  Harries)  are  obferved  to  bring  forth  their  Young 

*  twice  a  Year.     From  hence  it  is  evident,  that  thofe 

*  Iflands  are  capable  of  great  Improvement,  as  they 
c  abound  likewife  in  many  Curiofities,  efpecially  i:i 

*  Subjects  of  Philofophical  Qbfervation.     Nor  is  it 

*  lefs  plain,  by  the  many  antient  Monuments  remain- 
«  ing  among  them,  and   the  Marks  of  the   Plough 
«  reaching  to  the  very  Tops  of  the  Mountains  (which 
«  the  ardefs   Inhabitants  think  incapable  of  Culture), 
J  that  in  remote  Ages  they  were  in  a  far  more  flourifh- 


!  a  yf  T  O  U  R  //W  Scotl. 

ing  Condition  than  at  prefent.     The  Ruins  of  fpa- 
cious  Houfes,  and  the  numerous  Obelilks,  old  Forts, 
Temples,  Altars,  &c.  undeniably  prove  this  ;    be- 
fides,  that  the  Country  was  formerly  full  of  Woods, 
as  appears  by  the  great  Oak  and  Fir-trees  daily  dug 
out  of  the  Ground,  and  by  many  other  Tokens, 
there  being  feveral  Woods   and   Coppices  ftill  re- 
maining in  Sky^  Mull,  and  other  Places.     The  Inha- 
bitants are  not  to  be  mended  in  the  Proportion  of 
their  Perfons;    no  prepofterous  Bandages  diftorting 
them  in  the  Cradle,    nor  hindering  Nature   from 
duly  forming  their  Limbs ;   which  is  the  Reafon, 
that  bodily  imperfections  of  any  fort  are  very  rare 
among  them.      Neither   does   any  over-officioufly 
preventive  Phyfic,  in  their  Infancy,  fpoil  their  ori- 
ginal Conftitution ;    whence  they  have  fo  ftrong  a 
Habit  of  Body,  that  one  of  them  requires  treble  the 
Dofe  as  will  purge  any  Man  in  the  South  of  Scot- 
land.     But  what"  contributes,  above  all  things,  to 
their  Health  and  Longevity,  is  conftant  Temperance 
and  Exercife.     Their  Food  is  commonly  frefb,  and 
their  Meals  two  a  Day,    Water  being  the  ordinary 
Drink  of  the  Vulgar.     They  cure  all  Diforders  of 
the  Body  by  Simples  of  their  own  Growth,  and  by 
proper  Diet,  or  Labour :    hence  they  are  ftout  and 
adtive,  dextrous  in  all  their  Exercifes;    as  they  are 
withal   remarkably  fagacious,  choleric,    but   eaftly 
appeafed,  fociable,  good  natured,  ever  chearful,  and 
having  a  ftrong   Inclination  to  Mufic.     They  are 
hofpitable  beyond  Expreilion,  entertaining  ail  Stran- 
gers, of  what  Condition  foever,  gratis  ;   the  Ufe  of 
Money  being  ftill,  in  fome  of  thofe  Iflands,  unknown, 
and,  till  a  few  Ages  paft,   in  all  of  them, 
have  no  Lawyers,  or  Attorneys :  the  Men  and  Wo- 
men plead  their  own ,  Caufes ;   and  a  very  fpeedy 
Decifion  is  made  by  the  Proprietor,  who  is  perpe- 
tual Prefident  in  their  Courts,  or  by  his  Bailiff,  as 
his  Subititute. 

6  The 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.         315 

*  The  prefent  (fays- Mr.  Toland)  is  the  35th  Lord 

*  of  Barra   by  uninterrupted   lineal   Defcent,   a  thing 

*  whereof  no  Prince  in  the  World  can  boaft  ;   -and  he 

*  is  regarded  as  no  mean  Potentate  by  his  Subjects, 
4  who  know  none  greater  than  he.     When  the  Wife 

*  of  any  of  them  dies,  he  has  immediate  recourfe   to 
4  his  Lord,  reprefenting  firft  his  own  Lofs  in  the  Want 

*  of  a  Female  Companion  ;    and   next,  that  of  Mac- 
4  Nei^  his  Lord    himfelf,   if  he  fhould  not  go  on  to 

*  bej>et  Followers  for  him.     Hereupon  MacNeil  finds 

*  out  a  fuitable  Match  (neither  Side  ever  difiiking  his 
4  Choice,  but  accepting  it  as  the  higheft  Favour) ;  and 

*  the  Marriage   is  celebrated  without  any  Courtfhip, 
'  Portion,  or  Dowry  :    but  they  never  fail  to  make 

*  merry,  on  fuch  Occafions,  with  a  Bottle  or  more  of 
'  Ufcjuebaugh.     On  the  other  hand,  when  any  Wo- 
4  man  becomes  a  Widow,,  file  is,  upon  the  like  Ap- 
4  plication,  foon  provided  with  an  Hufband,  and  with 

*  as  little  Ceremony.     MacNeil  alfo  fupplies  any  of 
4  his  Tenants  with  as  many  Milk-cows,  as  he  may 
4  chance  to  lofe  by  the  Severity  of  the  Weather,  or  by 
4  other  Misfortunes.     He  takes  likewife  into  his  own 
4  Family,  and  maintains  to  the  Day  of  their  Death,  as 
4  many  old  Men,  as,  through  Age  and  Infirmity,  be- 
4  come  unfit  for  Labour,. .  i'i  Houfe  being  built  hard- 
4  by  on  Purpofe  for  them/ 

Of  the  Northern  Ijles  a/ Scotland. 

"\yl7E  come  now  to  the  Ifles  of  Orkney  and  Shetland. 
The  Orkneys,  called  by  the  Latins  Orcadcs, 
have  the  Caledonian  Ocean  on  the  Weft,  the  German 
Ocean  on  the  Eaft,  the  Sea  that  divides  them  from 
Shetland  on  the  North,  and  Pentland  Firth,  24  M  les 
long,  and  12  broad,  which  divides  them  from  the 
main  Land  of  Scotland,  on  the  South.  Antient  Au- 
thors differ  about  their  Number :  Pliny  reckoned  them 
40,  Or  of  us  33  $  but  it  appears  by  later  Difcoveries, 
VOL.  IV,  P  that 


'A  TOUR  thro  ScotI, 

that  they  are  only  28.  They  lie  in  Longitude  22 
Deg.  II  Min.  Latitude  59  Deg.  2  Min.  The  longeit 
Day  is  18  Hours  and  Tome  odd  Minutes  :  the  Win- 
ters, as  in  moft  fmall  Iflands,  and  indeed  always  near 
the  Sea,  are  generally  more  fubjecl:  to  Rain  than  Snow. 
The  Froft  and  Snow  do  not  continue  long,  but  the 
Wind  is  very  boifterous  ;  and  it  rains  fometimes  not 
by  Drops,  but  by  violent  Spouts  of  Water. 

STROMA  lies  fo  near  the  Coaft  of  Cakhrufs,  that  it 
was  always  poflefled  by  the  Earls  of  that  County,  and 
therefore  not  reckoned  among  the  Orcades.  This  is  a 
fmall  Ifland,  but  not  unfruitful.  Authors  are  not 
agreed  as  to  the  Reafon  of  giving  the  Name  of  Pentland 
Firth  to  that  Streight,  in  Breadth  about  12  Miles, 
which  lies  between  the  Orcades  and  the  main  Land  : 
fume  fay,  it  is  a  Corruption  of  the  Word  Piftland 
Firth)  which  was  fo  called,  becaufe  the  Piffs  formerly 
inhabited  thofe  Iflands,  and  Part  of  the  neighbouring 
Continent ;  and  that  many  of  them  periled  here, 
when  repulfed  by  the  antient  Inhabitants  of  Orkney. 

Others  think  Pentland  Firth  the  proper  Name;  and 
that  it  was  fo  nominated  from  the  Highlands  or  Hills 
in  the  North  of  Scotland,  by  which  it  is  bounded  on 
one  Side,  for  the  fame  Reafon  that  the  high  Hills, 
which  take  their  Rife  fome^ Miles  South- weft  of  E din- 
bur  gb?  are  called  Pentland  Hills:  This  Firth  is  re- 
markable for  its  fwifr,  violent,  and  contrary  Tides, 
occafioned  by  the  Multitude  of  the  Ifles,  and  the  Nar- 
rownefs  of  the  PafTage,  which  makes  it  very  dan- 
gerous, efpecially  to  Strangers  ;  and,  which  is  remark- 
able, the  Whirlpools,  with  which  the  Firth  abounds, 
occafioned,  as  is  thought,  by  fome  Hiatus's  in  the 
Earth  below,  are  moft  dangerous  in  a  Calm,  and 
whirl  the  Boats  or  Ships  round,  till  they  fwallow  them 
up;  but  if  there  be  any  Wind,  and  the  Boat  under 
Sail,  they  are  palled  without  Danger.  The  Mariners, 
who  ufe  to  carry  Paflengers  between  the  main  Land 
and  the  liles,  if  at  any  time  they  are  driven  near  thofe 

Whirlpools 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN*.  315- 

Whirlpools  by  the  Tide,  throw  a  Barrel,  Oar,  Bundle 
of  Straw,  or  any  other  bulky  thing  that  comes  to  hand, 
into  the  Whirlpools,  which  make  them  fmooth  enough 
till  the  Veflel  pafs  over  them  ;  and  what  is  thus  caft 
in,  is  generally  found  floating  again  a  Mile  or  two 
diftant.  The  different  Tides  in  this  Firth  are  rec- 
koned 24,  and  run  with  fuch  impetuous  Force,  that  no 
Ship  under  Sail,  with  the  faireft  Wind,  is  able  to  make" 
way  againft  them  ;  yet  the  Natives  on  both  Sides,  who 
know  the  proper  Seafons,  pafs  this  Firth  every  Pay 
fafely,  except  when  the  Weather  is  temneftuous. 

The  firil  of  the  Orkney  Iflands  is  SOUTH  RONAI.SA, 
fix  Miles  long,  and  five  broad,  fruitful  in  Corn,  and 
well  inhabited  ;  it  has  a  fafe  Harbour  on  the  North- 
fide,  but  the  South-eaft  has  the  dangerous  Rocks 
called  Pentland  Skerries ;  it  abounds  with  Cattle,  and 
has  two  united  Parifh- Churches,  whereof  the  Deari 
was  iVlinifter. 

A  little  to  the  .South-weft  lies  SV/JMKA,  a  fmall 
Ifland,  fruitful  in  Corn,  capable  of  maintaining  a  few 
Hufbandmen,  and  their  Families;  has  a  good  Fifhery 
on  its  Coafts,  and  is  noted  for  a  good  State- Quart)*. 
The  Whirlpools  near  this  liland  are  called  t 
of  Swinna. 

Beyond  Sw'mna  lie  WAVES  and  HOY,  which  are 
but  one  Ifle,  12  Miles  long,  and  full  of  high  Moun-N 
tains :  that  Part  called  Ftfayes  is  fruitful,  and  very  well 
inhabited.  This  Ifland  has  feveral  good  Harbour?, 
particularly  that  called  North-Hope.,  one  of  the  beft  in 
the  World,  and  propereft  for  thofe  who  defign  a  Fiib- 
ing-trade.  That  Part  called  -Hoy,  from  which  it  is 
only  feparated  by  a  Spring-tide,  hasthehigheft  Moun- 
tains in  Orkney,  and  the  deepeft  Vallies  ;  which  ftrike 
a  Terror  into  Strangers,  who  have  Occafion  to  travel 
that  Way.  '  On  thefe  Mountains  there  are  many 
Sheep,  which  run  wild,  and  are  fcarcely  to  be  caught 
by  any  Art.  On  Rora-head^  an  high  and  rugged  Pro- 
montory in  this  Ifland,  an  extraordinary  Fowl,  which 
P  2  the 


3i6  A  TOUR  tiro  Scotl. 

the  Inhabitants  call  Lyer,  builds  its  Neft  ;  it  is  about 
the  Size  of  a  Duck,  and  fo  fat,  that  it  feems  to  be  no- 
thing elfe;  the  Inhabitants  admire  it  much,  and  ven- 
ture their  Lives  to  climb  for  it  by  Ropes,  fsc.  It  is 
reckoned  delicious  Food,  eaten  with  Vinegar  and 
Pepper.  On  a  barren  Heath  in  this  Ifland  lies  an  ob- 
long Stone,  in  a  Valley  between  two  moderate  Hills, 
called,  by  way  of  Contraries,  The  dwarfy  Stone.  It 
is  36  Feet  long,  18  Feet  broad,  and  9  Feet  high  :  no 
other  Stones  are  near  it :  it  is  all  hollowed  within, 
having  a  Door  on  the  Eaft-fide  two  Feet  fquare,  with 
a  Stone  of  the  fame  Dimenfion  lying  about  two  Feet 
from  it ;  which  was  intended,  no  doubt,  to  clofe  this 
Entrance.  Within  is  cut  out,  at  the  South-end  of  it, 
the  Form  of  a  Bed  and  Pillow,  capable  of  holding  two 
Perfons,  as,  at  the  North- end,  is  another  Bed,  both 
very  neatly  done.  Above,  at  an  equal  Diiiance  from, 
both,  is  a  large  round  Hole ;  which  is  fuppofed  not 
only  to  have  been  defigned  for  letting  in  Light  and 
Air,  when  the  Door  was  {hut,  but  likewife  for  letting 
out  Smoke  from  the  Fire,  for  which  there  is  a  Place 
made  in  the  Middle  between  the  two  Beds.  The 
Marks  of  the  Workman's  Tool  appear  every-where  ; 
and  the  Tradition  of  the  Vulgar  is,  That  a  Giant  and 
his  Wife  had  this  Stone  for  their  Habitation}  though 
the  Door  alone  deftroys  this  Fancy,  which  is  wholly 
groundlefs  every  Way  befides.  Juft  by  it  is  a  clear 
and  pleafant  Spring,  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Inhabitant. 

From  the  Top  of  thefe  Hills  the  Sun  is  to  be  feen 
all  Night  about  the  Summer  Solilice.  On  the  North 
Part  of  this  Ifland  are  a  Church,  a  Gentleman's  Seat, 
and  feveral  Farm-houfes,  as  alfo  divers  Lakes,  which 
abound  with  Fifh,  especially  Trouts. 

Three  Miles  from  South  Ronalfa  lies  BURRA, 
three  Miles  long,  and  one  broad,  fruitful  in  Corn  and 
Pafturage,  and  affords  excellent  Fuel.  Stewart  of 
Mains  built  a  noble  and  fumptuous  Stone  Houfe  here. 

This 


Scoti.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  317 

This  Ifland  abounds  with  Rabbets,  and  has  a  Chapel ; 
but  belongs  to  the  Parifli  of  South Ronalja. 

Weft  from  this  lies  FLOTTA,  five  Miles  long,  and 
three  and  an  half  broad,  moft  of  it  en  comparted  with 
high  Rocks.  It  has  a  Church,  and  a  Gentleman's 
Seat  ;  and  abounds  with  excellent  Land- fowl  in  its 
Heaths,  but  has  little  Corn -ground,  and  not  many 
Inhabitants. 

Near  this  lie  FARA,  CAVA,  and  GRANSEY,  fruit- 
ful and  pleafant,  though  fmall  Iflands. 

We  pafs  by  feveral  Holms^  as  they  call  them,  which 
are  left  for  Pafturage,  and  come  to  POMONA,  the 
largeft  of  the  Orkney  Iflands,  and  for  that  Reafon 
called  the  Mainland.  It  is  24  Miles  long  ;  in  fome 
Places  9,  and  in  others  6  Miles  broad.  It  is  very 
fruitful,  and  well  inhabited  ;  though  there  are  no 
Trees  in  all  thefe  Iflands,  but  what  grow  in  the 
Bifhop's  Gardens  at  Kirkwall^  the  only  Town  in 
Orkney,  a  Royal  Burgh,  long  poffrfTed  by  rhe  Noru'e- 
gians,  pleafantly  fituated  upon  a  Bay,  near  the  Middle 
of  it.  It  is  about  a  Mile  in  Length,  and  is  the  Seat  of 
Juftice,  where  the  Sheriffs,  &c.  keep  their  Courts.  It 
confifts  of  one  Street,  which  is  narrow  ;  but  the  Hou- 
fes  are  well  built,  and  moft  of  them  covered  with 
Slate.  The  Crown  had  formerly  a  ftr:  ng  Caftle  here, 
which  now  is  in  Ruins.  Near  tht  Cafrle  Hands  a 
ftately  Houfe,  formerly  the  Bifhop's  Seat,  and  near  to 
that  a  Palace,  which  was  begun  by  Patrick  Stewart, 
Earl  Q{  Orkney,  in  the  Year  1574,  but  not  finifhed, 
becaufe  of  his  untimely  Death :  feveral  Rooms  of  it 
have  been  curioufly  painted  with  Scripture  Stories. 
At  the  North-end  of  the  Town  is  a  Fort  built  by  the 
Englijhy  during  Oliver  Cromwell's  Adminidration, 
ditched  about  with  a  Breaftwork,  and  other  Fortifi- 
cations, on  which  they  have  fome  Cannon  planted,  for 
the  Defence  of  the  Harbour.  There  is  a  ftately  Ca- 
thedral Church  here,  called  by  the  Name  of  St. 
^  who,  the  Natives  fay,  was  their  firft  Apoftle  : 
P  3  it 


3i8  'A  TOUR  tbro  Scotl. 

it  is  very  magnificent  for  this  Part  of  the  World,  and 
built  of  hewn  Stone,  excellently  polifhed :  it  has  14. 
Pillars  on  each  Side,  and  a  Steeple  eredled  on  four 
large  Pillars  in  the  Middle,  with  fine  Bells  in  it. 
There  are  fo  many  Turnings,  that  it  is  hard  for  a 
Stranger  to  find  the  fame  Way  out  or  in.  Here  is  a 
public  Grammar-fchool.  They  have  a  Charter  for 
two  weekly  Markets,  and  an  annual  Fair,  which  holds 
three  Days.  The  Town  is  governed  by  a  Provoft, 
four  Bailiffs,  and  a  Common  council.  This  Ifland 
has  nine  Parifh-churches,  many  Promontories  and 
.Bays,  and  feveral  Mines  of  good  White  and  Black 
Lead  ;  it  has  alfo  feveral  Gentlemens  Seats,  and  divers 
Lakes  and  Rivulets,  which  abound  with  Salmon  and 
ether  Fifh.  It  has  four  very  good  Harbours  ;  viz.  one 
at  Kirkwalli  both  large  and  fafe ;  another  at  Deer- 
found,  very  large,  with  good  Anchorage,  and  capable 
of  receiving  the  greateft  Fleets ;  the  third  is  at  Gra- 
hams hall;  and  the  fourth  at  Kerjlon,  which  is  very 
commodious,  and  well-fenced  againft  all  Winds.  In 
this  Ifland  are  two  Temples,  where  the  Natives  be- 
lieve by  Tradition,  that  the  Sun  and  Moon  were  wor- 
fniped  ;  which  I'elief  of  theirs  is  very  right,  fmce  the 
leffer  Temple  is  femicircular :  the  greater  is  100 
Paces  Diameter.  There  are  two  green  Mounts, 
creeled  at  the  Ea'ft  and  Weft-end  of  it;  and  round 
each  of  the  Temples  a  Trench  or  Ditch  is  drawn, 
like  that  about  Stone-benge.  Many  of  the  Stones  are 
about  20  or  24  Feet  in  Height  above  the  Ground, 
about  five  in  Breadth,  and  a  Foot  or  two  in  Thick- 
ncfs.  Som|e  of  them  are  fallen  down  ;  and  the  Tem- 
ples are  one  on  the  Eaft,  and  the  other  on  the  Weft- 
fide  of  the  Lake  of  Stennis^  where  it  is  (hallow  and 
fordable,  there  being  a  Railage  over  by  large  Stepping- 
fto.ncs.  Near  the  fmailer  Temple  (which  is  on  the 
Eaft  fide  of  the  Lake,  as.  the  greater  on  the  Weft) 
ftand  two  Stones  of  the  fame  Bignefs  with  the  reft ; 

through 


9toth         GREAT  BRITAIN.  319 

through  the  Middle  of  one  of  which  runs  a  great 
Hole,  by  which  Criminals  and  Vidims  were  tied. 

E  a  ft  from  The  Mainland  lies  COPPINSHA,  a  firaU 
I/land,  but  fruitful  in  Corn  and  Grafs;  has  good 
Fifhing,  and  abounds  with  Fowl,  It  is  very  confpi- 
cuous  to  Seamen,  as  is  the  Hplm  ;G  the  North-eaft  of 
it,  called  The  Horfe  of  Copplnjha. 

North  from  The  Mainland  lies  SHAPINTSHA,  five  or 
fix  Miles  long,  and  three  broad ;  it  has  a  very  fafe 
Harbour,  and  a  Parifii-church. 

To  the  South- eaft  lies  STRONSA,  fix  Miles  long, 
and  three  broad,  well  known,  becaufe  of  its  good 
Harbours,  to  thofe  who  frequent  this  Country  and 
Shetland  fot  Fifhing :  it  is  very  fruitful,  and  well  in* 
habited  j  and  has  a  Rock  belonging  to  it,  called  Out- 
hrrle^  remarkable  for  its  good  Fifhery. 

A  little  North-eafl:  of  it  lies  a  little  pleafant  Ifle, 
called  PAPA-STRCNSA,  very  fruitful  and  well  inha- 
bited. 

Farther  North  lies  SANDA,  about  12  Miles  long, 
and  8  Miles  broad,  well  inhabited,  and  has  two 
Harbours  ;  it  abounds  with  Cattle,  Hay,  and  Fifh ; 
but  the  Inhabitants  are  obliged  to  bring  their  Fuel  from 
Eda^  which  lies  Weft  of  it;  it  is  ten  Miles  long,  and 
in  fome. Places  five  Miles  broad.  There  is  good  Salt 
made  here  ;  and  it  abounds  with  Fifh  and  Fowl,  but 
not  with  Corn  and  Grafs. 

Three  Miles  Weft  from  Kir kwall  lies  DAMSEY,  a 
filial  I,  but  fruitful  Ifland,  and  abounds  with  Fifh. 

To  the  North-weft  lies  ROUSA,  8  Miles  long,  and 
6  broad ;  it  has  many  Promontories,  and  high  Hills, 
but  on  the  Coaft  is  fruitful,  and  well  inhabited  ;  it 
abounds  alfo  with  Fowl,  Fifh,  and  Rabbets. 

There  are  feveral  other  Mauds  in  the.  Neighbour- 
hood, which  are  fruitful  enough  for  their  Extent. 

Eight  Miles  North  from  Ttirkwall  lies  EGLISHA, 

three  Miles  long,  and  two  broad  j  it  has  a  fafe  Ro^d 

P  4  for 


32o  Scotl. 

for  Ship?,  is  very  pleafant  and  fruitful,   and    has   a 
Parifh-Church. 

Five  Miles  North-eaft  lies  NORTH  FARA,  three 
Miles  long;  it  is  but  thinly  inhabited,  but  affords  the 
general  Commodities  of  the  Country. 

SOUTH  FARA,  which  lies  near  Burra,  is  much  of 
the  fame  Extent  and  Nature. 

North  from  Eglijha  lies  WISTRA,  eight  Miles 
lon^,  in  fome  Places  five,  and  in  others  three  Miles 
broad ;  it  is  well  inhabited,  abounds  with  Corn,  Cat- 
le,  Ftfh,  and  Rabbets;  has  a  flrong  Caftle,  with  a 
convenient  Harbour. 

Two  Miles  North  eafl  lies  PAPA.WESTRA,  three 
Miles  long,  a  Mile  and  an  half  broad,  is  well  inha- 
bited, has  a  good  Harbour,  and,  together  with  the 
other  Weftra^  makes  up  a  Parifh.  In  this  liland  ftand, 
near  a  Lake  (now  called  6V.  TredweWs  Loch)y  two 
Obelifks,  in  one  of  which  is  an  Hole  ufed  by  the  Hea- 
thens for  the  tying  of  Criminals  and  Victims  ;  and, 
behind  them,  lying  on  the  Ground,  a  third  Stone, 
hollowed  like  a  Trough. 

The  People  of  the  Orcades  are  generally  healthy, 
ftout,  and  well-proportioned  :  they  are  more  numerous 
than  can  eafily  be  imagined.  Bleau^  in  his  Atlas* 
fays,  they  muftered  lo.coo  Men  at  once,  near  Kirk' 
^cal:^  fit  to  carry  Arms,  beiides  thofe  that  were  lefc  to 
cultivate  the  Ground.  The  Commodities,  which  they 
export  yearly,  are  Butter,  Tallow,  Hides,  Barley, 
Malt,  Oat-meal,  Fifh,  falted  Beef,  Pork,  Rabbet- 
fkins,  Otter-ikins,  white  Salt,  Stuffs,  Stockens,  Wool, 
Hams,  Quills,  Down,  Feathers,  &c.  Molucca  Beans, 
figured  Stones,  and  peculiar  Sorts  of  Fifh  and  Fowls, 
are  found  here.  The  Glaik  Geefe,  or  Barnacles* 
which  are  reckoned  to  breed  in  the  Trunks  of  Trees, 
or  in  the  Timber  of  old  Ships,  and  have  been  fo  fre- 
quently feen  about  thefe  and  the  neighbouring  Iflands, 
have  occafioned  abundance  of  Wrangling  among;  the 
Learned.  Some  of  them  have  denied  the  Matter  of 

Fafl, 


Scot}.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  321 

Fa6r?  and  boldly  aliened,  there  could  be  no  fuch  thing 
in  Nature,  as  that  Birds  fliould  proceed  from  Trees  ; 
others,  who  could  not  refift  the  Evidence  of  To  many 
Perfons  of  Credit,  who  had  feen  and  attefted  the 
hanging  of  Birds  of  that  Sort  to  the  Trunks  of  Trees-, 
&V.  have  had  recourfe  to  fuch  ftrange  Phiiofophica! 
Notions  for  explaining  this  Phenomenon,  as  ftill 
made  the  thing  more  ridiculous  and  incredible.  But 
there  are  two  Ways  to  fbive  this  Difficulty,  found  out 
by  modern  Authors,  both  cf  which  feem  very  pro- 
bable :  the  firft  is  the  Concha  Anaiifern,  mentioned  by 
SifrRobtrt '•  Sibbald)  in  his  Natural  Hijlory  cf  Scotland, 
Book  III.  PartW.  Cap.  12.  wherein  he  fays,  that  thofe 
Shells  ftick  to  Sea -ware,  or  Logs  of  Fir,  and  fuck 
Nourishment  from  them  ;  that  the  Animal  contained 
in  thofe  Shells  is  a  Fifh,  but  unftiapely,  and  fends  out 
fuch  a  Multitude  of  Feet,  as  referable  Hair,  which  the 
unwary  Obftrver  takes  for  Feathers ;  and  of  this  An-i 
rnal  Sir  Robert  has  given  us  a  Cut  in  the  End  of  his 
Book.  Dr.  WalliS)  in  his  Defcription  of  Orkney^  has 
done  the  like;  and  tells  us,  he  has  feen  forne  thou- 
fands  of  thofe  Concha,  {ticking;  to  Logs  of  Wood 
driven  adiore  in  that  Country.  But  the  Solution  given 
by  a  late  Author,  in  his  Curiofities  of  Nature  and  Art 
in  Hujbandry  and  Gardening^  printed  at  London^  p.  31 1 . 
feems  to  be  ftill  more  plain,  if  the  Fad  be  true  ;  vlts. 
That  the  Barnacles  lay  their  Eggs,  as  Fifh  do  theirs, 
and  leave  them  at  the  Mercy  of  the  Waves ;  and  that, 
as  they  Moat,  they  {tick  to  what  they  meet,  efpecially 
rotten  Wood,  Sea-ware,  and  other  maritime  Plant?, 
upon  which  we  may  obferve  a  glutinous  Subftance; 
and  that  they  are  hatched  there  by  the  Heat  of  the 
Sun. 

The  People  of  the  Orcadzs,  generally  {peaking,  are 
very  civil  and  industrious,  hofpitable,  fober,  a-nd  reli- 
giouily  difpofed.  Though  the  Air  be  .{harp  and  cold, 
yet  it  may  be  called  temperate.  They  are  generally 
long- lived,  the  Women  handfome,  bearing  Children 
P  5  fometiiiies 


A  TOUR  thro9  Scot!. 

fnmetimes  at  60  Years.  They  are  feldom  afflidecl 
with  Fevers,  Stone,  or  Gout ;  but  are  often  liable  to 
the  Scurvy,  Agues,  and  Confumptions.  They  gene- 
rally fpeak  the  Englijb  Tongue  after  the  Scots  way ; 
but  many  antient  People  of  the  poorer  Sort  fpeak  the 
JV'ur/z,  or  Norway^  or  old  Dani/h  Tongue,  which  has 
been  continued  from  the  firft  Planters  of  thefe  Iflands. 
They  have  Plenty  of  Black  Cattle,  Sheep,  Swine, 
Rabbets,  Geefe,  and  feveral  Sorts  of  Fifli.  They  ex- 
port great  Quantities  of  Oil,  Butter,  and  fait  Fifh, 
which  turn  to  good  Account.  Their  Corn-land  is 
every  -where  inclofed  ;  and  without  thefe  Inclofures 
their  Sheep  and  Swine,  and  moft  of  their  Cattle,  go 
loofe,  without  an  Herdfman. 

They  formerly  had  their  own  Kings,  after  the 
Manner  of  the  Fifls,  who  were  har rafted  by  the  Ro- 
mans \  but,  by  the  Injury  of  Time,  or  Negligence  of 
Writers,  only  two  are  come  to  the  Knowlege  of  Pof- 
terity,  viz.  Bl.idm  or  Balus-,.  and  Ganus,  who  was  co- 
temporary  with  CaraftacuSy  the  i8th  King  of  Scotland ^ 
in  the  firft  Century. 

Thefe  Ifles,  it  is  likely,  were  under  their  own 
Princes  (of  the  PMJh  Blood),  till  they  were  fubdued 
by  King  Kenneth  Macatyln,  about  the  Year  840.  But, 
Anno  1099,  Donald  Bans  having  affigned  them  to  the 
King  of  Norway,  for  affifting  him  in  his  Ufurpation, 
the  Norwegians  invaded  them  ;  and  were  Matters  for 
about  164  Years,  when  Magnus  King  of  Norway  fold 
all  again  to  Alexander  King  of  Scotland^  who  gave  the 
Property  hereof  to  a  Nobleman,  furnamed  Speire^  an 
Heirefs  of  whofe  Family  brought  it  to  the  $mclqir$)  or 
St.-  Clares^  one  of  whcm  carried  the  Title  of  Prince  of 
Orkney^  Duke  of  OUenburgb^  &c.  and  -married  a 
Daughter  of  the  King  of  Denmark.  But  one  of  his 
Succeflbrs  having  forfeited,  the  Title  and  Eftate  fell  to 
the  Crown ;  though,  in  Truth,  the  Scots  reaped  but 
little  Profit  by  them,  being  often  difturbed  by  the  Kings 
of  Denmark  and  Norway^  who  claimed  the  Sove- 
reignty § 


ScotR          GREAT  BRITAIN*.  323- 

reignty;  and,  in  fome  meafure,  continued  poflefTed  of 
it,  till  the  Marriage  of  King  James  III.  with  a  Daugh- 
ter of  Denmark,  when  they  were  firit  mortgaged  for  a 
great  Sum,  due  then  by  the  Contract ;  and  thereafter, 
upon  her  bringing  forth  a  Son  (afterwards  King 
James  IV.),  the  imire  Right  to  them  was  furrendered 
to  King  James  III.  which  was  farther  confirmed  to* 
King  James  VI.  upon  his  marrying  /Inne  his  Queen, 
the  King  of  Denmark's  Daughter.  The  Earldom  of 
Orkney,  and  Ljrdfhip  of  Zetland,  continued  in  the 
Crown,  till  Queen  Mary,  being  to  marry  James-  Hep~ 
burny  Edrl  of  Bothwell,  by  fatal  Advice  of  her  Privy 
Council,  advanced  him  to  the  Dignity  of  Duke  of 
Orkney.  -After  his  Death,  King  James  VL  created  a 
natural  Son  of  King  James  V.  Ear] ;  which  failing  in 
his  Son,  it  returned  to  the  Crown;  and,  Anno  1647, 
JPilliam  Douglas,  Earl  of  Morton,  having  advanced}  as 
he  faid,  greSt  Sums  to  King  Charles  1.  procured  this 
Country  in  Mortgage  for  his  Money  ;  but  it  was  re- 
deemed, and,  by  A6t  of  Parliament,  all  reannexed  to 
the  Crown,  Anno  1669,,  excepting  v/hat  belonged  to 
the  Biftiop  ;  which  Act  fuppreiled'the  Office  of  She- 
riff, and  e  e£led  one  with  a  different  Name,  viz.  to  be 
called,  57/t'  Stewartry  of  Orkney  and  Zetland.  But 
tie  faid  Country,  by  the  Union-Parliament,  was  dif- 
folved  from  the  Crown  ;  and  her  late  Majefty  there- 
upon granted  the  fame  to  the  then  Earl  of  Mortsn^  for 
Payment  of  the  yearly  Sum  of  500 /.  and  appointed 
him  Steward  and  Jufticier  within  the  Bounds  thereof. 
Under  the  Steward  are.  fome  Judges  of  hi&  Creation 
and  Appointment,  called  B&ilifs  :  in  every  Pariih  and 
Hie  there  is  one.  Their  Qlfice  is  to  overfee  the  Man- 
ners of  the  Inhabitants,  to  hold  Courts,  and  to  de- 
termine' in  Civil  Matters,  to  the  Value  of  ro/.  4 
(165.  8  d.  Engllfofc  bat  if  the  Matter  be  above,  it  is 
referred  to  the  Steward,  o?  his  Deputy.  Under  and 
fubfervient  to  thofe  Bailiffs  are  fix  or  feven  ef  the  moft 
taieftand  intelligent  Perfons  within  the  Parifh,  called 


A  TOU  R  thro  Scotl. 

jLawrigbt-men :  thefe,  in  their  refpeclive  Bounds, 
have  the  Overfight  of  the  People,  in  manner  of  Con- 
ftables,  and  inform  the  Bailiff  of  fiich  Enormities,  as 
occasionally  happen,  which  the  latter  punifhes  ac- 
cording to  the  Importance  and  Circumftances  of  the 
Fault ;  and,  if  it  be  above  his  Limits,  or  the  Extent  of 
his  Power,  he  fends  the  Delinquent  to  the  Seat  of 
Juftlce,  which  is  held,  as  we  hinted,  at  Kirkwall,  by 
the  Steward,  or  his  Deputy.  Thefe  Lawright-men 
have  a  Privilege  inherent  to  their  Office  by  the  Cuftom 
of  the  Country,  which  is  not  ufual  elfewhere;  and 
this  is,'  if  there  be  any  Sufpicion  of  Theft,  they  take 
fome  of  their  Neighbours  with  them,  during  the  Si- 
lence of  the  Night,  and  make  Search  for  the  Theft, 
which  is  called  Ranfacking,  from  Ranfaka,  which  is 
to  make  Inquiry,  in  the  antient  Danijb :  they  fearch 
every  Houfe  they  come  to,  and  feizing  him  upon 
MV  horn  the  Theft  is  found,  bring  him  to  the  Seat  of 
Juftice. 

The  Chrutian  Religion  was  not  only  preached,  but 
planted  very  early  in  thefe  Ifles;  for  we  find  Servanus 
(or  St.  Serf)  was  their  Bifhop,  and  Preceptor  to  the 
famous  Kcntigern  (whom,  in  a  familiar  way,  he  called 
Mvngdh^  or  Mungo^  in  his  vulgar  Tongue),  who 
founded  theBiflioprick  of  St.  Afaphin  Wales  about  the 
Year  560,  and  who  had  been  alfo  Bifhop  ofGtygwu, 
And,  Anno  1071,  the  People  of  Orkney  fent  one  of 
their  Clergy  to  Tork9  with  Letters,  defiring  that  Arch- 
bifhop  (who  was  then,  in  Fact,  poflefled  of  a  Jurif- 
diclion  over  the  Church  of  Scotland)  to  confecrate  him 
to  be  their  Bifhop.  The  laft  Popifh  Bifliop  was  Adam 
Hepburn^  who  conformed  to  the  Reformation,  and 
Jived  many  Years  after  it.  He  was  an  eminent  Man 
in  his  Time,  a  Lord  of  Council  and  Seffion;  he 
crowned  King;  James  VI.  was  Father  to  the  Lord 
Ji^ly-rsod-houfe^  where  he  was  Abbot,  and  where  his 
Tomb  remains  to  this  Day.  The  brave  Lieutenant. 

General 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  327 

General  George  Hamilton^  Field-Marflial  of  Great 
Britain^  was  Earl  of  Orkney. 

Eight  Miles  farther  North  lie  the  Ifles  ofSHET> 
LAND;  betwixt  them  lies  the  FAIR-!SLE,  which 
riles  up  in  three  high  Promontories,  and  is  feen  both  in 
Orkney  and  Shetland.  They  lie  in  61  and  62  Decrees 
of  North  Latitude,  and  have  Norway  on  the  Eaft, 
which  is  the  neareft  Part  of  the  Continent  of  Europe. 
There  are  in  all  46  Ifiands,  40  Holms,  or  lefs  liles, 
hft  for  Pafturage,  and  30  Rocks,  frequented  only  by 
Fowl. 

The  nrft  of  thefe  Tflands,  called  THE  MAIN- 
LAND, is  60  Miles  long,  and,  in  fome  Places,  16 
broad:  it  runs  into  the  Sea  with  abundance  of  Pro- 
montories. It  is  beft  inhabited,  and  cultivated,  on  the 
Shore ;  but  the  inner  Part  is  mountainous,  and  full  of 
Lakes  or  Bogs,  which  makes  traveling  there,  to 
Strangers,  dangerous.  The  Air  is  cool  and  piercing; 
yet  many  of  the  Inhabitants  live  to  a  great  Age.  About 
the  Summer  Solftice  they  have  fo  much  Light  all 
Kight,  that  they  can  fee  to  read  by  it.  The  Sun  fets 
between  ten  and  eleven  at  Night,  and  rifes  between 
one  and  two  in  the  Morning;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  Day  is  fo  much  fhorter,  and  the  Ni^ht 
longer,  in  the  Winter;  which,  with  the  Violence°of 
the  Tides,  and  the  Tempeftuoufnefs  of  the  Seas,  de- 
prives them  of  all  foreign  Correfpondence  from  Ofiol-er 
to  SJprU*  during  which  time  they  hear  nothing  of 
what  pafles  in  other  Parts  of  the  World.  A  known 
Initance  of  this  was,  that  though  the  Revolution  hap- 
pened to  begin  in  November^  they  knew  nothing  of  it 
tilt  the  May  following,  when  a  Fiibcrman,  who  ar- 
rived there,  told  them  of  it;  and  then  they  imprifoned 
him,  in  order  to  try  him  forfpreading  fuch  News. 

They  are  much  fubjeft  to  the  Scurvy,  by  eating 
too  much  Fifh  ;  but  Nature  has  furniftied  them  with 
great  Quantities  of  Scurvy- grafs  for  an  Antidote. 
They  have  little  Corn  of  their  own  Growth,  and  there- 


eotL 

fore  import  great  Quantities  from  Orkney.  Their 
common  Drink  is  Whey,  which  they  barrel  up,  and 
keep  in  cold  Cellars  ;  this  makes  it  very  ftrong,  fo  that 
it  quickly  turns  their  Heads.  Some  of  them  keep  for 
their  Drink  Butter-milk  mixed  with  Water,  and  this 
they  call  Blanc\.  The  better  Sort  have  good  Beer 
and  Ale,  of  which  they  are  very  liberal  to  Strangers. 
They  have  abundance  of  Fifh  of  all  forts  on  their 
Coafts  for  moft  Part  of  the  Year  :  thofe  that  abound 
moft  are  Cod,  Ling,  and  Herring.  They  have  alfo 
Shell-fifh  of  all  forts,  with  Whales,  Seals,  Sea-calves, 
and  Otters  ;  and  in  the  Winter-time  they  burn  Oil 
of  Fifli  inftead  of  Candle.  7"hey  abound  with  all 
forts  of  Fowl,  except  Heath-cocks ;  and  other  Fowls, 
which  frequent  Heaths,  will  not  live  there,  when 
brought  thither,  though  they  have  abundance  of  Heath. 
They  have  Store  of  Geefe,  and  many  forts  of  Ducks. 
They  have  Plenty  of  little  Horfes,  which  they  call 
Sthelties,  very  fit  for  the  Hufband man's  Ufe,  and  pace 
naturally.  They  /nake  ccarfe  Cloths,  Stockens,  and 
knit  Gloves,  for  their  own  Ufe,  and  alfo  for  Sale  to 
the  Norwegians.  Their  Grain  is  Oats  and  Big,  but 
moftr  of  the  latter.  They  have  abundance  of  Black 
Cattle  and  Sheep.  Their  Ewes  are  very  prolific,  and 
for  the  moft  Part  bring  forth  two,  and  fometimes 
three  Lambs  at  once.  Their  Fuel  is  Turf,  Peat,  and 
Heath.  Their  chief  Trade  of  Export  confifts  in  Filh, 
by  the  Produce  of  which  they  pay  their  Rent,  and 
purchafe  Neceflaries.  Their  native  Language  is  old 
Gothic,  or  German^  as  was  alfo  that  of  Orkney ;  but 
they  generally  now  (peak  Eng'ijb.  In  their  Cuftoms 
and  Habit  they  much  refembie  the  Germans ;  but  the 
better  Sort  imitate  the  Scots  Lovulandtrs.  Their  Re- 
ligion is  Proteftant,  and  they  are  generally,  as  well  as 
the  Orkneymcn,  very  devout.  There  were  few  or  no 
Piefbyterians  in  thefe  Parts  before  the  Year  1700, 
V/hen  new  Miilionaries  came,  and  ejecled  the  old 
Clergy ;  yet  trie  People  did  not  care  to^hear  them,  fo 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  327 

long  as  they  had  any  body  elfe.  They  make  ufe  of 
no  Phyficians ;  and  if  at  any  time  they  receive 
Wounds,  they  cure  themselves.  There  are  two  little 
Towns  in  this  Ifland  ;  the  firft  and  okleft  is  Scallo- 
way,  on  the  Weft- fide  of  the  Ifland,  where  there  is  a 
Cattle  four  Stories  high.  The  Inhabitants  are  about 
100  in  Number.  The  fecond  and  largeft  is  Lerwick^ 
which,  by  their  Fiftiing- trade,  is  increafed  now  to 
about  300  Famines. 

There  are  feveral  antient  Monuments  in  thefe 
Iflands,  and  particularly  thofe  called  Pifls-hottfes. 

The  Dutcb^  Hamburghers,  &c.  come  hither  to  fifh 
in  June,  and  go  away  again  in  Augujl  and  September ; 
and  fometimes  there  are  2000  BufTes  fifhing  in  Braf* 
fa's  Sound  at  once. 

The  moft  remarkable  of  the  other  Ifland?  here,  are 
ZEAL,  commonly  called  YELL,  18  Miles  long,  and 
9  broad  :  it  has  three  Churches,  and  feveral  Chapels. 
And, 

Farther  North  lies  VUIST,  much  of  the  fame  Di- 
menfions,  plain,  pleafant  to  the  Eye,  fruitful,  and  well 
inhabited.  It  is  the  pleafanteft  of  the  Shetland  Ifles, 
has  three  Churches,  and  as  many  Harbours,  The 
Inhabitants  fay,  no  Cats  will  live  in  it. 

TRONDA  lies  over-againft  Scalloway  ;  it  is  three 
Miles  long,  and  two  broad. 

A  little  North-eaft  lies  WALSEY,  three  Miles  long, 
and  as  many  broad. 

On  the  Eaft  of  Bra/fa's  Sound  lies  GREAT  RULE, 
eight  Miles  long,  and  two  broad  :  it  has  a  good 
Harbour^ 

Six  Leagues  Weft  from  The  Mainland  lies  FOULA, 
three  Miles  in  Length. 

More  to  the  Eaft  lies  BRASA,  five  Miles  long,  ancfc 
two  broad  j  it  has  fome  arable  Ground,  and  two 
Churches. 

BURRAY  is  three  Miles  long,  has  good  Pafturage,, 
abounds  with  Fifh  on  the  Coaft>  and  has  a  Church 

ifi 


823  A  T  O  U  R  tM          Scotl. 

in  it.  No  Mice  will  live  here  ;  and  it  is  faid,  they 
will  forfake  the  Place,  where-ever  the  Earth  of  it  is 
brought.  ^ 

Shetland  is  divided  into  12  Pariihes  ;  but  there  are 
many  more  Churches  and  Chapels  in  it.  This  Coun- 
try, like  Orkney  has  no  Wood  in  it;  but  they  have 
forne  Fifh  and  Fowl  peculiar  to  themfelves.  T*e  In- 
habitants are  very  bold  in  venturing  to  Sea  at  all 
Seafons  for  Fiih,  and  in  climbing  the  Rocks  for 
Fowl. 

It  has  been  debated  among  the  Learned,  whether 
thefe  Iflands,  the  Orcades,  or  the  North  -eaft  Coaft  of 
SfotJand,  was  the  THULE  of  the  Antients:  but  we 
have  not  room  to  give  an  Account  of  the  Arguments 
for  the  feveral  Hypothefes,  nor  to  confider  which  of 
them  are  moft  conclufive  ;  though  it  ought  to  be  ob- 
ferved.,  that  Sir  Robert  Sibbald  has  in  a  manner  de- 
monftrated,  that  the  North  eaftern  Parts  of  Scotland 
were  what  the  Antients  called  fo.  For  thus  fpeaks 
Claudian  of  Tbeodojius,  Father  of  the  Emperor  of  that 
Name: 

///*,  Cakdoniis  pofult  qul  caflra  prulnis. 
Maduerunt  Saxone  fujo 


Orcades  :  incaluit  PiElorum  /anguine  Tbule  ,4      * 
Scot  or  urn  cumulos  jievit  glad  alls  fame. 

In  Caledonian  Frofts  encamp'd  he  fiood  — 
The  Orkney  Ifles  were  dy'd  with  Saxon  Blood  : 
Then  THULE  with  the  Piftijh  Gore  grew  hot  : 
Icy  Stratbern  bemoan'd  each  flaughter'd  Scot. 

Stilus  Italicus  tikes  notice,  in  Tbule^  ofaCujftorn 
well  known  among  the  antient  Britons  and 
mam  : 

Caerulus  baud  atiter  cum  dlmlcat  inco'a  Thules, 
dgmlna  falciferv  clrcumvenit  afia       ' 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  329 

So,  when  the  azure  Son  of  Thule  wars, 
He  circles  Armies  driv'n  in  pointed  Cars. 

The  chief  Families  in  Orkney  and  Shetland  are  the 
Brutes ,  Sinclair  s,  Monats,  Nivtts,  Cbyneys,  Stuarts^ 
Grahams,  Mocdies,  Douglajfes,  Honeymans,  Trails, 
Bakies,  Southerlands,  Cralgus,  Youngs,  Buchanans,  . 
&c.  But  the  moft  antient,  and,  I  may  fay,  driginal, 
are  the  Fletts,  Hackreivsy  Ricbens,  Feas,  Skolas,  Groites, 
&c. 

In  the  Mouth  of  the  River  FORTH  lie  feveral 
Iflands,  the  moft  confiderable  of  which  is  the  MAY  : 
it  was  formerly  dedicated  to  St.  Adrian^  who  was 
martyred  there  by  the  Danes,  and  afterwards  a  reli- 
gious Place  was  built  in  Memory  of  him.  The 
Monks  gave  out,  that  barren  Women,  who  came  thi- 
ther annually  to  worfhip  at  St.  Adrian's  Shrine,  would 
thereby  be  cured  of  their  Barrennefs ;  and  it  was  fre- 
quented upon  that  Account  by  Women  in  the  Popifh 
Times.  But  whether  St.  Adrian  or  the  Monks  had 
the  moft  Influence  in  curing  their  Barrennefs,  I  de- 
termine not ;  yet  that  fond,  filly  Perfuafion  obtained 
fo  much  Credit,  that  [food,  of  Largo,  who  was  a 
noted  Sea-captain,  had  a  Charter  of  feveral  Lands  from 
King  James  IV.  to  be  in  Readineis  upon  Call  to  at- 
tend his  Majefty  and  the  Queen,  while  they  vifited  St. 
dd'ian.  This  Ifland  is  a  Mile  long  from  North  to 
South,  and  about  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  broad  :  it  lies 
feven  Miles  from  the  Coaft  of  Fife,  has  a  frefh- water 
Spring,  and  a  fmall  Lake.  No  Corn  grows  here  ; 
but  in  the  Summer  it  affords  Pafturage  for  100  Sheep, 
and  20  Black  Cattle.  7"he  Weft  fide  is  inacceflible, 
becaufe  of  high  Rocks ;  but  theEaft-fide  is  plain,  and 
has  four  Places,  where  Boats  may  arrive,  one  of  them 
a  fafe  Harbour  for  Ships  during  a  flrong  Weft  Wind. 
Fifh  of  all  Sorts  are  numerous  on  the  Coaft  of  this 
liland  ;  and  it  abounds  with  Fowl,  particularly  thofe 
called  Skarts,  Dunters,  Gulls,  Scouts,  and  Kittawaax  ; 

the 


330  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

the  latter  is  about  the  Size  of  a  Dove,  and  in  *July  is 
preferred  to.  a  Partridge.  The  Scouts  are  fomewhat 
lefs  than  a  Duck,  but  their  Eggs  are  larger  than  thofe 
of  a  Gooie,  and,  being  boiled  hard,  eat  very  well 
with  Vinegar  and  Parfley.  This  I/land  of  May  for- 
merly belonged  to  the  Priory  of  Ptttemueem,  but  was 
granted  in  Fee  by  King  Charles  I.  to  Cunningham  of 
Barns,  with  Liberty  to  build  a  Light-houfe  therefor 
the  Benefit  of  Ships ;  for  the  Maintenance  of  which 
they  were  to  allow  id.  per  Ton.  A  Tower  of  40 
Feet  high  is  built  there  for  that  End,  with  a  Fire  every 
Night ;  and  the  firft  Builder  was  caft  away  in  return- 
ing from  thence  to  his  PJoufe  in  Fife,  by  a  Tempeft 
which  fome  poor  old  Women  were  executed  for 
railing. 

The  BASS  lies  next;  but  I  have  already  given  an 
Account  of  it. 

Higher  up  in  the  Firth  lies  IKCHKEITH,  betwixt 
Fife  and  Lothian.,  a  Mile  and  an  Half  long,  and  about 
half  a  Mile  broad--;  the  Soil  is  fat,  and  produces  good 
Grafs,  and  abundance  of  phyfical  Herbs.  It  has  four 
frefh-water  Springs,  and  as  many  Harbours,  one  to- 
wards each  Quarter.  It  rifes  in  the  Middle,  and  has 
a  ftrong  Stone  Fort  raifed  upon  it  by  Queen  Mary, 
There  is  a  Stone  Quarry  here,  which  fends  forth  a 
flrong  fulphureous  Smell,  when  any  Pieces  are  broken 
off,  but  very  fit  for  building.  There  are  great  Shoals 
of  Fifh  round  the  Coafts  of  this  Ifland,  and  abundance 
of  Oyfters  during  the  Winter.  This  Ifland  had  its 
Name  from  the  noble  Family  of  Keith,  whofe  Foun- 
der had  this  Ifland,  with  the  Barony  of  Keith -?narefchal 
in  Lothian,  and  the  Hereditary  Dignity  of  Earl  Mar- 
Jhal  in  Scotland^  conferred  upon  him  by  King  Mai- 
colm  If.  in  the  Year  1010,  for  his  Valour  in  the  Bat- 
tle againft  the  Danes  at  Ear  in  Angus.  It  came  af- 
terwards to  the  Crown,  and  was  given  by  King  Ro- 
bert II.  to  John  Lord  Lyon  of  Glames,  the  Chief  of  that 
Family,  with  the  Barony  of  Kinghorn,  upon  his  mar- 


Scot!.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  331 

rying  that  Prince's  Daughter.  It  is  fmce  in  other 
Hands.  It  is  obferved,  that  here  Horfes  grow  fat  in 
a  little  Time. 

Higher  up,  \yithin  two  Miles  of  Aberdour^  lies  an 
Illand,  called  ST.  COLM'S-!NCH,  as  being  dedicated 
to  St.  Colnmba :  it  had  formerly  a  famous  Abbey,  with 
large  Endowments  ;  but  it  is  now  ruined  ;  and,  upon 
the  Alienation  of  Abbey-lands,  was  given  to  the 
Lord  Downs,,  a  Branch  of  the  Family  of  Stuart. 

Higher  up  lies  INCHARVY,  or  INCHGARY,  between 
two  Promontories,  near  the  Queen  s  ferry  ;  it  was  alfo 
fortified,  and  the  Guns  of  the  Forts  could  reach  the 
Shore  on  both  Sides,  fo  that  no  Ships  coulJ  fafeJy  pafs 
it  without  Leave. 

On  the  Top  of  an  high  rocky  Hill,  at  the  Weft- end 
ef  the  Iflands  of  Orkney,  near  the  Village  of  Skeal, 
there  is  a  fort  of  Pavement  confifting  of  Stones  vari- 
ouily  figured,  fome  like  a  Heart,  others  like  a  Crown, 
a  Leg,  a  Weaver's  Shuttle,  &c.  It  takes  up  above  a 
Quarter  of  a  Mile  in  Length,  and  from  20  to  30 
Feet  in  Breadth.  In  removing  any  of  thefe  Stones, 
the  Figure  is  as  neat  on  the  Under- fide,  as  the  Upper; 
and  being  as  big  as  the  Life,  all  of  one  Colour,  of  a 
redifh  kind  of  Stone,  pitched  in  a  redifh  Earth,  and 
the  Pavement  fo  very  Jong,  it  cannot  be  any  of  the 
teflellated  or  chequered  Works  of  the  Romans.  «  Part 
of  a  Garden  wall  is  decorated  with  thefe  Stones,  and 
many  of  them  are  taken  away  by  the  neighbouring 
Gentry,  to  fet  them  up  like  Dutch  Tiles  in  their 
Chimneys  ;  fo  that,  at  this  Rate,  in  lefs  than  a  Cen- 
tury, this  Pavement  will,  in  all  Likelihood,  fubfift  only 
in  Books. 

It  has  been  long  obferved,  that  the  I/lands  of  Scot- 
hnd,  efpecially  the  Weilern,  lie  more  conveniently  for 
carrying  on,  and  bringing  the  Fi(hing-trade  to  Per- 
fection, than  any  other  Parts  of  Europe. 

King  Charles  I.  as  I  have  remarked  in  another 
Place,  began  the  Experiment,  in  Conjun6tion  with  a 

Company 


332  A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

Company  of  Merchants ;  but  that  Defign.  miscarried 
by  the  Civil  War,  which  unhappily  broke  out  at  that: 
time.  'The  next  Attempt  was  made  by  King  C  barks  II* 
who  alfo  joined  with  fome  Merchants;  and  this  fuc~ 
ceeded  well  for  a  time.  Mr.  Martin  affures  us,  from 
fuch  as  faw  the  Fifh  that  were  caught  by  that  Com- 
pany, that  they  were  repined  the  beft  in  Europe  of 
their  kind,  and  according  bore  a  greater  Price.  But 
this  Defign  was  ruined  thus:  The  King,  having  Oc- 
cafion  for  Money,  was  advifed  to  withdraw  that  which 
was  employed  in  the  Fifhery  ;  at  which  the  Merchants 
being  difpleafed,  and  difagreeing  like  wife  among  thern- 
felves,  they  alfo  withdrew  their  Money  ;  upon  which 
that  Defign  was  laid  afrde  till  the  late  A<5t  for  eftablifh- 
ing  The  Free  Britijb  Fi fiery. 

But  the  Revival  of  this  undertaking  will,  in  all 
Probability,  be  one  of  the  Bleflings,  which  this  Ifland 
will  reap  by  the  late  happy  Union.  What  cannot 
Engllfh  Money,  and  Scotijh  Labour,  effedt  ! 

The  fettling  a  Fifhery  in  thofe  Parts  will  raife  a 
Nurfery  of  ftout  and  able  Seamen  in  a  very  fhort 
time,  to  ferve  the  Government  on  all  Occafions,  A 
new  Colony  need  not  be  planted  there;  for  the  Inha- 
bitants of  the  Weftern  Ifles  are  reckoned  to  be  about 
50,000;  many  of  whom  have  no  Employment,  and 
are  generally  dextrous  at  the  Oar,  and  only  want  to  be 
furniflied  with  proper  Materials  for  the  Fifliing-trade, 
which  would  encourage  the  Setting-up  of  other  Manu- 
factures. The  Commodioufnefs  and  Safety  of  the 
numerous  Bays  and  Harbours  of  thofe  Ifles,  feem  as  if 
Nature  had  defigned  them  for  promoting  Trade* 
They  have  fuch  abundance  of  Turf  and  Peat  for  Fuel, 
as  would  furnifti  Salt-pans  with  Fire  all  the  Year 
round.  The  Coafts  of  each  Ifland  afford  many  thou- 
fand  Loads  of  Sea-ware;  which,  if  preferved,  might 
be  fuccefsfully  ufed  for  making  Glafs,  and  like  wife 
Kelp  for  Soap.  Several  of  the  Iflands  afford  great 
Quantities  of  fine  Clay,  which,  if  improved,  might 

turn 


Scotl.  GREAT   BRITAIN.          333 

turn  to  a  good  Account  in  making  earthen  Ware  of 
all  Sorts.  Cod  and  Ling,  as  well  as  lefler  Fifh,  are  to 
be  had  on  the  Coafts  of  the  little,  as  well  as  of  the 
greater  Iftands:  and  what  has  been  faid  of  the  Wefteni 
ifles,  may  be  faid  likewife  or"  the  Jiles  of  Orkney  and 
Shetland. 

But,  if  thefe  Confiderations  are  not  fuiHcient  to  in- 
duce private  Peifons  to  fet  on  foot  fo  beneficial  an 
Improvement  to  the  Whole,  as  a  National  Fifliery,  it 
is  to  be  hoped,  that  a  ferious  Attention  to  the  Con- 
fequences  of  the  two  Rebellions  of  1715  and  1745, 
and  what  might  have  followed,  will  have  due  Weight 
with  our  Governors  for  this  Purpofe;  fince  fuch  a 
Scheme,  vigoroufly  and  effectually  puifued,  muft  em- 
ploy Multitudes  of  idle  Hands,  and  bind  the  whole 
Scotift  Nation  by  the  ftrongeft  Tie  among  Men,  their 
Inter  eft)  to  promote  the  Welfare  and  Profperity  of  a 
Government  fo  intent  to  employ  their  ufelefs  Hands, 
enrich  the  pooreft  Part  of  the  Ifland,  and  benefit  the 
Whole. 

June  1760.  This  Attempt  has  been  made,  and  pro- 
fecuted  with  fome  Vigour,  their  Neighbours  of  South 
Britain  joining  their  powerful  Aid  to  forward  it : 
But,  wherever  the  Fault  has  been,  I  am  forry  to  fay, 
that  it  has  not  yet  been  attended  with  the  Succefs  that 
might  have  been  expeded  from  fo  noble  and  national 
an  Undertaking;  though  (till  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that 
the  Difcouragements  are  not  fo  great,  but  that  they 
may  be  overcome  by  Patriotifm  and  Perfeverance. 
J  am,  Sir,  rnyit  truly, 

Tour  humble  Servant. 


LETTER 


334  -A  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

LETTER      VI, 

Containing  a  brief  Account  of  the  Rife,  Progrefi, 
and  Extinction,  of  the  Rebellion  raifed  in 
Scotland  in  the  Tear  1745.  Together  with  a 
Lift  of  the  Scotifh  Peerage,  and  of  the  Shires 
and  Burghs  that  are  privileged  to  return 
Members  to' the Britiih  Parliament.. 

SIR, 

I  Shall  now  proceed  to  the  Performance  of  my  Pro- 
mife,  made  in  different  Parts  of  the  preceding  Let- 
ters ;  to  wit,  to  give  a  brief  Account  of  the  Rife, 
Progrefs,  and  Suppreflion,  of  the  unnatural  and  un- 
. provoked  Rebellion  of  1745,  purpofely  referred  to  this 
Place,  as  it  was  the  Part  where  the  Flame  broke  out ; 
and  which  is  the  more  neceffary  to  be  given,  as  it 
muft  be  fuppofed  to  have  confiderably  affecled  the 
feveral  Towns  and  Countries  which  were  the  prin- 
cipal Scenes  of  Action  ;  and  alib,  as  it  will  here 
appear,  at  one  View,  in  all  its  different  Progreffions. 

In  the  Summer  of  the  Year  1745,  it  was  known, 
that  fome  Preparations  were  privately  making  for  "an 
Expedition  into  Scotland ;  and  a  principal  Officer  in 
the  French  Navy  raifed  a  Company  of  ico  Men, 
under  Pretence  of  the  E  aft -India  Company's  Service, 
which  were  ftiled  Graffins  de  Mer^  and  were  hand- 
fomely  cloathed  in  Blue,  faced  with  Red.  They 
were  put  on  board  a  Frigate  carrying  18  Guns  ;  and, 
every  thing  being  ready,  the  eldeft  Son  of  the  Pre- 
tender, who  had  been  for  fome  time  before  in  France^ 
iame  privately  to  Port  Lazare>  in  Britan^  where, 

oa 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN.  335 

on  the  I4th  of  July,  he  embarked  with  about  50  Scots 
and  Irijb,  in  order  to  land  in  the  Soiuh-weit  of 
Scotland* 

This  Frigate  of  his  was  joined  off  Belleijle  by  the 
•Elizabeth,  a  Man  of  War  of  66  Guns,  which  had 
been  taken  from  us  by  the  French  in  the  laft  War, 
and  was  now  extremely  well  manned  for  this  Service. 
In  their  Paflage  fhe  fell  in  with  a  Fleet  of  Englljh 
Merchantmen  under  the  Convoy  of  three  Men  of 
War;  one  of  which,  viz.  the  Lion,  commanded  by 
the  gallant  Captain  Brett  >  engaged  the  Elizabeth  for 
nine  Hours ;  but  foon  after  the  Engagement  began, 
the  Frigate  bore  away,  and  continued  her  intended 
Voyage.  The  Elizabeth,  when  Night  came  on, 
made  a  fhift  to  get  away,  and  returned  to  Breft  quite 
difabled,  having  her  Captain  and  64  Men  killed,  and 
130  dangeroufly  wounded.  She  had  on  board  a  large 
Sum  of  Money,  and  Arms  for  feveral  thoufand 
Men. 

The  Frigate  cruifed  for  fome  Days  between  the 
Iflands  of  Bar  a  and  L/7/?,  and  at  lad  ftood  in  for  the 
Coaft  of  Lochaber,  and  there  landed  betwixt  the 
I/lands  of  Mull  and  Sky  the  young  Chevalier,  and  his 
Attendants.  He  went  firft  to  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  'Mac- 
donald  of  Kenloch-Moidart,  where  he  remained  for 
fome  time  before  he  was  in  any  Condition  to  (hew  him- 
felf  in  public  ;  but,  about  the  middle  of  Auguft^  being 
joined  by  the  Cameron*  of  Locbitl,  the  AiacdonaMs  of 
Glengary,  the  Stuarts  of  dppin,  and  others  of  the 
Clans,  to  the  Number  of  between  1500  and  2000 
Men,  he  refolved  to  fet  up  his  Standard.  This  was 
accordingly  done,  and  the  Motto  he  made  choice  of 
was  TANDEM  TRIUMPHANS,  that  is,  At  length 
triumphant. 

About  the  middle  of  Augujl  he  appeared  with  his 
Forces  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Fort  Willia?n,  and 
about  this  time  publifhed  feveral  of  his  Father's  Ma- 
among  which  one  was  dated  in  1743, 

Which 


336  4  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

which  plainly  fhewed  that  an  Invaficn  was  then  in- 
tended;  another  in  1745,  declaring  his  Son  Regent  ; 
and  a  third,  containing  large  Promifes  to  the  People 
of  Scotland.  Soon  after,  two  Companies  of  St.  Cfair's 
Regiment  fell  in  with  the  Rebels,  whom  they  were 
fent  to  reconnoitre,  and  were  moft  of  them  taken  Pri- 
foners,  as  Captain  Siueatna?n  of  Guy's  Regiment  was 
prefently  after;  but  he  was  releafed  upon  his  Parole  ; 
and  it  was  from  this  Gentleman  that  the  firft  diftincl: 
Accounts  were  obtained  of  the  Force,  Difpofition, 
and  Defign  of  the  Rebels,  who  began  then  to  think 
themfelves  ftrong  enough  to  march  Southward. 

Lieutenant- General  Sir  John  Cope,  Commander  in 
Chief  of  the  King's  Forces  in  Scotland,  drew  together 
the  Troops  then  in  that  Kingdom,  armed  the  Militia, 
and  took  fuch  other  Precautions  as  he  thought  re- 
quifite;  and  at  length  judged  it  expedient  to  march 
Northward,  in  order  to  find  out  the  Enemy,  fuppo- 
iing  that  they  would  either  wait  for  him  at  the  Chain, 
which  is  the  Name  ufually  given  to  the  great  Road 
crofs  the  I/land  from  Invernefy  to  Fort  William,  or 
endeavour  to  meet  and  fight  him  in  his  PafTage ;  but 
they  did  neither:  for,  while  the  General  made  a  long 
and  fatiguing  March  to  Invcrnefs,  the  Rebels  gave 
him  the  Slip,  and,  inftead  of  marching  through  the. 
Pafs  of  Corryerroch,  they  took  the  Way  over  the 
Mountains,  feized  Perth  on  the  4th  of  September >  and 
on  the  5th  proclaimed  the  Pretender  there  ;  the  Perfon 
called  the  Duke  of  Perth,  the  late  Marquis  of  Tulli- 
bardin  {tiling  himfelf  Duke  of  Athol^  Lord  George  Mur- 
ray his  Brother,  and  feveral  others,  joining  and  de- 
claring for  him  -,  by  which  their  Numbers  fo  much 
increafed,  that  on  the  nth  they  began  their  March 
towards  the  Forth \  which  River  they  forded  at  the 
Frews  on  the  i3th,  and  fummoned  Glafgow  ;  but  re- 
ceiving no  Anfwer,  they  on  the  I4th  diverted  their 
March  Eaftward  towards  Edinburgh. 

4.  Mean 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Mean  time  Sir  John  Cope  reached  Invernefs,  from 
whence  he  difpatched  Orders  for  Tranfports  to  be  Tent 
him  to  Aberdeen^  in  order  to  bring  his  Forces  back:  by 
Sea  to  the  Port  of  Leltb\  and  with  this  View  he 
marched  with  all  poflible  Expedition  from  Invernefs 
to  Aberdeen^  where  he  embarked  his  Men ;  and,  on 
the  j  6th  of  September^  entered  the  Harbour  of  Dun  - 
bar,  where  the  next  Day  the  Men  landed,  and  on  the 
1 8th  the  Artillery.  They  were  fcarce  well  afhore, 
before  they  had  Advice  of  the  City  of  Edinburgh  being 
in  the  Hands  of  the  Rebels,  with  whom  the  Lord 
Proved,  and  fome  other  Magiftrates,  had  a  kind  of 
Treaty  on  the  i6th  in  the  Evening;  and,  Terms 
being  fettled,  the  Rebels  entered  the  Place  the  next 
Morning  about  five  o'Clock.  General  Guejl  had  re- 
tired into  the  Caftle,  with  a  fmall  Number  of  regular 
Troops ;  the  Bank,  and  mofl  of  the  public  Offices 
having  been  removed  into  that  Fortrefs  before.  Bri- 
gadier Fowke,  with  Gardiner's  and  Hamilton's  Dra- 
goons, having  joined  Sir  'John  Cope's  Army,  they,  on 
the  i  Qth,  marched  from  Dunbar^  and  encamped  at 
Night  on  the  Weft-fide  of  Haddingtoun  \  the  next 
Morning  early  they  continued  their  March,  and  in  the 
Evening  reached  Pre/ion-Pans^  the  Highlanders  ap- 
pearing on  the  high  Grounds  to  the  South  of  them  ; 
fo  that  they  were  very  near  each  other. 

Some  Firing  patted  during  the  Night.  Sept.  2ifl 
in  the  Morning,  about  three  o'Clock,  they  attacked 
the  King's  Troops ;  and  the  Dragoons,  breaking  on 
the  firft  Fire,  left  the  Foot  expofed  to  the  Highlanders, 
by  whom,  after  a  fhort  Difpute,  they  were  defeated, 
a  confiderab'e  Number  killed,  and  the  belt  Part  of  the 
reft  made  Prifoners,  the  few  Field-pieces  they  had  with 
them  being  likewife  taken.  This  is  by  fome  called 
the  Battle  of  Prefton-Pans^  by  others  the  Battle  of 
Seaton^  from  two  little  Towns  near  which  it  was 
fought;  but  if  it  muft  be  ftiled  a  Battle,  it  is  more 
properly  the  Battle  of  Glaidefmuir^  fince  that  was  the 
VOL,  IV.  Q.  Fisld 


338  jl  TOUR  thro  Scot!. 

Field  of  Battle,  being  a  wide  barren  Heath,  about 
feven  Miles  Eaft  from  Edinburgh. 

The  Rebels,  on  the  28th,  fent  out  Parties  to  Had- 
dingtoun  and  Dunbar,  and  their  Prifoners  to  Perth ; 
and,  on  the  29th,  began  to  take  their  Meafures  for 
cutting  off  all  Communication  between  the  Caftle  of 
Edinburgh  and  the  Town ;  which,  confidering  that 
they  wanted  heavy  Artillery,  and  indeed  all  other  Re- 
quifites  for  a  Siege,  was  a  very  needlefs  and  wild 
Attempt. 

On  the  firft  of  Oftobtr,  they  opened  thek  Trenches 
on  the  Caftle-hill)  a  little  below  the  Refervoir ;  upon 
which  the  Caftle  fired  upon  them,  killing  three  Men, 
and  wounding  a  commanding  Officer  ;  fo  that  by  four 
in  the  Afternoon,  they  abandonded  their  Works.  The 
City  of  Glafgow  being  fumrnoned  a  fecond  time,  and 
J5,ooo/.  being  demanded  by  way  of  Contribution, 
they  were  conftrained  to  compound  the  Matter  for 
5000  Guineas,  which  were  immediately  paid.  Hofti- 
lities  continued  between  the  Garrifon  of  the  Caftle  of 
Edinburgh^  and  the  Rebels,  till  the  fifth  in  the  Evening ; 
when,  feveral  Hcufes  being  beat  down  by  the  Artil- 
lery, and  the  Rebels  having  loft  20  Men  in  an  At- 
tempt to  drive  Part  of  the  Garrifon  from  the  Caftle- 
/;///,  the  Communication  between  the  Town  and 
Caftle  was  reftored,  and  Hoftilities  ceafed. 

On  the  yth,  the  Rebels  demanded  half  a  Crown  in 
the  Pound  from  the  Landlords  of  Houfes  in  Edinburgh, 
under  Pain  of  military  Execution.  About  the  Middle 
of  this  Month  they  were  joined  by  conliderable  Rein- 
forcements under  the  Command  of  feveral  Perfons  of 
Diftin£tion,  particularly  old  Gordon  of  Glenbucket,  For- 
bes Lord  Pltjligo,  the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock,  and  others. 
They  likewife  received  from  abroad  considerable  Sup- 
plies of  Ammunition,  military  Stores,  fmall  Arms,  and 
fame  Field-pieces.  There  was  alfo  one  Mr.  Boyer, 
or,  as  he  ftiled  himfelf,  Marquis  de  Gullies,  came  over 
in  one  of  thefe  Veffels  from  France,  as  an  Agent, 


Scotl.         GREAT  BRITAIN. 

whom  they  dignified  with  the  Title  of  Ambaflador. 
Towards  the  Latter  end  of  the  Month  a  great  Part  of 
their  Army  marched  to  Dalkeitb,  to  which  Place  they 
removed  their  Field-pieces  and  Ammunition  ;  and, 
having  ere£ted  a  Battery  at  Ailoway  to  fecure  the  Paf- 
fage  of  the  Firth ,  they  tranfported,  from  Montr  ofet 
Stone -hive%  and  other  Places,  the  Supplies  they  had  re- 
ceived from  abroad,  and  made  other  Difpofitions  to 
march  Southward. 

Mean  time  Field-Marmal  Wade^  Commander  in 
Chief  of  the  Army  intended  for  the  North,  began  to 
move  that  Way  with  his  Forces ;  confirming  of  fome 
Englljh  Regiments,  both  Horfe  and  Foot,  together  with 
the  Dutch  Auxiliaries,  and  a  Train  of  Field  Artillery, 
while  a  Body  of  Eritijb  Troops,  under  the  Command 
of  the  Earl  of  Allemarle^  landed  at  Newcaftle.  The 
Tryal Sloop  likewife  brought  into  Briftolz.  SpaniJbShip9 
on  board  of  which  were  2500  Fufils  with  Bayonets, 
and  ico  Barrels  of  Gunpowder,  feven  Chefls  of 
Money,  &c.  defigned  for  the  Service  of  the  Rebels. 
By  this  time  likewife  the  Militia  in  the  Northern 
Counties  were  raifed,  and  Afibciations  and  voluntary 
Contributions  fet  on  Foot  in  moft  Parts  of  the  King- 
dom. 

In  the  County  of  York  particularly,  through  the 
timely  Vigilance  and  Zeal  of  the  Archbrfhop  (Dr. 
Thomas  Herring)  aflifted  by  the  Nobility  and  Gentry, 
four  new  Regiments  were  raifed,  cloathed,  and  difci- 
plined,  at  the  Expence  of  the  County.  There  was 
likewife  a  confiderable  Body  of  Gentlemen  Volunteers 
on  Horfeback,  who  ferved  at  their  own  Expence,  put 
in  Motion  under  the  Command  of  Major  General 
Oglethorpe,  ft i led  the  Royal  Hunters.  In  Scotland^  the 
Lord  Prefident  of  the  Court  of  Sefiion,  Duncan  Forbes, 
Efq;  diftinguimed  himfelf  by  his  Zeal  and  Activity,  in 
diftributingCommiffions  for  raifing  feveral  independent 
Companies  in  the  North ;  which  were  to  be  put  under 
the  Command  of  the  Earl  of  London  >  fo  that  by  the 

2  End 


3 40  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

End  of  the  Month  there  was  an  Army  of  14.000 
Men  formed  in  the  North  of  England^  and  a  very 
confiderable  Body  raifed  in  the  North  of  Scotland,  for 
the  Security  of  Invernefs^  Fort 'William,  and  other 
Garrifons  there :  which  military  Preparations,  joined 
to  the  loyal  Spirit  which  fhewed  itfelf  in  all  Parts  of 
the  Nation,  and  more  particularly  at  London^  very  pro- 
bably difappointed  the  Defigns  of  the  Difaffecled, 
hindered  many  from  joining  the  Rebels,  and  even 
drew  ofFfome,  who  had  gone  to  Edinburgh  with  that 
Resolution. 

On  the  i ft  of  November •,  the  young  Chevalier  came 
to  the  Camp  at  Dalkeitb,  and  there  fixed  his  Head- 
Quarters,  as  lying  very  conveniently,  either  for  fend- 
ing Spies,  or  Detachments,  to  fee  what  was  doing  in 
the  North  of  England.  He  had,  however,  but  cool 
Encouragement,  fome  refufmgtoread  his  Letters,  and 
feveral  of  his  Emifiaries  being  feized  at  Newcafth^ 
Berwick,  and  at  other  Places.  He  detached  two  ad- 
vanced Corps  from  thence,  one  of  which  marched  to- 
wards Penpycook)  and  the  other  to  Loanbead^  both 
Places  being  in  the  Way  to  Peebles  and  Carlijle:  thefe 
Detachments  efcorted  their  Baggage  and  Ammunition; 
and  on  the  5th  their  Force  began  their  March  South- 
wards in  three  Columns. 

At  this  time  the  Duke  of  Perth  (as  he  ftiled  himfelf) 
had  the  Title  of  General  j  Lord  George  Murray  had 
the  Pofl  of  Lieutenant  General;  Lord  Elcho^  who  is 
eldeft  Son  to  the  Earl  ofpJPgmys,  commanded  thofe  that 
were  about  the  Perfon  of  the  young  Pretender,  and 
were  ftiled  his  Life-guards ;  the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock 
acted  as  Colonel  of  Huflars  j  and  Lord  Pitjligo  had  the 
Command  of  the  Angus  Horfe. 

But  though,  in  regard  to  their  Interefts,  thefe  Peo- 
ple were  honoured  with  thofe  Commands,  it  was 
known,  that  the  Pretender  confided  intirely  in  a  few 
Perfons,  moft  of  whom  came  over  with  him.  At  the 
Head  of  his  Councils  was  Sir  Thomas  Sheridan^  who  has 

beea 


ScotL         GREAT  BRITAIN.  341 

been  long  about  him,  an  Irljh  Gentleman,  of  a  middle 
Age,  and  reputed  a  IVlan  of  Capacity ;  Col.  Sullivan^ 
who  had  been  a  little  while  in  the  French  Service, 
and  was  fomewhat  of  an  Engineer;  General  Mac- 
donald,  an  Irtjb  Officer,  who  was  his  Aid  de  Camp  : 
Mr.  Kelfy,  who  was  To  long  in  the  Tower  on  the  Af- 
hit»ofjf tier  bury  Bifhop  of  Rochejler  ;  and  Mr.  Murray 
of  Brought -on ,  who  afted  all  along  as  his  Secretary. 
The  Number  of  Men  that  the  young  Pretender  had 
with  him  at  this  Juncture,  feems  to  have  been  about 
7000;  fome  of  whom,  when"  they  conficsred  the. 
Dangers  to  which  they  were  expofed,  deferted.  But, 
notwithstanding  this  and  other  Difappointments,  the 
Rebel  Chiefs,  continuing  firm  in  their  firft  Refolution, 
began  to  pafs  the  Tweed  on  the  6th,  and  the  fame  Day 
their  advanced  Guards  entered  England. 

His  Excellency  Field- MarQial  Wade  was  by  this 
time  arrived  at  Newcajile^  had  formed  the  King's  Army 
there,  and  would  have  marched  to  fight  the  Rebels,  if 
he  had  not  found  it  necefiary  to  be  firft  informed, 
whether  they  really  intended  to  invade  England,  and 
which  Route  they  meant  to  take,  that  of  NewcajUe, 
or  Carlijle.  He  caused  likewife  a  Declaration  to  be 
publilhed,  promifing  Pardon  to  fuch  of  the  Highlanders^ 
as  returned  to  their  Duty  by  the  i2th  of  November  j 
and  took  fuch  Precautions  for  the  Security  of  the  ad- 
jacent Country,  as  obliged  the  Rebels  who  were  too 
far  advanced  to  think  of  retiring  into  Scotland,  to 
throw  themfelves  into  the  Weftern  Road,  to  which 
their  People  in  general,  and  moft  of  their  Chiefs, 
fesmed  at  firft  to  beleaft  inclined. 

The  Pvigour  of  the  Seafon,  their  late  forced  Marches, 
and  a  kind  of  Flux  among  the  Soldiers,  retarded  the 
Operations  of  the  King's  Troops  for  fome  time;  but 
good  Quarters,  proper  Refrefhments,  and  the  extra- 
ordinary Care  of  their  Officers,  foon  overcame  thofe 
Difficulties,  and  put  the  Army  into  fo  good  a  Condi- 
tion, as  enabled  them  to  go  through  the  Winter  Cam- 
Q.  3  Pai£n 


34*  yfTOUR  thro  Scot!, 

paign  with  fewer  Inconveniencies,  and  much  lefs  Lcfs, 
than  could  be  reafonably  expe&ed,  confidering  the 
great  Hardfhips,  and  exceffive  Fatigues,  to  which  thofe 
Corps  particularly,  that  had  ferved  all  the  Summer  in 
Flanders )  were  expofed. 

On  the  yth  of  November >  the  Rebel  Army  advanced 
to  Htifybaugb,  and  from  thence  fent  out  Parties  to 
fcour  the  adjacent  Country.  On  the  8th,  they  came 
to  Langton  ;  and  on  the  Qth  they  appeared  on  a  Moor 
two  Miles  from  the  City  of  Carlijle.  This  Place  was 
formerly  very  ftrcng,  and  confidered  as  a  Bulwark 
jgainft  the  Scots.  The  beft  part  of  its  old  Walls  were 
fianding;  and  the  Caftle,  though  an  antient  irregular 
.Fortrefs,  had  fuch  Remains  of  Strength,  that,  in  the 
Opinion  of  Colonel  Durand^  who  commanded  there, 
it  was  tenable  againft  a  better  Army  than  that  of  the 
Rebels.  Jn  point  of  Force,  there  was  the  whole  Mi- 
litia of  the  two  Counties  of  Cumberland  and  JVeJlmor* 
land)  and  fome  Invalids  in  the  Caftle  ;  fo  that,  when 
the  young  Pretender  fummoned  them,  they  abfolutely 
refufed  to  give  up  the  Place  ;  upon  which  the  Rebels 
filed  off  towards  Brampton^  where  they  fpent  fome 
time  in  confulting  what  was  to  be  done. 

it  is  faid,  that  the  Officers  were  inclined  to  march 
on  ;  hut  the  Men  {hewing  a  Defire  to  return  to  Car- 
lijle^  it  was  not  judged  advifeable  by  their  Superiors  to 
crofs  their  Inclinations  ;  and  therefore,  after  cutting  a 
great  deal  of  Wood  for  Fafcines  and  Scaling-ladders, 
in  Corby  and  Warwick  Parks,  they,  on  the  isth,  began 
to  move  back  towards  Carlijle.  The  Place,  in  all 
Probability,  might  even  then  have  made  a  Defence  ; 
but  the  Threats  of  the  Rebels  had  fuch  an  EfTea,  that 
the  WThite  Flag  was  hung  out,  and  the  Town  capitu- 
lated on  the  1 5th,  and  the  Caftle  too  was  given  up  ; 
but  the  Governor  took  care  to  withdraw,  as  difliking 
the  Terms,  and  perfifted  in  his  firft  Opinion,  that  the 
Place  might  have  been  defended.  Thus  this  City  fell 
into  the  Hands  of  the  Rebels,  who  immediately  caufed 

the 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  343 

the  Pretender  to  be  proclaimed,  and  put  a  Garrifon 
into  the  Caftle,  under  the  Command  of  the  Duke  of 
Perth. 

As  Coon  as  Marftial  Wade  had  Intelligence  at  New- 
caftle  of  the  Route  which  the  Rebels  had  taken,  he  re- 
folved,  notwithftandin-g  the  Severity  of  theSeafon,  to 
march  from  thence  to  the  Relief  of  Carlljle  j  and  ac- 
cordingly on  the  1 6th  the  Army  began  to  move  for 
that  Purpofe.  His  Excellency  intended  to  have  begun 
his  March,  as  foon  as  it  was  light  ;  but  moving  from 
the  Left,  the  Swifs  Troops  had  the  Van,  which  de- 
layed their  Motions  feveral  Hours,  to  the  great  Preju- 
dice of  the  Expedition;  for  the  Weather  being  ex- 
ceflively  cold,  attended  with  a  deep  Snow,  and  an  hard 
Froft,  the  Troops  fuffered  very  much.  The  Major- 
Generals  Howard  and  Ogletborpe^  and  the  Brigadiers 
Cbolmonddeley  and  Mor  daunt  ^  marched  on  P'oot  at  the 
Head  of  the  Infantry  to  encourage  the  Soldiers.  It 
was  Eight  at  Night,  and  very  dark,  before  the  Front 
Line  got  into  the  Camp  at  Ovington  ;  and  though  the 
Soldiers  marched  with  great  Chearfulnefs,  yet,  the 
Roads  being  terribly  broken,  and  full  of  Ice,  it  was 
forefeen,  that  many  of  the  laft  Column  might  drop 
through  exceflive  Fatigue  ;  and  therefore  the  Major- 
Generals  Hufke  and  Oglethorpe  fent  out  Countrymen 
with  Lights  and  Carts  to  aflift  the  Rear- guard,  and 
bring  up  the  tired  Men  ;  in  which  Service  they  weie 
employed  till  near  Nine  the  next  Morning, 

On  the  lythjthe  Marihal  continued  his  March  to 
Hexkam,  where  he  arrived  with  the  firft  Line  about 
Four  in  the  Afternoon  ;  but  the  Rear  of  the  Army  did 
not  come  up  till  near  Midnight.  His  Excellency, 
having  Intelligence  that  Carlljle  had  furrendered,  re- 
folved  to  march  back  to  Newcastle  ;  but  the  Weather 
continuing  bad,  and  the  Roads  being  become  in  a 
manner  impaflable,  he  did  not  arrive  there  with  the 
Army,  till  the  22d  ;  and  even  then  the  Forces  under 
his  Command  were  fo  exceffively  fatigued,  that,  if  it 
0,4  had 


344  A  TOUR  thro'  Scotl. 

had  not  been  for  the  great  Care  taken  of  them  by  the 
People  of  Newcaftle,  who  fhewed  the  utmoft  Zeal  and 
AfFe&ion  in  providing  them  Quarters,  they  muft  have 
been  in  a  great  meafure  ruined  by  this  fatiguing 
March. 

This  Invafion  of  the  Rebels  having  thrown  all  the 
Northern  and  Weftern  Parts  of  the  Kingdom  into 
great  Confufion,  Directions  were  given  for  forming 
another  Army  in  Lancajhire.  The  City  of  Cbejier 
was  alfo  put  into  a  Condition  of  Defence,  in  a  furprifmg 
fhort  Space  of  time,  by  the  Care  and  Diligence  of  the 
Earl  of  Cbolmondeley.  At  £zW/Wlikewife,  all  necef- 
iary  Precautions  were  taken,  and  the  Inhabitants  of 
that  Town  fhewed  all  the-Spirit  and  Refolution  that 
could  be  defired. 

The  Rebels  did  not  continue  long  at  Carlijle\  for 
on  the  r  Qth,  the  young  Pretender  made  his  Entry  into 
that  City,  and  on  the  20th  his  Forces  continued  their 
March  to  Penritb,  from  whence  they  advanced,  on  the 
22d,  to  Kendall  $  moved  from  thence  to  Lancafter  on 
the  24th  ;  and  on  the  27th  reached  Prefton.  They 
were  at  Wigan  an.d  Leigh  on  the  28th  j  and  in  the 
Afternoon  of  the  fame  Day  an  advanced  Party  entered 
Mancheftery  where  they  began  to  beat  up  for  Volun- 
teers, but  with  much  lefs  Succefs  than  they  expecled, 
though  fome  few  People  joined  them  ;  and  they  had 
Lkewife  picked  up  fome  Perfons  of  defperate  Fortune 
in  their  March;  but  however,  nobody  of  any  Rank  or 
Diftinction  came  in,  which,  without  doubt,  was  a 
great  Difappointment ;  for  they  had  flattered  them- 
felves  with  the  Hopes  of  a  confiderable  Infurre&ion  in 
their  Favour. 

On  the  29'h,  the  main  Body  of  their  Army  moved 
towards  Manchejhr,  and  about  Ten  in  the  Morning 
their  Horfe  entered  the  Town  ;  and  the  Bellman  was 
fent  about  to  require  all  fuch  as  had  any  public  Money 
in  their  Hands,  to  bring  it  in.  About  Two  in  the 
Afternoon  the  young  Pietender,  at  the  Head  of  a  con- 
fiderable 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  345* 

fiderable  Body  of  picked  Highlanders^  and  in  their 
Drefs,  marched  into  Manchefter^  and  was  proclaimed. 
In  the  Evening  the  Bellman  was  again  Tent  about  to 
order  the  Town  to  be  illuminated,  and  at  Night  the 
Rear  of  their  Army  arrived  ;  but,  though  they  had  de- 
manded Quarters  for  10,000  Men,  it  was  ju.iged  they 
never  had  in  Manckefter  above  half  that  Numb?r. 

On  the  3eth  of  Ofiober,  a  Part  of  the  Rebel  Army 
marched  for  Stockport,  and  the  reft  for  Knotiford:  they 
carried  off  all  the  Horfes  they  could  meet  with  in  the 
Neighbourhood  of  Manchejhr  ;  at  Night  feveral  Par- 
ties eroded  the  River  Merjey  at  different  Places,  over 
Bridges  made  of  Trees  and  Planks  laid  acrofs,  in  fram- 
ing of  which,  they  compelled  the  Country- people  to 
aftift  them.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  their  whole 
Progrefs  no  Difcove:  ies  could  be  made  of  the  Routes 
they  intended  to  take,  becaufe  they  were  never  given 
out  above  an  Hour  before  their  March  began  ;  and 
neither  Officers  nor  Soldiers  knew  over  Night,  whither 
they  were  to  go,  or  what  Service  they  were  to  perform, 
the  next  Morning  :  which  Secrecy,  in  all  Probability, 
preferved  them  from  Deftruclion ;  fmce,  however 
formidable  they  might  be  at  a  Diftance,  thofe  who 
faw  them  at  Mancbefter^  and  other  Places,  were 
very  far  from  thinking  they  made  a  dreadful  Ap- 
pearance. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Duke  of  Cumberland 's  Army 
was  forming  in  Stafford/hire:  for,  upon  the  Approach 
of  the  Rebels,  it  was  refolved,  that  his  Royal  Highneis 
fhould  be  fent  down  to  command  the  Forces  in  that 
Part  of  the  Kingdom  ;  and  accordingly  he  arrived  at 
Lichfield  on.  the  28th  of  November  ;  that  As  my  being 
fuppofed  to  confift  of  upwards  of  12,000  Men,  well 
furnifhed  with  Artillery,  and  making  a  fine  Appear- 
ance. 

The  Army  under  the  Command  of  Field-Marfttal 

Wade  began  to  move  towards   the  latter  End  of  the 

Q,  5  Month, 


A  TOUR  tbrd  Scotl. 

Month,  the  Cavalry  having  reached  Darlington  and 
Rlcbmcnd  by,  the  2fth :  and  on  the  2Qth,  Marihal 
l*/ade^  with  the  Infantry,  was  at  Per/bridge ;  from 
whence  he  propofed  to  march  to  IVetbcrby^  and  to 
canton  the  whole  Army  in  the  adjacent  Villages  ; 
looking  upon  this  as  the  moft  convenient  Situation, 
either  for  diftreffingthe£nemy  in  cafe  they  fhould  at- 
tempt to  retire,  or  for  co-operating  with  his  Royal 
Highnefs's  Forces,  as  Occafion  fhould  require.  By 
thefe  well-concerted  Difpofitions,  all  Apprehenfions  of 
Danger  were  in  a  great  meafure  taken  off,  and  the 
Country-people  began  every- where  to  recover  their 
Spirits,  and  to  put  themfelves  in  the  beft  Pofture 
of  Defence  they  could,  for  fear  of  being  vifited  by 
thefe  Highland  Invaders.  Such  was  the  Situation  of 
things  at  the  Clofe  of  November  ;  and  we  now  return 
to  the  Progrefs  of  the  Rebels  fo  long  as  they  continued 
to  perfift  in  their  wild  Defign  of  advancing  into  South 
Britain. 

On  the  firft  of  December,  the  young  Chevalier,  with 
the  main  Body  of  his  Army,  and  all  his  Artillery,  en- 
tered Macdesfield;  and  at  this  time  the  greateft  Part  of 
the  Rebels  really  expected  an  Engagement,  as  appear- 
ed by  their  fcaling,  firing,  and  putting  in  Order  their 
,  Pieces  all  the  Afternoon  and  Evening  of  that  Day. 
But  what  were  the  true  Intentions  of  the  Chevalier, 
and  his  Councils  of  War,  it  is  impoflible  to  fay,  fmce 
at  firft  it  was  believed,  they  intended  to  march  into 
Wok* ;  but  perceiving  that  if  they  fhould  accomplifh 
that  Scheme,  they  fhould  certainly  be  fhut  up  there, 
and  reduced  to  great  Neceffities  in  a  mountainous 
Country,  with  which  they  were  not  acquainted,  they 
'  abandoned  this  Project  as  impracticable.  On  the  2d, 
about  2oco  of  their  Foot  pafled  by  Cow/worth^  and 
about  the  like  Number  of  Horfe  and  Foot  entered  Con- 
gleton\  and  the  next  Day,  thefe  two  great  Bodies  of 
their  Forces  advanced^  one  of  them  to  Leek^  and  the 
other  to  JJhburn,  within  15  Miles  of  Derby. 

On 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  347 

On  the  4th  in  the  Morning  the  Pretender's  Son  en- 
tered Derby  with  near  500  Horfe,  and  about  2000 
Foot  ;  and  in  the  Evening  the  reft  of  their  Forces, 
their  Artillery,  and  Baggage,  arrived  there  likewife  ; 
but  with  all  the  Precaution  pofftble,  to  hinder  any 
exacl:  Account  from  being  taken  of  their  Numbers  ; 
which  was  a  Point  they  laboured  with  the  utmoifc 
Diligence  during  their  whole  March.  On  their  firft 
coming  into  Derby,  it  wasjudged,  both  from  the  Mea- 
fures  they  took,  and  from  the  Behaviour  of  their  Chiefs, 
that  they  were  ftill  difpofed  to  march  on.  In  the 
Evening,  however,  they  held  feveral  Councils  of  War, 
in  which  the  Difputes  among  their  Chiefs  rofe  fohigb, 
that  they  could  not  be  concealed  ;  yet  they  agreed 
upon  nothing  that  Night,  except  levying  the  public 
Money,  which  they  did  with  unufual  Circumftances 
of  Terror  and  Violence.  The  next  Day  they  con- 
tinued at  Derby,  and  about  Noon  another  great  Coun- 
cil was  held,  in  the  Prefence  of  the  young  Pretender, 
in  which  a  final  Refolution  was  taken  of  returning  back, 
into  Scotland. 

It  was  obferved  by  the  People  of  the  Houfes,  where 
their  principal  Commanders  quartered,  that,  upon  the 
Riling  of  this  laft  Council,  their  Chiefs  looked  very  de- 
jecled  ;  and  that  fome  of  them  railed  at  the  French 
and  Irljh  about  the  young  Pretender,  and  others  made 
no  Scruple  of  faying  they  were  betrayed.  This  is  cer- 
tain, that,  whatever  was  the  Matter,  they  were  thence- 
forward always  diffident  of  each  other,  and  that  the 
Pretender  hi mfelf  was  afterwards  not  much  confidered. 
and  but  indifferently  obeyed. 

His  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  at  the- 
Head  of  the  King's  Forces,  took  all  imaginable  Pains  to  • 
force  the  Rebels  to  a  deciiive  Engagement ;  and  (when 
that   was  found  impolTible)  to  hinder    their  March 
into  North  Wales,  or  to  alarm  the  Nation  by  continu- 
ing their  Incuriion,  and    advancing  farther  into  the 
Heart  of  the  Kingdom.     In  order  to  elFecl  the  former 


-rf  TOUR  tlrt  Scotl. 

of  thefe  Purpofes,  his  Royal  Highnefs  advanced  to 
Stow,  upon  the  firft  Advice  of  the  Rebels  being  at 
Congleton  ;  but  when  it  appeared,  that  their  true  De- 
fian  was  to  march  to  Derby,  the  King's  Forces  moved 
towards  Northampton,  to  intercept  them  in  their  Route 
Southwards ;  and  having;  been  informed,  that  the  Re- 
bels had  poflefled  themfelves  of  Swarkfton  Bridge,  his 
Royal  Highnefs  encamped  on  the  6th  with  the  greateft 
Part  of  the  Forces  on  Aderiden  Common,  between 
Cole/hill  and  Coventry. 

In  the  mean  time  his  Excellency  Field -Marfhal 
Wade,  had  marched  the  Army  under  his  Command  to 
Wetberly,  where  he  encamped  on  the  5th:  and  the 
fame  Day  Orders  were  given  for  the  Horfe  and  Dra- 
goons to  proceed  to  Doncafter,  whither  the  Foot  were 
to  follow  them.  Thefe  Difpofitions  afforded  fufficient 
Reafon  for  the  Rebels  to  retreat,  fince  whoever  con- 
fiders  them  attentively,  will  find,  that,  in  the  firft 
place,  it  would  have  been  very  difficult  for  them  to 
have  proceeded  farther,  without  meeting  with,  and 
being  obliged  to  fight,  the  Duke's  Army,  which  was 
what  they  never  defigned  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
if  they  had  fucceeded  in  their  Scheme,  and  by  fome 
means  or  other  continued  their  March,  without 
coming  to  a  Battle,  it  muft  have  ended  in  their  abfo- 
lute  Ruin,  fince  a  Delay  of  two  or  three  Days  would 
have  rendered  their  Retreat  Northward  altogether  im- 
pofTible. 

Before  we  proceed  farther,  it  is  requifite  to  obferve, 
that  the  fecond  Son  of  the  Pretender  being  arriveTin 
France,  there  were  about  this  time  vaft  Preparations 
made  for  the  Invafion  of  this  Kingdom  ;  and  though, 
by  the  timely  and  prudent  Precautions  taken  by  the 
Ldrds  of  the  Admiralty,  they  were  prevented,  yet  they 
occafioned  a  great  deal  of  Confufion,  and  proved,  in 
that  refpe&,  of  fome  Service  to  the  Rebels ;  but,  in 
another  Senfe,  they  were  of  Service  to  the  Nation  ; 
fince  they  not  only  kept  alive,  but  heightened,  that 

Spirit 


Scotl.        GREAT  BRITAIN.  349 

Spirit  of  Zeal  and  Loyalty,  which  had  appeared  from 
the  breaking  out  of  the  Rebellion,  and  of  which  all 
Ranks  and  Degrees  of  People  gave  at  this  time  fuch 
lively  Teftimonies,  as  were  Sufficient  to  convince  even 
our  Enemies,  that  his  late  Majefty  jreigned  in  the 
Hearts  and  Affections  of  his  Subjects,  as  well  as  over 
their  Perfons. 

Yet,  in  North  Britain,  the  Flame  of  Rebellion  began 
again  to  fpread  itfelf,  by  the  Afliftance  of  the  French  ; 
for  Lord  John  Drummond  having  landed  with  about 
500  Men  at  Aberdeen ,  Peter  bead,  and  Montr  ofe,  he 
\vas  very  foon  joined  by  that  Body  which  Lord  Lewis 
Gordon  had  been  railing  in  the  North,  as  well  as  by 
other  of  the  dilTaffe&ed  Clans,  fuch  as  the  Mackenzits, 
the  MackmtoJheS)  the  Farqubarfons,  and  the  Frafers,  to 
the  Number  of  between  2  and  3000  Men ;  with  which 
Forces  he  drew  down  towards  Perth,  about  the  time 
the  young  Pretender  was  at  Derby.  The  Earl  of  Lou~ 
don,  who  was  at  the  Head  of  a  fmall  Body  of  Men  for 
the  King's  Service  in  the  North,  fpared  no  Pams  or 
Diligence  in  exciting  the  well  affecled  Clans  to  join 
him ;  and  by  the  Reinforcements  he  received  from  the 
Madeods,  the  Grants,  the  Monroes,  the  Sutherlands  and 
the  Guns,  he  was  foon  2000  ftrong.  At  Edinburgh 
likewife,  and  at  Glafgow,  they  began  to  raife  Men  for 
the  Service  of  the  Government,  with  great  Chearful- 
nefs  and  Succefs ;  fo  that  two  good  Regiments  were 
completed,  befides  feveral  independent  Corps ;  as  will 
be  feen  more  at  large,  when  we  fpeak  of  the  Meafures 
taken  by  the  Government,  in  North  Britain,  to  fup- 
prefs  the  Rebellion. 

.  After  the  Rebels  had  raifed  all  the  Money  they  could 
on  the  Town  of  Derby,  they  fet  about  profecuting  their 
Refolution  of  endeavouring  to  retire  into  Scotland  by 
the  fame  Road  they  came  ;  and  accordingly  marched, 
on  the  6th  of  December  174$'  to  dfolurn,  from  whence 
they  moved  the  next  Day  to  Leek,  deftroying,  in  their 
Paflage,  whatever  they  judged  might  be  of  Ufe  to  the 

4  King's 


350  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

King's  Forces  that  were  in  Purfuit  of  them ;  and, 
fhewing  a  warm  Spirit  of  Refentment  for  the  Difap- 
pointments  they  had  met  with,  thereby  provoking  the 
Country-people  to  do  them  all  the  Mifchief  they  could. 
They  carried  with  them  a  Train  of  Artillery,"  confut- 
ing of  15  fmall  Pieces  of  Cannon,  and  one  Mortar. 

On  the  8th  in  the  Evening  their  Vanguard  reached 
Mancbefter  ;  and  the  next  Morning  the  young  Cheva- 
lier, and  the  Main  of  his  Forces,  came  thither,  where 
they  were  not  received  as  they  had  been  before;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  the  Town's  People,  or  at  leaft  the 
Mob,  gave  them  fome  pretty  vifible  Marks  of  their 
Diflike  ;  which  was  inftantly  punifhed  by  an  Order  or 
Precept  in  the  Name  of  the  Chavalier,  and  figned  and 
fealed  by  Mr.  Murray  his  Secretary,  directed  to  the 
Conftable  and  Collector  of  the  Land-Tax  for  the 
Towns  of  Mancbejler  and  Salford ;  requiring  them  to 
collect  and  levy,  by  the  next  Day  at  Noon,  the  Sum 
of  2500  /.  to  be  paid  to  the  faid  Mr.  Murray,  with  a 
Promife  of  Repayment,  however,  when  the  Country 
fhould  be  peaceably  fettled  under  his  Government. 

On  the  loth,  they  continued  their  March  by  Pen* 
dleton-Pole  towards  Leigh  and  Wigany  which  laft  Place 
they  reached  on  the  nth,  and  pufhed  on  from  thence 
to  Prefton  the  next  Day ;  being  extremely  apprehen- 
five  of  finding  themfelves  furrounded  in  that  Neigh- 
bourhood. On  the  i  ith  in  the  Morning,  they  quitted 
Prefton,  and  continued  their  Route  to  Lancajler  ;  and, 
on  the  1 4th,  they  moved  from  thence  to  Kendal, 
which  they  entered  about  Ten  in  the  Morning,  and 
where  they  met  with  a  bad  Reception ;  for  the  Town's 
People  fired  upon  their  Huflars,  killed  one,  and  took 
took  two  Prifoners.  Their  Van- guard  continued  their 
March  from  thence  to  Shap  in  their  Way  to  Penritb; 
but,  feeing  the  Beacons  every-where  lighted,  and  being 
informed  that  it  was  done  to  raife  the  Country,  and 
that  the  People  were  difpofed  to  fall  upon  them  on  all 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.       351 

Sides,  they  thought  proper  to  return  to  Kendall,  which 
they  accordingly  did  about  Two  in  the  Morning. 

On  the  1 5th,  the  Pretender,  with  all  his  Forces,  ar- 
rived there,  and  began  to  march  from  thence  for  Pen- 
r.ith  on  the  i6th,  by  Break  of  Day;  Lord  George 
Murray  commanding  the  Rear- guard,  as  he  had  done 
during  the  whole  March.  They  intended  to  have 
reached  Penrith  that  Night,  but,  finding  it  impraclica- 
ble,.  they  thought  fit  to  halt  at  Shap,  where  we  (hall 
leave  them  for  the  prefent,  that  we  may  better  give  the 
Reader  an  Account  of  the  Motions  of  the  King's 
Forces,  in  order  to  overtake  them. 

His  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  having 
certain  Intelligence,  on  the  7th  of  December  9  that  the 
Highlanders  had  begun  to  move  Northward,  put  him- 
felf  the  next  Morning  at  the  Head  of  all  the  Horfc  and: 
Dragoons,  with  1000  Volunteers,  in  order  to  follow 
the  Rebels  from  Merriden>  and  flop  them  till  the  Foot 
came  up.  On  the  gth,  Sir  John  Ligonier  marched 
with  the  Brigade  of  Guards,  and  the  Regiment  of 
Semple^  to  Litcbfieldy  purfuant  to  his  Royal  Highnefs's 
Inftruclions. 

On  the  loth,  the  Duke  arrived  at  Macdesfeld  with 
two  Regiments  of  Dragoons,  having  a  Body  of  1000 
Foot  at  no  great  Diftance,  from  whence  he  fent  Or- 
ders to  Manchejler^  and  other  Parts  of  the  Country, 
that  nothing  might  be  neglected,  that  could  contribute 
to  retard  or  diftrefs  the  Enemy.  On  the  nth,  Major 
Wbeatley  was  detached  with  an  advanced  Party  of 
Dragoons  toharrafs  the  Rear  of  the  Rebels,  and  to  join 
the  Light- armed  Troops  that  were  expected  from  the 
other  Army. 

His  Excellency  Field-Marfhal  Wade^  having  re- 
ceived certain  Intelligence  of  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Rebels,  and  of  the  Situation  of  his  Majefty's  Forces 
under  the  Command  of  his  Royal  Highnefs,  held,  on 
the  8th  of  December •,  a  great  Council  of  War  at  Fcrry- 
to  confider  of  the  moft  effectual  Means  for 

cutting 


35*  A  TOUR  thro*  Scotl. 

cutting  off  the  Highlanders  in  their  Retreat;  and  in 
this  Council  of  War  it  was  refolved  to  march  diredly 
by  Waktfieldvn&  iRallifax  into  Lanca/hirey  as  the  moft 
likely  way  of  intercepting  them.  But,  arriving  at 
Wakefield  on  the  loth,  and  having  Advice  that  the 
rnain  Body  of  the  Rebels  was  at  Manchester,  and  their 
Vanguard  moving  from  thence  towards  Prefton^  his 
Excellency,  finding  that  it  was  now  impoffible  to  come 
up  with  them,  judged  it  unnecefTary  to  fatigue  the 
Forces  by  hard  Marches ;  and  therefore  detaching 
Major- General  Ogletborpe,  on  the  nth,  with  the  Ca- 
valry under  his  Command,  he  began  his  March  with, 
the  reft  of  his  Forces,  for  Newcaftle. 

On  the  1 3th,  a  great  Body  of  the  Horfe  and  Dra- 
goons, that  were,  as  has  been  faid,  under  Major- Ge- 
neral Oglethorpe,  arrived  at  Preflon,  having  marched 
ico  Miles  in  three  Days,  over  Snow  and  Ice ;  which 
was  a  nobk  Teftimony  of  Zeal  and  Spirit,  efpecially 
jn  the  new-raifed  Forces.  His  Royal  Highnefs  ar- 
rived about  One  at  the  fame  Place,  and  immediately 
gave  his  Orders  for  continuing  the  Purfuit  of  the  Rebels 
with  the  utmoft  Diligence.  Ori  the  J4th,  according- 
ly, General  Oglelhorpe  advanced  towards  Lancafler^ 
which  Place  they  reached  on  the  i6th  ;  General  Ogb- 
thorpe  continuing  his  Purfuit  at  the  Heels  of  the  Rebeh. 
On  the  1 7th,  the  Major-General  was  at  Shap9  and 
his  Royal  Highnefs  entered  Kendall,  having  now 
more  Hopes  of  coming  up  with  the  Enemy,  than  at 
any  time  during  the  March;  and  the  Difpofitions 
made  by  the  Duke  for  this  Purpofe,  were  fuch,  as 
{hewed  not  only  the  greateft  Intrepidity5  but  alfb  the 
utmoft  Penetration,  and  military  Capacity. 

On  JVednefday  the  i8th  of  December  in  the  Even- 
ing, Part  of  the  Cavalry,  with  his  Royal  Highnefs, 
came  up  with  the  Rebels,  after  ten  Hours  March,  a 
little  beyond  Lowther-Hall\  which  they  had  quitted  on 
the  Approach  of  the  King's  Forces,  and  thew  them- 
fclves  into  the  Village  of  Clifton,  about  three  Miles 

frons 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.          353 

from  Penntb  ;  where  they  had  great  Advantages  front 
the  Situation  of  the  Place,  and  from  fome  decayed 
broken  Walls,  which  ferved  them  inftead  of  Retrench- 
ments. His  Royal  Highnefs,  however,  caufed  the 
Village  to  be  immediately  attacked,  by  the  firft  Force 
that  came  up,  which  were  the  King's  own  Regiment 
of  Dragoons,  and  Part  of  the  Duke^  of  -King/Ion's 
Horfe,  who  behaved  extremely  well  upon  this  Occa- 
fion  ;  and  in  an  Hour's  time  drove  them  out  of  the 
Place,  though  a  very  ftrong  and  defenfible  Poft. 

While  their  Rear-guard  was  engaged  with  the 
King's  Forces  at  Clifton,  the  main  Bcxiy  of  the  Re- 
bels were  at  Penntb •,  and  foapprehenfive  of  being  over- 
taken, that  at  Ten  o'Clock  at  Night  they  ordered  their 
Artillery  and  Baggage  to  advance  towards  Carlifle^ 
and  on  the  I  Qth  in  the  Morning,  they  entered  that  City, 
exceffively  fatigued,  and  in  much  Corifufion.  The 
Rebels  did  not  continue  Jong  there,  but  contented 
themfelves  with  putting  a  fort  of  Garrifon  into  the 
Place,  compofed  of  between  4  and  500  Men,  moft  of 
them  being  thofe  that  had  joined  them  \n  England,  and 
which  they  had  formed  into  a  Corps  under  the  Title  of 
the  Manchefter  Regiment. 

The  main  Body  of  their  Army  continued  their 
March  towards  Scotland,  pafling  the  River  EJkt  tho* 
very  high,  which  coft  many  of  them  their  Lives  :  and 
on  the  2Oth  and  2ift  they  again  entered  North-Bri- 
tain, leaving  thofe  they  had  thrown  into  Garlijle  to 
fhift  for  themfelves  as  well  as  they  could,  and  without 
any  Hopes  of  Succour.  Thefe  pretended,  at  firft, 
that  they  would  make  an  obftinate  Defence;  and, 
having  moft  of  their  Artillery  with  them,  they  mount- 
ed them  on  the  Walls,  took  PofTeffion  of  the  Caftle, 
arid  carried  into  it  all  the  Provifions  they  could  find, 
leaving  the  Inhabitants  little  or  none  to  fuftain  them- 
fdives  with  ;  fo  that  they  were  in  the  utmoft  Diftrefs, 
being  able  to  draw  no  Relief  from  the  adjacent  Coun- 
try, becaufe  the  People  were  fenfible,  that  whatever 

they 


354          '  A  T  °  u  R  tM  s'cot? • 

they  fent  them  would  be  taken  from  'them  by  the  Re- 
bels. They  did  not,  however,  continue  Jong  in  this 
deplorable  Condition*,  being  relieved  from  it  by  the 
fpeedy  Arrival  of  the  King's  Forces,  who  foon  put  an 
End  to  the  Difpute,  and  reftored  the  People  of  Carlljle 
to  the  King's  Protection,  the  Rebels  in  theCaftle  being 
obliged  to  furrender  at  Difcretion  ;  but  not  till  Can- 
non was  brought  up,  and  the  neceflary  Difpofitions 
made  for  befieging  them. 

While  the  Rebels  were  doing  the  Buiinefs  of  the 
French  in  the  North,  vaft  Preparations  were  ftill  made 
on  the  Coaft  of  France,  and  French  Flanders,  for  in- 
vading this  Kingdom  ;  and  the  Informations  which 
the  Government  received  of  their  Embarkation,  par- 
ticularly at  Dunkirk,  induced  his  Majefty  to  give  fuch 
Directions  as  were  neceflary  for  appointing  proper 
Alarm  pofts  at  which  the  Troops  were  to  aflemble, 
and  fuch  Signals  as  were  requifite  for  aflembling  them ; 
and  at  the  fame  time  a  Proclamation  was  ifTued,  com- 
manding all  Officers,  Civil  and  Military,  to  caufe  the 
Coafts  to  be  carefully  watched,  and,  upon  the  firft  Ap- 
proach of  the  Enemy,  to  direct  all  Horfes,  Oxen,. 
Cattle,  and  other  Provisions,  to  be  driven  and  removed 
20  Miles  from  the  Place  where  the  Enemy  mould  at- 
tempt to  land ;  and  fuch  Regiments  of  regular  Troops 
as  were  at  this  time  quartered  in  and  about  London  ^ 
were  ordered  down  to  the  Coafts  of  Kent  and  Suffex. 

Thefe  wife  and  timely  Precautions,  joined  to  the 
Zeal  and  Spirit  (hewn  by  the  Gentlemen,  Clergy,  and 
other  Inhabitants  of  the  Maritime  Counties,  had  fo 
good  an  EfFe£t,  together  with  the  Diligence  ufed  by 
the  Officers  of  his  Majefty's  Navy,  that  ferved  on 
board  the  Squadron  then  in  the  Channel,  that  the  De- 
figns  of  the  French  were  totally  defeated,  notwith- 
fhnding  they  frequently  changed  their  Schemes. 

As  Lord  'John  Drummond,  Lord  Lewis  Gordon,  and 
the  reft  of  the  Rebel  Chiefs  in  Scotland,  were  all  this 
tme  labouring  with  great  Diligence,  as  well  as  much 

Violence, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Violence,  to  draw  together  a  confiderable  Force,  in  or- 
der to  join  the  Pretender  on  his  Return  into  that 
Country,  the  King's  loyal  Subjects  there  {hewed  the 
greateft  Zeal  and  Spirit,  in  exerting  their  utmoft  En- 
deavours to  raife  Troops  to  oppofe  them.  The  City 
of  Glafgow  particularly  diftinguifhed  itfelf,  upon  this 
Occafion,  by  levying  15  Companies  of  60  Men  each,, 
at  their  own  Expence ;  and  having  completed  them  by 
the  Beginning  of  the  Month  of  December  ^  they  march- 
ed from  thence,  under  the  Command  of  the  Earl  of 
flume )  for  Stirling. 

The  City  of  Edinburgh  alfo,  having  received  his 
Majefty's  Licence  for  that  Purpofe,  raifed  1000  Men 
for  the  King's  Service  ;  and  the  Earl  of  London*  with 
the  Forces  under  his  Command,  marching  from  /;z- 
vernefs*  obliged  a  Body  of  the  Rebels  to  raife  the 
Blockade  of  Fort  Auguftus^  which  they  had  formed 
under  the  Command  of  the  Son  of  Lord  Lovat ;  and, 
at  the  fame  time,  the  Macleods  and  Manroes  fcoured  all 
the  North  of  the  Rebel  Parties,  as  far  as  to  within  12 
Miles  of  Aberdeen.  Such  were  the  Tranfadlions  in 
South  and  in  North  Britain  to  the  Clofe  of  the  Year 
3745,  when  the  Rebels,  having  been  obliged  to  fly  out 
of  England^  began  again  to  gather  Strength  in  the 
Weft  of  Scotland,  and  to  refume  their  Defign  of  at- 
tacking Stirling  Caftle. 

The  Rebels,  having  pafled  the  River  EJk*  divided 
into  two  Bodies  ;  the  lefler,  confifting  of  about  2000 
Men,  marched,  on  the  2Cih  of  December ,  to  Ecde- 
feckan*  and  from  thence  the  next  Day  to  Moffat.  The 
larger  Body,  of  about  4000,  proceeded  to  Annan*  near 
the  Sea-fide,  and,  on  the  21  ft,  marched  to  Dumfries  ; 
and,  having  obliged  the  Town  of  Dumfries  to  pay  them 
j  100  /.  and  to  give  Hoftages  for  900 /.  more,  they  ar- 
rived on  the  25th  at  Glafgow. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Northern  Rebels,  under  Lord 
'John  Drwrnnond)  Lord  Lewis  Gordon*  the  Mafter  of 
Jkovet,  and  fome  other  of  their  Chiefs,  having  with 

them 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

them  fome  Artillery,  Ammunition,  and  Money,  which 
had  been  landed  from  on  board  fome  Spamjh  Priva- 
teers, arrived  at  Perth)  which  they  fortified'  for  a 
Place  of  Arms,  fitting  out  an  armed  Sloop  there,  as 
they  did  the  Hazard,  which  they  had  lately  taken, 
and  another  float  Privateer  at  Montrofe. 

The  young  Pretender  entered  Glajgow  at  the  Head 
of  all  his^  Forces,  and  had  thereby  the  Inhabitants  at 
his  Mercy,  the  Regiment  they  had  raifed  being  at 
Edinburgh,  and  they  intirely  defencelefs.  But,  hew 
fenfible  foever  they  might  be  of  their  Danger,  they  did 
nothing  contrary  to  theif  Duty  to  deliver  themfelves  ; 
on  the  contrary  they  fhewed  very  vifible  Signs  of 
Sorrow  and  Sadnefs ;  and  the  Chevalier,  though  he 
often  appeared  in  Public,  was  fcarce  attended  fo  much 
as  by  a  Mob. 

It  is  not  at  all  furprifing,  that  the  Behaviour  of  the 
Rebels  at  Glafgow^  thefe  Provocations  confidered, 
fhould  be  rather  worfe  than  in  other  Places  \  and  fo  it 
was.  They  found  themfelves  in  a  rich  City,  abound- 
ing in  whatever  they  wanted  j  and  therefore  they  con- 
fidered it  as  a  Magazine,  and  began  to  furnifh  them- 
felves immediately  with  Broad  cloth,  Tartan,  Linen, 
Shoes,  and  Stockens,  to  the  Amount  of  10,000 /. 
Sterling ;  fo  that,  by  this  means,  the  Pretender  in  a 
manner  new-cloathed  his  Army,  which  proved  a  great 
Means  of  keeping  them  together  ;  otherwife,  in  all 
Probability,  the  greater  Part  of  them  would  have  dif- 
perfed. 

On  the  3d  of  January^  having  finifhed  their  Bufmefs 
at  GlofgoiV)    and  gleaned  up  what  they  could,  they 
marched  to  Kilfyth j    the  next  Day  to  Bannockburn ; 
and  on  the  5th,  having  now  the  belt  Part  of  their 
Forces  together,  they  fummoned  the  Caftle  and  Town.  . 
of  Stirling  to  furrender.      General  Blakeney  anfwered,  1 
that  he  would  defend  the  Place  to  the  laft  Extremity  ; 
and  that,  as  he  had  lived,  he  was  determined  to  die,  a 
Man  of  Honour.    The  Town,  which  is  indeed  of  no  ( 

great  '•. 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  357 

great  Strength,  after  fome  time  fperit  in  Treaty,  fur- 
rendered  ;  and  the  Rebels  entered  it  upon  the  8th, 
when,  having  again  fummoned  the  Cattle,  to  as  little 
Purpofe  as  before,  they  took  a  final  Refolution  of  be- 
fieging  it  in  Form  with  what  Artillery  they  had. 

The  King's  Forces,  under  the  Command  of  Lieu- 
tenant General  Hawlty)  and  Major- General  Hujke9 
proceeded  from  Edinburgh  to  the  Relief  of  the  Cafile. 
Part  of  the  Forces  under  Major-General  tiujke  were 
fent  to  diflodge  the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock  from  Falkirk9 
where  he  lay  with  moft  of  the  Cavalry  belonging  to 
the  Rebel  Army.  On  the  I3th,  the  Forces  appoint- 
ed for  this  Service  began  to  move  towards  Linlltbgow^ 
which  they  entered  in  the  Evening,  at  the  very  Inftant 
the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock  was  marching  in  on  the  Side  next 
Falkirk,  with  fome  of  his  People;  but,  having  early 
Intelligence  of  the  General's  Purpofe  and  Nearnef-, 
he  retired,  with  fome  Precipitation,  to  the  main  Body 
of  the  Rebel  Army  before  Stirling. 

On  the  i6th.  General  Hujke^  with  the  Forces  un- 
der his  Command,  took  poiTeffion  of  Falkirk,  and  was 
followed  thither,  foon  after,  by  General  Hawley^  and 
the  reft  of  the  Army  ;  who  determined,  at  next  Day, 
to  attack  the  Rebels ;  but  being  informed,  that  the 
Rebels  were  in  Motion  towards  him,  and  endeavoured 
to  gain  fome  rifing  Grounds  near  the  Moor  of  Fulkirk, 
he  formed  his  Army,  and  advanced  in  good  Order, 
the  Dragoons  on  the  Left,  and  the  Foot  in  two  Lines. 
As  foon  as  they  came  within  100  Yards  of  the  Enemy, 
the  Dragoons  were  ordered  to  fall  on  Sword  in  Hand, 
and  the  two  Lines  of  Infantry  to  advance.  But,  be- 
fore they  could  put  thefe  Orders  in  Execution,  the 
Rebels  made  a  very  fmart  Fire,  which  threw  the  Dra- 
goons into  fome  Diforder,  and  they  the  Foot,  who 
made  only  one  irregular  Fire,  Barrel's  and  Ligonier's 
Battalion  excepted  ;  who  were  prefently  rallied  by  Bri- 
gadier Ckolmondeleyt  attacked  afterwards  by  the  Rebels, 

whom 


A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

whom  they  repulfed,  and  at  length  drove  them  quite 
*out  of  the  Field. 

In  the  mean  time  Major-General  Hufke^  with  won- 
derful Prudence  and  Prefence  of  Mind,  drew  together 
-and  formed  a  Body  of  Foot  in  the  Rear  of  thefe  two 
Regiments ;  which  the  Rebels  feeing,  did  not  venture 
to  renew  the  Attack.  General  Mordaunt^  taking  Ad- 
vantage of  this  Delay,  rallied  and  formed  the  reft  of 
the  Troops,  in  which  the  Officers,  who  in  general 
behaved  well,  affifted ;  which  prevented  their  prole- 
cuting  their  firft  Advantage. 

There  were  feveral  unforefeen,  and,  indeed,  ine- 
vitable Accidents,  that  contributed  greatly  to,  or  rather 
might  be  faid  to  have  been  the  fole  Occafion  of,  the 
Rebels  gaining  this  Advantage.  In  the  firft  Place, 
there  was  fome  Difficulty  and  Confufion  in  forming 
the  King's  Troops,  which  was  fucceeded  by  another 
unlucky  Accident ;  fome  of  the  Battalions  fired  with* 
out  Orders,  which  occafioned  a  great  Confufion  among 
the  Dragoons.  But  the  greateft  Misfortune  of  all 
was,  that,  juft  as  the  Army  began  to  move,  there 
came  on  a  violent  Storm  of  Wind  and  Rain5  which 
hindered  the  Men  from  feeing  before  them  ;  and  many 
of  their  Firelocks  were  fo  wet,  that  it  is  thought  fcarce 
a  fifth  Part  of  them  were  of  Ufe  :  add  to  this,  that  they 
had  not  the  Benefit  of  their  Artillery ;  for,  the  Wea- 
ther having  been  two  Days  very  wet,  and  there  being 
a  fteep  Hill  to  climb,  they  could  not  get  up  time 
enough  to  do  any  Service  in  the  Adion  j  and  the 
Commander  of  the  Tiain  having  quitted  it,  for  which, 
afterwards,  he  was,  as  defervedly  as  difgracefully, 
broke,  moft  of  the  People  who  belonged  to  the  Horfcs 
rode  away  with  them;  fo  that  when  the  Troops  re- 
tired to  their  Camp,  they  found  it  extremely  hard  to 
carty  off  their  Cannon  to  Linlitbgow,  to  which  the 
King's  Army  retired, .rather  to  avoid  the  Inclemency 
of  the  Weather,  than  in  Fear  of  the  Rebels. 

6  The 


Scotl. 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 


The  Rebels  returned  to  Stirling  on  the  i8th  in  the 
Afternoon;  and  again  fummoned  the  Caftle:  but  Ge- 
neral Blakeney  repeated  what  he  had  before  told  them, 
that  he  had  always  been  looked  upon  as  a  Man  of  Ho- 
nour, and  they  ihould  find  he  would  die  fo.  Upon 
this  they  began  to  erecT:  two  new  Batteries,  one  upon 
Gawan-Hill,  within  40  Yards  of  the  Caftle,  and  one 
upon  Lady's-  Hill,  upon  which  they  propofed  to  mount 
what  battering  Cannon  they  had,  which  were  but 
feven  Pieces  ;  viz.  two  18  Pounders,  two  1  6  Pounders, 
and  three  12  Pounders;  and,  while  this  was  doing, 
they  continued  to  fire  upon  the  Caftle  with  fmall 
Arms,  which  did  little  or  no  Mifchief,  though  at  the 
fame  time  it  expofed  their  Men  extremely,  and  they 
differed  by  the  Fire  of  the  Caftle  very  feverely  ;  which 
>ut  them  more  and  more  out  of  Humour  with  the 
>iege  ;  and  what  contributed  to  increafe  their  Unea- 
fmefs  was  the  great  Want  of  Provifions,  which  ob- 
liged them  to  fend  out  Parties  on  all  Sides,  to  carry  off 
what  Meal  they  could  in  any  Part  of  the  Country. 

The  greateft  Part  of  their  Army  being  returned  into 
the  Neighbourhood  of  Falkirk,  they  fent  away  their 
Prifoners  to  Down-  Caftle  on  the  ?5th,  except  the 
Officers  ;  and  the  Hazard  Sloop,  which  was  now  re- 
fitted, was  ordered  to  fail  to  France  to  carry  the  News 
of  this  Advantage,  which  they  magnified  extremely, 
as  appeared  by  the  Accounts  that  were  printed  of  it  at 
Paris. 

On  the  Return  of  the  King's  Army  to  Edinburgh,  a 
very  ftrict  Inquiry  was  made  into  the  Lofs  fuftained  by 
the  late  Aclion  ;  which  appeared  to  be,  Officers  ex- 
cepted,  very  fmall. 

It  happened  very  luckily,  that,  as  this  A£Hon  proved 
more  fatal  to  the  Officers  than  to  the  private  Soldiers, 
it  proved  as  fortunate  to  a  great  many  others  ;  for  the 
Rebels  having  fent  moft.of  the  Officers  that  were  taken 
Prifoners  at  Prejfan  Pans  to  G!amis9  Coupar,  and 
when  they  were  drawing  together  their  Forces 

abeut 


360  A  TOUR  thro  Scot?. 

about  Stirling,  the  loyal  Inhabitants  of  Dundee,  and 
other  Places,  formed  a  Defign  of  refcuing  them,  and 
cond u6Vmg  them  back  to  Edinburgh ,  which  they  exe- 
cuted with  great  Spirit  and  Diligence ;  and  they  ar- 
rived at  that  City  on  the  iQth,  the  very  next  Day  after 
the  Army  returned  thither  from  LinKwgow. 

When  the  News  of  this  Battle  reached  London,  it 
made  it  neceiFary  to  provide  for  the  immediate  Ex- 
tinction of  fo  dangerous  a  Flame,  by  fending  down  a 
fufficient  Number  of  Forces,  not  only  to  render  the 
Army  in  Scotland  more  formidable  than  before,  but  to 
increafe  its  Strength  to  fuch  a  Degree,  as  to  free  the 
Nation  from  any  Apprehenfions  of  its  Confequences, 
in  cafe  the  Enemy  fhould  grow  more  numerous,  or  the 
French  and  Spaniards  perfift  in  their  Defign  of  at- 
tempting an  Invafion,  for  their  Support,  in  any  Part  of 
his  Majefty's  Dominions.  It  was  with  this  View, 
that  a  Refolution  was  taken  of  embarking  the  Hejffian. 
Troops  in  Britijh  Pay,  then  in  the  Neighbourhood  of 
Antwerp^  for  Scotland  -,  and  it  was  alfo  thought  con- 
venient, that  to  reftore  the  Spirit  of  the  Soldiers,  to 
extinguifh  all  Animofities,  and  encourage  the  Well- 
affe£ted  in  North-Britain,  his  Royal  Highnefs  the 
Duke  fhould  immediately  go  down  thither. 

The  Troops  feemed  to  be  extremely  mortified  at 
the  Mifcarriage  at  Falkirk,  and  (hewed  an  earneft 
Defire  to  repair  it  by  marching  again  to  attack  the 
Rebels ;  for  which  the  neceflary  Preparations  were  in. 
ftantlymade;  and  the  Army,  in  a  very  few  Days, 
was,  in  every  refpecl,  in  a  better  Condition,  and  bet- 
ter provided,  than  before.  On  the  3cth  in  the  Morn- 
ing, to  the  great  Surprize  and  Joy  of  the  Army,  his 
Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  arrived  at 
Edinburgh,  after  a  Journey  amazingly  expeditious, 
confidering  the  Rigour  of  the  Seafon.  The  Sight  of 
the  Duke  baniflied  all  Remembrance  of  the  late  unto-^ 
ward  Accident,  and  the  Troops  fhewed  uncommon 

Ardour 


Scotl. 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 


Ardour  to  be  led,  bad  as  the  Weather  was,  into  the 
Field  again. 

His  Royal  Highnefs  reviewed  the  Forces  the  very 
next  Day,  and  marched  them  in  Purfuit  of  the  Rebels. 
He  quartered  that  Night  at  Linlithgow  with  eight 
Battalions  ;  Brigadier  Mordaunt^  with  fix  Battalions 
more,  was  at  Borrowftounnefs  ;  the  Dragoons  lay  in 
the  adjacent  Villages  ;  and  Colonel  Campbell,  with  the 
Argylejhire  Men,  took  Poft  in  the  Front  of  the  Army 
towards  the  Avon.  There  was,  at  that  time,  a  confi- 
derable  Body  of  the  Rebels  at  Falkirk,  who  immedi- 
ately retired  towards  Torwood.  The  next  Morning 
his  Royal  Highnefs  made  the  neceffary  Difpofitions 
for  profecuting  his  March,  when  he  received  Advice, 
that  the  Rebels  were  actually  repaying  the  Forth  with 
all  the  Diligence  imaginable  ;  which  News  were  foon 
after  put  out  of  Difpute  by  the  Noife  they  heard  of 
two  great  Reports  like  the  Blowing  up  of  Magazines  ; 
upon  which  Brigadier  Mordaunt  was  detached  with 
the  Argylejhire  Men,  and  the  Dragoons,  to  harrafs  the 
Rebels  in  their  Retreat.  The  Brigadier,  with  the 
Troops  under  his  Command,  arrived  at  Stirling  late? 
that  Evening,  where  they  found  the  Rebels  had  aban- 
doned their  Camp,  with  all  their  Artillery,  and  had 
blown  up,  a  great  Magazine  they  had  of  Powder  and 
Ball  in  the  Church  of  St.  Ninian;  and  that  v/ith  fa 
little  Care  or  Difcretion,  that  feveral  of  the  Country- 
people  were  buried  in  the  Ruins.  They  likewife  left 
behind  them,  all  the  wounded  Men  they  had  made 
Prifoners  in  the  late  Action,  and  about  20  of  their  own 
lick  Men  ;  but  it  was  fo  late  when  the  King's  Forces 
arrrived,  that  it  Was  judged  needlefs  to  continue  the 
Purfuit. 

On  the  2d  of  February,  about  one  in  the  After- 
noon, his  Royal  Highnefs  entered  Stirling,  and  was 
pleafed  to  teftify  his  intire  Satisfaction  with  refpecr.  to 
the  gallant  Defence  made  by  General  Blakency.  In 
the  mean  time,  the  Rebels  were  occupied  in  making 

VOL.  IV.  R  all 


3<$a  A  TOUR  tiro  Scotl. 

all  the  Difpatch  in  their  Power,  that  they  might  be  in- 
tirely  out  of  Reach,  before  Stirling  Bridge  could  be 
repaired  for  the  Paflage  of  the  Army. 

Part  of  them  took  the  Road  by  Tay-bridge>  towards 
the  Hills ;  the  reft,  confiding  of  Lord  Lewis  Gordon's 
Men,  the  Remains  of  the  French,  thofe  commanded 
by  Lord  Ogilvie,  and  the  few  Horfe  they  had,  got 
into  Perth  the  very  Night  that  Brigadier  Mar daunt 
arrived  at  Stirling ;  and  though  they  had  taken  a  great 
deal  of  Pains  in  throwing  up  feveral  Works  for  the 
Security  of  that  Place,  yet  they  began  to  abandon  it, 
and  to  continue  their  March  Northward  the-  next 
Morning  Lord  John  Drummond,  with  the  Remains 
of  the  Scots  and  Irijh  that  came  from  France,  made 
the  beft  of  their  Way  towards  Montrtfe,  and,  on  the 
3d  of  February,  the  Town  of  Perth  was  totally  eva- 
cuated. They  left  behind  them  there  13  Pieces  of 
Lon  Cannon,  8  and  12  Pounders,  nailed  Up;  and 
threw  a  vaft  Quantity  of  Ammunition  into  the  River, 
together  with  14  Swivel  Guns  that  had  been  taken 
out  of  the  Hazard  Sloop  ;  and  fet  at  Liberty  the 
Sailors  that  had  been. confined  there  from  the  Time 
that  Veflel  was  taken ;  but  they  thought  fit  to  carry 
Captain  Hill,  who  commanded  her,  along  with  them, 
and  fome  few  other  Prifoners  of  the  better  Sort. 

It  is  evident,  that  this  Retreat  of  theirs  was  made 
with  the  utmoft  Hurry  and  Precipitation  ;  and  yet  it 
was  barely  made  in  time :  for  on  the  4th,  by  fix  in  the 
Morning,  the  Bridge  of  Stirling  was  repaired,  fo  that 
the  Army  pafled  over  it ;  and  the  advanced  Guard, 
confiding  of  the  Argylejbire  Highlanders,  and  the  Dra- 
goons, marched  that  Night  as  far  as  Crief\  but  the 
Foot  were  cantoned  in  and  about  Dumblain,  where 
the  Duke  took  up  his  Quarters  that  Evening,  and  the 
next  Day  the  advanced  Guards  took  Poffeffion  of 
Perth.  We  may,  without  Danger  of  incurring  the 
Sufpicion  of  Adulation,  obferve,  that  fcarce  any 
Hiftory  can  (hew  a  more  illuftrious  Inftance  of  the 

Effetfs 


Scotl..         GREAT  BRITAIN.  363 

Effe&s  of  a  General's  Reputation  than  this  before  us, 
fmce,  in  the  Space  of  a  (ingle  Week,  his  Royal  High- 
nefs  quitted  the  Court  of  the  King  his  Father,  put 
himfelf  at  the  Head  of  the  Forces  in  Scotland^  and  faw 
the  Enemy  flying  with  Precipitation  before  htm. 

The  Rebels  were  very  fenfible,  how  much  the  News 
of  this  Retreat  of  theirs,   which  had  fo  much  the  Re- 
femblance  of  a  Flight,  would  alarm  their  Friends  both 
at  home  and  abroad ;    and  therefore  they  difperfed  fe- 
veral  Papers  to  aflign  fuch  Reafons  for  it,  as  they 
judged  might  give  it  a  fair  Appearance;  alleging,  that 
their  Men  were  fo  loaded  with  Booty,  that  they  were 
conftrained  to  let  them  carry  it  home;    that,   after  fo 
fatiguing  a  Campaign,    fome   Recefs  was  neceflary; 
and  that,  when  they  had  refrefhed  and  recruited  their 
Forces,  they  would  not  fail  to  make  a  frefh  Irruption 
into  the  Lowlands  in  the  Spring.     But,  whatever  Rea- 
fons they  might  pretend,  the  true  Motives  of  their 
Conduct  were  thefe :  They  judged,  that,  by  drawing 
the  War  imo  the  Highlands^  they  ihould  make  it  ex- 
tremely burdenfome  and  uneafy  to  the  King's  Forces, 
obtain  frequent  Opportunities  of  harraffing  and  fur- 
prifing  them,  and  have  a  fair  Chance  for  rendering 
them  weary  of  following  them   through   Countries, 
where  they  thought  it  impoflible  for  them  to  have 
Magazines,  and  other  Requifites  for  an  Army  of  their 
Force.     In  the  next  place,  they  perfuaded  themfelves* 
that  the  removing  the  War  into  the  Highland^  and 
the  Report  they  fpread  of  the  Severities  that  would  be 
inflicted  by  the  King's  Troops,  muft  keep  their  Men 
together,  which  they  now  found  a  very  difficult  Talk-; 
and  would  alfo  contribute  to  increafe  their  Strength. 
They  had,  befides  thefe,  another  Reafon  ;  which  was, 
the  giving  a   fair  Opportunity  to  their  Friends   the 
French^  ot  attempting  an  Invafion  in  the  South  ;  which 
they  flattered  themfelves  would  afford  fuch  a  Diver- 
fion  as  would   free  them  from  all  their  Difficulties. 
And  to  all  this  might  be  added,  that  they  had  formed  a 
R  2  Project 


364  4  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

'Projecl:  of  making  themfelves  Mafters  of  the  Chain  or 
Line  of  Fortifications,  that  ran  along  the  North  of 
Scotland  from  Fort-William  to  Inverness ;  and  thereby 
fecure  the  Country  behind  them,  and,  at  the  fame 
time,  afford  Means  for  the  French  and  Spaniards  to 
fend  them  Reinforcements  and  Supplies,  of  which 
they  had  hitherto  had  large  Promifes,  though  but  flight 
and  ineffectual  Performances. 

His  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  who 
penetrated  all  their  Views,  took  the  moft  proper  Me- 
thods that  could  be  contrived  for  the  defeating  them. 
He  gave  Orders  for  the  Army  to  march  by  different 
Roads  (but  in  fuch  Bodies  as  prevented  all  Danger  of 
Surprize)  to  Aberdeen,  where  he  propofed  to  fix  his 
Head-quarters,  to  raife  Magazines,  and  to  receive  fuch 
Succours  and  Supplies,  as  from  time  to  time  might  be 
requifite,  by  Sea,  from  the  South*  As  the  HeJJian 
Troops  were  now  in  Scotland,  his  Royal  Highnefs 
took  care  to  difpofe  of  them,  and  fome  other  Bodies  of 
Englljh  Troops,  at  Perth,  Dunke  d,  the  Caftle  of  Blair, 
Caftle  of  Menzies,  and  other  Places  ;  by  which  he  ef- 
feclually  fecured  the  Paffage  into  the  Lowlands,  and 
put  it  out  of  the  Power  of  the  Rebels  to  return  that 
Way  into  the  South.  General  Campbell,  with  the 
Argylejblre  Men,  undertook  the  Security  of  Fort 
William,  a  Place  at  that  time  of  infinite  Importance,  as 
it  fecured  another  Paffage  through  the  Weft  of  Scot- 
land, by  which  the  Rebels  might  again  have  made 
their  Way  into  England.  Thefe  Precautions  taken, 
his  Royal  Highnefs  fet  out  in  Perfon  for  Aberdeen, 
where  he  arrived  on  the  28th  of  February. 

The  Rebels,  in  Profecution  of  their  Defigns,  made 
it  their  fift  Care  to  become  Mafters  of  Invernefs,  a 
Town  of  pretty  confiderable  Trade  on  the  Ealt-fide 
of  the  Highlands,  with  a  good  Port,  and  a  fmall  Fort- 
refs,  fometimes  called  the  Caftle  of  Invernefs,  but  more 
properly  Fort  George,  to  defend  it.  The  Earl  of 
London  was  then  there  with  a  Body  of  about  1 500 

3  Men, 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  365 

Men,  mod  of  them  haftily  raifed  for  the  Service  of  the 
Government;  with  whom,  upon  the  Approach  of  the 
Rebels  to  within  a  very  fmali  Diftance  of  the  Place,  he 
marched  out,  in  order  to  aft  offenfively  ;  but,  finding 
that  impracticable,  and  that  the  Enemy  were  much 
fironger  than  he  expected,  he  judged  it  proper  to  re- 
treat, which  he  did  on  the  2oth  of  February,  without 
the  Lofs  of  a  Man,  leaving  two  independent  Com- 
panies, under  the  Command  of  Major  Grant,  in  Fort 
George,  with  Orders  to  defend  it  to  the  laft  Extre- 
mity. But,  it  feems,  thefc  Orders  were  but  indiffe- 
rently obeyed  ;  for  the  Place  was  foon  after  furren- 
dered  to  the  Rebels ;  upon  which  the  Chevalier  re- 
moved his  Quarters  thither,  having  with  him  about 
4000  Men  This  Succefs,  and  the  News  of  furpri- 
fing  fome  Parties  of  well- affected  Highlanders,  not  far 
from  the  Caftle  of  Blair,  fo  much  raifed  their  Spirits, 
that  they  were  refolved  to  profecute'  their  original  De- 
iign  of  reducing  the  Chain ;  and  accordingly  they  next 
attacked  Fort-~Auguftus^  a  very  fmall  Place,  and  only 
important  by  its  Situation  between  Invernefs  and  Fort- 
William,  in  which  there  was  a  very  fmall  Garrifon,  of 
no  more  than  three  Companies  of  Guifi*  Regiment, 
under  the  Command  of  Major -Wentworth-i  fo  that  it 
was  fpeediiy  reduced,  ?nd  as  fpeedily  demoli{hecf, 
which  was  the  fame  Fate  that  Fort  George  had  met 
with  :  a  clear  Demonftration,  that  they  did  not  think 
it  necefikry  to  have  any  Garrifon  in  that  Part  of  the 
Country.  But  as  they  were  (till  incommoded  by  the 
Neighbourhood  of  the  Earl  of  London,  who  lay  at  their 
Back  with  only  the  Firth  of  Murray  between  them  ; 
the  Duke  of  Perth,  the  Earl  of  Cromertie,  and  fome 
of  the  reft  of  their  chief  Commanders,  refolved  to  at- 
tempt the  furprifmg  that  Earl  by  the  Help  of  Boats, 
which  they  drew  together  on  their  Side  of  the  Water  5 
and,  taking  the  Advantage  of  a  Fog,  executed  their 
Scheme  fo  efFe&ually,  that,  falling  upon  the  King's 
Forces  under  the  Earl's  Command  unexpectedly,  they 
R  3  cut 


3 66  'A  TOUR  tiro  Scot!, 

cut  off  fome,  made  a  few  Officers  Prifoners,  and  ob- 
liged Lord  London  to  retire  with  the  reft  out  of 
Sutherland.  But  though  thefe  fmall  Advantages  ferved 
to  make  a  Noife,  and  to  keep  up  the  Spirits  of  their 
Party,  yet  they  did  them  little  real  Service;  and  their 
Money  beginning  to  run  fhort,  and  Supplies  both  at 
home  and  abroad  failing  their  Expectations,  caufed 
great  Divifions  and  Heart-burnings  amongft  them. 

Mean  time,  his  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke,  notwith- 
ilanding  the  Rigour  of  the  Seafon,  and  Badnefs  of  the 
Roads,  took  care  to  drftrefs  the  Rebels  as  much  as  it 
was  poilible ;  for  the  very  Day  after  he  joined  the 
Army,  he  detached  the  Earl  of  Ancram  with  100  Dra- 
goons, and  Major  Morris  with  300  Foot,  to  the 
Caftle  of  Corgarf,  at  the  Head  of  the  River  Don,  40 
Miles  from  Aberdeen^  and  in  the  Heart  of  the  Country 
then  in  PofieiHon  of  the  Rebels,  wherein  his  Royal 
Highnefs  had  Information  of  their  having  a  confider- 
able  Magazine  of  Arms  and  Ammunition,  which  his 
Lordfhip  had  Orders  to  feize,  or  to  deftroy  :  which 
CommiiTiori  he  executed  very  effectually ;  for,  the 
Rebels  retiring  upon  his  Approach,  he  became  Matter 
of  the  Place,  and  all  that  was  in  it ;  but,  for  want  of 
Horfes  to  carry  them  off,  was  obliged  to  deftroy  moil 
of  the  Arms,  and  30  Barrels  of  Powder. 

On  the  1 6th  of  March,  having  Intelligence  that  Rsy 
Stuart,  with  about  jooo  Foot,  and  60  Huffars,  was 
at  Strathbogie,  his  Royal  Highnefs  ordered  Major- 
General  Bland  to  drive  them  from  thence ;  and,  at  the 
fame  time,  ordered.Brigadier-General  Mordaunt,  with 
four  Battalions,  and  as  many  Pieces  of  Cannon,  to 
march,  and  fupport  the  Major- General,  if  there  (hould 
be  Occafion.  On  the  jyth,  the  Major- General  ad- 
vanced to  Stratbbsgie,  and  was  almoft  within  S'ght  of 
the  Place  before  the  Rebels  had  any  Notice  of  his  Ap- 
proach ;  which  alarmed  them  to  fuch  a  Degree,  that 
they  quitted  their  Poft,  and  retired  with  great  Preci- 
pitation towards  Keith.  .But  this  Succefs  was  attended 

witfc 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.  367 

with  fome  little  Check:  for,  General  Bland  having 
detached  a  Captain  of  Highlanders^  with  70  of  his 
Men,  and  30  of  Kingston's  Horfe,  with  Orders  to 
clear  that  Place,  and  then  rejoin  the  Army,  they,  con- 
trary to  his  Directions,  ventured  to  quarter  there  that 
Night ;  which  gave  the  Rebels  an  Opportunity  of  fur- 
priiingthem,  and  of  cutting  in  Pieces  moftof  the  Camp- 
bells,  who  were  quartered  in  the  Church-yard  j  but  the 
Cornet,  who  commanded  Kingftorf*  Horfe,  retired, 
with  fome  of  thofe  under  his  Command. 

The  Rebels,  being  very  well  apprized  of  the  great 
Importance  of  Fort-lVilliam  (the  Taking  of  which 
would  have  made  them  Matters  of  the  whole  Extent 
of  the  Country  from  Eaft  to  Weft,  and  from  Sea  to 
Sea,  and  would,  befides,  hav'e  opened  them  a  PafTage 
into  Argylejhire^  and  the  Weft  of  Scotland) ,  refolved 
to  leave  nothing  unattempted,  that  might  contribute 
to  the  Conqueft  of  this  Fortrefs;  and  therefore  ordered 
Brigadier  Stapleton^  with  a  large  Body  of  their  beft 
Men,  moft  of  their  Engineers,  and  as  good  a  Train 
as  they  could  furnifli,  to  attempt  it :  but,  the  Place 
"being  defended  by  Captain  Scot,  an  Officer  of  Cou- 
rage, Fidelity,  and  Experience,  they  were  obliged  to 
raife  the  Siege  on  the  3<d  of  /^>r/7,  about  a  Month  after 
they  had  begun  to  move  againft  it;  which  they  did 
whith  great  Precipitation,  bending  their  March  to  /«- 
•uerncfs.  Upon  which,  Captain  Scot  detached  a  Party 
of  the  Garrifon,  which  fecured  eight  Pieces  of  Cannon, 
and  feven  Mortars,  which  the  Enemy  had  left  behind 
them. 

They  had  before  this  received  a  very  great  Difap- 
pointment,  as  follows : 

We  have  already  obferved,  that  they  were  in  great 
Diftrefs  for  Money,  and  other  Neceflaries,  and  waited 
impatiently  for  a  Supply  from  France ;  which  they 
hoped,  notwithftanding  the  Mifcarriage  of  fo  many 
VeiTels  that  had  been  fent  them,  would  foon  arrive  on 
board  the  Hazard  Sloop  ;  to  which  they  had  given 
R  4  he 


368  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl. 

the  Name  of  The  Prince  Charles  Snow,  and  which  they 
had  Intelligence  was  at  Sea,  with  a  confiderable 
Quantity  of  Gold  on  board,  and  a  good  Number  of 
experienced  Officers  and  Engineers,  who  were  very 
much  wanted. 

On  the  25th  of  March,  this  long-looked  for  VefTel 
arrived  in  Tongue' Bay,,  into  which  (he  was  followed 
by  his  Majefty's  Ship  the  Sheernefs,  commanded  by 
Captain  Obrien,  who  immediately  attacked  her.  In 
the  Engagement  the  Hazard  Sloop  had  a  great  many 
Men  killed,  and  many  more  wounded ;  fo  that,  not 
being  able  to  maintain  the  Fight,  (he  ran  afhore  on 
the  Shallows,  wliere  the  Sheernefs  could  not  follow 
her  ;  and  there  fhe  landed  her  Men  and  Money.  The 
Place  on  which  (he  ran  on  fhore  (after  being  chafed 
56  Leagues),  was  in  the  Lord  Rea's  Country;  and  it 
happened,  there  was  then  at  his  Lordfhip's  Houfe  his 
Son  Captain  Mackay,  Sir  Henry  Monro,  Lord  Charles 
Gordon^  Captain  Macleod,  and  about  80  Men  of  Lord 
London's  Regiment,  who  had  retired  thither,  when  the 
Rebels  attacked  them  by  Boats,  as  has  been  before 
related. 

Thefe  Gentlemen,  having  animated  the  Soldiers  to 
attack,  notwithffonding  the  Superiority  of  Numbers, 
thofe  who  landed  from  the  Prince  Charles  Snow,  ob- 
tained, after  a  fhoit  Difpute,  a  complete  Viclory,  with 
little  or  no  Lofs  on  their  Side.  Befides  five  Chefts  of 
M  ,ney,  and  a  confiderable  Quantity  of  Arms,  they 
took  156  Officers,  Soldiers,  and  Sailors,  Prisoners, 
xvith  whom  they  embarked  on  board  the  Sbscrnefs 
Man  of  War,  and  failed  direclly  for  Aberdeen,  toge- 
ther with  another  Prize  Captain  Obrien  had  taken  in 
the  Orkneys.  The  Money,  befides  one  Cheft  that 
was  miffing,  and  what  had  been  taken  out  of  another 
that  was  broken,  amounted  to  12,500  Guineas  ;  and 
amongft  the  Prifoners  there  were  40  experienced  Of- 
ficers, who  had  been  long  either  in  the  French  or  the 
Spanijb  Service. 

At 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.          369 

At  the  fame  time  that  the  Rebels  employed  fo  con- 
fiderable  a  Part  of  their  forces  in  attacking  Fort  Wil- 
Ham,  they  Tent  another  Body  under  the  Command  of 
Lord  George  Murray^  to  make  a  like  Attempt  upon  the 
Cattle  of  '>/rf/r,  the  principal  Seat  of  his  Grace  the 
Duke  of  Atbel,  but  a  Place  of  no  great  Strength,  and  in 
which  there  was  only  a  fmall  Garifon,  under  the  Com- 
mand of  Sir  Andrew  Agnew  ;  which  Siege,  or  rather- 
Blockade  th^v  raifed  with  the  fame  Hurry  and  Preci- 
pitation, on  tne  Approach  of  the  Earl  of  Crawford,  as 
they  did  that  o;  Fort  7t/illiamy  upon  the  very  fame  Day, 
and  from  the  fame  Motives. 

Hs  Royal  Mighnefs,  having  before  made  the  ne- 
cefTary  Difpofitions,  marched  :rom  ,^bei  deen  on  the 
8th  of  April  1746,  in  order  to  find  out  the  Rebels  j 
who  now  had  united  all  their  Forces,  being  refolved 
to  make  a  Stand  at  Invernefs.  He  encamped  on  the 
I  ith  at  Cullen,  where  my  Lord  Albemarle  joined  him  ; 
and  the  whole  Army  the  next  Day  marched  to  the 
Spey^  and  parted  it  with  no  other  Lofs  than  of  one 
Dragoon,  and  four  Women,  who  were  drowned  thro* 
Hurry  and  Indifcretion.  Major- General  Hufke  was 
detached  in  the  Mornin'g  with  15  Companies  of  Gre- 
nadiers, the  loyal  Highlanders^  and  all  the  Cavalry,  and 
two  Pieces  of  Cannon  ;  and  his  Royal  Higbnefs  went 
with  them  himfdf. 

On  their  fii  ft  -Appearance,  the  Rebels  retired  f;om 
the  Side  of  the  Sf-ey  towards  Elgln\  whereupon  the 
Du';e  of  King/ton's  Horfe  immediately  forded  over, 
fuftained  by  the  Grenadiers  ai:>d  the  Highlanders ;  but 
the  Rebels  were  all  got  out  of  their  Reach  before 
they  could  pafs.  The  Foot  v.-^ded  over  as  faft  as  they 
arrived  ;  and,  though  the  Water  came  up  to  their 
Middles,  they  went  on  with  great  Chearfulnefs.  The 
Rebels  on  the  ether  Side  of  the  Spey  >  appeared  to  be 
between  2  and  3000;  but  they  did  not  make  any  Op-  - 
pofition,  either  while  the  King's  Troops  were  paffing, 
or  :  when  Part  of  them  had  pafi^dj  and  were  on  the 
K  5  other 


37o  A  T  O  U  R  thro*  Scotl. 

other  Side  the  River;  for  which  Conduct  of  theirs  it 
Teems  very  difficult  to  affign  any  Reafon,  unlefs  it  were, 
that  their  Officers  being  fenfible  that  the  Artillery  of 
the  King's  Troops  would  fecure  their  PafTage,  they 
were  unwilling  to  run  the  Rifk  of  difpiriting  their 
Men  by  an  unfuccefsful  Attempt  of  that  kind ;  and 
therefore  chofe  not  to  difpute  the  Pafiage  of  the  Spey  ; 
hoping  rather  to  deceive  their  Men  into  an  Opinion, 
that  they  fhould  he  well  enough  able  to  deal  with  them 
when  they  had  pafTed. 

The  King's  Army  marched  on  to  Elgin  and  For- 
refs,  and  from  thence  to  Nairn,  where  they  halted  on 
the  1 5th,  and  where  the  Rebels  thought  to  have  fur- 
prifed  them ;  but  the  Vigilance  and  ftri<5l  Difciplinc 
his  Royal  Highnefs  maintained,  abfolutely  difappointed 
them  ;  notwithstanding  which  they  fet  fire  to,  and  de- 
ftroyed  Fort- Augujlus^  called  in  all  their  Parties,  and 
prepared  for  a  general  Engagement ;  which  followed 
the  next  Day,  the  i6th,  when  the  Rebels  were  totally 
defeated,  near  Culloden  Houfe :  upwards  of  2000  of 
them  were  killed  in  the  Battle  and  Purfuit. 

The  Trench  Auxiliaries  all  furrendered  Prifoners  of 
War;  amongft  which  were  Brigadier  Stapleton,  the 
Marquis  de  Gullies,  whom  the  Highlanders  called  the 
French  Ambafiador,  Lord  Lewis  Drummond,  and  about 
52  more.  The  Lofs  on  the  Side  of  the  King's  Army 
was  very  inconfiderable ;  the  only  Perfons  of  Note 
killed,  were  Lord  Robert  Kerr,  Captain  in  Barrel's 
Regiment,  Captain  Crojfet  of  Price's,  Captain  John 
Campbell  of  London's^  and  Captain  Colin  Campbell  of 
the  Militia;  befides  thefe,  50  private  Men  killed,  and 
250  wounded. 

The  Number  of  all  the  Perfons  taken  in  this  fignal 
Vidory  were  222  French,  and  226  Rebels  ;  all  their 
Artillery  and  Ammunition,  with  other  military  Stores, 
and  12  Colours  likewife,  fell  into  the  Hands  of  the 
Viftors.  The  Earl  of  Kilmarnock  was  taken  in  the 
A&ion  j  Lord  Balmerino,  at  firft  repoited  to  be  k  lied, 
5  was 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        371 

was  taken  Toon  after;  and  four  Ladies,  that  had  been 
very  adiive  in  the  Rebellion,  were  likewife  feized  at 
Invernefs;  viz.  Lady  Ogilvle^  Lady  Kmlocb^  Lady 
Gordon,  and  Lady  Mackintojh* 

Immediately  after  the  Battle,  Brigadier  Mordaunt 
was  detached,  with  the  Volunteers,  to  the  Number  of 
900,  into  the  Frajers  Country,  in  order  to  reduce  all 
who  fhould  be  found  in  Arms  there;  and  with  the 
like  View  other  Detachments  were  made  into  other 
difaffecled  Parts  of  the  Country;  which  put  it  intirely 
out  of  the  Power  of  the  Rebels  ever  to  aflemble  after- 
wards in  any  Body,  capable  of  difturbing  the  Peace  of 
the  Country,  being  reduced  to  the  Neceffity  of  fepa- 
rating  into  fmall  Parties,  in  order  tq  ihift  the  better 
for  themfelves.  About  the  fame  time  that  the  whole 
Forces  of  the  Rebels  were  thus  vanquifhed  at  the  Bat- 
tle of  Culloden^  the  Earl  of  Greater  tie^  his  eldeft  Son,  a 
great  many  Officers  of  Dtftinclion,  and  about  150 
private  Men,  were  furpriied  in  the  North,  by  a  very 
fmail  Party  of  his  Majefty's  loyal  Subjc&s,  who  fent 
them  Prifoners  on  board  his  Majefty's  Ship  the  Houndy 
Captain  Dove,  from  Sutherland  to  Invernefs. 

Thus  the  Flame  of  the  Rebellion,  which,  after 
being  fmothered  for  fome  time  in  Scotland,,  broke  out 
at  latt  with  fuch  Force,  as  to  fpread  itfelf  into  England j 
and  not  without  Reafon  alarmed  the  Inhabitants  of 
this  Metropolis,  was  in  a  fhort  Space  totally  extin- 
guimed  by  him  who  gave  the  firfl  Check  to  its  Force  ; 
and  who  perhaps  alone  was  capable  cf  performing  this 
Service  to  his  Country,  to  his  Father,  and  to  his 
King. 

His  Royal  Highnefs,  as  he  well  deferved,  had  the 
Thanks  of  both  Houfes  of  Parliament  fent  him  by 
their  refpe£r.ive  Speakers ;  to  which  he  returned  the 
ir. oft  obliging  Anfvvers.  The  two  Houfes  alfo  ad- 
diefTed  his  Majefty,  fignifying  their  Readinefs  to  give 
h's  Royal  Highnefs  fuch  diftinguifhing  Marks  cf  pub- 
i  c  Gratitude  as  Ihould  be  molt  agreeable  to  his  Ma- 
#6  .eyj 


ot) 


37^  A  TOUR  thro  Sc 

jefty;  who  was  gracioufly  pleafed  to  recommend  to 
them  the  fettling  of  an  additional  Revenue  upon  his 
Royal  Son.  And  accordingly  an  additional  Revenue 
of  25,000  /.  per  Annum  was  fettled  upon  him,  making 
4O,ccc/.per  Annum  ;  his  Royal  Highr.efs  having  be- 
fore but  1  5,000  /.  per  Annum. 

While  thefe  grateful  Meafures  were  purfuing  above, 
his  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke  took  all  the  neceffary 
Precautions  for  effectually  fcattering  the  very  Embers 
of  the  late  Fire,  that  they  might  not  be  raked  together 
again,  or,  by  the  Addition  of  any  frefh  Fuel,  blown' 
into  a  new  Flame.  With  this  View  he  fent  Detach- 
ments of  well-affe6ted  Highlanders^  and  regular  Troops, 
into  the  wildeft  Countries  belonging  to  the  Claris  that 
had  been  in  Arms,  where  fuch  as  fubmitted  were  re- 
ceived to  Mercy,  and  fuch  as  flood  out  had  their 
Countries  burnt  j  and  at  the  fame  time  their  Cattle 
were  driven  away,  that  they  might  be  the  lefs  able  to 
fubfift,  and  thofe  Cattle  fold  for  the  Benefit  of  the  Sol- 
diers in  the  King's  Army.  Thefe  Meafures  had  very 
great  Ccnfequences;  the  burning  Lord  Lovat's  and 
Cameron  of  Lodnef*  Houfes  had  a  great  Effect,  and 
ftruck  mu.h  Terror;  fo  that  in  a  very  (hort  Space  of 
Time  .there  were  fcarce  any  Parties  of  Rebels  to  be 
heard  of,  and  moft  of  their  Chiefs  furrencered,  were 
taken,  or  found  Means  to  efcape  out  of  the  Ifland. 

Among  the  firft  were  the  Marquis  of  Tullibardin^ 
who  {tiled  himfelf  Duke  of  dtbcl,  who  died  afterwards 
a  Prifoner  in  the  Tower;  Mr.  ly'dllam  Murray,  a  near 
Relation  of  the  Earl  of  Dunmoris,  who  has  been  par- 
doned; the  Earl  of  Kelly,  and  the  Mafter  of  Lovat. 
As  for  Lord  Lovat  his  Father,  Mr.  Murray  of  Brougb- 
ton,  and  many  more,  they  were  taken  at  different 
times;  but  the  Duke  of  Perth,  Lord  John  Drtim'mond 
his  Brother,  Lord  Eldo  eldeft  Son  to'the  Earl  of  We- 
tnys,  and  feveral  of  their  Affociates,  made  their  Ef- 
capes  by  Sea  in  two  French  Privateers,  that  were  fent 

to  carry  off  thofe  who  had  been  doing  the  Bufinefs  ot* 

0  r, 

Prance 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN. 

France  at  the  Expence  of  their  Honours  and  Fortunes, 
Lord  PitjligO)  and  Lord  Lewis  Gordon,  retired  the 
fame  Way  ;  and  Lord  Ogilvie,  with  13  or  14  more, 
{hipped  themfelves  in  a  fmall  Veflel  for  Norway ). 
where,  as  foon  as  they  arrived,  they  were  feized  by 
Orders  from  the  late  King  of  Denmark,  but  were  af- 
terwards releafed,  retired  into  Sweden^  and  found 
Means  to  get  from  thence  into  France.  Lurd  Georg: 
Murray  alfo  made  his  Efcape;  but  whither,  or  in 
what  Manner,  we  are  not  able  to  fay. 

As  for  the  young  Pretender  himfelf,    he  found  it 
much  more  difficult  to  withdraw  than  any  of  his  Ad- 
herents;   which  was  the*  Reafon   that  he  remained 
long  behind  them:    and,  as  it  may  be  expected  that  a,. 
more  particular  Account  {hould  be  given  of  his  Ad- 
ventures, we  fhall  endeavour  it  without  any  Mixture- 
of  thofe  romantic  Tales  that  have  been  published  on 
that  Subject 

He  was.  in  the  Body  of  Referve  at  the  Battle  of 
Culloden,  where  he  is  faid  to  have  had  an  Horfe  {hot 
under  him;  but  while  the  French  v/ere  treating  with 
the  King's  Troops,  in  order  to  be  received  Prifoners 
of  War,  he  mounted  a  frefh  Horfe,  and  made  his 
Efcape.  That  very  Evening,  being  the  i6th  of  April^ 
he  retired  to  the  Houfe  of  a  Fa£tor  of  Lord  Lovat's, 
about  10  Miles  from  lnvernefs-3.  where,  meeting  with 
that  Lord,  he  ftaid  Supper:  after  Supper  was  over,  he 
fet  out  for  Eort-dugufluS)  and  purfued  his  Journey  the 
next  Day  to  Invergarry,  where  he  propofed  to  have 
dined;  but,  finding  no  Victual <,  he  fet  a  Boy  to 
filing,  who  caught  two  Salmon,  on  which  he  made 
an  hearty  Meal,  and  continued  waiting  there  for  fome 
of  his  Troops  who  had  promifed  to  rendezvous  at  that 
Place ;  but,  being  difappointed,  he  refolved  to  proceed 
to  Lockardge :  he  arrived  thereon  the  i8th  at  two  in 
the  Morning,  where  he  went  to  Sleep,  which  he  had 
not  done  for  five  Days  and  Nights ;  he  remained  there 
till  five  o'Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  in  hopes  of  ob- 
taining 


374  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl 

taining  fome  Intelligence;  but,  gaining  none,  he  fet 
out  from  thence  on  Foot,  and  traveled  to  the  Glen  of 
Morar^    where  he  arrived  the   igth  at  four  in  th( 
Morning. 

He  fee  out  about  Noon  the  fame  Day  for  Arra- 
Jbaig,  where  he  arrived  about  four  in  the  Afternoon. 
He  remained  there  about  feven  Days,  waiting  for  Capt. 
O  Neil,  who  joined  him  on  the  27th,  and  informed 
him,  that  there  were  no  Hopes  of  drawing  his  Troops 
together  again  in  a  Body;  upon  which  he  refolved  to 
go  to  Stornway^  in  order  to  hire  a  Ship  to  go  to 
France :  the  Perfon  employed  for  this  Purpofe  was 
one  Donald  M'Leod,  who  had  an  Intereft  there.  On 
the  28th  he  went  on  board  an  eight- oaied  Boat,  in 
Company  with  Sullivan  and  O  Neil,  ordering  the 
People  who  belonged  to  the  Boat  to  make  the  beft 
Hafte  they  could  to  Stormuay. 

The  N  ght  proving  very  tempeftuous,  they  all 
begged  of  him  to  go  back;  which  he  would  not  do, 
but,  to  keep  up  the  Spirits  of  the  People,  he  fung  them 
an  Highland  Song :  but,  the  Weather  growing  worfe, 
on  the  2Qth  about  feven  in  the  Morning  they  were 
driven  on  (bore  on  a  Point  of  Land  called  RuftnefS)  in 
the  Ifland  of  Benbecula,  where,  when  they  got  on 
fhore,  the  Pjretender  helped  to  make  a  Fire  to  warm 
the  Crew,  who  were  almoft  flarved  to  Death  with 
Cold.  .  On  the  30th,  at  fix  in  the  Evening,  they  fet 
fail  again  for  Stornway ;  but,  meeting  with  another 
Storm,  were  obliged  to  put  into  the  TfUnd  of  Scalp  in 
the  Harries^  where  they  all  went  on  {hore  to  a 
Farmer's  Houfe,  pafling  for  Merchants  that  were  {hip- 
wrecked  in  their  Voyage  to  the  Orkneys ;  the  Pre- 
tender and  Sullivan  going  by  the  Names  of  Sinclair  9 
the  latter  pafling  for  the  Father,  and  the  former  for  the 
Son.  They  thought  proper  to 'fend  from  thence  to 
Donald  M^Leod  at  Stornway,  with  Inftru&ions  to 
freight  a  Ship  for  the  Orkneys.  On  the  third  of  May  they 
leceived  a  Mefiage  from  birr,  that  a  Ship  was  ready. 

On 


Scotl.          GREAT  BRITAIN.  375 

On  the  4th  they  fet  out  on  Foot  for  that  Place, 
where  they  arrived  on  the  5th  about  Noon;  and, 
meeting  with  Donald  M-Leod^  they  found  that  he  had 
got  into  Company,  where,  growing  drunk,  he  had  told 
a  Friend  of  his  for  whom  he  had  hired  the  Ship:  upon 
which  there  were  200  People  in  Arms  at  Stornway^ 
upon  a  Report,  that  the  Pretender  was  landed  with 
500  Men,  and  was  coming  to  burn  the  Town ;  fo 
that  they  were  obliged  to  lie  all  Night  upon  the  Moor, 
with  no  other  Refreihment  than  Bifcuit  and  Brandy. 
On  the  6th  they  refolved  to  go  in  the  eight-oared 
Boat  to  the  Orkneys ;  but  the  Crew  refufed  to  venture, 
fo  that  they  were  obliged  to  fteer  South  along  the 
Coaft-fide,  where  they  met  with  two  EngUJh  Ships, 
and  this  compelled  them  to  put  into  a  defert  Ifland  j 
where  they  remained  till  the  icth,  without  any  Pro- 
vifion  but  fome  Salt-fifh  they  found  upon  the  Ifland. 

About  ten  in  the  Morning  on  that  Day  they  em- 
barked for  the  Harries,  and  at  Break  of  Day  on  the 
I  ith  they  were  chafed  by  an  Englijh  Ship,  but  made 
their  Efcape  among  the  Rocks  j  about  four  in  the 
Afternoon  they  arrived  at  the  Ifland  viBenbecula^  where 
they  (hud  till  the  I4th,  and  then  fet  out  for  the  Moun- 
tain of  Currada  in  South  £///?,  where  they  ftaid  till  the 
Militia  of  the  Ifle  of  Sky  came  to  the  Ifland  of  Irafky  ; 
and  then  failed  for  the  Ifland  of  U/0,  where  they  re- 
mained three  Nights,  till,  having  Intelligence  that  the 
Militia  were  coming  towards  Benbecula,  they  immedi- 
ately got  into  their  Boat,  and  failed  for  Lockbufdale  ; 
but  being  met  by  fome  Ships  of  War,  they  were  ob- 
liged to  return  to  Locbagnart,  where  they  remained  all 
Day,  and  at  Night  failed  for  Lochbufdale,  where  they 
a: rived,  and  ftaid  eight  Days  on  a  Rock,  making  a 
Tent  of  the  Sail  of  the  Boat.  They  found  themfelves 
there  in  a  moft  dreadful  Situation,  for,  having  Intel- 
ligence that  Captain  Scot  had  landed  at  Kilbnde,  the 
Company  was  obliged  to  feparate,  and  the  Pretender 
ard  0  Neil  went  to  the  Mountains,  where  they  re- 
mained 


3  76  A  T  O  U  R  thro  Scotl.1 

mained  all  Night,  and  foon  after  were  informed,  that 
General  Campbell  was  at  Bernary  ;  fo  that  now  they 
had  Forces  very  near  on  both  Sides  of  them,  and  were 
abfolutely  at  a  lofs  which  Way  to  move. 

In  their  Road  they  met  with  a  young  Lady,  one 
Mifs  M'donald,  to  whom  Captain  O  Neil  propofed 
aflifting  the  Pretender  to  make  his  Efcape,  which  at 
firft  fhe  refufed  ;  but,  upon  his  offering  to  put  on  Wo- 
man's Qoaths,  fh.e  consented,  and  deGred  them  to  go 
to  the  Mountain  of  Gurrada  till  (he  fent  for  them, 
where  they  accordingly  ftaid  two  Days;  but  hearing 
nothing  from  the  young  Lady,  the  Pretender  con- 
cluded (he  would  not  keep  her  Word,  and  therefore 
refolved  to  fend  Captain  .6  Neil  to  General  Campbell, 
to  let  him  know  he  was  willing  to  furrender  to  him  : . 
but  about  five  in  the  Evening  a  Meffage  came  from 
the  young  Lady,  d-jfiring  them  to  meet  her  at  Rujhnefs':  - 
being  afraid  to  pafs  by  the  Ford  becaufe  of  the  Mi- 
litia, they  luckily  found  a  Boat,  which  carried  ihem  to 
the  other  Side  of  Uia,  where  they  remained  Part  of  the 
Day,  afraid  of  being  feen  by  the  Country  people.  In 
the  Evening  they  fet  out  for  Ruftmefs,  and  arrived 
there  at  twelve  at  Night;  but  not  finding  the  young 
Lady,  and  being  alarmed  by  a  Boat  full  of  Militia, 
they  were  obliged  to  retire  two  Miles  back,  where  the 
Rretender  remained  on  a  Moor  (ill  O  Neil  went  to  the 
young  Lady,  and  prevailed  upon  her  to  come  to  the 
Place  appointed  at  Nightfal,  of  the  next  Day. 
•  About  an  Hour  after,  they  had  an  Account  of  Ge- 
neral Campbell's  Arrival  at '  Benbecula  ;  which  obliged  ; 
them  to  remove  to  another  Part  of  the  Ifland,  where, 
as  the  Day  broke,  they  difcovered  four  Sail  clofs  on 
the  Shore,  making  circdly  up  to  the  Place  where  they 
were,  fo  that  there  was  nothing  left  for  them  to  do 
but  to  throw  themfelves  among  the  Heath.  When 
tbe  Wherries  were  gone,  they  refolved  to  go  to  Clan- 
ronald's  Houfe;  but  when  they  were  within  a  Mile 
of  it,  they  heard  General  Campbell  was  there,  which 

forced 


Scotl.  GREAT  BRITAIN.        377 

forced  them  to  retreat  again;  and  foon  after  O  Neil 
was  taken. 

There  were  no  diftin&  Accounts  of  what  became  of 
the  Pretender  after  this,  for  the  Remainder  of  that 
Month,  and  the  greateft  Part  of  the  next,  except  that 
he  fhifted  about  from  Place  to  Place  in  Woman's 
Cloaths,  and  on  the  28th  of  'June  went  with  the  Lady 
whom  he  attended  in  a  little  Boat  from  South  Uiji  to  the 
Ifle  of  Sky,  there  he  refumed  his  own  Drefs,  and  Was 
carried  by  one  Mackinnon  in  a  Boat  to  Raga,  from 
whence  he  returned  in  a  Boat  to  Sfy,  and,  after  fome 
Stay  there,  went  back  to  the  Continent.  About  the 
Middle  of  July  the  Government  had  certain  Intelli- 
gence, of  his  croffing  the  Hill  of  Morar  in  Lochabcr^ 
proceeding  from  thence  to  Badenocb  ;  and  on  the  230! 
of  July  he  was  at  Arifaig,  and  continued  wandering 
about  that  Country,  in  great  Dtftrefs,  during  all  the 
Month  of  Auguft. 

On  the  6th  of  September,  two  French  Privateers 
came  upon  the  Coaft  of  Moldart,  where  the  Pretender 
firftlandedj  and  made  ftricl:  Inquiry  after  him.  Seve- 
ral of  the  CaMeTSz;,  2nd  fome  of  the  Macdonalds^  re- 
paired to  them,  and  were  employed  to  fearch  for  the 
Pretender;  but  it  was  the  iyth  before  he  came  ucv/f! 
to  them,  and  was  then  drafted  in  a  fhort  Coat  of  black 
Freeze,  with  a  Plaid  over  it.  He  was  in  a  bad  State 
of  Health,  and  feemed  to  be  brought  very  low  by  the 
Fatigues  he  had  gone  through.  He  embarked  the 
next  Day  about  Noon,  attended  by  the  following 
Perfons;  Alacpherfon  of  C!ur.ie9  with  others  of  his 
Clan,  Cameron  of  Lscbiel,  Dr.  Cameron  his  Brother, 
Lodowick  Cameron  of  Tor-Cajlle,  Allan  Gamer  on^  and 
Macdonald  of  Lochgary,  with  many  others  whofe 
Names  were  not  known.  Macdonald  of  Barifdale^ 
and  his  Son,  went  on  board  the  Ships  before  his 
Arrival. 

The  Ships  on  which  they  embarked  were  the  Happy 
Privateer_of  30  Guns  and  300  Men3  and  the  Prince 

of 


378  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 

ofContioi  2oGuns  and  240  Men,  fitted  out  from  St. 
Ma/o's  by  fome  of  his  own  Adherents.  They  were 
obliged  to  fail  round  the  Land's- End,  where  they  were 
chafed  by  two  Englijh  Men  of  War;  but  efeaped  by 
the  Thicknefs  of  the  Weather,  and  on  the  29th  ar- 
rived in  a  Creek  three  Leagues  to  the  Weft  of  Mor« 
laix,  where  he  prefently  went  afhore. 

He  was  fo  extremely  fatigued,  and  in  fo  bad  a  State 
of  Health,  that  he  refted  a  Week  before  he  went  to 
Fontainebleau,  where  the  French  Court  then  was,  and 
where  (if  their  Gazettes  deferve  any  Credit)  he  met 
with  a  very  kind  Reception,  had  a  great  Sum  of  Mo- 
ney given  him,  a  large  Penfton  fettled  upon  him,  and 
mighty  Promifes  made  him ;  but  all  this  was  only  to 
ferve  the  prefent  Turn,  and  to  exprefs  the  Refentment 
of  the  French  Court  for  our  Attempt  upon  Port  UO- 
rient.  For,  the  Situation  of  Things  changing,  the 
Difpofttion  of  the  French  Court  changed  likewife ;  his 
Penfion  was  forgot,  the  Complaints  he  made  little  re- 
garded, and  at  laft  he  was  plainly  given  to  underftand, 
that  the  beft  thing  himfelf  and  his  Brother  could  do, 
was  to  retire  to  Avignon  $  which  they  accordingly 
did. 

Having,  at  the  Conclufion  of  my  Tour  through 
that  Part  of  the  united  Kingdom  called  England,  given 
a  Lift  of  the  Englijb  Peerage,  it  would  be  an  Omiflion 
if  I  did  not  infert  a  Lift  of  the  Scotijh  Peerage;  the 
Families  and  Names  being  no  lefs  illuftrious,  and 
many  of  them  boafting  an  Anceftry  that  reflects  the 
higheft  Honour  upon  their  Defcendents. 


ALtp 


Scotl.        GRJ&AT  BRITAIN. 

379 

/ 
A  Lift  of  the  PEERAGE  0/  Scotland. 

DUKES.                           EARLS. 

Names.           Titles.    . 

Names* 

Titles. 

Hamilton        Hamilton 

Home 

Home 

Scot                Bucdeugb 

Fleming 

Wigton 

Lenox,           Lenox 

Lyon 

Strathmore 

;  Gordon          Gordon 

Hamilton 

Abercorn 

Douglas          Queenjberry 

Erfkine 

Kel'y  ( 

Campbell        Argyle 

Hamilton 

Haddington 

Murray           At  hoi 

Stuart 

Galloway 

Graham         Montr  oft 

Maitland 

Lander  dale 

Ker                Roxburgh 

Campbell 

London 

MARQJJISES. 
Hay                Tweedale 
Ker                 Lothian 
Johnfton        Annandak 

Alexander 
Hay 
Creighton 
Bruce 
Ramfay 

Stirling 
Kinnoul 
Dumfries 
Elg.&Kinc. 
Dalhoufie 

EARLS. 

Stewart 

Traquafr 

Craufurd         Craufurd 

Ogilvie 

Flnlater 

Hay                Errol 

Lefley 

Leven 

Sutherland      Sutherland 

Talmafh 

Dyfert 

Lefley             Rotbes 

Hamilton 

Selkirk 

Douglas          Morton 

Carnegy 

Northejk 

Erlkine            Buchan 

LindTay 

Balcarras 

Cunningham  Glencairn 

RadclifF 

Newburg 

Montgomery  Eglington 

Gordon 

Aboyn 

Kennedy         Caffils 
Sinclair           Caithnefs 

Cochran 
Keith 

Dundonald 
Kintore 

Steuart            Murray 

Campbell 

Braidalbine 

Gordon 

380  A  TOUR  thro  Scotl. 


EAR 

L  S. 

BAR 

0  NS. 

Names. 

Titles. 

Names. 

Titles. 

Gordon 

Aberdeen 

Somerville 

Somerville 

Murray 

Dunmore 

Borthwick 

Borthwick 

Obrien 

Orkney 

Douglas 

Mordington 

Douglas 

March 

Semple 

Semple 

Hume 

Marchmont 

Elphingfton 

ElphingJIon 

Carmichael 

Hyndford 

Olyphant 

Olypbant 

Dalrymple 

Stair 

Sandilands 

Torphichen 

Primrofe 

Rofeberry 

Lefley 

Lindores 

Boyle 

Glafgow 

Stewart 

Blantyre 

Stewart 

Eute 

Craniion 

Cranjhn 

Hope 

Hopfon 

Napier 

Napier 

Collier 

Portmore 

Fairfax 

Fairfax 

Scot 

Dthraine 

Mackay 

Rae 

VISCOUNTS. 

Afton 

Ajton 

Carey 

Falkland 

Forrefter 

Forrefler 

Murray 

Stormont 

Murray 

EMank 

Arbuthnot 

Arbuthnot 

Falconer 

lialker  ton 

Ingram 

Iriuin 

Hamilton 

Belhavw 

Ofburn 

Dumblain 

Roilo 

Rollo 

Graham 

Prejlon 

Colvill 

Cohill 

BARONS. 

Ruthven 

Ruthven 

Forbes 

Forbes 

Lefley 

Newark 

Fro  for 

*  S^u 

£?/&* 

Ruthir-rord 

Rutherford 

Grey 

Grey 

Bellenden 

Bellenden 

Cathcart 

Cathcart 

Kinnaird 

KinnairtL 

PEERS. 


Scotl. 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 


PEERS   attainted. 

EARLS:  ^r/^Marfhal,  Mar,  Nithfdale,  Win- 
ton,  Linlithgow,  Perth,  Seaforth,  Wemys,  South- 
«fk,  Airly,  Carnwath,  Panmure,  Middleton,  Kil- 
marnock,  Melford,  Cromertie. 

VISCOUNTS  :  Kenmure,  Kilfyth,  Strathallan, 
Dundee. 

BARONS:  Sinclair,  Lovat,  Balmerino,  Burleigh, 
Pitfligo,  Duffus,  Nairn. 

By  the  Articles  of  Union,  all  the  Englijh  of  the 
fame  Degree  at  the  Time  of  the  Union,  are  to  have 
Rank  and  Precedency  before  all  the  Scots  of  the  like 
Order  and  Degree  at  the  Time  of  the  Union:  but 
the  prefent  Peers  of  Scotland  are  to  have  Precedency 
before  all  Peers  of  Grtat  Britain  of  the  like  Order 
and  Degree,  who  may  be  created  after  the  Union. 

BISHOPRICKS  before  the  REVOLUTION. 

Jrckbijhopricks  of  St.  Andrews  WGlafgow. 
Edinburgh,       Aberdeen,      Dumbjane, 
Galloway,         Orkney,         Brechin, 
Dunkeld,          Caithnefs,      Murray, 
Rofsr  The  Hies,      LiiTimore  or  Argyle. 


A  LIST 


382 


A  TOUR  thro 


Scotl. 


A  L  I  S  T  of  the  Shires  and  Burghs  that 
are  privileged  by  the  Union  to  return 
Members  to  the  Britifh  Parliament \  for 
reprefenting  this  Northern  Part  of  the 
I/land  of  Great  Britain. 


1.  »T-HE  Shire 
•*•    deen. 

2.  The  Shire  of  Aire. 

3.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Aire,  Irvin>  Rotbfay, 
Inverary,  and  Camp- 
bell-town. 

4.  Shire  of  Argyle. 

5.  Shire  of  Bamff. 

6.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Bamff,  Elgin,  Cullen, 
Kintore,  and  Inverury. 

7.  Shire  of  Berwick. 

8.  Shire   of  Bute,    and 
Caithrufs. 

9.  Shire  of  Clackmannan^ 
and  Kinrofs. 

10.  Shire  of  Dumbarton, 

1 1 .  Shire  of  Dumfries. 

12.  Shire  of  Edinburgh. 

13.  City  of  Edinburgh. 

14.  Shire  of  Elgin. 

15.  Diftria     of     Burghs 
of  Ferrefs,  Invernefs, 
Nairn,  and  Fortrofe. 

16.  Shire  of  Fife. 

17.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Pittenweetn,    Anftru- 
tber  Eajler^    Anftru- 


ther    Wfejler^    Crailf, 
and  Kilrennie. 

1 8.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Inverkeithen^  Stirling, 
Dunfermline^  Culrofs^ 
and  Hfueenjberry. 

19.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Bruntlfland^     Dyfert, 
Kirkaldie,  and  King- 
home. 

20.  Shire  of  Forfar. 

21.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Dundee,  Perth,  St.  An- 
drewS)   Cowpar,    and 
Forfar. 

22.  Diftria     of     Burghs 
of  Montrofe^  Aberdeen^ 
Brochine^  Aberbrothocky 
and  Inverbervy. 

23.  Shire  of  Haddington. 

24.  Shire  of  Invernefs. 

25.  Shire  of  Kincardine. 

26.  Stewartry  of  Kir  cud- 
bright. 

27.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 
Kircudbrigkt,     Dum- 
fries, Lochmaban,  An- 
nan, and  Sanquhar. 

28.  Shire  of  Lanerk. 

29. 


Scotl. 


GREAT 


29.  Diftrid  of  Burghs  of 
Lanerk,     Linlithgow, 
Selkirk,  and  Peebles. 

30.  Shire  of  Linlithgow. 

31.  Shire  of  Nairn,    and 
Cromertie. 

32.  Stewartry  of  Orkney^ 
and  Zetland. 

33.  Shire  of  Pcetles. 

34.  Shire  of  Perth, 

35.  Shire  of  Renfrew. 

36.  Diftrids  of  Burghs  of 


and  D  unbar  ton* 

37  Shire  of  Rofs. 

38.  Diftria  of  Burghs  of 


BRITAIN.          383 

Dingwall,  Tain,  Dor- 
nockj  Weick)  and  Kirk' 
wall. 

39.  Shire  of  Roxburgh. 

40.  Diftrift  of  Burghs  of 

,  Haddington, 


unbar,  North  Ber- 


and  Lauder. 

41.  Shire  of  Selkirk. 

42.  Shire  of  Stirling. 

43.  Shire  of  Sutherland. 

44.  Shire  of  Wigtoun, 

45.  Diftrift  of  Burghs  of 
Wigtoun^     Whitkorn^ 
New  Galloway,    and 
Stranrayer. 


Reprefentatives  for  England 
For  the  Cinqueports     -     - 
Wales 


473 
16 

24 


Reprefentatives  for  England,  as  at 

the  End  of  Vol.  III. 
For  Scotland,  as  above     -     -     - 


The  Whole 


45 
558" 


INDEX 


INDEX 


T  O    T  H  E 


FOURTH  VOLUME. 


A. 

ABer,  Lake  of  254,  262 
Aberbrothock      201 
Abercorn  Caftle  152 

Aberdeen,  Earl  of  87 

Aberdeen,     New  and    Old 
204 — 209 

Aberdeenfhire  209 

Aberdour  165,  167 

Aberlady  77 

Abernethy  Laird  of  Main 
210 

A  chains,  King,  Founder   of 
the  Order  of  the  Thiftle 

41 

Acho  123 

A£ls  of  Parliament  relating 
to  Scotland  /  j> — 55 

Adamfon,  Mr.  93 

Adrian'j  Wall  141 

St.  Adrian'*  Shrine  174,329 
A  d  r  ian ,  Emperor  1 4  2 


JEft  uarium  Varans  1 1 

Agricola,  Julius      111,195 
Ail  fa  I/land  287 

Air,  River          14,  123,  124 
A\r,  Shire  of  122,127 

124 
103 
265 
64 
123 
205 
186 
187 
194 
61 
252 
296 
y/^/^  Ruffian 

JfripwreclCd  2 1  7 

Amber,  #»  huge  Piece      z  1 3 

St.  Andrews  I  74.     Its  Cba- 

ratter  by  Cardan          175 

St.  Andrew,  Tutelar  Stint  cf 

S    '  Scotland 


Alatum  Caftrum 
Albania 

Albany,  Duke  of 
Alexander  III. 
Alexander  VI.  Pope 
Allan,  River 
Alloway          I37>1 
A  Ira  and,  River 
Alnwick 
Alferig 
Alfvig  IJle 


INDEX. 


Scotland  41.     His  Relics 
176.     The  Order  of  106, 

'5< 

Angus,  Ear!  of         72,  159 

Annan,  River  14,  114 

Annan  Town  114 

Annandale  114,  155 

Annandale,  Marquis  of,  bis 

Seat  1 1 1 

Antonnius  Pius  142 

Aqua  Vitse  and  Cheefe,   a 

Murray  Man's  left  Provi- 

fan  2 1 9 

Aquinas,  Thomas  63 

Ardintrave  6 

Ardmeanach  261 

Ardock  185,  269 

Afgyle,  Duke  of,  bis  Low- 

land  Houfe  149.     Defeats 

the  Earl  of  'Mar  186.  Ano' 

tber  Seat  of  bis  21 1 

Armfdale  River  13 

Arnold  Bijbop  177 

Arran,  IJle  of  284 

Arrick-ftone  7 

Arthur'/  Oven  152 

Arthur'.*  $£#/  106,  149 

Aihol,    Duke  of,  bis  Seats, 

192, 264,  265,  266.     An 

Oppofer  of  the  Union  264. 

His  Superiorities  266 

Avon,  River  140 

Avona  IJle  288 

Aymouth  61 

B, 

Badenoch  224,  264 

Balcanqual,  Rev.  Doftor  95 
Balfour,  Sir  Andrew  94 
B-algony  165,182 


Balmerinoch  Monafery  183 

Balvaird  in  Fife,  the  Curiofi- 

ty  there  1 64 

Bam  ft',  T'&ww  and  Sbire  of 

213,215 

Banco  murdered  263 

Bannockburn  144,1^6 
Barclay,  Dr.  William  206 
Barnacles  320 

Baron,  a  Fijbmonger  240 
Baroncleuch  140 

Barra,  IJland  297 

Barrennefs  in  Women,a  Cure 
for  329 

Bafs,  afeep  Rock  73 

IJland         4,1 74,330 

Baubee,  ^  Coin  242 

Beaulieu,  River  and  Loch  11 
Battle,  afurprijing  68.  M-ar 
Prefton-Pans77.Q/TVIuf- 
felburgh  80.  O/Pinkey 
/^/V.  ^/  Largis  123.  ^/ 
Falkiik,  Between  Edward 
I.  andtbe  Scots  141.  At 
the  fame  Place,  in  1745. 
ib.  At  Bannockburn  1 44, 
iff  196.  Of  the  Harlow 

2I3 

Beaulieu,  an  Alley  11,262 
Beil haven,  Lordtbis  Seat  75 
Bells  //a>W  by  the  Hand  87 
Belvenie  215 

Benbecula  298 

Benedict  XIII.  grants  ample 
Privileges  to  the  Uni<ver- 
Jityof  St.  Andrews      178 
Benevis  Mountain  238 

Bernera,  I/lands  289,   302, 

305 
Berwick,  no  Part  of  England 

58,63 

Berwick, 


INDEX. 


Berwick,  Shire  of  58 

Bethune,  Cardinal  177 

•  drcbbijbop          179 

Bible  in  the  Erfe  Language 
261 

Biflet,  £ov/John  1 1 

Black  Book  o/Paifley       128 
Blacknefs  Caflle  112 

Blainoch  River  1 4 

Blair  Cajlle>  Scat  of  the  Duke 
o/Athol  265 

Blair,  Drummond,  a  great 
Cat ar aft  near  it  268 

Blakeney,  General  146 

Boetius,  Heftor,  his  Birth- 
place 199 
Boge/Gicht                  214 
Bogie,  River                     2 1  o 
Bohemian  Proteft  again/}  the 
Council  of  Conilance      9 3 
Bon  accord,  or  New  Aber- 
deen                           204 
Borera                    299»3°7 
Bcrve,  medicinal  Spring  304 
Borvve                             251 
Bothwell,  ^    Mary'/    /rf- 
vourite  1-67 
Boxes,  /?r  Clofe-jlools  84 
B oy d  Family,  their  Seat    1 2  5 
Boyne,  County                 2 1 5 
Braco,  Lairdy  his  Seats  210, 
215 

Brae  of  Murray  223 

Braidalbin,  county  of   265, 

268 

Braidalbin,  Earl  of         274 
Brafa  327 

Brechin,   m  moral le  for    a 
great  Vittory  20  2 

Brechin  in  Angus  268 

Brett,  Captain  335 


Bridge,  a  natural  one  194 
Brochty-craig  199 

Brodich  £?/?/*  285 

Brora,  I/I e  of  250 

Broxmouth  67 

Bruce,  Robert,  K'ng  2 1 3 
Bruce,  Sir  John  Hope,  his 

Seat  1 68 

Bruce,  Sir  William,  drthi- 

tcft  105,  1 68 

Braces,  Earls  of  Kincardin, 

their  Seat  I    8 

Bruntifland  170 

Bucclcugh,  Duke    of  160, 

161 

B  uchan  Town  216.     County 

21? 

Buchanan,    the    Hijlorians 

Skull q$.   His  Malice  106. 

Where  educated  133.     His 

Char  after  272 

Buchanneis  2 1 2,  2 1 6,  2 1 7 
Buckhaven  173 

Burleigh,  the  Mafler  of,  his 

defperute  Amour  162 

Burra  316 

Burray  327 

Burrowftounnefs  1 1  z 

Bute,  Earl  of  284 

Bute,  I/land  ibid. 

Byng>  Sir  George  200, 
212 

C. 

CaddelC*//*  220 

Caithnefs  250,252 

Caithnefs,  Ear!  of  109 

Caledonia, /or/wr/y  a  famous 
Foreftzj.     The  real    162 


S    2 


192 

Calendar- 


INDEX. 


Calendar-houfe,  140 

Cambufkenneth  Abbey  1 50 
Cameron,  where  educated 

'33 

Cameronians  73, 238 

Campbell  Family  made  Earls 

273,274.  Their  Surname, 

win  nee  derived  274 

Campbell,  Daniel,  Efq-,  1 37 
Campbell-town  273 

Campbell<7/Caldar  290 
Camus's  Crcfs  2O2 

Candida  Cafa  121 

Canney  IJland  293 

Caprington,  Laird  of,  his 

Trumpet  123 

Cardan,  his  Character  of  the 

Town  of  St.  Andrews  1 75 
Carlifle,  t  alien  from  the  Rebels 

'354 

Carlavrock  Caflle  115 

Carminy,  John,  Governor  of 
Scotland,  gains  three  Vic- 
tories in  one  Day  \  09 
Carrick                   119,  122 
Carron,  River    144,    150, 

252 

Carfe  197 

Cart,  Rivers  8,  i  28 

Cary  I  Hand  288 

Cafcade,    a  mvft  wonderful 

194 

Cafiils,  EarlofijC),  270,287 
Callle- William  '  263 

Cattle  in  Scotland  21,22 
Cava  317 

Chain,  Name  of  tie   great 
Road  336 

Chandos,    James,  Duke   of 

1 80 
Change-houfes  204 


Chanonry 

Charles  I. perfuades  Scotland 
to  O  bedience  6  3 .  Ereffs  a. 
ne<w  Bifioprick  at  Edin- 
burgh 87.  Where  horn, 
163.  Holds  a  Parliament 
at  St.  Andrews  1 79.  His 
Brafs  Statue  I  86,  267 

Charles  II.  58.  Pur  chafes 
a  Rock  73,  His  Jin e  Statue 
88,186.  Takes  a  Difguft 
at  Dumfermline  164.  At* 
tempts  the  Britifh  Fijhery 

332 

Cheny,  Lady,    her   Heroifm 

76 

Cholmondeley,      Brigadier 

343»  344 

Choppin,  a  Meafure  78 
Civil  Government  ^Scotland 

42>  45 

Clackmananftiire  185,  188 
Claik  Geefe  3  20 

Clan  Chattan  Tribe  223 
Clan  Macduff's  Crofs  167 
Clz&iLordJuJtice,  his  Seat 

Clerkington  7^ 

Clifton,  a  Village  352 

Clyde,  River  7,   129,   131, 

140,    148,      Firth    119, 

122,  127,  141 

Clydfdale,  Shire  of          153 
Co  al ,  the  heft,  where        1 8  8 
Coal  Mines,  the  People  work- 
ing in  them,  make  a  fright- 
ful Appearance  1 7  3 
Cobberipath  64 
Cobles,  or  open  Boats         77 
Cockburn  Family  75 
Cockburnfpath                64 
Cock. 


INDEX. 


Cockenny  76 

Coil  field,  and  Battle  there, 

123 

Coldingham         61,62,64 
Coldftream  63 

Colk,  a  Sea  Fowl  304 

St.  Coll,  #W  292 

College  c/Buckhaven,/»-tf- 


*verbialiyfo  called 


'73 


C'olli flown,  a  Dropping  Cave 

there 

St.  CoJm's/«r£ 
Colon  fa  I/land 
St.  Columbus'/ 

Lake 

Concha  Anatifera 
Convention  of  Burghs 
Conn  ell,  River 
Cookery,  very  nafty 
Cope,  Sir  John         77, 
Coppinflia 
Coronation  Chair,  and  Con- 

trocvcrfies  about  its  Origin 
189,  190 

Coulterneb,  a  Sea  Fowl  296 
Coweri,  Mr.  146 

Cowpar  165,  183 


212 

331 
290 
29I. 
294 
32I 

65 
12 
6l 

337 
319 


294 
1 10 
claims 
140 
140 


Cows,  how  ferried 
Cramond 
Craufurd,    Earl  < 

Precedency 
Craufurd  Moor 
Cromertie  Firth,  or  Bay  12, 
216,  252 

Cromertie-fhire      252,  261 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  68,  110, 

125,  126,  164,  166, 196, 
224,225,237 

Culdees,  or  Black  Monks  192 
Cullen  215 

Culloden  M00r  220 

>  Houfe  237 


Cumberland,  Duke    of,  fas 

Difpofitionsforpurfuing  the 

Rt  bels  351,  352.  .    Wbcm 

he  totally  defeats  370.  And 

has  an  additional  Revenue 

ft.  ttled  upon  him  •  372 

Culrofs    '  1  88,  189 

C  umbra  I/lands  .  287 

Cumin,  William,   Earl  of 

Buchan  215 

Cunningham  122,  124,  126 

Cunningham  Family        \  2  7 

Cuiloms,   C5>.  of  the  Scat-i 

32,  es?/^.  230,  e 


D. 

Dalkeith,  an  J  Duke  of  Biic- 

cleugh1^  Houfe  there    1  60 

Dairy  mp!e  Family,  their  Seat 

Damfey  3  1  9 

Darnley,    Lord,     his     Body 

found  i  o  6  .    Murdered  1  6  :> 

David  I.  King,  founds  Holy- 

rcod  houfe     104.       And 

three  Bificpricks  186,  19?, 

202 

Deanburn  £?-///£(?  63 

Debatable  Land  60 

Dee,  River  9,  1  19 

Deveron,   River     10,  210, 
214,215 

Ding-down-Tantallon     73 
Dingwall  12 

Dirleton-houfe  7^ 

Diving  for  Ships,  dcfcribed 
285 

Dodlor  Subtilis  63 

Dogs  majfacred  IO§ 

Domitian  in,  105 

Don,  Tfriw  9,  204 

Dornoch  Tow»        12,  250 
S  i  Dover, 


INDEX. 


Dover,  Duke  of  1 1 8 

Doverne,  River  10,  215 
Douglas,  William  64 

Douglas  Family    60,    154* 

!57 

Douglas,  James,  Earl of  I 1 8 
Douglas  Caftle,  its  Antiquity 
154.  Burnt  ibid. 

Douglafdale  154 

Douglas,  Town  and  Cajlle 

140 

Douglas,  River  7,  154 
Dowhirty  290 

Downs,  Lord  331 

Druids,  or  Celts,  a  Temple 
of  theirs  152.  Their  Houfes 

295 
Druidefs,  the  Houfe  of  one 

3°7 

Drumlanrig  Gardens       i  40 

jUrumlanrig,  theDukecf  116. 

Queenfberry V  Palace  1 1 7 

Drummor.d,  Lord  John  200, 

34-9 

Drurkennefs,  £0iv  /<?  /»v- 

<z;>v//  290 

Duff,  Kingt   his  Body  found 

213 
Dulfe,  a  Sea  treed  209,  216, 

299 

Dnmblain  1 86 

Dumbuck  131 

Dumfries'  114,  &  Jeq. 

Dumfriesfhire  114 

Dun,  River  122 

Dunbar,  a  Royal  Burgh  65 
Dun  bar  Family  63 

Dunbar,  George,  de  64 
Dunbar,  Gawm,  Bijhop  204 
Dunbarton  272.  Its  (iron? 


Dpnbriton  Firth  141 

Dundonald,  Earl  of ^133, 270 

Dwndee  197,  &  feq. 

Dune,  Diftor  206 

Dunfermline,    Earl  of,    his 

Seat  78 

Dunfermline,  Town       163 

Dunglas  Houfe,   Seat  of  Sir 

James  Hall  6; 

Dungfby  Head        254,258 

Dunhil  Battle  63 

D  u  ni  pace,  two  Hills       150 

Dunkeld  191,  192 

Dunnoter  Caftle     202,  203 

Dunrobin  Caftle  251 

Dupplin  Caftle t  Seat  of  the 

Ear/ofKinnou\  266.  The 

great  eft  Defeat  of  the  Scots 

from  the    Englilh,    there 

267 

Duns,  Town  and  Caftle      6  2 
Duns    Scotus,     John,    his 
Birth  place  62 

Dunftafnage  273 

Durand,  Colonel  342 

Dy  fert ,  a  Royal  Burgh     1 7  2 
Dyfert,  Z,0>\V  ?^/V. 

E. 

Eagles,   a/ume   a    kind    of 
Sovereignty  302 

Eaft  JE?»thian-fhire  64 

Ebba,  Abbefs,  and  her  Nuns, 
maim  th:mfelves  62 

St.  Ebbe's  Head  62 

Eccles  63 

Ecclefiaftical  Government  of 
Scotland  37 — 41 

Edelfred,  King  (^Northum- 
berland 62 
Eden, 


INDEX. 


Eden,  River  183 

Edinburgh,  ///  View  81. 
Gates  9 1 .  Markets  ibid. 
Churches  }O2.  The  Caftle 
not  impregnable ',  103.  Col- 
lege,  or  Univerjtty  92.  Is 
entered  by  the  Rebels  337 
Edward  I.  one  of  tt^  Englifh 
Csefars  196 

Edward  1 1.  murdered  Sir  Al. 
Seton'.f  /<u.-0  Svns  76 

Edward  VI..  King  of  Eng- 
land 80 
Egg,  I/land                       293 
Eglington  G*/?/*              1 26 
Eglifba                           319 
E igin,  Shire  0/219.     70tv» 
221, 222 

Elizabeth,    Princefs,    vcbcre 

burn  1 6  3 

Elizabeth,  ^<f^;r  1 10 

Elphinfton,  Bijkop          205 

Ely,  a  little  Town  1 7  3 

Englifti  Language,    why   it 

prevails  in  the  Lowlands 

37 
Englifh  underfill  the  Scots 

72 

Eoufmil  299 

Erigena  124 

Ermengred,  S>ucen          183 
Ern,  River  266,  2  58 

Errick-ftone  153 

Errol,  Earl  of  \  his  Seat  195 
Erfe,  or  ant  tent  Scots  Lan- 
guage 37, 226 
Erfilton  63 
Erskine  Family  1 47,  213 
Efcurialj?/  Scotland  104 
Esk-dale  114 
77>!|4 


F. 

Fair-ifle  255,  32^ 

Fairland -point  j  ;.•:•> 

Falkirk  141 

Falkland  165,  189 

Families,  the  (kief  in  Orkney 

W  Shetland  329 

Fara  317 

Faro  head  255,  258 

Farrar,  River-  262. 

Faft  Ctf/7/f,  6>«/  c/*  //^  Earl 

,3^  Hume  62 

Fergus  I.  123 

Fife,  near  Aberdour  69 

Fifenefs  174,  217 

Fifcftjire  ur,  162.  Abounds 

with  Towns  166.    Whence 

it  take  its  Name  167 

Findorn,  River,  and  Har~ 

hour  10,  220 

Finlater,  Earl  of,  his  Seat 

2I> 

Firr-trees,  6000  Acres  plant- 

ed  with  them  68 

Fifher-raw  77 

Fifheries/0  Scotland  15,  21 
Fifhery,     ^//5^    fy     King 
Charles  II.  332.   The  free 
Eritilh  revived  ibid. 

Flada,  a  J "mall  IJland       285 
Fiadda  296 

Fleurs,  or  the  Duke  of  Rox- 
burgh V  Houfe  158 
Floating  I/lands               271 
Flotta                             317 
Florida,  a  Spanifh  Ship  loft 
291 
Forbes,  late  Lord  Prejident 

220 

S  4  Forbes.-, 


INDEX. 


Forbes,  Lord  Forbes  213 
Forbes,  Z,0r^Pitfligo  ibid. 
Forbes,  Duncan,  E/q-,  89, 

339 

Forcabus  215 

Fordun  203 

Forfar  202 

Forfkhen  152 

Forrefs,  Burgh  of  220 

Fors.  River  13,  254 

Fort-Auguftus    242,     243, 
245,  2'H 

Fort-Qeorge          226,239 

Fort-William          238,243 

Forth,  Firth  o/*4,  162,  171, 

187,217 

Forth,  River  7,   no,   112, 
129,141,  147,  165,  170, 

*74»329 

Foul  a  327 

Fowke,  Brigadier  337 

Francis  II.   King  of  France 

80 

Frafer,  Doftor  205 

F  r afe r\r  Family  I  $  5 ,  213 
Frafeifburgh  213,216 

Fullerton  Clan  285 

Fiil.riw,    a  medicinal  Bird 
308 

G. 

Galloway  118,  119 

Galloway  Horfes  121.  Bridge 

144 
Garicch  in  Aberdeen fhire 

213 

Garmach,  or  Garmouth  10 
Gates  o  Edinburgh  91 
Genen-hill  155 


George  II    his  Gift  to  the 

Jlfffmbly  of  Scotland    261 

G e r m ach ,  a  Village         222 

GigaiaT/7*  288 

Gilhcranky  194 

Girdles,  or  Plates  Jar  baking 

189,  195, 

Glacialis  lerne  268 

Glafgovv,  the  Emporium  of 
Weft  of  Scotland  130.  Its 
Situation,  ibid.  Its  Uni- 
fverjity  132.  Trade  and 
Manufactures  133,  & feq. 
A  Marine  Society  there 

»39 
Glencanich  5 

Glenco,  inhuman  Majfacre 
there  263 

Glenelg  261 

Glengary  254, 262 

Glengyl  266 

Glenluce  Bay  \  20 

Glenlion  269 

God-fpeed-all,«  Village  77 
G  old  found  in  Brooks  I  40 
Goodtrees  82 

Gorbells  Village  131,138 
Gordon  Caflls  £14 

Gordon  Family       209,  2 1  3 
Gofpatrick,  Earl  0/Ntfrth- 
omberland  64 

Government,  the  Ecclejiafti- 
cal  </ Scotland  37.  The 
Civil  42 

Gowrock  128 

Graham's  Dike  141,142 
Graham  Family  1 99,  200 
Grain  find  Pulfe  ^Scotland 

2S 

Grampian 


INDEX. 


Grampion  Hills  192,  265, 
271 

Granfey  3 1 7 

Grave,  I/land  302 

Great  Britain,  Its  Extent  256 
Great  Rule  IJle  327 

Greenlow      .  63 

Greenoch  128,  131 

Gregory,  Mr.  James  180 
Graliins  de  Mer  334. 

Gueft,  General  337 

Guftavus  Adolphus        182 

H. 

Haddington,  71 

Haddington,  Earl  of,  his 

Seat  68 

HaddoV  Hole  87 

Hamilton,!)^  0/1 04, 105. 

Premier  Peer  o/Scotland, 

his  Seat  I  39 

Hamilton  Family  r  3  2.  Re- 

fidence  285 

Hamilton  7"«ou«  1 39 

Hamilton,  Archlijhop    175, 

177 

Hamilton,  Rebel  Governor  of 

Cariifie  210 

Hans  Towns  65 

Harbour  o/  Safety.  252 

Hare,  Mrj..  /^^r  Benefaftion 

95 

Harlow  Battle  2 1 3 

Harries  300, 304 

Hawthornden  108 

Hay,  Family  of  195*213 
Hebrides,  I/lands  282,310 
Helmfdale  River  1 2 

Hepburn,  Bijkop  106, 179 
Heriot's  Hofpitalt  the  moft 
magmfcenf  in  the  World 

95 


Hermatra  IJle  305 

Herring,  Dr.  Thomas     339 

Highland  Houfes     193,  194 

Highlanders,  their  Cujloms^ 

33>  34'  »94»     dre  obliged 

to  alter  their    Drefs    34* 

Their  Character  35.     Z>^- 

frauded   of  their  Honour 

269 

Highlands  divided  into  fivo 

Parts  268 

Hirta,  $fc  305 

Hoad  yare  Hoand,  w/W  84 

Holy  rood- houfe    81,    104, 

1 68 

Holy- wood  n6 

Hopton,  Earl  of  154 

Hopton-houfe  1 1 1 

Horn,  £#/  out  of  an  Head  94 

Horfefhoe  Haven  6 

Hounam  157 

Houies,  the  mofl  magnificent 

86.     Four  tan  Stories  high 

88 

Howard,  Major-general  343 
H  umber,  .R/ow  62 

HumetRe/tJenet  of  the  Earls 
of  that  Name  63 

Hume,  «  Barony  65 

Huntley  C^/?/^  210 

Hufke,  Major-general     343 
Hufs,  John  93 

I. 

James  II.  founds  the  Univer^ 
/(yo/Glafgow  132.  Kill- 
ed 157 

James  III.  murdered  145. 
///j  Minions  hanged  1 5  9. 

James  IV.  'The  Royal  Palaces 
in  his  Time  166.  Vifit* 
St.  AdrianV  Shrine  329* 


INDEX. 


James  V.  bis  CharaRtr  41. 
His  Body  found  1 06 .  Re- 
ftores  the  Order  of  St. 
Andrew  151 

James  VI.  bargains  for  the 
Rock  Bafs  74.  Founds  the 
public  Schools  at  Edin- 
burgh 92.  Improves  Glaf- 
gow  Univerfity  \  3  z 

James  VII.     regulates    the 
Order  of  St.  Andrew  106, 
178 
158 

Jedburgh  ibid. 

lern,  River  4 

Jerom  cf  'Prague  93 

Ignorance  impofed  upon  306 
Ila,  I/land  289 

Incharvy  331 

Inchdavanari  270 

Jnchkeith  330 

Jnchmurin  270 

Jnchnolaig  270 

Jnchennaugan  270 

Ingleftown  in 

Innerbervy  203 

Jnnerkeithin  162 

Innerury  213 

Infcription  upon  tbeParlia- 
tnent-boufe  88.  On  the 
Statue  of  Duncan  Forbes 

Inverary  211 

Inveraryihire,  and  what  it 

comprehends  273 

Inverefk  78 

Jnverlochy  263 

Invernefs  2^$,&  feq.  239, 

te'ftq.  263 

Johannes  de  Sacro  Bofco  1 1 6 
John  a  GrotV  Houfe       256 


Johniton,  or  St.  JohnVTVw* 
184 

Trwin,  River  14,  124 

Irwin,Toov»  14,  125 

Iflarid  o/Pygmies  303 

Iflands  in  Scotland,  their 

Number  3 

Jura  Ifland,  and  a  remarkable 

Inhabitant  there       -    288 

K. 

Kairn,  River  14 

Kebercurnig  152 

Keith  Bridge,  exceeding  bigb 

andfteep  2 1 4 

Keith,  Earl  Marfhal  202 
Ke;th  Family  330 

Kelly,  Mr.  341 

Kelfo  158 

Ken,  River  9 

Ker,  Mark,  Abbot*  turns 

Prote/ant  160 

Kennedy  Family,  Earls  of 

Cafiils,  their  Seat  122 
Kennedy,  Bijlop  178 

Kerniberg,  If  and  292 

Kerrera  5 

St.  Kilda,  I/land  305.  An. 

Houfe  of  a  Druidefi  tbere 
307 

Kildrumny  213 

Kiliwhimen  243 

Kiimaers,  Seat  of  the  Earls 

0/Glencairn  127 

Kilmarnock  Caftie  126 

Kilmamock,  the  Rebel  Earrs 

Seat  1 40 

Kilmaronoch,  Seat  of  the 

Earl  o/*Dondonald     270 

Kill  ri-moat  177 

Kiliyth 


INDEX. 


Kilfy  th  1 40 

Kincardin,  Shire  of,  Its  great 

Number  of  Fir  Trees  203, 

223 

Kincardin,  Earl  of  188 
Kin  cafe  i  25 

Kinghorn  1 7 1 

KingV  College  203* 

Kinlofs,  noble  Abbey, 2\  3,220 
Kinnoul,  Earl  of,  266,267 
Kinrofs  165,167 

Kinrofs  Houfe  168 

Kintail  123,  261 

Kintore  2 1 1 

Kintyre  273 

Kips,   ArthurV  Oven  there 
152 

Kirkaldy  171,188 

Kirkcudbright  1 1 8, 1 19 
Kirkintilloch  133 

Kirkwall,  the  only  Town  in 
Orkney  317 

Kifmul,^  297 

Knapdale  273 

Knockfin  252 

Knox,  John  1 06 

Knug,  a  Bird  250 

Kyle  123 

Kylus,  a  Britifli  King,  killed 
123 

L. 

Lady,  IJle  127 

Lakes,  the  tnoft  remarkable 
in  Scotland  4.  One  vchiih 
newer  freezes  5.  One 
<v;hofe  Middle  is  always 
frozen  ibid.  Afathomlefs 
one  on  the  Top  of  a??  high 
Mountain  242 


>77 

285 

269 
155 


Lambertoun,  "Bljhop 

Lamlafh  Harbour 

Lanerk 

Lapis  Calaminaris 

Lapis  Lazuli  140, 

Largis  in  the  Bay  of  Clyde 
and  Vattle  there   123,  I  26 

Lauder  Family,  their  Seat  74 

Lauder,  River  and  Dale  \  59 

Lauderdale,  Dukes  of,  fame 
Monuments  of  theirs      '  7  2 

Lauderdale,  Ear/ of,  his  Seat 
70 

Lauderfort,  Seat  of  the  Fa- 
mily of  Maitland          159 

Leith  75,  81,  82,86, 109, 
171 

Leith  Road 

Lemon  Hills 

Lenoxfhire 

Lermouth,    the 
Birth -plact 

Lervvick 

Lethington 

Lefly,  General 

Lefly,7tfw»   165 

Lefly  Family 

Leven,  River  8,  168,  173, 
183,271 

Leven,   Earl  of, 


104 

7 

184,  271 

Poet,     his 

t>3 

327 

70 

63,68 

169,  170 

182 


bis 


Lewes,  I/land 
Liberality,  an  Injlance  oj 

Libertoun 

Lingay 

Links,  or  Downs 

Linlithgow 

Lifmore,  I/land 


Seatt 
182 
300 


96 

82 
299 

'75 
150 

28,9 


Little,  Clement,  Founder-  of 
a  <very  good  Library        9  3 
Lochaber 


INDEX. 


Lochaber    224,  238,  258, 
262, 263,  272 
Lochbrim  261 

Lochbruifl  289 

Loch  Dee  9 

Loch  Eribol  6 

Lochern  266 

Lochew  261, 274 

Lochfinlagan  .  289 

Lochfyn  274 

Lochgenen,  Lake  155 

Lochiern  4 

Lochlevin  4, 167 

Lochlochy  Lough  262 

Lochloing  272 

Lochlomond  4,  270 

Lochmaben  1 1 4 

Lochmonar  5 

Lochmoy  11,223 

Lochmyrton  5 

Lochnavern,  Lake  251 

Lochnefs  4,  241,  262 

Lochoat  Lough  6 

Loch-rian 
Lochfhin 

Lochfpey  , 

Lochftin,  Lafo  250 

Loch  Sunart  f 

Lochtay  4,  183 

Lochyol,  Lake        25  i ,  262 
Lomonds,    /aw   remarkable 

Mountains  1 89 

Lorn  273 

Loffie,  River  10,  221.     Fa* 

mous  for  Salmon  222 

Lothian  80 

Lothian,  Marquis  of,  his  Seat 

1 60 

Lovat,ZW  262 

Loudon  Co/Me  126 

Lowlands  143 


120 
12 

10 


Low  landers,     refemlh    i&e  \ 

French  35 

Lyer,  a  Fowl  31"  1 

Lymphoy,  Copper  Mine  113  | 
Lyon,  Earls  c/'Strathmore, 
their  Seat  1  86 

Lyne  156  | 

M. 

Macbeth,  a  Tyrant  167,  263 

Macdonald,  King  of  the  JJles 

289. 

Macdonald,  General  341 
Macdonald,  Mifs,  affifts  the- 

Pretender  in  his  Efcape  376 
MacdufF  167 

Macfarlan,  Laird  of,  his  Seat 

at  Rouglalh  270 

Mackenzie,  a  brave  Iriih- 

man  123 

Mackintofh,Z«;W(?/"  223 
Maclean  Family  291,292. 
Magdalen  <?/"Valois,  Queen, 

her  Body  found  106 

Magdalen,      Daughter      of 

Francis  King  of  France- 

'7jt 
Maiden  Caftle,  whence  fo 

called  103 

Mainland,  I/land  325 

Maitland  Family  70,159 
Malcolm  Canmore  64,  1 10 
Malcolm  III.  163 

Man,  IJle  of  282 

Manchefter  Regiment  353 
Manufactures  in  Scotland 
23—25 
Mar,  Earl  of,  his  Seat  147. 

Defeated  1 86 

March,  Earls  of  64..  Their 

Seat  66 

March- 


INDEX. 


Marchmont  63 

St.  Margaret,  Queen  1 1  o 
St.  MargaretV  Bay  1 65 
Marlborough,  Duke  of  6 1 
Marvag,  medicinc.1  Spring 

Mary,  Queen,  courted  after  a 
martial  Manner  80 

Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  where 
defeated    129.        Confined 
167 

Mary  burgh  238 

Maflacre  of  Dogs  108 

Mauls  Mitre  153 

Maulfburgh,  whence  fo  called 
199 

Maxwell'.,  Family,  Earls  of 
Nithfdale  115,  118 

May-hole  122 

W&y.IJland  174,217,329 
Medicinal  Waters, Fountains, 
Sec.  27 

Meeting-houfes  (E^if copal) 
in  Edinburgh  IP3 

Vlelrofs  Abbey  157 

VIelvil  165,166,182 

VTenteith  197 

Mercians,  the  Pagan  62 
Vlerlin,  where  buried',  and 
Prophecy  156 

Mernoch,  I/land  285 

:rfe  County  58,64 

Method  of  riding  Poft  1 72 
Mletricks,  a  quadruped  Crea- 
ture 305 
St.  Michael'j  Church  1 50 
Vlid-Lothian  159 
Mmt-houfe  94 
Moaning  of  a  Whale  1 1 1 
Vioffat  27,  114 
Monchrolky  Kills  10 


Monteith 


272 


Montgomery  of   Skelmery 

288 

Montgomeries  Family,  their 

Seat  126 

Montpelier  ^/"Scotland  78 
Montrofe  Family  269 

Montrofe,  Duke  of  133 
Montrofe  IQ^ 

M o  n  t ro fe ,  Marquis  of  1 40 
Mordaunt,  Brigadier  343 
Mordington  60 

Morton,  Earl  of  156.  160 
Mountains,  the  mofi  remark- 

able  in  Scotland  26 

Muck,  I/land  293 

M^\\,  I/land  290 

Mull  <?/Galloway  1 20 
Mull  o/'Kintyre  1 1 9,  274 
St.  Mungo  Church  133 

Murder  ^Thomas  a  BeckeC 
127 
Murray,  Baflard^  Earl  of 

129.  Where  murde red  I  5 1 

Murray  Firth  218,  225,241, 

263 

Murray  County  2 1 S 

Murray,  Earh  of,  their  Seat 

220 

Murray,  Mr.  341 

Muffelburgh  77 

Mutchkin,    a  Meafure  78, 

242 

N. 

Nachaftel  270 

Nairn,  River  1 1 

Nairn ,  Shire  and  Tonvn     2 1 9 
Naltinefs  delighted  in          78 
Naftinefs 


INDEX. 


Naftinefs  of  Edinburgh  ac- 
counted for  8  3 
Navern,  fei>*r         13*250 
Nefs,  River  225,  237,  241, 
243,  250,  254.     Ntvtr 
freezes                          2c8 
Nefs,  the  federal  Counties  be- 
yond it                         250 
Nether-bow  Port  at  Edin- 
burgh 86 
New-bigging  77 
Newyards,  Lands  of       1 29 
Nid,  or  Nith,  River  1 4, 1 1 4, 
115, 116, 117 

St.  Ninian,  Founder  of  a  Bi* 
Jhoprick  121 

Nifbet  Family,  their  Seat  75 
Nithfdale  114 

North  of  Scotland,  defcribed 

249 

Northern  JJles    3 1 3,  ^./fy. 
North-Berwick  77 

North-Efk,  River          160 
North  Fara  315 

North- Hope  315 

North-Loch  107 

North-Uift  298 

Northumberland  60 

O. 

Oban ,  Bay  and  Town      5 , 6 
Ochil-hills  269 

Oglethorpe,  Major-General 

339>  343 

Old  Barracks  243 

O  ran  fa,  Ijle  290 

Orcades        313,  320 — 525 
Orcades,  afummary  Account 
of  them  1 20,  &c. 

Orchil- hills  188 


Ord,  a  Mountain  25;  z 

Order  of  the  Thiftle,  or  St. 
Andrew          41,  42,  106 
Orkney,  Princeof  3  22 

Orkney,  Ijlcs,   or   Orcades 


Ormiftoun 


75 


P. 


305 
128 


Pabbay 

Paifley 

Paldykirk  203 

Paladius,  firft  Bijbop  of  the 

Scots  203 

Panmure,  Earl  of  199 

Panmure  Family  268 

Papa-Stronfa  319 

Papa-Weftra  320 

Paps  o/'Jura  288 

Pavement  of  Stones,  vanoujly 

figured  331 

Pearl  Fijhery  20 

Pearls  of  great  Value  ,  where 

found  250,252 

Peafant,  and  his  Son,  gain  a 

Viftory  195 

Peebles,  Shire  and  Town  1  5  5 
Peerage  ^/"Scotland  379 
Pentland  -Firth  155,  259, 

3X4 

Pentland  Skerries  3  1  5 

Perth,  Earl  of  105 

Perth   1  84.      Seized  by  the 

Rebels  336 

Perthfhire  269,  272 

Peterhead   207,  211,  212, 

216,218 

Petty  -  port  Cujloms  \  07 

Phyficianso/  Scotland,  tbt.tr 

Lharafter  96 

Pitts, 


INDEX. 


Pifts,  are  cut  offbj  the  Eng- 

lifh  36 

Pitts  Houfes  327 

Pillar  of  Stone  220 

Pinkey  68,  78,  80.      £«///<? 

near  it  [80 

Pitcairn,  Dr.  78 

Pitfligo  217 

Pittenweem  174 

Poans,  a  Sort  ofFiJh        27  1 

Pollacks,  a  Sort  ofEiJh  271 

Pomona,  .//ft?  317 

Port  Glafgow  138 

Port-Patrick  119 

Porteous,   Captain,  the    no- 

torious Riot  committed  in 

relation  to  him     98  —  I  O  2 

Port-Seton  77 

Port-  Soy  a  216 

Portus  Salutis  12,25^2 

Powder  Magazine,  blown  up 

by  the  Rebels  1  46 

Praetorium,  the  Remains  of 

one  129 

Precious  Stones,  &c.    31,32 

Prefton  76,  77 

Preflon  Pans  7  6,  77 

Pretender,  the  young,    em- 

barks for  Scotland    334. 

Lands   335.      His  Motto 

ibid.     Is  totally    defeated 

370.     Efcapes  under  great 

Difficulties     373  —  376. 

Embarks  for  France  377 

Public-houfes  have  all  the 

fame  Sign  204 


Queenfberry,  Duke   of,  his 
Palace  1  1  6,  U  7 


Queen's-  ferry        110,162 

R. 

Raarfay,  IJle  29? 

Ranalfha,  7/7<?  256 

Randal's  Trench  156 

Rarities  in  Edinburgh  not  to 

be  met  with  either  in  Lon- 

don or  Oxford  94 

Ravenlheugh  253 

Rea,    Lord,    Chief   of  the 

Mackeys  251 

Rebels  enter  Edinburgh  337. 

Pajs  the  Tweed  341.  Take 

Carlifle  342.  Enter  Man- 

chert  er  344.  Macclesfield 

346.  Congleton/'^/V.  Der- 

by  347.       Endeavour    to 

retire  into  Scotland  349. 

Have  an  Advantage  over 

the  Engliih  Troops  at  Fal- 

kirk  357.       Blow   their 

Magazine  of  Powder  up 

361.     Take  Fort-George 

365.     Reduce    Fort  Au- 

guitus  ibid.     Surprize  the 

Earl  o/Xoudon  ibid.  Raife 

the  Siege  before  Fort-  Wil- 

liam   367.       Are    totally 

defeated  370 

Receipt,  to  prevent  Drunken- 

nefe  290 

Regent  of  Humanity          93 

Religion,    where  but  little 

known  261 

Renfrew,  Barony  of         i  27 

Renfrew,  a  Burgh  138 

Renfrew,  Shire  of  153 

Rivel  114 

Rivers,  the  principal  in  Scot- 

land 


Rocking 


INDEX, 


Rocking  Stone  1 64 

Roger,  Btflop  of  St.  An- 
drews  '77 

Roman  Wall,  where  it  be- 
gins, and  ends  273 
Rona,  IJle               296,  303 
Rofbin,  three  Victories  there 
in  one  Day            155,  156 
Rofes,  Town  of               199 
Roflin,  Chapel  1081,      Three 
Victories  gained  in  one  Day 
near  it  109 
Roflin,  Barons  of             1 09 
Rothes,  Earl  of  1 67.     His 
Palace                           1 69 
Rothfay  Burgh                284 
Rothy  Mays,   Seat   of  the 
Laird  <?/Braco            210 
Rouglafh,  Sra/  c/*  /^  Laird 
Macfarlan                  270 
Round  Table,  a  Rock       296 
Roufa,  IJle                        319 
Roxburgh,  Duke  of,  his  Seats 

67,158 

Roxburgh  Town  and  Cajile 
157 

Royal  Houfes  in  Scotland  in 
Decay  147 

R  oy  al  Infirmary  9  5 

Ruglen,  a  Burgh     138,140 
St.  Rule,  an  antient  Chapel 


, 


Rum,  IJland  293 

Rumbling    Br/gg,    a  moft 

wonderful  Cajcade  194 

s. 

Salmon,  'the  Hiftory  of  that 

Fijh  208 

Sahon-houfe  77 


Saltoun,  Lord 

Sanda  319 

Sarvedrum    Promontorium 

258 

ScaligerV    Charafter   given 
to  John  Duns  Scotus     63 
Scalloway  327 

Scalpa,  IJland  295 

Scar, -ft^r  14 

Scarba,  noted  for  the  Longe- 
vity of  its  Inhabitants  289 
Scone  1 89,  &feq. 

Scot,  Sir  John  179 

S  cotiils,  a  Set  ofScholaftics 
63 

Scotland,  its  Boundaries  and 
Extent  2,  3.     Divided  in- 
to four  Diftritls  249 
Scots  Fiddle  78 
Scott,  .Margaret,  anlnfmp. 
tion  on  her  Tomb-ftone  161 
Sea,  One -third  Water,  and 
Two -thirds  Fijh            259 
Seaforth,  Earl  of  ^123.     ///V 
<Sf«/                     261,  262. 
Sea  -ware,  ar  Weeds            65 
Seals,  hcrw  many  taken  at  one 
time                                299 
Seals  of  Bohemian  and  Mo- 
ravian Grandees*  annexed, 
to  the  Bohemia  nProtejl  93 
Second  fight,  explained  309 
Sellay                              305 
Seton  and  Winton  Palaces 

Seton  Family^  whence  their 
Name  76 

Seton,  Alexander,  Governor 
o/'Berwick  76 

Seton  Town  76 

S.everusV  Wall  141 

Sey- 


I    N    D    E    X. 


Seymour,  Edward,  Duke  of 

Somerfet  80 

Shapinfha  319 

Sharpe,  Archbijhop,   ajjajji- 

nated  1 76 

Sheen,  Dr.  179 

Sheridan,  Sir  Thomas    3 40 

Sheriff- muir  149 

Shetland,  I/lands  255,  313, 

325 

Shires  </ Scotland  57 

Shires  and  Burghs  t  that  fend 

Members  382 

Shrimps,  hop  like  Grajhoppers 

173 
Sibbald,  Sir  Robert  94,1 1 1 , 

328 
Sinclair,  Lord,  his  Caftle 

253 

Sky,  JJleof  262 

Sky,  an  IJland  293 

Slanes,  the    dropping    Cave 
there  2 i 2 

Soa,  I/land  307 

Society  for  promoting  Chri- 
ftian  Knovjlege,  an  Ac- 
count of  274 — 281 
Solan Geefe  73,  287,  308 
Solway  Firth  114,  119,  122 
Sota-Britil  295 
Soulifker,  a  Rock  303 
Southelk  River  9, 200,  202 
South- Fara  320 
South- Ron  alfay  315 
South-Uift  297 
Soutra  hill  159 
Spey,  River  I  o,  21 4,  2 1 5 
Spotfwood,  Archbijhop  106 
Spynie  Caftle  221 
S/o  Clair  William  109 


Stanley,  Sir  Thomas,  take* 

Berwick  59 

StewartWWLe'nox  JFW/tf//y  64 
Stewart,  Patrick,  Earl  of 

Orkney  317 

Stuart's  Family ,  their  antient 

paternal  Eft  ate  127,271. 

From  whence  proceeded  272 
Stirlingfliire  80,140,150 
Stirling  Caftle  141,  145,  146 
Stirling  Town  141,  145,  6? 

fej- 

Stone,  the  Dvoarfy  3 1 6 
Stonehive  203 

Straglafh  £ 

Stranrawer  1 1 9 

Strathave  214 

Strathbogy  205,  218 

Strathdevon  10 

Stratherin  223 

Strathern    197,    266,  268, 
270 

Strathmore  185,197 

Strathnairn  223 

Strathnavern    County    250, 

251 

Strathy,  River  13^ 

Strath -yla  214 

Striftnefs  in  Religion  affords 
poor  Dinners.  2 1 4 

Stroma,  I/Is-  256,314 

Stronfa  3191 

Sullivan,  Colonel'  341 

Sutherland  County >  250* 

Sutherland,    Earl   of,     his 
Caftle  s  250,255; 

Sutherland,  Alexander,  Earl 
•of  109.: 

S weatnam,  Captain         336) 
Swinna,  1ft and  31^- 

X  Tail! 


INDEX. 


T. 


Tail  of  the  great  Bear  icier e 

feen  257 

Tantailpn  Co/He,   infamout 

7* 

Tar  an  fay  305 

Tarbat,  a  Promontory      260 
Tarnaway,  Cafile  220 

Tax  of  Two  pence  Scots,  the 

grodEffefiiof  107 

Tay,  F/rM  */ 8>-  183,  195, 

217 

Tay,  River  of  8,  165,183, 

192,  266 

Tayn,  Town  of  12,    260. 

C0<ay?  0/^259.    B'ayofzbo. 

Shire  of  261 

Tea-table,  an  expenfi<ve  Time 

wafier  84 

Temple  oftt>eDrmds,J?anJ'- 

ing  aftron  omically          301 

Tenningham  68 

Terminus,  Temple   of  150, 

152 

St .  ThomasV  Hcfpital  9  5 
Thorn  ills,  a  Se&  ofScboIaJiics 

63 

.Thule,  eftbe  Antients  3  28 
7'h  u  r fo,  Town  and  River  1 3 
Timel.'&V/r  195 

Tinto  Hill  7 

Tiviotdale  157 

Toland'/  Defcription  of  the 
We  fern  I/lands  309 — 3F3 
Tolbooth,  the  common  Prifon 

9° 

Tomacurach  237 

Tong  251 

Tor- Wood  132 


Tranquility  of  Mind,  a  great 

Rarity  303 

Traquair,  Earl  of,   greatly 

impofverifoed  156 

Tronda  32.7 

Ttillibardin  266 

Turnbul  I,  Anbbijhop      132 

Turnpikes   in    Edinburgh, 

*wbat  is  meant  by  84 

Tweed,  River  59,  155,157, 

'59 

Tweedale,,  Marquis  of,   bis 

fne  Park  and  Seats  68,  78, 
86 

T  weed  ale,  County  155 

Two-pence  a  Day,  great 

Earnings  209 

Tyne,  River  71 

Tyre  ty  I/land  292 

V. 

Vaccinia  nigra  242 

Vallum  Romanum  142 
Vaterfa^  296 

Virvedrum  Promontorium 

258 

Univerfity  of  St.  Andrew, 
and  College  ,  an  Account  of 

17-8 

Upper  Tay  264 

Urqhart&T/?/*  242 

Vuiit  327 


W. 

Wade,   General   241, 

34T>  345»  346- 

of  the  Roads  made  by  him 

through 


INDEX. 


'through      the    Highlands 
244-248 

Wallace,  hums  the  Englifh 
in  the  Barns  124 

Wai  fey  327 

Walter,  afterward*  Steward 
ofScotland  263 

Warburton,  John,  Efq\  142 
Wardlaw,  Bi/hopofSt.  An- 
drews 178 
Wedderburn,  Sir  John  179 
Weick  13 
Wemys,  Lord,  his  Houfe  172 
Wayes  and  Hoy  Ifie  315 
Weft  Wafer  Late  155 
Wefter  Wemys  172 
Weftern  IJles  of  Scotland 
282.  Defcribed  by  Mr. 
Toland  309 
Weftra  320 
Whirlpools,  how  calmed '3 1 5 
Whitcart,  River  128 
Whithern  1 21 
Whortle  Berries  242 
Wick,  or  Welch  253 
Wigton,.  the  Shire  of  118, 

IL9 


Wilford,  Sir  George  71 
William  the  Wafter  253 
William  J.  his  Burial-place 

201 

William  III.  64 

Wilfon,  Alexander,  Efq\  101 

Wilfon,  Andrew, «  Criminal 

98- 

Winged  Oi/?^  103 

Win  ton,  Earl  of  75.     #// 

//oz(/^  i  I  o 

Wirkworth  61 

Wiihart,  George,  ^«r;//  177 

Woods,   //6^  moft  remarkalie^ 

2? 

Y. 

Yarmouth./^  Norfolk  67 
Yell  327 

Yefter-houfe  63,  71,  78,  80 
York-buildings  Company  75 

Z. 

Zeal,  or  Yell  327 

Zefter-houfe  61,71,78,8© 


F   I  N    2'   $. 


DA  Defoe,  Daniel 

620        A  tour  thro1  the  whole 

D32  island  of  Great  Britain 

1761  6th  ed. 

v.L 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
