A System of Magick (Daniel Defoe, 1727)
==========================================================
Defoe's 1727 history of magic from the magi to modern cunning-folk; companion to his History of the Devil. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b30538117).

6  £t$hQ


/


/  ^


%


\


V.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2018  with  funding  from
Wellcome  Library


https  ://arch  ive.org/detai  Is/b305381 1 7 ,


/


vf


>4

#  •


--  V  f


••••


SYSTEM

OF

MAGIC  K;

Vr>  ^  ‘  S;  '  "  ‘  t

O  R,  A

HISTORY

O  F  T  H  E

BLACK  ART.

/

BEING  AN

i

Hiftorical  Account  of  Mankind’s  moil  early
Dealing  with  the  Devil ;  and  how  the  Ac¬
quaintance  on  both  Sides  firft  began.


Our  Magick ,  Now ,  commands  the  Troops  of  Hell 5
The  Devil  himfelf  fubmits  to  Charm  and  Spell .

The  Confrer  in  his  Circles  and  his  Rounds
Juft  whiftles  up  his  Spirits ,  as  Men  do  Hounds.

Th ’  obfequious  Devil ,  obeys  the  Sorcerer* s  Skilly

The  Mill  turns  round  the  Horfe ,  that  firft  turns  round  the  Mill,


LONDON \  Printed :  And  Sold  by  J.Roberts

in  Warwick- Lane,  mdcc  xxvii.


'Lu^x

ifSTORJCAt.
MEDICAL


*


PR  E  FAG  E.


0  remove  a  Difficulty  in  my  Title ,
and  that  we  may  not  jlumhle  at
llf§J§llf  the  Threjhold,  fome  Preface  to  this


- -  -  J  a  $  J

new  Undertaking  may  he  neceffary,  hut  it
‘will  he  very  Jhort.

If  by  A  SYSTEM  of 'this  terrible  thing
called  Magickj  my  Readers  Jhould  expeB  a
Body  of  the  Black  Art  as  a  Science ,  a  Book
of  Rules  for  InfiruBion  in  the  PraBice,  or  a
Magical  Grammar  for  Introduction  to  young
Beginner s,  all  I  can  fay  to  fuch  is,  that  they
‘ will  he  miflaken.

The  World  has  perhaps  keen  impofed  upon
in  nothing  more  than  in  their  Notions  of  this
dark  PraBice,  as  ‘well  its  antient  as  its  ‘mo¬
dern  State.  Mofl  People ,  ‘when  they  read  of
the  antient  Magicians ,  think  they  are  reading
of  old  Necromancers  and  Conjurers,  ‘when
really  at  fir Jl  they  ‘were  very  honefl  Men ;
and  now ,  when  they  read  of  them  in  their  mo¬
dern  PraBice,  they  take  them  for  honefi  Fel¬
lows,  when  they  are,  generally  fpeaking,  meer

A  3  Jug~


PREFACE.  -

Juglers,  Cheats,  Mountebanks ,  and  Pofiure-
mafters ;  or  elfe,  real  W  izards  and  downright
Dealers  with  the  Devil.

There  is  One  Sort  would  fain  be  called
Canning  Men,  than  which  nothing  can  be  a
gr offer  piece  of  Delufion  and  ’tis  not  their

,  that
Senfe

in  all  their  Pra&ice.  ’Tis  afirange  Piece  of
Art  where  Fools  cheat  Fools ,  and  the  Blind
and  the  Ignorant,  are  imp o fed  upon  by  the  Blind
and  the  Ignorant.

All  the  Difcovery  I  can  make  by  it  is,  to  note
what  a  vifible  Difference  there  is  between
Cunning  and  Wit ;  between  Slight  of  Hand ,
as  I  may  call  it,  and  Under funding.  ’Tis  evi¬
dent  the  Pretenders  to  Magick  at  this  time
are  fo  far  from  dealing  with  the  Devil,  that
they  mujl  certainly  be  dealt  with  by  the  Devil,
that  have  any  thing  to  do  with  them.

In  thefirjl  Ages  they  were  Wife  Men •,  in  the
middle  Age,  Madmen  •  in  thefe  latter  Ages ,
Cunning  Men :  In  the  earliefi  Time  they  were
Honef ;  in  the  middle  Time,  Rogues  ■,  in  thefe  lafi
Times,  Fools :  At  firfi  they  dealt  with  Nature ;
then  with  the  Devil ;  and  now  not  with  the
Devil,  or  with  Nature  either  :  In  the  firfi


Cunning,  but  their  Clients  want  of  Cunning
gives  them  the  leafi  Appearance  of  Common


PREFACE.

Ages  the  Magicians  were  wifer  than  the
People  5  in  the  fecond  Age,  wickeder  than  the
People  and  in  our  Age,  the  People  are  both
wifer  and  wickeder  than  the  Magicians.

I  fee  no  great  Harm  in  our  prefent  Pretenders
to  Magick,  if  the  poor  People  could  but  keep
their  Money  in  their  Pockets ;  and  that  they
Jhould  have  their  Pockets  pick’d  by  fuch  an
unperforming ,  unmeaning,  ignorant  Crew  as
thefe  are,  is  the  only  Magick  that  I  can  find
in  the  whole  Science.

The  befi  Courfe  that  I  can  think  of  to  cure
the  People  of  this  Itch  of  their  Brain,  the
Tarantula  of  the  prefent  Age,  in  running  to
Cunning  Men,  as  you  call  them,  and  the  mofi
likely  to  have  Succefs,  is  this,  of  laughing  at
them  :  the  Satyr  has  reform’d  the  Age  of
many  a  Folly,  which  the  Solid  and  the  Solemn
could  never  reach :  Even  general  Vice,
would  the  Men  of  Wit  and  Men  of  Quality
join  in  the  Attempt,  might  be  hifs’d  out  of
the  World,  tho’  all  the  Preaching  and  all  the
Preachers  Jhou  d  prove  fruit lefs  and  exhaufled:
Men  are  to  be  ridicul’d  imto  good  Manners ,
when  they  won't  be  cudgell’d  into  it.

Your  modern  Harlequins,  efpecially  fo  exqui-
fitely  contriv'd,  and  fo  perfectly  well  perform’d


as


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.

as  thofe  of  late  by  Mr.  Rich,  (in  which,  not
to  flatter  him,  we  mujl  acknowledge  he  has  out¬
done  all  that  was  before  him)  have  gone  far¬
ther  to  expofe  and  run  down  the  Magick  I  am
fpeaking  of,  and  cure  the  World  of  the  Hyppo
and  the  Vapours,  than  the  whole  Stage  could  do
before  nay,  than  all  the  brightefl  Dramatick
Performances  of  the  lafl  Age  could  pretend  to.

Never  was  the  popular  Frenzy  better  expofed-,
the  Ignorance  on  one  fide,  and  the  Impudence  on
the  other,  more  accurately  laid  open  •,  the  Mi -
mickry  is  mimick’d  to  the  Life ;  the  Magician
made  a  Fool,  the  Fool  tickl’d  into  more  Wit ,  and
the  Devil  himfelf  laught  out  of  Countenance.

We  leave  the  Remainder  to  be  compleated
by  the  fame  Hand  the  Succefs  cannot
fail,  while  the  Senfes  and  the  Paflions  are  to
be  wrought  upon  by  the  Eye -fight :  Our  Me¬
thod  looks  the  fame  Way,  only  that  we  bring
it  up  from  its  Original,  and  purfue  it  to  the
End  of  its  ProfpeB.  Mr.  Rich  flows  you
what  foolifl  things  you  are  jufl  now  doings
we  flow  you  what  your  Anceflors  did  be¬
fore  you,  and  what  flill  worfe  things  the  Ages
to  come  are  like  to  do  after  you.

Let  no  Man  be  difgufled  at  the  good  Ac¬
count  we  give  of  the  Original  and  Wifdom  of

the


PREFACE,

the  Magi,  and  then  call  them  Magicians :  if
we  will  dehauch  the  Word  with  a  degeneracy
of  PraUice,  the  Fault  is  our  own.  Their  Ma-
gick  was  truly  Science ,  whereas  ours  is  nei¬
ther  Magick  or  Science ,  hut  a  kind  of  Devi-
liirn,  a  PraUice  carry  d  on ,  by  Men  that  would
he  wicked  if  they  did  not  want  Wit,  and  are
no  otherwife  Harmlefs ,  than  as  they  happen
to  he  Fools.

Even  at  its  hef,  ’ tis  a  Babe\-like  Confufion,
that  fpeaks  feveral  Languages,  and  none  to
he  underfood a  compleat  Degeneracy  of,  or
Deviation  from ,  common  Senfe  a  Complication
of  Negatives ,  that  how  many  foever  you  put
together,  won't  make  up  one  Affirmative.

Now,  to  bring  this  Nothing  from  the  Some¬
thing  it  deriv’d  from,  tho ’  it  feems  a  little
Difficult,  yet  ’tis  very  Necejfary,  and  this  is
the  Reafon  why  I  call  it  a  Hifory.

I  have  trac’d  it  as  far  hack  as  Antiquity
gives  us  any  Clue  to  difcover  it  hy ;  it  feems
to  have  its  Beginning  in  the  Ignorance  and
Curiofity  of  the  darkefi  Ages  of  the  World,
when  Miracle,  and  fomething  Wonderful,  was
expected  to  confirm  every  advanc’d  Notion ;
and  when  the  wife  Men,  having  rack’d  their
Invention  to  the  utmofi,  call'd  in  the  Devil  to

a  their


PREFACE.

their  Affiance,  for  ‘want  of  letter  Help ;  and
thofe  that  did  not  run  into  Satan's  Mea-
fures,  and  give  themf elves  up  to  the  Infernal,
yet  trod  fo  near,  and  upon  the  very  edge  of
Hell,  that  it  was  hard  to  dijlinguijh  between
the  Magician  and  the  Devil ;  and  there  they  have
gone  on  ever  fince :  fo  that  almojl  all  the  Dif-
pute  between  us  and  the  Magicians  is,  that  they
fay  they  converfe  with  good  Spirits,  and  we  fay
if  they  deal  with  any  Spirits  it  is  with  the  Devil :
let  the  following  Sheets  determine  the  Matter.

Flail !  Dangerous  Science ,  falfly  call’d  Sublime,
Which  treads  upon  the  very  brink  of  Crime.

Hell’s  Mimick,  Satan’s  Mountebank  of  State,
Deals  with  more  Devils  than  Heav’n  did  e’er  create.
The  Infernal  Juggling-box,  by  Hell  defign’d.

To  put  the  grand  Parade  upon  Mankind.

The  Devil’s  firfl  Game,  which  he  in  Eden  play’d,
When  he  harangu’d  to  Eve  in  Mafquerade.

In  the  firfl  Ages  Men  miftook  thy  Face,

Thy  Conj’ring  pafl  for  Wit,  thy  Gravity  for  Grace*
By  thee  the  junior  World  in  Witchcraft  grew.
That  Witchcraft  fill  I  the  Senior  Worlds  perfue.
Nature’s  firfl  U liter  to  indudl  Mankind,

Prompting  wife  Arts  to  his  enquiring  Mind.

To  Jubal  thou,  and  cfubalJ  Science  brought,

To  This  his  Metals,  That  his  Mu  Tick  taught.

But  born  a  Cheat,  under  the  Cloak  of  Grave,

Firfl  made  him  a  Mechanic then  a  Knave,


C  O  N  T  ENTS-


Introduction.  Of  the  Meaning  of  the  farms  $

* who  and  what  kind  of  People  the  Magicians
were,  and  how  the  Words  Magick  or  Magician
were  originally  underflood .  Page  i

Chap.  If.  How  Wifdom  and  Learning  advanc'd  Men  m
the  Firft  Ages  to  Royalty  and  Government ,  and  How
many  of  the  Magicians  were  ?nade  Kings  on  that  Ac¬
count  \  ^  Zoroaiter,  Cadmus,  many  others,  p.  38
Chap.  III.  Of  the  Reafon  and  Occafion  which  brought
the  ancient  honeft  Magi,  whofe  original  Study  was
Philofophy ,  Aftronomy ,  and  the  Works  of  Nature ,
to  turn  Sorcerers  and  Wizards ,  and  deal  with  the
Devil -y  and  how  their  Converfation  began.  p.  61
Chap.  IV.  Of  what  Shapes  the  Devil  affum'd  in  his
firft  Appearances  to  the  Magicians,  and  others ,  in
the  Firft  Ages  of  the  W orld  \  and  whether  He  is9  or
has  been  allow'd  to  affume  a  human  Shape ,  or  no.  p.  92.
Chap.  V.  A  Farther  Account  of  the  Devil’j  Conduct
in  Imitating  Divine  Infpirations  j  Something  of  the
Difference  between  them  j  and  particularly  of  Signs
and  W onders ,  Falfe  as  well  as  Frue^  and  the  Cheats
of  the  Former.  p.  izf

Chap.  VI.  Of  who  were  the  firft  PraRifers  of  Ma¬
gick,  as  a  Diabolical  Art ,  and  how  it  was  handed
on  to  the  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  where  it  was
firft  openly  encouraged.  p.  14 1

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  PraRice  and  Progrefs  of  Magick,  as
it  is  now  explain'd  to  be  a  Diabolical  Art ,  how  it  fpread
it  felf  in  the  World ,  and  by  what  Degrees  it  grew  up
to  the  Height  which  it  has  fmce  arriv'd  to.  p.  184

PART  II.

Introduction.  Of  the  Black  Art  it  felf$  what
it  really  is ,  why  there  are  fever al  differing  P r a  Ri¬
ces  of  it  in  the  feveral  Parts  of  the  Worlds  and

what


/


I


CONTENTS.

what  thofe  Practices  are  5  as  alfo,  what  is  contained
in  it  in  General.  p.  218

Chap.  I.  Of  Modern  Magick,  or  the  Black  Art  as  now
in  its  Practice  and  Perfection.  p.  228

Chap.  II.  The  Scene  chanf d\  That  as  the  Devil  aCted
at  Firft  with  his  Black  Art  without  the  Magici¬
ans,  fo  the  Magicians  feem  to  carry  it  on  now  with -
out  the  Devil.  p.  248

Chap.  III.  Of  the  prefent  Pretences  of  the  Magicians:
How  they  defend  themf elves  ,  and  fome  Examples  of
their  Practice.  ,  p.  284

Chap.  IV.  Of  the  DoClrine  of  Spirits  as  it  is  under  flood
hy  the  Magicians  \  How  far  it  may  he  fuppofed  there
may  he  an  Intercourfle  with  Superior  Beings ,  without
any  Familiarity  with  the  Devil,  or  evil  Spirits  ,  with
a  Tranfition  to  the  prefent  Times.  p.  321

Chap.  V.  Of  the  Magick  of  the  prefent  Time ,  as  it
ftands  ftrip'd  in  the  lafl  Chapter,  from  all  the  Pre-
tences  of  the  Magicians,  and  the  Deluflons  of  Pell  5
of  what  Length  it  has  gone ,  or  is  like  to  go,  in  de¬
luding  Mankind ^  what  the  Magicians  can  do ,  and
that  they  really  have  now  no  Converfewith  the  Devil
at  all:  So  that  the  Art  being  at  an  End ,  the  Hi  ft  or y
comes  to  an  Emd  of  courfe.  p.  3  p  7

Chap.  VI.  Of  raifing  the  Devil  by  Magical  Operations  j
whether  the  Magicians  really  have  fuch  a  Power  or
no ,  and  if  they  have,  whether  it  is  perform'd  as  an
Art ,  and  hy  the  Confequence  of  Magical  Experiments ,
or  whether  it  is  hy  Concert  and  mutual  Confent ,  be¬


tween  Satan  and  the  Magicians.


P-  37P


Chap.  VII.  Seeing,  as  the  Magicians  pretend ,  they  do
not  Deal  with  the  Devil,  or  raife  the  Devil  5  Who  it
is  they  do  Deal  with ,  how  their  Correfpondence  is
managed ,  and  why  do  they  Deal  with  Good  Spirits ,
hy  Conjurings  and  the  Black  Art  ?  p.  392


A

System  of  Magick.


INTRODUCTION.

Of  the  Meaning  of  the  Terms ;  who  and  what
kind,  of  People  the  Magicians  were ,  and
how  the  Words  Magick  or  Magician  were
originally  underflood.

E  F  O  R  E  I  come  to  the  main  End
of  this  Undertaking,  which  is  plainly
laid  down  in  my  Title,  ’tis  necefiary  to
explain  the  Terms,  and  to  determine
fully  what  is  and  is  not  to  be  under-
flood  by  Magick ,  the  Black  Art ,  and  fuch  like  hard
Words  as  we  fhall  be  oblig’d  to  make  frequent  Ufe
of  as  we  go  along.

I  am  willing  to  fuppofe  my  Readers  not  fo  un¬
acquainted  with  the  ancient  Ufage,  as  not  to  know
that  the  Word  Magick  had  a  quite  different  Signi¬
fication  in  former  Times  from  what  it  isnowapply’d
to9and  that  the  People  who  ftudied  or  profefs’d  that
which  we  now  call  Magick ,  were  quite  another  fort
of  Folk,  than  thofe  worthy  Gentlemen  who  now
apply  themfelves  to  that  Profeflion.

In  a  Word,  a  Magician  was  no  more  or  lefs  in
the  ancient  Chaldean  Times,  than  a  Mathematician ,  a

B  Man


A  SYSTEM

Man  of  Science,  who  ftor’d  with  Knowledge  and
Learning,  as  Learning  went  in  thofe  Days,  was  a
kind  of  walking  Dictionary  to  other  People,  and
inftruCted  the  reft  of  Mankind  in  any  Niceties  and
Difficulties  which  occur’d  to  them,  and  which
they  wanted  to  be  inform’d  about;  and  in  this
Senfe  we  are  to  be  underftood  when  we  fpeak  of
the  Magicians  in  Egypt ,  in  Perfidy  in  Babylon ,  6c c.

Thus  when  any  Omens,  ill  Signs  and  Tokens,
Dreams,  or  other  ftrange  things  happen'd  in  thofe
Times,  whether  publickly  in  the  Air,  or  particu¬
lar  to  Perfons  and  Families,  we  find  not  only  the
ordinary  People ,  but  even  Kings  and  Princes  fenc  im¬
mediately  for  the  Magicians  and  the  wife  Men,  the
Southfayers,  &c .  to  tell  them  what  the  Meaning  of
fuch  things  was.

Thefe  Magicians  are  explain’d  on  many  Occa¬
sions  by  the  term  of  wife  Men ,  and  that  Term  again
by  Men  of  Knowledge,  and  more  than  ordinary
Underftanding.  Men,  in  a  word ,  who  ftudied  Na¬
ture,  look’d  up  into,  and  made  Obfervations  from,
the  Motions  of  the  Stars  and  other  heavenly  Bo¬
dies,  and  who,  as  9tis  faid  in  the  Scriptures ,  under¬
ftood  the  Signs  of  the  Times,  the  Face  of  the  Hea¬
vens,  and  the  Influences  of  the  Superior  Luminaries
there;  who  fearched  into  the  Arcana  of  Nature,  and
were  Mafters  of  perhaps  a  little  experimental  Philo-
fophy ;  I  fay  a  little,  for  Reafons  which  I  fhall  re¬
peat  prefently.

It  was  no  Impropriety  in  Speech  to  call  fuch  as
thefe  wife  Men  at  that  time,  tho’  perhaps  the  utrnoft
of  their  Knowledge  might  arrive  to  no  more  than
what  we  would  now  juftly  call  fuperficial.  Be»
caufe  at  that  time  the  Knowledge  of  Nature  was
very  green  and  young  in  the  World ;  and  the  Phi-
lofopher  of  thofe  times,  if  he  was  to  be  rated  by  the
Rules  Men  are  pleafed  to  iudge  by  at  this  time,  would
be  fomething  like  our  Learned  Friend  Sir  Tho.  J. . . .

whofe


3


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

whofe  particular  Honour  it  was  to  be  a  Doftor
among  Fools,  and  a  Fool  among  Dodlors.

To  thefe  Magicians  Men  went  on  the  feveral  Oc~
cafions  hinted  as  above  for  the  Solution  of  doubt¬
ful  Queftions\  to  be  refolved  and  dire&ed  in  difficult
and  intricate  Undertakings 3  to  be  advifed  in  things
of  Moment  3  and  thefe  were  therefore  called  Sages
firll,  and  for  a  long  time  3  and  afterwards  Magi ,
from  the  greatnefs  of  their  Wifdom,  Hence  the
wife  State [men  to  whom  the  Government  of  the
Median  Interregnum  was  committed  were  called
Magi  3  as  wife  Men  to  whom  alone  it  was  fit  to
intrull  fo  important  an  Article  as  that  of  the  Go¬
vernment  of  an  Empire.

Thus  afterwards  in  the  Ifraelites  times,  their
wife  Men  were  called  by  another  but  very  fignifi-
cant  Name  or  Term  (viz.)  Seers,  a  Word  after¬
wards  held  in  fuch  Veneration,  that  they  thought
fit  to  bellow  it  upon  their  Prophets ,  who  alfo  were
called  Seers ,  tho’  afterwards  they  obtained  a  fupe-
rior  Title,  namely  that  of  Man  of  God.  But  before
that  I  fay  the  wifer  Men  were  called  Seers  3  and  this  is
moll  exprelly  fignified  in  that  eminent  Text,

1  Sam.  ix.  9.  where  ’tis  faid  that  before  time  they
ufed  to  fay  when  they  wanted  to  enquire  of  God,
that  is  to  enquire  about  any  thing  difficult,  come  and
let  us  go  to  the  Seer,  that  is  to  the  Magician ,  the  wife
Man ,  the  Prophet^  or  what  elfeyou  pleafeto  call  him.

It  is  plain  from  the  fame  Text  alfo  that  they
fometimes  went  to  thofe  People  called  Seers
upon  meaner  Enquiries  3  for  they  took  it  for  grant¬
ed  that  thofe  Seers  dealt  in  all  fecret  Matters  3  Thus
Ahaziah  fent  to  Baal-zebub  when  he  was  lick,  to
know  if  he  Ihould  live  or  dye,  z  Kings  i,  2,  3.  and
fo  the  King  of  Syria’s  Captains  told  their  Mailer,
that  Elijha  the  Prophet  told  the  King  of  Ifrael
what  he  did  in  his  Bed-chamber,  z  Kings  vi.  iz ,
And  to  bring  it  down  to  a  meaner  Cafe  Hill  3

B  2  even


4


A  SYSTEM

even  when  Saul  wanted  but  to  find  his  Father’s
loft  AfTes  or  Cattle,  his  Servant  faid  to  him,  let
us  go  and  enquire  of  the  Seerj  and  fo  they  did,  and
found  News  of  them.

Likewife  it  appears  by  the  fame  Text,  that  thofe
Seers ,  or  Prophets ,  or  Magi ,  made  an  Employment
of  it,  that  it  was  their  Bufinefs  to  tell  Men  of  their
loft  Goods,  dire<St  them  in  their  Way,  foretel  of
their  Health,  and  the  like  5  and  that  they  made  a
Lively  hood  or  Trade  of  it  5  therefore  when  Saul's
Servant  propofed  to  him  to  go  to  the  Seer,  Saul
made  a  Difficulty  of  it  becaufe  he  had  nothing  to
give  him  *  as  if  heftiould  have  faid,  1  have  no  Money  in
my  Pocket,  and  not  a  Loaf  of  Bread  to  give  the  cun¬
ning  Man  or  Seer,  and  how  ftiould  I  expe£t  that
he  fh  ould  give  me  any  Account  of  my  Cattle  for
nothing?  Then  when  the  Servant  told  him  he  had
a  fourth- part  of  a  Shekle  of  Silver  in  his  Purfe,
(which  hy  the  way  was  not  above  feven  Pence  half¬
penny,  or  thereabouts)  Saul  was  mighty  glad,  re¬
volving  to  give  the  low- priz'd  Magician  or  Prophet
that  vaft  Fee,  to  tell  him  what  was  become  of  his
Father’s  AfTes.

It  feems  the  Lawyers  Fees  were  not  fo  high  in  thofe
Days  as  they  have  been  fince*  for  if  he  had  not  had
that  Piece  of  Silver,  perhaps  about  as  big  as  an  En -
glifh  Groat,  I  fay ,  if  he  had  not  had  that,  a  couple
of  half-penny  Early  Loaves  it  feems  would  have
been  as  good,  and  have  done  as  well*  thofe
Loaves  being  not  ufually  bigger  than  our  Half¬
penny,  or  at  beft  than  our  Penny  Wheaten  brown
Bread  Loaves  are  now.

Again  you  find  when  Benhadad  King  of  Da¬
mascus  lent  to  Elifia  the  Prophet  to  know  if  he
fhould  live  or  dye,  he  fent  the  Prophet  a  Prefent,
forty  Camels  loaden  with  all  the  good  things  of
Damafcus ,  2  Kings  viii.  p.  A  large  Fee!  But  ’tis  to
be  fuppofed  the  Gift  fent,  was  not  fuited  to  the

Prophet


/


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.


Prophet  fo  much  as  to  the  Sender  ;  he  gave  as  a
King 5  but  fbill  we  find  the  Seers  were  fuppos’d
to  make  the  Gain  their  Bufinefs.

That  it  was  the  fame  thing  with  the  Magi  before
that,  we  have  no  reafon  to  doubt,  tho’  we  have  no
Particular  in  Story  relating  to  that  part.  But  we
find  thofe  South fay ers,  Magicians ,  and  wife  Men ,
who  were  fent  for  by  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt  to
interpret  his  Dream,  were  to  have  receiv’d  great
Rewards,  if  they  had  given  Sacisfa&ion  to  the
King;  and  Jofeph  we  fee  did  receive  great  Rewards,
as  well  as  Honour,  on  that  Account.

Again  afterwards  in  the  Cafe  of  Nebuchadnez¬
zar's  Dream,  there  is  a  fufficient  Teftimony  that
thofe  wife  Men ,  Ajirologers ,  Magicians ,  &tc.  were
efteemed  not  to  be  Wizards  and  Dealers  with  the
Devil,  but  only  (as  I  have  explain’d  the  Word  a-
bove)  meer  Philofophers ,  or  wife  Men,  Men  of  Lear¬
ning  and  Knowledge,  Men  of  Science  and  of  Skill  in
the  works  of  Nature;  for  when  the  King  demanded
of  them  to  tell  him  not  only  the  Interpretation  of  the
Dream, but  the  Dream  it  felf,and  threaten’d  them  with
Death  in  cafe  they  fail’d  to  perform  it,  they  expo-
ftulate  with  the  King  upon  the  unreafonabienefs  of
the  Propofal,  as  a  thing  that  no  King  in  the  World
would  expeft  from  them,  and  that  was  not  in  the
power  of  Nature  to  perform:

As  if  they  had  faid,  does  your  Majefty  think  we  deal
with  the  Devil \  that  you  Jhould  expect  fuch  a  Piece  of  Work
as  this  from  us  ?  it  is  not  in  the  Power  of  any ,  or  of  all
the  wife  Men ,  or  Philofophers,  in  the  Worlds  and
therefore  it  cannot  be  imagined  we  fhould  do  its  but
let  the  King  tell  us  the  Dream ,  and  then  we  will  interpret
it,  and  that's  as  much  as  Man  can  do.

’Tis  plain  from  hence,  not  only  that  the  Magi
or  Magicians  in  thofe  Days  were  not  really  Conju¬
rers  and  Dealers  with  the  Devil,  but  that  they  were
^jaderftood  to  be  what  we  may  call  Scholars ,  Men

B  l  of


5


6  a  s  r  s  r  e  m

of  Learning,  <3f  Wifdom,  and  of  a  fuperior  Un-
derftanding:  So  when  the  King  calls  for  Daniel  to
prefer  him,  it  is  faid  he  did  it  becaufe  an  excellent
Spirit  was  found  in  him  >  and  in  another  Place  ’tis
faid,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Holy  Gods  was  in  him $
whereas  at  the  fame  time  ’tis  certain  that  the  King
efteemed  him  as  one  of  the  Magicians $  nay,  and  he
was  fet  over  them,  as  the  Chief  and  Governor  of
all  the  reft.  Certainly  then  they  did  nor  take
thofe  Magicians  to  be  what  we  have  fince  under-
ftood  of  ours,  (viz.)  Dealers  with  the  Devil,  and
Sorcerers,  fuch  as  ought  to  be  punifhed  for  having
or  ufing  unlawful  Arts,  and  Practices  with  evil  Spi¬
rits  and  the  like.

Had  this  been  the  common  Opinion  of  them,
they  would  have  been  treated  after  another  man¬
ner,  both  then  and  in  after- Ages  5  for  not  only  a-
mong  the  Jews,  but  in  other  Nations,  fuch  as  we
call  now  Magicians  were  punifhed  as  Criminals.

But  to  go  back  a  little  to  Originals,  and  to  fetch
up  Knowledge  from  the  Fountain:  Man  born  igno¬
rant  arrives  to  very  little  Knowledge  but  what  comes
by  one  of  thefe  two  Channels.

Firft ,  Long  Experience,  Study  and  Application.

Secondly  1  Teaching  and  Inftrudion  from  thofe  that
went  before.

I  fhall  infift  only  upon  the  laft,  and  that  parti¬
cularly  for  the  fake  of  what  was  Antediluvean .  The
moft  early  Knowledge  which  Mankind  obtain’d  in
thofe  Days,  is  fuppos’d  to  be  by  Teaching  imme¬
diately  from  Heaven  5  for  Example.  Adam  and
j Eve's  Mouths  were  open’d  at  the  fame  time  with
their  Eyes,  and  they  could  fpeak,  and  knew  what
Language  to  fpeak,  as  foon  as  they  were  made.  But
’tis  moft  certain  alfo,  that  all  the  (peaking  World
fince  Adam  and  Eve  learnt  it  fuccefiively  from
them,  by  mere  Imitation  of  Sounds,  teaching  of
Parents  and  Nurfes,  and  the  like,


After


7


of  MAGIC  K.

After  Adam,  his  Poilerky  having  learnt  to  fpeak
immediately  from  him,  and  fo,  to  converfe  with
one  another,  a  confummate  acquir’d  Knowledge  in
feveral  other  things  quickly  follow’d  $  particular
Arts  and  Sciences  were  either  taught  by  Infpira-
tion  from  Heaven,  or  attain’d  by  the  exquifite  Ca¬
pacities  of  their  Minds  *  One  having  a  Genius  to
this,  Another  to  that  kind  of  Knowledges  as  one
to  Mufic,  another  to  working  in  and  finding  out
Metals  and  Minerals  in  the  Earth,  then  melting,
refining,  calling,  and  other  Operations  and  Im¬
provements,  as  Knowledge  came  in  by  the  Door
of  Experiment.

Adam's  Poflerity  (I  mean  his  particular  Houle  or
Family)  learnt  to  lpeak  more  immediately  from
him  and  Eve  their  Mother  by  meet  imitation
of  Sounds,  as  we  do  to  this  day  from  one  an¬
other.

But  having  thus  obtained  Speech  from  their  im¬
mediate  Parents,  all  other  acquir’d  Knowledge  men¬
tion’d  above,  fuch  as  of  their  Improvement  of
Culture,  Difcoveries  in  Nature,  and  the  like ,  feem’d
to  be  the  Confequence,  i.  Of  a  vehement  and  in¬
flam’d  Defire  after  Knowledge,  planted  in  their
Minds  by  Nature  it  felf >  an  inquiring  Difpofi-
tion*  being  fenfible  of  a  vafl  Treafure  hidden  in
Nature  apt  for  Difcovery,  and  which  as  it  were
waited  only  for  the  Search,  in  order  to  open  it  felf
to  their  View  for  the  general  Good.  A  vafl:
capacious  Underftanding  fitted  for  that  Search,  and
which  we  have  reafon  to  believe  the  Antediluvean
Fathers  were  more  than  ordinarily  furnifhed  with,
guiding  them  diredlly  to  the  Search  after,  and  into
all  the  Arcana  of  Nature,  with  a  Readinels  and
Accuracy  fo  pointed,  as  if  they  had  been  before¬
hand  inftrudled  what  to  fearch  for,  how  to  fearch
for  it,  and  where  to  find  it.  3,  A  fecret  In-
fpiration  from  Heaven,  filling  them  with,  or  at

B  4  leafi;


26


8


A  SYSTEM

leaft  dire£Hng  them  to  the  Knowledge  of  things  in
a  more  than  ordinary  manner.

N.  B.  We  cannot  doubt  but  were  there  now  to  ap¬
pear  a  Man  perfe&ly  untaught,  not  having  con¬
vert  at  all  with  Men  taught  and  inftru&ed  before
him,  and  yet  fhould  have  a  Treafure  of  fuch
Knowledge  in  his  Mind,  exerting  it  felf  in
A£bion  to  fuch  a  degree  as  was  ordinary  to
the  Patriarchs  of  the  Antediluvean  Age,  we
fhould  prefently  give  him  up  for  a  Magician  in
the  grofleft  Acceptation  of  the  Word,  and  fay
in  ftiort  that  he  deals  with  the  Devil .

But  be  it  fo  or  not,  and  let  the  confummate
Knowledge  of  thofe  Patriarchs,  come  which  way
it  will,  and  be  as  great  as  it  will,  or  as  you  will
fuppofe  it  to  be,  this  is  certain,  it  died  with  them  5
’twas  all  drown’d  in  the  Flood,  the  Poft-diluvean
Age  inherited  very  little  of  it*  or  if  they  did,  it
was  drown’d  again  in  the  Flood  of  Vice  and  Wick-
ednels,  which  aimoft  as  foon  overfpread  the  World,
as  the  People  did  the  Plains  of  Shinaar ,  and  much
fooner  than  they  fpread  the  reft  of  the  Earth  with
their  Pofterity,  however  fail  they  multiplied.

Nor  do  I  wrong  the  People  of  thofe  firft  Ages
after  the  Flood  in  the  leaft,  when  I  fay  they  feem’d  to
have  loft  all  that  fund  of  Knowledge,  all  that  capa¬
cious  Underftanding,  and  all  that  facred  Infpiration,
which  their  PredecefTors  the  Antediluveans  were
Mafters  of  3  I  need  go  no  further  for  an  Ex¬
ample  of  it  than  the  building  of  Babel.  For  was
it  poflible  that  any  thing  fo  abfurd  and  ridiculous
could  have  entred  into  the  Thoughts  of  Men,  if
they  had  not  been  funk  into  an  unexpreflible  Dege¬
neracy  as  to  Senfe,  a  toeer  Stupidity  of  Underftan¬
ding  ?  To  fay  nothing  of  their  having  loft  all  Pre^
tence  to  Infpiration  3  fo  far  were  they  from  any  Share
pf  faered  Light  in  it,  that  they  could  not  be  faid  to

have


9


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

have  a£led  with  common  Senfe.  Blefs  us !  to  build
aHoufe  to  reach  up  to  Heaven!  or  as  we  may  with
more  Propriety  exprefs  it,  to  build  a  Stair-cafe  to
go  up  into  Heaven  by  5  and  that  in  cafe  of  an¬
other  Flood  too,  which  adds  to  the  Madnefs  of  the
defign  many  ways.

1.  They  had  certainly  no  Notion  of  Heaven  it
felfj  not  to  fpeak  of  religious  Notions  of  Heaven,
they  mu  ft  be  entirely  dark  and  ftupid  as  to  thePhi-
lofophyof  it$  The  immenfe  Diftance,  the  differing
Regions,  the  Alteration  of  things  in  their  natural
Circumftances  and  Situation  by  the  Way,  or  in  the
Paffage.

2.  They  had  no  Underftanding  of  their  own
Conflitution,  or  at  lead  they  mull  have  very  grofs
and  abfurd  Conceptions  about  it ;  as  particularly  of
their  breathing  and  fubfilfing  in  the  Regions  above
the  Atmofphere,  and  in  the  pure  unmix’d  JEther ,
(or  what  elfe  it  fhould  be  called)  which  they  who
mounted  up  to  fuch  Height  would  be  fure  to  meet
with,  and  in  which  they  might  as  eafily  conceive
an  lmpoflibility  of  breathing,  as  they  could  con¬
ceive  of  the  lmpoflibility  of  living  without  Breath.

3.  They  mull  have  had  no  Notion  of  the  Na^
ture  of  the  Flood  it  felfj  as  that  of  the  Power,
Force,  and  Weight  of  the  Waters,  when  moving  in
fuch  a  collected  Body  5  how  unable  any  thing  they
could  build  would  be  to  refill  the  Force,  and  not
be  prefently  blown  up  and  driven  away  by  the
Stream.

4.  They  mull  be  utterly  ignorant  of  the  Nature
of  the  Earth  on  which  their  Building  flood  j
how  no  Foundation  could  be  laid  lo  deep  or
fo  firm  in  it,  but  what  by  the  Violence  of  fuch  an
immenfe  Ocean  of  Water  would  be  loofen’d  and
overwhelm’d,  and  the  Fabrick  by  confequence  be
brought  down$  the  Earth  which  upheld  it  being
wafh’d  away,

f.  They


A  SYSTEM

f.  They  muft  be  wholly  ignorant  of  what  our
learned  Theory  Men  infift  to  have  been  the  Caufes
of  the  Deluge,  namely  an  Abforption  or  breaking  in
of  the  Surface  of  that  Earth  which  was  before  a
known  Cavity  or  Hollow  fill’d  up  with  Water,  in¬
to  which  the  Earth  fell  with  a  Violence  equal  to
the  Fall  of  the  higheft  Mountain  that  could  be
fuppofed  to  fall  into  the  loweft  Subterranean  Deep  5
and  in  which  cafe  the  Height,  and  Strength,  and
Magnitude  of  their  Building  could  only  ferve  to
make  its  Fall  more  violent,  more  certain,  and  more
terrible.

All  thefe  things,  and  many  more,  which  Nature,
had  they  been  capable  of  confulting  it,  would  have
dictated  to  them,  they  muft  beperfedtly  ignorant  of*
otherwife  they  could  never,  with  a  Delibera¬
tion  and  long  confulting  one  another,  as  the  Rela¬
tion  of  the  Story  implies,  have  gone  about  fo  ridi¬
culous  a  piece  of  Work  as  that  of  Babel ,  than
which  nothing  attempted  by  the  grofieft  and  dull-
eft  Fancies  on  Earth  was  ever  more  abominably
foolifh  and  ignorant.

Were  thefe  the  Pofterity  of  the  wife  Antedilu-
vean  Age!  whofe  Minds  were  infpired  from  Hea¬
ven,  and  whofe  Underftandings  were  fo  eminently
large  and  capacious,  whofe  Genius  led  them  to  the
inventing  the  moft  ufeful  Arts,  and  to  exalt  them
in  quell  of  the  nobleft  parts  of  Science,  (fuch  as
Mufick  in  particular  *)  and  to  make  the  moft  refin’d
Experiments,  fuch  as  the  melting,  mixing,  fepara*
ting,  and  refining  of  Metals  *  and  which  was  ftill
as  much  as  all  the  reft,  the  finding  thofe  Metals  in
the  Oar,  as  the  Iron,  the  Copper,  the  Silver,  and
the  Gold,  of  which  we  find  they  had  a  compleat
Knowledge,  and  carried  it  on  no  doubt  to  the  moft
ufeful  Experiments?  Thus  Jahal  and  Jubal  for  Ex¬
ample,  the  Sons  of  Lantech,  who  feverally  apply¬
ing  themfelves  to  ufeful  Arts,  became  Inftrudtors

of


II


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

of  their  Pofterity  in  Culture  of  the  Earth,  Huf-
bandry,  breeding  of  Cattle,  &c.  Others  we  find  were
Proficients  in  Philofophy,  and  the  ftudy  of  Nature  5
for  the  Doftrine  of  Sounds  is  one  of  the  nicefi:
Parts  of  philofophical  Study,  and  we  find  them  im¬
mediately  Mailers  of  Mufick,  and  inventing  and
inftrudling  others  in  making  the  Inftruments  of  Mu¬
fick  ;  and  particularly  thofe  Nicefi:  and  mo  ft  Dif¬
ficult  of  all  the  reft,  the  Harp,  and  the  Organ,
that  is  to  fay  Wind- Mufick,  which  is  Vocal  ;  and
Mufick  by  Vibration ,  which  we  call  Inftrumentalj
likewife  Tubal-Cain  their  Brother,  who  was  the
firft  Artificer,  of  whom  we  may  fay  that  he  was
a  true  natural  Mechanick,  and  the  firft  and  bed
! Tinker  in  the  World.

In  the  room  of  this  capacious  Underftanding,
and  this  inquiring  and  applying  Temper  in  thofe
Ages,  behold  a  ftupid  Generation  rifen  up  in  Suc-
ceffion;  ftript  as  naked  of  the  natural  Glories  of
their  Anceftors,  as  the  Earth  was  of  its  natural
Fruitfulnefs  after  the  Curfe  in  Paradife  5  and  inftead
of  applying  themfelves  to  ufeful  Arts,  and  to  the
acquiring  of  Knowledge,  grown  as  indolent  as  they
were  ignorant,  having,  like  Solomon's  Fool,  no  de¬
light  in  Underftanding.

Inftead  of  qualifying  themfelves  to  inftrudl  their
Pofterity,  we  fee  no  marks  of  Wifdom  left  behind
them  fit  for  Imitation;  nothing  that  could  recom¬
mend  them  to  their  Children  for  any  thing  but  a  Race
of  brutifh,  unpoliftt’d,  unfiniftfd  Creatures,  that
neither  underftood  Heaven  or  Earth,  themfelves,  or
any  thing  about  them ;  that  feem’d  qualified  for
nothing  but  meerly,  as  the  reft  of  the  Brutal  World
were,  to  propagate  their  Kind,  and  overfpread  the
Earth.

Nor  in  their  Multiplying  their  Species  did  they
feem  to  promife  any  thing  but  to  people  the
World  with  a  Race  of  Fools,  as  ignorant  and  for-

f  did


X2


A  SYSTEM

did  as  their  Antediluvean  Progenitors  had  been  out¬
rageously  wicked  j  a  Race  that  threaten’d  to  make
Heaven  as  fick  of  them  for  their  Folly,  as  it  was
of  thofe  that  went  before  them  for  their  Corrup¬
tions  and  abominable  Vices  5  and  that  might  be  as
likely  to  have  brought  a  Deluge  upon  them  for
their  obftinate  untra6fcable  Ignorance,  as  the  other
had  been  for  their  Rebellion  and  Loofenefs,  had
not  God’s  Promife  not  to  deftroy  the  World  any
more,  been  their  Security.

Nor  indeed  were  they  lefs  corrupt,  their  Capa¬
cities  confidefd ,  than  the  old  World,  whofe  flagrant
Crimes  had  involv’d  them  in  a  general  Deftru6tion;
and  if  they  fell  fhort  in  any  thing,  it  was  for
want  of  Wit,  not  for  want  of  Wicked nefs.

This  appears  in  all  their  fubfequent  Conduct,
from  the  fir  ft  peopling  of  the  World  after  Noahy
to  that  foolifh  Bab  el- Building- Age  1  fpeak  of:  in
the  old  World  we  found,  that,  at  leaft  for  a  time.
Men  began  to  call  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord  j  and
the  Patriarchs  of  that  Age  were  famous  for  Piety,
of  whom  ’tis  faid,  as  particularly  of  Enochs  that  he
walked  with  God ;  an  emphatic  fignificant  Expreflion,
which  our  learned  Commentators  have  fpenta  great
deal  of  Time  in  expatiating  upon  and  explain¬
ing.  The  Scripture  again  exprefles  this  walking
with  God  to  be  an  A£t  of  Faith,  and  quotes  it,
Heb.  xi.  ver.  f.  as  a  glorious  Example  of  fuch  Faith
as  was  rewarded  with  an  immediate  Tranflation  of
the  Perfon  into  Heaven.  He  was  not ,  for  GOD  took
him  5  and  from  which  the  moft  exquifitely  and  ac-
complifhtly  whimfical  Mr.  Afgill  form’d  his  new
Syftem  of  going  the  near  eft  way  (Home)  to  Hea¬
ven  by  the  fartheft  way  about,  a  fiery  Chariot  in-
ftead  of  dying  5  as  if  the  former  were  not  a  Change
as  well  as  the  latter ,  and  as  if  Heaven  had  not  al¬
ready  made  the  beft  Choice  for  us:  But  iho’  he  fuf-
fer’d  Martyrdom  for  his  Scheme  (having  been  ex-

pell’d


9


*3


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

pell’d  the  Parliament  of  two  Kingdoms  for  it)  we
do  not  find  he  has  yet  had  the  Benefit  of  his  Pro-
jeft,  fo  we  mull  wait  till  he  is  pleafed  to  make  the
Experiment.  ;

But  to  return  to  the  Antediluveans :  The  old  World,
I  fay  ^  as  wicked  as  they  were,  had  fome  fliadow  of
Good  in  them,  and  for  fome  Years,  nay  fome  hun¬
dreds  of  Years,  they  maintain’d  the  Charadter  of
the  Sons  of  God ,  before  they  were  debauched  by
the  Daughters  of  Men  ;  that  is  to  fay,  before  they
blended  the  Race  with  the  corrupt  Seed  of  Cainy
and  mingled  Blood  with  Idolaters.  Where,  by  the
w  iy,  we  have  an  accurate  Defcription  of  the  Times,
I  mean  in  thofe  early  Days,  of  the  Race  5  ’tis
evident  ’twas  juft  then  as  ’tis  now,  the  Ladies  were
the  Devils  of  the  Age  ;  the  Beauties,  the  Toafts,  the
fine  Faces  were  the  Baits  5  the  Hell  lay  concealed
in  the  Smiles  of  the  charming  Sex,  They  were  the
Magicians ,  taking  the  Word  in  its  prefent  Accepta¬
tion  and  its  grofleft  Senfe:  There  lay  the  Witch¬
craft,  and  its  Force  was  fo  irrefiftible,  that  it  drew
in  even  the  Sons  of  God,  juft,  in  a  word,  as  it
does  now,  and  of  which  I  mail  have  Occafion  to
fpeak  again  at  large  as  we  go  on.  —  In  the  mean
time,  I  defcend  with  the  Story  to  the  next  Gene¬
ration.

The  Antediluveans  might  have  fomething  of  Re¬
ligion  in  them,  however  fatally  mix’d  with  Crime;
but  as  for  the  new  Good-for-nothing  Race,  we
hardly  read  of  any  thing  that  ever  was  to  be  found
among  them  that  may  be  called  valuable,  from  Noah
himfelf  downward ;  and  even  Noah  himfelf,  we  all
know,  fell  into  the  Debaucheries  of  Wine,  and  if  you
will  believe  Tradition,  continued  in  it  a  hundred
Yean.  Now  from  him,  and  from  his  immediate
Race,  Nature  feem’d  prepared  for  the  utmoft  De¬
generacy,  for  they  fell  into  all  manner  of  Crimes,
nay  into  the  worft  Crimes  fir(t;  for  they  did  not

be-


*4


A  SYSTEM

begin  low  and  fin  gradually,  but  immediately  after
the  Drunkennefs  of  Noah  himfelf,  his  Pofterity  de¬
generated  into  Idolatry ,  or  rather  return’d  to  it,  for
fome  think,  and  that  not  without  Probability  e-
nough,  that  Noah's  Sons  were  Idolaters  before  the
Flood,  and  were  faved  in  the  Ark ,fuchpwas  the  Will
of  God ,  meerly  for  being  the  Pofterity  or  Progeny
of  a  righteous  Father  j  if  fo,  then  they  only  returned
to  the  Idolatry  which  they  had  been  praftis’d  in
before.

But  he  that  as  it  wilf  ’tis  certain  that  the  Pofte¬
rity  of  Noah  fell  immediately  into  Idolatry,  and  that
all  his  wife  Dictates  which  he  gave  to  his  Chil¬
dren,  which  for  fo  many  Ages  were  preferved  by
oral  I* raduElion^  and  were  called  the  Precepts  of  Noah ,
had  no  fufficient  Effeft  upon  them  to  prevent  that
hated  Sin  of  Idolatry,  no  not  even  while  he  was
alive.

It  is  worth  obferving  here  indeed,  were  it  not
too  grave  for  your  Reading,  how  effectually  Noah  by
the  horrid  Defection  of  his  own  Morals  in  that  One
Aft  of  Drunkennefs ,  I  fay  how  effeftually  he  {hut
the  Door  againft  the  Force  of  all  his  Own  future  In-
ftruftions :  He  was  till  then  indeed  a  Preacher  of
Righteoufnefs,  and  had  been  fo  to  the  Antediluvean
World  for  near  fix  hundred  Years  5  but  after  that,
he  might  preach  indeed  if  he  would,  but  what  Re¬
gard  would  he  obtain,  when  the  debauch’d  Inftruftor
had  expos’d  himfelf  by  his  Drunkennefs  to  the  Ri¬
dicule  inftead  of  the  Reverence  of  his  Pofterity,
and  when  the  drunken  Monitor  by  his  own  Pra-
ftice  had  render’d  his  Inftruftions  fruitlefs  and  ridi¬
culous  ?

How  juftly  might  they  bid  him  hold  his  Tongue,
and  go  and  reform  his  Life,  before  he  pretended  to
inftruft  them  ?  bid  him  firft  learn  the  Precepts  he
taught,  and  fhow  them  by  his  Example  what  it
was  he  would  have  them  praftife?  How  might  they

up-


of  ■  M  A  G  1  C  K.

upbraid  him  with  exhorting  them  to  be  fober,
while  he  went  drunk  to  bed  ?  exhorting  them  to
Modefty  and  Virtue,  while  he  appear’d  in  the
mod:  fcandalous  manner,  lying  drunk  in  his  Tent,
and  his  Nakednefs  expos’d  to  the  Banter  and  im¬
pious  Jeft  of  his  Grandfon  Ham?

How  mu  ft  it  cover  his  Face  withBlufhes,  to  find
he  had  difhonoured  by  his  Example  the  Do&rine
of  Sobriety  which  he  had  preached  to  his  Children,
who  were  thereby  brought  to  mock  him,  rather
than  to  liften  to  him,  and  to  make  Ballads  of  him,
rather  than  copy  his  Precept  for  their  Imitation?

But  I  fay  this  is  a  Subjedt  too  folemn  for  the
Age,  and  you  will  prefently  tell  me  I  am  going  to
write  a  Comment  upon  the  ninth  Chapter  of  Ge¬
ne  ft  s.  So  I  leave  it  for  you  to  confider  of,  and  re¬
turn  to  the  Chronology  of  early  Wickednefs  in  the
Poft-diluvean  World.

Noah  being  thus  difabled,  by  his  own  falling  into
Crime,  from  inftrudting  his  Pofterity,  what  was  the
Confequence?  he  liv’d  to  fee  them  run  headlong
into  that  worft  of  all  Crimes,  Idolatry ,  and  the
Worlhip  of  GOD  funk  as  it  were  out  of  the
World,  even  in  his  own  time,  and  before  his  Eyes.

This  is  evident  from  Abraham ,  whom  the  Scripture
acknowledges  to  have  been  not  an  Idolater  only,
but  even  bred  up  in  Idolatry  while  he  lived  in  Me -
fopotamia  $  and  ’tis  certain  Abraham  was  born  above
fifty  Years  before  Noah  died  :  So  that  Noah  liv’d
to  fee  his  Pofterity  degenerated  into  Idolatry,  not
all  his  Preaching  or  Pradtice  being  able  to  pre¬
vent  it.

Having  thus  feen  all  the  Wickednefs  of  the  old
W orld  revived  in  its  newT  Inhabitants,  without  the
Wit  and  Capacities  which  they  had  before  j  and  the
Race  being  thus  entirely  degenerated,  we  mull  be¬
gin  all  our  historical  Account  of  them  with  taking
them  juft  as  we  find  them,  and  that  will  bring  us
direftly  to  the  Subjeft  I  propofe  The


i£  A  SYSTEM

The  Race  being  thus,  as  I  have  faid,  ftript  naked
of  the  Beauties  of  their  Anceftors,  whether  in  Mat-
ters  of  Senfe  and  Underftanding,  or  in  Matters  of
Piety  and  Religion,  and  running  on  into  all  man*
ner  of  foolifh  and  fimple  as  well  as  wicked  Excefies,
it  is  not  at  all  wonderful  if  when  any  particular  Per-
fon  appeared  more  than  ordinary  knowing,  or  but
a  Lover  of  and  Searcher  after  Knowledge  and
Wifdom,  fuch  a  Perfon  was  honoured  in  a  more
than  ordinary  manner,  was  reverenced  as  an  extra¬
ordinary  Man,  exalted  in  the  common  Efteem
when  alive,  and  perhaps  placed  among  the  Stars
after  his  Death ;  that  he  who  fhined  in  their  Efteem
when  living,  might  be  fuppofed  to  be  made  immor¬
tal  at  his  Death,  and  to  be  exalted  to  fhine  in  a
higher  Orbit.

Hence  it  became  a  vulgar  Error  among  the  firft
Ages,  but  was  riveted  fo  faft  in  the  Minds  of  Men,
that  nothing  could  perfwade  them  not  to  believe
it,  (viz.)  that  the  Stars  were  all  the  tranfparent
bright  Souls  of  their  wife  Anceftors,  who  for  their
Virtue  and  Wifdom  were  exalted  by  the  immortal
Powers  to  a  Station  of  Glory,  and  were  made  to
fhine  in  that  manner  for  the  farther  enlightning
the  World,  to  whom  they  had  been  fo  beneficent
when  they  were  here  5  and  from  hence  it  cameatlaft
that  all  their  great  Men,  and  efpecially  their  Kings,
were  thus  reverenced  and  exalted,  whether  they  were
good  Men  or  no.

It  could  not  be,  but  that  in  Procefs  of  Time,  as
the  World  grew  populous,  tho’  they  had  none  of
the  rare  Parts  and  exalted  Underftandings  of  the
Antediluvean  Patriarchs,  yet  there  would  be  fome
Men  of  a  more  refined  Genius,  and  of  more
capacious  Souls  than  others.  Surely  the  World
would  not  be  all  Fools,  or  not  all  equally  and  alike
fo*  nor  can  I  doubt  but  that  while  the  grofs  of  the
People  went  about  that  hare-brai'n’d  prepofterous


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.

piece  of  Work  which  we  call  Bahel9  there  were
fome  wifer  Heads  who  tho’  they  might  not  care  to
oppofe  themfelves  to  the  popular  Humour*  or  per-*
haps  to  their  Refentment,  and  did  not  ridicule  and
mock  the  Undertaking,  yet  look’d  on  it  with  a
different  View,  and  entertain’d  wifer  Notions  of
Things,  and  confequently  (when  by  the  Confu-
Hons  which  afterwards  happened  among  the  Buil¬
ders  on  Account  of  their  Speech,  they  were  oblig’d
to  give  over  their  Work)  might  take  the  Liberty
to  expoflulate  with  them  upon  the  Weaknefs  of  the
Defign,  and  convince  them  afterwards  that  it  was
an  unlikely  imprafticable  thing:  Or  perhaps  thofe
Men  had  calmly  argued  that  Part  with  them  be¬
fore,  and  had,  as  far  as  the  times  would  bear  it,
declared  their  Sentiments  about  it  *  thefe  Men
would  certainly  obtain  the  Gbara&er  of  wife  Men
upon  this  OccaJion,  and  be  valued  by  them  as  fuch
upon  all  fubfeqiaent  Events,

As  upon  the  Confufion  of  Languages  the  feveral
Families  who  underftood  one  anothers  Speech  kept
together,  fo  ’tis  very  probable  they  did  not  feparate
fingly,  every  one  running  his  own  way,  but  by
Families  and  Tribes,  or  by  Nations,  as  their  Speech
was  or  was  not  underflood  by  one  another $  and
this  was  directed  by  Providence  no  doubt,  for  it  is
faidjin  the  Text,  God  fcatter’d  them  upon  the  Face,
or  over  the  Face,  of  the  whole  Earth,

It  is  not  unlikely  but  that  when  they  left  off
Building,  and  found  they  were  not  able  to  purfue
the  Defign,  with  that  Xmpollibility  they  began
alfo  ,  to  fee  into  the  Folly  and  Abfurdity  of  the
Undertaking  j  and  began  more  and  more  every  day
to  refieft  upon  their  Stupidity  in  going  about  it  «
that  being  withal  afhamed  of  the  Work,  they
were  afhamed  of  the  Place  too,  and  went
every  Man,  or  'Tribe  of  Men  at  their  own  Way,
to  get  as  far  out  of  the  fight  of  it  as  they  could :  I

C  grant


iB  A  SYSTEM

grant  indeed  that  this  is  but  my  Conjecture,  but
I  think  ’tis  a  very  juft  Conjecture,  and  ’tis  made  on
Suppofition  that  all  wife  Men  look  back  with  Re¬
gret  upon  thofe  Actions  of  their  Lives  which  they
have  been  drawn  into,  and  in  which  they  have
reafon  to  fee  themfelves  miftaken. —  In  fhort,  as
no  Man  loves  to  fee  himfelf  a  Fool,  and  if  he  has
done  a  foolifh  thing,  does  not  care  to  have  the  Re¬
membrance  of  it  always  in  his  View 5  fo  generally
if  he  cannot  get  the  ObjcCt  removed  and  put  out
of  his  fight,  he  will  remove  himfelf  from  it,  if  he
can.

Upon  this  foot  I  cannot  doubt,  but  that  all  the
People  quitted  the  Plain  of  Shinaar  as  fall  as  they
could,  and  run  away  from  the  hated  Monument  of
their  Shame  5  we  would  have  done  fo  our  felves,
and  I  cannot  doubt,  I  fay,  but  they  did  fo  too.

Suppofe  then  the  People  to  be  upon  their  March,
and  going  to  the  feveral  Quarters  of  the  World,  whi¬
ther  they  were  directed  to  fettle  3  and  let  that  he
where  you  and  Sir  W alter  Raleigh  pleafe  5  for  that
learned  Author  following  Scripture-light  has  really
marfhall’d  them,  and  laid  out  their  feveral  Routs  as
exaCtly  and  authenticly  as  if  he  had  been  Com-
miflary- General,  and  had  gone  before  to  provide
them  Quarters.

Wherever,  I  fay,  thefe  feveral  Nations  went,  and
in  what  Country  foever  they  fettled  and  fixed  their
Abode,  tho’  the  Government  and  Monarchy  of  each
Divifion  was  Patriarchal  and  Hereditary,  yet  we  {hall
find  upon  feveral  Occafions  afterward,  that  they  had
among  them  many  particular  Men  famous  for  their
Wifdom  and  Knowledge,  and  for  their  Search  into
the  Secrets  of  Nature,  whofe  confummate  Wifdom
by  degrees  not  only  obtained  for  them  a  more  than
ordinary  Reverence  among  the  People  j  but,  infhort,
brought  the  People  to  fubjeCt  themfelves  to  their
Government,  and  make  fome  of  them  Kings.

Thus


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Thus  Cadmus ,  a  Phoenician  born,  became  King  of
Thebes  in  Greece ,  by  having  obtain’d  the  Fame  of  a
wife  Man,  and  one  who  dedicated  himfelf  to  the
common  Good  of  Mankind  5  So  Prometheus  obtain’d
the  Government  of  a  Part  of  Armenia ,  and  Atlas  the
lik  tin  Africa  $  and  thus  feveral  others,  by  their  Wif*
dom  and  earned:  Search  after  Knowledge,  obtain’d
the  Empire  and  Government  of  thofe  Countries
where  their  Wifdom  was  fo  confpicuous.  But  pray
take  this  with  you  as  you  go,  that  thofe  Days  are
over ,  that  Wifdom  crowns  no  Man  Now,  except  it
be  with  the  Rage  and  Malice  of  Enemies,  with  Po¬
verty  and  Infult.

/

Probitas  laudatur  &  Alget .


Honefty  (hall  be  prais’d  and  ftarv’d;  Wifdom  and
Knowledge  are  Marks  for  the  Men  of  Power  toflioot
at  5  to  be  High  and  Great,  is  to  be  Wife  and  Good.


He  that  is  Rich  is  Wife?

And  all  Men  learned  Poverty  defpife .

But  this  is  but  an  Excurfion,  I  come  back  re«
proved:  The  Magi  were  not  always  Kings  or  Em¬
perors  >  the  Wife  Men  and  the  Southfayers ,  the
Magicians  and  Aftrologers  (who  by  the  way  were  all
but  one  fort  of  People)  were  often  times  inmeanCir-
cum  dances  as  to  Money,  even  in  thofe  graver  Days  5
they  adtedfor  thepublick  Good  indeed,  but  it  was  in
Conjunftion  with  their  own  Intered  too,  they  had
their  Rewards  for  Southfaying  and  Divining  5
and  when  the  King  of  Syria  asked  his  Servants  to
go  to  Elijha  the  Prophet  to  enquire  for  him  abouc
his  Health,  he  bad  them  take  a  Prefent  in  their
Hand  for  the  Man  of  God .

I  cannot  indeed  fay  how  high  priz’d  things  went
in  thofe  Day$?  and  whether  Wifdom  was  not  un-

C  z  der-


to


A  SYSTEM

der-rated  then,  as  it  is  now*  whether  there  was
due  Encouragement  given  for  the  Search,  or  whe¬
ther  Wit  went  threadbare  and  in  Rags,  as  it  does
fince*  Authors  are  not  agreed  upon  it  indeed,  and
it  may  be  hard  to  bring  them  to  a  Point:  It  is  true,
later  and  more  modern  Philofophers  learned  to  de-
fpife  Money,  and  Solon  preferred  Wifdom  and  a
retired  Life  to  the  Wealth  of  Crosfus  j  but  in  the
more  early  Times  of  the  World,  the  Knowledge
of  Nature  and  the  Study  of  Wifdom  as  it  went
then,  feemed  to  be  a  communicative  Good,  which
therefore  as  they  that  reaped  the  Benefit  of  it  ought
to  pay  for  and  did  fo5  fo  their  wife  Men  grew
(in  time)  mercenary  and  mean,  as  in  other  Places.

This  leads  me  to  the  Times  when  the  primitive
Wiidom  of  thofe  early  Days  beginning,  as  I  faid,
to  be  more  common,  and  that  the  Magi  had  com¬
municated  much  of  their  Knowledge  to  the  com¬
mon  People. §Thofe  then  who  ftill  pretended  to  be
fomethiog  beyond  the  reft  of  the  World,  were
obliged  to  go  higher  in  their  Studies,  and  enquire
into  Nature,  view  the  Afpeft  of  the  Heavens,  cal¬
culate  the  Motions  of  the  Stars,  and  efpecially  dwell
upon  their  Influences  in  human  Affairs,  which  is
lince  called  Aftrology.

By  this  Study  they  obtained  the  Name  of  South -
fayers  and  Aflrologers ,  added  to  that  of  Magicians ,
which  they  had  before :  and  on  the  foot  of  thefe
Studies  they  interpreted  Dreams,  explain’d  good
and  bad  Omens,  foretold  Events,  and  perhaps  play’d
fome  Leger-de-main  Tricks  too,  to  impofe  upon
the  World,  as  their  worthy  Succefibrs  do  to  this
Day  j  and  in  a  word,  ’us  likely  they  did  all  thofe
things  then,  which  thefe  People  do  now,  of  whom
we  fay  with  more  Freedom  perhaps  than  Truth,
that  they  deal  moth  the  Devil.

Not  that  thole  People  were  charged,  at  leaft
not  yet,  with  any  criminal  Conversion  with  the

old


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

old  Gentleman  >  nor,  if  I  underfland  how  the  Cafe
Hood  with  Satan  at  that  time,  had  he  any  man¬
ner  of  Occafion  for  them,  but  did  his  Bufinefs  quite
another  way  y  for  the  Devil  had  Altars  and  Temples
of  his  own ,  was  another  kind  of  a  King  in  thofe
Days  than  he  has  appeared  to  be  fince :  Then  he
gave  Audience  in  form  of  a  Deity ,  and  law  hi  mi  elf
worfhipped  like  a  God  almofl  throughout  the  whole
World:  Here,  under  the  Name  of  Baal $  there,  Mo¬
loch  %  here  in  one  manner,  there  in  another  :  Nor
had  the  GOD  of  Heaven  One  Temple  in  the
World,  when  the  Devil  had  a  great  many  fcatter’d
here  and  there,  almoft  in  every  Nation.  I  allure
you,  however  modern  Writers  think  fit  to  repre-
fent  him,  he  fcorn’d  in  thofe  days  to  go  about  like
a  poor  fhabby  Out-at-heels  Devil,  as  he  has  done
fince,  and  may  perhaps  do  now.  No,  He  appeared
in  State,  and  as  he  ulurped  divine  Honours,  fo  he
made  a  Figure  fuitable  to  his  Ufurpation,  and  had
his  Shrines  and  his  Votaries,  his  Priefts  and  his
Places  of  Worfhip,  in  whatever  Shapes  or  Places  he
pleas’d  to  be  woriliipp’d  in:  Thus  as  Dagon  he  had
a  Houfe  of  folemn  Worfhip  at  JJJsdod ,  1  Sam.  v >  2.
and  as  Baalzebub  at  Ekron ,  and  the  like.

Now  as  the  Devil  had  thus  the  Government  of
the  whole  World  in  his  own  Band,  and  that  he  was
almoil  in  the  very  Letter  of  it  the  God  of  the  Worlds
fo  he  had  no  need  at  that  time  to  employ  fecret
Agents,  and  work  by  way  of  Familiars  or  private
Intelligence,  as  he  does  fince  y  nor,  to  do  the  ho-
neft  Men  Juftice,  had  any  of  the  South fayers  and
Magicians ,  and  thofe  which  were  at  firlt  called  their
wife  Men ,  any  Converfation  with  the  Devil  at  all,
no,  or  with  any  of  his  Works,  they  carried  on  no
Bufinefs  for  him.

But  they  were  Men  of  Thought,  or  if  you  pleafe.
Men  of  deeper  thinking  than  the  ordinary  fort  :
They  itudied  the  Sciences,  and  enquired  into  ufeful

C  3  things,


A  SYSTEM

things,  fearched  the  Works  of  Nature  and  Provi¬
dence,  ftudied  the  Meaning  and  End  of  things,  the
Caufes  and  Events,  and  confequently  were  able  to
fee  farther  into  the  ordinary  Courfe  and  Caufes
both  of  things  about  them,  and  things  above  them,
than  other  Men .

In  the  ftudy  of  Aftronomy,  they  foon  found  the
fecret  Influences  of  the  Stars  upon  the  Surface  of
the  Earth,  upon  Plants  and  Animals,  nay,  upon
both  Man  and  Bead: :  as  for  Example,  How  the
Growth  and  Virtues  of  earthly  Bodies  were  guided
and  govern’d  by  the  heavenly,  and  how  even  the
Events  of  the  greateft  moment  on  Earth  often¬
times  obey’d  the  Force  of  thofe  heavenly  Bodies  5
their  Conjunftions,  Oppofitions,  near  or  remote
Pofitions,  Revolutions  and  Appearances*  and  ac¬
cordingly  they  were  capable  of  making  fuch  pro¬
bable  Conjeftures  of  things  not  yet  come  to  pafs,
as  were  amazing  and  furprizing  to  the  reft  of  the
World*  and  by  which  they  took  them,  either  for
Men  fill’d  with  facred  Knowledge,  and  that  thofe
things  were  communicated  to  them  immediately
from  Heaven*  or  that,  however  they  got  it,  they
had  a  prophetick  Knowledge  of  what  fhould  come
to  pafs,  and  could  foretel  Events  even  before  the
apparent  Caufes  were  ordinarily  known.

This  gave  the  common  People  an  extraordinary
Veneration  for  the  Perfons  of  thofe  Magicians  and
wife  Men9  as  they  had  an  awful  Notion  of  their
exceeding  Wifdom  and  Knowledge.  Thus  Nebu¬
chadnezzar  ^  after  he  had  exalted  the  Prophet  Daniel
to  be  the  chief  of  his  wife  Men ,  ftoopt  to  him  with
a  kind  of  Reverence,  and  begins  his  Addrefs  not
like  that  of  a  Tyrant,  the  Terror  of  the  World,  as
he  at  that  time  really  was,  but  as  One  that  had  an
Awe  upon  his  Mind  of  the  great  Refpedl:  he  ought
to  fhow  to  a  Perfon  divinely  infpir’d  as  Daniel  was .
See  the  Text  Dan ,  iv.  p.  0  Belteftiazzar,  Mafer


23


of  MAGIC  K.

of  the  Magicians,  becaufe  I  know  that  the  Spirit  of

the  holy  Gods  is  in  thee ,  &c. - -  And  fo  in  the

8th  Verfe  of  the  fame  Chapter.  At  lafl  Daniel  came
in  before  me ,  whofe  Name  is  Beltefhazzar,  after  the
Name  of  my  God,  and  in  whom  is  the  Spirit  of  the
holy  Gods.

Thefe  were  the  Magicians  of  the  fir  ft  Ages  of
the  World,  and  fuch  was  the  Opinion  which  the
People  had  of  them  in  thofedays*  not  that  they  were
Conjurers,  or  cunning  Men ,  or  fuch  fort  of  People
as  we  now  call  them  *  but  were  Men,  who
at  that  time  knew  more  than  the  ordinary  rate  of
Knowledge  inftru&ed  others  to  know;;  and  were
endued  from  Heaven  with  extraordinary  Degrees
of  Wifdom  above  other  Men.  Nor  was  the  Re-
fpeffc  paid  to  them  equal,  but  more  or  lefs  in  de¬
gree,  according  to  the  particular  Degrees  of  fa-
cred  Infpiration  which  they  were  fuppofed  to  have.
Thus  in  the  Cafe  of  the  Prophet  Daniel  (as  above)
the  King  treats  him  not  as  a  Magician  only,  nor  as
the  Chief  of  the  Magicians  only,  but  as  a  Man  fill’d
with  higher  degrees  of  Wifdom  and  Knowledge
than  any,  nay  than  all  the  reft  of  the  Magicians  of  the
Age  put  together,  as  appears  Dan.  iv.  18.  Now
thou ,  O  Beltefhazzar,  declare  the  Interpretation  thereof  \
(that  is  of  the  Dream)  for  as  much  as  all  the  wife
Men  of  my  Kingdom  are  not  able  to  make  known
unto  me  the  Interpretation,  but  thou  art  able ,  for
the  Spirit  of  the  holy  Gods  is  in  thee.

This  is  ftill  further  explain’d  in  the  next  Chap¬
ter,  and  in  the  Tranfa&ions  of  the  next  Reign:  I
fay  it  is  farther  and  fully  explain’d  to  my  Purpofe,
(viz.)  as  to  what  was  the  People’s  Opinion  of  thefe
Magicians ,  as  well  as  their  King.  The  Story  is  very
particular.  It  was  in  the  Reign  of  Belfhazzar ,  the
Son  and  SuccelTor,  according  to  fome,  of  the  Great
Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon  %  when  the  King
faw  a  Hand  come  out,  and  writing  Words  upon

C  4  the


\


24


A  SYSTEM

the  Wall)  (fee  the  Text)  Dan.  v.  7.  The  King  cryed
aloud  to  bring  in  the  Altrologers,  the  Chaldeans,  and
the  South  fay ers  to  read  the  fVri  ting.  Why  were  thefe
call’d,  but  as  they  were  Men  of  Fame,  for  their
Learning  in  reading  fi range  Chara&ers,  Men  of
Skill  in  Languages  and  Books,  which  in  thofe
Days  the  common  People  knew  little  or  no¬
thing  of.

Well,  all  the  learned  Men  of  the  Kingdom  were
accordingly  call’d  together,  but  none  of  them  could
rmfwer  the  End  5  no,  notwithstanding  all  the  great
Rewards  promis’d  them.  Ver.  8.  Then  came  in  all
the  Kings  wife  Men ,  that  is  to  fay,  the  Flamjleads ,
the  Sir  Jfaacs ,  the  Halleys ,  the  IVhiftons ,  &c.  of
the  Age,  but  they  could  not  read  the  Writing,  &c.
And  what  follows?  Then  was  King  Beifhazzar  great-
Jy  troubled. ,  and  his  Countenance  was  chang'd  in  him .
Nor  is  that  all,  but  the  Text  adds,  and  his  Lords
were  aftonied.

It  feems  they  thought  thofe  wife  Men  knew  e-
very  thing,  that  they  had  been  able  to  underftand
all  the  Languages  in  the  World,  and  that  there-
fore  if  they  could  not  read  it,  it  muff  be  fome-
thing  fupernatural,  fomething  from  above,  or  fome~
thing  from  below,  which  was  worfe  \  And  in  thofe
Cafes  indeed  they  did  not  expeft  the  wife  Men
fhould  read  it,  for  they  did  not  fuppofe  thofe  wife
Men  correfponded  with  the  Devil,  or  had  an  evil
Spirit.  They  thought  indeed,  if  it  depended  upon
human  Underhand ing,  they  could  do  it,  but  as  to
higher  things  than  thofe  they  did  not  expedl:  them  5
fo  the  King  and  his  Lords  began  to  be  the  more
furpriz’d  at  it.  But  now  fee  the  10th  Verfe.  The
Queen  diredbs  them  to  enquire  out  Daniel ,  and
fend  for  him,  and  tells  them  he  would  certainly  read
the  Writing,  and  tell  them  the  Meaning  or  Inter¬
pretation  of  it.  See  the  W ords  at  large.

Now


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Now  the  Queen^  hy  reafon  of  the  words  of  the  King
and  his  Lords ,  came  to  the  banquet-houfe  -y  and  the
Queen  fake  and  faid ,  O  King,  live  for  ever :  let  not
thy  thoughts  trouble  theey  nor  let  thy  countenance  be
changed.

There  is  a  man  in  thy  kingdom ,  in  whom  is  the  fpirit
of  the  holy  Godsy  and  in  the  days  of  thy  father ,  light
and  underftandmg ,  and  wifdomy  like  the  wifdom
of  the  Godsj  was  found  in  him y  whom  the  King
Nebuchadnezzar  thy  Father ,  the  King  I  fay ,  thy
Father ,  made  M after  of  the  Magicians ,  Aftrologersy
Chaldeans ,  Sooth fayers\

Forafmuch  as  an  excellent  fpirit ,  knowledge ,

under  ft  anding,  interpreting  of  dreams ,  Jhew -

ing  of  hard  fentences ,  dijfolving  of  doubts  were

found  in  the  fame  Daniel,  whom  the  King  named  Rel-
tefhazzar :  let  Daniel  called^  and  he  will  Jhew

the  Interpretation.

After  this  Story  no  Man  need  enquire  what  the
World  underflood  by  the  Magicians  and  Aftrologers ,
and  w/ye  of  thofe  Days  3  But  ’tis  plain  they

were  look’d  upon  not  as  dealers  with  the  De¬
vil,  but  as  Men  infpir’d  from  Heaven,  fill’d  with
infpir’d  Knowledge,  Light  and  Underhand  ing,  and
excellent  Wifdom,  that  they  could  make  Interpre¬
tations,  refolve  Doubts,  &c.  as  ver.  if,  16,  of
the  fame  fth  Chapter.  And  as  fuch,  the  Princes  and
Lords  of  the  Country  apply’d  to  them  in  all  diffi-
cult  and  extraordinary  Cafes.

Now  ’tis  true,  we  have  only  Examples  of  the
Kings  and  Princes  making  ufe  of  thefe  People
in  difficult  Cafes,  as  Pharaoh ,  Nebuchadnezzar ,  Bel-
ftoazzar.  But  ’tis  not  to  be  doubted,  that  the  Peo¬
ple  in  general,  of  all  Qualities  and  Conditions,
went  to  them  to  be  refolv’d  in  their  Doubts,  and
to  have  Qiieftions  anfwer’d  them  in  difficult  Cafes  3
in  fhort  this  was  their  general  Employment,  and
they  made  a  Trade  of  it.


On


A  SYSTEM

On  this  Account  wc  find  in  feveral  ancient  Wri¬
tings,  that  the  Southfayers  were  made  ufe  of  to
interpret  Dreams,  and  foretel  things  to  come*  to
reprefent  good  or  bad  Omens,  and  give  their  Opi¬
nions  upon  the  Appearances  of  any  extraordinary
Phenomena  in  Nature  5  Thus  you  have  Julian  the
Apoftate  reproach’d  with  encouraging  fuch  Men,
and  liftning  to  them,  fome  Ages  after  this,  when
their  Reputation  was  funk  to  a  lower  degree  by
far,  than  it  was  at  in  former  Times.

This  being  then  the  Cafe,  we  are  not  to  talk  of
the  Magick  of  thofe  Ages,  or  of  the  People  call’d
Magicians ,  in  the  prefent  vulgar  Acceptation  of  the
Word*  but  they  are  to  be  underftood  to  be  what
Solon,  Plato ,  Seneca ,  Ariflotle ,  or  any  of  the  belt
and  brighteft  of  the  Philofophers  of  after- Ages
were  known  to  be,  namely  Men  of  Learning ;  who
had  apply’d  themfelves  to  the  ftudy  of  Virtue,  and
to  the  Knowledge  of  and  Search  into  the  moft  hid¬
den  treafures  of  Nature  5  who  underftood  the  Rea-
fons  of  things,  the  Caufes  and  Originals  of  the  moft
retir’d  and  difficult  Accidents  in  Nature,  that
fearch’d  into,  and  calculated  all  Aftronomical  Diffi¬
culties  }  the  Motions  and  Revolutions  of  heavenly
Bodies  }  and,  as  I  faid  before,  their  Influences  on
things  below  5  that  ftudied  and  found  out  the  phy-
fical  Virtues  of  Plants,  Metals,  Minerals,  and  in
a  word  every  difficult  thing,  either  in  natural  or
experimental  Philofophy.

Thefe  were  the  Magicians  of  thofe  Days,  and  to
write  a  Syftem  of  Magick  as  it  was  then  pra£bis’d,
and  is  to  this  Day  underftood  to  be  the  firft  mean¬
ing  of  it,  would  be  to  write  a  Syftem  of  natural
Philofophy}  only  with  this  fpecifick  Difference,
namely,  that  with  the  utmoft  of  their  Search,  the
higheft  of  their  Reach ,  and  the  greateft  of  their
Underftandings,  they  knew  fo  little  of  every  thing,
or  indeed  of  any  thing,  that  the  wifeft  of  their


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

wife  Men,  the  moft  accompliflied  Magician  or
Chaldean ,  in  all  the  Egyptian  or  Chaldean  Courts,
could  not  pretend  to  know  what  our  prefent  Pu¬
pils  in  Science  come  to  the  underftanding  of  in  the
firft  LeCfures  of  Philofophy,  which  they  go  thro*
in  a  Courfe  of  Academick  Study.

Their  Conceptions  of  things  were  rough  and  rude;
what  they  entertain’d  was  either  receiv’d  by  the
InftruCtion  of  others,  as  by  oral  Tradition  from
the  like  wife  Men  that  went  before  them,  or
from  the  dark  Conjectures  of  their  own  reafoning
and  enquiring  Difpofitions,  join’d  perhaps  to  fome
few,  and  thofe  but  very  mean,  Experiments  of  their
own  making,  from  Obfervation  and  Reflection.

Thefe  firft  Lights  burnt  very  dim  in  their  Un-
derftandings,  and  gave  but  little  helps  to  them  in
their  Search  after  Knowledge  -y  but  ftill  as  the  reft
of  the  World  was  infinitely  darker,  and  more  ig¬
norant  alfo  than  they  are  now,  fo  this  dim  Light,
and  thefe  glimmerings  of  Knowledge,  appear’d  to
them,  (in  proportion  to  the  Light  they  had  to
judge  by)  as  bright  and  fhining,  as  the  greateft  and
moft  confummate  Knowledge  does  now  to  us  in
the  Heads  of  a  Boyle ,  a  Newton ,  or  the  moft  ex-
quifite  and  beft  accomplifli’d  Philofophers  of  the
Age.

All  things  in  Nature  are  great  or  little  in  their
Appearances,  in  Proportion  to  thofe  proper  Ob¬
jects  which  they  are  to  be  confider’d  with,  or
meafur’d  by.  The  Earth  it  felf  is  confider’d  as  a  vaft
Globe  of  folid  Subftances,  form’d  into  one  Body
by  an  infinitely  powerful  Hand ;  when  on  the  one
hand  it  is  meafur’d  by  any  particular  Bodies,  either
Part  of  it  felf,  or  of  any  other  Body,  which  are"
final!,  and  as  it  may  be  faid  inconfiderable  in  Bulk
compar’d  to  it:  Whereas  on  the  other  hand,  that
very  Globe  or  vaft  Body  which  we  call  this
Earth ,  is  but  as  a  Point,  a  Mote,  or  a  grain  of

Duft,


iS  A  S  Y  S  T  E  M

Daft,  when  confider’d  with  and  meafur’d  by  the
immenfe  Bodies  of  the  Comets,  the  Sun,  the  fix’d
Stars,  or  other  thofe  glorious  Luminaries  which
we  fee  rang’d  above  us,  and  out  of  the  reach  even
aim  oft  of  our  Conceptions.

Thus  the  Knowledge  and  Acquirement  of  the
Magicians  and  wife  Men  in  the  firft  Ages  of  Time,
and  of  whom  I  have  been  now  fpeaking,  tho’
mean  and  trifling,  fuperficial,  and  of  little  Worth,
when  compar’d  with  the  accomplifh’d,  and  con-
fummate  Wifdom  of  the  Moderns,  their  experi¬
mental  Philofophy,  their  Knowledge  in  Aftronomy,
their  Improvement  of  Nature  and  Art  j  yet  it  was
Great,  and  worthy  of  Admiration,  when  compar’d  in
thofe  Days,  to  what  the  reft  of  Mankind  knew,  and
look’d  upon  by,  and  compar’d  with  an  ignorant  Age
fuch  as  that  was  $  and  therefore  the  King  tells  Da¬
niel,  that  an  Excellent  Sprit  of  IVifdom  was  found
in  him.  Dan.v.  14.  And  doubtlefs  the  People  look’d
upon  Daniel  to  be  infpir’d  with  Wifdom  and  Know¬
ledge  from  the  holy  Godsy  that  is  to  fay  from  Hea¬
ven,  as  indeed  he  was ,  tho’  not  from  their  dumb
Idols,  whom  they  called  by  the  Name  of  the  Holy
Gods .

In  like  manner,  tho’  perhaps  not  with  fo  ftrong
a  Conviction,  they  had  an  Opinion  of  all  thofe
they  call’d  the  Chaldeans  and  Southfayers ,  Magici -
dans  and  Aflrologers ,  that  they  had  fecret  Commu¬
nication  with  their  Gods,  and  that  they  receiv’d
all  the  Knowledge  with  which  they  were  infpir’d,
and  in  which  they  fo  much  exccll’d  the  reft  of
Mankind,  from  the  feveral  Deities  which  they  wor-
^liipp’d.  I  will  not  deny  but  that  thofe  Magicians
might  endeavour  by  many  S.ub  til  ties  and  Arts,  to
confirm  and  preferve  the  delufion  (for  they  knew
it  to  be  fo)  in  the  Minds  of  the  People  5  that  they
might  alfo  work  up  the  Veneration  of  the  deluded
Multitude  to  a  due  Height,  and  preferve  the  Opi¬
nion


of  MAGIC  K.

nion  both  of  their  Perfons  and  of  their  Capacities;
and  this  perhaps  will  appear,  when  further  enquir’d
into,  to  be  the  Foundation  of  all  the  wicked
things  which  follow’d,  as  I  fhall  demonftrate  in  its
Order.

It  was  really  a  Temptation  to  thofe  wife  Men ,  as
they  were  called,  to  fee  that  the  World  had  a  vaft
Opinion  of  them;  while  the  World  was  blind,
and  in  the  Infancy  of  their  own  Underflanding,  a
little  matter  would  impofe  upon  them;  but  in  pro-
cefs  of  things  the  World  grew  wifer,  and  the  light
Nature  began  to  receive  illuminations  from  the
light  of  Reafon,  and  then  it  behov’d  the  wife  Men
to  fee  that  their  Knowledge  alfo  encreafed  in  Pro-
portion  ;  for  Hill  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the
Reputation  of  their  Underftandings,  by  palling
from  one  Study  to  another,  and  afpiring  Rill  high¬
er  and  higher  in  their  feveral  Claffes  of  Improve¬
ment.

Now  this  it  was  eafie  to  do,  in  all  thofe  early
Days  of  Knowledge.  Nay,  they  had  a  thoufand
Years  before  them  ftill,  in  which  a  moderate  Com¬
petence  of  acquir’d  Knowledge  would  keep  up
their  Charadters ;  what  Courfe  was  taken  afterwards
we  fhall  fee  by  and  by.

To  fum  it  up  then  in  few  Words;  a  Magician  in
the  fir  ft  Ages  of  the  World  was  nothing  more  or
lefs  than  a  Man  of  Learning ;  only  you  muft  take
this  with  you  as  you  go,  that  by  the  Word  Learning
is  to  be  underftood  not  a  Man  of  Letters  and  Books ,
for  the  World  knew  little  of  either  in  the  firft
Days  of  thofe  Acquirements.  Nay,  we  have  rea¬
fon  to  be  aflur’d,  that  the  Knowledge  of  Letters
was  not  arriv’d  in  the  World,  at  the  time  when
Pharaoh  fummon’d  the  wife  Men,  and  the  Souch-
fayers,  and  Magicians  to  interpret  his  Dream ;  and
as  they  had  no  Letters,  they  had  no  Books;  and
therefore  when  ’tis  fait!  that  Mofes  was  learned  in

all


*


3°


A  SYSTEM

all  the  Wifdom  of  the  Egyptians ^  it  muft  be  un«
derftood  of  oral  Learning,  Wifdom  convey’d  to  him
by  Obfervation,  or  Inftru&ion,  or  Infpiration,  as
afterwards  he  really  receiv’d  it  from  Heaven.

The  Magicians,  I  fay,  were  Men  of  Learning,
that  is  to  fay  Men  of  Study,  Men  of  Obfervation,
bufy  in  the  fearch  after  Knowledges  and  if  we  will
take  Pains  to  enquire  into  it,  we  lliall  find  their
Obfervations  chiefly  refpedled  the  Motions  of  the
heavenly  Bodies,  the  Afpefts  and  Influences  of  the
Planets  and  fix’d  Stars  >  and  confidering  that  they
were  abfolutely  without  the  help  of  Inftruments
and  Glafles  to  make  their  Obfervations  by,  and
without  Books,  by  which  to  communicate  the
Knowledge  of  one  Age,  or  of  one  Perfon,  to  an¬
other  5  I  fay,  confidering  thefe  things  were  want¬
ing,  ’tis  a  wonderful  thing  that  they  arriv’d  to
fuch  a  Degree  of  aftronomical  Knowledge  as  they
did.

Others  ftudied  the  Knowledge  of  Nature,  in  the
Confiitution  and  Contexture  of  human  Bodies  5  the
Originals,  the  Progrefs,  and  the  caufes  of  Difeafes
and  Diftempers,  both  in  Men  and  Women  5  and
alfo  the  phyfical  or  medicinal  Virtue  of  Drugs  and
Plants,  for  Cure  and  Eafe  of  thofe  Difeafes  5  the
qualities  of  the  feveral  Herbs  and  Trees,  and  Pro-
dudtions  of  the  Earth  $  and  as  in  thefe  things  they  made
daily  Difcoveries  in  Nature,  which  the  World  was
till  then  ignorant  of,  and  by  which  they  perform’d
furprizing  Cures,  and  deliver’d  the  diftrefied  People
in  divers  Maladies,  they  were  on  that  Account,  and
defervedly  too,  had  in  great  Efteem,  were  reve¬
renc’d,  and  even  worfhip’d  by  the  People.

I  could  give  many  Examples  in  Hiftory  from  the
moft  ancient  Times,  when  their  Phyficians  and  A-
Aronomers  were,  after  their  Deceafe,  rank’d  among
their  Gods,  and  doubtlefs  were  had  in  a  profound
Veneration,  while  they  were  living.

In


of  MAGIC  K.

In  a  word,  Science  and  ufeful  Knowledge  being
young  in  the  World,  thofe  Men  who  gave  them-
felves  up  to  the  firft  Searches  after  thofe  things,
were  thought  worthy  of  the  greateft  Honours,
and  were  had  in  the  greateft  Efteem  *,  indeed  they
very  well  deferv’d  of  Mankind,  fince  they  gave
ftich  noble  Teftimonies  of  their  being  devoted  to
the  Publick  good.  Thus  Prometheus ,  who  is  faid
to  be  chain’d  down  to  Mount  Caucafus ,  with  a
Vulture  preying  upon  his  Bowels,  the  Subftance
or  Meaning  of  which  was  no  more  than  this:  That
he  gave  himfelf  fo  entirely  up  to  the  Study  of  A-
ftronomy,  and  to  fearch  after  the  Knowledge  of
the  heavenly  Motions,  that  the  eager  Defire  after
the  Knowledge  of  them  gnaw’d  into  his  very
Vitals,  confum’d  his  Natural  Strength,  and
proved  fatal  to  his  Health  $  and  that  this  was  upon
Mount  Caucafus ,  intimated  only,  that  he  chofe  a
high  Hill,  or  a  Summit  among  thofe  Moun¬
tains,  where  he  ufed  to  lye  on  his  Back  whole
Nights  together,  to  make  his  Obfervations  more
exaftly  of  the  revolving  Motions  of  the  Stars,  till
he  contra&ed  Diftempers  by  the  Colds  and  Damps
of  the  Air  j  fo  that  he  was  as  it  were  chain’d  down
to  thofe  Mountains,  till  the  Difeafes  he  contra&ed
cat  out  his  very  Bowels.

This  is  that  Prometheus ,  who  for  his  exquifite
Knowledge,  is  feign’d  by  the  Poets  to  have  firft
form’d  Man,  that  is  to  fay,  form’d  the  Model  of  a
Man  by  the  help  of  Water  and  Earthy  and  then
ftole  Fire  from  the  Sun  to  animate  the  Model,  and
to  give  him  Life  and  Motion.

The  Meaning  of  which  is  no  more  than  this,
that  by  his  Wifdom  he  inftru&ed  and  form’d  the
Minds  of  Men  in  true  Notions  and  right  Know-
lege  of  the  moft  fublime  Objects.


Prome


A  SYSTEM


Prometheus  fir ft ,  as  ancient  Authors  fay ,

Fir  ft  made  the  Model  of  a  Man  in  Clay  $

Form'd  all  the  beauteous  P arts ,  when  he'd  done

Stole  vital  Heat  from  the  prolific  Sun.

And  here,  by  the  way,  the  firft  Atheifts,  the  E-
picureans  and  others,  who  (hew’d  their  mighty
Willingnefs  to  deny  a  Firft  Caufe,  a  Being  Prior,
and  therefore  Superior,  to  all  Beings,  would  make
Man  to  be  the  Author  of  his  own  Form  and  Life  5
and  that  Prometheus  having  thus  form’d  the  Mo¬
del,  and  by  borrowing  Fire  from  the  Sun,  given  it
Life,  the  new-form’d  Creatures  had  ever  iince
communicated  that  Life  by  Generation.  But  this
empty  Notion  (lands  confuted  mod  effedtually,  by
only  joyning  the  following  four  Lines  to  thofe
above.

But  not  an  Author  tells  us ,  to  this  Day ,

Who  made  Prometheus  fir  ft  ^  and  who  the  Clay7
Who  gave  the  Great  Prolific  to  the  Sun,

And  where  the  firft  Productive  Power  begun.

But  to  leave  Moralizing,  which  my  merry  Rea-
ders  feem  to  have  an  Averiion  to,  I  go  on  with  my
Story.

The  learned  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  fays,  they  are
greatly  miflaken  who  think  that  the  Thing  as
well  as  the  W  ord  Magick  is  derived  from  Simon  Magus.
He  adds,  that  Simons  Name  was  not  Magus ,  a  Ma¬
gician,  but  GoeSy  a  Perfon  familiar  with  evil  Spirits,
and  that  he  only  ufurp’d  the  Tide  of  Simon  the
Magician ,  becaufe  the  Title  of  a  Magician  was  honou¬
rable  and  good  -y  and  my  Opinion  is  thus  (Irengthen’d
by  his  Authority,  viz.  that  there  is  a  manifefl  dif¬
ference  between  Magick ,  which  is  Wifdom  and

fuper-

7


*


33


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

fupernatural  Knowledge,  and  the  W itchery  and  Con¬
juring  by  which  we  now  underftand  the  Word,  and
ufe  it  accordingly.

I  join  with  this  Expofition  of  the  Word  Magick ,
and  fhall  therefore  carefully  diftinguifh  as  I  go  a-
long  betwixt  the  federal  differing  Perfons  known
in  Hiftory  for  Magi,  Magicians ,  and  Profeflbrs  or
Praftifers  of  Magick ;  and  thofe  Magicians  by  which
we  are  to  underftand  Sorcerers,  and  Enchanters,
and  Dealers  with  the  Devil,  of  whom  neverthelefs
I  fhall  have  occafion  frequently  to  fpeak  in  this
W  ork  \  becaufe,  though  I  fhall  let  you  know  that
the  Magicians  were  not  all  Sorcerers  and  Devil-
Dealers,  yet  I  mu  ft  alfo  let  you  know  too,  that  I
am  to  point  the  main  of  this  Difcourfe  to  fuch  as
are  fo.

Nor  is  this  previous  determining  the  Point  any
thing  lefs  than  neceflary  at  this  time,  with  refpe£fc
to  the  Variety  of  worthy  Gentlemen,  our  prefent
Contemporaries  in  fafhionable  Wifdom  5  who,  how¬
ever  willing  they  are  to  be  taken  for  Magicians ,
even  in  the  very  worft  Senfe  of  the  Word,  rather
than  not  to  pafs  for  Conjurers,  muft  be  vindicated
even  againft  their  Wills,  if  it  be  only  upon  the
fingle  Confideration  of  Incapacity  5  fince  as  none
of  the  Magi  of  the  World  were  famed  for  want¬
ing  Brains,  fo  the  Devil  having  no  occafion  for
Fools  in  the  natural  Senfe,  will  always  difown
them,  in  fpice  of  the  ftrongeft  Pretences  they  make
to  his  Service.

In  juftice  therefore  to  thofe  Wou'd-be-voitches,  I
muft  clear  the  way  as  I  go,  and  openly  diftinguifh
between  Magicians ,  underftanding  them  a*  wife  and
learned  Men j  or  Magicians  ^  underftanding  them  as
Black- Art  Men  \  and  Fools,  that  are  only  not  Sor -
cerers  becaufe  the  Devil  does  not  think  it  worth
his  while  to  employ  them  5  and  in  fhort,  that  they
are  incapable  of  being  as  wicked  as  they  would  be.

D  '  '  The


34


A  SYSTEM

The  W ord  Magus ,  from  whence  the  W ords  Magick
and  Magician  are  derived,  is  a  Per  fan  or  perhaps
Chaldean  Term,  ufed  originally  to  fignify  a  Student
in  Divinity,  a  Man  converfant  in  divine  Studies  5
and  Plato  fays  the  Art  of  Magick  is  nothing  but
the  Knowledge  of  the  Worlhip  of  the  Gods,  and
the  Perjians  called  their  Gods  ixdyxs  5  which  Ex-
pofition  of  the  Word  is  agreeable  to  that  of  Mat.  ii.
a.  there  came  wife  Men  of  the  Eaft ,  who  having
feen  the  Star  of  him  that  was  born  King  of  the
Jez vs,  came  fo  far  to  worjhip  him.

Thefe  wife  Men  the  Greeks  afterwards  called  Phi-
lofophers,  that  is,  Lovers  of  Wifdom*  and  the  fame
is  underflood  in  the  Indian  Language  by  Brachmans ,
and  now  Br amines ;  by  the  Babylonians ,  Chaldeans  y
by  the  Hebrew s9  Seers  5  and  among  the  Perfiansy
Magicians.

It  is  true,  as  King  James  I.  fays  in  his  Book  of
monologie,  that  under  the  name  of  Magick  all  other
unlawful  Arts  are  comprehended  $  but  that  is  only
as  we  Moderns  underfland  it,  not  that  it  was  un¬
derftood  fo  by  the  Ancients  $  and  even  in  that  the
King  diftinguifhes  between  Magick  in  its  word
Senfe,  and  the  Arts  or  Pra&ices  of  Witchcraft  and
Sorcery  j  which,  with  his  Majefly’s  Leave,  I  think
a  needlefs  Diflindtion:  Nor  fhall  I  be  fo  nice  5  but
all  thofe  Dealings  which  we  call  Necromancy^  Sor-
cery^  Witchcraft ,  and  all  kinds  of  diabolical  doings,
fhall  pafs  with  me  for  Magick  and  the  Black -
Art ,  and  in  this  Senfe  I  fhall  afterwards  ufe  the
Word.

The  wife  Men  of  Babylon  are  diftinguHVd  in  the
Prophecy  of  Daniel ,  into  four  Gaffes  $  the  Magi¬
cians,  that  is,  the  wife  Men,  in  the  Senfe  as  above,
I  mean  Philofophers  5  the  Aftrologers ,  which  arc
underflood  the  fame  with  our  Aitronomers,  and
with  them  Southfayers  ;  the  third  fort  are  the  Sorce¬
rers  %  who  were  called  Malefici  or  Workers  of  Evil  or

Mifchief*


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.  _

*

Mifchief,  as  fomc  call  them  3  thefe  are  the  kind  I
am  to  treat  of,  who  are  Workers  of  Evil  by  the
Affidance  of  an  evil  Spirit,  and  the  lad  are  called
Chaldaans ,  by  which  are  underdood  Foretellers  of
things  to  come,  who  underftand  their  hidden  and
fecret  Caufes.

This  Expofition  brings  us  down  to  the  Cafe  in
hand,  where  by  the  Word  or  Term  of  Magick  is
underdood  the  two  lad  forts,  who  working  Evil
of  feveral  kinds,  do  it  alfo  by  the  Affidance  of  an
evil  Spirit^  that  is  in  Englifh ,  by  the  Help  of  the
Devil,  by  Inchantment,  Conjurations,  and  corrupt
Methods.

The  Practices  of  thefe  People  were  many  ways
Diabolical,  even  in  thofe  days  3  and  if  we  may  cre¬
dit  King  James's  Account  of  them,  they  were  ra¬
ther  worfe  in  thofe  latter  Ages  of  the  World  than
in  former  times  j  but  of  that  in  its  Place.

Philo  Judaeus  carries  it  further  than  any  of  the  mod
ancient  Writers  and  Sages,  and  fays  that  by  this  kind
of  Magick ,  that  is  by  Aflrology ,  and  Qbfervation  of
the  heavenly  Bodies,  their  Motions,  and  Revolutions ,
Abraham ,  who  was  certainly  a  very  great  Magician ,
arriv’d  to  the  Knowledge  of  the  true  God  3  even  be¬
fore  he  came  out  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  3  that:  is  to
fay,  he  gather’d  from  the  wife  Government,  the  won¬
derful  Order  and  Motion,  and  the  immovable  De¬
crees  and  Revolutions  of  the  heavenly  Bodies,
that  there  mud  be  an  infinite,  wife,  and  intelli¬
gent  Being,  who,  as  he  was  the  fird  Caufe  of  their
Beings,  fo  he  was  like  wife  the  great  Director  of
their  Motions,  and  by  his  Appointment  every  thing
in  the  whole  Sydem  of  their  Operations  was  guid¬
ed  and  appointed  :  In  diort,  that  Abraham  learn’d
to  know  the  Creator,  by  the  Contemplation  of
the  Creature.  And  doubt  lets  as  this  ftudyof  Nature
direftly  leads  us  to  the  great  Author  of  Nature,  fo
Abraham  by  his  fincere  Application  to  the  fird,

D  2,  and


I6


A  SYSTEM

and  his  finccre  Defire  to  be  led  into  the  Number  of
the  laft;  God,  who  knew  thofe  Defires  of  his  Heart
to  be  fincere,  and  aiming  at  a  right  end,  was  plea-
fed  to  make  a  more  clear  Difcovery  of  himfelf  to
him  by  Vifion  and  Revelation ;  teaching  him  more
than  he  could  ever  have  obtain’d  by  all  the  Study
and  Application  imaginable.

It  is  not  doubted  however  that  Abraham  was  the
firft  teacher  of  Aftronomy  and  of  Arithmetick  in
the  World,  and  perhaps  of  the  feveral  Branches  of
the  Mathematicks  ;  The  Ancients  affirm,  that
he  taught  the  Phoenicians ,  that  is  to  fay  the  Cana-
anites  among  whom  he  liv’d,  and  the  Egyptians  alfo,
all  the  Knowledge  they  had,  whether  Philofophi-
cal  or  Divine.

Thus  then,  whatever  Notions  we  have  now  en¬
tertain’d  of  Magick  as  Diabolical,  yet  certainly,  as
our  Saviour  fays  in  another  Cafe,  in  the  beginning  it
was  not  fo.  In  the  firft  Ages  of  the  W orld,  the  Know¬
ledge  of  Magick  was  the  Wifdom  of  Nature;  and
nothing  but  Ignorance  brought  Men  to  proftitute
themfelves  to  the  Devil  for  the  encreafe  of  their
Underftandings.

And  this  indeed  is  the  way  by  which  Magick ,
and  the  Knowledge  of  the  molt  excellent  things,  has
been  abus’d  in  the  World;  when  Men  feeking  be¬
yond  themfelves  for  Knowledge,  and  ignorant  of
the  way  to  increafe  true  Knowledge,  have  been
impos’d  upon  to  make  ufe  of  wicked  and  diabo¬
lical  Methods  to  obtain  it;  the  Devil  not  only
readily  concurring  to  affift  them,  but  openly  adting
with  them  by  Concert,  to  encourage  the  De-
lufion.

Hence  the  weakelt  and  mo  ft  impotent  of  all
Capacities,  meer  Fools  excepted,  have  been  found
fufficient  to  make  Tools  for  the  Devil;  who  hard¬
ening  them  for  his  own  Work,  trains  them  up  to
his  Hand,  with  fuch  an  unwearied  Diligence,  that

nothing


of  M  A  G  l  C  K.

nothing  can  prevent  their  improving  in  his  Ser¬
vice.

Thus  while  Magick  is  the  Wifdom  of  Nature,
and  the  Magicians  of  thofe  Ages  were  the  wifed
and  bell  of  Men  y  the  Magicians  of  our  times,  and
of  this  new  kind,  improve  from  nothing,  begin
with  the  viled  of  Ignorance,  and  proceed  to  the
viled  of  Wickednefs,  till  they  come  to  be  the  mod
Diabolical  Creatures  in  the  World.

Magick  being  therefore  nothing  in  thofe  Times,
bur,  as  I  have  faid,  a  degree  of  ufeful  Knowledge,
and  the  Magicians  being  a  Race  of  honed  dudious
Men,  fcarching  after  Wifdom,  and  bled  with  greater
Shares  of  it,  than  the  ordinary  Race  of  Men  were
arriv’d  to;  we  mud  look  farther,  and  come
down  lower  into  Time,  for  the  prefent  vulgar  Ac¬
ceptation  of  the  Word:  In  which  Inquiry,  it
will  not  be  diffident  to  jump  at  once  from  the
beginning  of  things  to  the  prefent  times,  and  from
what  the  Magicians  were  in  Egypt  and  Chaldea ,  to
what  they  are  now  in  a  Chridian  Age:  But  we
mud  a  little  enquire  into  the  Gradations  of  the
Change,  and  fee  by  what  feveral  Progreffions  of
Art  the  ufeful  Magicians  of  thofe  Ages  have  come
on,  from  meer  Philofophy,  to  all  the  Extraordi¬
naries  of  Mydery,  Cunning,  Trick,  Cheat,  Star¬
gazing,  Fortune-telling,  Conjuring,  Witchcraft,
and  the  Devil;  and  if  this  be  not  an  Enquiry,
both  profitable  and  diverting,  I  mud  be  midaken
in  my  Subject,  or  in  my  Readers.  Let  us  enter
into  it  gradually,  and  with  Caution,  led  we  raife
the  Devil,  before  we  come  at  him.


D  j


37


CHAP.


38


A  SYSTEM

"V  ...  *

C  H  A  P.  II.

How  W'tfdom  and  Learning  advanc'd  Men  in
the  Ftrjl  Ages  to  Royalty  and  Government ,
and  How  Many  of  the  Magicians  were  made
Kings  on  that  Account ;  as  Zoroafter,  Cad¬
mus,  and  many  others .

IT  was  not  many  Ages  that  the  World  conti-
.  nued  in  a  Hate  of  Dullnefs,  equal  to  that  at  the
full  fcattering  the  Nations.  We  do  not  find  them
building  any  more  Babels ,  or  entertaining  them-
felves  with  fuch  grofs  Notions  any  more.

As  they  traveled  abroad  they  learned  Experience  j
they  faw  farther  into  Nature,  and  into  the  Rcafon
of  Things:  inftead  of  building  Ladders  and  Babels
to  reach  up  to  Heaven,  and  keep  them  from
drowning,  they  foon  learnt  to  build  Cities  to  keep
out  their  Enemies,  and  Ships  to  fail  upon  the
Water >  they  baffled  the  Fears  of  another  Deluge
not  by  their  Faith,  that  God  would  not  drown  the
World  again,  fo  much  as  by  the  belief  of  this
Whymfy,  that  feeing  they  could  fwim  in  Ships  and
Boats,  he  could  not  do  it*  or  that  knowing  they
could  live  upon  the  Water,  they  might  feem  not
to  care  whether  he  did  or  no.

In  this  travelling  Circumffance  they  grew  in
Knowledge,  as  I  fay,  and  at  leaft  fome  of  them
being  of  a  brighter  Genius  than  others,  advanc’d
beyond  their  Neighbours  in  Wifdom  and  Under-
Handing  both  fpeculative  and  practical  5  and  thefe,
as  they  gain’d  every  Day  more  Knowledge,  even  by
knowing,  fo  that  Knowledge  gain’d  them  infinite
Applaufe  and  EHeem  among  the  People.

Hence  every  afpiring  Genius  among  them  get¬
ting  the  Hart  of  the  reff,  either  in  real  or  affedted
Knowledge  of  things,  and  thereby  gaining  Ad¬
mirers  and  Dependents,  took  little  differing  Routs

in


M  A  G  1  C  K.


in  their  Wanderings  ;  and  wherever  they  thought
fit  to  plant  and  fettle,  they  built  Houles,  call’d  it
a  City,  and  the  Leader  made  himfelf  be  call’d  their
particular  King.

This  petty  Royalty,  as  it  was  rais’d  upon  the
foot  of  Chance,  rather  than  Blood,  and  upon  the
mean  Circum  fiance  of  a  bold  afpiring  Head,  which
a  (mail  fhare  of  Brains  above  its  Neighbours  gave
a  Title  to,  fo  it  feem’d  to  fubfift  on  the  foot  of  the
fame  Chance;  thofe  Kings  being  as  eafily,  and  as
often  depos’d,  as  they  were  either  over- power’d
by  their  Neighbours,  or  as  any  Decay  and  Defedt
of  the  bright  Part  that  rais’d  them,  caus’d  them  to
fink  in  the  Opinion  of  their  Subjects,  and  gave  the
King  of  the  next  City  a  better  Place  in  their  Favour*

Yet  this  Diminutive  Rank  of  Soveraignty  re¬
main’d  many  Ages  in  the  World;  and  we  find,  not
only  in  Abraham'1  s  Time,  when  the  five  Cities  of
the  Lake  or  Valley,  where  Sodom  flood,  had  five
Kings  over  them  $  and  afterwards  in  Jacob's  time,  the
City  of  Sichem  had  a  King  over  it;  but  even  at  the
coming  of  the  Ifraelites  into  Canaan ,  almofl  every
City  had  its  King;  and  we  have  a  great  deal  of
room  to  judge,  that  thefe  Kings  did  not  derive
from  a  patriarchal  Succeffion,  for  then  there  would
have  been  many  thoufandsof  Kings  more  than  there
were ;  but  from  the  exalted  Merit  of  the  Under-
flandings  and  Genius  of  fuefi  and  fuch  a  Perfon,
whom  the  People  thought  fit  to  admire  and  follow,
and  confequently  fubjedl  themfelves  to :  and  we  have
abundance  of  ^Examples  in  Hiflory  to  prove,  that
this  was  the  practice  of  thofe  firft  Ages.  But  this  is
a  dry  Study,  and  the  Search  after  their  Names  would
be  as  needlds,  as  the  Lift,  when  obtain’d,  would  be
tedious  to  read;  fo  I  leave  it,  and  go  on.

The  reafon  of  my  naming  this  Part,  is  not  to
fhow  the  Veneration  the  moft  early  Ages  of  the
World  had  for  Wifdom  and  Virtue;  for,  God  knowsy
thefe  Magi)  tho’  they  had  the  Merit  of  fame

D  4  Knowledge


40


A  SYSTEM

Knowledge  above  the  reft,  yet  we  do  not  find
they  had  a  much  greater  Share  of  Virtue  than  o-
ther  People :  But  even  as  we  find  it  now,  the  moft
knowing  Men  are  not  the  beft  Men*  even  fo  it
was  then,  every  wife  Man,  much  lefs  every  great
Man,  was  not  a  good  Man :  and  as  in  our  Age  it
may  be  fear’d,  we  have  more  Clergy  than  Ghri-
ftians  \  fo  there  were  in  thofe  Days  more  Sages
than  Saints :  till  at  laft  their  wife  Men  turn’d
whimfical,  their  Kings  Madmen,  their  Southfayers
meer  Conjurers,  and  their  Magicians  Devils :  Of  all
which  1  fhall  give  a  farther  Account  prefently.

I’ll  fuppofe  now,  that  the  Magicians  of  thofe
Ages  were,  as  I  have  defcrib’d  them  in  the  Chapter
before,  nothing  but  Men  fam’d  for  extraordinary
Knowledge  j  meer  Aftrologers ,  Philofophers,
Men  of  Study,  and  the  like.  You  will  next  fee
how  thofe  Men  frequently  rais  d  their  Fortunes  by
their  Wifdom,  or  rather  by  the  Opinion  which
the  ignorant  World  had  of  their  Wifdom  and  Ca¬
pacities.

Zorpafter  was  a  famous  Magician ,  in  the  Senfe
which  1  have  already  given  of  the  word.  Hiftory
tells  us3  he  was  a  great  Aftrologer,  and  foretold
things  by  his  Art,  which  were  to  come*  that  by
his  wonderful  Predi&ions,  he  obtain’d  fuch  a  Vene¬
ration  among  the  People,  that  the  Batlrians  ador’d
him  as  a  Man  fent  down  from  the  Gods,  or  if  you  like
it  as  well  in  Scripture  Terms,  as  a  Man  of  GOD  $
and  by  this  mighty  Opinion  which  they  had  of
him,  he  obtain’d  the  Empire  of  th &&a£trians.  This
muft  be  at  the  time  when  Ninus  was  Monarch
of  AJfyria\  for  he  was  afterwards  conquer’d,  dif-
poflefs’d  of  his  Dominions,  and  {lain  by  Semiramis ,
that  warlike  Widow  Queen  of  JJfyria.

They  report  that  he  foretold  he  fiiould  be  {lain
by  Lightning,  or  by  the  Fire  of  Heaven  -y  and  that
he  told  the  Jjfyrians ,  that  if  they  could  find  his
Allies,  they  fhould  carefully  preferve  them,  for

that


4^


of  MAGI  C  K.

that  their  Empire  fliould  continue  no  longer  than
while  his  Aflies  fhould  remain  in  Being;  that  after¬
ward  it  fell  out  accordingly,  that  he  was  kill’d  by
Lightning,  and  that  the  jiJJyrians  did  fo  preferve
his  Afhes,  but  that  they  were  afterwards  taken  from
them  by  the  Perfians ,  who  overthrew  their  Empire.

N,  B.  All  this  is  ilimm’d  up  thus  in  fa6t;  That
Zoroafter  left  behind  him  wholfome  Rules  of
Virtue  and  good  Government,  which  as  long
as  the  AJfyrians  kept  in  Memory,  and  wor¬
thily  follow’d,  they  were  profperous,  as  he
foretold  them  they  would  be;  but  when  af¬
terwards  they  degenerated  into  Vice,  and
cealed  to  obey  the  Rules  which  he  had  fet
them*  they  fell  into  Divifions  and  Fadions,
Civil  Wars  and  Devaftations,  which  at  length
ended  in  the  Ruin  of  their  Empire.

Cadmus ,  mention’d  before,  was  a  Phoenician ,  but
went  from  his  own  Country  and  fettled  in  Greece ,
where,  as  they  fay,  he  built  the  City  of  ‘Thebes ,
and  was  made  King  of  it,  in  confequence  of  the
Performance,  and  in  Veneration  of  his  Learning,
having  brought  fixteen  Letters  of  the  Greek  Alpha¬
bet  among  them ;  not  that  he  invented  thofe  Let¬
ters,  tho’  he  has  the  Fame  of  it  to  this  Day :  the
Letters  were  thefe ;  a,  /3,  7,  c/',  e,  yj,  x,  X,  v,  0,  7r,

<t,  t,  v ;  the  other  four  <P*  X,  *hcy  tell  us
were  afterwards  fupply’d  by  Palamedes  during  the
Siege  of  Troy.

But  the  Moral  of  the  Story  is  this,  that  Cadmus
came  from  Phoenicia  into  Greece ,  where  by  his
Learning  he  fnitru&ed  the  People,  civiliz’d  and
polifh’d  their  Manners,  and  taught  them  the
Knowldge  of  Letters;  direfted  them  to  build
Houfes,  and  inhabit  together  in  Towns  and  Vil¬
lages,  which  they  then'  called  Cities’;  and,  in  a
word,  introduc’d  among  them  Difcipline  and  good

Govern-


A  $  rs  T  E  M


Government:  in  Recompence  for  which  they
made  him  their  King,  and  call’d  their  firft  Town
fkebeS)  in  Honour  of  Cadmus ,  who  was  originally
of  the  Great  Egyptian  Thebes ,  a  City  much  more
ancient  than  the  Nation  of  the  Grecians.

Atlas  (alfo  mention’d  before)  was  an  African ,
confpicuous  for  his  Excellence  in  all  human  Wif-
dom  and  Knowledge  5  by  this  he  was  railed  to  fuch
a  height  in  the  Affedfion  of  the  People,  that  they
made  him  King  of  Mauritania  in  the  Northern
Part  of  Afric,  He  was  one  of  the  moft  learned
Magicians  of  the  Time,  and  by  his  Knowledge  in
the  Motions  of  the  Stars,  and  his  excellent  Judg¬
ment  in  the  good  Government  of  Nations,  he  is
feign’d  by  the  Ancients  to  carry  the  World  upon
his  Shoulders  j  that  is  to  fay,  his  Precepts  of  Govern¬
ment  fupported  the  Nations,  and  preferv’d  Order
and  Difcipline  in  the  World  1  and  for  this  he  was,
as  he  well  defer  v’d,  chofen  by  the  People  of  A  frig
to  be  their  King.

I  have  done  with  my  Examples  of  wife  Men  be¬
ing  made  Kings,  efpecsally  being  made  fo  for  their
Wifdora  too  \  and  indeed  to  what  purpofe  fliould
I  go  on  with  the  Account?  ’tis  not  pretended  the
Example  fliould  move  the  World  in  this  Age,  or
in  the  next :  the  World  at  prefent  has  no  great
occafion  for  more  wife  Kings  than  they  have 5  and
befides,  as  there  is  a  right  wife  Generation  riling
up  to  fupply  the  Place  of  Power,  as  faft  as  Nature
wears  off  the  Incumbents,  and  we  fee  no  Danger  of
wanting  a  fukable  Succeffion  $  fo  I  leave  that  part
of  the  Subjedt,  and  (hall  talk  of  another  Oafs.

The  Magicians  or  wife  Men  being,  as  I  have  thus
defcrib’d,  Men  of  Worth,  and  juitly  valued  in  the
World,  let  us  fee  how  long  they  held  it,  and  how
they  loft  that  Character.

The  firft  flep  which  I  meet  with,  which  Idle  ns
their  Figure  in  my  Account,  was  when  the  Magi

or


43


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

or  wife  Men  were  called  in  to  fupport  the  Govern¬
ment  of  the  Perfian  Empire:  And  here  they  ftiew’d
indeed,  that  Wifdom  is  not  the  only  Qualification  of
a  Prince  j  that  there  is  another  thing  requifite,  which
tho’  it  is  but  trifling  indeed  among  the  Moderns,
was  an  Eflential  among  the  Ancients,  who  found,
that  to  make  a  good  Governor,  it  was  requifite,
that  he  fhould  not  only  be  a  Wile  Man,  but  an
Honeft  Man*  and  in  defcft  of  this  Qualification*
the  Perfians  cut  the  Throats  of  all  the  Magiy  to
whom  they  had  committed  the  Government  of
the  Country  5  for  tho’  they  were  all  Philofophers,
and  wife  Men,  yet,  as  Fame  hands  it  down  to  us,
they  did  not  find  one  honeft  Man  among  them.

Thefe  Magi  are  called  by  fome  Priefts,  by
others  Philofophers,  by  others  Aftrologers*  it  is
certain  they  foretold  things  to  come,  or  at  leaft
made  the  People  believe  fo  *  as  in  the  Cafe  of  the
Queen  of  Perfia ,  Mother  of  King  Sapores.  The
Perfians  it  feems  were  in  great  Perplexity  for  want
of  a  King,  (there  were  no  Pretenders  at  that  time  to
put  in  their  Claim)  a  thing  which  very  feldom
happens  in  our  times:  The  Nobility  being  aflem-
bled,  in  order  to  confider  of  a  Nomination,  the
Magi  fent  them  word  that  they  fhould  not  pro¬
ceed,  for  that  the  Queen  Dowager  was  with  Child,
and  would  bring  forth  a  Prince,  who  fhould  be  a
mighty  King,  and  do  great  things  for  the  Honour
of  his  Country.

Upon  this  their  Confultations  broke  off,  and  with
great  Joy  they  fent  for  the  Queen,  and  laying  the
Crown  upon  her  Belly,  they  folemnly  crown'd  the
Embrio,  gave  it  the  Title  of  King,  and  faluted  it
King  by  the  Name  of  Sapor ,  or  Sapores ;  all  which
came  to  pafs:  And  yet  I  may  fay  all  this  might
come  to  pafs,  and  no  great  matterowing  to  the  Pro¬
phetic  Knowledge  of  the  Magi  y  for  the  Queen,  loth
to  have  a  King  chofen  too  foon,  before  ihe  knew  how

it


44


A  SYSTEM

it  was  with  her,  might  venture  to  fay  fhe  was  with
Child  3  or  at  leaft  get  the  Priefts,  'the  Magi,
to  fay  fo  for  her,  and  leave  the  reft  all  to  Fate  3  for
if  it  had  not  prov’d  fo,  no  body  was  injur’d,  and
it  would  only  have  been  faid  that  the  Magi  were
miftaken.

But  we  are,  if  you  pleafe,  to  fuppofe,  that  as  I
faid,  this  did  not  laft  long  3  the  low-priz’d  Learn¬
ing  of  the  Magicians  anlwer’d  very  well,  while  the
World  was  ignorant  in  Proportion  3  but  as  the
World  encreafed  in  People,  and  as  Years  went
over  their  Heads,  Knowledge  had  its  Gradations
too,  and  tho’  it  mu  ft  be  confefs’d  it  was  at  a  very  flow
Rate,  yet  fome  advances  they  did  make  3  and  as
Princes  feverally  were  lovers  of  Learning,  fo  they
encouraged  Men  of  Learning  too,  and  their  Num¬
bers  encereas’d,  as  well  as  their  Knowledge.

As  the  common  People  became  more  knowing
and  intelligent,  fo  it  behov’d  the  Magicians  to  advance
their  Studies,  and  feek  farther  into  the  more  fub-
lime  Parts  of  Learning,  to  prefcrve  the  Diftance
they  ftood  in,  from  the  lower  Glafs  of  their  Coun¬
trymen,  and  to  maintain  the  Refpeft  and  Venera¬
tion  which  as  I  faid  the  People  had  for  them  3  if
they  had  not  done  this,  they  had  foon  been  upon
a  Level  with  the  reft  of  Mankind  3  the  Rabble
had  been  their  Equals  in  Wifdom,  and  they  had
loft  themfelves  in  the  fuperior  Station  of  Magici -
ans ,  which  they  enjoy’d  before.

This  put  them  prefently  upon  fearching  farther
and  farther  into  the  Arcana  of  Nature,  purfuing
the  higheft  and  moft  elevated  Studies,  with  the
utmoft  Diligence  and  Application  3  advancing
from  one  thing  to  another,  ftill  to  keep  up  the
Figure  and  Charadter  of  wife  Men  which  they  had
before  3  that  is  to  fay,  being  ftill  as  many  degrees
•  above  the  common  fort,  however  the  common  fort
might  be  improv’d  in  Knowledge,  as  they  were  be¬
fore.  Nor


4?


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

Nor  was  this  difficult  to  do;  for  as  Knowledge
was  then,  and  even  is  ftill,  an  unexhaufted  Mine  and
Store-houfe  of  unvaluable  Treafure,  and  which  ftill
the  deeper  [it  is  dug  into,  difeovers  more  and  more
Riches,  and  an  infinite  variety  of  Rarities  and  cu¬
rious  things,  as  well  natural  as  artificial;  fo  the
farther  thefe  Men  of  Application  fearch’d  into  the
Arcana,  or  conceal’d  Treafures  of  Wifdom;  and
the  farther  and  greater  Experiments  they  made,  the
more  they  found  the  Search  anfwer  their  utmoft
Ambition;  the  more  they  knew,  the  more  they
difeover’d  yet  to  know;  and  all  their  Enquiries
made  good  the  modern  Diftich  made  upon  a  like
Subjeft.

What's  yet  difeover'd ,  only  ferves  to  Jhow
How  little's  known ,  to  what  there's  left  to  know .

This  was  not  only  an  Encouragement  to  the
wife  Men  of  the  Ages  we  fpeak  of,  to  go  on  in  their
Studies,  and  in  their  making  new  Difcoveries  in
the  hidden  and  moft  retir’d  parts  of  Nature;  but
it  fhew’d  that  they  were  ftill  able  to  maintain  the
Characters  they  bore  in  the  World,  and  to  make  good
the  DiftinCtion  which  was  formely  made  between
them  and  the  common  People;  fo  that  they  ftili
pafs’d  for  Magicians ,  wife  Men ,  and  Aftrologcrs,  as
they  really  atlaft  were;  and  for  Men  qualify’d  to  in-
ftruffc  the  ignorant  World  in  a  fuperior  Knowledge.

Take  them  then  in  this  new  Situation,  that  is  to
fay,  pufhing  on  in  the  commendable  fearch  after
Wifdom  and  Knowledge,  till,  as  Solomom-  fays,  they
dug  for  it  as  for  hid  Treafures ;  yet  the  common
People  follow’d  them  clofe  at  their  Heels;  the  Na¬
tions  grew  wifer  and  wifer,  as  well  as  the  Magi ;
till  in  ftiort  Art  began  to  fail,  or  rather  the  Num¬
bers  of  the  Men  of  Art  began  to  encreafe;  that  fo  ,
wife  Men  were  not  fuch  Rarities,  or  fo  high-priz’d
4  as


4  6  A  S  Y  S  T  E  M

as  they  had  been,  and  grew  daily  lefs  and  lefs  in
the  ordinary  Rate  and  Efteem  of  the  World.

Thus  in  fhort,  the  wife  Men ,  and  the  improving
World,  Teem’d  like  Men  running  a  Race,  in  the
purfuit  after  Knowledge  $  the  Magi  or  Southfayers,
or  what  you  pleafe  to  call  them,  had  gotten  the
Start,  and  were  a  great  way  a- head,  a  great  way
before  the  reft,  but  the  People  follow’d  and  ad¬
vanc’d  at  a  great  Rate.

And  this  brings  me  down  to  the  Point.

The  Men  of  Wit  and  Learning  being  hard  put
to  it  in  their  new  Difcoveries,  had  but  three  ways
to  preferve  the  Dignity  of  their  Profeilion,  and
keep  up  their  Credit  as  wife  Mine ,  that  is  as  Philo-
fophers,  Magi,  and  the  like.

1.  The  firft  was  to  purfue  vigoroufly  the  Study
of  Philofophy,  that  is  to  fay  of  Nature,  the  feveral
Branches  of  Aftronomy ,  Aftrology ,  Geemetry ,  and  the
like.

2.  The  fecond  was  to  pufh  into  the  Study  of  Art,
that  is  to  fay  Experimental  Philofophy.

3.  The  laft  was  the  Study  of  Reafon  (viz.)  Natu¬
ral  Homage,  and  the  Worlhip  of  the  Gods.

In  the  firft  of  thefe  they  went  on  with  great
Succefs*  nor  were  they  to  be  follow’d  by  the  com¬
mon  People,  whofe  Underftandings  could  never
come  up  to  any  uncommon  degrees  of  Science,  or
indeed  to  make  any  Pretcnfions  to  it  $  and  therefore
thofe  that  apply’d  to  this  Study,  kept  up  their
Credit  longer  than  any  of  the  reft.

Thus  the  three  wife  Men  of  the  Eaft  are  faid  to
come  into  Judaa  from  a  far  Country,  by  obferving
an  unufual  and  furprizing  Phenomenon,  (viz.) a  Star
at  Noon-day,  moving  in  a  particular  Orbit,  and
pointing  to  them  in  a  very  particular  Manner,  by
which  they  were  as  it  feems  dire&ed  to  follow  it,
in  order  to  make  an  extraordinary  Difcovery  of
fome  gteat  Birth,  and  of  fome  wonderful  Prince,

whom


of  MAGIC  K.

whom  therefore  they  ought  to  come  and  pay  Ho¬
mage  to.  Some  Authors  tell  us,  thefe  three  wife  Men ,
or  Magi,  were  three  of  the  Pofterity  of  Abraham %
by  Keturah  his  laft  Wife,  that  they  dwelt  in  Ara¬
bia  Felix,  and  that  they  had  it  revealed  to  them,
that  they  ftiould  fee  this  Star,  and  that  they  fhould
be  guided  by  it  to  fee  the  Great  Mejfiah ,  who  was
to  come  into  the  World  to  unite  the  Pofterity  of
Abraham ,  and  to  eftablifh  them  in  one  Kingdom,
which  ihould  rule  over  the  whole  World.  But  I
take  this  as  it  is,  viz.  a  Chimney-corner  Tale,  fit
for  a  Legend,  and  not  capable  of  any  manner  of
Improvement.

But  thus  far  ’tis  to  my  Purpofe,  namely,  that  the
Credit  of  the  wife  Men  of  the  Eaft  was  not  yet

?uite  funk  in  the  World  3  that  they  maintain’d  a
lorrefpondence  with  the  Stars  3  that  they  por’d
upon  the  heavenly  Motions,  and  knew  more  of  that
kind  than  all  that  ever  went  before  them.

As  the  Aftronomers,  and  Star-gazing  Magi  kept
up  the  Dignity  of  their  Charadfcers,  and  out-did  all
the  reft  of  Mankind  in  thofe  Ages  3  fo  the  fecond
fort  too  apply’d  themfelves  to  the  Study  of
lower  Life,  obferving  the  Mechanifm  of  Nature,
and  introducing  the  helps  of  Art,  even  to  perform
things  furprifing.  Among  thefe,  fome  fttidied  the
Microcofm  of  human  Bodies,  and  fearcht  both
Diftemper  and  Mediciii3  and  thefe  (that  is  to  fay,
the  Phyficians,  and  Naturalifts,)  obtain’d  a  noble
Afcendant  in  the  Efteem  of  the  Vulgar,  being  able
by  the  Knowledge  of  Drugs  and  Plants,  and  their
Venues,  to  apply  proper  Remedies  in  Cafes  of  the
greateft  Diftrefs  and  Difafter3  and  this  indeed  could
not  but  obtain  for  them  a  fix’d  and  large  Efteem
in  the  Minds  of  the  People,  whom  on  fo  many  Oc-
caftons  they  reliev’d.  Thus  the  firft  fearch’d  into
the  Curioftties  of  Nature,  the  fecond  into  the  Art
of  Phyfick,


48  A  8  T  $  T  E  M

b

But  the  third  were  a  very  particular  kind  indeed?
and  thefe  apply’d  themielves  to  the  Arcana  of  things
Divine 'y  and  at  this  Door  came  in  all  the  wicked
things,  which  have  fince,  with  fo  much  Juftice  too^
given  a  black  Chara&er  to  the  very  Name  of  a
Magician 'y  for  under  the  flieker  of  Religion,  the
word  and  mod  Diabolical  things  were  pra&is’d  s  and
in  a  few  Ages  more,  we  find  that  all  the  Magi *
dans  were  Prieds  in  JEgypty  or  according  to  fome,
all  the  Prieds  were  Magicians .  Some  have  offer’d  at
drawing  a  Paralel  from  this  to  our  times,  and  in
fome  Senfe  it  may  be  true,  but  in  others  doubtful.
For  if  by  Magicians  we  are  to  underdand  Philofo-
phers,  and  wife  Men,  I  fhall  never  be  brought  to
acknowledge  that  all  our  Prieds  are  Magicians ,  for
I  abhor  all  Slander.  But  to  go  back  to  the  Cafe
as  it  is  before  me,  certain  it  is,  that  the  wife  Men
finding,  as  above,  that  they  mud  take  new  Mea-
fures,  that  they  mud  have  Recourfe  to  fome  new
Art,  if  they  would  keep  up  the  Reputation  of  their
Wifdom  j  I  fay,  finding  it  thus,  they  apply’d  them*
felves  to  three  forts  of  Study.

The  fird  was  to  innocent  Art,  fecret  and  cun¬
ning  Contrivances  to  delude  the  Sight-,  this  we
call  Juggling,  Legerdemain,  or  philofophical  Delu-
fion,  fuch  as  I  fhall  mention  in  its  Place  5  but  this
would  go  but  a  little  way.

A  fecond  fort,  as  above,  apply’d  to  religious  Frauds,
and  fet  up  for  Coeledial  Delufions,  mixing  their
Magical  Performances  with  religious  Rites  ;  fo  de¬
ceiving  the  People  with  the  Opinion  of  Sanctity,
and  with  the  Belief  that  they  had  the  Aflidance  of
the  Gods.

In  Nomine  Domini  incipit  omne  malum .

Thefe  lad  dudied  indeed  Divinity,  fuch  as  it  was  5
and  how  unhappily  did  they  purfue  the  Myderies

they


1


of  M  A  G  I  G  K.

they  profefs’d !  for  firfl:  we  find  they  invoked  the
Gods,  and  not  finding  that  would  do,  they  chang’d
Hands  and  invoked  the  DeviL

FleElere  ft  nequeo  fuperos ,  Acheronta  moveho*

From  hence  it  is  that  I  fuppofe  our  wife  De®
fcribers  of  the  Magick  of  the  Ancients  tell  us
there  were  three  forts  of  Magick  •>  l.  Natural,
which  confifted  of  the  Parts  already  mentioned,
namely,  the  Knowledge  of  the  Stars,  the  Motions
of  the  Heavenly  Bodies,  and  their  Revolutions  and
Influences  j  that  is  to  fay,  the  Study  of  Nature,  of
Philofophy,  and  Aftronomy.  z.  Artificial  or  ratio®
nal  Magick,  in  which  they  included  the  Know¬
ledge  of  all  judicial  Aftrology,  the  calling  or  cal¬
culating  Nativities,  curing  Difeafes  by  Charms,  by
particular  Figures  placed  in  this  or  that  Pofition^
by  Herbs  gather’d  at  this  or  that  particular  Grids
of  Time,  and  by  faying  fuch  and  fuch  Words  over
the  Patient,  repeated  fo  many  times,  and  by  fuch
and  fuch  Geftures,  ftroking  the  Flefli  in  fuch  and
fuch  a  manner,  and  innumerable  fuch  like  Pieces
of  Mimickry  $  working  not  upon  the  Difeafe  it  felf,
but  upon  the  Imagination  of  the  diftemper’d  Peo¬
ple,  and  fo  effe&ing  the  Cures  by  the  Power  of
Nature,  tho’  that  Nature  were  fet  on  work  by  the
weakeft  and  fimplell  methods  imaginable.  But,
\ dly ,  the  lafl:  is  truly  called  Diabolical  and  hellifli
Magick,  which  was  operated  by  and  with  the
Concurrence  of  the  Devil,  carried  on  by  a  Cor®
fpondence  with  evil  Spirits,  with  their  Help,
Prefence,  and  perfonal  Affiftance,  and  chiefly
pra£tifed  by  their  Priefts.  And  thus  you  have
the  general  Syftem  of  Magick,  according  to  my
Title  :  But  I  mull  enter  a  little  into  the  Parti-
culars.


4  9


E


The


5o


A  SYSTEM

The  firft  Sort  of  this  Magick  I  have  alrea*
dy  deferibed  5  and  I  am  ftill  of  this  Opinion,  that
in  all  the  firft  Ages  of  the  W orld,  there  was  very
little  other  Magick  than  this  known  among  Men  5
That,  all  the  Diabolical  Praftices  of  the  third  Sort,
or  the  Art  and  Legerdemain  of  the  fecond  Sort
of  Magick,  was  perfe&ly  unknown  to  the  Ma¬
gicians  of  AEgypt  or  Arabia ,  or  afterwards  of  Chal¬
dea ,  at  leaft  for  a  great  while.

As  for  the  Magicians  of  Chaldea ,  I  have  named
them  already,  and  we  find  nothing  Diabolical  among
them  :  as  to  thofe  of  AEgypt ,  efpecially  fuch  as  were
ordinarily  called  fo,’tis  evident  alfo  they  were  gene¬
rally  the  fame  5  for  when  Pharaoh  King  of  AEgypt
dreamed  his  firft  Dream  of  the  feven  fat,  and  the  feven
leanKine,  Gen.  xli.  the  Words  are  exprefs,  ver.  8.  He
fent  for  all  the  Magicians  and  all  the  wife  Men  of  AEgypt  5
and  what  followed  ?  there  was  none  that  could  interpret
his  Dream.  Upon  which,  Jofeph  was  fent  for  5  where
by  the  way  you  may  obferve  the  difference  between
Jofeph  and  the  wife  Men  or  Magicians,  let  them  be
what  they  will.  The  wife  Men  came  when  they
were  fent  for,  and  they  put  the  King  to  the  trou¬
ble  of  telling  them  his  Dream,  and,  as  we  may  be¬
lieve,  went  away  to  confult  and  confider  of  an  An-
fwer.  If  they  could  have  amufed  the  King  with  any
fham  Anfwer,  fo  as  to  have  quieted  his  Thoughts,
which  were  difturbed  with  the  Oddnefs  of  the  Ap¬
pearance,  they  would  certainly  have  done  it  •,  whence
I  conclude  they  were  not  either  of  the  fecond  fort
of  Magicians,  who  by  Trick  and  Charm,  muttering
of  Words,  drawing  Figures,  and  fuch  empty  and
Ample  Formalities,  did  their  Work*  if  they  had,
they  would  certainly  have  cheated  the  King  with
fome  of  their  Impoftures  and  Legerdemain,  and
have  made  him  accept  of  this  or  that  wild  Story
for  an  Interpretation.


/


Nor


ft


of  MAGIC  K.

Nor  were  they  diabolical  Magicians,  fiich  as  by
a  real  and  immediate  Converfation  with  the  Devil,
or  fome  of  his  invifible  Agents  which  we  call  evil
Spirits,  wrought  their  ufuai  Wonders,  or  Delufions
like  Wonders  5  and  fuch  as  perhaps  thofe  after¬
wards  made  ufe  of  by  another  Pharaoh  King  of
JEgypt  really  were*  who  mimick’d  the  Miracles  of
Mofes  in  the  fight  of  the  King  and  his  Court  :
If  they  had  been  fucb,  the  Devil  would  not  have
fuffer’d  them  to  be  fo  difgraced  before  their  Lord,
as  to  go  away  and  fay  they  could  make  nothing
of  it,  nor  give  him  the  Interpretation*  the  Devil
would  certainly  have  furnifhed  them  with  fome
kind  of  Interpretation,  true  or  falfe,  at  lead:  fuch
as  fliould  have  fatisfied  the  King  for  the  pre-
fent.

N.B.  It  is  very  reafonable  to  fugged;  here,  that
thefe  Magicians  and  wife  Men  of  JEgypt ,  and
fo  thofe  afterwards  at  Babylon ,  had  been  ufually
called  together  before,  upon  fuch  Occafions
as  thofe  *  that  they  had  often  interpreted  Dreams,
perhaps  for  the  King  himfelf,  as  well  as  for  other
People*  that  fometimes  they 'did  perhaps  make
fuch  Interpretations  as  came  to  pafs,  by  which
they  maintained  much  of  their  Reputation  a  -
mong  the  People,  as  wife  Men  and  as  Magi¬
cians  :  the  fame  we  fee  pra&ifed  among  us  to
this  day  by  many  an  ignorant  old  Woman,
without  the  leaft  Claim  to  the  venerable  Name
of  Magician ,  much  lefs  of  Wife  *  alfo  we  cannot
doubt  but  that  the  Kings  of  jEgypt  and  of  Ba-
bylon  did  expedb  and  believe  thofe  Magicians
could  interpret  if  they  would  *  it  had  been
elfe  a  prepofterous  piece  of  Cruelty  in  Nebu¬
chadnezzar  to  put  all  the  Magicians  and  wife
Men  to  death,  becaufe  they  did  not  tell  him
his  Dream  and  the  Interpretation,  if  he  did
really  believe  they  were  not  able  to  do  it*  for

E  2,  ;  his


A  SYSTEM

^tis  certain  they  did  not  pretend  to  be  able  to
tell  the  Dream,  tho’  they  did  pretend  to  tell
the  Interpretation  3  but  he  certainly  believed
they  were  able  to  do  both.


But  when  Pharaoh  comes  to  talk  with  Jofeph ,  he
honeftly  tells  the  King  it  was  not  in  him  5  modertly
diverting  himfelf  of  all  Claim  to  the  Honour  which
he  forefaw  was  going  to  be  put  upon  him,  and
giving  up  the  Praife  to  the  fupream  Agent,  to
whom  it  was  due,  v.  3  <5.  It  is  not  in  me ,  hut  God
Jhall  give  Pharaoh  an  Anpwer  of  Peace 3  and  then  he
goes  on  to  interpret  the  Dream.

I  give  you  this  as  an  Evidence  of  the  Diffe**
rence  in  the  Kinds  of  Magick  pradtifed  in  thofe
times  3  the  firft  Sort,  ’tis  plain,  were,  as  has  been
defcribed,  meer  Men  of  Learning,  Marters  of  Sci¬
ence,  namely,  the  Knowledge  of  Nature,  ftudying
Philofophy,  Aftronomy,  and  the  like  3  fome  pradti-
fing  one  way,  fome  another  3  fome  looking  up  a-
mong  the  Stars,  others  down  among  the  Plants  $
fome  into  the  Microcofm  of  Man,  and  pradtifing
Medicine  for  the  Cure  of  Difeafes  3  fome  judging
of  Dreams  and  Omens,  others  of  Signs  and  Appea¬
rances,  and  ail  according  to  their  feveral  Studies,
and  the  feveral  Branches  of  Science  which  they  ap¬
plied  themfelves  to  3  but  not  any  Sorcery  or  Devil-
work  among  them  at  that  time,  or  for  fome  hun¬
dreds  of  Years  after.

But  come  now  to  the  fame  Country,  viz.  Mgypt^
for  here,  it  feems,  the  Devil  began  firrt  to  converfe
with  Mankind,  or  Mankind  with  him  rather,  in
this  familiar  manner  3  I  fay,  come  to  the  fame  Coun¬
try  at  the  diftance  of  lefs  than  two  hundred  Years,
or  thereabout,  and  there  you  find  the  Magicians
turned  into  another  fort  of  People,  or  rather  another
fort  of  People  mix’d  with  them  3  for  when  Mofes  and
Aaron  go  to  Pharaoh  to  demand  the  Liberty  of

the


si


6f  M  A  G  I  C  K.

die  Israelites ,  and  fhow  Miracles  or  Signs  before
him,  ’tis  faid  Pharaoh  fent  for  the  Magicians,  &c.
and  they  did  the  like.

But  then  let  us  fee  how  the  Text  diftin-
guifhes  the  kinds,  and  you  will  find  ’tis  exactly
according  to  my  prefent  diftindtion  :  Before,  ’tis
faid  Pharaoh  fent  for  the  Magicians  and  wife  Men
of  FEgypt.  See  Gen.  xli.  8.  But  now  the  Style  is
changed,  as  the  People  werealfo,  Exod.  vii.  1 1.  Pha¬
raoh  called  the  Sorcerers  and  Magicians  of  JEgypt%
and  fee  then  how  they  adbed,  ver.  zz.  and  the  Magi¬
cians  did  the  fame  with  their  Inch antments  5  and  the  like
in  feveral  other  Places :  fo  that  here  the  Magicians  and
wife  Men  were  of  another  fort,  for  they  adled  by
a  Diabolical  Pra&ice,  as  Sorcerers  and  Dealers  with
the  Devil  *  befides  ’tis  every  where  faid,  they  did  it
by  their  Inchantments,  which  we  never  find  fo
much  as  mentioned  before  *  no,  nor  afterwards  a-
mong  the  Chaldeans  and  the  Magicians  of  Perfia  and
Ajjyria ;  but  they  adted  by  the  meer  Force  of  their
Wifdom  and  Learning,  viz.  the  Study  of  Nature;
and  when  that  failed  them,  they  acknowledged
they  had  no  other  Power,  and  could  go  no
farther.

Now,  as  I  faid  before,  having  pafs’d  thro*
the  belt  of  the  Art,  and  the  firft  and  only  honed
Part  of  the  Pradlice,  it  follows,  that  we  con-
fider  the  Subfequent  Progressions  of  the  People
called  Magicians,  what  they  have  been  underftood
to  be,  what  they  now  are  in  the  World,  and
what  we  are  to  underftand  by  the  Word  when  we
fay  Magick  or  a  Magician  ;  and  this  is,

Firft ,  A  Jugler  or  Shower  of  Tricks  by  Legerde¬
main  and  Slight  of  hand*  which  I  call  only  a  fiiam
Magick,  and  which  the  World  has  been  indeed  de¬
luded  with  for  many  Ages.

Secondly ,  A  real  Sorcerer  or  Wizard  that  deals
with  the  Devilj  who  converfes  familiarly  with  the

E  3  old


H


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

old  Gentleman,  has  him  at  his  Call,  fetches  him,
fends  him  of  Errands,  raifes  him,  lays  him,  ufes
him,  upon  all  Occafions  and  in  all  Difguifes,  as  he
finds  Occafion.

That  there  have  been  fuch  as  thefe  in  the  World,
muft  be  true,  or  Hiftory  muft  be  one  univcrfal  Le¬
gend  of  Lies,  and  we  muft  have  been  deluded  and
impofed  upon  by  all  the  Writers  and  Regifter-
jkeepers  that  ever  have  been,  were,  or  are  in  Being  j
nay  even  the  facred  Writings  confirm  it,  and  there¬
fore,  with  the  Pardon  of  all  our  modern  Unbelievers,
who  deny  there  is  fuch  a  thing  as  a  Devil  or  evil
Spirit  in  Being,  either  in  the  World  or  out  of  it,
I  fay  with  their  good  Leave,  I  muft  take  it  for
granted.

Now  tho’  I  could  bring  many  Examples  among
the  Moderns,  where  ’tis  moft  certain  that  fome
walking  Gentlemen  among  us,  who  have  look’d  as
if  they  had  nothing  in  them  more  than  other  People,
have  really  been  a  Cage  of  Devils ,  and  as  the  Text
calls  them  Unclean  Spirits,  yet  I  muft  at  prefent
look  a  little  higher,  becaufe  I  am  refolved  to  bring
fuch  Evidence  as  cannot  be  denied.

Firfti  The  Scripture  fays  of  Judas ,  that  with  or
after  the  Sop  the  Devil  enter’d  into  him,  Johnx iii.
27.  And  after  the  fop  Satan  enter'd  into  him ,  that  is,
into  Judas  $  and  in  the  fame  Chap.  v.  2.  the  Devil
having  put  it  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Ifcariot,  Simon’*
Son,  to  betray  him:  and  again,  St.  Paul  fpeaking  to
Elymas ,  whom  the  Text  calls  in  totidem  verbis  the
Sorcerer ,  calls  him  thou  Child  of  the  Devil .  This,
and  all  the  Teftimonies  of  the  Devil’s  being  miracu-
loufly  difpoflefs’d  by  cur  Saviour,  and  by  his  Difciples
and  Apoftles,  will  put  it  out  of  queftion,  not  only
that  there  is  fuch  a  thing  as  a  Devil ,  but  alfo  that
he  has  PofTeflion  of  feveral  of  his  Servants  in  hu~
man  Shape.^

.>*.  •  -  *

But


of  M  A  G  l  C  K.

But  this  is  not  the  cafe  at  all,  for  I  am  not  now
upon  the  Proof  of  the  Reality  and  Exiftence  of  the
Devil *  that  has  been  worthily  undertaken,  and  hi-
florically,  mathematically,  and  enthufiaftically  e«
nough  Perform’d  by  a  late  Writer  in  another
Place:  But  I  am  now  talking  of  a  Set  of  People
who  were  not  poffefs’d  BY,  but  rather,  as  it  may
be  called,  are  pofiefs’d  OF  the  Devil *  have  him  in
their  keeping  and  Cuftody  *  where,  by  the  way,

I  do  not  find  but  that  the  Devil  feems  to  be  very
much  in  Subjection  to  them*  whether  it  be  volun¬
tarily,  and  fo  perhaps,  like  an  obfequious  Dog,  that
fawns  for  what  he  can  get  *  He  (the  Devil)  creeps  and
cringes,  in  order  the  better  to  carry  on  his  own
Defigns,  which  indeed  is  not  at  all  improbable*  or
whether  there  were  Ways  and  Means  which  thefc
antient  People  had  found  out,  by  what  fuperiour
Power  I  know  not,  to  fubje£t  the  Devil  to  their
Orders,  and  make  him  their  humble  Servant  upon
all  Oecafions,  to  run  and  go,  fetch  and  carry,  at
their  whiffle :  All  thefe  critical  Enquiries  may  per¬
haps  come  in  my  way,  when  I  come  to  talk  more
particularly  of  the  Magick  of  our  prefent  times,  and
the  Management  of  our  modern  Cunning  Men,  who
pretend  to  have  the  Devil  in  a  String,  make  him
jump  over  a  Broomftick,  dance  and  Show  Tricks,
as  the  Mountebanks  and  Merry-Andrews  do  with
a  Bear  and  a  Monkey.

I  muff  confefs,if  I  can  but,  in  my  further  Search
after  thofe  things,  find  out  the  Method  the  antient
Magicians  had  to  manage  the  Devil  thus,  and
bring  him  to  their  hand,  and  can  convey  the  Art  to
Poflerity,  or  at  lead:  fet  up  a  Scheme  for  the  prefent
Improvement  of  it,  I  fhall  not  doubt  but  I  ihall
meet  with  Encouragement  5  and  if  the  eminent
Mr.  JVh  — on  will  but  (loop  to  join  in  with  my
Defign  (as  I  doubt  not  he  will,  if  there  be  but
Money  to  be  got  by  it)  we  may  publifh  our  Read-

E  4  ingss


n


A  SYSTEM

ings,  and  fet  up  Le&ures  for  the  Inftru&ion  of
young  Magicians,  and  that  with  extraordinary  good
Succefsj  nor  do  I  think  the  reverend  Mr,  Em- — in
would  (lick  out :  for  why  fhould  we  doubt  but
they  who  have  already  levell’d  their  Saviour  with
a  Clafs  infinitely  below  the  Devil,  and  made  a
meer  Devil  or  Apparition  of  the  great  Teacher  and
Sanftifier  of  the  World,  would  willingly  fet  up
Leftures  in  Favour  of  the  Devil  himfelf,  if  they
can  find  their  account  in  it.

Befides,  when  we  are  thus  engaged  in  Satan’s
Service,  and  in  Conjun&ion  with  his  Friends  and
Favourites,  We  cannot  doubt  but  the  Devil  him¬
felf  will  be  fo  much  obliged,  that  he  may  come
frankly  and  Voluntier,  and  let  us  into  the  Secret,
bind  himfelf  Apprentice  to  us  for  a  Term  of
Years,  and  enable  us  to  play  the  Devil  with  him
for  the  Time  to  come,  as  he  had  played  the  De¬
vil  with  us  for  fo  many  Years  paft.  Nor,  if  he
be  a  grateful  Devil ,  can  he  do  lefs  %  for  no  Men  in
the  World  feem  better  qualified  to  advance  his  In-
tereft  in  the  main,  however  for  the  prefent  we
may  feem  to  keep  him  in  a  little  Subjeftion.

On  the  other  hand,  if  he  fhould  prove  an  un¬
grateful  Spirit,  and  hang  an  A — ,  as  the  Modeft
call  it,  being  unwilling  to  come  into  Bondage  j
then,  I  fay,  we  muft  try  if  we  can’t  find  the  way
to  do  it  without  him,  and,  by  our  Black- Art^  play
the  Devil  with  him,  and  force  him  to  come  when
he’s  called,  go  when  he  is  fent,  and  do  as  he  is
bid  5  as  our  Predeceflors  the  antient  Magicians  of
/Egypt  did  before  us,  who  made  him  affift  Mofes  and
Aaron ,  and  make  Frogs,  and  Snakes,  juft  as  they
directed  him:  tho’ it  feems  when  they  commanded
him  to  make  Lice,’  the  leaft  and  loufieft  Creature
of  ’em  all,  the  honeft  Devil  confefs’d  it  was  out  of
his  Power,  that  God  was  above  the  Devil ,  and  that
(in  a  Word)  he  could  not  do  it $  by  which  (however)

he


of  MAG  1  C  K.

he  loft  a  great  deal  of  his  Credit  with  his  Em¬
ployers,  and  perhaps  with  the  King  himfelf.

That  the  Devil  aflifted  the  Magicians  of  Adgypt
to  do  thofe  things,  or  in  ftiort,  that  they  made  ufe
of  him  as  their  Instrument,  is  plain  from  the  Text,
viz.  that  they  did  it  by  their  Inchantments :  What
manner  of  Conjurings  or  Inchantments  they  were
that  they  made  ufe  of,  we  have  no  particular  light
into  from  the  facred  Text  3  but  perhaps  fome  Guefs
may  be  made  at  ir,  from  what  happen’d  frequently
in  thofe  Countries  in  after- Ages.

Alfo  we  find  that  whatever  the  Magicians  in
Perfia ,  and  in  Media ,  and  in  thofe  Eaftern  Countries
were,  (for  their  Credit  continued  many  Ages)  yet  in
ALgypt  they  were  (after  that)  chiefly  Sorcerers  and
Dealers  with  the  Devil 3  and  in  a  word,  Adgypt
feem’d  to  be  the  Nurfery  of  human  Devils  for  all
the  World.  Hence  Baalim  is  called  a  Witch,  and
hence  in  the  Roman  times  the  ^Egyptian  Sorcerers
were  brought  to  Antioch  for  the  Afliftance  of  Ju¬
lian  the  Apoftate,  to  utter  Predidtions,  and  to  flat¬
ter  the  Emperor  with  their  good  Omens  and  their
Prognoftications  j  in  which  he  was  fo  fuperftitious,
that  they  put  the  grofleft  Delufions  upon  him,  ’till
the  Citizens  of  Antioch  made  a  jeft  of  him,  and  ex-
pofedhis  Inchantments  to  Ridicule  3  for  which,  had
he  lived  to  come  back  from  the  War  in  Perfia ,  he
had  vowed  a  fevere  Revenge.

Hence  alfo  the  ^Egyptians ,  are  to  this  day,  the
common  Strollers  of  the  World,  and  are  fucceeded
by  a  Race  of  Vagabonds  who  pretend  to  the  Art,
without  the  real  Wickednels  of  it,  and  would  be
thought  to  deal  with  the  Devil,  when  the  Truth
is,  they  know  little  or  nothing  of  him.

I  fuppofe  I  need  not  tell  you  that  the  Word
Gypjie  is  derived  from  thefe  llrolling  Magicians ,
which  really  came  out  of  ALgypt ,  and  wandering
over  the  World,  got  Money  by  their  pretending


A  SYSTEM

to  Magick,  telling  Fortunes,  predi&ing  Events,  and
Mountebanking  the  World  with  their  Inchant-
mentsj  ’till  at  laft  having  tired  the  Devil  with
following  them,  and  the  Drudgery  of  their  Ser¬
vice  being  not  worth  his  while,  Satan  left  them  j
and  they  have  been  fince  that,  for  fome  time,  in

the  Clafs  of  the  well-known  Cardinal -  who

pretending  to  an  Acquaintance  with  the  Devil,  and
to  have  three  inferior  Daemons  appointed  to  wait
on  him,  the  Devil  fent  thofe  three  Daemons  to
tell  his  Neighbours  ’twas  all  a  Cheat,  and  that  he,
Safari^  had  nothing  to  do  with  him.

’Tis  very  ftrange  Men  fhould  be  fo  fond  of  being
thought  wickeder  than  they  are  >  that  they  cannot
forbear,  but  that  they  muft  abufe  the  very  Devil,
and  claim  Kindred  of  him,  whether  he  has  any
Knowledge  of  them  or  no :  But  thus  it  is,  and  we
need  not  go  to  j£gypt  for  Examples,  when  we  have
fo  many  pieces  of  dull  Witchcraft  among  our
felves.

It  is  true  the  Devil  does  not  often  decline  an
Acquaintance  where  he  can  find  his  Account  in  it  5
and  therefore  the  eminent  Do&or  — —  may  hope,
that  after  a  little  farther  Application  to  Herefy  and
Blafphemy,  he  may  be  thought  worthy  of  Admit¬
tance  into  Satan’s  Favour,  at  leaft  fo  much  as  to
fettle  a  Correfpondence,  that  fo  they  may  a£i  in
concert  for  the  future.

I  am  told  fome  have  thought  it  a  particular  Re¬
putation  to  them  to  have  it  fuppofed  they  maintain
a  Correfpondence  of  this  kind,  which  mu  ft  be  up¬
on  the  foot  of  Satan’s  Credit,  fijppofing  that  he
knows  who  is  fit  for  his  Bufinefs,  and  who  not,
and  that  they  rauft  be  all  capable  Heads  that  he
thinks  fit  to  be  concerned  with  in  this  manner*  for
as  wife  Princes  always  chufe  wife  Councellors,
the  Devil  underftands  the  Capacities  of  his  Friends
fo  well,  that  he  is  never  mistaken  in  his  choice*
6  but


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

but  they  that  are  concerned  with  him  muft  at
leaft  be  of  the  Cunning  Clafs,  for  he  has  no  Incli¬
nation  at  all  to  Fools.

This  brought  fom$  juft  Refledtions  into  my
Thought  upon  the  Conduit  of  our  Times,  and  im¬
mediately  cleared  up  the  Charaiters  of  fome  of  the
greateft  Politicians  of  our  Age,  at  leaft  in  my  Opi¬
nion,  feeing  ’tis  evident  they  either  have  too  much
Brains,  or  too  little,  for  the  infernal  Corrdpondence  *
let  the  World  judge  which  of  the  two  is  their
Cafe.

I  fay  it  cleared  up  the  Charaiter  of  fome  great
Men  to  me,  and  I  concluded  they  were  no  Ma¬
gicians,  that  they  neither  pra&ifed  Magick  in  the
firft  Senfe,  as  Philofophers  3  or  in  the  laft  Senfe,  as
Conjurers 5  what  they  mightdo  in  the  middle  Senfe,
as  Jugglers,  that  remains  to  be  enquired  into  as  Op¬
portunity  may  prefent.

Indeed  I  run  over  in  my  Refledtions  the  prefent
Situation  of  1110ft  of  the  publiek  Affairs  in  Europe ,
the  Prime  Minifters,  grand  Viziers,  the  Statefmen,
the  Counfellors,  Generals,  Admirals  >  the  Clergy,
whether  Popifh  or  Proteftant,  Greek  Church,  or
Roman  Church,  Chriftian  or  Mahometan  5  and  I  muft
fpeak  it  to  their  Honour,  that  except,  as  a  late
Writer  taught  me  to  except,  our  own  People,  our
own  Country  and  Country  Worthies,  I  can  fee  no
reafon  to  think  any  of  the  prefent  Managers  to  be  Ma¬
gicians  $  whether,  as  above,  we  confider  the  Magi¬
cians  to  be  Philofophers,  or  as  Jannes  and  Jambres ,
Inchanters  and  Conjurers.

But  having  fpoken  of  the  two  feveral  forts  of
Magick ,  1.  Honeft  Magick,  which  I  have  proved
to  be  only  the  Study  of  natural  Philofophy  and
Aftronomy,  and  fuch  ufeful  Parts  of  Knowledge,
which  the  Learned  call  Natural  Magick  \  and,
zdly,  Diabolical  or  infernal  Magick,  which  is  a
pradtifing  by  the  Help  of  Demons  or  evil  Spi¬
rits,  It


A  SYSTEM

It  remains  then,  that  I  fliould  at  leaft  mention
the  third,  or  which  before  I  placed  as  fecond  in
Order,  which  is  Artificial  Magick ,  that  is  to  fay,  a
meer  Legerdemain  or  Juggling  with  Nature:  Thi§
is  managed  by  the  Wit  and  Dexterity  of  Man,  with
the  Advantages  of  concealed,  occult  Powers,  known
in  Nature,  but  unknown  and  unfeen  by  vulgar
Heads  and  Eyes*  and  fuch  Fame  tells  us  have  been
carried  to  extraordinary  heights,  fuch  as
i.  The  Glafs  Sphere  of  Archimedes,
z.  The  wooden  Pidgeon  of  Ar  chit  as.

3.  The  golden  Birds  of  the  Emperor  Leo^
which  fung.

4.  The  brazen  Birds  of  Boetius ,  which  did  both
flng  and  fly  3  and  his  brazen  Serpent,  which  could

hifs.

To  which  we  may  add,  Fryar  Bacon’s  brazen
Head,  which  fpoke.

Thefe  were  all  Impofitions  upon  the  Sight  or
Hearing  of  the  People  3  as  no  doubt  the  Phofphorus
would  have  been,  which  makes  Fire  burn  without
Heat,  and  without  confuming  the  Matter 3  and  had
a  Man  in  thofe  days  of  Invention  found  out  a  Load -
ft  one ,  what  Wonders  might  he  not  have  performed
by  it  ?  what  would  have  been  faid,  to  fee  him  make  a
piece  of  Iron  dance  round  a  Table,  while  the  Agent
held  the  Magnet  underneath  3  make  another  piece
of  Iron  touched  with  it,  fufpend  a  third  in  the  Air,
and  the  like  3  make  it  draw  one  End  of  a  Needle  to
it,  and  then  drive  it  from  it  again,  as  the  Poles  of
the  Magnet  were  turned  and  diredted  ?  Will  any
Man  believe  but  he  that  firlt  fhewed  thefe  unac¬
countable  things,  would  have  palled  for  a  Magician,
a  Dealer  with  the  Devil ,  nay,  or  rather  for  a  real
Devil  in  human  Shape  ?

Whoever  had  firft  brought  fuch  a  wonderful  Stone
into  view  as  our  ordinary  Chalk-ftone,  calcin’d  and
turned  into  Lime,  fuppofing  it.  never  to  have  been

heard


of  MAGICK.

heard  of  before,  and  diown  with  it  the  Rarity  of  its
Operation,  viz.  that  if  you  threw  it  into  the  Fire,  it
would  put  the  Fire  out,  and  if  you  put  it  into
Water  it  would  burn.

Thefe  are  fome  of  the  Delufions  of  Artificial
Magicians ,  and  fuch  as  thefe  the  World  has  been
full  of,  till  now  we  begin  to  be  too  Wife  to  be
cheated  any  longer  that  way  5  but  as  to  State-jug¬
glers,  the  Magick  of  the  Party- mongers  *  Religious-
jugglers,  and  the  Magick  of  the  Pulpit,  with  divers
other  lefs  fatal  Kinds,  I  believe  they  are  at  this
time  in  the  Meridian  of  their  Practice  and  Succels*
or  near  it  5  what  height  they  may  go  farther  we
do  not  indeed  certainly  know,  it  mult  be  left  to
Time.

And  thus  you  have  an  honed  Sydem  of  the  Sci¬
ence  called  Magick ,  according  to  the  Title  of  this
Undertaking.


CHAP.  III.

Of  the  Reafon  and  Occafion  which  brought
the  ancient  honeft  Magi,  whofe  original
Study  was  Rhilofophy ,  Aftronomy ,  arid  the
Works  of  Nature ,  to  turn  Sorcerers  and
Wizzards ,  and  deal  with  the  TDevil ;  and
how  their  Cornier  fat  ion  began .

HAVI N  G  thus  dated  the  Fa£t,  and  given  you
what  I  call  a  Syftem  of  Magick ,  ’tis  neceflary
now,  that  in  purfuance  of  my  Title,  I  fhould  in¬
fill:  more  particularly  upon  the  third  and  lad  fort  of
Magick  I  mention’d,  and  which  is  call’d  Diabolical ,
or  according  to  the  vulgar  Acceptation,  the  Black -
art ,  and  bring  it  out  to  you  from  its  very  foun¬
dation.


This


A  SYSTEM

This  muft  be  deduced  Hiftorically  from  the  o
ther  two,  or  elfe  I  cannot  lead  you  regularly  into
its  Original,  or  give  you  its  true  Defcription  \  be-
fides,  a  great  many  ufeful  and  agreeable  Specula¬
tions  offer  themfelves  in  the  rife  and  progrefs  of  the
thing  it  felf,  which  will  be  moft  neceffary  to  fpeak
to,  as  we  go  along.

Magick  did  not  jump  at  once  into  Being,  as  to
the  thing  it  felf 5  it  was  not  a  Revelation  from
Hell,  made  at  once  to  Mankind,  to  tell  them  what
they  might  do :  The  Devil  did  not  come  and  offer
his  Service  Gratis  to  us,  and  reprefeming  how
ufeful  a  Slave  he  would  be,  folicit  us  to  take  him
into  Pay,  and  this  at  once  without  Ceremony  or
Introduction.

Noj  no ,  it  was  a  long  Progreffion  of  Studies,  and
Improvement  in  wicked  and  mifchievcus  Schemes,
that  brought  Mankind  to  have  recourfe  to  the  In-
fernals,  to  feek  the  Aid  of  the  dark  Agents
below,  and  to  follicit  a  Commerce  of  that  kind  :
Nor  was  this  done  till  after  finding  many  Diffi¬
culties  in  their  other  way,  they  faw  evidently  they
could  not  do  without  him,  could  not  accomplilTi
their  mifchievous  Defires  by  other  Methods,  and  that
this  way  it  was  to  be  done.

Not  but  that  the  Devil  was  very  ready,  when  he
found  himfelf  made  neceffary  3  I  fay,  he  was  very
ready  to  come  into  the  Schemes  when  propos’d,
and  toferveus  incur  Occafion,  and  that  with  a  Wil-
lingnefs  which  was  extreamly  obliging 5  which  fhew’d
him  to  be  a  Perfon  of  abundance  of  Complaifance,
and  mighty  willing  to  engage  us  whatever  it  coft
him  $  as  much  as  to  fay,  he  was  glad  he  could  ferve
us,  was  ready  to  do  his  utmoft  for  us,  and  the  like.

Now  to  go  back  briefly  to  the  Occafion  which
brought  the  Magicians  to  the  Neceffity  of  fee  king
to  him  for  Affifhmce,  and  to  take  him  into  the  Ma¬
nagement  of  their  Affairs  3  the  Cafe  was  in  fliort

this :


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.  <?3

this:  The  World,  as  I  have  faid  already,  began  to  be
wifer  than  the  Ages  before  them  j  the  ordinary
Magick  of  the  former  Ages  would  not  pafs  any
longer  for  Wifdomj  and  if  the  wife  Men,  as  they
were  called ,  did  not  daily  produce  fome  new  Dif*
coveries,  ’twas  evident  the  Price  and  Rate  of
Sonthfaying  would  come  down  to  nothing.

If  this  put  them  upon  Stratagem  and  Art,  in  or¬
der  to  keep  up  their  Credit,  and  maintain  the  Di-
ftance  between  them  and  the  inferior  Rank  of
Men,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder’d  at  >  and  thefe  Strata¬
gems  were  of  feveral  kinds,  as  the  Occafion  and  the
Wit  of  the  Undertakers  prefented*  for  you  are  to
fuppofe  the  inquiring  Temper  of  the  common  Peo¬
ple  to  be  arriv’d  to  fuch  a  Height,  that  nothing
could  pafs  with  them  for  True,  at  lead:  nothing
which  had  any  Novelty  in  it,  unlefs  it  was  con¬
firm’d  by  fome  ftrange  thing,  forae  Sign,  fome
Miracle  to  be  wrought,  by  which  the  Mind  re¬
ceiving  a  due  Impreffion,  entertain’d  the  reft:  of  the
propos’d  Wonder  with  the  more  Satisfaction.

At  firft  the  Magicians  fatisfy’d  the  Curiofity  of
the  People  by  Juggle  and  Trick,  by  framing  ar¬
tificial  Voices  and  Noifes  $  foretelling  ftrange
Events,  by  mechanical  Appearances,  and  all  the
Cheats  which  we  find  put  upon  the  ignorant  Peo¬
ple  to  this  Day 5  and  it  would  be  tedious  to  enu¬
merate  the  Particulars  by  which  they  impos’d  upon
one  another.  You  may  guefs  at  them  by  fuch  as
are  mention’d  before  >  but  principally  thofe  who
ftudied  the  heavenly  Motions,  had  great  Opportu¬
nities  of  recommending  themfelves  for  Men  of
Craft,  pretending  to  tell  Fortunes,  calculate  Nati¬
vities,  refolve  Doubts,  read  the  Lines  of  Nature
drawn  in  the  Face,  Palms  of  the  Hand,  Symetry
of  the  Body,  Moles  and  Marks  on  the  Flelh,  and
the  like,


Thefe


<54  A  SYSTEM

Thcfe  things  they  carry’d  to  a  due  Length,  and
we  find  the  Succefs  was  fo  much  to  their  Ad¬
vantage,  that  the  whole  World,  or  great  Part  of
it,  has  been  Gypfey-ridden  by  them,  even  to  this
Day.

It  would  fill  a  Volume  larger  than  I  propofe
this  fliall  be,  to  give  an  Account  of  the  feveral
Stratagems  thofe  People  had  Recourfe  to,  in  the
early  Days  of  Sorcery  and  Magick, ,  in  order  to  main¬
tain  their  Charafter  in  the  World  as  extraordinary.
For  I  mu  ft  do  them  fo  much  juftice  as  I  go,  to
obferve,  that  they  did  not  immediately  run  to  the
Devil  for  Help)  or  at  ieaft,  if  fome  among  them
dealt  in  the  Dark,  and  correfponded  below,  they
did  not  all  do  fo*  perhaps  they  were  not  harden’d
enough  at  firft  for  the  carrying  on  fuch  a  Traffick.
5Twas  anew  Commerce,  and  had  fomething  a  little
Ihocking  at  firft,  till  the  neceffity  of  their  South-
faying  Circumftances  brought  them  to  comply  with
any  thing  rather  than  lofe  their  Trade.

The  Egyptians ,  you  muft  know,  were  a  People
originally  attended  with  two  things,  which  natu¬
rally  made  way  for  thefe  Magical  Studies.

i.  Moft  impertinently  Inquifitive,  grofly  Igno¬
rant  in  the  main,  (as  Ignorance  would  be  called
now,  but  mighty  Wife,  as  things  were  rated  at  that
time)  and  prying  into  every  thing  with  an  irre-
fiftible  Paffion  for  what  they  call’d  Knowledge)
on  this  Account  they  pafs’d  for  the  wifeft  Nation
on  Earth,  and  AEgypt  was  efteem’d  the  Center  of
Learning  and  Knowledge.  Hence  Mofes  was  faid
to  be  learned  in  all  the  Wifdom  of  the  A Egyptians .
It  is  true,  and  they  are  upbraided  with  it  by  the
Ethiopians  of  Arabia  Felix ,  which  they  call  the
South )  and  who,  tho’  Arabians ,  are  call’d  Ethiopi¬
ans  in  Scripture  3  1  fay,  it  is  true,  that  the  Egyp¬
tians  learned  all  their  Magick,  that  is,  their  Aftro-
nomy  and  Aftrology,  from  the  Arabians )  and  they

tell


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

tell  us  that  Abraham  inilrudted  his  Son  Ijhmael ,  in  all
the  fuperior  Knowledge  in  which  his  Poilerity
afterwards  grew  fo  famous.

2.  With  this  inquifirive  Temper  of  the  AEgypti~
ans ,  they  were  alfo  mod:  ridiculoufly  Superilitious>  I
fay,  mod  ridiculoufly,  becaufe  it  fhew’d  it  feU  in
that  fordid  and  moil  fimple  Idolatry  which  they  had
mong  them,  in  which  they  funk  below  the  com¬
mon  Notions  of  Worfhip  pradlis’d  by  the  moil
ignorant  Nations  in  the  World  5  for  they  wor-
fhip’d,  or  made  a  God  of,  almoft  every  thing  that
came  in  their  way  5  as  the  Ox,  the  Calf,  the  Wa¬
ter  of  Nile,  nay  the  River  it  felf,  the  Sand,  the
Crocodiles,  and  numberlefs  things  as  fenfelefs  as
thofe.

As  thefe  things  were  peculiar  to  them  as  a  Na¬
tion,  fo  they  particularly  qualify’d  them  to  be  im¬
pos’d  upon  by  their  Southfayers  and  Magicians,
with  alb  manner  of  Delufions*  nor  did  the  fubtle
Magicians  fail  to  make  their  Advantage,  upon  all
Occafions,  of  this  fuperflitious  and  inquiring  Hu¬
mour  of  the  People,  but  ufed  all  poffiblc  Stratagem
and  Art  to  delude  and  impofe  upon  them.

To  this  purpofe,  they  loon  mixt  their  Religion
and  their  Magick  together,  their  Philofophy  and  their
Idolatry  were  made  Affiftant  to  the  general  Fraud,
and  to  raife  a  due  Veneration  in  the  Minds  of  the
People:  To  this  or  that  particular  Tale  advanc’d
by  their  Priefts,  they  brought  always  along  with
them  fome  extraordinary  Revelation  from  the  Gods,
fome  wonderful  Difcovery  in  Nature,  or  fomething
ftrange  and  miraculous.

How  llrangely  does  religious  Enthufiafm  keep  its
hold  of  Mankind,  and  how  exadlly  do  pail  things
and  preient  correfpond !  As  the  End  is  the  fame,  fo
are  the  Means:  pious  Frauds  got  ground  from  the
Beginning,  and  pious  Frauds  get  ground  to  the
End.  As  no  Cheats  are  fo  fatal  as  thofe  which

F  come


66


A  S T STEM

Come  prefac’d  with  Introdu&ions  of  Religion,  fo
no  Cheats  are  fo  eafy  to  prevail,  fo  foon  make  Im-
preffions  upon  the  People,  or  ftamp  thofe  Impref-
lions  deeper.

The  Priefts  among  the  ^Egyptians ,  when  they
turn’d  Magicians ,  (or  rather,  I  fhould  have  faid,  the
Magicians ,  when  they  turn’d  Priefts,)  fet  up  for  Re¬
velation,  I nfpi ration,  and  a  Conversation  with  their
Gods>  and  for  this  purpofe  they  withdrew  into  the
Defarts  and  Waftes,  of  which  the  Country  is  known
to  be  full  5  and  where  to  their  Glory  (Shame)  be  it
fpoken,  the  Religious  of  th eRomiJh  Church  play’d
the  fame  Game  over  again,  fome  Ages  afterward.

Hither  the  ^Egyptian  Priefts,  I  fay,  retir’d  for
Converfation  with  their  Gods,  from  whence  they
were  fure  to  come  back  infpir’d,  that  is  to  fay,
fill’d  with  fome  new  Delufion  to  irnpofe  upon  the
People.  Here  they  cut  facred  Marks  upon  the
Trees,  and  then  brought  them  back  as  the  Lan¬
guage  taught  them  from  the  Gods>  and  by  which
they  pretended,  alter  muttering  over  them  fome
unfignifying  Significations,  to  utter  fome  Anfwers
to  any  Difficulties  propofed  to  them  $  and  then
fending  their  Votaries  into  the  Wildernefs,  they
would  fet  them  to  fearch  for  the  fame  Divine  Cha-
rafters  5  which  after  long  looking  for,  they  would
find  upon  fome  Stone,  or  Poft,  or  Tree,  and  come
home  in  Raptures  for  the  Difcovery.

Others  of  thefe  Divine  Magicians ,  or  Diviners
rather,  would  clamber  up  to  the  top  of  the  Pyra¬
mids,  whofe  immenfe  Height  we  have  fuch  certain
Accounts  of,  as  may  make  the  climbing  up  feem
incredible,  whatever  elfe  may  not  be  fo.  Yet  here
they  went  to  make  Obfervations,  and  Calculations
of  the  heavenly  Motions,  fome  fay>  but  according
to  others,  to  make  their  Conjurations,  their  facred
Retreats,  and  to  carry  on  the  Delufion  of  converfing
with  the  Gods.


Here


6?


of  M  AG  1C  K.

Here  alfo  they  cut  their  Diabolical  Marks,  which
the  ^Egyptians  call  the  Sacred  Charadters,  which
they  left  behind  them  indeed  in  the  Stone  upon  the
upper  fiat  of  the  Pyramid}  for  according  to  the
learned  Greaves ,  the  Summit  of  the  Pyramid  was
not  a  Point  as  the  top  of  a  Spire,  or  as  reprefent-
ing  a  Flame,  and  which  by  its  great  Height  it  feem’d
to  be}  but  the  uppermoft  Part  form’d  a  Plain,
which  Stephanas  in  his  Comment,  fupplying  the
Defedt  in  Herodotus ,  makes  to  be  eight  Qrgy'ue ,
which  again,  according  to  Suidas ,  is  a  Fathom ,  or
fix  Foot}  fo  that  the  Plain  on  the  top  of  the  Pyra¬
mid  muff  be  eight  Fathom  fquare:  Others  report  it
to  be  nine  Foot  only,  tho’  I  think  the  former
more  probable.

But  be  that  as  it  will,  here  ’tis  certain  they  made,
or  found  made  by  others,  certain  dark,  Myftick,
and  as  they  pretended  facred  Charadters,  whofe  Sig¬
nifications  were  reprefented  by  the  Priefts  juft  as
they  pleas’d}  for  we  have  reafon  to  believe  they
had  not  then  the  ufe  of  Letters}  and  as  fome  think,
thefe  myftick  Charadters  were  the  Original  of  all  the
Hyeroglyphick  Writing,  which  was  afterwards  the
ordinary  Pradtice  of  the  ^Egyptians ,  till  the  Hebrew
Charadters  were  handed  to  them  by  Mofes ,  from
the  Writing  of  God  deliver’d  him  at  Mount
Sinai .

It  is  very  well  obferv’d  by  the  learned  Author
juft  now  nam’d,  that  had  not  the  Priefts  flood  in
need  of  fomething  extraordinary,  to  make  their
cceleftial  Converfe  feem  more  Weighty  and  Impor¬
tant,  all  their  Aftronomical  Obfervations  might  as
well  have  been  made  from  the  plain  of  the  Rock
upon  which  thofe  Pyramids  are  built,  and  which
fupport  the  Foundation }  which,  as  he  takes  notice,  is
it  felf  fo  elevated,  that  in  a  Country  which  is  all  a  low,
flat  and  level  Surface,  for  near  fifty  Miles  every  way,
and  affords  a  fair  Horifon,  is  as  well  fuited  for  all

F  z  fuch


<58


A  SYSTEM

fuch  Obfervations  as  require  a  large  extended  Pro-
fpedt,  as  it  would  be  if  it  were  feven  or  eight  hun¬
dred  Foot  higher,  which  is  fuppofed  to  be  the
Height  of  the  Pyramid.

But  the  Reafon  is  evident;  the  mounting  the
Steps  or  Degrees  of  the  Pyramid  on  the  out-fide,
was  a  work  of  vaft  Labour,  and  feme  Hazard ;
Every  Head  could  not  bear  the  Elevation ;  every
Mind  could  not  have  Refolutson  to  undertake  it ;
few  would  venture  up  to  examine  the  Truth  of  the
Chara&ers,  or  bring  down  Copies  of  them,  much
lefs  examine  into  the  Nature  of  them.  And  if  they
had  gone  up  it  was  enough,  the  canning  Priefts
had  impreft  them  there,  and  left  the  Originals  up¬
on  the  top  Stone  of  the  wonderful  Building,  magi¬
cal  and  awful  in  it  felf;  and  as  it  was  really  fo,
that  there  the  Chara&ers  were  to  be  feen,  it  was
no  hard  matter  to  perfuade  the  credulous  fuperfti-
tious  People,

1.  That  they  were  written  there  by  the  Finger
of  the  Gods:

2.  That  the  Interpretation  of  them  was  given  by
Infpiration  to  the  fame  Priefts,  or  wife  Men,  who
firft  difeover’d,  and  brought  down  the  Chara&ers
themfelves.

How  far  thefe  Delufions  have  prevail’d,  and  do
to  this  Day  prevail  among  the  ^Egyptians ,  I  need
not  tell  you;  ’tis  enough  to  fay  it  has  gone  fuch  a
Length,  as  has  encouraged  Enthufiallic  Pretenders,
and  made  jEgypt  the  Nurfery  ox  Witchcraft  to  the
whole  World.

But  why  ftiould  we  think  it  ftrange  to  have  Di¬
vinity  and  Magick  thus  blended  together  in  a  Coun¬
try  fo  fuperftitious  as  JEgypt?  Has  there  not  been  a
ftranger  Mixture  of  Magick  and  Witchcraft,  not
omitting  Prieftcrafr,  in  all  kinds  of  Religions  ever
fioce,  and  is  it  lefs  among  the  Politer  Religions
now  in  Vogue,  rWn  it  was  in  thofe  Days?


To


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

To  begin  at  the  very  Pinnacle  of  the  Church,
and  to  leave  Judaical  Magick  all  behind  us,  tho’
they  had  the  Devil  almoft  in  every  Synagogue  $  I
fay,  to  begin  at  the  Pinnacle  of  the  Church,  How
many  Popes  in  particular  does  Hiftory  give  us  an
Account  of,  who  have  been  Sorcerers  and  Conjurers,
and  who  have  dealt  with  the  Devil  in  the  moft  open
and  avow’d  manner?  How  has  t \\zRomiJh  Church  been
eftablifht  upon  the  Artificial  Magick  of  the  Clergy  ?
and  how  juftly  may  we  fay  to  her,  as  Jehu  to  the
King  of  Ifrael ,  What  Peace ,  while  the  Whoredoms  of
thy  Mother  Jezebel  and  her  Witchcrafts  are  fo  many?

But  not  to  make  our  Enquiries  a  Satyr  upon  our
felves,  in  falling  upon  Popery,  where  we  are  equally
guilty  -y  let  us  recommend  it  to  our  Moft  Reve¬
rend,  and  Right  Reverend,  to  put  our  own  Ecclefi-
aftick  Affairs  into  fuch  a  good  Pofture,  that  we
may  have  no  Magick  among  us>  that  while  we  pull
down  the  formal  Magicians ,  we  may  not  fet  up  the
cunning  Men  upon  the  Fall  of  the  wife  Men ,  and
ere£t  Herefy  in  the  room  of  Schifm.

Some  People  pretend  our  Modern  Divinity  is  fo
Magical  in  its  own  Nature,  that  it  is  not  eafy  to
feparate  them  *,  that  is,  in  a  word,  the  Devil  has  fo
far  encroach’d  upon  the  Church,  that  it  is  impoffible
to  caft  him  out:  the  Truth  is,  if  it  was  not  fo,  we
fhould  hardly  have  fuch  a  ftruggle  as  has  now  been
among  us  to  keep  the  true  Lord  in  Pofleffion.  And
fince  the  Church  has  but  one  true  and  rightful
King  and  Sovereign,  there  would  never  have  been
fuch  a  bold  Attempt  to  depofe  him,  if  the  Devil,
the  ancient  Ufurperof  his  Throne,  had  not  been  at
work  again  to  ftep  up  in  his  Room.  But  we  fball
have  occafion  to  fpeak  of  this  Part  more  plainly  by
and  by.

It  was  with  great  Succefs,  that  the  a Egyptian
Priefls  went  on  in  the  manner  as  above,  and  their
Artificial  Magick  went  a  great  way  in  all  the

F  3  Eaftern


70


A  SYSTEM

%

Eaflern  World  j  they  were  counted  the  beft  and
wifeft  Men,  who.  Mountebank  like,  could  fhow
ni  oft  Tricks,  and  invent  the  mo  ft:  furprizing  things
to  take  with  the  Vulgar,  fo  as  to  give  their  Words
the  Force  of  an  Oracle,  and  entitle  them  to  the
Charafter  of  Divine  and  Prophetick:  And  thus
we  may  fuppofe  the  World  going  on  for  many
Ages,  till  at  length, to  come  nearer  our  ownTimes,
and  indeed  nearer  to  the  P  raft  ice  of  our  own  Times
too,  their  Mimickry  was  exhauiled  5  they  had  no
more  Tricks  to  play,  the  juggling  Trade  grew
Hale  and  dull,  the  World  began  to  look  beyond
them,  and  expefted  fomething  more  5  and  fo  the
laftj  I  do  not  fay  the  Church  Jugglers,  went  to  the
Devil  for  Help.  I  had  rather  tell  you  that  another
Generation,  who  had  always  been  true  Magicians ,
true  Prafticers  of  the  Diabolical  Part,  came  in  play
of  courfe,  and  fucceeded  the  firft,  who  gradually
depofed  themfelves  by  their  meer  Impotency  }  and
as  Darknefs  is  a  deprivation  of  Light,  and  fuc-
ceeds  it  by  the  meer  Confequence  of  things,  fo  the
honeft  Ignorance  of  the  innocent  Magician  being
.  unable  to  keep  the  Expeftation  of  the  People  up,
and  anfwer  the  Importunities  of  the  Age,  dealing
with  the  Devil  fucceeded,  even  by  the  meer  Con¬
fequence  of  things.

The  new  Magick  coming  thus  in  Play,  let  us  fee
tow  it  made  its  firft  Entrance  in  the  World,  and  in
what  Shapes  it  began  to  appear  $  inwhich  Search  we
{hall  find,  in  fhort,  that  Religion  Hill  open’d  the
Door.  For  as  the  Devil  afpir’d  at  nothing  more
from  the  Beginning  than  to  be  fet  up  for  a  God,  fo
he  always  built  his  Chappel  clofe  by  God’s  Church}
it  was  in  the  Confequence  of  this,  that  the
Priefls  were  always  his  more  Jm  mediate  Correfpom
dents.  How  long  they  continued  fo,  but  efpecially
when  the  Correfpondence  ceas’d,  would  be  a  Dis¬
covery  worth  making  to  the  World:  but  O  how
difficult  1  "  It


7i


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

It  is  indeed  to  be  obferv’d,  and  the  Devil  has
done  us  Chriftians  that  Juftice,  that  Satan  has  dis¬
cover’d  his  Attachment  to  the  Pagan  Rites  in  Di-
flin&ion  from,  and  Oppofition  to,  the  Chriftian
Worfhipon  many  Occafions,  and  that  particularly  as
perhaps  the  latter  is  more  fitted  to  introduce  Devil-
worfhip  in  the  World*  we  have  fome  Inftan-
ces  of  his  making  this  Diftin£Eion,  particularly
when  the  Emperor  Julian ,  while  he  was  only
Ctefar,  and  had  not  declar’d  himfelf  Apoftate,  (nay,
was  perhaps  more  inclin’d  to  be  a  Chriftian  than  a
Pagan,  for  he  was  Educated  a  Chriftian,)  I  fay,  it
was  obferv’d,  that  he  was  perverted  from  Chri-
ftianity,  and  confirm’d  a  Pagan,  by  Maximus  &  Ma¬
gician.

N.  B.  This  Maximus  was  a  Magician ,  when  the
Word  Magician  fignified  no  more  a  wife  Man,
or  a  Southfayer,  but  a  down-right  Conjurer,
a  Matter  of  the  Black-art,  or  One  who  dealt
the  Devil.

Nor  was  it  that  the  Magicians  were  Favourers  of
Paganifm  only,  but  fuch  was  the  Subtilty  of  the
Devil,  that  indeed  the  Pagan  Worfhip  confifted
much  in  Sorcery  and  Magick,  Conjurings,  Invo¬
cation  of  Devils,  and  railing  evil  Spirits*  by  Thefe
the  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  Paganifm  werefuppor-
ted.  ’Tis  faidof  the  famous  Champion  of  the  Chri-
fti  in  Religion,  Athanafias ,  that  he  underftood  all  the
Myfteries  of  the  Pagan  Theology*  but  we  are  not
come  to  that  Length  in  our  Enquiries  yet.

The  Devil  had  a  great  many  good  Reafhns  to
befriend  the  Pagan  Worfhip,  rather  than  the  Cbri-
ftian  *  for  that  indeed  the  Subftance  of  Paganifm
was  a  Diabolical  Syftem  in  it  felf,  and  to  worfhip
the  Heathen  Gods,  was  EfTentially  to  worfhip  the
Devil,  as  we  fhall  fee  in  its  Place.

F  4


We


y%


A  S  r  S  T  E  M

We  mud  obferve  here,  that  the  Curiofity  of
Man  in  the  mod  early  Times  was  never  fully  grati¬
fied,  hut  when  his  Underdanding  was  as  it  were
confounded,  when  he  was  under  fome  Adonifhment
and  Surprize?  at  feeing  or  hearing  fome  itrange
thing.  The  Pharifees,  when  they  were  attacking
our  Saviour,  as  they  almod  were  always,  and  when
as  they  thought  they  infulted  him,  ask’d  him  what
Sign  doed  thou  fhow,  that  thou  doed  fuch  things
as  thefe?

And  in  other  Places  ’tis  faid,  when  he  did  per¬
form  fome  miraculous  Things  they  were  adonifii’d
at  him  5  Adonifhment  introduces  Silence,  Men  are
fil'd  amaz’d,  and  have  nothing  to  fay,  and  then  Nature
dictates  Credulity  as  the  Confequence,  viz.  that
when  they  are  thus  fur  priz’d  with  Wonder,  they
fliould  confequently  believe  the  Perfon  who  fo  ado-
nifh’d  them  with  his  Miracles:  tho’,  by  the  way,  it
was  not  always  fo  with  the  Jews,  for  they  were
amaz’d,  and  yet  did  not  believe  neither  3  in  which
they  were  fomething  of  Kin  to  an  unbelieving
Chridian  in  our  Town,  of  Ecclefiadic  Fame  too 3
who  fays  he,  wonders  and  is  adomfh’d  at  the  Ma~
jedy  of  the  Scripture  Style,  and  yet  does  not  be¬
lieve  a  Word  they  fay.  A  bolder  Infidel  I  have  not
met  with  fince  I  was  lad  at  the  Pagan  Circle,
near  old  Charing,  where  God  was  own’d,  fworn
by,  imprecated,  blafphem’d,  and  deny’d,  all  in  a
Breath.

But  to  go  on:  The  Curiofity  of  Mankind  I  fay
was  never  fully  fatisfy’d,  but  when  fomething  won¬
derful  was  offer’d,  and  therefore  Miracle  was  im¬
mediately  call’d  for,  when  any  new  Sydem  was
offer’d,  or  any  thing  difficult  propofed.

Thus  when  Gcd  fent  Mofes  and  Aaron  to  Pha¬
raoh,  he  fuppofes  the  very  Cafe  3  Mofes  and  Aaron
were  to  allure  Pharaoh  that  God  fent  them,  and
they  were  in  his  Name  to  demand  Liberty  for  the

;  -  Children


of  MAGI  C  K.

Children  of  Ifrael .  The  Demand  was  furprizing:
’twas  an  infolenr  thing  indeed,  for  a  couple  of
Slaves  to  come,  and  ask  the  King  to  releafe  fix
hundred  thoufand  Men,  Slaves  like  themfelves,
from  their  Captivity,  and  from  the  King’s  Service,
whofe  Subjefts,  or  rather  Servants,  they  were  5  and
Pharaoh  ’tis  to  be  fuppos’d  began  to  refent  it  3  nay
we  may  fuppofe  without  any  Prelumption  thtf.  Pha¬
raoh'  s  Courtiers  made  Game  at  ’em,  and  his  Mini-
fters  of  State  perhaps  propos’d  to  puniili  them  for
their  Impudence,  and  for  putting  fuch  Notions  into
the  People’s  Heads,  which  might  be  dangerous,
and  might  excite  Tumulcs  and  Rebellion 3  and
therefore  it  was  Prudence  to  fupprefs  the  Infolence,
and  make  Examples  of  the  two  pretended  Ambaf-
fadors.

But  hold  !  fays  Mofes ,  we  do  not  come  to  affront
your  Majefty ,  nor  are  the  People  we  come  to
fpeak  for  inclin’d  to  revolt  or  rebel  $  but  we  come
from  God  5  the  People  of  Ifrael  whom  we  rcprefent
are  God’s  chofen  favourite  Nation,  tho’  they  are
your  Servants,  and  they  are  commanded  to  go  three
days  Journey  into  the  Wildernefs,  to  perform  a
great  Sacrifice,  and  make  a  great  Feaft  to  him  $  and
therefore  we  come  to  defire  your  Leave,  that  we
may  go  peaceably  and  do  the  Duty  of  our  W or-
fhip  5  alluring  your  Majefty,  that  God  himfelf,  who
has  thus  commanded  us  out,  has  fent  me  to  you  to
demand  your  Affent.

God  fent  you !  fays  the  King :  a  fine  Story  for  you  to
put  into  the  People’s  Heads  to  make  them  idle,  and
hinder  my  Bufinefs*  go,  get  you  gone  to  your
Work,  and  to  your  Task,  or  I  fhall  find  a  way  to
drive  thefe  Whymfics  out  of  your  Heads  again.

But  ftill  Mofes  and  Aaron ,  with  other  the  Heads
of  the  Ifraelites*  (for  there  were  many  more  with
them)  infilled,  that  they  were  fent  by  the  immediate
Dire&ion  of  God  himfelf.  And  how  do  you  prove

that,


73


/


a  s  r  s  r  e  m

that,  fays  the  King,  what  Sign  do  you  give  me
that  you  come  With  fuch  an  Authority  ?

With  this  Mofes  replies  to  Pharaoh ,  I  fhall  foon
convince  your  Majefty  that  I  am  fent  by  the  Great
King,  and  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth :  and  with
that  turning  to  Aaron ,  he  fays  to  him,  Brother ,  Throw
down  the  Staff,  or  Rod,  that  is  in  your  Hand,
upon  the  Ground  before  the  King.

Aaron  does  fo,  throws  down  his  white  Staff,  and
immediately  it  Was  turn’d  into  a  Serpent.

The  Learned  have  fpent  fome  Thought  upon
what  kind  of  Serpent  this  fhduld  be  5  but  that  is  not
to  my  Purpofej  nor  are  their  Conjectures  of  any
Weight,  efpecially  that  foolifh  Notion,  that  it
was  the  fame  kind  of  Serpent  as  appear'd  and  talk’d
to  Eve  in  Paradife,  and  that  it  walk’d  ereft  in  Pha¬
raoh's  Prefence,  fo  that  it  frighted  the  King.

But  Pharaoh  recovering  the  Surprife,  tells  them,
What  does  this  fignifie?  you  fhall  fee  I  have  Peo¬
ple  of  my  own  can  do  as  much  as  this.  Upon
which  his  two  chief  Conjurers  or  Magicians  were
call’d  in  j  ’tis  fuppos’d  they  were  at  hand,  for  the
Devil  is  feldom  out  of  Call  when  he  is  wanted  for
any  Mifchief.

Upon  this  conies  James  and  Jatnbres ,  fo  St.  Paul
call’d  them,  and  the  Text  fays  they  were  two  Ma¬
gicians^  and  perhaps  there  might  be  a  great  many
more  of  that  fort  $  for  it  feems  the  King’s  Court
was  not  then  without  a  fufficient  Number  of  Cler¬
gy  in  daily  Waiting.  And  the  Text  adds,  Pharaoh
call’d  the  wife  Men ,  and  the  Sorcerers  $  and  the  next
Word  calls  them  Magicians ,  and  not  only  Magi¬
cians  in  common,  as  the  Word  was  ufed  Perfonally,
but  as  it  was  ufed  Nationally,  The  Magicians  of
jEgypt :  whence  ’tis  inferr’d,  that  there  were  fome
Magicians  not  only  more  Eminent  than  others,  but
fuch  as  were  in  publick  Office  there  3  as  the  Emi¬
nent  Dr.  PL  ...  ,  may  be  call’d  the  King’s  Aftro-

nomer*


.  of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

nomer,  or  as  the  more  Eminent  Mr.  Flamfiead  ufu-
ally  call’d  himfelf  the  King’s  Star-gazer  >  and  if  it
was  not  fo  that  thefe  Men  were  in  ordinary  At*
tendance,  and  in  Pay,  how  fhould  they  be  brought
in  fo  foon,  while  Mofes  and  Aaron  were  in  the
Prefence  ?

Well,  thefe  Men  being  call’d  in,  Pharaoh ,  in
Contempt  of  Mofes  and  Aaron ,  and  the  Sign  or
Miracle  they  had  ihewn,  ask’d  them  if  they  could
not  do  that  as  well  as  Aaron  ?

They  readily  anfwer  Yes,  and  fall  to  Paw-waw*
ingi  as  the  Americans  call  it,  and  ufing  their  Irichant-
mens,  invoking  or  whifpering  their  Daemons,  or
what  other  Diabolical  Arts  they  might  ufe  we
know  not  5  but  upon  this,  and  their  Staves  or  Rods
being  caft  down,  they  were  turn’d  into  Serpents
too.

This  was  enough  to  make  Pharaoh  triumph  over
Mofes  and  Aaron ,  and  their  Company,  and  deriding
their  Mirale,  tell  them  infultingly,  this  did  not  at  all
teftifie  their  Miffion  from  God,  for  they  might  fee
his  wife  Men  could  turn  Rods  into  Serpents  as  well
as  they.  Nor  did  the  Diftin&ion  which  God  was
pleas’d  to  (how,  by  fuffering  Aaron's  Serpent  to  de¬
vour  or  fwallow  up  the  Serpents  of  the  A Egyptian
Sorcerers,  alter  the  Cafe  with  Pharaoh  $  for  that,
as  an  Accident,  did  not  import  any  thing  at  all  in  the
Cafe.  And  thus  he  fent  them,  or  rather  drove
them,  away  with  Contempt,  and  immediately  fent
Taskmalters  among  the  People  to  double  their
Affii&ions,  encreafe  their  Labours,  and  force  them
to  make  Brick  without  Straw.

Well,  Mofes  and  Aaron  come  again  with  the
fame  Meflage,  and  it  had  the  fame  Event,  they  are
Banter’d  and  ridicul’d  :  As  if  the  King  had  call’d  to
them  thus*  Well,  you  are  come  again,  and  you  fay
God  has  fent  you,  pray  has  he  furnifh’d  you  with
any  better  Teftimony  than  you  had  before,  have
you  any  other  Miracle  to  Ihow  ?  The

f


75


7 6  A  SYSTEM

The  facred  Ambafladors  gravely  tell  him  they
had,  and  if  he  would  ftill  refufe  to  grant  their  De¬
mands,  he  ftiould  fee  it  3  nay,  they  tell  him  be¬
fore*  hand  what  it  ftiould  be,  namely,  that  they
would  turn  the  W  aters  of  Nile9  the  great  River  of
their  Country,  into  Blood.

Pharaoh,  as  may  be  fuppofed,  not  believing  they
could  do  it,  treats  them  ftill  in  the  fame  manner,
and  refufes  ftill  to  receive  them  as  Meffengers  from
God  3  upon  which,  Mofes  calls  to  Aaron ,  and  bids
him  ftretch  out  his  Rod  and  fmite  the  Waters  of
the  River,  and  they  were  immediately  turned  into
Blood,  and  all  the  Waters,  Ponds,  and  Pools  be-
fides;  for  ALgypt  is  full  of  Pits  and  Ponds,  wherein
they  preferve  the  Water  of  Nile  after  the  annual  In¬
undation.

The  King,  frighted  at  this  fudden  Change  of  the
Water,  is  a  little  calmer  than  he  was  before*,  but
confidering  the  matter,  he  calls  his  Magicians  to  fee
if  they  could  not  do  this  alfo,  as  well  as  Mofes  3
when  they  came  they  did  the  fame,  by  which  ftill
the  blinded  Mind  of  the  Prince  continued  obfti-
nate.

I  might  run  through  the  reft  of  the  Miracles
wrought  there,  and  ftiew  you  how  the  Magicians
brought  Frogs,  but  could  not  bring  Lice  3  but
this  is  not  to  the  Cafe  3  the  Story  is  known.

Only  one  thing  I  muft  note  for  your  Dire&ion
in  the  reading  this  Part  of  the  Story,  viz.  that  the
Magicians  could  bring  Plagues,  at  leaft  fome  of
them,  as  well  as  Mofes  and  Aaron  3  but  the  Magi¬
cians  could  not  remove  them  again,  as  Mofes  did  3
fo  that  the  King  might  have  perceived  that  which
the  Magicians  themfelves  acknowledged  in  the
Plague  of  the  Lice,  that  it  was  the  Finger  of  God
which  only  could  remove  the  Plagues  he  brought.

The  whole  Defign  of  this  Remark  is  to  ftiew,
that  it  was  always  the  Temper  of  Mankind  to  de¬
mand


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

mand  a  Sign  or  a  Miracle,  to  confirm  any  new  ad¬
vanced  DotStrine,  or  any  extraordinary  Million,  and
to  take  thofe  Miracles  when  produced  for  a  full
Confirmation.

This  Temper  of  the  People,  as  it  drove  the  Ma¬
gicians  to  their  Shifts  how  to  fupply  Miracles  to
obtain  Credit  with  the  People,  fo  it  drove  them
beyond  their  Shifts  too  at  lad,  and  brought  them
to  a  Confederacy  with  the  Devil  for  a  Supply  of
Wonderfuls  to  delude  the  People.  They  tell  us  of
a  certain  Sorcerer  at  Antioch ,  who  for  the  Confir¬
mation  of  fome  particular  thing,  which  he  had  af¬
firmed  to  the  People,  to  keep  up  his  Credit  with
them,  told  them,  that  fuch  an  Evening  he  would
caufe  Fire  to  come  down  from  Heaven,  and  that
it  fliould  reft  on  the  Top  of  fuch  a  certain  Hill,  in
the  Sight  of  all  the  City.

Whether  the  cunning  Artift  had  found  out  any
Compofition  by  which  to  make  artificial  Fireworks,
agreeable  to  what  is  done  at  this  time  or  not,  is
not  certain  ;  tho’  ’tis  moft  certain  the  Art  of  ma¬
king  Gunpowder  was  not  then  known,  nor  for  above
a  thoufand  Years  afterwards:  But  for  certain  he
caufed  fuch  a  Machine  to  mount  in  the  Air,  unfeen
in  the  dark  of  the  Evening,  which  then  burfting,
came  down  again  in  a  Shower  of  Fire,  like  the
Stars  (as  we  call  them)  which  fpread  themfelves
and  fall  down  upon  the  burfting  of  the  Tail  of  a
Rocket  ;  and  this  fo  amazed  the  People,  that  they
believed  afterwards  every  thing  he  faid.

Thus  Simon  the  Sorcerer  is  faid,  by  his  Diabolical
Inchantments,  to  fly  up  in  the  Air,  and  perform
fo  many  furprizing  things,  that  ’tis  laid  the  Peo¬
ple  called  him  the  Great  Power  of  God ,  or  the
Appearance  of  the  great  Power  of  God,^7jviii.  10.

Indeed  the  Defcription  the  Scripture  gives  there
of  this  Simon  is  very  remarkable  to  the  cale  in  hand;
firft  ’tis  faid,  ver,  p.  "that  he  life d  Sorcery  and  bewitched

the


77


A  SYSTEM

the  People ,  that  is,  the  People  of  Samaria  *  then  9tis
added,  ail  the  People  gave  heed  to  him,  and  laid,
ffhis  Man  is  the  great  Power  of  God>  the  meaning  is
evident,  this  Man  has  done  fuch  great  and  ftrange
things,  fhewed  fuch  Miracles,  fuch  Wonders,  that
none  but  the  great  Power  of  God  could  enable
him  to  do  *  and  therefore  ’tis  certain  that  he  is  aided
and  affifted  by  the  great  Power  of  God  *  and  this
he  held  a  long  time.  ver.  u.  "To  him  they  had  re¬
gard >  becaufe  for  a  long  time  he  had  bewitched  them
with  his  Sorceries.

The  Cafe  of  Simon  and  the  People  at  Samaria
was  juft  as  it  was  with  Pharaoh  and  his  Magicians,
when  Mofes  and  Aaron  came  to  him.  Pharaoh  and
all  his  Courtiers  gave  heed  to  Jannes  and  Jambres ,
for  that  of  a  long  time  they  had  bewitched  them
with  their  Sorceries.

It  remains  a  Queftion  here,  by  what  Power  and
by  whofe  Hand  it  muft:  be,  that  the  Magicians  of
Mgypt  turned  their  Rods  into  Serpents*  fmote  the
Waters,  and  turned  them  into  Blood  *  brought
up  Frogs,  £j fc.  that  is,  in  fliort,  mimicked  or  imi¬
tated  the  Miracles  of  Mofes  and  Aaron .  If  I  am
asked  by  whofe  Permiffion  it  was  done,  I  knowhow
to  anfwer  *  but  if  you  ask  who  was  the  Inftru-
ment,  I  muft  fay  it  was  the  Devil  *  for  the  Text
fays  exprefly,  they  did  it  by  their  Inchantments.

On  the  other  hand,  when  they  were  baffled  in
their  Paw-w awing  for  Lice,  and  could  not  per¬
form  it,  ’tis  faid  exprefly,  they  acknowledged  that
they  could  not  do  it,  for  that  was  the  Finger  of  God ,
Exod.  viii.  ip.

Now  whether  the  Magicians  meant,  it  is  the  Fin¬
ger  of  God  that  hinders  us  from  doing  now  as  we
did  before,  fo  that  we  cannot  bring  up  Lice  as  we
did  Frogs*  or  whether  they  feemed  to  acknow¬
ledge,  that  the  Plague  of  Lice  was  the  Finger  of
God,  tho’  they  did  not  grant  that  the  Blood  and


79


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

the  Frogs  were  fo,  becaufe  the  Devil  could  do  it
alfo  3  this,  I  fay,  is  a  Doubt  which  Commentators
do  not  refolve,  or  at  lead  do  not  agree  about.

But  take  it  which  way  you  will,  ’tis  an  Acknow¬
ledgment,  that  what  they  did  by  their  Sorcery  and
Inchantments,  was  not  done  by  the  Finger  of
God  3  and  alfo  that  when  the  Finger  of  God  was
in  the  Work,  their  Sorcery  and  Inchantments  were
impotent  and  could  do  nothing.

It  is  not  to  be  queftioned  but  as  this  Correfpon-
dence  began  between  thefe  Magicians  and  the  in¬
fernal  Spirits,  they  did  alfo  upon  all  Occafions,  and
with  the  utmoft  of  their  Power,  as  well  as  with
the  greateft  Artifice  and  Cunning,  endeavour  to
make  the  People  believe,  that  what  they  did  was
by  the  great  Power  of  God,  by  the  Finger  of
Heaven  j  for  this  alone  anfwer’d  the  End,  which
was  Deluding,  and  Impofing  upon  Mankind.  ’Twas
the  Unhappinefs  of  that  Age,  as  it  is  of  ours,  when
a  more  modern  and  indeed  more  fatal  kind  of  Ma-
gick  is  pra&ifed  in  the  W orld  3  I  fay,  it  was  their
Unhappinels  that  the  Minds  of  the  People  feemed
prepared  for  their  Delufions,  by  being  more  eafily
impofed  upon  than  ufual.

The  Eaftern  World  had  for  many  Ages  been  led
and  guided  by  the  Juggles  and  Legerdemain  of  their
Southfayers  and  wife  Men,  as  they  were  called  3  and
when  they  by  the  Degeneracy  of  the  Times  were,
as  I  have  faid,  brought  fo  low  as  to  fubmit  to  Sor¬
cery  and  Inchantment,  they  had  a  vaft  Advantage
over  the  People,  by  the  good  Opinion  which  the
People  had  of  their  Sincerity  and  Honefty,  and  that
they  would  not  by  any  means  cheat  and  impofe
upon  them.

Thus  when  Errors  and  damnable  Doftrines;  in
Religion  are  broached  and  fet  on  foot  among  us  by
Men  of  apparent  Sa.ndtity  in  Converfation,  Men  of
fevere  Morals,  of  rigid  and  a  idl  e  r  e  Lives,  blamelefs

and


So


a  s  r  s  r  e  m

and  mortified  Manners,  ftri&ly  pradtifing  the  good
things  which  they  preach,  and  who  by  that  Stridt-
nefs  of  Converfation  have  obtained  a  Reputation
in  the  World,  as  Men  that  do  not  willingly  deceive
the  People,  or  that  at  leaft  have  not  a  wicked  De¬
fig11  to  deceive  j  In  Rich  cafe,  I  fay,  Error  comes
armed  with  a  fatal  and  double  Power,  and  its  In¬
fluence  is  much  more  likely  to  do  Mifchief,  the
Hypocrify  is  the  more  dangerous,  and  the  People
more  eafily  abufed.

i  Who  could,  in  our  Days  expedt,  that  Men
of  Morals,  Men  of  unfpotted  Lives,  and  whofe
Charadters  would  be  fuch  as  never  to  fuffer  any
Reproach,  fihould  blemifh  all  their  Reputation,
which  that  commendable  Redtitude  of  Life  had
obtained  for  them,  with  harbouring  a  horrid
and  deteftable  Blafphemy  againft  the  Holy  Ghoft
it  felf,  robbing  the  Son  of  God  of  the  Equality
which  he  thought  it  no  Robbery  to  aflume,  and  de¬
nying  the  Godhead  of  him  who  is  God blejfed  for  ever  ?

But  this  is  ftill  too  folemn,  and  I  am  not  alfo
come  on  far  enough  in  Order  of  time  to  talk  of
thofe  People  *  we  fhall  meet  with  them  again  in
our  Way :  for  the  prefent  I  mu  ft  be  content  to  go
back  to  the  South  and  to  the  Eaft,  vifit  the  pri¬
mitive  Times  of  Sorcery  and  Witchcraft,  and  fee  if
we  can  find  it  out,  how  the  Devil  and  Mankind
came  to  be  fo  well  acquainted  as  we  find  they  have
been  5  for  certainly  it  was  not  all  done  at  once.  Satan,
whole  Region  is  the  Air,  and  whofe  Bufinefs  is  in
the  Dark,  was  not  immediately  correfponded  with,
in  an  open,  publick,  and  avowed  manner  5  he  did
not  walk  about  in  Perfon,  undifguis’d  and  open,
eloathed  in  the  Shapes  and  Figures  of  a  Devil ,  and
adting  like  himfelfs  he  certainly  made  his  court  to
Mankind  by  fome  particular  Applications,  or  they
to  him  j  For  the  Learned  are  not  fully  agreed  who
made  the  firft  Advances  towards  the  new  Acquain¬
tance,


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.  Be

tance,  and  whether  the  Devil  made  love  firft,  or
how  Mankind  found  him  out.  I  rnuft  confefs  it  is
an  Enquiry  of  Moment,  and  theHiftory  of  it  would
take  up  fome  Room  in  our  Speculations,  perhaps
very  much  to  your  Satisfa£lion  5  I  mean,  if  we  could
give  a  true  and  particular  Account  how  the  Devil
and  Mankind  came  firft:  acquainted.

And  firft,  it  would  be  particularly  improving  to
our  Underftandings,  if  we  could,  tell  where  the  firft
Occafion  of  the  Correfpondence  lay  >  that  is  to  fay,

1.  Whether  the  Devil  in  the  Adminiftration  of  his
Affairs  found  it  abfolutely  neceftary  to  fettle  a  Cor-
refpondence  among  Mankind,  and  therefore,  as
Mr.  Milton  has  it,  travelled  to  this  Globe  upon  the
foot  of  new  Difcoveries,  and  improved  upon  thofe
Difcoveries  afterwards  by  the  dexterity  of  his  Ma¬
nagement,  making  his  Acquaintance  with  Mankind
his  own  way,  and  as  he  found  proper  for  his  Occa-
fions :  or,

2.  Whether  Mankind  finding  their  Defires  to
be  wicked,  infinitely  greater  than  their  Capacities,
and  being  under  an  abfolute  Neceffity  of  fome  ex¬
otick  Helps,  fome  Affiftances  farther  and  other
than  they  found  natural  Powers  would  fupply,
made  their  Application  to  him  5  according  to  the
laudable  Example  of  my  old  Friend  and  good  Pa¬
tron  in  every  wicked  Contrivance,  the  late  Ho¬
nourable  Mr.  M — g  M — -  who  (faving  that  I  can¬
not  fay  I  believed  him)  told  nle,  that  being  in  an
extraordinary  Streight,  and  wanting  an  infallible
Agent  in  a  particular  Piece  of  Revenge  where  sL
certain  Female  had  jilted  and  infulted  him*  went
out  into  his  Garden,  three  Nights  together,  juft
at  the  moment  of  T welve,  (that  it  feems  was  the  cri~

Heal  time  for  Satan  to  be  fpoke  with)  and  called
him  aloud  by  his  Name,  telling  him  he  wanted  his
immediate  Attendance  in  an  Affair  of  the  utmoft
Importance.

G  Now,,


A  SYSTEM

t

Now,  I  fay,  which  of  thefe  two  was  the  Cafe  at
the  Beginning  of  the  Intercourfe  between  Man  and
his  Mailer,  is  hard  to  determine,  and  would  be  a
moll  admirable  Difcovery  if  the  Certainty  could  be
come  at,-  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  the  nature
of  the  thing,  fo  as  it  might  be  depended  upon.
For  my  own  Part,  if  I  might  give  my  Opinion,  I
fhould  determine  it  in  Favour  of  the  Devil,  and
that  Mankind  were  the  AgrelFors,  fird  fought  the
Acquaintance,  implored  his  infernal  Majefty’s  Af~
fillance,  propofed  a  League  or  Confederacy  with  him
offenlive  and  defenfive^  and  vowed  themfelves  to  be
his  faithful  Allies,  and  to  ferve  him  to  the  utmod
of  their  Power*  upon  which  Application,  Satan,  as
powerful  Princes  often  do,  yielded  to  their  Im¬
portunities,  granted  their  Petition,  took  them  into
his  Protection,  and  has  been  their  conllant  Friend
and  Confederate,  on  all  wicked  Occafions,  ever
iince.

But  there  is  one  Difficulty  in  the  way  of  this
Opinion,  which  indeed  gives  me  a  fliock  in  the
Faith  of  it,  and  feems  to  intimate  that  it  cannot  be
fo,  at  lead  that  it  cannot  be  abfolutely  and  fully  fo
in  the  largell  Senfe  j  and  that  is,  How  did  Man¬
kind  come  firfb  to  know  that  there  was  fuch  a
Creature  as  a  Devil  in  Being  ?  that  he  was  capable
of  giving  them  Aflillance  in  the  Agency  of  fuch  black
Defigns  as  they  really  wanted  his  Help  in  ?  that  he
was  a  Spirit  qualified  for  his  Correfpondence,  and
that  he  would  upon  Application  give  him  the  Afli-
flancc  he  wanted  ?  And  again,  if  he  did  know,  or
that  any  traditional  Memoirs  remained  with  him
from  the  Records  of  Pad  Ages,  of  the  Agency  of  the
Devil  with  old  Eve ,  or  with  any  of  the  Antedi-
hivean  Race,  and  how  Satan  had  managed  things  in
thofe  Times*  yet  it  does  not  appear  how  he  found
the  Way  to  correfpond,  whether  he  had  any  lndru-
£lions  for  his  Application,  and  in  a  word,  how  he

knew


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

knew  where  to  find  the  Devil  out,  and  to  come  to
the  Speech  of  him.  Thefe  Difficulties  indeed  lie
in  the  way  of  my  laft  Hypothecs  3  and ’till  they
can  be  folved  to  the  general  Satisfaction,  I  doubt
1  mull  quit  the  fuppofed  Application  of  Man  to  the
Devil ,  and  allow  that  Satan  himfelf  firft  pickt  Ac¬
quaintance  with  him,  that  the  Correfpondence  be¬
gan  that  way,  that  the  Devil  offer’d  his  Service  to
him,  and  let  him  know  before-hand  how  ready
he  would  be  to  come  at  his  Call,  and  to  affift  him
upon  all  Occafions.

I  mult  confefs  this  Suppofition  lays  the  Devil  a
little  low  in  your  thoughts,  depreciates  his  Cha¬
racter,  and  places  him  beneath  the  Dignity  of  his  Se-
raphick  Original :  But  it  cannot  be  helped  $  if  the
Devil  will  make  himfelf  a  Slave,  he  muft  $  and  if  he
will  be,  according  to  the  happy  Title  of  the  Chief
of  his  Confederates,  Servus  Servorum ,  who  can  help
it?  The  thing  explains  it  felf:  Whatever  he  was  at
firft:,  he  certainly  has  been,  is,  and  is  like  to  be  the
moft  obfequious,  humble,  diligent  Devil  that  ever
Mankind  could  have  had  to  do  with.

I  muff  acknowledge  that  I  did  not  enquire  of
my  Friend  juft  now  named,  whether  the  Devil
gave  his  Attendance  immediately,  and  with  his  ufual
Alacrity,  upon  his  calling  out  fo  Audibly  to  him*
not  that  I  ever  doubted  but  that  the  Devil  did  wait
upon  him,  becaufe  ’tis  vifible  that  he  has  aCted  as
if  the  Devil  had  been  in  him  ever  fincej  but,  I  fay*

I  fhould  have  enquired  whether  he  came  at  the  firft
Call,  for  without  doubt  he  called  loud  enough  for
him  to  hear  $  for,  as  Voice  always  afcends,  the
Vibration  moving  moft  naturally  upward,  and  that
Satan’s  particular  Refidence  is  faid  to  lie  that
way,  there  is  no  room  to  queftion  but  he  could
hear  him  $  unlefs,  as  Elijah  faid  to  the  Priefts
of  Baal ,  he  might  be  bufy,  or  afleep,  or  gone  a
Journey  *  which  feldom  happens  to  him,  fo  as  to  be
out  of  the  way  of  Mifchief.

G  z


AT.  B.


A  SYSTEM

N.  B.  Here  indeed  I  ought  to  make  fome
fmall  Apology  for  what  I  happen’d  to  fay  of
the  Honourable  Perfon  I  juft  now  mentioned,
and  who  I  feemed  to  fuggeft  was  not  to  be
believed  $  which  Expreffion  (he  being  a  Per¬
fon  of  Honour)  I  o tight  to  ex plain ,  as  I  do  by
thefe  Prefents,  and  in  Manner  and  Form  fob
lowing,  that  is  to  fay 1 5  that  he  is  always  to  be
believed,  in  all  Cafes,  and  relating  to  all  Perfons,
but  himfelf  5  but  he  claiming  a  Right  and
Privilege  of  flandering  himfelf,  and  being  ex¬
ceeding  fond  of  being  thought  wickeder
than  he  is,  I  ventur’d,  by  way  of  Obfervation,
to  fufpedt  his  Veracity,  when  he  talks  of  his
Father’s  only  Son $  knowing  that  as  he  has  fo
conftantly  boafted  of  Sins  he  was  never  able
to  commit,  and  that  every  thing  mu  ft  be
falfe  which  cannot  be  true,  fo  there  is  no
Credit  to  be  given  to  him  in  that  Particular.

But  in  all  other  Cafes  you  muft  underftand
me  to  acknowledge  him  for  a  Man  of  as  nice
a  Tafte,  and  as  ftrift  an  Obferver  of  Truth
and  Decency,  as  ever  Satan  correfponded  with  j
which  publick  Acknowledgment  I  hope  he  will
take  for  ample  Satisfadlion.

Now,  with  Pardon  for  the  needful  Digreffion
above,  I  go  on  with  repeating  in  Subftance  what
I  concluded  before,  viz.  that  this  Difficulty  is  fo
great,  that  I  cannot  eafily  get  over  it,  viz.  to  refolve
who  began  the  Acquaintance  between  Satan  and
our  Anceftors  of  the  Eaft,  for  there  it  feems  they
firft  correfponded.

Nor  can  I  proceed  Hiftorically  in  my  prefent  Un¬
dertaking,  without  coming  to  a  Certainty  in  this
Point,  and  ’till  it  is  determined  one  way  or  other  5
and  for  that  Reafon,  I  think  I  mnft  for  the  pre¬
fent,  ’till  the  Devil  thinks  fit  to  clear  himfelf  of
the  Charge,  leave  it  at  his  Door,  and  grant  that  he

found


of  MAGIC  K.

found  the  Correfpondence  f 9  much  to  his  Advan¬
tage,  that  is  to  fay,  fo  much  for  the  Intereft  of  his
prefent  Undertakings  of  another  kind,  that  he  made
no  Scruple  of  being  firft  in  the  Application  5  that
he  (looped  without  Ceremony  to  make  the  firft  Vifit,
and  fo  began  the  Treaty  afterwards  in  his  own
Name.

Nor  has  the  Devil  been  very  nice  in  his  fubfe-
quent  Intimacies,  or  in  the  Management  of  the
Correfpondence  after  it  was  begun  *  but  has  on  fo
many  Occafions  teftified  his  Refolution  to  culti¬
vate  the  Friendllup  fo  (happily  for  him)  begun,
that  they  found  him  ever  after  at  their  Elbow'
when  they  had  Occafion  for  him,  and  fometimes
whether  they  had  Occafion  for  him  or  no  5  whe^
therhe  is  lefs  kind  to  their  Pofterity,  let  his  Friends
and  Confederates  of  the  prefent  Age  teftify.

It  is  true  that  fometimes  we  find,  or  at  lead  they
tell  us  fo,  that  he  is  too  cunning  for  his  Corre-
fpondents*  and  that  when  he  has  drawn  them  into
Bargains,  he  is  not  fo  juft  to  his  Word  as  he  fhould
be,  or  as  they  expected  5  and  this  brings  fome  Scan¬
dal  upon  the  Acquaintance,  as  if  he  was  not  a  faith¬
ful  Confederate,  and  that  he  leaves  his  Friends  of¬
ten  in  the  Lurch,  as  he  did  the  late  famous  Car-
touch  in  France ,  Jonathan  Wild  in  England ,  and  as
he  has  done  the  poor  Trooper  lately  at  Drefden 9
who,  they  fay,  be  ought  to  have  fecured  from  the
Officers  of  Juftice  5  and  that  when  he  had  killed  Mon-
fieur  Halm  the  Lutheran  Minifter,  the  Devil  fhould
have  given  him  an  invisible  Cloak  to  have  carried
him  off,  and  not  have  left  him  to  the  Mercy  of  the
Proteftants,  after  he  had  done  him  fuch  an  eminent
Piece  of  Service.

But  let  us  bring  things  to  a  right  Underftanding^
do  Satan  Juftice,  and  fet  the  Saddle  upon  the  right
Devil.  In  thefe  Cafes,  the  Queftion  is  not,  whether
the  Devil ,  after  having  made  Bargains  with  thefe
People,  did  not  perform,  and  was  not  fo  juft  to  his

G  |  Word


Z6


A  SYSTEM

Word  as  they  expedted  $  but  whether  he  was  not  as
juft  to  his  Word  as  they  ought  to  have  expedted?
For  Example,  perhaps  in  making  their  Bargains  with
the  Devils  they  expedt  things  to  be  performed
which  it  is  not  in  his  Power  to  perform  >  the  Mi-
ftake  lies  not  in  Satan  himfelf,  but  in  them  who
make  a  God  of  him,  and  will  have  him  be  able  to
do  every  thing.

Now  ’tis  true  that  Satan,  as  he  is  a  Spirit,  is
Magnipotent,  but  he  never  was  Omnipotent  >  and
therefore  there  may  be,  and  are,  abundance  of  fine
things  which  fuch  People  expedt  of  him,  which  he
really  not  only  never  promifes,  but  is  not  in  any
Condition  to  perform  5  and  if  People  will  have  him
do  what  he  is  not  able  to  do,  that  is  their  Fault,
not  his }  all  they  can  blame  him  for  in  that  cafe  is,
that  he  does  not  tell  them  how  far  he  can,  or  can-
not,ierve  them  $  and  that  truly,  to  give  him  his  Due,
feems  to  be  none  of  his  Bufinefs*  but  like  a  cunning
Artificer,  who  is  loth  to  tell  you  what  he  cannot
do,  but  enlarges  and  expatiates  upon  his  real  Abili¬
ties  5  fo  the  Devil ,  if  you  are  willing  to  believe  he
can  do  thus  and  thus  for  you,  ’ns  enough  if  he
does  but  equivocate,  and  tacitly  grant  it,  without
engaging  to  perform  >  but  he  is  not  bound  to  con-
fiefs  his  Impotence,  and  own  he  cannot  do  it:  So
thefe  People  pretend  to  blame  him,  whereas  in  truth
they  ought  only  to  blame  themfelvcs  for  expedting
things  of  him,  that  even  th z  Devil  himfelf  is  not  able
to  perform.

Thus  our  late  Friend  Jonathan ,  while  he  kept
within  Bounds,  had,  no  doubt,  a  faithful  and  friend¬
ly  Correfpondence  with  him.  6  But,  faid  the  Devil ,

*  What  would  Jonathan  have  me  do  ?  did  he  ex-
4  pedt  I  could  fave  him,  when  he  committed  a  Felo-
€  ny  even  with  his  Fetters  on,  and  while  he  was
c  in  Newgate  ?  I  had  been  his  Protedlor  in  a  thou-
c  fand  Rogueries,  Things,  which  if  I  had  not  ftood

*  by  him,  he  could  never  have  got  over:  I  had

bang’d


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

4  hang’d  a  hundred  and  fifty  honeft  Rogues  to  fave
4  him  5  every  one  of  which,  if  I  had  not  help’d  him  to
4  be  too  cunning  for  them,  and  flopt  their  Mouths
4  till’twas  too  late  to  open  them,  could  have  hang’d
4  him  and  faved  themfelves  >  but  he  was  come  to
4  fuch  a  Pitch  at  laft,  and  pufh’d  his  Fate  fo  far,

4  that  not  I,  no  not  the  Devil  hitnfelf,  could  fave
4  him.

The  like  Plea  the  Devil  made  for  hitnfelf,  no
doubt,  in  the  cafe  of  his  French  Favourite  Car~
touch-,  4  Had  he  thought  fit,  after  a  thoufand  au-
4  dacious  Villanies  fuccefsfully  committed,  and  an
4  infinite  Stock  of  Treafure  amafs’d,  for  he  was
4  grown  rich  by  the  Trade  >  had  he  thought  fit  to
4  have  left  Paris ,  and  march’d  off,  either  out  of  the
4  Kingdom,  or  at  leaf!  out  of  the  City  where  he
4  was  fo  well  known,  and  fo  diligently  purfued,  I.

4  had  carried  him  fafe  off.  ’  But  he  was  obftinately
and  inconfiderately  bold}  and  the  Devil  is  not  bound
to  fave  thofe  that  refolve  they  will  be  hang’d.  Nay,
if  am  not  mifinformed,  the  Devil  himfeif  told  him,
he  would  be  taken  if  he  ftaid  in  Paris  \  and  added,
that  the  Search  after  him  was  fo  hot,  and  fuch
Rewards  promifed,  and  he  fo  well  known,  that  if
he,  Satan  himfeif,  was  fo  perfeftly  defcribed,  and
fo  hotly  purfued,  he  fhould  certainly  be  difcover’d.
Tho’  by  the  way,  I  would  have  you  take  that  Part
only  ad  referendum 9  as  the  Men  of  Bufinefs  call  it.

Now  it  is  an  unreafonable  thing  that  Men  fhould
make  a  Bargain  with  cither  Man  or  Devil  for  more
than  they  are  able  to  perform,  and  then  pretend  to
blame  them  for  Non-Performance}  and  therefore
a  certain  noble  Lord,  now  in  Exile,  (whom  they
charge  with  .contracting  with  Satan  for  fome  Parti-
cular,  in  favour  of  his  late  Dumblam  Enterprife,
and  which  the  Devil  has,  it  feems,  fail’d  him  in)
ought  not,  as  they  fay  he  does,  to  blame  the  De~
vif  who  really  could  do  no  more  for  him  than  he  did.

G  4  Having


A  SYSTEM

)

Having  then  brought  it  to  this  Conclufion,  that
the  Devil  has  been  really  firft  in  the  Confederacy,
that  Satan  made  the  Acquaintance,  and  that  Man
neither  knew  how  to  come  at  the  Devil ,  nor  fq
much  as  knew  originally  that  there  was  any  fuch
thing  as  a  Devil  in  Being,  it  would  add  to  our  more
perfect  underftanding  of  the  whole  Matter,  if  we
could  be  informed  in  what  manner  the  Acquain¬
tance  begun.

The  firft  Attack  the  Devil  made  upon  our  Mo¬
ther  Eve9  we  have  had  fully  defcribed.  Sacred  Hi-
ftory  relates  the  Fadtj  and  honeft,  grave  Mr.  Milton
has  given  us  the  Particulars  as  diftinftly,  and  in  as
lively  Colours,  as  if  he  had  been  at  the  Conference,
heard  the  Courtfhip,  and  how  cunningly  the  Devil
managed  3  with  what  Addrels  he  infinuated  into  her
weakeft  Part,  and  how  entirely  he  conquer’d  her
Virtue,  her  Obedience,  her  Senfe  of  Religion,
brought  her  to  forget  the  Command  that  ftie  had
but  juft  learned  to  remember  j  and  to  facrifice  her
Soul,  and  all  her  Pofterity,  to  her  Appetite:  I  fay,
Mr.  Milton  has  done  it  in  fo  lively  a  manner,  that
it  feems  plain,  that  tho’  Solomon  could  not  under-
ftand  the  way  of  a  Man  with  a  Maid,  but  placed
it  among  the  things  that  were  too  wonder¬
ful  for  him  3  Milton  lee  ms  not  to  be  at  a  Lofs  to
Hefcribe  the  way  of  the  Devil  with  a  Woman.

Now,  I  fay,  we  have  a  diftinft  Account  how
the  Devil  made  the  firft  Attack  upon  Eve  in  Pa-
rad  ife  j  but  how  he  pick’d  Acquaintance  with  the
Sons  of  Noah  after  the  Deluge,  and  in  what  man¬
ner,  or  upon  what  Occaiion  that  was  begun,  we
are  utterly  at  a  loft  about.

Nor  have  we'  any  hiftorical  Account  who  were
the  Perfons  who  entertained  the  firft  Correfpon-
dpnee  with  him,  or  upon  what  Occafionj  nothing
appears  upon  Record  to  give  us  the  leaft  Light
Into  it3  other  than  this,  that  we  find  the  Effe&s  of


of  M  A  G  l  C  K.  89

an  invifible  Devil  in  Ham  or  Cham ,  one  of  Noah's
Sons,  and  in  Canaan  his  Grandfon*  but  it  is  not
the  invifible  Devil  that  I  am  enquiring  after,  but  an
appearing  converfible  D^mon  or  Evil  Spirit,  who
affutning  human  Shape,  or  at  lead  Voice,  and  in¬
telligible  Operations,  could  fupply  the  Office  of  the
Devil  in  affifting  Mankind  in  the  feveral  Exigencies
of  their  Affairs,  when  any  kind  of  infernal  Work
\vas  upon  their  Hands.

This,  I  fay,  is  the  Devil  I  am  enquiring  after  j
and  as  I  would  fain  bring  Mankind  and  him  to  be
acquainted  together  in  a  decent  and  regular  man¬
ner,  I  muff  confefs  I  am  at  a  great  Lofs  for  want
of  the  Particulars,  as  well  of  Perfons,  as  of  the  Cir-
cumftances  in  which  thofe  Perfons  were  concerned.

However  fince  that  Part  cannot  be  entred  any
farther  into,  or  at  lead  not  fo  far  as  to  make  a  full
Difcovery,  we  muff  take  up  with  fo  much  as  we
find  upon  Record,  and  this  may  perhaps  be  enough
to  fatisfy  us  that  fo  it  was.

The  Story  of  Job ,  according  to  the  facred  Chro¬
nology,  and  by  comparing  it  with  other  Accounts
of  things,  appears  to  be  very  antientj  even  fo  old
as  to  be  in  a  very  few  Years  after  Abraham  3  for
Eliphaz  the  Temanite  could  not,  by  Calculation,  be
many  Removes  from  Efau,  and  IJhmael 3  and  Job  be¬
ing  at  that  Time  an  old  Man,  no  lefs  than  a  hundred
Years  old,  he  might  probably  be  alive  within  the
time  o£  Japhetj  one  of  the  Sons  of  Noah>  for  ’tis
thought  Job  was  above  a  hundred  Years  old  when
his  firll:  Sorrows  came  upon  him.

Now  in  the  time  of  Job ,  ’tis  evident  the  Devil
had  made  his  vifible  Appearances  upon  Earth,  and
among  the  Sons  of  G  O  D  too  3  for  he  appeared
before  the  Lord  at  the  time,  as  is  fuppofed,  of  a
folemn  Service  or  Sacrifice.  What  his  Bufinefs  was
there,  and  on  what  Occafion  he  came,  does  not  lie
before  me  on  the  prefent  Occafion.

7  U

7


9°


A  SYSTEM

In  the  next  place,  the  Devil  not  only  had  per-
fonally  appeared,  but  it  feems  plain  from  the  Text,
when  God  had  given  Job  into  his  Hands,  that  is  to
fay,  had  given  him  Commiffion  to  fall  upon  and  af¬
flict  him,  and  that  he  was  gone  out  from  the  Pre¬
fence  of  God,  that  he  immediately  fet  his  human
as  well  as  elementary  Inftruments  at  work  %  that  he
raifed  a  Storm  of  Wind,  from  or  in  the  Wilder-
nefs,  and  blew  the  Houfe  down  upon  Job' s  Sons
and  Daughters  ;  that  he  brought  Thunder  and
Lightning  upon  the  Flocks,  and  burnt  up  the  poor
Sheep,  and  the  Servants  that  look’d  after  them:
This  was  nothing  but  what,  as  a  Devil  and  a  Prince
of  the  Air,  might  be  expeffced  from  him :  but  that
was  not  all  \  he  raifed  War  upon  him  ;  che  Chaldeans
from  one  fide,  (the  North)  and  the  Sabeans  from  ano¬
ther  fide,  (the  Rail)  made  out  their  Armies  and  came
upon  him,  and  plunder’d  him;  the  firfl;  carried  away
the  Camels,  and  the  other  the  Oxen.

’Tis  certain  thofe  Nations  were  at  Peace  with
Job  before,  and  his  Servants  fed  unmoleded  by  them
and  in  their  Neighbourhood,  ’till  the  Devil  took
upon  him  to  break  the  Peace,  and  excite  them  to
intuit  Job  and  fall  upon  his  Subftance.  How  came
this  to  pafs  ;  and  what  had  Job  done  to  any  of
them,  to  move  them  [to  ufe  Violence  with  him?  I
make  no  queftion  but  the  Devil  went  to  them,  and
told  them  God  had  fent  him  to  order  them  in  his
Name  to  ravage  the  Lands  and  carry  away  the
Goods  of  Job,  that  God  had  deftined  him  to  Mi-
fery  and  Poverty,  and  had  given  his  Effate  to  them,
and  therefore  it  was  lawful  for  them  to  fall  upon
and  deftroy  him  and  his  Family  %  and  to  give  them
a  Sign,  as  I  faid  before,  and  that  they  might  know
he  came  with  a  Commiffion,  they  fiiould  fee  he
would  go  and  fend  down  Fire  from  Heaven  and  de¬
ftroy  his  Sheep ;  and  if  they  would  not  carry  off  the
Camels  and  the  Oxen,  he  would  do  the  like  by  thofe
alfo.  '  This,


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

This,  and  the  Bait  of  Plunder,  was  enough  to  ani¬
mate  thofe  Nations  againfl  poor  Job,  and  fo  they
came  immediately  and  did  as  the  Devil  dire£ted.

This  feems  to  me  to  be  the  firfl  vifible  Appea¬
rance  of  the  Devil  among  the  Sons  of  Noah ,  in  the
Poft-diluvean  Ages.  I  will  not  fay  his  Acquaintance
begun  here,  tho’  if  I  fhould  fuppofe  it  did,  I  do  not
fee  that  I  could  be  contradidled  by  any  authentic!:
Vouchers  from  Hiflory.  Indeed  it  was  a  plaufiblc
Occafion  enough,  for  it  was  apparently  a  Favour
bellowed  on  the  Sabeans  and  on  the  Chaldeans ,  to
give  them  Job's  Goods  meerly  for  fetching  ;  and
this,  for  ought  we  know,  may  be  the  Reafon  that
the  firfl  Magicians  that  we  read  of  any  where,
were  among  thofe  two  Nations,  viz.  Chaldeans
and  (Arabians)  Sabeans  5  nor  can  I  doubt  but  that  the
Devil  having  made  his  Acquaintance  firfl  here,  kept
his  Hold  and  Interefl  amongfl  them  upon  account
of  the  good  Offices  he  had  done  them,  and  perhaps
might  do  them  on  many  other  Occafions.

Now,  tho’  I  would  not  be  poficive  where  there
is  the  lead:  Uncertainty,  being  mighty  cautious  (as
I  am  at  prefent  adling  in  the  Capacity  of  an  Hi-
florian)of  doing  the  Devil  any  Wrong  or  Injury  j  fo
I  enter  my  Caveat  too  againfl  an  Objection  her e9viz.
that  if  this  be  not  the  firfl  time  that  any  Man  gives
an  Account  of  Satan’s  Appearance,  and  that  this
was  not  the  firfl  of  his  Pranks  which  he  played
upon  Mankind  after  the  Flood,  let  them  fhew  us
another  before  it,  if  they  can  y  nay,  I  believe  the
Devil  himfelf  cannot  tell  us  any  one  Time  or  Place,
or  any  other  Occafion,  on  which  he  ever  fhowed
himfelf,  or  perhaps  durfl  flow  himfelf,  in  a  vifible
Appearance  in  the  World,  I  mean  after  the  De-
luge.

Nor  is  it  eafie  to  be  determined,  what  Shape,
what  Cafe  of  Flefh  and  Blood,  or  (as  I  might  fay
with  more  Propriety)  what  feemijig  Flefh  and

Blood


91


A  SYSTEM

Blood  he  appear’d  drefs’d  in  at  that  time*  nor  will
I  take  upon  me  to  guefs  what  Figure  he  made,
when  he  appear’d  among  the  Sons  of  God,  and
whether  they  knew  him  or  notj  that  is  to  fay,
knew  who  he  was,  and  on  what  occafion  he  ap¬
pear’d  there  j  whether  Job  was  among  them  or  not,
(for  he  was  doubtlefs  one  of  the  Sons  of  God,  and
the  Text  owns  him  as  fuchj  my  Servant  Job-,  for
Son  and  Servant  I  take  there  to  have  the  fame  Sig¬
nification  5)  and  whether  the  fhort  Difcourfe  which
it  is  faid  there  the  Lord  held  with  the  Arch-Ene¬
my  of  his  Servant  was  audible  and  articulate,  and
whether  the  reft  heard  it  or  no ;  all  thefe  Difficul¬
ties  I  leave,  as  the  Learned  fay,  to  another  Oppor¬
tunity,  that  is  to  fay ,  bccaufe  I  am  not  able  to  fay
one  Word  to  them  at  this.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  what  Shapes  the  Devil  a  fum'd  in  his  firft
Appearances  to  the  Magicians,  and  others ,
in  the  Fir  ft  Ages  of  the  IV or  Id ;  and  whe¬
ther  He  is,  or  has  been ,  allow'd  to  ajfume  a
Human  Shape ,  or  no.

AS  I  have  ingenuoufly  acknowledg’d  in  my  laft
Chapter,  that  I  can  give  you  no  Account  of
what  Dreis  or  Shape  the  Devil  appear’d  in,  when
he  prefented  himfelf  among  the  Sons  of  God,  as
noted  in  the  firft  Chapter  of  Job,  or  whether  he
was  vifible  to  any  elfe  but  his  Maker  5  fo  I  am
equally  uncertain  in  what  Figure  he  made  his  firft
Appearances  afterwards,  among  his  own  Acquain¬
tance  and  Servants,  when  he  was  introduc’d.

It  muft  therefore  fuffice  to  tell  you,  that  how¬
ever  it  was  manag’d^  we  find, there  was  certainly


of  MAGIC  tC.

an  Intelligence  carry’d  on,  a  Correfpondence  main*
rain’d,  and  what  was  not  perform’d  Perfonally,
was  done  by  Inchantments,  which  we  call  Sorcery  5
by  Voices  and  by  Dreams,  or  by  Apparition  in
fuch  Shapes  and  Poftures,  as  Satan,  for  Reafons  of
State,  thought  fit  to  take  upon  himfelf  for  the
Occafion.

♦

Some  have  doubted,  whether  the  Devil  is  em¬
power’d  to  take  up  any  human  Shape,  or  to  appear
in  the  Figure  of  a  Man  j  and  they  argue  that  it  does
not  feern  confiftent  with  the  Goodnefs  of  the  great
Father  of  Mankind,  to  fuffer  the  Arch-Enemy  of
his  Creatures  to  go  about  in  fuch  a  Difguife,  fo
dangerous,  and  that  might  be  fo  fatal  to  him  3  for
that  he  would  be  always  in  danger  of  being  de¬
ceiv’d  to  his  Hurt,  that  he  could  never  be  fafe>
but  that  as  the  Scripture  diredts  us  to  be  courteous
to  Strangers,  becaufe  fome  by  being  fo  had  enter¬
tain’d  Angels  5  fo  it  would  make  us  be  fhy,  and  a-
fraid  of  Strangers,  for  that  we  fhould  be  always  afraid
we  might  receive  the  Devil  into  our  Houfes,  and
efpecially  into  our  Friendfliip,  and  Familiarity.
And  hence  I  believe  came  the  foolifh  empty  No¬
tion,  tho’  fuch  as  it  is  impoffible  to  root  out  of  the
Fancies  of  Men,  viz.  that  the  Devil  cannot  ap¬
pear  without  his  cloven  Foot  5  of  which  I  fhall  fay
nothing  here,  but  that  it  is  a  thing  fo  ridiculous  as
to  merit  no  Notice,  either  now  or  at  any  other
time.

Tho’  there  may  be  many  things  faid  for  this  Opi¬
nion,  and  particularly  to  that  Part  which  relates  to
the  Safety  of  Mankind,  in  cafe  of  the  feveral  Dif-
guifes  that  the  Devil  may  appear  in,  yet  I  cannot
exclude  the  Devil  from  the  Privilege  of  putting
on  our  Clothes  fometimes,  and  that  too  perhaps  oft-
ner  than  we  may  think  he  does  j  and  that  he  appears
in  fuch  a  Shape  too,  oftner  than  we  may  believe  he
does.  As  to  the  Danger  of  it  I  may  fpeak  of  that
by  it  felf.  I


93


7


94


A  S  r  S  T  E  M

I  have  taken  it  for  granted  in  my  laft  Chapter*
that  in  the  firffc  Acquaintance  between  Mankind
and  the  Evil  Spirit,  after  the  Deluge,  Satan  was  the
Aggreffor*  that  he  made  his  Application  to  them
firft,  made  his  Propofals  of  Affiftance  and  Help,  in
the  Cafes  wherein  he  knew  they  wanted  his  Cor-
refpondence  y  and  I  fhall  add,  that  he  perhaps
rais’d  difficult  perplex’d  Cafes  in  the  World,  on
purpofe  to  prepare  the  Way  for  his  rendring  h ion¬
ic  If  ufeful.

We  are  come  now  to  the  Manner,  I  mean  How,
and  in  What  Way  the  cunning  Manager  made  his
firft  Addrefs  to  Mankind.  It  is  true,  we  are
fomething  deficient  in  the  Hiftory  of  this  firft
Tranfa&ion,  becaufe  we  do  not  yet  know,  nor
can  eafily  find  out,  who  was  his  firft  Correfpon-
dent  in  the  World  j  but  if  you  will  take  what  has
been,  by  what  is,  and  judge  of  his  firft  Method,
by  his  fubfequent  Pra&ice,  I  think  I  may  give  you
room  to  make  a  fair  Judgment.  Nor  do  I  think
’tis  an  improper  way  of  determining  the  Point,
fince  as  Satan  found  the  firft  Step  fuccefsful,  ’tis  pro¬
bable  he  found  no  occafion  to  alter  his  Meafures*
and  tho’  differing  Circumftances  of  Place  and  Per-
fons  may  make  him  vary  a  little  as  he  fees  Occa¬
fion,  yet  I  have  I  think  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to
fuppofe  that  the  general  rule  of  his  Pra£Hce  is  much
the  fame,  and  that  he  proceeds  upon  the  fame  foot
with  Mankind  in  all  Ages,  and  on  all  Occafions,
mutatis  mutandis ,  as  he  finds  the  Circumftances  of
the  People  the  fame,  or  not  the  fame.

Take  then  the  Devil’s  firft  Method  with  Man¬
kind  to  be  grounded  upon  his  ov/n  Experience  in
his  Antediluvean  Practices  with  their  Anceftors*
upon  his  Knowledge  of  their  Prefent  Gircum-
ftances,  I  mean  Prelent  at  the  time  after  the  Flood,
you  muft  allow  Satan  to  have  fo  much  Cunning  in
him,  as  to  be  able,  wirhout  the  leaft  Hefitation,  to

know


<


9S


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

know  what  was  the  bell  Method  to  come  about
the  Man,  and  how  to  compafs  him>  and  for  that
reafon,  I  fay,  I  do  not  allow  him  to  have  made  any
Change  in  his  Meafures.

The  firft  Method  then,  that  I  fuppofe  the
Devil  took  to  make  his  Acquaintance  with  Man¬
kind  was  by  the  way  of  Dreams ;  and  here  I  fhali
go  back  fo  far  as  to  fuggcft,  that  he  put  Canaan ,
Noah's  Grandfon,  upon  intoxicating  the  good  Patri¬
arch  his  Grandfather  with  Wine:  for  I  join  with  a
late  Opinion,  that  it  was  Canaan ,  not  Ham^  that  was
the  Occafion  of  it  5  tho’  Ham  was  guilty  of  trium¬
phing  over  the  old  Man,  when  he  was  overcome,
and  expofing  him,  as  far  as  lay  in  him,  to  his  mode¬
ller  Brethren.

Suppofe  then  young  Canaan  very  bufy,  helping  and
affifting  his  Grandfather,  in  planting  and  dreffing
the  Vines  after  the  Flood,  and  in  gathering  the
Fruit}  take  then  the  following  Obfervations  upon
thofe  Circumllances  in  particular.

Firft ,  I  cannot  come  into  that  foolifli  Notion,
that  Noah  did  not  underftand  the  Nature  of  the
Vine,  or  the  Strength  of  the  Juice,  when  the
Grapes  were  prefs’d,  and  the  Wine  ran  out,  and  that
he  drank  it  ignorantly}  I  fay,  I  cannot  come  into
that  Opinion:  For  Noah^  who  had  no  doubt  preach’d
againft  the  Vices  of  the  Antediluvian  World,  and
againft  Drunkennefs  among  the  reft,  mu  ft  certainly
know  the  Ufe  of  the  Vine,  and  the  Abufe  of  it
too }  how  elfe  did  he  come  to  plant  it  at  all,  and
to  prefs  the  Juice  out  for  Drinking  it  at  all  ?

Gen.  ix.  20.  Noah  began  to  be  an  Husbandman ,  and
he  planted  a  Vineyard.

2 1 .  And  he  drank  of  the  Wine ,  and  was  drunken .

Secondly ,  It  does  not  feem,  that  the  time  of  Noah's
Drunkennefs  was  upon  the  preffing  of  the  Grapes,
or  the  preffing  the  firft  Grapes  of  his  new  Planta¬
tion  5  it  muft  certainly  be  a  confiderable  time  after

his


A  SYSTEM

his  planting  them,  and  after  his  firft  making  of
Wine.  For  tho”cis  very  probable  that  he  planted  the
Vines  immediately  after  the  Flood,  and  the  Text
feems  to  intimate  as  much  *  yet  ’tis  evident  it  muffc
be  many  Years  after  that,  when  he  fell  into  the
fnare  of  Drunkennefs.  For  Canaan ,  who  was  then
a  Man  grown,  was  not  Born  at  the  coming  out
of  the  Ark,  and  there  muft  be  at  leaft  twenty
or  thirty  Years  between  that  time  and  the  Fa6t.
For  if  Canaan  had  not  been  Major,  had  not  been
at  Man’s  Eftate,  he  would  not  in  probability  have
been  curs’d  by  his  Grandfather,  as  a  Principal  in
the  Crime,  as  it  is  evident  he  was :  For  it  docs  not
feem  that  he  was  curfed  fo  particularly,  as  an  Ac-
ceffary  only,  or  for  the  meer  Offence  of  his  Fa¬
ther,  nor  would  it  have  been  Righteous  in  Noah
to  have  done  fo.  But  as  he  is  fo  warmly  fallen  up¬
on,  and  fo  particularly  by  the  old  Patriarch,  in  his
Anathema ,  ’tis  very  probable  he  was  a  Principal  in
the  Fa£fc  of  abufing  him.

Suppofe  then,  1  fay,  young  Canaan  bufy  in  af¬
fixing  his  Grandfather  in  planting  and  dreffing  the
Vines,  and  in  prefling  the  Fruit*  the  Devil  takes
this  for  a  Handle,  and  fubtly  makes  Canaan
dream.  (For  I’ll  grant,  with  Mr.  Milton ,  that  the
Devil  had,  from  the  Beginning,  the  Art  of  whif-
pering  to  him  in  his  Sleep,  as  that  Author  makes
him  do  to  Eve  in  Paradife,  and  thereby  making
him  dream  of  any  thing  he  pleas’d.)  Take  him  then
whifpering  to  Canaan ,  that  he  fhoqld  make  his
Grandfather  drunk  with  the  Wine,  and  that  he
fhould  be  able  to  do  what  he  pleas’d  with  him
ever  after*  infinuating,  that  the  EffeCt  of  it  would
be  to  make  his  Grandfather  have  a  greater  AffeCti-
on  to  him  than  to  any  of  the  reft  of  his  Grand¬
children.  This  is  not  improbable,  becaufe  the  De¬
vil  always  Tempts  with  the  Expectation  of  fome
apparent  Good.

Others


97


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.

Others  fuggeft,  that  Noah  having  reprov’d  and
reproach’d  Canaan  for  fome  Crime,  and  perhaps
caus’d  him  to  be  corrected  for  it,  the  Devil  took
hold  of  his  Refentment,  (which,  by  the  way,  is  not
much  unlike  a  Devil,)  and  propos’d  this  method  of
Revenge  to  him  in  a  Dream  5  as  if  he  had  dream’d
that  he  had  prevail’d  over  his  Grandfather,  by  per-
fuading  him  to  drink  himfelf  drunk,  and  had  there¬
by  made  him  expoie  himfelf  in  a  beaftly  manner,
’till  he  became  the  Ridicule  and  Jeft  of  the  whole
Family,  which  by  that  time  was  very  numerous  $  and
that  Canaan ,  pleafed  with  the  lively  Reprefentation
of  his  Grandfather’s  Shame,  refolv’d  (the  Devil
prompting  him  to  it  in  other  fubfetjuent  Dreams)
if  poffible,  to  give  himfelf  the  Satisfaction  of
bringing  it  to  pafs,  and  to  perfuade  the  old  Man
to  drink  himfelf  Drunk,  the  next  time  he  came  to
affifl  him  in  the  Bufineft  j  and  that  accordingly  he
did  fo,  and  prevail’d.

Whether  Satan  did  it  thus,  or  by  any  other  me¬
thod  of  Infinuation,  we  are  not  fare  5  but  it  is  very
probable  it  was  by  a  Dream :  Nor  is  it  clear  to  me,
that  the  Devil  had  ever  any  other  way  but  by
Dream  or  Apparition,  to  come  at  the  intelligent
Faculties  of  Man.  *Tis  evident  he  does  fuggeft
Evil  \  now  he  muft  do  it  deeping,  or  waking  *  if
deeping,  it  muft  be  by  a  Dream,  in  which  he  does
but  imitate  the  good  Spirit,  which,  as  the  Scripture
fays  plainly,  and  gives  a  multitude  of  Inftances  of
it,  opens  the  Underftandings  of  Men  in  the  Night
Vifions,  and  feals  their  InftruCtions:  Nor  is  it  a
new  Praftice  of  Satan  to  mimick  and  imitate  his
Maker,  in  the  Meafures  and  Operations  of  his
Wifdom  with  Mankind.

But  be  that  as  it  will,  we  are  fure  the  Devil  does
communicate  his  malicious  Propofals  of  Mifchief
to  Mankind  *  you  have  two  eminent  Examples  of

H  it


p8  '  A  8  T  S  T  E  M

it  in  Scripture,  which  are  too  plain,  and  too  dirc£t
to  toy  purpofe  here,  to  admit  any  Difpute>  firft,  in
the  Cafe  of  Davids  and  his  Proje£fc  of  numbring  the
Poeple,  ’tis  faid  exprefly,  I  Chron.xxi.  i.  Satan  moved
David  to  number  the  People.  W  here,  bythe  way,  tho’  it
was  his  Sin,  yet  by  it  we  gain  a  piece  of  Information,
how  prodigioufly  populous  the  Tribes  were  at
that  time,  viz.  that  there  were  fifteen  hundred  and
feventy  thoufand  fighting  Men  in  only  ten  of  the
Tribes  3  an  incredible  Number  to  inhabit  fo  final!  a
Spot  of  Ground  as  the  Land  of  Canaan ,  befides
Women  and  Children:  But  that  by  the  way.

The  lecond  Example,  which  renders  it  out  of  all
doubt  that  Satan  has  Accefs  to  the  Thoughts  of
Men,  is  thar  of  Judas ,  John  xiii.  z.  Satan  put  it  into  the
Heart  of  judas  to  betray  Chrift .  Now,  I  fay  as  above,
this  mull  be  done  fleeping,  or  waking*,  if  fleeping,
it  muft  be  by  Dreams  3  if  waking,  it  mull  be  by
Voice,  Pofleflion,  or  Apparition.  We  fhall  confider
them  all  in  their  Place.

It  is  probable  that  the  firft  Method  the  Devil
took  in  the  World  was  by  Dream  3  as  for  Poflef¬
fion,  we  do  not  meet  with  it  very  early  3  as  to  Voice
and  Apparition,  we  take  them  to  be  all  fubfequent,
and  the  Effedt  of  a  long  Acquaintance :  as  among
Men  there  are  feveral  degrees  of  Communication
with  one  another,  after  Men  have  a  Perfonal  Know¬
ledge  and  Acquaintance,  before  it  comes  up  to  Inti-
macy  and  Friendjbip.

Dream  then  being  the  firft  way  of  Accefs,  or  by
which  the  Devil  found  the  way  into  the  Mail}
there  is  no  room  to  doubt  but  by  this  Method  he
found  means  alfo  to  infufe  into  his  Mind  an  infi¬
nite  Variety  of  corrupt  Imaginations,  wicked  De¬
fires,  and  abhorred  Concluflons  and  Refolutions,
with  fome  ridiculous,  foolifh,  and  abfurd  things  at
*  the  fame  time.


Thus


of  MAG  I  C  K.

Thus  I  cannot  think  but  the  Devil  firfl:  put  it
into  the  Hearts  of  the  Men  of  the  old  World  to
go  about  that  ridiculous  piece  of  Work  (as  I  obferv’d
it  to  be  before)  of  building  of  Babel fir (t  by  fill¬
ing  their  Thoughts  with  daily  Terrors  and  Appre-
henfions  of  another  Inundation,  thronging  their
lleeping  Imaginations  with  Fancies  of  new  Rains  to
overflow  them  >  by  which,  every  time  they  had
any  hafty  Showers  which  rais’d  the  Water  of  the
Rivers  or  Brooks  to  what  we  call  a  Land- Flood,
they  would  be  immediately  alarm’d  as  if  another
Deluge  was  a  coming  upon  them,  and  that  they  were
immediately  to  be  drown’d.

Thus,  railing  the  Vapours  in  their  Hypocon-
drias,  they  were  every  Night  dreaming  that  they
heard  it  Thunder,  that  they  faw  heavy  Rains,  and
that  the  Brooks  and  Rivers  fwell’d,  or  as  we  fay
in  our  common  Difcourfe  on  fuch  Occafions,  the
Waters  were  out $  in  Confequence  of  this,  he  puts
them  upon  confidering  of  Means  for  their  own  Se¬
curity,  and  then  they  dream  every  Night  of  Me¬
thods:  One  while  they  are  for  building  another
Ark,  another  time  for  building  a  Thoufand,  that
is  to  fay,  an  Ark  for  every  Family,  or  Patriarchate,
or  Tribe  5  one  time  this  fooHlh  thing,  and  ano¬
ther  time  that*  and  perhaps  many  Men  dreaming
on  many  feveral  Methods,  till  at  laft  they  bring
their  fleeping  Cogitations  to  a  waking  Confultation  5
and  there  they  refolve  upon  the  meanefl,  emptyefl,
and  molt  inconfiftent  Project,  that  ever  any  Body
of  Men  form’d  in  their  Heads:  And  which,  if  the
Devil  had  not  been  in  them,  and  drawn  them  into
it,  as  I  fay,  meerly  to  impofe  upon,  and  expofe
them  even  to  their  own  Ridicule,  could  never
have  come  into  their  Heads,  I  mean  the  Building
of  Babel*


00


A  S  Y  S  T  E  M

If  the  Devil  did  excite  that  foolifli  Imagination,
he  mutt  do  it  as  he  was  a  meer  Devil,  to  fhow
his  Malice,  to  put  them  upon  doing  fome-
thing  extremely  Ridiculous,  and  which  fhould  at
laft  expofe  them  to  their  own  Refentments  on  the
Madnefs  and  Folly  of  it  5  or,  which  I  rather  think,
he  bewilder’d  their  Imaginations,  without  any  im¬
mediate  Profpeft,  other  than  this,  that  he  knew  it
would  end  in  fome  ridiculous  Undertaking,  either
very  fooliJhy  or  very  wicked y  not  knowing  which  it
would  be,  and  perhaps  not  much  caring,  fo  it
would  be  but  provoking  to  their  Maker,  and  what
might  any  way  bring  bis  Difpleafure  upon  them.

And  here,  by  the  way,  I  cannot  but  obferve,  that
the  Method,  God  in  his  Providence  was  pleas’d  to
take  with  Mankind,  upon  their  entring  upon  that
foolifti  Piece  of  W  ork,  was  the  rnildeft  and  kindeft
that  could  be  imagin’d,  and  the  moft  to  their  In-
tereft,  calculated  for  their  Good,  evidently  ifliiing
fo>  and  that  much  more  than  letting  them  go  on  in
their  Madnefs  would  have  been.

Had  Heaven  thought  fit  to  have  wink’d  at  the
audacious  Attempt,  and  to  have  let  them  go  on
with  it,  as  far  as  their  own  Ignorance  and  Obfti-
nacy  would  have  guided  them,  ’till  by  the  immenfe
Circle  of  the  firft  Stages  of  the  Building  they  had
form’d  an  Afcent  higher  than  any  thing  of  its  kind
could  be  fuppos’d  to  ftand  $  yet  they  mutt  have  ttop’d
at  laft,  it  mutt  have  ended  fomewherej  the  time
would  have  come  at  length,  that  as  they  had  call’d
a  Council  about  the  firft  Building  of  it,  they  would
have  call’d  another,  with  a  go  to  nowy  fhall  we  leave
off  this  mad  Piece  of  Work?  that  as  they  had  ad¬
vis’d  with  one  another,  faying  Go  to ,  let  us  Buildy
Gen.  xi.  4.  fo  they  would  have  faid,  Go  toy  let  us
leave  off  Building .

Sup-


a

r


lot


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

Suppofe  them  to  have  found  the  Way  up  to  the
Regions  above  the  Atmofphere,  or  where  elfe  you
can  imagine  }  and  that  they  then  found  themfelves
as  much  remote  from  Heaven,  whither  they  had
propos’d  the  Tower  fhould  reach,  as  they  were  at
firft  $  and  that  among  the  other  Mifchiefs  they  had
met  with,  fuch  as  the  Difficulty  of  carrying  Ma¬
terials  fo  high,  and  the  Difficulty  of  breathing,
they  had  alfo  begun  to  difcovcr  that  their
Work  was  fruitlels,  and  would  be  endlefs,  as  muff:
have  been  the  Cafe,  they  would  certainly  have  given
it  over  at  laft,  and  with  Indignation  at  themfelves,
perhaps  at  one  another,  have  laid  it  afide.

What  a  piece  of  Folly  would  the  fruitlefs  Toil
have  been,  how  would  they  have  reproach’d  them¬
felves,  and  perhaps  falling  out,  and  going  together
by  the  Ears  about  it,  the  Victors  would  have  made
the  Vanquilh’d  pull  it  down,  and  carry  away
the  Materials,  that  the  Monument  of  their  Shame
might  be  removed  out  of  their  Sight.  The  firft,
that  is,  leaving  off  the  Work,  I  fay,  muff:  have  hap¬
pen’d  at  laft}  the  other  it  was  very  likely  would
have  happen’d}  fo  that  ’tis  out  of  doubt  Heaven
aCted  the  kindeft  Part  for  them,  by  confounding
their  Speech,  to  make  the  going  on  with  it  im¬
practicable,  fo  bringing  them  to  a  Neceffity  of
laying  it  afide,  before  they  had  carried  it  on  too
far.

Having  thus,  wfah  a  rational  ProfpeCt,  propos’d
the  firft  Method  of  Satan’s  making  his  Acquain¬
tance  with  Mankind,  and  fo  brought  him  to  a  Scene
of  ACtion  3  ’tis  very  rational  to  fuggeft,  that  he
began  the  Method  very  early  3  and  therefore  thofe
two  Experiments  of  Canaan ,  and  the  Builders  of
Babel ,  are  not  improper  to  mention,  as  they  feem
to  be  things  which  Mankind  had  never  attempted,
if  the  Devil  had  not  put  them  upon  it}  nor  had

H  3  the


IQ  2,


A  SYSTEM

the  Devil  at  that  time  any  other  way  to  bring  it  to
pafs  but  by  Dreams,  at  lead;  not  as  we  know  of.

It  may  alfo  be  ohferv’d,  that  the  fir  ft  Converfe  of
Mankind  with  the  invidble  World,  whether  with
the  evil  Spirits,  or  with  the  Good,  or  even  with
their  Maker  himfelf,  was  by  Dreams;  and  therefore
it  is  not  improbable  that  Satan  made  his  Applica¬
tion  to  them  the  fame  way :  We  have  it  very  early
mention’d,  Gen.  xv.  i.  'the  JVord  of  the  Lord  came  to
Abram  in  a  Fifion ,  that  is  a  Dream  ;  and  again,  A
deep  Jleep  fell  upon ‘Abram ,  and  lo  a  horrour  of  great
JDarknefs  fell  upon  him ,  and  he  faid  unto  him  —
ver.  ii,  ly.

It  is  infome  particular  Texts  faid  the  Lord  appeared
to  Abram ,  which  if  interpreted  by  other  Places,
mud:  be  underftood  to  be  in  a  Dream  y  for  in  thofe
Places,  when  God  convers’d  by  Apparition  with
Abram ,  or  call’d  to  him  by  Voice,  it  is  diftingu  ftfid
exprefly  in  fo  many  Words,  that  God  faidy  and
Godi  went  up  from  talking  with  Abram  y  and  the
Lord  appeared  to  him  in  the  Door  of  his  Tent  y  and
the  like.

As  God  himfelf  took  this  Method  with  Abram%
and  fo  with  Mofes ,  and  fo  with  many  others,  both
before  and  fince;  fo  the  Devil  found  means  to
make  his  Addrefs  to  Mankind  by  the  fame  way.
Hence  we  find  a  mighty  great  Strefs  laid  uponfome
of  the  Dreams  of  the  Ancients  in  thofe  Days;  and
much  ado  was  made  about  the  Interpretation  of
them  :  For  when  once  a  Man  of  Note  had  dream’d
any  Important  Dream,  any  Dream  which  leem’d
to  have  fo  me  thing  extraordinary  in  it,  away
they  went  to  their  Cunning  Men,  their  Southfiyers
and  Magicians ,  to  enquire  of  them  the  Meaning  and
Interpretation  of  thefe  Dreams.

Now'1  bring  all  thefe  Circum fiances  together,  and
you  will  find  the  Devil  fubriiy  infinuating  Dreams
f  \  intq


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

into  the  Heads  of  Princes  and  Great  Men,  and
then  by  like  Dreams  communicating  to  his  Cor-
refpondents  thofe  very  Dreams,  and  what  Interpre¬
tations  they  fhould  make  of  them.

This  was  a  particular  Favour  done  in  Aid  of
thofe  Magicians ,  who  were  more  than  ordinarily  in
his  good  Graces  *  and  no  doubt  it  gave  them  a  particu¬
lar  Reputation  at  Court,  and  in  the  Opinion  of  the
People  *  as  having  a  more  than  ordinary  Underflanding
in  hidden  Matters,  or  having  a  very  particular  In¬
telligence  in  the  fecret  and  referv’d  Part  of  Nature,
or  a  Correfpondence  in  the  World  of  Spirits.

AH  Albrahazen ,  a  Perfian  Wizard,  had  doubtlefs
this  Intercourfe  with  the  Devil,  if  what  I  have  to
fay  of  him  is  true.  He  was,  it  feems,  a  Sabian  by
Birth,  and  had  obtain’d  a  wonderful  Reputation  for
his  Witchcraft*  the  fame  which  I  fuppofe  the
Scripture  calls  Inchantments,  in  the  Cafe  of  the
Magicians  of  JEgypt,  when  Mofes  and  Aaron  came  to
work  Miracles  before  Pharaoh  *  he,  you  may  fuppofe,
was  fent  for  by  the  King  of  Perfia  upon  fome  ex¬
traordinary  Occafion,  fuch  as  the  Interpretation
of  a  Dream,  or  of  fome  Apparition  like  that  of  Bel
JhazzaPs  Hand-writing,  or  fome  Meteor  or  Eclypfe,
and  he  never  fail’d  to  give  them  great  Satisfaftion
on  fuch  Occafions.  For  whether  his  Accounts  were
true  or  falfe,  he  always  deliver’d  them  in  fuch
ambiguous  Terms,  that  fomething  of  what  he  pre¬
dicted  might  be  fure  to  be  deduc’d  from  his  Words,
and  fo  feem  to  Import  that  he  had  effectually  re¬
veal’d  it,  whether  he  had  really  done  fo  or  not.

This  Ali,  (fo  Fame  tells  you,)  being  in
the  Defart  wandering  by  himfelf,  and  mufing
much  upon  the  Appearance  of  a  certain  Fiery
Meteor,  which  had,  to  the  great  Terror  of  all  the
Country,  been  feen  every  Night  for  twenty  or
thirty  Nights  fucceffively  *  was  mighty  defirous

H  4  \  to


i©4


A  SYSTEM

to  underdand  the  Meaning  of  ir,  and  what  it
fliould  Portend  to  the  World;  but  being  utterly
incapable  to  make  the  lead  probable  Guefs  at  the
Thing,  the  Reafon  or  Nature  of  it,  much  lefs  its
Import  or  Meaning;  he  fat  him  down  under  a
Palm-tree,  weary  with  his  Travelling,  and  his
Mind  alfo  tyr’d  and  weary ’d  with  fruitlefs  andunper^
forming  Imaginations ;  Here  he  vehemently  wifli’d
that  fome  attending  Spirit  would  be  fo  aflifting  to  his
Fancy,  that  he  might  at  lead  make  fome  probable
Conjeftures  at  the  true  Meaning  of  that  drange
Phenomenons  and  alfo  at  what  might  probably  be
the  Ifliie  and  Event  of  it  to  the  W orld.

With  this  very  warm  and  importuning  Delire  he
fell  afleep,  and  being  in  a  deep  Sleep  he  dream’d
^hat  a  tall  Man  came  to  him,  of  a  venerable  maje-
jedic  Afpeft,  but  with  a  pleafing  and  chearful
Smile  on  his  Face;  and  calling  him  by  his  Name,
told  him,  that  he  was  come  at  his  Requed  to  an-
fwer  his  Importunities;  and  that  he  would  tell  him
the  Signification  of  the  Great  and  Terrible  Fire  in
the  Air,  which  was  feen  in  his  City,  and  in  all
jirahia  and  Perjia.

And  now,  fays  he,  you  fliail  underdand  that  thefc
fiery  Appearances  are  nothing  but  certain  Colle&i-
ons  of  Matter  exhaled  by  the  Influence  of  the  Sun
from  the  Earth  or  Sea,  or  perhaps  from  other  folid
Bodies  in  the  Compafs  of  the  Solar  Sydem,  fuch
as  the  Planets  and  other  Bodies,  which  you  in  this
Earth  know  nothing  of

Thefe  being  fet  on  Fire,  in  their  wandering  Mo¬
tion  appear  like  Stars  or  Comets  for  a  time,  being
driven  about  in  the  Bxpanfe  by  the  Impetuofity  of
their  own  Motion,  and  become  vifible  in  this  He-
mifphere  to  the  infinite  Terror  of  the  People,  as
thou  feed  it  now  is ;  tho’  thofe  Apprehenfions  and
chat  Amazement  of  the  People  are  very  ground-

lefs,


of  M  A  G  l  C  K.

lefs,  and  railed  only  from  their  own  Folly  and  Ig¬
norance.

For  as  to  the  Importance  of  them  to  human  Af¬
fairs,  the  truth  is,  Aliy  and  you  are  to  be  undeceiv’d
in  that  Point,  they  have  no  Import  or  Significa¬
tion  at  all,  other  than  that  fometimes  by  their  near
Approach  to  the  Earth,  and  by  their  Attraction,
or  by  their  Diffipation  of  moift  Vapours  they  oc-
cafion  fometimes  great  Drought,  and  infuppor table
Heatj  and  at  other  times  diftilling  great  and  uq-
ufual  Rains,  by  condenfing  in  an  extraordinary
manner  the  Vapours,  which  oy  their  acquir’d  Heat
they  have  exhal’d.

Alt  was  furpriz’d  at  this  Account  5  and  being  en¬
courag’d  to  fpeak,  he  reply ’d,  But  what  fliall  I  an-
fwer  to  my  People,  who  expeCt  great  things  from  me  ?
I  have  often  fatisfy’d  them  in  like  Difficulties,  but
when  I  fliall  come  to  tell  them  that  it  fignifics  nothing
at  all,  that  it  is  only  the  effeCt  of  a  natural  Caufe,
and  is  of  no  Import  more  than  an  ordinary  Star}
they  will  Hone  me,  and  fay,  that  Heaven  never
hangs  out  fuch  Signals,  without  fome  Significa¬
tion}  that  I  only  impofe  upon  them,  becaufe
I  am  Ignorant,  and  do  not  underftand  the  Motions
and  Intimations  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies,  or  how
the  Affairs  of  this  World  are  influenc’d  by  them.

O  Ali.)  O  Albrahazen>  highly  favour’d !  faid  the  Ap¬
parition  }  I  will  inftruft  thee  then  how  to  prevent
thy  being  defpis’d  by  the  Elders  of  thy  People,  on
Condition  that  thou  wilt  now,  and  on  all  Occafi-
ons,  give  car  to  my  Inftru&ions,  and  follow  thofe
Rules  that  I  fhall  fet  thee.

To  this  he  readily  aflented,  and  made  fuch  Aflu-
ranees  as  were  fatisfa&ory  to  the  SpeArc.  Go  then,
fays  the  Vifion,  and  warn  thy  Nation,  that  this
Fiery  Meteor  Portends  an  cxceffive  Drought  and
Famine}  for  know  thou,  that  by  the  ftrong  exhal¬
ing


toy


io6


A  SYSTEM

ing  the  Vapours  of  the  Earth,  which  is  occafion’d
by  the  Meteor’s  unufual  nearnefs  to  this  Hemi-
fphere,  thenecdfary  Rains  will  be  withheld,  and  by
a  long  Drought  thou  knoweft  Famine  and  Scarcity
of  Corn  fucceeds  of  courfe.  Thus  by  judging  ac¬
cording  to  the  Rules  of  Natural  Caufes,  thou  fhalt
predidi;  what  fhall  certainly  come  to  pats,  and  flialt
obtain  the  Reputation  which  thou  fo  earneftly  de-
fire  ft,  to  wit,  of  a  Sage  Magician  and  wife  Mm,

But,  fays  AH,  and  what  fhall  T  fay  to  the  Lords
of  the  Perfian  Court,  who  have  fent  for  me,  to  en¬
quire  of  me  on  the  fame  Phenomenon  ?  what  fhall  it
Portend  to  that  Nation  ?  will  the  fame  Fate  be  the
Confequence  to  their  Country,  as  is  portended  to
this  ?

To  this  the  fubtle  Devil  anfwers:  This  Inquiry
is  to  thee  of  the  utmoft  Confequence.  Fiery  Meteors
fometimes  from  the  fame  Natural  Caufes  produce
juft  contrary  Events  5  and  whereas  thefe  Bodies,  as
I  faid,  exhale  an  infinite  Quantity  and  Bulk  of  Va¬
pours,  which  they  rarifie  by  their  Hear,  and  fo
caufe  immoderate  Drought  and  Heat  in  fuch  and
fuch  Climates,  and  particular  Countries,  where
they  approach  too  near  5  fo  on  the  other  hand  they
are  in  themfeives  vaft  Collections  of  humid  and  wa¬
tery  Vapours,  which  if  haitily  condens’d  would
be  fufficient  to  deluge  the  World,  and  drown  Man¬
kind  3  and  fometimes  they  condenfe  in  fo  confide-
rable  Quantities,  as  to  defcend  upon  the  Earth,  and
caufe  exceftive  Rains  and  Floods,  and  great  Defo-
lations  of  the  Country.  Go  then  fearlefs,  fays  he,
to  the  Perfian  Court,  and  Fredift  to  them  excef-
five  Rains  and  Floods,  which  fhall  greatly  hurt  the
Fruits  of  the  Earth,  and  occafion  great  Dearth  alfo.
Thus,  if  either  of  theie  fucceed,  as  it  is  mo  ft  pro¬
bable,  t  hou  {halt  be  allured ly  receiv’d  as  a  Sage  Ma¬
gician  in  one  Country,  if  not  in  the  other:  Alfo  to

both


107


of  MAGIC  K.

both  tbefe  thou  mayft  fuggeft,  as  a  Probability  only,
the  Confequence  of  thefe  to  be  a  Plague,  or  In¬
fection  among  the  People,  which  is  ordinarily  the
EffeCt  as  well  of  exceffive  Wet,  as  of  exceffive
Heat;  if  th  is  happens,  thou  fhalt  gain  the  Re¬
putation  thou  defireft;  and  if  not,  feeing  thou  didft
not  pofitively  foretel  it,  thou  fhaltnot  incur  the  Ig¬
nominy  of  a  falfe  Predial  or.

This  was  very  obliging  in  the  Devil,  it  muft  be
confefs’d,  if  the  Story  be  true;  and  Ali  was  very
fenfible  of  the  Help  it  was  to  him,  and  fail’d  not
to  ask  the  Vifion  how  he  fhould  obtain  his  pro¬
mis’d  Affiftance  in  the  like  Cafes  of  Difficulty.
Upon  which  the  Vifion  told  him,  that  whenever
he  wanted  his  Help,  he  fhould  come  again  to  the
Palm-tree,  and  that  furrounding  the  Tree  fifteen
times,  he  fhould  call  him  aloud  by  his  Name  three
times,  every  time  he  went  round  the  Tree;  and  at
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  time  he  fhould  find  Sleepi-
nefs  come  upon  him,  when  he  fhould  lay  himfelf
down  as  he  did  now,  with  his  Face  to  the  South;
and  if  he  fell  afleep,  he  fhould  be  fure  to  receive  a
Vifit  from  him  in  Vifion:  and  with  this  he  gives
him  theMagick  Name  which  he  was  to  call  him  by.

Ali  was  infinitely  exalted  with  the  thoughts  of
th  is  Information,  which  let  him  fo  much  into  the
Secret  of  Nature,  as  to  enable  him  to  fpeak  in  a
Dialect  infinitely  fuperior  to  the  common  Under-
ffanding,  and  in  particular  to  make  a  Judgment  of
things,  out  of  the  reach  of  the  moft  Pretending  of
the  reft  of  his  fellow  Magicians .  When  he  went
home  among  the  People,  he  fail’d  not  to  give  his
Judgment  of  the  terrible  Appearance  in  the  Air,
and  told  them  pofitively  it  porrended  a  great
Drought  and  Heat  in  the  approaching  Summer;
to  which  he  added,  as  a  Suggeftion  only,  that  he
had  great  reafon  to  believe  it  wouM  be  attended

with


io8  A  S  r  S  T  E  M

with  a  Famine,  and  perhaps  the  Famine  might  be
follow’d  with  a  Plague  5  infinuating,  that  if  the
Famine  was  not  attended  with  a  Plague  among  his
own  Countrymen,  as  he  had  faid  it  would,  it  was
then  likely  it  would  appear  firft  in  Perjia ,  their
Neighbouring  Kingdom,  and  perhaps  it  might  af¬
terwards  fpread  among  them.

Th  is  terrible  Prediction,  deliver’d  with  the  Au¬
thority  of  one  whom  they  had  the  Venerable  Opi¬
nion  of  before  as  a  Magician ,  and  one  that  could
foretel  Events  of  things,  gave  the  People  an  Alarm,
and  alfo  their  King  with  them,  to  whom  the
News  of  the  Prediction  was  foon  carry’dj  but  the
Magician  conceal’d  entirely  from  their  Knowledge
the  Manner  of  his  obtaining  his  Information,  fothat
it  came  to  them  on  the  Angle  Authority  of  his  own
Judgment.

It  happen’d  as  a  Confirmation  of  his  Prediction,
that  after  the  Meteor  ceas’d  to  appear,  and  the
Spring  Seafon  advanc’d,  an  extreme  hot  Seafon
came  on,  with  a  long  Drought  following  for  feve-
ral  Weeks,  which  began  very  much  to  burn  up
the  Fruits  of  the  Earth  5  immediately  the  People
xcmembring  the  W  ords  of  the  Magician ,  and  find¬
ing  fo  much  of  what  he  had  faid  prove  true,  it
put  them  in  a  great  Conflernation  from  the  Ap*
prehenfion  of  what,  according  to  his  Account,  was
yet  to  follow.

It  happen’d  fomc  time  after  this,  that  the  King
of  the  Country  dreamed  a  Dream,  which  much
perplex’d  him,  and  all  the  Magicians  and  Aftrolo-
gers  were  fent  for,  to  interpret  the  faid  Dream  5  but
Alt  was  not  fent  for,  which  grieved  him  much,
thinking  that  he  was  notefteem’d  enough  among  the
Princes  of  the  Country,  and  that  he  fear’d  his  having
foretold  the  portentous  Events  of  the  late  Meteor,
which  were  not  yet  determin’d  by  the  time  that  he

pre-


of  MAGIC  K.

predi&ed,  he  was  neglected,  as  a  Perfon  that  would
not  give  any  good  Interpretation  of  the  King’s
Dream.  However,  when  Ali  faw  that  the  Magi *
cians  and  Southfayers,  who  were  fent  for,  gave  the
King  no  Satisfa&ion*  for  they  were  confounded
in  their  Accounts,  and  differ’d  one  from  another,
and  the  King  was  fo  angry,  that  he  was  about  to
command  them  all  to  be  put  to  Death*  with  this
he  was  comforted  again,  and  refolv’d  to  apply  him-
felf  to  the  Palm-tree,  to  fee  if  he  could  furnifh  him-
felf  with  any  Intelligence  fuitablc  to  what  he  de-
fir’d*  in  which  Cafe  he  would  foon  let  the  King
know,  that  though  the  reft  of  the  Magicians  could
not  anfwer  his  Defire,  he  could  fupply  that  Defe£t  *
and  fo  he  fhould  gain  more  Reputation,  than  if  he
had  been  fent  for  with  the  reft.

Upon  this,  he  retires  himfclf  as  ufual  into  the
Defart  as  before,  and  comes  to  the  Spot  where  he
had  the  firft  Vifion.  Here  he  furrounds  the  Tree
fifteen  times,  and  every  time  calls  the  Speftrc  by
his  appointed  Name  three  times  over,  and  as  loud
as  his  utmoft  extended  Voice  would  admit*  when,
according  to  Direction,  he  laid  himfelf  down  with
his  Face  to  the  South,  fhut  his  Eyes,  and  obfequioufly
waited  till  he  fell  afleep,  which  was  not  long:
No  fooner  had  his  Senfes  forfaken  him,  whether
doz’d  with  any  infernal  Charm  or  other  wife,  the
Account  does  not  fpecify:  But,  I  fay,  no  fooner
was  he  afleep,  but  the  Vifion  appeared  to  his
Fancy,  and  asked  him  what  was  the  Occafion  of
his  coming.

He  anfwer’d,  That  the  King  had  dreamed  a
Dream,  and  had  told  it  to  the  Magicians,  whom  he
fent  for  in  order  to  have  them  interpret  his  Dream,
but  that  he  had  not  been  fent  for,  which  was  at  firft
very  grieving  to  him  *  but  that  upon  further  En¬
quiry  he  found  that  the  Magicians  had  given  the


no


A  SYSTEM

King  no  Satisfa&ion*  and  that  it  had  highly  pro¬
voked  him,  fo  that  he  was  going  once  to  have
killed  them  all,  and  that  now  he  was  glad  he  was  not
called  *  but  that  if  he  could  now  put  him  into  a
Condition  to  interpret  the  King’s  Dream,  it  would
cftablifh  his  Reputation  for  ever,  not  with  the
King  only,  but  with  the  whole  Country,  for
that  he  was  fure  to  be  exalted  to  the  higheft
.Pitch  of  Honour  that  the  King  could  give*  and
befides,  all  the  People  would  adore  him  as
one  that  had  Intelligence  among  the  Gods*  fo
that  he  ihould  be  had  in  the  higheft  Reverence
Imaginable.

The  Vifion  aflured  him  that  he  could  not  only
qualify  him  to  interpret  the  King’s  Dream,  but  that
he  had  made  the  King  dream  it  on  fet  Purpofe  to
to  give  him  Occafion  to  interpret  and  explain  it*
and  fo  he  let  him  into  the  Particulars  of  what  it
was  the  King  had  dreamed*  and  that  the  Dream
being  thus  directed  by  him,  he  likewife  could  di¬
rect  him  to  fuch  an  Interpretation  as  none  but
himfelf  could  put  upon  it*  and  fo  he  at  once
told  him  both  what  the  King  dreamed,  and  what
Interpretation  he  fhould  give  of  it*  adding,  that  he
would  yet  do  greater  things  for  him  than  thofe  *
for  that  if  he  had  Occafion  to  recommend  himfelf
to  the  King,  or  to  any  other  Perfon  of  Note,  he
would  put  it  into  his  Power  at  any  time,  not  only
to  tell  the  King  what  his  Dream  fignified,  but
Ihould  make  the  King  Dream  any  thing  that  he
thought  fit  *  fo  that  he  Ihould  be  able  to  fay  to
the  King,  To-morrow  Night  a  deep  Sleep  fhall
come  upon  you,  and  you  Shall  dream  fo  and  fo,
which  Dream  fhall  portend  fuch  and  fuch  things
to  you  and  your  People.

Alt  was  exceedingly  raifed  in  his  Thoughts  upon
fuch  a  Motion  as  this,  and  you  will  not  wonder

that


Ill


of  MAG  1  C  K.

that  he  exprefled,  tho’  in  his  Sleep  or  Villon,  his
high  Satisfaction  at  fach  a  Favour  ;  and  from  that
time  he  entertained  a  conftant  Correfpondence  with
this  Vilion  or  Apparition,  not  being  aware,  or  pef-
haps  not  concerned,  that  he  was  all  this  while  con¬
verting  with  the  Devil ,  and  that  the  new  Friend-
{hip  he  had  engaged  in,  was  neither  lefs  or  more
than  an  immediate  Correfpondence  with  Hell.

We  have  a  Parallel  Story  to  this,  and  almoft  of
the  ftme  kind,  of  the  Devil  and  an  old  Arabian
in  the  Court  of  a  Pharaoh  King  of  Mgypt ,  upon
the  Appearance  of  a  Comet  or  Blazing  Star,  and
of  which  I  fhull  give  an  Account  in  its  Place.

Nor  was  this  any  thing  extraordinary  in  thole
Times;  ’twas  natural  to  Satan’s  way  of  conver-
fing  with  Mankind,  who  had  frequently  midnight
Thoughts  injeCted  to  them  by  a*  fupernatural
Power,  that  is,  by  the  evil  Spirit,  without  their
knowing  by  what  Hand  they  were  injeCted  ;  and
the  Devil  was  able  moll  certainly  to  give  the  In¬
terpretation  of  thofe  Thoughts  which  he  had  been
the  Occalion  of.

This  whole  Affair,  tho’  remote  in  Time,  I
give  this  Account  of,  to  fuggeft  from  it  the  proba¬
ble  Method  which  Satan  has  taken  from  the  Be¬
ginning  toinfinuate  himfelf  into  Mankind;  and,  as
1  faid  before,  to  begin  the  Acquaintance;  which,
when  once  begun,  he  took  particular  Care  to
cultivate  to  all  the  degrees  of  Intimacy  poffiblej
fo  that  in  few  Years,  fuch  People  have  been  as  in¬
timate  with  the  Devil ,  tho’  perhaps  not  thoroughly
knowing  who  it  was  they  converfed  with,  as  they
could  defire  to  be.

By  this  Method  he  found  Opportunities,  upon  all
Occafions,  to  bring  Men  to  converfe  freely  and
fully  with  him;  and  as  he  often  furnifhed  them  with
Materials  and  SuhjeCb  to  amufe  the  reft  of  the
*  World


Jit


A  SYSTEM

World  with,  he  was  always  able  to  oblige  them  in
the  utmoft  manner :  feeing  nothing  could  be  more
to  the  Satisfa&ion  of  fuch  People  than  the  railing
their  Reputation  in  their  Profeflion,  and  giving  a
Sanfbion  or  Confirmation  to  their  Predi&ions.

I  know  it  is  doubted  by  many  among  the  Learn¬
ed,  whether  the  Devil  has  himfclf  any  Knowledge
of  Futurity,  and  whether  he  can  predift  or  fore¬
tell  Events,  or  any  thing  future  and  to  come  5  and
this  very  Vifion  ©r  Apparition,  fiippofing  it  to  be
true,  verifies  the  Opinion  •,  for  he  put  the  Alter¬
native  fcveral  times  upon  him,  that  to  if  he  mifs’d
giving  a  right  Interpretation  in  one  thing,  he
might  be  fure  in  another  5  and  if  one  Conje&ure
fliould  mifs,  another  might  hit,  as  you  fee  in  the
Conftru&ion  of  the  appearing  Body  of  Fire.

But  the  Queftion  is  needlefs  here  5  for  if  it  be
in  the  Devil's  Power  to  injeeb  the  Subjcft  of  a
Dream,  and  put  Thoughts  into  the  Heads  of  tlhofe
that  are  afleep,  ’tis  then  moft  certainly  fo  far  in  his
Power  to  give  the  Interpretation  of  thofc  Thoughts
to  whom  he  pleafes  to  grant  fuch  a  Favours  feeing
the  whole  Scheme  may  be  a  mcer  Cheat  and  De-
lufion  df  the  evil  Spirit,  on  purpofe  to  form  another
Delufion,  namely,  that  of  bringing  in  a  Conjurer
or  Dreamer  of  Dreams  to  interpret  it.  This  is  in¬
deed  a  true  Piece  of  the  Legerdemain  of  Hell,  and
it  may  be  called,  the  Devil  turned  Juggler  5  for  ’tis  fo
in  the  very  Abftraft,  and  nothing  elfe.

All  this  is  no  great  matter  for  Satan  to  do,  if  we
grant  him  only  the  Power  of  infufing  Midnight
Thoughts  into  the  Mind,  which  we  have  good
rcafon  to  believe  he  is  able  enough  to  perform,
and  yet  have  no  great  matter  of  Craft  in  him
neither,  not  fo  much  as  we  are  ordinarily  willing  to
fuppofe  the  Devil  is  Matter  of.  The  Variety  is  in¬
finite,  that  I  might  fuppofe  the  Devil  is  capable  to


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

a£fc  among  his  Difciples  by  this  piece  of  Cunning,
if  we  do  but  allow  him  fo  much  3  and  I  cannot
but  lay  ’tis  very  clear  to  me,  that  the  Devil  has  a
fecret  Power  to  inje£t  innumerable  things  into  our
Heads  by  Dream,  and  to  make  us  dream  almofi:
what,  and  when  he  pleafes,  fo  as  may  beft  ferve
his  Occasions,  and  Ours  too.

And  his  Advantages  are  very  great  by  this  Fraud,
for  he  gives  his  Inhrument  fuch  an  undoubted  Re¬
putation  for  a  Revealer  of  Secrets  and  an  Interpre¬
ter  of  Dreams,  that  nothing  can  be  like  it.  Not
Daniel  himfelf,  who  they  Paid  had  an  excellent  Spi¬
rit,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Holy  Gods  was  in
him,  could  do  more  3  for  by  this  Means,  the  South-
fayer  would  be  able  to  tell  the  Dreamer  what  it
was  he  dreamed  of,  as  well  as  what  it  fignified.

If  any  Man  doubt  that  the  Devil  can,  as  I  fay,
infufe  midnight  Thoughts,  and  whifper  Suggefti-
onsby  Dream  of  any  kind  to  the  Mind,  I  refer  him
to  Mr  .Milton?  whofhews  us  the  Devil  in  the  Shape
of  a  Toad  crept  clofe  to  Eve's  Ear  in  her  deepeft
Slumbers,  and  injedting  luflful  or  loofe  and  wandering
Thoughts  into  her  challe  Mind,  (I  fay  chafte,  forfuch
it  was  without  doubt  before)  and  making  her  dream
with  Pleafureof  the  Sin  which  he  refolved  to  allure
her  to  commit  the  next  Day,  and  fo  prepare  her
for  the  Crime,  which  till  then  her  very  Soul  ab¬
horred.

This  granted,  and  the  Devil  being  allowed  fuch
an  Advantage  over  Mankind,  whether  good  or  bad  3
I  cannot  wonder  either  that  he  makes  ufe  of  it  at
all,  or  that  he  makes  ufe  of  it  in  fuch  a  frequent
and  extraordinary  manner  as  to  bewitch  and  in-
fpire  his  Friends  and  Favourites  :  Nor  that  thofe
Friends  or  Favourites  of  his,  whom  he  does  thus
affifl,  make  fuch  corrupt  ufes  of  it  as  we  find  they
do,  for  infinuathig  an  Opinion  of  themfelves  into
the  World  ;  for  we  find  p  re  fenny,  when  this  Fami-

I  liarity


i*4  A  S  T  S  T  E  M

liarity  is  once  obtained  with  the  Evil  Spirit,  and
they  begin  to  aft  by  his  Inftruftion,  the  firft  thing
they  do  is,  to  put  a  Fraud  upon  Mankind,  and
make  the  World  believe  that  all  they  did  was  from
Heaven  ^  that  they  fpoke  by  Infpiration  and  Reve¬
lation,  and  that  their  Intelligence  was  immediately
from  the  Gods  3  to  fpeak  in  the  Language  of  thofe
Times.

Thus  Balaam  tells  the  King  of  Moab ,  he  can  fpeak
nothing  but  as  God  fhall  command  him  3  whereas
9tis  plain,  had  not  the  Devil  been  retrained  from
direfting  him  at  that  time,  he  would  as  heartily
have  curfed  Ifrael  as  he  blefled  them,  and  fo  have
gained  the  Rewards  of  his  Office,  which  was  the
Wages  of  Divination  5  but  he  eonfefles  the  Impo-
tency  of  his  Art,  when  he  found  a  Lock  put  upon  his
Tongue,  and  the  Key  in  the  Hand  of  a  fupream
Power 3  I  fay,  he  eonfefles  the  good  Will  he  had
to  the  Reward,  but  the  Weaknefs  of  his  Black-rfrt
where  Heaven  interpofed  its  Power,  Numb  xxiii.
23.  Surely  there  is  no  Inchantment  againfi  Jacob ,  nei¬
ther  is  there  any  Divination  againfi  Ifrael:  intimating,
that  he  had  tryed  the  utmofl  of  his  Skill,  but  could
do  nothing  3  and  in  ver.  20.  Behold  I  have  received
commandment  to  blefs ,  and  he  hath  bleffed ,  and  I  can¬
not  reverfe  it :  Nothing  can  be  plainer,  He  would,
but  the  Devil  and  he  together  were  not  able  to  re¬
verfe  the  Blefling.  The  only  thing  ftrange  in  this
Story  of  Balaam  is,  that  God  fhould  thus  fuffer  a
Sorcerer  and  Inchanter,  a  Witch  or  Dealer  with
the  Devil ,  to  receive  Commands  from  himfelf,  and
to  bid  him  go  and  do  thus  and  thus,  and  to  meet
him,  and  put  into  his  Mouth  what  he  fhould  fay
on  that  Occafionj  from  whence  fome  might  infi-
nuare,  that  the  Wizards  and  Magicians  of  thofe
Days  had  a  mutual  or  alternate  Converfe,  fome-
times  really  wirh  God  himlelf,  and  at  other  times
with  the  Devil  3  as  if  the  Wretch  were  to  day  a

Man


I


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Man  of  God,  and  to-morrow  a  Sorcerer,  Conjurer,
and  an  Inftrument  of  the  Devil  $  and  as  if  God
would  ftoop  to  employ  thofe  who  hadfo  far  ftooped
below  the  Dignity  of  reafonable  Creatures,  as  to
converfe  with  the  Devil.

By  this  means  the  People  alfo  were  the  more
eafily  fubjeCted  to  the  Abufe  of  the  Conjurer,
and  expofed  to  the  Delufions  of  an  evil  Spirit,
not  being  able  to  know  when  he  fpoke  from  One
or  from  the  Other  $  no  doubt  the  Deluder  would
always  pretend  he  fpoke  by  the  immediate  Illumi¬
nation  of  Heaven,  as  he  had  fometimes  really  done
fo,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  obtain  the  Opi¬
nion  that  he  did  always  fo.

Now  ’tis  moft  certain  that  nothing  can  more
affift  the  Delufions  of  the  Devil  in  fuch  cafes  as
thefe,  than  to  have  it  entertained  among  the  Peo¬
ple,  that  all  the  Infpiration  is  from  Heaven  5  even
the  Devil  himfelf  cannot  defire  a  flronger  Auxi¬
liary  it  is  an  Affiftance  fo  natural  to  the  Delufions
which  he  is  carrying  on  among  Men,  that  all  his
infernal  Art  cannot  form  an  Equivalent  to  it.  And
hence  it  came  to  pafs,  at  leaft  /  believe  fo ,  that  the
Devil  chofe  always  that  way  of  coming  at  the
Senfes  of  Mankind,  I  mean  by  Vifion  and  Dream,
by  Voices  in  the  Night,  and  by  Injections  of  Mid¬
night  Thoughts  $  becaufe  God  himfelf  had  made
ufe  of  the  fame  Means  to  infpire  the  Minds  of
Men  with  divine  Ideas  j  and  the  Devil,  by  imitating
the  fuperior  Revelations,  could  not  only  enable  his
Magicians  and  Southfayers,  and  fuch  other  Inftru-
mentsof  Delufion,  to  impofe  their  Cheats  upon  the
People,  but  could  even  delude  and  impofe  upon
thofe  Dreamers  them felves  too,  perfwading  them  to
believe  their  Infpirations  were  from  Heaven,  and
that  they  had  fuch  and  fuch  things  revealed  to  them
from  the  immediate  Spirit  of  God,  when  ic  was
only  a  Flatus  from  Hell,  throwing  them  into  Ec-

I  2.  Italics,


A  SYSTEM

ftafies,  and  as  Balaam  faid,  being  in  a  irance  but  with
his  Eyes  open ,  that  is  to  fay,  poffefs’d  with  the  W itch-
craft  of  an  evil  Spirit,  as  is  laid  of  the  Maid  in
the  AEls^  c.  xvi.  ver.  16.  who  had  a  Spirit  of
Divination,  and  brought  to  her  Mailer  great  Gain
by  Southfaying,  that  is  to  fay,  by  fpeaking  as  the
Devil  dictated  to  her  j  nay,  and  the  Text  is  plain
in  acknowledging  that  it  was  the  Devil  that  pof-
felled  her,  for  in  the  Original  you  have  his  Name
what  Devil  it  was  5  and  if  you  want  a  farther  Ex¬
planation  of  him,  you  may  have  it  too  5  his  Name
is  called  PTT’HON,  and  fome  of  your  Bibles
(fuppofing  for  once  that  you  read  any)  has  it  in  their
Margins  y  what  particular  Devil  Python  was,  whe¬
ther  an  avaricious,  a  treacherous,  a  deceiving  Devil  $
but  fome  think  it  was  the  firft,  becaufe  fhe  hired
out  herfclf,  and  her  Devil  with  her,  to  a  Mailer,
and  what  fhe  got  by  her  Devil ,  her  Mailer  was  to
make  the  befl  ofj  the  Terms  much  the  fame  as
a  late  Irijh  Mar — -s  married  two  Wives  for,  then  let
them  out  again  at  lo  much  a  Year,  and  took  the
Income  of  both  their  Devils  for  his  Jointure.  A
rare  Bargain  indeed,  and  fomething  a-kin5  I  believe,
to  the  Devil  Python  !

How  much  were  it  to  be  wiilt’d,  that  fome
of  our  Southfaying  Wits,  who  are  really  neither
wife  Men  or  Southfayers,  Magicians  or  Conju¬
rers,  and  who  will  have  us,  in  fpite  of  our
Senfes,  believe  that  they  are  really  infpired,
could  hut  tell  us  too,  with  any  moderate  Cer¬
tainty,  whether  thofe  Infpirations  are  from  God
or  the  Devil >  Whether  the  Flights  of  their  Iniipids
areEcilaiies  of  the  Adored,  or  of  the  Horrid  j  whe¬
ther  when  they  rail  at  Heaven,  and  burlefque  their
Maker,  we  may  not  really  believe  they  are  over¬
rul’d  by  a  divine  Influence,  to  do  it  with  fo  ill  a
Grace,  and  fo  little  common  Senfe,  that  it  may
be  dire£!ed  to  exalt  the  All- wife,  by  the  very

means


i


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

means  ufed  to  expofe  him,  and  to  make  them  mix  Im¬
pudence  with  fo  much  Ignorance,  that  others  equal¬
ly  wicked,  but  of  better  Judgment,  may  grow  fick
of  the  Crime  for  the  meer  Deficiency  of  the  Wit.

Doubtlefs,  He  that  knows  how  to  ferve  the
beft  Ends  by  the  word  Means,  can  leave  the
meanefl  Heads  and  the  mod  brainlefs  Wits  to
be  thus  wicked,  to  intimate  to  others  the  Weak-
nefs  of  the  Crime,  and  the  grofs  Abfurdity  of
Atheifm.  I  don’t  therefore  think  it  at  all  pro-
phane,  at  leaft  if  not  fo  intended,  to  fay  Such  a
Fellow  is  one  of  God-a-mighty’s  fimple  One’s  j
by  which  I  would  be  always  underftood,  that  he  is
one  to  whom  Heaven  has  denied  the  Gift  of
Brains,  and  fuffer’d  the  Devil  to  fill  up  the  empty
Spaces  in  his  Head  with  a  Share  of  glaring  Im¬
pudence,  fuch  as  will  pafs  for  Wit  with  thofe  that
have  none,  and  for  the  worft  of  Folly  with  all  the
reft  of  Mankind.

This  fort  of  wife  Men,  of  whom  the  Age  is
plentifully  ftored  at  this  time,  are  doubtlefs  plac’d
up  and  down  in  proper  Stations  by  the  Allowance
of  Providence,  for  the  Convi&ion  of  Mankind  in
their  particular  Spheres  -y  juft  as  the  Devil  himfelf
has,  in  many  cafes,  been  a  Preacher  of  Truth,  and
will  be  fo  to  the  End  of  the  World,  tho’  fore
again  ft  his  Will.

Of  fo  much  Force  is  Ironical  Righteoufnefs,
that  the  blackeft  Agents  are  fitted:  to  be  made  the
brighteft  Examples  of  it  >  fince  alfo  the  greateft
and  beft  Principles  are  often  illuftrated  by  their
moft  infamous,  and  confequently,  by  their  com  pleat-
eft  Contraries,

But  to  go  back  where  I  left  off.  The -Dm’/,  who
has  always  had  the  Impudence  to  rnimick  his  Ma¬
ker,  and  fometimes  to  perfonate  him  too,  in  his
Applications  to  Mankind,  has  made,  I  fay,  his
fir  ft  Acquaintance  with  him  by  this  Method  of

l  3  Dream


nS  A  S  T  S  r  E  M

Dream  and  Midnight  Vifion,  for  that  very  Reafo%
•y£z.  becaufe  it  is  the  Method  by  which  God  him-
felf  often  ufed  to  reveal  himfelf  to  the  Prophets  and
other  his  moil  eminent  Servants  of  old,  as  inftanc’d
before  in  Abraham ,  and  of  which  the  Scripture  has
many  Examples.  (I  hope  that  Book,  when  ’tis  taken
as  a  Hiflory  only,  may  obtain  Credit  enough  to  be
brought  in  Evidence.)  I  have  mentioned  Abraham
already,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  offer’d  that  this  is
not  fufficient,  becaufe  God  converfed,  as  the  Text
fays  in  another  Place,  Face  to  Face  with  Abraham  %
but  take  it  then  with  his  Grandfon  Jacob :  God  ap¬
peared  to  Jacob ,  Gen.  xxviii.  13.  in  his  Dream  of  the
Ladder  reaching  up  to  Heaven.  And  behold  the
Lord  flood  above  it  and  faid,  I  am  the  Lord  God
of  Abraham  thy  Father.  But  if  this  will  not  do
neither,  then  take  it  with  one  who  it  might  be
as  likely  fhould  have  the  Devil  appear  to  him  as
God  himfelf,  but  (till  ’twas  the  fame  thing,  Gen.  xf#
3.  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  Dream  y  So  might
the  Devil  too?  for  Abimelech  was  an  Idolater  :  And
again,  ver.  6.  And  God  faid  unto  him  in  a  Dream ,
Now  Abimelech  was  a  Philiftin  of  the  curfed  Race
deftined  to  Deflruftion  by  the  Poflerity  of  Abraham ,
and  yet  God  appeared  to  him,  or  came  to  him  in  a
Dream,  and  (poke  to  him  in  a  Dream.

From  hence  the  Devil ,  who  is  cunning  enough
to  imitate  all  thole  Methods  of  Accefs  to  the  Minds
of  Man,  which  ’tis .  poflible  for  him  to  come  at
him  by,  and  which  his  Maker  has  ufed  for  the
like  Communications,  has  always  made  ufe  of  this
Method  5  and  when  he  has  defigned  the  Delufion,
or  the  perplexing  of  Mankind,  or  any  other  of  his
infernal  Infatuations,  he  has  brought  them  to  pafs
by  the  injeftion  of  evil  Thoughts  or  other  dark
Means,  moving  his  Paffions  and  Affedtions,  inflilling
all  the  heliifh  Imaginations  that  are  requifite  to  the
Mifchiefs  he  defigns.  And  thus  you  have  the  Cir-

eumftances.


of  MAGIC  K.

eumdances,  and  the  Reafon  too,  of  the  Devil's  way
of  working  with  Mankind.

It  remains  a  Quedion,  tho’  of  no  extraordinary
Importance,  what  Shape  or  Form  the  Devil  made
life  of  in  his  fird  acquainting  himfelf  with  Man¬
kind.  It  is  Satan’s  Misfortune,  to  fay  no  worfe  of
him,  that  he  cannot  appear  in  his  own  Figure,
cloathed  with  any  of  his  native  Beauties  *  but  that
it  would  render  him  fo  frightful  to  his  Emiflaries,
and  even  his  bed  Friends  and  mod  ufeful  Ser¬
vants  would  be  terrified,  and  would  run  away  from
him  infiead  of  converfing  with  him*  and  the  mod
accurate  Magician  or  Southfayer  in  Arabia  would,
indead  of  going  into  the  Deferrs  and  Wildernefs  to
meet  him,  abhor  the  very  Place,  and  tremble  at
the  Thought  of  feeing  him.

Hence,  to  whifper  to  them  in  the  Night,  and
only  talk  in  Vifion  and  Appearance,  is  the  landed
thing  the  Devil  can  do  to  them,  as  well  as  the
wifed  way  for  himfelf*  for  was  he  ever  to  appear,
I  fay ,  in  his  own  Cloaths,  none  of  his  Friends
would  ever  come  to  receive  his  fecond  Vi  fit.  Now
his  coming  in  the  Night,  or  in  Dream,  as  is  hinted
in  the  Story  of  the  Magician  above,  is  certainly
needful  *  for  as  in  a  Dream  the  Voice  without  the
Vifion  is  fufficient,  fo  if  a  Shape  is  reprefented  to
the  Imagination  in  the  Sleep  it  fooner  wears  olF,
and  the  Imprefiions  are  fooner  raz’d  out  of  the
Mind,  than  if  the  Apparition  was  vifible  with  open
Eyes,  and  in  the  Light  of  the  Day  *  there’s  a  great
deal  of  difference  between  what  we  really  fee,  and
what  we  only  dream  we  did  fee.

We  have  indeed  fome  of  Balaam' s  Dreamers,
that  is  to  fay,  who  dream  with  their  Eyes  open*
indeed  fome  of  them  may  be  faid  to  be  always  in
a  Dream,  they  are  fcarce  any  thing  but  Apparition
themfelves*  their  whole  Lives  are  a -kind  of  moral
Delufion*  and  as  they  live  in  a  Dream,  fo  we

I  4  mud


20


A  8  T  8  T  E  M

muff:  dream  too,  to  make  any  thing  of  them,  for
they  never  are  what  they  feem  to  be,  or  feem  to
be  what  they  are.  But  as  I  may  perhaps  endeavour
to  difcover  thofe  People  to  the  World,  a  little
plainer  than  I  can  difcover  them  to  them felves,  I
fay  no  more  of  them  in  this  Place,  leaving  the  De¬
vil  and  them  to  act  in  Concert  a- while,  that  they
may  illuftrate,  and  be  Foils  to  one  another.

It  is  true  that  by  this  way  of  dealing  in  Dreams,  the
Devil  has  infinite  Advantage,  for  the  making  Con¬
jurers,  that  is  to  fa}7,  Magicians  and  Southfayers,  in
the  World  :  Whether  that  fort  of  People  have  been
of  any  Ufe  to  him  for  the  propagating  his  Intereft
in  the  World,  is  a  Queftion  by  it  felfi

That  the  Devil  took  this  Method  for  the  firft
eftablifhing  himfclf  in  the  World,  and,  as  I  call’d  it,
making  his  Acquaintance  with  Mankind,  I  have  ta¬
ken  Notice  of  already  :  How  ufeful  he  has  found  his
new-made  Friends,  and  how  apt  to  carry  on  his  Bu-
finefs,  and  efpeciaily  for  the  farther  extending  his
Power,  and  propagating  the  Delufions  of  others,  Hi-
ftory  will  inform  us  3  and  we  cannot  doubt  but  he
has  found  his  Advantage  in  it  :  But  it  remains  a
Queftion  of  Importance  ftill  undecided,  whether  are
belt  pleafed  in  thefe  nofturnal  Operations,  the  Devil
or  the  Magician  3  my  Opinion  is  for  the  firft.  I  believe
indeed  the  Devi  l  has  got  the  better  of  them  in  the  main,
and  whereas  he  at  firft  was  mighty  eager  to  make  his
Acquaintance  among  them,  and  glad  of  the  Means  3
hefeems  now  to  have  over- reached  them,  and  to  have
worked  them  up  to  a  Defire  after  the  Correfpon-
dence  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  fubtle  Manager  is
not  fo  cheap  to  be  had  fince,  but  makes  Bargains,  nay,
brings  them  up  to  his  own  Terms,  and  fometimes
tells  them  plainly,  he  has  no  Occafion  for  them  3
but  on  the  other  hand,  if  they  want  him,  they
muft  give  him  his  own  Price,  and  do  what  he  con¬
ditions  with  them  for,  or  clfe  ha  has  no  more  to  fay
to  thepj  tho’lie  is  %  Cheat  in  that  too,  Thug


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.

Thus  like  a  cunning  Chap,  he  turns  his  Back  and
is  gone,  knowing  very  well  that  they  will  call  him
again, and  give  him  his  Prices  yield  to  his  Demand,
and  rather  fell  themfelves  to  him  Soul  and  Body ,  as
we  are  told  is  now  very  frequent,  than  go  without
his  Affiftance.  This  is  all  owing  to  his  Subtilty,
and  Mankind’s  Folly  and  Fondnefss  for  had  they
Hood  as  they  did  at  firft,  he  mull  have  come  to
their  Conditions  3  but  he  found  the  way  to  make
himfelf  neceftary  to  them,  and  to  pleafe  them,  and
he  managed  accordingly.

It  is  indeed  an  Evidence  how  fhrewdly  the  Devil
over-reached  Mankind  in  the  mo  ft  early  Ages  of
the  World:  For,  Firft ,  as  I  mentioned  before,  this
was  to  come  to  them  with  feme  Authority,  and
with  the  Magnificence  of  a  God,  and  it  always
gave  them  an  Awe  and  kind  -of  Reverence  of  his
Appearance  3  Secondly ,  it  really  fo  far  prevail’d
with  them,  that  we  have  a  great  deal  of  Reafon  to
believe  they  did  not  always  know  whether  their
Intelligence  was  from  Above  or  from  Below,  and
whether  they  were  converfing  with  God  or  with
the  Devil 3  If  this  is  true,  as  I  have  no  Reafon  to
queftion,  I  have  lefs  Reafon  to  doubt  that  he  of¬
ten  deluded  them  to  think  the  former.  And  thus
perhaps  many  falfe  Prophets  in  former  times  came
to  rhe  poor  People,  and  began  their  Predictions
with  the  ufual  Preface,  "Thus  faith  the  L.ord  3  when
in  Juftice  they  ought  to  have  begun  with,  Fhus
faith  the  Devi  fas  they  might  eafily  have  feen  after¬
wards,  by  the  Confequence  of  it,  and  by  the  nature
of  their  Prediction  3  for  I  believe  that  way  it  is  moft
eafily  difeovered.

The  Difcovery  feems  indeed  to  be  directed  by
this  very  Method,  where  the  Scripture  fays.  If  a
Prophet  come /hews  Signs  and  Wonders,  and  then
adds,  go  ferve  other  Gods ,  his  very  Doctrine  proves
him  to  be  an  Impoftor,  and  on  that  very  Account

he


Ill


A  STSTEM

•  Aw  f\  ~r

he  is  to  be  rejeflred :  God’s  Prophets  will  always
teach  God’s  Truths,  a  falfe  Prophet  .is  eafily  known
by  his  Teachings  5  the  Devil  may  deceive  for  a
while,  but  even  the  Devil  himfelf  cannot  hold  it
long,  the  cloven  Principle  will  appear,  which  I
fuppofe  the  Fable  of  the  cloven  Foot  to  be  an  Em¬
blem  of,  and  no  more.

But  to  come  back  to  the  Example  of  the  Magi¬
cian  going  into  the  Defart  $  why,  the  very  Place
was  a  Branch  of  that  Complication  of  Fraud  which
conftituted  all  the  reft  :  The  Man  went  thither
firft  cafually,  fell  afleep  by  the  natural  Confequence
of  his  Wearinefs,  and  under  the  Palm-tree,  as  cu-
ftomary,  to  preferve  him  by  its  Shade  5  the  reft
was  all  a  Cheat  $  the  Devil  could  as  well  have
made  him  dream  and  fee  the  Vifion  in  his  Cham¬
ber  at  Sufaj  or  where  elfe  he  dwelt  in  Perfia ,
or  Arabia ,  as  in  the  Wildernefs*  but  he  catch’d
him  there,  and  took  that  Advantage,  to  introduce
the  Ceremony  of  his  future  correfponding  ;  and
therefore  he  appoints  him  to  come  again  to  the
fame  Place,  and  there  gives  him  the  Formality  of
Meafures  to  be  obferved  %  he  muft  make  his  Tour
fifteen  times  round  the  Tree  %  he  muft  call  him  by
what  infernal  Title  he  was  pleafed  to  give  himfelf y
and  this  to  be  done  three  times  every  Circuit  he
made  about  the  Tree*  and  when  all  this  was  done,
as  he  might  well  be  inclined  to  do,  he  was  to  lie
down  and  go  to  fleep.  And  what  need  all  this
Cookery,  but  to  difh  up  the  Delufion  with  a  due
Form,  give  a  SanfHon  to  the  Vifion  itfelf,  and
command  a  fuitable  Regard  to  the  Audience  which
he  had  the  Honour  to  be  admitted  to?

If  this  had  not  been  the  cafe,  it  might  as  well
have  all  been  tranfa£ted  any  where  elfe>  but  Satan
finds  his  Account  in  thefe  things:  For  during  many
Ages  after  this,  and  perhaps  in  other  Places,  the
Southfayersand  Magicians  of  Arabia^  went  out  in  the

Nights


of  M  A  G  I  C  IC

Night,  and  into  the  Wildernefs,  and  Solitary  Places,
to  meet  with  their  Infpirations,  and  to  dream
Dreams,  and  then  came  back,  ftor’d  and  qualify’d
to  make  their  Prediftions  *  as  much  as  to  fay,  they  go
to  their  Palm-trees,  to  meetVifions*  there  they  met
their  Devil ,  and  then  came  back,  and  fpread  their
Deiuflons,  as  their  Inftrudtor  had  furnifh’d  them.

Semiramis  it  Teems,  and  we  may  Toppofe  her  Sue-
ceflbrs  in  the  Babylonian  Monarchy,  kept  feveral
Sets  of  thefe  People  j  and  as  they  had  their  feveral
Denominations,  To  they  had  their  feveral  Offices
and  Employments  under  her:  As  particularly  her
wife  Men  ©r  Magicians  $  thefe  were  to  explain
to  her  the  Afpedfc  of  the  Heavens,,  the  pro¬
bable  Effedbs  of  all  furprizing  Phenomena  in  Na¬
ture  :  her  Jftrologers  and  South fayers  \  and  thefe  were
employ’d  to  confult  their  private  Devils,  and  were
Revealers  of  Secrets,  Interpreters  of  Dreams,  &c.  and
then  they  had  Wizards ,  and  Sorcerers ,  and  fuch  as
ufed  Inchantments  j  and  thefe  foretold  theSuccefsof
her  Military  Enterprizes,  expounded  Omens,  the
Signs  and  Circumltances  of  Creatures,  the  flying  of
Birds,  Voices,  Apparitions,  and  all  fuch  things  as
were  particularly  uneafy  ordifturbing  to  the  Queen,
or  to  her  Court, and  wanted  their  Explaining:  The
flrffcof  thefe  I  have  voted  already  to  be  honefl:  Men,
but  the  lalt  two  I  make  no  doubt  confulted  with
the  Devil,  and  the  Devil  with  them,  upon  all  Oc-
caflons.  Nor  do  I  doubt  at  all  but  that  they  made
Prodigies,  and  then  explain’d  their  Meaning,  as  I
faid  before  *  that  they  appointed  Dreams  on  pur-
pofe,  and  for  the  lake  of  interpreting  them  ^  of
which  I  fhall  give  you  another  Account  hereafter.

Sometimes  it  feems,  thefe  conjuring,  enchanting
People,  were  fo  far  from  explaining  things  to  the
Queen’s  Mind,  or  interpreting  things  after  the  man¬
ner  that  fhe  expedited,  that  her  Majefty  was  pleas’d
to  difpatch  them  out  of  her  way,  and  hang  them


A  SYSTEM

by  Dozens.  And  thus  Nebuchadnezzar  commanded
all  the  wife  Men  of  Babylon  to  be  put  to  Death,
tho’  it  does  not  appear  that  his  Commands  were  ex¬
ecuted,  nor  are  we  certain  they  were  not  *  but  ’tis
evident  it  was  very  much  the  Cuflom  to  do  fo.

Hence  I  fuppofe  they  were  generally  inclin’d,
like  the  Prophets  in  the  cafe  of  King  Ahab ,  to  take
care,  and  prophefy  nothing  but  what  fhould  pleafe
the  King.  And  when  Micaiah ,  a  true  Prophet,
or  Prophet  of  God,  came  to  teb  the  King  what
really  came  to  pafs,  we  fee  what  his  Fate  had  been,
if  the  King  had  out-liv’d  the  Battle.

Nor  to  this  Day  do  the  Princes  of  rhe  Eaft
make  any  fcruple  to  trufs  up  their  Conjurers  and
Southfayers,  when  they  find  them  juggle  with
them,  and  find  they  cheat  and  impofe  upon  them  5
an  admirable  Method  to  deal  with  the  Broachers  of
Atheiftical,  Deiftical,  and  Enrhufiaftic  A  hymfles  in
our  Age,  where  we  have  a  more  fare  JVord  of  Pro ~
phefy ,  which  we  are  commanded  to  take  heed  to,
and  which  the  modern  Agents  of  the  Devil  are
only  employ’d  to  counter- aft,  and  drive  our  of  the
World, 'if  poflible,  that  the  old  Oracles  of  Devil-
worfhip,  and  other  Delufions,  might  be  again  in¬
troduc’d.

But  I  am  loth  to  feem  vindiftive  in  my  Notions,
nor  would  I  fet  up  Fire  and  Faggot  5  no,  not  a-
gainft  the  Devil  and  his  Agents  5  they  may  have
enough  of  that  hereafter,  with  the  Devil  and  his
Angels:  And  befides,  fuch  a  Perfecution  mu  ft  ne-
ceflarily  at  this  time  be  fo  bloody,  that  I  know  not
what  City,  or  Town,  Inns  of  Court,  Palace,  College,
or  Univerfity,  ( our  own  excepted)  which  it  would
not  aim  oft  lay  wafte,  defolate,  and  make  void  of  Inha¬
bitants.  Mercy  on  us!  perfecute  and  pumfhMen  for
being  Atheifts,  andDeifts^  for  dividing  the  Trinity,
and  unfanftifying  the  Holy  Ghoft,  who  istheSanfti-
fierof  the  World,  and  fuch  difficult  Trifles  as  thefc  ?

where


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

where  would  it  end  !  and  what  would  become  of  all
the  religious  Part  of  the  World  !  what  a  Schifm5  in
the  molt  literal  Senfe,  would  this  make  among  us?
and  where  is  there  a  Church,  Chappel,  Meeting-
houfe  or  Congregation,  that  would  not  be  divided
againft  it  felt,  and  fet  up  a  new  Body  of  Diflenters  ?
Truly  fo,  as  diflenting  not  from  tjiis,  or  that  Opi¬
nion  of  Religion,  but  from  all  Religion,  and  all
Opinions  in  Religion  whatfoever.

Well,  let  the  Church  of  Rome  fend  Proteftants
to  Heaven  by  the  Rack  and  the  Gibbet,  I  would
not  be  inftrumental  to  fend  all  the  Atheifts  and
Arians  to  the  Devil \  no,  not  for  the  fake  of  my
Native  Country,  for  fear  of  laying  wafte  the
Glebe,  and  leaving  Pofterity  no  body  to  inftru£i
them  better.


CHAP.  V.

A  Farther  Account  of  the  Devi IV  Conduct  in
Imitating  TDivine  Infpirations ;  Something  of
the  ! Difference  between  them ;  and  parti  cm -
larly  of  Signs  and  Wonders ,  Falfe  as  well  as
True ,  and  the  Cheats  of  the  Former.

HAVIN  G  obferv’d  how  the  Devil ,  in  the  In¬
fancy  of  his  Correfpondence  with  Mankind,
came  to  him,  and  made  his  Acquaintance  by  the  fame
Method  that  God  was  pleas’d  to  reveal  himfelf  on
Occafions  of  the  greateft  Importance  5  it  would  be
very  much  to  the  Advantage  of  our  prefent  Enquiry,
if  we  could  come  at  feme  more  Particulars  in  the
refpedfcive  Appearances,  and  know  iomething  of  the
Difference  in  them,  that  fo  for  the  Future  we  might
difhngmfh  our  Modern  Iniphauons,  and  not  oblige
the  Devil  fo  much,  or  his  Favourites  either,  as  to
flatter  their  Vanity  with  thinking  they  are  di¬
vinely


12  y


-  jL r\J


ii  6  A  §  Y  S  T  E  M

vinely  infpired,  when,  as  I  faid  before,  they  are  only
deluded  with  the  Enthufiafms  of  Hell,  and  impos’d
upon  by  Mother  Eve's  Toad  at  their  Ears,  that  is
to  lay,  by  the  Whifpers  of  the  Devil .

That  God  was  pleas’d  to  reveal  himfelf  to  his
Servants  of  old  by  Vifion  and  Dream  is  evident,
befides  the  Examples  mention’d  before,  from  his
own  Declaration,  that  this  was  the  way  he  refolv’d
to  tranfadt  with  them,  Numb.  jdi.  6.  If  there  he  a
Prophet  among  you ,  I  the  Lord  will  make  my  felf
known  to  him  in  a  Vifion ,  and  will  fpeak  unto  him  in
a  Dream.  My  Servant  Mofes  is  not  fo ,  (that  is  to  fay,
was  more  than  fo,)  with  him  will  I  fpeak  Mouth  to
Mouth ,  even  apparently ,  and  not  in  dark  Speeches ,  &c.

This  is  a  noted  Declaration  of  the  Manner  how
God  would  difcover  himfelf  to  his  Servants  $  and
we  cannot  doubt  but  the  j Devil,  who  knew  it  very
well,  did  quickly  imitate  the  like  Method,  and
bring  in  a  thoufand  Delufions  at  the  fame  Door:
It  being  in  his  Power,  as  I  have  faid,  to  injedfc
Midnight  Thoughts  and  Amufements,  and  make
his  Appearances  in  Vifon  and  Dream  as  he  pleas’d  $
how  near  he  might  come  to  imitate  the  Villons
and  Revelations  of  God,  is  what  I  cannot  under¬
take  to  determine:  I  am  fure  ’tis  more  than  pro¬
bable  that  he  might  do  fo,  in  a  manner  as  might
deceive  thofe  unguarded  Perfons,  to  whom  he  often
thus  appear’d,  and  v^ofe  Ends  in  feeking  him  out
might  be  almoft  as  wicked  as  his  that  appear’d  to  them .

it  may  be  fomething  too  much  in  the  Favour  of
the  Pretenders  to  new  Light  and  Prophefies ,  and  to
the  ancient  Revelations  and  Difcoveries  made  by
falfe  Prophets,  properly  fo  call’d  in  the  holy  facred
Writings  j  but  1  cannot  anfwer  it  to  my  own  Reafon,
if  I  fhouid  fay,  that  I  believe  they  all  knew,  and
every  time  too  when  they  faid,  thus  faith  the  Lord ,
that  it  was  falfe,  that  they  told  a  wilful  preme¬
ditated  Lye,  and  that  they  ought  to  have  faid,  Thus
faith  our  fovereign  Lord  the  Devil.  Nor


I


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

Not*  will  I  venture  to  fay,  that  all  the  Modem
Heathens*  the  Druids  among  the  Britains ,  the
Priefts  of  the  Heathen  Temples,  who  uttered  the
Oracles  of  the  Devils  however  they  came  by  them,
or  the  Brdmans  and  flrieteft  Reclufes  of  the  Indi¬
ans,  the  Dervifes  of  Mahomet ,  and  the  like,  do  all
aftually  know,  that  is  to  fay,  by  immediate  Commu¬
nications  from  Hell,  and  the  I  nftru  mentality  of  its
Agents,  that  they  really  are  Confederate  with  the
great  Enemy  of  Mankind,  and  carrying  on  a  Cor-
refpondence  with  the  Devil.  I  have  fo  much  Opi¬
nion  of  the  Power  of  common  Senfe  in  Man,  as  a
human  Creature,  and  fo  much  Charity  for  the  good
Meaning  of  thole,  who  we  do  not  find  immediately
vile,  profligate,  and  immoral,  as  to  think  they
would  not  aft  with  Satan  upon  that  foot.

I  have  much  more  Reafon  to  think  the  four  Ec-
clefiaflicks  of  Switzerland ,  in  the  Story  Jetzer,  afted
with  Satan  open-ey’d,  and  open-fac’d,  when  they
propos’d  to  the  poor  foolifh  Creature  to  renounce
God  and  Jefus  Chrift,  and  fo  to  carry  on  the
Fraud  they  had  begun,  with  a  kind  of  Sanftion  in-
flead  of  an  Oath  of  Secrefy,  and  it  appear’d  indeed
to  be  fo  at  laft.

But  certainly,  as  in  other  Cafes,  abundant  Para-
lels  might  be  brought.  The  Devil ,  who  generally
afts  in  Difgufe,  has  carry ’d  thofe  Difguifes  fo  art¬
fully,  that  I  doubt  not  but  many  of  his  falfe  Pro¬
phets,  long  before  our  times,  have  (aid,  thus  faith
the  Lord ,  with  a  good  Grace*  that  is ,  with  a  real
Belief,  that  God  had  fpoken  to  them,  or,  as  was
the  Language  of  the  Scripture  Times,  had  fpoken
by  them,  when  really  it  was  the  Voice  of  the  De -
vil ,  and  of  no  body  elfe :  And  let  not  our  Modern
Enthufiafticks  take  this  to  be  faid  only  in  Favour  of
themfelves  *  I  am  not  come  fo  far  down  in  the
courfe  of  my  Work,  fo  much  as  to  think  of  them,
no  not  of  St.  Dunjlan ,  St.  Francis ,  or  of  the  more

eminent


I  2.8


A  SYSTEM

eminent  Deceiver  St.  Ignatius ,  the  greatefl  Enthu-4
liaftick  of  the  laft  ten  Centuries :  when  I  come
to  them*  we  fhall  reckon  as  we  meet.

But  I  am  yet  talking  of  the  fpecifick  Difference
between  the  Infpirations  of  falfe  Prophets,  the
Dreams  whifper’d  and  fuggefled  by  the  Devil 5  and
thofe  on  the  other  hand  from  the  contrary  Appear¬
ances  of  the  good  Spirit,  that  is  to  fay,  of  God
himfelf.  I  am  in  the  firfi  place  to  intimate,  that
they  are  not  always  to  be  difcern’d,  no  nor  eafy  to
be  difcern’d  j  if  they  were,  there  would  not  be  fo
many  Delufions  in  the  W orld  as  have  been  5  for  the
Men  are  not  all  Devils  before  they  come  to  him,
they  don’t  come  to  him  refolving  to  be  deceiv’d,
and  intending  to  deceive  every  Body  they  are  con¬
cern’d  with.  I  muft  own,  I  do  not  think  that  all
the  four  hundred  Priefts  of  Baal,  whom  Elijah  fum-
mon’d  together  to  the  great  Sacrifice  at  Mount
Carmel ,  would  havefhew’d  fo  many  antick  Tricks,
leaping  upon  the  Altar,  cutting  themfelves  with
Knives,  and  crying  O  Baal  hear  us!  if  they  had
believ’d  they  were  under  a  Delufion  of  the  Devil
all  the  while,  and  that  Baal  was  no  Body  but  a  dead
Stock,  a  lifelefs  Image,  without  Senfe  to  hear,
much  more  without  Power  to  anlwer.  They  mult
certainly  believe,  that  Baal  was  a  Something,  or  a
Somebody,  whom  it  was  their  Duty  to  pay  a  Ho¬
mage  and  Reverence  to>  or  that  they  paid  that
Homage  to  the  true  God,  through  the  Medium  of
an  image,  a  fort  of  a  Model  of  that  meaner  and
more  ignorant  Idolatry  call’d  Popery.

But  to  look  forward  beyond  this  Image  of  Idol-
worfhip,  we  have  the  old  falfe  Prophets  coming
much  nearer  to  the  true,  and  the  Infpirations  bear¬
ing  an  Affinity  in  a  more  fignificant  Point  *  and
that  is,  in  Signs  and  Wonders ,  or  what  we  call
Mircales,  which  yet  may  be  all  from  the  Devils
fo  hard  it  is  for  the  deceiv’d  falfe  Prophet

to


I


of  M  A  QIC  K.

to  know  when  he  is  right  and  when  he  is  wrong  *
and  fo  eafy  is  it  for  him  to  be  impos’d  upon  him-
felf,  and  confequently  to  delude  the  People  he  con-
verfes  with.

The  Devil^  as  far  as  his  Agency  of  this  kind  will
reach,  mull  eertainly  be  mightily  pleas’d  with  it$
for  by  thus  infpiring  his  Tools,  not  only  to  the  de¬
gree  of  falfe  Prophets,  but  to  an  Ability  of  work¬
ing  Miracles,  flowing  Signs  and  Wonders,  whe¬
ther  Real  or  Imaginary,  he  not  only  the  more  ef¬
fectually  impofes  upon  his  falfe  Prophets,  but  gives
or  deputes  fo  much  of  Devil  to  them,  as  to  make
them  able  to  delude  and  deceive  others,  nay  to  de¬
ceive  the  whole  World  $  or  as  the  Text  exprefles
it  Matt. xx iii.  24.  to  deceive  (if  it  were  poffible)  the
very  EleU.

’Tis  remarkable  in  this  fame  Text,  that  it  is  pre-
difted  there  fhall  come  falfe  Chrifts,  and  falfe  Pro¬
phets,  (Devils,  or  Devil’s  Agents)  and  fhall  fhew^
great  Signs  and  Wonders.

There  is  alfo  another  Text,  which  gives  us  a
Caution  againft  fuch,  tho’  I  do  confefs  I  can’t
fee  how  it  can  be  made  ufe  of  till  the  Delufion  has
gone  fome  Length*  and  that  is  in  Dent.  xiii.  1,  2-
If  there  arife  among  you  a  Prophet,  or  a  Dreamer  of
Dreams,  and  giveth  thee  a  Sign ,  or  a  Wonder ,  and
the  Sign ,  or  the  Wonder  come  to  pafs.  Now  this^
I  fay,  requires  fo  much  time,  as  to  the  fulfilling
the  Token  or  Prediction  of  the  falfe  Prophets,  till
when,  and  till  the  falfe  Doctrine  which  he  preaches
fhall  detect  him,  the  People  are  manifeftly  in  dan¬
ger  of  the  Delufion*  for  as  in  all  fuch  Cafes  in
thofe  ancient  Times,  every  Novelty  was  confirm’d
by  Signs  and  Wonders,  What  could  be,  more  de¬
luding,  and  more  apt  to  impofe  upon  the  People*
than  to  have  the  Shewer  of  thofe  Signs  and  Won-

*  g  v  >

ders  confirm  his  Teachings  by  a  Miracle,  and  that  the
Miracle  fhould  come  to  pafs?  Yet  all  this  may  at-

K'.:  tend


I  jo


A  SYSTEM

tend  the  lying  W  onders  of  a  Magician ,  a  falfe  Pro¬
phet,  nay  of  a  Devil-,  That  fuch  Wonders  may
be  wrought  as  are  juftly  term’d  falfe  and  lying
Wonders,  we  have  again  predicted  z  Fhef.  ii.  9.
which  Text  I  doubt  touches  a  little  our  holy  Fa¬
ther  the  Pope,  whofe  coming  is  faid  to  be  after  the
working  of  Satan,  with  ail  Power  and  Signs,  and  lying
Wonders j  intimating  that  there  are  Wonders  which
are  Delufive  5  faid  to  be  wrought,  but  not  wrought  5
a  la  Mode  the  Legend ,  the  Fables  of  Monkery ,  the  De~
*uil  of  Loudon,  and  the  like.  W onders  indeed  can
fcarce  be  called  lying  upon  any  other  Foundation  :
for  if  they  were  real,  and  a£hially  perform’d,  how
can  they  then  be  lying?  but  if  promis’d  to  be  per¬
form’d,  and  not  done  >  or  faid  to  be  really  perform’d
and  done,  but  v/ere  not,  then  they  are  indeed
Lyes,  or  lying  Wonders*,  and  take  them  which  way
we  will,  I  doubt  as  before,  and  leave  my  Mafters
the  Jefuites  to  bring  his  Holinefs  off  their  own
way.

But  I  come  on  upon  modern  Time  too  faft>  Hi-
ftory  demands  that  we  advance  by  juft  degrees,  and
to  that  purpofe  I  rauft  look  a  little  more  particu¬
larly  into  the  Antiquity  of  thefe  things.  Satan,
to  give  the  Devil  his  due,  did  not  manage  with
fo  little  Dexterity,  his  firft  Acquaintances  with
Mankind,  as  to  fuffer  his  fecret  Methods  to  be  dis¬
cover’d  and  detected,  or  his  Inftruments  to  be  ex¬
pos’d  j  On  the  contrary,  he  put  innumerable
W onders  upon  Mankind,  afted  with  inextricable
Stratagem  and  Art  5  from  which  Dexterity,  and
the  difficulty  of  explaining  his  Management,  the
common  Operations  of  his  Favourites  obtain’d  the
Sanftion  of  Devilifhj  and  the  Art  they  ufed,  ob¬
tain’d  the  honourable  Title  of  Blackj  and  this,
according  to  my  Title,  is  what  I  am  now  to  defcribe.

The  World  was  now  fo  much  improv’d  in  Know-
legde,  that,  as  I  hinted  above,  nothing  new  could  be

flatted.


I


of  MAG  I  C  K.

Hatted,  but  a  Miracle  was  prefendy  enquir’d  after  to
confirm  it ;  and  he  that  could  do  the  mod  eminent
things  of  that  kind,  was  the  moil  famous  in  their
Opinion.  A fopfus  was  a  Southfayer,  and  faid  to  be
the  Son  of  Apoflo :  Me  was  in  fiich  Credit  and  E-
fteem  in  his  time,  that  it  grew  into  a  Proverb,  to
be  as  infallible  as  Mopfus.

This  Mopfus  meeting  one  Chalchas ,  a  Man  like**
wife  eminent  in  the  fame  devilifh  Profeflion,  they
fell  into  Difpute  about  fome  things  relating  to  their
Art.  Mopfus  ask’d  Chalchas $  how  many  Figs  fuch
a  wild  Fig-tree,  as  he  pointed  out  to  him,  had  upon
it;  the  Southfayer  Chalchas  would  not  anfwer  him,
but  alledg’d,  that  it  was  not  a  fair  Queflion.  Upon
which  Mopfus  told  him  the  Number,  and  upon
counting  them  up,  it  was  found  true  to  a  Fig,
upon  which  Chalchas  was  fo  confounded,  not  being
able  to  conceive  how  it  was  perform’d,  that  tho’,
the  thing  was  trifling,  he  died  for  Grief.

It  feems,  Chalchas  had  his  Fortune  told  him  by
the  Oracle,  (viz.)  that  he  fhould  dye  when  he
found  out  a  better  Southfayer  than  himfelf;  all
which  I  can  refolve  into  nothing  but  this,  that
Mopfus  had  more  Favour  with  the  Devil  than  Chal -
chas ,  at  leaf!:  at  that  time,  and  that  he  whifper’d
the  Number  of  the  Figs  in  his  Ear;  or  to  clear  up
the  Juggle,  Mopfus  had  counted  them  before,  and
fo  the  Queflion  was  a  Juggle  in  it  felf;  which  in¬
deed  was  the  mofl  likely  of  the  two.

The  Humour  of  the  Times  being,  as  I  faid,  to
require  Miracles  and  Wonders,  the  Southlayers
and  Dreamers  of  Dreams  beflirr’d  themfelves,  and
fought  out  (every  Man  his  own  Way)  for  fecret  In-1
fpirations  and  Illuminations,  and  the  Devil  was
very  ufeful  to  them  on  many  Occasions,  till  at  laft
he  found  the  Work  encreas’d  upon  his  Hands,
and  he  was  oblig’d  to  fet  up  Delufion-Offices,  as
I  may  call  them,  and  give  out  Anfwers  at  the

K  2,  Shrines


1


A  SYSTEM

Shrines  of  the  People’s  Idols,  and  in  the  Names  of
their  Gods.

Thefe  were  fo  far  from  crying  down  the  Office
or  Dignity  of  a  Southfayer  in  the  World,  that  it
father  encreaft  their  Fame.  For  as  the  Number  of
thofe  Oracles  were  but  few,  not  above  twelve  or
fourteen,  great  and  fmall;  fo  the  wife  Men ,  the  Ma¬
gicians  and  South  fay  ersj  were  often  fent  by  their  re*
fpedbive  Princes,  whofe  Favourites  they  were,  to
thofe  Oracles  on  extraordinary  Occafions,  and  to
be  refolved  in  their  Doubts  5  whence  they  fre¬
quently  brought  fuch  Anfwers,  as  they  knew  would
pleafe  and  oblige  the  Prince  that  fent  them  ;  per¬
haps  as  beft  fuited  the  Circumftances  of  thofe  Prin¬
ces,  and  which  thofe  fo  fent  bed:  knew,  whether  the
Oracle  gave  fuch  Anfwers  or  no,  the  latter  being
not  always  neceflary.

This  working  by  Miracle  feldom  or  never  fail’d;
it  confounded  the  Underftandings  of  Men;  and
when  any  of  their  Southfayers  had  once  obtain’d
an  Efteem  by  fuch  a  Performance,  he  never  wanted
any  thing  more  to  continue  his  Character,  and  to
gain  him  Admittance  into  the  Favour  and  Court  of
the  greateft  Princes.  Hence  Jofeph' s  telling  Pha¬
raoh's  Chief  Butler  and  Chief  Baker  their  Dreams,
and  thofe  Dreams  exactly  coming  to  pafs,  open’d
the  Doors  of  the  Prifon  for  him;  as  his  adding  to
it  that  of  telling  the  Interpretation  of  Pharaoh's
Dream  advanc’d  him  to  the  fecond  Chariot,  and  to
the  crying  Abrek  before  him,  that  is  Bow  the  Knee.

’Tis  the  Opinion  of  fome  Learned  in  the  Wif¬
dom  of  the  ^Egyptians ,  that  Jofeph  continued  the
Art  of  Southfaymg  (for  in  that  the  Wifdom  of
the  j. Egyptians  chiefly  confided)  for  a  great  while
after;  and  I  acknowledge  my  felf  to  be  of  that  O-
pinion,  whether  I  am  learned  in  the  Wifdom  of  the
j. Egyptians  or  no,  and  that  he  had  never  been  con¬
tinued  in  fuch  a  high  Poll  fo  long,  if  he  had  not.


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

For  this  Reafon  thofe  Words  he  ufed  afterwards
to  his  Brethren,  Wot  you  not  that  fuch  a  Man  as  I
can  Divine ?  are  a  kind  of  Admiration;  that  is  to
fay,  Are  you  fo  ignorant  in  the  Cuftoms  of  this
Country,  as  not  to  know  that  a  Man  in  my  Poft
mu  ft  be  able  certainly  to  divine?  Gen.  xliv.  iy.

And  indeed,  without  putting  any  {train’d  or  con-
{train’d  Meaning  upon  the  Sacred  Text,  I  cannot
doubt  but  that  the  People  of  aEgypt  took  Jofeph
to  be  what  they  call’d  the  Prince  of  the  Magicians
of  the  Eaft;  that  is  to  fay,  one  of  the  Chief  of
them,  and  extraordinarily  qualify’d  by  the  Gods  for
the  Underltanding  deep  Myiteries,  for  diving  into
hard  Queftions,  interpreting  Dreams,  and  refolving
Doubts.  In  a  word,  in  the  fame  Senfe  that  Daniel ,
almoft  a  thoufand  Years  after,  was  dteem’d  at  Baby-
lon ,  viz.  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Holy  Gods  was  in  him  5
whether  they  meant  by  their  Gods  the  Crocodile,
or  the  River  Nile,  or  the  Great  Calf  at  the  ^Egyp¬
tian  Thebes,  or  Ifys,  or  Ofyris ,  that  I  fhall  not  en¬
quire  into  here,  but  they  doubted  not  that  fome  of  the
beft  and  brighteft  of  their  Deities  infpir’d  Jofeph
with  an  Excellent  Spirit.

Nor  was  it  unreafonable  for  the  poor  People  un¬
der  the  dark  Circumftances  of  that  Age 'to  believe  fo
of  him ;  for  how  elfe  fhould  he  have  the  Fore¬
knowledge  of  the  dreadful  Famine  feven  Years  be¬
fore  it  carne  ?  how  that  Sagacity  to  gather  fuch  im-
menfe  Quantities  of  Corn  in  the  plentiful  Years  be¬
fore  it;  and  lay  it  up  in  fuch  Places,  and  in  fuch
Proportions,  and  fo  fecur’d,  as  to  fupply  luitably
the  whole  Country  of  ALgypt,  fo  vaftly  extended,
and  fo  populous  as  it  was  at  that  time?

How  .  Jofeph  came  by  all  this  Knowledge  and
Wifdom,  they  (as  we  have  like  reafon  to  believe)
were  as  ignorant  of,  as  they  were  poiltive  that  it
was  fo,  by  fome  means  or  other;  and  therefore  it
was  no  Abfurdiry  for  them  to  fugged;  that  he  did  all

K  3  by


*33


A  SYSTEM

%

by  Divination,  that  is  to  fay,  by  Enchantment*
or  fecret  Convcrfe  with  the  Spirits  of  another
World  \  or  as  we  call  it,  with  more  Propriety  at
leaft  in  our  Opinion,  that  he  dealt  with  the  Devil-,  and
that  this  was  done  by  the  Charm  of  the  Silver
Cup  which  was  put  in  the  Mouth  of  Benjamins
Sack.

That  they  believ’d  fo  is  evident  from  the  Words
of  the  fame  Chap.  Gen.  xliv.  f.  Is  not  this  it  in
which  my  Lord  drinketh,  and  whereby  he  divineth  ?
The  Words  are  fully  explain’d  by  the  Cuftoms  and
Ufage  of  t  he  Magicians  and  Devil-hunters  in  thofe
Days>  who  ufed  ftrange  Geflures,  and  clanging
Sounds,  fuch,  or  not  much  unlike  fuch  as  our
old  Women  now  ufe  to  hive  their  Beesj  by
thefe  they  call’d  the  familiar  Devils ,  the  Pythons
and  aipollyons  of  their  Acquaintance  about  them,
whatever  Occafions  made  it  neceffary  for  them  to
(peak  with  them.

That  Jofeph  knew  better,  and  that  he  certainly
^either  ufed  fuch  Methods,  or  convers’d  with  any
fuch  kind  of  Foreigners  or  Infernals,  was  mo  ft  cer-
tainj  but  his  Steward  was  directed  to  (peak  in  thd
Language  of  the  Country}  nor  would  he  have
talk’d  to  have  been  underftood,  if  he  had  not;  and
this  confirms  the  Conjedlure  as  above,  and  makes  it
paoft  reafonable }  namely,  that  all  Mgypt  took  him
(Jofeph)  to  be  a  Southfayer  or  wife  Man,  and  that
certainly  he  could  Divine.

This  Part  of  Jofeph' s  Story  is  ufeful  to  explain
by  what  manner  of  Communication  the  Diviners
of  thofe  days  ufed  to  maintain  their  Acquaintance
with  the  Infernals,  and  how  mean  and  fcandalous
Methods  the  Devil  contriv’d  to  fettle  his  Corre-
pondeoce,  that  in  ftiort,  by  the  clanging  of  an  old
Kettle,  or  Brafs-pot,  the  whole  Hive  of  Devils
fhould  be  alarm’d,  be  told  that  fome  of  their  Ma¬
ilers  on  Earth  had  occasion  for  them,  or  as  we


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

call  it,  wanted  to  {peak  with  them,  and  that  they
fhould  immediately  fly  to  hand,  and  mount  to  the
Place  to  know  the  Bufinefs.

This  will  be  a  very  material  Point  to  difcufs  more
fully,  and  to  explain  thePhilofophy  of,  if  we  fhould
come  to  examine  the  raoft  accurate  and  polite  Me¬
thods  of  that  particular  Art,  which  we  call  railing
the  Devil ,  of  which  fo  many  valiant  old  Women
have  been  compleatly  Miflreffes*  and  that  fo  emi¬
nently,  that  Satan  durft  no  more  refufe  to  attend
the  Call,  or  Fail  of  his  Duty  when  he  heard  the
Summons,  than  a  School-boy  that  has  been  well
lafh’d  for  playing  Truanr,  dares  do  it  again,  before
his  Back-fide  has  done  fmarting:  For  doubtlels,
the  Scolding  of  an  old  Woman,  and  upon  fuch  a
Difappointment  too,  would  be  enough  to  terrifie
the  Devil  himfelf,  if  he  has  any  Senfe  of  that  out¬
rageous  Animal,  call’d  an  old  Witch,  upon  his
Mind.

But  I  leave  that  Part  to  a  particular  Differtatiot*
upon  the  Species,  when  I  fhall  learnedly  and  po¬
litely  examine,  and,  if  pra£ticable,  determine  for  the
good  of  Mankind,  the  two  following  Wehigty
and  Important  Difficulties.

Fir ft ,  Whether  upon  an  immergent  -Jid  fudden
Occafion,  the  Mufick  alfo  being  the  fame,  old  Mo¬
ther  Anthony  of - *  in  the  County  of - ~

could  not  be  as  effe£lual  with  her  Voice  to  hive  a
Swarm  of  Bees,  as  any  Brafs  Kettle  or  Warming-
pan  in  all  the  Village  5  and  fo  both  frugally  fave
her  Neighbours  from  the  rifque  of  bruifing  their
Houfhold- fluff*  and  the  faid  Mother  Anthony ,  in-
flead  of  being  liable  to  the  Ducking-flooi  for  a
common  Diflurber,  become  a  ufeful  Servant  to  her
King  and  Country,  and  enjoy  a  Penfion  for  her
good  Offices.

Secondly ,  Whether  the  fame  Mother  Anthony ,  ac¬
cording  to  the  Hypothefls  of  Jofeph's  Cup  of  Divi-

K  4  nation*


*3J


A  SYSTEM

nation,  might  not  be  alfo  made  ufeful  in  her  Ge ?
neration  upon  like  extraordinary  Occafions,  to  lay
the  Devil ,  and  that  too  by  the  fame  Rules  that
others  raifehim  3  fince  the  Bees  in  their  greateft  Hur¬
ries  and  Tumults  are  quieted,  as  above,  by  the  fame
Noife,  which  at  another  time  would  fret  and  dis¬
order  them  3  the  Philofophy  of  which  is  not  yet
underftood,  nor  can  the  Reafon  of  it  be  difcover’d
in  all  the  Philofophical  Tranfa&ions  or  Tranfa&ors
who  have  fo  long  ftudied  it.  From  whence  they
lay,  the  Tinkers  beating  their  Pans  when  they
publifli  their  Occupations,  or  as  we  call  it  vul¬
garly  in  England ,  Cry  their  T rades ,  are  extreamly
tmeafy  to  all  the  old  Women  above  their  ninth
Climaderic,  and  unfufferable  to  tbofe  who  are  en¬
gaged  in  the  Article  of  Circle-making,  and  Paw-
wawing  3  info  much  that  if  a  Tinker  fhould  have  ftop’d
in  a  Village  and  beat  his  Kettle  above  a  certain  li¬
mited  time,  at,  or  within  hearing  of  the  Town  of
Jpfwich ,  in  Mother  Lackland's  time,  fhe  would  have
been  obliged  to  have  railed  the  Devil  for  her  Afli-
ifance.  But  this  I  leave  to  Experiment.

As,  I  fay,  thefe  two  important  Queftions  may  take
up  a  large  Trad  by  themfelves,  and  as  they  mu  ft
heeds  be  of  vafi:  Confequence  to  the  Readers,  I  doubt
not  the  Bookfellers,  who  are  generally  Publick-fpi-
rited  Gentlemen,  will  embrace  the  Opportunity  of
publifhing  fuch  a  valuable  Piece  for  the  Good  of
the  Nation  3  fo  I  ihall  adjourn  it  for  the  pre¬
sent.

Come  we  next  in  order,  according  to  the  Con¬
tents  of  this  Chapter,  to  the  particular  Queftion
in  what  Shape  the  Devil  appeared  to  the  firft  Magi¬
cians,  or  the  Inchanters  of  the  moll  early  Times  3  and
the  Anfwer  is,  as  far  as  we  can  yet  learn,  that  he  did
not  aflame  any  Shape  or  viflble  Appearance  at  all  •
whether  it  was  his  Modeftv  or  his  Policy  is  a  Que-
ftion  has  been  a  little,  tho’  not  fully  difcufs’d,  and

thofe


of  MAGIC  K.

thofe  that  fpeak  moil  favourably  of  Satan,  think  it
was  the  firftj  for  in  the  early  Times  of  his  Inti¬
macy  he  might  be  loth  perhaps  to  expofe  himfelf
to  his  new  Acquaintance  j  whereas  afterwards,  when
hebecame  really  a  familiar  Spirit,  in  thelitteral  Senfe
of  the  Word,  he  made  no  Difficulty  to  converfe
with  his  Favourites  more  openly,  fee  and  be  feenj
of  which  in  its  Place.

But  if  this  was  not  the  Cafe,  it  feems  to  me*
that  at  fir  ft,  and  while  being  only  a  Night  Vifiter
he  communicated  himfelf  by  Vifion  and  Dream
only,  there  was  no  manner  of  Occafton  for  the  Lo¬
cality  of  his  Perfon,  and  for  a  real  Appearance  5
nor,  if  his  Bufinds  was  done,  was  it  material  whe¬
ther  he  deliver’d  it  by  his  own  Mouth,  or  by  the
Voice  of  any  of  his  trufty  and  well-beloved
Angels  and  Agents,  who  are  certainly  as  capable  to
officiate  in  his  Place  as  if  he  was  there  in  Perfon.

Belides,  as  much  a  Spirit  as  the  Devil  is,  we  have
Reafon  to  believe  he  is  fo  far  from  being  Omniprefent,
that  he  would  not  be  able  to  difpatch  a  thoufandth.
Part  of  the  Bufinefs  he  has  upon  his  hands,  if  he  had
not  an  innumerable  number  of  Deputy  Reprefenta-
tive  Devils  always  at  his  hand,  to  execute  his  Com-
rniffions,  and  make  their  Appearance  for  him,  when
and  as  often  as  the  meaneft  of  the  Southfaying  In-
chanting  Race  calls  him.

And  for  this  Reafon  it  might  be,  that  AliAlbrahazen 9
as  is  faid  above,  in  the  firft  Intimacies  betwixt  him
and  the  Favourite  Spirit  who  fpoke  to  him  in
Dream,  had  a  Name  given,  by  which  he  was  to
be  called  three  times  at  every  Round  of  the  Palm-
tree  Circle  5  which  when  he  had  reh called,  the
Devil ,  (that  is  to  fay,  that  particular  Deputy  Devil
which  was  appointed  to  wait  upon  him)  was  always
to  attend  and  be  ready.  Whether  that  faid  parti¬
cular  Spirit  was  bound  to  his  due  and  daily  Atten¬
dance  for  that  one  Occafion,  Hiftory  has  not  yet
-  '  '  '  '  1  * v  de^


IJ7


B  A  s  r  S  r  E  M

determined :  I  have  only  to  fay,  that  if  it  was  fo,
Friend  Mi  he  a  Magician  of  fome  Quality,

that  had  a  whole  Devil  to  attend  him  perfonally
and  fingly,  who  was  allowed  to  do  no  other
Bufinefs,  but  juft  wait  to  receive  his  Orders,  and
give  back  the  Inftru&ions  which  Mi  might  ftand
in  need  of,  unlefs  perhaps  now  and  then  he  might  go
upon  fome  other  Errands,  where  the  Occafion  was
extraordinary.

We  are  told,  that  in  America ,  and  in  fome  Na¬
tions  in  Africa ,  the  Magicians  or  Wizards  and
Pawaws  found  Ways  and  Means  to  converfe  with
Satan  Face  to  Face,  as  particular  Occafions  requir’d  $
and  that  from  the  Beginning  of  Time:  for  per¬
haps  his  Converfation  in  thofe  remote  Countries
might  be  as  antient  as  it  was  any  where,  Mgypt
and  Arabia  excepted.

It  is  faid  alfo  that,  he  does  appear  in  thofe  Coun¬
tries,  and  upon  certain  Times  or  Occafions,  in  hu¬
man  Shape,  fometimes  in  one  Pofture,  fometimes  in
another,  as  Circumftances  may  vary  $  as  fometimes
he  appears  angry  and  frightful,  furrounded  with
Fire,  preceded  with  Temp  eft,  and  the  like  terrify¬
ing  Obje£is,  to  let  the  People  know  that  he  can
hurt  them  $  fometimes  in  Smiles,  and  fweet  fpicey
Perfumes,  and  preceded  by  Mufic  and  Melody  in
the  Air,  to  let  them  know  he  is  pleafed.

’Tis  true,  it  was  late  in  the  World  before  we,  in
ihefe  Parts,  knew  any  thing  of  it  j  and  it  might  be
fo  alfo  before  he  begun  thofe  Pra6tices  there :  they
were  too  grofs  to  go  down  with  the  firft  Ages,
when  the  Knowledge  of  God  was  not  fo  entirely
obliterated  from  the  Minds  of  Men  as  it  was  af¬
terwards  5  But  Idolatry  had  prevailed  to  fuch  a  de¬
gree  in  America ,  that  the  Devil  was  perhaps  the
only  God  they  had  heard  any  thing  of  for  fome
thoufands  of  Years.  But  l  return  to  my  Subjedh


I


of  MAGIC  K.

Except  in  thofe  and  fucli  like  remote  and  unac¬
quainted  Parts  of  the  World,  we  do  not  find  much
Evidence  of  the  Magicians  feeing  or  converfing
with  evil  Spirits,  of  whatever  Kind  or  Quality,
in  the  Shapes  of  Men  or  Women  :  God’s  Angels
indeed,  who  are  in  facred  Text  called  the  Heaven-
ly  Hoft ,  are  and  have  been  frequently  allowed  to
make  their  Appearance,  and  have  been  fent  hither
on  immediate  and  fpecial  Bufinefs,  as  to  Abraham ,
to  Jacoby  to  Mofesy  to  the  Father  of  John  the  Bap-
tiff,  to  the  Virgin  Maryy  to  the  Shepherds  at  the
Birth,  to  our  Saviour  himfelf  on  divers  Occafions,
and  to  the  Women  at  the  Sepulcher,  at  the  Re-
fiirre&ion,  and  at  the  Afcenfion.

Perhaps  this  may  be  the  Reafon  why  the  Devil
has  kept  his  diftance  5  he  remembers  no  doubt  his
former  Rencounters  with  Uriel  and  with  Gabriely
or  other  Angels,  no  matter  who,  mentioned  by
Name  in  Mr.  Miltony  and  how  they  drove  him
about  from  one  Part  of  the  Watte  to  another,  out
of  Heaven,  out  of  Paradife,  and  every  where  elfe,
where  they  and  he  happen’d  to  meet  5  and  doubt-
lefs  he  does  not  much  care  to  rencounter  them.

What  Shape  or  Figure  he  appeared  in  when  he
came  to  tempt  his  Maker  and  our  Saviour,  at  that
time  himfelf  in  a  State  of  Perfonality  as  Fled*
and  Blood,  as  it  is  not  exprefied,  fo  I  will  nut  pre^
tend  to  make  a  Guefs  at  it:  ’Tis  plain  when  he
was  at  any  time  cafe  out  of  the  poor  diflemper’d
People  by  our  Saviour,  or  by  his  Difciples,  tho*
he  came  evidently  out  of  the  Demoniac  or  Poflefled*
yet  he  did  not  come  out  vifibly  and  in  Shape,  but
walking  off  like  a  dete&ed  Thief  in  the  dark,  and
imperceptible,  he  always  play’d  out  of  fight.

The  fame  Method  I  believe  he  took  with  all
forts  of  People  in  the  World  for  fome  Ages,  efpe-
cially  at  the  Beginning  of  Time  j  and  would  all  our
poflefled  or  profefled  Dealers  with  this  cunning


140


A  SYSTEM

Manager  a<5fc  in  the  Dark,  and  keep  him  to  them-
felves,  that  we  might  not  fee  their  Inftrudtor,  or  be
acquainted  with  the  Inftru&ions,  their  Witchery  and
Craft  of  Hell  would,  I  believe,  be  much  lefs  hurt¬
ful  to  the  World  than  it  is.

But  now  it  feems  as  if  our  modern  Magicians
afted  upon  another  foot  *  that  they  do  not  go  to
the  Devil ,  but  the  Devil  comes  to  them  *  they  do
not  go  to  him  in  the  Defarts  and  Retreats  of  the
Dark  for  DiredHons  and  Inftruftions,  but  he  afts
with  them  in  Concert,  and  there  is  a  kind  of  mu¬
tual  Cohabitation,  they  go  on  hand  in  hand,  and
are  Fellow- Agents,  both  Principals  and  both  Ac-
ceffaries,  only  with  this  ufual  difference  on  the  De¬
vil's  fide,  viz.  if  they  happen  to  do  any  capital
Mifchief,  fo  as  to  bring  them  to  the  Gallows,  he
always  leaves  the  Hanging  Part  to  them,  there  he,
as  we  fay,  flips  his  Neck  out  of  the  Collar,  and
is  gone.

This  fubtle  Agreement  in  Mifchief  between
the  Magician  and  the  Spirit  that  a£ts  with  him,  is
not  at  all  for  the  Advantage  of  Mankind  5  and  the
Magicians  of  the  former  Mould  feem  to  have  been
much  the  lefs  hurtful  kind,  for  they  generally
were  known  to  be  what  they  pretended,  and  were
only  made  ufe  of  by  People  when  they  wanted  ’em,
and  for  what  was  requir’d  of  them*  fo  they  had
their  Pay  and  Wages  of  Unrighteoufnefs,  and  you
had  done  with  them.

But  here  we  converfe  with  the  Men,  knowing
nothing  of  what  they  are,  and  do  not  fee  the  Devil
that  is  within  them*  fo  we  deal  with  the  Devil
at  fecond  hand,  as  we  may  call  it,  that  is,  we  talk
to  him  in  difguife,  make  Bargains  and  Contradfcs
with  him,  and  that  fome  of  the  word:  kind,  by
the  Agency  of  thefe  Magicians  ,  and  fee  not
the  evil  Spirit  who  is  all  the  while  both  Di¬
rector  and  Principal  in  all  the  Affair.  Thus  far  for

thofe


I


of  MAG  I  C  K

thofe  Magicians  who  really  deal  infecret  with  him,
and  this  is  that  Magick  which  we  call  the  Black  Art^
that  is  to  fay  a  fecret  undifcover’d  Confpiracy  between
Satan  and  thofe  Agents  of  his  which  apply  to  him
for  Dire&ion,  and  then  their  afting  again  by  thofe
Direftions,  to  abufe,  impofe  upon,  and  deceive
Mankind.


CHAP.  VI.

Of  who  were  the  fir  ft  Dr  atiic  ers  of  Magick,
as  a  ‘Diabolical  Art ,  and  how  it  was  handed
on  to  the  ^Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  where
it  was  fir  ft  openly  encouraged .

THE  Writers  upon  this  Subjeft  before  me
feem  to  have  all  been  at  a  lofs  to  fix  the  Q~
riginal  of  Magick  as  an  Art  Diabolical ,  and  they
would  fain  have  us  believe  it  was  in  Pradlice  in
the  Antediluvean  World.  This  I  have  not  denied,
nor  fhall  I  deny  it  dill  >  but  granting  the  Devil  to
have  a  Conqueft  upon  the  firlt  Woman,  and  by  her
Weaknefs  and  Treachery  drawing  her  Husband  in¬
to  the  fame  Snare,  we  may  give  up  all  their  Race
for  as  black  as  Hell  could  make  them :  And  indeed
the  facred  Text  defcribes  them  in  Terms  as  black
as  can  well  be  exprefled,  Gen.  vi.  iz.  God  looked
upon  the  Earth  and  behold  it  was  corrupt ,  for  all
Flejh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  Earth  $  and
ver.  13.  The  Earth  is  filled  with  Violence  5  and  ver.y.
fpeaking  of  Man,  the  Imagination  ofi  the  Thought  of
his  Heart  was  only  Evil  continually  >  and  the  EVick -
ednefis  of  Man  was  great  upon  the  Earth  :  upon  this
Account,  I  fay,  I  gave  up  all  that  Race  in  the  Be¬
ginning  of  this  Work  5  and  be  it  fo,  or  be  it  only
fuppofed  to  be  fo,  ’tis  much  the  fame,  nor  is  it

worth


14^


A  SYSTEM

Worth  difputing  with  any  Body  j  if  the  Devil  had  the
Management  of  thetii,  as  ’tis  evident  he  had,  much
lefs  could  not  be  expe<5ted,  let  that  part  go.

But  my  Queftion  has  been  all  along,  not  what
was  done  before  but  Jince  the  Deluge,  and  how  did
Satan  introduce  himfelf  to  the  pofl-diluvean  Ages*
when  and  where,  with  whom,  and  in  what  man¬
ner  did  he  make  his  firft  Acquaintance  and  break¬
ing  in  upon  Mankind  for  a  fecond  Poffeflion,  or
Management  of  Art  ?

I  mention’d  Zoroafter  flain  in  Battle  by  S  emir  amis ,
and  Prometheus  and  others,  and  very  early  they  were  *
and  I  ftand  by  my  Account  of  them,  that  they
were  the  firft  Magicians ,  as  the  Word  or  T erm
Magician  imply’d  a  Man  of  Learning,  of  Wit,  and
more  than  common  Underftanding,  fearching  after
Knowledge,  ftudying  the  Rudiments  and  firft  Pre¬
cepts  and  Principles  of  Philefophy.  But  we  are
now  in  Search  after  another  fort  of  People,  who,
tho’  they  were  Searchers  into  Knowledge  too,  yet
look’d  into  it  in  another  manner,  and  for  other
Purpofcs,  namely,  who  fearched  deeper  into  things*
and  into  deeper  things,  I  mean  fearching  into  HELL
it  felfj  who  began  firft  to  enter  upon  Diabolical
Enquiries  into  the  infernal  Myfteries  and  Arts  of
the  Devil ,  and  where  thofe  begun  it  is  not  fo  eafy
to  find  out.

Some  Authors,  as  Serenus ,  and  CaJJianus  from  him*
and  the  learned  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  from  both,  hand
down  this  fabulous  Original  for  our  Speculation*
viz.  that  Ham  or  Cham  the  Son  of  Noah  having
praftifed  thofe  fuperftitious  and  facrilegious  Arts
(I  take  their  own  Words)  before  the  Flood,  and
knowing  that  he  could  bring  no  Book  or  Memorial
of  that  nature  into  the  holy  Veflel  where  his  Life
was  to  be  fecured  by  the  goodnefs  of  his  Maker,
and  wherein  he  was  to  remain  with  his  righteous
and  godly  Father,  caufed  the  Rules  and  Precepts  to


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

be  graved  in  Metal,  and  in  hard  Stone,  which
ftiould  receive  no  Impreffion  from  the  Water.

But  this  is  fuch  an  evident  Fi<5tion,  and  full  of
fo  many  Abfurdities  and  Contradi&ions,  as  well  as
Falihoods,  that  ’tis  not  only  unlikely  it  fhould,  but
impoftible  it  can  be  true.

For Firfti  Where  were  thole  Plates  left?  If  they
were  to  be  preferved  in  the  Ark,  ’tis  certain  Noah
who  had  the  Superintendency  of  the  whole  Build¬
ing,  and  of  every  thing  that  was  brought  into  ir^
or  to  be  admitted,  would  much  lefs  have  admitted
copper  Plates  to  be  brought  in  there,  or  Tables  of
Stone  with  fuch  Abominations  engraven  on  them,
than  he  would  have  taken  in  written  Books,  if  fuch
had  been  then  in  ufe.

Secondly ,  Had  Cham  been  fuch  a  Perfon,  fo  far
engaged  in  a  Correfpondence  with  Hell,  we  may
reafonably  fuppofe  God,  who  for  the  Reafons  ta^en
from  the  Sins  of  the  reft  of  Mankind  deftroyed
the  whole  World,  would  never  have  fpared  him,
and  fo  by  him  laid  the  Foundation  of  the  Devil's
fecond  Kingdom,  and  of  his  debauching  the  World
with  Sorcery  and  Witchcraft:  nor  do  we  read
that  Cham  or  Ham  was  curfed  by  his  Father  on  any
fuch  Account,  but  for  Sins  actually  committed  af¬
ter  the  Deluge,  and  after  their  coming  out  of  the
Ark  *  but  to  charge  Ham  with  Sorcery  and  Diabo¬
lical  Praftices  before  the  Flood,  is  a  grofs  begging
the  Queftion,  and  by  no  means  to  be  admitted
without  good  Evidence.

“And  again,  the  Writing  and  Graving  upon
hard  Stones,  Metal,  &c.  requires  a  Proof  that  there
was  any  fuch  thing  as  the  Knowledge  and  Ufe  of
Letters  among  Men  before  the  Flood*  which  after
the  ftrifteft  Enquiry  is  not  yet  afeertained,  much
lefs  agreed  upon  by  Men  of  Learning*  the  fame
having  not  been  preferved  to  Mankind  after  the
Deluge,  which  ’tis  highly  probable  would  have
y  been,


143


1 44


A  SYSTEM

been,  if  fuch  a  thing  had  been  in  ufe,  the  Know¬
ledge  having  been  both  innocent  and  ufeful.

'Thirdly ,  If  fuch  Writing  or  Engravement  were
made  by  Cham ,  or  any  one  elfe,  where  were  they
laid,  and  how  found  again  ?  when,  by  the  uni¬
versal  Convulfions  fuffer’d  during  the  Flood,  not
the  leaft  Veftiges,  Ruins  or  Remains  of  Cities  or
Towns  were  to  be  feen  upon  the  Surface  of  the
Earth,  but  all  was  huddled  together  in  the  gene¬
ral  Confufion  of  the  Parts,  and  either  buried  and
overwhelmed  in  the  Body  of  the  Earth,  or  driven
down  by  the  rapid  Currents  which  followed  at
the  going  off  of  the  Flood*  and  it  feems  flrange
that  thefe  Stones  or  Plates  could  be  found,  when
every  thing  elfe  was  loft  and  overthrown*
when  the  Surface  being  perfe&iy  new,  no  one
Part  of  the  World  could  be  known  from  another,
much  lefs  any  Place  be  known  by  the  Situation
which  it  had  before.

There  are  many  more  Abfurdities  in  the  Cafe
as  it  is  propofed*  but  I  muff  not  dwell  too  long
in  a  Place,  that  have  fo  long  a  Journey  to  go.

Zoroafter  is  the  next  to  whom  they  would  a-
fcribe  the  Magick  Art  *  but  I  have  proved  him
to  be  a  very  honeft  Man,  and  a  wife  Man,  pro¬
perly  fpeaking,  in  my  former  Chapters,  and  that
he  was  employed  in  a  much  better  and  honefter
Study,  fuch  %as  in  difcovering  the  Nature  of  Herbs
and  Plants,  Metals  and  Minerals,  precious  Stones
and  Jewels  *  that  he  invented  the  Dodlrines  and
firft  Principles  of  natural  and  moral  Pbilolophy*
and  many  ufeful  and  beneficial  Parts  of  Know¬
ledge  for  the  Good  of  Mankind  *  the  Power  of
Simpathies  and  Antipathies,  and  their  various  Work¬
ings  and  Objects*  in  all  which  I  take  Abraham  alio,
who  was  flill  before  him,  to  have  been  efpeciaily
famous*  and  that  ’tis  probable  Abraham  was  parti¬
cularly  inftrufled  by  Noah  himfelf,  for  ’tis  evident

that


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

that  Abraham  was  upwards  of  fifty  Years  old  when
Noah  died.

To  come  off  of  all  this,  there  are  others  who
make  another  Zoroafter ,  a  real  and  Diabolical  Magi¬
cian,  who  was  not  {lain  by  Semiramis ,  as  that  wife
Prince  Zoroafter  was  j  but  on  the  other  hand,  ha¬
ving  been  teaching  his  Difciples  the  Art  of  railing
and  converfing  with  Spirits,  was  by  one  of
them  taken  away  out  of  his  School,  all  his  Scho¬
lars  looking  onj  or,  if  you  will  have  it  in  a  modem
Style,  he  raifed  the  Devil ,  to  fhew  his  Difciples  a
Teft  of  his  Art  5  and  the  Devil  carried  him  away
in  the  face  of  them  all ^  to  give  them  a  Tell  of  his
Power :  which  (by  the  way)  was  but  poor  Encou¬
ragement  at  that  time,  for  any  one  of  them  to  turn
Magician  \  and  for  that  Reafon,  and  knowing  the
Devil  to  be  no  Fool,  makes  me  give  the  lefs  heed
to  that  Part  of  the  Story.

Other  Writers,  of  whom  Jofephus  is  one,  (whofe
Credit,  I  mull  always  premife,  goes  but  a  very  lit¬
tle  way  with  me)  tells  us,  that  Seth  the  Son  of
Adam  firft  difcover’d  the  Planets  or  wandering  Stars
with  their  Motions,  Influences,  Revolutions,
that  thofe  with  feveral  other  ufeful  Branches  of
Aftronomic  Knowledge  were  handed  down  by  Tra¬
dition  to  Noah ,  and  by  him  to  the  new  World,
and  that  then  coming  from  Noah  immediately  to
Abraham ,  to  Zoroafter  and  others,  they  were  hand¬
ed  from  them  to  Pofterity,  as  we  find  it  at  this
Day.

But  all  this  is  nothing  to  the  purpofe,  that  is  to
fay,  nothing  to  our  Diabolick  Magick,  nor  does
it  give  any  Light  into  the  grand  Queftion,  Who
was  the  firfi  Author  of  that  kind  of  Study  5  who
was  Satan* s  firft  Correfpondent  in  the  new  W orld,
or  firft  dealt  with  the  Devil  after  the  Flood  ?  I
cannot  think  indeed  that  the  Devil  fuffered  Man¬
kind  to  live  long  unmolefted  by  hrni|  or  that  Man-

L  kind


*4J


I 46


A  SYSTEM

kind  could  go  on  long  without  Tome  Bufinefs  be*
tween  them :  they  would  be  both  eager  to  renew
the  Acquaintance,  and  reftore  the  ancient  Familia¬
rity  *  and  it  could  not  be  long  before  they  found
fome  means  or  other  to  bring  it  to  pafs>  for  Lovers
you  know  will  meet,  whatever  are  the  Difficulties
which  firft  obftruft :  and  efpecially  the  great  Artift
on  his  Side  had  many  dark  Defigns  in  view,  and
new  Foundations  to  lay  for  the  Overthrow  of  a
riling  Generation,  which  required  to  be  laid  deep
and  ftrong,  and  the  fooner  they  were  begun,  the
better  for  him.

As  to  Cham  being  the  Author  of  Magick  in  the
new  World,  that  indeed  I  cannot  grant,  that  is  to
fay,  not  as  the  Ancients  bring  in  the  Story  *,  namely,
that  he  invented  the  Seven  liberal  Sciences,  and
wrote  them  in  fourteen  Pillars  of  Brafs  or  Stone,
&c.  as  above  j  that  Cham ,  as  he  was,  not  with  Hand¬
ing  the  Curfe  he  incurred  by  his  ill  Behaviour  to
his  Father,  one  of  the  immediate  Progenitors  of  the
new  Race,  and  particularly  of  thofe  great  and
mighty  Nations  the  ^Egyptians ,  Arabians ,  Africans ,
and  Phoenicians ,  among  whom  all  human  Wifdom
and  Learning  firft  flourifhed,  and  indeed  firft  be¬
gan  fo  1  doubt  not  but  he  was  capable  to  inftrudfc
them  in  much  of  the  antediluvean  Knowledge,  and
that  of  even  the  belt  things,  and  did  fo  :  That  he
reigned  afterward  in  Mgypt  a  very  long  while,  is
confirmed  by  all  the  antient  Writers  3  particularly
in  the  Catalogue  of  the  ^Egyptian  Kings,  of  which
Cham  was  certainly  the  firft,  they  are  faid  to  reign
and  fucceed  ope  another  thus,

Cham  peopled  Egypt  the  Year  of  the  World  1847,
1  pi  Years  after  the  Flood.

Ofyris  or  Mizraim  the  Son  of  Cham  2008,  Jf2
Years  after  the  Flood.

N.  B.  This  was  the  King  who  elevated  Jofeph ,
and  who  built  the  Pyramids,  not  for  Tombs

and


1


t


of  M  A  G  I  e  K.

and  Monuments  only,  but  for  Magick,  that  is,
Aflronomick  Obfervations,  as  Semiramis  did
the  great  T ower  of  Babylon .

From  hence  it  appears  that  Cham  came  to  /Egypt
tyhen  he  was  near  three  hundred  Years  old  $  fup-
pofe  him  to  be  an  hundred  Years  old  when  he
came  out  of  the  Ark,  which  was  the  moil,  for  his
elder  Brother  Sem  was  no  more,  and  that  he  reign’d
in  /Egypt  one  hundred  and  hxty  one  Years,  in
which  time  he  made  the  /Egyptians  and  the  Ara¬
bians^  and  alfo  the  Phoenicians ,  for  they  were  all
his  Offspring,  very  polite  Nations.

The  Arabians  were  his  Poilerity  by  his  Son  Chits.

The  Phoenicians  by  his  Son  Canaan  whom  Noah
curfed.

The  /Egyptians  by  his  Son  Mizraim ,  which  was
the  King  OJyris  above.

The  Libyans  and  /Ethiopians  by  his  Sons  Phut  and

Lud.

So  that  in  fhort,  Cham  was  fo  exceeding  fruitful,
that  he  peopled  all  Africa ,  and  iince  that,  from
Africa  all  America ,  and  thofe  particularly  populous
Farts  of  Afia  called  Arabia  and  Syria.

I  expedfc  my  light-headed  Readers,  whofe  Wits
are  too  volatile  for  this  remote  Story,  will  call  this
a  dry  Subject,  tho’  to  me  I  confefs  ’tis  juft  the
contrary  >  but  as  it  is  too  grave  for  them,  1  will
endeavour  it  ihall  not  be  too  long  for  them  j  fo  to
oblige  Folly,  and  I  am  fore  to  the  Diilike  of  the
truly  wife  and  folid  Heads,  I  leave  off  before  I  have
done,  that  I  may  not  abate  that  moil  falhionable
Cuftom  of  writing  moil  of  that  which  is  pleafanr,
and  leaft  of  that  which  is  profitable  >  fo  willing  is
your  humble  Servant  to  be  a  Man  of  Mode,  and
fuch  a  Weight  does  he  put  on  thofe  who  have  real¬
ly  no  Weight  in  themfelves.

In  favour  then  of  the  Ufage  of  the  Times,  and
efpecially  of  the  Genius  and  Temper  I  mention

L  %  above5


148


A  SYSTEM

above,  I  am  to  leave  off  thofe  grave  tho’  ufeful  Dh*
greffions,  and  come  back  to  the  Progrefs  of  Ma-
gick,  the  particular  Subject  before  me.

That  the  Devil  was  the  Aggreffor  in  his  new
Correfpondence  with  Mankind  is  not  to  be  doubted,
but  that  is  not  fo  much  our  Bulinefs  $  as  to  know
when  this  Correfpondence  began,  who  was  the  firft
among  Men  that  carried  on  the  clandeftine  Deal¬
ing,  and  how  it  was  managed  on  both  Sides.

We  have  cleared  Cham  of  the  Charge,  as  far  as
Probabilities  will  go  in  his  Favour  $  and  the  Truth
is,  Cham  grew  quickly  too  great,  was  above  the
Occafion  for  it,  and  being  the  firft,  and  perhaps
the  greateft  Monarch  upon  Earth,  even  before
Ninus  or  Bell  (Baal)  he  had  no  need  of  turning
Conj  urer  and  Magician,  which  became  prefently
the  Work  of  a  meaner  Race  of  Men  than  Chamy
for  the  Magicians,  efpecially  fpeaking  of  them  now
as  Witches  and  Inchanters,  were  not  Kings  and
Emperors,  but  the  Servants  of  Kings  and  Empe¬
rors  5  kept  and  maintained  for  the  wicked  Works
and  Services  which  they  did  for  them.

Indeed  the  Magicians  which  I  mentioned  at
firft,  were  Worfhippers  of  the  divine  Being,  or
eminent  Examples  of  the  Homage  Men  owed
to  the  true  God  j  nay,  and  even  after  fome
time  were  Teachers  of  divine  things  too,  tho’
under  the  miftaken  Mediums  of  Idols  and  Images  5
Thefe  Magi^  or  Magicians,  as  I  have  obferved,
were  at  firft  fo  reverenced  and  honoured  by
the  Nations  they  ferved,  as  often  to  be  made  Go-
vernours  of  the  Common-wealth  $  Publick  Be-
nefadors  having  the  moft  Right  to  the  publick
Honours  and  Advancements  in  thofe  Countries
where  they  had  been  accepted  for  their  Merits.

Hence  it  feems  moft  natural,  that  all  Kings
fliould  be  Patriots,  feeing  the  very  Name  and  Dig¬
nity,  much  more  the  Office,  began  in  the  Thing  5

but


»'3r  t


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.  149

but  that  by  the  way;  how  far  the  Patriot  and  the
Royalty  go  together  in  thefc  Days,  how  the  Name
and  the  Dignity  correfpond,  let  the  Kings  of  the
Earth  examine,  whofe  Bufinefs  it  is  to  mend  it
where  it  is  not  fo,  and  to  let  it  be  more  known
where  it  is.

It  is  then  pretty  hard  to  find  out  who  were  the
firft  Magicians,  taking  the  Word  Magick  as  1  now
underhand  it,  viz.  in  the  word  Senie;  and  yet  it
does  not  feem  to  be  very  long  after  the  Flood  be¬
fore  we  fhall  find  fame  of  them  at  work;  for  in  the
immediate  Reign  after  Cham ,  that  is,  in  the  Reign
of  Mizraim  or  Ofyris ,  which  Hidory  makes  to  be
the  Pharaoh  whofe  Dream  Jofeph  interpreted,  and
who  reigned  two  hundred  fixty  one  Years;  in  his
Reign  ’tis  evident  there  were  fuch  People.  See  the
Place,  Gen.  xli.  8.  Pie  fent  and  called  for  all  the  Ma*
giciam  of  yEgypt,  and  all  the  wife  Men  thereof \

It  is  true  it  does  not  appear  poiitively  that  thefe
were  Magicians  of  the  word:  Sort,  but  it  feems  to
be  fo,  becaufe  Heaven  referved  from  them  the  re¬
vealing  to  Pharaoh  the  Interpretation  of  his  Dreams ;
which  however  might  be  to  preferve  the  Honour
to  Jofeph ,  and  to  make  way  for  all  the  great  Events
which  followed;  but  dill,  I  fay,  we  do  not  know
that  here  were  none  of  the  prefent  kind  of  wicked
Magicians,  and  we  have  much  reafon  to  believe
there  were.

But  within  the  Space  of  about  two  hundred  Years
after,  we  are  fure  to  find  them;  nay,  the  Text  is
plain,  they  were  there  when  Mofes  and  Aaron  dood
before  the  lad  Pharaoh  who  held  the  People  in
Captivity;  for  then  they  imitated  the  Miracles  of
Mofes  and  Aaron  by  their  Inchantmenrs,  that  is,  by
Sorcery  and  Witchcraft ;  now  even  this  was  but  a
little  above  eight  hundred  Years  from  the  Flood;
and  thus  much  may  fuffiee  for  the  Chronology  of
qf  Witchcraft  and  Sorcery.

L  a  Bui


I  JO


A  SYSTEM

Being  thus  come  to  a  tolerable  Certainty  as  to
Time,  when  this  Art  was  firft  pra&ifed,  we  fhall
be  led  more  direftly  to  the  Perfons,  by  entring
a  little  into  an  Enquiry  after  the  Pra&ice,  that  is,
the  Manner  made  ufe  of  in  thole  early  Times  of  the
Art  •>  for  by  difcovering  what  they  did,  we  fhall  dis¬
cover  alfo  who  did  it ;  They  afiled  certainly  from
the  Beginning,  by  certain  Myflick  or  concealed
Conjurations,  fuch  as  uncouth  Noifes  and  Sounds,
ftrange  Geflures,  Po (lures,  and  barbarous  Magick
Noifes,  of  which  we  fhall  fay  more  in  their  Place.

But  what,  fay  our  Enquirers,  were  thofe  things
called  Inchantments,  which  conflitute  what  is  called
the  Black  Art ,  or  the  Craft  Magical?  The  Text
fays  the  Magicians  did  fo  and  fo,  by  their  Inchant *
mentsy  that  is,  whatever  Wonders  or  Miracles  the
two  Prophets  of  God  wrought  by  the  Finger  and
Power  of  God,  thefe  Men  imitated  by  the  Power
of  the  Devil.

Thofe  Inchantments  I  take  to  confifl  of  certain
.agreed  Geflures  and  Noifes,  certain  barbarous
Names  and  Words,  and  fuch  inexplicable  Terms  of
hellifli  Art,  which  upon  Concert  between  Hell  and
the  hellifh  Agent,  are  to  be  fo  and  fo  underflood
between  them  *  on  expreffing  of  which,  and  mak¬
ing  fuch  Circles  and  Figures  on  the  Ground  as  is
agreed,  the  evil  Spirit  with  whom  they  have  con¬
certed  the  Affair  beforehand,  fhall  appear,  and  ap^
pear  too  in  fuch  and  fuch  Form  as  they  appoint  to
bring  him  out  in$  and  this  I  give  as  a  brief  Defini¬
tion  of  what  they  call  Inchantment.

And  here,  not  to  preach  upon  the  Point,  or  to
infill  that  even  what  is  thus  afted  mufl  be  by  the
Power  of  Heaven  concurring,  for  this  is  what  all
that  are  not  Atheifls  acknowledge  \  but,  I  fay,  not
to  dwell  on  this  Part,  I  make  fo  free  with  our
Fellow-Conjurers  as  to  fay,  they  put  a  great  deal  of
Cheat  upon  the  World,  in  pretending  to  a£fc  by

fu-


I


of  MAGIC  K.

fupernatural  Powers  in  thole  Inchantments,  let
them  be  of  what  fort  they  will,  whereas  rhey  really
afted  much  by  Cheat  and  Trick,  Legerdemain  or
Slight  of  Hand,  and  pretended  the  Prince  of  the
Air,  when  he  had  nothing  to  do  in  it  5  that  how¬
ever  fome  of  thole  things  were  certainly  bv  his,
the  Devil's  Aid  and  Affillance,  as  it  was  with  All
Alhrahazen ,  and  has  been  with  others  to  this  Day,
which  we  diall  not  and  cannot  deny,  yet  ’tis  appa¬
rent  much  of  it  has  been,  as  I  faid,  meet  juggling
and  deceiving.

As  the  Devil  has  not  tied  himfelf  up  to  Methods
in  his  afting  with  Mankind,  fo  neither  have  the
Magicians  of  the  World  kept  to  any  certain  Me¬
thods,  as  to  a  dated  Rule  in  their  Aftings  among
us,  but  have,  on  many  Occasions,  made  ufe  of  dif¬
fering  Methods  j  1  mean  as  to  their  Management
between  the  Devil  and  them  5  and  alfo  as  to  their
apparent  putting  the  Belief  of  it  upon  us.

How  we  diall  do  to  knovf  and  didinguifh  when
the  Magician  puts  the  Devil  upon  us,  and  when  he
only  afts  the  Juggler,  would  be  worth  while  to
find  out*  and  did  either  the  Devil  or  the  Magician
aft  by  any  dated  Rules  and  Methods,  we  might
make  fome  Judgment  about  it 5  but  on  the  other
hand,  they  are  fo  much  and  fo  often  both  Devils  and
both  Jugglers,  that  ’tis  very  difficult  to  fix  them.

For  Example,  in  their  coming  to  Audience,  ob¬
taining  Admittance,  or  call  it  what  you  will,  the
great  Quedion  is.  How  do  they  let  the  Devil  know
they  want  to  fpeak  with  him  ?  either  he  is  always
at  their  Elbow,  and  can  hear  them  whenever  they
call,  where-ever  they  are,  and  on  whatever  Occa-
fion  5  and  that  would  be  to  afcribe  either  great
things  to  him,  as  a  Perfon,  or  a  great  Number  to
him,  as  an  Hod.

Be  that  as  it  will,  ’tis  certain  thefe  People  have
certain  concerted  Terms  agreed,  as  I  faid  above,  up¬
on  repeating  which  he  is  to  appear  to  them*  mi

L  ^  lies


A  SYSTEM

afl:  for  them  as  they  {hall  agree,  and  thofe  I  call
Inchantments.  There  are  alfo  other  agreed  Signals,
upon  making  which,  the  Devil ,  according  to  the
Terms  agreed  on  between  them,  fhali  a<9:  in  fuch
and  fuch  a  manner  without  appearing!  and  thofe
I  call  Charms.

Thus,  it  feems,  the  Devil  and  Dr.  Boreman  agreed
the  Matter  5  the  good  Doflor  having  a  mind  to
pay  home  an  old  Jell  upon  a  young  Gentleman  that
had  abufed  a  poor  Girl,  a  Client  of  his  $  theDo<5bor,
it  feems,  told  her,  that  if  file  could  perfwade  him
to  get  into  her  Smock  upon  their  next  Intimacy,
he  would  certainly  agree  to  marry  her  3  upon  which
the  poor  Girl  makes  herfelf  a  new  one,  and  very
large  for  the  Purpofe,  and  getting  the  young  FeF
low  into  it,  the  Do£tor,  as  was  faid,  laid  fuch  a
Charm  upon  it,  or  the  Devil  by  his  Order,  that
the  Fellow  could  never  get  out  of  it  till  he  gave
the  Girl  a  Note  under  his  Hand  to  marry  her  the
next  Morning,  and  accordingly  did  it.

If  the  Story  be  Fa£t,  as  is  loudly  affirm’d,  the
Devil  afted  upon  the  honeil  fide  it  feems  3  which  I
do  not  however  charge  upon  him  as  a  thing  that
he  is  often  guilty  of  3  but  now  and  then,  for  the
Credit  of  his  Employers,  he  may  be  allowed  to  go
out  of  his  Way  a  little.

What  thofe  things  called  Charms  are,  and  how
made  ufe  of,  may  occafion  fome  Speculation  as  we
go  on,  and  when  we  come  to  fpeak  of  Charms
as  they  areufed  between  the  Magicians  and  the  Peo¬
ple  3  but  I  am  now  upon  the  Subject  of  Charms
and  Inchantments,  as  they  relate  to  the  proper  In-
tcrcourfe  between  the  Magician  and  the  Devil ,  of
the  Spirit  whom  he  a£b  with,  or  by  or  for  whom
he  afts,  for  ’tis  not  eafy  to  exprefs  it  right.

I  fay,  ’tis  not  eafy  to  fay  in  what  Capacity  the  Ma¬
gician  is  to  be  underftood  to  aft.  i*  Whether  WITH
(that  is)  in  Concert  and  Agreement,  or,  2.  as  W9
might  fay,  in  Partnerfliip  with  the  Devil 3  or  whe¬
ther


of  MAGIC  K.

cfaer  in  a  fuperior  Orb,  as  a  Magician  of  Quality,
making  ufe  of  an  attendant,  obfequious,  commanded
Devil ,  always  at  his  call,  to  do  what  he  bids  him,
jump  over  his  Stick,  run  and  go,  fetch  and  carry
like  a  Dog,  as  fome  eminent  Magicians  of  Stare
have  been  laid  to  aft  >  or  as  St.  Dunftan ,  St.  Francis ,
the  Abbot  of  Crowland ,  and  others  did  by  him,
who  they  tell  us  fet  him  to  work,  fent  him  of
Errands,  made  him  ring  the  Bell  to  Vefpers,  fweep
the  Church,  and  a  thoufand  good  things  the  ier-
viceable  Devil  did  for  them,  if  his  good  Hu¬
mour  is  not  bely’d  by  the  Pritfts  knavery,  and
Satan  charg’d  with  more  Complaifance  for  era,  than
ever  he  was  guilty  of:  Or,  3.  Whether  the  Devil
is  Mailer,  which  I  mull  own  is  more  likely,  and
the  Magician  Servant  *  and  then  he  does  not  aft
the  Devil ,  but  the  Devil  afts  him,  and  makes  him
do  every  thing  he  bids  him*  I  fay  all  thefe  are
doubtful  Points,  and  not  yet  fully  underllood  by
us,  or  at  leall  not  ealily.

But  be  it  which  of  thefe  it  will,  there  mull  be
fome  concerted  Terms  of  come  and  call  between
the  Devil  and  his  Correfpondents  *  like  Ships  at
Sea,  they  mull  converfeby  Signals,  they  mull  know
when  to  meet, and  when  to  fummons  fora  meeting*
when  to  appear,  and  when  to  difappear*  and  to  do
this,  is  one  of  the  conllituting  Parts  of  Magick*
for  without  it  the  Magician  is  as  good  as  no  body,
and  the  Devil  in  fliort  would  appear  of  no  ufe  to
him.

In  fome  Parts  of  India  they  alledge  to  this  Day,
that  he  is  talk’d  with  in  the  apparent  Shape  of  a  Man,
and  in  the  Habit  of  their  Prielts*  but  that  is  not  the
Bufinefs*  they  add  that  whenever  they  want  tofpeak
with  him,  they  go  up  to  fuch  and  fuch  Mountains
in  Troops  or  Affemblies*  fuch  as  ours  at  New
Hall  perhaps,  only  with  fome  fpecifick  Differences,
^vhich  I  might  mention  but  that  they  are  too

trifling


*54


A  SYSTEM

&

trifling  to  trouble  you  with.  When  they  are  all
together,  they  call  him  with  a  little  Kettle-Drum,
juft  as  I  told  you  the  good  old  Wives  hive  their
Bees,  fave  that  they  beat  it  on  the  wrong  fide 5
then  they  pronounce  fome  Words  which  they  call
Charms,  and  the  Devil  comes  without  fail.

It  is  hard  to  find  out  in  Hiftory,  what  Words
thofe  were,  that  were  us’d  for  Charms  in  JEgyptj
and  Arabia ,  between  the  Devil  and  the  Magicians
for  fo  many  Agesj  it  is  certain  they  differ’d  in  dif¬
fering  Countries,  and  ’tis  as  certain  they  differ’d  as
the  feveral  Perfons  a6ied  together  or  apart  5  but
I  am  as  much  at  a  lofs  to  find  out  what  the  Devil
Ihoiild  mean  by  fuffering  thofe  Words,  or  any
Words  at  all,  to  charm,  call,  awaken  or  alarm  him,
as  I  am  to  know  what  the  Words  were  3  but  at
prefent  let  us  think  of  the  Words.

The  Greeks  have  left  us  a  Word,  which  was  us’d
by  the  Magicians  of  Antiquity  among  them,  upon
thefe  and  many  more  fuch  Occafions.  This  is  that
famous  Trine,  or  Triangular  Word  call’d  Abraca*
dabra ,  which  drawn  out  in  its  Equilateral  Sides
Hands  thus.

ABRACADABRA
ABR AC AD  ABR
ABRACADAB
ABRACADA
A  B  R  A  C  A  D
ABRAC A
A  B  R  A  C
A  B  R  A
ABR
A  B
W  A

There  is  abundance  of  learned  Pu££le  among  the
Ancients  to  find  out  the  Signification  of  this
Word  %  the  fubtle  Poficion  of  the  Letters  gave  a

kind


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

kind  of  Reverence  to  them,  becaufe  they  read  it
as  it  were  every  way,  upwards  and  downwards,
backwards  and  forwards,  and  many  will  have  it  ftill
that  the  Devil  put  them  together:  Nay,  they  be¬
gan  at  kft  to  think  it  was  old  Legion's  Sirname,  and
whenever  he  was  call’d  by  that  Name,  he  ufed  to
come  very  readily  j  for  which  reafon  the  old  Wo¬
men  in  their  Chimney-corners  would  be  horribly
afraid  of  faying  it  often  over  together,  for  if  they
fhould  fay  it  a  certain  number  of  times,  they  had
a  Notion  it  would  certainly  raife  the  Devil .

They  fay  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  invented
by  one  Bafilides  a  learned  Greeks  that  it  con¬
tain’d  the  great  and  awful  Name  of  the  Divinity,  and
that  it  was  ufed  for  many  Years  for  the  opposing
the  Spells  and  Charms  of  the  Pagans  $  that  is,  the
Diabolical  Spells  and  Charms  of  the  Pagan  Magi¬
cians.

But  be  this  as  it  will,  it  fell  into  Contempt  in
after- Ages,  and  was  ufed  by  the  Magicians  them-
felves  5  fo  that  its  containing,  or  being  intended  to
contain  the  Name  of  God ,  feems  to  me  to  be  a
Pretence  only,  to  add  a  kind  of  Veneration  to  the
Word  5  whereas  it  it  now  drop’d,  only  that  fome
of  our  old  Women,  and  quack  Magicians ,  ufe  it
for  a  Spell  or  Charm,  as  they  would  have  it  call’d,
to  cure  Agues,  being  written  on  a  piece  of  Parch¬
ment,  and  hang’d  about  the  Neck  of  the  afflifted
Perfon.

It  would  be  nothing  but  crowding  our  Work
with  old  Stories,  to  colie£b  together  what  they  call
Sp  ells  and  Charms,  which  our  People  here  make
ufe  of,  (where-ever  they  had  them)  to  cure  Diftem-
pers.  I  know  an  old  Book-ridden  Bunyanift ,  that
is  to  fay,  a  Baptift  Preacher  in  Bedfordf,oire ,  who
cur’d  Agues,  by  only  faying  fome  Words,  while  he
gave  the  Patient  a  piece  of  Paper  to  put  into  his
Pockety  others  I  have  known  cur’d  by  faying


j6  A  SYSTEM

fame  Words  only,  and  giving  them  nothing  at  all.
I  could  give  you  many  Examples,  ana  you  will  find
many  more  in  the  learned  Coile&ions  of  Mr.  Aubery ,
and  others,  where  in  particular  there  is  the  Que-
ilion  anfwer’d,  Why  faying  fbme  W ords  which
have  no  Signification,  and  which  neither  the  Per-
fon  to  whom  they  are  faid,  or  the  Perfon  himfelf
who  fays  them,  can  underftand,  fhould  work  a  Cure  5
and  the  Anfwer  is,  becaufe  the  Gods  underftood
what  the  Perfon  meant,  who  firfl:  implor’d  their
Aid  in  thofe  Words,  and  to  which  they  have  Hill
regard.

Th  is  fliews  a  little,  what  I  am  bringing  all
thefe  things  to  $  namely,  that  this  was  the  Remains
of  the  old  Pagan  Magick,  and  is  all  deriv’d  from
it,  tho’  perhaps  it  is  praftis’d  with  lefs  crimi¬
nal  Correfpondence  than  it  was  then,  the  People
that  now  do  thefe  things  not  knowing  what  they
fay,  or  to  whom  they  fay  it,  yet  certainly  the  thing
is  the  fame.

And  this  too  gives  us  a  light  into  the  ancint  Pra¬
ctices  of  the  Magicians  in  Arabia^  mdAigypt^  and  the
Nature  of  thole  things  which  the  Scripture  calls
Inchantments*  and  how,  and  to  what  ufes  thofe
Inchantments  were  obtain’d  and  apply’d.  take  The
whole  in  this  fummary  Account,  which  I  gather
from  the  exaftefi:  Obfervation  of  the  ufage  of  thofe
Times,  and  of  the  behaviour  of  the  People  in  the
following  Ages.

Qf  .the  Nature  and  Original  of  Inchant¬
ments .  '

The  Story  of  the  Devil  and  Ali  Albrahazen  the  Sa-
bean  or  Perfian ,  ftands  as  a  good  Foundation  5  we
have  another  without  a  Name,  an  ALgyptian,  I  will  not
add  a  Name  by  way  of  Invention*  becaufe  I  will  not


of  MAGIC  K.

put  my  San&ion  to  the  Truth  of  all  the  Particulars,
but  the  Story  is  of  the  fame  Ufe,  whether  one
Word  of  the  Fail  be  true  or  no.  And  fo,  tho’  I
might  take  up  fome  time  with  Vouchers  for  the
Relation,  I  leave  it  upon  your  Hands  as  a  current
Tradition,  for  thofe  things  are  too  ancient  for
Quotation  of  any  fort.

N.  B.  There  is  no  room  to  queftion,  but  that
in  Arabia ,  ABgypt ,  Syria,  and  thofe  Countries,
where  fo  much  Magick  was  at  firft  praftis’d,
and  where  the  Devil's  Correfpondence  with
Mankind  was  begun,  where  Magick  was  in
its  Perfeition  for  fo  many  Ages,  and  praftis’d
with  fuch  apparent  Succefs,  there  are  a  great
many  ftrange  Stories  current  to  this  Day,  and
the  Mouths  of  the  People  are  ftill  fill’d  with
Traditional  Accounts  of  the  Wonders  of  the
Ancients  ;  their  ftrange  Perfomances,  and  the
Effects  of  their  Magical  Skill  ;  the  People  are
full  of  them,  and  even  our  Europeans,  when  they
travel  into  thofe  Countries,  bring  away  innu¬
merable  Tales  of  this  kind,  which  lofe  little  in
the  coming,  as  perhaps  this  among  the  reft.

The  Account  I  am  now  going  to  give,  relates  to
a  Magician  of  great  Note  it  fee  ms,  tho’,  as  I  have
faid,  I  have  not  his  Name,  whom  the  Devil ,  if  it
was  the  Devil ,  managed  much  in  the  fame  way  as
the  other,  and  ’tis  of  like  ufe  in  the  Cafe  before  us.
For  as  it  confirms  the  Devil's  Conduit  to  be  much
the  fame  with  Mankind,  tho’  in  different  Places,
fo  it  ftiews  us  that  the  fame  occafions  fuit  him  to
make  ufe  of :  Before,  he  frighted  the  Sabeans  with  a
Meteor  or  Ball  of  Fire  in  the  Air  5  Now  he  alarms
JEgypt  with  a  Comet;  either  of  them  things  of  no
Signification  in  themfelves,  and  which  we  in  thefe
days  can  look  on  without  running  to  Conjurers
for  their  Interpretation:  But  in  thofe  younger

days


*J7


U8  A  $  r  8  T  E  M

days  they  were  furprifing  and  terrifying,  and  there¬
fore  very  proper  to  amufe  the  World  with,  and
to  make  even  Kings,  as  well  as  People,  fend  for
their  Magicians ,  to  enquire  after  the  Events  of
them*

In  like  manner  we  find  in  both  thefe  Accounts,
the  Devil  not  only  making  ufe  of  Dreams  for  di-
fturbing  the  Fancies  of  the  People,  as  well  their
Kings  as  others  >  but  we  find  him  in  both  ufing
that  Power  peculiar  to  him  as  a  Spirit,  namely,  of
caufing  People  to  Dream  of  this,  or  that,  (whatever
he  pleafes)  on  purpofe  to  furnifh  a  Counterfeit  In¬
terpretation  to  his  Favourite  Southfayer,  and  raife
his  Reputation  at  Court,  in  order  to  ferve  his  ( Satan's)
Jntereft  in  other  fubfequent  Delufions :  But  I  refer  to
the  Story.

An  Arabian  of  Ancient  Fame,  and  Eminent  in  the
^Egyptian  Court  for  his  great  Skill  in  South-fay¬
ing,  having  long  ftudied  the  Knowledge  of  hidden
and  fecret  things,  and  arriv’d  to  great  Skill  in  the
Motions  and  Revolutions  of  the  Stars  and  Planets,
had  made  himfelf  famous  on  that  Account:  Having
alfo  much  ftudied  the  Appearances  and  Nature  of
the  Planets,  Vapours,  Meteors,  and  other  the
Phenomena  of  the  upper  Regions,  from  whence  he
made  great  and  accurate  Improvements  in  Natural
and  Experimental  Philofophy  j  he  alfo  ftudied  and
underftood  the  nature  of  Plants,  Flowers,  Drugs,
Gums,  &c.  and  the  Influences  of  the  Hea¬
venly  Bodies  upon  them,  giving  them  Virtue,  Co¬
lour,  Aromatick  Flavour,  and  moft  healing  and
comforting  Powers  5  and  by  this  Knowledge,  our
Learned  Arabian  obtain’d  the  Fame  of  a  moft  excel¬
lent  Phyfician,  as  well  as  of  a  wife  Man,  and
Southfayer,  and  was  had  in  univerfal  Efteem,
but  efpecially  I  fay  in  the  Court  of  Pharaoh  King
of  /Egypt .


N,


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

N.  B.  They  do  not  tell  us  which  Pharaoh  this
was,  fo  that  the  Chronology  of  this  Ara~
htan  is  fomething  defective  in  that  Partj  but
neither  is  this  very  material,  becaufe  much  of
it  will  bedifcover’d  by  the  other  Circum fiances*

Unwearied  in  his  Diligence  and  Studies,  and
eaten  up  with  the  Defire  of  Knowledge,  this  Arabian
Do&or  (for  fuch  we  fiiall  now  call  him)  not  at  all
abating  his  Search  after  Wifdom  by  the  Fame  al¬
ready  obtain’d  j  but  feeing  daily  that  there  was  an
Abyfs  of  Knowledge  yet  behind,  and  that  all  he
knew  was  as  nothing,  compar’d  to  what  he  was  ftili
ignorant  of,  he  purfued  his  Search  into  Nature
with  the  utmoft  Application :  All  Night,  yea  many
Nights  together,  he  continued  upon  the  Hills,  and
in  the  Defarts,  whither  he  wandered  5  for  Mgypt  is
a  plain  Country  for  many  Leagues  together,  from
Memphis  where  he  refided.  I  fay,  all  Night  he  fpent
in  looking  up  into  Heaven,  and  all  Day  in  poring
upon  the  Earth,  fearebing  into  the  Secrets  of  Na¬
ture,  and  trying  and  proving  the  Virtues  of  the
Plants  and  Fruits,  and  other  Rarities,  the  Product:
of  that  rich  and  fertile  Soil :  And  thus  he  wafted
and  exhaufted  his  vital  and  animal  Strength,
to  feed  and  nourifti  the  Strength  of  his  Mind,  and
fill  his  Head  and  Heart  with  Divine  Wifdom  and
Underftanding.  Thus  far  it  muft  be  acknowleg’d
he  was  a  true  Original  Magician,  and  a  Man  of
Merit  as  well  as  Fame.

It  happened  in  his  wandering  through  the  Be-
fart,  to  the  Station  where  he  ufttally  fix’d  his  Place
of  Aftronomick  Obfervations,  that  he  faw  rife  up
out  of  the  Sea,  Northward  from  his  Situation,  a
Body  of  Fire,  which  at  firft  feem’d  to  him  one
plain  Flame,  making  an  oblong  Square,  of  an  im-
menfe  Length  and  Breadth.  But  as  it  alcended  with
the  ordinary  Motion  of  the  Heavens,  or  rather  ac¬
cording


1 6o


•  s

A  S  r  S  T  E  M


cording  to  the  new  Syflems ,  the  ordinary  Motion  of
the  Earth,  it  leffen’d  in  its  apparent  Dimenfions,
and  alfo  came  to  bear  a  more  regular  Form  than  be¬
fore  $  till  coming  to  its  full  Height  it  appear’d  af*
ter  fome  time  to  be  a  Comet  or  Blazing- ft  ar^  which
was  vifible  above  the  Horizon,  as  is  ufual  in  fuch
Bodies,  for  about  twenty  fix  Days  (or  Nights  rather)
fucceflively,  and  then  was  feen,  no  more.

This  Appearance  being  entirely  new,  furmount-
cd  all  the  powers  of  his  Underftanding,  and  extreme¬
ly  perplex’d  him  3  and  being  one  Night  more  than
ordinarily  afflifted  about  it,  he  broke  out  into
Words  to  this  purpofe,  tho’  not  directed  to  any  of
the  Gods,  not  knowing  it  feems  which  of  them
were  able  to  inform  him,  and  which  not.  O  /  that
fome  of  the  hlejfed  Inhabitants  of  the  -unseen
W  orld  would  aftift  me  in  fe  arching  out  the  My  fiery
of  this  ftrange  Phenomenon.

He  was  the  more  anxious  about  it,  becaufe,  at
his  return  to  his  own  Houfe  at  Memphis ,  he  had  an
Account,  that  Pharaoh  had  fummon’d  all  the  Ma¬
gicians  and  wife  Men  of  JBgypt ,  to  give  him  their
feveral  Opinions  of  the  meaning  of  this  ftrange  Ap¬
pearance  5  for  the  King  had  either  feen  it,  or  heard
of  it  from  others.  The  Appearance  of  it,  as  I
have  faid,  being  conftant  for  about  twenty  fix
days  after  the  Arabian  had  firft  difcover’d  it  5  and
the  wife  Men  differing  very  much  in  their  Accounts
of  it,  their  Judgment  had  encreas’d  the  King’s
Curiofity  very  muchj  bcfides,  the  Arabian  South-
fayer  had  notice  given  him,  that  he  would  receive  a
Summons  or  Order  to  come  to  the  King’s  Palace
upon  the  fame  Occafion.

Being  thus,  as  is  faid,  extremely  puzzled  with
this  Affair,  and  believing  perhaps  that  he  ftiould
do  no  more  when  he  came  to  the  King,  than  dis¬
cover  his  Ignorance,  as  the  reft  of  the  Southfayers
and  the  Magicians  had  done,  he  was  very  uneafy.


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.  i6t

and  refolv’d  to  retire  into  ^Ethiopia  for  fotne  time,
till  the  Enquiry  might  be  over  $  and  as  he  was  not
fent  for  to  the  King,  when  the  reft  of  the  Magici-
cians  were,  it  would  be  no  Impeachment  of  his
Fame,  that  he  was  gone  abroad  for  fome  time.

One  Day,  while  this  publick  Uneafinefs  lafted,
as  he  was  walking  towards  his  ufual  Obfervatory  as
above,  there  joyn’d  him  a  grave  and  venerable  old
Man,  who  fainting  him  with  the  ufual  Blefting  of  the
Times,  and  in  the  Arabick  Tongue,  falls  into  Dif-
courfe  with  him  upon  divers  Subjedts,  fuch  as  feem’d
to  ftiew  that  the  Stranger  was,  like  himfelf,  an  En¬
quirer  after  Knowledge.  Among  the  reft  of  their
Difcourfe,  the  Arabian  particularly  gave  the  Stran¬
ger  an  Account  of  the  late  Appearance  which  he
had  feen,  as  above.

They  walk’d  together  till  they  came  to  the  Foot
of  a  gently  rifing  Mount,  on  the  Top  of  which
the  Arabian  had  eredted  for  himfelf  a  little  Hut,  or
Bower  of  Palm-tree  Leaves  5  here  the  Stranger
feeing  him  ready  to  go  up  to  the  Hill,  offer’d  to  take
his  Leave,  but  he  entreated  him  to  go  up  to  his
Obfervatory  (as  he  call’d  it)  with  him,  and  to  ftay
with  him  that  Night,  that  he  might  fhew  him  the
faid  Appearance,  and  that  in  the  Morning  he  fhould
go  whither  he  pleas’d.

When  they  were  come  up  to  the  Afcent  of  the
Hill,  the  Day  being  fhut  in,  and  the  time  for  Ob-
fervation  of  the  Stars  come  on,  the  Heavens  being
clear,  and  the  Moon  abfent  under  the  Horizon,
leaving  them  a  fair  View  of  the  Stars,  perfectly
bright  and  clears  the  Stranger  ask’d  him,  in  what
part  of  the  Hemifphere  he  had  feen  the  Comet  rife
and  fet,  and  what  was  the  particular  Sphere  of  its
Motion;  all  which  he  fhew’d  him  moft  exadtly,
and  at  laft  the  Comet  it  felf,  ncft  forgetting  at  the
fame  time  to  let  the  Stranger  know,  how  anxious
and  concern’d  he  had  been  to  underftand  the  Na-

M  ture


61  A  SYSTEM

tufe  and  Reafon,  as  well  as  the  Import  of  the  Ap#
pearanceof  fiich  a  Body,  and  to  what  particular  Na¬
tion  it  had  a  Reference  >  and  at  lafl  told  him,  how
vehemently  he  had  call’d  out  to  the  Gods,  to  give
him  fome  wife  Interpreter,  to  inftrudt  him  in  the
Nature  of  fuch  Appearances,  and  of  that  in  parti¬
cular.

The  Stranger  took  no  notice  of  his  knowing  that
he  had  done  fo,  but  began  with  a  Philofophical
Difcourfe  of  Comets  5  as  of  Stars,  which,  in  their
ordinary  Revolutions,  are  but  feldom  vifible*  and
therefore  when  they  do  appear,  fays  he,  it  is  generally
fuppofed  that  they  import  great  Changes  and  Trou¬
bles  among  Men,  which,  fays  he,  may  in  one
Senfe  be  true,  becaufe  they  frequently  are  very
much  the  occafion  of  them.

But,  fays  the  Arabian ,  how  fliall  we  know  when
‘  they  have  Important  Significations,  and  when  not,
and  to  what  Nations  and  Countries  their  Significa¬
tions  are  diredted,  and  which  are  not  concern’d  in
them  ?

Says  the  Stranger,  There  are  Methods  to  know
thele  things  alfo  >  and  the  Gods,  when  they  are
minded  to  communicate  thefe  things,  do  it  their
own  way.  But  Father ,  fays  the  Arabian ,  if  you  can
relieve  my  Thought  in  the  Signification  of  the
prefent  Difficulty,  pray  be  fo  kind  *  for  I  acknow¬
ledge  my  Ignorance,  and  that  which  perplexes  me
the  more  about  it,  is,  that  I  expedt  to  be  call’d  be¬
fore  Pharaoh  to-morrow,  whom  I  reverence  in  the
higheft  manner.  I  befeech  you  inform  me  what  I
am  to  call  this  (Irange  new  Appearance,  and  what
are  its  Confequences  to  the  World.

Here  the  Stranger  looking  upon  him  with  a  fmiling
Afpedfc,  reply’d  $  I  have  great  Regard  for  your  be¬
ing  efteem’d  by  Pharaoh ,  and  fhail  let  you  into  the
Knowledge  of  what  you  defire,  for  your  farther
good  Fortune.  Know  then*  added  he,  with  an

Afpedt


of  M  AG  ICR.  I

Afpe£fc  all  fhining  and  pleafant,  4  The  Appearance
4  we  now  fee,  is  a  Comet  or  Blazing- {tar,  the  like  of
4  which  has  not  been  feen  mJEgypt  in  the  Memory  of
4  the  mod  ancient  Man  in  the  Kingdom,  which
4  makes  the  wife  Men  entirely  at  a  lofs  about  itj
4  neither  have  they  receiv’d  any  traditional  Account
4  of  fuch  a  Phenomena  from  their  Fathers.

4  Comets,  continued  he,  are  not,  as  fix’d  Stars,  Bodies
4  of  Fire,  burning  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  Sun  3  but
4  Bodies  of  a  different  Nature,  compos’d  either  of
4  prepar’d  created  Matter,  fuited  from  the  begin-
4  ning  for  Inflamation,  or  of  vaft  Colledtions  of  ex-
4  hal’d  and  condens’d  Matter,  fubje£t  to  Inflama-
4  tion,  and  more  or  lefs  inflam’d  according  to  the  Po-
4  fition  of  their  Orbits  and  Motion ;  and  therefore
4  the  Eruption  of  their  Flame  is  but  on  one  fide,

4  or  on  one  fide  chiefly,  (as  we  fee  this  burning)

4  with  a  continued  and  vehement  Eruption:  They
4  move  in  the  utmofi  Extent  of  the  Wafle  or  Ex-
4  pance  of  Space,  which  you  call  the  JEther  or  Air,

4  and  their  Di  fiance  is  fo  great,  and  their  Revolu-
4  tions  fo  tedious,  that  they  fometimes  do  not  come
4  fo  near  this  Globe  as  to  be  vifible,  no  not  in  five
4  hundred  or  a  thoufand  Years  5  and  this  is  the  fe-
4  cond  that  was  ever  feen  in  this  Hemifphere,  fince
4  the  great  Deluge  of  the  Earth,  in  the  Years  of
4  Pharaoh's  Great  Grandfather’s  Father,  being  now
4  above  eight  hundred  Years  paft.

4  The  long  Tail,  or  extended  Flame  which  you
4  fee  at  one  fide  of  the  Star,  is  the  Eruption  of
4  Flame,  which,  as  I  fay,  continually  burns  with
4  great  Violence,  and  is  fometimes  extended  to  an
4  immenfe  and  unmeafurable  Length,  even  to  that
4  of  many  hundred  thoufand  Millions  of  Stadia ,
4  and  blazes  out  for  ever.

The  Arabian  heard  this  with  a  furprife  of  Plea-
fore,  and  was  even  ready  to  kneel  down  and  wor-
fhip  him  3  which  you  will  fay  his  much  the  Dea.il

M  &  fhould


A  SYSTEM

fliould  rcfufe :  But  when  he  was  juft  going  to  en¬
quire  of  him  what  Import  this  Appearance  was  to
the  World,  and  to  JEgypt  more  especially,  and  a-
bove  all  to  the  King  in  particular,  he  was  not  only
difappointed  to  the  lad  degree,  but  moil  miferably
afflidted  and  Surpris’d  *  for  that  turning  his  Head
cafually  from  him,  or  rather  his  Head  being  turn’d,
or  his  Eyes  turn’d  from  him,  he  in  that  very  Mo¬
ment  difappeared,  and  was  gone.

It  was  in  vain  that  the  Arabian  Dodtor  ran  out
of  the  Hut  or  Bower,  and  down  the  Hill  after  him,
to  his  two  Servants,  who  always  attended  him  at
the  Foot  of  the  Hill,  enquiring  of  them  if  the
Father,  the  venerable  Stranger,  came  not  to  them  ;
they  condantly  and  faithfully  affirm’d  that  they
had  watch’d,  as  was  their  Duty,  againd  wild  Bealls
for  his  Security,  and  that  nothing  had  palled  by
them.

It  was  in  vain  alfo,  that  he  went  back  lamenting,
and  calling  aloud  upon  the  Stranger,  whom  he  ftyl’d
Father ,  to  return.  Flow  is  it ,  faid  he,  that  you  could
thus  far  illuminate  my  Under  ft  anding,  and  reveal  the
fecret  of  TVifdom  but  in  part  5  promifing  to  me  a  clear
and  perfect  Knowledge^  and  then  leave  me  uninftruffed ,
and  in  the  dark ,  in  the  main  and  grand  Inquiry  ?  But
no  Voice,  no  Appearance  return’d,  which  afflidted
him  fore  5  and  the  Day  appearing,  herefolv’d  to  con¬
tinue  there  the  next  Night,  in  hopes  he  might  fee
him  again  in  the  Evening,  as  he  had  done  before.
After  refolving  on  this,  and  having  been  waking  (as  is
faid)  all  Night,  he  laid  him  down  to  deep.  He  was
no  Sooner  fallen  into  a  deep  Sleep,  but  he  dream’d
that  he  Saw,  (or,  to  Speak  it  in  the  Language  of  the
Eall,)  the  ancient  Father,  the  venerable  Stranger,
appear’d  to  him  again  in  a  D ream.

He  was  molt  agreeably  Surpriz’d  with  the  Sight
of  him,  and  according  to  the  Eadern  Cudom  fell
at  his  Feet,  embracing  his  Knees,  and  #/ith  all  the

paffionate


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

paflionate  Expreffions  which  he  had  ufed  before,  ex-
poftulated  with  him,  that  he  fhould  leave  him  fo
in  the  dark,  and  half  inform’d,  after  having  allur’d
him  that  he  would  fully  let  him  into  the  Know¬
ledge  of  that  molt  important  Secret.

The  Vifion  on  the  contrary  feem’d  difpleas’d,
and  look’d  at  him  with  a  lefs  knifing  and  pleafanc
Countenance  than  he  had  done  before,  when  he
was  awake 5  and  with  a  hern  Voice  ask’d  him
wherefore  he  call’d  after  him  fo  importunately,
when  he  had  fiaid  fo  long  with  him,  and  had  io
fully  inform’d  him  of  all  things  he  could  defire.

O  my  Father !  fays  the  Arabian ,  (tho’  himfclf  a
hundred  and  fifty  Years  old)  did  not  you  put  me  in
Expedition,  that  you  would  likewife  inform  me
of  what  mighty  Importance  this  frightful  Comet
fhould  be  to  Pharaoh ,  and  to  his  Kingdom,  and  to
the  Country  where  we  are,  that  I  might  obtain  the
Favour  of  the  King,  and  be  accepted  for  my  extra-
odinary  Wifdoni  and  Knowledge  among  the  People  ?

4  Thou  Fool !  fays  the  Vifion  harfhly :  O  thou  of
4  weak  and  empty  Judgment !  was  it  not  fufficient  to
4  thee,  that  I  had  let  thee  know  it  was  no  new
4  thing,  nothing  out  of  the  courfe  of  Nature,  but
6  a  Comet  or  Star  of  a  different  kind  from,  and
4  remoter  Pofition  than  the  reft  3  that  it  came  to
4  be  vifible  here  only  in  the  Courfe  of  its  ordinary
4  Revolution,  and  may  perhaps  appear  juft  in  the
4  fame  Manner,  and  in  the  fame  Place  again,  about
4  feven  or  eight  hundred  Years  hence?

4  Can  any  thing  be  more  natural,  than  that  when
4  I  had  told  thee  this,  thou  fhould’ft  know  alfothat
4  there  are  no  extraordinary  things  portended  in
4  Nature’s  common  and  ordinary  Events  5  no  Por~
4  teutons  Threatningj  no  ill  Omens  or  Bodings  in
4  the  common  Appearances  of  the  Heavens  -y  no
4  more  in  one  Star  than  in  another?  When  I  had
4  therefore  told  thee,  that  it  was  only  an  ordinary

M  3  4  Revo**


1 66


A  SYSTEM

4  Revolution  of  a  Comet,  I  in  effefl  told  thee  that
4  it  imported  nothing,  either  to  Pharaoh  or  to
4  thee,  or  to  any  Perfon  or  Place  whatever.

The  Arabian ,  furpris’d,  and  yet  inform’d  by  this
Difcourfe,  flood  juftly  reprov’d,  and  for  a  while  an-
fwer’d  not. a  Word  -y  which  the  Vifion  as  it  were
obferving,  fpoke  again  as  follows.

4  Tho’  I  have  given  thee  fqfficient  Light,  where*

4  by  to  expofe  the  Ignorance  of  the  wife  Men,

4  who  have  been  call’d  before  Pharaoh ,  yet  there
4  are  many  things  which  thou  may  ft  fay  to  the
4  King,  which  are  of  great  Importance  to  him  and
4  his  Kingdom  to  know,  which  thou  fhalt  be
4  enabled  by  me  to  give  him  the  Knowledge  of,

4  and  which,  if  thou  diligently  liflen  to  my  Inftru-
4  fbions,  fhall  fet  thee  at  the  right  Hand  of  the
4  King  in  all  his  Councils,  and  caufe  thee  to  be  e-
4  fteem’d  the  wifefl  Man  in  his  Kingdom :  But
4  then  thou  mull  be  very  careful  to  obferve  all  the
4  Rules  which  I  ihall  give  thee,  and  to  a£l  in  ex-
4  aft  Obedience  to  them.

The  Doctor  awaking,  and  the  Vifion  being  end¬
ed,  he  now  began  to  underfland  who  it  was  he
had  been  converting  with,  namely  an  Angel  of  the
invifible  World,  (I  fuppofe  the  Word  Devil  was
not  known  among  them  at  that  time,)  and  that  for
the  future  he  had  a  fair  Opportunity  of  good  In¬
telligence  from  the  other  World,  upon  all  necef-
fary  Occaflons,  and  upon  the  mo  ft  important  En¬
quiries.

Comforted  exceedingly  with  this  Intelligence,
he  haftens  back  to  the  City,  and  being  fent  for  to
appear  before  the  King,  as  he  expefled,  Pharaoh
told  him  the  Occafion  of  his  fending  for  him,  and
how  the  South fayers  and  wife  Men  were  puzzl’d
and  perplex’d  about  it,  but  could  give  him  no  Ra¬
tional  Account  of  it.


Upon


I


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Upon  this  the  Arabian  told  the  King,  that  he
was  forry  to  find  him,  Pharaoh ,  made  fo  uneafy  by
the  Apprehensions  of  a  thing,  which  tho’  above
the  Reach  and  Understanding  of  the  Magicians,
bad  yet  in  it  nothing  Extraordinary,  nothing  out
of  the  Courfe  of  Nature 5  that  there  was  nothing
in  it  more  than  the  neceffity  of  its  own  Motion
occafion’d,  and  that  it  had  therefore  no  portentous
Import  or  Signification  to  Pharaoh ,  or  to  any  of
his  People,  or  of  his  Dominions  5  and  that  this  he
might  be  afTur’d  af.

Then  he  went  on,  and  gave  the  King  an  Ac¬
count  of  the  Nature  of  the  thing,  as  a  Comet  or
Blazing-ftar  5  and  that  Word  for  Word  as  the  an¬
cient  Stranger  or  Spirit  had  deliver’d  it  5  and  this
he  did  too  in  the  Audience,  not  of  Pharaoh  only,
but  of  his  whole  Court  5  and  that  with  fuch  a  ge¬
neral  Applaufe,  that  all  the  other  Magicians  and
Southfayers  acknowledged  the  Juftice  and  Reafon
of  what  he  faid,  and  the  King  was  made  perfeftly
eafy  upon  that  Account.  From  whence  they  tell
us,  that  the  ^Egyptians ,  tho’  in  other  Cafes  the
mo  ft  Superstitious  People  in  the  World,  and  that
ufed  formerly  to  be  the  moSt  concern’d  upon  all
new  Phenomena  in  the  Heavens,  or  upon  any  un-
uflial  Appearances,  flying  immediately  to  the  Divi¬
nations,  and  to  their  Southfayers,  and  Magicians,  to
interpret  and  account  for  fuch  things  to  them,  are
yet,  ever  Since  this  Difcovery  by  the  South-

fay  er  fo  long  ago,  under  no  Concern  at  all  upon
the  Appearance  of  Comets  or  Blazing- ft  ars^  on  any
Account  whatfoever.

But  I  return  to  the  Arabian.  It  was  no  fmall
Fame  which  he  gain’d  by  the  Solution  he  had  given
of  this  Appearance  of  a  Comet  >  Pharaoh  preferr’d
him  before  all  the  Magicians  of  ALgypt ,  and  exalt¬
ed  him  to  divers  Honours,  but  particularly  to  that
of  being  near  his  Perfon,  to  eounfcl  and  adwife

M  4  him


t6%


A  SYSTEM

him  upon  all  extraordinary  Occafions,  as  well  in
Matters  of  State  and  Politicks,  as  Matters  of  Dif¬
ficulty  :  Nor  did  the  reft  of  the  Magicians  envy
him  the  Honours  he  enjoy’d,  for  they  were
convinc’d  he  merited  all  the  King  had  done  for
him  5  and  which  was  more,  they  did  not  find  they
could  come  at  any  Parc  of  the  extraordinary  Intel¬
ligence  or  Under  (landing  in  things,  which  he  was
M  after  of.

In  the  mean  time,  as  he  was  too  wife  to  commu¬
nicate  to  any  body  the  fource  of  his  Information,  fo
he  was  too  well  fatisfied  with  his  new  Intelligence,
to  ncgledt  the  Part  he  was  directed  to  adt,  which
was  frequently  to  meet  with  the  Vifion,  which  had
once  been  fo  favourable  to  him  :  In  a  word,  he  fol¬
low’d  with  the  grcateft  Aftiduity  the  begun  Inti¬
macy,  and  fail’d  not  to  attend  the  very  next  Night
in  particular,  after  he  had  made  his  Speech  con¬
cerning  the  Comet  before  the  King.

On  that  occafion,  going  towards  his  Obfervatory
as  ufual,  he  was  encounter’d  by  a  Man,  in  the  Ha¬
bit  of  an  JEthiopian ,  riding  upon  a  Mule,  and  having
a  Bow  hanging  over  his  Shoulder,  a  Sheaf  of  Ar¬
rows  at  his  Side,  and  a  Lance  in  his  Hand  3  the  Man
feem’d  to  fhun  him,  and  offer’d  to  go  forward,  but
prefently  turn’d  back,  and  with  a  kind  of  Compli¬
ment  to  the  Arabian  Dodfcor,  enquir’d  of  him,  if  there
were  any  way  for  him  to  Foord  through  the  River
If  Hus ,  which  at  that  time  of  the  Year  was  fo  low,
as  to  be  in  lbme  Places  almoft  dry,  and  eafily  paf-
fable  on  Horfe-back.  The  Arabian  courteously  an-
fvver’d  him,  that  there  was  not  any  Place  near  the
Road  or  Track  .which  he  was  going  in,  and  that  he
being  as  he  perceiv’d  a  Stranger  and  alone,  it
would  be  hazardous  for  him  to  venture  3  but  that
if  he  would  be  pleas’d  to  flay,  and  go  with  him  to
a  little  Hut  which  he  had  hard  by,  for  hisRetreat  in
the  Night,  he  would  guide  him  in  the  Morning

to


of  M  A  -G  1  C  K.

to  a  Place  where  he  fhould  pafs  the  River  with

Safety.

The  Traveller  thank’d  him  for  the  kind  Offer,  blit
feem’d  rather  inclin’d  to  go  on  }  Sir,  fays  the  Arabian ,
the  Night  approaches,  and  you  may  meet  with  o-
ther  Dangers  in  the  way  from  Crocodiles,  Lions,
&c.  preffing  him  again  to  ftay}  but  he  declin’d
it  again,  and  as  to  the  Dangers  he  laugh’d  at
and  defpis’d  them}  Well  then,  fays  the  kind  hofpi-
table  Arabian ,  let  me  fend  one  of  my  Servants  with
you  to  guide  you.  He  feem’d  at  firft  inclin’d  to
accept  fo  kind  an  Offer  as  that  was,  but  falling  a  lit¬
tle  farther  into  Difcourfe,  the  Arabian  perceiv’d
the  Stranger  began  to  look  pleas'd,  and  fancying
he  would  accept  the  firft  Offer,  viz.  of  Haying  all
Night,  mov’d  it  again,  and  with  a  little  additional
entreating,  the  Stranger  confented  to  that  Part,  and
turn’d  back  with  them.

The  Arabian,  tho’  with  two  Servants  with  him,
was  always  on  foot}  he  had  himfelf  no  Weapons,  be¬
ing  without  fear  but  of  wild  Beafts,  againft  which
his  two  Servants  were  his  Security,  who  were
armed  with  Swords  and  Lances}  but  the  Stranger,
well  arm’d  as  above,  turning  back,  they  went  on
fearlefs  together  towards  the  Hill,  which  was  about
the  Diftance  of  two  Miles.

In  the  Way,  the  Arabian  was  a  little  fhock’d
with  the  unufual  Civility  which  a  great  over-grown
Crocodile  fhew’d  them}  who  milling  out  of  a
marfhy  kind  of  Bog  near  the  Way,  came  forward
towards  them,  but  on  a  fudden  turn’d  back,  and
very  obfequioufly  crept  into  the  lurking  Place,
where  it  had  juft  before  come  out  from,  and  lay
Hill  there  as  quiet  as  if  i.t  had  been  hufh’d  by  its
own  Fears,  as  perhaps  it  was.

At  a  fmall  Difiance  farther  they  met*  two  She
Lions,  or  as  fome  call  them  Lioneffes}  and  as  they
heard  them  growling  at  feme  Difiance,  before  they

were


A  SYSTEM

were  feen;  they,  that  is,  the  Arabian  and  his  two
Servants,  began  to  ihow  fome  Concern  about  it*
but  behold,  when  the  Lions  appeared,  they  imme¬
diately  turned  about,  and  fled  with  the  utmoft  Pre¬
cipitation.

After  a  little  farther  walking,  the  Arabian  turn¬
ing  to  his  Gueft,  told  him,  There,  pointing  to  the
Bill  which  was  dole  at  hand,  was  his  little  Re¬
treat,  to  which  he  had  invited  him,  and  de fired
him  to  leave  his  Mule  with  his  Servants,  and  to
walk  up  the  little  Mount  with  him  $  which  the
Traveller  very  readily  did,  bidding  his  new  Land¬
lord  go  before  to  {hew  him  the  way,  and  he  would
follow  him,  as  alfo  he  did  5  but  what  a  Surprife
think  you  was  the  poor  Arabian  in  between  Joy
and  Fright,  when  turning  about  at  the  Top  of
the  Afcent  to  receive  his  Gueft,  he  faw  nobody  but
the  ancient  venerable  Stranger,  who  had  at  firft  ap¬
peared  to  him,  and  from  whom  he  had  received
fo  much  kind  InftruCfcion  and  Affiftance  before.

The  Apparition  (for  fuch  I  fuppofe  it  fhould  be
now  called)  perceiving  him  in  fome  Confufion,
bid  him  not  be  furprifed,  for  he  was  ftill  his  Friend,
and  in  the  fame  Difpofition  to  ferve  him  as  before,
and  asked  him  whether  he  came  that  Night  in  Ex¬
pectation  of  meeting  him  or  not  5  to  which  the  A-
rabian  replyed,  He  did,  hoping  to  fee  him  in  Perfon
or  in  Vifion,  having  fomething  to  offer,  which  he
hoped  he  would  be  fo  kind  as  to  comply  with
him  in.

Upon  asking  what  it  was,  he  told  him,  That
Pharaoh  had  a  great  Difficulty  upon  him,  and  had
asked  him  his  Opinion  therein,  and  he  knew  not
what  Anfwer  to  give.

What  is  this  Difficulty?  fays  the  Apparition.

Why,  fays  the  Arabian ,  he  has  a  private  Account
from  his  Spies,  that  fhermesbus ,  the  General  of  the
Armies  of  Ethiopia ,  defigns  w  invade  him  in  the

Be-


171


of  MAGIC  K.

Beginning  of  the  Year,  with  an  infinite  Number
of  Troops  *  and  as  the  King  is  in  greater  Readinefs
to  begin  the  War,  than  the  other,  he  wants  my
Opinion  whether  he  fhall  make  War  upon  Mthi -
opia  forthwith,  or  flay  till  he  is  obliged  to  do  it
in  his  own  Defence.

Go  you  back,  fays  the  Sfeftre  to  him ,  and  wait
till  the  King  fends  for  you  to  interpret  his  Dream
or  Dreams.

What  Dream?  fays  the  Arabian.

Why  to-morrow  Night,  fays  the  Speftre*,  the
King  fhall  dream,  that  a  black  Elephant  came  up
to  the  Gates  of  his  Palace,  and  that  with  his  mighty
Tusks  or  Teeth  he  broke  down  the  Gates,  and
was  entring  in  to  make  farther  Spoil  *  when  the
Gates  being,  as  I  fayy  broken  down  fir  ft,  the
Tower  which  was  over  the  Gates  being  fhaken
with  the  Fall,  fell  down  foon  after  upon  the  Ele¬
phant,  and  well-nigh  crufh’d  him  to  death*  but
that,  tho’  by  his  great  Strength  he  bore  up  the
Weight,  yet  he  was  fo  terrified  with  the  Fall  of
the  Tower  upon  him,  that  he  withdrew  into  the
Defart  and  went  quite  away.

And  what  Interpretation  fhall  I  give  of  this
Dream  ?  fays  the  Arabian.

You  fhall  tell  him ^  fays  the  Spectre ,  That  the  black
Elephant  is  the  King  of  ^Ethiopia-,  that  he  fhall  fend
his  General  to  invade  him,  even  to  the  Gates  of  his
Frontier  City  of  Zaba,  and  fhall  enter  the  Gates
thereof*  but  that  the  ^Egyptians  in  Garrifon  within
fhall  break  out  and  fall  upon  him,  and  tho’  by  the
great  Power  of  their  Troops  they  fhall  efcape,  yet
that  they  fhall  retire  and  go  back  into  the  Defarts
of  ^Ethiopia ,  and  not  dare  to  look  upon  him  any
more.

But  y;hat  then  fhall  I  advife  to  be  done  ?  fays  the

Arabian.


You


A  SYSTEM

You  will  find  it  moft  rational,  fays  the  SpeFtre ,  to
advife  him  to  begin  the  War*  and  may  promife
him  Succefs,  without  %arj  but  if  not,  let  him  place
very  great  Garrifons  in  all  the  Frontier  Towns  of
his  Dominions,  South,  and  efpecially  in  Zaba  or
Zabda-y  and  let  him  wait  in  a  good  Pofture  of  De¬
fence,  till  the  ALthiopiari  Army  advances  to  the  Siege
of  that  Place  j  and  fo  his  Dream  will  come  to  pafs.

This  was  all  wonderful ,  the  Arab  was  furprifed
with  being  thus  fur  milled  for  ingratiating  hitnfelf
with  his  Matter  the  King  of  Agypt  >  he  knew  well
enough,  that  to  be  able  to  make  Pharaoh  dream
what  he  pleafed,  and  then  to  interpret  it  how  he
pleafed,  mutt  needs  make  .him  pafs  for  a  great
Man,  in  a  Country  too  fo  fuperftitioufly  addiftcd
to  Dreams,  and  fo  uneafie  to  have  thofe  Dreams
interpreted,  as  the  People  of  ALgypt  were.

Thus  furnifhed,  he  goes  back  to  the  City,  where
he  heard  nothing  till  the  third  Day  in  the  Morn¬
ing,  when  the  whole  Court  was  in  Diforder,  all
Faces  feem’d  cloudy,  and  every  Mind  difturbed :
The  News  was  foon  fpread  into  all  Parts  of  the
City,  that  the  King  had  had  a  frightful  and
terrible  Dream,  which  had  fo  diftra£ted  his  Mind,
(’tis  fuppofed  they  did  not  call  him  His  Majefty)
that  he  could  not  reft.

The  wife  Men  and  the  Southfayers,  Magicians
and  Aftrologers  were  immediately  fentfor  in  a  great
hurry  to  give  their  Opinion,  and  interpret  Pharaoh' s
Dream  :  The  Circumftances  of  the  Dream  were
much  the  fame  with  thofe  already  mentioned  with
this  Addition,  that  at  the  Beginning,  Pharaoh  be¬
ing  in  a  deep  Sleep,  heard  as  he  thought  a  Hidden
great  Noife,  that  it  alarm’d  the  whole  City,  and
that  his  Guards,  as  we  call  them,  or  Soldiers  which
were  about  him,  were  awaken’d,  but  all  fled  away,
and  that  the  City  was  even  left  without  Defence,
only  that  the  Gates  were  Ihut.


That


of  MAGIC  K.

That  in  the  midft  of  this  Harry,  a  monftrous
black  Elephant,  breaking  down  all  before  him,  and
even  overthrowing  the  Houfes  and  Buildings  which
were  without  the  City,  came  on,  no  one  refilling
him,  to  the  Gates  of  the  City  or  Caftle  where
Pharaoh  flept  y  that  with  the  Force  of  his  mighty
Tusks,  or  Teeth,  he  beat  down  the  Gates  thereof y
but  that  the  Tower  being  fhaken  alfo,  Part  of  the
Building  fell  down  upon  the  Back  of  the  Elephant,
and,  as  the  King  thought  at  firfi:,  had  cruflied  him
to  Death.

But  that  notwithftanding  the  Weight  of  the
Building  which  fell  down  was  very  great,  yet  that
the  Elephant  by  his  mighty  Strength  bore  it  felf
up  and  received  no  Injury  by  it  y  but  being  made
afraid  by  the  great  Blow  it  received,  it  withdrew,
and  retired  into  the  Defart  towards  the  South.

None  of  the  Magicians  could  interpret  this
Dream,  or  rather,  they  could  not  agree  in  their  In¬
terpretations  of  it  y  fome  faid  one  thing,  fome  ano¬
ther,  fo  that  Pharaoh  received  no  Satisfa£tion  from
their  Interpretations  y  whereupon  the  Arab ,  who
appeared  at  Court  purpofely  to  be  called  in,  was
fummon’d,  the  King  being  told  that  he  was  there.

He  came  without  any  Hefitation  at  the  firft  Call  y
and  the  King,  with  great  Appearance  of  Diftur-
bance,  tells  him  what  a  ft  range  Dream  he  had  had,
how  it  had  difturbed  him,  and  the  like,  and  added,
that  none  of  the  Interpretations  which  the  wife
Men  had  given  of  it,  were  fatisfaftory  to  him,
or  agreeing  with  one  another.  The  Arab  ha¬
ving  then  demanded  a  Particular  of  the  King’s
Dream,  had  it  related  to  him  as  above  5  then  he  de-
fired  to  know  what  Account  the  Magicians  had
given  of  it,  and  how  they  had  interpreted  ity  which
when  he  was  told,  he  exprefs’d  fome  Wonder  that
they  fhould  all  amufe  the  King  in  fuch  a  manner,  and
fhould  fay  nothing  but  what  was  perfectly  remote
from  the  Cafe.  '  But


174


/


A  SYSTEM

But  turning  to  the  King,  4  Let  not  Pharaoh
4  (fays  he)  be  any  more  diflurbed  about  the  Inter-
4  pretation  of  his  Dream,  feeing  the  Event  fhall
4  redound  co  the  Honour  of  the  King  and  Profpe-
4  rity  of  his  Dominions  \  for  that  the  Dream  being
4  interpreted,  is  a  Reprefentation  of  what  fhall  im«

4  mediately  come  to  pafs :  ’  and  then  he  went  on  to
interpret  boldly  the  Dream  thus.

4  The  Noife,  O  King,  fays  he,  which  thou  waft
4  alarm’d  with  in  the  City,  and  which  thy  Soldiers
4  were  intimidated  with,  fo  as  to  run  out  of  the  City  \

4  this  is  nothing  elfe  but  a  Rumour  of  War  from
4  the  South,  and  a  certain  Alarm  upon  the  Approach
4  of  an  Army  upon  the  Borders,  at  whofe  Approach
4  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Country  fhall  fly  into
4  the  Mountains  and  Cities  for  fear  of  the  Invaders.

4  The  black  Elephant  aflaulting  the  Gates  of  the
4  King’s  Palace  is  the  General  of  the  Armies  of
4  z Ethiopia ,  who  fhall  make  War  upon  Pharaoh ,

4  and  fhall  invade  his  Kingdoms  with  a  great  Ar-
4  my,  and  fhall  break  down  the  Gates  of  his  flrong
4  Cities  *  but  let  not  the  King  be  difmayed  at  the
4  Strength  of  this  Enemy  which  is  fo  great,  for
4  the  Power  of  Pharaoh  fhall  fall  upon  him,  and
4  fhall  ftrike  him  with  Terror  and  Amazement  $
4  fo  that  he  fhall  flee  away  \vith  all  his  Army  into
4  the  Wildernefs,  and  into  the  Defart  Country,
4  and  fhall  be  feen  no  more.

He  had  no  fooner  delivered  his  Interpretation,
but  Pharaoh  embraced  him  with  Joy,  and  told  him,
That  he  had  indeed  given  him  a  right  Interpre¬
tation  of  the  Dream  5  and  that  he  fully  believed  it
would  come  to  pafs  in  the  fame  manner:  Where¬
upon  Pharaoh  forthwith  caufed  Preparations  of  War
to  be  made,  and  fent  Ambafladors  into  j, Ethiopia  to
denounce  War.

The  fame  Year  that  the  Arabian  had  given  this
Interpretation  of  the  King’s  Dream,  the  Ethiopians

with


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

with  a  great  Army  invaded  the  Coafts  of  JEgypt ,
wailing  the  Country  and  flaying  the  People,  even
to  the  Gates  of  Zaba  or  Zabda ,  a  fortified  City  on
the  Frontiers  of  the  Country,  which  they  befieged,
but  in  vain  5  and  the  King  of  ZEgypt  marching  a-
gainil  them  with  all  his  Chariots  and  Horfes,  at
their  Approach  the  ^Ethiopians  fled,  and  retired  in¬
to  the  Defart  Country,  and  were  feen  no  more.

This  Story,  fuppofing  it,  or  the  Subilance  of  it,
to  be  true,  lets  us  into  the  Manner  and  Method  in
and  by  which  the  Devil  firil  introduced  aCorrefpon-
dence  with  Mankind,  and  how  he  tranfafted  the
fame  with  the  Magicians  of  JEgypty  which  was  cer¬
tainly  continued  by  him  for  many  Ages  afterwards,
in  the  very  fame  manner,  and  by  which  the  Magi¬
cians  of  ZEgypt  obtained  fo  much  in  the  Opinion  of
Mankind,  that  they  pafled  for  the  wifeft  Men  in
the  World  5  whereas  all  this  Knowledge,  if  we
may  believe  Tradition,  was  neither  more  or  lefs
than  a  meer  dealing  with  the  Devil ,  a  plain  down¬
right  Hellifh  Correfpondence,  managed  by  a  magi¬
cal  Scheme,  dictated  by  the  Devil  himfelf,  and  ob-
ferved  by  the  Magicians  with  but  too  much  Exaet-
nefs  on  all  Occafions.

By  this  Diabolical  Magick  the  Devil  converfed
freely  with  the  Magicians,  and  they  with  him  5  and
whatever  fome  may  pretend,  that  the  Devil  cannot
a  flu  me  a  human  Shape  for  his  Correfpondence  with
Mankind,  ’tis  moll  certain  that  he  did  appear  in
divers  Shapes,  and  on  many  Occafions,  or  elfe  all
the  Accounts  of  fuch  things  which  Tradition  has
handed  down  to  the  fucceeding  Ages  muft  be  falle
and  fabulous,  made  up  by  the  Invention  of  the  Ages
in  which  they  were  written.

But  that  this  was  not  fo,  is  apparent  from  the
Scripture,  as  alfo  from  the  firft  Writers  of  the
^Egyptian  and  Phoenician  Hiilories,  by  all  which  we
read  of  the  Wickednefsof  the  Magicians  5  as  parti-

5  cularly


175


i76  A  SYSTEM

cularly  in  the  Story  of  the  Wonders  wrought  by
Aaron  and  Mofes  in  the  Prefence  of  Pharaoh ,  where
it  is  allowed  that  the  Magicians  wrought  by  Inchant-
ment,  which  I  always  underftood  to  mean  by  In¬
voking  the  Affillance  of  the  evil  Spirit,  and  by  re¬
ceiving  Help  and  Secret  Powers  as  well  as  Intelli¬
gence  from  thofe  evil  Spirits  j  and  befides  the  work¬
ing  by  Inchantment  or  Sorcery,  fo  taken  Notice
of  there,  we  fee  it  mentioned  again  in  the  Book  of
JVifdomr  Chap.  xvii.  fpeaking  of  the  Plague  of
Darknefs,  he  fays,  7 hey  were  fcalter'd  under  a  dark
Veil  of  For  get fulnefS)  being  horribly  aftonijhed  and  troubled
with  (Jlrange)  Apparitions ,  Noifes  as  of  Waters  falling
down ,  founded  about  them ,  and  fad  Vifions  appeared
unto  them  with  heavy  Countenances.  Ver.  6.  Only  there
appeared  to  them  a  Fire  kindled  of  it  felf  very  dread-
full  for  being  much  terrified ,  they  thought  the  things
which  they  faw  more  terrible  than  the  Things  they
Jaw  not.

Ver.  7.  As  for  the  Illufions  of  Art  Magick ,  they  were
put  down ,  and  their  vaunting  in  JVifdom  was  reproved
with  Difgrace :  For  they  that  promifed  to  drive  away
Terrors  and  Troubles  from  a  fick  Soul ,  were  fick  them -
felves  with  Fear ,  and  worthy  to  be  laughed  at.

This  whole  Quotation  is  a  Defcription  of  the
Darknefs  of  FFgypt ,  in  which,  according  to  this
Text,  there  were  flrange  Apparitions,  being  evi¬
dently  the  Devil  and  evil  Spirits  with  human
Shapes,  horrible  Appearances  and  heavy  Counte¬
nances.

I  think  this  is  fo  plain,  as  to  need  no  Confir¬
mation  from  other  Opinions :  Magick  was  reproved,
that  is  to  fay,  difgraced,  becaufe  the  Devil  could
not  affift  the  Magician,  fo  as  to  make  any  Abate¬
ment  of  the  Darknefs,  which  was  wrought  by  Hea¬
ven  y  for  even  the  Fire  could  not  be  made  to  give
any  Light,  fo  the  Power  of  Art,  nay  even  of  Ma¬
gick  it  felf,  was  at  an  End,


I


of  MAGIC  K.

In  this  terrible  Cafe,  the  Devil  or  rather  Devils
were,  it  Teems,  permitted  to  appear  in  horrible  and
frightful  Shapes,  with  heavy  Countenances,  &c.

In  like  manner  I  cannot  doubt  but  he  appeared
to  the  Magicians  when  he  and  they  had  Occafion
to  meet  and  converfe,  and  carry  on  their  Hellifh.
Combinations,  and  Confederacies  for  doing  Mifchiefj
and  this  brings  me  of  courfe  to  fpeak  of  the  Man¬
ner  of  the  Magicians  converting  with  the  Devily
for  hitherto  we  have  only  fpoken  of  his  con¬
verting  with  them.

The  Cafe  is  this:  Whenever  theDm/had  an  Oc¬
cafion  to  fpeak  with  the  old  Arab ,  or  in  Ages  af¬
ter  that  (for  the  Arab  was  firfb)  with  Ali  Albrahazen
the  Magician  of  Saba  in  Arabia^  he  knew  well  how
to  find  them  out,  and  could  go  to  them,  meet
them  in  Apparition ,  or  fpeak  to  them  in  Vifion  j
But  what  was  to  be  done  when  they  wanted  his
Atiiftance  upon  any  Emergency  ?

The  Story  of  AU,  mentioned  already,  ftated  the
Matter  for  him,  namely,  that  he  was  to  go  into
the  Defart  to  a  certain  Palm-tree,  furround  it  fo
many  times,  call  the  Devil  fo  many  times  in  every
Circle  by  fuch  and  fuch  a  Name,  and  then  he  would
come.

Here  was  indeed  a  great  deal  of  Ceremony,  be¬
fore  his  Worthip  would  be  fpoken  with  j  and  I
cannot  but  think  our  Friend  Roger  M — -  (Ac¬
cepted  Free  Mafon,f5?r.)  fpeaks  with  him  fomeumes
upon  much  eafier  Terms  5  for  the  World  is  grown
much  nicer  of  late,  than  they  were  then,  and  the
Devil  is  obliged  to  treat  with  them  on  Terms  of
lefs  Ceremony.

But  the  reft:  of  the  Story  of  the  old  Arabian  will,
flare  this  Matter  much  clearer,  and  to  the  Under-
{landing  of  every  Reader  5  and  will  let  us  fee  a  little
what  Methods  they  took  to  raife  the  Devil  in  Ring
Pharaoh's  time,  and  before  our  modern  Experiments
were  in  ufe,  N  The


178


A  S  r  S  T  E  M

The  Arab  was  now  a  great  Perfon,  all  -/Egypt  re¬
ceived  him  as  a  wonderful  Man  j  his  Words  were
the  Oracle  of  the  Day,  for  whatever  he  (aid  came
to  pafs  5  he  was  fent  to  far  and  wide,  and  Mef-
fengers  came  from  Perfidy  from  Phoenicia ,  nay
from  jEthiopidy  for  him  to  come  thither,  and  give
the  Interpretation  of  their  Vifions,  and  explain  to
them  every  doubtful  Cafe  •>  but  he  would  not
leave  the  Court  of  Pharaohy  and  he  was  in  the
right,  for  the  King  highly  honoured  him.

All  this  while  his  Reputation  wholly  depended
upon  the  conftant  Intelligence  which  he  kept  up
with  his  familiar  Spirit  (fo  I  may  now  call  it)  I
mean  the  Apparition  which  came  to  him  in  the
Defart  \  but  as  this  Appearing  was  arbitrary,  and
when  it  pleafed,  and  might  not  be  at  hand  when
he  might  have  a  more  than  ordinary  Occafion  for  it,
it  occurr’d  to  him  one  Night  to  propofe  Methods
of  a  more  conftant  and  lefs  difficult  Correfpondence,
and  that  the  Apparition  might  be  brought  to  a
greater  Familiarity,  fo  as  that  when  any  Exigence
was  upon  him,  he  might  be  fure  of  his  Aid,  might
be  able  to  call  him  to  his  Affiftance,  and  that  he
would  not  fail  to  appear.

Story  does  not  record  what  Condition  the  Devil
might  make  with  the  ol dAraby  as  for  felling  Souls,
figning  Contracts,  and  the  likcy  it  feems  to  me
there  was  little  need  of  thefe  things  in  thofe  Days,
if  there  had,  and  the  Devil  had  infifted  on  it,  I  doubt
not  the  Arabian  would  have  made  no  more  Scruple
of  ir,  than  our  Brother  of  the  Trowel,  who  adorns
fo  often  his  blue  Ribband  with  the  moft  honour¬
able  Badge  of  the  Leather  Apron  >  and  being  firft
incorporated,  as  above,  in  the  ancient  Society  of

free  Th« - s  may,  for  ought  we  know,  build  two

or  three  Churches  abroad,  feeing  the  Devil  and  he
are  known  to  be  upon  their  Travels  together.


You


of  M  A  G  I  C  R.  x

You  have  thus  a  Sketch  of  Satan’s  profefs’d
Correfpondence  with  his  Agents  in  the  firft
and  moil  early  Days  of  the  Magick  Art*  if  by
thofe  Subtilties  he  brought  them  into  great  Re¬
putation  among  the  People,  and  in  the  Courts  of
Princes,  you  are  not  to  doubt  but  he  found  his
Account  in  it  $  for  by  gaining  a  Reputation  to  his
Agents,  and  at  the  fame  time  keeping  them  at  his
Command,  for  the  fake  of  the  Illuminations  which
they  gained  from  him,  he  had  them  always  at  his
hand,  ready  to  do  or  undertake  any  thing  how¬
ever  black,  which  in  the  courfe  of  their  Witch¬
crafts  came  in  their  way.  We  fliall  find  fome  fla¬
ming  Examples  of  this  kind  very  quickly.

But  for  the  prefent  let  us  keep  to  our  Arab  as  a
Sample  or  Xnftance  of  the  ordinary  way  of  fuch
People  in  their  future  Correfpondences  j  hitherto
you  fee  the  Devil  very  afliftant,  and,  in  his  way*
obliging  to  the  lafl:  degree,  to  his  new  Acquain¬
tance  the  Arab.  I  will  for  the  prefent  fuppoie  he
had  no  other  Correfpondent,  at  leaft  not  in  Pha¬
raoh's  Court,  nor  was  there  any  need  of  another  $
but  you  are  to  fuppofe  he  had  more  fuch,  or  fuch
like,  in  other  Places.

He  had,  it  feems,  found  out  the  W ay  to  make  him-
felf  neceflary  to  the  Arab)  fo  that  the  Doftor  could
not  bear  the  Thoughts  of  wanting  his  conftant
Affiftance :  The  Senfe  of  this  puts  the  Arab  upon
propofing  to  him,  that  for  the  future  the  Devil
fliould  be  fo  favourable  to  him  as  always  to  come  to
him  whenever  he  had  Occafion,  and  this  with¬
out  obliging  him  to  go  into  the  Defart  and  up  the
Hill,  in  fearch  of  him,  which  many  times  the  ex¬
traordinary  Demands  of  the  Court  would  not  admit,
nor  allow  him  time  for.

If  the  Devil  did  concede  this  Favour,  which  was
more  than  he  granted  to  All  Albrahazen ,  (for  he
obliged  him  to  come  to  the  Palm-tree,  walk  fo

N  z  many


*79


1 8o


A  SYSTEM

many  times  about  it,  call  aloud  fo  many  times  upon
him  every  Circle  he  made)  before  he  would  comej
I  fay,  if  he  yielded  to  this  at  the  Delire  of  his  Ac¬
quaintance  the  Arab ,  it  was  certainly  for  the  great
Ends  which  were  to  follow.

Upon  his  new  Propofal,  Meafures  were  {fated  be¬
tween  them  that  upon  fuch  and  fuch  formal  ma¬
naging,  (for  there  was  fome  Reafon,  it  feems,  to
make  it  a  Piece  of  great  Formality,)  the  Devil
fhould  always,  that  is  fome  of  the  innumerable  Le¬
gions,  fhould  always  appear >  whether  Satan  himfelf,
or  fome  of  his  Meffiengers,  Servants,  or  Gentlemen
in  waitings  Hiftory  indeed  is  not  fo  particular  as  that
I  fhould  be  able  to  give  you  the  Names  of  them,
whether  Chriftian  Name  or  Sirname,  as  in  other
Cafes  might  be  expe£ted«

The  Forms  of  his  appearing,  the  Occafion,  the
Conditions,  &c.  being  thus  left  to  the  Arab  to  de¬
termine  as  fhould  be  for  his  Occafion  -y  let  us  fee
how  near  we  can  come  to  the  Particulars.

Circles  and  Figures  vifible  to  others,  with  fome
needful  Cant  or  hard  Words  which  might  be  made
ufe  of  audibly,  as  there  might  be  Occafion  •,  thefe
feem  to  have  been  appointed  as  the  Pomp  and  Ce¬
remony  of  the  thing  called  Conjuring  and  Magiek,
and  might  be  found  necefTary  for  many  Reafons  :
and  in  feveral  Ages  thefe  were  varied  and  changed,
as  the  Magician  and  the  Devil  might  agree  about
it  between  themfelves.

It  was  no  doubt  a  great  Condefcention  that  the
Devil  would  ftoop  to  be  always  at  hand,  and  to
come  when  he  was  called  -7  but  he  found  his  Ac¬
count  in  it :  the  Arab  now  had  him  at  his  Beck,  and
whenever  Pharaoh  had  any  difficult  thing  to  pro-
pofe,  the  old  Arab  could  as  they  call  it  raife  the
Devil,  when  he  pleafed,  to  affift  in  it.

This  is  what  After-times  called  having  a  Familiar,
and  a  familiar  Spirit,  and  is  acknowledged  to  this

time


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.  18 1

time  to  be  frequently  pra&is’d  by  Witches  and
Warlocks,and  what  we  find  mention’d  in  Scripture.
Menaffeh  in  particular,  tho’  one  of  the  Kings  of
Judahs  the  Scripture  is  exprefs  in  it,  'That  he  ufed
Inchantments  and  dealt  with  familiar  Sprits  and
tVizards^  z  Kings xxi.  6.  <

Several  hundred  Years  before  this  ’tis  apparent*
by  the  Laws  againft  fuch  as  thefe,  that  fuch  were$
and  that  doubtlefs  while  they  were  in  ALgypt ,  nay
it  mull:  be  there  j  the  Law  is  very  exprefs,  and
reckons  up  feveral  Sorts,  Deut.  xviii.  io,  n.  There
j hall  not  he  found  among  you ,  (mark  the  Kinds,)

1.  One  that  ufes  Divination.

2.  An  Obferver  of  Times,

3.  An  Inchanter,  t

4.  A  Witch.  r  „

f,  A  Charmer.

6.  A  Confulter  with  familiar  Spirits.

7.  A  Wizard.

8.  A  Necromancer.

then  follows  the  juft  Chara&er  of  thofe  PrafKces,
ver.  12.  For  all  that  do  fuch  things  are  an  Abomi-
nation  to  the  Lord.

Now  from  the  fame  Text  we  fhail  prove  that
thefe  were  Pra£Hces  in  the  Nations  of  that  Part  of
the  World,  even  long  before  the  Children  of  Ifrael
came  into  the  Land  of  Canaan.  See  the  fame  Chapter,

Verfe  12.  And  hecaufe  of  thofe  Abominations  the
LORD  thy  GOD  doth  drive  them  out  from  before  thee.

And  again,  Ver.  14.  For  thefe  Nations  which  thou
fait  pojfefs  hearkened  unto  Obfervers  of  Times ,  and  un¬
to  Diviners.

Now  fuch  a  one  was  this  Arab  $  let  him  a£t  as
he  did,  and  be  that  how  it  will,  ’tis  evident  he
hid  a  Familiar the  meaning  is,  he  was  in  or  under
a  Covenant  with  the  Devil >  he  had  made  an  Agree¬
ment  with  the  Apparition  for  continuing  the  Cor-
refpondence,  and  for  attending  him  conftantly,  to

N  }  fur-


/


t


1Z1  A  SYSTEM

furnifh  him  for  his  Predi&ions,  foretelling  Events,
and  acquainting  them  with  fecret  and  hidden
things.

Thefeare  the  known  Interpretations  of  thefefeve-
ral  Expreffions,  having  a  Familiar ,  ufing  Divination ,
InchantmentSy  8ec.  All  imply  a  Correfpondence  with
the  Devil ,  to  help  them  in  fuch  extraordinary
Cafes.

Such  a  fort  of  People  it  feems  there  was  among
the  Canaanites ,  that  is  to  fay  the  Phoenicians  5  and  the
Abomination  was  come  to  fuch  a  height,  and  God
had  born  with  it  fo  many  Ages,  that  now  he  was
refolved  to  drive  out  thofe  Nations,  for  this  very
Crime  :  Now,  as  there  were  fuch  People  among
the  Phoenicians ,  no  doubt  but  there  were  fuch  a-
mong  the  j. Egyptians  too,  from  whom  thefe  People
of  Ifrael  came  out,  and  who,  tho’  with  the  firft -
horn  of  their  Children  {lain  in  Agypt^  the  Lofs  of
their  Army  and  King  in  the  Waters  of  the  Red-
Sea  and  other  Calamities,  they  were  reduced  low
enough  at  the  Time  that  we  read  of  them,  yet
were  a  ftrong  and  powerful  Nation,  even  from  the
time  of  Mizraim  their  greateft  Monarch  after  Cham .

As  they  were  a  powerful  and  great  People,  fo
they  were  a  wife  and  learned  Nation,  as  Wifdom
and  Knowledge  went  then  in  the  World,  and  there¬
fore  we  find,  that  however  the  Chaldeans  and  Ara¬
bians  boaft  that  they  were  the  firft  Searchers  into
the  Myfteries  of  Wifdom  and  Knowledge,  and  that
the  firft  Rudiments  of  the  celeftial  Studies  were
conceiv’d  among  them,  which  yet  does  not  appear
other  than  in  their  Pretences  $  yet  fuppofe  it,  or
fuppofe  we  were  to  grant  it,  we  ftill  find  that  they
went  to  Adgypt  for  their  Practice  and  Encou¬
ragement *  that  perhaps  in  Arabia  they  might
drink  in  the  firft  Knowledge  and  Principles  of
things  \  But  Arabia ,  a  Country  always  poor,  and  not
able  to  give  Encouragement  to  Learning,  as  we

fay


f


of  MAG  I  C  K.

fay  of  a  Neighbouring  Country,  afforded  Nothing
but  the  dry  Study,  they  muff  go  farther  for  the  Im¬
provement  of  it  5  in  fhort  they  might  flay  at  home,
and  get  Knowledge,  but  they  mull  go  abroad  if
they  would  get  Money.

This  was  the  Realbn  that,  as  it  is  at  this  time  fo  nc-
where  elfe,  as  foon  as  the  Poor  Wretches  had  got
a  little  fmattering  of  Arabian ,  Mountain  Wit,  and  a
little  Star-gazing  Knowledge,  away  they  went  to
JEgypt^  and  there  they  fet  up  immediately  for  wife
Men  and  Conjurers,  and  we  fcarce  know  what  of
Philofophers.

The  ^Egyptians ,  a  wealthy  but  from  the  very  Be¬
ginning  a  fuperftitious  kind  of  People,  always  hunt¬
ing  after  fecret  Interpretations,  and  hidden  referved
Events,  poring  upon  rather  than  undedlanding  myfte-
rious  things,  and  loving  to  have  ftrange  Stories  told
them  by  any  one,  efpecially  Foreigners,  gaped  eagerly
after  the  fine  Tales  of  thefe  fecond -lighted  Ara¬
bians^  drank  in  their  Magick  as  it  was  then  called,
and  freely  parted  with  their  Money  to  have  their
Fortunes  told  them,  and  the  Lines  in  their  Palms
explain’d  to  them  by  the  crafty  wandering  Arabs.

On  the  contrary,  the  cunning  Ar tiffs,  that,  tho*
they  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  at  firff,  yet  fee¬
ing  plainly  that  even  that  little  was  efleemed  a
great  deal,  while  the  People  they  talked  with  knew
lefs,  and  finding  the  A "Egyptians  eafie  to  be  impofed
upon,  willing  to  be  cheated,  and  particularly  con¬
tented  to  have  their  Pockets  pick’d  for  the  Satis¬
fying  their  fimple  Curiofity  $  I  fay,  the  cunning
wandering  Strangers  made  a  good  Market  of  them,
grew  rich  and  famous  among  them,  and  kept  up
the  Reputation  of  their  Craft  by  all  the  Subtilties
of  Wit  and  Invention.

This  Succefs  encouraging  their  Studies,  we  may
eafily  fuppofe  they  puflied  into  all  manner  of  na¬
tural  Enquiries,  and  as  far  as  they  were  able  im-

N  4  \  proved


*83


184  A  SYSTEM

proved  themfelves,  and  furnifti’d  their  Heads  with
the  Knowledge  of  human  Things,  fuch  as  Reafon,
Philofophy,  and  natural  Experiments  might  fup-
ply  5  and  at  length  pu filing  at  every  thing,  they
found  the  way,  or  he  found  it  out  for  them,  as  I
have  already  obferv’d,  to  deal  with  the  Devil.  And
thus  we  are  come  at  the  Original  of  Magick,  as  we
now  underhand  the  Word,  that  is  to  fay  of  Diabo¬
lical  Praftices,  or  a  certain  fpreading  of  Delufions
by  the  Afiiftance  of  the  Devil .


CHAP.  VII.

Of  the  T  raff  ice  and  Drogrefs  of  Magick ,
as  it  is  now  explain'd  to  he  a  'Diabolical
Art ;  how  it  fpread  it  felf  in  the  Worlds
and  by  what  Degrees  it  grew  up  to  the
Height  which  it  has  Jince  arriv'd  to .

WE  have  pitch’d  upon  JEgypt  to  be  the  Spot
where  the  firft  hellifh  Ar?ift$  ftudy’d  this
that  I  now  call  Diabolical  Magick.  I  fhall  not  keep
you  long  upon  the  cold  Scent.  It  was  pra&is’d  there
very  early,  and  very  long,  before  we  heard  much  of
it  any  where  elfej  but  when  it  took  a  run,  when
it  darted  from  thence,  we  fhall  foon  hear  of  it  a-
broad  :  For  however  fecret  the  Black  Part  may  be,
and  however  private  the  Magicians  and  their  great
Maher  the  Devil  manag’d  their  Correfpondence,
yet  the  Pra&ice  of  it,  and  the  Game  they  play’d
upon  Mankind  by  it,  was  always  publick  and  open,
as  we  fhall  have  reafon  to  fay,  among  other  Nations,
as  well  as  among  our  own.

As  to  the  Chronology  of  it,  and  when  it  began,
in  what  Ages  of  the  World  thofe  Arabians  began
to  praclife  as  above,  when  they  firft  dealt  in  this

Craft,


of  MAG  I  C  K.  i8y

Craft,  when  the  i Egyptians  began  to  be  their  Scho¬
lars,  and  they  the  Devil's ,  it  is  not  (however ancient)
fo  difficult  to  come  at  the  Knowledge  of  in  ge¬
neral,  as  fome  other  things  in  the  World,  which
yet  we  think  our  felves  very  certain  of.

'The  Scripture,  whether  our  good  Friends  that
read  Books  in  this  Age  will  bear  with  our  quoting
it  in  Matters  of  Religion  or  no,  yet  is  generally
allow’d  to  be  a  tolerable  good  Hiftory.  Nay,  if
we  may  believe  fome  good  Authors,  it  muft  be  al¬
low’d  to  be  the  moll:  ancient  Hiftory,  and  the
Writing  from  which  all  other  Authorities  take  their
Rife  3  that  Mofes  was  long  before  Berofus ,  Homer ,

Hefiod ,  or  in  a  word,  any  of  the  Writers  on  Earth.

Nor  could  it  be  well  otherwife,  if  what  is  lately
advanc’d  is  true,  that  the  firft  Knowledge  of  Let¬
ters  to  write  by,  and  to  read  upon,  was  dictated
to  Mofes  from  Mount  Sinai ,  by  the  immediate  Re¬
velation  of  Heaven.  I  fay  it  could  not  be  otherwife.

For  how  fhould  they  write  before  they  had  Letters,
and  knew  how  to  form  the  found  of  Words  upon
the  Tables,  where  they  were  impreft?

As  Mofes  had  the  firft  Knowledge  of  Letters,  fo
he  had  the  firft  Knowledge  of  Things  too,  and  was
therefore  the  beft  qualified  to  be  a  Collector  of
Antiquities  3  nor  was  it  fo  difficult  a  Matter  for  Mo¬
fes  to  write  a  Hiftoryof  the  Creation,  and  of  all  the
material  Events  of  things  that  had  happen’d  before
his  time,  as  fome  may  imagine:  Since  by  the  Cal¬
culations  of  Time,  Mofes  might  eafily  have  an  Ac¬
count  of  thofe  things  by  a  fucceffive  Supply  of
Oral  Tradition  from  Noah  himfelf,  as  you  may  ga¬
ther  from  the  Times  wherein  he  liv’d,  and  the
Perfons  with  whom  he  had  convers’d  3  of  which
take  the  following  fhort  Sketch,  as  a  leading
Thread  or  Chain  of  things  direftly  confirming  my
Argument,


If


8  6  A  SYSTEM

r

If  Mofes  then  had  the  moil;  early  Knowledge  of
things  by  a  fhort  Succedion  of  the  Perfons  relating
them,  and  that  even  from  Adam  and  Noah  in  a
right  Line*  and  if  Mofes  had  the  fird  Knowledge
of  Letters,  even  immediately  from  a  fuperior  Hand,
then  at  lead  you  mud  allow  me,  that  Mofes  was
certainly  the  bed  qualify’d  to  form  a  Hidory  of
the  fird  things  tranfacied  in  the  World  j  and  was
the  fird  Man,  or  at  lead  the  Man  bed  able  to
write  that  Hidory  down.  For  who  could  form  a
Hidory  of  things  they  did  not  know?  and
who  could  write  before  they  had  Letters  to  form
the  Words  he  was  to  write  by?  and  who  could
read  what  was  written,  unlefs  thofe  Letters  had
been  knowrn,  and  made  puhlick  in  the  World  ?

Hence  I  infer  that  Mofes  was  the  fird  Hi  dorian,
and  the  Books  of  Mofes  are  the  fird  Hidory  in  the
World  5  and  if  the  fird,  confequently  mod  likely
to  be  the  bed  Authority  >  at  lead,  as  I  have  faid  a-
bove  (and  that  my  Readers  may  not  be  pufh’d  upon
too  hard,  to  believe  thofe  Books  which  they  have
fo  ill  a  relidi  of)  I  fay  at  lead,  they  wiil  allow  that
the  Scripture  or  Pentateuch  is  a  tolerable  good  Hi¬
dory,  and  that  is  all  I  ask  of  them  as  a  Favour.

Now  to  begin  with  the  Chronology  of  things;
The  Law  given  to  the  Jews  from  the  Mouth  of
the  Oracle  upon  Mount  Sinai  ^  of  which  Mofes  gives
us  the  Hidory,  was,  according  to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh ,
publifhed  Anno  Mundi  ifi 4.

Jofeph  died  2370,

Mofes  was  born

The  Children  of  Ifrael  came  out  of  ASgypt  if  15.

But  we  find  in  the  Hidory  of  Jofeph ,  and  we
find  by  the  Commands  to  extirpate  Witches  and
Sorcerers,  memion’d  in  the  fird  Law  given  the
Ifraelites *  I  fay,  we  find  the  Pra&ice  of  Diaboli¬
cal  Magick  was  much  more  ancient  than  Mofes ,
nay  than  Jofeph ,  and  that  it  was  pra&is’d  fo  long


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.  187

ago,  not  only  in  ALgypt^  but  in  Phoenicia  alfo  5  and
perhaps  in  the  laft,  as  Toon  as  in  the  firft.

Firft,  It  Teems  that  God  refolv’d  to  drive  out  the
Phoenicians ,  that  is  the  Canaanites ,  before  the  Chil¬
dren  of  Ifrael ,  even  for  this  very  Offence  among
others  >  and  I  cannot  come  up  to  the  modern  rate
of  Scepticifm,  as  to  believe  God  would  have  driven
them  out  of  their  Country,  for  a  Crime  which
they  were  not  guilty  of  5  and  efpecially  too,  that
he  would  have  affign’d  that  for  a  Rcafon  of  it,
which  the  poor  People  could  have  flood  up  and  clear’d
themfelves  of,  and  have  faid  they  did  not  under-
(land  what  it  was.

This  goes  far  to  a  Suggeflion,  that  the  Canaa-
nites  were  guilty  of  it  even  four  hundred  Years  be¬
fore,  and  before  God’s  Promife  to  Abram  to  give
him  that  Country  5  or  elfe  we  rnufl  fuppofe  the  Ca¬
naanites  condemned  to  an  Explufion  before  the
Crime  for  which  they  were  to  be  expell’d  was
committed  5  and  I  can  no  more  come  into  that  than
the  other.

Certainly,  God’s  Promife  to  turn  out  the  Inha¬
bitants  for  Abram's  Poflerity  mufl  be  allow’d  to
be  a  Sentence  of  Condemnation  upon  the  Canaa¬
nites  even  at  that  time  $  and  he  would  not  have  con¬
demned  them  to  Banifhment,  I  mean  as  a  Nation,
for  Crimes  which  they  were  not  even  then  guilty
ofj  efpecially  that  very  Crime  being  aflign’d  as  the
Caufe  of  their  faid  Condemnation  and  Sentence.

If  this  Argument  is  juft,  as  I  think  it  mufl  be,
then  I  have  gain’d  the  Point  as  to  the  Antiquity  \
for  then  this  Crime  of  Diabolical  Magickis  as  ancient
as  Abrams  and  ’tis  evident  Abram  was  born  above
fifty  fix  Years  before  Noah  died.  How  long  this
wicked  Trade  was  known  before  Abram ,  we  can¬
not  determine,  but  may  grant  it  might  be  forac
confiderable  time.

It


1


1 8  s  A  SYSTEM

It  is  certain  however  that  in  the  Reign  of  Miz-
raim ,  who  was  but  the  Grandfon  of  Noah ,  they
were  grown  very  confiderable,  I  mean  as  to  their
Reputation,  in  the  j. Egyptian  Court  y  and  I  am  wil¬
ling  to  fuppofe  my  old  Arab  was  one  of  the  Chief,
if  not  one  of  the  firft  of  them  in  Mizraim* s  Reign,
and  perhaps  near  the  Beginning  of  it :  For  as  the
Devil  introduc’d  himfelf  as  it  were  Voluntier  to
him,  it  fhould  feem  that  he  had  no  Correfpondents
of  that  kind  there  before,  and  took  that  Method  to
begin  his  Acquaintance  5  perhaps  allowing  his
Correfpondents  to  convey  the  fame  Method  of  In¬
telligence  from  one  to  another,  and  perhaps  to  re¬
new  the  Contradt  as  often  as  he  their  Inftrudtor
thought  fit.

But  be  that  how  it  will,  ’tis  certain  the  Devil
muft  beAggreflor,  in  all  Ages,  of  this  Art.  He  knew
well  enough  how  to  break  in  upon  them,  how  to
fhow  himfelf,  and  make  his  Appearances  to  them
as  often  as  he  thought  fit  j  and  could  begin  it,  or
renew  it,  how,  and  whenever  he  pleas’d.  But  the
Cafe  was  quite  different  on  their  Side,  for  no  body
knew  how  to  come  at  him,  they  did  not  fo  much
as  know  him  when  they  faw  him,  or  know  where
he  liv’d,  where  he  kept  his  Refidencej  how  to  go
to  him,  or  fend  to  him  5  or,  in  a  word,  to  have  any
Correfpondence  with  him,  but  juft  as  he  thought
fit  to  enter  into  a  Familiarity  with  them,  and  give
them  Methods  and  Rules  by  which  they  fhould  ob¬
tain  Audience  of  him,  when,  and  as  often  as  they
had  occafion.

This  being  the  cafe,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder’d  that
the  Devil,  and  thofe  Men  of  Crafr,  became  ac¬
quainted  very  foon  in  the  World  j  for  the  Devil  is
too  diligent  to  negle6t  his  own  Affairs  any  longer
than  till  they  were  ripe  for  his  Agitation.

Having  then  brought  all  the  Southfaying  and  Ma-
gick  of  the  firft  Ages  as  it  were  within  his  own

Manage-


I


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

Management,  and  eftablifh’d  a  Correfpondcnce  with
the  wife  Men  of  the  moil  early  Times,  we  are
next  to  examine  how  it  proceeded,  and  what  Pro-
grefs  it  made:  And  in  making  this  Inquiry, it  comes
directly  in  my  way  to  tell  you  a  very  unhappy
Truth  ^  namely,  that  the  Clergy  of  thofe  times
feem  to  me  to  be  the  firft  Conjurers,  and  Dealers  with
the  Devil 3  andfoin  all  the  fubfequent  Times,  and  in
all  or  moll  of  the  Diflant  Nations  of  the  World  3  I
mean  next  immediately  after  thofe  ^Egyptian  Pro¬
ficients.

I  hope  our  Moil  Reverend,  and  Right  Reverend
of  the  facerdotal  Order  in  thefe  Days,  and  in  this
wife  Magical  Age,  will  take  no  Offence  at  me  for
this,  at  icafl  till  I  have  farther  and  fully  explain’d
my  felf.  Far  be  it  from  us  (and  fad  would  be  our
Circum fiances  fhould  I  venture)  to  fuggefl  that  any
of  our  Clergy  fhould  be  Conjurers,  and  deal  in
Magick :  no,  1103  plenty  of  Grace,  and  paucity  of
Brains,  I  hope,  is  our  eftablifh’d  Proteftion  from
fuch  a  difmal  Eruption  as  that  would  be  upon
us.

In  order  therefore  to  explain  my  felf  fully  upon
this  Subje£l,  I  mull  go  back  to  the  early  Ages  of
the  World,  even  juft  where  I  was  before.  The
Devil ,  after  the  Flood,  obferving  the  World  begin
to  fill,  and  that  the  People  fpreading  themfelves
over  it,  began  to  People  it  again,  and  form  them¬
felves  into  Nations,  and  Governments 3  one  of  his  x
firft  Cares  was  to  debauch  their  Principles  as  to
Religion,  to  dictate  falfe  Notions  of  Homage  and
Worfhip  to  them,  and,  in  a  word,  to  introduce  Ido¬
latry.

As  he  knew  perfectly  well  the  End  he  aim’d  at,
fo  he  was  not  at  a  lols  to  find  out  the  Means.  It
would  be  too  long  a  Story  to  tell  you,  in  what
manner  he  found  out  Gods  for  them  to  worfhip,
tnd  how  he  canoniz’d  their  Heroes  for  them.  The

Tale


ipo


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

*

I

Tale  of  Ninus  or  Nimrod  appearing  to  the  wife
Men  in  a  Flame  of  Fire,  and  telling  them,  he  was
going  jull:  then  up  into  Heaven,  from  whence  he
would  always  fhine  upon  them  in  the  Shape  of  a
Star,  and  that  they  fliould  build  a  Temple  to  the
glory  of  his  Memory  j  that  he  fhould  be  call’d
j Baal  or  Bell ,  which  is  as  much  as  to  fay  a  great
God ,  and  that  he  would  be  always  ready  to  help
them  againft  their  Enemies,  as  he  was  to  fight  for
them  while  he  was  alive ,

I  fay,  this  Tale,  fuppofe  it  but  a  Tale,  was  not
at  all  unlikely  to  take  with  the  People,  who  had
the  Memory  of  their  dead  Hero-King  frefh  in  their
Thought,  and  who  were  ready  to  idolize  the  very
empty  Sound  of  his  Name.  Suppofe  the  wife  Men
as  they  call’d  them,  only  feign’d,  or  forg’d  this  Story,
and  reported  it  to  the  People  as  a  Vifion  which
they  had  really  feen,  tho’  they  had  not  feen  it  at
all,  yet  it  was  not  unlikely  to  make  Impreflions  upon
them,  in  their  firft  Ignorance  of  things.

But  fuppofe,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Devil ^  who
is  always  awake,  fliould  have  really  fhownhimfelf  in
fuch  an  Appearance,  and  then  have  drawn  in  the
wife  Magicians  of  that  Age,  upon  feeing  fuch  a
Sight  frightful  and  horrid  like  the  Devils  that  form’d
it,  to  relate  (as  they  might  with  Truth,)  the
Fa6b  to  the  People  :  It  was  not  at  all  ftrange,  that
the  wife  Men  mention’d  fliould  go  to  the  King
with  that  Story  alfo  j  and  that  he  the  King,  bi-
gotted  by  the  Magicians ,  and  terrify’d  as  they  were,
fliould  immediately  order  a  Temple  to  be  erefted,
Sacrifices  to  be  appointed,  and  a  formal  Worfhip
let  on  foot,  to  the  Honour  of  this  great  God  Bell ,
whofe  Memory  was  fo  high  in  their  Efteem  be¬
fore.

Hiftory  is  very  full  of  the  firfi:  Fury  of  idola¬
trous  Zeai,  and  of  the  extravagant  Branches  of
their  Devotion,  I  mean  in  their  Princes.  Ninus

built


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

built  a  Houfe  for  the  Worftiip  of  Belly  the  Walls
and  Towers  are  a  Prodigy  in  themfelves*  what  the
manner  of  Worftiip  was  we  do  not  read,  tho’  af¬
terwards  we  have  the  Defcription  of  their  abomi¬
nable  Rites,  as  the  Sacrifices  to  Moloch y  viz.  making
their  Children  to  pafs  through  the  Fire  5  whether
they  were  burnt  to  Death,  or  horribly  fcorcht,  Au¬
thors  do  not  yet  refolve  us.  The  King  of  Moab
facrific’d  his  Son,  the  Heir  Apparent  of  his  Throne,
upon  the  Walls  of  the  City,  only  to  obtain  Delive¬
rance  from  the  Siege  by  the  help  of  his  Idol,
at  the  Price  of  his  Son’s  Blood.

As  thofe  Idols  were  introduc’d  by  the  Art  of  the
Devily  fo  it  muft  be  that  the  Diredtion  came  from
him  5  1  mean  as  to  the  manner  of  the  Idol-worfhip,
and  that  he  certainly  held  an  immediate  Correfpon-
dence  with  the  Inftitutors  and  Managers  of  the
Idol  Rites.

Thefe  were  the  Magicians  and  Aftrologers,  who
by  his  Diredtions  were  inftrudted  what  Cere¬
monies,  what  Rites,  what  manner  of  Worftiip  to
offer  to  their  Gods  5  and  as  they  confulted  the  Ma¬
gicians  for  the  Inftitution  of  their  Worftiip,  fo  in
a  few  Ages  after  the  Magicians  or  Southfayers
were  their  Priefts,  and  their  Priefts  were  all  Ma¬
gicians  and  Southfayers.  Hence  the  Aurufpices,
the  Sacrificers,  and  the  Priefts  of  the  feveral  Tem¬
ples,  where  Anfwers  were  given  to  Queftions,  E-
vents  predidted,  and  the  like,  were  the  Givers  of
thofe  Anfwers  from  the  Oracle  5  that  is  in  plain
EngliJljy  the  Priefts  were  Magicians,  and  the  Magi¬
cians  were  the  Priefts,  and  the  Devil  brought
Witchcraft  and  Idolatry  to  be  at  laft  but  one  Sci¬
ence.

As  he  correfponded  perfonally  with  Ali  Albraha -
zeny  and  the  old  Araby  in  the  Infancy  of  time,  and
when  his  Kingdom  was,  as  it  were,  but  juft  eredting
and  fetting  up  in  the  World,  fo  when  that  Perfonai

Cor  re-


jpz


A  SYSTEM

Correfpondence  appear’d  fuccefsful  in  fetting  up  F-
dolatry,  he  made  in  equally  ufeful  for  the  Propa¬
gating  it,  and  the  Magicians  became  Priefts  in  the
Temples  of  their  Gods.

Nothing  could  be  more  agreeable  to  the  Priefts
of  their  Idols,  than  this  Intimacy  with  the  Infer¬
nal  Spirits  >  for  the  Devil ,  who  was  always  his
Craft’s  Mailer,  fail’d  not  as  well  to  delude  the
Priefts  themfelves,  as  by  them  to  impofe  upon  the
World;  nor  could  he  have  carry’d  on  his  Game
upon  Mankind  without  it.  For  if  the  Priefts  had
not  believ’d  that  they  convers’d  with  the  Gods,
when  really  they  convers’d  with  the  Devil ;  if  they
had  been  all  let  into  the  Secret,  and  made  to  pro¬
pagate  their  Religion  as  a  Cheat  upon  the  World,  to
which  they  were  to  have  been  privy  ;  if  it  had  all  been
known  to  be,  as  it  really  was,  a  Confpiracy  againft
Heaven  in  Favour  of  the  Devil ,  and  with  real  De-
fign  to  impofe  upon  and  damn  the  World,  they
would  never  have  been  brought  univerfally  to  have
kept  the  Devil's  Council,  and  have  come  into  the
Plot,  at  the  Price  of  their  eternal  Felicity,  and  the
Souls  of  ail  their  Friends.

The  Devil's  Plot  would  certainly  have  been  blown
long  before  it  was,  and  the  Priefts  of  the  Oracles
would  moft  certainly  have  firft  or  laft  have  betray’d
their  Mafter,and  expos’d  the  whole  Cheat.  But  the
Cafe  was  evidently  this,  the  Devil  found  the  way  to
delude  and  impofe  upon  the  very  Priefts  themfelves  ;
and  not  only  fuggefted  to  them,  but  made  them
really  believe,  that  the  Gods  convers’d  with  them,
that  the  Voices  they  heard,  the  Anfwers  dilated
by  their  Oracles,  the  Apparitions,  &c.  were  all  the
real  Appearances  of  their  Gods,  thofe  in  particular
whofe  Servants  and  Priefts  they  were;  when  in
Truth  it  was  no  more  than  a  grofs  Delufion,  and  an
Appearance  of  the  Devil.


I


I


of  M  AGIO  K.

I  make  no  doubt,  but  that  the  Tumult  rais’d  by
the  Silverfmiths  at  Eploefus ,  tho’  they  in  particular
were  touch’d  with  the  fenfe  of  their  Intereft,  and
the  lofs  of  their  Craft  and  Trade,  yet  was  carry’d
on  in  the  Sincerity  of  their  Ignorance  by  thofe  who
call’d  her  the  Great  Goddefs  Diana ,  whom  they  and
all  the  World  vuorjhipp'd 5  that  they  who  cry’d  Great
Is  Diana  of  the  Ephefians ,  believ’d  her  to  be  fo,
and  had  not  the  lead:  Notion  of  their  worftupping
the  Devil.

I  doubt  not  but  the  Priefts  of  Apollo  at  Delphos ,
who  waited  there  to  give  out  the  Anfwers  to  the
feveral  Enquirers  that  came  with  their  Gifts  to  the
Oracle, believ’d  that  the  faid  Oracles  were  iffued  by  the
Gods,  and  efpecially  by  Apollo  himfelfj  and  little
thought  that  they  (the  Priefts)  were  Tools  of  the
Devil ,  to  cheat  and  amufe  the  World,  and  propa¬
gate  Idolatry  j  for  which  the  true  God,  who  was
highly  affronted  in  the  Fraud,  would  one  Day  put
them  all  to  Silence.

Thus  far,  I  think  the  Clergy  are  beholden  to  me
Very  much,  for  eftabliftiing  their  Honefty  at  the
Expence  of  their  Heads,  and  telling  you  they  were
all  Fools,  rather  than  Knaves.  At  the  fame  time  it
holds  ftill,  and  this  part  can  never  be  deny’d,  that
as  the  Devil  carry’d  on  his  Kingdom  by  the  Art
Magick,  or  what  we  call  the  Black  Art ,  fo  the
Priefts  were  the  Inftruments  both  of  the  Witchcraft
and  the  Idolatry.

How  far  the  two  Infernal  Juggles  are  ftill  car«
ried  on,  and  whether  the  Priefts  in  moft  Parts  of
the  World  (our  own,Godblefs  us!  always  excepted)
are  not  Magicians,  and  Dealers  with  the  Devil ,
even  in  their  Sacreds,  and  by  the  meer  Confe-
quence  of  their  Office  5  let  the  Padres  and  Men  of
the  Tonfure  tell  us,  and  give  us  Satisfaction  if  they
can.


A  SYSTEM

We  have  now  brought  the  Magicians  of  Mgypt,
and  the  Priefts  of  the  Pagan  Temples  to  be  fome-
tbing  a-kin  ;  at  lead  we  may  fay,  I  have  brought  them
to  be  all  of  a  Trade;  and  f  believe  ’tis  not  very  dif¬
ficult  to  fhow  you,  that  as  they  ferv’d  the  fame  Matter,
fo  they  had  their  Inftru£tions  by  the  very  fame
Channel,  and  from  the  fame  Original:  In  a  word,
that  the  Worfhip  of  the  Gods,  which  was  indeed
the  Worfhip  of  the  Devil ,  was  dictated  in  the  very
fame  way,  namely,  by  an  immediate  Correfpon-
dence  with  the  Devil,  and  with  all  the  Circumftan-
ces  mention’d  in  the  Text  before  quoted;  (viz.)
Divination,  Inchantment,  Conjuration,  Appariti¬
on,  Vifion,  Dream,  Familiar  Spirits,  obferving
Times,  obferving  Seafons,  and  flying  of  Birds,  En¬
trails  of  Beafts,  and  the  like.

It  may  feem  a  little  difficult  to  bring  all  the
Schemes  of  Idol  or  Pagan  Worfhip  down  to  a
Level  with  Witchcraft  and  Diabolical  Magick ;
and  fome  will  tell  us,  that  feveral  Parts  of  the
Pagan  Worfhip,  or  even  Paganifm  in  general,  was
eftablifh’d  upon  pure  and  juft  Principles,  an  exadfc
and  regular  Virtue,  the  height  of  Morals,  prin¬
ciples  of  Truth,  and  of  natural  Religion,  of  good
Government,  and  of  Dedication  to  the  publick
Welfare  of  Mankind;  nay  even  upon  Principles  of
Piety,  and  a  Homage  to  be  paid  to  the  Divine  Be¬
ing,  as  the  firft  moving  Caufeof  Life,  and  as  a  Debt
due  to  that  Being,  for  all  the  good  attending  Hu¬
man  Life;  that  nothing  has  been  wanting  in  fome
Pagans  but  a  Revelation  from  Heaven,  and  an  open¬
ing  the  Eyes  of  the  Soul  by  Divine  Infpiration,
to  know  the  Only  True  God.

Thofe  that  are  of  this  Opinion,  fupport  it  by  the
Example  of  Numa  Pompilius ,  the  Founder  of  the
Roman  Rites,  and  to  whom  the  eftablifhing  the
greater  part  of  the  Pagan  Ceremonies  is  juftly  af-
fign’d ;  who,  they  tell  us,  afted  upon  the  higheft

Princi-


Principles  of  Morality  and  Virtue,  and  even  of
Piety  5  that  he  went  even  to  the  utmoft  length
that  Nature  and  Reafon  could  go  j  that  he  not  only
acknowledg’d  a  Supreme  Power,  to  whom  Man¬
kind  ow’d  his  Homage  for  the  good  receiv’d,  and
who  would  not  fail,  in  a  Life  to  come,  to  diftribute
Rewards  and  Punifhments,  agreeable  to  the  Life
and  Conduft  of  every  Man  here  :  But  own’d  alfo  that
Worfhip  as  a  Natural  Debt,  to  be  paid  by  all  Man¬
kind  5  hence  upon  the  Door  of  the  Temple  of  the
feveral  Gods  he  caus’d  to  be  written,  as  a  Dire&ion
to  all  Mankind,  this  fhort  Precept,  a  Jove  princi*
plum  >  intimating  that  every  Action  of  Man’s  Life
fhould  be  begun  with  Application  to  the  Gods.
They  add,  that  Numa  had  a  profound  fincere  Ve¬
neration  for  the  Creator  of  all  things,  as  the
Author  of  Life,  and  the  fupreme  God  of  Heaven
and  Earth,  and  that  he  wanted  nothing  to  be  a
fincere  Worfliipper  of  the  true  God,  but  a  true
Revelation  from  Heaven,  inlightning  his  Mind,  and
guiding  him  to  know  what  way  of  Worfhip  that
God  would  be  pleafed  to  accept.

They  give  us  feveral  other  Examples  of  Great
and  Illuftrious  Men,  who  tho’  profefs’d  Heathens
in  the  manner  of  Worfhip,  and  the  immediate  Ob¬
ject,  yet  form’d  their  Notions  upon  juft  and  noble
Principles,  flri£tly  adhering  to  the  natural  Princi¬
ples  of  Religion,  clofely  purfuing  Juftice  in  Go¬
vernment,  Impartiality  in  matters  of  Right,  pre¬
ferring  Virtue  and  Honour  in  the  People,  and  ma¬
king  wholfom  Laws  for  their  better  Government,
upon  all  Occafions  $  fuch  are  Lycurgus  the  Lacedamo-
nian ,  Confucius  the  Cbinefe ,  Solon  the  wife  Philofo-
pher,  and  fundry  others.

They  alfo  name  to  us  the  Books  of  the  Sybils ,
which,  fo  far  as  they  are  difcover’d,  they  fay  are
fill’d  with  fummary  Rules  for  well- governing  Man¬
kind,  and  directing  a  due  Homage  to  the  great  God.

O  z  But


rA  SYSTEM

Bat  let  us  look  thfo*  all  this.  God  for  wife
Ends  did  not  think  fit  to  accept  thefe  little  Ema¬
nations  of  Natural  Light,  or  to  reveal  himfelf  to
the  Perfons  *  however  fincere  they  may  be  faid  to
be  in  the  purfuit  of  Divine  Light*  as  then  they
were  left  to  the  dim  and  dusky  Shadows  of  natu¬
ral  Reafonings  only,  fo  it  appear’d  that  thofe  natural
Reafonings  were  notfufficient  to  inform  the  Mind  of
Man  concerning  God  *  But  that  when  they  had
done  all,  for  want  of  farther  Illuminations,  the  Z>m7
was  fuffer’d  to  chop  in,  and  confound  all  their
brighteft  Ideas  of  Worftiip,  with  a  horrid  Rhap-
fody  of  complicated  Idolatry.

This  very  Obfervation  is  fufficient,  or  at  leaft
it  might  be  expe&ed  chat  it  fhould  be  fufficient,  to
crufti  the  Notions  which  our  more  Polite  Gentle¬
men  now  advance,  in  favour  of  the  ftudy  of  Ma-
gick,  as  an  Art  or  Science  only*  They  con¬
tend  that  the  Word  Magick  is  greatly  miftaken,
and  that  we  do  not  underftand  what  we  fpeak  of  5  that
Magick  is  nothing  elfe  but  a  receiv’d  well-guided
way  of  thinking  and  acting  *  that  it  is  truly  the
Science  of  Refle&ion,  and  the  Art  of  making  a
right  Judgment  of  things,  by  giving  every  Obje6t,
however  diftant,  its  due  Weight*  thinking  of  things
according  to  the  true  Rate  of  them  5  that  the  hu¬
mane  Judgment  is  in  its  felf  infallible,  and  therefore
in  fome  manner  equal  to  the  divine  Being*  a  Light
iflued  from  Heaven,  and  darted  by  Emanation  into
the  Souls  of  Men*  which,  if  rightly  cultivated  and
improv’d,  and  efpecially  if  fincerely  follow’d,  ad¬
her’d  to,  and  obey’d,  guides  the  Soul  to  underftand
things  in  a  fuperior  way*  This  they  fay  is  Magick:
the  very  Word  which  intimates  a  luperior  and  di¬
vine  Knowledge,  leads  to  underftand  what  it
means*  and  this,  fay  they,  duly  follow’d,  would
from  the  Beginning  have  made  Men  be,  as  the  Ser¬
pent  told  them  they  fhould  be,  viz*  like  Gods,
knowing  Good  and  Eyil  Now


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

Now  thefe  fine-fpun  Notions  or  Imaginations,  I
fay,  are  fully  anfwer’d,  by  taking  Notice,  that  there
is  apparently  no  fuch  Infallibility  in  Man’s  Judg¬
ment,  unlefs  affifted  by  a  yet  higher  and  fuperior
degree  of  Illumination *  that  is  to  fay,  unlefs  God,
the  Author  of  all  perfeft  and  compleat  Illumina¬
tion,  fhould  add  to  it  the  Revelation  of  himfelf,
and  of  his  Mind  and  Will,  giving  the  Man  Rules
and  Laws  for  his  farther  Illumination,  and  for
the  Dire&ion  of  himfelf.

This  appears  in  the  Particular  mention’d  above,
namely,  that  notwithftanding  Man’s  infallible  Judg¬
ment  led  him  to  the  Knowledge  of  a  Divine  Be¬
ing,  and  that  there  was  a  great  firfb  Caufe,  Infi¬
nite,  Eternal  and  Superior,  becaufe  Prior  to  all  Be¬
ing,  and  that  this  firlt  Being  had  a  Right  to  the
Homage  and  Obedience  of  his  Creatures  j  yet  ’till
God  by  Revelation  directed  it,  all  the  Perfe&ion
of  human  Judgment  could  never  lead  Mankind  to  a
right  Knowledge  of  the  Worfhip  and  Homage
this  Great  Being  requir’d.  But  they  funk  down  in¬
to  Idolatry,  worfliipping  many  Gods,  and  Images,
the  Representations  of  Gods  5  and  in  a  word,  into
the  grofleft  and  dulldi  Conceptions  of  things  re¬
lating  to  their  Deities,  fuch  as  one  would  think  it  was
impoflible  humane  Judgment,  under  any  manner  of
Improvement,  could  fall  into  5  things  unworthy  of
God,  nay  unworthy  of  Men.  Hence  they  made
their  Jupiter ,  tho’  they  call’d  him  the  Father  of
Gods  and  Men,  a  horrid  Pi&ure  of  ungovern’d  Luft,
a  Ravager  of  the  World,  ravifhing  Innocence  and
Virtue,  transforming  himfelf  into  divers  Shapes,  to
obtain  his  vicious  Defires  5  as  into  a  white  Bull,  to
carry  away  Europa\  into  a  golden  Shower,  to  fall
into  the  Lap  of  Dana and  the  like.  Here  is  the
Pifture  of  infallible  humane  Judgment !  Wonder  no
more  that  at  laft  it  carry’d  them  all  headlong  into
the  Arms  of  the  Devil ,  and  not  only  to  be  ignorant

O  3  of


1 97


/


A  ST  S  T  E  M

of  the  Worfhip  of  the  true  God,  but  to  pay  the
Homage  they  ow'd  to  their  Maker,  to  him  who
was  their  Deftroyer  and  Enemy.

Thus  Numa ,  with  all  his  Sincerity  and  Piety,  re-
folv’d  all  his  Ideas  into  a  confus’d  Mafs  of  idola-

i

trous  Ceremonies,  adorning  the  Priefts,  forming
new  Orders  and  Degrees  of  his  Clergy  5  and,  in  a
word,  drawing  a  Scheme  of  pompous  Paganifm>
eftablifhing  Games,  and  inhumane  Fightings  of
Gladiators,  Races  and  Exercifes  for  Sport,  in  Ho¬
nour  of  the  Gods :  Befides  crowding  the  City  with
Temples  and  Altars,  to  innumerable  and  unknown
Deities  5  fo  that,  in  a  word,  after  he  had  acknowledg’d
that  there  was  a  fupreme  Power,  a  G  o  d  of  all  the
Earth,  a  great  firft  Caufe  of  Life,  and  to  whom  all
Homage  was  due,  I  fay,  after  all  thefe  fublime
Ideas,  he  yet  funk  down  into  the  grofteft  of  all  Ido¬
latries,  the  worftiipping  imaginary  Gods,  deifying
the  Stars  of  Heaven,  and  offering  Sacrifices,  build¬
ing  Temples,  dedicating  Priefts,  and  making  Vows
to  Stocks  and  Stones,  the  Work  of  their  own
Fingers,  and  the  Idols  of  their  own  Brain.

Will  any  one  think  we  wrong  the  Pagan  Inftitu-
tions,  much  Ids  the  Inftitutors,  to  fay,  that  the
Devil  had  a  Finger  in  all  this?  does  not  Satan  in
Policy  fuffer  an  Appearance  of  Virtue  and  Piety
to  be  fet  up,  to  mock  the  World  into  true  Devil*
worfhip?  How  could  he  fet  himfelf  up  to  be
worfhip’d  as  a  God ,  and  how  could  he  make  himfelf
truly  the  GW  of  this  World,  if  he  did  not  enjoin  to
his  Worfhippers,  at  leaft  feemingly,  fome  Forms  of
Life,  and  appearing  Principles,  agreeable  to  the
Rules  of  Virtue  and  Honour  ?  ’Tis  by  this  that  in
general  he  has  carry’d  on  the  Delufion,  and  this,  as  I
may  fay,  has  been  the  Magick  of  his  Art,  as  well
as  the  Art  of  his  Magick.

The  Romans  were  the  mo  ft  civiliz’d  Heathens
that  the  World  ever  faw$  their  Government  had


of  MAGIC  K.

in  it  all  the  Appearance  of  Juftice  and  Moderation  3
they  honour’d  and  rewarded  Virtue  and  Honour,
Love  to  our  Country,  Courage,  Gallantry :  How
did  they  crown  thofe  that  fav’d  a  Citizen,  give
Triumphs  to  thofe  that  had  conquer’d  their  Ene¬
mies,  give  Prizes  to  thofe  who  excell’d  in  the  moft
commendable  Things?  How  did  they  honour  Cha-
ftity  in  their  Veftal  Virgins  3  Temperance,  Elo¬
quence,  Learning  and  Philofophy  in  the  Perfons  of
thofe  that  excelled,  and  ere£t  Statues  to  their  Me¬
mory  when  dead  ?

Yet  all  this  while  their  Religion  was  Devil- wor-
fliip  3  their  Augurs  and  Southfayers,  and  the  Priefts
of  their  Temples  and  Oracles,  were  Diviners,  Ma¬
gicians^  Wizards,  and  in  the  very  Letter  of  it  Deal¬
ers  with  the  Devil ,  and  that  in  the  word:  Senle  3  all
their  Sacrifices,  and  their  Inftitution  of  Games,  for
appealing  the  angry  Gods,  were  the  moft  horrid
and  barbarous  Pieces  of  Ignorance,  or  hellilh  Cru¬
elty  and  Brutality,  that  could  be  imagin’d,  even
fometimes  to  human  Sacrifices  3  and  in  all  thofe  ex-
cefles  of  their  Devotion,  the  Devil  led  them  on
blinded  by  ftrong  Delufions  to  fuch  Performances,
in  order  to  appeafe  the  Wrath  of  Heaven,  as  were
unworthy  of  God,  inconfiftent  with  his  Nature,  as
a  bountiful  beneficent  Being,  as  a  fountain  of  Good-
nefs  and  Mercy,  infinitely  Compaffionate  to  his
Creatures  3  and  who  could  not  take  Pleafure  in
thofe  things  which  were  injurious  to  Mankind,
in  order  to  be  reconcil’d  to  them,  or  be  pacify’d
by  deftroying  thofe,  whom  it  was  his  glory  to  lave
and  proteft.

All  the  while  that  they  erefled  Temples  to  Ju¬
ftice,  to  Honour,  to  Virtue,  and  to  Peace,  they
ft  tidied  all  poffible  ways,  by  War,  and  Blood,  to  a-
mafs  Treasures,  and  enlarge  their  Empire,  ’till,
as  the  Roman  Hiftories  confefs,  they  left  no  Na¬
tion  unfubdued,  except  fuch  as  they  found  it  not  in

O  4  their


l99


/


too


A  SYSTEM


%


their  Power,  or  worth  their  while  to  Conquer \
that  is  to  fay,  fuch  as  the  Parthians who  were  too
powerful  for  them  to  conquer,  and  fo  poor  when
conquer’d,  as  not  to  be  worth  the  Attempt  5  or  the
Indians  and  ^Ethiopians ,  who  tho’  rich,  yet  were  fo
remote  and  fenc’d  by  wide  unpaffable  Defarts,  and
protefbed  by  the  exceffive  Heat  of  the  Climate,  fo
that  it  was  not  in  their  Power  to  affault  them.
Their  Armies  were  not  able  to  endure  the  March
thro’  the  Libyan  Sands,  or  over  the  Mountains  and
vaft  Waters  of  India^  under  or  near  the  Equinox,
and  where  there  was  nothing  to  fhelter  or  relieve
them  under  the  exceffive  apd  violent  Force  of  the
Sun.

All  the  reft  of  the  World,  as  I  have  faid,  they
continually  invaded  and  fubdued,  and  matter’d  not
the  Reafon  and  Juftice  of  the  War,  if  the  Reward
of  their  Treafures,  and  the  Advantage  of  Govern¬
ing  them,  was  apparent.

Thus  Cafar  invaded  the  Gauls ,  the  Helvetian x,
the  Germans ,  without  any  juft  Pretence  of  making
War,  except  only  that  of  Conqueft,  Plunder  and
Dominion.  What  Pretence  of  War  had  the  Romans
againft  a  quiet,  a  remote,  an  inoffenfive  Nation,  as
the  Britains  certainly  were?  They  neither  offer’d
to  difturb  the  Aoman  Government,  or  were  in
Condition  to  do  it  $  having  no  Knowledge  of  Arms
equal  to  any  fuch  Attempt,  no  Alliances  or  Cor-
refpondence  with  any  of  the  Romans  Enemies,  no
Ships  to  traverfe  the  Ocean,  and  make  them  ter¬
rible.


Nothing  call’d  Ctefar  over  hither  to  invade  the
innocent  Britains ,  but  thirft  of  Glory,  and  enlarg¬
ing  Dominion  *  a  Principle  imbib’d  from  the
tyrannick  Nature  of  the  Devil 5  to  raife  humane
Glory,  not  by  Deeds  truly  Great,  not  by  virtuous
Actions,  but  by  deftroyingand  infulting  the  Weak
in  Prefumption  of  Strength,  and  by  fhedding

Blood


of  MAGI  C  K.

Blood  to  triumph  over  the  Wrongs  and  Opprefi*
fion  of  their  Fellow- Creatures.

And  what  was  the  Reward  of  C<efar\  Ambition
andThirft  of  Glory?  A  Conqueft  indeed  he  gain’d  *
but  of  what,  and  for  whom  ?  a  Conqueft  of  Inno¬
cence,  and  a  Conqueft  for  the  Devil  j  the  fruit  of
which  was  thus  to  be  fumm’d  up:  They,  flrft  and
Jaft,  deftroyed  two  Millions,  fome  think  five  or  fix
Millions,  of  the  Inhabitants  5  they  fpilt  alfo  an  Ocean
Roman  Blood  5  eighty  thoufand  Romans  were  killed
at  one  time  by  the  gallant  Queen  Roadicia  at  Ca~
molodinum ,  now  Malden  in  EJfe x\  and  after  a  Poi-
feffion  of  above  fix  hundred  Years,  they  were  forc’d
to  abandon  it  with  Infamy  and  Scandal,  and  fo  end¬
ed  juft  where  they  began.

Whence  was  all  this,  but  from  the  Devil  ?  whofq
Government  of  the  World  had  this  Magick  in¬
deed  always  in  it,  that  it  fpread  Cruelty  and  Ty¬
ranny  in  all  Parts,  founded  Dominion  in  Blood,  and
made  the  World  a  Theatre  of  Rapin  and  Vio¬
lence.  .

This  was  the  fecret  Magick  of  his  Government,
and  yet  this  was  always  carried  on  under  the  Mask
of  Juftice,  Peace  and  Religion  5  that  is  to  fay,  Avar
rice  was  juftice,  and  to  gain  the  Plunder  of  a  Na¬
tion  was  a  fufficient  Pretence  to  quarrel  with  and
fubdue  it:  Conqueft  then  brought  Peace j  that  is  tq
fay,  when  Rapin  or  Slaughter  had  impoverifti’d  or
extirpated  a  People,  then  the  Romans  gave  them
Peace,  and  prote&ed  the  Remnant  >  and  as  to  Reli¬
gion,  the  Subftance  of  it  was,  as  above,  Cruelty
and  Superftition.

This  is  the  Sum  of  the  Roman  Polity ,  and  of  the
Methods  taken  in  a  Government  and  by  a  People
who,  as  above,  are  faid  to  be  the  moft  civilized  of
all  the  Pagan  Nations  and  Governments  in  the
World  3  and  this,  in  a  word,  ferves  to  open  the
Eyes  of  Pofterity,  and  betrays  the  Devil's  Gonfpi-

racy


201


2QZ


A  SYSTEM

racy  againft  Mankind  in  the  opened  manner  pop*
liblc.  The  Magick  of  Hell  difeovers  it  felf  here,
that  under  the  fpecious  Pretence  of  juft  Govern¬
ment,  and  under  the  Fame  of  a  civiliz’d  Nation,
governing  themfelves  and  the  World  by  the  Rules
of  Juftice  and  Virtue,  a  Loofe  was  given  to  all  man-
der  of  Barbarifms,  Cruelty,  Blood  and  Oppreflion.

It  is  clear  in  fo  many  Examples,  that  I  need  fay
no  more  to  explain  it,  that  the  Roman  Govern¬
ment  and  the  Roman  Religion  was  all  founded  on
a  Diabolical  Regimen,  and  was  maintained  by  the
Magick  and  Artifice  of  the  Devil  and  his  Inftru-
ments ;  which  Inftruments  were  chiefly  the  Priefts
of  the  Idol  Temples  and  Worihip,  who  by  the
Subtilty  of  their  Arts  (Religious  Art,  the  worft
fort  of  Magick)  made  fuch  deep  Impreflions  on  the
Minds  of  the  deluded  World,  that  not  the  com¬
mon  fort  only,  not  the  Vulgar,  or  as  we  fay  the
Canaile ,  the  Mobb  and  Rabble  of  the  People  came
Into  it,  and  believed  the  lying  Wonders  j  but  the
learned  W orld,  the  Philofophers,  the  Poets,  Men  of
the  moft  exquifitc  Parts,  and  the  moft  polite  Know¬
ledge,  nay  of  the  nobleft  Principles  of  Virtue,  and  who
had  the  moft  refined  Ideas  of  Juftice  and  Honour,
even  thefe  all  came  into  the  Delufions  of  this  Black
Art,  believed,  and,  as  I  may  fay,  reliflied  the  Witch¬
craft  and  Delufions  of  the  Magicians  and  Sorcerers,
and  were  taken  with  their  lying  Wonders  j  even  the
Cato's ,  the  'Tally's,  the  great  and  the  greateft  He¬
roes,  Philofophers,  Scholars,  ’twas  all  one,  they  were
fwallowed  up  by  the  Arts  of  the  Magicians  and
Southfayers  3  nay,  their  Kings  ftooped  to  deal  in
this  Black  Art  themfelves.  Romulus  the  Founder
of  the  City  of  Rome,  and  the  firft  Father  even  of
the  Roman  Name,  was  him  felf  a  Southfayer  3  that
is  to  fay,  a  Magician,  a  Diviner  or  Inchanters  in  plain
EngliJIf a  Dealer  with  the  Devil ,  and  the  great  Pro¬
pagator  of  the  infernal  Art  3  I  fay,  the  great  Pro¬
pagator


of  MAGI  C  K.

pagator  of  it,  for  he  was  the  firft  that  inftituted  the
Augurs  in  the  Pagan  Worihip,  and,  as  I  faid,  Hook’d
in  the  Magicians  into  their  Religion,  making  all
the  Wizards  and  Conjurers,  Pricfts  ;  tho’  I  muft
infift  upon  it,  not  Romulus ,  Numa ,  or  the  Devil
himfelf ,  could  make  all  the  Priefts  Conjurers,  no
not  to  this  Day.

Some  have  been  of  Opinion  that  Numa  Pompiliusy
who  I  have  faid  was  Gncerely  inclin’d  to  Religion,
as  it  was  Amply  underftood  to  be  a  meer  Homage
due  from  Man  a  Creature,  to  God  the  Creator;  that
he  a£tcd  from  a  fincere  Principle,  and  that  he  went
farther  towards  cftablifhing  the  true  Religion,  than
any  Pagan  in  the  World  ever  did  before  him.

But  they  add,  he  was  loft  for  want  of  revealed
Light  :  that  having  determined  by  the  Light
of  his  Reafon  that  there  was  a  God,  and  that  he
was  to  be  worfhipped,  but  not  knowing  how  or
in  what  manner  that  Worfhip  was  to  be  direfted,
and  not  being  able  to  find  out  by  his  utmoft  Search
what  Worfhip  would  be  acceptable,  He  funk  into
Idolatry  and  Polytheifm,  as  the  only  Pattern  that
was  before  him  3  with  this  Addition,  that  having
thus  taken  his  Rife  from  a  wrong  Beginning,  his
devout  Temper  hurried  him  on  into  all  the  Ex¬
tremes  of  Idolatry  and  Paganifm,  ’till  at  length  he
came  into  this  very  Mifchief  I  am  fpeaking  of,  I
mean,  Magick,  Sorcery,  and  dealing  with  familiar
Spirits,  that  is,  the  Devil.

This  is  juft  what  I  had  faid  already;  but  it  is
moft  certain,  that  though  at  firft  they  afted  up¬
on  fome  Foundation  of  natural  Principles,  or  if
you  pleafe,  Principles  of  Natural  Religion  :  Yet
they  afterwards  run  farther  into  this  Sorcery  and
Southfaying,  and  that  with  fuch  an  univerfal
Guft  of  Inclination,  that  it  became  a  chief  Part  of
their  Religion  3  and  there  were  very  few  of  their
great  Men,  nay  even  of  their  Kings  and  Empe¬
rors,


$04


A  $  r  S  T  E  M

torsj  but  what  were  Magicians  themfelves  $  and
forae  of  them,  if  not  all  of  them,  took  it  for  a
Part  of  their  Imperial  Titles,  and  a  Badge  of  their
Honour,  to  be  called  Pontifex  Maximus ,  and  fome-
times  appeared  in  the  Robes  of  a  Sacrificer,  and  of
this  or  that  Order  of  the  Priefts,  as  they  thought
fit }  ’till  at  length  unfuflferable  Pride  and  Infolence
led  them  toacceptof  divine  Honours  themfelves,  to
lay  afide  the  Pried:,  and  aflume  that  of  a  God  *  placing
themfelves  fo  above  the  Sacrificer,  as  tofuffer  them-’
felves  to  be  facrificed  to :  But  this  went  but  a  little
Way.

At  length  the  Chriftian  Religion,  in  fpite  of
Perfecution  and  obftinate  Refiftance,  both  from  the
Jews  as  well  as  the  Pagans,  began  to  fpread  it  felf
in  the  World  :  and  as  Chrift  bimfelf  fays,  that  he
came  to  deftroy  the  Works  of  the  Devils  fo  it  ap-?
pearedi  for  immediately  the  Glories  of  the  Pagan  Su-
perftition  began  to  fade,  their  Oracles  ceas’d,  the
Priefts  became  dumb  $  and  the  Devil,  not  able  to  car¬
ry  on  the  Cheat  any  farther,  threw  it  up  *  the  Au¬
gurs  and  Soqthfayersfled  from  the  Face  of  the  Chri¬
ftian  Dodtrjne,  and  from  the  Preaching  of  the  A?
poftles  and  their  Succeflors,  as  not  able  to  exercife
their  Sorceries  and  Divinations,  no  not  fo  much  as
in  the  Prefence  of  the  Chriftian  Minifters.

We  have  two  remarkable  Inftances  of  this  in  the
facred  Text  5  one  is  ABs  xiii,  7.  when  being  at
the  Ifle  of  Cyprus ,  Elymas  the  Sorcerer  ventured
to  withftand  St.  Paul ,  when  he  preached  the
Word  of  God  to  Sergius  Paulus  the  Governourj
but  for  the  audacious  Attempt  was  ftruck  blind
by  the  miraculous  Word  of  the  blefled  Apoftle,  fo
being  made  an  Inftrument  to  confirm  theGovernour
in  his  Faith,  and  compleat  the  Converfion  which
the  conjuring  Wretch  fought  to  oppofe,  ver,  iz.
"The  Deputy ,  when  he  faw  what  was  done ,  beheve d9
being  aftonijhed  at  the  Beftrine  of  the  LOR D,

~  The


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

The  other  Inftance  is  in  Afts  xix.  ip.  where  indeed
there  is  a  double  Evidence  ;  Firft ,  of  the  Power  of
the  Chriftian  Dodrine  prevailing  over  the  Magick
and  Diabolick  Arts  then  in  Practice  ;  and,  Secondly ,
of  the  prodigious  Encreafe  of  thofe  Magical  Dclu-
fions  among  the  Romans ,  however  wife  and  polite
a  People  they  were;  the  Story  is  fhort,  and  fully  to
the  purpofe.  St.  Paul ,  preaching  at  Ephefusy  made
a  wonderful  Progrefs  in  converting  the  Pagans  of
that  great  City,  to  the  Chriftian  Faith.  Some  Hi-
llories  tell  us,  he  converted  one  hundred  thoufand
People  there  and  in  the  Country  adjacent ;  but
that  by  the  way:  In  a  word,  the  Text  fays, ver.  17.
the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jefus  was  magnify' d.  And  how,
but  by  this  eminent  Vidory  over  the  Devil?  For
(befides  the  Conqueft  of  the  Exorcifts  who  went  a-
bout  to  caft  out  a  Devil  by  their  Conjurings  and
Spells)  the  Magicians  themfelves  were  converted  by
Paul's  preaching,  and  that  to  a  prodigious  Number
of  them,  ver.  ip.  Many  alfo  of  them  which  ufed  cu¬
rious  Artsy  brought  their  Books  together ,  and  burned
them  before  all  Men  :  and  they  counted  the  Price  of
themy  and  found  it  fifty  thoufand  Pieces  of  Silver .
What  a  height  muft  the  Black  Art  of  the  Devil  be
come  to  at  that  time,  that  the  Books  which  were
to  be  found  in  that  one  City  fhould  amount  to  fuch
a  Sum  of  Money  ?  I  give  this  Account,  as  I  have
faid,  to  let  you  fee  to  what  an  extravagant  height
the  Devil  had  carried  this  Matter;  and  how  and
in  what  manner  he  fupported  his  Intereft  in  the
World.  But  I  muft  go  back  to  the  Beginning  of
things,  where  I  left  off,  viz.  at  the  Inftitution  of
the  Augursy  who  were  for  fome  Ages  the  Engroflers
of  all  thefe  Delufions  in  the  Roman  Empire.

The  Augurs  were  a  fort  of  Roman  Priefts,  who
pretended  to  foretell  Events  by  Omens,  by  the
chattering  of  Birds,  howling  of  Dogs,  and  other
uncouth  Noifes  of  any  kind  in  the  Air:  They  were

ereded


20  6


A  SYSTEM

ere&ed  into  a  Society,  and  formed  in  a  College  o?
Hall  by  the  King’s  fpecial  Order  $  the  Number  at
firft  was  but  three,  one  being  taken  from  every
Romm  Tribe  5  and  while  they  were  thus  few,  the
Dignity  was  very  valuable,  and  it  was  highly
efteemed  among  even  the  Patricii  and  Nobility.
Servius  Tullius  encreas’d  their  Number  to  Four,  and
caufed  them  to  be  taken  only  from  the  Nobility:
Afterwards  Quintus  and  Census  Agellinus  obtained
that  Five  more  ftiould  be  added  to  their  Number,
and  fhould  be  chofen  out  of  the  Plebeii  or  Common
People.  So  ambitious  were  the  Romms  of  this
Diabolical  Preferment,  and  fo  much  Honour  had
the  Devil's  immediate  Servants  in  the  World)  nay,
upon  this  Increafe  of  their  Number  to  Nine,  the
Government  was  fo  refolute  againft  lowering  the
Trice  of  that  Reverence  and  Efteem  they  had
among  the  People,  that  they  paffed  a  Decree  a-
gainft  encreafing  their  Number  any  more.

However  Sylla ,  one  of  the  moft  bloody  and
cruel  Tyrants  of  his  Time,  that  he  might,  accord¬
ing  to  Cuftom,  join  his  Care  of  Religion  to  his
Thirft  of  Blood,  added  fix  more  j  fo  that  now  their
Number  was  fifteen.  The  eldeft,  whether  in  Years
of  longeft  {landing  in  Order,  (l  am  not  pofitive
which)  was  made  Father  or  Prefident  of  the  College,
and  had  the  immediate  Diredtion  of  all  the  reft.

Their  Privileges,  like  their  Inftitution,  were  ex¬
orbitant  )  for  they  were  never  to  be  depofed  or  ex¬
pelled,  no  not  for  any  Crime  how  great  foever,
nor  their  Places  filled  up  by  another.

N.  B.  Crime  did  not  render  the  Devil's  Agents
fcandalous  in  their  Profeflion,  but  rather  the
wickeder  they  were,  the  fitter  for  the  Prieft-
h<pod  or  Augurate.  How  far  the  fame  Max¬
im  may  hold  in  fome  of  the  facred  Order  in
the  World  at  this  time,  if  I  was  of  their
Number,  I  Ihould  not  vote  to  have  it  examined.

And


of  MAGIC  K.

And  now  for  the  Ceremonies  of  the  Augurs
Trade*  for  we  mu  ft  note,  that  the  Art  Magick
had  always  abundance  of  dark  and  uncouth  Ufuges
attending  it,  as  it  has  to  this  Day*  railing  the
Devil  was  not  done  with  a  Whiftle,  like  calling  a
Dog  5  or  with  a  Beck  of  the  Head  or  Hand,  as  we
beckon  to  Servants  when  we  call  them  filently
to  come  near  us  $  the  Devil  knew  very  well  that
his  Affair  mult  be  clothed  with  Ceremony,  or  it
would  not  take  with  the  W orld,  or  at  leaft  would
not  hold  long  in  it.

The  Pagan  Rites  were  indeed  loaded  with  Bur-
thenfome  Ceremonies  5  all  the  Devil's  Worfhip  was
filled  with  Conjurin  gs  and  Mutterings,  ftrange  Ge~
ftures,  Agitations,  Ecftafies,  and  I  know  not  how
many  Diftortings  of  the  Limbs  and  Countenances,
wild  Pradbices  and  frightful  Noifes,  that  filled  the
People  with  Terror,  and  with  a  kind  of  awful
Horrour  at  the  Majefty  of  their  Gods.

The  Augurs  Obfervations  were  attended  with  a
great  Variety  of  thofe  things,  as  the  Apparatus  to
their  Vifions,  or  whatever  elfe  they  were  to  be
called.  The  Augur  firft  placed  himfelf  upon  a  high
Tower  like  one  of  our  Obfervatories,  and  perhaps
the  Tower  eredbed  upon  a  high  Hill,  as  upon  the
Mons  Palaiinus  in  Rome :  Here  he  feated  himfelf  in
the  cleareft  Day,  or  in  a  Star-light  Night,  to  ob-
ferve  what  came  by  him,  or  in  his  Sight,  by  Day,
or  what  he  might  hear  or  fee  by  Night.

He  held  in  his  Hand  a  Lituus ,  that  is,  a  crooked
Staff,  with  which  he  ufed  a  great  many  wild  Ge-
ftures  and  Motions *  and  he  had  00,  his  grave  L<enay
that  is,  his  Southfaying  Gown  or  Mantle  :  He
placed  himfelf  always  with  his  Face  to  the  Eaft,
and  at  his  firft  fixing  his  Station  he  utter’d  cer¬
tain  Sentences  and  exotic  barbarous  Words,  which
none  knew  the  Meaning  of  but  the  Devil  and
himfelf.


207

A


Being


A  SYSTEM

Being  thus  feated  and  fix’d,  as  I  have  faid,  h&
quarters  out  the  Heavens,  or  Hemifphere  rather,  into
four  Parts  or  Regions,  each  Quarter  having  before¬
hand  fuch  and  fitch  Predi&ions  aflign’d  to  it :  If  it
was  Day,  then  he  was  to  mark  every  Bird  that  rofe
up,  or  came  flying  by,  or  towards  him*  which  of
the  faid  four  Quarters  he  firft  appear’d  in,  and  then
killing  his  Sacrifices,  and  muttering  over  cer¬
tain  Sentences,  joyning  fome  petitionary  Speeches
to  fuch  or  fuch  a  Deity,  or  Daemon  rather,  (which
Speeches  were  call’d  Effata )  he  then  proceeded  to
Divination.

If  it  was  in  the  Night,  he  obferv’d  in  the  like
manner  any  fiery  Meteor,  any  flying  or  fliooting
Fires,  any  hidden  Vapour,  (as  the  Nights  are  full  of
fuch  things,)  or  any  Cloud  eclipfing  the  Light
of  any  particular  Planet  or  Star  of  the  firft  Magni¬
tude*  and  then  he  proceeded  in  the  fame  manner*
only  with  fome  particular  Words  and  Mutterings*
as  regarded  the  feveral  Appearances  refpe£tively.

In  the  Night,  it  was  faid,  they  had  the  Company
of  feveral  Spirits  aflifting  them,  and  communica¬
ting  to  them  the  Knowledge  of  the  Things  theyde-*
fir’d.  Their  Divinations  were  arbitrary  and  pofi-
tive,  nor  durft  any  Man  ask  or  enquire  of  them  thef
Realon  of  what  they  predicted,  or  how  they  came
to  know  that  it  would  or  ihould  be  fo  and  fo.  A
Provifion,  Imuft  confefs,  very  prudent  in  the  Priefts,
and  which,  as  the  cafe  has  flood  with  fome  of
them,  would  be  very  much  to  their  Convenience
to  this  Day,  as  I  fhall  ftiow  in  its  Place.

By  this  taking  fuch  a  kind  of  State  upon  them,
they  politickly  preferv’d  the  Reverence  and  Efteem
of  their  Order,  and  imprinted  a  kind  of  Awe  in  the
Minds  of  the  People,  concerning  not  the  Holinefs
of  their  Perfons  only,  (tho’  that  went  a  great  way,)
but  concerning  the  divine  Myfteries,  as  they  were
call’d,  which  were  put  into  their  Hands  *  and  they

were


of  MAGIC  K.

were  look’d  upon  as  PeiTons  to  whom  the  Gods
had  commuted  the  moft  fecret  Things  that  were
otherwife  known  only  to  themfelves,  and  were  com¬
municated  to  the  Augursy  Favourites  of  the  Gods*
for  the  good  of  Mankind.

A  Learned  Author,  fpeaking  of  this  Myftery  of
Southfaying,  fays,  it  came  firft  from  the  Chaldeans ,
who  taught  it  to  the  Greeks ,  of  whom  Amphiaraus
was  an  eminent  Proficient;  but  he  mentions  no¬
thing  of  who  taught  it  the  Chaldeans ,  in  which  I
believe  my  Account  is  the  moft  authentick  ;  name¬
ly,  that  the  Devil  taught  it  to  the  Arab  I  have
mention’d,  or  to  fome  other,  if  any  was  before
him  ;  that  theie  gave  it  to  the  JEgyptianSy  and  ChaU
deanSy  and  Phoenicians ,  much  about  the  fame  time  %
and  that  the  Phoenicians  taught  it  the  Greeks  their
Prince  Cadmus  being  an  eminent  Southfayer :  and
fo  you  fee  its  blefled  Original.

In  a  word,  as  it  is  a  particular  Familiarity  with
the  Devily  and  depends  entirely  upon  his  Affiftance,
fo  no  body  can  contend  that  he  was  not  the  firft
Introducer  of  it  as  an  Art;  fince,  as  I  obferved,  he
might  eafily  begin  a  Correfpondence  with  Man  5
but  it  was  utterly  impoffibie  that  Men  ftiould  be¬
gin  a  Correfpondence  with  him;  or  know  where  to
find  him,  and  how  to  call  him  to  their  Affiftance,
whatever  the  Occafion  might  be,  without  his  Di-
reft  ion,  Affiftance,  and  Confent.

As  to  the  Introducing  it  from  one  Nation  to  a-
nother,  it  may  indeed  be  fomething  difficult  toaffign
the  manner;  But  as  to  the  meer  divining  upon  the
flying  of  Birds,  upon  Noifes,  and  Appearances
in  the  Air,  the  Chattering  of  Pyes,  the  Croak¬
ing  of  Frogs  and  Ravens,  and  the  like,  I  take  much
of  that  to  be  meer  juggle  and  Legerdemain  of  the
Priefts  and  Augursy  and  they  have  carry’d  on  the
juggling  Trade  to  a  great  Perfection  in  the  fame

P  Country


M


A  SYSTEM

Country  to  this  Day  5  ( ft  and  clear  Dominicans:)
of  which  hereafter.

But  now  for  a  downright  Converfe  with  the  De-
*vil)  I  don’t  underfland  that  Satan  ever  ty’d  himfelf
down  by  Articles,  that  not  only  fuch  and  fuch  a
Man  as  my  Arab ,  or  Alt  Albrahazen ,  of  whom  I
have  fpoken,  fhould  be  able  to  call  him  up  when
they  pleas’d,  by  fuch  and  fuch  Forms,  Ceremonies,
Voices  and  Sounds  3  but  that  to  whomfoever  they
fhould  communicate  the  fame  Tokens,  or  Watch¬
words,  they  fhould  have  the  fame  Power,  and  that
the  very  Words  fhould  call  him  or  his  Agents  up
to  an  Appearance,  whoever  made  ufe  of  them.

This  would  have  been  to  have  the  Devil  bind
himfelf  Prentice  to  them  and  their  Heirs  for  ever  }
and  to  have  chain’d  himfelf  down,  Gaily flave  like,
to  the  found  of  the  Words,  which  I  take  to  be  quite
wide  of  the  Cafe  }  nor  would  it  ferve  his  Defigns,
for  the  Devil  loves  to  know  his  Agents,  and  not  be
at  the  call  of  every  Boy,  becaufe  perhaps  his  Grand¬
mother  told  him  the  Words  which  fhe  ufed  to  raile
the  Devil  with,  or  becaufe  the  Devil  and  fhe  had  a-
greed  upon  the  Matter.  But  no  doubt  Satan,  who
is  certainly  the  Author  of  all  this  kind  of  Magick,
and  which  therefore  and  for  that  very  Reafon  is
call’d  by  his  Name,  Diabolick  }  I  fay,  no  doubt,
as  he  is  the  only  Teacher  of  the  Art,  fo  he
teaches  it  immediately  by  himfelf}  that  is,  he  makes
Men  Magicians ,  and  Wizards,  and  makes  old  Wo¬
men  Witches  (ay  and  young  too)  by  an  immediate
Converfe  and  Co nt raft  with  them  only,  and  between
them  and  himfelf.  Nor  does  he  flick  at  the  Pains
of  beginning  a-new  with  every  Ferfon,  and  in  e-
very  Country}  and  this  is  the  Reafon  why  the
Black  Art,  as  we  righteoufly  entitle  it,  is  not  the
fame  in  all  Countries,  nor  is  the  Devil  talk’d  to  in
the  fame  Words,  for  then  all  the  Witches  and  Ma¬
gicians


2  I  I


of  MAGIC  K.

gi  clans  of  every  Nation  mnft  learn  the  lame  Lan¬
guage  j  but  on  the  contrary,  as  the  Devil  talks  all
Languages  when  he  pleafes,  fo  he  talks  to  every
one  of  his  Difciples  in  their  own  Mother  Tongue,
and  direfts  them  to  do  the  fame  to  him  $  fo  that  a
Roman  Wizard  calls  him  up  in  Latin ;  a  T ’if can
Conjurer  in  Italian $  a  High  German  Doftor  makes
his  Circles,  and  calls  his  Figures,  and  talks  Ma-
gick  to  him  in  the  fuitable  Tongue  call’d  High
Dutch-,  the  fecond- lighted  Highlander  in  Irs ,  and
the  LancajJdire  Lady  in  EngliJJo.

So  propitious,  fo  civil,  fo  well-manner’d  is  Satan
to  all  his  Drudges  and  Devotees,  that  he,  to  put
them  to  as  little  trouble  as  poffible,  Hoops  to  hear¬
ken  to  their  Summons,  as  they  think  fit  to  exprefs
themfclves  in  their  own,  or  any  Language.  Nay,
tho’  the  Magicians  fometimes  form  a  Cant  of  their
own,  by  which  they  amufe  their  Clients,  yet  their
familiar  Friend  takes  it  in  good  part,  and  on  -
verfes  with  them  in  their  own  way.

Even  the  poor  Indians ,  Pawaw  with  him  in  the
Language  of  the  moll  Northern  America ,  the  Ba¬
nians  in  the  Language  of  the  Eafl  Indians ,  the  Ijlanders
of  Amhoyna  in  the  Language  of  the  Celebes  and  Mo-
luccos ,  and  the  Chinefe  in  that  of  Grand  Tartary.

The  Magicians  feern  to  a£fc  in  this  Part,  as  if  the
Devil  condefcended  to  them,  not  they  to  him  5  but
then  this  makes  it  evident,  that  lie  converfes  Per-
fonally  with  them  all,  that  he  makes  his  Bar-
gains  and  Agreements  with  them  always  feparately,
in  all  Places,  and  in  all  Languages  •,  whereas,
if  he  gave  them  a  general  Commiffion  to  empower
others  to  divine,  inchant,  and  raife  the  Devil ,  or
evil  Spirits,  they  muft  all  underhand  one  univerfal
Language.

The  fum  of  the  Matter  is  this  3  the  Devil ,  as  a
Learned  Author  fays,  has  three  ways  by  which  he
carries  on  his  Kingdom  in  the  World,  and  by

P  1  which


A  8  r  S  T  E  M

which  he  works  all  his  Wonders,  which  amufe
and  deceive  them.

1.  By  moving  the  Affections  and  Thoughts  of
Men,  whether  lleeping  or  waking  5  and  this,  as  it
refpeCts  his  caufing  them  to  dream  on  any  Occafion
as  he  thinks  fit,  is  one  very  confiderable  Branch  of
his  Power.

2.  By  his  exquifite  Knowledge  of  Nature,  by
which  he  turns  the  Caufes  of  things  to  his  own
Purpofes,  and  often  brings  to  pafs  fuch  Events  as  fuic
with  his  particular  Occafions.

3.  By  Illufion  and  Fraud,  impofing  upon  the
Senfes,  binding  and  blinding  the  Underftanding  and
the  Eyes,  both  of  the  Body  and  of  the  Minds  of
willingly-deceiv’d  Men.

N.  j 8.  And  I  may  add  a  fourth,  which  perhaps
he  was  not  acquainted  with  in  former  times ,
namely,  by  familiar  Agreement,  CompaCI:  and
ContraCt  with  the  Bright  Men  of  the  Times,
who  he  brings  over  to  converfe  and  corre-
fpond  with  him,  and  who  he  aCts  by,  and
allows  them  to  play  their  Game  and  his  own
together $  and  this  is  Magick,

Having  then  eftablifh’d  a  Correfpondence  with
Man,  we  are  not  to  wonder  if,  to  gratify  his  new
Correfpondents,  he  empowers  them  to  aCt  abun¬
dance  of  firange  and  unaccountable  things  in  the
World,  that  they  may  by  that  means  obtain  a  Re¬
putation  of  being  wifer  and  craftier  than  their
Neighbours,  and  may  alfo  be  admir’d  and  efteem’d
fir  ft,  and  confequently  believ’d.

Thefe  Wonders  they  work  by  his  immediate
Hand,  by  his  Power  and  Afiiftance,  as  well  as  Di¬
rection  and  this  I  cali  Magick ,  and  it  is  fo  in  the
Worft  Senfe.

To  this  he  fubjoins  a  Power,  as  it  may  be  call’d,
over  himfelfj  authorizing  the  Magicians  or  Con-


t


of  MAG  I  C  IC

jurers  to  fummon  him  in  to  their  Aid  whenever
they  have  Occafion  for  him,  to  demand  his  Pre¬
fence  and  Afliftance  whenever  theypleafe.  It  was
faid  of  Hamed  an  JEgyptian  Sorcerer,  that  he  had
the  Devil  fo  at  his  Command,  that  if  he  did  bat
draw  a  Circle  upon  the  Ground,  and  ftamp  with
his  Foot  in  the  middle  of  it,  the  Devil  would  ap¬
pear,  and  bring  as  many  Devils  with  him,  as  the
Magician  ftampt  feveral  times  on  the  Ground  *  and
that  upon  their  fo  appearing,  he  could  again  fend  them
of  fuch  Errands,  and  for  the  Difpatch  of  fuch  Bu¬
ll  nefs  as  he  requir’d  \  whether  to  do  good  or  evil,
to  bring  on  Mifchief,  or  to  prevent  Mifchief,  as
he  that  fo  call’d  him  up  pleas’d  to  diredii  but  I  do
not  vouch  the  Truth  of  the  Devil's  Complaifance
in  this  Particular,  nor  fee  the  Reafon  of  it.

If  the  Magicians  in  thofe  ancient  Days  had  fuch
Influence  upon  him,  ’tis  undoubtedly  true  that  they
did  him  great  and  fignal  Services,  for,  and  by  it 5
or  elfe  Satan,  who  does  not  ufe  to  difpence  his  Fa¬
vours  gratis ,  mu  ft  have  fome  fecret  View  in  it,
which  they  or  we  have  not  yet  difcover’d.

This  great  Ufe  which  theZ)<?w7makesof  Magicians
and  Conjurers,  is  a  certain  Difcovery  that  he  is  con¬
fin’d  by  a  fuperior  Hand  in  his  Workings,  and  that
he  can  only  a6b  by  Stratagem,  by  Cunning,  and  Craft,
not  by  Force  and  Power.

It  is  reported  of  a  Sorcerer  in  Rome ,  that  he
could  call  for  Lightning  and  Thunder  whenever
he  pleafed,  and  that  the  Devil  would  produce  it
for  him>  but  that  calling  him  up  once  to  procure
Thunder,  that  ftiould  burn  a  Houfe,  and  do  great
Mifchief,  to  gratifie  the  wicked  Defign  of  the
Conjurer  j  he  told  him  No,  he  could  not  gratifie  his
Revenge  fo  far,  at  leaft  not  at  that  timej  and  that
the  fame  Sorcerer  did  at  laft  confefs,  that  the  Spirit
which  he  convers’d  with,  could  fliow  his  Power

P  1  many


214


A  SYSTEM

many  ways  in  a  miraculous  manner,  but  could  not
do  any  Mifcbief  by  it.

It  may  be  true,  and  no  doubt  is  fo,  that  the  Ma¬
gicians^  were  they  fully  empower’d,  and  at  Liberty,
would  really  do  more  Mi  (chief  than  the  Devil  him-
felf,  had  he  the  fame  Power  j  not  that  their  Malice
can  be  greater,  but  their  Policy  is  certainly  Ids  y
and  as  they  do  not  fee  fo  far  before  them  as  he  does,
fo  they  do  not  always  fee  into  the  Reafon  of  things,
and  whether  it  would  be  for  the  common  Intereft
or  no :  for  Example  y  were  the  Devil  empower’d
to  fire  Houfes,  deftroy  Families,  lay  wafte  King¬
doms,  he  might  encline  to  do  it*  but  his  Pru¬
dentials  and  Politicks  might  fome  times  tell  him,
that  it  would  be  more  for  his  Intereft  to  let  it  a-
lone  y  and  fo  the  Magicians  like  wife  find  it,  I  fay,  for
their  common  Intereft,  to  a£t  by  Craft  and  Subtilty
as  their  Mafter  the  Devil  has  done  before  them,
rather  than  by  open  Rage  and  Fury-  I  mean  for
their  common  Intereft  as  Magicians.  The  Devil,  could
without  doubt,  in  the  ordinary  Exercife  of  his  Power
as  a  Spirit,  burn,  kill,  deftroy,  and  in  fome  fenfe
put  an  end  to  God’s  Creation :  But  this  would  not
anfwer  his  End y  he  knows  his  Maker  is  his  Go-
vernour,  and  could  if  he  pleas’d  punifh  him  imme¬
diately,  even  as  he  exprefies  it  in  the  Scripture,  be¬
fore  his  time :  And  he  knows  like  wife,  that  when  he
had  deftroy’d,  and  made  havock  of  Mankind,  God
could,  with  the  Breath  of  his  Mouth,  form  a  new
Species,  and  that  fuch  a  Kind  as  he  fhould  have  no
Power  over 5  and  therefore  ’tis  not  in  fhort  the
Devil's  Intereft  to  make  that  Spoil  in  the  World,
which  as  an  Angel,  as  a  powerful  Spirit,  he  might
do  3  and  efpe'e  tally  if  we  fuppofe  him  not  to  be
chain’d  and  fetter’d  down  to  fuperior  Limitations,
which  however  we  know  to  our  infinite  Satisfa¬
ction  that  lie  is,

la


of  MAG  I  C  K.


In  a  word,  the  Devil's  Bufinefs,  and  all  his  Aim,
is  not  to  deftroy,  but  to  damn  Mankind  >  not  to
cut  him  off,  and  put  his  Maker  to  the  trouble  of
a  new  Creation,  but  to  make  him  a  Rebel,  like
himfeif 3  and  even  this  he  is  fain  to  bring  to  pafs  by
Subtilty  and  Art,  making  ufe  of  Man  againft  Man,
arming  Flefn  againft  Spirit,  and  fetting  Nature  in
Defiance  of  the  God  of  Nature  j  and  this  by  fe-
cretly  correfponding  with  fome  of  the  worft  and
vileft  abandon’d  Wretches  that  he  can  find^  in-
ftrufting  them,  and  teaching  them  his  own  Methods,
and  fo  making  them  Tray  tors  to  their  own  Kind  5
drawing  them  in  to  engage  with  him  in  ruining  the
Souls  and  Bodies  of  others,  and  concerting  Mea-
fures  with  thefe  corrupted  Inftruments,  whofe
Principles  he  has  firft  debauch’d,  that  they  may  aft
and  do  for  him,  and  in  his  Name,  all  the  Mifchief
which  he  finds  it  is  not  for  his  Purpofe  to  do  him¬
feif.

While  he  thus  lies  behind  the  Curtain  himfeif,
and  is  not  feen,  or  at  leaft  not  publickly,  he  cor-
refponds  moft  punftually  with  thefe  Agents,  en>
powering  and  direfting  them  by  a  great  variety  of
belli  ill  Arts  and  Contrivances  to  work  Wonders,
amufe  and  impofeupon  Mankind,  and  carry  on  all  his
Affairs  for  him.  And  this  is  that  we  call  the  Black
Art,  and  fo  I  am  come  back  to  my  Text.

If  it  be  true  that  the  Devil  is  the  Prince  of  the
Air,  then  he  can  form  Tempefts  in  it,  can  poifon
and  infeft  it  fo,  as  that  all  Creatures,  Humane  as
well  as  fenfitive  and  vegetable,  fhould  periili  in  it  5
But  as  he  is  yet  a  Prince  under  Limitations  and  Ro
ftriftions,  fo  he  can  exert  no  more  Power  than  he
has  j  and  when  his  humane  Agents,  who  are  there*'
in  worfe  Devils  than  himfeif,  would  be  for  Con¬
flagrations,  and  general  Deftruftion  j  He  wifely,  or
rather  cunningly,  puts  them  off,  and  diverts  them,
without  telling  them,  or  giving  them  room  to


21 6  A  SYSTEM

think,  that  he  really  has  not  Power  himfelf  to  en¬
able  them.

It  is  impoffible  to  clofe  this  Article  of  the  Magi¬
cians  Power  being  limited,  without  an  agree¬
able  Reflexion  upon  the  modern  Furies  of  our
Age,  your  Party  Leaders,  and  Politick  Scheme-
Makers  j  what  merry  work  they  would  make  in  the
World,  if  the  Devil ,  their  Head  Engineer,  was  not
limited,  and  not  in  Condition  to  truft  them  with
the  Power  of  doing  Mifchief  as  they  defire  it.

Perhaps  the  Senfe  of  this  Limitation  in  the  Pow¬
er  of  their  chief  Correfpondent  is  one  Reafon,  that
however  ftudious  they  are  to  do  Mifchief,  yet  they
have  not  fo  much  ftudied  the  Diabolical  Art  as  they
would  otherwife  have  done*  in  a  word,  they  are
not  com  pleat  Magicians ,  becaufe  they  fee  the  Black
Art  is  not  wicked  enough  for  them,  and  they  can¬
not  obtain  a  Power  by  it  to  out-fin  the  Devil.

But  I  comeback  to  the  Art  it  felf.  The  Artifts  are
certainly  very  helpful  to  the  Devil ,  as  well  as  the
Devil  to  them:  For  as  he  is  oblig’d  to  work  by
Stratagem,  not  by  Force,  all  his  Cunning  is  em¬
ploy’d  to  carry  on  his  Kingdom  and  Government
in  the  World  >  and  this  brings  me  to  the  Reafon
why  the  Devil  does  not  care  to  aft  in  Perfon,  in
moil:  cafes  of  his  Adminiftration  j  but  to  employ
thofe  People,  whom  we  call  Magicians ,  that  they
may  aft  with  his  full  Directions,  and  tho’  with
Art,  yet  with  Power  alfo  lufficient  to  ftand  his
Ground  againfi  all  humane  Oppofition.

Under  the  Cover  of  thefe  Agents  he  afts  with
infinite  Succefs,  by  their  Influence  he  carries  on
all  his  Affairs,  and  efpecially  thofe  of  Kingdom
and  Dominion,  in  which  it  is  not  for  want  of  Im¬
pudence  if  he  does  not  rival  or  indeed  dethrone
his  Maker.  By  his  fecret  Correfpondence  with
them  it  is  that  he  fills  the  World  with  fh am  Won¬
ders,  and  falfe  Stories,  which  being  detefted  apd

expofeds


of  M  A  G  l  C  K.

expofed,  reflects  upon  the  Magicians ,  not  upon  the
Devil  5  neither  indeed  ought  it  to  affeft  him,  for  that
it  is  not  for  want  of  his  Affiftance  if  any  of  them
mifcarry,  but  from  their  expefting  more  from  him
than  it  is  fit  he  fiiould  grant,  or  than  perhaps  it  is
in  his  Power  to  grant.  No  wonder  then  he  is  fo
officious,  and  fo  willing,  that  he  runs  and  goes,
and  dances  Attendance  upon  a  fet  of  ignorant  Ma¬
gicians  3  I  fay  ignorant,  except  only  as  he  inftrufts
them  3  ’tis  evidently,  becaufe  he  makes  his  Advan¬
tage  of  them,  and  they  aft  for  his  Account.

*Tis  then  apparent,  that  the  Magicians  are
Inftruments  by  which  the  Devil  carries  on  his  Po¬
litick  Affairs  in  the  World.  It  is  time  then,  in  the
next  Place,  to  enquire  in  what  manner  they  per¬
form  it,  and  from  what  Principles  they  aft 3  and
then  we  fhall  come  to  fome  Hiftorical  Account  of
their  merry  Proceedings  in  the  World.


Zl?


YSTEM  of  MAGICK,


PART  II.


INTROD  U  C  T  I  O  N,


Of  the  Black  Art  it  felf ;  what  it  really  is,
why  there  are  fever al  differing  T radices
of  it  in  the  fever  al  Tarts  of  the  World,
and  what  thofe  Traffic es  are  ;  as  alfo ?
what  is  contained  in  it  in  General .

T  i


Have  all  along,  till  now,  fpoken  of  the
general  Correfpondence  of  the  Devil
with  Mankind,  under  the  Head  of
Diabolick  Magick ,  as  a  meer  Intimacy
only  I  have  reprefented  it  as  a  Method
which  the  Devil  firft  took,  to  form  his  Inter  eft  and
Acquaintance  with  Mankind,  when  he  was  drown’d
out  of  his  Kingdom  in  the  old  World  by  the
Flood.

Tk


2


of  MAGIC  K.

?Tis  too  certain  that  the  Devil  a£ted  by  this  Me¬
thod  at  firft,  for  the  Propagation  of  his  own  De»
iigns  only,  and  to  fet  on  foot  a  new  Adminiftrati-
on  of  his  Affairs  5  it  being  for  many  Reafons  not
his  Bufinefs  to  aft  openly  and  barefacedly  in  the
World  as  a  Devil  5  but  now  ’tis  alfo  as  apparent,
that  after  the  Devil  had  thus  eftablifhed  a  Corre¬
fpondence,  he  foon  found  Man  as  forward  as  him-
felf,  as  willing  to  embark  with  him  and  engage,
as  he  could  defire  ,  nay  fo  forward  in  the  new
Trade,  fo  eager  for  Mifchief,  fo  glad  of  being  ve¬
iled  with  Power  (tho?  Infernal)  to  do  it,  and  to
gratify  thofe  vileft  of  his  Paliions,  Envy,  Revenge,
Malice  and  Strife,  that  the  Devil  himfelf,  as  is  ob-
ferved  in  the  laft  Chapter,  is  forced  to  reftrain  him,
and  gently  to  divert  his  Thoughts  to  fome  lefs  vi¬
olent  and  lefs  deftruftive  Methods  -7  not  being  wil¬
ling,  and  fometimes  indeed  not  being  able,  to  aft
fo  much  the  Devil  as  theie  new  Hell- fire  Agents
would  have  him  aft  it.

The  Correfpondence  being  thus  fettled  between
the  Devil  and  the  Magician,  and  the  Treaties  be¬
tween  them  figned,  ratified, and  exchanged  in  Form,
the  Inftrument  (Man)  is  immediately  furnifhed  by
the  Employer  (Satan)  with  all  neceffary  Qualifica¬
tions  for  his  Bufinefs,  and  is  compleatly  qualify’d
for  an  Infernal  Mountebank  $  and  fo  he  falls  to  his
Juggling-box  and  to  fhewing  his  Tricks,  his  Pawaw-
ing  and  Conjuring,  and  in  a  word,  exercifing  his
new  Acquirements  and  Hellilh  Talents  upon  Man¬
kind  5  and  this  we  call,  and  that  with  a  great  Pro¬
priety  of  Speech,  the  BLACK  A  R  T.

The  brief  Definition  of  what  we  call  the  Black
Art7  that  is  to  fay,  as  I  would  have  it  be  under-
flood  in  the  reft  of  my  Difcourfe,  is,  that  it  is  a
new  general  Term  for  all  the  Branches  of  that
Correfpondence  which  Mankind  has  maintained,
or  does,  or  can  carry  on,  between  himfelf  and  the

Devil 3


2  20


A  SYSTEM

Devils  between  this  and  the  Infernal  World;  com-
prifing  ail  the  eight  Particulars  which  I  mentioned
before,  as  they  are  taken  from  the  Prohibition  of
them,  and  the  Declaration  againft;  them  in  the
Law  of  Mofes ,  viz.

Divining)  the  fame  as  South  faying.

Ohferving  of  ‘times.

Ufing  Inch  ant  me  nt .

Witchtraft .

Charming)  orfetting  of  Spells.

Dealing  with  Familiar  Spirits.

Wizardizing)  or  Sorcery)  thought  to  be  the  fame
as  Witchcraft,  but  miftaken.

Necromancing.

The  Pra&ice  of  thefe,  or  of  gny  of  them,  or  of
all  pf  them,  is  what  we  are  to  underftand  by  this  ge¬
neral  Term  the  Black  Art and  as  thefe  feveral  Parts
are  exprefs’d  after  a  differing  manner,  and  per¬
haps  pra&is’d  in  a  differing  Form  in  feveral  and  re¬
mote  Parts  of  the  World,  it  may  be  neceffary  to
give  a  brief  Defcription  of  them  one  by  one;  that
fo  when  we  name  them  apart,  I  may  yet  be  right¬
ly  underftood,  and  may  need  no  more  Digreftions
for  Explanation  of  Terms  as  I  go  on.

i.  Divining.  A  Diviner  I  underftand  to  be  the
fame  as  was  antienly  called  a  Southfayer-y  this  is  ex¬
prefly  confirm’d  in  Scripture,  if  you  will  take  its
Authority  for  any  thing,  Alls  xvi.  1 6.  A  certain
Damfel  poffeffed  with  a  Spirit  of  Divination  met  us ,
who  brought  her  Majler  great  Gain  by  South  faying  :
So  that  Divination  and  Southfaying  is  the  fame
thing.

N.  B.  Obferve  that  this  Divination  is  here
called  a  Spirit,  that  is  to  fay,  the  Devil ,  or  a
Devil ;  and  he  was  really  in  her,  for  ’tis  faid,
Paul  caft  him  out  of  her.


This.


ail


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

This  Southfaying  alfo,  as  we  are  to  underftand  it*
contained  all  thofe  leffer  Pieces  of  low-priz’d  Art*
called*  telling  Fortunes,  refolding  Difficulties,  find¬
ing  out  and  difcovering  fecret  things  >  and  perhaps
all  the  juggling  Part  pra&ifed  at  this  time  j  and  that
without  any  Correfpondence  with  the  Spirit  Python
that  Paul  call  out,  or  any  other  Spirit  but  that  of
Fraud  and  Legerdemain,  which  the  Divining  or
Southfaying  is  only  made  a  Cover  to.

z.  Obfervers  of  Times .  Thefe  I  take  to  be  fome*
who,  by  Correfpondence  with  an  evil  Spirit,  de¬
clared  fuch  and  fuch  Days  or  Times  to  have  a
particular  Fatality,  fb  that  no  Bufinefs  which  was
undertaken  on  that  Day  could  profper  \  and  this
Part  of  the  Black  Art  may  take  in  fuch  as  carrying
on  the  Study  of  judicial  Aftrology  to  the  extreme*
and  to  the  Gates  of  Hell,  afcribe  Events  of  Things
to  the  Government  and  Influence  of  the  Stars,  and
that  Influence  to  be  fo  or  lb  directed  for  Good  or
Evil,  according  to  the  particular  Pofition,  Oppofi-
tion,  Conjunction  or  Situation  of  thofe  Stars  or
Planets  in  differing  Houfes  5  as  if  thefe  could  be  the
Dire&ors  of  the  Fate  of  Perfons,  Families  and  Na¬
tions  \  and  that  the  Events  of  things  were  directed
by  them,  and  by  the  Seafons  and  Times  of  their
Stations  here  or  there  in  the  Courfe  of  their  ordi¬
nary  Motion,  whether  direct  or  retrogade:  In  a
word,  the  Praftice  of  judicial  Aftrology,  tho’  not
a  dealing  with,  or  by  the  Help  of  the  Devil ,  is
condemn’d  here,  as  being  a  plain  robbing  Divine
Providence  of  its  known  Glory,  in  direfting  and  dif-
pofing  both  Caufes  and  Events  in  all  things  relating
to  the  Government  of  Mankind,  or  indeed  of  the
whole  World,  and  afenbing  that  to  the  poor
innocent  unconcerned  Stars  or  Planets  which  is
fingly  in  the  Difpofition  of  him  that  made  them*
The  Stars  and  Planers  are  no  intelligent  Beings  y
they  have  indeed  a  vegetative  or  active  Life,  but  as  to

Know*


A  SYSTEM

Knowledge  or  Acquaintance  of  or  with  human  Af¬
fairs  they  are  entirely  lifelefs  Bodies,  utterly  incapable
of  influencing  or  dire&ing  any  thing,  or  of  any
Motion  or  Aftion,  other  than  by  the  Direftion  of  the
fame  Power  and  Providence  which  made  and  guides
them  in  common  with  the  reft  of  the  World.

3.  Ujing  Inchantments.  Thefe  are  varioufly  de-
fcrib’d  by  the  Ancients  3  but  to  explain  it  by  our
modern  Terms  of  Art,  this  is  what  we  call  Con¬
juring  3  and  this  is  certainly  performed  by  the  im¬
mediate  Agency  and  Affiftance  of  the  evil  Spirit,
when  the  Magician  ufing  thefe  Inchantments,
works  by  the  fecret  Aid  of  the  Devil  fome  won¬
derful  thing,  fo  as  to  furprife  the  Beholders,  and
make  them  think  the  Operator  is  vefted  with  fu-
pernatural  Power,  and  confequently  is  fome  ex¬
traordinary  Man.  Thus  when  St.  Paul  healed  the
lame  Man  at  Lyftra ,  the  People,  furprifed  with  the
Miracle,  cry’d  out  prefently,  J?he  Gods  are  come
down  to  us  in  the  Likenefs  of  Men.  Thus  the  Ma¬
gicians  in  Pharaoh's  Court  made  Frogs,  turn’d  the
Water  into  Blood,  and  the  Rods  into  Serpents  by
their  Inchantments,  that  is  to  fay,  by  the  immedi¬
ate  Hand  of  the  Devil 3  who  was  permitted,  it
fee  ms,  to  increafe  the  Plagues  of  ALgypt^  doing  Mif-
chief  being  his  particular  Talent:  But  I  do  not
read  that  whenever  Aaron  and  Mofes  denounc’d
any  of  thofe  Plagues,  the  Magicians  could  ftop  or
prevent  them  3  if  they  could  have  done  that
indeed,  they  had  been  worth  Notice,  but  it
was  quite  otherwife  3  for,  left  they  fhould  boaft
too  much  of  their  Power,  they  were  reftrain-
ed,  and  not  able  to  make  Lice,  tho’  they  had
made  Frogs  and  Serpents  3  but  they  were  obliged
to  acknowledge  in  publick,  that  they  were  unable
to  do  it,  that  it  was  the  Finger  of  God,  and  that
he  had  put  a  ftop  to  their  Inchantments  3  in  a  word*
it  made  them  acknowledge  that,  according  to  an


ef  M  A  G  I  C  K.

old  Proverb  which,  for  ought  I  know,  is  derived
from  thence,  G  OD  is  above  the  Devil.

4.  Witchcraft .  This  is  indeed  the  blackeil  part
of  the  Black  Art  it  felf:  I  need  not  defcribeit  any
farther  than  this,  that  it  is  a  Power  received  im¬
mediately  from  the  Devil  to  doMifchief§  to  gratify
Rage,  Envy,  Malice,  Revenge,  and  the  vildt  Paf-
ilons  of  Men,  giving  it  into  their  Hands  to  be¬
witch  Men,  Cattle,  Places  and  Things 5  to  burn
and  deftroy,  tho’  limited,  as  hinted  before  in  many
Particulars  5  the  Effects  of  this  Witchcraft  we  of¬
ten  fee,  and  {hall  fay  more  to  it  in  its  Place.

This  includes  Perfons  being  immediately  agi¬
tated  by  an  evil  Spirit,  carried  often  violently
into  the  Air  by  the  Help  of  the  Devils  and  being
able  to  carry  away  others  in  the  Air  abbs  and  not
to  infill  upon  all  the  improbable  things  faid  of  them,,
and  faid  to  be  done  by  them>  yet  that  the  Devil
certainly  plays  his  Pranks  by  thofe  Tools  fomctimes
in  a  molt  extravagant  manner,  I  mull  grant.  Why
it  is  generally  pradlis’d  by  old  Women  only,  is  a
Point  to  be  conlider’d  by  itfelf.

In  this  Article  of  Witchcraft  is  included  what  we
call  an  Evil  Tongue,  an  evil  Eye,  Curling,  Blafting*
Bewitching,  and  abundance  of  Hellifh  things  which
thofe  Creatures  are  permitted  to  praftife,  to  the
Hurt  of  thofe  that  they  point  their  Malice  againft.

f.  Charming.  This  is  certainly  a  Piece  of  the
Black  Art,  and  conlills  of  divers  Branches,  fuch  as
fetting  Spells,  drawing  Circles,  within  which  if  the
Perfon  to  be  operated  upon  fets  his  Feet,  he  {hall  not
be  able  to  ftir  out  of  the  Conipafs  of  it  with¬
out  Leave  from  the  Charmer  1  likewife  Doziogs,
giving  Filters,  Potions,  and  Hellifh  Contrivances
to  caufe  Barrennefs,  Impotence,  Idio.tifm,  Lunacy,
Love,  Hatred,  and  abundance  more  namcl^fs  Wick-
edndfes,  which  nothing  but  the  Devil  and  Father
of  Mifcfaicf  could  empower  them  to  do.

6.  Dealing


z  24


A  SYSTEM

6c  Dealing  with  Familiar  Spirits .  This  is  what
was  more  immediately  proper  to  a  Magician  3  I
mean,  fuch  a  Diabolical  Magician  as  I  have  been
describing  j  and  as  the  Title  expreffes  it,  is  an  im¬
mediate  converfxng  with  a  Devil ,  who  always  attends
him  at  his  Call,  to  come  and  go  as  he  pleafes,  to
confuit  with,  be  advifed  and  diredied  by,  and  in  a
word,  to  do  for  him  whatever  He,  the  Magician
defires.

Thus  we  read  that  King  Menajfes  dealt  with  the
Devil 3  the  Text  fays  ex  prefly,  he  ufed  Witchcraft
and  Inchantments ,  and  dealt  with  a  familiar  Spirit .  And
who  could  doubt  it,  from  what  followed?  nothing
but  a  Man  abandoned  to  Hell,  and  that  had  the
Devil  at  his  Elbow,  could  have  been  prevailed  with
to  do  what  he  did,  which  at  that  time  was  the
molt  dangerous  piece  of  Impudence  that  ever  had
been  heard  of,  viz.  to  fet  a  carved  Image  in  the
very  Temple,  the  Houfe  of  God.

7.  Wizards .  This  fome  take  to  be  nothing  but
what  they  call  a  Man  Witch  3  but  in  the  Pra&ice
it  hath  been  carried  farther,  namely,  to  be  one  that
confults  with  the  Devil ,  to  give  Anfwers  to  difficult
Queftions,  to  reveal  and  difcover  Confpiracies,  and
to  govern  the  greater  things  of  Life  3  as  to  blaft  or
fucceed  the  Enterprizes  of  Princes  and  People  3  to
tell  and  foretell  the  Succefs  of  fuch  and  fuch  Un¬
dertakings  3  and  even  to  influence  the  Undertakers.
Such  a  one  as  this  was  Baalim ,  who  being  fam’d
for  a  Wizard,  was  fent  for  a  long  way  by  the  King
of  Moab  to  curfe  the  Camp  and  Army  of  the  He¬
brews.

The  Northern  Word  ufed  in  our  own  Country
for  this  Kind  is  a  Warlock ,  the  antient  Import  of
which  was  one  that  could  give  good  or  bad  Speed
to  any  Undertaking,  or  at  leaf!:  could  foretell  whe¬
ther  the  thing  enquired  about  fhould  fucceed  or  no.

We


/


i


ofMAGIC  K.

We  have  abundance  of  merry  Tales  fcatter’d  a*
broad  in  the  Oral  Tradition  of  antient  times,  and
among  thofe  antient  things  called  Old  Women j  con*
cerning  Wizards:  how  the  Kings  and  Princes  ufed
to  confult  with  them,  before  they  undertook  any

great  Enterprize  :  They  tell  you  in  the  Norths
ow  an  old  Wizard  warned  King  James  IV  of
Scotland  who  was  killed  at  Flodden  Fields  not  to  paf$
the  Tweed  with  his  Army,  but  encamp  on  the  Nor*
them  Bank  of  the  River,  and  that  if  the  Englijh
paffed  the  Water  of  Tweed  to  attack  him,  he  fhould
certainly  defeat  and  overthrow  them  \  but  that  if
he  fought  on  Englijh  Ground,  he  fliould  lofe  both
his  Army  and  his  Life  5  which  accordingly  hap*
pen’d.  They  relate  the  fame  of  old  Mother  Shiptort
in  England ,  who,  (tho’  fo  many  Fables  are  made  of
her)  was  a  real  and  known  Perfon,  and  was  not  a
Witch  or  a  Prophetefs,  but  a  Warlock  or  Wizard,
and  ’tis  certain  ihe  did  foretell  to  Cardinal  Woolfs}
his  falling  into  Difgrace  at  Court,  his  Loft  of  the
King’s  Favour,  and  his  Death  $  all  which  according¬
ly  happen’d*

8.  The  laft  of  thefe  is  a  Necromancer^  §  W  ord
very  antient,  and  containing  indeed  the  Black  Arc
in  its  full  Perfe£bion$  this  being  One  who  not  like
the  Wizard  foretold  or  ptedi&ed,  but  who,  whetl
the  People  came  to  him,  would  carry  them  to  his
Originals,  that  is  to  fay,  would  go  to  work,  and
bring  the  Devil  Up  by  his  Art  to  talk  with  and  do
their  Bufinefs  for  them  himfelf*  and  this  indeed
might  properly  be  faid  to  be  a  Teacher  of  the
Black  Art,  that  is  to  fay,  not  that  he  could  tie  the
Devil  down  to  appear  to  the  Perfon,  whoever  it
was,  that  he  took  a  Fee  of,  and  be  at  his  Sutti*
mons  as  he  was  before  at  his  the  Necromancer's  oWn$
but  if  ever  any  Perfon  had  a  mind  to  come  into
the  wicked  Oafs,  and  have  a  Perfonal  Conference
with  the  Devil  in  order  to  make  a  Bargain  with

Q,  him*


zi&  A  S  1C  $  *T  E  M

him,  the  Necromancer’s  Bufinefs  was  to  raife  the
Devil ,  prefent  the  Stranger,  bring  them  acquaint¬
ed,  and  then  leave  the  Devil  and  the  Man  to  agree
the  Matter  among  themfelves.

In  a  word,  the  Necromancer,  (like  the  famous
Mr.  Whifton  of  good,  lying,  merry  Memory)  was  the
Devil's  Broker,  neither  more  or  lefs>  he  brings
Grift  to  the  Devil's  Mill,  Cuftomers  to  his  Shop,
and  farthers  his  Trade,  and  his  own  Gain  by  the  or¬
dinary  Method  of  his  Employment.

It  is  true  thefe  blackeft  of  the  Black- Art  Men
have  a  great  many  other  things  in  their  Pra&ice,
befides  that  of  brokering  for  the  Devil $  they  were
ufed  to  raife  Storms,  Whirlwinds,  and  Hurricanes,
by  which  they  made  themfelves  very  terrible  to  the
People,  as  if  it  was  in  their  Power  to  do  all  the
mifehievous  things  in  the  World:  By  this  they
brought  in  their  Cuftomers,  for  the  People  ufually
brib’d  them,  as  the  Indians  worfiiip  the  Devil  that
he  may  do  them  no  Harm.  The  ftrong  Opinion
the  common  People  had  of  thefe  Men  in  time
paft  was  fuch,  that  they  would  go  to  them  for
Rain  in  Drought,  and  for  fair  Weather  in  Harveft,
for  Abatement  of  Floods,  and  for  protefbing  their
Cattle  in  Lightning  and  Thunder.

To  fum  them  up  all,  the  Diviner  and  Southfayer,
the  judicial  Aftrologer  and  Conjurer,  the  Inchanter
and  Charmer,  the  Witch  and  the  Wizard,  the  Ne¬
cromancer  and  Dealer  with  a  Familiar  Spirit  all  put
together  and  praftifed  in  their  fulleft  Extent,  make
Up  this  One  Black  Art  which  I  am  fpeaking  of,  in
its  Perfeftion  5  and  in  this  Senfe  I  am  to  be  under-
ftood  in  the  following  Part  of  this  Work.

Only  take  a  few  Hints  by  way  of  Obfervation,
on  this  Occalion,  viz.  that  the  Devil  has  fome  lit¬
tle  Out-lyers  and  fculking  Operators  in  the  World,
and  which  he  makes  great  ufe  of,  which  may  not
be  faid  to  come  under  any  of  thofe  Denominations  $  as

j  par-


of  M  A  G  I  C  it  i

particularly  our  Second-fight  Men  in  Scotland •,  the
Wind  Merchants  in  Norway 9  who  fell  fair  and  foul
W eather,  Storms  and  Calms,  as  the  Devil  and  you  can
agree  upon  a  Price,  and  as  your  Occafions  require :
Alfo  in  Lapland ,  Mufcovy 7  Siberia  and  other  Nor¬
thern  Parts  of  the  World,  he  is  faid  to  a£fc  by  dif¬
fering  Methods,  and  govern  his  Dominions  by  a
more  open  and  arbitrary  Method,  not  prefcribed  and
limited  to  Art  and  Craft  as  he  does  here.

We  have  alfo  fome  new  Practitioners  in  Magick
among  ourfelves,  who  deal  with  the  Devil  in  a  more
exalted  fublime  Way,  and  who,  for  ought  I  know,
are  able  to  teach  the  Devil  fome  new  and  more
accurate  ways  of  managing  them,  and  the  reft  of
the  World  too^  than  ever  he  knew  before.  In  a
word,  inftead  of  enquiring  at  the  Devil's  Oracle,
and  learning  from  him,  I  think  the  Devil  muft  even
come  to  School  to  them  *  for  as  Alphonfus  of  Caflile
faid,  If  God  Almighty  had  confulted  with  him  when
he  made  the  Worlds  he  could  have  Jhewed  him  how  to
mend  it :  So  certainly,  if  the  Devil  had  confulted
thefe  Gentlemen  in  his  firft  Rebellion,  they  might
as  well  tell  us,  they  would  have  ftiewn  him  how  to
have  martial’d  his  Army  better,  and  perhaps  not
have  loft  the  Day  as  he  did  5  at  leaft  they  would
take  upon  them  to  give  him  new  Meafures  for  his
prefent  and  future  ConduCl,  that  fo  he  may  rebell
againft  Heaven  again  whenever  he  pleafes,  and  fhali
be  fure  to  carry  on  the  War  (at  leaft  defenfively)
with  better  Succefs  than  ever  he  did  before.

We  have  alfo  fome  modern  SeCts  of  Hellifii  Di¬
vinity  not  formerly  known,  no  not  to  the  Devil
himfclf  *  which  feem  to  partake  of  the  Black
Art  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  which,  tho’  not  con¬
tain’d  under  any  of  the  eight  Heads  already  mention’d,
yet  the  Profeftbrs  claim  to  be  incorporated  among
the  Devil's  Graduates,  and  may  be  juftly  efteemed
Members  of  the  Society  of  Deceivers*  and  that

QL %  they


2.z8


A  SYSTEM

they  have  pradtifed  the  Black  Art  in  a  more  exqui-
fite  Method  than  any  that  ever  went  before  them ;
of  whom,  and  of  their  Art  and  Management,  if  I
may  obtain  a  Freedom  of  Thinking  in  an  Article  of
fuch  Importance  as  this,  I  may  give,  you  a  very
profitable  Defcription  in  the  Procefs  of  this  Hi-
ftory.

There  remains  a  Vacancy  too  for  our  Friends  of
the  Legend  and  Calendar,  among  whom  we  {hall
find  certain  Red  Letter  Black- Art  Men  who  deal
with  the  Devil  under  the  fandtify’d  Vizor  of  the
red  Hat ,  the  Coul ,  and  the  Tonfure  j  among  whom,
I  fay,  many  have  been,  and  many  ftill  may  be  A-
gents  of  Hell  in  the  moft  abftradted  Senfe,  and
therefore  cannot  be  denied  to  be  Pradtitioners  in  the
Black  Art ,  as  effcdtually,  and  to  all  Intents  and
Purpofes,  as  fully  as  ever  the  Monks  of  Loudon ,  or
the  Patrons  of  Father  Jetzer ,  and  the  Maid  of  Kent  *
of  all  which  in  their  Order.


CHAP.  I.

Of  Modern  Magick ,  or  the  Black  Art  as  now
in  its  Brattice  and  Berfettion.

TH  E  antient  Magick  having  by  a  long
Succeffion  of  Art  and  Time  been  handed
down  to  the  Grecians ,  and  from  them  to  the  Ro¬
mans,  we  cannot  but  acknowledge  that  they  went  a
great  way  to  the  improving  it,  for  they  mingled
the  Black  Art  fo  entirely  among  their  religious
Worfliip  that  it  is  not  to  this  day  poffible  to  diftin-
guifh  between  the  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  their
Gods,  and  the  Inchantments  and  Charms,  Conju¬
rations  and  Divinations  immediately  diredted  by
the  Devil .


I


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

I  have  mentioned  fomething  of  this  already  in
their  Augurs ,  and  the  feveral  Inftitutions  of  Romu¬
lus,  Numa  Pompilius ,  and  others  5  but  nothing  fo
effectually  difcover’d  the  Black  Art  to  be  blended
with  their  Religious  Rites,  and  the  Craft  of  the
Devil  with  the  Worfliip  of  their  Gods,  as  the  fet-
ting  up  Oracles ,  giving  Refponfes,  and  folving
Doubts,  as  if  by  Enquiry  of  the  Gods  5  whereas  in¬
deed  it  was  all  managed  by  the  Craft  of  the  De¬
vil,  and  the  Agency  of  thofe  folemn  Knaves  the
Priefts  *  and  this  I  call  Ecclefiaftick  Magick.

There  was  not  a  little  Knavery  in  the  fetting  up
the  Augurs,  in  the  Divinations  and  Predictions
from  the  flying  and  chattering  of  Birds  $  and  be¬
fore  that,  in  the  Priefts  poring  upon  the  Intrails
of  the  Beafts  facrificed  to  their  Gods  :  Here  this
Art  went  fuch  a  length,  that  the  Truth  is,  the
Devil  faw  himfelf  outdone  by  the  Priefts,  and
the  Witchcraft  of  Superftition  went  beyond  all
that  Satan  himfelf  ever  pretended  to  in  the  firft  In-
ftitution  :  So  far  did  the  crafty  and  avaritious  Priefts
engrofs  the  Devil's  Bufinefs,  that  they  really  feem’d
to  take  the  very  Trade  out  of  his  Hand,  or  as  we
fay  of  an  invading  Tradefman  that  fets  up  under
his  Mafter’s  Nofe,  he  takes  the  Bread  out  of  his
Mouth .

The  Greeks  were  the  moft  fuperftitious  of  all  the
jD^/7-Worfliippers  in  the  World,  worfe  than  the
Perfians  and  Chaldeans ,  from  whom  they  borrowed
all  the  Fundamentals  of  their  Idolatry,  and  far
worfe  than  the  Romans ,  who  were  afterwards  their
Scholars:  Image  and  Idol  Worfliip  were  Eflentials
in  all  their  Temples,  which  the  Romans  at  firft  re¬
jected  with  Difdain  $  even  Numa  Pompilius,ihe  moft
devout  and  fuperftitious  of  all  the  Romans ,  defpis’d
it  5  and  many  of  the  moft  learned  of  the  Roman
Authors  exclaim  againft  it  as  abfurd  and  ridiculous  5
however  they  came  into  it  afterwards  alfo.


But


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

But  the  Greeks ,  I  fay,  from  their  particular  Love
to  Superftition,  were  the  firft  that  worfhipped  the
Images  of  their  Gods :  thus  you  read  of  the  Ephe-
Jians  having  the  Image  of  Jupiter  which  came  down
from  Heaven  5  in  like  manner  they  had  particular
Images  in  every  Temple,  and  Temples  almoft  in
every  Corner  5  and  being  the  fitted:  People  to  be
thus  impofed  upon  and  deluded,  the  Priefts  who  were
equally  fubtle  there  as  in  other  Places,  invented  (or
the  Devil  dire£bed  them  to)  that  grcfleft  of  all  Cheats,
the  Oracles  of  their  Gods  5  to  whofe  Temples  they
conftantly  repair’d  for  Anfwers  in  the  moft  difficult
and  doubtful  Cafes  j  and  the  Romans  took  it  from
them.

Thefe  Oracles  were  indeed  the  Devil's  Matter-
piece,  for  here  the  Prietts  and  himfelf  juggled  to¬
gether  in  fo  notorious  a  manner,  that  no  Contri¬
vance  for  putting  a  jmblick  Cheat  upon  the  World
ever  met  with  the  like  Succefs:  The  Devil  affift-
ing  the  Priefts  gave  Anfwers  in  the  moft  fubtle,
doubtful  and  ambiguous  Terms  imaginable,  fo  that
they  frequently  pofTefied  the  People  with  a  Belief
of  the  Things  predi&ed  being  come  to  pafs^  where¬
as  it  was  all  owing  to  the  Double  Entendre  of
the  Anfwers,  which  left  things  to  be  underftood
any  way  the  Priefts  thought  fit,  and  left  the  Priefts
room  to  fuggeft  a  Correfpondence  between  the  O-
racle  and  the  Event,  when  indeed  there  was  no
manner  of  Similitude,  no  Coherence,  or  any  thing
like  it.

Hiftory  gives  feveral  Examples  of  the  ambiguous
doubtful  Anfwers  of  the  Oracles,  and  yet  fo  bigot-
ted  were  the  Greeks  to  their  Notions  of  them,  that
on  the  Day  of  the  great  Battle  at  Plat<ea  with  the
Perfians  they  would  not  give  Battle,  tho’  the  Ene¬
my  was  upon  them,  and  began  to  trample  down
their  Infantry  with  the  Plorfe,  till  they  knew  the
Will  of  the  Gods,  as  they  exprefs’d  it,  and  had  a


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

*  ^  *

full  Anfwer  from  the  Oracle  5  the  Soldiers  fitting
ftill  upon  the  Ground,  and  letting  the  Enemies  cut
them  in  Pieces.  But  as  foon  as  they  had  underftood
that  the  Oracle  had  given  its  Anfwer,  and
that  their  Sacrifices  for  Vidfcory  were  favourable,
their  Commanders  alluring  them  that  the  Gods
were  propitious,  and  that  they  had  a  Promife  of
Vidtory,  they  immediately  rous’d  up  from  their
Seats,  form’d  their  Battalia  or  Phalanx,  and  fell  on
with  fuch  Fury,  that  the  Perfeans  and  the  other
Greeks  that  were  confederate  with  them,  were  ut¬
terly  overthrown,  and  cut  in  Pieces.

It  will  not  be  amifs,  in  order  to  fhow  the  World
how  great  the  Powers  of  religious  Infatuations
were,  and  how  far  Mankind  may  be  impos’d  upon,
to  give  a  fhort  Account  of  but  that  one  Day’s  Ac¬
tion  between  the  Grecian  Army  under  their  Ge¬
neral  Paufanias ,  and  Mardonius  Leader  of  the  Army
of  Xerxes  the  King  of  Perfia.

The  Perfean  Army  confided  of  three  hundred
thoufand  Perfians ,  the  Flower  of  Xerxes's  Army;
and  fifty  thoufand  Greeks ;  'Thebans ,  Macedonians  and
Theffaiians ,  Auxiliaries  or  Confederates  with  Xerxes .
The  Athenians  and  Lacedemonians  confided  of  no
more  than  forty  thoufand  Grecians ,  but  old  Soldiers,
and  well  arm’d,  commanded  by  Paufanias ,  to  whom
they  had  join’d  indeed  feventy  thoufand  Auxiliar
Militia,  but  thefe  were  only  raw  and  unexperi¬
enc’d  People;  nor  had  they  any  Dependance  on
them  for  their  Valour  or  Difcipline,  only  for
making  Excurfions,  plundering,  and  the  like.

c  The  Greeks  had  lent  to  enquire  of  the  Oracle
c  at  Delphos ,  to  know  the  Succefs  of  the  War,  and
Q  were  anfwer’d,  that  they  fliould  certainly  have

*  the  Victory,  provided  they  fought  the  Battel  up-
c  on  Athenian  Ground ,  or  in  the  Plains  of  Geres

*  and  Proferpina ,  and  made  their  Prayers  to  fuch
£  and  filch  G  o  d  s,  Demy  Gods  and  Nymphs,  (Ex-

Q..4  6  cellent


Z\ X


A  SYSTEM

f  celknt  Conjuring  and  Magick  to  patch  up  Religion
6  < with  !  )

4  This  Anfwer  of  the  Oracle  was  an  apparent
«  Cheat,  for  no  body  knew  where  this  Piece  of
€  Ground  could  be:  The  Plain  of  Ceres  was  indeed
f  on  Athenian  Ground ,  but  then  it  was  not  near

*  where  the  Armies  lay,  and  they  being  inferiour  in

*  Force,  could  not  chufe  their  Ground,  or  fight

*  where  they  pleas’d  $  But  there  was  an  old  Temple
5  of  Ceres  and  Proferpina ,  near  their  Camp,  and
‘  Jikewife  fome  dedicated  Places  facred  to  thofe
€  Nymphs  and  Demy  Gods  fpoken  of  upon  Mount
f  Ctih<eron >  but  then  the  Land  belong’d  to  the  Ci-
f  tizens  of  Plat#a9  and  not  to  the  Athenians ,  and
f  this  perplex’d  them  much.

f  While  they  were  in  this  Uneafinefs,  the  Pla -

*  t<eans ,  to  {hew  their  good  will,  and  encourage
£  the  Army,  bellow’d  all  the  Lands  which  thofe

*  Temples  and  dedicated  Places  flood  on,  and  for
f  a  large  Space  round,  by  Deed  of  Gift  on
£  the  Athenians ,  fo  to  caufe  them  to  fight  on  At  he?
£  nian  Ground.

*  All  things  being  thus  elear?d  up,  and  the  Ar-
f  mies  juft  ready  to  engage,  the  Grecian  General
f  caufed  Sacrifices  to  the  Gods  for  Vi£lory  to  be
f  brought  to  the  he^d  of  the  Troops  j  nor  would

*  the  Athenians  ftir,  or  ftrike  a  Stroke,  till  they
f  were  ended,  and  that  the  Priefts  gave  Signals  of
f  the  Fortunate  Omens.  The  Perfian  Army  ad?
f  yanc’d,  the  Horfemen  charg’d  in  upon  the  fore-
£  moft  Troops,  the  Arrows  flew  in  Clouds,  and

*  many  were  flam*  but  ’twas  all  one,  the  Soldiers
|  fat  upon  the  Ground,  and  would  not  ftir  a  Foot.

£  But  as  foon  as  Paufanias  had  Notice  that  the
?  Sacrifices  were  happily  ended,  and  that  he  found

*  thofeTokens  in  the  JLntrails  of  the  Bealls,  which  the
f  Superftition  of  the  Age  eftcemed  Fortunate,  and
|  Signals  of  Succefs*  he  immediately  caus’d  the


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

f  Army  to  raife  a  Shout,  and  gave  the  Signal  of
c  Battel:  Upon  which  the  Soldiers  fuddenly  rife
4  up  upon  their  Feet,  with  Acclamations,  and  re-
4  ceiv’d  the  Charge  of  the  Barbarians  in  (uch  excel-
4  lent  Order,  and  with  fuch  undaunted  Bravery,
*  that  notwithftanding  the  Enemy  came  pouring  in
£  upon  them  with  their  Multitudes,  expe&ing  to
4  bear  all  down  before  them,  yet  the  Perjians  were
4  repulfed,  and  utterly  overthrown,  and  Mardonius
€  with  above  three  hundred  thoufand  Men  kill’d
4  upon  the  Spot.

What  Ecclefiaftick  Magick  was  this !  what  Super¬
ftition,  without  ground  !  The  Sacrifices  would  have
gone  on,  tho’  the  Armies  had  engag’d  }  or  if  not,
why  were  they  not  brought  fooncr  to  the  Place,
and  how  in  a  few  Moments  more  might  the  whole
Army  have  been  cut  in  Pieces  without  Refiftance,
for  want  of  the  Ceremony  of  a  timely  Sacrifice?
But  fuch  is  the  Power  of  Superftition,  and  to  fuch
fL  degree  of  Pofleffion  or  Infatuation  had  the  Devil ,
by  the  means  of  his  Jnftruments  the  Magiciansy
jbrought  Mankind.

This  I  take  to  be  the  Meridian  of  the  DeviPs
Influence,  and  when  the  Magick  Diabolical  was  at
its  greateft  Height.  The  Romans  were  fuperftitious
enough,  but  not  fo  grofly  given  up :  and  yet  the  Gre¬
cians  were  a  wife  Nation}  the  Athenians  were  fam’d
for  Wifdom  and  Knowledge}  for  Philofophy}  Art
and  Science  flourifh’d  among  them  to  a  degree  be¬
yond  all  the  reft  of  the  World.  Nay  they  defpis’d
the  Wifdom  of  all  the  World  in  comparifon  of
their  own }  yet  fwallow’d  up  with  the  Magick  of
Superftition,  they  were  in  fhort  bewitch’d  by  a
religious  Sorcery,  and  run  into  Superftition  to  an
excefs  equal  to  Madneis  and  Diftraftion.

The  Romans I  faid  above,  follow’d  them  at  the
Hells }  and  tho’  at  firft  the  wifeft  of  their  Leaders
feje6ted  the  Image  Worfliip  of  the  Greeks ,  nay

flood


*34


A  SYSTEM

flood  out  one  hundred  and  feventy  Years  from  Nu*
wa  Pompilius ,  efteeming  it  abfurd  and  impious  to  re-
prefent  things  glorious,  by  things  bafe  or  mean;
yet  fT rrpuinius  Prifcus  following  the  Ufage  of  the
Greeks ,  (who,  I  fay,  of  all  the  Nations  of  the  World
were  the  mo  ft  deluded  by  the  Devil ,)  brought  in
the  Cuftom  of  fetting  up  the  Images  of  their  Gods
in  their  Temples;  and  in  fome  Ages  after,  this  Ufe
of  Images  came  up  to  fuch  a  height,  and  multi¬
plied  to  fuch  an  infinite  Number,  that  it  was  next
to  impoflible  to  know  them  one  from  another,  but
they  were  oblig’d  to  write  their  Names  over  their
Statues  and  Images  ;  and  the  Numbers  of  their
Gods,  and  Demy-Gods,  grew  up  to  fuch  a  Multi¬
tude,  that  they  were  oblig’d  to  marflial  them  into
Regiments  and  Clafles,  Degrees  and  Orders,  and
even  of  them  too  many  to  repeat.  Such  as  DU
Confentes  Sekffiy  Dii  Patritii ,  DU  Medii  Infigniores^
DU  Medionm  or  common  Gods,  Terreftial  and  Coe-
leftial  Heroes,  Gods  and  Demy-Gods,  Nymphs,
and  in  a  word,  an  infinite  Throng  of  Gods.

Happy  Art!  however  Infernal  and  Diabolick,
that  could  furnifh  Gods  from  the  Street  to  the  Capi¬
tol;  nay  Dunghil  Gods,  Door-keeping  Gods,  and
Senate-Houfe  Gods,  Dii  Confcripti ,  and  above  all
the  reft,  as  the  Learned  Ladlantius  fays,  the  Rabble
of  Gods  beatify’d  by  Men.  Epimenides  Cretenjis
erefted  in  the  Athenian  Plains  the  famous  Altar  to
the  Dii  Ignatii ,  the  Unknown  Gods,  of  which
St.  Paul  took  Notice,  for  it  remain’d  there  to  his
time,  when  he  made  that  fam’d  Oration,  Inimitable
for  its  Eloquence  and  Beauty  of  Language,  as  well
as  Excellence  and  Strength  of  Argument,  when  he
flood  upon  Mars-Hill  at  Athens ,  confuting  the
Wifdom  of  the  Philofophers,  and  perhaps  Magi¬
cians .

And  whence  now  came  all  this  Ignorance  and
Superftition?  but  from  the  early  Delufions  of  the


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Devil ,  carry’d  on  among  Men  by  the  help  of  this
we  call  Magick  or  Black  Art ,  and  in  all  its  feveral
Compofitions  ?  that  is  to  fay,  as  above,  Divining, ,
South  faying^  Inch  ant  ment,  Wh  itch  craft,  Sorcery ,  and
dealing  with  Familiar  Sprits ,  Necromancy ,  and  the
Devil .

Thefe  things  introduc’d  Enthufiafm,  Enthu¬
fiafm  brought  up  Idolatry,  and  then  Witchcraft
and  Magick  brought  down  the  Minds  of  Men  to
a  Meannefs  fit  to  be  deluded  by  them.

It  may  not  be  improper  to  obferve  here,  that  the
Black  Art ,  as  thus  explain’d,  may  be  lefs  needful
in  thofe  Days,  when  the  deluded  World  was  more  eafy
to  be  impofed  upon  and  cheated,  than  now,  when
the  World  feem  to  have  their  Eyes  open,  and  re¬
quire  more  Artifice  to  impofe  upon  them  with.

In  the  Grecian  and  Roman  Times,  the  Minds  of
Men  untaught,  and  without  the  Affifiance  of  Di¬
vine  Illuminations,  were  eafily  impos’d  upon,  given
up  to  ftrong  Delufions,  and  to  believe  Lies*  they
were  bigotted  by  the  Priefts,  and  by  their  own
Native  Superftitions,  and  were  eafily  deluded  to
worfhip  any  Gods,  every  bodies  Gods,  and  even  as
above,  Unknown  Gods.  Happy  Ignorance !  com¬
par’d  to  our  Age,  who  by  their  Excefs  of  Know¬
ledge  and  Senfe  are  arriv’d  to  a  degree  of  Liberty,
from  the  Slavery  and  Bondage  of  all  Religion*  that
efteem  themfelves  wife,  in  having  found  out  a  new
Happinefs  for  Mankind,  freeing  him  from  the
Chains  of  Doftrine  and  Principle,  triumphing  in  a
State  of  compleat  Atheifm  and  Irreligion,  and  in-
Head  of  worfliipping  many  Gods,  fave  them¬
felves  the  trouble  of  Idolatry,  and  worfhip  no  God
at  all.

It  muft  be  confefs’d  it  has  coft  the  Devil  fome
Pains,  he  has  employ’d  a  world  of  Agents,  and
bellow’d  a  great  deal  of  Magick,  to  bring  this  to
pafs*  nay,  in  my  Opinion  it  feems  that  he  never

was


A  SYSTEM

\  X

Was  able  to  bring  it  to  pafs,  no,  not  by  all  his  A-
gents,  and  whatever  Pains  and  Expence  he  had  been
at}  but  on  the  contrary,  it  came  into  his  Manage¬
ment  by  an  unforefeen,  and,  even  to  the  Devil  him-
fe If,  an  unexpe&ed  turn  of  his  Affairs:  For  firft  it
feem’d  to  be  a  new  Difcovery  in  its  very  Nature,
and  what  Satan  had  no  Notion  of  for  many  thou-
fands  of  Years}  and  1  do  not  find  the  moft  Learned
in  thefe  Matters  are  agreed  yet  about  it,  as  whe¬
ther  it  is  immediately  from  Hell,  a  new  Invention
of  the  Place,  and  fo  introduc’d  by  the  Devil  as  a
Favour  and  Advantage  to  Mankind  }  or  whether
the  Cafe  is  inverted,  and  as  Man  has  in  this  Pra¬
ctice  out-finn’d  the  j Devil,  fo  he  has  been  the  Devil's
Inftru&or  in  it,  and  brought  the  thing  to  him,  as
a  Projector  does  a  Scheme  to  the  Perfon  whom  he
would  have  to  manage  it  for  him.

Indeed  I  mu  ft  do  the  Devil  the  Juftice  to  fay
I  think  it  was  the  latter}  that  it  never  enter’d  into
Satan's  Head,  as  cunning  as  he  is,  to  imagin  any
thing  fo  grofs  would  go  down  with  the  World}
that  tho’  it  is  true  he  had  begun  early  in  fetting
up  himfelf  in  the  place  of  God,  and  had  gotten
himfelf  to  beworfhip’d  as  a  God,  yet  he  never  of¬
fer’d  to  fuggeft  to  Mankind  that  there  was  no  God
to  be  ador’d  at  all}  no  Supreme  Being  exifting,  to
whom  the  Homage  of  the  World  was  due,  as  to
its  Creator  and  Preferver.

The  Devil  knew  the  early  Principles,  and  whence
they  were  infus’d}  he  knew  that  it  was  a  Fire
kindled  with  the  Life,  and  that  could  not  be  ex-
tinguifli’d  but  with  the  fame  Life}  that  it  was  the
Work  of  Nature  in  Man,  twifted  with  his  Reafon,
and  as  he  thought  it  impoffible  to  be  erac’d  and  ob¬
literated,  fo  he  never  attempted  it.  Not  to  believe
a  God!  All  Hell  acknowledg’d  the  Mighty  Truth,
and  the  Devil  himfelf  could  never  imagine  Mankind
pould  be  brought  to  cjueftion  it.

Infernal


of  MAG  1  C  K.

Infernal  Spirits  Themfelves  have  deify' dy
But  Devils  nor  Men  the  Being  of  God  deny'd  ;
'Still  wifer  Ages  found  new  ways  to  Sin ,

And  turn'd  the  Devil  out ,  to  let  the  Atheift  in.

This  Attainment  is  indeed  a  new  Invention;  but
like  our  late  South- Sea  Stock  it  is  run  up,  and  has
gain’d  upon  Mankind  by  a  general  Infatuation,  and
may  well  be  call’d  Magick  in  its  very  Abftraft.
Nothing  indeed  but  a  kind  of  thinking  rightly  call'd
Free,  and  founded  on  Schemes  of  the  moft  re¬
fin’d  Infidelity,  could  aft  upon  fuch  a  Syftem  as
this:  What  Magick  muft  there  be  to  work  up  the
Mind  of  Man  to  a  Poflibility  of  receiving  fuch  a
Principle,  without  Aftonifhment.  No  God!  what
a  Shock  it  gives  to  the  Soul,  what  a  Blow  to  the
reafoning  Powers!

j the  fecret  Trepidation  racks  the  Soul ,

And  while  he  fays  No  God ,  replies ,  thou  Fool !

It  muft  be  a  moft  exquifitc  Piece  of  Magical
Work,  and  Magick  in  it  felf  muft  be  a  moft  exqui-
fite  Art,  more  refin’d  and  more  fuperior  in  W'ick-
ednefs,  than  the  moft  fuperlative  Craft  of  Hell  ever
arriv’d  to,  that  fhould  raze  out  the  Impreflions  of  a
God  from  the  Soul  of  Man,  where  they  were  firft
riveted  by  the  very  fame  Hand  of  Power  that  created
him;  that  could  harden  the  Soul  againft  the  Ter¬
rors  of  his  Maker,  and  blot  out  all  the  Reprefen-
tations  of  God,  which  the  light  of  Nature  anti
of  Reafon  had  printed  upon  his  Mind.

It  is  beyond  even  the  lofty  Theme  I  am  upon,  and
as  the  Power  of  Magick  cannot  reach  ir,  fo  it  is  alfo
beyond  me  to  conceive  of  it,  either  what  Power  it
is  wrought  by,  or  from  what  ftrange  corrupted
Fountain  it  flows.  I  confefs,  I  cannot  find  in  my

Heart


*37


A  SYSTEM

Heart  to  charge  Satan  with  it,  for  I  would  not
flander  the  Devil j  nor  do  I  find  any  Footfteps  of
it  in  all  the  Devil's  Story,  or  in  all  the  Accounts  of
his  Management  in  the  W orld :  1  leave  it  therefore
to  the  Learned  Searchers  into  the  Antiquity  of  thefe
Times,  to  find  out,  if  it  be  poffible*  its  Original*
and  tell  us  from  whence  it  proceeds  $  promifing  in
the  mean  time,  that  if  they  will  but  tell  me  where
it  begun,  I’ll  take  care  to  give  them  an  Account
where  it  will  end,  and  that  from  very  good  Au¬
thority.

The  bringing  Mankind  to  deny  the  Being  of  their
Maker,  is  a  thing  in  it  felf  fo  furprifing,  fo  ftiock-
ing  to  Nature  and  to  common  Senfe,  that  it  can¬
not  but  raife  our  Curiofity,  if  poffible,  to  find  out
its  Original  5  I  acknowledge  my  felf  to  have  loft
a  great  deal  of  Labour  in  the  Search,  nor  have  all
the  Methods  I  have  hitherto  taken  been  able  to
give  me  any  confiderable  Light  into  the  Matter.  I
am  loth  I  confefs  to  go  to  Satan  himfelf  to  en¬
quire  about  it,  and  fo  deal  with  the  Devil  my  felf,
while  I  am  exploding  the  Pradice  in  others.  Be-
fides,  I  am  very  doubtful,  whether,  if  I  did,  he
could  give  me  a  true,  or  at  leaft,  a  full  Ac¬
count  of  it  $  for  I  am  under  a  full  Perfwafion  that
it  is  beyond  him,  that  the  Original  was  from  the
Nature  of  Man,  arriv’d  by  his  own  Improvement
to  a  height  beyond  his  firft  Inftrudor.  How  the
Heart  of  Man  became  receptive  of  Wickednels  be¬
yond  the  Power  of  Hell  and  Devils  to  infufe,  is  a
Point  too  curious  to  dwell  upon  here,  we  may  meet
with  it  again  in  our  way.

It  may  be  true,  and  we  have  good  reafon  to  fay
we  find  it  fo,  that  the  Devil  greedily  embrac’d  the
Propofal  \  and  like  the  King  of  Spainy  when  Colum¬
bus  brought  him  the  firft  News  of  a  new  World  in
America  offer’d  to  his  Government,  and  adding  a
new  Empire  to  his  Dominion!  $  He  whofe  Ambi¬
tion


of  MAGICK.

tion  had  before  grafp’d  the  whole  World  in  Ima¬
gination,  yet  greedily  accepted  the  Difcovery,  how
mean  foever  the  Difcoverer  was.  Thus  Satan ,
however  out-witted  and  out-finn’d  by  the  Dexte¬
rity  of  Men,  being  fhew’d  a  way  of  infulting  his
Maker,  (his  darling  Sin,  and  the  height  of  his  Am¬
bition)  which  he  never  thought  of  before,  tho*
perhaps  fecretly  difdaining  to  be  out-ftiot  in  his
own  Bow,  yet  greedily  embrac’d  the  Difcovery,
embarks  in  the  Scheme,  and  prompts  the  wicked
Contrivers  to  go  on  with  it,  with  the  utmoft  Ap¬
plication.

It  may  be  ask’d  of  me,  why  I  will  Infift  upon
this  matter  in  a  Treatife  of  Magick*  that  this  re¬
lates  to  the  Atheifts,  not  to  Magicians ,  and  that  b)r
the  fame  Rule,  all  Enthufiafms,  Herefies  and  myfte-
rious  things  in  Religion,  as  well  as  in  Science,  may
be  rated  in  the  fame  Clafs,  and  be  call’d  by  the
fame  Name,  and  fo  we  {hall  make  a  Magick  of  Re¬
ligion  at  laft.

But  let  a  fhort  Anfwer  fuffice  to  this  weak  Obje-
£tion*  All  Errors  in  Religion  are  not  equally  Diabo¬
lic,  no,  nor  equally  mifehievous*  and  as  I  have  faid
above,  that  this  feems  to  be  of  an  Original  deeper
than  Hell,  and  out  of  the  Reach  of  the  Devil *  fo,
as  far  as  it  is  a  Crime  which  derives  from  the  Man
as  an  Independent,  andafting  th t  Devil  by  himfelf,  I
think  it  muft  have  the  Height  of  human  Imagina¬
tion  and  Invention  in  it,  and  fo  may  be  call’d
Magical,  as  Magick  is  a  Sicence  or  Art  of  doing
Superlative  Evil.

If  then  it  {hall  be  allow’d  at  lead  to  be,  as  it  really
is,  an  Extreme  of  human  Wickednefs,  it  muft
have  the  EfTence  of  Magick  in  it,  as  Magick  is
nowconfider’d  *  and  therefore  when  I  mention  it  in
the  Title  of  this  Chapter,  I  call  it  Mag  1  c  k  in  its
Practice  and  Perfection.  What  myfterious  Power
muft  it  be,  or  as  ’tis  ufual  to  exprefs  it,  what  Ma-
6  gick


A  SYSTEM

gick  muft  there  be  in  it*  that  Mankind  can  be
harden’d  to  a  Pitch,  capable  of  denying  the  Power
that  made  them,  capable  of  arguing  againft  the  Re¬
ality  of  that  Being,  which  gave  them  Being  ?

Nor  does  the  Magick  confift  in  the  Fad,  nei¬
ther  do  I  lay  the  Strefs  of  it  there  ;  or  upon  the  Sin
againft  Reafon,  againft  common  Senfe,  the  Ingrati¬
tude  to  their  Maker,  the  open  Infult  of  Heaven,
the  Venture  of  provoking  that  Being  whofe  Power
it  infults,  and  many  other  things  of  like  Impor¬
tance;  thefe  are  things  the  People  I  am  talking  to,
and  the  Age  I  am  talking  in,  can  ridicule,  and  make
a  Jeft  of,  and  laugh  at  the  mention  of  them ;  nor
lhall  I  dwell  upon  them,  the  Divines  are  equal  to
this  Task,  and  their  proper  Work  it  is.  I  leave  it
with  them.

But  my  Enquiry  looks  another  way,  and  there
the  Magick  discovers  it  felf ;  viz.  by  what  ftrang®
Influence,  by  what  fecret  Wonder  in  Nature  it  is
brought  about,  that  Men  who  fay  they  have  Souls,
that  have  a  Capacity  of  reafoning  and  judging,  and
whofe  univerfal  Pajjion  is  to  be  vain  of  that  Judg¬
ment,  proud  of  their  reafoning  Powers,  and  of  their
being  capable  of  cenfuring  the  Defefts  of  o-
thers,  that  Thefe  fhould  ever  be  capable  of  being
thus  impos’d  upon*  of  receiving  fuch  a  Notion,  and
even  of  defiring  it  fhould  be  true.  This  is  indeed
aftonifhing !  and  here  I  confefs  there  muft  be  fome
Magick, ,  fome  fecret  prevailing  Artifice,  whether  of
the  Devil ,  or  of  what  elfe,  who  can  tell?  Here
muft  be  fome  Wheels  and  Springs,  able,  when  fee
a  going,  to  give  a  Progreflion  to  the  whole  Move¬
ment;  and  here  muft  be  fome  fecret  Hand  turning
thofe  Wheels  and  Springs;  be  it  Internal,  Exter¬
nal,  or  Infernal,  I  leave  it  as  I  find  it;  only  I
think,  as  I  thought  before,  my  Judgment  di&ates
tome,  that  theDmVis  not  in  the  Plot,  that  he  had
no  hand  in  it,  at  leaft  not  at  firft ;  what  he  may  have


of  MAGIC  K.

done  fince  I  know  nothing  of  yet,  and  I  do
not  fee  how  I  fhall,  at  leaft  not  till  I  have  made
farther  Inquiry.

In  looking  into  this  Abfurdity,  which  fo  many
Men  of  Parts,  and  who  fcorn  Abfurdities  in  other
things,  are  pleas’d  to  come  into,  I  cannot  but  ob-
ferve  how  bufy  they  are*  how  many  Arts  and  Tricks
truly  Magical,  do  they  find  out,  to  reafon  them-
lelves  into  the  belief  of  that  horrid  Inconfiftency  ?
What  fubterfuges  do  they  fly  to,  what  Arguments,
weak  as  they  are,  do  they  ufe*  and  how  do  they
cleave  and  cling  about  them,  loading  every  Word
that  can  be  offer’d  againft  them  with  innumerable
Cavils,  and  with  the  moil  apparent  Sophiftry !

One  fort  will  have  a  God  of  one  kind,  One  of  an¬
other.  The  Sceptick  forms  the  Notion  of  a  God  in
his  Mind,  but  ftrips  him  of  all  his  governing  Pow¬
er,  divefts  him  of  Knowledge  and  Wifdom,  Holy-
nefs  and  Juftice,  and  all  thofe  glorious  Attributes
for  which  he  is  worthy  to  be  ador’d,  and  which
make  him  juftly  the  Obje£t  of  our  Homage,  and
of  our  Affe&ion  too.

The  Deift  ftrips  him  of  the  very  conftituting
Part  of  the  Deity,  and  brings  him  down  to  a  Level
with  our  Reafoning-,  divefting  him  of  all  Govern¬
ing,  Prote&ing  and  Prefcrving  Providence,  and  parti¬
cularly  of  all  Refentment  againft  the  vileft  Offences  5
robbing  him  of  the  Power  of  Rewards  and  Punish¬
ments,  and  making  him  fo  good,  fo  kind  and  graci¬
ous,  that  they  do  not  leave  him  room  to  be  Juft,
or  allow  him  any  Refentment  let  the  cafes  be  what
they  will.

The  jlthtift  cut-goes  them  all,  and  not  able  in*
deed  to  reconcile  their  Notions  to  common  Senfe,
much  lefs  to  reafon  himfelf  into  their  Opinions,
audacioufly  fhuts  his  Eyes  againft  Reafon  and  Senfe
alfo,  and  tells  you  there  is  No  God  at  all.


R


Now


24 1


A  SYSTEM

Now  Magick  puts  an  end  to  all  this  Difficulty!
for  by  confulting  the  dark  Oracle,  and  entring  a
little  into  the  Secrets  of  the  facred  Science ,  as  they
wickedly  tell  you  it  is  they  come  out  transform’d
into  a  new  kind  of  Species,  they  tell  you  that  they
are  arriv’d  to  a  compleat  Knowledge  of  the  Eternal
Myfleries;  that  God  is  nothing  but  the  Sum  of
human  Defires,  the  Ecftafy  of  an  exalted  Spirit,
carry’d  up  into  the  Regions  of  eternal  Calm  and
Quiet,  where  the  Soul  is  in  Raptures  of  Joy  and
Love.  This  they  refolve  by  the  Light  of  the  re¬
fin’d  fublime  Judgment  to  be  the  Perfeftion  of  Hap«
pinefs,  and  that  is  God .  Amor  Deus  e/?  Jupiter
quod  cun  que  cupis ,

They  tell  your  farther,  to  defcend  to  the  Perfona-
lity  of  a  God,  is  talking  wildly  and  immethodically,
and  what  is  inconfiftent  with  Nature  3  that  God  is
a  Quality,  rather  than  a  Beings  that  cannot  be  de-
ferib’d  by  Words,  any  more  than  it  can  be  limited
by  Space  j  that  the  fupreme  Effence  is  an  in-
conceiveable  Spirit  of  Light  and  Glory,  and  the
Soul  receives  an  aflimulating  Light  and  Knowledge,
even  by  the  Contemplation  of  it,  by  the  Rays  of  a
communicable  Effulgence  j  fo  that  having  been
once  illuminated,  it  continues  enjoying  a  full  Luftre
of  eminent  Glory  for  ever  after.

This  unintelligible  Stuff  is  all  Magick  to  me,  and
I  believe  we  may  truly  fay  it  is  fo  to  us  all  >  it  is
fome  of  the  Cant  of  the  Trade,  the  Terms  of  Art
in  that  Profeffion*  and  if  this  be  the  Difcovery
that  Magick  makes  to  the  Mind,  the  Magicians  will
have  fmall  caufe  to  boaffc  of  their  Improvement,  I
prefume  it  fliall  leave  the  Mind  darker  than  it
finds  it.

Now  that  this  makes  room  for  Atbeifm ,  or  Deifm ,
or  Polytheifm  in  the  Mind,  it  is  very  evident  5  for,
next  to  the  denying  the  divine  Being,  our  enter¬
taining  falfe  and  corrupt  Notions  unworthy  of

-  God,


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

.«•  V,.

God,  and  of  the  reafoning  human  Soul,  are  fatal  to
Religion.

Yet,  what  Impreffions  have  thefe  things  made
upon  fome  of  the  politeft  Men  in  this  Age,  who
pretending  to  extirpate  all  the  Notions  of  Religion
in  their  Souls,  begin  it  with  denying  the  Being  of
the  God  that  evidently  made  them  3  if  you  pretend
to  argue  from  Reafon,  from  Nature,  from  vifible
Things,  to  invifible,  they  reje£t  it  all,  and  call  for
Demonftration*  they  will  have  Heaven  meafur’d
Mathematically  and  Geographically,  as  it  were  by
Scale  and  Compals,  and  will  judge  of  things  invi-
fible  according  to  Gunter  3  they  will  allow  of  no¬
thing  but  what  they  can  fee  with  their  Eyes,  and  feel
with  their  Hands,  nor  will  they  believe  any  fuch  thing
as  an  Incomprehenfible.  They  will  have  all  Heaven
refolv'd  into  Nature,  all  Religion  into  Reafon,  and
all  God  into  Philofophy.  They  are  not  thus  diffi-
cult  in  other  things  3  lefs  Evidence  will  ferve  them
in  Crime,  and  they  will  make  ihift  with  the  weak-
eft  Arguments  in  the  World,  to  perfwade  them-
felves  into  the  Lawfulnefs  and  Juftice  of  the  vileft
things  that  they  allow  the  Praftice  of 5  fo  partial
are  they  to  their  corrupt  Inclinations,  fo  prejudic’d
againft  every  thing  that  looks  like  a  fuperior
and  legal  Reftraint  to  their  Vices  3  is  not  this
juftly  call’d  Magick?  is  it  not  with  the  utmofl:
Propriety  brought  into  a  Syftem  of  Magick  ?  is  it
not  really  a  Black  Arty  a  Piece  of  Conjuration  and
Witchcraft?  is  it  not  all  Necromancy  and  the
Devil?

When  Human  Wit,  in  fearch  of  things  Divine ,
Would  Reafon’s  Light  with  Revelation  join,

ExpeEi  to  have  Almighty  Being  made  known
By  the  fame  Light,  by  which  we  know  our  own  3


Creating


A  SYSTEM

Creating  by  Created  would  explain ,

And  Demonstration  of  firft  Powers  obtain  *

How  does  the  wild  Philofophy  confefs ,

Its  Weaknefs ,  Ignorance ,  Emptynefs  5

i/ra  do  the  Naturalifts ,  SOS  OV  Dreamy

tVhen  gravely  they  prefent  the  Sacred  Scheme  !
Laydown  the  Draught, draw  out  the  Magick  P fin,  7
A  felf-deriving  Worlds  a  felf-creating  Man\

And  would  a  Nature  void  of  God  explain .  5

Strange  !  how  when  Men  are  once  of  Crime  poflefs’d,
'their  reafoning  Faculties  are  all  fupprefs'd.

If  of  Religion  they  fome  Hints  defire ,

What  Proofs,  what  Demonftrations  they  require  ?
What  Difficulties,  ere  they  can  fubmit ,

What  reafoning  Scruples  raife ,  what  turns  of  Wit,
To  jhift  the  ftrong  Conviction  from  the  Mind  *

As  //Religion  all  to  Senfe  confin’d,

Should  every  School  Diftindtion  undergo ,

And  Rules  of  Faith,  to  Rules  of  Reafon  bow .

But  if  to  harden’d  Crime  they  but  encline ,

In  vain  their  reafoning  Light  pretends  to  Jhine ,

The  wildeft  Notions  blindly  entertain*

Reafon  and  Nature  ftruggle:  but  all  in  vain.

Error,  like  Mother’s  Milk  they  fwallow  downy
And  by  their  Choice  make  every  Crime  their  own.
The  deadly  poifonous  Draught  drink  freely  ///,

And  ask  no  reafoning  Queftions  when  they  Sin.

Take  Crime  by  Lump  howe'er  abfurd  and  grofs,

And  wed  Miftakes,  for  better  or  for  worfe.

So  pedling  Merchants,  their  Stocks  encreafe ,

Turn  W holefale-men*  and  only  trade  by  th’  Piece.


1


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

The  bringing  Mankind  then  into  thefe  Abfurdi-
ties,  I  fay,  is  the  height  of  Magick;  ’tis  making  them
capable  of  entertaining  Atheiftic  Notions,  and  on
Pretence  of  reafoning  to  receive  Principles  incon-
fiftent  with  Reafon  ;  and  becaufe  things  Divine  are
in  fome  Particulars  incomprehenfible,  they  run  into
Notions  neither  comprehenfible  or  rational.

This  is  infinitely  beyond  all  the  Enthufiafm  and
religious  Frenzy  in  the  World;  ’tis  brought  about
by  a  Pofleftion,  a  meer  Rapture  of  the  Imagina¬
tion,  which,  in  a  word,  forms  in  the  Mind  a  new
Scheme  of  Nature,  new  Notions  of  Being. ,  of  Life,
of  Motion,  of  paft,  prefent,  and  future  ;  nay,  they
tell  you  as  much  ;  they  tell  you  the  common  Con-i
ccptions  of  things  are  only  calculated  to  keep  the
World  blind  and  dark,  that  wrap’d  up  in  their  own
Ignorance,  they  may  be  eafy.

That  if  by  a  fupernatural  Light,  and  by  the
Study  of  facred  Science,  (that  is  to  fay  of  Magick)
a  few  of  the  more  enlightned  part  of  Mankind  have
attain’d  to  a  clearer  View  of  things,  and  that  View
or  Knowledge  is  communicated  to  the  Souls  of
thofe  Few,  by  a  fublime  Influence;  yet  it  is  not  fo
in  the  main,  that  the  reft  of  the  World  underftand
nothing  of  it,  and  that  Mankind  remain  blind  and
ignorant,  for  want  meerly  of  Application  to,  and
Study  of  a  true  Knowledge.

Thefe  are  the  Things  which  they  tell  us  of  them-
felves,  and  which  they  talk  in  a  kind  of  Cant  par¬
ticular  to  their  own  fort;  reprefenting  themfelves
as  a  kind  of  angelick  People,  that  live  above  the
reft  of  the  World,  and  that  a£fc  in  a  higher  Sphere,
are  endow’d  with  fuperior  Light,  that  live  beyond
the  ordinary  Rate  of  their  Fellow-Creatures.  What
Reality  there  is  in  thefe  things,  what  Attainments
they  have,  and  how  they  have  exercifed  them,  we
{hall  difcover  more  plainly,  when  we  look  a  little
intQ  the  reft  of  it;  when  we  fee  what  angelick

R  3  things


A  SYSTEM

things  they  do,  and  in  what  manner  they  exercife
their  extraordinary  Faculties  j  whether  they  appear
to  be  Illuminations  from  Heaven,  or  Delufions  of
Hell  *  whether  Emanations  of  the  Realms  of  Light,
or  Mills  and  Vapours  from  the  Regions  of  Dark-
nefs  5  in  a  word,  whether  they  are  Revelations  and
Infpiration  from  the  good  Spirit  above,  or  Enthu-
liafms,  Witchcraft,  and  Sorcery,  prompted  and
affifted  by  the  Devil.

How  low- priz’d  are  all  their  Undertakings,  how
mean  and  contemptible  the  Methods  they  take  to
exert  thefe  noble  and  fuperior  Faculties?  How  do
they  prafldfe  upon  Mankind  by  Conjurations,  Spells
and  Enchantments,  by  the  molt  pitiful  and  fcanda-
lous  Delullons,  pretending  to  divine  and  fuperior
Knowledge?  One  part  of  their  Performances
confills  in  juggling  and  flight  of  Hand,  another
part  in  Fraud  and  Fallhood,  another  in  the  moll
ignorant  Pretences  *  and  the  lafl,  and  as  I  may  fay,
the  only  real  Part,  in  a  meer  Necromancy  and  Deal¬
ing  with  familiar  Spirits.

In  their  Operations,  were  their  Acquirements
Divine,  was  their  Power  from  Heaven,  were  the
extraordinary  Accomplifhments  which  they  boallof,
truly  and  as  they  fay  Seraphick  and  Heavenly,  it
would  appear  in  this,  that  like  their  heavenly  Origi¬
nal  they  would  be  exerted  in  doing  good*  they  would
be  fliewn  in  a£ts  of  Charity,  of  Beneficence  to
Mankind,  moving  the  World  to  reform,  and
in  a  word,  in  bringing  a  Glory  to  Religion,  and  to
every  laudable  thing*  whereas  on  the  contrary  we
fee,  the  Magicians  of  the  latter  Ages  of  the  World
are,  and  always  have  been,  employed  in  the  extreme
of  Wickednefs,  in  the  blackell  Crimes,  in  prote&ing
and  encouraging  the  worll  and  moll  devilifli  Pra-
ttices  in  the  World,  prompting  confederated  Mil-
chiefs,  joyning  in  with  Murder,  Treafon,  Affaffina-
tion,  and  all  manner  of  wicked  things.


Thus


of  M  A  G  i  c  rc

Thus  they  tell  us  of  the  Magicians  among  the
Germans ,  who  fomented  the  Rebellion  of  thofe  En-
thufiafts  call  Anabaptiftsy  which  brought  fo  many
thoufands  to  their  Grave  by  War  and  Treafon.
Some  will  tell  us,  that  Count  Wallefiiney  the  Great
General  under  the  Emperor  Ferdinand  II,  and  who
fought  the  great  Battel  of  Lutzen ,  againft  the
King  of  Sweden ,  us’d  Magick,  and  that  feveral  of
the  German  Officers  had  Charms  and  Spells  about
them,  to  render  them  invulnerable,  fo  that  no
Sword  would  cut  them,  no  Bullets  wound  them  ;
but  that  they  were  deluded  by  the  Magicians ,  for
that  many  of  them  were  found  among  the
Slain,  with  Charms  hanging  about  their  Necks;
and  that  Wallenftine  himfelf,  notwithftanding  his
Magick  Art,  was  overthrown,  and  fliame fully  bea¬
ten  by  the  Swedes  in  that  great  Battel,  and  was  him¬
felf  afterwards  aflaffinated  and  kill’d  by  an  Irijh
Captain  in  the  Caftle  of  Egra  in  Bohemia ,  though
furrounded  with  his  Guards.

Many  Inftances  have  been  given,  and  Hiftory  is
full  of  them,  where  the  Pretenders  to  this  Art  have
been  abandon’d  to  Ruin,  either  deluded  by  the
Dxmon  they  trufted,  or  through  the  real  Defici¬
ency  of  the  Art  it  felf;  the  latter  of  which  I  infift
upon  has  been  chiefly  the  Reafon  of  it;  for  what
Operation  could  they  expeft  from  the  help  of  Ma¬
gick,  to  counter-act  the  Determinations  of  Provi¬
dence?  even  Balaam  himfelf  could  declare  it  thus;
Surely  there  is  no  Enchantment  againft  j  acob,  neither
is  there  any  Divination  againft  Israel.  Numb,
xxiii.  2.  j.


R  4  CHAP,


A  S  Y  ST  E  M


CHAP.  II.

The  Scene  chang'd ;  That  as  the  Devil  aBed  at
Firft  with  his  Black  Art  without  the  Ma¬
gicians,  fo  the  Magicians  feem  to  carry  it
on  now  without  the  Devil.

Hitherto  I  have  made  the  Devil  the  Aggreftor  in
all  the  Tranfadtions  between  himfelf  and  Man¬
kind,  but  now  we  muft  turn  the  Tables  3  for  * whe¬
ther  it  be ,  that  finding  things  go  on  currently,  and
to  hisMind,  heonly  fits  ftill  and  looks  on,  like  an  En«
gineer  who  has  with  infinite  Art  and  great  Fa¬
tigue  form’d  a  new  Machine,  then  fets  it  at  W ork,
and  feeing  it  perform  according  to  Expeftation,  fits
down  with  Satisfaction,  and  lets  it  go  round  of  it
felf:  Or  whether  the  Nature  of  Man,  corrupt,
and  prompt  to  all  the  foolifh  and  foul  things  the
Devil  could  put  into  his  Head,  does  really  run  on
fafter  than  the  Devil  can  drive  him :  This  as  a
Doubt,  which  either  Philofophy  or  Divinity  have
not  yet  rcfolv’d,  I  muft  leave  it  to  Time  and  Expe¬
rience  to  explain.

That  thus  it  is,  the  Faft  is  plain  $  if  th t  Black  or
Diabolick  Art  was  at  firft  a  Machine  of  the  Devil ,
or  let  it  be  whofe  it  will,  it  works  now  of  it  felf,
it  performs  to  the  Devil's  Satisfaction  5  he  has  little
to  do  but  to  fit  ftill,  and  fee  the  Wheels  go  round.

Nay,  we  may  fay,  the  Scholars  teach  the  Ma¬
iler,  the  Magician  feems  to  guide,  nay  to  command
the  Devil ,  whofe  Art  it  is  that  he  profeffes,  and
according  to  the  Lines  in  my  Title,

The  ohfequious  Devil  attends  the  Sorcerer's  Spell-,

The  Mill  turns  round  the  Horfe ,  who  firft  turns
round  the  Mill

*  9TL


of  MAG  I  C  K.

*Tis  worth  obferving  here,  how  remarkable  the
Turn  is  that  Teems  to  be  given  to  the  working  of
thefe  Infernal  Machines.  At  firfl,  the  Devil  had  Tome
Difficulty  with  Mankind,  was  oblig’d  to  a£b  with
great  Craft  and  Subtilty,  to  make  his  Acquaintance
among  them,  as  I  have  obferv’d  at  large  j  after
this  he  got  the  ATcendant  to  Tuch  a  degree,  that
he  (as  the  Devil  you  know  is  apt  to  encroach  where
he  finds  room  for  it)  Tec  himfelf  up  for  a  Guide,
then  a  Governor,  then  a  God  $  was  firfl  follow’d
as  a  Director  or  Advifer,  next  obey’d  and  fubmitted
to  as  a  Governor  and  Commander  5  and  then  (for
he  never  refs)  worfhipp’d  as  a  God  5  which  no  doubt
was  his  firfl,  and  of  Neceffity  mufl  be  his  higheft
Aim  and  Ambition.

But  now,  by  we  know  not  what  Fate,  Mankind
feems  to  have  got  the  better  of  him ;  inflead  of  be¬
ing  waited  upon  in  Form,  and  humbly  expefled,  as
in  his  firfl  Appearances  j  inflead  of  being  Paw-wa'd9
and  great  AfTemblies  and  Ceremonies  us’d  to  ob¬
tain  an  Audience  of  him,  he  comes  now  at  every
old  Woman’s  Call,  and  upon  the  mofl  trifling  Oc¬
casion  $  inflead  of  being  a  Counfellor  or  an  Advi¬
fer,  much  lefs  a  Governor,  now  he’s  a  meer  Er¬
rand  Boy,  runs  and  goes,  will  do  any  Drudgery,
work  like  a  Horfe,  fetch  and  carry  like  a  Dog,  dig
Ditches,  carry  Burthens,  build  Churches,  or  any
thing  the  Priefls  and  the  Conjurers  bid  him  do  5
witnefs  New ‘Market  Heathy  Stone-hengc ,  Crowland
Abbey,  and  a  thoufand  more  things,  which  to  be
fure  the  Devil  did,  becaufe  we  don’t  know  how
elfe  they  could  be  done.

The  Magicians  were  formerly  the  Devil's  Ser¬
vants,  but  now  they  are  his  Mailers,  and  that  to
fuch  a  degree,  that  ’tis  but  drawing  a  Circle,
calling  a  few  Figures,  muttering  a  little  Ara-
hick ,  and  up  comes  the  Devil ,  as  readily  as  the
Drawer  at  a  Tavern,  with  a  d'ye  call  Sir?  or  like  a

Scots


*4  9


2J0


A  SYSTEM

Scots  Caude ,  with  What's  your  Honour's  Wull  Sir  f
Nay,  and  as  the  learned  in  the  Art  fay,  He  muft  come ,
he  can't  help  it :  Then  as  to  tempting,  he’s  quite  out
of  Doors.  And  I  think,  as  the  old  Parliament  did  by
the  Bifhops,  we  may  e’en  vote  him  ufelefs :  In  a
word,  there’s  no  manner  of  Occafion  for  him;
Mankind  are  as  forward  as  he  can  wifh  and  defire  of
them :  Nay,  fome  cunning  Men  tell  us  we  fin  fa¬
lter  than  the  Devil  can  keep  Pace  with  us;  as  wit-
nefs  the  late  witty  and  moderately  wicked  Lady —
who  blefs’d  her  Stars,  that  the  Devil  never  tempted
her  to  any  thing,  he  underftood  himfelf  better,  for
fhe  knew  well  enough  how  to  fin  without  him,
and  that  it  would  be  lofing  his  time  to  talk  to
her.

Likewife  our  happy  Friend  the  much  honoured
Sir// - ,  who  values  himfelf  upon  this  particu¬

lar  Accomplifhment,  that  he  is  able  to  S I N  like  a
Gentleman ;  nay  he  merits  much  from  Satan,  in  that,
if  he  may  be  believed  when  he  fpeaks  the  word  of
himfelf,  he  is  alfo  able  to  teach  him  (the  Devil)  to
be  more  refinedly  wicked  than  he  is  :  This

Sir  77„ -  certainly  gives  the  Devil  very  little

Trouble  about  him :  and  tho’  I  don’t  hear  that  the
old  Gentleman  is  yet  come  to  School  to  the  Ba^
ronet;  yet  as  the  Baronet  don’t  come  to  learn  of
him,  fo  he  (the  Devil)  need  not  come  to  teach  him,
for  that  he  is  certainly  as  well  accotnpliflied  in  the
horrid  Art  as  the  Devil  can  make  him.

The  Age  we  live  in,  fruitful  in  Black  Arts  (whe¬
ther  in  that  which  by  way  of  Eminence  we  call
Black  Art  or  no,  is  yet  undetermined)  affords  us
many,  I  dare  not  fay  bright,  Examples  of  flaming
Wickednefs:  ’Tis  no  new  thing  to  hear  the  Right
Honourable  my  Lord— — —  tho’  his  Lordfhip  is
known  to  be  no  Necromancer  neither,  rate  himfelf
above  the  low,  mechanick,  poor-headed  Rabble  (as
he  juftly  calls  them)  who  dare  be  Devils ,  but  don’t

under-


\


of  MAG  i  C  K.

underftand  it  5  have  Impudence  enough,  but  not  a
Genius  to  be  truly  flagrant :  It  is  indeed  a  modern
Accomplifhment,  and  requires  fome  Additions  of
Art  and  Pra&ice  to  be  able  to  fin  like  a  Lord.  And
tho’  the  great  Man  juft  now  mentioned  may,  per¬
haps,  have  reafon  to  exalt  his  own  Acquirement,
and  to  boaft  of  accumulated  Crime  5  infomuch  that
he  would  take  it  for  an  Affront,  if  the  Devil  ftiould
pretend  to  prompt  him  5  and  that  perhaps  Satan,
who  underftands  good  Breeding,  has  had  more  Man¬
ners  than  to  difturb  his  Lordftiip  that  way,  feeing
him  go  on  fo  happily  without  him  5  yet  it  may  be
acknowledged  the  watchful  Seraph  does  find  a  little
Bufinefs  fometimes  among  fome  of  his  Lordftiip’s
Imitators,  being  at  fome  happy  Pains  to  form  them,
as  the  Moderns  exprefs  it,  and  make  them  as  finifti’d
Devils  of  Quality  as  his  Lordfhip  5  fo  that  we  may
be  fatisfied  there  is  no  great  Fear  we  ftiall  want  a
Succeflion  of  human  Internals,  no  not  among  Men
of  Rank.

Wonder  not  then  that  the  Devil  growing  fo
much  out  of  Bufinefs  in  the  World,  and  Men  grow¬
ing,  as  I  faid,  fuch  Proficients  in  the  Science  of  the
Abominahles,  is  in  proportion  humble  as  tobisCon-
dudir,  and  allows  himfelf  to  be  the  obedient  Servant
of  every  Star-gazer  and  Figure-*  cafter  5  that  becomes
when  he  is  called,  goes  when  he  is  fent,  nay  fome¬
times  comes  before  he  is  called,  and  is  the  rnoft  di¬
ligent  Devil  imaginable.  He  would  be  very  ungrate¬
ful,  it  muft  be  allowed,  if  he  fhouid  not,  where
the  Age  is  fo  obliging  to  him  j  but  befides  that,  he
finds  it  for  his  Intereft  too,  and  he  is  too  cunning
not  to  pufti  his  Game  where-ever  it  will  go.

I  have  heard  of  a  Magician,  that,  when  the  Devil
and  he  had  made  a  Bargain  that  he  ftiould  always
come  when  he  was  called,  that  is  to  fay,  that  when¬
ever  the  Magician  drew  fuch  and  fuch  Circles,  and
made  fuch  and  fuch  Figures,  and  then  called  him

by


2JI


2$%


A  8  T  8  T  E  M

by  Name,  that  then  he  fhould  be  fure  to  appear,
had  a  mind  to  try  whether  the  Devil  would  be
honeft  to  him  or  nb  *  and  for  making  this  Experi¬
ment  performed  all  his  Exercifes,  as  I  may  call
them,  by  himfelf,  and  when  he  had  no  manner  of
Occafion  for  it :  However,  the  punctual  Devil  kept
his  Word,  and  came  to  a  Tittle,  which  the  Necro¬
mancer  was  mightily  pleafed  with.  After  this  he
thought  he  might  make  a  little  Game  with  the
Devil-,  fo  he  calls  him  up  again,  and  when  he
came,  the  Spirit  ask’d  him,  what  was  the  Bufinefs*
he  told  him,  he  had  no  Bufinefs,  only  called  him
for  his  Company,  and  to  be  better  acquainted.  Ve¬
ry  well,  fays  Satan,  or  Beelzebub ,  or  who  you  will
call  him,  for  I  don’t  remember  that  he  knew
what  his  Name  was*  but  it  feems  the  patient  Devil
anfwer’d  him’Twas  very  well,  and  fhewed  no  man¬
ner  of  Refentment  *  but  after  fome  Convention
left  him  again  very  quietly.

The  foolifh  Fellow,  it  feems,  went  on  with  the
Sport,  making  a  Fool  of  the  Devil  fo  often  and  fo
long,  ’till  at  laft  the  Devil  asking  him,  as  before,
what  he  called  him  up  for,  and  he  telling  him  he
had  no  Bufinefs,  but  only  that  he  liked  his  Con-
verfation,  and  called  him  up  for  the  fake  of  his
Company  :  Very  well,  fays  the  Devil ,  not  at  all
difpleafed,  I  am  glad  to  hear  it  *  then  go  along  with
me,  and  you  fhall  have  enough  of  my  Company,  with¬
out  giving  me  the  Trouble  to  come  fo  far:  and
with  that  the  Conjurer  felt  himfelf  lifted  up  in  the
Air  a  little  from  the  Ground,  which  made  him  cry
out  horribly.

I  don’t  know  what  Argument,  and  Entrea¬
ties  he  ufed,  fo  as  to  move  Cotnpaffion  in  him  that
is  known  not  to  be  furnifhed  with  any  thing  of
that  kind*  but  perhaps  the  Devil  was  not  quit®
ready  for  him,  and  knew  that  he  might  do  him
more  Service  m  the  Station  he  wTas  newly  entred

into  $

\  '


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

into*  fo  it  feems  he  did  not  take  him  quite  away
that  time:  However  it  was,  the  Magician  was  ef¬
fectually  cured  of  trying  Experiments,  and  never
offer’d  to  make  a  Jeft  of  the  Devil  any  more.

If  I  fhould  tell  you  the  Name  of  this  bold  Spark
of  a  Conjurer,  and  that  he  lived  not  far  off  of  one
of  our  'Temples',  you  would  perhaps  wonder  at  the
Man,  who  indeed  no  body  ever  took  to  have  Wit
enough  to  banter  the  Devil >  but  I  muff  not  bring
my  Chara&ers  too  near  home*  befides,  who  knows
but  the  Devil  may  charge  me  with  difeovering  his
Secrets,  and  betraying  Converfation  j  fo  I  fay  no
more:  If  any  body  finds  me  out, and  gueffes  at  the
Man  by  the  Story,  I  fhali  be  only  forry  for  the
Perfon,  not  for  the  Pi&ure.

As  I  was  mufing  of  thefe  things  the  other  day,
and  having  a  great  many  merry  Stories  of  this
fort  in  my  Budget,  was  confidering  which  was  fit
to  be  told,  and  which  not,  it  came  into  my  Thoughts,
how  travelling  fome  time  fince,  from  Daventry  to¬
wards  Leicefler ,  I  met  on  the  Road  with  a  Coun¬
tryman,  of  whom,  being  my  felf  a  Stranger  to  the
Road,  I  asked  the  Way  to  Northampton the  Coun¬
tryman  told  me,  but  with  a  Tone  of  Melancholy
and  Dejedtion,  that  he  was  going  to  Northampton ,
and  if  I  pleafed,  and  I  would  not  over-ride  him, he
would  fhow  me  the  W ay.

I  was  very  glad  of  his  offer’d  Service,  and  fo
fUiting  my  Pace  to  his,  for  he  had  but  a  very  poor
Horfe,  we  went  on  together  5  I  flill  perceived  the
Man  to  be  penfive  and  lad,  fpoke  little,  and  never
but  when  I  asked  him  fome  Queltion  which  oblig’d
him  to  an  Anfwer  5  often  figh’d  and  lifted  up  his
Hands,  and  fometimes  his  Eyes,  and  minded  his
Way  fo  little,  that  if  his  Horfe  had  not  been  more
fagacious  than  he,  the  Man  would  have  run  a  gain  ft
a  Poit,  or  into  a  Ditch  j  and  two  or  three  times  he
did  get  into  a  Hole  or  fome  other  ill  Place  in  the

Way,


Way,  which  he  might  have  fhunn’d.  Country-
man,  fays  I,  what’s  the  matter  with  you?  and  fo
we  begun  the  fhort  Difcourfe  as  follows :

Countryman.  Why,  Sir?

Author.  Why,  you  don’t  feem  to  mind  your  Feet,
or  your  Horfe’s  Feet  5  you  may  lead  me  to  Nor-
ihampton ,  but  I  think  you  want  fomebody  to  lead
you  too,  or  elfe  you  will  be  in  a  Ditch.

Co.  m.  I  care  not  much  indeed,  where  I  go,  or
what  becomes  of  me.

Au.  So  I  think  truly  ;  why,  if  you  were  in  fome
Roads  that  I  know,  you  would  have  found  a  Stable
for  your  Horfe  by  this  time.

Co .  m.  A  Stable  for  my  Horfe !  what,  in  a  Ditch,
I  fuppofe  ?

Au.  Yes,  I  mean  fo  indeed;  you’ll  be  but  an  odd
Guide  to  me  if  you  can’t  keep  your  feif  out  of
Harms- way.

Co.  m.  As  I  faid  before,  I  care  not  what  becomes
of  me;  but  however,  Matter,  I’ll  guide  you  well
enough  the  Way  to  Northampton.  And  #  then* - -

#  N.  B.  Here  he  ft  opt  and  fetch'd  a  Sigh ,  and  I
thought  I  faw  Tears  ft  and  in  his  Eyes.

Au.  And  then !  what  then  ?  what  will  you  do
with  your  felf  then  ?

Co.  m.  Nay,  I  don’t  know,  not  I ;  hang  my  felf,  I
think,  I  don’t  know  any  thing  I  can  do  better.

Au.  Fr’ythee,  Friend,  what’s  the  matter?  is  it
fuch  a  Secret  you  dare  not  tell  it  ?  I  hope  you
have  not  committed  Murther.

Co  m.  No,  no  Murther;  I  have  committed  nei¬
ther  Murther  nor  Robbery;  ’tis  no  fuch  great
matter  neither.

Au.  No  great  matter,  and  yet  talk  of  hanging

your  felf!

Co.m.  It  is  a  great  matter  to  me,  tho’  it  may  be
it  would  be  nothing  in  the  Eyes  of  others.


of  MAG  1C  K.

Au.  Well,  Friend,  if  it  be  not  too  much  a  Se¬
cret,  let  me  ask  you  what  it  is  3  perhaps  I  may  help
you.

Co.m.  Ay,  you  or  fifty  more  may  ask  me  3  but
I  am  a  Fool  if  l  tell  you.

Au.  Well,  Countryman,  if  it  be  a  Secret,  pray
keep  it  to  your  Felf ^  I  don’t  defire  to  know  any
of  your  Affairs.

Co.m.  Nay,  ’tis  no  great  Secret  neither 3  and  yet
’tis  a  Secret  too,  or  elfe  I  fhould  not  have  gone  to
Northampton  to-day.

Au.  You’re  a  merry  Fellow,  Countryman  3  what,
a  Secret  and  no  Secret !  that’s  a  Secret  indeed  of
it  felf.  I  don’t  underftand  you.

Co.m.  Why  Mafter,  if  you  muff  have  it,  you
muff  3  the  matter  is  this :  I  am  a  Cuckold,  and  my
Wife’s  a  Whore,  that's  no  Secret-,  But  I  can’t  tell
who  does  it  for  me  3  that's  a  Secret ,  and  that’s  what
I  want  to  find  out  3  fo  there’s  the  Secret  and  no
Secret  made  out  at  once.  An’t  I  right  now,  Mafter  ?

Au.  Poor  Man !  I  think  thou  haft  made  it  out
indeed  3  but  why  fo  melancholy  at  it  ?  Sure  you
would  not  hang  your  felf  to  find  it  out  ?

Co.m.  No,  Mafter,  not  to  find  it  out  ;  but  I  am
fit  to  hang  my  felf  becaufe  I  can’t  find  it  out.
Would  not  any  Man  hang  him  felf  to  be  a  Cuckold,
and  can’t  find  out  the  Man  ?

Au.  And  what  if  you  did  find  out  the  Man  ?
what  would  you  be  the  better  for  that,  unlefs  you
could  prevent  it?

Co.m.  O,  I’d  prevent  it,  I  warrant  ye  3  I  would
not  hang  my  felf,  I  allure  you ,  but  I’d  hang  the
Dog,  I’d  foon  prevent  their  whoring.

Au.  Well,  but  Countryman,  that’s  wrong  again,
that  has  the  Gallows  at  the  end  of  it  3  and  that
would  be  but  poor  Work  for  you  to  bring  your
felf  to  the  Devil ,  becaufe  your  Wife’s  a  Whore.


*5$


Co.  m.


i;<S  A  SYSTEM

Co.m.  Nay,  I  don’t  care  where  I  go,  rather  than
be  a  Cuckold.

Au.  Is  that  fuch  a  frightful  thing  to  you !  would
you  commit  Murther  and  be  hang’d,  rather  than
be  a  Cuckold  ?

Co.m.  Why  Mailer,  what  muft  I  do?

Au .  Do !  Be  contented,  if  you  can’t  help  it,  as
many  an  honeft  Man  is  forc’d  to  do.

Co.m .  No,  no,  that  won’t  do 5  I  can’t  be  con¬
tented  5  I  muft  and  will  find  it  out.

An .  Well,  but  do  you  think  hanging  your  felf
will  difeover  it  to  you,  or  being  hang’d  for  Mur¬
ther  about  it  y  d’ye  think  you  fh.aH  know  the  Se¬
cret  when  you’re  hang’d  ?

Co.  m.  No  doubt  of  it.

Au.  Well,  but  what  if  you  did?

Co.  m.  Did  ?  why,  d’ye  think  I  could  not  get
Leave  to  come  again  and  plague  them  ?

Au.  Who  do  you  think  could  give  you  Leave  ?
As  for  Heaven,  I  fuppofe  you  don’t  think  much
about  that,  efpecially  upon  the  foot  you  fpeak  of^
I  mean  Murther  5  and  as  for  the  Devil,  I  don’t  think
he  would  part  with  you,  if  he  once  had  you  faftj
fo  I  would  not  have  you  depend  upon  it  too  much.

Co.m.  Well,  but  the  Devil,  it  may  be,  would  tell
me  who  ’ tis.

Au.  And  what  would  you  be  the  better  if  he
did?

Co.m.  Why  I  would  get  him  to  come  and  plague
them  a  little,  and  that  would  do  as  well  another
way  *  for  I  am  refolved  they  ftiall  have  no  Reft.

Au.  You  are  a  terrible  revengeful  Fellow,  that
you  would  be  content  to  go  to  the  Devil  to  be  re*^
venged  of  the  Man  that  cuckolds  you.

Co.m.  And  of  the  Whore  too 5  you  ftiould  have
put  that  in,  Mafter.

Au.  [  wonder  indeed  you  han’t  been  reveng’d  of
her  already,  confidering  your  furious  Spirit:  why

you


of  M  A  G  I  C  R.

you  arc  a  Madman,  I  fliould  be  afraid  you  fliould
murther  your  Wife.

Co.m.  Ay  Matter,  flie’s  afraid  o’  that  too  5  but
flie  has  been  too  cunning  for  me,  for  fhe  is  run  for
it,  and  got  out  of  my  Clutches.

Au.  She’s  in  the  right  of  it:  can  you  blame  her?

Co.  m.  Ay,  but  flie  has  robb’d  me  too.

Au.  Robb’d  you!  ay,  what  could  you  expeft?
why  if  you  would  have  murther’d  her,  fhe  mutt
have  been  a  Fool  to  have  ftaid  5  and  if  fhe  was
forced  to  fly,  you  could  not  think  flie  would  go
away  empty,  could  you  ?

Co.m.  Well,  I  will  find  them  out,  if  they  are  a-
bove  Ground.

Au.  If  you  can,  you  mean  5  but  pray  are  they
gone  together?

Co.m.  Nay,  if  I  knew  that,  then  I  fliould  know
who  the  Rogue  is,  which  is  one  of  the  main  things
I  want  to  be  informed  of.

Au.  And  which  you  would  be  content  to  go  to
the  Devil  to  difcover  ?

Co.  m.  if  1  was  fure  he  or  any  one  clfe  could  but
tell  me,  I  didn’t  care  where  I  went.

Au.  Why,  do  you  think  if  the  Devil  did  know,
that  he  would  tell  you  ?

Co.m.  Why  not,  Matter?

Au.  Why  do  you  think  the  Devil  is  more  your
Friend  than  theirs?  do  you  think  he  cares  how  ma¬
ny  Whores  and  Cuckolds  there  are  ?

Co.  m.  Nay  that’s  true  indeed,  I  did  not  think  of
that*  but  however,  I  fliall  be  informed  where  I
am  going,  whether  the  Devil  knows  any  thing  of
it  or  no  j  and  if  he  does — —

Au.  What  then,  what  if  he  does?

Co.m .  Why  then  I  believe  I  fliall  get  it  out  of
him.

Au.  What,  d’ye  mean,  out  of  the  Devil?  why,
where  are  you  going  ?

S  Co ,  m,

Iptiiltf*  '  '  lx  '•


157


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

Co.  vn.  To  one  of  his  Acquaintance,  Mafter,  that
will  tell  me,  I  dare  fay,  for  a  Piece  of  Money  *  and
tho’  the  Jade  han’t  left  me  a  Shirt  to  my  Back,  I
have  borrow’d  a  little  Money  for  this  Work,  and
I  will  have  it  out,  if  Money  will  do  it.

Au.  W  hat  do  you  mean,  Countryman,  are  you
really  going  to  the  Devil?

Co.  m.  Why  to  tell  you  the  Truth,  I  am  going
to  a  Cunning  Man,  Mafter,  hard  by  Northampton ,
that  I  am  told  will  difcover  it  all  to  me.

Au.  Well,  but  do  you  call  that  going  to  the  De~
vil  ?

Co.m.  Yes  certainly,  for  he  deals  with  the  Devil ,
or  elfe  he  could  never  do  fuch  ftrange  things.

Au.  What  ftrange  things  does  he  do  ?

Co.m.  Why  he  can  caft  a  Figure,  tell  Folks
where  their  loft  Cattle  are,  tell  who  robs  them,  and
oftentimes  helps  them  to  get  their  Goods  again.

Au .  And  fo  you  think  he  can  tell  who  has  cuck¬
olded  you,  don’t  you  ?

Co.m.  To  be  fure  he  can,  Mafter $  why  fhould
not  he  tell  one  thing  as  well  as  another?

Au.  He’ll  take  your  Money  to  be  fure,  that’s  all
you  can  be  fure  of.  I  tell  thee,  Countryman,  ’tis  all
a  Cheat  >  they  are  only  Rogues  and  Jugglers,  they
know  nothing  of  the  matter.

Co.m.  Why  that  can’t  be,  Mafter  $  they  fay  he
Will  fliew  me  the  Man’s  Face  in  a  Looking-glafs.

Au.  And  what  if  he  does  fhew  you  a  Man’s  Face
and  you  don’t  know  him,  where  are  you  then  ?

Co.  m.  Nay,  that’s  none  of  his  Fault.

Au.  ’Twill  be  his  Fault  to  put  a  Cheat  upon  you,
and  fhew  you  a  Face  you  don’t  know,  pretending
that’s  the  Man,  and  you  ne’er  the  wifer.

Co.m.  Well,  but  he  will  make  me  dream  of  the
Man,  and  fee  him  in  my  Sleep.

Au.  Very  well,  and  fo  if  you  chance  to  dream  of  an
honeft  Man,  you  will  go  and  murther  him  will  you,
for  making  you  a  Cuckold  ?  I  tell  you  your  Cunning

4  *  Man


2


of  MAG  1  C  K.

Man  is  a  Cheat  5  he  no  more  deals  with  the  Devil
than  you  do.

Co.m.  Well  then,  I’ll  go  to  Oundle ,  there’s  a
Man  that  deals  in  Magick,  and  he’ll  raife  the  De¬
vil  for  me  if  I  defire  it,  and  I  fhall  fee  him  and  talk
with  him  my  felf.

Au.  And  you  believe  it,  do  you  ?

Co.  m .  I  fhall  believe  it  fure  when  I  fee  it,  {han’t
I?  why  d’ye  think  I  wore  believe  my  own  Eyes?

Au.  Why,  do  you  know  the  Devil  when  you  fee
him?  how  will  you  be  fure  ’tis  the  Devil ?

Co.  m.  I  {hall  know  him  by  his  cloven  Foot,
{han’t  I,  Matter  ?

Au.  I  believe  not  5  did  you  ever  fee  the  Devil  in
your  Life  ?

Co.  m.  No  not  I,  but  I  have  heard  of  a  great  ma¬
ny  that  have  5  why  is  that  fuch  a  ftrange  thing,
Matter  ?

Au.  ’Tis  fuch  a  ftrange  thing,  that  I  don’t  believe
one  Word  of  it.

Co.m.  What,  don’t  you  believe  that  a  Magician
can  raife  the  Devil?

Au.  I  do  not  know,  Countryman,  but  the  Devil
may  be  called  up  upon  extraordinary  Occafions^
but  hardly  by  your  three-half-penny  Conjurer,  nor
upon  fuch  a  Bufinefs  as  yours  is.

Co.  m.  Why,  won’t  the  Devil  come  when  he  is
called?  why,  the  Magician  at  Oundle  can  make  him
come,  they  fay,  whether  he  will  or  no :  if  he  does
but  draw  a  Circle  and  turn  round  five  times  in  it,
j  the  Devil  can’t  help  appearing,  no  more  than  if  we
faid  the  Lord’s  Prayer  backward.

Au.  Why,  will  he  come  if  we  fay  our  Prayers
backward  ?

Co.m.  Ay,  certainly,  Matter  %  Why,  you  don’t
doubt  that,  d’ye?  >  -

Au.  Nay,  I  don’t  fay  I  doubt  it:  but  did  you  ever
try  it  your  felf  ?

S  z


Co,  m.


160  A  SYSTEM

Co.m.  No,  I  never  try’d  it,  that’s  true;  but  1
have  heard  an  old  Woman  at  Dav'ntry  ufed  to
raife  the  Devil  that  Way  very  often.

Au.  I  wonder  you  (hould  not  try  it,  when  you
have  fuch  Occafion  to  talk  with  him.

Co .  m.  Ay,  I  want  to  talk  with  him,  that  I  do,
but  I  dare  not  talk  with  him  by  my  felf  neither.

Au.  Why  not?  you  know  well  enough  what  to
fay  to  him.

Co.  m.  Ay,  that’s  true,  but  I  don’t  know  how  to
manage  him  as  they  do;  they  are  ufed  to  him;  ’tis
their  Trade  to  deal  between  him  and  us.

Au.  But  it  would  fave  you  the  Charges,  and  I
fancy  the  Devil  and  you  are  no  Strangers.

Co.  m.  What  d’ye  mean,  Mailer?  I  never  faw  him
in  my  Life.

Au .  Well,  if  you  ha’nt  been  in  his  Company,
I  dare  fay  lie  has  been  in  yours.

Co.m.  Why  fo,  Mailer?

Au.  You  would  never  talk  of  hanging  your  felf,
and  of  being  hanged  for  Murther,  fo  familiarly  as
you  do,  if  he  had  not  been  at  work  with  you.

Co.m.  Why,  I  am  half  mad,  Sir;  What  would
you  have  me  do?  I  muft  be  revenged  on  ’em.

Au.  Ay,  I  told  you  the  Devil  had  been  with  you,
’tis  he  makes  you  talk  of  Revenge;  that’s  all  the
Devil ,  and  ends  in  Damnation ;  for  if  he  is  a  Spirit
which  waits  to  devour,  and  that  does  all  he  can  to
deilroy  us,  we  may  very  well  think  all  evil  Motions
come  from  him.

Co.m.  I  don’t  underiland  thofe  things,  Mailer,
not  I ;  but  I  am  fure  the  Devil  has  had  nothing  to
do  with  me,  either  in  that  or  any  thing  elfe.

Au.  I  tell  thee,  honeil  Friend,  thou  doeil  not
know  when  the  Devil  is  working  in  thee,  and  when
not;  all  fuch  horrid  Thoughts  as  thou  hail  had
about  Self-murther,  Revenge,  and  doing  Mifchief  to
others,  muil  be  from  the  Devil.


Co.m ,


of  MAGIC  IC  261

_ i

Co.m.  Well,  Mailer,  let’s  talk  no  more  of  that,
nay  Head  runs  another  way  at  prefent.

Au.  Why,  will  you  really  go  to  enquire  of  the
Devil  about  who  has  made  you  a  Cuckold  ?

Co.m.  No,  not  to  the  Devil9  1  only  go  to  the
Cunning  Man.

Au.  Yes,  and  to  the  Conjurer  at  Oundle ,  you  fay,
and  he  can  raife  the  Devil ,  it  feems.

Co  .m.  Well  then,  he  deals  with  the  Devil ,  not  I.

Au.  And  do  you  think,  as  I  faid  before,  the  De¬
vil  would  befriend  you  fo  far  as  to  hinder  your
Wife’s  Wickednefs?  do  think  he  would  not  rather
make  her  wickeder  than  fhe  is  ?

Co.m.  Nay,  that’s  true;  but  however,  I’d  try
what  I  can  do;  I  am  refolv’d  I’ll  go  to  him.

When  I  found  he  was  fo  pofitive,  I  bad  him  e’en
go  and  try  the  Experiment ;  but  depend  upon  it,
faid  I,  the  Devil  won’t  betray  the  Secret  to  you*
he  is  too  much  o’  t’other  Side.

By  this  time  we  were  come  to  Queen's- Crofs,  a
little  of  this  fide  Northampton ,  ;  and  feeing  the
Town  from  the  Hill,  I  offer’d  to  go  on  fafter,
feeing  I  knew  the  Way  was  before  me:  but  he  be-
fpoke  me  to  keep  him  Company;  for,  Mafter,  fays
he,  if  you  lye  in  the  Town  all  Night,  I’ll  cer¬
tainly  come  and  tell  you  what  the  cunning  Mem
fays  to  me.

I  was  not  unwilling  to  hear  the  Refult  of  the
Story,  but  was  particularly  curious  to  hear  what
the  Magician  at  Oundle  could  do ;  fo  I  refolved  to
ftay  at  Northampton  that  Night,  and  we  kept  Com¬
pany  together  to  the  Town.  When  we  came  to
the  Town,  I  put  up  at  the  George  Inn ,  and  thought
he  would  have  gone  in  with  me;  but  when  we  came
to  the  Door,  he  bad  me  Good-by  for  the  prefent,
for  the  Cunning  Man,  he  faid,  liv’d  two  Miles  out
of  the  Town,  and  he  would  talk  with  him,  and
come  to  meat  Night.


I


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

I  went  into  my  Inn  and  ftaid  there  all  Night,
but  heard  no  more  of  my  poor  Cuckold  the  Coun¬
tryman  all  that  Evening.  The  next  Morning  I  was
indifpofed,  which  made  me  flay  longer  at  the  Inn
than  I  intended,  and  indeed  was  obliged  to  ftay  there
all  that  Day  and  Night  too,  but  Hill  I  had  no
News  of  my  Countryman,  which  made  me  a  little
chagreenj  but  atlaft  he  came  back  again,  and  comes
to  me,  but  not  ’till  the  next  Day  about  eleven
a-Clock.

Then  as  I  had  been  waiting  before  very  patient¬
ly,  I  began,  and  fpoke  a  little  angrily  $  What’s  the
Bufinefs  now,  fays  1,  what’s  the  matter  with  you,
that  you  dodge  about  fo  ?

O  Sir,  fays  he,  let  me  come  in,  and  I’ll  tell  you
the  ftrangeft  things - -

Well,  come  in  then,  fays  /,  and  fit  down*  I
thought  you  had  been  loft,  or  had  forgot  your
Promife.  So  he  came  in,  and  we  begun  another
fhort  Difcourfe,  as  follows  :

Co.  m.  O  Mafter,  I  have  had  a  hard  Night’s  Work
on’t.

An.  What  do  you  mean  of  a  Night’s  Work,
where  have  you  been  ?

Co.m.  Why  firft,  Mafter,  I  went  to  my  cunning
Man,  and  gave  him  a  Shilling,  which  it  feems  he
takes  before  he  will  fpeak  a  Word.

An.  Ay,  ay,  they  are  in  the  right,  ’tis  the  only
thing  I  can  call  them  cunning  Men  for.

Co.  m.  Why  are  they  cunning  in  that?

Au .  Becaufe  they  know  if  they  did  not  take  the
Money  before-hand,  no  body  would  give  it  them
afterwards,  becaufe  they  can  tell  nothing,  nor  fay
any  thing  to  the  purpofe.

Co.  m.  Well,  I  gave  him  the  Shilling  5  he  de¬
manded  Half  a  Crown,  but  I  told  him  I  was  a  poor
Man,  and  fo  he  condescended  in  Charity  to  take  a
Shilling.

An,


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.  16  5

Au.  That  is  to  fay,  he  faw  there  was  no  more
to  be  had,  fo  he  took  what  he  could  get  y  and  fo
they  all  do.  But  come,  what  did  he  do  for  it,  what
did  he  tell  thee?

Co.m.  O  he  examined  me  very  ftri&ly,  I  affure
you.

Au.  Examine  you,  about  what  ?

Co.m.  Why,  how  long  my  Wife  had  been  gone,
what  fhe  carried  with  her,  what  a- Clock  fhe
went  at,  what  fhe  faid  at  parting  j  and  took  every
thing  down  in  Figures.

Au.  Very  well,  this  was  all  Grimace,  to  put  a
Countenance  upon  things.

Co.m.  Then  he  bid  me  hold  my  Tongue,  and  he
fell  to  making  Figures  and  mutt’ring  to  himfelf$
and  on  a  fudden  he  ftarts  up  5  Well,  fays  he,  I  find
your  Wife  is  gone  away,  and  that  you  bear  her
very  feverely  before  fhe  went.  Now,  I  could
not  deny  that  Part,  Matter,  becaufe  I  knew  it  was
true*  but  how  fhould  he  know  that.  Matter,  if  he
wan’t  a  cunning  Man  ?

Au .  Well  enough  :  when  he  had  examined  you  fo
ttri£tly  before  in  all  the  Particulars,  he  might  eafi-
ly  guefs  you  had  ufed  her  hardly,  by  the  Rage  you
were  in,  when  you  came  to  him*  and  when  you
talk’d  of  hanging  your  felf  and  murthering  her.  he
might  eafily  judge  that  you  had  talked  the  Erne  to
her,  which  had  frighted  the  Woman,  and  ih  was
run  away  for  fear  of  you  $  there’s  no  great  cunning
in  all  that.  I  was  a  going  to  fay  fo  to  you  my  lelf
once,  for  I  really  thought  of  it  before.

Co.m.  Why  then  you  are  as  much  a  cunning
Man  as  he.

Au.  Well,  what  elfe  did  he  fay  to  you?

Co.m .  Nothing  to  the  purpofe,  only  to  vex  me
and  make  me  mad.

Au.  Nay  that  he  could  not  do,  for  I  vCrily  think
you  were  mad  before  \  but  what  was  it  ?  come,  tell  me.

S  4  Co.  M>


A  S  r  S  T  E  M

Co.m.  Why,  Mailer,  he  fell  to  fcribbling  and
fcrawling  again  upon  a  Piece  of  Paper,  and  then  he
rifes  and  walks  up  and  down,  and  round  and
round,  as  I  thought,  he  made  Circles  three  or  four
times,  and  talk’d  to  himfelf  ail  the  while.

Au.  Well,  and  that  frighted  you,  I  warrant  you  ;
did  not  you  think  he  was  going  to  raife  the  De¬
vil  ?

Co .  m.  Why  you  know  every  thing,  Mailer,  afore-
hand,  I  think  you  are  as  cunning  as  he*  I  was  fo
frighted  I  trembled  like  an  Afpen  Leaf,  Mailer.

Au,  Why,  didn’t  you  fay  you  wanted  to  fee
the  Devil ,  to  tell  you  all  ?

Co.  m.  Ay,  that’s  true,  Mailer,  but  I  was  deadly
fraid  for  all  that,  efpecially  when  I  thought  he  was
juft  a  coming.

Au.  Well,  and  how  then,  what  came  of  it  ?

Co.m.  Came  on  it!  why,  Mailer,  the  Man’s  a
Rogue,  a  meer  Cheats  he  had  got  my  Money,  and
when  ail  come  to  all,  he  told  me  nothing,  at  leaft
nothing  that  fignified  any  thing  to  me.

Au.  Well,  but  what  was  it?  for  I  find  he  told
you  fomething,  tho’  you  don’t  like  it :  did  he  bid
you  go  home  and  be  quiet  and  eafie,  and  not  trou¬
ble  your  felf  about  it  ?

Co.m.  Hang  him,  Rogue;  when  he  had  made  nil
his  Turns,  and  his  Circles,  and  faid  all  his  Witch¬
craft  over  to  himlelf,  he  fits  down  and  calls  me  to
him,  and  very  civilly  bad  me  fit  down,  and  begun
his  ugly  Story.

Au.  I  find  he  has  not  pleafed  ye :  I  really  fancy
the  Man  has  given  thee  good  honelt  Advice,  and
bid  thee  go  home  and  mind  thy  Bufinefs,  and  be
eafie;  did  not  1  fay  the  fame  to  thee  ?

Co.m .  I’ll  tell  it  you  all,  Mafter,  if  you’ll  have
Patience;  he’s  a  Rogue;  a  Rogue,  Mafter.  I  told
you  he  would  have  my  Money  beforehand,  and  fo
he  had,  or  he  fiiould  never  ha’  had  a  Farthing;
gnd  he  knew  that  well  enough,  '  //#»


of  MAGIC  K.

Au.  No,  no,  he  knew  Folks  never  pay  when  they
don’t  like  the  Story  3  but  go  on,  what  did  he
fay?

Co.m.  Why,  as  grave  as  a  Judge,  he  takes  me  by
the  Hand,  felt  my  Pulfe,  holding  his  conjuring  Paper
in  t’other  Hand,  all  the  while  3  Heark  thee,  Friend,
fays  he,  I  have  calculated  the  Times  and  the  Seafons,
I  have  brought  your  Names  in  a  direct  Oppofition,
I  have  done  every  thing  to  fatisfy  you,  that  can
be  done,  and  all  my  Numbers  and  Accounts  agree,
and  this  is  the  Sum  of  your  Cafe  3  You  are  a  poor,
honeft,  fretful,  paffionate  Fellow  that  fiands  here
on  one  Side 3  and  then  he  {hewed  me  his  damned
Figures,  and  Crofies  and  Circles,  on  one  fide  3  and
here’s  your  poor  Wife  a  t’other  fide,  fays  he  3  and
then  he  fine  wed  me  his  Figures  again  3  fhe  has  anger’d
you,  and  fcolded  at  you  for  your  ill  Ufage  of  her,
and  you  have  fallen  upon  her  and  beaten  her  un¬
mercifully,  and  threaten’d  tomurther  her,  and  file  is
run  away  for  fear  of  it  3  and  now  you  call  her
Whore,  and  come  to  me  to  tell  you  who  has  made
a  Cuckold  of  you.

Au.  And  did  the  Man  fay  all  this  to  you,  Friend?

Co.m.  Yes,  Mailer,  and  a  great  deal  more,  like
a  Rogue  as  he  is.  He  a  cunning  Man !  he’s  a  Block¬
head  3  why,  I  knew  all  that  before.

Au.  Ay,  and  he  might  eafily  gather  it  from  your
Difcourfe.

Co.  m.  No,  Mailer,  that  he  could  not,  I’m  fure.

Au.  Well  then,  you’ll  make  him  a  cunning  Man
indeed,  at  the  fame  time  that  you  call  him  a  Block¬
head  and  a  Fool.  I  tell  you  I  gather’d  as  much  be¬
fore  from  you,  and  you  can’t  help  it  3  you  are  too
full  of  your  o  wn  Story.  But  go  on,  what  did  he
fay  then?

Co.m.  Why,  then  he  fell  to  preaching,  and  giv¬
ing  me  Advice  3  Go  home,  Friend,  fays  the  Toad,
gild  be  eafie  and  quiet,  and  tell  your  Friends  you  are

lorry


2  6$


i


%66


A  S  r  STEM

forry  you  have  been  in  fuch  a  Heat,  and  that  you
hope  your  Wife  will  come  home  again,  for  you
won’t  do  her  any  Hurt*  and  then  your  Neigh¬
bours  will  tell  her,  and  file’ll  come  lovingly  again
to  you*  Fori  tell  thee  Friend,  fays  he,  thou  art
in  the  Wrong,  the  poor  Woman  is  no  Whore,  I
can  fhow  it  you  in  black  and  white  here  *  and  then
he  pointed  to  his  curfed  Conjuring  Paper  5  fhe’s  a
very  honeft  Woman,  thou  haft  only  a  Whymfie
come  in  thy  Head  becaufe  fhe  is  gone,  I  tell  thee
thou  art  no  Cuckold,  go  home  and  be  quiet.

Au.  And  did  he  fay  all  this  to  thee  ?

Co.  m.  Yes,  to  be  lure  Matter,  and  a  great  deal
more  fuch  Stuff*  what  fhould  I  be  in  fuch  a  Paf-
fion  with  him  for  elfe?

Au.  Upon  my  Word,  Friend,  whether  he  be  a
cunning  Man  or  no,  that  I  have  noching  to  fay
to  *  he  may  make  thee  believe  fo,  that’s  for  his  Ad¬
vantage*  but  o’my  Confcience  I  think  he’s  a  wife
Man,  and  an  honeft  Man,  and  I  would  advife  thee
to  follow  his  Counfel*  for  I  do  tell  thee,  I  firmly
believe  ’tis  thy  Cafe  to  a  Tittle,  and  1  tell  thee  thy
whole  Difcourfe  difcover’d  it*  he  might  have  faid
it  all  without  his  Figures  and  Circles*  that  was
done  to  amufe  you,  but  ’tis  plain  from  all  you  have
faid,  that’s  thy  very  Cafe.

Co.  m.  Ay,  ay,  Matter,  ’tis  no  matter  for  that,
let  him  be  as  cunning  and  as  wife  as  he  will,  I
have  had  anocherguefs  Account  of  it,  and  better
Advice  fince*  for  I  have  been  at  Oundle ,  Matter,
fince  that,  and  there  I  have  met  with  a  cunning
Man  indeed.

Au.  Why,  have  you  really  been  confulting  with
the  Devil  then?

Co.  m.  I  believe  I  have  indeed.

Au.  Nay,  then  ’tis  like  you  have  had  good  Ad¬
vice  indeed  *  mayn’t  a  body  know  what  you  have
met  with  there  too?


Co.  w}.


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

Co.  m.  Truly  Mailer,  I  don’t  know  whether  I
can  tell  it  you  or  no,  for  I  have  been  frighted  out
of  my  Wits.  I’m  fure  if  my  Hat  had  been  on,  my
Hair  would  have  lifted  it  off,  tho’  I  had  had  a  good
Basket  of  Apples  upon  my  Head.

Au.  Come  let  me  hear  it  however,  as  well  as  you
can.

Co.  m.  Why  Mailer,  when  I  came  to  the  Man’s
Houfe,  (’tis  within  two  Mile  of  Oundle  I  think,  or
thereabout,)  it  was  almoil  dark,  and  that  made  it
the  worfe.  I  knock’d  at  the  Door,  and  out  came  a
tall  black  frightful  old  Man.  I  begun  to  be  fright*
ed  at  the  very  firfl  Sight,  for  I  thought  it  had  been
the  Devil  was  come  before  I  ask’d  for  him.

Au.  And  are  you  fure  it  was  not?

Co.  m.  Yes,  I  think  he  was  not  the  Devilj  for
he  fpoke  very  civilly  to  me  5  and  when  I  ask’d  him
if  he  was  the  cunning  Man,  he  fmiTd,  and  bad  me
come  in  *  fo  he  carry’d  me  into  a  large  Room,
which  had  but  one  dim  burning  Candle  in  it,  and
I  trembl’d  every  Inch  of  me,  for  I  thought  the
Candle  burnt  blue  as  foon  as  I  look’d  at  it.

Au.  Very  well,  fo  you  thought  you  were  come
into  good  Company,  did  not  you?

Co.  m.  Indeed,  I  wifh’d  my  felf  out  of  the  Houfe
again,  that  I  did*  but  the  old  Gentleman  whillled,
and  in  came  a  young  Fellow  that  look’d  like  a  Ser¬
vant,  and  he  bad  him  go  fnuff  the  Candle,  and
bring  in  another,  and  that  comforted  me  a  little  5
then  he  fat  him  down  in  a  great  Elbow-Chair,
with  a  little  Table  before  it,  and  upon  the  Table
was  a  great  many  Books,  and  a  Pen  and  Ink,  and
Paper.  Come  Friend,  fays  he,  let  me  know  thy
Bufinefs,  for  tho’  l  am  none  of  thofe  ignorant  Fel¬
lows  you  call  Cunning  Men,  yet  perhaps  I  may
tell  you  what  you  want  to  know,  upon  a  better


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

Au.  Well,  he  begun  pretty  high:  what  could  he
pretend  to  ?

Co.  m.  I  reply’d,  Sir,  I  was  told  you  was  one
that  dealt  in  fecret  things,  that  underflood  the  Black
Art ,  and  thofe  we  call  Cunning  Men  ;  if  I  am  mi-
flaken,  I  am  very  forry :  and  fo  made  as  if  I  would
go  away  again,  but  he  flopp’d  me,  and  faid,  Look
you  Friend,  I  am  none  of  thofe  Fellows  you  call
cunning  Men,  I  look  upon  them  to  be  all  Cheats;
my  Praftice  is  all  Divine,  of  a  fuperior  Nature,  I
fludy  things  in  a  higher  Sphere,  I  deal  in  the  My-
fleries  of  an  invifible  World,  and  converfe  with  the
World  of  Spirits  unembody’d,  who  are  beneficent
and  kind  to  us,  who  are  Spirits  embody’d,  and  not
only  converfe  with  us  below,  but  are  helpful  and
ferviceable  to  us  on  all  Occafions.  I  can’t  remem¬
ber  all  his  hard  Words,  Mafler,  but  he  faid  a  deal
more  to  that  purpofe.

Au.  Well,  did  not  he  ask  for  your  Money  be¬
fore  hand  too,  as  t’other  did  ?

Co.  m.  No  indeed,  but  when  he  bad  me  tell  him
my  Cafe,  I  put  my  Hand  in  my  Pocket,  and  pull’d
out  two  half  Crowns,  and  went  to  offer  him  the
Money,  for  I  found  he  was  not  an  ordinary  Fel¬
low,  and  fo  I  thought  he  would  not  be  very  low-
priz’d.

Au.  But  he  took  the  Money,  I  fuppofe?

Co.  m.  No,  he  faid  he  did  not  do  thefe  things
for  Money,  as  he  found  I  believ’d  he  did;  but  he
faid,  you  may  put  what  you  pleafe  in  there,  poin¬
ting  to  a  Box  that  flood  upon  the  Table;  I  fhall
difpofeof  it  charitably,  and  to  better  Ufes,  it  maybe,
than  you  would  do  your  felf;  fo  I  put  the  Money
into  his  Box,  which  had  a  flit  like  a  Tradefman’s
Till.

Au.  Very  well,  this  look’d  great  indeed.

Co.  m.  Then  he  bad  me  tell  him  my  Cafe;  for,
fays  he,  I  perceive  you  are  a  Man  of  a  troubled

Countenance^


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.  i6p

Countenance,  your  Mind  is  opprefs’d,  the  Paflions
of  your  Soul  have  been  in  a  Perturbation,  your
Spirits  are  fluttering  ftill,  and  in  a  Storm,  tho*
fomething  abated  of  what  they  have  been  5  pray  be
very  free,  and  tell  me  your  whole  Cafe,  as  fully  and
plainly  as  you  can.

Au.  Well,  I  aflure  you,  he  fpoke  in  ftate  with  a
great  deal  of  Majefty.

Co.  m.  Yes,  and  yet  he  fpoke  very  courteoufly
too,  and  I  began  to  like  him  mightily;  fo  I  began,
and  told  him  my  Cafe  at  large,  juft  as  I  did  you,
Mafter.

Au.  That  is  to  fay,  that  you  wanted  to  be  re¬
veng’d  of  your  Wife,  and  to  find  out  the  Man  that
had  cuckolded  you,  and  the  like ;  fo  you  expedted
prefently  he  fliould  tell  you  who  it  was.

Co.  m.  Yes,  fo  I  did;  but  he  brought  me  to  un¬
der  ft  and  things  better,  and  I  found  he  was  in  Ear-
neft,  and  that  he  was  not  to  be  cheated.  He  ex¬
amin’d  me  too  as  t’other  had  done,  and  ask’d  me
abundance  of  Queftions.

Au.  And,  I  doubt  not,  gather’d  your  Cafe  in  e-
very  Part  of  it  from  the  weak  inconfiftent  Account
you  gave  him  of  it.

Co.  m.  I  don’t  know  that ;  but  after  he  had  done
asking  me  all  his  Queftions,  he  took  his  Pen  and  Ink
too,  and  wrote  down  a  great  many  things  upon  his
Paper,  and  made  Lines  with  a  fhort  brafs  Rule  and
a  Pencil,  and  then  took  out  a  pair  of  Compafles,
and  drew  feveral  Figures  and  Marks,  but  I  under-
ftood  nothing  of  them,  neither  could  I  fee  them
diftindlly  by  the  Candle  Light;  then  he  ask’d  me
my  Chriftian  Name,  which  I  told  him  was  Edward ,
and  he  fee  it  down  in  great  Letters,  but  fuch  as
tho’  I  can  read  Mafter,  I  am  fure  that  l  never  faw
fuch  Before.  Then  he  ask’d  my  Wife’s  Chriftian
Name  too,  which  I  told  him  was  Abigail  and  he
fet  that  down  in  the  fame  kind  of  Letters  as  before;

then


270


A  SYSTEM

then  he  ask’d  my  Age,  and  my  Wife’s  Age,  and
the  Age  of  my  two  Children  5  of  all  which  I  gave
him  a  full  Account.

Au.  I  fuppofe  you  had  told  him  that  you  had
two  Children  j  he  did  not  conjure  out  that,  did  he?

Co.  m.  Yes,  he  had  ask’d  me  that  before,  and  I
told  him  5  fo  when  he  had  done  all,  and  I  believe
we  had  talk’d  together  above  an  Hour,  he  rofe  up,
and  offer’d  to  go  away,  and  I  rofe  up  too,  but  he
laid  his  Hand  upon  my  Arm,-  Do  you  fit  ftill,  fays
he,  and  I’ll  come  to  you  again  5  at  which  I  was  a
little  frighted  to  be  left  alone,  and  he  perceiv’d  it.
Don’t  be  afraid,  fays  he,  there  fhall  nothing  hurt
you,  nor  fpeak  to  you  5  and  if  you  hear  any  Noife
don’t  you  ftir,  but  fit  ftill  here.  So  he  took  up  one
of  the  Candles,  and  went  into  another  Room  by  a
little  Door  like  a  Clofet-Door,  and  when  he  fhut
the  Door  after  him,  I  perceiv’d  a  little  Window  of
one  broad  Square  of  Glafs  only,  that  look’d  into
the  Room  which  he  was  gone  into.

Au,.  I  warrant  ye,  you  wanted  to  peep,  did  not  ye  ?

Co.  m.  Yes,  i  did,  but  I  durfi  not  ftir  for  my
Life,  becaufe  he  had  charg’d  me  I  fhould  not.

Au.  Well,  but  you  was  to  hear  fame  Noifes,  was
you  not?

Co.  m.  But  I  did  not,  except  once  that  I  heard  a
Noife  like  the  drawing  of  a  Chair  upon  the  Floor,
which  being  nothing  but  what  was  ordinary,  did
not  difturb  me.

Au.  Well,  how  long  did  he  ftay  ?

Co.  m.  About  half  an  Hour,  and  came  in  again,
looking  very  well  pleas’d,  and  ask’d  me  how  1  did,
and  then  fat  down  as  before.  Well,  fays  he,  I  have
been  confulting  on  your  Cafe,  and  I  find  things  not
fo  threatning  to  you  as  I  expededj  perhaps  you
may  not  be  in  fo  ill  a  Cafe  as  you  imagine  5  how¬
ever,  I  am  order’d  to  tell  you,  that  fome  Days  af¬
ter  your  return,  your  Wife  fliall  come  to  a  Houfe

near


of  M  A  G  1  C  R.

near  you,  and  fend  to  know  if  you  will  receive  her
again  kindly  5  if  the  Perfon  {he  fends  is  a  Woman,
you  may  conclude  your  Wife  has  abus’d  you  ;  but
if  fhe  fends  a  Man,  then  flie  is  innocent,  and  you
are  miftaken.

Au.  This  was  point-blank,  I  aiTure  you.

Co.  m.  I  did  not  like  it  however,  and  that  he
might  fee  well  enough ;  for  I  can’t  allow  any  if ’s
or  ana’s.  Tell  me  of  being  miftaken!  faid  I  to  him,
I  can’t  be  miftaken.  Well,  fays  he.  I’ll  go  again
and  confult  farther  about  you  ;  and  feeing  me  be¬
gin  to  get  up  too,  he  turns  again  5  You  are  not
afraid,  fays  he,  are  you?  No,  not  at  all,  faid  I?
Well,  nor  you  won’t  be  afraid,  will  you,  if  you  fee
nothing  frightful?  No, not  at  all,  faid  I  again.  But
I  ly’d,  Mafter,  for  I  was  almoft  frighted  to  Death,
when  he  fpoke  of  my  feeing  fomething;  but  as  I
had  faid  No  twice,  and  fpoke  it  pretty  heartily  too,
he  faid,  Well  then,  come  along  with  me  into  the
next  Room.

Au.  I  doubt  you  were  afraid  then  indeed.

Co.  m.  Ay,  fo  I  was  heartily,  and  he  perceiv’d  it
too  again  5  Well,  fays  he,  if  you  are  afraid  to  go
into  my  Room  of  Praftice,  I’ll  ftay  here  with  you  5
only,  whatever  you  fee  or  hear  fit  you  ftill,  and
neither  fpeak  or  llir  out  of  your  Chair.

Au.  Well,  did  you  obferve  his  Direction?

Co.  m.  No,  indeed  Mafter,  my  Heart  fail’d  me;
I  durft  neither  go  nor  ftay,  but  I’ll  tell  you  what  I
did  when  he  was  gone  into  the  next  Room,  I  went
to  the  Window  and  peep’d.

Au.  And  what  did  you  fee?  ’tis  odd  peeping  at
the  Devil,  I  muft  tell  you.

Co.  m.  I  faw  my  old  Gentleman  in  a  great  Chair,
and  two  more  in  Chairs  at  fome  Diftance,  and  three
great  Candles,  and  a  great  Sheer  of  white  Paper
upon  the  Floor  between  them ;  every  one  of  them  had
a  long  white  Wand  in  their  Hands,  the  lower  end
of  which  touch’d  the  Sheet  of  Paper.  Au.


27*


/


2  71


A  SYSTEM

l  -  ■  /  '  ^  V

Aii.  And  were  the  Candles  upon  the  Ground
too  ?

Co.  m.  Yes,  all  of  them.

Au.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  Ceremony  about
you,  I  aftiire  you.

Co.  m.  I  think  fo  too,  but  it  is  not  done  yetj
immediately  1  heard  the  little  Door  ftir,  as  if  it  was
opening,  and  away  I  skipp’d  as  foftly  as  I  could
tread,  and  got  into  my  Chair  again,  and  fat  there
as  gravely  as  if  I  had  never  ftirr’d  out  of  it.  I  was
no  fooner  fet  but  the  Door  open’d  indeed,  and  the
old  Gentleman  came  out  as  before,  and  turning  to
me,  faid,  Sit  ftill,  don’t  ye  ftirj  and  at  that  Word,
the  other  two  that  were  with  him  in  the  Room
walk’d  out  after  him,  one  after  another  crofs
the  Room,  as  if  to  go  out  at  the  other  Door  where
I  came  in  *  but  at  the  farther  end  of  the  Room
they  Hop’d,  and  turn’d  their  Faces  to  one  another
and  talk’d  $  but  it  was  fome  Devil’s  Language  of
their  own,  for  I  could  underftand  nothing  of  it.

Au.  And  now  I  fuppofe  you  were  frighted  in
earned  ?

Co.  m.  Ay,  fo  I  was  \  but  it  was  worfe  yet,  for
they  had  not  flood  long  together,  buc  the  great
Elbow-Chair  which  the  old  Gentleman  fat  in  at
the  little  Table  juft  by  me  began  to  ftir  of  it  felfj
at  which  the  old  Gentleman  knowing  I  fliould  be
afraid,  came  to  me  and  faid,  Sit  ftill,  don’t  you  ftir,
all  will  be  well,  you  iball  have  no  harm  j  at  which
he  gave  his  Chair  a  kick  with  his  Foot,  and  faid.
Go,  with  fome  other  W ords,  and  of  other  Language,
and  away  went  the  obedient  Chair  Aiding  two  of
its  Legs  on  the  Ground,  and  the  other  two  off,  as
if  fome  body  had  dragg’d  it  by  that  Part.

Au.  And  fo  no  doubt  they  did,  tho’  you  could
not  fee  it.

Co.  m.  As  foon  as  the  Chair  was  dragg’d  or  mov’d
to  the  end  of  the  Room,  where  the  three,  I  know

not


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.

not  what  to  call  ’em,  were,  two  other  Chairs  did
the  like  from  the  other  fide  of  the  Room,  and  fo
they  all  fat  down,  and  talk’d  together  a  good  while  5
at  laft  the  Door  at  that  end  of  the  Room  open’d
too,  and  they  all  were  gone  in  a  Moment  without
rifing  out  of  their  Chairs  3  for  I  am  fure  they  did
not  rife  to  go  out,  as  other  Folks  do.

Au.  What  did  you  think  of  your  felf,  when  you
faw  the  Chair  ftir  fo  near  you  ?

Co.  m .  Think  I  nay,  I  did  not  think  3  I  was  dead,
to  be  fure  I  was  dead,  with  the  Fright,  and  expe&ed
I  ftiould  be  carry’d  away.  Chair  and  all,  the  next
Moment.  Then  it  was,  I  fay,  that  my  Hair  would
have  lifted  off  my  Hat,  if  it  had  been  on  I  am  fure
it  would.

Au,  Well,  but  when  they  were  all  gone,  you
came  to  your  felf  again,  I  llippofe?

Co,  m.  To  tell  you  the  truth  Matter,  I  am  not
come  to  my  felf  yet.

Au.  But  go  on,  let  me  know  how  it  ended.

Co.  m.  Why,  after  a  little  while  my  old  Man
came  in  again,  call’d  his  Man  to  let  the  Chairs  to
rights,  and  then  fat  him  down  at  the  Table,  fpoke
chearfully  to  me,  and  ask’d  me  if  I  would  drink,
which  \  refus’d,  tho’  I  was  a-dry  indeed.  I  believe
the  fright  had  made  me  dry  3  but  as  I  never  had
been  us’d  to  drink  with  the  Devil ,  I  didn’t  know
what  to  think  of  it,  fo  I  let  it  alone.

Au.  But  you  might  e’en  have  ventur’d,  for  the
old  Necromancer  was  but  a  Man,  whatever  Cor-
refpondence  he  might  have,  and  his  Ale  would  not
have  hurt  you.  But  what  elfe  did  he  fay  about  your
Bufinefs  ?

Co.  m.  'Why,  he  told  me  the  invifible  Agents
were  favourable  in  their  Anfwers3  that  there  ap¬
pear’d  nothing  but  well  3  that  he  was  allur’d
by  the  Afpe£ts  which  any  way  concern'd  me;
that  I  was  more  concern’d  about  this  Matter,  than

T  there


%  y  ^


A  SYSTEM

there  was  reafon  for*  that  I  fhould  go  home  and
wait,  till  by  the  Signals  he  had  given  me,  I  might
judge  for  my  felf,  and  till  I  heard  from  my  Wife  as
before  *  and  that  if  I  could  make  any  plain  Difco-
very,  that  there  was  real  Guilt,  I  fhould  come  to
him  again,  and  he  would  endeavour  to  point  out
the  Man.  But  if  I  could  not,  I  fhould  reft  fatif-
fy’d  that  I  had  been  wrong  inform’d  of  things  in
my  Family,  and  might  make  my  felf  eafy.

Au.  This  is  an  odd  Story,  why  this  Man  is  only
a  Cheat  like  all  the  reft  ^  he  bids  you  go  home,  and
if  you  can  find  out  any  real  Guilt,  then  come  to
him  and  he  will  tell  you  what  to  do  *  that  is  to  fay*
he  knows  nothing:  Is  this  your  Necromancer!
pray  where  does  he  dwell?

Go.  m.  Nay,  Matter,  the  Man  has  done  me  no
wrong.  I  was  directed  to  the  Houfe,  but  I  can’t
find  it  again,  if  I  was  to  be  bang’d  for  milling  it$
however  I  won’t  betray  him  neither,  let  him  be
what  he  will.

Au,  Well,  but  it  feems  you  are  not  fully  fatisfy’d
yet,  becaufe  he  does  not  confirm  your  Notion  that
your  Wife  is  a  Whore  >  I  fancy  you  have  a  Mind  it
fhould  be  fo.

Co.  m.  I  don’t  care  what  fhe  is,  fo  I  could  but
find  it  out.

Au.  But  you  fee,  neither  the  honeft  Man  at
Northampton ,  nor  the  Devil  at  Oundle ,  would  give
you  any  reafon  to  think  fo.  I  would  have  you  go
home,  as  the  firft  Man  advis’d  you,  and  be  quiet.  I
verily  believe  there’s  nothing  at  all  in  it,  but  you
have  been  a  cruel  Husband,  have  us’d  your  Wife
like  a  Dog,  and  frighted  her  with  worfe,  and  fhe
is  fled  from  you,  as  a  poor  naked  defencelefs  Sheep
Would  from  a  Lion  or  a  Wolf.

Go.  m .  And  you  would  have  me  go  home  and  fub«
mit  to  my  Wife?  no,  I’ll  hang  my  felf  firft.

Au.


of  M  A  G  1  C  R.

An.  I  don’t  fay  fubmit  to  your  Wife  5  tho’  if  you
have  wrong’d  your  Wife,  as  I  doubt  you  have,  I
fee  no  reafon  why  you  fhould  not  make  a  Wife  Sa¬
tisfaction  for  the  Injury  done  her  Character,  as  well
as  you  would  to  a  Man  that  was  able  to  cudgel  you
into  it.  But  I  fay  go  home,  and  mend  your  Wife’s
Husband,  and  that  will  in  all  probability  mend  your
Wife,  and  you  may  live  comfortably  again  to¬
gether.

Co.  m.  I  can’t  promife,  Mailer*  to  take  any  of  their
Advices,  or  your’s  either.

This  Story  is  not  told  fo  much  to  give  an  Ac¬
count  of  the  Man,  who  was  nothing  as  I  could
underhand  by  it  all,  but  a  bafe  paffionate  Fellow  to
an  honeft  Woman  his  Wife  5  but  ’tis  a  kind  of  a
Hiftory  of  modern  Magick,  or  of  the  Craft  which
is  at  this  time  in  Praftice  in  the  World.  Nor  is  it
a  lingular  Example,  for  we  have  many  more  Peo¬
ple  among  us,  who  are  Pretenders  to  the  facred
Sciences,  as  they  call  them 3  who  yet  do  not  level  their
Knowledge  of  them  to  fuch  mean  Ufes,  as  to  go
Mountebanking  with  them,  to  get  a  Crown  or  two
for  petty  Difcoveries,  and  fet  up  for  what  they  call
cunning  Men;  which  is  indeed  the  lowelt  Step  of
this  kind  that  a  Spirit  of  the  invifible  World  could
well  be  fuppos’d  to  take.

It  is  true,  ’tis  fomething  hard  to  defcribe  what
this  thing  we  call  Magick  is,  and  how  it  is  to  be
underftood  now  3  what  it  was  formerly  we  know
fomething  of,  and  yet  even  then  no  great  things  were
perform’d  by  it 5  fomething  they  did,  whether  by
the  thing  it  felf  as  an  Art,  or  by  the  Devil  being
prefent  to  alHft  them,  we  know  not  3  that  which
would  be  call’d  wonderful  is,  that  they  did  then,  as
they  pretend  to  do  Hill,  feveral  things  which  the  Devil
really  has  no  Power  to  do  3  and  particularly  that  of
foretelling  things  to  come,  which  we  do  not,  ge¬
nerally  ipeaking,  grant  the  Devil  to  have  in  his

T  Powers


A  SYSTEM

Power 5  he  can  indeed  make  better  judgment
of  things  than  we  can,  but  that  the  Knowledge  of
Futurity  is  given  him,  I  deny*

For  the  Augurs  and  Southfayers,  they  did  ftrange
things  formerly  j  by  whofe  Power,  is  not  in  my
reach,  nor  any  ones  elfe  to  determine:  For  Exam¬
ple  5  In  the  latter  end  of  the  Life  of  Aumftus  Ctefar ,
while  the  Ceremonies  were  performing  in  the  Cam -
pus  Martins ,  the  Emperor  and  a  vaft  Concourfe  of
People  being  prefent,  an  Eagle  came  into  the
Place,  and  hover’d  over  the  Emperor  fome  time,
flying  round  and  round  him  in  the  Air,  and  then
flying  towards  a  fmall  Temple  or  Oratory,  it  fet¬
tled  upon  a  little  Pinacle,  juft  over  the  Statue  of
Agrippa.

This  was  taken  as  a  Prefage  or  Omen  to  the
Emperor,  whether  of  Good  or  Evil  was  hard  to
determine  *  but  the  Augurs  being  confulted,  they
determin’d  it  to  be  Evil,  and  that  it  betoken’d  the
Death  of  the  Emperor  in  a  fliort  time.

Another  Accident  happened  the  very  next  Day,
viz.  a  Fiafli  of  Lightning  broke  upon  the  Statue
of  the  Emperor,  over  the  Senate- Houfe,  and  ftruck
out  the  Letter  C,  from  the  Word  Cafar ,  in  the
Infcription  upon  the  Capital  of  the  Work  over  the
Statue.  The  Augurs  were  again  confulted,  and  they
again  confulting  with  one  another,  and  by  the  ordinary
Obfervations,  declar'd  the  Emperor  would  dye
within  a  hundred  Days  5  fignify’d  by  the  Numeral
Letter  C  being  ftruck  out,  and  that  he  fhould  then
be  reckon’d  among  the  Gods,  becaufe  the  Word
JE  S  A  R  in  the  Hetrurian  Tongue  fignifies  a
God.

Nowit  fell  out  according  to  this  Prediction $  the
Emperor,  and  ‘Tiberius  his  Heir  Apparent,  went  as  far
as  Beneventum ,  he  was  taken  Sick  there  of  a  Diarrhaa ,
and  can hng  himfelf  to  be  carry ’d  to  Nola  near
Capuay  he  expired  ninety  nine  Days  after  the  Stroke

of


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

of  the  Thunder-Bolt  or  Lightning  as  above.  If
then  the  Devil  has  no  Knowledge  of  Futurity,  but
that  the  Study  of  the  Intellectual  World,  or
World  of  Spirits,  be  a  facred  Science ,  as  the  Profef-
fors  of  it  contend  *  then  thofe  Augurs  who  aCted
upon  the  foot  of  the  ancient  Magick,  were  illumi¬
nated  from  thofe  IntelleClual  Beings,  and  had  con-
verfe  with  Spirits  of  a  differing  kind  from  thofe
which  we  call  Devils  or  Diabolical.

Now,  as  ’tis  hard,  to  diftinguifh.  thefe  Illumina¬
tions,  otherwife  than  by  the  Events  and  Con-
fequences  of  the  Intelligence  they  bring*  fo  I
think,  that  if  firft  of  all,  the  DiftinClion  be  allow’d
between  good  and  evil  Spirits,  then  ’tis  a  jufb  way
of  determining,  viz.  that  fuch  intelligence  as  tends
to  the  good  of  Mankind,  to  the  Propagation  of
Virtue,  and  preferving  Honour,  Chaftity,  Pro¬
perty  and  Religion,  may  be  fuppoAJ  to  proceed
from  good  Spirits,  whether  Angels  or  other  Spirits
unembodyed*  on  the  contray,  where  the  Corref-
pondence  has  a  general  Tendency  to  Mifchief,  to
encourage  Crime,  to  the  hurt  of  Mankind  in  gene¬
ral,  to  difcourage  Virtue  and  Religion,  to  infuk
Heaven,  and  in  a  word,  where  the  Tenour  and
Bent  of  the  Illumination  is  to  do  Evil,  or  to  direCfc
to  the  doing  it,  there  we  may  without  Injury  to
Perfons,  or  to  the  Devil  himfelf,  fay  it  is  from  him,
or  by  his  Agency,  and  that  he  (the  Devil )  is  prin^*
cipally  concern’d  in  it*  for  we  know  it  is  his  Nature
and  particular  Property  to  be  propagating  Evil,  and
that  he  is  apparently  known  to  hate  Mankind,  and
abhor,  envy,  and  malign  the  Holy  Nature  of  the
Eternal  Being.

It  may  be  a  very  juft  Diftinftion  between  the
blefled  eternal  Being,  and  the  curfed  exil’d  con¬
demn’d  Species  of  Evil  Angels,  in  a  word,  be*
tween  God  and  the  Devil, to  fay  of  then}  thus;

t  5


277


God


A  SYSTEM

God  is  the  Perfeftion  of  Good.

The  Devil  is  the  Extreme  of  Corruption.

God  the  Perfection  of  Parity  and  Holinefs.

The  Devil  a  Compolition  of  the  tittnoft  Im?
purity.

From  thefe  two  Contraries  derive  all  the  execu¬
tive  Power  of  Good  and  Evil  3  the  Devil  can  no
more  be  the  Genuine  Parent  of  good  Actions,  than
an  evil  Tree  can  bring  forth  good  Fruit*  than
Darknefs,  which  is  a  Privation  of  the  glorious
Light,  can  be  aConfequence  or  Production  of  it.

God  can  no  more  be  the  Author  of  Evil,  than
he  can  Annhilate  himfelf,  and  Ceafe  to  be  3  and  he
cannot  Ceafe  to  be,  becaufe,  he  that  Exifls  from
Eternity  is  Eternal,  and  Exifls  necefTarily,  as  well
as  from  himfelf.

If  then  the  Intelligence  given,  or  the  Illumina¬
tions  receiv’d  by  the  Art  which  thefe  Men  pre¬
tend  to,  is  found  to  have  thefe  eflential  Qualifications
of  Goodnefs*  viz.  Beneficent  to  Mankind,  direfting
Men  to  the  preferving  Virtue,  Honour,  Pro¬
perty  and  Piety  3  then  I  fhould  be  tempted  to
think  they  have  an  Acquaintance  with  the  intelle¬
ctual  World,  a  Converfe  with  good  Spirits,  and  a
Prefcience  communicated  from  the  good  Angelss
thofe  Guardians  of  Mankind,  waking  Centinels,  let  to
guard  the  World  from  Evil,  and  to  counter-aft  the
Malice  and  Rage  of  Hell,  but  not  elfe.

Here  then  is  a  Tefl  of  the  Magicians  Art,  and  let
us  not  be  amus’d  and  impos'd  upon  by  the  Preten¬
ces  to  the  facred  Sciences,  and  to  the  fludy  of
exalted  Mvft  cries,  Incantations  Divine  and  Sub¬
lime,  and  many  other  lofty  Expreflions  3  fignificant
in  themfel  es,  but  not  fo  in  the  cafe  before  us,  un-
lefs  teftiiy’d  by  the  Virtue  and  juft  Productions
which  appear  in  then*  Praftice.  I  fay,  let  us  not  be
amus’d  with  thefe  to  embrace  Hell  in  the  Difguife

’  of


of  MAGIC  K.

of  Heaven,  and  converfe  with  a  Deceiver  ill  the
Robes  of  an  Angel  of  Light.

If  there  are  fuch  glorious  things  attain’d  to  by
Art,  and  by  the  Study  of  thefe [acred  Sciences ,  where
fiiall  we  find  the  Practice  of  them  ?  I  think  we  mud
be  referr’d  back  to  the  Augurs  and  Diviners  among  the
more  honed;  Heathens  $  for  we  may  almod  anfwer
for  it,  that  nothing  of  this  kind  is  feen  among  usi
or  at  lead:  if  it  is  found  in  Theory,  and  there  is  in
Nature  a  Reality  of  Art,  fuch  as  I  have  men¬
tion’d  above  >  that  Magick  is  a  Science  laudable  in
its  Study,  judibable  in  its  Pra&ice,  fublime  in  its
Attainment  j  it  is  yet  fo  blended  with  the  wicked
Parr,  by  the  Corruption  of  its  Profeflors,  that  we
fcarce  know  where  to  find  one,  either  in  Being  or
in  Story,  in  the  whole  Chriftkn  Time,  whofe  Pra~
£tice  can  be  allow’d  to  be  facrcd,  whatever  can  be
faid  of  the  Science.

It  is  true,  there  was  a  fam’d  Magician  in  Kent 9
who  pretended  to  this,  and  of  whom  I  fhall  fpeak
at  large  in  the  next  Chapters  5  and  he  Teem’d  to
a £t  wholly  upon  the  Principle  of  doing  good,  de~
te&ing,  punifhing,  and  expodng  Crime:  but  I
fhall  give  my  Exceptions  to  it  when  I  come  to  his
Story.

At  prefent  therefore  the  World  are  to  be  excus’d
the  Miflake,  if  they  run  into  it  even  with  a  kind
of  general  Confenr,  taking  the  Word  Magick
and  Magician  in  the  word:  Senfe,  underftanding
them  all  as  pra£Hdng  the  Diabolical  Part  of  it,  viz,
f  a  Converfe  with  Evil  Spirits,  and  a  Dealing  with
the  Devil  inclufive  alfo  of  all  thofe  feveral  Claffes
into  which  I  have  diftinguifli’d  it  before.

Hence  perhaps  it  is,  that  in  our  Difcourfing  with
even  the  mod:  Learned  Men  upon  this  Subject,  a
few,  a  very  few  excepted,  it  is  very  hard  to  bring
them  to  any  Notions  of  a  Difference  between  Ma¬
gick  and  Witchcraft,  between  a  Magician  and  a

T  4  Sorcerer,


A  SYSTEM

Sorcerer,  between  a  Student  in  the  exalted  Scien¬
ces,  a  Converfer  with  the  Intellectual  World,  and
a  Wretch  that  has  a  Familiar,  a  Wizzard  or  Ne¬
cromancer  >  but  they  will,  tho’  they  may  be  wrong
in  it  too,  have  them  be  reckon’d  all  in  a  Clafs,
that  they  are  all  PraClitioners  in  the  Diabolical
Part,  and  in  a  word,  that  they  all  deal  with  the
Devil.  Indeed  the  Difference  is  not  eafily  preceptible,
becaufe  of  the  Pretences  which  the  worft  of  them
make  to  the  high  Illumination,  when  they  are
really  aCting  the  vileft  Part,  and  that  in  the  ordi¬
nary  courfe  of  their  Practice*  ’tis  therefore  by  the
Confequences  only,  that  they  are  to  be  known*
Witchcraft  and  Sorcery  may  in  one  RefpeCl  be
juftly  faid  to  be  all  Magick  j  but  I  mufl  not  allow
that  all  Magick  is  Witchcraft,  as  I  diftinguifh’d
before  between  a  Witch  and  a  Wizzard.  But  fee¬
ing  it  is  fo  hard  to  know  them  afunder,  and  that
the  Impofture  is  fo  great,  the  beft  Method  I  can
take  is,  where  Hiflory  or  Convention  will  fupply
Materials,  to  give  you  as  many  Examples  of  the
feveral  Practices  and  PraCtifers  in  thefe  lafl  Ages
of  the  Woild  as  we  can  meet  with,  as  well  for
your  Diverfion  as  InftruCtion.

I  mufl  here  enrer  a  Caution  too  againft  a  weak,
but  vulgar  Miftake,  which  to  the  Reproach  of  hu¬
man  Underhanding  the  World  has  been  very
much  poffels’d  with*,  and  that  b,  to  aferibe  every
difficult  unaccountable  Performance  to  th c  Art  Ma¬
gic's  $  and  every  fuperior  Genius,  every  Man  of  a
Tublime  Thought,  and  more  than  ordinary  Capa¬
city,  to  be  a  Magician.  Archimedes  was  a  mod  ac-
complifh’d  Genius,  and  an  excellent  Mathema¬
tician,  but  we  will  have  him  be  a  Magician  too.
Fryar  Bacon ,  who  by  his  Skill  in  the  Mathema?
ticks,  and  the  DoChine  of  Motion,  and  of  Sounds,
made  a  BrazcmHead  to  fpeak  $  of  which  by  the
way  there  are  many  Examples  in  Hiflory,  more

ancient


I


t


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

ancient  than  Father  Bacon ,  yet  we  will  have  this
honeft  Friar  be  a  Witch,  a  Magician ,  a  Conjurer,
only  becaufe  the  thing  was  beyond  the  ordinary
Conception.

Men  of  Thought  and  Head,  who  have  a  Genius
a  little  above  their  Neighbours,  have  on  all  Occa-
fions  been  liable  to  be  thus  treated  ;  even  our  Savi¬
our  himfelf,  when  he  a£ted  fuch  Wonders  as  the
like  had  not  been  feen,  and  call  out  Devils  j  what
faid  the  amaz’d  World  ?  The  more  weak  and  ad¬
miring  and  innocent  Thoughts  were  amaz’d,  the
Text  fays  they  were  aftonifh’d;  and  at  another
time  they  were  fill’d  with  Wonder,  and  the  like  ^
but  the  felf-wife  Heads,  the  pretending  Pharifees,
having  neither  Knowledge  to  reach  the  Divine
Power  by  which  he  wrought,  and  too  much  Pride
to  fubmit  to  Faith,  reproach’d  him  with  dealing
with  the  Devil  s  He  cafteth  out  Devils  by  Belzeebub
the  Prince  of  Devils.  Mat.  xii.  24.

This  Miftake  may  therefore  take  place  in  the
Cafe  before  me;  arad  Men  who  have  ftudied,  in
the  moft  exquifite  manner,  any  of  the  Sciences
which  are  lawful  and  commendable,  and  are  arriv’d
to  a  degree  of  Knowledge  beyond  others,  may  be
fufpefted  of  Magick ,  and  of  the  Diabolick  Magick
too,  which  I  have  Been  fpeaking  of.

1  will  not  venture  to  ftate  the  Bounds,  critically
fpeaking,  between  the  lawful  Study  of  Magick  as  a
Science,  and  the  unlawful  Part  of  its  Practice  as  a
Diabolick  or  a  Black  Art,  any  more  than  between
f  the  noble  Study  of  Aftronomy,  including  the  Motions
of  the  heavenly  Bodies,  and  that  corrupt  and  horrid
Impofition,  that  worft  of  Juggle,  the  moft  fimple
and  fcandalous  of  all  Cheats,  call’d  judicial  Aftro-
logy.

That  Magick  may  be  a  handle  to  Witchcraft,
that  one  may  begin  where  the  other  ends,  this  I
will  not  deny  1  but  I  muft  be  allowed  to  fay,  that  if

^  there


A  SYSTEM

there  is  an  invifible  World,  a  World  of  Spirits,  if
there  is  a  Converfe  between  the  Spirits  unem¬
bodied,  and  our  Spirits  embodied,  which  alfo  I  can¬
not  deny,  whatever  lawful  way  there  can  be  found,  if
iuch  can  be  found,  to  form  an  Intelligence  between
them,  muft  be  a  fublime  and  heavenly  Attainment,
at  the  fame  time,  I  will  not  venture  to  fay  fuch  an
Intelligence  can  be  form’d.

Nor  will  I  venture  to  fay,  that  there  can  be
any  fettled  Method  found  out  to  call  up  any  of
thofe  invifible  Inhabitants  of  the  World  of  Spirits,
to  a  vifible  Appearance  in  this  World,  and  to  an
audible  and  vocal  Converfation,  fo  as  to  receive  In¬
telligence  of  things  prefent,  or  Directions  in  things
to  come,  to  be  advifed,  counfeiled  or  informed  by
them,  or  to  any  fuch  Purpofe  \  it  does  not  feem  pro¬
bable  -y  If  at  any  time  they  do  or  can  appear,  which
yet  I  do  not  grant,  it  muft  be  fpontaneous  and  ar¬
bitrary,  how,  when,  where,  and  on  what  Occafi-
on  they  think  fit :  But  as  to  our  calling  them  up  by
Art,  except  it  be  by  a  Diabolical  Magick,  and  by
the  immediate  Affiftance  of  the  Devil ,  and  perhaps
too  it  may  be  only  a  Delufion  of  Satan’s,  who  pre¬
tending  to  vifit  us  by  the  good  Spirits  we  want  to
converfe  with,  conftitutes  a  miffionary  Devil  to  per-
fonate  the  Spirit  expe&ed,  and  fo  put  a  Cheat  up¬
on  the  Enquirer,  as  the  Witch  of  Endor  raifed  a
Spe&re  or  Sham  Samuel  in  the  room  of  the  true
Prophet  Samuel >  who  we  may  without  Prefumption
believe  knew  nothing  of  the  matter.

To  pretend  by  Art  to  bring  thofe  good  Spirits
from  their  State  of  Felicity,  wherever  it  is,  to  an
Appearance  for  our  private  Concerns,  feems  to  have
no  Confiftence  in  the  Nature  of  a  future  State  5
that  there  may  be  an  invifible  and  imperceptible
Converfe  of  Spirits  which  we  cannot  deferibe,  and
appointed  by  Providence  for  Ends  which  we  do  not
fully  understand,  I  believe  is  poffible$  But  it  is  then

done


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

done  their  own  way,  and  we  know  nothing  of  the
manner.

There  is  much  {aid  of  Guardian  Angels,  and  fome
feeming  Ground  from  Scripture,  but  not  enough  to
be  called  an  Authority  from  whence  to  ground  an
Hypothefis  of  the  manners  nor  will  the  greateft  Ma¬
gician  that  ever  was,  how  much  foever  he  pretends
to  the  facred  Science,  takes  upon  him  to  fay  he  can
call  up  or  caufe  to  appear  one  of  chofe  guardian
Angels  j  no  not  by  the  utmoft  and  moil  exquifite
Art  that  was  ever  attained  to>  fo  that  all  that  Part
of  calling  up  good  Spirits  or  Guardian  Angels  to  a
vifible  Appearance,  feems  to  be  fictitious  and
groundlefs.  As  to  calling  up  evil  Angels  or  evil  Spi¬
rits,  that  is  to  fay  Devils  as  it  is  to  be  done  by
the  Affiitance  of  the  Devil ,  and  that  he  has  given
his  Affiftance  to  the  doing  it,  and  therefore  can  do
it,  I  make  no  Queftion  j  and  therefore  when  the  Ma¬
gicians  do  at  any  time  bring  up  Appearances  and
frightful  Apparitions  by  their  Art,  I  fhall  always
fuppofe  it  to  be  the  Devil ,  that  is  to  fay,  the  Devil
raifed  by  Confent  of  the  Devil j  the  Devil  coming
up  at  their  Call,  who  he  had  before  confented  fhould
have  Leave  to  call  him  >  for  he  muft  come  Voiun-
tier  too,  nor  can  he  be  called  up  or  diflurbed  with¬
out  his  Confent  *  but  he  bargains  with  thofe  wick¬
ed  People  upon  fuch  Conditions  as  they  agree  be¬
tween  them,  that  he  fliall  obfequioufly  attend
whenever  they  ufe  fuch  and  fuch  Methods  to  call
him,  and  this  is  Witchcraft,  and  this  is  Magick  5
This  Magick  is  Witchcraft ,  and  this  Witchcraft  is
Magick:  let  any  one  diftinguifh  between  them  if
they  can.


CHAP.


*84  4  SYSTEM

CHAP.  III.

Of  the  prefent  'Pretences  of  the  Magicians :

How  they  defend  themfelves ;  and  fome  Ex ■*
j  amples  of  their  Practice.

THE  Magicians,  fuch  as  acknowledge  the'm-
felves  to  be  acquainted  with  the  Black  Art ,  as
we  call  it,  are  not  dumb  and  fpeechlefs  in  their  own
Cafe  •,  on  the  contrary,  they  defend  themfelves  with
the  utmoft  Artifice  j  have  their  hiftorical  Accounts
of  their  Pra&ice,  and  give  the  moil  fair  and  plaufible
Sketches  of  the  Art  it  felf  that  can  be  imagin’d.

They  infill  that  it  is  a  general  Miilake,  a  vulgar
Error,  and  injurious  to  all  the  Praftifers  of  this
Science,  to  fay  they  have  a  Familiar,  as  we  under-
fland  the  Word,  that  is,  an  evil  Spirit,  or  that  they
deal  with  the  Devil  }  they  own  they  have  Acceis
to,  and  an  Intercourfe  with  fupcriour  Beings,  and
converfe  with  the  World  qf  Spirits}  but  that  they
are  the  good  and  well-difpofed  Spirits,  who  are  al¬
ways  beneficent,  kind,  and  ready  to  dq  all  pof-
fible  Offices  of  Love  to  Mankind}  that  they  are
certainly  influenc’d  from  above,  and  that  confe-
quently  it  is  fo  far  from  being  true,  that  they  are
Diabolick  and  wicked  Spirits,  that  on  the  contrary
they  are  always  employed  in  Matters  fuperiour  to
the  Nature  of  the  Infernal  Spirits}  that  they  do
not  amufe  the  World  with  Fiftions,  and  deceive
and  abufe  the  People,  that  come  to  them  with  their
Enquiries}  that  they  do  not,  like  the  Devil’s  Ora¬
cles  of  old,  give  ambiguous  and  doubtful  Anfwers
in  the  Cafes  and  Enquiries  that  are  brought  before
them,  to  cheat  and  delude  the  innocent  En¬
quirer}  but  that  they,  on  the  contrary,  tell  them
the  Truth  of  every  thing,  be  it  for  Good  or  Evil

to


1


of  M  A  G  I  C  k.

to  them  •>  that  they  often  deteft  Criminals,  expofe
Vice,  prevent  Mifchief,  and  promote  Virtue
Things  no  body  will  pretend  are  in  the  Intent  and
Meaning  of  evil  Spirits >  that  they  do  not  impofe
upon  the  ignorant  to  cheat  and  defraud  them,  or
make  unjult  Advantages  of  them.

In  difcourfing  many  Years  fince  upon  this  Subjefb
with  aparticular  Friend,  a  judicious  and  learned
Man,  and  one  that  was  not  eafily  impofed  upon,
I  Teemed  to  be  doubtful  of  the  Reality  of  the  thing
in  general,  and  whether  there  was  indeed  fuch  a
thing  as  that  of  Men  having  Intercourfe  with  the
World  of  Spirits,  and  whether  we  might  diftin-
guifh  between  that  and  Witchcraft,  infilling  that  I
th  ought  it  was  all  Witchcraft,  Sorcery,  and  the
Devil .

He  told  me  he  was  of  my  Mind  ’till  fome  Years
before,  that  he  had  Occafion  to  convene  with  the
famous  Magician  called  Dr.  Boreman  in  Kent,  who
he  allured  me  was  a  very  grave  judicious  Man,  and,
as  he  believed,  a  good  Man.  I  had  once,  faid  he,
above  all  the  reft,  a  long  Conference  with  him  on
a  particular  Occafion  j  but  ’tis  too  long  to  tell  you
the  Particulars.  If ’tis  not  too  long  for  you  to  tell,
faid  /,  it  will  not  be  too  long  for  me  to  hear,  for
I  am  really  impatient  to  know  what  is  to  be  known
of  that  Kind  5  and  the  more,  becaufe  1  am  at  a
lofs  to  pafs  a  Judgment  about  it.  Well,  faid  hcj
if  I  tire  you  then  with  the  length  of  it  tell  me,  and
I  will  leave  off:  So  he  began  his  Story  thus:
4  I  had,  faid  he,  a  Friend,  a  young  Man,  who  defired
4  me,  upon  an  extraordinary  Occafion  to  go  with
4  him  (as  he  called  it)  to  a  Cunning  Man.

k  I  asked  him ,  What  was  the  Bufinefs?

4  He  faid ,  It  was  Bufinefs  of  Confequenee  to  him,
6  and  tho’  he  did  not  care  to  tell  it  juft  then,  yet  I
4  ftiould  know  it  afterward.

4  I


xte  A  S  r  $  T  E  M

4  I  told  him ,  I  had  no  Faith  at  all  in  thofe  fort
4  of  People  whom  they  called  Cunning  i^len.

4  Na yr  fays  he,  I  believe  they  deal  with  the  De*
4  vil ,  but  I  don’t  care  for  that,  if  I  can  but  have  Sa-
4  tisfa&ion  in  what  I  go  about.

4  I  told  him,  I  differ’d  from  him  in  that  too,  for
4  I  neither  believed  that  they  dealt  with  the  Devil ,
4  or  the  Devil  with  them*  or  that  they  could  fay
4  any  thing  to  him  that  was  to  the  Purpofe.

4  Why,  they  do  tell  ftrange  things,  fays  he.

4  I  told  him ,  I  believed  nothing  of  it  *  but  that  it
4  was  all  a  Cheat  *  and  fo  I  feem’d  loth  to  have
4  him  go  to  the  Cunning  Man  at  all.

N.  B.  You  mull  underftand  here,  that  my  Friend
was  not  fo  really  doubtful  as  he  made  the
young  Man  believe  he  was  *  but,  as  he  had
told  me  before,  he  believ’d  there  was  fomc*
thing  in  it,  but  he  could  never  come  at  the
Speech  of  one  of  the  Pretenders  to  the  Art,
and,  fo  was  entirely  ignorant  of  what  they  did,
or  how  they  proceeded,  and  therefore  (as  he
told  me)  he  was  mighty  willing  to  go  with
him,  tho’  he  made  feme  Shew  of  being  back*
backwards  *  fo  he  went  on  with  his  Dif*
courfe.

4  I  was  not  only  loth  to  let  him  go,  fays  my
4  Friend,  but  I  told  him  I  did  not  care  for  it,  and
4  therefore  defired  he  would  excufe  me  going  with
4  him*  but  when  he  told  me  who  the  cunning
4  Man  was,  and  that  he  would  go  to  the  famous
4  Dr.  Boreman ,  my  Curio fity  prevail’d  with  me,
4  not  only  not  to  perfw-ade  him  againft  going,  but
4  to  refolve  eg  go  with  him  my  felf.

4  In  a  word,  we  appointed  a  Day,  and  I  went
4  with  him,  for  I  had  a  great  mind  to  talk  with
4  the  Dodbor.


*  When


1


of  MAGIC  K.

4  When  we  came  to  the  Houfe  (it  was  in  Kenty
4  not  far  from  Maidftoney  where  the  Do&or  liv’d  at
4  that  time  *  I  don’t  remember  the  Place  exa&ly)
4  but,  I  fay,  when  we  came  to  the  Place,  a  Ser-
4  vant  came  to  the  Door,  and  very  civilly  led  us  in-
4  to  the  Houfe,  and  bad  us  fit  down  *  leaving  us  in
4  a  large  Hall,  where  we  walk’d  about,  looking
4  on  his  Magical  Pidtures,  of  which  wefaw  a  great
4  many,  whofe  meaning  I  did  not  at  all  underftand,
4  and  the  Servant  went  away,  as  I  fuppofe,  to  call
4  his  Mafter,

4  After  a  while  the  Do&or  came  in  with  a  Staff
4  in  his  Hand  like  a  Crutch,  as  I  thought*  and  I
4  thought  alfo  he  was  lame,  having  lately  had  the
4  Gout:  He  was  a  grave  old  Man,  with  a  long
4  black  Velvet  Gown  on,  his  Beard  long,  and  the
4  upper  Lip  of  it  trimm’d  into  a  kind  of  Mnfchatoy
4  a  Cap  on  his  Head  with  a  Border  of  Hair  within
4  it,  as  was  the  Cuftom  in  thofe  Days.

4  After  ufual  Civilities,  he  began  to  enquire  our
4  Bufinels*  and  directing  his  Speech  to  me,  as  the
4  Senior  in  appearance,  I  told  him,  that  young
4  Man  (pointing  to  him  that  came  with  me)  my
4  Friend,  had  fomething  of  Importance  to  commu-
4  nicate  to  him,  and  which  he  wanted  his  Advice
4  in  *  and  fo,  fays  he,  I  bid  the  young  Man  give  the
4  Doftor  an  Account  of  his  Bufinefs.

4  This  young  Man  had,  it  feems,  a  particular
4  Cafe  which  he  went  to  him  about*  andtho’  he  had
4  defired  me  to  go  with  him,  as  I  have  faid,  yet  he
4  had  not  told  me  his  Cafe*  fo  I  was  oblig’d  to
4  direft  him  to  tell  it  himfelf.

4  Then  the  Doctor  defir’d  the  young  Man  to
4  give  him  his  Cafe  in  writing  *  but  he  told  him,  he
4  could  not  write  well  enough,  or  explain  his  Cafe
4  fo  intelligibly  to  him  in  writing.

4  Well  then,  fays  the  Dottory  tell  it  me  in  Words
4  at  length,  and  I’ll  write  it  down  from  your  own

4  Mouth;


288


A  SYSTEM

c  Mouth  :  However,  I  perfwaded  him  to  write  it
1  down  as  well  as  he  could  £  upon  which,  he  de-
1  fired  a  Pen,  Ink  and  Paper,  which  the  Doftor  or-
J  der  d  his  Man  to  give  him>  and  in  the  mean
*  time,  the  Doftor  ask'd  me  to  walk  into  another
1  Room  5  come,  fays  he,  we  will  leave  him  to  do
c  it,  that  we  may  not  difiurb  him.  So  we  went  in-
;  to  the  next  Room.

6  Then  he  began  a  Difcourfe,  by  asking  me  if  1
:  knew  any  thing  of  the  young  Man's  Cafe  *  which
1  I  really  did  not,  and  therefore  told  him  fo  j  but
c  if  I  had  known  it,  I  fiiould  hardly  have  given
;  him  any  Account,  for  I  took  that  to  be  a
:  Piece  of  his  Art,  to  pick  as  much  of  the  Circum-
E  fiance  of  the  Cafe  out  privately  as  he  could,  fo  to
1  guide  his  Anfwersj  but  I  quite  miftook  the  Man.
;  From  that  we  fell  into  feveral  other  Difcourfes,
■  and  among  the  reft,  I  asked  the  Doftor,  if  it
;  would  be  no  Offence  to  him  to  let  us  talk  a  lit—
;  tie  about  the  Study  of  thofe  things  which  he  was
1  fo  fam’d  for.

c  He  faid,  No  not  at  all,  if  I  was^difpofed  to  talk
:  of  them  in  a  ferious  and  friendly  manner.

6  I  told  him,  I  hoped  he  did  not  think  I  had  any
;  ill  Defign,  tho’  a  Stranger  5  if  he  did,  I  would
;  not  defire  to  fay  any  more  5  and  that  as  I  did  not
:  know  what  he  might  underftand  by  the  Word
;  Friendly,  I  would  not  move  it  any  farther.

c  He  faid.  He  did  not  apprehend  any  thing  dan-
:  gerousj  for  he  ufed  no  unlawful  Arts,  but  he
faid  feveral  Perfons  made  a  Jeft  of  thofe  things
which  he  efteemed  facred,  and  that  he  did  not  care
1  for  thofe  Difcourfes  or  thofe  People  who  buf-
;  foon’d  things  becaufe  they  did  not  underftand
;  them.

c  I  told  him,  that  whatever  I  thought,  he  fiiould
;  find  I  would  neither  treat  him,  or  theSubjedb  we
1  might  difcourfe  of,  with  any  Diffefpeft.

«  He


of  M  A  G  1  C  It

s  He  told  me  he  would  take  my  Word  for  It  $
6  fo  we  fell  into  feveral  Difcourfes  about  Science  ift
4  general,  particularly  of  the  Study  of  Magick  and
‘.the  Pradtice  of  it,  and  when  firfl  it  was  knowfi
4  in  the  World.

6  He  told  me,  I  feem’d  Ignorant  in  the  thing  it
*  felf,  and  to  what  purpofe,  fays  he,  fhould  I  go  to
4  fpeak  of  the  Original  of  a  thing  which  you  hav£
€  not  right  Notions  of?  So  we  difcours’d  a  little
4  farther  upon  it,  thus  :

4  A.  What  Notions  would  you  have  me  enter-
4  tain  of  it?  I  fcarce  know  what  you  mean  by  the
4  thing  itfelf

4  Dr.  Why,  Sir ,  you  feem  neither  to  know  what
€  I  mean,  or  what  you  mean  your  felf.

4  A.  'That  is  to  fay ,  I  do  not  exprefs  my  felf  per&
4  haps  right  j  then  you  may  fet  me  to  rights*  and
4  it  would  be  very  kind  to  do  fo.

4  Dr.  You  fpeak  of  my  pradtifing  as  an  Arty  UoW
€  I  pradtife  no  Art ,  nor  ufe  any  Arty  I  am  no
4  Juggler ,  Sir  >  you  don’t  fee  me  fhew  Tricks.

4  A .  I  wou’d  not  offend  you*  Sir  5  will  you  tell
4  me  then  what  it  is  you  do  pradtife  ?

4  Dr.  Neither  will  I  be  offended  $  but  if  you
4  will  give  me  leave  to  ask  you  a  previous  Queftiort
4  or  two,  1  fhall  be  the  better  able  to  anfwer  your
4  other  Queftion  afterwards.

4  A.  Any  Queftion  you  pleafe,

4  Dr.  Why  then,  will  you  tell  me  what  brought
\  4  you  hither  to  me?

4  A.  Why  really,  Sir,  my  Anfwer  muff  be,  I  can1*
f  4  not  'Well  telly  my  Friend  who  is  writing  there  in
4  the  other  Room,  will  tell  you  that  better  than  L
4  Dr.  W7hy  then  fhall  I  tell  you  what  you  come
4  for?  perhaps  you’ll  think  that  fomething  odd.

4  A.  So  indeed  1  fhould,  if  I  did  not  confider  you
4  as  a  Man  of  Art.


A  SYSTEM

4  Dr.  No,  no,  not  a  Man  that  deals  with  the
4  Devil ,  as  you  fancy  I  do.

4  A.  Nay,  you  muft  deal  with  fome  body,  if  you
4  tell  me  my  Bufinefs  here,  when  I  don’t  know  it
4  my  felf.

4  Dr.  Why,  I  will  tell  you  in  few  Words  then*

4  your  Friend  comes  about  Bufinefs,  you  to  fatisfy
4  your  Curiofity.

4  A.  Upon  my  Word  I  think  you  are  in  the
4  right.

4  Dr.  Well,  I  have  ufed  no  great  matter  of  ART
4  you  fee  yet.

4  A.  Nay,  I  don’t  know  that*  I  fuppofe  what
4  you  do  is  pretty  much  in  the  dark,  and  impercep-
4  tible  s  fo  you  might  ufe  Art,  and  I  know  nothing
4  of  it.

4  Dr.  That’s  true,  or  elfe  it  would  be  no  Art.

€  A.  But  is  my  Curiofity  any  Offence  to  you,

4  Dodtor?  if  it  is,  I’ll  ha’  done  and  fay  no  more,

4  but  leave  you  and  my  Friend  together,  for  I  don’t
4  come  to  affront  you,  far  from  it,  I  affure  you.

4  Dr.  No,  no,  ’tis  no  Offence  at  all  to  me*  on-
4  ly  fince  you  feem  to  talk  friendly  and  freely,  give
4  me  leave  to  ask  you  fome  Queftions  firft,  and  then
4  I’ll  ftate  yours  for  you,  and  anfwer  them  diredtly,
4  and  I  hope  to  your  Satisfaftion.

4  A.  With  all  my  Heart  *  ask  me  what  you
4  pleafe.

Dr.  4  What  did  you  fuppofe  me  to  be,  or
4  what  did  your  Friend  tell  you  I  was,  before  you
4  came  ?

4  A.  And  you  will  promife  me  not  to  take  it  ill
4  if  I  fpeak  plain  Englifh  ?

4  Dr.  Not  in  the  lead*  I’ll  put  it  into  your
4  Mouth,  for  I  know  what  you  took  me  for,  as  well
4  as  you  do  your  felf.

4  A.  I  doubt  you  do,  Sir*  and  that  loofe  as  if  we
4  were  in  the  right.

Dr,


%9l


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Dr.  4  Not  at  all  neither,  but  of  that  afterwards;
4  you  and  your  Friend  took  me  for  a  Necromancer ,
4  a  Magician ,  one  that  deals  with  the  Devi /,  can
4  raife  the  Devil ,  converfes  with  him,  and  by  his
4  Help  can  refolve  difficult  Queilions,  give  Anfwers
4  in  doubtful  Cafes ;  and,  in  fliorr,  that  1  am  a  Con -
4  jurer.

4  And  fo  you  muft  be,  I  think,  or  elfe  how
4  do  you  know  all  this  ?

4  Dr.  How  I  know  it,  is  not  the  Queffcion  $  but
4  whether  it  is  true  or  no  ?

4  A.  Exaftly  true  to  a  tittle.

4  Dr.  And  if  I  am  no  fuch  Perfon,  have  I  not
4  then  a  great  deal  of  wrong  done  me?

4  A.  You  know.  Sir,  ’tis  natural  for  People  to
4  fay,  a  Man  deals  with  the  Devil ,  when  he  tells
4  People  their  Thoughts,  foretells  to  them  what
4  comes  to  pafs,  and  refolves  fuch  Doubts  as  no
4  body  but  the  Devil  could  refolve.

4  Dr.  And  perhaps  the  Devil  himfelf  could  not
4  do  thofe  things  if  he  was  to  appear  and  do  his  ut-
6  moft,  for  he  knows  no  more  of  things  to  come
6  than  you  or  I  do,  and  perhaps  not  fo  much.

4  A.  Nay,  do  not  join  me  to  your  felf,  pray,  for
4  you  may  know  more  than  the  Devil  himfelf
4  can  tell  you.

4  Dr.  Or  elfe  I  would  burn  my  Books,  and  pre-
4  tend  no  more  to  the  facred  Sciences  which  I
4  have  fo  much  Veneration  for,  and  which  you  call
4  my  Practice.

4  A.  If  I  was  fure  of  that,  Ifhouid  have  another
4  kind  of  Notion  of  you  and  your  Practice  than  I
4  have  yet,  I  affiure  you.

4  Dr.  If  you  was  fure  of  what  ?

4  A.  Why,  that  you  do  not  perform  thefe  things
4  by  the  Help  of  a  familiar  Spirit.

4  Dr*  Nay  hold,  I  don’t  fay  that  neither  ;  but
4  are  there  no  Spirits  but  what  are  Devils?

U  z  A.


A  SYSTEM

4  A.  I  don’t  know  indeed  as  to  that  5  but  we
4  underftand  no  other  5  when  we  talk  of  a  familiar
4  Spirit  we  always  underftand  (by  it)  the  Devil.

4  Dr.  Then  you  mifunderftand  it,  Sir,  that’s
4  certain:  unfufferable  Ignorance!  why,  are  there
4  no  good  Spirits  ?

4  A.  I  can  fay  nothing  to  that.

*  Dr.  And  perhaps  are  not  defirous  to  be  in-
4  formed.

4  A.  Nay  there  you  wrong  me,  and  take  me  for
4  a  Fool  into  the  Bargain  j  for  there  are  none  but
4  Fools  that  have  no  Delight  in  underftanding  5  I
4  would  be  inform’d  of  every  thing  that  I  do  not
4  know.

4  Dr.  There  would  be  no  fuch  things  as  Fools,

4  Sir,  if  they  were  willing  to  be  inform’d.

Jf  Fools  could  their  own  Ignorance  difeern ,

^they'd  he  no  longer  Fools ,  hecaufe  they'd  learn .

4  A.  Well,  I  am  very  willing  to  learn,  I  affiire
4  you,  and  of  you  too,  whatever  you  pleafe  to  in-
4  form  me  5  perhaps  I  may  be  in  the  wrong  as  to
4  what  you  fay  of  good  Spirits  $  but  I  never  heard
4  of  any.

4  Dr.  That’s  ftrange  indeed!  you  have  been  much
4  out  of  their  Care,  fure.

4  A .  I  don’t  know  that  neither  5  I  hope  not.  If
4  they  have  any  of  us  in  Charge  for  Good,  I  may
4  be  under  their  Care  I  hope,  and  yet  know  no-
4  thing  of  it  my  felf.

4  Dr.  At  leaftit  feemsyou  have  been  out  of  their
*  Acquaintance,  but  that  is  not  much  to  the  Cafe  5
4  the  Lofs  has  been  yours  to  be  fure,  and  the  Fault
4  too.

4  A.  The  Lofs  may  have  heen  mine  $  but  how
4  does  it  appear  that  the  Fault  has  been  mine  too?


of  M  A  G  l  C  K.

c  Dr.  It  Teems  evident  to  me ;  and  perhaps  I  may
4  convince  you  of  it,  if  you  allow  me  to  ask  you
4  a  few  more  fuch  innocent  Queftions  as  thefe.

4  A.  With  all  my  Heart,  efpecially  if  they  are
4  innocent.

4  Dr.  If  you  have  any  Reafon  to  fufpe£t  them,
4  do  not  anfwer.

4  A.  And  you  give  me  Leave  to  ufe  my  Liberty,
4  Sir,  without  Offence  ?

4  Dr.  Ay,  your  utmoft  Liberty,  Sir*  whyfhould
4  I  be  offended  ?  I  think  you  ought  rather  to  be
4  offended,  if  I  ask  any  thing  that  does  not  become
4  me:  The  firft  Queftion  I  would  ask  you  is,  whe*
4  ther  you  think  there  is  an  invifible  World.

4  A.  That’s  no  unfair  Queftion  at  ail  ;  and  you
4  fhall  find,  Sir,  I  won’t  cavil,  I’ll  anfwer  diredly.

4  I  make  no  doubt  but  there  is.

4  Dr.  But  let  my  Queftion  be  dire£ttoo;  by  an
4  invifible  World,  I  don’t  mean,  as  the  AJironomers
4  fuggeft ,  that  there  are  Planetary  Worlds,  made  in-
4  vifible  only  to  us  by  their  Diftance.

4  A.  No,  no,  I  do  not  take  you  foj  I  believe
4  there  is  a  World  of  Spirits,  and  that  I  fuppofe  is
€  what  you  mean  by  invifible  $  alfo  that  this  World
4  youfpeakofis  inhabited  by  Spirits  only,  and  there-
4  fore  juftly  called  invifible.

4  Dr.  You  are  kind,  nay  generous  in  Argumenr,

4  for  you  grant  fafter  than  I  ask.

4  A.  I  do  that  to  fave  Circumlocutions,  and  giv-
4  ing  you  Trouble.

4  D.  Well  Sir,  where  do  you  fuppofe  this  World
4  of  Spirits  is?  for  there  muft  be  a  Locality  for
4  the  dwelling  even  of  Spirits;  how  elfe  do  we
4  call  it  a  World  ?  and  Heaven  itfelf  is  a  Place,  ac«-
4  cording  to  the  common  underftanding  of  the  Word.

4  A.  It  is  hard  to  fay  where  it  is,  at  leaft  ’tis  hard
f  to  me ;  fo  I  cannot  anfwer  that  Queftion,  at  leaft
£  not  directly  as  I  would  do.

U  $  4  Dr?


*93


2p4


A  SYSTEM

‘  •

4  Dr.  It  is  true,  the  infinite  Spaces  above  are  not
4  eafily  defcribed,  as  they  are  not  to  be  mathemati-
4  callv  lin’d  out;  but  we  have  Reafon  to  know

j  41

4  the  Inhabitants  of  it  are  not  very  remote  from  us,
4  and  that  brings  on  another  Queftion.

4  A.  I  know  fome  People  think  the  Regions  of
4  the  Air,  even  within  the  Comp  a(s  of  the  Atmo-
4  fphere,  are  full  of  Spirits,  and  that  of  divers  kinds.,
*  fome  good,  and  fome  evil.

4  Dr .  I  have  nothing  to  fay  to  that  Notion  5
4  I  can’t  allow  they  inhabit  promifcuoufiy  the
4  fame  Regions,  and  dwell  together  3  as  good  and  bad
4  People  live  here  among  one  another  without  Di-
4  ftinftion.

4  A.  I  don’t  pretend  to  refolye  that  Queftion  in~
4  deed.

6  Dr.  Neither  did  I  propofe  it,  Sir:  but  my  Que-
4  flion  is  this  j  As  you  grant  a  World  of  Spirits,
4  and  that  you  do  not  know  where  it  is  5  fo  that  for
4  ought  you  know  it  may  be  very  near,  as  well  as
4  very  remote  $  nor  to  a  Spirit  is  diftance  of  Place
4  any  thing  worth  confidering,  if  I  may  fpeak  my
4  Opinion:  But  my  Queftion,  I  fay,  is  this;  Do
4  you  believe  that  the  Spirits  inhabiting  theinvifible
4  World  have  any  Converfe  with  us,  or  with  our
4  embodied  Spirits,  in  this  World  ?

4  A,  Truly  it  is  a  nice  Queftion,  and  what  I
4  have  often  confidered  very  ferioufly  5  I  am  of
4  Opinion  there  is  a  certain  fecret  Converfe  of  Spi-
4  rits,  tho’  I  cannot  underftand  any  thing  of  the
4  manner.

4  Dr.  Well^  Sir,  your  Conceptions  are  much  the
4  fame'- with  mine,  only  that  you  believe  there  is,

4  and  I  am  fure  of  it.

4  A.  That’s  carrying  it  a  great  way  5  and  !  think
4  this  brings  me  to  turn  the  Tables,  and  to  demand
c  Leave  to  ask  you  fome  Queftions  in  my  turn,  if
4  you  have  done,  or  when  you  have  done.

Dr.


of  MAG  I  C  K.

4  Dr.  With  all  my  Heart,  Sir  5  pray  ask  what  you
4  pleafe.

4  A.  My  firtl  Queftion  will  be,  Sir,  how  you  can
4  fay  you  are  fure  there  is  fuch  a  Converfe  with
4  the  Spirits  of  the  invifible  World?

4  Dr.  Becaufe  I  have  actually  convers’d  with
4  them  my  felf.

4  A.  Now  you  come  to  the  Point  indeed.  But
4  what  then  do  you  call  Converting?

4  Dr.  Why,  I  call  feeing  them,  fpeaking  to
6  them,  and  hearing  them  fpeak,  Converting  >  is  not
4  that  as  clear  as  the  other?

4  A.  The  Expreffion  is  clear,  but  the  thing  ex~

4  prefs’d  is  not  fo,  at  leaft  not  to  me :  How  do  you
4  reconcile  feeing,  and  fpeaking,  to  the  thing  call’d
4  Spirits?

4  Dr.  Why,  therein  you  and  I  differ  in  our  Cir-
4  cumftances,  and  this  is  the  fublime  Quality  of  the
4  Sciences  which  we  profefs*  that  being  under  the
4  Operation  of  a  higher  and  exalted  Mind,  the  Eyes
4  of  the  Soul,  which  is  a  Spirit,  can  operate  upon
c  immaterial  Objects,  and  fee  what  to  common
4  Sight  is  call’d  invifible.

4  A.  This  is  all  myfterious,  and  if  you  will  allow
4  me  the  Freedom,  we  fliould  call  it  all  Cant  and
4  unintelligible.

4  Dr.  I  know  it  very  well  *  and  we  on  the  other
4  hand  call  your  Difcourfe  empty  and  infigoificant
4  for  that  you  neither  underhand  what  you  fay,
4  nor  fay  what  you  might  eafily  be  taught  to  un-
4  aerftand;  and  if  a  Man  enlightned  in  this  fuperior
4  Manner  comes  to  talk  with  you,  and  would  in-
c  ftruft  you  a  little,  you  prefently  fly  out,  and  cry
4  a  Magician,  a  Conjurer,  that  he  has  a  Familiar,
4  and  deals  with  the  Devil-,  this  was  not  always  fo.

4  A.  This  brings  me  to  my  firft  Queftion  Sir  ex-
4  a£rty,  namely  Whence  is  the  Orignalof  what  you

U  4  4  call


*r<J*


t96  A  SYSTEM

t  call  your  fublime  Pra£tice,  and  where  and  when
4  did  it  begin?

4  Dr i  I  could  run  you  back,  Sir,  to  its  Original,
4  and  give  you  the  Hiflory  of  it,  but  ’twouldbe  too
4  long.  I  doubt  your  want  of  Patience.

4  A.  My  Curiofity  is  too  great  to  let  me  want
4  Patience.

4  Dr.  Well,  I’ll  give  you  an  Abridgement  then
4  of  it  thus  >  Before  the  Deluge ,  when  the  Ante-
4  diluveans  had  the  Bleffing  of  Longevity,  to  the
6  Number  of  almoft  a  thoufand  Years,  we  have
4  many  Teflimonies  of  their  converfing,  not  only
£  with  the  Spirits  of  the  invifible  World,  but  with
6  the  great  Life  of  Spirit,  the  Being  of  Beings  $
4  and  if  we  can  deduce  any  thing  from  Con-
4  fequences,  divine  Spirits  daily  illuminated  the
4  Minds  of  Mankind,  and  convey’d  all  ufeful
4  Science  to  them,  and  that  to  fuch  a  degree  as
4  has  never  been  attain’d  to  fince,  by  which  all  the
4  mo  ft  exalted  Parts  of  both  natural  and  fuperna-
4  tural  Knowledge  were  convey’d  into  their  Under-
£  ftandings.

4  A.  They  had,  without  queftion,  a  fuperior  Ge^
4  nius  in  the  Anted iluvean  State,  far  above  what
4  we  have  now,  and  your  Notions  of  that  kind  are
4  very  clear  to  me,  I  agree  with  you  in  that.

4  Dr.  They  had  not  fo  much  a  fuperior  Genius,
4  as  they  had  a  fuperior  Illumination  $  what  fhould
4  you  and  l  have,  if  we  had  liv’d  three  or  four
4  hundred  Years,  and  had  convers’d  all  that  while
4  in  an  angelick  Society,  and  with  an  invifible  Spe~
4  cics  of  Creatures,  in  whom  compleat  Knowledge
?  was  but  meer  Nature,  and  who  had  the  Good-
4  nefs  to  be  always  communicating  the  moil  perfcdl
*  Ideas,  the  mod  fublime  Images  to  our  Thoughts  ?
\vhat  fhould  we  be  capable  of.?

A .


of  MAGIC  K.

4  A.  Nay,  I  think  you  might  fay,  what  fliould
4  we  not  be  capable  of.

4  Dr.  Then  confidering  that  at  the  end  of  that
4  three  or  four  hundred  Years  we  were  but  in  the
4  Prime  of  our  Age,  in  full  Strength  of  Judg-
4  ment,  and  Vigour  of  Mind,  capable  to  receive
4  the  moft  divine  Impreffions  of  facred  Knowledge,
4  what  fhould  we  not  learn  with  fuch  Teachers?

4  A.  But  how  do  we  know  that  they  were  thus
4  blefs’d?

4  Dr,  Why,  does  not  all  your  Accounts  of  thole
4  Times  bring  in  the  People  converfing  thus?  Nay,
4  do  you  not  fay  that  God,  or  that  Inconceivable
4  Something  (which  you  call  fo)the  King,  and  Go-
4  vernor,  and  Maker  of  Spirits,  convers’d  among
4  them,  talk’d  with  and  to  them  ?

4  A.  Yes,  we  believe  God  himfelf  convers’d
4  with  them,  particularly  with  Adam  the  firffc  of
4  them,  and  with  Noah  the  lafl  of  them,  and  no
4  doubt  with  many  others  between.

4  Dr.  Well,  and  did  the  great  Being  of  Beings
4  converfe  with  Man,  and  not  the  fmalier  and  lower
4  degrees  of  Spirit?  do  you  think  the  Servants  did
4  not  converfe,  if  the  Mailer  did  ?

4  A.  Why,  that  indeed  I  never  confiderkPbe-
4  fore,  I  confefs.

4  Dr.  But  where  elfe  had  they  the  Knowledge  of
4  fome  things,  which  nothing  but  Spirit  and  1'piri-
4  tuous  Converfe  could  pollibly  convey  ?

4  A.  What  things  were  they?  I  do  not  rightly
4  underfland  you.

4  Dr.  Why,  firfb  for  Example,  Music k,  that
4  Heavenly  Science,  the  Do&rine  of  Sounds  5  mea-
6  fur’d  and  divided  fo  as  by  DilTonance  to  make
c  Harmony,  to  be  admir’d  by  every  Ear,  to  move
4  the  Pa  (lions,  and  agitate  the  Soul,  to  be  read  by
4  Notes,  underltood  by  the  differing  Key  of
*  Sounds,  die  only  umverfa!  Character  in  the

J  World,


A  SYSTEM

4  World.  Could  the  Genius  of  Man  invent  it  ?  No:

4  it  came  from  the  invifible  World,  and  was  cer-
4  tainly  communicated  from  the  Fountain  pf  Know-
4  ledge,  by  the  Agency  of  the  good  Spirits,  with
4  which  they  fo  freely  converfed.

4  A.  Y°u  advance  boldly,  Doftor.

4  Dr.  That  may  fairly  be  aflerted,  which  is  im*

4  poflible  to  be  otherwife.

4  A.  I  won’t  venture  to  fay  it  is  impoffible.

4  Dr.  But  I  dare  fay  it,  and  with  good  Reafon  5
4  then  there  is  the  Doftrine  of  Numbers,  which
4  we  call  vulgarly  Avithmetick  •>  this  with  Mufick
4  feem  to  be  two  Infinites,  the  Bounds  of  them
4  and  the  Variety  is  not  to  be  meafur'd,  or  conceiv’d
4  of,  and  how  could  human  Genius  meafure  them
4  out?

4  A .  What  do  you  inferr  from  thence?

4  Dr.  Nothing  but  this  y  that  thofe  good  beneficent
4  Spirits,  with  whom  Mankind  had  then  the  Blef-
4  fing  of  a  daily  Society,  fill’d  their  Minds,  and
4  infpir’d  their  Thoughts  with  thefe  noble  and  ufe-
4  ful  Difcoveries,  and  qualify ’d  them  daily  to  im*

4  prove  upon  them.

4  A.  You  talk  above  me  now  indeed.

4  Dr.  You  cannot  fay  but  I  talk  plainly,  and  in*
4  telligible.

4  A •  So  you  conclude,  that  the  good  Spirits  in-
4  ftrufted  them  in  thefe  fublimer  Parts  of  Know-
4  ledge?  Pray,  why  did  they  not  teach  them  A-
4  ftronomy,  natural  Philofophy,  and  all  the  ufeful
4  Branches  of  the  Mathematicks  ?

4  Dr.  And  fo  no  doubt  they  did.  There’s  the
4  Ark  for  Example j  you  fay,  God  fpoke  to  N&ahy
4  and  told  him  in  general  what  kind  of  Veil'd  it
4  fhould  be>  by  which  I  fuppofe  you  may  under-
4  ftand,  God  told  him  that  the  World  fhould  be
4  drown’d,  and  that  he  fhould  be  fav’d  in  a  Ship,
4  whiph  he  fhould  build?  But  can  you  think  Noah

4  could


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

could  do  all  this  without  the  more  particular  Dire-
£Hon  of  thefe  good  and  beneficent  Spirits,  inftru-
£ting  him  how  to  perform  the  Work  ?  How  the
Beams,  and  the  Timbers,  the  Planks  and  all
the  Parts  were  to  be  put  together 5  how  the
Bottom  was  to  be  lhap’d  for  fwimming,  the  Head
and  the  Stern  for  breaking  off  the  Force  of  the
Water,  in  that  truly  unbounded  Ocean  the
Flood  5  all  thefe  things  I  make  no  Queftion  he
was  inftrufted  in  by  the  daily  Afliftance  of  the
good  Inhabitants  of  the  invifible  Regions,  who
freely  had  at  that  time  an  Intercourfe  with  the
embodyed,  that  is,  imprifon’d,  Spirits  of  Men;
and  thefe  are  the  fame  that  we  converfe  with
now:  fo  that  I  have  fairly  brought  it  down  to  our
own  Times.

4  A.  Sir,  your  Bifcourfe  is  very  well  laid  toge¬
ther  I  confefs;  but  you  make  a  long  leap,  and
fome  of  it  in  the  dark  too ;  from  Noah ,  and  the
Year  of  the  World  if 76,  or  thereabouts,  to  our
time,  which  is  about  three  thoufand  Years  after.
How  is  it  that  thefe  good  Spirits  left  off  their
Good-will  towards  Men,  and  feem  to  fhun  us  as
much  now  as  they  courted  us  before  ?

4  Dr. *  I  do  not  find  itfo,  I  rather  fay  they  do  and
would  converfe  with  us  ftill,  if  we  either  faw  the
Bleffing  of  it,  or  knew  how  to  value  it,  and  made
it  appear  we  defir’d  it.

4  A .  But  when  did  it  break  off?  what,  did  the
Flood  put  an  end  to  it  ?

4  Dr.  It  feems,  that  Men,  hy  a  differing  Con-
du&,  and  a  way  of  Life  too  grofs  for  fo  excellent
and  fublime  a  Converfe,  have  render’d  themfelves
unworthy  and  unqualify’d  fince  the  Flood ;  fo  that
the  angelick  Train  feem  to  have  forfaken  the
Earth,  and  only  communicate  themfelves  to  fuch
as  render  themfelves  acceptable  and  worthy  by
a  Life  of  earned:  Application  to  the  Study  of  di-

*  vine


A  SYSTEM

vine  Science,  and  who  feek  after  the  high  Illu¬
mination.

4  A .  So  that  there  are  fome  who  enjoy  this  ex¬
traordinary  Society  ftill?

c  Dr.  Why  not,  pray  ?  The  good  Spirits  are  the
fame}  they  change  not,  neither  is  their  Good¬
will  towards  Men  abated}  but  the  cuftom  of
the  World  has  been,  and  ftill  is,  to  be  fhy  and  a-
fraid  of  them,  take  them  to  be  evil  Spirits,  and,
as  the  World  calls  them,  Devils}  fo  that  a  good
Spirit  cannot  now  offer  its  Afliftance  to  Man,  or
go  about  to  do  any  good  to  Mankind,  but  they
are  frighted  and  terrify’d,  and  cry  out  the  Devil ,
fly  from  it,  and  refufe  to  accept  the  Benefit
offer’d.

4  A.  But  it  feems  all  do  not  treat  them  fo.

4  Dr.  No.  But  how  then  are  they  treated  who
aft  after  another  manner  ?

4  A.  Why,  how  are  they  treated?

4  Dr.  Are  we  not  treated  as  Daemoniacks,  as  Ma¬
gicians  and  Conjurers,  Necromancers,  and  that  deal
with  the  Devil.  Did  not  you  take  me  for  fuch?
c  It  is  very  true,  I  did,

4  Z)r.Ay,and  are  you  not  under  fome  fort  of  Fright,
even  all  the  while  you  are  talking  with  me,  as  if
you  were  talking  with  the  Devil,  and  left  I
ihould  raife  the  Devil  while  you  are  here?

6  A.  I  cannot  fay  but  it  is  in  fome  meafure  true.

4  Dr .  And  yet  we  know  no  more  of  the  Devil
than  you  do,  nor  converfe  any  more  with  him
than  other  Folks  do,  nor  fo  much  neither.

4  Having  carried  on  our  Gonverfation  thus  far,
my  Companion,  who  was  all  this  while  a  writing
his  Cafe,  came  to  the  Door,  and  calling  to  the
Doftor,  told  him  he  had  done  5  Well,  fays  the
Doctor  to  him ,  pray  give  me  the  Paper  then,  and
let  me  read  it  over*  fo  he  gave  him  his  Paper,
which  was  a  long  one  indeed,  and  very  clofe  writ-

4  tei^


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

€  ten,  containing  all  his  Cafe,  which  it  feems  was
4  very  particular,  and  requir’d  abundance  of  better
4  Advice  than  I  thought  the  grave  Do£tor  was  able
4  to  give  him,  but  I  was  really  miftaken.

I  was  far  from  being  tir’d  with  this  Account,
and  believe  I  fhall  not  tire  the  Reader  with  fetting
it  down.  Indeed  I  interrupted  him  here,  with  ask¬
ing  him  if  he  did  not  yet  know  his  Man’s  Cafe,  and
if  he  did  not  read  the  Paper  $  but  he  told  me  he
did  not,  fo  I  defir’d  him  to  let  me  have  the  reft  of
the  Story,  and  he  went  on  thus.

4  My  Man,  faid  he,  who  was  with  me,  told  me
c  little  or  nothing  of  his  Cafe,  as  I  hinted  before,
4  except  that  he  faid  it  was  very  Difficult  and
4  Intricate  j  and  that  if  it  could  not  be  refolv’d,  and
4  brought  to  a  Conclufion,  he  was  lure  he  fhould
4  never  get  over  it,  but  fhould  be  undone,  and  that
4  therefore  he  came  to  this  Man.

4  Why,  fays  /,  what  do  you  take  the  Man  to  be?

4  Why,  what  ffiould  I  take  him  for,  fays  he?

4  Nay,  I  fuppofe,  faid  /,  you  take  him  for  a
4  Conjurer,  and  one  that  deals  with  the  Devil.

€  I  care  not  who  he  is,  or  who  he  deals  with,

4  fays  the  Man ,  fo  I  do  but  get  my  Bufinefs  done  by
4  him,  find  out  a  Man  or  two  that  I  look  for,  and
4  have  fome  fatisfafbion  in  my  other  Affairs.

4  I  don’t  know  who  you  look  for,  faid  /,  and  I
4  doubt  you  don’t  know  who  ’tis  you  feek  to.

4  Why,  the  Devil ,  fays  he,  who  d’ye  think  T
s  feek  to,  when  I  come  to  a  Cunning  Man  ?

4  This  Difcourfe  was  before  we  came  to  the
4  Doctor’s  Houfe,  and  was  the  Occafion  indeed
4  that  I  was  at  fir  ft  fo  fhy  of  him,  and  made  fo
4  many  round-about  Cautions  when  I  firft  fpoke  to
4  him.

4  When  he  had  written  his  Cafe  down,  and
4  given  it  to  the  Magician ,  the  Do£tor  ask’d  him
4  if  he  could  not  leave  the  Paper  with  him,  and

4  come


A  SYSTEM

gome  again  in  two  or  three  Days?  The  Enquirer
feem’d  uneafy  at  that,  tho’  he  did  not  direftly  fay
No  5  but  the  Doctor  perceiv’d  it*  Well  then*
faid  he,  are  you  willing  to  ftay  here  with  me
about  eleven  or  twelve  Hours,  and  lit  up  all
Night?  The  Man  look’d  earneftly  at  me,  as  if
it  had  been  to  ask  me  whether  he  fhould  venture
to  ftay  all  Night,  but  withal  look’d  a  little  fright¬
ed  too.

4  The  Doftor  feeing  him  look  at  me,  as  if  he
would  ask  my  Advice,  turn’d  to  me,  finding  at
the  Man’s  Backwardnefs.

*  Sir,  fays  he ,  I  perceive  you  mull  decide  it  5
he  feems  a  little  frighted,  I  don’t  know  at  what.
4  Sir,  fays  /,  fmiling,  I  believe  he  is  afraid  the
Candles  will  burn  blue .

4  Ay,  fays  he ,  you  fee  the  Reafon  why  the  good
Spirits  have  left  off  converting  with  Mankind  ;
and  you  fee  how  we  that  are  Men  of  Art,  and
who  have  ftudied  the  facred  Sciences,  fuffer  by
the  Errors  of  common  Fame  5  they  take  us  all
for  Devil-Mongers,  damn’d  Rogues,  and  Con¬
jurers.

4  It  is  very  true,  Sir,  faid  I,  I  fee  it  now  >  he  is
afraid  in  Ihort  that  you  will  raife  the  Devil
With  that  he  turns  to  the  Man*  Hark  ye  Friend,
fays  he,  are  you  afraid  to  ftay  all  Night?  fpeak
honeftly,  if  you  are,  and  tell  mefo.

4  Why,  Sir,  fays  the  Man ,  I  can’t  fay  but  I  am
a  little  uneafy  about  it,  tho’  I  don’t  know  at
what,  for  I  an’t  very  apt  to  be  afraid  of  Sights,
notl.  With  that  1  put  in  a  Word  to  my  Compa¬
nion*  Why  Coufin,  fays  I,  if  you  are  uneafy  about
feeing  any  ftrange  Sight,  or  hearing  any  thing  un¬
common,  what  did  you  come  to  this  Gentleman
for?  you  know  very  well  what  you  told  me  you
underftood ,  him  to  be,  and  what  you  expelled  of
him,


‘  Nay,


of  M  A  Q  I  C  K.

4  Nay,  fays  the  Conjurer ,  I  muft  needs  fay*

4  he  that  is  afraid  to  the  fee  Devil ,  fliould  never
4  come  to  fee  U  Se

4  Why,  you  don’t  always  deal  with  the  Devily
4  do  ye  ?  fays  the  Man.

4  Nay,  fays  he ,  I  han’t  told  you  yet  that  I  deal
4  with  him  at  all  \  but  I  fay,  you  fliould  not  be
4  afraid  of  him,  when  you  come  of  thefe  Errands  j
4  for  it  feems  you  fuppofe  we  talk  with  him  for  you.

4  Why,  that  is  as  much  as  to  tell  me,  fays  the
4  young  Many  you  can  raife  the  Devil  for  me,  if  you
4  pleafe.

6  Well,  come  be  plain  with  me,  and  tell  mej
4  have  you  have  a  Mind  to  fee  him  or  no  ?  fays  the
4  Doctor  laughing.

4  No,  not  1,  fays  fe,  not  at  all,  and  that  made
4  me  uneafy.

4  Well,  well,  fays  hey  you  fliall  not  fee  the  Devil
4  then.

4  But  fliall  I  fee  nothing  elfe,  Sir?  fays  he.  I
4  would  fee  none  of  your  Spirits,  whether  they  are
4  Devils  or  no.

4  I  tell  you,  fays  the  Do£tor,  you  fliall  fee  no-
4  thing  to  hurt  you.

4  But,  fays  the  Man  again,  I  don’t  know  what  to
4  fay,  you  fpeak  in  generals  j  pray  don’t  fright  me,
4  any  more  than  hurt  me.

4  l  tell  thee  again,  fays  the  Doftor,  I’ll  neither
4  hurt  thee,  nor  fright  thee  \  but  if  you  will  have
4  nothing  done  for  you,  what  do  you  give  me  your
4  Cafe  for?  and  if  you  are  afraid  to  fee,  or  hear  any
4  thing,  why  do  you  not  care  to  leave  your  Cafe
4  with  me,  and  come  again  ?

4  This  was  fuch  a  reafonable  Propofal,  that  I
4  could  not  but  tell  my  young  Man,  that  I  thought
4  he  was  playing  the  Fool  with  the  Doctor*  if  you
4  flay,  you  mult  be  content  to  fee  what  is  to  be
4  fccn>  and  if  you  don’t  care  to  venture  that,  can’t

4  you


A  SYSTEM

4  you  go,  and  come  again?  fo  in  a  word,  I  advis’d
4  him  to  leave  his  Caie  with  the  Dodlor,  and  go
4  away,  and  come  for  an  Anfwer  when  he  fliould
4  appoint  him.

4  As  we  were  going  away,  the  Dodtor  takes
4  me  by  the  Hand,  the  young  man  being  gone  out
4  of  the  Door  5  You  fee,  Sir,  the  Notions  the  poor
4  innocent  well-meaning  People  have  of  all  the
4  good  Spirits  of  the  invifibie  World*  and  tho’  in
4  their  Diftreffes  they  will  come  to  us,  and  we
4  make  fome  Search  for  them,  yet  they  give  the  Devil
4  all  the  Praife  of  it*  nay  tho’  they  receive  good
4  from  it  *  and  yet  they  acknowledge  the  Devil  to
4  be  the  Author  of  nothing  but  Mifchief.

4  But  Sir,  faid  I,  you  could  I  fuppofe  give  this
4  honeft  Man  what  Anfwer  you  {hall  purpofe  to
4  give  him,  without  letting  him  fee  any  Appearan*
4  ces  to  fright  or  terrifie  him  ?

4  I  have  nothing  about  me,  fays  he,  or  that  con*
4  verfes  with  me,  that  need  to  fright  or  terrifie  any
*  one,  much  lefs  that  will  do  him  any  hurt.  I  do  not
4  fay,  but  as  the  good  Spirits  are  beneficent  and
4  kind,  and  may  meet  and  converfe  upon  any  Occa*
4  fions,  and  in  any  Place  from  their  own  happy  In*
4  clination,  to  ferve  and  affift  the  opprefs’d  or  indigent
4  Creatures, may  come  and  go,pafs  and  repafs  in  or  near
4  myHoufe,  which  would  be  to  me  thegreateft  Feli-
4  city  of  Life.  On  this  Occafion  the  Man  might  have
4  heard  fome  little  Noifes,  and  perhaps  have  feen
4  fome  Motions  rather  than  Bodies,  which  he  might
4  call  Spedtres  and  Apparitions,  or  Devils,  or  what  he
4  would*  yet  thefe,as  they  would  take  no  Notice  of
4  him,  or  do  any  thing  to  terrify  or  diforder  him,  fo
4  he  would  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  fit  Hill,  and
4  not  offer  to  {Hr,  or  fpeak,  and  be  under  no  Concern
4  at  all.

4  Well,  Sir ,  faid  /,  were  the  Cafe  mine,  as  it  is
4  not,  I  affine  you  I  would  have  truffed  you,  for


'of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

I  do  not  think,  let  the  Cafe  be  what  it  will,  that
it  is  your  Bufinefs  to  fuffer  your  Clients  to  receive
any  Hurt  in  your  Houfe,  or  to  be  frighted,  fo  as
to  bring  any  evil  Report  upon  you.
c  JSir,  fays  the  Doftor ,  my  Bufinefs  is  to  do  good
to  all  Men,  and  to  hurt  none,  as  is  the  Dtfire  of
thofe  fuperior  Beings,  which  I  have  the  Happi-
nefs  to  converfe  with  3  and  therefore  it  only  is
wanting  to  us,  that  the  poor  People  were  a  little
lefs  afraid  of  us,  and  that  they  came  to  us  for
meer  Neceffity  only,  and  not  meerly  tofatisfie  their
Curiofity,  as  is  often  their  Cafe.  However,
added  hey  as  to  the  young  Man  your  Friend,  let
him  go  home,  to-morrow  you  will  fee  he  will
come  back  to  me  in  a  great  Hurry,  tho’  I  han’t
order’d  him  to  come  till  Friday as  you  heard  $
but  I  warrant  ye  he  will  dream  fome  ftrange  Dream
to-night,  his  very  Fright  will  make  him  do  it,
and  then  he  will  come  and  defire  me  to  interpret
his  Dream  for  him  3  and  then  you  may  hear  farther.
4  Well,  Sir,  faid  /,  I  lhall  obferve  him,  and  per¬
haps  he  will  ask  me  to  come  along  with  him  3  if
he  does,  I  ihall  venture  to  come.

‘  No,  fays  the  Dottor ,  I  don’t  think  he  will  ask
you  to  come,  1  believe  he  will  be  in  better  Heart
to-morrow 3  and  it  may  be  he’ll  offer  to  flay  all
Night  with  me,  and  all  Day  too,  if  I  defire  him,
let  him  fee  what  he  will.

I  think,  faid  /,  he’s  a  Fool,  he  don’t  flay  now  %
indeed  if  it  had  been  my  Cafe,  I  would  have
trufled  you.

6  Well,  Sir,  fays  he ,  if  you  have  anv  Occa¬
sion  in  which  I  can  render  you  any  Service,  I
fhali  be  always  ready  to  anfwer  your  Expeditions
in  the  befl  manner  I  am  able  3  and  in  the  mean
time,  I  hope  you  will  no  more  have  thofe  weak
Notions,  as  if  all  the  Intelligence  Mankind  can
attain  to  from  the  invifible  World  mult  be  with

X  €  the


3  o6


A  SYSTEM

*  the  Devil,  or  the  evil  Spirits.  I  hope  you  will
t  fee,  that  there  are  Cafes  come  before  me,  which
i  the  Devil  would  no  more  be  a  Devil  if  he  fhould
4  give  any  Satisfaction  in,  or  any  Relief  to  the
4  Inquirer.

4  1  gave  him  an  Anfwer  in  as  obliging  Terms  as
4  I  could,  and  fo  we  parted,  and  I  came  to  the
4  young  Man,  who  waited  for  me  with  the  utmofl
4  Impatience,  and  with  fome  kind  of  Terror >  for
4  I  found  he  was  in  a  Sweat,  tho’  it  was  a  cold
4  Evening  too.

4  When  I  came  up  to  him,  I  ask’d  him  how  he
4  did.

4  Pretty  well,  fays  he ,  but  I’m  glad  I  am  got
4  away.

4  Whyfo?  /aid  /.  No  body  offer’d  to  detain  you,

4  I  thought  the  Doftor  fpoke  very  civilly  to  you  *

4  and  I’m  fure  he  did  fo  to  me.

4  Ay,  fays  be ,  he  did  fo,  and  I  had  a  mind  to
4  have  ventur’d  once  to  ftay  all  Night,  but  I  am
4  heartily  glad  I  didn’t  j  I  fhould  have  been  fright-
4  ed  out  of  my  Wits,  if  I  had  feen  the  Devil.

4  Why,  I  can  allure  you,  that  he  fays  pofitively
4  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Devil ,  and  if  you
4  had  feen  any  Appearance,  it  would  have  not  been
4  an  evil  Spirit,  or  Devil,  but  a  good  Spirit  j  that  it
4  would  have  come  to  render  you  Service,  and  do
4  you  good,  rather  than  have  hurt  you,  and  that
4  you  would  have  had  no  need  to  be  frighted.

4  No  matter  for  that,  fays  he ,  all  Spirits  are
4  Devils  to  me  5  if  I  had  feen  a  Spirit,  or  an  Ap~
4  parition,  all  he  could  have  faid  to  me,  would
4  not  have  perfwaded  me  to  believe  it  had  not  been
4  the  Devil .

4  Why,  would  you  not  have  believ’d  the  Doftor,
4  if  he  had  told  you  fo  ?

4  No,  fays  nor  a  hundred  conjuring  DoClofs
*  more,  not  I.

4  But


of  M  A  G  /  C  K.

4  But  what  is  it  you  go  to  him  for  then?  faid  L
If  you  won’t  believe  what  he  fays,  what  fignifies
you*  going  to  him?  you  had  better  have  kept  it
to  your  felf,  and  never  have  troubled  him.

4  Nay,  that’s  true*  faid  he ,  and  that  was  the  rea«
fon  I  was  loth  to  leave  my  Cafe  with  him.

4  But  you  have  left  it  with  him,  fays  /,  han’t
you  ?

4  Yes,  fays  he^  and  let  him  make  the  beft  of  it,
and  the  woril  of  it,  I  never  intend  to  go  to  him
again.

4  W  hat,  fays  I,  won’t  you  go  to  him  for  an  An-
fwer  ?

4  No,  not  I,  faid  he ,  I  have  enough  of  him  %
come  away.  I  am  fo  frighted  already,  I  am  almoil
dead;  don’t  vou  fee  what  a  Sweat  I  am  in?  for  all

*  v

’tis  fuch  cold  Weather,  the  Sweat  runs  down  my
Face  in  Drops.

4  Why,  what  d’ye  fweat  for  now?  faid  I.  You  are
far  enough  out  of  his  way  here,  an’t  you?

4  No,  no,  fays  he.  Why,  if  he  has  his  Devil
within  Doors,  d’ye  think  he  has  not  his  Devil
without  Doors  too?  Why,  all  the  while  I  have
ftood  here  for  you,  i  fancy  every  Tree  is  a  Man,
and  every  Man  a  Shadow*  and  every  Shadow  a
Spirit.

4  You  iee,  faid  /,  ’tis  Evening*  and  the  Light
begins  to  be  Dusky*  and  fo  you  fee  double:
Why,  lure  you  an’t  fo  frighted  as  you  feem
to  be  ?

4  Indeed  T  am,  fays  he ,  I  don’t  know  what’s  the
matter,  I  don’t  ufe  to  be  foj  I  us’d  to  laugh
at  People  when  they  talk’d  of  feeing  Apparitions,
and  being  frighted  with  Spirits.

4  Well,  well,  you’ll  come  again,  for  all  that*
faid  /,  l  warrant  you.

4  No,  if  the  Devil  catches  me  there  again,  I’ll
forgive  him,  fays  he.

X  %  You


308


A  SYSTEM

\

4  You  don’t  know  your  own  Mind ,faid  I.  Why,
4  he  will  anfwer  all  your  Queftions.

4  Ay,  fo  he  {hall,  when  1  come  again,  fays  he.

4  I  warrant  you’ll  come  again  to  him,  fays  /,
4  for  an  Anfwer  to-morrow.

4  Nay,  fays  he%  I  am  not  appointed  till  Friday.

4  Ay,  fays  /,  ’tis  no  matter  for  that,  I  dare  fay
4  you  won’t  have  Patience  to  flay  fo  long.  Why,
4  you’ll  dream  of  it  all  Night:  1  don’t  doubt  but
4  you’ll  be  with  him  again  alio,  for  Satisfa-
4  dtion  to  your  Enquiries *  1  know  you  han’t  the
4  Patience,  tho’  I  don’t  know  your  Cafe.

4  You  may  fay  what  you  will ^  fays  ^,but  I  adore
4  you,  I’ll  go  near  him  no  more.

4  This  kind  of  Difcourfe  held  us  to  a  Town
4  hard  by,  where  we  lodg’d  that  Night,  for  it  was
4  too  late  to  go  any  farther.  And  in  the  Morning
4  I  happen’d  to  over-fleep  my  felfj  For,  in  fhort,
4  my  Head  ran  fo  much  upon  the  Dodtor,  and  his
4  invifible  World,  that  it  kept  me  awake  almoft  all
4  Night*,  fo  that  in  the  Morning,  when  I  got  up,
c  ’twas  near  ten  a  Clock.

i

4  When  I  call’d  for  my  young  Man,  the  Matter
4  of  the  Houfe  told  me  he  was  gone.  Gone !  faid
4  I :  what,  and  never  ttay  for  me,  nor  to  fpeak  to
4  me?

4  Nay,  Sir,  fays  the  Man  of  the  Houfe,  I  bc-
4  lieve  he  is  mad.  Why,  he  has  made  fuch  a  Noife,
4  and  a  Difturbance,  he  has  frighted  all  the  Houfe  j
4  two  of  my  People  have  been  fain  to  fit  up  with
4  him  all  Night  j  he  fays  he  has  feen  the  Devil .

4  Seen  the  Devil !  fays  I :  does  he  know  the  .Dew/
c  when  he  fees  him?  I  believe  he  never  faw  him  in
4  his  Life.  I  fuppofe  it  was  feme  Dream.

4  Nay,  fays  the  Man ,  I  don’t  know  how  he
4  fhould  fee  the  Devil  here,  I’m  fure  my  Houfe
4  is  not  haunted.  I  fancy  he  has  been  at  Dr.  Bore-
4  man's  lately.


Dr.


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

4  Dr.  Foreman ,  (fays  I)  who’s  that?

4  O,  Sir,  fays  my  Landlord ,  did  you  never  hear
4  of  Dr.  Foreman ?  Why,  he’s  the  molt  famous
4  Man  in  all  this  Country,  he  does  a  thoufand
4  flrange  things.

4  W  hat,  fays  /,  is  he  a  Conjurer,  does  he  deal
4  with  the  Devil ?

4  I  don’t  know  for  that,  fays  my  Landlord ,  I  can’t
4  fancy  he  deals  with  the  Devil  neither  $  for  he  is  a
4  very  honed  Gentleman,  and  does  a  great  many
4  good  things.  Folks  that  deal  with  the  Devil  don’t
4  ufe  to  do  any  thing  that’s  good.

4  Pr’ythee,  fays  /,  what  good  does  he  do?

4  Why,  Mailer,  fays  my  Landlord ,  they  fay,  he
4  lays  the  Devil ,  when  other  Folks  raife  him*  he
4  can  cure  a  Houfe  when  it’s  haunted.  Here  was
4  a  Houfe  in  our  Town  fo  plagu’d  with  evil  Spi-
4  rits,  that  no  body  could  lie  in  it  *  and  when  the
4  Dodtor  was  font  tor,  he  went  and  fat  up  all  Night
4  in  it*  what  he  did  there  no  body  knows,  but  he  fo
4  frighted  the  Devil  to  be  fare,  that  the  Houfe  has
4  never  been  haunted  any  more  lince$  and  the  poor
4  Wenches  are  fo  afraid  of  him  all  round  the  Co un-
4  try,  that  they  dare  not  fee  him.

4  Why,  fays  /,  what  does  he  do  to  them?

4  Why,  Sir,  fays  he^  a  poor  Girl  can’t  let  a  young
4  Fellow  kifs  her,  but  the  Dodter  will  Tell*  and
4  if  they  prove  with  Child,  he’ll  tell  the  Father  of
4  it  prefentlyj  nay  he’ll  difeover  all  the  little
4  whoreing  Intrigues  in  the  Country.  Now,  Ma-
4  Her,  adds  he ,  this  is  not  Devil’s  Work  5  you  know
4  the  Devil  didn’t  care  if  they  were  all  Whores,
4  not  he.

4  That’s  very  true,  indeed,  fays  I-y  but  what  then
4  mult  the  Dodtor  be  call’d?  is  he  a  Magician ?

4  I  fuppofe  he  is,  Mailer,  fays  he^  tho’  I  don’t
4  know  what  that  means.  But  he  charms  Folks,
f  £1$  fets  Spells,  and  a  young  Fellow  dares  not

X  3  4  comp

y

1  *


3  °9


A  $  r  8  T  E  M

4  come  near  an  honeft  Girl,  for  fear  of  him.  Why,
4  they  fay,  he  drew  a  Circle  the  other  Day  round
4  a  young  Lafs’s  Bed  that  was  fufpefted  j  and  when
4  the  Fellow,  that  they  thought  had  to  do  with
4  her,  came  to  her,  truly  he  could  not  get  away
4  till  the  Doftor  was  fent  for  to  releafe  him.

4  And  do  you  believe  all  this  ?  faid  /.

c  Believe  it,  Sir !  fays  he.  Why,  all  the  Country
4  believes  it,  and  the  young  People  are  kept  in  fuch
4  Awe  by  it,  that  I  don’t  think  there  will  be  one
4  Baftard  got  this  Year,  no,  not  in  twenty  Parifhes
4  hereabout  j  and  that’s  Lvery  hard,  Mafter,  fays
4  he .  this  War  time  too,  when  the  King  is  like  to
4  want  Soldiers.

4  This  Difcourfe  was  diverting,  but  ftill  I  wanted
4  to  hear  of  my  Man.  I  was  loth  to  go  back  to  the
4  Doftor  to  feek  him  there ,  fo  I  was  oblig’d  to  go
€  away  without  him.

Thus  far  I  have  entertain’d  you  with  my  Friend’s
Relation,  as  I  had  it  from  him  in  a  continu’d  Dif¬
courfe,  and  this  laft  Part  is  merry  enough  5  nor  is  it
more  than  I  have  heard  by  many  other  Hands,  I
mean  of  the  Doftor’s  Exploits 5  and  particularly
’twas  certainly  true  of  him,  that  he  kept  all  the
young  People,  I  mean  the  wicked  part  of  ’em,  in
Awe  5  whether  by  Spells  or  Charms,  and  what  thofe
Spell  or  Charms  were,  that  I  could  never  come  to
Certainty  about.

The  Story  of  his  perfwading  a  young  Fellow  and
his  Wench  to  get  both  into  her  Smock,  and  that
when  he  was  in,  the  Doftor  fet  his  Spell  upon  him,
fo  that  he  could  never  get  out  till  the  Doftor  was
fent  for  to  releafe  him  5  and  that  he  would  not  re^
leafehim  till  the  Fellow  obi  g’d  himfelf  to  marry  the
Girl  5  this  Story,  I  fay,  is  fo  firmly  believ’d  all  o-
ver  that  Part  of  the  Country,  that  no  body  doubts
pf  it.

But


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

But  to  come  back  a  little  to  my  Friend,  and  the
Story  of  the  young  Fellow  that  was  with  him,
which  I  fhall  give  you  now  in  a  more  fummary
way,  it  being  too  long  for  my  Work  \  The  Short
of  the  Cafe  was  this:  The  Fellow  being  heartily
frighted,  as  you  have  heard,  was  no  fooner  got  to
Bed,  and  fell  fall  afleep,  but  he  dreamed  that  the
Doftor  came  into  his  Chamber  and  to  his  Bed-fide,
with  two  Devils  or  Spirits  with  him  j  that  he  was
at  firfl:  fo  terrified,  that  he  was  not  able  to  fpeak  *
but  that  the  Doctor  fpofce  kindly  to  him,  and  bad
him  not  be  afraid,  for  that  here  was  a  good  Angel
come  to  him,  to  give  him  a  full  Anfwer,  happy,
and  for  his  Satisfa£Hon,  to  all  his  Difficulties  $  and
that  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  hear  and  receive
his  Meffiage,  and  be  eafy  $  and  that  upon  this,  the
Spirit  advanced  clofe  to  the  Bed-fide  j  but  that  he
cry’d  out,  and  refufed  to  hear  him  \  at  which  the
Do&or  fpoke  angrily  to  him,  and  faid,  Well,  fince
you  refufe  the  Advice  and  Direction  of  a  good  Spi¬
rit,  we  fhall  leave  you  to  the  fame  diflurbing  Devil
which  poflefs’d  you  before:  and  upon  this  the
Do&or  and  the  good  Spirit  vanifhed  out  of  his
Sight,  and  an  ugly  frightful  Devil  remain’d  in  the
Place,  which  grinn’d  and  threaten’d  him  in  a  ter¬
rible  manner,  but  faid  nothing  to  him  :  that  the
Horrour  of  the  laft  Speftre  frighted  him  fo  terri¬
bly,  that  he  waked  out  of  his  Sleep,  knock’d  up
the  People  of  the  Houfe,  and  told  them  the  Devil
was  in  the  Room,  and,  in  a  word,  difturb’d  the
whole  Family  $  the  Hofller  and  a  Maid-Servant
fat  up  with  him,  but  faw  nothing  5  and  in  the  Morn¬
ing  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  he  took  his  Horfe  and
went  away.

As  the  Doftor  had  told  my  Friend,  and  as  he  faid
to  the  young  Man,  fo  it  was  5  for  being  terrified  to
the  laffi  Degree  with  this  courfe  Appearance,  away
he  went  to  the  Doftor’s  Houfe  in  hurry  enough.

X  4  It


A  SYSTEM


It  happen’d  that  when  he  came  to  the  Houfe,  the
Dodor  was  at  his  Door,  fpeaking  to  fomcbody  that
he  was  juft  difmiffing,  and  the  Party  went  away
juft  as  the  young  Man  came  up.

4  W ell,  fays  the  Doctor ,  what’s  the  matter  now  ?
4  why,  I  did  not  bid  you  come  till  Friday.

4  O  Sir,  fays  the  young  Man,  bux  let  me  fpeak  with
4  you  a  little  upon  another  Occafion  that  has  hap-
9  pen’d  fince,  and  I’ll  wait  upon  you  again  about
9  t’other  Bufinefs  on  Friday ,  as  you  appointed.

4  Come,  come  in  then,  fays  the  Doctor ,  1  believe  I
4  know  your  Bufinefs;  I  warrant  ye  you  have  been
4  dreaming  fome  frightful  thing  or  other  to-night:
4  what,  have  you  feenth o.  Devil  in  your  Sleep?  you
9  had  e’en  as  good  ha’  let  me  have  fhewn  him
f  you.

4  Why  Tq  you  have,  Sir,  fays  he,  han’t  you  ?
f  pray  have  not  you  been  abroad  to-night?

4  Abroad,  fays  the  Doff  or,  what  do’ft  thou  mean
€  by  that?  I  am  but  juft  out  of  Bed.

4  Why,  Mafter,  fays  he,  han’t  you  been  at  Wroo -
4  tham  to-night  ?

4  At  Wrootham!  why,  thou  art  mad;  I  tell  thee  I
9  am  but  juft  up.

4  It’s  no  matter  for  that  ,fays  the  Man ,  fill  faring
4  and  wild-,  I  am  fure  I  faw  you  there?  and  fpoke
9  to  you,  and  you  to  me.

4  Come  Friend,  faysthe  Doffor,  Ifeeyou  arefright-
4  ed,and  you  have  dreamt  waking;  you  have  dreamt
4  of  the  Devil ,  or  of  Spirits,  all  Night;  why,  thou
9  art  not  come  to  thy  felf  yet :  come,  let  me  know
4  the  whole  Story.

4f  Nay,  Sir,  fays  the  young  Man ,  !tis  a  plain  Cafe
4  you  know  the  whole  Story  already,  as  well  as  I.

4  Not  a  Word,  not  I  >  fays  the  Doff  or,  I  allure


you.

4  Why,  Sir ,fays  he,  han’t  you  told  me  the  ver
f  Cafe,  han’t  you  told  me  I  have  been  dreamini


of  MAGIC  K.

4  of  the  Z)m7,andfeen  the  Devil?  how  can  you  fay?
4  you  know  nothing  of  it  ?

6  Truly,  fays  the  Doctor  y  any  one  that  faw  what
4  a  Fright  you  were  in  lad  Night,  without  the
4  lead  Reafon,  and  fees  how  bewilder’d  you  look
4  now,  might  guefs  you  have  been  terrify ’d  in  a
4  Dream,  and  that  without  any  Witchcraft  or  Con-
4  juring  in  the  lead:  But,  adds  the  Doftcr ,  what
4  fignifles  telling  me  I  know  it  already?  If  you
4  think  fit  to  tell  me  the  Cafe,  well  and  good*  if
4  not,  pr’ythee  go  about  your  Bufinefs,  I  defire  not
4  to  meddle  with  it.

4  With  that  he  begg’d  the  Doftor’s  Pardon,  and
4  told  him,  if  he  did  not  know  his  Cafe  already,
4  he  hoped  he  would  not  be  angry  with  him  for
4  what  he  had  faid,  at  lead  he  was  fure  he  would
4  nor,  when  he  had  told  him.  So  he  gave  him  the
4  whole  Story  at  large  as  I  have  told  it  you,  with
4  a  great  many  more  Particulars.

4  Well,  fays  the  Doctor ,  you  fee  there  are  good
4  and  beneficent  Spirits  in  Being,  who  are  willing
4  to  relieve  and  extricate  us  out  of  Difficulties,  ac
4  lead  by  their  good  Counfel  and  Advice  -y  and  if  thou
4  hadd  had  Courage  and  Patience  to  have  heard  it,
4  no  doubt  you  would  have  had  all  your  Doubts
4  explained,  and  your  Quedions  anfwer’d  -y  and
4  would  have  had  no  need  to  come  to  me:  But  the
4  Devil?  who  you  fay  dood  behind,  and  who  af-
4  terwards  appeared  terrible  and  frightful  to  you,
4  prevented  your  accepting  the  good  Counfel,  and
4  the  Anfwers  which  you  would  have  had  from  the
4  fird  Appearance :  and  as  for  my  appearing  to  you,
4  depend  upon  it  your  Imagination  fupplied  than
4  Parr,  for  I  have  not  dirr’d  out  from  home  all
4  Night  $  befides,  a  good  Spirit  might  aflame  a
4  Shape  and  Appearance  like  me,  that  it  might  be

4  more  familiar  to  you.

*  ■> : :  ■  1  >


f  But,


3*4


A  SYSTEM

4  But,  SiY^fays  the  young  Man ,  what  mud  I  do  now  ?
c  if  I  have  rejedled  this  good  Offer,  it  may  he  the
4  fame  good  Spirit  will  not  now  refolve  me,  or  do
4  any  thing  for  me.

4  Perhaps  it  may ifays  the  Doctor or  perhaps  I  may
4  obtain  a  Refolution  for  you  *,  are  you  willing  to
4  flay  with  me  now,  by  Day-light?

4  Ay  Sir,  with  all  my  Heart  $  I’ll  wait  all  Day,

4  and  all  Night  too  now,  if  you  pleafe>  for  I  am
4  fatisfied  now,  that  you  will  do  me  no  hurt.

4  In  fhort,  the  Fellow’s  Cafe  was  thus  :  (Take  it
4  in  my  Friend’s  own  Words  again  5)  He  was  de-
4  fperately  in  love  with  a  young  Gentlewoman  in
4  the  Country,  had  courted  her  a  long  time,  and
4  gain’d  her  Good-will  fo  far  at  laft,  that  they  had
4  agreed  to  be  married  $  but  on  a  hidden,  fome
4  other  Objed  had  prefentedto  her  Friends,  who  had
4  a  better  Eftate  than  this  young  Man  j  and  he
4  found  his  Miftrefs  was  at  firft  kept  up  from  him  j
4  and  at  laft,  that  tho’  fhe  was  at  Liberty,  fhe  was
4  grown  cold  and  indifferent  to  him,  and  he  was
4  half  mad  with  the  Difappointrnent :  That  after
4  this  fhe  feem’d  a  little  kinder,  and  told  him  the
4  Reafon  of  her  Coldnefs  5  but  after  all  that,  ano-
4  ther  thing  perplexed  him,  and  that  was  5  That
4  three  Nights  together  he  dreamt  that  he  faw  a
4  Neighbouring  Gentleman  killing  his  Miftrefs,  and
4  in  downright  Englijh ,  lying  with  her.

4  This  laft  tormented  him,  and  he  was  fo  per-
4  plex’d  between  his  Love  and  his  Jealoufy,  that  he
4  could  not  reft  j  to  this  was  to  be  added,  that  tho’
4  his  Miftrefs  was  kinder  to  him  than  before,  yet
4  her  Father  had  given  him  a  pofitive  Denial,  and
4  he  knew  not  what  to  do  5  and  for  a  Dire&ion  in
4  this  Difficulty  he  went  to  the  Cunning  Man.

4  Upon  thefe  things,  the  Do&or,  after  all  the
4  intervening  Circumftances  which  have  taken  up
4  your  time,  gave  him  this  very  good  Advice  5  whe-

4  4  ther


of  MAGI  C  K.  ,

€  ther  by  his  Art,  confulting  of  Spirits,  or  by  what
i  other  Method  I  know  not,  but  he  deliver’d  it  to
4  him  in  this  Form,  or  to  this  Purpofe.

*  Friend,  fays  the  Do  ft  or ,  the  Intelligence  which
4  I  have  had  relating  to  thy  Affairs  from  the  invi-
4  fible  Regions,  and  by  the  Aid  of  thofe  good  Spi-
4  rits  which  thou  art  fo  afraid  to  receive  it  from,

4  is  very  kind  and  favourable  to  thee,  if  thou  arc
4  difpofed  to  hearken  to  good  Advice.

4  The  young  Woman  that  thou  art  fo  deeply  in
4  love  with,  is  not  diftioneft*  thofe  Dreams  thou  •
4  had  ft  in  Prejudice  of  thy  Affe&ion  are  injurious,

4  and  proceed  from  the  grinning,  angry  Spirit,

4  which,  as  thou  faidft,  appeared  to  thee  in  thy  laft
4  Night’s  Difturbance  :  However,  it  would  be
4  wifely  done,  if  thou  wouldft  withdraw  thy  Af-
4  fedtion  from  this  Objedt,  for  I  am  well  allured  her
4  Parents,  who  are  refolved  todifpofe  of  her  another
4  way,  will  never  favour  thee  \  and  if  thou  takeft
4  her  againft  their  Confent,  will  neither  give  thee
4  Portion  or  Bleffing,  nor  will  thy  Marriage  be
4  happy.

4  Ask  me  not  by  what  Rules  I  obtain  this  Infor-
4  mationj  quiet  thy  Mind  in  the  view  of  other
4  Offers  which  may  prefentj  preferve  thy  Virtue
4  and  Temperance  j  there  feems  fomething  in  View,

4  tho’  yet  at  a  Diftance,  which  fhall  be  more  to
c  thy  Satssfadfion  even  than  this,  had  it  gone  for-
4  ward  $  and  I  fee  a  Light  of  moderate  Happinefs
4  glancing  towards  thee  from  a  remote  Part,  inti-
4  mating  that  thou  fhalc  be  very  happy,  and  live
4  comfortably,  if  the  Exercife  of  a  patient  and  quiet
4  Temper  prevail  over  Rafhnefs  and  PafHon  ^  but  if
4  the  latter  prevail,  expedt  Mifery  and  diftradled
4  Circumftances  may  be  thy  Lot.

4  The  Youth  went  away  better  inftrudted  than
4  I  fliould  have  expedted  from  an  Art  which  I
$  have  fo  very  bad  an  Opinion  of ;  But  this

4  Dr.


/


A  SYSTEM

4  Dr.  Borman  was  a  ft  range  Man,  according  to  all
4  the  Reports  of  the  Country  about  him,  and  did
4  abundance  of  things,  even  by  the  Methods  of
4  his  Art,  which  carried  a  Face  of  Good  with
4  them,  as  is  fa  id  before,  Pag.  309  $  if  it  was
4  delufive  and  came  from  the  Devil ,  it  was  fo
4  much  the  more  dangerous,  as  it  came  cover’d  and
4  coloured  with  a  Mill  of  Virtue,  and  a  religious
4  Charader,  and  with  a  Mouth  always  full  of  a
4  lofty  Cant,  as  if  talking  from  a  divine  Oracle,
4  and  direded  by  Spirits  always  employed  for  the
4  Good  of  Mankind  in  general,  and  to  do  Ads  of
4  Charity  and  Beneficence  to  afilided  or  perplexed
4  Perfons  in  particular.

Thus  far  from  my  Friend  who  ccnverfcd  with
Dr.  Boreman :  He  gave  me  feveral  other  Accounts
of  him,  which,  not  with  handing  all  the  good  things
pretended  to,  and  the  fine  canting  Words  of  the
Dodor,  convince  me  hill  that  he  mu  ft  have  had
fome  unlawful  Converfation  with  fuch  Spirits  or
fuch  Beings  as  I  fhould  ftill  call  Devils'.  That  he
ufed  Spells,  and  Charms,  and  Familiars  5  that  he  did
not  difown  the  Appearance  of  Spirits  to  him,  af-
fuming  vifible  Bodies,  was,  it  feems,  well  known  i
and  that  he  had  feveral  Books  of  Magical  Experi¬
ments  I  have  heard  it  alfo  well  atteftedj  whether
there  were  any  wicked  Magical  Performances  in
thofe  Books,  or  not,  I  cannot  tell.

It  is  true,  or  elfe  general  Report  mu  ft  lye  moft
unufually,  that  he  did  perform  feveral  ftrange  things  $
yet  they  fay  he  was  never  known  to  do,  or  dired  the
doing  any  Mifchief,  or  to  encourage  any  injurious
thing:  It  was  ufual,  as  they  report  of  him,  to  fet
Spells  for  the  Country  People  for  the  preferving
their  Cherry-Gardens  from  being  plunder’d,  and
their  Orchards  from  being  robb’d:  Take  fome  of
the  Tales  which  pafs  for  creditable,  as  follows.


of  MAG  1  C  K.

That  three  young  Fellows  being  gotten  into  an
Orchard,  which  I  fuppofe  was  under  his  particu¬
lar  Care,  he  caufed  a  large  Bell  to  hang  to  the
Heel  of  their  Shoes  behind,  like  a  Heel-fpur,  by
Which  they  alarm’d  the  Houfe  and  raifed  the  Peo¬
ple,  who  furrounding  the  Orchard,  took  them  all;
when  they  were  taken,  the  Bells  being  to  be  pull’d
off,  could  not  be  leen,  and  yet  the  Sound  of  them
was  heard  all  the  Way  they  went  to  the  Juflice
of  the  Peace,  till  he  committed  them,  and  then
ceafed.

Another  time,  fome  Boys  being  gotten  into  a
Cherry-Garden,  and  one  of  them  being  up  a
Cherry-Tree,  he  made  the  Boy  fee  a  great  Maflif
Dog  fitting  at  the  bottom  of  the  Tree,  waiting
for  his  coming,  looking  him  full  in  the  Face,  and
grinning  and  lnarling  at  him  if  he  offer’d  to  flir  ;
fo  that  the  poor  Boy  not  daring  to  come  down,
was  oblig’d  to  fit  in  the  Tree  ’till  he  cry’d  out
for  Help*  by  which  means,  the  People  of  the
Houfe  came  and  found  him  in  the  Tree  3  and
as  foon  as  they  were  come,  he  could  fee  no  more
of  the  Dog,  neither  could  any  body  fee  it  but
himfelf.

The  Methods  he  took  with  lewd  People  of  thole
Times,  were,  it  feems,  exceeding  many,  and  fuch
that,  as  the  Landlord  told  my  Friend,  the  young
Wenches  flood  in  awe  of  him,  and  were  terrified
.with  the  very  Name  of  him.

No  petty  Thefts  but  he  would  difeover  them,
t  even  after  they  were  committed  3  and  if  we  may
believe  common  Fame,  if  People’s  Cattle  were  gone
affray,  he  would  tell  them  which  Way  to  look  for
them.  Whether  he  could  ha’  told  Saul  how  to  find
his  Father’s  Affes,  I  cannot  fay  3  But  I  dare  affirm
he  could  not  have  told  him  of  the  Kingdom,  as
Samuel  did.


And


5 » 8


A  SYSTEM

And  yet  this  Dr.  Borman ,  as  they  fay,  would  not
fuffer  any  fuch  thing  as  a  Witch  to  live  in  the
Country,  but  expofed  and  detected  them  on  all  oc-
cafionsj  and  the  wicked  Spirits  on  all,  occafions
fled  from  him,  as  was  reported  of  the  Houfe  which
they  faid  was  haunted.

How  to  reconcile  this  to  a  Correfpondence  of
Devils  only,  1  cannot  fay  >  and  yet  that  Magick  Powers
are  communicated  by  good  Angels,  and  by  divine  Ap¬
pointment,  I  can  fee  no  Reafon  to  fuggeft*  but  the
contrary  feems  to  be  evident  by  the  People  of
Epbefus ,  coming  and  bringing  their  conjuring  Books,
and  burning  them,  upon  receiving  the  Chriftian
Faith  by  the  preaching  of  the  Apoftle  Paul^  to  the
Value  of  fifty  thoufand  Pieces  of  Silver.

There  are  abundance  of  Books  upon  this  Subject
left  by  this  Dr.  Boreman-,  and  fome,  as  they  fay ,  with
Rules  of  Art,  as  they  are  called  5  but  they  are  kept  fo
up  in  private  Hands,  that  1  do  not  find  they  are  to  be
come  at,  by  any  means.  The  Works  of  the  right
famous  Enthufiaft  Jacob  Behemen  feem  to  be  of  the
fame  kind,  tho’  fomething  more  refin’d,  and  lefs  ra¬
tional,  being  all  in  the  Clouds  and  Confufion.

This  Jacob  Behemen  took  it  very  ill  to  be  called
a  Magician  j  but  he  was  a  kind  of  a  Vifionilt.  He
pretended  to  fee  things  invifible,  and  hear  things
unutterable 5  and  I  might  add,  lie  feeraed  to  have
fome  Truth  in  it,  for  he  publiftied  things  unintelli¬
gible.

His  Writings  are  either  Magick  or  Enthufiaftick,
or  rather  both,  for  I  never  met  with  many  that
would  pretend  to  underftand  them,  and  never  with
one  that  was  the  better  for  them  $  except  it  was
one  very  particular  Man  among  his  Admirers,  who
declared  himfeif  to  be  the  better  for  them,  only,
and  for  that  very  Reafon,  namely ,  becaufe  he  did
not  underftand  them.


Now


of  MAG  1  C  K.

Now  that  I  may  not  Teem  to  pafs  my  Cenfure
rafhly,  I  defire  that  my  more  intelligent  Readers
will  pleafe  to  reduce  the  following  things  into
Meaning,  if  they  can,  and  favour  us  with  the  In¬
terpretation  ;  being  fome  particular  Account  of  the
Life  of  this  famous,  religious  Ingineer,  tor  I  know
not  what  elfe  to  call  him,  and  the  Titles  of  fome
of  his  Books.

4  By  the  Differences  and  Controverfies  in  Re-
4  ligion  which  he  knew  not  how  to  fatisfy  him-
4  felf  in,  he  was  flir’d  up  and  moved  to  ask,  feek
4  and  knock ,  that  he  might  know  the  Truth.

6  Upnn  which  by  the  Divine  Drawing  and
4  Will  he  was  in  Spirit  wrapt  up  into  the  holy
*  Sabbath ,  in  which  he  remained  feven  whole
4  Days  by  his  own  Confefiion  in  highefl  Joy :  Af-
4  ter  he  came  to  himfelf,  he  laid  afide  the  Folly
4  of  Youth,  and  was  driven  by  divine  Zeal  ear-
4  neflly  to  reprehend  impudent ,  fcandalous ,  and
4  blaffbemous  Speeches,  and  did  forbear  in  ail  his
4  Actions  the  Jeall  Appearance  of  Evil,  and  con-
4  tinned  to  get  his  Living  by  the  Labour  of  his
4  Hands,  ’till  the  Beginning  of  the  Sixth  Seculumy
4  which  was  the  Year  i<5uO,  when  he  was  the
4  feccnd  time  poffefs’d  with  a  Divine  Lights  and
4  by  the  Sight  of  a  fudden  Object  was  brought  to
4  the  inward  Ground  or  Center  of  the  hidden  Na -
4  ture.

*  ■

4  Yet  fomewhat  doubting,  he  went  out  into
4  an  open  Field,  and  there  beheld  the  miracu-
4  lous  Works  of  the  Creator  in  the  Signatures  and
4  Figures  of  all  creared  things  manifeftly  laid  open  5
4  whereupon  he  was  taken  with  an  exceeding
4  J°y>  yet  held  his  Peace ,  in  Silence  praifing  GOD ,

4  Bur  ten  Years  after,  in  the  Year  16 io,  thro*
4  the  over~Jbadowing  of  the  holy  Spirit,  he  was
4  a  third  time  touched  by  GO Z),  and  renewed,

4  and


3  20


A  SYSTEM

4  and  became  fo  enlighten’d,  that  lead  fo  great
4  Grace  bellowed  upon  him  fhould  flip  out  of
4  his  Memory,  and  he  refill  his  God,  he  wrote
4  privately  for  himfelf  (without  the  Help  of  any
4  Books  but  the  holy  Scriptures)  many  Books,
4  fuch  as  thefe ;

4  A  Book  of  the  Signature  of  all  things.

4  A  Condolatory  Book  of  the  Four  Complexions,

4  A  Mifterium  magnum  upon  Genejis.

4  A  Book  of  177  Theofophick  Queftions.

4  Certain  Letters  to  divers  Perfons  at  certain
4  times,  with  certain  Keys  for  fame  hidden
4  Words,

Thefe  learned  Labours  of  this  right  learned  En-
thufiaft  may,  for  ought  I  know,  be  flill  extant  j
they  are  recommended  here  for  their  extraordinary
Titles,  and  I  believe  are  much  about  as  intelligible
as  the  above  Rhapfody  of  his  Life 5  to  all  which
I  recommend  the  curious  Reader,  if  he  has  a  mind
to  embarrafs  his  Underilanding  for  an  Age  or  two,
and  come  out  as  wife  as  he  went  in.  The  Speci¬
men  I  think  to  be  much  of  a  Piece  with  the  good
Dr.  Boreman ,  only  with  this  fpecifick  Difference,
*viz.  that  Friend  Jacob  carries  us  up  into  the  Clouds
to  underfland  things  there,  if  any  body  there  may
be  found  to  teach  us  -y  and  Dr.  Boreman  was  for
bringing  the  Clouds  down  to  us,  to  teach  us  what
we  could  underfland  nothing  of,  when  we  were
taught.

Thus  you  have  the  two  invifible  and  unintelligi¬
ble  Brothers  together  5  whether  they  have  left  any
to  carry  on  the  unmeaning  Magick,  I  know  not.

There  have  been  fome  Pretenders  to  the  Art  who
have  fucceeded  the  Dodlor,  but  we  fee  nothing  of
their  Performance,  at  lead  not  equal  to  his  :  Let
us  look  a  little  higher.


CHAP.


3**


of  MAGIC  K.

I  *  \  i  \  \  i '  x  1  ;  '  v  •  £  '  » ■  -•  -  £  •  -  >  -  i»

•  .  *  *  .  *  »•*  •->■  0\  $

CHAR  IV.

Of  the  cDoEtrine  of  Sprits  as  it  is  under*
food  by  the  Magicians ;  How  far  it  may  be
fuppfed  there  may  be  an  Intercourfe  with
Superior  Beings ,  without  any  Familiarity
with  the  Devil,  or  evil  Spirits  ;  with  a
Tranftion  to  the  prefent  Times .

WHEN  the  feven  Sons  of  Scteva  the  Jem
pretended  to  Exorcifm,  and  to  caft  the
Devil  out  of  a  poffefs’d  Perfon,  the  Devil  taking  it
in  fcorn  to  be  affronted  by  meer  Pretenders,  and
difdaining  thofe  that  had  no  Authority  to  make
ufe  of  the  Names  which  he  was  fubje£ted  to  the
Terror  of,  flew  upon  them,  as  the  Text  fays ,  in  a
Ragc^Jefas  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  fays,  he^  buc
mho  are  ye?  and  he  never  left  them  till  they  fled
away  from  him  naked  and  wounded.

Now  in  what  Name  or  by  what  Authority
Dr.  Boreman  or  any  of  thefe  Magicians  difmifled
the  Devil  from  haunted  Houfes,  chafed  away  Spi-
rits  from  the  Places  where  they  had  made  any  Ap¬
pearance,  and  kept  the  Devil  in  fuch  Awe  as  is  re¬
ported,  I  cannot  yet  learn.  Had  the  Doftor  really
caft:  the  Devil  out  of  any  Demoniack  or  poflefs’d
Perfon,  and  openly  have  exercifed  fuch  an  abfoiute
Power  over  him,  and  had  it  been  well  vouch’d
by  Perfons  of  known  Integrity  and  found  Judgment*
we  mufl  then  have  believ’d  that  there  were  forne
good  Spirits,  fome  fuperior  intelligent  Beings,
whom  the  Doctor  was  fo  favoured  by,  that  know¬
ing  his  good  Intentions,  they  would  afliit  him  with
their  Aid  againft  the  evil  Spirits.


Y


A  SYSTEM

But  there  are  innumerable  Difficulties  in  the
Way  >  the  Words  of  our  Saviour  are  cxprefs,  that
this  Kind  goeth  not  out  hut  by  Prayer  and  Fafiing ,
and  I  do  not  read  much  of  the  Doctor  being  a  Per-
fon  fo  pious  and  fo  religious  as  to  exercife  himfelf
that  way  at  all  5  what  he  might  do  in  private  I
know  not,  but  by  all  I  can  learn,  he  afted  as  by
the  immediate  Deputation  of  thofe  good  Spirits,  in¬
timating,  that  they  brought  him  Intelligence,  that
they  acquainted  him  with  the  Circumftances  of
every  enquiring  Perfon ;  that  they  directed  him
what  Anfwers  to  give  j  that  he  was  but,  as  it
were,  their  Meflenger  to  evil  Spirits,  ordering
them  to  remove  from  fuch  and  fuch  Places  j  that
they  empower’d  him  by  fpeaking  fuch  and  fuch
Words,  to  charm  and  bind  down  fuch  People  as
he  was  dire&ed  to  operate  upon,  to  fuch  a  Limit,
and  within  fuch  a  Circle  of  Ground.

But  all  this  is  itill  attended  with  this  Doubt,  viz>
That  the  Faft  is  not  proved  y  let  us  fee  therefore
what  it  is  likely  thefe  good  Spirits  can  do  5  and
what  they  really  arc  believ’d  to  do  in  any  Part  of
the  World,  for  the  general  Good  of  Mankind.

That  there  are  feme  Appearances  in  the  World,
and  that  of  fuch  Spirits  as  we  may  call  Good,  I
will  not  deny  here,  whether  I  grant  it  at  prefent
or  no.  The  People  in  Norway  tell  you  of  a  good
Spirit  which  at  all  times  gives  People  Notice  of
things  fatal  and  deftru&ive*  that  it  appears  in  a
Hying  Ball  of  a  yellowifh  green  $  and  is  feen  in  the
Air,  and  will  knock  at  their  Doors  before  approach¬
ing  Tempeils  and  deep  Snows,  that  they  may  fave
their  Filhing-Boats  by  hauling  them  up  upon  the
Shores,  or  into  narrow  fafe  Creeks  where  they  will
receive  no  Damage,  and  that  on  Shore  they  may
bring  home  their  Cattle  and  fecure  them  from  thofe
deep  Snows  and  fevere  Colds,


In


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

In  Laconia  we  are  told  of  feveral  Spirits  which
they  converfe  with,  not  by  way  of  Witchcraft  and
Sorcery,  but  which  they  call  their  good  Spirits,  and
whom  they  confult  with  upon  every  urgent  Occa-
fion  for  Relief  and  Affiftance,  and  who  never  do
any  Hurt  to  them  or  to  their  Cattle.  What  the
Lapland  Witches  may  do  I  know  not,  neither  is  it
my  prefent  Inquiry.

Whether  thefe  good  Spirits  are  not  thofe,  who
at  the  Requeft  of  fome  certain  People  on  all  the
Coafls  of  Norway ,  are  faid  to  procure  fair  Winds
for  Ships  going  to  Sea,  I  will  not  undertake  to
fay>  But  this  I  have  upon  ffcri£t  Enquiry  learnt.

Fir  ft i  That  it  really  is  fo  in  Fa&>  that  upon  go¬
ing  to  certain  People  there,  and  upon  paying  them
a  fmall  Confideration  (not  above  two  Dollars)  they
have  been  allured  of  a  fair  Wind,  exaftly  at  fuch  a
Time,  from  fuch  a  certain  Point  of  the  Compafs,
and  to  laft  fo  many  Hours  as  has  been  agreed  for.

Secondly ,  That  this  has  been  agreed  for  when  the
Winds  have  been,  as  the  Seamen  call  it,  fet  in  to
blow  Trade  from  a  directly  contrary  Point,  and  for  a
conliderable  time  before  $  and  that  when  they  have
gone  away  and  declined  the  Agreement,  they  have
lain  a  long  time  without  a  fair  Wind,  till  com¬
plying  \  and  again,  that  upon  fo  complying  they
have  never  failed.

Thirdly ,  That  if  you  offer  to  delire,  or  give  Mo¬
ney  to  them  to  raife  a  high  Wind,  that  is,  a  Storm,
they  will  be  very  angry,  refufe  your  Money  with
Difdain,  and  ask  you  in  their  Language,  if  you
think  they  deal  with  the  Devil?  that  their  Power
comes  from  a  good  Spirit,  that  never  does  any  Hurt
in  the. World,  but  always  does  things  kind  and
good,  and  for  the  Benefit  of  Mankind.

Ail  our  Accounts,  Hiftories  and  Relations  con¬
cerning  the  Northern  Parts  of  Britain  are  full  of
the  Appearance  of  Spirits  to  the  Inhabitants  on

Y  z  fundry


3*3


324


A  SYSTEM

■  •

fondry  Occafions,  and  yet  none  of  thofe  Spirits  are
hurtful  to  them,  or  join  in  any  hurtful  things.

Either  thefe  Spirits  inhabit  in  the  Regions  of  the
Air,  and  fo  are  near  us  and  take  Cognizance  of  our
Perfons  and  Affairs,  or  they  do  not :  if  they  do  not,
what  do  they  appear  for?  if  they  take  cognizance
of  us  and  of  our  Affairs,  and  yet  do  None  Hurt,
then  they  are  not  Devils  tho’  Spirits,  for  the  Devil
would  certainly  do  the  utmoft  Mifchief  he  could  *
on  the  contrary,  thofe  Spirits  do  eminent  good  Ser¬
vices  on  fundry  Occafions  to  Mankind  >  they  mufl
therefore  be  fuppofed  at  leaft  to  be  good  and  bene¬
ficent  Beings,  inhabiting  fo  me  where  in  the  vaftEx-
panfe  of  Space  which  we  call  the  Habitation  of  Spi¬
rits,  or  the  invifible  World.

And  this  leads  us  by  the  Hand  to  that  hitherto
unintelligible  thing  called  the  Second-fight  5  that  is
to  fay,  that  thofe  good  Spirits  make  themfelves
vifible  to  fome  particular  Perfons,  and  reprefent  to
them  the  Form  or  Shadow  of  this  or  that  Perfon
that  they  have  a  mind  to  have  feen$  and  even  thofe
Perfons  are  reprefented  not  to  do  them  Hurt,  but
oftentimes  to  warn  of  approaching  Mifchief,  Death
or  Danger.

To  what  purpofe  fhould  the  Devil ,  who  is  never
guilty  of  doing  Good,  except  with  defign  of  Evil,
I  fay  to  what  purpofe  fhould  he  foretell  Evils  a  -
waiting  this  or  that  Man,  who  cares  not  what  Evil
may  or  can  befall  him?  to  reprefent  to  him  things
in  Effigie,  which  fhall  yet  come  to  pafs  in  Reality  ?  to
give  him  warnings  of  Evils  in  time,  that  he  may
avoid  it?  This  is  not  like  the  Devil ,  who  is  always
feeking  Man’s  Deftruftion.  For  Example:

The  Second-fighted  Highlander  fees  a  young
Lady  with  three  Gentlemen  Handing  at  her  right
Hand,  intimating  that  they  fhould  every  one  of
them  in  their  Turn,  be  her  Husband  j  and,  however
unlikely,  this  comes  to  pafs  :  He  fees  the  like

num-


of  MAG  I  C  K.

'.s'  ■

number  of  Women  (landing  on  the  left  hand  of  a
Man,  and  he  is  directed  by  this  to  know  they  fliall
all  be  his  Wives;  the  very  Faces  and  Habits  of
them  are  defcribed,  and  that  fo  as  to  have  them
known;  and  this,  tho’  fceming  at  firfl:  ridiculous,
comes  to  pafs.  A  Second- fight  Man  travelling  on
the  Road,  fees  a  Man  on  Horfeback  at  a  great  di-
flance  coming  towards  him;  a  great  River  being
between  them ;  He  fays  to  his  Friend  that  was
with  him,  Ride  forward  to  the  River  Bank  and  you
may  chance  fave  the  Man's  Life ,  for  he  will  pafs  the
Ford ,  hut  will  he  driven  away  hy  the  IVater ,  and
you  may  chance  afift  him  to  get  out.

The  Man  to  whom  it  was  faid,  gallop’d  up  to
the  River’s  Brink  and  calls  to  the  Man  on  the
other  Side,  bidding  him  not  come  forward,  for  the
River  at  the  Ford  was  newly  rifen,  and  the  Water
or  the  Current  would  be  too  ilrong  for  his  Horfe,
adding  that  he  would  be  in  Danger:  I  know  the
Ford ,  fays  he,  better  than  you ,  mind  your  own  Affair s%
and  with  that  comes  on  and  enters  the  River,  and
was  accordingly  driven  away  with  the  Current,
and  in  great  Danger;  but  the  Man  fent  to  warn
him  was  fo  careful,  that  running  on  the  other  fide
of  the  River,  he  had  an  Opportunity  to  throw  a
Rope  to  him,  which  at  laft  he  took  hold  of,  and
with  great  Difficulty  is  drawn  to  the  Shore:  and
in  that  manner  his  Life  was  laved.

Now,  tho’  it  is  true,  that  the  Intelligence
which  this  Man  gave,  was  the  faving  the  Man’s
Life,  yet  they  will  have  it,  that  this  Man  dealt
with  the  Devil:  How  elfe,  fay  they,  fhould  this
Man.  know  that  the  other  Man,  a  Stranger  to
him,  fiiould  be  in  Danger?  But  I  anfwer,  that
the  Devil  has  no  Knowledge  of  Futurity,  and
therefore  this  could  not  be  the  Devil ,  or  from  the
Devil .


6  ^  &  IT  S  *T  R  Af


Befides,  why  fliould  the  Devil  tell  the  Man,  and
warn  him  of  the  Danger  of  paffing  the  River?
would  he  not  much  rather  that  the  Man  fhould
have  been  drown’d,  and  as  many  more  as  he  could  ?
?Tis  evident  that  in  Witchcrafts  and  familiar


Spirits,  where  the  Devil  afts  by  the  Agency  of  the
Witch  or  Wizard,  they  are  always  fam’d  for  doing
Mifchief,  prompting  to  all  manner  of  Evil,  torment*
ing  the  particular  People  they  are  empower’d  to
aft  upon  3  murthering  others,  deftroying  Cattle,
fetting  Fire  to  Houfes,  Ships,  Stacks  of  Corn  or
Hay  3  and  in  a  word  every  thing  hurtful,  and  every
thing  hateful.

There  is  fome  Reafon  therefore  certainly  to  di-
ftinguifli  between  thole  Spirits  who  are  kind,  and
careful,  and  affiftant  to  Mankind,  and  thofe  that
are  mifehievous,  deflruftive,  and  declare  themfelves
Enemies  to  the  common  Good  :  The  Laft  are  evi¬
dently  of  Hell,  $;he  very  Nature  of  the  Devil  ap¬
pears  in  all  their  Aftions,*  and  in  the  Ends  and  Aims
of  all  the  Emiflaries  they  employ.  What  contrary
Judgment  is  to  be  made  from  contrary  Eftefts,  re¬
gains  to  he  confider’d.

They  both  aft,  at  leaft  we  underftand  them  to
aft,  by  the  Affiftance  of  fome  invifible  Spirits  or,  as
it  may  be  more  properly  exprefied,  the  invifible
Spirits  aft  in  them  and  by  them.

As  to  Witchcraft  and  Poffeffion,  that  I  think  is
plain,  and  needs  no  Difcourfe  upon  it  3  ’tis  known
to  be  all  from  an  evil  Spirit,  or  in  plain  Englifh,
from  the  Devil :  There  is  no  Room  to  difpute  it*
the  Wretches  employed  acknowledge  it,  and  the
Hellifh  things  they  do  difeover  it  3  fo  we  need
fay  no  more  of  that,  not  i§  it  the  Bufinefi  be¬
fore  me.

But  who  is  it  that  afts  thefe  other  forts  of  Peo¬
ple?  what  Spirits  inform  them?  what  fecret  Power


opens  their  Eyes,  to  fee  things  hid  from  the  reft  of

Man-


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.  I

Mankind?  I  meet  with  many  that  have  examined
into  this  Matter  of  the  Second- fight,  and  who  have
difcourfed  with  the  People  who  are,  what  (hall  I
call  it  ?  I  can  hardly  fay,  Bleffed  with  it  j  neither
do  they  call  it  fo  themfelvesj  and  all  that  I  have
enquired  of  about  it,  feem  only  to  hold  up  their
Hands  with  a  kind  of  Aftbnffliment  at  the  thing,
but  can  give  no  Account  of  it  \  they  wonder  at,
but  do  not  underftand  it.

To  me  ’tis  more  a  Wonder  that  it  fhould  not  be
underftood  $  for  it  feems  to  be  nothing  more  or
lefs  than  this:  That  fuppbfing  an  invifible  World,
or  World  of  Spirits,  as  we  have  already  been  dif-
courfing,  and  have  in  part  granted  $  I  fay,  fuppofing
there  are  fuch  Spirits,  and  that  they  inhabit  the  in-
vifible  Regions  $  how  near  to  or  remote  from  us,  we
know  not,  and  that  the  Reality  of  their  Exigence  is
certain,  this  Second- fight  then  is  accounted  for  thus :

Two  Ways  thofe  Spirits  find  to  converfe  with
Mankind  $  be  it  for  Good  or  Evil,  that’s  a  Queftion
fay  it  felfj  I  fay,  they  maintain  an  Intercourfe  with
Mankind  two  Ways.

Firft ,  By  immediate,  perfonal,  and  particular  Con¬
verfe  with  this  or  that  Man,  and  by  fuch  particular
Methods  as  is  only  known  to  the  Perfon*  whether
by  the  Means  of  any  Science,  or  Art,  or  otherwife,
we  know  not  5  this  we  call  Magic k,  and  the  Man
fo  converfing  with  them,  we  call  a  Magician.

Secondly ,  Or  thefe  Spirits,  &£Hng  at  a  diltance,
render  themfelves  vifible,  and  their  Tranfafhons  per¬
ceptible  to  fuch  and  fuch  particular  Perfons,  and
on  fuch  Occafions  as  they  think  fit,  and  as  they
find  needful  5  without  any  farther  Concern  or  Ac¬
quaintance  with  the  Perfon,  or  communicating  to
him  or  them  any  thing  of  the  Reafon  or  Nature  of
the  Difcovery,  or  any  Knowledge  of  the  Perfon  fo
making  the  Difcovery  *  and  this  is  what  we  foolifh-
ly  enough  call  the  Second-fight.


Nor


3*8  A  ST  STEM

Nor  is  this  Notion  in  any  thing  inconfident  ei-
ther  with  Reafon  or  the  Nature  of  the  thing*  the
Angel  that  flood  with  the  flaming  Sword  in  his
Hand  was  feen  by  the  Afs  of  Balaam ,  and  not  feen
by  his  Mafler.  Our  Saviour  in  his  glorified  State  af¬
ter  his  Refurreftion  was  feen  and  converfed  with
in  the  opened  and  freed  manner  imaginable  by  the
two  Difciples  going  to  Emaus ,  and  yet  they  knew
not  who  it  was*  and  as  foon  as  they  knew  him  he
became  invifible  to  them  again.

Now,  fuppofe  one  of  thefe  invifible  Inhabitants
defigns  to  make  itfelf  vifible,  either  to  difcover
fuch  or  fuch  an  Evil  at  hand,  to  particular  Men,  or
to  warn  this  or  that  Perfon  of  Mifchief  attending
another*  fo  that  he  may  immediately  go  and  pre¬
vent  it :  Can  we  think  it  difficult  for  that  Spirit
to  make  itfelf  vifible  to  this  or  that  particular  Man,
and  not  to  another?  I  think  there  is  nothing  drange
at  all  in  it.

A  Second- lighted  Man  going  towards  a  Gentle¬
man’s  Houfe  mBradalbin ,  fees  the  Gentleman,  towards
whofe  Houfe  he  was  going,  riding  on  the  Road
with  a  neighbouring  Gentleman,  whom  he  alfo
knew,  attended  with  three  Servants  on  Foot  and
one  on  Horfeback,  fix  in  all  *  then  he  fuddenly  fees
a  Troop  of  Highland  Robbers,  forty  or  fifty  in
,  Number,  rufhing  out  of  a  Wood  or  fome  other
Place  where  they  lay  in  Ambufh,  who  furrounded
the  Gentlemen,  difmounted  and  robb’d  them,
wounded  the  fird  Gentleman  in  the  Arm,  and  killed
one  of  the  Servants.

The  Man  going  forward  to  the  Gentleman’s
Houfe,  jud  in  the  Court  or  Entry  before  his  Houfe
fees  the  Gentleman,  with  the  other  Gentleman  his
Friend,  mounting  his  Horfe  to  ride  abroad,  and  the
Servants  attending,  jud  three  in  Number,  befides

the  Gentleman’s  Steward  on  Horfebacko

6


He


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

He  immediately  fpeaking  to  one  of  the  Servants,
enquires  which  way  their  Matter  was  travelling*
they  anfwer  him,  that  he  is  going  to  Innerlochy ,
upon  fuch  and  fuch  Bufinefs.  Which  Way  does
the  Laird  intend  to  take?  fays  the  Man.  Such  a
Gat,  fays  the  Servant.  I  befeech  his  Honour,  fays
the  Man,  that  he  go  not  by  that  Gat ,  (that  is  to  fay,
by  that  Road)  for  if  he  does,  he  will  fall  into  bad
Hands.

The  Servant  tells  his  Matter,  and  he  calls  the
Stranger,  and  asks  him  what  he  meant  by  telling
him  fo.  Sir,  fays  he,  I  tell  it  for  good,  if  your
Honour  pleafe  to  hearken  to  it.  For  if  you  go  by
that  Gat,  ('mentioning  the  Road  which  his  Servant
had  nam’d)  you  will  fall  in  with  the  Robbers,  who
haunt  thofe  Hills,  and  will  be  overpower’d  and
mifehiev’d.

What,  fays  the  other  Gentleman  that  was  to
go  with  him,  mocking  at  the  fecond-fighted  Man,
are  ye  one  of  thofe  Fool-Bodies  (a  Scots  Exprefllon)
that  they  call  Seers?  ha’  ye  been  feeing  a  Vi-
lion  this  Morning?  Pr’ythee,  how  many  were  they,
and  what  did  they  fay  to  you?

An  your  Honour  will  gang,  fays  the  Man,
gang  your  war.  But  you  will  remember  what  I
have  told  you,  when  ye  find  it  true.

The  firft  Gentleman  anfwer’d,  Were  they  a
Troop,  fay  you?  Yes,  and’t  pleafe  your  Honour,
fays  the  Man.

Well,  well,  fays  the  Gentleman,  I  fliall  go  an
a  Troop  of  Devils  were  in  the  Way.  So  the  Man
was  flouted  on  all  Hands,  and  went  his  way  back  *
the  two  Gentlemen  went  on,  as  they  faid  they
would,  and  were  attack’d  and  robb’d  j  one  Servant
kill’d,  and  one  of  the  Gentlemen  had  his  Arm
broke  with  a  Piftol-Buliet,  and  was  brought  back
the  fame  Day  to  his  own  Houfe.  n


What


A  SYSTEM

What  Spirit  it  muft  be,  that  could  thus  form  an
Appearance  of  things  that  would  come  to  pafs,  that
We  cannot  determine  5  but  fuppofing  this  Story  to
be  true  in  Fa£fc,  as  many  fuch  have  been,  this  had
certainly  one  Token  of  a  good  Spirit  in  it  %  namely,
that  it  gave  the  Gentleman  fair  Warning  to  {hun  the
Danger  that  awaited  him,  and  as  it  were,  fent  an
Exprefs  to  him  from  the  invifible  World,  which  if
he  had  not  defpifed,  he  might  have  efcaped,  and  a-
voided  the  Danger,

Now,  had  this  been  the  Devil ,  if  I  have  any
Notion  of  the  Devil ,  and  of  his  Nature,  as  well
as  Defigns,  his  Part  would  rather  have  been  to  hare
fent  an  Agent  of  his  to  the  Troop  of  Robbers  his
Friends,  to  give  them  Notice,  that  fuch  a  Gentle¬
man,  and  fuch  another  with  him,  was  coming  up¬
on  the  Way,  and  that  in  fuch  a  Place  they  fliould
be  fare  to  meet  and  fur  prize  them.  He  would  have
been  fo  far  from  warning  the  Gentlemen  of  their
Danger,  that  he  would  have  run  them  into  it  with
all  the  Artifice  he  was  Matter  of*  and  I  will  not
fay  that  he  did  not  prompt  the  two  Gentlemen  a-
bove,  to  feoff  and  flout  at  the  poor  fecond- lighted
Man,  and  make  a  Jeft  of  his  Intelligence,  as  you
have  heard  •,  that  fo  they  might  go  on,  and  fall  into
the  Danger  they  were  warned  againft,  rather  than  go
another  Way,  and  avoid  it.

Some  of  thefe  informing  Spirts  think  fit  to
appear  themfelves  to  thefe  fecond-fighted  Peo¬
ple,  and  not  to  others  j  and  if  the  Author  of
the  Defcription  of  the  Weftern  Iflands  of  Scot -
land  may  be  credited,  who  alfo  names  not  the
Circumttances  only,  but  the  Perfons,  they  have
not  only  abundance  of  thefe  fecond-fighted  People
there,  but  they  have  abundance  of  things  difeover’d
to  them  in  this  Manner,  and  efpecially  upon  the  ap¬
proaching  Death  or  Difafters  of  any  Perfon  or  Fa¬
mily.  It  is  true,  the  Examples  he  brings  are  moft


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

@f  them  trifling,  but  we  have  many  Relations  in
that  Country  generally  received  for  Truth,  which
are  confiderablej  and  divers  Examples  are  to  be
had,  which  are  new,  and  without  Precedent  %
nothing  is  more  frequent  among  them  than  that  of
Foretelling  the  Death  of  any  Perfon,  fome  Exam*
pies  of  which  I  can  give  of  my  own  Knowledge.

I  was  at  a  Gentleman’s  Houfe  in  this  Town,  near
St.  James's ,  and  he  happen’d  to  have  fome  Friends
invited  to  his  Houfe  that  Day  upon  an  Entertain*
ment,  the  Occafion  of  which  I  do  not  juft  now
remember.  Among  the  Guefts  at  his  Table  was  an
ancient  Gentlewoman,  and  her  Daughter  a  fine  beau¬
tiful  young  Lady,  and  was  I  think  to  be  marry’d
the  next  Week,  or  within  a  very  few  Days:  There
(at  oppofite  to  her  another  Lady,  of  what  Coun¬
try  I  do  not  remember,  but  {he  was  a  Foreigner,
and  I  think  was  a  Dutch  Woman,  but  appear’d  as
a  Perfon  of  good  Figure.

This  Foreigner  it  feems  came  to  the  Gentleman’s
Houfe,  not  as  invited  to  the  Entertainment,  but
upon  fome  Bufinefs  of  Confequencej  Dinner  being
juft  ready  he  ask’d  her  to  ftay,  and  told  her  they
would  difpatch  their  Bufinefs  afterwards,  and  fo  led
her  in  among  the  Ladies.

After  Dinner,  the  Gentleman  and  this  Foreign
Lady  withdrew  to  difpatch  their  Affair,  which  was
fomething  relating  to  the  Exchequer ,  where  he  had
an  Employ}  and  in  Difcourfe,  ftie  (aid  to  him,  Pray
Mr. - who  is  that  elderly  Lady  that  fat  op¬

pofite  to  me?  fo  he  told  her  the  Lady’s  Name}  and
that  young  charming  Lady  is  her  Daughter,  1  fup-
pofe?  fays  {he.  Yes,  fays  the  Gentleman.  Poor  Lady,
fays  floe,  I  am  very  forry  for  her,  for  that  her  Daugh¬
ter  is  a  moil  beautiful  Creature  indeed,  and  I  fee
{he  is  very  fond  of  her,  ’tis  a  fad  thing !  What  d’ye
mean?  fays  the  Gentleman,  Why,  fays  flic,  the
young  Lady  won’t  live  above  a  Fortnight,  and  the

poor


J


i


A  ST  STEM


poor  Lady  her  Mother  wili  aim  oil;  break  her
Heart  for  her:  I  am  very  forry.

The  Gentleman  (who  told  me  Story  with  his
own  Mouth)  was  extreamly  furpris’d  at  what  fhe  faid,
and  would  fain  have  underftood  it  as  if  fhe  jefted
with  him  5  but  fhe  affirm’d  it  ferioufly,  and  fhew’d
fo  much  Concern  at  it,  that  he  could  not  carry  it
off  for  a  Jeff  5  then  he  ask’d  her  how  fhe  knew  it?
I  fee  it  upon  her,  fays  fhe,  I  with  I  could  fhow  it
you,  I  tell  you  fhe  is  a  dead  Woman,  all  the
World  can’t  fave  her,  for  her  Hour  is  come,  ask  me
no  more  Queftions.  My  Friend  told  me  the  Story
immediately  j  the  Concern  about  it  had  almoft
frighted  him,  and  the  Event  anfwer’d  it  all  5  in  a-
bout  three  Days  the  young  Lady  was  taken  very
ill,  which  turn’d  to  a  Vomiting,  and  that  to  a
Fever,  and  fhe  dy’d  on  the  very  fourteenth  Day
afterward.

Another  time  walking  in  a  Friend’s  Garden  near
London ,  there  was  a  young  Gentlewoman  walking  in
the  next  Garden,  and  there  being  but  a  low  Wall
between,  and  a  Mount  on  that  Side  where  we
were,  we  could  fee  her  walking  with  her  Father
on  one  fide  of  her,  and  a  Sifter  on  the  other  j  faid
one  Gentleman  that  was  with  me,  Who  is  the  mid-
dlemoft  Perfon  of  thofe  three?  we  told  him  fhe  was
the  Gentleman’s  Daughter  who  walk’d  by  her.

Has  fhe  been  fick  ?  faid  he.  Now  it  was  true,  that
the  Lady  had  been  very  ill,  and  was  come  into  the
Country  for  Air,  and  we  told  him  how  it  was.
Well,  fays  he,  the  Air  won’t  recover  her,  for  fhe
will  dye  within  a  very  few  Days.  I  earneftly  prefs’d
him  to  tell  us  how  he  knew  it  ;  he  anfwer’d  am*
biguoufly  a  good  while,  but  as  I  prefs’d  him  with
great  Importunity,  he  told  me  ferioufly :  Said  he,
you  cannot  fee  it  as  I  do,  I  wifh  X  could  not  fee
things  fo  as  I  do,  but  her  Face  now  at  this  Inftant
is  to  me  exactly  what  you  call  a  Death's  Head $


o  f  MAG  1C  K.

that  is,  the  Skeleton  of  a  Head  or  Scull,  and  no
other.

The  thing  was  right,  and  the  young  Woman
died  within  a  Week  after.

But  to  return  to  the  Subjedt :  As  thefe  Spirits  wc
may  fuppofe  can  make  any  Reprefentations  of  things
vifible,  and  that  to  whom  they  pleafe,  fo  it  may  be
fuppofed  they  can  make  tbemfelves  vifible  alfo,
when,  and  to  whom  they  pleafe  5  and  this  is  at-
tefled  by  many  Witnefles,  and  evidenced  by  feve-
ral  differing  Circumftances,  of  which  I  have  by  En¬
quiry  met  with  a  great  many  in  my  time.

In  the  Highlands  and  Iflands,  they  tell  you  of  a
Spirit,  which  the  poor  ignorant  Country  People
call  Browny ,  or  Bronneya$  it  feems  was  the  more  an¬
cient  Name  they  gave  it,  as  the  Norwegians  have
another,  whom  they  call  Bielke .

Much  Pains  has  been  taken  to  examine  who  this
Browny  is,  and  whether  he  is  a  good  Spirit  or  a
bad  3  but  moil  of  the  Stories  I  meet  with  are  fo
fabulous,  or  trifling,  or  ridiculous,  that  I  rather
take  the  Appearance  to  be  imaginary  than  real*
If  it  be  real,  it  muil  be  fome  low-priz’d  Spirit,
employed  among  the  meaneil  of  People,  and  on  the
meaneil  Occafions,  fcarce  worth  naming,  and  yet
mo  ft  of  them  rather  for  evil  than  good.

It  is  worth  obferving,  that  where  thefe  frequent
Appearances  are,  and  thefe  fecond-fighted  Vifionifts^
we  rarely  hear  of  any  Paw- wa wing  or  Conjuring,
no  Black-Art-Men,  very  little  Magick.  I  fancy  it
feems  rather,  that  what  Bufinefs  thefe  invifible  A-
gents  have  to  do,  and  what  Intercourfe  they  carry
on  with  this  World,  they  generally  do  it  them-
felves,  they  are  not  manag’d  by  Art,  or  call’d  in  to
the  Aid  and  Affiftance  of  the  Artiils.  But  as  they
make  things  vifible  at  Pleafure,  they  want  no  A-
gents,  they  do  their  own  Bufinefs  their  own  way  5
and  in  a  word,  they  have  no  Magicians  among  them,

none


354


A  SYSTEM

none  of  thofe  they  call  Cunning  Men*  or  that  con^
fult  with  the  invifible  World  in  behalf  of  others  f
it  feems  they  have  no  Occafion  of  fuch  Men,  they
are  not  fo  fanciful*  or  over-run  with  Vapours,  as
we  are  in  this  Part  of  the  World.

Yet  they  have  fome  Remains  of  Sorcery  among
them  too,  and  particularly  they  are  flrangely  ad-
difted  to  Charms.  In  the  Ifles  of  Orkney  they  ufe
a  Charm  to  flop  Bleeding,  and  they  tell  you  it  is
as  effe£tual  as  the  flrongeft  Stiptick,  be  the  Bleed¬
ing  outward  by  a  W  oiind,  or  inward  by  any  break¬
ing  the  VefTels,  Wrench  or  Strain,  of  by  DifienH
per*  and  for  this  they  have  particular  People,  whom
they  call  Charmers.  W  hat  Part  of  the  Black  Art  or
Magick  thefe  Charmers  praftife,  I  know  not,  but
it  feems  they  perform  it  at  a  Diflance,  and  without
feeing  or  knowing  the  Perfons 5  only  the  Perfon
who  is  in  Diftrefs  by  Bleeding,  fends  his  Name  to
the  Charmer,  and  he  fends  the  good  Spirit  he  talks
of,  and  (as  the  Magicians  fay)  converfes  with,  and  the
Bleeding  is  flopt  m  a  Moment.  This  the  Charmer,
as  they  call  him  does,  by  repeating  the  Name  of
the  Perfon  affli&ed,  to  which  he  always  adds
fome  barbarous  unintelligible  Language  of  his
own*  upon  repeating  which  he  fends  the  Me  {lon¬
ger  away,  and  the  Cure  is  perfe£ted.  Now  this  is
much  the  fame  with  the  Magick  of  other  Prafti-
fcrs  5  for  this  they  tell  you  is  the  Charmer’s  fpeaking
to  the  good  Spirit  he  converfes  with,  who  imme¬
diately  flyes  invifible  to  the  poor  diftrefs’d  Patient,
and  works  the  Cure.

Thefe  Charms  are  alfo  of  feveral  Kinds,  and  for
fevcral  Purpofes*  fome  to  cure  humane  Bodies,
fome  to  cure  Cattle,  fome  to  quiet  great  Dogs,  and
prevent  their  falling  upon  People  as  they  go  along,
and  fome  perhaps  to  prevent  their  Barking  when  a
Thief  may  attempt  the  Houfe  *  that  Part  I  flip-
pofe  they  won’t  call  the  Work  of  ^  good  Spirit.

They


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

They  have  fach  a  Variety  of  thofe  things  in  other
Parts,  as  well  as  in  our  own  Country,  and  efpeci-
ally  in  Ireland ,  in  Norway ,  and  in  fome  Parts  of
Germany ,  that  it  would  be  needlefs  to  give  an  Ac¬
count  of  them,  and  a  little  out  of  the  way  too  in
fuch  a  Work  as  this.

But  I  muftcome  a  little  nearer  home.  Thefe  Arts
are  ufed  more  on  this  fide  the  World,  as  the  ren-
dring  darker  things  vifible,  feems  to  be  more  the
cafe  on  that  fide}  and  as  I  am  enquiring  rather
what  our  Magicians  pra&ife  without  the  Devil ,
than  what  the  Devil  or  any  other  Spirit  praftifes
without  the  Magician  •>  I  come  to  bring  all  thefe
things  down  to  your  immediate  Underftanding.

We  have  been  diving  into  Myfteries  long  e-
nough,  and  been  ferious  till  perhaps  you  are  tir’d  %
for  a  little  grave  doings  wearies  us  at  this  time  of
day}  let  us  fee  if  the  Subjeft  will  afford  us  any
Diverfion.  The  Age  is  witty  beyond  mcafure,  ancf
not  a  little  wicked  too}  but  whence  is  it  that  we
have  no  Magick  in  our  Wit?  It  is  not  many  Years
ago,  fince  the  fprightly  Part  of  human  Wit  re-
lifh’d  with  Mankind,  and  Men  were  bright  by  meer
Jnfpiration}  the  good  Spirits,  if  fuch  there  are,
diftated  things  of  Value  to  the  Minds  of  Men,  they
convers’d  in  the  very  Confines  of  the  myfterious
World,  but  without  Raptures  and  Agitations}
they  had  the  Sublime  without  the  Infernal,  the
Humid  without  the  Horrid}  they  had  the  Fire
,  without  the  Brimftone}  they  could  laugh  without
Baudy,  and  jeft  without  Blafphcmy}  talk  without
Buffoonry,  and  vote  without  Bribery}  write  with-^
out  Pedantry,  and  read  without  Party.

But  now,  blefs  us  all!  how  ftrangely  is  the
Courfe  of  things  chang’d }  what  with  good  Spirits
and  bad  Spirits,  we  do  every  thing  without  Spirit }  we
are  all  Magick,  and  no  Witchcraft,  the  Devil  with¬
out  the  Devil y  we  laugh  without  a  Jeft,  and  jeft

with-


3 3<S  A  S  r  S  T  E  M

without  Wit  5  we  write  without  Senfe,  and  read
without  Tafte;  we  are  lewd  beyond  Whoredom,
and  devout  beyond  Religion  5  we  preach  without
Do&rine,  are  religious  without  Principles  5  pray
without  Doxology,  and  worfhip  without  a  God.

Now,  how  fhall  we  do  to  find  out  the  Magick
of  all  this  ?  ’tis  certainly  brought  about  by  fome
ftrange  Fafcination,  fome  Devilifme  that  we  feel,
and  don’t  fee.  Here  mu  ft  be  fome  Intercourfe  be¬
tween  us  and  the  invifible  World,  tho’  I  doubt  ’tis
fome  of  the  darker  Part  of  it.  Every  Man  feems  to
me  to  have  his  Daemon  of  a  particular  kind,  pro¬
per  and  feparate  to  himfelf,  by  which  he  ’either  go¬
verns  himfelf,  or  is  govern’d,  I  know  not  well
which  to  call  it  ;  and  fo  he  walks  on  in  his  own
way,  follows  no  body,  and  leads  no  body;  but  is
a  Principle,  a  Do&rine,  a  Governor,  nay  a  God  to
himfelf.

Formerly  the  Broachers  of  Errors,  and  particular
Notions,  had  always  their  Difciples  and  Followers  ;
and  they  judged  pretty  much  of  the  goodnefs  or
badnefs  of  the  Do&rine,  whether  Religious,  Philo-
fophic  or  Moral,  by  the  Number  and  Quality  of
the  Followers  they  had;  even  the  Jews  did  thus
of  our  Saviour,  Have  any  of  the  Elders  or  of  the
Rulers  believed  on  him  ?

But  now,  God  fave  us !  fo  many  Men,  fo  many
Maggots,  Tot  Homines ,  Tot  Di .  . .  r ;  every  Man
broaches  his  own  Opinions,  preaches  them  to  him¬
felf,  is  his  own  Convert;  his  Soul  is  the  Difciple
of  his  Fancy,  and  his  Senfes  the  Pulpit  of  his  Hu¬
mour  ;  as  for  other  People,  as  he  teaches  no  body,
fo  he  fcorns  to  be  taught  by  any  body,  and  bids
God  da...  him,  if  he  had  not  rather  go  to  the
Devil ,  than  not  go  to  Heaven  his  own  way.

Thus  we  live  in  a  general  Difguife,  and  like  the
Mafquerades,  every  Man  drefles  himfelf  up  in  a  par¬
ticular  Habit,  not  two  appear  a-like  in  the  whole

Place  %


/


337


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

Place;  and  that  the  Simily  may  be  perfe£t,  the
Humour  carries  it  on  to  the  minuted;  Part;  as  the
Habits  are  not  alike,  fo  they  are  always  particularly
remarkable  for  being  direddy  oppofite  to  the  Per-
fon  they  cover;  the  Phlegmatic  drefles  a  la  San -
guine,  the  Sober  mimicks  the  Drunkard,  theChafte
chufes  to  drefs  a  la  Court  if ane ,  the  Atheifb  puts  on
the  Religieufe ,  the  Chriftian  has  the  Veft  and
the  Turban,  and  the  Quaker  a  Habit  from  the
Theatre.

In  the  Appearance  of  the  fuperior  Part  it  is
much  the  fame :  Mimickry,  and  oppofite  Capacities
engrofs  Converfation;  the  Beau  turns  Polemic,  the
Atheift  difputes  Principles,  the  Adtrefs  pradtifes
Modefty,  and  the  Pedant  panegyricks  upon  Wit:

Fools  write  Satyr,  as  Clowns  teach  Manners;  the
Fops  are  the  Men  of  Weight;  and  fince,  by  Acci¬
dent,  Wit  and  Senfe  appear’d  under  the  Tide  of
the  T  attlers,  the  eternal  Clang  of  Tea-Table
Tattle  has  rung  the  Changes  upon  Scandal,  and
fet  up  for  the  univerfal  Cenfors  of  Converfation.

And  need  we  go  any  farther  now  for  our  Enqui¬
ries  after  Magick?  could  things  take  fuch  a  Torn  as  *  \
this,  without  a  general  Converfe  with  the  World
of  Spirits?  will  any  Man  tell  me  this  could  happen
by  the  Nature  of  things,  or  even  by  the  Things  of
Nature?  No,  no:  invifible  Operations  are  acted
from  an  invisible  World;  the  Magicians  are  in  the
right,  all  the  great  things  they  do  could  never  be
done  without  an  Intercourfe  with  a  fuperior  Rank
of  Beings,  be  they  Infernal,  or  what  other  Devils
you  pleafe  to  call  ’em.

Take  a  few  bright  Doings  for  Examples.  Upon
what  foot  does  the  bright  Lord  —  fit  every  Morning
over  his  Chocolate,  talking  upon  all  the  Works  of
the  Learned,  himfelf  Unlearned  to  a  Scandal?  And
how  good-natur’d  and  well-manner’d  is  the  Age,
that  no  body  laughs  at  him  till  he  is  gone,  or  for-

Z  bears


35  8  A  SYSTEM

bears  it  afterwards?  How  wife  are  his  Remarks!
how  juft  his  Refledtions !  when  he  talks  fo  much,
and  underftands  fo  little,  that  it  may  be  truly  faid,
no  wife  Man  talks  like  him.  In  which  however  his
Lordfhip  had  this  Happinefs,  that  he  chofe  to  take
it  for  a  Compliment,  inftead  of  a  Satyr.

Sir 'Timothy  Title-Page  is  an  admirable  Gentleman  y
his  Knowledge  of  the  firft  Leaf  of  every  thing,
compleatly  covers  his  Ignorance  of  the  Infde  of
any  thing.  His  juft  Charadter  is  fo  true  a  Pidture
of  the  Age,  that  you  need  go  no  farther  for  a  Rea~
fon  why  Nonfenfe  bears  fuch  a  Price,  and  the
Bookfellers  Trade  is  fo  much  improv’d  j  feeing  they
buy  moft  Books  that  read  leaft,  and  that,  according
to  the  famous  Dr.  Salmon ,  the  having  a  good  Li-
■  brary  makes  a  Man  a  Dodtor.  However,  Sir  Timo-
thy  no  doubt  underftood  the  Names  of  Authors,
and  had  as  good  a  local  Memory  as  to  the  Editions
of  Books,  as  moft  Men  that  could  not  read  Latin .
Nor  was  he  ever  out  in  his  Judgment,  that  I  have
heard  of,  till  an  unlucky  Linnen- Draper  ask’d  him
once  concerning  the  Learned  Author  called  ( a )
Crocus  upon  Hinderlandsy  who  the  Knight  prefently
own’d,  but  unluckijy  forgot  that  the  Impreffion
was  made  mGermany^  and  that  the  Books  came  over
not  in  Quires,  but  in  Rolls,  from  Bremen  and  Ham*

The  Happy,  Miferable,  Generous,  Cynical,

Good-natured,  out  of  Humour  Bart.  Sir - -

would  be  approv’d  by  Somebody,  if  he  was  not
laught  at  by  Every  body  j  he  might  fometimes  pafs  for
pleafant,  if  he  was  not  always  furly,  and  to  like  fome-
thing,  only  that  he  diflikes  every  thing.  He  fets  up
for  a  Critick,  with  this  unhappy  Addition  to  his
Profeflion,  that  he  alters  every  thing,  and  mends

{a)  Crocus  and  Hinderlands  are  two  particular  forts  of  coarfe  Ger¬
many  Linnen,  which  are  Imported  by  the  Hamburgh  Merchants »  and  are
known  to  every  Draper.

nothing.


of  MAG  I  C  K,

nothing.  How  unanfwerable  a  Demonfiration  is  this
extraordinary  Genius  of  the  Influence  of  the  Invi-
fible  World  upon  the  Affairs  of  Mortals  here?  fee¬
ing  if  he  had  lefs  than  a  hundred  thoufand  Devils
in  him,  he  could  never  carry  on  the  Pradtice  of  an
universal  Pedant,  without  being  whip’d  out  of
Human  Society  for  a  Scandal  to  the  very  AB  Cj
and,  to  turn  the  Poet’s  Words  a  little  awry  for  him,

cc  Fellows,  that  ne'er  were  heard  or  read  of,

<c  IVould  long  ere  this  have  wrote  his  Head  off.

Roch.  to  ShadweL

The  Ladies  afford  us  an  infinite  Variety,  and  to
infpedt  their  Share  in  the  Magick  of  this  Age’s
Management,  would  take  up  a  Volume  by  it  felf.
In  a  word,  they  are  all  Magicians ,  and  1  won’t  take
upon  me  to  fay,  that  as  Witchcraft,  generally  (peak¬
ing,  has  for  fome  Ages  been  engrofs’d  by  the  Sex,
and  the  Poffeflion  chiefly  lay  among  the  Matrons  >
that  is  to  fay,  that  none  but  old  Women  were
Witches;  So  now  the  fame  Sex  feem  to  have  en-
groffed  the  facred  Sciences,  and  the  Magick  lies  in
fhort  all  among  the  Ladies.  Who  fhall  enter  into
the  Defcription  of  it?  The  Magick  of  their  Wit,
O  how  Subtle)  the  Magick  of  their  Beauty,  how
exquifitely  New-fafhion’d  !  and  the  Magick  of  their
Tongues,  how  charmingly  Loud  !  not  to  fay  Sono¬
rous  and  MuficaL

To  make  thefe  Beauties  of  the  Sex  the  more  dif-
fufive  in  their  brightefl  Qualifications,  and  infi¬
nitely  more  fo  than  was  poflible  in  former  Ages,
we  have  three  new- invented  Colleges  of  Wit  and
good  Manners,  where  the  Ladies  receive  daily  Ad¬
dition  to  their  Ordinary  Acquirements  3  and  which
give  them  infinite  Advantage  over  the  paft  Days  of
their  Anceftors,  (Grandmothers)  and  in  the  fre¬
quent  Accefs  to  which  they  mult  neceffarily

Z  2  excel


34°


A  $  r  S  T  E  M

excel  all  that  went  before  them.  Thefe  are  the
Tea-Table,  the  AfTembly,  and  the  Mafquerade*  at
the  firft  they  learn  to  be  Light-headed,  at  the
fecond  to  be  Light-hearted,  and  if  at  the  third
they  don’t  learn  to  be  Light-heel’d,  the  Defeft
muft  lie  fomewhere  elfe  than  in  the  laudable  En¬
deavours  of  thofe  that  fet  them  up  in  fo  many  Parts
of  this  newly-reform’d  Nation  >  whofe  Endeavours
for  the  publick  Good  can  never  be  enough  com¬
mended,  either  in  Print  or  in  Manufcript.

I  have  had  feme  Thought  to  enquire  among  all
the  real  Magicians  of  the  Times,  and  efpecially  of
the  more  Eminent  Pretenders  about  Baldwin' s-  Gar¬
dens  ,  White- Crofs- Alley,  Old- Street,  White-Chappel ,
£ec.  and  to  get  Intelligence  from  the  invifible
World  concerning  this  Important  Queftion  >  Whe¬
ther  any  of  the  good  Spirits  or  bad  Spirits,  the
white  Devils  or  black  D evils ,  or  whatever  Spi¬
rits  they  were  which  formerly  infpir’d  the  Roche -
fters ,  the  Dorfets  and  Drydens  of  the  lad  Ages,  are
yet  in  Being  ?And  if  they  are,  what  has  been  the  Occa-
ilon  that  they  have  withdrawn  the  Spirit  of  Poetry
from  the  Englijh  World?  That  not  only  the  Fire  is
cxtinguifh’d,  and  the  genial  Infpiration  decay’d,
but  that  the  relifh  of  true  Poefy  is  loft?  That  as
there  is  nothing  perform’d  that  will  bear  reading,
fo  no  Readers  that  can  tafte  a  Perfomance!  even
the  exalted  Merit  of  the  greateft  Men  is  fung  in
Notes  without  Mufick,  Lines  without  Meaning,
Words  without  Energy,  Verfe  without  Poetry,
and  Poetry  without  Spirit.

I  wonder  fometimes  that  the  great  Men,'  or  Man
rather ,  who  we  fee  daily  Perfecuted  by  the  horrid
Jingle  (I  think  I  fhould  fay  Jangle)  of  their  Rhim-
ing  Expe&ants  and  Dependents,  do  not  confider  of
paying  their  Debts  (I  mean  their  poetical  Debts)  in
kind ,  and  give  the  poor  verifying  Devils  now  and  then
a  Diftich  (at  leaft)  in  Ballance  of  their  voluminous

Labours :


of  MAGIC  K.

Labours :  if  they  paid  but  after  the  rate  of  publick
Xruereft,  but  three  per  Cent,  it  would  at  lead  in  time
reduce  the  Debt,  and  might  in  the  mean  time  lay
the  Foundation  of  a  good  Sinking  Fund.

If  they  do  not  think  of  this  or  fome  other  way,
(for  Penilons  will  rather  encreafe  the  Number,  and
like  Sweat-meats  draw  the  Flyes  about  them)  I  fay,
if  they  do  not  think  of  fome  fuch  way,  they  may  I
think  juftly  fwear  the  Peace  againft  the  Aifailants,
and  fafely  affirm  that  they  go  in  Danger  of  being
Panegyrick’d  to  death  by  ’em.  For  in  ihorr,  fuch
writing  is  little  lefs  in  my  Opinion  than  a  poetical
Affiaffination,  and  the  Minifters  are  in  Danger  of
dying  the  Death  of  Edward  V.  and  being  fmother’d
with  Feather-beds.

Heavens  deliver  every  honeft  Statefman  from  the
infupportable  Burthen  of  Panegyrick,  efpecially
where  ’tis  attended  with  two  Negatives,  want  of
Money,  and  want  of  Wit  5  the  laft  makes  the  fir  ft
lamentable,  but  the  firft  makes  the  laft  unfufferable*
the  firft  is  piteous^  the  laft  is  pitiful 3  the  firft  is  af¬
flicting,  the  laft  tormenting  \  the  firft  importunate,
but  the  laft  impertinent :  and  as  a  wife  Giver  would
give  any  thing  to  be  deliver’d  from  them,  fo  a  wife
Receiver  would  rather  decently  ftarve,  than  to  re¬
ceive  at  the  Price  of  being  a  Plague  to  the  boun¬
tiful  Hand,  and  of  being  reliev’d,  as  the  unjuft
Judge  reliev’d  the  Widow,  to  be  rid  of  her.

As  for  the  poetical  Gentlemen  themfelves,  I
think  it  may  be  faid  of  them  with  refpeCt  to  rheir
Magick,  as  was  faid  of  a  late  Author  of  a  Qua¬
druple  Performance  with  refpeft  to  his  Merit  5
namely,  that  there  might  be  fome  in  his  Poverty,
but  there  was  none  at  ail  in  his  Poetry.

In  my  Opinion,  however,  there  is  a  great  deal  of
Magick  or  Black  Art,  or  call  it  dealing  with  the
Devil  if  you  will3  that  Poetical  Dregs  Ihould  re-

z  3  galQ


34*


A  SYSTEM

gale  the  Age.  If  they  were  fent  to  the  Druggifls ,
and  fold  there  for  Emeticks,  or  made  up  in
Lotions,  and  given  for  Glitters,  I  fhould  not
doubt  their  effeftual  Operation :  But  that  they
fhould  be  paum’d  upon  us  for  Wit,  (By  Jove ,  and
all  the  Hell-born  Clan  of  Deities!)  I  think  the  Au¬
thors,  like  Coiners  of  Counterfeit  Money,  fhould
be  drawn,  hang’d  and  quarter’d,  for  High-Treafon
againft  the  Peace  of  their  Sovereign  Lord  King
Drama ,  his  Crown  and  Dignity.

Where’s  the  Cadence,  the  Propriety,  the  Plot,
the  Genius,  not  to  fay  any  thing  of  the  Wit,  in  any
one  Play,  written  for  thefe  two,  or  three,  or  four
laft  Reigns?  The  Drums  and  Trumpets  of  the
War,  the  Broad-fides  of  the  Fleets  at  Barfleur  and
La  Hogue ,  together  with  the  more  terrible  Cla¬
mours  of  the  Street  Mobs,  and  all  the  &ceteras  of
Parties,  Rabbles,  Riots  and  Rebellions,  quite  fi-
lenc’d  the  Mufes,  ttruck  them  Dumb,  and  I  am
told  they  could  never  make  any  Mufick  fince,  no
not  all  Nine  of  them  put  together.

Now  we  talk  of  the  Black  Art,  of  Magick,  of
railing  Spirits,  of  having  an  Intercourfe  with  fu-
perior  Beings  and  the  like  5  I  think  the  Art  of  our
Days,  the  Magick  of  this  Age,  has  been  exercis’d
to  lay  the  Spirits,  not  raife  them  j  to  link  the  Devil
of  Wit,  not  lift  him  up  5  and  if  they  have  any  In¬
tercourfe  with  the  invilible  World,  it  mull  be  among
the  inferior  Beings,  not  the  Superior,  if  they  know
any  Degrees  among  the  Seraphick  Train:  Certain
it  is,  the  Impetuolity  of  our  Wit  has  for  fome
Years  been  all  let  off  in  Squibs  and  Crackers,  and
fo  like  the  letter  Volcano’s  of  Lipary  and  Strombol 0,
have  given  Vent  to  the  Subterraneans  of  Sulphur
and  Nitre,  while  the  Quantity  was  moderate.  Where¬
as  when  the  luxuriance  of  Wit  over-power’d  thofe
fmaller  Eruptions,  then  Mount  Gibello  (ALtna)  and
Vejfuvius  roar’d  aloud,  and  over-run  all  the  Coun¬
try


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

try  with  a  Torrent  of  liquid  Fire.  Where  then  is  the
Fire  which  once  flam’d  in  this  Hemifphere!  Thofe
Comets  in  Wit  which  blaz’d  in  their  feveral  Orbits
are  difappear’d,  and  when  the  Revolution  of  their
Spirits  fhall  be  vifible  again,  what  Aftronomer,
what  Calculator  can  inform  us?  not  all  the  Newtons?
the  IVhiftons^  or  Halleys  in  the  Nation  can  folve  this
Difficulty.

What  Magician  now  can  bring  us  to  an  Inter-
courfe  with  thofe  departed  Wits,  or  affift  us  in  the
bringing  them  to  converfe  with  us  again?  If  there
Is  an  Acquaintance  with  this  World  of  Spirits,  let
us  call  upon  the  Sons  of  Art  to  exert  their  Ut-
snoft,  and  bring  thofe  good  Spirits  again  in  play  j
and  to  reftore  the  Commonwealth  of  Wit,  that  the
new-fafhion’d  Ribaldry,  which  the  World  now  re-
lifties  for  Wit,  and  the  Dogmatick,  which,  upon
the  flriCtefl  View  of  our  other  Performances,  the
utmoft  PerfeCiion  of  them,  may  receive  their  due
Cenfure,  to  the  Satisfaction  of  all  the  true  Mafters
of  common  Senfe,  and  the  due  Mortification  of  the
voluminous  Scriblers  of  the  Age.

Pardon  me  then,  from  the  ftrange  turn  of  Affairs
in  thefc  Times  of  ours;  I  fay,  pardon  me  to  look
back  again  a  little  to  the  Conjurings  and  Black  Art
of  the  middle  Ages  of  Time,  efpecially  among  thofe
of  them  who  did  not  pretend  to  deal  with  the
Devil ,  and  it  will  prefently  bring  us  to  an  under-
ftanding  of  things  among  our  felves.

After  the  ancient  Magicians  had  tir’d  the  World
with  their  Tricks,  and  the  Devil  began  to  fail  them,
except  to  thofe  who  kept  an  immediate  Correfpon-
dence  with  him  by  way  of  Familiar,  there  came
up  a  new  fort  of  Magick,  as  well  as  a  new  fort  of
Magicians  >  the  Cafe  was  this.

The  People  it  feems  began  to  difeover  that  the
Magicians  having  left  off  that  ufeful  and  valuable
Study  of  Science,  call’d  the  Knowledge  of  Nature,  the

Z  4  Improve*


/


344


A  SYSTEM

Improvement  of  Art,  and  the  Inftruftion  of  Man¬
kind  in  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  had  turn’d  their  Hands
to  a  new  and  inferiour  Study  *  that  they  confulted
Daemons  and  Evil  Spirits,  that  they  qualify ’d  them-
felves  by  hellifti  Correfpondences  to  do  Mifchief,  in-
ftead  of  doing  Good  *  .and  that  in  ftiort  they  dealt
with  the  Devils  making  themfelves  the  Terror  inftead
of  the  Bleffing  of  Mandind.

When  this  came  to  be  their  Chara£ter,  no  won¬
der  the  People  began  to  be  afraid  of  them,  to
fiiun  and  avoid  them  as  a  kind  of  Devils  themfelves  5
fo  that  except  a  few,  who  kept  up  their  Reputation
by  a  clofer  and  cunninger  Manage,  the  People
withdrew  their  Reverence  from  the  Magicians^  till  at
laft  the  Devil  was  fain  to  fhift  Hands  too,  and  a£t
by  other  Inftruments,  or  he  would  have  endanger’d
his  Kingdom  in  the  World,

So  Monarch  j,  when  their  Politicks  grow  ft  ale ,

Change  Meafures ,  and  by  Novelty  prevail.

Upon  this  Change  of  the  Devil's  Meafures,  he
frequently  found  Reafons  to  change  fome  of  his  In¬
ftruments  too,  and  thus  from  the  Magi ,  he  turn’d
over  to  the  Clergy  *  and  fo,  as  1  hinted  in  its  Place,
the  Augurs,  the  Aurufpices,  and  the  Oracles  came
in  play.

Now  it  happen’d  to  Satan,  as  it  has  frequently
happens  to  other  mighty  Princes  and  Tyrants  in
the  World*  that  finding  his  Servants  and  Statef-
inen  ceafe  to  be  Popular,  ceafe  to  be  the  dar¬
lings  of  the  People,  as  they  ufed  formerly  to  be*  he
found  alfo  a  necefiity  to  fhift  Hands,  difmifs  his
Tools  and  Inftruments,  and  take  up  with  others.
So  Philip  II.  had,  as  was  faid,  eleven  new  Mini-
ilers  and  Governors  in  the  Netherlands  *  but  no
new  Management  if  any  of  his  Agents  and  prime
Minifters  grew  odious  to  the  People,  he  valued
not  difgracing  them,  recalling  them,  expofing

them.


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

them,  and  turning  them  out*  but  took  care,  that
when  another  Governor  came,  the  Government
ihould  be  the  fame.  And  when  the  Prince  of  Par -
ma^  who  by  his  Conduct  recover’d  the  whole  Low*
Country  Pofieflions  to  the  Crown  of  Spain ,  would
have  preferv’d  them  by  his  Prudence,  when  he  had
gain’d ’em  by  his  Valour  5  the  Spanijh  Councils,  which
were  all  for  Tyranny  and  for  Cruelty,  chofe  to
difcourage  that  gallant  Prince,  rather  than  not  car¬
ry  on  their  old  abfolute  Dominion.  So  every
Governor  there,  if  the  People  complain’d,  was
fure  to  be  turn’d  out,  and  yet  the  next  was  oblig’d
to  purfue  the  fame  Tyranny,  ’till  they  were  peti¬
tion’d  out,  as  others  had  been  before  them.

- When  Miniflers  of  State

Ceafe  to  he  popular ,  they  know  their  Fate .

T*he  Crafty  Tyrant  has  no  more  to  do ,

But  facrifice  a  Favourite  or  two .

The  Mobb  are  eajily  cajol'd ,  and  then
He  changes  not  the  Mifehiefs ,  but  the  Men .

By  this  Method,  as  I  fay,  the  Devil  purfued  his
Intereil  in  the  World  $  When  one  Generation
grew  out  of  Ufe,  out  of  Fafhion,  and  flale,  he  took
to  another  j  when  the  Augurs  grew  ftale,  when  the
Cheats  of  the  Oracles  were  expos’d,  when  the
Priefts  could  no  more  predidfc  by  the  Entrails,  he
fets  his  Wits  to  work  to  find  out  other  Ways  and
Means,  for  the  carrying  on  his  Game:  as,

1.  By  a  kind  of  A  Urological  Magick,  in  which
he  manag’d  with  a  great  deal  of  Subtilty  and  Art,
bringing  the  Stars  and  planetary  Influences  into
Play*  and  by  an  unpraftis’d  Subtilty,  the  Art  was
then  carried  on  with  Spell  and  Charm,  by  W ords  cut
in  Metals,  and  in  Stones,  divining  by  the  Byril,  by
the  Amathyft,  by  the  Luftre  of  the  Emerald,  and
the  Ruby,  and  by  all  the  old  Superftitions  brought

into


A  S  r  $  T  E  M

into  a  new  Rule  of  Praftice.  This  was  call’d  the
y*tifmans.y  or  the  Sympathetick  Conjuring-ftone.

It  would  be  too  tedious  for  this  Work,
to  give  a  long  Hiftory  of  the  Delufions  and
Cheats  which  the  Devil  put  upon  Mankind  for
three  or  four  hundred  Years  Pra&ice  of  this  kind
in  the  World.  I  fhall  fatisfy  my  felf  only  to  let
you  fee,  by  way  of  Ahrigment,  what  thefe  Talif-
mans  were,  and  what  the  Authors  of  them  pre¬
tended  j  take  the  Defcription  of  them,  as  collected
from  the  bed  Authors,  thus.

4  <TalifmanS')  or  Muthalfans ,  was  the  Name  of  cer-
4  tain  Magical  Figures  graved  upon  Stones  or  Me-
4  tals,  whereof  the  Anonymous  Author  of  a  Book,
4  entitled,  the  : Talifmans  Juftified ,  gives  this  De-
4  feription.  The  : talifmans ,  fays  he,  is  the  Seal,  the
4  Figure,  the  Character  or  Image  of  a  Celeftial
‘  Sign,  Conftellation,  or  Planet,  graved  on  a  Sym-
4  pathetick  Stone,  or  on  Metal  correfpondent  to  the
4  Star.  The  Effects  which  were  attributed  to  thefe
4  Figures  are  altogether  marvellous  5  ’tis  faid,  for
4  Example,  that  the  Figure  of  a  Lion  ingraven  on
4  Gold,  while  the  Sun  is  in  Leo9  preferves  thofe
4  from  the  Stone  that  carry  this  cfalifman  about
4  them  5  and  that  that  of  a  Scorpion  made  under  the
4  Sign  Scorpio ,  fecures  from  the  Wounds  of  that
4  Animal.  For  to  give  Beauty  and  Strength  of
4  Body,  they  grave  the  Figure  of  Venus ,  on  the
c  fir  ft  Face  of  Libra9  Pifces  or  Taurus:  to  purchafe
4  Honours  and  Dignities  eafily,  they  grave  the  I-
4  mage  of  Jupiter ,  that  is,  a  Man  having  the  Head
4  of  a  Ram,  on  Silver,  or  on  a  white  Stone  5  and
4  he  that  carries  this  Talifman  about  him  will  fee
4  (fay  they)  furprizing  EffeCts :  To  be  fuccefsful  in
4  Merchandize  and  Gaming,  they  reprefent  Mer -
4  cury  on  Silver  $  to  be  courageous  and  victorious,
4  they  engrave  the  Figure  of  Mars  on  the  firft
4  Face  of  Scorpio*,  to  procure  the  Favour  of  Kings,
4  c  they


of  MAGI  C  K.

€  they  reprefent  the  Sun  in  Likenefs  of  a  King,  fit-
4  ting  on  a  Throne,  with  a  Lion  at  his  Side,  in
4  very  fine  Gold,  in  the  firft  Face  of  Leo.  In  the
c  Number  of  Talifmans  are  ranked  the  Palladium
4  of  Troy  5  The  Roman  Bucklers  call’d  Ancilia  >  The
4  fatal  Statues  of  Constantinople ,  for  the  Preferva-
4  tion  of  that  City:  The  Statue  of  Memnon  in
4  yEgypt ,  which  moved  and  gave  Oracles,  as  foon
4  as  the  Sun  was  rifen  :  The  Statue  of  the  Goddels
4  Fortune ,  that  Sejanus  had,  which  brought  good
4  Luck  to  thofe  that  poffefs’d  it:  The  brazen  Fly:
c  Virgil's  golden  Leach,  which  hinder’d  the  Flies
4  from  entering  Naples ,  and  deftroy’d  all  the
4  Leaches  of  a  Well  in  that  City:  The  Figure  of
4  a  Stork,  which  Apollonius  fet  up  in  Conftantino-
4  pie ,  to  drive  away  thefe  Animals:  The  Statue  of
4  a  Knight,  which  ferv’d  that  City  as  a  Prefervative
4  again!!  the  Plague:  The  Figure  of  a  Serpent  in
4  Brafs,  which  hinder’d  all  Serpents  from  entering
4  inco  the  fame  Place  5  whence  it  happen’d,  that
4  Mahomet ,  foon  after  the  taking  of  Conftantinopley
4  having  broken  the  Teeth  of  that  Serpent,  a  pro-
4  digious  Number  of  Serpents  came  upon  the  In-
4  habitants  of  that  City,  but  without  doing  them
4  any  hurt,  becaufe  all  their  Teeth  were  broke,  as
4  were  thofe  of  the  brazen  Serpent.

4  ’Talifmans  are  diftinguifli’d  into  three  forts,  viz.
4  Aflronomical,  Magical,  and  Mix’d :  The  Aftro-
4  nomical  are  referred  to  Signs  of  Celeftial  Con-
4  fiellations,  which  are  in  graven  with  other  Fi-
4  gures,  and  fome  intelligible  Characters:  The  Ma-
4  gical  have  extraordinary  Figures  with  Superftiti-
4  ous  Words,  and  the  Names  of  unknown  Angels:
4  The  Mix’d  are  compos’d  of  Signs  and  barbarous
4  Names,  but  which  are  neither  fuperftitious,  or
4  of  unknown  Angels.  They  bury  them  in  the
4  Earth,  or  in  the  Squares  of  publick  Places,  or
*  they  may  carry  them  about  them.  Some  have

4  believ’d


347


A  SYSTEM

4  believ’d  that  Apollonius  Tyaneeus  was  the  firfl  Au~
£  thor  of  the  Talifmans ,  but  others  are  of  Opinion
4  that  the  TEgyptians  were  the  Inventers  of  them,
4  which  Herodotus  feems  to  infinuate  in  the  fecond
4  Book  of  his  Hiftory,  when  he  fays,  this  People
4  having  firlt  of  all  given  Names  to  the  twelve
c  Celeftial  Gods,  did  likewife  engrave  Animals  on
4  Stones.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  I {land  of  Samo-
4  thracia  made  Talifmans  with  Gold  Rings,  which
4  had  Iron  fee  in  them  inflead  of  Precious  Stones  :
4  Petronius  fpeaks  of  it,  when  he  fays,  that  Trimal-
4  cio  carried  a  Gold  Ring  fet  with  Stars  of  Iron.
4  The  Gods,  which  they  call’d  the  Gods  of  Samo -
4  thracia ,  were  thofe  that  prefided  over  the  Science
4  of  the  Talifmans ,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  In-
4  feriptions  of  thofe  three  Altars  whereof  Tertullian
4  fpeaks.  Before  the  Pillars,  faith  he,  there  are
4  three  great  Altars,  dedicated  to  three  forts  of
4  Gods,  which  they  call  Great,  and  Mighty,  and
4  Strong,  and  which  are  believed  to  be  thofe  of  Sa-
4  mothracia.  Apollonius  makes  mention  of  three
4  Divinities ,  to  whom  he  joineth  Mercury ,  and  re-
4  lateth  the  barbarous  Names  of  thofe  Gods ,  which
4  it  was  prohibited  to  reveal,  ( viz.)  Axierus ,
4  Axiocerfo ,  Axiocerfus  and  Cafmilus>  which  he  fays,
4  are  Ceres ,  Proferpina ,  Pluto  and  Mercury.  The
4  j. Egyptians ,  from  whom  the  greateft  Part  of  other
4  People  have  learned  the  Secret  of  thofe  Rings,
4  had  alfo  other  Talifmans  for  all  Parts  of  the  Body.
4  And  perhaps  ’tis  for  this  that  we  find  fo  many
4  little  Figures  of  Gods ,  Men  and  Animals ,  in  the
4  ancient  Tombs  of  this  Country.  The  moft  an-
4  cient  Talifmans  are  made  upon  Plants,  Branches
4  of  Trees,  or  Roots.  Jofephus  fpeaks  of  them  in
4  the  eighth  Book  of  his  Antiquities,  and  attributes
4  the  Invention  of  them  to  Solomon.  They  ap-
4  ply,  fays  he,  to  the  Nofe  of  the  Sick  poflefled
4  by  the  Devil,  a  Ring,  wherein  a  Root  was  fet

4  inftead


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

4  inftead  of  a  Stone:  Solomon  had  taught  it  in  his
4  Works.  This  Hiftorian  fays,  that  he  has  even
4  feen  the  EfFedlsj  and  that  a  Jew ,  Eleazer  by
4  Name,  cured  many  poflefled  in  this  manner,  in
4  the  Prefence  of  the  Emperor  Vefpafian .  The  an-
4  cient  A Egyptians  believed,  that  certain  Stones  cut
4  out  into  Beetles,  had  considerable  Virtues  to  pro-
4  cure  Strength  and  Courage  for  thofe  that  earned
4  them  about  with  them  j  becaufe,  fays  JElian ,  this
4  Animal  has  no  Female,  and  is  an  Image  of  the
4  Sun.  They  put  likewife  fometimes  the  Figures
4  of  Frogs  in  Palifmans ,  and  Pliny  teftifies  that  if
4  we  believe  thofe  that  improve  that  Science,  a
4  parcel  of  Frogs  ought  to  be  efteemed  more  (ig-
4  nificant  in  a  Commonwealth,  than  a  body  of
c  Laws.  JElian  fays,  that  thofe  of  ACgypt  took  a
4  Reed,  which  preserved  them  from  being  devoured
4  by  Adders  or  Crocodiles  of  the  Nik)  and  that
4  they  are  the  Emblem  of  Wifdom  and  Prudence.
4  cTzetzes  relateth,  that  a  Philofopher  put  a  Stop
4  to  a  Plague  at  Antioch  ^  by  a  Ealifman  of  Stone,
4  wherein  there  was  the  Head  of  Charon  graved.
4  Apollonius  made  ufe  of  the  Figures  of  Storks  and
4  Serpents ,  and  the  ^Egyptians  commonly  made  ufe
4  of  the  Figures  of  Serapis ,  of  Canopus ,  God  of  the
4  Egyptians ,  of  the  Spar-Hawk  and  Afp,  againft  the
4  Evils  which  might  come  from  the  four  Elements,
4  Earth,  Water,  Air  and  Fire.

The  modern  Ealifmans  are  not  fo  curious  as  the
ancient,  and  we  may  know  them  by  the  Charadbers,
which  are  purely  Arabick ,  Eurktjh^  or  of  other
Oriental  Tongues.  The  principal  Authors  that
have  treated  on  this  Subjedb  in  the  latter  Ages,  are
Camilli  Leonard /,  who  has  writ  the  Mirror  of
Stones.  Geber ,  Bacon ,  and  Paracelfus ,  who  have
treated  of  Aftrological  Magick,  and  of  the  Sym¬
pathy  of  Stones,  Metals  and  Planets.  Gaff ar el  has
compos’d  a  Book  on  this  Subjedb  $  intitled,  Unheard -


3jo


A  SYSTEM

of  Curiofities .  And  Agrippa  has  treated  of  it  in
his  Occult  Philofophy.  Gregory  of  Tours  relateth,
that  the  City  of  Paris  had  been  built  under  a  Con-
ftellation,  which  preferved  it  from  Conflagration
Serpents  and  Mice*  and  that  a  little  before  the
Fire  that  happen’d  in  the  Year  f88,  they  had*
found  in  raking  up  an  Arch  of  a  Bridge,  the  two
Talifmans  Prefervers  of  that  City,  which  were  a
Serpent  and  a  Moufe  of  Brafs.  Some  have  de¬
rived  the  Arabick  Name  Talifman  from  the  Greek
©Wlsgwrir,  which  fignifies  Prefervation.  We  will
not  fpend  time  t©  fhew  the  Vanity  of  the  Tailf-
mans ,  for  we  live  in  an  Age  that  is  not  much  ad-
difted  to  fuch  Superftitions.

But  thefe  things  went  but  a  little  way,  com¬
pared  to  what  followed  $  for  now  the  Pagan  Wor¬
ship  declining,  the  World  began  to  fee  with  o-
ther  Eyes  ^  the  Devil  loft  Ground  every  where,
and  the  Chriftian  Religion  fpread  it  felf  infenfibly,
and  in  a  furprifing  manner,  efpecially  over  all  the
Eaftern  and  Northern  Parts,  as  into  Afia,  and  into
Germany  and  France  $  and  now  it  behoved  the  Devil
to  take  new  Meafures  alfo.

Nor  was  he  at  all  at  a  Lois,  for  he  knew  his
Method  prefently,  and  that  was  to  put  on  the
Face  of  Religion,  rank  in  with  the  fandtifyed  Part
of  the  People,  to  wit ,  the  Clergy,  and  draw  them
into  his  Scheme,  as  he  had  done  the  Pagan  Priefts
before.

Upon  this  he  took  up  the  Tonfure,  fhaved  him-
felf  for  a  Monk,  or  a  Monkey,  which  you  pleafe,
drefs’d  himfelf  up  in  the  Habit,  put  on  the  facred
Veftments,  and  got  prefently  into  Orders.  The  Popes
quickly  fell  in  with  him:  Pope  Sylvefter  II.?gavehim
Inftitution  and  Induction,  and  from  this  time  for¬
ward  he  quitted  the  Aftrologick,  and  fet  up  an
Ecclefiaftic  Magick  in  the  World:  The  Succefs

has


of  MAGIC  KM

has  been  wonderful,  beyond  even  his  own  Expecta¬
tion  5  for  it  mult  be  confeffed,  when  the  Frieds  fird
began  a  Correfpondence  with  him,  they  out-drips:
him  in  their  Speed,  for  they  run  even  before  they
were  fent.  St.  Francis  and  St.  Ignatius  out-did  all
the  Arts  of  infernal  Magick  that  ever  were  known,
or  in  ufe  in  the  World,  and  with  his  Affiftance  did
more  to  eftablifh  a  Race  of  Inchanters  and  Church
Magicians  in  the  World,  than  the  Dm/himfelf  could
have  expected.

This  ferved  his  Intereft  effectually  on  one  Side
of  the  World,  that  is  to  fay,  for  Europe  efpecially,
and  all  the  Weftern  World:  And  Confucius  drew
out  another  Plan  of  Ecclefiaftick  or  rather  Philo-
fophick  Magick  for  him  in  China  and  Japan .  But
he  was  dill  at  a  Lofs  for  all  the  reft  of  Afia  and
Africa ,  which  we  might  then  call  the  middle  Part
of  the  World  $  and  which  at  that  time  was  ripe
for  any  kinds  of  Enthufiafm  or  Church  Magick,
let  it  he  aimed  what  it  would.

Satan ,  who  always  fees  his  Opportunity,  and  has
no  want  of  Vigilance  to  lay  hold  of  it,  faw  the
Occafion,  but  could  not  readily  find  out  a  Handle.-
He  could  not  prefently  think  of  a  Method,  ’till  at
length  the  induftrious  Devil  found  out  the  Contri¬
vance  of  fetting  up  the  Unity  againd  the  Trinity,
the  Houfe  of  IJhmael  againd  the  Houfe  of  Ifaac^  the
Race  of  the  Bond-woman  againd  the  Race  of  the
Free- woman  >  the  Circumcifion  againd  the  Bap-
tifrn  5  and  the  Magick  of  Mahomet's  Pidgeon  to  mi-
mick  the  Chridian  Dove.

Having  thus  fettled  the  Scheme,  he  found  out  a
Tool  fit  for  his  Purpofej  a  fierce  ignorant  Arabian ,
bold,  lubtle,  cruel,  and  mercilefs  $  to  Men  infolem,
and  audacious  to  Heaven >  who  by  this  meer  Ma¬
gick  of  Enthufiafm,  back’d  by  the  Sword  and
Spear,  fee  up  the  bolded,  the  groffed,  and  the  mod
fenfclefs  of  all  Impodures  that  ever  was  in  the

World  5


35z


A  SYSTEM

World;  and  which  yet  at  this  Time,  and  for  above
a  thoufand  Years  paft,  has  ftrangely  triumph’d  over
the  Chriftian  World,  has  fpread  itfelf  over  Afia  and
Africa ,  from  the  utmoft  Iflands  of  India  Eaft,  to
the  utmoft  Corner  of  Africa  to  the  Weft ;  and  it  was,
’till  within  a  few  Years  paft,  Mafter  of  a  fourth
Part  of  Europe  befides.

Such  is  the  Force  of  Ecclefiaftic  Magick,  and  how
far  it  is  gone  befides  this  to  break  into  the  Eccle¬
fiaftic  Affairs  of  the  Chriftian  World,  is  not  hard

•  *  _

to  defcribe,  tho’  it  would  take  up  too  much  Room,
efpeciaily  at  the  Clofe  of  this  Work,  to  enquire
into  the  Particulars.

What  a  continued  Series  of  Ecclefiaftic  Magick
has  been  afted  among  the  Romifh  Clergy,  and  in
the  whole  Papal  Hierarchy !  Even  Popery  itfelf
feems  to  me  to  be  one  entire  Syftem  of  Antechri-
ftian  Magick;  its  Conftitutions  are  all  Sorcery  and
Witchcraft;  they  prevail  upon  Senfe  by  Nonfenfe,
upon  the  Head  by  the  Tail,  upon  Zeal  by  Enthu-
fiafm ;  and  upon  the  Chriftian  Do&rine  by  the  Do¬
ctrine  of  the  Devil.

How  could  it  be  poflible  that  Mankind,  blinded
by  their  own  Obftinacy,  could  fink  their  Reafon  to
creft  Notion  ;  eftablifh  Fraud  and  Cheat,  againft
Chriftian  Sincerity  and  Plainnefs;  make  Men  re-
fufe  to  fee  when  their  Eyes  are  open ;  worfhip
Priefts  in  the  Name  of  God,  and  fet  up  Darknels
in  the  room  of  Light;  if  they  were  not  bewitched
with  the  Magick  of  Hell,  and  under  the  entire
Management  of  the  Devil  ?

It  would  be  worth  while  here  to  draw  a  Table
of  Proportions,  and  let  us  fee  how  much  more
fatal  to  the  World  this  Ecclefiaftic  Magick  of  Po¬
pery,  inclufive  of  a  few  other  fpiritual  Delufions
and  Enthufiafms,  has  been,  than  all  the  Magick
of  Paganifm,  and  all  the  Conjurations  of  Hell  were
before.

That


of  MAGIC  K.

That  Men  fhould  renounce  the  Idols,  and  tfien
worfhip  the  Pried*  condemn , Oracles,  and  enquire
of  the  Devils  call  off  the  Baals ,  the  Jupiter s,  and
the  Saturns  of  the  Pagans,  and  fet  up  a  Broaden
God  that  they  fhould  fird  Worfhip  and  then
devour !

That  whole  Nations  lhould  relinquifh  the  glorious
Hod  of  Heaven,  the  much  more  rational  Gods  of
their  Fore- fathers,  and  empower  every  Pried  to
make  a  God  for  ’em  with  half  an  Ounce  of  Meal  !
The  Clergy  were  indeed  in  the  right  of  it  fo  far,
that  they,  like  the  Silver-fmiths  of  Ephefusy  when
they  had  once  drawn  the  People  ,  into  this  Magick
of  a  Worfhip,  took  care  to  engrofs  the  Art  of  ma¬
king  Gods  all  to  themfelves.  ,

Nor  was  it  the  lead  Part  of  the  Magick  of  this
Contrivance,  that  they  fhould  make  eating  their
God  be  a  Part  of  their  mod  folemn  Idolatry,  I  can¬
not  call  it  Worfhip  5  that  when  they  had  made  a
Bufhel  or  two  of  Gods,  and  been  paid  for  ’em,  the
People  that  came  to  Church  might  eat  ’em  up,
and  the  Prieds  be  richly  fet  to  work  to  make
more.

If  ever  the  Talijmans  of  the  Greeks ,  the  Augurs
and  Aurufpices  of  the  Romans ,  the  Lap-dog  of  Fe-
nutiusy  or  Mahomefs  Pidgeon  could  out-do  thefe
Delufions  of  Church  Magick,  I  am  quite  midaken
and  fhall  be  ready  to  acknowledge  it.

That  Men  fhould  fin  againd  God,  and  then  ask
the  Pried  Pardon  for  it  5  as  if  a  Man  fhould  commit
Treafon  in  England  againd  the  King,  and  then  go
to  a  Chimny-fweeper,  or  a  Black-guard-boy,  to  be
pardon’d  for  it :  That  a  Man  fhall  go  to  a  Shop¬
keeper  in  Cheapfede  to  buy  a  Licenfe  to  commit
Whoredom,  or  to  rob  upon  the  Highway,  and
dock- job  Heaven  in  Exchange- Alley  by  Puts  and
Refufal.


374


A  SYSTEM

If  ever  there  was  any  Magick  in  AUgypt  or  Ara -
Via  like  this,  Hiftory  is  entirely  filent  in  it,  nor  had
the  Devil  ever  Craft  enough  to  teach  his  Difciples
any  fuch  Art.  What  Sums  of  Money  would  the
Heathen  Priefts  have  raifed  if  their  Gods  had  took
Bribes  as  ours  do,  and  Pardons  for  Sin,  and  Licenfe
to  fin,  had  been  to  be  bought  and  fold  at  the
Church  Doors,  as  it  is  with  us?

But  thefe  are  merry  Times,  and  the  Church  Ma-
gick  out-does  all  the  Conjurings  of  the  Antients,
as  much  as  Madam  Violante  out-does  a  common
Stage-Tumbler,  or  as  an  Hofpital  thorough-bred
Surgeon  does  a  Mountebank  Tooth-drawer.

As  to  our  religious  Magick,  the  Enthufiafms
and  Herefies  that  reign  among  us,  I  think  we  muft
deal  with  them  juft  as  their  Maker  feems  to  have
,  done,  let  them  alone,  give  them  up  to  their  own
Magick,  and  to  their  own  Delufions,  to  believe
the  Lies  of  their  own  making.  For  as  thofe  holy
Cheats  are  the  eafieft  to  be  difcover’d,  they  are  the
hardeft  to  be  cur’d,  becaufe  they  are  generally  fup-
ported  from  this  invifible  World  of  Spirits,  thefe
mighty  good  fuperior  Beings,  that  is  to  fay,  the
Devil ,  with  whom  the  Fathers  of  thefe  religious
Frauds  have  fo  intimate  Acquaintance,  that  the  Mif-
chiefs  they  fpread,  and  the  Confufions  which  they
bring  every  Day  into  all  our  religious  Eftablifii-
ment,  are  too  deep  rooted  for  all  the  Skill  and  Ap¬
plication  of  the  more  religious  World  to  cure.

But  I  muft  obferve  one  thing  here,  which  is
necefiary  to  your  Illumination,  and  tho’  it  ftlould
bring  me  back  and  draw  me  in  again  to  the
Sin  of  Gravity,  which  the  Town  hates  5  yet  ven¬
turing  the  general  Difpleafure,  I  fay  ’tis  necefiary
to  take  Notice  here,  that  thefe  religious  Effluvia
of  Hell,  which  at  prefent  make  fuch  Confufion  of
Principles  among  us,  are  fo  demonftrably  embrac’d
by  the  prefent  Magi,  the  Sages,  the  Converfers

f  with


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

with  good  Spirits,  the  Roficrucians ,  and  Matters
of  the  Occult  Sciences,  and  all  the  other  Preten¬
ders  to  Supernaturals,  and  fecret  Illuminations;  that
they  leave  us  no  more  room  to  doubt  but  they  are  all
Natives  of  the  fame  Climate,  bred  up  in  the  fame
Countiy,  carrying  on  the  fame  Intereft,  and  will
ttiare  at  laft  in  the  fame  Deftrudtion ;  when  the
Tares  and  the  Wheat  fhatl  be  skilfully  and  criti-

ca  ^  lePa™ec^5  as  we  are  well  aflur’d  they  will  be.

This  indeed  Hands  fair  againft  all  the  modern
leachers  of  the  Roficrucian  Whim  lies,  and  the

S°?hInCp0n  fctS>  that  Nonc  ^em  apply
to  the  Eftabhfliment  of  true  Religion.  On  the

contrary,  they  eftablilh,  or  ftrive  to  eftablifh,  old

Errors,  and  continually  broach  new;  they  preach

another  Dodnne,  and  their  Notions,  were  they

Extravagancies,  and  En-
thufiaft.c  Brains,  would  expofe  themfelves,  being  a
kind  of  i  ehgious  Ramble,  a  confus’d  and  a  con¬
founding  Heap  of  Nonfenfe:  The  poor  People

£°uld  he  in  Danger  of  being  wheedfed

into  their  Delufions,  but  this  unravels  all  their  dark
Schemes,  and  tends  to  Ihow  us  the  Cheat  of  all  the
reft,  and  to  convince  us  that  ’tis  all  a  Black  Art,
aa^  f^bolick,  a  meer  Emanation  of  Hell.

11  ifUi  a!LtheiJ  Jfa&ick  detects  and  expofes  it  felf,
all  the  h'gh  and  bluttnng  Bombaft  of  Sacred,  Di¬
vine,  Excellent,  and  fuch  like,  difeover  whence
they  come;  the  Pretences  to  Illuminations,  Com-

?wn'w  °?^°rIntCrCOurfe  with  SPirits>  and  an  invi-
fible  World,  appear  to  be  Pretences,  and  no  more  i

Their  Dreams  of  Aertal  Subftances  and  Spirituous  Bo-

~ les’  th£  Inhabitants  of  the  Elements, the  refin’d  incor-

poreal  Effaces;  their  Abttrads  of  Quinteflence,  and

i  rh0urind  muTr  ^{"ch  they  puc  upon  the  World;

I  fay,  they  all  fmell  of  the  Fire  and  Brimftone,  are

born  of  Hell,  their  mvifible  World  is  evidently  to

be  underftood  the  Infernal  World,  and  their  Study  <  ~


3JT


15 6


A  SYSTEM

.  .  '  -•  •  •  $r  •

the  Sacred  Sciences,  is  neither  more  orlefs,  tofpeak
in  the  common  Dialed!:,  than  dealing  with  the
Devil ‘y  there  it  begins,  and  there  it  muft  and  will
end.

What  elfe  means  their  Philofophick  Cant  of
mingling  the  fupernatural  Eftences,  their  confound¬
ing  the  Terms  of  Religion  and  things  Divine,
with  the  Dreams  and  the  Jargon  of  their  unfigni-
fying  Language?  loofing  the  Name  of  God,  De¬
vil,  Heaven,  Hell ,  in  the  Cant  of  their  Trade,
and  the  labour’d  Expreffions  of  facred  Flame,  men¬
tal  Fire,  immortal  Spirit,  Perfedtion,  Corruption,
illuminating  Genius,  and  a  vaft  Throng  of
Words,  tending  to  amufe  the  Foolifh,  and  diftradt
the  Wife*  tending  to  deftroy  Religion  and  all  the
folid  Eftablifhment  of  Heaven,  whether  for  the  Fe¬
licity  of  the  Juft,  or  Punifhment  of  the  Wicked  ?

Had  their  Magick  any  Tokens  of  a  truly  Divine
Inftitution,  of  a  heavenly  Original,  and  was  this  de-
monftratea  by  its  confirming,  and  conforming  to  the
Principles  of  either  Natural  or  Reveal’d  Religion,
fomething  might  befaid  for  it  5  or  was  its  Tendency
to  eftablifh,  not  bewilder  the  Underftanding,  and
to  fix  the  Knowledge  of  the  true  God  in  the  Minds
of  Men  ;  was  it  qualify’d  to  eftablifh  our  Faith  in
divine  Illuminations,  and  truly  todiredt  our  Worfhip
and  Homage  to  Him,  encouraging  at  the  fame  time
Peace,  Juftice,  Humility,  and  every  Chriftian  Virtue  ;
Were  this  the  Cafe,  we  fhould  not  difpute  with
them  the  Converfe  of  Spirits  between  us  and  the
invifible  World,  the  Spirits  uncas’d  and  fled  from
hence,  with  the  Spirits  yet  embodyed,  by  an  invifible
and  inconceivable  Communication.  But  leave  it  as
it  is,  a  Matter  indifferent  to  us  at  prefent,  till  it
comes  to  be  underftood  better  when  we  arrive
there..

CHAP.


it*-


357


of  MAGIC  K.

CHAP.  V.

Of  the  Magick  of  the  prefent  Time ,  as  it
funds  flrif  d  in  the  lafi  Chapter,  from  all
the  ‘Pretences  of  the  Magicians,  and  the  ‘De-
Inf  ons  of  Hell  ;  of  what  Length  it  has
gone ,  or  is  like  to  goy  in  deluding  Mankind ;
what  the  Magicians  can  do,  and  that  they
really  have  now  no  Converfe  with  the  Devil
at  all:  So  that  the  Art  being  at  an  End \
the  Hifory  comes  to  an  End  of  courfe .

HAVING,  in  the  laft  Chapter,  brought  down
this  Idol  call’d  Magick  to  its  true  Original,
ftrip’d  it  of  all  the  Mafquerade  D relies,  jelled  a
little  about  it,  and  at  laft  laid  the  Raftard  at  the
Devil's  Door,  who  is  the  true  Father  of  it  5  One
would  think  fo  Rare-fac’d  an  Impofture  fhould  be
able  to  appear  no  longer  in  the  World,  that  it
would  be  hifs’d  off  the  Stage,  and  that  the  very  Roys
and  Girls  would  throw  Stones  and  Dirt  at  it  in  the
Street.

Rut  the  Cafe  is  quite  otherwife,  and  in  fpight  of
Contradidtion  the  Devil  goes  on  his  own  way  $  if
this  or  that  Nation,  or  Country,  or  People  drop
him,  and  refufe  him,  he  goes  to  another  $  like  a
true  Pedlar,  if  he  is  anfwer’d  No  at  one  Door,  he
knocks  at  the  next.  If  he  fells  Counterfeits,  and  is
call’d  Cheating  Knave  at  one  Houfe,  he  calls  him-
felf  honeft  Man  at  another.  The  Devil  is  never
baulk’d,  but  carries  on  his  Game,  in  fpight  of  all
the  Repulfes  he  meets  with,  nay  in  fpite  of  Heaven
it  felf.

Rdides,  he  is  never  at  a  lols  for  Difguifes,  and
like  a  Lady  at  the  Ball,  if  {he  happens  to  have  been^
known  in  her  Mafquerade  Habit  Yefterday,  to-

A  a  3  morrow


358  A  S  Y  S  T  E  M

morrow  fhe  gets  another  that  Ihall  be  a  more  per¬
fect  Difguife.  If  he  happens  to  be  blown  heref  he
is  conceal’d  there.  If  he  is  difcover’d  and  known
for  a  Devil  tc-day,  you  fhall  mi  flake  him  again,
and  take  l.im  for  a  Saint  or  J^lci^iciciTi  of  another
kind  to-morrow.

Nay 5  and  after  all,  even  where  he  is  knbwn  to
be  the  Devils  and  finds  he  cannot  be  difguis’d  any
longer 5  yet  he  has  his  ways  with  him,  to  win  and
pleafe  you,  and  draw  you  in,  at  leaf!  to  bear  with
him,  feeing  he  does  you  no  harm.  Thus,  do  you
not  fee  the  Crowd  about  the  Puppet-Show,  and  do
they  not  laugh,  and  halloo,  and  appear  infinitely
pleas’d  with  the  grofleft  and  fimplell  of  all  Cheats  $
and  that  tho’  they  know  them  to  be  Cheats  and
Delufions,  and  that  they  are  but  meer  Puppets?

So  our  Magicians^  tho’  you  know  them  to  be
Cheats,  tho’  you  know  that  notwithftanding  all
their  Pretences,  they  really  deal  with  the  Devil  %
yet  we  have  People  among  us  that  would  be  con¬
tent,  and  deal  with  them  upon  that  very  Score.  I
want  to  know,  fays  the  jealous-headed  Country-
man,  who  has  made  me  a  Cuckold,  and  don’t  tell
me  of  the  Cunning  Man  going  to  the  Devil  for  In¬
formation.  Why,  I  d  go  to  the  Devil  my  felf,  if
I  knew  wheie  he  was,  rather  than  not  find  it  out.

Nay,  tho  you  convince  them,  that  even  in  the
woift  of  it  all,  the  Fellow  is  not  fo  wicked  as  they
think  he  is,  or  as  he  makes  of  him  felf,  that  he
knows  nothing  of  the  Devil  any  more  than  they
do,  but  only  cheats  them,  and  perfwades  them  to
believe  he  knows  fomcthing,  when  indeed  he
knows  nothing  of  the  matter,  yet  ftill  they  will
go  to  him*  Such  an  old  Woman,  or  fuch  a  young
Fool,  told  ’em,  that  they  had  been  with  the  Cun¬
ning  Man,  and  they  will  go  too$  nor  is  it  pofHble
to  perfwade  them  againft  it,  till  they  have  thrown
their  Money  away,  and  come  back  afliamU

So


0


J


LV1  /I


Lr  i  U


So  that  the  Delufion  dill  goes  on.  A  young  Girl
has  two  Sweet- hearts,  and  {he  goes  to  the  Cun¬
ning  Man  to  know  which  of  thofe  two  fhall
have  her.  A  young  Fellow  has  loft  his  Miftrefs,
and  muft  know  who  Courts  her.  Another  has  loft
a  Cow,  and  away  he  goes  to  the  Cunning  Man
to  know  who  has  dole  her.  The  crafty  Sh  >\  er,
like  the  Devil's  Oracles  of  old,  gives  doubtful  An*
fwers,  fatisfies  no  Body,  and  yet  pleafes  every  Body.
He  fends  the  Girl  home  with  an  old  Wife’s
Tale*  bids  her  lay  two  Sticks  a-crofs  under  her
Pillow,  and  the  fird  die  dreams  on  will  be  the
Man.  The  poor  Girl’s  Head  runs  upon  the  Affair
of  a  Husband,  ’tis  no  wonder  fhe  fliould  dream  of
one  of  them,  and  it  may  be  the  right,  as  well
the  wrong,  fo  that  ’tis  an  even  Lay.  But  the  Con¬
jurer  is  right  \  and  to  be  once  right,  fee  ures  him  the
Cuftora  of  all  the  young  People  in  the  Country  j
whereas,  if  he  is  out,  that’s  forgotten,  and  does
him  no  Harm.

This  is  the  Devil's  low- priz’d  Game,  and  he
carries  it  on  a  great  wayj  and  as  the  Mountebank
oftentimes  gets  more  Money  than  a  licenfed  Phy-
fician,  and  the  Quack  than  the  Do£tor>  fo  the
Devil  gets  more  Clients  than  the  Counfellor,  and
his  Agents  have  as  much  Pra&ice  as  the  Lawyers,
and  perhaps  upon  as  honed  a  foot  too  as  fome  of
them.

I  fliould  enquire  a  little  here,  and  expofe  the
weak  Doings  of  thofe  Cunning  Men,  and  how
they  delude  the  poor  People  $  but  ’tis  of  no  great
Ule.  For  as  ’tis  one  of  the  fimpled  things  of  its
kind  in  the  World,  and  by  which  the  poor  Peo¬
ple  are  the  mod  impos’d  upon,  yet  ’tis  perhaps
one  of  the  lad  Delufions  in  the  World  that  they
will  be  cur’d  of*  nor  can  all  the  Cunning  Men  of
aliigher  Kind  in  the  whole  World  reafon  them  out
of  it.  They  will  leave  the  Surgeon  for  the  Moun-

A  a  4  tebankj


36o  a  s  r  s  t  e  m

tebank,  the  Phyfician  for  the  Quack,  the  Parfon
for  the  Conjurer,  and  God  for  the  Devil.  A  few
diort  Tales  upon  this  Part  may  perhaps  illuftrate
the  Speculation,  and  fhow  you  the  Force  of  Fraud,
tho’  I  doubt  it  will  not  do  much  towards  a  Cure.

A  Magician  giving  out  his  Bills,  and  beading  of
his  mighty  Perfomances,  went  down  in  the  way  of
his  Calling,  as  other  Tradefmen  do,  to  Briftol  Fair,
and  there  he  did  Wonders,  told  Fortunes,  calcu¬
lated  Nativities,  look’d  in  the  Girls  Hands,  peep’d
in  their  Eyes,  talk’d  broad  things  to  them  to  make
them  blufh  *  and  then  guefling  from  their  Colour
how  things  flood  with  them,  and  by  a  thoufand
crofs  Quedions,  drd  crept  into  their  Cafes,  and
then  told  them  for  a  mighty  Difcovery,  what  they
had  diicover’d  to  him  with  their  own  foolifh
Tongues  that  very  Minute.

Among  the  red  of  the  young  Lades  that  came
to  him  with  their  Grievances,  there  comes  one
.with  that  laudable  Quedion*  if  in  Love ,  whether
1  Jhdll  marry  the  Man  or  no  ?  She  was  fo  Modeft
that  foe  could  not  tell  the  Dodtor  her  Cafe  her
felf,  but  fhe  brings  it  him  in  Writing*  and  in¬
dead  of  dating  the  Quedion  as  above.  If  in  Love ,
die  had  written  it,  if  Courted.

The  Dodtor  (for  they  are  all  Doffors)  looks  upon
the  Paper,  and  feeingit  a  Woman’s  Hand*  ’Tis  your
own  W riting,  Child,  fays  he,  I  fuppofe,  you  would
not  rrud  any  body  elfe  with  it*  die  curtify’d,  and
faid  Tes :  fo  he  reads  it  out,  If  in  Love ,  whether  the
Man  will  marry  me  or  no?  The  Girl  colour’d  and  faid,
’tis  not  fo,  you  don’t  read  it  right,  Sir.  Well  Child,
fays  he,  I’ll  read  it  right,  by  and  by  *  come  hither
Sweet-heart,  pull  off  thy  Glove,  let  me  fee  thy
Hand*  fo  he  takes  her  by  the  Hand,  looks  in  the
Palm,  cries  Hum,  very  well,  all’s  right  there*  then
he  feels  her  Pulfe,  Ha!  fays  he,  with  a  kind  of  Start,
is  it  fo  ?  well,  come  Child,  fays  he,  fit  down  in  this

C*nir3


of  MAGIC  K.

Chair,  I’ll  tell  thee  a  Story  :  fo  the  Girl,  after  a  few
Curtefies  and  flight  Refufes,  fits  down  5  and  the  Do-
£tor  begins  his  Story:  There  was,  fays  he,  a  young
Woman,  a  very  pretty  cleaver  Girl,  as  you  are,  my
Dear,  (and  with  that  he  feels  her  Pulfe  again)
came  to  me  t’other  Day  juft  with  fuch  a  Question
as  this,  and  after  I  had  a  little  Talk  with  her,  and
feeling  her  Pulfe,  as  1  do  yours,  my  Dear,  (and
then  he  felt  her  Pulfe  again,  and  ftarted  again  Ha3
fays  h t^tisfo  indeed,  and  then  goes  on)  I  by  the  Help
of  my  Art,  which  is  the  moil  certain  Line  for  the
Difcovery  of  hidden  Truth  direfted  by  Nature,  and
by  the  Intercourfe  of  invifible  Beings,  which  inform
me  of  every  thing  proper  to  be  known,  and  for  the
Service  of  thofe  who  come  to  be  affifted  with  my
exalted  Genius,  I  fay  by  my  infallible  Judgment
I  found  the  poor  Girl  had  concealed  fomething  from
me,  which  indeed  file  ought  not  to  have  done.

For  by  giving  me  a  wrong  Account  of  her  Cafe,
how  fiiould  I  give  a  direft  Anfwer  ?  were  it  not  that
I,  who  am  aftifted  by  the  good  Spirits,  the  Inhabi¬
tants  of  the  fuperior  World,  am  notjto  be  deceived.

So  I  faid  to  her,  Sweet-heart,  thou  hail;  con¬
cealed  the  chief  Part  of  thy  Cafe  $  is  there  not
fomething  more  in  this  Queftion  than  thou  haft
acknowledg’d  ?  She  made  me  no  Anfwer  at  firft,
till  I  being  illuminated  by  the  bright  Spirit  of
the  fifth  Region  of  Alahamed  irwijhah ,  and  by  all
the  aflifting  Lights  of  the  high  exalted  Atmofphere,
(Here  the  Doctor  run  over  a  great  many  Greek
Words,  which  almoft  frighted  the  poor  Girl  whom
he  held  faft  by  the  Hand  or  Wrift  all  the  while)  I,
faid  he,  that  could  not  be  deceived,  told  her  in
plain  Words,  Why  thou  haft  concealed  from  me
that  thou  art  with  Child  $  at  which,  continues  he,
the  guilty  poor  Girl  having  nothing  to  fay,  and  be¬
ing  not  able  to  deny  what  file  found  was  reveal’d
to  me  by  my  never-failing  Intelligence,  confefs’d

to


361


A  S  r  S  T  E  M

to  me,  that  it  was  foj  and  I  having  Compaffion  for
her  Circumftances  (for  (he  had  been  deluded)  pro¬
mis’d  her  my  powerful  Affiftance  to  bring  the  Knave
to  marry  her,  which  is  now  happily  done  to  her  in¬
finite  Satisfaction.  All  this  while  he  held  her  by
the  Wrift,  and  look’d  frequently  in  her  Face.

By  the  firft  he  difcern’d  an  unufual  Fluttering  and
fudden  Diforder  in  her  Pulle,  occafioned  by
the  Story  being  well  enough  told,  and  the  firft
Girl’s  Behaviour  mimick’d  to  the  Life  3  by  looking
in  her  Face,  he  faw  her  Colour  come  and  go  3  and
when  he  talked  of  his  knowing  every  thing  from
the  fuperior  Beings  and  the  invifible  W ord,  he  faw
fhe  was  in  the  utmoft  Confufion.

Now  my  Dear,  fays  the  DoCtor,  railing  her  by
the  Hand  out  of  the  Chair,  give  me  Leave  to  look
a  little  farther  3  fo  leading  her  to  the  Window,  he
gently  lifted  up  one  of  her  Eye-lids,  then  he  gave
two  Hums  and  faid,  Pretty  well  there .  The  Girl  all
the  while  blufht  and  colour’d,  and  chang’d  now
red,  and  then  pale  3  a  little  Conjuration  indeed
would  tell  the  DoCtor  how  it  was  with  her.

Now,  my  Dear,  fays  he  to  the  Girl,  you  would
do  well  to  be  fo  free  with  me  as  to  let  me  know
your  whole  Cafe,  if  you  think  fit  to  truft  me  with
it,  and  for  that,  1  am  as  fecret  as  Death  3  you  need
not  be  under  the  leaft  Concern  about  that,  for  ’tis
my  Bufinefs,  I  am  trufted  with  the  Secrets  of
Princes,  and  am  a  Counfellor  of  Counfellors  3  and  if
I  ftiould  betray  any  body,  it  would  be  a  double
Offence,  neither  would  the  invifible  Spirits  com¬
municate  the  Secrets  of  People’s  Affairs  to  me  if
they  did  not  judge  me  faithful,  therefore  you  may
truft  me  with  the  utmoft  Safety,  Child,  adds  he,
I  fhall  never  divulge  any  thing  that  you  commit  to  me.

The  Girl  was  as  mute  as  a  Fifh,  and  faid  not  one
Word  to  him,  but  blufh’d  and  colour’d  as  red  as
the  Gills  qf  a  Turkey-Cock  when  he  is  angry.

Come


of  MAGIC  K.

Come,  my  Dear,  fays  be,  perhaps  you  can’t  ex-
prefs  your  feif  freely,  fo  I  won’t  prefs  you  any  far¬
ther  >  but  fit  down  till  I  confult  the  good  Spirits  again,
who,  as  I  told  thee,  are  always  ready  to  affifl  di-
ftrefled  Innocence  }  and  who  will  not  fail  to  give
me  a  full  Information  of  your  Cafe,  and  Direftions
alfo  for  your  Good*  fo  that  I  do  not  need  you
fhould  make  any  kind  of  Confeffion  of  your  Cafe
to  me,  I  fhall  be  able  prefently  to  tell  it  you  di-
re£tly  without  your  Help  }  fo  pray  fit  but  two  or
three  Minutes,  and  I’ll  come  to  you  again.

Having  faid  this  to  her,  he  offer’d  to  go  away,
at  which  the  Girl  fell  a  crying  vehemently  j  and
the  Do£tor,  too  cunning  not  to  take  hold  of  it,  and
fatisfied  that  he  had  hit  the  Mark,  flopt,  and  came
back  to  her:  Well,  my  Dear,  fays  he,  I  fee  how
’tis,  and  I  had  partly  Intelligence  of  it  before,  as
you  may  eafily  perceive  }  But,  come  Child,  adds
he,  let’s  fee,  what  is  to  be  done  for  thee  ?  She  cried
all  the  whilej  but  when  he  faid,  What’s  to  be  done,
fhe  faid,  but  could  not  fpeak  it  plain  for  crying.
That  Thomas  would  - — —  and  there  fhe  flopp’d.  I
underfland  thee  Child,  fays  he,  that  I  fhould  make
Thomas  marry  thee,  is  it  not?  YES ,  fays  fhe,  and
blubber’d  mo  ft  fadly .

Well,  fays  the  Doftor,  but  how  far  are  you
gone  with  Child?  let  me  know  that,  and  then  I’ll
tell  thee  whether  I  can  bring  it  to  pafs  or  no.
With  that  he  laid  his  Hand  gently  upon  her  Belly.
I  doubt  thou  art  far  gone,  fays  he  :  About  four
Months,  fays  the  Girl.  Well,  Child,  fays  he,  come
to  me  again  To-morrow  in  the  Afternoon,  and  I’ll
tell  thee  what  is  refolved  in  thy  Cafe  by  the
Powers  who  aflifl  my  never-failing  Art.  So  taking
a  Crown  of  the  Poor  Girl  for  letting  him  pump
the  Truth  out  of  her  own  Mouth,  and  getting  the
Reputation  of  a  mofl  eminent  Magician  and  Man  of
Art,  he  difmifs’d  her  for  that  time,  letting  her  know

that


A  SYSTEM

that  if  he  undertook  to  bring  Thomas  to  marry  her,
he  fhould  expedt  a  more  confiderable  Acknow¬
ledgement.

In  a  word,  he  took  Thomas's  Name,  and  where
he  liv’d,  and  found  Ways  to  manage  Thomas  fo  well,
that  Thomas  came  to  him  in  two  or  three  Days  to
get  rid  of  a  Ghoft,  that  haunted  him.  The  Cafe
was  this:  The  Dodlor  had  an  Implement  which
he  carried  with  him  upon  the  Occafion  of  his  Bu«
finefs;  a  fub  le,  oily-tongu’d,  young  Fellow,  who
was  a  Jack-of-all-Trades,  here  he  was  a  juggler,
there  a  Tumbler,  To-day  a  Conjurer,  at  one  time
a  Ghoft  or  Apparition,  at  another  a  Devil  or  Spirit,
and  fo  added  all  Shapes  and  Poftures  that  could  be
defiled.

The  Dodlor  having  had  his  Intelligence  from  the
Girl  where  Thomas  liv’d,  and  finding  very  happily
that  he  lodg’d  in  a  publick  Houfe  not  far  off,  being
Servant  to  a  Tradefman,  who  not  having  Room
for  him  in  his  Houfe,  paid  for  a  Lodging  for  him
in  the  Ale-houfe;  I  fay,  having  gotten  this
Handle,  he  fends  his  Ingineer  to  lodge  in  the  fame
Houfe.

This  Fellow  finds  an  Opportunity  to  come  fo
far  acquainted  with  Thomas ,  as  always  to  know
whither  he  went,  and  upon  what  Errands  and  Bu-
finefs:  and  the  fir  ft  Time  that  Thomas  was  fent  of
an  Errand  (very  happily  for  him)  was  to  a  Vil¬
lage,  about  a  Mile  out  of  the  City,  and  in  the
Evening,

As  Thomas  was  going  to  this  Village,  this  fubtle
Rogue  gets  behind  a  Wall  in  his  Way,  and  with
a  hollow  dead  kind  of  Voice  calls  him  three  times
by  his  Name;  and  immediately  convey’d  himfelf
away  into  a  Field  of  Corn,  where,  had  Thomas  fu-
fjpe&ed  him,  he  could  not  have  found  him;  and  get¬
ting  out  of  the  Corn,  he  runs  round  by  another
Way  5  and  puts  himfelf  juft  in  the  Way  that  Thomas

was


of  MAG  1  C  K.

was  to  come,  and  as  if  he  had  been  farther  that
Way,  and  was  returning,  meets  Thomas  full-but,  as
they  call  it,  one  going  from  the  City,  and  the  o-
there  coming  to  it.

They  falute  asufual,  and  as  Acquaintance,  and  fall
into  a  Ihort  Difcourfe  upon  the  Occafion  of  the
Voice  that  Thomas  had  heard.

George ,  fays  Thomas,  I  am  very  glad  to  fee  you  $
I  wilh  you  would  go  back  with  me  to  yon’  Town
there,  I’d  be  much  beholden  to  you  for  your  Com¬
pany.

I  am  in  great  Halle,  fays  George  5  I  can’t  go
now.

O  Pray  do,  if  you  can,  for  I’m  terribly  frighted,

fays  Thomas.

Frighted,  fays  George ,  at  what?

Why,  as  I  came  along  by  the  llone  Wall  there,
fays  Thomas ,  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Hill,  I  heard  a
Voice  call  me  three  Times  by  my  Name,  aloud.

Why,  what  does  that  fignify,  fays  George  ?  ’twas
fomebody  behind  the  Wall,  to  be  fure,  that  knew
you  j  what  fhou’d  you  be  frighted  at  that  for  ?

No,  no,  ’twas  not  behind  the  Wall,  ’twas  rather
on  t’other  fide  of  the  Road,  fays  Thomas  -9  but  the
Voice  was  up  in  the  Air,  to  be  fure  it  mult  befome
Spirit.

Nay,  if  it  was  up  in  the  Air  indeed,  fays  George ,
there  may  be  fomething  in  it  5  thofe  Voices  are  lad
things  5  my  Mailer  now  would  tell  you  exactly  what
it  meant.

Why  ay,  fays  Thomas ,  fo  they  fay  5  your  Mafler
can  tell  Folks  all  fuch  things,  but  can’t  you  tell
a-body  fomething  of  it  too  ?  come,  do,  go  back
with  me  a  little.

Nay,  fays  George ,  fince  you  are  fo  concern’d,  I
will  go  ’till  I  fee  you  fafe  at  the  next  Town,  or
fo,  but  I  mull:  run  Home  then,  for  ’tis  aim  oil
,  and  my  Mailer  will  want  me,

[So


A  SYSTEM

[ft  in  Jhort ,  George  goes  along  with  him ,  which
was  all  he  wanted .

But  George ,  fays  Thomas,  what  can  this  Voice
mean?

How  many  Times  did  it  call  you?  fays  George.
Three  Times,  fays  "Thomas .

And  was  it  very  loud  and  diftinft  ?  fays  George.
Are  you  lure  you  are  not  deceived  ?  for  fometimes
People  fancy  Voices  when  there  are  none.

Ay,  that  maybe,  fays  Thomas,but  lan’t  fo  fancy¬
ful  5  I  am  very  fure  I  heard  it  three  Times  $  it
call’d  my  Chriftian  Name  and  Sirname,  Thomas
firft,  then  Thomas  Saunders ,  and  Thomas  Saunders
again  j  ’twas  a  Devil's  Voice  to  be  fure,  ’twas
harfh  and  hollow  as  the  Devil .

Nay,  I  don’t  like  it,  I  confefs,  fays  George  $  it
feems  to  fignify  Death  when  People  are  called  fo,
and  it  may  be  in  three  Days,  three  Weeks,  or
three  Months,  or  three  Years.

Can’t  you  tell  me  which?  fays  Thomas .

No  really,  fays  George ,  I  can’t  go  fo  far  as  that.
If  my  Matter  was  to  know  the  Cafe,  he  would
tell  you  exa&ly  $  but  I  dare  fay  ’tis  Death,  or
fomething  very  bad.

They  had  not  gone  far  after  this,  but  George
watching  a  convenient  Place,  gives  a  little  Start,
and  ftops,  looking  as  if  he  faw  fomething  :  Hold
a  little,  fays  he  to  Thomas.

What’s  the  matter  ?  fays  Thomas .

Matter,  fays  George 5  Nay  you  beft  know  what1
the  matter  >  have  you  committed  Murther,  Thomas
have  you  kill’d  any  body?

I  kill’d  any  body !  Mercy  upon  me !  fays  Thomas ,
what  do  you  mean?

Why,  do  you  fee  nothing,  fays  George ,  do  ye  fee
nothing  #  there  ?

#  He  points  to  a  great  Tree  which  flood  on  the  Corn*
mon  which  they  were  going  over.

No,


/V*


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.  3  67

No,  not  I,  fays  Thomas  •>  don’t  fright  mo  5  you
know,  George ,  I  am  frighted  enough  already.

Nay,  fays  George ,  I  don’t  defire  to  fright  you,
Thomas  %  but  you  would  be  worfe  frighted  than  I
if  you  faw  it }  I’m  glad  you  don’t.

But  what  is  it  ?  fays  Thomas .  Dear  George ,  tell  me,
is  it  the  Devil?

Noj  no ,  not  the  Devil ,  fays  George ,  but  ’tis  a  Spi¬
rit,  ’tis  a  Ghoft  to  be  fure  y  that  made  me  ask  if  you
had  kill’d  any  body.

Well,  I  fhall  die,  fays  Thomas  }  I’m  e’en  dead
with  the  Fright  5  Why  how  fhould  you  fee  it  and
not  I,  George  ?

O,  there’s  a  Reafon  for  that,  fays  George  y  my  Ma¬
tter  gave  me  a  particular  Sight}  that  I  can  fee  Ap¬
paritions  when  others  can’t,  it  belongs  to  our  Bii-
finefs }  but  you’ll  fee  it  presently,  for  it  will  come
nearer,  l  fee  that.

O,  fays  Thomasy  what  fhall  I  do,  George  ?  will  it
fpeak  to  me  ?

I  don’t  know  yet,  fays  George ,  it  may  be  not,  I’ll
tell  you  prefently.

They  continued  going  forward  all  this  while,  and
began  to  come  pretty  near  the  Town}  when  by-
and-by,  fays  George ,  I  don’t  know  what  to  think  of
it,  Thomas  y  it  threatens  and  makes  Signs  as  if  it
would  come  up  to  you  and  ftrike  you.

Strike  me !  fays  Thomas  :  nay  then  ’twill  kill  me
to  be  fure.

No,  no,  they  never  kill  any  body}  befides,  I  fee
you  are  in  fuch  a  Fright,  I’ll  fee  if  I  can  fpeak  to
it,  and  keep  it  off }  if  my  Mafter  were  here,  he’d
fend  it  away  with  a  Word  fpeaking.  With  that
George  goes  three  Steps  forward}  bids  Thomas  Hand
ftill,  draws  a  Circle  with  his  Stick  upon  the  Ground,,
and  puts  Thomas  into  it ‘  Stand  there,  fays  George^  and
you  fhall  be  fafe,  and  don’t  be  afraid.  I’ll  fee  what
I  can  do  for  thee.


Thomas


A  SYSTEM

Thomas  {lands  ffcill  as  he  was  bid,  but  quaking  and
trembling  in  the  utmoft  Confufion;  and  George  goes
forward  a  little  out  of  the  Way  and  talks  aloud,
but  fo  that  Thomas  could  hear  only  the  Voice,  not
underfland  the  Words  ;  and  George  makes  a  great
many  Motions  and  Crofles  in  the  Air,  and  this  he
'held  a  good  while,  when  he  comes  back  to  Thomas .

Well,  Thomas ,  fays  hey  I  believe  I  have  deliver’d
you  for  this  time,  but  fomething  is  the  matter  ;  this
Apparition  threatens  you  ftrangely  ;  I  fancy  you’ll
hear  of  it  again.

But  is  it  gone  now  ?  fays  Thomas .

Stand  ftill ^  fays  George ,a  little,  I  think ’ds  a  going.

So  George  and  he  {land  llill  a  little :  Ay,  there,
fays  George ,  it  goes  off  that  Way  (pointing  North)
and  now  ’tis  gone  up  in  the  Air,  fays  George ,  come
now  we’ll  go  on.  So  away  they  went  to  the  Town,
and  George  tells  him  he  muft  take  his  Leave  of  him,
and  run  home  as  hard  as  he  can  drive.

Dear  George ,  fays  Thomas ,  don’t  leave  me;  why,
I  could  not  go  back  in  the  dark  if  you  would  give
me  a  thoufand  Pounds.

I  can’t  poflibly  ftay,  fays  George ;  if  you  are  fo
frighted,  you  had  beft  lie  there  all  Night,  and  come
Home  in  the  Morning.

I  dare  not  do  that  neither,  fays  Thomas ,  my  Ma¬
iler  will  be  fo  angry,  ’tis  as  much  as  my  Place  is
worth.  -

Why  then  you  muft  get  fomebody  to  come  with
you  at  the  Town,  fays  George ,  for  indeed  I  can’t
ftay  now.  So  away  comes  George  and  leaves  him,
and  fets  up  a  Run,  as  if  he  was  bound  to  be  back
again  with  the  utmoft  Expedition.

When  George  had  got  away  and  was  out  of  fight,
he  alter’d  himielf,  as  he  knew  very  well  how  to  do
by  his  Skill  in  Poftures  and  Tumbling,  which,  as
before ,  was  a  Part  of  his  Trade;  and  having  a  linnen
Habit  in  his  great  Pocket,  dreffes  himfelf  up  in  the
'  Habit


/


of  M  A  Q  1  C  K.

r—jnpi  y  -

Habit  of  a  Ghoftor  an  Apparition,  not  in  a  Shrowd
like  a  dead  Body,  but  all  in  white,  down  to  the  Feet*
and  a  Woman’s  Head-drefs  upon  his  Head  5  and
in  this  Pofture  he  places  himfelf  where  he  knew
‘Thomas  would  come.  But  before  this,  covering  his
Habit  with  his  great  Coat,  he  plac’d  himfelf  at  the
Village  in  fight  of  the  Door  where  Thomas  went  in*
that  he  might  be  fure  to  know  when  he  came  our,
*and  which  Way  he  went,  left  he  fhould  take  fome
other  Way*  and  alfo  to  know  who  and  how  many
he  got  to  come  with  him.

He  foon  found  Thomas  on  his  Way,  for  he  came
out  of  the  Houfe  and  two  Fellows  with  him  in
about  an  Hour :  So  George  follow’d  ’em  at  a  di-
ftance,  ’till  he  faw  them  in  a  little  Lane  leading
into  the  Common  as  before,  and  when  he  knew  they
could  go  no  other  Way  5  upon  which,  he  run  by
another  Way  over  the  Fields,  and  got  into  the
Common  before  them,

The  firft  thing  he  did  was  to  get  into  a  little
Thicker,  where  lying  flat  on  the  Ground,  and  out
of  Sight,  he  lay  and  hifs’d  like  a  Serpent  mo  ft
frightfully  -y  This  had  its  immediate  Effeft,  for  it
frighted  them  all,  and  he  heard  one  of  them  fay,  It
was  the  Devil ,  and  that  he  was  come  for  Thomas  to
be  fure :  and  the  other  faid  fo  too,  adding  that  he
would  go  no  further  j  this  was  enough  for  George ,
for  by  this  he  knew  they  were  no  Champions  that
Thomas  had  brought  along  with  him  5  fo  removing  and
getting  to  another  Place  a  little  behind  them,  that
they  might  not  run  back  again,  there  he  chang’d
his  Note,  and  then  growl’d  like  a  great  Dog,  and
that  frighted  them  again.  Now  having  made  this
Beginning,  he  leaves  off  a  little,  and  goes  into  the
Common,  and  ftands  in  the  middle  of  the  Road
juft  where  the  Lane  open’d  into  the  Heath  j  fo  that
he  might  be  fure  to  be  feen  all  in  white,  a  little  be¬
fore  they  came  out  of  the  Lane,

B  b  ’  The


3  70


A  SYSTEM

The  Night  was  not  very  dark,  but  no  Moon¬
light  j  fome  Stars,  not  many,  were  feeni  when  co¬
ming  to  the  Lane’s  end,  they  faw  the  Speftre,  and
no  fooner  faw  it,  but  all  three  run  away  and  cry’d
out  moft  terribly.  George  had  now  his  End,  for  he
didn’t  defire  to  carry  it  on  any  farther  5  fo  he  kept
his  Poft  ’till  he  found  by  their  Noife  they  crofs’d
the  Common  farther  off  and  out  of  Sight  3  then  he
put  off  his  Habit,  and  made  the  bell  of  his  Way
to  their  Lodgings  where  when  Thomas  came,  he
found  George  very  fedately  (landing  at  the  Door
fmoaking  his  Pipe.

He  bad  Thomas  well-come  Home,  but  faid  no
more,  not  taking  the  leaft  notice  of  any  thing  3  but
found  that  Thomas  went  immediately  up  Stairs,  and
threw  himfelf  down  upon  the  Bed 3  and  the  next
Morning  Thomas  was  very  fick.

George  in  the  mean  time  went  home  to  his  Ma¬
iler,  and  gave  him  an  Account  of  the  whole  Tranf-
aftion,  who  finding  his  Engines  work  to  his  Mind,
gave  George  farther  Inftruftions  3  which  were  in  fhort,
to  haunt  the  poor  Fellow  Night  and  Day,  and  give
him  no  Quiet,  ’till  he  had  manag’d  him  up  to  a
Neceflity  of  coming  to  him  (the  Dottor)  for  Help,
which  was  not  long  firft.

I  fhould  have  obferved  that  the  Do£lor  or  Cun¬
ning  Man  finding  he  fhould  compafs  his  Ends  upon
Thomas^  fent  now  for  the  poor  Girl,  and  told  her,  that
he  had  employed  the  utmofl  of  his  Art  and  Skill
in  her  Behalf 3  And  upon  my  Word,  adds  he,  my
Child,  I  have  had  a  fatherly  Concern  for  you  3
and  I  have  engaged  fo  many  of  the  good  Spirits
of  the  fuperior  Regions  in  your  Favour,  that  they
(always  ready  to  do  A£ts  of  Beneficence  ana
Kindnefs  to  dillrefs’d  Mortals)  have  allured  me  that
Thomas  ftiall  marry  you  3  ay,  and  fihall  come  and
court  you  to  have  him  too,  as  much  as  if  he  had
not  gotten  this  unjuft  Advantage  of  you,  or  he

fliall


371


of  MAG  I  C  K.

fhall  have  no  Reft  in  this  Life,  nay  he  ftiall  have
no  Reft  in  this  Life  ’till  he  does.

The  poor  Girl  fmil’d,  and  was  mightily  pleas’d,
as  you  may  well  fuppofe,  and  puts  her  Hand  in  her
Pocket,  and  gives  the  Doftor  half  a  Guinea  for  the
good  News.  The  Dodtor  took  the  Money,  but
told  her  modeftly,  that  if  he  did  her  fuch  a  great
piece  of  Service  as  this,  fhe  muft  confider,  &?<r.
She  underftood  him,  and  told  him,  fhe  had  not  a
great  deal  of  Money,  but  yet  fhe  had  a  rich  Aunt,
and  other  good  Friends  $  and  Thomas  need  not
ha’  us’d  her  foy  for,  that  if — -and  then  fhe  cry’d
again,  fhe  would  have  fcorn’d  to  ha’  marry’d  him,

but - l  underftand  you,  Child,  fays  the  Doctor*

now  you  muft  not  only  take  him,  but  muft  be  glad
he  will  take  you?  Yes,  Sir,  fays  fhe.

Well,  fays  the  Doffor,  and  does  your  Aunt  know
this  unlucky  Story  ?

Yes  Sir,  fays  the  Girl,  and  fhe  bid  me  tell  you,
fhe  will  make  a  handfome  Prefent  to  you,  if  you
can  bring  it  about.

Well  Child,  fays  the  Do£tor,  tell  your  Aunt,

I  will  undertake  to  do  it,  if  ftie  will  be  as  good  as
her  Word.

Indeed  fhe  will.  Sir.  I  will  bring  it  you,  fays  fhe  5
and  nam’d  the  Sum,  which  was  no  lefs  than  twenty
Pounds y  and  the  Doctor,  with  an  unufual  Modefty,
not  craving  any  more,  told  her  generoufly,  that  if
he  fail’d,  he  would  have  nothing  more  than  fhe
had  given  him  already.

This  Treaty  took  up  two  or  three  Days,  and  in
the  mean  time  George  haunted  Thomas ,  upon  feve-
ral  Occafions :  Nay,  he  could  hardlv  ftir  out  of
Doors  in  the  Night,  but  he  fhow’d  himfelf,  fome~
times  all  in  White,  fometimes  all  in  Blacky  till  at
laft  Thomas  comes  to  him  one  Evening:  George ,
fays  he ,  dear  George ,  if  you  don’t  help  me,  I  know
not  what  to  do.  I  am  harrafs’d  out  of  my  Wits.
v  B  b  2,  This


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

This  Z)W/,  if  it  is  the  Devil ,  haunts  me  fo,  that  it
gives  ifte  no  Reft.  Laft  Night  it  call’d  me  again
three  times  at  my  Chamber  Window,  the  very
fame  Voice,  and  three  times  over,  juft  as  it  did  at
the  long  Wall.

N .  B.  George  had  cunningly  got  a  Ladder  in  the
Nighty  and  fet  it  up  to  the  Fellow's  Window ,
and  went  up ,  and  call'd  him  aloud ,  with  the
fame  hollow  dead  Sound ,  as  he  did  before ,

Well,  fays  George ,  I  am  forry  for  it,  Thomas-,  I
would  have  you  fend  for  a  Minifter,  and  prepare  for
another  World,  for  I  doubt  you  are  not  very  long
for  this  World.

But  did  not  you  tell  me^fays  Thomas,  your  Mafter
could  do  fomething  for  me  ?

Yes  indeed,  fays  George ,  I  did  fo*  and  I  believe
he  could,  if  you  han’t  let  it  run  too  far,  and  if  you
han’t  done  fome  fad  thing,  Thomas:  For  the  Spi¬
rits  of  the  invifible  World,  which  my  Mafter
knows  and  converfes  with,  are  all  good  Spirits,

! Thomas ,  and  they  will  do  no  nothing  for  you,  adds
he,  if  you  have  committed  Murder  or  Robbery,
or  any  fuch  thing*  and  therefore  if  that  be  your
Cafe,  do  not  let  me  carry  you  to  my  Mafter,  for
he  can  do  you  no  good.

Thomas  ftar’d  as  if  he  had  been  bewitch’d.  Mer¬
cy  upon  me!  what  do  you  mean,  Brother  George ,  fays
he,  I  am  as  Innocent  as  the  Child  unborn.  I  never
did  any  fuch  thing  in  my  Life.

Well,  Thomas ,  fays  George ,  if  you  fpeak  honeftly.
I’ll  let  my  Mafter  know  your  Cafe,  and  if  you  will
come  to  our  Office  to-morrrow  Morning,  you
fhall  have  his  Anfwer.

Good  George ,  fays  Thomas ,  don’t  put  it  off  till  to¬
morrow*  what  fhall  I  do?  Why  George ,  the  Devil
will  murder  me  to-night.

What  would  you  have  me  do?  fays  George .  I’ll
go  immediately,  if  you  will,  but  I  doubt  he  is  not
at  home.  i  How-


of  MAGIC  K.

However,  'Thomas  prefling  him,  away  they  go  to
the  Dodtor  together;  which  was  indeed  what  George
wanted.  When  they  came  to  him,  George  intro¬
duces  the  young  Man;  and,  in  a  word,  tells  him
the  whole  Story  at  Large,  and  implores  his  high
fuperior  Afliftanceto  the  poor  diftrefs’d  young  Man,
who  was  daily  terrify’dand  harrafs’d,  to  the  danger  of
his  Wits.

But,  fays  the  Dodtor,  (juft  as  George  had  been
taught  to  do  before)  I  fear  this  Man  has  commit¬
ted  fome  flagrant  Crime,  and  fo  the  evil  Sprits
have  a  right  to  purfue  him.  Hark  thee  Friend,
come  hither  to  me,  let  me  fee  thy  Hand  ;  haft  thou
not  committed  Murder,  or  Treafon?  No  indeed,
Sir,  fays  Thomas ,  never  in  my  Life.

Well,  pull  of  thy  Glove,  fays  the  Dodtor.

Here,  Sir,  fays  Thomas ,  you  may  fee  I  an’t  burnt
in  the  Hand.

Pr’ythee,  young  Man,  fays  the  Dodtor,  I  don’t
look  for  that;  fo  he  examines  his  Palm.  Well,  fays
the  Dodtor,  all’s  well  here .  Nor  you  have  com¬
mitted  no  Robbery  or  Felony  ?  don’t  come  to  me
if  you  are  Guilty  of  any  fuch  Crimes  as  you  ought
to  be  hang’d  for.

No,  indeed,  I  han’t,  and’t  pleafe  you,  fays
Thomas .

Then  the  Dodtor  feels  his  PuHe,  and  looks  him
full  in  the  Face :  Here  is  fome  Diforder,  fome  Guilt
here.  Look  ye  young  Man,  aflure  your  felf,  if  you
have  ftole  any  Thing,  or  committed  any  Crime,
the  good  Spirits,  Inhabitants  of  the  invifible  World,
whofe  fublime  Influences  I  fliall  apply  to  them  for
in  your  Behalf,  and  to  deliver  you  from  the  Power
of  the  evil  Spirits  which  haunt  you  thus,  will  do
nothing  for  you,  if  you  are  a  Criminal ;  and  more
than  that,  they  will  certainly  inform  me  of  it,  as
foon  as  I  make  my  Application  for  your  Relief,  and
tell  it  me  as  the  Reafon  why  they  can  do  nothing

B  b  1  for


374


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

\

for  you  s  fo  you  had  better  let  me  know  it  before¬
hand.

Indeed,  Sir,  and  pleafe  you,  fays  Thomas^  I  have
never  done  any  fuch  thing  in  my  Life.

Halt  thou  ever  done  any  Injury,  fays  the  Doctor ,
to  any,  for  which  thou  can’ll:  be  thus  plagu’d?

No  indeed,  Sir,  not  I,  fays  Thomas.

Well,  Friend,  fays  the  Dottor ,  I  enquire  for  your
Service  only*  for  I  don’t  care  what  you  have
done,  nor  do  I  care  to  know  it.  But  let  me  ask
you  one  Queftion  more,  and  then  I  fhali  be  able  to
fpeak  for  you  in  general,  as  a  very  innocent,  honeft
Perfon.  Are  you  willing  to  make  Satisfa&ion,  or
Reparation,  to  any  Body,  or  to  every  Body  that  you
have  done  any  Injury  to?

Yes,  Sir,  with  all  my  Heart,  fays  Thomas  5  and
Sir,  adds  he,  I  have  never  done  any  Hurt  in  all  nay
Life.

All  this  while  the  Do&or  holds  him  by  the  Hand,
and  every  now  and  then  feels  his  Pulfe.  Look  you.
Friend,  fays  he,  here  is  fome  little  Diforder  here  in
your  Blood,  your  Confcience  flutters,  and  is  a  lit¬
tle  difturb’d.  Come,  don’t  fend  me  of  a  Fool’s  Er¬
rand,  for  if  thou  doeft,  I  cannot  only  do  thee  no
good,  but  thefe  evil  Spirits  will  tear  thee  to  Pieces,
when  they  know,  as  they  will  do,  that  I  have
fpoke  for  thee.  Come,  I’ll  ask  thee  but  one  Que¬
ftion  more:  Has  there  been  no  Love-Bufinefs  be¬
tween  any  young  Girl  and  you,  and  flie  has  broke
her  Hearr,  and  is  dead  for  you,  and  now  pays  you
home  for  it,  and  plagues  you?  for  it  feems  you  fay
the  Apparition  had  a  Woman’s  Head-drefs  on.

No,  indeed,  Sir,  fays  Thomas ,  I  ne’er  had  any
Fancy,  but  for  one,  and  Ihe  is  alive  5 1  am  fare  I  faw
her  feveral  times  fince  this  happen’d.

Now  the  Dodlor  had  him  faft.  Well,  is  there
■  any  thing  between  you,  is  flie  your  Sweet-hearc
ftill?

No,


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

No,  and’c  pleafe  you,  fays  Thomas ,  we  have
done.

Done!  fays  the  Dottor^  What  have  you  done?
you  han’t  lain  with  her,  have  you?  But  however*
come,  Thomas ,  fays  the  Dottor^  \  muft  own  that  is
not  a  fair  Queftion,  fo  I  don’t  prefs  you  to  anfwer
me.  I  hope  you  have  done  the  Girl  no  Wrong,
if  you  have,  you  fay  you  will  make  Reparation.
Come,  fit  down  there,  till  I  go  into  my  Study,  and
if  you  have  been  Honeft,  I  fhall  ferve  you,  I  don’t
doubt  5  but  if  you  han’t,  I  fhall  come  back,  and
tell  you  all  you  have  conceal’d,  without  giving  my
felf  the  Trouble  of  asking  you.

Here  Thomas  began  to  flare,  and  look  frighted.
Why,  Sir,  and’t  pleafe  you,  fays  he ,  muft  I  con-
fefs  every  thing  ?

No,  no,  Thomas ,  fays  the  Doffor^  I  don’t  ask
you  to  confefs  any  thing*  I’ll  come  back  prefently,
and  tell  you,  as  well  as  if  you  told  me  your  felf.

Ay,  but  then,  Sir,  fays  Thomas ,  you  fay,  if  I
don’t  tell  you  every  thing  firft,  then  I  fhall  get  no
Help  afterwards  ?

That’s  very  true,  Thomas ,  fays  the  Dotlor  gravely^

I  do  fay  fo*  and  therefore,  if  you  have  any  thing
to  tell  me  before  I  go, let  me  know  it*  but  I  don’t
oblige  you  to  tell,  you  may  do  as  you  will*  if  you
have  any  thing  to  fay,  tell  me  *  if  not,  tell  me.

Why,  nothing,  Sir,  but  about  the  Girl,  a  little.

Why,  there  now ,  I  thought  fo,  when  I  felt  your
Pulfe :  didn’t  I  almoft  tell  you  fo  ?  fays  the  Dodtor.

I  warrant  you,  ye  have  lain  with  the  poor  Girl
now,  and  it  may  be  got  her  with  Child:  is  that  it?

I’m  afraid  fo,  indeed,  Sir,  fays  Thomas >  but  it
was  but  twice.

Well,  fays  the  Dottor?  you  drew  her  in,  I  dare  •
fay,  by  promifing  to  marry  her,  didn’t  you?

I  think  you  know  every  thing,  fays  Thomas  *  in¬
deed,  ’tis  fo,  Sir.

B  b  4  And


37J


%7&


A  SYSTEM

And  then,  fays  the  Dottor^  when  you  found  the
poor  Girl  was  with  Child,  you  difappointed  her,  I
fuppofe?

Yes*  Sir,  fays  Thomas 5  there’s  no  hiding  any
thing  from  you,  I  think.

Well,  Thomas.)  fays  the  Doffor ,  but  what  fhall  I
do  for  you  now?  for  unlefs  you  make  this  poor
Girl  fame  Satisfaflrion,  there’s  no  faving  you.
Where  is  fhe?  you  fay  fhe’s  alive,  it  feems.

Yes,  mcTt  pleafe  you ,  fhe’s  alive,  fays  Thomas ,  fhe
don’t  live  far  off.

Well,  what  muft  be  done,  Thomas?  fays  the  Do¬
ctor .  What,  would  you  marry  her?  will  that  give
her  Satisfaftion,  Thomas  ?

Yes,  and' t  pleafe  you ,  I’ll  marry  her*  and  I’ll  fend
for  her  juft  now,  fays  Thomas .

What,  and  marry  her  in  the  Dark?  fays  the  Do -
Uor :  that  won’t  do,  Thomas.

Why,  Sir,  fays  Thomas ,  I’ll  marry  her  over  a-
gain,  by  Day-light .

No,  no,  Thomas ,  fays  the  DoPtor^  we  won’t  break
through  the  Laws  neither.  I’ll  tell  you  what  you
fhall  do.  Send  for  the  Girl ,  and  let  me  hear  her
Story,  and  what  fhe  demands  5  if  marrying  her  will
do,  Thomas ,  and  that  will  fatisfie  her,  you  fhall
fign  a  Bond  here  to  her,  to  marry  her  to-morrow
Morning)  and  then  to  proteft  you  from  the  Devil
that  haunted  you,  you  fhall  lie  here  with  my  other
Man  Will .  to-night,  and  I  will  anfwer  none  of  them
will  dare  to  haunt  you  in  my  Houfe.

With  all  my  Heart,  an' t  pleafe  you,  fays  Thomas ,
if  you  will  promife  me,  I  fhall  not  be  haunted  any
more  afterwards.

Why,  Thomas ,  fays  the  Doffior ,  to  fecure  you,
I’ll  caft  a  Figure  for  you  to-night,  and  I  will  know
if  thofe  Voices  and  Spe tires  were  upon  her  Account,
or  no  1  and  if  they  were,  I  will  anfwer  for  it,  you
hear  no  more  of  them  after  you  have  marry’d

her)


377


of  MAGI  C  K.

her  5  and  if  they  were  not,  you  {han’t  be  oblig’d  to
take  her  5  that’s  a  fair  Propofal,  Thomas .

Nay9  Maftery  an’t  pleafe  you,  fays  Thomas ,  I
think  I  (hould  take  her,  that’s  the  Truth  on’tj  and
I’ll  e’en  have  her,  I  think ,  whether  I  am  deliver’d  or
no,  fince  you  fay  ’tis  juft,  and  I  fliould  do  it.  And,
hefides  Mafter ,  fays  Thomas ,  ftie  is  a  good  honeft
Girl,  and  loves  me  too  mainly,  and  {he’ll  be  a
good  Wife:  I’ll  e’en  take  her,  Mafter,  for  better
for  worfe.

Now  you  fpeak  honeftly,  fays  the  Doffor.  Now
I  like  you,  Thomas .  I  warrant  you  the  Devil  will
haunt  you  no  more,  if  you  take  her  $  but  you  have
been  but  a  kind  of  a  Rogue  to  her  before,  I  under-
ftand.

Upon  the  whole,  the  Doftor  heartens  him
on,  the  young  Fellow  is  eafy,  and  the  young
Woman  is  fent  for  $  and  in  the  Morning  they  were
marry ’d,  and  had  a  great  Wedding- Dinner  near  the
Do&or’s  Houfe  >  fo  that  all  was  done  to  the  Girl’s
Mind,  and  the  Conjurer’s  too.  For  the  Do6tor
had  two  Gunieas  of  Thomas ,  for  delivering  him
from  the  Devif  (Who  could  do  it  cheaper!)  and
twenty  of  the  good  Wife’s  Friends,  and  the  Lady
that  gave  the  Money  thought  it  very  well  be¬
lt  ow’d.

This  Management  of  the  Magician ,  ferves  to  let
you  fee,  with  what  Art  and  Dexterity  thefe  Men
play  the  Do£tor  with  our  ignorant  People  *  and
well  they  deferve  the  Name  of  Cunning  Men\  and
as  this  is  the  greateft  Part  of  the  Magick  they  are
Mafters  of,  fo  this  is  the  chief  'End  and  Aim  of
this  Relation,  to  let  the  Reader  into  the  Cheat  of
it.  Here  were  two  Fools  manag’d  by  one  cunning
Knave  j  yet  both  of  them  are  lerv’d.  The  Know¬
ledge  of  their  Story,  and  the  way  to  do  them  both
Juftice,  is  pick’d  out  of  their  own  Mouths  j  yet
{hey  are  brought  to  do  one  another  Juftice,  and

believe


A  SYSTEM

believe  *tis  all  done  by  the  Magick  of  the  Cunning
Man*  he  gets  their  Money,  and  they  come
both  off  thankful  into  the  Bargain.  And  here’s
not  an  Ounce  of  Magick  in  it  all  \  here’s  no  deal¬
ing  with  the  Devil  in  all  this.  ’Tis  nothing  but  a
Bite ,  a  kind  of  a  Juggle  5  a  Devil  and  no  Devil ,  a
Doftor  no  Conjurer,  a  Vifion  without  a  Spirit,  a
Dance  without  a  Fiddle  j  and  in  a  word,  here  was
Craft,  but  no  Knavery  neither:  For  what  he  did,
ended  in  doing  a  poor  injur’d  Wench  Juftice,  and
bringing  a  young  impudent  Fellow  upon  his  Knees,
making  him  take  the  Woman,  not  indeed  for  the
Fear  of  God,  but  for  Fear  of  the  Devil .

This  Account  of  the  Doctor,  or  Cunning  Man,
may  Hand  upon  Record,  as  a  Specimen  of  the  Ma¬
gick  which  we  have  now  generally  pra&is’d  among
us  j  or  if  you  pleafe  to  take  it  as  a  Specimen  of
what  is  at  prefent  put  upon  the  World  for  Magick.
For  as  to  the  Real  Black  Art,  or  Dealing  with  the
Devil  by  way  of  Compa£t,  Intercourfe,  Witchcraft,
and  fuch  like,  we  find  fo  little  of  it  left,  that  we
have  fome  reafon  to  fay  ’tis  quite  out  of  Ufe,  and
we  have  heard  very  little  of  it  in  this  Part  of  the
World  for  many  Years.

Not  that  we  are  much  better  than  our  Anceftors,
nor  have  we  feen  any  thing  in  the  Manners  of  the
People  lefs  addifted  to  Sorcery  than  formerly  j  but
Cuitom  has  made  Men  turn  Magicians  to  them-
felves,  we  feem  to  carry  on  our  Correfpondencc
with  Hell  fingle  handed,  and  by  a  kind  of  immedi¬
ate  Intercourfe  fo  that  we  want  no  more  the  Help  of
the  Magician ,  whatever  we  do  of  the  Magick.  And
here  I  think  the  Magick  it  felf  being  as  it  were
brought  to  a  Conclufion,  the  Hi  (lory  of  it  is  juftly
at  a  Conclufion  alfo.  The  Arts  of  Hell  are
now  no  more  carry’d  on  by  particular  Inflruments,

■  and  by  way  of  Profeffionj  the  Black  Art  is  at  End*
the  Devil  having  no  more  need  of  the  Magicians ,


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

has  drop’d  them,  and  manages  his  Affairs  himfelfj
and  the  Magicians  having  no  other  Accefs  to  the
Devil ,  than  what  is  Imaginary,  and  carry’d  on  by
meer  Legerdemain,  whatever  it  was  formerly,  their
Number  is  decreas’d,  and  in  a  manner  worn  off  by
Time  j  fo  that  you  have  now  nothing  left  but  a
few  Jugglers,  Cunning  Men,  Gypfies  and  For  tun-
tellers.  In  fliort  the  Trade  is  decay’d,  and  we  may
fuppofethe  Managers  of  the  Black  Negotiation  have
turn’d  their  Hands  to  other  Employments.


CHAP,  VI.

-  4  '  .  A

Of  raifing  the  Devil  by  Magical  Operations  %
whether  the  Magicians  really  have  fuch  a
*Power  or  no ,  and  if  they  have ,  whether  it
is  perform’d  as  an  Art ,  and  by  the  Confe -
quence  of  Magical  Experiments ,  or  whether
it  is  by  Concert  and  mutual  Confent ,  be¬
tween  Satan  and  the  Magicians.

RAifing  the  Devil  has  been  thought  by  fome
to  be  a  Branch  of  Witchcraft  rather  than  Ma-
gick  -y  and  then  it  fhould  not  be  mention’d  in  this
Place 5  but  the  Point  is  not  fully  decided.  It  feems
both  the  Worthy  Profeffions  have  pretended  to  it,
and  perhaps  both  have  attain’d  to  praCtife  it,  and
fo  it  may  be  reckon’d  among  the  Occult  Sciences ,  in
common  to  the  Practitioners  of  both  Kinds,  and
then  may  be  properly  treated  of  in  which  part  of
our  Undertaking  we  pleafe.

It  is  a  kind  of  a  vulgar  Expreffion,  and  has  not
much  Propriety  in  it,  I  mean  that  of  raifing  the  Devil  *
for  the  Devil  is  not  rais’d,  he  is  rather  brought
down.  As  his  Abode  is  exprefly  faid  to  be  in  the

upper


0


A  SYSTEM

upper  Regions,  and  his  Principality  is  in  the  Air,
he  is  not  fetch’d  out  of  the  Earth  j  and  as  fome
have  thought  with  the  {lamp  of  a  Foot,  as  if  he
lodg’d  under  us,  and  we  knock’d  for  4him,  as  the
lick  Body  knocks  upon  the  Floor  for  the  Nurfc  to
come  up  Stairs,  and  fpeak  to  him.

Satan  certainly  is  not  far  out  of  Call,  tho’  ’tis  ftill
fometing  doubtful  in  what  particular  Element  he
inhabits.

1.  Not  in  the  Earthy  (fay  I)  becaufe  then  he
would  be  impower’d  to  (hake  the  World  with
Earthquakes,  overturn  Cities  and  Towns,  and  give
Mankind  perpetual  Difturbances,  and  perhaps  would
be  oblig’d  to  do  fo  as  often  as  he  mov’d  from  Place
to  Place.  Nay,  it  would  feem  necefiary  that  the  Earth,
not  with  Handing  his  fpirituous  Nature,  mu  ft  fuffer
fome  Convulfions,  Diflocations,  and  Openings,  or
fome  or  other  Diftortions,  every  time  an  old  Woman
had  Occaflon  to  fpeak  with  him.

2.  Not  in  the  Sea:  this  is  apparent  by  the  Devils
of  Gadarene ,  who  befought  Chrift  not  to  fend  them
away  into  the  Deep .  It  feems  they  have  an  Averfion
to  the  Water,  and  that  therefore  Inftin£t  led  the  Herd
of  Swine  to  run  into  the  Sea,  to  deliver  themfelves
from  the  Devil ,  fuppofing  he  would  leave  them
when  they  came  there.  But  the  Hogs  it  feems
were  not  fagacious  enough  to  find  their  Way  out
again,  or  to  confider  that  before  they  went  in.
Luke  viii.  31,  3  J,

3.  Notin  the  Fire 5  Becaufe  that  Element  is  ap*
propriated  for  their  final  State,  is  to  be  their  Pri-
fon,  and  the  Place  of  their  Punifhment*  and  as
they  have  at  prefent  an  Interval  for  Aftion,  fo  they
mu ift  have  a  Medium  of  Space  for  their  Refidence
during  the  time  of  Aftion.

4.  It  muft  then  be  in  the  Air^  or  airy  Regions  ;
and  as  we  have  reafon  to  believe  that  they  are  not
confin’d  to  the  Atmofphere  of  this  Globe  the

Earth,


cf  MAGIC  K

Earthy  which  compar’d  to  them,  their  Numbers,
and  the  Extent  of  their  Operations,  would  be  by
much  too  narrow  a  Place  for  them,  too  much  pre-
fcrib’d  and  limited,  and  give  them  no  room  for
A£lion  in  proportion  to  themfelvesj  fo  !  am  wil¬
ling  to  allow  Satan  to  be  in  Capacity,  (at  leaftable)
to  vifit  all  the  Atmofpheres  and  Spaces  in  the  im-
menfe  Waite,  whether  of  habited,  habitable,  or
uninhabited  Bodies  >  and  whether  in  thofe  we  call
Planets,  or  fuch  Bodies  as  we  have  no  Name  for,
becaufe  no  Knowledge  of.

Thus  the  Devil  cannot  complain  that  I  have  not
given  him  room  enough,  fince  I  have  deny’d  his
Locality  to  no  Place  but  Heaven ,  where  he  cannot
come,  and  perhaps  does  not  now  defire  it,  and
the  other  grofs  Elements  which  could  not  contain
him.

The  Devil  being  Refident,  chiefly  at  leaft,
in  that  invifible  World,  the  Air,  and  which  we
particularly  call  the  World  of  Spirits,  our  bringing
him  out  into  Company  is  very  unworthily  call’d
railing  the  Devil  $  for  how  can  that  be  rais’d  up,
which  is  already  not  below  ?

However,  if  we  will  talk  intelligibly,  we  muff:
call  things  as  other  People  call  them,  and  fpeak  of
them  as  other  People  underftand  them,  that  they
may  know  what  we  talk  of,  and  know  how  to
think  upon  what  we  fpeak  to  them  about.  Having
therefore  no  other  way  of  exprefling  it,  you  mull
be  content  to  hear  me  fpeak  of  railing  the  Devil9
tho’  at  the  fame  time  I  tell  you  ’tis  Nonfenfe  in  the
very  Terms,  and  contrary  to  Nature.

But  to  hold  you  no  longer  upon  fettling  Preli¬
minaries,  the  Point  in  hand  is,  Can  the  Magicians
who  we  are  now  fpeakingof,  raife  the  Devil ,  or  can
they  not  ?  Can  the  Magick  Art  perform  this
high  Operation,  is  it  in  the  reach  of  the  Profefllon,
and  is  Satan  fubje&ed  to  it?  is  he  obliged  to  come


3b*


AST  ST  E  M

when  he  is  call’d,  when  fuch  and  fuch  Words  of
Command  are  given  our,  fuch  and  fuch  Methods
us’d,  fuch  and  fuch  Words  repeated?  is  he  rous’d,
as  the  Keeper  rouzes  the  Lions  in  the  Tower,  di-
llurb’d  from  his  Abode,  and  oblig’d  to  come  away?
or  as  the  Huntfman  unharbours  a  Deer,  by  his  Horn
and  his  Hallow  ?

If  the  Devil  is  under  this  Neceffity,  and  is  thus
at  the  Summons  of  every  Glafs  Trumpet,  as  we
may  call  it,  that  every  Scoundrel  rafcally  Figure-cafter
and  Circle -maker  can  fetch  him  up,  when  they  think
fits  I  muft  fay,  1  think  Satan  is  no  free  Agent  %
He  is  very  far  from  being  a  Prince,  and  a  Prince
of  the  Power  of  the  Air.  Nay,  there  are  fo  many
rational  Obje<5tion$  againft  it,  fo  many  Difficulties,
Abfurdities,  and  even  Impoffibiliues  in  it,  that  I
think  there  is  hardly  room  for  any  farther  Difpute
about  it*  the  thing  has  nothing  in  it  rational,  or
agreeing  to  common  Senfe.

But  how  is  it  done  then  ?  for  that  it  is  fo,  and
that  the  Devil  does  appear,  when  they  call,  does
come,  when  he  is  fent  for,  and  that  by  the  mean  eft
of  thofe  Creatures  who  have  thofe  Dealings  with
him,  is  not  to  be  deny’dj  nor  never  has  been  deni¬
able  fince  the  Witch  of  Endor' s  Days,  nor  will  it
want  Confirmation  on  many  Occafions  fince  that :
Did  not  fhe  put  it  to  Saul,  who  he  would  have  her
bring  up?  intimating  that  fhe  could  bring  up  whom
file  pleas’d,  even  the  Devil  himfelf,  if  he  wanted
him.

It  muft  be  then  by  Concert  and  Agreement  j  for
if  the  Devil  can’t  be  forc’d  out  of  his  Den,  if  he  is
not  conjur’d  up,  as  we  call  it  3  he  muft  be  invited
in  a  friendly  manner,  and  prevail’d  upon  by  En¬
treaties,  or  expe&ed  by  Agreement  5  and  in  both
thefe  Cafes  ’tis  much  more  ageeeable  to  our  Under-
ftanding,  and  we  can  conceive  of  things  with  much
more  Propriety.

Either


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

Either  he  is  invited  by  Entreaties  and  Petitions*
importun’d  and  earneftly  defir’d  to  come  5  and  this  is
a  kind  of  Peculiar  }  for  that  it  is  a  Reality  we  have
no  room  to  doubt.  I  fay,  ’tis  peculiar  to  thofe
Countries  where  the  Devil  is  worihip’d  as  a  God*
where  they  bow  the  Knee,  and,  as  the  Indians  call
it,  fay  O  to  him  as  a  fupreme  Power.  That  he
willingly  obferves  thefe  Summons,  and  comes  when
they  delire  him,  is  eafy  to  fuppofe>  as  he  is  a  poli¬
tick  Devil ,  and  willing  to  preferve  his  Pofleffion  a-
mong  them,  willing  to  be  worfhip’d  and  ador’d,  as
he  mod  obfequioufly  is  upon  thofe  Occafions,  and
which, he  in  a  manner  triumphs  over  his  Maker  by,
as  if  he  had  gain’d  a  Victory,  had  conquer’d
thofe  Parts  of  his  Dominions,  and  taken  them  from
him  by  Force.

Or  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  oblig’d  by  Contraft,
between  himfelf  and  thofe  Infernal  Merchants  that
trade  with  him.  I  fay,  he  is  oblig’d  to  come  when
they  have  Occafion  for  him  5  and  in  this  cafe  he
mu  it  perform  his  Pro  mile,  or  elfe  he  would  not
maintain  his  Credit,  and  would  not  be  trufted  again.
Thus,  in  one,  he  is  bound  to  come  as  he  is  a  cun¬
ning  Devil ,  and  knows  his  Incereftj  and  in  the  o-
ther  Cafe,  as  he  is  an  honeft  Devil ,  and  keeps  his
Word*  tho’  the  laft  is  fubjeft  to  many  Breaches
andFalfifications,  and  he  is  not  always  as  good  as  his
Word  neither.

All  the  Difficulty  that  lies  before  us  here,  is,  how
he  makes  his  Bargains.  Witches  and  Wizards,  they
tell  us,  fign  Contrafts,  let  him  prick  their  Hands,
and  fign  with  their  Blood  3  Hellifh  Doings!  but
I  do  not  tell  you  I  give  any  Credit  to  them.  But  the
Magicians ,  who,  it  is  fuppos’d,  are  Perfons  of  a  fu-
periour  Dignity,  feem  to  aft  upon  a  better  foot,
and  by  the  Help  of  whar  they  call  Art}  have  to  do
with  him  in  a  fuperior  Way}  what  that  Way  is,
and  what  Art  it  is  to  be  call’d,  that  brings  the

Affairs


383


j84


A  SYSTEM

Affairs  of  Hell  into  fuch  a  Management,  is  the
great  Queftion  before  me.

It  is  true,  the  Magicians  deny  it,  and  Dr-
Boreman  would  have  told  you  he  fcorn’d  your
Words*  he  raifed  no  Devil ,  he  had  to  do  with  no
evil  Spirits,  he  dealt  with  no  fuch  Cattle*  but  on
the  contrary,  that  he  laid  the  Devil  when  other
People  raifed  him  *  that  he  cured  Houfes  that  were
haunted,  and  turned  the  Devil  out  of  Doors  when
he  was  got  in*  all  which  I  believe  as  ftedfaftly  as
I  do  that  St=  Dunftan  took  him  by  the  Nofe  with
a  pair  of  red  hot  Tongs*  or  that  St.  Francis  would
have  nothing  to  do  with  him,  when  he  appeared
to  him  in  the  Shape  of  a  Bag  of  Money*  or  that
St  .Ignatius  refilled  him,  when  he  tempted  him  in
the  Shape  of  a  naked  beautiful  Lady.

Where,  by  the  way,  if  the  Legend  Makers  of  the
Romijh  Church  could  prove  thofe  two  Paffages
to  be  true  in  Fa£t,  fo  that  we  could  no  more  doubt
them,  we  ftiould  have  much  more  Reafon  to  take
thofe  two  Perfons  for  Saints  than  ever  I  thought
we  had.  It  muft  be  confefs'd,  the  thing  would
be  rare  in  itfelf,  to  fee  a  Prieft  kick  a  Purfe  of  Gold
out  of  his  Way  upon  the  Road,  and  not  think  it
worth  his  while  to  take  it  up:  So,  to  fee  a  young
Lady,  beautiful  and  charming,  offer  herfelf  to  a  Prieft,
and  he  turn  from  her,  as  J ofe-ph  from  his  Miftrefs,
look’d  a  little  more  Saint-like  than  I  muft  own  I
fhould  expeft  from  any  of  the  Tribe,  efpecially  on
the  Roman  Sjde  of  the  Queftion.  I  hope  our  own
Church  has  abundance  of  fuch  Saints  among  the
Clergy,  tho’  I  may  not  have  the  Honour  to  be
acquainted  with  many  of  them.

But  thefe  Men  of  Art  can  raife  him  *  that  feems
to  be  a  Truth  too  folid  to  be  deny’d*  and  I  muft
not  hazard  my  Reputation  fo  much  as  to  oppofe
all  the  old  Women  that  have  feen  him,  or  dream’d
they  faw  him :  So  that  I  muft  take  it  for  granted,

that


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

**«

that  they  can  raife  him  }  tho’  I  believe  it  no  more
than  I  do  that  Dr.  Boreman  could  lay  him  when
other  People  had  raifed  him,  which  I  take  to  be
whimfical  and  ridiculous.

But  fuppofing  then,  for  Difcourfe  fake,  that  they
can  raife  him,  as  they  call  it*  What  is  it,  and  how
is  it  done  ?

As  to  what  it  is,  I  take  it  to  be  no  more  than
this  3  that  the  Devil  is  pleafed,  at  their  Defire  figni-
fy'd  to  him  in  fuch  manner  as  to  the  Magician  in  his
great  Wifdom  feems  meet ,  to  afliime  a  Visibility,  and
put  on  fuch  a  Shape  or  Perfon  as  he  and  the  Ma¬
gician  agrees  upon  for  the  prefent  Purpofe.  This
being  granted,  two  Things  necefiarily  follow:

1.  That  the  Devil  and  the  Magician  really  cor-
refpond.

2.  That  the  Devil  was  prefent  before,  only  not
vifibly.

Firjl ,  That  the  Devil  and  the  Magician  corre-
fpondrBy  Correfponding  mu  ft  I  think  be  under-
llood  that  the  Magician  knows  where  Satan  is>
that  Meafures  are  concerted  between  them,  how
to  converfej  as  was  the  cafe  between  him  and  Al-
hrahazen ,  of  whom  already}  and  that  by  thefe  con¬
certed  Meafures,  he  can  ask  the  Favour  of  Satan
as  often  as  he  pleafes,  to  make  himfelf  vifible
for  fuch  or  fuch  an  Occafion,  as  at  that  time  pre¬
fent  s.

2.  By  this  it  fhould  feem,  according  to  the  Opinion
of  Some  learned  in  this  Wifdom,  that  thole  Magi¬
cians  that  are  eminent  in  their  Practice,  have  fome
Devil  or  other  always  with  them,  vifible  to  them-
felves,  tho1  invifible  to  others}  and  that  they  both  fee
and  converfe  with  them  continually.  This  is  very
rational  to  believe,  and  is  what  I  take  to  be  that
which  the  Scripture  means  by  having  a  Familiar
Spirit}  and  that  Menajfeh  had  fuch,  the  Text  is  po-

C  c  fitive


iZ6


A  S  r  S  T  E  M

fitive  in.  Now  that  thefe  Men  or  Women,  whe¬
ther  Magicians  or  what  you  pleafe  to  call  them?
can  defire  the  Favour  of  their  Familiar  or  Seconda¬
ry  Devil ,  to  aflume  a  Shape  and  put  on  Vifibility,
I  make  no  quellion  of*  it  feems  to  be  no  great
matter,  and  to  have  no  great  Difficulty  in  it.  On
the  other  hand,  thefe  feem  to  be  the  only  People
that  can  raife  the  Devil  $  for  how  fhould  any  body
elfe  do  it  upon  fuch  common  and  ordinary  Occa-
fions,  if  he  was  not  at  their  Elbow  ?  how  could
they  call  him  with  muttering  over  a  little  Gib-
berifh,  and  talking  it  in  Whifper  too  ?  The  Devil  is
not  Omnifcient*  he  cannot,  at  the  Diftance  of  his
airy  Dwelling,  know  the  Thoughts  of  the  Agent,
or  fee  the  Circles  and  Figures  he  draws*  he  mull
therefore  be  invifibly  prefent  with  him,  can  fee  his
Circles,  Crofles  and  Figures,  and  all  his  Motion?,  whe¬
ther  publick  or  private  $  and  I  infill  upon  it,  that
none  can  raife  the  Devil  in  this  manner  but  fuch
Men  as  thofe,  that  have  a  certain  and  conllant  In-
tercourfe  with  him.  I  do  not  fay  that  the  Ma¬
gicians  have  this  Correfpondence  with  him,  nor  do
I  fay  or  believe  that  all  of  them  can  bring  Satan  into
Apparition  when  they  pleafe  5  but  this  I  do  both  fay
and  believe,  that  thofe  that  can  or  do  thus  raife  him,
as  we  call  it ,  do  it  by  this  Means,  and  have  fuch  a
Correfpondence  and  Intimacy  with  him,  and  that  it
can  be  done  by  no  other.

All  the  Notions  which  we  can  have  of  the  Devil ,
founded  upon  the  Scripture,  or  upon  Reafon,  feem
to  jultify  this  Opinion*  for  unlefs  we  fhall  allow
him  to  be  Infinite,  Omnifcient  and  Omniprefent,  (and
that  would  be  to  make  him  a  God)  we  cannot  make  it
rational  that  he  fhould  be  commanded  into  Vifi-
bility  and  Adlion  juft  when  we  pleafe.

If  he  is  confin’d  to  Locality,  if  he  is  any-where,
and  that  Any-where  is  Some-where,  then  he  mull

have


of  M  A  G  I  C  K

have  fome  fettled  Intelligence  eftablifhed  between
him  and  Mankind  for  the  carrying  on  his  Rufinefs*
and  this  mult  be  carried  on  by  the  Agency  of  fome
Spirits,  it  cannot  be  by  Voice  only,  by  meer  Whi-
fper  and  Suggeftion,  if  he  be  not  prefentj  for  tho*
it  may  be  true  that  Spirits  converfe  without  the
Help  of  Voice,  yet  infernal  Spirits  cannot  aft,  as  the
Infinite  Eternal  Being  afts,  namely,  by  infinite  ex-
tenfive  Knowledge  5  they  mull  converfe  by  the  In-
ftrumentality  and  Agency  of  their  Perfons  :  it  is
true  it  may  be  imperceptible  to  human  Sight,  and
it  is  fo  j  but  there  is  not  the  lefs  Reality  in  their
Agency,  for  that  there  is  not  the  lefs  Perfonality
nor  Agency  of  Perfons  or  Places  on  that  account  *
for  That  may  as  really  be  that  cannot  be  perceived
to  exift,  as  That  which  is  vifible.

Now  ftand  clear  Magick,  and  (land  clear  Magi¬
cians  5  for  if  the  Magician  can  raife  the  Devil ,  he
muft  correfpond  with  the  Devil  $  and  if  he  corre-
fponds  with  the  Devil^  he  muft  have  a  Familiar  5  or
how  does  he  do  it?  The  Devil  muft  either  be  al¬
ways  by  him,  or  have  an  Agent  Devil  in  Com-
million  always  attending  him,  and  always  ready  to  aft
as  he  lhall  direftj  a  Deputy  Devil  under  Orders,  and
inftrufted  to  aft  for  him,  and  to  perfonate  either
Devil ,  or  other  Shape,  as  Occafion  prelents,  or  as  the
Magician  pleafes  to  direft.  It  can  be  no  otherwife,
not  the  Devil  himfelf  can  aft  upon  any  other  foot.

All  we  have  to  fay  for  our  Magicians  is,  to  hope
that  what  they  have  to  fay  for  themfelves  may  have
fome  Truth  in  it  5  namely,  that  they  deal  with  Spi¬
rits,  but  that  it  is  wirh  good  Spirits,  not  with  the
Devil ,  or  with  evil  Spirits  j  and  this  we  have  only
their  own  Words  for  5  we  cannot  be  lure  it  is  fo,
nor  will  I  venture  to  fay  that  we  have  a  great
deal  of  Reafon  to  believe  them  *  at  leaft  there  may
be  room  to  doubt  the  Truth  of  it.

C  c  &


\


387


1


A  SYSTEM

I  would  rather  advance  for  them  what  I  have
much  more  Reafon  to  believe,  and  that  is,  that
they  deal  with  no  Spirits  at  all,  either  good  or
bad  5  for  if  1  fhould  once  entertain  a  Belief  that
they  really  confuited  with  any  Spirits  at  all,  I  fhould
be  afraid  they  were  Devils  >  becaufe,  as  I  have  faid
that  1  helieve  the  Devil  would  not  be  at  their  Beck
at  every  T urn,  fo  often  as  they  have  Occafion  for  him  j
fo  I  am  lefs  of  the  Opinion  that  the  good  Spirits
would  be  called  backward  and  forward  on  their
trivial  and  frivolous  Errands,  nor  is  it  rational  to
believe  they  fhould.

If  then  they  have  any  Spirits,  I  doubt  they  areZ)m/r,
not  good  Spirits  5  but  my  more  juftifiable  Opinion,
and  which  Lthink  is  really  well-grounded,  is,  that
moft,  if  not  all  of  them,  who  pretend  to  this  Gonverfe
with  Spirits,  have  no  Knowledge  of,  or  Correfpon-
dence  with,  any  Spirits  at  all  5  but  that  all  the
Cant  of  their  good  Spirits,  the  Inhabitants  of
the  invifible  World,  and  their  Intelligence  with
them  is  a  Cheat,  a  meer  Cheat  and  Delufion,  toabufe
the  ignorant  world,  impofe  upon  the  weak,  and  if
poffible  gain  themfelves  a  Chara&er  and  a  Fame  of
Knowledge  and  Wifdom,  in  order  to  pick  Pockets,
and  get  Money.

How  many  Tricks  do  they  play  with  Mankind!
how  many  Frauds  do  they  put  upon  us!  under  how
many  Sham- Appearances  do  they  juggle  with  us!
’Tis  plain,  when  any  fublime  Doftrine  comes  to  be
difcufs’d  by  them,  they  are  all  in  the  dark  5  they
neither  can  conceive  right  themfelves,  or  teach  us
how  to  make  a  right  Judgment  of  any  thing,  but
appear  to  be  empty  ignorant  Creatures  themfelves ;
who  have,  like  Jacob  Behemen ,  got  a  high  Cant  of
myftick  Language,  Words  without  Meaning,  and,
as  I  faid  before,  valued  only  for  their  being  un¬
intelligible,  and  that  entirely  fo*  and  very  parti¬
cularly


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

cularly  too,  for  that  they  are  fo  put  together,  that
not  only  no  body  that  hears  them  can  under-
ftand  them,  but  that  they  do  not  underftand  ’em
themfelves.

This  certainly  is  the  juft  Charafter  of  moft  of  the
Magicians  we  meet  with  in  our  Times }  what  may
have  been  formerly,  or  what  may  yet  be,  where  the
Devil  has  really  a  Correfpondence  with  any  of  thefe
People,  and  if  there  are  any  Albrahazens  aliye,  I  will
not  determine  $  but  then,  I  fay,  either  thefe  mult
have  a  more  than  intimate  Converfe  with  the  De¬
vil  perfonally,  as  Ali  had,  or  they  mult  do  it  by  way
of  Familiar ,  by  a  conftant  attending  Agent  5  and
then  they  are  no  more  Magicians,  but  Necroman¬
cers ,  and  downright  Dealers  with  the  Devil  \  and
this  is  not  what  we  are  talking  of,  it  not  what
they  pretend  to,  nor  is  it  really  in  them*

To  bring  it  then  down  to  the  Cafe  in  hand,  I
mean  about  railing  the  Devil >  the  prefent  Queftion
is  of  two  Parts,  Firft ,  Whether  the  Magicians  have
a.  Power  to  raife  the  Devil ,  that  is,  to  produce  an
Appearance  or  Apparition  of  the  Devil.  This,  I  fay,  I
will  not  deny  5  only  that  then  1  fay,  they  are  no  more
Magicians,  but  Witches,  Wizards,  Necromancers,
or  what  elfe  you  pleafe  to  call  thofe  People  that
have  an  immediate  Converfation  with  the  Devil.

Secondly ,  Whether,  if  they  can  do  it  at  all,  ’tis
done  as  an  Art ,  a  Syftem,  for  the  Pradlice  of  which
there  are  Rules  and  Methods,  which  being  learned
by  others,  enables  them  to  perform  the  fame  thing,
as  an  Operation,  whether  mathematical  or  other-
wife  ?  and  this  I  think  I  may  venture  to  deny  5  becaufe
I  think  it  lubjedts  Satan  to  fuch  a  Situation  of
Circumftances,  as  are  iuconliftent  with  all  the  No¬
tions  we  have  of  him  as  a  Spirit  5  as  a  powerful
unlimited  Seraph,  a  Prince  of  the  Air,  and  who
(except  where  his  Maker  has  limited  and  preferibed

C  c  3  him)


38?


39 o


A  S  T  S  T  E  M

him)  is  placed  in  a  Station  inconceivably  fuperior  to
all  human  Influence  or  Operation.

To  talk  of  fcrewing  the  Devil  up  into  an  En*
gine,  that  like  a  Jack  in  a  Box  he  may  be  brought
out  and  fliewn  for  a  Sight  to  the  People  whenever
a  Conjurer  thinks  fit,  or  to  be  fliewn  like  a  Puppet-
Show  for  Two-pence  a-piece,  I  muft  needs  fay,  this
is  really  diflionouring  the  Devil  himfelf.

What  may  be  done  by  Concert  and  Agreement
between  the  Devil  and  them,  is  one  things  but  to
talk  of  bringing  him  out  by  an  Art  or  Invention,  fo
that,  as  I  faid  before,  the  Artifts  may  call  him  in,  or  call
him  up,  when  they  pleafej  this  would  be  railing
him  indeed,  in  the  very  litteral  Senfe  of  the  Words
and  may  be,  for  ought  I  know,  what  was  the  true
Meaning  of  the  Expreflion  at  firft.  And  I  muft  ob-
ferve  here,  this  railing  the  Devil  is  an  old  way  of
fpeaking,  and  was  formerly  much  more  in  ufe  a-
mong  us  than  it  is  now*,  for  I  am  not  yet  deter¬
mined  in  the  matter  fully,  whether  it  be  a  Fa£t  or
a  meer  proverbial  Speech ;  My  Opinion  at  prefent
muft  neceflarily  be  for  the  latter  >  for  as  to  railing
him,  ’tis,  as  I  have  faid  already,  a  piece  of  Nonfenfe,
becaufe  (i)  it  intimates  that  he  is  fetch’d  up  ab  in -
feris9  from  Below  5  whereas  I  have  given  many
good  Reafons  to  move  you  to  believe  he  is  already
rather  Above  than  Below  :  and,  (2)  Becaufe  I  can
give  you  many  more  to  prove,  that  if  he  was  Be¬
low,  that  is  to  fay,  in  Hell ,  in  the  bottomlefs  Pit
it  felf,  as  we  have  too  much  fancy’d  he  is  5  all  the
old  Women  and  old  Witches,  and  all  the  Prayers
in  the  Parifli,  read  backward,  all  the  Circles  and
Figures,  all  the  Paw-waws  and  Conjurings  in  the
World,  could  never  fetch  him  out  again  \  ’till  He
comes,  who  has  the  Key  of  the  Bottomlefs  Pit ,  and
who  jhuts ,  and  no  Man  can  open.


We


3?i


of  MAGIC  K.

We  are  told  that  St.  Peter  gave  our  holy  Father
of  St.  Angelo  the  Keys  of  Heaven  •,  but  I  doubt  he
has  not  the  Keys  of  t’other  Place  too  j  if  he  has,
he  has  been  but  a  forty  Jay  lor,  for  the  Devil  has
been  abroad  thefe  four  thoufand  Years  to  our
Knowledge,  and  continues  ftill  at  large  $  not  a
Conftable  can  take  him  up,  even  a  Scape  Warrant
cannot  apprehend  him.

As  he  is  then  at  large ,  tho’  he  is  a  Prifoner  too
in  one  Senfe,  but  as  I  fay  the  Devil  is  at  large,  he
is  then  a  free  Agent  as  to  us,  he  goes  to  and  fro ,  in
or  throughout  the  Earth ,  and  walks  up  and  down
therein ,  Job.  i.  7.  He  has  free  Liberty  of  Egrefs  and
Regrefs ,  can  go  and  come,  when,  where  and  how  he
pleafes.

I  muft  plead  for  Liberty ,  you  fee,  tho’  it  be  for
the  Devil .  It  has  pleafed  his  Maker  to  give  this
roaring  Lion  Liberty  to  go  up  arid  down,  feeking,
(3 V.  and  how  came  he  to  fell  or  lofe  that  Liberty  ?
How  came  the  Magician  to  be  the  Devil's  Jaylor,
that  he  ihould  have  him  in  his  Cuftody,  to  call  him
out  when  he  thinks  fit?  If  it  is  fo,  ’tis  a  voluntary
Confinement,  and  the  Devil  finds  his  Account  in
it,  or  he  would  never  fubmit  to  it  5  fo  that  it  muft
be  by  a  Confent  of  Parties,  and  then  we  come  into'
the  Road  of  things  again  *  that  is  to  fay,  that  the
Devil  may  confent  to  appear  when  he  is  fo  and  fo,
and  for  fuch  and  fuch  Purpofes,  required  5  but  this
is  quite  another  thing  than  what  the  Magicians  are
faid  to  doj  I  muft  therefore  give  it  againft  them.
The  Devil  is  not  to  be  raifed  by  Art  5  no  Magick,
no  Conjuring,  no  Circles  or  Squares,  no  Prayers  read
backward,  no,  or  forward  either,  will  bring  him
out,  unlefs  he  pleafes,  and  finds  it  for  his  Purpofe.
If  he  comes  at  all,  he  comes  of  himfdf,  and  about
his  own  Rufinefs,  or  by  Agreement  with  his  own
Domefticks,  fuch  as  old  Mother  — < — of  Endor ,

c  c  4  or


39*


A  SYSTEM

or  Mother  Lackland  of  Ipfwich ,  or  fuch  as  he  is  in
adhial  Confederacy  with  ;  but  as  for  your  Preten¬
ders  to  Art,  that  they  can  raife  him,  and  lay  him,
fetch  him  in  or  fend  him  out,  ’tis  all  a  Cheat,  and
the  Magician  has  this  to  be  laid  in  his  Favour,  that
he  really  is  not  fo  intimate  with  the  Devil  as  he
fays  he  is.


CHAP.  VII.

Seeing,  as  the  Magicians  pretend ,  they  do  not
Deal  with  the  Devil,  or  raife  the  Devil,
Who  it  is  they  do  Deal  with ,  how  is
their  Correspondence  managed ,  and  why  do
they  ‘Deal  with  Good  'Spirits,  by  Conju -
rings  and  the  Black  Art  ?

THERE  remain  but  two  Queftions  then,
which  have  any  Difficulty  in  them,  to  fpeak
to  in  this  Affair  of  Magick  the  firft  is  the  natural
Confequence  of  what  is  (aid  before  $  If  the  Magi¬
cian  cannot  raife  the  Devil ,  who  and  what  it  is  he
does  raife?  for  we  will  have  it  that  he  has  Spirits
about  him :  If  they  are  not  evil  Spirits,  as  he  will
affert  in  his  own  Defence,  what  Spirits  are  they,  and
by  what  Power  or  Influence  does  he  maintain  fuch
a  Correfpondence  among  the  Intelligent  Beings  of
the  inviiibie  World,  as  to  procure  thole  fuperior
Angelick  Creatures  to  appear  upon  Earth,  either  at
his  Rcqueft,  or  upon  luch  Occafions  as  he  repre-
fents  to  them  ?

There  is  too  much  Difficulty,  I  had  almoft  {aid
Abfurdity,  in  this  Part,  for  us  to  come  into  it,  as
the  Magicians  pretend  to  defire  j  they  would

have


393


of  MAGIC  K.

have  us  believe  that  all  they  do  is  by  the  Aid  and
Affiftance  of  thefe  happy  Intelligent  Beings,  that
they,  upon  the  meet  Principle  of  Affection  to
Mankind,  and  meerly  from  their  Beneficent  Na¬
ture  and  Difpofition,  are  ready  at  all  times  to  af-
fift  their  faithful  Agent  or  Servant  the  Magician ,  in
doing  a£ts  of  Charity,  Kindnefs  and  Benevolence
to  their  Fellow-Creatures.

It  is  true,  the  Magician  by  this  puts  a  great
Compliment  upon  himfelf,  and  luggefts  that  he  is
himfelf  a  general  Bleffing  to  Mankind  >  and  that  as
filch  thefe  Generous  and  Beneficent  Beings  An¬
gle  out  them  (the  Magicians)  as  the  proper  Inftru-
ments  of  their Kindnels  to  their  Fellow-Creatures;
and  that  they  even  could  not  a 6t,  at  lead  not  fo
fully  and  effe&ually,  without  them.

That  therefore  it  is,  thofe  fuperior  Beings  are
pleas’d  to  converfe  with  thefe  Magicians ,  and  com¬
municate  to  them  a  fuperior  Knowledge  of  things,
making  them  ufeful  to  Mankind,  and  giving  them
a  Reputation  for  their  Wifdom,  that  fo  the  di-
ftrefied  People  may  apply  to  them  for  Affiftance,
Direction  and  Counfel.

But  then  the  fecond  Queftion  is,  Howy  do  they
converfe  with  them,  by  what  means  do  thofe  good
Spirits  come  to  know  when  the  Magician  has  any
thing  to  be  affifted  in,  and  in  what  manner  do  they
claim  or  defire  their  Affiftance?  Now  the  Diffi¬
culty  of  this  Queftion  raifes  a  Doubt  almoft  un-
anfwerable  againft  the  Truth  of  the  Magician's  An-
fwer  to  the  firft.

They  tell  us  they  converfe  with  the  good  Spi¬
rits  of  the  invifible  World:  That  they  would  have
us  take  as  a  firft  Principle,  a  Poftulatum  that  fhould
be  granted ;  tho’  ’tis  pretty  much  to  ask  too :  bus
to  oblige  them  as  far  as  with  any  colour  of  com¬
mon  Senfe  can  be  done,  let  us  fuppofe  it,  tho’  I
can  by  no  means  grant  it.  But


394


/


A  SYSTEM

But  how  then  is  it  manag'd  ?  How  is  this  Con¬
verfe  carry’d  on?  In  a  word,  how  do  they  come
together  ?  It  muft  be  either,

1 .  By  the  Magicians  applying  to  thefe  Spirits  for
Advice  when  they  want  it.

2.  Or  by  the  Spirits  officioufly  coming  to  them
upon  fuch  Occafions,  of  their  own  meer  Good-
nefs.

3.  Or  thofe  good  Spirits  muft  be  always  prefent,
and  to  beieen,  fpoken  to,  and  converfed  with,  with¬
out  calling,  or  wit  hout  ieeking  to  be  call’d.

I  muft  be  fo  plain  with  our  Magicians,  as  to  fay,  that
I  do  not  fee  how  either  of  theie  three  can  be  m^de
out  by  them  *  nor  yet  how  they  can  defend  them-
felves  from  the  Charge  of  Diabolick  Magick,  un-
lefs  they  make  out  all  the  three,  and  that  very
clearly  too.

I.  As  to  Magicians  applying  to  thefe  Spirits  for
Advice  and  Intelligence*  this  I  know  is  their  Pre¬
tence,  this  they  all  alledge*  and  when  the  poor
ignorant  People  apply  to  them,  they  make  a  great
deal  of  Ceremony  with  their  Circles  and  Figures,
with  Magical  Books,  Hebrew  or  Arabick  Chara¬
cters,  muttering  of  hard  Words,  and  other  Barba-
rifms  innumerable*  Juft,  in  a  word,  as  the  old
Necromancers  do,  when  they  confult  with  the
Devil.

Now,  is  there  any  thing  of  all  this  requifite
in  order  to  converfe  with  a  good  Spirit  ?  did  the
Prophets  of  old  ufe  any  thing  of  this  Mimickry*
when  they  went  to  enquire  of  the  Lord  ?  If  they
would  have  their  Art  be  call’d  the  Sacred  Science,
and  we  muft  believe  that  they  converfe  with  Hea¬
venly  Beings,  what  need  of  all  thefe  Amufements,
thefe  Conjurings  and  Paw-wawings?

Will  they  make  us  believe  that  the  good  Spi¬
rits  are  to  be  us’d  as  the  Wizards  and  Witches  ufe

the


/


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

the  Devil?  that  they  are  to  be  brought  down  by
Mutterings  and  Conjurings,  by  Pollutes  and  Diftoi>
tions,  or  (as  our  Dancing- Mafters  talk)  by  Gro-
tefque  Characters?  This  would  do  very  little  to
oblige  our  Reverence,  Nor  to  me,  would  it  look
like  any  thing  but  talking  to  the  Devil .

If  it  is  done  to  put  an  Amufement  upon  the
ignorant  People  that  come  to  them,  and  to  give
a  Soleminity  (as  they  call  it)  to  the  thing,  then  ’tis
evident  it  is  done  to  cheat  them.  For  what  Oc-
cafion  could  there  be  for  fuch  things,  if  they  were
really  about  to  converfe  with  the  exalted  Spirits
of  a  heavenly  Kind,  and  Inhabitants  of  the  invifible
Regions?

It  is  manifeft  they  apply  to  their  invifible  an-
gelick  Spirits,  juft  as  the  other  fort  of  People
do  to  the  Devil .  Their  Ceremonies  of  Ad-
drefs  arc  much  the  fame,  and  when  the  poor  ig¬
norant  Stranger  feems  fur  priz’d  at  it,  they  tell
him  he  Ihould  not  fear,  for  they  are  not  going
to  raife  the  Devil j  granting  clearly  that  there  was
good  reafon  to  fufpeCt  it.

If  they  are  Honeft,  why  then  will  they  not  tell
us  the  reafon  of  all  thefe  Barbarifms?  What
Caufe,  and  what  Neceffity,  when  they  are  apply¬
ing  to  Heaven,  to  a£t  juft  as  thole  do  who
apply  to  Hell  ?  Let  them  examine  Hiftory  or  An¬
tiquity,  nay  let  them  examine  Nature  5  are  the
Application  to  God  and  Idols  the  fame?  The
Devil  may  mimick  the  Methods  of  the  beft  Ser¬
vice,  and  feek  to  be  ferved  in  the  fame  manner
as  his  Maker  j  but  we  no  where  read  that  ever
the  Servants  of  God  mimick’d  the  Devils  ’till
now.

Let  them  look  at  that  eminent  Time,  when
the  Prophet  Elijah  brought  himfelf  and  the  Priefts
of  Baal  to  a  Teft  for  the  Truth  of  their  Wor-

ihip,


A  S  Y  S  T  E  M

fhip,  and  the  Reality  of  the  God  they  wor-
ftiip’d:  The  Idolatrous  Priefts  began  their  Pagan
Rites,  their  Sacrifices  were  alike  5  that  was  ap¬
pointed  by  the  Prophet,  becaufe  they  fhould  not
fay  but  their  Idol  Devil  had  equal  Honour  done
him,  as  the  true  God  had*  in  a  Proportion.
But  when  they  came  to  the  Service  of  the
Priefts,  the  Idoi-Priefts  us’d  their  Exorcifms,  their
Conjurings,  their  Ecftafies  and  their  Barbarifms,
leaping  up  upon  their  Altars,  and  dancing  to
their  God,  then  cutting  themfelves  with  Knives,
and  the  like.

But  when  the  truly  reverend  Prophet  came  to
begin  the  facred  Office,  and  the  Apparatus  of  lay¬
ing  the  Sacrifice  upon  the  Wood  was  fimply  per¬
formed  *  what  did  Elijah  ?  nothing,  but  in  a  folemn
manner,  and  in  the  Audience  of  all  the  People,
and  in  the  Vulgar  Tongue,  that  they  might  all
underftand  what  was  faid,  and  with  a  loud  Voice,
call  upon  the  True  God  to  hear  him,  and  to
glorifie  himfelf  in  the  Sight  of  the  People*  and
God  did  hear  him,  and  magnified  his  Power  ac¬
cordingly,  to  the  Conviftion  of  the  People,  even
to  the  Conviftion  of  their  Senfes.

Bring  this  down  to  our  Cafe  now.  Here  is  a
fet  of  Men  pretending  to  confult  the  good  Spi¬
rits,  Inhabitants  of  the  fuperior  Regions,  and  who
dwell  in  the  angelick  World,  where-ever  that  is.
To  thefe  they  give  all  the  adorable  Names  they
can  devife,  in  ftrange  and  Outlandifti  Terms,  and
advance  them  in  their  Notions*  that  they  may
raife  the  Regard  of  their  wondering,  but  ignorant
Admirers.

When  they  have  done  all  this,  they  apply
to  them  juft  after  the  Pattern  of  the  Wizards
and  Necromancers  in  their  enquiring  of  the  Devily
with  Mutterings  and  Whifpers,  with  hard  and

exotick


29


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

exotick  Words,  and  unintelligible  Speeches;  ns  if
the  good  Spirits  did  not  underltand  Engltjh,  as
well  as  Arabick  and  Hebrew ,  or  as  well  as  rhcir
unmeaning,  unfignifying  Devil- Language ;  a  Jargon
of  their  own  forming,  without  any  real  Ufage
among  Men,  but  fuch  as  they  pleafe  to  put  up¬
on  it.

How  can  this  be  reconcil’d  to  the  converfing
with  Good  Spirits  ?  Intelligent  and  Beneficent
Beings,  who  partake  of  the  Heavenly  Nature,
and  are  always  inclined  to  do  good  to  Mankind,
who  affift  the  Indigent  and  Diftieffied,  and  prottdb
thofe  that  are  in  Danger,  diredt  in  Difficulties,  and
are  ready  on  all  Occafions  to  do  good  Offices  and
Adis  of  Kindnefs  to  every  one  ?

How  are  they  thus  ready  and  beneficent,  if  they
are  thus  to  be  call’d  out  of  their  happy  Abodes,
like  Devils ,  with  Spells  and  Conjurations,  with
Necromancy  and  Wizardifm?  Were  they  fuch
blefled,  bountiful,  and  beneficent  Beings,  and  fo  ready
to  help  and  affift  Mankind  in  times  of  Dif¬
ficulties,  protedb  them  from  Evil,  and  from  evil
Spirits,  ’twould  be  but  reafonable  to  fuppofe  they
fhould  give  fome  Diredtions  to  Mankind,  how  to
obtain  and  procure  their  Affiftance,  when  they
want  it.

It  is  fuppofed,  if  thefe  Spirits  are  fuch  good,
fuch  beneficent,  compaffionate  Beings,  and  fo  par¬
ticularly  inclined  to  do  good  to  Mankind;  I  fay,  it
is  to  be  fuppofed  they  are  fo,  by  the  determinate
Appointment  of  their  Creator;  their  Heavenly  Fa¬
ther,  from  whofe  inherent  Goodnefs  all  good
Defires,  and  all  good  Thoughts  do  proceed,  as
well  in  Heaven  as  in  Earth,  as  well  in  Angels  and
Spirits,  as  in  humane  Creatures.  Thefe  good  Spi¬
rits  then,  if  they  were  fuch  as  is  pretended,  would
certainly  diredt  Mankind  to  obtain  their  Aid,  by

'  praying


3p8  A  SYSTEM

praying  to  the  ^Supreme  Being,  under  whofe  Com*
imnd  and  Direftion  they  immediately  are,  that
they  (the  faid  good  Spirits)  might  be  fent  to  di-
reft,  affift,  and  proteft  thofe  that  fo  defire  their
Affiftance.

It  is  a  flirewd  Sign  to  me,  that  thefe  Spirits  are
of  another  Clafs,  and  that  they  do  not  proceed
from  Him  who  is  the  Author  of  all  Good}  that  they
muft  be  apply’d  to  in  fuch  a  fcandalous  manner,
juft  as  the  Devil  is  apply’d  to }  that  they  take
the  Honour  to  themfelves  of  being  apply’d  to  di-
reftly  and  immediately,  as  God  himfelf  is,  and
without  giving  the  Honour  to  God,  the  firft
Caufe  and  Original  Author  of  all  Good  5  and  that
they  at  the  fame  time  ftoop  fo  low,  as  to  accept
of  the  like  mean  and  bafe  Methods  of  being  call’d  to
for  Help,  which  are  ufed  when  we  want  to  raife
the  Devil.

What  do  the  Magicians  mean  by  this  uncouth
Jargon,  /’//  go  and  confult  with  the  good  Spirits
which  I  converfe  with)  and  I'll  bring  you  an  An -
fwer  ?  Where  are  thefe  good  Spirits,  and  how  do
they  converfe  with  them?  If  they  would  fay,  I
will  pray  to  God  that  he  may  fend  his  Angels,
or  fome  of  his  Angels,  or  good  Spirits,  to  advife
and  affift  you 3  this  had  fome  Senfe  in  it}  fome-
thing  like  the  ufuai  Method :  then  when  we  came
to  the  Magician  or  Cunning  Man,  our  Language
would  be,  we  pray  you  Enquire  of  the  Lord  for  us  }
and  thus  it  was  when  God  had  his  good  Prophets,
and  his  good  Spirits  to  aft  between  his  People
and  him,  as  much  as  can  be  fuppos’d  now.

But  now  the  Magician ,  inftead  of  faying  I  will
enquire  of  the  Lord  for  you,  fays  I  will  con¬
fult  with  the  good  Spirits  of  the  invifible  World,
who  I  have  the  Honour  to  converfe  with,  and
I  will  tell  you  what  they  fay  in  your  Cafe.  Here’s

not


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

not  a  Word  of  God,  or  of  what  he  pleafes  to  do,
or  not  to  do,  to  direft  or  not  to  diredj  but
thefe  good  Spirts  are  to  teach  and  diredfc*  as  if
he  that  made  thefe  good  Spirits  was  out  of
the  Queftion,  and  had  nothing  to  do,  either  with
them  or  us.

Thefe  things,  I  fay,  render  it  very  fufpicious
that  there  are  no  fuch  things  as  good  Spirts  in  the
Cafe,  efpecially  when  they  are  join’d  with  the
fcandalous  manner  of  their  being  apply’d  to  5  and
if  there  are  no  good  Spirits,  and  they  dif-
own  all  Converfation  with  bad  Spirits,  it  may
be  faid  without  Offence,  (tho’  in  the  vulgar  way)
not,  What  the  Devil  are  they  doing?  but,  What
Devils  are  they  doing  with  ?

2.  But  here  is  a  fecond  Suggeftion  to  help
them  out,  and  this  is,  that  they  do  not  go  to
converfe  with  thefe  good  Spirits,  by  a  fpecial  In¬
fluence,  calling  them  to  their  Affiftancej  but  the
good  Spirits  (thereby  fliowing  themfelves  to  be
good  and  beneficent,  as  has  been  faid,)  condefcend
to  come  Voluntier,  to  help  and  affift,  counfel  and
direft,  in  cafe  of  the  Diftrefs  of  thofe  helplefs
Creatures  called  Men  \  and  that  they  do  this  offi-
cioufly  by  the  Affiftance  of  their  chofen  Ser¬
vants  the  Magicians  \  who,  like  the  Almoners  of  a
great  Prince,  are  always  laying  before  their  Eyes
Suitable  Objefts  for  their  Help  and  Benevo¬
lence.

This  is  a  formal  Story,  and  might  have  fome
Weight  in  it,  *  if  it  were  not  that  it  wanted
Truth  of  Fadfc  to  fupport  it  5  and  that  this  is  fo,
we  muft  believe,  ’till  we  get  the  following  Diffi¬
culties  removed.  The  firft  is,  How  do  they  know
the  Condition  and  Circum fiances  of  thofe  that
want  to  be  affifted?  That  thefe  good  Spirits
muft  either  know  it  by  an  infinite  Prefcience*


400


A  S  Y  S  T  E  M

by  which  they  mud  every  one  of  them  know
every  thing,  and  that  not  every  thing  that  is  vi-
fible  to  human  Eyes  and  Real,  but  every  invi-
fible  and  imaginary  Thing,  the  Thoughts,  the
Anguifti  of  the  Soul,  the  Defires,  Wifhes,
Fears,  Terrors,  and  Hopes  of,  not  only  the  par¬
ticular  Perfons  they  are  to  affift,  but  of  all  Peo¬
ple  whatever,  in  ail  Places  and  Times,  and  on
every  particular  Occafion  whatever  >  and  to  do  fo
would  be  to  be  abfolutely  and  eflentially  God,
and  every  one  of  them  feparately  fo*  a  Thought
attended  with  a  Heap  of  horrid  Confufions,  and
forming  diftrafted  Images  in  the  Mind,  fuch  as
tend  to  all  manner  of  Blafphemies  on  one  hand,
or  grofs  Abfurdities  on  the  other.

The  next  thing  is,  if  the  good  Spirits  cannot
by  their  own  Prefcience  know  the  Condition  and
Circumftances  of  thofe  that  may  want  their  Afii-
ftance  5  how,  or  by  whom  muft:  they  be,  or  are
they  informed  of  it  ?

Now  here  is  the  only  Crifis  in  which  the  Magi¬
cian  makes  himfelf  necefiary  5  for  if  the  good  Spirits
had,  joined  to  fo  univerfal  Beneficence  in  their  Dif-
pofition,  an  infinite  Knowledge  of  all  the  Perfons
and  their  Circumftances  who  ftood  in  any  need  of
their  Help,  they  would  then  certainly,  in  confe-
quence  of  the  general  good  Difpofition  of  their  Na¬
ture,  immediately  apply  themfelves  to  the  proper
Objects,  and  in  Compaflion  to  them  would  relieve
and  aflift  them  of  their  own  free  Goodnefs  and  Be¬
neficence,  not  needing  the  Interpofition  of  any  o-
ther  Agent  whatfoever.

But  now  this  we  do  not  find :  but  thefe  good
Spirits,  with  all  the  Good-will  which  they  bear  to
us,  yet  fit  paftively  ftill,  and  fee  all  the  Miferies  of
Mankind,  and  all  the  Diftrefles  which  this  or  that
particular  Ferfon  labours  under,  and  perhaps  lan-

guiihes


of  M  A  G  1  C  K.

guifhes  in*  and  at  laft  lets  him  perifti  without  the
lead  Help  or  Afliftance.

This*  I  think*  deftroys  the  very  Notion  of  their
Prefcience,  or  elfe  it  muft  deftroy  the  Notion  of
their  Beneficence  >  one  or  other  muft  drop :  they  muft
either  not  know  of  the  miferable  Wretch  and  his
Diftrefies*  who  wants  their  Afliftance  $  or  knowing  it,
they  muft  want  a  Will  or  Power  to  aflift  and  de¬
liver  him.

But  here  comes  in  the  Magician,  and  he  truly,
to  make  himfelf  a  neceflary  Man  in  his  Generation,
is  to  be  made  acquainted  with  our  Diftrefies  and
our  Complaints,  and  he  is  to  lay  them  before  thefe
good  Spirits,  and  procure  their  Anfwers*  in  which
Cafe  it  follows  moft  naturally,

Firft ,  That  thofe  good  Spirits  are  ftiort-fighted,
ignorant  and  uninform’d  Beings,  ’till  they  receive
Information  from  fome  inferior  Hand:  Thus  in
ihort,  the  Counfellor  at  Law ;  he  is  ready  to  give  his
Advice  in  the  moft  difficult  Cafe,  and  perfectly  qua-
lifyed  and  able  to  direfl:  what  you  ihould  doj  but
he  fits  in  his  Chambers  in  the  'Temple  or  in  Lincolns -
Inn ,  and  waits  (perfe&ly  paffive  in  all  Bufinefs)  ’till
the  Client,  brought  by  the  Attorney  or  Sollicitor,
comes  to  him  with  his  Brief;  and  if  the  Client  does
not  come,  he  may  fit  ftill  and  be  ruined  for  any
Advice  or  Afliftance  the  Lawyer  will  give  him,  ’till
he  is  asked:  Or  as  the  Phyfician  -y  he  isMafter  of  his
Bufinefs,  able  to  direft  and  advife,  able  to  pre-
fcribe  a  Specifick,  a  certain  Cure,  for  fuch  or  fuch
Diftempers  $  but  fits  in  his  Study,  and  ftirs  not  out
of  his  eafie  Chair,  to  do  the  diftrefs’d  People  in  his
f  Neighbourhood  any  good,  or  to  help  them  in  their
greateft  Diftrefs,  ’till  he  is  fent  for,  and  the  Cafe  laid
before  him,  and  then  he  fhews  his  beneficent  good
Difpofition:  If  they  have  ftaid  ’till  the  Diftemperis
too  far  gone,  he  pities  them  and  fhews  his  Con~

D  d  cern


1


A  SYSTEM

cern  for  them  }  but  adds.  Why  did  not  you  let  me  know
his  Condition  fooner  ?  I  could  ha’fav’dhis  Life  if  you
had  fentto  mein  time}  but  howfhouldl  do  him  any
good,  when  you  did  not  fo  much  as  let  me  know  he
was  fick  ?  and  thus  the  poor  Patient  languifties  and
dies,  and  the  Phyfician  is  not  blam’d  by  any  body,
for  how  fhould  he  help  him,  when  they  did  not
fend  to  him  for  Advice,  or  fo  much  as  let  him  know
he  was  fick?

Secondly ,  That  the  Magicians  area  moil  necefiary
Generation  of  Men,  that  without  them  the  miferable
World  would  be  robb’d  of  the  Affiftance  of  all
thofe beneficent  good  Spirits  in  the  invifible  World,
which  wait  to  do  us  good,  but  cannot  apply  them-
felves  to  exert  the  good  Difpofitions  they  are  filled
with,  for  want  of  knowing  the  Condition  and
Circumftances  of  thofe  diftrefled  Creatures  which
fiand  in  need  of  their  Help*  and  that  thofe  Magi-
ans  being  the  only  Men  that  converfe  in  that  invi¬
fible  World,  and  hold  any  Correfpondence  with
the  Spirits  that  are  difpofed  to  afiift  us,  they  alone
can  hand  that  Afllftance  to  ns,  being  the  only  Peo¬
ple  that  can  acquaint  the  faid  good  Spirits  with
our  Condition.

f thirdly ,  That  therefore  ’tis  our  only  Bufinefs  to
cherilh  and  encourage  thefeufefui  Men  called  Magi¬
cians,  and  to  take  care  that  the  Race  be  not  extinct,
and  the  W orld  deprived  of  their  extraordinary  Per¬
formances.

This  would  be  a  noble  Doftrine  for  the  Men  of
Figures  and  Circles,  a  Magician  would  out- do  all
the  Mountebanks,  Quacks  and  Pretenders  to  infal¬
lible  Remedies  in  the  World}  they  would  bring
Law^  Phyfick  and  Divinity  into  one  Head  of  Pra¬
ctice,  and,  good  Spirits  infpiring,  they  would  cure
the  Age  of  all  its  Diftempers  both  of  Soul  and
$ody,  they  would  refolve  all  Cafes  qf  Gon-

fcience


of  M  A  G  I  C  K.

fcience  Jure  divino ,  cure  all  the  Incurables  in
Guy* s  Hofpital,  and  make  that  old  — - ’s  Cha¬
rity  as  ufelefs  as  his- — - s.  They  would  abridge

the  Praftice  of  the  Law  to  Perfe&ion,  and  bring  all
the  Pleadings  at  Bar  to  Chamber  Practice  5  the
good  Spirits  would  all  be  Peace-makers,  and  Ma¬
gicians  be  general  Arbitrators.

But  this  not  being  at  prefent  our  Cafe,  from  hence
I  venture  to  conclude,  that  thefe  good  Spirits,  if
fuch  there  be,  are  not  io  intimate  with  our  modern
Magicians  as  the  latter  pretend  they  are  3  and  ?tis
to  be  doubted  thefe  carry  on  their  Intelligence
with  a  different  fort  of  Spirits,  and  in  a  Manage
favouring  a  little  more  of  the  Diabolick  than  the
Angelickj  or,  as  I  [aid  before ,  with  no  Spirits  at  all.


FINIS.
